Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 40

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

Cancer stem cells from human glioblastoma resemble but do not
mimic original tumors after in vitro passaging in serum-free media
Noemí García-Romero1,*, Carmen González-Tejedo2,*, Josefa Carrión-Navarro3,*,
Susana Esteban-Rubio4, Gorjana Rackov1, Vanessa Rodríguez-Fanjul1, Jorge OliverDe La Cruz5, Ricardo Prat-Acín6, María Peris-Celda6, David Blesa7, Laura RamírezJiménez7, Pilar Sánchez-Gómez8, Rosario Perona9, Carmen Escobedo-Lucea10,
Cristobal Belda-Iniesta3, Angel Ayuso-Sacido1,3,4
1

Instituto Madrileño de Estudios Avanzados, IMDEA Nanociencia, Madrid, Spain

2

Centro Nacional de Biotecnología (CNB-CSIC), Madrid, Spain

3

Fundación de Investigación HM Hospitales, HM Hospitales, Madrid, Spain

4

Instituto de Medicina Molecular Aplicada (IMMA), School of Medicine, San Pablo-CEU University, Campus de Montepríncipe,
Madrid, Spain

5

International Clinical Research Center, Center for Translational Medicine, St. Anne’s University Hospital, Brno, Czech Republic

6

Neurosurgery Department, Hospital Universitario la Fe de Valencia, Valencia, Spain

7

Genetic and Genomic Unit, Fundación Centro de Investigación Príncipe Felipe, Valencia, Spain

8

Neuro-oncology Unit, Instituto de Salud Carlos III-UFIEC, Madrid, Spain

9

Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas, CIBERER, CSIC/UAM, Madrid, Spain

10

Division of Biopharmaceutics and Pharmacokinetics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Angel Ayuso-Sacido, email: ayusosacido@gmail.com
Keywords: cancer stem cells, glioblastoma, genetic alterations, drug discovery, primary cell culture
Received: May 30, 2016     Accepted: August 17, 2016     Published: August 29, 2016

ABSTRACT
Human gliomas harbour cancer stem cells (CSCs) that evolve along the course of
the disease, forming highly heterogeneous subpopulations within the tumour mass.
These cells possess self-renewal properties and appear to contribute to tumour initiation,
metastasis and resistance to therapy. CSC cultures isolated from surgical samples are
considered the best preclinical in vitro model for primary human gliomas. However, it
is not yet well characterized to which extent their biological and functional properties
change during in vitro passaging in the serum-free culture conditions. Here, we
demonstrate that our CSC-enriched cultures harboured from one to several CSC clones
from the human glioma sample. When xenotransplanted into mouse brain, these cells
generated tumours that reproduced at least three different dissemination patterns found
in original tumours. Along the passages in culture, CSCs displayed increased expression
of stem cell markers, different ratios of chromosomal instability events, and a varied
response to drug treatment. Our findings highlight the need for better characterization
of CSC-enriched cultures in the context of their evolution in vitro, in order to uncover
their full potential as preclinical models in the studies aimed at identifying molecular
biomarkers and developing new therapeutic approaches of human gliomas.

year [2]. The average survival does not exceed 15 months
even after extensive surgery followed by radiotherapy
alone or in combination with Temozolomide treatment
[3-5], and just 0.05% to 4.7% of patients survive 5 years
after diagnosis [6, 7].

INTRODUCTION
Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common and
devastating brain tumor in human adults [1], with an
incidence ranging from 0.59 to 3.69 per 100 000 persons/
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

65888

Oncotarget

High lethality of GBM might be partly attributed
to a small population of tumour cells, termed Cancer
Stem Cells (CSCs), which drive tumour initiation and
maintenance [8-11]. Current approaches to treat GBM
patients have little success, possibly due to the fact that
the CSC subpopulation is refractory to both chemo- and
radiotherapy. Growing evidence points to CSCs as a more
reliable preclinical GBM model than traditional cancer cell
lines; therefore, many efforts have been made to isolate
and culture CSCs in order to study their contribution to
the tumorigenic processes, as well as to identify new
therapeutic targets and biomarkers for diagnostics,
prognostics, GBM stratification, treatment selection, and
follow-up response to therapy.
CSCs display intra- and inter-tumour heterogeneity
[12, 13], carry genomic and genetic alterations found
in the original tumour and phenocopy their critical
histopathological features when grown in serum-free
media [14]. Under these culture conditions, CSC gene
expression patterns resemble the original tumour more
closely than those of other established tumour cell
lines [15, 16]. Comparative analysis of different CSC
collections reveals at least two different CSC subtypes:
the first one with a proneural-like phenotype, and a
highly invasive behaviour, and the second one with
a mesenchymal-like phenotype and a nodular pattern
with minimal invasiveness [17-19]. In addition, mRNA
expression profiling and cytogenetic analysis of 48
glioma surgical samples from The Cancer Genome Atlas
Research Network (TCGA) [20, 21], suggests there are
four different CSC subtypes: proneural, mesenchymal,
classical and neural [22], thus emphasizing the value of
CSCs as preclinical models for GBMs.
CSCs are dynamic systems susceptible to evolution
in culture, resulting in molecular alterations not found in
the original tumours [19]. Their response to functional
assays, such as tumour cell migration and dissemination,
proliferation or drug sensitivity, might thus experience
important changes as they evolve, affecting the
reproducibility of the results as well as their capacity to
model the original tumours. Therefore, in order to define
the best biologically and clinically relevant conditions for
a given experiment, the study of GBM CSC phenotypic
and molecular dynamic in culture is essential.
Here, we present a collection of results showing
that serum-free media selected CSC-enriched cultures
ranging from homogeneous to quite heterogeneous
populations from the original tumour. As they evolved in
vitro, these cells displayed increasing stemness marker
expression, as well as different ratios of chromosomal
instability events. They reproduced at least three different
dissemination patterns found in the original tumours, but
exhibited irregular response to drugs between passages.
Our findings highlight the need to characterize a large
number of CSC-enriched cultures, both in the context of
their original tumours and their in vitro evolution, in order
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

to take full advantage of these preclinical tumour models
for developing new therapeutic approaches.

RESULTS
Isolation and characterization of CSC cultures
from human surgical samples
In order to examine the stability of CSC cultures,
together with live-cell functions, we first isolated eleven
CSC-enriched cultures derived from fresh surgical
human GBM samples and cultured them under serumfree conditions [23]. As such, they grew as expandable
sphere-like cultures showing different growing features
under the optical microscope, based on which they
were grouped into three clusters (Supplementary Table
S1). One representative culture for each cluster was
chosen for further analysis, and their CSC properties
were characterized within the first 2 passages (see
Supplementary Section). GBM18 grew as spheres attached
to the surface that eventually detached (Figure 1A, i),
GBM27 grew as spheres in suspension (Figure 1B, i)
and GBM38 grew as an attached monolayer of cells in
combination with spheres that eventually detached from
the plate (Figure 1C, i). Then, with the aim of studying
the evolution of CSCs in vitro right after their isolation,
we subcultured them for up to 20 passages (18 months)
without freeze-thaw cycles (Supplementary Figure S5).

Cell morphology of CSCs and tumourspheres
remains stable along passages
We first examined the sphere surface and observed
that all three CSC cultures displayed different cellular
projection patterns that remained unchanged for all
passages studied (Figure 1A, ii, 1B, ii and 1C, ii).
Afterwards, we wondered whether the cell organization
within the spheres also followed reproducible patterns.
Interestingly, for all three CSC cultures, we found the
presence of extracellular matrix (Figure 1A, iii and iv,
1B, iii and iv and 1C, iii and iv) and, along the number
of passages, we observed an increasing number of spheres
displaying wider intercellular space and a higher number
of cell membrane projections, some of which interlaced,
increasing the membrane surface per cell and contributing
to the maintenance of the sphere architecture (Figure 1D, i).
Next, the spheres were processed to carry out a
comparative study of cell morphology intra- and interCSC culture. Serial semithin sections showed significant
inter-CSC culture differences but a high grade of intraCSC culture homology. We observed that the presence
of multilobular and polymorphic nuclei was a common
feature for all of them. Additionally, dividing cells
were observed in both the peripheral regions and the
center of the tumourspheres (Supplementary Figure S6).
Ultrathin sections revealed that most cells displayed
65889

Oncotarget

1B, v) and GBM38 a combination of polysaccharide,
electron dense and lipid inclusions (Figure 1C, v). Finally,
we also observed the alteration of the mitochondrial
architecture along the passages (Figure 1A, vi, 1B, vi,

the presence of differential inter-CSC culture abnormal
inclusions. GBM18 showed inclusions compatible with
polysaccharide deposits (Figure 1A, v), GBM27 showed
an important number of electron dense inclusions (Figure

Figure 1: Neurosphere architecture and cell morphology analysis of GBM18, GBM27 and GBM38 CSC-enriched
cultures. A. GBM18 neurosphere morphology under the OM (i), SEM (ii) and TEM (iii-vi). Black arrow shows extracellular matrix

(iv), white asterisk shows clear cytoplasm cells (iii) and black asterisk shows representative polysaccharide intracellular deposits (5).
B. GBM27 neurosphere morphology under the OM (i), SEM (ii) and TEM (iii-vi). Black arrow shows extracellular matrix (iv), white
asterisk shows clear cytoplasm cells (iii) and black asterisk shows representative electro-dense intracellular deposits (v). C. GBM38
neurosphere morphology under the OM (i), SEM (ii) and TEM (iii-vi). White arrow shows extracellular matrix (iv) and representative
lipid drops (v). Black arrow shows representative electro-dense intracellular deposits (v). White asterisk shows clear cytoplasm cells and
black asterisk shows representative polysaccharide intracellular deposits (iii). D. Highlighted differences observed along the GBM18,
GBM27 and GBM38 passages in culture: neurosphere architectural reorganization (i), mitochondrial crest architectural loss (ii) and double
membrane structures (iii).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

65890

Oncotarget

1C, vi and 1D, ii) and the presence of double membrane
structures in late passages (Figure 1D, iii). Interestingly,
the cell morphology remained mostly unchanged for all
three CSC cultures along the passages.

mRNA expression of CSC markers. We found that cells
in late passages from GBM18, GBM27 and GBM38
expressed higher mRNA levels of CD133 and CD44
while those of SSEA1 remained unchanged (Figure 2A).
Consistently, when we analysed the mRNA expression
of stem cell markers such as OCT3/4, BMI and SOX2 we
found increasing values in late passages with the only
exception of SOX2 for GBM38, whose expression level
remained low and even along the passages. Additionally,
the mRNA expression level of adult neural stem cell

CSC-enriched cultures increase their stemness
stage along the passages
Once we have discarded relevant changes in cell
morphology within the tumorspheres, we looked into the

Figure 2: Gene expression analysis at early and late passages of CSC-enriched cultures. A. Cancer Stem Cell
markers. B. Stemness markers. C. Differentiation markers. Keywords: black columns represent early passages; white columns represent
late passages; for every comparative analysis, the sample with lower mRNA gene expression is given the value 1. Error bar represents
Standard Deviation. *: P ≤ 0.05; **: P ≤ 0.01 and ***: P ≤ 0.001.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

65891

Oncotarget

markers, such as NESTIN and MELK, also increased in
late passages, while the expression of TERT remained high
and unchanged (Figure 2B). As the results suggested an
increased stemness stage of CSC-enriched cultures along
the passages, we also looked into the mRNA expression of
differentiation markers for the three main neural lineages.
We observed that astrocyte markers (GFAP and S100β)
remained unchanged along the passages for all three
CSC-enriched cultures studied. The mRNA expression of
neuronal markers remained equal for GBM18 and GBM27
with a little increase of β-III-Tubulin in late passages
of GBM38. Moreover, we did not observe significant
changes in transcript levels of the early oligodendrocyte
marker PDGFRa, while CNPase increased in late passages
for GBM18 and GBM38 (Figure 2C).

in 17 somatic chromosomes, including 11 gains in
10 chromosomes, although the total number of gains
came down to 6 after the first passage. Additionally,
this CSC-enriched culture exhibited a total of 26 DNA
losses in 11 chromosomes along the 20 passages; being
chromosomes 10 and 19 the most affected, with 6 and 5
DNA losses, respectively (Figure 3B and Supplementary
Table S5). Finally, GBM38 displayed genomic alterations
in all somatic chromosomes. We detected a total of 22
DNA gains in 11 chromosomes, and 28 DNA losses in
17 chromosomes, along all passages (Figure 3C and
Supplementary Table S6).
Next, we wondered whether the most recurrent
sites of DNA copy-number aberration described in
glioma samples, containing a putative oncogene or
tumor suppressor gene [24], might be also altered in
CSC-enriched cultures. To address this question, we
analysed the location of 19 statistically significant DNA
gains and 20 DNA losses identified previously from
543 GBM solid samples by TCGA [24] (Supplementary
Table S7). GBM18 displayed just 3 DNA gains, all of
them at chromosome 7, including the oncogenes EGFR,
CDK6 and MET, and 2 DNA losses including AKT1
and AKT3, within the set of recurrent DNA gains. On
the contrary, this CSC-enriched culture showed 10
DNA losses (50%) and no DNA gains within the set of
recurrent DNA losses (Figure 3A and Supplementary
Tables S4 and S7). Interestingly, GBM27 and GBM38
displayed changes on DNA gains and losses throughout
the passages, affecting the location of both oncogenes
and tumor suppressors. GBM27 showed DNA gains
affecting the location of 14 genes within the set of
recurrent DNA gains at first passage, although half of
them involved less than 50% of the cells. However,
after the fifth passage, many DNA gains disappeared,
remaining those that affected the location of MYCN,
SOX2, EGFR, CDK6, MET and GRB2. Nonetheless, after
the tenth passage, MYCN and GRB2 DNA sequence gains
persisted in less than 50% of cells. Unexpectedly, this
CSC-enriched culture displayed 6 DNA gains and just
3 DNA losses within the set of recurrent DNA losses at
first passage, although the DNA gains reduced to 5 after
the fifth passage, affecting the location of LSAMP, 3q29
and NF1, which actually involved less than 50% of cells
after the tenth passage. DNA losses affecting the location
of CDKN2A/B, PTEN and 19q13.33, for all passages, and
QKI, 10q26.3 and 15q14, in less than 50% of the cells,
after the tenth passage were also detected (Figure 3B
and Supplementary Tables S5 and S7). Finally, GBM38
showed DNA losses affecting chromosomes 4 and 12 in
all passages, and chromosome 17 after the fifth passage,
within the set of recurrent DNA gains. These DNA losses
matched the location of FGFR3, PDGFRa, CCND2,
CDK4, MDM2 and GRB2. Surprisingly, DNA sequence
gains affecting the location of EGFR, CDK6 and MET
at chromosome 7 disappeared after the tenth passage,

Chromosomal instability collaborates with
in vitro evolution of CSC-enriched cultures
Chromosomal instability is a hallmark of tumor
cells, including gliomas, and the main cause of genomic
alterations throughout the course of the disease. In order
to evaluate the occurrence of genomic alterations in CSCs
isolated from surgical samples, over their passages in
culture, we carried out sequential Comparative Genomic
Hybridization (CGH) assays on GBM18, GBM27 and
GBM38. First, we wondered whether the chromosomal
instability might be generated by the isolation and culture
procedures or due to an inherent feature of CSCs. To
rule out the first possibility, we set out to investigate the
presence of genomic alterations in Neural Stem Cells
(NSCs) isolated from surgical samples of human adult
brain - normal counterpart of CSCs - under the same
isolation and culture procedures used for CSCs. The
analysis of CGH data showed the absence of genomic
alterations in NSCs along the first 7 passages, when the
cells became senescent (Supplementary Figure S7).
These results demonstrated that our isolation and culture
procedures did not generate chromosomal instability
in human adult NSCs displaying a normal genetic
background.
Then, we focused on the analysis of CGH data from
all three CSC-enriched cultures – GBM18, GBM27 and
GBM38- at passages 1, 5, 7, 10, 15 and 20. As expected,
we observed genomic alterations due to DNA losses and
gains in all three CSC-enriched cultures. Interestingly,
genomic alterations identified in GBM18 remained
unchanged for all passages assayed while GBM27 and,
to a greater extent, GBM38 displayed chromosomal
instability events along the passages (Figure 3A-3C).
In general, DNA losses outnumbered gains in all
three CSC-enriched cultures. GBM18 displayed genomic
alterations in 17 somatic chromosomes, including 3 DNA
gains in chromosomes 3, 7 and 20, and 25 DNA losses in
15 different chromosomes (Figure 3A and Supplementary
Table S4). GBM27 also displayed genomic alterations
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

65892

Oncotarget

while others affecting AKT3 and MDM4 at chromosome
1 appeared from the fifth passage on. Consistent with
this, the same variability was observed within the set
of recurrent DNA losses. We detected 4 DNA gains at
the first passage in chromosomes 3, 15 and 22, all of
them affecting less than 50% of the cells. However, 3
of these DNA gains disappeared after the fifth passage
and the last one after the tenth passage. Interestingly, 2
new DNA gains, affecting chromosome 1, appeared at
passage 5 in 100% of the cells and remained along the 20
passages under study. We also observed the presence of
4 DNA losses in all passages, affecting the chromosome

9 (CDKNA/B), 10 (PTEN and 10q26.3) and 14 (NPAS3).
Surprisingly, the DNA sequences gained at the first
passage, affecting chromosome 22 in less than 50% of
the cells, were consistently lost in 100% of the cells
from the fifth passage on, and the same happened for
the 2 DNA gains affecting the chromosome 3 at the first
passage, which turned out to be lost at the last passage.
Finally, to add on the high chromosomal instability of
this CSC-enriched culture, we found 2 more DNA losses,
affecting the chromosome 13 (RB1 and 13q22.1) in less
than 50% of the cells, between the passages 7 and 10
(Figure 3C and Supplementary Tables S6 and S7).

Figure 3: Graphical representation of chromosomal imbalances detected in GBM18, GBM27 and GBM38 CSCenriched cultures along the 20 first passages in culture after isolation from surgical samples. A. GBM18. B. GBM27.

C. GBM38. The X-axis represents the chromosomes, while the Y-axis represents the normalized log2 Cy5(CSC)/Cy3(healthy control)
fluorescence intensity thresholds -1 (loss(red)) and 1 (gain (blue)), respectively. The genes AKT3, QK1, EGFR, RB1, AKT1 and TP53,
frequently altered by DNA gains or losses in human gliomas, are shown as ideograms at passage 1 and 20. The clear boxes indicate the
location of the gene. Blue represents DNA gains and red DNA losses.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

65893

Oncotarget

CSC proliferation and duplication times display
fluctuations along the passages

disseminated through the mouse brain and invaded the
contralateral hemisphere at both early and late passages
(Figure 5A, 2). On the contrary, GBM38 CSCs remained
within the ipsilateral hemisphere forming a nodularlike tumor mass, with well-defined boundaries, also at
both early and late passages (Figure 5A, 3). We found
GBM18 CSCs surrounding blood vessels in the striatum,
but not GBM27 CSCs. Both GBM18 and GBM27 CSCs
seemed to accumulate along the ventricular wall and
use the myelin fiber tracks within the striatum and the
corpus callosum to migrate (Figure 5 and Supplementary
Figure S8). In order to find a molecular signature that
explained this histological finding, we studied the mRNA
expression of genes related to migration and invasiveness.
Consistently, the mRNA expression of CD90, CD144,
CD24, CD73 and OLIG2 was higher in GBM27 followed
by GBM18 and GBM38. Interestingly, the expression
levels of CD90, CD144, CD166, CD24 and CD73, were
significantly increased in the late passages of GBM27,
as well as OLIG2 to a lesser extent. Similar results were
observed when we analysed CD90, CD24, CD73 and
OLIG2 for GBM18 and CD166 and CD73 for GBM38.
However, the higher mRNA expression of migration and
invasiveness markers at late passages did not translate into
an increased migration of CSCs in vivo (Figure 5B).

We next wondered whether the observed changes in
morphology, chromosomal instability and differentiation
state along the passages in culture, might influence the
proliferation ratio of CSC-enriched cultures. To address
this question, we carried out viability assays with early and
late passages cultured in vitro for up to 5 days. In general,
we found no significant differences in the percentage of
viable cells between early and late passages of GBM27
and GBM38. Interestingly, we did observe significant
differences between early and late passages of GBM18
(P < 0.01) (Figure 4A). GBM27 displayed the higher
duplication time followed by GBM18 and GBM38, which
showed the highest proliferation rate in vitro (Figure 4B).
Then, we wanted to know whether the proliferation rate
in vitro correlated with survival of mouse models of brain
tumor xenotransplanted with these CSCs. Consistently, we
found that the overall survival of xenotransplanted mice
with GBM18 and GBM38 was quite similar, around 100
days, while those mice xenotransplanted with GBM27
displayed longer overall survival with an average of 220
days (Figure 4C).

In vivo migration and dissemination patterns of
CSCs remain unchanged along passages

The CSCs response to drugs evolves in vitro

To evaluate the ability of these CSC-enriched
cultures to recapitulate the original tumor features, we
carried out orthotopic transplantations within the striatal
brain of adult nude mice. Staining with anti-human
Vimentin, to expose human cells, revealed the in vivo
migration and invasion capacity of these three CSCenriched cultures. At the time of diagnosis, GBM18 and
GBM27 were clinically described as highly disseminating,
while GBM38 was described as nodular (Figure 5A, 1-3).
Consistent with clinical description, GBM18 formed a
nodular-like tumor mass; however, the nodular boundaries
were not well defined. The cells migrated out of the
nodular tumor mass and invaded the neighbouring tissues,
reaching the contralateral hemisphere at both early and
late passages (Figure 5A, 1). Interestingly, GBM27 CSCs

Once we confirmed that all CSC-enriched cultures,
regardless the passage in culture, reproduced the migration
and dissemination patterns in vivo, we wanted to know
whether the time in culture influenced their sensitivity to
a panel of drugs currently used in both clinical trials and
clinical practice against GBM. To address this question,
we carried out functional viability assays with three
different early and late passages for all CSC-enriched
cultures (Figure 6). The IC50 as well as the percentage
of cell survival at 10 µM were calculated by lineal
interpolation to compare drug sensitivity between early
and late passages. We found that all three CSC cultures
showed significant differences between early and late
passages in both the IC50 and the viability at 10 µM for at
least 20% of the assayed drugs. Interestingly, late passages

Figure 4: Viability of early and late passages of CSC-enriched cultures and average survival of mouse models of their
respective brain tumor xenotransplants. A. Viability assay for early and late passages of GBM18, GBM27 and GBM38. B. Duplication
time for early and late passages of GBM18, GBM27 and GBM38. C. Kaplan-Meier survival curves for mice xenotransplanted with
GBM18, GB27 and GBM38.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

65894

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Brain dissemination patterns of early and late CSCs isolated from human samples. A. MRI from the original tumor

and mouse model of brain tumor xenotransplanted with GBM18 (A1), GBM27 (A2) and GBM38 (A3) at early and late passages. GBM18
and GBM27 are clinically defined as highly disseminated while GBM38 as nodular. Squared regions are shown at higher magnification.
B. Gene expression analysis of migration and invasiveness markers at early and late passages of CSC-enriched cultures. Keywords: black
columns represent early passages; white columns represent late passages; Error bar represents Standard Deviation. *: P ≤ 0.05; **: P ≤ 0.01
and ***: P ≤ 0.001.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

65895

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Drug sensitivity panel of early and late CSCs isolated from human samples. For every CSC-enriched culture

viability differences (% viability at late passages - % viability at early passages), as well as the viability at IC50 for early and late passages
are shown. Keywords: red bars mean that early passages are more sensitive than late passages; blue bars mean that early passages are
less sensitive than late passages; asterisks represent differences between early and late IC50 by * (one), ** (two) or *** (three) orders of
magnitude.

were significantly more sensitive to cisplatin. In the same
line, we observed that all three CSC cultures displayed
higher sensitivity to drugs interfering with DNA synthesis
at late passages, with the only exception of camptothecin
for which GBM38 showed an IC50 at least 10 times higher
at late passages. However, there were no differences
between early and late passages when we assayed drugs
that interfered with DNA repair. GBM18 and GBM27
displayed sensitivity to taxol but there were important
differences between both CSC cultures. While the IC50
between early and late passages of GBM27 was quite
similar, late passages of GBM18 displayed an IC50 more
than 50 times lower than early passages. The three CSC
cultures were sensitive to bortezomib; however, GBM27
and GBM38 were significantly more sensitive at early
passages. Then, we assayed a collection of drugs targeting
growth factors and cell signalling pathways. We observed
an IC50 more than 10 times lower at early passages of
GBM18 for tipifarnib, desatinib and perifosine, and the
opposite for vorinostat. GBM27 also displayed significant
differences between late and early passages for perifosine,
enzastaurin and tipifarnib. Finally, we found significant
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

differences between early and late passages of GBM38 for
PLX4032 and to a lesser extent for desatinib, perifosine,
temsirolimus and Nutlin-3 (Figure 6).

DISCUSSION
The percentage of surgical samples from which we
were able to isolate expandable CSC cultures, as well as
the different growth patterns observed, is consistent with
previous works [11, 17, 18]. These patterns apparently did
not change along the passages when observed under the
OM. However, a closer analysis under the EM revealed
morphological changes common to all three CSCs, as well
as more specific features for each of them. For all analyzed
CSC lines, TEM confirmed common architectural
reorganization of spheres and a higher number of
disrupted mitochondrial crests over the passages. The
widening of intercellular spaces, together with the increase
of membrane surface per cell, probably played a role in
permitting the access of fresh nutrients to internal cells as
well as the clearance of residual metabolites. Additionally,
the alteration of mitochondrial cytoarchitecture might be
65896

Oncotarget

compatible with a progressive selection of glycolysis
for glucose metabolism in vitro [25]. In this regard, the
ability of CSCs isolated from human gliomas to use
multiple pathways for energy production has been recently
demonstrated, suggesting that CSCs might be refractory to
treatments targeting individual metabolic pathways [26].
Moreover, we observed abnormal deposits of different
types of macromolecules in all three CSC lines, probably
as a result of altered metabolic pathways. In this regard,
the deposit volume might be related to the differentiation
stage; the clear cytosolic cells, found within the sphere,
might thus correspond to the most undifferentiated CSC
subpopulation. Interestingly, for all analysed CSC lines,
the morphology of most cells within the spheres was
highly homogeneous, which suggests a clonal origin of
these cells.
In line with the homogeneous cell morphology
within each CSC line, the analysis of specific molecular
marker expression along the passages revealed a striking
similarity between the analysed CSC lines. These results
support the uniform presence of differentiated cells within
the tumorspheres along the passages, and are consistent
with the observation that cytosolic cells were overloaded
with aberrant deposits. Furthermore, these results suggest
a positive selection of CSCs with more prominent
stemness stage. Our data thus confirm previous genomic
analyses of CSC lines from different passages, which
showed that CSC biological replicates grouped together
when compared with other samples [15, 17, 27]. However,
the relative expression of specific biomarkers between the
passages has not been previously reported.
In the last few years, several groups have published
a collection of data demonstrating the existence of
intra-tumor heterogeneity in human glioblastoma [12,
13, 28]. Consistent with these reports, we found that
most chromosomal alterations affected 100% of the cell
populations along the 20 passages after isolation. This
finding, together with the morphologically homogeneous
intra-tumoral CSCs, points to a clonal origin for the
tumor cells present in primary cultures. Interestingly, our
CGH analysis shows that the current protocols for CSC
enrichment and culture, under serum-free conditions,
randomly generate both homogeneous and heterogeneous
populations of CSCs. We observed DNA gains, affecting
less than 50% of the population, in the first passage of
GBM27 and GBM38 cells that disappeared a few passages
later, which might suggest the presence of clones less prone
to survival or competitiveness than other clones in vitro.
Additionally, DNA gains and losses affecting less than
50% of the population showed up at different passages,
and then either disappeared or remained underrepresented
in the total population. Finally, for these two CSC-enriched
cell lines, we also observed new DNA gains and losses,
affecting 100% of the population, at different passages. On
the contrary, CGH analysis showed no significant changes
for the GBM18 homogenous population. All together,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

these results suggest that a heterogeneous population
of CSC-enriched cell lines evolve in vitro as they do in
vivo, although essential differences in microenvironment
cues probably drive the evolution process in different
directions. We found that CSC-enriched cultures displayed
similar duplication times, meaning that the chromosomal
instability and gene expression variability observed along
passages did not translate into significant proliferation
changes in vitro. Interestingly, mouse models of brain
tumor xenotransplated with GBM27, that displayed
the higher duplication time in vitro, showed the longest
average survival. This result suggests a link between low
proliferation in vitro and in vivo, however other parameters
like the brain dissemination pattern, may also influence
and more experiments with a higher number of CSC- lines
will be needed to clarify this question.
Notably, the dissemination pattern of CSCs through
the parenchymal brain in mice remained unchanged along
the passages - resembling the original tumors -. This finding
suggests the presence of either specific mutations or, most
probably, coordinated molecular alterations, passed on
from the original clone, responsible for the migration
and dissemination. Consistently, other authors observed
no changes in the dissemination patterns in vivo from
different passages of CSCs [11, 17]. However, considering
that CSCs also evolve in vitro, it is important to note that
new alterations affecting essential molecules in migration
pathways along the passages in vitro might modify the
dissemination pattern in vivo. Importantly, we showed
three different patterns of dissemination in vivo for CSCs
isolated from human glioma samples. GBM27 displayed a
highly disseminating pattern, longer overall survival and
higher expression of OLIG2, consistent with the CSC type
I described by Günther et al., and the proneural phenotype
[29]. On the contrary, GBM18 and GBM38 displayed a
nodular dissemination pattern and similar overall survival,
which resemble the CSC type II , and the mesenchymal
phenotype [16, 17, 29, 30]. However, GBM18 showed
irregular boundaries, with cells migrating out of the main
tumor mass, and significantly higher OLIG2 expression
than GBM38. Therefore, the disseminated, nodular and
semi-nodular preclinical in vivo models of GBM constitute
three separated tumor behaviours that might need different
therapeutical approaches.
Supporting the idea of in vitro evolution of CSCenriched cultures, we also observed significant variations
in the IC50 for a number of drugs along the first 20
passages in culture. These variations affected both homo
(GBM18) and heterogeneous (GBM27 and GBM38)
CSC-enriched cultures. The in vitro DNA gains and losses
might thus not be enough to explain the drug-sensitivity
variations, and genetic and/or epigenetic alterations along
the passages might also play a role. These results suggest
that reliable functional experiments need to be performed
on well-characterized CSC-enriched cultures within a
limited number of passages.
65897

Oncotarget

Altogether, the CSC-enriched cultures from surgical
samples are now the most reliable preclinical models of
human high-grade glial tumors. However, these models
are far from mimicking the original tumors. Indeed,
these cultures evolve in vitro acquiring new features as a
result of their intrinsic instability and microenvironment
cues. Therefore, in order to take advantage of the whole
potential of these preclinical tumor models to develop
new therapeutic approaches, it will be essential to isolate
a large number of CSC-enriched cultures and characterize
them not only in the context of their original tumors but
also their evolution in vitro.

Hatfield, PA) in PBS. Brains were removed, post-fixed in
PFA/GA overnight and rinsed in cold PBS (5x10 min).
After fixation, brains were cut into 200 μm sections on
a vibratome (Leica VT-1000), rinsed, dehydrated and
embedded in araldite (Durcupan, Sigma). For both
types of samples, tumorspheres and brain tissue slides,
semithin sections (1.5 μm) were cut with a diamond
knife and lightly stained with 1% toluidine blue (Panreac,
Barcelona, Spain). Semithin sections were detached from
the glass slide by repeated freezing (liquid nitrogen) and
thawing and re-embedded in an araldite block. The block
with semithin sections was cut in ultrathin (0.05 μm)
sections with a diamond knife, stained with lead citrate,
and examined under a Tecnai Spirit Electron Microscope
(FEI). Photographic images were taken with a Morada
camera (Soft Image System, Munster, Germany).

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Isolation and culture of CSCs from human GBM
samples

RT and QRT-PCR

Cancer stem cells were isolated from human
fresh GBM samples. Tissue samples were obtained
from patients operated at the Neurosurgery department
(Hospital la Fe, Spain). Permission to use this material
was obtained from the ethical review board in Hospital
la Fe and Principe Felipe Research Center, and written
informed consent was obtained from patients. GBM CSCs
and normal brain parenchyma cells were cultured in media
containing: DMEM/F-12 (Gibco, 11039), Non Essential
Amino Acids (10mM; Gibco, 11140), Hepes (1M; Gibco,
15630), D-Glucose (45%; Sigma, G8769), BSA-F5
(7,5%; Gibco, 15260), Sodium Pyruvate (100mM; Gibco,
11360), L-Glutamine (200mM; Gibco, 25030), AntibioticAntimycotic (100x; Gibco, 15240), N2 Supplement (100x;
Gibco, 17502), Hydrocortisone (1μg/μl; Sigma, H0135),
Tri-iodothyronine (100μg/ml; Sigma, T5516), EGF (25ng/
μl; Sigma, E9644), bFGF (25ng/μl; Sigma, F0291) and
Heparin (1μg/μl; Sigma, H3393).

For RT-PCR, total RNA was isolated using RNeasy
Mini or Micro kit (QIAGEN) following the manufacturer’s
recommendations. One µg of RNA was used for cDNA
synthesis (High-Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription
Kit; Applied BioSystems). Samples were amplified with
specific primers and the Paq5000 polymerase (Stratagene),
in a Mastercycler (Eppendorf). QRT-PCR was run in a
LightCycler 480 Instrument (Roche). For each experiment,
controls were performed in which reverse transcriptase
was omitted from the cDNA reaction mixture and template
DNA was omitted from the PCR mixture.

Cancer stem cell differentiation
Cells were plated for 10 days on 8-well chamber
slides (Nalgene Nunc, 177402) coated with Matrigel
Basement Membrane Matrix (2mg/ml; BD, 356234) in
growth factor-free media supplemented with 10% FBS.
Cells were then fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde.

Tumorsphere morphological analysis

Immunocytochemistry

To evaluate possible changes in both the sphere
architecture and cell morphology, we separated 12 spheres
of 150 μm diameter from each CSC culture at different
time points (Supplementary Figure S5) and further
analysed them by optical microscopy (OM), Screening
Electronic Microscopy (SEM) and Transmission
Electronic Microscopy (TEM). Tumorspheres were
fixed with 3.5% glutaraldehyde (Electron Microscopy
Science, Hatfield, USA) for 1 h at 37°C. Afterwards,
they were embedded in 3% agar drops and postfixed
with 1% osmium tetroxide (Sigma), rinsed, dehydrated,
and embedded in araldite (Durcupan, Sigma). For brain
tissue analysis, at the appropriate time points, mice were
deeply anesthetized with an intraperitoneal injection of
Ketamine (100mg/kg) and Medetomidine (0,5mg/kg),
and transcardially perfused with a 0.9% NaCl solution
followed by a 2% paraformaldehyde/2.5% glutaraldehyde
solution (PFA/GA, Electron Microscopy Sciences,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Cells were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 20 min,
washed with PBS and incubated in 0.2% Triton X-100/PBS
for 20min at 37ºC and 10min at RT. Cells incubated with
BrdU were treated with 1N HCl for 30 min at 37ºC and
neutralized in 0.1M borate buffer, pH 8.5 for 5min at RT.
After treatment with 5% normal goat serum/0.1% Triton
X-100/PBS for 15min, cells were incubated overnight at
4ºC with the following primary antibodies: BrdU (mouse
monoclonal, 1:100, Dako), GFAP (rabbit polyclonal,
1:1000, Dako), SOX2 (goat, 1:50, Chemicon), Nestin
(rat, 1:100, Chemicon), Tuj1 (chicken, 1:500, Sigma) and
CNPase (mouse monoclonal, 1:400, Abcam). Cells were
then incubated 1h with the corresponding Alexa Fluor
conjugated secondary antibodies (1:500) and treated with
DAPI (1:1000, Sigma) for 15min. Coverslips were mounted
in Fluorsave Reagent (Calbiochem, 345789).
65898

Oncotarget

Immunohistochemistry

was assessed using the MTS assay. Briefly, single-cell
suspensions of CSCs were plated in a 96-well plate, 3000
cells/well in a final volume of 80 μl/well. For the viability
assay, they were allowed to grow up to 5 days and analyzed
every 24 hours. For drug sensitivity assays, the cells were
allowed to grow and to form spheres for 4 days. Cultures
were then treated with 20 μl/well of media (control cells),
vehicle (DMSO or water) or increasing concentrations
of each drug for 72h. 20 μl/well of MTS (CellTiter 96
AQueous One Solution Cell Proliferation Assay, Promega)
was added to the culture media, incubated at 37ºC for 3
hours and absorbance was measured at 490 nm. Sensitivity
was assessed by comparing the absorbance values of
drug-treated cells with vehicle-treated cells and with the
absorbance values of control cells (untreated cells) for
each treatment group. Each treatment group was repeated
in quadruplicate and each experiment in duplicate. Lines
were classified as sensitive if their viability decreased or
remained unchanged compared with controls.

Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded sections were
stained (as per the manufacturer’s staining protocol) with
the Bond Polymer Refine Detection Kit on a Bond-max™
fully automated staining system (Leica Microsystems
GmbH, Germany), using a mouse monoclonal
antibody against human Vimentin (1:500, Santa Cruz
Biotechnology).

Genomic DNA microarray
Genomic DNA was quantified by spectrophotometry
(NanoDrop
ND1000,
NanoDrop
Technologies,
Wilmington, Delaware USA). Integrity of DNA was
assessed by 0.8% agarose gel electrophoresis. Nonamplification labeling of DNA (direct method) was
obtained following the ‘Agilent Oligonucleotide ArrayBased CGH for Genomic DNA Analysis’ protocol
Version 4.0 (Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, California
USA. p/n G4410-90010). 500 ng of experimental and
pool female reference genomic DNA samples were
fragmented in a restriction digestion step. Digestion
was confirmed and evaluated by DNA 7500 Bioanalyzer
assay. Cyanine 3-dUTP and cyanine 5-dUTP were used
for fluorescent labeling of test and reference digested
gDNAs respectively, using the ‘Agilent Genomic DNA
Labeling Kit PLUS’ (Agilent p/n 5188-5309) according
to the manufacturer’s instructions. Labeled DNA was
hybridized with Human Genome CGH Microarray 44K
(Agilent p/n G4426B-014950) containing 43,000+
coding and noncoding human sequences. Arrays were
scanned in an Agilent Microarray Scanner (Agilent
G2565BA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol and
data extracted using Agilent Feature Extraction Software
9.5.3.1 following the Agilent protocol CGH-v4_95_Feb07
(‘Lowess Only’ normalization correction dye bias method
instead of ‘Linear Only’) and the QC Metric Set CGH_
QCMT_Feb08.

Statistical analysis
Statistical analyses were performed using a 2-tailed
Student t test. Data are presented as means ± standard
deviation and were calculated using the software package
GraphPad Prism v. 5.0. Statistical values of p > 0.05 were
not considered significant.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the histology core facility at IMMA
(Facultad de Medicina, Universidad San Pablo-CEU), the
Electronic Microscopy and Genetic and Genomic Core
Facilities at Centro de Investigación Príncipe Felipe, and
the Biobank Hospital la Fe.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no competing financial interests.

Xenografts

GRANT SUPPORT

All mouse experiments were approved by and
performed according to the guidelines of the institutional
animal care committee of Principe Felipe Research Center in
agreement with the European Union and national directives.
An average of 75.000 cells were stereotactically injected into
the striatum of the right brain hemisphere (0 mm anterior
and 2,5 mm lateral to the bregma; 3,5 mm intraparenchymal)
of 9 week-old NUDE mice (Charles River Laboratories).
Mice were euthanized when they presented neurological
symptoms or a significant loss of weight.

We are grateful for the financial support from
PI10/01069, PI14/00077, and the ‘Miguel Servet Program’
CP11/00147 (AAS), PI-01495 (RP), and PI12/00775)
(PSG) from Fondo de Investigaciones Sanitarias, Instituto
de Salud Carlos III, Spain, supported by FEDER funds,
and Ministerio de Economía y Competitividad, Red
Temática de Investigación Cooperativa en Cáncer
(RTICC) (RD12/0036/0027) (PSG).

Author contributions

MTS assays

N.G.R., C.G.T., J.C.N., S.E.R., and A.A.S.
conceived, designed and performed research with
assistance from C.B.I., C.E.L., R.P., P.S.G., M.P.C.,

The viability of early and late CSC-enriched culture
in vitro as well as their sensitivity to different drugs
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

65899

Oncotarget

R.P.A., J.O.C., and V.R.F. All authors contributed to the
general discussion and comments on the manuscript.
N.G.R., J.C.N., and A.A.S. wrote the manuscript with
inputs from G.R., P.S.G., and C.B.I.

Precursors from Human Glioblastoma. Cancer Res. 2004;
64: 7011–21.
12.	 Sottoriva A, Spiteri I, Piccirillo SGM, Touloumis A, Collins
VP, Marioni JC, Curtis C, Watts C, Tavaré S. Intratumor
heterogeneity in human glioblastoma reflects cancer
evolutionary dynamics. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013;
110: 4009–14.

REFERENCES
1.	 Louis DN, Ohgaki H, Wiestler OD, Cavenee WK, Burger
PC, Jouvet A, Scheithauer BW, Kleihues P. The 2007 WHO
classification of tumours of the central nervous system. Acta
Neuropathol. 2007; 114: 97–109.

13.	 Piccirillo SGM, Combi R, Cajola L, Patrizi a, Redaelli S,
Bentivegna a, Baronchelli S, Maira G, Pollo B, Mangiola a,
DiMeco F, Dalprà L, Vescovi a L. Distinct pools of cancer
stem-like cells coexist within human glioblastomas and
display different tumorigenicity and independent genomic
evolution. Oncogene. 2009; 28: 1807–11.

2.	 Ostrom QT, Bauchet L, Davis FG, Deltour I, Fisher JL,
Langer CE, Pekmezci M, Schwartzbaum JA, Turner
MC, Walsh KM, Wrensch MR, Barnholtz-Sloan JS. The
epidemiology of glioma in adults: A state of the science
review. Neuro Oncol. 2014; 16: 896–913.

14.	 Joo KM, Kim J, Jin J, Kim M, Seol HJ, Muradov J, Yang
H, Choi Y La, Park WY, Kong DS, Lee J Il, Ko YH,
Woo HG, et al. Patient-Specific Orthotopic Glioblastoma
Xenograft Models Recapitulate the Histopathology and
Biology of Human Glioblastomas In Situ. Cell Rep. 2013;
3: 260–73.

3.	 Stupp R1, Mason WP, van den Bent MJ, Weller M, Fisher
B, Taphoorn MJ, Belanger K, Brandes AA, Marosi C,
Bogdahn U, Curschmann J, Janzer RC, Ludwin SK, et al.
Radiotherapy plus concomitant and adjuvant temozolomide
for glioblastoma. N Engl J Med. 2005; 352: 987–96.

15.	 Lee J, Kotliarova S, Kotliarov Y, Li A, Su Q, Donin NM,
Pastorino S, Purow BW, Christopher N, Zhang W, Park JK,
Fine HA. Tumor stem cells derived from glioblastomas
cultured in bFGF and EGF more closely mirror the
phenotype and genotype of primary tumors than do serumcultured cell lines. Cancer Cell. 2006; 9: 391–403.

4.	 Stupp R, Hegi ME, Gilbert MR, Chakravarti A.
Chemoradiotherapy in malignant glioma: Standard of care
and future directions. J Clin Oncol. 2007; 25: 4127–36.
5.	 Darefsky AS, King JT, Dubrow R. Adult glioblastoma
multiforme survival in the temozolomide era: A populationbased analysis of Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End
Results registries. Cancer. 2012; 118: 2163–72.

16.	 Li A, Walling J, Kotliarov Y, Steed ME, Ahn SJ, Rosenblum
M, Mikkelsen T, Zenklusen JC, Fine HA. Genomic Changes
and Gene Expression Profiles Reveal That Established
Glioma Cell Lines Are Poorly Representative of Primary
Human Gliomas. Molecular Cancer Research. 2008; 6:
21–31.

6.	 Sant M, Minicozzi P, Lagorio S, Børge Johannesen T,
Marcos-Gragera R, Francisci S. Survival of European
patients with central nervous system tumors. Int J Cancer.
2012; 131: 173–85.

17.	 Günther HS, Schmidt NO, Phillips HS, Kemming D,
Kharbanda S, Soriano R, Modrusan Z, Meissner H,
Westphal M, Lamszus K. Glioblastoma-derived stem cellenriched cultures form distinct subgroups according to
molecular and phenotypic criteria. Oncogene. 2008; 27:
2897–909.

7.	 Ostrom QT, Gittleman H, Farah P, Ondracek A, Chen
Y, Wolinsky Y, Stroup NE, Kruchko C, Barnholtz-sloan
JS. N E U RO - O N CO LO GY CBTRUS Statistical
Report: Primary Brain and Central Nervous System
Tumors Diagnosed in the United States in 2006-2010.
2013; iil–56.

18.	 Marziali G, Signore M, Buccarelli M, Grande S,
Palma A, Biffoni M, Rosi A, D’Alessandris QG,
Martini M, Larocca LM, De Maria R, Pallini R, RicciVitiani L. Metabolic/Proteomic Signature Defines Two
Glioblastoma Subtypes With Different Clinical Outcome.
Sci Rep. 2016; 6: 1–13.

8.	 Singh SK, Clarke ID, Terasaki M, Bonn VE, Hawkins C,
Squire J, Dirks PB. Identification of a Cancer Stem Cell in
Human Brain Tumors. Cancer Res. 2003; 63: 5821–8.
9.	 Singh SK, Hawkins C, Clarke ID, Squire JA, Bayani J, Hide
T, Henkelman RM, Cusimano MD, Dirks PB. Identification
of human brain tumour initiating cells. Nature. 2004; 432:
396–401.

19.	 Wakimoto H, Mohapatra G, Kanai R, Curry WT, Yip S,
Nitta M, Patel AP, Barnard ZR, Stemmer-Rachamimov
AO, Louis DN, Martuza RL, Rabkin SD. Maintenance of
primary tumor phenotype and genotype in glioblastoma
stem cells. Neuro Oncol. 2012; 14: 132–44.

10.	 Ignatova TN, Kukekov VG, Laywell ED, Suslov ON,
Vrionis FD, Steindler DA. Human cortical glial tumors
contain neural stem-like cells expressing astroglial and
neuronal markers in vitro. Glia. 2002; 39: 193–206.

20.	 Phillips HS, Kharbanda S, Chen R, Forrest WF, Soriano
RH, Wu TD, Misra A, Nigro JM, Colman H, Soroceanu L,
Williams PM, Modrusan Z, Feuerstein BG, et al. Molecular
subclasses of high-grade glioma predict prognosis, delineate
a pattern of disease progression, and resemble stages in
neurogenesis. Cancer Cell. 2006; 9: 157–73.

11.	 Galli R, Binda E, Orfanelli U, Cipelletti B, Gritti A,
Vitis S De, Fiocco R, Foroni C, Dimeco F, Vescovi A.
Isolation and Characterization of Tumorigenic, Stem-like
Neural Precursors from Human Glioblastoma Isolation
and Characterization of Tumorigenic, Stem-like Neural

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

65900

Oncotarget

21.	 Verhaak RGW, Hoadley KA, Purdom E, Wang V, Qi Y,
Wilkerson MD, Miller CR, Ding L, Golub T, Mesirov
JP, Alexe G, Lawrence M, O’Kelly M, et al. Integrated
Genomic Analysis Identifies Clinically Relevant Subtypes
of Glioblastoma Characterized by Abnormalities in
PDGFRA, IDH1, EGFR, and NF1. Cancer Cell. Elsevier
Ltd; 2010; 17: 98–110.

Dekmezian C, Reue K, Christofk H, Mischel PS, et al.
Metabolic state of glioma stem cells and nontumorigenic
cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011; 108: 16062–7.
27.	 Beier D, Hau P, Proescholdt M, Lohmeier A, Wischhusen
J, Oefner PJ, Aigner L, Brawanski A, Bogdahn U, Beier
CP. CD133+ and CD133- glioblastoma-derived cancer stem
cells show differential growth characteristics and molecular
profiles. Cancer Res. 2007; 67: 4010–5.

22.	 Xie Y, Bergström T, Jiang Y, Johansson P, Marinescu VD,
Lindberg N, Segerman A, Wicher G, Niklasson M, Baskaran
S, Sreedharan S, Everlien I, Kastemar M, et al. The Human
Glioblastoma Cell Culture Resource: Validated Cell Models
Representing All Molecular Subtypes. EBioMedicine. 2015;
2: 1351–63.

28.	 Meyer M, Reimand J, Lan X, Head R, Zhu X, Kushida M,
Bayani J, Pressey JC, Lionel AC, Clarke ID, Cusimano M,
Squire JA, Scherer SW, et al. Single cell-derived clonal
analysis of human glioblastoma links functional and genomic
heterogeneity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015; 112: 851–6.

23.	 Ayuso-Sacido, A., Roy, N.S., Schwartz, T.H., Greenfield,
J.P., Boockvar, J.A. Long-term expansion of adult human
brain subventricular zone precursors. Neurosurgery. 2008;
62, 223–229.

29.	 Nevo I, Woolard K, Cam M, Li A, Webster JD, Kotliarov Y,
Kim HS, Ahn S, Walling J, Kotliarova S, Belova G, Song
H, Bailey R, et al. Identification of molecular pathways
facilitating Glioma cell invasion in situ. PLoS One. 2014; 9.

24.	 Brennan, C.W. et al. The somatic genomic landscape of
glioblastoma. Cell. 2013; 155, 462–477.

30.	 Xie Y, Bergström T, Jiang Y, Johansson P, Marinescu VD,
Lindberg N, Segerman A, Wicher G, Niklasson M, Baskaran
S, Sreedharan S, Everlien I, Kastemar M, et al. The Human
Glioblastoma Cell Culture Resource: Validated Cell Models
Representing All Molecular Subtypes. EBioMedicine. 2015;
2: 1351–63.

25.	 Warburg O, P.K., Negelein E üeber den Stoffwechsel der
Tumoren. Biochem Z. 1924; 319–344.
26.	 Vlashi E, Lagadec C, Vergnes L, Matsutani T, Masui
K, Poulou M, Popescu R, Della Donna L, Evers P,

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

65901

Oncotarget

