Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 2

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

The pepper’s natural ingredient capsaicin induces autophagy
blockage in prostate cancer cells
Ágata Ramos-Torres1, Alicia Bort1, Cecilia Morell1, Nieves Rodríguez-Henche1,
Inés Díaz-Laviada1
1

 epartment of System Biology, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Unit, School of Medicine, Alcala University, Alcala de
D
Henares 28871, Madrid, Spain

Correspondence to: Ines Diaz-Laviada, e-mail: ines.diazlaviada@uah.es
Keywords: capsaicin, reactive oxygen species, autophagy, prostate cancer
Received: August 04, 2015 	Accepted: November 16, 2015 	Published: November 27, 2015

ABSTRACT
Capsaicin, the pungent ingredient of red hot chili peepers, has been shown to
have anti-cancer activities in several cancer cells, including prostate cancer. Several
molecular mechanisms have been proposed on its chemopreventive action, including
ceramide accumulation, endoplasmic reticulum stress induction and NFκB inhibition.
However, the precise mechanisms by which capsaicin exerts its anti-proliferative
effect in prostate cancer cells remain questionable. Herein, we have tested the
involvement of autophagy on the capsaicin mechanism of action on prostate cancer
LNCaP and PC-3 cells.
The results showed that capsaicin induced prostate cancer cell death in a timeand concentration-dependent manner, increased the levels of microtubule-associated
protein light chain 3-II (LC3-II, a marker of autophagy) and the accumulation of the
cargo protein p62 suggesting an autophagy blockage. Moreover, confocal microscopy
revealed that capsaicin treatment increased lysosomes which co-localized with LC3
positive vesicles in a similar extent to that produced by the lysosomal protease
inhibitors E64 and pepstatin pointing to an autophagolysosomes breakdown inhibition.
Furthermore, we found that capsaicin triggered ROS generation in cells, while the
levels of ROS decreased with N-acetyl-cysteine (NAC), a ROS scavenger. Co-treatment
of cells with NAC and capsaicin abrogated the effects of capsaicin on autophagy and
cell death. Normal prostate PNT2 and RWPE-1 cells were more resistant to capsaicininduced cytotoxicity and did not accumulate p62 protein.
Taken together, these results suggest that ROS-mediated capsaicin-induced
autophagy blockage contributes to antiproliferation in prostate cancer cells, which
provides new insights into the anticancer molecular mechanism of capsaicin.

cancer cases and deaths could be prevented by broadly
applying effective therapies. Management of earlystage prostate cancer can vary from radiation or surgery
to androgen deprivation therapy [4, 5]. Unfortunately,
the appearance of hormone refractory cancer cells leads
eventually to the recurrence of cancer which turns
to a castration resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) for
which the only treatment option is chemotherapy with
docetaxel. Unfortunately, patients treated with docetaxel
experience significant toxicity and sometimes resistance
and inevitably decline to disease progression. Therefore,
a great effort is required to improve treatment options
and effectiveness.

INTRODUCTION
Prostate cancer (PC) is the second highest cause
of cancer-related death among men in developed
countries [1]. Risk factors associated with the leading
causes of cancer death include tobacco use, overweight/
obesity and physical inactivity [2]. Extensive research
in the last years has collected fruitful results and
European cancer mortality predictions for 2015 point
to a reduction in prostate cancer-related mortality rates
between 9% and 17% depending on patient’s age [3].
In spite of this, cancer deaths predicted for the next
years are undesirably high and a substantial portion of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1569

Oncotarget

An emerging area of cancer research is focused
on chemoprevention by natural compounds. Dietary
products are of particular interest as chemo-preventive
and chemo-therapeutic agents because of their low toxicity
and potent efficacy. One of the food additive consumed
worldwide is the pungent compound capsaicin which is
considered a promising nutraceutical in anticancer therapy
[6]. Capsaicin (8-methyl-N-vanillyl-6-noneamide) is
the major ingredient of the hot chili peppers belonging
to the genus Capsicum and responsible for their spicy
flavor and burning sensation. Accumulating data have
demonstrated the anti-neoplastic activity of capsaicin in
many cancer cell lines as well as in vivo [7]. In particular
capsaicin has shown anti-tumor properties against prostate
cancer, inhibiting prostate tumor cells growth in vitro and
reducing prostate growth in animal models [8, 9]. Several
convergent studies have revealed that capsaicin caused
cell cycle arrest and trigger apoptosis in human prostate
carcinoma cells [10, 11]. Signaling mechanisms involved
in capsaicin-induced prostate cell death include reactive
oxygen species (ROS) generation, ceramide accumulation
and NFκB inhibition [8]. In this line, we have previously
shown that in prostate PC-3 cancer cells, capsaicin induces
ROS generation which triggers endoplasmic reticulum
stress that precedes apoptosis [12].
Endoplasmic reticulum stress accelerates the
degradation of accumulated proteins within the lumen and
may induce programmed cell death through activation
of autophagy. Autophagy, or cellular self-digestion, is
a homeostatic process where cytosolic components are
targeted for removal or turnover in membrane-bound
compartments (autophagosomes) that fuse with the
lysosome forming the autophagolysosome. This cellular
pathway is crucial for cellular fitness prolonging cell
survival by recycling nutrients and energy. However,
under stressful conditions sustained autophagy activation
can promote cell death. Autophagy dysfunction is often
associated with many diseases, including cancer, either
promoting pro-survival and pro-death mechanisms
depending upon the tumor type, genetic context and
cellular conditions and thus, the implication of autophagy
in cancer is still not completely understood. Particularly
in prostate cancer, evidence of dysregulation of autophagy
related proteins provide evidence that autophagy plays a
relevant role in both disease progression and therapeutic
resistance [13]. Therefore, targeting programmed cell
death through modulation of autophagy has become a
promising approach to fighting prostate cancer [14, 15].
In fact, it has been carried out autophagy-oriented clinical
trials that involve autophagy modulation with therapeutic
benefits [16]. In addition, natural compounds have
revealed as promising agents able to modulate autophagy
in prostate cancer [17].
The present manuscript examines the ability
of capsaicin to trigger autophagy in prostate cancer
androgen-sensitive and androgen-independent cells and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

the role of autophagy in capsaicin-induced cytotoxicity.
A link between capsaicin-induced autophagy and ROS
production has also been evaluated.

RESULTS
Capsaicin inhibits the PI3K/Akt/mTOR axe
and modulates autophagy in both LNCaP
and PC-3 cells
We first evaluated the anti-proliferative effect
of capsaicin in normal prostate PNT2 and RWPE-1
cells and in prostate cancer (LNCaP and PC-3) cells.
As seen in Figure 1A, normal prostate cells were more
resistant to capsaicin-induced toxicity than cancer cells.
We then studied the time- and dose-dependent effect of
capsaicin on prostate cancer cell lines viability. Consistent
with our previous observation [10] and results from
other laboratories [11] we found that capsaicin dosedependently inhibited prostate cancer cells viability,
with higher potency in the androgen-resistant PC-3 cells
(IC50 =20  μM) than in the androgen-sensitive LNCaP
cells (IC50 = 80 μM) (Figure 1B). Capsaicin was less
effective in LNCaP cells as the anti-proliferative effect
was observed at doses over 40 μM whilst in PC-3 cells
a decrease in cell viability is appreciated from 1 μM
capsaicin (Figure 1B). To compare the effect of capsaicin
on the androgen-sensitive cells with that of the androgenresistant cells we choose 20 μM and 80 μM doses for
subsequent experiments.
The Akt/ mammalian (or mechanistic) target of
rapamycin (mTOR) signaling pathway is frequently
hyperactivated in a wide assortment of human solid
tumors including prostate cancer. Akt kinase mediates
a potent anti-apoptotic signal in prostatic cancer and
inhibition of this pathway has become an attractive
mechanism to increase the efficacy of traditional
chemotherapies. mTOR regulates key cellular functions
downstream Akt kinase linked to the coordination of
cell growth and metabolism. When active, mTORC1
triggers cell growth and proliferation by promoting
protein synthesis, lipid biogenesis, metabolism and
reducing autophagy. To investigate whether capsaicin
impact this signaling pathway we determined the levels
of phosphorylated Akt at Ser473 which is a hallmark of
Akt activation. When prostate cells were incubated with
capsaicin there was a time- and dose-dependent decrease
in Akt phosphorylation pointing to an inhibition of this
signaling pathway. mTOR activity can be monitored
by following the phosphorylation of its downstream
effector protein S6. Therefore, to further confirm the
inhibition of Akt/mTOR axe, we measured the levels of S6
protein phosphorylation. According to the observed Akt
inhibition, levels of phosphorylated S6 protein decrease
in a time- and dose-dependent fashion in capsaicin-treated
cells (Figure 2).
1570

Oncotarget

A large body of literature has demonstrated that
inhibition of the Akt/mTOR pathway leads to induction of
autophagy in many cell types. So, we then tested whether
capsaicin induced autophagy in the prostate cancer cell
lines. During autophagy, microtubule-associated protein
1 light chain 3 (LC3) is cleaved at its C-terminal arginine
residue to form LC3-I. LC3-I is easily activated and
conjugated to phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) and bound
to the autophagosome membrane to form LC3-II. This
can be measured by observing the shift in molecular
weight on immunoblots. To investigate whether capsaicin
induced autophagy in prostate cancer cells, we determined
the increase of LC3-II in capsaicin treated cells. As can
be observed in figure 3, when prostate cells were treated

with 20 μM and 80 μM of capsaicin an increase in the
LC3-II form was observed. At 20 μM a dose a timedependent increase in the LC3-II form can be observed.
However, at 80 μM there is a peak at 24 hours treatment
but at 48 hours the increase in the LC3-II form is lost. An
important point is that autophagy is a dynamic, multistep process that can be modulated at several steps, both
positively and negatively. An increase in LC3-II can
reflect either increased autophagosome formation due to
augmented autophagic activity, or to reduced turnover
of autophagosomes [18]. To further study the intensity
of autophagy activity induced by capsaicin in prostate
cells, we measured the levels of the p62 protein which
becomes incorporated into the completed autophagosome

Figure 1: Cytotoxic effect of capsaicin on normal prostate cells and on prostate cancer cells. A. Human normal prostate

cells (PTN2 and RWPE-1) and human prostate cancer cells (LNCaP and PC-3), were treated for 24 h with different doses of capsaicin.
B. Porstate cancer cells were treated with different doses of capsaicin for 24, 48 and 72 hours . Cell viability was monintored by MTT.
Results are referred to vehicle-treated cells, considered as 100% viability. Results shown are the mean ± S.D. of four experiments performed
in triplicate. *p < 0.05 and **p < 0.01 versus control compared with Student’s t test.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1571

Oncotarget

and is degraded in autolysosomes. In addition, p62 is
also required for the autophagic removal and therefore
increased levels of p62 correlates with autophagy
inhibition [18]. When prostate cancer cells were incubated
with capsaicin for 24 h and 48 h the levels of p62 were
increased (Figure 3). The increase was higher at 80 μM
in both cell lines (Figure 3). These results suggest that in
capsaicin-treated cells autophagy is activated but there is
a blocking of autophagy that induces the accumulation
of p62.
Interestingly, cell incubation with 3-Methyl adenine
(3-MA), a class III phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase inhibitor,
reduced capsaicin-induced LC3-II formation but had no
impact on p62 accumulation further confirming that
accumulation of p62 is due to an autophagy blocking
(Figure 4). Moreover, 3-MA did not modify the antiproliferative effect of capsaicin in prostate cells although
it has an inhibitory effect when added alone (Figure 4).

To corroborate the autophagy blocking we incubated
the cells with capsaicin, labelled endogenous LC3 by
inmmunofluorescence and incubated cells with Lyso
Tracker Red, an acidotropic dye which primarily detect
lysosomes. As shown in Figure 5A and 5B, diffuse
cytoplasmic staining of LC3 was observed in non-treated
control cells whereas a 50% of capsaicin-treated cells
displayed punctuate LC3. In addition, capsaicin treatment
increased the number of lysosomes. Interestingly,
lysosomes co-localize with LC3 puncta (Figure 5C)
suggesting that in capsaicin-treated cells autophagosome
formation and fusion with lysosomes is activated but
autophagolysosomes cannot be removed and therefore
autophagy cannot flux. As a further confirmation of this
result, we used the protease inhibitors E64 and pepstatin
which prevent lysosomal degradation. E64 and pepstatin
treatment for 30 min prior to addition of capsaicin resulted
in a greater accumulation of LC3 puncta and lysosomes

Figure 2: Inhibition of PI3K/Akt/mTOR axe by capsaicin in prostate cancer cells. Cells were treated with vehicle (control) or

80 μM of capsaicin for different times and pAkt, Akt, pS6 and S6 proteins were detected by Western blot. Lower panel, densitometric values
of the blots. Results are the mean ± S.D. of four experiments. #p ≤ 0.05 and ##p ≤ 0.01 versus control at each concentration and *p ≤ 0.05
and **p ≤ 0.01 versus the same condition at 1 h compared with Student’s t test.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1572

Oncotarget

compared with capsaicin alone or E64+pepstatin alone
(Figure 5A and 5B).

a fourfold increase in intracellular ROS level at 80 μM of
capsaicin compared to the control LNCaP cells (P < 0.01).
However, in PC-3 cells, capsaicin treatment did not
elicit such a big increase in ROS levels. Although there
was a significant twofold increase in intracellular ROS
production after capsaicin treatment at 80 μM for 1 hour
(P < 0.05; Figure 6A), at 20 μM the increase of ROS was
very slight. In LNCaP cells, the increase of ROS induced
by 80 μM capsaicin at 1 hour was even higher than that
induced by hydrogen peroxide, used as a positive control.
On the contrary, levels of ROS in capsaicin-treated PC-3
cells were lower than that induced by hydrogen peroxide

Capsaicin treatment induces intracellular
reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation
To determine the effect of capsaicin on intracellular
ROS production in LNCaP cells and in PC-3 cells, cells
were treated with capsaicin at 1 μM, 20 μM and 80 μM
for 1 hour and 48 hours. As seen in Figure 6A, in LNCaP
cells, the intracellular level of ROS was significantly
increased in a concentration-dependent manner. There was

Figure 3: Autophagy blockage induced by capsaicin in prostate cancer cells. Cells were treated with vehicle (control), 20 μM

or 80 μM of capsaicin for 1 h, 24 h and 48 h and LC3 and p62 proteins were detected by Western blot. Upper panel, a representative
image of four experiments. Lower panel, densitometric values of the blots. Results are the mean ± S.D. of four experiments. *p ≤ 0.05 and
**p ≤ 0.01 versus control at each and #p ≤ 0.05 and ##p ≤ 0.01 versus the same condition at 1 h compared with Student’s t test.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1573

Oncotarget

(Figure 6B). In addition, co-incubation with NAC, a
ROS scavenger, suppressed intracellular ROS production
induced by capsaicin treatment in both LNCaP and PC-3
cells (Figure 6B).
To analyze the role of ROS on capsaicin-induced
prostate cell death, we incubated the cells with 10 mM
NAC prior to the treatment with of capsaicin. As shown
in figure 6C, the addition of NAC increased cell viability
both in control and in capsaicin-treated cells. Surprisingly,
this effect was stronger in PC-3 cells than in LNCaP cells
in spite of the higher ROS levels found in LNCaP cells
compared with PC-3 cells.

by NAC pretreatment. This effect was better appreciated
with 80 μM of capsaicin, which induced a greater p62
increase.
A stronger piece of evidence supporting the idea
that NAC suppressed the autophagy blockage induced
by capsaicin was obtained by confocal microscopy.
When cells were incubated with capsaicin and NAC, the
autophagolysosomes accumulation observed in capsaicintreated cells was almost totally inhibited (Figure 8).
Moreover, administration of NAC also reduced the
inhibition of the PI3K/Akt pathway in both cell lines
(Figure 8).
These data reveal that ROS play a critical role
in the capsaicin-induced inhibition of PI3K/Akt and
autophagolysosomes accumulation.
To investigate whether autophagy blockage
correlated with apoptosis, prostate cells were incubated
with capsaicin and levels of the caspase 3 precursor, procaspase 3, and poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP)
were determined by Western blot. As shown in Figure 9,
capsaicin dose-dependently induced a decrease in procaspase 3, indicating an activation of caspase 3 which plays

ROS are involved in capsaicin-induced
autophagy blocking and apoptosis
To further investigate the involvement of ROS on
the capsaicin action on prostate cells, LNCaP and PC-3
cells were incubated with NAC prior the addition of
capsaicin and autophagy marker proteins were detected
by Western blot. As shown in figure 7, capsaicin-induced
LC3-II conversion and p62 accumulation was decreased

Figure 4: Autophagy inhibition with 3-MA do not modify the effect of capsaicin in prostate cancer cells. Cells were

treated with vehicle (control) or 80 μM of capsaicin in the presence or not of 1 mM 3-MA for 24 h. Upper panel and LC3 and p62 proteins
were detected by Western blot. A representative image of three experiments is shown. Lower panel, viability of cells treated with vehicle
(control), 20 μM or 80 μM of capsaicin in the presence or not of 3-MA for 24 h and 48 h. Results are the mean ± S.D. of four experiments.
*p ≤ 0.05 and **p ≤ 0.01 versus control compared with Student’s t test.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1574

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Capsaicin induces autophagy blockage in prostate cancer cells. Cells were treated with vehicle (control), 20 μM or

80 μM of capsaicin for 24 h and LC3 protein was detected by immunofluorescence (green). Lysosomes were labelled with Lysotracker
(red) and nuclei with DAPI (blue). A. LNCaP cells; B. PC-3 cells and C. magnification of PC-3 cells treated with 20 μM capsaicin. Image
is representative of three experiments.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1575

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation by capsaicin treatment in prostate cancer cells. A. Cells were treated

with vehicle (control), 1 μM, 20 μM or 80 μM of capsaicin for 1 h, or 48 h and ROS were measured by flow cytometry using the dye
DCFDA. B. Cells were treated with H2O2 used as a positive control, 10 mM NAC, capsaicin 80 μM or capsaicin 80 μM and 10 mM NAC
for 1 h and ROS were measured by flow cytometry. C. Cell viability in cells pre-treated with 10 mM NAC and then treated with 20 μM or
80 μM capsaicin for 24 h or 48 h . Results are the mean ± S.D of three experiments performed in triplicate.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1576

Oncotarget

Figure 7: Involvement of ROS on the capsaicin-induced autophagy blockage. Cells were treated with 20 μM or 80 μM of

capsaicin for 24 and 48 hours in the presence or not of 10 mM N-Acetylcisteine (NAC). Autophagy related proteins were determined by
Western Blot. Image shown is representative of other two experiments.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1577

Oncotarget

a central role in the execution phase of cell apoptosis.
Likewise, a dose-dependent decrease in PARP levels, which
is a marker of apoptosis, was observed in capsaicin-treated
cancer cells. Notably, the pre-treatment with NAC not only
reduced the accumulation of p62 but also the reduction

of pro-caspase 3 and PARP, suggesting a link between
autophagy and apoptosis in the prostate cancer cells.
Those changes were not observed in the
prostate normal cells PTN2 and RWPE-1 suggesting
that the prostate cancer cells are more sensitive to

Figure 8: The Reactive oxygen species (ROS) scavenger NAC abrogates capsaicin-induced autophagolysosomes
accumulation and Akt inhibition in prostate cancer cells. A. Cells were treated with vehicle (control), 80 μM capsaicin or

10 mM NAC plus 80 μM capsaicin for 24 h and LC3 protein was detected by immunofluorescence (green). Lysosomes were labelled with
Lysotracker (red) and nuclei with DAPI (blue). B. Cells were treated with vehicle (control), 20 μM or 80 μM of capsaicin for 24 h and pAkt,
pS6 and p62 proteins were detected by Western blot. Image is representative of three experiments.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1578

Oncotarget

capsaicin-induced autophagy blocking and apoptosis
execution (Figure 9).

cells. Capsaicin time-dependently increased the levels of
LC3-II in both cell lines with higher potency and efficacy
in PC-3 cells than in LNCaP cells.
Increased LC3 lipidation can reflect induction of
autophagy, reduction in autophagosome maturation, or
the inability of turnover to degrade the increased amount
of autophagosomes formed [18]. Trying to discriminate
between these situations, we measured levels of p62,
a recruiter of ubiquitin-tagged protein aggregates to
autophagosomes for specific degradation and therefore
used as a cargo marker. In general, inhibition of autophagy
correlates with increased levels of p62, suggesting that
steady-state levels of this protein reflect the autophagic
status [18]. Our results indicate that p62 accumulates
in capsaicin-treated cells suggesting that breakdown of
autophagolysosomes must be inhibited by capsaicin.
Confocal microscopy shows that capsaicin treatment
induces an increase in the cytoplasmic LC3 puncta which
co-localizes with lysosomes, which are also increased
in number. This result suggest that autophagolysosome
formation is greater than is its breakdown and therefore
they accumulate in the cell. The mechanism through

DISCUSSION
It has been previously described that capsaicin
inhibits prostate cell proliferation with different potency
in the different cell lines. Based on these pre-clinical
findings, interest in capsaicin is increasing in relation
to the management of prostate cancer. In our study, the
anti-proliferative effect of capsaicin on LNCaP and PC-3
prostate cells was confirmed by MTT assay. Results
showed that capsaicin was a potent cytotoxic compound
to the androgen insensitive PC-3 cells and moderately
cytotoxic to the androgen sensitive LNCaP cells, whereas
it exhibited a very low cytotoxicity against the normal
human prostate cell lines PNT2 and RWPE-1. In addition,
capsaicin induced in the prostate cancer cell lines PC-3 and
LNCaP, an inhibition of the PI3K/Akt/mTOR axe which
is generally upregulated in prostate cancer. As mTOR is
one of the main regulators of autophagy we wondered
whether capsaicin induced autophagy in prostate cancer

Figure 9: Apoptosis induction by capsaicin in prostate cancer cells but not in normal prostate cells. Prostate cancer cells

(LNCaP and PC-3) and normal prostate cells (PTN2 and RWPE-1) were treated with vehicle (control), 20 μM or 80 μM of capsaicin
in the presence or not of N-Acetylcisteine (NAC) for 24 h and p62, pro-caspase 3 and PARP proteins were detected by Western blot.
A representative image of three experiments is shown.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1579

Oncotarget

which autophagosomes fuse with lysosomes is not fully
understood [19]. Recent data indicate that the class
III PI3K regulator ATG14 plays a key role controlling
autophagosome fusion with a lysosome [19–21]. In that
study authors demonstrate that ATG14 is required for
SNARE binding and autophagosome lysosome fusion
promotion, but is dispensable for PI3K stimulation and
autophagosome biogenesis [20]. In our study, inhibition
of PI3K with 3-MA partially abrogated capsaicin-induced
LC3-II increase, but did not affect p62 accumulation.
This suggests that capsaicin could be acting on two
points,  first  in the earlier steps of autophagy by
inhibition of Akt/mTOR and second in the late phases
of the autophagy process blocking the resolution of
autophagolysosomes. Likewise, 3-MA pretreatment
did not have any effect on capsaicin-induced cell death
although it has an inhibitory effect when administered
alone.
Autophagy is deregulated in various pathological
conditions, including cancer. However the final effect of
autophagy activation in cancer cells is highly variable
depending on the integration of complex signaling
pathways and extracellular conditions [22]. In general,
autophagy activation allows cells to respond to
stressful environmental conditions such as starvation
or hypoxia. This function is particularly important for
cancer cells that are characterized by high metabolic
demand. As a prosurvival mechanism, autophagy may
be used by transformed cells to adapt to the tumor
microenvironment characterized by poor oxygen and
nutrients supply. By other hand, as a suppressor pathway,
autophagy prevents tumor initiation. Many autophagy
regulators have been identified as potential cancer
therapeutic agents and some cytotoxic anticancer drugs
also induce autophagy [22].
Previous studies performed by other authors also
demonstrate that capsaicin may induce autophagy in
several malignant cell lines. Oh et al. demonstrated that
Dihydrocapsaicin (DHC), a saturated structural analog of
capsaicin, induced autophagy in the colorectal carcinoma
cell line HCT116 as well as in the breast cancer cell line
MCF-7 [23]. Interestingly, autophagy blocking with 3-MA
or Atg5 siRNA, sensitized cells to apoptosis-mediated
cell death [23]. The same authors also demonstrated that
capsaicin and DHC triggered cell death an autophagy in
WI38 normal lung epithelial fibroblast cells [24]. Studies
performed by by Choi et al. showed that capsaicin induced
autophagy in the human breast cancer cell lines MCF-7
and MDA-MB-231. Furthermore, capsaicin treatment
in the presence of the autophagy inhibitors 3-MA or
Bafilomycin A1 (BaF1) significantly reduced cell
viability compared with cells treated with capsaicin only.
Surprisingly, the cytotoxic effect of capsaicin was found
to be much higher in normal breast epithelial MCF10A
cells than in the malignant cell lines MCF-7 and MDAMB-231, although in normal cells capsaicin did not induce
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

autophagy [25]. This is in contrast with our results in
which prostate cancer cells are more sensitive to capsaicin
than normal cells. It is important to note that most of
these studies show that capsaicin is effective at doses
over 100 μM. It seems like capsaicin is more effective in
prostate cancer cells than in other cell types as we have
found that the cell viability IC50 is around 20 μM in PC-3
cells and 80 μM in LNCaP cells.
On the other hand, 80 μM capsaicin in the culture
media corresponds to the dose of 1.43 mg/kg of mice
body weight. Considering that most of the in vivo studies
on the antitumoral effect of capsaicin on xenograft
non prostate tumor models have used doses between
40 and 90 mg/Kg capsaicin, our results in prostate
cancer cells indicate that probably lower doses will be
needed to reduce prostate tumor growth. In fact, we have
preliminary studies in which capsaicin exhibit antitumoral
activity against prostate PC-3 cells at a dose of 25 mg/
Kg/2 days [26].
Other studies have also shown that capsaicin
could induce apoptosis in U251 glioma cells, and the
inhibition of autophagy could contribute to apoptosis
[27]. Moreover, it has been recently demonstrated that
capsaicin enhances sensitivity of cholangiocarcinoma
cells to 5-fluorouracil through the inhibition of autophagy
[28]. These results are similar to ours and indicate that
blocking of autophagy can cause cells to become sensitive
to the apoptosis signaling pathway. In our study, the
blockage of autophagy induced by capsaicin in prostate
cancer cells may contribute to cell death as procaspase 3
and PARP are also activated.
Recent findings have shown an upregulation of
autophagy proteins in prostate cancer biopsies which
were highly associated with a high Gleason score and
to extraprostatic invasion [29]. Therefore, it seems like
in prostate cancer activation of autophagy is necessary
to survival of cancer cells. In line with this notion, it
has been proposed that the androgen sensitive LNCaP
cells can undergo to the autophagic pathway to survive
under androgen deprivation conditions, as a mechanism
of transition to an androgen-independent state [30].
Current research also demonstrates that inhibition of the
autophagic machinery improves prostate cell killing and
tumor responsiveness [13]. In fact, autophagy inhibition
is now being explored in a number of clinical trials for
patients with advanced prostate cancer [13]. In this
scenario, our results showing that capsaicin induces
autophagy blocking in prostate cancer cells provide a
potential therapeutic option for prostate cancer.
Using a cytofluorimetric approach, we have found
that capsaicin induces ROS in a time and dose-dependent
fashion. ROS can exert different effects according to the
basal metabolic rate of the cell. The high basal metabolic
rate of cancer cells makes them more susceptible to
redox-directed therapeutics in comparison to nontransformed cells [31]. We have previously described
1580

Oncotarget

Cell culture

that the capsaicin-induced accumulation of ROS in
prostate PC-3 cells causes endothelial reticulum stress
and triggers apoptosis [12]. In this study a possible
relationship between capsaicin-induced ROS generation
and autophagy was examined. Although connections
between ROS and autophagy are observed in diverse
physiological and pathological conditions, the mode of
activation of autophagy and its potential protective role
remain incompletely understood [32]. It is generally
accepted that that ROS induce autophagy and autophagy,
in turn, serves to reduce oxidative damage. In this study
we found that the ROS scavenger NAC reduced capsaicininduced LC3-II and p62 accumulation and decreased
the amount of autophagolysosomes found in capsaicintreated cells. Likewise, co-treatment with capsaicin and
NAC protected against capsaicin-induced cell death and
partially abrogated PI3K/Akt/mTOR inhibition. According
to our study, we speculate that autophagy is necessary
for prostate cell survival and that capsaicin reduces cell
proliferation by a mechanism that involves autophagy
blocking through ROS generation. It must be noted that
although capsaicin induces an intense ROS increase in the
prostate cell line LNCaP, this cell line is less sensitive to
the anti-proliferative action of capsaicin as well as to the
autophagy blocking. Differences in autophagy induction
in both cell lines have been previously found by other
authors [33]. One possible explanation is that autophagy
contributes to androgen receptor (AR) degradation in
LNCaP cells [34] and as capsaicin blocks autophagy,
AR may be maintained at levels enough to sustain cell
proliferation. This question will be addressed in future
studies.
Our study underscores the importance of improving
our understanding of how autophagy interacts with
death pathways in transformed cells and then to use
this knowledge to identify novel therapeutic targets and
approaches that would more specifically treat cancer
cells. One alternative therapeutic approach for prostate
cancer is represented by the use of capsaicin alone or in
combination with other drugs.

Human prostate epithelial PC-3 and LNCaP
cells and human prostate normal RWPE-1 cells were
purchased to American Type Culture Collection (ATCC
CRL-1435, CRL-1740 and CRL 11609 respectively)
(Rockville, MD, USA). The human prostate normal
PNT2 cell line was purchased to ECACC (European
Collection of Cell cultures, Salisbury, SP4 0JG, UK).
Cells were routinely grown in RPMI 1640 medium
supplemented with 100 IU/ml penicillin G sodium,
100 μg/ml streptomycin sulfate, 0.25 μg/ml amphotericin
B (Invitrogen, Paisley, UK) and 10% fetal calf serum.
The cell line RWPE-1 was supplemented with
Keratinocyte-SFM and bovine pituitary extract (0.05 mg/
ml), and recombinant EGF (5 ng/ml). For treatment
experiments, cells were plated and grown over night, the
medium was then replaced with serum-free RPMI 1640
for 4 hours and then incubated with different doses of
capsaicin for the indicated times.

Cell viability assay
Cell
viability
was
determined
by
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium
bromide (MTT) (Sigma-Aldrich) method. In brief, a total
of 50,000 cells/well were seeded into 12-well plate in a final
volume of 1mL. After treatments, 100 μl MTT solution
(5  mg/ml in PBS) was added to the medium and cells
were incubated at 37°C for 4 h. Then, the supernatant was
discarded and dimethyl sulfoxide was added to dissolve
the formazan crystals. Treatments were carried out in
triplicate. The optical density in each well was evaluated
by measurement of absorbance at 490 and 650 nm using a
microplate reader (ELX 800 Bio-Tek Intruments, INC).

Western blotting analysis
Cells were lysed in a lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH
7.4, 0.8 M NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 0.1% Triton X-100,)
containing Protease Inhibitor and Phosphatase inhibitor
Cocktails (Roche, Diagnostics; Mannheim, Germany)
and cleared by microcentrifugation. Protein concentrations
were measured by BioRad™ protein assay kit (Richmond,
CA, USA). Equal amounts of the protein samples were
electrophoresed on 7%–12% sodium dodecyl sulfate
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) mini-gel
after thermal denaturation for 5 minutes at 95°C. Proteins
were transferred onto Immobilon PVDF membrane at
100 V for 2 hours at 4°C. Membranes were probed with
the indicated primary antibody overnight at 4°C and then
blotted with respective secondary antibody. Visualization
was performed by incubation for 3 min with enhanced
chemo luminescence detection buffer (100 mM TrisHCl pH 8.5, 1.25 mM luminol, 0.2 mM p-coumaric
acid, and 0.03% H2O2) and the blots were analyzed using

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials
Capsaicin (CAP), N-Acetyl cysteine (NAC) and
3-methyladenine (3-MA) were purchased to Sigma
(St. Louis, USA). The inhibitors E64 and pepstatin were
purchased to Roche Diagnostics (Mannheim, Germany).
Primary anti-p62, anti-pAkt and antibodies were from
Cell Signalling Technology (Danvers, MA,USA) and the
anti-LC3 polyclonal antibody was obtained from Novus
(England, UK). Peroxidase labeled secondary anti-mouse
IgG was from Sigma (St. Louis, USA) and anti-rabbit IgG
was from Calbiochem (San Diego, USA).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1581

Oncotarget

Scion Image (Scion Corporation, Informer Technologies,
Inc). The protein level was normalized to the matching
densitometric value of internal control.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

Measurement of ROS

Abbreviations

The intracellular level of ROS were analyzed
with the oxidation-sensitive fluorescent probe
2′,7′-Dichlorofluorescin diacetate (DCFDA), (Sigma, St.
Louis, USA). DCFDA is a cell-permeable non-fluorescent
probe that is de-esterified intracellularly and turns to
highly fluorescent 2′,7′-dichlorofluorescein upon oxidation
and therefore provides a rapid quantitation of intracellular
oxygen-reactive species. After treatments, cells were
incubated with 5 μM DCFDA for 20 minutes in a 37°C
incubator. Fluorescence was measured by a FACSCalibur
flow cytometer. The fluorescence corresponding to the
oxidized probe was followed by measuring the green
(530  mm; FL1) fluorescence in the iodide propidium
negative population (585 mm; FL2). Untreated cells
without fluorescence were used as the background
fluorescence.

AR, androgen receptor; CAP, capsaicin;
DAPI, 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole; DCFDA, 2′,
7′-Dichlorofluorescin diacetate; LC3, light-chain 3;
3-MA, 3-methyl adenine; NAC, N-acetyl-l-cysteine; ROS,
reactive oxygen species.

The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

REFERENCES
1.	 Torre LA, Bray F, Siegel RL, Ferlay J, Lortet-Tieulent J,
Jemal A. Global cancer statistics, 2012. CA Cancer J Clin
2015;65:87–108.
2.	 De Nunzio C, Presicce F, Lombardo R, et al. Physical
­activity as a risk factor for prostate cancer diagnosis: a prospective biopsy cohort analysis. BJU Int 2015.
3.	 Malvezzi M, Bertuccio P, Rosso T, et al. European ­cancer
mortality predictions for the year 2015: does lung cancer
have the highest death rate in EU women? Ann Oncol
2015;26:779–86.

Confocal microscopy
After treatments, 100 nM lysotracker (Life
Technologies, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA
USA), was added to visualize lysosomes. Then, the
cells were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS and
incubated with 0.1% Triton X-100 for permeabilization.
Immunolabeling with the anti-LC3 polyclonal antibody
was performed by incubation at room temperature for
1 h. Secondary labelling was performed with Alexa
Flour 594, conjugated to anti-rabbit IgG and Alexa Flour
488 (Invitrogen). Imaging was performed with a Leica
TCS SP5 laser-scanning confocal microscope with LASAF imaging software, using a 63X oil objective.

4.	 van Dodewaard-de Jong JM, Verheul HM, Bloemendal HJ,
de Klerk JM, Carducci MA, van den Eertwegh AJ. New
Treatment Options for Patients With Metastatic Prostate
Cancer: What Is The Optimal Sequence? Clin Genitourin
Cancer 2015.
5.	 Cha EK, Eastham JA. Chemotherapy and novel therapeutics
before radical prostatectomy for high-risk clinically localized prostate cancer. Urol Oncol 2015.
6.	 Bommareddy A, Eggleston W, Prelewicz S, et al.
Chemoprevention of prostate cancer by major dietary
­phytochemicals. Anticancer research 2013;33:4163–74.
7.	 Diaz-Laviada I, Rodriguez-Henche N. The potential antitumor effects of capsaicin. Prog Drug Res 2014;68:181–208.

Statistical analysis

8.	 Diaz-Laviada I. Effect of capsaicin on prostate cancer cells.
Future Oncol 2010;6:1545–50.

Data were analyzed using the Student’s t test
using Origin software v 8.0 (OriginLab Corporation).
Significance levels were defined as P < 0.05 (*,#) and
P < 0.01 (**,##). All graphs were drawn using Origin
software.

9.	 Venier NA, Colquhoun AJ, Sasaki H, et al. Capsaicin: a
novel radio-sensitizing agent for prostate cancer. Prostate
2015;75:113–25.
10.	 Sanchez AM, Malagarie-Cazenave S, Olea N, Vara D,
Chiloeches A, Diaz-Laviada I. Apoptosis induced by capsaicin in prostate PC-3 cells involves ceramide accumulation,
neutral sphingomyelinase, and JNK activation. Apoptosis
2007;12:2013–24.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING
Authors acknowledge the technical assistance of
Isabel Trabado in confocal analysis.
This work has been supported by grants from
Spanish Economy and Competitiveness Ministry
(BFU2012-31444), Comunidad de Madrid (S2010BMD2308), Fundación TPG (Patrocinio 3013-001) and
Junta de Comunidades Castilla-LaMancha (POII11-01590054).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11.	 Mori A, Lehmann S, O’Kelly J, et al. Capsaicin, a
­component of red peppers, inhibits the growth of androgenindependent, p53 mutant prostate cancer cells. Cancer Res
2006;66:3222–9.
12.	 Sanchez AM, Martinez-Botas J, Malagarie-Cazenave S,
et al. Induction of the endoplasmic reticulum stress protein GADD153/CHOP by capsaicin in prostate PC-3
1582

Oncotarget

cells: a microarray study. Biochem Biophys Res Commun
2008;372:785–91.

25.	 Choi CH, Jung YK, Oh SH. Autophagy induction by
­capsaicin in malignant human breast cells is modulated by
p38 and extracellular signal-regulated mitogen-activated
protein kinases and retards cell death by suppressing endoplasmic reticulum stress-mediated apoptosis. Molecular
pharmacology 2010;78:114–25.

13.	 Farrow JM, Yang JC, Evans CP. Autophagy as a modulator and target in prostate cancer. Nature reviews Urology
2014;11:508–16.
14.	 Fulda S, Kogel D. Cell death by autophagy: emerging
molecular mechanisms and implications for cancer therapy.
Oncogene 2015.

26.	 Sanchez AM, Sanchez MG, Malagarie-Cazenave S, Olea N,
Diaz-Laviada I. Induction of apoptosis in prostate tumor
PC-3 cells and inhibition of xenograft prostate tumor growth
by the vanilloid capsaicin. Apoptosis 2006;11:89–99.

15.	 Janku F, McConkey DJ, Hong DS, Kurzrock R. Autophagy
as a target for anticancer therapy. Nat Rev Clin Oncol
2011;8:528–39.

27.	 Liu YP, Dong FX, Chai X, Zhu S, Zhang BL, Gao DS. Role
of Autophagy in Capsaicin-Induced Apoptosis in U251
Glioma Cells. Cellular and molecular neurobiology 2015.

16.	 Rebecca VW, Amaravadi RK. Emerging strategies to effectively target autophagy in cancer. Oncogene 2015.

28.	 Hong ZF, Zhao WX, Yin ZY, et al. Capsaicin Enhances
the Drug Sensitivity of Cholangiocarcinoma through the
Inhibition of Chemotherapeutic-Induced Autophagy. PloS
one 2015;10:e0121538.

17.	 Naponelli V, Modernelli A, Bettuzzi S, Rizzi F. Roles of
Autophagy Induced by Natural Compounds in Prostate
Cancer. Biomed Res Int 2015;2015:121826.
18.	 Klionsky DJ, Abdalla FC, Abeliovich H, et al. Guidelines
for the use and interpretation of assays for monitoring
autophagy. Autophagy 2012;8:445–544.

29.	 Giatromanolaki A, Sivridis E, Mendrinos S, Koutsopoulos
AV, Koukourakis MI. Autophagy proteins in prostate
­cancer: relation with anaerobic metabolism and Gleason
score. Urol Oncol 2014;32:39 e11–8.

19.	 Bernard A, Klionsky DJ. Toward an understanding of
autophagosome-lysosome fusion: The unsuspected role of
ATG14. Autophagy 2015;11:583–4.

30.	 Li M, Jiang X, Liu D, Na Y, Gao GF, Xi Z. Autophagy protects LNCaP cells under androgen deprivation conditions.
Autophagy 2008;4:54–60.

20.	 Liu R, Zhi X, Zhong Q. ATG14 controls SNARE-mediated
autophagosome fusion with a lysosome. Autophagy
2015;11:847–9.

31.	 Laurent A, Nicco C, Chereau C, et al. Controlling tumor
growth by modulating endogenous production of reactive
oxygen species. Cancer Res 2005;65:948–56.

21.	 Diao J, Liu R, Rong Y, et al. ATG14 promotes membrane
tethering and fusion of autophagosomes to endolysosomes.
Nature 2015;520:563–6.

32.	 Scherz-Shouval R, Elazar Z. Regulation of autophagy by
ROS: physiology and pathology. Trends in biochemical
­sciences 2011;36:30–8.

22.	 Li S, Wang L, Hu Y, Sheng R. Autophagy regulators as
potential cancer therapeutic agents: a review. Current topics
in medicinal chemistry 2015;15:720–44.

33.	 Pickard RD, Spencer BH, McFarland AJ, et al. Paradoxical
effects of the autophagy inhibitor 3-methyladenine on
docetaxel-induced toxicity in PC-3 and LNCaP prostate
cancer cells. Naunyn-Schmiedeberg’s archives of pharmacology 2015;388:793–9.

23.	 Oh SH, Kim YS, Lim SC, Hou YF, Chang IY, You HJ.
Dihydrocapsaicin (DHC), a saturated structural analog of
capsaicin, induces autophagy in human cancer cells in a
catalase-regulated manner. Autophagy 2008;4:1009–19.

34.	 Mitani T, Minami M, Harada N, Ashida H, Yamaji R.
Autophagic degradation of the androgen receptor mediated
by increased phosphorylation of p62 suppresses apoptosis
in hypoxia. Cellular signalling 2015;27:1994–2001.

24.	 Oh SH, Lim SC. Endoplasmic reticulum stress-mediated
autophagy/apoptosis induced by capsaicin (8-methyl-Nvanillyl-6-nonenamide) and dihydrocapsaicin is r­ egulated
by the extent of c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase/­extracellular
signal-regulated kinase activation in WI38 lung e­ pithelial
fibroblast cells. The Journal of pharmacology and
­experimental therapeutics 2009;329:112–22.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1583

Oncotarget

