NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 November 01.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2013 October 24; 502(7472): 462–471. doi:10.1038/nature12749.

Chromatin Dynamics during Cellular Reprogramming
Effie Apostolou1,2 and Konrad Hochedlinger1,2,#
1Massachusetts

General Hospital Cancer Center and Center for Regenerative Medicine; Harvard
Stem Cell Institute, 185 Cambridge Street, Boston, MA 02114, USA

2Howard

Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology,
Harvard University and Harvard Medical School, 7 Divinity Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA

Preface

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Induced pluripotency is a powerful tool to derive patient-specific stem cells. In addition, it
provides a unique assay to study the interplay between transcription factors and chromatin
structure. Here, we review the latest insights into chromatin dynamics inherent to induced
pluripotency. Moreover, we compare and contrast these events with other physiological and
pathological processes involving changes in chromatin and cell state, including germ cell
maturation and tumorigenesis. We propose that an integrated view of these seemingly diverse
processes could provide mechanistic insights into cell fate transitions in general and might lead to
novel approaches in regenerative medicine and cancer treatment.

Introduction

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Reprogramming of somatic cells to pluripotency can be achieved by different approaches,
including somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT) into oocytes, fusion between somatic and
pluripotent cells and ectopic expression of defined transcription factors (TFs)1,2. SCNT
demonstrated that epigenetic rather than genetic changes are the basis for most
differentiation processes during normal development. Cell fusion experiments documented
that the pluripotent state is dominant over the somatic state in the context of hybrids.
Together, these observations led to the seminal discovery that a small set of TFs, such as
Oct4, Sox2, Klf4 and c-Myc (collectively called OKSM), are sufficient to convert
differentiated cells into induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs)3. Importantly, induced
pluripotency provides a biochemically and genetically tractable system to dissect the
mechanisms underlying this remarkable cell fate change.
Recent progress in genome-wide technologies and the analysis of small cell numbers has
allowed researchers to capture transcriptional and epigenetic snapshots of rare cell
populations undergoing cell fate transitions in different biological contexts. These analyses
yielded important insights into the type and sequence of molecular changes inherent to
transcription factor-induced pluripotency, germ cell reprogramming and cellular
transformation. A common theme emerging from these studies is that nascent iPSCs,
developing germ cells and premalignant cells utilize different as well as overlapping

#

Correspondence: khochedlinger@helix.mgh.harvard.edu.

Apostolou and Hochedlinger

Page 2

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

mechanisms to alter cell identity. The aim of this review is to define those transcriptional,
chromatin and epigenetic changes that endow specialized cells with pluripotency as well as
the molecular barriers that resist cell fate change.

Mechanisms of Induced Pluripotency

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Acquisition of induced pluripotency is a slow (∼2 weeks) and inefficient (0.1-3%)
process1,3, indicating that TFs need to overcome a series of epigenetic barriers that have
been gradually imposed on the genome during differentiation to stabilize cell identity and to
prevent aberrant cell fate changes. Earlier work has shown that cell populations expressing
OKSM pass through a sequence of distinct molecular and cellular events (Figure 1).
Fibroblasts initially downregulate markers associated with the somatic state and
subsequently activate genes associated with pluripotency, suggesting an ordered process4,5.
As soon as nascent iPSCs activate endogenous core pluripotency genes including Oct4,
Sox2 and Nanog, they acquire a self-sustaining pluripotent state and no longer require
exogenous factor expression. The latter events also coincide with the activation of the
silenced X chromosome in female somatic cells, the upregulation of telomerase and the
acquisition of immortality, which are hallmarks of cultured pluripotent cells5,6. In the
following sections, we will review current knowledge of how overexpressed TFs engage
with chromatin, collaborate with epigenetic regulators and integrate extracellular signals in
order to reprogram cellular identity (Figure 2).
Transcription Factors Drive Cell Fate Change

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The most commonly used combination of reprogramming TFs comprises OKSM, and we
will therefore primarily focus on this set of factors3. Previous results suggested that c-Myc
and OKS play distinct roles during the acquisition and maintenance of pluripotency7.
Briefly, OKS are the minimally required set of factors for iPSC generation from many cell
types under classic reprogramming conditions (i.e. in the presence of serum and the cytokine
LIF). OKS cooperatively suppress lineage-specific genes and activate embryonic stem cell
(ESC)-related genes, resulting in the establishment of a self-sustaining pluripotency
network7. In contrast, ectopic c-Myc expression significantly enhances and accelerates
reprogramming but is dispensable for iPSC formation8,9. c-Myc expression functions early
during reprogramming, presumably by stimulating cell proliferation and inducing a
metabolic switch from an oxidative to a glycolytic state typical of pluripotent cells10,11.
More recent evidence suggests that c-Myc may also contribute to reprogramming by
inducing pause release and promoter reloading of RNA polymerase, leading to
transcriptional amplification of target genes12,13.
It is worth noting that each of the original four reprogramming factors has been functionally
replaced by either related TFs, upstream epigenetic modifiers, miRNAs or small
compounds1. Moreover, iPSCs have been derived with molecules that do not contain any of
the original TFs14,15, indicating a remarkable flexibility and redundancy among
reprogramming factors (Figure 2). For example, a recent report demonstrated that the core
pluripotency factors Oct4 and Sox2 can be substituted for by lineage specifiers such as
Gata3 and Geminin16. These molecules have been associated with mesendodermal and
ectodermal differentiation, respectively, and they mutually repress the respective other
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 November 01.

Apostolou and Hochedlinger

Page 3

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

lineage program, suggesting that the suppression of these major differentiation pathways is
sufficient to trigger iPSC induction. This idea is consistent with the observation that many
classic pluripotency factors, including Oct4, Sox2 and Nanog, participate in early lineage
decisions and hence may also be considered lineage specifiers17. A prediction that follows
from these results is that TFs that stabilize the somatic state should be inhibitory to OKSMmediated reprogramming. Indeed, depletion of the B cell-specifying TF Pax5 or ectopic
expression of its antagonist CEB/P-alpha enables the reprogramming of terminally
differentiated B cells18. Conversely, forced expression of lineage-specific TFs, in
combination with OKSM, significantly impairs iPSC formation by sustaining a somatic gene
expression program and preventing activation of pluripotency genes19. Together, these
findings demonstrate that reprogramming TFs have to achieve two key tasks, namely the
extinction of the somatic program, which is maintained by counteracting TFs, and the
induction of a stable pluripotent state typical of ESCs.
Different Types of Chromatin Targets

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Developmental progression from pluripotent stem cells via progenitors to terminally
differentiated cells is accompanied by a gradual deposition of repressive histone marks,
followed by chromatin compaction20-22. A key question is therefore how reprogramming
TFs dismantle somatic chromatin and establish an epigenetic state that is compatible with
pluripotency. Recent studies assessing OKSM occupancy and histone marks early during the
reprogramming of mouse and human fibroblasts into iPSCs have provided first clues to this
question10,23,24. Combining these observations, one may categorize OKSM targets into three
classes of loci based on (i) chromatin accessibility, (ii) the requirement for additional
remodeling, and (iii) the kinetics of transcriptional activation (Figure 3a). Genes with an
“open” chromatin state in somatic cells comprise the first group of targets, characterized by
increased DNaseI hypersensivity, active H3K4me2/3 marks and the ability to bind OKSM
immediately. Downregulated somatic genes and genes linked to a mesenchymal-to-epithelial
transition (MET), which specifies early stages of reprogramming25, fall into this group24.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

A second class of early-bound OKSM targets includes distal regulatory elements, which
appear to require additional chromatin remodeling for transcriptional activation24. A
subgroup of these elements carries the H3K4me1 mark and exhibits nucleosome depletion
as well as DNAse I hypersensitivity, which are chromatin features characteristic of
“permissive enhancers”. Permissive enhancers typically bind TFs prior to their associated
promoter regions and before transcriptional activation26. The MyoD locus exemplifies this
group of enhancers; ectopically expressed Oct4 initially binds to the MyoD enhancer,
triggering crosstalk with its promoter and subsequent acquisition of a poised chromatin
state26 Another subset of distal regulatory elements comprises DNase I-resistant loci unable
to bind c-Myc alone24. Early pluripotency genes such as Sall4 belong to this group.
Interestingly, occupancy of these targets by OKS facilitates binding of c-Myc. This
observation thus identifies OKS as “pioneer factors” for c-Myc, which defines the ability of
TFs to bind closed somatic chromatin and enable chromatin remodeling as well as
recruitment of other TFs and cofactors24.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 November 01.

Apostolou and Hochedlinger

Page 4

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Broad heterochromatic regions enriched for the repressive H3K9me3 mark constitute a third
set of OKSM targets. Genes within this category comprise core pluripotency genes, such as
Nanog and Sox224. These regions are refractory to immediate OKSM binding and seem to
require the most extensive chromatin remodeling for transcriptional activation. Of interest,
refractory domains are reminiscent of broad chromatin regions containing extensive H3K9
dimethylation termed LOCKs (Large Organized Chromatin K9 modification)27. LOCKs are
generally underrepresented in pluripotent cells and associated with repression of lineagespecific genes in differentiated cells27.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Bivalent genes constitute a separate group of chromatin targets that are marked by both
active H3K4 methylation and repressive H3K27 methylation in iPSCs or ESCs28. Genes
within this category are transcriptionally silent in ESCs and iPSCs but poised for rapid
activation upon lineage commitment. Although the actual number and relevance of bivalent
promoters remain controversial29, induced pluripotency gradually restores these domains to
an ESC-like pattern10,23. The transcription factor Utf1 has recently been implicated in the
regulation of bivalency by a dual mechanisms that involves deposition of the repressive
H3K27me3 mark and degradation of residual transcripts30. Notably, Utf1 expression can
substitute for some of the original reprogramming factors, providing indirect evidence that
the establishment of bivalent promoters may be an important step during the acquisition of
pluripotency14. Together, these results illustrate how the initial chromatin state of somatic
and pluripotency-related genes determines if and when they become occupied and
transcriptionally regulated by OKSM in the course of reprogramming. They further suggest
that certain histone marks (e.g., H3K9 methylation) act as potent barriers that resist
acquisition of pluripotency. We will therefore next focus on the enzymes that deposit or
remove these marks and their impact on cellular reprogramming.
Role of Histone-modifying Enzymes

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Histone modifications and chromatin structure are regulated by histone code “writers” such
as histone methyltransferases (HMTs) and acetyltransferases (HATs) and “erasers” such as
histone demethylases (HDMs) and deacetylases (HDACs) (Figure 2). These enzymes
function as coactivators or corepressors of OKSM at different stages of reprogramming and
can profoundly influence iPSC derivation. For example, recruitment of PRC2, which
deposits the repressive H3K27me3 mark, and inhibition of Dot1L, which establishes the
active H3K79me2/me3 marks, have been associated with the downregulation of somatic
genes early in reprogramming31,32. Accordingly, loss of PRC2 abrogates whereas loss of
Dot1L enhances iPSC formation. Activation of the H3K36 HDMs Jhdm1a/1b33 and
suppression of the H3K27 HDM Jmjd3 promote intermediate-to-late stages of iPSC
generation by suppressing the Ink4/Arf locus34, which is essential for the acquisition of
immortality. An additional early role for Jhdm1b in epithelial gene activation was recently
reported35. In contrast, H3K9 HMTs maintain the abovementioned “refractory”
heterochromatic state of somatic cells and thus act as major barriers of reprogramming.
Consistent with this notion, knockdown of G9a (H3K9me2 HMT) or Suv39h1/h2 and Setd1
(H3K9me3 HMTs), or overexpression of H3K9 HDMs, increases TF accessibility and
results in more efficient iPSC generation from somatic cells24,36,37. Altogether, these results
demonstrate that histone code writers and erasers are essential components of iPSC

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 November 01.

Apostolou and Hochedlinger

Page 5

formation by either maintaining the somatic state or assisting in the TF-induced
establishment of pluripotency.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Reprogramming TFs have been reported to directly interact with histone-modifying
enzymes, providing a mechanistic explanation for how they may alter chromatin and cell
state during induced pluripotency. Examples include the H3K27 HDM Utx14 and the
H3K4me3 “effector” Wdr538, which bind to Oct4 protein and co-occupy many genomic
targets in ESCs, thus keeping them in a transcriptionally active state. Depletion of either
molecule blunts iPSC formation due to a failure to activate pluripotency genes14,38. Oct4
may play a very specific role in recruiting epigenetic regulators to target genes compared
with Sox2, Klf4 and c-Myc, as it cannot be replaced by related family members during
induced pluripotency8. In agreement, deletion of a linker domain on Oct4, which is absent
on other POU domain family members, associates with chromatin remodelers implicated in
reprogramming and its deletion abrogates iPSC formation39. Intriguingly, some
reprogramming-associated cofactors function in a chromatin-independent manner. For
example, the H3K27 HDM Jmjd3 blocks reprogramming not only by activating the
Ink4a/Arf locus but also by targeting the methyl-lysine effector protein Phf20 for
ubiquitination; Phf20 is required to activate Oct4 transcription in collaboration with Wdr534.
Overall, these and other7 examples document the physical association of reprogramming
TFs with a variety of histone modifiers and exemplify the diverse mechanisms by which
they assist in reinstating pluripotency in somatic cells.
DNA Methylation: Safeguarding Cell Identity

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

DNA methylation is considered to be the most stable epigenetic modification, which confers
permanent gene silencing during development and in the adult. Changes in histone
modifications typically precede the removal or deposition of DNA methylation marks during
differentiation20. Similarly, DNA methylation changes almost exclusively occur at the end
of the reprogramming process and after chromatin changes have taken place10, indicating a
hierarchy of events that recapitulates normal development (Figure 1). DNA methylation is
established by the de novo methyltransferases Dnmt3a and Dnmt3b and preserved by the
maintenance methyltransferase Dnmt140. Although DNMT3a knockdown promotes iPSC
formation in human cells31, the mouse Dnmt3a/b enzymes are dispensable for cellular
reprogramming41. This surprising finding suggests that the silencing of lineage-specific
genes is mainly achieved through alternative mechanisms such as deposition of repressive
H3K27 methylation, which is consistent with PRC2's essential role in iPSC formation32.
In contrast to the dispensability of de novo methylation for iPSC formation, DNA
demethylation of pluripotency genes appears to be critical for faithful reprogramming.
Demethylation can occur by either active or passive mechanisms40, both of which have been
implicated in iPSC generation. Downregulation of Dnmt1 in reprogramming intermediates
facilitates their transition towards authentic iPSCs, consistent with a supportive role of
passive, replication-dependent demethylation in iPSC formation42. Enzymes associated with
active DNA demethylation have been more directly linked with iPSC formation (Figure 1).
Tet proteins catalyze the hydroxylation of 5-methylcytosine (5mC) to 5hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC), which serves as a substrate for TDG-mediated base

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 November 01.

Apostolou and Hochedlinger

Page 6

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

excision repair into unmodified cytosines40. Shortly after overexpression of OKSM, Tet2
induces hydroxymethylation of key pluripotency genes such as Nanog and Esrrb, priming
them for subsequent demethylation and transcriptional activation (Figures 1 and 3b)43.
Interestingly, proteomic and genomic analyses revealed that Tet1/2 directly interact with
Nanog and co-occupy many pluripotency targets in ESCs, implicating Nanog in the
targeting of Tets44. In agreement, simultaneous overexpression of Tet1/2 and Nanog
significantly enhances, while depletion of either factor abrogates iPSC formation43-45.
Moreover, Tet1 overexpression can compensate for exogenous Oct4 expression during
cellular reprogramming, providing genetic evidence that Tet1 contributes to the activation of
somatically silenced pluripotency genes46. A role for activation-induced deaminase (AID) in
DNA demethylation during TF-induced reprogramming has also been reported, although the
underlying mechanisms are incompletely understood40.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Inefficient DNA demethylation or remethylation has further been suggested to be the main
reason for the “epigenetic memory” observed in many iPSC lines. This term describes cell
type of origin-dependent transcriptional and epigenetic patterns that can influence the
differentiation potential of iPSCs1. Of note, genomic regions that fail to undergo DNA
demethylation towards an ESC-like state in human iPSCs were shown to be decorated by
broad H3K9me3 domains in somatic cells47, and some of these areas overlap with the
abovementioned “refractory domains” that are inaccessible to OKSM early in
reprogramming24. These findings therefore suggest that promiscuous OKSM binding or lack
of OKSM binding to targets could explain some of the observed differences between ESCs
and iPSCs. It should be interesting to assess whether manipulation of H3K9 HDMs or
HMTs is sufficient to erase epigenetic memory in iPSCs.
3D Chromatin Architecture in Reprogramming

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Accumulating evidence suggests that local and three-dimensional (3D) chromatin
architecture provide additional levels of gene regulation in pluripotent stem cells48.
However, their roles in cellular reprogramming are incompletely understood. Local
chromatin architecture defines the position and density of nucleosomes as well as the
presence of histone variants (Figures 1 and 3c)49. Histone variants usually modify the ability
of nucleosomes to undergo remodeling and to accommodate active or repressive histone
modifications. The histone variant macroH2A has previously been associated with resistance
to efficient chromatin remodeling49. In agreement, the presence of macroH2A potently
inhibits TF-induced reprogramming of somatic cells to pluripotency by maintaining
pluripotency loci in a repressed state50-52.
Local chromatin architecture is regulated by diverse remodeling complexes, which also
impact iPSC formation (Figure 1). Components of the SWI/SNF complex, such as Brg1,
BAF155 and Brm, are directly recruited by Oct4 to targets in order to relax chromatin
structure and facilitate binding of other TFs53. This finding thus corroborates Oct4's role as a
pioneer factor by influencing local chromatin structure at silenced targets. Similarly, the
CHD remodeling factor Chd1 has been proposed to actively open chromatin during factorinduced reprogramming, and its knockdown impairs iPSC formation54. In contrast, members
of the repressive NURD complex including HDAC1 and Mdb3, which are critical for

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 November 01.

Apostolou and Hochedlinger

Page 7

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

heterochromatin compaction, inhibit reprogramming and their knockdown strongly increases
the efficiency of iPSC generation55. Interestingly, Mbd3 associates with loci enriched for
Tet1 and 5hmC in ESCs and its expression is essential for global levels of 5hmC56. The
latter observation may explain the discrepancy between the observed early deposition of
5hmC at pluripotency loci43 but its delayed conversion into unmodified cytosines during
iPSC generation10; Mbd3 may be recruited to these hydroxymethylated pluripotency
promoters and block immediate demethylation until unidentified coactivators relieve Mbd3mediated gene repression.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In addition to local chromatin structure, 3D chromatin architecture has been implicated in
pluripotency, differentiation and reprogramming (Figure 3d)48. Differentiation of ESCs is
accompanied by a repositioning of pluripotency genes from the nuclear center to the nuclear
periphery57 and a disruption of promoter-enhancer looping at key pluripotency loci such as
Oct458,59 and Nanog54,55. This raises the question of whether and how 3D chromatin
structure is restored in iPSCs. A recent study identified complex pluripotency-specific longrange interactions of the Nanog locus, which become rearranged during differentiation and
are largely restored during reprogramming60. The establishment and maintenance of this
network is dependent on Mediator and Cohesin complexes, which are known to orchestrate
long-range chromatin interactions59. Interestingly, subunits of these complexes were found
to directly interact with the reprogramming factors60,61 and their knockdown inhibited iPSC
formation60.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Extending these findings, long-range chromatin interactions around the Oct4 promoter were
recently implicated in the reprogramming of murine and human cells61,62. Importantly, these
interactions took place specifically in those rare cells that were poised to form iPSCs, and
they preceded transcriptional activation, suggesting a causal effect of 3D chromatin structure
on transcription. These results, together with previous studies documenting a role for Oct4
and Klf1 (highly similar to Klf4) in mediating long-range chromatin interactions63,64,
support the idea that reprogramming factors do not merely activate or silence genes but also
function as chromatin organizers, which rearrange chromatin architecture from a somatic to
a pluripotent state. This interpretation is further consistent with the recent discovery of
“super-enhancers”, which are broad distal regulatory elements characterized by cooperative
and excessive binding of Mediator components and cell-type specific transcription factors,
such as Esrrb and Klf4, in ESCs65. Given the documented role of super-enhancers in
controlling the expression of master regulatory genes in different cell types, it is likely that
the resetting of somatic-specific to pluripotency-specific super-enhancers constitutes another
roadblock for iPSCs formation. The dynamics of this switch during induced pluripotency
and the potential role of super-enhancers in 3D chromatin architecture certainly warrants
further investigation.
Cell Signaling and Chromatin
External cues are critical to direct cells expressing OKSM towards a stable pluripotent state
and to prevent acquisition of alternative cell fates7. Extracellular signals can either support
or inhibit iPSC formation (Figure 2). For example, dual chemical inhibition of the Gsk3b
and Erk1/2 pathways (“2i” condition) enhances the transition of partially reprogrammed

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 November 01.

Apostolou and Hochedlinger

Page 8

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

cells into iPSCs66. Similarly, activation of the Jak/Stat3 pathway by the cytokine LIF is
limiting for iPSC formation67. By contrast, the TFG-b pathway negatively affects iPSC
generation and its suppression by chemical inhibitors significantly increases the acquisition
of pluripotency68,69.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Recent data offer new mechanistic insights into how external signals communicate with
chromatin structure in pluripotency and reprogramming. For instance, the downstream
effector of LIF signaling, Stat3, requires the chromatin remodeler subunit Brg1 in order to
keep targets accessible and prevent their repression by the PRC2 complex70. Moreover,
culture of ESCs in 2i endows cells with a so-called “naïve” or “ground” state that is
characterized by altered H3K27me3 distribution and a decreased number of bivalent
promoters as well as global DNA hypomethylation71,72. Mechanistically, growth of ESCs in
2i induces activation of the TF Prdm14, which directly represses Dnmt3a/b and inhibits
differentiation-inducing Fgfr signaling71. It is important to mention here that signaling
molecules can also have opposite effects on different stages of reprogramming. BMPs
promote an early MET in a miRNA-dependent manner25, while they block the late
conversion of partially reprogrammed cells into iPSCs by targeting the repressive H3K9
HMTs Suv39h1 and Setdb136. Conversley, Wnt/Tcf3 signaling is inhibitory early but
stimulatory late in reprogramming73.
Nutrients and cofactors present in the extracellular environment represent a final class of
molecules that influence the epigenome and cellular reprogramming. A point in case is
ascorbic acid (vitamin C), which has been shown to strongly enhance the efficiency and
kinetics of reprogramming74 and to increase the quality of mouse iPSCs by preventing
aberrant hypermethylation75. Ascorbic acid presumably functions both as an antioxidant and
as a cofactor for specific epigenetic modifiers such as the H3K36 HDMs Jmjd1a/1b33.
Furthermore, ascorbic acid was suggested to be a cofactor for H3K9 HDMs and Tet
enzymes according to recent studies, which reported a global decrease of the repressive
H3K9me2/3 marks36 and genome-wide DNA hypomethylation76, respectively, in nascent
iPSCs exposed to this compound. Together, these observations provide compelling new
evidence for the tight communication between reprogramming-associated signaling
molecules and TFs in order to rewire epigenetic regulatory circuits.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Sequence of Molecular Events
An unresolved question is whether the rare cells that successfully give rise to iPSCs undergo
a defined sequence of transcriptional and epigenetic events. Different approaches have been
used to resolve this issue. A number of reports utilized surface marker combinations to
prospectively identify those rare cell populations that are destined to form iPSCs10,77-79.
One of these studies identified two major waves of gene expression changes that coincided
with the early extinction of somatic genes and with the late activation of core pluripotency
genes, respectively10. The lack of major transcriptional changes during the intermediate
phase suggested that cells undergo gradual epigenetic alterations in order to prime the
genome for transcriptional activation of pluripotency genes. In agreement with this notion is
the observation that histone marks associated with pluripotency enhancers are established at
early and intermediate stages of reprogramming, whereas DNA methylation changes occur

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 November 01.

Apostolou and Hochedlinger

Page 9

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

late, coinciding with transcriptional activation of associated genes10. Integrating
observations from other studies, this intermediate period is also characterized by the
establishment of pluripotency-specific long-range chromatin interactions60,61 and Tetmediated conversion of 5mC into 5hmC at pluripotency promoters43, further supporting the
interpretation that cells undergo a series of chromatin changes in preparation for stable
pluripotency.
An independent study analyzed transcriptional changes of 48 genes in single cells
undergoing reprogramming15 and concluded that the initial response to reprogramming
factor expression is quite heterogeneous and consistent with a stochastic process. However,
later events, leading to the activation of pluripotency genes, occur in a hierarchical fashion.
This analysis led to the inference that activation of the endogenous Sox2 locus is a critical
upstream event in cells that undergo successful reprogramming. A parallel study examined
clonal populations of cells expressing OKSM and defined “maturation” and “stabilization”
phases of reprogramming that were distinguished by differential expression of pluripotency
genes80. Unexpectedly, the authors discovered that the transition to the stabilization phase is
dependent on a different set of factors (e.g., GDNF signaling and meiosis genes) from those
that control maintenance of pluripotency.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Several groups reported transient upregulation of developmental regulators, such as
epidermal, extraembryonic and epiblast-associated genes, at intermediate stages of
reprogramming10,16,42,73,77. While the molecular mechanisms underlying this observation
remain elusive, it is tempting to speculate that reprogramming intermediates transiently pass
through a state with increased developmental plasticity, which could represent stages of
normal development7. Alternatively, these genes might be activated as a consequence of
aberrant TF binding11 or unspecific effects incurred by small compounds81. Regardless,
recent studies showed that depletion of some of these transiently expressed genes impairs
reprogramming into iPSCs, suggesting functional relevance78,81.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In conclusion, while the overall gene expression trends are similar among different studies,
variability related to the exact sequence of molecular events and the relative contribution of
stochastic and deterministic events remain to be resolved. Another fundamental question
that needs to be addressed is whether cells expressing alternative reprogramming factors
pass through the same sequence of events, described here, and encounter the same barriers
as cells expressing OKSM. This question is particularly relevant with respect to
reprogramming approaches that involve small compounds81 or TFs that have not been
directly implicated in pluripotency16.

Lessons from Other Reprogramming Systems
In this section, we will compare induced pluripotency with other processes involving
epigenetic reprogramming such as SCNT, cell fusion and germline specification with the
goal of identifying mechanistic similarities and differences (Table 1).

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 November 01.

Apostolou and Hochedlinger

Page 10

Somatic Cell Nuclear Transfer

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Remarkably, the somatic gene expression program is downregulated within 22 hours of
SCNT in mice (Dieter Egli, pers. comm.)82. This observation is reminiscent of iPSC
formation and suggests that extinction of somatically expressed genes is rapid and efficient
in both approaches. Somatic Oct4 activation after SCNT occurs with a similar kinetics
(24-36 hours)82 and was suggested to require Tet383, whereas it takes a minimum of 8 days
to detect Oct4 expression during induced pluripotency82 and this process appears to involve
Tet243. This marked difference in pluripotency gene activation poses the key question of
whether SCNT and induced pluripotency depend on the same TFs for reprogramming; both
Oct4 and Sox2 proteins are in fact detectable in oocytes. Schöler and colleagues recently
addressed this question by genetically depleting maternal Oct4 protein from mouse oocytes
prior to SCNT84. Surprisingly, loss of Oct4 did not abrogate the oocyte's ability to
reprogram somatic nuclei, indicating compensation by other TFs. An alternative explanation
is that SCNT may depend on an entirely different suite of reprogramming factors. The
identification of the oocyte-enriched Glis1 protein85 capable of enhancing iPSC formation in
the context of OKS expression indeed supports this hypothesis.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

A key molecular event that distinguishes induced pluripotency from SCNT is the rapid
histone exchange between somatic nucleus and oocyte, as was demonstrated in Xenopus
SCNT experiments. Specifically, the somatic linker histone H1 is replaced within hours of
SCNT for the oocyte-specific counterpart B4, and this process is essential for pluripotency
gene activation in reconstructed oocytes86. This particular exchange of histone types might
contribute to reprogramming by depleting somatic chromatin from epigenetic repressors
known to interact with histone H1, such as Dnmt1/3b and H3K9 methyltransferases87,88.
Concomitant with the replacement of “repressive” histone variants, incorporation of “active”
histone variants including H3.3 and H2A.X into the somatic chromatin facilitates efficient
chromatin remodeling of embryonic genes89,90. Despite these effective mechanisms, some
epigenetic marks including those of the silenced X chromosome (Xi) in female somatic
nuclei appear to be more recalcitrant to remodeling by the oocyte compared with
pluripotency genes, indicating differential susceptibility of some genomic loci to the
oocyte's reprogramming machinery91. The relative resistance of X reactivation to efficient
remodeling during Xenopus SCNT has been functionally linked to the repressive histone
variant macroH2A, since its knockdown resulted in a more efficient reactivation of the Xi91.
Thus, the eviction of macroH2A represents a rate-limiting step for successful
reprogramming in the context of both SCNT and iPSC induction. Given the prominent role
of “active” and “repressive” histone variants during SCNT, it should be informative to
systematically test their function and that of associated chaperones49 during iPSC
generation.
Cell-Cell Fusion
Downregulation of somatic genes in ESC-somatic hybrids also occurs within the first 1-2
days of fusion92. When examining the same Oct4-GFP reporter that was used for SCNT and
iPSC formation, Oct4 reactivation in fusion hybrids took place with a similar kinetics as
SCNT (24-48 hours) 92 and this process was reported to involve Tet293. This finding
suggests that ESCs, like oocytes, contain additional reprogramming factors that are limiting

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 November 01.

Apostolou and Hochedlinger

Page 11

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

during iPSC formation. Corroborating this point, Nanog overexpression promotes cell fusion
reprogramming and drives maturation of iPSCs, whereas its absence blunts both types of
reprogramming45. Surprisingly, Oct4 protein is required, whereas Sox2 protein is
dispensable for fusion-mediated reprogramming, identifying a notable difference to induced
pluripotency94. It is further important to mention that the reprogramming of hybrids is not
complete upon activation of somatic pluripotency genes 2 days post fusion. Activation of the
silenced X chromosome in female hybrids takes several days, which is reminiscent of the
delayed X reactivation observed during Xenopus SCNT95. Consistently, transcriptome-wide
analysis of hybrid formation documented that some silenced ESC-associated genes are
activated more rapidly than others96. These results are in line with the sequential activation
of pluripotency-associated genes during iPSC derivation4,5 and likely reflect different
chromatin accessibility of associated genomic loci to ESC-derived reprogramming factors.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

At the chromatin level, inhibition of the H3K9 HMT G9a or overexpression of the H3K9
HDM Jhdm2a increases cell fusion-directed reprogramming, which is in accordance with
their supportive roles in iPSC generation97. Conversely, depletion of PRC1 or PRC2
subunits decreases cell fusion-mediated reprogramming and induced pluripotency,
underscoring the general importance of H3K27me3-mediated gene repression for the
acquisition of pluripotency98. Collectively, these findings support the interpretation that
iPSC formation and cell fusion-directed reprogramming face similar epigenetic barriers and
are stimulated by the same TFs, consistent with the fact that iPSC factors were initially
identified in ESCs3. Based on the accelerated kinetics of pluripotency activation in hybrids
compared with nascent iPSCs, it should be feasible to devise genetic screens in order to
identify other Nanog-like molecules that are limiting for efficient TF-induced
reprogramming.
Primordial Germ Cell Reprogramming

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

PGC maturation represents yet another type of reprogramming, which occurs naturally and
encompasses major epigenetic remodeling events that prepare the developing germ line for
totipotency99,100. Remarkably, PGCs that have completed reprogramming exhibit two active
X chromosomes in females101, ESC-like transcriptional patterns and bivalent domains102.
This includes expression of potent reprogramming factors, such as Oct4, Sox2, Nanog and
Prdm14100,103. Each of these factors is essential for PGC formation in vivo, although their
precise roles in PGC reprogramming remain elusive. Importantly, PGCs are unipotent in
vivo (i.e., they can only produce oocyte or sperm) but they have the unique potential to give
rise to pluripotent stem cells, coined “embryonic germ cells” (EGCs), upon explantation in
culture1. Expression of these ESC-associated TFs might thus endow PGCs with the latent
ability to acquire pluripotency upon isolation from the gonads and exposure to appropriate
extracellular cues. Because germ cell reversion into EGCs rarely occurs in vivo, except in
cases of spontaneous teratocarcinomas (i.e., pluripotent tumors), potent mechanisms must be
in place to preserve the PGC state. Blimp1 is a possible candidate molecule owing to its role
as a repressor of c-Myc and Klf4 expression in PGCs103. It should be possible to test this
hypothesis by assessing whether acute loss of Blimp1 is sufficient to convert PGCs into
EGCs in vitro and to cause teratocarcinomas in vivo. Notably, Blimp1's putative role in
suppressing the acquisition of a pluripotent state in PGCs might be taken over by Dmrt1 at

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 November 01.

Apostolou and Hochedlinger

Page 12

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

subsequent stages of male germ line development. Male mice lacking this TF in the
germline aberrantly express pluripotency factors and develop testicular teratomas with
almost full penetrance104. The notion that Blimp1 and Drmt1 might actively resist
acquisition of pluripotency is analogous to the inhibitory effect that somatic TFs have during
iPSC formation19.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

With respect to chromatin dynamics, global loss of H3K9 methylation is among the most
striking changes in developing PGCs99. Notably, downregulation of H3K9 HMTs appears to
be critical for efficient reprogramming in the context of PGC specification100, cell fusion97
and iPSC formation24,36,37. This particular chromatin alteration may therefore represent a
general requirement for cellular reprogramming in these very different cellular contexts.
Similarly, loss of inhibitory H3K27 methylation at pluripotency loci through catalysis by
Utx seems to be another required step during both PGC reprogramming and iPSC
formation14. Lastly, Tet1 and Tet2 enzymes have been functionally associated with DNA
demethylation in in vitro-derived PGCs105, revealing similarities with SCNT83 and cell
fusion93. However, it is noteworthy that genetic loss of both Tet1 and Tet2 is not essential
for viability and fertility in vivo106, suggesting compensation by other mechanisms. Indeed,
passive demethylation was recently suggested to contribute to PGC reprogramming through
downregulation of the de novo methyltransferases Dnmt3a/b and the Dnmt1 cofactor
Uhfr1107. Combined with the enhancing effects of Tet1/2 overexpression44 and Dnmt1/
Dnmt3a depletion31,42 on iPSC formation, these data show that the erasure of somatic DNA
methylation patterns is a general roadblock for successful epigenetic reprogramming in
different cellular settings. Cells utilize a combination of “passive” and “active” DNA
demethylation strategies to overcome this barrier, although their relative contribution varies
depending on the reprogramming context.

Induced Pluripotency and Tumorigenesis

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Several lines of evidence support the idea that induced pluripotency and transformation are
related processes at a cellular level (see Box). Reprogramming, like cancer, is a rare, multistep process that ultimately leads to the formation of a small population of immortal cells
with tumorigenic potential; iPSCs, like ESCs, have the ability to give rise to teratomas
(benign tumors containing derivatives of the three germ layers) upon transplantation under
the skin of mice1. Another similarity between reprogramming and some types of cancer is
the observation that somatic stem and progenitor cells are more susceptible to both iPSC
formation108,109 and tumorigenesis110,111 compared to mature cells. This observation may
indicate that the epigenetic state of the starting cell provides a permissive environment for
both oncogenic and reprogramming factors. Further, TF-mediated reprogramming induces a
metabolic switch from an oxidative to a glycolytic state typical of most cancer cells112.
Lastly, teratocarcinomas represent a special type of cancer that originates from transformed
PGCs and contains pluripotent cells, documenting a rare example of spontaneous
reprogramming of committed (germ) cells into pluripotent malignant cells1. An important
distinction, however, between these examples of cancer and induced pluripotency is the fact
that iPSCs are normal diploid cells that support development when re-introduced into
embryos, whereas most cancer cells are aneuploid and characterized by aberrant
differentiation patterns. It should thus be informative to study those chromatin and

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 November 01.

Apostolou and Hochedlinger

Page 13

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

epigenetic events that transiently endow iPSCs with immortality and tumorigenic properties
in addition to increased differentiation potential, as this might lead to new strategies to
reverse malignancy.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Molecular data support the cellular commonalities between reprogramming and malignancy.
First, each of the four classic reprogramming factors has been shown to be oncogenic in
mice, and some of these genes are amplified or mutated in human cancer113, suggesting that
they might destabilize cell state in tumors akin to their role in reprogramming. Chromatin
regulators that cooperate with OKSM during reprogramming, such as Jhdm1b and
macroH2A, have also been associated with tumorigenesis. Jhdm1b expression has been
causally linked with myeloid transformation of hematopoietic progenitors through silencing
of the ink4b gene114 and with pancreatic adenocarcinoma formation through silencing of
developmental genes in collaboration with PRC2115. In contrast to the cancer- and
reprogramming-promoting role of Jhdm1b, expression of macroH2A provides a barrier for
both iPSC formation and the malignant progression of melanoma cells. MacroH2A's
promoting effect on melanoma invasion is in part exerted through upregulation of the cell
cycle regulator CDK8, which differs from the pluripotency genes targeted by this histone
variant during induced pluripotency116. These and several other examples113 hence
document that premalignant cells and nascent iPSCs target some of the same chromatin
regulators to manipulate cell identity, although their targets may vary.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Both cellular reprogramming and cancer are also characterized by similar global changes in
chromatin structure and DNA methylation. Cancer cells, like ESCs, are devoid of LOCKs
compared to normal differentiated cells27. Given the observation that H3K9 methylation is a
major barrier for iPSC formation24,36,37, this finding suggests that many cancers have
acquired a developmentally more primitive epigenetic state that might be required for the
maintenance of malignancy. Another hallmark of most cancer genomes are altered
methylation patterns, which can manifest as aberrant hypermethylation or hypomethylation.
It is interesting to mention in this regard that reduced methylation levels, induced by
hypomorphic expression of Dnmt1, causes T cell lymphomas in mice117 and promotes iPSC
formation in vitro42. Likewise, mutations in Dnmt3A have been observed in AML113, and
knock-down of this enzyme facilitates human reprogramming into iPSCs31. These
similarities between reprogramming and tumorigenesis are thus further consistent with the
view that cancer cells need to override some of the same somatic barriers as iPSCs to alter
cellular states.
Of note, the correlation between reprogramming and cancer is not absolute. In fact, some
epigenetic regulators and histone modifications have been shown to play opposite roles
during reprogramming and malignancy. For example, loss of Tet2 causes myeloid
transformation in mice118, consistent with a tumor suppressor function, whereas depletion of
Tet2 protein abrogates reprogramming43. Similarly, the H3K79 methyltransferase Dot1L
promotes leukemia formation induced by MLL-AF9 translocations119 although it prevents
iPSC formation31. Components of the SWI/SNF complex, which facilitates reprogramming,
act as potent tumor-suppressors and are frequently mutated in cancer120, indicating opposite
functions. Lastly, genome-wide methylation analyses of somatic cells and iPSCs identified a
set of reprogramming-specific differentially methylated regions (R-DMRs), which showed

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 November 01.

Apostolou and Hochedlinger

Page 14

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

significant overlap with DMRs that changed during the transformation of normal into
malignant cells121. However, R-DMRs that become hypomethylated and bivalent during
iPSC generation are typically hypermethylated in cancer, whereas R-DMRs that become
hypermethylated in iPSCs lack bivalent marks and are usually hypomethylated in cancer.
Given the importance of bivalently marked genes in multilineage differentiation, their
methylation silencing in cancer may be a secure way to keep cells in a self-perpetuating
undifferentiated state while this change would be detrimental for pluripotency in iPSCs. In
summary, the abovementioned discrepancies between tumorigenesis and reprogramming are
likely explained by strongly stage and cell-context dependent roles these enzymes and their
modifications play during tumorigenesis and reprogramming.
A testable prediction following the abovementioned observations is that some cancer cells
should be susceptible to epigenetic reprogramming into a non-malignant state. Indeed, both
SCNT and iPSC experiments demonstrated that malignant cells such as melanoma122 and
medulloblastoma123 can be reprogrammed into a pluripotent state that supports
differentiation into a number of normal cell types. Thus, some cancers are not irreversibly
locked in a tumorigenic state but instead amenable to epigenetic reversion into a
phenotypically normal state.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Outlook

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Extensive functional genomics and screening approaches over the past few years have
provided important insights into the epigenetic mechanisms occurring during normal,
induced and pathological examples of cell fate change. While the drivers of cell fate change
may be quite different in distinct contexts (e.g., OKSM in reprogramming, unidentified
factors during SCNT and oncogenes in tumorigenesis), the resultant chromatin and
epigenetic changes leading to altered cell identities are often conserved. This observation
probably underlies the fact that different reprogramming approaches face some of the same
molecular barriers that have been established during development and terminal
differentiation to resist aberrant cell fate changes. We therefore conclude that TF-induced
reprogramming provides a powerful tool to interrogate those chromatin and epigenetic
mechanisms that stabilize cell fates during development and that become corrupted in
cancer. These analyses have implications for both regenerative medicine and cancer biology.
A better understanding of the molecular steps leading to pluripotency and the roadblocks
resisting cell fate change in different contexts have already enabled researchers to interfere
in a rationalized way with defined molecules or pathways to promote or prevent desired cell
fate changes50-52,91. An interesting future challenge will be to isolate and stabilize
intermediate stages of reprogramming, which might represent natural or artificial cellular
states with increased differentiation potential. Dissecting the molecular roadblocks of
reprogramming has also relevance for studying and treating cancer. Given that premalignant
cells utilize some of the same epigenetic mechanisms as nascent iPSCs to change cell
identity, their manipulation may lead to novel strategies that reverse malignancy by altering
cellular state rather than cell survival. While the concept of reprogramming cancer cells to
pluripotency has already been demonstrated, additional work is needed to develop more
specific approaches that reverse malignant cells into a non-pluripotent state by targeting
defined transcription factors or epigenetic regulators. Recent work on the conversion of

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 November 01.

Apostolou and Hochedlinger

Page 15

leukemia and lymphoma cells into non-tumorigenic, quiescent macrophages by a single
TF124 is a promising step in this direction.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Acknowledgments
We thank Alex Bortvin, Dieter Egli, Vincent Pasque, Bernhard Payer, Bing Ren, Xie Wei, Mamta Tahiliani, and
members of the laboratory for helpful suggestions, and Bill Lowry, Kathrin Plath and Matthias Stadtfeld for critical
reading of the manuscript. We apologize to those colleagues whose work we could not cite due to space contraints.
Support to E.A. was by HHMI and to K.H. by HHMI and NIH (R01HD058013).

References

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

1. Stadtfeld M, Hochedlinger K. Induced pluripotency: history, mechanisms, and applications. Genes
Dev. 2010; 24:2239–2263. [PubMed: 20952534]
2. Yamanaka S, Blau HM. Nuclear reprogramming to a pluripotent state by three approaches. Nature.
2010; 465:704–712. [PubMed: 20535199]
3. Takahashi K, Yamanaka S. Induction of pluripotent stem cells from mouse embryonic and adult
fibroblast cultures by defined factors. Cell. 2006; 126:663–676. [PubMed: 16904174]
4. Brambrink T, et al. Sequential expression of pluripotency markers during direct reprogramming of
mouse somatic cells. Cell stem cell. 2008; 2:151–159. [PubMed: 18371436]
5. Stadtfeld M, Maherali N, Breault D, Hochedlinger K. Defining molecular cornerstones during
fibroblast to iPS cell reprogramming in mouse. Cell stem cell. 2008; 2:230–240. [PubMed:
18371448]
6. Maherali N, et al. Directly reprogrammed fibroblasts show global epigenetic remodeling and
widespread tissue contribution. Cell stem cell. 2007; 1:55–70. [PubMed: 18371336]
7. Orkin S, Hochedlinger K. Chromatin connections to pluripotency and cellular reprogramming. Cell.
2011; 145:835–850. [PubMed: 21663790]
8. Nakagawa M, et al. Generation of induced pluripotent stem cells without Myc from mouse and
human fibroblasts. Nat Biotechnol. 2008; 26:101–106. [PubMed: 18059259]
9. Wernig M, Meissner A, Cassady J, Jaenisch R. c-Myc is dispensable for direct reprogramming of
mouse fibroblasts. Cell stem cell. 2008; 2:10–12. [PubMed: 18371415]
10. Polo J, et al. A molecular roadmap of reprogramming somatic cells into iPS cells. Cell. 2012;
151:1617–1632. [PubMed: 23260147]
11. Sridharan R, et al. Role of the murine reprogramming factors in the induction of pluripotency. Cell.
2009; 136:364–377. [PubMed: 19167336]
12. Lin CY, et al. Transcriptional amplification in tumor cells with elevated c-Myc. Cell. 2012;
151:56–67. [PubMed: 23021215]
13. Rahl PB, et al. c-Myc regulates transcriptional pause release. Cell. 2010; 141:432–445. [PubMed:
20434984]
14. Mansour A, et al. The H3K27 demethylase Utx regulates somatic and germ cell epigenetic
reprogramming. Nature. 2012; 488:409–413. [PubMed: 22801502]
15. Buganim Y, et al. Single-cell expression analyses during cellular reprogramming reveal an early
stochastic and a late hierarchic phase. Cell. 2012; 150:1209–1222. This study performed the first
single cell transcriptional analysis of nascent iPSCs and identified an early stochastic and a late
deterministic phase. [PubMed: 22980981]
16. Shu J, et al. Induction of Pluripotency in Mouse Somatic Cells with Lineage Specifiers. Cell. 2013;
153:963–975. This report demonstrated that iPSCs can be derived through ectopic expression of
lineage specifiers rather than “classic” pluripotency factors. [PubMed: 23706735]
17. Loh KM, Lim B. A precarious balance: pluripotency factors as lineage specifiers. Cell stem cell.
2011; 8:363–369. [PubMed: 21474100]
18. Hanna J, et al. Direct reprogramming of terminally differentiated mature B lymphocytes to
pluripotency. Cell. 2008; 133:250–264. [PubMed: 18423197]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 November 01.

Apostolou and Hochedlinger

Page 16

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

19. Hikichi T, et al. Transcription factors interfering with dedifferentiation induce cell type-specific
transcriptional profiles. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America. 2013; 110:6412–6417. [PubMed: 23550161]
20. Gifford CA, et al. Transcriptional and Epigenetic Dynamics during Specification of Human
Embryonic Stem Cells. Cell. 2013
21. Xie W, et al. Epigenomic analysis of multilineage differentiation of human embryonic stem cells.
Cell. 2013; 153:1134–1148. These studies (20 and 21) established the first comprehensive
chromatin and DNA methylation maps of pluripotent and lineage-restricted cells. [PubMed:
23664764]
22. Zhu J, et al. Genome-wide Chromatin State Transitions Associated with Developmental and
Environmental Cues. Cell. 2013; 152:642–654. [PubMed: 23333102]
23. Koche R, et al. Reprogramming factor expression initiates widespread targeted chromatin
remodeling. Cell stem cell. 2011; 8:96–105. [PubMed: 21211784]
24. Soufi A, Donahue G, Zaret K. Facilitators and impediments of the pluripotency reprogramming
factors' initial engagement with the genome. Cell. 2012; 151:994–1004. This publication
determined how somatic chromatin structure influences access by reprogramming factors and
identified important barriers to iPSC formation. [PubMed: 23159369]
25. Polo JM, Hochedlinger K. When fibroblasts MET iPSCs. Cell stem cell. 2010; 7:5–6. [PubMed:
20621040]
26. Taberlay P, et al. Polycomb-repressed genes have permissive enhancers that initiate
reprogramming. Cell. 2011; 147:1283–1294. [PubMed: 22153073]
27. Wen B, Wu H, Shinkai Y, Irizarry RA, Feinberg AP. Large histone H3 lysine 9 dimethylated
chromatin blocks distinguish differentiated from embryonic stem cells. Nature genetics. 2009;
41:246–250. [PubMed: 19151716]
28. Bernstein BE, et al. A bivalent chromatin structure marks key developmental genes in embryonic
stem cells. Cell. 2006; 125:315–326. [PubMed: 16630819]
29. Marks H, et al. The transcriptional and epigenomic foundations of ground state pluripotency. Cell.
2012; 149:590–604. [PubMed: 22541430]
30. Jia J, et al. Regulation of pluripotency and self- renewal of ESCs through epigenetic-threshold
modulation and mRNA pruning. Cell. 2012; 151:576–589. [PubMed: 23101626]
31. Onder T, et al. Chromatin-modifying enzymes as modulators of reprogramming. Nature. 2012;
483:598–602. [PubMed: 22388813]
32. Fragola G, et al. Cell reprogramming requires silencing of a core subset of polycomb targets. PLoS
genetics. 2013; 9:e1003292. [PubMed: 23468641]
33. Wang T, et al. The histone demethylases Jhdm1a/1b enhance somatic cell reprogramming in a
vitamin-C-dependent manner. Cell stem cell. 2011; 9:575–587. [PubMed: 22100412]
34. Zhao W, et al. Jmjd3 inhibits reprogramming by upregulating expression of INK4a/Arf and
targeting PHF20 for ubiquitination. Cell. 2013; 152:1037–1050. [PubMed: 23452852]
35. Liang G, He J, Zhang Y. Kdm2b promotes induced pluripotent stem cell generation by facilitating
gene activation early in reprogramming. Nature cell biology. 2012; 14:457–466.
36. Chen J, et al. H3K9 methylation is a barrier during somatic cell reprogramming into iPSCs. Nature
genetics. 2013; 45:34–42. [PubMed: 23202127]
37. Sridharan R, et al. Proteomic and genomic approaches reveal critical functions of H3K9
methylation and heterochromatin protein-1gamma in reprogramming to pluripotency. Nature cell
biology. 2013; 15:872–882. These reports (36 and 37) identified H3K9 methylation as a major
chromatin barrier of cellular reprogramming into iPSCs.
38. Ang YS, et al. Wdr5 mediates self-renewal and reprogramming via the embryonic stem cell core
transcriptional network. Cell. 2011; 145:183–197. [PubMed: 21477851]
39. Esch D, et al. A unique Oct4 interface is crucial for reprogramming to pluripotency. Nature cell
biology. 2013; 15:295–301.
40. Kohli RM, Z Y. Tet, TDG and the Tet, TDG and the Dynamic Cycle of DNA
DemethylationDynamic Cycle of DNA Demethylation. Nature. 2013

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 November 01.

Apostolou and Hochedlinger

Page 17

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

41. Pawlak M, Jaenisch R. De novo DNA methylation by Dnmt3a and Dnmt3b is dispensable for
nuclear reprogramming of somatic cells to a pluripotent state. Genes Dev. 2011; 25:1035–1040.
[PubMed: 21576263]
42. Mikkelsen T, et al. Dissecting direct reprogramming through integrative genomic analysis. Nature.
2008; 454:49–55. [PubMed: 18509334]
43. Doege C, et al. Early-stage epigenetic modification during somatic cell reprogramming by Parp1
and Tet2. Nature. 2012; 488:652–655. [PubMed: 22902501]
44. Costa Y, et al. NANOG-dependent function of TET1 and TET2 in establishment of pluripotency.
Nature. 2013
45. Silva J, et al. Nanog is the gateway to the pluripotent ground state. Cell. 2009; 138:722–737.
[PubMed: 19703398]
46. Gao Y, et al. Replacement of Oct4 by Tet1 during iPSC Induction Reveals an Important Role of
DNA Methylation and Hydroxymethylation in Reprogramming. Cell stem cell. 2013; 12:453–469.
[PubMed: 23499384]
47. Lister R, et al. Hotspots of aberrant epigenomic reprogramming in human induced pluripotent stem
cells. Nature. 2011; 471:68–73. [PubMed: 21289626]
48. Duboule D, dl W. The many faces of developmental enhancers. Nature. 2013
49. Skene PJ, Henikoff S. Histone variants in pluripotency and disease. Development. 2013;
140:2513–2524. [PubMed: 23715545]
50. Gaspar-Maia A, et al. MacroH2A histone variants act as a barrier upon reprogramming towards
pluripotency. Nat Commun. 2013; 4:1565. [PubMed: 23463008]
51. Pasque V, et al. Histone variant macroH2A marks embryonic differentiation in vivo and acts as an
epigenetic barrier to induced pluripotency. J Cell Sci. 2012; 125:6094–6104. [PubMed: 23077180]
52. Barrero MJ, et al. Macrohistone Variants Preserve Cell Identity by Preventing the Gain of
H3K4me2 during Reprogramming to Pluripotency. Cell reports. 2013; 3:1005–1011. [PubMed:
23545500]
53. Singhal N, et al. Chromatin-Remodeling Components of the BAF Complex Facilitate
Reprogramming. Cell. 2010; 141:943–955. [PubMed: 20550931]
54. Gaspar-Maia A, et al. Chd1 regulates open chromatin and pluripotency of embryonic stem cells.
Nature. 2009; 460:863–868. [PubMed: 19587682]
55. Luo M, et al. NuRD Blocks Reprogramming of Mouse Somatic Cells into Pluripotent Stem Cells.
Stem Cells. 2013; 31:1278–1286. [PubMed: 23533168]
56. Yildirim O, et al. Mbd3/NURD complex regulates expression of 5-hydroxymethylcytosine marked
genes in embryonic stem cells. Cell. 2011; 147:1498–1510. [PubMed: 22196727]
57. Peric-Hupkes D, et al. Molecular maps of the reorganization of genome-nuclear lamina interactions
during differentiation. Molecular cell. 2010; 38:603–613. [PubMed: 20513434]
58. Phillips-Cremins JE, et al. Architectural Protein Subclasses Shape 3D Organization of Genomes
during Lineage Commitment. Cell. 2013
59. Kagey MH, et al. Mediator and cohesin connect gene expression and chromatin architecture.
Nature. 2010; 467:430–435. [PubMed: 20720539]
60. Apostolou E, et al. Genome-wide Chromatin Interactions of the Nanog Locus in Pluripotency,
Differentiation, and Reprogramming. Cell stem cell. 2013
61. Wei Z, et al. Klf4 organizes long-range chromosomal interactions with the oct4 locus in
reprogramming and pluripotency. Cell stem cell. 2013; 13:36–47. [PubMed: 23747203]
62. Zhang H, et al. Intrachromosomal Looping Is Required for Activation of Endogenous Pluripotency
Genes during Reprogramming. Cell stem cell. 2013; 13:30–35. The above studies (60-62)
identified pluripotency-specific, genome-wide interaction networks around pluripotency loci and
implicate Mediator and Cohesin in their regulation. [PubMed: 23747202]
63. Levasseur D, Wang J, Dorschner M, Stamatoyannopoulos J, Orkin S. Oct4 dependence of
chromatin structure within the extended Nanog locus in ES cells. Genes & development. 2008;
22:575–580. [PubMed: 18283123]
64. Schoenfelder S, et al. Preferential associations between co-regulated genes reveal a transcriptional
interactome in erythroid cells. Nature genetics. 2010; 42:53–61. [PubMed: 20010836]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 November 01.

Apostolou and Hochedlinger

Page 18

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

65. Whyte WA, et al. Master transcription factors and mediator establish super-enhancers at key cell
identity genes. Cell. 2013; 153:307–319. [PubMed: 23582322]
66. Silva J, et al. Promotion of reprogramming to ground state pluripotency by signal inhibition. PLoS
Biol. 2008; 6:e253. [PubMed: 18942890]
67. Yang J, et al. Stat3 activation is limiting for reprogramming to ground state pluripotency. Cell stem
cell. 2010; 7:319–328. [PubMed: 20804969]
68. Ichida J, et al. A small-molecule inhibitor of tgf-Beta signaling replaces sox2 in reprogramming by
inducing nanog. Cell stem cell. 2009; 5:491–503. [PubMed: 19818703]
69. Maherali N, Hochedlinger K. Tgfbeta signal inhibition cooperates in the induction of iPSCs and
replaces Sox2 and cMyc. Curr Biol. 2009; 19:1718–1723. [PubMed: 19765992]
70. Ho L, et al. esBAF facilitates pluripotency by conditioning the genome for LIF/STAT3 signalling
and by regulating polycomb function. Nature cell biology. 2011; 13:903–913.
71. Leitch HG, et al. Naive pluripotency is associated with global DNA hypomethylation. Nat Struct
Mol Biol. 2013; 20:311–316. [PubMed: 23416945]
72. Yamaji M, et al. PRDM14 ensures naive pluripotency through dual regulation of signaling and
epigenetic pathways in mouse embryonic stem cells. Cell stem cell. 2013; 12:368–382. The above
two references characterize the effect of combined Gsk3/Mapk signal inhibition (“2i”) on the
epigenome of ESCs and provide an intriguing link to Prdm14. [PubMed: 23333148]
73. Ho R, Papp B, Hoffman JA, Merrill BJ, Plath K. Stage-specific regulation of reprogramming to
induced pluripotent stem cells by wnt signaling and T cell factor proteins. Cell reports. 2013;
3:2113–2126. [PubMed: 23791530]
74. Esteban M, et al. Vitamin C enhances the generation of mouse and human induced pluripotent
stem cells. Cell stem cell. 2010; 6:71–79. [PubMed: 20036631]
75. Stadtfeld M, et al. Ascorbic acid prevents loss of Dlk1-Dio3 imprinting and facilitates generation
of all-iPS cell mice from terminally differentiated B cells. Nature genetics. 2012; 44:398–405.
S391–392. [PubMed: 22387999]
76. Blaschke K, et al. Vitamin C induces Tet-dependent DNA demethylation and a blastocyst-like state
in ES cells. Nature. 2013
77. O'Malley J, et al. High-resolution analysis with novel cell-surface markers identifies routes to iPS
cells. Nature. 2013; 499:88–91. [PubMed: 23728301]
78. Hansson J, et al. Highly coordinated proteome dynamics during reprogramming of somatic cells to
pluripotency. Cell reports. 2012; 2:1579–1592. [PubMed: 23260666]
79. Tanabe K, Nakamura M, Narita M, Takahashi K, Yamanaka S. Maturation, not initiation, is the
major roadblock during reprogramming toward pluripotency from human fibroblasts. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2013; 110:12172–12179.
[PubMed: 23812749]
80. Golipour A, et al. A late transition in somatic cell reprogramming requires regulators distinct from
the pluripotency network. Cell stem cell. 2012; 11:769–782. [PubMed: 23217423]
81. Hou P, et al. Pluripotent Stem Cells Induced from Mouse Somatic Cells by Small-Molecule
Compounds. Science. 2013 This provocative report suggests that induced pluripotency can be
achieved with four small compounds and without the use of transcription factors.
82. Egli D, et al. Reprogramming within hours following nuclear transfer into mouse but not human
zygotes. Nat Commun. 2011; 2:488. [PubMed: 21971503]
83. Gu TP, et al. The role of Tet3 DNA dioxygenase in epigenetic reprogramming by oocytes. Nature.
2011; 477:606–610. [PubMed: 21892189]
84. Wu G, et al. Establishment of totipotency does not depend on Oct4A. Nature cell biology. 2013
This study discovered that Oct4 is dispensable for reprogramming somatic nuclei by SCNT,
pointing to important mechanistic differences with induced pluripotency. 10.1038/ncb2816
85. Maekawa M, et al. Direct reprogramming of somatic cells is promoted by maternal transcription
factor Glis1. Nature. 2011; 474:225–229. [PubMed: 21654807]
86. Jullien J, Astrand C, Halley-Stott RP, Garrett N, Gurdon JB. Characterization of somatic cell
nuclear reprogramming by oocytes in which a linker histone is required for pluripotency gene
reactivation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America.
2010; 107:5483–5488. [PubMed: 20212135]
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 November 01.

Apostolou and Hochedlinger

Page 19

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

87. Lu X, et al. Drosophila H1 regulates the genetic activity of heterochromatin by recruitment of
Su(var)3-9. Science. 2013; 340:78–81. [PubMed: 23559249]
88. Yang SM, Kim BJ, Norwood Toro L, Skoultchi AI. H1 linker histone promotes epigenetic
silencing by regulating both DNA methylation and histone H3 methylation. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2013; 110:1708–1713. [PubMed:
23302691]
89. Nashun B, Akiyama T, Suzuki MG, Aoki F. Dramatic replacement of histone variants during
genome remodeling in nuclear-transferred embryos. Epigenetics. 2011; 6:1489–1497. [PubMed:
22139579]
90. Jullien J, et al. HIRA dependent H3.3 deposition is required for transcriptional reprogramming
following nuclear transfer to Xenopus oocytes. Epigenetics Chromatin. 2012; 5:17. [PubMed:
23102146]
91. Pasque V, Gillich A, Garrett N, Gurdon JB. Histone variant macroH2A confers resistance to
nuclear reprogramming. EMBO J. 2011; 30:2373–2387. [PubMed: 21552206]
92. Han DW, et al. Pluripotential reprogramming of the somatic genome in hybrid cells occurs with
the first cell cycle. Stem Cells. 2008; 26:445–454. [PubMed: 18065396]
93. Piccolo FM, et al. Different Roles for Tet1 and Tet2 Proteins in Reprogramming-Mediated Erasure
of Imprints Induced by EGC Fusion. Mol Cell. 2013; 49:1023–1033. [PubMed: 23453809]
94. Pereira CF, et al. Heterokaryon-based reprogramming of human B lymphocytes for pluripotency
requires Oct4 but not Sox2. PLoS genetics. 2008; 4:e1000170. [PubMed: 18773085]
95. Do JT, et al. Enhanced reprogramming of Xist by induced upregulation of Tsix and Dnmt3a. Stem
Cells. 2008; 26:2821–2831. [PubMed: 18757295]
96. Foshay K, et al. Embryonic stem cells induce pluripotency in somatic cell fusion through biphasic
reprogramming. Molecular cell. 2012; 46:159–170. [PubMed: 22445485]
97. Ma DK, Chiang CH, Ponnusamy K, Ming GL, Song H. G9a and Jhdm2a regulate embryonic stem
cell fusion-induced reprogramming of adult neural stem cells. Stem Cells. 2008; 26:2131–2141.
[PubMed: 18535151]
98. Pereira CF, et al. ESCs require PRC2 to direct the successful reprogramming of differentiated cells
toward pluripotency. Cell stem cell. 2010; 6:547–556. [PubMed: 20569692]
99. Hajkova P, et al. Chromatin dynamics during epigenetic reprogramming in the mouse germ line.
Nature. 2008; 452:877–881. [PubMed: 18354397]
100. Magnusdottir E, Gillich A, Grabole N, Surani MA. Combinatorial control of cell fate and
reprogramming in the mammalian germline. Current opinion in genetics & development. 2012;
22:466–474. [PubMed: 22795169]
101. Chuva de Sousa Lopes SM, et al. X chromosome activity in mouse XX primordial germ cells.
PLoS genetics. 2008; 4:e30. [PubMed: 18266475]
102. Sachs M, et al. Bivalent chromatin marks developmental regulatory genes in the mouse
embryonic germline in vivo. Cell reports. 2013; 3:1777–1784. [PubMed: 23727241]
103. Durcova-Hills G, Tang F, Doody G, Tooze R, Surani MA. Reprogramming primordial germ cells
into pluripotent stem cells. PLoS One. 2008; 3:e3531. [PubMed: 18953407]
104. Krentz AD, et al. The DM domain protein DMRT1 is a dose-sensitive regulator of fetal germ cell
proliferation and pluripotency. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America. 2009; 106:22323–22328. [PubMed: 20007774]
105. Hackett JA, et al. Germline DNA demethylation dynamics and imprint erasure through 5hydroxymethylcytosine. Science. 2013; 339:448–452. [PubMed: 23223451]
106. Dawlaty MM, et al. Combined deficiency of Tet1 and Tet2 causes epigenetic abnormalities but is
compatible with postnatal development. Dev Cell. 2013; 24:310–323. [PubMed: 23352810]
107. Kagiwada S, Kurimoto K, Hirota T, Yamaji M, Saitou M. Replication-coupled passive DNA
demethylation for the erasure of genome imprints in mice. EMBO J. 2013; 32:340–353.
[PubMed: 23241950]
108. Eminli S, et al. Differentiation stage determines potential of hematopoietic cells for
reprogramming into induced pluripotent stem cells. Nature genetics. 2009; 41:968–976.
[PubMed: 19668214]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 November 01.

Apostolou and Hochedlinger

Page 20

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

109. Tan KY, Eminli S, Hettmer S, Hochedlinger K, Wagers AJ. Efficient generation of iPS cells from
skeletal muscle stem cells. PLoS One. 2011; 6:e26406. [PubMed: 22028872]
110. White AC, et al. Defining the origins of Ras/p53-mediated squamous cell carcinoma. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2011; 108:7425–7430.
[PubMed: 21502519]
111. Barker N, et al. Crypt stem cells as the cells-of-origin of intestinal cancer. Nature. 2009; 457:608–
611. [PubMed: 19092804]
112. Folmes CD, et al. Somatic oxidative bioenergetics transitions into pluripotency-dependent
glycolysis to facilitate nuclear reprogramming. Cell Metab. 2011; 14:264–271. [PubMed:
21803296]
113. Suva ML, Riggi N, Bernstein BE. Epigenetic reprogramming in cancer. Science. 2013;
339:1567–1570. [PubMed: 23539597]
114. He J, Nguyen AT, Zhang Y. KDM2b/JHDM1b, an H3K36me2-specific demethylase, is required
for initiation and maintenance of acute myeloid leukemia. Blood. 2011; 117:3869–3880.
[PubMed: 21310926]
115. Tzatsos A, et al. KDM2B promotes pancreatic cancer via Polycomb-dependent and -independent
transcriptional programs. J Clin Invest. 2013; 123:727–739. [PubMed: 23321669]
116. Kapoor A, et al. The histone variant macroH2A suppresses melanoma progression through
regulation of CDK8. Nature. 2010; 468:1105–1109. [PubMed: 21179167]
117. Gaudet F, et al. Induction of tumors in mice by genomic hypomethylation. Science. 2003;
300:489–492. [PubMed: 12702876]
118. Moran-Crusio K, et al. Tet2 loss leads to increased hematopoietic stem cell self-renewal and
myeloid transformation. Cancer Cell. 2011; 20:11–24. [PubMed: 21723200]
119. Krivtsov AV, et al. H3K79 methylation profiles define murine and human MLL-AF4 leukemias.
Cancer Cell. 2008; 14:355–368. [PubMed: 18977325]
120. Kadoch C, et al. Proteomic and bioinformatic analysis of mammalian SWI/SNF complexes
identifies extensive roles in human malignancy. Nature genetics. 2013; 45:592–601. [PubMed:
23644491]
121. Doi A, et al. Differential methylation of tissue- and cancer-specific CpG island shores
distinguishes human induced pluripotent stem cells, embryonic stem cells and fibroblasts. Nature
genetics. 2009; 41:1350–1353. [PubMed: 19881528]
122. Hochedlinger K, et al. Reprogramming of a melanoma genome by nuclear transplantation. Genes
Dev. 2004; 18:1875–1885. [PubMed: 15289459]
123. Stricker SH, et al. Widespread resetting of DNA methylation in glioblastoma-initiating cells
suppresses malignant cellular behavior in a lineage-dependent manner. Genes Dev. 2013;
27:654–669. [PubMed: 23512659]
124. Rapino F, et al. C/EBPalpha induces highly efficient macrophage transdifferentiation of B
lymphoma and leukemia cell lines and impairs their tumorigenicity. Cell reports. 2013; 3:1153–
1163. [PubMed: 23545498]

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 November 01.

Apostolou and Hochedlinger

Page 21

Similarities between induced pluripotency and malignant transformation

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Reprogramming of somatic cells to pluripotency and transformation of normal cells into
malignant cells are illustrated as biochemical reactions with defined reactants (somatic
cells) and products (iPSCs or cancer cells). Reprogramming is initiated by the
overexpression of OKSM, while cellular transformation begins with the activation of
oncogenes and/or repression of tumor suppressor genes. Intermediates of each reaction
remain largely elusive. Both processes can be enhanced by modulation of additional
genes, which can be considered “catalyzers” of the reaction. At a cellular level, both
induced pluripotency and tumorigenesis are multi-step processes that require
proliferation and result in a change of cell identity or differentiation potential. The “end
product” is in both cases an immortal cell with tumorigenic potential. However, cancer
cells almost always acquire genetic aberrations and become aneuploid while iPSCs retain
a normal diploid genome. At a molecular level, many cancer cells have, like iPSCs,
reduced levels of H3K9 methylation and altered DNA methylation patterns compared
with differentiated cells. Overall, these findings suggest that nascent iPSCs and
premalignant cells face some of the same epigenetic barriers to alter cell identity. This
notion may explain why the same epigenetic regulators are involved in both processes,
such as Utx, macroH2A, Jhdm1b, Ezh2, Tet2 or Dnmts. This idea is further consistent
with the finding that certain somatic progenitor stem and cells are more susceptible to
tumorigenesis and reprogramming than differentiated cells, indicating a more permissive
epigenetic environment. A prediction that follows is that the malignant state should be
reversible upon exposure of cancer cells to reprogramming factors, which is indeed
consistent with recent results (see text for details).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 November 01.

Apostolou and Hochedlinger

Page 22

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 1. Dynamics of key epigenetic and transcriptional changes during direct reprogramming

Colored bars represent different cellular and transcriptional events (top panel) or epigenetic
modifications (bottom panel) that change in dynamic patterns during iPSC formation.
Examples of candidate enzymes that have been associated with these epigenetic marks in the
context of direct reprogramming are given on the right. OKSM: Oct4, Klf4, Sox2, cMyc;
5mC: 5′-methyl-Cytosine; 5hmC: 5′-hydroxy-methyl-Cytosine; MET: Mesenchymal-toepithelial-transition.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 November 01.

Apostolou and Hochedlinger

Page 23

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 2. Interplay between reprogramming factors and molecules influencing chromatin state

Shown are different transcription factors that have been shown to trigger induced
pluripotency, with the classical combination (Oct4, Sox2, Klf4, c-Myc) highlighted. Below
each category are examples of molecules that have been shown to facilitate (green) or inhibit
(red) reprogramming. BMPs (Bone Morphogenetic Factors) and Wnts have stage-dependent
enhancing or suppressive roles during iPSC formation (black, see text for details). RBPs:
RNA Binding Proteins.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 November 01.

Apostolou and Hochedlinger

Page 24

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 3. Levels of epigenetic gene regulation during induced pluripotency

a. Depicted are four categories of genes with associated histone modifications and their
transcriptional response during reprogramming. Examples of genes within each category are
shown to the right. b. Gain and loss of DNA methylation occurs late in reprogramming,
while the acquisition of hydroxymethylation at pluripotency genes takes place at early-tomid stages of iPSC formation. c. Oct4 (O), Klf4 (K) and Sox2 (S) function as “pioneer
factors” that bind to high-density nucleosome regions, enabling chromatin remodeling and
the recruitment of other factors including c-Myc (M). d. Changes in long-range chromatin

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 November 01.

Apostolou and Hochedlinger

Page 25

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

interactions around the Nanog locus during iPSC formation. iPSC formation re-establishes a
3D chromatin network typical of ESCs, and this process depends on Mediator and Cohesin.
Colored loops represent somatic-specific (orange), intermediate-specific (green) and
pluripotency-specific (blue) Nanog-interacting loci.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 November 01.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Activation of
pluripotency
genes

8-12 days (Oct4-GFP reporter)
(4,5)

<36h hrs (4-cell embryo; Oct4GFP reporter)(82)

24-48 hrs (Oct4-GFP reporter)
(92)

1-2 days, btw. E7.25-E8.5 (e.g.,
Sox2, Dppa3, Nanog)(100)

3-4 days (e.g., Klf4, Stat3)(103)

Extinction of cell-oforigin expression
program

1-2 days (e.g., Thy1 and Snai1 during
fibroblast reprogramming)(5)

22-24 hrs (2-cell embryo; global silencing of
somatic genes/activation of zygotic genes)(82)

24-48 hrs (e.g., Nestin, Glur6 in NPC-ESC
hybrids)(92)

∼2 days, btw. E6.25-E8.5 (e.g., Hox genes)
(100)

1-2 days (e.g., Blimp1)(103)

Types of
Reprogramming

Direct Reprogramming
(OKSM factors)

SCNT

Cell Fusion

PGC maturation in vivo

PGC-to-EGC conversion
in vitro

3-4 days (X-GFP reporter)
(101)

N/A

H1 (99)
H2A.Z (99)
(Nap-1 Hira)(99)

N/A

∼9 days (94)

∼3 days, btw. E11.5-E13.5 (XGFP reporter)(101)

H1/B4 (86)
H3.3 (89)
H2A.X (90)
H2A.Z (90)
macroH2A (91)

macroH2A (50-52)

∼12 days (X-GFP reporter) (5)

∼3 days (morula embryo; XGFP reporter)

Histone
variants
(chaperones)

X chromosome
reactivation

N/A

Glp (100)
Utx (14)
Prmt5 (103)

G9a (96)
Jhdm2a (96)
PRC1/2 (97)

HDACs (91)

PRC1/2 (32)
Utx (14)
Dot1L (31)
HDACs (1)
(see also Figure 1)

Histone
modifiers

N/A

Dnmt3a/b/L (107)
Uhrf1 (107)
Tet1/2 (105)
AID (1,40)

Tet1/2 (93)
AID (2)

Dnmt1
Tet3 (83)

Dnmt1 (42)
Tet1/2 (43,44)
AID (40)

DNA
methylation
factors

N/A

Blimp1 (100)
Prdm14 (100)
Tcfap2c (100)
Nanog (100)
Oct4 (100)
Sox2 (100)

Nanog (45)
Oct4 (2)
(Sox2 not required)(2)

(Oct4 not required)(84)

Nanog (45)
Stat3 (67)

Requirement
for endogenous
TFs

LIF/Stat3+FGF+ SCF or
ERK/GSK inhibition
(“2i”)(71)

BMP (100)

LIF
Wnt

N/A

Wnt (1,73)
LIF (67)
BMP (25,36)
ERK/GSK inhibition
(“2i”)(66)

Relevant
signaling
pathways

Key molecular and cellular events during different reprogramming strategies with examples of implicated molecules. SCNT, somatic cell nuclear transfer; PGC, primordial germ cell; EGC, embryonic germ
cell; NPC, neural progenitor cell; ESC, embryonic stem cell; TF, transcription factor. Note that some references refer to review articles covering the discussed molecule.

Table 1

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Comparison of different types of cellular reprogramming

Apostolou and Hochedlinger
Page 26

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 November 01.

