Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 21

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Palmitoylated claudin7 captured in glycolipid-enriched membrane
microdomains promotes metastasis via associated transmembrane
and cytosolic molecules
Florian Thuma1,*, Sarah Heiler1,*, Martina Schnölzer2, Margot Zöller1
1

Department of Tumor Cell Biology, University Hospital of Surgery, Heidelberg, Germany

2

Department of Functional Proteome Analysis, German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany

*

These authors contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Margot Zöller, email: m.zoeller@uni-hd.de
Keywords: claudin7 palmitoylation, metastasis, glycolipid-enriched membrane microdomains, complex-dependent bioactivity
Received: November 26, 2015     Accepted: March 31, 2016     Published: April 22, 2016

ABSTRACT
In epithelial cells claudin7 (cld7) is a major component of tight junctions, but is
also recovered from glycolipid-enriched membrane microdomains (GEM). In tumor
cells, too, cld7 exists in two stages. Only GEM-located cld7, which is palmitoylated,
promotes metastasis. Searching for the underlying mechanism(s) revealed the
following.
The metastatic capacity of the rat pancreatic adenocarcinoma cell line ASML is
lost by a knockdown (kd) of cld7 and is not regained by rescuing cld7 with a mutated
palmitoylation site (cld7mPalm). ASML-cld7kd and ASML-cld7mPalm cells show reduced
motility and invasiveness. This is due to cld7, but not cld7mPalm associating with α6β4,
ezrin, uPAR and MMP14, which jointly support motility and invasion. Palmitoylated
cld7 also is engaged in drug resistance by repressing Pten, allowing activation of
the antiapoptotic PI3K/Akt pathway. An association of cld7mPalm with the major Pten
phosphorylating kinases does not restore apoptosis resistance as phosphorylated Pten
is not guided towards GEM to compete with non-phosphorylated Pten. The pathway
whereby palmitoylated cld7 supports expression of several EMT genes and nuclear
translocation of EMT transcription factors remains to be unraveled. An association
with Notch, reduced in ASML-cld7mPalm cells, might be the starting point. Finally, GEMlocated, palmitoylated cld7 associates with several components of vesicle transport
machineries engaged in exosome biogenesis.
Taken together, prerequisites for cld7 acting as a cancer-initiating cell marker
are GEM location and palmitoylation, which support a multitude of associations and
integration into exosomes. The latter suggests palmitoylated cld7 contributing to
message transfer via exosomes.

INTRODUCTION

differentiation ca­pacity, anchorage independent growth,
longevity and drug resistance [4]. CIC are also defined
by sets of surface markers [5], which were repeatedly
reported to be of functional relevance [6, 7]. In gastro­
intestinal cancer evidence was provided that EpC acts
as a CIC biomarker, but requires support by claudin7
(cld7) [8–10]. Experimental evidence pointing towards a
dominance of the cld7 contribution demanded controlling
the genuine cld7 activity [9].
Claudins are a family of four-pass tight junction (TJ)
proteins [11–13]. The importance of clds, in­cluding cld7,

Cancer remains one of the leading causes of death
[1]. This mostly is due to the capacity of malignant
cells to metastasize, the unpredictable spread of tumor
cells frequently setting the corner stone for curative
therapy [2]. Evidence is accumulating that limitations
in cancer therapy can be overcome by attacking a small
population of cancer-initiating cells (CIC) that are
essential for primary tumor and metastatic growth [3].
CIC are characterized by tumorigenicity, self-renewal and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30659

Oncotarget

was repeatedly demonstrated by targeted deletion (ko).
Cld1ko mice die within one day after birth due to severe
defects in the barrier functions of the skin [14]. A cld7ko
is lethal within 10 days after birth due to destruction of
the intestine [15]. The authors speculate on a missing
association with in­tegrins and a striking upregulation of
MMP9 contributing to gut destruction [15]. An intestinespecific conditional cld7ko mouse revealed a specific
enhancement of paracellular small organic solute flux
across the TJ, which included N-formyl-L-methionionylL-leucyl-L-phenylalanine (fMLP), a major bacterial
product that initiates colonic inflammation [16].
However, clds can also be diffusely distributed in
lateral membranes [17–20]. This accounts particu­larly for
cld7 [21–23] and was first described for the localization
in kidney tubuli [24]. Claudins are PKA, PKC and
MLCK targets [25–29], where cld phosphorylation can
prohibit integration into TJ, which is accompanied by
loss of epithelial cell polarization [30–32]. We expect that
multiple phos­phorylation sites need to be affected, as we
did not observe relocation, when mutating individual ser­
ine residues [33]. Instead, our studies confirmed claudin7
palmitoylation and partitioning into gly­colipid-enriched
membrane microdomains (GEM) [9, 10, 33, 34]. GEM
are known to harbor palmitoy­lated proteins and due to
the particular lipid composition to function as a scaffold
creating a platform for signal transduction and, via
cytoskeleton linker molecules, for reorganization of the
cytoskeleton [35–38]. GEM are additionally prone for
internalization [39, 40], where GEM membrane and linked
cytosolic molecules are recruited into early endosomes,
the GEM complexes being maintained and re­
covered
in exosomes [41–43]. In concern about the contribution
of clds to oncogenesis and tumor pro­gression, several
reports describe TJ proteins preventing or promoting
tumor progression [18, 44–46]. Our data pointing towards
functional importance of cld7 in tumor progression
[9, 10], we want to mention particularly one report on cld7
expression in triple negative breast cancer. The bulk tumor
does not express cld7-associated rab25, but expression
is seen in CIC [47]. We interpret these data in the sense
that cld7 and palmitoylated cld7 account for distinct, nonoverlapping activities such that dependent on the cellular
context, the functional engagement in TJ or in GEM are
dominating. To cir­cumvent the problem of skewed results,
we transfected HEK cells with palmitoylation deficient
cld7 (cld7mPalm), which confirmed strong enrichment only of
palmitoylation-competent cld7 in GEM [33]. To elaborate
palmitoylated cld7 selective activities, we here rescued a
cld7kd in a metastatic pan­creatic tumor line with cld7mPalm.
EpCAM (EpC) is a CIC marker [48], frequently
associated with cld7 [9, 36, 49–52]. The oncogenic and
tumor progression supporting activity of EpC is due
to EpC interfering with E-cadherin-mediated cell-cell
adhesion via disrupting the link between α-catenin and
F-actin [53] as well as by its engagement in Wnt/β-catenin
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

signaling [54] and by controlling cell movement via
down-regulation of PKC [55] and regulation of MMP7
expression [56, 57]. These activities are promoted by the
cytoplasmic tail of EpC (EpICD), which forms a complex
with β-catenin, FHL2 (four-and-half-LIM-only) and Lef1, re­locates to the nucleus and initiates c-myc, cyclin A
and E transcription [58]. EpICD also initiates tran­scription
of reprogramming genes like Oct4 and Nanog, which
is accompanied by epithe­
lial-mesen­
chymal transition
(EMT) with upregulation of vimentin, Snail, Slug and
downregulation of E-cadherin in a colon cancer and a
hepatoma line [59]. Though not evaluated, it is tempting to
specu­late on a cld7 contribution as hepatocyte progenitors
express EpC and cld7 [60] and in colon and pan­creatic
cancer, EpC is cld7-associated [50]. Under physiological
conditions, too, the EpC-cld7 asso­ciation appears vital.
An EpCko, associated with intestine destruction-promoted
death within one week after birth, is due to the missing
association of EpC with cld7 [61]. These findings pointed
to­wards a concerted ac­tivity of EpC and cld7 in tumor
progression, which was confirmed by a cld7kd and an
EpCkd in a me­tastasizing line, which both sufficed to wave
metastatic growth [9]. As EpC is one of the dominating
partners of cld7, we also generated an EpC rescue with a
mutation of the cld7-binding site (EpCmAG) to differentiate
not only between non-palmitoylated and palmitoylated
cld7, but also on the impact of an EpC association.
We confirm that only palmitoylated cld7 promotes
tumor progression by supporting motility and inva­
sion, GEM location-dependent activation of the PI3K/
Akt pathway and upregulation of mesenchymal genes.
Finally, GEM-located palmitoylated cld7 associates with
vesicle transporter complexes. This might have severe
consequences on exosome delivery and the communication
with neighboring tu­mor, stroma and hematopoietic cells.

RESULTS
Cld7 belongs to the family of TJ proteins, supposed
to inhibit tumor progression. However, cld7 is also
recovered outside of TJ. We provided evidence that
palmitoylated cld7 is enriched in GEM, co­operating with
GEM-, but not TJ-located molecules [33]. Indeed, nonpalmitoylated versus palmitoy­lated cld7 exhibit on nonoverlapping and opposing activities.

The model
ASML is a metastasizing pancreatic adenocarcinoma
[62], highly expressing cld7 and EpC. At least part of
the two molecules are associated via a direct proteinprotein interaction [50]. A cld7kd as well as an EpCkd are
accompanied by loss in metastatic potential [9]. To control
for the impact of cld7 palmitoylation, ASML-cld7kd cells
were rescued with a palmitoylation site mutated cld7
(ASML-cld7mPalm). A transient cld7 rescue served as
30660

Oncotarget

control. As ASML-EpCkd cells also do not metastasize,
which could be due to palmitoylated cld7 supporting
the generation of the cotranscription factor EpICD [33],
we additionally generated an ASML-EpCresc line and a
rescue line, where the binding site for cld7 is mutated
(ASML-EpCmAG). The latter allows judging, whether
functional activity of palmi­toylated cld7 is strictly linked
to associated EpC.
Cld7 has two palmitoylation sites. A palmitoylation
assay revealed that mutating AA184 and AA186 prevents
cld7 palmitoylation indicating that predominantly the
cld7 C-terminal tail is palmitoylated (Figure 1A). ASMLcld7mPalm express cld7 at a comparable level to ASMLwt
cells. This also accounts for EpC expression in ASMLEpCresc and ASML-Ep­CmAG (Figure 1B). Furthermore,
cld7 co-immunopre­
cipitates with EpC, but not with
EpCmAG. Cld7mPalm does not coimmunoprecipitate with
EpC. Both EpC and cld7 coimmunoprecipitate with the
tetraspanin Tspan8, but coimmunoprecipitation with
EpCmAG is impaired (Figure 1C). Confocal microscopy
confirmed strong colocalization of cld7  with EpC in
ASMLwt and ASML-EpCresc cells, but poor colocalization
in ASML-EpCmAG and ASML-cld7mPalm cells (Figure 1D).
Furthermore, in ASMLwt and -cld7resc cells cld7 and EpC
are enriched in light density (GEM) fractions, but cld7mPalm
is shifted towards heavier fractions. Recovery of EpC in
light density fractions depends on the association with
(palmitoylation competent) cld7. EpC is poorly recovered
in light density fractions of ASML-cld7kd and -EpCmAG
lysates and is not rescued into light density frac­tions in
ASML-cld7mPalm lysates. Recovery of the constitutively
GEM-located tetraspanin Tspan8 is not affected by the
cld7kd or cld7mPalm (Figure 1E).
Taken together, in ASML cells, which do not form
TJ, cld7 is palmitoylated and enriched in GEM. The
association with EpC is promoted by cld7 palmitoylation,
but is not completely abolished in the absence of
(palmitoylated) cld7, possibly due to EpC associating also
with other palmitoylated GEM-located molecules, like e.g.
Tspan8.

in lung suspensions. Instead, ASML-EpCresc cells develop
lymph node metastases and a limited number of lung
metastases after in­trafootpad application. Although with
a significant delay, ASML-EpCresc bearing rats become
mori­bund after 154–215 days mostly due to the metastatic
lymph node burden. Few ASML-EpCmAG cells were
recovered in lymph nodes and lung in ex vivo cultures,
but did not form visible metastases. Im­munohistology
confirmed that ASML and ASML-EpCresc cells displaced
the lung tissue with only EpC+/cld7+/CD44v6+ tumor cells
being seen in most sections. Instead, no tumor nodules
were seen in the lung of rats that received ASML-cld7kd
or ASML-cld7mPalm cells, only bronchiolar epithelial cells
being stained by anti-EpC and anti-cld7 (Figure 2B, 2C).
Thus, palmitoylated cld7 is indispensable for ASML
metastasis formation. There are 3 major, mutu­ally not
exclusive features, whereby palmitoylated cld7 could
support the metastasis process. (i) Palmitoylated cld7
promotes tumor cell motility by associating with integrins
and the cytoskeleton and/or by cooperating with proteases
to create space for metastases; (ii) palmitoylated cld7 is
engaged in apoptosis resistance and (iii) EMT.

Palmitoylated cld7 and motility
ASML cells do not grow locally, the capacity to
leave the injection site and to reach the first lymph node
station becoming vital. Transwell migration and wound
healing of ASML-cld7kd and -EpCkd cells is significantly
reduced. It is restored in ASML-cld7resc and -EpCresc cells,
but not in ASML-cld7mPalm and -EpCmAG cells (Figure 3A,
3B). In transwell migration the cld7kd exerted a stronger
effect than the EpCkd, which was controlled for the
migration of individual cells by videomicroscopy. Distinct
to the reduced migration of ASML-cld7kd and -cld7mPalm
cells, migration of single ASML-EpCkd cells was increased
and migration of -EpCmAG was not affected (Figure 3C).
This finding indicates that cld7 ac­tively promotes motility,
whereas “free” EpC hampers motility, though to a minor
degree.
In order to define the mechanism(s) underlying
palmitoylated cld7-promoted motility, we searched
by mass spectrometry for proteins preferentially coimmunoprecipitating after mild lysis, not to destroy GEM
complexes, with cld7 and/or cld7mPalm. ASMLwt were
precipitated with anti-EpC and anti-cld7. ASML-EpCkd,
-EpCmAG and -cld7mPalm lysates were precipitated with
anti-cld7. A considerable number of cytoskeletal proteins
associate with EpC and cld7. While integrins and some
tetraspanins preferen­
tially coimmunoprecipitate with
EpC (Supplementary Table S1A), the association requires
palmitoylation-com­petent cld7. This is demonstrated for
α6β4 and Tspan8 that do not or poorly colocalize with EpC
in ASML-EpCmAG and -cld7mPalm cells and most poorly with
cld7 in ASML-cld7mPalm cells (Supplementary Figure S1).
Α6β4 and Tspan8 also poorly coimmunoprecipitate with

Anchorage independence and metastasis
formation require palmitoylation-competent cld7
Anchorage independence and tumor progression
are central features of CIC. Soft agar colony forma­
tion of ASML-cld7kd and ASML-EpCkd cells is strongly
decreased, but is largely regained in ASML-EpCresc and
partly in ASML-EpCmAG cells. Soft agar colony formation
is not restored in ASML-cld7mPalm cells, which start to form
small clusters, but die after 1 wk of culture (Figure 2A).
ASML-cld7kd cells completely lost the capacity
to metastasize via the lymphatic system and metastatic
capacity is not rescued in ASML-cld7mPalm cells. None of
the rats developed visible metastasis. Very few tumor cell
colonies grew in ex vivo cultured lymph node and none
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30661

Oncotarget

cld7 in ASML-cld7mPalm lysates. Coimmuno­precipitation
of α3  with cld7 is less severely affected in ASMLcld7mPalm cells (Figure 3E). Furthermore, the cytoskeletal
linker proteins actinin, moesin and RhoA, which are
engaged in actin cytoskeleton or­ganization, preferentially
associate with palmitoylation-competent cld7. On the
contrary, cytoskeletal keratins and myosin associate with
EpC and cld7, but more readily with non-palmitoylated
cld7 (Supplementary Table S1A). Confocal microscopy

confirmed strongly reduced colocalization of ezrin and
RhoA with cld7mPalm. EpC poorly colocalizes with ezrin
and RhoA in ASML-EpCmAG and -cld7mPalm (Figure 3D).
WB of immunoprecipitates confirmed the association
of cld7 with ezrin, tubulin and RhoA. However, ezrin
does not coimmunoprecipitate with cld7mPalm and
coimmunoprecipitation of tubulin and RhoA with cld7 is
strongly reduced in ASML-cld7mPalm precipitates. Finally,
cld7 poorly coim­munoprecipitates with α3 and tubulin

Figure 1: Characterization of ASML-EpC and cld7 knockdown and rescue clones: ASML cells were transfected with
EpC- and cld7-shRNA and cloned in selection medium. EpC expression was rescued in ASML-EpCkd clones using primers for wt

rescue (EpCresc) or point mutated (position 282 and 279) EpC (EpCmAG); cld7 was rescued in ASML-cld7kd clones with a mutation at the
palmitoylation site at AA184 and AA186 or was transiently rescued using primers for wt rescue (cld7resc). (A) Wt, kd and rescue ASML
clones were lysed in the presence of N-ethylmaleimide (NEM) to irreversibly block unmodified thiol groups. After incubation with HAM
buffer for unmasking palmitoylated cysteine thiol groups, samples where incu­bated in biotin-BMCC for selective labeling of palmitoylated
cys­teines. Samples were blotted with streptavidin-HRP and after stripping with anti-cld7; (B) lysates of wt, kd and rescue ASML clones
(one representative clone was selected) were separated by SDS-PAGE and blotted with anti-EpC (D5.7), anti-cld7 and anti-Tspan8 (D6.1,
control); (C) lysates of wt, kd and rescue ASML clones were precipitated with anti-EpC or anti-cld7. After SDS-PAGE, precipi­tates were
blotted with anti-EpC, anti-cld7 or anti-Tspan8; (D) wt and rescue ASML clones were stained with anti-EpC(red) and anti-cld7 (green);
staining was evaluated by confocal microscopy, digital overlays (scale bar: 10 µM). The indicated area (white square) was amplified
10-fold for better discrimination. The Pearson correlation coefficiency is shown for the encircled membrane area; (E) lysates of wt,
kd and rescue ASML clones were separated according to density by sucrose gradient centrifugation; 1ml fractions were collected and
fractions 5–8 and 9–12 were pooled. After SDS-PAGE, fractions were blotted with anti-EpC, anti-cld7 and anti-Tspan8 (GEM control).
EpC and cld7 were efficiently downregulated in kd clones and were recovered in rescue clones. Muta­tion of the palmitoylation site at
AA184 and AA186 prevented cld7 palmitoylation. Cld7 palmitoyla­tion strongly facilitates the association with EpC, the cld7-EpC
complex being enriched in GEM.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30662

Oncotarget

in ASML-EpCmAG and with Tspan8 in ASML-EpCkd and
-Ep­CmAG cells, which indicates a contribution of cld7associated EpC to complex formation (Figure 3E).
Taken together, multiple associations between cld7,
actin linker and actin (re)organizing proteins well explain
the reduced motility of ASML-cld7kd cells. Fittingly,
palmitoylation-competent cld7 poorly as­
sociates with
keratins.

(Figure 4A). However, the protease profile of ASML cells
is not significantly altered in ASML-cld7kd and ASMLEpCkd and rescue clones (Supplementary Figure S2).
Instead, particularly MMP9 activity (zymography) is
strongly reduced in ASML-cld7kd and ASML-cld7mPalm cells
(Figure 4B). Co-immunoprecipitation (mass spectrometric
analysis, data not shown), revealed an association with
uPAR and CD147 (basigin), the latter recruiting proteases
from neighboring cells. These associations and an
association with MMP14 were confirmed by WB after coim­munoprecipitation. The associa­tion with uPAR depended
on cld7 palmitoylation, whereas the associa­
tion with
MMP14 and CD147 was also seen in ASML-cld7mPalm cells.
The latter finding is supported by strong colocalization of
CD147 with cld7mPalm (Figure 4C, 4D).

Palmitoylated cld7 and invasiveness
Matrigel invasion and penetration of ASML-cld7kd
cells is strongly reduced and is not rescued in ASMLcld7mPalm cells. Invasion and penetration of ASML-EpCkd
and -EpCmAG cells is also reduced, although less efficiently

Figure 2: Palmitoylated cld7 supports anchorage independent growth and metastasis formation: (A) Wt, kd and rescue ASML cells
(500) were seeded in soft agar in 10 cm Petri-dishes. Colonies were counted after 14 d. The mean number ± SD (triplicates) of colonies
and representative examples are shown. (B, C) BDX rats received 1 × 106 wt, kd or rescue ASML cells, ifp. (B) The number of sur­viving
rats and the mean survival time are shown; (C) the number of visible lung metastases, the mean draining lymph node diameter, the number
of tumor cell colonies growing in suspended lung and LN tissue was evaluated after 4 wk. (D) Shock frozen lung sections from ASML wt,
-cld7kd, cld7mPalm and -EpCresc bearing rats were stained with anti-EpC, -cld7 and -CD44v6 (scale bar: 120 µm). Tumor cells (EpC+, cld7+,
CD44v6+) are only seen in the lung of ASMLwt and -EpCresc bearing rats. In the lungs of ASML-cld7kd and -cld7mPalm bearing rats only
bronchiolar epithelium (*) is stained by anti-EpC and anti-cld7. Anchorage-independent growth and metastasis are severely impaired in
both kd clones, but are re­gained in ASML-EpCresc and partly ASML-EpCmAG, but not in -cld7mPalm cells, indicating only palmi­toylated cld7
supporting metastasis.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30663

Oncotarget

Figure 3: The impact of palmitoylated cld7 on cell motility: (A) Wt, kd and rescue ASML cells (2 × 104 in RPMI/1% BSA) were seeded

in the upper part of a Boyden chamber; the lower part, separated by a 0.8 µm pore size membrane contained RPMI/20% FCS. Recovery of
cells on the lower membrane site was evaluated after 16 h by crystal violet staining. The percent ± SD of migrating cells compared to the
total input are shown. (B) Wt, kd and rescue ASML cells were seeded in 24-well plates. When cultures reached a subconfluent stage, the
monolayer was scratched with a pipette tip. Wound healing was fol­lowed for 72 h. Examples (scale bar: 250 µm) and the mean percent ±
SD of the wound area compared to the 0 time point are shown. (C) Cells as above were seeded in 6-well plates coated with LN111. Pic­
tures were taken every 20 min for 24 h. Migration of 20 individual cells was recorded. An example of migration of a single cell as well
as the mean migration ± SD of 20 cells/well is pre­sented. (A–C) Sig­nificant differences as compared to ASMLwt cells: *. (D) Wt, kd and
rescue ASML cells were stained with anti-ezrin (green) or anti-RhoA (green) and anti-EpC (red) or anti-cld7 (red). Staining was evalu­
ated by confocal microscopy; digital overlays of staining are shown (scale bar: 10 µm). The indicated area (white square) was amplified
10-fold for better discrimination. The Pearson correlation coeffi­cient is shown for the encircled membrane area. (E) Lysates of cells as
above were precipitated with anti-α3, -α6β4 (B5.5), -ezrin and -tubulin and were blotted with anti-cld7 or were precipitated with anti-cld7
and blotted with -RhoA and -Tspan8. The relative signal strength of cld7 precipitates is indi­cated. The strength of the cld7 signal in ASML
wt was arbitrarily set as 1.0. WB of α3, β4, ezrin, tubulin and Rho are included as controls. Migration of ASML-cld7kd and -cld7mPalm,
but not of -cld7resc cells is severely reduced. Impaired mi­gration is accompa­nied by reduced association of cld7mPalm with ezrin, and, less
pronounced, α3, α6β4, tubulin, RhoA and Tspan8. In the absence of (palmitoylated) cld7, EpC does poorly colocalize/associate with RhoA.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30664

Oncotarget

We demonstrated before that several proteases
associate with GEM-located tetraspanins and also with
CD44v6 [63, 64]. As invasiveness was not rescued in
ASML-cld7mPalm, we suggest that the contribu­tion of cld7
is linked to the integration of palmitoylated cld7 into
GEM, rather than to a direct impact of cld7 on protease
activity.

ASML-cld7kd and -cld7mPalm cells show increased levels of
activated Casp3 and cleaved Casp9 (Supplementary Figure
S3B, S3C), reduced phosphorylated PI3K, Akt and BAD as
well as Bcl2 and BclXl recovery. Slightly upregulated BID,
BAK, BAX and Smac/Diablo expression is not dependent
on cld7 palmitoylation (Supplementary Figure S3D).
mTOR is downregulated in ASML-cld7kd, -cld7mPalm, -EpCkd
and -EpCmAG. Compared to ASML cells, Pten expression
is upregulated in ASML-cld7kd and ASML-cld7mPalm
cells. However, Pten phosphorylation is also upregulated
(Supplementary Figure S3E). The flow-cytometry analysis
was confirmed by a signaling protein array and/or by WB
(Supplementary Figure S3D–S3F, Figure 5B). Pronounced
Pten phosphoryla­tion in ASML-cld7kd and -cld7mPalm opposed
expectation, as the cells did not regain apoptosis resis­tance.
Furthermore, expression of GSK3β, CK2 and src, known to
be engaged in Pten phosphorylation [65], is not (GSK3β,
CK2) or only slightly (src) upregulated in ASML-cld7kd and
-cld7mPalm cells (Figure 5B). Mass spectrometry analysis of
signaling molecules co-immunoprecipitating with cld7 did
not provide hints towards a special reduction of serine

Apoptosis resistance, cld7 and PTEN
High drug resistance of ASML cells is strongly
reduced in ASML-cld7kd and is not rescued in -cld7mPalm
cells. Drug resistance of ASML-EpCkd cells also is reduced,
though less severely. Drug re­sistance is re-established
in ASML-EpCresc and partially in -EpCmAG cells. This
accounted for AnnV/PI staining (apoptosis), mitochondrial
integrity (MTT assay) and proliferation (3H-thymidine
incorpora­tion) (Figure 5A, Supplementary Figure S3A).
In the absence of stress, expression of proteins
engaged in receptor-mediated apoptosis or the mito­chondrial
pathway of apoptosis is unaltered. However, cisplatin-treated

Figure 4: Palmitoylated claudin7 supports invasiveness and protease activity: (A) Wt, kd and rescue ASML cells were seeded on

matrigel. Matrigel invasion and penetration was evaluated after 16 h incu­bation. The mean percent ± SD of invading and penetrating cells
and representative examples are shown. (B) Zymography of culture supernatants of ASMLwt, -cld7kd and -cld7mPalm cells; MMP2 and MMP9
bands are indicated. (C) Lysates from cells as in (A) were precipitated with anti-CD147 (EMMPRIN), anti-uPAR and anti-MMP14 and
were blotted with anti-cld7 or were precipitated with anti-cld7 or anti-EpC and blotted with anti-uPAR and anti-CD147. WB of lysates
with anti-uPAR, -MMP14 and -CD147 are included as controls. (D) Cells as above were stained with anti-CD147 (green) and either antiEpC (red) or anti-cld7 (red). Digital overlays are shown (scale bar: 10 µm). ASML-cld7kd cells are poorly invasive and invasiveness is not
restored in ASML-cld7mPalm cells. This also accounts for reduced MMP9 activity and fits to reduced coimmunoprecipitation of cld7mPalm with
MMP14 and uPAR. EpC has a weaker impact on invasiveness and MMP activity.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30665

Oncotarget

threonine kinases co-immunoprecipitating with cld7 in
ASML-cld7mPalm lysates (Supplementary Table S1B). Thus,
we speculated that by exclusion of palmitoy­lation-deficient
cld7 from GEM, pronounced Pten phosphorylation does not
rescue PI3K/Akt pathway activation. WB of pooled sucrose
gradient fractions indicated that only src, but not GSK3β and
CK2 is recovered in light density fractions. Phosphorylated
Pten also is not recovered in light density fractions
(Figure 5C). A WB of membrane and cytosolic lysates
confirmed recovery of pPten exclusively in the cytosol,
the strongest signal being seen in the ASML-cld7mPalm
cytosol. CK2 and GSK3β were prefer­entially recovered
in the cytosol, src was enriched in the membrane fraction,
cld7 was recovered in the membrane and the cytosolic
fraction, whereas Tspan8 was exclusively recovered in the
membrane fraction (Figure 5D). Thus, an association of
GSK3β, CK2 and src with cytoplasmic cld7mPalm could ac­
count for pronounced Pten phosphorylation. Indeed, cld7mPalm
coimmunoprecipitates with GSK3β, CK2 and src, which
also, albeit very weakly coimmunoprecipitate with Pten
(Figure 5E).

The data confirm a dominating role of
palmitoylation-competent cld7 in drug resistance due to
Pten repression. Cytoplasmic Pten phosphorylation via
cld7mPalm recruited GSK3β, CK2 and src obviously does
not suffice to restore apoptosis resistance.

Palmitoylated cld7 and EMT
Metastasis formation requires EMT. The metastasis
suppressor E-cadherin is slightly upregulated in ASMLEpCkd, but not in ASML-cld7kd cells. However, EMTassociated N-cadherin, fibronectin (FN) and vimentin
expression is reduced in ASML-cld7kd and ASML-EpCkd
cells. Expression of N-cadherin and FN is rescued in
ASML-EpCresc, but not or less efficiently in ASMLcld7mPalm cells (Figure 6A, 6B). Reduced Oct3/4, Snail,
Sox2, Wnt1, Notch and β-catenin in ASML-cld7kd cells
also is not rescued in ASML-cld7mPalm cells. Instead, p-βcatenin expression is higher in ASML-cld7kd and slightly
higher in -cld7mPalm cells (flow-cytometry) and lysates
(WB). Recovery of Oct3/4, Snail, Sox2 as well as of

Figure 5: Cld7 and apoptosis resistance: (A) Wt, kd and rescue ASML cells were cultured in the pres­ence of increasing amounts of

cisplatin. Flow cytometry analysis of the percent of AnnV+, AnnV+PI+ and PI+ cells; mean ± SD (triplicates) are shown, significant
differences to wt cells: *. (B) WB of Akt, Pten, pPten and Pten phosphorylating kinases in untreated and PMA-treated wt, kd and rescue
ASML cells; (C) sucrose gradient fractions of the lysates as above and WB with anti-Pten, -pPten, -GSK3β, -CK2, -src, -cld7 and -Tspan8;
(D) Membrane and cytosol lysates from cells as above were blotted with anti-GSK3β, -CK2, -src, -pPten and -cld7. (E) WB with anti-Pten,
-cld7, -EpC, -GSK3β, -CK2 and -src after precipitation with anti-GSK3β, anti-CK2 and anti-src. Drug resistance of ASML-cld7kd cells is
severely impaired and not rescued in ASML-cld7mPalm cells. Upregulation of Pten in PMA-treated ASML-cld7kd and -cld7mPalm cells indicates
Pten repression only by palmitoylation-competent cld7. Concomitant pronounced cytoplasmic Pten phosphorylation does not contribute
rescuing apoptosis resistance.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30666

Oncotarget

Notch and β-catenin also is reduced in ASML-cld7kd and
ASML-cld7mPalm nuclei. ZEB1 is downregu­lated only in
ASML-EpCkd and -cld7kd lysates. Unexpectedly, Slug
expression is increased in ASML-cld7kd and -cld7mPalm
cells and lysates (Figure 6C–6E). Cld7 does not associate
with Oct, Snail and Nanog, but coimmunoprecipitates with
Notch, coimmunoprecipitation being reduced in ASMLEpCkd, -Ep­CmAG and -cld7mPalm lysates (Figure 6F).
Taken together, palmitoylated cld7 contributes
to expression of several EMT-related proteins and tran­
scription factors and hampers β-catenin phosphorylation.
The association of palmitoylated cld7 with Notch might be
the initial trigger for altered EMT gene expression.

competent cld7 in intracellular vesicle traffic demands
mentioning.
Besides co-immunoprecipitating with adhesion
molecules (Supplementary Table S1A) and mostly
cytoplasmic signaling molecules (Supplementary Table S1B),
cld7 also coimmunoprecipitates with soluble carrier and
trans­
porter proteins, some of which (aldose reductase,
Na,K-ATPase, TM9SF2, transportin and lactadherin 2)
preferentially co-immunoprecipitate with cld7mPalm
(Supplementary Table S1C).
GEM, including tetraspanin-enriched membrane
microdomains (TEM) are prone for internalization
[39, 40]. The internalization complex is maintained during
intracellular vesicle traffic and vesicle exo­cytosis [67].
Recruitment of palmitoylation-competent cld7 and cld7associated EpC into GEM was already demonstrated
(Figure 1) as well as the GEM-located cld7 association with
integrins and ARP2/3 complex components that are engaged
in early endosome formation (Supplementary Table S1A).
In ad­dition, chaperons, which are enriched in exosomes,

A dominating role of GEM located cld7 in vesicle
transport
Metastasis formation is supported by exosomes [66].
Though we focused on cell inherent activities of GEMlocated cld7, the strong engagement of palmitoylation-

Figure 6: Cld7 palmitoylation and EMT gene expression: (A, C) Wt, kd and rescue ASML cells were stained with antibodies against

EMT markers, EMT-related signaling molecules and transcription factors; the mean percent ± SD of stained cells is shown. Significant
differences to ASMLwt cells are indicated by *. (B, D) Total cell lysates and (E) the nuclear fraction of the cells as above were sepa­rated
by SDS-PAGE and blotted with the indicated antibodies; (F) Lysates were precipitated with anti-cld7 and blotted with anti-Oct3/4, -Snail,
-Nanog and -Notch. A cld7kd severely affects EMT signaling molecules and transcription factors, with the exception of Slug. Reduced
recovery accounts particularly for the nuclear fraction. N-cadherin, FN and vimentin expression is reduced. These changes are not reverted
in ASML-cld7mPalm cells. Only an EpCkd is asso­ciated with E-cadherin upregulation.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30667

Oncotarget

are most abundantly recovered in EpC and cld7 co-im­
munoprecipitates, where 6 of 28 did not or poorly associate
with cld7mPalm (Supplementary Table S1D). Palmi­toylationcompetent cld7 also associates with several transporter
complexes and vesicle trans­
port-as­
sociated molecules,
particularly myoferlin, rab25 and Sec31a. Several
additional rab proteins associ­ated with cld7 independent
of palmitoylation. On the opposite, only palmitoylationdeficient cld7 as­sociated with caveolin (Supplementary
Table S1E). Mostly palmitoylation-independent, cld7
associ­ated with vesicle transporter complexes, like coatomer
complexes, dynein, Vamp family proteins (Supplementary
Table S1F) and tubulins (Supplementary Table S1A).
Finally, cld7 abundantly associates with proteases of the
proteasome complex. These associations partly depend on
cld7 palmitoylation; the association with the ribophorin
protease complex being only seen with palmitoylationcompetent cld7 (Supplementary Table S1G). Colocalization
with cld7/palmitoylated cld7 was confirmed for the vesicle
trans­
porters rab5, rab7, rab11, Lamp1 as well as for
HSP70, the membrane coat clathrin, the internali­zation
complex associated dynamin and the cytoskeletal linker
protein tubulin. Notably, caveolin does not colocalize with
palmitoylation-competent cld7 (Figure 7A). WB confirmed
cld7 palmitoylation-depend­ent coimmunoprecipitation for

rab5 and rab7. The association with Lamp1, CathepsinD,
dynamin and AnnII was only partially cld7 palmitoylationdependent (Figure 7B).
Flow cytometry confirmed high cld7, EpC,
Tspan8 and distinct α6β4, ezrin, tubulin, RhoA and
cave­olin expression in ASML exosomes. However, the
percentage of cld7+, EpC+ and RhoA+ exosomes was
reduced, whereas the percentage of caveolin+ exosomes
was increased in ASML-cld7mPalm exosomes (Figure 8A).
Coimmunoprecipitation of exosome lysates confirmed the
distinct composition of palmitoy­lation-competent versus
-deficient cld7 exosomes. Cld7 coimmunoprecipitated
with the CIC markers EpC, α6β4 and Tspan8 in ASMLwt
exosomes. Coimmunoprecipitation of EpC, CD44v6,
β4 and Tspan8 was strongly reduced in ASML-cld7mPalm
exosomes. Also, anti-EpC, anti-CD44v6 and anti-α6β4 did
not coimmunoprecipitate cld7 in ASML-cld7mPalm, but
coimmunoprecipitation of anti-CD44v6 with anti-α6β4 and
vice versa was not affected in ASML-cld7mPalm (Figure 8B).
Taken together, (i) solute carrier expression
is affected by a cld7kd; (ii) abundant associations of
cld7 with stress response modulators (chaperones) could
be important with respect to apoptosis resistance; (iii)
the unexpectedly strong association of palmitoylated
cld7 with the vesicle transporter machinery, including the

Figure 7: The linkage between palmitoylated cld7, vesicle formation and vesicle transporter proteins: (A) Colocalization of cld7 (red)

and EpC (red) with vesicle formation and vesicle transport associated proteins (green) in wt, EpCkd, cld7kd and cld7mPalm ASML cells. Digital
overlays of confocal mi­cros­copy images are shown (scale bar: 10 µm); (B) WB and coimmunoprecipitation of cld7 with vesi­cle formation
and transport proteins in wt, kd and rescue ASML cells. Only palmitoylation-competent cld7 colocalizes and coimmunoprecipitates with
molecules engaged in GEM-supported vesicle formation and vesicle transport. Instead, palmitoylation-competent cld7 does not colocalize
with caveolin.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30668

Oncotarget

deviation from the proteasome, highlights cld7 as a so
far unrecognized exosome organ­izer. This was confirmed
by the distinct composition of ASML versus ASMLcld7mPalm exosomes, which also displayed different
association profiles. A central role of palmitoylated cld7
in vesicle traf­fic and exosome biogenesis could well
be a major factor in the contribution of cld7 to the CIC
pheno­type.
In brief, distinct to non-palmitoylated cld7 that in
epithelial cells acts as a TJ protein, palmitoylated cld7
is GEM-associated and contributes in this particular
environment to tumor cell motility, invasive­ness, EMT
and exosome biogenesis.

[9, 33], the GEM-located cld7-EpC complex promoting
EMT [9, 10]. Starting from this point, we evaluated the
importance of cld7 palmitoylation on CIC activities in
a rat metastasizing tumor model, where an EpCkd was
rescued with a point mutated EpC that cannot bind cld7
(EpCmAG). A cld7kd was rescued with a mutation in the
C-terminal palmitoylation site (cld7mPalm) that suffices
preventing cld7 palmi­toylation [33]. This model allowed
deciphering palmitoylation-dependent activities of cld7
as well as differentiating between genuine versus driver
activities of cld7. Both rescue lines confirmed a domi­
nant role of palmitoylated cld7 in promoting motility and
apoptosis resistance and pointed towards an involvement
of cld7 in exosome biogenesis.

DISCUSSION

Metastasis supporting activity of cld7 depends
on palmitoylation

Claudins were first described as TJ components
that are engaged in sealing, formation of ion channels
and organization of paracellular small organic solute
flux [16, 68]. However, claudins are also found outside
of TJ [17–24], where their functions are still disputed.
We described that in tumor cells palmi­toylated cld7 is
recovered in GEM [9], special microdomains serving
as signaling platforms [35–38] and being prone for
internalization [39–41]. There was evidence that GEMlocated cld7 sup­ports mo­tility [33] and apoptosis resistance
[9]. Finally, GEM-located cld7 is associated with EpC

ASMLwt bearing rats die with lymph node and lung
metastases after 5–6 wk. However, ASML-cld7kd and
-cld7mPalm cells did not grow locally, did not reach the
draining lymph node or the lung and 5/5 rats were tumor
free after > 26 wk. Nonetheless, ASML-cld7mPalm differ
from ASML-cld7kd cells start­ing to divide in soft agar at
a comparable frequency to ASMLwt cells, but cells died
after 1 wk. As the proliferation rate of ASMLwt, -cld7kd
and -cld7mPalm cells does not differ (data not shown), the

Figure 8: Recovery of cld7 and associated molecules in exosomes: (A) Flow cytometry of latex beads bound wt, kd and rescue ASML
exosomes stained with anti-cld7, -EpC, -Tspan8, -α6β4, -ezrin, -RhoA, -tubulin and -caveolin. Overlays of the negative control and stained
samples are shown. (B) Lysates of ASMLwt, and -cld7mPalm exosomes were precipitated with anti-cld7, -EpC, -CD44v6, -Tspan8 or -α6β4.
Dissolved precipitates were separated by SDS-PAGE and were blotted with the in­dicated antibodies. The WB of exosome lysates is included
as control. ASMLwt exosomes stain brightly with anti-Tspan8, -EpC, and -cld7 and distinctly with anti-α6β4, -ez­rin, -RhoA and -tubulin.
ASML-cld7mPalm exosomes show reduced cld7+, -EpC+ and RhoA+, but more caveolin+ exosomes. Exosome lysate coimmunoprecipitation
confirmed reduced recovery of EpC, CD44v6, α6β4 and Tspan8 in anti-cld7 precipitates of ASML-cld7mPalm than ASMLwt exosomes.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30669

Oncotarget

finding points towards impaired apoptosis resistance of
ASML-cld7mPalm.
Taken together, only palmitoylated cld7 supports
tumor progression. Depending on the tumor type, the
failure of non-palmitoylated cld7 to support metastatic
growth could be due to integration in TJ. This could
explain the discrepant findings on cld7 prohibiting [69, 70]
vs. promoting metastasis [9, 10, 71–75].

However, vimentin, FN and N-cadherin expression is
reduced. Wnt1 is slightly down­regulated in ASML-cld7kd
and, less pronounced, -cld7mPalm, but unaltered in -EpCkd
cells. In line with this finding is the downregulation of
β-catenin and the pronounced β-catenin phosphorylation in
ASML-cld7kd and -cld7mPalm. Reduced recovery of nuclear
β-catenin could account for impaired FN, Snail1, Snail2
and Twist expression [83]. However, only Snail1 recovery
is impaired, whereas Slug expression is upregulated. Thus,
in ASML cells Snail transcription [84] does not or not
exclusively rely on β-catenin. Activation of EMT-related
transcription factors can also proceed via integrins, ILK
activation leading to NFkB nuclear translocation [86] or
via activation of the src/p38MAPK pathway [87, 88].
uPAR, too, can induce EMT through activation of the
PI3K/Akt pathway, src kinases, ERK/MAPK and myosin
light chain kinase [89]. These alternative pathways of
EMT transcription factor induction could be impaired in
ASML-cld7mPalm due to the reduced association with α3,
α6β4 and uPAR. Finally, by not yet defined mechanisms,
cld7 is engaged in Pten repression. High Pten ex­
pression in ASML-cld7kd and -cld7mPalm can account for
downregulation of Snail, ZEB and Twist tran­scription [90].
Further explorations are required to precisely
define the pathway(s), whereby palmitoylated cld7 sup­
ports transcription and/or nuclear translocation of EMT
transcription factors, where the association with Notch
could be the initial trigger. Nonetheless, the loss of EMT
features of ASML-cld7mPalm cells strongly argues for an
engagement of palmitoylated cld7 in EMT.

Cld7 palmitoylation, motility, invasiveness and
the crosstalk with the cytoskeleton
Mass
spectrometry
of
molecules
coimmunoprecipitating with cld7 in ASMLwt cells confirmed
the as­
sociation with tetraspanins, CD44, the integrins
α3(β1) and α6β4 and the association with cy­toskeletal linker
proteins [76]. The repeatedly described association with β1
[15, 77] is accompanied by a strong basolateral distribution,
a reduction in pFAK and poor adhesion [77]. These
reports are in line with our findings, which additionally
point towards the requirement for cld7 palmitoylation
to associate with integrins and downstream signaling
cascades. Furthermore, cld7 amply associates with actin
binding/organizing and actin polymerizing molecules.
The associations with actin linker proteins mostly de­
pend on cld7 palmitoylation, whereas the association with
myosin and cytokeratins frequently is ham­pered by cld7
palmitoylation. This has consequences on cell motility,
which is strongly reduced in ASML-cld7kd and ASMLcld7mPalm cells. We suggest the impact of palmitoylated cld7
on motility is supported by the association with tetraspanins
and, possibly via Tspan8, with integrins [39–41].
Cld7 also associates with MMPs and uPAR
[15, 78, 79], which contribute to motility by matrix
protein degradation. Coimmunoprecipitation confirmed
the association with uPAR and a weak association with
MMP14. The uPAR association is exclusively observed
with palmitoylation-competent cld7, i.e. depends on
the GEM localization. Likely via the association with
MMP14, MMP9 becomes recruited and activated, the
gelatinolytic activity of ASMLwt cells significantly
exceeding that of ASML-cld7kd and ASML-cld7mPalm cells.
GEM-located palmitoylated cld7 also associates with
CD147, which binds MMPs on neighboring cells [80]
thereby promoting MMP activity. Corresponding changes
being seen in ASML-Tspan8kd and ASML-CD44vkd cells
[63, 64], we argue that the engagement of cld7 in inva­
siveness, similar to its contribution to motility, relies on
associated GEM-located molecules.
Taken together, GEM-located palmitoylated
cld7 supports motility and invasion by associating with
integrins, tetraspanins, cytoskeletal linker proteins and
proteases.
Tumor cells motility is frequently associated with
EMT [81, 82]. Expression of several EMT-related genes
is impaired in ASML-cld7kd and -cld7mPalm cells. Weak
E-cadherin expression in ASMLwt cells is not affected.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

The engagement of cld7 in stress resistance
ASML cells are strikingly apoptosis resistant [62].
This relies on concerted activities of CD44v6 pro­moting
activation of the MAPK and the PI3K/Akt pathway [63],
on Tspan8 engaged in PI3K/Akt acti­vation [64] and on
cld7. There is no evidence for a direct engagement of cld7
in MAPK or JNK path­way activation. Instead, apoptosis
resistance promoted by cld7 is accompanied by low level
Pten ex­pression [9]. Furthermore, there is evidence for
palmitoylation-competent cld7 recruiting Pten re­pressing
miRNA (unpublished finding). We now defined that only
palmitoylated, GEM-located cld7 contributes to apoptosis
resistance. Unexpectedly, apoptosis resistance was not
rescued in ASML-cld7mPalm cells, despite upregulated Pten
phosphorylation. There are several possible explanations.
First, Pten phosphorylation in ASML-cld7mPalm cells is
ineffective as Pten is not recruited into GEM. Mostly
cytoplasmic cld7mPalm associates with GSK3β and
CK2, prominent Pten phosphorylating kinases [65].
Alternatively, not mutually exclusive, GSK3β and CK2
can also contribute to Pten stabilization [91, 92].
Taken together the contribution of cld7 to apoptosis
resistance relies on Pten repression, supported by Pten
inactivation. The inefficacy of cld7mPalm to restore apoptosis
resistance, despite pronounced Pten phosphorylation,
30670

Oncotarget

may rely on the failure to recruit phosphorylated Pten
towards GEM. Taking into account the multiple activities
of Pten and the abundance of pathways regulating Pten
transcription and activity [93] additional contributions of
cld7 to Pten regulation cannot be excluded.

associate with vesicle transporters of the rab family, some
of these associations de­pending on cld7 palmitoylation,
e.g. anti-rab5 and -rab7 coimmunoprecipitate cld7, but not
cld7mPalm. On the other hand, Tspan8 and palmitoylationcompetent cld7 do not or poorly associate with caveo­
lin, which strengthens the assumption of a caveolinindependent internalization route. In concern about
molecular complexes engaged in scission, fission and
vesicle transport [96, 97], cld7 shares with tetraspanins
[67] the association with clathrin, dynein and Snare
proteins. Notably, too, colon cancer organoids deliver
two types of exosomes. Only apical exosomes express
tetraspanins, cld7 and EpC [22]. Coimmunoprecipitation
of ASMLwt and -cld7mPalm exosome lysates confirmed
that the exosomal CIC markers EpC, CD44v6 and α6β4
are abundant in cld7 precipitates of ASMLwt, but not
-cld7mPalm exosomes. Though it remains to be answered,
whether palmitoylated cld7 actively contributes to
exosome biogenesis, by its recruitment into exosomes the
possibility should be taken into account that palmitoylated,
GEM-located cld7 supports tumor progression also via
exosomes.
As summarized in Figure 9, distinct to nonpalmitoylated cld7, which is enriched in TJ complexes,
palmitoylated cld7 is recruited into GEM, where it
associates with EpC, tetraspanins, integrins, prote­
ases, cytoskeletal components and signal transductions

Outlook: Cld7 and exosome biogenesis
Tetraspanins, located in so called tetraspaninenriched microdomains, which are similar to GEM, play
a major role in membrane invagination, the generation
of early endosomes and their traffic through MVB
towards the release as exosomes [67]. These findings fit
to tetraspanins being constitutive exosome components
[94]. We now described similar features for palmitoylated,
GEM-located cld7. As cld7 and Tspan8 are loosely
attached, are both located in GEM and are palmitoylated,
we cannot sharply decipher, whether the two molecules
work in concert or independently. Both cld7 and Tspan8
share the abundant association with chaperons [95], the
association being mostly cld7 palmitoylation-independent.
Furthermore, both - but Tspan8 more intensely - associate
with integrins and membrane-integrated proteases
[67,  73,  94]. Instead, cld7  has a strong affinity for
proteasomal proteases, which might drive at least part
of intraluminal vesicles into the degradation pathway
rather than towards release. Tspan8 and cld7 abundantly

Figure 9: Overview of molecules associating and cooperating with palmitoylated cld7: (A) Only palmitoylated cld7 is enriched

in GEM, where it associates in a direct protein-protein interaction with EpC. Interactions with additional transmembrane proteins,
predominantly tetraspanins, integrins, CD44v6, transmembrane metalloproteases, ADAMs, uPAR and NOTCH likely are indirect and pro­
moted by the special lipid composition of GEM and the catcher activity of tetraspanins, which may be first order partners for some of the
listed membrane molecules. The majority of associations with cy­toplamic molecules are indirect and promoted by the lipid composition of
GEM. Thus, the multiple deficiencies associated with cld7mPalm in migration, invasion, apoptosis resistance and EMT are due to exclusion
from GEM (or recruitment into TJ) and persistence in the cytosol, the latter being demon­strated for Pten phosphorylation. (B) Cld7 is
recovered in exosomes. There is evidence that only palmitoylated cld7 is recovered in those exosomes, where biogenesis/vesicle transport
depends on tetraspanins rather than ESCRT complexes and lipids. Whether cld7 actively contributes to the bio­genesis of these “tetraspanindependent” exosomes remains to be explored. Taken together, there is strong evidence that TJ-integrated cld7 and palmitoylated GEMintegrated cld7 fulfill non-overlapping activities. Whether cld7 palmitoylation is linked to the metastatic pheno­type or is also observed in
non-transformed cells and under which conditions remains to be explored.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30671

Oncotarget

molecules. It is prone for internalization and release
in exosomes. The multiple interactions of GEMlocated protein complexes prohibit assigning activities
as exclusively being palmitoylated cld7- versus
GEM complexes-dependent. However, palmitoylated
cld7 hardly shares activities with non-palmitoylated cld7
and only palmitoylated cld7 promotes metastasis.

lysis with Lubrol protein complexes not relying on direct
protein-protein interactions are not destroyed. Lysates were
centrifuged (13000 g, 10 min, 4°C), mixed with antibody
(1 h, 4°C) and incubated with ProteinG-Sepha­rose (1 h).
Washed complexes/lysates, dissolved in Laemmli buffer,
were resolved on 10%–12% SDS-PAGE. After protein
transfer, blocking, blotting with anti­bodies, blots were
developed with ECL.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Protein identification

Cell lines

After SDS-PAGE, gels were stained with
Coomassie-blue. Protein digestion, sample preparation,
mass spectrometeric analysis by nanoLC-ESI-MS/MS on
an LTQ orbitrap and database searches were performed as
described [99].
Flow-cytometry followed routine procedures. Where
indicated, cells or latex beads bound exosomes [67] were
fixed and permeabilized. Samples were analyzed in a
FACSCalibur using the CellQuest program.

ASML [62], ASML-EpCkd, ASML-cld7kd cells
[9] were maintained in RPMI 1640/10% FCS w/wo
0.5 µg/ml G418. ASML-EpCkd cells were transfected
with pcDNΑ3.1(+)hygromycin plasmid containing EpC
(ASML-EpCresc) or EpC mutated at G282 and A279
(ASML EpCmAG) or ASML-cld7kd cells were transfected
with cld7 mutated at AA184 and AA186 (palmitoylation
site) using the pcDNΑ3.1(+)hygromycin plasmid
(ASML- cld7mPalm). Where indicated, ASML-cld7kd
cells were transiently transfected with wt cld7 using the
pcDNΑ3.1(+)hygromycin plasmid (ASML-cld7resc).
Primers are listed in Supplementary Table S2. Stable
rescue clones were established by single cell cloning
and were cultured in RPMI 1640/10% FCS/0.5 µg/ml
G418/120 µg/ml hygromycin.

Zymography
Culture supernatant of ASML, -cld7kd and -cld7mPalm
cells, starved for 24 h, was centri­fuged (15 min, 15000 g).
Aliquots of supernatant were incubated with Laemmli
buffer (15 min, 37oC) and separated in a 10% acrylamide
gel containing 1 mg/ml gelatin. After washing (2.5%
Triton), gels were incubated in developing buffer (37oC,
48 h) and stained with Coomassie-blue.

Antibodies and chemicals
See Supplementary Table S3.

Confocal microscopy

Exosome preparation

Cells on glass-slides were fixed (4%
paraformaldehyde, 20 min on ice), perme­abilized (1%
Triton-X100, 4 min, on ice), blocked (PBS/1% gelatin,
30 min, on ice), incubated with primary antibody
(60 min, on ice), washed, incubated with fluorochromeconjugated secondary anti­body (60 min, on ice), blocked
(IgG with irrelevant specificity of the same species as the
primary anti­body), incubated with a second, dye-labeled
primary antibody and washed. Slides were mounted in
Elvanol. Digitized images were generated using a Leica
LMS780 microscope and the Carl Zeiss Vi­sion software
for evaluation. The Z-stack offers 30 positions through
the depth of the cell. All pictures were taken at Z-stack
14–16. Depending on the quality of the antibody and the
density of marker ex­pression, the intensity for the green
channel varied between 700–900 master gain values and
for the red channel between 500–750 master gain values.
The photosystem automatically generates the single
fluorescence and overlay pictures. Only overlays are
shown at a 50% reduction compared to the origi­nal size.
Where indicated, selected fields were amplified 10-fold (5fold compared to original). From the amplified field the
membrane or the cytoplasm were encircled for evaluation
of the Pearson corre­lation coefficient between the red and

Cells were cultured (48 h) in serum-free medium.
Cleared supernatants (2 × 10 min, 500 g, 1 × 20 min,
2000 g, 1 × 30 min, 10000 g) were centrifuged (90 min,
100000 g) and washed (PBS, 90 min, 100000 g). The
resuspended pellet was purified by sucrose gradient
centrifugation [67].

Sucrose density gradient centrifugation
Cell lysates and exosomes in 2.5 M sucrose were
overlaid by a continuous sucrose gradient (0.25 M–2 M)
and centrifuged (15 h, 150000 g), collecting twelve 1 ml
frac­tions.

Palmitoylation assay
Palmitoylation of cld7 was determined using the IPABE method [98].

IP, Western blot (WB)
Cells and exosomes were lysed for 30 min at 4°C
with HEPES buffer, 1% Lub­rol, 1 mM PMSF, 1 mM
NaVO4, 10 mM NaF, protease inhibitor mix. During mild
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30672

Oncotarget

Statistics

green channel using Image J (Rasband WS, ImageJ, US
Na­tional Institute of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA
http;//imagej.nih.gov/ij/) [100].

P values < 0.05 (two-tailed Student’s t-test, KruskalWallis test) were considered significant.

Histology

Abbreviations

Snap frozen sections (5 µm) were fixed, incubated
with antibodies, washed, exposed to biotinylated
secondary antibodies and alkaline phosphatase conjugated
avidin-biotin solution. Sections were counter-stained with
H&E. Digitized images were generated using a Leica
DMRBE microscope.

ASML: BSp73ASML, CIC: cancer initiating
cells, cld7: claudin-7, cld7mPalm: cld7 with a mutation in
the palmitoylation site, EMT: epithelial-mesenchymal
transition, EpC: EpCAM, Ep­
CmAG: EpC with a AG
resc
point mutation, EpC : wt EpC rescue, ESI-MS/MS:
electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry,
FN: fibronectin, GEM: glycolipid-en­riched membrane
microdomains, ICD: intracellular domain, ifp: intrafootpad,
IP: immunoprecipita­tion, kd: knockdown, LN: laminin, m:
mutated, resc: rescue, TJ: tight junction, WB: Western blot.

Migration
Cells, in the upper part of a Boyden chamber
(RPMI/0.1% BSA), were separated from the lower part
(RPMI/20% FCS) by 8 µm pore size polycarbonatemembranes. After 16 h the lower mem­
brane side
was stained (crystal-violet), measuring OD595 after
lysis. Migration is presented as % input cells. In an in
vitro wound healing assay, a subconfluent monolayer
was scratched with a pipette tip. Wound closure was
controlled by light microscopy. For videomicroscopy,
5 × 104 cells were seeded on laminin (LN)332-coated 24well plates. Plates were placed under an Olympus IX81
inverse micro­scope with a Hg/Xe lamp, an incubation
chamber (37oC, 5% CO2), a CCD camera (Hamamatsu)
and a ScanR acquisition soft ware (Olympus, Hamburg,
Germany). Two pictures (20-fold magnification)/chamber
(2 ms exposure) were taken every 20 min for 12 h.
Migration was quantified according to Manual_tracking
plugin running in the open-source software Image J for
20 cells per well.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING
This investigation was supported by the Deutsche
Krebshilfe and the Wilhelm Sander Stiftung (MZ). We
greatly appreciate the help by Angela Frank in animal
experiments, immu­nohistology and flow cytometry and
cordially thank Dr. W. Gross, University Hospital of
Surgery, Heidelberg, for help with the Image J evaluation
of confocal microscopy.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

Authors’ contributions
SH and FT performed and analyzed experiments.
MS performed the proteome analysis. MZ helped
with experiments, planned experiments and wrote the
manuscript, which was dis­cussed with SH, FT and MS.

Apoptosis
Cells (1 × 105) were grown for 48 h in RPMI/10%
FCS containing cisplatin. Survival was monitored by
annexinV-APC/PI staining, MTT assay and 3H-thymidine
uptake.

REFERENCES
1.	 Bosetti C, Bertuccio P, Malvezzi M, Levi F, Chatenoud L,
Negri E, La Vecchia C. Cancer mortal­ity in Europe, 2005–
2009, and an overview of trends since 1980. Ann Oncol.
2013; 24:2657–2671.

Soft agar assay
Tumor cells in 0.3% agar were seeded on a
preformed 1% agar layer counting colo­nies after 3 wk.

2.	 Michl P, Gress TM. Current concepts and novel targets in
advanced pancreatic cancer. Gut. 2013; 62:317–326.

In vivo assays
BDX rats received 1 × 106 tumor cells intrafootpad
(ifp). Rats were controlled weekly for local and draining
lymph node tumor growth, short breathing or weight loss.
Animals were sacri­ficed when draining nodes reached
2 cm diameter, rats lost > 10% weight or latest after 240 d.
Animal experiments were Government-approved (BadenWuerttemberg, Germany).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3.	

Mimeault M, Batra SK. Altered gene products involved in the
malignant reprogramming of can­cer stem/progenitor cells and
multitargeted therapies. Mol Aspects Med. 2014; 39:3–32.

4.	

Chen SY, Huang YC, Liu SP, Tsai FJ, Shyu WC, Lin SZ. An
overview of concepts for cancer stem cells. Cell Transplant.
2011; 20:113–120.

5.	 Kim K, Lee KH, Lee J, Choi J. Overview of current
standpoints in profiling of circulating tumor cells. Arch
Pharm Res. 2014; 37:88–95.
30673

Oncotarget

6.	 Zöller M. CD44: can a cancer-initiating cell profit from an
abundantly expressed molecule? Nat Rev Cancer. 2011;
11:254–267.

23.	 Lu Z, Kim do H, Fan J, Lu Q, Verbanac K, Ding L,
Renegar R, Chen YH. A non-tight junction function of
claudin-7-Interaction with integrin signaling in suppressing
lung cancer cell prolif­eration and detachment. Mol Cancer.
2015; 14:120.
24.	 Li WY, Huey CL, Yu AS. Expression of claudin-7 and -8
along the mouse nephron. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol.
2004; 286:F1063–1071.
25.	 D’Souza T, Agarwal R, Morin PJ. Phosphorylation of
claudin-3 at threonine 192 by cAMP-depend­ent protein
kinase regulates tight junction barrier function in ovarian
cancer cells. J Biol Chem. 2005; 280:26233–26240.
26.	French AD, Fiori JL, Camilli TC, Leotlela PD,
O’Connell MP, Frank BP, Subaran S, Indig FE, Taub DD,
Weeraratna AT. PKC and PKA phosphorylation affect the
subcellular localization of claudin-1 in melanoma cells. Int
J Med Sci. 2009; 6:93–101.
27.	 Chen C, Wang P, Su Q, Wang S, Wang F. Myosin light chain
kinase mediates intestinal barrier disruption following burn
injury. PLoS One. 2012; 7:e34946.
28.	 Nishida M, Yoshida M, Nishiumi S, Furuse M, Azuma T.
Claudin-2  regulates colorectal inflamma­tion via myosin
light chain kinase-dependent signaling. Dig Dis Sci. 2013;
58:1546–1559.
29.	 Ikari A, Ito M, Okude C, Sawada H, Harada H, Degawa M,
Sakai H, Takahashi T, Sugatani J, Miwa M. Claudin-16 is
directly phosphorylated by protein kinase A independently
of a vasodila­
tor-stimulated phosphoprotein-mediated
pathway. J Cell Physiol. 2008; 214:221–229.
30.	 Li X, Akhtar S, Choudhry MA. Alteration in intestine tight
junction protein phosphorylation and apoptosis is associated
with increase in IL-18 levels following alcohol intoxication
and burn in­jury. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012; 1822:196–203.
31.	 Shen L. Tight junctions on the move: molecular mechanisms
for epithelial barrier regulation. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2012;
1258:9–18.
32.	 Sjö A, Magnusson KE, Peterson KH. Protein kinase C
activation has distinct effects on the localiza­
tion,
phosphorylation and detergent solubility of the claudin
protein family in tight and leaky epithelial cells. J Membr
Biol. 2010; 236:181–189.
33.	 Heiler S, Mu W, Zöller M, Thuma F. The importance
of claudin-7 palmitoylation on membrane subdomain
localization and metastasis-promoting activities. Cell
Commun Signal. 2015; 13:29.
34.	 Nübel T, Preobraschenski J, Tuncay H, Weiss T, Kuhn S,
Ladwein M, Langbein L, Zöller M. Claudin-7 regulates
EpCAM-mediated functions in tumor progression. Mol
Cancer Res. 2009; 7:285–299.
35.	 Levental I, Grzybek M, Simons K. Greasing their way: lipid
modifications determine protein asso­ciation with membrane
rafts. Biochemistry. 2010; 49:6305–6316.
36.	Stepanek O, Draber P, Horejsi V. Palmitoylated
transmembrane adaptor proteins in leukocyte sig­naling. Cell
Signal. 2014; 26:895–902.

  7.	 Maccalli C, De Maria R. Cancer stem cells: perspectives for
therapeutic targeting. Cancer Immu­nol Immunother. 2015;
64:91–97.
  8.	 Gires O. Lessons from common markers of tumor-initiating
cells in solid cancers. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2011; 68:4009–4022.
  9.	 Thuma F, Zöller M. EpCAM-associated claudin-7 supports
lymphatic spread and drug resistance in rat pancreatic
cancer. Int J Cancer. 2013; 133:855–866.
10.	 Philip R, Heiler S, Mu W, Büchler MW, Zöller M,
Thuma F. Claudin-7 promotes the epithelial-mesenchymal
transition in human colorectal cancer. Oncotarget. 2015;
6:2046–2063. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.2858.
11.	 Tsukita S, Furuse M. Overcoming barriers in the study of
tight junction functions: from occludin to claudin. Genes
Cells. 1998; 3:569–573.
12.	Schneeberger EE, Lynch RD. The tight junction: a
multifunctional complex. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2004;
286: C1213–28.
13.	 Schulzke JD, Günzel D, John LJ, Fromm M. Perspectives on
tight junction research. Ann NY Acad Sci. 2012; 1257:1–19.
14.	 Furuse M, Hata M, Furuse K, Yoshida Y, Haratake A,
Sugitani Y, Noda T, Kubo A, Tsukita S. Claudin-based tight
junctions are crucial for the mammalian epidermal barrier:
a lesson from claudin-1-deficient mice. J Cell Biol. 2002;
156:1099–1111.
15.	 Ding L, Lu Z, Foreman O, Tatum R, Lu Q, Renegar R,
Cao  J, Chen YH. Inflammation and disrup­tion of the
mucosal architecture in claudin-7-deficient mice.
Gastroenterology. 2012; 142; 305–315.
16.	 Tanaka H, Takechi M, Kiyonari H, Shioi G, Tamura A,
Tsukita S. Intestinal deletion of Claudin-7 enhances
paracellular organic solute flux and initiates colonic
inflammation in mice. Gut. 2015; 64:1529–1538.
17.	 Lal-Nag M, Morin PJ. The claudins. Genome Biol. 2009;
10:235.
18.	 Ding L, Lu Z, Lu Q, Chen YH. The claudin family of
proteins in human malignancy: a clinical per­
spective.
Cancer Manag Res. 2013; 5:367–375.
19.	 Van Itallie CM, Anderson JM. Claudin interactions in and
out of the tight junction. Tissue Barri­ers. 2013; 1: e25247.
20.	 Findley MK, Koval M. Regulation and roles for claudin-family
tight junction proteins. IUBMB Life. 2009; 61:431–437.
21.	 Gonzalez-Mariscal L, Namorado Mdel C, Martin D, Sierra G,
Reyes JL. The tight junction pro­
teins claudin-7 and
-8 display a different subcellular localization at Henle’s
loops and collecting ducts of rabbit kidney. Nephrol Dial
Transplant. 2006; 21:2391–2398.
22.	 Tauro BJ, Greening DW, Mathias RA, Mathivanan S, Ji H,
Simpson RJ. Two distinct populations of exosomes are
released from LIM1863 colon carcinoma cell-derived
organoids. Mol Cell Pro­teomics. 2013; 12:587–598.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30674

Oncotarget

37.	 Head BP, Patel HH, Insel PA. Interaction of membrane/
lipid rafts with the cytoskeleton: impact on signaling and
function: membrane/lipid rafts, mediators of cytoskeletal
arrangement and cell signaling. Biochim Biophys Acta.
2014; 1838:532–545.

54.	 Yamashita T, Budhu A, Forgues M, Wang XW. Activation
of hepatic stem cell marker EpCAM by Wnt-beta-catenin
signaling in hepatocellular carcinoma. Cancer Res. 2007;
67:10831–10839.
55.	 Maghzal N, Vogt E, Reintsch W, Fraser JS, Fagotto F.
The tumor-associated EpCAM regulates morphoge­netic
movements through intracellular signaling. J Cell Biol.
2010; 191:645–659.

38.	 Mollinedo F, Gajate C. Lipid rafts as major platforms for
signaling regulation in cancer. Adv Biol Regul. 2015 ;
57:130–146.

56.	 Denzel S, Mack B, Eggert C, Massoner P, Stöcklein N,
Kemming D, Harréus U, Gires O. MMP7 is a tar­get of the
tumour-associated antigen EpCAM. Int J Exp Pathol. 2012;
93:341–353.

39.	Lajoie P, Nabi IR. Lipid rafts, caveolae, and their
endocytosis. Int Rev Cell Mol Biol. 2010; 282:135–163.
40.	 Ewers H, Helenius A. Lipid-mediated endocytosis. Cold
Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2011; 3:a004721.

57.	 Sankpal NV, Willman MW, Fleming TP, Mayfield JD,
Gillanders WE. Transcriptional repres­
sion of epithe­
lial
cell adhesion molecule contributes to p53 control of breast
cancer invasion. Can­cer Res. 2009; 69:753–757.

41.	 Zöller M. Tetraspanins: push and pull in suppressing and
promoting metastasis. Nat Rev Cancer. 2009; 9:40–55.
42.	 Nicolson GL. Cell membrane fluid-mosaic structure and
cancer metastasis. Cancer Res. 2015; 75:1169–1176.

58.	 Maetzel D, Denzel S, Mack B, Eggert C, Bärr G, Gires O.
Nuclear signalling by tumour-associ­ated anti­gen EpCAM.
Nat Cell Biol. 2009; 11:162–171.

43.	 Andreu Z, Yáñez-Mó M. Tetraspanins in extracellular vesicle
formation and function. Front Immu­nol. 2014; 5:442.
44.	 Singh AB, Sharma A, Dhawan P. Claudin family of proteins
and cancer: an overview. J Oncol. 2010; 2010:541957.

59.	 Lin CW, Liao MY, Lin WW, Wang YP, Lu TY, Wu HC.
Epithelial Cell Adhesion Molecule Regu­
lates Tu­
mor
Initiation and Tumorigenesis via Activating Reprogramming
Factors and Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition Genes
Expression in Colon Cancer. J Biol Chem. 2012; 287:
39449–39459.

45.	 Kwon MJ. Emerging roles of claudins in human cancer. Int
J Mol Sci. 2013; 14:18148–18180.
46.	 Escudero-Esparza A, Jiang WG, Martin TA. The Claudin
family and its role in cancer and metasta­sis. Front Biosci.
2011; 16:1069–1083.

60.	 Yovchev MI, Grozdanov PN, Zhou H, Racherla H, Guha C,
Dabeva MD. Identification of adult hepatic progenitor cells
capable of repopulating injured rat liver. Hepatology. 2008;
47:636–647.

47.	 Cheng JM, Volk L, Janaki DK, Vyakaranam S, Ran S, Rao KA.
Tumor suppressor function of Rab25 in triple-negative
breast cancer. Int J Cancer. 2010; 126:2799–2812.

61.	 Lei Z, Maeda T, Tamura A, Nakamura T, Yamazaki Y,
Shiratori H, Yashiro K, Tsukita S, Hamada H. EpCAM
contributes to formation of functional tight junction in the
intestinal epithe­lium by recruiting claudin proteins. Dev
Biol. 2012; 371:136–145.

48.	 Imrich S, Hachmeister M, Gires O. EpCAM and its potential
role in tumor-initiating cells. Cell Adh Migr. 2012; 6:30–38.
49.	 Kuhn S, Koch M, Nübel T, Ladwein M, Antolovic D,
Klingbeil P, Hildebrand D, Moldenhauer G, Langbein L,
Franke WW, Weitz J, Zöller M. A complex of EpCAM,
claudin-7, CD44 variant isoforms, and tetraspanins
promotes colorectal cancer progression. Mol Cancer Res.
2007; 5:553–567.

62.	 Matzku S, Komitowski D, Mildenberger M, Zöller M.
Characterization of BSp73, a spontaneous rat tumor and its
in vivo selected variants showing different metastasizing
capacities. Invasion Me­tastasis. 1983; 3:109–123.

50.	 Ladwein M, Pape UF, Schmidt DS, Schnölzer M, Fiedler S,
Langbein L, Franke WW, Molden­hauer G, Zöller M. The
cell-cell adhesion molecule EpCAM interacts directly with
the tight junc­tion protein claudin-7. Exp Cell Res. 2005;
309:345–357.

63.	 Jung T, Gross W, Zöller M. CD44v6 coordinates tumor
matrix-triggered motility and apoptosis resistance. J Biol
Chem. 2011; 286:15862–15874.
64.	 Yue S, Mu W, Zöller M. Tspan8 and CD151 promote
metastasis by distinct mechanisms. Eur J Cancer. 2013;
49:2934–2948.

51.	 Wu CJ, Mannan P, Lu M, Udey MC. Epithelial cell adhesion
molecule (EpCAM) regulates claudin dynamics and tight
junctions. J Biol Chem. 2013; 288:12253–12268.

65.	 Fragoso R, Barata JT. Kinases, tails and more: regulation
of PTEN function by phosphorylation. Methods. 2015;
77–78:75–81.

52.	 Okada T, Nakamura T, Watanabe T, Onoda N, Ashida A,
Okuyama R, Ito K. Coexpression of Ep­CAM, CD44 variant
isoforms and claudin-7 in anaplastic thyroid carcinoma.
PLoS One. 2014; 9:e94487.

66.	 Thuma F, Zöller M. Outsmart tumor exosomes to steal the
cancer initiating cell its niche. Semin Cancer Biol. 2014;
28:39–50.

53.	 Winter MJ, Nagelkerken B, Mertens AE, Rees-Bakker HA,
Brtiaire-deBruijn IH, Litvinov SV. Ex­pression of EpCAM
shifts the state of cadherin-mediated adhesions from strong
to weak. Exp Cell Res. 2003; 285:50–58.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

67.	 Rana S, Yue S, Stadel D, Zöller M. Toward tailored
exosomes: the exosomal tetraspanin web con­
tributes
to target cell selection. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2012;
44:1574–1584.
30675

Oncotarget

68.	 Krug SM, Schulzke JD, Fromm M. Tight junction, selective
permeability, and related diseases. Semin Cell Dev Biol.
2014; 36:166–176.

81.	 Tiwari N, Gheldof A, Tatari M, Christofori G. EMT as the
ultimate survival mechanism of can­cer cells. Semin Cancer
Biol. 2012; 22:194–207.

69.	 Alikanoglu AS, Gunduz S, Demirpence O, Suren D,
Gunduz UR, Sezer C, Yildiz M, Yildirim M. Expression
pattern and prognostic significance of claudin 1, 4 and 7 in
pancreatic cancer. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2015; 16:4387–
4392.

82.	 Gonzalez DM, Medici D. Signaling mechanisms of the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Sci Sig­nal. 2014; 7:re8.

70.	 Cunniffe C, Brankin B, Lambkin H, Ryan F. The role
of claudin-1 and claudin-7 in cervical tumori­
genesis.
Anticancer Res. 2014; 34:2851–2857.

84.	 Sánchez-Tilló E, Liu Y, de Barrios O, Siles L, Fanlo L,
Cuatrecasas M, Darling DS, Dean DC, Cas­
tells A,
Postigo A. EMT-activating transcription factors in cancer:
beyond EMT and tumor inva­siveness. Cell Mol Life Sci.
2012; 69:3429–3456.

83.	 Schmalhofer O, Brabletz S, Brabletz T. E-cadherin, betacatenin, and ZEB1 in malignant progres­sion of cancer.
Cancer Metastasis Rev. 2009; 28:151–166.

71.	 Cao C, Wang W, Ma C, Jiang P. Computational analysis
identifies invasion-associated genes in pituitary adenomas.
Mol Med Rep. 2015; 12:1977–1982.

85.	 IV Santaliz-Ruiz LE, Xie X, Old M, Teknos TN, Pan Q.
Emerging role of nanog in tumorigene­sis and cancer stem
cells. Int J Cancer. 2014; 135:2741–2748.

72.	Bouchagier KA, Assimakopoulos SF, Karavias DD,
Maroulis I, Tzelepi V, Kalofonos H, Karavias DD,
Kardamakis D, Scopa CD, Tsamandas AC. Expression
of claudins-1, -4, -5, -7 and occludin in hepatocellular
carcinoma and their relation with classic clinicopathological
features and patients’ survival. In Vivo. 2014; 28:315–326.

86.	 McDonald PC, Fielding AB, Dedhar S. Integrin-linked
kinase—essential roles in physiology and cancer biology.
J Cell Sci. 2008; 121:3121–3132.
87.	 Lv ZM, Wang Q, Wan Q, Lin JG, Hu MS, Liu YX, Wang R.
The role of the p38 MAPK signal­ing pathway in high
glucose-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition of
cultured human renal tubular epithelial cells. PLoS One.
2011; 6:e22806.

73.	 Okada T, Nakamura T, Watanabe T, Onoda N, Ashida A,
Okuyama R, Ito K. Coexpression of Ep­CAM, CD44 variant
isoforms and claudin-7 in anaplastic thyroid carcinoma.
PLoS One. 2014; 9:e94487.
74.	 Holczbauer Á, Gyöngyösi B, Lotz G, Törzsök P, KaposiNovák P, Szijártó A, Tátrai P, Kupcsu­lik P, Schaff Z, Kiss
A. Increased expression of claudin-1 and claudin-7 in liver
cirrhosis and hepa­tocellular carcinoma. Pathol Oncol Res.
2014; 20:493–502.

88.	 Li NY, Weber CE, Wai PY, Cuevas BD, Zhang J, Kuo PC,
Mi Z. An MAPK-dependent pathway in­duces epithelialmesenchymal transition via Twist activation in human
breast cancer cell lines. Surgery. 2013; 154:404–410.
89.	 Jo M, Lester RD, Montel V, Eastman B, Takimoto S,
Gonias SL. Reversibility of epithelial-mesen­
chymal
transition (EMT) induced in breast cancer cells by
activation of urokinase receptor-dependent cell signaling.
J Biol Chem. 2009; 284:22825–22833.

75.	 Jun KH, Kim JH, Jung JH, Choi HJ, Chin HM. Expression
of claudin-7 and loss of claudin-18 cor­relate with poor
prognosis in gastric cancer. Int J Surg. 2014; 12:156–162.
76.	 Shen L. Tight junctions on the move: molecular mechanisms
for epithelial barrier regulation. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2012;
1258:9–18.

90.	 Bertrand FE, McCubrey JA, Angus CW, Nutter JM,
Sigounas G. NOTCH and PTEN in prostate cancer. Adv
Biol Regul. 2014; 56:51–65.

77.	 Lu Z, Kim do H, Fan J, Lu Q, Verbanac K, Ding L,
Renegar R, Chen YH. A non-tight junction function of
claudin-7-Interaction with integrin signaling in suppressing
lung cancer cell prolif­eration and detachment. Mol Cancer.
2015; 14:120.

91.	 Patsoukis N, Li L, Sari D, Petkova V, Boussiotis VA. PD-1
increases PTEN phosphatase activity while decreasing
PTEN protein stability by inhibiting casein kinase 2. Mol
Cell Biol. 2013; 33:3091–3098.

78.	 Vilen ST, Suojanen J, Salas F, Risteli J, Ylipalosaari M,
Itkonen O, Koistinen H, Baumann M, Stenman UH,
Sorsa T, Salo T, Nyberg P. Trypsin-2 enhances carcinoma
invasion by processing tight junctions and activating
ProMT1-MMP. Cancer Invest. 2012; 30:583–592.

92.	 Cordier F, Chaffotte A, Terrien E, Préhaud C, Theillet FX,
Delepierre M, Lafon M, Buc H, Wolff N. Ordered
phosphorylation events in two independent cascades of the
PTEN C-tail revealed by NMR. J Am Chem Soc. 2012;
134:20533–20543.

79.	 Gurbuz N, Ashour AA, Alpay SN, Ozpolat B. Downregulation of 5-HT1B and 5-HT1D recep­
tors inhibits
proliferation, clonogenicity and invasion of human
pancreatic cancer cells. PLoS One. 2014; 9: e110067.

93.	 Milella M, Falcone I, Conciatori F, Cesta Incani U, Del
Curatolo A, Inzerilli N, Nuzzo CM, Vac­caro V, Vari S,
Cognetti F, Ciuffreda L. PTEN: Multiple Functions in
Human Malignant Tumors. Front Oncol. 2015; 5:24.

80.	 Joghetaei N, Stein A, Byrne RA, Schulz C, King L,
May AE, Schmidt R. The Extracellular Ma­
trix
Metalloproteinase Inducer (EMMPRIN, CD147) - a
potential novel target in atherothrombo­sis prevention?
Thromb Res. 2013; 131:474–480.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

94.	 Kowal J, Tkach M, Théry C. Biogenesis and secretion of
exosomes. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2014; 29:116–125.
95.	 De Maio A. Extracellular heat shock proteins, cellular
export vesicles, and the Stress Observation System: a form
30676

Oncotarget

of communication during injury, infection, and cell damage.
It is never known how far a controversial finding will go!
Dedicated to Ferruccio Ritossa. Cell Stress Chaperones.
2011; 16:235–249.

  99.	 Junwei L, Bonifati S, Hristov G, Martilla T, ValmaryDegano S, Stanzel S, Schnölzer M, Mougin C,
Aprahamian M, Grekova S, Raykov Z, Rommelaere J,
Marchini A. Synergistic combination of valproic acid and
oncolytic parvovirus H-1PV as a potential therapy against
cervical and pan­creatic carcinomas. EMBO Mol Med.
2013; 5:1537–1555.

96.	Jackson LP, Kümmel D, Reinisch KM, Owen DJ.
Structures and mechanisms of vesicle coat com­ponents
and multisubunit tethering complexes. Curr Opin Cell Biol.
2012; 24:475–483.

100.	 Manders EM, Stap J, Brakenhoff GJ, van Driel R, Aten JA.
Dynamics of three-dimensional replica­tion patterns during
the S-phase, analysed by double labelling of DNA and
confocal mi­croscopy. J Cell Sci. 1992; 103:857–862.

97.	 Khan AR. Oligomerization of rab/effector complexes in the
regulation of vesicle trafficking. Prog Mol Biol Transl Sci.
2013; 117:579–614.
98.	

Brigidi GS, Bamji SX. Detection of protein palmitoylation
in cultured Hippocampal neurons by immunoprecipitation
and acyl-biotin exchange (ABE). J Vis Exp. 2013;
72:e50031.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30677

Oncotarget

