Research Article

Extensive Immunoglobulin Production Sensitizes Myeloma
Cells for Proteasome Inhibition
1

3

1

4

5

Silke Meister, Ulrich Schubert, Kirsten Neubert, Kai Herrmann, Renate Burger,
5
3
3
1
Martin Gramatzki, Sabine Hahn, Sandra Schreiber, Sabine Wilhelm,
2
4
1,2
Martin Herrmann, Hans-Martin Jäck, and Reinhard E. Voll
1
IZKF Research Group 2, Nikolaus-Fiebiger-Center of Molecular Medicine; 2Department of Internal Medicine 3, University Hospital
Erlangen; 3Institute of Clinical and Molecular Virology; 4Division of Molecular Immunology, Department of Internal Medicine 3,
Nikolaus-Fiebiger-Center, University of Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany; and 5Division for Stem Cell Transplantation and
Immunotherapy, 2nd Medical Department, University of Kiel, Kiel, Germany

Abstract
Multiple myeloma is an incurable plasma cell neoplasia
characterized by the production of large amounts of monoclonal immunoglobulins. The proteasome inhibitor bortezomib (PS-341, Velcade) induces apoptosis in various malignant
cells and has been approved for treatment of refractory
multiple myeloma. Inhibition of the antiapoptotic transcription factor nuclear factor-KB (NF-KB) apparently contributes
to the antitumor effects of bortezomib; however, this
mechanism cannot fully explain the exceptional sensitivity of
myeloma cells. Extensive protein synthesis as in myeloma cells
is inherently accompanied by unfolded proteins, including
defective ribosomal products (DRiPs), which need to be
degraded by the ubiquitin-proteasome system. Therefore, we
hypothesized that the proapoptotic effect of bortezomib in
multiple myeloma is mainly due to the accumulation of
unfolded proteins in cells with high protein biosynthesis.
Using the IgG-secreting human myeloma cell line JK-6L and
murine MH-chain–transfected Ag8.H myeloma cells, apoptosis
induction upon proteasome inhibition was clearly correlated
with the amount of immunoglobulin production. Preferentially in immunoglobulin-high myeloma cells, bortezomib
triggered activation of caspases and induction of proapoptotic
CHOP, a component of the terminal unfolded protein response
induced by endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. In immunoglobulin-high cells, bortezomib increased the levels of
proapoptotic Bax while reducing antiapoptotic Bcl-2. Finally,
IgG-DRiPs were detected in proteasome inhibitor–treated
cells. Hence, proteasome inhibitors induce apoptosis preferentially in cells with high synthesis rate of immunoglobulin
associated with accumulation of unfolded proteins/DRiPs
inducing ER stress. These findings further elucidate the
antitumor activities of proteasome inhibitors and have
important implications for optimizing clinical applications.
[Cancer Res 2007;67(4):1783–92]

Introduction
Multiple myeloma, a malignancy of plasma cells, results in the
overproduction of monoclonal immunoglobulins. Although the
hitherto existing therapeutic strategies, such as chemotherapy,

Requests for reprints: Reinhard Voll, IZKF Research Group 2, Nikolaus-FiebigerCenter, Glückstrasse 6, 91054 Erlangen, Germany. Phone: 49-9131-8539301; Fax: 499131-39311; E-mail: rvoll@molmed.uni-erlangen.de.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-06-2258

www.aacrjournals.org

radiotherapy, autologous, and allogeneic stem cell transplantation,
lead to prolonged survival of multiple myeloma patients, these
therapies rarely induce long-lasting complete remissions but
frequently are associated with severe adverse effects (1). Recently,
the dipeptidyl boronic acid derivative bortezomib (PS-341,
Velcade), a reversible, highly selective and potent inhibitor of the
26S proteasome, has been approved for treatment of multiple
myeloma progressing on prior therapy (2, 3). According to recent
studies, bortezomib may also be part of very effective frontline
therapy.
The 26S proteasome constitutes a multienzyme complex present
in all eukaryotic cells that plays an essential role in degrading
supernumerous, defective, or misfolded proteins, which are
targeted for proteasomal degradation by ubiquitinylation. In
addition, the proteasomes are involved in the regulation of cellular
processes, including cell cycle and apoptosis, by controlling the
degradation of key regulatory factors (4). Bortezomib and other
proteasome inhibitors induce apoptosis in many different types of
cancer cells; however, myeloma cells seem to be exceptionally
sensitive (5, 6).6 The molecular mechanisms of this hypersensitivity
have not yet been fully characterized.
In general, it is believed that the antimyeloma effect of
bortezomib is, at least partially, due to inhibition of the
transcription factor nuclear factor-nB (NF-nB). Constitutive NF-nB
activity in myeloma cells mediates survival as well as resistance to
chemotherapy and radiotherapy (6, 7), among other effects, by
inducing the expression of antiapoptotic proteins, adhesion
molecules, and autocrine growth factors such as interleukin-6
(IL-6; ref. 5). NF-nB is normally sequestered in the cytoplasm as an
inactive complex with inhibitory proteins called InBs. Activation
of NF-nB requires signal-induced proteasome-dependent degradation of InBs, thereby releasing NF-nB that then activates
transcription of its target genes (8).
However, proteasome inhibitors may have additional effects on
myeloma cells beyond the blockade of NF-nB because a specific
inhibitor of the InB kinase h (IKKh) reduced proliferation of
myeloma cells markedly less effectively than bortezomib (7). In
consistency, we also observed that myeloma cell lines were
markedly more sensitive to bortezomib when compared with
other, more specific NF-nB inhibitors.
Proteasome inhibition prevents the clearance of unfolded
proteins by the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)–associated degradation pathway (ERAD), resulting in an ER stress response (9, 10).
This so-called unfolded protein response (UPR) is a signaling

1783

6

Our unpublished data.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (4). February 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

pathway from the ER to the nucleus triggered by the accumulation
of misfolded proteins in the ER lumen (11, 12). The UPR includes
three mechanisms to handle the vast increase of unfolded proteins:
transcriptional induction of target genes enhancing protein folding,
general translational repression, and ERAD to eliminate misfolded
proteins (13). UPR activation seems to be essential for plasma cell
differentiation and survival by inducing ER chaperones and folding
enzymes. However, overwhelming ER stress activates terminal UPR,
leading to apoptosis (14–17).
Based on these findings, we hypothesized that the proapoptotic
effect of bortezomib in myeloma cells producing large amounts of
secreted immunoglobulin is due to the accumulation of IgGderived defective ribosomal products (DRiPs) and other unfolded
proteins in the ER and cytoplasm. Therefore, the level of ER
proteins synthesized in cells should correlate with their sensitivity
towards proteasome inhibition. To address this question, we
investigated the effects of proteasome inhibitors, such as
bortezomib, on the viability of myeloma cell clones producing
various amounts of immunoglobulin. We found a clear correlation
of the immunoglobulin chain expression level with the sensitivity
towards proteasome inhibitors in subclones of the human IgGsecreting myeloma cell line JK-6L and in subclones of the murine
myeloma cell line Ag8 transfected with an expression plasmid
encoding the A heavy (H)–chain. Moreover, proapoptotic factors
of the ER stress response were much stronger induced in
subclones producing high levels of AH-chains than in those
producing no AH-chains.

Materials and Methods
Antibodies. The following primary antibodies were used: monoclonal
mouse anti-GRP78 (BiP, BD PharMingen, Heidelberg, Germany), rabbit
polyclonal anti-actin (Sigma, Taufkirchen, Germany), rabbit polyclonal anticaspase-12 (Acris Antibodies GmbH, Hiddenhausen, Germany), rabbit
polyclonal anti-XBP-1, mouse monoclonal anti-CHOP, rabbit polyclonal
anti-Bcl-2, and mouse monoclonal anti-Bax (all from Santa Cruz
Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA). As secondary antibodies, the following
were used: horseradish peroxidase–conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG, goat
anti-rabbit IgG (Amersham Biosciences, Freiburg, Germany), donkey antigoat IgG (Santa Cruz Biotechnology), FITC-conjugated goat anti-mouse
IgM (Southern Biotechnology Associates, Birmingham, AL), and FITCconjugated goat anti-human IgG (Caltag, Burlingame, CA).
Reagents. MG-132, lactacystin, and MG-262 were received from
Calbiochem (Schwalbach/Ts., Germany); bortezomib (PS-341, Velcade)
was obtained from the University Hospital Pharmacy Erlangen; and
tunicamycin was purchased from Sigma.
Cell lines and culture conditions. Cell lines used in this study were
grown in RPMI 1640 supplemented with 50 units/mL penicillin, 50 Ag/mL
streptomycin, 1 mmol/L sodium pyruvate, 2 mmol/L L-glutamine, 10% FCS
for mouse myeloma cells, and 20% FCS for JK-6L. Cells were maintained at
37jC in a humidified incubator containing 5% CO2. We established the
human myeloma cell line JK-6L from the peripheral blood of a patient with
an IgGn secreting multiple myeloma (18, 19). The Ag17A3.1 (Ag8AH) cell line
was generated by transfection of Ag8.H cells, a subclone of the murine
immunoglobulin-negative mouse plasmocytoma Ag8.653 (20), with the
AH-chain–encoding plasmid vector pAgptDsec. This vector contains the
genomic sequence of a productively rearranged murine AH-chain gene
harboring the 17.2.25 VH region, which is able to pair with immunoglobulin
light chains (21). The polyadenylated sequence of the secreted form was
deleted. Stable transfectants were selected in complete RPMI supplemented
with 2.5 Ag/mL mycophenolic acid, 250 Ag/mL xanthine, 100 Amol/L
hypoxanthine, and 16 Amol/L thymidine (HT-media supplement; SigmaAldrich, Taufkirchen, Germany). To obtain Iga-expressing Ag8 cells
(Ag8Iga), Ag8.H cells were transfected with an expression plasmid encoding

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (4). February 15, 2007

murine Iga (22). Single-cell clones from Ag8AH and JK-6L cells were
established by limiting dilution.
Flow cytometric analysis. Surface staining was done as described (23).
For intracellular staining, cells were fixed and permeabilized using Cytofix/
Cytoperm (BD, Heidelberg, Germany), stained with the appropriate amount
of antibodies, and analyzed by flow cytometry using a FACSCalibur (BD
Biosciences, San Jose, CA). Data analyses were done using the Cell Quest
software (BD Biosciences).
Viability assay. Cells (4  104) were treated with different concentrations of proteasome inhibitors for 24 h and incubated for another 4 h with
AlamarBlue (15 AL added to 200 AL of culture; BioSource International, Inc.,
Camarillo, CA). Activity of the mitochondrial dehydrogenase results in
conversion of the coloring, which was followed by measurement of the
absorption using a spectrophotometer (Spectramax 190, Molecular Devices,
Sunnyvale, CA).
Cell cycle analysis. Cells (1  105) were treated with 1 Amol/L
bortezomib for indicated time intervals. Harvested cells were resuspended
in a staining solution containing 0.6 Ag/mL propidium iodide (SigmaAldrich), 4 mmol/L sodium citrate, and 0.1% Triton X-100 and incubated for
24 h at 4jC. DNA content was determined by flow cytometry (Epics XL,
Coulter Co., Miami, FL).
Cell death analysis. Cells (1  105) were treated with different
concentrations of bortezomib for indicated time intervals; 50 Amol/L of the
broad-range caspase inhibitor zVAD-FMK (Alexis Biochemicals, San Diego,
CA) was used to block caspase activation. Staining with Annexin V-FITC
(Responsif GmbH, Erlangen, Germany) and propidium iodide (SigmaAldrich) was done as described (24). The fluorescent dye 3,3¶-dihexyloxacarbocyanine iodide (DiOC6, Sigma) was used to reveal disruption of the
mitochondrial transmembrane potential (DW m). For measurement, 1  105
cells were treated with 1 Amol/L bortezomib for indicated time intervals.
Afterwards, cells were incubated with DiOC6 dye for 20 min at 37jC and
analyzed by flow cytometry.
Caspase-3/7 assay. Cells (5  104) were treated with 1 Amol/L bortezomib
for 16 h. Caspase-3/7 activity was measured with the Caspase-Glo 3/7 assay
(Promega, Madison, WI) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Luminescence was measured using a luminometer (Sirius, Berthold
Detection Systems, Pforzheim, Germany).
Immunoblotting. Cells (1  106) were treated with 1 Amol/L bortezomib
for indicated time intervals. Equal amounts of cells were washed with PBS
and directly lysed in SDS sample buffer containing h-mercaptoethanol to
generate total cell lysates. Proteins were separated on SDS-polyacrylamide
gels and transferred onto polyvinylidene difluoride membranes (Millipore,
Billerica, MA). Membranes were blocked with 5% nonfat dry milk (Roth,
Karlsruhe, Germany) in TBS solution containing 0.05% Tween 20 (Merck,
Hohenbrunn, Germany) for 1 h. Blots were probed with antibodies and
developed using the enhanced chemiluminescence method.
Reverse transcription-PCR analyses. Cells (1  106) were treated with
1 Amol/L bortezomib for indicated time intervals. Total RNA was isolated
using the Mini RNAeasy kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). Aliquots of 1 Ag
total RNA were treated with the Superscript reverse transcriptase
(Invitrogen, Karlsruhe, Germany) and amplified with Taq polymerase
(NEB, Frankfurt/Main, Germany) using specific primers for XBP-1 ( forward,
CCTTGTGGTTGAGAACCAGG; reverse, TCTCTGTCTCAGAGGGGATC)
and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase ( forward, AGTCCAGTGAGCTTCCCGTTCAGC; reverse, TGGTATCGTGGAAGGACTCATGAC).
PCR products were separated by electrophoresis on agarose gels and
visualized by ethidium bromide staining. For quantitative real-time PCR
analysis, the cDNA and appropriate primers (Bcl-2 forward,
ATGCCTTTGTGGAACTATATGGC; Bcl-2 reverse, GGTATGCACCCAGAGTGATGC; Bax forward, TGAAGACAGGGGCCTTTTTG; Bax reverse,
AATTCGCCGGAGACACTCG; InBa forward, TGAAGGACGAGGAGTACGAGC; InBa reverse, TTCGTGGATGATTGCCAAGTG; h-actin forward,
GGCTGTATTCCCCTCCATCG; h-actin reverse, CCAGTTGGTAACAATGCCATGT) were mixed with 2 ABsolute qRT-PCR SYBR green ROX reagent
(Abgene, Hamburg, Germany). Quantitative real-time PCR was done in
triplicates in an Applied Biosystems 7300 real-time PCR system (Applied
Biosystems, Darmstadt, Germany).

1784

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Immunoglobulin Production Sensitizes for Bortezomib
Electrophoretic mobility shift analysis. Electrophoretic mobility shift
assays (EMSA) were done as described previously (25). Briefly, nuclear
extracts were prepared from cells (5  106) treated with 1 Amol/L
bortezomib for indicated time intervals. Ten micrograms of nuclear extracts
were added to the probe mix. Probes were end labeled with 32P-dGTP
(Hartmann Analytik, Braunschweig, Germany). The reaction mixtures were
incubated at room temperature for 15 min and run on a 4% non-denaturing
polyacrylamide gel. For specificity control, nuclear extracts were incubated
for 15 min at room temperature with unlabeled double-stranded
oligonucleotides or a respective mutant variant at 100-fold molar excess.
Gels were dried on Whatman paper and exposed to X-ray film for 48 h at
70jC. Alternatively, gels were analyzed using phosphoimaging instrumentation (Fujifilm FLA-3000, Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, CA).
Metabolic labeling. For detection of IgG DRiPs, short-term pulse-chase
experiments were conducted following previously published standard
DRiP pulse-chase protocols (26, 27). Briefly, JK-6L cells were treated with
25 Amol/L of each MG-132 and lactacystin or DMSO during 10 min of
starvation in methionine-free, serum-free RPMI (Invitrogen, Life Technologies, Karlsruhe, Germany). Cells were radiolabeled for 5 min with 1.5 mCi/mL
35
S-methionine (Amersham Life Sciences, GE Healthcare, Munich, Germany)
and chased for up to 30 min while shaking at 37jC in Iscove’s DMEM

supplemented with 10% FCS and 10 mmol/L methionine in the presence or
absence of proteasome inhibitors. Cells were lysed in 200 AL CHAPSdeoxycholate buffer for 5 min on ice and separated from the insoluble
fraction by centrifugation at 20,000  g for 10 min. IgG proteins were
recovered from the soluble fraction by immunoprecipitation using antihuman IgG antibodies (mixture of polyclonal rabbit and goat anti-human
IgGs from Jackson Immuno Research Laboratories, Inc., West Grove, PA)
prebound to Protein G-Sepharose. Samples were separated by SDS-PAGE on
a 10% Acrylamide Prosieve gel (FMC Bioproducts, Rockland, ME). Following
fixation for 1 h in 40% methanol, 10% acetic acid, gels were rinsed with water,
soaked in 1 mol/L sodium salicylic acid solution for 5 h, and dried.
Radioactivity in gels was analyzed using phosphorimaging instrumentation
(Fujifilm BAS-2000, Fujifilm, Tokyo, Japan) or fluorography.

Results
Sensitivity to bortezomib-induced apoptosis depends on
immunoglobulin expression levels. First, we wanted to determine the sensitivity of myeloma cells secreting high versus low
amounts of IgG towards proteasome inhibitors (Fig. 1A). For this

Figure 1. Bortezomib reduces cell viability
in immunoglobulin-expressing myeloma
cell lines. A, experimental system used in
this study. In a first approach, subclones of
the human JK-6L cell line producing low
(JK-6L.39L) and high (JK-6L.31H) levels of
IgG were incubated in the presence (+) or
absence ( ) of proteasome inhibitors and
analyzed for their viability. In a second
approach, non-transfected (Ag8.H) and
AH-chain–transfected (Ag8AH) murine Ag8
cells as well as AgAH subclones without
(Ag8AH , clone Ag8AH.12) or with
(Ag8AH+, clone Ag8AH.1) AH-chain
expression were analyzed for their viability
in the presence or absence of proteasome
inhibitors. B, flow cytometric analyses of
cytoplasmic IgG in JK-6L and cytoplasmic
AH-chain expression in the parental Ag8AH
clone and its subclones Ag8AH+
(Ag8AH.1) and Ag8AH (Ag8AH.12).
Numbers in histograms represent the
mean fluorescence intensity of IgG
expression in JK-6L subclones and the
percentages of AH-chain–positive Ag8
cells. Histograms representing flow data of
Ag8AH, Ag8AH , and Ag8AH+ cells (filled
histograms ) and Ag8.H (non-filled
histograms ) are overlaid. C, cell viability
assays of human JK-6L subclones
(JK-6L.39L and JK-6L.31H) and murine
Ag8 cell lines (Ag8.H, Ag8AH, and
Ag8Iga). Cells were treated with different
concentrations of bortezomib as indicated
for 24 h and incubated with the vital dye
AlamarBlue. The absorbance (OD ) was
measured using a spectrophotometer.
Columns, mean values from triplicates;
bars, SD. Represent one of three
independently done experiments.
Student’s t test was used for statistical
analysis. **, P V 0.01; *, P V 0.05.

www.aacrjournals.org

1785

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (4). February 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

purpose, we tested >500 subclones of the human myeloma cell line
JK-6L, which naturally secretes IgG, for the levels of intracellular
IgG expression by flow cytometry. The maximal difference between
IgG-producing cells was up to 5-fold (Fig. 1B). Selected subclones
producing different amounts of IgG were treated with increasing
concentrations of proteasome inhibitors, and viability was
determined. As shown in Fig. 1C, the viability of a high (JK6L.31H) and a low (JK-6L.39L) IgG-producing subclone was
strongly and dose-dependently reduced by concentrations of
bortezomib as low as 10 nmol/L. However, the subclone producing
higher levels of IgG was significantly more affected by proteasome
inhibition, although the difference in IgG synthesis was at the most
5-fold. Similar results were obtained for other high and low IgGproducing JK-6L subclones (data not shown). The correlation
between IgG expression and sensitivity towards proteasome
inhibition was also observed using another proteasome inhibitor
(MG-262) that reversibly blocks the proteasome by a different
mechanism (data not shown).
To further challenge our hypothesis that the level of immunoglobulin biosynthesis determines the sensitivity towards proteasome inhibition, we established an in vitro model, based on the
murine myeloma cell line Ag8, which express neither endogenous
immunoglobulin heavy (H) nor light (L) chains (Fig. 1A). The Ag8.H
cells were transfected with an expression plasmid encoding the
membrane form of a AH-chain (Fig. 1A); hence, this AH-chain
cannot be secreted. Due to the lack of IgL chains, there is also no
surface expression detectable. Expression of AH-chain was
analyzed by flow cytometry (Fig. 1B) and Western blot analysis
using an anti-IgM antibody (data not shown). The viability of Ag8
cells synthesizing AH-chains (Ag8AH) was drastically reduced with
increasing proteasome inhibitor concentrations, whereas the nontransfected parental cells (Ag8.H) seemed virtually unaffected by
the proteasome inhibitor (Fig. 1C). In addition, expression of
another ER-synthesized protein Iga, which is a signal transducing
component of the B-cell receptor complex, rendered Ag8 cells
hypersensitive towards bortezomib (Fig. 1C). These results clearly
indicate that the sensitivity of myeloma cells towards proteasome
inhibitors depends on the synthesis of immunoglobulin chains or
other proteins processed within the ER.
To exclude artifacts caused by the transfection and selection
procedure, we generated subclones of Ag8AH cells to obtain clones
with and without AH-chain expression (Fig. 1A). In Fig. 1A, flow
cytometric analyses of AH-chain expression of two Ag8AH
subclones, one that lost AH-chain expression (Ag8AH ) and one
that still expressed the AH-chain (Ag8AH+), are displayed.
To exclude the possibility of differences in proteasome function
between Ag8AH and Ag8AH+ subclones, we determined the
proteasomal chymotrypsin-like activity. Because proteasomal
proteolysis requires the expenditure of ATP, we also investigated
whether any alterations exist in respect to cellular ATP contents.
Our results showed that neither the proteasomal activity nor
the ATP status was significantly different between Ag8AH and
Ag8AH+ cells (data not shown). In addition, Ag8AH+ versus
Ag8AH subclones traverse through cell cycle with similar kinetics
(Fig. 2A). Interestingly, in the presence of bortezomib, G2 arrest
occurs earlier and is more pronounced in Ag8AH+ compared with
Ag8AH cells (Fig. 2A).
The following figures show experiments using the two subclones
Ag8AH (Ag8AH.12) and Ag8AH+ (Ag8AH.1) as shown in Fig. 1A;
however, similar results were obtained using other AH-chain–
negative as well as AH-chain–positive subclones (data not shown).

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (4). February 15, 2007

We investigated by three independent assays whether decreased
viability in bortezomib-treated Ag8AH+ compared with Ag8AH
cells is due to induction of apoptosis. First, the frequency of
apoptotic and necrotic cells in the presence of bortezomib was
determined using Annexin V-FITC and propidium iodide staining.
The percentages of Annexin V-FITC–positive/propidium iodide–
negative apoptotic cells were significantly higher in Ag8AH+
compared with Ag8AH subclones (Fig. 2B). In addition, the
percentages of Annexin V-FITC/propidium iodide double-positive
cells, representing primary or secondary necrotic cells, were strongly
increased in Ag8AH+ compared with Ag8AH cells (Fig. 2B). Second,
induction of apoptotic cell death by bortezomib was verified by
measuring the mitochondrial membrane potential w using the
fluorescent dye DiOC6. The mean fluorescence intensity was
markedly lower in Ag8AH+ cells, again confirming that bortezomib
preferentially induced apoptosis in Ag8 cells expressing AH-chains
(Fig. 2C). Third, there was significantly higher caspase-3/7 activity
in Ag8AH+ compared with Ag8AH subclones (Fig. 2D). To evaluate
the functional importance of caspase activation for bortezomibinduced apoptosis, we analyzed the influence of the pan-caspase
inhibitor zVAD-FMK. As shown in Fig. 2E, zVAD-FMK significantly
interferes with bortezomib-triggered cell death in Ag8AH+ subclones. These results based on the analyses of various subclones
with and without AH-chain expression, all derived from the same
parental AH-chain–transfected Ag8 clone, and therefore, only
differing in immunoglobulin expression, further confirmed that
immunoglobulin synthesis is sufficient to confer increased sensitivity
towards apoptosis upon proteasome inhibition.
Bortezomib induces proapoptotic CHOP in Ag8MH+ cells.
Next, we wanted to further investigate the mechanism of apoptosis
induction by bortezomib in Ag8AH+ cells. Recently, it has been
shown that inhibition of the proteasome induces UPR. Hence, we
tested whether bortezomib triggers ER stress in Ag8 subclones,
leading to activation of terminal UPR and apoptosis. We analyzed
prominent UPR components, such as BiP, XBP-1, CHOP, and
caspase-12, known to be activated by classic inducers of UPR such
as the glycosylation inhibitor tunicamycin.
First, we evaluated the activation of the prosurvival chaperone
BiP over time in bortezomib-treated Ag8AH compared with
Ag8AH+ cells. Immunoblotting showed that the basal levels of BiP
were already very high, and neither tunicamycin nor bortezomib
further increased protein levels of BiP in Ag8AH and Ag8AH+ cells
(Fig. 3A). Next, we studied the influence of bortezomib on the
expression of XBP-1, a transcription factor inducing UPR components including chaperones. Upon ER stress, XBP-1 mRNA is spliced
by the stress transmembrane kinase/RNase IRE1 to generate a
transcript encoding a XBP-1 protein with higher transactivator
activity. This splicing event is a frameshift splicing resulting in the
translation of a larger XBP-1 protein (28). Bortezomib treatment
diminished the amount of spliced XBP-1 mRNA both in Ag8AH
and Ag8AH+ cells (Fig. 3B), whereas the spliced and unspliced form
of the XBP-1 protein markedly increased upon bortezomib
treatment in all subclones (Fig. 3A). This discrepancy is most likely
explained by decreased proteolysis of XBP-1 during proteasome
blockade, as described previously (29).
Next, we investigated whether bortezomib induces UPR proteins
involved in mediating apoptosis. Overexpression of CHOP (30),
along with activation of caspase-12 (31), is proposed to foster
apoptotic processes within the UPR. Bortezomib treatment of Ag8
cells resulted in a marked induction of CHOP at 8 h (Fig. 3A).
Interestingly, in Ag8AH+ cells, CHOP accumulated earlier (4 h) and

1786

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Immunoglobulin Production Sensitizes for Bortezomib

Figure 2. Bortezomib induces cell death
in Ag8AH /+ subclones. A, cell cycle
analysis. Ag8AH /+ cells were treated with
1 Amol/L bortezomib for indicated time
intervals. DNA content of cells incubated
with propidium iodide/Triton X-100 was
determined by flow cytometry. One
representative histogram out of triplicates.
B, cell death analysis. Ag8AH /+
subclones treated with 1 Amol/L bortezomib
(Bz ) for indicated time intervals were
stained with Annexin V-FITC/propidium
iodide (PI) and analyzed by flow cytometric
analysis. Diagrams show the percentages
of Annexin V-FITC–positive (+)/propidium
iodide–negative ( ) and Annexin V-FITC/
propidium iodide double-positive cells of
Ag8AH versus Ag8AH+ subclones. C,
measurement of mitochondrial membrane
potential. Ag8AH /+ subclones were
treated with 1 Amol/L bortezomib for
indicated time intervals. Cells were double
stained with DiOC6 dye and propidium
iodide and analyzed by flow cytometry.
Mean fluorescence intensities (MFI ) of
propidium iodide–negative/DiOC6-positive
cells are displayed in the diagram, with
high MFI indicating non-apoptotic cells.
D, analysis of caspase-3/7 activation.
Ag8AH /+ subclones were treated with
1 Amol/L bortezomib for 16 h. Activation of
caspase-3/7 was determined using the
Caspase-Glo assay. Columns, mean of
luminescence in RLU; bars, SD. E,
caspase inhibition. Ag8AH /+ subclones
were treated with 1 Amol/L bortezomib in
the presence or absence of the caspase
inhibitor zVAD-FMK for 2 h, or inhibitor
alone. Cells were stained with Annexin
V-FITC/propidium iodide and analyzed
by flow cytometry. Diagrams show the
percentages of Annexin V-FITC–positive/
propidium iodide–negative and Annexin
V-FITC/propidium iodide double-positive
cells of Ag8AH versus Ag8AH+
subclones. Columns, mean from triplicates
in all experiments; bars, SD. Represent
one of three independently done
experiments. **, P V 0.01; *, P V 0.05.

to much higher levels as in Ag8AH cells (Fig. 3A). Further results
showed that bortezomib induced caspase-12 activation only in
Ag8AH+ cells, as evidenced by detection of cleavage products
derived from the 60 kDa precursor form (Fig. 3C). These data
indicate that proapoptotic signals are triggered by overexpression
of CHOP and caspase activation preferentially in Ag8AH+ cells.
Bortezomib modulates the Bcl-2/Bax ratio in favor of
proapoptotic Bax in Ag8MH+ cells. It has been reported that
CHOP down-regulates antiapoptotic Bcl-2 (32). Moreover, both
Bcl-2 and the proapoptotic Bcl-2 family member Bax have been
shown to be associated with the ER, suggesting the involvement in
ER stress–induced cell death (33). Therefore, we analyzed whether
bortezomib treatment, which we have already found to increase
CHOP, may also alter the Bcl-2/Bax ratio.
Quantitative real-time PCR analyses revealed a reduction of Bcl-2
mRNA in Ag8AH cells upon bortezomib treatment; in Ag8AH+
subclones, there was no marked change of Bcl-2 mRNA levels
observed (Fig. 4A). However, Bcl-2 protein levels decreased to a
similar extent in both cell lines at 4 and 8 h after treatment with
bortezomib (Fig. 4B).

www.aacrjournals.org

In Ag8AH cells, the mRNA levels of the proapoptotic factor Bax
slightly decreased upon bortezomib treatment. In contrast, in
Ag8AH+ cells, Bax mRNA levels increased, especially 2 h after
bortezomib treatment (Fig. 4A). In agreement with real-time PCR
results, Bax protein concentrations decreased in Ag8AH cells but
accumulated over a period of 8 h after addition of bortezomib in
Ag8AH+ cells (Fig. 4B). In summary, the ratio of Bcl-2/Bax proteins
as calculated by densitometric analyses (data not shown) was
lower in Ag8AH+ cells compared with Ag8AH cells 8 h after
bortezomib treatment. This differential regulation by bortezomib
of antiapoptotic versus proapoptotic Bcl-2 family members may
contribute to increased apoptotic cell death in Ag8AH+ compared
with Ag8AH cells.
Bortezomib alters activity of the transcription factors
NF-KB and activator protein-1. Because it is generally
assumed that the antitumor effect of bortezomib is, at least
partially, due to inhibition of NF-nB (34), we analyzed the basal
NF-nB activity in Ag8 myeloma cells. Nuclear extracts prepared
from bortezomib-treated Ag8AH+ and Ag8AH
cells were
subjected to EMSA to quantify NF-nB DNA-binding activity. In

1787

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (4). February 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Ag8 subclones upon bortezomib treatment (Fig. 5C), indicating
that NF-nB transcriptional activity is reduced at a similar degree
in Ag8AH+ and Ag8AH subclones. Hence, preferential blockade
of the survival factor NF-nB does not account for the increased
sensitivity of Ag8AH+ cells towards bortezomib. It remains
unclear which mechanisms cause the discrepancy between DNAbinding activity and transcriptional activity of NF-nB under
conditions of proteasome blockade.
Interestingly, DNA-binding activity of the transcription factor
Oct-1 slightly increased in Ag8AH+ and Ag8AH subclones upon
bortezomib treatment (Fig. 5A and B), which might be due to
stabilization of the transcription factor because of reduced
proteasomal degradation. However, DNA-binding activity of the
transcription factor activator protein-1 (AP-1), which is involved in

Figure 3. Bortezomib induces UPR components. A, Western blot analysis of
total cell lysates from Ag8AH /+ subclones treated with 1 Amol/L bortezomib for
indicated time intervals. As a positive control for UPR activation, cells were
treated with 5 Ag/mL tunicamycin (tun ) for 6 h. Cell lysates were separated by
SDS-PAGE on a 10% polyacrylamide gel, and immunoblotting was done using
anti-BiP, anti-XBP-1 (u , unspliced; s , spliced), and anti-CHOP antibodies.
Anti-actin antibody staining served as control for equal loading. B, reverse
transcription-PCR analysis of total RNA isolated from Ag8AH versus Ag8AH+
subclones treated with 1 Amol/L bortezomib for indicated time intervals.
Tunicamycin-treated cells served as positive control. Reverse transcription-PCR
was done using a primer set that detects the unspliced (XBP-1u, 442 bp) and
spliced (XBP-1s, 416 bp) form of XBP-1 mRNA. PCR products were resolved on
a 2% agarose gel. Levels of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase
(GAPDH ) mRNA were used for adjustment of the mRNA concentrations. One of
two independently done experiments. C, caspase-12 activation by bortezomib in
Ag8AH+ subclones. Western blot analysis of total cell lysates from Ag8AH /+
subclones treated with 1 Amol/L bortezomib for indicated time intervals was done
using an anti-caspase-12 antibody. Pro-caspase-12 cleavage products indicating
activation of caspase-12 were detectable only in Ag8AH+ cells, most pronounced
after 12 h of bortezomib treatment. One representative immunoblot of three
independent experiments.

repeated experiments we did not find major differences in DNA
binding (Fig. 5A and B). If at all, upon bortezomib treatment,
there was a trend towards a decreased NF-nB DNA-binding
activity in Ag8AH subclones but an increased NF-nB activity in
Ag8AH+ (Fig. 5A and B). However, NF-nB DNA-binding activity
does not necessarily reflect transcriptional activity, which is also
regulated by other mechanisms including complex composition,
acetylation, and phosphorylation events. Therefore, we analyzed
InBa mRNA levels, which are strongly induced by NF-nB
activation (35). Relative InBa mRNA levels dropped in both

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (4). February 15, 2007

Figure 4. Bortezomib modulates expression of Bcl-2 family members.
A, quantitative real-time PCR analysis of total RNA isolated from Ag8AH /+
subclones treated with 1 Amol/L bortezomib for indicated time intervals. As
control, cells were treated with 5 Ag/mL tunicamycin (tun ) for 6 h. Relative Bcl-2
and Bax mRNA levels of bortezomib-treated Ag8AH /+ subclones normalized to
h-actin mRNA levels, which served as internal control. cDNA from untreated cells
served as reference control. The comparative C t (DDC T) method for relative
quantification of gene expression was used. PCR analysis was done in
triplicates. One representative data set of at least two independent experiments.
B, Western blot analysis of total cell lysates from Ag8AH /+ subclones, cultured
for the indicated time intervals in the presence of 1 Amol/L bortezomib.
Tunicamycin-treated cells served as control. Cell lysates were separated by
SDS-PAGE on a 12.5% polyacrylamide gel. Immunoblotting was done using
anti-Bcl-2 and anti-Bax antibodies. The upper bands detected by the Bcl-2
antibody are proposed to be phosphorylated forms of Bcl-2, and the lower one,
running at 23 kDa, corresponds to a cleaved form of Bcl-2. Anti-actin antibody
staining served as loading control.

1788

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Immunoglobulin Production Sensitizes for Bortezomib

Figure 5. Influence of bortezomib on
nuclear DNA-binding activity of the
transcription factors NF-nB and AP-1 is
dependent on AH-chain expression status.
A, EMSA was done with nuclear extracts
(10 Ag) prepared from Ag8AH /+ cells
treated with 1 Amol/L bortezomib for
indicated time intervals. NF-nB, Oct-1, and
AP-1 DNA-binding activity was analyzed
using 32P-labeled oligonucleotide probes
containing specific binding sites. The results
of the blocking experiment with unlabeled
double-stranded oligonucleotides (+Inh ;
showing blocking) or a respective mutant
variant (Mut ) that did not suppress specific
signals as well as sample without competing
oligonucleotide ( Inh ). As further control,
gel was loaded with free labeled probes.
B, quantification of NF-nB, Oct-1, and AP-1
activity plotted in phosphoimager units
(PLS). Representative data from one of
two independently done experiments.
C, determination of transcriptional InBa
activity. Quantitative real-time PCR analysis
of total RNA isolated from Ag8AH /+
subclones treated with 1 Amol/L bortezomib
for indicated time intervals. Relative InBa
mRNA levels of bortezomib-treated
Ag8AH /+ subclones normalized to h-actin
mRNA levels, which served as internal
control. cDNA from untreated cells served as
reference control. The comparative C t
(DDC T) method for relative quantification of
gene expression was used. Columns, mean
from triplicates; bars, SD. P V 0.01 versus
0 h controls.

cellular activation, proliferation, and stress-induced apoptosis (36),
was markedly induced selectively in Ag8AH+ subclones (Fig. 5A
and B). These data may indicate a role of ER overload/stress for
induction of AP-1.
IgG-derived DRiPs accumulate in response to proteasome
inhibition. It has been shown that due to failure at translation or
posttranslational processes, f30% of newly synthesized proteins
are defective (26, 37). In myeloma cells, the relatively high
expression levels of immunoglobulin should concomitantly result
in the formation of a substantial number of ER-resident DRiPs,
which ultimately have to be degraded by the ubiquitin-proteasome
system. Therefore, proteasome inhibition should cause an accumulation of DRiPs and other unfolded proteins responsible for
induction of UPR-initiated apoptosis.
To analyze IgG DRiP formation in a human non-transfected
myeloma cell line, we did short-term pulse-chase experiments
using JK-6L cells. To rescue defective ribosomal products from
proteasomal degradation, we used a combination of two proteasome inhibitors (lactacystin and MG-132), which in previous DRiP
pulse-chase experiments have been shown to efficiently and rapidly
shut down the activity of the 26S proteasome. 35S-methionine–
labeled IgG molecules were recovered from the soluble fraction by
immunoprecipitation using antihuman IgG antibodies. Upon
proteasome inhibition, the recovery of radiolabeled IgG heavy
chains was increased by f30%, reaching its maximum at 5 min
after pulse radiolabeling (Fig. 6A). These results are consistent with
an accumulation of IgG-DRiPs caused by proteasome inhibition.

Discussion
Bortezomib was previously shown to target malignant myeloma
cells through induction of apoptosis, probably by blocking NF-nB
activation, which mediates survival and resistance to chemothe-

www.aacrjournals.org

rapy and radiotherapy (2, 6, 7, 38, 39). However, testing numerous
cell lines for their basal NF-nB activity and their sensitivity to
proteasome inhibition, we previously observed that high levels
of protein synthesis were more predictive for proteasome
inhibitor–induced apoptosis than NF-nB activity (data not shown).
In addition, previous reports evidenced that proteasome inhibition has more profound effects on myeloma cells than just NF-nB
inhibition (29, 40, 41), indicating mechanisms beyond NF-nB
blockade.
Extensive protein synthesis within the secretory ER pathway is an
extraordinary feature of plasma cells and their malignant counterparts, myeloma cells. In the case of secreted proteins, such as
immunoglobulin, DRiPs should initially arise in the ER, whereas
DRiP degradation is proposed to take place in the cytoplasmic
proteasomes. Therefore, we suggest that accumulation of unfolded
proteins, predominantly DRiPs, within the ER leads to UPR
activation, resulting in inhibition of protein synthesis and induction
of ER chaperones to enhance folding and to prevent aggregation
of nascent secretory proteins. Unfolded proteins that cannot
be correctly folded are redirected to the cytoplasm by the action
of ERAD and degraded by the 26S proteasome (42). Blockade of
proteasomes inhibits consequently ERAD-mediated export of
unfolded proteins into the cytoplasm, thereby increasing UPR and
ER overload (42). Whereas UPR activation is essential in plasma cell
physiology and survival (14–16), prolonged overwhelming UPR
activation causes apoptosis. Hence, myeloma cells producing
enormous numbers of immunoglobulin should accumulate deleterious amounts of unfolded proteins under condition of proteasome
inhibition.
In the presence of bortezomib, we observed increased intracellular amounts of AH-chains, which were predominantly ubiquitinylated, indicating a proteasome-dependent degradation of
unfolded AH-chains (data not shown). Other groups also provided

1789

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (4). February 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 6. Proteasome inhibitors induce
accumulation of IgG DRiPs. A, JK-6L
cells treated with 25 Amol/L MG-132/
lactacystin (LC ) or DMSO as a solvent
control were radiolabeled for 5 min with
35
S-methionine and chased for up to 30
min. IgG molecules were recovered from
CHAPS-deoxycholate–solubilized cell
lysates by immunoprecipitation and
analyzed by SDS-PAGE. 35S-radioactivity
of Igg heavy chains was quantified using
phosphoimaging and plotted as
percentage of initial incorporation.
B, model of bortezomib-induced apoptosis
in myeloma cells. In cells secreting large
amounts of immunoglobulin, defective
ribosomal products and other unfolded
proteins arise, which get ubiquitinylated
and are normally degraded by the 26S
proteasome complex. Proteasome
inhibitors, such as bortezomib, block the
enzymatic activity of proteasomes, thereby
preventing disposal of misfolded proteins
and NF-nB activation. Consequently,
accumulation of unfolded proteins/DRiPs
within the cell along with weakened
activation of the survival factor NF-nB,
which is otherwise strongly induced by
ER overload, leads to apoptosis.

evidence that non-secreted ER-retained IgL- and AH-chains are
degraded by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway (43, 44).
Thus far, all DRiPs assigned to a defined protein were either
derived from infected or transfected cells overexpressing viral or
recombinant proteins but not from endogenously expressed
proteins (26, 45, 46). Pulse-chase analyses revealed an accumulation of 35S-methionine–labeled IgG in the cytoplasmic fractions.
Accumulation of DRiPs due to proteasome inhibition may be an
important mechanism of bortezomib-mediated cell death, targeting primarily cells with high protein synthesis. Of course, this
represents not the only cytotoxic mechanism of bortezomib. For
instance, other tumor cells may be primarily eliminated due to
their dependence on NF-nB activation.
A very recent report comparing two cell lines from different
patients found an increased sensitivity towards bortezomib in the
cell line containing higher concentrations of IgE chains associated
with activation of the terminal UPR (41). To investigate if
immunoglobulin synthesis itself sensitizes cells to proteasome
inhibitor–induced cell death, we systematically investigated subclones of the same human myeloma cell line JK-6L, only varying in

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (4). February 15, 2007

respect to the amount of IgG production. Consistent with our
hypothesis, increasing levels of IgG rendered cells more susceptible
to bortezomib-induced cell death.
To confirm the effect of immunoglobulin chain expression on
sensitivity towards bortezomib, the non–immunoglobulin-producing murine myeloma cell line Ag8.H was stably transfected with
a AH-chain expression plasmid. Expression of AH-chain resulted
in drastically increased sensitivity to proteasome inhibition.
Most likely, increased synthesis of ER proteins generally leads
to increased susceptibility against proteasome inhibitors, as
evidenced by transgenic expression of the transmembrane protein Iga.
To exclude transfection artifacts, subclones of the Ag8AH clone
were established. In addition, Ag8AH+ subclones were much more
sensitive to proteasome inhibitors compared with Ag8AH subclones. Cell death induced by bortezomib was predominantly
apoptotic, both in Ag8AH+ and Ag8AH cells as shown by Annexin
V-FITC/propidium iodide staining, decreased mitochondrial membrane potential, and caspase activation. As expected, the pancaspase inhibitor zVAD-FMK significantly delayed onset of cell death.

1790

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Immunoglobulin Production Sensitizes for Bortezomib

Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are involved in the process of
bortezomib-induced apoptotic cell death (47). As described, ROS,
produced by misfolded proteins (oxidation and reduction of
disulfide bonds), accumulate during prolonged UPR and contribute
to cell death (48). We observed a significantly higher increase of
ROS by bortezomib treatment in Ag8AH+ compared with Ag8AH
subclones, linking increased ROS production and susceptibility
to cell death to immunoglobulin synthesis (data not shown).
In addition, elimination of ROS by antioxidants, such as Nacetylcystein, markedly reduced bortezomib-induced cell death in
Ag8AH+ cells (data not shown).
In spite of the high number of subclones analyzed, we could not
identify any IgG-negative JK-6L subclones, indicating that immunoglobulin expression is crucial for survival of plasma as well as
myeloma cells, most likely by UPR-mediated expression of
chaperones and autocrine growth factors such as IL-6 (14–16).
Extensive studies have elucidated the relationship between the UPR
and plasma cell differentiation (49). The UPR-induced transcription
factors XBP-1 and ATF6 mediate the induction of UPR target genes
such as ER-resident chaperones.
One major mechanism by which bortezomib induces apoptosis in
Ag8 cells could be the induction of the terminal UPR pathway, driven
by overwhelming accumulation of defective immunoglobulin chains
in the ER. Previously published data have shown that bortezomib is
able to induce ER stress in pancreatic cancer and myeloma cells
(29, 40, 41). To investigate whether proteasome inhibition activates
UPR, and whether this depends on immunoglobulin synthesis, we
analyzed the induction and activation status of prosurvival UPR
components, such as BiP, and proapoptotic terminal UPR components, such as CHOP and caspase-12, in Ag8AH versus Ag8AH+
subclones. Chaperones like BiP are highly constitutively expressed
in plasma cells to ensure the secretory cell function. Our finding
that BiP synthesis is not markedly altered in bortezomib- and
tunicamycin-treated Ag8 cells suggests that BiP expression has
already reached maximally high levels in these myeloma cells.
UPR-mediated cell survival or cell death is regulated by the
balance of cytoprotective and proapoptotic factors (17). Consistent
with findings of other groups (40, 41, 50), we showed that CHOP is
strongly up-regulated in bortezomib-treated cells. Most importantly, our data revealed a faster and stronger induction of CHOP in
Ag8AH+ compared with Ag8AH cells. Hence, bortezomib causes a
strong up-regulation of CHOP without an increase of BiP, thereby
fostering apoptotic cell death by altering the ratio of these
prosurvival and antisurvival factors.
One relevant target of CHOP is Bcl-2, whose expression is
suppressed by CHOP (32). Bcl-2 protein levels were clearly reduced
during incubation with bortezomib, but in Ag8AH+ cells, Bcl-2
protein expression partially recovered after 8 h, a fact that may
reflect a block in proteasome-mediated degradation of Bcl-2
(51, 52). Based on our findings, the previously observed bortezomibinduced reduction of Bcl-2 (53) may be, at least partially, mediated
by increased CHOP levels.
The proapoptotic Bax, antagonizing Bcl-2, was induced on
mRNA and protein level in bortezomib-treated Ag8AH+ but not in
Ag8AH cells. These data suggest transcriptional induction of
Bax; however, we cannot exclude additional effects of bortezomib
on proteasome-mediated degradation of Bax (54). In Ag8AH+ cells,
bortezomib modulates the Bcl-2 to Bax ratio in favor of the
proapoptotic Bax, whereas in Ag8AH cells, the Bcl-2 to Bax ratio
is altered more in favor of the antiapoptotic Bcl-2. In summary,
bortezomib-induced proapoptotic factors, such as Bax, CHOP, and

www.aacrjournals.org

caspases, may dominate over antiapoptotic factors like Bcl-2 in
tilting the balance towards apoptosis, especially in immunoglobulinsynthesizing cells.
Inhibition of NF-nB activation by bortezomib is generally
considered as a major mechanism of the proapoptotic effects of
proteasome inhibition on tumor cells (7). In addition, UPR and ER
overload have been shown to induce activation of NF-nB (55, 56). As
expected, we did not observe a marked increase of NF-nB DNAbinding activity under conditions of bortezomib-induced ER stress,
most likely due to simultaneous blockade of proteasome-dependent
InB degradation. Monitoring InBa mRNA expression, which is highly
dependent on NF-nB activity, even indicated a marked reduction in
NF-nB transcriptional activity in both Ag8 subclones. The discrepancy in between just slightly changed NF-nB DNA-binding activity
and drastically reduced transcriptional activity remains still elusive
but might be due to altered posttranslational modifications and
coactivator recruitment to NF-nB. We conclude that inhibition of
NF-nB activation is not the crucial factor, which explains the
differential sensitivity of Ag8AH+ versus Ag8AH subclones to
proteasome inhibition: NF-nB DNA-binding and transcriptional
activity were similarly affected in Ag8AH and Ag8AH+ cells, if at all,
there was a even stronger inhibition in Ag8AH clones. Nevertheless, inhibition of NF-nB activity may contribute to apoptosis.
The transcription factor AP-1 was significantly induced in
bortezomib-treated Ag8AH+ cells. AP-1 is induced by the UPR kinase
IRE-1 via activation of c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase (JNK), which is
known to mediate stress-induced apoptosis (36, 57). Therefore, JNK/
AP-1 signaling may also contribute to bortezomib-induced cell death.
This work shows that myeloma cells producing high amounts of
immunoglobulin are more susceptible to apoptosis by agents, such
as bortezomib, that evoke overwhelming ER stress by inhibiting
the degradation of unfolded proteins, including DRiPs. Simultaneously, bortezomib interferes with ER overload–mediated activation of NF-nB, which normally counteracts ER stress–induced
apoptosis (Fig. 6B).
Our findings that sensitivity towards proteasome inhibition is
primarily dependent on the extent of immunoglobulin synthesis
have important implications for the therapeutic use of bortezomib
and other proteasome inhibitors. We postulate that tumors
synthesizing high amounts of proteins, especially secreted ones,
represent primary targets of proteasome inhibitors. Down-regulation of protein biosynthesis or increase of protein folding enzymes/
chaperones could represent a novel mechanism for partial
resistance towards bortezomib. However, a complete cessation of
immunoglobulin production may be barely observed because a
significant level of UPR activation seems to be important for
plasma and myeloma cell physiology and survival (14–16).
Moreover, agents influencing protein folding and DRiP rate may
modulate the sensitivity of cells towards proteasome inhibitors and
augment the antimyeloma activity of bortezomib.

Acknowledgments
Received 6/20/2006; revised 11/9/2006; accepted 12/10/2006.
Grant support: Interdisciplinary Center for Clinical Research project no. N2;
German Research Society Collaborative Research Centers SFB 643 project B3 (R. Voll),
SFB 466 (H-M. Jäck), and GRK 592 (K. Herrmann); and ELAN Fonds of the University
Hospital Erlangen (H-M. Jäck and R. Voll).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank Benjamin Frey (Department of Radiotherapy, University of ErlangenNürnberg, Erlangen, Germany) for providing antibodies and help during preparation of
this article and Wolfgang Baum (Deparment of Internal Medicine 3, University of
Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany) for assistance and discussion.

1791

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (4). February 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

1. Richardson PG, Mitsiades C, Hideshima T, Anderson
KC. Bortezomib: proteasome inhibition as an effective
anticancer therapy. Annu Rev Med 2006;57:33–47.
2. Adams J. Proteasome inhibition in cancer: development of PS-341. Semin Oncol 2001;28:613–9.
3. Kane RC, Bross PF, Farrell AT, Pazdur R. Velcade: U.S.
FDA approval for the treatment of multiple myeloma
progressing on prior therapy. Oncologist 2003;8:508–13.
4. Jackson G, Einsele H, Moreau P, Miguel JS. Bortezomib,
a novel proteasome inhibitor, in the treatment of
hematologic malignancies. Cancer Treat Rev 2005;31:
591–602.
5. Rajkumar SV, Richardson PG, Hideshima T, Anderson
KC. Proteasome inhibition as a novel therapeutic target
in human cancer. J Clin Oncol 2005;23:630–9.
6. Mitsiades N, Mitsiades CS, Poulaki V, et al. Biologic
sequelae of nuclear factor-kappaB blockade in multiple
myeloma: therapeutic applications. Blood 2002;99:
4079–86.
7. Hideshima T, Chauhan D, Richardson P, et al. NFkappa B as a therapeutic target in multiple myeloma.
J Biol Chem 2002;277:16639–47.
8. Hayden MS, Ghosh S. Signaling to NF-kappaB. Genes
Dev 2004;18:2195–224.
9. Travers KJ, Patil CK, Wodicka L, Lockhart DJ,
Weissman JS, Walter P. Functional and genomic
analyses reveal an essential coordination between the
unfolded protein response and ER-associated degradation. Cell 2000;101:249–58.
10. Werner ED, Brodsky JL, McCracken AA. Proteasomedependent endoplasmic reticulum-associated protein
degradation: an unconventional route to a familiar fate.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1996;93:13797–801.
11. Kaufman RJ. Stress signaling from the lumen of the
endoplasmic reticulum: coordination of gene transcriptional and translational controls. Genes Dev 1999;13:
1211–33.
12. Patil C, Walter P. Intracellular signaling from the
endoplasmic reticulum to the nucleus: the unfolded
protein response in yeast and mammals. Curr Opin Cell
Biol 2001;13:349–55.
13. Mori K. Tripartite management of unfolded proteins
in the endoplasmic reticulum. Cell 2000;101:451–4.
14. Gass JN, Gifford NM, Brewer JW. Activation of an
unfolded protein response during differentiation of
antibody-secreting B cells. J Biol Chem 2002;277:
49047–54.
15. Iwakoshi NN, Lee AH, Vallabhajosyula P, Otipoby KL,
Rajewsky K, Glimcher LH. Plasma cell differentiation
and the unfolded protein response intersect at the
transcription factor XBP-1. Nat Immunol 2003;4:321–9.
16. van Anken E, Romijn EP, Maggioni C, et al. Sequential
waves of functionally related proteins are expressed
when B cells prepare for antibody secretion. Immunity
2003;18:243–53.
17. Kim R, Emi M, Tanabe K, Murakami S. Role of the
unfolded protein response in cell death. Apoptosis 2006;
11:5–13.
18. Wurflein D, Dechant M, Stockmeyer B, et al.
Evaluating antibodies for their capacity to induce cellmediated lysis of malignant B cells. Cancer Res 1998;58:
3051–8.
19. Drach J, Angerler J, Schuster J, et al. Interphase
cytogenic studies in multiple myeloma (MM) and
monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance
(MGUS). Blood 1994;84:173a.
20. Kearney JF, Radbruch A, Liesegang B, Rajewsky K. A
new mouse myeloma cell line that has lost immunoglobulin expression but permits the construction of

antibody-secreting hybrid cell lines. J Immunol 1979;123:
1548–50.
21. Jack HM, Beck-Engeser G, Sloan B, Wong ML, Wabl
M. A different sort of Mott cell. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1992;89:11688–91.
22. Franz S, Herrmann K, Führnrohr B, et al. After
shrinkage apoptotic cells expose internal membranederived epitopes on their plasma membranes. Cell
Death Differ. Epub 2006 Dec 15.
23. Schuh W, Meister S, Roth E, Jack HM. Cutting edge:
signaling and cell surface expression of a mu H chain
in the absence of lambda 5: a paradigm revisited.
J Immunol 2003;171:3343–7.
24. Frey B, Franz S, Sheriff A, et al. Hydrostatic pressure
induced death of mammalian cells engages pathways
related to apoptosis or necrosis. Cell Mol Biol (Noisy-legrand) 2004;50:459–67.
25. Voll RE, Jimi E, Phillips RJ, et al. NF-kappa B
activation by the pre-T cell receptor serves as a selective
survival signal in T lymphocyte development. Immunity
2000;13:677–89.
26. Schubert U, Anton LC, Gibbs J, Norbury CC, Yewdell
JW, Bennink JR. Rapid degradation of a large fraction of
newly synthesized proteins by proteasomes. Nature
2000;404:770–4.
27. Qian SB, Bennink JR, Yewdell JW. Quantitating
defective ribosome products. Methods Mol Biol 2005;
301:271–81.
28. Yoshida H, Matsui T, Yamamoto A, Okada T, Mori K.
XBP1 mRNA is induced by ATF6 and spliced by IRE1 in
response to ER stress to produce a highly active
transcription factor. Cell 2001;107:881–91.
29. Lee AH, Iwakoshi NN, Anderson KC, Glimcher LH.
Proteasome inhibitors disrupt the unfolded protein
response in myeloma cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
2003;100:9946–51.
30. Zinszner H, Kuroda M, Wang X, et al. CHOP is
implicated in programmed cell death in response to
impaired function of the endoplasmic reticulum. Genes
Dev 1998;12:982–95.
31. Rao RV, Hermel E, Castro-Obregon S, et al. Coupling
endoplasmic reticulum stress to the cell death program.
Mechanism of caspase activation. J Biol Chem 2001;276:
33869–74.
32. McCullough KD, Martindale JL, Klotz LO, Aw TY,
Holbrook NJ. Gadd153 sensitizes cells to endoplasmic
reticulum stress by down-regulating Bcl2 and perturbing
the cellular redox state. Mol Cell Biol 2001;21:1249–59.
33. Rao RV, Ellerby HM, Bredesen DE. Coupling endoplasmic reticulum stress to the cell death program. Cell
Death Differ 2004;11:372–80.
34. Hideshima T, Richardson P, Chauhan D, et al. The
proteasome inhibitor PS-341 inhibits growth, induces
apoptosis, and overcomes drug resistance in human
multiple myeloma cells. Cancer Res 2001;61:3071–6.
35. Sun SC, Ganchi PA, Ballard DW, Greene WC. NFkappa B controls expression of inhibitor I kappa B
alpha: evidence for an inducible autoregulatory pathway. Science 1993;259:1912–5.
36. Herr I, Debatin KM. Cellular stress response and
apoptosis in cancer therapy. Blood 2001;98:2603–14.
37. Yewdell JW, Anton LC, Bennink JR. Defective
ribosomal products (DRiPs): a major source of antigenic
peptides for MHC class I molecules? J Immunol 1996;
157:1823–6.
38. Adams J. The proteasome: a suitable antineoplastic
target. Nat Rev Cancer 2004;4:349–60.
39. Hideshima T, Richardson PG, Anderson KC. Targeting proteasome inhibition in hematologic malignancies.
Rev Clin Exp Hematol 2003;7:191–204.
40. Nawrocki ST, Carew JS, Pino MS, et al. Bortezomib

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (4). February 15, 2007

1792

References

sensitizes pancreatic cancer cells to endoplasmic
reticulum stress-mediated apoptosis. Cancer Res 2005;
65:11658–66.
41. Obeng EA, Carlson LM, Gutman DM, Harrington WJ,
Jr., Lee KP, Boise LH. Proteasome inhibitors induce a
terminal unfolded protein response in multiple myeloma cells. Blood 2006;107:4907–16.
42. Wiertz EJ, Tortorella D, Bogyo M, et al. Sec61mediated transfer of a membrane protein from the
endoplasmic reticulum to the proteasome for destruction. Nature 1996;384:432–8.
43. Mancini R, Fagioli C, Fra AM, Maggioni C, Sitia R.
Degradation of unassembled soluble Ig subunits by
cytosolic proteasomes: evidence that retrotranslocation
and degradation are coupled events. FASEB J 2000;14:
769–78.
44. O’Hare T, Wiens GD, Whitcomb EA, Enns CA,
Rittenberg MB. Cutting edge: proteasome involvement
in the degradation of unassembled Ig light chains.
J Immunol 1999;163:11–4.
45. Princiotta MF, Finzi D, Qian SB, et al. Quantitating
protein synthesis, degradation, and endogenous antigen
processing. Immunity 2003;18:343–54.
46. Shaffer AL, Shapiro-Shelef M, Iwakoshi NN, et al.
XBP1, downstream of Blimp-1, expands the secretory
apparatus and other organelles, and increases protein
synthesis in plasma cell differentiation. Immunity 2004;
21:81–93.
47. Ling YH, Liebes L, Zou Y, Perez-Soler R. Reactive
oxygen species generation and mitochondrial dysfunction in the apoptotic response to Bortezomib, a novel
proteasome inhibitor, in human H460 non-small cell
lung cancer cells. J Biol Chem 2003;278:33714–23.
48. Haynes CM, Titus EA, Cooper AA. Degradation of
misfolded proteins prevents ER-derived oxidative stress
and cell death. Mol Cell 2004;15:767–76.
49. Ma Y, Hendershot LM. The stressful road to antibody
secretion. Nat Immunol 2003;4:310–1.
50. Nawrocki ST, Carew JS, Dunner K, Jr., et al.
Bortezomib inhibits PKR-like endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) kinase and induces apoptosis via ER stress in
human pancreatic cancer cells. Cancer Res 2005;65:
11510–9.
51. Dimmeler S, Breitschopf K, Haendeler J, Zeiher AM.
Dephosphorylation targets Bcl-2 for ubiquitin-dependent degradation: a link between the apoptosome and
the proteasome pathway. J Exp Med 1999;189:1815–22.
52. Fernandez Y, Verhaegen M, Miller TP, et al.
Differential regulation of noxa in normal melanocytes
and melanoma cells by proteasome inhibition: therapeutic implications. Cancer Res 2005;65:6294–304.
53. Mortenson MM, Schlieman MG, Virudachalam S,
et al. Reduction in BCL-2 levels by 26S proteasome
inhibition with bortezomib is associated with induction
of apoptosis in small cell lung cancer. Lung Cancer 2005;
49:163–70.
54. Li B, Dou QP. Bax degradation by the ubiquitin/
proteasome-dependent pathway: involvement in tumor
survival and progression. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2000;
97:3850–5.
55. Pahl HL, Baeuerle PA. The ER-overload response:
activation of NF-kappa B. Trends Biochem Sci 1997;22:
63–7.
56. Deng J, Lu PD, Zhang Y, et al. Translational
repression mediates activation of nuclear factor kappa
B by phosphorylated translation initiation factor 2. Mol
Cell Biol 2004;24:10161–8.
57. Urano F, Wang X, Bertolotti A, et al. Coupling of
stress in the ER to activation of JNK protein kinases by
transmembrane protein kinase IRE1. Science 2000;287:
664–6.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Extensive Immunoglobulin Production Sensitizes Myeloma
Cells for Proteasome Inhibition
Silke Meister, Ulrich Schubert, Kirsten Neubert, et al.
Cancer Res 2007;67:1783-1792.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/4/1783

This article cites 56 articles, 31 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/4/1783.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 50 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/4/1783.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

