Research Article

Activation of Insulin-like Growth Factor Signaling Induces Apoptotic
Cell Death Under Prolonged Hypoxia by Enhancing
Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress Response
1

3

1

2

Hiroko Endo, Kohei Murata, Mutsuko Mukai, Osamu Ishikawa, and Masahiro Inoue

1

Departments of 1Biochemistry and 2Surgery, Osaka Medical Center for Cancer and Cardiovascular Diseases and
3
Department of Surgery, Suita Municipal Hospital, Osaka, Japan

Abstract
Malignant cells in solid tumors survive under prolonged
hypoxia and can be a source of resistance to current cancer
therapies. Mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), one of the
downstream molecules of the insulin-like growth factor (IGF)
pathway, is a key regulator of translation, integrating multiple
environmental and nutritional cues. The activity of mTOR is
known to be suppressed under hypoxic conditions in cancer
cells, whereas the contribution of this suppression to cell
survival has not yet been clarified. We show that stimulating
IGF signaling provoked caspase-dependent apoptosis under
low oxygen tension in two cancer cell lines, COLO 320 and
AsPC-1. In concurrence with increased levels of BAD phosphorylation, cell death was not accompanied by cytochrome c
release from mitochondria. The cells were rescued from
apoptosis when phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) or mTOR
activity was inhibited, suggesting that these signals are critical
in the observed cell death. IGFs and insulin enhanced the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress response as monitored by
induction of the CCAAT/enhancer binding protein homologous protein (CHOP) proteins and the X box protein-1 splicing
under hypoxic conditions, and this response was suppressed
by inhibiting PI3K and mTOR activity. IGF-induced cell death
under hypoxic conditions was prevented by treatment with
cycloheximide, suggesting that de novo protein synthesis is
required. Indeed, suppression of CHOP protein levels with
small hairpin RNA reduced cell death. Taken together, the data
suggest that stimulating IGF signaling under hypoxic conditions provokes apoptosis by enhancing the ER stress
response. [Cancer Res 2007;67(17):8095–103]

Introduction
Regions with low oxygen tension are commonly observed in
experimental as well as solid tumors in humans. The tumor cells in
hypoxic regions are resistant to current cancer therapies (1).
Besides resistance to therapy, there is substantial evidence that
hypoxia is a selective force toward a more aggressive tumor
phenotype. Thus, the poorer the tumor oxygenation, the poorer
prognosis for the patient (2). Much progress has been made in
understanding the molecular mechanisms of the hypoxic response

Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research Online
(http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Requests for reprints: Masahiro Inoue, Department of Biochemistry, Osaka
Medical Center for Cancer and Cardiovascular Diseases, 1-3-3 Nakamichi, Higashinariku, Osaka 537-8511, Japan. Phone: 81-6-6972-1181; Fax: 81-6-6972-7749; E-mail: inouema2@mc.pref.osaka.jp.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-06-3389

www.aacrjournals.org

in tumor cells (3). However, these studies have focused on
short periods of hypoxia (hours) so that the molecular mechanism of cancer cells to respond to the prolonged hypoxia (days)
that commonly exists in solid tumors remains to be further
elucidated.
The insulin-like growth factor (IGF) family, which consists of
two ligands, IGF-I and IGF-II, interact with the receptor IGF-I
receptor (IGF-IR), a transmembrane tyrosine kinase that is
structurally and functionally related to the insulin receptor (4).
The role of IGF-IR in malignant transformation is well documented
(4, 5). IGF-IR signaling can induce many effects including
mitogenesis, transformation, and cell survival. However, the role
of IGF signaling under hypoxic conditions is not yet clarified.
Mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) is one of the downstream
molecules in the IGF pathway and a key regulator of translation,
integrating environmental and nutritional cues. Although many
studies report that mTOR activity is up-regulated in various types
of cancers (6), it is also true that mTOR activity is suppressed
under hypoxic conditions in cancer cells (7–9). Because hypoxia is
an apoptosis-inducing stress (10) and the IGF/mTOR signal is
considered to be an important factor for the survival of cancer
cells, suppression of mTOR signaling under hypoxic conditions
seems to be paradoxical.
Recently, hypoxia was shown to generate an endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress (11, 12). Proteins must be folded into proper
conformation to carry out their cellular functions. In eukaryotic
cells, the ER serves as a processing station for protein folding and
the posttranslational modification of secreted and transmembrane proteins (13, 14). Unfolded or misfolded proteins, which
occur under various physiologic and pathologic conditions, are
harmful to cells. To overcome this stress, cells use the ER stress
response signaling pathway, which has three functional components: (a) transcriptional up-regulation of a set of genes to process
the misfolded proteins, called the unfolded protein response (UPR);
(b) repression of translation to decrease the load of client proteins; and (c) programmed cell death, which occurs when ER functions are severely impaired (15). Although the precise mechanism
of how protein misfolding is provoked under low oxygen tension
remains to be elucidated, it is now clear that a stress response is
critical for cell survival during hypoxia (11, 12).
Given that hypoxia is an ER stress, promoting protein synthesis via IGF signaling under hypoxic conditions could induce
excessive protein levels that might lead to cell death rather than
protect cells from apoptosis, as is widely observed under normoxic conditions. Here, we showed that IGF signaling and the
consequent activation of mTOR signaling under prolonged hypoxic
conditions induce apoptotic cell death through enhancement
of the ER stress response in human colon and pancreatic cancer
cell lines.

8095

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (17). September 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Materials and Methods
Cells and cell culture. The colon cancer cell line COLO 320 and the
pancreatic cancer cell line AsPC-1 were obtained from the American Type
Culture Collection. The cells were cultured in RPMI 1640 with or without
10% fetal bovine serum. Hypoxia was achieved by incubating cells with 1%
O2 and 5% CO2 in a Multigas Incubator (ASTEC, Fukuoka, Japan). Anoxia
(0% O2) was achieved by the AnaeroPack system (Mitsubishi Gas Chemical,
Tokyo, Japan). Cells were seeded at a density of 3  105 or 1  105 per well
of 12-well tissue culture plates for counting viable cells, and at 1.5  106 or
1  106 per plate in 60-mm tissue culture plates for Western blotting and
reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) for the COLO 320 or AsPC-1 cells,
respectively. The COLO 320 cells were preincubated in control media for
6 h under normoxic conditions, then treated with or without reagents and
immediately transferred to the hypoxic chamber. The AsPC-1 cells were
preincubated in culture media for 17 h under normoxic conditions, then the
medium was changed to serum-free medium and the cells were treated with
or without reagents and immediately transferred to the Multigas Incubator
or the AnaeroPack system. The concentration of IGF-I, IGF-II, and insulin
was 100 ng/mL, 100 ng/mL, and 100 nmol/L, respectively, when not
otherwise indicated. After the indicated periods, cells were subjected to
cell counting. Viable cell number was assessed by the trypan blue dye
exclusion assay.
Reagents. Cycloheximide, tunicamycin, and insulin were purchased from
Sigma Chemical Co.; zVAD-fmk was from Peptide Institute; IGF-I and IGF-II
were from R&D Systems; and LY 294002, rapamycin, and etoposide (VP-16)
were from Wako Pure Chemical Industries.
Immunoblot analysis. Western blotting analysis was done as previously
described (16). The primary antibodies against AKT, eukaryotic initiation
factor 4E–binding protein 1 (4EBP1), S6 kinase (S6K), S6, and BAD were
purchased from Cell Signaling Technology. The antibodies raised against
the phosphorylated proteins AKT (Ser473), 4EBP1 (Thr37/46), S6K (Thr389), S6
(Ser235/236), and BAD (Ser112) were also from Cell Signaling Technology.
Other antibodies used included growth arrest– and DNA damage–inducible
gene 153 (GADD153)/CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP) homologous protein (CHOP), GRP78/BiP, and cyclic AMP–responsive element
binding protein 2/activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) from Santa Cruz
Biotechnology; anti–h-actin from Sigma; anti–cytochrome c from Becton
Dickinson; and anti-porin from Invitrogen. The secondary anti-rabbit
immunoglobulin G (IgG) and antimouse IgG antibodies, both horseradish
peroxidase conjugated, were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology.
Cytosol fractionation. Fractionation of the cytosol was done using the
Mitochondria/Cytosol Fractionation Kit (BioVision) according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, 7.5  107 COLO 320 cells were detached
by treatment with trypsin and collected by centrifugation. After washing
with PBS, the cell pellet was resuspended with Cytosol Extraction Buffer
Mix containing DTT and protease inhibitors and mixed by pipetting. After
centrifugation at 700  g, the supernatant was recovered and further
centrifuged at 10,000  g. The supernatant from the second spin was used
as the cytosolic fraction.
Semiquantitative RT-PCR. Total RNA was isolated from the cells using
RNeasy Mini (Qiagen). One microgram of total RNA was reverse transcribed
to obtain cDNA using Superscript III (Invitrogen) according to the
manufacturer’s protocol. The PCR reactions were done in the iCycler
(Bio-Rad). One microliter of reverse transcription reaction solution was
used in 20 AL of total PCR reaction buffer as a template. For CHOP and
h-actin mRNA amplification, the cycling program was an initial melting
step of 5 min at 95jC followed by 25 cycles at 94jC for 60 s, annealing at
58jC for 60 s, and elongation at 72jC of 30 s. The same program was used
for X box protein-1 (XBP1) amplification, except for annealing temperature
(56jC) and number of cycles (30 cycles). The primer sequences were
described in Supplementary Table S1. Amplified PCR products were
visualized on a 1% agarose gel (2% gel for XBP1) stained with ethidium
bromide.
RNA interference. Gene silencing was done using the pSuperRetro
plasmid purchased from Oligoengine as previously described (17). The
corresponding sequence of the CHOP oligonucleotide was 5¶-gtcctgtcttcagatgaaa-3¶. The small hairpin RNA (shRNA)/CHOP vector was introduced

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (17). September 1, 2007

into cells by retroviral vector transfection (18). After selection with
puromycin for 1 week, the cells were subjected to further experiments.
Statistical analysis. The experiments were repeated at least thrice with
representative results shown. Statistical analysis was done with GraphPad
Prism 4 (GraphPad Software). The statistical significance of the results was
tested with the unpaired t test. P < 0.05 was considered to be statistically
significant.

Results
IGF-I, IGF-II, or insulin induced cell death in COLO 320 cells
under hypoxic conditions. To explore the mechanism of cell
death under hypoxic conditions, we used the human colon cancer
cell line COLO 320. When these cells were cultured without serum
under hypoxic conditions, the COLO 320 cells showed minimal
death with a slight increase in cell number until day 4 (Fig. 1A).
No further increase in cell number was observed at day 1 after
treatment with IGF-I or insulin. The second day after IGF-I or
insulin treatment under hypoxic conditions, COLO 320 cells
showed massive cell death along with a prominent decrease in
viable cells. The cell death induced by IGF-I or insulin under
hypoxic conditions was not remarkable in 24 h of culture, whereas
after 24 h, cell death became prominent and increased with time.
Cell death was similarly induced by IGF-II, and the degree of cell
death with IGF-I, IGF-II, and insulin was dose dependent (Fig. 1B).
The IGFs and insulin bind the receptors IGF-IR and insulin
receptor, respectively, which share a high degree of identity in their
primary and tertiary structures. Both receptors activate highly
similar sets of downstream intracellular events including the Ras/
Raf/mitogen-activated protein kinase and phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase (PI3K) pathways. As the degree of cell death was observed
equally between the IGFs and insulin, the cell death would be
expected to occur through a pathway common to both the IGF-IR
and insulin receptor pathways.
The cell death induced by IGFs or insulin under hypoxic
conditions is caspase-dependent apoptosis. Morphologic analysis under microscopy showed that the type of death induced by
IGFs or insulin under hypoxic conditions was typical apoptosis
with nuclear condensation and fragmentation (data not shown).
Although COLO 320 cells exhibited low caspase-3 activity under
both normoxic and hypoxic conditions without serum, treatment
with IGF-I, IGF-II, or insulin under hypoxic conditions clearly
enhanced the cleavage of procaspase-3 to the active form, but not
under normoxic conditions (Fig. 2A). At the same time, the
cleavage of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP), which is a
substrate of caspase-3, was also remarkably enhanced by treatment
of the cells with the IGFs or insulin under hypoxic conditions.
Caspase-9, a molecule upstream of caspase-3 in the caspaseactivation cascade, was also cleaved into an active form under
hypoxic conditions in cells treated with the IGFs or insulin
(Supplementary Fig. S1). The contribution of caspases to the cell
death induced by IGFs and insulin under hypoxic conditions was
confirmed by the result that the death was circumvented by the
broad-specificity caspase inhibitor zVAD-fmk (Fig. 2B). Taken
together, the cell death induced by IGFs or insulin under hypoxic
conditions was caspase-dependent apoptosis.
IGF- or insulin-induced apoptosis under hypoxic conditions
was not accompanied by cytochrome c release from mitochondria. The finding that IGFs or insulin induced typical
apoptosis under hypoxic conditions was surprising because IGF
is a well-known antiapoptotic factor in various settings (5). To
explore the apoptotic pathway in IGF-treated COLO 320 cells under

8096

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

IGF Induces Cell Death under Prolonged Hypoxia

phorylation, mitochondria might be protected from apoptotic
stimuli. Hence, we examined cytochrome c release from mitochondria into the cytosol to determine whether the mitochondrial apoptotic machinery was involved in the IGF- or insulin-induced cell
death in COLO 320 cells under hypoxic conditions. Cytochrome c

Figure 1. IGF-I, IGF-II, or insulin induced cell death of COLO 320 cells under
hypoxic conditions. A, viable number of COLO 320 cells at the indicated time
points under hypoxic conditions without treatment (.), with 100 ng/mL IGF-I
(IGF1 ; o), or with 100 nmol/L insulin (Ins; 5). B, viable cell number at day 3
under hypoxic conditions. The indicated doses of IGF-I (light gray column ),
IGF-II (IGF2 ; dark gray column ), or insulin (black column ) were added to the
medium at day 0. The experiment was done in triplicate and repeated thrice.
Bars, SD. * P < 0.05.

hypoxic conditions, the phosphorylation of BAD, a proapoptotic
member of the Bcl-2 family, was examined. BAD is a BH3-only
protein that induces apoptosis by forming a dimer with and
inactivating the antiapoptotic proteins Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL (19). Once
phosphorylated by IGF treatment, BAD binds to a 14-3-3 protein
and is thus unavailable to interact with members of the Bcl-2
family (20). The BAD protein was clearly phosphorylated after
treatment of the cells with the IGFs or insulin under hypoxic
conditions (Fig. 2C). Because IGF treatment caused BAD phos-

www.aacrjournals.org

Figure 2. The cell death induced by IGF or insulin treatment under hypoxic
conditions in COLO 320 cells was apoptosis, not accompanied by cytochrome c
release from mitochondria. A, Western blot analysis of the cleavage of
procaspase-3 and PARP. Cells were cultured under the indicated conditions for
17 h. N, normoxia; H, hypoxia. Arrow, cleaved form of PARP. B, viable cell
number at day 3 of COLO 320 cells with or without IGF-I, insulin, or zVAD-fmk
(zVAD ), 10 Amol/L treatment as indicated. The experiment was done in triplicate
and repeated thrice. Bars, SD. *, P < 0.05, versus control (nontreated).
C, phosphorylation of the proapoptotic protein BAD after IGF or insulin
treatment was examined by Western blotting. The cells were cultured under
hypoxic conditions with the indicated treatments and subjected to Western
blotting. Membranes were probed with anti–phosphorylated BAD (p-BAD ) or
anti-BAD (BAD ) antibody. D, Western blot of the cytosolic fractions from cells
cultured under normoxic or hypoxic conditions with the indicated factors. The
concentration of VP-16 was 10 Amol/L. The membrane was probed with
anti–cytochrome c antibody. The membrane was also probed with anti-porin
antibody to exclude the possibility that the cytosolic fraction was contaminated
with the mitochondrial fraction. The equality of protein loading was confirmed by
staining the transferred proteins with Ponceau S (Sigma; data not shown).
Whole-cell lysate was used as a positive control for both antibodies.

8097

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (17). September 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

was not detected in the cytosolic fraction after IGF-I treatment
(Fig. 2D), which was confirmed by immunocytochemistry showing
that cytochrome c was confined to mitochondria in IGF-I–treated
cells (Supplementary Fig. S3). Meanwhile, VP-16 treatment clearly
induced cytochrome c release from mitochondria (Fig. 2D;
Supplementary Fig. S2). Preferential distribution of mitochondria
to the perinuclear region was confirmed by MitoTracker Red
staining (data not shown). Taken together, both IGFs and insulin
caused prominent apoptosis under hypoxic conditions in COLO
320 cells that was not accompanied with mitochondrial cytochrome c release.
PI3K and mTOR signals are involved in IGF- or insulininduced apoptosis under low levels of oxygen tension. To
explore the intracellular signaling that leads to the IGF- or insulininduced apoptosis under hypoxic conditions, the PI3K and mTOR
signaling pathways were examined in COLO 320 cells because these
molecules are known to be activated by IGF or insulin stimulation.
Under normoxic conditions, phosphorylation of AKT, a downstream molecule of PI3K, as well as that of S6K, S6, and 4EBP1,
downstream molecules of mTOR, was increased by IGF or insulin
treatment (Fig. 3A). Meanwhile, under hypoxic conditions,
phosphorylation of these proteins in IGF- or insulin-treated cells
was increased but to a lesser extent than was observed under
normoxic conditions (Fig. 3A). In contrast, treatment with IGFs or
insulin restored phosphorylation of AKT completely even under
hypoxic conditions. Thus, the IGFs or insulin was able to fully
activate the PI3K pathways and partially the mTOR pathways
under hypoxic conditions.
To generalize the findings, the human pancreas cancer cell line
AsPC-1 was used in similar experiments. AsPC-1 cells treated with
IGF-I also showed remarkable cell death under anoxic conditions
(Fig. 3D) but not under hypoxic conditions (data not shown). The
phosphorylation of AKT, as well as of S6K, S6, and 4EBP1, was
increased by IGF-I treatment under normoxic conditions (Fig. 3B).
Meanwhile, as was observed in COLO 320 cells, S6K, S6, and 4EBP1
were partially phosphorylated in IGF-I–treated cells under hypoxic
conditions (Fig. 3B). Further suppression of the phosphorylation of
4EBP1, S6K, and S6 was not observed under anoxic conditions.
Treatment with IGF-I restored phosphorylation of AKT under
hypoxic and anoxic conditions as well.
Next, to examine the effect of these signals on cell death, LY
294002 (a PI3K inhibitor) or rapamycin (an mTOR inhibitor) was
added into the culture medium with IGFs or insulin. When the
PI3K/mTOR pathways were blocked by these inhibitors, the IGF- or
insulin-induced apoptosis was suppressed in both cell lines (Fig. 3C
and D). These results indicate that activation of the PI3K/mTOR
pathways played critical roles in the cell death induced by IGF or
insulin treatment under hypoxic or anoxic conditions, although the
oxygen tension at which IGFs or insulin induced cell death was cell
type specific. Hypoxia (1% O2) was sufficient for IGF- or insulininduced death in COLO 320 cells, whereas anoxia was necessary for
AsPC-1 cells.
IGFs and insulin enhance the ER stress response under low
levels of oxygen tension. Protein synthesis is suppressed under
hypoxic conditions (9, 21, 22), at least partially due to ER stress
(11, 12), in which suppression of protein synthesis is one of the
essential components. Because activation of PI3K and mTOR
signaling promotes protein synthesis (23, 24), we speculated that
activation of PI3K and mTOR may enhance ER stress under
hypoxic conditions. To investigate the role of IGFs and insulin in ER
stress under hypoxic conditions, we assessed the UPR.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (17). September 1, 2007

Under normoxic conditions in COLO 320 cells, the mRNA
transcription of CHOP/GADD153 was undetectable in basal levels
and slightly induced by IGF or insulin treatment (Fig. 4A, top).
Transcripts of the UPR gene XBP1 are spliced into short,
transcriptionally active forms under ER stress, indicating the presence of IRE1 endoribonuclease activity, one of the principal arms
of the ER stress response (25). Under normoxic conditions, the
spliced short form of XBP1 was undetectable in basal levels and
slightly induced by IGF or insulin treatment. Under hypoxic
conditions alone, mRNA of CHOP and the spliced short form of
XBP1 were slightly induced when compared with those under
normoxic conditions. In contrast, when the cells were treated with
IGFs or insulin under hypoxic conditions, the levels of CHOP and
splicing of XBP1 were remarkably induced to levels observed in
the cells treated with tunicamycin, a known inducer of ER stress.
The induction of CHOP mRNA and XBP1 splicing was increased by
IGF-I and insulin in a dose-dependent manner (Supplementary
Fig. S3). Other UPR genes, BiP and ATF4, were examined to confirm
the induction of ER stress by IGF or insulin treatment under
hypoxic conditions (Fig. 4A, bottom). IGFs or insulin increased the
protein levels of BiP and ATF4 under hypoxic conditions but not
under normoxic conditions.
Next, we examined the downstream signal activated by IGFs or
insulin that enhanced ER stress. When the activation of PI3K or
mTOR was inhibited by LY 294002 or rapamycin, respectively,
IGF-I- or insulin-induced UPR was suppressed (Fig. 4B, top). These
results were confirmed by the protein levels of CHOP (Fig. 4B,
bottom). Thus, IGFs and insulin provoked the UPR under hypoxic
conditions in COLO 320 cells through the PI3K/mTOR pathway. In
AsPC-1 cells, anoxia itself induced UPR. Under anoxic conditions,
CHOP transcription was induced and XBP1 was extensively spliced
(Fig. 4C, top). IGF-I treatment further enhanced the mRNA
transcript levels of both CHOP and XBP1. Inhibition of PI3K or
mTOR suppressed the elevated levels of CHOP protein induced by
IGF-I treatment and attenuated the cleavage of PARP at the same
time (Fig. 4C, bottom). Thus, in AsPC-1 cells, anoxia itself induced
ER stress, and IGF-I enhanced the UPR through the PI3K/mTOR
pathway.
Cell death induced by IGFs or insulin under low levels of
oxygen tension is attenuated by suppression of de novo
protein synthesis. One of the well-characterized roles of mTOR
is the regulation of mRNA translation. Because IGFs and insulin
activated mTOR signaling under hypoxic conditions, it is possible
that IGFs or insulin reactivates protein synthesis under hypoxic
conditions. To explore the contribution of protein synthesis in
IGF-induced cell death, we treated COLO 320 cells with cycloheximide, which inhibits protein synthesis by inhibiting translational elongation. At the 125 ng/mL dose, cycloheximide had
no cytotoxic effect on the cells under normoxic conditions (data
not shown). Strikingly, IGF-I– and insulin-induced cell death
under hypoxia was negated by treatment of the cells with cycloheximide (Fig. 5A). The activation status of the caspases observed
in the IGF- or insulin-induced apoptosis under hypoxic conditions was examined (Fig. 5B, top). The cleavage of caspase-3
induced by IGF-I or insulin in untreated cells under hypoxic
conditions was inhibited by cycloheximide treatment. To determine whether cycloheximide treatment affected ER stress induced
by the IGFs or insulin, the mRNA transcripts of UPR genes were
measured. Treatment with cycloheximide strongly suppressed
CHOP mRNA levels and XBP1 splicing in both IGF-I– and
insulin-treated cells under hypoxic conditions (Fig. 5B, bottom).

8098

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

IGF Induces Cell Death under Prolonged Hypoxia

Figure 3. The PI3K and mTOR signals
are involved in IGF- or insulin-induced
apoptosis under low levels of oxygen
tension. A, Western blot probed with
antibodies against the downstream
molecules of PI3K and mTOR. COLO 320
cells were cultured under normoxic or
hypoxic conditions with the indicated
factors for 17 h and the lysate was
subjected to the experiments. a, b, and c,
hypophosphorylated, intermediately
phosphorylated, and hyperphosphorylated
bands of 4EBP1, respectively. Anti–
phosphorylated protein antibodies are
indicated with a ‘‘p’’ prefix. B, AsPC-1 cells
were cultured under normoxic, hypoxic, or
anoxic (A) conditions for 24 h with the
indicated treatments and the lysate was
subjected to Western blotting with the
indicated antibodies. C, viable cell number
at day 3 of COLO 320 cells cultured under
hypoxic conditions with the indicated
reagents. Rap, rapamycin (100 nmol/L;
gray column); LY, LY 294002 (10 Amol/L;
black column ). LY 294002 and rapamycin
were added 30 min before the addition of
either IGFs or insulin. D, percent death
at day 3 of AsPC-1 cells cultured under
anoxic conditions with the indicated
treatments as in (C). The experiment was
done in triplicate and repeated thrice.
Bars, SD. * P < 0.05.

In AsPC-1 cells, suppression of protein synthesis by cycloheximide
also inhibited the cell death induced by IGF-I under anoxic
conditions (Fig. 5C, left). The enhanced CHOP mRNA levels and
splicing of XBP1 transcripts were inhibited by cycloheximide
(Fig. 5C, right). Thus, suppression of de novo protein synthesis
attenuated the UPR and rescued cells from apoptosis induced by
the IGFs or insulin under hypoxic or anoxic conditions in two
different cell lines.
These results indicate two possible effects of cycloheximide in
suppressing IGF- or insulin-induced cell death under hypoxic
conditions. First, cycloheximide might repress global protein
synthesis stimulated by IGF or insulin to levels that induced cell
death because increasing the influx of nascent peptides enhances
the protein load on the ER processing and folding machineries.
Second, cycloheximide might suppress cell death by repressing the
de novo synthesis of specific protein(s). To examine the first
possibility, we assessed global protein synthesis using a [35S]methionine and cysteine incorporation assay in COLO 320 cells
(Supplementary Fig. S4). Global protein synthesis was suppressed
after 18.5 h of hypoxia to approximately half of that found under
normoxic conditions. In cells cultured with IGF-I, protein synthesis
was slightly but significantly increased compared with the
nontreated cells. Meanwhile, cycloheximide prominently suppressed protein synthesis in both IGF-I–treated and nontreated

www.aacrjournals.org

cells. Taken together, IGF-I marginally enhanced the global protein
synthesis under hypoxic conditions.
IGF- or insulin-induced apoptosis under low levels of
oxygen tension is attenuated by suppression of CHOP protein
levels. We next evaluated whether the de novo synthesis of a
specific protein or proteins is critical for the IGF- or insulininduced cell death under hypoxic conditions. We focused on
CHOP/GADD153 because it is a candidate in the cell death
pathway due to excessive ER stress, although the mechanism is still
poorly understood (26). A retroviral vector containing small hairpin
CHOP RNA (shRNA/CHOP) was introduced into the cells. The level
of CHOP protein in the cells transfected with shRNA/CHOP was
remarkably reduced compared with the cells transfected with
empty vector, and the protein levels remained low after IGF-I
stimulation (Fig. 6A and B, bottom). When the levels of CHOP were
reduced both in COLO 320 and AsPC-1 cells, the IGF-I–induced
death was dramatically suppressed (Fig. 6A and B, top), and
caspase-3 activation and PARP cleavage were suppressed in parallel
(Fig. 6A and B, bottom). Thus, CHOP is critical for the cell death in
two cell lines treated with IGF-I under hypoxic or anoxic
conditions.
Based on the collective data, we propose a mechanism of IGFinduced cell death under low levels of oxygen tension (Fig. 6C). The
IGFs or insulin triggers multiple intracellular pathway including

8099

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (17). September 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

PI3K, AKT, and mTOR. Activated AKT phosphorylates BAD, which
in turn might protect mitochondria and prevent these organelles
from releasing cytochrome c. Thus, the mitochondrial death pathway is blocked by IGF, as is widely reported in cells under normoxic conditions. On the other hand, activated mTOR enhanced

the ER stress response under hypoxic conditions. Although CHOP
plays a critical role in the activation of caspase-3 and subsequent
apoptosis, it is unclear how the caspase is activated.

Discussion
We show that the IGFs or insulin could induce apoptosis under
hypoxic conditions. The IGFs or insulin enhanced the UPR. CHOP, a
UPR gene, is necessary for the cell death induced by IGF or insulin
under hypoxic conditions. Adaptation to ER stress is critical for the
survival of tumor cells during hypoxia (11, 12), whereas cell death is
also conspicuous in cells that have encountered insurmountable
ER stress (13, 15). We are currently investigating whether these two
cell lines are representative for tumor cell lines or tumor cells in
general.
The mechanism of IGF or insulin enhanced UPR under hypoxic
conditions is obscure. The first possibility is the up-regulation of
protein synthesis by IGFs or insulin. It is widely accepted that IGFs
or insulin stimulates an anabolic reaction including the promotion
of protein synthesis during normoxia. In COLO 320 cells, IGF-I
slightly but significantly increased protein synthesis. Inhibition of
mRNA translation is a well-characterized and universal cellular
response to oxygen deprivation (21). Repression of translation is
mediated by three distinct mechanisms during hypoxia: (a)
phosphorylation and inhibition of eukaryotic initiation factor 2a
by the PERK (eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2a kinase3),
(b) inhibition of the mTOR pathway (27), and (c) inhibition of the
eukaryotic elongation factor 2 by AMP-activated protein kinase (9).
To fully restore protein synthesis under hypoxic conditions, the
activation of multiple pathways would be required, although the
slight increase in global protein synthesis under hypoxic conditions
might be enough to enhance ER stress.
The second possibility is that IGF or insulin causes the upregulated translation of UPR gene–specific mRNA in spite of global
suppression of protein synthesis. The UPR genes have the ability to
compete for translation under ER stress conditions that limit
initiation of other cellular mRNAs (13). IGFs or insulin might
promote translation of individual UPR genes or increase the
ligands that activate ER-resident protein kinases to initiate UPR. In
these situations, IGFs or insulin is able to enhance the UPR without
increasing global protein synthesis. Induction of CHOP by amino
acid deprivation, which is also accompanied by suppression of
global protein synthesis, requires IGF-I/PI3K/mTOR signaling (28).
The CHOP protein, also known as GADD153, is a member of the
C/EBP family (29). It is ubiquitously expressed at very low levels
and robustly induced by a wide variety of cell stressors including
genotoxic stress, nutrient depletion, and ER stress. Although it is

Figure 4. Addition of IGFs or insulin enhanced ER stress under low levels
of oxygen tension. A, top, semiquantitative RT-PCR of CHOP and XBP1
transcripts. COLO 320 cells were cultured under normoxic or hypoxic conditions
for 17 h with the indicated factors. The cells cultured under normoxic
conditions with 2 Ag/mL tunicamycin (Tun ) were used as a positive control for
UPR. A, bottom, Western blot of BiP and ATF4 from the cells treated as in
(A, top ). B, top, semiquantitative RT-PCR of CHOP and XBP1 transcripts.
COLO 320 cells were cultured under hypoxic conditions for 17 h and then treated
with IGF-I, insulin, rapamycin (100 nmol/L), and/or LY 294002 (10 Amol/L) as
indicated. B, bottom, Western blot of CHOP from the cells treated as in (B, top ).
C, top, semiquantitative RT-PCR of CHOP and XBP1 transcripts. AsPC-1
cells were cultured under normoxia, hypoxia, or anoxia for 24 h with or without
IGF-I. C, bottom, Western blot of CHOP and PARP. AsPC-1 cells were cultured
under anoxic conditions for 48 h with IGF-I, rapamycin (100 nmol/L), and/or
LY 294002 (10 Amol/L). Arrow, cleaved form of PARP.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (17). September 1, 2007

8100

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

IGF Induces Cell Death under Prolonged Hypoxia

now clear that CHOP plays an important role in ER stress-induced
apoptosis (26), the mechanisms whereby CHOP induces apoptosis
are still unclear. In some cellular contexts, the CHOP-mediated
death signal is transmitted to the mitochondria through repression
of Bcl-2 proteins (30, 31). Contrarily, we showed that IGF-induced
apoptosis under hypoxic conditions was CHOP dependent but
independent of mitochondrial cytochrome c release in COLO 320
cells.
Recently, Marciniak et al. (32) reported that CHOP is not only
induced by ER stress but also that CHOP per se enhances ER stress
by increasing the ER client protein load and changing the redox
conditions within this organelle. In this case, CHOP does not
induce cell death directly but enhances ER stress and the cell death
that occurs as a consequence. Various downstream effectors of cell
death induced by ER stress other than CHOP have been identified,
including activation of the mitochondrial death pathway (33),
activation of calpain by Ca2+ release from the ER (34), and
activation of the ER-resident caspase, caspase-12 in mice (35) and
caspase-4 in humans (36). Mitochondria were unlikely to be
involved in our experimental system. Calpain was unlikely to
be involved in caspase activation because calpain inhibitor I
(N-acetyl-leucinyl-leucinyl-norleucinal) did not reduce the cell
death (data not shown). Activation of caspase-4, the human
counterpart of mouse caspase-12, is also a possible explanation of
the mitochondria-independent activation of caspase-9. Morishima
et al. reported that, on activation, caspase-12 translocates from the
ER to the cytosol where it directly cleaves procaspase-9
independent of mitochondria (37). When caspase-4 levels were
repressed by shRNA, we observed a partial rescue from cell death
in COLO 320 cells but not in AsPC-1 cells (data not shown). These
data suggest that the downstream effectors of IGF- or insulininduced cell death, which activate executional caspases, may be cell
type specific.
It is widely accepted that IGF/PI3K/mTOR signaling plays an
important role in mitogenesis, transformation, and protection from
apoptosis (5) and may accordingly contribute to carcinogenesis.
Indeed, germ-line mutations of the LKB1 and TSC1/2 genes, which
suppress the mTOR signal, predispose individuals to a variety of
human tumors. Phosphatase and tensin homologue, which
suppresses PI3K activity, is frequently mutated in various tumors.
Overexpression of IGF-II and IGF-IR is often observed in cancer
specimens, and their contribution to tumorigenesis was clearly
shown in experimental animals (38, 39). Nonetheless, induction of
cell death by IGF/PI3K/mTOR signaling has also been documented.
IGF-I induces apoptosis in osteosarcoma cells (40) and glioma cells
(19). Overexpression of fragments of the IGF-IR intracellular
domain in cancer cells was shown to induce cell death and inhibit
tumorigenesis in nude mice (41–43). Activation of the mTOR signal
under hypoxic conditions accelerated cell death in Lewis lung

carcinoma cells (8). Furthermore, although early-stage tumors
express abundant levels of the IGF-IR, the expression is rather
reduced in advanced prostate cancer and breast cancer (4).
These reports and our current findings suggest that IGF signaling
would not invariably work in favor of cancer cell survival

Figure 5. IGF-I– or insulin-induced cell death under low levels of oxygen
tension was attenuated by suppression of protein synthesis. A, viable number at
day 3 of COLO 320 cells cultured under hypoxic conditions with the indicated
factors. CHX, cycloheximide (125 ng/mL). The experiment was done in triplicate
and repeated thrice. Bars, SD. *, P < 0.05. B, top, Western blot analysis of
caspase-3. Cells were cultured under hypoxic conditions for 17 h with the
indicated factors. Procaspase-3 and activated caspase-3 were detected with
the corresponding antibody. B, bottom, semiquantitative RT-PCR of CHOP and
XBP1 transcripts. COLO 320 cells were cultured under hypoxic conditions for
17 h with the indicated factors. C, left, percent death at day 3 of AsPC-1 cells
cultured under anoxic conditions with IGF-I and/or cycloheximide, 12.5 Ag/mL.
C, right, semiquantitative RT-PCR of CHOP and XBP1 transcripts. AsPC-1 cells
were cultured for 24 h with the indicated factors as in (C, left).

www.aacrjournals.org

8101

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (17). September 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 6. IGF-I–induced cell death
under low levels of oxygen tension was
attenuated by repression of CHOP/
GADD153 expression. A, top, viable
number at day 3 of COLO 320 cells
transfected with shRNA/CHOP (CHOPi ) or
empty vector (vector ). Cells were cultured
under hypoxic conditions with or without
IGF-I. The experiment was done in
triplicate and repeated thrice. Bars, SD.
*, P < 0.05. A, bottom, Western blot
analysis of indicated proteins from COLO
320 cells cultured under hypoxic conditions
for 17 h with the indicated treatments.
Arrow, cleaved form of PARP. B, top,
percent death at day 3 of AsPC-1 cells
transfected with shRNA/CHOP or empty
vector. Cells were cultured under anoxic
conditions with or without IGF-I. B, bottom,
Western blot analysis of indicated proteins
from AsPC-1 cells cultured under anoxic
conditions for 48 h with the indicated
treatments. Arrow, cleaved form of PARP.
C, a model of IGF-induced cell death under
low levels of oxygen tension. MAPK,
mitogen-activated protein kinase.

throughout cancer development. Suppression of IGF signaling
could be also a strategy for the cancer cells to counteract the
potentially harmful effects of signaling through this pathway. A
number of gene expression studies have reported that hypoxia
induces some of the IGF binding proteins (IGFBP) such as IGFBP-1
and IGFBP-3, which are transcriptionally regulated by hypoxiainducible factor (44). ER stress also induces IGFBP-1 through ATF4
(28). Although the physiologic role of IGFBPs under hypoxic
conditions is not yet clarified, local up-regulation of IGFBPs in
hypoxia might support cell survival by binding IGFs and inhibiting
IGF signaling.
The experiments in this study were mostly done under serumfree conditions to focus on the effects of IGF signaling. Under
the existence of serum, COLO 320 cells showed massive necrosis
with no signs of apoptosis under hypoxia, probably because of

4

H. Endo and M. Inoue, unpublished observation.

References
1. Brown JM. Exploiting the hypoxic cancer cell: mechanisms and therapeutic strategies. Mol Med Today 2000;6:
157–62.
2. Hockel M, Vaupel P. Tumor hypoxia: definitions and
current clinical, biologic, and molecular aspects. J Natl
Cancer Inst 2001;93:266–76.
3. Semenza GL. Targeting HIF-1 for cancer therapy. Nat
Rev Cancer 2003;3:721–32.
4. LeRoith D, Roberts CT, Jr. The insulin-like growth
factor system and cancer. Cancer Lett 2003;195:127–37.
5. Baserga R, Peruzzi F, Reiss K. The IGF-1 receptor in
cancer biology. Int J Cancer 2003;107:873–7.
6. Guertin DA, Sabatini DM. An expanding role for
mTOR in cancer. Trends Mol Med 2005;11:353–61.
7. Arsham AM, Howell JJ, Simon MC. A novel hypoxia-

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (17). September 1, 2007

overgrowth, and the death was also reduced by inhibitors of PI3K
and mTOR.4 Thus, suppressing PI3K/mTOR signaling might
contribute in multiple ways to survival of cancer cells in tumor
hypoxic regions. Because many cancer cells acquire the ability to
secrete IGFs in autocrine fashion (4) and IGF-II is reportedly
induced by hypoxia (45), the experimental settings in this study
might recapitulate the hypoxic tumor microenvironment, which is
isolated from the blood perfusion. Further studies are required to
clarify the growth factor milieu of hypoxic regions in vivo.

Acknowledgments
Received 9/18/2006; revised 5/18/2007; accepted 6/22/2007.
Grant support: Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research from the Japanese Society for
the Promotion of Science and a grant from the Osaka Community Fund.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank Shigeomi Shimizu for insight and discussion, and Noriko Kanto and
Yoriko Mawatari for their expert assistance.

inducible factor-independent hypoxic response regulating mammalian target of rapamycin and its targets.
J Biol Chem 2003;278:29655–60.
8. Hamanaka Y, Mukai M, Shimamura M, et al.
Suppression of PI3K/mTOR pathway rescues LLC cells
from cell death induced by hypoxia. Biochem Biophys
Res Commun 2005;330:318–26.
9. Liu L, Cash TP, Jones RG, Keith B, Thompson CB,
Simon MC. Hypoxia-induced energy stress regulates
mRNA translation and cell growth. Mol Cell 2006;21:
521–31.
10. Shimizu S, Eguchi Y, Kosaka H, Kamiike W, Matsuda
H, Tsujimoto Y. Prevention of hypoxia-induced cell
death by Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL. Nature 1995;374:811–3.
11. Feldman DE, Chauhan V, Koong AC. The unfolded
protein response: a novel component of the hypoxic stress
response in tumors. Mol Cancer Res 2005;3:597–605.

8102

12. Koumenis C. ER stress, hypoxia tolerance and tumor
progression. Curr Mol Med 2006;6:55–69.
13. Kaufman RJ. Stress signaling from the lumen of the
endoplasmic reticulum: coordination of gene transcriptional and translational controls. Genes Dev 1999;13:
1211–33.
14. Ron D. Translational control in the endoplasmic
reticulum stress response. J Clin Invest 2002;110:1383–8.
15. Xu C, Bailly-Maitre B, Reed JC. Endoplasmic reticulum stress: cell life and death decisions. J Clin Invest
2005;115:2656–64.
16. Imamura F, Shinkai K, Mukai M, et al. rho-Mediated
protein tyrosine phosphorylation in lysophosphatidicacid-induced tumor-cell invasion. Int J Cancer 1996;65:
627–32.
17. Mukai M, Kusama T, Hamanaka Y, et al. Cross talk
between apoptosis and invasion signaling in cancer cells

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

IGF Induces Cell Death under Prolonged Hypoxia
through caspase-3 activation. Cancer Res 2005;65:
9121–5.
18. Kusama T, Mukai M, Endo H, et al. Inactivation of
Rho GTPases by p190 RhoGAP reduces human pancreatic cancer cell invasion and metastasis. Cancer Sci
2006;97:848–53.
19. Yang E, Zha J, Jockel J, Boise LH, Thompson CB,
Korsmeyer SJ. Bad, a heterodimeric partner for Bcl-XL
and Bcl-2, displaces Bax and promotes cell death. Cell
1995;80:285–91.
20. Zha J, Harada H, Yang E, Jockel J, Korsmeyer SJ.
Serine phosphorylation of death agonist BAD in
response to survival factor results in binding to 14-3-3
not BCL-X(L). Cell 1996;87:619–28.
21. Hochachka PW, Buck LT, Doll CJ, Land SC. Unifying
theory of hypoxia tolerance: molecular/metabolic defense and rescue mechanisms for surviving oxygen lack.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1996;93:9493–8.
22. Koumenis C, Naczki C, Koritzinsky M, et al. Regulation of protein synthesis by hypoxia via activation of
the endoplasmic reticulum kinase PERK and phosphorylation of the translation initiation factor eIF2a. Mol
Cell Biol 2002;22:7405–16.
23. Bader AG, Vogt PK. An essential role for protein
synthesis in oncogenic cellular transformation. Oncogene 2004;23:3145–50.
24. Gingras AC, Raught B, Sonenberg N. Regulation of
translation initiation by FRAP/mTOR. Genes Dev 2001;
15:807–26.
25. Yoshida H, Matsui T, Yamamoto A, Okada T, Mori K.
XBP1 mRNA is induced by ATF6 and spliced by IRE1 in
response to ER stress to produce a highly active
transcription factor. Cell 2001;107:881–91.
26. Oyadomari S, Mori M. Roles of CHOP/GADD153 in
endoplasmic reticulum stress. Cell Death Differ 2004;11:
381–9.
27. Koritzinsky M, Magagnin MG, van den Beucken T,
et al. Gene expression during acute and prolonged

www.aacrjournals.org

hypoxia is regulated by distinct mechanisms of translational control. EMBO J 2006;25:1114–25.
28. Entingh AJ, Law BK, Moses HL. Induction of the
C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP) by amino acid
deprivation requires insulin-like growth factor I, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, and mammalian target of
rapamycin signaling. Endocrinology 2001;142:221–8.
29. Ron D, Habener JF. CHOP, a novel developmentally
regulated nuclear protein that dimerizes with transcription factors C/EBP and LAP and functions as a
dominant-negative inhibitor of gene transcription.
Genes Dev 1992;6:439–53.
30. Matsumoto M, Minami M, Takeda K, Sakao Y, Akira
S. Ectopic expression of CHOP (GADD153) induces
apoptosis in M1 myeloblastic leukemia cells. FEBS Lett
1996;395:143–7.
31. McCullough KD, Martindale JL, Klotz LO, Aw TY,
Holbrook NJ. Gadd153 sensitizes cells to endoplasmic
reticulum stress by down-regulating Bcl2 and perturbing the cellular redox state. Mol Cell Biol 2001;21:
1249–59.
32. Marciniak SJ, Yun CY, Oyadomari S, et al. CHOP
induces death by promoting protein synthesis and
oxidation in the stressed endoplasmic reticulum. Genes
Dev 2004;18:3066–77.
33. Li J, Lee B, Lee AS. Endoplasmic reticulum-stress
induced apoptosis: multiple pathways and activation of
PUMA and NOXA by p53. J Biol Chem 2006;281:7260–70.
34. Nakagawa T, Yuan J. Cross-talk between two cysteine
protease families. Activation of caspase-12 by calpain in
apoptosis. J Cell Biol 2000;150:887–94.
35. Nakagawa T, Zhu H, Morishima N, et al. Caspase-12
mediates endoplasmic-reticulum-specific apoptosis and
cytotoxicity by amyloid-h. Nature 2000;403:98–103.
36. Hitomi J, Katayama T, Eguchi Y, et al. Involvement of
caspase-4 in endoplasmic reticulum stress-induced
apoptosis and Ah-induced cell death. J Cell Biol 2004;
165:347–56.

8103

37. Morishima N, Nakanishi K, Takenouchi H, Shibata T,
Yasuhiko Y. An endoplasmic reticulum stress-specific
caspase cascade in apoptosis. Cytochrome c -independent activation of caspase-9 by caspase-12. J Biol Chem
2002;277:34287–94.
38. Christofori G, Naik P, Hanahan D. A second signal
supplied by insulin-like growth factor II in oncogeneinduced tumorigenesis. Nature 1994;369:414–8.
39. Lopez T, Hanahan D. Elevated levels of IGF-1
receptor convey invasive and metastatic capability in a
mouse model of pancreatic islet tumorigenesis. Cancer
Cell 2002;1:339–53.
40. Raile K, Hille R, Laue S, et al. Insulin-like growth
factor I (IGF-I) stimulates proliferation but also increases caspase-3 activity, Annexin-V binding, and DNAfragmentation in human MG63 osteosarcoma cells:
co-activation of pro- and anti-apoptotic pathways by
IGF-I. Horm Metab Res 2003;35:786–93.
41. Hongo A, Yumet G, Resnicoff M, Romano G,
O’Connor R, Baserga R. Inhibition of tumorigenesis
and induction of apoptosis in human tumor cells by the
stable expression of a myristylated COOH terminus of
the insulin-like growth factor I receptor. Cancer Res
1998;58:2477–84.
42. Liu Y, Lehar S, Corvi C, Payne G, O’Connor R.
Expression of the insulin-like growth factor I receptor C
terminus as a myristylated protein leads to induction of
apoptosis in tumor cells. Cancer Res 1998;58:570–6.
43. Sperandio S, de Belle I, Bredesen DE. An alternative,
nonapoptotic form of programmed cell death. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 2000;97:14376–81.
44. Bacon A, Harris A. Hypoxia-inducible factors and
hypoxic cell death in tumour physiology. Ann Med 2004;
36:530–9.
45. Kim KW, Bae SK, Lee OH, Bae MH, Lee MJ, Park BC.
Insulin-like growth factor II induced by hypoxia may
contribute to angiogenesis of human hepatocellular
carcinoma. Cancer Res 1998;58:348–51.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (17). September 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Activation of Insulin-like Growth Factor Signaling Induces
Apoptotic Cell Death Under Prolonged Hypoxia by
Enhancing Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress Response
Hiroko Endo, Kohei Murata, Mutsuko Mukai, et al.
Cancer Res 2007;67:8095-8103.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/17/8095
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2007/08/23/67.17.8095.DC1

This article cites 45 articles, 18 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/17/8095.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 4 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/17/8095.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

