Published OnlineFirst July 22, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-1117

Cancer
Research

Perspective

Redox Imbalance and Biochemical Changes in Cancer
Tonia C. Jorgenson1, Weixiong Zhong1,2, and Terry D. Oberley1,2

Abstract
For this article, we explore a hypothesis involving the possible role of reduction/oxidation (redox) state in
cancer. We hypothesize that many modiﬁcations in cellular macromolecules, observed in cancer progression,
may be caused by redox imbalance. Recent biochemical data suggest that human prostate cancer cell lines show a
redox imbalance (oxidizing) compared with benign primary prostate epithelial cells; the degree of oxidation
varied with aggressive behavior of each cell line. Our recent data suggest that human breast cancer tissues show a
redox imbalance (reducing) compared with benign adjacent breast tissues. Accumulating data summarized in
this article suggest that redox imbalance may regulate gene expression and alter protein stability by posttranslational modiﬁcations, in turn modulating existing cellular programs. Despite signiﬁcant improvements in cancer
therapeutics, resistance occurs, and redox imbalance may play a role in this process. Studies show that some
cancer therapeutic agents increase generation of reactive oxygen/nitrogen species and antioxidant enzymes,
which may alter total antioxidant capacity, cause cellular adaptation, and result in reduced effectiveness of
treatment modalities. Approaches involving modulations of intra- and extracellular redox states, in combination
with other therapies, may lead to new treatment options, especially for patients who are resistant to standard
treatments. Cancer Res; 73(20); 6118–23. 2013 AACR.

Introduction
Reduction/oxidation (redox) homeostasis is maintained by
the net physiologic balance between reducing and oxidizing
equivalents within subcellular compartments, with important
components being reactive oxygen species and antioxidant
enzymes (1). The free-radical theory of cancer traditionally
encompassed the view that oxidative stress by reactive oxygen/
nitrogen species (ROS/RNS) caused DNA damage and promoted genetic instability (1). However, ROS/RNS are now thought
to be involved in both direct DNA damage and modulations
of redox-regulated signaling pathways, which may be beneﬁcial or detrimental in cancers. For example, data show that
BCR/ABL oncogenes induce ROS, causing regulation of gene
expression patterns of the transcription factor nuclear factor
erythroid 2-related factor 2 (NRF2), a major regulator of
cellular redox homeostasis (2). Adaptations resulting from
NRF2 activation may have beneﬁcial effects under stress
conditions through modulation of antioxidant pathways but
may also contribute to cancer therapy resistance mechanisms
(3). A recent study measured tissue redox activity in an
animal model of neuroblastoma or glioma brain cancers using

Authors' Afﬁliations: 1Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine,
Wisconsin Institutes for Medical Research, University of Wisconsin School
of Medicine and Public Health; and 2Pathology and Laboratory Medicine
Service, William S. Middleton Memorial Veterans Hospital, Madison,
Wisconsin
Corresponding Author: Tonia C. Jorgenson, Wisconsin Institutes for
Medical Research, University of Wisconsin, 1111 Highland Avenue, Madison, WI 53705. Phone: 608-265-6136; Fax: 608-265-3301; E-mail:
tjorgenson@wisc.edu
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-1117
2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

6118

nitroxide-enhanced MRI in living mice or electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy (EPRS) in excised organs (4).
Brain tissues in mice with late-stage cancers differed in their
reducing activity for the nitroxide radical measured by MRI or
EPRS, tissue total antioxidant capacity, and plasma levels of
matrix metalloproteinases (4), with combined results indicating that late-stage brain cancers were in an oxidized redox
state. Furthermore, abundant data have shown that cancer
cells showed altered epigenetic patterns relative to benign
cells; epigenetic changes have been shown to be caused by
redox imbalance in certain instances, resulting in alterations
of gene expression patterns (5).
Several distinguishing hallmarks of cancer were originally
proposed by Weinberg, with underlying genetic instability as a
major feature of cancer (6). Currently, the role of changes in
energy metabolism and interactions between tumor intra- and
extracellular redox environments are being investigated. For
example, as proposed by Warburg, tumor cells often exhibit
increased aerobic glycolysis compared with benign cells.
Recent data indicate that the mitochondrial antioxidant
enzyme, manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD), may
contribute to the Warburg effect by regulating redox ﬂux and
glucose consumption in transition from quiescence to proliferation in human breast cancer cells (7). In contrast, recently
proposed as the reverse Warburg effect, tumor-associated
stroma secrete energy-rich metabolites, which epithelial cancer cells take up and use in mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation, promoting proliferation and tumor growth (8).
Increased levels of glutamine and loss of Caveolin-1 (CAV-1)
expression in human breast cancer–associated ﬁbroblasts
correlated with recurrence and poor patient prognosis, and,
therefore, absence of CAV-1 may be a new biomarker for the
reverse Warburg effect (8).

Cancer Res; 73(20) October 15, 2013

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst July 22, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-1117

Redox Imbalance in Cancer

While studies of genetic instability and metabolism were
major milestones in our understanding of cancer, oxidative
stress and redox imbalance have been suggested to be present
in cancer tissues. Oxidative stress is often putatively identiﬁed
by analysis of ﬂuorescent dyes that are sensitive to ROS,
whereas redox imbalance is usually measured by biochemical
analysis of the stoichiometry of redox couples [NAD/NADH,
NADP/NADPH, cysteine (Cys)/cystine (Cyss), glutathione
(GSH)/glutathione disulﬁde, thioredoxin (TRX)/thioredoxin
disulﬁde]. Unfortunately, analyses of ROS levels and/or redox
imbalance do not provide mechanistic insights concerning
cancer. What is missing is an understanding of how increased
ROS and/or redox imbalance affect key macromolecules
involved in cancer development and progression. Posttranslational modiﬁcations (PTM) involving redox-sensing Cys
residues or addition/deletion of low-molecular-weight metabolites to macromolecules, induced by ROS and/or redox
imbalance, need to be further investigated in cancer development and progression. Whereas PTMs regulated by redox
are the subject of active investigation in cancer, the possible
relationship of redox with other biochemical changes in cancer is less frequently studied. This article brieﬂy summarizes
links between redox imbalance and biochemical changes
described in cancer.

shown). The reduced form of TRX1 was predominant over the
oxidized, showing a 4.7-fold increase (P  0.04; Fig. 1). Furthermore, TRX1 enzymatic activities were 2.1-fold increased
(Fig. 2). Interestingly, these data suggest that while human
prostate cancer cell lines may be in a state of redox imbalance,
favoring an oxidizing environment and under oxidative stress,
human breast cancer tissues may be in a state of imbalance,
favoring a reducing environment and reductive stress. Further
investigations in human breast tissues and mechanistic studies
in a cell culture model of human breast cancer progression are
in progress. It will be important to determine redox state in
metastatic breast cancer tissues.
Redox state in extracellular spaces is largely regulated by the
Cys/Cyss redox couple. Data in prostate cancer cell lines show
that modulating the extracellular redox state by changing the
concentration of Cys/Cyss in cell culture media altered prostate cancer invasiveness (12). It is likely that the Cys/Cyss redox
couple regulates –SH to disulﬁde conversion in key proteins of
the extracellular matrix and plasma membranes. Studies in
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma cells suggest that
activities of Cyss transporters control redox status and may be
modulated to improve therapeutic efﬁcacy (13). Studies have
shown the importance of Cyss metabolism in extra- and
intracellular interactions between stromal and chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) cells, with modulations of redox state

Posttranslational Modiﬁcations

www.aacrjournals.org

25
Benign
Cancer

20

Rel. reduced TRX1

For this article, we focus on PTMs controlled by redox
reactions, including the formation of intramolecular protein
disulﬁde bonds between two closely spaced Cys residues,
containing two paired sulfhydryl (–SH) groups, a reaction that
may be reversed by reduction (9). Oxygen is required for
cellular metabolism and ROS are produced as bioproducts
(10). Physiologic (balanced) levels of oxidants and antioxidants
are required for proper cellular functions, which are regulated
by redox biochemistry and show alterations in cancers.
Increased levels of oxidants for a required period of time may
oxidize intramolecular closely spaced –SH groups to disulﬁdes,
potentially affecting protein function. For example, TRX is an
antioxidant protein, which provides reducing equivalents to
proteins involved in cancer, including ribonucleotide reductase and transcription factors. TRX may undergo reversible
redox reactions involving Cys32 and Cys35 located within the
active site, or other modiﬁcations involving Cys62, Cys69, and
Cys73 outside of the active site (10). TRX with two –SH groups
at Cys32, Cys35 and Cys62, Cys69 is enzymatically active,
whereas protein with disulﬁdes at these two positions is
irreversibly inactivated. Oxidation in only the active-site cysteines is reversible by TRX reductase. Data in human prostate
cell lines show increased TRX1 protein oxidation, with decreased enzyme activity in more invasive cancer cell lines (11).
Studies showed increased TRX1 oxidation in human prostate
cancer tissues with high Gleason scores in comparison with
tissues with low Gleason scores (unpublished data). In contrast, recent preliminary studies in human breast cancer
tissues using Western blot analysis of tissue lysates showed
1.5-fold increased levels of TRX1 in inﬁltrating ductal carcinomas compared with adjacent benign tissue (data not

15

10

5

0
Human breast tissues

Figure 1. The reduced form of TRX1 was predominant in human breast
cancer tissues. The redox state of TRX1 was expressed as the ratio of
the reduced form of TRX1 to total TRX1. Cancer refers to inﬁltrating
ductal carcinoma. Benign refers to the adjacent benign breast tissue.

, P < 0.04. Data from paired tissues obtained on biopsy or
mastectomy were averaged from 2 patients from the University of
Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health and 2 from Capital
Biosciences. Redox Western blotting involves derivatization of
proteins with a thiol-reactive reagent such as iodoacetic acid, followed
by native gel electrophoresis and Western blotting.

Cancer Res; 73(20) October 15, 2013

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

6119

Published OnlineFirst July 22, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-1117

Jorgenson et al.

Rel. TRX activity

3

Benign
Cancer

2

1

0
1

2

3
4
5
Paired human breast tissues

6

Figure 2. Human breast cancer tissues showed increased TRX activities.
Data showed a 2.1-fold increased trend in TRX activities in inﬁltrating
ductal carcinomas (cancer) versus benign/adjacent tissues (benign).
Paired tissues obtained on biopsy/mastectomy from 6 patients were
obtained from the University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public
Health and Capital Biosciences. The insulin disulﬁde reduction assay was
used to assess total TRX activity of 6 paired human tissues relative to
8
GAPDH in triplicate. The assay measures the rate of which TRX (1  10
mol/L TRX) catalyzes reduction of insulin disulﬁdes by dithiothreitol.

altering viability and drug sensitivity (14). Primary cells from
patients with CLL expressed low levels of the active subunit
of the Cyss/glutamate antiporter (xCT), resulting in limited
ability to transport Cyss into the cell for GSH synthesis. Stromal
bone marrow cells were shown to actively convert Cyss to
Cys and release the molecule to the extracellular environment, which may then be taken up by CLL cells and result in

increased GSH (14). Increased GSH is thought to inhibit cell
death and protect CLL cells from drug toxicity, a mechanism
that could potentially be modulated as a therapeutic strategy
to overcome resistance.
Several other important PTMs are being actively investigated in cancers. Examples of PTMs shown to be inﬂuenced
by redox in cancer or under conditions causing oxidative/
nitrosative stress are summarized in Table 1 and include
phosphorylation (15), methylation (16), acetylation (17),
SUMOylation (18, 19), nitrosylation (20, 21), nitration (22), and
glutathionylation (23, 24). Potential important targets for
PTMs in cancers include transcription factors, oncogenes,
tumor suppressors, proteins involved in metabolism, and
proteins controlling antioxidant/pro-oxidant balance. Further
studies are needed to determine whether alterations of PTMs
in cancers are a cause or consequence of changes in ROS, redox
state, or redox imbalance. However, it has been shown that
ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) protein kinase activation
is regulated by ROS under oxidative stress (15). As mentioned
above, BCR/ABL oncogenes have been shown to induce ROS,
causing regulation of gene expression patterns of the transcription factor NRF2, a major regulator of cellular redox
homeostasis (2).

Epigenetic and Transcriptional Changes
Epigenetics may be deﬁned as heritable environmental or
lifestyle dependent alterations to DNA or chromatin, acquired
after birth (or in utero), without changes within the underlying

Table 1. Posttranslational modiﬁcations documented in cancer or oxidative/nitrosative stress
Modiﬁcation

Addition

Cancer

Stress

Ref.

Phosphorylation

Phosphate to serine,
threonine, tyrosine

ATM activation in response to
double strand breaks; altered
MnSOD (SOD2) activities

15, 22

Methylation

Methyl to arginine,
lysine

Altered MnSOD (SOD2) activities

Acetylation

Acetyl to lysine

Changes in HAT and HDAC
activities modulate transcription;
altered MnSOD (SOD2) activities

Sumoylation

SUMO to lysine

Nitrosylation

Nitric oxide to cysteine

Nitration

Nitric oxide to tyrosine

Glutathionylation

Glutathione to cysteine

eEF2 and SUMO-1
overexpression correlated with
cisplatin resistance
Inﬂammatory mediators inhibit
BRCA1
Altered levels of nitrated nucleotides,
fatty acids, and proteins
GST overexpression associated
with drug resistance

ATM activation under oxidative
stress in absence of double
strand breaks by oxidation of
cysteine
Loss of MnSOD associated with
chronic oxidative stress and
aberrant epigenetic regulation
Under caloric restriction and
resveratrol, SIRT1 and AMPK
synergize to establish
physiologic conditions;
dysregulated MnSOD (SOD2)
activities with oxidative stress
Global effects involving inhibition
of SUMO conjugating enzymes
by oxidation of cysteine
NRF2 activation by oxidation of
cysteines within KEAP1
Nitration of MnSOD results in loss
of activity
Protection from irreversible
oxidation

16, 22

17, 22

18, 19

20, 21
22
23, 24

Abbreviations: GST, glutathione S-transferase; HDAC, histone deacetylase.

6120

Cancer Res; 73(20) October 15, 2013

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst July 22, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-1117

Redox Imbalance in Cancer

DNA sequence; epigenetic changes may involve the reversible
addition of methyl groups to DNA (methylation) or reversible
PTMs involving addition of acetyl and/or methyl groups to
histone proteins (acetylation/methylation). These reactions
are catalyzed by DNA-histone acetyltransferases or methyltransferases (6). In addition, microRNAs bind to the 50 or 30
untranslated regions (UTR) of target mRNAs, which in turn
modulate gene expression. Several effects on speciﬁc genes or
subsets of genes have been characterized as being regulated by
microRNA modiﬁers, including roles in cancer progression
(6). For example, recent studies showed that repression of
miR-200a in breast cancer cells, which targets Kelch-like ECHassociated protein 1 (Keap1) mRNA, subsequently leads to its
degradation and contributes to dysregulation of NRF2 (25).
The Keap1 levels were restored upon epigenetic treatment
with a histone deacetylase inhibitor, suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA). Recent literature suggests that epigenetic
changes may be driven by redox imbalance through metabolic
reprogramming of the existing cellular epigenetic program (5).
Transcription may be modulated by redox imbalance through
epigenetic mechanisms, which are linked to metabolism
through variations of required intermediates, such as NADþ.
For example, modulations of cellular processes may occur in
any instance in which there is limited availability of enzymes
required for modiﬁcations within subcellular compartments,
such as class III histone deacetylases (HDAC), which are
dependent on NADþ [commonly referred to as sirtuins (SIRT);
ref. 17]. Therefore, any alteration that depletes cellular NADþ
will affect the activity of SIRTs. In addition, xanthine oxidoreductase activity is increased in human serum obtained from
patients with leukemia compared with healthy controls and is
further increased in relapse (2). These data suggest a role for
the xanthine oxidoreductase system in disease recurrence/
resistance, of note because this system is known to use the
cofactor NADþ in drug metabolism with concomitant increased generation of ROS (2).
It has been suggested that an increased reducing environment provides conditions necessary for the optimal rate of
electron transfer and enzymatic activity required for transcription factor binding to DNA. Transcription occurs within the
nucleus of a cell and is a process by which nucleic acid sequences of DNA are copied to RNA (6). Transcription is dependent upon structural components and regulatory sequences
located internally within the complete nucleic acid sequence.
Splicing occurs concurrently or afterwards and is a process
that removes introns and joins exons to produce mRNA,
required for proper protein synthesis (6). Mutations in coding
regions, gene promoters, and consensus binding sites are
involved in regulation of gene expression, whereas modiﬁcations in splicing may affect protein function. Epigenetic modiﬁcations to DNA, histone modiﬁcations, and microRNA modiﬁers may modulate gene expression patterns (6).
Transcriptional regulation often involves redox-sensing Cys
residues located within the region required for DNA binding of
redox-regulated transcription factors. The promoter regions of
redox-regulated genes contain an antioxidant responsive element (ARE), a cyclic AMP responsive element (CRE), and SP-1
sites required for activation of redox-regulated transcription

www.aacrjournals.org

factors such as AP-1, NF-kB, NRF2, tumor protein 53 (TP53),
glucocorticoid, and other hormone receptors, among others
(3, 10). The presence of AREs in so many transcription factors
provides strong evidence that redox imbalance is a major
factor in regulating cellular adaptation to redox injury.
Reduced forms of TRX are active enzymatically, whereas
partially oxidized forms are inactive and must be reduced by
TRX reductases for activation (10). Therefore, modulations of
nuclear compartment redox state may alter activity of transcription factors that are reduced by TRX and ultimately gene
expression patterns. Interestingly, recent data suggest that
the redox state of human TRX1 may be changed by treatment
with the HDAC inhibitor SAHA in cell culture, and this compound is currently in clinical trials for treatment of acute
myeloid leukemia (26).
Several examples document complex genetic and epigenetic
inﬂuences in cancer progression. For example, mutational
status of VHL in renal cell carcinoma was not correlated with
clinical outcome, although alterations in DNA methylation
were associated with metastasis (27). Monozygotic and dizygotic twin studies estimate the relative importance of complex
genetic and epigenetic factors inﬂuencing disease phenotypes
(28). One study comparing monozygotic twins revealed
increased promoter methylation at speciﬁc CpG sites with no
DNA mutations of the disease-associated genes (28). Another
study showed that monozygotic twins, discordant for childhood leukemia (previously considered only a genetic disease),
showed increased BRCA promoter methylation in somatic cells
(ﬁbroblasts of saliva) of the female diagnosed with childhood
leukemia (12%), compared with her healthy sister (3%; ref. 29).
Interestingly, mutations in IDH1 and IDH2 result in complex
genetic and epigenetic cellular and biochemical changes such
as increased hematopoietic stem cell progenitors, alterations
in cell differentiation, and changes in DNA methylation and
metabolism (30). Thus, single mutations affecting cell biochemistry can have complex effects on cell behavior, epigenetic
changes, and metabolism.

Protein Stability
Changes in protein stability within subcellular compartments may inﬂuence protein levels and function. Protein
stability is regulated by changes in protein folding/unfolding,
conformational changes, hydrophobic interactions, hydrogen
bonding, redox potential, pH, temperature, and metal binding
(6). Oxidizing conditions favor unfolding of proteins and
stabilization, with disulﬁde bond formation through oxidation
of two Cys residues forming covalent sulfur-sulfur bonds (9).
Reducing conditions favor highly reactive free –SH groups (9).
Subcellular oxygenation levels and cellular responses to oxidative stress are important factors regulating protein stability,
which are altered in cancers. For example, dysregulation of the
transcription factors hypoxia-inducible factor a (HIF-1a) and
NRF2 have been identiﬁed in several cancers, and therapeutic
approaches involving these transcription factors are being
investigated (3, 6). Under normoxic conditions, HIF-1a is
ubiquinated and subsequently degraded. However, under hypoxic conditions, it may be stabilized and may associate with the

Cancer Res; 73(20) October 15, 2013

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

6121

Published OnlineFirst July 22, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-1117

Jorgenson et al.

VHL protein, which in turn activates HIF-1a-regulated genes
(6). Similar to HIF-1a, under normoxic cellular conditions,
NRF2 is ubiquinated and subsequently degraded, potentially
regulated by biochemical reactions involving Cys residues
as redox sensors within the scaffold protein Keap1 (3). In
response to oxidative/nitrosative stresses, NRF2 is stabilized,
with subsequent activation of genes responsible for stimulating antioxidant genes and cytoprotective enzymes (3). Modulations to NRF2 compartmentalization and trafﬁcking also
occur, which play an important role in mediating cross-talk
with other molecular signaling pathways, including NF-kB,
aryl hydrocarbon receptor, TP53, and notch homolog 1 (3).
Importantly, high levels of NRF2 have been identiﬁed in several
cancers, which result in constitutive activation of NRF2 and
redox-regulated adaptations. The adaptations protect cells
from cytotoxic effects of anticancer or chemoprevention compounds and cause resistance to chemo- and radiotherapy;
therefore, controversy exists whether therapeutic approaches
may be useful for activating or inhibiting NRF2 (3).

Conclusions and Discussion
It is undisputed that genetic and epigenetic factors inﬂuence
cancer initiation and progression. It has been shown that
oxidation may cause mutations and promote genetic instability. Despite an initial belief that rapid sequencing of DNA from
cancer families and further extensive knowledge about the
biochemistry of cancer would, perhaps, result in cancer cures,
metastatic cancer remains a formidable challenge today. Two
mechanistic reasons for failure are genomic instability and
development of resistance to therapeutic agents. While the
latter feature of the metastatic cancer phenotype may be
related to genomic instability, it may also be caused by the
other biochemical changes of cancer described in this article.
Treatment failure may be due to a lack of understanding of an
underlying feature that drives all of the biochemical changes
described in cancer progression. This article provides beginning evidence that sequential changes in redox balance drive
cancer development and progression. To prove this hypothesis,
combined analyses of already described biochemical changes
and biochemical and biomarker studies of redox imbalance
need to be carried out in human benign and cancer tissues of
varying degrees of progression. Subsequently, animal models
will need to be developed in which key proteins regulating
redox balance are mutated at active sites or overexpressed to
determine effects on cancer formation.
Studies show that some cancer therapeutic agents increase
generation of ROS/RNS and antioxidant enzymes, which may
alter total antioxidant capacity and cause cellular adaptations.
Adaptations resulting from HIF-1a and NRF2 pathway activation may have beneﬁcial effects through modulating anti-

oxidant pathways under stress conditions but may also contribute to cancer therapy resistance. Accumulating data show
that oxidative stress and redox imbalance cause epigenetic
changes. Regulation of gene expression is inﬂuenced by
several factors, including posttranslational modiﬁcations and
microRNA, which may in turn modulate existing cellular
programs. Recent data suggest that cancers may be in a state
of redox imbalance, which may increase with progression.
Preliminary studies in our laboratory suggest that redox
imbalance may be either oxidizing (prostate) or reducing (one
pathologic type of breast cancer before metastasis). Many
modiﬁcations in cellular macromolecules observed in cancer
progression may be caused by redox imbalance. Proteomic
studies are needed to identify protein modiﬁcations in cancer
progression and will determine whether redox imbalance
precedes or follows these modiﬁcations, or both, in a vicious
cycle. Perhaps future cancer diagnostics may include an analysis of redox state with progression or provide a new method
for monitoring response to therapy. New treatment options
may involve modulating intra- or extracellular redox state of
cancer cells at varying stages of progression, which may involve
metabolic reprogramming. New clinical trials might involve
attempts at modulating redox imbalance in cancers resistant
to antihormonal treatments, radiation, or standard chemotherapy or sensitizing resistant cancers to drug treatment.
Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest
No potential conﬂicts of interest were disclosed by the authors.

Authors' Contributions
Conception and design: T.C. Jorgenson, W. Zhong, T.D. Oberley
Acquisition of data (acquired and managed patients, provided facilities,
etc.): T.D. Oberley
Analysis and interpretation of data (e.g., statistical analysis, biostatistics,
computational analysis): T.C. Jorgenson, W. Zhong, T.D. Oberley
Writing, review, and/or revision of the manuscript: T.C. Jorgenson,
W. Zhong, T.D. Oberley
Administrative, technical, or material support (i.e., reporting or organizing data, constructing databases): T.D. Oberley
Study supervision: W. Zhong, T.D. Oberley

Acknowledgments
The authors thank Weihua Shan for technical assistance.

Grant Support
This work was supported in part by funds from the Department of Pathology
and Laboratory Medicine, University of Wisconsin, NCI UW Carbone Comprehensive Cancer Center (NIH grant P30 CA014520), NIH grants RO1CA139844,
RO1CA139843, RO1CA073599 (TDO-CoI), and resources and facilities at the
William S. Middleton Memorial Veterans Hospital (Madison, WI). Tonia C.
Jorgenson is supported in part by PF-13-286-01-TBE from the American Cancer
Society.
Received April 19, 2013; revised June 20, 2013; accepted July 8, 2013;
published OnlineFirst July 22, 2013.

References
1.
2.

6122

Hussain SP, Hofseth LJ, Harris CC. Radical causes of cancer. Nat Rev
Cancer 2003;3:276–85.
Irwin ME, Rivera-Del Valle N, Chandra J. Redox control of leukemia:
from molecular mechanisms to therapeutic opportunities. Antioxid
Redox Signal 2013;18:1349–83.

Cancer Res; 73(20) October 15, 2013

3.
4.

Zhang DD. The Nrf2-Keap1-ARE signaling pathway: the regulation and
dual function of Nrf2 in cancer. Antioxid Redox Signal 2010;13:1623–6.
Bakalova R, Zhelev Z, Aoki I, Saga T. Tissue redox activity as a hallmark
of carcinogenesis: from early to terminal stages of cancer. Clin Cancer
Res 2013;19:2503–17.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst July 22, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-1117

Redox Imbalance in Cancer

5.

6.
7.

8.

9.
10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.
16.

17.
18.

Hitchler MJ, Domann FE. Redox regulation of the epigenetic landscape
in Cancer: a role for metabolic reprogramming in remodeling the
epigenome. Free Radic Biol Med 2012;53:2178–87.
Weinberg RA. The biology of cancer. New York: Garland Science,
Taylor & Francis Group, LLC; 2007.
Sarsour EH, Kalen AL, Xiao Z, Veenstra TD, Chaudhuri L, Venkataraman S, et al. Manganese superoxide dismutase regulates a metabolic
switch during the mammalian cell cycle. Cancer Res 2012;72:3807–16.
Pavlides S, Whitaker-Menezes D, Castello-Cros R, Flomenberg N,
Witkiewicz AK, Frank PG, et al. The reverse Warburg effect: aerobic
glycolysis in cancer associated ﬁbroblasts and the tumor stroma. Cell
Cycle 2009;8:3984–4001.
Klomsiri C, Karplus PA, Poole LB. Cysteine-based redox switches in
enzymes. Antioxid Redox Signal 2011;14:1065–77.
Lee S, Kim SM, Lee RT. Thioredoxin and thioredoxin target proteins:
from molecular mechanisms to functional signiﬁcance. Antioxid Redox
Signal 2013;18:1165–207.
Shan W, Zhong W, Zhao R, Oberley TD. Thioredoxin 1 as a subcellular
biomarker of redox imbalance in human prostate cancer progression.
Free Radic Biol Med 2010;49:2078–87.
Chaiswing L, Zhong W, Liang Y, Jones DP, Oberley TD. Regulation of
prostate cancer cell invasion by modulation of extra- and intracellular
redox balance. Free Radic Biol Med 2012;52:452–61.
Yoshikawa M, Tsuchihashi K, Ishimoto T, Yae T, Motohara T, Sugihara
E, et al. xCT inhibition depletes CD44v-expressing tumor cells that are
resistant to EGFR-targeted therapy in head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma. Cancer Res 2013;73:1855–66.
Zhang W, Trachootham D, Liu J, Chen G, Pelicano H, Garcia-Prieto C,
et al. Stromal control of cystine metabolism promotes cancer cell
survival in chronic lymphocytic leukaemia. Nat Cell Biol 2012;14:276–86.
Guo Z, Kozlov S, Lavin MF, Person MD, Paull TT. ATM Activation by
oxidative stress. Science 2010;330:517–21.
Cyr AR, Hitchler MJ, Domann FE. Regulation of SOD2 in cancer by
histone modiﬁcations and CpG methylation: closing the loop between
redox biology and epigenetics. Antioxid Redox Signal 2013;18:1946–55.
Morris BJ. Seven sirtuins for seven deadly diseases ofaging. Free
Radic Biol Med 2013;56:133–71.
Bossis G, Melchior F. Regulation of SUMOylation by reversible oxidation of SUMO conjugating enzymes. Mol Cell 2006;21:349–57.

www.aacrjournals.org

19. Chen C-Y, Fang H-Y, Chiou S-H, Yi S-E, Huang C-Y, Chiang S-F, et al.
Sumoylation of eukaryotic elongation factor 2 is vital for protein
stability and anti-apoptotic activity in lung adenocarcinoma cells.
Cancer Sci 2011;102:1582–9.
20. Yakovlev VA. Nitric oxide-dependent downregulation of BRCA1
expression promotes genetic instability. Cancer Res 2013;73:706–15.
21. Fourquet S, Guerois R, Biard D, Toledano MB. Activation of NRF2 by
nitrosative agents and H2O2 involves KEAP1 disulﬁde formation. J Biol
Chem 2010;285:8463–71.
22. Dhar SK, St Clair DK. Manganese superoxide dismutase regulation
and cancer. Free Radic Biol Med 2012;52:2209–22.
23. Townsend DM, Manevich Y, He L, Hutchens S, Pazoles CJ, Tew KD.
Novel role for glutathione S-transferase pi. Regulator of protein SGlutathionylation following oxidative and nitrosative stress. J Biol
Chem 2009;284:436–45.
24. Mieyal JJ, Chock PB. Posttranslational modiﬁcation of cysteine in
redox signaling and oxidative stress: Focus on s-glutathionylation.
Antioxid Redox Signal 2012;16:471–5.
25. Eades G, Yang M, Yao Y, Zhang Y, Zhou Q. miR-200a regulates Nrf2
activation by targeting Keap1 mRNA in breast cancer cells. J Biol
Chem 2011;286:40725–33.
26. Ungerstedt J, Du Y, Zhang H, Nair D, Holmgren A. In vivo redox state of
Human thioredoxin and redox shift by the histone deacetylase inhibitor
suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA). Free Radic Biol Med 2012;53:
2002–7.
27. Vanharanta S, Shu W, Brenet F, Hakimi AA, Heguy A, Viale A, et al.
Epigenetic expansion of VHL-HIF signal output drives multiorgan
metastasis in renal cancer. Nat Med 2013;19:50–6.
28. van Dongen J, Slagboom PE, Draisma HH, Martin NG, Boomsma DI.
The continuing value of twin studies in the omics era. Nat Rev Genet
2012;13:640–53.
29. Galetzka D, Hansmann T, El Hajj N, Weis E, Irmscher B, Ludwig M, et al.
Monozygotic twins discordant for constitutive BRCA1 promoter methylation, childhood cancer and secondary cancer. Epigenetics 2012;
7:47–54.
30. Figueroa ME, Abdel-Wahab O, Lu C, Ward PS, Patel J, Shih A, et al.
Leukemic IDH1 and IDH2 mutations result in a hypermethylation
phenotype, disrupt TET2 function, and impair hematopoietic differentiation. Cancer Cell 2010;18:553–67.

Cancer Res; 73(20) October 15, 2013

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

6123

Published OnlineFirst July 22, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-1117

Redox Imbalance and Biochemical Changes in Cancer
Tonia C. Jorgenson, Weixiong Zhong and Terry D. Oberley
Cancer Res 2013;73:6118-6123. Published OnlineFirst July 22, 2013.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-1117

This article cites 29 articles, 7 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/73/20/6118.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 3 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/73/20/6118.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

