Published OnlineFirst March 1, 2016; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-3232

Integrated Systems and Technologies: Mathematical Oncology

Cancer
Research

Mathematical Modeling Reveals That Changes to
Local Cell Density Dynamically Modulate Baseline
Variations in Cell Growth and Drug Response
James M. Greene1, Doron Levy2, Sylvia P. Herrada3, Michael M. Gottesman3, and
Orit Lavi3

Abstract
Cell-to-cell variations contribute to drug resistance with
consequent therapy failure in cancer. Experimental techniques
have been developed to monitor tumor heterogeneity, but
estimates of cell-to-cell variation typically fail to account for
the expected spatiotemporal variations during the cell growth
process. To fully capture the extent of such dynamic variations, we developed a mechanistic mathematical model supported by in vitro experiments with an ovarian cancer cell line.
We introduce the notion of dynamic baseline cell-to-cell
variation, showing how the emerging spatiotemporal heterogeneity of one cell population can be attributed to differences
in local cell density and cell cycle. Manipulation of the

geometric arrangement and spatial density of cancer cells
revealed that given a ﬁxed global cell density, signiﬁcant
differences in growth, proliferation, and paclitaxel-induced
apoptosis rates were observed based solely on cell movement
and local conditions. We conclude that any statistical estimate
of changes in the level of heterogeneity should be integrated
with the dynamics and spatial effects of the baseline system.
This approach incorporates experimental and theoretical
methods to systematically analyze biologic phenomena and
merits consideration as an underlying reference model for cell
biology studies that investigate dynamic processes affecting
cancer cell behavior. Cancer Res; 76(10); 2882–90. 2016 AACR.

Introduction
Major Findings
Cells are never isolated from their surroundings. Even in an
experimental setting, cells always grow as part of a population.
As such, they are constantly exposed to random ﬂuctuations in
external signals. One such ﬂuctuating signal comes from local
cell density (LCD). LCD and the ability of cells to move can
dramatically and dynamically change cell-to-cell variation.
Tracking the intrinsic spatiotemporal process of cell growth
reveals heterogeneity in crucial features, such as cell-cycle
duration, growth, proliferation, and apoptosis rates. These
constitute intrinsic dynamic baseline variations that are characteristics of all cell populations. These baseline variations are
needed to explain and predict cell heterogeneity and to determine the signiﬁcance of any alteration resulting from cell-tocell variability, especially in cancer.

1
Department of Mathematics, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, New
Jersey. 2Department of Mathematics and Center for Scientiﬁc Computation and Mathematical Modeling, University of Maryland, College
Park, Maryland. 3Laboratory of Cell Biology, Center for Cancer
Research, NCI, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland.

Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research
Online (http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Corresponding Author: Orit Lavi, NCI, NIH, 37 Convent Dr., Room 2112, Bethesda,
MD 20892. Phone: 301-435-8086; Fax: 301-435-8188; E-mail: orit.lavi@nih.gov
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-3232
2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

Within an individual tumor, there are typically genotypic
and phenotypic variations. This heterogeneity, due to both
genetic and nongenetic alterations, can be either temporary or
irreversible (5–10). Tumor heterogeneity has been identiﬁed as
one of the causes of cancer therapy failure, contributing to drug
resistance (11, 12). Great efforts have been made to identify
and categorize the different subpopulations of cells within a
tumor/patient, and to determine their importance in relation to
treatment, with the hope of ﬁnding ways to efﬁciently target
them. It is accepted that such an approach primarily aims to
ﬁnd genetically stable clones, and assumes that each clone
consists mainly of a homogenous population of cells, with
insigniﬁcant variations concerning the subject of study. Thus,
the common goal is to focus on (and target) the identiﬁed
genetic alterations. However, this approach does not take into
account the importance of temporal changes that are not
necessarily the result of genetic alterations (13). Determining,
additionally, the extent of each clone's plasticity would result in
a more pragmatic treatment protocol.
It has been long recognized that a single clone of cells may
have signiﬁcant phenotypic variations, even concerning drug
sensitivity (14, 15). Perhaps the most easily observed evidence
of intrinsic nongenetic heterogeneity regarding drug response
occurs in virtually every survival curve for cancer cells exposed
to drugs, as killing curves have two key features: (i) a continuous curve, that is, a gradual slope, (ii) distinct residual cells
that survive even after administration of high doses of the drug
(Fig. 1A; Supplementary Table S1). Different types of cell-tocell variations have been experimentally observed for a single
population in many complex cellular processes, such as

2882 Cancer Res; 76(10) May 15, 2016

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst March 1, 2016; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-3232

Dynamic Baseline Variations and Drug Sensitivity

Quick Guide to Equations and Assumptions
We developed a spatial mathematical model of cancer cell growth in a two-dimensional spatial environment. The model is
formulated as an agent-based model that incorporates spatial aggregation/repulsion forces, as well as transitions through
three cellular states: proliferation (P), apoptosis (A), and quiescence (Q). Cell movement is governed by a stochastic differential
equation (SDE) with no constraints to a speciﬁc lattice, and transition rates between cellular compartments depend on a
cell's microenvironment via a local cell density (LCD) measurement. A more thorough description of the model is provided
in the Supplementary Materials. An important feature of this work is that a cell interacts only with other cells in its local
neighborhood, deﬁned here as a sphere of radius ea centered at the particle's position [Xk(t) for the kth particle at time t]. We
model cells as hard spheres with centers Xk(t) and ﬁxed radius er. Thus, the LCD can be deﬁned as
rloc ¼

NB"a  ð"r Þ2
;
ð"a Þ2

ðAÞ

where NB"a is the number of distinct cells in the local neighborhood. The kth cell's motility is then governed by a SDE combining
both attractive and repulsive forces:
dXk ðtÞ ¼ Fa ½Zk ðtÞðXk ðtÞÞdt þ Fr ½Zk ðtÞðXk ðtÞÞdt þ sdWk ðtÞ

ðBÞ

Here, Zk ðtÞ describes the population LCD at time t, and Fa (Fr ) models the attractive (repulsive) forces experienced by a cell
due to the presence of neighboring cells. Both force terms are modeled deterministically as a gradient of symmetric functions, with distinct supports. The attractive force is chosen to account for the observed phenomenon of
cellular aggregation and generally has a large support relative to Fr , whereas the repulsive force models volume exclusion.
Finally, random effects are included in the standard Wiener term sdWk ðtÞ, where s denotes the mean free path.
Randomness is included to account for the experimentally observed random walk-like motion by cells in low-density
conditions. Note also that the movement is not constrained to a lattice and that this framework is adapted from Morale
and colleagues (1–3).
Cells also experience transitions between three compartments: P, A, and Q. These transition rates are determined by an
individual LCD rloc , deﬁned as in Eq. A. Cells in the Q compartment are neither dividing nor dying, but instead are in a resting
phase. Often, this state is referred to as G0 and is the compartment where all dividing cells originate. From Q, cells can either
transition into compartments P or A. Cells in P are undergoing proliferation, that is, progressing through the cell cycle. Thus,
each cell in P has a state variable a(t), the cell-cycle stage/age, which measures a cell's progress through P. a(t) increases between
discrete time steps t and t þ Dt via the rate w(rloc ,c):
aðt þ DtÞ ¼ aðt Þ þ vðrloc ðt þ DtÞ; cÞDt

ðCÞ

Here, c is the spatially constant drug concentration, which acts to increase v (and thus increase the cell cycle duration). Note
that the rate of cell-cycle progression v is also dependent upon the LCD rloc . We assume that due to LCD constraints,
proliferating cells do not move through the cell cycle at a constant speed, but instead decelerate as rloc increases. More precisely,
we assume a base length of m (¼15) hours, after which, if a(t) > m, division is successful and both mother and daughter cell
reenter compartment Q. If the amount of time in culture spent in P exceeds a speciﬁed limit, the cell transitions to apoptosis, A.
Cells undergoing apoptosis are destined to complete cell death; that is, once cells enter compartment A there are no transitions
back to P or Q. Once completed, the cell is removed from the simulation. As in our previous report (4), the amount of time
spent in A is dictated by an a priori g distribution, independent of any state variables. Transitions can be either explicit or
implicit. Explicit transition rates are interpreted as probabilities per unit time, that is, continuous Markov chain transition rates,
while implicit rates depend on state variables speciﬁc to individual cells.

duration of apoptosis (8, 16), cell size and age (17), and
duration of cell cycle (18). These variations occur in many
organisms, generated by a variety of mechanisms that are based
on stochastic and/or deterministic (primarily external) signals
in a given cell population. In cancer studies, predictions of the
disease dynamics are highly dependent on the way those
expected baseline variations are evaluated, prior to any additional new alterations, both experimentally and theoretically.
So far, the baseline variations have been reported in a limited
way, as short-term observations. However, normalization with
the expected dynamic baseline cell-to-cell variation of the
spatiotemporal growth process has not been included, and
thus, the current statistical approach that determines the reference model may produce false conclusions.

www.aacrjournals.org

Cells are never isolated from their surroundings. Even in an
experimental setting, cells always grow as part of a population. As
such, they are constantly exposed to random ﬂuctuations in
external signals. One such ﬂuctuating signal comes from local
cell density (LCD). LCD and the ability of cells to move can
dramatically and dynamically change cell-to-cell variation. We
hypothesized that the intrinsic spatiotemporal process of cell
growth should result in intrinsic considerable cell-to-cell variations. These constitute intrinsic dynamic baseline variations that
are characteristics of all cell populations. We argue that the initial
global cell density (GCD) is not sufﬁcient to determine the
baseline variations of the system. To quantify and mechanistically
understand the impact of spatial LCD and the ability of cells to
move, we developed a spatial mathematical model of cancer

Cancer Res; 76(10) May 15, 2016

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

2883

Published OnlineFirst March 1, 2016; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-3232

Greene et al.

dynamics that can be used to theoretically investigate whether a
speciﬁc set of local cellular principles can explain the observed
distributions in cell-cycle duration (CCD), growth, and drug
response. We show that this mechanism of spatial LCD can
explain in vitro experimental cell growth data. We experimentally
tested two representative geometric seeding conﬁgurations from a
range of low to high LCD. Both seeding conﬁgurations shared the
same GCD. We seeded OVCAR-8 cells in a simple 2D culture
system and examined the spatiotemporal cell-to-cell differences
in growth rate, proliferation, and paclitaxel-induced apoptosis
percentages. Experimentally and theoretically, we demonstrate
the extent of those cell-to-cell dynamic baseline variations, based
solely on differences in geometrical seeding conﬁgurations, yet
sharing the same global conditions. Understanding and quantifying these dynamic baseline variations can help to determine
the signiﬁcance of any alteration resulting from cell-to-cell variability, especially in cancer.

Materials and Methods
Growth curve
Cells (OVCAR-8 parental human ovarian carcinoma cells) were
seeded with culture medium (RPMI1640 medium þ 10% FBS þ
100 U/mL penicillin streptomycin þ 2 mmol/L glutamine) in 100
mm dishes in three different GCDs (about 7%, 20%, and 30%),
with each density in two different geometrical conﬁgurations
Figs 1E and 2A). The OVCAR-8 cell line was obtained from the
NCI, NIH (Bethesda, MD). It is part of the NCI-60 panel of cancer
cell lines, which were authenticated by the NCI using short
tandem repeat markers to conﬁrm cell identity. The cells were
passaged for approximately two weeks in our laboratory after
resuscitation and then used for experiments. Although the random seeding was mixed very well, the seeding pattern was 5 dots,
spaced uniformly on the plate, containing 2/3  105, 2  105, and
10/3  105 cells per dot, respectively, to reach the desired GCD.
Two plates per condition were seeded. The plates were incubated
at 37 C in humidiﬁed 5% CO2. Every 24 hours, each plate was
counted using a Cellometer Counter (Nexcelom Bioscience) four
times (Fig. 2B; Supplementary Table S2).
Time series imaging using confocal microscopy
A Zeiss 710 confocal microscope was used to image over time
the entire well on an 8-well slide (ibidi) and form a 24-hour time
series movie of cell movements and growth (several snapshots are
provided in Supplementary Fig. S1). The tool employed on the
Zeiss software was "Tiling," which allowed the microscope to take
a series of spatial-sequence snapshots of the well and combine
them together to create a single whole matrix image with a wide
view of hundreds of cells (OVCAR-8-DsRed2 cell line; ref. 19). The
plates were imaged using a Zeiss 710 confocal microscope with
20 objective, 10 z-stacks, and a 5  5 tile, to form two Time
Series Imaging movies.
Proliferation detection
Detecting Ki67 using FACS. The percentage of Ki67-mediated cell
proliferation as a function of LCD and GCD was measured by a
staining method using the Ki67 protocol using an Anti-human
Ki67 FITC, Flow Cytometry Staining Buffer, and Foxp3 Fixation/
Permeabilization Solution (eBioscience) according to the manufacturer's instructions. OVCAR-8 were seeded in 150 mm dishes
in drug-free medium and incubated at 37 C for 24 hours to allow

2884 Cancer Res; 76(10) May 15, 2016

cells to attach. Three different global cell densities (7%, 20%, and
33%) were seeded, each density in two different geometrical
conﬁgurations. Although the random formation was mixed very
well, the circular formation was 15 dots containing 2/3  105, 2 
105, and 10/3  105 cells per dot, respectively. The percentages of
proliferation were then evaluated by FACS (BD LSRFortessa) every
day for 4 days. Data from 10,000 gated events per sample were
collected. Data were collected three times. For experiments with
drug, after 24 hours with drug-free media, random and circular
plates from each density were dosed with IC50 paclitaxel, 0.001 
6.20E6 mmol/L and with IC50  4 paclitaxel. After 3 days of
incubation with the drug, data were collected. See Supplementary
Table S3 for the results.
Detecting Ki67 using confocal microscopy. Cells were seeded at the
desired density in an 8-well plate (ibidi). To form a circular
structure for imaging, cloning cylinders (purchased from Sigma-Aldrich) were placed using forceps in the center of each well
before seeding. Cells (4  104) per well were seeded, and after 24
hours, the cylinders were removed and the circular arrangement of
the cells could be observed. After 48 hours, we followed the
manufacturer's instructions to add the primary antibody (see
details in Supplementary Materials). PBS (200 mL) was added to
each well prior to imaging. The plates were imaged using a Zeiss
710 confocal microscope with 20 objective, 10 z-stacks, and a
3  10 tile to form Fig. 3B.
Survival assay (MTT)
Cell survival was measured by 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) viability assays.
OVCAR-8 were randomly seeded at two different densities, 104
and 105 cells per well in 24 well plates. After 24 hours, all cells
were dosed with 20 mmol/L paclitaxel in 16 different dilutions
(Fig. 1A; Supplementary Table S1). Three hundred microliters of
each dilution was added to each of the 24 wells. Once all the plates
were dosed, they were incubated for another 72 hours. The MTT
assay was performed according to the manufacturer's instructions
(Molecular Probes). Absorbance values were determined at 570
nm on a Spectra Max 250 Spectrophotometer (Molecular
Devices). All MTT assays were performed three times in triplicate.
Apoptosis
Cells were seeded as in the Ki67 FACS experiments. The
percentage of apoptosis-mediated cell death was measured by a
double staining method using a Dead Cell Apoptosis Kit with
Annexin V Alexa Fluor 488 & PI (Invitrogen) according to the
manufacturer's instructions. The percentages of apoptosis and
necrosis were then evaluated by FACS (BD LSRFortessa). Data
from 10,000 gated events per sample were collected. Cells in early
stages of apoptosis were positively stained with Annexin V,
whereas cells in late apoptosis and necrosis were positively
stained with both Annexin V and propidium iodide (PI). The
number of cells positively stained with Annexin V was used
to estimate the death rate. Data were collected three times; see
Fig. 3C and Supplementary Table S4 for the results.

Results
Dynamic variation in cell-cycle duration
In this study, we focused on cell-to-cell dynamic baseline
variations in relation to three key features of cancer cells: cell

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst March 1, 2016; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-3232

Dynamic Baseline Variations and Drug Sensitivity

cycle, growth, and drug sensitivity. First, we explored the variation
between cells in their CCD, as this affects growth and drug
sensitivity. We sought to identify a set of cellular principles that
would explain our experimental patterns of OVCAR-8 growth,
reproduce the common normal-like distribution of CCD with its
parameters, and analyze the implications of spatial variations in
proliferation rates. To study these issues, we took a mathematical
modeling approach to study the entire growth and treatment
processes as a function of both time and space. We hypothesized
that the local spatial component signiﬁcantly affects the characteristics of this duration distribution.
Our spatial mathematical model is formulated as an agentbased model (ABM) that incorporates spatial aggregation/repulsion forces, as well as transitions through three cellular states (see
Supplementary Materials; Fig. 1B). Cell movement is described
via a stochastic differential equation, and transition rates are functions of LCD rloc . Using our in silico model, we investigated the
effect of imposing a deterministic cell-cycle structure based on
the spatial location of the cell. In particular, we were interested
in the distribution of the CCD as a function of time. The initial
simulated GCD was r(0) ¼ 10%, and the population of cells was

allowed to grow until a time t, such that a plate was fully covered,
that is, r(t) ¼ 100%. The entire population of cells was initially
assumed to be quiescent synchronized and randomly distributed
in space. By calibrating the model with growth curves over 4 days
(initial 10% and 80% GCD; Fig. 1C) and experimental time series
imaging data (random, 10%) for a period of 24 hours, we imaged
a wide spatial range of the cultured plate with hundreds of cells
(Fig. 1D and Supplementary Fig. S1A and S2A). In this way, we
were able to determine the parameter space of the model (see
Supplementary Materials, Supplementary Fig. S1 and S2).
Our in silico results clearly showed that the basic assumptions of
an intrinsic CCD as a deterministic process with growth limitation
based merely on LCD can produce the normal-like distribution of
CCD in randomly seeded cells. Moreover, as illustrated in Fig. 1E
(where the CCD is modeled using equations S.9 and S.10 in the
Supplementary Material), a full 3D histogram for the lengths of
successful divisions for 10-hour windows in a single simulation
demonstrated normal-like distributions that are functions of both
time and space. For example, the ﬁrst histogram labeled 15 on the
"occurrence interval" axis denotes the distribution for all divisions
occurring in simulation time t such that t2[15, 25] hours. We

Figure 1.
Cell-to-cell baseline growth variation. A, GCD impacts drug sensitivity. Typical experimental survival curves demonstrating the short-term impact of 10%
versus 80% GCD on drug sensitivity. B, mechanistic mathematical model diagram with three compartments. Cells move stochastically through the
three phases in ABM, with explicit rates represented by solid lines, and implicit rates given by dashed lines. C, experimental growth curves over 4 days
in two initial conditions. To calibrate the math model, growth over 4 days was measured (red dots, with initial 10% vs. 80% GCD of cells that were
seeded in random). Ten simulation results are plotted in blue. D, tracking spatiotemporal growth. To calibrate the math model, we tracked the
spatiotemporal growth over 24 hours using confocal microscopy (top). Including these datasets, we set the parameter space of the model (bottom; P,
red; Q, yellow; A, blue). E, simulated distribution of CCD as a function of LCD. Histogram showing CCDs based on the time interval of division. F, differences
in growth depend on LCD. Variation in global growth based on variation in LCD. Growth curves with initial GCDs of approximately 7% and 20%
demonstrate the dramatic variations in growth over 10 days between two seeding methods (Figs. 1E vs. 2A, top).

www.aacrjournals.org

Cancer Res; 76(10) May 15, 2016

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

2885

Published OnlineFirst March 1, 2016; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-3232

Greene et al.

observed a traveling wave of normal-like distributions, starting
with short cell cycles at low GCDs, which gradually increased
as the population grew. Averaging over all time intervals yields
a distribution with mean ¼ 23 hours, similar to our previously
observed experimental value (24.41 hours; ref. 4). Figure 1E
illustrates the interesting temporal dynamics of the variance
distribution (simulation), with a relative maximum variation
occurring at approximately t ¼ 80 hours, that is, at this point the
plate reaches a 50% to 70% value of GCD.
Local conditions create different global behavior
As LCD affects the distributional dynamics, we experimentally tracked the growth of cells over time with different

initial geometric conﬁgurations, while the initial total seeding
number of cells held constant. Throughout this article, we
describe our work concerning two main geometrical conﬁgurations that represent the extreme cases in a range of commonly
used seeding methods in any experimental cell culture laboratory (illustrated in Fig. 1E), which are random seeding (uniformly distributed across the plate), or circular seeding structure
(can be achieved by direct application with a pipette without
mixing the plate, illustrated in Fig. 2A). Common growth curves
with shared initial GCDs of about 7% and 20% demonstrate the
dramatic variations in growth over 10 days (Fig. 1F). The cells
with an initial 20% GCD in random versus patterned circular
seeding grew about 70% faster [i.e., (# cellsRand/# cellscircular 1) 

Figure 2.
Spatial cell-to-cell baseline variation in proliferation. A, simulated distribution of CCD (bottom) in cells grown in a circular seeding pattern (top). This histogram is
parallel to the one shown in Fig. 1E (top) but with the circular seeding conﬁguration. B, experimental spatial proliferation. Using confocal microscopy imaging for
the circular seeding pattern after 48 hours, we observed more proliferative cells in the surrounding area, as determined by Ki67 staining. The circular conﬁguration was
formed using a cloning cylinder (top right). C–F, dynamic heterogeneity in proliferation. Using FACS to measure the Ki67 ﬂorescence intensity over 4 days for two
geometric conﬁgurations, dynamic cell-to-cell variation can be observed in proliferation percentage and in transition between proliferation to nonproliferation sates.

2886 Cancer Res; 76(10) May 15, 2016

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst March 1, 2016; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-3232

Dynamic Baseline Variations and Drug Sensitivity

100 ¼ 70%] even during the ﬁrst 4 days (Supplementary Table
S2). These results show that not only the known global, but also
LCD conditions can produce distinctive cell-to-cell baseline
variations in growth.
Given that cell spacing had major effects on growth, we used
our mathematical model to ask how the previous distribution of
CCD would vary when the system grew in a speciﬁc geometrical
conﬁguration of circular (Fig. 2A, top), instead of random seeding
(initially with 10% GCD, as before). The simulation predicts a
wide and stable CCD distribution, with the variation values of
most time points approximately the same. Interestingly, a binormal distribution with two distinct average values was obtained
(Fig. 2A, bottom). This reﬂects the two subpopulations in the P
state, the slow growing cells closer to the center and the faster,
more proliferative cells growing at the periphery, when the area
occupied by each subpopulation varies based on the GCD. In the
case of low GCD, most cells are in a proliferative state, even ones
closer to the center. However, they have different CCDs. On the
other hand, once the GCD increases, most of the cells in the center
move to a quiescent state, and the CCD for the rest of the P
population changes based on the circular bands that the cells
occupy. Thus, the two mean values of the binormal distribution
approach one another and may be considered as a single distribution at later stages of the process. This process can be seen in
Supplementary Movie S1, in which we simulated the spatiotemporal heterogeneity in CCD for a circular structure. Contact
inhibition is well known to regulate the progression of the cell
cycle. The contribution of this work is mainly to mechanistically
and systematically predict the entire process of cancer cell dynamics as a population, based on local interactions, beginning with
low cell density, growing with or without geometrical constraints.
For cancer cells, cell-to-cell interactions slow cellular growth, but
in many cases do not necessarily completely stop cell divisions,
leading to heterogeneity. The unknowns are the extent and
implications of such dynamic heterogeneity.
Using confocal microscopy imaging, for the circular pattern,
after 48 hours, we observed more proliferative cells in the surrounding area, as determined by Ki67 staining (Fig. 2B). Note
that it took 48 hours to reach this spatial distribution of proliferation. Prior to 48 hours, most cells showed random spatial
proliferation (data not shown), as was predicted by the simulated movie. We further measured the cell-to-cell differences in the
cell population distribution of Ki67 protein expression using
ﬂow cytometry, for two seeding patterns for 4 days at three
different GCDs: 7%, 20%, and 30%. Three key FACS measurements were closely studied, the percentage of Ki67-positive cells,
the Ki67 median intensity of all cells (positive and negative),
and the shape of the Ki67 intensity distribution. These three
measurements include information about the entire population,
proliferative, nonproliferative state, and the transition between
them over time. On average, the Ki67 distributions (example
plotted in Fig. 2C) in populations with circular seeding at low
GCDs were wider than when cells were seeded randomly, as was
predicted by the simulation. In higher GCDs, we can observe
higher ﬂuctuations in proliferation over time at the random
case (Fig. 2D). We found that the Ki67 percentages over 4 days
for low (less than 30%) GCDs reached a maximum in random
seeding, while a minimum was observed in circular seeding
(Fig. 2E and F; Supplementary Table S3); altogether, the highest
variation in proliferation percentages between the two geometrical conﬁgurations, can reach up to 36% over time [e.g.,

www.aacrjournals.org

(#Ki67PositiveCellsRand_72h/#Ki67PositiveCellscircular_72h1) 
100 ¼ 36%]. In other words, the baseline variations of both
seeding methods are dynamic over time and the highest variations occur 72 hours after seeding. This is a growth feature
related to the cells' adjusting process after initial seeding, which
is also a function of local spatial constraints.
For cells that initially were seeded at low GCDs of less than
30%, there was a pattern that included the LCD and GCD.
During the ﬁrst 24 hours, cells are mainly in the process of
attaching themselves to the plate. During the second 24 hours,
that is, 24to 48 hours, cells mostly proliferate. During the third
24 hours, that is, 48 to 72 hours, cells increase their movement
to contact other close neighboring cells. During the fourth
24 hours, that is, 72 to 96 hours, the plate was much more
dense, changing the initial geometry. As a result, cells that
were locally dense act differently from the random case over
time. These variations can be seen in the changes of median
ﬂuorescence intensity as a function of seeding methods with
varying GCDs (Fig. 2E) and variations as a function of time
(Supplementary Table S3) or variations in Ki67-positive percentage as a function of seeding methods (Fig. 2F).
Taken together, this evidence implies that there are two
main mechanisms that affect the population dynamic and
thus its expected variations: the transition process between
the P and Q states and the CCD (for cells in P state). We
showed that the ﬂuctuation in the transition process between
states is as profound as the variations in CCD, especially for
the geometrical cases, such as the circular rearrangement at
low GCDs. However, in the case of randomly seeded cells,
changes in the CCD are the main factors causing variations in
spatial proliferation. These experimental results validate our
understanding from the simulated predictions of a traveling
wave versus stable distribution of CCD illustrated in Figs. 1E
and 2A, which show the different mechanisms of the expected
variations.

Cell-to-cell baseline variation in drug-sensitive cells
Finally, we examined whether or not our ﬁnding concerning
the role of LCD and cell movement as an intrinsic inducer of
spatial proliferation variation can also explain the cell-to-cell
baseline variation in drug sensitivity. We found that both
killing curve features, the continuous curve and the distinct
residual surviving cells after high drug doses, can be largely
explained on the basis of the LCD mechanism, at least for
chemotherapy drugs, such as paclitaxel. Paclitaxel is a mitotic
inhibitor and hence acts on cells in the proliferative compartment P. More precisely, its primary chemotherapeutic effect is
on the cytoskeleton, targeting tubulin (20). During cell division, chromosomal microtubules are necessarily destabilized
and broken down as the mother cell divides. Paclitaxel acts as a
stabilizer for these microtubules, thus preventing metaphase
spindle conﬁguration. At high paclitaxel doses, the cell is
unable to complete mitosis and remains at the mitotic checkpoint of the cell cycle for a prolonged period of time. Eventually, prolonged activation of the mitotic checkpoint triggers
apoptosis due to unsuccessful cell division. Using FACS, we
quantiﬁed the ﬂuorescence intensity of Ki67 staining for cells
that were treated with an IC50 dose of paclitaxel for 72 hours.
We observed that in cases of low GCD (less than 30%), there
were differences in the median Ki67 values of the entire

Cancer Res; 76(10) May 15, 2016

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

2887

Published OnlineFirst March 1, 2016; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-3232

Greene et al.

population (all cells included) between the two seeding methods: random versus circular (Fig. 3A; Supplementary Table S3).
Randomly seeded cells expressed a much higher level of Ki67,
consistent with increased proliferation (or at least staying
in "cell cycle") at low GCDs. When high doses (IC50  4) were
applied, much higher differences in the median occurred
(Fig. 3A, ﬁrst row). The range of median ratios for IC50
was 17%–47% (7% and 20% GCDs, respectively), whereas for
IC504, the range was 73%–88%. In addition, when we exam-

A
Ki67 Median
(all cells)

Linear diﬀerence
1,584

Ki67 (%)

GCD

2,330

2,288
564

0.07

11

0.33

88

73
17

0.07

–10

0.20

13

10
3

0.07

GCD

47

–336 245

0.20

6

)

2

–2

0.20

7

0.33

0.33

13
4

0.07

IC50

8

–2

0.20

2

0.33

IC50 × 4

B

Survival (%)

1
0.9

S 1, ρ(0) = 0.1, random

0.8

S 2, ρ(0) = 0.8, random

0.7

S 3, ρ(0) = 0.1, circular

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
10−6

10−5

10−4

10−3

10−2

10−1

100

101

102

Drug concentration

C
% Apoptosis

Random
Mean

Std

Circular
Mean

Std

No drug

3.8

0.1

7.13

0.22

IC50

63.7

1.06

54.2

0.4

IC50 × 4

72

5.20

61.77

1.10

Figure 3.
Cell-to-cell baseline variation in drug sensitivity. A, cells after paclitaxel
treatment demonstrate changes in their cell-cycle phases. Ki67-positive cells
represent proliferative cells, that is, in their cell cycle. To track those changes,
we monitored the median in Ki67 ﬂorescence intensity using all cells and
measured the percentage of the positive cells (after 4 days, 3 days with
paclitaxel). These results are the average of three experiments (see
Supplementary Table S3). The differences between the two seeding methods
were calculated in two ways: linear differences (i.e., median or percentage
values of random seeded cells  values of circular seeded cells) and as a ratio
given as a percentage [i.e., (ValueRand/Valuecircular 1)  100 ¼ x%)]. B,
simulated survival curves. Relative cell survival is computed after 3 days of
treatment as a function of dosage (x-axis). Note that the dense geometries
(S2 and S3) experience an overall greater survival rate and thus are intrinsically
drug-resistant. C, experimental apoptosis percentage of both geometrical
conﬁgurations, using Annexin V assay. std, standard deviation.

2888 Cancer Res; 76(10) May 15, 2016

ined the percentage of only Ki67-positive cells, we found the
same trend, approximately a 10% range in linear differences
(Fig. 3A, second row), and about 13% in their ratio. Again, with
randomly seeded cells, there are more positive cells than occur
with the circular seeding method.
Furthermore, we hypothesize that different geometrical conﬁgurations sharing the same GCD can produce variations in
actual apoptosis rates, and this intrinsic resistance can be traced
back to cell-cycle dynamics. In general, increasing GCD is
a well-documented cause of decreasing drug sensitivity. An
example can be seen in Fig. 1A (Supplementary Table S1),
where we performed MTT assays on initially randomly seeded
cells with 10% versus 80% GCD of cells treated with paclitaxel.
Killing curves showed the percentage of surviving cells after
72 hours of treatment as a function of the drug dosage, normalized by nontreated cells growing in parallel. The observed
increase in IC50 at high GCDs is slightly more than one order
of magnitude. To examine our theory about signiﬁcant variations due to ﬂuctuations in LCD, we utilized our ABM to mechanistically study the killing curves for three different spatial
seeding conﬁgurations: r1(0) ¼ 10% (of GCD), and r2(0) ¼
80% in random structure and r3(0) ¼ 10% in circular structure.
The mathematical model qualitatively showed that the randomly seeded plate can reach a higher relative survival percentage for most drug concentrations and experience a more
gradual decrease with increasing drug concentrations, that is, a
more gradual slope (Fig. 3B). The simulations also predicted
that the compact conﬁguration (i.e., circular structure) would
exhibit the same trend as high GCD, meaning that the LCD can
produce signiﬁcant higher survival with a more gradually
sloped curve and higher number of surviving cells after exposure to high drug concentrations than randomly seeded cells
that share the same GCD of 10%.
The model could not predict differences for low drug concentrations and was not sensitive enough to provide information about the observed IC50 variations. However, the model
did provide direction based on the underlying dynamics to
examine the general survival variation in a more detailed way,
namely to focus on the relationship between processes related
to CCD, the transition between the P and Q states, and the
apoptosis rates as a function of the LCD. To experimentally
quantify the cell-to-cell baseline variations in paclitaxel drug
sensitivity, we further directly measured the apoptosis percentages under different local conditions: random and circular,
using Annexin V staining, with the same GCD (20%). For the
IC50 and IC50  4 settings, the variation between the random
versus circular structures reached 12% to 14% linear differences
in actual apoptosis percentage after normalizing each geometrical seeding method with their nontreated apoptosis rates
(Fig. 3C; Supplementary Table S4). Therefore, our results suggest that features related to the changes in growth (e.g., CCD
and transition between the P and Q states) and apoptosis
rates are functions of the geometric cell conﬁguration, that is,
LCD, in addition to GCD.

Discussion
Recently, Sandler and colleagues (21) addressed a central
question concerning the origin of cell-to-cell variation in CCD
by studying the differences between generations of cells derived
from a parental cell. The main debate is whether observed

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst March 1, 2016; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-3232

Dynamic Baseline Variations and Drug Sensitivity

variation originates from stochastic or deterministic processes.
Although stochasticity, for instance, results from random bursts
of gene expression or noisy partition of cellular components at
division, deterministic characteristics may result from the
robust design of the dynamic cellular system that can produce
a stable oscillator. They concluded, on the basis of an experimental setting with very low cell densities, that the cell cycle is
a deterministic and not a stochastic process. This leads to the
conclusion that the internal noise, without high external noise,
does not seem to add enough stochasticity to cause cell-to-cell
variation in CCD.
Most experimental settings involve higher GCDs (30%–
50%), yet have low LCDs (by randomly seeding the cells),
especially in high-throughput screening experiments. In our
current study, we suggest a method to integrate the conclusions
from single-cell studies (such as those from Sandler and colleagues) with experimental conditions that include higher
cell densities into a single uniﬁed model. This uniﬁed model
can serve as a general reference model for cell biology studies
that focus on dynamic features of single cells, population of
cells, and the relationship between them. Theoretically and
experimentally, we show that the LCD, in addition to the GCD,
can lead to signiﬁcant differences in spatial growth, proliferation, and paclitaxel-induced apoptosis rates. Another important aspect of this work is that it addresses a phenomenon that
all cell biologists take for granted: killing curves are not discrete
in nature, but rather are gradual, reﬂecting intrinsic heterogeneity in a cell population that can be attributed to differences in
LCD and cell cycle. Furthermore, our model allows us to
systematically explain why, and speciﬁcally how, one population can lose synchronization much faster than another.
This type of mechanistic model can be used to determine
whether the observed system behavior or characteristics are the
result of speciﬁc principles. For example, a future extension to our
model could test the following questions: to what extent would
additional internal noise (neglected here due to the Sandler and
colleagues ﬁndings) change the population dynamics? Or what is
the threshold level of collective internal noise that would begin to
affect the entire system dynamics, in relation to spatial growth,
proliferation, or drug response? Moreover, beyond a cell's
response to a drug, our model has implications concerning other
cellular processes, such as adult stem cell regeneration. Lei and

colleagues have recently suggested the origin and consequence of
heterogeneity in healthy tissues (22). They showed that heterogeneous proliferation, when not all cells have the same probability of proliferation, increases robustness in the process of tissue
regeneration and replacement of defective cells and hence provides improved long-term performance.
In summary, a comprehensive reference model is essential in
cell biology studies to determine signiﬁcance. We stress the value
of including in the reference model not only statistical tests, but
also dynamic features of the process as an integral method.

Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest
No potential conﬂicts of interest were disclosed.

Authors' Contributions
Conception and design: J.M. Greene, D. Levy, M.M. Gottesman, O. Lavi
Development of methodology: J.M. Greene, D. Levy, O. Lavi
Acquisition of data (provided animals, acquired and managed patients,
provided facilities, etc.): S.P. Herrada, O. Lavi
Analysis and interpretation of data (e.g., statistical analysis, biostatistics,
computational analysis): J.M. Greene, D. Levy, O. Lavi
Writing, review, and/or revision of the manuscript: J.M. Greene, D. Levy,
S.P. Herrada, M.M. Gottesman, O. Lavi
Administrative, technical, or material support (i.e., reporting or organizing
data, constructing databases): D. Levy, M.M. Gottesman, O. Lavi
Study supervision: D. Levy, M.M. Gottesman, O. Lavi

Acknowledgments
The authors thank George Leiman, Carol Cardarelli, Susan Garﬁeld,
Langston Lim, Poonam Mannan, Karen Wolcott, Subhadra Banerjee,
Mirit Aladjem, and Haiqing Fu for their assistance and for insightful
discussions.

Grant Support
This research was funded, in part, by the Intramural Research Program of
the NIH and also supported, in part, by a seed grant from the UMD-NCI
Partnership for Cancer Technology. The work of D. Levy was supported by
the John Simon Guggenheim Memorial Foundation.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment
of page charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement
in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.

Received December 2, 2015; revised February 4, 2016; accepted February 17,
2016; published OnlineFirst March 1, 2016.

References
1. Burger M, Capasso V, Morale D. On an aggregation model with long and
short range interactions. Nonlinear Anal Real World Appl 2007;8:939–58.
2. Morale D. Modeling and simulating animal grouping - Individual-based
models. Future Gener Comp Sy 2001;17:883–91.
3. Morale D, Capasso V, Oelschlager K. An interacting particle system modelling aggregation behavior: from individuals to populations. J Math Biol
2005;50:49–66.
4. Greene JM, Levy D, Fung KL, Souza PS, Gottesman MM, Lavi O. Modeling
intrinsic heterogeneity and growth of cancer cells. J Theor Biol 2015;367:
262–77.
5. Marusyk A, Polyak K. Tumor heterogeneity: causes and consequences.
Biochim Biophys Acta 2010;1805:105–17.
6. Park SY, Gonen M, Kim HJ, Michor F, Polyak K. Cellular and genetic
diversity in the progression of in situ human breast carcinomas to an
invasive phenotype. J Clin Invest 2010;120:636–44.
7. Sanz-Moreno V, Gadea G, Ahn J, Paterson H, Marra P, Pinner S, et al. Rac
activation and inactivation control plasticity of tumor cell movement. Cell
2008;135:510–23.

www.aacrjournals.org

8. Spencer SL, Gaudet S, Albeck JG, Burke JM, Sorger PK. Non-genetic origins
of cell-to-cell variability in TRAIL-induced apoptosis. Nature 2009;459:
428–32.
9. Gupta PB, Fillmore CM, Jiang G, Shapira SD, Tao K, Kuperwasser C,
et al. Stochastic state transitions give rise to phenotypic equilibrium in
populations of cancer cells. Cell 2011;146:633–44.
10. Sharma SV, Lee DY, Li B, Quinlan MP, Takahashi F, Maheswaran S, et al. A
chromatin-mediated reversible drug-tolerant state in cancer cell subpopulations. Cell 2010;141:69–80.
11. Saunders NA, Simpson F, Thompson EW, Hill MM, Endo-Munoz L,
Leggatt G, et al. Role of intratumoural heterogeneity in cancer drug
resistance: molecular and clinical perspectives. EMBO Mol Med 2012;
4:675–84.
12. Almendro V, Marusyk A, Polyak K. Cellular heterogeneity and molecular
evolution in cancer. Annu Rev Pathol 2013;8:277–302.
13. Pisco AO, Brock A, Zhou J, Moor A, Mojtahedi M, Jackson D, et al. NonDarwinian dynamics in therapy-induced cancer drug resistance. Nat Commun 2013;4:2467.

Cancer Res; 76(10) May 15, 2016

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

2889

Published OnlineFirst March 1, 2016; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-3232

Greene et al.

14. Gascoigne KE, Taylor SS. Cancer cells display profound intra- and interline
variation following prolonged exposure to antimitotic drugs. Cancer Cell
2008;14:111–22.
15. Cohen AA, Geva-Zatorsky N, Eden E, Frenkel-Morgenstern M, Issaeva I,
Sigal A, et al. Dynamic proteomics of individual cancer cells in response
to a drug. Science 2008;322:1511–6.
16. Messam CA, Pittman RN. Asynchrony and commitment to die during
apoptosis. Exp Cell Res 1998;238:389–98.
17. Tzur A, Kafri R, LeBleu VS, Lahav G, Kirschner MW. Cell growth and size
homeostasis in proliferating animal cells. Science 2009;325:167–71.
18. Wang P, Robert L, Pelletier J, Dang WL, Taddei F, Wright A, et al. Robust
growth of Escherichia coli. Curr Biol 2010;20:1099–103.

2890 Cancer Res; 76(10) May 15, 2016

19. Brimacombe KR, Hall MD, Auld DS, Inglese J, Austin CP, Gottesman
MM, et al. A dual-ﬂuorescence high-throughput cell line system for
probing multidrug resistance. Assay Drug Dev Technol 2009;7:
233–49.
20. Rowinsky EK, Donehower RC. Paclitaxel (taxol). N Engl J Med 1995;332:
1004–14.
21. Sandler O, Mizrahi SP, Weiss N, Agam O, Simon I, Balaban NQ. Lineage
correlations of single cell division time as a probe of cell-cycle dynamics.
Nature 2015;519:468–71.
22. Lei J, Levin SA, Nie Q. Mathematical model of adult stem cell regeneration
with cross-talk between genetic and epigenetic regulation. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 2014;111:E880–7.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst March 1, 2016; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-3232

Mathematical Modeling Reveals That Changes to Local Cell Density
Dynamically Modulate Baseline Variations in Cell Growth and Drug
Response
James M. Greene, Doron Levy, Sylvia P. Herrada, et al.
Cancer Res 2016;76:2882-2890. Published OnlineFirst March 1, 2016.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-3232
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2016/03/01/0008-5472.CAN-15-3232.DC1

Cited articles

This article cites 22 articles, 4 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/76/10/2882.full#ref-list-1

E-mail alerts

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.

Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

