Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 37

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Priority Research Paper

Heterogeneity in mechanisms of emergent resistance in
pediatric T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia
Babasaheb D. Yadav1,*, Amy L. Samuels2,*, Julia E. Wells2,*, Rosemary Sutton3,
Nicola C. Venn3, Katerina Bendak1, Denise Anderson4, Glenn M. Marshall5, Catherine
H. Cole6, Alex H. Beesley2,**, Ursula R. Kees2,** and Richard B. Lock1,**
1

Leukaemia Biology Program, Children’s Cancer Institute, Lowy Cancer Research Centre, University of New South Wales,
Sydney, New South Wales, Australia

2

Division of Children’s Leukaemia and Cancer Research, Telethon Kids Institute, University of Western Australia, Perth,
Western Australia, Australia
3

Molecular Diagnostics, Children’s Cancer Institute, Lowy Cancer Research Centre, University of New South Wales, Sydney,
New South Wales, Australia
4

Division of Bioinformatics and Biostatistics, Telethon Kids Institute, University of Western Australia, Perth, Western Australia,
Australia

5

Kids Cancer Centre, Sydney Children’s Hospital, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia

6

School of Paediatrics and Child Health, University of Western Australia, Perth, Western Australia, Australia

*

Denotes Equal First Authorship

**

Denotes Equal Senior Authorship

Correspondence to: Richard B. Lock, email: rlock@ccia.unsw.edu.au
Keywords: acute lymphoblastic leukemia; relapse; drug resistance; xenograft; pre-clinical testing
Received: June 08, 2016	

Accepted: July 28, 2016	

Published: August 11, 2016

Abstract
	 Relapse in pediatric T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) remains a
significant clinical problem and is thought to be associated with clonal selection
during treatment. In this study we used an established pre-clinical model of induction
therapy to increase our understanding of the effect of engraftment and chemotherapy
on clonal selection and acquisition of drug resistance in vivo. Immune-deficient
mice were engrafted with patient diagnostic specimens and exposed to a repeated
combination therapy consisting of vincristine, dexamethasone, L-asparaginase and
daunorubicin. Any re-emergence of disease following therapy was shown to be
associated with resistance to dexamethasone, no resistance was observed to the
other three drugs. Immunoglobulin/T-cell receptor gene rearrangements closely
matched those in respective diagnosis and relapse patient specimens, highlighting
that these clonal markers do not fully reflect the biological changes associated
with drug resistance. Gene expression profiling revealed the significant underlying
heterogeneity of dexamethasone-resistant xenografts. Alterations were observed in
a large number of biological pathways, yet no dominant signature was common to all
lines. These findings indicate that the biological changes associated with T-ALL relapse
and resistance are stochastic and highly individual, and underline the importance
of using sophisticated molecular techniques or single cell analyses in developing
personalized approaches to therapy.

INTRODUCTION

heterogeneity contributing to the progression of disease
and resistance to treatment. Patients often show dismal
prognosis after first relapse, with only 0% to 25% of
patients achieving durable remission after second-line
treatment [1-7]. The majority of T-ALL relapses occur

Pediatric T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(T-ALL) is a highly aggressive cancer, with clonal
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

58728

Oncotarget

during therapy or soon after completion of therapy,
with resistance to glucocorticoids considered to be one
of the main contributors to therapeutic failure [8-10].
Development of primary resistance can be considered
either in terms of clonal evolution or the selection of
a resistant sub-clone that was already present at low
numbers at the time of diagnosis [11-15], resulting in the
outgrowth of aggressive and resistant disease with adverse
clinical outcome.
Patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models have been
widely utilized to gain insight into clonal evolution and
mechanisms of resistance to chemotherapy in ALL [1620]. However, to date no molecular studies of T-ALL
clonal selection and/or evolution in response to standard
remission-induction therapy have been performed in
PDX models. In 2014 our group established a pre-clinical
mouse model of T-ALL relapse [21]. A unique aspect of
this model is that it uses a four-drug combination therapy
with a repeated-block design to model, as closely as
possible, current ALL induction-therapy protocols. In
the present study we have used this model to examine in
greater detail the process of drug-resistance acquisition
and clonal evolution in vivo. Our findings indicate
that mechanisms of resistance to remission-induction
are highly heterogeneous, supporting the continued
development of individualized approaches to leukemia
therapy.

-47) and one still in first remission (ALL-72). Following
engraftment, all xenografts were treated for four weeks
with VCR, DEX, ASP, and DNR (the ‘VXLD’ module,
Supplementary Table S1A). Disease onset was monitored
in peripheral blood by determining the percentage of
human CD45+ cells and, upon disease re-occurrence,
treatment was continued for a further two weeks with half
doses of VCR, DEX and L-ASP (the ‘1/2 VXL’ module,
Supplementary Table S1A). The combination of both
treatment blocks was designed to replicate therapy for
newly diagnosed ALL whilst accounting for toxicity, and
is referred to as the ‘VXLD2’ schedule.
In all six of the newly derived xenografts, the
initial four-week treatment module clearly delayed
disease progression (Figure 1), but in each case disease
re-emerged 28-77 days after the last week of treatment.
However, the response of each of the lines to the second
round of therapy (1/2 VXL) varied considerably, with
disease reoccurring in only some of the engrafted animals
(Figure 1, and Supplementary Table S1B).
To further probe the behavior of T-ALL samples
in this pre-clinical model, we repeated the in vivo drug
selection protocol to establish independent xenograft lines
using diagnosis samples from two patients from whom we
had generated ALL-44 and ALL-46. These xenografts are
referred to as ALL-44 ‘repeat’ and ALL-46 ‘repeat’, and
they were treated in exactly the same way as described
above. We observed that in case of the ALL-46 ‘repeat’,
the kinetics of engraftment (Supplementary Figure S1A)
exactly matched that of the original xenograft (Figure 1C).
In contrast, a stark difference in the engraftment pattern
was observed for ALL-44 ‘repeat’, where none of the
mice ‘relapsed’ following the initial four-week treatment
module (Supplementary Figure S1B), whilst in the original
ALL-44 xenograft disease remained evident in four out
of six mice even after both treatment modules (Figure
1B). The variability in the response to treatment for ALL44 (summarized in Supplementary Table 1B) indicates
that there may be a stochastic element to the selection
or evolution of clones with the capacity to survive drugtherapy.

RESULTS
Kinetics of engraftment and relapse in a preclinical model of T-ALL therapy
To examine the role of engraftment and
chemotherapy in the selection of leukemic cells, a
previously optimized, clinically relevant four drug model
of induction therapy was used in immunocompromised
(NSG) mice engrafted with diagnostic bone marrow
samples from T-ALL patients [21]. In that earlier
study, two xenograft lines (ALL-27 and ALL-31) were
established that demonstrated acquired drug resistance
in response to treatment [21]. In the present study six
additional xenograft lines were established and treated in
the same way, two at second passage (ALL-42 and ALL44) and four at first passage (ALL-46, ALL-47, ALL72 and ALL-73), in regards to the stage of their serial
engraftment in mice. In total, xenografts derived from the
diagnosis specimens of eight T-ALL patients are presented
(Table 1), consisting of one with refractory disease
(ALL-31), one with chemo-resistant disease who died
early (ALL-44), three with early relapse ( < 18 months)
in the bone marrow (ALL-42, -44, -46, -73), two with
early isolated central nervous system relapse (ALL-27,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Effect of engraftment and drug-treatment on
T-ALL clonal markers
To evaluate the selection pressure caused by
engraftment in NSG mice, we explored the Ig/TCR and
SIL-TAL1 gene rearrangements of diagnostic patient
samples, and their corresponding xenografts at first,
second or third passage (Supplementary Data File1).
Assessments were performed using a panel of 25 clonal
markers for the patient samples and first two xenografts
ALL-42 and ALL-44, whilst for the remaining xenografts,
the major markers (2-3 gene rearrangements per line) were
58729

Oncotarget

Table 1: Patient characteristics and risk factors for diagnostic bone-marrow samples used in T-ALL patient-derived
xenografts (PDX).

* ALL-27 & ALL-31 were reported previously (Samuels et al 2014); cyto3+, cytoplasmic CD3 positive; Res Dis, resistant
disease; CNS, central nervous system; BM, bone marrow; Dx, diagnosis; rel, relapse; DOD, died of disease; CR, clinical
remission; HR, high risk; SR, standard risk; N/A, not available; D7 Pred response, Day 7 Prednisone Response (‘good or
poor’, according to BFM definition); MRD, minimal residual disease; D35, Day 35; WBC, white blood cell count

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

58730

Oncotarget

sequenced by Sanger sequencing and/or quantified by RQPCR.
Three of the six patients in the present study had
bone marrow relapses (ALL-42, ALL-46, ALL-73).
Comparison of their diagnosis and relapse specimens
using the Ig/TCR markers showed that all markers
detected at diagnosis were conserved in the patients’
relapse samples and in all the primary and secondary

passages of their xenografted cells, independent of
chemotherapy treatment. Examining the diagnostic/
relapse pairs there was only one change observed in either
the pattern of gene rearrangements or in the nucleotide
sequence of selected markers (Supplementary Data File1).
The SIL-TAL1 rearrangement was only found in ALL-42
and was consistently present in both the patient and all
derived PDX cells, with no evidence of evolution. The

Figure 1: Development of drug-resistant T-ALL xenografts. NSG mice were inoculated with patient biopsy samples and treated
with the induction-therapy VXLD2 schedule (or saline) to create multidrug resistant sublines. The percentage of human CD45+ cells in the
peripheral blood was used to assess leukemia progression, in xenografts treated either during second passage A. & B. or first passage C.-F.
in regards to serial engraftment of the patient diagnostic specimen.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

58731

Oncotarget

patient corresponding to ALL-73 acquired a TRB marker
at relapse that was not detected in any of the ALL-73
PDX samples. Backtracking of this marker in the patient’s
earlier samples using the specific RQ-PCR test revealed

this marker was present at a very low level ( < 0.1%) at
diagnosis and responded more slowly to chemotherapy.
The same test confirmed its absence in all of the derived
xenograft cells.

Figure 2: Assessment of drug resistance in relapsing xenografts. Lines in which disease re-emerged (‘R’) following multidrug
VXLD2 induction therapy, and their passage-matched controls (‘C’), were assessed ex vivo for acquired drug resistance to single agent
DEX: A. ALL-27, B. ALL-31, C. ALL-42, D. ALL-44 & E. ALL-46. The Alamar blue assay was used to measure cell survival (mean
± SEM) following a 48-hour drug exposure; each treatment arm (‘R’ or ‘C’) represents the average of 4-6 independent mice, with three
technical replicates performed for each mouse.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

58732

Oncotarget

diagnosis samples, and that in vivo drug-treatment (just
as we observe at patient relapse) does not substantially
alter the pattern of major clonal markers detected by this
technique.

The retention of diagnosis clonal markers at relapse
is consistent with our laboratory’s experience in the routine
testing of T-ALL patients for MRD, as well as reports in
the literature [3, 19, 22]. There was a slightly lower level
of MRD at relapse for ALL-42 due to a lower percentage
of blasts at relapse than diagnosis. The much lower level
of blasts in patient ALL-47 (2% compared to diagnosis) is
indicative of molecular BM relapse at the time of isolated
CNS relapse by clinical criteria. Interestingly for ALL46, ALL-47 and ALL-73, there were patient samples
available for intermediate time points between diagnosis
and relapse, from which one can clearly trace the course of
the disease in these patients i.e. initial response to therapy,
as evidenced by a decrease in the selected clonal markers
to an undetectable level (MRD negative), followed by a
subsequent increase in the marker before clinical relapse.
Upon primary engraftment of all six diagnostic
samples (ALL-42, ALL-44, ALL-46, ALL-47, ALL-72
& ALL-73) into NSG mice, there were clonal markers in
these first passage mice that remained stable in comparison
to the diagnosis specimen, both in terms of quantification
and nucleotide sequence (Supplementary Data File1). In
ALL-42 and ALL44, in which all potential markers were
evaluated, there was also evidence of some minor changes
to the clonal composition of the leukemic compartment,
something not entirely unexpected given the selection
pressure likely to be exerted by placing human cells into
a mouse (albeit immunocompromised) host. However,
the additional bands seen by heteroduplex electrophoresis
were polyclonal by Sanger sequencing.
From each xenograft line that did not show
treatment resistance at first passage (all except ALL72), we harvested cells from a single untreated control
mouse with markers most resembling the respective
patient diagnostic sample, and placed these into multiple
recipient mice (i.e. 2nd passage). In the case of ALL-46,
cells were additionally engrafted from 2nd passage mice
into a 3nd passage. For each xenograft we selected and
followed one or two Ig/TCR markers through each stage,
by both RQ-PCR and Sanger sequencing (Supplementary
Data File1). In every case, the selected marker in control
mice remained identical in both quantity and nucleotide
sequence to that seen in both the respective patient
and first passage mice, indicating that so far as can be
determined from Ig/TCR gene rearrangements, the clonal
composition of the leukemic compartment remains largely
stable through serial engraftment in NSG mice. Similarly,
treatment of the mice with multidrug therapy (either
VXLD2 for the purpose of modelling induction therapy,
or ½ VXL for the purpose of maintaining baseline drugselection pressure in subsequent expansions) did not affect
either the quantity or the sequence of the clonal markers
being tracked (Supplementary Data File1). Together these
data indicate that although there is some selection pressure
at first passage, these PDX models largely preserve the
Ig/TCR gene rearrangements observed in the original
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Ex vivo assessment of drug resistance in relapsing
xenografts
We next wished to determine whether the reemergence of disease in some xenografts following
multidrug treatment was associated with acquired
resistance to any of the agents used in the VXLD2
protocol. Leukemia cells isolated from in vivo drugselected (‘R’ or relapse) or saline-treated (‘C’ or control)
xenografts were thus tested ex vivo against each of the
four drugs individually. Previously, we have reported
that the xenografts ALL-27R and ALL-31R, which were
also treated with a VXLD2 regimen in vivo, demonstrated
acquired resistance to DEX [21] (data reproduced in
Figure 2A & 2B; p < 0.01 for both, Repeated Measures
ANOVA). Consistent with these findings, we found that
ALL-42R, ALL-44R and ALL-46R showed a significant
decrease in DEX sensitivity compared to their respective
controls (Figure 2C, 2D and 2E; p < 0.01 for all, Repeated
Measures ANOVA); however, there was no change in
sensitivity to ASP, VCR and DNR in these xenografts
(Supplementary Figure S2A, B and C).
In contrast, ALL-47R, ALL-72R and the repeated
ALL-46R xenograft, showed no change in sensitivity to
any of the four drugs tested compared with their controls
(Supplementary Figures S2D-F; ALL-73 could not be
tested in this assay due to insufficient cell numbers). In
summary, DEX was the only drug for which increased
resistance was observed, a phenotype observed in five out
of the seven xenografts we have tested in this model so far.
There thus appears to be a stochastic component to the reemergence of disease following multidrug therapy (both in
terms of the frequency with which ‘relapses’ are observed,
and the acquisition of a resistant phenotype) which is not
reflected in the apparent stability of PCR-based clonal
markers (Ig/TCR rearrangements).

Analysis of genes and pathways associated with
acquired DEX resistance
To better understand the biological processes
associated with the acquisition of DEX resistance in this
xenograft model, we performed gene expression profiling
of patient diagnostic specimens and their matched control
and VXLD2-treated xenografts. Array data for xenografts
ALL-27 and ALL-31, previously reported [21], were also
normalized and re-analyzed alongside the samples from
the present study, giving a total of five xenografts with
a DEX-resistance phenotype (ALL-27, ALL-31, ALL42, ALL-44, ALL-46) and one xenograft for which no
58733

Oncotarget

resistance was observed after drug-treatment (ALL-72);
as noted above, it was not possible to determine DEX
sensitivity in ALL-73 due to insufficient cell numbers.

Next, we compared baseline gene-expression
profiles of each of these samples using an unsupervised
clustering method (Figure 3). In four out of the six

Figure 3: Effect of engraftment and drug-treatment on T-ALL gene expression profiles. Clustering by sample similarity

for patient diagnosis samples (white squares), xenograft controls (i.e. saline-treated; grey cylinders) and samples recovered following in
vivo drug-treatment (black circles); A.-E. Xenograft lines for which VXLD2-treatment resulted in DEX resistance; F. Xenograft for which
disease recurrence following VXDL2 was not associated with DEX resistance (ALL-72). Panels on the left (A, C, E) are the xenograft
lines from which samples form highly distinct clusters. The color scale represents the mean absolute difference between individual arrays.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

58734

Oncotarget

xenograft lines (ALL-31, ALL-44, ALL-46 & ALL-72)
the engrafted samples were clearly distinct in terms of
baseline gene expression from their respective diagnostic
patient specimens, and in three of these cases (Figure 3A,
3C & 3E - i.e. the left-hand panels) there were also strong
transcriptional differences (distinct clusters) between
control and VXLD2-treated samples. This observation was
not correlated with acquired DEX resistance since neither
the ALL-27 nor the ALL-42 xenografts demonstrated
separation of control and VXLD2-treated samples (Figure
3B & 3D).
The clear separation of samples in ALL-31,
ALL-44 and ALL-46 in Figure 3 would suggest that
these xenografts should return the largest number of
differentially expressed genes when comparing VXLD2
vs. control groups. However, with the exception of ALL46 which has a particularly large number of significant
genes (n = 1074), there was no particular pattern to the
number of differentially expressed genes among the
other xenografts (Figure 4A: ALL-31, n = 103; ALL44, n = 125; ALL-27, n = 338; ALL-42, n = 69). This
demonstrates that although there may be larger overall
transcriptional changes in response to drug-treatment in
certain xenografts (i.e. ALL-31, ALL-44 and ALL-46),
a large proportion of the signal still remains specific to
each biological replicate (i.e. the individual mice in each
treatment arm). In other words, there is heterogeneity in
the biological pathways driving DEX resistance, even
within a single xenograft line.
This heterogeneity is even more evident when
comparing the overlap in differentially expressed genes
between the five xenografts (Figure 4A). Remarkably,
there was not a single gene in common between all
five analyses, demonstrating that there are multiple
mechanisms by which leukemic cells may acquire
resistance to DEX. A full list of the differentially expressed
genes associated with each xenograft is provided in
Supplementary Data File2.
To further interrogate the potential mechanism of
DEX resistance, we compared the individual Affymetrix
gene lists for differential regulation of ATPase Binding
Cassette proteins (ABCs) and epigenetic modifiers, both
of which are known to contribute to drug resistance
[23, 24]. Our microarray analysis showed that ABCA2
is overexpressed in ALL-31 and ALL-46, highlighting
the possible involvement of ABCs in drug resistance of
these two PDXs. Furthermore, Affymetrix global gene
analysis was compared to dbEM [25], an epigenetic
modifier database. Three out of five relapsed xenografts
showed dysregulation of epigenetic modifiers: ALL27 showed up-regulation of SETD7 in relapse; ALL42 showed down-regulation of KDM5B; and ALL-46
showed the most changes, with two epigenetic modifiers
up-regulated (HDAC9, SMARCD3) and three downregulated (KDM5B, HDAC7, FBXO10). Therefore, not all
DEX resistant xenografts showed differential expression
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

of ABCs or epigenetic regulators and only KDM5B
was down-regulated in two out of the five xenografts.
In contrast, each xenograft showed a diverse pattern of
differentially regulated genes, thus emphasizing the
underlying heterogeneity of drug resistance.
Given the significant heterogeneity at the level of
individual genes, we used Ingenuity Pathway Analysis to
assess whether there might instead be common themes
in terms of underlying biological processes significantly
associated with each individual xenograft showing DEX
resistance (Supplementary Figure S6). The major pathways
associated with DEX-resistance in each xenograft are
summarized in Figure 4B, with a more detailed breakdown
of the annotations belonging to each term provided
in Supplementary Figure S3. Among these biological
functions, the vast majority showed unique identifiers and
included: tyrosine phosphorylation of protein for ALL-46,
protein kinase cascade in ALL-44, MAPKKK cascade
in ALL-42, small GTPase mediated signal transduction
in ALL-31, and transmembrane receptor protein serine/
threonine kinase signaling in ALL-27 (Supplementary
Figure S6). Even at the level of biological pathways
however, it is clear that there is significant heterogeneity in
the mechanisms contributing to acquired DEX-resistance
in these T-ALL xenografts. Through unsupervised
clustering the most similar responses were seen in ALL-44
and ALL-46 - a relationship driven in large part by strong
changes in cell death and survival signaling (Figure 4B;
see also Supplementary Figures S4 and S5, which show
the relationship of these genes within the full network of
differentially expressed transcripts in ALL-44 and ALL46). This single observation is the most notable finding
from our pathway analysis, but is perhaps not surprising
given the known links between glucocorticoid sensitivity
and apoptotic signaling [26-29]. The overwhelming
conclusion from these studies is that there is significant
heterogeneity in the biological response in terms of RNA
expression of these engrafted leukemias to multidrug
therapy, both within individual samples and between
xenografts, mirroring the individual nature of T-ALL
relapse in patients.

DISCUSSION
In this study we have implemented a novel in vivo
approach to T-ALL xenograft drug selection, and were
able to demonstrate the development of resistance even
in primary cells engrafted at first passage. Out of the eight
T-ALL PDX lines we have presented in this paper, five
developed resistance to DEX upon disease re-emergence
(ALL-27, ALL-31, ALL-42, ALL-44, ALL-46), whilst
two showed no change in drug sensitivity (ALL-72 and
ALL-47). These results, together with observation that the
‘repeated’ engraftments for ALL-44 and ALL-46 yielded
markedly different results from their respective original
experiments (i.e. no re-emergence of disease in the ALL58735

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Biology of acquired DEX-resistance in VXLD2-treated xenografts. A. Venn diagram of the lists of genes differentially
expressed (adjusted p-value < 0.05) between control and DEX-resistant xenografts, demonstrating that the signatures associated with this
acquired phenotype are largely specific to each sample; B. Heatmap of the most significant biological functions associated with these
DEX-resistant signatures, with the color representing the absolute number (and thus the prominence) of distinct biological sub-functions
associated within each category.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

58736

Oncotarget

application of similar strategies in the leukemia field is
likely to be an important aspect of future improvements in
clinical outcome for T-ALL.

44 repeat, and no development of drug-resistance in the
ALL-46 repeat), demonstrate the variable nature of the
leukemic response to therapy. It is interesting to note, that
despite the use of multiple drugs during this induction
therapy model we find, in accordance with clinical
experience [30, 31], that when resistance is associated with
disease re-emergence (i.e. relapse), it is the phenotype of
dexamethasone resistance that is most commonly shared.
Evidently it is this class of drug that exerts the biggest
selection pressure during induction therapy, and thus
must be presumed to be the most effective - explaining
why sensitivity to glucocorticoids is such an important
prognostic factor for ALL [8, 9, 32, 33].
Our clonal marker studies in primary patient
samples showed that the predominant clones at diagnosis
were preserved at relapse, consistent with clinical data
[34]. This is also consistent with literature showing that
leukemic clones at diagnosis are genetically highly related
[19], and although gene re-arrangements may change
during the course of treatment due to persistent activity of
the VDJ recombination enzyme system in leukemic blasts
[35] or through the selection of subclones with different Ig/
TCR markers [14, 16, 36], it is unlikely that the evolution
of such markers would be detectable within one month of
remission induction therapy [22]. Where changes in Ig/
TCR gene rearrangements in patients are observed, they
are typically in cases of late relapse (>5 years from initial
diagnosis) [22]. In the present study we observed that the
dominant clonal rearrangements present at both patient
diagnosis and relapse, were also present in corresponding
control and drug-treated xenografts selected at primary,
secondary or tertiary passages, indicating that these
PDX models recapitulate the course of clinical disease in
this regard. However, the fact that the majority of these
xenografts acquired drug-resistance following treatment in
the absence of changes in these standard MRD markers,
demonstrates that additional phenotypic data are required
to accurately predict the risk of relapse and the presence
of minor drug resistant sub-clones.
In summary, it is evident that there are many
different ways that cancer cells can escape from
therapy, something highlighted by the heterogeneous
biological signatures associated with the acquisition
of DEX-resistance in the present study. The increasing
sophistication of molecular genetic methods, such as
next-generation sequencing, now presents the possibility
of accurately tracking the in vivo selection of therapyresistant clones in individual patients [12, 15, 37-39],
an excellent example of which is the TRACERx Study
(Tracking Cancer Evolution through Treatment [Rx])
which aims to document multi-region and longitudinal
genetic changes in lung cancers to examine how they
evolve, how treatment influences that process, and the
impact of clonal heterogeneity on therapeutic and survival
outcome [15]. While the current study focused on patients
with predominantly high-risk and/or poor outcome, the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Ethics approval and patients
All experimental studies had received prior
approval from the Animal Care and Ethics Committee
of the University of New South Wales, and the Human
Research Ethics Committees of the South Eastern Sydney
Local Health District and the University of New South
Wales. Samples used in this study were obtained from
the pediatric patients treated on four different clinical
trial protocols. The primary samples for ALL-27, ALL31, ALL-44, ALL-46 and ALL-47 were obtained from
children treated on Australia and New Zealand Children’s
Haematology and Oncology Group (ANZCHOG) ALL
Study 8 clinical trial [40], whereas sample ALL-42 was
obtained from an ANZCCSG ALL Study 7 [41] treated
patient. ALL-72 was derived from a patient treated as per
Children’s Oncology Group (COG) protocol AALL0434,
and ALL-73 from an 11-month old baby with ALL treated
according to Interfant 06 [42, 43]. The patients were
all diagnosed between 2003 and 2010 with T-ALL and
referred for testing of minimal residual disease (MRD)
at Children’s Cancer Institute (CCI) with consent for
research on biobanked material.
The patient characteristics and risk factors are shows
in Table 1. Patient bone marrow aspirates were collected
in Acid Citrate Dextrose tubes (Becton Dickinson, North
Ryde, NSW, Australia) and layered onto Lymphoprep
(Stemcell Technologies, Tullamarine, VIC, Australia),
centrifuged and the mononuclear cell layer collected and
washed as per manufacturer’s instructions. Samples for
DNA were set aside and the remaining sample was viably
frozen in 1ml aliquots of 1x107 or 2x107 cells with fetal
calf serum and 10% DMSO.

Development of T-ALL xenografts and in vivo
drug treatments
Xenograft lines were established as previously
described [21, 44] from viably frozen T-ALL diagnosis
biopsy samples, using the NOD/SCID/IL-2 receptor
gamma−/− (NOD.Cg-Prkdcscid Il2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ) ‘NSG’ strain
of immunocompromised mice. Engraftment and disease
progression were monitored by enumerating the proportion
of human versus mouse CD45+ cells in the peripheral
blood (%huCD45+), using established flow cytometric
procedures [13, 44]. When the %huCD45+ exceeded 50%,
animals were euthanazed and tissues were harvested and
cryopreserved. Continuous xenografts were established by
58737

Oncotarget

inoculating spleen-derived cells from primary engrafted
animals into secondary and tertiary recipient mice.
For in vivo drug treatment, groups of six NSG mice
were inoculated intravenously with 2-5 x 106 human
leukemia cells, either directly from patient samples
(i.e. at primary passage) or purified from the spleens of
previously engrafted mice (i.e. at secondary passage).
These alternative approaches were designed to test the
selective pressure of the engraftment process on responses
to induction-therapy and the evolution of clonal markers.
In two cases (ALL-44 and ALL-46) we repeated the entire
engraftment process, starting from the primary patient
specimen, in order to examine variability in the selection
and outgrowth of T-ALL clones in these PDX models
(ALL-44 ‘repeat’ and ALL-46 ‘repeat’). Mice were
monitored weekly via tail vein bleeds for engraftment
and subsequent to drug treatment [13, 44]. When the
%huCD45+ reached a median of at least 1%, mice were
randomized for the ‘induction-therapy’ regimen VXLD2
(see Supplementary Table S1A) which we developed
previously [21]. Xenografts in which leukemic cells reemerged following VXLD2 treatment (i.e. “relapsing”)
were given the designation ‘R’ and their passage-matched
controls the designation ‘C’ (e.g. ALL-42C and ALL42R).
To test the stability of clonal markers
(Immunoglobulin and T-cell receptor, Ig/TCR, and genes)
in VXLD2-selected lines, selection pressure in subsequent
passages was maintained by treating xenografts with
the ½ VXL module only (Supplementary Table S1A).
Mice were excluded from the study if they developed
spontaneous thymic lymphomas. The drugs used in this
study were: DEX (Dexamethasone sodium phosphate;
Hospira, Mulgrave, Victoria, Australia), VCR (Vincristine
sulfate; Baxter, Darlinghurst, NSW, Australia), ASP
(L-Asparaginase (Colaspase), Sanofi, Macquarie Park,
New South Wales, Australia), DNR (Daunorubicin
hydrochloride; Pfizer, West Ryde, NSW, Australia).

(V-N-(D)-N-J), identified using NCBI IgBlast (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/igblast/) and ESG-MRD-ALL
guidelines (European Study Group on MRD detection in
ALL). RQ-PCR was performed on a Biorad IQ-5 platform,
using an appropriate hydrolysis probe and standard curves
made by serial dilution of the patient’s diagnostic DNA
and normal peripheral blood mononuclear cell controls
[49] according to EuroMRD guidelines [50].

Alamar blue colorimetric assay
Xenograft cells were assessed for single agent ex
vivo drug sensitivity by Alamar blue assay; cells were
retrieved from cryostorage and resuspended in QBSF60 medium (Quality Biological, Gaithesburg, MD,
USA) supplemented with 20 ng/mL Flt-3 ligand, 100 U/
mL penicillin, 100 μg/mL streptomycin, and 2 mmol/L
L-glutamine. Before treatment, cells were plated in 96well plates (100 μL/well) at a density previously optimized
and were equilibrated overnight at 37°C with 5% CO2.
Cells were then treated with 10-fold serial dilutions of
each drug (DEX, VCR, ASP or DNR: 100 µM- 1nM) for
48 hours, at which point Alamar blue reagent was added
(0.6 mmol/L Resazurin, 0.07 mmol/L Methylene Blue,
1 mmol/L potassium hexacyanoferrate (III), 1 mmol/L
potassium hexacyanoferrate (II) trihydrate). Fluorescence
was measured at 0 and 6 hours using a fluorescent plate
reader (VICTOR, PerkinElmer, Glen Waverley, VIC,
Australia) with excitation at 560 nm and emission at 590
nm and data are expressed as a percentage of untreated
controls.

Gene expression analysis
RNA was extracted from patient and xenograft cells
using the AllPrep kit (Qiagen, Doncaster, VIC, Australia)
following the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were
quantified by Nanodrop ND-1000 Spectrophotometry
(ThermoFisher Scientific, Scoresby, VIC, Australia)
and RNA integrity assessed using the Agilent 2100
Bioanalyzer and the RNA Nano 6000 kit (Agilent
Technologies, Mulgrave, VIC). Mononuclear cells were
purified from xenografted spleens containing >95%
huCD45+ cells. We have previously shown that at high
engraftment levels (>90% huCD45+ cells) species-specific
transcriptional profiles can be obtained from xenografts
without requiring masking of murine signatures [51]. RNA
was processed and labeled according to manufacturer’s
instructions (GeneChip WT Sense Target Labeling
Protocol, Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA, USA). The cDNA
was hybridized onto Affymetrix GeneChip Human Gene
1.0 ST or 1.1 ST arrays), and processed according to
standard protocols (Ramaciotti Centre for Genomics,
Sydney, NSW, Australia).

Clonal analysis by identification of gene
rearrangements
DNA was isolated from 1x107 cells from patient
diagnosis or relapse samples using the NucleobondAXG 100 kit (Machery Nagel, Düren, Germany) and the
corresponding primary, secondary or tertiary xenografts
using the DNeasy Blood and Tissue kit kit (Qiagen,
Doncaster, VIC, Australia). Clonal markers were identified
by PCR screening of over 300 Ig/TCR rearrangements in
the IGH, IGK, TRG, TRD, TRA, TRB genes, as well as
the SIL-TAL1 fusion, using 24 single and multiplex PCR
reactions followed by heteroduplex analysis and direct
sequencing products [45-48]. Pairs of patient-specific
primers were designed to enable real-time quantitative
PCR (RQ-PCR) detection of the unique junctional regions
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

58738

Oncotarget

Author Contributions

The Bioconductor ‘arrayQualityMetrics’ package
[52] was used to perform quality control checks on the
arrays prior to and after robust multi-array average
(RMA) normalization [53]. Potential batch effects were
corrected using ComBat [54] available from Bioconductor.
Technical replicates were averaged prior to analysis to
avoid falsely optimistic p-values. Version 19 custom
chip definition files (CDFs) from the Brain Array group
[55] were used to allocate Entrez gene IDs (http://

AHB, URK and RBL conceived and designed study;
BDY conducted xenograft experiments and analysis;
ALS, JEW, DA performed gene-expression profiling and
analysis; RS, NCV and BDY performed clonal marker
studies; GMM and CHC provided patient material
and clinical oversight; All authors contributed to the
preparation of the manuscript.

brainarray.mbni.med.umich.edu/Brainarray/
Database/CustomCDF/19.0.0/entrezg.asp) along

REFERENCES

with a modified affy package (affy_1.44.1) compatible
with these CDFs [56]. The Bioconductor limma package
[57] was used to perform differential expression analysis,
adjusting p-values for multiple testing by the method of
Benjamini & Hochberg [58]. Results were filtered for
those genes with absolute fold changes greater than 1.5 and
adjusted p-values < 0.05. Differentially expressed genes
that passed these criteria were analyzed for biological
function using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (Ingenuity®
Systems; http:/www.ingenuity.com), collapsing redundant
annotation terms into higher functional (parent) categories
and averaging the associated p-values. To reduce data
dimensionality, annotation terms associated with only a
single sample were filtered out.
Microarray data from this study can be accessed
from ArrayExpress (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress),
accession number E-MEXP-3916 (ALL-27 & ALL-31),
and E-MTAB-4759 (for all other samples).

1.	 Einsiedel HG, Von Stackelberg A, Hartmann R, Fengler R,
Schrappe M, Janka-Schaub G, Mann G, Hahlen K, Gobel
U, Klingebiel T, Ludwig WD and Henze G. Long-term
outcome in children with relapsed ALL by risk-stratified
salvage therapy: results of trial acute lymphoblastic
leukemia-relapse study of the Berlin-Frankfurt-Munster
Group 87. J Clin Oncol. 2005; 23:7942-7950.
2.	

3.	 Szczepanski T, Van der Velden VH, Waanders E, Kuiper
RP, Van Vlierberghe P, Gruhn B, Eckert C, PanzerGrumayer R, Basso G, Cave H, Stadt UZ, Campana D,
Schrauder A, et al. Late recurrence of childhood T-cell
acute lymphoblastic leukemia frequently represents a
second leukemia rather than a relapse: first evidence for
genetic predisposition. J Clin Oncol. 2011; 29:1643-1649.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

4.	 Rivera GK, Zhou Y, Hancock ML, Gajjar A, Rubnitz J,
Ribeiro RC, Sandlund JT, Hudson M, Relling M and
Evans WE. Bone marrow recurrence after initial intensive
treatment for childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia.
Cancer. 2005; 103:368-376.

We thank the patients and staff of Sydney Children’s
Hospital for the provision of T-ALL biopsies. Children’s
Cancer Institute Australia for Medical Research is
affiliated with the University of New South Wales and the
Sydney Children’s Hospitals Network.

5.	 Raetz EA, Borowitz MJ, Devidas M, Linda SB, Hunger
SP, Winick NJ, Camitta BM, Gaynon PS and Carroll WL.
Reinduction platform for children with first marrow relapse
of acute lymphoblastic leukemia: A Children’s Oncology
Group Study. J Clin Oncol. 2008; 26:3971-3978.

CONFLICTs OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

6.	 Schrappe M, Valsecchi MG, Bartram CR, Schrauder A,
Panzer-Grumayer R, Moricke A, Parasole R, Zimmermann
M, Dworzak M, Buldini B, Reiter A, Basso G, Klingebiel
T, et al. Late MRD response determines relapse risk overall
and in subsets of childhood T-cell ALL: results of the
AIEOP-BFM-ALL 2000 study. Blood. 2011; 118:20772084.

GRANT SUPPORT
This study was supported by the NHMRC (Projects
Grants ID513765, ID1024232 and ID1011499; Research
Fellowships 568703 and 1059804), the Children’s
Leukaemia and Cancer Research Foundation (CLCRF
Project Grants & Fellowship, AHB & URK) and the
Steven Walter Children’s Cancer Foundation.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Nguyen K, Devidas M, Cheng SC, La M, Raetz EA, Carroll
WL, Winick NJ, Hunger SP, Gaynon PS, Loh ML and
Children’s Oncology G. Factors influencing survival after
relapse from acute lymphoblastic leukemia: a Children’s
Oncology Group study. Leukemia. 2008; 22:2142-2150.

7.	 Tallen G, Ratei R, Mann G, Kaspers G, Niggli F,
Karachunsky A, Ebell W, Escherich G, Schrappe M,
Klingebiel T, Fengler R, Henze G and von Stackelberg
A. Long-term outcome in children with relapsed acute
lymphoblastic leukemia after time-point and site-ofrelapse stratification and intensified short-course multidrug

58739

Oncotarget

chemotherapy: results of trial ALL-REZ BFM 90. J Clin
Oncol. 2010; 28:2339-2347.

FK, Stanulla M, Schrappe M, Schrauder A, Bornhauser BC,
et al. Xenografts of highly resistant leukemia recapitulate
the clonal composition of the leukemogenic compartment.
Blood. 2011; 118:1854-1864.

8.	 Inaba H and Pui C-H. Glucocorticoid use in acute
lymphoblastic leukaemia. The Lancet Oncology. 2010;
11:1096-1106.
9.	

20.	 Zunino SJ, Storms DH and Ducore JM. Novel in vivo model
of inducible multi-drug resistance in acute lymphoblastic
leukemia with chromosomal translocation t(4;11). Cancer
Lett. 2010; 296:49-54.

Piovan E, Yu J, Tosello V, Herranz D, Ambesi-Impiombato
A, Da Silva AC, Sanchez-Martin M, Perez-Garcia A, Rigo
I, Castillo M, Indraccolo S, Cross JR, de Stanchina E, et
al. Direct reversal of glucocorticoid resistance by AKT
inhibition in acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Cancer Cell.
2013; 24:766-776.

21.	 Samuels AL, Beesley AH, Yadav BD, Papa RA, Sutton R,
Anderson D, Marshall GM, Cole CH, Kees UR and Lock
RB. A pre-clinical model of resistance to induction therapy
in pediatric acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Blood Cancer J.
2014; 4:e232.

10.	 Beesley AH, Rampellini JL, Palmer ML, Heng JY, Samuels
AL, Firth MJ, Ford J and Kees UR. Influence of wild-type
MLL on glucocorticoid sensitivity and response to DNAdamage in pediatric acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Mol
Cancer. 2010; 9:284.

22.	 Szczepanski T, Van der Velden VH, Raff T, Jacobs DC,
van Wering ER, Bruggemann M, Kneba M and van
Dongen JJ. Comparative analysis of T-cell receptor gene
rearrangements at diagnosis and relapse of T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) shows high stability of
clonal markers for monitoring of minimal residual disease
and reveals the occurrence of second T-ALL. Leukemia.
2003; 17:2149-2156.

11.	 Jan M and Majeti R. Clonal evolution of acute leukemia
genomes. Oncogene. 2013; 32:135-140.
12.	 Landau DA, Carter SL, Getz G and Wu CJ. Clonal
evolution in hematological malignancies and therapeutic
implications. Leukemia. 2014; 28:34-43.

23.	 Chekhun VF, Lukyanova NY, Kovalchuk O, Tryndyak VP
and Pogribny IP. Epigenetic profiling of multidrug-resistant
human MCF-7 breast adenocarcinoma cells reveals novel
hyper- and hypomethylated targets. Mol Cancer Ther. 2007;
6:1089-1098.

13.	 Liem NL, Papa RA, Milross CG, Schmid MA, Tajbakhsh
M, Choi S, Ramirez CD, Rice AM, Haber M, Norris
MD, MacKenzie KL and Lock RB. Characterization of
childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia xenograft models
for the preclinical evaluation of new therapies. Blood. 2004;
103:3905-3914.

24.	 Rahgozar S, Moafi A, Abedi M, Entezar EGM,
Moshtaghian J, Ghaedi K, Esmaeili A and Montazeri F.
mRNA expression profile of multidrug-resistant genes in
acute lymphoblastic leukemia of children, a prognostic
value for ABCA3 and ABCA2. Cancer Biol Ther. 2014;
15:35-41.

14.	 Choi S, Henderson MJ, Kwan E, Beesley AH, Sutton
R, Bahar AY, Giles J, Venn NC, Pozza LD, Baker DL,
Marshall GM, Kees UR, Haber M, el at. Relapse in children
with acute lymphoblastic leukemia involving selection of a
preexisting drug-resistant subclone. Blood. 2007; 110:632639.

25.	 Singh Nanda J, Kumar R and Raghava GP. dbEM: A
database of epigenetic modifiers curated from cancerous
and normal genomes. Sci Rep. 2016; 6:19340.

15.	 Jamal-Hanjani M, Quezada SA, Larkin J and Swanton C.
Translational implications of tumor heterogeneity. Clin
Cancer Res. 2015; 21:1258-1266.

26.	 Jing D, Bhadri VA, Beck D, Thoms JA, Yakob NA, Wong
JW, Knezevic K, Pimanda JE and Lock RB. Opposing
regulation of BIM and BCL2 controls glucocorticoidinduced apoptosis of pediatric acute lymphoblastic
leukemia cells. Blood. 2015; 125:273-283.

16.	 Clappier E, Gerby B, Sigaux F, Delord M, Touzri F,
Hernandez L, Ballerini P, Baruchel A, Pflumio F and
Soulier J. Clonal selection in xenografted human T
cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia recapitulates gain of
malignancy at relapse. J Exp Med. 2011; 208:653-661.

27.	 Bachmann PS, Gorman R, Papa RA, Bardell JE, Ford
J, Kees UR, Marshall GM and Lock RB. Divergent
mechanisms of glucocorticoid resistance in experimental
models of pediatric acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Cancer
Res. 2007; 67:4482-4490.

17.	 Nowak D, Liem NL, Mossner M, Klaumunzer M, Papa
RA, Nowak V, Jann JC, Akagi T, Kawamata N, Okamoto
R, Thoennissen NH, Kato M, Sanada M, et al. Variegated
clonality and rapid emergence of new molecular lesions in
xenografts of acute lymphoblastic leukemia are associated
with drug resistance. Exp Hematol. 2015; 43:32-43 e31-35.

28.	 Schmidt S, Rainer J, Riml S, Ploner C, Jesacher S,
Achmueller C, Presul E, Skvortsov S, Crazzolara R and
Fiegl M. Identification of glucocorticoid-response genes in
children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Blood. 2006;
107:2061-2069.

18.	 Jansson J, Hsu YC, Kuzin I, Campbell A and Mullen
CA. Acute lymphoblastic leukemia cells that survive
combination chemotherapy in vivo remain sensitive to
allogeneic immune effects. Leuk Res. 2011; 35:800-807.

29.	 Webb MS, Miller AL, Johnson BH, Fofanov Y, Li T, Wood
TG and Thompson EB. Gene networks in glucocorticoidevoked apoptosis of leukemic cells. J Steroid Biochem Mol
Biol. 2003; 85:183-193.

19.	 Schmitz M, Breithaupt P, Scheidegger N, Cario G,
Bonapace L, Meissner B, Mirkowska P, Tchinda J, Niggli

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

58740

Oncotarget

30.	 Klumper E, Pieters R, Veerman A, Huismans D, Loonen A,
Hahlen K, Kaspers G, Wering Ev, Hartmann R and Henze
G. In vitro cellular drug resistance in children with relapsed/
refractory acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Blood. 1995;
86:3861-3868.

Kaspers GJ, Bierings MB, et al. High-risk childhood acute
lymphoblastic leukemia in first remission treated with novel
intensive chemotherapy and allogeneic transplantation.
Leukemia. 2013; 27:1497-1503.
41.	 Sutton R, Venn NC, Tolisano J, Bahar AY, Giles JE,
Ashton LJ, Teague L, Rigutto G, Waters K, Marshall
GM, Haber M, Norris MD, Australian and New Zealand
Children’s Oncology G. Clinical significance of minimal
residual disease at day 15 and at the end of therapy in
childhood acute lymphoblastic leukaemia. Br J Haematol.
2009; 146:292-299.

31.	 Kaspers GJ, Wijnands JJ, Hartmann R, Huismans L,
Loonen AH, Stackelberg A, Henze G, Pieters R, Hählen K
and Van Wering ER. Immunophenotypic cell lineage and
in vitro cellular drug resistance in childhood relapsed acute
lymphoblastic leukaemia. Eur J Cancer. 2005; 41:13001303.
32.	 Dördelmann M, Reiter A, Borkhardt A, Ludwig W-D, Götz
N, Viehmann S, Gadner H, Riehm H and Schrappe M.
Prednisone response is the strongest predictor of treatment
outcome in infant acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Blood.
1999; 94:1209-1217.

42.	 Winter SS, Dunsmore KP, Devidas M, Eisenberg N, Asselin
BL, Wood BL, Leonard Rn MS, Murphy J, Gastier-Foster
JM, Carroll AJ, Heerema NA, Loh ML, Raetz EA, et al.
Safe integration of nelarabine into intensive chemotherapy
in newly diagnosed T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia:
Children’s Oncology Group Study AALL0434. Pediatr
Blood Cancer. 2015; 62:1176-1183.

33.	 Paugh SW, Bonten EJ, Savic D, Ramsey LB, Thierfelder
WE, Gurung P, Malireddi RS, Actis M, Mayasundari A
and Min J. NALP3 inflammasome upregulation and CASP1
cleavage of the glucocorticoid receptor cause glucocorticoid
resistance in leukemia cells. Nat Genet. 2015; 47:607-614.

43.	 van der Sluis I, Moricke A, Escherich G, von Stackelberg
A, Holter W, Klingebiel T, Flotho C, Legien S, Tissing W,
Bierings M, Guimbal-Schmolck C, Pichlmeier U, Kuhnel
HJ, et al. Pediatric Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia:
Efficacy and safety of recombinant E. coli-asparaginase in
infants (less than one year of age) with acute lymphoblastic
leukemia. Haematologica. 2013; 98:1697-1701.

34.	 Marshall GM, Kwan E, Haber M, Brisco MJ, Sykes PJ,
Morley AA, Toogood I, Waters K, Tauro G, Ekert H and
Norris MD. Characterization of clonal immunoglobulin
heavy chain and I cell receptor gamma gene rearrangements
during progression of childhood acute lymphoblastic
leukemia. Leukemia. 1995; 9:1847-1850.

44.	 Lock RB, Liem N, Farnsworth ML, Milross CG, Xue
C, Tajbakhsh M, Haber M, Norris MD, Marshall GM
and Rice AM. The nonobese diabetic/severe combined
immunodeficient (NOD/SCID) mouse model of childhood
acute lymphoblastic leukemia reveals intrinsic differences
in biologic characteristics at diagnosis and relapse. Blood.
2002; 99:4100-4108.

35.	 Kreyenberg H, Eckert C, Yarkin Y, Reising M, Willasch
A, Handgretinger R, Kremens B, von Stackelberg A,
Henze G, Klingebiel T and Bader P. Immunoglobulin
and T-cell receptor gene rearrangements as PCR-based
targets are stable markers for monitoring minimal residual
disease in acute lymphoblastic leukemia after stem cell
transplantation. Leukemia. 2009; 23:1355-1358.

45.	 Langerak AW, Szczepanski T, van der Burg M, WolversTettero IL and van Dongen JJ. Heteroduplex PCR analysis
of rearranged T cell receptor genes for clonality assessment
in suspect T cell proliferations. Leukemia. 1997; 11:21922199.

36.	 Eckert C, Flohr T, Koehler R, Hagedorn N, Moericke A,
Stanulla M, Kirschner-Schwabe R, Cario G, Stackelberg
A and Bartram C. Very early/early relapses of acute
lymphoblastic leukemia show unexpected changes of clonal
markers and high heterogeneity in response to initial and
relapse treatment. Leukemia. 2011; 25:1305-1313.

46.	 van Dongen JJ, Langerak AW, Bruggemann M, Evans PA,
Hummel M, Lavender FL, Delabesse E, Davi F, Schuuring
E, Garcia-Sanz R, van Krieken JH, Droese J, Gonzalez D, et
al. Design and standardization of PCR primers and protocols
for detection of clonal immunoglobulin and T-cell receptor
gene recombinations in suspect lymphoproliferations: report
of the BIOMED-2 Concerted Action BMH4-CT98-3936.
Leukemia. 2003; 17:2257-2317.

37.	 Kim T, Yoshida K, Kim Y, Tyndel M, Park H, Choi S, Ahn
J, Jung S, Yang D and Lee J. Clonal dynamics in a single
AML case tracked for 9 years reveals the complexity of
leukemia progression. Leukemia. 2016; 30:295-302.
38.	 Roberts KG and Mullighan CG. Genomics in acute
lymphoblastic leukaemia: insights and treatment
implications. Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2015; 12:344-357.

47.	 Pongers-Willemse MJ, Seriu T, Stolz F, d’Aniello E,
Gameiro P, Pisa P, Gonzalez M, Bartram CR, PanzerGrumayer ER, Biondi A, San Miguel JF and van Dongen
JJ. Primers and protocols for standardized detection
of minimal residual disease in acute lymphoblastic
leukemia using immunoglobulin and T cell receptor gene
rearrangements and TAL1 deletions as PCR targets: report
of the BIOMED-1 CONCERTED ACTION: investigation
of minimal residual disease in acute leukemia. Leukemia.
1999; 13:110-118.

39.	 Ma X, Edmonson M, Yergeau D, Muzny DM, Hampton
OA, Rusch M, Song G, Easton J, Harvey RC, Wheeler DA,
Ma J, Doddapaneni H, Vadodaria B, et al. Rise and fall of
subclones from diagnosis to relapse in pediatric B-acute
lymphoblastic leukaemia. Nat Commun. 2015; 6:6604.
40.	 Marshall GM, Dalla Pozza L, Sutton R, Ng A, de GrootKruseman HA, van der Velden VH, Venn NC, van den
Berg H, de Bont ES, Maarten Egeler R, Hoogerbrugge PM,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

58741

Oncotarget

48.	 Sutton R, Shaw PJ, Venn NC, Law T, Dissanayake A, Kilo
T, Haber M, Norris MD, Fraser C, Alvaro F, Revesz T,
Trahair TN, Dalla-Pozza L, et al. Persistent MRD before
and after allogeneic BMT predicts relapse in children with
acute lymphoblastic leukaemia. Br J Haematol. 2015;
168:395-404.

53.	 Irizarry RA, Hobbs B, Collin F, Beazer-Barclay YD,
Antonellis KJ, Scherf U and Speed TP. Exploration,
normalization, and summaries of high density
oligonucleotide array probe level data. Biostatistics. 2003;
4:249-264.
54.	 Johnson WE, Li C and Rabinovic A. Adjusting batch
effects in microarray expression data using empirical Bayes
methods. Biostatistics. 2007; 8:118-127.

49.	 Sutton R, Bahar AY, Kwan E, Giles JE, Venn NC, Tran
S, Hackenberg N, Pozza LD, Marshall GM, Haber
M, van der Velden VH and Norris MD. Improving
minimal residual disease detection in precursor B-ALL
based on immunoglobulin-kappa and heavy-chain gene
rearrangements. Leukemia. 2008; 22:2265-2267.

55.	 Dai M, Wang P, Boyd AD, Kostov G, Athey B, Jones
EG, Bunney WE, Myers RM, Speed TP and Akil H.
Evolving gene/transcript definitions significantly alter the
interpretation of GeneChip data. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005;
33:e175-e175.

50.	 van der Velden VH, Cazzaniga G, Schrauder A, Hancock
J, Bader P, Panzer-Grumayer ER, Flohr T, Sutton R,
Cave H, Madsen HO, Cayuela JM, Trka J, Eckert C, et
al. Analysis of minimal residual disease by Ig/TCR gene
rearrangements: guidelines for interpretation of real-time
quantitative PCR data. Leukemia. 2007; 21:604-611.

56.	 Gautier L, Cope L, Bolstad BM and Irizarry RA. affyanalysis of Affymetrix GeneChip data at the probe level.
Bioinformatics. 2004; 20:307-315.
57.	 Ritchie ME, Phipson B, Wu D, Hu Y, Law CW, Shi W and
Smyth GK. limma powers differential expression analyses
for RNA-sequencing and microarray studies. Nucleic Acids
Res. 2015; 43:e47.

51.	 Samuels AL, Peeva VK, Papa RA, Firth MJ, Francis RW,
Beesley AH, Lock RB and Kees UR. Validation of a mouse
xenograft model system for gene expression analysis of
human acute lymphoblastic leukaemia. BMC Genomics.
2010; 11:256.

58.	 Benjamini Y and Hochberg Y. Controlling the false
discovery rate: a practical and powerful approach to
multiple testing. J R Stat Soc Series B Stat Methodol.
1995:289-300.

52.	 Kauffmann A, Gentleman R and Huber W.
arrayQualityMetrics—a bioconductor package for quality
assessment of microarray data. Bioinformatics. 2009;
25:415-416.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

58742

Oncotarget

