Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 39

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

Modeling of signaling crosstalk-mediated drug resistance and its
implications on drug combination
Xiaoqiang Sun1,2,3, Jiguang Bao4, Zhuhong You5, Xing Chen6, Jun Cui3,7
1

Zhongshan School of Medicine, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, 510080, China

2

School of Mathematical and Computational Science, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, 510000, China

3

School of Life Science, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, 510275, China

4

School of Mathematical Sciences, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, 100875, China

5

School of Computer Science and Technology, China University of Mining and Technology, Xuzhou, 221116, China

6

School of Information and Electrical Engineering, China University of Mining and Technology, Xuzhou, Jiangsu, 221116, China

7

Collaborative Innovation Center of Cancer Medicine, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, 510060, China

Correspondence to: Xiaoqiang Sun, email: xiaoqiangsun88@gmail.com, dongbusun@163.com
Xing Chen, email: xingchen@amss.ac.cn
Jun Cui, email: cuij5@mail.sysu.edu.cn
Keywords: signaling crosstalk, drug resistance, drug combination, synergism
Received: June 16, 2016     Accepted: August 26, 2016     Published: August 31, 2016

Abstract
The efficacy of pharmacological perturbation to the signaling transduction
network depends on the network topology. However, whether and how signaling
dynamics mediated by crosstalk contributes to the drug resistance are not fully
understood and remain to be systematically explored. In this study, motivated by
a realistic signaling network linked by crosstalk between EGF/EGFR/Ras/MEK/
ERK pathway and HGF/HGFR/PI3K/AKT pathway, we develop kinetic models for
several small networks with typical crosstalk modules to investigate the role of the
architecture of crosstalk in inducing drug resistance. Our results demonstrate that
crosstalk inhibition diminishes the response of signaling output to the external stimuli.
Moreover, we show that signaling crosstalk affects the relative sensitivity of drugs,
and some types of crosstalk modules that could yield resistance to the targeted drugs
were identified. Furthermore, we quantitatively evaluate the relative efficacy and
synergism of drug combinations. For the modules that are resistant to the targeted
drug, we identify drug targets that can not only increase the relative drug efficacy but
also act synergistically. In addition, we analyze the role of the strength of crosstalk
in switching a module between drug-sensitive and drug-resistant. Our study provides
mechanistic insights into the signaling crosstalk-mediated mechanisms of drug
resistance and provides implications for the design of synergistic drug combinations
to reduce drug resistance.

INTRODUCTION

and how the signaling dynamics mediated by crosstalk
contributes to the drug resistance are intriguing and remain
to be systematically investigated.
Various cancer studies for targeted therapy
suggested that the signaling crosstalk could provide subtle
posttranslational activation of signaling pathways which
can bypass the stress of the therapeutic target and further
modulate the expression patterns of oncogenes [12–14]. For
example, a crosstalk (ERK inhibiting HGFR) exists between
EGF/EGFR/Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK pathway and HGF/HGFR/
PI3K/AKT pathway [15]. Relief of profound crosstalk

Drug resistance is often an inevitable obstacle
in drug efficacy of the targeted therapeutics for cancer
patients [1–3]. Many paradigms of mechanisms have
been revealed to explain the drug resistance at molecular,
cellular and microenvironmental levels [4–9]. Intracellular
signaling pathways link the cell’s genome to the
extracellular microenvironment [10]. Various types of
crosstalk among such signaling pathways enable dynamic
modulations of signal transduction network [11]. Whether
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

63995

Oncotarget

inhibition of HGFR signaling by drugs (or  inhibitors)
targeting BRAF attenuates the drug efficacy in BRAFV600E
melanomas [15, 16]. Moreover, crosstalk among signaling
pathways may occur at multiple levels of signal transduction
[17, 18]. For instance, EGFR/HER2 signaling pathways can
crosstalk with other receptor tyrosine kinases, including
MET, IGF1R, FGFR and EphA2, at the receptor level via
the shared downstream targets of EGFR/HER2. At mediator
level, the activation of mutated BRAF crosstalks with the
upstream receptors such as EGFR and can independently
activate downstream effectors [19].
Biological signaling pathways in cells are known
to often interact with each other via extensive signaling
crosstalk. Crosstalk-linked signaling modules [20]
or motifs [21, 22] may carry out key functions of the
signaling network. Therefore, it’s instructive to analyze
the key kinetics of small signaling networks to get
more mechanistic understanding on the properties and
functions of typical modules. Previous studies have
developed some motif-based models to investigate the
dependence of drug efficacy on the network topology.
Behar, M. et al. [10] examined how the combinations of
signaling hub topologies and dynamical signals affect
the relative sensitivity of the stimulus response to the
pharmacological perturbations. Zhang, Y. et al. [23]
computationally analyzed how variations in pairs of
parameters synergistically (or antagonistically) affect the
response in a series of small molecular network motifs.
Van, W.R. et al. [24] investigated non-monotonic inputoutput relation arising from simple network topologies by
analyzing two simple interacting linear signaling pathways
that carry two different signals with different physiological
responses. However, these works did not investigate the
causal relationship between the architectures of crosstalk
in the signaling network and drug resistance.
In this study, we investigated the contributions
of signaling crosstalk to the drug resistance using
module-based kinetic modeling approach. Motivated
by experimental evidence of drug resistance mediated
by crosstalk between signaling pathways, we developed
kinetic models for eight small molecular networks with
typical crosstalk modules. We investigated the signaling
dynamics of proteins in the modules with or without the
drug treatment. Our simulations demonstrated that various
types of signaling crosstalk could afford rich dynamics of
proteins in the modules, and that crosstalk inhibition could
diminish the response of signaling output to the stimuli.
Moreover, we found that signaling crosstalk affects the
relative sensitivity of drugs, and we further identified some
crosstalk modules that could result in resistance to the
targeted drugs. In addition to the structure of the crosstalk,
the kinetic parameters of crosstalk, i.e., the strength of
the crosstalk, might also be important in determining the
network dynamics. Therefore, we further analyzed the role
of the crosstalk strength in switching a module between
drug-sensitive and drug-resistant responses.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

As a promising strategy to overcome drug
resistance, combination therapy has been suggested to
improve the effects of targeted therapeutics [25–29].
As demonstrated by Yin, N., et al. [30], the synergism
or antagonism of drug combinations largely depends on
the network topology. Moreover, the synergism of drug
combinations is not always identical to effectiveness.
Therefore, to both synergistically and effectively reduce
drug resistance, it’s important to select drug targets in the
signaling network for rationally designing optimal drug
combinations [29, 31, 32]. We therefore quantitatively
evaluated both the relative efficacy and synergism of
drug combinations. For the modules that were resistant
to the targeted drug, we identified pairs of drug targets
that could not only increase the relative drug efficacy but
also exhibit synergistic effect when they were targeted
in a combinatorial manner. Our results indicated that
the downstream proteins or transcriptional factors in the
crosstalk-linked signaling pathways might be important
potential targets of drug combination to reduce the
resistance of targeted therapeutics.

RESULTS
Experimental evidence and computational
modeling
We first examined a realistic case of widely studied
signaling pathways as shown in Figure 1. Stimulated
by growth factors EGF and HGF respectively, EGFR/
Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK and HGFR/PI3K/AKT pathways
[15] converge to phosphorylate BAD [16] that plays
a critical anti-apoptotic role in many types of tumor
cells [33]. A crosstalk inhibition from ERK to HGFR
exists between these two pathways. Relief of profound
crosstalk inhibition of HGFR signaling by drugs (or
inhibitors) targeting BRAF attenuates the drug efficacy
in BRAFV600E melanomas [19]. As such, this signaling
crosstalk contributes to drug resistance.
Motivated by this experimental evidence, we then
asked a more general question about how signaling
dynamics of crosstalk-linked modules affect the drug
efficacy and which types of signaling crosstalk could result
in the drug resistance. For simplicity, we investigated two
interacting pathways stimulated by two growth factors G1
and G2, respectively, as shown in Figure 2A (left panel).
G1 promotes the phosphorylation of protein R1 into R1*,
and G2 promotes the phosphorylation of protein R2 into
R2*. The signaling cascades from R1 and R2 activate P1 and
P2, respectively. The activated P1* and P2* converge to the
output, O, and promote its activation or expression. The
drug was considered to inhibit the activation of P1. Since
our study focuses on the effects of crosstalk between two
signaling pathways in the core module (blue dashed line)
on the drug efficacy, we represented this module of
enzyme-catalyzed cascades as an abbreviated reaction
63996

Oncotarget

form, module 0 (M0). As shown in the right panel of
Figure 2A, these two pathways were simply and generally
represented as G1-A-B and G2-C-D, where G1 and G2 are
two growth factors, A and C represent upstream receptors
or proteins, and B and D represent downstream proteins or
transcriptional factors.
We then considered 8 typical modules that contain
different types of signaling crosstalk (Figure 2B): M1, A
activating D; M2, A inhibiting D; M3, B activating C; M4,
B inhibiting C; M5, B activating C, and D activating A;
M6, B inhibiting C, and D inhibiting A; M7, B inhibiting
C, and D activating A; M8, B activating C, and D
inhibiting A. For simplicity, only these 8 typical modules
were considered, with the assumption of network
symmetry. The basic module 0 without crosstalk was
chosen as a control case for comparison. A drug inhibiting
B was incorporated for all modules. We used kinetic
equations (see Materials and Methods) to simulate the
temporal activations of proteins in each signaling module.

identical, so were that of B and D. Their activation levels
were elevated up by the stimuli and then decreased due
to their degradation after the elimination of the stimuli.
In the module 1, due to the crosstalk activation from A
to D, the level of D was higher than that in the module 0.
Whereas in the module 2, the activation level of D was
diminished due to the crosstalk inhibition from A to D.
In the module 3, the activation levels of C and D were
higher than that in the module 0, the opposite situation
was observed for the module 4 where the activation of
C as well as D was inhibited by B. Interestingly, the
activations of proteins in module 5 exhibited persistence
even after the elimination of the stimuli, which was due to
the mutual crosstalk activation between two pathways. In
the module 6, we assumed the crosstalk inhibition from D
to A was stronger than that from B to C, so the pathway
A-B-O was repressed. In the modules 7 and 8, incoherent
mutual crosstalk between two pathways enhanced one
side of signaling but inhibited another side. Overall, the
levels of signaling outputs in the modules with crosstalk
inhibition (modules 2, 4, 6, 7 and 8) were lower than that
in other modules (modules 0, 1, 3 and 5).

Signaling crosstalk affects stimuli-response
dynamics
We investigated the dynamics of components in
various signaling modules in response to the stimuli of G1
and G2 without drug treatment (Figure 3). Different types
of crosstalk resulted in different dynamics of proteins
and signaling output. In the basic module 0, due to the
assumption of symmetry, the time courses of A and C were

Signaling crosstalk affects drug sensitivity
Next, we incorporated the drug effects into the model
and investigated the influence of signaling crosstalk on the
kinetics of proteins in various modules. In our simulation,
component B was chosen as the drug target. Different

Figure 1: Drug resistance mediated by crosstalk inhibition between EGF/EGFR/Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK and HGF/
HGFR/PI3K/AKT pathways in BRAFV600E melanomas [15]. These two pathways promote the phosphorylation of BAD [16]

that plays a critical role in anti-apoptosis of many types of tumor cells [33]. High levels of ERK-dependent crosstalk inhibition suppress
HGFR signaling and PI3K activation. BRAFV600E is sensitive to RAF inhibitor that potently inhibits BRAF and ERK signaling, resulting
in relief of ERK-dependent crosstalk inhibition and reactivation of HGFR signal transduction. This, in turn, sustains the activation and
function of downstream BAD signaling and attenuates the drug efficacy in BRAFV600E melanomas [15].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

63997

Oncotarget

types of signaling crosstalk have different impacts on the
drug-induced dynamics of proteins and signaling output
(Figure 4). Under the drug treatment, the activation of
B was significantly decreased in all the modules. Other
proteins presented various distinct dynamics in different
modules. Particularly, in module 2, due to the crosstalk
inhibition of D by A, both the activation of B and D were
downregulated thus the signaling output was significantly
decreased. Notably, the persistence of signaling activation
in module 5 without drug treatment (Figure 3) was
disappeared due to the drug treatment.
We calculated relative drug efficacy (see Materials
and Methods) for 8 different modules. The drug efficacies
in modules 1, 4, 6, 7 and 8 were less than 0 (Figure 5),
indicating that the drug-induced relative reduction of
output in these modules were lower than that in the basic
module 0. This result demonstrated that the signaling
crosstalk in these modules could dampen the efficacy of
B-targeting drug and thus contribute to the drug resistance.
We then take a close look at the kinetics of these
drug-resistant modules (1, 4, 6, 7 and 8) to get more
mechanistic insights into the crosstalk-mediated drug

resistance. The module 1 represents a common molecular
mechanism underlying the drug resistance of targeted
therapy. Although component B in one side of the pathway
was inhibited by the drug, the bypassing signaling from
A to D increased the signaling in the other pathway thus
maintained the signaling output. The module 4 contains
a crosstalk inhibition from B to C. The B-targeting drug
relieved this inhibition and thus restored the signals of
C and D and the activation of the output. The crosstalkmediated dynamic adaptation of the cell signaling system
to the drug treatment provides an important mechanism
underlying drug resistance, which is consistent with
Figure 1 and validated by experiments in [19]. In addition,
our simulation (Figure 5) also suggested that the mutual
crosstalk inhibition in module 6 could result in drug
resistance, which is consistent with a realistic module as
shown in Figure S1 and the experimental results in [34].
Similar mechanism holds for modules 7 and 8 where
crosstalk inhibition exists.
We also examined the relative efficacy of B-targeting
drug under various forms of input stimuli (Figure S2). In
the simulation, the stimuli of G1 and G2 were varied alone

Figure 2: Typical crosstalk-linked signaling modules. Various modules contain different types of crosstalk between two signaling
pathways. (A) A small network of enzyme-catalyzed cascades with crosstalk between two pathways stimulated by two growth factors G1
and G2, respectively. G1 promotes the phosphorylation of protein R1 into R1*, and G2 promotes the phosphorylation of protein R2 into R2*.
The signals from R1* or R2* activates P1 or P2, respectively. The activated P1* and P2* converge to promote the activation or expression of
the signaling output, O. The drug is considered to inhibit the activation of P1. This study focuses on the effects of crosstalk between two
pathways in the core module (blue dashed line) of the signaling network on the drug efficacy. We reduced this module to a simplified
form represented as module 0 (M0) as shown in the right panel. This basic module 0 without crosstalk was chosen as a control case
for comparison. (B) Various modules that contain different types of signaling crosstalk: M1, A activating D; M2, A inhibiting D; M3,
B activating C; M4, B inhibiting C; M5, B activating (C and D) activating A; M6, B inhibiting C, and D inhibiting A; M7, B inhibiting C,
and D activating A; M8, B activating C, and D inhibiting A. For simplicity, we only considered these 8 typical modules containing one- and
two-crosstalk links that were commonly found in intracellular signaling networks.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

63998

Oncotarget

of drug combinations than the basic module. Moreover,
compared to the effects of single B-targeting drug
(Figure 5), only a portion of drug targets in combination
with B resulted in the increase of the relative drug efficacy
(Table 1). This implies that, in order to improve the
efficacy of the targeted therapy using drug combination,
the appropriate drug targets should be chosen and
combined.
We then quantitatively evaluated synergism for
various drug combinations using Bliss combination index
(see Materials and Methods). The values of combination
index (CI) of different drug combinations used for modules
1–8 were computed (Figure 6B). The synergism patterns
of different modules with various drug combinations
were shown in Figure 6C, where white represented
synergy (CI > 0.05), gray additivity (CI < − 0.05) and
black antagonism (−0.05 < CI < 0.05). It should be noted
that in this work 5% perturbation by noise is tolerated to
separate the synergy and antagonism, taking into account
of noise effects [37]. These results demonstrated that drug
combinations in different modules exhibited differential
synergism or antagonism, indicating that the topology of
crosstalk played an important role in affecting the efficacy
and synergism of drug combinations. In addition, we
found that not all drug targets combined with B exhibited
synergistic effects in various modules (Table 2).
For modules 1, 4, 6, 7, and 8 that were resistant to the
B-targeting drug, combining D with B as drug targets could

or simultaneously to various types. Modules 1, 4, 6, 7 and 8
are more prone to resisting B-targeting drugs (Figure S3),
which is consistent with the above results (Figure 5).

In silico screening of drug combinations
The rational application of drug combinations
has been suggested to be beneficial for combating drug
resistance [27]. Given the limitation of the molecularly
targeted agents currently available, the traditional
experimental screening approach is expensive, time
consuming and practically unfeasible. In silico screening
of drug combinations provides an alternative rational
approach [35, 36]. Here we employed the kinetic model
to examine whether combinatorial drugs perform better
than the single drug in the context of drug resistance based
on various module structures. We used the relative drug
efficacy and synergism as two indices to evaluate the drug
combinations for various modules.
The relative efficacies of drug combinations for
different modules were shown in Figure 6A. For module
i, if the relative efficacy of drug combination is greater
than 0, then the drug combination induced more reduction
in integrated output compared to the basic module, vice
versa. Different drug combinations and different modules
exhibited different drug efficacy. For a specific module,
some drug combinations had positive relative efficacy,
indicating that this module allowed better performance

Figure 3: Temporal dynamics of proteins in various modules without drug treatment. Different types of crosstalk resulted
in different dynamics of proteins and signaling output. “Active (frac)” indicates fraction of activation of each protein.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

63999

Oncotarget

The impacts of strength of signaling crosstalk on
the drug efficacy and synergism patterns

not only increase the relative drug efficacies of these modules
(Table 1) but also exhibit synergistic effects (Table 2). This
indicates that the downstream proteins or transcriptional
factors in two parallel pathways of crosstalk-linked signaling
modules might be important potential targets of drug
combination that effectively and synergistically reduces the
resistance of targeted therapeutics.

We then examined how the changes in the strength
of signaling crosstalk in various modules affected the drug
efficacy and synergism patterns of the drug combination.
Our simulation demonstrated that the increasing strength

Figure 4: Temporal dynamics of proteins in various modules under the treatment of B-targeting drug. Different types of
signaling crosstalk have different impacts on the drug-induced dynamics of proteins and signaling output. “Active (frac)” indicates fraction
of activation of each protein.

Figure 5: Relative drug efficacies of 8 modules under the treatment of B-targeting drug. Modules 1, 4, 6, 7 and 8 exhibited
lower drug efficacies as compared to the basic module 0, indicating that the crosstalk in these modules could render cells insensitive to the
drug treatment.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

64000

Oncotarget

of signaling crosstalk affected drug sensitivities,
particularly for module 4, 5 and 7 (Figure 7). As the
strength of crosstalk increased, modules 4 and 7 switched
from drug-resistance to be drug-sensitive, whereas the
mode of module 5 switched from drug-sensitive to drugresistant. Furthermore, the increase in the strength of
crosstalk enhanced the drug resistance in modules 1, 6
and 8 and amplified the drug sensitivity in module 2. The
relative drug efficacy in module 3 was affected slightly by
the strength of crosstalk.
We further investigated the signaling dynamics in
modules 4, 5 and 7 with increased strengths of crosstalk
(10 folds of the normal strength). The signaling kinetics
in modules 4, 5 and 7 without and with drug treatment
were shown in Figure 8A–8C and Figure 8D–8F,
respectively. Compared to the normal situation in Figure 3,
the stronger crosstalk inhibition of C by B in modules
4 and 7 resulted in more repression of C and D
(Figure 8A, 8C). Following the drug treatment, in module
4 and 7 (Figure 8D), although B was decreased at a low
level by drug treatment, C and D were still repressed by
B due to the strong crosstalk inhibition. Therefore, in this
situation, the signaling output was reduced more than that
in normal situation (Figure 4) and, thus, more sensitive
to the drug treatment. For module 5, the strong mutual
activation between two pathways resulted in a more robust

persistence of the signaling activation (Figure 8B). As
such, the persistence of the signaling in module 5 was not
lost when the strength of crosstalk was increased, which
switched module 5 to be insensitive to the drug treatment.

DISCUSSION
In this study, we analyzed the effects of signaling
crosstalk on the efficacy and resistance of targeted
drugs and drug combinations by employing modulebased modeling approach. We demonstrated how the
architecture of signaling crosstalk contributes to the drug
resistance and analyzed the related signaling dynamics.
We also identified the principles for selecting targets to
effectively and synergistically reduce drug resistance
using combinatorial drugs.
Recently, increasingly more attention has been paid
to drug resistance to improve the efficacy of the targeted
therapy for cancer patients. Several mechanisms have been
proposed to account for the origin and acquisition of drug
resistance. For example, at molecular scale, genetic and
epigenetic modifications can render tumor cells insensitive
to targeted drugs [23], resulting in drug resistance. At
the cellular scale, tumor stem cells are thought to be left
behind by chemotherapy although it kills most cells in a
tumor, which might serve as an important mechanism of

Figure 6: Drug combination evaluation. (A) Relative efficacies of drug combinations (A, B, C and D) for different modules. The
efficacy of drug combination was dependent on the topology of crosstalk-linked signaling modules. (B) Synergism evaluations for various
drug combinations using Bliss combination index. Various drug combinations for different modules exhibited different values of synergism.
(C) Synergism patterns of different modules with various drug combinations. White, synergy; Gray, additivity; Black, antagonism.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

64001

Oncotarget

Table 1: Comparing the relative efficacies of drug combinations to that of single B-targeting drug
Drug targets combined with B
Module 1
Module 2
Module 3
Module 4
Module 5
Module 6
Module 7
Module 8

A
▲
▲
▲
▼
▲
▼
▼
▼

B
▼
▲
▲
▼
▲
▼
▼
▼

C
▲
▲
▲
▼
▲
▼
▼
▼

D
▲
▼
▼
▲
▼
▲
▲
▲

Remark: ▲ indicates that the drug combination increased the relative drug efficacy compared to the single B-targeting drug.
Whereas ▼ indicates that the drug combination had lower relative drug efficacy than the single B-targeting drug.

Table 2: Synergisms of drug combinations with B-targeting drug

Module 1
Module 2
Module 3
Module 4
Module 5
Module 6
Module 7
Module 8

A
Additivity
Additivity
Additivity
Additivity
Antagonism
Synergy
Additivity
Synergy

Drug targets combined with B
B
C
Antagonism
Additivity
Additivity
Additivity
Antagonism
Antagonism
Antagonism
Synergy
Antagonism
Antagonism
Additivity
Additivity
Antagonism
Synergy
Antagonism
Additivity

drug resistance [38, 39]. In addition, spatial intra-tumor
heterogeneity might also contribute to the drug resistance
[40, 41]. At the microenvironmental scale, due to the
drug-induced secretion of various cytokines or growth
factors, the dynamic microenvironment adaptation [42]

D
Synergy
Additivity
Synergy
Synergy
Additivity
Synergy
Synergy
Synergy

also plays an important role in facilitating the ability of
cancer cells to withstand therapeutic assaults [43]. Our
study focused on the role of crosstalk among intracellular
signaling pathways in drug resistance. We systematically
verified the hypothesis that at molecular scale, in addition

Figure 7: Impacts of the strength of signaling crosstalk on the relative drug efficacies of various modules. The increasing

strength of signaling crosstalk switches drug sensitivities of module 4, 5 and 7.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

64002

Oncotarget

to genetic or epigenetic mutations, the dynamic adaptation
in posttranslational activation of signaling pathways
mediated by crosstalk might also render cancer cells to be
insensitive to the drug treatment.
The topology of signaling network has been
demonstrated to have profound impacts on the biological
functions such as biochemical adaptation [44] and cell
fate decision [45]. Jensen, K.J. et. al. [46] investigated the
effect of the architecture of small molecular network on
the drug efficacy and synergism. Charlebois, D. A et. al.
[47] also demonstrated that coherent feedforward loop in
transcriptional regulatory motifs could contribute to the
drug resistance. Our work further revealed that some types
of signaling crosstalk could also reduce the sensitivity of
cancer cells to the drug inhibition. At the normal strength
of crosstalk, a feedforward crosstalk in module 1 could
yield drug resistance, which is consistent with the results
in Ref. [47]. Moreover, our results also revealed some
other crosstalk-linked modules (Modules 4, 6, 7, and 8)
could also resist to the drug treatment. The predictions of
modules 4 and 6 are supported by the experimental studies
of drug resistance [19, 34].
Our model revealed a network architecturedependent mechanism of signaling crosstalk-mediated
drug resistance. The typical resistant modules (modules
1, 4, 6, 7, and 8) revealed by our model might be used to
design robust modules in synthetic biology. Our model also
predicted that the downstream proteins or transcriptional
factors in two parallel pathways within crosstalk-linked

signaling modules might be potential targets of drug
combination that effectively and synergistically reduces
the resistance of targeted therapeutics. The predicted
synergistic effect of combination of B-targeting drug
and D-targeting drug for module 4 is consistent with
experimental studies [48, 49]. The principle revealed by
our model might be useful for guiding the experimental
design of drug combination.
With the increased strength of crosstalk, the relative
efficacies and synergism patterns of drug combinations for
different modules were shown in Figure S4. Compared
to Figure 6, the increased strength of signaling crosstalk
significantly influenced the synergism patterns of different
modules. More specifically, the increase in strength of
the crosstalk could trigger the switch of some signaling
modules between drug sensitivity and drug resistance. For
example, module 5, containing mutual crosstalk activation
between two pathways, is drug-sensitive at lower strength
of crosstalk but drug-resistant at higher strength of
crosstalk. The mutual crosstalk activation could be viewed
as positive feedback within the signaling network, which is
able to maintain the persistence of the signaling activation
of network as the strength of the crosstalk increases.
Feedback and feedforward loops in the signaling
network have been demonstrated to significantly
influence the drug effects [46]. In the future studies, we
will extend our model to systematically investigate the
effects of feedback and feedforward loops on the drug
resistance and drug combinations. In addition, the drug

Figure 8: Signaling dynamics in modules 4, 5 and 7 with increased strengths of crosstalk. The strength of crosstalk was set
to 10-fold of the normal strength. Shown are signaling dynamics in modules 4, 5 and 7, respectively, (A–C) without and (D–F) with drug
treatment. “Active (frac)” indicates fraction of activation of each protein.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

64003

Oncotarget

administration of different dosages is very important but
beyond the scope of this study that focuses on the effect
of signaling crosstalk on drug response. In the future
work, we will use the developed model to investigate
the effect of drug dosages on the relative drug efficacies
and synergism patterns of drug combinations for various
signaling modules. Furthermore, we will try to study how
to optimize dosing of drug combinations for different
signaling modules.
As the signaling transduction and gene expression
are often stochastic and noise exists extensively in the
biochemical reaction networks [50], the effect of noise on
the drug efficacy for various module structures should be
examined to reveal how molecular noise interferes drug
efficacy and contributes to drug resistance. In the future
work, we are going to develop a stochastic model using
chemical Langevian equations [51] for various signaling
modules to simulate stochastic dynamics of molecules (e.g.,
proteins, transcriptional factors and genes). Such stochastic
model might be helpful for our understanding on the causal
relationship between the noise and the drug resistance.
In summary, our study investigated the role of
signaling crosstalk in cell’s adaptation to the drug
treatment. Our study provides insight into the signaling
crosstalk-mediated mechanisms underlying the drug
resistance and delineates the implications associated with
optimal targets of combination therapy for cancer patients.

To incorporate the drug effects into the model, we
defined a function g=i 1 + Drug  to multiply K j ,i in
K Di 

Equation (1) if the drug inhibits X i , as in Ref. [30].
Concentrations and time in the model were nondimensional and the total concentration normalized to 1.
Standard parameter values were used to reproduce the key
kinetic features of a realistic signaling network [16, 19] as
shown in Figure 1. These values of parameters are listed
below (for all i = 1, 2, ..., 5 and j = 0, 1, ..., 8):
Vj, i = 0.4 if X activates X i ; Vj, i = −1 if X inhibits X i ;
Vj, i = 0 if no link between X and X i . K j ,i = 0.8, di = 0.2,
VA = 0.2, K A = 0.5, VC = 0.2, K C = 0.5, K Di = 0.1.
The profiles of various types of stimuli (G1 and G2)
are shown in Figure S2. In the typical simulation, a
basic stimulus S0 was used for G1 and G2, while in the
simulations with varied stimulus (Figure S3), S1–S6
for G1 and/or G2 were used. The above ODEs were
numerically solved using 4-th order Runge-Kutta method.
The in silico experiments was performed in MATLAB
R2007b (MathWorks, USA).
j

The relative drug efficacy
To evaluate the relative drug efficacy (RDE) for
different modules, we defined the following index to
quantify the relative decrease of integrated output (IO)
due to the drug treatment in module i as compared to that
in the basic module (module 0),

MATERIALS AND METHODS

=
RDE ( i )

Computational modeling

V j ,i ⋅ (1 − X i )

5

∑ g ⋅K
j =1

i

j ,i

+ (1 − X i )

⋅ X j − di ⋅ X i + fi (t ) 

(1)

where X i , i = 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5, represents component
A, B, C, D and output O in the signaling network,
respectively. V is the maximal activation rate of X i by
X , and K j ,i is the corresponding Michealis constant.
Different values of the matrix V characterize different
module topologies. di is the degradation rate of X i . fi (t )
(i = 1 or 3) is an input function describing the effect of
stimulus G1 on A or that of G2 on C, which is defined as
follows,

(0)
(0)
IOno
_ drug − IOdrug
(0)
IOno
_ drug



(3)

Bliss combination index [53] was employed to
evaluate the synergism between two drugs targeting “two”
(same or different) components in the modules, which was
defined as follows:
CI (i ) ( d1 , d=
R12 (i ) ( d1 , d 2 ) − ( R1(i ) ( d1 ) + R2 (i ) ( d 2 ) − R1(i ) ( d1 ) ⋅ R2 (i ) ( d 2 ) )  (4)
2)

j ,i

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

(i )
IOno
_ drug

−

Synergism evaluation of drug combination

j

 VA ⋅ G1 (t )
 K + G (t ) , i = 1;
1
 A
 VC ⋅ G2 (t )

fi (t ) =
, i 3;
=
 K C + G2 (t )

0,
Otherwise.



(i )
(i )
IOno
_ drug − IOdrug

(i )
where IOdrug
and IOno(i )_ drug represent time-integrated
output in the module i with or without drug treatment,
T
respectively, that is, IO (i ) = ∫0 O (i ) (t )dt , with T set as 100 in
this work. If the relative drug efficacy is greater than 0
for module i, then the drug induced more reduction in
integrated output of module i compared to the basic
module, vice versa.

According to the Michaelis-Menten kinetics
[52], we formulated the following ordinary differential
equations (ODEs) to model the kinetics of proteins in each
module (Figure 2):

dX i
=
dt

j

j

where R12 (i ) ( d1 , d 2 ) is relative ratio of integrated
output reduced by the combinatorial drug 1 and drug 2 to
that without drug treatment in the module i. R12 (i ) ( d1 , d 2 )
was computed as

(2)

R12 (i ) ( d1 , d 2 ) =

IO (i ) (d1 , d 2 ) − IOno(i )_ drug
IOno(i )_ drug

.

(5)

Similarly, R1 ( d1 ) or R1(i ) ( d 2 ) is relative ratio of
integrated output under the treatment of single drug 1 or
(i )

64004

Oncotarget

drug 2 compared to that without drug treatment in the
module i. R ( d ) + R ( d ) − R1(i ) ( d1 ) ⋅ R2(i ) ( d 2 ) in Equation (4)
models the expected effect of two combinatorial drugs [53].
If the combination index is greater than 0, the
combination effect of the drug 1 and drug 2 was evaluated
to be synergistic, while if this index is less than 0, these
two drugs were considered to be antagonistic, otherwise
additive.
(i )
1

1

2

(i )

  9.	 Pazarentzos E, Bivona TG. Adaptive stress signaling
in targeted cancer therapy resistance. Oncogene. 2015;
34:5599–5606.

2

10.	 Behar M, Barken D, Werner S, Hoffmann A. The Dynamics
of Signaling as a Pharmacological Target. Cell. 2013;
155:448–461.
11.	 Kolch W, Halasz M, Granovskaya M, Kholodenko BN. The
dynamic control of signal transduction networks in cancer
cells. Nat Rev Cancer. 2015; 15:515–527.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS and funding

12.	 Lee H-J, Zhuang G, Cao Y, Du P, Kim H-J, Settleman J.
Drug resistance via feedback activation of Stat3 in oncogeneaddicted cancer cells. Cancer Cell. 2014; 26:207–221.

We would like to acknowledge Prof. Tianshou
Zhou and Prof. Jiajun Zhang at Sun Yat-sen University
for valuable discussion. This work was supported by the
National Key Basic Research Program of China (No.
2015CB859800, 2014CB910800), National Natural
Science Foundation of China (No. 61572506, 31522018,
61503419, 11301517), Guangdong Nature Science
Foundation (No. 2014A030310355, 2016A030313234).

13.	 Wagle N, Van Allen EM, Treacy DJ, Frederick DT,
Cooper ZA, Taylor-Weiner A, Rosenberg M, Goetz EM,
Sullivan RJ, Farlow DN. MAP kinase pathway alterations
in BRAF-mutant melanoma patients with acquired
resistance to combined RAF/MEK inhibition. Cancer
Discov. 2014; 4:61–68.
14.	 Pazarentzos E, Bivona T. Adaptive stress signaling in
targeted cancer therapy resistance. Oncogene. 2015.
34:5599–606.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

15.	 Holderfield M, Deuker MM, McCormick F, McMahon M.
Targeting RAF kinases for cancer therapy: BRAF-mutated
melanoma and beyond. Nat Rev Cancer. 2014; 14:455–467.

The authors declare no conflict(s) of interest.

References

16.	 Perna D, Karreth FA, Rust AG, Perezmancera PA, Rashid M,
Iorio F, Alifrangis C, Arends MJ, Bosenberg MW, Bollag G.
BRAF inhibitor resistance mediated by the AKT pathway
in an oncogenic BRAF mouse melanoma model. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA. 2015; 112:536–545.

  1.	 Camidge DR, Pao W, Sequist LV. Acquired resistance to
TKIs in solid tumours: learning from lung cancer. Nat Rev
Clin Oncol. 2014; 11:473–481.
  2.	 Foo J, Michor F. Evolution of acquired resistance to anticancer therapy. J Theor Biol. 2014; 355:10–20.

17.	 Azad A, Lawen A, Keith JM. Prediction of signaling crosstalks contributing to acquired drug resistance in breast
cancer cells by Bayesian statistical modeling. BMC Syst
Biol. 2015; 9:1–17.

  3.	 Chen X, Yan CC, Zhang X, Zhang X, Dai F, Yin J, Zhang Y.
Drug–target interaction prediction: databases, web servers and
computational models. Brief Bioinform. 2016: 17:696–712.
  4.	 Brown R, Curry E, Magnani L, Wilhelmbenartzi CS, Borley J.
Poised epigenetic states and acquired drug resistance in
cancer. Nat Rev Cancer. 2014; 14:747–753.

18.	 Yamaguchi H, Chang SS, Hsu JL, Hung MC. Signaling
cross-talk in the resistance to HER family receptor targeted
therapy. Oncogene. 2013; 33:1073–1081.

  5.	 Ivanov M, Barragan I, Ingelman-Sundberg M. Epigenetic
mechanisms of importance for drug treatment. Trends
Pharmacol Sci. 2014; 35:384–396.

19.	 Lito P, Pratilas C, Joseph E, Tadi M, Halilovic E,
Zubrowski  M, Huang A, Wong WL, Callahan M,
Merghoub  T. Relief of Profound Feedback Inhibition of
Mitogenic Signaling by RAF Inhibitors Attenuates Their
Activity in BRAFV600E Melanomas. Cancer Cell. 2012;
22:668–682.

  6.	 Shetzer Y, Solomon H, Koifman G, Molchadsky A,
Horesh S, Rotter V. The paradigm of mutant p53-expressing
cancer stem cells and drug resistance. Carcinogenesis. 2014;
35:1196–1208.

20.	 Barabasi A-L, Oltvai ZN. Network biology: understanding
the cell’s functional organization. Nat Rev Genet. 2004;
5:101–113.

  7.	 Lee HJ, Zhuang G, Cao Y, Du P, Kim HJ, Settleman J. Drug
Resistance via Feedback Activation of Stat3 in OncogeneAddicted Cancer Cells. Cancer Cell. 2014; 26:207–221.

21.	 Mangan S, Alon U. Structure and function of the feedforward loop network motif. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA.
2003; 100:11980–11985.

  8.	 Nikhil W, Allen EM, Van, Treacy DJ, Frederick DT,
Cooper ZA, Amaro TW, Mara R, Goetz EM, Sullivan RJ,
Farlow DN. MAP kinase pathway alterations in BRAF-mutant
melanoma patients with acquired resistance to combined
RAF/MEK inhibition. Cancer Discov. 2013; 4:61–68.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

22.	 Milo R, Shen-Orr S, Itzkovitz S, Kashtan N, Chklovskii D,
Alon U. Network motifs: simple building blocks of complex
networks. Science. 2002; 298:824–827.

64005

Oncotarget

23.	 Zhang Y, Smolen P, Baxter DA, Byrne JH. Computational
analyses of synergism in small molecular network motifs.
PLoS Comput Biol. 2014; 10:e1003524.

39.	 Cojoc M, Mäbert K, Muders MH, Dubrovska A. A role
for cancer stem cells in therapy resistance: cellular and
molecular mechanisms. Semin Cancer Biol. 2014; 31:16–27.

24.	 Van WR, Tans SJ, Wolde PR, Mashaghi A. Non-monotonic
dynamics and crosstalk in signaling pathways and their
implications for pharmacology. Sci Re. 2015; 5:11376.

40.	 Fu F, Nowak MA, Bonhoeffer S. Spatial heterogeneity
in drug concentrations can facilitate the emergence of
resistance to cancer therapy. PLoS Comput Biol. 2015;
11:e1004142.

25.	 White N. Preventing antimalarial drug resistance through
combinations. Drug Resist Updat. 1998; 1:3–9.

41.	 Wellbrock C. Spatial intra-tumour heterogeneity in acquired
resistance to targeted therapy complicates the use of PDX
models for co-clinical cancer studies. EMBO Mol Med.
2015; 7:1087–1089.

26.	 Holohan C, Van Schaeybroeck S, Longley DB, Johnston PG.
Cancer drug resistance: an evolving paradigm. Nat Rev
Cancer. 2013; 13:714–726.

42.	 Sun X, Bao J, Shao Y. Mathematical Modeling of Therapyinduced Cancer Drug Resistance: Connecting Cancer
Mechanisms to Population Survival Rates. Sci Rep. 2016;
6:22498.

27.	 Hu C-MJ, Zhang L. Nanoparticle-based combination
therapy toward overcoming drug resistance in cancer.
Biochem Pharmacol. 2012; 83:1104–1111.
28.	 Chen X, Ren B, Chen M, Liu MX, Ren W, Wang QX,
Zhang LX, Yan GY. ASDCD: antifungal synergistic drug
combination database. PLoS One. 2014; 9:e86499.

43.	 Obenauf AC, Zou Y, Ji AL, Vanharanta S, Shu W, Shi H,
Kong X, Bosenberg MC, Wiesner T, Rosen N. Therapyinduced tumour secretomes promote resistance and tumour
progression. Nature. 2015; 520:368–72.

29.	 Chen X, Liu MX, Yan GY. Drug–target interaction
prediction by random walk on the heterogeneous network.
Mol Biosyst. 2012; 8:1970–1978.
30.	 Yin N, Ma W, Pei J, Ouyang Q, Tang C, Lai L. Synergistic
and antagonistic drug combinations depend on network
topology. PLoS One. 2014; 9:e93960.

44.	 Ma W, Trusina A, El-Samad H, Lim WA, Tang C. Defining
network topologies that can achieve biochemical adaptation.
Cell. 2009; 138:760–773.
45.	 Avraham R, Yarden Y. Feedback regulation of EGFR
signalling: decision making by early and delayed loops. Nat
Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2011; 12:104–117.

31.	 Chen X, Ren B, Chen M, Wang Q, Zhang L, Yan G.
NLLSS: Predicting Synergistic Drug Combinations based
on semi-supervised learning. PLoS Comput Biol. 2016.
12:e1004975.

46.	 Jensen KJ, Moyer CB, Janes KA. Network Architecture
Predisposes an Enzyme to Either Pharmacologic or Genetic
Targeting. Cell Syst. 2016; 2:112–121.

32.	 Xing C, Yan CC, Zhang X, Xu Z, Feng D, Jian Y, Zhang Y.
Drug-target interaction prediction: databases, web servers and
computational models. Brief Bioinform. 2015; 17:696–712.
33.	 Sun X, Bao J, Nelson KC, Li KC, Kulik G, Zhou X.
Systems modeling of anti-apoptotic pathways in prostate
cancer: psychological stress triggers a synergism pattern
switch in drug combination therapy. PLoS Comput Biol.
2013; 9:e1003358.

47.	 Charlebois DA, Balázsi G, Kærn M. Coherent feedforward
transcriptional regulatory motifs enhance drug resistance.
Phys Rev E. 2014; 89:052708.
48.	 Greger JG, Eastman SD, Zhang V, Bleam MR, Hughes AM,
Smitheman KN, Dickerson SH, Laquerre SG, Liu L,
Gilmer  TM. Combinations of BRAF, MEK, and PI3K/
mTOR inhibitors overcome acquired resistance to the BRAF
inhibitor GSK2118436 dabrafenib, mediated by NRAS or
MEK mutations. Mol Cancer Ther. 2012; 11:909–920.

34.	 Carver B, Chapinski C, Wongvipat J, Hieronymus H,
Chen  Y, Chandarlapaty S, Arora V, Le C, Koutcher J,
Scher  H. Reciprocal Feedback Regulation of PI3K and
Androgen Receptor Signaling in PTEN-Deficient Prostate
Cancer. Cancer Cell. 2011; 19:575–586.

49.	 Mao M, Tian F, Mariadason JM, Tsao CC, Jr LR, Dayyani F,
Gopal YN, Jiang ZQ, Wistuba II, Tang XM. Resistance to
BRAF inhibition in BRAF-mutant colon cancer can be
overcome with PI3K inhibition or demethylating agents. Clin
Cancer Res. 2012; 19:657–667.

35.	 Kirouac DC, Du JY, Lahdenranta J, Overland R, Yarar D,
Paragas V, Pace E, Mcdonagh CF, Nielsen UB, Onsum MD.
Computational modeling of ERBB2-amplified breast cancer
identifies combined ErbB2/3 blockade as superior to the
combination of MEK and AKT inhibitors. Sci Signal. 2013;
6:ra68.

50.	 Warren PB, Tănasenicola S, Wolde PRT. Exact results
for noise power spectra in linear biochemical reaction
networks. J Chem Phys. 2006; 125:120–124.
51.	 Gillespie DT. The Chemical Langevin Equation. Journal of
Chemical Physics. 2000; 113:297–306.

36.	 Iyengar R, Zhao S, Chung SW, Mager DE, Gallo JM.
Merging systems biology with pharmacodynamics. Sci
Transl Med. 2012; 4:126ps7.

52.	 Michaelis L, Menten ML. Die Kinetik der Invertinwirkun.
Biochem Z. 1913; 49:333–369.

37.	 Peng H, Wen J, Li H, Chang J, Zhou X. Drug inhibition
profile prediction for NFκB pathway in multiple myeloma.
PLoS One. 2011; 6:e14750.

53.	 Loewe S. The problem of synergism and antagonism of
combined drugs. Arzneimittelforschung. 1953; 3:404–404.

38.	 Dean M, Fojo T, Bates S. Tumour stem cells and drug
resistance. Nat Rev Cancer. 2005; 5:275–284.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

64006

Oncotarget

