Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 46

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

A novel mechanism of action of HER2 targeted immunotherapy
is explained by inhibition of NRF2 function in ovarian cancer
cells
Hilal S. Khalil1, Simon P. Langdon3, Alexey Goltsov1, Tero Soininen1, David J.
Harrison4, James Bown2, Yusuf Y. Deeni1
1

Division of Science, School of Science, Engineering and Technology, Abertay University, Dundee, DD1 1HG, United Kingdom

2

Division of Computing and Mathematics, School of Arts, Media, and Computer Games, Abertay University, Dundee,
DD1 1HG, United Kingdom

3

Division of Pathology, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Western General Hospital,
Edinburgh, EH4 2XU, United Kingdom

4

School of Medicine, University of St Andrews, St Andrews, KY16 9TF, United Kingdom

Correspondence to: Yusuf Y. Deeni, email: y.deeni@abertay.ac.uk
Keywords: Pertuzumab/Trastuzumab, NRF2, ROS, HER2-targeted, cancer-immunotherapeutics
Received: June 29, 2016     Accepted: September 21, 2016     Published: October 04, 2016

ABSTRACT
Nuclear erythroid related factor-2 (NRF2) is known to promote cancer therapeutic
detoxification and crosstalk with growth promoting pathways. HER2 receptor tyrosine
kinase is frequently overexpressed in cancers leading to uncontrolled receptor
activation and signaling. A combination of HER2 targeting monoclonal antibodies
shows greater anticancer efficacy than the single targeting antibodies, however, its
mechanism of action is largely unclear. Here we report novel actions of anti-HER2
drugs, Trastuzumab and Pertuzumab, involving NRF2.
HER2 targeting by antibodies inhibited growth in association with persistent
generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), glutathione (GSH) depletion, reduction
in NRF2 levels and inhibition of NRF2 function in ovarian cancer cell lines. The
combination of antibodies produced more potent effects than single antibody alone;
downregulated NRF2 substrates by repressing the Antioxidant Response (AR)
pathway with concomitant transcriptional inhibition of NRF2. We showed the antibody
combination produced increased methylation at the NRF2 promoter consistent with
repression of NRF2 antioxidant function, as HDAC and methylation inhibitors reversed
such produced transcriptional effects. These findings demonstrate a novel mechanism
and role for NRF2 in mediating the response of cancer cells to the combination of
Trastuzumab and Pertuzumab and reinforce the importance of NRF2 in drug resistance
and as a key anticancer target.

target genes [5]. Under basal conditions, a low level of
free NRF2 is available in the cytoplasm where some
translocates into the nucleus to drive the basal transcription
of target genes. Much of the remaining cytosolic NRF2 is
held by Kelch-like ECH-associated protein 1 (KEAP1),
a cytoplasmic NRF2-binding adaptor that primes NRF2
for degradation via 26S proteasome [6, 7]. Following
oxidative stress or in the presence of NRF2 activators,
a number of cysteine residues within KEAP1 become
oxidized causing conformational changes in the KEAP1
structure. This disables KEAP1 to bind additional NRF2
and cause its degradation leading to nuclear accumulation

INTRODUCTION
Nuclear erythroid related factor-2 (NRF2) is a
leucine zipper transcription factor and the master regulator
of the antioxidant response (AR) pathway. It drives both
basal and oxidative stress-induced transcription of a
battery of phase I, II, and III detoxification enzymes and
cytoprotective genes [1–3], as well as other genes of the
metabolic and signal transduction pathways [2–4]. This
is achieved by its binding to cis-acting factors called
Antioxidant Response Elements (AREs) or electrophile
response elements (EpREs) within the promoters of its
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

75874

Oncotarget

of NRF2, activation of its transcriptional function to
induce transactivation of ARE-containing genes and
finally restoration of cellular redox homeostasis [8].
Hyperactivation of NRF2 is also a recognized
intermediate in cellular proliferation and in conferring
therapeutic resistance to cancers [9–11]. Specifically,
NRF2 activation and KEAP1 inactivation mutations are
harbinger to permanent constitutive activation of the NRF2
dependent AR pathway now frequently observed in cancers
[12–15]. Furthermore, several therapeutic strategies such
as anticancer radio- and chemo-therapy largely depend
on reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation to induce
cytotoxicity. Thus, hyper-activation of NRF2 dependent
AR pathway would attenuate the potency of such agents.
Moreover, NRF2 is directly involved in the regulation of
apoptosis and proliferation [16, 17].
The HER receptor network contains four members
(HER1, HER2, HER3 and HER4) belonging to the family
of Receptor Tyrosine Kinases (RTKs), which are key
regulators of cellular proliferation, differentiation and
survival [18–21]. Activation of RTKs involves ligand
dependent homo- and hetero-dimerization and stimulation
of their intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity that leads to the
phosphorylation of tyrosine residues in the intracellular
domain of these receptors. The phospho-tyrosine residues
serve as docking sites to recruit a number of signal adapter
proteins containing specific domains called SH2- and
PTB. Through these domains, RTK links its activation
with different cellular signaling pathways such as PI3K/
AKT/mTOR, MAPK, and STAT [22, 23]. The activation
kinetics and strength of the HER receptor network depend
significantly on the expression levels, which vary across
different cells and cancers [24]. Likewise it is these
variations in expression combined with their context
dependent preferences for dimerization partners and
ligand dependent or independent signaling modes that
cause complexity in fully elucidating the activation and
functioning of the HER receptor family.
The HER2 and HER3 receptors are non-autonomous
and possess certain defining features, in that HER2 has
auto-kinase activity but no known ligands, whereas HER3
is a pseudo-kinase receptor that lacks tyrosine kinase
activity. These features dictate the interaction between
the HER2 and HER3 receptors and for forming active
heterodimer complexes. Mutation or increased gene copy
number leads to hyper-activation or overexpression of
HER receptors respectively. These mechanisms lead to
receptor auto-phosphorylation and constitutive activation,
enabling cells to lose their requirement for ligand and/or
hetero-dimerization of receptors, mechanisms which elicit
uncontrolled proliferative pathways ultimately converting
normal cells into malignant cells [18, 22, 23, 25, 26].
Among the RTK kinase family members, HER2 has
gained major importance as an anticancer drug target. This
is owing to this receptor frequently being overexpressed in
certain cancer types and partners with the HER3 receptor,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

a combination, which is known to strongly elicit robust
growth-promoting pathways [27–33].
HER2 targeting immunotherapeutic agents,
comprising of HER2 specific humanized monoclonal
antibodies, Pertuzumab and Trastuzumab (Herceptin), have
acquired a central position as targeted anticancer modalities
and are currently being extensively studied [31, 32]. These
monoclonal antibodies frequently have limited effectiveness
in combating cancers as tumor cells circumvent the action of
the single agents due to the readjustments in co-expression
of HER2/HER3 receptors, their ligand binding dynamics
or changing preference for the dimerizing partners [25, 34,
35]. Because of such complexity, it is imperative to identify
and characterize downstream pathway nodes where RTK
signaling converges, in order to identify novel druggable
targets to exploit during immunotherapies involving HER2
inhibition.
Recently, a growing body of evidence has
implicated coregulatory roles of HER2/HER3, NRF2 and
ROS in the promotion of cellular proliferation, increased
detoxification potential and therapeutic resistance in
cancer cells [36–39]. Specifically, generation of ROS,
which is a key regulator of the NRF2 pathway [40], has
been demonstrated as a regulator of the HER2/HER3
complex and subsequent activation of their functions
[41]. Elucidation of these new mechanisms place ROS
at a central position where it might act as a point of
convergence of these two cytoprotective pathways.
Moreover, studies have also shown direct mechanisms of
activation of NRF2 by components of the RTK pathway
such as PI3K and MAPK [42, 43], whereas many aspects
of RTK signaling are regulated by ROS, whose levels
are directly modulated by NRF2 function [44]. We have
recently shown that NRF2 regulates the expression of
HER2 and HER3 to modulate HER2/HER3 targeted
immunotherapy against ovarian cancer cells [45].
We have also shown the ROS-dependent hierarchical
addiction and manipulation strategy of these cancer
cells to draw proliferative advantage [10, 11]. This led
us to hypothesize that inhibition of NRF2 function and
concomitant cellular accumulation of ROS are possible
mechanistic components and basis of action of HER2targeted immunotherapy.
In this study, we have elucidated a new
mechanism of action of the combination of anticancer
immunotherapeutic agents. We demonstrate that
combination treatment with HER2 targeting monoclonal
antibodies, Pertuzumab and Trastuzumab, causes
inhibition of NRF2 function and subsequent repression of
NRF2 dependent antioxidant response pathway in human
ovarian cancer cell lines. This repressive action on NRF2
not only defined the overall sensitivity towards targeted
therapy, but could also be modulated to further enhance
this sensitivity in otherwise resistant ovarian cancer
cells. Furthermore, we present evidence and describe
an epigenetic mechanism of transcriptional repression
75875

Oncotarget

of NRF2, which involves promoter methylation and
gene silencing following combination of Pertuzumab
and Trastuzumab treatment. Thus we reveal that the
effectiveness and enhanced cytotoxic action of the
combination of HER2 targeted immunotherapeutic agents
can be at least partly explained by their ability to cause
transcriptional inhibition of NRF2 and greater repression
of its antioxidant function in low, moderate and high
HER2 expressing ovarian cancer cell lines. As such,
this study expands the role of NRF2 as a key element
in driving drug resistance and offers a novel strategy of
cancer cell sensitization during the course of targeted
therapy for cancer employing immunotherapeutics.

We then further investigated the contribution of ROS
generation in the mechanism of cytotoxic action of these
immunotherapeutic agents. To address this, we repeated
our cytotoxicity experiment but this time co-treated cells
with the ROS scavenger, N-acetyl Cysteine (NAC) in order
to neutralize ROS and then study its consequences on
survival for different time points of treatment. Strikingly,
we found that neutralization of ROS in all the cell lines
significantly improved survival following drug treatments
(Figure 1C), especially at later time point and perhaps
following the uptake and channeling of NAC in de novo
GSH synthesis. Consistent with our previous conclusions,
NAC dependent protection was more pronounced and
sustained in the PEO4 cell line and with Pertuzumab and
combination treatments, whereas for OVCAR4, NAC was
more protective following Trastuzumab and combination
treatment. Interestingly, NAC treatment of SKOV3
cells exerted limited protection against cytotoxic action
of the inhibitors (Figure 1C). These observations are of
significance, as they clearly illustrate the role of ROS
and hence of the overall antioxidant potential of cancer
cells in determining sensitivity to otherwise unrelated
immunotherapeutic agents. The fact that receptor
inhibition led to generation of ROS (Figure 1B) and that
this ROS was a contributing factor in cellular cytotoxicity
(Figure 1C) implicated the engagement of antioxidant
pathway during drug action. Thus, we next sought to
investigate the status of the NRF2-KEAP1antioxidant
response of these cancer cells following the HER2/HER3
targeted immunotherapies. In order to further support and
confirm this role, we performed additional experiments as
described below.

RESULTS
Action of targeted immunotherapeutic agents
involves generation of ROS, which contributes to
cancer growth inhibition
Reactive oxygen species (ROS), while traditionally
considered as cellular by-products of metabolism, have
gained enormous importance in the past decade and
are further recognized as second messengers in signal
transduction processes influencing growth, survival and
overall physiological homeostasis [46–48]. Furthermore,
there are several previous studies that have illustrated
the co-modulatory role and interaction of ROS with RTK
receptors and growth promoting pathways [49–52]. These
taken together with our recent work (10, 11, 45) have led
us to hypothesize that inhibition of NRF2 function and
concomitant cellular accumulation of ROS are possible
mechanistic components and basis of action of HER2targeted immunotherapy. To address this hypothesis we
first studied total ROS levels in basal, Heregulin (HRG)
stimulated and drug-inhibited states in three cell lines.
HRG is a growth factor belonging to the EGF family. We
used HRG as it is a potent ligand for HER receptors and
causes HER2-HER3 dimerization [20]. We used a low
HER2 expressing ovarian cancer cell line, OVCAR4,
a moderately HER2 expressing PEO4 and a HER2
overexpressing cell line, SKOV3 [34].
Data in Figure 1A illustrate that HRG stimulation
alone led to a significant and sustained increase in ROS
levels in all three cell lines as compared to basal levels
in unstimulated cells. More importantly, we saw that
treatments with Pertuzumab, Trastuzumab or their
combination led to ROS generation in our ovarian cancer
cell line models. ROS elevation was seen at all the time
points tested but these were consistently significant in
PEO4 cells and more restricted in OVCAR4 (Figure 1B).
Within single agent treatments, in PEO4, Pertuzumab
generated more ROS than Trastuzumab while in OVCAR4
and SKOV3, Trastuzumab consistently generated higher
ROS than Pertuzumab alone.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Inhibition of NRF2 by Retinoic acid (RA)
disrupts its antioxidant transcriptional program,
suppresses NRF2 and HO-1 protein levels,
elevates cellular ROS and enhances cytotoxicity
of the immunotherapeutic agents
Retinoic acid (RA) has previously been shown
to inhibit the antioxidant response (AR) pathway in an
NRF2 dependent manner [53]. In order to extend the
observations reported in the previous section, we wanted
to study the consequences of NRF2 inhibition on survival
following exposure to the HER2 targeting drugs. Firstly,
we did a series of experiments in the ovarian cancer cell
line models in order to validate and confirm the inhibitory
action of RA on the NRF2 dependent AR pathway.
Exposure to RA alone caused a decrease in total NRF2
levels (Figure 2A). Interestingly the levels of NRF2
in these cell lines were further decreased following cotreatment with combined immunotherapy (Trastuzumab &
Pertuzumab). This drug induced reduction in NRF2 levels
suggested that immunotherapy is also targeting NRF2.
Next, using the luciferase ARE reporter AREc32 cell line,

75876

Oncotarget

we demonstrated that RA treatment significantly inhibited
transcriptional activity of NRF2 at all the time points
tested (Figure 2B). RA treatment of AREc32 reporter cell
line also elevated ROS levels (Supplementary Figure S1).
Furthermore, RA could not further enhance the inhibitory
action of combination of immunotherapeutic agents on
AR pathway. We also examined the effect of RA treatment
at single cell level on NRF2 substrate, HO-1, and could
demonstrate a decrease in its abundance (Figure 2C).
These findings suggested that while RA inhibits NRF2
dependent AR pathway, such treatment might also elevate
cellular ROS levels in the ovarian cancer cell lines. Indeed
we found that treatment with RA significantly induced
ROS in the three cell lines tested (Figure 3A and 3B).
We next asked whether RA dependent inhibition
of NRF2 AR pathway would sensitize ovarian cancer
cells to targeted immunotherapeutic agents and if such
treatment could achieve sensitization in the otherwise drug
resistant OVCAR4 cell line. To do this, we repeated drug
treatments either alone or in combination for 24-96 h, but
this time with co-treatment of RA (Figure 3C). We found

significantly enhanced cytotoxicity of targeted therapies
following NRF2 inhibition in all three cell lines, in all
treatments and at most time points tested. PEO4 cell line
was most sensitized to such treatments with all groups
showing significant increase in cell death. OVCAR4,
which was more resistant, was also sensitized to targeted
therapies following RA treatment. We also determined
whether treatment with RA in the absence of any other
drugs alone could curb cancer growth, and thus analyzed
growth rates for 4 days and found growth inhibition
(Supplementary Figure S2). These findings illustrated
the important role of NRF2 in influencing outcomes to
targeted therapies involving HER2 receptor inhibition.
These results indicate that effectiveness of anticancer
therapy involving targeted immunotherapeutic agents could
be enhanced by parallel inhibition of the NRF2 dependent
antioxidant response pathway. As such, this represents a
novel drug target in the context of HER2 inhibition and
could explain the enhanced effectiveness of combination
of Pertuzumab and Trastuzumab, a treatment that reduced
NRF2 levels, as opposed to single agents. This could

Figure 1: Treatment with HER2 targeting antibodies generates Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) that when neutralized
leads to cytoprotection in ovarian cancer cells. (A) Heregulin treatment causes persistent elevation of ROS in ovarian cancer cells.

Exponentially growing cells were seeded in triplicates in opaque flat bottom black walled 96-well plates for 24 h. Following this, cells were
either left untreated (UT) or treated with 1nM Heregulin for different time points as indicated. Following incubations, cells were loaded
with DCFDA fluorescent stain for 45 min and assayed for ROS as described in Materials and Methods. (B) HER2 targeting monoclonal
antibodies cause ROS generation. Cells were seeded as in (A) and treated with either 1nM HRG alone or with co-treatment of 20μg/mL
Pertuzumab (PR), Trastuzumab (TR) or their combination (COMB) for different time points as indicated and ROS assay was repeated.
For both (A) and (B), the fluorescence reading recorded from each well was normalized to total cell abundance within the same wells
as described in Materials and Methods. (C) Treatment with N-Acetyl Cysteine (NAC) desensitizes ovarian cells to immunotherapeutic
agents targeting HER2. Cells were seeded as in (A) and either left untreated in media containing 1nM Heregulin (HRG) or treated with
same media containing 20μg/mL of HER2 inhibitors, Pertuzumab and Trastuzumab either alone or in combination (RTKi only group) or
in the continuous presence of 10mM NAC (RTKi + NAC group). Cells were treated with the MTT reagent as described in Materials and
Methods and OD readings were obtained. Data shown are mean values ± S.D of triplicates, normalized to UT in (A) or HRG in (B) and
(C) and expressed as fold change. Statistical significance was determined between treatment groups either by independent t test or ONE
WAY ANOVA followed by post hoc Tukey’s test as appropriate and significance expressed according to the scale * P <0.05, **P <0.01,
***P <0.001.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

75877

Oncotarget

further serve to explain why HER2 immunotherapeutics in
certain contexts show poor efficacy.

(Trastuzumab & Pertuzumab) with RA treatments, we next
asked whether targeted immunotherapy would also inhibit
NRF2-dependent transcription. To address this, we used
the AREc32 cell line, stably expressing 8 copies of NRF2
dependent cis-regulatory antioxidant response elements, as
a luciferase reporter. We found that while HRG stimulation
alone induced the antioxidant response pathway, cotreatment with combination of Pertuzumab and Trastuzumab
not only disrupted such induction, but further suppressed

Action of targeted immunotherapeutic agents
involves repression of NRF2-dependent
transcription and depletion of total Glutathione
Having observed additional decreased levels of NRF2
in these cell lines following combined immunotherapy

Figure 2: Treatment with Retinoic acid (RA) causes inhibition of NRF2 dependent antioxidant response pathway and
generates ROS. (A) Western analysis showing repression of NRF2 levels following RA treatment in PEO4, OVCAR4 and SKOV3 cell

lines. Exponentially growing cells were either left untreated, treated with 2.5μM RA or a combination of 2.5μM RA together with 20μg/
mL of Pertuzumab and Trastuzumab for 96 h before being harvested to prepare protein lysates and processed as described in Materials and
Methods. Ponceau stain of the same blot was used as loading control. Red bars indicate NRF2 levels following quantification of immunoblot
signal intensities obtained in (A) and normalized to the value of UT and expressed as fold change. The signal intensities of bands were
quantified through integrated optical densitometry measurement. (B) RA treatment causes inhibition of NRF2 dependent transcription.
Exponentially growing AREc32 cell line stably expressing 8xcis-antioxidant response elements driving the expression of luciferase gene
in an NRF2 dependent manner were either left untreated (UT), treated with RA alone, or with RA and combination of Pertuzumab and
Trastuzumab for different time points as indicated. Following this, cell lysates were prepared and assayed for Luciferase activity (BrightGlo
Luciferase system, Promega). Data are the mean values ± S.D of quadruplicates, normalized to untreated (UT) and expressed as fold
change with statistical significance determined by ONE WAY ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post hoc test according to the scale * P <0.05,
**P <0.01, ***P <0.001. (C) RA treatment causes repression of HO-1 levels. Immunofluorescent labelling of endogenous HO-1 in cells
previously grown on poly-L lysine coated coverslips and exposed to RA treatment as in (A). For immunolabelling, primary HO-1 antibody
followed by Alexa Fluor® 568 conjugated secondary antibody (red fluorescence) was used. Nuclear reference was provided by co-staining
with 4',6-Diamidino-2-Phenylindole, Dihydrochloride (DAPI). Images were captured with Leica DMiRe2 electronic microscope using
integrated features of ANDOR iQ core software (ANDOR Technologies Ltd). Scale bar indicates 10μm. These are representative images
taken in different field of views with relevant fluorescence channels and 100x objective.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

75878

Oncotarget

it significantly at 24 and 72 h of treatment (Figure 4A).
Treatments with single agents alone also inhibited NRF2
function, although to a lesser extent than their combination.
We next asked whether NRF2 repression would
also lead to depletion of total cellular glutathione. A 96
h treatment with HRG induced total cellular glutathione,
while combination of Pertuzumab and Trastuzumab
significantly reduced this level in PEO4 cells. The same
was seen for OVCAR4 and SKOV3 cells, albeit not
significantly (Figure 4B). These studies demonstrate that
HER2 targeting monoclonal antibodies repress the NRF2
dependent antioxidant pathway which may well contribute
to the unique enhanced cytotoxicity in the combination of
Pertuzumab and Trastuzumab.

HER2 targeting monoclonal antibodies, Pertuzumab and
Trastuzumab, either used individually or in combination
(Figure 5A). To do this, we again used the low HER2
expressing ovarian cancer cell line, OVCAR4, the
moderately HER2 expressing PEO4 and the HER2
overexpressing cell line, SKOV3 [34]. Moreover, the
expression of the HER2 key heterodimerization partner,
HER3, is variable in these ovarian cell lines with PEO4
expressing the highest, OVCAR4 moderate and SKOV3,
the lowest [34]. We found that not only did the cells
exhibit variable and statistically significant and distinct
susceptibilities to the monoclonal antibodies, but that they
also exhibited time dependent variation in sensitivities
(Figure 5A). For example, within single treatments, while
Pertuzumab was more cytotoxic (than Trastuzumab) to
PEO4 cells, Trastuzumab achieved greater cytotoxicity
in OVCAR4 and SKOV3 cell lines. Secondly, with each
treatment modality, growth inhibition was maximal
following 72 h of treatment. Thirdly, the combination
treatment, having both Pertuzumab and Trastuzumab,
was generally more cytotoxic than single agents in all
cell lines. Finally, overall, PEO4 was found to be more

Ovarian cancer cells exhibit different
degrees of cytotoxicity to HER2 targeting
immunotherapeutic agents Pertuzumab and
Trastuzumab
We next determined the degree of sensitivity of
ovarian cancer cells derived from different origins to the

Figure 3: Inhibition of NRF2 pathway by Retinoic acid (RA) sensitizes ovarian cancer cells to immunotherapeutic
agents targeting HER2 by increased ROS and enhanced growth inhibition. (A) RA treatment causes increase in ROS levels.

Exponentially growing cells were seeded in triplicates in opaque flat bottom black walled 96-well plates for 24 h. Following this, cells
were either left untreated (UT) or treated with 1nM Heregulin and exposed to 2.5μM RA for different time points as indicated. Following
incubations, cells were loaded with DCFDA fluorescent stain for 45 min and assayed for ROS by measuring fluorescence as described
in Materials and Methods. Data is shown as fold change of RA treated cells to UT or RA and HRG treated cells to HRG treated cells as
indicated (broken line). (B) Green fluorescent signal of DCFDA stain indicating ROS accumulation in ovarian cancer cells. Exponentially
growing cells were either left untreated in media containing 1nM Heregulin (HRG) in the presence 5% charcoal stripped FBS, or treated
with same media containing 20μg/mL of HER2 inhibitors, Pertuzumab and Trastuzumab either alone or in combination (RTKi only group)
or in the continuous presence of 2.5μM RA (RTKi + RA group). Following treatments, cells were washed with PBS and imaged using
Leica DMiRe2 electronic microscope and 485/535nm filter set. Merging with bright field phase contrast images captured in same field of
view were performed by using integrated features of ANDOR iQ core software (ANDOR Technologies Ltd). Scale bar indicates 50μm.
These are representative images with a 40x objective. (C) Growth inhibition measured using the MTT assay as described in Materials
and Methods. Values are mean values ± S.D of triplicates and expressed as fold decrease to HRG. Statistical significance was determined
between pairs of RTKi only and RTKi + RA groups by independent t test and significance expressed according to the scale * P <0.05,
**P <0.01, ***P <0.001.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

75879

Oncotarget

Pertuzumab and Trastuzumab produce different
levels of RTK signaling inhibition in ovarian
cancer cell lines

sensitive to combination of the drugs, SKOV3 showed
moderate sensitivity while OVCAR4 was least sensitive
(Figure 5A).
This analysis revealed the differential responses
of the tested ovarian cancer cell lines to the same HER2
inhibitors indicating the variable nature of outcomes to
targeted therapy involving HER2 inhibitors. However,
since most of the time points tested revealed the
combination of the two inhibitors produced the highest
growth inhibition, this initial cytotoxicity data supports
the use of the combination treatment in ovarian cancer
[31, 33].

Upon observing varying degrees of growth
inhibition to Pertuzumab and Trastuzumab in the three
cell lines used, we next sought to determine whether these
also achieve different degrees of RTK signaling inhibition.
Specifically, we determined the levels of phosphorylated
forms of HER2 Thr 877 (pHER2) and AKT Ser 473
(pAKT) following 96 h treatment with the HER2 targeting
agents (Figure 5B).

Figure 4: Treatment with Pertuzumab and Trastuzumab causes repression of NRF2 dependent transcription and
depletion of total Glutathione levels. (A) Combination of Pertuzumab and Trastuzumab cause inhibition of NRF2 dependent

transcription. Exponentially growing AREc32 cell line stably expressing cis-regulatory antioxidant response elements driving the expression
of luciferase gene in an NRF2 dependent manner were treated with 1nM HRG alone or with co-treatment of 20μg/mL Pertuzumab and
Trastuzumab either individually or in combination for different time points as indicated. Following this, cell lysates were prepared and
assayed for Luciferase activity as described in Materials and Methods. Data shown are mean values ± S.D of quadruplicates, normalized
to untreated (UT) and expressed as fold change with statistical significance determined by ONE WAY ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post
hoc test. In upper panel, asterisks indicate significant difference in inhibition between monotherapy and combination while the # notation
indicates the significant difference of inhibition between HRG and all the treatment types. In lower panel, asterisks indicate significant
differences between individual groups as indicated and according to the scale * P <0.05, **P <0.01, ***P <0.001. (B) Combination of
targeted immunotherapeutic agents causes glutathione depletion. Exponentially growing cells were seeded in 60mm tissue culture plates
for 24 h and either left untreated (UT) or treated with media containing 1nM Heregulin alone (HRG) or with co-treatment of 20μg/mL
Pertuzumab (PR), Trastuzumab (TR) or their combination (COMB) for 96 h before being harvested to prepare protein lysates and processed
for glutathione assay. Data were normalized to the total protein content from same plates determined by Bradford assay and are mean values
± S.D of triplicates and expressed as fold change to the UT. Statistical significance was determined by ONE WAY ANOVA followed by
Tukey’s post hoc test according to the scale * P <0.05, **P <0.01, ***P <0.001.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

75880

Oncotarget

At 96 h, there was more marked repression of
pHER2 and pAKT in the PEO4 cell line than either
OVCAR4 or SKOV3 cells, consistent with the observation
of increased sensitivity of PEO4 to these inhibitors.
Furthermore, treatment with a combination of the two
agents usually achieved the highest inhibition of RTK
signaling, again consistent with the highest growth
inhibition seen in combination treatment in Figure 5A.
Finally and again consistent with Figure 5A, OVCAR4
was found to have least inhibition of the phosphorylated
substrates at all time points tested.
NRF2 is a master regulator of the antioxidant
response (AR) pathway [7], while KEAP1 is its main
regulator by functioning as an adaptor for ubiquitin
ligase complex and promoting NRF2 degradation [54].
In the context of targeted immunotherapy, recent reports
have suggested a role for NRF2 in determining overall

treatment response [37, 55, 56]. More specifically, several
studies have either suggested direct cross talk of NRF2
and RTK signaling [36], or modulation of NRF2 by
the RTK substrates PI3K [57–59] and MAPK [42, 43].
Furthermore, both RTK mediated growth promoting
pathways and NRF2 dependent antioxidant responses
have been documented to lead to drug resistance of cancer
cells [60–64]. In light of these emerging roles of NRF2 in
determining overall treatment responses, we next extended
our investigation to study regulation of NRF2 and its
degrader, KEAP1, in response to targeted therapies.
Treatment with HER2 inhibitors either alone or in
combination on the contrary reduced NRF2 levels equally
in our cell lines, consistent with previous studies [36].
The combination treatment caused a distinct repression in
NRF2 levels in all three cell lines as compared to HRG
treatment alone, whereas at the same time point, there

Figure 5: Treatment with Trastuzumab and/or Pertuzumab causes cytotoxicity and modulates expression of pHER2,
pAKT, NRF2 and KEAP1 in ovarian cancer cell lines. (A) Effect of antibodies on cell number. Cells were treated with Pertuzumab

(PR), Trastuzumab (TR) or combination (COMB) of antibodies in the presence of 1nM Heregulin. Antibodies were used at 20μg/mL. After
treatment, cell number was assessed by use of the MTT assay as described in Materials and Methods. Values are means with ± S.D of
triplicates and expressed as fold decrease to HRG alone. Statistical significance was determined between untreated and treated groups by
ONE WAY ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post hoc test. Asterisks indicate significance of difference between HRG and individual treatment
group whereas “#” indicates significance of difference between combination and Pertuzumab (red sign) or combination and Trastuzumab
(blue sign) according to the scale * P <0.05, **P <0.01, ***P <0.001. (B) Western blot analysis showing levels of phospho HER2 T877
and phospho AKT S487 and (C) NRF2 and KEAP1 in response to treatments with 20μg/mL of Pertuzumab (Pr), Trastuzumab (Tr) and
their combination (Comb) in PEO4, OVCAR4 and SKOV3 cells. Exponentially growing cells were treated with media containing 1nM
Heregulin alone, or with co-treatment of Pertuzumab, Trastuzumab or their combination for 96h before being analyzed as described in
Materials and Methods. The bar charts show phospho HER2 or NRF2 (red bars) and phospho AKT levels or KEAP1 (blue bars) following
quantification of the immunoblot signal intensities obtained and normalized to HRG treatment group and expressed as fold change. The
signal intensities of bands were quantified through integrated optical densitometry measurement using Gelpro software (Version 3.1, Media
Cybernetics).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

75881

Oncotarget

was induction of KEAP1 in PEO4 and SKOV3 cell lines
(Figure 5C). Both NRF2 repression and KEAP1 induction
were greater in PEO4 and SKOV3 cell lines than in
OVCAR4, consistent with the cytotoxicity profiling
(Figure 5A). NRF2 is implicated in numerous contexts
in causing drug resistance [62–65] and the observed
repression of NRF2 following combination treatment and
greater repression in more sensitive cell lines is again
consistent with a role for NRF2 in determining sensitivity
to these targeted agents.
To characterize these observations further in an
in vivo context, we performed extensive bioinformatic
analysis and data mining from in vivo SKOV3 xenograft
model previously exposed to same HER2 target
immunotherapies. We especially sought to determine the
precise mechanism of combination-induced repression of
NRF2 and its antioxidant function.

87, 121, and 220 were due to Trastuzumab, Pertuzumab
and combination of respectively. Furthermore, a total of
19, 31, and 56 genes and transcripts were commonly and
significantly down regulated (p≤0.05) by Trastuzumab
and Pertuzumab, by Pertuzumab and combination,
and by Trastuzumab and combination, respectively.
The significant down regulation (p≤0.05) of 26 genes
was common to both single and combination therapies.
Irrespective of either monotherapy or combination
therapy, within the NRF2 network, the total up- and downregulated genes, especially of the significant ones (p≤0.05)
by each therapy were closely balanced and symmetrical
(Figure 6B–6D, also see Supplementary Table S2).
However, significantly greater volcanicity was observed
with combination immunotherapy. Overall a total of 309,
354, and 540 genes were significantly affected (p≤0.05)
by Trastuzumab, Pertuzumab, and their combination,
which accordingly represent 1:1.2:1.8 fold differences in
the number of affected genes within the NRF2 network
following these immunotherapies, respectively. We could
visualize these significant changes in the NRF2 network
using heatmaps, however, due to the large number of
the genes affected, we chose to present only the filtered
heatmap showing genes that remained significant even at
p=0.001 (Figure 6A). The higher number of modulated
genes recorded with the combination therapy relative to
the monotherapies is indicative of a more complex gene
expression changes and cellular reprogramming events,
which led to the observed greater cellular ROS production
and compromise of cellular NRF2 levels and functions.
More specifically, genes within the NRF2 network
that were markedly expressed and down regulated
following combination immunotherapy were detoxification
and metabolism related AKR1B1, AKR1C1, ATP13A3,
ATP1B1, ATP2A1, HMOX1, NQO1, FRMD6, GAPDH,
GCLM, GCSH, GSTM4, H6PD, IDH1, PRDX1, SOAT1,
SOD2, UGDH; DNA damage and repair related MLH3,
MSH6, MYH4; cell signaling, proliferation, inflammation
and immunity, and angiogenesis, related AKT3, AKTIP,
CDH6, CXXC5, CXCL2, GSK3A, GSK3B, HACE1,
ID1, KIT, KITLG, OSMR, PIK3AP1, PIK3IP1, PIK3R2,
PIK3R5, RPS6KB1; EPHA2, FGF12, FGFBP1, FOS,
FOSL2, FSTL1, IGF2BP3, JUNB, MAPK1, NGF, PDGFA,
PDGFC, PDGFD, TGFA, TNFRSF1A, TAX1BP1, TUBB3,
VEGFA, cell cycle regulation, cell survival and death
related BAD, BARD1, BCL6, BCL2L15, BNIP1, CDK7,
CDKN3, NAV2; as well as transcription and epigenetics
control related AHR, ARNTL, BACH1, BACH2, BRCA1,
BRCA2, ETS1, NFE2L2, NFKBIZ, RORA, RUNX2;
BLM, HAT1, HMGB1, MED4, MET, METRN, METTL1,
PRRX1, TES (Supplementary Table S1 and S2; Figure
6A). Likewise some genes within the NRF2 network that
were markedly expressed and up regulated following
combination immunotherapy were detoxification and
metabolism related ABCB9, ABCC1, ABCC10, ACOX2,
GPX2, GPX4, GSR, GSS, GSTA2, GSTM1, GSTM2,

Genetic reprogramming and NRF2 signaling
following in vivo anti-HER2 immunotherapy
We recently reported on some genetic cellular
reprogramming events following HER2-targeted
immunotherapy with Trastuzumab or Pertuzumab and
their combination in an in vivo xenograft model of
ovarian cancer [25, 32]. We re-examined the expression
profile and microarray data previously reported [32, 48].
However, this time we digressed from global analysis of
gene expression and focused on the NRF2 network using
a knowledge-based approach that is largely informed
by information reported in [50–54]. We analyzed gene
expression data as before [28, 32] on the response of
SKOV3 xenograft tumors to Trastuzumab, Pertuzumab,
and their combination treatments in the context of dynamic
changes in the NRF2 network and signaling pathway.
A total of 3599 transcripts of 2250 genes linked to
the NRF2 network and function were identified in the array
with 14, 15 and 24% either upregulated or down regulated
significantly (p≤0.05) following Trastuzumab, Pertuzumab
and combination of the HER2-targeted immunotherapies
(Figure 6A; Supplementary Table S1 and S2). The volcano
plots illustrated in Figure 6B–6D indicate transcripts of
genes within the NRF2 network. Strikingly, we identified
significant changes in expression within the genes of
the NRF2 network following immunotherapies relative
to control values. Many of the differentially expressed
genes in the NRF2 network due to combination treatment
were already modulated by either Trastuzumab and/
or Pertuzumab monotherapy. The Pertuzumab and
combination treatments produced greater effects in gene
expression changes in ascending order of magnitude
relative to Trastuzumab, both in terms of significant
(p≤0.05) down- and up-regulation of genes (Figure 6E
and 6F; Supplementary Table S1 and S2). Specifically
some of these transcripts were significantly down
regulated (p≤0.05) following immunotherapy of which
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

75882

Oncotarget

GSTM3, TALDO1, UGT1A6; cell signaling, proliferation,
inflammation and immunity, and angiogenesis, related
AKT1, CEBPA, DUSP5, DUSP5P, DUSP6, ERBB2,
ERBB2IP, ERBB3, FOXA2, FOXJ2, FOXJ2, FOXO1,
FOXO3, JUN, NFE2L1, PDGFB, RPS6KA2, RPS6KB2;
cell cycle regulation, cell survival and death related
CDKN1A, CDKN1B, CDKN2A, CDKN2B, CASP1,
FRMD6, VAV3; as well as stability, transcription and
epigenetics control related BACH1, BACH2, BTRC,
KEAP1, MAFF, MAFG, MAFK, NOTCH1, NOTCH3,
PRRX2, NCOA6, NCOR1, RARA, RCOR3, RORA,
RXRA, RXRB, RXRG, SYK, XBP1, HDAC1, HDAC3,
HDAC5 (Supplementary Table S1 and S2; Figure 6A).
Some similarly related gene expression changes were seen
with single immunotherapy, Trastuzumab or Pertuzumab,
but sometimes to a different magnitude and different
direction.
It is clear that Trastuzumab, Pertuzumab and
combination have all produced significant induction of
KEAP1 expression. Whilst Trastuzumab and Pertuzumab

caused significant induction of NRF2 expression, their
combination strikingly resulted in the profound and
highly significant down regulation of NRF2 expression.
These in vivo observations strongly supported our in
vitro data (Figure 5C) regarding the status of NRF2 and
KEAP1 following immunotherapies. Further analyses and
visualization of the in vivo gene expression data (Figure
7 and Figure 8) confirmed our observed perturbations in
the NRF2 network and down regulation of some NRF2
target genes, especially genes associated with antioxidant
responses and glutathione metabolism These give credence
to our assertion of ROS production and compromise of
NRF2 status and functions as the basis of action and
effectiveness of the immunotherapies, especially with
the combination of Trastuzumab and Pertuzumab. It is
of interest to observe the up regulation of expression of
HDACs and certain nuclear co-repressor genes, as well
as the down regulation of HAT expression and its related
functional homologues or orthologues such as DNA2,
HES1, MED4, MET, METRN, METTL1, which point to

Figure 6: NRF2 network dependent molecular responses to Trastuzumab and Pertuzumab alone or in combination.

(A) Heatmap showing significant (p=0.001) differential expression of genes within the NRF2 network relative to control treatment of
SKOV3 ovarian xenograft tumors (SAM FDR=10%) as in References [15, 48]. Red represents increased expression and green decreased
expression relative to the median of the controls. (B-D) Volcano-plots showing gene expression changes within the NRF2 network following
Trastuzumab (B), Pertuzumab (C), and their combination (D) treatment of the SKOV3 xenograft tumors. The genes with significant (p
≤ 0.05) and non-significant fold changes are colored red and black, respectively, while some genes with a high fold change are marked
by blue crosses. (E-F) Venn diagram showing distinct and overlap of significantly up-regulated (E) and down-regulated (F) transcripts of
genes within the NRF2 network relative to control treatment of SKOV3 xenograft tumors with Trastuzumab and Pertuzumab alone or in
combination.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

75883

Oncotarget

Figure 7: Common and differential expression changes in transcription and epigenetics associated genes in responses
to Trastuzumab and Pertuzumab alone or in combination of. (A) Heatmap showing differential changes (B) Heatmap showing
significant (p≤0.05) differential changes in the expression of the genes relative to control treatment of SKOV3 ovarian xenograft tumors
(SAM FDR=10%) as in References [15, 48]. Red represents increased expression and green decreased expression relative to the median of
the controls. (C, D) Volcano-plots showing gene expression changes in transcription and epigenetics associated genes following trastuzumab
(C), pertuzumab (D), and their combination (E) treatment of the SKOV3 xenograft tumors. The genes with significant (p ≤ 0.05) and nonsignificant fold changes are colored red and black, respectively, and some genes with a high fold change are marked by blue crosses.

Figure 8: Visualization of common and differential gene expression changes within the NRF2 network and signaling
pathways. Network of gene expression profiles in response to either Trastuzumab (A) or Pertuzumab (B) alone, or following their
combination treatment (C) in SKOV3 xenograft tumors from References [15, 48], and as depicted in the NRF2-related interactome and
regulome model of Papp D et al 2012 [50]. The color of the node depicts the ratio of the expression values with drug compared to the
expression values in control samples.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

75884

Oncotarget

transcriptional packaging and control. Consequently, we
hypothesized that transcriptional silencing and epigenetics
may contribute to the distinct mechanisms of inhibition
of NRF2 function by combination immunotherapy. In
an attempt to test this hypothesis, we used KEGG and
knowledge-based approach to examine the in vivo gene
expression data with particular attention to transcription
and epigenetics pathways. The data obtained (Figure 8)
supported this hypothesis, which we later confirmed using
our in vitro cell models (Figures 9–11). Overall there is
agreement between the in vitro and the in vivo data.

exposed to combination treatment of Pertuzumab and
Trastuzumab for 96 h. In this experiment, we firstly
quantitatively determined basal expression levels of
NRF2 and its substrates HO-1 and GCLM through qRTPCR (Figure 9A). Consistent with previous reports, we
found significantly higher basal levels of NRF2 [31] as
well as HO-1 and GCLM levels in PEO4 than OVCAR4
and SKOV3, with OVCAR4 having the least expression
levels. More importantly, following 96 h of treatment
with combination of Pertuzumab and Trastuzumab, there
was significant downregulation of NRF2 expression in
all the three cell lines tested. Furthermore, HO-1 and
GCLM expression were reduced following the same
treatments (Figure 9B). This demonstrated and confirmed
that targeted therapy cause transcriptional repression
of NRF2 leading to downregulation in expression of its
transcriptional substrates and as such confirmed the in vivo
microarray data.
In the second and related strategy, we cloned the
1.5kb promoter region of NRF2 gene into a luciferase
reporter vector to generate a luciferase based reporter assay
for NRF2 transcription (called prNRF2). This reporter was

Combination treatment with Pertuzumab and
Trastuzumab causes transcriptional repression
of NRF2 leading to downregulation of expression
of genes under its regulation
In order to verify the in vivo data of microarray and
confirm transcriptional inhibition of NRF2 in our own
cell line models, we adopted two approaches. Firstly, we
performed quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) on cDNAs
obtained from PEO4, OVCAR4 and SKOV3 previously

Figure 9: qRT PCR analysis of NRF2 and its substrates reveal downregulation of NRF2, HO-1 and GCLM mRNA
expression following treatment with targeted immunotherapeutic agents. (A) Ovarian cancer cell lines exhibit different basal
levels of NRF2 and its substrate expression. Exponentially growing cells were treated with 1nM Heregulin for 96 h. Following this, cells
were harvested for total RNA for subsequent reverse transcription to generate cDNA and used to perform quantitative Real Time PCR (qRT
PCR) as described in Materials and Methods. (B) Treatment with combination of Pertuzumab and Trastuzumab causes downregulation of
NRF2, HO-1 and GCLM mRNA. Cells were exposed to combination of 20μg/mL of Pertuzumab and Trastuzumab for 96 h before being
harvested for RNA and subjected to qRT PCR as in (A). (C) Luciferase reporter assay for NRF2 transcription demonstrates repression of
NRF2 transcription following exposure to HER2 targeting immunotherapeutic agents. Exponentially growing PEO4 and SKOV3 cells
were transfected with either empty PGL3 basic vector or 1μg PGL3 basic vector with cloned 1.5kb fragment of NRF2 promoter (prNRF2)
driving the expression of luciferase gene. Co-transfection with 0.2μg pRL-CMV plasmid was performed as an internal transfection control
as described in the Materials and Methods. At 24 h post-transfection, cells were either left untreated in media containing 1nM HRG (UT) or
treated with combination of 20μg/mL of Pertuzumab and Trastuzumab (COMB) for 96 h. Following treatments, cell lysates were prepared
from the transfected cells, transferred to opaque flat bottom white 96-well plates and their luciferase activity recorded using Dual luciferase
reporter assay (Promega) in multiplate luminometer (MODULUS™, Promega). For (A), (B) and (C), data are means with ± S.D of triplicates
and expressed as fold change with statistical significance determined by either ONE WAY ANOVA or independent t test as appropriate
according to the scale * P <0.05, **P <0.01, ***P <0.001.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

75885

Oncotarget

Figure 10: Treatment with HER2 targeting immunotherapeutic agents causes induction of HDAC1 expression and
repression in phospho-HDAC levels. (A) Immunoblotting analysis showing induction of total HDAC 1 levels following treatment

with combination of Pertuzumab and Trastuzumab in PEO4, OVCAR4 and SKOV3 cell lines. Exponentially growing cells were either
left untreated (UT) or treated with media containing 1nM Heregulin alone (HRG), or with co-treatment of 20μg/mL of Pertuzumab (PR),
Trastuzumab (TR) or their combination (COMB) for 96 h before being harvested for immunoblotting using an anti-HDAC1 antibody (Table
1). Ponceau stain of the same blot was used as loading control Red bars indicate HDAC1 levels following quantification of the immunoblot
signal intensities obtained and normalized to the value of UT and expressed as fold change. The signal intensities of bands were quantified
as described in Materials and Methods, (B) Treatment with HER2 inhibitors causes induction of nuclear HDAC1 levels. Immunofluorescent
labelling of endogenous HDAC1 in cells previously grown on poly-L lysine coated coverslips and exposed to treatments as in (A). For
immunolabelling, Alexa Fluor® 568 conjugated secondary antibody (red fluorescence) was used. Nuclear reference was provided by costaining with 4',6-Diamidino-2-Phenylindole, Dihydrochloride (DAPI). Images were captured with Leica DMiRe2 electronic microscope
using integrated features of ANDOR iQ core software (ANDOR Technologies Ltd). Scale bar indicates 10μm. These are representative
images taken in different field of views with relevant fluorescence channels and 100x objective. (C) Immunoblotting analysis of phosphoHDAC levels following treatment with combination of Pertuzumab and Trastuzumab in PEO4, OVCAR4 and SKOV3 cell lines.
Exponentially growing cells were either left untreated (UT) or treated with media containing 1nM Heregulin alone (HRG), or with cotreatment of 20μg/mL of Pertuzumab (PR), Trastuzumab (TR) or their combination (COMB) for 96 h before being harvested to prepare
protein lysates and processed for immunoblotting using an anti-phospho HDAC antibody (Table 1). Ponceau stain of the same blot was
used as loading control (not shown). Red bars indicate phospho-HDAC levels following quantification of the immunoblot signal intensities
obtained in (A) and normalized to the value of UT and expressed as fold change. The signal intensities of bands were quantified through
integrated optical densitometry measurement as described in Materials and Methods.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

75886

Oncotarget

Table 1: Antibodies used in the study
Antibody

Host

Catalogue Number

Company

NRF2

Rabbit

Sc-722

Santa Cruz

KEAP1

Rabbit

4678S

Cell signalling

Phospho Her2 T877

Rabbit

2241S

Cell signalling

Phospho AKT 473

Rabbit

4060S

Cell signalling

HDAC1

Mouse

5356

Cell signalling

PhosphoHDAC

Rabbit

3443

Cell signalling

Heme Oxygenase 1 (HO-1)

Rabbit

sc-10789

Santacruz

Alexa fluor 488 conjugated
secondary antibody

Rabbit

ab150077

Abcam

Alexa fluor 568 conjugated
secondary antibody

Rabbit

ab175471

Abcam

β-actin

Rabbit

ab1801

Abcam

used to directly report any transcriptional perturbation of
NRF2. We transfected prNRF2 into our ovarian cancer
cell lines, repeated the immunotherapeutic combination
treatment for 96 h and assayed cells for luciferase activity
(Figure 9C). We found that indeed combination treatment
significantly reduced luciferase signal, demonstrating
transcriptional inhibition of NRF2 expression in both
PEO4 and SKOV3 cell lines. In this transient transfection
strategy, by 96 h, we could not obtain any detectable
expression of our vectors in OVCAR4 (data not shown).
These experiments clearly demonstrated transcriptional
inhibition of NRF2 and explain the repression of NRF2
protein seen before (Figure 5C).

(Figure 10B). We next examined phosphorylated levels
of HDAC4 (Figure 5 and Figure 7). Phosphorylation of
HDAC was previously shown to repress its activity by
nuclear export [68, 69]. We found a clear repression of
phospho-HDAC following combination treatment for 96
h in PEO4 and OVCAR4 cell line. However, in SKOV3,
we could not see such repression (Figure 10C).

Inhibition of HDAC and DNA methyl
transferases induce NRF2, HO-1 and
transcriptional antioxidant response, and disrupt
immunotherapy dependent repression of NRF2
While the diminished levels of NRF2 protein seen
earlier could be partly explained by induction of KEAP1
during some treatments, the same does not explain its
transcriptional repression. Upregulation of HDAC1 as
seen in Figure 10 on the other hand warrants itself for
further study, as this could be a potential mechanism of
transcriptional repression of NRF2, especially upon the
finding of HDAC1 induction following combination
treatment.
For these reasons, we next tested this assumption
by repeating exposure of our cells to the combination of
Pertuzumab and Trastuzumab, but also treating cells with
combination of inhibitors of HDAC1, Trichostatin (TSA)
or that of DNA methylation, namely 5-azacytidine (5-Aza)
[70, 71], collectively called T/A. Both these inhibitors are
expected to relief transcriptional inhibition of genes that
are under epigenetic regulation and silenced by DNA
methylation dependent mechanisms. We found that not
only did T/A lead to NRF2 induction, suggesting relief of
methylation dependent suppression of its gene expression,
but more importantly, it also disrupted the inhibitory
action of 96 h of HER2 inhibitors treatments (Figure 11A).

HER2 targeting immunotherapeutic agents
cause upregulation of HDAC1 and repression
of phospho HDAC levels demonstrating HDAC
activation
A noticeable feature in our in vivo microarray
data analysis was the finding that several histone
deacetylases (HDACs) levels were upregulated (Figure
7). Upregulation and activation of HDAC1 would lead
to diminished acetylation, increased methylation and
subsequent repression of gene expression [66, 67]. We next
sought to determine whether upregulated HDAC1 could
be reproduced in our cell lines following combination
treatment in vitro, which could further serve to explain
the transcriptional downregulation of NRF2 expression
during such treatments. Firstly, we immunoblotted for
total HDAC1 in our three cell lines and saw induction of
HDAC1 only in combination treatment, albeit to different
levels in each cell line (Figure 10A). Furthermore, we
fluorescently immunostained total HDAC1 and confirmed
nuclear upregulation following combination treatment
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

75887

Oncotarget

We could also show such T/A dependent induction of both
NRF2 and its downstream transcriptional target, HO-1 at
single cell level by performing immunostaining (Figure
11B). This important finding firstly demonstrated that
NRF2 gene expression could be subjected to epigenetic

regulation involving DNA methylation and/or acetylation;
secondly, that the inhibition of NRF2 following exposure
to HER2 targeting drugs involves the above mechanism;
thirdly that as such, this could be disrupted by using
specific inhibitors also leading to induction of NRF2

Figure 11: Inhibition of HDAC and DNA Methyl Transferase induce NRF2 protein levels, causes nuclear localization of
NRF2 and HO-1, disrupts both targeted immunotherapy dependent NRF2 protein and transcriptional repression, and
activates NRF2 dependent antioxidant transcriptional response program. (A) Immunoblotting analysis showing induction

of total NRF2 levels following treatment with combination of Trichostatin and 5-azacytidine both in the absence and presence of HER2
inhibitors. Exponentially growing cells were either left untreated in media containing 1nM Heregulin alone (UT) or treated with either
a combination of 20μg/mL Pertuzumab and Trastuzumab (COMB), with combination of 200nM Trichostatin A and 2μM 5-Azacytidine
(T/A) or with all four drugs together for 96 h. Following incubation, cells were harvested to prepare protein lysates and processed for
immunoblotting using relevant antibodies (Table 1). Blotting with β-actin was used as loading control. Red bars indicate NRF2 levels
following quantification of the immunoblot signal intensities obtained in (A) and normalized to the value of UT and expressed as fold
change. The signal intensities of bands were quantified through integrated optical densitometry measurement using Gelpro software
(Version 3.1, Media Cybernetics). (B) Treatment with T/A causes nuclear induction of NRF2 and HO-1 levels. Immunofluorescent labelling
of endogenous NRF2 (upper panels) and HO-1 (lower panels) in cells previously grown on poly-L lysine coated coverslips and exposed
to T/A treatments as in (A). For immunolabelling, Alexa Fluor® 488 conjugated secondary antibody was used for NRF2 staining (green
fluorescence), while Alexa Fluor® 568 conjugated secondary antibody was used for HO-1 staining (red fluorescence). Nuclear reference
was provided by co-staining with 4',6-Diamidino-2-Phenylindole, Dihydrochloride (DAPI). Images were captured with Leica DMiRe2
electronic microscope, while merging, co-localization and further analysis were performed by using integrated features of ANDOR iQ
core software (ANDOR Technologies Ltd). Scale bar indicates 10μm. These are representative images taken in different field of views
with relevant fluorescence channels and 100x objective. (C) Inhibition of HDAC and DNA Methyl Transferase disrupt the transcriptional
inhibition of NRF2 exerted by the HER2 targeting immunotherapeutic agents. Exponentially growing PEO1 and SKOV3 cells were
seeded in triplicates in 24 well plates and transfected with either empty PGL3 basic vector or 1μg PGL3 basic vector with cloned 1.5kb
fragment of NRF2 promoter (prNRF2) driving the expression of luciferase gene. Co-transfection with 0.2μg pRL-CMV plasmid was
performed as an internal transfection control. At 24 h post-transfection, cells were either left untreated in media containing 1nM HRG (UT)
or treated with combination of 20μg/mL of Pertuzumab and Trastuzumab (COMB), or combination of 200nM Trichostatin A and 2μM
5-Azacytidine (T/A) or combination of COMB and T/A as indicated for 96 h. Following treatments, cell lysates were prepared from the
transfected cells, transferred to opaque flat bottom white 96-well plates and their luciferase activity recorded using Dual luciferase reporter
assay (Promega) in multiplate luminometer (MODULUS™, Promega). (D) Inhibition of HDAC1 and DNA Methyl Transferases induce
NRF2 dependent antioxidant transcriptional program. Exponentially growing AREc32 cell line stably expressing NRF2 dependent 8xcisregulatory antioxidant response elements were seeded in triplicates in opaque 96 well plates and either mock treated (DMSO) or exposed
individually to either 50μM tert-butylhydroquinone (tBHQ), 5μM Sulforophane (Sul), 5μM Trichostatin (TSA), 5μM 5-azacytidine (5Aza), or a combination of tBHQ with either TSA or 5-Aza, or a combination of Sul with TSA or 5-Aza for 24 h. Following this, cell lysates
were prepared and assayed for Luciferase activity (BrightGlo Luciferase system, Promega). For (C) and (D), Data are the means with ± S.D
of triplicates and expressed as fold change with statistical significance determined by ONE WAY ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post hoc test
according to the scale * P <0.05, **P <0.01, ***P <0.001.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

75888

Oncotarget

substrates. We next made use of AREc32 cell line, the
stable clone of antioxidant response reporter to further
study the consequences of HDAC1 and DNA methylation
inhibition on NRF2 dependent antioxidant response
pathway. In this strategy, we used TSA and 5-Aza either
alone or with classical activators of NRF2 to see whether
that would lead to further antioxidant activation. While the
classical NRF2 activator, tert-butylhydroquinone (tBHQ)
and sulforophane induced ARE signal by 13 and 2.5 fold
respectively, TSA alone led to almost 35-fold induction
(Figure 11C). Furthermore, TSA could further enhance
ARE signal in tBHQ treated cells to more than 70 fold.
These findings further validated our earlier assumption of
the involvement of epigenetic mechanisms in regulating
NRF2 and hence its downstream antioxidant pathway.
To further confirm the transcriptional mechanism
of NRF2 regulation following T/A treatments, we used
prNRF2, our cloned NRF2 luciferase based promoter
assay as its transcriptional reporter. We found that while
combination treatment of Pertuzumab and Trastuzumab
repressed NRF2 transcription, cotreatment with T/A
disrupted this repression in both PEO4 and SKOV3 cell
line with the latter showing a more pronounced induction
of NRF2 transcription following T/A cotreatment
(Figure 11D).
Altogether, findings in this set of experiments
demonstrate the involvement of transcriptional and

epigenetic mechanisms of NRF2 regulation with its effects
seen both at the transcriptional, single cell and overall
protein levels.

Anti HER2 targeted therapy causes NRF2
promoter methylation explaining its
transcriptional repression following HER2
inhibition
In order to more directly determine the epigenetic
basis of NRF2 regulation following combination of HER2
targeting drugs, we performed epigenetic study of NRF2
promoter involving methylation profiling. This was also
done to explain the transcriptional and protein induction
of NRF2 followed by activation of its antioxidant function
upon inhibition of HDAC and DNA methylation. To do
this, we first performed in silico analysis of the NRF2
promoter to identify CpG islands (Supplementary Figure
S1A). This was done using the CpG analysis program
Methprimer
(http://www.urogene.org/methprimer/).
This analysis identified a CpG island containing 18 CpG
dinucleotides (Figure 12C and Supplementary Figure
S3A). We next designed primers specific for amplification
of bisulfite converted DNA but not unconverted DNA,
exposed all three cell line models of this study to 96 h
of Pertuzumab and Trastuzumab combination treatment,
isolated total genomic DNA from exposed cells and

Figure 12: Combination of HER2 targeting immunotherapeutic agents, Pertuzumab and Trastuzumab cause
hypermethylation of NRF2 promoter. Exponentially growing PEO4, OVCAR4 and SKOV3 cell lines were seeded in 60mm tissue
culture plates and either left untreated in media containing 1nM HRG, or treated either individually or in combination with 20μg/mL of
Pertuzumab and Trastuzumab for 96 h. Following this, cells were harvested for total genomic DNA, bisulfite converted, quantified and
subjected to PCR using specific primers flanking the predicted CpG methylation sites in NRF2 promoter. PCR products were sequenced,
analyzed and examined for conserved CpG dinucleotides indicating methylation.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

75889

Oncotarget

Table 2: Conserved CpG dinucleotides demonstrating methylated cytosines
Cell Line

Conserved CpG dinucleotides
UT

Position

Treated

Position *

PEO4

1

206

6

46, 79, 159, 163, 184, 206

OVCAR4

0

-

3

138, 184, 206

SKOV3

0

-

1

157

* Nucleotide position within the 270bp CpG island in NRF2 promoter (see Supplementary Figure S3).
performed its bisulfite conversion. Such conversion
converted all the non-methylated cytosine nucleotides in
the DNA to Thymine, whereas the methylated cytosines
being resistant to such conversion remained intact. Using
the designed bisulfite conversion specific primers flanking
the predicted CpG island, we set up PCR, amplified
this region, purified and sequenced it (Supplementary
Figure S3). Careful analysis of the sequencing results
revealed striking differences in the sequences between
untreated and treated cell lines (Table 2). We found that
only one CpG dinucleotide among the 18 predicted was
methylated in the PEO4 cell line in the untreated state
(CpG dinucleotide at position 206, Figure 11C). However,
following treatments, we found a total of six CpG
dinucleotides retained following conversion, suggesting
their methylation (CpG dinucleotides at positions 43, 79,
159, 163, 184 and 206, Figure 11C). OVCAR4, which
showed the least inhibition of NRF2 protein following
drug treatment also exhibited limited CpG methylation
with only three CpG dinucleotides showing methylation
(position 138, 184 and 245). A surprising finding was with
SKOV3, which only exhibited a single conservation of the
CpG dinucleotide, suggesting a single methylated cytosine
at position 157 (Figure 12C). The disparity between a very
pronounced NRF2 protein inhibition in SKOV3 (Figure
5C) while still very limited methylation profile could be
explained by the fact that KEAP1 induction during the
same treatments was the highest in this cell line potentially
accounting for this as a contributing factor in NRF2
repression.
This is the first report of NRF2 promoter methylation
profiling following HER2 targeted immunotherapy. This
novel finding demonstrated for the first time that the
human NRF2 promoter in three ovarian cancer cell lines
exhibited methylation following combination treatment
and hence identifies a novel mechanism of transcriptional
repression of NRF2.

It has significantly improved our understanding of the
biology of HER2-related cancers and the emergence of
novel anti-HER2 drugs for the treatment of cancers. While
several mechanisms, including inhibition of proliferation
and angiogenesis, DNA repair and extracellular domain
cleavage for recruiting host immune natural killer
(NK) cells and triggering of an antibody-dependent
cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) process [75] have
been identified for Trastuzumab, the mechanism of
action of Pertuzumab has appeared limited to primarily
inhibiting signal transduction by blocking the function of
HER2. Several in vitro and in vivo studies have clearly
elucidated this mechanism of action by Pertuzumab
[76–79]. Although these therapies work by different
mechanisms, it appears that to exert an antitumor effect,
they should for example inhibit phosphorylation of HER3
and antagonise the PI3K/AKT pathway [25, 28, 29].
Detailed experimental and clinical studies have shown the
complimentary and enhanced efficacy and safe tolerability
of HER2 targeting and blockade by the novel combination
of Trastuzumab with Pertuzumab [32, 80–84]. However,
treatment outcomes with single agent or combination of
agents remain fairly unpredictable, tumour type specific
and tumour biology dependent, especially the expression
levels of cell surface receptors, their dimerization
preferences, recycling kinetics and ligand abundance [25,
33–35, 85]. Also the molecular mechanisms responsible
for susceptibility and de novo and/or acquired resistance
to these HER2 targeted immunotherapeutic agents are
poorly understood. In this study we aimed to identify and
characterise novel signalling pathways that might explain
the efficacy of HER2-targeted immunotherapies that are
critical to avoid or to overcome resistance.
In the current study, we sought to determine the
mechanism of action of targeted immunotherapeutic
agents and in particular to understand the enhanced
cytotoxic response triggered uniquely by combination
of immunotherapeutics rather than individual agents. We
determined the degree of sensitivity of ovarian cancer
cells derived from different origins to the HER2 targeting
antibodies, Pertuzumab and Trastuzumab, either employed
alone or in combination. These ovarian cancer cell lines are
of low (OVCAR4), moderate (PEO4), and high (SKOV3)
HER2 expression status [34], in addition to having

DISCUSSION
The introduction of monoclonal antibody based
targeted anticancer immunotherapy in the form of HER2
targeting Trastuzumab (Herceptin) and Pertuzumab has
opened a new chapter in cancer immunotherapeutics.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

75890

Oncotarget

variable expression levels of HER3, the key dimerization
partner of HER2 in the order PEO4>OVCAR4>SKOV3
[34]., We found that at least part of mechanism of action
of the HER2 targeted immunotherapeutic agents involved
generation of ROS, which contributed to the killing
effects and cancer growth retardation. This is consistent
with the conventional adage that depletion of GSH can
cause oxidative stress and sensitise tumours to the killing
effects of the therapeutic agents. These observations were
further reinforced by the use of NAC to attenuate ROS
and desensitise, or of RA to elevate ROS, and augment the
cytotoxicity of Trastuzumab and Pertuzumab.
The cell lines exhibited complex and different
degrees of cytotoxicity to Pertuzumab and Trastuzumab
alone or their combination. However, the combination
treatments produced the greatest cytotoxicity and killing
effect, as well as the highest inhibition of RTK signalling,
consistent with previous observations [25, 32, 33]. Since
we have recently characterised these cell lines as having
different levels of NRF2, KEAP1, hierarchical addiction
to ROS and its potential for manipulation, intricate with
their proliferative capacity [10, 11], we postulated any or
all of these to be possibilities for the observed differential
response to the different immunotherapies, especially
the combination therapy. The rationale for this postulate
was the fact that RTK and AR pathways share common
substrates, both pathways are cytoprotective and prosurvival in nature and both these have been implicated in
drug resistance. Additionally, recent studies have explored
and identified co-modulatory and co-regulatory roles of
the two pathways [36–39].
Interestingly, combination of the targeted
immunotherapeutic agents (Pertuzumab and Trastuzumab)
caused down regulation of NRF2, induction of KEAP1,
and depletion of glutathione, features that were ascribable
to inhibition of the NRF2 dependent antioxidant
transcriptional program. These demonstrated that HER2
targeting monoclonal antibodies repress the NRF2
dependent antioxidant pathway, which may contribute
to the enhanced cytotoxicity for the combination of
Pertuzumab and Trastuzumab.
Next, we sought evidence that the mechanism
of action and effectiveness of HER2 targeted
immunotherapies, in particular the combination of
Trastuzumab and Pertuzumab, in vivo, is characterised by
inhibition of NRF2 function. We did this by performing a
series of in vitro experimentation, as well as bioinformatic
analysis of microarray data from the in vivo SKOV3
xenograft model of HER2 targeting immunotherapies
[32] as before [25]. In our analysis of gene expression we
focused on the NRF2 network using a knowledge-based
approach that was informed by previous reports [50–54].
Firstly, we demonstrated that the suppressive effects of
combination therapy on the AR pathway seen in vitro
(Figure 1 and Figure 2) were reproduced in vivo (Figure
6–8). Significant changes in the gene expression of NRF2
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

and the NRF2 network signalling were observed following
treatment with anti-HER2 immunotherapies in the SKOV3
xenograft. The most dynamic effects and changes were
seen with the combination therapy. Up regulation of some
of the genes within the NRF2 network can be explained
by the takeover of transcriptional control of such genes
by other significantly induced transcription factors like
the FOXO family and NFE2L1 (NRF1). Thus the in vivo
model supported and confirmed the results of our in vitro
model, which showed that the effectiveness of HER2target immunotherapy is greatly and significantly informed
by repression of NRF2 and its antioxidant function. A
number of classical NRF2-dependent genes like AKR1C1,
ATP1B1, BRCA1, BRCA2, GAPDH, GCLM, GCSH,
GSTM4, H6PD, HMOX1, IDH1, NQO1, PRDX1, SOAT1,
SOD2, UGDH TUBB3, and VEGFA were suppressed,
especially with combination therapy.
Several possible mechanisms of NRF2 inhibition
seen in vitro and in vivo could be identified and explained
from the microarray analyses. First, the classical NRF2
and KEAP1 relationship, levels and dynamics appeared to
be in place following the HER2 target immunotherapies in
vivo as observed with the in vitro model. The expression
of NRF2 significantly decreased following combination
treatment. This supports the notion that NRF2 opposes
the action and effectiveness of Trastuzumab and
Pertuzumab, perhaps by promoting the sequestration of
the ROS generated to kill cells following immunogenic
drugs administration. Further, this notion is strengthened
and supported by the observation that the expression of
KEAP1 was significantly induced following both single
and combination treatments with least induction observed
under combination treatments. However, the ratio of
NRF2/KEAP1 expression was higher under single agent
than with combination treatments, suggesting greater
degradation and inhibition of NRF2 function [7, 8] with
combination than with single agents.
The mechanisms by which retinoic acid (RA)
inhibits NRF2 and its function are known [62, 86] and
have been the basis for our use of RA to modulate cellular
NRF2 status, ARE-dependent transcriptional program and
to implicate NRF2 in regulating cellular susceptibility to
HER2 targeted immunotherapies. Interestingly, we found
increased expression of RXR and RARA genes following
Trastuzumab, Pertuzumab, and their combination treatment
of the SKOV3 xenograft tumours. This suggested that
these mechanisms may play a part in vivo to inhibit NRF2
function and thus influence the effectiveness of the HER2
target immunotherapies. Also GSK3 expression appeared
stable and the expression of FYN kinase was induced, by
all the immunotherapies against the SKOV3 xenograft
tumours, especially with combination therapy where the
expression of β-TrCP was induced, which highlights
another possible mechanism of controlling NRF2
levels and functions [87–89]. Further, the down and up
regulation of BACH1 and BACH2 expression following
75891

Oncotarget

antibodies Pertuzumab and Trastuzumab cause greater
inhibition of NRF2 function and subsequent greater
repression of NRF2 dependent antioxidant responses in
human ovarian cancer cell lines. The degree of repression
of NRF2 determines the overall sensitivity of cancer cells
towards the HER2 targeted therapies, an axis that could
be modulated to further sensitise otherwise resistant
ovarian cancer cells. Furthermore, we present evidence
that methylation leading to transcriptional repression
and gene silencing at the NRF2 promoter occurs
following combination of Pertuzumab and Trastuzumab
treatments. Therefore the greater effectiveness and
enhanced cytotoxic action of the combination of the
HER2 targeted immunotherapeutic agents may be
at least partially explained by their unique ability to
cause transcriptional inhibition of NRF2 and greater
repression of its antioxidant function in low, moderate
and high HER2 expressing ovarian cancer cell lines.
This study expands the role of NRF2 as a key element
in driving drug resistance and opens up a novel strategy
of sensitising cancer cells to HER2 targeted therapy, as
well as overcoming the resistance of cancer cells to such
immunotherapeutics.

single agent and combination therapy, respectively, could
help explain the greater loss of NRF2 function in the
combination therapy, since BACH is a negative regulator
of ARE-NRF2-dependent transcription of genes [90–92].
Moreover, there was up regulation of expression of MAF
gene family (MAFF, MAFG, MAFK), especially following
combination therapy, an observation that agrees with the
notion of the negative regulation of ARE-NRF2 dependent
transcriptional program [93, 94].
Further analyses and visualisation of the in vivo
gene expression data confirmed perturbations in the
NRF2 network and down regulation of some NRF2
target genes, especially genes associated with antioxidant
responses (AKR1B1, AKR1C1, HMOX1, NQO1, FRMD6,
GAPDH, IDH1, PRDX1, SOAT1, SOD2) and glutathione
metabolism (ATP1B1, ATP2A1, GCLM, GCSH, GSTM4,
H6PD). These supported the role of ROS production and
the undermining of NRF2 status and functions as the
bases of action and effectiveness of the immunotherapies,
especially with the combination of Trastuzumab and
Pertuzumab. It is pertinent to describe the up regulation of
expression of HDACs (HDAC1, HDAC3, HDAC5, SIRT7),
histone methyl transferases with CpG binding protein
(CXXC1) and certain nuclear co-repressor genes (NCOA6,
NCOR1, PRC1, RCOR3), as well as the down regulation
of expression HAT and its related functional homologues
or orthologues like DNA2, HES1, MED4, MET, METRN,
METTL1. These observations highlighted genetic and
transcriptional packaging, suturing and control, which
consequently led us to hypothesise that transcriptional
silencing and epigenetics, as shown before [95, 96] may
contribute to the distinct mechanisms of inhibition of
NRF2 function by combination immunotherapy. These
data and those from the NRF2 gene promoter methylation,
transcriptional assays and HDACs dynamics using our
in vitro cell models supported the hypothesis. Overall
there is agreement between the in vitro and the in vivo
data which together illustrate the important role of NRF2
in influencing outcomes to targeted therapies involving
HER2 receptor inhibition. Moreover, our recent work on
the regulation of HER2 and HER3 by NRF2 to oppose
HER2 targeted immunotherapy [45], gives further support
and credence to this assertion. The study has also opened
up a new potential avenue of improving the effectiveness
of Trastuzumab (Herceptin), which currently benefits
less than 30% of breast cancer bearing patients and as
Trastuzumab-associated chemotherapy can modulate the
pro-inflammatory markers of HER2-positive breast cancer
patients [97].

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell lines, culture conditions and treatments
Human ovarian cancer cell lines PEO4, OVCAR4
and SKOV3 were maintained in RPMI 1640 media
(Gibco® Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% foetal
bovine serum (FBS), 2 mM glutamine, 1 mM sodium
pyruvate, 100 μg/ml streptomycin and 100 U/ml penicillin
in an atmosphere of 5% CO2 and incubated at 37°C.
Before experimental treatments, cells were grown for 24
h in RPMI 1640 media prepared as above but replacing
FBS with 5% double charcoal stripped FBS (Fisher).
Heregulin-β1 (HRG, Sigma) was used by preparing 1
μM stock solution made with 5% trehalose, 10% FBS
in PBS and diluted to a final concentration of 1nM
with media during treatments. Monoclonal antibodies
targeting HER2 receptor, Pertuzumab and Trastuzumab
or their combinations were used by directly diluting the
drugs in media to a final concentration of 20 μg/mL.
For Retinoic acid (RA) treatments, a stock solution of
40 mM was made in 100% ethanol in amber Eppendorf
tubes pre-aired with nitrogen gas. Once the stock
solution was made, it was bubbled again with nitrogen
gas and closed, stored at -80°C and protected from light
until further use. A final concentration of 2.5 μM was
used for treatments. For reducing conditions, 100 mM
N-Acetyl Cysteine (NAC, Sigma-Aldrich) was prepared
in deionised water and diluted to a final concentration
of 10 mM with media during treatments. For ROS
detection, 2′,7′-Dichlorofluorescin diacetate(DCFDA,
Sigma) solution was prepared with Dimethylsulfoxide

CONCLUSION
We have elucidated a novel mechanism of
action for the combination of HER2 target anticancer
immunotherapeutic agents. We demonstrate that
combination treatment with HER2 targeting monoclonal
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

75892

Oncotarget

Table 3: Primer sequences
Primers

Sequence

Biseq forward

5- TGAGATAAAAGTAGGGTAAGGTTTTGTA-3

Biseq reverse

5- ACTACCAACTAAAATCCCAACAAAC-3

prNRF2 forward

5- CTC GAG GGC GTT GAT TGC TAT AGT CAG G-3

prNRF2 reverse

5- CCA TGG GAT GAG CTG TGG ACC GTG TG-3

GCLC F forward

5-TCTCTAATAAAGAGATGAGCAACATGC-3

GCLC R reverse

5-TTGACGATAGATAAAGAGATCTACGAA-3

Probe

5FAM-CAGGAGATGATCAATGCCTTCCTGCAAC-3BHQ

in amber tubes to a concentration of 50 mM and stored
at -20°C in dark until used. For cytotoxicity assay,
3-(4,5-Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-Diphenyltetrazolium
Bromide (MTT) was used by making a stock solution
of 5 mg/mL in PBS and filter sterilising it. The solution
was stored at 4°C in the dark until used. To inhibit
DNA methylation, 5-azacytidine and HDAC inhibitor
Trichostatin A (collectively referred to as T/A) were used
at final concentration of 2 μM and 200 nM respectively.
Mock treatments with DMSO were performed in parallel.

were trypsinized (Gibco® Invitrogen), washed with
PBS, and harvested to obtain protein lysates using RIPA
buffer (Pierce Biotech) supplemented with protease and
phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Pierce Biotech). The
lysates were subjected to sonication of 2 cycles for 10
s at 50% pulse. The final mixture was shaken gently on
ice for 15 min and the protein supernatant was obtained
following centrifugation of the lysates at 14000 x g for 15
min. Proteins obtained were quantified by Bradford assay
(Sigma-Aldrich) using BSA as a standard and sample
buffer (Nupage LDS, Invitrogen) was added to protein
lysates, heated at 70°C for 20 min and stored at -20°C until
further use. On the day of immunoblotting, lysates were
loaded into wells of 4-12% gradient SDS-polyacrylamide
gels (Nupage® Bis-Tris gels, Life Technologies) and
subjected to electrophoresis at 200V for 1-2 h. Following
this, proteins were transferred to polyvinylidene
difluoride membranes (GE Amersham) using the XCell
SureLock Mini-Cell system (Invitrogen) at 50V for
90 min and processed using a commercially available
kit (WesternBreeze™ Chromogenic Immunodetection
Kit, Invitrogen). Non-specific reactivity was blocked
by incubation with the blocking reagent supplied in the
kit. Membranes were further treated by incubating with
primary antibodies (Table 1) for 2 h at room temperature
or overnight at 4°C, followed by incubation for 30 min at
room temperature with appropriate secondary anti rabbit
antibody supplied in the kit. Bands were visualized with
the BCIP/NBT based chromogenic substrate. For loading
control, either immunoblotting of the same lysates was
performed using β-Actin antibody (Abcam Bioscience,
UK) or the PVDF membranes with transferred proteins
visualized using Ponceau stain (Sigma).

Reactive oxygen species (ROS) detection
The ROS detection assay was performed by using
2′,7′-Dichlorofluorescin diacetate (DCFDA) staining
(Sigma). Briefly, cells were seeded in triplicate at a
density of 5×103 cells/well in opaque flat bottom 96well tissue culture plates in 100μl media without phenol
red and allowed to grow for 24 h before being exposed
to different treatments. Following required treatments,
a 50mM stock solution of DCFDA was added to each
well containing 100 μL pre-existing media to achieve a
final concentration of 25 μM and incubated for 45 min
at 37°C. Fluorescence signal intensities indicating ROS
levels were recorded by taking readings using 96-well
fluorescent multi plate reader (MODULUSTM, Promega)
using excitation and emission spectra of 485/535 nm. To
normalise the fluorescence signal, cells in the same wells
were subsequently stained with coomassie brilliant blue
stain (Sigma-Aldrich) for 1 h, washed with distilled water
and 10% SDS solution added to release the absorbed dye
for 10 min while shaking. The absorbance values at 595
nm were then recorded using multiplate absorbance reader
(MODULUSTM, Promega) and data used to normalise the
fluorescence values.

Cloning and expression vector
The 1.5kb proximal promoter region of NRF2
upstream of its translational start site was cloned into a
luciferase reporter vector (Promega) and used to study
the transcriptional regulation of NRF2. Table 3 lists the
primers for the amplification of the NRF2 promoter.

Protein extraction and immunoblotting
For immunoblotting, cells were seeded in 60mm
tissue culture plates and grown until 70% confluent and
exposed to required treatments. At protein harvest, cells
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

75893

Oncotarget

Total genomic DNA was isolated from human cells using
DNeasy Blood and tissue kit (Qiagen) and quantified using
AstraGene microvolume spectrophotometer (AstraNet).
100ng of the genomic DNA was used to amplify the
promoter sequences with MyFi mix (Bioline), using
primers that incorporated XhoI and NcoI restriction
endonuclease sites 5’ and 3’ ends of the amplified NRF2
promoter respectively. PCR conditions for promoter
amplification were initial denaturation of 95°C for 7 min
followed by 35 cycles of 95°C for 30 s for denaturation,
a gradient annealing temperature of 50−60°C for 30 s
and 72°C for 90 s for extension and a final extension for
10 min at 72 °C. The PCR products were subjected to
electrophoresis and extracted from agarose gel (Qiagen),
digested using XhoI and NcoI restriction enzymes
(Promega) and ligated into pGL3 basic luciferase vector
(Promega) to create the NRF2 promoter construct
(prNRF2) driving the expression of Luciferase gene for
utilization in a Dual luciferase reporter assay (Promega).
The integrity of cloned sequences was determined by
commercial sequencing service (www.dnaseq.ac.uk). The
NRF2 promoter construct was transfected into relevant
cell lines using Lipofectamine® 3000 (Life Technologies)
as a transfection reagent.

quadruplicate in 24-well plates at a density of 0.5 × 105
cells per well and allowed to attach for 24 h. Next day,
cells were washed with pre-warmed PBS, treated as
required and further allowed to incubate for the desired
time period. Towards the end of treatments, 250 μL of the
reconstituted luciferase reagent (Bright GloTM Luciferase,
Promega) was added in each well containing 250 μL of
pre-existing media and the plate incubated at 37°C for 10
min. 100 μL of the cell lysate was transferred to opaque
white bottom 96-well plate for luminescence detection in
a luminometer (MODULUSTM, Promega) while 50μL was
subjected to Bradford assay to estimate protein content for
the normalization of luminescence signal.

Cytotoxicity assay
Cytotoxicity assays were performed using
3-(4,5-Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-Diphenyltetrazolium
Bromide (MTT). Briefly, cells were seeded in triplicates
at a density of 0.5 × 104cells in 96-well plate and allowed
to attach for 24 h. Following this, old media was removed
and 80 μL of media containing relevant drugs was added
and the plate incubated for the required period of time.
On the day of assay, 20 μL of the 5mg/mL MTT stock
was added to each well and the plate further incubated
for 4 h. Following this, the old media with MTT was
removed, cells gently washed with pre-warmed PBS and
100 μL of DMSO added to solubilize the internalized
MTT by shaking the plate over an orbital shaker for 15
min. Absorbance of the released dye was measured and
recorded using multiplate reader (MODULUS™, Promega)
at 540 nm.

Luciferase reporter assay
For the analysis of promoter activities and
transcriptional regulation of NRF2, the 1.5 kb promoter
region of NRF2 gene cloned in pGL3 basic vector
(Promega) was transfected into relevant cell lines. Briefly,
cells were seeded in triplicates in 24-well plates at a
density of 2 × 105cells per well and allowed to attach for
24 h. Following this, cells were either transfected with 1
μg of empty pGL3 basic vector (Promega) or PGL3 basic
vector with cloned fragments of NRF2 promoter driving
the expression of luciferase gene, using transfection
reagent Lipofectamine 3000® according to manufacturer’s
instructions (Life Technologies). Co-transfection was also
performed with 0.2 μg of pRL-CMV vector (Promega)
expressing renilla luciferase to provide an internal control
of transfection. Following this, cells were allowed to
grow for 24 h, subjected to desired treatments, lysed and
protein lysates transferred to opaque white bottom 96-well
plates. The dual luciferase activity of fire fly luciferase
(from cloned promoters) and Renilla (internal control)
in the harvested lysates was measured sequentially
by following manufacturer’s instructions (Promega)
and taking luminescence readings in a luminometer
(MODULUSTM, Promega). To determine the NRF2
dependent transcriptional antioxidant response following
different treatments, stable clones of MCF7 cells carrying
pGL3 vector with a cloned 8 copies of Cis-Antioxidant
Response Elements (ARE) were used as stable luciferase
reporter cells (AREc32) to report NRF2 dependent
transcription [98]. Briefly, AREc32 cells were seeded in
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Immunocytochemistry/immunolabelling
For immunocytochemistry, exponentially growing
cells were seeded at a density of 5 × 104 cells in media
onto poly-L lysine (Sigma-Aldrich) coated cover slips
placed in a 12-well tissue culture plates and allowed to
attach for 24 h. Following relevant treatments, cells were
washed three times with ice cold PBS and fixed in 3.5%
paraformaldehyde in standard PBS at room temperature
for 30 min. Next, cells were gently washed twice with
1 ml of PBS, permeabilized with 0.3% triton X-100 in
PBS for 10min, and following three washes with PBS,
blocked with a solution containing 1% goat serum, 1%
bovine serum albumin and 0.05% Triton X-100 in PBS for
30 min. Cells were then incubated with relevant primary
antibody (Table 1) diluted in blocking solution for 1 h,
washed three times with 0.1% Triton X-100/PBS for 5
min, and then incubated with Alexa Fluor 488 or 568conjugated goat anti-rabbit secondary antibody (Table 1)
for 30 min. After subsequent three washes with the 0.1%
Triton X-100 in PBS for 5 min, cover slips with cells were
mounted on slide using 4',6-Diamidino-2-Phenylindole,
Dihydrochloride (DAPI)-containing mounting reagent
75894

Oncotarget

(Life technologies) and imaged under relevant filters with
a Leica DMiRe2 electronic microscope.

methylated sites was identified. The primers, which were
specific for Bisulfite converted DNA, were selected and
ordered (Table 3) and used to amplify 270 bp region of
genomic DNA isolated from PEO4, OVCAR4 and SKOV3
cells following relevant treatments.

Imaging and analysis
Quantitative analysis of raw immunoblots was
performed by capturing the images in high resolution
TIFF format files using a charge-coupled-device camera
(AxioCam MRc, Carl Zeiss) and subjected to Gelpro
analysis software, version 3.1 (Gelpro Media Cybernetics)
for integrated optimal densitometry. Fluorescence
images of immunocytochemistry were collected under
relevant excitation and emission filters depending on the
fluorotype under Leica DMiRe2 electronic microscope
equipped with iXonEM +897 EMCCD camera (ANDOR
Technologies Ltd). Images were analyzed using
multidimensional microscopy software Andor Module iQ
Core. Colocalization assay was performed and determined
with software integral features supplied by Andor IQ core
software. Data were generally expressed as mean ± S.D.
for individual sets of experiments.

Quantitative real-time PCR (qRT PCR)
Quantitative real-time PCR (qRT PCR) was
performed using Taqman® Universal master mix (Life
technologies). The probes and primers for human NRF2
(Hs00975961_g1), HO-1 (Hs00157965_m1) and 18s RNA
(Hs03928992_g1) were obtained from life technologies
and previously validated by the manufacturers. For
GCLM, custom-made primers were used with the
sequence and probe listed in Table 3. Real time PCR,
analysis and processing of obtained data were performed
by Stratagene Mx 3000P PCR amplification machine and
built-in software (Agilent Technologies). Briefly, PEO4,
OVCAR4 and SKOV3 cell lines were seeded in 60 mm
plates and grown until 70% confluent. Following this, cells
were washed once with warm PBS and new media with
required treatments added for the desired period of time.
Total RNA was extracted from treated cells using Trisure
(Bioline) and its integrity and quality was determined
by agarose gel electrophoresis and quantified using
AstraGene microvolume spectrophotometer (AstraNet).
500 ng RNA was next used to convert to cDNA with the
Affinity Script cDNA synthesis kit (Agilent Technologies).
The cDNA was subjected to qRT PCR using relevant
probes and primers as listed in Table 3.

Bisulfite sequencing and promoter methylation
analysis
Bisulfite conversion of the genomic DNA extracted
from ovarian cell lines was performed using EpiTect
Fast LyseAll Bisulfite Kit (Qiagen) using manufacturer’s
instructions. Briefly, ovarian cancer cells were seeded in
60 mm plates and allowed to attach for 24 h. Following
this, cells were exposed to different treatments for required
period of time, trypsinized, centrifuged and pellets
suspended in 150 μL cold PBS. From this mixture, 10 μL
was used for DNA extraction using the lysis buffer supplied
in the kit, bisulfite converted following manufacturer’s
instructions and the final elute quantified using AstraGene
microvolume spectrophotometer (AstraNet) to obtain a
concentration of 20 ng/μL genomic DNA. Next, 100 ng
of the extracted DNA was subjected to PCR amplification
(Myfi mix, Bioline), using bisulfite specific primers (Table
3) applying PCR conditions of 95°C for 7 min for initial
denaturation followed by 30 cycles of 95°C for 30 s
denaturation, 50°C for 30 s for annealing and 72°C for 90
s for extension and a final extension at 72°C for 10 min.
Unconverted DNA extracted from same cells were used as
negative controls. The products were run on 1.5% agarose
gel and analyzed for integrity and size (Supplementary
Figure S3) and sent to a commercial sequencing service
(https://www.dnaseq.co.uk) to identity the sequences. For
in silico analysis of promoter methylation and prediction
of CpG islands in NRF2 promoter, the Methprimer (www.
urogene.org) online resource was used. Firstly, a 1.5 kb
human NRF2 promoter sequence was retrieved from
Ensembl genome browser (Ensembl.org) and provided
as input to the Methprimer software. Following further
analysis, a 270 bp region with 18 predicted potential
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Statistical analysis
All statistical analysis were performed using
statistical software SPSS (IBM, version 22). Test for
normality of data was determined by Shapiro-Wilk and
Kolmogorov and Smirnov tests. The significance (p value)
of differences of pooled results was determined by either
independent t tests or One WAY ANOVA followed by post
hoc Tukey’s tests. Significance was defined as * = p< 0.05,
** = p<0.01, *** = p<0.001.

Glutathione assay
Total cellular Glutathione (GSH) levels were
determined by using the GSH assay kit (Sigma) according
to the protocols described by Tietze F, 1969 [99].

Bioinformatics methods and in vivo analysis
Microarray data on gene expression (GSE31432;
NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus https://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/geo) following Trastuzumab (20 mg/kg),
Pertuzumab (20 mg/kg) and the combination treatment
from SKOV3 tumor xenografts in mice were used [32,
75895

Oncotarget

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

100]. In this paper, we focused on gene expression
relating to the NRF2 network and downstream targets, as
well as the glutathione and epigenetics signatures, which
are modulated by the anti-HER2 therapies. Different
visualization methods were used to represent the results
of statistical analysis of expression data. In addition
to typical clustering of expression data in the form of
heatmaps, we generated and analyzed volcano plots, Venn
diagrams and signaling network maps. Volcano plots
represent fold change in gene expression level together
with the statistical significance of this change [32, 100,
101]. Signaling network maps combine gene expression
data with protein signaling network downloaded from
the KEGG database (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/), the
work of Papp D et al, 2012 [102] and other knowledgebased approach and sources [103–106]. We used the R
programming language for statistical processing of the
data (Student's t-test) with the Bioconductor package for
processing the data and Cytoscape (http://www.cytoscape.
org) with CytoKEGG plugin for network illustration
to integrate the gene expression data with the KEGG
signaling networks and also the NRF2-related interactome
and regulome [102], downloaded and imported into the
network model to Cytoscape. From there, the list of genes
associated with the pathways were extracted and used
in R to obtain the required gene expression values for
further analysis. The means of the expression values in
drug and control samples were calculated and followed
by a Student's t-test to calculate the p-values for the fold
changes. We then generated the heatmaps showing the
log2 fold-change that the drugs caused to expression of the
genes. We also used the fold-change data and the p-values
to create volcano plots for the different drugs treatments
using all the genes in the dataset and only for the genes
associated with the different pathways examined and
reported. Lastly, the ratios were exported to Cytoscape to
color the nodes in the network visualization.

The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

FUNDING
This work was supported by grants from The
Northwood Trust, Breakthrough Breast Cancer and
Scottish Funding Council (SRDG), and personal support
to AG from Scottish Informatics and Computer Science
Alliance (SICSA).

Author contributions
HSK, YYD contributed in the study design, designed
and performed in vitro experiments, and prepared the
manuscript; YYD, TS. And AG performed Bioinformatics
analyses; SPL provided some materials, contributed in
the study design, and preparation of the manuscript; DJH
provided some materials, contributed in the study design
and review of the manuscript; JB contributed in the
study design, helped with coordination and review of the
manuscript. YYD coordinated, conceived and designed the
study. All authors reviewed and approved the manuscript
and its submission for publication.

REFERENCES
1.	 MacLeod AK, McMahon M, Plummer SM, Higgins LG,
Penning TM, Igarashi K, Hayes JD. Characterization of the
cancer chemopreventive NRF2-dependent gene battery in
human keratinocytes: demonstration that the KEAP1-NRF2
pathway, and not the BACH1-NRF2 pathway, controls
cytoprotection against electrophiles as well as redox-cycling
compounds. Carcinogenesis. 2009; 30:1571-1580.
2.	 Chen H, Li J, Li H, Hu Y, Tevebaugh W, Yamamoto M,
Que J, Chen X. Transcript profiling identifies dynamic gene
expression patterns and an important role for Nrf2/Keap1
pathway in the developing mouse esophagus. PLoS One.
2012; 7:e36504.

Abbreviations
5-Aza: 5-azacytidine; AR: Antioxidant Response;
ARE: Antioxidant Response Element; DCFDA:
2′,7′-Dichlorofluorescin diacetate; FBS: Foetal bovine
serum; GSH: Glutathione; HDAC: Histone deacetylase;
HER: Human epidermal growth factor receptor; HRG:
Heregulin-β1; KEAP1: Kelch-like ECH-associated
protein 1; MTT: 3-(4,5-Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5Diphenyltetrazolium Bromide; NAC: N-Acetyl Cysteine;
NRF2: Nuclear erythroid related factor-2; RA: All-trans
Retinoic acid; ROS: Reactive oxygen species; RTK:
Receptor tyrosine kinase; TSA: Trichostatin.

3.	 Hayes JD, Dinkova-Kostova AT. The Nrf2 regulatory
network provides an interface between redox and
intermediary metabolism. Trends Biochem Sci. 2014;
39:199-218.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

4.	 Meakin PJ, Chowdhry S, Sharma RS, Ashford FB, Walsh
SV, McCrimmon RJ, Dinkova-Kostova AT, Dillon JF,
Hayes JD, Ashford ML. Susceptibility of Nrf2-null mice to
steatohepatitis and cirrhosis upon consumption of a high-fat
diet is associated with oxidative stress, perturbation of the
unfolded protein response, and disturbance in the expression
of metabolic enzymes, but not with insulin resistance. Mol
Cell Biol. 2014; pii: MCB.00677-14.

The authors would like to thank Professor C. Roland
Wolf for kindly providing the AREc32 stable cell line.

5.	 Kimura M, Yamamoto T, Zhang J, Itoh K, Kyo M, Kamiya
T, Aburatani H, Katsuoka F, Kurokawa H, Tanaka T,
Motohashi H, Yamamoto M. Molecular basis distinguishing

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

75896

Oncotarget

the DNA binding profile of Nrf2-Maf heterodimer from that
of Maf homodimer. J Biol Chem. 2007; 282: 33681-33690.

18.	 Yu D, Wolf JK, Scanlon M, Price JE, Hung MC. Enhanced
c-erbB-2/neu expression in human ovarian cancer cells
correlates with more severe malignancy that can be
suppressed by E1A. Cancer Res. 1993; 53: 891-898.

6.	 Li W, Yu S, Liu T, Kim JH, Blank V, Li H, Kong AN.
Heterodimerization with small Maf proteins enhances
nuclear retention of Nrf2 via masking the NESzip motif.
Biochim Biophys Acta. 2008; 1783:1847-1856.

19.	 Lipton A, Goodman L, Leitzel K, Cook J, Sperinde J,
Haddad M, Köstler WJ, Huang W, Weidler JM, Ali S,
Newton A, Fuchs EM, Paquet A et al. HER3, p95HER2, and
HER2 protein expression levels define multiple subtypes of
HER2-positive metastatic breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res
Treat. 2013; 141: 43-53.

7.	 Kaspar JW, Niture SK, Jaiswal AK. Nrf2:INrf2 (Keap1)
signaling in oxidative stress. Free Radic Biol Med. 2009;
47:1304-1309.
8.	 Kobayashi M, Yamamoto M. Molecular mechanisms
activating the Nrf2-Keap1 pathway of antioxidant gene
regulation. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2005; 7: 385-394.

20.	 Asrani K, Keri RA, Galisteo R, Brown SA, Morgan SJ,
Ghosh A, Tran NL, Winkles JA. The HER2- and heregulin
β1 (HRG)-inducible TNFR superfamily member Fn14
promotes HRG-driven breast cancer cell migration,
invasion, and MMP9 expression. Mol Cancer Res. 2013;
11: 393-404.

9.	 Gauron C, Rampon C, Bouzaffour M, Ipendey E, Teillon J,
Volovitch M, Vris S. Sustained production of ROS triggers
compensatory proliferation and is required for regeneration
to proceed. Sci Rep. 2013; 3:2084.

21.	 Balz LM, Bartkowiak K, Andreas A, Pantel K, Niggemann
B, Zänker KS, Brandt BH, Dittmar T. The interplay of
HER2/HER3/PI3K and EGFR/HER2/PLC-γ1 signalling
in breast cancer cell migration and dissemination. J Pathol.
2012; 227: 234-244.

10.	 Deeni Y, Khalil HS, Goltsov A, Langdon S, Harrison D,
Bown J. Quantitative analysis of proliferation behaviour of
ovarian cancer cells with the dynamics of reactive oxygen
species production and sequestration. J. Biotech. 2014; 185;
S1-S126.

22.	 Alroy I, Yarden Y. The ErbB signaling network in
embryogenesis and oncogenesis: signal diversification
through combinatorial ligand-receptor interactions. FEBS
Lett. 1997; 410:83–86.

11.	 Khalil HS, Goltsov A, Langdon SP, Harrison DJ, Bown
J, Deeni Y. Quantitative analysis of NRF2 pathway
reveals key elements of the regulatory circuits underlying
antioxidant response and proliferation of ovarian cancer
cells. J Biotechnol. 2015; 202:12-30.

23.	 Schulze WX, Deng L, Mann M. Phosphotyrosine
interactome of the ErbB-receptor kinase family. Mol Syst
Biol. 2005; 1:0008.

12.	 Wakabayashi N, Itoh K, Wakabayashi J, Motohashi H,
Noda S, Takahashi S, Imakado S, Kotsuji T, Otsuka F,
Roop DR, Harada T, Engel JD, Yamamoto M. Keap1-null
mutation leads to postnatal lethality due to constitutive Nrf2
activation. Nat Genet. 2003; 35:238-245.

24.	 Citri A, Yarden Y. EGF-ERBB signalling: towards the
systems level. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2006; 7:505–516.
25.	 Goltsov A, Deeni Y, Khalil HS, Soininen T, Kyriakidis S,
Hu H, Langdon SP, Harrison DJ, Bown J. Systems analysis
of drug-induced receptor tyrosine kinase reprogramming
following targeted mono- and combination anti-cancer
therapy. Cells. 2014; 3:563-591.

13.	 Shibata T, Ohta T, Tong KI, Kokubu A, Odogawa R, Tsuta
K, Asamura H, Yamamoto M, Hirohashi S. Cancer related
mutations in NRF2 impair its recognition by Keap1-Cul3
E3 ligase and promote malignancy. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S
A 2008; 105:13568-13573.

26.	 Hung MC, Zhang X, Yan DH, Zhang HZ, He GP, Zhang
TQ, Shi DR. Aberrant expression of the c-erbB-2/neu
protooncogene in ovarian cancer. Cancer Lett. 1992;
61:95-103.

14.	 Ohta T, Iijima K, Miyamoto M, Nakahara I, Tanaka H,
Ohtsuji M, Suzuki T, Kobayashi A, Yokota J, Sakiyama
T, Shibata T, Yamamoto M, Hirohashi S. Loss of Keap1
function activates Nrf2 and provides advantages for lung
cancer cell growth. Cancer Res. 2008; 68:1303-1309.

27.	 Garrett JT, Olivares MG, Rinehart C, Granja-Ingram
ND, Sánchez V, Chakrabarty A, Dave B, Cook RS, Pao
W, McKinely E, Manning HC, Chang J, Arteaga CL.
Transcriptional and posttranslational up-regulation of HER3
(ErbB3) compensates for inhibition of the HER2tyrosine
kinase. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011; 108:5021-5026.

15.	 Homma S, Ishii Y, Morishima Y, Yamadori T, Matsuno Y,
Haraguchi N, Kikuchi N, Satoh H, Sakamoto T, Hizawa N,
Itoh K, Yamamoto. Nrf2 enhances cell proliferation and
resistance to anticancer drugs in human lung cancer. Clin
Cancer Res. 2009; 15:3423-3432.

28.	 Garrett JT, Sutton CR, Kuba MG, Cook RS, Arteaga CL.
Dual blockade of HER2 in HER2-overexpressing tumor
cells does not completely eliminate HER3 function. Clin
Cancer Res. 2013; 19:610-619.

16.	 Pan H, Wang H, Zhu L, Wang X, Cong Z, Sun K, Fan Y.
The involvement of Nrf2-ARE pathway in regulation of
apoptosis in human glioblastoma cell U251. Neurol Res.
2013; 35:71-78.

29.	 Chakrabarty A, Sánchez V, Kuba MG, Rinehart C, Arteaga
CL. Feedback upregulation of HER3 (ErbB3) expression
and activity attenuates antitumor effect of PI3K inhibitors.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012; 109:2718-2723.

17.	 Niture SK, Jaiswal AK. Nrf2-induced antiapoptotic Bcl-xL
protein enhances cell survival and drug resistance. Free
Radic Biol Med. 2013; 57:119-131.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

75897

Oncotarget

30.	 García-García C, Ibrahim YH, Serra V, Calvo MT, Guzmán
M, Grueso J, Aura C, Pérez J, Jessen K, Liu Y, Rommel C,
Tabernero J, et al. Dual mTORC1/2 and HER2 blockade
results in antitumor activity in preclinical models of breast
cancer resistant to anti-HER2 therapy. Clin Cancer Res.
2012; 18:2603-2612.

42.	 Kang KW, Ryu JH, Kim SG. The essential role of
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase and of p38 mitogenactivated protein kinase activation in the antioxidant
response element-mediated rGSTA2 induction by decreased
glutathione in H4IIE hepatoma cells. Mol Pharmacol. 2000;
58:1017-1025.

31.	 Moasser MM, Krop IE. The Evolving Landscape of
HER2 Targeting in Breast Cancer. JAMA Oncol. 2015;
1:1154-1161.

43.	 Zipper LM, Mulcahy RT. Inhibition of ERK and p38 MAP
kinases inhibits binding of Nrf2 and induction of GCS
genes. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2000; 278:484-92.

32.	 Sims AH, Zweemer AJ, Nagumo Y, Faratian D, Muir M,
Dodds M, Um I, Kay C, Hasmann M, Harrison DJ, Langdon
SP. Defining the molecular response to trastuzumab,
pertuzumab and combination therapy in ovarian cancer. Br
J Cancer. 2012; 106:1779-1789.

44.	 Aslan M, Ozben T. Oxidants in receptor tyrosine kinase
signal transduction pathways. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2003;
5:781-788.
45.	 Khalil HS, Langdon SP, Kankia IH, Bown J, Deeni YY.
NRF2 Regulates HER2 and HER3 Signaling Pathway to
Modulate Sensitivity to Targeted Immunotherapies. Oxid
Med Cell Longev. 2016; 2016:4148791.

33.	 Goltsov A, Langdon SP, Goltsov G, Harrison DJ, Bown J.
Customizing the therapeutic response of signaling networks
to promote antitumor responses by drug combinations.
Front Oncol. 2014; 4:13.

46.	 Sauer H, Klimm B, Hescheler J, Wartenberg M. Activation
of p90RSK and growth stimulation of multicellular tumor
spheroids are dependent on reactive oxygen species
generated after purinergic receptor stimulation by ATP.
FASEB J. 2001; 15:2539-2541.

34.	 Nagumo Y, Faratian D, Mullen P, Harrison DJ, Hasmann
M, Langdon SP. Modulation of HER3 is a marker of
dynamic cell signaling in ovarian cancer: implications
for pertuzumab sensitivity. Mol Cancer Res. 2009;
7:1563-1571.

47.	 Forman HJ, Maiorino M, Ursini F. Signaling functions of
reactive oxygen species. Biochemistry. 2010; 49:835-842.

35.	 Gaborit N, Abdul-Hai A, Mancini M, Lindzen M, Lavi S,
Leitner O, Mounier L, Chentouf M, Dunoyer S, Ghosh
M, Larbouret C, Chardès T, Bazin H, et al. Examination
of HER3 targeting in cancer using monoclonal antibodies.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015; 112:839-844.

48.	 Mittler R, Vanderauwera S, Suzuki N, Miller G, Tognetti
VB, Vandepoele K, Gollery M, Shulaev V, Van Breusegem
F. ROS signaling: the new wave? Trends Plant Sci. 2011;
16:300-309.
49.	 Liu LZ, Hu XW, Xia C, He J, Zhou Q, Shi X, Fang J,
Jiang BH. Reactive oxygen species regulate epidermal
growth factor-induced vascular endothelial growth factor
and hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha expression through
activation of AKT and P70S6K1 in human ovarian cancer
cells. Free Radic Biol Med. 2006; 41:1521-1533.

36.	 Kang HJ, Yi YW, Hong YB, Kim HJ, Jang YJ, Seong YS,
Bae I. HER2 confers drug resistance of human breast cancer
cells through activation of NRF2 by direct interaction. Sci
Rep. 2014; 4:7201.
37.	 Manandhar S, Choi BH, Jung KA, Ryoo IG, Song
M, Kang SJ, Choi HG, Kim JA, Park PH, Kwak MK.
NRF2 inhibition represses ErbB2 signaling in ovarian
carcinoma cells: implications for tumor growth retardation
and docetaxel sensitivity. Free Radic Biol Med. 2012;
52:1773-1785.

50.	 Bae YS, Kang SW, Seo MS, Baines IC, Tekle E, Chock
PB, Rhee SG. Epidermal growth factor (EGF)-induced
generation of hydrogen peroxide. Role in EGF receptormediated tyrosine phosphorylation. J Biol Chem. 1997;
272:217-221.

38.	 Shimokawa H. Reactive oxygen species promote vascular
smooth muscle cell proliferation. Circ Res. 2013;
113:1040-1042.

51.	 Xia C, Meng Q, Liu LZ, Rojanasakul Y, Wang XR, Jiang
BH. Reactive oxygen species regulate angiogenesis and
tumor growth through vascular endothelial growth factor.
Cancer Res. 2007; 67:10823-10830.

39.	 Gauron C, Rampon C, Bouzaffour M, Ipendey E, Teillon J,
Volovitch M, Vriz S. Sustained production of ROS triggers
compensatory proliferation and is required for regeneration
to proceed. Sci Rep. 2013; 3:2084.

52.	 Liou GY, Storz P. Reactive oxygen species in cancer. Free
Radic Res. 2010; 44:479-496.

40.	 Kang KW, Lee SJ, Kim SG. Molecular mechanism of nrf2
activation by oxidative stress. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2005;
7:1664-1673.

53.	 Wang XJ, Hayes JD, Henderson CJ, Wolf CR. Identification
of retinoic acid as an inhibitor of transcription factor Nrf2
through activation of retinoic acid receptor alpha. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A. 2007; 104:19589-19594.

41.	 He J, Xu Q, Jing Y, Agani F, Qian X, Carpenter R, Li Q,
Wang XR, Peiper SS, Lu Z, Liu LZ, Jiang BH. Reactive
oxygen species regulate ERBB2 and ERBB3 expression via
miR-199a/125b and DNA methylation. EMBO Rep. 2012;
13:1116-1122.

54.	 Zhang DD, Lo SC, Cross JV, Templeton DJ, Hannink M.
Keap1 is a redox-regulated substrate adaptor protein for a
Cul3-dependent ubiquitin ligase complex. Mol Cell Biol.
2004; 24:10941-10953.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

75898

Oncotarget

55.	 Zhou S, Ye W, Shao Q, Zhang M, Liang J. Nrf2 is a
potential therapeutic target in radioresistance in human
cancer. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2013; 88:706-715.

69.	 Ha CH, Wang W, Jhun BS, Wong C, Hausser A, Pfizenmaier
K, McKinsey TA, Olson EN, Jin ZG. Protein kinase
D-dependent phosphorylation and nuclear export of histone
deacetylase 5 mediates vascular endothelial growth factorinduced gene expression and angiogenesis. J Biol Chem.
2008; 283:14590-14599.

56.	 Ozgen M, Koca SS, Karatas A, Dagli AF, Erman F, Gundogdu
B, Sahin K, Isik A. Lapatinib ameliorates experimental
arthritis in rats. Inflammation. 2015; 38:252-259.

70.	 Vigushin DM, Ali S, Pace PE, Mirsaidi N, Ito K, Adcock
I, Coombes RC. Trichostatin A is a histone deacetylase
inhibitor with potent antitumor activity against breast
cancer in vivo. Clin Cancer Res. 2001; 7:971-976.

57.	 Shibata T, Saito S, Kokubu A, Suzuki T, Yamamoto M,
Hirohashi S. Global downstream pathway analysis reveals
a dependence of oncogenic NF-E2-related factor 2 mutation
on the mTOR growth signaling pathway. Cancer Res. 2010;
70:9095-9105.

71.	 Christman JK. 5-Azacytidine and 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine
as inhibitors of DNA methylation: mechanistic studies and
their implications for cancer therapy. Oncogene. 2002;
21:5483-5495.

58.	 Lee JM, Hanson JM, Chu WA, Johnson JA.
Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, not extracellular signalregulated kinase, regulates activation of the antioxidantresponsive element in IMR-32 human neuroblastoma cells.
J Biol Chem. 2001; 276:20011-20016.

72.	 Clynes RA, Towers TL, Presta LG, Ravetch JV. Inhibitory
Fc receptors modulate in vivo cytotoxicity against tumor
targets. Nat Med. 2000; 6:443-446.

59.	 Nakaso K, Yano H, Fukuhara Y, Takeshima T, Wada-Isoe K,
Nakashima K. PI3K is a key molecule in the Nrf2-mediated
regulation of antioxidative proteins by hemin in human
neuroblastoma cells. FEBS Lett. 2003; 546:181-184.

73.	 Gennari R, Menard S, Fagnoni F, Ponchio L, Scelsi M,
Tagliabue E, Castiglioni F, Villani L, Magalotti C, Gibelli
N, Oliviero B, Ballardini B, Da Prada G, et al. Pilot study
of the mechanism of action of preoperative trastuzumab in
patients with primary operable breast tumors overexpressing
HER2. Clin Cancer Res. 2004; 10:5650-5655.

60.	 Morgillo F, Lee HY. Resistance to epidermal growth
factor receptor-targeted therapy. Drug Resist Updat. 2005;
8:298-310.

74.	 Arnould L, Gelly M, Penault-Llorca F, Benoit L, Bonnetain
F, Migeon C, Cabaret V, Fermeaux V, Bertheau P, Garnier
J, Jeannin JF, Coudert B. Trastuzumab-based treatment
of HER2-positive breast cancer: an antibody-dependent
cellular cytotoxicity mechanism? Br J Cancer. 2006;
94:259-267.

61.	 Engelman JA, Jänne PA Mechanisms of acquired resistance
to epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase
inhibitors in non-small cell lung cancer. Clin Cancer Res.
2008; 14:2895-2899.
62.	 Wang XJ, Sun Z, Villeneuve NF, Zhang S, Zhao F, Li
Y, Chen W, Yi X, Zheng W, Wondrak GT, Wong PK,
Zhang DD. Nrf2 enhances resistance of cancer cells
to chemotherapeutic drugs, the dark side of Nrf2.
Carcinogenesis. 2008; 29:1235-1243.

75.	 Nahta R, Yu D, Hung MC, Hortobagyi GN, Esteva FJ.
Mechanisms of disease: understanding resistance to HER2targeted therapy in human breast cancer. Nat Clin Pract
Oncol. 2006; 3:269-280.

63.	 Jaramillo MC, Zhang DD. The emerging role of the Nrf2Keap1 signaling pathway in cancer. Genes Dev. 2013;
27:2179-2191.

76.	 Mullen P, Cameron DA, Hasmann M, Smyth JF, Langdon
SP. Sensitivity to pertuzumab (2C4) in ovarian cancer
models: cross-talk with estrogen receptor signaling. Mol
Cancer Ther. 2007; 6:93-100.

64.	 Shim GS, Manandhar S, Shin DH, Kim TH, Kwak MK.
Acquisition of doxorubicin resistance in ovarian carcinoma
cells accompanies activation of the NRF2 pathway. Free
Radic Biol Med. 2009; 47:1619-1631.

77.	 Sakai K, Yokote H, Murakami-Murofushi K, Tamura T,
Saijo N, Nishio K. Pertuzumab, a novel HER dimerization
inhibitor, inhibits the growth of human lung cancer cells
mediated by the HER3 signaling pathway. Cancer Sci.
2007; 98:1498-1503.

65.	 Bao LJ, Jaramillo MC, Zhang ZB, Zheng YX, Yao M,
Zhang DD, Yi XF. Nrf2 induces cisplatin resistance through
activation of autophagy in ovarian carcinoma. Int J Clin
Exp Pathol. 2014; 7:1502-1513.

78.	 Takai N, Jain A, Kawamata N, Popoviciu LM, Said JW,
Whittaker S, Miyakawa I, Agus DB, Koeffler HP. 2C4,
a monoclonal antibody against HER2, disrupts the HER
kinase signaling pathway and inhibits ovarian carcinoma
cell growth. Cancer. 2005; 104:2701-2708.

66.	 Ropero S, Esteller M. The role of histone deacetylases
(HDACs) in human cancer. Mol Oncol. 2007; 1:19-25.
67.	 Sarkar S, Abujamra AL, Loew JE, Forman LW, Perrine
SP, Faller DV. Histone deacetylase inhibitors reverse CpG
methylation by regulating DNMT1 through ERK signaling.
Anticancer Res. 2011; 31:2723-2732.

79.	 Capparelli C, Rosenbaum S, Berman-Booty LD, Salhi A,
Gaborit N, Zhan T, Chervoneva I, Roszik J, Woodman SE,
Davies MA, Setiady YY, Osman I, Yarden Y, et al. ErbB3/
ErbB2 complexes as a therapeutic target in a subset of wildtype BRAF/NRAS cutaneous melanomas. Cancer Res.
2015; 75: 3554-3567.

68.	 Grozinger CM, Schreiber SL. Regulation of histone
deacetylase 4 and 5 and transcriptional activity by
14-3-3-dependent cellular localization. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A. 2000; 97:7835-7840.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

75899

Oncotarget

80.	 Garrett JT, Sutton CR, Kuba MG, Cook RS, Arteaga CL.
Dual blockade of HER2 in HER2-overexpressing tumor
cells does not completely eliminate HER3 function. Clin
Cancer Res. 2013; 19:610-619.

91.	Kaspar
JW,
Jaiswal AK. Antioxidant-induced
phosphorylation of tyrosine 486 leads to rapid nuclear
export of Bach1 that allows Nrf2 to bind to the antioxidant
response element and activate defensive gene expression. J
Biol Chem. 2010 ; 285: 153-162.

81.	 Chakrabarty A, Sánchez V, Kuba MG, Rinehart C, Arteaga
CL. Feedback upregulation of HER3 (ErbB3) expression
and activity attenuates antitumor effect of PI3K inhibitors.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012; 109:2718-2723.

92.	Tan MK, Lim HJ, Bennett EJ, Shi Y, Harper JW. Parallel
SCF adaptor capture proteomics reveals a role for
SCFFBXL17 in NRF2 activation via BACH1 repressor
turnover. Mol Cell. 2013; 52: 9-24.

82.	 Baselga J, Cortés J, Kim SB, Im SA, Hegg R, Im YH,
Roman L, Pedrini JL, Pienkowski T, Knott A, Clark E,
Benyunes MC, Ross G, et al. Pertuzumab plus trastuzumab
plus docetaxel for metastatic breast cancer. N Engl J Med.
2012; 366:109-119.

93.	Kataoka K, Igarashi K, Itoh K, Fujiwara KT, Noda
M, Yamamoto M, Nishizawa M. Small Maf proteins
heterodimerize with Fos and may act as competitive
repressors of the NF-E2 transcription factor. Mol Cell Biol.
1995; 15:2180-2190.

83.	 Swain SM, Kim SB, Cortés J, Ro J, Semiglazov V,
Campone M, Ciruelos E, Ferrero JM, Schneeweiss A,
Knott A, Clark E, Ross G, Benyunes MC, et al. Pertuzumab,
trastuzumab, and docetaxel for HER2-positive metastatic
breast cancer (CLEOPATRA study): overall survival results
from a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase
3 study. Lancet Oncol. 2013; 14:461-471.

94.	Kimura M, Yamamoto T, Zhang J, Itoh K, Kyo M, Kamiya
T, Aburatani H, Katsuoka F, Kurokawa H, Tanaka T,
Motohashi H, Yamamoto M. Molecular basis distinguishing
the DNA binding profile of Nrf2-Maf heterodimer from that
of Maf homodimer. J Biol Chem. 2007; 282:33681-33690.
95.	Khor TO, Fuentes F, Shu L, Paredes-Gonzalez X, Yang AY,
Liu Y, Smiraglia DJ, Yegnasubramanian S, Nelson WG,
Kong AN. Epigenetic DNA methylation of antioxidative
stress regulator NRF2 in human prostate cancer. Cancer
Prev Res. 2014; 7:1186-1197.

84.	 Gianni L, Pienkowski T, Im YH, Roman L, Tseng LM, Liu
MC, Lluch A, Staroslawska E, de la Haba-Rodriguez J, Im
SA, Pedrini JL, Poirier B, Morandi P, et al. Efficacy and
safety of neoadjuvant pertuzumab and trastuzumab in women
with locally advanced, inflammatory, or early HER2-positive
breast cancer (NeoSphere): a randomised multicentre, openlabel, phase 2 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2012; 13:25-32.

96.	Li Z, Xu L, Tang N, Xu Y, Ye X, Shen S, Niu X, Lu S, Chen
Z. The polycomb group protein EZH2 inhibits lung cancer
cell growth by repressing the transcription factor Nrf2.
FEBS Lett. 2014; 588:3000-3007.

85.	 Nahta R, Yu D, Hung MC, Hortobagyi GN, Esteva FJ.
Mechanisms of disease: understanding resistance to HER2targeted therapy in human breast cancer. Nat Clin Pract
Oncol. 2006; 3:269-280.

97.	Lemos LG, Victorino VJ, Herrera AC, Aranome AM,
Cecchini AL, Simão AN, Panis C, Cecchini R Trastuzumabbased chemotherapy modulates systemic redox homeostasis
in women with HER2-positive breast cancer. Int
Immunopharmacol. 2015; 27:8-14.

86.	 Wang H, Liu K, Geng M, Gao P, Wu X, Hai Y, Li Y, Li Y,
Luo L, Hayes JD, Wang XJ, Tang X. RXRα inhibits the
NRF2-ARE signaling pathway through a direct interaction
with the Neh7 domain of NRF2. Cancer Res. 2013;
73:3097-3108.

98.	Wang XJ, Hayes JD, Wolf CR. Generation of a stable
antioxidant response element-driven reporter gene cell
line and its use to show redox-dependent activation of nrf2
by cancer chemotherapeutic agents. Cancer Res. 2006;
66:10983-10994.

87.	 Jain AK, Jaiswal AK. GSK-3beta acts upstream of Fyn
kinase in regulation of nuclear export and degradation
of NF-E2 related factor 2. J Biol Chem. 2007;
282:16502-16510.

99.	Tietze F. Enzymic method for quantitative determination
of nanogram amounts of total and oxidized glutathione:
applications to mammalian blood and other tissues. Anal
Biochem. 1969; 27:502-522.

88.	 Niture SK, Jain AK, Shelton PM, Jaiswal AK. Src
subfamily kinases regulate nuclear export and degradation
of transcription factor Nrf2 to switch off Nrf2-mediated
antioxidant activation of cytoprotective gene expression. J
Biol Chem. 2011; 286:28821-28832.

100.	Faratian D, Zweemer AJ, Nagumo Y, Sims AH, Muir
M, Dodds M, Um I, Kay C, Hasmann M, Harrison DJ,
Langdon SP. Trastuzumab and pertuzumab produce changes
in morphology and estrogen receptor signaling in ovarian
cancer xenografts revealing new treatment strategies. Clin
Cancer Res. 2011; 17:4451-4461.

89.	 Chowdhry S, Zhang Y, McMahon M, Sutherland C,
Cuadrado A, Hayes JD. Nrf2 is controlled by two distinct
β-TrCP recognition motifs in its Neh6 domain, one of which
can be modulated by GSK-3 activity. Oncogene. 2013;
32:3765-3781.

101.	Faratian D, Goltsov A, Lebedeva G, Sorokin A, Moodie
S, Mullen P, Kay C, Um IH, Langdon S, Goryanin I,
Harrison DJ. Systems biology reveals new strategies for
personalizing cancer medicine and confirms the role of
PTEN in resistance to trastuzumab. Cancer Res. 2009;
69:6713-6720.

90.	 Shan Y, Lambrecht RW, Donohue SE, Bonkovsky HL.
Role of Bach1 and Nrf2 in up-regulation of the heme
oxygenase-1 gene by cobalt protoporphyrin. FASEB J.
2006; 20: 2651-2653.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

75900

Oncotarget

102.	Papp D, Lenti K, Módos D, Fazekas D, Dúl Z, Türei D,
Földvári-Nagy L, Nussinov R, Csermely P, Korcsmáros
T. The NRF2-related interactome and regulome contain
multifunctional proteins and fine-tuned autoregulatory
loops. FEBS Lett. 2012; 586:1795-1802.

and metabolic networks. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012;
40:10228-10239.
105.	Bidkhori G, Narimani Z, Hosseini Ashtiani S, Moeini A,
Nowzari-Dalini A, Masoudi-Nejad A. Reconstruction of
an integrated genome-scale co-expression network reveals
key modules involved in lung adenocarcinoma. PLoS One.
2013; 8:e67552.

103.	Malhotra D, Portales-Casamar E, Singh A, Srivastava S,
Arenillas D, Happel C, Shyr C, Wakabayashi N, Kensler
TW, Wasserman WW, Biswal S. Global mapping of binding
sites for Nrf2 identifies novel targets in cell survival
response through ChIP-Seq profiling and network analysis.
Nucleic Acids Res. 2010; 38:5718-5734.

106.	Mathis C, Gebel S, Poussin C, Belcastro V, Sewer A,
Weisensee D, Hengstermann A, Ansari S, Wagner S, Peitsch
MC, Hoeng J. A systems biology approach reveals the
dose- and time-dependent effect of primary human airway
epithelium tissue culture after exposure to cigarette smoke
in vitro. Bioinform Biol Insights. 2015; 9:19-35.

104.	Hirotsu Y, Katsuoka F, Funayama R, Nagashima T,
Nishida Y, Nakayama K, Engel JD, Yamamoto M. Nrf2MafG heterodimers contribute globally to antioxidant

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

75901

Oncotarget

