2365

Opioid Medications and Longitudinal Risk of Delirium
in Hospitalized Cancer Patients
Jean-David Gaudreau, PhD1-4
Pierre Gagnon, MD1-6
0
Marc-Andre Roy, MD, MSc6,7
François Harel, MSc1
Annie Tremblay, MD1,7
1

Centre de Recherche en Cancerologie de L’HotelDieu de Quebec, Quebec City, Quebec, Canada.
2

Faculty of Pharmacy, Laval University, Quebec
City, Quebec, Canada.

BACKGROUND. Delirium is an important problem in hospitalized cancer patients.
The objective of this study was to determine whether exposure to corticosteroids,
benzodiazepines, or opioids predicted delirium.

METHODS. A prospective cohort study was conducted in an oncology/internal
medicine population. Patients were assessed continuously for the presence of delirium until they were discharged by using the Nursing Delirium Screening Scale
(Nu-DESC). Follow-up for outcome began after incident delirium. The primary
outcome was the presence of a delirium event, which was defined as a Nu-DESC
score >1. Strengths of associations of medications with delirium were expressed
as odds ratios (ORs) in univariate and multivariate analyses.

MD-PhD Program, Faculty of Medicine, Laval
University, Quebec City, Quebec, Canada.

RESULTS. In total, 114 patients (1823 patient-days) met the inclusion criteria for

4

number of delirium events by patient was 6 (total number, 667 delirium events).

3

Maison Michel Sarrazin, Quebec City, Quebec,
Canada.
5

Department of Psychiatry, L’Hotel-Dieu de Quebec, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Quebec,
Quebec City, Quebec, Canada.

the study. The mean follow-up from incident delirium was 16 days. The mean
Analysis by day on several occasions revealed significant associations between
opioids and delirium. Corticosteroids and benzodiazepines were not associated
significantly with an increased risk of delirium on any given day. Analysis by
patient using generalized estimating equation (GEE) models showed an increased

6

risk of delirium on any day of follow-up associated with opioid exposure in uni-

7

adjustment for corticosteroid, benzodiazepine, and antipsychotic exposure using

Centre de Recherche Universite Laval RobertGiffard, Quebec City, Quebec, Canada.
Department of Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine,
Laval University, Quebec City, Quebec, Canada.
Supported by a grant from the Sociobehavioural
Cancer Research Network and funded through the
National Cancer Institute of Canada (NCIC) Centre
for Behavioural Research and Program Evaluation
with funds from the Canadian Cancer Society.
Jean-David Gaudreau is the recipient of a clinical
research award from the Mach-Gaensslen Foundation of Canada.
Dr. Gagnon is a Research Scientist of the NCIC
through an award from the NCIC with funds from
the Canadian Cancer Society.
Dr. Roy is supported by the Fonds de la Recherche en Sante du Quebec, Montreal.
Address for reprints: Pierre Gagnon, MD, L’HotelDieu de Quebec, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire
de Quebec, 11 Cote du Palais, Quebec City, Province of Quebec, Canada, G1R 2J6; Fax: (418)
691-5019; E-mail: pierre.gagnon@crhdq.ulaval.ca
Received October 19, 2006; revision received
January 1, 2007; accepted February 6, 2007.

ª 2007 American Cancer Society

variate analysis (OR of 1.70; P < .0001). The association remained significant after
GEE regressions (OR of 1.37; P ¼ .0033). Truncating follow-up at 30 days did not
affect the results (OR of 1.38; P < .032).

CONCLUSIONS. Exposure to opioids during hospitalization was associated significantly with an increased longitudinal risk of delirium. Cancer 2007;109:2365–73.
 2007 American Cancer Society.

KEYWORDS: delirium, hemato-oncology, psychoactive medications, opioids.

D

elirium is a frequent psychiatric condition in hospitalized
patients, especially in oncology populations.1,2 One possible explanation is the high exposure rate of such patients to drugs prone
to induce delirium. Contrary to common clinical wisdom, however,
very few psychoactive medications were identified repeatedly as delirium risk factors in large-scale studies.3 The quality of research in
drug-induced delirium has been questionable methodologically in
the past3; however, the results from a recent and rigorously conducted study suggest that psychoactive medications, such as benzodiazepines, corticosteroids, and opioids, increase the risk of
developing delirium during hospitalization in oncology patients.2
Clearly, determining that such drugs are associated with delirium
onset is an important step toward better patient management. The
longitudinal analysis of factors associated with delirium is particularly valuable from the standpoint of evidence-based medicine.

DOI 10.1002/cncr.22665
Published online 27 April 2007 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

2366

CANCER

June 1, 2007 / Volume 109 / Number 11

Indeed, these data may be used not only to lend further support to the causal relation between a given
type of drug and delirium but also to help optimize
the prevention and/or treatment of delirium on a
day-to-day basis by controlling exposure to these
medications over time.
In psychiatric research, taking depression studies
as an example,4 the patient’s status (affliction, reversal, exacerbation, etc) is difficult to determine with
precision. This is mainly because of the lack of laboratory tests or histologic analyses that may be monitored over time. In delirium research, an effective
way to monitor delirium status over time is using a
continuously rated instrument, such as the Nursing
Delirium Screening Scale (Nu-DESC).5 Patients do
not necessarily face the same risk of delirium after a
first occurrence, and those patients should not be
included in the analyses as new patients. Two
approaches can be used to take this into account.
The first approach is to wait until the patient is free
of clinical manifestations. However, this approach
raises important issues, especially regarding the duration of remission. It is well recognized that delirium fluctuates over time, such that there is currently
no evidence to support the notion of cure or reversal
after a single day of symptomatic remission: Delirium still may be present, albeit in a subclinical form.
Moreover, there are no guidelines that define duration of remission such that, after a given period, the
patient can be considered at risk for a new incident
delirium. The second approach involves taking into
account all observations for all patients as of the first
manifestations of delirium and taking into consideration that these observations are nonindependent. In
our opinion, this is the most appropriate approach.
Few studies have examined the course of delirium, and most of those studies focused on the
associated mortality risk during hospitalization.6,7
However, 2 pioneer studies on the course of delirium
in association with exposure to psychoactive medications have been conducted in recent years.8,9 Using
the first approach, 1 study in patients with advanced
cancer examined the relation between delirium reversibility and various risk factors, including psychoactive medications.9 In multivariate analyses,
psychoactive medications were associated significantly with reversibility. However, the strength of the
evidence was impaired by a number of shortcomings,
such as including large numbers of prevalent cases of
delirium, retrospectively determining causes of delirium based on chart review by unblinded investigators, considering multiple criteria for the involvement
of psychoactive medications in delirium reversibility,
not specifying clearly which medications known to

cause delirium were studied, whether the variable
was defined a priori, and defining the variable psychoactive medications as a heteroclite set comprising
numerous medications (eg, opioids, benzodiazepines,
antidepressants) as well as antipsychotics. The other
study, which used the second approach, suggested
a longitudinal association between anticholinergic
medications and delirium severity.8 However, that
study also had methodological shortcomings. The
authors used a rather empirical method, based on
clinical experience and on a correlative clinical index,
to evaluate anticholinergic effect. Delirium assessments were performed irregularly and infrequently.
The majority of patients who were included were
prevalent cases of delirium. Patients with missing laboratory data were assumed to have normal values
without evaluation for randomness. Notwithstanding
their respective limitations, for several years, these 2
studies have been among the most helpful available
references on the course of delirium in relation to exposure to psychoactive medications. From a statistical perspective, delirium is typically a recurrent
event, given its fluctuating nature. Naive statistical
techniques (eg, basic logistic regression analysis)
ignore the existence of recurrent events or the fact
that the recurrent events within patients are correlated. Conversely, longitudinal techniques (repeatedmeasures designs) analyze the whole pattern of recurrent events over time. Longitudinal studies provide a
large number of data points, thus improving the statistical power of the analyses and attenuating the
effects of collinearity among explanatory variables. In
delirium research, naive techniques are commonplace. Longitudinal data analysis largely has been
underused, especially regarding the study of delirium
risk factors, such as psychoactive medications,
because, to our knowledge, no study before ours has
attempted to perform this type of analysis. In a prospective cohort study that involved innovative methodological characteristics, we endeavored to evaluate
the relation between corticosteroids, benzodiazepines, and opioids and the longitudinal risk of delirium in hospitalized cancer patients.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Patients
The study population consisted of patients who were
admitted to the hemato-oncology/internal medicine
unit at the Hotel-Dieu de Quebec Hospital, Canada,
from January 21, 2002 to September 10, 2005. Study
inclusion criteria were as follows: 1) patients with a
histologic diagnosis of cancer and 2) incident cases
of delirium.

Opioids and Longitudinal Delirium Risk/Gaudreau et al.

Consecutive incident cases of delirium from our
previous work, which examined the role of psychoactive medications in delirium occurrence2 (n ¼ 43
patients), were included in the current study along
with the enrollment of 71 new incident delirium
cases. The 2 phases of enrollment were conducted in
the same manner. In total, sample size of 114 incident delirium cases enabled this study to have a
power of 80% to detect a 15% difference in the odds
of delirium between groups. Written consent was not
obtained, because there was no perceived risk of
harm to patients. The hospital’s Research Ethics
Committee approved this study.

Outcome Measure
The Nu-DESC is an observational delirium diagnostic
instrument that was developed by our group and is
performed on a 24-hour basis (once per 8-hour shift).
It rates the presence and severity of delirium manifestations in 5 dimensions: orientation, behavior, communication, perception, and psychomotor activity.
Total scores range from 0 (no manifestations) to 10
(severe manifestations). A total score 2 at any time
during the day defines delirium according to the NuDESC (a positive score on any of the 3 8-hour nursing
shifts). This approach maximizes delirium detection
(eg, instrument sensitivity) to levels never achieved
before in the field and has even allowed reducing
delays in delirium diagnosis by up to 5 days.10 However, for the purposes of the current study, this precluded us from demonstrating with confidence that
patients truly were delirious over the whole 24-hour
period when the presented a positive Nu-DESC score
on a given day. For example, positive delirium evaluations on consecutive days of follow-up may have represented either a single episode or distinct episodes.
From a longitudinal analyses standpoint, however,
any delirium-positive day is considered a recurrence.
Thus, any Nu-DESC score >1 on a given day of follow-up was defined as a delirium event. This term
has been defined similarly and used in a recently
published delirium study.11 These delirium events
would represent the smallest analyzable delirium unit
(eg, each Nu-DESC delirium score for each 24-hour
period) and, conceptually, would be equivalent to the
statistical term recurrences mentioned above. This
approach allowed us to include all observations for
all patients as of the first manifestations of delirium,
like previous work in delirium course studies.8
The Nu-DESC can be used to assess delirium
status rapidly on a continuous basis with a high level
of sensitivity and diagnostic accuracy. Sensitivity,
specificity, and efficiency of 85.7%, 86.8%, and 86.4%,
respectively, were achieved based on the Nu-DESC

2367

validation study.5 The performance of the Nu-DESC
was tested previously by using the Confusion Assessment Method (CAM)12 as the reference standard. The
CAM was administered by study nurses who were
blinded to the patients’ Nu-DESC delirium status,
and the results were confirmed by experienced clinical psychiatrists who also were blinded to the patients’ delirium status. The Nu-DESC was determined
to be congruent to the overall concept of delirium
based on the fourth edition of the Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders and was of
comparable sensitivity and diagnostic accuracy.5 To
our knowledge, no other delirium instrument presents such advantageous characteristics. Follow-up
began after incident delirium (the first Nu-DESC
score 2) and ended with the patient’s discharge
from the hospital. The presence of a delirium event
(a subsequent Nu-DESC score 2) was the outcome
variable of the study. In addition, the nurses who
rated the Nu-DESC were blinded to patients’ medication use and the study hypothesis.

Variables
In a previous study, we observed significant associations between incident delirium and cumulative daily
equivalent doses of corticosteroids, benzodiazepines,
and opioids >15 mg of dexamethasone, >2 mg of
lorazepam, and >90 mg of morphine, respectively.2
The dichotomization of doses did not compromise
the results, because the difference in the fit of models
with medications as dichotomous versus continuous
variables was not statistically significant2 based on
the likelihood-ratio chi-square statistic.1. These
thresholds of medication exposure also were used in
the current study to examine the associated risk of
delirium. We have accounted for antipsychotic exposure, because patients frequently were receiving such
medication during follow-up for their delirious state.
We have applied the required methodological precautions when conducting drug-induced delirium
studies.3 Medication exposure for corticosteroids,
benzodiazepines, opioids, and antipsychotics was
computed as cumulative daily doses in oral lorazepam,14 oral dexamethasone,15 subcutaneous morphine,15,16 and oral haloperidol17, respectively, based
on the available literature. In calculating the equianalgesic dose of morphine, the potencies of the intravenous, subcutaneous, and intramuscular routes are
considered equivalent.18 Exposure to antipsychotic
medications was retained as a continuous variable.
Confounding Variables
Potentially confounding variables of an association
between medications and delirium were chosen

2368

CANCER

June 1, 2007 / Volume 109 / Number 11

based on past work in the field and because of clinical relevance. The patients’ clinical characteristics,
sex, age, disease-related variables (primary cancer
site, presence and sites of metastases, if applicable),
diagnosis of delirium on a previous hospitalization,
and dementia were determined at admission from
medical records using standardized forms by a
trained study nurse. Thus, the severity of illness as a
confounding factor was taken into account indirectly,
through the presence of metastases, because metastatic spread is an indicator of disease severity. In
our setting, the type of pain experienced by the
patients was recorded in nursing charts on a 24-hour
basis. Uncontrolled pain was documented according
to nursing or physician notes that the patient was
complaining of pain or exhibiting pain spontaneously or upon movement. An experienced research
nurse conducted a chart review of nursing and physician notes to document uncontrolled pain during the
study period. Given the rehabilitative focus of our
setting, few demented patients are admitted. Nevertheless, the patients’ medical and nursing charts
were inspected carefully for potential evidences of
cognitive impairment and/or dementia. All available
laboratory data were collected from medical charts
and from computerized databases both at admission
and later during follow-up. Along with laboratory
data that were collected after admission, other timedependent precipitants for delirium were documented based on chart review by a trained nurse. These
precipitants were similar to those from previous studies and included episodes of infection, dehydration,
or hypoxia.9 However, because of missing values
and/or the limited quantity of these observations
compared with medication data, we lacked the
power to analyze these precipitants in a longitudinal
fashion. Missing values were not substituted with
normal values, because precipitants typically were
not measured for those patients who seemed to be
healthier. Because of the nonrandomness of missing
data, values were not imputed, as this may have
compromised the validity of the results.19 For admission variables, the categories used for the analyses
were as follows. Ion levels (sodium, potassium,
and calcium) were trichotomized (normal/low/high);
whereas aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase, urea, and creatinine levels were dichotomized (normal/high).

Statistical Analysis
Preliminary analyses included descriptive statistics of
medication exposure and baseline patient characteristics. The distribution of variables associated with
occurrence of delirium was examined using the chi-

square test. When discrete time points are considered, generalized estimating equations (GEE analysis)20,21 is the recommended longitudinal approach.22
An analysis of the odds of daily occurrence of delirium during follow-up was conducted using a GEE
model. The GENMOD procedure in the SAS software
package was used.23 All statistical analyses were performed using SAS software (version 9.1; SAS Institute
Inc., Cary, NC).

RESULTS
Characteristics of the Study Population
Baseline characteristics of the patients who met the
eligibility criteria for study entry are presented in
Table 1. Sixty patients had metastatic spread (52.6%).
No cases of dementia were recorded. Fourteen percent of the study follow-ups have ended with the
patient’s death. These patients did not present more
delirium events than the others nor were they followed for a longer period than the rest of the sample.
Eight percent of the patients were transferred to
another facility, whereas the remaining patients were
discharged home (78%).
Characteristics of Pain and Pain Control
The major categories of cancer pain based on etiology were as follows: 1) direct tumor involvement:
somatic (73 patients), visceral (41 patients), neuropathic (27 patients); 2) therapeutic procedures (16
patients); and 3) side effects/toxicities (14 patients).
Many patients had >1 category. To control pain
symptomatology, a total of 3265 doses of opioids
were received by the 114 patients. Most patients
(n ¼ 75) presented a regular pattern of use of opioids
(1, 2, 3, or 4 times daily) supplemented by opioids as
needed. Thirty patients received opioids only when
needed. The most widely used administration route
was subcutaneous (101 patients at some point during
follow-up), followed by oral (101 patients), and transdermal (39 patients). Based on our chart review,
none of the patients reported uncontrolled pain during the study period.
Analysis by Day
The risk of delirium was analyzed first for each day
of follow-up. The results of these analyses are presented in Figure 1. There were 114 patients who were
at risk of delirium on the first day of follow-up. The
total number of patient-days at risk was 1823 days.
The total number of delirium events was 667 events.
After 30 days of follow-up, 79% of the 667 delirium
events had occurred; and, after 60 days, 92% of the
delirium events had occurred.

Opioids and Longitudinal Delirium Risk/Gaudreau et al.

2369

TABLE 1
Characteristics of the Study Patients at Hospital Admission (n = 114)
Characteristic

All patients (%), N = 114

Mean age  SD, y
Women
Mean follow-up, d
Mean no. of delirium events
History of delirium
Primary cancer diagnosis
Hematologic
Gastrointestinal tract
Lung
Bones/soft tissue
Genital
Urinary
Breast
Ovary
Colorectal
Other
Extent of disease
Locoregional only
Primary site of metastases
Brain
Bone
Liver
Lung
Laboratory data*
Low sodium
High sodium
Low potassium
High potassium
Low calcium
High calcium
High ALT
High AST
High urea
High creatinine

63  13
60 (53)
16
6
18 (16)
11 (9.6)
11 (9.6)
11 (9.6)
12 (10.5)
12 (10.5)
9 (7.9)
14 (12.3)
8 (7)
12 (10.5)
14 (12.3)
54 (47.4)
8 (7)
29 (25.4)
24 (21.1)
24 (21.1)
25 (22.9)
3 (2.8)
18 (16.5)
3 (2.8)
24 (38.7)
24 (38.7)
15 (18.3)
24 (28.9)
31 (27.9)
29 (25.7)

SD indicates standard deviation; ALT, alanine aminotransferase; AST, aspartate aminotransferase.
* The denominator for the proportions (%) was the total number of patients who had received the
said laboratory test. Normal ranges for laboratory data were determined as follows: sodium, 135–145
mmol/L; calcium, 2.15–2.57 mmol/L; potassium, 3.5–5.1 mmol/L; transaminases: AST, <50 U/L (men
[M])/<40 U/L (women [F]); ALT, <60 U/L (M)/<50 U/L (F); urea, 2.9–7.9 mmol/L (M)/2.1–7.1
mmol/L (F); creatinine, 60–110 lmol/L (M)/50–100 lmol/L (F).

Odds ratios (ORs) representing the risk of delirium were computed for each day of follow-up.
Twenty ORs were computed for corticosteroids, and
39 ORs were computed for benzodiazepines. Days
with absence of medication exposure in cases or controls (ORs equal to 0 or ?) were not considered further. There did not appear to be a significant relation
between exposure to medication above the thresholds
and delirium for corticosteroids and benzodiazepines:
ORs were scattered above and below the null value
(Fig. 1), and none of the ORs appeared to indicate an
increased risk of delirium on any day of observation.
There appeared to be a graphic trend toward an
association between exposure to doses >90 mg of

FIGURE 1. The risk of delirium is illustrated by day associated with corticosteroids, benzodiazepines, and opioids. In total, 1823 patient-days were at
risk of delirium for the entire follow-up period. The dashed line represents
the total number of patients at risk on that particular day. The solid line
represents the number of delirium events for that particular day. The ratio of
the number of delirium events to the number of patients at risk was
112:114 on Day 1, 17:59 on Day 10, 5:30 on Day 20, 7:16 on Day 30, 3:9
on Day 40, 5:7 on Day 50, and 2:5 on Day 60. Because most delirium
events already had occurred, representation of follow-up was truncated at
60 days. Odds ratios (ORs) comparing the probability of delirium between
patients who were exposed to doses above the thresholds (>15 mg dexamethasone, >2 mg lorazepam, >90 mg morphine) and patients who were
exposed to lower doses were computed on each day of follow-up. For clarity,
the ORs are represented on a log scale.

morphine equivalents and the presence of a delirium
event (Fig. 1). Statistically significant associations
were noted on 3 occasions during follow-up: on Day
8 (OR of 4.8; 95% confidence interval [95% CI], 1.3–
17), on Day 15 (OR of 8.1; 95%CI, 1.5–43.2), and on
Day 28 (OR of 10; 95%CI, 1–97.5). Because the power
of an analysis by day is somewhat limited, next, we
used analyses by patient by combining the total
number of daily observations (precipitants and delirium events) for the entire cohort.

Analysis by Patient
The results of the analyses based on the 1823
patient-days at risk for delirium during follow-up are

2370

CANCER

June 1, 2007 / Volume 109 / Number 11

TABLE 2
The Presence of Delirium in Relation to Exposure to Daily Doses of
Corticosteroids >15 mg Dexamethasone, >2 mg lorazepam, or >90 mg
Morphine (n = 114 Patients; 1823 Patient-days at Risk)

TABLE 3
Daily Risk of Delirium Associated With Exposure to Opioids (Daily
Dose >90 mg of Subcutaneous Morphine Equivalents)
Variable

Medication

Delirium event
(n = 667)

No delirium
(n = 1156)

P

Corticosteroids
Benzodiazepines
Opioids

60
147
208

131
279
243

.12
.31
<.0001

presented in Table 2. Of the 3 classes of medications
studied, a significant chi-square test result was noted
for opioids (P < .0001). Further examination of the
nature of the association between this class of medications and delirium was performed using logistic
regression models.
ORs that represented the risk of delirium associated with exposure to opioids were calculated. For
the follow-up period, on any given day, the crude
odds of experiencing a delirium event were 1.70
times greater for patients who were exposed to daily
opioid doses >90 mg compared with patients who
were exposed to lower doses (P < .0001) (Table 3). To
control for a potential bias toward positive associations caused by repeated measures, we used GEE
models to evaluate the daily risk of delirium over
time for patients who were exposed to opioids. The
risk of delirium remained significant (OR of 1.39;
95%CI, 1.04–1.85; P ¼ .027).
We also examined the associations between
baseline patient characteristics and delirium in univariate analyses (data not shown). These variables
included sex, age, primary cancer site, presence and
sites of metastases, diagnosis of delirium on a previous hospitalization, and laboratory data at admission. Consistent with our previous work,2 a history of
delirium and the presence of liver metastases were
variables associated with an increased risk of delirium. Next, several multivariate models were evaluated for goodness of fit to data. None of the baseline
variables remained a significant predictor of delirium
when they were fitted simultaneously into models
that included opioid exposure or other time-dependent variables. Thus, in the best-fitting multivariate
model, the risk of delirium associated with opioid exposure was adjusted only for the other 3 classes of
medications studied (benzodiazepines, corticosteroids, and antipsychotics) and still was significant
(OR of 1.37; 95%CI, 1.03–1.83; P ¼ .033). Exposure to
opioids was a significant predictor of delirium in all
of the models in which this variable was studied.
Finally, to control further for repeated measures,
this time for the potential bias of patients who had

Entire follow-up
Crude
With repeated measures
Unadjusted
Adjusted*
First month of follow-up
Crude
With repeated measures
Unadjusted
Adjusted*

OR

95% CI

P

1.70

1.37–2.11

<.0001

1.39
1.37

1.04–1.85
1.03–1.83

.027
.033

1.58

1.23–2.01

.0003

1.41
1.38

1.05–1.89
1.03–1.85

.023
.032

OR indicates odds ratio; 95% CI, 95% confidence interval.
* OR adjusted for corticosteroid, benzodiazepine, and antipsychotic exposure.

longer follow-up, analyses similar to those described
above were performed for a shorter follow-up but in
which 80% of all patient-days of observation still
would be available for analysis (30 days). These
results were comparable to those obtained by using
the complete length of follow-up for all patients. The
adjusted risk of delirium associated with opioids was
1.38 (95%CI, 1.03–1.85; P ¼ .032) (Table 3).

DISCUSSION
Delirium frequently is seen in consultation-liaison
psychiatry, particularly in oncology settings. Psychoactive medications, especially opioids, are among
the most consistent risk factors for incident delirium.3,24 We showed previously that opioids were
involved in the development of delirium in hospitalized patients.2 The current study provides convincing evidence that exposure to the latter drug class
also strongly influences the course of delirium. In
fact, to our knowledge, this is the first study to suggest that the risk of presenting a delirium event is
almost 40% greater for hospitalized patients who are
exposed to relatively high opioids doses (>90 mg of
daily morphine equivalents) compared with patients
who are exposed to lower doses. After having presented an incident delirium, study patients were
more likely to present a delirium event later if they
still were exposed to high opioid doses. A typical
study patient presented approximately 7 delirium
events, suggesting that, of 16 days of follow-up, a
typical patient was delirious at some point each day
for roughly 7 days. This draws attention to the importance of controlling risk factors, especially medication, even after delirium appears to be reversed.
Our study combined several important methodological characteristics, including but not limited to 1)

Opioids and Longitudinal Delirium Risk/Gaudreau et al.

a large sample of delirious patients, 2) a longitudinal
and dynamic design that was suited particularly well
to the fluctuating nature of delirium, 3) continuous
assessment of delirium status performed by bedside
nurses who were blinded both to patients’ medication use and to the study hypothesis, and 4) taking
into account antipsychotic exposure when establishing the role of other psychoactive medications on
the risk of delirium. Foremost, our statistical approach using GEE models allowed us to take into
consideration the temporal order between delirium
and the time-varying variables, the changes in these
variables that occurred between each reassessment
and the preceding one, and within-person correlations. Comparison with current data is difficult,
because few studies have examined the longitudinal
risk of delirium and its associated factors. In 1996,
Inouye and Charpentier presented a complex model
that featured 5 precipitating delirium risk factors,
including psychoactive medications.25 Although the
variable was defined somewhat imprecisely in that
study,3 the results nevertheless lend support to the
important role of psychoactive medications in precipitating delirium. The data presented herein are in
agreement with results from a recent study, which
suggested that controlling exposure to psychoactive
medications can reverse delirium.9 Our data also
suggest that delirium was preventable/reversable if
exposure to opioid medications was kept as low as
possible. Although cognitive function seems to be
preserved in patients taking moderate doses of
opioids for chronic pain,26,27 the documentation of
the effect of high doses of opioids on cognitive function remains incomplete. Our current and past work2
in the field of drug-induced delirium has helped to
identify a critical threshold of daily exposure to
opioid medications (90 mg of morphine) above
which the risk of delirium significantly increases.
According to a recent review, daily doses >180 mg of
morphine or a morphine equivalent may be considered excessive.28 To prevent/reverse delirium, escalation of the dose to such levels preferably should be
avoided. More specifically, opioid doses should be
reduced by 25% if analgesia is satisfactory; nonessential, centrally active medications should be discontinued; and sepsis, metabolic derangement, and/or
tumor in the central nervous system should be
excluded. If delirium persists, then a change to an alternative opioid, a change in opioid route to the
intraspinal route (with or without local anesthetic), a
trial of other anesthetic or neurosurgical options, or
a trial of antipsychotic medication should be considered.18 Antipsychotic prophylaxis is one of the most
promising research directions in pharmacologic de-

2371

lirium prevention.29 The longitudinal association
between opioids and delirium noted in this study
clearly lends support to the causality of the correlation but also minimizes the possibility of interference
by a fixed confounding factor, such as age. This
strongly suggests that delirium indeed is associated
with a time-varying factor. Our results also lend support to a previous study showing that a change in exposure to anticholinergic medications was associated
independently with a change in the severity of delirium symptoms.8
In contrast, we did not note significant associations for the other groups of medications studied.
However, these results should be interpreted with
caution because of study limitations. First, we could
not analyze longitudinally the impact of other precipitating factors on delirium course during hospitalization (eg, episodes of infection). Second, we could
not account for a potential dose-accumulation effect
or possible drug interactions or for the possibility
that the effect of a drug exposure may last more
than 1 day. Third, our primary measurements were
collected by using a newly validated tool that shows
promise but that has not been proven sufficiently to
date. For instance, its discriminatory capacity to
separate out dementia from delirium could be studied in other populations, especially because the rate
of dementia in our population is low. Fourth, this
study included a number of patients from a previous
study.2 Although both studies favor the involvement
of opioids in causing delirium, the generalizability of
the results presented here remains to be documented. Finally, including a specific measure of performance status or disease severity in the study
potentially may have provided more extensive information on the demographic characteristics of the
sample examined.
No associations were noted between corticosteroids or benzodiazepines and delirium. According to
the available literature, the evidence linking these 2
classes of medications to delirium seems to be
weaker than that for opioids,3 although all 3 groups
of medications are plausible risk factors from a biologic standpoint.30 Benzodiazepines and corticosteroids have been associated with delirium in case
series31–34 (a rather weak study design).35 In cohort
and case-control studies, no significant associations
were identified between corticosteroids and delirium,
whereas benzodiazepines were associated significantly with delirium in 1 study. However, most of
those studies had methodological flaws.3 Conversely,
in our previous work,2 we observed significant associations between benzodiazepines, corticosteroids,
and an increased risk of delirium by using a more

2372

CANCER

June 1, 2007 / Volume 109 / Number 11

rigorous methodology than that employed in previous studies. It also is conceivable that statistical
power was lacking in the current study and, thus,
that small differences were not identifiable. Nevertheless, based on our results, corticosteroids and
benzodiazepines do not seem to increase the longitudinal risk of delirium. Obviously, the data regarding
the associations between these drug classes and delirium still are contradictory, and further investigation into this matter is warranted.
In conclusion, based on our previous work2 and
on the current report, we seem to have isolated a
single modifiable delirium risk factor, exposure to
opioid medications, that would influence both the
development of the condition2 and its subsequent
course. Prevention of delirium is a major aspect of
its psychiatric management, and great efforts have
been made in developing interventions designed to
reduce its frequency, with undeniable success.36,37
However, to date, these interventions have been
somewhat complex, time- and money-consuming,
and are not necessarily suited to all settings. Bearing
in mind that our findings may relate only to specific
populations and that the implications of these findings also may depend on other contributing factors
in those specific populations, the results presented in
this article constitute readily applicable clinical data.
It appears that patients who are exposed to daily
opioid doses <90 mg are at lower risk of delirium.
Furthermore, these results provide a significant
evidence basis for upcoming randomized controlled trials targeting these medications. Some examples of simple experimental interventions would
include reducing the doses of opioids and/or adding
antipsychotics.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.
14.

15.

16.
17.

18.
19.

20.

21.

REFERENCES
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

Gagnon P, Allard P, Masse B, DeSerres M. Delirium in terminal cancer: a prospective study using daily screening,
early diagnosis, and continuous monitoring. J Pain Symptom Manage. 2000;19:412–426.
Gaudreau JD, Gagnon P, Harel F, Roy MA, Tremblay A. Psychoactive medications and risk of delirium in hospitalized
cancer patients. J Clin Oncol. 2005;23:6712–6718.
Gaudreau JD, Gagnon P, Roy MA, Harel F, Tremblay A.
Association between psychoactive medications and delirium in hospitalized patients: a critical review. Psychosomatics. 2005;46:302–316.
Beekman AT, Geerlings SW, Deeg DJ, et al. The natural history of late-life depression: a 6-year prospective study in
the community. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2002;59:605–611.
Gaudreau JD, Gagnon P, Harel F, Tremblay A, Roy MA. Fast,
systematic, and continuous delirium assessment in hospitalized patients: the nursing delirium screening scale. J
Pain Symptom Manage. 2005;29:368–375.

22.

23.
24.

25.

26.

Ely EW, Shintani A, Truman B, et al. Delirium as a predictor of mortality in mechanically ventilated patients in the
intensive care unit. JAMA. 2004;291:1753–1762.
Leslie DL, Zhang Y, Holford TR, Bogardus ST, Leo-Summers
LS, Inouye SK. Premature death associated with delirium
at 1-year follow-up. Arch Intern Med. 2005;165:1657–1662.
Han L, McCusker J, Cole M, Abrahamowicz M, Primeau F,
Elie M. Use of medications with anticholinergic effect predicts clinical severity of delirium symptoms in older medical inpatients. Arch Intern Med. 2001;161:1099–1105.
Lawlor PG, Gagnon B, Mancini IL, et al. Occurrence, causes,
and outcome of delirium in patients with advanced cancer:
a prospective study. Arch Intern Med. 2000;160:786–794.
Gaudreau JD, Gagnon P, Harel F, Roy MA. Impact on delirium detection of using a sensitive instrument integrated
into clinical practice. Gen Hosp Psychiatry. 2005;27:194–199.
Fann JR, Roth-Roemer S, Burington BE, Katon WJ, Syrjala
KL. Delirium in patients undergoing hematopoietic stem
cell transplantation. Cancer. 2002;95:1971–1981.
Inouye SK, van Dyck CH, Alessi CA, Balkin S, Siegal AP,
Horwitz RI. Clarifying confusion: the Confusion Assessment Method. A new method for detection of delirium.
Ann Intern Med. 1990;113:941–948.
Collett D. Modeling Survival Data in Medical Research.
New York: Chapman & Hall; 1994.
Rosenbaum JF, Gelenberg AJ. Anxiety. In: Gelenberg AJ,
Bassuk EL, Schoonover SC, editors. The Practitioner’s Guide
to Psychoactive Drugs. New York: Plenum; 1991:179–218.
American Hospital Formulary Service. Drug Information
2002. Bethesda, Md: American Society of Health System
Pharmacists, Inc.; 2002.
Cherny NI, Portenoy RK. Cancer pain management. Current strategy. Cancer. 1993;72(11 suppl):3393–3415.
Gelenberg AJ, Bassuk EL, Schoonover SC, editors. The Practitioner’s Guide to Psychoactive Drugs. New York: Plenum;
1991.
Cherny NI. The management of cancer pain. CA Cancer J
Clin. 2000;50:70–116; quiz, 117–120.
Little RJA, Rubin DB. Statistical Analysis With Missing
Data, 2nd ed. New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.; 2002:312–
349.
Zeger SL, Liang KY. An overview of methods for the analysis of longitudinal data. Stat Med. 1992;11(14–15):1825–
1839.
Lipsitz SR, Laird NM, Harrington DP. Generalized estimating equations for correlated binary data: using the odds ratio
as a measure of association. Biometrika. 1991:153–160.
Twisk JW, Smidt N, de Vente W. Applied analysis of recurrent events: a practical overview. J Epidemiol Commun Health.
2005;59:706–710.
SAS Institute Inc. The GENMOD Procedure: SAS/STAT 9.1
User’s Guide. Cary, NC: SAS Institute Inc.; 2004:2569–2657.
Elie M, Cole MG, Primeau FJ, Bellavance F. Delirium risk
factors in elderly hospitalized patients. J Gen Intern Med.
1998;13:204–212.
Inouye SK, Charpentier PA. Precipitating factors for delirium in hospitalized elderly persons. Predictive model and
interrelationship with baseline vulnerability. JAMA. 1996;
275:852–827.
Bruera E, Franco JJ, Maltoni M, Watanabe S, Suarez-Almazor M. Changing pattern of agitated impaired mental status in patients with advanced cancer: association with
cognitive monitoring, hydration, and opioid rotation. J
Pain Symptom Manage. 1995;10:287–291.

Opioids and Longitudinal Delirium Risk/Gaudreau et al.
27. Vainio A, Ollila J, Matikainen E, Rosenberg P, Kalso E. Driving ability in cancer patients receiving long-term morphine
analgesia. Lancet. 1995;346:667–670.
28. Ballantyne JC, Mao J. Opioid therapy for chronic pain. N
Engl J Med. 2003;349:1943–1953.
29. Meta-register of Current Controlled Trials. Available at URL:
http://www.controlled-trials.com/mrct/search.html Accessed
December 22, 2006.
30. Gaudreau JD, Gagnon P. Psychotogenic drugs and delirium
pathogenesis: the central role of the thalamus. Med
Hypotheses. 2005;64:471–475.
31. Francis J, Martin D, Kapoor WN. A prospective study of delirium in hospitalized elderly. JAMA. 1990;263:1097–1101.
32. Breitbart W, Gibson C, Tremblay A. The delirium experience: delirium recall and delirium-related distress in hospitalized patients with cancer, their spouses/caregivers, and
their nurses. Psychosomatics. 2002;43:183–194.

2373

33. Tuma R, DeAngelis LM. Altered mental status in patients
with cancer. Arch Neurol. 2000;57:1727–1731.
34. Olofsson SM, Weitzner MA, Valentine AD, Baile WF, Meyers
CA. A retrospective study of the psychiatric management
and outcome of delirium in the cancer patient. Support
Care Cancer. 1996;4:351–357.
35. Concato J, Shah N, Horwitz RI. Randomized, controlled
trials, observational studies, and the hierarchy of research
designs. N Engl J Med. 2000;342:1887–1892.
36. Inouye SK, Bogardus ST Jr, Charpentier PA, et al. A multicomponent intervention to prevent delirium in hospitalized older patients. N Engl J Med. 1999;340:669–676.
37. Lundstrom M, Edlund A, Karlsson S, Brannstrom B, Bucht
G, Gustafson Y. A multifactorial intervention program
reduces the duration of delirium, length of hospitalization,
and mortality in delirious patients. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2005;
53:622–528.

