Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 12

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

EMMPRIN/CD147 is a novel coreceptor of VEGFR-2 mediating its
activation by VEGF
Farah Khayati1,2,3, Laura Pérez-Cano4, Kamel Maouche5, Aurélie Sadoux1,3, Zineb
Boutalbi1,3, Marie-Pierre Podgorniak1,3, Uwe Maskos5, Niclas Setterblad2,6, Anne
Janin2,7, Fabien Calvo1,2,3, Céleste Lebbé2,8, Suzanne Menashi9,10, Juan FernandezRecio4, Samia Mourah1,2,3
  1INSERM UMR-S 976, Hôpital Saint-Louis, Paris, France
  2Université Paris-Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France
  3Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Laboratoire de Pharmacologie-Génétique, Hôpital Saint-Louis, Paris, France
  4Joint BSC-IRB Research Program in Computational Biology, Life Sciences Department, Barcelona Supercomputing Center,
Barcelona, Spain
  5Département de Neurosciences, Institut Pasteur, Unité de Neurobiologie Intégrative des Systèmes Cholinergiques, Paris,
France
  6Plateforme d’Imagerie, IUH, Hôpital Saint-Louis, Paris, France
  7INSERM U728, Laboratoire de Pathologie, Hôpital Saint-Louis, AP-HP, Paris, France
  8Département de Dermatologie Hôpital Saint Louis, Paris, France
  9CNRS-UMR 7149, Laboratoire CRRET, Créteil, France
10

Université Paris 12, Créteil, France

Correspondence to:
Samia Mourah, e-mail: samia.mourah@sls.aphp.fr
Keywords: VEGFR-2, EMMPRIN/CD147, interaction/activation, coreceptor
Received: July 21, 2014	

Accepted: December 07, 2014	

Published: March 23, 2015

ABSTRACT
EMMPRIN/CD147 is mainly known for its protease inducing function but a role
in promoting tumor angiogenesis has also been demonstrated. This study provides
evidence that EMMPRIN is a new coreceptor for the VEGFR-2 tyrosine kinase receptor
in both endothelial and tumor cells, as it directly interacts with it and regulates its
activation by its VEGF ligand, signalling and functional consequences both in vitro
and in vivo. Computational docking analyses and mutagenesis studies identified a
molecular binding site in the extracellular domain of EMMPRIN located close to the
cell membrane and containing the amino acids 195/199. EMMPRIN is overexpressed
in cancer and hence is able to further potentiate VEGFR-2 activation, suggesting
that a combinatory therapy of an antiangiogenic drug together with an inhibitor of
EMMPRIN/VEGFR-2 interaction may have a greater impact on inhibiting angiogenesis
and malignancy.

only in endothelial cells but also in tumor cells, promoting
survival, proliferation, apoptosis and migration [1].
VEGF exerts its angiogenic effects by binding to its
main receptor (VEGFR-2) or KDR [1, 2]. Binding initiates
receptor dimerization which subsequently activates the
intracellular tyrosine kinase domains [2]. Active VEGFR-2

INTRODUCTION
Angiogenesis is a key component of the tumor
microenvironment, essential for tumor growth and invasion.
Among the angiogenic regulators, vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF) is known to be the major actor not

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9766

Oncotarget

RESULTS

then initiates several downstream cell signalling pathways,
including stress-activated protein kinase 2/p38 MAP
kinase, phosphatidylinositol-f3 kinase, Focal Adhesion
Kinase (FAK) and AKT, which culminate in endothelial
cell migration, proliferation and vessel formation.
The extracellular domain of VEGFR-2 consists of 7 Ighomology domains. The first 3 domains were shown to
mediate ligand binding whereas the membrane proximal
domains are involved in ligand-induced receptor
dimerization [3–5].
EMMPRIN/CD147, a membrane spanning gly­
coprotein particularly known as a regulator of matrix
degrading proteinases such as MMPs and uPA, has
been more recently shown by us and by others [6–8]
to be implicated in angiogenesis via the regulation of
VEGF expression. Our more recent reports described the
concomitant regulation by EMMPRIN of VEGF receptor
VEGFR-2 in both endothelial cells and tumor cells, in a
mechanism mediated by HIF-2 alpha [9] thus increasing
respectively angiogenesis and malignancy. It was also
shown to have several other malignancy promoting
functions including tumor cell invasion, survival and
anchorage-independent growth [10]. Indeed, EMMPRIN
has been greatly implicated in malignancy as it is highly
expressed in most cancer tissues and its expression often
correlates with tumor progression [11–14].
EMMPRIN belongs to the immunoglobulin (Ig)
superfamily and is composed of two C2-like immu­
noglobulin extracellular domains, a transmembrane
domain and a short cytoplasmic domain [15]. The
extracellular region, which contains three conserved
N-glycosylation sites that are variably glycosylated, has
been implicated in EMMPRIN self association [16],
while the first Ig domain within this region is required
for counter-receptor activity involved in MMP induction
[17]. The highly conserved transmembrane domain and
the short cytoplasmic domain are thought to be implicated
in interactions between EMMPRIN and other molecular
partners within the membrane. In particular, EMMPRIN
was shown to interact with integrins α3β1 and α6β1,
enhancing the adhesion and spreading of the cell to the
ECM [18] and to caveolin-1 in lipid rafts leading to a
decrease in EMMPRIN cell surface self association [19].
The ability of EMMPRIN to associate with different
proteins was suggested to determine the different cellular
functions attributed to it, although the nature of such
interactions and their involvement in signal transduction
has not yet been determined.
Our present study uncovered, in both endothelial
cells and tumor cells, a unique mechanism of action
showing that a direct interaction of EMMPRIN with
VEGFR-2 on the plasma membrane is required for VEGFinduced VEGFR-2 activation and downstream signaling.
These findings have to be taken in account in tumor
angiogenesis combinatorial therapy development.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

EMMPRIN/CD147 interacts with VEGFR-2
in its non-phosphorylated and phosphorylated
forms in endothelial and tumor cells in vitro
and in vivo
The potential interaction between EMMPRIN and
VEGFR-2 was investigated by immunoprecipitation
(IP) assays in endothelial cells HMEC and melanoma
cells M10. Complex formation was identified by the
immunoprecipitation of either VEGFR-2 or VEGF
followed by EMMPRIN immunoblotting (Figure 1A).
IgG was used as a negative control. The fluorescent red
spots observed using in situ proximity ligation assay
(PLA) (Figure 1B) and confocal microscopy, a method
which highlights protein/protein closely colocalized in
cells, confirmed the proximity between EMMPRIN and
VEGFR-2, and to a lesser extent between EMMPRIN and
VEGF, at the cell surface.
To further investigate whether EMMPRIN interacts
directly with VEGFR-2 in a cell-free system, we performed
pull-down assays using recombinant EMMPRIN and
recombinant VEGFR-2. Our results show that VEGFR-2
bound specifically to EMMPRIN and to the same extend as
to VEGF, used as a positive control (Figure 1C).
The specificity of EMMPRIN/VEGFR-2 inter­action
was demonstrated by the decrease in the imm­unoprecipitated
(IP) complex when EMMPRIN expression was silenced
using siRNA strategy (Figure 1D). This was confirmed by
PLA assay showing a large decrease in the number of red
dots of cells transfected with EMMPRIN siRNA in both
endothelial and tumor cells compared with its corresponding
scrambled siRNA (Figure 2). Similar results were obtained
with BLM melanoma cells (not shown).
We have next shown that EMMPRIN also interacted
with the active form of VEGFR-2 and this interaction was
enhanced after VEGF treatment of endothelial as well as
melanoma cells. EMMPRIN/pVEGFR-2 heterodimers
are visualized by PLA red dots in Figure 3A. Importantly,
intense clustering pattern of these EMMPRIN/pVEGFR-2
heterocomplexes were also observed in human breast
cancer (n = 11) and melanoma (n = 15) tissues (Figure 3B)
demonstrating the implication of EMMPRIN/pVEGFR-2
interactions in vivo.
To investigate the role of EMMPRIN in VEGF/
pVEGFR-2 interaction in vivo, we generated melanoma
BLM cells with stable knockdown of EMMPRIN
(EMMPRIN-miRNA) for injection in nude mice. The 4
clones of BLM-EMMPRIN-miRNA analyzed showed a
decrease in EMMPRIN expression (protein and mRNA)
in comparison to BLM-srambled-miRNA. This decrease
was greatest in clone 2 and 4 which also correlated with
the lowest invasive capacity of these clones; clone 4 was
chosen for the in vivo studies (Figure 4A, 4B, 4C).

9767

Oncotarget

Figure 1: EMMPRIN/CD147 interacts with VEGFR-2 and VEGF in endothelial and tumor cells. (A) VEGFR-2 and
VEGF from HMEC and M10 cell lysates were immunoprecipitated (IP) with anti-VEGFR-2 and anti-VEGF antibody respectively;
western blotting was performed using anti-EMMPRIN antibody. Non immune IgG was used as controls. Representative blots of three
independent experiments are shown. (B) In situ Proximity ligation assay (PLA) detection of EMMPRIN-VEGFR-2 and EMMPRIN-VEGF
heterodimers (red dots). Negative controls without primary antibody are also shown. Nuclei were stained with DAPI (blue), magnification
x 63. Representative images of three independent experiments are shown. (C) Direct interaction between the recombinant EMMPRIN and
the recombinant VEGFR-2 in vitro. VEGFR-2 was first incubated with protein G beads prior to the addition of the recombinant EMMPRIN.
Bound proteins were subsequently analyzed by Western blotting. Non-immune IgG served as a negative control and interaction between
VEGF and VEGFR-2 served as a positive control. (D) Cells (HMEC, MDA-MB-231 and M10) were transfected for 24 hours with EMMPRIN
siRNA or scrambled control siRNA at 33nmol/L concentration, and then subjected to IP assays using antibodies against VEGFR-2 and
VEGF. Western blotting was performed using anti-EMMPRIN antibody. Representative blots of three independent experiments are shown.
Analysis of tumor xenograft sections showed a
decrease in pVEGFR-2 immunostaining and in EMMPRIN/
pVEGFR-2 interaction in EMMPRIN knockdown tumors
(BLM-EMMPRIN-miRNA), compared to control tumors
(BLM-scrambled-miRNA). Importantly, this was associated
with a significant decrease in VEGF/pVEGFR-2 interaction
(Figure 4D, 4E).

shown that EMMPRIN knockdown by siRNA decreased
VEGFR-2 phosphorylation mediated by VEGF, in both
endothelial and tumor cells (Figure 5A). Furthermore,
PLA experiments have shown that the reduced activation
of VEGFR-2 observed with EMMPRIN inhibition was
associated with a decrease in both VEGF/pVEGFR-2
interaction (Figure 5B) and VEGFR-2 homodimerization
(Figure 5C) (the decrease was even greater in the presence
of VEGF), demonstrating the importance of EMMPRIN
in VEGFR-2 phosphorylation mediated by VEGF
(Figure  5B). Phospho-Proteome Profiler Array analysis
showed that certain VEGF-induced downstream signals
were inhibited upon EMMPRIN silencing (Figure 5D). Of
interest, the activation of p38 and its downstream HSP27
involved in migration were impaired, but not that of the

EMMPRIN is required for VEGF-mediated
VEGFR-2 activation and downstream signalling
We next investigated the potential role of
EMMPRIN in the activation of VEGFR-2 by its VEGF
ligand. Immunoprecipitation of VEGFR-2 followed
by immunoblotting with pVEGFR-2 antibody have
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9768

Oncotarget

Figure 2: EMMPRIN silencing decreases EMMPRIN/VEGFR-2 interaction in endothelial and tumor cells. Cells were
transfected with EMMPRIN siRNA or scrambled siRNA prior to in situ PLA for EMMPRIN-VEGFR-2 interaction. Cell nuclei were
stained with DAPI (blue), magnification x 63. The detected dimers (EMMPRIN/VEGFR-2) are represented as red dots. Representative
images of three independent experiments are shown. Quantification of PLA signals was performed on ~150 transfected cells per condition
in three independent experiments; mean PLA signal/cell ± SD are plotted. ***P ≤ 0.0001.
comprehensive modeling strategy using all the available
structural information for the possible interacting domains
(see Methods). The best docking model was obtained by
using one of the EMMPRIN monomers from the x-ray
structure and a two-domain construct of VEGFR-2 D6-D7
domains. Interestingly, the lowest-energy binding mode
obtained by docking simulations was compatible with
membrane binding, and had the majority of interactions
between EMMPRIN D2 and VEGFR-2 D6 domains
(Figure 7).

kinases FAK or Src. In addition, the PLCγ-1/MEK1/2
pathway involved in cell proliferation was also affected.
These findings suggest a role of EMMPRIN in VEGF
signalling.
The functional consequence of this regulation was
demonstrated by a decrease in cell migration observed in
EMMPRIN siRNA transfected cells that was not restored
after VEGF treatment.
Cell migration was investigated using modified
Boyden chamber assays. Migration of HMEC, M10 and
MDA-MB-231 cells in which EMMPRIN was inhibited
with siRNA was measured in the presence or not of VEGF.
As shown in Figure 6, EMMPRIN silencing greatly
inhibited cell migration stimulated by VEGF in the studied
models.

Site-directed mutagenesis confirm EMMPRIN/
VEGFR-2 interaction model
The contribution of hot spots residues to EMMPRIN/
VEGFR-2 interaction according to the above described
model was examined by computational analysis. The
EMMPRIN/VEGFR-2 interface according to this model is
highly electrostatic (Figure 7B). Based on the model, and
considering the residues with highest electrostatic binding
energy that were not involved in important intra-domain
interactions, the following EMMPRIN mutants were
constructed in order to validate the binding interface site:
D144A, Q182A, R184A, Q195A, T199A (Figure 7). We
also generated Q182A/R184A and Q195A/T199A double
mutants (see Methods). D136A was defined as a negative
control, since according to the model this residue should
not be involved in the interaction.
We first transfected BLM-EMMPRIN-miRNA
cells with EMMPRIN full length cDNA (wide type: WT)

A molecular model for EMMPRIN/VEGFR-2
direct interaction
The above findings indicate that EMMPRIN
interacts with VEGFR-2 to enhance its activation by
VEGF, therefore we aimed to build a structural model
for EMMPRIN/VEGFR-2 complex that could explain
the experimental results. Modeling this system presented
several major challenges such as: (i) it was not known
whether EMMPRIN interacts with VEGFR-2 as monomer,
dimer or oligomer; (ii) the interacting molecules are
expected to have significant interdomain flexibility; and
(iii) it was not known which VEGFR-2 domain could be
involved in the interaction. Therefore we performed a

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9769

Oncotarget

Figure 3: EMMPRIN interacts with pVEGFR-2 in vitro and in vivo. (A) EMMPRIN interacts with pVEGFR-2 in HMEC

endothelial cells and M10 tumor cells. In situ PLA for EMMPRIN/pVEGFR-2 was performed after VEGF stimulation (5 minutes, 50
ng/ml); red dots represent EMMPRIN-pVEGFR-2 interaction; nuclei are stained with DAPI (blue). Representative images of three
independent experiments are shown. Quantification of PLA signals was performed on ~150 transfected cells per condition in three
independent experiments; mean PLA signal/cell ± SD are plotted. **P ≤ 0.001. (B) EMMPRIN interacts with pVEGFR-2 in human cancer
tissues. In situ PLA detection of EMMPRIN and pVEGFR-2 interaction in human melanoma tissues (M202 and M165) and in human breast
cancer tissues (B132 and B18) using antibodies against EMMPRIN and pVEGFR-2. Nuclei were stained with DAPI (blue); phase contrast
indicates cell contour (grey); the panels show high magnification (x 40) to clearly visualize the PLA spots representing heterodimers.
Representative photos of three independent experiments are shown.

or mutated on the following residues: D136A, D144A,
Q182A, R184A, Q195A, T199A, Q182A/R184A and
Q195A/T199A. EMMPRIN/VEGFR-2 binding was eval­
uated by immunoprecipitation using an antibody directed
against VEGFR-2 (Figure 8). Results show that both
the single and the double mutants reduced EMMPRIN/
VEGFR-2 binding to a varying degrees but the greatest
reduction was observed with the double mutant Q195A/
T199A pointing to the importance of this site in the
interaction. By contrast, the negative control D136A mutant
had no detectable effect on EMMPRIN/VEGFR-2 binding.
The role of these EMMPRIN residues on the
activation of VEGFR-2 by its ligand VEGF was inves­
tigated by studying the binding behaviour of the
EMMPRIN mutants towards VEGF-induced VEGFR-2
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

activation. Figure 9 shows a total inhibition of pVEGFR-2
activation by VEGF with the double mutant Q195A/
T199A while the other single mutants had lower effects
(Figure S1). This is consistent with the VEGF/pVEGFR-2
interaction results obtained by in situ PLA.
Altogether, our results uncovered a novel
mechanism by which EMMPRIN regulates VEGFR-2
activation by direct binding, modulating its downstream
signalling and functional consequences.

DISCUSSION
EMMPRIN/CD147 has been reported to play
crucial roles not only in matrix proteolysis and tumor
invasion but also in angiogenesis [8]. We hypothesized
9770

Oncotarget

Figure 4: EMMPRIN knockdown decreases EMMPRIN/pVEGFR-2 and VEGF/pVEGFR-2 interactions
in vivo. Melanoma cell line BLM was transfected with EMMPRIN-miRNA (BLM-EMMPRIN-miRNA) or scrambled-miRNA (BLM-

Scrambled-miRNA).EMMPRIN expression in 4 different clones was analyzed by: (A) western blot (Western Blot was performed
usinganti-EMMPRIN antibody normalized to actin; representative blots of three independent experiments); (B) by qRT-PCR (means
of relative expression to the reference gene PPIA of at least 3 independent experiments, error bars refer to 95% confidence intervals;
*P < (0.05)) and (C) Invasion assay using a modified Boyden chamber was performed with clone 4 BLM-EMMPRIN-miRNA.
Representative images of three independent experiments are shown. EMMPRIN/pVEGFR-2 interaction in experimental mouse model
using EMMPRIN deficient tumor cells. Melanoma cell line BLM was transfected with EMMPRIN-miRNA (BLM-EMMPRIN-miRNA)
or scrambled-miRNA (BLM-Scrambled-miRNA). (D) Immunofluorescence analysis of pVEGFR-2 in xenograft tumors from ScrambledmiRNA or EMMPRIN-miRNA BLM cells 5 weeks after injection. Representative images of 10 primary tumors analysed are shown.
(E) EMMPRIN/pVEGFR-2 and VEGF/pVEGFR-2 interactions in EMMPRIN-silenced xenografts by in situ PLA. Nuclei were stained
with DAPI (blue), magnification x 40. Representative images of 10 primary tumors analysed are shown. Quantification of PLA signals
was performed on ~150 transfected cells per condition in three independent experiments; mean PLA signal/cell ± SD are plotted.
**P ≤ 0.001;***P ≤ 0.0001.

that a possible link between EMMPRIN and VEGFR-2
may exist since both these membrane receptors localized
on endothelial and tumor cell surface are involved in
common functional properties, notably angiogenesis. In
this study, we uncovered a novel function of EMMPRIN
as a coreceptor of VEGFR-2, as it directly interacts with
it and regulates its activation, signalling and functional
consequences. Furthermore, in both endothelial and tumor
cells, EMMPRIN enhanced VEGF-induced VEGFR-2
phosphorylation, downstream signalling of the VEGFinduced pathway, and consequently cell migration. Our

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

results show that EMMPRIN/VEGFR-2 interaction
involves a binding site located in the extracellular domain
of EMMPRIN which contains the amino acids 195/199
located very close to the cell membrane, since mutating
this site blocked the interaction. In addition, our in vivo
studies showed that VEGF/pVEGFR-2 interaction is
significantly impaired in mice injected with EMMPRINmiRNA transfected BLM.
It is interesting to note that high expression of
EMMPRIN in human renal cancer was reported to be
involved in sunitinib (VEGFR inhibitor) resistance [20].

9771

Oncotarget

Figure 5: EMMPRIN enhances VEGF-mediated VEGFR-2 activation (phosphorylation and homodimerization)
in EMMPRIN silenced HMEC and M10 cells. Phosphorylation of VEGFR-2 by VEGF (5 minutes, 50 ng/ml) was assessed

by: (A) VEGFR-2 IP followed by immunoblotting for pVEGFR-2 and VEGFR-2 used as loading control (representative blots of
three independent experiments are shown), and (B) In situ PLA showing VEGF/pVEGFR-2 interaction (red dots).Quantification of
PLA signals was performed on ~150 transfected cells per condition in three independent experiments; mean PLA signal/cell ± SD
are plotted. ***P ≤ 0.0001 (magnification x 63). (C) In situ PLA detection of VEGFR-2 homodimers in HMEC endothelial cells.
Nuclei were stained with DAPI (blue), magnification x 63. (D) VEGF-induced downstream signalling by Phospho-Proteome profiling
of EMMPRIN silenced HMEC cells. Total cell lysates (300μg) were incubated with Human Phospho-Kinase Array membranes
(containing 43 different kinases) (R&D systems) and developed by chemiluminescent system. Representative dots of selected kinases
are shown.

As EMMPRIN is highly expressed in cancer its interaction
with VEGFR-2 may represent one underlying mechanism
of this resistance.
In order to determine whether EMMPRIN/VEGFR-2
binding could explain the enhancement in VEGF-mediated
VEGFR-2 dimer formation and VEGFR-2 activation by
EMMPRIN, we explored the possible oligomerization
state of EMMPRIN when interacting with VEGFR-2
in our model. It has been reported that EMMPRIN can
dimerize in cis (both monomers in the membrane of the
same cell), through the domain D1, but the structure
of the dimer is not known. Therefore, we modeled the
dimer of EMMPRIN extracellular domains by docking
two monomers from the x-ray structure (see Methods).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Interestingly, the lowest-energy docking solution is
symmetric and would be compatible with membrane
attachment (Figure 10). It should be noted that it was
impossible to find a dimer conformation that fully satisfied
the recently reported mutational data on EMMPRIN
dimerization in solution, which suggests that membrane
attachment imposes additional structural restraints to
EMMPRIN dimerization [21].
We combined the above described models obtained
for EMMPRIN/VEGFR-2 complex and EMMPRIN dimer,
allowing interdomain flexibility with NMA (see Methods),
and found many possible rearrangements that are
compatible with membrane attachment (see an example
in Figure 11A). Interestingly, with a small interdomain

9772

Oncotarget

Figure 6: EMMPRIN is required in VEGF-induced VEGFR-2 cell migration. Cell migration was determined using a transwell
system. EMMPRIN siRNA transfected cells (HMEC, MDA-MB-231 and M10) were seeded in 24-well/insert of Boyden chambers and
treated with VEGF (50 ng/ml). After 24 hours of incubation, cells were fixed, stained with Diff-Quick and counted under a microscope.
Columns indicate means of 3 independent experiments carried out in triplicate; and bars, SD *P < 0.05.

Figure 7: EMMPRIN/VEGFR-2 docking model. (A) Best-energy docking model for the interaction between EMMPRIN monomer
(blue) and VEGFR-2 D6-D7 model (green). Interface residues are shown in ball & stick. (B) Surface representation of EMMPRIN monomer
residues, colored according to their electrostatic contribution to the VEGFR-2 D6-D7 binding energy (highest contributors in red). Interface
residues are highlighted.
rearrangement, the D7 domains could form a dimer as in
VEGFR-2 D7 x-ray structure, keeping compatibility with
membrane attachment (Figure 11B).
The model shown in Figure 7A for EMMPRIN/
VEGFR-2 interaction suggests that EMMPRIN can
stabilize a VEGFR-2 dimer in which D7 domains are
not in the expected proximity to activate VEGFR-2
intracellular domain. This is compatible with our findings
that EMMPRIN can dimerize VEGFR-2 (Figure 5C)
but cannot activate it by itself (Figure 5A). However,
we also found that EMMPRIN enhances VEGFmediated VEGFR-2 dimerization and thus activation
of intracellular signalling (Figure 5A, 5C). A possible
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

model for this is shown in Figure 11B. When EMMPRIN
is present, it can help to recruit VEGFR-2 molecules and
form dimers, so when VEGF is added, its probability
of binding two VEGFR-2 monomers increases. The
binding of VEGF to two VEGFR-2 monomers will
facilitate the D7 domains to form a dimer so that the
intracellular domains can adopt a suitable orientation that
triggers auto-phosphorylation and thus activation of the
intracellular signalling (Figure 11Ba). However, in the
absence of EMMPRIN, unligated VEGFR-2 molecules
are not necessarily located in the proximity of each other
and therefore VEGFR-2 dimer formation after VEGF
binding, although possible, would be a limiting step that
9773

Oncotarget

Figure 8: EMMPRIN amino acid residues 195–199 are required for EMMPRIN/pVEGFR-2 interaction. EMMPRIN/
VEGFR-2 interaction in BLM EMMPRIN-deficient cells transfected with EMMPRIN simple and double mutant constructs, control
D136A and WT. After VEGFR-2 pull-downs, interaction with EMMPRIN was analyzed by Western blotting. Representative blots of
three independent experiments are shown. In situ PLA using confocal microscopy shows red fluorescent spots which denote very close
localization between EMMPRIN and pVEGFR-2. Fluorescence was markedly decreased with the double mutant Q195A/T199A. Nuclei
were stained with DAPI (blue), magnification x 63. Representative images of three independent experiments are shown. Quantification
of PLA signals was performed on ~150 transfected cells per condition in three independent experiments; mean PLA signal/cell ± SD are
plotted.

could make the intracellular signalling activation less
efficient (Figure 11Bb).
Taken together, these results provide evidence
that EMMPRIN is a novel coreceptor of VEGFR-2.
EMMPRIN plays a central role in its activation not
only in angiogenesis but also in increasing tumor cells
malignant properties mediated by VEGFR-2. This should
have implications in the design of new strategies to inhibit
VEGFR-2 activation. Several innovative antiangiogenic
drugs have recently been developed. Doxazosin, an
hypertension drug was shown to decrease VEGFR-2/
Akt/mTOR signalling and to exert antitumor effects in an
animal model [22]. Beside such monotherapy approach,
a combinatory strategy using, for example, a dual EGFR
inhibition together with anti VEGF treatment have recently
shown an improved clinical benefit [23]. In this context,
our results propose a novel antiangiogenic approach using
an inhibitor of EMMPRIN-VEGFR-2 interaction, which
would be expected to be specific for tumor angiogenesis,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

as EMMPRIN is known to be highly expressed in cancer
tissues. Its use in combination with an anti-angiogenic
drug may have a greater impact on inhibiting angiogenesis
and malignancy.

Materials and Methods
Cell culture
Human microvascular endothelial (HMEC) cells line
derived from dermal microvasculature (T. Lawley, Emory
University, Atlanta, GA) were maintained in MCDB-131
medium (Gibco, Invitogen) with 10% fetal bovine serum
(FBS) (Invitrogen), 2 ml glutamine (Invitrogen), 10ng/
ml endothelial growth factor (Upstate Biotechnology/
Millipore), and 1μg/ml hydrocortisone (Sigma-Aldrich).
Primary melanoma M10 cells, established from patient
primary nodular melanoma were maintained in RPMI
medium (Gibco, Invitogen) with 10% FBS, Hepes
9774

Oncotarget

Figure 9: EMMPRIN amino acid residues 195–199 are required for VEGF-mediated VEGFR-2 activation.

VEGF-mediated VEGFR-2 phosphorylation in BLM EMMPRIN-deficient cells transfected with EMMPRIN double mutant constructs,
control D136A and WT. VEGFR-2 phosphorylation by VEGF (5 min) was analyzed by VEGFR-2 IP followed by immunoblotting for
pVEGFR-2 and VEGFR-2. Representative blots of three independent experiments are shown. In situ PLA was performed to identify
VEGF/pVEGFR-2 interaction (red dots) with and without VEGF treatment. Nuclei are stained with DAPI (blue), magnification x 63.
Representative images of three independent experiments are shown. Quantification of PLA signals was performed on ~150 transfected cells
per condition in three independent experiments; mean PLA signal/cell ± SD are plotted. Comparing PLA signals between VEGF treated
and non-treated showed significant difference for WT and control conditions; **P ≤ 0.001.

Figure 10: Scheme of the modeling procedure followed in this work. The final models were obtained by a combination of
EMMPRIN (blue)/VEGFR-2 D6-D7 (green) docking, EMMPRIN/EMMPRIN docking and NMA-based conformational search. Those
models compatible with the membrane attachement were selected.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9775

Oncotarget

Figure 11: Models of EMMPRIN/VEGFR-2 interaction. (A) Model of the interaction of EMMPRIN (blue) and VEGFR-2 (green)

on the membrane, based on our EMMPRIN/VEGFR-2 D6-D7 docking models, EMMPRIN dimer docking model, and inter-domain NMAbased conformational search. With a small rearrangement of VEGFR-2 D7 domains, this model is compatible with D7/D7 dimer x-ray
structure. (B) Proposed models for the role of EMMPRIN in VEGF-mediated VEGFR-2 activation. (a) According to EMMPRIN/VEGFR-2
model, EMMPRIN could recruit VEGFR-2 dimers on the membrane surface, which can facilitate binding of VEGF (red) to two VEGFR-2
monomers and hence favour D7/D7 orientation suitable for activation of VEGFR-2 intracellular domains (activation of intracellular signal
is represented by a green flash). (b) In the absence of EMMPRIN, VEGFR-2 monomers would be more spread on the membrane surface, so
VEGF binding to two VEGFR-2 monomers (second step, marked by a dashed arrow) is less likely and therefore activation of intracellular
signal would be smaller.

1M, pyruvate Nas, and glutamine (Invitrogen). Human
breast carcinoma MDA-MB-231 cells were maintained
in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM)
(Gibco, Invitogen) with 10% FBS (Invitrogen) and 2ml
glutamine (Invitrogen). Melanoma BLM cells (American
Type Culture Collection (ATCC Manassas, VA)) were
maintained in DMEM containing 4.5 g/l glucose, 10%
FBS, 100 U/ml penicillin and 100 mg/ml streptomycin.
HEK293T cells (ATCC) were cultured in DMEM
medium (Gibco, Invitogen) supplemented with 10% FBS
(Invitrogen), 100 U/ml penicillin, 100 mg/ml streptomycin
and 2ml glutamine (Invitrogen).

transferred to Nitrocellulose membranes and probed with
anti-EMMPRIN mAb (555961, BD-Pharmingen), antiVEGF (C-1) mAb (Sc-7269, Santa Cruz), anti-VEGFR-2
rabbit pAb (Sc-504, Santa Cruz-) or anti-pVEGFR-2 (Tyr
1175) rabbit mAb (2478, Cell Signaling). The proteins
were visualized with ECL reagent (Pierce), and their
expression was normalized relative to total cell lysate
protein concentration.

In situ proximity ligation assay (PLA)
In situ PLA was used to assess protein-protein close
proximity. Cells grown on 8-well culture slides (Labtek chamber slides (Nunc, #154534)), were immediately
fixed and subjected to in situ PLA using the Duolink
Detection kit (Olink Bioscience, Sweden) according to
the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, after blocking
slides were incubated with mouse anti-EMMPRIN (1:250,
555961, BD, Pharmingen), rabbit anti-VEGFR-2 (1:50;
Santa cruz), mouse anti-VEGF (1:200; Santa cruz) or rabbit
anti-pVEGFR-2 (Tyr 1175) (1:100; Cell Signalling) primary
antibodies. PLA minus and PLA plus probes (containing
the secondary antibodies conjugated with oligonucleotides)
were added. For VEGFR-2 homodimers detection, primary
antibody was prepared using the Probemaker kit (OLINK,
Bioscience) according to manufacturer's instructions: 1
mg/ml of monoclonal antibody (affinity purified through

Immunoprecipitation and western blotting
analyses
Cells treated or not with human recombinant VEGF
(50 ng/ml; R&D Systems) for 5 minutes at 37°C were
harvested, washed with PBS and lysed in extraction buffer
(TBS-Nonidet P-40 solution comprising 50mM Tris buffer
pH 7.5, 150mM NaCl, 0.5% Nonidet P-40, 5mM NaF and
0.2mM Na3VO4 in the presence of Complete Protease
Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche)). For immunoprecipitation,
cell lysates were incubated with antibodies against
targeted proteins and Protein G-sepharose beads (Sigma).
Immunoprecipitated proteins were subjected to sodium
dodecyl sulphate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis then
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9776

Oncotarget

Real-time quantitative PCR (qRT-PCR)

a protein G column) was independently conjugated to each
of a pair of oligonucleotides to generate plus and minus
PLA probes. Thereafter, further oligonucleotides are added,
allowed to hybridize to the PLA probes, and ligase joins
the two hybridized oligonucleotides to a closed circle. The
DNA is then amplified (rolling circle amplification), and
detection of the amplicons was carried by a fluorescently
labeled probe (Detection Kit 563). Protein complexes
were visualized in a laser-scanning confocal microscope
(Leica-Lasertechnik) as bright fluorescent signals. For PLA
analysis of frozen tumor tissues, cryosections were fixed
with 4% Paraformaldehyde for 15 min, and in situ PLA
assay was performed as described above for cultured cells.
Fluorescent and phase contrast images were taken. Negative
controls without primary antibody were performed.

Total RNA was extracted from BLM-scrambledmiRNA or BLM-EMMPRIN-miRNAcells using Trizol
reagent (Invitrogen). RNA quantity and quality were assessed
using the Nanodrop-ND-1000 (Nanodrop Technologies,
Wilmington). First-strand cDNA was synthesized using a
High-Capacity cDNA Archive Kit (Applied-Biosystems)
according to the manufacturer’s protocol. EMMPRIN
primers were specifically designed (Eurogentec, Belgium).
Transcript levels were measured by qRT-PCR using Perfect
Master Mix-Probe (AnyGenes, France) on LightCycler-480
(Roche) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The
transcript levels were normalized to the housekeeping PPIA
(peptidylprolylisomerase A) transcripts.

Immunofluorescence, confocal microscopy

Small interfering RNA transfection

Sections of BLM-Scrambled-miRNA and BLMEMMPRIN-miRNA derived tumor tissues were fixed and
incubated with primary anti-pVEGFR-2 antibody (Cell
signaling) followed by Alexa Fluor 488 fluorescently
conjugated secondary antibody (Molecular Probes). DAPI
was used for nuclear counterstaining. Confocal images
were taken with a Leica inverted confocal microscope
(Leica Lasertechnik, Heidelberg).

siRNA for EMMPRIN (IDs: 147251 (5′ GCCA­
AUGCUGUCUGGUUGCtt 3′) and 215973 (5′ GCU­
ACACAUUGAGAACCUUGtt 3′)) or scrambled siRNA
oligos (Ambion/Applied-Biosystems, France) were
transfected into cells by using the Lipofectamine-2000
(Invitrogen). Cells were then incubated for 24h prior to
treatment with VEGF and were then analyzed by Coimmunoprecipitation, Western Blotting, in situ PLA, cell
migration and phospho-kinase array.

Animal experiment

EMMPRIN stable knockdown

Mouse experiments were conducted according
to French veterinary guidelines and those formulated
by the council of Europe for experimental animal use
(L358–86/609EEC). Female 5-week-old nude/c mice
(Janvier) were injected subcutaneously with 5 × 106 stably
transfected BLM-EMMPRIN-miRNA or BLM-scrambledmiRNA cells (n = 10 mice for each cell line). Five weeks
later, all mice were sacrificed by cervical dislocation and
tumors were resected and stored in liquid nitrogen prior to
in situ PLA and immunofluorescence assays.

In order to knockdown EMMPRIN expression
in BLM cell line, lentivirus-based miRNA was used.
MicroRNA sequence EMMPRIN-miRNA (5′- TTCATGAG­
GGCCTTGTCCTCA-3′) targeting human EMMPRIN was
selected with Invitrogen Block-iTRNAi Designer software
(http://www.invitrogen.com/rnai), and srambled-miRNA
(Invitrogen) was used for the negative control [20].The U6
promoter-miRNA-Ubiquitin promoter-mCherry cassette
was cloned into the BamHI and XhoI sites in the lentiviral
vector pTK431 [24]. The vector plasmids (either pTK431EMMPRIN-miRNA or pTK431-scrambled-miRNA),
together with the packaging construct plasmid pDNRF and
the envelope plasmid pMDG-VSVG, were cotransfected into
HEK293T cells to produce the viral particles [24, 25]. The
viral titres were determined by p24 antigen measurements
(KPL, Lausanne, Switzerland). BLM cells were plated in
a 24-well plate at a density of 10.000 cells/well in culture
medium. At 60% of confluent, LV-EMMPRIN-miRNA
(121 ng/μL of P24) or LV-scrambled-miRNA (97 ng/μL
of P24) was added in 100 μl of complete culture medium
without FBS. After overnight incubation with the vectors,
medium was refreshed and cells were allowed to growth.
For determination of transduction efficiencies, transduced
cultures were analyzed by cell sorting with a FACS ARIAIII
(Becton-Dickinson, San Jose, CA, USA), real-time PCR,
Western blotting and invasion assay.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Migration and invasion assays
The in vitro migration (on uncoated filters) and
invasion (on coated filters with matrigel, BD Bioscience)
were performed using a modified Boyden chamber [26] in
24-well plates and 8-mm pore filter inserts (BD Bioscience).
After 24h of incubation, cells were fixed, stained with
crystal violet 0.5% and counted under a light microscope.

Human phospho-kinase array
The human phospho-Kinase Array Kit (Proteome
Profiler Array, ARY003, R&D Systems) was used to
detect relative levels of phosphorylation of 46 kinase
phosphorylation sites, according to the manufacturer’s
instructions, using total cell lysates of EMMPRIN or
scrambled siRNA transfected HMEC cells treated or not
9777

Oncotarget

NMA-based conformational sampling

with 50 ng/ml VEGF. Briefly, cell lysates diluted to 300
μg/mL of protein in a detergent- urea and phosphatase
inhibitor-containing solubilizing buffer (R&D Systems)
were incubated with the arrays overnight at 4°C. After
washing unbound material, membranes were incubated
with a cocktail of phosphosite–specific, biotinylated
antibodies, and phosphorylated kinases were detected
with streptavidin-horseradish peroxidase. Signals were
revealed with a chemiluminescent substrate kit (ECL Dura
Thermo Scientific, 34076). Independent experiments were
performed in duplicates.

We used iMC module from iMOD [32] (with a
maximum amplitude of 6Å) for conformational sampling
of extracellular EMMPRIN and VEGFR-2 D6-D7 model.
With this method, we generated 100 conformations
independently for EMMPRIN and VEGFR-2 D6-D7
monomers. These NMA-based EMMPRIN conformations
were combined to produced new EMMPRIN dimer
models, built based on the main dimer interface described
by the EMMPRIN/EMMPRIN docking model. These
EMMPRIN dimer models were combined with the NMAbased VEGFR-2 D6-D7 conformations, based on the
main interface described by the EMMPRIN/VEGFR-2
D6-D7 docking model. This generated 10,000 (2:2)
EMMPRIN/VEGFR-2 D6-D7 models. Finally, when
considering cell membrane, we obtained a total of 32
models in which C-term regions from all molecules were
located approximately in the same plane (to represent the
attachment to the membrane) and with more than 80%
of the atoms located in one side of the defined plane
(in order to disregard strong steric clashes with the cell
membrane).

Modelling: general consideration
We modelled EMMPRIN/VEGFR-2 association by
using homology-based modeling, computational docking,
and conformational sampling by normal mode analysis
(NMA) (Figure 10). On the one side, we built a model for
VEGFR-2 D6-D7, and we docked it to EMMPRIN x-ray
structure. The EMMPRIN/VEGFR-2 docking model was
later confirmed by site-directed mutagenesis. We also used
docking to build models for EMMPRIN dimerization.
The docking models obtained for EMMPRIN/VEGFR-2
and EMMPRIN dimer, in combination with NMA-based
sampling, were compatible with membrane attachment,
and with D7 x-ray dimers. We tried other docking
combinations but could not find any better model.

Site directed mutagenesis
EMMPRIN residues (Asp144, Gln182, Arg184,
Gln195, Asp136 and Thr199) involved in the interaction
between EMMPRIN and VEGFR-2 were mutated to Ala­
nine using « Geneart Site-Direct Mutagenesis system »
(Lifetechnologies) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. The following mutations were made in the
PCRII vector containing EMMPRIN full length cDNA
(PCRII-EMMPRIN) [10]. Briefly, the mutagenesis
reactions were performed using Platinum Taq DNA
polymerase (Lifetechnologies), with specifically designed
mutagenesis primers (Table 1) and cycling conditions as
follows: 37°C for 20 minutes, 94°C for 2 minutes followed
by 18 cycles of 94°C for 20 seconds, 57°C for 30 seconds
and 68°C for 2.5 minutes; and finally 1 cycle of 68°C for
5 minutes. Each mutagenesis product was transfected into
chemically competent DH5α T1R E.coli (Lifetechnologies)
and grown at 37°C overnight. Colonies were selected and
screened for the correspondant mutation at each site by
DNA sequencing. PCRII-EMMPRIN wide type (WT) and
mutated were transfected into BLM-EMMPRIN-miRNA
cells using the Lipofectamine-2000 (Invitrogen).

Homology-based modeling of VEGFR-2 D6-D7
We used Modeller 8v1 [27] to model the structure
of VEGFR-2 D6-D7 domains from 1F97 PDB template
structure, with 24% of sequence identity and selected by
FUGUE server (http://tardis.nibio.go.jp/fugue/prfsearch.
html) [28] as the best homologous topology. The D7
coordinates in the model were replaced by the known
x-ray structure (3KVQ PDB). The resulting D6-D7
construct (in particular the linker between D6 and D7
domains) was finally refined by Modeller 8v1.

Computational docking
Computational docking was performed by
combining the 10,000 output solutions from FTDock 2.0
[29] and the 2,000 ones from ZDock 2.1 [30]. The resulting
12,000 solutions were then scored by pyDock [31].

Energetic analysis of interaction model
The best docking model for EMMPRIN D1-D2/
VEGFR-2 D6-D7 was energetically minimized using
Tinker (http://dasher.wustl.edu/tinker/). The global binding
energy had a clear electrostatic contribution. The binding
energy per residue was calculated for this minimized
structure using pyDock [31]. Residues with the highest
electrostatic contribution were further considered for
selecting mutant candidates (Figure 7B).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Statistical analysis
Data are presented as the mean values ± SD. MannWhitney test was used to evaluate differences between
groups. Data were considered statistically significantly
different for P value < 0.05. All statistical tests were twosided. Analyses were performed using Prism 6 (GraphPad
Software Inc, La Jolla, CA).
9778

Oncotarget

Table 1: Primer sequences used for mutagenesis
Mutation

Primer Sequence

D136A

for: GTGCCACCTGTCACTGCCTGGGCCTGGTACAAG
rev: CTTGTACCAGGCCCAGGCAGTGACAGGTGGCAC

D144A

for: TGGTACAAGATCACTGCCTCTGAGGACAAGGCC
rev: GGCCTTGTCCTCAGAGGCAGTGATCTTGTACCA

Q182A

for: ATGGAGGCCGACCCCGGCGCGTACCGGTGCAACGGCAC
rev: GTGCCGTTGCACCGGTACGCGCCGGGGTCGGCCTCCAT

R184A

for: CGACCCCGGCCAGTACGCGTGCAACGGCACCAG
rev: GCTGGTGCCGTTGCACGCGTACTGGCCGGGGTCG

Q195A

for: CTCCAAGGGCTCCGACGCGGCCATCATCACGCTC
rev: GAGCGTGATGATGGCCGCGTCGGAGCCCTTGGAG

T199A

for: CGACCAGGCCATCATCGCGCTCCGCGTGCGCAG
rev: CTGCGCACGCGGAGCGCGATGATGGCCTGGTCG

Q182A/R184A

for: AGGCCGACCCCGGCGCGTACGCGTGCAACGGCACCA
rev: TGGTGCCGTTGCACGCGTACGCGCCGGGGTCGGCCT

Q195A/T199A

for: GCTCCGACGCGGCCATCATCGCGCTCCGCGT
rev: ACGCGGAGCGCGATGATGGCCGCGTCGGAGC

Acknowledgments

kinase insert domain-containing receptor for vascular endothelial growth factor. The Journal of biological chemistry.
1998; 273:31283–8.

This work was supported by Institut National de la
Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM), La Ligue
Nationale contre le Cancer (LNCC), La Société Française
de Dermatologie and Université Paris Diderot. F.K was
supported by a PhD fellowship from Cancéropôle-Ile de
France and from Fondation ARC pour la Recherche sur
le Cancer. L.P.C was supported by a FPU fellowship from
Spanish Ministry of Science. This work was supported by
grant BIO2010–22324 from Plan NacionalI+D+iMICINN.
We thank the core facility of the Institut
Universitaire d’Hématologie for confocal microscopy
analyses. The core facility is supported by grants from
the Association Saint-Louis, Conseil Regional d’Ile-deFrance, and the Ministère de la Recherche.

4.	 Hyde CA, Giese A, Stuttfeld E, Abram Saliba J, Villemagne D,
Schleier T, Binz HK, Ballmer-Hofer K. Targeting extracellular domains D4 and D7 of vascular endothelial growth
factor receptor 2 reveals allosteric receptor regulatory sites.
Molecular and cellular biology. 2012; 32:3802–13.
5.	 Barleon B, Totzke F, Herzog C, Blanke S, Kremmer E,
Siemeister G, Marme D, Martiny-Baron G. Mapping of the sites
for ligand binding and receptor dimerization at the extracellular
domain of the vascular endothelial growth factor receptor FLT1. The Journal of biological chemistry. 1997; 272:10382–8.
6.	 Voigt H, Vetter-Kauczok CS, Schrama D, Hofmann UB,
Becker JC, Houben R. CD147 impacts angiogenesis and
metastasis formation. Cancer Invest. 2009; 27:329–33.
7.	 Tang Y, Nakada MT, Kesavan P, McCabe F, Millar H,
Rafferty P, Bugelski P, Yan L. Extracellular matrix metalloproteinase inducer stimulates tumor angiogenesis by elevating vascular endothelial cell growth factor and matrix
metalloproteinases. Cancer research. 2005; 65:3193–9.

Conflicts of interest
The authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.

REFERENCES

8.	 Bougatef F, Quemener C, Kellouche S, Naimi B,
Podgorniak MP, Millot G, Gabison EE, Calvo F, Dosquet
C, Lebbe C, et al. EMMPRIN promotes angiogenesis
through hypoxia-inducible factor-2alpha-mediated regulation of soluble VEGF isoforms and their receptor VEGFR2. Blood. 2009; 114:5547–56.

1.	 Ferrara N, Gerber HP, LeCouter J. The biology of VEGF
and its receptors. Nat Med. 2003; 9:669–76.
2.	 Hicklin DJ, Ellis LM. Role of the vascular endothelial
growth factor pathway in tumor growth and angiogenesis. Journal of clinical oncology : official journal of the
American Society of Clinical Oncology. 2005; 23:1011–27.

9.	 Bougatef F, Menashi S, Khayati F, Naimi B, Porcher R,
Podgorniak MP, Millot G, Janin A, Calvo F, Lebbe C, et al.
EMMPRIN promotes melanoma cells malignant properties
through a HIF-2alpha mediated up-regulation of VEGFreceptor-2. PloS one. 2010; 5:e12265.

3.	 Shinkai A, Ito M, Anazawa H, Yamaguchi S, Shitara K,
Shibuya M. Mapping of the sites involved in ligand association and dissociation at the extracellular domain of the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9779

Oncotarget

10.	 Quemener C, Gabison EE, Naimi B, Lescaille G, Bougatef F,
Podgorniak MP, Labarchede G, Lebbe C, Calvo F, Menashi
S, et al. Extracellular matrix metalloproteinase inducer upregulates the urokinase-type plasminogen activator system promoting tumor cell invasion. Cancer research. 2007;
67:9–15.

21.	 Yu XL, Hu T, Du JM, Ding JP, Yang XM, Zhang J, Yang
B, Shen X, Zhang Z, Zhong WD, et al. Crystal structure of
HAb18G/CD147: implications for immunoglobulin superfamily homophilic adhesion. The Journal of biological
chemistry. 2008; 283:18056–65.
22.	 Park MS, Kim BR, Dong SM, Lee SH, Kim DY, Rho SB.
The antihypertension drug doxazosin inhibits tumor growth
and angiogenesis by decreasing VEGFR-2/Akt/mTOR signaling and VEGF and HIF-1alpha expression. Oncotarget.
2014; 5:4935–44.

11.	 Huet E, Gabison EE, Mourah S, Menashi S. Role of
emmprin/CD147 in tissue remodeling. Connect Tissue Res.
2008; 49:175–9.
12.	 Nabeshima K, Iwasaki H, Koga K, Hojo H, Suzumiya J,
Kikuchi M. Emmprin (basigin/CD147): matrix metalloproteinase modulator and multifunctional cell recognition molecule that plays a critical role in cancer progression. Pathol
Int. 2006; 56:359–67.

23.	 Falchook GS, Naing A, Hong DS, Zinner R, Fu S, PihaPaul SA, Tsimberidou AM, Morgan-Linnell SK, Jiang Y,
Bastida C, et al. Dual EGFR inhibition in combination with
anti-VEGF treatment: a phase I clinical trial in non-small
cell lung cancer. Oncotarget. 2013; 4:118–27.

13.	 Yan L, Zucker S, Toole BP. Roles of the multifunctional
glycoprotein, emmprin (basigin; CD147), in tumour progression. Thromb Haemost. 2005; 93:199–204.

24.	 Bahi A, Boyer F, Gumy C, Kafri T, Dreyer JL. In vivo gene
delivery of urokinase-type plasminogen activator with regulatable lentivirus induces behavioural changes in chronic
cocaine administration. Eur J Neurosci. 2004; 20:3473–88.

14.	 Weidle UH, Scheuer W, Eggle D, Klostermann S,
Stockinger H. Cancer-related issues of CD14. Cancer
genomics & proteomics. 2010; 7:157–69.

25.	 Naldini L, Blomer U, Gallay P, Ory D, Mulligan R, Gage
FH, Verma IM, Trono D. In vivo gene delivery and stable
transduction of nondividing cells by a lentiviral vector.
Science. 1996; 272:263–7.

15.	 Muramatsu T, Miyauchi T. Basigin (CD147): a multifunctional transmembrane protein involved in reproduction,
neural function, inflammation and tumor invasion. Histol
Histopathol. 2003; 18:981–7.

26.	 Shields JD, Emmett MS, Dunn DB, Joory KD, Sage LM,
Rigby H, Mortimer PS, Orlando A, Levick JR, Bates DO.
Chemokine-mediated migration of melanoma cells towards
lymphatics–a mechanism contributing to metastasis.
Oncogene. 2007; 26:2997–3005.

16.	 Sun J, Hemler ME. Regulation of MMP-1 and MMP-2
production through CD147/extracellular matrix metalloproteinase inducer interactions. Cancer research. 2001;
61:2276–81.
17.	 Koga K, Aoki M, Sameshima T, Hamasaki M, Egawa N,
Seiki M, Toole BP, Suzumiya J, Nabeshima K. Synthetic
emmprin peptides inhibit tumor cell-fibroblast interactionstimulated upregulation of MMP-2 and tumor cell invasion.
International journal of oncology. 2011; 39:657–64.

27.	 Sali A, Blundell TL. Comparative protein modelling
by satisfaction of spatial restraints. J Mol Biol. 1993;
234:779–815.
28.	 Shi J, Blundell TL, Mizuguchi K. FUGUE: sequence-­
structure homology recognition using environment-specific
substitution tables and structure-dependent gap penalties. J
Mol Biol. 2001; 310:243–57.

18.	 Li Y, Wu J, Song F, Tang J, Wang SJ, Yu XL, Chen ZN,
Jiang JL. Extracellular membrane-proximal domain of
HAb18G/CD147 binds to metal ion-dependent adhesion
site (MIDAS) motif of integrin beta1 to modulate malignant properties of hepatoma cells. The Journal of biological
chemistry. 2012; 287:4759–72.

29.	 Katchalski-Katzir E, Shariv I, Eisenstein M, Friesem AA,
Aflalo C, Vakser IA. Molecular surface recognition: determination of geometric fit between proteins and their ligands
by correlation techniques. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1992;
89:2195–9.

19.	 Tang W, Hemler ME. Caveolin-1 regulates matrix metalloproteinases-1 induction and CD147/EMMPRIN cell surface clustering. The Journal of biological chemistry. 2004;
279:11112–8.

30.	 Chen R, Li L, Weng Z. ZDOCK: an initial-stage proteindocking algorithm. Proteins. 2003; 52:80–7.
31.	 Cheng TM, Blundell TL, Fernez-Recio J. pyDock: electrostatics and desolvation for effective scoring of rigid-body
protein-protein docking. Proteins. 2007; 68:503–15.

20.	 Sato M, Nakai Y, Nakata W, Yoshida T, Hatano K,
Kawashima A, Fujita K, Uemura M, Takayama H,
Nonomura N. EMMPRIN promotes angiogenesis, proliferation, invasion and resistance to sunitinib in renal cell
carcinoma, and its level predicts patient outcome. PloS one.
2013; 8:e74313.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

32.	 Lopez-Blanco JR, Garzon JI, Chacon P. iMod: multipurpose normal mode analysis in internal coordinates.
Bioinformatics. 2011; 27:2843–50.

9780

Oncotarget

