Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No.4

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Hypoxia/HIF1` induces lapatinib resistance in ERBB2-positive
breast cancer cells via regulation of DUSP2
Sergey V. Karakashev1, Mauricio J. Reginato1
1

Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Drexel University College of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19102, USA

Correspondence to:
Mauricio J. Reginato, e-mail: Mauricio.Reginato@drexelmed.edu
Keywords: breast cancer, hypoxia, HIF-1a, lapatinib, ERBB2/HER2, DUSP2
Received: August 08, 2014	

Accepted: November 25, 2014	

Published: January 24, 2015

ABSTRACT
ERBB2/HER2 belongs to the EGFR-family of receptor tyrosine kinases and
its overexpression can promote tumor progression. Breast cancer patients with
ERBB2 amplifications are currently treated with lapatinib, a small-molecule kinase
inhibitor that specifically blocks EGFR/ERBB2 signaling. Here, we show that hypoxia,
via HIF-1, induces resistance to lapatinib-mediated effects in ERBB2-expressing
mammary epithelial and ERBB2-positive breast cancer cells. Lapatinib-mediated
growth inhibition and apoptosis in three-dimensional (3D) cultures are decreased
under hypoxic conditions. Hypoxia can maintain activation of signaling pathways
downstream from ERBB2 including AKT and ERK in the presence of lapatinib. HIF-1 is
both required and sufficient to induce lapatinib resistance as overexpression of stable
HIF-1 in ERBB2-expressing cells blocks lapatinib-mediated effects and maintains
ERBB2-downstream signaling under normoxic conditions. Under hypoxia, activation
of ERK signaling is required for lapatinib resistance as treatment with MEK inhibitor
trametinib reverses hypoxia-mediated lapatinib resistance. HIF-1 can bypass the
lapatinib-treated inhibition of the ERK pathway via inhibition of the dual-specificity
phosphatase 2 (DUSP2). Indeed, overexpression of DUSP2 in ErbB2-positve breast
cancer cells reverses hypoxia-mediated lapatinib resistance. Thus, our results provide
rationale for therapeutic evaluation of the treatment of hypoxic ERBB2 expressing
breast tumors with a combination of lapatinib and MEK inhibitors.

(ERK). ERK kinase regulates multiple downstream targets
involved in regulation of cell proliferation and survival
and the ERK pathway is deregulated in many cancers.
Since ERBB2 overexpression in breast cancer
cells is critical for tumor progression it is an attractive
therapeutic target [4]. Indeed, development of targeted
therapy against EGFR/ERBB2, such as a lapatinib, have
significantly improved treatment of ERBB2-positive
breast cancer [5, 6]. Lapatinib, a small molecule kinase
inhibitor, blocks both EGFR and ERBB2 kinase activity
and is currently used in combination therapy with DNA
damaging agents in ERBB2-positive breast cancers [7].
In spite of the clinical efficiency of lapatinib in breast
cancer patients, some ERBB2-expresing tumors are not
responsive to this treatment and some patients that do
initially respond, acquire lapatinib resistance [8,  9].

INTRODUCTION
Despite significant progress in treatment and
diagnostics, breast cancer remains the second most deadly
cancer among women in the developed world [1]. Breast
cancer is a highly heterogeneous disease, classified by
stage, size, morphology and the presence of receptors
such as estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor or
ERBB2/HER2. ERBB2 is a receptor tyrosine kinase that
is overexpressed in over 30% of breast tumors [2, 3].
This oncogene belongs to the EGFR receptor family and
plays an important role in EGFR pathway signaling. This
pathway is triggered by EGFR activation via binding to
its ligand EGF resulting in activation of EGFR/ERBB2
downstream target proteins including the serine/threonine
kinase AKT and extracellular signal-regulated kinase

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1967

Oncotarget

that HIF-1α is required for ERBB2 oncogenesis in vivo
and anoikis resistance in vitro [21]. Since hypoxia is
associated with resistance to standard chemotherapy [22],
we examined whether hypoxia alters response of ERBB2positive breast cancer cells to targeted therapies such as
lapatinib. Using MCF10A cells overexpressing wild type
ERBB2 (MCF10A-ERBB2), mammary tumor epithelial
cells derived from MMTV-neu transgenic mice (MTECNeu) and SK-BR3 cells, all of which overexpress similar
levels of ERBB2 (Figure S1A), we examined the effects of
lapatinib treatment under normoxic and hypoxic (1% O2)
conditions. Treatment of all three cell lines with lapatinib
(1 μM) under normoxic conditions reduced cell viability
as measured by MTS assay (Figure 1A). However, under
hypoxic conditions, treatment with lapatinib had reduced
effects on cell viability in MCF10A-ERBB2, MTEC-Neu
and SK-BR3 cells (Figure 1A).
To characterize this effect further, we examined
MCF10A-ERBB2 cells treated with increasing doses
of lapatinib for 48 hours under normoxic and hypoxic
conditions. Treatment of MCF10A-ERBB2 cells with
lapatinib, under normal oxygen conditions, showed
a decrease in viability of 21% and 49% at 1 and 5 μM
respectively compared to control treated cells (Figure 1B).
However, treatment under hypoxic conditions showed a
decrease of viability of only 3% and 22% at same doses
(Figure 1B). To verify MTS results, we carried out cell
counting and observed similar inhibition of lapatinib
effects on MCF10A-ERBB2 cell number under hypoxic
conditions compared to normoxia (Figure S1B). In
order to determine whether hypoxia alters the effects
of lapatinib on MCF10A-ERBB2 cells cultured in 3D
conditions, single MCF-10A-ERBB2 cells were placed in
basement membrane culture as previously described [23]
and allowed to form acinar-like structures for six days
under normal oxygen. Cells were then treated with 1 μM
lapatinib and either maintained in normoxic conditions or
placed in hypoxic conditions for 48h. Lapatinib treatment
of ERBB2 cells under normoxic conditions contained
75% cleaved-caspase-3 positive structures (Figure 1C).
However, hypoxia-treated structures contained 5 fold less
caspase-3 cleavage (14%) following lapatinib treatment.
Thus, hypoxia blocks lapatinib-mediated cell death in
ERBB2-positive breast cancer cells in both standard and
in 3D culture conditions.
We next examined if hypoxia alters lapatinib
effects on ERBB2-mediated signaling. As expected,
MCF10A-ERBB2 cells treated with lapatinib for 48 hours
under normoxic conditions contained decreased ERBB2
phosphorylation (Y877) starting at 250 nM concentration
and maximally inhibited ERBB2 phosphorylation at
1 and 5 μM (Figure 1D). However, under hypoxia we
observed that lapatinib treated cells maintained ERBB2
activation and ERBB2 remained active at 1 and 5 μM
treatments compared to normoxic cells (Figure 1D).
We also examined expression of the Bcl-2-family

Understanding molecular mechanisms of ­lapatinibresistance may help identify combination regimens for
these patients.
Hypoxia, or low oxygen concentration, is another
factor that contributes to tumor progression. Normal
epithelial cells usually have 3–7% oxygen tension.
However, in solid tumors, oxygen concentrations often
reach below 1% due to uncontrolled cell growth and the
inability to form normal blood vessels [10]. Hypoxia
inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) is a major player in the cells
response to hypoxia. HIF-1 is a transcription factor that
consists of two subunits: HIF-1α and HIF-1β. Under
normoxic conditions, HIF-1α is hydroxylated by prolyl
hydroxylase (PHD) that utilizes oxygen as a substrate
and hydroxylated HIF-1α undergoes rapid proteasomal
degradation [11]. However, at low oxygen levels PHD
is not able to hydroxylate HIF-1α and it translocates to
the nucleus where it forms a dimer with HIF-1β. HIF-1
dimer activates expression of more than one hundred
genes that play a protective role in cells experiencing
hypoxia [12, 13]. Many of HIF-1α-mediated effects are
beneficial for transformed cells as HIF-1α reprograms
cell metabolism towards glycolysis [14], activates
angiogenesis [15], and inhibits apoptosis [16]. Therefore,
hypoxic tumors are often associated with poor prognosis
and are resistant to different anticancer agents [17–19].
However, the mechanism of hypoxia/HIF-1-mediated
resistance to targeted therapy has not been well studied.
Here, we show that hypoxia promotes lapatinib
resistance in ERBB2- expressing breast cancer cells
through HIF-1-mediated ERK activation. Specifically,
HIF-1α stabilization in hypoxic cells leads to activation
of ERK pathway via downregulation of dual-specificity
phosphatase 2 (DUSP2). Indeed, the expression of a stable
HIF-1α mutant or reduction of DUSP2 via RNAi can
promote lapatinib resistance in breast cancer cells under
normal oxygen tension. In addition, we show that targeting
the ERK pathway in hypoxic ERBB2-positive breast
cancer cells sensitizes to lapatinib treatment. Importantly,
HIF-1α expression inversely correlates with DUSP2 levels
in ER-negative breast cancer patients and associates with
poor prognosis.

RESULTS
Hypoxia blocks lapatinib-mediated growth
inhibition in ERBB2-positive breast cancer cells
We have previously shown that treatment of MCF10A cells with hypoxia (1% O2) blocks anoikis and
inhibits luminal clearing of acinar-like structures when
cells are placed in three dimensional (3D) basement
membrane cultures [20]. More recently, we showed that
MCF-10A cells overexpressing ERBB2 and ERBB2positive breast cancer cells stabilizes HIF-1α levels and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1968

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Hypoxia blocks lapatinib-mediated effects in ERBB2-positive breast cancer cells. (A) Indicated cells were treated

with 1 μM lapatinib under hypoxia for 48h and cell viability was assessed by MTS assay. (B) MCF10A-ERBB2 cells were treated with
increasing doses of lapatinib under normoxic or hypoxic conditions and cell viability was assessed. (C) Cell were placed in 3D culture
conditions and transferred to normoxic or hypoxic conditions in the presence or absence of lapatinib. Cells were then stained for cleaved
caspase-3 (top) and the percentage of caspase-positive acini was determined (bottom). (D) Cell lysates were collected from cells in B for
immunoblot analysis. Error bars indicate S.E. (*p ≤ 0.05).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1969

Oncotarget

pro-apoptotic protein BIM and cell cycle inhibitor p27Kip1.
These two proteins are downstream of ERBB2/EGFR
pathway and are often used as biomarkers for efficiency
of anti-ERBB2 therapy [24–26]. Expression of both BIM
and p27Kip1 were upregulated in normoxic cell treated with
higher lapatinib doses (Figure 1D). However, consistent
with hypoxia blocking lapatinib-effects on apoptosis in
3D conditions and cell growth in 2D, hypoxia prevented
lapatinib-mediated increase in expression of both BIM
and p27Kip1 levels (Figure 1D). Thus, hypoxia can reduce
lapatinib-mediated inhibition of ERBB2 phosphorylation
and induction of key regulators of apoptosis and cell cycle
arrest in ERBB2-expressing cells.

dasatinib treatment did not alter ERK activation under
hypoxic or normoxic conditions (Figure S3A). Thus,
hypoxia-mediated lapatinib resistance in MCF10AERBB2 cells is dependent on MEK/ERK activity and is
independent of AKT and c-SRC pathways.

Trametinib abrogates hypoxia-mediated
lapatinib resistance in ERBB2 breast cancer cells
Recently, a novel MEK inhibitor trametinib has been
approved for treatment of metastatic melanoma containing
B-RAF mutations as monotherapy or in combination with
dabrafenib [29]. Thus, we tested whether trametinib,
a selective MEK inhibitor, can decrease the protective
effect hypoxia provides to lapatinib treated ERBB2
expressing cells. MCF10A-ERBB2 cells were treated with
trametinib in the presence of increasing doses of lapatinib
under normoxic and hypoxic conditions. Treatment with
trametinib did not alter lapatinib-mediated effects on
cell viability under normoxic conditions (Figure S2B).
However, under hypoxic conditions, the addition of
trametinib reduced cell viability in lapatinib treated cells
(Figure 2B). Importantly, trametinib treatment abrogated
the hypoxia-mediated protective effect on lapatinib
treated 3D structures. Combination treatment of lapatinib
with trametinib reversed hypoxic-mediated inhibition
of apoptosis in acinar structure that was observed
when treated with lapatinib alone (Figure  2C  and 2D).
Interestingly, trametinib treatment alone in 3D structures
had much stronger apoptotic effect on hypoxic cells
compared to normoxic cells (Figure 2C  and 2D). In
addition, treating MCF10A-ERBB2 cells with trametinib
alone or in combination with lapatinib reversed hypoxiamediated activation of ERK and inhibition of BIM
expression (Figure 2E). Similar results were seen in
hypoxic breast cancer cells derived from MMTV-Neu mice
(MTEC-Neu) cultured in 3D and treated with lapatinib
and trametinib (Figure S4). Thus, these data suggest that
combination treatment of lapatinib and trametinib should
be explored as a therapeutic option in treating hypoxic
ERBB2-positive breast cancer cells.

ERK activity in elevated and required for
hypoxia-mediated lapatinib resistance in breast
cancer cells
We next examined ERBB2 downstream signaling
in lapatinib treated MCF10A-ERBB2 cells in response
to hypoxia. As expected, lapatinib treatment of ERBB2expressing cells reduced ERK and AKT activation under
normoxic conditions (Figure 2A). However, under hypoxia
ERK and AKT activation was increased and maintained
even in presence of high doses of lapatinib (Figure 2A).
Since recent studies have shown that hypoxia can also
activate c-SRC [27], we examined c-SRC activation under
these conditions. We found undetectable levels of c-SRC
activation in normoxic cells. However, c-SRC is strongly
activated in cells exposed to hypoxia and lapatinib
treatment has minimal effects on c-SRC activation in these
cells (Figure 2A). Thus, hypoxia increases and prolongs
c-SRC, ERK and AKT activation in ERBB2-expressing
cells in the presence of lapatinib.
Activation of c-SRC, AKT and ERK pathways
has been shown previously to play a role in resistance to
ERBB2-targeted therapy [28] thus we next determined
which pathway is critical for hypoxia mediated lapatinib
resistance. MCF10A-ERBB2 cells were treated with either
phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) inhibitor (LY294002)
or MEK inhibitor (UO126) in the presence of increasing
doses of lapatinib. Under normoxic conditions, treating
cells with PI3 kinase or MEK inhibitor did not alter
lapatinib effects on cell viability (Figure S2A). However,
under hypoxic conditions, MEK inhibitor, but not PI3K
inhibitor, reduced cell viability in lapatinib treated cells
(Figure S2A). Since we also observed increased levels of
c-SRC phosphorylation in MCF10A-ERBB2 cells under
hypoxic conditions (Figure 2A), we tested whether c-SRC
activation is required for hypoxia-mediated lapatinib
resistance. MCF10A-ERBB2 cells under hypoxia were
treated with vehicle control or dasatinib, a small molecule
c-SRC inhibitor. Treatment of MCF10A-ERBB2 cells with
dasatinib inhibited hypoxia-mediated c-SRC activation
(Figure S3A) but did not alter hypoxia-mediated effects on
growth in lapatinib treated cells (Figure S3B). Moreover,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

HIF-1α is required for hypoxic effects on
proliferation and signaling in lapatinib-treated
ERBB2-positive cells
To investigate how hypoxia activates ERK signaling
and leads to lapatinib resistance in MCF10A-ERBB2
cells, we first examined the role of HIF-1. Since HIF-1α
stabilization and induction of a number of genes are major
events in cellular responses to hypoxia [30], we examined
whether HIF-1 is required for hypoxia-mediated lapatinib
resistance in MCF10A-ERBB2 cells. We stably reduced
HIF-1α levels in MCF10A-ERBB2 cells via shRNA
(Figure 3A). Reducing HIF-1α levels in MCF10A-ERBB2
cells had minimal effects under hypoxic conditions in
1970

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Hypoxia requires ERK activity for lapatinib resistance in breast cancer cells. (A) Cells were treated with

increasing doses of lapatinib under normoxic or hypoxic conditions and cell lysates were collected for immunoblot analysis. (B) Cells
were treated with increasing doses of lapatinib under hypoxic conditions in the presence of control or trametinib (50 nM) and cell viability
was assessed. (C) MCF10A-ERBB2 cells were placed in 3D culture conditions and then incubated under normoxic or hypoxic conditions
in the presence or absence of lapatinib (1 μM), trametinib (50 nM) or both treatments. Cells were stained for cleaved caspase-3. (D) The
percentage of caspase-positive acini was determined for C. (E) Cells were treated with lapatinib, trametinib or a combination of both drugs
under normoxic or hypoxic conditions and cell lysates were collected for immunoblot analysis. Error bars indicate S.E. (*p ≤ 0.05).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1971

Oncotarget

Figure 3: HIF-1α is required for hypoxic-mediated lapatinib resistance and signaling in ERBB2-expressing
cells. (A)  Cell lysates from cells stably expressing control or HIF-1α shRNA were collected for immunoblot analysis. (B) Cells were
treated with increasing doses of lapatinib under hypoxic conditions and then stained with crystal violet. (C) Cell viability was assessed
with cells as described in B. (D) Cells expressing control or HIF-1α shRNA were treated with vehicle control or lapatinib under hypoxic
conditions. Cell lysates were then collected for immunoblot analysis. Error bars indicate S.E. (*p ≤ 0.05).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1972

Oncotarget

2D culture; however HIF-1α depleted cells were sensitized
to lapatinib treatment starting at 250 nM dose as seen by
crystal violet staining (Figure 3B). Hypoxic cells stably
expressing HIF-1α shRNA were no longer resistant to
lapatinib treatment (Figure 3C). We also examined effects
of reducing HIF-1α on signaling pathways and biomarkers
in lapatinib treated cells. Reducing HIF-1α had no effect
on ERBB2 phosphorylation in untreated or lapatinibtreated cells under hypoxic conditions (Figure 3D). As
shown above, hypoxia maintained ERK activation in
lapatinib treated cells (Figure 3D). However, reducing
HIF-1α levels in MCF10A-ERBB2 hypoxic cells reduced
basal ERK activity and importantly restored lapatinibmediated ERK inhibition. HIF-1α knockdown cells
treated with lapatinib also contained elevated BIM levels
compared to control cells (Figure 3D), consistent with
reduced cell viability of these cells under hypoxia. Thus,
these data suggest that HIF-1α is required for hypoxiamediated resistance to lapatinib effects, activation of ERK
and BIM inhibition.

in many cancers and that hypoxic tumors have decrease
expression of DUSP2 [32]. We examined DUSP2
expression in three different ERBB2 expressing breast
cancer cell lines and observed that DUSP2 protein levels
are downregulated under hypoxic conditions (Figure 5A).
DUSP2 RNA levels were also reduced nearly 90% in
hypoxic MCF10-ERBB2 when compared to normal
oxygen (Figure S5A). Consistent with its regulation of
ERK, DUSP2 downregulation correlated with increased
ERK activation in breast cancer cells placed under
hypoxic conditions (Figure 5A). Moreover, MCF10AERBB2 cells expressing HIF-1α RNAi abrogated DUSP2
downregulation under hypoxia, (Figure S5B) thus
regulation of DUSP2 by hypoxia in breast cancer cells is
HIF-1α-dependent.
To test whether DUSP2 inhibition alone was
sufficient to confer lapatinib resistance in ERBB2expressing cells under normal oxygen conditions, we
stably reduced DUSP2 expression in MCF10A-ERBB2
cells via RNAi. As expected DUSP2 inhibition resulted in
increased ERK activation even under normoxic conditions
(Figure 5B). MCF10A-ERBB2 cells depleted of DUSP2
partially blocked lapatinib effect on cell viability under
normoxic conditions (Figure 5C and S6A). We also tested
if DUSP2 depletion inhibits the effects lapatinib has on
MCF10A-ERBB2 cells cultured in 3D conditions. Control
and DUSP2 depleted cells were cultured in 3D for 6 days
under normoxic conditions and then treated with lapatinib
for 48 hrs. DUSP2 downregulation alone was sufficient to
significantly reduce caspase-3 cleavage in lapatinib treated
cells (Figure S6B). Similar results were seen in DUSP2
depleted SK-BR3 cells with respect to ERK activation
(Figure S6C) and inhibition of lapatinib-mediated effects
on cell viability under normoxic conditions (Figure S6D).
These data suggest that reducing DUSP2 levels alone in
ERBB2 expressing breast cancer cells induces lapatinib
resistance. To test whether increasing DUSP2 levels could
sensitize hypoxic breast cancer cells to lapatinib, we stably
overexpressed Flag-tagged DUSP2 in MCF10A-ErbB2
cells. Compared to control cells, cells overexpressing
DUSP2 were sensitized to lapatinib-treatment as Erk
activation was reduced and BIM expression elevated
in these cells (Figure 5D). DUSP2 overexpressing
cells reversed hypoxia-mediated resistance to lapatinib
treatment as measured by cell viability (Figure 5E) and
cell number (Figure 5F). These data suggest that hypoxiamediated lapatinib resistance in ErbB2-positive breast
cancer cells is DUSP2 dependent.

HIF-1 is sufficient to induce resistance to
lapatinib in ERBB2-positive cells under
normoxic conditions
To determine whether HIF-1α stabilization is
sufficient to confer lapatinib resistance in ERBB2expressing cells under normoxic conditions, we
overexpressed a stable non-degradable form of HIF-1α
containing proline to alanine mutations (HIF-1α P402A,
P564A) in MCF10A-ERBB2 cells. We confirmed that this
mutant expressed levels similar to endogenous HIF-1α
stabilized under hypoxia and to cells treated with prolylhydroxylase inhibitor DMOG (Figure 4A). MCF10AERBB2 cells expressing the stable form of HIF-1α were
resistant to lapatinib-mediated effects on cell viability
(Figure 4B) and cell number (Figure 4C) under normal
oxygen conditions. In addition, similar to effect of
hypoxia, MCF10A-ERBB2 cells expressing stable form
of HIF-1α were able to maintain ERBB2, ERK, and AKT
activation even when treated with high doses of lapatinib
under normal oxygen conditions (Figure 4D). Stable HIF1α expressing cells also contained reduced levels of BIM
following lapatinib treatment compared to control cells
(Figure 4D). Thus, HIF-1α expression alone is sufficient to
block lapatinib-mediated effect on growth and signaling in
ERBB2-expressing cells under normal oxygen conditions.

Hypoxia/HIF-1promotes lapatinib resistance
through regulation of DUSP2

Inverse DUSP2 and HIF-1α relationship in ER
negative breast cancers is associated with poor
prognosis

One possible mechanism of HIF1-mediated
ERK activation under hypoxia is regulation of the dual
specificity protein phosphatase 2 (DUSP2). DUSP2 is a
phosphatase that negatively regulates ERK activity [31].
Recently, it has been reported that DUSP2 is downregulated
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Since HIF-1α expression is associated with poor
clinical outcome in breast cancer patients [33] and we
show that hypoxia via HIF-1α reduces DUSP2 expression,
1973

Oncotarget

Figure 4: HIF-1α is sufficient to induce lapatinib-resistance in ERBB2-expressing cells under normoxic
conditions. (A) Cell lysates from cells placed in hypoxia, treated with DMOG for 6 hrs, or cells expressing control or HIF-1α mutant
(P402A/P564A) were collected for immunoblot analysis. (B) MCF10A-ERBB2 cells stably expressing control or HIF-1α mutant were
treated with increasing doses of lapatinib and cell viability was assessed. (C) Cells as in B were stained with crystal violet. (D) Cell lysates
were collected from cells as in B for immunoblot analysis. Error bars indicate S.E. (*p ≤ 0.05).

we interrogated whether DUSP2 expression may also be
associate with poor clinical outcome in breast cancer
patients. We examined expression of DUSP2 in ERBB2positive breast cancer samples using Kaplan-Meier
Plotter [34] and found that in 207 ERBB2-positive breast
cancer patients with reduced DUSP2 levels showed a
decreased trend in relapse-free survival that was not
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

significant (p  =  0.15) (Figure S7). However, when we
examined a larger cohort of ER-negative breast cancer
patients (n = 788 patients) we found that low levels of
DUSP2 expression was significantly associated with
reduced relapse-free survival (Figure 6A). In addition,
in this same patient population we found that high levels
of HIF-1α is also associated with reduced relapse-free

1974

Oncotarget

Figure 5: HIF-1 target DUSP2 is required for lapatinib resistance. (A) Indicated cells were exposed to hypoxia for 6 hrs and

cell lysates were collected for immunoblot analysis. (B) Cells stably expressing control or DUSP2 shRNA were treated with 1 μM lapatinib
and cell lysates were collected for immunoblot analysis. (C) Cells expressing control or DUSP2 shRNA were treated with increasing doses
of lapatinib and cell viability was assessed. (D) Cells stably expressing DUSP2-flag protein were treated with 1 μM lapatinib under hypoxia
and cell lysates were collected for immunoblot analysis. (E) Cells expressing DUSP2-flag were treated with increasing doses of lapatinib
and cell viability was assessed. (F) Cells as in E were stained with crystal violet. Error bars indicate S.E. (*p ≤ 0.05).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1975

Oncotarget

Figure 6: An inverse relationship between DUSP2 and HIF-1α in ER negative breast cancer associates with decreased
relapse-free survival. (A) Kaplan-Meier plots of relapse-free survival (RFS) in a dataset of patients with ER-negative breast cancer

(n = 788), stratified by DUSP2 expression. Data was obtained from the Kaplan-Meier plotter database [34]. The P value was calculated by
a log-rank test. (B) Similar analysis was performed in the same patient database but RFS stratified by HIF-1α expression. (C) A schematic
model of hypoxia-mediated lapatinib resistance.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1976

Oncotarget

survival (Figure 6B), which is consistent with the idea that
HIF-1α reduces DUSP2 expression and thus may inversely
correlate with DUSP2 levels. Thus, an inverse relationship
exists between DUSP2 and HIF-1α in ER negative breast
cancer patients with both high HIF-1α and low DUSP2
levels associating with poor prognosis.

protective effect in lapatinib treated cells suggesting that
the ERK pathway is critical for hypoxia-mediated lapatinib
resistance. Interestingly, hypoxic ERBB2-expressing cells
in 3D culture were hypersensitive to trametinib treatment
alone compared to normoxic cells, suggesting that hypoxic
cancer cells may be more dependent on the MEK-ERK
pathway for cell survival and thus more sensitive to MEK
inhibitors.
Recent studies have shown that resistance to targeted
therapy may depend on whether tumor cells are in direct
contact with extracellular matrix while matrix-deprived
cells may be more sensitive to pathway inhibitors [42].
Consistent with this idea, lapatinib treatment of ERBB2expressing cells in 3D culture under normoxic conditions
was less effective at inducing apoptosis in matrix-attached
cells compared to inner cells deprived of contact with
matrix (Figure 2B). However, under hypoxic conditions
we observed reduced amounts of apoptotic cells in both
inner and outer regions of 3D structures and, importantly,
combination of lapatinib and trametinib was able to induce
apoptosis in both matrix-attached and matrix-deprived
hypoxic cells. Thus, targeting MEK/ERK pathway in
hypoxic tumors may reverse lapatinib resistance from
matrix-protection.
To further investigate the mechanism of hypoxiamediated ERK activation and lapatinib resistance we
tested if stabilization of HIF-1α was required for hypoxia
mediated ERK activation. In HIF-1 depleted cells
hypoxia-mediated lapatinib resistance was reversed as
well as hypoxia regulation of ERK phosphorylation and
BIM expression. Moreover, expression of a stable form of
HIF-1 in ERBB2-expressing cells was sufficient to induce
lapatinib resistance, and maintain ERK signaling, even in
the presence of high doses of lapatinib under normoxic
conditions. Thus, HIF-1 is both required and sufficient
for hypoxia-mediated lapatinib-resistance and the effect
on cell viability and ERK signaling in ERBB2-positive
cells. These data suggest that HIF-1α may be used as a
biomarker to predict lapatinib resistance in ERBB2positive breast cancers.
Lin [32] and others have previously shown that
hypoxia/HIF-1 can regulate ERK activity through DUSP2
downregulation. DUSP2 is a phosphatase that negatively
regulates ERK and p38 activity. DUSP2 downregulation
was previously observed in different types of cancer.
In HeLa cells, hypoxia/HIF-1/DUSP2-mediated ERK
activation promotes doxycycline and paclitaxel
resistance [32]. Interestingly, paclitaxel is widely used in
combinational breast cancer therapy including treatment
of ERBB2-positive breast tumors. In this study we
demonstrate that hypoxia decreases DUSP2 levels in
three cancer cell lines and this correlates with increased
ERK activation. Moreover, DUSP2 depletion promotes
lapatinib resistance even under normoxic conditions and
DUSP2 overexpression abrogates hypoxia protective
effect on ErbB2-positive cells treated with lapatinib.

DISCUSSION
Here, we demonstrate for the first time that hypoxia
promotes lapatinib resistance in ERBB2-positive breast
cancer cells through activation of the MEK-ERK pathway
in a HIF-1-dependent manner via regulation of DUSP2
(Figure 6C). Additionally, we show that hypoxia abrogated
the induction of apoptosis in 3D cultures treated with
lapatinib. We also demonstrate that lapatinib treated
ERBB2-positive cell lines exposed to hypoxia maintained
high levels of ERK phosphorylation and decreased levels
of pro-apoptotic protein BIM compared to lapatinibtreated cells under normal oxygen. Moreover, we show
that hypoxia/HIF-1 inhibition of DUSP2 is a major
mechanism by which hypoxia activates ERK and inhibits
lapatinib-mediated induction of apoptosis and BIM.
Importantly, co-treatment with lapatinib and trametinib,
an FDA approved MEK inhibitor, was able to reverse
hypoxia protective effects. Thus, combination treatment
of lapatinib and trametinib may be a therapeutic option in
treating hypoxic ERBB2-positive breast cancer cells.
Clinical efficiency of lapatinib is limited by acquired
resistance [35] thus understanding mechanisms of
resistance may lead to better treatment modalities. Several
mechanisms of lapatinib resistance have been proposed,
including ERBB2-independent activation of PI3K-AKT
and ERK pathways [8, 36]. ERBB2-independent ERK
activation has been shown to play a role in lapatinib
resistance. In ERBB2/EGFR-positive pancreatic cancer
cell lines lapatinib has limited efficacy due to k-ras
mutations [37]. However, MEK inhibitors can sensitize
these tumors to lapatinib [38]. Moreover, SRC, MET, and
Axl driven lapatinib-resistant cell lines also have increased
ERK signaling. Currently a combination of lapatinib and
c-SRC inhibitor as well as lapatinib and MET kinase
inhibitor are in clinical trials (https://clinicaltrials.gov
NCT00662636 and NCT01138384). Activation of other
members of EGFR family such as ERBB1 or ERBB 3
has also been shown to promote lapatinib resistance in
various cancer cell lines [39–41]. We and others have
shown that hypoxia can activate MEK/ERK pathways and
in this study we show for the first time that hypoxia can
promote lapatinib resistance through activation of ERK
signaling. Indeed, cells exposed to hypoxia had increased
c-SRC, AKT and ERK signaling and were less sensitive to
lapatinib. Although hypoxia was able to activate multiple
pathways in breast cancer cells only treatment with MEK
inhibitors were able to reverse the hypoxia-mediated
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1977

Oncotarget

Data from clinical samples shows that ER-negative
breast cancers with reduced DUSP2 expression associate
with poor clinical outcome. Future studies will further
investigate the potential use of DUSP2 as a biomarker for
lapatinib-resistance.
In summary, we have shown that hypoxia promotes
lapatinib-resistance in ERBB2-positive breast cancer cells
via HIF1-regulation of the ERK pathway. Our data also
suggests that breast cancers containing high levels of
HIF-1 and reduced DUSP2 expression could be utilized
as predictive markers for lapatinib-resistance and identify
patient population that may benefit from combination
treatment with lapatinib and MEK inhibitors for the
treatment of hypoxic ERBB2-positive tumors.

Absorbance values were expressed as a percentage relative
to untreated cells. Each sample was assayed in duplicate
and each experiment was carried out three independent
times. 0.1% crystal violet solution was used for crystal
violet staining.

shRNA transfections and viral transductions
Retroviruses were packaged as previously
described [43] and used to stably transduce MCF10AERBB2 cells with pMiT-HIF-1α-P402A,P546A (kindly
provided by D. Plas, University of Cincinnati) [44] and
pLV158-DUSP2-flag (Genecopoeia, Rockville, PA).
For shRNA transfections shRNA lentiviral particles
were generated as previously describe [43]. Control
pLKO-Puro vector containing shRNA from Addgene
(plasmid 1864, D. Sabatini (MIT)) with sequence:
cctaaggttaagtcgccctcgctcgagcgagggcgacttaaccttagg. HIF1α and DUSP2 shRNA from Sigma and the sequences
used for HIF-1α: ccggggagatcttgccctacctgttctcgagaacaggta
gggcaagatctcctttttg and for DUSP2: ccggccgctggagacaca
atcatatctcgagatatgattgtgtctccagcggtttttg.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell culture and reagents
MCF10A and SK-BR3 cells were obtained from
ATCC (Manassas, VA). MCF10A-ERBB2 cells line
is stably expressing wildtype ERBB2 (pBabe-Neu) as
previously described [23]. MCF10A and MCF10AERBB2 cells were cultured in DMEM/F12 medium
(Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) supplemented with 5% horse
serum 20 ng/ml of EGF (Peprotech, Rocky Hill, NJ),
10 μg/ml of insulin (Sigma), 1 ng/ml of cholera toxin
(Sigma), 100 μg/ml of hydrocortisone (Sigma), 50 units/ml
of penicillin, and 50 μg/ml of streptomycin (Invitrogen);
SK-BR3 in McCoy’s medium (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA)
supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum. MTEC-Neu
cells were kind gift from Tiffany Seagroves (University
of Tennessee Health Sciences Center) and previously
described [21]. LY294002 and U0126 were obtained from
Calbiochem (San Diego, CA). Trametinib, lapatinib and
dasatinib were purchased from Selleck Chemicals, LLC
(Houston, TX).

3D morphogenesis assay and
immunofluorescence
Assays were performed as described previously
[20]. Briefly, 5000 cells per well were plated onto 8-well
chamber slides (BD Falcon) coated with 40 μl of growth
factor-reduced Matrigel (BD Falcon). Cells were then
overlaid with growth medium supplemented with 2%
growth factor-reduced Matrigel. Structures were allowed
to form for six days and followed by drug treatments
for 48 hrs. Immunofluorescence of three-dimensional
structures was performed as previously described [20].
For quantification of percent cleaved caspase-3 positive
acini; a minimum of 20 acinar structures were counted
per experiment and each experiment was repeated three
independent times. Caspase positivity was defined as a
structure with 5 or more cleaved caspase-3-positive cells.

Hypoxic treatment
Cells were placed into a humidified hypoxic
chamber (invivo2 Hypoxia Workstation, Ruskinn,
UK) equilibrated to 1.0% O2, 5.0% CO2 at 37°C. Any
experimental chemical compounds were added to cells
immediately before placement in the hypoxic chamber.
Cell lysates were collected immediately after removal
from hypoxia chamber. Unless noted, all hypoxic
treatments were performed for 48 hours.

Quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR)
Total RNA was isolated from cells using the
RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). Equal
amounts of total RNA (250 ng) were added to Brilliant
II qRT-PCR master mix (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA) with
primer/probe sets purchased from Applied Biosystems
(Foster City, CA). PCR were performed using a Applied
Biosystems 7500 machine and analysis was performed
using Data Assist (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA). Gene and
catalog numbers for the primer/probe sets are as follows:
DUSP2 (Hs00358879_m1). Expression of cyclophillin
A (Hs99999904_ m1) and 18S (Hs99999901_s1) mRNA
were as used as internal controls. Data are represented as
a fold-change between samples.

Growth inhibition assays
For all assays, unless noted, cells were cultured for
24 hours and then exposed to various concentrations of
different chemical compounds for 48 hours. Cell viability
was measured by colorimetric MTS assay Promega
(Madison, WI) accordingly to manufacture instructions.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1978

Oncotarget

Immunoblot analysis

6.	 Geyer CE, et al. Lapatinib plus capecitabine for
HER2-positive advanced breast cancer. N Engl J Med.
2006; 355:2733–43.

Cell lysates were prepared in RIPA lysis buffer
supplemented with 1 μg each of pepstatin, leupeptin,
aprotinin, and 200 μg/ml phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride.
Antibodies used include: human ERBB2, ERBB2
(pY1248), AKT, AKT (pS473), BIM, cleaved-caspase-3,
p27, SRC, SRC(pY416), (Cell Signaling Technology
Danvers, MA); HIF-1α were from Novus (Littleton, CO);
β-actin, Erk1/2, pERK1/2, DUSP2 and HRP-conjugated
secondary antibodies from Santa Cruz Biotechnology
(Santa Cruz, CA).

7.	 Ryan Q, Ibrahim A, Cohen MH, Johnson J, Ko C, Sridhara R,
Justice R, Pazdur R. FDA drug approval summary: lapatinib in combination with capecitabine for previously
treated metastatic breast cancer that overexpresses HER-2.
Oncologist. 2008; 13:1114–9.
8.	 Wang Y-C, et al. Different mechanisms for resistance to
trastuzumab versus lapatinib in HER2-positive breast
­cancers—role of estrogen receptor and HER2 reactivation.
Breast Cancer Res. 2011; 13:R121.
9.	 Fink MY, Chipuk JE. Survival of HER2-Positive Breast
Cancer Cells: Receptor Signaling to Apoptotic Control
Centers. Genes Cancer. 2013; 4:187–95.

Clinical dataset analysis
The level of DUSP2 and HIF-1α mRNA expression
in clinical breast tumor subtype from ER-negative breast
cancers was derived from gene expression data and relapse
free survival information was downloaded from GEO, EGA
and TCGA database. For relapse-free survival analysis, we
stratified ER-negative patients (n = 788) by expression
of either DUSP2 (Affymetrix-ID- 204794) or HIF-1α
(Affymetrix-ID-200989) and presented this data as KaplanMeier plots. Significance was determined using log-rank
tests. (http:kmplot.com/analysis/index.php?p) [34].

10.	 Ryan HE, Poloni M, Mcnulty W, Elson D, Gassmann M,
Arbeit JM, Johnson RS. Hypoxia-inducible Factor-1α Is a
Positive Factor in Solid Tumor Growth. Cancer Res. 2000;
60:4010–4015.
11.	 Tyers M, Rottapel R. VHL: a very hip ligase. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A. 1999; 96:12230–2.
12.	 Schwab LP, Peacock DL, Majumdar D, Ingels JF, Jensen LC,
Smith KD, Cushing RC, Seagroves TN. Hypoxia-inducible
factor 1α promotes primary tumor growth and tumor-­
initiating cell activity in breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res.
2012; 14:R6.

Statistical analysis
Quantitative data from all experiments are presented
as means±s.e. from three independent experiments, and
were analyzed with the unpaired two-tailed Student’s
t-test. A P-value of < 0.05 was considered statistically
significant.

13.	 Semenza GL. Defining the role of hypoxia-inducible factor 1 in cancer biology and therapeutics. Oncogene. 2010;
29:625–34.
14.	 Kim J, Tchernyshyov I, Semenza GL, Dang CV. HIF-1mediated expression of pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase:
a metabolic switch required for cellular adaptation to
hypoxia. Cell Metab. 2006; 3:177–85.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

15.	 Forsythe JOA, Jiang B, Iyer NV, Agani F, Leung SW.
Activation of vascular endothelial growth factor gene transcription by hypoxia-inducible factor 1. Mol Cell Biol.
1996; 16:4604–13.

We thank Christina Ferrer and Valerie Sodi for
helpful discussions and critically reading this manuscript.

16.	 Flamant L, Notte A, Ninane N, Raes M, Michiels C.
­Anti-apoptotic role of HIF-1 and AP-1 in paclitaxel
exposed breast cancer cells under hypoxia. Mol Cancer.
2010; 9:191.

REFERENCES
1.	 Siegel R, Naishadham D, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2013.
CA Cancer J Clin. 2013; 63:11–30.

17.	 Selvendiran K, Bratasz A, Kuppusamy ML, Tazi  MF,
Rivera BK, Kuppusamy P. Hypoxia induces
­chemoresistance in ovarian cancer cells by activation
of ­signal ­transducer and activator of transcription 3. Int
J Cancer. 2009; 125:2198–204.

2.	 Hortobagyi GN, et al. The Global Breast Cancer Burden:
Variations in Epidemiology and Survival. Clin Breast
Cancer. 2005; 6:391–401.
3.	 Jemal A, Siegel R, Xu J, Ward E. Cancer Statistics, 2013.
CA Cancer J Clin. 2010; 60:277–300.

18.	 Liang S, Galluzzo P, Sobol A, Skucha S, Rambo B,
Bocchetta M. Multimodality Approaches to Treat Hypoxic
Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC) Microenvironment.
Genes Cancer. 2012; 3:141–51.

4.	 Bonneterre J, Peyrat JP, Re F, Humaine Â, Me O,
Lambret CO, Ce L. Review ERBB2 Oncogene in Human
Breast Cancer and its Clinical Significance. Eur J Cancer.
1998; 34:791–808.

19.	 Slamon DJ, Godolphin W, Jones LA, Holt JA, Wong SG,
Keith DE, Levin WJ, Stuart SG, Udove J, Ullrich A. Studies
of the HER-2/neu proto-oncogene in human breast and
ovarian cancer. Science. 1989; 244:707–12.

5.	 Landgraf R. HER2 therapy. HER2 (ERBB2): functional
diversity from structurally conserved building blocks.
Breast Cancer Res. 2007; 9:202.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1979

Oncotarget

20.	 Whelan KA, Caldwell SA, Shahriari KS, Jackson SR,
Franchetti LD, Johannes GJ, Reginato MJ. Hypoxia
Suppression of Bim and Bmf Blocks Anoikis and Luminal
Clearing during Mammary Morphogenesis. Mol Biol Cell.
2010; 21:3829–37.

33.	 Generali D, et al. Hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha
­expression predicts a poor response to primary chemoendocrine therapy and disease-free survival in primary human
breast cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2006; 12:4562–8.
34.	 Györffy B, Lanczky A, Eklund AC, Denkert C,
Budczies J, Li Q, Szallasi Z. An online survival analysis
tool to rapidly assess the effect of 22,277 genes on breast
cancer prognosis using microarray data of 1,809 patients.
Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2010; 123:725–31.

21.	 Whelan KA, Schwab LP, Karakashev SV, Franchetti L,
Johannes GJ, Seagroves TN, Reginato MJ. The oncogene
HER2/neu (ERBB2) requires the hypoxia-inducible factor
HIF-1 for mammary tumor growth and anoikis resistance.
J Biol Chem. 2013; 288:15865–77.

35.	 Rana P, Sridhar SS. Efficacy and tolerability of lapatinib in
the management of breast cancer. Breast Cancer (Auckl).
2012; 6:67–77.

22.	 Sullivan R, Paré GC, Frederiksen LJ, Semenza GL,
Graham CH. Hypoxia-induced resistance to anticancer
drugs is associated with decreased senescence and requires
hypoxia-inducible factor-1 activity. Mol Cancer Ther. 2008;
7:1961–73.

36.	 Rexer BN, Arteaga CL. Intrinsic and Acquired Resistance
to HER2-Targeted Therapies in HER2 Gene-Amplified
Breast Cancer: Mechanisms and Clinical Implications. Crit
Rev Oncog. 2012; 17:1–16.

23.	 Haenssen KK, Caldwell SA, Shahriari KS, Jackson SR,
Whelan KA, Klein-Szanto AJ, Reginato MJ. ErbB2 requires
integrin alpha5 for anoikis resistance via Src regulation of
receptor activity in human mammary epithelial cells. J Cell
Sci. 2010; 123:1373–82.

37.	 Walsh N, Kennedy S, Larkin A, Corkery B, O’Driscoll L,
Clynes M, Crown J, O’Donovan N. EGFR and HER2
inhibition in pancreatic cancer. Invest New Drugs. 2013;
31:558–66.

24.	 Catzavelos C, et al. Decreased levels of the cell-cycle
­inhibitor p27Kip1 protein: Prognostic implications in
­primary breast cancer. Nat Med. 1997; 3:227–30.

38.	 Walters DM, Lindberg JM, Adair SJ, Newhook TE,
Cowan  CR, Stokes JB, Borgman CA, Stelow EB,
Lowrey BT, Chopivsky ME. Inhibition of the Growth of
Patient-Derived Pancreatic Cancer Xenografts with the
MEK Inhibitor Trametinib Is Augmented by Combined
Treatment with the Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor/
HER2. Neoplasia. 2013; 15:143–55.

25.	 Tan P, Cady B, Wanner M, Worland P, Cukor B,
­Magi-galluzzi C, Lavin P, Draetta G, Pagano M, Loda M. The
Cell Cycle Inhibitor p27 Is an Independent Prognostic Marker
in Small (T 1a, b) Invasive Breast Carcinomas. Advances in
Brief Invasive Breast Carcinomas. 1997:1259–63.

39.	 Noto A, De Vitis C, Roscilli G, Fattore L, Marra E,
Luberto  L, Andrilli AD, Giovagnoli MR, Normanno N,
Ruco L, Mancini R, Ciliberto G. Combination therapy with
anti-ErbB3 monoclonal antibodies and EGFR TKIs potently
inhibits Non-small Cell Lung Cancer. Oncotarget. 2013;
4:1253–1265.

26.	 Faber AC, et al. BIM expression in treatment-naive cancers
predicts responsiveness to kinase inhibitors. Cancer Discov.
2011; 1:352–65.
27.	 Hanna SC, et al. HIF1 α and HIF2 α independently activate
SRC to promote melanoma metastases. J Clin Invest. 2013;
123:2078–93.
28.	 De Luca A, D’Alessio A, Gallo M, Maiello MR, Bode AM,
Normanno N. Src and CXCR4 are involved in the invasiveness of breast cancer cells with acquired resistance to
lapatinib. Cell Cycle. 2014; 13:148–56.

40.	 Dupouy S, Doan VK, Wu Z, Mourra N, Liu J. Activation
of EGFR, HER2 and HER3 by neurotensin/neurotensin
­receptor 1 renders breast tumors aggressive yet highly
responsive to lapatinib and metformin in mice. Oncotarget.
2013; 5:8235–8251.

29.	 Kim KB, et al. Phase II study of the MEK1/MEK2 ­inhibitor
Trametinib in patients with metastatic BRAF-mutant
­cutaneous melanoma previously treated with or without a
BRAF inhibitor. J Clin Oncol. 2013; 31:482–9.

41.	 Takagi S, Banno H, Hayashi A, Tamura T. HER2 and
HER3 cooperatively regulate cancer cell growth and determine sensitivity to the novel investigational EGFR/HER2
kinase inhibitor TAK-285. Oncoscience. 2014; 1:196–204.

30.	 Benita Y, Kikuchi H, Smith AD, Zhang MQ, Chung DC,
Xavier RJ. An integrative genomics approach identifies
Hypoxia Inducible Factor-1 (HIF-1)-target genes that form
the core response to hypoxia. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009;
37:4587–602.

42.	 Muranen T, Selfors LM, Worster DT, Iwanicki MP, Song L,
Morales FC, Gao S, Mills GB, Brugge JS. Inhibition of
PI3K/mTOR leads to adaptive resistance in matrix-attached
cancer cells. Cancer Cell. 2012; 21:227–39.

31.	 Ward Y, Gupta S, Jensen P, Wartmann M, Davis RJ,
Kelly K. Control of MAP kinase activation by the mitogeninduced threonine/tyrosine phosphatase PAC1. Nature.
1994; 367:651–4.

43.	 Caldwell SA, Jackson SR, Shahriari KS, Lynch TP,
Sethi  G, Walker S, Vosseller K, Reginato MJ. Nutrient
­sensor O-GlcNAc transferase regulates breast cancer
­tumorigenesis through targeting of the oncogenic transcription factor FoxM1. Oncogene. 2010; 29:2831–42.

32.	 Lin S, Chien C, Lee J, Yeh Y, Hsu K, Lai Y, Lin S, Tsai S.
Suppression of dual-specificity phosphatase - 2 by hypoxia
increases chemoresistance and malignancy in human cancer
cells. J Clin Invest. 2011; 121:1905–16.

44.	 Tandon P, Gallo CA, Khatri S, Barger JF, Yepiskoposyan H,
Plas DR. Requirement for ribosomal protein S6 kinase 1 to
mediate glycolysis and apoptosis resistance induced by Pten
deficiency. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011; 108:2361–5.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1980

Oncotarget

