Research Article

Synuclein-; Targeting Peptide Inhibitor that Enhances Sensitivity
of Breast Cancer Cells to Antimicrotubule Drugs
1

2

3,4

5

Vinay K. Singh, Yue Zhou, Joseph A. Marsh, Vladimir N. Uversky,
3,4
2
1
Julie D. Forman-Kay, Jingwen Liu, and Zongchao Jia

1
Department of Biochemistry, Queen’s University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada; 2Department of Veterans Affairs, Palo Alto Health Care
System, Palo Alto, California; 3Molecular Structure and Function, Hospital for Sick Children; 4Department of Biochemistry,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; and 5Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana

aberrant expression of synuclein-g (SNCG; ref. 1), also referred
breast cancer specific gene 1 (2), to the disease progression of breast
cancer. SNCG, along with the synuclein-a (SNCA) and synuclein-h,
belongs to a family of intrinsically disordered proteins (3). Recently,
it has been recognized that intrinsically disordered proteins are
more common than previously thought and can play important
biological roles. SNCG mRNA and protein are not expressed in
normal breast tissue or tissues with benign breast diseases but are
abundantly expressed in a high percentage of invasive and
metastatic breast carcinomas (2, 4, 5). A series of functional studies
have shown that SNCG expression significantly stimulates proliferation (6–9), invasion, and metastasis of breast cancer cells (10).
SNCG has been shown to interact with BubR1, a mitotic
checkpoint kinase required for the prevention of cell mitotic
divisions following severe cell damage or mutation (11). In MCF7
breast cancer cells with SNCG overexpression, nocodazole and
taxol, the common microtubule inhibitors, have much reduced
efficacy. This has been attributed to the SNCG-BubR1 interaction
(11, 12). The inhibitory effects of SNCG on checkpoint function
are also reduced when the cellular expression level of BubR1 is
increased by ectopic overexpression (13). Additional evidence
shows that the interaction of BubR1 with CENP-E, which is
critically required for the mitotic checkpoint signaling, is impaired
in the presence of SNCG. This suggests that SNCG may inhibit the
BubR1 function through the interference of BubR1-CENP-E
interaction (13). Taken together, it may be hypothesized that
BubR1 is a cellular target of SNCG, and the interaction of SNCGBubR1 may represent a novel mechanism for inactivation of the
mitotic checkpoint (11–13).
Currently, microtubule inhibitors are used as the first-line
chemotherapeutic agents to treat patients with advanced or
metastatic breast cancer (14, 15). However, response rates to this
class of drugs vary significantly. These microtubule-disrupting
agents are thought to arrest cells in mitosis by triggering the mitotic
checkpoint activation, resulting in cells arrested in the mitotic
phase without entering anaphase (16). Prolonged treatments with
these agents lead to cell death by undergoing apoptosis (17).
Because the working mechanism of antimicrotubule drugs relies
heavily on the normal function of the mitotic checkpoint machinery
in which BubR1 is a critical component (17), the inhibitory effect of
SNCG on BubR1 function may explain the induced resistance of
breast cancer cells to microtubule inhibitors after exogenous
expression of SNCG (18).
In this study, we have designed a novel peptide based on the
conserved residues of a single ankyrin-repeat motif and investigated
its interaction with SNCG both in vitro and in breast cancer cell
lines. We have further examined the molecular mechanism by which
the ANK peptide overrides SNCG-mediated drug resistance.

Abstract
Synuclein-; (SNCG) plays oncogenic roles in breast carcinogenesis. Although the expression of SNCG is abnormally high
in advanced and metastatic breast carcinomas, SNCG is not
expressed in normal or benign breast tissues. SNCG is an
intrinsically disordered protein known to interact with BubR1,
a mitotic checkpoint kinase. The SNCG-BubR1 interaction
inhibits mitotic checkpoint control upon spindle damage
caused by anticancer drugs, such as nocodazole and taxol.
Antimicrotubule drugs that cause mitotic arrest and subsequent apoptosis of cancer cells are frequently used to treat
breast cancer patients with advanced or metastatic diseases.
However, patient response rates to this class of chemotherapeutic agents vary significantly. In this study, we have designed
a novel peptide (ANK) and shown its interaction with SNCG
using fluorometry, surface plasmon resonance, and isothermal
titration calorimetry. Binding of the ANK peptide did not
induce folding of SNCG, suggesting that SNCG can function
biologically in its intrinsically disordered state. Microinjection
of the ANK peptide in breast cancer cell line overexpressing
SNCG (MCF7-SNCG) exhibited a similar cell killing response by
nocodazole as in the SNCG-negative MCF7 cells. Overexpression
of enhanced green fluorescent protein–tagged ANK reduces
SNCG-mediated resistance to paclitaxel treatment by f3.5fold. Our coimmunoprecipitation and colocalization results
confirmed the intracellular association of the ANK peptide
with SNCG. This is likely due to the disruption of the interaction
of SNCG with BubR1 interaction. Our findings shed light on
the molecular mechanism of the ANK peptide in releasing
SNCG-mediated drug resistance. [Cancer Res 2007;67(2):626–33]

Introduction
Breast cancer development and progression involve abnormality
of multiple genes through genetic and epigenetic alterations.
Differential DNA sequencing and in situ hybridization linked the

Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research Online
(http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
V.K. Singh and Y. Zhou contributed equally to this work.
V.K. Singh is the recipient of Canadian Institutes of Health Research fellowship in
Transdisciplinary Cancer Research. Z. Jia is the recipient of the Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council of Canada Steacie Fellowship and is a Canada Research
Chair in Structural Biology.
Requests for reprints: Zongchao Jia, Department of Biochemistry, Queen’s
University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada K7L 3N6. Phone: 613-533-6277; Fax: 613-5332497; E-mail: jia@post.queensu.ca or Jingwen Liu, Department of Veterans Affairs, Palo
Alto, CA 94304. Phone: 650-493-5000, ext. 64411; Fax: 650-849-0251; E-mail: Jingwen.
Liu@med.va.gov.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-06-1820

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (2). January 15, 2007

626

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Peptide-Mediated Sensitivity to Antimicrotubule Drugs
with a monoclonal anti-GFP antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa
Cruz, CA; 1:500 dilution) and then subsequently probed with 1:100 dilution
of a goat anti-SNCG polyclonal antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology). The
mitotic index was determined followed by the treatment with 0.5 Amol/L
taxol as per standard protocol (11).
GST pull-down assay. GST-SNCG (20 Ag) protein or GST alone was
added to pre-equilibrated slurry of glutathione-Sepharose 4B and incubated
for 60 min. The unbound protein was then washed thrice with PBS
containing 1% Triton X-100. MCF-7 cell lysate (1 mg) was mixed with the
beads and incubated for 1 h at 4jC. After extensive washes, the beads were
collected, boiled in sample buffer, separated on 12% SDS gel, and analyzed
by Western blotting as described above.
BubR1-SNCG association in the absence and presence of the ANK
peptide. COS7 cells were cotransfected with pCS2-BubR1 (11, 13), pCISNCG, and pEGFP-ANK plasmid or with the control plasmid pEGFP by
FuGENE 6 transfection reagent (Roche). Two days after transfection, cells
were lysed, and immunoprecipitation with anti-SNCG antibody was done as
described above. The proteins in immunoprecipitate complexes and total
cell lysates were analyzed by Western blotting using a monoclonal anti-Myc
antibody (1:500 dilution; BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA), anti-GFP antibody,
and anti-SNCG antibody.
Microinjection of the ANK peptide and immunofluorescence
microscopy. MCF7-SNCG and MCF-Neo cells as describe previously
(11) were grown to 80% confluence, split with trypsin, and seeded on a 22mm glass coverslip treated with human fibronectin (10 mg/mL) into 60-mm
diameter dishes containing cell maintenance medium for 24 h and used for
the experiments. To exclude the possibility that microinjection might affect
cell cycle and proliferation, MCF7-Neo and MCF7-SNCG cells were microinjected with goat IgG as a control. Injections were done at a constant flow by
varying the injection pressure P c between 40 and 70 units. The microscope
stage was kept at 37jC. Approximately 25 to 30 cells were microinjected in
each experiment (n = 3). Thirty minutes after microinjection, the coverslips
were transferred to medium containing 0.5 Amol/L nocodazole and incubated
for additional 24 h. Medium without nocodazole was used for control. In the
immunofluorescence experiments, cells were fixed as described (12), and
mitotic index determined following standard protocol (11).
Immunostaining of phosphorylated histone (H3). The MCF7-SNCG
and MCF7-neo cells cultured on coverslips were transfected by pEGFP or
pEGFP-ANK respectively for >24 h and treated with 0.5 Amol/L taxol
(Sigma, St. Louis, MO) for 18 h. The mitotic index was calculated according
to the proportion of the number of H3 staining GFP-positive cells to total
GFP-positive cells.
Flow cytometry. MCF7-SNCG cells were cultured, transfected, and fixed
as described previously followed by probing with 2 Ag/mL rabbit polyclonal
anti-phosphorylated H3 (Ser10; Upstate, Charlottesville, VA) at room
temperature. After two washes with PBS, cells were treated with
allophycocyanin-labeled goat anti-rabbit secondary antibody (Molecular
Probes, Carlsbad, CA), 50 Ag/mL propidium iodide, and 100 Ag/mL RNase.
Cells were analyzed for cell cycle and anti–phosphorylated H3 population on
a FACSCalibur flow cytometer using CellQuest software (Becton Dickinson,
San Jose, CA). The mitotic index was calculated according to the proportion
of the number of double H3-GFP–positive cells to the total GFP-positive cells.

Therapeutic application of this peptide may represent a possible
future strategy to intervene against overexpression of SNCG in
breast cancer and to enhance the effectiveness of anticancer drugs.

Materials and Methods
Cloning, expression, and purification of SNCG. The SNCG coding
region was amplified from the human cDNA clone (Genbank accession no.
AF017256) using primers 5¶-GCGGATCCATGGATGTCTTCAAGAAGGGC-3¶
(sense) and 5¶-GAGCGGCCGCAGTCTCCCCCACTCTGGGCCTC-3¶ (antisense) and was subsequently subcloned as a BamHI-NotI fragment into
the pGEX-4T-3 vector (Amersham Biosciences, Arlington Heights, IL) in the
correct reading frame to express the glutathione S-transferase (GST)-SNCG
fusion protein. Recombinant GST-SNCG was first purified using GSTrap
column as per manufacturer’s instructions (Amersham Biosciences)
followed by further purification using G-200 gel filtration column on AKTA
fast protein liquid chromatography (Amersham Biosciences). Purity of GSTSNCG and SNCG was analyzed using 12% SDS-PAGE (Supplementary
Fig. S1). The average yield was f22 mg of GST-SNCG and 10 mg of GST
cleaved SNCG per liter of Escherichia coli culture.
Nuclear magnetic resonance. Isotopically labeled SNCG was expressed
in M9 minimal media containing 1 g/L 15N-ammonium chloride and
purified as described above. Final nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
samples were in 10 mmol/L sodium phosphate (pH 7), 7.5% D2O. 1H-15N
heteronuclear single quantum coherence (HSQC) experiments were done on
a Varian Inova 800 MHz spectrometer and processed using NMRPipe (19).
Circular dichroism and fluorescence spectroscopy. ANK peptide was
prepared by solid-phase synthesis (Supplementary Methods). SNCG-ANK
interaction was monitored using far-UV circular dichroism (CD) recorded on
a rapid-scanning monochromator fitted with a CD module (RSM 1000, Olis,
Inc., Bogart, GA). Molar ellipticity [u] was calculated according to the formula
[u] = [u]  100 / (nlc), where n represents the number of amino acids in
the protein, l represents the path length of the cuvette in centimeters, and c
represents the concentration in millimolar. ANS binding experiments were
carried out using an LS50B fluorescence spectrometer (Perkin-Elmer,
Norwalk, CT). The ‘‘phase diagram’’ method analysis of spectroscopic data,
which is extremely sensitive for the detection of intermediate states (20)
of protein during binding of ligand, was used to observe association of the
ANK peptide with SNCG (Supplementary Methods).
Surface plasmon resonance and isothermal titration calorimetry.
Surface plasmon resonance (SPR) experiments were done as described
previously (21) using Biacore3000 (Biacore, Inc., Piscataway, NJ), detailed in
the Supplementary Methods. Titration calorimetry measurements were
done with a VP-isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC) calorimeter (MicroCal, Inc., Northampton, MA). Binding variables, such as the number of
binding sites, the binding constant, and the binding enthalpy of bound
ligand, were determined by fitting the experimental binding isotherms.
Cloning and expression of enhanced green fluorescent protein–
fused ANK. The sense sequence of the 105-bp single-stranded oligonucleotide corresponding to the AA sequence of the ANK peptide with a
stop codon was as follows: AAGGGCAACAGTGCCCTTCACGTAGCCTCACAGCATGGCCACCTTGGATGCATACAGACCTTGGTTAGATATGGAGCAAATGTCACCATGCAGAACCACGGGTGA. This single-stranded
oligonucleotide was used as the template in a PCR reaction to produce a
double stranded DNA fragment with the 5¶ primer (AAGGGCAACAGTGCCCTTC) and the 3¶ primer (TCACCCGTGGTTCTGCATG). The
DNA fragment was cloned into an expression vector pEGFP-C2 to produce an
enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP)-ANK fusion protein. Cytoplasmic
expression of EGFP-ANK fusion protein was confirmed by green fluorescent
signals in cells transfected with pEGFP-ANK. The correct molecular mass of
EGFP-ANK was verified by Western blotting with anti-GFP antibody.
Detection of ANK-SNCG interaction and mitotic index in breast
cancer cell lines. T47D, MCF7-neo, and MCF7-SNCG clones were
transfected with pEGFP-ANK plasmid or the control plasmid pEGFP by
FuGENE 6 transfection reagent (Roche, Indianapolis, IN). Cell lysate was
prepared as described previously (11, 12) followed by coimmunoprecipitation using 10 Ag of goat anti-SNCG antibody. Western blotting was done

www.aacrjournals.org

Results
Design of the single ankyrin peptide. The in vivo interaction of
SNCA with multiple ankyrin repeats containing synphilin-1 was
shown previously (22). In light of the high sequence homology
between SNCA and SNCG (55.9%), it is conceivable that a peptide
similar to the ankyrin repeats could interact with SNCG. To investigate this possibility, we designed a 34-residue peptide (KGNSALHVASQHGHLGCIQTLVRYGANVTMQNHG), which we shall call the
ANK peptide. The underlined residues in the ANK peptide represent
the nine conserved ankyrin residues (Supplementary Fig. S2).
SNCG functions as a natively unfolded protein and interacts
with the ANK peptide in vitro. Experiments were first done to

627

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (2). January 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

suggests that the ANK peptide can interact with ANS, potentially as
an oligomer. Importantly, formation of the SNCG-ANK complex is
accompanied by an f20% decrease in ANS fluorescence intensity of
the only peptide that is affected by the presence of SNCG, suggesting
the association between SNCG and the ANK peptide.
Kinetics of the SNCG-ANK interaction. Using immobilized
ANK peptide and a GST-SNCG analyte, SPR showed effective
binding of the SNCG to the ANK peptide. Figure 2B shows sensograms measured at several GST-SNCG concentrations. Sensograms
were deconvoluted globally, using a simultaneous fit for both association (k a, M 1 s 1) and dissociation (k d, s 1). Global fits were
obtained for the two-phase reaction (conformation change) model
with rate constants of k a1 (2.59  10 3 M 1 s 1), k d1 (0.014 s 1),
K a2 (3.32  10 3 M 1 s 1), k d2 (8.02  10 4 s 1). Overall, the
apparent K d was found to be 73.4 Amol/L for the SNCG-ANK
peptide interaction. There was no significant decrease in analyte
binding capacity to the ANK peptide for the duration of the
experiments, and the active ANK peptide surfaces were very stable.
No binding was observed when GST was used as the analyte (data
not shown), which confirmed that SNCG was responsible for the
observed interaction between GST-SNCG and the ANK peptide.
ITC was also used to thermodynamically characterize the SNCGANK interaction (Fig. 2C). Because the thermodynamic properties
of an interaction often reflect its structural characteristics, it
was interesting to note an endothermic phase followed by an
exothermic phase. No visible precipitation was observed in the
titration mixture. The thermodynamics of the peptide titration in
GST-SNCG solution exhibited excellent agreement with ideal
binding (Fig. 2C), indicating the presence of one high-affinity and
multiple low-affinity sequential binding sites. The heat of dilution
was measured by titrating the ANK peptide in buffer alone. This was
generally small and subtracted from each binding titration curve. A
measured K d of 70 F 5 Amol/L and DH of 2.174 F 0.2 kcal/mol for
the first binding site and in the severalfold lower affinity range for
other sequential binding sites were observed. These results were in
very good agreement with SPR and fluorescence analysis, validating
the observed interaction in solution and in the immobilized form.
ANK peptide binds to SNCG in breast cancer cell lines. To
observe the association of the ANK peptide with SNCG in breast
cancer cell lines, we cloned nucleotide sequence corresponding

confirm the previous observation (3) that SNCG is intrinsically
disordered. The 1H-15N HSQC spectrum of native SNCG was
characterized by narrow line widths and limited 1H chemical shift
dispersion (Fig. 1A). This is indicative of conformational averaging
within a rapidly inter-converting ensemble, which shows that SNCG
is intrinsically disordered. The far-UV CD spectrum of SNCG was
characteristic of an intrinsically disordered polypeptide chain as
well, as evidenced by the absence of bands in the 210- to 230-nm
region and an intensive minima at f196 nm (Fig. 1B). Interestingly,
no significant conformational change could be detected in SNCG
upon titration of the ANK peptide into SNCG solution (Fig. 1B).
Demonstration of SNCG association with the ANK peptide using
NMR titrations was inconclusive due to the high concentrations of
protein and peptide required and the precipitation of the ANK
peptide, which is not highly soluble, under these conditions.
To further probe the association of SNCG with the ANK peptide,
we have used several biophysical approaches. We observed the
maximal intrinsic tyrosine fluorescence of SNCG at 345 nm, whereas
addition of the ANK peptide resulted in a pronounced blue shift in
k max, analyzed using the method of parametric dependencies
(Supplementary Fig. S3). It has been shown that the dependence
I(k 1) = f[I(k 2)] is linear for the all-or-none transition between two
different conformations. Whereas the nonlinearity of this function
reflects the sequential character of structural transformations, each
linear portion describes the individual all-or-none transition.
Supplementary Figure S3 shows that the I 310 versus I 370 plot has
at least three linear regions, suggesting a complex mechanism of
the ANK peptide binding to SNCG involving at least three distinct
stages, possibly including de-aggregation of peptide.
ANS fluorescence was used to study the conformational properties
of SNCG and the SNCG-ANK interaction (Fig. 2A). Changes in ANS
fluorescence intensity are frequently used to monitor formation of
partially folded intermediates during protein unfolding and refolding
(23) and to analyze the hydrophobic surfaces of proteins (24).
Figure 2A shows that SNCG did not interact with ANS, confirming
that this protein is intrinsically disordered and does not possess large
solvent-exposed hydrophobic patches that are typical of folded
conformations. Addition of the ANK peptide induced significant
changes in ANS fluorescence properties, including a dramatic
increase in the fluorescence intensity and a blue shift in k max. This

Figure 1. NMR and CD show that SNCG is disordered. A, the 1H-15N HSQC spectrum of SNCG, with the limited spectral dispersion diagnostic of disordered
protein. The measurement was carried out using 0.35 mmol/L 15N-labeled SNCG in 10 mmol/L sodium phosphate (pH 7) at 5jC. B, SNCG remains disordered upon
association with the ANK peptide. Far-UV CD spectra of SNCG with titration of varying concentration of the ANK peptide. Samples containing 0.145 mg/mL
SNCG were dialyzed into 5 mmol/L sodium phosphate buffer (pH 7) for data acquisition. Spectra were averaged from 12 scans recorded at 25jC in a cell of path length
0.1 mm using OLIS RSM spectrometer. The baseline was corrected by subtracting the spectra measured under identical conditions for the remaining buffer after dialysis.
Peptide was reconstituted into flow-through buffer after dialysis and used for titration. Spectra resemble random coil reference spectra typical of disordered proteins.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (2). January 15, 2007

628

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Peptide-Mediated Sensitivity to Antimicrotubule Drugs

Figure 2. Interaction between SNCG and the ANK peptide monitored by the ANS fluorescence, SPR, and ITC. A, fluorescence emission spectra of SNCG and the
ANK peptide in presence of 0.02 mg/mL ANS; 30 Amol/L SNCG and 240 Amol/L ANK were used. All samples were in 10 mmol/L sodium phosphate buffer (pH 7), and an
averaged scan of buffer was used to correct all spectra. Scan 1, only buffer; scan 2, only ANS; scan 3, only ANK; scan 4, only protein; scan 5, ANS fluorescence
in the presence of protein and the ANK peptide. Scan 5 indirectly represents the association of SNCG and the ANK peptide. B, representative sensorgrams. Replicates
of the interaction between peptide and GST-SNCG at concentrations of 4.413 Amol/L (1), 2.648 Amol/L (2), and 0.662 Amol/L (3). C, ITC analysis of the binding
of ANK peptide to the GST-SNCG in vitro. The protein solution for ITC was dialyzed extensively against 10 mmol/L phosphate buffer (pH 7). The peptide solution was
prepared by diluting with the buffer used for the protein dialysis. Injections (6 AL  50) of peptide (400 Amol/L) were done by means of a rotating stirrer-syringe to the
reaction cell, containing 1.43 mL of the 50 Amol/L protein solution. The heat of dilution was determined to be negligible in separate titrations of the ligand into the
buffer solution. Top, raw heat change elicited by successive injections of peptide into a solution of GST-SNCG; bottom, normalized integration data (kcal/mol of peptide
as a function of the molar ratio of peptide to the GST-SNCG and the fitting to the sequential binding site model). Calorimetric data analysis was carried out with ORIGIN
5.0 software (MicroCal). IP, immunoprecipitation.

were further validated using GST pull-down assay. We generated
and purified GST fusion proteins that contain the full-length
(amino acid 127) SNCG (Supplementary Fig. S1). GST pull-down
assay was done with purified GST fusion proteins immobilized on
glutathione-Sepharose beads and MCF7-neo cell lysate transfected
with pEGFP-ANK or pEGFP alone. After intensive washings,
proteins bound to the beads were eluted and analyzed by Western
blotting using anti-GFP antibody. Figure 3D shows that EGFP-ANK
did not bind to GST (lane 3). However, a strong band of EGFP-ANK
was detected with GST-SNCG (lane 2). The pull-down assay also
showed no interaction of EGFP alone with GST-SNCG (lane 1).
Taken together, these results confirmed the specific association
of SNCG with the ANK peptide in cell lines.
ANK peptide disrupts SNCG association with BubR1 and
releases SNCG-mediated drug resistance. Our previous studies
have identified BubR1 as a cellular target of SNCG through yeast twohybrid and coimmunoprecipitation (11). The binding of SNCG to
BubR1 is believed to result in the compromised mitotic checkpoint
function as shown by increased resistance of cancer cells to
antimicrotubule drugs (11). We were interested to determine
whether the binding of ANK to SNCG would directly affect SNCG
interaction with BubR1. In further experiments, we transfected COS7
cells with pCS2-BubR1, pCI-SNCG, pEGFP-ANK, or the control
vector pEGFP at equal molar ratios. Two days after transfection, cells
were harvested for immunoprecipitation with anti-SNCG antibody.
The presence of the myc-tagged BubR1 in immunoprecipitate
complexes was detected by Western blot using anti-Myc antibody.
The membrane was then sequentially probed with anti-GFP

to the ANK peptide into pEGFP-C2 vector (pEGFP-ANK) and
expressed the ANK peptide as a fusion protein with its NH2terminal linked to EGFP. Plasmids pEGFP-ANK and pEGFP were
separately transfected into cells. Western blotting using anti-GFP
antibody showed specific signals of EGFP as a 33-kDa protein and
EGFP-ANK as an f37-kDa fusion protein (Fig. 3A ). The
intracellular localization of EGFP-ANK was shown by strong green
fluorescent signals in cytoplasm, which is colocalized with red
signals of SNCG (Fig. 3B). To examine the in vivo binding of ANK to
SNCG, we did coimmunoprecipitation experiments (Fig. 3C).
MCF7-SNCG (lanes 3 and 4) cells were transfected with pEGFPANK (lane 3) or the control vector pEGFP (lane 4). In this
experiment, MCF7-neo cells were included as negative controls
(lanes 1 and 2). Two days after transfection, cell lysates were
prepared, and immunoprecipitation with anti-SNCG antibody was
conducted. The presence of EGFP-ANK in SNCG immunoprecipitate complexes obtained from different transfected cells was
detected by Western blot using anti-GFP antibody. The membrane
was subsequently reprobed with anti-SNCG antibody to show equal
amounts of SNCG in immunoprecipitate complexes of MCF7-SNCG
cell lysates. Figure 3C (top) shows that when anti-SNCG IP
complexes were probed with GFP antibody, only EGFP-ANK but
not EGFP alone is found to coprecipitate with SNCG (lane 3) in
MCF7-SNCG cells. EGFP-ANK was also not in the immunoprecipitate complexes of neo cells. Figure 3C (bottom) shows the
immunoblotting of anti-SNCG and anti-GFP in total cell lysates.
The results of coimmunoprecipitation clearly show the direct
intracellular binding of the ANK peptide to SNCG. These results

www.aacrjournals.org

629

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (2). January 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 3. Colocalization, coimmunoprecipitation, and
GST pull-down experiments using EGFP-ANK fusion
protein confirm that SNCG associates with the ANK
peptide in vivo. A, expression and coimmunoprecipitation
of EGFP-ANK fusion protein. Representative Western blot
is depicting detection of EGFP-ANK expression in COS7
cells. Lanes 2 and 3, samples transfected with different
clones (cl-4 and cl-8, respectively) of pEGFP-ANK plasmid.
B, MCF7-SNCG cells were transfected with pEGFP-ANK,
fixed on a coverslip, permeabilized, and probed with
anti-SNCG and anti-GFP antibodies to observe
colocalization. Fluorescent cells were visualized using
a 100 objective (oil) on an inverted confocal microscope
(Leica Microsystems, Heidelberg, Germany). C and D,
MCF7-SNCG and MCF7-neo were transfected with
pEGFP-ANK or pEGFP plasmids. Two days after
transfection, total cell lysates were harvested, and 2 mg of
total cell lysate per sample was used to perform
immunoprecipitation with anti-SNCG antibody or GST
pull down using GST-SNCG overexpressed in E. coli. Only
GST served as control. The samples were separated by
SDS-PAGE, and the membrane was sequentially
probed with anti-GFP and anti-SNCG antibodies for
coimmunoprecipitation and anti-GFP, anti-GST, and
anti-SNCG antibodies, respectively, for GST pull-down
experiment.

To further show the function of the ANK peptide in restoring the
impaired mitotic checkpoint control in SNCG-expressing cells,
MCF7-neo, MCF7-SNCG, and T47D cells were transfected with
pEGFP-ANK or the control vector pEGFP. Two days after transfection, cells were exposed to taxol for 18 h, and numbers of
mitotic arrested and apoptotic cells were counted after DAPI
staining. Expression of EGFP-ANK in neo cells did not significantly
alter the mitotic index or the percentage of apoptotic cells.
However, expression of this peptide in SNCG cells consistently
caused an f2-fold increase in the number of mitotic arrested cells

antibody and followed with anti-SNCG antibody. Figure 4 (left)
shows that when anti-SNCG immunoprecipitate complexes were
probed with myc antibody, the myc-BubR1 was found to coprecipitate with SNCG in the absence of EGFP-ANK, and myc-BubR1
signal was not detected in the immunoprecipitate complex of cells
expressing the ANK peptide. In contrast, anti-GFP antibody only
detected the GFP signal in the immunoprecipitate complex obtained
from cells expressing EGFP-ANK and not from cells expressing GFP
only. Figure 4 (right) illustrates the results of Western blots using
total cell lysates, showing similar expression levels of these proteins.
These results clearly indicate that the binding of the ANK peptide
to SNCG interrupted the interaction of SNCG with BubR1.
To determine whether the ANK peptide mediated disruption of
SNCG-BubR1 association in vivo released the inhibition of mitotic
arrest, we used microinjection of the ANK peptide into the stable
breast cancer cell line MCF7 expressing SNCG (MCF7-SNCG) and
the control SNCG-negative MCF7-Neo cell line. Microinjection
efficiency and viability were excellent when cells were injected with
goat IgG as a control, showing that background effects of
microinjection and antibody were minimal in both cell lines.
Significant numbers of cells survived after treatment with the ANK
peptide by microinjection in both cell lines (Supplementary Fig. S4).
After microinjection, cells were treated with 0.5 Amol/L nocodazole
for 24 h, and the fraction of mitotically arrested cells was counted
after 4¶,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) staining. As shown in
Fig. 5, when the cells without ANK injection were treated with
nocodazole, MCF7-Neo cells exhibited a significantly higher degree
of mitotic arrest compared with MCF7-SNCG cells. In contrast,
injection of the ANK peptide into MCF7-SNCG cells significantly
(P < 0.05) increased the level of mitotically arrested cells to a level
comparable with that in MCF7-Neo cells (Fig. 5B, gray columns).
These results are indicative of the ANK peptide functioning as a
SNCG inhibitor.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (2). January 15, 2007

Figure 4. Disruption of BubR1-SNCG association in the presence of the ANK
peptide. Western blot shows coimmunoprecipitation of SNCG and BubR1 in the
presence and absence of EGFP-ANK. COS7 cells were transfected with
pCS2-BubR1, pCI-SNCG, pEGFP-ANK, or the control vector pEGFP at equal
molar ratios. Coimmunoprecipitation was conducted using anti-SNCG antibody
as described in Materials and Methods. Left, presence of myc -BubR1 in
immunoprecipitate complex in absence of the ANK peptide but not in the
presence of the ANK peptide. Right, similar expression levels of BubR1, the ANK
peptide, and SNCG proteins on Western blots using total cell lysates.

630

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Peptide-Mediated Sensitivity to Antimicrotubule Drugs

Discussion
The exogenous expression of oncogenic protein SNCG in breast
cancer cells has been linked to stimulated proliferation, increased
cell invasion and metastasis, and resistance to nocodazole-elicited
apoptosis (6–8, 11, 13). One of the molecular mechanisms underlying
the oncogenic functions of SNCG is its interaction with BubR1 and
the consequential inhibition of BubR1-mediated mitotic checkpoint
functions (11, 13). SNCG belongs to a family of intrinsically disordered proteins, which have a wide range of significance in living
systems, but their structural and functional characteristics are still
poorly understood (3, 25–29). Our CD and NMR results confirm the
previous observations that SNCG is intrinsically disordered (3). In
the present study, we have designed and characterized a 34-aminoacid ANK peptide based on the conserved residues of single ankyrin
motif, which is the repeating unit of multiple ankyrin domain known
as the protein-protein interaction module (30).
Indeed, we observed the in vitro SNCG-ANK interaction using a
number of biophysical approaches. Interestingly, upon interaction,
far UV CD showed that SNCG undergoes no significant conformational changes and remains disordered. This contrasts to the
coupled binding and folding that has often been observed for other
intrinsically disordered proteins (31). Similar to the SNCG-ANK
interaction is the case of the calmodulin-binding fragment of
caldesmon (CaD136), which binds a single calmodulin molecule with
relatively high affinity while undergoing only very moderate folding
(32). These SNCG and calmodulin studies represent a newly recognized class of intrinsically disordered proteins that are able to bind
their ligands while remaining disordered and affirm the biological
relevance of intrinsic disorder. Intrinsic tyrosine fluorescence
provides a convenient means of monitoring the binding between
the peptide and SNCG. The fact that the addition of the ANK peptide
was accompanied by a pronounced blue shift in the fluorescence
emission spectra, which reflects the normalization of tyrosine
fluorescence, can be attributed to the distortion in the residual SNCG
structure induced by binding with the ANK peptide. In SNCA, paramagnetic relaxation enhancement NMR experiments have shown
that there are similar long-range residual tertiary contacts involving
the charged COOH-terminal region and the middle section of the
protein (33, 34). These observations lead to conclusion that binding
of the ANK peptide did not induce folding of SNCG, suggesting that
SNCG can function biologically in its intrinsically disordered state.
Furthermore, SPR results provide the direct evidence of the SNCGANK interaction (Fig. 2A), which suggest a good fit to bivalent
analyte model. For ITC, deconvolution of isotherm data indicates
that the observed heat peaks are the results of cumulative
contributions from bindings to at least two thermodynamically
distinct binding sites (Fig. 2B). In fact, it is not unusual to observe
simultaneous endothermic and exothermic reaction while protein
has binding site in two different states (35, 36). Importantly, the
analysis of binding-induced changes in tyrosine fluorescence using
the phase diagram method suggests a mechanism of the ANK
peptide binding to SNCG in which the complex formation involves
at least three distinct stages (Supplementary Fig. S3).
We investigated the cellular effects of the SNCG-ANK
interaction using the endogenously SNCG-overexpressing cells
T47D, MCF7-SNCG stable expressing cell line, and its control cell
line MCF7-Neo. When cell lines were treated with nocodazole or
taxol, MCF7-SNCG and T47D displayed a much lower mitotic
index than MCF7-Neo, indicating an impaired mitotic checkpoint
function. However, in the presence of synthetic ANK peptide

Figure 5. ANK peptide microinjected MCF7-SNCG cells show similar sensitivity
to antimicrotubule drug nocodazole as MCF7-Neo control cells. The ANK peptide
(1 Amol/L stock in needle) was microinjected together with goat IgG (1 mg/mL)
and FITC (5 mg/mL; Molecular Probes) into the MCF7-SNCG or MCF7-Neo
cells under a 40 magnification of phase contrast microscope (Carl Zeiss, Inc.,
Jena, Germany) using a pressure injection system (Femtojet, Eppendorf,
Hamburg, Germany). Cells were fixed with paraformaldehyde and then
visualized using DAPI (blue ). Red is pseudo-color for DAPI-stained DNA in
control cells. Microinjected cells were identified using green from goat IgG
probed with donkey anti-goat IgG labeled with Alex Fluor 488 (Roche).
Fluorescent cells were visualized using a 100 objective (oil) on an inverted
confocal microscope (Leica). A, MCF7-SNCG cells injected with IgG and treated
with 0.5 Amol/L nocodazole. B, MCF7-SNCG cells injected with ANK and treated
with 0.5 Amol/L nocodazole. C, uninjected MCF7-SNCG cells treated with
0.5 Amol/L nocodazole. D, untreated MCF7-SNCG cells injected with ANK.
Bottom, statistics of the viability of MCF7-Neo control cells versus MCF7-SNCG
cells. Y-axis, number of cells undergoing mitotic arrest. Left, uninjected cells;
right, ANK peptide-injected cells, both treated with antimicrotubule drug
nocodazole. MCF7-Neo cells were not significantly affected by microinjection of
ANK peptide (see black columns ). MCF7-SNCG cells microinjected with the
ANK peptide exhibited a significant (P < 0.05) increase in the number of cells in
mitotic arrest (see gray columns ).

and a 5-fold increase in apoptotic cell populations (Fig. 6A). These
cells were also probed with rabbit polyclonal anti–phosphorylated
H3, and the mitotic index was calculated according to the
proportion of the number of H3-stained EGFP-positive cells to
total EGFP-positive cells (Fig. 6B). This result corroborated with
increases in sensitivity to taxol by overexpressing EGFP-ANK in
MCF7-SNCG and T47D cells shown by DAPI-stained cells. Similar
results were achieved using flow cytometric analysis of EGFP-ANK
containing MCF7-SNCG cells treated with 0.5 Amol/L taxol. Cell
cycle analysis of MCF7-SNCG cells transfected with EGFP-ANK
revealed almost a 4-fold increase in apoptotic/dead cell population
in comparison with cells transfected with the control vector
pEGFP (Fig. 6C and D). Furthermore, anti–phosphorylated H3
staining showed a 3.5-fold increase in positive phosphorylated
histones in comparison with MCF7-SNCG cells not containing
EGFP-ANK (Fig. 6C and D). Taken together, these results
confirmed our finding that overexpression of EGFP-ANK improves
the sensitivity of MCF7 breast cancer cells to antimicrotubule drug
treatment.

www.aacrjournals.org

631

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (2). January 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

oncogenic proteins, such as SNCG, that induce tumor progression.
Given that the SNCG-BubR1 interaction is the shown leading factor
that overrides the effect of nocodazole and taxol (11, 12),
minimization of this interaction would be useful. Using colocalization, coimmunoprecipitation, and GST pull-down experiments, we
concluded that EGFP-ANK binds to the SNCG intracellularly
(Fig. 3). Furthermore, we show that when expressed in MCF7-SNCG
cells, EGFP-ANK, but not the EGFP alone, restored the mitotic
checkpoint function, whereas expressing EGFP-ANK in MCF7-neo
cells had little effect on mitotic index or the percentage of
apoptotic cells (Fig. 6). These findings suggest that the ANK peptide
functions as a SNCG inhibitor.
Although we cannot exclude the possibility that the ANK
peptide may also interact with SNCA, this scenario is either
unlikely or has minimal effect in the breast cancer. In both MCF7SNCG and MCF7-Neo cells, alteration of background level of SNCA
expression has not been reported. The fact that MCF7-Neo cells are
not affected by ANK peptide suggests the lack of any detectable
involvement of SNCA. Taken together, we believe that SNCG is the
molecular target for the ANK peptide, which can be directly related
to the mitotic arrest mediated by nocodazole and taxol. The

microinjected into the cells, MCF7-SNCG cells exhibited similar
response to nocodazole as MCF7-Neo cells (Fig. 5), indicating that
the inhibitory effects of SNCG on mitotic checkpoint function was
released by the ANK peptide. We have recently shown similar
findings when SNCG expression was knocked down using antisense
RNA (12), providing independent support for the notion of ANKmediated disruption of SNCG complex leading to breast cancer cell
sensitivity to taxol-induced mitotic arrest. To understand the
molecular mechanism of ANK function, we have further shown that
the binding of the ANK peptide to SNCG prohibited the interaction
of SNCG with BubR1, thereby releasing the inhibitory effect of
SNCG on BubR1-mediated mitotic checkpoint function. This is a
very important observation as various types of cancers have
mitotic checkpoint defects that in some cases could be caused by
silencing of BubR1 through mutations (37). BubR1 can prevent the
uncontrolled cell division observed in highly infiltrating breast
cancers and therefore is a desired target for controlling these
cancers, whereas cells not expressing BubR1 are able to override
mitotic checkpoint controls and continue to progress through cell
cycle (38). Because BubR1 is a critical component of the mitotic
checkpoint control, it could be a potential cellular target of

Figure 6. Expression of EGFP-ANK disrupts the SNCG-mediated inhibition of mitotic checkpoint function as measured by microscopy and flow cytometry. Expression
of EGFP-ANK disrupting the SNCG-mediated inhibition of mitotic checkpoint function, using (A) DAPI and (B) anti–phosphorylated H3 staining. A and B, cells treated
with 0.5 Amol/L taxol for 18 h, or untreated control cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 20 min at room temperature and then stained with 1 Ag/mL DAPI
or 2 Ag/mL anti–phosphorylated H3 primary and Texas Red goat antirabbit secondary antibodies (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). Green fluorescent cells were identified for
positive transfected cells. For each sample, 200 to 300 cells randomly chosen from five different views under a Nikon fluorescent microscope were scored for
interphase, mitosis, or apoptosis based upon nuclei morphology. Derived from three separate transfections (P < 0.01). C, flow cytometry was done to measure
apoptotic and mitotically arrested cells after treatment with taxol in the presence and absence of ANK. MCF7-SNCG cells transfected with pEGFP-ANK were treated
with 0.5 Amol/L taxol for 18 h. Left, cell cycle analysis of ANK-positive and ANK-negative cells to measure apoptosis only. Propidium iodide staining clearly shows higher
cell killing in presence of the ANK peptide (top left ). Right, representative scattergram for mitotic arrest measurement using anti–phosphorylated H3 primary
antibody and allophycocyanin (APC ) goat antirabbit secondary antibody staining for ANK-positive and ANK-negative cells. D, statistics of the apoptotic cells and mitotic
arrest cells. The two columns on the left represent propidium iodide staining, and the remaining two columns on the right show anti–phosphorylated H3 staining.
Representative of three separate experiments (P < 0.01).

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (2). January 15, 2007

632

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Peptide-Mediated Sensitivity to Antimicrotubule Drugs

observed ANK peptide binding with SNCG and the resultant
competition with the SNCG-BubR1 interaction in cell lines
represent a novel mechanism by which cancer cells increases
sensitivity to antimicrotubule drugs.
In conclusion, we have designed and characterized a novel
peptide based on a single ankyrin motif. The peptide associates with
SNCG, which remains disordered. To our best knowledge, this is the
first report that a single ankyrin motif has been shown to interact
with any protein, in contrast to commonly observed interactions
involving multiple ankyrin repeats. The interaction overrides the
effects of elevated SNCG levels, by competing with the SNCG-BubR1
interaction, and results in the nocodazole- and taxol-mediated
mitotic arrest. This finding may be useful in devising future
strategies to intervene against overexpressed SNCG in breast cancer
and enhance the effectiveness of anticancer drugs. In light of our
recent new findings showing prominent expressions of SNCG in
eight different types of human cancers (39), SNCG expression status
may have a broad effect in patient responses to antimicrotubule

References
1. Lavedan C, Leroy E, Dehejia A, et al. Identification,
localization and characterization of the human gsynuclein gene. Hum Genet 1998;103:106–12.
2. Ji H, Liu YE, Jia T, et al. Identification of a breast
cancer-specific gene, BCSG1, by direct differential cDNA
sequencing. Cancer Res 1997;57:759–64.
3. Uversky VN. Natively unfolded proteins: a point where
biology waits for physics. Protein Sci 2002;11:739–56.
4. Bruening W, Giasson BI, Klein-Szanto AJ, Lee VM,
Trojanowski JQ, Godwin AK. Synucleins are expressed
in the majority of breast and ovarian carcinomas and
in preneoplastic lesions of the ovary. Cancer 2000;88:
2154–63.
5. Wu K, Weng Z, Tao Q, et al. Stage-specific expression
of breast cancer-specific gene gamma-synuclein. Cancer
Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2003;12:920–5.
6. Liu J, Spence MJ, Zhang YL, Jiang Y, Liu YE, Shi YE.
Transcriptional suppression of synuclein gamma
(SNCG) expression in human breast cancer cells by
the growth inhibitory cytokine oncostatin M. Breast
Cancer Res Treat 2000;62:99–107.
7. Lu A, Zhang F, Gupta A, Liu J. Blockade of AP1
transactivation abrogates the abnormal expression of
breast cancer-specific gene 1 in breast cancer cells.
J Biol Chem 2002;277:31364–72.
8. Jiang Y, Liu YE, Goldberg ID, Shi YE. Gamma
synuclein, a novel heat-shock protein-associated chaperone, stimulates ligand-dependent estrogen receptor a
signaling and mammary tumorigenesis. Cancer Res
2004;64:4539–46.
9. Jiang Y, Liu YE, Lu A, et al. Stimulation of estrogen
receptor signaling by gamma synuclein. Cancer Res
2003;63:3899–903.
10. Jia T, Liu YE, Liu J, Shi YE. Stimulation of breast
cancer invasion and metastasis by synuclein gamma.
Cancer Res 1999;59:742–7.
11. Gupta A, Inaba S, Wong OK, Fang G, Liu J. Breast
cancer-specific gene 1 interacts with the mitotic
checkpoint kinase BubR1. Oncogene 2003;22:7593–9.
12. Zhou Y, Inaba S, Liu J. Inhibition of synuclein-gamma
expression increases the sensitivity of breast cancer cells
to paclitaxel treatment. Int J Oncol 2006;29:289–95.
13. Inaba S, Li C, Shi YE, Song DQ, Jiang JD, Liu J. Synuclein
gamma inhibits the mitotic checkpoint function and
promotes chromosomal instability of breast cancer cells.
Breast Cancer Res Treat 2005;94:25–35.
14. Valero V, Jones SE, Von Hoff DD, et al. A phase II

www.aacrjournals.org

chemotherapy, and the ANK peptide will be an important molecular
tool to study the tumorigenic functions of SNCG in a wide range of
human cancers in addition to breast cancer.

Addendum
An NMR study of SNCG has been recently published (40).

Acknowledgments
Received 5/18/2006; revised 10/20/2006; accepted 11/10/2006.
Grant support: Canadian Institutes of Health Research (Z. Jia), Department of
Veterans Affairs, Office of Research and Development, Medical Research Service,
U.S. Army Medical Research and Material Command grants breast cancer 010046
and breast cancer 033154 (J. Liu), and Natural Sciences and Engineering Research
Council of Canada Postgraduate Scholarship (J.A. Marsh).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank Dr. Steve Smith (Queen’s University) for critical reading of the article and
Kim Munro (Protein Function Discovery Facility, Queen’s University) for his technical
support.

study of docetaxel in patients with paclitaxel-resistant
metastatic breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:3362–8.
15. Chan S, Friedrichs K, Noel D, et al. Prospective randomized trial of docetaxel versus doxorubicin in patients with
metastatic breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:2341–54.
16. Blajeski AL, Phan VA, Kottke TJ, Kaufmann SH. G(1)
and G(2) cell-cycle arrest following microtubule depolymerization in human breast cancer cells. J Clin Invest
2002;110:91–9.
17. Shin HJ, Baek KH, Jeon AH, et al. Dual roles of human
BubR1, a mitotic checkpoint kinase, in the monitoring
of chromosomal instability. Cancer Cell 2003;4:483–97.
18. Pan ZZ, Bruening W, Giasson BI, Lee VM, Godwin
AK. Gamma-synuclein promotes cancer cell survival
and inhibits stress- and chemotherapy drug-induced
apoptosis by modulating MAPK pathways. J Biol Chem
2002;277:35050–60.
19. Delaglio F, Grzesiek S, Vuister GW, Zhu G, Pfeifer J,
Bax A. NMRPipe: a multidimensional spectral processing system based on UNIX pipes. J Biomol NMR 1995;6:
277–93.
20. Kuznetsova IM, Turoverov KK, Uversky VN. Use of
the phase diagram method to analyze the protein
unfolding-refolding reactions: fishing out the ‘‘invisible’’
intermediates. J Proteome Res 2004;3:485–94.
21. Hancock MA, Spencer CA, Koschinsky ML. Definition
of the structural elements in plasminogen required for
high-affinity binding to apolipoprotein(a): a study
utilizing surface plasmon resonance. Biochemistry
2004;43:12237–48.
22. Engelender S, Kaminsky Z, Guo X, et al. Synphilin-1
associates with a-synuclein and promotes the formation
of cytosolic inclusions. Nat Genet 1999;22:110–4.
23. Semisotnov GV, Rodionova NA, Razgulyaev OI,
Uversky VN, Gripas’ AF, Gilmanshin RI. Study of the
‘‘molten globule’’ intermediate state in protein folding
by a hydrophobic fluorescent probe. Biopolymers 1991;
31:119–28.
24. Stryer L. The interaction of a naphthalene dye with
apomyoglobin and apohemoglobin. A fluorescent probe
of non-polar binding sites. J Mol Biol 1965;13:482–95.
25. Uversky VN. What does it mean to be natively
unfolded? Eur J Biochem 2002;269:2–12.
26. Iakoucheva LM, Brown CJ, Lawson JD, Obradovic Z,
Dunker AK. Intrinsic disorder in cell-signaling and
cancer-associated proteins. J Mol Biol 2002;323:573–84.
27. Romero P, Obradovic Z, Dunker AK. Natively
disordered proteins: functions and predictions. Appl
Bioinformatics 2004;3:105–13.

28. Tompa P. Intrinsically unstructured proteins. Trends
Biochem Sci 2002;27:527–33.
29. Uversky VN, Oldfield CJ, Dunker AK. Showing your
ID: intrinsic disorder as an ID for recognition,
regulation and cell signaling. J Mol Recognit 2005;18:
343–84.
30. Mosavi LK, Cammett TJ, Desrosiers DC, Peng ZY. The
ankyrin repeat as molecular architecture for protein
recognition. Protein Sci 2004;13:1435–48.
31. Dyson HJ, Wright PE. Coupling of folding and
binding for unstructured proteins. Curr Opin Struct
Biol 2002;12:54–60.
32. Permyakov SE, Millett IS, Doniach S, Permyakov
EA, Uversky VN. Natively unfolded C-terminal domain
of caldesmon remains substantially unstructured after
the effective binding to calmodulin. Proteins 2003;53:
855–62.
33. Ulmer TS, Bax A, Cole NB, Nussbaum RL. Structure
and dynamics of micelle-bound human a-synuclein.
J Biol Chem 2005;280:9595–603.
34. Dedmon MM, Lindorff-Larsen K, Christodoulou J,
Vendruscolo M, Dobson CM. Mapping long-range
interactions in a-synuclein using spin-label NMR and
ensemble molecular dynamics simulations. J Am Chem
Soc 2005;127:476–7.
35. Chao Y, Fu D. Thermodynamic studies of the
mechanism of metal binding to the Escherichia coli
zinc transporter YiiP. J Biol Chem 2004;279:17173–80.
36. Rollin-Genetet F, Berthomieu C, Davin AH,
Quemeneur E. Escherichia coli thioredoxin inhibition
by cadmium: two mutually exclusive binding sites
involving Cys32 and Asp26. Eur J Biochem 2004;271:
1299–309.
37. Ohshima K, Haraoka S, Yoshioka S, et al. Mutation
analysis of mitotic checkpoint genes (hBUB1 and
hBUBR1) and microsatellite instability in adult T-cell
leukemia/lymphoma. Cancer Lett 2000;158:141–50.
38. Taylor SS, McKeon F. Kinetochore localization of
murine Bub1 is required for normal mitotic timing and
checkpoint response to spindle damage. Cell 1997;89:
727–35.
39. Liu H, Liu W, Wu Y, et al. Loss of epigenetic control of
synuclein-gamma gene as a molecular indicator of
metastasis in a wide range of human cancers. Cancer
Res 2005;65:7635–43.
40. Marsh JA, Singh VK, Jia Z, Forman-Kay JD. Sensitivity
of secondary structure propensities to sequence differences between alpha- and gamma-synuclein: implications for fibrillation. Protein Sci 2006;15:2795–804.

633

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (2). January 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Synuclein-γ Targeting Peptide Inhibitor that Enhances
Sensitivity of Breast Cancer Cells to Antimicrotubule Drugs
Vinay K. Singh, Yue Zhou, Joseph A. Marsh, et al.
Cancer Res 2007;67:626-633.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/2/626
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2007/01/10/67.2.626.DC1

This article cites 40 articles, 12 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/2/626.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 3 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/2/626.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

