Oncotarget, August, Vol.2, No 8

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Unraveling the complexity of basal-like breast cancer
Lauren L. C. Marotta and Kornelia Polyak
and PDGFR-β and that inhibition of these together with
lapatinib and sunitinib, respectively, greatly increased
tumor growth inhibition. These results could be directly
applicable to BLBC and suggest that drug combinations
may often be necessary to kill the mixtures of cancer cells
present in tumors.
In another study at the whole-tumor level, published
in the same issue of The Journal of Clinical Investigation
as our report, Lehmann et al. [7] classified 587 triplenegative breast cancer cases into six subtypes using
k-means clustering of gene expression data. Two of the
identified subtypes were labeled as “basal-like” subtypes,
and cell line models of them preferentially responded
to cisplatin in culture and in mice. By scrutinizing
intertumor heterogeneity, this work identified a potential
treatment for BLBC, and it highlights the significance of
personalizing breast cancer therapy.
In summary, recent advances in BLBC are helping
to unravel its complexity by improving our understanding
of intratumor and intertumor heterogeneity, cell plasticity,
and intracellular networks. Successful targeted treatment
strategies for BLBC will likely be designed based on the
potential targets and tumor biology details presented here
as well as additional findings from the studies discussed
and research inspired by them. These will likely include
tumor-specific combinations of one or more drugs for
multiple cell populations or states. Notably, such therapies
may appear soon, as several of the inhibitors identified
here, or related compounds, are already in clinical use or
development.

Basal-like breast cancer (BLBC) is a form of breast
cancer with generally poor prognosis that expresses basal
cell markers and has an undifferentiated phenotype.
The majority of BLBC is also classified as “triplenegative breast cancer” due to the lack of expression of
the estrogen and progesterone receptors and the lack of
overexpression of HER2. BLBC is the only major breast
cancer subtype with no targeted therapies, and although
~20% of patients diagnosed with BLBC respond well to
chemotherapy and are essentially cured, the remaining
~80% succumb to their disease in just a few years after
diagnosis. Therefore, new molecular-based approaches
to treating BLBC are urgently needed. Several recent
studies, including our report in the July 2011 issue of The
Journal of Clinical Investigation [1], have used largescale, unbiased approaches to offer valuable insights into
the details of complex aspects of BLBC.
In our report, we explored how intratumor
heterogeneity impacts BLBC. After screening 1,576
genes, we found that the JAK2/STAT3 pathway is
preferentially required in CD44+CD24- breast cancer
cells, which are most common in BLBC [2]. We identified
a JAK2/STAT3 inhibitor, NVP-BSK805, that decreased
basal-like breast tumor growth by eliminating this cell
type, showing that targeting the JAK2/STAT3 pathway
is a potential way to treat BLBC. Since we also found
that basal-like breast tumors include CD24+ cells, which
may also play a role in breast cancer progression [3], this
would likely be most effective in combination with other
cell type-specific drugs.
Other researchers have also looked into the
importance of intratumor heterogeneity in BLBC by
taking into account the added complexity of cell plasticity.
Using a high-throughput screen for inhibitors of cells
that had undergone an epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT), Gupta et al. [4] discovered that the compound
salinomycin inhibited basal-like breast tumor growth.
Thus, therapies that target particular cellular phenotypes
could be useful in treating BLBC. Corroborating this
work, LOXL2 was recently found to be involved in EMT
and BLBC metastasis [5].
Important BLBC discoveries have also come from
looking at tumors as a whole rather than at specific cancer
cell populations. Sun et al. [6] screened all known human
kinases and phosphatases for anchorage-independent
growth suppression and thereby elucidated a complicated
intracellular network in triple-negative breast cancer.
They found that PTPN12 normally suppresses HER2
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Lauren L. C. Marotta: Department of Medical Oncology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA; Program in
Biological and Biomedical Sciences, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA
Kornelia Polyak: Department of Medical Oncology, DanaFarber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA; Program in Biological
and Biomedical Sciences and Department of Medicine,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA; Department of
Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA
Email: Kornelia_Polyak@dfci.harvard.edu
Received: August 26, 2011;
Published: August 28, 2011

References
1.	 Marotta LL, Almendro V, Marusyk A, Shipitsin M,
Schemme J, Walker SR, Bloushtain-Qimron N, Kim JJ,
588

Oncotarget 2011; 2: 588 - 589

Choudhury SA, Maruyama R, Wu Z, Gonen M, Mulvey
LA, Bessarabova MO, Huh SJ, Silver SJ et al. The JAK2/
STAT3 signaling pathway is required for growth of
CD44+CD24- stem cell-like breast cancer cells in human
tumors. J Clin Invest. 2011; 121:2723-2735.
2.	 Park SY, Lee HE, Li H, Shipitsin M, Gelman R, Polyak
K. Heterogeneity for stem cell-related markers according
to tumor subtype and histologic stage in breast cancer. Clin
Cancer Res. 2010; 16:876-887.
3.	 Shipitsin M, Campbell LL, Argani P, Weremowicz S,
Bloushtain-Qimron N, Yao J, Nikolskaya T, Serebryiskaya
T, Beroukhim R, Hu M, Halushka MK, Sukumar S, Parker
LM, Anderson KS, Harris LN, Garber JE et al. Molecular
definition of breast tumor heterogeneity. Cancer Cell. 2007;
11:259-273.
4.	 Gupta PB, Onder TT, Jiang G, Tao K, Kuperwasser C,
Weinberg RA, Lander ES. Identification of selective
inhibitors of cancer stem cells by high-throughput
screening. Cell. 2009; 138:645-659.
5.	 Moreno-Bueno G, Salvador F, Martin A, Floristan A,
Cuevas EP, Santos V, Montes A, Morales S, Castilla MA,
Rojo-Sebastian A, Martinez A, Hardisson D, Csiszar K,
Portillo F, Peinado H, Palacios J et al. Lysyl oxidase-like
2 (LOXL2), a new regulator of cell polarity required for
metastatic dissemination of basal-like breast carcinomas.
EMBO Mol Med. 2011:Epub ahead of print.
6.	 Sun T, Aceto N, Meerbrey KL, Kessler JD, Zhou C,
Migliaccio I, Nguyen DX, Pavlova NN, Botero M, Huang
J, Bernardi RJ, Schmitt E, Hu G, Li MZ, Dephoure N,
Gygi SP et al. Activation of multiple proto-oncogenic
tyrosine kinases in breast cancer via loss of the PTPN12
phosphatase. Cell. 2011; 144:703-718.
7.	

Lehmann BD, Bauer JA, Chen X, Sanders ME, Chakravarthy
AB, Shyr Y, Pietenpol JA. Identification of human triplenegative breast cancer subtypes and preclinical models
for selection of targeted therapies. J Clin Invest. 2011;
121:2750-2767.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

589

Oncotarget 2011; 2: 588 - 589

