www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2017, Vol. 8, (No. 7), pp: 11460-11479
Research Paper

Establishment and application of a novel patient-derived
KIAA1549:BRAF-driven pediatric pilocytic astrocytoma model
for preclinical drug testing
Florian Selt1,2, Juliane Hohloch1, Thomas Hielscher3, Felix Sahm4,5, David Capper4,5,
Andrey Korshunov4,5 Diren Usta1, Sebastian Brabetz6, Johannes Ridinger1, Jonas
Ecker1,2, Ina Oehme1, Jan Gronych7,8, Viktoria Marquardt9, David Pauck9, Heidi
Bächli10, Charles D. Stiles11, Andreas von Deimling4,5, Marc Remke9, Martin U.
Schuhmann12, Stefan M. Pfister2,6, Tilman Brummer13, David T.W. Jones6, Olaf
Witt1,2,*, Till Milde1,2,*
1

Clinical Cooperation Unit Pediatric Oncology (G340), German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), and German Cancer
Consortium (DKTK), Heidelberg, Germany

2

Center for Individualized Pediatric Oncology (ZIPO) and Section of Pediatric Brain Tumors, Department of Pediatric Oncology,
Hematology and Immunology, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany

3

Division of Biostatistics (C060), German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany

4

Department of Neuropathology, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany

5

Clinical Cooperation Unit Neuropathology (G380), German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), and German Cancer Consortium
(DKTK), Heidelberg, Germany

6

Division of Pediatric Neurooncology (B062), German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany, and German
Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Heidelberg, Germany

7

Division of Molecular Genetics (B060), German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), and German Cancer Consortium (DKTK),
Heidelberg, Germany

8

AbbVie Deutschland GmbH & Co. KG, Medical Immunology, Wiesbaden, Germany (current affiliation)

9

Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology, and Clinical Immunology, Medical Faculty, University Hospital Düsseldorf,
Germany, and Department of Pediatric Neuro-Oncogenomics, German Cancer Consortium (DKTK) and German Cancer
Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany

10

Department of Neurosurgery, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany

11

Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA

12

Department of Neurosurgery, University Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany

13

Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research, Albert-Ludwigs-University and University Medical Centre, Freiburg,
Germany

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Florian Selt, email: f. selt@dkfz.de
Keywords: pediatric low grade glioma, pilocytic astrocytoma, KIAA1549:BRAF-fusion, oncogene-induced senescence (OIS),
MAPK-inhibitors
Received: November 18, 2016     Accepted: November 23, 2016     Published: December 17, 2016

ABSTRACT
Pilocytic astrocytoma (PA) is the most frequent pediatric brain tumor. Activation
of the MAPK pathway is well established as the oncogenic driver of the disease. It is
most frequently caused by KIAA1549:BRAF fusions, and leads to oncogene induced
senescence (OIS). OIS is thought to be a major reason for growth arrest of PA cells
in vitro and in vivo, preventing establishment of PA cultures. Hence, valid preclinical
models are currently very limited, but preclinical testing of new compounds is urgently
needed. We transduced the PA short-term culture DKFZ-BT66 derived from the PA of a
2-year old patient with a doxycycline-inducible system coding for Simian Vacuolating
Virus 40 Large T Antigen (SV40-TAg). SV40-TAg inhibits TP53/CDKN1A and CDKN2A/

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11460

Oncotarget

RB1, two pathways critical for OIS induction and maintenance. DNA methylation
array and KIAA1549:BRAF fusion analysis confirmed pilocytic astrocytoma identity
of DKFZ-BT66 cells after establishment. Readouts were analyzed in proliferating as
well as senescent states, including cell counts, viability, cell cycle analysis, expression
of SV40-Tag, CDKN2A (p16), CDKN1A (p21), and TP53 (p53) protein, and geneexpression profiling. Selected MAPK inhibitors (MAPKi) including clinically available
MEK inhibitors (MEKi) were tested in vitro. Expression of SV40-TAg enabled the
cells to bypass OIS and to resume proliferation with a mean doubling time of 45h
allowing for propagation and long-term culture. Withdrawal of doxycycline led to an
immediate decrease of SV40-TAg expression, appearance of senescent morphology,
upregulation of CDKI proteins and a subsequent G1 growth arrest in line with the
re-induction of senescence. DKFZ-BT66 cells still underwent replicative senescence
that was overcome by TERT expression. Testing of a set of MAPKi revealed differential
responses in DKFZ-BT66. MEKi efficiently inhibited MAPK signaling at clinically
achievable concentrations, while BRAF V600E- and RAF Type II inhibitors showed
paradoxical activation. Taken together, we have established the first patient-derived
long term expandable PA cell line expressing the KIAA1549:BRAF-fusion suitable for
preclinical drug testing.

approaches identified alternative, yet less frequent events
[23, 68]. The most frequent alteration found in PA is the
activating fusion of KIAA1549 with the BRAF kinase
domain (>60%), followed by typically mutually exclusive
BRAFV600E point mutation, FGFR1 mutations, NTRKfamily fusions, NF1 mutations, or KRAS mutations
[23, 68]. All these alterations lead to an activation of
the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling
pathway, which is detected in nearly 100% of cases,
identifying PA as a single pathway disease [23, 68].
All of the identified alterations are targetable,
either directly or by inhibiting activity downstream of
the alteration [43]. Specific targeted drugs are clinically
available, since they have already been approved for the
treatment of different malignancies or are in preclinical
and phase I/II clinical trials (e.g. BRAF-inhibitors) [47].
The first compound targeting BRAF that entered
a phase II clinical trial for pediatric LGG patients was
sorafenib [25]. Sorafenib is a multi-kinase inhibitor
targeting BRAF, VEGFR, PDGFR and c-kit. The trial
failed due to unexpected tumor growth under sorafenib
treatment, which was explained by paradoxical MAPK
pathway activation through facilitated BRAF dimer
formation in the presence of the drug [51]. This experience
highlighted the urgent need for detailed preclinical testing
of every new compound before entering a clinical trial,
and for more detailed knowledge of the mechanism of
action of each individual drug.
Comprehensive preclinical drug tests for PAs are
currently hampered by the lack of suitable preclinical
models. Although PA is the most frequent pediatric brain
tumor, only a few preclinical models have been published.
In 2011, Gronych et al. reported on a mouse model where
RCAS-mediated gene delivery of a truncated version
of BRAFV600E-kinase reliably generated PA-like tumors
in vivo [19]. In the same year Raabe et al. published a

INTRODUCTION
Pilocytic astrocytoma (PA) is a pediatric lowgrade glioma (pLGG) and the most common pediatric
brain tumor, accounting for ~18 % of all pediatric brain
tumors [41]. It is a benign and slowly growing tumor
corresponding to WHO grade I [31], which can arise
anywhere in the CNS, but is most commonly localized
in the cerebellum followed by the optic pathway/
hypothalamic region [55]. Pilocytic astrocytomas
almost never progress to higher grade astrocytomas,
and dissemination occurs only in extremely rare cases
[18]. Current standard of care therapy includes maximal
safe resection where possible and chemotherapy and/or
irradiation (e.g., SIOP LGG 2004 trial, NCT00276640).
The ten-year overall survival (OS) rate of patients with
PA exceeds 90% [18]. However, PAs can cause extensive
morbidity due to local tumor expansion or therapyrelated side effects (due to surgery, chemotherapy and
irradiation), aggravated by recurrence or progressive
disease (PD), which occurs in up to 80% of patients,
depending on location and extent of initial resection [18].
Hence, PA comprises a chronic disease, and reduction of
morbidity rather than increase of survival is the focus of
current treatment strategies. The most commonly used
chemotherapeutic agents, vincristine and carboplatin, are
not effective in every patient, and PD is often observed
during or after chemotherapy (ten-year event-free survival
(EFS) rate of 32%) [18]. Therefore, the development of
new therapies is urgently needed in order to specifically
target the disease and improve the clinical course of
patients suffering from PA.
Recent years of research have uncovered the
underlying genetic alterations of PA. Initial studies
described the prototypic KIAA1549-BRAF fusion
[10, 24, 42], and recent large scale genomic profiling
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11461

Oncotarget

PA model, where transduction of BRAFV600E into human
neural stem cells caused transformation and subsequent
growth arrest [44]. These models replicate BRAFV600E
positive PAs, however they are difficult to expand
and therefore only of limited use for medium- to highthroughput preclinical testing. The only patient-derived
long-term pediatric LGG cell line that is available to
date is BT-40 [3]. This model was established from
a juvenile pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma patient
and is characterized by a BRAFV600E mutation and
homozygous CDKN2A/B deletion, thereby molecularly
resembling a WHO grade II-III glioma rather than a
PA. To date, there are no reported patient-derived PA
cell lines, and consequently no model with endogenous
expression of the prototypical KIAA1549:BRAF fusion
on a human genetic background [39]. Due to this lack
of true KIAA1549:BRAF fusion-positive PA models all
preclinical data on the fusion was generated using models
where it was artificially overexpressed, e.g. in fibroblasts.
[24, 51]. However, these models do not recapitulate the
expression levels of the fusion in PAs, and do not exhibit
the cellular background of PAs.
Our own efforts to generate PA models by
orthotopical transplantation of primary PA tumor material
into mice in order to generate patient-derived xenografts
(PDX) or by cultivating primary PA cells in vitro under
neural stem cell conditions failed in 36/36 cases. In
comparison, the take rate of orthotopically transplanted
high-grade gliomas in mice was ~30% in our hands
(unpublished observation). A possible reason for the
failure of PA model generation was identified by the
detection of oncogene-induced senescence (OIS) in the
vast majority of PA tumor samples, primary short-term
cultures and in vitro models [22, 44]. OIS is a form of
premature senescence found in benign RAS and RAF
driven tumors [34, 49], among others. It is accompanied
by accumulation of p53 and p16 (CDKN2A) [49]
leading to permanent cell cycle arrest. OIS is thought to
be a tumor-suppressive mechanism preventing tumors
from further malignant transformation in the absence
of additional cooperating mutations and serves as an
explanation for the benign nature of PA with almost no
tendency to malignant transformation. Since OIS is
clearly detectable upon culture of primary PA cells [22],
we hypothesized that inducible interference with the OIS
program can reversibly bypass growth arrest in primary
PA cells, enabling the establishment of a long-term
expandable cell line.
In order to reversibly suppress OIS, a lentiviral
doxycycline-inducible expression system coding for
Simian Vacuolating Virus 40 large T antigen (SV40-TAg)
was generated. The viral protein SV40-TAg inhibits two
of the major pathways involved in the induction and
maintenance of OIS, TP53/CDKN1A and CDKN2A/RB1
[2, 9]. Using this tool we generated a novel patient-derived
PA model, DKFZ-BT66, with endogenous expression of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

the KIAA1549:BRAF fusion and maintenance of typical
PA characteristics, suitable for long-term expansion and
preclinical drug screening.

RESULTS
Doxycycline-dependent expression of SV40-TAg
in DKFZ-BT66 leads to long-term proliferation
In order to generate an expandable and
experimentally functional in vitro model of PA, we
performed lentiviral transduction of DKFZ-BT66 cells at
passage 2 with a tetracycline-inducible vector (pFRIPZ
TAg) co-expressing red fluorescent protein (RFP) and
SV40-TAg. SV40-TAg targets the OIS mediators RB1
and TP53, thereby inhibiting induction of OIS [2, 9].
DKFZ-BT66 cells were cultured in medium supplemented
with doxycycline, allowing for doxycycline-induced coexpression of SV40-TAg and RFP. Doxycycline-induced
minimal-CMV promoter activity was detectable in vitro
by fluorescence microscopy of RFP expression (Figure
1a). In contrast, RFP expression was not detectable by
immunofluorescence microscopy after 12 days of culture
without doxycycline, indicative of reduced promotor
activity (Figure 1a). Flow cytometry documented
a highly enriched RFP-expressing population after
puromycin selection of transduced DKFZ-BT66 cells
under doxycycline (Figure 1b). SV40-TAg expression
upon addition of doxycycline was time- and concentration
dependent as measured on mRNA and protein levels.
Withdrawal of doxycycline from the culture medium led
to a considerable decrease of SV40-TAg mRNA level after
48h (Figure 1c). Accordingly, SV40-TAg protein levels
were strongly decreased by 48h and undetectable by 120h
after doxycycline withdrawal (Figure 1d). A comparable
reduction of SV40-TAg mRNA and protein level was seen
in cells cultured at decreased concentration of doxycycline
for 5 days (Supplementary Figure 1a-1b). While addition
of 1 μg/ml doxycycline resulted in SV40-TAg protein
levels comparable to positive control HEK293T cells
(constitutively expressing SV40-TAg), almost no SV40TAg protein was detectable at concentrations as low as 0.1
μg/ml doxycycline.
DKFZ-BT66 cells demonstrated steady proliferation
with a calculated mean doubling time of 43.8h (SD 3.8;
n=3, passage 11 - 13) in the presence of doxycycline and
hence SV40-TAg expression (Figure 1e). Of note, loss of
SV40-TAg expression upon withdrawal of doxycycline
resulted in complete proliferation arrest of DKFZ-BT66
without significant changes in total cell counts over
240h, after an initial drop in cell numbers. Comparison
of cells with or without SV40-TAg expression revealed
statistically significant differences in cell counts from
120h onwards (Figure 1e).
Taken together, our system allows for precise
experimental control of doxycyclin-induced SV40-TAg
11462

Oncotarget

Figure 1: a. Light and fluorescence microscopy: DKFZ-BT66 cells cultured in the presence of 1μg/ml doxycycline for 10 days (upper row) show

marked expression of RFP indicating activity of the inducible promotor and enhanced proliferation as opposed to cells cultured in the absence of
doxycycline, which do not express RFP. b. Flow cytometric detection of red fluorescence indicating RFP positivity in DKFZ-BT66 cells cultured in
the presence of 1 μg/ml doxycycline. A single population emerged after puromycin selection exhibiting high fluorescence levels, as demonstrated
by 99,8% of the cells displaying RFP (FL2-H) positivity (representative plot shown). c. Fold change of SV40-TAg mRNA level after the indicated
time points of doxycycline withdrawal compared to cells cultured in the presence of 1μg/ml doxycycline (time point 0). Depicted are mean +/SD d. Change in SV40-TAg protein level in DKFZ-BT66 cells upon doxycycline withdrawal. HEK293T cells, constitutively expressing SV40TAg, served as positive control (pos. ctrl.); BT-40 glioma cells, not expressing SV40-TAg, were used as negative control (neg. ctrl.). e. Growth
kinetics of cells cultured in the presence (yellow line) or absence (blue line) of doxycycline, respectively. Dashed line indicates the number of cells
seeded at hour 0. Significant differences between the groups are indicated * p<0.05 and ** p<0.01. Depicted are mean +/- SD f. TSNE analysis
(t-Distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding) of whole genome DNA methylation data. DKFZ-BT66 cell line (passage 10, black dot) exhibited
a close similarity in DNA-methylation to its primary tumor (orange dot) and the group of infratentorial pilocytic astrocytomas but differed from
other pediatric low- and high grade tumors. DNET: Dysembryoplastic neuroepithelial tumor, WHO grade I; GG: Ganglioglioma, WHO grade
I; GBM MYCN: MYCN-amplified glioblastoma, WHO grade IV. g. Copy number plot of chromosome 7q calculated from DNA-methylation
array data confirming the presence of a chromosomal gain typical for the tandem duplication that leads to a KIAA1549:BRAF-fusion. DNA was
extracted from passage 10 cells. h. Detection of KIAA1549:BRAF(KEX16BEX9)-fusion gene mRNA by RT-qPCR using fusion break point specific
primers at passages 10, 12 and 15. Mean +/- SD of expression at the three passages is depicted. An astrocyte cell line (TÜ-DKFZ-002) transduced
with a retroviral construct coding for the full length form of KIAA1549:BRAF(KEX16BEX9)-fusion served as positive control (pos. ctrl.) and
reference for expression level. Neuroblastoma cell line BE-(2)C served as a fusion negative control (neg. ctrl.) i. MAPK downstream activation
status of DKFZ-BT66 in the presence of 1μg/ml doxycycline on pMEK (Ser217/ Ser221) and pERK (Thr202/ Tyr204) level compared to the
BRAFV600E-mutated PXA cell line BT40 (positive control) and the BRAF-wild type cell line HEK293T (negative control).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11463

Oncotarget

expression in DKFZ-BT66 cells, effectively blocking
growth arrest and inducing cell proliferation.

clearly demonstrated the PA origin of DKFZ-BT66 cells,
some additional copy number aberrations not present in
the primary tumor and rather atypical for PA (e.g. partial
loss of chromosome 17q) were detected in the cell line
(Supplementary Figure 1d). These changes remained
stable over several passages, however, and no further
appreciable changes occurred at higher passages.
In summary, DKFZ-BT66 displayed a methylation
profile similar to primary infratentorial PAs as well as to
the primary tumor of origin, expressed and maintained the
prototypical KIAA1549:BRAF fusion, and showed the
expected MAPK activity. Thus, we conclude that DKFZBT66 cells are indeed a true PA model.

DKFZ-BT66 reflects the typical molecular and
cellular biology of pilocytic astrocytoma
In order to confirm the PA origin of isolated DKFZBT66 cells, we investigated DNA-methylation patterns,
sequencing of the KIAA1549:BRAF fusion, fusion
transcript expression, and MAPK pathway activation.
Genome-wide methylation analysis using methylation
arrays has previously been shown to be a robust tool to
pinpoint identity and molecular subsets of a wide range
of brain tumors including PAs [30], glioblastomas [57],
medulloblastomas [21] and tumors designated as “PNET”
[56]. t-SNE analysis of genome-wide methylation data
confirmed that the primary DKFZ-BT66 tumor sample
belongs to the methylation group of infratentorial PA.
It furthermore revealed that the DKFZ-BT66 cell line
at passage 10 still exhibited a closer similarity to the
methylation group of infratentorial PAs compared to other
methylation clusters of pediatric low- as well as highgrade tumors. This demonstrates that the methylation
pattern of the cell of origin inherent to the primary tumor
remained conserved following in vitro culture, transfection
as well as antibiotic selection procedures (Figure 1f).
DKFZ-BT66 cells were derived from a
primary PA tumor exhibiting the typical and specific
KIAA1549:BRAF-fusion (KEX16BEX9). Indeed, analysis of
the copy number plot derived from the DNA methylation
data of the DKFZ-BT66 cells revealed the presence of
the prototypical ~2Mb duplication on chromosome 7q34
leading to KIAA1549:BRAF fusion (Figure 1g). The
increased magnitude of gain seen in the cells compared
with the primary DKFZ-BT66 tumor sample indicated
a high tumor cell purity of the cultured DKFZ-BT66
cells (Supplementary Figure 1c). The presence of the
KIAA1549:BRAF-fusion (KEX16BEX9) was additionally
confirmed by gene-panel sequencing with detected
breakpoints within BRAF intron 8 (position 140488009
on chromosome 7) and KIAA1549 intron 16 (position
138538359 on chromosome 7) (not shown). The
KEX16BEX9 transcript was detected continuously over
several passages (p10, p12 and p15) in DKFZ-BT66
cells by RT-qPCR using fusion-spanning primers
specific for KEX16BEX9(Figure 1h). In line with the
presence and previously reported consequence of the
KIAA1549:BRAF-fusion, MAPK downstream activation
was detected by Western Blot in DKFZ-BT66 cells
under SV40-TAg expressing proliferating conditions
(Figure 1i). DKFZ-BT66 cells showed higher levels of
phosphorylated MEK (pMEK; Ser217/ Ser221) and ERK
(pERK; Thr202/ Tyr204) compared to the BRAF wild type
cell line HEK293T constitutively expressing SV40-TAg,
and an ERK activation comparable to the BRAFV600Eexpressing cell line BT-40 (Figure 1i). Although we could
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Growth arrest of DKFZ-BT66 cells in the
absence of SV40-TAg is accompanied by a
senescence phenotype
Proliferation of DKFZ-BT66 cells was strongly
SV40-TAg dependent, with loss of SV40-TAg expression
resulting in growth arrest. As expression of SV40-TAg
was used in order to bypass OIS, this phenotype was
not unexpected and in line with the re-induction of OIS.
It was accompanied by several senescence-associated
phenotypic changes of DKFZ-BT66 cells, comparable to
primary PA cultures in OIS: withdrawal of doxycycline
led to a distinct change in cell morphology with rounded,
enlarged and flattened cells (Figure 2a), a phenotype
typical for senescent cells [49]. A statistically significant
induction of the cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor (CDKI)
CDKN1A (p21) expression was detectable on mRNA and
protein level 48h after doxycycline withdrawal, but not for
the CDKI CDKN2A (p16) (Figure 2b-2d). The expected
accumulation of TP53 in the presence of SV40-TAg [40]
steadily decreased in a time-dependent manner after loss
of SV40-TAg expression upon doxycycline withdrawal
(Figure 2d). The time-dependent decrease of pERK with
a complete loss of pERK after 120h indicated abrogation
of MAPK-activation in the absence of SV40-TAg (Figure
2d). Cell cycle analysis revealed a cell cycle arrest with an
increase in G0/G1-phase and a decrease of S-phase upon
loss of SV40-TAg expression 48 hours after doxycycline
withdrawal and at later time points (Figure 2e, 2f).
In order to characterize the transcriptomic changes
upon induction of cell cycle arrest after loss of SV40TAg expression, we compared gene expression profiles
of DKFZ-BT66 cells expressing SV40-TAg (with
doxycycline) and without SV40-TAg expression (120h
after doxycycline withdrawal). Pathway enrichment
analysis of genes regulated upon SV40-TAg loss revealed
a significant downregulation of pathways involved in
cell cycle, DNA replication and RNA processing, and an
upregulation of pathways known to be associated with
senescence such as cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction
[29] (Figure 3a Table 1). Unsupervised clustering of the
KEGG gene sets “cell cycle” (hsa04110) and “DNA
11464

Oncotarget

replication“ (hsa03030), as well as a senescence gene
set published by Fridman et al. [15] revealed a very
clear separation of the samples into two different groups
according to induction or absence of SV40-TAg expression
(Figure 3b-3d). The majority of the genes in the gene sets
“cell cycle” and “DNA replication” were downregulated
in the group without SV40-TAg expression, whereas
the majority of the genes in the senescence gene set was
upregulated. Accordingly, gene set enrichment analyses
(GSEA) performed on the same three gene sets (Figure
3e-3g) confirmed a statistically significant enrichment of
downregulated genes of the gene sets “cell cycle”, “DNA
replication” and of upregulated senescence genes in cells
upon SV40-TAg loss.
A generally accepted feature of cells undergoing OIS
is their positive staining for SA- β-galactosidase [6, 11].
Indeed, DKFZ-BT66 cells showed marked activity of SAβ-galactosidase in the absence of doxycycline, confirming
their senescent state. Circumvention of growth arrest by

expression of SV40-Tag, however, was not sufficient to
abrogate SA- β-galactosidase staining of DKFZ-BT66
cells, suggesting that not all features of senescence are
reverted in our model system (Supplementary Figure 1e).
Taken together, the observed growth arrest
of DKFZ-BT66 in the absence of SV40-TAg was
accompanied by distinct morphological as well as cell
biological changes indicative of induction of a senescent
phenotype comparable to OIS.

Growth arrest upon loss of SV40-TAg expression
is not due to replicative senescence
Growth arrest accompanied by senescent
features can be due to both oncogene-induced as
well as replicative senescence. An ultimate growth
arrest of DKFZ-BT66 cells was observed after 19
(+/- 1) passages (n=3 replicates) independent of the
presence of doxycycline. This was accompanied by

Figure 2: a. Light microscopic comparison of passage 10 DKFZ-BT66 cells grown in the presence of doxycycline (+DOX; 1 μg/ml) and

cells cultivated in the absence of doxycycline (-DOX) for 21 days. Cells grown in the absence of doxycycline show enlarged, round and
flattened cell bodies as compared to a small spindle like phenotype observed in cells proliferating in the presence of doxycycline. b, c. Fold
changes of CDKN1A (p21) and CDKN2A (p16) mRNA in DKFZ-BT66 cells after doxycycline withdrawal normalized to the level in cells
cultured in the presence of 1 μg/ml doxycycline (0 hours). n=3, significant differences are indicated as: ** p<0.01 and * p<0.05. Depicted
are mean +/- SD d. Western blot analysis of total cell lysates. DKFZ-BT66 cells were seeded in full medium supplemented with 1μg/ml
doxycycline and medium was replaced by doxycycline-free medium 24 hours later. Cells were lysed after the indicated time in the absence
of doxycycline. BT-40 and HEK293T were cultured in normal growth medium without doxycycline before lysis e. Changes in cell cycle
distribution after the indicated culture time in the absence of doxycycline. An increase in G1-phase and a significant reduction (*p<0.05)
in S-phase cells was detected as compared to control (0 hours) (n=3). Depicted are mean +/- SD f. Representative cell cycle histograms of
DKFZ-BT66 cells cultured in the presence (+DOX) or absence (-DOX for ten days) of doxycycline for ten days, respectively.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11465

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Gene expression profiling (GEP) data of DKFZ-BT66 was obtained in the presence (+DOX, n=3) or absence
(-DOX, n=3) of doxycycline for five days. a. Pathway enrichment map derived from GEP data showing the most regulated (up and
down) KEGG pathways in senescent (-DOX) DKFZ-BT66 cells (p< 0.01). The size of the circles is proportional to the number of genes in
the respective pathway. The width of the edges (lines connecting two circles) is proportional to the number of genes overlapping between
the two pathways. b, c, d. The heatmaps show the regulation of genes summarized as cell cycle genes (b) and DNA replication genes (c)
by the KEGG database and a senescence gene set (d) published by Fridman et al [20]. Unsupervised clustering separated the 3 +DOX and
the 3 -DOX samples in each case and indicated differential expression of the analyzed genes in the two settings. Most of the genes of the
cell cycle (b) and DNA replication (c) gene sets were downregulated in the absence of doxycycline. In contrast, the genes of the senescence
gene set were predominantly upregulated in the absence of doxycycline. e, f, g. Gene set enrichment analysis performed on the same gene
sets confirmed significant downregulation of cell cycle (e, p= 0.008) and DNA replication genes (f, p= 0.01) in the absence of doxycycline
and upregulation of senescence genes (g, p= 0.01).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11466

Oncotarget

Table 1: The top 10 most differentially regulated KEGG pathways in DKFZ-BT66 in proliferating vs. arrested mode
KEGG Pathway

No. of genes

Direction of regulation

P-Value

FDR

DNA replication

36

Down

1,35E-13

4,02961E-11

Cell cycle

118

Down

1,448E-09

1,62706E-07

ECM-receptor interaction

61

Up

1,63798E-09

1,62706E-07

Spliceosome

116

Down

2,87395E-08

2,14109E-06

RNA transport

136

Down

3,81383E-08

2,27304E-06

Fanconi anemia pathway

46

Down

4,50544E-07

2,2377E-05

Mismatch repair

22

Down

1,97183E-06

8,39436E-05

Cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction

151

Up

2,02138E-05

0,000752964

Homologous recombination

28

Down

4,74498E-05

0,001441792

Oocyte meiosis

99

Down

4,83823E-05

0,001441792

Direction of regulation in the senescence mode is shown.

morphologic changes reminiscent of senescence with
flattened, enlarged and irregularly-formed cell bodies
(Supplementary Figure 2a-2b). Since the promoter
driving SV40-TAg expression was still active, as
indicated by RFP expression (Supplementary Figure 2b),
we presumed that senescence at this point could not be
reverted by SV40-TAg and was therefore different from
OIS. We hypothesized that the observed growth arrest
was therefore replicative (instead of oncogene-induced)
senescence, the former of which is reversible by human
telomere reverse transcriptase (TERT) expression.
We transduced DKFZ-BT66 (passage 18) cells with a
retroviral expression system coding for TERT (pBabe_
hygro_hTERT), leading to constitutive TERT expression
(Supplementary Figure 2d). Of note, untransduced
DKFZ-BT66 cells showed no endogenous TERT
expression on mRNA level (Supplementary Figure 2d).
TERT expression allowed DKFZ-BT66 PA cell line to
proliferate beyond passage 20 (up until passage 32 at the
time of manuscript submission) and prevented senescent
changes, preserving a cell morphology similar to early
passage cells (supplementary Figure 2c), suggestive of a
reversion of replicative senescence. Loss of SV40-TAg
by withdrawal of doxycycline still led to a subsequent
and robust growth arrest independent of TERT
expression (Supplementary Figure 2e). Of note, TERT
cells grew slightly faster in the presence of SV40-TAg
(doubling time: 41.7 +/- 6.7 h) as compared to DKFZBT66 cells without TERT overexpression (Figure 1e).
We conclude that TERT expression inhibited replicative
senescence but not senescence induced by loss of SV40TAg expression.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

In summary, these data demonstrate that DKFZBT66 cells carry a dominant senescence program that
differs from replicative senescence and is in line with OIS
driven by the KIAA:BRAF1549 fusion.

A DKFZ-BT66-derived PA OIS gene signature
identifies PA patients with excellent progression
free survival
In order to identify, which patients are reflected
by our model in either state (proliferating or in OIS), we
generated a gene signature for OIS in PA based on DKFZBT66 cells in either proliferation or OIS. A penalized
logistic regression model was fitted resulting in a PA OIS
signature of 68 probesets (Figure 4a; Supplementary Table
3). This gene signature was applied to a dataset of 112
clinically and molecularly annotated primary PA samples
(pilocytic astrocytoma ICGC PedBrain cohort [23]) (Table
2). The signature was able to discriminate between two
subsets of patients within this cohort with significantly
different PFS (Figure 4b). Patients with low expression
of the PA OIS signature had a significantly decreased
PFS rate, as opposed to patients with a high expression
(p=0.003). There was no significant correlation of the OIS
signature with other parameters annotated in the primary
PA dataset.
We conclude that DKFZ-BT66 reflects patients with
a higher risk of progression in the proliferating state, and
patients with a low risk of progression in the senescent
state. Therefore, proliferating DKFZ-BT66 need to be
applied for drug testing, since they reflect the patients at
risk of progression and in need of further therapy.

11467

Oncotarget

DKFZ-BT66 identifies MEK inhibitors as
promising candidates for the treatment of
proliferating pilocytic astrocytoma

By design of our model, all effects mediated by
TP53/CDKN1a or CDKN2a/RB1 are blocked in the
proliferating state, since both pathways are blocked by
SV40-TAg. Accordingly changes in metabolic activity
as well as cell numbers upon treatment with both MEKis
studied did not correlate well with the observed effects
on pERK reduction. Both MEKi caused an unexpected
concentration-dependent increase of metabolic activity in
DKFZ-BT66 cells treated at lower doses for 72 or 240
hours (Figure 6a-6b), which was not caused by increased
cell counts (Figure 6c-6d). Reduction of metabolic
activity and cell counts after long-term treatment (240
hours) in the proliferating state was more pronounced
in cells treated with trametinib than in cells treated with
selumetinib (Figure 6a-6d). The effects on proliferation
of DKFZ-BT66 cells treated in senescent mode (loss of
SV40-TAg expression without doxycycline) were weaker
or not detectable (Figure 6e-6f).
In summary, we demonstrated differential responses
to inhibitors of different points in the MAPK signaling
cascade, with BRAFi and RAFi activating and MEKi
inhibiting the pathway.

Inhibitors of the MAPK pathway represent a
promising class of drugs currently under investigation for
the treatment of tumors with MAPK activation (reviewed
in Samatar et al. [47]). We tested a set of clinically available
and investigational MAPK inhibitors (MAPKi) - BRAF
inhibitors (BRAFi), inhibitors of dimeric RAF (RAFi),
and MEK inhibitors (MEKi) - for their ability to inhibit
MAPK-signaling, metabolic activity and proliferation in
DKFZ-BT66 cells. Two approved BRAFi, sorafenib (a
multi-kinase inhibitor also targeting RAF kinases) and
vemurafenib (a BRAF V600E-specific inhibitor), caused
paradoxical activation of the MAPK-signaling cascade
as indicated by an increase in pERK level after 24h of
treatment (Figure 5a). This has been suggested earlier in
other BRAF-fusion-driven models [25, 51]. MLN2480
and TAK-632, two potent class II RAFi [47], also caused
paradoxical activation of the pathway in our model (Figure
5a). Conversely, ERK activation was fully abrogated by
two clinically available MEKi, selumetinib and trametinib,
at concentrations as low as 0.1 μM at 24h (Figure 5a),
as indicated by loss of pERK signal in the Western blot.
The loss of pERK persisted upon long-term treatment
of 120h, without signs of paradoxical activation (Figure
5b). Both MEKi increased the level of pMEK after 24h
in a concentration dependent manner, in both SV40-TAg
expressing and non-expressing settings, indicative of
feedback activation (Figure 5c). Of note, measurement of
MEKi effects on pERK by western blots in the senescent
cells was precluded due to the previously demonstrated loss
of pERK after induction of senescence (Figure 5c).

DISCUSSION
Pilocytic astrocytoma is the most common pediatric
brain tumor but no patient-derived model of this entity
suitable for long-term use has been established up to
now. Several of our own efforts to generate PA models
either in vivo or in vitro had also previously failed. We
hypothesized that OIS, which was found to be present in
PA patient samples and short-term cultures [22], is the
main hurdle for successful model development. In line
with this hypothesis, inhibition of senescence mediators

Figure 4: A PA OIS signature was derived from gene expression data of DKFZ-BT66 in proliferation (+DOX) and senescence
mode (-DOX). a. Heatmap of the 68 PA OIS signature probesets. b. Kaplan-Meier curves depicting the progression free survival in
patients of the ICGC PedBrain PA cohort with either high or low expression of the PA OIS signature genes. Patients with high OIS score
show a significantly increased progression free survival as compared to patients with a low OIS score (p=0.003).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11468

Oncotarget

Table 2: Annotations of the Pilocytic Astrocytoma ICGC PedBrain cohort
age

gender
location

MAPK alteration

resection status

n

% of total

pediatric (<18 years)

100

89,3

adult (18 years and older)

12

10,7

male

49

43,8

female

63

56,3

infratentorial

84

75,0

  spinal

1

0,9

  brain stem

12

10,7

  cerebellum

68

60,7

supratentorial

27

24,1

  optic pathway

6

5,4

  3rd ventricle

4

3,6

  4th ventricle

4

3,6

  diencephalon

8

7,1

  cerebral hemisphere

7

6,3

BRAF-fusion

92

82,1

BRAF-mutation

6

5,4

FGFR1-mutation

5

4,5

NF1

2

1,8

KRAS-mutation

2

1,8

NTRK2-fusion

1

0,9

NA

4

3,6

total

61

54,5

subtotal

34

30,4

NA

17

15,2

median: 8 years (0.8-26)

RB1 and TP53 by expression of SV40-TAg in short-term
cultured PA cells enabled us to circumvent senescence and
to establish a proliferating PA cell line. The resulting cell
line, DKFZ-BT66, preserved a typical molecular and cell
biological phenotype characterizing it as true PA. DKFZBT66 exhibits several advantages compared to already
existing non-patient-derived model systems: I) DKFZBT66 displays the true genetic background of a PA as
opposed to the available models that are based on non-PA
cells such as neural stem cells [44], fibroblasts [24, 51]
or murine neural stem cells [19]. II) DKFZ-BT66 is the
first cell line endogenously expressing the prototypical
KIAA1549:BRAF fusion. It therefore recapitulates the
PA fusion expression level much closer than the existing
KIAA1549:BRAF-models which are mainly based on
fusion-overexpressing fibroblasts. III) The expandability
of existing models can be limited due to senescence (as
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

seen in primary PA cell cultures), potentially limiting
their use for medium- and large-scale experiments.
Circumvention of senescence in DKFZ-BT66 abrogates
this limitation and allows for expansion of the cell line.
The inducibility of the expression system used in our
model allowed for reversion of SV40-TAg expression by
withdrawal of doxycycline. Loss of SV40-TAg expression
was accompanied by several senescence features,
including enlarged cell morphology, upregulation of
CDKN1a, and G0/G1 cell cycle arrest [49]. Discrimination
between OIS and replicative senescence can be
challenging, since both of them share a subset of mediators
(e.g. TP53, CDKN1A, RB1, CDKN2A and others) and
result in a similar phenotype [28]. However, our functional
evidence indicates that OIS is present in DKFZ-BT66 cells
after loss of SV40-TAg expression. Replicative senescence
occurs when telomeres are shortened, ultimately resulting
11469

Oncotarget

in crisis when induction of senescence is inhibited [32].
Stabilization of telomeres is therefore a critical step in the
development of malignant tumors [32]. Many tumor cells
gain immortality by expression of telomerase [50] or use
alternative lengthening of telomeres (ALT) to maintain
their telomeres [36] to avoid replicative senescence and
crisis. Expression of TERT was absent in DKFZ-BT66
and the cells entered growth arrest after about 20 passages
in culture despite SV40-TAg expression, indicative for
crisis being present in these late passage cells. The fact
that no spontaneous immortalized clone evolved from
DKFZ-BT66 cells in crisis (more than 3 months of
observation) indicates that DKFZ-BT66 cells did not
reactivate TERT or initiate ALT. This observation is in line

with a previously published study by Tabori et al., which
demonstrated the absence of TERT activity or ALT and
therefore continuous shortening of telomeres over time
in pilocytic astrocytoma tumor samples [59]. Artificial
overexpression of telomerase in our model allowed the
cells to overcome ultimate growth arrest, to proliferate
beyond their replicative lifespan and to maintain initial
cell shape, functionally proving that the absence of
telomerase activity and/or ALT in DKFZ-BT66 was
responsible for late passage growth arrest. Proliferation
of TERT-overexpressing DKFZ-BT66 cells remained
strongly dependent on SV40-TAg expression. TERT
expression cannot bypass OIS, since the trigger of OIS
is independent from telomeres [64], but is capable of a

Figure 5: a. Western blot analysis of total cell lysates from DKFZ-BT66 cells treated for 24 hours with the indicated inhibitors before

lysis. For each condition 2 x106 cells were seeded 24 hours before treatment in 10 cm culture dishes (Corning) in ABM supplemented with
doxycycline b. Western blot analysis of total cell lysates from cells treated for 120 hours with selumetinib or trametinib before lysis. For
each condition 2 x106 cells were seeded 24 hours before treatment in 10 cm culture dishes in ABM supplemented with doxycycline. 48-72
hours after the beginning of treatment medium was exchanged by fresh medium containing the indicated concentrations of inhibitor and
1μg/ml doxycycline in order to keep inhibitor- and doxycycline levels stable c. Western blot analysis of total cell lysates from cells treated
for 24 hours with selumetinib or trametinib. For experiments in proliferation (+DOX) 2x106 cells were seeded 24 hours before treatment
in 10 cm culture dishes in ABM supplemented with 1μg/ml doxycycline and then treated for 24h with the inhibitors before lysis. For
experiments in senescence mode (-DOX) 4x106 cells were seeded in 10 cm cell culture dishes and cultivated in the absence of doxycycline
for five days followed by treatment with selumetinib or trametinib for 24 hours before lysis.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11470

Oncotarget

Figure 6: a, b. Assessment of metabolic activity by CellTiter-Glo assay. Mean of three independent replicates +/- SD is depicted. a) Cells

were treated with selumetinib for 72 and 240 hours, respectively, either in proliferation (+DOX, 1 μg/ml doxycycline) or senescence mode
(-DOX). b) Cells were treated with trametinib for 72 and 240 hours, respectively, either in proliferation (+DOX, 1 μg/ml doxycycline)
or senescence mode (-DOX). c-f. Influence of inhibitor treatment on proliferation of DKFZ-BT66 in proliferation (+DOX) or senescence
mode (-DOX). Cells were treated for 240 hours with the indicated concentrations and then counted by automated trypan blue staining. Data
is mean +/- SD of three biological replicates. Significant differences are indicated as: ** p<0.01 and * p<0.05. Dashed lines indicate the
number of cells seeded per well of a 6-well plate (Corning) 24 hours before treatment was started.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11471

Oncotarget

durable reversion of replicative senescence and crisis since
telomere shortening is their trigger [4, 61]. Growth arrest
observed in TERT-overexpressing DKFZ-BT66 after
SV40-TAg withdrawal was therefore strongly suggestive
for OIS being present in DKFZ-BT66. As the additional
expression of hTERT was only intended for experimental
purposes, future screenings should not be performed on
DKFZ-BT66 transduced with hTERT without testing for
differences in biological readouts beforehand.
Of note, CDKN2A levels did not change after
doxycycline withdrawal. This was not unexpected, since
SV40-Large T inhibits the CDKN2A/RB1 pathway at
the level of RB1, which is downstream of CDKN2A
and therefore does not influence the expression level of
CDKN2A. On the other hand, CDKN1A is affected since
SV40-TAg inhibits p53 upstream of CDKN1A. Therefore
CDKN1A goes up again after p53 is released from
inhibition and can affect it´s downstream targets.
We observed that MAPK activation was
downregulated after induction of senescence. Senescence
was maintained in the absence of MAPK signaling,
indicating that oncogenic signaling via ERK is only
needed for induction of senescence, but not for its
maintenance. One possible mechanistic explanation for
downregulation of MAPK activity in senescence might
be the upregulation of ERK specific phosphatases (e.g.
DUSP family members) and other regulatory proteins
via e.g. TP53 as has been described before in other OIS
systems [7]. Further investigations need to be performed
to explain this observation in the DKFZ-BT66 model.
However, MAPK silencing in arrested cells compared to
proliferating cells might indicate that the use of MAPKi
is more likely to be successful in proliferating cells since
the target for MAPKi is expressed to a lesser extent in
senescent cells. MAPKi therefore might influence PA
only at the time of progression or the proliferating subset
of cells within a tumor, which is rather low according
to immunohistochemical Ki67 detection of PA samples
(typically <5%) [12, 17]. This could explain the delay of
several months that is seen until first clinical responses
under treatment with MEKis is detected (unpublished
observation).
The observation of OIS being present and reversible
in DKFZ-BT66 makes it well suitable for studies on OIS
in PA, and led us to develop a PA OIS gene signature.
Application of this signature on gene expression data of
a cohort of PA patients allowed us to define two groups
of patients, statistically significantly different in their
PFS. Patients with low PA OIS score had a significantly
decreased PFS rate, as opposed to patients with a high PA
OIS score. We concluded that DKFZ-BT66 in proliferating
or senescent state models PA in either progressing mode
or OIS, respectively. Low or absent OIS activity correlates
with an activated MAPK pathway in DKFZ-BT66.
Patients with low PA OIS score therefore could represent
a subset in which MAPK activation and susceptibility to
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

MEK inhibition is higher, highlighting the potential for
these drugs in the treatment of progressing patients and
giving a possible biomarker for predicting the subset of
patients most likely to show a response. The potential use
of the PA OIS score as an independent prognostic marker
has to be investigated prospectively within clinical trials.
As a single pathway disease characterized by
activation of the MAPK pathway, inhibition of MAPK
is a promising novel approach to PA treatment. Careful
preclinical testing of new inhibitors before application
in clinical trials is strongly needed. This has been
highlighted by a study investigating the RAF inhibitor
sorafenib, which reported unexpected tumor growth in
pediatric PA patients in a phase II trial [25]. Paradoxical
activation of the MAPK signaling pathway was identified
as the molecular correlate of the observed increase in
tumor mass. DKFZ-BT66 was able to detect paradoxical
activation after treatment with sorafenib, recapitulating
the results of the phase II trial [25], and the same was
observed for vemurafenib [51]. Since KIAA1549:BRAF
fusions signal as homodimers [51], we tested MLN2480
and TAK-632, two potent inhibitors of dimeric RAF
[47], for their activity in DKFZ-BT66. However, both
MLN2480 and TAK-632 caused unexpected paradoxical
activation of pERK in our model system, similar to
sorafenib and vemurafenib. Other groups have reported
MAPK inhibition upon RAFi treatment in RAS and BRAF
mutated as well as BRAF fusion backgrounds. MLN2480
inhibited MAPK pathway signaling in preclinical BRAF
and RAS mutant melanoma and colorectal carcinoma
models [8]. In addition, MLN2480 has recently been
shown to suppress pERK and cell proliferation in short
term cultures of primary pilocytic astrocytoma cells that
were confirmed as positive for the KIAA1549:BRAF
fusion gene [58]. TAK-632 was initially described to
have cellular activity against mutated BRAF or mutated
NRAS cancer cell lines and antitumor efficacy in vivo in
BRAF and NRAS mutated xenograft models [38]. TAK632 was shown to induce minimal paradoxical activation
and potent antiproliferative effects in preclinical NRASand BRAF-mutated melanoma models [37]. Finally,
TAK-632 showed MAPK inhibitory effects with loss of
pERK in a SND1:BRAF fusion pancreatic cancer model
[5]. Conversely, in our model setting treatment with RAFi
led to MAPK activation. We therefore conclude that the
lack of MAPK inhibition upon RAFi treatment could be
a class-specific aspect of our model system. One possible
explanation of this finding is the described paradoxical
activation of downstream ERK signaling upon RAF
inhibition in conditions of elevated RAS-GTP [26], which
needs to be investigated in future studies.
In contrast, two MEKi, selumetinib and trametinib,
caused robust and durable downregulation of MAPK
activity in DKFZ-BT66, in line with reported clinical
responses of LGGs to MEK inhibitors in phase I studies
(unpublished data, and [1, 65]). These findings support
11472

Oncotarget

the investigation of MEKi in current phase I/II clinical
trials and their potential as candidates for translation
into upcoming phase III clinical trials. Both trametinib
and selumetinib inhibited MAPK signaling efficiently
at clinically achievable concentrations, as measured
by reduction of pERK levels. However, this did not
translate into simultaneous reduction of cell numbers
or metabolic activity. The reduction of cell number and
metabolic activity after treatment with trametinib but not
selumetinib is inconsistent with the effective abrogation of
MAPK signaling under treatment with either compound
at the same concentrations. Thus the observed effect
could be of unspecific toxic nature. We believe the most
likely reason for the lack of observable inhibition of cell
growth attributable to MEKi to be model-inherent: while
SV40-TAg inhibits OIS, by its very function it abrogates
TP53 function and thereby inhibits all TP53-dependent
downstream effects. This is enforced by SV40-TAg acting
as a powerful mitogen, which has been shown to induce
cell growth in growth factor free medium [54]. As SV40TAg acts downstream of the MAPK-signaling cascade, it
could have such a strong autonomous growth promoting
effect that inhibition of MEK upstream of SV40-TAg
cannot be fully translated into the desired effect on
viability and metabolic activity. Another explanation
of the unchanged or increased metabolic activity and
unchanged cell numbers at MEKi concentrations clearly
inhibiting MAPK activity is that activation of parallel
signaling pathways including the PI3K-mTOR pathway
leads to resistance to MEKi [66]. PI3K activation
has been shown to overcome BRAF V600E-induced
senescence in melanoma [63], and PI3K signaling was
found to be enhanced in BRAFi-resistant melanomas
[62]. Other mechanisms could include the reconfiguration
of chromatin leading to sustained up-regulation of
mechanisms activating RAS signaling through PI3K,
as has been shown in IDH mutant gliomas [14], with
subsequent stimulation of metabolism. Lastly, the lack of
specific effects on cell counts and metabolic activity could
be a function of time, and this could very well be expected.
In patients clinical response delay is seen even under
chemotherapy, and a response to MEKi in early trials has
been noted to be measurable after months of treatment.
This is very well conceivable given the slow-growing
nature of PAs, and furthermore emphasizes the preclinical
validity of this model. However, preclinical drug screens
using this model will have to take the limitation into
account, that signaling effects such as changes in pMEK
and pERK are readily detectable, but effects on cell
proliferation or cell death are limited. Further efforts to
generate new patient-derived and true PA models with
different genetic backgrounds are urgently warranted,
hopefully overcoming the limitation of our model.
In summary, the DKFZ-BT66 model is an in vitro
PA-model well suited for testing of compounds inhibiting
MAPK signaling based on BRAF fusion-driven activation.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

It will be also very useful to understand the biochemistry
of BRAF fusion proteins that significantly differ in their
regulatory requirements from BRAF point mutants such
as V600E [27]. It is capable of preclinical identification
of MAPKi leading to either robust inhibition of MAPK
pathway activity or paradoxical activation on a faithful
genetic and epigenetic PA background. Finally, the model
is fully suitable for OIS studies in PA.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Ethics statement
Investigation has been conducted in accordance with
the ethical standards and according to the Declaration of
Helsinki and according to national and international
guidelines and has been approved by the authors'
institutional review board.

Patient sample
The pilocytic astrocytoma cell line DKFZBT66 was derived from a primary tumor sample of a
pilocytic astrocytoma patient obtained during therapeutic
intervention by one of the co-authors (MUS). Informed
consent for sample collection and use was obtained, and
the study was approved by the institutional review board
of the University of Heidelberg (S-304/2014). The male
patient was almost 2 years of age (22 months) when
he was diagnosed with a partially cystic left cerebellar
tumor causing a strong dislocation of the brain stem
and a compression of the mesencephalon. The diagnosis
of pilocytic astrocytoma was confirmed by a local
neuropathologist and by a central German histopathology
review board. The KIAA1549:BRAF fusion (KEX16BEX9)
was detected by the presence of a specific fusion
transcript. After gross total resection of the tumor, no
further therapeutic intervention was necessary. The patient
is being monitored on a regular basis, and up to now (4
years and 8 months after resection) no relapse of the
disease has occurred.

Viral vectors and transduction
The lentiviral vector pFRIPZ was generated from
the pTRIPZ plasmid (Open Biosystems), which contains
a doxycycline regulated promotor (minimal CMV)
controlling a turboRFP cDNA followed by a shRNAmir
cassette. To generate pFRIPZ, the NotI site in pTRIPZ
was eliminated and the mir30 based shRNAmir cassette
was replaced by the encephalomyocarditis virus internal
ribosomal entry site (EMCV IRES) followed by an EcoRI
and NotI cutting site for subcloning. SV40-TAg DNA
was amplified from retroviral pQCXIH/TAg vector [45]
using primers with NotI overhangs and sub-cloned into
pJET cloning vector (pJET1.2/blunt, Thermo Fisher
11473

Oncotarget

Scientific, Cat. No. K1231) by blunt end ligation using
manufacturers’ instructions. SV40-Tag-containing pJET
plasmids were digested with NotI and cut SV40-TAg
inserts were separated on a 1% agarose gel. pFRIPZ
vector was digested with NotI and ligated with SV40TAg DNA. Clones with correctly orientated SV40-TAg
inserts were identified by restriction digest and positive
clones were sequenced via an external sequencing service
(GATC Biotech, Germany) and used for further plasmid
preparations. pBABE-hygro-hTERT plasmid was a gift
from Bob Weinberg (Addgene plasmid # 1773). The full
open reading frame (LKB) of the KIAA1549:BRAFfusion (KEX16BEX9) was described before [24] and
subcloned into retroviral pBABE-hygro plasmid (pBABEhygro-LKB).
Lentiviral packaging of pFRIPZ TAg vector was
performed using Thermo Scientific Trans-Lentiviral
Packaging system (Cat. No. TLP5912). To this end, 5 x
106 HEK293T cells grown in a 10 cm culture dish for 24h
were co-transfected with pFRIPZ TAg plasmid DNA and
Trans-Lentiviral Packaging Mix using calcium phosphate
transfection. Retroviral packaging was performed using
Platinum-GP Retrovirus Expression System, Pantropic
from Cell Biolabs (VPK-302). Therefore, 5 x 106
Platinum-GP cells grown in a 10 cm culture dish for
24h were co-transfected with pBABE-hygro-hTERT or
pBABE-hygro-LKB plasmid DNA and pCMV-VSV-G
plasmid DNA using calcium phosphate transfection.
Medium was changed 16-20 hours after transfection,
and viral supernatant was collected 24h after the medium
change. Polybrene (Santa Cruz) was added to a final
concentration of 8μg/ml and viral supernatant was used
for immediate target cell transduction or stored in aliquots
at -80°C. Target cells were seeded at a density of 5 x 105
cells in 10 cm culture dishes 24 hours prior to infection
followed by incubation with three ml viral supernatant.
After six hours, a top-up with seven ml target cell medium
was added. Antibiotic selection of transduced clones with
either puromycin (pFRIPZ TAg plasmid, 1μg/ml, Cayman
Chemicals, catalogue no. 13884) or hygromycin-B
(pBABE-hygro-hTERT and pBABE-hygro-LKB plasmids,
250μg/ml, Santa Cruz, catalogue no. sc-29067) was started
24 hours after infection and performed for 10 days.

absence of SV40-TAg, DKFZ-BT66 cells were seeded in
complete growth medium without doxycycline. BT-40 cell
line [3] was a kind gift of Dr. P. Houghton, University
of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, and
was grown in RPMI1640 with L-glutamine (LONZA;
BE12-702F, Belgium) and 10% fetal bovine serum
(Sigma Aldrich, Germany). DKFZ-BT66 cells and BT40 cells have been proven to be free of contamination by
mycoplasma or viral contamination using the Multiplex
cell Contamination Test (McCT)[48]. Confirmation of
identity by Multiplex Cell line authentication test (MCA)
[48] was not possible since these cell lines are not present
in the MCA database. HEK293T cells (GE Healthcare,
Dharmacon catalogue no. HCL4517) were propagated in
DMEM medium with L-glutamine (LONZA; BE12-604F,
Belgium) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum
(Sigma Aldrich, Germany) and had identity confirmed and
proven to be free of contamination by mycoplasma or viral
contamination using the Multiplex Cell Contamination
and Authentication Test (MCA and McCT)[48].
Platinum GP cells (Cell Biolabs, catalogue no. RV-103)
were propagated in DMEM medium with L-glutamine
(LONZA; BE12-604F, Belgium) supplemented with 10%
fetal bovine serum (Sigma Aldrich, Germany) and 10μg/
ml blasticidin (Gibco, UK). TÜ-DKFZ pBABE-LKB,
a cell line derived from non-neoplastic brain artificially
overexpressing the KIAA1549:BRAF fusion, was
cultivated in ABM basal medium (LONZA; CC-3187, US)
supplemented with AGM SingleQuot Kit Supplements &
Growth Factors (LONZA; CC-4123, US). All cell lines
were grown at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere with 5%
CO2. Cell counts were performed by automated trypan
blue staining using Vi-CELL XR automated cell counter
(Beckmann Coulter, Germany). Doubling time of cultured
cells was calculated using publicly available software
(http://www.doubling-time.com/compute_more.php). All
cell lines in culture were checked regularly every month
for contamination with mycoplasma using Venor®GeM
Mycoplasma PCR Detection Kit (Minerva Biolabs, 111250, Germany).

MAPK inhibitors
All inhibitors were purchased from Selleckchem. A
panel of RAF inhibitors including sorafenib (catalogue no.
S1040), vemurafenib (catalogue no. S1267), MLN2480
(catalogue no. S7121) and TAK-632 (catalogue no.
S7291) and two MEK inhibitors, selumetinib (catalogue
no. S1008) and trametinib (catalogue no. S2673), were
investigated. All compounds were ordered as 10mM stock
solution dissolved in DMSO and stored at -80°C in 50μl
aliquots until used. Inhibitors and solvent control (0.1%
DMSO) were diluted in cell culture medium (with or
without doxycycline depending on the context) and added
to the cell culture at the indicated concentrations for the
indicated time.

Cell culture
DKFZ-BT66 cell line was cultivated as a monolayer
in ABM basal medium (LONZA; CC-3187, US)
supplemented with AGM SingleQuot Kit Supplements &
Growth Factors (LONZA; CC-4123, US). For expansion,
1μg/ml doxycycline (Santa Cruz; sc-337691) was added
to the medium prior to use and medium was replaced
three times a week to obtain stable doxycycline levels.
DKFZ-BT66 cells were passaged every 7-10d into new
cell culture dishes after short enzymatic digestion with
0.05% trypsin-EDTA (Gibco, UK). For experiments in the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11474

Oncotarget

Metabolic activity

Microscopy

Measurement of metabolic activity in DKFZBT66 cells was performed in 96-well flat bottom black
opaque wall plates (Greiner) after inhibitor treatment
for 72 or 240 hours. 24 hours before treatment 25.000
cells/well were seeded for experiments with 72
hours duration and 5.000 cells/well were seeded for
experiments with 240 hours duration in experiments in
the presence of 1μg/ml doxycycline. For experiments
in the absence of doxycycline 100.000 cells/well were
seeded 24 hours prior to treatment for both, the short
and the long-term treatment time. Cells were incubated
with the different MAPK inhibitors in several dilutions,
ranging from 10 μM to 0.005 nM. All treatments
were performed in triplicate. Each plate contained an
untreated and a DMSO control. Medium was exchanged
three times per week and replaced in order to keep
inhibitor levels and doxycycline levels stable. After the
incubation time metabolic activity was determined using
CellTiter-Glo assay (Promega, catalogue no. G7571)
following manufacturer´s instructions. Luminescence
was detected by FLUOstar OPTIMA automated plate
reader (BMG Labtech). Dose-response curves and half
maximal inhibitory concentrations (IC50-values) were
calculated using GraphPad Prism software (v5.01) for
windows.

Bright field pictures were captured as described before
[13]. Fluorescence images of RFP expressing cells were
captured using an Olympus CX41 microscope in combination
with an Olympus U-RFL-T reflected fluorescence system and
CellB 2.3 software. Exposure time was 25ms for bright field
and 500ms for fluorescence images.

Cell cycle analysis
1.5 x106 cells were washed with PBS and fixed by
dropwise addition of 70% ice cold ethanol while vortexing.
Following 30 minutes incubation on ice cells were washed
once and re-suspended in staining solution containing 0.1%
Triton-X-100 and 1μg/ml 4',6-Diamidino-2-Phenylindole
(DAPI; Applichem). After 30 minutes incubation at room
temperature, cells were analyzed on a BD FACS Canto
II flowcytometer using a 405 nm excitation laser and a
Pacific-Blue emission filter. Doublets were discriminated
using a SSC-W/SSC-H plot and cell cycle was plotted as
counts/Pacific-Blue histogram. Evaluation of data was
performed using FlowJo-V10 software.

Senescence-associated β-galactosidase staining
Senescence-associated (SA) β-galactosidase staining
was performed using a senescence β-galactosidase staining
kit (Cell Signaling Technology, catalogue no. 9860)
following manufacturer´s instructions.

Western blot

DNA-methylation array and t-SNE analysis

Western blot analysis was performed as described
previously [13]. In short, protein concentrations of cell
lysates were determined using the Thermo Scientific Pierce
(Waltham, MA, USA) BCA Protein Assay Kit according
to manufacturer’s instructions. The antibodies used are
summarized in supplementary Table 1. Luminescence
signals were detected using Amersham ECL Prime
Western Blotting Detection System (GE Healthcare) on
PVDF membrane with Chemi- Smart 5000 Technology
(Vilber Lourmat).

The Illumina Infinium HumanMethylation450
Beadchip (450k) array was used for molecular
subgrouping and copy number profiling as described
before [21]. t-Distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding
(t-SNE) analysis was performed as described before [56].

Gene panel sequencing
A customized gene panel covering 130 brain tumorrelated genes was used as described [46]. In brief, a target
enrichment method based on the Agilent SureSelect
Enrichment technology (Santa Clara, CA, USA) was
applied. The generated libraries (enriched regions of
interest) cover the exonic regions of the respective genes,
as well as intronic regions involved in gene fusions
including KIAA1549:BRAF breakpoints.

RNA-isolation, cDNA synthesis and quantitative
reverse transcription real-time PCR (qPCR)
RNA extraction from cell culture and cDNA
synthesis was performed as reported previously [35].
Quantitative real-time PCR was conducted using an
ABI 7500 Real Time PCR cycler (Applied Biosystems)
using ABI 7500 Software v2.3 (Applied Biosystems)
with Platinum SYBR Green qPCR SuperMix-UDG
(Invitrogen). The quantitative real-time PCR conditions
were as described previously [35]. Quantitative realtime PCR Primers were purchased from Qiagen and
Invitrogen (see supplementary Table 2). The ΔΔCt
method was used to assess relative quantification. ACTB
was used as control gene.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Gene expression profiling, pathway analysis,
GSEA and development of a PA OIS gene
signature
Gene expression profiling was performed as
described before [23]. Hierarchical clustering was
performed using Euclidean distance and complete
linkage after gene-wise standardization. Differentially
11475

Oncotarget

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

expressed probesets were identified using the empirical
Bayes approach [53] based on moderated t-statistics as
implemented in the Bioconductor package limma [52].
KEGG pathways (http://rest.kegg.jp) and a previously
published senescence pathway [15] were used for
pathway analysis. In case multiple probesets mapped to
the same gene, the probeset with the largest effect based
on limma analysis was used. The camera test [67] was
used to competitively test pathways for regulation between
conditions. All p-values were adjusted for multiple testing
using Benjamini-Hochberg correction in order to control
the false discovery rate. An enrichment map [33] was used
to visualize results from pathway tests. A penalized logistic
regression model was fitted on DKFZ-BT66 samples to
find a PA OIS signature using the glmnet algorithm [16].
Due to the small sample size, an elastic net penalty was
used to allow for a moderately sized signature. A small
elastic net mixing parameter (α=0.99) was added to the
L1 penalty parameter. The L1 penalty parameter was
determined based on leave-one-out cross-validation.
The OIS score was predicted on PA patient samples and
scaled. Prognostic impact of OIS score on progressionfree survival was assessed using Kaplan-Meier estimates
and log-rank test. OIS score was dichotomized at median
cut-off. P-values below 0.05 were considered statistically
significant. All analyses were carried out using R 3.2 [60].

We thank the patient and family for consenting to
use the tumor material for this study. We thank Daniela
Kuhn and Carina Müller for excellent technical assistance.
We thank Franziska Wöhrle, who constructed the pFRIPZ
lentiviral vector backbone.

Editorial note
This paper has been accepted based in part on
peer-review conducted by another journal and the authors’
response and revisions as well as expedited peer-review in
Oncotarget.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
OW is advisory board member of Novartis and
Astra Zeneca. TB has received a speaker honorarium from
Actelion.

FUNDING
This study was funded by A Kids’ Brain Tumor Cure
(PLGA) Foundation (SP, DJ, AvD, OW), and the “Verein
für krebskranke Kinder Odenwald” (OW). OW (W1461/41) and IO (Oe542/2-1) are funded by the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG). IO is supported by H.W.
& J. Hector foundation (#M71). JG was supported by the
Dr. Mildred Scheel Foundation for Cancer Research. MR
together with DP or VM are funded by the Kind-Philipp
Stiftung and the Düsseldorf School of Oncology (Medical
Faculty, Heinrich-Heine University), respectively. TB is
supported by the DFG via the Heisenberg program and the
Centre for Biological Signalling Studies BIOSS.

Statistics
In vitro experiments were performed in a minimum
of three biological replicates. All data is presented as
mean ± standard deviation (SD). Differences between
two groups were compared using an unpaired t-test with
Welch´s correction. P-values <0.05 were considered
significant. Dose-response curves and half-maximal
inhibiting concentrations (IC50) were calculated using
GraphPad Prism version 5.01 (GraphPad Software, La
Jolla, CA, USA) for Windows. Graphs were generated
using GraphPad Prism version 5.01 and Microsoft
Powerpoint 2010 for Windows.

Author contributions

data.

FS, TH, FS, AK, JR, IO, VM, DP, MR analyzed and
interpreted data.
FS, SMP, DTWJ, OW and TM drafted the article.
FS, TH, IO, CDS, SMP, TB, DTWJ, OW, TM
critically revised the article.
All authors gave their final approval of the version
to be published.

Abbreviations
ALT  alternative lengthening of telomeres, BRAFi  BRAF
inhibitor, CDKI cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor,
DAPI 4',6-Diamidino-2-Phenylindole,
EFS eventfree survival, GSEA  gene set enrichment analysis,
IC50  half-maximal inhibiting concentration, MEKi  MEK
inhibitors, MAPK  Mitogen-activated protein kinase,
MAPKi  MAPK inhibitor(s), OIS  oncogene induced
senescence, PA  pilocytic astrocytoma, PD  progressive
disease, PDX  patient-derived xenografts, pLGG  pediatric
low-grade glioma, RAFi  RAF inhibitor(s), RFP  red
fluorescent
protein,
SA  Senescence-associated,
SD  standard deviation, SV40-TAg  Simian Vacuolating
Virus 40 large T antigen, TERT  telomere reverse
transcriptase.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

FS, SMP, TB, DTWJ, OW and TM designed the study.
FS, JH, FS, DC, DU, SB, JR, JE, VM, DP collected

REFERENCES
1.	 Banerjee A, Jakacki R, Onar-Thomas A, Wu S, Nicolaides
T, Turner D, Richardson S, Young-Poussaint T, Phillips JJ,
Prados M (2014) A phase 1 study of AZD6244 in children
with recurrent or refractory low-grade gliomas: A Pediatric
Brain Tumor Consortium report. ASCO Annual Meeting
Proceedings, City. pp 10065.
11476

Oncotarget

2.	 Bargonetti J, Reynisdottir I, Friedman PN, Prives C (1992)
Site-specific binding of wild-type p53 to cellular DNA is
inhibited by SV40 T antigen and mutant p53. Genes Dev.
6: 1886-1898.

13.	 Ecker J, Oehme I, Mazitschek R, Korshunov A, Kool M,
Hielscher T, Kiss J, Selt F, Konrad C, Lodrini Met al (2015)
Targeting class I histone deacetylase 2 in MYC amplified
group 3 medulloblastoma. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 3:
22. doi: 10.1186/s40478-015-0201-7.

3.	 Bid HK, Kibler A, Phelps DA, Manap S, Xiao L, Lin J,
Capper D, Oswald D, Geier B, DeWire Met al (2013)
Development, characterization, and reversal of acquired
resistance to the MEK1 inhibitor selumetinib (AZD6244) in
an in vivo model of childhood astrocytoma. Clin Cancer Res.
19: 6716-6729. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-0842.

14.	 Flavahan WA, Drier Y, Liau BB, Gillespie SM, Venteicher
AS, Stemmer-Rachamimov AO, Suva ML, Bernstein BE
(2016) Insulator dysfunction and oncogene activation in
IDH mutant gliomas. Nature. 529: 110-114. doi: 10.1038/
nature16490.

4.	 Bodnar AG, Ouellette M, Frolkis M, Holt SE, Chiu CP,
Morin GB, Harley CB, Shay JW, Lichtsteiner S, Wright WE
(1998) Extension of life-span by introduction of telomerase
into normal human cells. Science. 279: 349-352.

15.	 Fridman AL, Tainsky MA (2008) Critical pathways in
cellular senescence and immortalization revealed by gene
expression profiling. Oncogene. 27: 5975-5987. doi:
10.1038/onc.2008.213.

5.	 Chmielecki J, Hutchinson KE, Frampton GM, Chalmers ZR,
Johnson A, Shi C, Elvin J, Ali SM, Ross JS, Basturk Oet al
(2014) Comprehensive genomic profiling of pancreatic acinar
cell carcinomas identifies recurrent RAF fusions and frequent
inactivation of DNA repair genes. Cancer Discov. 4: 13981405. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-14-0617.

16.	 Friedman J, Hastie T, Tibshirani R (2010) Regularization
Paths for Generalized Linear Models via Coordinate
Descent. J Stat Softw. 33: 1-22.
17.	 Giannini C, Scheithauer BW, Burger PC, Christensen MR,
Wollan PC, Sebo TJ, Forsyth PA, Hayostek CJ (1999)
Cellular proliferation in pilocytic and diffuse astrocytomas.
J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 58: 46-53.

6.	 Collado M, Gil J, Efeyan A, Guerra C, Schuhmacher AJ,
Barradas M, Benguria A, Zaballos A, Flores JM, Barbacid
Met al (2005) Tumour biology: senescence in premalignant
tumours. Nature. 436: 642. doi: 10.1038/436642a.

18.	 Gnekow AK, Falkenstein F, von Hornstein S, Zwiener
I, Berkefeld S, Bison B, Warmuth-Metz M, Driever
PH, Soerensen N, Kortmann RDet al (2012) Long-term
follow-up of the multicenter, multidisciplinary treatment
study HIT-LGG-1996 for low-grade glioma in children and
adolescents of the German Speaking Society of Pediatric
Oncology and Hematology. Neuro Oncol. 14: 1265-1284.
doi: 10.1093/neuonc/nos202.

7.	 Courtois-Cox S, Genther Williams SM, Reczek EE,
Johnson BW, McGillicuddy LT, Johannessen CM, Hollstein
PE, MacCollin M, Cichowski K (2006) A negative feedback
signaling network underlies oncogene-induced senescence.
Cancer Cell. 10: 459-472. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2006.10.003.
8.	 Cunniff EGC, Zhang J, Chouitar J, Mettetal J, Nakamura K,
Arita T, Nakamura A, Okaniwa M, Ishikawa T, Yoshida S
(2013) Use of combination treatment with the investigational
RAF kinase inhibitor MLN2480 and the investigational MEK
kinase inhibitor TAK-733 on the growth of BRAF-mutant
and RAS-mutant preclinical models of melanoma and CRC.
ASCO Annual Meeting Proceedings, City. pp e13529.

19.	 Gronych J, Korshunov A, Bageritz J, Milde T, Jugold M,
Hambardzumyan D, Remke M, Hartmann C, Witt H, Jones
DTet al (2011) An activated mutant BRAF kinase domain
is sufficient to induce pilocytic astrocytoma in mice. J Clin
Invest. 121: 1344-1348. doi: 10.1172/JCI44656.
20.	 Herranz N, Gallage S, Mellone M, Wuestefeld T, Klotz S,
Hanley CJ, Raguz S, Acosta JC, Innes AJ, Banito Aet al
(2015) mTOR regulates MAPKAPK2 translation to control
the senescence-associated secretory phenotype. Nat Cell
Biol. 17: 1205-1217. doi: 10.1038/ncb3225.

9.	 DeCaprio JA, Ludlow JW, Figge J, Shew JY, Huang CM,
Lee WH, Marsilio E, Paucha E, Livingston DM (1988)
SV40 large tumor antigen forms a specific complex with
the product of the retinoblastoma susceptibility gene. Cell.
54: 275-283.

21.	 Hovestadt V, Remke M, Kool M, Pietsch T, Northcott
PA, Fischer R, Cavalli FM, Ramaswamy V, Zapatka M,
Reifenberger Get al (2013) Robust molecular subgrouping
and copy-number profiling of medulloblastoma from small
amounts of archival tumour material using high-density
DNA methylation arrays. Acta Neuropathol. 125: 913-916.
doi: 10.1007/s00401-013-1126-5.

10.	 Deshmukh H, Yu J, Shaik J, MacDonald TJ, Perry A,
Payton JE, Gutmann DH, Watson MA, Nagarajan R (2011)
Identification of transcriptional regulatory networks specific
to pilocytic astrocytoma. BMC Med Genomics. 4: 57. doi:
10.1186/1755-8794-4-57.
11.	 Dimri GP, Lee X, Basile G, Acosta M, Scott G, Roskelley
C, Medrano EE, Linskens M, Rubelj I, Pereira-Smith Oet al
(1995) A biomarker that identifies senescent human cells in
culture and in aging skin in vivo. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
92: 9363-9367.

22.	 Jacob K, Quang-Khuong DA, Jones DT, Witt H, Lambert
S, Albrecht S, Witt O, Vezina C, Shirinian M, Faury Det
al (2011) Genetic aberrations leading to MAPK pathway
activation mediate oncogene-induced senescence in
sporadic pilocytic astrocytomas. Clin Cancer Res. 17: 46504660. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-11-0127.

12.	 Dirven CM, Koudstaal J, Mooij JJ, Molenaar WM (1998)
The proliferative potential of the pilocytic astrocytoma: the
relation between MIB-1 labeling and clinical and neuroradiological follow-up. J Neurooncol. 37: 9-16.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23.	 Jones DT, Hutter B, Jager N, Korshunov A, Kool M,
Warnatz HJ, Zichner T, Lambert SR, Ryzhova M, Quang
DAet al (2013) Recurrent somatic alterations of FGFR1 and
11477

Oncotarget

NTRK2 in pilocytic astrocytoma. Nat Genet. 45: 927-932.
doi: 10.1038/ng.2682.

35.	 Milde T, Oehme I, Korshunov A, Kopp-Schneider A,
Remke M, Northcott P, Deubzer HE, Lodrini M, Taylor
MD, von Deimling Aet al (2010) HDAC5 and HDAC9 in
medulloblastoma: novel markers for risk stratification and
role in tumor cell growth. Clin Cancer Res. 16: 3240-3252.
doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-0395.

24.	 Jones DT, Kocialkowski S, Liu L, Pearson DM, Backlund
LM, Ichimura K, Collins VP (2008) Tandem duplication
producing a novel oncogenic BRAF fusion gene defines the
majority of pilocytic astrocytomas. Cancer Res. 68: 86738677. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-2097.

36.	 Muntoni A, Reddel RR (2005) The first molecular details of
ALT in human tumor cells. Hum Mol Genet. 14: R191-196.
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddi266.

25.	 Karajannis MA, Legault G, Fisher MJ, Milla SS, Cohen
KJ, Wisoff JH, Harter DH, Goldberg JD, Hochman T,
Merkelson Aet al (2014) Phase II study of sorafenib
in children with recurrent or progressive low-grade
astrocytomas. Neuro Oncol. 16: 1408-1416. doi: 10.1093/
neuonc/nou059.

37.	 Nakamura A, Arita T, Tsuchiya S, Donelan J, Chouitar J,
Carideo E, Galvin K, Okaniwa M, Ishikawa T, Yoshida
S (2013) Antitumor activity of the selective pan-RAF
inhibitor TAK-632 in BRAF inhibitor-resistant melanoma.
Cancer Res. 73: 7043-7055. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.
CAN-13-1825.

26.	 Karoulia Z, Wu Y, Ahmed TA, Xin Q, Bollard J, Krepler
C, Wu X, Zhang C, Bollag G, Herlyn Met al (2016) An
Integrated Model of RAF Inhibitor Action Predicts Inhibitor
Activity against Oncogenic BRAF Signaling. Cancer Cell.
30: 501-503. doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2016.08.008.

38.	 Okaniwa M, Hirose M, Arita T, Yabuki M, Nakamura
A, Takagi T, Kawamoto T, Uchiyama N, Sumita A,
Tsutsumi Set al (2013) Discovery of a selective kinase
inhibitor (TAK-632) targeting pan-RAF inhibition: design,
synthesis, and biological evaluation of C-7-substituted
1,3-benzothiazole derivatives. J Med Chem. 56: 6478-6494.
doi: 10.1021/jm400778d.

27.	 Kohler M, Roring M, Schorch B, Heilmann K, Stickel N,
Fiala GJ, Schmitt LC, Braun S, Ehrenfeld S, Uhl FMet al
(2016) Activation loop phosphorylation regulates B-Raf in
vivo and transformation by B-Raf mutants. EMBO J. 35:
143-161. doi: 10.15252/embj.201592097.

39.	 Olow A, Mueller S, Yang X, Hashizume R, Meyerowitz J,
Weiss WA, Resnick AC, Waanders AJ, Stalpers LJ, Berger
MSet al (2016) BRAF status in personalizing treatment
approaches for pediatric gliomas. Clin Cancer Res. doi:
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-15-1101.

28.	 Kuilman T, Michaloglou C, Mooi WJ, Peeper DS (2010)
The essence of senescence. Genes Dev. 24: 2463-2479. doi:
10.1101/gad.1971610.
29.	 Kuilman T, Michaloglou C, Vredeveld LC, Douma S,
van Doorn R, Desmet CJ, Aarden LA, Mooi WJ, Peeper
DS (2008) Oncogene-induced senescence relayed by an
interleukin-dependent inflammatory network. Cell. 133:
1019-1031. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.03.039.

40.	 Oren M, Maltzman W, Levine AJ (1981) Post-translational
regulation of the 54K cellular tumor antigen in normal and
transformed cells. Mol Cell Biol. 1: 101-110.
41.	 Ostrom QT, Gittleman H, Fulop J, Liu M, Blanda R,
Kromer C, Wolinsky Y, Kruchko C, Barnholtz-Sloan JS
(2015) CBTRUS Statistical Report: Primary Brain and
Central Nervous System Tumors Diagnosed in the United
States in 2008-2012. Neuro Oncol. 17: iv1-iv62. doi:
10.1093/neuonc/nov189.

30.	 Lambert SR, Witt H, Hovestadt V, Zucknick M, Kool
M, Pearson DM, Korshunov A, Ryzhova M, Ichimura
K, Jabado Net al (2013) Differential expression and
methylation of brain developmental genes define locationspecific subsets of pilocytic astrocytoma. Acta Neuropathol.
126: 291-301. doi: 10.1007/s00401-013-1124-7.

42.	 Pfister S, Janzarik WG, Remke M, Ernst A, Werft W,
Becker N, Toedt G, Wittmann A, Kratz C, Olbrich Het al
(2008) BRAF gene duplication constitutes a mechanism of
MAPK pathway activation in low-grade astrocytomas. J
Clin Invest. 118: 1739-1749. doi: 10.1172/JCI33656.

31.	 Louis DN, Perry A, Reifenberger G, von Deimling A,
Figarella-Branger D, Cavenee WK, Ohgaki H, Wiestler
OD, Kleihues P, Ellison DW (2016) The 2016 World
Health Organization Classification of Tumors of the Central
Nervous System: a summary. Acta Neuropathol. 131: 803820. doi: 10.1007/s00401-016-1545-1.

43.	 Raabe E, Kieran MW, Cohen KJ (2013) New strategies in
pediatric gliomas: molecular advances in pediatric lowgrade gliomas as a model. Clin Cancer Res. 19: 4553-4558.
doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-0662.

32.	 Mathon NE, Lloyd AC (2001) Cell senescence and cancer.
Nat Rev Cancer. 1: 203-213. doi: 10.1038/35106045.

44.	 Raabe EH, Lim KS, Kim JM, Meeker A, Mao XG, Nikkhah
G, Maciaczyk J, Kahlert U, Jain D, Bar Eet al (2011) BRAF
activation induces transformation and then senescence in
human neural stem cells: a pilocytic astrocytoma model.
Clin Cancer Res. 17: 3590-3599. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.
CCR-10-3349.

33.	 Merico D, Isserlin R, Stueker O, Emili A, Bader GD (2010)
Enrichment map: a network-based method for gene-set
enrichment visualization and interpretation. PLoS One. 5:
e13984. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013984.
34.	 Michaloglou C, Vredeveld LC, Soengas MS, Denoyelle C,
Kuilman T, van der Horst CM, Majoor DM, Shay JW, Mooi
WJ, Peeper DS (2005) BRAFE600-associated senescencelike cell cycle arrest of human naevi. Nature. 436: 720-724.
doi: 10.1038/nature03890.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

45.	 Roring M, Herr R, Fiala GJ, Heilmann K, Braun S,
Eisenhardt AE, Halbach S, Capper D, von Deimling A,
Schamel WWet al (2012) Distinct requirement for an
intact dimer interface in wild-type, V600E and kinase-dead
11478

Oncotarget

B-Raf signalling. EMBO J. 31: 2629-2647. doi: 10.1038/
emboj.2012.100.

58.	 Sun Y PC, Calligaris D, Chadwick EJ, Alberta JA,
Ramkissoon SH, Ramkissoon LA, Garcia VM, Mazzola E,
Goumnerova L, Kane M, Yao Z, Kieran MW, Ligon KL,
Hahn WC, Garraway LA, Rosen N, Gray NS, Agar NY,
Buhrlage SJ, Segal RA, Stiles CD (2016) A Brain Penetrant
RAF Dimer Antagonist For The Non-Canonical BRAF
Oncoprotein of Pediatric Low-Grade Astrocytomas. NeuroOncology, in press:

46.	 Sahm F, Schrimpf D, Jones DT, Meyer J, Kratz A, Reuss
D, Capper D, Koelsche C, Korshunov A, Wiestler Bet al
(2016) Next-generation sequencing in routine brain tumor
diagnostics enables an integrated diagnosis and identifies
actionable targets. Acta Neuropathol. 131: 903-910. doi:
10.1007/s00401-015-1519-8.

59.	 Tabori U, Vukovic B, Zielenska M, Hawkins C, Braude I,
Rutka J, Bouffet E, Squire J, Malkin D (2006) The role of
telomere maintenance in the spontaneous growth arrest of
pediatric low-grade gliomas. Neoplasia. 8: 136-142. doi:
10.1593/neo.05715.

47.	 Samatar AA, Poulikakos PI (2014) Targeting RAS-ERK
signalling in cancer: promises and challenges. Nat Rev
Drug Discov. 13: 928-942. doi: 10.1038/nrd4281.
48.	 Schmitt M, Pawlita M (2009) High-throughput detection
and multiplex identification of cell contaminations. Nucleic
Acids Res. 37: e119. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp581.

60.	 Team RC (2013) R: A language and environment for
statistical computing.

49.	 Serrano M, Lin AW, McCurrach ME, Beach D, Lowe SW
(1997) Oncogenic ras provokes premature cell senescence
associated with accumulation of p53 and p16INK4a. Cel.l
88: 593-602.

61.	 Vaziri H, Benchimol S (1998) Reconstitution of telomerase
activity in normal human cells leads to elongation of telomeres
and extended replicative life span. Curr Biol. 8: 279-282.
62.	 Villanueva J, Vultur A, Lee JT, Somasundaram R,
Fukunaga-Kalabis M, Cipolla AK, Wubbenhorst B, Xu
X, Gimotty PA, Kee Det al (2010) Acquired resistance
to BRAF inhibitors mediated by a RAF kinase switch in
melanoma can be overcome by cotargeting MEK and
IGF-1R/PI3K. Cancer Cell. 18: 683-695. doi: 10.1016/j.
ccr.2010.11.023.

50.	 Shay JW, Bacchetti S (1997) A survey of telomerase activity
in human cancer. Eur J Cancer. 33: 787-791. doi: 10.1016/
S0959-8049(97)00062-2.
51.	 Sievert AJ, Lang SS, Boucher KL, Madsen PJ, Slaunwhite
E, Choudhari N, Kellet M, Storm PB, Resnick AC (2013)
Paradoxical activation and RAF inhibitor resistance of
BRAF protein kinase fusions characterizing pediatric
astrocytomas. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 110: 5957-5962.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1219232110.

63.	 Vredeveld LC, Possik PA, Smit MA, Meissl K, Michaloglou
C, Horlings HM, Ajouaou A, Kortman PC, Dankort D,
McMahon Met al (2012) Abrogation of BRAFV600Einduced senescence by PI3K pathway activation contributes
to melanomagenesis. Genes Dev. 26: 1055-1069. doi:
10.1101/gad.187252.112.

52.	 Smyth GK (2005) Limma: linear models for microarray
data. Bioinformatics and computational biology solutions
using R and Bioconductor. Springer, City. pp 397-420.
53.	 Smyth GK (2004) Linear models and empirical bayes
methods for assessing differential expression in microarray
experiments. Stat Appl Genet Mol Biol. 3: Article3. doi:
10.2202/1544-6115.1027.

64.	 Wei S, Wei S, Sedivy JM (1999) Expression of catalytically
active telomerase does not prevent premature senescence
caused by overexpression of oncogenic Ha-Ras in normal
human fibroblasts. Cancer Res. 59: 1539-1543.

54.	 Stiles CD, Capone GT, Scher CD, Antoniades HN, Van
Wyk JJ, Pledger WJ (1979) Dual control of cell growth by
somatomedins and platelet-derived growth factor. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A. 76: 1279-1283.

65.	 Widemann BC, Marcus LJ, Fisher MJ, Weiss BD, Kim A,
Dombi E, Baldwin A, Whitcomb P, Martin S, Gillespie A
(2014) Phase I study of the MEK1/2 inhibitor selumetinib
(AZD6244) hydrogen sulfate in children and young adults
with neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) and inoperable
plexiform neurofibromas (PNs). ASCO Annual Meeting
Proceedings, City. pp 10018.

55.	 Stokland T, Liu JF, Ironside JW, Ellison DW, Taylor R,
Robinson KJ, Picton SV, Walker DA (2010) A multivariate
analysis of factors determining tumor progression in
childhood low-grade glioma: a population-based cohort
study (CCLG CNS9702). Neuro Oncol. 12: 1257-1268. doi:
10.1093/neuonc/noq092.

66.	 Wilson TR, Fridlyand J, Yan Y, Penuel E, Burton L, Chan
E, Peng J, Lin E, Wang Y, Sosman Jet al (2012) Widespread
potential for growth-factor-driven resistance to anticancer
kinase inhibitors. Nature. 487: 505-509. doi: 10.1038/
nature11249.

56.	 Sturm D, Orr BA, Toprak UH, Hovestadt V, Jones DT,
Capper D, Sill M, Buchhalter I, Northcott PA, Leis Iet al
(2016) New Brain Tumor Entities Emerge from Molecular
Classification of CNS-PNETs. Cell. 164: 1060-1072. doi:
10.1016/j.cell.2016.01.015.

67.	 Wu D, Smyth GK (2012) Camera: a competitive gene set
test accounting for inter-gene correlation. Nucleic Acids
Res. 40: e133. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks461.

57.	 Sturm D, Witt H, Hovestadt V, Khuong-Quang DA, Jones
DT, Konermann C, Pfaff E, Tonjes M, Sill M, Bender
Set al (2012) Hotspot mutations in H3F3A and IDH1
define distinct epigenetic and biological subgroups of
glioblastoma. Cancer Cell. 22: 425-437. doi: 10.1016/j.
ccr.2012.08.024.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

68.	 Zhang J, Wu G, Miller CP, Tatevossian RG, Dalton JD,
Tang B, Orisme W, Punchihewa C, Parker M, Qaddoumi
Iet al (2013) Whole-genome sequencing identifies genetic
alterations in pediatric low-grade gliomas. Nat Genet. 45:
602-612. doi: 10.1038/ng.2611.
11479

Oncotarget

