HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Author Manuscript

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 03.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2015 February 26; 518(7540): 495–501. doi:10.1038/nature14169.

Whole genomes redefine the mutational landscape of pancreatic
cancer
A full list of authors and affiliations appears at the end of the article.

Abstract
Author Manuscript

Pancreatic cancer remains one of the most lethal of malignancies and a major health burden. We
performed whole-genome sequencing and copy number variation (CNV) analysis of 100
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas (PDACs). Chromosomal rearrangements leading to gene
disruption were prevalent, affecting genes known to be important in pancreatic cancer (TP53,
SMAD4, CDKN2A, ARID1A and ROBO2) and new candidate drivers of pancreatic carcinogenesis
(KDM6A and PREX2). Patterns of structural variation (variation in chromosomal structure)
classified PDACs into 4 subtypes with potential clinical utility: the subtypes were termed stable,
locally rearranged, scattered and unstable. A significant proportion harboured focal amplifications,
many of which contained druggable oncogenes (ERBB2, MET, FGFR1, CDK6, PIK3R3 and
PIK3CA), but at low individual patient prevalence. Genomic instability co-segregated with
inactivation of DNA maintenance genes (BRCA1, BRCA2 or PALB2) and a mutational signature
of DNA damage repair deficiency. Of 8 patients who received platinum therapy, 4 of 5 individuals
with these measures of defective DNA maintenance responded.

Author Manuscript

Pancreatic cancer (PC) has a median survival of 6 months and a 5-year survival that remains
less than 5% despite 50 years of research and therapeutic development1. It is the fourth

Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to S.M.G. (sean.grimmond@glasgow.ac.uk) or A.V.B.
(andrew.biankin@glasgow.ac.uk).
*A list of participants and their affiliations appears at the end of the paper.
§These authors jointly supervised this work.
Online Content Methods, along with any additional Extended Data display items and Source Data, are available in the online version
of the paper; references unique to these sections appear only in the online paper.
Supplementary Information is available in the online version of the paper.

Author Manuscript

Author Contributions Biospecimens were collected at affiliated hospitals and processed at each biospecimen core resource centre.
Data generation and analyses were performed by the Queensland Centre for Medical Genomics. Investigator contributions are as
follows: A.V.B. and S.M.G. (concept and design); S.M.G., J.V.P. N.W., A.V.B. (project leaders); N.W., S.M.G., D.K.C., A.V.B.
(writing team); J.V.P., S.M.G., N.W., A.L.J., P.B., S.S., K.S.K., Nk. W., P.J.W., A.M.P., F.N., B.P., E.M., O.H., J.L.F., C.L., D.T.,
S.W., Q.X., K.N., N.C., M.C.J.Q., M.J.A., M.Z.H.F., A.J.R., S.K., K.Q., M. Pi., H.C.L., M.J.C. and J.W. (bioinformatics); M. Pa.,
C.J.S., D.K.C., E.S.H., A.M.N., A.C., A.S., C.S., A.V.P., I.R., A.M.S., S.P.N., R. B. (preclinical testing); A.L.J., M.D.J., M.P., C.J.S.,
C.T., A.M.N., V.T.C., L.A.C., J.S.S., D.K.C., V.C., A.S., C.S., A.J.G., J.A.L., I.R., A.V.P., E.A.M. (sample processing and quality
control); A.J.G., J.G.K., C.T., G.Z., A.S., D.A. R.H.H., A.M., C.A.I-D., A.S. (pathology assessment); A.L.J., L.A.C., A.J.G., A.C.,
R.S.M., C.B., M.F., G.T., J.S.S., J.G.K., C.T., K.E., N.Q.N., N.Z., H.W., N.B.J., J.S.G, R.G., C.P., R.G., C.L.W., R.A.M., R.T.L.,
M.F., G.Z., G.T., M.A.T., A.P.G.I., J.R.E., R.H.H.,A.M., C.A.I-D.,A.S. (sample collection and clinical annotation); D.M., T.J.C.B.,
A.N.C., I.H., S.I., S.M., C.N., E.N., S.W. (sequencing). All authors have read and approved the final manuscript.
BAM files and associated metadata in XML format have been uploaded to the European Genome-phenome Archive (EGA; http://
www.ebi.ac.uk/ega) under accession number EGAS00001000154. All SNP array data is available via GEO (GSE61502). For more
information about Australian Pancreatic Cancer Genome Initiative, see (http://www.pancreaticcancer.net.au/apgi/collaborators).
The authors declare no competing financial interests.

Waddell et al.

Page 2

Author Manuscript

commonest cause of cancer death in Western societies and is projected to be the second
leading cause within a decade. As a consequence, there is an urgent need to better select
patients for current therapies and develop novel therapeutic strategies.
Recent exome and CNV analyses of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma have revealed a
complex mutational landscape2,3.Activating mutations of KRAS are near ubiquitous and
inactivation of TP53, SMAD4 and CDKN2A occur at rates of >50%. The prevalence of
recurrently mutated genes then drops to ~ 10% for a handful of genes involved in chromatin
modification, DNA damage repair and other mechanisms known to be important in
carcinogenesis; however, a long tail of infrequently mutated genes dominates, resulting in
significant intertumoural heterogeneity. Faced with this diversity, it is not surprising that
therapeutic development using an unselected approach to patient recruitment for clinical
trials has been challenging2–4.

Author Manuscript

Somatic structural rearrangement of chromosomes represents a common class of mutation
that is capable of causing gene disruption (such as deletion or rearrangement), gene
activation (for example, copy number gain or amplification) and the formation of novel
oncogenic gene products (gene fusions). Many of these events actively drive
carcinogenesis5,6 and in some instances present therapeutic targets. Early karyotyping7 and
more recent genomic sequencing of small numbers of primary tumours (n = 3) and
metastases (n = 10) suggests that PDAC genomes contain widespread and complex patterns
of chromosomal rearrangement8,9.

Author Manuscript

Here we performed deep whole-genome sequencing of 100 PDACs and show that structural
variation (variation in chromosomal structure) is an important mechanism of DNA damage
in pancreatic carcinogenesis. We classify PDAC into four subtypes based on structural
variation profiles and implicate molecular mechanisms underlying some of these events.
Finally, as proof of concept, we use a combination of structural variation, mutational
signatures and gene mutations to define putative biomarkers of therapeutic responsiveness
for platinum-based chemotherapy, which are current therapeutic options for PDAC10–14, and
for therapeutics that target similar molecular mechanisms such as PARP inhibitors15 that are
currently being tested in clinical trials.

Genomic landscape of pancreatic cancer

Author Manuscript

Patients were recruited and consent obtained for genomic sequencing through participating
institutions of the Australian Pancreatic Cancer Genome Initiative (APGI; htpp://
www.pancreaticcancer.net.au) as part of the International Cancer Genome Consortium
(ICGC; http://www.icgc.org)16 (Supplementary Table 1). Array-based CNV was analysed
using GAP17 and tumour cellularity estimated with qPure18. Whole-genome sequencing was
performed on 100 primary PDACs with an epithelial cellularity of ≥ 40% (n = 75), and
complemented by cell lines derived from APGI participants (n = 25) to an average depth of
65×, and compared to the germline (average depth 38×) (Supplementary Table 2). Mutations
were detected using qSNP19 and GATK and indels called with Pindel and GATK.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 03.

Waddell et al.

Page 3

Author Manuscript

Point mutations and structural variation in PDAC

Author Manuscript

A total of 857,971 somatic point mutations and small insertions and deletions were detected
in the cohort: 7,888 were non-silent mutations in 5,424 genes (Supplementary Tables 3 and
4). Orthogonal validation of >3,000 exonic mutations estimated the accuracy of mutation
calls at >95% (Methods). Consistent with previous estimates20, the average mutational
burden across the cohort was 2.64 per Mb (range 0.65–28.2 per Mb). Somatic structural
variants were identified with the qSV package, which uses multiple lines of evidence to
define events (discordant pairs, soft clipping and split reads). Events verified using an
orthogonal sequencing method were also included (Methods and Extended Data Fig. 1a).
Where possible, these events were cross-referenced with CNV data (Methods). In total,
11,868 somatic structural variants were detected at an average of 119 per individual (range
15–558) (Supplementary Table 5 and Extended Data Fig. 1b). The majority of structural
variants were intra-chromosomal (10,114) and were classified into 7 types: intrachromosomal rearrangements (5,860), deletions (1,393), duplications (128), tandem
duplications (179), inversions (1,629), fold-back inversions (579) and amplified inversions
(346); inter-chromosomal translocations were less prevalent (1,754) (Supplementary Table
6). A total of 6,908 rearrangements directly disrupted gene sequences and 1,220 genes
contained a breakpoint in 2 or more patients (Supplementary Table 7). Recurrent gene
fusions were not detected: 1,236 structural variants led to the joining of two gene loci,
however, only 183 of these events were fused in an orientation and frame that was capable
of expressing a product, and none of these predicted fusion events occurred in more than one
sample.

Genes affected by mutation and structural variation
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Commonly mutated genes that characterize PDAC (KRAS, TP53, SMAD4 and CDKN2A)2,3
were reaffirmed as significant using MutSig21 analysis (Supplementary Table 8). Combining
structural variation events with deleterious point mutations increased the prevalence of
inactivation events for TP53 to 74% (3 structural variants and 71mutations), 31%for SMAD4
(9 structural variants and 22 mutations) and 35%for CDKN2A (11 structural variants and 24
mutations). Two additional genes not previously described in human PDAC (KDM6A and
PREX2) had recurrent pathogenic mutations and structural variants at a rate of 10% or more.
KDM6A is a SWI/SNF interacting partner that was identified in a pancreatic sleeping-beauty
transposon mutagenesis screen22, and is mutated in RCC and medulloblastoma. In our
cohort, KDM6A was inactivated in 18% of patients, (4 frame shifts, 1 in-frame deletion and
2 missense mutations, 5 structural variants and 8 homozygous deletions). In most cases (n =
15), both alleles of KDM6A were affected. The RAC1 guanine nucleotide exchange factor
PREX2, mutated in melanoma23 was inactivated in 10% of PDAC patients (1 frame shift, 1
splice site and 5 missense mutations, 2 structural variants and1 homozygous deletion). In
addition, the tumour suppressor gene RNF43, originally identified in cystic tumours of the
pancreas, was inactivated in 10% of PDAC patients (4 frameshift and 4 nonsense mutations,
2 structural variants). Two of these PDACs had an associated intraductal papillary mucinous
neoplasm (IPMNs). Recent studies have suggested that loss of functional RNF43 may confer
sensitivity to WNT inhibitors24. Figure 1 shows the prevalence of aberrations in key driver

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 03.

Waddell et al.

Page 4

Author Manuscript

genes and pathways in PDAC; implicating structural variation as an important mutational
mechanism in pancreatic carcinogenesis.

Subtyping using structural rearrangements
The distribution of events was used to classify tumours into the following four subtypes
(Fig. 2 and Extended Data Fig. 2 and Methods).
Stable subtype

Author Manuscript

Subtype 1 was classified as ‘stable’ (20% of all samples). These tumour genomes contained
≤ 50 structural variation events and often exhibited widespread aneuploidy suggesting
defects in cell cycle/mitosis (Extended Data Fig. 3). Point mutation rates for KRAS and
SMAD4 were similar to the rest of the cohort, and the prevalence of TP53 mutations was
only slightly less (61% versus a mean of 70%across all samples). In addition, telomere
length was no different in comparison to other subgroups.
Locally rearranged subtype

Author Manuscript

Subtype 2 was classified as ‘locally rearranged’ (30% of all samples). This subtype
exhibited a significant focal event on one or two chromosomes. The group could be further
divided into those with focal regions of gain/amplification and those that contained complex
genomic rearrangements (Extended Data Fig. 4). Approximately one-third of locally
rearranged genomes contained regions of copy number gain that harboured known
oncogenes (Supplementary Table 9). These included common focal amplifications in KRAS,
SOX9 and GATA6 and often included therapeutic targets such as ERBB2, MET, CDK6,
PIK3CA and PIK3R3, but at low individual prevalence (1–2% of patients) (Supplementary
Table 9). The remaining local rearrangements involved complex genomic events such as
breakage–fusion–bridge (BFB, n = 9) or chromothripsis5,25 (n = 15), which resulted in a ring
chromosome in at least one case (ICGC_0059) (Extended Data Figs 5 and 6).
Chromothripsis is linked to TP53 mutations in medullobastoma and acute myeloid
leukaemia and here, 10/13 chromothriptic tumours had a TP53 mutation, 5 of which were
bi-allelic (Fig. 1). Five of these chromothriptic events occurred after chromosomal
duplication suggesting that they are less likely to be driving carcinogenesis (Methods).
Scattered subtype
Subtype 3 was classified as ‘scattered’ (36% of all samples). Tumours in this class exhibited
a moderate range of non-random chromosomal damage and less than 200 structural variation
events (Extended Data Fig. 7).

Author Manuscript

Unstable subtype
Subtype 4 was classified as ‘unstable’ (14%of all samples). The tumours exhibited a large
number of structural variation events (>200; maximum of 558) (Extended Data Fig. 8). This
scale of genomic instability suggested defects in DNA maintenance26, which potentially
defines sensitivity to DNA-damaging agents (Fig. 3a; Methods).

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 03.

Waddell et al.

Page 5

Author Manuscript

Genomic markers of defective DNA maintenance

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

We mapped the relationship between the unstable subtype, mutations in BRCA pathway
genes and a recently described mutational signature associated with deleterious mutations in
BRCA1 or BRCA2 in breast, ovarian and pancreatic cancer20. The majority of unstable
tumours (10 of 14) fell within the top quintile of the BRCA signature when ranked by
prevalence per Mb (Fig. 2b). In addition, the top quintile of the BRCA signature was
associated with deleterious mutations of BRCA1 (n = 2), BRCA2 (n = 7), and PALB2 (n = 2)
(Fig. 2b) (Supplementary Table 10). Four of the BRCA2 mutations were germline in origin
(3 frameshift and 1 nonsense), and in each case, the wild-type allele was inactivated in the
tumour. A further 2 patients had somatic mutations in BRCA1 (both with splice site
mutations), and another 3 had somatic BRCA2 mutations (1 indel and 2 splice site
mutations). All deleterious BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations had inactivation of the second
allele. Three patients had pathogenic germline PALB2 mutations that were associated with
the BRCA mutational signature. One of these was a TGTT deletion, which is known to
occur in pancreatic cancer27 (this tumour also had a somatic BRCA2 mutation), and the
mutations of PALB2 in both the other 2 cases are associated with an inherited predisposition
to breast cancer28. Germline PALB2 mutation carriers did not have evidence of somatic loss
of the second allele; however, heterozygous germline mutation of PALB2 appears sufficient
to cause DNA replication and damage response defects29. In contrast, tumours containing a
somatic heterozygous silent mutation of BRCA2, a heterozygous intronic structural variation
and 2 unclassified heterozygous missense mutations in BRCA1 (predicted to be benign or
only possibly damaging by Polyphen2) were not associated with a high-ranking BRCA
mutational signature (<1 BRCA signature mutation per Mb) or an unstable genome
(Supplementary Table 10). Overlapping deleterious mutations in BRCA1, BRCA2 and
PALB2 with unstable genomes and the BRCA mutational signature showed that mutations in
these genes were associated with the top quintile of the BRCA mutational signature, and the
majority (9 of 11) also exhibited unstable genomes (Fig. 3a).

Defective DNA repair without BRCA pathway mutations

Author Manuscript

Mutations in BRCA pathway genes accounted for approximately half of patients with a high
BRCA mutational signature and/or an unstable genome (Fig. 3a). Hyper-methylation is
known to play a role in silencing BRCA1, BRCA2 and PALB2 in some breast and ovarian
cancers; however, high-density methylome array profiling of this cohort30 allowed us to
exclude this as a contributing mechanism. Single instances of biallelic, inactivating, somatic
mutation was observed for two genes known to induce genomic instability and
chemosensitivity when inactivated: RPA1 (ref. 31) (splice site and loss of heterozygosity
(LOH)), and the DNA polymerase zeta catalytic unit/REV3L32 (nonsense and LOH). We
also detected mutations in other genes involved in DNA maintenance such as ATM,
FANCM, XRCC4 and XRCC6 in tumours with an unstable genome or the BRCA mutational
signature; however, they are yet to be causally linked to these genomic events or sensitivity
to DNA-damaging agents.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 03.

Waddell et al.

Page 6

Author Manuscript

Putative genotypes of platinum responsiveness

Author Manuscript

As the APGI was a prospective observational cohort study with extensive clinical follow-up,
it was possible to track therapeutic responsiveness of participants that received
chemotherapy when their disease recurred. At the time of analysis, 53 patients had
documented recurrences and 25 received a variety of chemotherapeutic agents
(Supplementary Table 11). This analysis was complemented through therapeutic testing of
patient-derived xenografts (PDXs) generated from APGI participants. Overall, 8 patients
received a platinum-based therapy and 7 PDXs were treated with gemcitabine and cisplatin
(Fig. 3b). Of 5 patients with unstable genomes and/or a high BRCA mutational signature
burden (designated as ‘on-genotype’) 2 had exceptional responses (defined as complete
radiological resolution of disease and normalization of CA19.9 levels33), and 2 had robust
partial responses based on RECIST1.1 criteria34 (Fig. 4a), while 3 patients who did not have
any of these characteristics (‘off-genotype’) did not respond. These observations were
supported by PDX studies where 2 of 3 on-genotype PDXs responded to cisplatin (one
BRCA2 mutant responded and one carrying bi-allelic inactivation of RPA1, which notably
retained RAD51 foci (Extended Data Fig. 9) also responded. Another, with a mutational
signature but not an unstable genome, and without a mutation in a BRCA pathway gene, did
not respond. This compares to no responses in the 4 PDXs in the off-genotype group (Figs 3
and 4b). Combining patient and PDX response data, on-genotype tumours were associated
with response to platinum-based therapy (P = 0.0070, Fisher’s exact test, Fig. 3b)
(Supplementary Table 11).

Discussion
Author Manuscript

This study provides the most comprehensive description, to date, of the genomic events that
characterize pancreatic cancer and demonstrates that structural variation is a prominent
mechanism of genomic damage in this disease. It reinforces the importance of KRAS, TP53,
SMAD4, CDKN2A and ARID1A gene mutations, in addition to numerous genes mutated at
low prevalence. Recurrent mutations identified in KDM6A further highlights the role of
chromatin modification and a broader role for aberrant WNT signalling is implicated
through the relatively frequent inactivation of suppressor genes such as ROBO1, ROBO2,
SLIT2 and RNF43.

Author Manuscript

Structural variant analysis classifies PDAC into four subtypes with potential clinical
relevance. A significant proportion of tumours contain amplifications and copy-number
gains of known oncogenes, but most occur at low individual prevalence, suggesting
significant diversity of mechanisms involved in PDAC progression. Several of these
constitute known therapeutic targets with available inhibitors (ERBB2, MET, FGFR1).
Others include: GATA6, which is known to be amplified in PDAC and correlates with poor
survival in other cancer types35; PIK3CA, which is amplified in ovarian36 and lung
squamous cell carcinomas37; PIK3R3 amplified in ovarian cancer; and CDK6, amplified in
oesophageal cancer. These may present opportunities for therapeutic intervention, either
alone or in combination with other agents.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 03.

Waddell et al.

Page 7

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Multiple studies of platinum-based therapies in PDAC have shown borderline signals, and
some meta-analyses show a benefit11,12, suggesting that individual studies were
underpowered, and that these signals could be driven by subgroups of responders. More
recently, addition of oxaliplatin has shown efficacy in second line therapy14, and
FOLFIRINOX, a platinum-containing combination therapy is emerging as a treatment
option for advanced PDAC. Most patients do not receive this therapy due to its toxicity, or it
is substantially modified38. There are, however, significant responses in subgroups that are
not well-defined39,40, and improved survival reported in patients with germline BRCA1 and
BRCA2 mutations who receive platinum-based therapies41. Defining biomarkers of platinum
responsiveness would significantly alter current treatment approaches to PDAC and improve
overall outcomes. Current patient recruitment strategies for clinical trials of PARP
inhibitors, thought to target similar mechanisms, are mostly based on germline deleterious
mutations of BRCA1 and BRCA2. If we take into account mutations in BRCA pathway
components, both germline and somatic, as well as putative surrogate measures of
deficiencies in DNA maintenance, that is, unstable genomes and the BRCA mutational
signature, germline mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 only account for as few as 4 of a
potential 24 (17%), and only4%of all patients. Genomic instability and BRCA mutational
signature status based on whole-genome sequencing also provide independent evidence of
putative deficiencies in DNA damage repair. It remains to be seen whether these surrogate
measures are predictive of therapeutic response in the absence of BRCA or PALB2
mutations. However, the presence of mutations in non-BRCA pathway genes that are
associated with both genomic instability and chemosensitivity in 2/14 unstable tumours
suggests that diagnostic whole-genome sequencing to detect surrogate measures of defects
in DNA maintenance may ultimately be a better method of identifying potential responders
to platinum and PARP inhibitor therapy.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

The proof of concept data presented here suggest that mutations in BRCA pathway
component genes and surrogate measures of defects in DNA maintenance (genomic
instability and the BRCA mutational signature) have potential implications for therapeutic
selection for pancreatic cancer. These data define a putative biomarker hypothesis that needs
testing in a clinical trial, as these results are from a small number of patients selected based
on high tumour cellularity; patients often received combination therapies, and the primary
tumour was sequenced rather than the recurrence. As only selected gene sets can be tested in
the clinic at this time, surrogate measures of molecular mechanisms identified using wholegenome sequencing can be used to inform individual gene selection for clinical use. As
diagnostic genomic approaches continue to evolve and become more affordable, wholegenome sequencing may provide new opportunities in the clinic. However, there are
significant hurdles still to overcome. These include the technical challenge of whole-genome
sequencing using small diagnostic samples that are preserved in fixatives such as formalin,
analytical demands and the return of results within a clinically relevant timeframe. Major
initiatives are emerging that aim to address these challenges (such as Genomics England and
the Scottish Genomes Partnership) to ultimately advance and assess these approaches for
their potential to improve human health for many diseases including cancer.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 03.

Waddell et al.

Page 8

Author Manuscript

METHODS
Human research ethical approvals

Author Manuscript

Australian Pancreatic Cancer Genome Initiative: Sydney South West Area Health Service
Human Research Ethics Committee, western zone (protocol number 2006/54); Sydney Local
Health District Human Research Ethics Committee (X11-0220); Northern Sydney Central
Coast Health Harbour Human Research Ethics Committee (0612-251M); Royal Adelaide
Hospital Human Research Ethics Committee (091107a); Metro South Human Research
Ethics Committee (09/QPAH/220); South Metropolitan Area Health Service Human
Research Ethics Committee (09/324); Southern Adelaide Health Service/Flinders University
Human Research Ethics Committee (167/10); Sydney West Area Health Service Human
Research Ethics Committee (Westmead campus) (HREC2002/3/4.19); The University of
Queensland Medical Research Ethics Committee (2009000745); Greenslopes Private
Hospital Ethics Committee (09/34);North Shore Private Hospital Ethics Committee. Johns
Hopkins Medical Institutions: Johns Hopkins Medicine Institutional Review Board
(NA00026689). ARC-NET, University of Verona: approval number 1885 from the
Integrated University Hospital Trust (AOUI) Ethics Committee (Comitato Etico Azienda
Ospedaliera Universitaria Integrata) approved in their meeting of 17 November 2010 and
documented by the ethics committee 52070/CE on 22 November 2010 and formalized by the
Health Director of the AOUI on the order of the General Manager with protocol 52438 on
23 November 2010. Ethikkommission an der Technischen Universität Dresden (Approval
numbers EK30412207 and EK357112012).
Animal experiment approvals

Author Manuscript

Mouse experiments were carried out in compliance with Australian laws on animal welfare.
Mouse protocols were approved by the Garvan Institute/St Vincent’s Hospital Animal Ethics
Committee (ARA 09/19, 11/23 and 12/21 protocols). Female NOD/SCID/interleukin 2
receptor [IL2R] gamma (null) (NSG) mice and athymic Balb-c-nude mice were housed with
a 12 h light, 12 h dark cycle, receiving food ad libitum.
Sample acquisition

Author Manuscript

Samples used were prospectively acquired and restricted to primary operable, non-pretreated
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. After ethical approval was granted, individual patients
were recruited preoperatively and consented using an ICGC approved process. Immediately
following surgical extirpation, a specialist pathologist analysed specimens macroscopically
and samples of the tumour, normal pancreas and duodenal mucosa were snap frozen in
liquid nitrogen (for full protocol see APGI website: http://www.pancreaticcancer.net.au/).
The remaining resected specimen underwent routine histopathologic processing and
examination. Once the diagnosis of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma was made,
representative sections were reviewed independently by at least one other pathologist with
specific expertise in pancreatic diseases (authors: A.G., D.M., R.H.H. and A.C.), and only
those where there was no doubt as to the histopathological diagnosis were entered into the
study. Co-existent intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms in the residual specimen were
not excluded provided the bulk of the tumour was invasive carcinoma, and the invasive
carcinoma samples were used for sequencing. All samples were stored at −80 °C. Duodenal
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 03.

Waddell et al.

Page 9

Author Manuscript

mucosa or circulating lymphocytes were used for generation of germline DNA. A
representative sample of duodenal mucosa was excised and processed in formalin to confirm
non-neoplastic histology before processing. All participant information and biospecimens
were logged and tracked using a purpose-built data and biospecimen information
management system (Cansto Pancreas). Median survival was estimated using the Kaplan–
Meier method and the difference was tested using the log-rank test. P values of less than
0.05 were considered statistically significant. Statistical analysis was performed using
StatView 5.0 Software (Abacus Systems, Berkeley, CA, USA). Disease-specific survival
was used as the primary endpoint.
Sample extraction

Author Manuscript

Samples were retrieved, and either had full face sectioning performed in OCT or the ends
excised and processed in formalin to verify the presence of carcinoma in the sample to be
sequenced and to estimate the percentage of malignant epithelial nuclei in the sample
relative to stromal nuclei. Macrodissection was performed if required to excise areas of nonmalignant tissue. Nucleic acids were then extracted using the Qiagen Allprep Kit in
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions with purification of DNA and RNA from
the same sample. DNA was quantified using Qubit HS DNA Assay (Invitrogen).
Throughout the process, all samples were tracked using unique identifiers.
Patient material

Author Manuscript

One hundred matched normal and tumour derived samples were obtained from patients with
PDAC. DNA was extracted from the samples using the QiagenAllprep DNA/RNA mini kit
method. Tumour cellularity was determined from SNP array data using qpure18. Clinical and
sample data are summarized in (Supplementary Table 2). Patients were recruited and
consent obtained for genomic sequencing through the Australian Pancreatic Cancer Genome
Initiative (APGI) as part of the International Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC)16.
Patient-derived cell line(PDCL) generation

Author Manuscript

The PDX-derived primary cell lines, named The Kinghorn Cancer Centre (TKCC) lines,
were generated in the laboratory. All cell lines were profiled by short tandem repeat (STR)
DNA profiling as unique (http://www.cellbankaustralia.com). Briefly, patient-derived
tumours established in immunocompromised mice were mechanically and enzymatically
dissociated using collagenase (Stem Cell Technologies, USA) and plated onto flasks coated
with 0.2mg ml−1 rat tail collagen (BD Biosciences, USA). Subsequently, epithelial cultures
were enriched and purified using a FACS Aria III Cell sorter (BD Biosciences, USA), using
a biotinylated anti-mouse MHCI antibody (1:200 dilution; eBiosciences, USA) coupled with
Streptavidin AlexaFluor 647 secondary step (1:1,000; Invitrogen, USA) and anti-mouse
CD140a-PE antibody (1:300; BD Biosciences, USA) to remove mouse stroma. Dead cells
were removed using propidium iodide (Sigma-Aldrich, Australia). Following establishment,
all patient-derived (TKCC) cell lines were profiled by short tandem repeat (STR) DNA
profiling as unique (http://www.cellbankaustralia.com).

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 03.

Waddell et al.

Page 10

Sequencing

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

DNA (1 µg) was diluted to 52.5 µl in DNase-/RNase-free molecular biology grade water
before fragmentation to approximately 300 bp using the Covaris S2 sonicator with the
following settings Duty Cycle 10%, intensity 5, cycles per burst 200, time 50 s or 45 s for
PCR-Free libraries. Following fragmentation libraries for sequencing were prepared using
the standard Illumina library preparation technique of end-repair, adenylate 3′ ends, indexed
adaptor ligation, size selection and finally PCR enrichment for adaptor ligated library
molecules following the manufacturer’s recommendations (Part no. 15026486 Rev. C July
2012). A subset of libraries was generated omitting the final PCR enrichment step to
generate PCR-Free libraries as per the manufacturer’s recommendations (Part no. 15036187
Rev. A Jan 2013). For standard libraries commercially available TruSeq DNALT Sample
Prep Kit v2 (Catalogue no. FC-121-2001) were used for all steps with the following
exceptions. Size selections of the Adaptor Ligated fragments were completed using two
rounds of SPRI bead purifications (AxyPrepMag PCR Clean-upCatalog no. MAG-PCRCL-250) using a final bead to DNA volume ratio of 0.60:1 followed by 0.70:1, selecting for
molecules with an average size of 500 bp. Size-selected libraries were then amplified for a
total of 8 cycles of PCR to enrich for DNA fragments both compatible with sequencing and
containing the ligated indexed adaptor. For PCR-Free libraries commercially available
TruSeq PCR-Free DNA LT Sample Preparation Kit (Catalog no.FC-121-3001 and
FC-121-3002) was used following the 350 bp library LT protocol for all steps with no
modifications. The final whole-genome libraries were qualified (amplified and PCR-Free
libraries) and quantified (amplified libraries only) via the Agilent BioAnalsyser 2100
(Catalog ID:G2940CA) instrument using the DNA High Sensitivity kit (Catalog ID:
5067-4626). Quantification of PCR-Free libraries was performed using the KAPA Library
Quantification Kits For Illumina sequencing platforms (Kit code KK4824) in combination
with Life Technologies Viia 7 real time PCR instrument.

Author Manuscript

Whole genome libraries were prepared for cluster generation by cBot (catalogue no.
SY-301-2002) and sequencing as per the manufacturer’s guidelines. Individual libraries
were clustered on a single lane of a HiSeq v3 flowcell using the TruSeq PE Cluster Kit v3cBot-HS kit (Catalogue no. PE-401-3001). Illumina supplied control library PhiX (10pM)
was spiked into each lane at a concentration of 0.3% to provide real time analysis metrics.
Final library concentrations of 8 pM (amplified) and 14 pM (PCR-free) were used for cluster
generation. Clustered flow cells were sequenced on the Illumina HiSeq 2000 instrument
(HiSeq control software v1.5/Real Time Analysis 1.13) using TruSeq SBS Kit v3-HS (200
cycles, Catalog no. FC-401-3001). Paired reads each of 101 bp were generated for all
libraries and in total approximately 220-million paired reads were generated per lane, in line
with the manufacturer’s specification. Real time analysis of the control library PhiX showed
cluster density, error rates, quality scores, mapping rates and phasing rates were also in line
with published specifications.
Sequence alignment and data management
Sequence data was mapped to a genome based on the Genome Reference Consortium
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/projects/genome/assembly/grc/human/) GRCh37 assembly
using BWA42.Multiple BAM files from the same sequence library were merged and within

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 03.

Waddell et al.

Page 11

Author Manuscript

library duplicates were marked. Resulting final BAMs were used as input into variant
calling. All BAM files have been deposited in the EGA (Accession number: EGAS
00001000154).
Copy number analysis
Matched tumour and normal patient DNA was assayed using Illumina SNP BeadChips as
per manufacturer’s instructions (Illumina, San Diego CA) (HumanOmni1-Quad or
HumanOmni2.5–8 BeadChips). SNP arrays were scanned and data was processed using the
Genotyping module (v1.8.4) in Genomestudio v2010.3 (Illumina, San Diego CA) to
calculate B-allele frequencies (BAF) and logR values. GenoCN43 and GAP17 were used to
call somatic regions of copy number change – gain, loss or copy neutral LOH. Recurrent
regions of copy number change were determined and genes within these regions were
extracted using ENSEMBL v70 annotations.

Author Manuscript

Identification of structural variations

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Somatic structural variants were identified using the qSV tool (manuscript in preparation).
qSV uses independent lines of evidence to call structural variants including discordant reads,
soft clipping and split read. Breakpoints are also identified using both de novo assembly of
abnormally mapping reads and split contig alignment to enhance break point resolution.
Depending on the level of evidence qSV bins calls into different categories and calls were
considered high confidence if: (i) they were category 1 and therefore contain multiple lines
of evidence (discordant pairs, soft clipping on both sides and split reads); (ii) they were
category 2 and therefore there was 2 lines of evidence: discordant pairs (both breakpoints)
and soft clipping; or discordant pairs (both breakpoints) and split read; or soft clipping
(double sided) and split read; (iii) they were category 3 with 10 or more supporting events
(discordant read pairs or soft clipping at both ends). Only high confidence calls were used in
further downstream analysis. Copy number variation was estimated using SNP arrays and
the GAP tool17. Depending on the read pair types supporting an aberration or the associated
of copy number events each structural variant was classified as: deletion, duplication,
tandem duplication, foldback inversion, amplified inversion, inversion, intrachromosomal or
translocation. Essentially, the type of rearrangement is initially inferred from the orientation
information of discordant read pairs, soft clipping clusters and assembled contigs which
span the breakpoints. This allows identification of 4 groups of events: duplications/intrachromosomal rearrangements, deletions/intra-chromosomal rearrangements, inversions and
inter-chromosomal translocations. Boundaries of segments of copy number that occur in
close proximity to each breakpoint were then used to aid further classification of the events.
Structural variants with breakpoints that flanked a copy number segment of loss were
annotated as deletions. Duplications and inversions associated with increases in copy
number enabled the characterization of tandem duplications and amplified or foldback
inversions. Events within the same chromosome which linked the ends of copy number
segments of similar copy number levels were often identified and were called intrachromosomal rearrangements.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 03.

Waddell et al.

Page 12

Author Manuscript

Events were then annotated if they were within 100 kb of a centromere or telomere and
genes which were affected by breakpoints were annotated using ENSEMBL v70. Structural
variants and copy number data were visualized using circos44.
The landscape of structural rearrangements in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma
In total 11,868 structural variants were detected within the 100 PDAC cohort with an
average of 119 events per patient (range 15–558). Each event was classified into one of 8
categories: deletion, duplication, tandem duplication, foldback inversion, amplified
inversion, inversion, intra chromosomal and translocation. Within the cohort there was inter
patient heterogeneity in terms of total number of events (range of events per patient 15–558)
and proportion of event type (Extended Data Fig. 1).
Classification of subtypes based on the pattern or structural rearrangements

Author Manuscript

Each tumour was classified into one of four subtypes based on the volume of events, the
predominance of specific types of structural rearrangement events and the distribution of
events across the genome in each patient. In addition to counting structural variation events,
two analyses were carried out to detect localized events. Non-random chromosomal
clustering of structural variants was detected using an approach originally described by
Korbel and Campbell25. Significant clustering of structural variation events was determined
by a goodness-of-fit test against the expected exponential distribution of (with a significance
threshold of <0.0001). Highly focal events were detected using an adaptation of a method45
where chromosomes with a high structural variant mutation rate per Mb exceeded 5 times
the length of the interquartile range from the 75th percentile of the chromosome counts for
each patient. The rules used to determine these subtypes are as follows:

Author Manuscript

Stable—These tumours contain few structural rearrangements (<50) which are located
randomly through the genome.

Author Manuscript

Locally rearranged—The intra-chromosomal rearrangements in these tumours are not
randomly positioned through the genome, instead they are clustered on one or few
chromosomes. To correct for the different chromosome lengths, the number of events per
Mb was calculated for each chromosome within each tumour. Tumours were considered
locally rearranged if they harboured at least 50 somatic events within the genome and
contained a locally rearranged chromosome. Chromosomes were considered locally
rearranged if the number of intrachromosomal events exceeded 5 times the length of the
interquartile range from the 75th percentile of the chromosome counts per Mb for that
patient. The events in the locally rearranged tumours are broadly comprised of either: (1)
focal amplifications—the majority of events are gain (tandem duplication, duplication,
foldback inversion or amplified inversion) or (2) complex rearrangements—the events are
part of a complex event such as chromothripsis or breakage–fusion–bridge.
Scattered—These tumours contain 50–200 structural rearrangements which are scattered
throughout the genome.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 03.

Waddell et al.

Page 13

Author Manuscript

Unstable—These tumours are massively rearranged as they contain >200 structural
rearrangements which are generally scattered throughout the genome.
Classification of complex localized events
Evidence of clustering of breakpoints was estimated as proposed by Korbel and Campbell25.
Chromosomes with clustering of structural variants were reviewed for evidence of
chromothripsis (oscillation of copy number, random joins and retention of heterozygosity)
and breakage–fusion–bridge (BFB for loss of telomeric region with neighbouring highly
amplified region with inversions).
Verification of structural variations

Author Manuscript

We used two methods of verification for structural variants: (1) an in silico approach, which
considers events with multiple lines of evidence (qSV category 1: discordant pairs, soft
clipping on both sides and split read evidence) as verified, as well as events which were
associated with a copy number change (gain or loss) and (2) orthogonal sequencing methods
including SOLiD long mate pair and capillary sequencing.
Long mate pair sequencing and verification of structural rearrangements

Author Manuscript

Long mate-paired libraries were made according to Applied Biosystems Mate-Paired
Library Preparation 5500 Series SOLiD systems protocol using 5 µg of DNA which was
sheared using the CovarisS220 System. Long mate pair libraries were sequenced using the
SOliD v4 (Applied Biosystems). Sequence data was mapped to a genome based on the
Genome Reference Consortium (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/projects/genome/
assembly/grc/human/). GRCh37 assembly using bioscope v1.2.1 (Applied Biosystems).
Each sample was sequenced to an average non-redundant physical coverage of 180× (64–
333) in the tumour and 187× (52–503) in the control sample. Structural rearrangements were
determined by analysing clusters of discordant read pairs using the qSV tool. Events
identified by Hiseq sequencing were considered verified if the right and left breakpoint of
these events were within 500 bases of the right and left breakpoint of an event identified by
SOLiD sequencing.
PCR and capillary sequencing for verification of structural rearrangements

Author Manuscript

For PCR and capillary sequencing PCR primers were designed with primer BLAST (NCBI)
to span the predicted breakpoint, primers were designed with primer BLAST (NCBI). PCR
was carried out in the tumour and matched normal genomic DNA using, respectively, a 25
or 50 µl reaction volume composed of 22 or 44 µl of Platinum Taq DNA polymerase
(Invitrogen, Carlsbad, Ca), 2 or 4 µl of 10 µM primer (Integrated DNA Technology) and 1 or
2 µl of genomic DNA as template (1 ng µl−1). The following parameters was used for the
PCR. Initial denaturation at 94 °C for 2 min, followed by 35 cycles of denaturation at 94 °C
for 30 s, annealing at 60 °C for 30 s and extension at 68 °C for 1 min; followed by final
extension at 68 °C for 15 min. PCR products were visualized by gel electrophoresis and
classified into one of four categories: (1) validated—strong and specific PCR band of the
expected size was observed only in the tumour and not in the normal sample, this indicates a
somatic rearrangement; (2) germline—clear PCR band of the expected size both in the

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 03.

Waddell et al.

Page 14

Author Manuscript

tumour and normal; (3) not validated—PCR yields smears or multiple bands, this potentially
indicates non-specific primer pair; (4) not tested—no PCR band was observed in tumour and
normal.
Verification of structural variations—results
In total 7,105 events were verified in silico. Of these 5,666 events contained multiple lines
of evidence (qSV category 1), 2,904 events were associated with a copy number change
(events classified as deletion, duplication, tandem duplication, amplified inversion and
foldback inversion) and 1,871 contained multiple lines of evidence and were associated with
a copy number change.

Author Manuscript

We also verified structural variant events using long mate pair resequencing (SOLiD paired
50 bp) or sequencing of a different sample from the same patient of 33 tumours. Using this
approach 1,924 events were confirmed and the verification status of structural variant events
was recorded in Supplementary Table 5 in the “validation_status_id” column where 0 =
untested and 1 = verified. In total 7,228 of the 11,868 events identified (61%) were verified
(Supplementary Table 5 and Extended Data Fig. 1) the remaining events remain untested.
Identification of substitutions and small insertion/deletions

Author Manuscript

Substitutions are called using 2 variant callers: qSNP19 an in-house heuristics-driven
somatic/germline caller; and GATK46 which is a Bayesian caller. The two callers were
chosen because they use very different calling strategies and while each maybe subject to
artefacts (as are all variant callers), they will be subject to different artefacts. Each compared
variant falls into one of three categories: seen only by qSNP, seen only by GATK, and seen
by both qSNP and GATK. Mutations identified by both callers or those that were unique to a
caller and verified by an orthogonal sequencing approach were considered high confidence
and used in all subsequent analyses (Supplementary Table 3). Small indels (<200 bp)were
identified using Pindel47; each indel was visually inspected in the Integrative Genome
Browser (IGV)48. Once somatic mutations were called, their effects on any alternative
transcripts were annotated using a local install of the Ensembl database (v70) and the
Ensembl Perl API.
Verification of substitutions and small insertion/deletions

Author Manuscript

In total 3,304 of the 10,335 events identified were verified (Supplementary Tables 3 and 12)
the remaining events remain untested. Substitutions and indels were verified using
orthogonal sequence data which included data produced on different sequencing platforms
(Hiseq or SOLiD exome or long mate pair SOLiD sequencing) or data from related
nucleotide samples (RNA-seq). For example, if orthogonal tumour sequence data was
available (DNA from a cell line, RNA from the primary sample etc.) and a somatic variant
was also observed in the second tumour sample then that would add support for the variant.
It should be noted that tumour samples can only be used to support an existing somatic
variant and the absence of a called variant in a second tumour sample does not discredit the
original call. Conversely, a second normal sample will only discredit somatic variants and
the absence of the called variant in the second normal does not support the original call. This
approach is designed to be conservative. In order to be considered for verification, an

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 03.

Waddell et al.

Page 15

Author Manuscript

additional BAM should have a minimum of 10 reads at the variant position, and at least two
reads must show the variant. If multiple additional BAMs are available, each BAM votes
independently and the concordance of the votes is used to classify the verification of the
variant. Each variant examined by qVerify is assigned to one of four categories:

Author Manuscript

1.

Verified—one or more additional tumour BAMs showed evidence of the variant
and no additional normal BAMs showed the variant.

2.

False Positive—one or more additional normal BAMs showed evidence of the
variant indication that it is likely to be a germline variant.

3.

Mixed—across multiple additional BAMs, there was conflicting evidence – one or
more additional tumour BAMs showed the variant as did one or more additional
normal BAMs. This could also be evidence of a germline variant incorrectly called
somatic.

4.

Untested—there were no additional BAMs or there were additional BAMs but none
passed the minimum coverage threshold or there were additional BAMs that did
not show the variant and so did not provide evidence for or against it.

Telomere length analysis
Reads containing the telomeric repeat (TTAGGG) × 3 or (CCCTAA) × 3 were counted and
normalized to the average genomic coverage (the average base coverage of each genome).
The normalized telomere count was obtained separately for each tumour and its matching
normal. A ratio was calculated by tumour normalized counts/normal normalized counts.
Determination of the BRCA signature

Author Manuscript

High confidence somatic mutations that were called by both qSNP and GATK across the
genome were used to determine the proportion of the BRCA signature in each sample using
a published computational framework20,49. In this way, the 96 substitution classification (as
determined by substitution class and sequence context) was determined for each sample and
compared to the validated BRCA signature20 and the proportion of the BRCA signature in a
given sample was ascertained.
Patient derived xenograft (PDX) mouse model generation
Six female eight-week-old NOD/SCID/interleukin 2 receptor [IL2R] gamma(null) (NOG)
mice and athymic Balb-c-nude mice were used for the establishment of the patient derived
xenograft (PDX) model. All mice were bred at the Australian Bioresources (ABR) under
research protocols approved by the Garvan Animal Ethics Committee (09/19, 11/23, 11/09).

Author Manuscript

The PDXs were generated according to methodology published elsewhere with
modifications50. Briefly, surgical non-diagnostic specimens of patients operated at APGI
clinical sites were implanted subcutaneously (s.c.) into three NOG and three Balb-c-nude
mice for each patient, with two small pieces per mouse (left and right flank; engraftment
stage). Once established, tumours were grown to a size of 1,500mm3, at which point they
were harvested, divided, and re-transplanted into further mice to bank sufficient tissues for
experimentation (first passage and second passage). After expansion, passaged tumours

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 03.

Waddell et al.

Page 16

Author Manuscript

were excised and propagated to cohorts of 40 female Balb-c-nude mice or greater at an
average of 8 weeks old, which constituted the treatment cohort (third passage). Utilization of
the NOG mouse model, which is characterized by high immune deficiency in this study has
enabled establishment of a significant cohort of PDXs (80) xenografts, with a high rate of
successful engraftment and propagation (76%, data not shown).
In vivo therapeutic testing

Author Manuscript

Tumour-bearing mice with a palpable tumour (volume (V) = 150mm3; V = 0.5 × length ×
width2) were treated with various agents at maximum tolerable dose (MTD) or vehicle
treatment based on previously established schedules50,51, where gemcitabine (140 mg per
kg) was administered intraperitoneally on day 1 and day 4 for 4weeks and cisplatin (6mg per
kg) intravenously on day 1 and day 14. The investigators were not blinded to the group
allocation. To avoid accumulating toxicity of repeated injections, an additional treatment
was given after the recovery time of two weeks only when no tumour regression was
observed, otherwise treatment was continued once the tumour relapsed to its original size
(100%). Measurement of chemotherapy response was based on published methodology51,
where primary xenografts were treated with the specified monotherapy and their growth
characteristics mapped from the time resistance developed (characterized by progressive
tumour growth in the presence of drug), until euthanasia. Mice were euthanized and tissues
collected for further analyses when tumour size reached 400% (600–700mm3).
RAD51 foci formation assay

Author Manuscript

Antibodies used included RAD51 (Clone 14B4, GeneTex), γH2AX (phospho-histone H2AX
Ser129 clone 20E3, Cell signaling), and geminin (10802-1-AP, ProteinTech Group,
Chicago, IL). Primary culture of PDX from patient ICGC_0016 was established by plating
and growing cells from an enzymatically digested xenograft on a collagen matrix for
approximately 1 week before irradiation and immunofluorescence staining. For this
experiment, xenograft was established in a NSG-eGFP mouse. This mouse model allowed
us to efficiently visualize eGFP positive mouse stromal cells and eGFP negative tumour
cells under the microscope. Briefly, the eGFP expressing NSG mouse was generated in our
laboratory by crossing previously established heterozygous eGFPNOD.CB17-Prkdcscid
mice52 with the the NOD/SCID/interleukin 2 receptor (IL2R) gamma (null) (NOG) strain in
our laboratory. eGFP expressing offspring was backcrossed five times onto the parental line
to ensure homozygosity for IL2Rgamma deletion and confirmed by genotyping
(Transnetyx).

Author Manuscript

Cell lines of interest were grown on coverslips overnight and irradiated with 10 Gy or left
untreated. Subsequently coverslips were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (in PBS) 6 h postirradiation and stained with RAD51, γH2AX and geminin antibodies as previously
described53.DAPI was used as a nuclear stain. RAD51 focus assay scoring was performed as
previously established53.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 03.

Waddell et al.

Page 17

Author Manuscript

Extended Data

Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 1. Summary of structural rearrangements

Author Manuscript

a, Histogram showing the number of events verified in silico or by orthogonal sequencing
methods (Methods). In total 7,228 of the 11,868 events identified (61%) were verified, the
others remain untested. These included 5,666 events which contained multiple lines of
evidence (qSV category 1: discordant pairs, soft clipping on both sides and split read
evidence, Methods) thus were considered verified. Of these events 2,463 events were also
verified by orthogonal sequencing methods (SOLiD long mate pair or PCR amplicon
sequencing) or the event was associated with a copy number change which was determined
using SNP arrays. The remaining 1,562 events were verified using orthogonal sequencing
methods or the event was associated with a copy number change (qSV category 2 and 3,
Methods). b, Histogram showing the number of structural rearrangements in each pancreatic
cancer. 100 PDACs were sequenced using HiSeq paired-end whole-genome sequencing.
Structural rearrangements were identified and classified into 8 categories (deletions,
duplications, tandem duplications, foldback inversions, amplified inversions, inversions,
intra-chromosomal and inter-chromosomal translocations, Methods). The number and type
of event for each patient is shown. PDAC shows a high degree of heterogeneity in both the
number and types of events per patient. The structural rearrangements were used to classify
the tumours into four categories (stable, locally rearranged, scattered and unstable,
Methods).

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 03.

Waddell et al.

Page 18

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Extended Data Figure 2. Distribution of structural variant breakpoints within each patient

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

The 100 patients are plotted along the x axis. The upper plot shows the number of structural
rearrangements (y axis) in each tumour. The lower plot shows which chromosomes (y axis)
harbour clusters of breakpoints. The distribution of breakpoints (events per Mb) within each
chromosome for each sample was evaluated using two methods to identify clusters of
rearrangements or chromosomes which contain a large number of events. Method 1:
chromosomes with a significant cluster of events were determined by a goodness-of-fit test
against the expected exponential distribution (with a significance threshold of <0.0001).
Chromosomes which pass these criteria are coloured blue. Method 2: chromosomes were
identified which contain significantly more events per Mb than other chromosomes for that
patient. Chromosomes were deemed to harbour a high number of events if they had a
mutation rate per Mb which exceeds 1.5 times the length of the interquartile range from the
75th percentile of the chromosome counts for each patient. Chromosomes which pass these
criteria are coloured orange. Chromosomes which pass both tests they are coloured red.
These criteria show that the unstable tumours which contain many events often have
significant clusters of events. In contrast locally rearranged tumours are associated with both
clusters of events and a high number of events within that chromosome when compared to
other chromosomes.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 03.

Waddell et al.

Page 19

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 3. The stable subtype in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma

The 20 stable tumours are shown using circos. The coloured outer ring represents the
chromosomes, the next ring depicts copy number (red represents gain and green represents
loss), the next is the B allele frequency. The inner lines represent chromosome structural
rearrangements detected by whole genome paired sequencing and the legend indicates the
type of rearrangement. Stable tumours contained less than 50 structural rearrangements in
each tumour.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 03.

Waddell et al.

Page 20

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Extended Data Figure 4. The locally rearranged subtype in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma

Author Manuscript

The 30 locally rearranged tumours are shown using circos. The coloured outer rings
represent the chromosomes, the next ring depicts copy number (red represents gain and
green represents loss), the next is the B allele frequency. The inner lines represent
chromosome structural rearrangements detected by whole-genome paired sequencing and
the legend indicates the type of rearrangement. In the locally rearranged subtype over 25%
of the structural rearrangements are clustered on one of few chromosomes.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 03.

Waddell et al.

Page 21

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 5. Example of evidence for chromothripsis in a pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (ICGC_0109)

Upper plot is a density plot showing a concentration of break-points on chromosome 5. Next
panel shows the structural rearrangements which are coloured as presented in the legend.
The lower panels show copy number, logR ratio and B allele frequency derived from SNP
arrays. This chromosome showed a complex localization of events similar to chromothripsis.
Copy number profile and structural rearrangements suggest a shattering of chromosome 5
with a high concentration of structural rearrangements, switches in copy number state and
retention of heterozygosity, which are characteristics of a chromothriptic event.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 03.

Waddell et al.

Page 22

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 6. Example of evidence for breakage-fusion-bridge (BFB) in a pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma (ICGC_0042)

Upper plot is a density plot showing a concentration of break-points on chromosome 5. Next
panel shows the structural rearrangements which are coloured as presented in the legend.
The lower panels show copy number, logR ratio and B allele frequency derived from SNP
arrays. This chromosome showed a complex localization of events similar to BFB. Copy
number profile suggests loss of telomeric q arm and a high concentration of structural
rearrangements suggesting a series of BFB cycles, with multiple inversions mapped to the
amplified regions.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 03.

Waddell et al.

Page 23

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 7. The scattered subtype in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma

The 36 tumours classified as scattered are shown using circos. The coloured outer rings
represent the chromosomes, the next ring depicts copy number (red represents gain and
green represents loss), the next shows the B allele frequency. The inner lines represent
chromosome structural rearrangements detected by whole genome paired end sequencing.
The legend indicates the type of rearrangement. The scattered tumours contained 50–200
structural rearrangements in each tumour.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 03.

Waddell et al.

Page 24

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 8. The unstable subtype in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma

The 14 unstable tumours are shown using circos. The coloured outer rings are chromosomes,
the next ring depicts copy number (red represents gain and green represents loss), the next is
the B allele frequency. The inner lines represent chromosome structural rearrangements
detected by whole genome paired sequencing and the legend indicates the type of
rearrangement. The unstable tumours contained a large degree of genomic instability and
harboured over 200 structural rearrangements in each tumour which were predominantly
intra-chromosomal rearrangements evenly distributed through the genome.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 03.

Waddell et al.

Page 25

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 9. RAD51 foci formation in a primary culture of genomically unstable
PDAC

a, RAD51 and geminin fluorescence in untreated cells derived from an unstable pancreatic
tumour with a somatic mutation in the RPA1 gene (ICGC_0016). Primary culture of
ICGC_0016 consists of eGFP+ mouse stromal and eGFP− tumour cells. b, Upper panel:
irradiated unstable pancreatic cancer cells (ICGC_0016), middle panel: HR competent
(TKCC-07) and lower panel: HR-deficient (Capan-1) pancreatic tumour cells. Cells were
irradiated in vitro with 10Gy, and 6 h post-irradiation examined by immunofluorescence

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 03.

Waddell et al.

Page 26

Author Manuscript

microscopy. eGFP negative tumour cells from ICGC_0016 readily form RAD51 foci
following induction of DNA damage. TKCC-07 is a pancreas cancer cell line generated
from a homologous recombination (HR) pathway competent patient-derived xenograft and
served as a positive control for staining and RAD51 foci formation after DNA damage.
Capan-1 cells which are HR-deficient do not form RAD51 foci. c, RAD51 score (percentage
of geminin positive cells that have RAD51 foci) in examined pancreatic tumour cells.

Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.

Authors
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Nicola Waddell1,2, Marina Pajic3,4, Ann-Marie Patch1, David K. Chang3,5,6,7, Karin
S. Kassahn1, Peter Bailey1,7, Amber L. Johns3, David Miller1, Katia Nones1, Kelly
Quek1, Michael C. J. Quinn1, Alan J. Robertson1, Muhammad Z. H. Fadlullah1, Tim
J. C. Bruxner1, Angelika N. Christ1, Ivon Harliwong1, Senel Idrisoglu1, Suzanne
Manning1, Craig Nourse1, Ehsan Nourbakhsh1, Shivangi Wani1, Peter J Wilson1,
Emma Markham1, Nicole Cloonan1,2, Matthew J. Anderson1, J. Lynn Fink1, Oliver
Holmes1, Stephen H. Kazakoff1, Conrad Leonard1, Felicity Newell1, Barsha
Poudel1, Sarah Song1, Darrin Taylor1, Nick Waddell1, Scott Wood1, Qinying Xu1,
Jianmin Wu1, Mark Pinese1, Mark J. Cowley3, Hong C. Lee3, Marc D. Jones3,7,
Adnan M. Nagrial3, Jeremy Humphris3, Lorraine A. Chantrill3, Venessa Chin3,
Angela M. Steinmann3, Amanda Mawson3, Emily S. Humphrey3, Emily K. Colvin3,
Angela Chou3,8, Christopher J. Scarlett3,9, Andreia V. Pinho3, Marc Giry-Laterriere3,
Ilse Rooman3, Jaswinder S. Samra10,11, James G. Kench3,11,12, Jessica A. Pettitt3,
Neil D. Merrett5,13, Christopher Toon3, Krishna Epari14, Nam Q. Nguyen15, Andrew
Barbour16, Nikolajs Zeps17,18,19, Nigel B. Jamieson7,20,21, Janet S. Graham7,22,
Simone P. Niclou23, Rolf Bjerkvig24, Robert Grützmann25, Daniela Aust25, Ralph H.
Hruban26, Anirban Maitra27, Christine A. Iacobuzio-Donahue28, Christopher L.
Wolfgang29, Richard A. Morgan26, Rita T. Lawlor30,31, Vincenzo Corbo30, Claudio
Bassi32, Massimo Falconi32,33, Giuseppe Zamboni31,33, Giampaolo Tortora34,
Margaret A. Tempero35, Australian Pancreatic Cancer Genome Initiative*, Anthony
J. Gill3,11, James R. Eshleman26, Christian Pilarsky25, Aldo Scarpa30,31, Elizabeth
A. Musgrove7, John V. Pearson1,2, Andrew V. Biankin3,5,6,7,§, and Sean M.
Grimmond1,7,§

Affiliations
Author Manuscript

1Queensland

Centre for Medical Genomics, Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The
University of Queensland, St Lucia, Brisbane, Queensland 4072, Australia
2QIMR

Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Herston Road, Brisbane 4006,
Australia

3The

Kinghorn Cancer Centre, Cancer Division, Garvan Institute of Medical
Research, University of New South Wales, 384 Victoria St, Darlinghurst, Sydney,
New South Wales 2010, Australia

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 03.

Waddell et al.

Page 27
4St

Author Manuscript

Vincent’s Clinical School, Faculty of Medicine, University of New South Wales,
New South Wales 2010, Australia

5Department

of Surgery, Bankstown Hospital, Eldridge Road, Bankstown, Sydney,
New South Wales 2200, Australia

6South

Western Sydney Clinical School, Faculty of Medicine, University of New
South Wales, Liverpool, New South Wales 2170, Australia
7Wolfson

Wohl Cancer Research Centre, Institute of Cancer Sciences, University of
Glasgow, Garscube Estate, Switchback Road, Bearsden, Glasgow G61 1BD, UK

8Department

of Anatomical Pathology, St Vincent’s Hospital, Sydney, New South
Wales 2010, Australia
9School

Author Manuscript

of Environmental & Life Sciences, University of Newcastle, Ourimbah, New
South Wales 2258, Australia
10Department

of Surgery, Royal North Shore Hospital, St Leonards, Sydney, New
South Wales 2065, Australia
11University

of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales 2006, Australia

12Tissue

Pathology and Diagnostic Oncology, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital,
Camperdown, New South Wales 2050, Australia

13School

of Medicine, University of Western Sydney, Penrith, New South Wales
2175, Australia

14Department

of Surgery, Fremantle Hospital, Alma Street, Fremantle, Western
Australia 6160, Australia

Author Manuscript

15Department

of Gastroenterology, Royal Adelaide Hospital, North Terrace,
Adelaide, South Australia 5000, Australia
16Department

of Surgery, Princess Alexandra Hospital, Ipswich Rd, Woollongabba,
Queensland 4102, Australia

17School

of Surgery M507, University of Western Australia, 35 Stirling Highway,
Nedlands 6009, Australia
18St

John of God Pathology, 12 Salvado Rd, Subiaco, Western Australia 6008,
Australia
19Bendat

Family Comprehensive Cancer Centre, St John of God Subiaco Hospital,
Subiaco, Western Australia 6008, Australia

Author Manuscript

20Academic

Unit of Surgery, School of Medicine, College of Medical, Veterinary and
Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow Royal Infirmary, Glasgow G4 OSF,
UK
21West

of Scotland Pancreatic Unit, Glasgow Royal Infirmary, Glasgow G31 2ER,

UK

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 03.

Waddell et al.

Page 28
22Department

Author Manuscript

of Medical Oncology, Beatson West of Scotland Cancer Centre, 1053
Great Western Road, Glasgow G12 0YN, UK

23Norlux

Neuro-Oncology Laboratory, CRP-Santé Luxembourg, 84 Val Fleuri,
L-1526, Luxembourg
24Norlux

Neuro-Oncology, Department of Biomedicine, University of Bergen, Jonas
Lies vei 91, N-5019 Bergen, Norway

25Departments

of Surgery and Pathology, TU Dresden, Fetscherstr. 74, 01307
Dresden, Germany
26Department

of Pathology, The Sol Goldman Pancreatic Cancer Research Center,
the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21231, USA
27Departments

Author Manuscript

of Pathology and Translational Molecular Pathology, University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston Texas 77030, USA
28The

David M. Rubenstein Pancreatic Cancer Research Center and Department of
Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York 10065,
USA
29Department

of Surgery, The Sol Goldman Pancreatic Cancer Research Center,
the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21231, USA
30ARC-NET

Centre for Applied Research on Cancer, University and Hospital Trust
of Verona, Verona 37134, Italy

31Department

of Pathology and Diagnostics, University of Verona, Verona 37134,

Italy

Author Manuscript

32Department

of Surgery and Oncology, Pancreas Institute, University and Hospital
Trust of Verona, Verona 37134, Italy
33Departments

of Surgery and Pathology, Ospedale Sacro Cuore Don Calabria
Negrar, Verona 37024, Italy
34Department

of Oncology, University and Hospital Trust of Verona, Verona 37134,

Italy
35Division

of Hematology and Oncology, University of California, San Francisco,
California 94122, USA

Acknowledgements
Author Manuscript

We would like to thank C. Axford, M.-A. Brancato, S. Rowe, M. Thomas, S. Simpson and G. Hammond for central
coordination of the Australian Pancreatic Cancer Genome Initiative, data management and quality control; M.
Martyn-Smith, L. Braatvedt, H. Tang, V. Papangelis and M. Beilin for biospecimen acquisition; and D. Gwynne for
support at the Queensland Centre for Medical Genomics. We also thank M. Hodgins, M. Debeljak and D. Trusty
for technical assistance at Johns Hopkins University. N. Sperandio and D. Filippini for technical assistance at
Verona University. We acknowledge the following funding support: National Health and Medical Research Council
of Australia (NHMRC; 631701, 535903, 427601); Queensland Government (NIRAP); University of Queensland;
Institute for Molecular Bioscience; Cancer Research UK (C596/A18076, C29717/A17263); Australian
Government: Department of Innovation, Industry, Science and Research (DIISR); Australian Cancer Research
Foundation (ACRF); Cancer Council NSW: (SRP06-01, SRP11-01. ICGC); Cancer Institute NSW: (10/ECF/2-26;
06/ECF/1-24; 09/CDF/2-40; 07/CDF/1-03; 10/CRF/1-01, 08/RSA/1-15, 07/CDF/1-28, 10/CDF/2-26,10/FRL/2-03,
06/RSA/1-05, 09/RIG/1-02, 10/TPG/1-04, 11/REG/1-10, 11/CDF/3-26); Garvan Institute of Medical Research;

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 03.

Waddell et al.

Page 29

Author Manuscript

Avner Nahmani Pancreatic Cancer Research Foundation; University of Glasgow; Cancer Research UK; Howat
Foundation; R.T. Hall Trust; Petre Foundation; Philip Hemstritch Foundation; Gastroenterological Society of
Australia (GESA); American Association for Cancer Research (AACR) Landon Foundation – INNOVATOR
Award; Royal Australasian College of Surgeons (RACS); Royal Australasian College of Physicians (RACP); Royal
College of Pathologists of Australasia (RCPA); Italian Ministry of Research (Cancer Genome Project FIRB
RBAP10AHJB); Associazione Italiana Ricerca Cancro (12182); Fondazione Italiana Malattie Pancreas – Ministero
Salute (CUP_J33G13000210001); Wilhelm Sander Stiftung 2009.039.2; National Institutes of Health grant P50
CA62924.

Appendix
Australian Pancreatic Cancer Genome Initiative (Participants are arranged by
institution.)

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Garvan Institute of Medical Research Andrew V. Biankin1,2,22, Amber L. Johns1,
Amanda Mawson1, David K. Chang1,2,22, Christopher J. Scarlett1, Mary-Anne L. Brancato1,
Sarah J. Rowe1, Skye H. Simpson1, Mona Martyn-Smith1, Michelle T. Thomas1, Lorraine
A. Chantrill1, Venessa T. Chin1, Angela Chou1, Mark J. Cowley1, Jeremy L. Humphris1,
Marc D. Jones1,2, R. Scott Mead1, Adnan M. Nagrial1, Marina Pajic1, Jessica Pettit1, Mark
Pinese1, Ilse Rooman1, Jianmin Wu1, Jiang Tao1, Renee DiPietro1, Clare Watson1, Angela
Steinmann1,Hong Ching Lee1, Rachel Wong1, Andreia V. Pinho1, Marc Giry-Laterriere1,
Roger J. Daly1, Elizabeth A. Musgrove1, Robert L. Sutherland1‡; Queensland Centre for
Medical Genomics / Institute for Molecular Biosciences Sean M. Grimmond3, Nicola
Waddell3, Karin S. Kassahn3, David K. Miller3, Peter J. Wilson3, Ann-Marie Patch3, Sarah
Song3, Ivon Harliwong3, Senel Idrisoglu3, Craig Nourse3, Ehsan Nourbakhsh3, Suzanne
Manning3, Shivangi Wani3, Milena Gongora3, Matthew Anderson3, Oliver Holmes3,
Conrad Leonard3, Darrin Taylor3, Scott Wood3, Christina Xu3, Katia Nones3, J. Lynn Fink3,
Angelika Christ3, Tim Bruxner3, Nicole Cloonan3, Felicity Newell3, John V. Pearson3, Peter
Bailey3, Michael Quinn3, Shivashankar Nagaraj3, Stephen Kazakoff3, Nick Waddell3,
Keerthana Krisnan3, Kelly Quek3, David Wood3, Muhammad Z. H. Fadlullah3; Royal
North Shore Hospital Jaswinder S. Samra4, Anthony J. Gill4, Nick Pavlakis4, Alex
Guminski4, Christopher Toon4; Bankstown Hospital Ray Asghari5, Neil D. Merrett5,
Darren Pavey5, Amitabha Das5; Liverpool Hospital Peter H. Cosman6, Kasim Ismail6,
Chelsie O’Connnor6; Westmead Hospital Vincent W. Lam7 Duncan McLeod7, Henry C.
Pleass7, Arthur Richardson7, Virginia James7; Royal Prince Alfred Hospital James G.
Kench8, Caroline L. Cooper8, David Joseph8, Charbel Sandroussi8, Michael Crawford8,
James Gallagher8; Fremantle Hospital Michael Texler9, Cindy Forest9, Andrew Laycock9,
Krishna P. Epari9, Mo Ballal9, David R. Fletcher9, Sanjay Mukhedkar9; Sir Charles
Gairdner Hospital Nigel A. Spry10, Bastiaan DeBoer10, MingChai10; St John of God
Healthcare Nikolajs Zeps11, Maria Beilin11, Kynan Feeney11; Royal Adelaide Hospital
Nan Q. Nguyen12, Andrew R. Ruszkiewicz12, Chris Worthley12, Chuan P. Tan12, Tamara
Debrencini12; Flinders Medical Centre John Chen13, Mark E. Brooke-Smith13, Virginia
Papangelis13; Greenslopes Private Hospital Henry Tang14, Andrew P. Barbour14; Envoi
Pathology Andrew D. Clouston15, Patrick Martin15; Princess Alexandria Hospital Thomas
J. O’Rourke16,Amy Chiang16, Jonathan W. Fawcett16, Kellee Slater16, Shinn Yeung16,
Michael Hatzifotis16, Peter Hodgkinson16; Austin Hospital Christopher Christophi17,
Mehrdad Nikfarjam17, Angela Mountain17; Victorian Cancer Biobank18; Johns Hopkins
Medical Institutes James R. Eshleman19, Ralph H. Hruban19, Anirban Maitra19, Christine

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 03.

Waddell et al.

Page 30

Author Manuscript

A. Iacobuzio-Donahue19, Richard D. Schulick19, Christopher L. Wolfgang19, Richard A
Morgan19, Mary Hodgin19; ARC-Net Centre for Applied Research on Cancer Aldo
Scarpa20, Rita T. Lawlor20, Stefania Beghelli20, Vincenzo Corbo20, Maria Scardoni20,
Claudio Bassi20; University of California, San Francisco Margaret A. Tempero21;
University of Glasgow Andrew V. Biankin1,2,22, Sean M. Grimmond2,3, David K.
Chang1,2,22, Elizabeth A. Musgrove2, Marc D. Jones1,2, Craig Nourse2,3, Nigel B.
Jamieson2,22, Janet S, Graham2,22; Greater Glasgow & Clyde National Health Service
Andrew V. Biankin1,2,22, David K. Chang1,2,22, Nigel B. Jamieson2,22, & Janet S.
Graham2,22, Karen Oien2,22 & Jane Hair22
1The

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Kinghorn Cancer Centre, Garvan Institute of Medical Research, 370 Victoria Street,
Darlinghurst, Sydney, New South Wales 2010, Australia. 2Wolfson Wohl Cancer Research
Centre, Institute of Cancer Sciences, University of Glasgow, Garscube Estate, Switchback
Road, Bearsden, Glasgow, Scotland G61 1BD, UK. 3Queensland Centre for Medical
Genomics, Institute for Molecular Bioscience, University of Queensland, St Lucia,
Queensland 4072, Australia. 4Royal North Shore Hospital, Westbourne Street, St Leonards,
New South Wales 2065, Australia. 5Bankstown Hospital, Eldridge Road, Bankstown, New
South Wales 2200, Australia. 6Liverpool Hospital, Elizabeth Street, Liverpool, New South
Wales 2170,Australia. 7Westmead Hospital, Hawkesbury and Darcy Roads, Westmead,
New South Wales 2145, Australia. 8Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Missenden Road,
Camperdown, New South Wales 2050, Australia. 9Fremantle Hospital, Alma Street,
Fremantle, Western Australia 6959, Australia. 10Sir Charles Gairdner Hospital, Hospital
Avenue, Nedlands, Western Australia 6009, Australia. 11St John of God Healthcare, 12
Salvado Road, Subiaco, Western Australia 6008, Australia. 12Royal Adelaide Hospital,
North Terrace, Adelaide, South Australia 5000, Australia. 13Flinders Medical Centre,
Flinders Drive, Bedford Park, South Australia 5042, Australia. 14Greenslopes Private
Hospital, Newdegate Street, Greenslopes, Queensland 4120, Australia. 15Envoi Pathology,
1/49 Butterfield Street, Herston, Queensland 4006, Australia. 16Princess
AlexandriaHospital,237 Ipswich Road, Woolloongabba, Queensland
4102,Australia. 17AustinHospital,145 Studley Road, Heidelberg,
Victoria3084,Australia. 18Victorian Cancer Biobank, 1 Rathdown Street, Carlton, Victoria
3053, Australia. 19Johns Hopkins Medical Institute, 600 North Wolfe Street, Baltimore,
Maryland 21287, USA. 20ARC-NET Center for Applied Research on Cancer, University of
Verona, Via dell’Artigliere, 19 37129 Verona, Province of Verona, Italy. 21University of
California, San Francisco, 500 Parnassus Avenue, San Francisco, California 94122,
USA. 22Greater Glasgow and Clyde National Health Service,1053GreatWestern Road,
Glasgow G12 0YN, UK.

Author Manuscript

‡Deceased.

References
1. Vogelzang NJ, et al. Clinical cancer advances 2011: annual report on progress against cancer from
the American Society of Clinical Oncology. J. Clin. Oncol. 2012; 30:88–109. [PubMed: 22147736]
2. Biankin AV, et al. Pancreatic cancer genomes reveal aberrations in axon guidance pathway genes.
Nature. 2012; 491:399–405. [PubMed: 23103869]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 03.

Waddell et al.

Page 31

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

3. Jones S, et al. Core signaling pathways in human pancreatic cancers revealed by global genomic
analyses. Science. 2008; 321:1801–1806. [PubMed: 18772397]
4. Harada T, et al. Genome-wide DNA copy number analysis in pancreatic cancer using high-density
single nucleotide polymorphism arrays. Oncogene. 2008; 27:1951–1960. [PubMed: 17952125]
5. Stephens PJ, et al. Massive genomic rearrangement acquired in a single catastrophic event during
cancer development. Cell. 2011; 144:27–40. [PubMed: 21215367]
6. Stephens PJ, et al. Complex landscapes of somatic rearrangement in human breast cancer genomes.
Nature. 2009; 462:1005–1010. [PubMed: 20033038]
7. Griffin CA, et al. Consistent chromosome abnormalities in adenocarcinoma of the pancreas. Cancer
Res. 1995; 55:2394–2399. [PubMed: 7757992]
8. Molenaar JJ, et al. Sequencing of neuroblastoma identifies chromothripsis and defects in
neuritogenesis genes. Nature. 2012; 483:589–593. [PubMed: 22367537]
9. Campbell PJ, et al. The patterns and dynamics of genomic instability in metastatic pancreatic
cancer. Nature. 2010; 467:1109–1113. [PubMed: 20981101]
10. Conroy T, et al. FOLFIRINOX versus gemcitabine for metastatic pancreatic cancer. N. Engl. J.
Med. 2011; 364:1817–1825. [PubMed: 21561347]
11. Sultana A, et al. Meta-analyses of chemotherapy for locally advanced and metastatic pancreatic
cancer. J. Clin. Oncol. 2007; 25:2607–2615. [PubMed: 17577041]
12. Ciliberto D, et al. Role of gemcitabine-based combination therapy in the management of advanced
pancreatic cancer: a meta-analysis of randomised trials. Eur. J. Cancer. 2013; 49:593–603.
[PubMed: 22989511]
13. Heinemann V, Boeck S, Hinke A, Labianca R, Louvet C. Meta-analysis of randomized trials:
evaluation of benefit from gemcitabine-based combination chemotherapy applied in advanced
pancreatic cancer. BMC Cancer. 2008; 8:82. [PubMed: 18373843]
14. Oettle H, et al. Second-line oxaliplatin, folinic acid, and fluorouracil versus folinic acid and
fluorouracil alone for gemcitabine-refractory pancreatic cancer: outcomes from the CONKO-003
Trial. J. Clin. Oncol. 2014; 32:2423–2429. [PubMed: 24982456]
15. Kaufman B, et al. Olaparib monotherapy in patients with advanced cancer and a germline
BRCA1/2 mutation. J. Clin. Oncol. 2015; 33:244–250. [PubMed: 25366685]
16. International Cancer Genome Consortium. International network of cancer genome projects.
Nature. 2010; 464:993–998. [PubMed: 20393554]
17. Popova T, et al. Genome alteration print (GAP): a tool to visualize and mine complex cancer
genomic profiles obtained by SNP arrays. Genome Biol. 2009; 10:R128. [PubMed: 19903341]
18. Song S, et al. qpure: a tool to estimate tumor cellularity from genome-wide single-nucleotide
polymorphism profiles. PLoS ONE. 2012; 7:e45835. [PubMed: 23049875]
19. Kassahn KS, et al. Somatic point mutation calling in low cellularity tumors. PLoS ONE. 2013;
8:e74380. [PubMed: 24250782]
20. Alexandrov LB, et al. Signatures of mutational processes in human cancer. Nature. 2013; 500:415–
421. [PubMed: 23945592]
21. Lawrence MS, et al. Mutational heterogeneity in cancer and the search for new cancer-associated
genes. Nature. 2013; 499:214–218. [PubMed: 23770567]
22. Mann KM, et al. Sleeping Beauty mutagenesis reveals cooperating mutations and pathways in
pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA. 2012; 109:5934–5941. [PubMed:
22421440]
23. Berger MF, et al. Melanoma genome sequencing reveals frequent PREX2 mutations. Nature. 2012;
485:502–506. [PubMed: 22622578]
24. Jiang X, et al. Inactivating mutations of RNF43 confer Wnt dependency in pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA. 2013; 110:12649–12654. [PubMed: 23847203]
25. Korbel JO, Campbell PJ. Criteria for inference of chromothripsis in cancer genomes. Cell. 2013;
152:1226–1236. [PubMed: 23498933]
26. Tutt A, et al. Absence of Brca2 causes genome instability by chromosome breakage and loss
associated with centrosome amplification. Curr. Biol. 1999; 9:1107–1110. [PubMed: 10531007]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 03.

Waddell et al.

Page 32

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

27. Jones S, et al. Exomic sequencing identifies PALB2 as a pancreatic cancer susceptibility gene.
Science. 2009; 324:217. [PubMed: 19264984]
28. Hellebrand H, et al. Germline mutations in the PALB2 gene are population specific and occur with
low frequencies in familial breast cancer. Hum. Mutat. 2011; 32:E2176–E2188. [PubMed:
21618343]
29. Nikkilä J, et al. Heterozygous mutations in PALB2 cause DNA replication and damage response
defects. Nature Commun. 2013; 4:2578. [PubMed: 24153426]
30. Nones K, et al. Genome-wide DNA methylation patterns in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma
reveal epigenetic deregulation of SLIT-ROBO, ITGA2 and MET signaling. Int. J. Cancer. 2014;
135:1110–1118. [PubMed: 24500968]
31. Wang Y, et al. Mutation in Rpa1 results in defective DNA double-strand break repair,
chromosomal instability and cancer in mice. Nature Genet. 2005; 37:750–755. [PubMed:
15965476]
32. Doles J, et al. Suppression of Rev3, the catalytic subunit of Polξ, sensitizes drug-resistant lung
tumors to chemotherapy. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA. 2010; 107:20786–20791. [PubMed:
21068376]
33. Chang DK, Grimmond SM, Evans TRJ, Biankin AV. Mining the genomes of exceptional
responders. Nature Rev. Cancer. 2014; 14:291–292. [PubMed: 25688402]
34. Eisenhauer EA, et al. New response evaluation criteria in solid tumours: revised RECIST guideline
(version 1.1). Eur. J. Cancer. 2009; 45:228–247. [PubMed: 19097774]
35. Deng N, et al. A comprehensive survey of genomic alterations in gastric cancer reveals systematic
patterns of molecular exclusivity and co-occurrence among distinct therapeutic targets. Gut. 2012;
61:673–684. [PubMed: 22315472]
36. Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network. Integrated genomic analyses of ovarian carcinoma.
Nature. 2011; 474:609–615. [PubMed: 21720365]
37. Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network. Comprehensive genomic characterization of squamous
cell lung cancers. Nature. 2012; 489:519–525. [PubMed: 22960745]
38. Peddi PF, et al. Multi-institutional experience with FOLFIRINOX in pancreatic adenocarcinoma.
JOP. 2012; 13:497–501. [PubMed: 22964956]
39. Villarroel MC, et al. Personalizing cancer treatment in the age of global genomic analyses: PALB2
gene mutations and the response to DNA damaging agents in pancreatic cancer. Mol. Cancer Ther.
2011; 10:3–8. [PubMed: 21135251]
40. Showalter SL, et al. Identifying pancreatic cancer patients for targeted treatment: the challenges
and limitations of the current selection process and vision for the future. Expert Opin. Drug Deliv.
2010; 7:273–284. [PubMed: 20201734]
41. Golan T, et al. Overall survival and clinical characteristics of pancreatic cancer in BRCA mutation
carriers. Br. J. Cancer. 2014; 111:1132–1138. [PubMed: 25072261]

References

Author Manuscript

42. Li H, Durbin R. Fast and accurate short read alignment with Burrows–Wheeler transform.
Bioinformatics. 2009; 25:1754–1760. [PubMed: 19451168]
43. Sun W, et al. Integrated study of copy number states and genotype calls using high-density SNP
arrays. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009; 37:5365–5377. [PubMed: 19581427]
44. Krzywinski M, et al. Circos: an information aesthetic for comparative genomics. Genome Res.
2009; 19:1639–1645. [PubMed: 19541911]
45. Nik-Zainal S, et al. Association of a germline copy number polymorphism of APOBEC3A and
APOBEC3B with burden of putative APOBEC-dependent mutations in breast cancer. Nature
Genet. 2014; 46:487–491. [PubMed: 24728294]
46. McKenna A, et al. The Genome Analysis Toolkit: a MapReduce framework for analyzing nextgeneration DNA sequencing data. Genome Res. 2010; 20:1297–1303. [PubMed: 20644199]
47. Ye K, Schulz MH, Long Q, Apweiler R, Ning Z. Pindel: a pattern growth approach to detect break
points of large deletions and medium sized insertions from paired-end short reads. Bioinformatics.
2009; 25:2865–2871. [PubMed: 19561018]
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 03.

Waddell et al.

Page 33

Author Manuscript

48. Thorvaldsdóttir H, Robinson JT, Mesirov JP. Integrative genomics viewer (IGV): highperformance genomics data visualization and exploration. Brief. Bioinform. 2013; 14:178–192.
[PubMed: 22517427]
49. Nik-Zainal S, et al. Mutational processes molding the genomes of 21 breast cancers. Cell. 2012;
149:979–993. [PubMed: 22608084]
50. Rubio-Viqueira B, et al. An in vivo platform for translational drug development in pancreatic
cancer. Clin. Cancer Res. 2006; 12:4652–4661. [PubMed: 16899615]
51. Rottenberg S, et al. Selective induction of chemotherapy resistance of mammary tumors in a
conditional mouse model for hereditary breast cancer. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA. 2007;
104:12117–12122. [PubMed: 17626183]
52. Niclou SP, et al. A novel eGFP-expressing immunodeficient mouse model to study tumor-host
interactions. FASEB J. 2008; 22:3120–3128. [PubMed: 18495755]
53. Graeser M, et al. A marker of homologous recombination predicts pathologic complete response to
neoadjuvant chemotherapy in primary breast cancer. Clin. Cancer Res. 2010; 16:6159–6168.
[PubMed: 20802015]

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 03.

Waddell et al.

Page 34

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 1. Mutations in key genes and pathways in pancreatic cancer

The upper panel shows non-silent single nucleotide variants and small insertions or
deletions. The central matrix shows: non-silent mutations (blue), copy number changes
(amplification (>5 copies) represented in red and loss represented in green) and genes
affected by structural variants (SV, yellow). Pathogenic germline variants are highlighted
with asterisk (*) symbols. The histogram on the left shows the number of each alteration in
each gene.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 03.

Waddell et al.

Page 35

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 2. Subtypes of pancreatic cancer

Author Manuscript

a, Subgroups of PDAC based on the frequency and distribution of structural rearrangements.
Representative tumours of each group are shown. The coloured outer rings are
chromosomes, the next ring depicts copy number (red represents gain and green represents
loss), the next is the B allele frequency (proportion of the B allele to the total quantity of
both alleles). The inner lines depict chromosome structural rearrangements. b, The
contribution of the BRCA mutational signature within each tumour ranked by prevalence
(red bars). Unstable tumours are associated with a high BRCA mutation signature and
deleterious mutations in BRCA pathway genes. The dagger (†) symbol indicates predicted
only as possibly damaging by Polyphen2.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 03.

Waddell et al.

Page 36

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 3. Putative biomarkers of platinum and PARP inhibitor responsiveness

a, A Venn diagram showing the overlap of surrogate measures of defects in DNA
maintenance (unstable genomes and BRCA mutational signature), with mutations in BRCA
pathway genes. Of a total of 24 patients (24%), 10 have both unstable genomes and the
BRCA mutational signature. The majority of patients with mutations in BRCA pathway
genes (9) are within this intersect, however 2 have the mutational signature, but are
classified either as scattered (n = 1) or locally rearranged (n = 1). GL, germline; S, somatic.
b, Individual tumours are ranked based on their BRCA mutational signature burden, with the

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 03.

Waddell et al.

Page 37

Author Manuscript

diameter of each circle representing the number of structural variants in each. Those
encircled by a solid line have mutations in BRCA pathway genes. Responders and nonresponders to platinum-based therapy are indicated with solid lines for patients and broken
lines for patient-derived xenografts (PDX).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 03.

Waddell et al.

Page 38

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 4. Responses to platinum therapy

a, ICGC_0006: one of two patients who had an exceptional response to platinum-based
therapy. Treatment of the recurrence with FOLFOX resulted in an exceptional response with
recanalization of the portal vein which was previously obliterated by tumour and resolution
of the mass with complete normalization of CA19.9 levels. b, Platinum responsiveness in
patient-derived xenografts. Curves represent relative tumour volume (0.5 × length × width2,
y axis) over time (days, x axis). Arrows indicate drug treatment. Responses remain stable for
>210 days. Error bars indicate standard error of the mean.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 03.

