NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 June 30.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Published in final edited form as:
Cell. 2009 March 6; 136(5): 823–837. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2009.02.024.

Principles of Cancer Therapy: Oncogene and Non-oncogene
Addiction
Ji Luo1, Nicole L. Solimini1, and Stephen J. Elledge1,*
1Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Department
of Medicine, Division of Genetics, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA

Abstract

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Cancer is a complex collection of distinct genetic diseases united by common hallmarks. Here, we
expand upon the classic hallmarks to include the stress phenotypes of tumorigenesis. We describe a
conceptual framework of how oncogene and non-oncogene addictions contribute to these hallmarks
and how they can be exploited through stress sensitization and stress overload to selectively kill
cancer cells. In particular, we present evidence for a large class of non-oncogenes that are essential
for cancer cell survival and present attractive drug targets. Finally, we discuss the path ahead to
therapeutic discovery and provide theoretical considerations for combining orthogonal cancer
therapies.

The Current State of Cancer Research

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The past two decades have witnessed tremendous advances in our understanding of the
pathogenesis of cancer. It is now clear that cancer arises through a multistep, mutagenic process
whereby cancer cells acquire a common set of properties including unlimited proliferation
potential, self-sufficiency in growth signals, and resistance to antiproliferative and apoptotic
cues. Furthermore, tumors evolve to garner support from surrounding stromal cells, attract new
blood vessels to bring nutrients and oxygen, evade immune detection, and ultimately
metastasize to distal organs (Hanahan and Weinberg, 2000). Many of these phenotypic traits
can be brought about by genetic alterations that involve the gain-of-function mutation,
amplification, and/or overexpression of key oncogenes together with the loss-of-function
mutation, deletion, and/or epigenetic silencing of key tumor suppressors (Hahn and Weinberg,
2002).
Cancer cells achieve these phenotypes in large part by reactivating and modifying many
existing cellular programs normally used during development. These programs control
coordinated processes such as cell proliferation, migration, polarity, apoptosis, and
differentiation during embryogenesis and tissue homeostasis. Consistent with Darwinian
principles, cancer evolves through random mutations and epigenetic changes that alter these
pathways followed by the clonal selection of cells that can survive and proliferate under
circumstances that would normally be deleterious.
Although a number of oncogenes and tumor suppressors, such as PI3K, Ras, p53, PTEN, Rb,
and p16INK4a, are frequently mutated in cancer cells, there also appears to be a large number
of low-frequency changes that can contribute to oncogenesis. Indeed, data from tumor
sequencing projects reveal an astounding diversity of mutations in tumors. In one study,

©2009 Elsevier Inc.
*
Correspondence: selledge@genetics.med.harvard.edu.

Luo et al.

Page 2

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Stratton and colleagues estimate that individual mutations in as many as 20% of all kinases
can play an active role in tumorigenesis (Greenman et al., 2007), although it remains to be seen
whether mutations in 20% of other gene classes will also drive tumorigenesis. Large-scale
sequencing of multiple cancers has so far failed to identify new, high-frequency mutation
targets in addition to those previously identified (Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network,
2008; Ding et al., 2008; Jones et al., 2008; Parsons et al., 2008; Sjoblom et al., 2006; Wood et
al., 2007). Rather, these studies found that every tumor harbors a complex combination of lowfrequency mutations thought to drive the cancer phenotype. Furthermore, the repertoires of
somatic mutations in different cancer types such as breast and colon cancers appear to be
different. Although there is much debate with regard to the statistical requirements needed to
distinguish likely driver from noncontributing passenger mutations among the large collection
of mutations in tumors, it is clear that there is tremendous complexity and heterogeneity in the
patterns of mutations in tumors of different origins.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The complexity of alterations in cancer presents a daunting problem with respect to treatment:
how can we effectively treat cancers arising from such varied perturbations? Cancer cells have
extensively rewired pathways for growth and survival that underlie the malignant phenotype.
Thus, a key to successful therapy is the identification of critical, functional nodes in the
oncogenic network whose inhibition will result in system failure, that is, the cessation of the
tumorigenic state by apoptosis, necrosis, senescence, or differentiation. Furthermore,
therapeutic agents attacking these nodes must display a sufficiently large therapeutic window
with which to kill tumor cells while sparing normal cells. To borrow a term from yeast and fly
genetic analyses, the therapeutic agents must constitute “synthetic lethality” with the cancer
genotype/phenotype (Kaelin, 2005). In some cases, particular agents can display genotypedependent lethality similar to synthetic lethality without directly inhibiting a particular protein.
The two mainstay treatment options for cancer today—chemotherapy and radiation—are
examples of agents that exploit the enhanced sensitivity of cancer cells to DNA damage.
Despite all of our knowledge, however, we still do not have a clear molecular understanding
of why these agents work to selectively kill tumor cells and, conversely, why they eventually
fail. The advent of “targeted” therapies, which aim to attack the underlying oncogenic context
of tumors, provides more sophisticated examples of synthetic lethality. When properly
deployed, these therapies tend to be more effective relative to chemotherapy and radiation.

Additional Hallmarks: The Stress Phenotypes of Cancer

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Although there is no simple way to predict a priori which proteins will act as nodal points to
generate cancer drug targets, solutions are likely to emerge from multiple sources, including
recent initiatives to understand cancer at the systems level. From a genetic point of view, it is
important to appreciate that the plethora of mutations observed in the cancer genome must
ultimately result in a common set of hallmarks in order to bring about the malignant phenotype.
The goal of cancer therapy is, therefore, to either reverse these properties or target them as
tumor-specific liabilities, preferably through the combinatorial application of a relatively small
number of drugs. Thus we need a thorough understanding of the nature of these hallmarks.
In addition to the six hallmarks outlined in the seminal review by Hanahan and Weinberg
(Hanahan and Weinberg, 2000) that collectively promote survival and proliferation in foreign
environments (Figure 1, top), as well as the hallmark of “evading immune surveillance”
proposed by Kroemer and colleagues (Kroemer and Pouyssegur, 2008) (Figure 1, left), we
propose a number of additional, equally prevalent hallmarks of cancer cells based on recent
analyses of cellular phenotypes. Although these cancer phenotypes are not responsible for
initiating tumorigenesis, they are common characteristics of many tumor types (Figure 1,
bottom). Among these additional hallmarks are DNA damage/replication stress, proteotoxic
stress, mitotic stress, metabolic stress, and oxidative stress. We collectively refer to this subset

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 June 30.

Luo et al.

Page 3

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

as the stress phenotypes of cancers. There are often intricate functional interplays among these
shared hallmarks of tumor cells, which are illustrated in Figure 1 and discussed below.
Although some of these stress phenotypes are not unique to cancer cells and can be observed
in other conditions such as chronic inflammation, we propose that they represent a common
set of oncogenesis-associated cellular stresses that cancer cells must tolerate through stress
support pathways. How these phenotypes arise is not well understood, but targeting these
hallmarks and their associated vulnerabilities in a wide variety of cancers has shown promise
for therapeutic intervention.
DNA Damage and DNA Replication Stress

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Based on karyotypic and mutational analyses, it is clear that tumors, especially solid tumors,
pass through stages of extreme genomic instability that result in the accumulation of point
mutations, deletions, complex chromosomal rearrangements, and extensive aneuploidy
(Hartwell and Kastan, 1994). This level of instability is due in part to a constitutive level of
endogenous DNA damage, which results in activation of the DNA damage stress response
(DDR) pathway (Bartkova et al., 2005; Gorgoulis et al., 2005). Elevated levels of DNA damage
observed in early stage tumors are thought to be due to several factors. First, the shortening of
telomeres due to replication in the absence of sufficient telomerase activity leads to the
appearance of double-strand breaks (DSBs) at telomeric ends. The subsequent fusions of these
deprotected ends initiate breakage-fusion-bridge cycles that result in translocations and gene
amplification events (Maser and DePinho, 2002). DSBs resulting from replication stress can
also lead to breakage-fusion-bridge cycles (Windle et al., 1991). Additionally, oncogene
activation in precancerous lesions has been shown to increase DSBs and genomic instability
(Halazonetis et al., 2008), possibly through DNA hyper-replication (Bartkova et al., 2006; Di
Micco et al., 2006). Finally, mutation of genes involved in either DNA repair programs (such
as excision, crosslink, or mismatch repair) or the DDR pathways (such as ATM and p53
signaling) can lead to increased DNA damage, inappropriate cell-cycle progression, and
genomic instability (Harper and Elledge, 2007). In normal cells, DNA damage signals to halt
proliferation, induce cellular senescence, or elicit apoptosis. Cancer cells have evolved to
overcome the antiproliferative effects of DNA damage, continuing to replicate in the presence
of damage (Figure 1).
Proteotoxic Stress

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Tumors exhibit proteotoxic stress evidenced by their frequent constitutive activation of the
heat shock response. We think this is due, in part, to the striking degree of aneuploidy (altered
chromosome number) often found in solid tumors (Figure 1) (Ganem et al., 2007;Torres et al.,
2008;Williams et al., 2008). Aneuploidy and gene copy-number changes can alter the relative
balance of growth and survival signals, thereby promoting tumorigenesis. However, they also
result in corresponding increases and decreases in transcript levels (Pollack et al., 2002;Torres
et al., 2007;Tsafrir et al., 2006) that produce imbalances in the stoichiometry of protein complex
subunits (Papp et al., 2003). These imbalances increase the amount of toxic, unfolded protein
aggregates in the cell and place additional burdens on the protein folding and degradation
machineries (Denoyelle et al., 2006). This proteotoxic stress is counteracted, in part, by the
heat shock response pathway, which promotes the proper folding and/or proteolytic
degradation of proteins (Whitesell and Lindquist, 2005).
Mitotic Stress
A subset of tumors display increased rates of chromosome mis-segregation, which is referred
to as the CIN (chromosome instability) phenotype (Komarova et al., 2002). This instability
results in a shifting chromosome distribution, thus allowing tumor cells to rapidly evolve. In
principle, CIN phenotypes can result from defects in a variety of pathways involved in mitosis,

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 June 30.

Luo et al.

Page 4

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

including defects in mitotic proteins that execute chromosome segregation and defects in the
spindle assembly checkpoint, which coordinates anaphase entry with proper alignment of
chromosomes on the mitotic spindle (Cahill et al., 1998). In addition, the CIN phenotype could
result from the presence of extra centrosomes in tumor cells or from stresses placed on the
mitotic apparatus due to the need to segregate supernumerary chromosomes (Ganem et al.,
2007). Furthermore, CIN and mitotic stress might arise indirectly as a result of DSBs and
genomic instability following oncogene activation, even in lesions where the mitotic machinery
is intact (Halazonetis et al., 2008). Mutations in certain oncogenes, such as Ras, and tumor
suppressors, such as p53, have been suggested to contribute to the CIN phenotype (Denko et
al., 1994). However, the precise cause of mitotic stress is not known for the vast majority of
tumors.
Metabolic Stress

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Normal cells derive the bulk of their ATP through mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation.
In what has been referred to as the Warburg effect, most cancer cells are found to predominantly
produce energy by the less efficient method of glycolysis and secrete a large amount of lactic
acid, even under high oxygen conditions (Warburg, 1956). Tumor cells exhibit dramatically
increased glucose uptake and highly elevated rates of glycolysis (DeBerardinis et al., 2007).
This provides the basis for tumor imaging by positron emission tomography (PET) using the
glucose analog 18F-2-deoxyglucose. This transition to glycolysis for energy production
provides several advantages to the tumor including adaptation to a low oxygen environment
and the acidification of the surrounding microenvironment, which promotes tumor invasion
and suppresses immune surveillance (Figure 1).
Oxidative Stress
The defining characteristic of oxidative stress is the presence of reactive oxygen species (ROS),
and cancer cells typically generate more ROS than normal cells (Szatrowski and Nathan,
1991). Both oncogenic signaling (Lee et al., 1999) and the downregulation of mitochondrial
function (Gogvadze et al., 2008) in tumors can contribute to ROS generation. ROS are highly
reactive and likely to contribute to the increased levels of endogenous DNA damage observed
in cancer cells (Figure 1). In addition, ROS are important signaling mediators, and their
presence may contribute to transformation. For example, ROS promote the activation of the
transcription factor HIF-1 by hypoxia (Dewhirst et al., 2008), and HIF-1 can promote the
glycolytic switch and angiogenesis observed in tumors.

Attacking the Hallmarks of Cancer
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Any therapy with the stated goal to treat and possibly cure cancer must show differential
toxicity toward tumor cells relative to normal cells. Implicit in this statement is that some
unique properties of cancer cells not shared by normal cells, such as those depicted in Figure
1, must be exploited to the specific detriment of cancer cells, i.e., the concept of synthetic
lethality. In principle, cancer can be treated by inducing cancer cells to undergo apoptosis,
necrosis, senescence, or differentiation. These changes can be brought about by disrupting
cancer cell-autonomous processes, by interfering with autocrine/paracrine signaling within
tumors, or by blocking heterotypic signaling between tumor cells and the surrounding stromal
tissue or blood vessels. Enhancing immune surveillance against cancer cells expressing novel
antigens is also an attractive approach that has shown efficacy in specifically killing cancer
cells (Muller and Scherle, 2006).
Experiments aimed at either suppressing oncogene activity or restoring tumor suppressor
function have revealed that such intervention is highly deleterious to the cancer cell. The
heightened state of dependency of cancer cells on oncogenes and the loss of tumor suppressors

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 June 30.

Luo et al.

Page 5

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

led to the terms “oncogene addiction” (OA) and “tumor suppressor gene
hypersensitivity” (Weinstein, 2002; Weinstein and Joe, 2008). These alterations are necessary
for both the establishment and maintenance of the oncogenic state and therefore are logical
drug targets. Indeed, much effort has been extended to pharmacologically inhibit oncoproteins.
What is thought to underlie the phenomenon of oncogene addiction is the observation that
oncogenes elicit strong, opposing prosurvival and proapoptotic signals in cancer cells that favor
growth and survival, and the acute inhibition of oncogene function tilts this balance toward
cell death (Downward, 2003; Sharma and Settleman, 2007).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

To bring about their phenotypic manifestations, oncogenes rely on extensive adaptations in
cellular processes that are themselves not oncogenic. In addition, cancer cells may also display
an increased dependence on the normal cellular functions of certain genes that act in oncogenic
pathways but are not themselves classical oncogenes. For example, mutations in many genes
in a given oncogenic pathway are unable to directly promote tumor formation because, despite
being required for their pathway, they cannot increase the overall activity of the pathway
because they are not rate-limiting. However, a reduction in the activity of many such genes
can become rate-limiting to the pathway in question, and thus, they represent potential drug
targets. By this rationale, cancer cells are addicted to both oncogenes and non-oncogenes. To
describe this addiction of cancer cells to the functions of non-oncogenes, we have termed this
phenomenon “non-oncogene addiction,” NOA (Solimini et al., 2007). Although NOA genes,
like oncogenes, are required for maintenance of the tumorigenic state, NOA genes do not
undergo oncogenic mutations or functionally significant genomic alterations in tumors. The
concept of non-oncogene addiction underscores the important contribution of these supporting
networks to oncogenesis and highlights the potential of non-oncogenes as points of intervention
for cancer therapeutics.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Whereas some gene classes and pathways fall neatly into the OA or NOA designations, others
are more difficult to categorize because they exhibit characteristics of both phenomena. For
example, interferon regulatory factor 4 (IRF4) (Iida et al., 1997) is oncogenic and
overexpressed due to translocations in some multiple myelomas. However, it is also required
for the survival of myelomas lacking IRF4 translocations or overexpression (Shaffer et al.,
2008). Should it be considered as an example of OA in the latter cases? Also, should a protein
that is directly activated by an oncogene and required for tumorigenesis—but is otherwise not
mutated in cancer—be considered an example of NOA when it is so clearly linked to an
oncogene? Both examples are clear if one adheres to a strict definition of NOA stating that
NOA genes do not undergo oncogenic mutations in tumors. However, these examples often
run counter to our overall intuitive sense of the different categories. Regardless, although the
OA and NOA designations are not perfect, they provide a useful intellectual framework for
thinking about cancer cell vulnerabilities and the principles of cancer therapies. Below, we will
discuss examples of oncogene and non-oncogene addiction and describe how modern tools are
being applied to identify these classes of genes for possible therapeutic exploitation.

Oncogene Addiction and Tumor Suppressor Gene Hypersensitivity
Despite the multitude of genetic and epigenetic alterations found across cancers, a given tumor
is likely to be driven by only a select few changes—those that result in the gain of an oncogene
or the loss of a tumor suppressor. The phrase “oncogene addiction” was coined to describe the
observation that tumor maintenance often depends upon the continued activity of certain
oncogenes (Weinstein, 2002). This phenomenon has been demonstrated in vivo for several
oncogenes. For example, mouse models using an inducible MYC oncogene have shown that
MYC-driven skin papillomas, lymphomas, and osteosarcomas can all be reversed upon MYC
withdrawal (Felsher and Bishop, 1999; Jain et al., 2002; Pelengaris et al., 1999). Similarly,
addictions to the HRAS or BCR-ABL oncogenes have been demonstrated in mouse models of

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 June 30.

Luo et al.

Page 6

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

melanoma and leukemia, respectively (Chin et al., 1999; Huettner et al., 2000). In human
colorectal cancer cells bearing a KRAS mutation, somatic knockout of the KRAS oncogene
results in reversion of the transformed phenotype and abrogates the ability of these cells to
form tumors in nude mice (Shirasawa et al., 1993).
The subset of oncogenes whose inhibition can lead to tumor cell death, differentiation, arrest,
or senescence is of great clinical interest as targets for cancer therapeutics (Table 1). This
strategy has proven successful for the protein kinase oncogenes BCR-ABL (imatinib/Gleevec),
EGFR (gefitinib/Iressa, erlotinib/Tarceva), and HER2 (trastuzumab/Herceptin) (Druker,
2002;Roberts and Der, 2007;Sharma et al., 2007), and efforts toward inhibition of BRAF,
MDM2, and the lipid kinase PI3K are underway. Targeting non-kinase oncogenes such as
RAS and MYC, however, has proven more difficult.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In contrast to oncogenes, tumor suppressor genes act to provide the cellular restraints necessary
to prevent aberrant growth and survival or genomic instability. Loss of tumor suppressor genes
through deletion, inactivating mutation, or epigenetic silencing results in the removal of these
restraints leading to tumorigenesis. Reintroduction of a tumor suppressor gene into a tumor
lacking that gene can result in tumor regression. This concept has been recently demonstrated
by reactivation of p53 in mouse tumor models (Martins et al., 2006; Ventura et al., 2007; Xue
et al., 2007). Pharmacological exploitation of tumor suppressor mutations, however, has lagged
behind efforts aimed at oncogenes because it is often difficult to use a small molecule to either
restore or mimic the function of a protein that is either mutated or absent. In cases where a
tumor suppressor negatively regulates the activity of a proto-oncogene, drugs targeting the
corresponding proto-oncogene should prove efficacious in treating tumors lacking that tumor
suppressor. For example, tumors that have lost the tumor suppressor and lipid phosphatase
PTEN, which normally acts to constrain PI3K signaling, are likely to be sensitive to PI3K
inhibitors. Similarly, loss of Rb, p16, p21, or p27 all result in upregulation of cyclin-dependent
kinase (CDK) activity, which drives cell-cycle entry. In principle, tumors resulting from these
lesions might be more sensitive to CDK inhibitors. Whether such predictions prove true will
only become apparent from clinical trials employing PI3K and CDK inhibitors. In many other
cases, however, such as those involving loss of the tumor suppressors p53 or ARF, there is no
obvious positive signaling pathway to target, and alternative therapeutic strategies must
therefore be considered.

Targeting Non-oncogene Addiction for Cancer Therapy

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

We proposed the concept of non-oncogene addiction (NOA) based on the understanding that
the tumorigenic state depends on the activities of a wide variety of genes and pathways, many
of which are not inherently oncogenic themselves (Solimini et al., 2007). Importantly, these
genes and pathways are essential to support the oncogenic phenotype of cancer cells but are
not required to the same degree for the viability of normal cells. From a purely genetic point
of view, these dependencies should provide an ample number of drug targets that when
inhibited will constitute synthetic lethality with the underlying tumor genotype. Gene
interaction studies in yeast have provided precedence for this notion. For example, most
mutations exhibit enhanced growth defects when paired with certain other mutations, and one
study in yeast identified an average of six genetic interactions per gene (Collins et al., 2007).
As a tumor contains many genetic alterations, each of these changes provides an opportunity
to pair with the loss of function of a second gene to result in a severe and possibly lethal growth
and survival phenotype. Furthermore, if this second gene is targeted with a drug that inhibits
its protein, then a potential cancer therapy can result.
NOA genes and pathways provide important targets for antitumor therapies. In the sections
below, we will discuss general classes of NOA genes with specific examples when available.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 June 30.

Luo et al.

Page 7

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NOA genes fall into two general categories, tumor intrinsic and tumor extrinsic. Whereas
tumor-intrinsic NOA genes support the oncogenic state of the tumor cell in a cell-autonomous
manner, tumor-extrinsic NOA genes function in stromal and vascular cells that provide
heterotypic support for the tumor. An advantage of targeting these accessory cells is that, unlike
tumor cells, they tend to be genetically more stable and therefore are less likely to evolve drug
resistance. However, in certain circumstances tumors may be able to evolve reduced
dependency on these accessory cells.
The trade-off for the tumorigenic state is that tumor cells experience numerous cellular stresses
not experienced by normal cells and therefore tumor cells are more dependent on stress support
pathways for their survival. In principle, there are two approaches to exploit this dependency
to selectively kill tumor cells. The first approach, stress sensitization, aims to diminish the
activity of the stress support pathways such that the tumor cell can no longer cope with the
stress of its oncogenic state and either ceases to proliferate or initiates apoptosis or necrosis.
The second approach, stress overload, aims to exacerbate existing oncogenic stress in order to
overwhelm the stress support pathways in the tumor cell, leading to growth arrest or cell death.
Both approaches, therefore, disrupt the balance of pro- and antisurvival signaling to the
detriment of tumor cells. Examples of specific types of NOA are illustrated in Figure 2 and
discussed below.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Intrinsic Non-oncogene Addiction
DNA Damage and Replication Stress
In nearly all tumor cell types, the rate of spontaneous DNA damage and the degree of replication
stress are enhanced. The presence of oncogenes can also elicit substantial DNA damage
(Halazonetis et al., 2008). DNA damage stress can be exploited therapeutically through both
stress sensitization and stress overload. An elaborate DNA damage response (DDR) pathway
exists in the cell to ameliorate the effects of DNA damage by promoting DNA repair. Mutations
in genes of this pathway result in increased sensitivity to DNA damage (Harper and Elledge,
2007). In principle, cells experiencing spontaneous DNA damage should show enhanced
sensitivity to agents that interfere with this stress response pathway (Figure 2). In support of
this notion, recent studies have shown that inhibitors of the DDR kinases ATM and Chk1
exhibit selective toxicity toward cancer cells (Chen et al., 2006; Kennedy et al., 2007).
Although it seems counterintuitive that a pathway that normally serves to restrain proliferation
and promote apoptosis would protect a cancer cell, the DNA repair and genomic stability
afforded by this pathway could save a cancer cell from death caused by persistent DNA damage
and replication stress.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Stress overload of the DDR pathway should also show efficacy in cancer treatment. Although
it is not clear why DNA-damaging agents, such as IR and chemotherapy, are effective cancer
therapies, it is possible that these are examples of stress overload, where cancer cells with
already elevated levels of DNA damage and replication stress cannot repair the additional
damage inflicted by these agents. An alternative explanation is that during tumorigenesis, the
persistence of DNA damage selects for cells with mutations that abrogate part of the DDR
pathway and therefore cannot properly sense and respond to DNA damage. These cells with a
partially defective DDR might therefore be more vulnerable to the extensive DNA damage
resulting from radiation or chemotherapy that is lethal without a normal DDR pathway. In this
context, DNA damage exploits a stress phenotype of tumors that is analogous to non-oncogene
addition.
Given the sensitivity of many cancers to DNA-damaging agents, there should exist genes whose
inhibition will generate endogenous DNA damage to exacerbate this sensitivity. Exemplifying
this phenomenon are cancers bearing BRCA2 mutations. These tumors are defective in

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 June 30.

Luo et al.

Page 8

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

homologous recombination-mediated DNA repair and are particularly sensitive to DNA
crosslinkers such as cisplatin (Sakai et al., 2008). Furthermore, these tumors rely heavily on
other forms of DNA repair such as base-excision repair, resulting in sensitivity to inhibitors of
poly-ADP-ribose polymerase (PARP1), an enzyme that facilitates repair of single-stranded
breaks (Bryant et al., 2005; Farmer et al., 2005). In normal cells, the endogenous DNA damage
generated by PARP inhibition is well-tolerated because of functional compensation from
homologous recombination-mediated repair. Indeed, mice deficient in PARP1 are fertile and
do not exhibit increased tumor susceptibility (Conde et al., 2001). The addiction of BRCA2
mutant cells to PARP1 function is therefore an example of NOA that is exploited
therapeutically. There are likely to be additional non-oncogene targets like PARP1 that can be
exploited to treat these tumors. Likewise, the DNA damage sensitivity of other cancer types
might also be exploited in this manner, although whether generating endogenous damage is
superior to adding exogenous damage remains to be determined.
Mitotic Stress

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

As noted above, a variety of tumors display increased rates of chromosome mis-segregation,
the CIN phenotype, because they contain mutations that alter the fidelity of mitosis. Cancer
cells bearing mitotic alterations such as aneuploidy or weakened mitotic spindle regulatory
machinery are likely to exhibit greater reliance on stress support pathways for proper
chromosome segregation. They are therefore more sensitive to catastrophic genomic instability
caused by stress overload or stress sensitization of the mitotic machinery (Weaver and
Cleveland, 2005).
The spindle checkpoint can provide stress support in cells that have defects in the mitotic
machinery, and in such cases inhibiting the spindle checkpoint could lead to lethality as a result
of stress sensitization. Conversely, some tumors with the CIN phenotype possess mutations
that weaken the spindle checkpoint (Cahill et al., 1998) and might be especially sensitive to
stress overload caused by the inhibition of proteins that carryout mitosis. A notable example
of stress overload is the microtubule stabilizer taxol, which interferes with proper spindlekinetochore attachment and has shown efficacy in the treatment of breast and ovarian cancers
(Weaver and Cleveland, 2005). Inhibitors of mitotic kinases such as PLK1 and Aurora-B that
also promote stress overload are currently undergoing clinical trials (Carpinelli and Moll,
2008; Strebhardt and Ullrich, 2006). Aneuploidy itself might be a target of NOA as genetic
screens in yeast have identified mutations that show synthetic lethality with tetraploid verses
diploid cells (Storchová et al., 2006).
Proteotoxic Stress

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Proteotoxic stress is a frequent occurrence in cancer cells as a result of the extreme aneuploidy,
copy-number variation, and transcriptional alterations present in tumors. These changes alter
the dosage balance of protein subunits in different protein complexes and consequently place
increased stress on chaperone pathways to maintain normal homeostasis of the proteome. The
heat shock pathway plays a major role in promoting protein folding and is activated in many
tumors (Whitesell and Lindquist, 2005) and is therefore a potential NOA target (Figure 2).
Studies in yeast have shown that an extra copy of a single chromosome is sufficient to activate
the heat shock response (Torres et al., 2007). Pharmacological and genetic evidence supports
the notion that sensitizing tumor cells toward proteotoxic stress can strongly suppress
tumorigenesis. For example, the chaperone HSP90 acts to fold newly synthesized proteins and
refold mis-folded proteins (Whitesell and Lindquist, 2005). The chaperone activity of HSP90
requires its ATPase activity, which can be inhibited by the anticancer drug geldanamycin.
Although the antitumor activity of geldanamycin has been attributed to the destabilization of
key HSP90 client proteins involved in cell proliferation such as CDK4 and HER2, it is also

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 June 30.

Luo et al.

Page 9

possible that the sensitization of tumor cells to elevated general proteotoxic stress leads to its
efficacy.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Additional genetic support for NOA comes from studies of HSF1 knockout mice (Dai et al.,
2007). HSF1 is the major transcription factor responsible for activating the expression of heat
shock proteins, including HSP90, in response to excess unfolded proteins. Loss of HSF1
markedly reduces tumorigenesis driven by either p53 or Ras mutations (Dai et al., 2007). Given
that neither HSP90 nor HSF1 have been shown to be oncogenes, they represent examples of
NOA.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Stress sensitization and stress overload are two sides of the same coin. In principle, instead of
sensitizing cancer cells toward endogenous proteotoxic stress, therapies that enhance protein
unfolding should overload the stress support network in cancer cells, achieving the same result.
Normal cells, on the other hand, should be less sensitive to such therapies due to their low
baseline proteotoxic stress. A convenient method of inducing protein unfolding is temperature
elevation. Indeed, hyperthermia is being extensively investigated as a tumor treatment for
colon, breast, testicular, prostate, and liver cancers and has been the subject of ongoing clinical
trials, often in combination with chemotherapy (Fiorentini and Szasz, 2006). The induction of
protein unfolding by hyperthermia could provide a rationale for the efficacy of this approach.
Strong support for this explanation again comes from yeast where it was shown that the
presence of just one extra chromosome results in enhanced temperature sensitivity, consistent
with a general sensitivity to temperature for aneuploid cells (Torres et al., 2007).

Unfolded proteins are generally turned over by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. Thus, a
second key component of the proteotoxic stress response pathway is the proteasome. Genetic
experiments have shown that the presence of an extra chromosome is sufficient to increase the
sensitivity of yeast cells to proteasome inhibitors (Torres et al., 2007). One promising new
anticancer drug bortezomib (Velcade), which has shown efficacy in treating multiple myeloma,
acts to inhibit the protease function of the proteasome (Richardson et al., 2006). As proteasome
inhibition is likely to stabilize many different proteins, it has been traditionally thought that
the stabilization of a particular subset of proteins might be responsible for the antitumorigenic
activity of Velcade. However, it is equally likely that its efficacy results from enhanced
proteotoxic stress leading to stress overload and represents a prime example of NOA.

Metabolic Stress

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Tumor cells exhibit altered metabolic behavior due to both cell-intrinsic properties and the
tumor microenvironment. As noted above, tumor cells have increased glucose uptake and
preferentially metabolize glucose through glycolysis even in the presence of oxygen. Although
the reason for the Warburg effect is unclear, it has been suggested that such adaptation allows
the tumor cell to divert resources toward biosynthesis, reduce the generation of ROS through
mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation, and cope with fluctuating oxygen availability in the
tumor vicinity (DeBerardinis et al., 2008; Kroemer and Pouyssegur, 2008). Inhibition of the
glycolytic/biosynthetic pathways in a tumor cell will lead to stress overload due to
incompatibility with the persistent proliferative drive from oncogenes (Vander Heiden et al.,
2001). Indeed, inhibition of ATP citrate lyase (which synthesizes acetyl-CoA from citrate),
RNAi knockdown of lactate dehydrogenase A (the enzyme that converts pyruvate to lactate in
the last step of glycolysis), and inhibitors against acetyl-CoA carboxylase and fatty acid
synthase (which control the conversion of acetyl-CoA to manonyl-CoA to palmitate) all lead
to substantial attenuation of tumor cell growth (DeBerardinis et al., 2008; Kroemer and
Pouyssegur, 2008). Recently, it has been shown that the mere switching of pyruvate kinase
from one splice variant (M2) commonly expressed in tumor cells to another splice variant (M1)
can negatively impact the tumorigenic state, presumably by shunting pyruvate to the TCA cycle

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 June 30.

Luo et al.

Page 10

(Christofk et al., 2008). Thus targeting key metabolic enzymes that constitute NOA could
effectively attenuate tumor cell proliferation.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Oxidative Stress
Tumor cells often show increased levels of intracellular ROS (Szatrowski and Nathan, 1991).
Multiple causes contribute to ROS generation. Hypoxia-reperfusion in the tumor
microenvironment can lead to ROS production, which in turn can initiate a viscous cycle of
mitochondrial damage and further ROS generation (Gogvadze et al., 2008). In addition,
oncogenes such as Ras can stimulate ROS production, a mechanism that has been implicated
as an underlying cause of oncogene-induced senescence (Lee et al., 1999). ROS cause oxidative
damage to DNA, proteins, lipids, and other cellular components and therefore pose a significant
cellular stress (Figure 1). Cancer cells partially alleviate this stress by engaging glycolysis and
downregulating mitochondrial function (Gogvadze et al., 2008). Agents that enhance ROS
production, therefore, are expected to cause stress overload in cancer cells. In support of this
notion, it has been shown that dichloroacetate, which inhibits pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase
(PDK) and therefore stimulates mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation and ROS production,
can selectively elicit apoptosis in cancer cells but not in normal cells (Bonnet et al., 2007).
Similarly, reducing the cellular ROS buffering capacity through the inhibition of glutamatecysteine ligase (a rate-limiting enzyme in cellular glutathione synthesis) can markedly increase
the radiosensitivity of cancer cells (Diehn et al., 2009).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Hypoxia and Nutrient Stress
Solid tumors, due to poor and abnormal tumor vasculature (see below), often suffer from
suboptimal oxygen and nutrient supplies. This stress underlies the requirement for augmented
angiogenesis (Figure 1). Consequently many tumors upregulate the transcription factor
hypoxia-inducible factor HIF-1 (Pouyssegur et al., 2006). HIF-1 initiates a coordinated
transcriptional program to both stimulate vessel sprouting (through the induction of VEGF-A
and angiopoietin-2) and promote glycolysis (through the induction of glucose transporter 1,
hexokinase, lactate dehydrogenase, and pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 1). Furthermore,
HIF-1 protects tumor cells from acidosis and promotes the extrusion of lactate by inducing
carbonate anhydrases, monocarboxylate transporter MCT4, and the Na+/H+ exchanger NHE1.
Drugs targeting either HIF-1 or its effector pathways will therefore sensitize tumor cells toward
hypoxic stress. Indeed, anti-angiogenic therapies have been effective in various clinical settings
(see below). Inhibiting the monocarboxylate transporter, which would result in intracellular
lactate accumulation and acidosis, might also be a viable approach to selectively kill hypoxic
tumor cells addicted to glycolysis (Pouyssegur et al., 2006).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

As tumor cells grow away from the vasculature system, they experience nutrient stress and can
resort to autophagy for survival. Although impaired autophagy could contribute to oncogenesis
by promoting genomic instability and cytokine release (Mathew et al., 2007), autophagy is
critical for the survival of apoptosis-resistant tumor cells during nutrient or growth factor
restriction. Inhibiting autophagy in such cells would sensitize them toward metabolic stress
and promote necrotic death. In support of this notion, the autophagy inhibitor chloroquine has
been shown to synergize with DNA damage to induce tumor cell death in mice (Jin and White,
2007).
Immune Response Modulation
Most tumors express antigens that could potentially elicit an immune response due to the
expression of a mutant protein that gives rise to a novel epitope. However, in the vast majority
of cases tumors are able to prevent rejection by effectively suppressing an immune response
in the tumor microenvironment (Muller and Scherle, 2006; Zou, 2005). Although not a stress
phenotype, there are examples of NOA that can be used to reverse this hallmark. Several
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 June 30.

Luo et al.

Page 11

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

mechanisms protect tumor cells from immune surveillance. Tumor cells can downregulate the
expression of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules to reduce antigen
presentation (Garrido and Algarra, 2001). Tumor cells also synthesize and release a number
of immunomodulatory factors such as chemokines (e.g., CCL2), cytokines (e.g., IL6 and IL10),
and prostaglandins (e.g., PGE2) to suppress the activation of cytotoxic T cells (Sharma et al.,
2005). Furthermore, the depletion of key metabolites in the tumor microenvironment, such as
glucose, also inhibits cytotoxic T cell expansion (Muller and Scherle, 2006).
The tumor's addiction to “immunosuppressive” NOA genes could be exploited for therapeutic
gains. For example, the cycloxygenase-2 (COX2) inhibitor celecoxib, which blocks PGE2
synthesis, has been shown to enhance immune response to tumors in mice (Stolina et al.,
2000). Reactivating MHC gene expression in tumor cells that have downregulated MHC,
perhaps by inhibiting a histone deacetylase (HDAC) or a transcriptional repressor, is yet
another potential means to enhance tumor immune surveillance. Active immunization against
tumor antigens has been shown to be greatly enhanced by interfering with inhibitory T cells
through the use of anti-CTLA-4 antibodies, providing another example of NOA-like therapy
(Peggs et al., 2008). A major attraction of re-establishing the antitumor immune response is
that one could potentially apply it in a systematic manner toward many tumor types and allow
the immune system to detect and eradicate tumors at a relatively early stage.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Extrinsic Non-oncogene Addiction
Angiogenesis
One of the best examples of extrinsic NOA is the ability of solid tumors to recruit new blood
vessels through the secretion of angiogenic factors. Tumor angiogenesis ensures that cells in
the interior of the tumor receive sufficient nutrients and oxygen to survive. Blocking tumor
angiogenesis would therefore severely restrict tumor growth (Folkman, 2007). Early
experiments using mouse xenografts indicated that antibody-mediated inhibition of vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF), which promotes the proliferation and migration of vascular
endothelial cells and vessel sprouting, could severely constrain angiogenesis and tumor growth
(Kim et al., 1993). These and other studies led to the development of the anti-VEGF antibody
bevacizumab for therapeutic use (Ferrara et al., 2004). Additionally, the small-molecule
inhibitors sorafenib and sunitinib, which target multiple receptor tyrosine kinases including
VEGF receptors, have shown efficacy in treating metastatic renal cell carcinoma (Escudier et
al., 2007; Motzer et al., 2006). In principle, any protein required for angiogenesis in endothelial
cells is a candidate for extrinsic NOA.
Stromal Support

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The tumor stroma plays a key role in supporting tumor growth (Hu and Polyak, 2008). It is
increasingly clear that heterotypic interactions between the tumor and its surrounding stromal
cells lead to phenotypic changes in the stroma that better support tumor growth. For example,
the myofibroblasts surrounding breast tumors are distinct from normal mammary stromal
fibroblasts in their ability to secrete stromal-derived factor 1 to both stimulate tumor growth
and recruit endothelial progenitor cells for angiogenesis (Orimo et al., 2005). This phenotypic
distinction is further supported by substantial gene expression and epigenetic changes observed
in these cancer-associated stromal cells (Allinen et al., 2004). In addition, bone marrow-derived
mesenchymal stem cells and hematopoietic progenitors have been found to play important
roles in tumor metastasis either through cytokine-mediated paracrine signaling or through their
mobilization to distal sites to help establish the metastatic niche, respectively (Kaplan et al.,
2005; Karnoub et al., 2007). Although somatic mutations in tumor stromal cells are rare
(Allinen et al., 2004; Qiu et al., 2008), in the case of familial neurofibromatosis 1 caused by
mutations in the NF1 gene, careful modeling of the disease in mice has revealed a striking

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 June 30.

Luo et al.

Page 12

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

contribution of mast cells to tumor development. The contribution of NF1 heterozygous mast
cells and bone marrow cells to the disease phenotype is dependent on signaling by c-kit in these
cells, a receptor readily inhibited by imatinib. Indeed, imatinib was successfully applied to
reduce the tumor burden of an NF1 patient (Yang et al., 2008), thus demonstrating the utility
of targeting tumor-extrinsic NOA pathways for cancer therapy. We have used the stress
phenotypes to illustrate NOA; however, it is important to realize that other examples of NOA
pathways exist unrelated to stress that when inhibited will also be incompatible with the
oncogenic state.

The Path Ahead to New Cancer Therapeutics
We are approaching a new era in cancer research as we now have the tools to mount a systematic
assault on the problem of tumorigenesis in terms of both understanding the underlying
pathogenic process and devising new therapies to treat cancer. Below we explore new
approaches for identifying cancer drug targets and provide theoretical considerations of how
therapies attacking cancer might be optimally applied.
Approaches to Target Identification

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Having outlined the different classes of potential cancer targets based on their underlying
cellular functions, what is the best approach that we as cancer researchers can take to quickly
generate therapies that are so desperately needed? Clearly target identification and patient
stratification, that is, the ability to group patients with common biomarkers to link them to the
appropriate therapy, will play a major part in the evolution of new therapies. Thus, new
biomarkers and means to identify therapeutic targets are needed. In a general sense, the
approaches that served us so well in the first era of cancer research—the painstaking
identification of individual genes and attempts to exploit them to cure cancer—will likely not
suffice for the next era of cancer research. Systems-level approaches are needed to identify the
vulnerabilities of cancer cells in a genome-wide and unbiased manner. Two such
complementary and mutually reinforcing efforts are underway and should systematically
identify candidate drug targets, providing a blueprint for cancer drug target discovery.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The first is the traditional approach to identify genetic lesions in cancer cells and exploit this
knowledge for therapeutics, a tried and true method that has led to the identification of several
drug targets. Such an approach is currently employed by The Cancer Genome Atlas and other
similar efforts that aim to characterize, in a large number of cancer types, genomic alterations
including copy-number variation, transcriptional profiles, epigenetic modifications, and DNA
sequence alterations. While expensive, this approach has the potential to identify common
alterations in oncogenes and tumor suppressors for further functional analysis and uncover
oncogene addiction pathways that can be targeted (Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network,
2008; Jones et al., 2008; Parsons et al., 2008). It is clear that these efforts will yield important
new information on human cancer and aid biomarker discovery and patient stratification.
However, this approach has two limitations with respect to target discovery. First, current
sequencing capacity is primarily limited to coding regions, though whole-genome sequencing
will become feasible with cheaper and more highly parallel sequencing methods. The second
limitation is that this approach will not discover NOA pathways that support tumorigenesis,
such as those discussed above, because they are not mutated in cancers.
The second approach takes a more functional, systems-biology approach to identify cancer cell
vulnerabilities (Ngo et al., 2006; Schlabach et al., 2008; Silva et al., 2008). This has been made
possible by the RNA interference (RNAi) revolution. Advances in RNAi technology in
mammalian cells have made it possible, for the first time, to systematically interrogate every
cellular protein for potential addiction by cancer cells. A functional approach using RNAi offers
several advantages in target discovery. First, RNAi-mediated protein knockdown results in
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 June 30.

Luo et al.

Page 13

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

either partial or complete loss of function, which in many cases closely mimics the effect of
an inhibitor. Second, RNAi can be applied to any annotated gene in the human genome based
on sequence information alone without the a priori knowledge of the gene's cellular function
or mutational status in cancer. Therefore, this approach will uncover both known and new
genes that were not previously implicated in cancer. Third, RNAi can be readily applied to
animal models (Dickins et al., 2007). This provides rapid, in vivo target validation that takes
advantage of the many mouse models of cancer, without the need to first develop an inhibitor.
Lastly and importantly, genome-wide RNAi screening will identify genes that are not mutated
in cancers and exhibit features of NOA. Systematic RNAi screens aimed to generate either
“synthetic lethal signatures” against specific oncogenes or tumor suppressors or “cancer lethal
signatures” using a large panel of cancer and normal cells should reveal a genetic landscape
of cancer vulnerabilities that guide the rational design of therapeutic approaches.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

A current limitation of the RNAi approach is the fact that many screens are being performed
in cell lines in vitro and are limited to analysis of genes important for proliferation and survival.
Thus, these screens will miss certain classes of genes that might function only in the proper in
vivo tumor environment. This limitation can be overcome, however, if large-scale genetic
screens can be approached systematically in mice with defined cancer models. Continuous
RNAi library development that aims to improve gene knockdown efficiency and incorporate
features (such as barcodes) that enable very high throughput screening will further enhance
the power of this approach. These efforts would require a sustained commitment of resources,
such as an organized consortium effort, but would result in the identification and validation of
critical cancer drug targets in a relatively unbiased, comprehensive fashion. Given the longstanding success of genetics in providing unbiased insights into biology and disease
mechanisms, our goal should be nothing less than identifying all the pathways upon which
cancer cells depend to maintain the oncogenic state.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The identification of drug targets is only the first step in the process to develop new cancer
therapeutics. The ability to identify or design small-molecule inhibitors with the appropriate
pharmacological properties against any given target is the next challenge. Currently, many
efforts focus only on the so-called “druggable genome,” which represents proteins with
enzymatic functions that can be easily assayed or targeted. However, recent studies have shown
that many proteins previously thought to be difficult to target can, in fact, be inhibited by small
molecules (Wells and McClendon, 2007). New methods of identifying small molecules based
on their ability to bind specific proteins and disrupt protein-protein interaction should widen
the playing field and allow more validated targets that emerge from physical mapping and
genetic screens to enter the drug development pipeline. Of course, it is widely hoped that RNAi
itself will become a cancer therapy in the near future once a solution to its effective delivery
to tumors is found. If so, this will circumvent many limitations inherent to small-molecule
inhibitors and revolutionize drug development.
Mathematical Elimination of Cancer using Orthogonal Therapies
It is very likely that the oncogenes and non-oncogenes to which tumors are addicted will serve
as the targets of successful cancer therapies in the future. However, it is already clear that each
of even the best therapies applied alone eventually fail in the majority of cases. Each therapy
can be considered to be a filter that removes a set of cancer cells with certain properties (Figure
3). However, a subset of tumor cells slip through the filter to eventually establish clones,
rendering the therapy ineffective. These rare, pre-existing mutant cells contain suppressor
mutations that circumvent the therapy. Examples of suppressor mutations might include an
altered drug-binding site on the intended target, amplification of the drug target, activation of
drug efflux pumps, or activation of an alternative pathway, such as a growth factor signaling
pathway, that performs the same function as the inhibited pathway. The rate of appearance of

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 June 30.

Luo et al.

Page 14

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

suppressor mutations is an important parameter in cancer therapies. Unfortunately, one of the
inherent properties of cancer cells is their enhanced genomic instability, which accelerates the
appearance of suppressor mutations.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

From a theoretical perspective, in order to overcome this problem, a combinatorial series of
filters applied concurrently is needed to eliminate all of the cancer cells in a patient. How this
will be accomplished remains to be determined, but we envision it to be the simultaneous
application of orthogonal cancer therapies. Two therapies are considered orthogonal, and
therefore act synergistically, when they attack a cancer in two different ways such that a
suppressor mutation for the first therapy cannot suppress the second therapy and vice versa. It
should be noted that some non-orthogonal therapies might also have efficacy in combination
if only a portion of the suppressors can overcome both therapies. This leads to the simple
mathematical proposition that the probability of cancer escaping the therapies, the recurrence
index, RI, will be proportional to the number of cancer-initiating cells, N, times the frequency
of suppressor mutations for therapy 1, v1, times the frequency of suppressor mutations for
therapy 2, v2, and so on to produce RI = Nv1v2…vi. Once RI becomes much less than 1, the
probability of surviving the cancer is high. Importantly, this general treatment takes full
consideration of tumor cell heterogeneity such as the existence of “cancer stem cells” that might
have a different property than the bulk of the tumor. Although the values of the parameters in
this equation are not currently known and are likely to vary based on tumor type, it is clear that
such an approach can work as it is analogous to the treatment of HIV. For HIV, which resembles
tumors in that it is highly mutable, a triple cocktail of inhibitors of HIV replication can control
the progression of the disease. We envision that cancer therapies will adopt this calculus and
convert cancer, like AIDS, from a terminal illness to a chronic disease or even provide a cure.
Given that cancer is actually a collection of distinct diseases, the orthogonal combinations will
vary depending upon the tumor genotype and possibly the genotype of the patient. It is likely
that the treatment regimen employed will be determined by the analysis of a series of
biomarkers in each tumor that have been previously shown to predict efficacy of a particular
therapy. Combinatorial therapies are currently being considered for a number of cancers.
However, it will be important to understand the nature and frequency of suppressors that allow
escape from each therapy when designing combinations in order to maximize the orthogonality
of the combinatorial therapies. In addition, it is critical that such therapies, when tolerated by
patients, be applied concurrently, not sequentially, because the latter will allow the number of
cancer-initiating cells, N, to expand prior to the subsequent treatment, thereby increasing the
RI. Finally, it should be noted that if one of the therapies employed is a DNA-damaging agent,
it might increase the frequency of suppressor mutations for the other therapies with which it
is combined.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In summary, there are many avenues through which to approach future cancer therapies. We
hope these additional hallmarks depicting the stress phenotypes of cancer cells will both
improve our understanding of the efficacy of existing therapies and provide rationales for new
therapeutics. Cancer therapeutic targets can emerge through both the analysis of classical
oncogenes and the analysis of a new class of genes that constitute NOA. New genome-wide
efforts to approach cancer from a systems-biology perspective hold great promise for
identifying new targets for anticancer therapies. Finally, we propose that through the proper
combination of orthogonal cancer therapies, it is possible to convert cancer from a death
sentence into a manageable or even curable disease.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank O. Cohen-Fix, J. Glaven, S.M. Lewis, W.G. Kaelin, and G.M. Wahl for critical reading of the
manuscript. J.L. is supported by a fellowship from the American Association of Cancer Research. N.L.S. is a fellow
of the Susan G. Komen for the Cure Foundation. This work is supported by grants from the NIH and the U.S.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 June 30.

Luo et al.

Page 15
Department of Defense to S.J.E. S.J.E. is an investigator with HHMI. We dedicate this review to I. Bernard Weinstein
for his contributions to cancer biology.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

REFERENCES

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Allinen M, Beroukhim R, Cai L, Brennan C, Lahti-Domenici J, Huang H, Porter D, Hu M, Chin L,
Richardson A, et al. Molecular characterization of the tumor microenvironment in breast cancer.
Cancer Cell 2004;6:17, 32. [PubMed: 15261139]
Ashwell S, Zabludoff S. DNA damage detection and repair pathways-recent advances with inhibitors of
checkpoint kinases in cancer therapy. Clin. Cancer Res 2008;14:4032, 4037. [PubMed: 18593978]
Bartkova J, Horejsi Z, Koed K, Kramer A, Tort F, Zieger K, Guldberg P, Sehested M, Nesland JM, Lukas
C, et al. DNA damage response as a candidate anti-cancer barrier in early human tumorigenesis. Nature
2005;434:864, 870. [PubMed: 15829956]
Bartkova J, Rezaei N, Liontos M, Karakaidos P, Kletsas D, Issaeva N, Vassiliou LV, Kolettas E, Niforou
K, Zoumpourlis VC, et al. Oncogene-induced senescence is part of the tumorigenesis barrier imposed
by DNA damage checkpoints. Nature 2006;444:633, 637. [PubMed: 17136093]
Bonnet S, Archer SL, Allalunis-Turner J, Haromy A, Beaulieu C, Thompson R, Lee CT, Lopaschuk GD,
Puttagunta L, Harry G, et al. A mitochondria-K+ channel axis is suppressed in cancer and its
normalization promotes apoptosis and inhibits cancer growth. Cancer Cell 2007;11:37, 51. [PubMed:
17222789]
Bryant HE, Schultz N, Thomas HD, Parker KM, Flower D, Lopez E, Kyle S, Meuth M, Curtin NJ,
Helleday T. Specific killing of BRCA2-deficient tumours with inhibitors of poly(ADP-ribose)
polymerase. Nature 2005;434:913, 917. [PubMed: 15829966]
Cahill DP, Lengauer C, Yu J, Riggins GJ, Willson JK, Markowitz SD, Kinzler KW, Vogelstein B.
Mutations of mitotic checkpoint genes in human cancers. Nature 1998;392:300, 303. [PubMed:
9521327]
Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network. Comprehensive genomic characterization defines human
glioblastoma genes and core pathways. Nature 2008;455:1061, 1068. [PubMed: 18772890]
Carlo-Stella C, Lavazza C, Locatelli A, Vigano L, Gianni AM, Gianni L. Targeting TRAIL agonistic
receptors for cancer therapy. Clin. Cancer Res 2007;13:2313, 2317. [PubMed: 17438088]
Carpinelli P, Moll J. Aurora kinases and their inhibitors: more than one target and one drug. Adv. Exp.
Med. Biol 2008;610:54, 73. [PubMed: 18593015]
Chen Z, Xiao Z, Gu WZ, Xue J, Bui MH, Kovar P, Li G, Wang G, Tao ZF, Tong Y, et al. Selective Chk1
inhibitors differentially sensitize p53-deficient cancer cells to cancer therapeutics. Int. J. Cancer
2006;119:2784, 2794. [PubMed: 17019715]
Chin L, Tam A, Pomerantz J, Wong M, Holash J, Bardeesy N, Shen Q, O'Hagan R, Pantginis J, Zhou H,
et al. Essential role for oncogenic Ras in tumour maintenance. Nature 1999;400:468, 472. [PubMed:
10440378]
Christofk HR, Vander Heiden MG, Harris MH, Ramanathan A, Gerszten RE, Wei R, Fleming MD,
Schreiber SL, Cantley LC. The M2 splice isoform of pyruvate kinase is important for cancer
metabolism and tumour growth. Nature 2008;452:230, 233. [PubMed: 18337823]
Collins SR, Miller KM, Maas NL, Roguev A, Fillingham J, Chu CS, Schuldiner M, Gebbia M, Recht J,
Shales M, et al. Functional dissection of protein complexes involved in yeast chromosome biology
using a genetic interaction map. Nature 2007;446:806, 810. [PubMed: 17314980]
Conde C, Mark M, Oliver FJ, Huber A, de Murcia G, Menissier-de Murcia J. Loss of poly(ADP-ribose)
polymerase-1 causes increased tumour latency in p53-deficient mice. EMBO J 2001;20:3535, 3543.
[PubMed: 11432840]
Dai C, Whitesell L, Rogers AB, Lindquist S. Heat shock factor 1 is a powerful multifaceted modifier of
carcinogenesis. Cell 2007;130:1005, 1018. [PubMed: 17889646]
DeBerardinis RJ, Mancuso A, Daikhin E, Nissim I, Yudkoff M, Wehrli S, Thompson CB. Beyond aerobic
glycolysis: transformed cells can engage in glutamine metabolism that exceeds the requirement for
protein and nucleotide synthesis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2007;104:19345, 19350. [PubMed:
18032601]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 June 30.

Luo et al.

Page 16

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

DeBerardinis RJ, Lum JJ, Hatzivassiliou G, Thompson CB. The biology of cancer: metabolic
reprogramming fuels cell growth and proliferation. Cell Metab 2008;7:11, 20. [PubMed: 18177721]
Denko NC, Giaccia AJ, Stringer JR, Stambrook PJ. The human Ha-ras oncogene induces genomic
instability in murine fibroblasts within one cell cycle. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 1994;91:5124,
5128. [PubMed: 8197195]
Denoyelle C, Abou-Rjaily G, Bezrookove V, Verhaegen M, Johnson TM, Fullen DR, Pointer JN, Gruber
SB, Su LD, Nikiforov MA, et al. Anti-oncogenic role of the endoplasmic reticulum differentially
activated by mutations in the MAPK pathway. Nat. Cell Biol 2006;8:1053, 1063. [PubMed:
16964246]
Dewhirst MW, Cao Y, Moeller B. Cycling hypoxia and free radicals regulate angiogenesis and
radiotherapy response. Nat. Rev. Cancer 2008;8:425, 437. [PubMed: 18500244]
Di Micco R, Fumagalli M, Cicalese A, Piccinin S, Gasparini P, Luise C, Schurra C, Garre M, Nuciforo
PG, Bensimon A, et al. Oncogene-induced senescence is a DNA damage response triggered by DNA
hyper-replication. Nature 2006;444:638, 642. [PubMed: 17136094]
Dickins RA, McJunkin K, Hernando E, Premsrirut PK, Krizhanovsky V, Burgess DJ, Kim SY, CordonCardo C, Zender L, Hannon GJ, et al. Tissue-specific and reversible RNA interference in transgenic
mice. Nat. Genet 2007;39:914, 921. [PubMed: 17572676]
Diehn M, Cho RW, Lobo NA, Kalisky T, Dorie MJ, Kulp AN, Qian D, Lam JS, Ailles LE, Wong M, et
al. Association of reactive oxygen species levels and radioresistance in cancer stem cells. Nature.
2009 Published online February 4, 2009. 10.1038/nature07733.
Dikmen ZG, Gellert GC, Jackson S, Gryaznov S, Tressler R, Dogan P, Wright WE, Shay JW. In vivo
inhibition of lung cancer by GRN163L: a novel human telomerase inhibitor. Cancer Res
2005;65:7866, 7873. [PubMed: 16140956]
Ding L, Getz G, Wheeler DA, Mardis ER, McLellan MD, Cibulskis K, Sougnez C, Greulich H, Muzny
DM, Morgan MB, et al. Somatic mutations affect key pathways in lung adenocarcinoma. Nature
2008;455:1069, 1075. [PubMed: 18948947]
Downward J. Targeting RAS signalling pathways in cancer therapy. Nat. Rev. Cancer 2003;3:11, 22.
[PubMed: 12509763]
Druker BJ. Inhibition of the Bcr-Abl tyrosine kinase as a therapeutic strategy for CML. Oncogene
2002;21:8541, 8546. [PubMed: 12476300]
Escudier B, Eisen T, Stadler WM, Szczylik C, Oudard S, Siebels M, Negrier S, Chevreau C, Solska E,
Desai AA, et al. Sorafenib in advanced clear-cell renal-cell carcinoma. N. Engl. J. Med 2007;356:125,
134. [PubMed: 17215530]
Farmer H, McCabe N, Lord CJ, Tutt AN, Johnson DA, Richardson TB, Santarosa M, Dillon KJ, Hickson
I, Knights C, et al. Targeting the DNA repair defect in BRCA mutant cells as a therapeutic strategy.
Nature 2005;434:917, 921. [PubMed: 15829967]
Felsher DW, Bishop JM. Reversible tumorigenesis by MYC in hematopoietic lineages. Mol. Cell
1999;4:199, 207. [PubMed: 10488335]
Ferrara N, Hillan KJ, Gerber HP, Novotny W. Discovery and development of bevacizumab, an antiVEGF antibody for treating cancer. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov 2004;3:391, 400. [PubMed: 15136787]
Fiorentini G, Szasz A. Hyperthermia today: electric energy, a new opportunity in cancer treatment. J.
Cancer Res. Ther 2006;2:41, 46. [PubMed: 17998673]
Folkman J. Angiogenesis: an organizing principle for drug discovery? Nat. Rev. Drug Discov 2007;6:273,
286. [PubMed: 17396134]
Ganem NJ, Storchova Z, Pellman D. Tetraploidy, aneuploidy and cancer. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev
2007;17:157, 162. [PubMed: 17324569]
Garrido F, Algarra I. MHC antigens and tumor escape from immune surveillance. Adv. Cancer Res
2001;83:117, 158. [PubMed: 11665717]
Gogvadze V, Orrenius S, Zhivotovsky B. Mitochondria in cancer cells: what is so special about them?
Trends Cell Biol 2008;18:165, 173. [PubMed: 18296052]
Gorgoulis VG, Vassiliou LV, Karakaidos P, Zacharatos P, Kotsinas A, Liloglou T, Venere M, Ditullio
RA Jr. Kastrinakis NG, Levy B, et al. Activation of the DNA damage checkpoint and genomic
instability in human precancerous lesions. Nature 2005;434:907, 913. [PubMed: 15829965]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 June 30.

Luo et al.

Page 17

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Greenman C, Stephens P, Smith R, Dalgliesh GL, Hunter C, Bignell G, Davies H, Teague J, Butler A,
Stevens C, et al. Patterns of somatic mutation in human cancer genomes. Nature 2007;446:153, 158.
[PubMed: 17344846]
Guertin DA, Sabatini DM. Defining the role of mTOR in cancer. Cancer Cell 2007;12:9, 22. [PubMed:
17613433]
Hahn WC, Weinberg RA. Modelling the molecular circuitry of cancer. Nat. Rev. Cancer 2002;2:331,
341. [PubMed: 12044009]
Halazonetis TD, Gorgoulis VG, Bartek J. An oncogene-induced DNA damage model for cancer
development. Science 2008;319:1352, 1355. [PubMed: 18323444]
Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. The hallmarks of cancer. Cell 2000;100:57, 70. [PubMed: 10647931]
Harley CB. Telomerase and cancer therapeutics. Nat. Rev. Cancer 2008;8:167, 179. [PubMed: 18256617]
Harper JW, Elledge SJ. The DNA damage response: ten years after. Mol. Cell 2007;28:739, 745.
[PubMed: 18082599]
Hartwell LH, Kastan MB. Cell cycle control and cancer. Science 1994;266:1821, 1828. [PubMed:
7997877]
Hu M, Polyak K. Microenvironmental regulation of cancer development. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev
2008;18:27, 34. [PubMed: 18282701]
Huettner CS, Zhang P, Van Etten RA, Tenen DG. Reversibility of acute B-cell leukaemia induced by
BCR-ABL1. Nat. Genet 2000;24:57, 60. [PubMed: 10615128]
Hynes NE, Lane HA. ERBB receptors and cancer: the complexity of targeted inhibitors. Nat. Rev. Cancer
2005;5:341, 354. [PubMed: 15864276]
Iida S, Rao PH, Butler M, Corradini P, Boccadoro M, Klein B, Chaganti RS, Dalla-Favera R. Deregulation
of MUM1/IRF4 by chromosomal translocation in multiple myeloma. Nat. Genet 1997;17:226, 230.
[PubMed: 9326949]
Jain M, Arvanitis C, Chu K, Dewey W, Leonhardt E, Trinh M, Sundberg CD, Bishop JM, Felsher DW.
Sustained loss of a neoplastic phenotype by brief inactivation of MYC. Science 2002;297:102, 104.
[PubMed: 12098700]
Jin S, White E. Role of autophagy in cancer: management of metabolic stress. Autophagy 2007;3:28, 31.
[PubMed: 16969128]
Jones S, Zhang X, Parsons DW, Lin JC, Leary RJ, Angenendt P, Mankoo P, Carter H, Kamiyama H,
Jimeno A, et al. Core signaling pathways in human pancreatic cancers revealed by global genomic
analyses. Science 2008;321:1801, 1806. [PubMed: 18772397]
Kaelin WG Jr. The concept of synthetic lethality in the context of anticancer therapy. Nat. Rev. Cancer
2005;5:689, 698. [PubMed: 16110319]
Kaplan RN, Riba RD, Zacharoulis S, Bramley AH, Vincent L, Costa C, MacDonald DD, Jin DK, Shido
K, Kerns SA, et al. VEGFR1-positive haematopoietic bone marrow progenitors initiate the premetastatic niche. Nature 2005;438:820, 827. [PubMed: 16341007]
Karnoub AE, Dash AB, Vo AP, Sullivan A, Brooks MW, Bell GW, Richardson AL, Polyak K, Tubo R,
Weinberg RA. Mesenchymal stem cells within tumour stroma promote breast cancer metastasis.
Nature 2007;449:557, 563. [PubMed: 17914389]
Kennedy RD, Chen CC, Stuckert P, Archila EM, De la Vega MA, Moreau LA, Shimamura A, D'Andrea
AD. Fanconi anemia pathway-deficient tumor cells are hypersensitive to inhibition of ataxia
telangiectasia mutated. J. Clin. Invest 2007;117:1440, 1449. [PubMed: 17431503]
Kim KJ, Li B, Winer J, Armanini M, Gillett N, Phillips HS, Ferrara N. Inhibition of vascular endothelial
growth factor-induced angiogenesis suppresses tumour growth in vivo. Nature 1993;362:841, 844.
[PubMed: 7683111]
Komarova NL, Lengauer C, Vogelstein B, Nowak MA. Dynamics of genetic instability in sporadic and
familial colorectal cancer. Cancer Biol. Ther 2002;1:685, 692. [PubMed: 12642695]
Kroemer G, Pouyssegur J. Tumor cell metabolism: cancer's Achilles' heel. Cancer Cell 2008;13:472, 482.
[PubMed: 18538731]
Lee AC, Fenster BE, Ito H, Takeda K, Bae NS, Hirai T, Yu ZX, Ferrans VJ, Howard BH, Finkel T. Ras
proteins induce senescence by altering the intracellular levels of reactive oxygen species. J. Biol.
Chem 1999;274:7936, 7940. [PubMed: 10075689]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 June 30.

Luo et al.

Page 18

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Lee YM, Sicinski P. Targeting cyclins and cyclin-dependent kinases in cancer: lessons from mice, hopes
for therapeutic applications in human. Cell Cycle 2006;5:2110, 2114. [PubMed: 16969111]
Longley DB, Harkin DP, Johnston PG. 5-fluorouracil: mechanisms of action and clinical strategies. Nat.
Rev. Cancer 2003;3:330, 338. [PubMed: 12724731]
Maira SM, Stauffer F, Brueggen J, Furet P, Schnell C, Fritsch C, Brach-mann S, Chene P, De Pover A,
Schoemaker K, et al. Identification and characterization of NVP-BEZ235, a new orally available dual
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/mammalian target of rapamycin inhibitor with potent in vivo antitumor
activity. Mol. Cancer Ther 2008;7:1851, 1863. [PubMed: 18606717]
Martins CP, Brown-Swigart L, Evan GI. Modeling the therapeutic efficacy of p53 restoration in tumors.
Cell 2006;127:1323, 1334. [PubMed: 17182091]
Maser RS, DePinho RA. Connecting chromosomes, crisis, and cancer. Science 2002;297:565, 569.
[PubMed: 12142527]
Mathew R, Kongara S, Beaudoin B, Karp CM, Bray K, Degenhardt K, Chen G, Jin S, White E. Autophagy
suppresses tumor progression by limiting chromosomal instability. Genes Dev 2007;21:1367, 1381.
[PubMed: 17510285]
McGuire JJ. Anticancer antifolates: current status and future directions. Curr. Pharm. Des 2003;9:2593,
2613. [PubMed: 14529544]
Moreira JN, Santos A, Simoes S. Bcl-2-targeted antisense therapy (Oblimersen sodium): towards clinical
reality. Rev. Recent Clin. Trials 2006;1:217, 235. [PubMed: 18473975]
Motzer RJ, Michaelson MD, Redman BG, Hudes GR, Wilding G, Figlin RA, Ginsberg MS, Kim ST,
Baum CM, DePrimo SE, et al. Activity of SU11248, a multitargeted inhibitor of vascular endothelial
growth factor receptor and platelet-derived growth factor receptor, in patients with metastatic renal
cell carcinoma. J. Clin. Oncol 2006;24:16, 24. [PubMed: 16330672]
Muller AJ, Scherle PA. Targeting the mechanisms of tumoral immune tolerance with small-molecule
inhibitors. Nat. Rev. Cancer 2006;6:613, 625. [PubMed: 16862192]
Nava-Parada P, Emens LA. GV-1001, an injectable telomerase peptide vaccine for the treatment of solid
cancers. Curr. Opin. Mol. Ther 2007;9:490, 497. [PubMed: 17932813]
Ngo VN, Davis RE, Lamy L, Yu X, Zhao H, Lenz G, Lam LT, Dave S, Yang L, Powell J, et al. A lossof-function RNA interference screen for molecular targets in cancer. Nature 2006;441:106, 110.
[PubMed: 16572121]
Orimo A, Gupta PB, Sgroi DC, Arenzana-Seisdedos F, Delaunay T, Naeem R, Carey VJ, Richardson
AL, Weinberg RA. Stromal fibroblasts present in invasive human breast carcinomas promote tumor
growth and angiogenesis through elevated SDF-1/CXCL12 secretion. Cell 2005;121:335, 348.
[PubMed: 15882617]
Papp B, Pal C, Hurst LD. Dosage sensitivity and the evolution of gene families in yeast. Nature
2003;424:194, 197. [PubMed: 12853957]
Parsons DW, Jones S, Zhang X, Lin JC, Leary RJ, Angenendt P, Mankoo P, Carter H, Siu IM, Gallia
GL, et al. An integrated genomic analysis of human glioblastoma multiforme. Science
2008;321:1807, 1812. [PubMed: 18772396]
Peggs KS, Quezada SA, Allison JP. Cell intrinsic mechanisms of T-cell inhibition and application to
cancer therapy. Immunol. Rev 2008;224:141, 165. [PubMed: 18759925]
Pelengaris S, Littlewood T, Khan M, Elia G, Evan G. Reversible activation of c-Myc in skin: induction
of a complex neoplastic phenotype by a single oncogenic lesion. Mol. Cell 1999;3:565, 577.
[PubMed: 10360173]
Pollack JR, Sorlie T, Perou CM, Rees CA, Jeffrey SS, Lonning PE, Tibshirani R, Botstein D, BorresenDale AL, Brown PO. Microarray analysis reveals a major direct role of DNA copy number alteration
in the transcriptional program of human breast tumors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2002;99:12963,
12968. [PubMed: 12297621]
Pommier Y. Topoisomerase I inhibitors: camptothecins and beyond. Nat. Rev. Cancer 2006;6:789, 802.
[PubMed: 16990856]
Pouyssegur J, Dayan F, Mazure NM. Hypoxia signalling in cancer and approaches to enforce tumour
regression. Nature 2006;441:437, 443. [PubMed: 16724055]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 June 30.

Luo et al.

Page 19

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Qiu W, Hu M, Sridhar A, Opeskin K, Fox S, Shipitsin M, Trivett M, Thompson ER, Ramakrishna M,
Gorringe KL, et al. No evidence of clonal somatic genetic alterations in cancer-associated fibroblasts
from human breast and ovarian carcinomas. Nat. Genet 2008;40:650, 655. [PubMed: 18408720]
Quintas-Cardama A, Kantarjian H, Cortes J. Flying under the radar: the new wave of BCR-ABL
inhibitors. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov 2007;6:834, 848. [PubMed: 17853901]
Richardson PG, Mitsiades C, Hideshima T, Anderson KC. Bortezomib: proteasome inhibition as an
effective anticancer therapy. Annu. Rev. Med 2006;57:33, 47. [PubMed: 16409135]
Roberts PJ, Der CJ. Targeting the Raf-MEK-ERK mitogen-activated protein kinase cascade for the
treatment of cancer. Oncogene 2007;26:3291, 3310. [PubMed: 17496923]
Roccaro AM, Hideshima T, Richardson PG, Russo D, Ribatti D, Vacca A, Dammacco F, Anderson KC.
Bortezomib as an antitumor agent. Curr. Pharm. Biotechnol 2006;7:441, 448. [PubMed: 17168660]
Sakai W, Swisher EM, Karlan BY, Agarwal MK, Higgins J, Friedman C, Villegas E, Jacquemont C,
Farrugia DJ, Couch FJ, et al. Secondary mutations as a mechanism of cisplatin resistance in BRCA2mutated cancers. Nature 2008;451:1116, 1120. [PubMed: 18264087]
Schlabach MR, Luo J, Solimini NL, Hu G, Xu Q, Li MZ, Zhao Z, Smogorzewska A, Sowa ME, Ang XL,
et al. Cancer proliferation gene discovery through functional genomics. Science 2008;319:620, 624.
[PubMed: 18239126]
Selivanova G, Wiman KG. Reactivation of mutant p53: molecular mechanisms and therapeutic potential.
Oncogene 2007;26:2243, 2254. [PubMed: 17401433]
Shaffer AL, Emre NC, Lamy L, Ngo VN, Wright G, Xiao W, Powell J, Dave S, Yu X, Zhao H, et al.
IRF4 addiction in multiple myeloma. Nature 2008;454:226, 231. [PubMed: 18568025]
Sharma S, Yang SC, Zhu L, Reckamp K, Gardner B, Baratelli F, Huang M, Batra RK, Dubinett SM.
Tumor cyclooxygenase-2/prostaglandin E2-dependent promotion of FOXP3 expression and CD4+
CD25+ T regulatory cell activities in lung cancer. Cancer Res 2005;65:5211, 5220. [PubMed:
15958566]
Sharma SV, Settleman J. Oncogene addiction: setting the stage for molecularly targeted cancer therapy.
Genes Dev 2007;21:3214, 3231. [PubMed: 18079171]
Sharma SV, Bell DW, Settleman J, Haber DA. Epidermal growth factor receptor mutations in lung cancer.
Nat. Rev. Cancer 2007;7:169, 181. [PubMed: 17318210]
Shirasawa S, Furuse M, Yokoyama N, Sasazuki T. Altered growth of human colon cancer cell lines
disrupted at activated Ki-ras. Science 1993;260:85, 88. [PubMed: 8465203]
Siddik ZH. Cisplatin: mode of cytotoxic action and molecular basis of resistance. Oncogene
2003;22:7265, 7279. [PubMed: 14576837]
Silva JM, Marran K, Parker JS, Silva J, Golding M, Schlabach MR, Elledge SJ, Hannon GJ, Chang K.
Profiling essential genes in human mammary cells by multiplex RNAi screening. Science
2008;319:617, 620. [PubMed: 18239125]
Sjoblom T, Jones S, Wood LD, Parsons DW, Lin J, Barber TD, Mandelker D, Leary RJ, Ptak J, Silliman
N, et al. The consensus coding sequences of human breast and colorectal cancers. Science
2006;314:268, 274. [PubMed: 16959974]
Solimini NL, Luo J, Elledge SJ. Non-oncogene addiction and the stress phenotype of cancer cells. Cell
2007;130:986, 988. [PubMed: 17889643]
Spira AI, Carducci MA. Differentiation therapy. Curr. Opin. Pharmacol 2003;3:338, 343. [PubMed:
12901941]
Stauffer SR. Small molecule inhibition of the Bcl-X(L)-BH3 protein-protein interaction: proof-ofconcept of an in vivo chemopotentiator ABT-737. Curr. Top. Med. Chem 2007;7:961, 965.
[PubMed: 17508927]
Stolina M, Sharma S, Lin Y, Dohadwala M, Gardner B, Luo J, Zhu L, Kronenberg M, Miller PW,
Portanova J, et al. Specific inhibition of cyclooxygenase 2 restores antitumor reactivity by altering
the balance of IL-10 and IL-12 synthesis. J. Immunol 2000;164:361, 370. [PubMed: 10605031]
Storchová Z, Breneman A, Cande J, Dunn J, Burbank K, O'Toole E, Pellman D. Genome-wide genetic
analysis of polyploidy in yeast. Nature 2006;443:541, 547. [PubMed: 17024086]
Strebhardt K, Ullrich A. Targeting polo-like kinase 1 for cancer therapy. Nat. Rev. Cancer 2006;6:321,
330. [PubMed: 16557283]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 June 30.

Luo et al.

Page 20

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Su Z, Dannull J, Yang BK, Dahm P, Coleman D, Yancey D, Sichi S, Niedzwiecki D, Boczkowski D,
Gilboa E, et al. Telomerase mRNA-transfected dendritic cells stimulate antigen-specific CD8+ and
CD4+ T cell responses in patients with metastatic prostate cancer. J. Immunol 2005;174:3798, 3807.
[PubMed: 15749921]
Szatrowski TP, Nathan CF. Production of large amounts of hydrogen peroxide by human tumor cells.
Cancer Res 1991;51:794, 798. [PubMed: 1846317]
Torres EM, Sokolsky T, Tucker CM, Chan LY, Boselli M, Dunham MJ, Amon A. Effects of aneuploidy
on cellular physiology and cell division in haploid yeast. Science 2007;317:916, 924. [PubMed:
17702937]
Torres EM, Williams BR, Amon A. Aneuploidy: cells losing their balance. Genetics 2008;179:737, 746.
[PubMed: 18558649]
Tsafrir D, Bacolod M, Selvanayagam Z, Tsafrir I, Shia J, Zeng Z, Liu H, Krier C, Stengel RF, Barany F,
et al. Relationship of gene expression and chromosomal abnormalities in colorectal cancer. Cancer
Res 2006;66:2129, 2137. [PubMed: 16489013]
Vander Heiden MG, Plas DR, Rathmell JC, Fox CJ, Harris MH, Thompson CB. Growth factors can
influence cell growth and survival through effects on glucose metabolism. Mol. Cell. Biol
2001;21:5899, 5912. [PubMed: 11486029]
Vassilev LT. MDM2 inhibitors for cancer therapy. Trends Mol. Med 2007;13:23, 31. [PubMed:
17126603]
Ventura A, Kirsch DG, McLaughlin ME, Tuveson DA, Grimm J, Lintault L, Newman J, Reczek EE,
Weissleder R, Jacks T. Restoration of p53 function leads to tumour regression in vivo. Nature
2007;445:661, 665. [PubMed: 17251932]
Verdine GL, Walensky LD. The challenge of drugging undrug-gable targets in cancer: lessons learned
from targeting BCL-2 family members. Clin. Cancer Res 2007;13:7264, 7270. [PubMed:
18094406]
Warburg O. On the origin of cancer cells. Science 1956;123:309, 314. [PubMed: 13298683]
Weaver BA, Cleveland DW. Decoding the links between mitosis, cancer, and chemotherapy: The mitotic
checkpoint, adaptation, and cell death. Cancer Cell 2005;8:7, 12. [PubMed: 16023594]
Weinstein IB. Cancer. Addiction to oncogenes-the Achilles heal of cancer. Science 2002;297:63, 64.
[PubMed: 12098689]
Weinstein IB, Joe A. Oncogene addiction. Cancer Res 2008;68:3077, 3080. [PubMed: 18451130]
Wells JA, McClendon CL. Reaching for high-hanging fruit in drug discovery at protein-protein interfaces.
Nature 2007;450:1001, 1009. [PubMed: 18075579]
Whitesell L, Lindquist SL. HSP90 and the chaperoning of cancer. Nat. Rev. Cancer 2005;5:761, 772.
[PubMed: 16175177]
Williams BR, Prabhu VR, Hunter KE, Glazier CM, Whittaker CA, Housman DE, Amon A. Aneuploidy
affects proliferation and spontaneous immortalization in mammalian cells. Science 2008;322:703,
709. [PubMed: 18974345]
Windle B, Draper BW, Yin YX, O'Gorman S, Wahl GM. A central role for chromosome breakage in
gene amplification, deletion formation, and amplicon integration. Genes Dev 1991;5:160, 174.
[PubMed: 1995414]
Wood LD, Parsons DW, Jones S, Lin J, Sjoblom T, Leary RJ, Shen D, Boca SM, Barber T, Ptak J, et al.
The genomic landscapes of human breast and colorectal cancers. Science 2007;318:1108, 1113.
[PubMed: 17932254]
Xue W, Zender L, Miething C, Dickins RA, Hernando E, Krizhanovsky V, Cordon-Cardo C, Lowe SW.
Senescence and tumour clearance is triggered by p53 restoration in murine liver carcinomas. Nature
2007;445:656, 660. [PubMed: 17251933]
Yang FC, Ingram DA, Chen S, Zhu Y, Yuan J, Li X, Yang X, Knowles S, Horn W, Li Y, et al. Nf1dependent tumors require a microenvironment containing Nf1+/−- and c-kit-dependent bone
marrow. Cell 2008;135:437, 448. [PubMed: 18984156]
Zou W. Immunosuppressive networks in the tumour environment and their therapeutic relevance. Nat.
Rev. Cancer 2005;5:263, 274. [PubMed: 15776005]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 June 30.

Luo et al.

Page 21

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Figure 1. The Hallmarks of Cancer

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In addition to the six hallmarks originally proposed by Hanahan and Weinberg (top half, white
symbols) and evasion of immune surveillance proposed by Kroemer and Pouyssegur, we
propose a set of additional hallmarks that depict the stress phenotypes of cancer cells (lower
half, colored symbols). These include metabolic stress, proteotoxic stress, mitotic stress,
oxidative stress, and DNA damage stress. Functional interplays among these hallmarks
promote the tumorigenic state and suppress oncogenic stress. For example, the utilization of
glycolysis allows tumor cells to adapt to hypoxia and acidify its microenvironment to evade
immune surveillance. Increased mitotic stress promotes aneuploidy, which leads to proteotoxic
stress that requires compensation from the heat shock response pathway. Elevated levels of
reactive oxygen species result in increased levels of DNA damage that normally elicits
senescence or apoptosis but is overcome by tumor cells.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 June 30.

Luo et al.

Page 22

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 2. Examples of Non-oncogene Addictions in Cancer Cells

The tumorigenic state results in a variety of alterations (shown on top), which are related to
the hallmarks described in Figure 1. These alterations give rise to a number of potentially
deleterious circumstances or vulnerabilities (detailed in the bottom half) that could be lethal
to the tumor cells if left unchecked. The existence of stress support pathways (shown in red)
help suppress this lethality. Many of these pathways are examples of non-oncogene addiction
(NOA), and therapeutics that interfere with their functions could display synthetic lethality
with the tumor genotype/phenotype.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 June 30.

Luo et al.

Page 23

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 3. The Combinatorial Filter of Orthogonal Cancer Therapies

A tumor consists of genetically distinct subpopulations of cancer cells (represented by the
different cell shapes), each with its own characteristic sensitivity profile to a given therapeutic
agent. Each cancer therapy can be viewed as a filter that removes a subpopulation of cancer
cells that are sensitive to this treatment while allowing other insensitive subpopulations to
escape. This escape occurs as a result of suppressor mutations that occur at a given frequency
(v) unique to each therapy and tumor type. By combining therapies with orthogonal modes of
action, a combinatorial filter can be set up to minimize the recurrence index (RI) of the cancer.
N represents the total number of cancer cells in the tumor. A combination of orthogonal
therapies that result in RI < 1 would greatly enhance the likelihood of preventing tumor
recurrence.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 June 30.

CDKs

BCL-XL, BCL-2

DNA

IDO

HSP90

OA

OA

NOA

NOA

NOA

Addiction

Hallmarks

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Target

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

ous Hallmarks of Cancer

Inhibit CDKs and induce cellcycle arrest

Bind to the BH3 pocket of BclXL and inhibit its antiapoptotic
function

Inhibits pyrimidine
metabolism, incorporation in to
DNA and RNA causes cellcycle arrest

Inhibits tryptophan catabolism
in tumor microenvironment to
allow T cell proliferation

A geldanamycin analog that
binds to the ATP-binding
pocket of HSP90 and inhibits
its catalytic activity

Potential mechanisms

Lee and
Sicinski, 2006

Stauffer, 2007

Longley et al.,
2003

Muller and
Scherle, 2006

Whitesell and
Lindquist,
2005

References

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Table 1
Luo et al.
Page 24

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 June 30.

PARP1

TGFβ 2

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Inhibits tumor autocrine and
paracrine signaling, reverses
immune suppression in the
tumor microenvironment
Inhibit base excision repair in
homologous recombination
repair-deficient cancer cells

NOA

Potential mechanisms

NOA

Hallmarks

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Addiction

Bryant et al.,
2005; Farmer
et al., 2005

Muller and
Scherle, 2006

References

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Target

Luo et al.
Page 25

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 June 30.

VEGF

NOA

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Hallmarks

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Addiction
Inhibits endothelial cell
recruitment and tumor
vasculature

Potential mechanisms
Folkman, 2007

References

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Target

Luo et al.
Page 26

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 June 30.

COX2

Proteasome

PI3K

NOA

NOA

OA

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Hallmarks

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Addiction

Reverses immune suppression
in the tumor
microenvironment, inhibits
tumor autocrine and paracrine
signaling

Inhibits the catalytic activity of
26S proteasome and induces
apoptosis

Causes cell-cycle arrest in
tumor cells and inhibits tumor
angiogenesis

Potential mechanisms

Muller and
Scherle, 2006

Roccaro et al.,
2006

Maira et al.,
2008

References

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Target

Luo et al.
Page 27

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 June 30.

DNA

NOA

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Hallmarks

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Addiction
Induces DNA crosslinks

Potential mechanisms
Siddik, 2003

References

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Target

Luo et al.
Page 28

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 June 30.

EGFR

OA

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Hallmarks

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Addiction
Inhibit EGFR tyrosine kinase
by competing with ATP
binding

Potential mechanisms
Sharma et al.,
2007

References

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Target

Luo et al.
Page 29

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 June 30.

hTERT

OA

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Hallmarks

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Addiction
Mimics telomere sequence and
inhibits the hTERT active site

Potential mechanisms
Dikmen et al.,
2005; Harley,
2008

References

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Target

Luo et al.
Page 30

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 June 30.

BCR-ABL, cKit, Src, PDGFR,
other TKs

hTERT

hTERT

OA

OA

OA

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Hallmarks

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Addiction

Tyrosine kinase inhibitor with
multiple targets

A short immunogenic peptide
from hTERT designed to elicit
T cell response against hTERT
+ tumor cells

Autologous dendritic cells
transduced to express an
hTERT-LAMP fusion protein
to elicit T cell response to
hTERT + tumor cells

Potential mechanisms

QuintasCardama et al.,
2007

Harley, 2008;
Nava-Parada
and Emens,
2007

Harley, 2008;
Su et al., 2005

References

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Target

Luo et al.
Page 31

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 June 30.

)

TRAIL receptor

NOA

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Hallmarks

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Addiction
Bind and activate TRAIL
receptors to induce apoptosis

Potential mechanisms
Carlo-Stella et
al., 2007

References

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Target

Luo et al.
Page 32

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 June 30.

DHFR

NOA

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Hallmarks

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Addiction
Inhibits thymidine
biosynthesis and induces
replicative stress

Potential mechanisms
McGuire, 2003

References

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Target

Luo et al.
Page 33

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 June 30.

HDM2

OA

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Hallmarks

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Addiction
Binds to HDM2 and inhibits
the binding and ubiquitination
of p53

Potential mechanisms
Vassilev, 2007

References

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Target

Luo et al.
Page 34

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 June 30.

BCL-2

OA

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Hallmarks

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Addiction
Inhibits the expression of
BCL-2 by blocking translation
of its mRNA

Potential mechanisms
Moreira et al.,
2006

References

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Target

Luo et al.
Page 35

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 June 30.

mTOR

Mutant p53

Chk1

Mitotic spindle

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NOA

Inhibit protein synthesis

Reactivate the function of
mutant p53

Prevents activation of the DNA
damage response, leading to
persistent DNA damage and
replication stress

NOA

TSGH

Interfere with dynamics and
stability of mitotic spindles,
activate mitotic checkpoints,
and induce chromosome missegregation

Potential mechanisms

NOA

Hallmarks

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Addiction

Guertin and
Sabatini, 2007

Selivanova and
Wiman, 2007

Ashwell and
Zabludoff,
2008

Weaver and
Cleveland,
2005

References

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Target

Luo et al.
Page 36

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 June 30.

RAR, RXR

OA

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Hallmarks

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Addiction
Induces cellular differentiation

Potential mechanisms
Spira and
Carducci, 2003

References

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Target

Luo et al.
Page 37

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 June 30.

BCL-XL, BCL-2

OA

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Hallmarks

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Addiction
Stapled BH3 domains that bind
to BCL-2 family members and
promote apoptosis

Potential mechanisms
Verdine and
Walensky,
2007

References

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Target

Luo et al.
Page 38

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 June 30.

Multiple kinases
(VEGFR, RAF,
c-Kit, PDGFR)

NOA

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Hallmarks

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Addiction
Inhibit endothelial cell
recruitment and tumor
vasculature

Potential mechanisms
Folkman, 2007

References

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Target

Luo et al.
Page 39

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 June 30.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 June 30.

Induce DNA breaks

Inhibits ERBB2 activation and
induces immune destruction of
cancer cells

OA

Potential mechanisms

NOA

rsity of their chemical structures, the hallmarks they attack, and their cellular targets. These agents are either investigational drugs or approved for selective oncology
ddiction; NOA, non-oncogene addiction; TSGH, tumor suppressor gene hypersensitivity. Symbols for each hallmark refer to those used in Figure 1.

ERBB2

Topo-isomerase I

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Hallmarks

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Addiction

Hynes and
Lane, 2005

Pommier, 2006

References

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Target

Luo et al.
Page 40

