Priority Report

An Imaging Biomarker of Early Treatment Response in
Prostate Cancer that Has Metastasized to the Bone
1,4

2

1

1,4

1

Kuei C. Lee, Sudha Sud, Charles R. Meyer, Bradford A. Moffat, Thomas L. Chenevert,
3,4
2
1,4
Alnawaz Rehemtulla, Kenneth J. Pienta, and Brian D. Ross
Departments of 1Radiology, 2Urologic Oncology, and 3Radiation Oncology, and 4Center for Molecular Imaging, University of Michigan
Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan

Abstract
Prostate cancer ranks as the most common lethal malignancy
diagnosed and the second leading cause of cancer mortality in
American men. Although high response rates are achieved
using androgen blockade as first-line therapy, most men
progress toward hormone-refractory prostate cancer. Systemic
chemotherapies have been shown to improve clinical outcome
in hormone refractory prostate cancer patients; however,
they are not curative. Due to the high incidence of bone
involvement in hormone-refractory prostate cancer, assessment of treatment response in metastatic prostate cancer to
the bone remains a major clinical need. In this current study,
we investigated the feasibility of using the functional diffusion
map ( fDM) as an imaging biomarker for assessing early
treatment response in a preclinical model of metastatic
prostate cancer. The fDM biomarker requires a pretreatment
and midtreatment magnetic resonance imaging diffusion
map, which is used to quantify spatially distinct therapeuticinduced changes in the Brownian motion (or diffusion) of
water within tumor tissue. Because water within tumor cells
is in a restricted environment relative to extracellular water,
loss of cell membrane integrity and cellular density during
therapy will be detected by fDM as an increase in diffusion.
Regions of significantly increased diffusion values were
detected early using fDM in docetaxel-treated versus untreated
metastatic prostate bone tumors at 7 days post treatment
initiation (P < 0.05), indicating loss of tumor cell viability.
Validation of fDM results was accomplished by histologic
analysis of excised tissue. Results from this study show the
capability of fDM as a biomarker for detection of bone
cancer treatment efficacy, thus warranting clinical evaluation.
[Cancer Res 2007;67(8):3524–8]

Introduction
According to the American Cancer Society, there were an
estimated 232,090 new cases of prostate cancer diagnosed in 2005
in the United States with f30,350 men succumbing to metastatic
disease. This ranks prostate cancer as the most common lethal
malignancy diagnosed in American men and the second leading
cause of male cancer mortality. Although first-line therapy with
androgen deprivation has a high response rate, most men

Conflict of interest: A. Rehemtulla, T.L. Chenevert, and B.D. Ross have a financial
interest in the use of the underlying technologies.
Requests for reprints: Brian D. Ross, Department of Radiology, University of
Michigan, 2071 BSRB, 109 Zina Pitcher Place, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-0946. Phone:
734-763-2099; Fax: 734-763-5447; E-mail: bdross@umich.edu.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-06-4236

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (8). April 15, 2007

inevitably become hormone refractory. Systemic chemotherapy
using docetaxel has been established as a standard of care for
hormone-refractory prostate cancer as phase III trials have shown
prolonged survival (1). However, there is no curative therapy,
further necessitating the need for development of novel therapies
to combat this disease. Impinging on the development of novel
therapeutics for metastatic prostate cancer is the inability to
readily assess tumor response. Although prostate-specific antigen
has been explored as a potential response measure, with a 50%
drop in serum levels indicating an antitumor effect, the use of
prostate-specific antigen end points as a reliable surrogate for
survival has not been prospectively validated in phase III clinical
trials. In metastatic prostate cancer, bone represents the most
common site of involvement in which f90% of advanced prostate
cancer patients are afflicted with bone lesions during the course of
disease (2). Moreover, currently available imaging strategies for
assessing treatment response of bony lesions are lacking, which
further confounds the treatment of metastatic prostate cancer.
In the treatment of metastatic prostate cancer, imaging
technologies have been solely used for detecting metastatic lesions
because no current imaging strategy is able to decisively assess
tumor response to therapy. This is highlighted by the fact that
current standards for assessing bone tumor response fail to meet
the needs of oncologists (3, 4). Moreover, the Response Evaluation
Criteria in Solid Tumors system explicitly deems bone disease to be
‘‘nonmeasureable.’’ Given the clear need for assessing treatment
response of bone tumors, the current study aims to determine the
feasibility of diffusion magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and
functional diffusion mapping ( fDM) to serve as reliable response
biomarkers.
In brief, diffusion MRI exploits the Brownian motion of water
within tissues as a biomarker that correlates with cellularity (5, 6).
Conceptually, effective treatment of a tumor, leading to disruption
of cellular integrity and subsequent loss in overall cellular density,
results in an increase in diffusion values detectable by diffusion
MRI (7). As such, diffusion MRI has received great interest within
the arena of oncology following an initial study showing that this
technique provided early quantitative assessment of tumor
response to therapy (8). More importantly, the recently described
fDM technique, which uses a unique method for interpreting
diffusion MRI data, has shown promise as an early biomarker for
treatment response in glioma patients. In these studies, the fDM
approach was able to provide early and reliable stratification of
patient populations into response categories defined by traditional
outcome measures (9, 10). However, the use of imaging for
assessing treatment response of solid bone lesions has remained
elusive in clinical care.
In this current study, fDM was evaluated as a biomarker for
assessing response of bone lesions using a preclinical model of
metastatic prostate cancer consisting of human PC-3 cells stably

3524

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Imaging Treatment Response of Metastatic Bone Cancer

expressing the firefly luciferase gene (PC3Luc). The use of in vivo
bioluminescence detection facilitated the identification of focal
metastatic lesions within the animal, which would subsequently be
entered into the magnetic resonance studies. In numerous studies,
the use of optical reporters, such as bioluminescence and
fluorescence, afforded the ability to monitor disease progression
and treatment response as the amount of optical signal is proportionate to the amount of disease within each animal (11–14).
As such, the luciferase reporter in this preclinical model provided
a dynamic indicator of treatment response throughout the study.
In addition, bone tumor response to docetaxel therapy was also
monitored using standard measurements of response such as
growth kinetics and histopathology, which were correlated with
diffusion MRI and fDM findings. Our results showed that fDM
analysis provided early indication of positive tumor response to
treatment, which preceded discernible differences in tumor growth
kinetics between treated and control groups. Moreover, histologic
assessment of excised bone lesions was spatially correlated with
fDM within regions showing positive response to therapy as well as
regions that did not respond. Taken together, these results show
the potential application of the fDM approach as a sensitive
biomarker for assessing early changes in tumor response of lesions
residing in the bone.

Materials and Methods
Cell lines. PC3 cells were transfected with a luciferase-encoding
pLazarus retroviral construct using Fugene 6 (Roche Applied Science,
Indianapolis, IN) per manufacturer’s instructions. Wild-type PC3 cells were
cultured in RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum whereas
transfected cells (PC3Luc) were maintained in selection media supplemented with 200 Ag/mL G418 (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA).
Mice. Male severe combined immunodeficient mice (Charles River
Laboratories, Wilmington, MA) were housed in specific pathogen-free
rooms at The University of Michigan Association for Assessment and
Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care International accredited facilities.
For implantation of PC3Luc cells, mice were anesthetized with 1.75%
isofluorane/air anesthesia and 2  105 cells in 100 AL of sterile Dulbecco’s
PBS lacking Ca2+ and Mg2+ were administered into the left ventricle of the
heart.
Bioluminescence detection. Approximately 4 to 5 weeks after PC3Luc
implantation, animals were screened using bioluminescence to select
subjects exhibiting metastatic disease. Subsequently, animals were divided
into untreated control (n = 11) and docetaxel-treated (n = 9; 40 mg/kg/wk
 3) groups. Bioluminescence studies were initiated before treatment for
baseline values and done throughout the experiment. For these studies,
mice were anesthetized with a 2% isofluorane/air mixture and given a single
i.p. dose of 150 mg/kg D-luciferin (Promega, Madison, WI) in normal saline.
Animals were then reanesthetized using 2% isofluorane/air mixture f8 min
post administration of D-luciferin and images were acquired f10 to 12 min
post administration of D-luciferin. For photon counting, a charge-coupled
device camera system (Xenogen, Alameda, CA) with a nose-cone isofluorane
delivery system and heated stage for maintaining body temperature was
used. Results were analyzed using Living Image software provided with the
Xenogen imaging system. Signal intensity was quantified as the sum of all
detected photon counts within a uniform region of interest manually placed
during data postprocessing.
MRI. A subset of control (n = 5) and docetaxel-treated (n = 7) animals
from the bioluminescence screening study, which had evidence of focal
metastases within the leg, were entered into the magnetic resonance
studies. For MRI examination, mice were anesthetized with a 2%
isofluorane/air mixture and maintained at 37jC, using a heated water
bed, inside a 9.4-T Varian magnetic resonance scanner (120-mm clear
horizontal bore; Varian, Palo Alto, CA) and a double-tuned volume
radiofrequency coil. A trace diffusion-weighted multislice spin echo

www.aacrjournals.org

sequence was used to acquire 15 slices with two different diffusion
weightings (b 1, 184 s/mm2; b 2, 1,106 s/mm2; slice thickness, 0.5 mm; image
matrix, 64  128; field of view, 15  15 mm; echo time, 40 ms; repetition
time, 3.5 s). The z-gradient first moment was zeroed to reduce the dominant
source of motion artifact as well as a 32-point navigator echo was
prepended to each phase-encode echo. The phase deviation of each
navigator echo relative to their mean was subtracted from the respective
image echoes before the phase-encode Fourier transform. Images were
acquired before treatment and subsequently twice per week. The low
b-factor images were essentially T 2 weighted to allow tumor volume
measurements. The tumor boundary was manually defined on each slice
and then integrated across slices to provide a volume estimate.
Image registration and fDM. An important part of fDM analysis is the
registration of posttreatment ADC maps to baseline pretreatment ADC
maps. Image registration was done using an automated linear affine
coregistration algorithm to maximize mutual information between the two
temporally distinct three-dimensional data sets (15). Following registration
and segmentation of voxels within the tumor both at baseline and on day 4,
fDM statistics were calculated (I-Response, Cedara Software, Mississauga,
Ontario Canada). First, ADC values of voxels posttherapy were plotted as a
function of baseline ADC values. These voxels were then further segmented
into three regions based on the upper and lower thresholds of ADC change.
Tumor voxels with an ADC increase above the upper threshold were
depicted as red, whereas voxels that had decreased below the lower
threshold were depicted as blue. All other voxels that did not change
significantly were depicted as green.
Histopathology. Approximately 2 weeks post treatment initiation,
selected animals from the control (n = 2) and docetaxel-treated (n = 2)
groups were sacrificed immediately after acquisition of magnetic resonance
data and tumor-bearing legs were harvested for staining. Tissue sections

Figure 1. Bioluminescence imaging of control and treated animals.
A, representative images from control (top ) and treated (bottom ) animals from
weeks 1, 2, 3, and 4. B, points, mean normalized photons from control (n = 11)
and treated (n = 9) groups on days 0, 7, 14, and 21 post treatment initiation;
bars, SE.

3525

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (8). April 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 2. fDM analysis of metastatic bone
lesions in the tibia of severe combined
immunodeficient mice. A, schematic
of a tumor residing in the bone with a
pseudo-fDM overlay generated from
coregistration of diffusion MRI data
pretreatment and posttreatment. After
treatment, regional changes of ADC are
plotted on the image to provide a visual
representation of tumor response. Green
voxels, areas of the lesion that did not
respond to therapy such that a significant
change in ADC was not detected. In the
event of a positive therapeutic response,
loss of cellularity within responsive regions
results in a significant increase in ADC
(>0.4  10 9 m2/s; red voxels ). B, fDM
analysis from a representative control
animal at days 7 and 11 post initiation
of PBS treatment. Top, fDMs from a
representative control animal are provided
for qualitative assessment of overall
changes in tumor ADC. Bottom, scatter
plots were also generated and the
percentage of increased ADC was
determined to be 1.2% and 2.5% on days 7
and 11, respectively. C, fDM analysis from
a representative treated animal at days 7,
11, 14, and 18 post initiation of docetaxel
therapy. Top, fDMs for the representative
treated animal. Bottom, scatter plots were
also generated and the percentage of
increased ADC was determined to be 4.0%
(day 7), 13.1% (day 11), 30.0% (day 14),
and 53.7% (day 18). D, points, mean
percentage of increased ADC from the
control (n = 5) and treated (n = 7) groups
as a function of time post initiation of
therapy; bars, SE. E, points, mean
normalized volumes from control (n = 5)
and treated (n = 7) groups as a function of
time; bars, SE.

(5-Am thickness) were stained with H&E using routine protocols. The
histopathology results were then compared with fDM using distinguishable
landmarks as well as dimensional analysis.

Results and Discussion
For the current study, a previously reported model of metastatic
prostate cancer with a high incidence of bone involvement was
used (12). As previously mentioned, this disease model was
generated through intracardiac injection of human PC3Luc tumor
cells stably expressing firefly luciferase into severe combined
immunodeficient mice. Approximately 4 weeks post injection of
PC3Luc cells, bioluminescence detection was used to monitor
differences in luciferase activity between control and treated
groups. Serial images from representative control and treated
animals are provided in Fig. 1A. For the control animal, luciferase
activity continued to markedly increase from week 1 to 4. However,
in the representative treated animal, despite an initial increase,
luciferase activity remained relatively unchanged especially when
comparing week 4 with week 1. The mean photon counts from

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (8). April 15, 2007

control (n = 11) and treated (n = 9) groups were calculated and
plotted in Fig. 1B showing a continuous signal increase in control
animals, whereas docetaxel-treated animals remained stable
throughout the experiment. These results indicated that docetaxel
therapy had an effect in stunting disease progression as compared
with controls.
Animals that presented metastatic lesions in the leg region,
based on bioluminescence detection, were entered into the
magnetic resonance studies. To better illustrate the fDM approach,
a representation of a bone lesion undergoing therapy is provided in
Fig. 2A. During successful therapy, the loss of tumor cell viability
(density) occurring regionally within the tumor mass can be
spatially resolved using the fDM approach. These areas can be
detected as an increased region of water mobility, and fDM displays
these regions of cell loss as red whereas regions not significantly
affected by the treatment are displayed as green (Fig. 2A). In the
current study, MRI examinations were accomplished twice per
week to quantify tumor volume and generate fDM data. In Fig. 2B
(top), an fDM from a representative control animal was provided

3526

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Imaging Treatment Response of Metastatic Bone Cancer

for qualitative assessment of overall changes in tumor ADC.
Corresponding scatter plots (Fig. 2B, bottom) were also generated
and the percentage of increased ADC was determined to be 1.2%
and 2.5% on days 7 and 11, respectively. fDM analysis from a
representative treated animal at day 7, 11, 14, and 18 postinitiation of docetaxel therapy was also done as shown in Fig. 2C.
fDMs (Fig. 2C, top) for the representative treated animal revealed
an increase in regions of red voxels over time, and corresponding
scatter plots (Fig. 2C, bottom) determined the regions of increased
ADC to be 4.0% (day 7), 13.1% (day 11), 30.0% (day 14), and 53.7%
(day 18). Mean changes in tumor diffusion, as determined by fDM,
from control (n = 5) and treated (n = 7) groups were plotted in
Fig. 2D. Control animals revealed insignificant change in diffusion
values whereas treated animals revealed progressively increasing
fDM diffusion changes (red regions) over the 3-week treatment
period. A statistically significant difference in fDM values between
control and treated animals was achieved as early as 7 days post
treatment (P < 0.05; Fig. 2D). MRI determination of tumor
volumes revealed continued growth of control tumors throughout
the experiment whereas treated tumors did not (Fig. 2E), which
correlates with our fDM findings and indicates that docetaxel
therapy was efficacious. Moreover, differences in tumor volumes
between the two groups reached significance at day 11 post
treatment initiation (P < 0.05), much later than was observed by
fDM, suggesting that fDM could serve as an early biomarker for
treatment response.
Validation of the fDM findings was accomplished through
spatially correlating fDM with H&E-stained histologic sections
from control (Fig. 3A) and treated (Fig. 3B) tumors excised 14 days
following treatment initiation (16). For the control tumor, fDM data
revealed minimal changes in tumor diffusion values, which
corresponded to histologic observations of a highly dense and
cellular morphology (Fig. 3A). A macroscopic cross-sectional view
of the leg from a treated animal (Fig. 3B) showed a much more
heterogeneous morphology in which regions of high and low
cellularity were apparent throughout the tumor mass. The fDM
image corresponding to the proximal region of the lesion with
reduced cellularity showed (Fig. 3C, bottom left) that a significant
portion of the tumor mass, as depicted by the red voxels,
responded to therapy. In contrast, the fDM image corresponding
to the distal (Fig. 3C, bottom right) region showed a lack of
significant treatment response consistent with histologic findings.
Microscopic images (Fig. 3C, top left) from a region corresponding
to an area of red voxels revealed a high degree of cellular
disintegration. For comparison, a microscopic image from a region
of green voxels in the distal fDM image (Fig. 3C, top right) revealed
a relatively dense and highly cellular tumor region. Due to the lack
of a nonresponsive tumor to serve as a negative control, the
possibility exists that the observed fDM changes could be due to
secondary effects of docetaxel therapy rather than a distinct
antitumor effect. However, our previous results have clearly and
reliably shown that a drastic increase in tumor water diffusion
values is directly correlated with an underlying decrease in cellular
density resulting from a positive therapeutic response (16, 17).
Moreover, previous studies have also shown that diffusion MRI was
able to ascertain the loss of antitumor effect and emergence of
drug resistance when resistant tumors exhibited decreased
diffusion change on further treatment with an initially effective
therapy (18, 19). As such, the observed fDM changes in this prostate
cancer model seem to be consistent with the anticipated antitumor
effects of docetaxel therapy, which correlated both temporally and

www.aacrjournals.org

spatially with the histopathologic findings. Taken together, these
histologic and diffusion findings show that the fDM imaging
biomarker is capable of detecting spatially distinct changes in
tumor cellularity in response to therapeutic intervention.
Results of this study highlight the sensitivity and the quantitative
aspects of the fDM approach as an imaging biomarker, as well as
its ability to provide high spatial and temporal resolution for
assessment of therapeutic response. However, metastatic hormone
refractory prostate cancer commonly presents with diffuse skeletal
involvement (multiple sites of bone metastases). In this current

Figure 3. Standard measures of treatment response. A, top, a representative
bone lesion 14 d post injection of PBS was immediately extracted after diffusion
MRI acquisition for histologic analysis by H&E staining. Bottom, comparative
analysis of fDM and histology revealed that the green region corresponded to an
area of high cellularity and density. B, the fDM image (bottom left) from the
proximal region of the tumor suggests that a region of the lesion responded to
therapy, which correlated with the corresponding H&E-stained region (top left ),
revealing low cellular density. fDM analysis of the distal tumor region (bottom
right ) suggests a lack of treatment response as little change in ADC was
detected. Comparative analysis of the fDM image and corresponding
H&E-stained section (top right ) reveals a relatively dense cellular morphology.
C, H&E staining of the femur section taken 14 d post treatment initiation revealed
a bone lesion heterogeneous in density with the proximal region appearing to
be less dense as compared with the distal region.

3527

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (8). April 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

study, a single lesion was monitored for evaluating the fDM
approach. Future efforts evaluating the use of whole body diffusion
MRI imaging to follow multiple metastatic lesions over time are
warranted (20).
In summary, this study provides the foundation to develop an
imaging strategy that has both preclinical and clinical applications.
The use of the fDM approach could greatly enhance the preclinical
development of novel therapies by allowing for rapid and
quantitative noninvasive assessment of drug efficacy in vivo. More
importantly, the clinical translation of this technique could greatly
affect treatment planning in which early detection of an ineffective

References
1. Petrylak DP, Tangen CM, Hussain MH, et al. Docetaxel
and estramustine compared with mitoxantrone and
prednisone for advanced refractory prostate cancer. N
Engl J Med 2004;351:1513–20.
2. Bubendorf L, Schopfer A, Wagner U, et al. Metastatic
patterns of prostate cancer: an autopsy study of 1,589
patients. Hum Pathol 2000;31:578–83.
3. Therasse P, Arbuck SG, Eisenhauer EA, et al. New
guidelines to evaluate the response to treatment in solid
tumors. European Organization for Research and
Treatment of Cancer, National Cancer Institute of the
United States, National Cancer Institute of Canada.
J Natl Cancer Inst 2000;92:205–16.
4. Hamaoka T, Madewell JE, Podoloff DA, Hortobagyi GN,
Ueno NT. Bone imaging in metastatic breast cancer.
J Clin Oncol 2004;22:2942–53.
5. Lyng H, Haraldseth O, Rofstad EK. Measurement of
cell density and necrotic fraction in human melanoma
xenografts by diffusion weighted magnetic resonance
imaging. Magn Reson Med 2000;43:828–36.
6. Sugahara T, Korogi Y, Kochi M, et al. Usefulness of
diffusion-weighted MRI with echo-planar technique in
the evaluation of cellularity in gliomas. J Magn Reson
Imaging 1999;9:53–60.
7. Chenevert TL, Stegman LD, Taylor JM, et al. Diffusion
magnetic resonance imaging: an early surrogate marker

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (8). April 15, 2007

therapy would provide an opportunity to switch to an alternative
therapy in a timelier manner thereby providing for the prospect of
individualized patient care.

Acknowledgments
Received 11/17/2006; revised 2/7/2007; accepted 3/1/2007.
Grant support: NIH grants P01CA85878, P50CA93990, P50 CA69568, and
R24CA83099.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.

of therapeutic efficacy in brain tumors. J Natl Cancer
Inst 2000;92:2029–36.
8. Ross BD, Chenevert TL, Kim B, Ben-Yoseph O.
Magnetic resonance imaging and spectroscopy: application to experimental neuro-oncology. Q Magn Reson
Biol Med 1994;1:89–106.
9. Hamstra DA, Chenevert TL, Moffat BA, et al.
Evaluation of the functional diffusion map as an early
biomarker of time-to-progression and overall survival in
high-grade glioma. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2005;102:
16759–64.
10. Moffat BA, Chenevert TL, Lawrence TS, et al.
Functional diffusion map: a noninvasive MRI biomarker
for early stratification of clinical brain tumor response.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2005;102:5524–9.
11. Burton DW, Geller J, Yang M, et al. Monitoring of
skeletal progression of prostate cancer by GFP
imaging, X-ray, and serum OPG and PTHrP. Prostate
2005;62:275–81.
12. Kalikin LM, Schneider A, Thakur MA, et al. In vivo
visualization of metastatic prostate cancer and quantitation of disease progression in immunocompromised
mice. Cancer Biol Ther 2003;2:656–60.
13. Yang M, Burton DW, Geller J, et al. The bisphosphonate olpadronate inhibits skeletal prostate cancer
progression in a green fluorescent protein nude mouse
model. Clin Cancer Res 2006;12:2602–6.

3528

14. Yang M, Jiang P, Sun FX, et al. A fluorescent
orthotopic bone metastasis model of human prostate
cancer. Cancer Res 1999;59:781–6.
15. Meyer CR, Boes JL, Kim B, et al. Demonstration of
accuracy and clinical versatility of mutual information
for automatic multimodality image fusion using affine
and thin-plate spline warped geometric deformations.
Med Image Anal 1997;1:195–206.
16. Moffat BA, Chenevert TL, Meyer CR, et al. The
functional diffusion map: an imaging biomarker for the
early prediction of cancer treatment outcome. Neoplasia
2006;8:259–67.
17. Lee KC, Moffat BA, Schott AF, et al. Prospective early
response imaging biomarker for neoadjuvant breast
cancer chemotherapy. Clin Cancer Res 2007;13:443–50.
18. Lee KC, Hall DE, Hoff BA, et al. Dynamic imaging of
emerging resistance during cancer therapy. Cancer Res
2006;66:4687–92.
19. Schepkin VD, Lee KC, Kuszpit K, et al. Proton and
sodium MRI assessment of emerging tumor chemotherapeutic resistance. NMR Biomed 2006;19:1035–42.
20. Takahara T, Imai Y, Yamashita T, Yasuda S, Nasu S,
Van Cauteren M. Diffusion weighted whole body
imaging with background body signal suppression
(DWIBS): technical improvement using free breathing,
STIR and high resolution 3D display. Radiat Med 2004;
22:275–82.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

An Imaging Biomarker of Early Treatment Response in
Prostate Cancer that Has Metastasized to the Bone
Kuei C. Lee, Sudha Sud, Charles R. Meyer, et al.
Cancer Res 2007;67:3524-3528.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/8/3524

This article cites 20 articles, 7 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/8/3524.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 4 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/8/3524.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

