679

Endocrine and Targeted Manipulation of Breast Cancer:
Proceedings of the Sixth Cambridge Conference
Supplement to Cancer

Preclinical Modeling of Endocrine Response
and Resistance
Focus on Aromatase Inhibitors
Luciana F. Macedo, PharmD, PhD
Gauri Sabnis, PharmD, PhD
Angela Brodie, PhD

The authors developed a breast cancer intratumoral aromatase model system to

Department of Pharmacology and Experimental
Therapeutics, University of Maryland School of
Medicine, and the Greenebaum Cancer Center,
Baltimore, Maryland.

current study, the mechanisms of resistance to letrozole during the course of

compare the antitumor efficacy of several aromatase inhibitors (AIs) and antiestrogens (AEs). Although the AI letrozole caused sustained growth inhibition,
tumors eventually began to grow, even when treatment was maintained. For the
treatment were investigated. Estrogen receptor a (ER-a) levels decreased below
control levels in letrozole-resistant tumors. The decrease was simultaneous to an
increase in phosphorylation of ER-a and an unaltered expression of progesterone
receptor (PgR). Expression levels of HER-2, activated (phosphorylated) SHC-adaptor protein (p-Shc), growth factor receptor-bound protein 2 (Grb-2), p-Raf, phosphorylated mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 1/2 (p-Mekl/2), and
phosphorylated mitogen-activated protein kinase (p-MAPK) were increased.
When cells isolated from letrozole-resistant tumors (LTLTCa cells) were treated
with inhibitors of the HER-2 signaling pathway, ER-a expression and estradiol-stimulated transactivation was restored. The HER-2 blocker trastuzumab also
restored the sensitivity of LTLTCa cells to AIs and AEs. These findings suggested
that there is crosstalk between ER and HER-2 signaling. To prevent activation of
the HER-2 pathway and resistance to AIs, mice were treated with a combination

Supported by National Institutes of Health Grant
CA-62483.

of AIs and the ER down-regulator fulvestrant. There was no increase in HER-2 or
p-MAPK expression, and tumor growth was inhibited significantly. When trastuzumab was added to unresponsive tumors under letrozole treatment, it significantly inhibited tumors growth compared with switching to trastuzumab alone.

Dr. Brodie owns stock in Merck, Pfizer, Wyeth,
and Johnson & Johnson; has received honorarium from Pfizer and AstraZeneca; and has
received research funding from AstraZeneca.

However, the trastuzumab plus letrozole combination was more effective than

Presented at Endocrine and Targeted Manipulation of Breast Cancer: Proceedings of the Sixth
Cambridge Conference, Cambridge, Massachusetts, April 30–May 1, 2007.

 2007 American Cancer Society.

Address for reprints: Angela Brodie, PhD, Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, University of Maryland School of
Medicine, Health Science Facilities, Room 580,
685 West Baltimore Street, Baltimore, MD
21201; Fax: (410) 706-0032; E-mail: abrodie@
umaryland.edu
Received July 30, 2007; revision received
September 25, 2007; accepted October 2, 2007.

ª 2007 American Cancer Society

letrozole alone only in refractory breast tumors. These results suggested that
blocking both ER and HER-2 signaling may delay the development of resistance
to AIs in patients with recurrent breast cancer. Cancer 2008;112(3 suppl)679–88.

KEYWORDS: aromatase, breast cancer, xenografts, HER-2.

T

he majority of patients with breast cancer are postmenopausal
women who have estrogen receptor (ER)-positive tumors.
Although circulating estrogen levels are reduced greatly after menopause, concentrations in breast tissue remain similar to those of
premenopausal women.1 It has been observed that approximately
66% of breast carcinomas contain aromatase (the rate-limiting
enzyme responsible for estrogen biosynthesis), and the estrogen
synthesized in situ has a role in stimulating the tumor.2,3 The well-

DOI 10.1002/cncr.23191
Published online 10 December 2007 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

680

CANCER Supplement

February 1, 2008 / Volume 112 / Number 3

tolerated, systemic, antiendocrine therapies to block
the effects of estrogens significantly have improved
the treatment of patients with hormone-sensitive
breast cancer. Two classes of agents currently are
available. The antiestrogen (AE) tamoxifen competes
with estrogen for the ER and prevents the transcription of estrogen-regulated genes, such as progesterone receptor (PgR); and aromatase inhibitors (AIs),
such as anastrozole, letrozole, and exemestane, block
the conversion of androgen precursors into estrogens. Unlike tamoxifen, AIs do not have estrogenic
activity, which may account for their clinical advantage. To compare the effectiveness of AIs and AEs
and to determine the best strategy for their optimal

use, we used a mouse model with tumors of human
ER-positive cancer cells stably transfected with the
aromatase gene (MCF-7Ca or Ac1 cells).4–8 The cells
synthesize estrogens, which stimulates the proliferation and development of tumors in ovariectomized,
immunosuppressed mice. The tumors are responsive
to the antiproliferative effects of both AEs and
AIs.4,7,8 This model simulates the postmenopausal
breast cancer patient, because the source of estrogen
after menopause is from nonovarian tissue (including
the breast and breast cancers) and is not under regulation by gonadotropins.
The results obtained from our intratumoral
model9,10 predicted the findings of several clinical
studies.11,12 Although recent results from clinical
trials indicated that AIs were more effective than tamoxifen, tumors in some patients inevitably developed resistance to the treatment. We have explored
the mechanisms involved in cells and tumors from
MCF-7Ca tumors in mice that no longer were responsive to treatment with the AI letrozole. In the
current study, our objectives were to investigate the
inhibition of signaling pathways associated with resistance and to restore sensitivity to letrozole and
other hormone therapy.

Effect of Long-term Letrozole Treatment on
Tumor Growth
Over the last decade, AIs have produced a significant
improvement in the treatment of breast cancer.
Nevertheless, some patients initially are unresponsive

FIGURE 1. The effects of long-term treatment with letrozole on the growth
of MCF-7Ca xenografts. (A) Animals were inoculated with MCF-7Ca cells at
2 sites on each flank and were supplemented with androstenedione (100 lg
per day) for the duration of the experiment.13 When the tumors reached
measurable size (approximately 300 mm3), animals were assigned to 3
groups (n 5 20 per group) and received daily subcutaneous injections with
either vehicle (control), or tamoxifen (100 lg per day), or letrozole (10 lg
per day). Tumor volumes were measured weekly and are expressed as the
percentage change relative to the initial tumor volume. Two mice per group
were killed, and tumors were collected for analysis at 4 weeks, 28 weeks,
and 56 weeks, as indicated on the graph. (B) The effect of letrozole treatment on HER-2, SHC-adaptor protein (Shc), activated (phosphorylated) Shc
(p-Shc), Shc, growth factor receptor-bound protein 2 (Grb-2), mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), p-MAPK, estrogen receptor a (ER-a), p-ER-a,
and progesterone receptor (PgR) expression in MCF-7Ca tumor xenografts.13
Letrozole-treated tumors were collected at 4 weeks (when they were
responding to letrozole) and at 28 weeks and 56 weeks (when they were
growing on letrozole), analyzed by Western immunoblotting, and compared
with vehicle-treated tumors that were collected at Week 4 (control). Tumors
were homogenized in lysis buffer as described previously.13

Models for Aromatase Inhibitor Studies/Macedo et al.

to therapy, whereas others develop resistance to
treatment. One of the greatest challenges to all cancer therapy is the ability of tumor cells to adapt and
survive treatment. The process eventually results in
disease progression. We have developed a xenograft
model to investigate how cells adapt and survive the
effects of treatment. Although letrozole caused
marked inhibition of tumor growth in this mouse
model for an extended period and reduced estrogen
levels by 90%, the tumors eventually acquired the
ability to grow in the presence of letrozole and were
refractory to second-line therapy with AEs.10 To
understand the mechanisms associated with resistance to letrozole treatment, we analyzed tumors that
were collected from mice at specific times during the
course of treatment (Fig. 1).13 Thus, tumors were collected at 4 weeks, when they were regressing in
response to treatment, and at 28 weeks, when
tumors had nearly doubled in size (Fig. 1A). Tumors
also were collected at 56 weeks, when their volumes
had grown 6 times bigger than their initial size despite continued letrozole treatment. Immunoblot
analysis revealed that the transition from a responsive state to an unresponsive state was associated
with the activation of growth factor receptor pathways, particularly the Her2/Raf/mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathway (Fig. 1B).13
We observed that the expression of HER-2 was
increased 2-fold in tumors that were treated with
letrozole (Fig. 1B), even by 4 weeks, when tumors
were regressing, and also at 28 weeks and 56 weeks,
when tumors were growing on letrozole treatment
(Fig. 1A). The increase of HER-2 expression was followed by a simultaneous increase in activated (phosphorylated) SHC-adaptor protein (Shc) activation (pShc) (Fig. 1B). The expression levels of growth factor
receptor-bound protein (Grb-2) and p-MAPK also
were increased 6-fold (Fig. 1B).13 A cell line (named
LTLTCa) was developed from the letrozole-resistant
tumors after 56 weeks of treatment (Fig. 1A).13 The
LTLTCa cells also demonstrated up-regulation of
HER-2, Grb-2, p-Shc, p-Raf, p-MAPK, and p-MAPK
kinase 1/2 (p-MEK1/2) (Fig. 2A). Downstream kinases that are targets for MAPK, such as p90 ribosomal S6 kinase (p90RSK) and the ETS-domaincontaining protein (Elk), also were activated by phosphorylation (Fig. 2A). It was reported previously that
MAPK can phosphorylate ER directly or indirectly
through its downstream targets Elk-1 and p90RSK,
thereby stimulating the transcription of genes
involved in growth regulation and tumor progression.14–17 In fact, when tumors became insensitive to
letrozole and were growing actively, ER-a expression
was decreased below control levels (Fig. 1B). Thus,

681

FIGURE 2. Profile of protein expression on cells isolated from letrozole-resistant tumors (LTLTCa cells, right column) compared with MCF-7Ca cells (left
column). (A) Expression of HER-2, activated (phosphorylated) SHC-adaptor protein (p-Shc), growth factor receptor-bound protein 2 (Grb-2), phosphorylated
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) kinase 1/2 (p-MEK1/2), p90 ribosomal
S6 kinase (p90RSK), p-p90RSK, phosphorylated ETS-domain-containing protein
(p-Elk), p-MAPK, MAPK, and progesterone receptor (PgR) in MCF-7Ca and
LTLTCa cells. Cell lysates were prepared and used for Western blot analysis as
described previously.13 (B) Effect of 5 lM of the MAPK inhibitor PD98059 in
increasing estrogen receptor a (ERa) expression in LTLTCa cells compared
with MCF-7Ca cells. LTLTCa cells were transferred into steroid-free medium
for 3 days before plating. The next day, cells were washed with Dulbecco
phosphate-buffered saline and treated with steroid-free medium containing
androstenedione (25 nM) and the indicated concentration of PD98059. The
medium was changed every 3 days, and the cells were lysed 9 days later.
Cell lysates were prepared as described previously.13

ER levels were increased at 4 weeks of letrozole treatment (Fig. 1B); however, by 28 weeks, ER levels had
decreased below the level of controls, and they
declined further to even lower levels by 56 weeks.
Although the total amount of ER-a dropped, the
small amounts that remained demonstrated strong

682

CANCER Supplement

February 1, 2008 / Volume 112 / Number 3

phosphorylation, which was significantly superior to
the levels of phosphorylation observed in letrozoleresponsive tumors. Furthermore, the level of expression of the ER-regulated PgR during these 56 weeks
of treatment did not change even when the tumors
progressed from a responsive state to a refractory
state (Fig. 1B). We observed that, in vivo, the LTLTCa
cells also had decreased expression of ER-a (Fig. 2B)

and had similar levels of PgR compared with parental
MCF-7Ca cells (Fig. 2A). These results suggested that
the growth of letrozole-resistant tumors became independent of estrogen stimulation because of a
decrease in ER expression and also because of crosstalk between HER-2/Raf/MAPK and ER that ultimately caused the constitutive activation of ER by
phosphorylation.13 It was demonstrated previously
that the interaction between growth factor and ER-a
results in an increased, ER-related transactivation in
a ligand-independent manner.18 In our model, the
increase in the phosphorylation of the ER promoted
its transactivation, even in the absence of the ligand,
as indicated by the steady expression of the estrogen-regulated PgR (Figs. 1B, 2A).13 By using LTLTCa
cells, we observed that letrozole resistance was similar to resistance to many types of hormone treatments, such as anastrozole, exemestane, tamoxifen,
and fulvestrant (Fig. 3A,B).13,19 In addition, these
cells were unresponsive to estradiol (E2)19 (Fig. 3C).
E2 did not stimulate LTLTCa cells to grow and did
not increase their ER transcriptional activity (Fig.
4B).19 Because of the constitutive activation of the
ER, the LTLTCa cells became insensitive to the proliferative concentrations of E2 and to the reduction in
E2 levels caused by AIs. Thus, the cells had acquired

FIGURE 3. Restoration of hormone sensitive to cells isolated from letrozole-resistant tumors (LTLTCa cells) with trastuzumab (Herceptin). LTLTCa
cells were transferred to improved minimal essential medium without Phenol
Red before they were plated into 96-well plates (1000 cells per well) and
allowed to attach overnight. The next day, they were treated with the indicated agents for a total of 6 days. The cell viability was measured using the
3-(4,5-dimethiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl tetrazolium bromide assay as described
previously.24 (A) Effect of combined letrozole and trastuzumab in LTLTCa
cells. The combination of letrozole plus trastuzumab was significantly better
than single-drug treatment or control (P < .0001, 10212 M to 1029 M;
P < .05, 1028 M to 1025 M). Bars on the graph represent the mean 
standard error (SE). (B) Effect of trastuzumab combined with the antiestrogens (AEs) tamoxifen and fulvestrant and the aromatase inhibitors (AIs) exemestane and anastrozole in LTLTCa cells. The generalized linear model
method was used to estimate and assess differences between groups. Cell
viability was significantly lower in groups that received the combination of
trastuzumab plus an AI or an AE versus control (P < .0001), trastuzumab
alone (P < .0001), or endocrine agent alone (P < .0001). Bars on the graph
represent the mean  SE. ANOVA indicates analysis of variance. (C) The
effect of estradiol (E2) on the proliferation of MCF-7Ca and LTLTCa cells in
the presence or absence of trastuzumab (Herceptin) pretreatment. When pretreated with Herceptin (100 lg/mL), LTLTCa cells exhibited significant stimulation of proliferation in response to E2 at concentrations from 10212 M to
1027 M compared with E2 alone (P < .0001). Bars on the graph represent
the mean  SE.

Models for Aromatase Inhibitor Studies/Macedo et al.

683

the ability to grow independent of estrogen stimulation.

FIGURE 4. Effect of trastuzumab treatment on protein expression and
estrogen receptor a (ER-a) transactivation. Cells isolated from letrozole-resistant tumors (LTLTCa cells) were transferred to improved minimal essential
medium without Phenol Red 24 hours before the beginning of the experiment. The next day, they were treated with the indicated agents for the specified amount of time. The cell lysates were generated as described
previously.24. (A) The effect of trastuzumab treatment at various time points
on protein expression of phosphorylated ETS-domain-containing protein 1 (pElk-1), phosphorylated mitogen-activated protein kinase (p-MAPK), phosphorylated p90 ribosomal S6 kinase (p-p90RSK), and ER-a in LTLTCa cells. The
expression of proteins was examined by using Western immunoblot analysis.
The blot shows the p-Elk-1 level at 60 kilodaltons (kD), the p-p90RSK level
at 90 kD, the p-MAPK from 42 kD to 44 kD, and the ER-a level at 66 kD.
The blots show results from a single, representative experiment of 3 independent experiments. (B) The effect of trastuzumab treatment on transactivation of ERa in LTLTCa cells. The ERa transactivation assay was performed to
measure transcriptional activation of ERa in LTLTCa cells. An enzyme-linked
immunoadsorbent assay-based ER transactivation assay was performed
according to the manufacturer’s guidelines (Panomics, Fremont, Calif). Briefly,
the lysates of cells or tumors were generated as described above. Activated
ER-a from cellular extracts was allowed to bind to an ER consensus-binding
site (ER Probe) on a biotinylated oligonucleotide. Then, these oligonucleotides
were immobilized on a streptavidin-coated, 96-well plate. Next, the ER-a
that was bound to the oligonucleotide was detected by using an antibody
directed against ER-a. An additional horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody provided a colorimetric readout, which was quantified by a
spectrophotometer that read absorbance at 450 nanometers (nm). The treatment with trastuzumab increased ER-a activation in a time-dependent manner. Bars on the graph represent the mean  standard error.

Overcoming Letrozole Resistance With
Signal-transduction Inhibitors
Previous reports have indicated that tumors that over
express HER-2 are more likely to be ER-negative and
PgR-negative than tumors that do not show over
expression.20 We hypothesized that activation of
the HER-2 signaling pathway may cause the downregulation of ER expression and also the acquisition
of resistance to letrozole. We investigated whether
the inhibition of key proteins in the HER-2 pathway
would reverse the hormone-refractory condition and
cause the up-regulation of ER expression back to
normal levels. In fact, LTLTCa cells that were treated
with the clinically used HER-2 blocker trastuzumab
(Herceptin) or with the MAPK inhibitor PD98059
markedly increased the expression and/or transactivation of ER similar to levels in the parental MCF7Ca cells and much higher than the levels we
observed in untreated LTLTCa cells (Figs. 2B,
4A,B).13,19 The treatment of LTLTCa cells with trastuzumab also was very effective in restoring the antiproliferative effect of letrozole on LTLTCa cells (Fig.
3A).19 Trastuzumab at a dose of 100 lg/mL was
found to have a synergistic effect when combined
with letrozole. Trastuzumab reversed the resistance
of LTLTCa cells not only to letrozole but also to tamoxifen, exemestane, and anastrozole (Fig. 3B).19
The hormone insensitivity of LTLTCa cells is related
to the inability of E2 to promote ER transactivation
in LTLTCa cells (Fig. 4B).19 However, when LTLTCa
cells that expressed high levels of HER2 and initially
were unresponsive to E2 were pretreated with 100
lg/mL of herceptin, ER levels were restored, and the
LTLTCa cells became as sensitive as MCF-7Ca cells
(Fig. 3C). Trastuzumab at the same concentration
also restored the MCF-7Ca levels of p-Elk1, p-MAPK,
and p-p90RSK expression in LTLTCa cells (Fig. 4A).19
The blockade of HER-2 signaling with trastuzumab
in LTLTCa cells also increased the levels of ER-a
transcriptional activity under E2 stimulation to levels
equivalent to those observed in MCF-7Ca cells (Fig.
4B).19 These results indicate that HER-2 is a negative
regulator of ER-a and that blockade of the HER-2
signaling pathway restores ER-a expression and activation to normal levels observed before HER-2 upregulation. Furthermore, the results suggest that better control over tumor growth may be achieved by
blocking both growth factor receptor pathways, particularly HER-2, as well as ER-mediated signaling.
Several clinical trials have been initiated with tyrosine kinase inhibitors that will test the hypothesis

684

CANCER Supplement

February 1, 2008 / Volume 112 / Number 3

FIGURE 5. The effect of trastuzumab alone or in combination with letrozole on the growth of MCF-7Ca xenografts: The tumor xenografts of MCF7Ca cells were grown in mice as described previously.19 Trastuzumab (5 mg/
kg per week) did not inhibit the growth of MCF-7Ca tumors. The difference
in the exponential parameter governing the growth rate of control versus
trastuzumab treatment was 0.02 (standard error [SE], 0.14; 95% confidence
interval, from 20.25 to 0.3), which was not statistically significant
(P 5 .86). The difference in the exponential parameter governing the growth
rate of trastuzumab versus trastuzumab plus letrozole was 0.49 (P 5 .0001).
The difference in the exponential parameter governing the growth rate of
trastuzumab versus letrozole was 0.32 (P 5 .0009). The difference in the exponential parameter governing the rate of letrozole versus letrozole switched
to letrozole plus trastuzumab was 0.21 (SE, 0.08; P 5 .008). The difference
in the exponential parameter governing the tumor growth rate of letrozole
plus trastuzumab versus letrozole switched to letrozole plus trastuzumab
was 0.39 (SE, 0.09; P < .0001). The difference in the exponential parameter
governing the rate of letrozole switched to trastuzumab versus letrozole
switched to letrozole plus trastuzumab was 0.2 (SE, 0.08; P 5 .011) over
Weeks 15 through 28. When the results were compared through Week 29,
the difference in the exponential parameter governing the growth rate of
letrozole versus letrozole switched to trastuzumab was 0.005 (SE, 0.08;
P 5 .97). D4A indicates androstenedione.

that combining agents to inhibit estrogen signaling
and growth factor signaling will block crosstalk and
overcome resistance to therapy. We investigated this
hypothesis in a study in which MCF-7Ca xenografts
were grown in female, ovariectomized mice, as
shown in Figure 5. When tumors reached measurable size (approximately 300 mm3), mice were
grouped into 4 groups, 1) control (n 5 5), 2i) trastuzumab given at a dose of 5 mg/kg per week divided
into 2 doses (n 5 5), 3) letrozole given at a dose of
10 lg per day plus trastuzumab at a dose of 5 mg/
kg per week divided into 2 doses (n 5 5), and 4)
letrozole given at a dose of 10 lg per day (n 5 30)
(Fig. 5).19 When given with androstenedione, trastuzumab alone was not an effective treatment strategy

in reducing MCF-7Ca tumors. The growth rate of
control tumors (androstenedione at a dose of 100 lg
per day) did not differ statistically from the growth
rate of tumors in mice that were treated with trastuzumab over the first 7 weeks. In addition, trastuzumab treatment alone was significantly worse than
trastuzumab plus letrozole (P 5 .0001) and was
worse than letrozole alone (P 5 .0009). Our in vitro
studies with LTLTCa cells suggested that this was
caused by the up-regulation of intratumoral ER-a
expression, which would cause an increased
response to estrogens. The combination of letrozole
and trastuzumab was as effective as letrozole alone.
Nevertheless, tumors on letrozole treatment ultimately began to grow and had doubled in volume
by Week 15. At that time, the mice were subdivided
into 3 groups: 1) trastuzumab at a dose of 5 mg/kg
per week divided into 2 doses, 2) letrozole at a dose
of 10 lg per day plus trastuzumab at a dose of 5
mg/kg per week divided into 2 doses, and 3) letrozole at a dose of 10 lg per day. The tumors in the
mice that received combined trastuzumab plus
letrozole, however, responded better than tumors in
mice that received the same treatment from Week 0.
The growth rate of these tumors also was significantly smaller than the growth rate of tumors in the
mice that stayed on letrozole treatment. The combination of trastuzumab and letrozole was more effective in the long-term treatment of resistant tumors
than trastuzumab alone. We demonstrated that resistance to letrozole can be overcome by adding
trastuzumab to the treatment regime and that inhibition of the HER-2 pathway, along with the inhibition of estrogen synthesis, may prolong the
responsiveness of refractory breast tumors to endocrine therapies. These results also suggest that
switching letrozole-treated tumors to letrozole plus
trastuzumab is a better option than starting with
combined letrozole plus trastuzumab from the beginning. In other words, the benefits of a combination of letrozole and trastuzumab over letrozole
alone are achieved only when tumors have a refractory phenotype.

Combination and Sequential Treatment of AIs and AEs
In previous studies, we demonstrated that the combination of letrozole and the pure AE fulvestrant was
more effective than either treatment alone in delaying the development of resistance (Fig. 6A).21 Conversely, sequential treatment of letrozole-resistant
tumors with tamoxifen and fulvestrant did not produce any improvements.9 These findings may be
explained by our mechanistic studies, which indicated that the down-regulation and constitutive acti-

Models for Aromatase Inhibitor Studies/Macedo et al.

vation of ER in letrozole-resistant tumors make AEs
ineffective. Several reports have suggested that crosstalk between ER and HER-2 pathways may occur in
refractory breast cancer cells and cause resistance to
hormone therapy that may be restored by interrupting this crosstalk with an ER down-regulator, such as
fulvestrant.13,22,23 Analysis of tumors that received
letrozole and letrozole plus fulvestrant indicated
greater repression of HER-2 and p-MAPK expression
in tumors that were treated with the combination
therapy compared with tumors that were treated
with letrozole alone (Fig. 6B). We also investigated
therapeutic strategies to overcome resistance to anastrozole treatment, as shown in Figure 6C.8 The
growth of these tumors in mice was inhibited significantly by anastrozole treatment compared with the
growth in control tumors. Nevertheless, tumors
doubled in size after 8 weeks of treatment. Therefore,
we investigated whether combining anastrozole treatment with fulvestrant would prevent or delay the development of resistance compared with anastrozole
alone. The tumors that were treated with the combi-

685

nation of anastrozole and fulvestrant regressed
by 35% during 18 weeks of treatment, whereas anastrozole alone resulted in a > 8-fold increase in tumor size (Fig. 6C). Thus, the combination of the AI
anastrozole and fulvestrant was more effective in
maintaining suppression of tumor growth than
anastrozole alone, as indicated by the changes in tu-

FIGURE 6. The effect of aromatase inhibitors combined with the antiestrogen fulvestrant compared with aromatase inhibitor alone. (A) The effect of
letrozole (10 lg per day) and fulvestrant (1 mg per day) alone or in combination on the growth of MCF-7Ca breast tumor xenografts in female, ovariectomized, athymic, nude mice. The tumor xenografts of MCF-7Ca cells
were grown in the mice as described previously.15 When tumors reached
approximately 300 mm3, animals were divided into 4 groups and injected
subcutaneously daily with vehicle (control; n 5 6), fulvestrant (1 mg per
day; n 5 7), letrozole (10 lg per day; n 5 18), or letrozole (10 lg per day)
plus fulvestrant (1 mg per day; n 5 5). Tumor volumes were measured
weekly and are expressed as the percentage change in mean tumor volume
relative to the initial size at Week 0.15 (B) The effect on HER-2, mitogenactivated protein kinase (MAPK), and phosphorylated MAPK (p-MAPK) expression in MCF-7Ca tumor xenografts from the experiment described in A.
Tumors were collected at 29 weeks and analyzed by Western immunoblotting, as described previously.13 (C) The effect of anastrozole (200 lg per
day) and the combination of anastrozole and fulvestrant (1 mg per day) on
the growth of Ac1 breast tumor xenografts in female, ovariectomized, athymic, nude mice. Animals were inoculated with Ac1 cells6 at 1 site on each
flank and were supplemented with androstenedione (100 lg per day) for the
duration of the experiment, as described previously.7,8 When tumors reached
approximately 300 mm3, animals were divided into 3 groups and injected
subcutaneously daily with vehicle (control; n 5 5), anastrozole (200 lg per
day; n 5 8), or anastrozole (200 lg per day) plus fulvestrant (1 mg per day;
n 5 5). Tumor volumes were measured weekly and are expressed as the
percentage change in mean tumor volume relative to the initial size at Week
0. When the tumors in the anastrozole-treated group doubled their original
size, the mice were divided into 2 groups and injected subcutaneously daily
with anastrozole (200 lg per day; n 5 5) or anastrozole (200 lg per day)
plus fulvestrant (1 mg per day; n 5 3). Animals in the control group had
statistically significantly larger tumor volumes compared with all treated
groups (P < .06) at Week 8. Animals in the anastrozole-treated group had
statistically significant larger tumor volumes compared with the anastrozole
plus fulvestrant group (P 5 .01) at Week 18. The differences in tumor volume between the anastrozole and anastrozole to anastrozole plus fulvestrant
groups had marginal statistical significance (P 5 .2) at Week 18. At the specified time points, the animals were killed, and the tumors were excised,
cleaned, and weighed. The mean tumor weights (see inset bar graph) in the
control and anastrozole-treated groups were larger statistically than in the
anastrozole to anastrozole plus fulvestrant group (P < .01) and the anastrozole plus fulvestrant group (P < .001). Tumor weights in the anastrozole to
anastrozole plus fulvestrant group and in the anastrozole plus fulvestrant
group did not differ statistically.

686

CANCER Supplement

February 1, 2008 / Volume 112 / Number 3

mor growth and mean tumor weight (Fig. 6C). After
the tumors from anastrozole-treated mice had
doubled their initial size (Week 8), mice were
assigned to 2 groups. Both groups continued on
anastrozole treatment, but 1 group also received fulvestrant. The addition of fulvestrant reduced the
growth of tumors by 350%, and a significant reduction in tumor weight was observed compared with
the tumors in mice that were treated with anastrozole alone. The additive effect of the combination of
anastrozole or letrozole and fulvestrant suggests
that complete blockade of estrogen action by the
down-regulation of ER and the inhibition of estrogen synthesis has a greater effect on tumor growth
than either treatment strategy alone. The results
also suggest that the combination of an AI and the
ER down-regulator fulvestrant can delay and overcome the development of resistance to AIs.8,21
Because clinical trials in patients with advanced disease are challenging, important, valuable information will be gained from preclinical studies, such as
those described herein, which can guide the direction of the trials. Restoring sensitivity to AIs and
hormone therapy could achieve important gains in
treatment benefit and may delay the need for chemotherapy.

Conclusions
The transition of ER-positive breast tumors from a
responsive state to a letrozole-resistant state is associated with molecular mechanisms of adaptation
that involve the activation of growth factor receptor
pathways, particularly the Her2/Raf/MAPK signaling
pathway. The crosstalk between this pathway and ER
(HER-2 appears to be a negative regulator of ER-a)
caused its down-regulation and constitutive activation of ER by phosphorylation, leading to the transcription of genes that regulate tumor proliferation.
Inhibition of key proteins in the HER-2 pathway can
reverse this refractory phenotype. Furthermore, inhibition of the HER-2 pathway, along with aromatase
inhibition, may prolong the responsiveness of breast
tumors to endocrine therapies. However, the benefits
of this combination are achieved only when tumors
become resistant to AIs. Our results also indicate
that the addition of fulvestrant to an AI may be an
optimal second-line therapy for patients who have
tumors that progress on therapeutically effective
doses of letrozole or anastrozole. Although the studies are limited to AI-resistant tumors, they suggest
that the acquisition of resistance may be delayed in
patients with breast cancer by down-regulating ER

and preventing the crosstalk between HER-2 and ER
signaling.

OPEN DISCUSSION
The questions and discussion below follow from the
oral presentation given at the Sixth Cambridge Conference on Endocrine and Targeted Manipulation of
Breast Cancer and do not correspond directly to the
written article, which is a more general review.
Dr. Steven Come. So, does this study suggest
that crosstalk requires both the presence of the ER
and the ligand to recruit coactivators, because it
looks like either one alone is not sufficient to enable
that compensation?
Dr. Angela Brodie: Yes, I think it does, although
we did not address this specifically here.
Dr. Stephen Johnston. Clinically, trial design is
very relevant to the issue of whether you wait until
time-to-progression to go to a combined strategy or
try to prevent it from the outset. If this is right and,
in addition, we get negative results from some of the
trials of AIs versus AIs plus the targeting agent, then
you’ve got an explanation.
Dr. Brodie. Our theory is that combining drugs
at the point when cells become resistant is much
more effective than switching to a second drug,
because removing the AI releases inhibition of E
signaling.
Dr. Charles Coombes. It seems to me that, until
we design studies in metastatic breast cancer where
we can rebiopsy, or maybe use circulating tumor
cells, to see whether we’re mirroring what you’ve got
going on here, we’re all in the dark in terms of the
relevance to the patients.
Dr. Brodie: Yes, it is true that we cannot demonstrate the changes in the tumor without rebiopsy.
Dr. Paul Goss. It looks as though, if you don’t
give trastuzumab from the outset of endocrine treatment, the tumor prioritizes production of HER-2 as a
mechanism of endocrine resistance, and then you
could strike it with anti-HER-2 therapy when the tumor amplifies that pathway. If you block that particular mechanism from the outset, the tumor finds a
different way to do it.
Dr. William Miller: How consistent are these
treatments? Are they reproducible?
Dr. Brodie. These, of course, are means of the
group, so we pool the tumors and sample the lysate
for protein expression. It is a concern that we had a
long time ago, whether small tumors may be
responding differently from large, etc. Therefore, we
prefer pooling tumors.

Models for Aromatase Inhibitor Studies/Macedo et al.

Dr. Miller. But is there a possibility you might be
missing something? It may be that, when you mix together all the tumors, certain tumors might be resistant, and others are not. It would be interesting to
know.
Dr. Brodie. We’re tracking each tumor week by
week, and then we’re homogenizing them, etc. So,
we would know if 1 was resistant and the other was
growing. But this does not usually occur.
Dr. Coombes. What I’m trying to understand is
whether this is a single tumor or, within this tumor
model, there are certain tumors, which behave differently.
Dr. Brodie. Well, to some extent, yes. But it’s
only 1 cell line, MCF-7, so it’s only a model for
patients that are very hormone dependent. However,
the tumors are quite consistent in their behavior to
treatment.
Dr. Come. Angela has demonstrated that you
can see these pathway changes within a couple of
weeks; and Bill Miller is exposing patients preoperatively to drug and then rearraying them, so you may
actually have not only 2 populations-sensitive and
resistant-at the outset, but a third and fourth population, and so on, based on how they respond to the
exposure. I think we are showing that, even in short
exposures, these things are happening.
Dr. Goss. The clinical trial world has been trying
the experiments that you’re showing here in the animal model, and we should all be cautious about
interpreting the animal results; because, in patients,
there are probably multiple, simultaneous mechanisms going on at once.
Dr. Brodie. Yes, it could be. This is the best
model that we have available in the lab really, so it is
only representative of some patients. But, with the
earlier studies, the model has been predictive, in that
responses in the mouse were also seen in patients.
Dr. Johnston. What I’m really impressed with is
that keeping the AI on seems to be very important,
not only for Faslodex (fulvestrant) to be effective in
that model of resistance, but also for your signaling
drug to be more effective. That’s something that I
think hasn’t always been thought of in trial designs,
particularly at the time of resistance. Another thing
is that, if you block from the outset, you’re just giving
the tumor a chance to develop another mechanism.
Dr. James Ingle. If you look at the outcomes in
your model of tamoxifen versus letrozole, I don’t
think they’re similar to what has been shown in
Breast International Group trial 1–98. The advantage
for letrozole in your model seems to be substantially
better than tamoxifen. Have you done anything in
more of an adjuvant setting, where you inject the

687

cells, wait a short time, and, before anything shows
up, you start your therapies?
Dr. Brodie: No, the tumors are of measurable
size when we start treatment.
Dr. Ingle: Do you have any thoughts on the difference?
Dr. Brodie. The duration of response to letrozole
may not be quite as long as shown in Figure 1. Some
animals were taken out for sampling from the letrozole group. Statistical models can correct for that,
but it may appear in the figure to increase the
response time. However, the findings are consistent.
Tamoxifen is never as good as letrozole, even though
the dose of tamoxifen is higher.

REFERENCES
1.

van Landeghem AA, Poortman J, Nabuurs M, Thijssen JH.
Endogenous concentration and subcellular distribution of
estrogens in normal and malignant human breast tissue.
Cancer Res. 1985;45:2900–2906.
2. Silva MC, Rowlands MG, Dowsett M, et al. Intratumoral
aromatase as a prognostic factor in human breast carcinoma. Cancer Res. 1989;49:2588–2591.
3. Brodie A, Lu Q, Nakamura J. Aromatase in the normal
breast and breast cancer. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol.
1997;61:281–286.
4. Yue W, Zhou DJ, Chen S, Brodie AMH. A new nude mouse
model for postmenopausal breast cancer using MCF-7 cells
transfected with the human aromatase gene. Cancer Res.
1994;54:5092–5095.
5. Brodie AH, Jelovac D, Long B. The intratumoral aromatase
model: studies with aromatase inhibitors and antiestrogens. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2003;86:283–288.
6. Macedo LF, Guo Z, Tilghman SL, Sabnis GJ, Qiu Y, Brodie
A. Role of androgens on MCF-7 breast cancer cell growth
and on the inhibitory effect of letrozole. Cancer Res.
2006;66:7775–7782.
7. Sabnis G, Macedo L, Goloubeva O, Schayowitz A, Zhu Y,
Brodie A. Toremifene-atamestane; alone or in combination:
predictions from the preclinical intratumoral aromatase
model. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2007 2007 Sep 7; [Epub
ahead of print].
8. Macedo L, Sabnis G, Moreira TH, et al. Effects of combining the aromatase inhibitor anastrozole with fulvestrant in
the intratumoral aromatase model. In: American Association for Cancer Research Annual Meeting Proceedings; Los
Angeles, Calif, April 14–18. Philadelphia, Pa: AACR; 2007
Abstract 992. Available from URL: http://www.abstractsonline.
com/viewer/searchresults.asp Accessed June 15, 2007.
9. Long BJ, Jelovac D, Thiantanawat A, Brodie AM. The effect
of second-line antiestrogen therapy on breast tumor
growth after first-line treatment with the aromatase inhibitor letrozole: long-term studies using the intratumoral aromatase postmenopausal breast cancer model. Clin Cancer
Res. 2002;8:2378–2388.
10. Long BJ, Jelovac D, Handratta V, et al. Therapeutic strategies using the aromatase inhibitor letrozole and tamoxifen
in breast cancer model. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2004;96:456–
465.

688

CANCER Supplement

February 1, 2008 / Volume 112 / Number 3

11. Baum M, Buzdar AU, Cuzick J, et al. Anastrozole alone or
in combination with tamoxifen versus tamoxifen alone for
adjuvant treatment of postmenopausal women with early
breast cancer: first results of the ATAC randomized trial.
Lancet. 2002;59:2131–2139.
12. Coombes RC, Hall E, Gibson LJ. A randomized trial of exemestane after 2 to 3 years of tamoxifen therapy in postmenopausal women with primary breast cancer. N Engl J
Med. 2004;350:1081–1092.
13. Jelovac D, Sabnis G, Long BJ, Goloubeva OG, Brodie AMH.
Activation of MAPK in xenografts and cells during prolonged treatment with aromatase inhibitor letrozole. Cancer Res. 2005;65:5380–5389.
14. Kato S, Endoh H, Masuhiro Y, et al. Activation of
the estrogen receptor through phosphorylation by mitogen-activated protein kinase. Science. 1995;270:1491–
1494.
15. Joel PB, Traish AM, Lannigan DA. Estradiol-induced phosphorylation of serine 118 in the estrogen receptor is independent of p42/p44 mitogen-activated protein kinase.
J Biol Chem. 1998;273:13317–13323.
16. Santen RJ, Song RX, McPherson R, et al. The role of mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase in breast cancer. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2002;80:239–256.
17. Chen D, Washbrook E, Sarwar N. Phosphorylation of
human estrogen receptor alpha at serine 118 by 2 distinct
signal transduction pathways revealed by phosphorylationspecific antisera. Oncogene. 2002;21:4921–4931.

18. Levin ER. Bidirectional signaling between the estrogen receptor and the epidermal growth factor receptor. Mol
Endocrinol. 2003;17:309–317.
19. Sabnis G, Schayowitz A, Goloubeva O, Brodie A. Trastuzumab increases sensitivity of hormone dependent and hormone refractory breast cancer cells to endocrine agents.
In: American Association of Cancer Research 100th Annual
Meeting Proceedings. Los Angeles, CA, April 14–18, 2007.
Abstract 991.
20. Konecny G, Pauletti G, Pegram M, et al. Quantitative association between HER-2/neu and steroid hormone receptors
in hormone receptor-positive primary breast cancer. J Natl
Cancer Inst. 2003;95:142–153.
21. Jelovac D, Macedo L, Goloubeva OG, Handratta V, Brodie
AM. Additive antitumor effect of aromatase inhibitor letrozole and antiestrogen fulvestrant in a postmenopausal
breast cancer model. Cancer Res. 2005;65:5439–5444.
22. Nicholson RI, Gee JM. Oestrogen and growth factor crosstalk and endocrine insensitivity and acquired resistance in
breast cancer. Br J Cancer. 2000;82:501–513.
23. Yue W, Wang JP, Conaway M, Masamura S, Li S, Santen RJ.
Activation of the MAPK pathway enhances sensitivity of
MCF-7 breast cancer cells to the mitogenic effect of estradiol. Endocrinology. 2002;143:3221–3229.
24. Sabnis GJ, Jelovac D, Long B, Brodie A. The role of growth
factor receptor pathways in human breast cancer cells
adapted to long-term estrogen deprivation. Cancer Res.
2005;65:3903–3910.

