Published OnlineFirst January 27, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-1540

Cancer
Research

Therapeutics, Targets, and Chemical Biology

Treatment of Invasive Brain Tumors Using a
Chain-like Nanoparticle
Pubudu M. Peiris1,2,3, Aaron Abramowski3,4, James Mcginnity1,3, Elizabeth Doolittle1,2,3,
Randall Toy1,2,3, Ramamurthy Gopalakrishnan2,3, Shruti Shah1,3, Lisa Bauer2,3,5,
Ketan B. Ghaghada6,7, Christopher Hoimes8,9, Susann M. Brady-Kalnay9,10,
James P. Basilion1,2,3,9, Mark A. Griswold2,3,9, and Efstathios Karathanasis1,2,3,9

Abstract
Glioblastoma multiforme is generally recalcitrant to current
surgical and local radiotherapeutic approaches. Moreover,
systemic chemotherapeutic approaches are impeded by the
blood–tumor barrier. To circumvent limitations in the latter
area, we developed a multicomponent, chain-like nanoparticle
that can penetrate brain tumors, composed of three iron oxide
nanospheres and one drug-loaded liposome linked chemically
into a linear chain-like assembly. Unlike traditional smallmolecule drugs or spherical nanotherapeutics, this oblongshaped, ﬂexible nanochain particle possessed a unique ability
to gain access to and accumulate at glioma sites. Vascular
targeting of nanochains to the avb3 integrin receptor resulted
in a 18.6-fold greater drug dose administered to brain tumors

than standard chemotherapy. By 2 hours after injection, when
nanochains had exited the blood stream and docked at vascular beds in the brain, the application of an external lowpower radiofrequency ﬁeld was sufﬁcient to remotely trigger
rapid drug release. This effect was produced by mechanically
induced defects in the liposomal membrane caused by the
oscillation of the iron oxide portion of the nanochain. In vivo
efﬁcacy studies conducted in two different mouse orthotopic
models of glioblastoma illustrated how enhanced targeting by
the nanochain facilitates widespread site-speciﬁc drug delivery.
Our ﬁndings offer preclinical proof-of-concept for a broadly
improved method for glioblastoma treatment. Cancer Res; 75(7);

Introduction

to avoid having to penetrate the BTB, implantable biodegradable
drug depots within a brain tumor are currently being used in
clinical practice to localize a chemotherapeutic and allow for
controlled drug delivery (3). However, this method relies on drug
diffusion from a central core. As a result, drug usually cannot reach
the tumor periphery where the most aggressive cells persist.
Therefore, the ideal drug delivery system should be based on
systemic intravascular administration, which utilizes the tumor's
own blood supply for transport allowing for drug delivery
throughout the tumor and its invasive sites.
Notably, nanoparticles have shown promise, because they
can be designed not only to carry a range of cytotoxic drugs, but
also to "smuggle" the drug into intracranial tumors such as
gliomas. For example, although the potent chemotherapeutic
drug doxorubicin (DOX) exhibits insigniﬁcant penetration of
the BTB, it was demonstrated in patients with glioblastomas
that long circulating liposomal nanoparticles containing doxorubicin achieved a 13- to 19-fold higher accumulation of
doxorubicin in brain cancerous lesions compared with the
normal brain (4). However, even though the BTB compromises
the impermeable nature of the blood-brain barrier (BBB),
blood vessels are not nearly as leaky as the angiogenic vessels
observed in other cancer types (5). Thus, nanoparticles exhibit
relatively low penetration into gliomas with a patchy, nearperivascular distribution, resulting in failure to deliver drugs to
the difﬁcult-to-reach invasive sites of brain tumors (6).
To circumvent the limitations of today's drugs in treating
invasive brain tumors, a multicomponent, ﬂexible chain-like
nanoparticle was developed. The nanoparticle, termed nanochain, is composed of three iron oxide nanospheres and one

The invasive forms of brain tumor, such as glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), are terminal upon diagnosis and no new protocols
have been developed in more than 30 years. Current approaches
for the treatment of glioma are limited in their effectiveness,
because GBM tumors are characteristically diffuse, highly invasive, nonlocalized, and drug penetration across the blood–tumor
barrier (BTB) is poor for most chemotherapeutic agents (1, 2).
Today, systemic chemotherapy is not the primary treatment of
choice for brain tumors due to the presence of the BTB. In an effort
1
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio. 2Department of Radiology, Case Western
Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio. 3Case Center for Imaging
Research, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio. 4Department of Biochemistry, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland,
Ohio. 5Department of Physics, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio. 6Edward B. Singleton Department of Pediatric Radiology, Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, Texas. 7Department of Radiology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas. 8University Hospitals Case Medical Center, Cleveland, Ohio. 9Case Comprehensive Cancer Center, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio.
10
Department of Molecular Biology and Microbiology, Case Western
Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio.

Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research
Online (http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Corresponding Author: Efstathios Karathanasis, Case Western Reserve University, 2071 Martin Luther King Jr. Drive, Wickenden Building, Cleveland, OH
44106. Phone: 216-844-5281; Fax: 216-844-4987; E-mail: stathis@case.edu
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-1540
2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

1356–65. 2015 AACR.

1356 Cancer Res; 75(7) April 1, 2015

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst January 27, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-1540

Treatment of Invasive Gliomas Using Nanochains

Figure 1.
Illustration of the nanochain particle
and its therapeutic effect on brain
tumors. A, schematic of a linear
nanochain particle composed of three
iron oxide nanospheres and one drugloaded liposome. B, TEM image of
nanochain particles. C, illustration of
the successful delivery of nanochainbased drug to invasive brain cancer via
vascular targeting and RF-triggered
drug release.

drug-loaded liposome chemically linked into a linear, chain-like
assembly (Fig. 1A and B; refs. 7, 8). The multicomponent nature
and shape of the particle result in two unique features that
facilitate effective treatment of difﬁcult-to-treat brain tumors
using a low dose of cytotoxic drugs as illustrated in Fig. 1C
(7, 9, 10). Contrary to traditional small-molecule drugs or
more contemporary nanotherapeutics, the nanochain particle
possesses a unique ability to gain rapid access to and be deposited at brain tumor sites. The nanochains are capable of transporting their drug cargo to brain tumors via highly speciﬁc
vascular targeting of the vascular bed associated with the primary
tumor mass and its invasive sites. Numerous studies have shown
that avb3 integrin is highly overexpressed on brain tumors'
vascular bed, which has led to clinical trials testing integrin
antagonists as antiangiogenic agents for patients with GBM
(11–16). Furthermore, avb3 integrin is minimally expressed on
normal resting blood vessels (17, 18). Notably, RGD-targeted
nanoparticles are rapidly internalized by endothelial cells via the
avb3 integrin receptor (13, 14, 19, 20). Hence, the nanochain
utilizes a cyclic RGD peptide as a ligand to target the avb3 integrin
receptor on the endothelium of angiogenic blood vessels of
brain tumors. The size, shape, and ﬂexibility of the nanochains
signiﬁcantly increase the margination of the particles toward the
blood vessel walls in microcirculation (i.e., continuous scavenging of vascular walls), and targeting avidity of nanoparticles (i.e.,
latching on vascular target) due to geometrically enhanced multivalent attachment on the vascular target (9).
However, even after successful targeting to brain tumors, the
drug molecules must spread to all the cancer cells, especially the
hard-to-reach ones, resulting in widespread anticancer activity
throughout the entire volume of tumors. Although nanoparticles typically release their content slowly, drug release from
nanochains can be remotely triggered due to mechanically induced defects of the liposomal membrane caused by the oscillation of the iron oxide portion of the nanochain in the presence
of an radio frequency (RF) ﬁeld (7). Two hours later, after
nanochains slip from the blood stream and dock on the
vascular bed of brain tumors, a low-power RF ﬁeld (10-kHz
frequency; 5 mT amplitude) is applied outside the body. The
ﬁeld causes the nanochain to vibrate, breaking open the drugloaded liposome and spreading cytotoxic drugs to the entire
volume of glioma sites (7, 21).

www.aacrjournals.org

In contrast with delivery of cancer drugs via passive intratumoral accumulation, our strategy utilizes the overexpressed avb3
integrin receptor as a docking site to establish well-distributed
drug reservoirs on the brain tumor vasculature, which can subsequently spread free drug in the tumor interstitium using an RF
ﬁeld as an external trigger. In this study, we show that the synergy
of nanochain's enhanced targeting and widespread drug delivery
capabilities facilitates enhanced treatment of brain tumor sites,
which are otherwise inaccessible by conventional therapies.

Materials and Methods
Materials
The primary antibody for the speciﬁc endothelial antigen CD31
was purchased from BD Biosciences Pharmingen. Secondary
antibodies and cell culture media were obtained from Invitrogen.
Cross-Linked Ethoxylate Acrylate Resin (CLEAR) resin, reaction
vessels, other accessories for solid-phase chemistry, and the cyclo
(Arg-Gly-Asp-D-Phe-Cys) or c(RGDfC) peptide were purchased
from Peptides International Inc. The cross-linkers 3,30 -Dithiobis
(sulfosuccinimidylpropionate; DTSSP) and sulfosuccinimidyl
4-[N-maleimidomethyl]cyclohexane-1-carboxylate (sulfo-SMCC),
and the cleaving agent Tris[2-carboxyethyl] phosphine (TCEP) were
obtained from Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc. Polyethylene glycol
(PEG) conjugates were purchased from Laysan Bio. General solvents
and chemicals were obtained from Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc. Doxorubicin was obtained from Sigma.
Synthesis and characterization of nanoparticles
The nanochains were fabricated using a two-step solid-phase
chemistry based on a previously published method (7, 8). More
details on the synthesis of the nanochain particles can be found
in previous publications (7, 8, 21).
Tumor model
All animal procedures were conducted under a protocol
approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee
of Case Western Reserve University (Cleveland, OH). The CNS-1
rodent glioma tumor model was used for these studies. Five- to
8-week-old NIH athymic nude mice (20–25 g each) were housed
in the Athymic Animal Core Facility at Case Western Reserve
University according to institutional policies. CNS-1 cells were

Cancer Res; 75(7) April 1, 2015

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

1357

Published OnlineFirst January 27, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-1540

Peiris et al.

infected with GFP encoding lentivirus, harvested for intracranial
implantation by trypsinization, and concentrated to 1  105 cells/
mL in PBS. Mice were anesthetized by intraperitoneal administration of 50 mg/kg ketamine/xylazine and ﬁtted into a stereotaxic
rodent frame. Cells were implanted at AP ¼ þ0.5 and ML ¼ – 2.0
from bregma at a rate of 1 mL/minute in the right striatum at a
depth of 3 mm from dura. A total of 200,000 cells were
implanted per mouse. Similar procedures were used for the 9L
glioma model.
Histologic evaluation
Once the appropriate tumor sizes were established (8 days
after tumor inoculation), the animals were injected intravenously
with the nanochain particles at a dose of 0.5 mg/kg doxorubicin.
At 2 hours after injection, the animals were exposed to the RF ﬁeld
for 60 minutes. Animals were euthanized 24 hours after injection,
and organs were extracted and analyzed histologically for location
of brain tumor (CNS-1-GFP cells). Serial tissue sections of 12-mm
thickness were stained for the speciﬁc endothelial antigen CD31
and with the nuclear stain DAPI. The tissue sections were imaged
at 5, 10, and 20 magniﬁcation on the Zeiss Axio Observer Z1
motorized FL inverted microscope. To evaluate the spread of
drugs in relation to the location of nanochains, we used Prussian
blue to stain iron. Direct ﬂuorescence (red) imaging was used for
doxorubicin. Histologic sections were imaged on a Zeiss Axio
Observer Z1 motorized FL inverted microscope. To obtain an
image of the entire section, a montage of each section was made
using the automated tiling function of the microscope.
Survival study
Once the tumors were established (5 days; histologically
conﬁrmed), the animals were injected intravenously with the
nanochain at a dose of 0.5 mg/kg doxorubicin. At 2 hours after
injection, a 60-minute application of the RF ﬁeld (amplitude
`B ¼ 2 mT, frequency f ¼ 10 kHz, RF power ¼ 3–5 Watts) was
employed using a custom-made solenoid (N ¼ 105 turns, inner
diameter ¼ 2.8 cm; ref. 7). During this procedure, the animals
were anesthetized through the administration of inhalant isoﬂurane. Two subsequent treatments were applied at time intervals
of 2 days at the same doxorubicin dose followed by exposure to RF
following identical protocol to the ﬁrst cycle (if applicable).
Following the same schedule for the treatments and RF application, control groups included animals treated with nanochains
(no RF), liposomal doxorubicin with RF, free doxorubicin, and
saline. After tumor inoculation, mice were monitored daily for
any abnormal symptoms. The well-being of the animals took
priority in decisions about euthanasia or other interventions.
When animals showed a 10% loss of body weight, they were
euthanized in a CO2 chamber. Although the 10% weight loss was
the primary endpoint criterion for the vast majority of the animals, two animals in the CNS-1 glioma model, one animal in the
doxorubicin-treated group, and one animal in the nanochaintreated group (þRF), had to be euthanized because the animals
suffered from inactivity and lethargy. At the terminal point, the
tumor mass at the primary site had grown signiﬁcantly with a ﬁnal
size of about 1.8 mm. Although the ﬁnal size of the tumor at the
primary site does not indicate the degree of tumor invasiveness,
we histologically observed a considerable number of distant sites
with dispersive brain tumor cells in the case of the CNS-1 glioma
model. Time of death was determined to be the following day.

1358 Cancer Res; 75(7) April 1, 2015

Statistical analysis
Means were determined for each variable in this study and
the resulting values from each experiment were subjected
to one-way ANOVA with post hoc Bonferroni test (SPSS 15).
A P value of less than 0.05 was used to conﬁrm signiﬁcant
differences. Normality of each dataset was conﬁrmed using the
Anderson–Darling test.

Results
Synthesis and characterization of nanochains
To fabricate the multicomponent nanochain particles, a stepwise solid-phase chemistry approach was developed. In the ﬁrst
step (Fig. 2A), amine-PEG functionalized iron oxide nanospheres
(hydrodynamic diameter of 27 nm) were conjugated onto aminefunctionalized CLEAR resin via a homo-bifunctional cross-linker
reactive toward primary amines containing a disulﬁde bridge. The
iron oxide nanospheres were allowed to bind to the solid support
and then cleaved off using a reducing agent. The thiolytic cleavage
liberated the iron oxide nanosphere from the solid support
converting the amines to a different chemical functionality (thiol
group) on the portion of the nanosphere's surface that was linked
to the resin. The second step (Fig. 2B) used the same type of resin
and the modiﬁed nanospheres were introduced in a step-by-step
manner using a hetero-bifunctional cross-linker for conjugation
between primary amine and sulfhydryl groups. As a ﬁnal component, an amine functionalized doxorubicin-loaded liposome
with a hydrodynamic diameter of 35 nm was added. It should be
noted that each step included multiple washing cycles to remove
any unbound nanospheres and excess reagents from the nanoparticle–resin complex. In the end, the thiol of the cysteine residue
of the c(RGDfC) peptide was used to conjugate the targeting
ligand to the remaining amine-terminated PEG on the surface of
nanochains. Finally, the avb3 integrin-targeting nanochains were
cleaved off the resin and recovered.
Because of the simpliﬁed puriﬁcation procedure and easy
handling of multiple reaction vessels, the solid-phase–based
synthesis enables us to manufacture large amounts of nanochains that exhibited a high degree of uniformity. On the basis
of analysis of multiple TEM images (minimum count was
200 particles), the majority of the particles (>85%) is composed of nanochains with three iron oxide spheres and one
liposome (7, 21). As shown in Fig. 2C, the hydrodynamic size
of the nanochain particle and each constituent nanosphere, as
measured by dynamic light scattering (DLS), veriﬁed the TEM
ﬁndings. Because of the high intraliposomal space available for
drug encapsulation and the efﬁcient remote loading technique
(22), the entrapment efﬁciency was very high (drug cargo: 6.8 
105 ng doxorubicin per particle). To determine the contribution of blood plasma to leakage of doxorubicin, Fig. 2D shows
an in vitro stability test. The dialysis curve plateaued after
approximately 3 hours, and the nanochain exhibited a leakage
of approximately 6.5% of the total encapsulated doxorubicin
after 24 hours, which was comparable with the leakage of a
typical 100-nm liposome.
Vascular targeting of brain tumors
To evaluate the nanochain's ability at targeting brain
tumors, we compared the avb3 integrin-targeting nanochains
with avb3 integrin-targeting 30-nm liposomes, their nontargeting variant and free doxorubicin. For this study, we selected

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst January 27, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-1540

Treatment of Invasive Gliomas Using Nanochains

Figure 2.
Reaction scheme of the controlled assembly of nanochains using solid-phase chemistry. A, in the ﬁrst step, chemical bifunctionality on the surface
of parent iron oxide nanospheres is topologically controlled, resulting in nanospheres with two faces, one displaying only amines and the other only thiols.
B, in the second step, the two unique faces on the parent nanosphere serve as ﬁttings to chemically assemble them into nanochains. C, size
distribution of nanochain particles and their parent nanospheres obtained by DLS (data presented as mean  SD). IO, iron oxide. D, comparison of in vitro
blood plasma stability of nanochains to 30-nm and 100-nm liposomal doxorubicin. In a typical leakage procedure, 1 mL of formulation was placed in
dialysis tubing with 100 k MWCO and dialyzed against blood plasma at 37 C.

the orthotopic CNS-1 glioma model. Recent reviews have
compared the most commonly used rodent glioma models
(e.g., C6, 9L) in terms of pathologic and genetic similarities
with the human disease (23, 24). The CNS-1 model is one of
the few models that recapitulate the microenvironment of the
human disease and display several histologic features and
diffuse growth and invasive pattern similar to human GBM.
In addition to their ability to express several glioma markers, a
three-dimensional cryo-imaging technique showed that the
rodent CNS-1 glioma cells is a valid system to study the highly
dispersive nature of glioma tumor cells along blood vessels
and white matter tracts in vivo (25).
The animals were injected with the various doxorubicin formulations via tail vein at a dose of 0.5 mg/kg doxorubicin 8 days
after orthotopic tumor inoculation. The animals were transcardially perfused with heparinized PBS 24 hours after intravenous
administration, and brains were retrieved and analyzed for doxorubicin content following an established protocol (26). At this
time point, doxorubicin was undetectable in blood circulation.
We predominantly collected the tumor mass at the primary site
because it was very challenging to identify the margins of the
invasive sites of the tumor. Vascular targeting of nanochains
resulted in a 4.7% of the administered dose being localized in
brain tumor (Fig. 3A), which was 18.6-fold higher than free
doxorubicin. Free doxorubicin and nontargeted liposomes exhibited very low accumulation (<1% of injected dose) at brain cancer
sites. The targeted liposomes and nontargeted nanochains displayed an accumulation of 1.45% and 1.75% of the injected dose,

www.aacrjournals.org

respectively, in brain tumors. As expected, the levels of doxorubicin in normal brain were undetectable in the case of all the
formulations.
After evaluating the signiﬁcant targeting enhancement of doxorubicin to brain tumors using nanochains, we used noninvasive
imaging to assess the therapeutic efﬁcacy of the nanoparticle with
or without the RF application. By infecting the CNS-1 cells with
GFP encoding lentivirus, the expression of GFP of the CNS-1 cells
enabled in vivo imaging using a Maestro ﬂuorescence imaging
system (Supplementary Fig. S1A). As a metric of the response of
brain tumors to various treatments (n ¼ 5 in each group),
quantiﬁcation of ﬂuorescence signal was used (Fig. 3B). Because
of the emission of GFP in the green zone of the visible spectrum,
the depth-dependent attenuation of the ﬂuorescence signal primarily by the skull (and the brain tissues) does not allow accurate
quantiﬁcation of the number of CNS-1 glioma cells in the case of
in vivo imaging (Supplementary Fig. S1B). However, the relative
differences of ﬂuorescence signal among the various treatments
can be used as a comparison in a semiquantitative manner. At 8
days after orthotopic tumor inoculation, the animals were intravenously injected with nanochains at a dose of 0.5 mg doxorubicin per kg of body weight. A 60-minute application of the RF
ﬁeld (amplitude B ¼ 5 mT, frequency f ¼ 10 kHz) was used at the
point of maximum accumulation of the nanochain in brain
tumors (2 hours after injection; ref. 7). Previous in vitro studies
identiﬁed that a 60-min application of the RF ﬁeld at the selected
operating conditions guarantees approximately 100% release of
nanochain's drug cargo (7). Maestro imaging was performed

Cancer Res; 75(7) April 1, 2015

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

1359

Published OnlineFirst January 27, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-1540

Peiris et al.

Figure 3.
5
Evaluation of the ability of nanochains to target invasive brain tumors in mice. A, CNS-1 cells (2  10 ) were implanted in the right striatum at a depth of 3 mm
from dura. At 8 days after tumor inoculation, the animals were injected with doxorubicin, nontargeted liposomes, integrin-targeting liposomes, nontargeted
nanochains, and targeted nanochains. All formulations were administered at a dose 0.5 mg doxorubicin per kg of body weight (n ¼ 4 mice per group;  , P <
0.01 by Student t test). At 24 hours after injection, animals were euthanized, brain tumors were excised, and their doxorubicin content was extracted and
measured using an established method. B, as a metric of the response of brain tumors to various treatments (n ¼ 5 in each group), quantiﬁcation of
ﬂuorescence intensity (FI) was used. The stable expression of green ﬂuorescence protein within the CNS-1 cells enabled in vivo imaging using a CRi
Maestro ﬂuorescence imaging system. All formulations were administered at day 8 after tumor inoculation at a dose of 0.5 mg doxorubicin per kg biweekly.
In the case of treatments combined with the RF ﬁeld, animals were exposed for 60 minutes to an RF ﬁeld (amplitude B ¼ 5 mT, frequency f ¼ 10 kHz)
using a custom-made solenoid coil. The y-axis represents the normalized difference of ﬂuorescence signal between days 8 and 10 (calculation of normalized
day8
day10
day8
value [(FI
- FI
)/FI
]x100; n ¼ 5 in each group;  , P < 0.01 by Student t test). DOX, doxorubicin.

before and 48 hours after injection to allow for the cytotoxic
effects of doxorubicin to occur. Figure 3B shows that the signal of
the untreated animals doubled within 48 hours. Although free
doxorubicin decelerated the disease, the brain tumor continued
growing as indicated by the increase of ﬂuorescence signal. Even
with the nanochain's enhanced targeting efﬁcacy, the nanochain
therapy (without RF) resulted in a similar anticancer effect to free
doxorubicin. However, animals treated with nanochain followed
by application of the RF ﬁeld exhibited a substantial decrease of
ﬂuorescence signals, which indicates the additional therapeutic
effects of the RF-triggered release. Furthermore, no temperature
increase of the brain tissue was observed due to the RF ﬁeld
(Supplementary Fig. S2), indicating that the triggered release
mechanism of drug from the nanochains is not based on
hyperthermia.
Histologic evaluation
After evaluating the targeting capabilities and anticancer effects
of the nanochain in a macroscopic manner, we assessed the
localization of nanochain in invasive glioma and the degree and
topology of doxorubicin delivery with or without the application
of the RF ﬁeld. Histologic analysis was performed on separate
groups of mice 24 hours after injection (n ¼ 3). A representative
image of a brain section is shown in Fig. 4A (left) displaying the
presence of the primary tumor and clusters of invasive cancer cells
dispersed in the brain. Bright ﬁeld microscopy of the same
histologica section stained with hematoxylin-eosin is shown in
Supplementary Fig. S3. Most notably, application of the RF ﬁeld
resulted in widespread delivery of doxorubicin at both the primary and invasive sites of brain tumor (of Fig. 4A, right). We then

1360 Cancer Res; 75(7) April 1, 2015

focuses on an invasive site (shown by the yellow circle in Fig. 4A)
to assess the ability of the nanochain to deliver drugs to dispersing
glioma cells. Imaging at higher magniﬁcation of this invasive site
showed that nanochains were selectively localized on the endothelium associated with cancerous sites (Fig. 4B, left). Notably,
application of the RF ﬁeld facilitated the spreading of doxorubicin
at distant cells away from nanochain deposits (Fig. 4B, right).
Although the RF-triggered release resulted in widespread delivery
of doxorubicin to the target site (Fig. 4C), no spread of doxorubicin was observed in the case of nanochain-treated animals that
were not exposed to RF, since the ﬂuorescence signal of intraliposomal doxorubicin is quenched (Fig. 4D). The in vivo anticancer
effects of the nanochain treatment followed by RF observed in
histology are consistent to cell cytotoxicity studies (Supplementary Fig. S4). Although 30-nm liposomal doxorubicin, 100-nm
liposomal doxorubicin, and nanochain without RF exhibited
moderate cytotoxicity (less than 30% relative cytotoxicity),
RF-triggered release of doxorubicin from nanochain had significant cytotoxic effects (65% cytotoxicity), which was comparable
with the effect of free doxorubicin (75% cytotoxicity), indicating
the release of free doxorubicin molecules from the nanochain
particles upon application of the RF ﬁeld.
Survival studies
The therapeutic effect of the nanochain treatment was determined in two orthotopic glioma models by measuring survival
times. Control treatments included free doxorubicin followed by
RF and nanochain without RF. The treatments were administered
three times (Fig. 5A), each at a dose of 0.5 mg/kg doxorubicin.
Targeted nanochains exhibited a 2.6-, 3.2-, and 6-fold higher

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst January 27, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-1540

Treatment of Invasive Gliomas Using Nanochains

Figure 4.
Histologic evaluation of the nanochain
treatment. A, histological evaluation
of the anticancer effect of nanochains
was performed in the orthotopic
CNS-1 model in mice [magniﬁcation,
5; green, CNS-1 glioma cells (GFP);
blue, nuclear stain (DAPI); violet,
doxorubicin]. Fluorescence imaging
of an entire histologic section of the
brain shows the primary tumor and its
invasive sites (left). Fluorescence
imaging of the same histologic section
shows the widespread distribution of
doxorubicin molecules after a 60-min
application of RF (right). B, higher
magniﬁcation imaging (20) of an
invasive site shows the location of
nanochains (blue) with respect to the
location of endothelial cells (green, CD
31) and brain tumor cells (left), and the
RF-triggered release of doxorubicin
(right) in the same histologic section.
Nanochains were visualized by
staining iron with Prussian blue. The
distribution of doxorubicin molecules
is shown with (C) or without (D) RF
with respect to the location of cancer
cells. DOX, doxorubicin.

deposition in brain tumors than nontargeted nanochains,
targeted liposomes, and nontargeted liposomes, respectively
(Fig. 5B). Since the targeting efﬁciency of the nanochains to brain
tumors was found to be signiﬁcantly higher than those formulations, we chose to only assess the effect of targeted nanochains
with or without the combination of the RF ﬁeld on the survival
rate. Not surprisingly, the free doxorubicin treatment had negligible therapeutic beneﬁts in the CNS-1 model. On the other hand,
even with their enhanced targeting capability, nanochains (without RF) exhibited a moderate effect. However, the survival time of
the nanochain-treated animals followed by RF was signiﬁcantly
increased (25  3 days; mean  SD) when compared with the
nanochain-treated group without RF (16  1 days), doxorubicintreated group (10  3 days), and the untreated group (9  1 days).
In comparison with standard chemotherapy (i.e., doxorubicin),
the 2.5-fold increase in survival of the nanochain-treated animals
followed by RF is highly signiﬁcant considering the highly invasive nature of the CNS-1 model.
To illustrate the therapeutic efﬁcacy of the nanochain treatment,
we also used the 9L model, which is an aggressive but not invasive

www.aacrjournals.org

glioma model. As expected, the therapeutic effect of the free
doxorubicin treatment was negligible as indicated by the survival
time being similar to the untreated group. Although 100% of
the untreated and doxorubicin -treated mice died within 28 days,
40% of the nanochain-treated group followed by RF was still alive
after 77 days (Fig. 5C). At the terminal point, post portem
measurements showed that the tumor at the primary site was
1.8  0.17 mm (mean  SD) in size for both animal models.
The average weight progression for each group is shown in
Supplementary Fig. S5. Because of the highly selective deposition
of the nanochain particles at brain tumors and the subsequent
efﬁcient spreading of drug, this signiﬁcant therapeutic outcome
was achieved at a very low dose (i.e., 0.5 mg/kg), which is 10- to
20-fold lower than the typical clinical regimens of liposomal
doxorubicin.

Discussion
Invasive brain tumors are recognized as one of the deadliest
forms of cancer. This stems from the fact that radiation therapy

Cancer Res; 75(7) April 1, 2015

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

1361

Published OnlineFirst January 27, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-1540

Peiris et al.

Figure 5.
Treatment of brain tumor using nanochains. A, the schedule of treatments
and application of RF are shown with respect to tumor inoculation. All
formulations were administered at a dose of 0.5 mg doxorubicin per kg
biweekly. Each treatment was administered three times at day 5, 7, and 9
after tumor inoculation. In the case of treatments combined with the RF
ﬁeld, animals were exposed for 60 minutes to an RF ﬁeld (amplitude B ¼ 5
mT, frequency f ¼ 10 kHz) using a custom-made solenoid coil. B, the
survival times of CNS-1 tumor-bearing animals are shown after treatment
with saline (untreated group), doxorubicin followed by RF, nanochains (no
RF), and nanochains followed by RF (n ¼ 5 mice in each group). C, the
survival times of 9L tumor-bearing animals are shown after treatment with
saline (untreated group), doxorubicin followed by RF and nanochains
followed by RF (n ¼ 5 mice in each group). DOX, doxorubicin.

and surgical resection are incapable of completely removing
deeply penetrating, diffuse brain tumors (1, 2). As a result, median
survival is merely prolonged to 12 months following the combination of surgical resection and focal radiotherapy. At the same
time, even though potent cytotoxic drugs are available to oncologists, systemic chemotherapy is not the primary treatment of
choice for malignant brain tumors due to the presence of the BTB,
which limits transport to lipophilic or low-molecular-weight,
uncharged compounds. In an effort to prevent exposure of
healthy organs to the toxic side effects of chemotherapeutics and
avoid having to penetrate the BTB, implantable drug depots
within a brain tumor are currently being used in clinical practice
(3). For example, Gliadel, an intracranial implantable biodegradable polymer loaded with the lipophilic drug BCNU, extends
the median survival of patients with grade IV glioma by 13.4

1362 Cancer Res; 75(7) April 1, 2015

weeks compared with placebo (27). On the other hand, systemic
administration of nanoparticles has the potential to facilitate
access to the entire brain tumor by utilizing the tumor's own
blood supply.
Historically, attempts to improve nanoparticle homing to brain
tumors have relied on the EPR effect followed by targeting of
various receptors to direct the nanoparticle–drug complex into
brain tumor cells. However, even though the BTB slightly compromises the nature of BBB, brain tumors consist of blood vessels
that are not as leaky as the angiogenic vessels observed in other
cancer types. This results in low penetration of nanoparticles
into the brain tumor interstitium, resulting in failure to reach
the majority of the primary tumor mass and especially its invasive
sites (6). Furthermore, the EPR effect is typically noticeable at
the core regions of a brain tumor, while it is attenuated at the
invasive sites of brain tumors with dispersing cancer cells. This is
due to the fact that the BBB of invasive sites has a very high
likelihood to remain intact. Importantly, it is not uncommon
to ﬁnd dispersing brain tumor cells as far away as 4 cm from the
primary site (28). Along these lines, the nanochain-based
therapy exploits the tumor vasculature as a docking site for the
nanoparticles followed by RF-triggered drug release to spread
the drug throughout the primary tumor and its invasive sites,
which are nearly inaccessible by today's systemic therapeutics.
Although various receptors have been exploited to target nanoparticles to cancer cells (e.g., folate, EGF receptors; refs. 29–34),
our work suggests that avb3 integrin-mediated vascular targeting
provides highly selective targeting of brain tumors. In fact, the
structure and shape of the nanochains have been speciﬁcally
designed to target the tumor vascular bed (9). The particle shape
governs the navigation of circulating nanoparticles through different biologic processes, including targeting of difﬁcult-to-reach
cancer sites (35). One of the pivotal steps dictating the transport of
ﬂowing nanoparticles is their margination toward the blood
vessel walls. Contrary to spherical nanoparticles, nanoparticles
with geometrical asymmetry (e.g., oblong shape) are subjected to
torques, resulting in tumbling and rotation, which increase the
lateral drift of nanoparticles toward the blood vessel walls in
microcirculation (36–38). Furthermore, the particle shape also
governs the targeting avidity of nanoparticles using receptorligand systems. Compared with nanospheres, oblong-shaped
nanoparticles exhibit enhanced targeting avidity due to geometrically enhanced multivalent docking. Indeed, within 24 hours
after injection, integrin-targeting of nanochains resulted in a 4.7%
of the administered dose being localized in brain tumor, which
was 3-fold higher than integrin-targeting liposomes. Regarding
the in vivo fate of the remaining nanochains, our previous publication evaluated the organ distribution of nanochains, which
was comparable with the behavior of standard 100-nm PEGylated
liposomes (7). At 24 hours after injection, the nanochains were
mostly found in the reticuloendothelial organs (liver and spleen).
Even though such a signiﬁcant portion of the injected dose
accumulated at the tumor site, the histologic studies show that
no spread of doxorubicin in the brain tumor was observed in the
absence of the external stimulus (i.e., RF ﬁeld). Not surprisingly,
even with the enhanced targeting, the nanochain treatment
(without RF) provided only modest beneﬁts in terms of prolonged survival. This is primarily related to the drug release proﬁle
from nanoparticles. Although free drug in its molecular form
quickly spreads within the tumor interstitium (39–41), nanoparticles, without any triggering mechanism, release their content at a

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst January 27, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-1540

Treatment of Invasive Gliomas Using Nanochains

relatively slow rate, once they deposit at the target site. This slow
release generates a low temporal and spatial concentration gradient of the drug, resulting in noncytotoxic levels of the drug distal
from the particle (41).
Although previous studies exploited vascular targeting for antiangiogenic strategies (13, 42, 43), we coupled vascular targeting of
nanochains to a unique triggered release mechanism to spread high
amounts of drug into the hard-to-reach brain tumors. In a previous
study (7), we assessed the relation of the nanochain's structure to
RF-triggered drug release. Through their interaction with magnetic
ﬁelds at the selected frequency of 10 kHz, the iron oxide
component of the nanochain particle efﬁciently converts magnetic energy to mechanical vibration, resulting in "mechanical"
disruption of the liposomal membrane. Contrary to heat-induced
drug release achieved by other nanoparticle designs (e.g., thermosensitive nanoparticles incorporating iron oxide or gold nanoparticles; ref. 44), the release mechanism of nanochains results in rapid
and efﬁcient drug release even from very low concentration of
nanoparticles. This ability stems from the structure of the nanochains, in such fashion that the response of the nanoparticles to the
10 kHz oscillating magnetic ﬁeld is a mechanical "vibration" of the
chain, rather than true rotational motion or heat dissipation (7).
For example, although application of RF induced rapid release of
doxorubicin from nanochains at very low particle concentration,
negligible doxorubicin release was observed from liposomes
encapsulating doxorubicin and iron oxide nanospheres. Although
a nanochain containing more than 3 iron oxide nanospheres may
exhibit even faster triggered release proﬁles, a nanochain larger
than 150 nm in length (i.e., 4 or more iron oxide nanospheres)
reduces signiﬁcantly the extraction yield of nanochains from the
resin during the solid-phase–based synthesis of the particles.
Furthermore, the RF frequencies and power used in our system
are lower than those experienced in a conventional clinical MRI
(e.g., 64 MHz at kilowatts of power). These RF ﬁelds are well
understood, and thus the design, cost, and clinical deployment of
such system present a low degree of difﬁculty.
In addition to the drug delivery barrier of gliomas, it is important to recognize that glioma cells tend to be particularly resistant
to drugs. The underlying causes for the failure of therapies against
brain tumors may be diverse but cellular hierarchies have been
identiﬁed deﬁned in glioblastomas with self-renewing tumorinitiating cells at the apex that frequently display resistance to
conventional treatments and can migrate to cause tumor recurrence (45–47). For our initial studies, we chose doxorubicin as a
drug model candidate, because of its ﬂuorescence properties and
its ability to rapidly diffuse through cellular membranes and reach
nuclear DNA, which functions as a sink for doxorubicin (39–41).
Although it is well established that free doxorubicin displays very
poor penetration into gliomas and is nearly inaccessible to brain
tumor cells (48–50), our data indicate the enormous potential of
the nanochain therapeutic strategy to deliver doxorubicin to
glioma cells. To address both challenges of drug delivery and

multidrug resistance, future studies will seek to integrate the
nanochain technology with the appropriate combination of complementary drugs to enable effective treatment of the "general
population" of glioma cells as well as the small fraction of glioma
cells that are resistant.
In this study, we show that both the particle shape and the
multicomponent nature of the nanochain particle played an
essential role in its therapeutic efﬁcacy against invasive gliomas.
Coupling a vascular targeting strategy with the RF-triggered drug
release of nanochains overcame the BTB issues, enabling high
drug concentrations and widespread delivery within the tumor
and therefore provided an increased likelihood of highly effective
treatment of invasive brain cancer using a low dose of cytotoxic
drugs.

Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest
M.A. Griswold reports receiving commercial research grant from Siemens
Healthcare (MRI Business Unit). No potential conﬂicts of interest were disclosed
by the other authors.

Authors' Contributions
Conception and design: P.M. Peiris, K.B. Ghaghada, S.M. Brady-Kalnay,
J.P. Basilion, M.A. Griswold, E. Karathanasis
Development of methodology: P.M. Peiris, E. Doolittle, R. Toy, S. Shah,
K.B. Ghaghada, C. Hoimes, S.M. Brady-Kalnay, M.A. Griswold, E. Karathanasis
Acquisition of data (provided animals, acquired and managed patients,
provided facilities, etc.): P.M. Peiris, A. Abramowski, J. Mcginnity, E. Doolittle,
R. Toy, S. Shah, L. Bauer, E. Karathanasis
Analysis and interpretation of data (e.g., statistical analysis, biostatistics,
computational analysis): P.M. Peiris, E. Doolittle, S. Shah, K.B. Ghaghada,
C. Hoimes, E. Karathanasis
Writing, review, and/or revision of the manuscript: P.M. Peiris, K.B. Ghaghada,
C. Hoimes, S.M. Brady-Kalnay, J.P. Basilion, M.A. Griswold
Administrative, technical, or material support (i.e., reporting or organizing
data, constructing databases): J. Mcginnity, R. Gopalakrishnan, K.B. Ghaghada,
M.A. Griswold, E. Karathanasis
Study supervision: M.A. Griswold, E. Karathanasis

Acknowledgments
The authors thank Dishen Lin, Swetha Rao, and Samantha Tucci for help with
animal studies and histology.

Grant Support
This work was supported by grants from the National Cancer Institute
(R01CA177716), the Clinical and Translational Science Collaborative of Cleveland (UL1TR000439) from the National Center for Advancing Translational
Sciences component of the NIH, the Case Comprehensive Cancer Center
(P30CA043703), and the Ohio Cancer Research Associates (E. Karathanasis).
L. Bauer was supported by a fellowship from the National Cancer Institute
Training Program in Cancer Pharmacology (R25CA148052).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of
page charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in
accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
Received May 28, 2014; revised December 19, 2014; accepted January 4, 2015;
published OnlineFirst January 27, 2015.

References
1. Juratli TA, Schackert G, Krex D. Current status of local therapy in malignant
gliomas–a clinical review of three selected approaches. Pharmacol Ther.
2013;139:341–58.
2. Adamson C, Kanu OO, Mehta AI, Di C, Lin N, Mattox AK, et al. Glioblastoma multiforme: a review of where we have been and where we are going.
Expert Opinion on Investigational Drugs 2009;18:1061–83.

www.aacrjournals.org

3. Wang PP, Frazier J, Brem J. Local drug delivery to the brain. Advanced Drug
Delivery Reviews 2002;54:987–1013.
4. Koukourakis MI, Koukouraki S, Fezoulidis I, Kelekis N, Kyrias G, Archimandritis S. High intratumoural accumulation of stealth liposomal doxorubicin (Caelyx) in glioblastomas and in metastatic brain tumours. Br J
Cancer 2000;83:1281–6.

Cancer Res; 75(7) April 1, 2015

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

1363

Published OnlineFirst January 27, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-1540

Peiris et al.

5. Hobbs SK, Monsky WL, Yuan F, Roberts WG, Grifﬁth L, Torchilin VP,
et al. Regulation of transport pathways in tumor vessels: role of tumor
type and microenvironment. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998;95:
4607–12.
6. Baumann BC, Kao GD, Mahmud A, Harada T, Swift J, Chapman C, et al.
Enhancing the efﬁcacy of drug-loaded nanocarriers against brain tumors by
targeted radiation therapy. Oncotarget 2013;4:64–79.
7. Peiris PM, Bauer L, Toy R, Tran E, Pansky J, Doolittle E, et al. Enhanced
Delivery of Chemotherapy to Tumors Using a Multicomponent Nanochain with Radio-Frequency-Tunable Drug Release. ACS Nano 2012;
6:4157–68.
8. Peiris PM, Schmidt E, Calabrese M, Karathanasis E. Assembly of linear
nano-chains from iron oxide nanospheres with asymmetric surface chemistry. PLoS One 2011;6:e15927.
9. Peiris PM, Toy R, Doolittle E, Pansky J, Abramowski A, Tam M, et al.
Imaging metastasis using an integrin-targeting chain-shaped nanoparticle.
ACS Nano 2012;6:8783–95.
10. Peiris PM, Tam M, Vicente P, Abramowski A, Toy R, Bauer L, et al. Oncommand drug release from nanochains inhibits growth of breast tumors.
Pharm Res 2014;31:1460–8.
11. Schnell O, Krebs B, Carlsen J, Miederer I, Goetz C, Goldbrunner RH, et al.
Imaging of integrin alpha(v)beta(3) expression in patients with malignant
glioma by [18F] Galacto-RGD positron emission tomography. Neurooncology 2009;11:861–70.
12. Reardon DA, Nabors LB, Stupp R, Mikkelsen T. Cilengitide: an integrintargeting arginine-glycine-aspartic acid peptide with promising activity for
glioblastoma multiforme. Expert Opinion on Investigational drugs 2008;
17:1225–35.
13. Danhier F, Vroman B, Lecouturier N, Crokart N, Pourcelle V, Freichels
H, et al. Targeting of tumor endothelium by RGD-grafted PLGAnanoparticles loaded with paclitaxel. J Control Release 2009;140:
166–73.
14. Reddy GR, Bhojani MS, McConville P, Moody J, Moffat BA, Hall DE, et al.
Vascular targeted nanoparticles for imaging and treatment of brain tumors.
Clin Cancer Res 2006;12:6677–86.
15. Bello L, Francolini M, Marthyn P, Zhang J, Carroll RS, Nikas DC, et al. Alpha
(v)beta3 and alpha(v)beta5 integrin expression in glioma periphery.
Neurosurgery 2001;49:380–9; discussion 90.
16. Phuphanich S, Brat DJ, Olson JJ. Delivery systems and molecular targets of
mechanism-based therapies for GBM. Expert Rev Neurotherapeutics
2004;4:649–63.
17. Brooks PC, Clark RA, Cheresh DA. Requirement of vascular integrin alpha
(v)beta(3) for angiogenesis. Science 1994;264:569–71.
18. Brooks PC, Stromblad S, Klemke R, Visscher D, Sarkar FH, Cheresh
DA. Anti-integrin alpha(v)beta(3) blocks human breast cancer
growth and angiogenesis in human skin. J Clin Invest 1995;96:
1815–22.
19. Murphy EA, Majeti BK, Barnes LA, Makale M, Weis SM, Lutu-Fuga K, et al.
Nanoparticle-mediated drug delivery to tumor vasculature suppresses
metastasis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2008;105:9343–8.
20. Kiessling F, Huppert J, Zhang C, Jayapaul J, Zwick S, Woenne EC, et al. RGDlabeled USPIO inhibits adhesion and endocytotic activity of alpha(v)beta
(3)-integrin-expressing glioma cells and only accumulates in the vascular
tumor compartment. Radiology 2009;253:462–9.
21. Peiris PM, Toy R, Abramowski A, Vicente P, Tucci S, Bauer L, et al. Treatment
of cancer micrometastasis using a multicomponent chain-like nanoparticle. J Control Release 2014;173:51–8.
22. Bolotin E, Cohen R, Bar L, Emanuel N, Ninio S, Lasic D, et al. Ammonium
sulfate gradients for efﬁcient and stable remote loading of amphipathic
weak bases into liposomes and ligandoliposomes. Journal of Liposome
Research 1994;4:455–79.
23. Barth RF, Kaur B. Rat brain tumor models in experimental neuro-oncology:
the C6, 9L, T9, RG2, F98, BT4C, RT-2 and CNS-1 gliomas. J Neurooncol
2009;94:299–312.
24. Jacobs VL, Valdes PA, Hickey WF, DeLeo JA. Current review of in vivo GBM
rodent models: emphasis on the CNS-1 tumour model. ASN neuro 2011;3:
e00063.
25. Burden-Gulley SM, Qutaish MQ, Sullivant KE, Lu H, Wang J, Craig SE, et al.
Novel cryo-imaging of the glioma tumor microenvironment reveals migration and dispersal pathways in vivid three-dimensional detail. Cancer Res
2011;71:5932–40.

1364 Cancer Res; 75(7) April 1, 2015

26. Karathanasis E, Chan L, Balusu SR, D'Orsi CJ, Annapragada AV, Sechopoulos I, et al. Multifunctional nanocarriers for mammographic quantiﬁcation of tumor dosing and prognosis of breast cancer therapy. Biomaterials 2008;29:4815–22.
27. Brem H, Ewend MG, Piantadosi S, Greenhoot J, Burger PC, Sisti M. The
safety of interstitial chemotherapy with BCNU-loaded polymer followed
by radiation therapy in the treatment of newly diagnosed malignant
gliomas: phase I trial. J Neurooncol 1995;26:111–23.
28. Iacob G, Dinca EB. Current data and strategy in glioblastoma multiforme.
Journal of medicine and life 2009;2:386–93.
29. Huang X, Peng X, Wang Y, Shin DM, El-Sayed MA, Nie S. A reexamination
of active and passive tumor targeting by using rod-shaped gold nanocrystals and covalently conjugated peptide ligands. ACS Nano 2010;4:
5887–96.
30. Cheng Y, Meyers JD, Agnes RS, Doane TL, Kenney ME, Broome AM,
et al. Addressing Brain Tumors with Targeted Gold Nanoparticles: A
New Gold Standard for Hydrophobic Drug Delivery? Small 2011;7:
2301–6.
31. Gabizon A, Horowitz AT, Goren D, Tzemach D, Shmeeda H, Zalipsky S. In
vivo fate of folate-targeted polyethylene-glycol liposomes in tumor-bearing
mice. Clinical Cancer Research 2003;9:6551–9.
32. Gabizon A, Shmeeda H, Horowitz AT, Zalipsky S. Tumor cell targeting of
liposome-entrapped drugs with phospholipid-anchored folic acid-PEG
conjugates. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2004;56:1177–92.
33. Park JW, Hong K, Kirpotin DB, Colbern G, Shalaby R, Baselga J, et al. AntiHER2 immunoliposomes: enhanced efﬁcacy attributable to targeted delivery. Clin Cancer Res 2002;8:1172–81.
34. Park JW, Kirpotin DB, Hong K, Shalaby R, Shao Y, Nielsen UB, et al. Tumor
targeting using anti-her2 immunoliposomes. J Control Release 2001;74:
95–113.
35. Toy R, Peiris PM, Ghaghada KB, Karathanasis E. Shaping cancer nanomedicine: the effect of particle shape on the in vivo journey of nanoparticles.
Nanomedicine 2014;9:121–34.
36. Gavze E, Shapiro M. Motion of inertial spheroidal particles in a shear ﬂow
near a solid wall with special application to aerosol transport in microgravity. J Fluid Mechanics 1998;371:59  79.
37. Lee SY, Ferrari M, Decuzzi P. Shaping nano-/micro-particles for
enhanced vascular interaction in laminar ﬂows. Nanotechnology 2009;
20:495101.
38. Gentile F, Chiappini C, Fine D, Bhavane RC, Peluccio MS, Cheng MM,
et al. The effect of shape on the margination dynamics of non-neutrally
buoyant particles in two-dimensional shear ﬂows. J Biomech 2008;41:
2312–8.
39. Terasaki T, Iga T, Sugiyama Y, Sawada Y, Hanano M. Nuclear binding as a
determinant of tissue distribution of adriamycin, daunomycin, adriamycinol, daunorubicinol and actinomycin D. J Pharmacobiodyn 1984;7:
269–77.
40. Maraﬁno BJ Jr, Giri SN, Siegel DM. Pharmacokinetics, covalent
binding and subcellular distribution of [3H]doxorubicin after intravenous administration in the mouse. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1981;
216:55–61.
41. Laginha KM, Verwoert S, Charrois GJ, Allen TM. Determination of doxorubicin levels in whole tumor and tumor nuclei in murine breast cancer
tumors. Clin Cancer Res 2005;11:6944–9.
42. Park JH, Kwon S, Nam JO, Park RW, Chung H, Seo SB, et al. Self-assembled
nanoparticles based on glycol chitosan bearing 5beta-cholanic acid for
RGD peptide delivery. J Control Release 2004;95:579–88.
43. Nam JO, Kim JE, Jeong HW, Lee SJ, Lee BH, Choi JY, et al. Identiﬁcation of
the alphavbeta3 integrin-interacting motif of betaig-h3 and its anti-angiogenic effect. J Biol Chem 2003;278:25902–9.
44. Brazel CS. Magnetothermally-responsive nanomaterials: combining magnetic nanostructures and thermally-sensitive polymers for triggered drug
release. Pharm Res 2009;26:644–56.
45. Bao S, Wu Q, McLendon RE, Hao Y, Shi Q, Hjelmeland AB, et al. Glioma
stem cells promote radioresistance by preferential activation of the DNA
damage response. Nature 2006;444:756–60.
46. Singh SK, Clarke ID, Terasaki M, Bonn VE, Hawkins C, Squire J, et al.
Identiﬁcation of a cancer stem cell in human brain tumors. Cancer Res
2003;63:5821–8.
47. Cheng L, Bao S, Rich JN. Potential therapeutic implications of cancer stem
cells in glioblastoma. Biochemical pharmacology 2010;80:654–65.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst January 27, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-1540

Treatment of Invasive Gliomas Using Nanochains

48. Ohnishi T, Tamai I, Sakanaka K, Sakata A, Yamashima T, Yamashita J, et al.
In vivo and in vitro evidence for ATP-dependency of P-glycoprotein-mediated efﬂux of doxorubicin at the blood-brain barrier. Biochemical pharmacology 1995;49:1541–4.
49. Mankhetkorn S, Dubru F, Hesschenbrouck J, Fiallo M, GarnierSuillerot A. Relation among the resistance factor, kinetics of
uptake, and kinetics of the P-glycoprotein-mediated efﬂux of doxo-

www.aacrjournals.org

rubicin, daunorubicin, 8-(S)-ﬂuoroidarubicin, and idarubicin in
multidrug-resistant K562 cells. Molecular pharmacology 1996;49:
532–9.
50. Rousselle C, Clair P, Lefauconnier JM, Kaczorek M, Scherrmann JM,
Temsamani J. New advances in the transport of doxorubicin through the
blood-brain barrier by a peptide vector-mediated strategy. Molecular
pharmacology 2000;57:679–86.

Cancer Res; 75(7) April 1, 2015

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

1365

Published OnlineFirst January 27, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-1540

Treatment of Invasive Brain Tumors Using a Chain-like
Nanoparticle
Pubudu M. Peiris, Aaron Abramowski, James Mcginnity, et al.
Cancer Res 2015;75:1356-1365. Published OnlineFirst January 27, 2015.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-1540
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2015/01/27/0008-5472.CAN-14-1540.DC1

Cited articles

This article cites 50 articles, 13 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/75/7/1356.full#ref-list-1

E-mail alerts

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.

Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

