Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 32

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

EGFRvIII does not affect radiosensitivity with or without gefitinib
treatment in glioblastoma cells
Nina Struve1, Matthias Riedel1, Alexander Schulte2, Thorsten Rieckmann1,3, Tobias
J. Grob4, Andreas Gal5, Kai Rothkamm1, Katrin Lamszus2, Cordula Petersen1,
Ekkehard Dikomey1, Malte Kriegs1
1

Department of Radiotherapy and Radio-Oncology, University Medical Center Hamburg Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany

2

Department of Neurosurgery, University Medical Center Hamburg Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany

3

 epartment of Otorhinolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery, University Medical Center Hamburg Eppendorf, Hamburg,
D
Germany

4

Department of Pathology, University Medical Center Hamburg Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany

5

Department of Human Genetics, University Medical Center Hamburg Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany

Correspondence to:
Malte Kriegs, e-mail: m.kriegs@uke.de
Nina Struve, e-mail: ni.struve@uke.de
Keywords: EGFRvIII, glioblastoma, radiosensitivity, X-irradiation, gefitinib
Received: August 10, 2015      Accepted: September 04, 2015      Published: September 16, 2015

ABSTRACT
Background: Glioblastomas (GBM) are often characterized by an elevated
expression of the epidermal growth factor receptor variant III (EGFRvIII). We used
GBM cell lines with native EGFRvIII expression to determine whether this EGFR
variant affects radiosensitivity with or without EGFR targeting.
Methods: Experiments were performed with GBM cell lines lacking (LN229,
U87MG, U251, CAS-1) or endogenously expressing EGFRvIII (BS153, DKMG).
The two latter cell lines were also used to establish sublines with a low (−) or
a high proportion (+) of cells expressing EGFRvIII. EGFR signaling and the cell
cycle were analyzed using Western blot and flow cytometry; cell survival was
assessed by colony forming assay and double-strand break repair capacity by
immunofluorescence.
Results: DKMG and BS153 parental cells with heterogeneous EGFRvIII expression
were clearly more radiosensitive compared to other GBM cell lines without EGFRvIII
expression. However, no significant difference was observed in cell proliferation,
clonogenicity or radiosensitivity between the EGFRvIII– and + sublines derived
from DKMG and BS153 parental cells. Expression of EGFRvIII was associated with
decreased DSB repair capacity for BS153 but not for DKMG cells. The effects of EGFR
targeting by gefitinib alone or in combination with irradiation were also found not
to depend on EGFRvIII expression. Gefitinib was only observed to influence the
proliferation of EGFRvIII– BS153 cells.
Conclusion: The data indicate that EGFRvIII does not alter radiosensitivity with
or without anti-EGFR treatment.

neurosurgical resection, radiotherapy (RT) and adjuvant
chemotherapy (CT) with temozolomide [2].
GBMs are generally characterized by genomic
rearrangements and a variety of mutations associated
with radio- and chemoresistance [3]. The most frequent
alteration is the amplification of the gene encoding the

INTRODUCTION
Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common
malignant brain tumor in adult patients, with an estimated
5-year survival rate of less than 10% [1]. The current standard
of care is an intensive multimodal treatment including
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33867

Oncotarget

epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), causing a
massive overexpression of EGFR. This gene amplification
is present in about 40%-60% of GBMs and is often
associated with the expression of the deletion variant
EGFRvIII. This variant lacks the exons 2–7, leading to a
ligand-independent and constitutively activated receptor
[4]. In GBMs, the amplified egfr gene is encoded on
double minute chromosomes (DMC), with up to 200
copies present per nucleus [5].
There are already several pre-clinical studies analyzing
the function of EGFRvIII in GBM. Due to the lack of GBM
cell lines stably expressing endogenous EGFRvIII, these
experiments were performed with cell lines transfected with
EGFRvIII encoding vectors [6, 7]. In these studies, EGFRvIII
expression was found to result not only in accelerated tumor
growth but also in increased repair of X-irradiation induced
DNA double-strand breaks (DSB) associated with enhanced
radioresistance [6, 7]. In line with these data, the inhibition of
EGFR results in a depressed DSB repair, leading in turn to
radiosensitisation [6, 7].
In contrast, clinical studies investigating the
potential use of EGFRvIII expression as a prognostic
marker have thus far failed to yield a clear result. While
small studies observed both better and poorer survival
for patients with EGFRvIII positive tumors [8, 9], larger
studies failed to show any association [10–13]. Likewise,
no clear clinical benefit has been observed following
EGFR targeting; a substantial increase in side effects was
observed for this treatment, however, especially when
combined with radiotherapy [14].
In this study, we analyzed the impact of EGFRvIII
on cellular radiosensitivity and EGFR targeting using two
GBM cell lines (DKMG and BS153) with endogenous
EGFRvIII expression [5, 15]. These cell lines were also
used to establish two pairs of sublines with either a low
(−) or high (+) fraction of EGFRvIII expressing cells.
When compared to GBM cell lines negative for EGFRvIII,
DKMG and BS153 cells were found to be clearly more
radiosensitive. However, using the pairs of EGFRvIII- and
+ sublines, we were able to demonstrate that EGFRvIII
itself has no impact on either cell growth or cellular
radiosensitivity with or without EGFR targeting.

more sensitive, compared to GBM cell lines expressing
no EGFRvIII (Figure 1B). With respect to cell cycle
distribution, no obvious differences were observed
between the six cell lines (Figure 1C).

Characterization of EGFRvIII– and + sublines
Immunofluorescent staining of EGFRvIII revealed
that its expression is heterogeneous in DKMG as well
as BS153 cells, with mostly membranous localization
(Figure 2A). The detection of EGFRvIII by flow cytometry
showed a great difference in the fraction of cells positive
for EGFRvIII, with only 11.7% for DKMG and 80.7% for
the BS153 culture. In addition, the expression was clearly
higher for BS153 cells (Figure 2B).
To establish EGFRvIII negative (−) and positive (+)
sublines from DKMG and BS153 cell lines, the EGFRvIII
was marked by a specific antibody and EGFRvIII− and +
cells were separated by fluorescence activated cell sorting
(FACS). The EGFRvIII−/+ subclones were grown in 10%
heat inactivated FCS and four to six passages after sorting,
the fraction of cells expressing EGFRvIII was found to be
72.9% (DKMG) and 97.3% (BS153) in the EGFRvIII+
cultures, but only 0.2% (DKMG) and 6.2% (BS153) in the
EGFRvIII- cultures (Figure 2C). These percentages remained
constant for up to 20 passages or 18 weeks respectively
with little variation (Supplementary Figure S1). Whereas
presence of the EGFRvIII gene is frequently associated with
EGFR gene amplification [16], EGFRvIII protein expression
is a dynamic process regulated also by epigenetic events
[5, 17]. Therefore changes in the EGFRvIII expression
profile — presence of EGFRvIII expressing cells in the
EGFRvIII− subline and vice versa — are expected especially
since we still detect EGFR gene amplification in EGFRvIIIDKMG and BS153 cells (data not shown).

Impact of EGFRvIII on cell signaling
and cell growth
To study the effect of EGFRvIII on cellular signaling,
cell lysates from DKMG and BS153 EGFRvIII− and +
sublines were analyzed by Western blot. EGFRvIII+ BS153
cells showed an enhanced activation/phosphorylation of
EGFR, EGFRvIII, AKT and ERK1 (upper band) compared
to the EGFRvIII− subline. In contrast, for EGFRvIII+
DKMG cells, an enhanced phosphorylation of EGFRvIII
and ERK2 (Figure 3A, lower band) was detectable, when
compared to EGFRvIII− DKMG cells, indicating that the
effects of EGFRvIII expression on down-stream signaling
differ in these two cell lines.
Noticeable morphological changes were seen depending
on the EGFRvIII status for BS153, but not for DKMG cells
(Figure 3B). EGFRvIII− cells displayed a flattened shape in
contrast to the more spindle-like morphology of EGFRvIII+
cells, as has also been reported previously [5]. With respect
to cell growth, no differences were observed for the DKMG

RESULTS
Radiosensitivity of GBM cell lines with and
without EGFRvIII expression
The radiosensitivity of six well established GBM
cell lines differing in EGFRvIII expression was analyzed
under normal serum conditions by colony forming assay,
specifically four strains (LN229, U87MG, U251, CAS-1)
without, one cell line with moderate (DKMG) and one
with strong (BS153) EGFRvIII expression (Figure 1A).
A pronounced difference in radiosensitivity was found
for both DKMG and BS153 cells, which were clearly
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33868

Oncotarget

Figure 1: EGFRvIII expression and radiosensitivity of different GBM cell lines. A. Expression of EGFR wildtype and

EGFRvIII in different EGFRvIII positive and negative GBM cell lines as detected by Western blot using EGFR and EGFRvIII (L8A4)
specific antibodies. Actin served as a loading control. B. Cell survival of EGFRvIII positive and negative GBM cell lines after irradiation
as assesed by colony forming assay (pre-plating). C. Cell cycle distribution of EGFRvIII positive and negative GBM cell lines analyzed by
PI staining and flow cytometry.

sublines, and only a minor differences seen in the BS153
sublines, with EGFRvIII+ cells showing a slightly delayed
proliferation in the first days after seeding (Figure 3C) and a
small reduction in plating efficiency (Figure 3D).

0.46, p6Gy = 0.22). Additionally, knock down of EGFRvIII
via siRNA did not change the cellular radiosensitivity of
BS153 cells (Supplementary Figure S3).
These results show that endogenously encoded
EGFRvIII appears to have no or even a negative impact
on DSB repair and fails to confer cellular radioresistance.

Impact of EGFRvIII on DNA double-strand
break (DSB) repair and radiation response

Impact of EGFRvIII on EGFR targeting

Previous data using cell lines transfected with
EGFRvIII encoding vectors demonstrated that DSB repair
after irradiation was increased due to EGFRvIII expression,
leading to a radioresistance when EGFRvIII was expressed
[6]. To study the effect of endogenous EGFRvIII on DSB
repair, the DKMG and BS153 sublines were exposed to
2 Gy and the number of co-localized γH2AX/53BP1 repair
foci was measured 24 h after irradiation (Supplementary
Figure S2, Figure 4A). No difference was observed for
the two DKMG sublines, while a significant increase in
the number of residual γH2AX/53BP1 foci was detected
for EGFRvIII+ BS153 cells, indicating a reduction in
DSB repair capacity (Figure 4A). With regard to cellular
radiosensitivity, no significant difference was detectable
between the EGFRvIII− and + sublines for DKMG cells.
For BS153 cells, a slight increase in the surviving fraction
of the EGFRvIII+ subline was observed, although this was
not significant at 4 and 6 Gy (Figure 4B; p2Gy = 0.03, p4Gy =
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

We also tested whether EGFRvIII influences EGFR
targeting by using the small molecule inhibitor gefitinib
applied either alone or in combination with IR. For DKMG
and BS153 EGFRvIII+ sublines, a minor inhibition of
EGFR-signaling (phosphorylation of EGFR, EGFRvIII,
AKT and ERK1/2) (Figure 5A) and proliferation
(Figure 5B) was detectable, while no effect was detectable
in the EGFRvIII– DKMG subline. In contrast, gefitinib
was found to cause a clear inhibition of EGFR signaling
(Figure 5A) associated with a strong reduction in cell
proliferation (Figure 5B) in the EGFRvIII− BS153
subline. However, no cytotoxic effect was observed in
any of the four sublines when the cells were treated with
gefitinib for 24 h (Figure 5C).
The effect of gefitinib on cell survival after irradiation
was tested by adding gefitinib 2 h prior IR, followed by
a 24 h incubation, after which gefitinib was removed and
33869

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Generation of EGFRvIII− and EGFRvIII+ sublines as determined via FACS. A. Detection of EGFRvIII (red) by
immunofluorescence using an EGFRvIII-specific antibody (blue, DNA staining with DAPI). B. EGFRvIII expression in parental DKMG and
BS153 cells as detected by flow cytometry (dot plots). EGFRvIII expression (APC-A) was detected using an EGFRvIII-specific antibody.
U87MG cells served as a negative control (SSC-A; side scatter) and a secondary antibody control was used to asses unspecific staining.
C. Using parental DKMG and BS153 cell lines, EGFRvIII expressing and non-expressing cells were seperated by FACS to generate EGFRvIII−
and EGFRvIII+ sublines. EGFRvIII expression in EGFRvIII−/+ sublines 4-6 passages after sorting as analyzed by flow cytometry.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33870

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Impact of EGFRvIII expression on EGFR downstream signaling, proliferation and clonogenicity. A. Effect

of EGFRvIII expression on EGFR signaling as determined by Western blot analysis using antibodies against (p)EGFR (Y1173), (p)AKT
(T308) and (p)ERK1/2 (T202/Y204). U87MG cell served as a negative control cell line. B. Morphology of EGFRvIII− /+ DKMG and
BS153 cells (phase-contrast microscopy, 100× magnification). C. Proliferation of EGFRvIII− and EGFRvIII+ DKMG and BS153 cells.
The cell number was determind for up to 8 days. D. Relative clonogenicity of EGFRvIII− /+ DKMG and BS153 cells as determined by
colony forming assay (pre-plating).

the cells were retained for colony growth (pre-plating).
A change in cellular radiosensitivity induced by gefitinib
was only seen for EGFRvIII+ DKMG cells (Figure 6A).
However, when these cells were trypsinized and replated for
colony growth 24 h after irradiation (delayed-plating), this
radiosensitization was completely abolished (Figure 6B).
For BS153, radiosensitivity was not affected in either
EGFRvIII− or EGFRvIII+ cells (Figure 6C).

expressing vectors [6, 7, 18]. The analysis in the present
study was performed for the first time with GBM cell
lines expressing endogenous EGFRvIII, with DKMG cells
showing more than 10% and BS153 more than 80% of
cells positive for EGFRvIII.
Both DKMG and BS153 cells were used to establish
sublines with either a very low (EGFRvIII− ) or very high
fraction of EGFRvIII positive cells (EGFRvIII+). These
sublines were found to differ in EGFR expression: The BS153
EGFRvIII+ subline is characterized by a strong expression of
EGFR and EGFRvIII, while the DKMG EGFRvIII+ subline
showed only a low expression of wild type EGFR and a
moderate expression of EGFRvIII. This divergence in EGFR
and EGFRvIII expression might explain the differences
observed concerning downstream signaling, proliferation

DISCUSSION
The aim of this study was to determine the impact
of EGFRvIII on the sensitivity of GBM cells towards IR
and anti-EGFR targeting. So far, such studies have been
performed with cell lines transfected with EGFRvIII
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33871

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Impact of EGFRvIII expression on DSB repair capacity and cellular radiosensitivity. A. Quantification of

residual γH2AX/53BP1 double positive foci in DKMGvIII−/+ and BS153vIII−/+ cells 24 h after irradiation with 2 Gy. B. Cell survival
after irradiation as assessed by colony forming assay (pre-plating).

and morphology. For DKMG cells, the EGFRvIII+ subline
exhibited merely greater ERK2 phosphorylation, while for
BS153 cells, the EGFRvIII+ subline displayed both greater
ERK1 and AKT phosphorylation, which is in line with
former siRNA data analyzing erlotinib resistant BS153
with elevated EGFRvIII level [19]. Additionally a slightly
impaired cell growth and an altered cell morphology can be
observed for the BS153 EGFRvIII+ subline when compared
to the EGFRvIII- subline. The only difference observed in
terms of DSB repair was also seen in the BS153 cells, with
the EGFRvIII+ subline showing an impaired repair capacity.
In this context p53 might be of importance, since BS153
sublines are mutated in p53 (R248Q) while DKMG sublines
—which did not display any differences in DSB repair—are
wild type (see Materials and Methods).
Strikingly, no significant difference in cellular
radiosensitivity was observed for either of the two sublines
derived from DKMG or BS153 cells. This observation
suggests that EGFRvIII has no impact on the cellular
radiosensitivity in these GBM cell lines. Surprisingly, when
compared to GBM cell lines lacking EGFRvIII expression
(LN229, U87MG, U251, CAS-1), both parental EGFRvIII
positive cell lines showed a higher radiosensitivity (Figure
1B). Since this difference cannot be attributed to the presence
of EGFRvIII, other still unknown factors appear to play a role,
with genetic differences between EGFR positive and negative
GBM cell lines likely of importance. However, a larger
number of EGFRvIII positive and negative GBM cell lines
still needs to be analyzed in order to bring clarity to this issue.
Using the DKMG and BS153 sublines, we also tested
whether EGFRvIII may influence the cell’s response to
EGFR targeting. In order to inhibit EGFR and EGFRvIII
signaling we used gefitinib, a small molecule inhibitor used
in clinical trials for the treatment of GBM patients [20, 21].
Again, greater effects were observed for the BS153 sublines,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

which showed a strong inhibition of EGFR downstream
signaling and a suppressed proliferation in EGFRvIII−, but
not in EGFRvIII+ cells. Nevertheless, no notable cytotoxic
effect was detected in any of the four EGFRvIII sublines after
treatment with gefitinib alone or after combined treatment
with irradiation. Even the small increase in radiosensitivity
seen for the EGFRvIII+ DKMG subline treated by gefitinib
was found to be abolished when cells were replated 24 h
after irradiation. This is assumed to result from a reversible
cell cycle arrest induced in p53wt DKMG cells through
combined treatment with EGFR inhibition and irradiation, as
recently demonstrated for p53wt NSCLC cells [22]. Overall,
these data demonstrate that both the cytotoxic as well as the
cytostatic effect of EGFR targeting in GBM cells does not
depend on EGFRvIII.
In contrast to the results presented here, strong
effects have been reported for EGFRvIII negative cell lines
transfected with EGFRvIII expressing vectors. EGFRvIII
was found not only to strongly enhance DSB repair and
to increase radioresistance, but also to accelerate tumor
growth [6, 7, 18]. In line with this, a reduction in DSB
repair and radioresistance was observed when EGFRvIII
transfected cells were treated with EGFR inhibitors. Taken
together, these data show that the effects of EGFRvIII in
transfected cells are different from those resulting from
endogenous expression and highlight the importance
of the experimental model system. In this context our
established isogenetic sublines facilitate the analysis of
EGFRvIII-mediated effects without cell engineering.
Our data suggest that the level of EGFRvIII
expression in GBM tumors cannot serve as a predictive
marker for increased radioresistance. This conclusion is in
line with recent clinical data showing a lack of association
between EGFRvIII expression and progression free and
overall survival for GBM patients treated with surgery,
33872

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Effect of gefitinib on EGFR signaling, proliferation and clonogenicity. DKMGvIII− /+ and BS153vIII− /+ cells
were treated with 5 μM gefitinib. A. After 2 h incubation, phosphorylation of EGFR (Y1173), AKT (T308) and ERK1/2 (T202/Y204)

was determined by Western blot analysis using phosphospecific antibodies. The detection of unphosphorylated proteins and actin served as
controls. B. Proliferation of DKMGvIII−/+ and BS153vIII−/+ cells in the presence of gefitinib (n = 2). The cell number was determind for
up to 8 days. The data set from Figure 3C was used for comparison with untreated cells. C. Relative cytotoxicity of gefitinib as determind by
colony forming assay (pre-plating). The surviving fraction of gefitinib-treated cells was normalized to the plating efficiency of untreated cells.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33873

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Effect of gefitinib on radiosensitivity. DKMGvIII−/+ and BS153vIII−/+ cells were treated with gefitinib for 2 h
before irradiation. Cell survival of DKMGvIII−/+ and BS153vIII−/+ cells was assesed by colony forming assay A, C. under pre-plating
conditions and B. delayed plating conditions (only DKMGvIII+).

Cell culture

RT and CT according to current standards [13]. Recent
clinical trials have also failed to show a benefit of EGFR
targeting for the outcome of patients with GBM tumors,
while simultaneously demonstrating an increase in normal
tissue damage [14, 23, 24]. Our data further indicate that
EGFR targeting alone or in combination with RT does
not contribute to enhanced control of GBM tumors, even
when these are positive for EGFRvIII expression.
In summary, it is shown here for the first time
that endogenous EGFRvIII in GBM cells does not
affect radiosensitivity with or without EGFR targeting.
Nevertheless, the isogenetic EGFRvIII− and EGFRvIII+
sublines established here can be considered to be an
optimal tool for the analysis of the impact of EGFRvIII
on other parameters relevant for the outcome of GBM
tumor patients.

BS153 cells were generated by Jones et al. [15].
DKMG cell were obtained from the DSMZ (Germany)
and Cas-1 cells were obtained from Banca Biologica e
Cell Factory (Italy). BS153, LN229, U87MG, U251 and
Cas-1 cells were cultured in DMEM (Sigma-Aldrich)
supplemented with 10% FCS (Biochrome), 2 mM
L-glutamine and 1 mM sodium pyruvate (Sigma-Aldrich);
DKMG cells were cultured in RPMI (10%FCS, 2 mM
L-glutamine, 1 mM sodium pyruvate). In accordance to
Schulte et al. [25] all sublines derived from BS153 and
DKMG cells were grown in 10% heat inactivated FCS to
maintain EGFRvIII expression in the EGFRvIII+ sublines.
All cells were cultured at 37°C, 5% CO2 and 100%
humidification. Sequencing of the PTEN gene (exons 1–9)
revealed mutations in DKMG (T167A) and BS153 (C136Y)
cells (Table S1). Sequencing of the TP53 gene (exons 5–8)
confirmed a wild type sequence in DKMG and revealed a
R248Q mutation in BS153 cells (Supplementary Table S1).
All cells were identified by a short tandem repeat multiplex
assay (Applied Biosystems; Supplementary Table S2). The
morphology of cells was recorded using a phase-contrast
microscopy with 100x magnification (Zeiss Axioplan 2).

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Inhibitors and reagents
To inhibit EGFR and EGFRvIII activity, 5 μM
gefitinib (LC Laboratories, tyrosine kinase inhibitor)
dissolved in DMSO (Sigma) was used.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33874

Oncotarget

Irradiation

Immunofluorescence

Cells were irradiated at room temperature with
200 kV X-rays (Gulmay RS225, Gulmay Medical Ltd.,
15 mA, 0.8 mm Be + 0.5 mm Cu filtering) at a dose rate
of  1.2 Gy/min.

Immunofluorescent staining was performed as
described earlier [26]. For the detection of EGFRvIII, cells
were fixed (4% formalin, 15 min, RT) and stained with a
primary antibody (L8A4). For detection of γH2AX/53BP1
co-localized DSB repair foci, cells were fixed and
incubated with anti-phospho-Histone H2AX (Ser139,
Upstade) and anti-53BP1 (Novus, Biologicals) antibodies
with the respective secondary antibodies (fluoresceinlabeled anti-rabbit antibody, GE-Healthcare, Amersham™;
ALEXA fluor® 594-labeled anti-mouse antibody,
Molecular Probes; both 1:1000, at RT for 60 min); DNA
was then stained with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole
(DAPI; QBiogene). A confocal fluorescence microscope
(Zeiss Axioplan 2; 630-fold magnification) was used for
analysis. At least 100 nuclei with γH2AX/53BP1 double
positive foci were randomly selected and counted. Only
intact nuclei were analyzed.

Cell survival
Cell survival was determined using the colony
forming assay. For pre-plating, 250–350 cells were seeded
per 6-well plate 24 h prior to treatment. When incubated
with gefitinib, the medium was replaced 24 h after
treatment, followed by further incubation with AmnioMax
C-100 Basal Medium (Life Technologies) containing
10% FCS and C-100 supplement (Life Technologies)
to optimize colony formation. For delayed plating
experiments, 1x105 cells were seeded per flask and grown
for 6 days to achieve an exponentially growing culture
before treatment. Twenty-four hours after treatment, cells
were re-seeded for colony formation under the conditions
described above. Colonies were allowed to grow for 2 to
3 weeks depending on the treatment in order to adapt for
growth delay. Colonies were then fixed in 70% ethanol
and stained with crystal violet; colonies of more than 50
cells were counted. The surviving fraction of irradiated
or gefitinib-treated cells was normalized to the plating
efficiency of untreated cells.

Flow cytometry
Cells were stained with an EGFRvIII-specific
antibody as described above (Immunofluorescence).
Samples were analyzed using flow cytometry (FACScan
Canto, BD Biosciences).

Establishment of EGFRvIII+/− sublines
Parental DKMG and BS153 cell cultures
expressing EGFRvIII heterogeneously were used to
establish EGFRvIII+/− sublines. Cells cultures incubated
in phosphate buffered saline containing 3 mM EDTA
(PBS/EDTA, 15 min, 37°C) were detached by scraping,
followed by an incubation with anti-EGFRvIII antibody
(1 μg/ml) for 1 h at 4°C. Cells were then washed two times
with PBS/EDTA and exposed to a secondary antibody
(Alexa fluor® 647, Molecular Probes) for 1 h at 4°C. After
additional washing, cells were sorted according to either
absent or maximal EGFRvIII expression using an ARIA
III cytometer (BD Biosciences; FACS core facility of the
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf). The
separated EGFRvIII −/+ sublines were cultured in heat
inactivated FCS. In both sublines, the level of EGFRvIII
expression was found to be stable for at least 15–20
passages.

Cell cycle analysis
For cell cycle analysis, cells were harvested, fixed
by 70% ethanol and stored at –20°C. Thereafter cells
were washed with PBS (0.1% Tween) and the DNA was
stained with propidium iodide (PI, 10 μg/ml) containing
RNase A (RNase A 0.1 μg/ml) for 30 min at room
temperature. DNA histograms were constructed using flow
cytometry (FACS Scan Canto and FACSDiva software,
BD Biosciences) and the fraction of G1, S and G2 phase
cells was calculated using ModFit LT™ software (Verity
Software House, Inc.).

Western blot
Proteins from whole cell extracts were detected
by Western blot according to standard protocols. The
antibodies recognizing EGFR, pEGFR (Y1173), ERK,
pERK (T202, Y204), AKT and pAKT (T308) were
obtained from Cell Signaling Technology, while the
anti β-Actin antibody was purchased from SigmaAldrich. The EGFRvIII antibody (clone L8A4) was
kindly provided by D. Binger. Secondary anti-mouse
and anti-rabbit antibodies were purchased from LI-COR
Biosciences. The Odyssey® CLx Infrared Imaging System
(LI-COR Biosciences) was used for signal detection and
quantification.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Data evaluation
Unless otherwise indicated, experiments were
repeated at least three times. The data are presented as
mean values (±SEM). Prism software (GraphPad Prism 5,
Firma) was used for analyzing and graphing the data. The
unpaired student’s t-test was performed for the statistical
analysis. P-values were calculated using two-sided tests
(*p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001).
33875

Oncotarget

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING

6.	 Mukherjee B, McEllin B, Camacho CV, Tomimatsu N,
Sirasanagandala S, Nannepaga S, Hatanpaa KJ, Mickey B,
Madden C, Maher E, Boothman DA, Furnari F, Cavenee WK,
et al. EGFRvIII and DNA double-strand break repair:
a molecular mechanism for radioresistance in glioblastoma.
Cancer research. 2009; 69:4252–4259.

The authors gratefully acknowledge the technical
assistance of K. Hoffer, B. Riepen and K. Kolbe and the
FACS core facility (UKE).

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

7.	 Lammering G, Hewit TH, Valerie K, Contessa JN, Amorino GP,
Dent P, Schmidt-Ullrich RK. EGFRvIII-mediated radioresistance through a strong cytoprotective response. Oncogene.
2003; 22:5545–5553.

All authors declare no conflict of interest.

GRANT SUPPORT

8.	 Montano N, Cenci T, Martini M, D’Alessandris QG, Pelacchi F,
Ricci-Vitiani L, Maira G, De Maria R, Larocca LM,
Pallini R. Expression of EGFRvIII in glioblastoma: prognostic significance revisited. Neoplasia. 2011; 13:1113–1121.

N. Struve, M. Kriegs & E. Dikomey: City of Hamburg,
Landesexzellenzinitiative Hamburg (LEXI 2012; Tumor
targeting via cell surface molecules essential in cancer
progression and dissemination); M. Kriegs and E. Dikomey:
BMBF (02NUK032); M. Kriegs: Erich und Gertrud
Roggenbuck-Stiftung; Forschungsförderung der medizinischen
Fakultät am UKE, Hamburg; Spierling Stiftung.

9.	 Shinojima N, Tada K, Shiraishi S, Kamiryo T, Kochi M,
Nakamura H, Makino K, Saya H, Hirano H, Kuratsu J, Oka K,
Ishimaru Y, Ushio Y. Prognostic value of epidermal growth
factor receptor in patients with glioblastoma multiforme.
Cancer research. 2003; 63:6962–6970.
10.	 Heimberger AB, Suki D, Yang D, Shi W, Aldape K. The
natural history of EGFR and EGFRvIII in glioblastoma
patients. Journal of translational medicine. 2005; 3:38.

Editorial note
This paper has been accepted based in part on peerreview conducted by another journal and the authors’
response and revisions as well as expedited peer-review
in Oncotarget.

11.	 Liu L, Backlund LM, Nilsson BR, Grander D, Ichimura K,
Goike HM, Collins VP. Clinical significance of EGFR
amplification and the aberrant EGFRvIII transcript in conventionally treated astrocytic gliomas. Journal of molecular
medicine. 2005; 83:917–926.

REFERENCES

12.	 Pelloski CE, Ballman KV, Furth AF, Zhang L, Lin E,
Sulman EP, Bhat K, McDonald JM, Yung WK, Colman H,
Woo SY, Heimberger AB, Suki D, et al. Epidermal growth
factor receptor variant III status defines clinically distinct
subtypes of glioblastoma. Journal of clinical oncology : official journal of the American Society of Clinical Oncology.
2007; 25:2288–2294.

1.	 Stupp R, Hegi ME, Mason WP, van den Bent MJ, Taphoorn MJ,
Janzer RC, Ludwin SK, Allgeier A, Fisher B, Belanger K,
Hau P, Brandes AA, Gijtenbeek J, et al. Effects of radiotherapy with concomitant and adjuvant temozolomide
versus radiotherapy alone on survival in glioblastoma in a
randomised phase III study: 5-year analysis of the EORTCNCIC trial. The Lancet Oncology. 2009; 10:459–466.

13.	 Weller M, Kaulich K, Hentschel B, Felsberg J, Gramatzki D,
Pietsch T, Simon M, Westphal M, Schackert G, Tonn JC,
von Deimling A, Davis T, Weiss WA, et al. Assessment
and prognostic significance of the epidermal growth factor
receptor vIII mutation in glioblastoma patients treated with
concurrent and adjuvant temozolomide radiochemotherapy.
International journal of cancer Journal international du cancer. 2014; 134:2437–2447.

2.	 Stupp R, Mason WP, van den Bent MJ, Weller M, Fisher B,
Taphoorn MJ, Belanger K, Brandes AA, Marosi C, Bogdahn U,
Curschmann J, Janzer RC, Ludwin SK, et al. Radiotherapy plus
concomitant and adjuvant temozolomide for glioblastoma. The
New England journal of medicine. 2005; 352:987–996.
3.	 Adamson C, Kanu OO, Mehta AI, Di C, Lin N, Mattox AK,
Bigner DD. Glioblastoma multiforme: a review of where
we have been and where we are going. Expert opinion on
investigational drugs. 2009; 18:1061–1083.

14.	 Peereboom DM, Shepard DR, Ahluwalia MS, Brewer CJ,
Agarwal N, Stevens GH, Suh JH, Toms SA, Vogelbaum MA,
Weil RJ, Elson P, Barnett GH. Phase II trial of erlotinib
with temozolomide and radiation in patients with newly
diagnosed glioblastoma multiforme. Journal of neurooncology. 2010; 98:93–99.

4.	 Wong AJ, Ruppert JM, Bigner SH, Grzeschik CH,
Humphrey PA, Bigner DS, Vogelstein B. Structural alterations of the epidermal growth factor receptor gene in human
gliomas. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America. 1992; 89:2965–2969.

15.	 Jones G, Machado J Jr, Merlo A. Loss of focal adhesion
kinase (FAK) inhibits epidermal growth factor receptordependent migration and induces aggregation of nh(2)terminal FAK in the nuclei of apoptotic glioblastoma cells.
Cancer research. 2001; 61:4978–4981.

5.	 Del Vecchio CA, Giacomini CP, Vogel H, Jensen KC,
Florio T, Merlo A, Pollack JR, Wong AJ. EGFRvIII gene
rearrangement is an early event in glioblastoma tumorigenesis and expression defines a hierarchy modulated by epigenetic mechanisms. Oncogene. 2013; 32:2670–2681.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

16.	 Gan HK, Kaye AH, Luwor RB. The EGFRvIII variant in glioblastoma multiforme. Journal of clinical
33876

Oncotarget

neuroscience : official journal of the Neurosurgical Society
of Australasia. 2009; 16:748–754.

Kasten-Pisula U, Petersen C, et al. Radiosensitization
of NSCLC cells by EGFR inhibition is the result of an
enhanced p53-dependent G1 arrest. Radiotherapy and
Oncology. 2015; 115:120–127.

17.	 Nathanson DA, Gini B, Mottahedeh J, Visnyei K, Koga T,
Gomez G, Eskin A, Hwang K, Wang J, Masui K, Paucar A,
Yang H, Ohashi M, et al. Targeted therapy resistance mediated by dynamic regulation of extrachromosomal mutant
EGFR, DNA. Science. 2014; 343:72–76.

23.	 Gallego O, Cuatrecasas M, Benavides M, Segura PP,
Berrocal A, Erill N, Colomer A, Quintana MJ, Balana C,
Gil M, Gallardo A, Murata P, Barnadas A. Efficacy of
erlotinib in patients with relapsed gliobastoma multiforme who expressed EGFRVIII and PTEN determined by
immunohistochemistry. Journal of neuro-oncology. 2014;
116:413–419.

18.	 Golding SE, Morgan RN, Adams BR, Hawkins AJ, Povirk LF,
Valerie K. Pro-survival AKT and ERK signaling from
EGFR and mutant EGFRvIII enhances DNA double-strand
break repair in human glioma cells. Cancer biology & therapy. 2009; 8:730–738.

24.	 Kesavabhotla K, Schlaff CD, Shin B, Mubita L, Kaplan R,
Tsiouris AJ, Pannullo SC, Christos P, Lavi E, Scheff R,
Boockvar JA. Phase I/II study of oral erlotinib for treatment of relapsed/refractory glioblastoma multiforme and
anaplastic astrocytoma. Journal of experimental therapeutics & oncology. 2012; 10:71–81.

19.	 Schulte A, Liffers K, Kathagen A, Riethdorf S, Zapf S,
Merlo A, Kolbe K, Westphal M, Lamszus K. Erlotinib
resistance in EGFR-amplified glioblastoma cells is associated with upregulation of EGFRvIII and PI3Kp110delta.
Neuro-oncology. 2013; 15:1289–1301.
20.	 Mellinghoff IK, Wang MY, Vivanco I, Haas-Kogan DA,
Zhu S, Dia EQ, Lu KV, Yoshimoto K, Huang JH, Chute DJ,
Riggs BL, Horvath S, Liau LM, et al. Molecular determinants of the response of glioblastomas to EGFR kinase
inhibitors. The New England journal of medicine. 2005;
353:2012–2024.

25.	 Schulte A, Gunther HS, Martens T, Zapf S, Riethdorf S,
Wulfing C, Stoupiec M, Westphal M, Lamszus K.
Glioblastoma stem-like cell lines with either maintenance or
loss of high-level EGFR amplification, generated via modulation of ligand concentration. Clinical cancer research :
an official journal of the American Association for Cancer
Research. 2012; 18:1901–1913.

21.	 Rich JN, Reardon DA, Peery T, Dowell JM, Quinn JA,
Penne KL, Wikstrand CJ, Van Duyn LB, Dancey JE,
McLendon RE, Kao JC, Stenzel TT, Ahmed Rasheed BK,
et al. Phase II trial of gefitinib in recurrent glioblastoma.
Journal of clinical oncology : official journal of the
American Society of Clinical Oncology. 2004; 22:133–142.

26.	 Myllynen L, Rieckmann T, Dahm-Daphi J, Kasten-Pisula U,
Petersen C, Dikomey E, Kriegs M. In tumor cells regulation
of DNA double strand break repair through EGF receptor
involves both NHEJ and HR and is independent of p53 and
K-Ras status. Radiotherapy and oncology : journal of the
European Society for Therapeutic Radiology and Oncology.
2011; 101:147–151.

22.	 Kriegs M, Gurtner K, Can Y, Brammer I, Rieckmann T,
Oertel RD, Wysocki M, Dorniok F, Gal A, Grob TJ, Laban S,

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33877

Oncotarget

