www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2017, Vol. 8, (No. 7), pp: 10891-10904
Research Paper

Gedunin inhibits pancreatic cancer by altering sonic hedgehog
signaling pathway
Ramadevi Subramani1, Elizabeth Gonzalez2, Sushmita Bose Nandy1, Arunkumar
Arumugam1, Fernando Camacho2, Joshua Medel2, Damilola Alabi2, Rajkumar
Lakshmanaswamy1,2
1

 enter of Emphasis in Cancer Research, Department of Biomedical Sciences, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center,
C
Paul L. Foster School of Medicine, El Paso, Texas-79905, USA

2

Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, El Paso, Texas-79905, USA

Correspondence to: Rajkumar Lakshmanaswamy, email: rajkumar.lakshmanaswamy@ttuhsc.edu
Keywords: pancreatic cancer, gedunin, metastasis, hedgehog/gli signaling, apoptosis
Received: December 21, 2015     Accepted: February 25, 2016     Published: March 14, 2016

ABSTRACT
INTRODUCTION: The lack of efficient treatment options for pancreatic
cancer highlights the critical need for the development of novel and effective
chemotherapeutic agents. The medicinal properties found in plants have been used to
treat many different illnesses including cancers. This study focuses on the anticancer
effects of gedunin, a natural compound isolated from Azadirachta indica.
METHODS: Anti–proliferative effect of gedunin on pancreatic cancer cells was
assessed using MTS assay. We used matrigel invasion assay, scratch assay, and soft
agar colony formation assay to measure the anti–metastatic potential of gedunin.
Immunoblotting was performed to analyze the effect of gedunin on the expression of
key proteins involved in pancreatic cancer growth and metastasis. Gedunin induced
apoptosis was measured using flow cytometric analysis. To further validate, xenograft
studies with HPAC cells were performed.
RESULTS: Gedunin treatment is highly effective in inducing death of pancreatic
cancer cells via intrinsic and extrinsic mediated apoptosis. Our data further indicates
that gedunin inhibited metastasis of pancreatic cancer cells by decreasing their
EMT, invasive, migratory and colony formation capabilities. Gedunin treatment also
inhibited sonic hedgehog signaling pathways. Further, experiments with recombinant
sonic hedgehog protein and Gli inhibitor (Gant-61) demonstrated that gedunin induces
its anti–metastatic effect through inhibition of sonic hedgehog signaling. The anti–
cancer effect of gedunin was further validated using xenograft mouse model.
CONCLUSION: Overall, our data suggests that gedunin could serve as a potent
anticancer agent against pancreatic cancers.

with pancreatic cancer in the U.S. and 337,000 globally
by the end of 2015 [4]. The high metastatic nature and
late stage diagnosis of this disease mainly contribute to
its high lethality establishing an essential need for the
development of novel chemotherapeutic agents against
this deadly disease.
Many phytochemicals have been explored for
their abilities to not only treat/prevent carcinogenesis
progression but also for their abilities to overcome the
extreme side effects of chemotherapy [1]. Azadirachta

INTRODUCTION
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma remains a highly
malignant disease with very poor prognosis. It is the 4th
leading cause of cancer related deaths in the United States
and it is projected to become the 2nd leading cause of
cancer related deaths by the year 2030 [1–3]. Mortality
rates are the highest with a 5-year survival rate of
approximately 6% for all stages of pancreatic cancer [4].
It is estimated that 48,960 new cases will be diagnosed

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10891

Oncotarget

indica, commonly known as Neem, is a tree found
predominantly in Asian and African countries where it has
been widely used for its many medicinal properties [5].
Isolated Neem extracts have been studied for their anti–
cancer effects on variety of cancers such as breast, colon,
cervical, amongst others [6–10]. We have previously
demonstrated the efficacy of ethanolic Neem leaf extracts
in inhibiting mammary carcinogenesis by altering
proliferation, apoptosis and angiogenesis [11]. Gedunin
(tetranortriterpenoid) is an active ingredient derived from
Neem extracts. Gedunin has shown to have potential
anticancer activity by inhibiting proliferation of breast
cancer cells via modulation of certain heat shock proteins
[12]. Additionally, anti–proliferative effects have been
observed in ovarian cancer cells in response to gedunin
treatment through regulation of important signaling
pathways [13].
Mutated KRAS is observed in >90% of pancreatic
cancer cases and its downstream mediator, GLI1, is
responsible for KRAS–induced pancreatic development/
transformation [14]. Other studies demonstrated that GLI1
transcription factor acts synergistically with activated
KRAS to induce metastatic pancreatic cancer [15].
Aberrant Hedgehog/GLI signaling pathway activity has
been associated with growth and progression in many
cancer types including pancreatic cancer [16]. It was
discovered that sonic hedgehog (Shh) was aberrantly
expressed in 70% of pancreatic adenocarcinoma tissues
[17]. Overexpression of Shh alone was sufficient to
induce pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PanIN) [18].
Shh signaling activates GLI transcription factors which
possess oncogenic characteristics and are deregulated in
malignant cancers resulting in invasion and metastasis,
chemo–resistance,
and
epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition [19]. According to previous reports, inhibition of
upstream target sonic hedgehog (Shh) results in decreased
expression of GLI1, therefore inhibiting tumor growth in
xenograft models [17]. This highlights the crucial role of
the Hedgehog/GLI signaling pathway in K-RAS driven
pancreatic cancer for chemotherapeutic developments.
Herein, we demonstrate that gedunin induces
anticancer activity on pancreatic cancer by inhibiting
proliferation and metastasis through alteration of Shh/
GLI1 signaling pathway and also by inducing apoptotic
cell death.

PANC-1 cells with increasing concentrations of gedunin
(5 to 50 μM). The cell viability analysis exhibited that
gedunin induced approximately 50% cell death at 25μM
concentration in all three pancreatic cancer cell lines
(Figure 1A-1F). However, 25μM of gedunin was not able
to significantly alter cell viability of normal pancreatic
cells (hTERT-HPNE) (Figure 1G) suggesting that gedunin
selectively kills pancreatic cancer cells and is nontoxic to
normal pancreatic cells. In addition, microscopic analysis
also showed no or minimal reduction in cell number of
normal pancreatic cells (hTERT-HPNE) treated with
gedunin (Figure 1H). This data is encouraging because
gedunin seems to be specifically targeting pancreatic
cancer cells more efficiently than normal pancreatic
cells. Proliferative markers such as phosphorylated forms
of AKT, PI3K, mTOR, and p70S6K were significantly
down–regulated in the pancreatic cancer cell lines treated
with 25μM gedunin (Figure 1I). These results demonstrate
the anti–proliferative potential of gedunin on aggressive
pancreatic cancer cells

Gedunin induces apoptosis in pancreatic
cancer cells
The effect of gedunin on apoptosis was analyzed
using Annexin V–FITC Apoptosis Detection Kit I.
Gedunin treatment (25μM) demonstrated the induction
of apoptosis in HPAC (46.5%), MIAPaCa-2 (37.6%),
and PANC-1 (44.7%) cells (Figures 2A and 2B). Pro–
apoptotic markers Bax, cleaved Caspase 3, and cleaved
PARP were increased in response to gedunin treatment in
all three pancreatic cancer cells. Interestingly, Bcl-2, an
anti–apoptotic marker, was decreased in gedunin–treated
pancreatic cancer cells. In addition, Caspase 8, one of the
signature markers for death receptor pathway of apoptosis
was increased in response to gedunin treatment. This
indicates that gedunin–treatment induces both intrinsic
and extrinsic mediated apoptotic cell death (Figure 2C).
TUNEL assay results further confirmed the apoptotic
effect of gedunin on pancreatic cancer cells (Figure 2D).

Gedunin reduces the migratory characteristics of
pancreatic cancer cells
The migratory ability of a cancer cell is crucial
for the development of metastasis. The effect of
gedunin on HPAC, MIAPaCa-2 and PANC-1 cells
migratory capabilities was evaluated using the scratch
assay. Gedunin treatment (15μM) effectively inhibited
the migratory abilities of all pancreatic cancer cells
compared to control groups. The control cells migrated
and completely filled the scratch within 72h. Even after
72h, HPAC, MIAPaCa-2, and PANC-1 cells treated with
gedunin were only able to migrate ~55%, 14%, and 28%,
respectively (Figure 3A-3F).

RESULTS
Gedunin inhibits cell viability of pancreatic
cancer cells
The effect of gedunin on cell viability of pancreatic
cancer cell lines was tested using an MTS assay. Upon
24h of gedunin treatment, a dose–dependent decrease in
cell viability was observed in HPAC, MIAPaCa-2, and

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10892

Oncotarget

Metastasis is reduced in gedunin treated
pancreatic cancer cells

gedunin on colony forming abilities of pancreatic cancer
cell lines. Crystal violet staining showed the reduced
size and number of colonies in gedunin treated cells
compared to the control groups (Figure 4D). Quantitative
analysis revealed that gedunin inhibited ~80 to 88% of
colony forming ability of pancreatic cancer cells (Figure
4E). These results indicate that gedunin is effective in
blocking EMT.

Epithelial to mesenchymal transition, invasion
and colony forming capacities are important events
involved in metastatic progression. Using Western blots
we studied the expression of key proteins involved in the
EMT process, which drives the metastatic progression
of cancers. We observed that pro–EMT markers such as
Snail, N-cadherin, Vimentin, Slug, Notch 1 & 2, and Zeb
were downregulated while anti–EMT marker, E-cadherin,
was upregulated with 25μM gedunin treatment (Figure
4A). Next, we used the Matrigel–coated Boyden chambers
to assess the effect of gedunin on the invasive capabilities
of the pancreatic cancer cells. Treatment with 15μM of
gedunin profoundly inhibited the invasive capacity of
HPAC, MIAPaCa-2 and PANC-1 cells by 80.5%, 88.6%,
and 72.5% respectively (Figures 4B and 4C). Further,
soft agar assays were conducted to observe the effects of

Sonic hedgehog/Gli–signaling was reduced upon
gedunin treatment in pancreatic cancer cells
The Sonic hedgehog/Gli signaling pathway has
been shown to promote cancer progression. Shh and
Gli1 were upregulated in all pancreatic cancer cell lines
such as HPAC, MIAPaCa-2, and PANC-1 compared to
normal pancreatic cell line hTERT HPNE (Figure 5A).
To understand the molecular mechanism behind the anti–
cancer effects of gedunin on pancreatic cancer, we sought

Figure 1: Gedunin inhibits cell viability of pancreatic cancer cells. A. C. E. and G. Cells were treated with 5-50μM gedunin

(GD). Cell viability was assessed using MTS analysis after treatment with different doses of gedunin for 24h. B. D. F. and H. Control and
25μM gedunin treated cells (their IC50 concentration) were visualized under light microscope at 10X magnification. I. Western blot analysis
of total and phosphorylated forms of AKT, PI3K, mTOR, and p70s6kinase in pancreatic cancer cell lysates treated with 25μM gedunin.
Data are expressed as the mean ± SEM (*p<0.05) of three separate experiments.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10893

Oncotarget

to investigate the role of gedunin on Hedgehog signaling
pathway. Gedunin treated pancreatic cancer cells were
effectively downregulated PTCH1, PTCH2, Gli1, SUFU
and Shh proteins involved in Hedgehog/Gli signaling
pathway (Figure 5B). HPAC cells were used for further
experiments due to their aggressive nature and higher
protein expression levels of Shh.
Exogenous supplementation of rhShh (0.5, 1, and
2μg/ml) increased the expression levels of Shh in a dose–
dependent manner, compared to the control cells (Figure
5C). Based on our findings we decided to use 1μg/ml
rhShh for further experiments as it was sufficient enough to
significantly increase the expression of Shh levels similar
to highest dose tested (2μg/ml rhShh) in comparison to
the control cells. Then GANT-61 a Gli inhibitor was
used to investigate the effect of Gli in gedunin–induced

anticancer effect. GANT-61 significantly inhibited the
Gli1 expression in a dose–dependent manner. Our results
showed that 5μM GANT-61 was as effective as the highest
dose tested (10μM), so we chose 5μM dose for further
studies (Figure 5D). Immunofluorescence microscopy
provided further insight on the level of intracellular Gli1
and Shh expression in response to different treatments.
Cells treated with 1μg/ml rhShh demonstrated higher
expression levels of Gli1 and Shh in comparison to the
control cells. Whereas HPAC cells treated with 25μM
gedunin or 5μM GANT-61 had minimal expression
levels of Gli1 and Shh. Interestingly, the addition of
gedunin to rhShh treatment group resulted in a significant
reduction in Gli1 and Shh expression. Inhibition of Gli1
through GANT-61 decreased the expression levels of
Shh indicating the possibility of a feedback regulation in

Figure 2: Gedunin induced apoptosis in pancreatic cancer cells. A. and B. Apoptosis of pancreatic cancer cells treated with

25μM gedunin was detected using flow cytometry. After 24h treatment with Gedunin, cells were stained with Annexin V-FITC/PI. HPAC,
MIAPaCa-2, and PANC-1 cells were treated with 25μM gedunin for 24h and protein lysates were subjected to immunoblotting. C. Western
blotting was performed using antibodies against Bax, Bcl-2, Cleaved Caspase 3, Cleaved PARP, and Caspase 8. D. Pancreatic cancer
cells were treated with 25μM gedunin for 24h and then labeled with DAPI and TUNEL solution. Detection of TUNEL positive cells was
observed using confocal microscopy. Data are expressed as the mean ± SEM (*p<0.05) of three separate experiments.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10894

Oncotarget

Hedgehog signaling by Gli1 (Figures 5E and 5F). These
data demonstrate gedunin’s ability to negatively influence
the Hedgehog/Gli pathway.
Our results further demonstrate that overexpression
of Shh resulted in marginally increasing cell viability.
Gedunin, however was able to inhibit cell viability even
in cells with high levels of Shh. In addition, treatment
with Gli inhibitor GANT-61 also resulted in reduction
in cell viability in pancreatic cancer cells overexpressing
Shh (Figure 5G). These data indicate the gedunin inhibits
pancreatic cancer cell viability by targeting the Shh/Gli
signaling pathway.

ailments by altering Shh/Gli signaling. Classic scratch
assay was performed to assess the migratory capacity of
cells. Cells treated with 1μg/ml rhShh migrated 100% of
the scratch within 48h, while gedunin–treated (15μM)
cells failed to close the scratch even after 72h. Cells
treated with both 15μM gedunin and 1μg/ml rhShh had
migrated only 23% of the scratch after 72h incubation,
indicating gedunin’s efficacy in halting migration
even in the presence of exogenous rhShh (Figures 6A
and 6B).
As expected, in matrigel invasion assay, cells
treated with rhShh (1μg/ml) displayed exponentially
higher numbers of invading cells, compared to the control
group. Gedunin displayed reduced number of invaded
cells, similar to GANT-61 (5μM). Addition of gedunin
efficiently inhibited rhShh–induced invasion of pancreatic
cancer cells. Our data demonstrates that Shh/Gli signaling
is important for metastasis and that gedunin effectively

Gedunin inhibits metastasis of pancreatic cancer
cell through the sonic hedgehog/Gli signaling
To further confirm gedunin’s anti–metastatic
characteristics, we tested events crucial for metastatic

Figure 3: Gedunin reduces the migratory characteristics of pancreatic cancer cells. A. C. and E. The migratory capabilities
of HPAC, MIAPaCa-2, and PANC-1 cells treated with 15μM gedunin were evaluated using the scratch assay. B. D. and F. Graphical
representation of migration in pancreatic cancer cells was calculated via NIS-Element AR software. Data are expressed as the mean ± SEM
(*p<0.05) of three separate experiments.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10895

Oncotarget

Gedunin inhibited pancreatic cancer growth and
metastasis in HPAC xenograft models

targets this pathway resulting in reduced metastatic
potential of pancreatic cancer cells (Figures 6C and 6D).
We further investigated the effect of gedunin on
HPAC cells treated with rhShh in order to test its efficacy
in inhibiting pancreatic cancer growth and metastasis.
Our results demonstrate a significant downregulation of
Notch 1 & 2, Slug, Snail, Zeb and N-Cadherin in response
to gedunin treatment. Additionally, gedunin upregulated
the expression of E-cadherin even in the presence of
high levels of Shh (Figure 6E). Moreover, gedunin was
highly effective in reducing the expression of proliferative
markers such as pAKT, pPI3K, pmTOR, and pP70S6K,
which were upregulated by rhShh treatment (Figure 6F).
Gedunin similarly influenced the hedgehog signaling
markers (PTCH1, PTCH2, Gli1, SUFU and Shh) (Figure
6G). All these data demonstrate that Shh/Gli signaling
is enhanced in pancreatic cancer cells and gedunin
effectively targets this signaling pathway and inhibits
pancreatic cancer progression.

To further validate the anti–cancer activity of
gedunin, we performed xenograft studies using athymic
nude mice. HPAC cells (1 × 106 cells) were transplanted
subcutaneously in the flanks of the nude mice. After
palpable tumors developed (~100 mm3), the nude mice
were randomly divided into two groups (control and
gedunin (20 mg/kg body weight) treatment groups,
n=6). Gedunin was administered five times a week for a
month, while the controls received vehicle treatment at
the same frequency for the same duration. No significant
difference in body weight was recorded for either group,
indicating that gedunin treatment is safe and does not have
any toxic effects (Figure 7A). Our results demonstrated
that gedunin effectively suppressed pancreatic tumor
growth as evidenced by a significant decrease in tumor
volume compared to the untreated control group (Figure

Figure 4: Metastasis is reduced in gedunin treated pancreatic cancer cells. A. Expression levels of EMT signaling proteins

(Snail, E-Cadherin, N-Cadherin, Vimentin, Slug, Notch 2, and Zeb) were measured by Western blotting. B. and C. Matrigel invasion
assay evaluating invading abilities of pancreatic cancer cells treated with 15μM gedunin, which was recorded using Nikon Eclipse TS 100
microscope (20X magnification). D. and E. Soft agar assay represents inhibition of colony formation in HPAC, MIAPaCa-2 and PANC-1
cells treated with 15μM gedunin. Data are expressed as the mean ± SEM (*p<0.05) of three separate experiments.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10896

Oncotarget

7B, 7C and 7D). Immunohistochemical staining of the
tumor tissue demonstrated a significant decrease of Gli1,
Shh and Snail expression in the gedunin treated mice
compared to the control group (Figure 7E). In control
nude mice, micro–metastasis was observed in brain, liver,
and lung; Gedunin–treated mice showed no metastasis
to distant organs as illustrated through hematoxylin
and eosin staining (Figure 7F). To further confirm the
anti–metastatic effect of gedunin observed in vitro, we
conducted immunoblotting for key molecular players
of EMT. Pro–EMT markers N-Cadherin, Vimentin, and
Notch 2 were downregulated, while the epithelial marker
E-Cadherin was up regulated in gedunin–treated tumors
(Figure 7G). Further, expression levels of molecular

markers involved in the Shh signaling pathway were
also analyzed. Consistent with our in vitro findings,
mice treated with gedunin had a decreased expression of
PTCH1, PTCH 2, Gli1, SUFU, and Shh in comparison to
the control group (Figure 7H). These results corroborate
our in vitro findings that gedunin suppresses metastasis
via Hedgehog/Gli1 signaling, leading to reduced tumor
burden.

DISCUSSION
Pancreatic cancer carries the worst prognosis due
to its metastatic nature. Unfortunately, the available
conventional treatments for pancreatic cancer remain

Figure 5: Sonic hedgehog/Gli–signaling was reduced upon gedunin treatment in pancreatic cancer cells. A. The expression

levels of Shh and Gli1 in normal pancreatic cells (hTERT-HPNE) and pancreatic cancer cell lines (PANC-1, HPAC and MIAPaCa-2). B.
Western blot analysis of Hedgehog/Gli1 signaling protein expressions in pancreatic cancer cells treated with 25μM gedunin. C. and D.
Standardization analysis to identify the effective dose of rhShh and Gli1 inhibitor (GANT-61) in HPAC cells using Western blot analysis.
Immunofluorescence analysis of Gli1 E. and Shh F. expression in HPAC cells treated with 25μM gedunin, 1μg/ml rhShh with or without
gedunin, and 5μM GANT-61 with or without 1μg/ml rhShh. Immunofluorescence images were captured using confocal microscopy at 60X
magnification. Experiments were done in triplicates. G. Cell viability of HPAC cells were studied using MTS assay on cells were treated
with 1μg/ml rhShh, 25μM gedunin alone or in combination with 1μg/ml rhShh, and 5 μM GANT-61 alone or in combination with 1μg/ml
rhShh. Data are expressed as the mean ± SEM (*p<0.05) of three separate experiments.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10897

Oncotarget

ineffective as a result of its acquired chemo–resistance,
thus emphasizing the need for the development of novel
chemotherapeutic strategies [20]. Natural compounds are
reported to have the capabilities of inhibiting proliferation
and inducing apoptosis in cancer cells [21]. In fact,
they have revolutionized the field of cancer therapy
development as; more natural compounds are being
tested in the preclinical and clinical trials [22]. Gedunin, a
bioactive compound derived from the Neem tree, appears
to be an effective natural chemotherapeutic agent due
to its potent anticancer effects on many types of cancer
such as oral, prostate, ovarian, and colon [12]. Gedunin
is a limonoid and it has been shown to be an effective
anticancer drug [13, 23]. Using liquid chromatography/

mass spectrometry (LC/MS) the human plasma levels
of limonoids were estimated [24, 25]. They found
that increasing doses of limonin was associated with
increased availability of limonins in the plasma (1.74
to 5.27 nmol/L). Further, the mean time to maximum
concentration in the plasma was observed at 6 hours. All
these data clearly demonstrate that the limonoid-gedunin is
bioavailable. In our present study, we found that gedunin is
an effective anticancer agent against the human pancreatic
adenocarcinoma cells. Further, we also demonstrate that
gedunin did not have any toxic effects on the normal
pancreatic cells. These findings are interesting and suggest
that gedunin could be a potential chemotherapeutic drug
for pancreatic cancer.

Figure 6: Gedunin inhibits growth and metastasis of pancreatic cancer cell through the sonic hedgehog/Gli signaling.

A. Migratory abilities of HPAC cells treated with 15μM gedunin, 1μg/ml rhShh with or without 15μM gedunin, and 5μM GANT-61
with or without 1μg/ml rhShh were recorded for 72h using Nikon Biostation CT. B. Quantification of distance migrated by the cells was
obtained via NIS-Element AR software. C. and D. The invading capabilities of HPAC cells with various treatments (15μM gedunin, 1μg/
ml rhShh with or without 15μM gedunin, and 5μM GANT-61 with or without 1μg/ml rhShh) were visualized using Nikon Eclipse TS 100
microscope (20 X magnifications) and invaded cells were also quantified from 5 different fields per treatment. Western blotting analysis
of HPAC cells treated with 25μM gedunin or 1μg/ml rhShh alone or in combination was done using antibodies against E. EMT molecular
markers, F. proliferative markers, and G. Hedgehog/Gli1 signaling markers. Data are expressed as the mean ± SEM (*p<0.05) of three
separate experiments.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10898

Oncotarget

It is well known that both the intrinsic and extrinsic
pathways are involved in cellular apoptosis [26]. Bcl2 family is mainly involved in regulating intrinsic
pathway of apoptosis, which is mainly dependent on the
expression of Bcl-2 and Bax. On the other hand, increased
expression of cleaved caspase 8 indicates the activation
of extrinsic pathway of apoptosis [27]. We observed
increased expressions of Bax, cleaved Caspase 3, cleaved
Caspase 8 and cleaved PARP and while Bcl-2 expression
was decreased in gedunin treated pancreatic cancer cells.
Collectively, these data demonstrate that gedunin induces
apoptosis through both the intrinsic and extrinsic pathways
in pancreatic cancer cells. Furthermore, gedunin also
impacts the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway in such a way
to inhibit pancreatic cancer growth. PI3K/AKT/mTOR
pathway plays a significant role in the growth and survival
of various cancer cells [28]. Gedunin effectively inhibited

the activation of PI3K and its downstream signaling
by dephosphorylating PI3K at Tyr458/Tyr199, AKT at
Ser473, p70S6K at Thr389 and mTOR at Ser2448. These
data demonstrate that gedunin is effective in negatively
regulating PI3K downstream signaling at several levels
leading to reduced survival of pancreatic cancer cells.
Gedunin was highly effective in inhibiting the
aggressive and metastatic nature of the pancreatic cells
which was evident from the reduced levels of migration,
invasion and also decreased colony forming capabilities.
Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a
crucial process involved in initiation and progression of
metastasis [29]. During EMT there is loss or reduction
of epithelial characteristics and the gain of mesenchymal
characteristics leading to the loss of cell-to-cell adhesion,
promotion of invasion, and subsequently induction of
metastasis [30]. EMT can be initiated by many different

Figure 7: Gedunin inhibited pancreatic cancer growth and metastasis in HPAC xenograft models. Nude mice bearing

HPAC tumors (~100 mm3) were divided into two groups (i) Control (vehicle-DMSO) and (ii) gedunin (20mg/kg body weight). A. Body
weight and B. tumor volume were measured twice weekly for 30 days. C. Control and gedunin treated mice with HPAC xenografts. D.
Representative data demonstrating excised tumors of both control and gedunin treated mice. E. Gedunin treated HPAC xenograft tissues
were evaluated by IHC for Gli1, Shh, and Snail expression. F. Micrometastasis in control xenografts observed in brain, lung, and liver using
hematoxylin and eosin staining. Immunoblots of xenograft tumor tissues for G. EMT markers and H. Hedgehog/Gli1 signaling markers.
Data are expressed as the mean ± SEM (*p<0.05) of three separate experiments.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10899

Oncotarget

signaling pathways and there are key molecules in these
pathways that regulate EMT [31]. Our data demonstrated
that gedunin inhibits EMT by decreasing the expression of
mesenchymal markers N-Cadherin, Slug, Snail, Vimentin,
Notch 1 & 2, and Zeb while increasing the expression of
epithelial marker E-cadherin. These effects of gedunin
could be attributed to the inhibition of the three essential
metastatic events namely migration, invasion, and colony
formation in pancreatic cancer cells. Together, our data
shows that gedunin is able to inhibit cell proliferation,
increase apoptosis, while at the same time inhibiting the
metastatic characteristics of pancreatic cancer cells.
The inhibition or suppression of EMT in pancreatic
cancer cells is significant and understanding the molecular
mechanism is crucial for making advances in treating
pancreatic cancers. Recent findings have deemed that
molecularly targeted therapies are the most promising
cancer therapies [32]. Oncogenic KRAS mutations
account for >95% of pancreatic cancer development
[33]. In addition, its constitutive activity stimulates
downstream effectors such as Hedgehog signaling [34]. It
has been discovered that various cancers contain aberrant
Hedgehog signaling activation which is responsible for
1/3 of cancer–related deaths; making this pathway an
ideal target for chemotherapeutic development [35].
Overexpression of Gli1, a downstream transcription factor
of the Hedgehog signaling pathway, is observed in many
cancers and is suggested to play a role in the development
and progression of metastatic diseases [36]. Here we
show that gedunin effectively targets the Shh/Gli pathway
in pancreatic cancer cells. Our study demonstrated a
significant increase of Shh and Gli1 expression in all the
pancreatic cancer cell lines tested, confirming aberrant
Shh/Gli1 activity in pancreatic cancers. Importantly,
gedunin effectively reduced the expression of key
molecular markers involved in the Shh signaling pathway
including Shh, Gli1, PTCH1 and 2, and SUFU. Earlier
it was reported that pancreatic cancer tissue had higher
expression of Shh, PTCH1 and Gli 1 mRNA compared to
adjacent normal pancreatic tissue [37, 38]. Although the
direct crosstalk between Gli1 and EMT is not completely
elucidated, it is known that Gli1 exhibits a pro–
tumorigenic effect on pancreatic cancer cells by altering
the EMT process [39]. GANT-61, a well–established Gli1
inhibitor was used to confirm if gedunin–induced its effect
through Gli1. Our findings suggest that gedunin–induced
Gli1 inhibition led to inhibition of pancreatic cancer
migration and invasion even in the presence of exogenous
rhShh. Based on our data, we can speculate that gedunin’s
anticancer potential is driven through inhibition of EMT
by targeting Gli1.
To further validate our in vitro findings we
used the in vivo xenograft model. Gedunin efficiently
suppressed tumor growth in in vivo xenograft models
with insignificant changes to body weight; suggesting that
gedunin could be a safe anticancer agent with minimal side
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

effects. The animals that received gedunin did not exhibit
any discomfort. This is important to measure in order to
avoid harsh and severe side effects usually recorded in
many of the conventional chemotherapies available today
[40]. Furthermore, gedunin inhibited micro–metastasis
in the brain, liver and lung when compared to control
animals. Similar to our in vitro data, we also observed that
gedunin suppressed the Hedgehog/Gli1 signaling pathway
and EMT in the xenograft tumors as well. These data
validates that gedunin induces anticancer/anti–metastatic
effects by targeting Hedgehog/Gli1 signaling pathway. In
conclusion, our findings highlight the potential of gedunin
as a potent anticancer drug for pancreatic cancer. Further
studies are required to understand the pharmacokinetics
and pharmacodynamics of gedunin for it to be considered
as an anticancer agent with high clinical translational
potential.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Ethics statement
All experiments performed were reviewed and
approved by the Texas Tech University Health Sciences
Center Institutional Biosafety Committee and Institutional
Animal and Care and Use Committee.

Cell lines and reagents
hTERT HPNE (human normal pancreatic epithelial
cells) and HPAC, PANC-1 and MIAPaCa-2 (pancreatic
cancer cell lines) were purchased from the American
Type Culture Collection. The cell lines were characterized
and authenticated by ATCC based on morphology,
karyotyping and PCR assays. Cells were cultured at 37°C
in a humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2. Similar
to our prior studies, the above mentioned cell lines were
supplemented with the appropriate culture medias such as
Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s media, M3 base Media and
RPMI-1640 [41].
Gedunin was acquired from Tocris Bioscience
(Bristol, UK). MTS reagent [3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2yl)-5-(3-carboxymethoxyphenyl)-2-(4-sulfophenyl)-2Htetrazolium] and DeadEnd Fluorometric TUNEL system
were purchased from Promega (Madison, WI, USA). BSA
was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Corporation (St Louis,
MO, USA). BD Pharmingen Annexin V-FITC Apoptosis
Detection Kit I was obtained from BD Biosciences
(San Diego, CA, USA). GANT-61 and Recombinant
Sonic Hedgehog/Shh (C24II) were purchased from
R&D Systems (Minneapolis, MN). Mammalian protein
extraction reagent (mPER) was acquired from Thermo
Scientific (Rockford, IL, USA). All experimental
procedures, reagents and chemicals used in this study were
approved by the Texas Tech University Health Sciences
Center Institutional Biosafety Committee.
10900

Oncotarget

The primary antibodies used for western blot analysis
were: pAKT (sc-101629), AKT (sc-5298), Bcl-2 (sc783) and Notch 1 (sc-23299) obtained from Santa Cruz
Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA, USA); Notch 2 (4530P),
Snail (3879), E-cadherin (3195), N-cadherin (4061), Zeb
(3396), Vimentin (5741), Slug (9585), Bax (2772), cleaved
caspase-3 (9661), cleaved PARP (9542), pPI3K (4228),
PI3K (4292), pPTEN (9549), pmTOR (2974), mTOR
(4517), p-p70s6kinase (9206), p70s6kinase (9202), Shh
(2207), PTCH1 (2468), PTCH2 (2470), SUFU (2520) and
Gli1(3538) were procured from Cell Signaling Technology,
Boston, MA, USA; Caspase 8 (ab 25901) was purchased
from Abcam (Cambridge, MA, USA) and β-actin from
Sigma Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). Appropriate anti–
mouse and anti–rabbit secondary antibodies were purchased
from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA, USA).

were plated at a density of 5 × 104 cells/well for PANC1 and 8 × 104 cells/well for HPAC and MIAPaCa-2 in
the upper chamber of 6.5 mm transwell with 8.0μm pore
polycarbonate membrane inserts (Corning Incorporated,
Corning, NY, USA) coated with matrigel (Company,
Bedford, MA, USA). Cells were treated with 15μM
gedunin for 48h. Growth media (600μl) containing 10%
FBS was added in the lower chamber of the transwell as
a chemo–attractant. Invaded cells in the lower chamber
were fixed and stained with 0.2% crystal violet in 5%
formalin. Randomly selected fields, with a magnification
of 20X, were imaged and captured via Nikon Eclipse TS
100 microscope.
In another set of experiments 15μM gedunin, 1μg/
ml rhShh, 5μM GANT-61, 1μg/ml rhShh and 15μM
gedunin, and 1μg/ml rhShh and 5μM GANT-61 were
administered to HPAC cells for 48h to investigate the role
of sonic hedgehog on the invasive capacity of pancreatic
cancer cells.

MTS assay
MTS assay was conducted to analyze cell
proliferation. Cells (hTERT HPNE, HPAC, MIAPaCa-2,
and PANC-1) were seeded in 96 well plates at a density
of 0.3 × 104 cells/ well and maintained in an incubator
containing 5% CO2 at 37°C for 24h. Various concentrations
of gedunin (5, 10, 15, 20, 25, and 50μM), 1μg/ml of
rhShh,  and 5μM of GANT-61) were added to the cells
and incubated for 24h. MTS was added and incubated for
4h then the optical density was measured at 490 nm using
a microplate reader (CLARIOstar, BMG LABTECH,
Cary, NC, USA).

Colony formation assay
Pancreatic cancer cells at densities of 2 × 104
cells were seeded on 60-mm dishes with a top layer of
0.7% agarose and a bottom layer of 1% agar. Treatment
groups were administered with 15 μM of gedunin every
3 days for up to 39 days for PANC-1 cells and 60 days
for HPAC and MIAPaCa-2. Cells were fixed and stained
with 0.2% crystal violet in 5% formalin solution. Colonies
were counted manually and images were captured using
Nikon SMZ 1500 at 4X magnification. Experiments were
conducted in triplicates.

Scratch assay
Cell migration was evaluated using scratch assay
as described in our previous study [41]. HPAC and
MIAPaCa-2 cells were seeded on a 6 well plate at a
density of 8 × 105 cells/well and 6 × 105 cells/well for
PANC-1. Cells were cultured at 37°C in 5% CO2 until
monolayer confluency was reached. A scratch was made
with a sterile pipette tip and washed twice with PBS and
fresh media was added. Cells were treated with 15μM
gedunin or vehicle (Dimethyl Sulfoxide).
HPAC cells were further studied using 1μg/ml of
rhShh, 15μM gedunin, 5μM GANT-61, and combinations
such as 15μM gedunin with 1μg/ml rhShh and 5μM
GANT-61 with 1μg/ml rhShh in order to understand the
involvement of sonic hedgehog signaling in pancreatic
cancer cell migration. Images were taken at 2h intervals
for a time period of 72h at 37°C using the Biostation CT
(Nikon Instruments Inc. Melville, NY, USA). The distance
migrated by the cells was calculated using NIS-Element
AR software (24809702).

Western blot analysis
Total proteins from cultured cells and xenograft
tumor tissues were loaded and separated using SDS-PAGE
and transferred onto PVDF membranes. Blocking of
membranes was done using 5% bovine serum albumin and
the blots were incubated overnight at 4°C with primary
antibodies against AKT, pAKT, PI3K, pPI3K, mTOR,
pmTOR, P70S6K, pP70S6K, Bax, Bcl-2, Cleaved Caspase
3, Cleaved PARP, Cleaved Caspase 8, Snail, E-cadherin,
N-cadherin, Vimentin, Slug, Notch 1 & 2, Zeb, PTCH1,
PTCH2, Gli1, SUFU, Shh and β-actin. Appropriate
horseradish peroxidase-coupled secondary antibodies were
used to detect the primary antibodies and visualized using
enhanced chemiluminescence.

Apoptosis by annexin V-FITC
Apoptosis was measured using Annexin
V-FITC Apoptosis Detection Kit I. According to the
manufacturer’s instructions, HPAC, MIAPaCa-2, and
PANC-1 cells were seeded in 6 well plates at a density
of 2.5 × 105 cells/well and treated with 25μM gedunin for

Invasion assay
The invasive capabilities of pancreatic cancer cells
with gedunin were assessed using the invasion assay. Cells
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10901

Oncotarget

24h. Pancreatic cell death was analyzed using a FACS
Accuri C6 flow cytometer (San Jose, CA, USA).

were fixed in 10% formalin for histopathological analysis
and immunohistochemistry while the rest of the tissue
was snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and used for molecular
analysis.

TUNEL assay

Hematoxylin and eosin staining

DeadEnd Fluorometric TUNEL assay was conducted
to analyze DNA fragmentation in cells undergoing
apoptosis. Pancreatic cancer cells were seeded in 8-well
chambers at a density of 5 × 103 cells and treatment
with 25μM gedunin for 24h (25412610). After fixing
with 4% formaldehyde, the cells were washed with PBS
and permeabilized using 0.2% Triton X-100. Following
equilibration, cells were labeled using TdT reaction mix
and incubated for 60 min at 37°C in a humidified chamber.
Subsequently, 2X SSC were added for 15 min to stop the
reaction. Apoptotic cells were detected using Nikon laser
scanning confocal microscope [42].

Formalin fixed paraffin embedded tissues were
deparaffanized, gradually dehydrated, and stained with
H&E staining. Subsequently, brain, liver and lung
tissues from both control and gedunin–treated mice were
evaluated for micrometastatic abrasions. Images were
obtained using Nikon Microscope– ECLIPSE 50i at 40X
magnification.

IHC
Formalin–fixed paraffin–embedded tumors were
deparaffanized in xylene and rehydrated via decreasing
ratios of ethanol baths. After antigen retrieval, tissue
samples were blocked and incubated with antibodies
against Shh and Gli1. Antibody binding was detected
using ultra Marque polyscan HRP labeling (Cell Marque,
Rocklin, CA, USA). Tissue slides were stained with DAB
chromogen and counterstained with hematoxylin followed
by dehydration through increasing ethanol dilutions ending
in a xylene bath. After slides were sealed with mounting
media (Surgipath Medical Industries, Richmond, IL,
USA), images were captured using a Nikon Microscope–
ECLIPSE 50i at 40X magnification.

Confocal microscopy analysis
HPAC cells (1 × 104 cells/well) were seeded in
8-well chamber slides and treated after 24h with 25μM
gedunin, 1μg/ml rhShh, 5μM GANT-61, 1μg/ml rhShh and
25μM gedunin, 5μM GANT-61 and 1μg/ml rhShh. Then
24h after incubation with the respective treatments the
cells were fixed with 100% methanol and 100% acetone
(ratio 1:1). Membrane permeabilization was done using
0.2% Triton X in PBS for 20 min and blocked with 5%
BSA. Slides were then incubated with Shh (sc-9024) and
Gli1 (sc-20687) antibodies (Santa Cruz Biotechnology,
Santa Cruz, CA, USA) for 24h followed by Alexa fluor
488-conjugated anti–rabbit secondary antibody (Life
Technologies, Grand Island, NY, USA). Images were
captured by Nikon laser scanning confocal microscope.

Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis were performed using Graphpad
Prism version 5.03 software (La Jolla, CA, USA). The
repeated measures analysis of variance was used to
evaluate the dose and time response to gedunin treatment.
Multiple comparisons between groups with significant
differences were analyzed using Dunnett post–hoc test.
Paired t–test was done to analyze intergroup differences.
The values of p <0.05 were considered as statistically
significant.

Xenograft study
All the animal experiments performed were
approved by the Texas Tech University Health Sciences
Center Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.
Female 4–6 week old athymic nude mice were procured
from Harlan Laboratories (Madison, WI, USA). HPAC
cells were implanted subcutaneously in the right and left
flanks (1 × 106 cells/flank) of each animal (n=6). Once
palpable tumors were formed (~100 mm3), gedunin
(20mg/kg body weight; 5 days/ week for 1 month) was
administered via intraperitoneal injections to the treatment
group, control animals received vehicle (Dimethyl
Sulfoxide) treatment. All animals were regularly
monitored and both tumor volume and body weight were
recorded weekly. Tumor volume was calculated and
compared between control and treated groups using the
formula 4/3π×r12×r2, where r1 is the minor radius and r2 is
the major radius. After one month of treatment the mice
were euthanized and the tumors, brain, lung, and liver
tissues were surgically excised. A portion of the tissues
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Texas Tech University Health Sciences
Center El Paso, TX for supporting this project.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

REFERENCES
1.	 Arumuggam N, Bhowmick NA, Rupasinghe HP. A Review:
Phytochemicals Targeting JAK/STAT Signaling and IDO
10902

Oncotarget

Expression in Cancer. Phytotherapy Research : PTR. 2015;
29: 805-817.

13.	 Kamath SG, Chen N, Xiong Y, Wenham R, Apte S,
Humphrey M, Cragun J, Lancaster JM. Gedunin, a novel
natural substance, inhibits ovarian cancer cell proliferation.
International journal of gynecological cancer. 2009; 19:
1564-1569.

2.	 Cheng HB, Bo Y, Shen WX, Ren XG, Tan JN, Jia ZR, Xu
CL. Longikaurin E induces apoptosis of pancreatic cancer
cells via modulation of the p38 and PI3K/AKT pathways by
ROS. Naunyn-Schmiedeberg’s archives of pharmacology.
2015; 388: 623-634.

14.	 Mills LD, Zhang Y, Marler RJ, Herreros-Villanueva
M, Zhang L, Almada LL, Couch F, Wetmore C, Pasca
di Magliano M, Fernandez-Zapico ME. Loss of the
transcription factor GLI1 identifies a signaling network in
the tumor microenvironment mediating KRAS oncogeneinduced transformation. The Journal of biological
chemistry. 2013; 288: 11786-11794.

3.	 Subramani R, Gangwani L, Nandy SB, Arumugam A,
Chattopadhyay M, Lakshmanaswamy R. Emerging roles
of microRNAs in pancreatic cancer diagnosis, therapy and
prognosis (Review). International journal of oncology.
2015; 47: 1203-1210.

15.	 Nolan-Stevaux O, Lau J, Truitt ML, Chu GC, Hebrok M,
Fernandez-Zapico ME, Hanahan D. GLI1 is regulated
through Smoothened-independent mechanisms in neoplastic
pancreatic ducts and mediates PDAC cell survival and
transformation. Genes & development. 2009; 23: 24-36.

4.	 Yeo TP. Demographics, epidemiology, and inheritance of
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. Seminars in oncology.
2015; 42: 8-18.
5.	 Hao F, Kumar S, Yadav N, Chandra D. Neem components
as potential agents for cancer prevention and treatment.
Biochimica et biophysica acta. 2014; 1846: 247-257.

16.	 Xin Y, Shen XD, Cheng L, Hong DF, Chen B. Perifosine
inhibits S6K1-Gli1 signaling and enhances gemcitabineinduced anti-pancreatic cancer efficiency. Cancer
chemotherapy and pharmacology. 2014; 73: 711-719.

6.	 Priyadarsini RV, Murugan RS, Sripriya P, Karunagaran D,
Nagini S. The neem limonoids azadirachtin and nimbolide
induce cell cycle arrest and mitochondria-mediated
apoptosis in human cervical cancer (HeLa) cells. Free
radical research. 2010; 44: 624-634.

17.	 Thayer SP, di Magliano MP, Heiser PW, Nielsen CM,
Roberts DJ, Lauwers GY, Qi YP, Gysin S, Fernandez-del
Castillo C, Yajnik V, Antoniu B, McMahon M, Warshaw
AL, et al. Hedgehog is an early and late mediator of
pancreatic cancer tumorigenesis. Nature. 2003; 425:
851-856.

7.	 Arumugam A, Subramani R, Nandy S, Powell S, Velazquez
M, Orozco A, Galvez A, Lakshmanaswamy R. Desacetyl
nimbinene inhibits breast cancer growth and metastasis
through reactive oxygen species mediated mechanisms.
Tumour biology : the journal of the International Society
for Oncodevelopmental Biology and Medicine. 2015.

18.	 Pasca di Magliano M, Sekine S, Ermilov A, Ferris J,
Dlugosz AA, Hebrok M. Hedgehog/Ras interactions
regulate early stages of pancreatic cancer. Genes &
development. 2006; 20: 3161-3173.

8.	 Elumalai P, Gunadharini DN, Senthilkumar K, Banudevi
S, Arunkumar R, Benson CS, Sharmila G, Arunakaran
J. Induction of apoptosis in human breast cancer cells
by nimbolide through extrinsic and intrinsic pathway.
Toxicology letters. 2012; 215: 131-142.

19.	 Inaguma S, Riku M, Hashimoto M, Murakami H, Saga S,
Ikeda H, Kasai K. GLI1 interferes with the DNA mismatch
repair system in pancreatic cancer through BHLHE41mediated suppression of MLH1. Cancer research. 2013;
73: 7313-7323.

9.	 Babykutty S, S PP, J NR, Kumar MA, Nair MS, Srinivas P,
Gopala S. Nimbolide retards tumor cell migration, invasion,
and angiogenesis by downregulating MMP-2/9 expression
via inhibiting ERK1/2 and reducing DNA-binding
activity of NF-kappaB in colon cancer cells. Molecular
carcinogenesis. 2012; 51: 475-490.

20.	 Schenk M, Aykut B, Teske C, Giese NA, Weitz J, Welsch
T. Salinomycin inhibits growth of pancreatic cancer and
cancer cell migration by disruption of actin stress fiber
integrity. Cancer letters. 2015; 358: 161-169.

10.	 Chitta KS, Khan AN, Ersing N, Swaika A, Masood A,
Paulus A, Qadeer A, Advani P, Sher T, Miller KC, Lee K,
Chanan-Khan AA. Neem leaf extract induces cell death
by apoptosis and autophagy in B-chronic lymphocytic
leukemia cells. Leukemia & lymphoma. 2014; 55:
652-661.

21.	 Feitelson MA, Arzumanyan A, Kulathinal RJ, Blain SW,
Holcombe RF, Mahajna J, Marino M, Martinez-Chantar
ML, Nawroth R, Sanchez-Garcia I, Sharma D, Saxena
NK, Singh N, et al. Sustained proliferation in cancer:
Mechanisms and novel therapeutic targets. Seminars in
cancer biology. 2015; 35: S25-54.

11.	 Arumugam A, Agullo P, Boopalan T, Nandy S, Lopez
R, Gutierrez C, Narayan M, Rajkumar L. Neem leaf
extract inhibits mammary carcinogenesis by altering cell
proliferation, apoptosis, and angiogenesis. Cancer biology
& therapy. 2014; 15: 26-34.

22.	 Attar R, Tabassum S, Fayyaz S, Ahmad MS, Nogueira DR,
Yaylim I, Timirci-Kahraman O, Kucukhuseyin O, Cacina
C, Farooqi AA, Ismail M. Natural products are the future of
anticancer therapy: Preclinical and clinical advancements
of Viscum album phytometabolites. Cellular and molecular
biology (Noisy-le-Grand, France). 2015; 61: 62-68.

12.	 Patwardhan CA, Fauq A, Peterson LB, Miller C, Blagg
BS, Chadli A. Gedunin inactivates the co-chaperone p23
protein causing cancer cell death by apoptosis. The Journal
of biological chemistry. 2013; 288: 7313-7325.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23.	 Kishore TKK, Ganugula R, Gade DR, Reddy GB, Nagini S.
Gedunin abrogates aldose reductase, PI3K/Akt/mToR, and
NF-kappaB signaling pathways to inhibit angiogenesis in
10903

Oncotarget

a hamster model of oral carcinogenesis. Tumour biology.
2015.

34.	 Morris JP,4th, Wang SC, Hebrok M. KRAS, Hedgehog,
Wnt and the twisted developmental biology of pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma. Nature reviews.Cancer. 2010; 10:
683-695.

24.	 Manners GD, Jacob RA, Breksa AP,3rd, Schoch TK,
Hasegawa S. Bioavailability of citrus limonoids in humans.
Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry. 2003; 51:
4156-4161.

35.	 Barakat MT, Humke EW, Scott MP. Learning from Jekyll
to control Hyde: Hedgehog signaling in development and
cancer. Trends in molecular medicine. 2010; 16: 337-348.

25.	 Roy A, Saraf S. Limonoids: overview of significant
bioactive triterpenes distributed in plants kingdom.
Biological & pharmaceutical bulletin. 2006; 29: 191-201.

36.	 Inaguma S, Riku M, Ito H, Tsunoda T, Ikeda H, Kasai K.
GLI1 orchestrates CXCR4/CXCR7 signaling to enhance
migration and metastasis of breast cancer cells. Oncotarget.
2015; 6: 33648-33657. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5203.

26.	 Sprick MR, Walczak H. The interplay between the Bcl-2
family and death receptor-mediated apoptosis. Biochimica
et biophysica acta. 2004; 1644: 125-132.

37.	 Kayed H, Kleeff J, Osman T, Keleg S, Buchler MW, Friess
H. Hedgehog signaling in the normal and diseased pancreas.
Pancreas. 2006; 32: 119-129.

27.	 Ashkenazi A. Targeting the extrinsic apoptosis pathway
in cancer. Cytokine & growth factor reviews. 2008; 19:
325-331.

38.	 Hao K, Tian XD, Qin CF, Xie XH, Yang YM. Hedgehog
signaling pathway regulates human pancreatic cancer cell
proliferation and metastasis. Oncology reports. 2013; 29:
1124-1132.

28.	 Liu P, Cheng H, Roberts TM, Zhao JJ. Targeting the
phosphoinositide 3-kinase pathway in cancer. Nature
reviews.Drug discovery. 2009; 8: 627-644.

39.	 Liu Q, Sheng W, Dong M, Dong X, Dong Q, Li F. Gli1
promotes transforming growth factor-beta1- and epidermal
growth factor-induced epithelial to mesenchymal transition
in pancreatic cancer cells. Surgery. 2015; 158: 211-224.

29.	 Long H, Wang Z, Chen J, Xiang T, Li Q, Diao X, Zhu B.
microRNA-214 promotes epithelial-mesenchymal transition
and metastasis in lung adenocarcinoma by targeting the
suppressor-of-fused protein (Sufu). Oncotarget. 2015; 6:
38705-38718. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5478.

40.	 Buhrmann C, Shayan P, Kraehe P, Popper B, Goel A,
Shakibaei M. Resveratrol induces chemosensitization
to 5-fluorouracil through up-regulation of intercellular
junctions, Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and
apoptosis in colorectal cancer. Biochemical pharmacology.
2015; 98: 51-68.

30.	 Zhang W, Li H, Yang Y, Liao J, Yang GY. Knockdown or
inhibition of aldo-keto reductase 1B10 inhibits pancreatic
carcinoma growth via modulating Kras-E-cadherin
pathway. Cancer letters. 2014; 355: 273-280.
31.	 Lamouille S, Xu J, Derynck R. Molecular mechanisms
of epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Nature reviews.
Molecular cell biology. 2014; 15: 178-196.

41.	 Subramani R, Lopez-Valdez R, Salcido A, Boopalan T,
Arumugam A, Nandy S, Lakshmanaswamy R. Growth
hormone receptor inhibition decreases the growth
and metastasis of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.
Experimental & molecular medicine. 2014; 46: e117.

32.	 Cheng P, Wang YF, Li G, Yang SS, Liu C, Hu H, Jin G,
Hu XG. Interplay between menin and Dnmt1 reversibly
regulates pancreatic cancer cell growth downstream of the
Hedgehog signaling pathway. Cancer letters. 2015.

42.	 Boopalan T, Arumugam A, Parada J, Saltzstein E,
Lakshmanaswamy R. Receptor activator for nuclear factorkappaB ligand signaling promotes progesterone-mediated
estrogen-induced mammary carcinogenesis. Cancer science.
2015; 106: 25-33.

33.	 O’Hagan RC, Heyer J. KRAS Mouse Models: Modeling
Cancer Harboring KRAS Mutations. Genes Cancer. 2011;
2: 335-343. doi: 10.1177/1947601911408080.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10904

Oncotarget

