Published OnlineFirst September 8, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-2066

Cell, Tumor, and Stem Cell Biology

Atypical Protein Kinase CI Is Required for Bronchioalveolar
Stem Cell Expansion and Lung Tumorigenesis
1

1

1

2

Roderick P. Regala, Rebecca K. Davis, Alyssa Kunz, Andras Khoor,
3
1
Michael Leitges, and Alan P. Fields

Departments of 1Cancer Biology and 2Pathology, Mayo Clinic Comprehensive Cancer Center, Jacksonville, Florida and
3
Biotechnology Centre of Oslo, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway

Abstract
Protein kinase CI (PKCI) is an oncogene required for
maintenance of the transformed phenotype of non–small cell
lung cancer cells. However, the role of PKCI in lung tumor
development has not been investigated. To address this
question, we established a mouse model in which oncogenic
KrasG12D is activated by Cre-mediated recombination in the
lung with or without simultaneous genetic loss of the mouse
PKCI gene, Prkci. Genetic loss of Prkci dramatically inhibits
Kras-initiated hyperplasia and subsequent lung tumor formation in vivo. This effect correlates with a defect in the ability of
Prkci-deficient bronchioalveolar stem cells to undergo Krasmediated expansion and morphologic transformation in vitro
and in vivo. Furthermore, the small molecule PKCI inhibitor
aurothiomalate inhibits Kras-mediated bronchioalveolar stem
cell expansion and lung tumor growth in vivo. Thus, Prkci is
required for oncogene-induced expansion and transformation
of tumor-initiating lung stem cells. Furthermore, aurothiomalate is an effective antitumor agent that targets the tumorinitiating stem cell niche in vivo. These data have important
implications for PKCI as a therapeutic target and for the
clinical use of aurothiomalate for lung cancer treatment.
[Cancer Res 2009;69(19):7603–11]

Introduction
Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death in the United
States (1). Non–small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the most
prevalent type of lung cancer accounting for f80% of cases (2).
Despite recent treatment advances, the 5-year survival rate of
patients with NSCLC remains only 15%. Thus, there is a dire need
to better understand the key molecular events driving lung
tumorigenesis that could lead to more effective means of
prevention, diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment.
Activating mutations in Kras are among the most common
molecular changes found in NSCLC tumors (3, 4) and several
transgenic mouse models have shown the critical role of oncogenic
Kras in lung tumor initiation and maintenance. Transgenic
mice carrying a conditional oncogenic KrasG12D allele activated
by Cre-recombinase (LSL-Kras mice) develop epithelial hyper-

Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research Online
(http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
A.P. Fields and M. Leitges are both communicating authors.
Requests for reprints: Alan P. Fields, Department of Cancer Biology, Mayo Clinic
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Griffin Cancer Research Building, Room 212, 4500 San
Pablo Road, Jacksonville, FL 32224. Phone: 904-953-6109; Fax: 904-953-0277; E-mail:
fields.alan@mayo.edu.
I2009 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-2066

www.aacrjournals.org

plasias, lung adenomas, and adenocarcinomas (5, 6). A second
murine lung cancer model (the KrasLA mouse) is based on sporadic
Kras mutation using a ‘‘hit-and-run’’ gene targeting strategy (7).
KrasLA mice carry a latent activation oncogenic KrasG12D allele
activated by spontaneous somatic recombination. KrasLA mice
invariably develop numerous lung tumors pathologically similar
to human disease (7).
Bronchioalveolar stem cells (BASC) are the probable cells of
origin of Kras-induced lung tumors in these mouse models (8).
BASCs function in lung homeostasis and possess characteristics of
regional lung stem cells (8). BASCs reside in bronchioalveolar duct
junctions (BADJ), a niche at the boundary between the terminal
bronchioles (TB) and the alveolar space. BASCs express the
hematopoietic stem cell marker Sca-1, Clara cell–specific protein
(CCSP), and surfactant protein C (SPC), but not the hematopoietic
and endothelial cell markers CD45 and Pecam (8). BASCs exhibit
stem-like self-renewal and the ability to differentiate into Clara
cells and alveolar type II (AT2) cells in vitro (8). Moreover, BASCs
expand in response to Kras transformation in vitro, and within the
BADJ in vivo, eventually giving rise to adenomas and carcinomas in
the LSL-Kras mouse model (8).
We recently showed that protein kinase CL (PKCL) is an
oncogene in NSCLC (9, 10). PKCL expression is elevated in NSCLC
tumors and cell lines, and PKCL is required for the transformed
phenotype of NSCLC cells harboring oncogenic Kras mutation (9).
PKCL activates a novel oncogenic PKCL-Par6-Rac1 signaling axis
that is necessary for the maintenance of the transformed
phenotype of human NSCLC cells (11). We recently identified
aurothiomalate as a potent and selective inhibitor of oncogenic
PKCL signaling (12, 13). Aurothiomalate inhibits NSCLC cell
transformation in vitro and tumorigenicity in vivo by disrupting
the interaction between PKCL and Par6, thereby blocking the
PKCL-Par6-Rac1 signaling axis (12, 13).
Although PKCL is important in the maintenance of the transformed phenotype of NSCLC cells harboring Kras mutation (11, 14),
the role of PKCL in Kras-mediated lung tumor development has not
been explored. Here, we assess the role of the mouse PKCL gene
Prkci, in Kras-mediated lung tumorigenesis using a novel
bitransgenic mouse model harboring conditional LSL-Kras and
Prkci knockout (Prkcifl ) alleles. LSL-Kras/Prkcifl/fl mice exhibit a
significant impairment in lung hyperplasia and lung tumor
formation, indicating that Prkci is necessary for early events in
Kras-mediated lung tumorigenesis. The effect of Prkci deficiency
on tumorigenesis correlates with a defect in Kras-mediated BASC
expansion in the absence of Prkci. Furthermore, the PKCL inhibitor
aurothiomalate inhibits Kras-mediated BASC expansion and
transformation in vitro and in vivo. Our results show that Prkci
plays a requisite role in BASC transformation and identify
aurothiomalate as a promising therapeutic agent that can target
the lung cancer stem cell niche in vivo.

7603

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (19). October 1, 2009

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst September 8, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-2066
Cancer Research

Figure 1. Prkci is necessary for Kras -mediated
lung tumorigenesis. LSL-Kras and LSL-Kras/Prkcifl/fl
mice were infected with AdCre, harvested,
and processed as described in the Materials
and Methods. A, staining of a LSL-Kras lung
tumor for mouse PKCL protein. B, histopathology of
LSL-Kras and LSL-Kras/Prkcifl/fl mice. Top left,
multiple lesions are evident on the surface of LSL-Kras
mouse lungs (arrows ). Top middle, LSL-Kras mice
develop numerous focal adenomas (arrows )
Top right, LSL-Kras adenomas often surround
bronchioles. Bottom left, LSL-Kras/Prkcifl/fl mice exhibit
a smooth lung surface devoid of visible lesions.
Bottom middle, LSL-Kras/Prkcifl/fl lungs exhibit fewer
and smaller lesions than LSL-Kras mice.
Bottom right, LSL-Kras/Prkcifl/fl lungs exhibit largely
normal lung morphology. C, LSL-Kras/Prkcifl/fl mice
exhibit reduced lung hyperplasias. Columns, mean;
bars, SE (n = 6); *, P < 0.05. D, LSL-Kras/Prkcifl/fl
mice exhibit reduced lung tumor formation.
Columns, mean; bars, SE (n = 12); *, P = 0.007.

Materials and Methods
fl/fl

Generation and AdCre treatment of LSL-Kras/Prkci
mice.
LSL-Kras mice (B6.129), generated as previously described (5), were mated
to mice harboring a floxed Prkci allele (Prkcifl mice) to generate
bitransgenic LSL-Kras/Prkcifl/fl mice. Nontransgenic littermates served as
controls in all experiments. Mice (6–8 wk of age) were administered AdCre
(1.5  108 IFU/mL) by intratracheal instillation in two 50-AL aliquots as
described previously (15). All animal experiments were approved by the
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Mayo Clinic.
Histology and immunohistochemistry. Mice were sacrificed, exsanguinated, and the lungs perfused with 10% buffered formalin through the right
ventricle. The trachea was intubated and instilled with an additional 3 mL
of 10% buffered formalin. The lungs were removed intact and fixed
overnight in 10% buffered formalin. For histologic analysis, lungs were
embedded in paraffin, serially sectioned (5 Am) and stained with H&E.

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (19). October 1, 2009

Immunohistochemical analysis was performed as described (10). Mouse
PKCL was detected using a PKCL antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) and
visualized using the Envision Plus Dual Labeled Polymer Kit following the
instructions of the manufacturer (DAKO). In some experiments, the
antibody was incubated overnight at 4jC with a 200-fold molar excess of
PKCL peptide (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) prior to use in immunohistochemistry to confirm antibody specificity. Slide images were captured and
analyzed using the ScanScope scanner and ImageScope software (Aperio
Technologies).
BASC isolation and culture. Lung epithelial cells were isolated as
described (16). Red blood cells (RBC) were lysed in RBC lysis buffer
(StemCell Technologies) and BASCs isolated using the EasySep immunomagnetic cell selection procedure (Stem Cell Technologies). Briefly,
CD45pos Pecampos cells were selected out using primary biotinylated
antibodies anti-CD45 (BD PharMingen) and anti-Pecam (BD PharMingen).
CD45neg Pecamneg cells were incubated for 15 min at room temperature

7604

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst September 8, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-2066
PKCi Is Required for Lung Tumorigenesis
with FITC-conjugated anti-CD34 (BD PharMingen) and Sca1-PE labeling
reagent (Stem Cell Technologies). Sca1pos CD34pos CD45neg Pecamneg
BASCs were selected using the EasySep FITC and PE selection kits. BASCs
were resuspended in BEGM (Lonza, without hydrocortisone) containing
10 ng/mL of keratinocyte growth factor (PeproTech) and 5% charcoalstripped fetal bovine serum and plated at equal densities on Matrigelcoated (BD Biosciences) tissue culture wells. Cultures were infected with
AdCre (7.5  107 IFU/mL) the day after plating and medium was changed
every 2 d thereafter. Bright-field images of BASC colonies were captured
on an Olympus IX71 inverted microscope and colony size was determined
using Image-Pro Plus 6.3 software (Media Cybernetics).
Immunofluorescence of BASCs in Matrigel culture was performed as
described (17) using the following antibodies: rabbit anti-CCSP (Upstate),
goat anti-SP-C (Santa Cruz Biotechnology), rabbit anti-Ki67 (Abcam), Alexa
Fluor 488 donkey anti-rabbit IgG, Alexa Fluor 568 donkey anti-goat IgG, and
Alexa Fluor 594 goat anti-rabbit IgG (Molecular Probes). Samples were
mounted using ProLong Gold anti-fade reagent with 4¶,6-diamidino-2phenylindole (Molecular Probes) and observed on a Zeiss 510 LSM confocal
laser microscope. Images were analyzed with Adobe Photoshop software
(Adobe Systems).
BASC colonies were released from Matrigel culture using BD cell
recovery solution (BD Biosciences) and total RNA subjected to quantitative
PCR as described (18). RNA quantity and integrity were measured using a
NanoDrop ND-1000 spectrophotometer.
Kras and Prkci allele status. Kras allele status in AdCre-treated BASC
cultures and adenomas microdissected from LSL-Kras/Prkcifl/fl mice was
determined by PCR as described (5, 19). Prkcifl allele status was determined
using the following PCR primers: F1, 5¶-CACCAACGGGTTTGCTATCT-3¶; R1,
5¶-CCAGCAAGACAAAACACCAA-3¶; R2, 5¶-ATTACAGCAGGGCAAACTGC-3¶.
Treatment of KrasLA2 mice with aurothiomalate. Three-week-old
KrasLA2 mice were given daily i.p. injections of aurothiomalate (Myochrysine, Taylor Pharmaceuticals) at 60 mg/kg/d or vehicle control (0.9%

sodium chloride solution; Sigma-Aldrich) for the indicated time periods.
Tumors were analyzed as described above.
Detection and analysis of BASCs in mouse lung tissues. BASCs were
detected in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded mouse lung tissues as
described previously (20). Lung tissue sections were stained using goat
anti-SPC (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) and rabbit anti-CCSP (Upstate)
antibodies diluted in 1% bovine serum albumin (Sigma-Aldrich) at 4jC
overnight. The slides were washed thoroughly with PBS and then incubated
with Alexa Fluor 488 donkey anti-rabbit IgG and Alexa Fluor 568 donkey
anti-goat IgG secondary antibodies (Molecular Probes) diluted in 1% bovine
serum albumin for 1 h at room temperature. After washing with PBS, the
samples were mounted using ProLong Gold antifade reagent with 4¶,6diamidino-2-phenylindole. Immunofluorescence images were captured on
an Olympus BX51 fluorescent microscope using DPController and
DPManager software (Olympus), and processed in Adobe Photoshop.
Statistical analysis. The Cochrane-Armitage test was used to compare
BASC number and distribution in vivo using StatsDirect 2.6.1. The Student’s
t test and one-way ANOVA statistical analyses were performed using
SigmaStat 3.5. P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

Results
Prkci is required for Kras-mediated lung tumorigenesis. To
determine whether PKCL is involved in lung tumor formation, we
used the LSL-Kras mouse model in which lung tumors are initiated
by AdCre-mediated activation of a conditional oncogenic Kras
allele (5). Because PKCL is overexpressed in primary human NSCLC
tumors (10), we assessed whether mouse PKCL protein is also
highly expressed in lung tumors from LSL-Kras mice. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed light staining for mouse PKCL in
normal lung epithelial cells with more intense staining in lung

Figure 2. Lung tumors in LSL-Kras/Prkcifl/fl mice
arise due to incomplete recombination of the Prkcifl
alleles. Genomic DNA from microdissected
LSL-Kras/Prkcifl/fl tumors was analyzed for Kras (A )
and Prkci (B ) allele status. Each tumor expresses the
recombined (A, top ) but not the unrecombined
Kras allele (A, bottom ). Normal lung epithelium (N ) and
tumor (T ) DNA from a Kras mouse serve as controls
for Kras allele recombination. All LSL-Kras/Prkcifl/fl
tumors analyzed contained a recombined Prkci allele
(B, top ) as well as an unrecombined Prkci allele
(B, bottom ), indicating incomplete deletion of the
conditional Prkcifl alleles. Recombined (R) and
unrecombined (U) Prkci allele controls. C, LSL-Kras/
Prkcifl/fl tumors express mouse PKCL protein. Adjacent
sections were stained with H&E (left ), PKCL antibody
(middle ), or with PKCL antibody in the presence of PKCL
peptide to verify the specificity of staining (right ).

www.aacrjournals.org

7605

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (19). October 1, 2009

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst September 8, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-2066
Cancer Research

Figure 3. Prkci is necessary for Kras -mediated
expansion of BASCs in vivo. LSL-Kras and
LSL-Kras/Prkcifl/fl mice were harvested 12 wk
after intratracheal instillation of AdCre.
Lung tissue sections were subjected to
immunofluorescence as described in the
Materials and Methods. A, expansion of CCSP
(green ) and SPC (red) double-positive
BASCs (outlined ) is evident within the TBs of
LSL-Kras mice (top ). Clara cells within the
bronchioles stain positive for CCSP but negative
for SPC. AS, alveolar space. BASC
expansion was not observed in LSL-Kras/Prkcifl/fl
mice (bottom ). B, quantitative analysis
of TBs for BASCs in lungs from nontransgenic,
Prkcifl/fl, LSL-Kras , and LSL-Kras/Prkcifl/fl
mice. Columns, percentage of TBs; bars, SE.
Statistical analysis revealed a significant
increase in BASC number and BASC/TB in
LSL-Kras mice compared with nontransgenic,
Prkcifl/fl , or LSL-Kras/Prkcifl/fl mice (P < 0.0001).
No statistically significant difference in
BASC number or distribution was observed
between nontransgenic, Prkcifl/fl , and
LSL-Kras/Prkcifl/fl mice.

tumor cells from LSL-Kras mice (Fig. 1A, right). Thus, mouse PKCL
is highly expressed in Kras-initiated lung tumors in mice.
We have shown that PKCL is required for transformed growth
and invasion of human NSCLC cells in vitro and tumorigenicity
in vivo (9, 10). To assess the role of PKCL in oncogenic Krasinitiated lung tumorigenesis, we crossed mice harboring a
conditional knockout Prkci allele (Prkcifl ) with LSL-Kras mice to
generate bitransgenic LSL-Kras/Prkcifl/fl mice. In LSL-Kras/Prkcifl/fl
mice, intratracheal instillation of AdCre leads to simultaneous Cremediated activation of the oncogenic Kras allele and inactivation
of the Prkcifl/fl alleles in the same target cells within the lung.
Twelve weeks following AdCre administration, LSL-Kras and
LSL-Kras/Prkcifl/fl mice were assessed for lung hyperplasias and
lung tumors (Fig. 1B). As expected, LSL-Kras mice developed
numerous tumors visible on the surface of the lung (Fig. 1B, top left,
arrows). In contrast, LSL-Kras/Prkcifl/fl mice exhibited few visible
tumors (Fig. 1B, bottom left). Pathologic examination revealed
that LSL-Kras mice develop multiple focal adenomas often
surrounding bronchioles (Fig. 1B, top middle and right, arrows),
whereas LSL-Kras/Prkcifl/fl mice exhibit largely normal lung
morphology and fewer lesions (Fig. 1B, bottom middle and right).
Analysis also revealed a significant reduction in both hyperplasias
(Fig. 1C) and adenomas (Fig. 1D) in LSL-Kras/Prkcifl/fl mice when
compared with LSL-Kras mice. Thus, genetic deletion of Prkci

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (19). October 1, 2009

inhibits hyperplasia and subsequent tumor formation, indicating a
role for Prkci in an early step of Kras-mediated lung tumorigenesis.
Because LSL-Kras/Prkcifl/fl mice formed some lung tumors, albeit
in significantly reduced numbers, we determined the status of the
Kras and Prkci alleles in tumors formed in these mice. Genomic
DNA from tumors microdissected from LSL-Kras/Prkcifl/fl mice was
analyzed for Kras and Prkci allele status by PCR (Fig. 2A and B).
As expected, the LSL-Kras allele had undergone Cre-mediated
recombination (Fig. 2A, top) with concomitant loss of the
unrecombined Kras allele (Fig. 2A, bottom) in all of the tumors
analyzed. In contrast, each tumor contained a recombined
(deleted) Prkci allele (Fig. 2B, top), and an unrecombined Prkci
allele (Fig. 2B, bottom), indicating incomplete deletion of the
conditional Prkcifl alleles. The presence of unrecombined Prkci was
not due to a contamination of the tumor samples by normal lung
as indicated by the absence of the unrecombined LSL-Kras allele in
the same tumor samples (Fig. 2A, bottom). Furthermore, immunohistochemistry confirmed the expression of mouse PKCL protein
in these tumors (Fig. 2C). Our data indicate that lung tumors in
LSL-Kras/Prkcifl/fl mice arise due to incomplete recombination of
the conditional Prkcifl alleles. Thus, Prkci is critical for Krasinduced lung tumorigenesis, and only Kras-transformed cells
that escape complete inactivation of both Prkcifl alleles are able
to progress in tumorigenesis.

7606

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst September 8, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-2066
PKCi Is Required for Lung Tumorigenesis

Prkci is required for Kras-mediated expansion of the BASC
niche in vivo. Our data indicate that Prkci is required for a very early
event(s) in Kras-mediated oncogenesis in vivo. Kras-mediated lung
tumorigenesis in the LSL-Kras mouse model is thought to be initiated
by clonal expansion of BASCs, the putative cell of origin of
Kras-initiated lung tumorigenesis (8). Therefore, we next assessed
whether Prkci deficiency affects the expansion of BASCs induced by
Kras in vivo. BASCs are identified in tissue sections at the BADJ by
dual immunofluorescence for SPC and CCSP (Fig. 3A). AdCre-treated
LSL-Kras mice exhibit frequent clusters of SPC/CCSP–doublepositive BASCs at BADJs indicative of BASC expansion (Fig. 3A,
top). In contrast, LSL-Kras/Prkcifl/fl mice exhibit significantly fewer
BASCs at the BADJs (Fig. 3A, bottom). Quantitative analysis of
sections from AdCre-treated nontransgenic, LSL-Kras and LSL-Kras/
Prkcifl/fl mice revealed a significant increase in the percentage of
TBs containing one or more BASCs, and in the average number of

BASCs/TB in LSL-Kras mice when compared with nontransgenic
mice (Fig. 3B). LSL-Kras/Prkcifl/fl mice exhibited a significant
inhibition in Kras-mediated BASC expansion, such that the number
and distribution of BASCs in these mice was indistinguishable from
that of nontransgenic mice (Fig. 3B). Furthermore, AdCre-treated
Prkcifl/fl mice exhibited no difference in BASC number or distribution
compared with nontransgenic mice, indicating that Prkci deficiency
does not overtly affect the BASC niche in the absence of oncogenic
Kras (Fig. 3B). Thus, Prkci is necessary for Kras-mediated BASC
expansion in vivo, linking the effect of Prkci-deficiency on BASC
expansion with lung tumorigenesis. Furthermore, the inhibitory
effect of Prkci deficiency on lung tumorigenesis is not due to a
decrease in the number of BASCs in LSL-Kras/Prkcifl/fl mice.
Oncogenic Kras induces the expression of PKCL and
Prkci-dependent proliferative signaling in BASCs in vitro. To
further explore the role of Prkci in BASC expansion, we isolated

Figure 4. Kras induces PKCL expression and activates oncogenic Prkci-mediated signaling in BASCs in vitro. A, immunofluorescence staining of isolated lung epithelial
cells (left) and purified BASCs (right) from LSL-Kras mice for CCSP (green), SPC (red), and 4¶,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI, blue). SPC-positive AT2 cells
(AT), CCSP-positive Clara cells (arrows), and SPC/CCSP–double-positive BASCs (arrowheads). B, LSL-Kras and Prkcifl allele status in BASCs isolated from
nontransgenic, LSL-Kras, and LSL-Kras/Prkcifl/fl mice in the presence and absence of AdCre. The conditional Kras and Prkci alleles are efficiently recombined in the
presence of AdCre. C, Kras induces PKCL mRNA expression in BASCs from LSL-Kras but not LSL-Kras/Prkcifl/fl mice. D, Kras induces MMP10 mRNA in BASCs from
LSL-Kras but not from LSL-Kras/Prkcifl/fl mice. Columns, mean of triplicate determinations; bars, SE (C and D). Results are representative of four independent experiments
with similar results. *, P < 0.05, statistically significant difference from LSL-Kras in the absence of Cre; **, P < 0.05, statistically significant difference from LSL-Kras.

www.aacrjournals.org

7607

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (19). October 1, 2009

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst September 8, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-2066
Cancer Research

Figure 5. Kras induces Prkci -dependent
BASC expansion and morphologic
transformation in vitro . BASCs from
nontransgenic, LSL-Kras , and
LSL-Kras/Prkcifl/fl mice were treated with
AdCre and plated in three-dimensional
Matrigel culture. A, photomicrographs of
cultures after 4 d. BASC colonies were
analyzed for diameter (B ) and morphology
(C ). B, columns, mean percentage of
nontransgenic controls; bars, SE.
C, columns, mean percentage of colonies
with spherical (filled columns ) or
amorphic (open columns) morphology;
*, statistically significant difference from
nontransgenic; **, P < 0.0001, statistically
significant difference from LSL-Kras .
There was no statistically significant
difference in colony diameter or
morphology between nontransgenic and
LSL-Kras/Prkcifl/fl colonies. D, confocal
microscopy of BASC colonies stained for
4¶,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI ) and
Ki67 (left ). Quantitative analysis of Ki67
staining (right ). Columns, mean
percentage of Ki67-positive cells; bars, SE;
*, statistically significant difference from
nontransgenic; **, P < 0.05, statistically
significant difference from LSL-Kras .

and established BASCs from nontransgenic, LSL-Kras, and LSLKras/Prkcifl/fl mice in primary culture using established procedures
(8). Isolated lung epithelial cell populations consisted of a mixture
of SPC-single positive AT2 cells (Fig. 4A, left, AT), CCSP-single
positive Clara cells (Fig. 4A, left, arrows), and SPC/CCSP–doublepositive BASCs (Fig. 4A, left, arrowheads). This BASC population
was enriched based on positive staining for the stem cell markers
Sca1 and CD34. Consistent with previous reports, >95% of the cells
remaining after this selection stained double-positive for the BASC
markers SPC and CCSP (Fig. 4A, right). Purified BASCs from
nontransgenic, LSL-Kras and LSL-Kras/Prkcifl/fl mice were treated
with AdCre, and efficient recombination of the LSL-Kras and
Prkcifl alleles was confirmed by PCR (Fig. 4B). Consistent with our
finding that mouse PKCL protein expression is elevated in lung
tumors from LSL-Kras mice, AdCre treatment of BASCs from
LSL-Kras mice induced a significant increase in PKCL mRNA
abundance, whereas BASCs from LSL-Kras/Prkcifl/fl mice, as
expected, expressed no detectable PKCL mRNA (Fig. 4C). We
previously identified matrix metalloproteinase 10 (MMP10) as a

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (19). October 1, 2009

transcriptional target of the oncogenic PKCL-Par6-Rac1 signaling
axis (11), and MMP10 has also been identified as a transcriptional
target of oncogenic Kras (21, 22). Therefore, we assessed MMP10
expression in BASCs from LSL-Kras and LSL-Kras/Prkcifl/fl mice
by quantitative PCR. MMP10 mRNA was induced in BASCs
from LSL-Kras mice but not from LSL-Kras/Prkcifl/fl mice after
AdCre treatment (Fig. 4D). Thus, oncogenic Kras activates
oncogenic PKCL signaling in BASCs, and this signaling is inhibited
in BASCs from LSL-Kras/Prkcifl/fl mice.
Oncogenic Kras-mediated BASC expansion and morphologic
transformation requires Prkci. Because BASCs expand and
initiate Kras-mediated tumors in vivo (8, 23), we assessed BASCs
from LSL-Kras and LSL-Kras/Prkcifl/fl mice for proliferative expansion and morphologic transformation after the induction of
oncogenic Kras in vitro (Fig. 5). BASCs from nontransgenic mice
treated with AdCre form colonies of organized spherical structures
when plated in three-dimensional Matrigel culture (Fig. 5A, left).
In contrast, BASCs from LSL-Kras mice grow as large amorphic,
disorganized colonies (Fig. 5A, middle). Interestingly, BASCs from

7608

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst September 8, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-2066
PKCi Is Required for Lung Tumorigenesis

LSL-Kras/Prkcifl/fl mice form spherical colonies similar in size and
morphology to those from nontransgenic mice (Fig. 5A, right).
Quantitative analysis revealed that BASCs from LSL-Kras mice form
structures of larger average diameter (Fig. 5B) and more amorphic
shape (Fig. 5C) than BASCs from either nontransgenic or LSL-Kras/
Prkcifl/fl mice. Thus, the change in colony size and morphology
observed in LSL-Kras BASCs requires both Kras and Prkci.
Immunofluorescent confocal microscopy revealed that BASCs from
nontransgenic and LSL-Kras/Prkcifl/fl mice form hollow spheres
consisting of a single layer of epithelial cells with a low proliferative
index; in contrast, BASCs from LSL-Kras mice form solid masses of
highly proliferative cells (Fig. 5D, left). Quantitative analysis showed
a significant increase in proliferation of LSL-Kras BASCs (percentage
of cells staining positive for Ki67) when compared with nontransgenic BASCs and that this increase was not seen in LSL-Kras/
Prkcifl/fl BASCs (Fig. 5D, right). Thus, oncogenic Kras induces Prkcidependent proliferative expansion and morphologic changes
associated with cellular transformation of BASCs in vitro.
BASCs exhibit self-renewal and the ability to differentiate into
bronchiolar Clara cells and AT2 cells (8). Therefore, we assessed
whether the increase in proliferation observed in LSL-Kras BASC
cultures in vitro was due to the expansion of undifferentiated
BASCs, or alternatively, the induction of lineage-specific differen-

tiation of BASC into single positive Clara and/or AT2 cells.
Confocal immunofluorescence microscopy revealed that BASC
colonies from nontransgenic, LSL-Kras, and LSL-Kras/Prkcifl/fl
mice are made up predominantly of SPC/CCSP–double-positive
staining BASCs (Supplemental Fig. S1), indicating that Kras
induces Prkci-dependent BASC expansion.
Aurothiomalate blocks Kras-mediated, Prkci-dependent
BASC expansion and morphologic transformation in vitro.
We recently identified aurothiomalate as a highly selective small
molecule inhibitor of oncogenic PKCL/E signaling that exhibits
potent antitumor activity against human NSCLC cells (12, 13).
Because Prkci is necessary for Kras-mediated BASC expansion and
morphologic transformation in vivo and in vitro, we assessed
whether aurothiomalate inhibits the effects of Kras on BASCs.
BASCs from LSL-Kras mice were transduced with AdCre and plated
in three-dimensional Matrigel culture in the presence of 20 Amol/L
of aurothiomalate or diluent (saline; Fig. 6A, left and middle). As
expected, saline-treated BASCs formed large amorphic colonies; in
contrast, aurothiomalate-treated cells formed small spherical
colonies similar to those formed by BASCs from nontransgenic
and LSL-Kras/Prkcifl/fl mice (Fig. 6A, right). Analysis revealed that
saline-treated BASCs form significantly larger colonies than
aurothiomalate-treated BASCs (Fig. 6B, left), which is associated

Figure 6. Aurothiomalate inhibits
Kras -mediated BASC expansion and
morphologic transformation in vitro and
tumor growth in vivo. A, morphology of
BASCs from LSL-Kras mice in the
presence of 20 Amol/L of aurothiomalate
(middle ) or saline (left ). Analysis of BASC
colony morphology in the presence and
absence of aurothiomalate (right ).
*, P < 0.001, statistically significant
difference from BASCs cultured in the
absence of aurothiomalate. B, colony
diameter (left ) and Ki67 staining (right ) of
BASCs in the presence and absence of
aurothiomalate. Columns, mean; bars, SE;
*, P = 0.01, statistically significant
difference from BASCs in the absence of
aurothiomalate. C, aurothiomalate blocks
Kras -mediated BASC expansion in vivo .
Nontransgenic and KrasLA2 mice were
treated with aurothiomalate or saline for 3
wk, and lungs were analyzed for BASC
number and distribution as described in
Fig. 3. Statistical analysis revealed a
significant increase in BASC number
and in the mean number of BASC/TB in
saline-treated KrasLA2 mice when
compared with aurothiomalate-treated
KrasLA2 mice, nontransgenic mice treated
with aurothiomalate, or nontransgenic mice
treated with saline (P < 0.0001). No
statistically significant differences in BASC
number or distribution were observed
between saline-treated nontransgenic,
aurothiomalate-treated nontransgenic, and
aurothiomalate-treated KrasLA2 mice.
D, aurothiomalate inhibits lung tumor
growth in KrasLA2 mice. Columns, mean
fold-change in average tumor size after
6 wk in the presence of aurothiomalate or
saline; bars, SE; *, P = 0.003, statistically
significant difference from saline-treated
KrasLA2 mice.

www.aacrjournals.org

7609

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (19). October 1, 2009

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst September 8, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-2066
Cancer Research

with an increased proliferative index compared with aurothiomalate-treated BASCs (Fig. 6B, right). Thus, aurothiomalate, like
genetic loss of Prkci, blocks Kras-mediated proliferative expansion
and morphologic transformation of BASCs.
Aurothiomalate inhibits Kras-mediated BASC expansion
and lung tumorigenesis in vivo. We next assessed the effect of
aurothiomalate on BASC expansion and tumor formation in
KrasLA2 mice harboring a latent oncogenic Kras allele activated
by spontaneous recombination in vivo (7). Nontransgenic and
KrasLA2 mice were treated with either aurothiomalate (60 mg/kg/d)
or diluent (saline) for 3 weeks, at which time, mice were sacrificed
and assessed for BASC number and distribution as described
above. Aurothiomalate has no demonstrable effect on BASC
number or distribution in nontransgenic mice (Fig. 6C), consistent
with our finding that Prkci-deficiency does not overtly affect BASCs
in the absence of oncogenic Kras in vivo. In contrast, saline-treated
KrasLA2 mice exhibit a significant increase in BASCs/TB that is
inhibited by aurothiomalate (Fig. 6C). Consistent with the
inhibitory effect of aurothiomalate on BASC expansion, aurothiomalate-treated KrasLA2 mice exhibited a decrease in tumor growth
when compared with saline-treated mice after a 6-week course of
aurothiomalate treatment (Fig. 6D). Therefore, similar to genetic
loss of Prkci, aurothiomalate blocks Kras-mediated BASC expansion and inhibits subsequent lung tumor growth in vivo.

Discussion
The PKCL oncogene plays a requisite role in the maintenance of
the transformed phenotype of NSCLC cells in vitro and in vivo (10).
However, the present study is the first to assess the role of PKCL in
lung tumor formation. Our data firmly establish that genetic
disruption of Prkci has a profound inhibitory effect on oncogenic
Kras-mediated lung tumor development. Although Prkci-deficient
mice still develop lung hyperplasias and lung tumors in response to
oncogenic Kras, albeit at a dramatically reduced incidence,
molecular analysis of these tumors shows that these lesions
invariably retain an unrecombined Prkci allele and express mouse
PKCL protein. These data argue that Prkci is absolutely required for
a very early step in Kras-mediated lung tumorigenesis, such that
only the occasional Kras-transformed cell that escapes complete
recombination of both Prkcifl alleles (and retains PKCL expression)
is competent to progress in tumorigenesis.
The inhibitory effect of Prkci deletion on tumorigenesis is
reflected in a severe defect in the ability of Prkci-deficient BASCs to
expand and undergo Kras-mediated transformation in vitro. Thus,
Prkci is necessary for the first identifiable step in Kras-mediated
tumorigenesis involving expansion and transformation of the
putative lung cancer stem cell in the mouse. Our data provide
important new insight into a key pathway involved in BASC

expansion in response to an oncogenic stimulus; i.e., the oncogenic
PKCL signaling axis. Our data places Prkci among a small cadre of
genes known to play a critical role in oncogene-induced BASC
expansion, including the polycomb group member Bmi1 (23), p38
MAPK (24), the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p27 (25), and
phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (20).
By virtue of its role in BASC expansion, PKCL is an attractive
target for therapeutic intervention in lung cancer. Aurothiomalate,
a highly selective inhibitor of oncogenic PKCL/E signaling (12, 13),
potently blocks Kras-mediated expansion and morphologic transformation of BASCs in vitro and in vivo, and inhibits lung tumor
growth in vivo. Our data indicate that aurothiomalate suppresses
oncogene-mediated tumor induction, at least in part, through
inhibition of the expansion of lung cancer stem cells. These data
have important implications for the use of aurothiomalate in
cancer treatment. A population of cells within human lung tumors
has been identified that exhibits properties of lung cancer stem
cells similar to those exhibited by BASCs (26, 27). These lung
cancer stem cells are capable of self-renewal, serial passage as
tumors in immunocompromised mice, and differentiation into
highly proliferative tumor cells (26, 27). Based on these properties,
lung cancer stem cells are thought to be responsible for the
initiation and long-term maintenance of human lung tumors,
much as BASCs are in the mouse lung. Given their central role in
tumorigenesis, lung cancer stem cells must be therapeutically
targeted to achieve lasting antitumor responses. Unfortunately,
lung cancer stem cells exhibit intrinsic resistance to commonly
used cytotoxic agents (26, 27). Our present results show that
aurothiomalate exhibits potent antiproliferative activity toward the
tumor stem cell niche in a relevant preclinical lung cancer model.
Future studies will be required to assess whether aurothiomalate
has similar antiproliferative effects on human lung cancer stem
cells isolated from primary human lung tumors.

Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest
No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

Acknowledgments
Received 6/5/09; revised 7/10/09; accepted 7/20/09; published OnlineFirst 9/8/09.
Grant support: National Cancer Institute CA084136-12, the V-Foundation, and the
American Lung Association/LUNGevity (A.P. Fields); and a Ruth A. Kirschstein
Postdoctoral Fellowship Award CA115160 from the National Cancer Institute
(R.P. Regala).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
The authors thank Erin Donivan and Suzie Randle for assistance with animal
husbandry procedures, and Brandy Edenfield for immunohistochemical analysis of
lung tissues.

1. Jemal A, Siegel R, Ward E, et al. Cancer statistics, 2008.
CA Cancer J Clin 2008;58:71–96.
2. Schiller JH. Current standards of care in small-cell
and non-small-cell lung cancer. Oncology 2001;61
Suppl 1:3–13.
3. Gazdar AF, Minna JD. Molecular detection of early
lung cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:299–301.
4. Salgia R, Skarin AT. Molecular abnormalities in lung
cancer. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:1207–17.

5. Jackson EL, Willis N, Mercer K, et al. Analysis of lung
tumor initiation and progression using conditional
expression of oncogenic Kras. Genes Dev 2001;15:
3243–8.
6. Meuwissen R, Linn SC, van der Valk M, Mooi WJ,
Berns A. Mouse model for lung tumorigenesis through
Cre/lox controlled sporadic activation of the Kras
oncogene. Oncogene 2001;20:6551–8.
7. Johnson L, Mercer K, Greenbaum D, et al. Somatic
activation of the Kras oncogene causes early onset lung
cancer in mice. Nature 2001;410:1111–6.

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (19). October 1, 2009

7610

References

8. Kim CF, Jackson EL, Woolfenden AE, et al. Identification of bronchioalveolar stem cells in normal lung and
lung cancer. Cell 2005;121:823–35.
9. Regala RP, Weems C, Jamieson L, Copland JA,
Thompson EA, Fields AP. Atypical protein kinase CL
plays a critical role in human lung cancer cell
growth and tumorigenicity. J Biol Chem 2005;280:
31109–15.
10. Regala RP, Weems C, Jamieson L, et al. Atypical
protein kinase CL is an oncogene in human non-small
cell lung cancer. Cancer Res 2005;65:8905–11.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst September 8, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-2066
PKCi Is Required for Lung Tumorigenesis

11. Frederick LA, Matthews JA, Jamieson L, et al. Matrix
metalloproteinase-10 is a critical effector of protein
kinase CL-Par6a-mediated lung cancer. Oncogene 2008;
27:4841–53.
12. Erdogan E, Lamark T, Stallings-Mann M, et al.
Aurothiomalate inhibits transformed growth by targeting the PB1 domain of atypical protein kinase CL.
J Biol Chem 2006;281:28450–9.
13. Stallings-Mann M, Jamieson L, Regala RP, Weems C,
Murray NR, Fields AP. A novel small-molecule inhibitor
of protein kinase CL blocks transformed growth of nonsmall-cell lung cancer cells. Cancer Res 2006;66:1767–74.
14. Banan A, Fields JZ, Farhadi A, Talmage DA, Zhang L,
Keshavarzian A. The h1 isoform of protein kinase C
mediates the protective effects of epidermal growth
factor on the dynamic assembly of F-actin cytoskeleton
and normalization of calcium homeostasis in human
colonic cells. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2002;301:852–66.
15. Fasbender ALJ, Walters RW, Moninger TO, Zabner J,
Welsh MJ. Incorporation of adenovirus in calcium
phosphate precipitates enhances gene transfer to airway
epithelia in vitro and in vivo. J Clin Invest 1998;102:184–93.

www.aacrjournals.org

16. Rice WR, Conkright JJ, Na CL, Ikegami M, Shannon
JM, Weaver TE. Maintenance of the mouse type II cell
phenotype in vitro . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol
2002;283:L256–64.
17. Debnath J, Muthuswamy SK, Brugge JS. Morphogenesis and oncogenesis of MCF-10A mammary epithelial
acini grown in three-dimensional basement membrane
cultures. Methods 2003;30:256–68.
18. Regala RP, Thompson EA, Fields AP. Atypical protein
kinase CL expression and aurothiomalate sensitivity in
human lung cancer cells. Cancer Res 2008;68:5888–95.
19. Kissil JL, Walmsley MJ, Hanlon L, et al. Requirement
for Rac1 in a Kras induced lung cancer in the mouse.
Cancer Res 2007;67:8089–94.
20. Yang Y, Iwanaga K, Raso MG, et al. Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase mediates bronchioalveolar stem cell
expansion in mouse models of oncogenic Kras-induced
lung cancer. PLoS One 2008;3:e2220.
21. Tchernitsa OI, Sers C, Zuber J, et al. Transcriptional basis of KRAS oncogene-mediated cellular
transformation in ovarian epithelial cells. Oncogene
2004;23:4536–55.

22. Zuber J, Tchernitsa OI, Hinzmann B, et al. A genomewide survey of RAS transformation targets. Nat Genet
2000;24:144–52.
23. Dovey JS, Zacharek SJ, Kim CF, Lees JA. Bmi1 is
critical for lung tumorigenesis and bronchioalveolar
stem cell expansion. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2008;105:
11857–62.
24. Ventura JJ, Tenbaum S, Perdiguero E, et al. p38a
MAP kinase is essential in lung stem and progenitor
cell proliferation and differentiation. Nat Genet 2007;
39:750–8.
25. Besson A, Hwang HC, Cicero S, et al. Discovery of an
oncogenic activity in p27Kip1 that causes stem cell
expansion and a multiple tumor phenotype. Genes Dev
2007;21:1731–46.
26. Eramo A, Lotti F, Sette G, et al. Identification and
expansion of the tumorigenic lung cancer stem cell
population. Cell Death Differ 2008;15:504–14.
27. Chen YC, Hsu HS, Chen YW, et al. Oct-4
expression maintained cancer stem-like properties in
lung cancer-derived CD133-positive cells. PLoS One
2008;3:e2637.

7611

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (19). October 1, 2009

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst September 8, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-2066

Atypical Protein Kinase Cι Is Required for Bronchioalveolar
Stem Cell Expansion and Lung Tumorigenesis
Roderick P. Regala, Rebecca K. Davis, Alyssa Kunz, et al.
Cancer Res 2009;69:7603-7611. Published OnlineFirst September 8, 2009.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-2066
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2009/09/08/0008-5472.CAN-09-2066.DC1

This article cites 27 articles, 12 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/69/19/7603.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 8 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/69/19/7603.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

