Published OnlineFirst February 11, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2045

Cancer
Research

Microenvironment and Immunology

Vaccine-Mediated Immunotherapy Directed against a
Transcription Factor Driving the Metastatic Process
Andressa Ardiani1, Soﬁa R. Gameiro1, Claudia Palena1, Duane H. Hamilton1, Anna Kwilas1,
Thomas H. King2, Jeffrey Schlom1, and James W. Hodge1

Abstract
Numerous reports have now demonstrated that the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) process is
involved in solid tumor progression, metastasis, and drug resistance. Several transcription factors have been
implicated as drivers of EMT and metastatic progression, including Twist. Overexpression of Twist has been
shown to be associated with poor prognosis and drug resistance for many carcinomas and other tumor types.
The role of Twist in experimental cancer metastases has been principally studied in the 4T1 mammary tumor
model, where silencing of Twist in vitro has been shown to greatly reduce in vivo metastatic spread.
Transcription factors such as Twist are generally believed to be "undruggable" because of their nuclear
location and lack of a speciﬁc groove for tight binding of a small molecule inhibitor. An alternative approach
to drug therapy targeting transcription factors driving the metastatic process is T-cell–mediated immunotherapy. A therapeutic vaccine platform that has been previously characterized consists of heat-killed
recombinant Saccharomyces cerevisiae (yeast) capable of expressing tumor-associated antigen protein. We
report here the construction and characterization of a recombinant yeast expressing the entire Twist protein,
which is capable of inducing both CD8þ and CD4þ Twist-speciﬁc T-cell responses in vivo. Vaccination of mice
reduced the size of primary transplanted 4T1 tumors and had an even greater antitumor effect on lung
metastases of the same mice, which was dependent on Twist-speciﬁc CD8þ T cells. These studies provide the
rationale for vaccine-induced T-cell–mediated therapy of transcription factors involved in driving the
metastatic process. Cancer Res; 74(7); 1945–57. 2014 AACR.

Introduction
Numerous reports have now demonstrated that the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) process is involved
in solid tumor progression, invasion, and metastasis (1–7).
Studies have also shown that cells undergoing EMT become
more drug resistant (8–13). Several transcription factors
have been implicated as drivers of EMT and metastatic
progression, including Twist (12), Snail (5), Slug (14), and
Brachyury (2, 15), among others; perhaps the most studied of
these is Twist. Overexpression of Twist has been shown to be
associated with poor prognosis for the following human
carcinomas: breast (16, 17), colorectal (18, 19), cervical
(20), lung (21), esophageal (22), hypopharyngeal (23), prostate (24), gastric (25), and bladder (26), as well as human
melanoma (27), glioblastoma (28), gastrointestinal stromal
Authors' Afﬁliations: 1Laboratory of Tumor Immunology and Biology,
Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda,
Maryland; and 2GlobeImmune Inc., Louisville, Colorado
Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research
Online (http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Corresponding Author: Jeffrey Schlom, Laboratory of Tumor Immunology
and Biology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, NIH,
10 Center Drive, Room 8B09, MSC 1750, Bethesda, MD 20892. Phone:
301-496-4343; Fax: 301-496-2756; E-mail: js141c@nih.gov
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2045
2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

tumor (29), and osteosarcoma (30). Overexpression of Twist
has also been shown to be associated with hormone and
drug resistance (17, 21) and the suppression of senescence
programs (31).
The role of Twist in cancer metastases has been principally
studied in the 4T1 mammary tumor model, where 4T1 cells are
transplanted into the mammary fat pad and spontaneously
metastasize to the lung. Silencing of Twist in vitro has been
shown to greatly reduce in vivo metastatic spread (32, 33).
Transcription factors such as Twist are generally believed to be
"undruggable" because of their nuclear location and lack of a
speciﬁc groove for tight binding of a small molecule inhibitor.
One study (9) has shown that pretreatment of 4T1 cells in vitro
with the antibiotic salinomycin before transplant resulted in a
4-fold reduction of metastases, a decrease in the epithelial
marker E-cadherin and an increase in the mesenchymal marker vimentin. Pretreatment of 4T1 cells with paclitaxel, however,
induced the opposite effects.
An alternative approach to drug therapy to target transcription factors driving the metastatic process is T-cell–mediated
immunotherapy. A recent study has shown that T cells from
mice vaccinated with a 10-mer Twist peptide could lyse 4T1
tumor cells in vitro (34). This provided evidence that Twist
polypeptides could be processed through the cytoplasm and
transported in the context of class I major histocompatibility
complex (MHC) as a 9–10 peptide–MHC complex on the cell
surface for T-cell recognition.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

1945

Published OnlineFirst February 11, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2045

Ardiani et al.

A therapeutic vaccine platform that has been previously
characterized consists of heat-killed recombinant Saccharomyces cerevisiae (yeast) capable of expressing tumor-associated antigen (TAA) protein. Recombinant yeast-CEA vaccine
was shown (35–39) to efﬁciently activate murine and human T
cells, which are capable of lysing murine and human tumor
cells, respectively, and recombinant yeast-CEA vaccination of
mice resulted in antitumor activity. These and other studies
have shown that yeast (even devoid of the tumor antigen) could
efﬁciently activate murine and human dendritic cells via their
Toll-like receptors (TLR) and consequently induce dendritic
cells to produce high levels of type I cytokines such as interleukin (IL)-2, TNF-a, and IFN-g. Thus, the "yeast component" of
the recombinant yeast is an integral part of the vaccine
platform in its ability to activate the innate immune system
and has been shown previously to contribute in part to
antitumor effects (35–39).
We report here the construction and characterization of a
recombinant yeast expressing the entire Twist protein, which
is capable of the induction of both CD8þ and CD4þ Twistspeciﬁc T-cell responses in a 4T1 mammary breast cancer
model. Vaccination of mice reduced the size of primary
transplanted 4T1 murine mammary tumors and had an even
greater antitumor effect on lung metastases of the same mice.
These antitumor effects were seen in (i) the unresected setting,
(ii) in the neoadjuvant tumor setting where mice were vaccinated before the surgical resection of the primary tumor, and
(iii) in the adjuvant setting where primary tumors were surgically removed before the administration of vaccine. These
studies provide the rationale for vaccine-induced T-cell–mediated therapy of transcription factors involved in driving the
metastatic process.

Materials and Methods
Animals
All mice were housed and maintained in microisolator
cages under speciﬁc pathogen-free conditions and in accordance with the Association for Assessment and Accreditation
of Laboratory Animal Care guidelines. All experimental studies
were carried out under approval of the NIH Intramural Animal
Care and Use Committee.
Tumor cells
4T1 murine mammary and P815 mouse lymphoblast-like
mastocytoma cell lines were purchased from American Type
Culture Collection and maintained in the recommended
medium.
RNA isolation, quantitative RT-PCR, and EMT array
Tissues were collected from na€ve mice, and cell lysates
were obtained utilizing gentleMACS M Tubes as per the
manufacturer's recommendations (Miltenyi Biotec). Total
RNA was isolated from tissue lysates and tumor cell lines
using the RNeasy Extraction Kit (Qiagen), and reversed
transcribed into cDNA using the Advantage RT-for-PCR Kit
(Clontech). cDNA (2.5–10 ng) was used in quantitative realtime PCR reactions using the following probes speciﬁc for
Twist1 (Mm00442036_m1) and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate

1946

Cancer Res; 74(7) April 1, 2014

dehydrogenase (GAPDH; 4352339E). Fold change in relative
mRNA expression was calculated as expression in 4T1 Twist
short hairpin RNA (shRNA) cells relative to control shRNA
cells. Relative mRNA expression levels of 84 genes involved
in the EMT process were assessed using an EMT PCR array
(SA Biosciences) as per the manufacturer's directions. PCR
was performed on the 7300 Real-Time PCR System (Applied
Biosystems). Where indicated, values calculated as expression relative to GAPDH as previously described (2).
Immunohistochemistry
Female Balb/c mice (n ¼ 3) were inoculated with 5  104
4T1 cells on the mammary fat pad on day 0. On day 30, mice
were euthanized, primary tumors and lung tissues were harvested. Twist expression was detected via immunohistochemistry using rabbit-polyclonal antibody to Twist (EMD Millipore) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Expression
of mesenchymal markers was detected using rabbit antibody
to N-cadherin and vimentin (Abcam). Epithelial marker
expression was detected using rabbit antibody to E-cadherin
(Cell Signaling). Entire slides were digitally scanned by an
Aperio ScanScope CS scanning system and analyzed by Aperio
ImageScope Viewer software (Aperio Technologies Inc.). The
statistical analysis was composed of three independent
murine tumors, within each contained a complete stained
tumor section. Positive tumor regions were measured using
the Positive Pixel Count v9 algorithm. Negative controls included omission of primary antibody with PBS and matched rabbit
isotype antibody.
Generation of Twist knockdowns
4T1 cells were transfected with 1 mg of puriﬁed control
shRNA or the Twist1-speciﬁc targeting shRNA (Origene) using
a nucleofector device as per the manufacturer's recommendations (Lonza). Stable transfectants were selected utilizing
growth media containing 2 mg/mL puromycin (Sigma-Aldrich).
Western blot analysis
Cells were washed twice with PBS and lysed in RIPA Lysis
Buffer (Santa Cruz Biotech). Protein concentration was measured using a BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientiﬁc).
Aliquots containing 40 mg of protein were run on an SDSPAGE, and transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane. Membranes were blocked for 1 hour at room temperature with 5%
milk in PBS and probed overnight at 4 C using antibodies
speciﬁc for pan-actin (clone Ab-5, Neo Markers) or Twist (clone
2c1a, Abcam) at the concentrations recommended by the
respective manufacturers. Membranes were washed 3 times
using PBS containing 0.05% Tween 20 (PBST), and incubated
with appropriate IRDye-labeled secondary antibodies (LI-COR
Biotechnology) at a 1:5,000 dilution in 5% milk in PBS for 1 hour
at room temperature. Membranes were washed 3 times with
PBST. All Western blots were imaged using the Odyssey
Infrared imaging system (LI-COR Biotechnology).
Proliferation
Five hundred tumor cells were seeded per well in 96-well
trays, and cell viability was assessed by MTT. Brieﬂy, MTT

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst February 11, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2045

Twist Vaccine for Targeting Metastases

reagent (Sigma-Aldrich) was added per well at a ﬁnal concentration of 0.5 mg/mL for 2 hours at 37 C. Medium was removed
and the converted dye was solubilized in ice-cold isopropanol
and measured at 560 nm on a micro plate reader (Bio-TEK
Instruments). To evaluate the effect of radiation or chemotherapy on the growth of tumor cells, cells were exposed
in vitro to 5 Gy radiation dose or 1 ng/mL docetaxel in complete
media or were left untreated. Cells were harvested 24, 48, or
72 hours after exposure, and the total number of adherent
viable cells was determined by trypan blue exclusion.
Migration and invasion assays
In vitro cell migratory and invasive abilities were assessed
using CytoSelect 96-well cell migration and invasion assays as
per the manufacturer's instructions (Cell Biolabs, Inc.). Brieﬂy,
105 tumor cells in serum-free media were seeded into the upper
chamber and media containing 20% FBS was placed into the
lower chamber. After 24-hour incubation at 37 C, cells that had
moved into the lower chamber were lysed and quantiﬁed
utilizing the CyQuant GR dye solution; ﬂuorescence was measured at 480/520 nm utilizing a micro plate reader (Bio-TEK
Instruments). Data are expressed as relative ﬂuorescence units,
as per the manufacturer's instructions.
F-actin staining
Cells were grown on glass coverslips, and stained for F-actin
utilizing Alexa Fluor-488 labeled phalloidin (Invitrogen, Life
Technologies) as per the manufacturer's recommendations.
Vaccine constructs
Recombinant S. cerevisiae yeast constructs without antigen
(wild-type yeast) or expressing the Twist 1 gene protein
(referred to here as recombinant yeast-Twist) were engineered
by methods similar to those previously described (GlobeImmune; ref. 35). Expression of Twist protein from yeast-Twist
was conformed by Western blot analysis (Supplementary
Fig. S1).
Murine CD8þ T-cell responses
Female Balb/c mice (n ¼ 5) were vaccinated with PBS, wildtype yeast, or recombinant yeast-Twist vaccine at 1 yeast unit
(YU) per site at 4 sites (4 YU total) on days 0, 7, 14, and 21. On
day 35, mice were euthanized and spleens were removed,
dispersed into single-cell suspensions, pooled, and stimulated
for 6 days with 1 mg/mL of Twist peptide (LYQVLQSDEL, CPC
Scientiﬁc). Bulk lymphocytes were recovered by centrifugation
through a Ficoll-Hypaque gradient. For the assay of tumorkilling activity, the recovered lymphocytes and 111In-labeled
target cells P815 pulsed with the Twist peptide were incubated
for 5 hours and radioactivity in supernatants was measured
using a g counter (Corba Autogamma; Packard Instruments).
For IFN-g production, the pooled splenocytes were stimulated
for 7 days with 1 mg/mL of Twist peptide and bulk lymphocytes
were recovered by centrifugation through a Ficoll-Hypaque
gradient. Recovered T cells were restimulated with fresh,
irradiated, naive syngeneic splenocytes (as antigen processing
cells, APC) and 1 mg/mL of either Twist peptide or control HIV
peptide (AMQMLKETI, CPC Scientiﬁc) for 24 hours. Superna-

www.aacrjournals.org

tant was collected and analyzed for murine IFN-g by cytometric bead array (BD PharMingen) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Results were background corrected for
HIV peptide.
Murine CD4þ T-cell proliferation and ﬂow cytometry
Female Balb/c mice (n ¼ 5) were injected with PBS, or
vaccinated wild-type yeast or yeast-Twist vaccine at 1 YU per
site at 4 sites (4 YU total) weekly for 3 or 4 weeks. Fourteen days
after the last vaccination, animals were euthanized and splenocytes were collected and pooled. CD4þ T cells were puriﬁed
by negative selection using a magnetic separation system
(Miltenyi Biotec). To measure Twist-speciﬁc proliferation,
CD4þ T cells were cocultured with irradiated syngeneic spleen
cells (APC) and Twist peptide (QQPASGKRGARKRRS, CPC
Scientiﬁc) at 0.4 mg/mL. After 4 days of incubation, 1 mCi of
[3H]-thymidine (Perkin-Elmer) was added per well; plates were
harvested after 16 hours of incubation and thymidine incorporation was measured using a 1450 Betaplate reader (PerkinElmer). To analyze T-cell activation markers, cells were harvested on day 5 and multicolor cytometric analyses for T-cell
activation were performed using an LSR-II (BD Biosciences).
FoxP3 antibody with appropriate isotype was purchased from
eBioscience and the remaining antibodies and their respective
isotype control antibodies were purchased from BD Biosciences. Supernatant was also collected and analyzed for
IFN-g by cytometric bead array (BD Biosciences).
Antitumor vaccination
Female Balb/c mice (n ¼ 8–10) were injected with 5  104
4T1 mammary tumor cells. Four days or 11 days after tumor
implantation, mice were injected with PBS or with wild-type
yeast or yeast-Twist at a dose of 1 YU at 4 sites (4 YU total) and
subsequently weekly for the duration of the experiment. Tumor
growth was measured twice/week and recorded. Mice were
euthanized either on day 21 or when the average tumor volume
in each group reached 1,000 mm3. To enumerate lung metastasis, lungs were harvested and dispersed into single-cell
suspension and plated in the presence of 6-TG (Sigma-Aldrich).
Ten days later, cells were ﬁxed with methanol, stained with
0.03% methylene blue, and the number of clonogenic metastatic cells was counted.
Analysis of tumor T-cell inﬁltration
To determine the presence of T-cell inﬁltrates in the
primary tumors and lung tumor tissues, female Balb/c mice
(n ¼ 3) were injected with 5  104 4T1 mammary tumor cells.
Four days after tumor implantation, mice were injected
weekly with PBS or with wild-type yeast or yeast-Twist at a
dose of 1 YU at 4 sites (4 YU total). Mice were euthanized when
the average tumor volume in each group reached 1,000 mm3.
Primary tumors and lungs were harvested and T-cell inﬁltrates were detected using rabbit-polyclonal antibody to CD3
(Dako) according to the manufacturer's instructions and
analyzed by Aperio ImageScope Viewer software (Aperio
Technologies Inc.) as earlier described. Negative controls
included omission of primary antibody with PBS and matched
rabbit isotype.

Cancer Res; 74(7) April 1, 2014

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

1947

Published OnlineFirst February 11, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2045

Ardiani et al.

T-cell/NK depletion study
Female Balb/c mice (n ¼ 8–10) were injected with 5  104
4T1 mammary tumor cells. Four days after tumor implantation, mice were vaccinated weekly with either PBS or wild-type
yeast or recombinant yeast-Twist at a dose of 1 YU at 4 sites
(4 YU total) and subsequently weekly for the duration of
the experiment. On days 4 to 7 and every week thereafter,
animals were depleted of CD4þ T cells, CD8þ T cells, or both
CD4þ and CD8þ T cells by intraperitoneal administration
of a daily dose (100 mg) of anti-CD4 (GK 1.5) and/or anti-CD8
(Lyt 2.2) hybridomas in PBS. For natural killer (NK) cell
depletion, animals were injected with 25 mL anti-asialo-GM1
antibody (Cedarlane) intraperitoneal once per week. Tumor
volume was recorded twice/week.
Tumor resection and antitumor vaccination
To model the neoadjuvant tumor setting, female Balb/c
mice (n ¼ 8–10) were injected with 5  104 4T1 mammary
tumor cells. Four days after tumor implantation, mice were
vaccinated weekly with either PBS or wild-type yeast or yeastTwist at a dose of 0.3 YU at 1 site (0.3 YU total). Tumors were
allowed to grow and metastasize to distant site. On day 10,
primary tumors were removed using sterile technique. To
enumerate lung metastasis, mice were euthanized on day
40, lungs were harvested, and the number of clonogenic
metastatic cells was counted. To model the adjuvant tumor
setting, female Balb/c mice (n ¼ 20) were injected with 5  104

4T1 mammary tumor cells. On day 14, primary tumors were
surgically removed using aseptic technique and after 1 week,
mice were vaccinated with PBS or yeast-Twist at a dose of 1
YU at 4 sites (4 YU total) and weekly thereafter. Mice were
observed and their survival was recorded.
Toxicology study
Female Balb/c mice (n ¼ 5) were vaccinated with either PBS
or wild-type yeast or recombinant yeast-Twist at a dose of 1 YU
at 4 sites (4 YU total) weekly for 18 weeks. One week following
the last injection, animals were assessed for any potential
toxicities utilizing the following parameters: in-life body
weight, CBC (20 parameters: WBC, LY, MO, EO, RBC, Hb, HCT,
MCV, PLT), serum chemistry (5 parameters: BUN, CRE, AST,
ALT, ALK), and autoimmunity (5 parameters: Histone, n-RNP,
dsDNA, ssDNA, CIC antibodies), as described previously (40).
Statistical analysis
Data were analyzed using GraphPad Prism (Version 5;
GraphPad Software). Data points in graphs represent the
mean SD.

Results
Expression of Twist in normal tissues and tumors
To evaluate Twist as a potential target of carcinoma therapy,
Twist mRNA expression was analyzed in a range of normal
murine tissues and the 4T1 tumor cell line (Fig. 1A). High levels

Figure 1. Expression of Twist in
normal tissues and tumors. A, realtime PCR was performed to
evaluate Twist RNA expression in
several normal murine tissues and
the 4T1 breast cancer cell line.
Female Balb/c mice (n ¼ 3) were
4
injected with 5  10 4T1 cells in
mammary fat pad. On day 30,
primary tumors and lung
metastases were harvested. B,
Twist mRNA expression in primary
tumor and lung metastases was
evaluated by real-time PCR. Error
bars indicate mean  SEM from
triplicate measurements. Data
are representative of two
independent experiments.
C and D, Twist protein expression
in primary tumor and lung
metastases was detected by
immunohistochemistry
(magniﬁcation, 20) and quantiﬁed
by positive pixel quantiﬁcation
analysis. Statistical analyses were
done by the Student t test.

1948

Cancer Res; 74(7) April 1, 2014

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst February 11, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2045

Twist Vaccine for Targeting Metastases

Figure 2. Silencing Twist
expression is associated with a
decreased migratory/invasive
phenotype. The functional role of
Twist in 4T1 tumor cells was
analyzed by gene knockdown.
A, Western blot analysis of Twist
protein in the 4T1 control and Twist
shRNA cell lines. Actin is shown as
the protein loading control. B,
proliferation of the 4T1 control and
Twist shRNA cells was assessed
by MTT assay after 1, 3, and 5 days
of in vitro growth. C and D, in vitro
cell migration (C) and invasion (D)
of the 4T1 cell line pair. Error bars
indicate mean  SEM from
triplicate measurements. E, fold
change in relative mRNA
expression in genes known to be
involved in the EMT process in 4T1
Twist shRNA relative to control
shRNA cells. F, F-actin staining of
the 4T1 cell line pair (magniﬁcation,
20). The blue signal represents
the DAPI-stained nuclei and the
green signal represents the
staining of the
F-actin.

of Twist mRNA expression were seen in 4T1 cells and testis,
generally considered to be an immunologically privileged site,
with lower levels detected in spleen. Some other tissues
evaluated showed detectable, albeit low, levels of Twist mRNA.
Contrary to Twist, expression of Brachyury mRNA, a different
EMT regulator, was negative in all samples evaluated, with the
exception of testis (data not shown). The 4T1 line was chosen
for further study because of its ability to metastasize spontaneously to the lung, its involvement in EMT demonstrated in
previous studies, and the fact that Twist was shown to be a
mediator of metastatic spread in the 4T1 model (33). Figure 1B
shows the signiﬁcantly higher level of expression of Twist in
biopsies of 4T1 pulmonary metastases versus primary tumors
by RT-PCR. This ﬁnding was further conﬁrmed by immunohistochemistry (Fig. 1D) where the expression of Twist in
pulmonary metastases was signiﬁcantly elevated compared

www.aacrjournals.org

with primary tumors (P ¼ 0.0373; Fig. 1C). Because Twist is
expressed in some normal organs, the results shown in Fig. 1A
also deﬁne Twist as a "self-antigen" to which Balb/c mice are
supposedly immunologically "tolerant."
Silencing Twist expression is associated with a decreased
migratory phenotype
To conﬁrm and extend previous observations that Twist is a
driver of metastasis in this 4T1 model, it is shown that the
reduced level of Twist in Twist shRNA–transfected 4T1 cells
(Fig. 2A) reduced the level of migration (Fig. 2C) and invasion
(Fig. 2D). However, Twist shRNA-treated cells grow in vitro at
an identical rate to the control shRNA-treated cells (Fig. 2B).
Expression of 84 genes involved in the process of EMT was
analyzed by real-time PCR in 4T1 cells stably silenced for the
expression of Twist1 (4T1 Twist shRNA) compared with

Cancer Res; 74(7) April 1, 2014

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

1949

Published OnlineFirst February 11, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2045

Ardiani et al.

control cells (control shRNA). Shown in Fig. 2E is the selected
group of genes whose expression was either upregulated or
downregulated greater than 3-fold in Twist-silenced tumor
cells. For example, Mmp-3 and Mmp-9 expression was markedly downregulated; Mmp-3 and Mmp-9 encode for the matrix
metallopeptidases-3 and -9, respectively, enzymes known to
participate in the breakdown of the extracellular matrix (41).
Silencing of Twist1 in 4T1 cells also resulted in a marked (4.3fold) decrease in the expression of Spp1, the gene encoding for
the secreted sialoprotein osteopontin, previously described as
a regulator of adhesion, motility, tumor growth, and metastasis
(42). The gene most greatly upregulated (50-fold) following
Twist1 silencing in 4T1 cells was Krt14, which encodes for the
epithelial marker protein keratin (14). Also markedly upregulated were the genes encoding for ﬁbroblast growth factor
binding protein 1 (Fgfbp1) and regulator of G-protein signaling
2 (Rsg2). The former is a protein involved in binding and
activation of ﬁbroblast growth factors, whereas regulator of
G-protein signaling 2 may inhibit G protein–coupled receptor–
mediated signaling via inactivation of G proteins. In addition,
silencing Twist expression in 4T1 cells also mediated reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton as indicated by F-actin
staining depicted in Fig. 2F. Although tumor cells with high
levels of Twist presented F-actin ﬁlaments organized into actin
stress ﬁbers, silencing of Twist in 4T1 cells promoted cortical
organization of F-actin in the areas of cell-to-cell contact.
Although Twist was previously implicated in apoptotic evasion
(43), in the 4T1 model, however, silencing Twist did not
improve cells' sensitivity to radiation or docetaxel treatment
(data not shown). Altogether, our data indicate that Twist plays
a functional role in the 4T1 model on the remodeling of the
extracellular matrix as well as on the events of tumor cell
migration and invasion.
Vaccination with recombinant yeast-Twist induces
Twist-speciﬁc T-cell responses
To determine whether CD8þ and/or CD4þ Twist-speciﬁc
immune responses could be elicited in vivo, Balb/c mice were
vaccinated 4 times at weekly intervals with recombinant yeastTwist vaccine, wild-type yeast, or buffer (PBS). Mice were
euthanized on day 35. As mentioned above, wild-type yeast
have previously been shown to stimulate dendritic cells via
TLRs, which, in turn, can activate T cells to produce high levels
of type 1 cytokines; the yeast component of the vaccine is thus
considered an integral part of the vaccine platform. Splenic T
cells from mice in each of the vaccinated groups were pulsed
with a 10-mer Twist peptide to activate CD8þ T cells. The
splenocytes from mice vaccinated with the recombinant yeastTwist produced 2-fold more IFN-g and displayed signiﬁcantly
greater (>3-fold, P ¼ 0.02) lytic activity against 4T1 cells than
splenocytes from the wild-type yeast group or no treatment
group (Fig. 3A and B). A novel 15-mer Twist peptide was also
used to activate CD4þ T cells, and signiﬁcantly greater proliferative activity and increased IFN-g production were also seen
from splenocytes in the recombinant yeast-Twist vaccinated
mice (Fig. 3C and D). These data, taken together, indicate that
the recombinant yeast-Twist vaccine can break tolerance to
this self-antigen. Analyses of populations of CD4þ memory T

1950

Cancer Res; 74(7) April 1, 2014

cells after in vitro restimulation revealed a 7- and 1.6-fold
increase of CD4þ T memory stem cells (Tscm) in Twistvaccinated mice compared with PBS- or yeast wild-type–
treated mice, respectively (Fig. 3E). This recently described
Tscm population was thought to generate potent antitumor
activity (44).
Antitumor and antimetastatic effect of recombinant
yeast-Twist vaccination
Antitumor activity was evaluated in vaccinated tumor-bearing mice. 4T1 cells were transplanted in mammary fat pads on
day 0 and mice were vaccinated 3 times at weekly intervals
starting on day 4. Mice were euthanized on day 21 and lung
metastases were enumerated. As seen in Fig. 4A, on day 21
there was a signiﬁcant reduction (P ¼ 0.0199) in primary tumor
volume in the recombinant yeast-Twist vaccinated group
versus the wild-type yeast vaccinated group or PBS vaccinated
group (n ¼ 8–10 mice/group). There was also a statistical
difference (P ¼ 0.005) in the number of lung metastases in the
Twist vaccinated group versus the PBS vaccinated group and a
trend but a nonstatistical difference (P ¼ 0.16) between Twist
vaccinated and wild-type yeast vaccinated groups (Fig. 4B).
Other studies have shown that immunosuppressive factors,
correlating with the size of the primary tumor, can inﬂuence
the growth of secondary lesions. To control for the possibility
that the size of the primary tumor was inﬂuencing the number
of lung metastases, mice were transplanted with 4T1 in fat pads
on day 0 and vaccinated weekly starting at day 4 with recombinant yeast-Twist, wild-type yeast, or buffer; primary tumor
volumes were then measured. Mice in each group were euthanized when the average tumor volume reached 1,000 mm3 (Fig.
4C). As seen in Fig. 4D, there was a reduction in the number of
lung metastases in the recombinant yeast-Twist vaccinated
group versus the wild-type yeast vaccinated group (P ¼ 0.03)
and versus the PBS vaccinated group (P ¼ 0.004). Moreover, the
percentage of mice with 150 clonogenic metastatic cells was
12.5% in the control group, 16% in the wild-type yeast vaccinated group, and 58% in the recombinant yeast-Twist vaccinated group.
Analysis of splenic immune populations in tumor-bearing
mice receiving no treatment of yeast-Twist vaccine indicated
that the yeast-Twist vaccine did not alter the relative percentage or mean expression of Tregs or myeloid-derived suppressor
cells (data not shown). Similar observations were attained in
non–tumor-bearing mice receiving PBS, yeast wild-type, or
yeast-Twist vaccine. Independently of the presence of tumor,
yeast-Twist vaccination also did not alter the relative percentage of CD4þ and CD8þ T cells, and NK, B, or dendritic cells and
also did not alter the expression of CD28 on both CD4þ and
CD8þ T cells (data not shown). The primary tumors and lung
tumor tissues were subjected to immunohistochemistry staining to detect the presence of CD3þ T-cell inﬁltrates. The
quantiﬁcation of T-cell inﬁltrates revealed similar numbers of
CD3þ T-cell inﬁltrates in the primary tumors from mice
treated with PBS, wild-type yeast, and yeast-Twist (Fig. 5B).
However, an intense staining of CD3þ T-cell inﬁltrates was
detected in lung tumors harvested from mice that received
yeast-Twist when compared with other groups (Fig. 5A).

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst February 11, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2045

Twist Vaccine for Targeting Metastases

Figure 3. Vaccination with recombinant yeast-Twist induces Twist-speciﬁc T-cell responses. Female Balb/c mice (n ¼ 5 per group) were injected with PBS or
were vaccinated with 1 YU/site at 4 sites of yeast wild-type or yeast-Twist vaccine on days 0, 7, 14, and 21. On day 35, mice were euthanized and spleens
111
were harvested. A, to evaluate lytic activity, lymphocytes were incubated for 5 hours with
In-labeled target P815 cells pulsed with Twist peptide.
Radioactivity in the supernatant was measured and speciﬁc lysis of 4T1 tumor cells was calculated. This lysis was done on P815 pulsed with the 10-mer Twist
þ
peptide. B, to evaluate Twist-speciﬁc CD8 T-cell responses, splenic cells were stimulated with Twist 10-mer peptide. Supernatants from these
þ
cultures were collected and analyzed for murine IFN-g by cytometric bead array. To evaluate CD4 T-cell proliferation in response to Twist 15-mer peptide,
þ
CD4 T cells were puriﬁed and tested for proliferation by culturing with irradiated APCs and Twist peptide for 5 days. C, proliferation in response to
3
stimuli was measured by incorporation of H-thymidine, which was added during the ﬁnal 18 hours. All experiments were done two times with similar results.
Data shown are representative from one experiment. Statistical analyses were done by the Student t test. Error bars indicate mean  SEM from
þ
triplicate measurements. D, supernatants from these cultures were collected and analyzed for murine IFN-g by cytometric bead array. E, populations of CD4
þ
þ
memory T cells after in vitro restimulation. Isolated CD4 T cells were restimulated in vitro for 5 days with Twist 15-mer peptide or control LCMV peptide; CD4
T-cell memory subsets were deﬁned based on the expression of CD44 and CD62L, using matched isotype controls.

Positive pixel quantiﬁcation conﬁrmed a signiﬁcant increase
of CD3þ T-cell inﬁltrates in lung tumor tissues harvested
from mice vaccinated with yeast-Twist versus PBS-treated
(P ¼ 0.0007) and versus wild-type yeast vaccinated group
(P ¼ 0.0005; Fig. 5C). Immune depletion studies were conducted
to determine which immune cell subset(s) was most responsible
for the antitumor effect. As seen in Fig. 5D, CD4 or NK cell
depletion had minor effects (nonstatistical) on antitumor activity. Depletion of CD8þ T cells, however, completely abrogated
the antitumor effect of the recombinant yeast-Twist vaccination.
Antitumor and antimetastatic effect of recombinant
yeast-Twist vaccination in the neoadjuvant 4T1
mammary tumor model
The prior studies were conducted with mice vaccinated with
1 YU at 4 sites weekly for 3 weeks, with either recombinant
yeast-Twist or wild-type yeast. As was mentioned and shown
above, wild-type yeast vaccination was expected to induce
some level of antitumor activity. In an attempt to minimize the
effect of wild-type yeast vaccination in this model, mice were

www.aacrjournals.org

vaccinated 3 times at weekly intervals with reduced levels of
both wild-type yeast and recombinant yeast-Twist: 0.3 YU at a
single site (13-fold lower dose than previously used dose of 4
YU). To model the neoadjuvant tumor setting, mice were
transplanted with 4T1 tumor cells in the fat pad at day 0, and
were vaccinated weekly starting at day 4 throughout the study.
On day 14, primary tumors were removed, and mice were
euthanized on day 40. As seen in Fig. 6A, there was no statistical
difference in tumor volume of mice vaccinated with recombinant yeast-Twist, wild-type yeast, or PBS in the size of
primary tumors removed at day 10. Analyses of lungs removed
from mice on day 40 (Fig. 6B), however, showed a clear
difference in number of lung metastases (P ¼ 0.02) between
mice vaccinated with recombinant yeast-Twist vaccine versus
wild-type yeast, and a difference between the PBS vaccinated
group and the recombinant yeast-Twist vaccinated group (P <
0.0001). The percentage of mice with 1,000 clonogenic lung
metastatic cells was 0% in the control group, 25% in the wildtype yeast vaccinated group, and 71% in the recombinant
yeast-Twist vaccinated group. These studies provide evidence

Cancer Res; 74(7) April 1, 2014

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

1951

Published OnlineFirst February 11, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2045

Ardiani et al.

Figure 4. Antitumor and antimetastatic effect of recombinant yeast-Twist vaccination. In A–D, female Balb/c mice (n ¼ 8–10 per group) were inoculated in the
mammary pad with 4T1 mammary tumor cells on day 0. Mice were injected with PBS (open circles) or vaccinated with 1 YU/site at 4 sites of yeast wild-type
(squares) or recombinant yeast-Twist vaccine (closed circles). A, mice were vaccinated on days 4, 11, and 18. Primary tumor volume was measured twice a
week and recorded. B, on day 21, mice were euthanized and lungs were harvested and dispersed to single-cell suspension and plated. After 10 days
incubation, total number of clonogenic metastatic cells was counted. C, mice were vaccinated on day 4 and weekly thereafter. Primary tumor volume was
3
measured twice a week and recorded. When the average of the primary tumor volume for each group reached 1,000 mm , mice were euthanized, lungs
were harvested and dispersed to single-cell suspension, and plated. D, after 10 days incubation, total number of clonogenic metastatic cells was
counted. A–D:  , statistical signiﬁcance (P < 0.05) between mice that received recombinant yeast-Twist vaccine and mice that received PBS or yeast wild-type.
Statistical analyses were done by the Student t test. NS, no signiﬁcance. This experiment was done two times with similar results. Data shown are
representative from one experiment.

for a difference in the therapeutic effect of the recombinant
yeast-Twist vaccine for metastatic lesions versus the primary
tumor lesion, and provide additional evidence that the size of
the primary tumor did not affect the ability of the recombinant
yeast-Twist vaccine to reduce the number of lung metastases.
Antitumor and antimetastatic effect of recombinant
yeast-Twist vaccination when vaccine administration
was delayed and in the adjuvant 4T1 mammary tumor
model
Unlike passive therapies, vaccine induced therapeutic
responses require multiple vaccinations at appropriate inter-

1952

Cancer Res; 74(7) April 1, 2014

vals to maximize immune responses. We have previously
shown that multiple vaccinations of recombinant yeast
vaccines are required for optimal antitumor responses
(39). 4T1 tumors are rapidly growing, and mice bearing
unresected 4T1 tumors reach ethical limits for experiments
by approximately day 28. If vaccines were initiated on day 14,
one could not administer the minimum of three vaccinations
required, because mice would be required to be sacriﬁced at
or before the third vaccination. Our data demonstrate that
administration of yeast-Twist 4 days after tumor implantation was able to elicit a robust antitumor and antimetastatic
effect (Figs. 4 and 6). To further strengthen this ﬁnding, we

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst February 11, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2045

Twist Vaccine for Targeting Metastases

4

Figure 5. The detection of T-cell inﬁltrates in primary and lung tumor tissues. Female Balb/c mice (n ¼ 3 per group) were inoculated with 5  10 4T1 in the
mammary fat pad on day 0. Mice received either PBS or 1 YU/site at 4 sites of wild-type yeast or recombinant yeast-Twist vaccine alone started on
3
day 4 and weekly thereafter. When the average of the primary tumor volume for each group reached 1,000 mm , mice were euthanized, and their primary
þ
tumors and lung tumor tissues were harvested, and the presence of CD3 T-cell inﬁltrates was detected by immunohistochemistry (A). B, positive pixel
þ
þ
quantiﬁcation analysis of CD3 T-cell inﬁltrates in primary tumor tissues. C, positive pixel quantiﬁcation analysis of CD3 T-cell inﬁltrates in lung tumor
tissues. D, the effect of T-cell or NK depletion on tumor growth of mice receiving recombinant yeast-Twist vaccine. Female Balb/c mice (n ¼ 10 per group) were
4
inoculated with 5  10 4T1 in the mammary fat pad on day 0. Mice received either PBS or 1 YU/site at 4 sites of recombinant yeast-Twist vaccine
þ
þ
alone started on day 4 and weekly thereafter, or recombinant yeast-Twist vaccine concurrently with NK cell, CD4 , and/or CD8 T-cell–depleting antibodies.
Tumor volume was measured twice a week and recorded. Statistical difference based on the Student t test as measured on day 18 posttumor transplant.

performed an additional study in a more rigorous setting
where vaccine was given when primary tumor is more
established and consequently permitting more tumor cells
to metastasize to distant site. Brieﬂy, female Balb/c mice
(n ¼ 20 per group) were inoculated with 5  104 4T1
mammary tumor cells in the mammary pad on day 0. On
day 11, primary tumors were recorded, the tumors were
palpable, and the average tumor volume was 113.4 mm3 (Fig.
7A, inset). Mice were then randomized to receive either PBS
or yeast-Twist and the primary tumor volumes were measured. As seen in Fig. 7A, delaying administration of yeastTwist until day 11 after tumor implantation, where primary
tumors are established and thus provide a longer window
for tumor cells to metastasize to distant site, still generated a
signiﬁcant primary antitumor effect, albeit less pronounced
when compared with earlier vaccine administration. Mice in
each group were then euthanized when the average tumor

www.aacrjournals.org

volume reached 1,000 mm3. As seen in Fig. 7B, there was a
reduction in the number of lung metastases in the recombinant yeast-Twist vaccinated group versus PBS vaccinated
group (P ¼ 0.03).
To model the adjuvant setting, we performed additional
studies where 4T1 cells were transplanted in mammary fat
pads on day 0. On day 14, primary tumor volume was surgically
removed and 1 week later (day 21 after initial tumor implantation), mice were vaccinated with PBS or yeast-Twist vaccine.
Survival curve analyses revealed that mice that received yeastTwist vaccine experienced greater overall survival, presumably
by reduced pulmonary metastases burden, compared with
mice that received PBS (P ¼ 0.01, not shown).
In light of the fact that Twist is expressed in some normal
Balb/c tissues (Fig. 1), it was possible that the antitumor
effect of the recombinant yeast-Twist vaccine could also
elicit an autoimmune and/or other toxic effects. Balb/c mice

Cancer Res; 74(7) April 1, 2014

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

1953

Published OnlineFirst February 11, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2045

Ardiani et al.

Figure 6. Antitumor and antimetastatic effect of recombinant yeast-Twist vaccination in the neoadjuvant 4T1 mammary tumor model. Female Balb/c mice
4
(n ¼ 8–10 per group) were inoculated with 5  10 4T1 mammary tumor cells in the mammary pad on day 0. Mice were vaccinated with PBS (open
circles) or 0.3 YU/site at one site of yeast wild-type (squares) or recombinant yeast-Twist vaccine (closed circles) on day 4 and followed with weekly injections
thereafter. Tumor volume was measured once a week and recorded on day 10 posttumor implantation (A). On day 14, primary tumors were surgically removed.
On day 40 posttumor implantation, mice were euthanized and lungs were harvested, dispersed to single-cell suspension, and plated. Ten days after
initial incubation, total number of clonogenic metastatic cells was counted (D). Statistical analyses were done by the Student t test.

were each vaccinated 18 times at weekly intervals with
recombinant yeast-Twist, wild-type yeast, or unvaccinated
control. Groups were age matched. Mice were euthanized at
19 weeks. There were no signiﬁcant differences among any of
the groups in (i) body weight, (ii) 20 different blood chemistry parameters, (iii) 7 different clinical chemistry parameters, and (iv) 5 different autoimmunity panels (Supplementary Table S1).

Discussion
The studies reported here show for the ﬁrst time that a
vaccine can induce a therapeutic response targeting a transcription factor that is a driver of the metastatic process.
Although both CD4þ and CD8þ Twist-speciﬁc T-cell responses
were induced by the recombinant yeast-Twist vaccine (Fig. 3),
antibody-mediated depletion studies showed that CD8þ T cells
were primarily responsible for the antitumor effects (Fig. 5D).

Figure 7. Antitumor and antimetastatic effect of recombinant yeast-Twist vaccine when vaccination was delayed and in the adjuvant 4T1 mammary
4
tumor model setting. Female Balb/c mice (n ¼ 20 per group) were inoculated with 5  10 4T1 mammary tumor cells in the mammary pad on day 0. A, on day
11, primary tumor volume was palpable (inset) and mice were randomized to receive either PBS (open circles) or 1 YU/site at 4 sites of yeast-Twist
(closed circles) followed with weekly injection thereafter. Primary tumor volume was measured and recorded. When the average of the primary tumor volume
3
for each group reached 1,000 mm , mice were euthanized, lungs were harvested and dispersed to single-cell suspension, and plated. B, after 10 days
incubation, total number of clonogenic metastatic cells was counted. Statistical analyses were done by the Student t test.  , statistical signiﬁcance
(P < 0.05) between mice that received recombinant yeast-Twist vaccine and mice that received PBS.

1954

Cancer Res; 74(7) April 1, 2014

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst February 11, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2045

Twist Vaccine for Targeting Metastases

These studies also lend further support to previous studies
(2, 34, 45) that T cells can be generated to transcription factors.
Although transcription factors such as Twist and Brachyury
are active in the nucleus, these studies provide evidence that
transcription factors can be processed in the cytoplasm as
polypeptides and transported to the cell surface in the form of
9–10 mer peptide–MHC class I molecule complexes or 15 mer–
MHC class II molecule complexes. These peptide–MHC complexes can in turn be recognized by CD8þ and CD4þ T cells,
respectively. The studies reported here also demonstrate that
Twist is expressed in some normal murine tissues (Fig. 1) and
that the vaccine used can break tolerance to the Twist self
antigen. More importantly, these studies demonstrate that Tcell–mediated antitumor effects can be induced in the absence
of any apparent autoimmunity or other toxic effects (Supplementary Table S1).
It is unclear at this time why the recombinant yeast-Twist
vaccine was more effective in the control of the pulmonary
metastases versus the primary tumor. One possible explanation is the observation that there is more Twist expression in the metastases than the primary tumor (Fig. 1B–D).
This correlates with the signiﬁcant increase of T-cell inﬁltrates in the lung tissues from mice treated with yeast-Twist
when compared with other treatment groups, whereas
similar numbers of T-cell inﬁltrates were detected in the
primary tumors among all groups (Fig. 5A–C). These data
suggest that the T-cell inﬁltrates in the lung tumor tissues
are Twist speciﬁc. Another explanation is the differences in
the tumor microenvironments of the primary versus metastatic lesions.
Although the recombinant yeast-Twist vaccine is shown
to be more efﬁcacious in the induction of Twist-speciﬁc
immune responses and antitumor activity than the wildtype yeast vector (Figs. 3, 4, 6, and 7), the experiments reveal
some degree of immune and antitumor effects with the wildtype yeast vector. Previous studies have shown that wildtype yeast can induce a strong innate immune response;
treatment of murine or human immature dendritic cells was
shown to efﬁciently mature dendritic cells and produce
levels of type I cytokines analogous to the use of TLR
agonists, which are being evaluated as potential cancer
therapeutics (35–39). Thus, it is confounding to consider
the wild-type yeast vector as a true control for any immune
response. As seen in the neoadjuvant tumor setting (Fig. 6),
however, when the number of YUs was reduced for both the
recombinant yeast-Twist vaccine and the wild-type yeast
vector, the differential antitumor effect for the recombinant
yeast-Twist vaccine became more pronounced.
Twist has been shown to be a poor prognostic indicator
for a wide range of human tumors (8, 16, 17, 19–22, 25, 29, 46,
47). It is unclear at this time, however, whether it will be a
valid target for immunotherapy or other types of therapy
because of its fairly high level of expression in several human
normal adult tissues (15). It should also be pointed out that
although numerous studies with human carcinoma cells
have shown a clear correlation between biologic processes
of EMT, such as migration, invasion, and phenotypic
changes (such as conversion of epithelial markers to mes-

www.aacrjournals.org

enchymal markers), this correlation is not as clear with
murine carcinoma cell lines. For example, it has been shown
(32) that 4T1 cells express E-cadherin but are migratory and
invasive, whereas 6NR1 cells express vimentin and N-cadherin, and do not express E-cadherin, but fail to metastasize.
In our studies, the expression of Twist corresponds to some,
but not all features associated with EMT. In vitro, silencing
of Twist expression inhibited the ability of 4T1 cells to
migrate and invade, modulated genes associated with EMT
and mediated re-organization of the actin cytoskeleton
(Fig. 2). In vivo, primary tumors and pulmonary metastases
of 4T1 cells were analyzed for 84 genes involved in the EMT
process by RT-PCR; several genes that are classically upregulated during the EMT process, such as Cdh2 (N-cadherin),
Vim (vimentin), and Zeb2 (Zinc ﬁnger E-box binding homeobox 2), were overexpressed in the lung metastasis biopsies by
4.5-, 12-, and 6.2-fold, respectively, when compared with
primary tumors. In addition, an EMT array was performed
on primary tumors harvested from Twist-vaccinated and
nontreated tumors. Tumors from Twist-vaccinated mice
demonstrated 3- to 6-fold decrease in expression of genes
that are classically upregulated during EMT and the metastasis process, such as N-cadherin (Cdh2), SRY-box containing gene 10 (Sox10), Tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase 1
(Timp1), and Zinc ﬁnger E-box binding homeobox 1 (Zeb1,
not shown). However, we conﬁrmed that the EMT process in
this 4T1 murine model does not exhibit the phenotypic
characteristics of EMT in human carcinoma cells. Using
immunohistochemistry, we were able to evaluate the expression of classical epithelial marker E-cadherin and mesenchymal markers N-cadherin and vimentin on 4T1 primary
tumors and lung metastases (Supplementary Fig. S2).
Although there was a signiﬁcant decrease in E-cadherin
expression in lung metastases compared with primary
tumors (Supplementary Fig. S2A), comparable N-cadherin
and vimentin expression between primary tumors and lung
metastases was also observed (Supplementary Fig. S2). This
confounding observation further conﬁrmed that the EMT
process in murine is not as well deﬁned as in human
carcinomas. Another transcription factor, Brachyury, has
been shown to be a driver of EMT for a range of human
carcinomas. Brachyury has been shown to be differentially
expressed in human carcinomas versus normal adult human
tissue; it is not expressed in murine carcinomas. Brachyuryspeciﬁc human T cells have been generated in vitro that are
capable of lysing human tumor cells. A phase I trial is
ongoing using a recombinant Brachyury vaccine.
The 4T1 model, however, as has previously been shown (32,
33, 41) and reported here, is an excellent model to study the
biology of metastatic process. Numerous preclinical studies
and several clinical studies have now shown the antitumor
synergy between vaccine therapy and chemotherapy, radiation
therapy, hormonal therapy, or the use of small molecule
targeted therapeutics (48–50). The studies reported here also
support the use of the 4T1 model to further study interventions
of the metastatic process by using vaccines targeting the
transcription factor Twist, as a monotherapy or in a range of
combination therapies.

Cancer Res; 74(7) April 1, 2014

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

1955

Published OnlineFirst February 11, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2045

Ardiani et al.

Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest

Acknowledgments

The Laboratory of Tumor Immunology and Biology, J. Schlom, Chief, has a
CRADA with GlobeImmune. No potential conﬂicts of interest were disclosed by
the authors.

The authors thank Dr. A. Molinolo for assistance in interpreting immunohistochemistry and pathology data, M. Taylor and Z. Guo for technical
assistance, and D. Weingarten for editorial assistance in the preparation of
this article.

Authors' Contributions
Conception and design: A. Ardiani, S.R. Gameiro, C. Palena, D.H. Hamilton,
T.H. King, J. Schlom, J.W. Hodge
Development of methodology: A. Ardiani, S.R. Gameiro, C. Palena, D.H.
Hamilton, J. Schlom, J.W. Hodge
Acquisition of data (provided animals, acquired and managed patients,
provided facilities, etc.): A. Ardiani, S.R. Gameiro, C. Palena, D.H. Hamilton,
A. Kwilas, J.W. Hodge
Analysis and interpretation of data (e.g., statistical analysis, biostatistics,
computational analysis): A. Ardiani, S.R. Gameiro, C. Palena, D.H. Hamilton,
J. Schlom, J.W. Hodge
Writing, review, and/or revision of the manuscript: A. Ardiani, S.R.
Gameiro, C. Palena, D.H. Hamilton, J. Schlom, J.W. Hodge
Administrative, technical, or material support (i.e., reporting or organizing data, constructing databases): A. Ardiani
Study supervision: S.R. Gameiro, J. Schlom, J.W. Hodge

Grant Support
This research was supported by the Intramural Research Program of the
Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, NIH, and through a
Cooperative Research and Development Agreement (CRADA) with GlobeImmune, Inc.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the
payment of page charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked
advertisement in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this
fact.

Received July 18, 2013; revised December 18, 2013; accepted January 7, 2014;
published OnlineFirst February 11, 2014.

References
1.

2.

3.

4.
5.

6.

7.
8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

1956

Brabletz T, Hlubek F, Spaderna S, Schmalhofer O, Hiendlmeyer E,
Jung A, et al. Invasion and metastasis in colorectal cancer: epithelialmesenchymal transition, mesenchymal-epithelial transition, stem cells
and b-catenin. Cells Tissues Organs 2005;179:56–65.
Fernando RI, Litzinger M, Trono P, Hamilton DH, Schlom J, Palena C.
The T-box transcription factor Brachyury promotes epithelial-mesenchymal transition in human tumor cells. J Clin Invest 2010;120:533–44.
Gravdal K, Halvorsen OJ, Haukaas SA, Akslen LA. A switch from
E-cadherin to N-cadherin expression indicates epithelial to mesenchymal transition and is of strong and independent importance for the
progress of prostate cancer. Clin Cancer Res 2007;13:7003–11.
Kalluri R, Weinberg RA. The basics of epithelial-mesenchymal transition. J Clin Invest 2009;119:1420–8.
Lee MY, Chou CY, Tang MJ, Shen MR. Epithelial-mesenchymal
transition in cervical cancer: correlation with tumor progression, epidermal growth factor receptor overexpression, and snail up-regulation. Clin Cancer Res 2008;14:4743–50.
Sarrio D, Rodriguez-Pinilla SM, Hardisson D, Cano A, Moreno-Bueno
G, Palacios J. Epithelial-mesenchymal transition in breast cancer
relates to the basal-like phenotype. Cancer Res 2008;68:989–97.
Thiery JP. Epithelial-mesenchymal transitions in tumour progression.
Nat Rev Cancer 2002;2:442–54.
Chen Y, Li L, Zeng J, Wu K, Zhou J, Guo P, et al. Twist confers
chemoresistance to anthracyclines in bladder cancer through upregulating P-glycoprotein. Chemotherapy 2012;58:264–72.
Gupta PB, Onder TT, Jiang G, Tao K, Kuperwasser C, Weinberg RA,
et al. Identiﬁcation of selective inhibitors of cancer stem cells by highthroughput screening. Cell 2009;138:645–59.
Huang B, Cohen JR, Fernando RI, Hamilton DH, Litzinger MT, Hodge
JW, et al. The embryonic transcription factor Brachyury blocks cell
cycle progression and mediates tumor resistance to conventional
antitumor therapies. Cell Death Dis 2013;4:e682.
Kajiyama H, Shibata K, Terauchi M, Yamashita M, Ino K, Nawa A, et al.
Chemoresistance to paclitaxel induces epithelial-mesenchymal transition and enhances metastatic potential for epithelial ovarian carcinoma cells. Int J Oncol 2007;31:277–83.
Kwok WK, Ling MT, Lee TW, Lau TC, Zhou C, Zhang X, et al. Upregulation of TWIST in prostate cancer and its implication as a therapeutic target. Cancer Res 2005;65:5153–62.
Marshall JL, Hoyer RJ, Toomey MA, Faraguna K, Chang P, Richmond
E, et al. Phase I study in advanced cancer patients of a diversiﬁed
prime-and-boost vaccination protocol using recombinant vaccinia
virus and recombinant nonreplicating avipox virus to elicit anti-carcinoembryonic antigen immune responses. J Clin Oncol 2000;18:
3964–73.
Bolos V, Peinado H, Perez-Moreno MA, Fraga MF, Esteller M, Cano A.
The transcription factor Slug represses E-cadherin expression and

Cancer Res; 74(7) April 1, 2014

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

induces epithelial to mesenchymal transitions: a comparison with Snail
and E47 repressors. J Cell Sci 2003;116:499–511.
Hamilton DH, Litzinger MT, Fernando RI, Huang B, Palena C.
Cancer vaccines targeting the epithelial-mesenchymal transition:
tissue distribution of brachyury and other drivers of the mesenchymal-like phenotype of carcinomas. Semin Oncol 2012;39:
358–66.
Riaz M, Sieuwerts AM, Look MP, Timmermans MA, Smid M, Foekens
JA, et al. High TWIST1 mRNA expression is associated with poor
prognosis in lymph node-negative and estrogen receptor-positive
human breast cancer and is co-expressed with stromal as well as
ECM related genes. Breast Cancer Res 2012;14:R123.
Vesuna F, Lisok A, Kimble B, Domek J, Kato Y, van der Groep P, et al.
Twist contributes to hormone resistance in breast cancer by downregulating estrogen receptor-a. Oncogene 2012;31:3223–34.
Gomez I, Pena C, Herrera M, Munoz C, Larriba MJ, Garcia V, et al.
TWIST1 is expressed in colorectal carcinomas and predicts patient
survival. PLoS ONE 2011;6:e18023.
Okada T, Suehiro Y, Ueno K, Mitomori S, Kaneko S, Nishioka M, et al.
TWIST1 hypermethylation is observed frequently in colorectal tumors
and its overexpression is associated with unfavorable outcomes in
patients with colorectal cancer. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 2010;
49:452–62.
Kajiyama H, Shibata K, Umezu T, Mizuno M, Suzuki S, Yamamoto E,
et al. Expression of Twist enhances risk of poor oncologic outcome in
patients with stage Ib to II cervical carcinoma with lymphovascular
space involvement. Hum Pathol 2013;44:181–8.
Nakajima TE, Yoshida H, Okamoto N, Nagashima K, Taniguchi H,
Yamada Y, et al. Nucleostemin and TWIST as predictive markers for
recurrence after neoadjuvant chemotherapy for esophageal carcinoma. Cancer Sci 2012;103:233–8.
Gao Y, Xuan XY, Zhang HY, Wang F, Zeng QR, Wang ZQ, et al.
Relationship between TWIST expression and epithelial-mesenchymal
transition of oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma. Cell Biol Int 2012;
36:571–7.
Yu L, Lu S, Tian J, Ma J, Li J, Wang H, et al. TWIST expression in
hypopharyngeal cancer and the mechanism of TWIST-induced promotion of metastasis. Oncol Rep 2012;27:416–22.
Gajula RP, Chettiar ST, Williams RD, Thiyagarajan S, Kato Y, Aziz K,
et al. The twist box domain is required for twist1-induced prostate
cancer metastasis. Mol Cancer Res 2013;11:1387–400.
Ru GQ, Wang HJ, Xu WJ, Zhao ZS. Upregulation of Twist in gastric
carcinoma associated with tumor invasion and poor prognosis. Pathol
Oncol Res 2011;17:341–7.
Yu Q, Zhang K, Wang X, Liu X, Zhang Z. Expression of transcription
factors snail, slug, and twist in human bladder carcinoma. J Exp Clin
Cancer Res 2010;29:119.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst February 11, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2045

Twist Vaccine for Targeting Metastases

27. Weiss MB, Abel EV, Mayberry MM, Basile KJ, Berger AC, Aplin AE.
TWIST1 is an ERK1/2 effector that promotes invasion and regulates
MMP-1 expression in human melanoma cells. Cancer Res 2012;72:
6382–92.
28. Mikheeva SA, Mikheev AM, Petit A, Beyer R, Oxford RG, Khorasani L,
et al. TWIST1 promotes invasion through mesenchymal change in
human glioblastoma. Mol Cancer 2010;9:194.
29. Ding J, Zhang Z, Pan Y, Liao G, Zeng L, Chen S. Expression and
signiﬁcance of twist, E-cadherin, and N-cadherin in gastrointestinal
stromal tumors. Dig Dis Sci 2012;57:2318–24.
30. Yin K, Liao Q, He H, Zhong D. Prognostic value of Twist and E-cadherin
in patients with osteosarcoma. Med Oncol 2012;29:3449–55.
31. Tran PT, Shroff EH, Burns TF, Thiyagarajan S, Das ST, Zabuawala T,
et al. Twist1 suppresses senescence programs and thereby accelerates and maintains mutant Kras-induced lung tumorigenesis. PLoS
Genet 2012;8:e1002650.
32. Lou Y, Preobrazhenska O, auf dem Keller U, Sutcliffe M, Barclay L,
McDonald PC, et al. Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is not
sufﬁcient for spontaneous murine breast cancer metastasis. Dev Dyn
2008;237:2755–68.
33. Yang J, Mani SA, Donaher JL, Ramaswamy S, Itzykson RA, Come C,
et al. Twist, a master regulator of morphogenesis, plays an essential
role in tumor metastasis. Cell 2004;117:927–39.
34. Demaria S, Wang B, Yang AM, Santori F, Kawashima N, Matsumura S.
Immunotherapy against metastatic breast cancer with a twist
(abstract). Breast Cancer Res Treat 2007;106:S31.
35. Bernstein MB, Chakraborty M, Wansley EK, Guo Z, Franzusoff A,
Mostbock S, et al. Recombinant Saccharomyces cerevisiae (yeastCEA) as a potent activator of murine dendritic cells. Vaccine 2008;
26:509–21.
36. Boehm AL, Higgins J, Franzusoff A, Schlom J, Hodge JW. Concurrent
vaccination with two distinct vaccine platforms targeting the same
antigen generates phenotypically and functionally distinct T-cell populations. Cancer Immunol Immunother 2010;59:397–408.
37. Cereda V, Vergati M, Huen NY, di Bari MG, Jochems C, Intrivici C, et al.
Maturation of human dendritic cells with Saccharomyces cerevisiae
(yeast) reduces the number and function of regulatory T cells and
enhances the ratio of antigen-speciﬁc effectors to regulatory T cells.
Vaccine 2011;29:4992–9.
38. Remondo C, Cereda V, Mostbock S, Sabzevari H, Franzusoff A,
Schlom J, et al. Human dendritic cell maturation and activation by a

www.aacrjournals.org

39.

40.

41.
42.

43.

44.
45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

heat-killed recombinant yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) vector
encoding carcinoembryonic antigen. Vaccine 2009;27:987–94.
Wansley EK, Chakraborty M, Hance KW, Bernstein MB, Boehm AL,
Guo Z, et al. Vaccination with a recombinant Saccharomyces
cerevisiae expressing a tumor antigen breaks immune tolerance
and elicits therapeutic antitumor responses. Clin Cancer Res 2008;
14:4316–25.
Hodge JW, Grosenbach DW, Aarts WM, Poole DJ, Schlom J. Vaccine
therapy of established tumors in the absence of autoimmunity. Clin
Cancer Res 2003;9:1837–49.
Tao K, Fang M, Alroy J, Sahagian GG. Imagable 4T1 model for the
study of late stage breast cancer. BMC Cancer 2008;8:228.
Tuck AB, Hota C, Chambers AF. Osteopontin (OPN)-induced increase
in human mammary epithelial cell invasiveness is urokinase (uPA)dependent. Breast Cancer Res Treat 2001;70:197–204.
Jin HO, Hong SE, Woo SH, Lee JH, Choe TB, Kim EK, et al. Silencing of
Twist1 sensitizes NSCLC cells to cisplatin via AMPK-activated mTOR
inhibition. Cell Death Dis 2012;3:e319.
Gattinoni L, Restifo NP. Moving T memory stem cells to the clinic.
Blood 2013;121:567–8.
Palena C, Polev DE, Tsang KY, Fernando RI, Litzinger M, Krukovskaya
LL, et al. The human T-box mesodermal transcription factor Brachyury
is a candidate target for T-cell-mediated cancer immunotherapy. Clin
Cancer Res 2007;13:2471–8.
Jiang W, Pang XG, Wang Q, Shen YX, Chen XK, Xi JJ. Prognostic role
of Twist, Slug, and Foxc2 expression in stage I non-small-cell lung
cancer after curative resection. Clin Lung Cancer 2012;13:280–7.
Lee KW, Lee NK, Kim JH, Kang MS, Yoo HY, Kim HH, et al. Twist1
causes the transcriptional repression of claudin-4 with prognostic
signiﬁcance in esophageal cancer. Biochem Biophys Res Commun
2012;423:454–60.
Ardiani A, Farsaci B, Rogers CJ, Protter A, Guo Z, King TH, et al.
Combination therapy with a second-generation androgen receptor
antagonist and a metastasis vaccine improves survival in a spontaneous prostate cancer model. Clin Cancer Res 2013;19:6205–18.
Hodge JW, Ardiani A, Farsaci B, Kwilas AR, Gameiro SR. The tipping
point for combination therapy: cancer vaccines with radiation, chemotherapy, or targeted small molecule inhibitors. Semin Oncol 2012;
39:323–39.
Schlom J. Therapeutic cancer vaccines: current status and moving
forward. J Natl Cancer Inst 2012;104:599–613.

Cancer Res; 74(7) April 1, 2014

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

1957

Published OnlineFirst February 11, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2045

Vaccine-Mediated Immunotherapy Directed against a Transcription
Factor Driving the Metastatic Process
Andressa Ardiani, Sofia R. Gameiro, Claudia Palena, et al.
Cancer Res 2014;74:1945-1957. Published OnlineFirst February 11, 2014.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2045
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2014/02/12/0008-5472.CAN-13-2045.DC1

This article cites 50 articles, 13 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/74/7/1945.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 1 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/74/7/1945.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

