Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 12

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Camptothecin targets WRN protein: mechanism and relevance
in clinical breast cancer
Raghavendra A. Shamanna1, Huiming Lu1, Deborah L. Croteau1, Arvind Arora2,
Devika Agarwal3, Graham Ball3, Mohammed A. Aleskandarany2, Ian O. Ellis2, Yves
Pommier4, Srinivasan Madhusudan2 and Vilhelm A. Bohr1
1

Laboratory of Molecular Gerontology, Biomedical Research Center, National Institute on Aging, NIH, Baltimore, Maryland,
USA

2

Academic Unit of Oncology, Division of Cancer and Stem Cells, School of Medicine, University of Nottingham, Nottingham,
UK
3

School of Science and Technology, Nottingham Trent University, Clifton Campus, Nottingham, UK

4

Developmental Therapeutics Branch and Laboratory of Molecular Pharmacology, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda,
Maryland, USA

Correspondence to: Vilhelm A. Bohr, email: vbohr@nih.gov
Keywords: breast cancer, Werner syndrome, helicase, camptothecin, topoisomerase I
Received: November 20, 2015	

Accepted: February 09, 2016	

Published: March 03, 2016

Abstract
Werner syndrome protein (WRN) is a RecQ helicase that participates in DNA
repair, genome stability and cellular senescence. The five human RecQ helicases,
RECQL1, Bloom, WRN, RECQL4 and RECQL5 play critical roles in DNA repair and cell
survival after treatment with the anticancer drug camptothecin (CPT). CPT derivatives
are widely used in cancer chemotherapy to inhibit topoisomerase I and generate DNA
double-strand breaks during replication. Here we studied the effects of CPT on the
stability and expression dynamics of human RecQ helicases. In the cells treated with
CPT, we observed distinct effects on WRN compared to other human RecQ helicases.
CPT altered the cellular localization of WRN and induced its degradation by a ubiquitinmediated proteasome pathway. WRN knockdown cells as well as CPT treated cells
became senescent and stained positive for senescence-associated β-galactosidase
at a higher frequency compared to control cells. However, the senescent phenotype
was attenuated by ectopic expression of WRN suggesting functional implication of
WRN degradation in CPT treated cells. Approximately 5-23% of breast cancer tumors
are known to respond to CPT-based chemotherapy. Interestingly, we found that the
extent of CPT-induced WRN degradation correlates with increasing sensitivity of
breast cancer cells to CPT. The abundance of WRN decreased in CPT-treated sensitive
cells; however, WRN remained relatively stable in CPT-resistant breast cancer cells. In
a large clinical cohort of breast cancer patients, we find that WRN and topoisomerase
I expression correlate with an aggressive tumor phenotype and poor prognosis. Our
novel observations suggest that WRN abundance along with CPT-induced degradation
could be a promising strategy for personalizing CPT-based cancer chemotherapeutic
regimens.

INTRODUCTION

Werner (WRN), RECQL4 and RECQL5. These helicases
display unique as well as overlapping functions in DNA
metabolism. They bind specific DNA structures and
catalyze unwinding and annealing of DNA strands to
resolve DNA replication forks, D-loops, G-quadruplex
structures and Holliday junctions [1, 2]. Mutations in
BLM, WRN and RECQL4 are associated with autosomal
recessive diseases. Loss of function of BLM and WRN

The RecQ family of helicases contains highly
conserved and ubiquitously expressed proteins that unwind
DNA in the context of replication, repair, transcription,
chromatin remodeling and telomere maintenance [1, 2].
Human and most mammalian cells encode five RecQlike (RECQL) helicases: RECQL1, Bloom (BLM),
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13269

Oncotarget

is associated with Bloom syndrome (BS) and Werner
syndrome (WS) respectively, while RECQL4 is associated
with Rothmund-Thomson (RTS), RAPADILINO and
Baller-Gerold (BGS) syndromes[1-3].
In general, cells with defects in DNA repair have
increased risk of transformation to a pre-cancer or
cancer phenotype. WS and BS patients exhibit increased
incidence of cancer. The most common neoplasias in
WS patients are thyroid cancer, malignant melanoma,
meningioma, soft tissue sarcoma, osteosarcoma, breast
cancer and leukemias [3, 4]. Increased WRN expression
is observed in several cancer cell lines and depletion of
WRN induces cell death in these cells [5]. Irinotecan
treatment enhanced the survival of colorectal cancer
patients who expressed lower WRN [6].
The plant alkaloid camptothecin (CPT) and its
derivatives, irinotecan and topotecan, represent an
important class of drugs used in chemotherapy. These
drugs specifically target DNA topoisomerase I (Top1),
an enzyme that transiently creates DNA single-strand
breaks to reduce supercoiling during replication and
transcription [7, 8]. CPT generates cytotoxic covalent
reaction intermediates, CPT-DNA-Top1, by inhibiting the
re-ligation step of the Top1 catalytic cycle. The cytotoxic
effect of the CPT-DNA-Top1 intermediate is S-phasespecific, and is thought to reflect collision events between
the replication machinery and the cytotoxic lesion [7, 8].
When cells accumulate many CPT-DNA-Top1 lesions, the
DNA damage response (DDR) and associated pathways
are activated [8]. Subsequent to DDR activation, DNA
repair factors, including RecQ helicases are recruited
to the DNA lesions and/or to stalled DNA replication
forks. All human RecQ helicases are important for cell
survival after CPT treatment [9-13]. WS and BS patient
cells are hypersensitive to inhibitors of Top1 and DNA
interstrand crosslinking agents, and a synergistic increase
in chromosomal aberrations is observed in BLM-WRN
double knockout cells exposed to these agents [11].
RECQL4-deficient RTS patient cells and RECQL1 and
RECQL5 knockdown cells are also sensitive to CPT [9,
12, 13]. However, studies identifying the mechanisms by
which CPT or its analogs exert their effects on human
RecQ helicases are limited. In this study, we tested the
effects of CPT on the five RecQ helicases in cellular
studies and bioinformatically analyzed the association
between CPT sensitivity and WRN gene expression.
Further we analyzed the expression profiles of WRN
and Top1 in a large cohort of human breast cancers to
identify any correlations between gene expression and
breast cancer specific survival. This study spans from
biochemical and cellular work through bioinformatics to
a clinical study.
CPT treatment specifically altered the stability and
subcellular localization of WRN, while similar effects
on other RecQ helicases were not observed. In CPTtreated cells, a large fraction of WRN re-localized to the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

cytoplasm and was selectively degraded by the ubiquitin
proteasome pathway. CPT-induced WRN degradation was
independent of p53 status, and the extent of degradation
was associated with the sensitivity of the tumor cells to
the anticancer drug. WRN degradation was more extensive
in CPT-sensitive breast cancer cells than in CPT-resistant
cells. However, CPT-dependent degradation of Top1
was extensive in all cell lines tested. In the METABRIC
(Molecular Taxonomy of Breast Cancer International
Consortium) cohort comprising 1977 breast cancers, ~20%
of tumors were found to express high Top1 mRNA and
~83% were found to express high WRN mRNA. Altered
Top1 and WRN expression was not only associated with
aggressive breast cancers but also correlated with adverse
prognostic outcome in patients. Interestingly, in patients
with estrogen receptor (ER)-positive breast cancers, high
WRN and high Top1 levels were associated with a bad
prognosis. Together these results suggest that WRN,
but not the other RecQs, is a target of CPT in mediating
chemotherapeutic effects in the tumor cells.

RESULTS
Stability, expression and subcellular distribution
of WRN in CPT-treated cells
CPT and its derivatives specifically target Top1,
and the five human RecQ helicases play essential roles
in cell survival after CPT treatment [9-13], thus we tested
the effects of CPT on the expression dynamics of all
five human RecQ helicases to identify unique or shared
responses to CPT treatment.
U2OS cells were treated with 10 μM CPT for 1,
2, 6, 8 or 10 hours, and lysed with IP lysis buffer [14].
Proteins in the supernatant fraction, obtained after
centrifugation, were analyzed by immunoblotting for
WRN, BLM, RECQL1, RECQL4, RECQL5, Ku80, CtIP
and XLF (Figure 1a). Exposure to CPT caused a decrease
in the abundance of WRN protein, but not of the other
proteins tested (Figure 1a and 1b). Quantification of the
immunoblots indicated that WRN protein decreased
significantly in a time-dependent manner from ~1 to 10 h
after treatment with CPT (Figure 1a graph). This reduction
was not observed for BLM, RECQL1, RECQL4 and
RECQL5 or for the DNA repair proteins Ku80, CtIP, and
XLF (Figure 1a and 1b). The half-life of WRN protein
is reported to be approximately 6 h [15], consistent with
its apparent half-life in this study (Figure 1a graph).
Interestingly, cells treated with 1 or 10 Gy ionizing
radiation (IR) did not show a decrease in WRN abundance
at time points up to 10 h after irradiation (Figure 1c).
These results indicate that the effect of CPT on WRN
protein levels could be specific.
The mRNA transcripts encoding all five RecQ
13270

Oncotarget

helicases were also quantified in CPT-treated and
untreated cells (Figure 1d). For all RecQ helicases,
transcript abundance was unaffected up to 24 h with CPT
treatment. This indicates that CPT induces (Figure 1a)
specific post-translational degradation of WRN protein,
or that it destabilizes WRN protein by another mechanism.

WRN protein distribution was analyzed in U2OS
cells stably expressing YFP-WRN and treated with
CPT using confocal microscopy (Figure 2a). Live-cell
microscopy results indicated that YFP-WRN localized
primarily to the nucleolus, re-localized to the nucleoplasm
~60 min after exposure to CPT, after which YFP-WRN

Figure 1: Expression of RecQ helicases in CPT and IR treated cells. a. Half-life of DNA repair proteins in CPT treated cells.

Lysates from U2OS cells were treated with 10 µM CPT for the indicated times and immunoblotted for DNA repair proteins viz., Ku70, CtIP,
XLF and the RecQ helicases WRN, BLM, RECQL1, RECQL4 and RECQL5. Below; graph showing the relative levels of WRN protein
normalized to tubulin from three independent experiments. b. Bar graph showing the protein levels of RecQ helicases in CPT treated cells.
c. Immunoblots showing the expression of DNA repair proteins as in panel A from IR treated U2OS cells. d. Quantitative RT-PCR analysis
showing mRNA levels of RecQ genes in CPT treated U2OS cells. Expression of GAPDH mRNA was used for normalization. Error bars
represent standard deviation from two independent experiments.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13271

Oncotarget

fluorescence declined to a low level in the nucleolus
(Figure 2a). YFP-WRN foci were also observed in the
nucleoplasm of CPT-treated cells, suggesting recruitment
of WRN to CPT-induced DNA damage. To examine
the subcellular distribution of WRN, proteins from the
cytoplasm, cytoplasmic organelles, nuclear-soluble
and chromatin fractions were isolated and analyzed by
Western blotting (Figure 2b). The results suggest that
WRN is enriched in cytoplasmic organelles (Figure 2b,
compare lane 5 with 6-8) after CPT treatment. Analysis
of subcellular protein fractions from IR treated cells did
not show significant changes in the distribution pattern of
WRN compared to untreated cells (Supplementary Figure
S1a). Further, results from immunostained cells indicated

that endogenous WRN resides in the nucleolus of cells
(Figure 2c top panel and [16]) and that, upon treatment
with CPT, re-localizes to the nucleoplasm and cytoplasm
(Figure 2c bottom panels). To test the role of translation
in CPT-dependent enrichment of WRN in the cytoplasmic
organelle fraction observed in Figure 2b, cells were treated
with cycloheximide (CHX) along with CPT. Inhibition
of translation did not affect CPT-induced re-localization
of WRN (Supplementary Figure S1b), suggesting that
the WRN enrichment is not dependent on new protein
synthesis. Collectively these results demonstrate that
WRN undergoes re-localization in cancer cells treated
with CPT.

Figure 2: CPT-induced re-localization of WRN. a. Dynamic distribution of YFP-WRN in CPT-treated cells. Live cell time-lapse
micrographs from CPT (10 µM) treated U2OS cells stably expressing YFP-WRN. Arrows point the nucleus of YFP-WRN expressing cells.
b. WRN distribution in the subcellular compartments. Immunoblots indicating the relative levels of WRN in the cytoplasmic, cytoplasmic
organelle, nuclear soluble and chromatin fractions of U2OS cells treated with and without CPT. Time indicate the length of the exposure to
CPT. c. Enrichment of endogenous WRN in the cytoplasm. Confocal microphotographs showing WRN and 53BP1 localization in U2OS
cells treated with CPT. Representative images from two independent experiments. Microscope images were taken with 40X objective.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13272

Oncotarget

CPT-induced ubiquitination and degradation of
WRN

Top1 occurs in an ubiquitin- and proteasome-dependent
manner [18, 19]. Therefore, it seemed possible that WRN
downregulation might be ubiquitin- and proteasomedependent. Consistent with this possibility, the proteasome
inhibitor MG132 suppressed CPT-induced degradation of
WRN and Top1 in cells treated with 1 µM CPT (Figure
3b and Supplementary Figure S2b). Further, when 293T
cells co-expressing 3xFlag-WRN and HA-ubiquitin
were treated with CPT and MG132 (Figure 3c), and
cell lysates were analyzed after immunoprecipitation,
ubiquitin and WRN co-immunoprecipitated with HA or
FLAG antibodies. MG132 stabilized HA-ubiquitinated
Flag-WRN, implicating proteasome-mediated degradation
of WRN in CPT-treated cells (Figure 3c). We found no

To identify the CPT concentrations that induce
WRN degradation, U2OS cells were treated with 0.01,
0.05, 0.1, 0.5, 1, 5, 10 and 20 µM CPT for 16h and
extracts were prepared by lysing the cells with RIPA buffer
followed by brief sonication. Our results showed that the
WRN protein is downregulated in cells exposed to 0.5 to
20 µM CPT, conditions that induce degradation of Top1
(Figure 3a and Supplementary Figure S2a). We previously
reported that WRN interacts with Top1 [17] and other
studies have shown that CPT-induced degradation of

Figure 3: Ubiquitin proteasome-mediated degradation of WRN in CPT treated cells. a. CPT-induced WRN down regulation

is associated with Top1 degradation. Immunoblots showing WRN and Top1 protein levels in U2OS cells treated with indicated concentration
of CPT for 16 h. b. Proteasome inhibitor MG132 inhibits the effect of CPT on WRN and Top1. U2OS cells were treated with 10 µM
MG132 to inhibit proteasome pathway and with 10 µM E64 to inhibit lysosome pathway. c. Ubiquitination of WRN in CPT treated
cells. Immunoblots showing ubiquitinated (HA-ubiqutin) 3xFlag-WRN in immuno­precipitated fractions of CPT (1µM) treated 293T cells
expressing 3xFlag-WRN and HA-ubiqutin.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13273

Oncotarget

WRN attenuates CPT-induced cellular senescence

evidence that WRN was enriched in lysosomes, using
cells in which the lysosome was fluorescence-labeled with
lysosome-specific GFP (Supplementary Figure S3). These
results suggest that CPT-stimulated degradation of WRN
is lysosome-independent, but ubiquitin- and proteasomedependent.

To explore the functional consequences of WRN
downregulation in CPT treated cells, we analyzed cell
survival and cellular senescence after CPT treatment.
Compared to control cells, WRN depleted cells displayed
dose-dependent reduction in cell viability in the
presence of CPT (Supplementary Figure S4a). However,

Figure 4: WRN attenuates CPT-induced cellular senescence. a. Knockdown of WRN induces cellular senescence in human

fibroblasts. Left, micrographs showing SA-β-gal stained GM637 cells; right, bar graph showing SA-β-gal positive cells (n = three
independent experiments). Immunoblots showing knockdown levels of WRN. shCtrl, control shRNA; shWRN, WRN shRNA b. CPTinduced cellular senescence in human fibroblasts. Bar graph showing SA-β-gal positive GM637 cells treated with CPT for 18 h. Error bars
represent standard deviation from two independent experiments. Immunoblots indicate WRN degradation after CPT treatment. c. Ectopic
expression of WRN attenuates CPT-induced cellular senescence. GM637 cells transfected with vector, Flag-WRN and Flag-RECQL4 were
treated with indicated CPT concentrations and stained for SA-β-gal (n = three independent experiments).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13274

Oncotarget

knockdown of RECQL4 did not increase the sensitivity
of cells to CPT. These results suggest a distinct protective
role of WRN against the cytotoxic effects of CPT.
It is well established that DNA damage induces
cellular senescence [20], and we and others have shown

that WRN plays a role in preventing this process [21, 22].
Because the results presented above showed that WRN
is downregulated in CPT-treated cells we hypothesized
that decreased abundance of WRN could exacerbate
CPT-induced senescence. To test this possibility, we

Figure 5: WRN degradation is associated with sensitivity of tumor cells to CPT. a. WRN expression and CPT sensitivity of

breast cancer cells lines. Graph showing Z scores of WRN transcript expression and CPT sensitivity as documented in NCI-60 Cell Miner
database. Z score for WRN transcript intensity indicates relative mRNA expression compared to average expression of NCI-60 panel of cell
lines. Negative Z score for CPT sensitivity indicates the resistance of the cell line to CPT. b. WRN protein expression in tumor cell lines.
c. CPT-dependent WRN degradation in CPT-sensitive and CPT-resistant breast cancer cell lines. Immunoblots represents protein levels in
cells treated with CPT for 16 h. Graphs showing relative degradation of WRN d. and Top1 e. in breast cancer cell lines treated with 10 µM
CPT. f. CPT-dependent cell viability and proliferation in sensitive and resistant breast cancer cells. Graph showing relative cell proliferation
after 24 h of CPT (0.01 to 10 µM) treatment. Error bars represent SEM from three independent experiments.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13275

Oncotarget

measured senescence-associated β-galactosidase (SA-βgal) activity, a marker of senescence [21], in fibroblasts
and U2OS cells treated with CPT. Knockdown of WRN in
human fibroblasts, GM0637, induced cellular senescence
in ~60% of the cell population (Figure 4a). Treatment of
cells with 5 and 20 µM CPT, levels that downregulated
WRN, also induced senescence in ~35 and ~45% of cells,
respectively (Figure 4b). To evaluate any protective role(s)
that WRN may provide against CPT-induced cellular
senescence, GM0637 cells were transfected with 3xFlagWRN (Supplementary Figure S4b) for 24 hours before
treatment with CPT. Consistent with the results obtained
in the untransfected cells (Figure 4b), vector-transfected
cells exposed to 5 and 20 µM CPT accumulated ~35 and
~40% senescent cells. However, vector-transfected cells
treated with DMSO only accumulated ~8% senescent cells
(Figure 4c) and the ability of CPT to induce the senescent
phenotype was attenuated in cultures expressing 3xFlagWRN (Figure 4c). The 3xFlag-WRN expressing cultures
contained ~14% and ~24% senescent population in the
presence of DMSO and CPT, respectively (Figure 4c).
Similar results were observed in U2OS cells expressing
C-terminal GFP-tagged WRN (Supplementary Figure
S4c). However, ectopic expression of 3xFlag-RECQL4
(Supplementary Figure S4b) did not significantly inhibit
CPT-induced cellular senescence (Figure 4c). These
results demonstrate that WRN provides partial protection
against CPT-induced cellular senescence.

breast cancer cells lines [5, 6]. Lately there has been an
interest in using Top1 inhibitors in the treatment of breast
cancer [25, 26], which traditionally has been treated with
other approaches. Since Top1 protein expression is tightly
correlated with mRNA expression in various cancer cell
lines [27] and the above results show that WRN and
Top1 are targets for degradation in CPT treated cells, we
conducted an in silico search to find correlations between
the steady-state expression of Top1 and WRN and the
sensitivity to Top1 inhibitors using Cancer Cell Line
Encyclopedia (CCLE) and Cancer Genome Atlas (TGCA)
databases. The results suggest that, irrespective of cancer
types, toptecan sensitivity is generally associated with
Top1 (p-value = 7.7e-03) and WRN (p-value = 2.27e-06)
mRNA expression (Supplementary Figure S5a, S5b and
5c). Additionally, mining of breast cancer specific RNAseq
data from TCGA, indicated a strong correlation between
Top1 and WRN expression (Supplementary Figure S5a; r
= 0.325, p = 5.83e-26) suggesting the importance of these
two genes in breast cancer.
To investigate WRN and Top1 expression and the
phenomenon of CPT-induced WRN degradation in breast
cancer cells, we used three CPT-sensitive (MCF-7, T47D
and ZR-75-1) and three CPT-resistant (BT549, MDAMB-231 and BT-474) cell lines. The Cell Miner database
(http://discover.nci.nih.gov/cellminer/) information on the
breast cancer cell lines showed that WRN expression was
low in two of the CPT-sensitive cell lines (MCF-7 and
T47D), high in one CPT-resistant cell line (BT-549) and
low in another CPT-resistant (MDA-MB-231) cell line
(Figure 5a). Western blot analysis of WRN in the six breast
cancer cell lines showed that these cells expressed WRN at
relatively similar levels (within 20% of each other: Figure
5b). However, upon treatment with CPT, a significant
difference in WRN degradation was observed between
the CPT-sensitive and -resistant cell lines (Figure 5c). The

WRN degradation and CPT sensitivity in breast
cancer cells
A specific mutation (Phe1074Leu) in WRN is found
to increase the risk of breast cancer incidence [23, 24],
and dysregulation of WRN expression is observed in

Figure 6: Top1 and WRN mRNA expression in METABRIC cohort. Kaplan Meier curves showing BCSS (Breast cancer
specific survival) based on Top1 expression a. and WRN expression b.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13276

Oncotarget

Table 1: Clinico-pathological characteristics of METABRIC cohort based on WRN and Top1 expression

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13277

Oncotarget

CPT-sensitive cells showed significant WRN degradation
after CPT treatment, whereas the CPT-resistant cells
showed minimal WRN degradation (Figure 5c and 5d).
In contrast, CPT-induced Top1 degradation was extensive
in both (Figure 5c and 5e) demonstrating that Top1 has no
predictive power and further that dose was sufficient to
induce degradation in all cell lines.
A seminal study reported a high degree of
heterogeneity in Top1 degradation after CPT treatment
[28]. Our results confirm this observation in MCF-7,
T47D, HCT116, and WI38 cell lines treated with CPT
for 8 h (Supplementary Figure S6a); however Top1 was
extensively degraded in all tested cell lines, including ZR75-1, after 16 h of treatment (Figure 5c and Supplementary
Figure S6a and S6b). Supporting the importance of WRN
in cell proliferation after DNA damage, CPT-sensitive
breast cancer cells, which displayed drug-induced WRN
degradation, showed compromised cell proliferation after
CPT treatment (Figure 5f). Cell survival and proliferation
of CPT-resistant cells was largely unaffected by CPT
(Figure 5f). Together these results demonstrate that CPTsensitivity correlated with WRN degradation and not Top1
degradation.

other hand, PAM50.LumA tumors, PAM50.basal and
Genufu subtype (ER+/Her2-/low proliferation) express
high levels of WRN mRNA (ps≤0.01). Similarly, the WRN
mRNA level was significantly associated with the various
integrative clusters (Table 1) described in the METABRIC
study which was based on gene copy number changes and
gene expression data [29]. Low WRN mRNA expression
was significantly associated with clusters, which had poor
clinical outcome in the METABRIC study [29]. Low
WRN mRNA expression in tumors was associated with
adverse Breast Cancer Specific Survival (BCSS) in the
whole cohort (p = 0.002) (Figure 6a). The data provides
evidence that low WRN mRNA expression is associated
with aggressive phenotypes and poor survival in patients.
In the METABRIC cohort, ~20% (390/1977)
of tumors had high Top1 mRNA expression and 80%
(1586/1977) tumors had low Top1 mRNA expression
(Figure 6b). High Top1 mRNA expression was significantly
associated with aggressive clinicopathological features
including high histological grade, larger tumor size, high
risk Nottingham prognostic index (NPI) > 3.4, Her2 over
expression, and ER- and PR- tumors (ps < 0.05) (Table 1).
High Top1 mRNA expression in tumors was associated
with adverse BCSS in the whole cohort (p = 0.002) (Figure
6b). Of note, patients in the METABRIC cohort did not
receive Top1 inhibitor based therapy. Nevertheless, taken
together, the data provides evidence that high Top1 mRNA
expression is associated with aggressive breast cancers.

Top1 and WRN mRNA expression in human
breast cancers
Given the essential role of WRN and Top1 in
DNA repair and replication we studied their role in
breast cancer pathogenesis and prognosis. Inhibition of
WRN promoter methylation increased the WRN mRNA
levels which in turn increased the protein levels in
several cancer cells [6], and a tight correlation between
Top1 mRNA and protein expression was observed in
the NCI-60 panel of cell lines [27] implying that high
mRNA leads to high protein expression. Therefore we
investigated the mRNA levels of WRN and Top1 in the
METABRIC (Molecular Taxonomy of Breast Cancer
International Consortium) cohort. Primary tumors were
expression profiled [29] to investigate associations with
clinic-pathological parameters and survival in patients.
Nearly 16.5% (326/1977) of tumors had low WRN mRNA
expression and ~85.5% (1651/1977) tumors had high
WRN mRNA expression (Figure 6a). Low WRN mRNA
expression was significantly associated with aggressive
clinicopathological features including high histological
grade, lymph node stage, high risk Nottingham prognostic
index (NPI) > 3.4 and Her-2 over expression (ps≤0.01)
(Table 1). Interestingly, ER negative and triple negative
phenotypes were more common in tumors with high
WRN mRNA expression (ps≤0.01). Low WRN mRNA
expression was significantly associated with molecular
phenotypes: PAM50.Her2, PAM50.LumB, Genufu
subtype (ER+/Her2-/High proliferation) and Genufu
subtype (Her2 positive) breast tumors (ps≤0.01). On the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

WRN and Top1 co-expression in ER positive and
ER negative breast cancers
Our in vitro results suggest that WRN degradation
could be a useful marker in personalized chemotherapy. To
identify potential patient populations that may benefit from
CPT-based regimens, we proceeded to sub-group analysis
of patients in the METABRIC cohort where ER positive
tumors comprised of 1507/1977 (76.2%) of tumors and
470/1977 (23.8%) were ER negative tumors.
When Top1 and WRN were combined together, as
expected, patients with high WRN/high Top1 expressing
tumors had worst survival compared to tumors with low
WRN/low Top1 expression in the whole cohort (p <
0.0001) (Figure 7a and Supplementary Table 1) as well
as in the ER positive cohort (p < 0.0001) (Figure 7b). In
addition, in high risk ER positive tumors that received
adjuvant endocrine therapy, high WRN/high Top1
expressing tumors was associated with poor survival (p <
0.001) (Supplementary Figure S7a). In ER positive tumors
that received no endocrine therapy, high WRN/high Top1
expressing tumors remains associated with poor survival
compared to tumors with low WRN/low Top1 expressing
(p = 0.006) (Supplementary Figure S7b).
Interestingly, when WRN and Top1 examined were
combined in ER negative tumors, low WRN/low Top1
13278

Oncotarget

Figure 7: Kaplan Meier curves showing BCSS with WRN and Top1 expression. a. WRN and Top1 expression in whole
cohort. b. and c. combined expression of WRN and Top1 in ER positive and ER negative METABRIC cohorts.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13279

Oncotarget

recent study identified NSC 19630 [1-(propoxymethyl)maleimide] as a specific inhibitor of WRN, which
synergistically inhibited cell proliferation and induced
DNA damage with topotecan [32].
CPT and its analogs are used against a broad
spectrum of tumors [33]. It covalently binds to the
interface between Top1 and DNA, thereby blocking the
cleavage/re-ligation activities of the topoisomerase [7]. As
a result high loads of protein-linked DNA breaks block
replication and transcription events and initiate senescence
and cell death [8, 34]. The novel observation reported
here is that WRN is specifically degraded in CPT-treated
cells exacerbating the adverse consequences of CPTinduced DNA damage and loss of functional Top1. CPT
treatment leads to a reduction of Top1 protein, trapped
as the CPT-DNA-Top1 complex, by small ubiquitinlike modifier (SUMO) protein conjugation and by the
ubiquitin proteasome pathway [18, 35, 36]. As shown
here, CPT also causes the specific degradation of WRN,
but not of the other RecQ helicases, likely because WRN
physically and functionally interacts with Top1 [17]. Thus,
the physical association between WRN and Top1 could
lead to a shared ‘fate’ of degradation in CPT-treated cells.
However, as shown in Figure 5c, Top1 degradation can be
uncoupled from WRN degradation in certain cell types.
Protein degradation is orchestrated mainly by the
proteasome and lysosome proteolytic systems. Lack
of KFERQ motifs in WRN suggests that it may not be
targeted for degradation by lysosomes. Our results showed
that CPT treatment induced re-localization of WRN from
the nucleolus to the cytoplasm where ubiquitin-dependent
protein turnover occurs. Ubiquitinylation of proteins
occur by the addition of ubiquitin molecules to lysine
residues on target proteins. In the G1 phase of the cell
cycle, BLM is ubiquitinated and degraded to promote nonhomologous end joining [37]. Such degradation pathways
might be operating on the other RecQ helicases depending
on the cell cycle, as well as the functional contexts.
Acetyltransferases CBP and p300 increased the stability
of WRN in the presence of mitomycin C, and WRN
stability and degradation was respectively associated
with acetylation and ubiquitination of six lysine residues
of the protein [15]. We observed ubiquitination of WRN
after CPT treatment, suggesting decreased WRN stability
due to protein degradation by the ubiquitin-proteasome
pathway. However, the ubiquitin ligases that mediate CPTdependent ubiquitination of WRN are yet to be identified.
Interestingly, CPT-induced WRN degradation was
confined to CPT-sensitive cancer cells suggesting a role
for WRN in rendering resistance against CPT. In addition
to enhancing the enzymatic activity of Top1 [17], WRN’s
nuclease and helicase activities might play critical roles
in removing CPT-Top1-DNA cytotoxic lesions to reduce
cytotoxic effects of the drug. Therefore it is possible that
the WRN contributes to resistance to CPT by enhancing
DNA repair capabilities at various levels.

expressing tumors had the worst survival compared to
patients with high WRN/high Top1 expressing tumors (p
= 0.021) (Figure 7c). Collectively, the data suggest that
WRN/Top1 expression may have predictive significance
in the ER negative sub-group. In patients who had no
adjuvant chemotherapy, compared to tumors with low
WRN/low Top1 expression, tumors with high WRN/
high Top1 expression have a poorer prognosis (p = 0.043)
(Supplementary Figure S7d).
Taken together, in ER positive tumors WRN/
Top1 co-expression may have predictive significance in
patients who received endocrine therapy and prognostic
significance in patients who received no endocrine therapy.
Importantly, the data also suggest that an alternative
form of therapy such as those targeting Top1 could be a
promising strategy in high Top1/high WRN expressing
tumors. Overall these results identify that ~14% of ER
positive and ~34% of ER negative breast cancer patients
express high WRN and high Top1 in their tumors and may
benefit from CPT-based personalized chemotherapy.

DISCUSSION
Cellular studies show that RecQ helicases protect
against the cytotoxic effects of CPT [9-13]. To characterize
the mechanism, we analyzed the expression and stability
of the human RecQ helicases in cells exposed to CPT. CPT
affects the degradation of WRN protein without altering
expression of WRN mRNA or the abundance of the other
RecQ proteins. CPT treatment resulted in re-localization
of WRN from the nucleolus to the nucleoplasm and
cytoplasmic organelles, and resulted in downregulation of
the protein in a time- and CPT concentration-dependent
manner. CPT-induced WRN downregulation was mediated
by the ubiquitin proteasome pathway, and ectopic
expression of WRN attenuated the CPT-induced senescent
phenotype. Drug-induced WRN degradation in breast
cancer cell lines was associated with the sensitivity of cells
to CPT. Breast cancer patients with ER-positive tumors
expressing high WRN and Top1 had poor survival. Overall
findings presented in this study, based on cellular studies,
in silico studies and clinical studies, suggest that WRN
helicase along with Top1 can be targeted with CPT at the
protein level and could be a used as a potential marker for
predicting the efficiency of CPT-based chemotherapy for
breast cancer.
WRN, the largest human RecQ protein, contains
a nuclease domain, which is not found in other RecQ
proteins, and catalyzes four DNA-dependent reactions:
3’-5’-exonuclease, ATPase, DNA strand annealing and
3’-5’-helicase activities. Through its enzymatic functions,
WRN acts on various DNA structures to facilitate DNA
repair. Mutations in WRN leads to defects in DNA
repair, premature aging and to cancer susceptibility [23,
30, 31]. Small molecules targeting DNA repair proteins
have profound effects in inhibiting tumor survival. A
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13280

Oncotarget

Senescence is enhanced when RecQ helicases are
deficient [21], or if there is persistent DNA damage [38]
and after treatment with anticancer drugs like CPT [39].
In our recent report we demonstrated that knockdown of
RecQ helicases (with the exception of RECQL1) resulted
in the accumulation of DNA-SCARS (DNA segments with
chromatin alternations reinforcing senescence), increased
p21 and p16 along with increased SA-β-gal activity [21].
WRN knockdown and CPT treatment both induce DNA
damage and cause increased p21 expression and SA-β-gal
activity [39]. Here, we demonstrate that WRN degradation
and increased senescence after CPT treatment can be
suppressed by ectopically expressing WRN. Rescue of
WRN in CPT-treated cells might increase the efficiency of
DDR to remove cytotoxic DNA lesions.
Top1 gene amplification has been reported in about
30% of breast cancers [40] and a tight correlation between
mRNA and protein expression was observed in the NCI60 panel of cell lines [27]. Irinotecan, a semisynthetic
derivative of CPT is routinely used in colorectal cancer
therapy [41]. Although phase II trials have demonstrated
a response rate of about 5% to 23%, irinitotecan is not
routinely used as monotherapy in breast cancer [26].
However, etirinotecan, a long acting derivative of
irinotecan has shown a response rate of 29% and is
currently being evaluated in a large phase III clinical trial in
metastatic breast cancer [25]. Given the potential promise
of Top1 inhibitors in breast cancer, the development of
predictive biomarkers to personalize therapy is highly
desirable. In the current study, we suggest that CPTinduced WRN degradation in breast cancer cells could be
a biomarker for CPT sensitivity. Taken together, the preclinical data show that WRN and/or Top1 expression could
have prognostic and/or predictive significance in breast
cancers. To explore this hypothesis, we conducted the first
large study of WRN and Top1 expression in human breast
cancers. We observed that Top1 mRNA overexpression
was associated with aggressive highly proliferative breast
cancers. In contrast, for WRN, low mRNA expression
was associated with adverse clinicopathological features
and was linked to poor breast cancer specific survival.
Taken together, these novel observations suggest that
low WRN expression in human tumors may promote
a ‘mutator phenotype’ leading to aggressive breast
cancers. Although the mechanism of regulation of WRN
mRNA expression is not understood, Agrelo et al. have
previously shown that epigenetic inactivation of WRN is
frequent in solid tumors with the highest prevalence in
colorectal tumors [37.9% (69/182 tumors)] [6]. In a small
cohort of breast tumors (n = 58), 17.2% (10/58) showed
WRN inactivation although the authors did not describe
any clinicopathological associations in that study [6]. In
our study, we have found that WRN mRNA expression
level was low in 326/1977 of breast tumors (16.5%)
which concur strikingly with the study by Agrelo et al. In
colorectal cancers, WRN hypermethylation and depletion
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

is associated with good response to irinotecan therapy
[6]. We speculate that low WRN expression could result
in a genomic instability phenotype with an aggressive
behavior. To support this hypothesis, we observed that
low WRN was associated with lymph node positivity,
grade 3 and HER-2 overexpression. As the clinical study
presented here provides prognostic information, future
studies, particularly in patients who receive neoadjuvant
chemotherapy (including Top1 inhibitor) could provide
predictive information.
When WRN and Top1 were combined, surprisingly
we found that tumors with high Top1/high WRN expression
have poor survival, particularly in the ER positive subgroup. Top1 has essential roles during replication and
proliferation. Highly proliferative ER positive breast
tumors (PAM50. Lum B phenotype) manifest endocrine
resistance. As high Top1 expression is significantly
associated with PAM50. Lum B breast tumors (Table 1),
we speculate that endocrine resistance may be contributing
to the poor survival seen in patients. The data for WRN
is intriguing. Whether WRN-mediated DNA repair in ER
positive tumors would influence therapy outcome remains
to be established. Interestingly, high expression of the
multifunctional WRN helicase is observed in several
cancer cell lines (Supplementary Figure S5 and [5]). As
WRN participates in various DNA repair pathways, it is
possible that it enhances the DNA repair capabilities of
established tumor cells to withstand DNA damage induced
by endogenous and exogenous agents.
In conclusion, we provide the first pre-clinical
evidence that WRN degradation is a biomarker of CPT
sensitivity in breast cancer cells, where it can distinguish
CPT- sensitive and resistant breast cancer cells. Therefore,
WRN expression and degradation could be used to identify
tumors which may be sensitive to CPT and its derivatives.
However, a prospective clinical trial of Top1 inhibitor
therapy in ER positive breast cancers would be required
to confirm our in vitro results. Additionally we show that
in human breast cancers, Top1 and/or WRN expression
has prognostic and predictive significance. Top1/ WRN
expression based stratification could be a promising
approach to personalize Top1 inhibitor therapy in breast
cancer patients.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell culture
U2OS, 293T, GM637, BT-474, BT-549, MCF7, MDA-MB-231, T47D, ZR-75-1, HCT116, HCT116
p53-/- and WI-38 were cultured as described [14, 21, 28].
For knockdown experiments, cells were infected with
lentivirus carrying either control or WRN or RECQL4
small hairpin RNA (shRNA) as described before [21]
13281

Oncotarget

for at least 72 hours. For overexpression, transfections
were performed with 3 x 105 cells using 1 μg of pCMVtag4 plasmids with 3xFlag or 3xFlag-WRN or 3xFlagRECQL4, or pEGFP, pEGFP-WRN, or pcDNA3.1-HAubiquitin using jetPRIME (Polyplus transfection) [21].
CPT (Sigma) was dissolved in DMSO, and 10 mM
aliquots were stored at -20 0C, and cells were treated at 10
μM unless otherwise specified. For proteasome inhibition,
cells were treated with 10 μM MG132 (EMD Millipore)
and for inhibiting protein synthesis, cells were pretreated
with 10 μg/ml cycloheximide (CHX; Sigma). For
detecting lysosomes, cells were infected with CellLight
Lysosome-GFP baculovirus (Life technologies). For IR
treatments, cells were grown in 6 cm plates and irradiated
with 1 or 10 gy of 137Cs gamma rays.

expressing lysosome specific GFP were treated with CPT.
Post treatment, cells were fixed and immunostained for
WRN and 53BP1 as described before [21] and imaged
with a Zeiss LSM510 (40X objective) microscope and
Volocity 3D image analysis software (Perkinelmer).
Time-lapse microscopy was performed with U2OS cells
stably expressing YFP-WRN using the above mentioned
microscope settings supported with temperature and CO2regulated incubation chamber.

Cell survival and proliferation assays
Cells (5000/well) were seeded in triplicates in a 96well plate and treated with CPT for 24h. Cell viability and
proliferation were assayed according to the manufacturer’s
protocol using WST-1 reagent (Roche). Cell viability
was calculated from three independent experiments and
normalized to no treatment controls.

Immunoblotting
Cells were lysed in either IP lysis buffer [14] or
RIPA buffer (Thermo Scientific) and briefly sonicated.
The Subcellular Protein Fractionation kit for Cultured
Cells (Thermo Scientific) was used to isolate proteins from
specific cellular compartments i.e. cytoplasm, cytoplasmic
organelles, nuclear soluble and chromatin. Proteins were
detected by Western blotting [14] using in house (antiWRN, -RECQL4, -RECQL5), Abcam (anti-CtIP, -XLF),
Millipore (histone 3), BD Pharmingen (anti-53BP1,
-calretuculin, -Top1) and Santa Cruz (anti-RECQL1,
-Ku80, -actin, -tubulin) antibodies and quantitated by
using ImageJ 1.46r software (National Institutes of Health,
USA).

SA-β-gal assay
Three biological repeats of SA-β-gal staining was
performed with control, WRN and RECQL4 expressing
cells treated with CPT for 18 hours as previously described
[21].

WRN and Top1 mRNA expression in patient
tumors
The METABRIC study protocol, molecular
profiling, Tumor Marker Prognostic Studies (REMARK)
criteria were followed [29, 42] to study WRN and Top1
mRNA expression. Gene copy number was assayed on the
Affymetrix SNP 6.0 platform (data available through the
European Genotype Archive, http://www.ebi.ac.uk/ega/
page.php under accession Number: EGAS00000000082).
The mRNA expression was analyzed as before [29, 43] by
using WRN (ILMN_1679881) and Top1 (ILMN_2192316)
specific probes.
Breast cancer specific survival (BCSS) was defined
as the number of months from diagnosis to the occurrence
of BC related-death and the data was analyzed using SPSS
(SPSS, version 17 Chicago, IL) as described before [43].
Cumulative survival probabilities were estimated using the
Kaplan-Meier method, and differences between survival
rates were tested for significance using the log-rank test
and multivariate analysis for survival was performed using
the Cox proportional hazard model as described before
[43].

Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction
(qRT-PCR)
Total cellular RNA was isolated using RNeasy RNA
isolation kit (Qiagen) from 500,000 cells treated with or
without CPT. Complementary DNA (cDNA) synthesis and
qRT-PCR were performed in a single reaction tube with 15
ng of RNA using gene-specific primers and SuperScript
III Platinum SYBR Green One-Step qRT-PCR kit (Life
Technologies). Reverse transcription and qRT-PCR were
performed according to manufacturer’s protocol in a
7900 Fast Real-Time PCR system (Applied Biosystems).
Hs00262956_m1 (RECQL1), Hs00172060-m1 (BLM),
Hs01087915_m1 (WRN), Hs01548660_g1 (RECQL4),
Hs00188633_m1 (RECQL5) and Hs02758991_g1
(GAPDH) primer sets (Applied Biosystems) were used
for quantitating mRNA.

Immunostaining and microscopy

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Cells grown in chambered glass slides (Labtek)
for 24 hours in the presence or absence of bacullovirus
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

We thank Drs. Sanjay K Bharti and Beverly Baptiste
for critical reading of this manuscript.
13282

Oncotarget

chemotherapeutic DNA damage. Cancer research. 2010;
70:6548-6555.

Financial support

11.	 Imamura O, Fujita K, Itoh C, Takeda S, Furuichi Y and
Matsumoto T. Werner and Bloom helicases are involved in
DNA repair in a complementary fashion. Oncogene. 2002;
21:954-963.

Intramural Program of the National Institute
on Aging and the National Cancer Institute, National
Institutes of Health, USA.

12.	 Jin W, Liu H, Zhang Y, Otta SK, Plon SE and Wang
LL. Sensitivity of RECQL4-deficient fibroblasts from
Rothmund-Thomson syndrome patients to genotoxic agents.
Human genetics. 2008; 123:643-653.

ConflictS of Interest
There is no conflict of interest.

13.	 Hu Y, Lu X, Zhou G, Barnes EL and Luo G. Recql5 plays
an important role in DNA replication and cell survival after
camptothecin treatment. Molecular biology of the cell.
2009; 20:114-123.

REFERENCES
1.	 Bohr VA. Rising from the RecQ-age: the role of human
RecQ helicases in genome maintenance. Trends in
biochemical sciences. 2008; 33:609-620.

14.	 Shamanna RA, Singh DK, Lu H, Mirey G, Keijzers G,
Salles B, Croteau DL and Bohr VA. RECQ helicase
RECQL4 participates in non-homologous end joining
and interacts with the Ku complex. Carcinogenesis. 2014;
35:2415-2424.

2.	 Croteau DL, Popuri V, Opresko PL and Bohr VA. Human
RecQ helicases in DNA repair, recombination, and
replication. Annual review of biochemistry. 2014; 83:519552.

15.	 Li K, Wang R, Lozada E, Fan W, Orren DK and Luo J.
Acetylation of WRN protein regulates its stability by
inhibiting ubiquitination. PloS one. 2010; 5:e10341.

3.	 Lauper JM, Krause A, Vaughan TL and Monnat RJ, Jr.
Spectrum and risk of neoplasia in Werner syndrome: a
systematic review. PloS one. 2013; 8:e59709.
4.	

16.	 Marciniak RA, Lombard DB, Johnson FB and Guarente
L. Nucleolar localization of the Werner syndrome protein
in human cells. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America. 1998; 95:68876892.

Sugimoto M, Furuichi Y, Ide T and Goto M. Involvement of
WRN helicase in immortalization and tumorigenesis by the
telomeric crisis pathway (Review). Oncology letters. 2011;
2:609-611.

17.	 Laine JP, Opresko PL, Indig FE, Harrigan JA, von Kobbe
C and Bohr VA. Werner protein stimulates topoisomerase
I DNA relaxation activity. Cancer research. 2003; 63:71367146.

5.	 Opresko PL, Calvo JP and von Kobbe C. Role for the
Werner syndrome protein in the promotion of tumor cell
growth. Mechanisms of ageing and development. 2007;
128:423-436.
6.	

7.	

18.	 Desai SD, Liu LF, Vazquez-Abad D and D’Arpa P.
Ubiquitin-dependent destruction of topoisomerase I is
stimulated by the antitumor drug camptothecin. The Journal
of biological chemistry. 1997; 272:24159-24164.

Agrelo R, Cheng WH, Setien F, Ropero S, Espada J, Fraga
MF, Herranz M, Paz MF, Sanchez-Cespedes M, Artiga
MJ, Guerrero D, Castells A, von Kobbe C, Bohr VA and
Esteller M. Epigenetic inactivation of the premature aging
Werner syndrome gene in human cancer. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America. 2006; 103:8822-8827.

19.	 Lin CP, Ban Y, Lyu YL, Desai SD and Liu LF. A ubiquitinproteasome pathway for the repair of topoisomerase I-DNA
covalent complexes. The Journal of biological chemistry.
2008; 283:21074-21083.

Hsiang YH, Hertzberg R, Hecht S and Liu LF. Camptothecin
induces protein-linked DNA breaks via mammalian DNA
topoisomerase I. The Journal of biological chemistry. 1985;
260:14873-14878.

20.	 Chen JH, Hales CN and Ozanne SE. DNA damage, cellular
senescence and organismal ageing: causal or correlative?
Nucleic acids research. 2007; 35:7417-7428.
21.	 Lu H, Fang EF, Sykora P, Kulikowicz T, Zhang Y, Becker
KG, Croteau DL and Bohr VA. Senescence induced by
RECQL4 dysfunction contributes to Rothmund-Thomson
syndrome features in mice. Cell death & disease. 2014;
5:e1226.

8.	 Tomicic MT and Kaina B. Topoisomerase degradation,
DSB repair, p53 and IAPs in cancer cell resistance to
camptothecin-like topoisomerase I inhibitors. Biochimica
et biophysica acta. 2013; 1835:11-27.
9.	 Sharma S and Brosh RM, Jr. Human RECQ1 is a DNA
damage responsive protein required for genotoxic stress
resistance and suppression of sister chromatid exchanges.
PloS one. 2007; 2:e1297.

22.	 Grandori C, Wu KJ, Fernandez P, Ngouenet C, Grim J,
Clurman BE, Moser MJ, Oshima J, Russell DW, Swisshelm
K, Frank S, Amati B, Dalla-Favera R and Monnat RJ, Jr.
Werner syndrome protein limits MYC-induced cellular
senescence. Genes & development. 2003; 17:1569-1574.

10.	 Mao FJ, Sidorova JM, Lauper JM, Emond MJ and
Monnat RJ. The human WRN and BLM RecQ helicases
differentially regulate cell proliferation and survival after
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23.	 Ding SL, Yu JC, Chen ST, Hsu GC and Shen CY. Genetic
variation in the premature aging gene WRN: a case-control
13283

Oncotarget

study on breast cancer susceptibility. Cancer epidemiology,
biomarkers & prevention. 2007; 16:263-269.

topoisomerase I in transcription of human ribosomal RNA
genes. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America. 1988; 85:1060-1064.

24.	 Wang Z, Xu Y, Tang J, Ma H, Qin J, Lu C, Wang X, Hu Z,
Wang X and Shen H. A polymorphism in Werner syndrome
gene is associated with breast cancer susceptibility in
Chinese women. Breast cancer research and treatment.
2009; 118:169-175.

35.	 Mao Y, Sun M, Desai SD and Liu LF. SUMO-1
conjugation to topoisomerase I: A possible repair response
to topoisomerase-mediated DNA damage. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America. 2000; 97:4046-4051.

25.	 Awada A, Garcia AA, Chan S, Jerusalem GH, Coleman RE,
Huizing MT, Mehdi A, O’Reilly SM, Hamm JT, BarrettLee PJ, Cocquyt V, Sideras K, Young DE, Zhao C, Chia
YL, Hoch U, et al. Two schedules of etirinotecan pegol
(NKTR-102) in patients with previously treated metastatic
breast cancer: a randomised phase 2 study. Lancet Oncol.
2013; 14:1216-1225.

36.	 Beidler DR and Cheng YC. Camptothecin induction
of a time- and concentration-dependent decrease of
topoisomerase I and its implication in camptothecin
activity. Molecular pharmacology. 1995; 47:907-914.
37.	 Wang J, Chen J and Gong Z. TopBP1 controls BLM protein
level to maintain genome stability. Molecular cell. 2013;
52:667-678.

26.	 Kumler I, Brunner N, Stenvang J, Balslev E and Nielsen
DL. A systematic review on topoisomerase 1 inhibition
in the treatment of metastatic breast cancer. Breast cancer
research and treatment. 2013; 138:347-358.

38.	 Rodier F, Coppe JP, Patil CK, Hoeijmakers WA, Munoz
DP, Raza SR, Freund A, Campeau E, Davalos AR and
Campisi J. Persistent DNA damage signalling triggers
senescence-associated inflammatory cytokine secretion.
Nature cell biology. 2009; 11:973-979.

27.	 Pfister TD, Reinhold WC, Agama K, Gupta S, Khin SA,
Kinders RJ, Parchment RE, Tomaszewski JE, Doroshow
JH and Pommier Y. Topoisomerase I levels in the NCI-60
cancer cell line panel determined by validated ELISA and
microarray analysis and correlation with indenoisoquinoline
sensitivity. Molecular cancer therapeutics. 2009; 8:18781884.

39.	 Han Z, Wei W, Dunaway S, Darnowski JW, Calabresi
P, Sedivy J, Hendrickson EA, Balan KV, Pantazis P and
Wyche JH. Role of p21 in apoptosis and senescence of
human colon cancer cells treated with camptothecin. The
Journal of biological chemistry. 2002; 277:17154-17160.

28.	 Desai SD, Li TK, Rodriguez-Bauman A, Rubin EH and Liu
LF. Ubiquitin/26S proteasome-mediated degradation of
topoisomerase I as a resistance mechanism to camptothecin
in tumor cells. Cancer research. 2001; 61:5926-5932.

40.	 Kumler I, Balslev E, Poulsen TS, Nielsen SL, Nygard SB,
Romer MU, Christensen IJ, Hogdall E, Moreira J, Nielsen
DL, Brunner N and Stenvang J. Topoisomerase-1 gene copy
aberrations are frequent in patients with breast cancer. Int J
Cancer. 2015.

29.	 Curtis C, Shah SP, Chin SF, Turashvili G, Rueda OM,
Dunning MJ, Speed D, Lynch AG, Samarajiwa S, Yuan
Y, Graf S, Ha G, Haffari G, Bashashati A, Russell R,
McKinney S, et al. The genomic and transcriptomic
architecture of 2,000 breast tumours reveals novel
subgroups. Nature. 2012; 486:346-352.

41.	 Gustavsson B, Carlsson G, Machover D, Petrelli N, Roth
A, Schmoll HJ, Tveit KM and Gibson F. A review of the
evolution of systemic chemotherapy in the management of
colorectal cancer. Clin Colorectal Cancer. 2015; 14:1-10.
42.	 McShane LM, Altman DG, Sauerbrei W, Taube SE,
Gion M, Clark GM and Statistics Subcommittee of the
NCIEWGoCD. Reporting recommendations for tumor
marker prognostic studies (REMARK). J Natl Cancer Inst.
2005; 97:1180-1184.

30.	 Chun SG and Yee NS. Werner syndrome as a hereditary
risk factor for exocrine pancreatic cancer: potential role
of WRN in pancreatic tumorigenesis and patient-tailored
therapy. Cancer biology & therapy. 2010; 10:430-437.
31.	 Chun SG, Shaeffer DS and Bryant-Greenwood PK. The
Werner’s Syndrome RecQ helicase/exonuclease at the
nexus of cancer and aging. Hawaii medical journal. 2011;
70:52-55.

43.	 Arora A, Abdel-Fatah TM, Agarwal D, Doherty R, Moseley
PM, Aleskandarany MA, Green AR, Ball G, Alshareeda
AT, Rakha EA, Chan SY, Ellis IO and Madhusudan S.
Transcriptomic and Protein Expression Analysis Reveals
Clinicopathological Significance of Bloom Syndrome
Helicase (BLM) in Breast Cancer. Molecular cancer
therapeutics. 2015; 14:1057-1065.

32.	 Aggarwal M, Sommers JA, Shoemaker RH and Brosh
RM, Jr. Inhibition of helicase activity by a small molecule
impairs Werner syndrome helicase (WRN) function in the
cellular response to DNA damage or replication stress.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America. 2011; 108:1525-1530.
33.	 Kehrer DF, Soepenberg O, Loos WJ, Verweij J and
Sparreboom A. Modulation of camptothecin analogs in
the treatment of cancer: a review. Anticancer Drugs. 2001;
12:89-105.
34.	 Zhang H, Wang JC and Liu LF. Involvement of DNA
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13284

Oncotarget

