Editorial

Perioperative Chemotherapy for
Urothelial Cancer
How Have We Made a ‘‘Sow’s Ear’’ Out of a Chemotherapy-Sensitive Tumor?
Tanya B. Dorff, MD1 and David I. Quinn, MBBS, PhD

In the beginning, the concept of adjuvant chemotherapy after surgery or other localized treatment modality was met with skepticism, especially among surgeons. Slowly, with earnest work from many—but notably the Milan Group in breast cancer; the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project in colon
cancer; and the International Adjuvant Lung Cancer Trial Collaborative Group, the Eastern Cooperative
Oncology Group (ECOG), and others in lung cancer—a 4% to50% reduction in the risk of cancer recurrence was demonstrated with adjuvant, systemic therapy after surgery in patients who were stratified based
on historic criteria and categorized as being at elevated risk of recurrence.1-3 Consequently, adjuvant therapy is now standard for patients with these cancers.
Progress in defining the role of neoadjuvant, adjuvant, or adjunctive systemic therapies in genitourinary cancer has been uneven. The use of adjuvant chemotherapy in the most chemosensitive tumor, testicular cancer, has been well studied to the point that success against the cancer is almost universal. The goal
now is not to over treat patients and expose too many to chemotherapy-associated morbidity with the use
of risk-adapted surveillance strategies based on pathologic and serum marker criteria. In prostate cancer,
adjuvant androgen deprivation is a standard of care for patients who have lymph node metastases at radical
prostatectomy, whereas adjuvant radiation has benefit for patients with extracapsular extension, and adjunctive androgen deprivation is a standard for patients with high-risk, localized disease who receive radiation therapy as their primary treatment. The potential role of perioperative chemotherapy in prostate
cancer is unclear. Renal cell cancer has suffered from a lack of drugs that are suitable for use in the adjuvant
setting until the recent advent of agents targeting the vascular endothelial growth factor pathways.
One of the great paradoxes of modern genitourinary cancer therapeutics is the relative lack of benefit
for chemotherapy in the adjunctive setting for patients with bladder cancer who either undergo surgery or
receive radiation. In advanced transitional-cell urothelial cancer, cisplatin-based chemotherapy has a
response rate in excess of 45%, albeit with limited durability in many patients.4 Concurrent cisplatin

Corresponding author: David I. Quinn, MBBS, PhD, Kenneth J. Norris Jr. Comprehensive Cancer Center, Keck School of Medicine, University of
Southern California, 1441 Eastlake Avenue, Suite 3453, Los Angeles, CA 90033; Fax: (323) 865-0061; diquinn@usc.edu
Division of Oncology, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California
See referenced Original Article on pages 5193-201, this issue.
Received: February 3, 2009; Accepted: February 6, 2009
Published online July 30, 2009 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com)
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.24569, www.interscience.wiley.com

Cancer

November 15, 2009

5139

Editorial

chemotherapy is of incremental benefit for patients who
receive definitive radiation therapy for muscle-invasive
transitional cell cancer according to an adapted protocol
from a series of Radiation Therapy Oncology Group trials.5 However, the use of neoadjuvant or adjuvant combination chemotherapy regimens has not improved
outcome over and above concurrent chemoradiation therapy alone. For patients who undergo cystectomy for bladder cancer, neoadjuvant chemotherapy with combined
methotrexate, vinblastine, doxorubicin, and cisplatin
(MVAC) for patients who have transitional cell cancer or
with cisplatin and etoposide for patients who have small
cell cancer has net benefits as measured by overall or disease-specific survival.6,7
The Southwest Oncology Group (SWOG)/Intergroup Trial 8710 demonstrated that patients who
received neoadjuvant MVAC before they underwent cystectomy for transitional cell cancer had better survival
than patients who proceeded directly to surgery.6 On an
intention-to-treat basis, the statistical significance was
marginal. In addition, further analysis of the data demonstrated that surgical technique used for the cystectomy
was very important in determining outcome, so that the
extent of lymph node dissection was a greater factor in
predicting survival than randomization to chemotherapy
or not.8 Nonetheless, these data, which built upon
updated analyses of 2 Nordic trials and 2 sizeable metaanalyses that demonstrated a small but robust overall survival advantage of 5% total difference at 5 years for neoadjuvant, cisplatin-based combination therapy, influenced
therapeutic decision-making with a large upswing in the
use of neoadjuvant chemotherapy.9-11
In small cell bladder cancer, which accounts for
<5% of cancers at this anatomic site, case series data from
the M. D. Anderson Cancer Center describe an approximate doubling of cancer-specific survival at 5 years for
patients with localized cancer who received neoadjuvant
cisplatin-based chemotherapy compared with those who
underwent cystectomy alone.7 Corroborative data from
several large centers, including the University of Southern
California, confirmed this finding, making neoadjuvant
therapy the standard for this subset of patients with small
cell bladder cancer.12
Given the data supporting neoadjuvant chemotherapy in bladder cancer, is there a role for adjuvant or postoperative therapy? Neoadjuvant chemotherapy and
5140

adjuvant chemotherapy both have their advantages and
clinical proponents. Neoadjuvant therapy allows us to
observe whether the cancer responds and allows the patient
to experience chemotherapy in the absence of postoperative
morbidity. Adjuvant therapy, in a postoperative context,
allows us to give treatment based on a very accurate concept
of the disease stage. The only trial to our knowledge that
assessed preoperative versus postoperative chemotherapy in
this setting suggested no difference in cancer control outcomes for MVAC given before or after cystectomy.13 An
early phase 2 trial demonstrated the efficacy of adjuvant
MVAC compared with untreated historic controls.
Unfortunately, subsequent studies have been underpowered or otherwise flawed, often producing marginally better
outcomes that were not statistically significant. Despite
this, a meta-analysis (in itself flawed by omitting the largest
trial undertaken to date) concluded that there was a survival advantage for cisplatin-combination chemotherapy
that was of similar magnitude to the advantage observed
with neoadjuvant chemotherapy.9,10 It is noteworthy that
data supporting the most commonly used perioperative
chemotherapy regimen, cisplatin and gemcitabine, largely
are empiric and are based on extrapolation from data in the
advanced setting. The assumption that activity in the
advanced setting translates to the adjuvant setting may not
always be borne out as exemplified in colon rectal cancer,
in which irinotecan/fluoropyrimidine combinations have
major activity in patients with advanced disease but are relatively inefficacious in unselected populations who receive
the same regimen as adjuvant therapy.14
In this month’s issue of Cancer, Gallagher and colleagues15 from Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center
report on their adjuvant pilot study of novel regimens
incorporating 4-drug, rapid-replicating dosing of doxorubicin and gemcitabine followed by paclitaxel and either
cisplatin or carboplatin, depending on the patient’s postoperative renal function, with granulocyte-colony–stimulating factor (G-CSF) support, for patients with
extravesical and/or lymph node metastatic disease at surgery for urothelial cancer. Patients were compared for disease-specific and overall survival with a contemporary
control group from the same institution that did not
receive adjuvant chemotherapy. Although efforts were
made to control for variables among controls, such
cohorts tend to be biased to better outcome based on less
aggressive disease (do not warrant adjuvant therapy) or
Cancer

November 15, 2009

Editorial/Dorff and Quinn

worse outcome based on a perceived lack of tolerance of
adjuvant therapy (would not tolerate adjuvant therapy) as
well as patient selection bias for a variety of reasons. In
addition, patients on protocol always are followed more
closely, especially for disease recurrence, compared with
patients who receive standard therapy and are used as
post-hoc controls. Within these caveats and the limitations of phase 2 design, the study was well conducted. Significantly, 80% of patients required dose delay or
modification, and neutropenia was the most common
cause for delay or change, suggesting that the regimens
were overly ambitious in this population and despite GCSF. The study did not provide evidence of improved disease-specific survival in either cohort compared with controls but did suggest a difference in overall survival in
favor of chemotherapy versus controls. Although these
results may seem divergent for methodological reasons,
generally, an effect on overall survival is considered strong
evidence for further pursuit in larger studies, because it is
a ‘‘hard’’ endpoint. The net impact of the study is inconclusive, and the authors’ statement that further focus on
neoadjuvant therapy was reasonable but hardly definitive.
The current ‘‘negative’’ result from Gallagher et al with a
novel dose-dense strategy should not preclude further
evaluation of dose-dense strategies like as high-dose-intensity MVAC in the adjuvant setting for patients with normal renal function and good performance status.16
Based in part on the data presented by Gallagher
et al, the Cancer and Leukemia Group B (CALGB) initiated a randomized phase 3 trial comparing the rapid replicating regimen of doxorubicin, gemcitabine, paclitaxel,
and cisplatin with cisplatin plus gemcitabine in patients
with extravesical disease and/or lymph node involvement
at cystectomy for transitional cell bladder cancer (CALGB
90104). Unfortunately, the trial was closed early because
of poor accrual and before full Intergroup endorsement
could be obtained. Concurrently, several other phase 3 trials assessed cisplatin-based chemotherapy in the adjuvant
setting compared with initial observation and chemotherapy at first evidence of recurrence in Europe, including
European Organization for Research and Treatment of
Cancer (EORTC) Trial 30994 (recently closed because of
poor accrual), and Italian Study Group (closed early with
presented data showing no benefit to adjuvant chemotherapy) and Spanish Oncology Genitourinary Group
(SOCOG) (ongoing accrual) trials. Each of these trials
Cancer

November 15, 2009

has had major challenges in accruing patients despite large
numbers of patients undergoing cystectomy for bladder
cancer within potential referral areas. This pattern of poor
accrual to perioperative chemotherapy trials on both sides
of the Atlantic continues a theme in such trials; even the
SWOG/Intergroup 8710 neoadjuvant trial took 11 years
to accrue 317 patients.
The sad fact is that, from the most recent round of
phase 3 trials, it is likely that little conclusive will emerge
until they are analyzed in composite rather than individually. In the interim, we are provided with little help in
deciding whether or not to offer adjuvant chemotherapy
and with which regimen, if we believe MVAC is not an
option. Our current approach to patients is risk stratified
based on disease stage.17 Biomarkers have the potential to
guide our therapy. We await the results from 499 patients
who were screened prospectively for the pathologic stage
T2, p53, adjuvant MVAC trial along with the retrospective International Bladder Network Study of patients with
T3 bladder cancer treated with or without perioperative
chemotherapy.18,19 These studies will provide data to
power predictive and prognostic studies of p53 and cell
cycle markers as well as markers potentially predictive of
platin response or resistance, such as excision repair crosscomplementing factor 1 or ERCC1.20,21 The EORTC
and SOCOG studies may provide biospecimens to help
confirm the value of these markers.
The current best-practice perioperative chemotherapy regimen for patients with muscle-invasive urothelial
cancer who elect to undergo cystectomy is neoadjuvant or
postoperative MVAC. Such practice needs to incorporate
individual counseling of patients related to the narrow
window between benefit and risk that exists with such an
approach. The use of any other regimens should be considered less proven, although non-MVAC, cisplatin-based
combinations do have some supportive data; and cisplatin
with gemcitabine is equivalent in the advanced setting. In
contradistinction to this, noncisplatin-based regimens,
including those that incorporate carboplatin, have no proven benefit in the perioperative setting, actually may be
harmful by increasing perioperative risk, and should not
be used routinely but, rather, should be reserved for use in
clinical trials. There is a particular unmet need for patients
with moderate-to-severe renal impairment. The way forward is to leverage promising new drugs in the perioperative setting while recognizing that surgical technique,
5141

Editorial

particularly extensive lymph node dissection, may have a
very significant effect on patient outcome. The sow’s ear
that is perioperative chemotherapy for urothelial cancer
could not be construed as a silk purse but presents a challenge to all of us who are confronted by this disease. The
best treatment for patients with muscle-invasive bladder
cancer is the best available clinical trial. Such trials need to
be powered and accrued not only to answer clinical questions but also to provide information about patient selection through biologic specimen acquisition and
biomarker assessment. A renewed focus on collective buyin and accrual to trials by urologists and oncologists who
treat bladder cancer needs to move beyond generic motherhood statements and unfulfilled promissory notes; our
patients deserve more than a sow’s ear.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures
The authors made no disclosures.

References
1.

2.

Bonadonna G, Brusamolino E, Valagussa P, et al. Combination chemotherapy as an adjuvant treatment in operable
breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 1976;294:405-410.
Wolmark N, Fisher B, Rockette H, et al. Postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy or BCG for colon cancer: results from
NSABP protocol C-01. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1988;80:30-36.

3.

Arriagada R, Bergman B, Dunant A, Le Chevalier T, Pignon JP, Vansteenkiste J. Cisplatin-based adjuvant chemotherapy in patients with completely resected nonsmall-cell
lung cancer. N Engl J Med. 2004;350:351-360.

4.

von der Maase H, Hansen SW, Roberts JT, et al. Gemcitabine and cisplatin versus methotrexate, vinblastine, doxorubicin, and cisplatin in advanced or metastatic bladder
cancer: results of a large, randomized, multinational, multicenter, phase III study. J Clin Oncol. 2000;18:3068-3077.

5.

Shipley WU, Kaufman DS, Tester WJ, Pilepich MV, Sandler
HM. Overview of bladder cancer trials in the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group. Cancer. 2003;97(8 suppl):2115-2119.

6.

Grossman HB, Natale RB, Tangen CM, et al. Neoadjuvant
chemotherapy plus cystectomy compared with cystectomy
alone for locally advanced bladder cancer. N Engl J Med.
2003;349:859-866.

7.

Siefker-Radtke AO, Dinney CP, Abrahams NA, et al. Evidence supporting preoperative chemotherapy for small cell
carcinoma of the bladder: a retrospective review of the
M. D. Anderson cancer experience. J Urol. 2004;172:481-484.

8.

Herr HW, Faulkner JR, Grossman HB, et al. Surgical factors influence bladder cancer outcomes: a cooperative group
report. J Clin Oncol. 2004;22:2781-2789.

5142

9.

Advanced Bladder Cancer Meta-analysis Collaboration.
Neoadjuvant chemotherapy in invasive bladder cancer: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet. 2003;361:
1927-1934.

10. Winquist E, Kirchner TS, Segal R, Chin J, Lukka H. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy for transitional cell carcinoma of
the bladder: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Urol.
2004;171(2 pt 1):561-569.
11. Sherif A, Holmberg L, Rintala E, et al. Neoadjuvant cisplatinum based combination chemotherapy in patients with
invasive bladder cancer: a combined analysis of 2 Nordic
studies. Eur Urol. 2004;45:297-303.
12. Quek ML, Nichols PW, Yamzon J, et al. Radical cystectomy for primary neuroendocrine tumors of the bladder:
the University of Southern California experience. J Urol.
2005;174:93-96.
13. Millikan R, Dinney C, Swanson D, et al. Integrated therapy for locally advanced bladder cancer: final report of a
randomized trial of cystectomy plus adjuvant M-VAC versus cystectomy with both preoperative and postoperative
M-VAC. J Clin Oncol. 2001;19:4005-4013.
14. Saltz LB, Niedzwiecki D, Hollis D, et al. Irinotecan fluorouracil plus leucovorin is not superior to fluorouracil plus
leucovorin alone as adjuvant treatment for stage III colon
cancer: results of CALGB 89803. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25:
3456-3461.
15. Gallagher DJ, Milowsky MI, Iasonos A, et al. Sequential
adjuvant chemotherapy after surgical resection of high-risk
urothelial carcinoma. Cancer. 2009;115:5193-5201.
16. Sternberg CN, de Mulder P, Schornagel JH, et al. Seven
year update of an EORTC phase III trial of high-dose intensity M-VAC chemotherapy and G-CSF versus classic MVAC in advanced urothelial tract tumours. Eur J Cancer.
2006;42:50-54.
17. Stein JP, Lieskovsky G, Cote R, et al. Radical cystectomy
in the treatment of invasive bladder cancer: long-term
results in 1054 patients. J Clin Oncol. 2001;19:666-675.
18. Cote RJ, Klotz LH. Combination Chemotherapy in Treating Patients With Bladder Cancer: NCT00005047;
SWOG-4B951, LAC-USC-4B951, NCI-G00-1715. Available at: http://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT00005047.
Accessed January 2, 2009.
19. Goebell PJ, Groshen S, Schmitz-Drager BJ, et al. Concepts
for banking tissue in urologic oncology—the International
Bladder Cancer Bank. Clin Cancer Res. 2005;11(2 pt 1):
413-415.
20. Chatterjee SJ, Datar R, Youssefzadeh D, et al. Combined
effects of p53, p21, and pRb expression in the progression
of bladder transitional cell carcinoma. J Clin Oncol. 2004;
22:1007-1013.
21. Bellmunt J, Paz-Ares L, Cuello M, et al. Gene expression
of ERCC1 as a novel prognostic marker in advanced bladder cancer patients receiving cisplatin-based chemotherapy.
Ann Oncol. 2007;18:522-528.

Cancer

November 15, 2009

