Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 27

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Targeted expression of BikDD combined with metronomic
doxorubicin induces synergistic antitumor effect through Bax
activation in hepatocellular carcinoma
Huei-Yue Dai1, Hui-Yu Chen2, Wei-Chen Lai2, Mien-Chie Hung1,2,3,4, Long-Yuan Li1,2,3
1

Center for Molecular Medicine, China Medical University Hospital, Taichung 404, Taiwan

2

Graduate Institute of Cancer Biology, China Medical University, Taichung 404, Taiwan

3

Department of Biotechnology, Asia University, Taichung 413, Taiwan

4

Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA

Correspondence to:
Long-Yuan Li, e-mail: lyl@mail.cmu.edu.tw
Mien-Chie Hung, e-mail: mhung@mdanderson.org
Keywords:

synergistic

antitumor

effect,

combination

therapy,

orthotopic

animal

model,

hepatocellular

carcinoma,

metronomic

chemotherapy
Received: March 24, 2015      Accepted: June 05, 2015      Published: June 17, 2015

ABSTRACT
Conventional chemotherapy is commonly used to treat advanced non-resectable
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) but this treatment modality has not demonstrated
convincing survival benefit in HCC patients. Our previous studies indicated that
targeted expression of therapeutic BikDD driven by a liver cancer-specific α-fetoprotein
promoter/enhancer (eAFP) in the VISA backbone (eAFP-VISA-BikDD) significantly
and specifically kills HCC cells in multiple orthotopic animal models. To enhance its
therapeutic efficacy, we combined eAFP-VISA-BikDD with chemotherapeutic agents
and found that eAFP-VISA-BikDD plus doxorubicin (Dox) or 5-fluorouracil (5-FU)
demonstrated synergistic cytotoxicity in HCC cells. Specifically, the combination of
eAFP-VISA-BikDD plus Dox markedly induced apoptosis via increased Bax mitochondrial
translocation and cytoplasmic cytochrome c release. Compared with either agent alone,
a low dose of Dox combined with eAFP-VISA-BikDD induced better antitumor effect
and prolonged longer survival of mice in two orthotopic liver cancer xenograft models.
Our findings provide strong preclinical support for evaluating the combined therapy of
eAFP-VISA-BikDD and Dox in a clinical setting as a treatment option for HCC.

Patients with advanced HCC are frequently treated
with chemotherapeutic drugs, such as doxorubicin (Dox)
and 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) [3–5]. Dox, a topoisomerase II
poison, induces apoptosis by disrupting the mitochondrial
membrane potential and activating the caspases. 5-FU is
an antimetabolite drug that inhibits thymidylate synthase
and thereby induces cell death. Unfortunately, there is no
convincing survival advantage to using chemotherapeutic
agents either as a single agent or in combination to
treat advanced HCC [5, 6]. Interestingly, however, the
combination of chemotherapy and gene therapy has
demonstrated enhanced therapeutic effects and prolonged
life span in multiple tumor xenograft models, including
those of ovarian, breast, and lung cancers [7–10]. Moreover,
results from a phase II clinical trial (NCT00044993) that

INTRODUCTION
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the
most common and aggressive malignancies in the world,
particularly in Asia and Africa where high prevalence of
hepatitis B and C infection has been reported. There are
several treatment modalities for early-stage HCC, such as
surgical resection, liver transplantation, radiofrequency
ablation, and transarterial chemoembolization [1, 2].
Although surgical resection and liver transplantation are
considered curative, only a small number of patients are
candidates. The poor prognosis of HCC is mainly due to
its high propensity for intrahepatic metastasis and tumor
recurrence.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23807

Oncotarget

evaluated the combination of Dox and AdCMV-p53
gene therapy for stage II and III breast cancer patients
demonstrated a significant improvement in response rate
compared with those receiving chemotherapy alone [11].
HCC is highly refractory to cytotoxic chemotherapy
partly due to the increased expression of multidrugresistance genes, which allow active efflux of chemo­
therapeutic agents. An imbalance of Bcl-2 family members
also plays a role in the chemoresistance of HCC [12].
Functionally, Bcl-2 family members are divided into
two major groups, anti-apoptotic and pro-apoptotic.
Overexpression of anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL proteins
rendered HCC cells more resistant to chemotherapeutic
agents, such as staurosporine, Dox, and paclitaxel, in human
HCC whereas reduced level of Bcl-2 sensitized cancer cells
to these agents [13–15]. Expression of Bcl-xL was shown
to be higher in HCC than in adjacent normal liver [13], and
enhanced Bcl-xL expression in HCC correlated with poorer
prognosis [16]. In contrast, ectopic expression of natural
born killer (Nbk; also known as Bcl-2 interacting killer or
Bik) sensitized breast cancer cells to drug-induced apoptosis
and revert acquired chemoresistance [17].
Bik is a BH3-only protein of the Bcl-2 family
that promotes apoptosis. Bik-induced cell death is
mediated by its interaction with anti-apoptotic proteins,
such as Bcl-2, Bcl-xL and Mcl-1, via its BH3 domain,
thereby releasing pro-apoptotic proteins Bax and Bak
to disrupt the mitochondrial membrane potential,
resulting in cytochrome c release and subsequent
activation of caspases [18–20]. The activity of Bik is
regulated by post-translational modifications [21]. For
example, phosphorylation of the Bik at Thr33 and Ser35
increased its apoptotic potency [22]. Mutation of these
two phosphorylation sites to create a constitutively
phosphorylated Bik by aspartic acid substitutions (BikDD)
resulted in higher binding affinity for the antiapoptotic
proteins and induced apoptosis more potently than its
wild-type counterpart [23].
Overexpression of BikDD has been demonstrated
to potently reduce tumor growth in xenograft tumor
model of multiple types of cancer [24–26]. Specifically,
an eAFP-VISA-BikDD vector was designed to induce
targeted expression of BikDD in HCC cells by controlling
its expression under a liver cancer-specific α-fetoprotein
promoter/enhancer (eAFP), whose activity can further
enhanced by the VP16-GAL4-WPRE integrated systemic
amplifier (VISA) module [25, 26] to a level similar or
comparable to that of the non-specific cytomegalovirus
(CMV) promoter. Systemic administration of liposomeencapsulated eAFP-VISA-BikDD effectively repressed
tumor growth and prolonged survival in multiple
xenograft and syngeneic orthotopic HCC mouse models
[26]. In addition to its potent therapeutic efficacy,
systemic treatment of a high dose of eAFP-VISA-BikDD/
liposome was shown to be safe in animal study [26].
Here, we investigate the potential therapeutic efficacy of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

eAFP-VISA-BikDD gene therapy in combination with
conventional chemotherapeutic agents in HCC cell lines
and in orthotopic liver cancer tumor mouse models and
explore potential mechanisms by which the combination
treatment induces apoptosis.

RESULTS
eAFP-VISA-BikDD combined with Dox or 5-FU
produces synergistic cytotoxic effects in HCC
cells
Chemotherapeutic agents, such as Dox and
5-FU, are commonly used to treat advanced nonresectable primary and metastasis HCC. Previously, we
demonstrated that non-viral eAFP-VISA-BikDD gene
therapy significantly reduced tumor growth in mouse
models with a relatively safe profile [26]. Here, we tested
a potentially synergistic cytotoxic effect of eAFP-VISABikDD plus Dox or 5-FU on HCC cells by WST-1 assay.
First, we validated the cytotoxic effect eAFP-VISABikDD (by transfection) on HCC cell proliferation.
As expected, expression of BikDD effectively reduced
cell viability in all three HCC cell lines (Figure 1,
black bars). We then treated HCC cells with eAFPVISA-BikDD plus Dox at various concentrations and
found that the combination induced a dose-dependent
cytotoxic effect. The IC50 (the half maximal inhibitory
concentration) of Dox in Huh7 (Figure 1A), PLC/PRF/5
(Figure 1B), and Tong/HCC (Figure 1C) was 0.43, 0.29
and 0.23 μM, respectively. Comparable growth inhibition
was observed at approximately 0.1 μM Dox when cells
were also transfected with 0.1 μg of eAFP-VISA-BikDD,
suggesting that BikDD sensitized HCC cells to Doxinduced cell death.
Next, we calculated the combination index (CI)
according to the Chou and Talalay method [27] and
plotted against the fraction affected (Fa) for the eAFPVISA-BikDD and Dox combination in HCC cells
(Supplementary Figure S1) and found that it exhibited
a synergistic cytotoxic effect (CI values < 1, = 1 and >
1 indicate synergism, additive effect and antagonism,
respectively). Similar results were observed when eAFPVISA-BikDD was combined with 5-FU (Figure 2 and
Supplementary Figure S2). Together, our findings suggest
that lowering the dose of chemotherapy may be feasible by
incorporating eAFP-VISA-BikDD gene therapy to achieve
similar cancer cell killing effect at higher doses without
the associated adverse side effects.

eAFP-VISA-BikDD plus Dox is more effective
than eAFP-VISA-BikDD plus 5-FU under
clinically achievable concentrations
To identify a more clinically relevant combination
treatment, we sought to compare the synergistic effect
23808

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Cytotoxic effects of eAFP-VISA-BikDD plus Dox against human HCC cell lines in vitro. Huh7 A. PLC/PRF/5

B. and Tong/HCC C. cells were transfected with indicated concentrations of eAFP-VISA-BikDD by using extruding DOTAP:cholesterol
liposomes. Transfection mixtures were removed after 4 hours, and fresh DMEM complete medium containing the indicated concentration
of Dox was added for an additional 72 hours followed by cytotoxicity analysis by WST-1 assay. Relative cell viability was normalized to
untreated cells (set as 100%) and expressed as mean ±SD.

between eAFP-VISA-BikDD/Dox and eAFP-VISABikDD/5-FU at clinically relevant concentrations. The
steady-state plasma concentration of Dox [28–30] and
5-FU [31–33] in patients ranged from 0.025 to 0.25 μM and
0.192 to 192 μM, respectively, after drug administration.
Dose monitoring of 5-FU to achieve maximum clinical
efficacy and reduce side effect in patients indicated that
a 5-FU plasma concentration between 450 to 550 μg/L
(equivalent to 3.46 to 4.23 μM) consistently yielded optimal
clinical efficacy and safety in patients [33]. Therefore, we
re-analyzed the CI values at higher fraction affected (Fa >
0.5) for eAFP-VISA-BikDD plus clinically relevant dose of
Dox (0.1 μM; Supplementary Figure 3A) or 5-FU (5 μM;
Supplementary Figure 3B). A CI value between 0.85 − 0.9
indicates slight synergism; 0.7 − 0.85 moderate synergism;
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

0.3 − 0.7 synergism; 0.1 − 0.3 strong synergism, A higher
percentage of data points (CI < 0.7) were observed in HCC
cell lines treated with eAFP-VISA-BikDD/Dox (85%)
compared with eAFP-VISA-BikDD/5-FU (50%). Notably,
strong synergism (CI < 0.3) was only observed in eAFPVISA-BikDD plus Dox but not 5-FU. These findings
indicate that the clinically relevant concentration of Dox
can be used with the eAFP-VISA-BikDD gene therapy
in combination to effective kill HCC cells. In addition to
therapeutic efficacy in cancer cells, we also investigated
the effect of eAFP-VISA-BikDD plus Dox on normal liver
cell lines with results showing limited damage to normal
liver cells in vitro (THLE-2 and MIHA; Figure 3A and 3B).
On the basis of these findings, we utilized the eAFP-VISABikDD/Dox combination for all subsequent experiments.
23809

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Cytotoxic effects of eAFP-VISA-BikDD plus 5-FU against human HCC cell lines in vitro. Huh7 A. PLC/

PRF/5 B. and Tong/HCC C. cells were transfected for 4 hours with indicated concentrations of eAFP-VISA-BikDD by using extruding
DOTAP:cholesterol liposomes. Transfection mixtures were removed after 4 hours, and fresh DMEM complete medium containing the
indicated concentration of 5-FU was added for an additional 72 hours followed by cytotoxicity analysis by WST-1 assay. Relative cell
viability was normalized to untreated cells (set as 100%) and expressed as mean ±SD.

eAFP-VISA-BikDD plus Dox increases Bax
activation, cytochrome c release, and cleaved
caspases-3 expression

eAFP-VISA-BikDD/Dox had higher expression of cleaved
caspase-3 than those treated with each agent alone (Figure
4A and 4B). The expression levels of both proapoptotic
(Bax and Bak) and antiapoptotic (Bcl-xL and Mcl-1)
did not change upon various treatments (Figure 4A and
4B). In addition, the expression levels of BikDD were
similar between cells treated with eAFP-VISA-BikDD
alone or eAFP-VISA-BikDD/Dox, suggesting that altered
expression of these Bcl2 family proteins may not be
involved in the increased apoptosis by the combination
treatment. Thus, we next sought to investigate the
molecular mechanisms underlying eAFP-VISA-BikDD/
Dox-enhanced apoptosis.
Induction of apoptosis by the Bik/Nbk is mediated
by the dissociation of anti-apoptotic proteins (e.g., Bcl-2,

To determine whether the synergistic growth
inhibition by eAFP-VISA-BikDD/Dox is attributed
to enhanced apoptosis, we analyzed cell viability by
propidium iodide staining and flow cytometry 72 hours
after combination treatment. The percentage of sub-G1
cells was significantly increased after treatment with
eAFP-VISA-BikDD, Dox, or the combination compared
with the control vector-transfected group (p < 0.001,
Supplementary Table S1). The level of apoptosis was
highest in cells treated with eAFP-VISA-BikDD/Dox in
3 HCC cell lines (p < 0.05). Moreover, cells treated with
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23810

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Cytotoxic effects of combining eAFP-VISA-BikDD and Dox in normal liver cell lines. THLE-2 A. and MIHA B.

cells were transfected with control (Ctrl) or eAFP-VISA-BikDD for 4 hours. Transfection mixtures were then replaced by fresh complete
medium containing the indicated concentration of Dox for an additional 72 hours. At the end of incubation, cytotoxic effects were evaluated
by WST-1 assay. Relative cell viability was normalized to untreated cells (set as 100%). Data represent mean ±SD. N = 3.

Bcl-xL, and Mcl-1) from pro-apoptotic proteins (e.g., Bax
or Bak) to execute cell death signals [18, 34]. Previous
studies have indicated that Huh-7 cells express Bcl-xL at
high levels but not Bcl-2 [35]. We screened the protein
expression of Bcl-2, Bcl-xL, and Mcl-1 in Huh7, PLC/
PRF/5 and Tong/HCC cells and also found that Bcl-xL
and Mcl-1 were highly expressed in Huh7, PLC/PRF/5
and Tong/HCC whereas Bcl-2 was barely undetectable
(Supplementary Figure S4). We hypothesized that eAFPVISA-BikDD/Dox may increase apoptosis by enhancing
the binding affinity of BikDD to the anti-apoptotic
proteins. Huh7 cells were treated with eAFP-VISABikDD/Dox followed by immunoprecipitation using antiBcl-xL or anti-Mcl-1 antibodies. eAFP-VISA, which does
not express BikDD, was used as control for comparison.
The results revealed that the interaction between BikDD
and Bcl-xL was substantially enhanced in eAFP-VISABikDD/Dox-treated cells that peaked at 12–24 hour, which
then declined but remained higher than that observed in
eAFP-VISA-BikDD-treated cells at 48 hours (Figure 4C).
In contrast, cells treated with eAFP-VISA-BikDD alone
did not exhibit such increase in BikDD/Bcl-xL interaction
(Figure 4C). The interaction between BikDD and Mcl-1
was initially similar between eAFP-VISA-BikDD and
eAFP-VISA-BikDD/Dox-treated cells (12~24 hours after
Dox treatment). However, persistent binding of BikDD
to Mcl-1 was observed from a longer incubation period
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

(about 36 hours) in eAFP-VISA-BikDD/Dox-treated
but not eAFP-VISA-BikDD cells. BikDD expression
in input lysates was reduced over time in eAFP-VISABikDD and eAFP-VISA-BikDD/Dox-treated cells due
to transient transfection. Expression of endogenous Bik
protein did not unchanged, and interaction between Bik
and Bcl-xL or Mcl-1 was not detected even after 48 hours
of Dox treatment. We further validated the interaction
between BikDD and anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family proteins
by reciprocal immunoprecipitation using antibody against
Bik (Figure 4D) which showed that the binding of BikDD
to Bcl-xL was increased when we added Dox to the eAFPVISA-BikDD gene therapy. Similar results were observed
in Tong/HCC cells (Figure 4E). Taken together, these
results indicate Dox prolongs the binding of BikDD to
Bcl-xL or Mcl-1, leading to enhance apoptosis.
On the basis of these observations, we asked
whether higher levels of activated Bax or Bak are released
as a result of enhanced binding of BikDD to Bcl-xL or
Mcl-1 to promote cell death. To this end, we collected
supernatant from first immunoprecipitation with anti-Bik
followed by a second immunoprecipitation with anti-Bax
(6A7) or anti-Bak. The Bax (6A7) and Bak antibodies
used in the current study specifically recognize the epitope
at the N-terminus of activated Bax and Bak. We observed
higher levels of activated Bax in cells treated with eAFPVISA-BikDD/Dox than eAFP-VISA-BikDD or Dox
23811

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Effects of eAFP-VISA-BikDD combined with DOX on apoptosis-related protein expression in HCC cell
lines. Huh7 A. and Tong/HCC B. cells were transfected with control (Ctrl) vector or eAFP-VISA-BikDD. After 4 hours of incubation,
transfection mixtures were replaced by fresh DMEM complete medium or DMEM complete medium containing Dox (0.1 μM) for 72
hours. Cell lysates were collected for Western blot analysis. C. Huh7 cells were transfected for 4 hours with vector control (Ctrl) or
eAFP-VISA-BikDD. After incubation, the transfection mixture was removed then replaced with DMEM complete medium or DMEM
complete medium containing Dox (0.1 μM) for additional 12–48 hours. Cells were harvested at the indicated time points and subjected to
immunoprecipitation with anti-Bcl-xL and anti-Mcl-1 antibodies. D, E. Cells were treated as described above and lysates were harvested at
24 hours after Dox administration and subjected to immunoprecipitation by anti-Bik antibody in 1% CHAPS lysis buffer. Equal amounts
of proteins from different treatment were separated by SDS-PAGE and then incubated with anti-BiK antibody. The anti-Bik polyclonal
antibody recognizes both wild-type and mutant form Bik. F. Supernatant was harvested from precipitated immune complexes from (D) and
(E) and subjected to secondary immunoprecipitation with anti-Bax (6A7) antibody. G. Bax mitochondrial translocation and cytochrome c
release in combination therapy. Huh7 cells were transfected with control vector or eAFP-VISA-BikDD for 4 hours and then incubated with
DMEM complete medium or DMEM complete medium containing Dox for additional 36 hours. Cell lysates were harvested and subjected
to subcellular fractionation experiments. Western blot analysis was performed to determine the levels of Bax and cytochrome c. Antibody
to cytochrome c oxidase IV antibody (COX IV) was used as mitochondrial loading control.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23812

Oncotarget

alone in Huh7 and Tong/HCC cells (Figure 4F). However,
the levels of activated Bak in combination therapy were
similar to that in eAFP-VISA-BikDD gene therapy alone
(Supplementary Figure S5). Results from subcellular
fractionation also revealed higher levels of Bax in the
mitochondria and cytochrome c released into cytosol in
cells treated with eAFP-VISA-BikDD/Dox (Figure 4G).
These findings indicate that combination therapy promotes
apoptosis likely by increasing the binding of BikDD to
anti-apoptotic proteins to release and activate Bax.

compared to eAFP-VISA-BikDD (Figure 5C; median
survival: combined therapy, > 112 days vs. eAFP-VISABikDD, 71 days; p < 0.05) . In addition, TUNEL staining
of mice tumor tissues indicated the percentage of apoptotic
cells was highest in eAFP-VISA-BikDD/Dox-treated group
followed by eAFP-VISA-BikDD alone, Dox alone, and
control in that order (Figure 5D; quantitation shown below).
The results from TUNEL assay were consistent with those
from tumor growth inhibition and survival analysis showing
that eAFP-VISA-BikDD/Dox effectively induces apoptosis.
Importantly, eAFP-VISA-BikDD/Dox as well as low-dose
Dox treatment had very little effect on normal liver cells and
did not significantly reduce mice body weight compared
with initial body weight before treatment (Supplementary
Figure S6). Hence, this combination regimen may provide
a relatively safe and effective therapeutic option for the
treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma as demonstrated in
the animal model.

Synergistic anticancer effect of eAFP-VISA-BikDD/
Dox in orthotopic xenograft mouse model
To evaluate the potential therapeutic efficacy of
eAFP-VISA-BikDD/Dox in liver cancer, we established
an orthotopic xenograft mouse model of hepatocellular
carcinoma. We first determined the dosage and frequency
of Dox administration for this study. The conventionaldose schedule for Dox in humans is 60 to 75 mg per m2
every 21 to 28 days. It is well known that high doses of
Dox induce adverse side effects, such as heart failure. To
reduce toxicities, metronomic chemotherapy (chronic low
doses of chemotherapeutic drugs) is another option for
drug administration. Several studies have reported that
weekly low-dose Dox produces equivalent antitumor effects
compared with conventional high-dose intermittent Dox
[36, 37]. Therefore, we examined the efficacy of weekly
low-dose Dox in combination with eAFP-VISA-BikDD
twice a week in a mouse tumor model of HCC. To this end,
severe-combined immune deficient (SCID) mice bearing the
orthotopic Huh7-Luc cells were systemically administered
eAFP-VISA-BikDD alone or in combination with low-dose
Dox. Tumor growth was monitored weekly by non-invasive
in vivo bioluminescence imaging system. Mice treated with
eAFP-VISA-BikDD alone or combined with Dox (0.5 mg/
kg) had significantly smaller tumors compared with those
treated with vector control at day 21 after initial treatment
(Figure 5A; Representative images from IVIS shown on
right). Moreover, mice treated with eAFP-VISA-BikDD/
Dox had more statistically significant reduction in tumor
growth than those treated with eAFP-VISA-BikDD alone
(p < 0.05) or vector control (p < 0.001) at day 14 and day 21
after the initial treatment. Similar results were also obtained
when we measured the tumor weight at 37 days after initial
treatment (Figure 5B). These results are consistent with our
previous studies that demonstrated similar tumor growth
inhibition by eAFP-VISA-BikDD [26]. Weekly treatment
of low-dose Dox (0.5 mg/kg) for 4 weeks did not affect
tumor weight compared with the control group. Strikingly,
the combination of eAFP-VISA-BikDD and Dox (0.5 mg/
kg) had better antitumor efficacy than eAFP-VISA-BikDD
monotherapy (p = 0.005). The average tumor weight was
1.834 ± 0.17g and 0.825 ± 0.2 g for eAFP-VISA-BikDD
and eAFP-VISA-BikDD/Dox-treated groups, respectively.
eAFP-VISA-BikDD/Dox also prolonged mice survival
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

eAFP-VISA-BikDD/Dox inhibits tumor growth
and metastasis and prolongs survival time in
orthotopic syngeneic mouse model
To evaluate the combination therapy in a syngeneic
animal model with normal host immune response, we first
evaluated the cytotoxic effect of eAFP-VISA-BikDD/
Dox in vitro in ML-1 mouse HCC cells by calculating
the CI value. As shown in the Fa-CI plot (Supplementary
Figure S7), eAFP-VISA-BikDD/Dox exhibited synergistic
cytotoxic effect, with CI values below 1 indicating
synergism. We then examined the efficacy of this
combination in mice with ML-1 tumors. Mice treated with
eAFP-VISA-BikDD/Dox had significantly smaller tumors
and longer survival rate compared with the control group
(Figure 6A and 6B). The number of TUNEL-positive cells
in the tumors of eAFP-VISA-BikDD/Dox-treated group
was 1.4- and 13-fold higher than in those of the eAFPVISA-BikDD-treated and control group, respectively
(Figure 6C; quantitation shown below). Remarkably,
mice that received systemic administration of eAFPVISA-BikDD gene therapy alone or combined Dox had
less pulmonary nodules compared with those that received
no treatment (Supplementary Table S2), suggesting that
eAFP-VISA-BikDD may also suppress metastasis.

DISCUSSION
HCC is highly malignant and resistant to chemo­
therapeutic agents and has high propensity of intrahepatic
and extrahepatic metastases. To improve the overall
therapeutic efficacy, especially in treating unresectable
HCC, combination therapies are being explored to
maximize therapeutic advantages while reducing
potential side effects and complications. Among various
combination regimens, studies on gene therapy and
23813

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Antitumor effect of eAFP-VISA-BikDD combined with Dox in an orthotopic xenograft mouse model. A.

Huh7 cells were orthotopically inoculated into the left liver lobe of SCID mice. One week after tumor inoculation, mice were randomly
divided into four groups for treatment. Mice received systemic intravenous injection of control vector or eAFP-VISA-BikDD encapsulated
in liposomes twice a week for four weeks. Dox (0.5 mg/kg) or normal saline was administered once a week by tail vein injection for four
weeks. Tumor growth was monitored weekly by in vivo imaging system. B. Thirty-seven days after initial treatment, mice were sacrificed
and liver tumors were dissected and weighed. Data represent mean ±SEM. N = 5. Representative images of tumor tissues from mice after
the indicated treatment are shown on the right. C. Survival rate of mice after the indicated treatment. n.s., not significant. D. Detection
of apoptosis in liver tissues by TUNEL assays. Tissues collected from (A) were fixed with 10% neutral buffered formalin, and TUNELpositive cells were stained and counted from four randomly selected fields per section. Arrows indicate TUNEL-positive apoptotic cells.
Quantitation is shown below. Data represent mean ±SD.

chemotherapy are of particular interest [9, 10]. Here, we
demonstrated that the combination of eAFP-VISA-BikDD
gene therapy and clinically achievable concentration of
Dox is both effective and safe in the animal models tested.
Compared
with
conventional
high-dose
chemotherapy, metronomic chemotherapy, which is
administered at low doses and more frequent intervals,
has more clinical benefits not only in the reduction
of adverse drugs toxicity but also in targeting both
proliferating tumor cells and tumor-associated endothelial
cells [36, 38]. This approach has become widely utilized
by oncologists in clinical trials to treat a variety of
human cancers [39–42]. Generally, conventional Dox
is administrated in mice at a dose of 10 mg/kg every 3
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

weeks. In this study, while metronomic Dox (0.5 mg/kg,
once per week for consecutive 4 weeks) did not exhibit
therapeutic efficacy in orthotopic HCC animal models,
when combined with eAFP-VISA-BikDD, significant
tumor regression, prolonged survival, and even inhibition
of distant metastasis were observed (Figures 5 and 6 and
Supplementary Table S2). The effect of eAFP-VISABikDD/Dox on normal liver tissues was negligible (Figure
5D and 6C), supporting that this combination regimen not
only provides therapeutic efficacy but also retains safety
in orthotopic HCC mice models.
The mechanisms of Dox-induced apoptosis in
normal and tumor cells are different [43]. Wang et al.
showed that Dox induces apoptosis through enhanced
23814

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Antitumor effect of eAFP-VISA-BikDD combined with Dox in an orthotopic syngeneic mouse model. A. Left,

ML-1 cells were orthotopically inoculated into the left liver lobe of BALB/c mice. One week after tumor inoculation, mice were randomly
divided into four groups for treatment. Mice received systemic intravenous injection of control vector or eAFP-VISA-BikDD encapsulated
in liposomes twice a week for four weeks. Dox (0.5 mg/kg) or normal saline was administered once a week by tail vein injection for four
weeks. Thirty-seven days after initial treatment, mice were sacrificed and liver tumors were dissected and weighed. Data represent mean
±SEM. N = 5. Representative images of tumor tissues from mice after the indicated treatment are shown on the right. B. Survival rate of
mice after the indicated treatment. n.s., not significant. C. Detection of apoptosis in liver tissues by TUNEL assays. Tissues collected from
(A) were fixed with 10% neutral buffered formalin, and TUNEL-positive cells were stained and counted from four randomly selected fields
per section. Arrows indicate TUNEL-positive apoptotic cells. Quantitation is shown below. Data represent mean ±SD.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23815

Oncotarget

Cell viability assay

p53 expression, leading to caspase 3 activation. A similar
phenomenon was also observed when Dox was combined
with p53 gene therapy in the treatment of HCC [44].
We did not detect wild-type p53 expression in HCC
cell lines after Dox treatment because all the HCC cell
lines (Huh7, Tong/HCC and PLC/PRF/5) that we used in
this study harbor mutant p53. Several studies have also
reported enhanced Bik expression in the presence of Dox
in various types of human cancers, such as melanoma,
lymphoma, and breast cancer [45–47]. However, the levels
of endogenous Bik in HCC cells remained undetectable
by Western blot analysis even with the addition of Dox.
Although our findings did not support the results from the
prior studies, the variation in Bik protein expression in
response to Dox is likely cell-type dependent. Our study
demonstrated that Dox plays a distinctly different role
in promoting BikDD-induced apoptosis by enhancing
the binding affinity of BikDD to anti-apoptotic proteins
although further studies will be required to delineate the
mechanism.
In summary, we demonstrated that the eAFPVISA-BikDD/Dox combination triggers mitochondriadependent cell apoptosis involving the activation of Bax
and caspases-3. Moreover, eAFP-VISA-BikDD sensitizes
HCC tumors to Dox treatment. Our findings suggest
that the eAFP-VISA-BikDD/Dox combination has great
potential as a treatment modality for advanced HCC.

WST-1 assay was performed to assess the killing
effect (cytotoxicity) of BikDD, chemotherapeutic agents,
or their combination according to the manufacturer’s
protocol (Roche Diagnostics, Mannhein, Germany). At
harvest, ten microliters of WST-1 reagent was added to
each well and incubated at 37°C for 3 hours. Absorbance
was taken at 450 nm and at 630 nm for the test and
background wavelength, respectively, by an ELISA
reader. Cell viability was expressed as the percentage
of absorbance of the treated cells relative to that of the
untreated control cells. The effect of the combination was
determined by calculating the combination index (CI) in
Calcusyn software using non-constant ratio combination
(Biosoft, Ferguson, MO). CI values > 1, = 1 and < 1
represent antagonism, additive effect and synergism,
respectively. Fraction affected (Fa) value indicates the
fraction of cell death after drug exposure such that a value
of 0.5 represents 50% of cell killing. The molar ratios of
eAFP-VISA-BikDD to Dox in HCC cells are shown in
Supplementary Table S3.

Flow cytometric analysis of DNA content
To detect DNA contents, cells were fixed in ice-cold
70% ethanol at 4°C overnight and then washed with icecold PBS twice prior to incubation with freshly prepared
propidium iodide (PI) staining solution containing 100
μg/ml RNaseA and 50 μg/ml PI at room temperature for
30 min. At the end of the incubation period, cells were
analyzed by flow cytometry.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell lines and reagents
HCC cell lines Huh7, PLC/PRF/5, and Tong/
HCC, were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagles’s
medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% FBS (Gibco
BRL, Rockville, MD) at 37°C with 5% CO2. THLE-2,
an immortalized normal liver cell line was provided by
Dr. Ya-Wen Chen (National Health Research Institutes,
Taiwan). The non-tumorigenic immortalized liver cell line
MIHA was kindly provided by Dr. Chowdhury (Albert
Einstein College of Medicine, New York). Doxorubicin
(Dox) and 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) were purchased from
Sigma Chemical Co. (St. Louis, MO).

Immunoprecipitation and Western blot analysis
Cells were lysed in 1% CHAPS lysis buffer
containing proteinase inhibitors for 10 min on ice. Cell
lysate was centrifuged at 12, 000 rpm for 10 min at 4°C
to collect supernatant for protein quantification. For
immunoprecipitation, an equivalent amount of protein
(500 μg) was incubated with anti-Nbk/Bik antibody
(Santa Cruz Biotechnology), anti-Bcl-xL (Cell Signaling
Technology) or anti-Mcl-1 (BD Pharmingen) overnight at
4°C. After incubation with protein A/G-Sepharose beads
on a rotating platform for 3 h, immune complexes were
washed with lysis buffer four times and then resuspended
in SDS-PAGE sample buffer. Finally, the samples were
denatured at 95~100°C for 5min and then separated by
SDS-PAGE. To detect the active form of Bax and Bak, the
supernatants were collected from 1st immunoprecipitation
with Bik antibody and then incubated with 1 μg of
anti-Bax (6A7; BD Pharmingen) or anti-Bak (AM03;
Calbiochem) antibody in 300 μl of CHAPS lysis buffer
at 4°C overnight. For Western blot analysis, an equal
amount of proteins (30 μg) from different lysates were
separated on 12~15% SDS-PAGE and then electroblotted
onto PVDF membrane. The blot was probed with the

Transfection and drug administration
Construction and purification of the pUK-eAFPVISA-BikDD expression plasmid was described
previously [26]. HCC cells seeded on 96-well plates at a
density of 5, 000 cells per well and then transfected with
pUK-eAFP-VISA-BikDD with the indicated plasmid
concentration by using extruding DOTAP:cholesterol
liposomes. Four hours after incubation, transfection
mixture was aspirated and then replaced by fresh
complete medium containing various concentrations of
chemotherapeutic drugs for an additional 72 hours.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23816

Oncotarget

following primary antibodies: anti-Bik (Santa Cruz
Biotechnology), anti-Mcl-1 (BD Pharmingen), anti-BclxL (Cell Signaling Technology), anti-Bax (Santa Cruz),
anti-Bak (Calbiochem), anti-cleaved caspase-3 (Cell
Signaling Technology) and α-tubulin (AC-74, SigmaAldrich) followed by horseradish peroxidase-conjugated
secondary antibodies. Active (cleaved) caspase-3, a maker
for apoptosis, consists of a large (17 kDa) and small (12
kDa) subunit derived from the inactive proenzyme. The
cleaved caspase-3 (Asp175) antibody used in this study
specifically recognizes the large fragment of activated
capsase-3 but not full-length caspase-3 or other cleaved
caspases. The anti-Bik polyclonal antibody recognizes
both wild-type and mutant Bik. All membranes were
detected by the ECL chemiluminescence reaction (GE
Healthcare Life Sciences).

Mountain View, CA) was performed according to the
manufacturer’s instructions with some modification.
Briefly, after deparaffinization and rehydration, tissue
sections were permeabilized by proteinase K at RT for
15 min. The slides were washed by PBS twice then
immersed in 3% H2O2/methanol for 5 min to quench
the endogenous peroxidase activity. After completion
of TdT-end labeling, tissue sections were placed in 2X
SSC for 15 min at room temperature to terminate the TdT
enzyme reactions and washed twice in PBS. The sections
were sequentially incubated with antibody solution and
conjugate. Finally, the slides were developed in 3, 3′
diaminobenzidine (DAB) chromogen and counterstained
with methyl green. The mean of TUNEL-positive cells
was calculated by counting cells from four random fields
for each sample.

Subcellular fractionation

Statistical analyses

Cells were harvested at indicated time points
and lysed in mitochondria lysis buffer with a Dounce
homogenizer until about 90% cells were broken. The
homogenate was centrifuged at 1, 000 g to pellet the nuclei
and unbroken cells. The supernatant was collected and
then subjected to centrifugation at 10, 000 g for 30 min
at 4°C to pellet mitochondria-enriched heavy membrane
fraction. The final supernatant was further centrifuged at
100, 000 g for 60 min at 4°C to obtain cytosolic fraction.

All data were representative of at least three
independent experiments. All P values were analyzed by
student’s t-test except for calculation of survival time.
Survival curves were calculated by Kaplan-Meier method
and compared using the log-rank test (SPSS software). A
P value < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Dr. Jennifer L. Hsu for editing the
manuscript.

Combination treatment in orthotopic animal models
Five-week-old male severe-combined immune
deficient (SCID) or BALB/c mice were purchased from
BioLASCO Company (Yi Lan, Taiwan, ROC) and were
housed in a specific pathogen free condition at China Medical
University Laboratory Animal Center. Food and water were
available ad libitum. All animal experiments were approved
by the Laboratory Animal Care and Use Committee of the
China Medical University. After anesthesia, mice underwent
median laparotomy. Huh7 (5 x 105) or ML-1 cell (105) were
inoculated into the subcapsular parenchyma of the left liver
lobe by an insulin syringe (Terumo, Elkton, MD). One week
after inoculation, mice were randomly assigned to 4 groups.
To evaluate the combination therapy, mice were administered
DNA/ liposome complex (20 μg) twice per week and then
Dox (0.5 mg/kg) once per week by tail vein injection for a
total of 4 weeks. Tumor growth was monitored weekly by
in vivo Imaging System (Xenogen). Thirty-seven days after
the initial treatment, all mice were sacrificed and liver tumors
dissected and weighed.

FUNDING
This work was supported by the following
grants: Ministry of Science and Technology (NSC102–
2321-B-039–002 and NSC102–2325-B-039–002 to
L.-Y.L.); Ministry of Health & Welfare (MOHW102-TDPB-111-NSC105 and MOHW103-TDU-PB-211–122027
to L.-Y.L.); Cancer Prevention and Research Institute of
Texas (ETRA RP120727, to M.-C.H.). In memoriam, Mr.
Tiong Loi Ang for his courageous battle against cancer.

CONFLICTS OF INTERESTS
Mien-Chie Hung has ownership interest (including
patents) for BikDD. All other authors have no conflicts of
interest to declare.

REFERENCES

Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP
nick end labeling (TUNEL) assay

1.	 Schwartz M, Roayaie S, Konstadoulakis M. Strategies for
the management of hepatocellular carcinoma. Nature clinical practice Oncology. 2007; 4:424–432.

To investigate cell apoptosis induced by various
treatments, an in situ TUNEL assay (BioVision,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23817

Oncotarget

2.	 El-Serag HB, Marrero JA, Rudolph L, Reddy KR.
Diagnosis and treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma.
Gastroenterology. 2008; 134:1752–1763.

15.	 Luo D, Cheng SC, Xie H, Xie Y. Chemosensitivity of
human hepatocellular carcinoma cell line QGY-7703 is
related to bcl-2 protein levels. Tumour biology : the journal
of the International Society for Oncodevelopmental Biology
and Medicine. 1999; 20:331–340.

3.	 Han KH, Park JY. Chemotherapy for advanced hepatocellular carcinoma. Journal of gastroenterology and hepatology.
2008; 23:682–684.

16.	 Watanabe J, Kushihata F, Honda K, Sugita A, Tateishi N,
Mominoki K, Matsuda S, Kobayashi N. Prognostic significance of Bcl-xL in human hepatocellular carcinoma.
Surgery. 2004; 135:604–612.

4.	 Tanikawa K. Chemotherapy for highly advanced hepatocellular carcinoma. Journal of gastroenterology and hepatology. 2001; 16:361–362.

17.	 Radetzki S, Kohne CH, von Haefen C, Gillissen B, Sturm
I, Dorken B, Daniel PT. The apoptosis promoting Bcl-2
homologues Bak and Nbk/Bik overcome drug resistance
in Mdr-1-negative and Mdr-1-overexpressing breast cancer
cell lines. Oncogene. 2002; 21:227–238.

5.	 Brown KS. Chemotherapy and other systemic therapies for
hepatocellular carcinoma and liver metastases. Seminars in
Interventional Radiology. 2006; 23:99–108.
6.	 Topp ZZ, Sigal DS. Beyond chemotherapy: systemic treatment options for hepatocellular carcinoma. Translational
Cancer Research. 2013; 2:482–491.

18.	 Gillissen B, Essmann F, Graupner V, Starck L, Radetzki S,
Dorken B, Schulze-Osthoff K, Daniel PT. Induction of cell
death by the BH3-only Bcl-2 homolog Nbk/Bik is mediated
by an entirely Bax-dependent mitochondrial pathway. The
EMBO journal. 2003; 22:3580–3590.

7.	 Sopo M, Anttila M, Sallinen H, Tuppurainen L, Laurema A,
Laidinen S, Hamalainen K, Tuunanen P, Koponen JK,
Kosma VM, Heinonen S, Alitalo K, Yla-Herttuala S.
Antiangiogenic gene therapy with soluble VEGF-receptors
-1, -2 and -3 together with paclitaxel prolongs survival of
mice with human ovarian carcinoma. International journal of
cancer Journal international du cancer. 2012; 131:2394–2401.

19.	 Chinnadurai G, Vijayalingam S, Rashmi R. BIK, the founding member of the BH3-only family proteins: mechanisms
of cell death and role in cancer and pathogenic processes.
Oncogene. 2008; 27:S20–29.

8.	 Lin T, Zhang L, Davis J, Gu J, Nishizaki M, Ji L, Roth JA,
Xiong M, Fang B. Combination of TRAIL gene therapy
and chemotherapy enhances antitumor and antimetastasis effects in chemosensitive and chemoresistant breast
cancers. Molecular therapy : the journal of the American
Society of Gene Therapy. 2003; 8:441–448.

20.	 Gillissen B, Essmann F, Hemmati PG, Richter A, Richter
A, Oztop I, Chinnadurai G, Dorken B, Daniel PT. Mcl-1
determines the Bax dependency of Nbk/Bik-induced apoptosis. The Journal of cell biology. 2007; 179:701–715.
21.	 Jiao S, Wu M, Ye F, Tang H, Xie X. BikDDA, a mutant of
Bik with longer half-life expression protein, can be a novel
therapeutic gene for triple-negative breast cancer. PloS one.
2014; 9:e92172.

9.	 Li D, Zhang Y, Xie Y, Xiang J, Zhu Y, Yang J. Enhanced
tumor suppression by adenoviral PTEN gene therapy combined with cisplatin chemotherapy in small-cell lung cancer.
Cancer gene therapy. 2013; 20:251–259.

22.	 Verma S, Zhao LJ, Chinnadurai G. Phosphorylation of the
pro-apoptotic protein BIK: mapping of phosphorylation
sites and effect on apoptosis. The Journal of biological
chemistry. 2001; 276:4671–4676.

10.	 Zhang M, Garbuzenko OB, Reuhl KR, RodriguezRodriguez L, Minko T. Two-in-one: combined targeted
chemo and gene therapy for tumor suppression and prevention of metastases. Nanomedicine (Lond). 2012; 7:185–197.

23.	 Li YM, Wen Y, Zhou BP, Kuo HP, Ding Q, Hung MC.
Enhancement of Bik antitumor effect by Bik mutants.
Cancer research. 2003; 63:7630–7633.

11.	 Cristofanilli M, Krishnamurthy S, Guerra L, Broglio K,
Arun B, Booser DJ, Menander K, Van Wart Hood J, Valero
V, Hortobagyi GN. A nonreplicating adenoviral vector that
contains the wild-type p53 transgene combined with chemotherapy for primary breast cancer: safety, efficacy, and
biologic activity of a novel gene-therapy approach. Cancer.
2006; 107:935–944.

24.	 Sher YP, Tzeng TF, Kan SF, Hsu J, Xie X, Han Z, Lin WC,
Li LY, Hung MC. Cancer targeted gene therapy of BikDD
inhibits orthotopic lung cancer growth and improves longterm survival. Oncogene. 2009; 28:3286–3295.
25.	 Xie X, Xia W, Li Z, Kuo HP, Liu Y, Li Z, Ding Q, Zhang
S, Spohn B, Yang Y, Wei Y, Lang JY, Evans DB, Chiao PJ,
Abbruzzese JL, Hung MC. Targeted expression of BikDD
eradicates pancreatic tumors in noninvasive imaging models. Cancer cell. 2007; 12:52–65.

12.	 Fernandez-Luna JL. Regulation of pro-apoptotic BH3-only
proteins and its contribution to cancer progression and chemoresistance. Cellular signalling. 2008; 20:1921–1926.
13.	 Takehara T, Liu X, Fujimoto J, Friedman SL, Takahashi
H. Expression and role of Bcl-xL in human hepatocellular
carcinomas. Hepatology. 2001; 34:55–61.

26.	 Li LY, Dai HY, Yeh FL, Kan SF, Lang J, Hsu JL, Jeng LB,
Chen YH, Sher YP, Lin WC, Hung MC. Targeted hepatocellular carcinoma proapoptotic BikDD gene therapy.
Oncogene. 2011; 30:1773–1783.

14.	 Chun E, Lee KY. Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL are important for the
induction of paclitaxel resistance in human hepatocellular
carcinoma cells. Biochemical and biophysical research
communications. 2004; 315:771–779.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27.	 Chou TC, Talalay P. Quantitative analysis of dose-effect
relationships: the combined effects of multiple drugs or
23818

Oncotarget

enzyme inhibitors. Advances in enzyme regulation. 1984;
22:27–55.

39.	 Kamat AA, Kim TJ, Landen CN Jr, Lu C, Han LY, Lin
YG, Merritt WM, Thaker PH, Gershenson DM, Bischoff
FZ, Heymach JV, Jaffe RB, Coleman RL, Sood AK.
Metronomic chemotherapy enhances the efficacy of antivascular therapy in ovarian cancer. Cancer research. 2007;
67:281–288.

28.	 Smith L, Watson MB, O’Kane SL, Drew PJ, Lind MJ,
Cawkwell L. The analysis of doxorubicin resistance in
human breast cancer cells using antibody microarrays.
Molecular cancer therapeutics. 2006; 5:2115–2120.

40.	 Orlando L, Cardillo A, Rocca A, Balduzzi A, Ghisini R,
Peruzzotti G, Goldhirsch A, D’Alessandro C, Cinieri S,
Preda L, Colleoni M. Prolonged clinical benefit with metronomic chemotherapy in patients with metastatic breast
cancer. Anti-cancer drugs. 2006; 17:961–967.

29.	 Minotti G, Menna P, Salvatorelli E, Cairo G, Gianni L.
Anthracyclines: molecular advances and pharmacologic
developments in antitumor activity and cardiotoxicity.
Pharmacological Reviews. 2004; 56:185–229.
30.	 Greene RF, Collins JM, Jenkins JF, Speyer JL, Myers CE.
Plasma pharmacokinetics of adriamycin and adriamycinol:
implications for the design of in vitro experiments and treatment protocols. Cancer research. 1983; 43:3417–3421.

41.	 Correale P, Cerretani D, Remondo C, Martellucci I, Marsili
S, La Placa M, Sciandivasci A, Paolelli L, Pascucci A,
Rossi M, Di Bisceglie M, Giorgi G, Gotti G, Francini G. A
novel metronomic chemotherapy regimen of weekly platinum and daily oral etoposide in high-risk non-small cell
lung cancer patients. Oncology reports. 2006; 16:133–140.

31.	 Finch RE, Bending MR, Lant AF. Plasma levels of 5fluorouracil after oral and intravenous administration in cancer patients. British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology. 1979;
7:613–617.

42.	 Bocci G, Tuccori M, Emmenegger U, Liguori V, Falcone A,
Kerbel RS, Del Tacca M. Cyclophosphamide-methotrexate
‘metronomic’ chemotherapy for the palliative treatment of metastatic breast cancer. A comparative pharmacoeconomic evaluation. Annals of oncology : official journal of the European
Society for Medical Oncology / ESMO. 2005; 16:1243–1252.

32.	 Findlay MP, Raynaud F, Cunningham D, Iveson A, Collins
DJ, Leach MO. Measurement of plasma 5-fluorouracil by
high-performance liquid chromatography with comparison
of results to tissue drug levels observed using in vivo 19F
magnetic resonance spectroscopy in patients on a protracted
venous infusion with or without interferon-alpha. Annals
of oncology : official journal of the European Society for
Medical Oncology / ESMO. 1996; 7:47–53.

43.	 Wang S, Konorev EA, Kotamraju S, Joseph J, Kalivendi S,
Kalyanaraman B. Doxorubicin induces apoptosis in normal
and tumor cells via distinctly different mechanisms. intermediacy of H(2)O(2)- and p53-dependent pathways. The
Journal of biological chemistry. 2004; 279:25535–25543.

33.	 Saif MW, Choma A, Salamone SJ, Chu E.
Pharmacokinetically guided dose adjustment of 5-fluorouracil: a rational approach to improving therapeutic
outcomes. Journal of the National Cancer Institute. 2009;
101:1543–1552.

44.	 Xu Q, Leong J, Chua QY, Chi YT, Chow PK, Pack DW,
Wang CH. Combined modality doxorubicin-based chemotherapy and chitosan-mediated p53 gene therapy using
double-walled microspheres for treatment of human hepatocellular carcinoma. Biomaterials. 2013; 34:5149–5162.

34.	 Shimazu T, Degenhardt K, Nur EKA, Zhang J, Yoshida T,
Zhang Y, Mathew R, White E, Inouye M. NBK/BIK antagonizes MCL-1 and BCL-XL and activates BAK-mediated
apoptosis in response to protein synthesis inhibition. Genes
& development. 2007; 21:929–941.

45.	 Panaretakis T, Pokrovskaja K, Shoshan MC, Grander D.
Activation of Bak, Bax, and BH3-only proteins in the apoptotic response to doxorubicin. The Journal of biological
chemistry. 2002; 277:44317–44326.

35.	 Li CH, Chen PY, Chang UM, Kan LS, Fang WH, Tsai KS,
Lin SB. Ganoderic acid X, a lanostanoid triterpene, inhibits
topoisomerases and induces apoptosis of cancer cells. Life
sciences. 2005; 77:252–265.

46.	 Hur J, Bell DW, Dean KL, Coser KR, Hilario PC, Okimoto
RA, Tobey EM, Smith SL, Isselbacher KJ, Shioda T.
Regulation of expression of BIK proapoptotic protein in
human breast cancer cells: p53-dependent induction of BIK
mRNA by fulvestrant and proteasomal degradation of BIK
protein. Cancer research. 2006; 66:10153–10161.

36.	 Scharovsky OG, Mainetti LE, Rozados VR. Metronomic
chemotherapy: changing the paradigm that more is better.
Current Oncology. 2009; 16:7–15.
37.	 Shiraga E, Barichello JM, Ishida T, Kiwada H. A metronomic schedule of cyclophosphamide combined with
PEGylated liposomal doxorubicin has a highly antitumor
effect in an experimental pulmonary metastatic mouse model.
International Journal of Pharmaceutics. 2008; 353:65–73.

47.	 Stravopodis DJ, Karkoulis PK, Konstantakou EG,
Melachroinou S, Lampidonis AD, Anastasiou D, Kachrilas
S, Messini-Nikolaki N, Papassideri IS, Aravantinos G,
Margaritis LH, Voutsinas GE. Grade-dependent effects on
cell cycle progression and apoptosis in response to doxorubicin in human bladder cancer cell lines. International journal of oncology. 2009; 34:137–160.

38.	 Gasparini G. Metronomic scheduling: the future of chemotherapy? The lancet oncology. 2001; 2:733–740.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23819

Oncotarget

