Review

Nuclear Factor-KB, an Unappreciated Tumor Suppressor
Fei Chen and Vince Castranova
The Health Effects Laboratory Division, National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, Morgantown, West Virginia

Abstract
The notion that nuclear factor-KB (NF-KB) is a tumorpromoting transcription factor has become a widely accepted
dogma in biology. However, recent findings suggest an
inhibitory role for NF-KB in carcinogenesis and tumorigenesis.
Although the tumor suppressor–like effect of NF-KB remains
to be rigorously established by further studies using cellular
and animal models, these latest findings warrant caution with
respect to blockage of NF-KB activation as a broad strategy
in treating cancers. [Cancer Res 2007;67(23):11093–8]

Introduction
Nuclear factor-nB (NF-nB) is a transcription factor important for
the expression of numerous genes contributing to inflammation
and innate and adaptive immune responses. The most common
form of NF-nB is the p50/RelA heterodimer, although other forms
of NF-nB dimers, such as p50/p50, p52/p52, p52/RelA, p50/c-Rel,
c-Rel/c-Rel, p52/RelB, and p50/RelB, have also been identified in
some types of cells (1). In resting state, this transcription factor
is inactive and retained in cytoplasm by binding to its inhibitory
proteins such as InBa, InBh, and InBq, among which InBa is the
most abundant. A plethora of intracellular and extracellular cues
that influence signaling pathways, which integrate ubiquitination,
oligomerization, and phosphorylation, induce activation of InB
kinase (IKK) complexes containing IKKa, IKKh, and NEMO/IKKg
subunits. Phosphorylation of InBa by IKK causes ubiquitination
and proteasomal degradation of InBa, leading to liberation and
translocation of NF-nB into the nucleus where it regulates gene
expression through binding to the nB elements in the enhancer or
promoter regions of the genes. Regulation of NF-nB occurs at
several different hierarchical levels. The activation of this
transcription factor is affected by a number of parallel signaling
pathways that cross-talk with NF-nB–activating signal cascades
either positively or negatively. In the nucleus, the translocated
NF-nB undergoes several different modifications of its subunits,
including phosphorylation, acetylation, and ubiquitination. In
addition, the nuclear NEMO/IKKg may be modified by SUMO for
the subsequent ATM-dependent phosphorylation and monoubiquitination of NEMO/IKKg to amplify genotoxic stress–induced
NF-nB activation. The transcriptional activity of NF-nB is further
influenced by a number of other variables such as local
concentrations of different NF-nB dimers, redox status of NF-nB
subunits, the nature of its partners, fidelity of canonical nB
elements, distance of its binding sites from the start site of
transcription, neighboring transcription factor binding sites, the

Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research Online
(http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Requests for reprints: Fei Chen, The Health Effects Laboratory Division, National
Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, 1095 Willowdale Road, Morgantown, WV
26505. Phone: 304-285-6021; E-mail: fchen@cdc.gov.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-1576

www.aacrjournals.org

accessibility of nB sites based on the degree of histone H3 and H4
acetylation and methylation in the nearby chromatin structure, the
methylation status of proximal CpG islands, and/or other
idiosyncrasies of target promoters.

NF-KB and Tumor Promotion
The primary role of NF-nB is to maintain normal cellular
functions that range from cell-to-cell communication to cell
motility, cell cycle progression, and cell lineage development (1).
Earlier evidence suggests that aberrant activation of NF-nB or its
upstream signaling pathways is responsible for the initiation of
tumorigenesis including evasion of apoptosis, malignant transformation, sustained cell proliferation, metastasis, and angiogenesis
(1). A group of antiapoptotic genes, including Bcl-xL, cIAP1, cIAP2,
XIAP, A20, c-FLIP, and TRAF-2, can be up-regulated by NF-nB,
leading to protection of the cells from apoptosis in response to a
variety of DNA-damaging signals. A sustained activation of NF-nB
contributes to the expression of proto-oncogenes including c-myc
and cyclin D1, which are accountable for both transformation
initiation and tumorigenic proliferation. The capacity of NF-nB to
induce expression of cell adhesion molecules, vascular endothelial
growth factors (VEGF), and matrix metalloproteinases (MMP)
promotes the metastatic potential of tumor cells. The linkage
between tumorigenesis and chronic inflammation, in which NF-nB
plays a pivotal role in the expression of numerous inflammatory
cytokines and other mediators, has been well established (1). Most
recently, NF-nB has also been implicated in the transcriptional upregulation of microRNA-155 (miR-155), an oncogenic miRNA that
was derived from B-cell integration cluster (BIC) gene and highly
expressed in some lymphatic tumors, breast cancer, lung cancer,
and colon cancer (2). The majority of miRNAs inhibit expression of
genes through siRNA-mediated mRNA silencing, 3-untranslated
region–dependent translational interference, and miRNA machinery–induced heterochromatin formation. In contrast, miR-155
stimulates expression of the antiapoptotic cytokines through
unknown mechanisms (2). Furthermore, either gain of functional
mutations of NF-nB family members or constitutive activation of
NF-nB has frequently been observed in many human cancers.
In addition to the transcriptional regulation of the antiapoptotic
genes and growth factors by NF-nB, the upstream kinases of NF-nB,
IKKa and IKKh, are able to modulate cell growth and antiapoptotic responses in a NF-nB–independent manner. IKKa has
previously been shown to be capable of phosphorylating histone
H3 serine 10 (H3S10p), which is usually associated with the active
gene transcription markers, such as trimethylation of the histone
H3 lysine 4 (H3K4me3) and acetylation of H3K9 and H3K14. It is
generally viewed that active gene transcription is essential for a
sustained cell proliferation. IKKa is also capable of phosphorylating SMRT, a transcriptional repressor of Notch-regulated genes,
leading to the release of SMRT from the chromatin and the
expression of Notch-targeting genes that are important for the
growth of the colorectal tumors (3). An additional interesting
observation is that IKKa can form a complex with Aurora A and

11093

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (23). December 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Plk1 kinases at the centrosome (4). Phosphorylation of Aurora A
kinase at threonine 288 in the T-loop by IKKa seems to be one
of the critical biochemical events required for the completion of
mitosis. Unlike IKKa, IKKh is unable to phosphorylate histone H3,
SMRT, and Aurora A. However, phosphorylation of FoxO3a, a proapoptotic transcription factor, and HDAC1, a repressive histone
deacetylase (HDAC), by IKKh is regarded as a pivotal mechanism
for IKKh-induced tumorigenesis (5). The phosphorylation of
FoxO3a and HDAC1 by IKKh promotes degradation of these two
proteins through the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. Most recently,
IKKh has also been shown to be capable of phosphorylating
tuberous sclerosis 1 (TSC1; ref. 6). TSC1 associates with TSC2 to
form a tumor suppressor complex by repressing the mammalian
target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway. Phosphorylation of TSC1 by
IKKh disrupts the formation of TSC1 and TSC2 complex, leading to
sustained activation of mTOR signaling that contributes to tumor
angiogenesis.
Taken together, it seems to be likely that NF-nB and its upstream
activating signals are important contributors to the tumorigenesis
by their ability to regulate the expression and/or function of
oncogenes, growth factors, antiapoptotic proteins, mitotic kinases,
and the transcriptional repressors. Thus, inhibition of NF-nB or its
upstream kinases in combination with established cytocidal drugs
and therapeutic radiation seems to be a promising strategy for
cancer therapy. In addition, such inhibition should also be
beneficial in preventing malignant transformation of the normal
cells and the uncontrolled growth of the tumor cells in the earlier
phases of tumorigenesis.

NF-KB Acts as a Tumor Suppressor in Collaboration
with p53
The topic of NF-nB in tumor promotion has extensively been
reviewed in the past (1). However, this general view suggesting that
NF-nB is a tumor promoter is increasingly complicated or
challenged by recent evidence indicating the tumor suppressor–
like effects of NF-nB under many circumstances. Yet the hypothesis
that NF-nB is potentially involved in tumor suppression is not
completely ill-conceived. One of the earliest suggestions of a
possible tumor-suppressing effect of NF-nB was the proapoptotic
function of c-Rel and RelA in T cells, B cells, fibroblasts, 293 cells,
neuronal cells, and HeLa cells. In these cells, overexpression of
these subunits induces apoptosis in response to death stimuli,
whereas inhibition of NF-nB protects these cells from apoptosis. It
was suggested that NF-nB was capable of inducing expression of
p53, Fas, FasL, Bax, c-myc, DR4, DR5, and Bcl-xS, which are actively
involved in the promotion of cell apoptosis, thereby facilitating
tumor cell death. NF-nB is also implicated in the up-regulation of
the tumor suppressor CYLD, a deubiquitinase that terminates
NF-nB signaling and enhances cell death through removal of K63polyubiquitin chains from NEMO/IKKg and TRAF-6. An intriguing
observation is that NF-nB seems to be an essential component in
mediating p53-induced cell death in a cellular system where p53
was overexpressed. Inhibition of NF-nB by transfection of the cells
with a degradation-resistant InBa abrogates p53-mediated apoptosis. Further studies suggested that genetic deficiency of NF-nB
RelA has similar effects on apoptotic resistance and tumorigenic
transformation induced by E1a and Ras as loss of p53. Identifying
how NF-nB cooperates with p53 in this apoptotic response seems
to be a difficult task due to the fact that p53 has been implicated in
the regulation of not only cell apoptosis but cell cycle arrest and

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (23). December 1, 2007

metabolism as well. In addition, the hypothesis that NF-nB is
required for p53-induced apoptosis had been challenged by the fact
that NF-nB signaling antagonizes the function and stability of p53
protein in a variety of cellular models (7). There is also additional
evidence showing mutual antagonism between the NF-nB RelA
subunit and p53 through competition for limited pools of
coactivators, in which IKKa-mediated phosphorylation of cyclic
AMP–responsive element binding protein–binding protein (CBP)
switches CBP from p53 binding to NF-nB binding. CBP is a p300
homologue histone acetyltransferase that is able to induce
transcription initiation by acetylating histone proteins,
NF-nB RelA subunit, and other transcription factors. Studies by
Perkins and associates (8) implied that the NF-nB family member
p52 might be responsible for mediating p53-induced cell death.
Activation of p53 has been proposed to tip a switch from NF-nB
p52-Bcl-3, an activator complex, to p52-HDAC, a repressor
complex. This exchange from activator to repressor can result in
the inhibition of cyclin D, a crucial factor promoting cell growth
and cell cycle transition. Furthermore, NF-nB p100, which
generates mature p52 protein, has been shown to be able to
sensitize cells to death receptor–mediated apoptosis through
recruitment of the death machinery complexes in several cell
lines. In agreement with this notion, NF-nB p52 subunit has also
been shown to be capable of interacting with p53 directly to
mediate the expression of p53 target genes such as PUMA, DR5,
GADD45a, and Chk1, all of which are important for p53-induced
apoptosis. Finally, the upstream kinase of NF-nB, IKKa, may be
involved in p53-mediated cellular responses by either stabilizing
p53 family protein, p73, or fostering expression of 14-3-3r, a p53targeting gene (9, 10). Physical interaction of the nuclear IKKa with
p73 leads to accumulation of p73 and an enhanced cell apoptosis
induced by cisplatin. The stabilization of p73 by IKKa is dependent
on the IKKa kinase activity that is capable of phosphorylating p73
and consequently preventing p73 from ubiquitination and
proteasomal degradation. The expression of 14-3-3j was diminished in Ikka / keratinocytes because of lysine 9 trimethylation
of histone H3 and DNA methylation in the promoter region of
the 14-3-3r gene. Reintroduction of Ikka prevents associations of
lysine 9 trimethylase SUV39h1 and DNA methylase Dnmt3a with the
14-3-3r locus, leading to derepression of the 14-3-3r gene (10).
Although the fact that NF-nB or its upstream signaling promotes
apoptosis has been relegated to the background by a large volume of
literature showing an antiapoptotic effect of NF-nB, a proapoptotic
role of NF-nB has been resurrected in several newer studies.

Tumor Suppressor–like Effects of NF-KB in
Epidermal Cells
The first evidence directly linking NF-nB to tumor suppression
was from experiments with murine and human epidermis
transgenic for InBa protein that inhibits NF-nB (11). Functional
blockade of NF-nB in epidermal cells resulted in severe hyperplasia
of the skin in transgenic mice, which could be reversed by
overexpression of active p50 and RelA subunits of NF-nB,
suggesting the tumor-suppressive effect of NF-nB. The epidermal
cells from these skin-targeted transgenic mice showed an
aggressive growth pattern with a marked increase in DNA
synthesis. A follow-up study suggested that the hyperplastic skin
lesions, which resembled human squamous cell carcinomas, were
possibly a compensatory secondary response to keratinocyte
apoptosis owing to permanent inhibition of NF-nB in these cells.

11094

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

NF-kB and Tumor Suppression

The compensatory proliferation due to apoptosis was further
confirmed in retrovirally transduced human keratinocytes expressing NF-nB RelA or InBa in the presence of active Ha-Ras. Without
coexpression of the active Ha-Ras Gly12Val mutant, sustained
inhibition of NF-nB by expression of InBa caused mild hyperplasia.
Ras-InBa coexpression produced invasive large neoplasms, which
partially resulted from increased expression of MMP3, cyclindependent kinase 4 (CDK4), and telomere maintenance enzyme
hTERT. However, several questions remain to be answered. For
instance, it is still unclear how NF-nB inhibition increases
expression of MMP3, CDK4, and hTERT. Is NF-nB a negative
transcriptional regulator for the expression of these genes? What is
the underlying mechanism mediating keratinocyte apoptosisinduced compensatory overproliferation?
An inverse correlation between the expression levels of IKKa, an
upstream kinase contributing to the NF-nB2/p100 processing–
based alternative activation of NF-nB, and the aggressiveness of
squamous cell carcinomas was recently shown (12). In a transgenic
mouse model, overexpression of IKKa in suprabasal and basal
epidermis significantly delays onset and metastasis of carcinogeninduced skin carcinomas, possibly a result of repression in cell
mitosis and angiogenesis. An intriguing finding from this study is
that IKKa binds to the distal VEGF-A promoter with the
consequent inhibition of VEGF-A expression. IKKa had previously
been shown to be capable of phosphorylating serine 10 of histone
H3 (H3S10p). H3S10p usually acts in collaboration with another
active gene transcription marker, trimethyl lysine 4 of histone H3
(H3K4me3), in the euchromatin region of the nucleosome, to
regulate gene expression. It will be interesting to study how IKKa
binding to the promoter DNA of the VEGF-A gene suppresses the
expression of VEGF-A.

Tumor Suppressor–like Effects of NF-KB in Other
Type of Cells
Most studies revealing a tumor-suppressive effect of NF-nB
were from transgenic inhibition of NF-nB in skin cells, giving the
impression that this tumor suppressor–like function of NF-nB
occurred predominantly in epidermal cells. Since 2006, however,
several groups reported additional evidence implying that NF-nB
signaling or activity is indeed involved in tumor suppression in
other experimental systems including endothelial cells (13),
mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEF; ref. 14), and Drosophila
tracheal epithelial cells (15). The basic issue addressed by
Kisseleva et al. (13) is how NF-nB regulates endothelial cell
function, angiogenesis, and tumor metastasis based on endothelial cell specific transgenic expression of InBa in mice. Despite
the observation indicating that such inhibition of NF-nB
sensitizes endothelial cells to lipopolysaccharide-induced apoptosis, the endothelial cells in which NF-nB activation was abrogated
exhibited an increased angiogenic potential. This effect seemed
to produce a marked increase in tumor burden and metastasis of
the inoculated melanoma due to an extensive tumor vasculature
in the transgenic mice. A major drawback of animal models is
the intertwining complexity of interactions between the transgenic cells and the surrounding cells or tissues. It is usually
difficult, therefore, to differentiate the autonomous response of
transgenic cells from the compensatory reaction of bystander
cells. This problem can be possibly circumvented by the use of
homologous cells. Indeed, using MEFs derived from wild-type
(wt) and Ikkb gene knockout mice, our recent study suggests that

www.aacrjournals.org

Ikkb / MEFs exhibit a high rate of proliferation, migration, and
invasion (14). The Ikkb / cells also showed alterations in
cytoskeleton rearrangement and cell morphology, similar to the
cells undergoing epithelial-mesenchymal transition during tumorigenesis. IKKh is a key upstream kinase responsible for the
canonical activation of NF-nB. Deficiency in the Ikkb gene results
in severe inhibition of the basal or inflammation-induced
activation of NF-nB. Thus, NF-nB or its upstream kinase seems
to be important for the maintenance of normal cell morphology
and function. Accordingly, cells with interrupted NF-nB signaling
acquire transformed phenotypes spontaneously. One argument is
that MEFs themselves are genetically unstable and heterogeneous. They are derived from mesenchymal stem cells, which are
multipotent and capable of differentiating into either mesodermtype lineages or non–mesoderm-type lineages. The question to be
asked is why it is that although MEFs are pluripotent, only
Ikkb / MEFs, but not wt MEFs, acquire characteristics of
transformative cells during culture and passage. In fact, this
transformative phenotype occurred not only in Ikkb / MEFs but
in relA / MEFs as well (16), indicative of the role of NF-nB in
maintaining genomic stability. The transformative potential of
the relA-deficient MEFs seems to be partially dependent on the
compensating expression of NF-nB p50/p50 homodimers among
different relA / isolates (16). The relA / MEFs with a relatively
higher level of p50/p50 homodimer are capable of undergoing
transformation, whereas the relA / MEFs with a lower level of
p50/p50 homodimer seem to be morphologically normal.
Furthermore, a striking similarity in changes of cell morphology,
cytoskeleton, and mobility was seen in Drosophila S2 cells and
tracheal epithelial cells in which IKKq, a possible alternative
kinase for activating Drosophila NF-nB Dorsal/Dif system, was
diminished (15). IKKq inactivation, either by expression of a
kinase-mutated IKKq or transfection with IKKq siRNA, fosters cell
morphology alterations as seen in Ikkb / and relA / MEFs.

NF-KB Acts as a Tumor Suppressor in Liver Cancer
Recent studies on the mouse models of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) have taken a step further in defining the tumorsuppressive or tumor-promoting functions of NF-nB. Mice with
hepatocyte-specific Ikkb gene knockout exhibited a marked
increase in HCC induced by diethylnitrosamine, a chemical
carcinogen, correlating with enhanced reactive oxygen species
(ROS) production and c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase (JNK) activation
(17). The importance of JNK signaling in carcinogen-induced HCC
has previously been shown based on the fact that hepatocytespecific deletion of c-Jun or JNK1 minimized the carcinogenic
potential of chemical carcinogens. In agreement with this notion,
treatment of the mice carrying hepatocyte-specific Ikkb gene
deletion with butylated hydroxyanisole, an established antioxidant
that removes ROS and inhibits JNK activation, ameliorated the
onset of HCC. Surprising results have also been obtained from
studies on mice with hepatocyte-specific deletion of NEMO/IKKg
(18). The time scale of HCC development in mice with hepatocytespecific deficiency in NF-nB signaling seems to be correlated with
the degree of NF-nB inhibition. Partial inhibition of NF-nB by
hepatocyte-specific deletion of Ikkb did not cause spontaneous
HCC. The HCC, as well as JNK activation, in mouse liver could be
seen only after applying a chemical carcinogen to these mice for
several months. On the other hand, severe or complete inhibition of
NF-nB in parenchymal cells, as achieved by hepatocyte-specific

11095

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (23). December 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

deletion of NEMO/IKKg, resulted in spontaneous HCC development and JNK activation without additional carcinogen treatment
(18). Thus, these latest findings clearly support the hypothesis that
NF-nB can play a tumor suppressor–like role in MEFs, mouse or
human skin cancer models, and mouse liver cancer models.

Tumor Suppression by NF-KB Is Attributed to JNK
Inhibition
How might loss of function of NF-nB actually foster early
abnormal cell growth and/or clonal expansion in the early phase
of tumorigenesis? It is difficult to identify molecules mediating
the tumor suppressor–like function of NF-nB. These molecules possibly affect several aspects of cell cycle, cell death,
signal transduction, or carcinogenic transformation. In addition, a number of other transcription factors, structural proteins,
metabolic enzymes, and proteins involved in the biochemical

operation of the cells have been shown to be effectors of NF-nB
activation. One of the very likely targets of NF-nB in tumor
suppression is JNK, a versatile kinase that is able to phosphorylate a number of proteins contributing to both apoptotic and
antiapoptotic responses. A sustained activation of JNK gives rise
to a cellular growth advantage, resulting in progressive and
uncontrolled proliferation, a general feature of tumor cells. The
earliest evidence supporting JNK inhibition by NF-nB is from
transient transfection of the kinase-mutated IKKh into the
human bronchial epithelial cells, in which an enhanced JNK
activation was observed following IKKh-NF-nB inhibition (19).
This observation was supported by later reports showing
elevation of stress signal–induced JNK activation in either
Ikkb / or relA / MEFs. A substantial enhancement of JNK
activation by tumor necrosis factor a (TNFa) was observed in
the cells where NF-nB was deficient due to genetic interruption
of the Ikkb or relA gene. Reexpression of the corresponding

Figure 1. A, NF-nB inhibition induces carcinogenesis in liver or other organs. In the liver cancer model, hepatocye-specific deficiency (depicted by a red X) in relA,
Ikkb , or Ikkc enhances JNK activation and ROS generation in these cells. In response to a carcinogen, a subpopulation of NF-nB–deficient hepatocytes undergo
apoptosis because of a weakened antiapoptotic response. The apoptotic cells trigger release of hepatomitogens such as TNFa and IL-6 from Kupffer cells and
hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) from Ito cells in which NF-nB is normal. These hepatomitogens, along with the enhanced JNK activation and ROS generation,
foster uncontrolled proliferation and carcinogenic transformation of the remaining hepatocytes. These proliferative hepatocytes may be those cells that have either
escaped from apoptosis despite deficiency in NF-nB or differentiated into a stage that differs from that of cells prone to apoptosis (as denoted by a different shape).
B, the tumor-suppressive or tumor-promoting effect of NF-nB might be determined by the degree or duration of NF-nB activation and other cellular contexts.
The basal-level NF-nB may be tumor suppressive by maintaining the functions of immunosurveillance, inhibiting JNK or ROS generation and guarding genomic stability.
During acute inflammation, transient acute NF-nB activation is important for inflammatory cytokine production. These cytokines may be involved in innate immune
response against both invading microorganisms and tissue damage. A sustained activation of NF-nB, such as in the case of chronic inflammation, is tumorigenic
because of over-repair of the damaged tissues, expression of oncogenes and growth factors, and the release of a number of angiogenic factors.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (23). December 1, 2007

11096

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

NF-kB and Tumor Suppression

deficient genes reversed the enhancement of JNK activation in
these cells. Whereas it has not been rigorously established how
NF-nB inhibits JNK, GADD45h and XIAP were originally proposed
as key regulators that impede TNFa-induced JNK activation.
However, later studies by several other groups including ourselves
suggest that ROS may be the key mediators of TNFa- or arsenicinduced JNK activation in the cells where NF-nB is inhibited (19).
NF-nB seems to be essential to protect the cells from oxidative
stress by curtailing ROS generation and consequent JNK
activation. Conversely, defects in NF-nB activation or activity
make it possible to unleash the process of ROS generation and,
consequently, a sustained JNK activation. Earlier studies indicated
that NF-nB is an important transcription factor regulating the
expression of antioxidant enzymes including superoxide dismutases (SOD1 and SOD2) and glutathione peroxidase (GPx). In
Ikkb / MEFs, an appreciable reduction in the expression of
metallothionein 1 (MT1) and metallothionein 2 (MT2) was noted
(19). Both MT1 and MT2 are low molecular weight metal binding
proteins characterized by a high content of cysteine residues and
lack of aromatic amino acids. The abundance of cysteine residues
makes both proteins capable of detoxifying metal ions and
scavenging ROS. Indeed, the ectopic expression of MT1 in
Ikkb / MEFs could attenuate the cytotoxic response to arsenic,
indicating the importance of MT1 in metal detoxification and
redox regulation (20). Thus, the increased ROS generation and
JNK activation in the cells where NF-nB signaling is deficient very
likely result from a reduction in the expression of the genes such
as SODs, GPx, MT1, and MT2, which are involved in protective
responses against oxidative stress. Conversely, a normal level of
NF-nB activation or activity may be pivotal to keep the ROS in
check and prevent sustained JNK activation that otherwise will
be tumorigenic.

Is the Tumor Suppressor–like Effect of NF-KB
Achieved through Antiapoptosis?
The importance of apoptosis in attenuating tumor burden is
well known. Apoptosis has been a highly desired effect in cancer
therapy. However, the role of NF-nB in apoptosis and its role in
carcinogenesis or tumorigenesis remain unresolved. In the mouse
liver cancer models, two groups attempted to reconcile the
antiapoptotic role of NF-nB with the carcinogenic effect of NF-nB
inhibition (17, 18). The central concept of these models is that
NF-nB is still antiapoptotic as shown by an overwhelming
number of studies. However, loss of NF-nB in hepatocytes
sensitizes these cells for spontaneous and stress-induced hepatocyte apoptosis, which triggers release of hepatomitogens such as
interleukin 6 (IL-6) and TNFa from the bystander Kupffer cells in
which NF-nB signaling is normal. The hepatomitogens, in turn,
initiate a compensatory proliferation of a subset of hepatocytes
that either escape apoptosis despite the deficiency of NF-nB or
differentiate into a stage that differs from that of those cells
prone to apoptosis (Fig. 1A). An alternative possibility is that
hepatomitogens promote aberrant clonal expansion and differentiation of the progenitor cells in humans or oval cells in rodents,
which are the precursor cells of the hepatocytes located in the
periphery of the biliary tract, leading to HCC. It is fair to say that
this explanation is intuitively plausible for NF-nB deficiency–
1
Q. Chang, Y. Zhang, K.J. Beezhold, H. Zhao, J. Chen, V. Castronova, X. Shi, F. Chen,
unpublished observations.

www.aacrjournals.org

induced HCC, although much remains to be learned. If apoptosis
is indeed the initiator for HCC, what is the role of apoptosis in
other types of cancer that undergo therapy-induced apoptosis?
It is known that almost all types of cancers are cytologically
heterogeneous and abundant in cancer stem cells and poorly
differentiated cells. Can these cells also undergo an uncontrolled
proliferation by apoptosis? If so, preventing apoptosis, rather than
inducing apoptosis, might be desirable for cancer therapy.
Another daunting question is whether these latest mouse liver
cancer models are truly representative of human HCC. The most
common etiologies of human HCC are HBV or HCV infection and
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. There is no available evidence
indicating that the development of human HCC is a result of
defects in NF-nB signalings in hepatocytes. In fact, previous
reports had suggested that NF-nB activation was instrumental in
inducing human HCC. Our recent studies indicate that the
expression levels of three IKK kinase subunits, IKKa, IKKh, and
NEMO/IKKg, are much higher in human HCC relative to the
surrounding normal liver tissues.1

Future Perspectives
Although NF-nB does not meet the established criteria for a
tumor suppressor, such as loss of functional mutation and frequent
deletion in tumor cells, rapidly emerging data strongly indicate
that normal levels of NF-nB activity are fundamentally important
to impede aberrant JNK activation and ROS generation. The
sustained JNK activation and ROS generation may be tumorigenic
through both genetic and epigenetic mechanisms. The genetic
influences, such as ROS-induced genomic mutations and JNKinduced expression of oncogene or growth factors that are
intimately involved in cancer development, have been established
beyond doubt. The link between JNK or ROS and epigenetic
regulation, in contrast, is currently underemphasized. Epigenetic
abnormalities in cancer development, mainly the altered methylation states on both histones and genomic DNA, have been
gathering interest in the last two years. Involvement of JNK in
polycomb signaling that catalyzes lysine 27 methylation of histone
H3 and links to DNA methylation had previously been shown in
the developmental regulation of Drosophila. It is highly possible
that both JNK and ROS are important participants in epigenetic
modulation in human cancer. Therefore, a tumor suppressor–like
effect of NF-nB might be achieved by both genetic activation of
target genes and by effects on epigenomics. The functional
outcome of NF-nB in tumor suppression or tumor promotion
may be determined by the cell types, stimulators, duration of
activation, and other accompanying signals (Fig. 1B). Deciphering
the web of NF-nB, JNK, and ROS in tumor suppression or
promotion will be invaluable to define better therapeutic strategies
for cancers.

Acknowledgments
Received 4/30/2007; revised 8/13/2007; accepted 8/20/2007.
Grant support: Intramural research grants from the National Institute for
Occupational Safety and Health (F. Chen and V. Castranova).
We thank Dr. Murali Rao of the Pathology and Physiology Research Branch of
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health/Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention for critical reading of the manuscript.
We apologize to the authors for our inability to cite their original works in this
brief review. Detailed citation of the references can be found online in Supplementary
data.
Disclaimer: The opinions expressed in this manuscript are those of the authors
and do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. National Institute for
Occupational Safety and Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

11097

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (23). December 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

References
1. Karin M. Nuclear factor-nB in cancer development
and progression. Nature 2006;441:431–6.
2. Kluiver J, van den Berg A, de Jong D, et al. Regulation
of pri-microRNA BIC transcription and processing in
Burkitt lymphoma. Oncogene 2007;26:3769–76.
3. Fernandez-Majada V, Aguilera C, Villanueva A, et al.
Nuclear IKK activity leads to dysregulated notchdependent gene expression in colorectal cancer. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 2007;104:276–81.
4. Prajapati S, Tu Z, Yamamoto Y, Gaynor RB. IKKa
regulates the mitotic phase of the cell cycle by
modulating Aurora A phosphorylation. Cell Cycle 2006;
5:2371–80.
5. Hu MC, Lee DF, Xia W, et al. InB kinase promotes
tumorigenesis through inhibition of forkhead FOXO3a.
Cell 2004;117:225–37.
6. Lee DF, Kuo HP, Chen CT, et al. IKKh suppression of
TSC1 links inflammation and tumor angiogenesis via
the mTOR pathway. Cell 2007;130:440–55.
7. Tergaonkar V, Pando M, Vafa O, Wahl G, Verma I. p53
stabilization is decreased upon NFnB activation: a role
for NFnB in acquisition of resistance to chemotherapy.
Cancer Cell 2002;1:493–503.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (23). December 1, 2007

8. Perkins ND. NF-nB: tumor promoter or suppressor?
Trends Cell Biol 2004;14:64–9.
9. Furuya K, Ozaki T, Hanamoto T, et al. Stabilization
of p73 by nuclear IKK-a mediates cisplatin-induced
apoptosis. J Biol Chem 2007;282:18365–78.
10. Zhu F, Xia X, Liu B, et al. IKKa shields 14-3-3j, a
G(2)/M cell cycle checkpoint gene, from hypermethylation, preventing its silencing. Mol Cell 2007;27:
214–27.
11. Seitz CS, Lin Q, Deng H, Khavari PA. Alterations in
NF-nB function in transgenic epithelial tissue demonstrate a growth inhibitory role for NF-nB. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 1998;95:2307–12.
12. Liu B, Park E, Zhu F, et al. A critical role for I nB kinase
a in the development of human and mouse squamous
cell carcinomas. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2006;103:
17202–7.
13. Kisseleva T, Song L, Vorontchikhina M, Feirt N,
Kitajewski J, Schindler C. NF-nB regulation of endothelial cell function during LPS-induced toxemia and
cancer. J Clin Invest 2006;116:2955–63.
14. Chen F, Lu Y, Castranova V, Li Z, Karin M. Loss of
Ikkh promotes migration and proliferation of mouse
embryo fibroblast cells. J Biol Chem 2006;281:37142–9.
15. Oshima K, Takeda M, Kuranaga E, et al. IKK

11098

epsilon regulates F actin assembly and interacts with
Drosophila IAP1 in cellular morphogenesis. Curr Biol
2006;16:1531–7.
16. Gapuzan ME, Schmah O, Pollock AD, Hoffmann A,
Gilmore TD. Immortalized fibroblasts from NF-nB RelA
knockout mice show phenotypic heterogeneity and
maintain increased sensitivity to tumor necrosis factor
a after transformation by v-Ras. Oncogene 2005;24:
6574–83.
17. Maeda S, Kamata H, Luo JL, Leffert H, Karin M. IKKh
couples hepatocyte death to cytokine-driven compensatory proliferation that promotes chemical hepatocarcinogenesis. Cell 2005;121:977–90.
18. Luedde T, Beraza N, Kotsikoris V, et al. Deletion of
NEMO/IKKg in liver parenchymal cells causes steatohepatitis and hepatocellular carcinoma. Cancer Cell
2007;11:119–32.
19. Zhang Y, Chen F. Reactive oxygen species (ROS),
troublemakers between nuclear factor-nB (NF-nB) and
c-Jun NH(2)-terminal kinase (JNK). Cancer Res 2004;64:
1902–5.
20. Peng Z, Peng L, Fan Y, Zandi E, Shertzer HG, Xia Y. A
critical role for InB kinase h in metallothionein-1
expression and protection against arsenic toxicity.
J Biol Chem 2007;282:21487–96.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Nuclear Factor-κB, an Unappreciated Tumor Suppressor
Fei Chen and Vince Castranova
Cancer Res 2007;67:11093-11098.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/23/11093
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2007/11/27/67.23.11093.DC1

This article cites 20 articles, 7 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/23/11093.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 9 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/23/11093.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

