Original Article

Retinoic Acid Induces REST Degradation and
Neuronal Differentiation by Modulating the
Expression of SCFb-TRCP in Neuroblastoma
Cells
Akanksha Singh, BS1; Christopher Rokes, MD1; Monica Gireud, BS1; Stephen Fletcher, MD8; James Baumgartner, MD8;
Greg Fuller, MD, PhD3; John Stewart, MD, PhD3; Peter Zage, MD, PhD1,7; and Vidya Gopalakrishnan, PhD1,2,4,5,6,7

BACKGROUND: The repressor element-1 silencing transcription factor (REST) is a repressor of neuronal genes. Its expression is associated with poor neuronal differentiation in many neuroblastoma patient samples and cell lines. Because retinoic acid promotes neuronal differentiation, the authors postulated that it involves modulation of REST expression.
METHODS: The expression of REST and of an S-phase kinase-associated protein 1/cullin 1/F-box (SCF) protein complex
that contains the F-box protein b-transducin repeat-containing protein (b-TRCP) (SCFb-TRCP) in neuroblastoma tumor
samples and cell lines was analyzed by immunofluorescence and Western blot analysis. SK-N-SH and SK-N-AS cells were
treated with retinoic acid and MG-132 to measure proteasomal degradation of REST by Western blot and quantitative
real-time polymerase chain reaction analyses. Immunoprecipitation and coimmunoprecipitation assays were done in SKN-AS cells that were transfected either with a control plasmid or with an enhanced green fluorescent protein-SCFb-TRCP–
expressing plasmid. RESULTS: Several neuroblastoma patient samples and cell lines displayed elevated REST expression.
Although, REST transcription increased upon retinoic acid treatment in SK-N-SH and SK-N-AS cells, REST protein levels
declined, concomitant with the induction of neuronal differentiation, in SK-N-SH cells but not in SK-N-AS cells. MG-132
treatment countered the retinoic acid-mediated decline in REST protein. SCFb-TRCP, a known REST-specific E3-ligase, was
poorly expressed in many neuroblastoma samples, and its expression increased upon retinoic acid treatment in SK-N-SH
cells but declined in SK-N-AS cells. Ectopic expression of SCFb-TRCP in SK-N-AS cells promoted REST ubiquitination and
degradation and neuronal differentiation. CONCLUSIONS: The current results indicated that elevated transcription of
REST compounded by its impaired degradation by SCFb-TRCP may contribute to the failure of these tumors to differC 2011 American Cancer Society.
entiate in response to retinoic acid. Cancer 2011;117:5189–202. V
KEYWORDS: neuroblastoma, retinoic acid, repressor element 1 silencing transcription factor, REST, SCFb-TRCP,
proteasome.

Neuroblastoma is the most common pediatric extracranial solid tumor and is believed to arise from neural crest
precursors that are committed to form the sympathetic nervous system.1,2 Although genetic alterations, such as v-myc
myelocytomatosis viral-related oncogene/neuroblastoma derived (avian) (MYCN) gene amplification, are used to predict
tumor behavior, tumor differentiation is a factor that determines invasiveness and therapy resistance.3,4 Retinoic acid, a
prodifferentiation agent, is a component of standard of care for children with high-risk disease.5 However, 50% to 60% of
patients have resistance to therapy and develop progressive disease.6 Multiple molecular events contribute to retinoic acid
resistance and failure to differentiate; however, a better characterization of these events may yield improved stratification
of patients and identify patients who might benefit most from retinoic acid-based therapies.7-9
Corresponding author: Vidya Gopalakrishnan, PhD, Department of Pediatrics Research, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe
Boulevard, Unit 853, Houston, TX 77030; Fax: (713) 563-5407; vgopalak@mdanderson.org
1
Department of Pediatrics, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas; 2Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University
of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas; 3Department of Pathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas; 4Center
for Cancer Epigenetics, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas; 5Center for Stem and Developmental Biology, The University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas; 6The Brain Tumor Center, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas; 7Program in
Neuroscience, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, The University of Texas, Health Science Center, Houston, Texas; 8Department of Pediatric Neurosurgery,
University of Texas Medical School, Houston, Texas
The first two authors contributed equally to this article.

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.26145, Received: January 2, 2011; Revised: February 17, 2011; Accepted: March 2, 2011, Published online April 26, 2011 in Wiley Online
Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Cancer

November 15, 2011

5189

Original Article

The repressor element-1 silencing transcription factor (REST) is a transcriptional repressor important for
mammalian nervous system development.10,11 REST is
expressed in embryonic stem cells, neural progenitors, and
non-neural cells, where it binds consensus repressor element-1 (RE1) to repress several terminal neuronal differentiation genes.10-18 REST down-regulation in neural
progenitors during neurogenesis derepresses target genes.
REST is down-regulated by proteasomal degradation during the differentiation of embryonic stem cells into neural
progenitors and is down-regulated by transcriptional
repression as neural progenitors differentiate into mature
neurons.12,19 Recent studies have attributed an oncogenic
role for REST in the pediatric brain tumor medulloblastoma; however, to our knowledge, REST has not been
studied in neuroblastoma to date.20-22
In the current study, we demonstrate that REST
expression is maintained in several human neuroblastoma tumor samples and cell lines and that the maintenance of REST expression is associated with an
undifferentiated phenotype. Retinoic acid treatment of
the neuroblastoma cell lines SK-N-SH and SK-N-AS
promoted the expression of REST-target neuronal genes
in the former cells, but not in the latter cells. Surprisingly, despite the up-regulation of REST transcription
by retinoic acid in both cell lines, a significant decline
in REST protein was observed in SK-N-SH cells, but
not in SK-N-AS cells. It is noteworthy that an S-phase
kinase-associated protein 1/cullin 1/F-box (SCF) protein complex containing the F-box protein b-transducin
repeat-containing protein (b-TRCP) (SCFb-TRCP), an
F-box protein and E3 ligase known to promote REST
proteasomal degradation, was poorly expressed in several but not all human neuroblastoma tumors.19,23 Furthermore, a retinoic acid-mediated decrease in REST
levels in SK-N-SH cells occurred coincident with an
increase in the expression of SCFb-TRCP. In contrast,
the failure to down-regulate REST protein in SK-N-AS
cells was correlated with a decline in SCFb-TRCP levels.
The finding that constitutive expression of SCFb-TRCP
promoted REST ubiquitination and degradation and
rescued the blockade of neuronal differentiation in
these cells suggests that the failure to effectively up-regulate SCFb-TRCP and consequently degrade REST may
contribute to the inability of SK-N-AS cells to undergo
differentiation upon retinoic acid treatment. Taken together, our studies indicated that REST is an important
molecular target in the response of neuroblastoma cells
to retinoic acid.

5190

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell Culture
The neuroblastoma cell lines SK-N-SH, SK-N-AS, IMR32, and SK-N-SY5Y were obtained from American Type
Culture Collection (Manassas, Va). SH-EP, NBL-S, and
NGP cells were a kind gift from Drs. Maris and Cohn to
P.Z. For experiments that involved drug treatment, cells
were treated with 10 lM ALL-trans retinoic acid (Sigma
Chemical Company, St. Louis, Mo), diluted in dimethyl
sulfoxide according to the manufacturer’s specifications in
minimal light conditions and incubated for periods ranging from 4 to 120 hours. For longer treatments, the drug
and media were replenished every 48 hours. For other
studies, cells were treated with 10 lg/mL cycloheximide
alone, retinoic acid alone, or both for 120 minutes. Proteasomal degradation was studied using the proteasomal
inhibitor MG-132 (5 lM; Sigma Chemical Company)
with or without retinoic acid (10 lM) for 4 hours.
Patient Samples
Deidentified frozen and paraffin-embedded human neuroblastoma samples were obtained from the Children’s Oncology Group and the Biopathology Center (Columbus,
Ohio) or from the University of Texas Medical School
through an institutional review board-approved protocol,
and the diagnoses were confirmed by our pathologists.
Then, the samples were processed for Western blot analysis
and immunofluorescence staining as described below.
Western Blot Analysis
Neuroblastoma cells were lysed by sonication. For patient
samples, frozen tumor blocks were homogenized using as
dismembrator.24 Equal amounts of protein were subjected to 4% to 15% sodium dodecyl sulfate-gradient gel
electrophoresis and Western blot analysis using antibodies
against REST and synapsin (Millipore, Waltham, Mass);
retinoic acid receptor-alpha (RAR-a) and N-Myc (Santa
Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, Calif); type III b-tubulin (TUBIII) (TUJ-1; Covance, Princeton, NJ); actin
(Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, Mass); b-TRCP
(Invitrogen, Carlsbad, Calif); Ki-67 (BD Biosciences, San
Jose, Calif); and S-phase kinase-associated protein 2
(Skp2) and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase
(GAPDH) (Abcam, Cambridge, Mass).
Transient Transfection
SK-N-AS cells were cotransfected with a plasmid that
expressed green fluorescent protein (GFP) and either control vector pQCXIP or the plasmid pQCXIP-SCFb-TRCP

Cancer

November 15, 2011

Retinoic Acid Affects REST via b-TRCP/Singh et al

(kindly provided by Dr. Westbrook) using Roche FuGENE
HD reagent (Roche, Basel, Switzerland). Transfection efficiency was monitored by flow cytometry and was 45%.
SYBR Green Reverse TranscriptasePolymerase Chain Reaction Analysis
RNA was prepared from SK-N-AS and SK-N-SH cells
using the RNeasy Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, Calif). Equal
amounts of RNA were converted to combinational DNA
using the Omniscript reverse transcriptase-polymerase
chain reaction analysis (RT-PCR) kit (Qiagen) and were
analyzed by quantitative RT-PCR using iQ SYBR Green
Supermix (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, Calif). Results
were expressed relative to 18sRNA. The sequences of the
primers used were as follows: for 18sRNA, forward 50 GTGGTGTTGAGGAAAGCAGACATTG-30 and reverse
50 -CATCCTTCTGTCTGTTCAAGAACCAGT C-30 ;
for synapsin 1 (Syn1), forward 50 -GTCTGACA GATACA
AGCTGTGGGTG-30 and reverse 50 -GACCACGAGCT
CTACGATGAGCTG-30 ; for TUBIII, forward 50 -GGAA
GGAGTGTGAAAACTGCGACTG-30 and reverse 5-CA
CGACGCTGAAGGTGTTCATGATG-30 ; for REST,
forward 50 -GGAAGGAGTGTGAAAACTGCGACTG-30
and reverse 50 -GCTGTCAACTTCCAGCT TCC-30 ; and,
for RAR-a, forward 50 -CATCCCCAGC CACCATTGA
GAC-3 and reverse 50 -GACAGACAAAGCAAGGCTTG
TAGATG-30 .
Immunofluorescence Assay
Cells were plated in Lab-Tek II Chamber Slides (Thermo
Fisher Scientific, Rochester, NY), treated with 10 lM retinoic acid for 120 hours, fixed in 2% buffered paraformaldehyde, and washed. After blocking, the cells were incubated
with the antibodies against REST (Millipore), type III btubulin (Covance, Denver, Pa), and b-TRCP (Invitrogen).
Next, nonspecifically bound antibody was removed by
washing, and the cells were incubated with fluorophoreconjugated secondary antibody, washed, covered with 40 ,6diamidino-2-phenylindole (1 lg/mL), observed under a
Nikon fluorescence microscope (Nikon Inc., Melville, NY),
and analyzed using MetaMorph software (Molecular Devices, Downington, Pa). For patient samples, a similar procedure was used after an initial deparaffinization step.25
Immunoprecipitation and
Coimmunoprecipitation Assays
Extracts that were prepared from SK-N-AS cells transfected
with vector alone or with a plasmid that expressed enhanced
GFP (eGFP) b-TRCP were lysed by sonication using a

Cancer

November 15, 2011

Misonix Sonicator 3000 (Misonix, Inc., Farmingdale, NY).
After removing the debris by centrifugation, 1 mg of protein was denatured at 95 C for 5 minutes, and the final volume was raised to 1 mL. The denaturing step was not done
for coimmunoprecipitation (coIP) experiments. After preclearing with protein G magnetic beads (Millipore), 2 mg
of total extract were incubated with mouse antiubiquitin
antibody (Abcam) overnight at 4 C. For coIP assays, lysates
were incubated with mouse anti-b-TRCP antibodies or
with nonimmune sera (Invitrogen). Proteins were eluted
using sodium dodecyl sulfate buffer. Immunoprecipitated
proteins and input material (1% or 3%) were subjected to
Western blot analysis using anti-b-TRCP (Cell Signaling
Technology) or anti-REST antibodies (Millipore).

RESULTS
REST Expression and Neuronal Differentiation
in Neuroblastoma Cell Lines
To better understand the role of REST in the response of
neuroblastoma cells to retinoic acid, first, we measured
REST expression in a panel of paraffin-embedded tumor tissue sections (n ¼ 41) by immunofluorescence analysis (Fig.
1A). Of the 41 samples analyzed, 89% were classified as
neuroblastoma, 3% were classified as ganglioneuroblastoma,
and 8% were classified as ganglioneuroma. REST expression
was elevated in all but 1 neuroblastoma sample. Pathology
reports indicated poor to complete absence of neuronal differentiation in most of the neuroblastoma samples except 1
tumor, in which neuronal differentiation was observed.
REST expression was lower or absent in ganglioneuroblastoma and ganglioneuroma samples. Human medulloblastoma tumors and normal cerebellum tissues were included
as positive and negative controls, respectively, for REST
staining.20-22 Western blot analysis of lysates prepared from
a separate set of snap-frozen human neuroblastoma samples
revealed high expression of the 180-kd REST protein in all
but 1 sample (Fig. 1B). The REST antibody has been validated by several laboratories for Western blot analysis.26-28
The lack of expression of the neuronal differentiation
marker Syn1 correlated well with REST expression in most
but not all of the tumor samples. Our studies revealed that
REST protein expression was maintained in a panel of neuroblastoma cell lines and was associated with poor expression or lack of expression of the neuronal marker Syn1 (Fig.
1B). These findings also were validated by SYBR Green
RT-PCR (quantitative RT-PCR [qRT-PCR]) analysis of 2
representative neuroblastoma cell lines, SK-N-SH (retinoic
acid-sensitive) and SK-N-AS (retinoic acid-insensitive)

5191

Original Article

Figure 1. Expression of the repressor element 1 silencing transcription factor (REST) is shown in neuroblastoma tumor samples
and cell lines. (A) An immunofluorescence assay to measure REST expression in human neuroblastoma tumors was done using
anti-REST antibodies. Normal human cerebellum was included as a negative control, and a human medulloblastoma tumor was
used as a positive control. Nuclei were stained with Hoechst dye, and these images were captured using a Nikon fluorescence
microscope (Nikon Inc., Melville, NY) and analyzed with Metamorph software (Molecular Devices, Downington, PA). The corresponding hematoxylin and eosin (H&E)-stained sections also are shown. (B) Western blot analysis of REST expression in lysates
prepared from frozen human neuroblastoma tumor samples was performed using anti-REST antibody. Actin served as a loading
control. (C) For Western blot analysis, extracts from various neuroblastoma cell lines were probed with anti-REST antibody. Actin
was used as the loading control.

5192

Cancer

November 15, 2011

Retinoic Acid Affects REST via b-TRCP/Singh et al

Figure 2. Expression of the repressor element 1 silencing transcription factor (REST) is associated with poor neuronal differentiation. (A) SYBR Green reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction measurements of (Left) REST and (Right) its target gene
synapsin 1 (Syn1) in SK-N-SH and SK-N-AS cells are illustrated. Measurements were done in triplicate. mRNA indicates messenger
RNA. (B) Western blot analysis was used to measure Syn1 protein expression in SK-N-SH and SK-N-AS cells. Actin was included
as the loading control. (C) An immunofluorescence assay was used to evaluate the expression and localization of REST (red) and
its target, the terminal neuronal differentiation marker type III b-tubulin (TUBIII) (green), using primary antibodies specific to the
proteins indicated in B and fluorophore-conjugated secondary antibodies. Nuclei (blue) were stained with 1 lg/mL 40 ,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI), and images of stained cells were captured using a charged-coupled device camera and a Nikon fluorescence microscope. Analyses were performed using Metamorph software.

(Figs. 1C and 2A, respectively).29 Expression levels of the
known REST-target gene and neuronal markers Syn1 and
TUBIII were greater in SK-N-SH cells compared with SKN-AS cells as measured by Western blot, qRT-PCR, and
immunofluorescence analyses (Fig. 2A-C). Thus, our results
demonstrated an inverse correlation between REST expression and neuronal differentiation in SK-N-SH and SK-NAS cells.
Retinoic Acid Treatment Promotes Neuronal
Differentiation in SK-N-SH Cells by
Modulating REST Expression
To determine whether retinoic acid induced neuronal differentiation in neuroblastoma cells through down-regula-

Cancer

November 15, 2011

tion of REST expression, SK-N-SH and SK-N-AS cells
were exposed to the drug for 24 to 120 hours; then, changes
in proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis were assessed.
Flow cytometric analyses did not demonstrate an accumulation of cells with sub-G1 DNA content, suggesting a lack of
apoptosis (Fig. 3A). Western blot analysis revealed a significant decline in Ki-67 staining in SK-N-SH cells, but not in
SK-N-AS cells at these time points (data not shown). This
was accompanied by morphologic changes, such as neurite
extension, that were indicative of neurogenesis in SK-N-SH
cells but not in SK-N-AS cells (Fig. 3B). These results indicated that retinoic acid did not cause apoptosis but induced
phenotypic changes characteristic of neuronal differentiation in SK-N-SH cells but not in SK-N-AS cells.

5193

Original Article

Figure 3. The effects of retinoic acid (RA) on the proliferation and differentiation of neuroblastoma cells are illustrated. (A) SK-NSH and SK-N-AS cells were treated with 10 lM RA for 120 hours and analyzed according to (Top) propidium iodide staining and
(Bottom) flow cytometry to assess changes in the number of cells in various phases of the cell cycle. Untreated cells were
included as controls. (B) Phase-contrast microscopy was used to study changes in cell morphology (neurite extension) in drugtreated and untreated cells (original magnification, 10).

Next, we investigated whether the induction of neuronal differentiation in SK-N-SH cells was correlated
with changes in REST expression or activity. Figure 4A
illustrates that retinoic acid treatment caused a decline in
REST protein levels between 48 hours and 72 hours of
treatment in SK-N-SH cells, whereas a modest increase
was noted in SK-N-AS cells after 24 hours and 48 hours.
The proproliferative protein N-Myc similarly was downregulated by retinoic acid in SK-N-SH cells and was not
detected in SK-N-AS cells, as expected (Fig. 4A). Likewise, RAR-a protein levels also declined in response to
retinoic acid exposure (Fig. 4A).16,30 Neuronal differentiation was induced in SK-N-SH cells, as demonstrated by
increased levels of Syn1 and Tuj1 proteins in these cells

5194

but not in SK-N-AS cells (Fig. 4A,C). Levels of the ubiquitin E3 ligase Skp2, which is important for cell cycle exit
during neurogenesis, indicated a modest change at best in
SK-N-AS cells but not in SK-N-SH cells (Fig. 4A). It is
noteworthy that retinoic acid treatment also caused REST
translocation into the cytoplasm in both cell lines between
24 hours and 48 hours of treatment. This was associated
with increased TUBIII expression at 48 hours in SK-NSH cells. In retinoic acid-treated SK-N-AS cells, the nuclear localization of REST largely was unaltered, and this
was correlated with poor TUBIII expression (Fig. 4B,C).
These findings suggest that the decline in REST expression, together with the export of REST from the nucleus,
promoted derepression of REST-target genes.

Cancer

November 15, 2011

Retinoic Acid Affects REST via b-TRCP/Singh et al

Figure 4. (A) Retinoic acid (RA) down-regulates repressor element-1 silencing transcription factor (REST) protein levels and induces the expression of neuronal differentiation markers in (Top) SK-N-SH cells and (Bottom) and SK-N-AS cells. Cells were treated
with 10 lM RA for various periods (from 0 to 120 hours). Changes in the expression of REST, retinoic acid receptor-a (RAR-a), NMyc, E3 ligase S-phase kinase-associated protein 2 (Skp2), and synapsin 1 (Syn1) were evaluated by Western blot analysis using
specific antibodies. Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) expression was measured to ensure equal loading.
(B,C) An immunofluorescence assay with untreated or RA-treated SK-N-SH cells (Top) and SK-N-AS cells (Bottom) was used to
determine (B) changes in REST (red) expression and localization and (C) changes in coexpression of the terminal neuronal differentiation marker type III b-tubulin (TUBIII) and REST (red) with commercially available primary antibodies against these proteins
and fluorophore-conjugated secondary antibodies. Nuclei were stained with 1 lg/mL 40 ,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI).
Stained cells were observed using a Nikon fluorescence microscope and were analyzed using Metamorph software.

Retinoic Acid Modulates REST Expression by
Transcriptional and Post-Transcriptional
Mechanisms
REST gene expression in cortical progenitors is regulated
by binding of the RAR-a complex to the retinoic acid responsive element (RARE) within the REST promoter.12,19
Surprisingly, although a retinoic acid-dependent increase
in REST gene expression was detected in both cell lines,
RAR-a transcript levels were elevated in SK-N-SH cells
but were decreased in SK-N-AS cells (Fig. 5A). However,
REST protein levels declined upon retinoic acid treatment
(Fig. 4A-C). These findings raised the possibility that reti-

Cancer

November 15, 2011

noic acid may modulate REST levels by post-transcriptional mechanisms.
To distinguish between transcriptional and posttranscriptional regulation of REST by retinoic acid, SKN-SH and SK-N-AS cells were treated with cycloheximide for 2 hours to block translation of newly synthesized
messenger RNA in the presence or absence of retinoic
acid. A small decrease in REST protein levels was observed
even within 2 hours of treatment with retinoic acid (Fig.
5B). Cycloheximide treatment caused a further decline in
REST levels in both the presence and the absence of retinoic acid (Fig. 5B). Because it is known that RAR-a

5195

Original Article

Figure 5. Retinoic acid (RA) promotes transcriptional and post-transcriptional changes in repressor element 1 silencing transcription factor (REST) expression. (A) SYBR Green reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction analysis was used to measure
changes in gene expression of REST, RA receptor-a (RAR-alpha), and synapsin 1 (Syn1) in (Top) SK-N-SH cells and (Bottom) SKN-AS cells in response to 10 lM RA treatment for various periods (from 0 to 120 hours). RA was added to the culture medium every 48 hours. Experiments were repeated in triplicate, and error bars were calculated. (B) (Top) SK-N-SH cells and (Bottom) SKN-AS cells were untreated or treated with 10 lM RA alone, 10 lg/mL cycloheximide (CHX) alone, or both drugs for 2 hours.
Changes in the expression of REST and in the positive control (RAR-alpha) were measured by Western blot analysis using specific antibodies. Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) served as the loading control.

protein undergoes a retinoic acid-dependent decline, we
used it as a positive control.30 These results confirmed
that the modulation of REST expression by retinoic acid
involved transcriptional and post-transcriptional mechanisms in SK-N-SH and SK-N-AS cells.
Retinoic Acid Promotes Proteasomal
Degradation of REST
To determine whether the decline in REST levels in the
presence of retinoic acid occurred through proteasomal
degradation of REST protein, we treated SK-N-SH and
SK-N-AS cells with the proteasomal inhibitor MG-132
for 4 hours in the presence and absence of retinoic acid. A
substantial increase in REST protein levels was observed
in the presence of MG-132 compared with the levels in

5196

cells that were treated with retinoic acid alone (Fig. 6A).
The decline in REST protein levels upon retinoic acid
treatment was significantly greater than that observed in
Figure 5B, possibly because of the longer time of exposure
to the drug (Fig. 6A). These results demonstrated that
blocking proteasomal activity could counter retinoic acidmediated degradation of REST protein and facilitate neuronal differentiation.
Because the ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation of REST is mediated by SCFb-TRCP, next, we
measured its expression in the same panel of human
neuroblastoma tumor tissues described in Figure 1C by
immunofluorescence analysis. Figure 6B indicates that
SCFb-TRCP was expressed at significant levels in normal
human cerebellum (positive control) in which REST was

Cancer

November 15, 2011

Retinoic Acid Affects REST via b-TRCP/Singh et al

Figure 6. Retinoic acid (RA)-mediated effects on repressor element 1 silencing transcription factor (REST) require proteasomal
activity. (A) (Top) SK-N-SH cells and (Bottom) SK-N-AS cells were treated with RA (10 lM) in the presence or absence of the proteasome inhibitor MG-132 (5 lM) for 4 hours. Untreated cells were included as controls. Whole cell extracts prepared from these
cells were subjected to Western blot analysis using anti-REST and antiglyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) antibodies. (B) Deparaffinized human neuroblastoma samples were stained with anti-b-transducin repeat-containing protein (bTRCP) antibody and the nuclear dye Hoechst. Stained sections were observed under a Nikon fluorescence microscope and were
analyzed using Metamorph software. (C) Western blot analysis to measure b-TRCP expression in human neuroblastoma tumor
lysates was done using specific antibodies. Actin served as the loading control.

Cancer

November 15, 2011

5197

Original Article

absent and was expressed at very low levels in human
medulloblastoma (negative control) in which REST
expression was high. Once the SCFb-TRCP antibody was
validated for immunofluorescence analysis, we examined
its expression in human tumors. Of the 7 tumor samples
depicted in Figure 6B, SCFb-TRCP either was expressed at
low levels or was completely absent in 6 tumors, whereas 1
tumor had high SCFb-TRCP expression. In all 41 tumors
that we studied, b-TRCP either was not expressed or was
poorly expressed in 22 tumors (54%). Furthermore, 16 of
those 22 samples had high REST expression (73%). These
results also were validated by Western blot analysis of the
tumor cell extracts described above (Fig. 1B). Of the 12
samples that had elevated REST expression, 7 had low to
negligible SCFb-TRCP expression (Fig. 6C).
We next investigated whether retinoic acid promoted a change in SCFb-TRCP expression and whether
these changes contributed to alterations in REST levels
in neuroblastoma cells.19,23 SCFb-TRCP expression was
detected in both SK-N-SH cells and SK-N-AS cells in the
absence of retinoic acid treatment. However, retinoic acid
treatment promoted a further elevation in SCFb-TRCP
expression in SK-N-SH cells as determined by qRT-PCR
and Western blot analyses (Fig. 7A,B). It is noteworthy
that SCFb-TRCP levels declined in SK-N-AS cells upon retinoic acid treatment (Fig. 7A,B). These results suggest
that an increase in REST transcription compounded by a
decrease in SCFb-TRCP expression may contribute to elevated REST levels and a block of neuronal differentiation
in retinoic acid-treated SK-N-AS cells.
Because the levels of SCFb-TRCP in untreated SK-NAS cells were not significantly different from the levels in
SK-N-SH cells yet REST levels did not decline in SK-N-AS
cells upon retinoic acid treatment, we investigated whether
the interaction between SCFb-TRCP and REST and/or its
ubiquitination and degradation was deranged and whether
this contributed to REST accumulation in SK-N-AS cells.
We transiently transfected SK-N-AS cells with a plasmid
that expressed eGFP-tagged SCFb-TRCP or vector alone and,
48 hours later, measured REST expression and neuronal
differentiation. A dramatic decline in REST protein levels
was observed, as expected, that coincided with increased
Syn1 expression in cells that expressed the eGFP-SCFbTRCP
transgene compared with vector-transfected controls.
Thus, down-regulation of REST by eGFP-SCFb-TRCP
appeared to be sufficient to promote neuronal differentiation in SK-N-AS cells (Fig. 7C). The status of REST ubiquitination was then determined with IP assays. To capture
the ubiquitinated intermediates better, extracts were pre-

5198

pared from control vector-transfected or eGFP-SCFb-TRCPtransfected SK-N-AS cells 24 hours post-transfection and
processed for IP with antiubiquitin antibodies. The immunoprecipitates were analyzed for REST and SCFb-TRCP
using specific antibodies (Fig. 7D). We observed an increase
in slower migrating, ubiquitinated REST protein in eGFPSCFb-TRCP transgene-expressing cells compared with vector-transfected controls (Fig. 7, IP lanes). To confirm interaction between the 2 proteins, we performed coIP using
anti-b-TRCP antibodies and probing for REST. Although
SCFb-TRCP was immunoprecipitated in vector-transfected
and transgene-expressing cells, REST was detected only in
the immunocomplexes from eGFP-SCFb-TRCP–expressing
cells (Fig. 7E,F). These observations suggest that a less than
optimal interaction between SCFb-TRCP and REST potentially may be responsible for elevated REST expression in
SK-N-AS cells.

DISCUSSION
Retinoic acid, a vitamin A derivative that is used as a differentiation-inducing agent in neuroblastoma treatment,
is considered standard of care for children with high-risk
disease.31-33 Nevertheless, it is not uniformly beneficial
for all patients.31-33 Several studies have attributed antiproliferative, prodifferentiation, and proapoptotic effects
to retinoic acid.34-37
In the current study, we identified a role for REST,
a repressor of neuronal differentiation, in retinoic acidmediated induction of neuronal differentiation in neuroblastoma cells. We observed that REST expression was
elevated in the vast majority of human neuroblastoma
tumors. It was absent and poorly expressed in ganglioneuroblastoma and ganglioneuroma, respectively.
Pathology reports indicated that REST-expressing neuroblastomas were undifferentiated or poorly differentiated.
These observations also were recapitulated in a panel of
human neuroblastoma cell lines. Intriguingly, REST
expression was higher in SY5Y cells compared with SK-NSH cells, although both cells are responsive to retinoic
acid.38 Whether retinoic acid treatment of SY5Y cells
causes a decline in REST levels similar to that observed in
SK-N-SH cells remains to be determined. Our findings
are supported by another study that demonstrated aberrant REST gene expression in neuroblastoma cell lines
and with expression data from the Pediatrics Tumor Affymetrix database (http://home.ccr.cancer.gov/oncology/
oncogenomics/ accessed December 30, 2010).39 Previous
studies have demonstrated that unliganded RAR binds
Cancer

November 15, 2011

Figure 7. Retinoic acid (RA) promotes repressor element 1 silencing transcription factor (REST) degradation through an S-phase
kinase-associated protein 1/cullin 1/F-box (SCF) protein complex that contains the F-box protein b-transducin repeat-containing
protein (b-TRCP) (SCFb-TRCP). Changes in expression of the REST-specific ubiquitin E3-ligase SCFb-TRCP after treatment with RA
(10 lM) in SK-N-SH cells and SK-N-AS cells for various periods (from 0 to 120 hours) was done by (A) SYBR Green reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction analysis using primers specific to the genes and normalization to 18S messenger RNA levels
and (B) Western blot analysis using antibodies specific to SCFb-TRCP. GAPDH indicates glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase; UT, untranslated. (C) SK-N-AS cells were transiently transfected with empty vector (control) or with plasmid that expressed
enhanced green fluorescent protein (eGFP)-tagged SCFb-TRCP and were analyzed 48 hours later by Western blot analysis to measure changes in REST expression and in synapsin 1 (Syn1) using specific antibodies. SCFb-TRCP expression in transfected cells was
confirmed using commercially available antibodies specific to the protein. (D) SKN-AS cells transiently transfected with plasmid
that expressed eGFP-SCFb-TRCP and extracts that were prepared 24 hours later (to better capture ubiquitinated intermediates)
were subjected to immunoprecipitation using antiubiquitin (Ub) antibodies or control nonimmune sera (immunoglobulin G [IgG]).
The immunoprecipitated, ubiquitinated proteins were analyzed by Western blot analysis using anti-REST and anti-b-TRCP antibodies. Input extracts (1% and 3%) are shown as controls. (E,F) Extracts prepared from SK-N-AS cells that were transfected as
described for D also were studied for interaction between REST and b-TRCP by coimmunoprecipitation using (E) anti-b-TRCP
antibody and Western blot analysis with anti-REST antibodies or (F) anti-REST antibody and Western blot analysis with anti-bTRCP antibodies. The efficiency of pull-down was determined by probing for SCFb-TRCP and REST as indicated in E and F, respectively. In E, light (L) and dark (D) exposures of pull-down with anti-b-TRCP antibodies are shown to demonstrate immunoprecipitation of endogenous SCFb-TRCP in vector-transfected cells.

Original Article

the RARE sequence in the REST promoter and repress its
gene expression during the differentiation of cortical progenitors.12,40 In our studies, we observed transcriptional
up-regulation of REST expression in the presence of retinoic acid. This is consistent with work from other groups,
in which ligand-bound RAR functioned as an activator after the conformational, change-dependent dismissal of
corepressors and recruitment of coactivators to the
complex.41
Surprisingly, REST transcription was up-regulated
despite a decline in the levels of RAR-a in the presence of
retinoic acid, suggesting that this may involve RAR-a–independent mechanisms. It is known that other RAR family members, such as RAR-c, are down-regulated in
response to retinoic acid in SK-N-SH cells.42,43 However,
the status of RAR-b in these cells is unclear. Levels of the
E3-ligase Skp2, which promotes degradation of the
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p27, were not altered
appreciably in our studies, indicating that Skp2-independent mechanisms may control cell cycle exit and neuronal differentiation in SK-N-SH cells.44-47 A small
decline in Skp2 levels was observed in SK-N-AS cells, consistent with a previous report; however, this appeared to
be insufficient to induce neuronal differentiation in these
cells in our studies.45
Despite the substantial increase in REST gene
expression, retinoic acid promoted a reduction in REST
protein levels in the drug-responsive SK-N-SH cells but
not in the nonresponsive SK-N-AS cells. RARs and their
coactivators/corepressors are ubiquitinated and targeted
for proteasomal degradation by the 26S proteasome in a
retinoic acid-dependent manner, which has been
hypothesized to provide a dynamic control over transcription at target promoters.42,43 The finding that MG-132
blocked RAR-a degradation in SK-N-SH and SK-N-AS
cells suggests that similar regulatory mechanisms may be
operational in these cells. In addition, the blockade of retinoic acid-mediated REST degradation by MG-132 treatment indicates proteasomal involvement in modulating
REST levels in these cells.
In our studies, several human neuroblastoma tumors
had poor SCFb-TRCP expression, and a significant proportion of these samples had elevated REST expression, consistent with the possibility that SCFb-TRCP may control
REST levels in neuroblastoma cells. However, it is important to note that not all samples exhibited this inverse correlation between the 2 proteins. Mutations in SCFb-TRCP
that abrogate its interaction with target proteins, including REST, have been described in several cancers.48,49

5200

Likewise, mutations in REST that interfere with its interaction with SCFb-TRCP also potentially may explain elevated REST expression in human neuroblastoma samples
that also exhibited high SCFb-TRCP expression. Indeed,
our IP and coIP experiments suggested that the interaction between REST and SCFb-TRCP may be inefficient in
SK-N-AS cells. It would be interesting to investigate
whether there are specific mutations in REST and/or
SCFb-TRCP that interfere with the ability of the 2 proteins
to interact in SK-N-AS cells and other neuroblastoma
cells with high REST expression. This may have potential
implications for decisions on the therapeutic use of retinoic acid in patients with neuroblastoma based on their
individualized fingerprint of REST and SCFb-TRCP status.
The mechanism by which retinoic acid affects SCFb-TRCP
expression and the reason for differences in the effect of
retinoic acid on SCFb-TRCP biology in SK-N-SH cells and
SK-N-AS cells are under investigation. REST can function both as an oncogene and as a tumor suppressor in a
cell type-dependent manner.19-22 In the latter case, it is
believed that the overexpression of SCFb-TRCP supports
malignant behavior.19,48,50 Our in vitro findings predict
that REST may function as an oncogene in neuroblastoma cells, although it remains to be formally proven.
Our data also suggest that manipulating proteasomal
activity may be worth investigating as a possible
mode of therapeutic intervention in animal models of
neuroblastoma.
In conclusion, it is becoming increasingly evident
the heterogeneity of neuroblastoma tumors coupled with
the degree of differentiation (a validated risk predictor)
may influence response to therapeutic agents like retinoic
acid.51 A more rigorous characterization of the ‘‘differentiation signature’’ of patient tumors may provide a more
reliable way to evaluate appropriate therapeutic intervention. Indeed, an excellent recent study determined that
loss of the neurofibromin 1 (NF1) tumor suppressor protein increases the activity of the rat sarcoma-mitogen activated protein kinase kinase (RAS-MEK), which then
down-regulates the transcriptional coactivator of the retinoic acid receptors called zinc finger protein 423
(ZNF423).52 A previous report by the same group also
highlighted the importance of ZNF423 in the response of
neuroblastoma cells to retinoic acid.8 Those studies also
demonstrated poor outcome in patients who had low
expression of both NF1 and ZNF423. These results are
particularly important because mutations in the retinoic
acid signaling pathways have not been demonstrated.
Because REST is an important regulator of neuronal

Cancer

November 15, 2011

Retinoic Acid Affects REST via b-TRCP/Singh et al

differentiation, it may be reasonable to hypothesize that
patients who have elevated REST levels in their tumors
may have a poorer prognosis. This will require validation
through study of patient data.

FUNDING SOURCES
This work was supported in part through funding from the
Matt Larson Pediatric Brain Tumor Foundation, the Ray
Fish Foundation, and the American Cancer Society grant RSG09-273-01 DDC to V.G. The plasmid pQCXIP expressing
SCFb-TRCP was a kind gift from Dr. Thomas Westbrook (Baylor
College of Medicine).

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
The authors made no disclosures.

REFERENCES
1. Brodeur GM. Neuroblastoma: biological insights into a clinical enigma. Nat Rev Cancer. 2003;3:203-216.
2. Mueller S, Matthay KK. Neuroblastoma: biology and staging. Curr Oncol Rep. 2009;11:431-438.
3. Brodeur GM, Seeger RC, Schwab M, Varmus HE, Bishop
JM. Amplification of N-myc in untreated human neuroblastomas correlates with advanced disease stage. Science.
1984;224:1121-1124.
4. Fredlund E, Ringner M, Maris JM, Pahlman S. High Myc
pathway activity and low stage of neuronal differentiation
associate with poor outcome in neuroblastoma. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A. 2008;105:14094-14099.
5. Matthay KK, Reynolds CP, Seeger RC, et al. Long-term
results for children with high-risk neuroblastoma treated on
a randomized trial of myeloablative therapy followed by 13cis-retinoic acid: a Children’s Oncology Group study. J Clin
Oncol. 2009;27:1007-1013.
6. Maris JM. Recent advances in neuroblastoma. N Engl J
Med. 2010;362:2202-2211.
7. Epping MT, Meijer LA, Bos JL, Bernards R. UNC45A confers resistance to histone deacetylase inhibitors and retinoic
acid. Mol Cancer Res. 2009;7:1861-1870.
8. Huang S, Laoukili J, Epping MT, et al. ZNF423 is critically required for retinoic acid-induced differentiation and
is a marker of neuroblastoma outcome. Cancer Cell.
2009;15: 328-340.
9. Li Z, Tan F, Thiele CJ. Inactivation of glycogen synthase
kinase-3beta contributes to brain-derived neutrophic factor/
TrkB-induced resistance to chemotherapy in neuroblastoma
cells. Mol Cancer Ther. 2007;6(12 pt 1):3113-3121.
10. Chong JA, Tapia-Ramirez J, Kim S, et al. REST: a mammalian silencer protein that restricts sodium channel gene
expression to neurons. Cell. 1995;80:949-957.
11. Schoenherr CJ, Anderson DJ. The neuron-restrictive silencer
factor (NRSF): a coordinate repressor of multiple neuronspecific genes. Science. 1995;267:1360-1363.
12. Ballas N, Grunseich C, Lu DD, Speh JC, Mandel G. REST
and its corepressors mediate plasticity of neuronal gene
chromatin throughout neurogenesis. Cell. 2005;121:645657.

Cancer

November 15, 2011

13. Gopalakrishnan V. REST and the RESTless: in stem cells
and beyond. Future Neurol. 2009;4:317-329.
14. Kagalwala MN, Singh SK, Majumder S. Stemness is only a
state of the cell. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol.
2008;73:227-234.
15. Ooi L, Wood IC. Chromatin crosstalk in development and
disease: lessons from REST. Nat Rev Genet. 2007;8:544554.
16. Ballas N, Mandel G. The many faces of REST oversee epigenetic programming of neuronal genes. Curr Opin Neurobiol. 2005;15:500-506.
17. Gopalakrishnan V, Bie B, Sinnappah-Kang ND, et al. Myoblast-derived neuronal cells form glutamatergic neurons in
the mouse cerebellum. Stem Cells. 2010;28:1839-1847.
18. Majumder S. REST in good times and bad: roles in tumor
suppressor and oncogenic activities. Cell Cycle. 2006;5:19291935.
19. Westbrook TF, Hu G, Ang XL, et al. SCFbeta-TRCP controls oncogenic transformation and neural differentiation
through REST degradation. Nature. 2008;452:370-374.
20. Fuller GN, Su X, Price RE, et al. Many human medulloblastoma tumors overexpress repressor element-1 silencing
transcription (REST)/neuron-restrictive silencer factor,
which can be functionally countered by REST-VP16. Mol
Cancer Ther. 2005;4:343-349.
21. Lawinger P, Venugopal R, Guo ZS, et al. The neuronal
repressor REST/NRSF is an essential regulator in medulloblastoma cells. Nat Med. 2000;6:826-831.
22. Su X, Gopalakrishnan V, Stearns D, et al. Abnormal expression of REST/NRSF and Myc in neural stem/progenitor
cells causes cerebellar tumors by blocking neuronal differentiation. Mol Cell Biol. 2006;26:1666-1678.
23. Guardavaccaro D, Frescas D, Dorrello NV, et al. Control
of chromosome stability by the beta-TrCP-REST-Mad2
axis. Nature. 2008;452:365-369.
24. Richards KN, Zweidler-McKay PA, Van Roy N, et al. Signaling of ERBB receptor tyrosine kinases promotes neuroblastoma growth in vitro and in vivo. Cancer. 2010;
116:3233-3243.
25. Aguilera DG, Das CM, Sinnappah-Kang ND, et al. Reactivation of death receptor 4 (DR4) expression sensitizes
medulloblastoma cell lines to TRAIL. J Neurooncol. 2009;
93:303-318.
26. Bruce AW, Lopez-Contreras AJ, Flicek P, et al. Functional
diversity for REST (NRSF) is defined by in vivo binding affinity hierarchies at the DNA sequence level. Genome Res.
2009;19:994-1005.
27. Kreisler A, Strissel PL, Strick R, Neumann SB, Schumacher
U, Becker CM. Regulation of the NRSF/REST gene by
methylation and CREB affects the cellular phenotype of
small-cell lung cancer. Oncogene. 2010;29:5828-5838.
28. Singh SK, Kagalwala MN, Parker-Thornburg J, Adams H,
Majumder S. REST maintains self-renewal and pluripotency
of embryonic stem cells. Nature. 2008;453:223-227.
29. Gaetano C, Matsumoto K, Thiele CJ. Retinoic acid resistant
neuroblastoma cells and the expression of insulin-like
growth factor-II. Prog Clin Biol Res. 1991;366:165-172.
30. Nagai J, Yazawa T, Okudela K, Kigasawa H, Kitamura H,
Osaka H. Retinoic acid induces neuroblastoma cell death by
inhibiting proteasomal degradation of retinoic acid receptor
alpha. Cancer Res. 2004;64:7910-7917.
31. Reynolds CP, Lemons RS. Retinoid therapy of childhood
cancer. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am. 2001;15:867-910.

5201

Original Article
32. Matthay KK, Villablanca JG, Seeger RC, et al. Treatment
of high-risk neuroblastoma with intensive chemotherapy,
radiotherapy, autologous bone marrow transplantation, and
13-cis-retinoic acid. Children’s Cancer Group. N Engl J
Med. 1999;341:1165-1173.
33. Reynolds CP, Kane DJ, Einhorn PA, et al. Response of
neuroblastoma to retinoic acid in vitro and in vivo. Prog
Clin Biol Res. 1991;366:203-211.
34. Lucarelli E, Kaplan DR, Thiele CJ. Selective regulation of
TrkA and TrkB receptors by retinoic acid and interferongamma in human neuroblastoma cell lines. J Biol Chem.
1995;270:24725-24731.
35. Matsuo T, Thiele CJ. p27Kip1: a key mediator of retinoic
acid induced growth arrest in the SMS-KCNR human neuroblastoma cell line. Oncogene. 1998;16:3337-3343.
36. Melino G, Thiele CJ, Knight RA, Piacentini M. Retinoids
and the control of growth/death decisions in human neuroblastoma cell lines. J Neurooncol. 1997;31:65-83.
37. Niles RM. Signaling pathways in retinoid chemoprevention
and treatment of cancer. Mutat Res. 2004;555:81-96.
38. Pahlman S, Ruusala AI, Abrahamsson L, Mattsson ME,
Esscher T. Retinoic acid-induced differentiation of cultured
human neuroblastoma cells: a comparison with phorbolester-induced differentiation. Cell Differ. 1984;14:135-144.
39. Nishimura E, Sasaki K, Maruyama K, Tsukada T, Yamaguchi K. Decrease in neuron-restrictive silencer factor (NRSF)
mRNA levels during differentiation of cultured neuroblastoma cells. Neurosci Lett. 1996;211:101-104.
40. Bour G, Lalevee S, Rochette-Egly C. Protein kinases and
the proteasome join in the combinatorial control of transcription by nuclear retinoic acid receptors. Trends Cell Biol.
2007;17:302-309.
41. Rochette-Egly C, Germain P. Dynamic and combinatorial
control of gene expression by nuclear retinoic acid receptors
(RARs) [serial online]. Nucl Recept Signal. 2009;7:e005.
42. Gianni M, Bauer A, Garattini E, Chambon P, RochetteEgly C. Phosphorylation by p38MAPK and recruitment of

5202

43.

44.
45.

46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.

52.

SUG-1 are required for RA-induced RAR gamma degradation and transactivation. EMBO J. 2002;21:3760-3769.
Kopf E, Plassat JL, Vivat V, de The H, Chambon P, Rochette-Egly C. Dimerization with retinoid X receptors and
phosphorylation modulate the retinoic acid-induced degradation of retinoic acid receptors alpha and gamma through
the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. J Biol Chem. 2000;275:
33280-33288.
Carrano AC, Eytan E, Hershko A, Pagano M. SKP2 is
required for ubiquitin-mediated degradation of the CDK inhibitor p27. Nat Cell Biol. 1999;1:193-199.
Nakamura M, Matsuo T, Stauffer J, Neckers L, Thiele CJ.
Retinoic acid decreases targeting of p27 for degradation via
an N-myc-dependent decrease in p27 phosphorylation and
an N-myc-independent decrease in Skp2. Cell Death Differ.
2003;10:230-239.
Kamura T, Hara T, Matsumoto M, et al. Cytoplasmic
ubiquitin ligase KPC regulates proteolysis of p27(Kip1) at
G1 phase. Nat Cell Biol. 2004;6:1229-1235.
Keller UB, Old JB, Dorsey FC, et al. Myc targets Cks1 to
provoke the suppression of p27Kip1, proliferation and lymphomagenesis. EMBO J. 2007;26:2562-2574.
Frescas D, Pagano M. Deregulated proteolysis by the F-box
proteins SKP2 and beta-TrCP: tipping the scales of cancer.
Nat Rev Cancer. 2008;8:438-449.
Fuchs SY, Spiegelman VS, Kumar KG. The many faces of
beta-TrCP E3 ubiquitin ligases: reflections in the magic
mirror of cancer. Oncogene. 2004;23:2028-2036.
Kudo Y, Guardavaccaro D, Santamaria PG, et al. Role of
F-box protein betaTrcp1 in mammary gland development
and tumorigenesis. Mol Cell Biol. 2004;24:8184-8194.
Cohn SL, Pearson AD, London WB, et al. The International Neuroblastoma Risk Group (INRG) classification system: an INRG Task Force report. J Clin Oncol. 2009;
27:289-297.
Holzel M, Huang S, Koster J, et al. NF1 is a tumor suppressor in neuroblastoma that determines retinoic acid
response and disease outcome. Cell. 2010;142:218-229.

Cancer

November 15, 2011

