House Passes 21st Century
Cures Act
Legislation would boost NIH funding,
speed drug development

T

he 21st Century Cures Act (H.R.6-114th Congress 20152016), which seeks to accelerate the discovery, development,
and delivery of promising new treatments to individuals living
with cancer and many other diseases, is making its way through
the US Congress.
The bill passed in the House of Representatives by a vote
of 344 to 77 on July 10, 2015, and at press time was being
considered by the Senate. Leaders in the cancer field consider
the legislation to be a significant step toward strengthening both
the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and the US Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) in their efforts to get better cures
to patients more quickly and efficiently. “As it stands now, the
bill is a brilliant piece of legislation that will save many lives
for generations to come,” says Ronald DePinho, MD, president
of The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center
(MDACC) in Houston.
The 21st Century Cures Act is the result of a nearly
2-year bipartisan effort led by House Energy and Commerce

Cancer
CANCER

December 1, 2015
DECEMBER 1, 2015

Committee chairman Fred Upton (R-MI) and Representative
Diana DeGette (D-CO). It is supported by the pharmaceutical
industry, patient advocacy groups, and medical organizations.
Among its many provisions, the Act calls for an additional
$8.75 billion for the NIH.
The Senate has been working on its own “Innovation for
Healthier Americans” initiative, which aligns with the House’s
effort. Organizations such as the American Society of Clinical
Oncology (ASCO) and the non-profit “Act for NIH,” launched
by MDACC’s board of visitors, have worked with Congress to
communicate what they consider to be the most pressing needs
to be addressed. At press time, the Senate was expected to act on
its legislation some time before the end of the year.
“Recognizing that there’s not a family, not a person who
isn’t affected by cancer or disease in some way, we sought to try
and help give people a little more help,” says Upton. “Science,
healthcare, and technology have come a long way, and 21st
Century Cures seeks to embrace those advances to help find a
cure for cancer and the thousands of diseases that plague us all.”
Among key provisions in the legislation are:
• Creating the “Innovation Fund,” a funding stream of $1.75
billion per year for 5 years for the NIH and $110 million
per year for 5 years for the FDA that will enable Congress
to invest additional resources into both agencies.
• Breaking down existing barriers to sharing and analyzing
the growing amount of health data generated in research
and clinical settings.
• Strengthening the FDA’s ability to examine the direct
experience with particular diseases and conditions and
the effect of their current therapies.
• Providing guidance for the broader, more collaborative
development and use of drug development tools.
• Modernizing clinical trials in a variety of ways, including
allowing researchers to design more targeted clinical trials
that can produce faster and cheaper results.
• Removing regulatory uncertainty for the development of
new medical applications.
• Providing new incentives for the development of drugs
for rare diseases.
• Creating a new coordinating mechanism to remove
choke points that slow the connections between scientific
discovery, drug and device development, and how
therapies are approved and made available to patients.
For Dr. DePinho, one of the most critical elements of the
legislation is the infusion of funds into the NIH. “By 2018, we
would be back up to the water line with funding and would
have inflationary increases each year, enabling the NIH to
become a robust entity once again from a funding standpoint,”
4101
1

© ALEXANDER RATHS / SHUTTERSTOCK.COM

Oncology Issues in Focus | BY CARRIE PRINTZ

he says. “[The Act] also creates some reforms and some strategic
plans for the NIH, including a 5-year term of office for research
institutions and national center directors.”
In addition, the Act provides additional funds for high
risk/high reward research, reduces the administrative burden
on researchers, and supports young and emerging scientific
investigators, he says.
Currently, only 1 in 6 grants is being funded by the NIH,
and many young investigators have their grants delayed, Dr.
DePinho says. The additional funding will help to stabilize the
nationwide cancer research enterprise, which has served as the
basis for many major discoveries in the field, he notes.
Dr. DePinho cites MDACC immunologist James Allison,
PhD, as an example. Dr. Allison’s pioneering basic research
into the immune system in the 1980s and 1990s led to the
development of a new class of immunotherapy drugs to treat
cancer, including ipilimumab, which was approved in 2011 by
the FDA for the treatment of metastatic melanoma.
“We need to support the young Jim Allisons of today so that
they can illuminate the clear paths toward solving the problem,”
he says.
Dr. DePinho and his colleagues believed that the legislation
also needed to provide broad-based support for all diseases and
not pit one against the other. “One field often cross-pollinates
with the other,” he says. “Research in Alzheimer’s disease could
lead to significant advances in asthma, heart disease, or cancer.”

Linking Electronic Health Records
ASCO leaders have honed in on another important piece of
the legislation: the interoperability of electronic health records
(EHRs) and information blocking. Recently, the organization
has developed CancerLinQ, a health information technology
platform to harness big data analytics that will help oncologists
deliver high-quality care to patients with cancer.
That effort can only be strengthened by efforts to provide
the interoperability of EHR called for in the 21st Century
Cures Act, says Clifford Hudis, MD, former ASCO president
and chair-elect of its government relations committee.
CancerLinQ is being built to take advantage of the billions
of observations that physicians make regarding their patients
with cancer, with the ultimate goal of using the type of artificial
intelligence now used routinely by companies such as Google.
Dr. Hudis gives the example of how Google can now predict

what people are starting to search for before they have even
finished typing.
However, medicine has been slow to adopt such methods
and instead often still relies on paper records or EHRs that
are noninteroperable or difficult to transfer among clinics
or institutions, he says. This problem is often the result of
efforts that are made to customize EHRs, which then become
difficult to transfer or extract information from. “Widespread
interoperability is critical for patient care and essential to help
patients and physicians navigate the continuum of care,” Dr.
Hudis says, noting that ASCO has called on the Senate to
further address this issue in its version of the legislation.

The bill is a brilliant piece of
legislation that will save many
lives for generations to come.
—Ronald DePinho, MD
He also notes that the type of big data gathered by
CancerLinQ and other systems will allow for more rapid and
accurate insights into how “real-world” patients are responding
to approved treatments. Because many patients are excluded
from clinical trials due to comorbid conditions, it is not always
known in advance how these patients will respond to certain
drugs. “We will get much more rapid feedback with more
data, and it will help the FDA determine if they should grant
approval of a therapy more quickly or if they should withdraw
or postpone it,” he says.

Critical Voices
The 21st Century Cures Act is not without its critics. Some
groups contend that it favors drug and device manufacturers
and could lead to the approval of treatments that either do not
work or could potentially harm patients.
However, Dr. DePinho believes that the legislation ensures
the safety and effectiveness of therapies. “You have to balance
the need and urgency with safety,” he says. “When it comes
to cancer, you have people who are dying, and patients and
families are counting on us to make sure we deliver on these
opportunities to save their lives.”
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29007

Regular Coffee Consumption May Improve Survival in Patients
With Colon Cancer

P

atients with colon cancer who regularly consume caffeinated
coffee may be able to prevent the return of the disease after
treatment, according to a large study conducted by the DanaFarber Cancer Institute in Boston, Massachusetts.1
The patients in the study were treated with surgery and
chemotherapy for stage III colon cancer and were found to
derive the greatest benefit from consuming 4 or more cups of
4102

coffee per day, amounting to approximately 460 mg of caffeine.
The findings demonstrated that the patients were 42% less
likely than noncoffee drinkers to experience disease recurrence,
and 33% percent less likely to die of cancer.
A more modest benefit occurred with the consumption
of 2 to 3 cups of coffee daily, whereas drinking 1 cup or less
was found to provide little protection in the study, which was

Cancer

December 1, 2015

