Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 33

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Proton pump inhibitors enhance the effects of cytotoxic agents
in chemoresistant epithelial ovarian carcinoma
Yoo-Young Lee1,*, Hye-Kyung Jeon1,*, Ji Eun Hong1, Young Jae Cho1, Ji Yoon Ryu1,
Jung-Joo Choi1, Sang Hoon Lee2, Gun Yoon3, Woo Young Kim4, In-Gu Do5,
Min Kyu Kim6, Tae-Joong Kim1, Chel Hun Choi1, Jeong-Won Lee1, Duk-Soo Bae1,
Byoung-Gie Kim1
1

 epartment of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine,
D
Seoul, Korea

2

Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Chung-Ang University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea

3

 epartment of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Pusan National University Yangsan Hospital, Pusan National University School of 
D
Medicine, Yangsan, Korea

4

epartment of Obstetrics
D
Medicine, Seoul, Korea

5

Pathology, Kangbuk Samsung Hospital, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea

6

 epartment of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Samsung Changwon Hospital, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine,
D
Changwon, Korea

and

Gynecology,

Kangbuk

Samsung

Hospital,

Sungkyunkwan

University

School

of

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to:
Jeong-Won Lee, e-mail: garden.lee@samsung.com
Byoung-Gie Kim, e-mail: bksong.kim@samsung.com
Keywords: epithelial ovarian cancer, microenvironment, V-ATPase, omeprazole, clear cell carcinoma
Received: April 27, 2015 	Accepted: September 07, 2015 	Published: September 19, 2015

ABSTRACT
This study was designed to investigate whether proton pump inhibitors
(PPI, V-ATPase blocker) could increase the effect of cytotoxic agents in chemoresistant
epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC). Expression of V-ATPase protein was evaluated in
patients with EOC using immunohistochemistry, and patient survival was compared
based on expression of V-ATPase mRNA from a TCGA data set. In vitro, EOC cell
lines were treated with chemotherapeutic agents with or without V-ATPase siRNA or
PPI (omeprazole) pretreatment. Cell survival and apoptosis was assessed using MTT
assay and ELISA, respectively. In vivo experiments were performed to confirm the
synergistic effect with omeprazole and paclitaxel on tumor growth in orthotopic and
patient-derived xenograft (PDX) mouse models. Expression of V-ATPase protein in
ovarian cancer tissues was observed in 44 patients (44/59, 74.6%). Higher expression
of V-ATPase mRNA was associated with poorer overall survival in TCGA data.
Inhibition of V-ATPase by siRNA or omeprazole significantly increased cytotoxicity
or apoptosis to paclitaxel in chemoresistant (HeyA8-MDR, SKOV3-TR) and clear cell
carcinoma cells (ES-2, RMG-1), but not in chemosensitive cells (HeyA8, SKOV3ip1).
Moreover, the combination of omeprazole and paclitaxel significantly decreased the
total tumor weight compared with paclitaxel alone in a chemoresistant EOC animal
model and a PDX model of clear cell carcinoma. However, this finding was not
observed in chemosensitive EOC animal models. These results show that omeprazole
pretreatment can increase the effect of chemotherapeutic agents in chemoresistant
EOC and clear cell carcinoma via reduction of the acidic tumor microenvironment.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

35040

Oncotarget

INTRODUCTION

(Figure  2B and 2C). Inhibition of V-ATPase significantly
increased cytotoxicity to paclitaxel in HeyA8-MDR (20%,
P < 0.05) and SKOV3-TR cells (20%, P < 0.05), but not
in chemosensitive cell lines HeyA8 and SKOV3ip1.
When we extended exposure time of the cytotoxic drugs
to 72 and 96 hours, respectively, the results were the same
(supplementary Figure 1A).

Epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) is the leading
cause of death among all gynecological cancers and
the five-year survival rate is dismal at 11% for patients
with stage IV and 23%–41% for patients with stage III
EOC [1]. One of the major obstacles to overcoming this
bleak prognosis is tumor chemoresistance that arises
following treatment with taxane and platinum-based
agents, which is the standard regimen of chemotherapy
for post-surgery EOC [2].
Chemoresistance of cancer cells can occur by
genetic or epigenetic mechanisms [3, 4] but the acidic
tumor microenvironment has also been shown to increase
the chemoresistance of solid tumors [3]. For example,
one of the most distinctive features of tumor cells is their
cytoplasmic alkalization and subsequent acidification
of the tumor microenvironment [5, 6]. Recently, highdose proton pump inhibitors (PPI), which inhibit acidic
microenvironments by blocking the activity of vacuolar
H+-ATPases (V-ATPases), have been shown to enhance
the effect of chemotherapeutic agents on chemoresistant
tumors developed in companion animals [7].
This study was designed to investigate whether
PPI increase the cytotoxic effect of chemotherapy in
chemoresistant EOC cells in vitro and in vivo.

Intracellular pH decreases after PPI treatment
To confirm the change of pH in cells by PPI
treatment, alterations in intracellular pH in HeyA8 and
HeyA8-MDR cells were verified using the BCECF-AM
pH indicator. In chemoresistant HeyA8-MDR cells,
fluorescence significantly decreased, indicating that
intracellular pH was acidified by V-ATPase inhibition. In
contrast, intracellular pH showed no significant change in
chemosensitive HeyA8 cells (Figure 3A). Additionally,
quantitative analysis showed that intracellular pH
decreased with statistical significance in HeyA8-MDR
cells, but statistical significance was not achieved in
HeyA8 cells (Figure 3B).

PPI pretreatment significantly increases the
cytotoxicity and apoptosis of chemotherapeutic
agent in chemoresistant EOC cells
We then assessed whether pretreatment with
omeprazole could reverse the sensitivity to chemotherapy
in chemoresistant cell lines (taxane-resistant including
HeyA8-MDR and SKOV3-TR; clear cell carcinoma cell
lines including ES-2 and RMG-1). The results showed that
pretreatment with omeprazole significantly decreased cell
survival after paclitaxel treatment in HeyA8-MDR cells
by > 30% (P < 0.05) when compared to treatment with
paclitaxel alone. However, this finding was not observed in
HeyA8 cells, which are sensitive to paclitaxel (Figure 3C).
When we extended exposure time of the cytotoxic drugs
to 72 and 96 hours, respectively, the results were the same
(supplementary Figure 1B). Similar results were obtained
with SKOV3-TR (30%, P < 0.05) and SKOV3ip1 (no
difference). Clinically, clear cell histology among EOC
has poorer prognosis than other EOC subtypes due to its
resistance to chemotherapy [8, 9]. Experiments conducted
using clear cell carcinoma cell lines including ES-2
and RMG-1 showed that pretreatment with omeprazole
could increase the cytotoxicity to paclitaxel and cisplatin
compared with drug alone (Figure 3C).
To assess cell apoptosis, active caspase-3 was
measured by ELISA in EOC cells HeyA8, HeyA8MDR, and ES-2 treated with paclitaxel, with or without
omeprazole pretreatment. Omeprazole pretreatment
significantly increased the apoptotic activity of
chemotherapy in all three cell lines and, interestingly,
the increase in apoptosis with omeprazole was larger in

RESULTS
Expression of V-ATPase in patients with EOC
and its clinical significance
Immunoreactivity of V-ATPase was predominantly
observed in the cytoplasm of cells (Figure 1A). V-ATPase
expression was not observed in any of the five normal
ovarian and fallopian tube epithelium but was expressed
in 44 of 59 EOC tissues (74.6%) as shown in Figure 1B.
To investigate the clinical significance of V-ATPase
expression in EOC, we used TCGA data and found that
patients with higher 75 percentile mRNA expression
of V-ATPase showed significantly poorer overall
survival than patients with lower 25 percentile mRNA
expression of V-ATPase (Figure 1C, HR; 1.493, 95% CI;
1.109–2.009).

V-ATPase siRNA transfection significantly
increases the cytotoxicity of paclitaxel in
chemoresistant cells
V-ATPase protein expression was initially assessed
in several EOC cell lines. Western blot analysis showed
variable expression of V-ATPase protein in EOC cell
lines (Figure 2A). In order to test whether inhibition of
V-ATPase could enhance chemosensitivity, EOC cell
lines were transfected with V-ATPase specific siRNA

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

35041

Oncotarget

Figure 1: V-ATPase immunoreactivity in human ovarian epithelium and survival analysis based on mRNA expression
of V-ATPase in patients with epithelial ovarian cancer (TCGA data). A. Representative V-ATPase staining from normal ovarian
epithelium (a), and serous ovarian adenocarcinoma (b–d) with no staining (0), weak staining (+1), moderate staining (+2), strong staining
(+3), respectively. (All photographs were taken at original 400x magnification) B. Distribution of patients with epithelial ovarian cancer
according to the V-ATPase immunoreactivity C. Kaplan-Meier survival analysis showed higher overall survival in patients who showed
lower 25% expression of mRNA expression.

chemoresistant cell lines HeyA8-MDR and ES-2 than in
the chemosensitive cell line HeyA8 (Figure 4).

tissue to assess for cell proliferation and apoptosis. Cell
proliferation was evaluated using immunohistochemistry
staining for Ki-67, which revealed that paclitaxel with
omeprazole pretreatment significantly decreased the
number of proliferating cells compared with paclitaxel
alone (P < 0.05, Figure 5B). Additionally, paclitaxel with
omeprazole significantly increased apoptosis, assessed by
TUNEL assay, compared with paclitaxel alone (P < 0.01,
Figure 5C).

PPI pretreatment significantly decreases tumor
growth in chemoresistant cell line orthotopic
xenografts of EOC
In order to assess the potential clinical relevance of
the in vitro results, in vivo experiments were performed
using an EOC orthotopic animal model. HeyA8,
HeyA8-MDR, or ES-2 cells were injected into the
abdominal cavity of athymic nude mice. Mice injected
with HeyA8-MDR or ES-2 cells and treated with
paclitaxel in combination with pretreated omeprazole
had significantly decreased tumor weight compared with
those mice treated with paclitaxel alone (P < 0.01 and
P < 0.05, respectively, Figure 5A). However, this finding
was not observed in mice injected with chemosensitive
HeyA8 cells, which is consistent with the results of our
in vitro studies. In order to validate the results of our
in vitro PPI pretreatment studies, we used mouse tumor

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

PPI pretreatment significantly decreases the
tumor growth in a PDX model of clear cell
carcinoma
We developed a PDX model of clear cell carcinoma
using subrenal implantation of human ovarian cancer
tissue. We assessed V-ATPase protein expression in several
models of PDX of EOC and found various expression
levels (Figure 6A). We selected case number OV-68, a
clear cell carcinoma with relatively high expression of
V-ATPase, for an in vivo therapy experiment. The patient

35042

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Western blot analysis for protein expression of V-ATPase in epithelial ovarian cancer cell lines and the effects
of V-ATPase specific siRNA on cytotoxicity of paclitaxel in epithelial ovarian cancer cell lines. A. Variable expression of
V-ATPase V1C1 was observed in epithelial ovarian cancer cell lines. B. Knockdown of V-ATPase expression siRNA transfection assessed
by Western blot analysis in epithelial ovarian cancer cell lines. C. Cell survival significantly decreased in V-ATPase siRNA and paclitaxeltreated cells compared with paclitaxel alone in chemoresistant cell lines. (HeyA8, SKOV3ip1, and A2780-PAR; chemosensitive cell lines,
HeyA8-MDR, SKOV3-TR, and A2780-CP20; chemoresistant cell lines). Bar, standard deviation.

from which this model was derived was 44 years old
at the time of her initial visit and presented with FIGO
stage IIIA ovarian cancer with clear cell carcinoma. The
ovarian cancer tissues obtained during initial surgery were
used for this model. The patient received six cycles of
paclitaxel and carboplatin after optimal debulking surgery
but had recurrent disease six months after the last dose of
chemotherapy, which is clinically platinum resistant. The
PDX model was treated for 3 weeks, beginning 5 weeks
after implantation of xenograft tissues (passage  3).
Omeprazole pretreatment significantly inhibited tumor
growth compared with paclitaxel alone in this model
(P < 0.05) (Figure 6B). Pretreatment with omeprazole also
inhibited cell proliferation and increased apoptosis in this
model (Figure 6C and 6D, respectively).

V-ATPase mRNA was significantly associated with poor
survival. In our in vitro studies, V-ATPase expression
significantly decreased after EOC cell lines were treated
with specific inhibitors, including siRNA and omeprazole,
and pretreatment with omeprazole to inhibit V-ATPase
function sensitized chemoresistant cells to paclitaxel
treatment. In an in vivo orthotopic chemoresistant mouse
model of EOC, tumor volume significantly decreased
following chemotherapy only when omeprazole was used
for pretreatment. These results were corroborated in a
PDX animal model derived from a patient whose clear
cell carcinoma of the ovary showed platinum resistance, in
which pretreatment with omeprazole significantly reduced
tumor growth compared to paclitaxel alone.
V-ATPases are ATP dependent H+ transporters,
which regulate intra- and extracellular pH by actively
transporting protons [10]. For tumor cells, cytoplasmic
acidification may be lethal because this acidification can
trigger a cascade of lytic enzymes that ultimately lead
to self-digestion [11]. V-ATPases in tumor cells thus

DISCUSSION
In examining epithelial ovarian cancer patients
in a TCGA cohort, we found that higher expression of

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

35043

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Measurement of pH after omeprazole treatment and effects of omeprazole on cell survival with cytotoxic
drugs in epithelial ovarian cancer cell lines. A, B. Significantly decreased intracellular pH was observed in omeprazole (20 mg/mL)

treated chemoresistant cell lines (HeyA8-MDR). C. Omeprazole pretreatment was significantly associated with decreased cell viability
measured by MTT assay in chemoresistant cell lines (HeyA8-MDR, ES-2, RMG-1). Bar, standard deviation.

maintains an appropriate relatively neutral intracellular
pH and an acidic extracellular pH [12]. As a result, the
acidic microenvironment increased by overexpression
of V-ATPases is observed in malignant tissues [13]. For
example, higher expression of V-ATPases in cancer cells is
associated with poorer prognosis [14], and knockdown of
V-ATPase expression by siRNA in a human hepatocellular
carcinoma was found to markedly slow the growth rate
and block the metastatic spread in nude mice [15].
Proton pump inhibitors such as omeprazole,
used clinically to suppress gastric acidity in gastritis,
are activated by acidic conditions and tend to decrease
intracellular pH and increase the extracellular pH via
inhibition of V-ATPases in a covalent interaction [16]. The
pharmacodynamics of PPIs has been shown to have antiproliferative and pro-apoptotic effects on certain cancer
cell lines [11, 17–20]. Clinically, omeprazole is safe for
treating gastritis and esophagitis, but it is frequently
associated with drug interactions. Omeprazole has high
affinity for cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes and is
primarily metabolized by this enzyme. It has therefore
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

been suggested that omeprazole might stimulate the
effect of anti-cancer agents which are also metabolized
by CYP enzyme. However, until now, reports studying
drug interactions have not found that omeprazole alters
the pharmacokinetics and toxicities of these anti-cancer
agents. With the safety and convenient administration
of omeprazole, there are potential benefits in clinical
application.
Among the histotypes of EOC, clear cell ovarian
carcinoma is known for its distinctive histopathological
and molecular genetic features, including chemoresistance
[21, 22]. In this study, clear cell carcinoma cell lines
showed chemoresistance, which was abrogated by
blocking V-ATPase via omeprazole. In addition, in a PDX
animal model derived from a patient with chemoresistant
clear cell ovarian cancer, there was higher expression
of V-ATPase in tumor tissue and poor tumor response
to paclitaxel alone; however, omeprazole pretreatment
increased the sensitivity of the tumor to paclitaxel.
These findings suggest V-ATPase as a candidate target
molecule or biomarker for cancer treatment and provide
35044

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Involvement of omeprazole in cytotoxic drug-induced cell death. A. Cell death was observed by light microscopy in

each cell line (HeyA8, HeyA8-MDR, and ES-2). B. Expression of active caspase-3, measured by ELISA, was significantly increased in the
omeprazole and paclitaxel group compared to paclitaxel alone. Bar, standard deviation. (OM; omeprazole)

a potential role for omeprazole as a chemosensitizer in
clear cell carcinoma of the ovary. Clinical trials with this
regimen should be seriously considered in the future,
especially considering that no chemotherapeutic agents
have demonstrated efficacy for clear cell carcinoma of the
ovary until now.
In conclusion, omeprazole enhanced the effect of
chemotherapeutic agents on chemoresistant cells and
animal models. This data suggests that omeprazole may
be useful as a chemosensitizer in treatment of patients with
chemoresistant EOC.

the specimens using hematoxylin and eosin staining.
Specimens were used in analysis if they comprised more
than 90% tumor cells. This study was reviewed and
approved by the Institutional Review Board at Samsung
Medical Center, Seoul, Korea (IRB No. 2011-04-008-002).
We also investigated the prognostic role of ATP6V1C1
gene expression using unprotected data of 489 patients
from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) [23].

Immunohistochemical analysis
Immunohistochemical studies were carried out on
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded, 4 μm thick tissue
sections. The primary antibodies used were rabbit
polyclonal V-ATPase subunit C1 antibody (Santa Cruz
Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA) and anti-Ki-67 (DAKO,
Glostrup, Denmark). Tissue sections were deparaffinized
three times in xylene for a total of 15  minutes and
subsequently rehydrated. Immunostaining for V-ATPase
was performed using a Bond-maxTM automated
immunostainer (Leica Biosystems, Melbourne, Australia)
and the BondTM Polymer Refine Detection kit (Vision
Biosystems, Melbourne, Australia). Briefly, antigen
retrieval was carried out at 97°C for 20 minutes in ER1

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Patients and tissue specimens
Fifty-nine patients who underwent surgery for
EOC at the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology
at Samsung Medical Center between October 2003 and
November 2005 were included in this study. Five normal
ovarian and fallopian tube specimens were used as normal
controls. Tumor tissue specimens were obtained during
surgery from women with epithelial ovarian carcinoma.
A single gynecologic pathologist (I-G Do) examined

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

35045

Oncotarget

Figure 5: The effect of omeprazole as a chemosensitizer in chemoresistant cells assessed in female BALB/c nude
mice. A. Tumor weights were only significantly lower in chemoresistant animal models (HeyA8-MDR, ES-2) treated with omeprazole and
paclitaxel compared to paclitaxel alone. B. Tumor cell proliferation, assessed by Ki-67 immunohistochemistry staining, in harvested tumor
tissues was significantly lower in the omeprazole and paclitaxel group compared with paclitaxel alone. C. Apoptotic activity in harvested
tumor tissues was significantly higher in the omeprazole and paclitaxel group (paclitaxel; 120 μg/mouse, OM; omeprazole; 50 mg/kg, NS;
not significant). Columns, mean of 10 mice. Bars, standard error. (All photographs were taken at original magnification × 100)

buffer. After blocking endogenous peroxidase activity
with 3% hydrogen peroxidase for 10 minutes, primary
antibody incubation was carried out for 15 minutes at
room temperature at a dilution of 1:200. Anti-mouse IgG
(AI-2000, Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA) was used
in place of primary antibody as a negative control. The
intensity of staining was graded on a semiquantitative
scale from 0 to 3, where 0 = no staining, 1+ = weak
staining, 2+ = moderate staining, and 3+ = strong staining.
Immunohistochemistry for Ki-67 was performed as
described previously [24]. To quantify Ki-67 expression,
the number of Ki-67 positive cells and the total number
of tumor cells were counted in 5 random fields at 100x
magnification and the percentage of positive cells was
calculated.

labeling (TUNEL) assay with a commercially available
apoptosis detection kit (Promega, Fitchburg, WI)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions [25]. Briefly,
after routine deparaffinization, rehydration, and blocking
of endogenous peroxidase with 3% hydrogen peroxide in
PBS for 10 min at room temperature, tissue sections were
digested with 20 μg/mL proteinase K in PBS for 15 min
at room temperature. After washing sections in PBS
buffer, equilibration buffer was applied for 5 min at room
temperature, and the sections were then incubated with
working strength terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase
(TdT) enzyme for 60 min at 37°C in a humidity chamber.
The reaction was terminated in working strength stop/
wash buffer for 15 min at room temperature. After washing
in PBS, the sections were covered with Streptavidin HRP
solution for 30 min at room temperature, and the color
reaction was developed using DAB substrate chromogen
solution for 5 min and then washed with distilled water.
Sections were lightly counterstained with Mayer’s
hematoxylin for 30 sec. All sections were also stained with

TUNEL assay
Apoptotic cell death was assessed using a terminal
deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated dUTP nick end

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

35046

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Effects of omeprazole on paclitaxel in a patient-derived tumor xenograft (PDX) model of platinum resistant
ovarian clear cell carcinoma (ov-68). A. V-ATPaseV1C1 protein expression was variable in PDX models of EOC. B. Omeprazole

resulted in a significantly decreased tumor weight compared with paclitaxel injected control. In each picture, the small left piece is normal
kidney (no tumor transplanted), and the right large piece is developed PDX. C. Tumor cell proliferation with Ki-67 immunohistochemistry
in harvested tumor tissues was significantly decreased in the omeprazole treated group. D. Apoptotic activity in harvested tumor tissues was
significantly increased in the omeprazole and paclitaxel group. Bar, standard error.

H&E for histologic evaluation. To quantify cell death, the
number of TUNEL-positive cells was counted in 5 random
fields at 100x magnification and the percentage of positive
cells was calculated.

RPMI 1640, ES-2: McCoy’s 5A, RMG-1: Ham’s F12)
supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and
0.1% gentamicin sulfate (Gemini Bioproducts, Calabasas,
CA) in 5% CO2 at 37°C.

Cell lines

Western blot analysis

Human EOC cell lines (HeyA8, SKOV3ip1,
HeyA8-MDR, SKOV3-TR, and A2780-CP20) were a gift
from Dr. Anil K. Sood, Department of Cancer Biology,
University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, TX,
USA [26]. A2780 and ES-2 cell lines were obtained
from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC,
Manassas, VA). The RMG-1 cell line was obtained
from Japan Health Science Research Resources Bank
(HSRRB, Osaka, Japan). Human EOC cell lines were
maintained in complete media (HeyA8, HeyA8-MDR,
SKOV3ip1, SKOV3-TR, A2780, and A2780-CP20:

Preparation of lysates from cultured cells and
tumors has been described previously [27]. Protein
bands were probed with V-ATPase subunit C1 antibody
at 1:1000 dilution (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa
Cruz, CA) and tubulin antibody at 1:3000 dilution
(Epitomics, Burlingame, CA), and then probed with
horseradish peroxidase-conjugated anti-rabbit and antigoat antibody (GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ). Bands
were visualized by enhanced chemoluminescence using an
ECL kit (Amersham Biosciences, Buckinghamshire, UK)
according to the manufacturer’s protocol.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

35047

Oncotarget

Animal care and development of in vivo models,
including established cell line xenografts and
patient-derived xenografts (PDX)

Small interfering RNA (siRNA) transfection and
drug treatment
V-ATPase V1C1 siRNA and negative control
siRNA were obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology.
Cells were seeded at 4 × 103 cells/well in a 96-well
microplate in RPMI 1640 with 10% FBS. All
siRNAs (10 nM) were transfected into cells using
Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen, San Diego, CA)
according to the manufacturer’s protocol. After
24  h of siRNA transfection, cells were treated
with various  concentrations of paclitaxel (SigmaAldrich,  St. Louis, MO) and then incubated at 37°C
for 48, 72, and 96 h. Omeprazole (AstraZeneca,
Mölndal, Sweden) was resuspended in normal saline
at a concentration  of 5 mg/mL. Cells were seeded at
4 × 103 cells/well in a 96-well microplate in RPMI 1640
with 10% FBS. Cells were pretreated with or without
omeprazole (20 mg/mL) based on previous reports
[28], and after 24 h of treatment, cells were treated with
various  concentrations  of paclitaxel and incubated at
37°C for 48, 72, and 96 h.

Female BALB/c nude mice were purchased from
Orient Bio (Seongnam, Korea). This study was reviewed
and approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use
Committee (IACUC) of the Samsung Biomedical Research
Institute (protocol No. H-A9–003), which is an Association
for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal
Care International (AAALAC International) accredited
facility and abides by the Institute of Laboratory Animal
Resources (ILAR) guide. To establish orthotopic cell
line xenografts, HeyA8 (0.25 × 106 cells/0.2 mL HBSS),
HeyA8-MDR (1.0  × 106 cells/0.2 mL HBSS), and ES-2
(7.5 × 105 cells/0.2  mL HBSS) were injected into the
peritoneal cavity of mice [33]. For the PDX model of
EOC, surgical patient tumor specimens were reduced
into small pieces (less than 2–3 mm3), implanted into the
subrenal capsule of the left kidney, and propagated by serial
transplantation [34]. After 6 days of cell injection for the cell
line models or 5 weeks for the PDX models, omeprazole
(50 mg/kg) based on previous studies [28, 35] or PBS were
pre-injected i.p. After 24  h paclitaxel (120 μg/mouse) or
PBS were injected i.p. once weekly in 200 μl volume. Four
groups of cell line xenograft mice (n = 10 per group) for
each cell line and two groups for PDX (n = 10 per group)
were monitored for adverse effects. Tumors were harvested
after 4 weeks of therapy or when any of the mice began to
appear moribund. Total body weight and tumor weight of
each mouse were recorded. Tumors were fixed in formalin
and embedded in paraffin or snap frozen in OCT compound
(Sakura Finetek Japan, Tokyo, Japan) in liquid nitrogen.

3-(4, 5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2, 5-diphenyl
tetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay
The MTT assay was performed as previously
described [29]. Each sample was assayed in triplicate.

Measurement of intracellular pH levels
BCECF-AM(2′,7′‑bis‑(2‑carboxyethyl)‑5‑(and‑
6)‑carboxyfluorescein, (Invitrogen) is the most widely
used fluorescent indicator for intracellular pH. The
BCECF-AM was excited at 488 nm with emission
collected  at 500–550  nm [30]. HeyA8 and HeyA8MDR (4 × 105 cells) cells were seeded in a 35 mm
confocal dish  (#200350, SPL Lifescience, Pocheon,
Gyeonggi,  Korea) in RPMI  1640 with 10% FBS.
The next day, cells were treated with omeprazole (10
μ g/mL) in serum free RPMI 1640 without  sodium
bicarbonate.  After 24 h of treatment, the cells were
treated with 1 μ g/mL BCECF-AM solution, incubated at
37°C for 30 minutes and analyzed by LSM 700 confocal
microscope.
To measure 490 nm/450 nm ratio [31, 32],
HeyA8 and HeyA8-MDR (2 × 104 cells/well) cells
were seeded  in a 96-well black microplate in RPMI
1640 with 10% FBS. After two days, cells were
treated  with omeprazole (10 μg/mL) in serum free
RPMI 1640 without sodium bicarbonate. After 24 h of
treatment, the cells were treated with 1 μg/mL BCECFAM solution,  incubated at 37°C for 30 minutes and
analyzed by PerkinElmer VICTOR2 plate reader.
Data corrected to cell numbers by using MTT assay.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Statistical analysis
The Mann–Whitney U test was used to evaluate the
significance and to compare differences among groups for
in vitro and in vivo assays. Overall and progression-free
survival curves were evaluated and compared according
to the Kaplan-Meier method using the log-rank test. SPSS
software (version 17.0; SPSS, Chicago, IL) was used for
all statistical analyses. All P-values were two-sided and
considered statistically significant if P < 0.05.

Acknowledgments
This study was supported by a grant of the Korea
Healthcare technology R&D Project, Ministry for Health
& Welfare Affairs, Republic of Korea. (A092255).This
study was supported by Samsung Medical Center grant.
(PRX1110231). This study was supported by a grant from
the National R&D Program for Cancer Control, Ministry
for Health, Welfare and Family affairs, Republic of Korea.
(0920010).

35048

Oncotarget

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

c­ ytology samples as a diagnostic and prognostic marker
in oral ­squamous cell carcinoma. Cancer Biol Ther. 2010;
9:1057–1064.

The authors declare no potential conflict of interest.

15.	 Lu X, Qin W, Li J, Tan N, Pan D, Zhang H, Xie L, Yao G,
Shu H, Yao M, Wan D, Gu J, Yang S. The growth and
metastasis of human hepatocellular carcinoma x
­ enografts
are inhibited by small interfering RNA targeting to the
subunit ATP6L of proton pump. Cancer Res. 2005;
65:6843–6849.

REFERENCES
1.	 Jemal A, Siegel R, Xu J, Ward E. Cancer statistics.
CA Cancer J Clin. 2010; 60:277–300.
2.	 Matsuo K, Lin YG, Roman LD, Sood AK. Overcoming
platinum resistance in ovarian carcinoma. Expert Opin
Investig Drugs. 2010; 19:1339–1354.

16.	 Larsson H, Mattson H, Sundell G, Carlsson E. Animal
pharmacodynamics of omeprazole. A survey of its pharmacological properties in vivo. Scand J Gastroenterol Suppl.
1985; 108:23–35.

3.	 Tredan O, Galmarini CM, Patel K, Tannock IF. Drug
­resistance and the solid tumor microenvironment. J Natl
Cancer Inst. 2007; 99:1441–1454.

17.	 De Milito A, Iessi E, Logozzi M, Lozupone F, Spada M,
Marino ML, Federici C, Perdicchio M, Matarrese P,
Lugini L, Nilsson A, Fais S. Proton pump inhibitors induce
apoptosis of human B-cell tumors through a caspase-­
independent mechanism involving reactive oxygen species.
Cancer Res. 2007; 67:5408–5417.

4.	 Safaei R. Role of copper transporters in the uptake and
efflux of platinum containing drugs. Cancer Lett. 2006;
234:34–39.
5.	 Tannock IF, Rotin D. Acid pH in tumors and its potential for
therapeutic exploitation. Cancer Res. 1989; 49:4373–4384.

18.	 Morimura T, Fujita K, Akita M, Nagashima M, Satomi A.
The proton pump inhibitor inhibits cell growth and induces
apoptosis in human hepatoblastoma. Pediatr Surg Int. 2008;
24:1087–1094.

6.	 De Milito A, Fais S. Tumor acidity, chemoresistance and
proton pump inhibitors. Future Oncol. 2005; 1:779–786.
7.	 Spugnini EP, Baldi A, Buglioni S, Carocci F,
de  Bazzichini  GM, Betti G, Pantaleo I, Menicagli F,
Citro  G, Fais S. Lansoprazole as a rescue agent in
­chemoresistant tumors: a phase I/II study in companion
animals with spontaneously occurring tumors. J Transl
Med. 2011; 9:221.

19.	 Yeo M, Kim DK, Park HJ, Cho SW, Cheong JY, Lee KJ.
Retraction: Blockage of intracellular proton extrusion with
proton pump inhibitor induces apoptosis in gastric cancer.
Cancer Sci. 2008; 99:185.
20.	 Udelnow A, Kreyes A, Ellinger S, Landfester K,
Walther P, Klapperstueck T, Wohlrab J, Henne-Bruns D,
Knippschild U, Wurl P. Omeprazole inhibits proliferation
and modulates autophagy in pancreatic cancer cells. PLoS
One. 2011; 6:e20143.

8.	 Tagami T, Foltz WD, Ernsting MJ, Lee CM, Tannock IF,
May JP, Li SD. MRI monitoring of intratumoral drug
­delivery and prediction of the therapeutic effect with a
­multifunctional thermosensitive liposome. Biomaterials.
2011; 32:6570–6578.

21.	 Prat J. New insights into ovarian cancer pathology. Ann
Oncol. 2012; 23:x111–117.

9.	 Itamochi H, Kigawa J, Terakawa N. Mechanisms of
­chemoresistance and poor prognosis in ovarian clear cell
­carcinoma. Cancer Sci. 2008; 99:653–658.

22.	 Lee YY, Kim TJ, Kim MJ, Kim HJ, Song T, Kim MK,
Choi CH, Lee JW, Bae DS, Kim BG. Prognosis of ­ovarian
clear cell carcinoma compared to other h
­istological
­subtypes: a meta-analysis. Gynecol Oncol. 2011;
122:541–547.

10.	 Forgac M. Vacuolar ATPases: rotary proton pumps in
­physiology and pathophysiology. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol.
2007; 8:917–929.

23.	 Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network . Integrated
genomic analyses of ovarian carcinoma. Nature. 2011;
474:609–615.

11.	 Marino ML, Fais S, Djavaheri-Mergny M, Villa A,
Meschini S, Lozupone F, Venturi G, Della Mina P,
Pattingre S, Rivoltini L, Codogno P, De Milito A. Proton
pump inhibition induces autophagy as a survival mechanism following oxidative stress in human melanoma cells.
Cell Death Dis. 2010; 1:e87.

24.	 Jalava P, Kuopio T, Juntti-Patinen L, Kotkansalo T,
Kronqvist P, Collan Y. Ki67 immunohistochemistry:
a  valuable marker in prognostication but with a risk of
misclassification: proliferation subgroups formed based
on Ki67 immunoreactivity and standardized mitotic index.
Histopathology. 2006; 48:674–682.

12.	 Nishi T, Forgac M. The vacuolar (H+)-ATPases—nature’s
most versatile proton pumps. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2002;
3:94–103.
13.	 Spugnini EP, Citro G, Fais S. Proton pump inhibitors as anti
vacuolar-ATPases drugs: a novel anticancer strategy. J Exp
Clin Cancer Res. 2010; 29:44.

25.	 Hanaoka H, Katagiri T, Fukukawa C, Yoshioka H,
Yamamoto S, Iida Y, Higuchi T, Oriuchi N, Paudyal B,
Paudyal P, Nakamura Y, Endo K. Radioimmunotherapy of
solid tumors targeting a cell-surface protein, FZD10: therapeutic efficacy largely depends on radiosensitivity. Ann
Nucl Med. 2009; 23:479–485.

14.	 Perez-Sayans M, Reboiras-Lopez MD, Somoza-Martin JM,
Barros-Angueira F, Diz PG, Rey JM, Garcia-Garcia  A.
Measurement of ATP6V1C1 expression in brush
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

35049

Oncotarget

26.	 Matsuo K, Nishimura M, Bottsford-Miller JN, Huang J,
Komurov K, Armaiz-Pena GN, Shahzad MM, Stone RL,
Roh JW, Sanguino AM, Lu C, Im DD, Rosenshien NB,
et al. Targeting SRC in mucinous ovarian carcinoma. Clin
Cancer Res. 2011; 17:5367–5378.

31.	 Lv C, Yang X, Yu B, Ma Q, Liu B, Liu Y. Blocking the
Na+/H+ exchanger 1 with cariporide (HOE642) reduces the
hypoxia-induced invasion of human tongue squamous cell
carcinoma. Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2012; 41:1206–1210.
32.	 Akiba Y, Kaunitz JD. Regulation of intracellular pH and
blood flow in rat duodenal epithelium in vivo. Am J Physiol.
1999; 276:G293–302.

27.	 Park YA, Lee JW, Kim HS, Lee YY, Kim TJ, Choi CH,
Choi JJ, Jeon HK, Cho YJ, Ryu JY, Kim BG, Bae DS.
Tumor suppressive effects of bromodomain-containing protein 7 (BRD7) in epithelial ovarian carcinoma. Clin Cancer
Res. 2014; 20:565–575.

33.	 Thaker PH, Han LY, Kamat AA, Arevalo JM, Takahashi R,
Lu C, Jennings NB, Armaiz-Pena G, Bankson JA,
Ravoori  M, Merritt WM, Lin YG, Mangala LS, et al.
Chronic stress promotes tumor growth and angiogenesis
in a mouse model of ovarian carcinoma. Nat Med. 2006;
12:939–944.

28.	 Luciani F, Spada M, De Milito A, Molinari A, Rivoltini L,
Montinaro A, Marra M, Lugini L, Logozzi M, Lozupone F,
Federici C, Iessi E, Parmiani G, et al. Effect of proton pump
inhibitor pretreatment on resistance of solid tumors to cytotoxic drugs. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2004; 96:1702–1713.

34.	 Lee JW, Ryu JY, Yoon G, Jeon HK, Cho YJ, Choi JJ,
Song SY, Do IG, Lee YY, Kim TJ, Choi CH, Kim BG,
Bae  DS. Sphingosine kinase 1 as a potential therapeutic
­target in epithelial ovarian cancer. Int J Cancer. 2014; .

29.	 Lee JW, Han HD, Shahzad MM, Kim SW, Mangala LS,
Nick AM, Lu C, Langley RR, Schmandt R, Kim HS,
Mao S, Gooya J, Fazenbaker C, et al. EphA2 immunoconjugate as molecularly targeted chemotherapy for ovarian
carcinoma. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2009; 101:1193–1205.

35.	 Tari A, Kawano M, Kodama K, Yonei Y, Okahara S,
Haruma K, Sumii K, Kajiyama G. The effects of rabeprazole on parietal cells and enterochromaffin-like cells in
rats: a comparison with omeprazole. J Gastroenterol. 2002;
37:177–185.

30.	 Zhdanov AV, Dmitriev RI, Papkovsky DB. Bafilomycin
A1 activates respiration of neuronal cells via uncoupling
­associated with flickering depolarization of mitochondria.
Cell Mol Life Sci. 2011; 68:903–917.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

35050

Oncotarget

