Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 3

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Ibrutinib synergizes with poly(ADP-ribose) glycohydrolase
inhibitors to induce cell death in AML cells via a BTK-independent
mechanism
Lianne E. Rotin1,2, Marcela Gronda1, Neil MacLean1, Rose Hurren1, XiaoMing Wang1,
Feng-Hsu Lin1, Jeff Wrana3, Alessandro Datti3,4, Dwayne L. Barber1, Mark D.
Minden1,2, Malik Slassi5, Aaron D. Schimmer1,2
1

Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Ontario Cancer Institute, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada

2

Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada

3

Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Toronto, Ontario, Canada

4

Department of Agricultural, Food, and Environmental Sciences, University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy

5

Fluorinov Pharma Inc., Toronto, Ontario, Canada

Correspondence to: Aaron D. Schimmer, e-mail: aaron.schimmer@utoronto.ca
Keywords: AML, BTK, ibrutinib, ethacridine lactate, PARG
Received: July 29, 2015	

Accepted: November 16, 2015	

Published: November 27, 2015

ABSTRACT
Targeting Bruton’s tyrosine kinase (BTK) with the small molecule BTK inhibitor
ibrutinib has significantly improved patient outcomes in several B-cell malignancies,
with minimal toxicity. Given the reported expression and constitutive activation of BTK
in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cells, there has been recent interest in investigating
the anti-AML activity of ibrutinib. We noted that ibrutinib had limited single-agent
toxicity in a panel of AML cell lines and primary AML samples, and therefore sought
to identify ibrutinib-sensitizing drugs. Using a high-throughput combination chemical
screen, we identified that the poly(ADP-ribose) glycohydrolase (PARG) inhibitor
ethacridine lactate synergized with ibrutinib in TEX and OCI-AML2 leukemia cell lines.
The combination of ibrutinib and ethacridine induced a synergistic increase in reactive
oxygen species that was functionally important to explain the observed cell death.
Interestingly, synergistic cytotoxicity of ibrutinib and ethacridine was independent of
the inhibitory effect of ibrutinib against BTK, as knockdown of BTK did not sensitize
TEX and OCI-AML2 cells to ethacridine treatment. Thus, our findings indicate that
ibrutinib may have a BTK-independent role in AML and that PARG inhibitors may have
utility as part of a combination therapy for this disease.

INTRODUCTION

AML is a hematologic malignancy characterized
by the overproduction of poorly differentiated myeloidlineage cells [3]. Previously, other groups reported
increased expression and constitutive activation of BTK
in AML cell lines and primary AML patient samples [4–8].
BTK mediates signal transduction from the FLT3-ITD,
TLR9 and CXCR4 receptors in AML cell lines, thereby
promoting leukemic cell survival, growth, and migration
[7, 9]. We further characterized the anti-AML activity of
ibrutinib and identified drugs that sensitize AML cells to
ibrutinib. Through exploration of the synergistic activity
of ibrutinib with other drugs, we uncovered a BTKindependent role for ibrutinib with potential clinical utility
in AML.

Ibrutinib is a small-molecule Bruton’s tyrosine
kinase (BTK) inhibitor approved for clinical use in several
B-cell malignancies, including chronic lymphocytic
leukemia (CLL). Inhibition of BTK induces cell death
by blocking constitutive B-cell receptor (BCR) signaling
and impairing tumor-microenvironment interactions
in CLL cells [1, 2]. BTK is expressed in almost all
B-hematopoietic malignancies, but is also expressed in
myeloid cells and myeloid malignancies where it can
be activated through mechanisms distinct from BCR
signaling. Since BTK is expressed in myeloid cells, we
evaluated ibrutinib in acute myeloid leukemia (AML).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2765

Oncotarget

RESULTS

viability were measured by the sulforhodamine-B (SRB)
assay. Potential synergistic hits were identified using the
excess-over-Bliss additivism (EOBA) formula and average
positive EOBA scores for each combination were rank
ordered (Figure 2A). Ethacridine lactate and pentamidine
were top synergistic hits common to both TEX and
OCI-AML2 cells. We validated both combinations in these
cell lines, but pursued ethacridine lactate over pentamidine
because of its greater synergy with ibrutinib (EOBA
scores of up to 0.58 and 0.47 by Alamar Blue in TEX and
OCI-AML2, respectively) (Figure 2B, Figure S2). The
ibrutinib-ethacridine combination induced cell death,
as determined by Annexin V and PI staining, but the
mechanism of cell death was caspase-independent
(Figure S3). Ibrutinib and ethacridine also induced
strong synergistic cytotoxicity in U937, HL60, and K562
leukemia cells, but not in KG1a cells (Figure S4).
Ethacridine lactate is used clinically as a topical
antiseptic [13] and intra-amniotic abortifacient [14]. It
is a DNA intercalator and putative poly(ADP-ribose)
glycohydrolase (PARG) inhibitor [15, 16].

BTK is overexpressed and constitutively active
in AML cells
To determine the relevance of BTK as a therapeutic
target in AML, we examined the protein and mRNA
expression of BTK in a panel of AML cell lines. Analysis
of the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia [4] demonstrated
that AML cells expressed levels of BTK mRNA similar
to B-cell malignancies (Figure S1). Likewise, a subgroup
of primary AML patient samples had increased BTK
expression (Figure 1A). Next, we evaluated the expression
of BTK by immunoblotting in a series of AML cell lines.
OCI-AML2, THP1, U937, NB4, K562, and the stem
cell-like AML cell line TEX all expressed BTK, but this
protein was not detectable in KG1a AML cells or Jurkat
D1.1 T-ALL cells (Figure 1B). Phosphorylation of BTK at
Tyr223, a marker of BTK activation [10–12], was detected
in all cell lines expressing BTK (Figure 1B), suggesting
constitutive BTK activity.

AML cell lines are insensitive to chemical BTK
inhibition with ibrutinib

The ibrutinib-ethacridine combination is
preferentially cytotoxic to a subset of primary
AML cells compared to normal hematopoietic
cells

To investigate the effects of BTK inhibition on
AML viability and proliferation, we treated AML cells
with increasing concentrations of ibrutinib. Phospho-BTK
was reduced to undetectable levels at doses as low as
1 μM ibrutinib (Figure 1C). Compared to the sensitive
B-lymphoblastic leukemia cell line, Daudi, the AML cell
lines TEX, OCI-AML2, HL60, and U937 were relatively
insensitive to ibrutinib, with IC50s ranging from 4- to
30-fold higher than Daudi cells in the Alamar Blue Assay,
which measures cell proliferation and viability (Figure 1D)
and much higher than the 1 μM concentration required
to reduce levels of phospho-BTK. Similar insensitivity
to ibrutinib was seen when measuring cell viability with
Annexin V and PI staining (Figure 1E), which measures
apoptosis. Interestingly, KG1a cells lacking detectable
expression of BTK were the most sensitive to ibrutinib
compared to other AML cell lines (KG1a IC50 = 2.87 μM
by Alamar Blue assay).

Having
identified
the
combination
of
ethacridine and ibrutinib as synergistic in AML cell
lines, we tested the combination in primary AML
cells (n = 9) (see Supplementary Table 1 for patient
characteristics) and normal hematopoietic cells
obtained from consenting donors of G-CSF mobilized
stem cells for allotransplantation (n = 9). Primary
cells were incubated with increasing concentrations
of ethacridine and ibrutinib for 48 hours in Iscove’s
Modified Dulbecco’s Medium supplemented with
10% fetal bovine serum, without additional growth
factors, and viability was subsequently measured with
Annexin V/PI staining and flow cytometry (Figure 3).
Similar to the AML cell lines, ibrutinib had minimal
single-agent cytotoxicity, with IC50s exceeding 8 μM
in all primary cells. We noted that primary AML cells, on
average, were more sensitive to single-agent ethacridine
and combination ibrutinib-ethacridine treatment compared
to normals: a subset of 6 of 9 AMLs demonstrated
greater than 70% cell death from the combination,
while only 1 of 9 normals (Normal 2) exhibited similar
sensitivity. However, in some normal samples, the drug
combination induced ≥ 50% cell death, suggesting that the
ibrutinib-ethacridine combination may also have toxicity
towards some normal hematopoietic cells.

A combination chemical screen with ibrutinib
in AML cell lines identifies the PARG inhibitor,
ethacridine lactate, as an ibrutinib sensitizer
Given the limited single-agent cytotoxicity in AML
cell lines, we sought to determine whether we could
identify drugs that sensitize AML cells to ibrutinib. To
this end, we carried out a high-throughput combination
chemical screen with ibrutinib in both TEX and
OCI-AML2 cells. The cell lines were co-treated with
ibrutinib and increasing concentrations of compounds
from an in-house chemical library containing 240
internationally prescribed drugs for a total of 5046
different assays among the two cell lines in this screen.
Following 72 hours of incubation, cell growth and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

The combination of ibrutinib and ethacridine
delays the growth of AML cells in vivo
To assess the in vivo efficacy and toxicity of
ibrutinib in combination with ethacridine, we evaluated
this combination in a mouse model of leukemia. SCID
2766

Oncotarget

mice were injected subcutaneously with OCI-AML2
cells. When tumors were palpable, mice were treated with
ibrutinib, ethacridine, or the combination of both drugs.
The combination of ibrutinib and ethacridine decreased
the growth of OCI-AML2 cells more than either drug
alone (*P < 0.001 and **P < 0.0001). Of note, no toxicity
from combination treatment was detected as measured by
changes in body weight, behavior or gross examination of
the organs at the end of the experiment (Figure 4).

tested ethacridine in combination with two other BTK
inhibitors currently in clinical trials: CC-292 and
ONO-4059. Cell growth and viability was measured
72 hours after incubation by the Alamar Blue assay and
EOBA scores were calculated. CC-292 and ONO-4059
synergized with ethacridine in TEX and OCI-AML2 cells
with efficacy similar to ibrutinib (Figure 5).
To further examine the specificity of the synergistic
activity of ethacridine, we sought to determine whether
this compound generally sensitized AML cells to kinase
inhibitors. We therefore selected inhibitors of kinase
targets bearing minimal sequence similarity to BTK.
Specifically, we tested PIM1/2 and STO-609, inhibitors
of Calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase
family members PIM 1/2 and CaMKK, respectively.
TEX cells were treated with these compounds in
combination with ethacridine. Synergy was assessed by

Ethacridine synergizes with other small molecule
BTK inhibitors, but not inhibitors of unrelated
kinases
We sought to investigate whether the observed
synergy with ethacridine was specific to ibrutinib or a
property common to other BTK inhibitors. We therefore

Figure 1: AML cell lines express constitutively active BTK, but are insensitive to ibrutinib. (A) BTK mRNA expression in

primary AML cells was determined by analysis of microarray gene expression (GEO accession code: GSE1159). BTK mRNA expression
was examined in 267 patients with AML [46]. (B) BTK and pBTK-Y223 expression in AML cell lines was determined by immunoblotting.
(C) TEX and OCI-AML2 cells were treated with 1 μM ibrutinib for 1 h or 16 h. pBTK-Y223 and BTK expression in cell lysates was
detected by immunoblotting. (D, E) AML cell lines were treated with increasing concentrations of ibrutinib over 72 h and cell growth and
viability relative to untreated cells was determined by (D) Alamar Blue or (E) Annexin V and PI staining on flow cytometry. Data depict
mean relative viability ± SD from a representative experiment performed in triplicate. Data are representative of three (D) or two (E)
independent experiments.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2767

Oncotarget

EOBA calculation following viability determination at
72 hours with Annexin V and PI staining on flow
cytometry. Neither PIM1/2, nor STO-609 synergized with
ethacridine in TEX cells, with EOBA scores not exceeding
0.03 for either combination (Figure 6A).
We also tested the combination of ethacridine with
the ABL kinase inhibitor imatinib and the ABL and SRC

family kinase inhibitor, dasatinib. Of note, ibrutinib
is reported to inhibit SRC family kinases [17] as they
share sequence homology to the TEC kinases. TEX
and OCI-AML2 cells were combination-treated with
ethacridine and these kinase inhibitors. Following a
72-hour incubation, cell growth and viability was
determined by the Alamar Blue assay. The combinations

Figure 2: The PARG inhibitor ethacridine lactate sensitizes AML cell lines to ibrutinib. (A) Ibrutinib was co-treated with

240 drugs in TEX and OCI-AML2 cells for 72 h. Growth and viability was determined with the SRB assay and synergy was calculated
using the EOBA formula as described in the methods. Compounds were ranked in order of increasing average positive EOBA score.
(B, C) TEX and OCI-AML2 cells were combination-treated with ibrutinib and ethacridine for 72 h and cell growth and viability relative
to untreated cells was determined by Alamar Blue. (B) Data represent mean growth and viability ± SD from a representative experiment
performed in triplicate. (C) EOBA synergy scores (shown) were calculated for each of the combinations tested. EOBA values > 0.1 (lightest
grey) denote a synergistic combination, while values > 0.5 (darkest grey) denote a strongly synergistic combination. Data represent mean
EOBA scores from a representative experiment performed in triplicate.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2768

Oncotarget

produced primarily additive effects as calculated by the
EOBA formula (Figures 6B and Figure S5). Thus, the
observed synergy with ethacridine appears specific for
TEC family kinase inhibitors.

oxygen species) production in AML cells treated with
the drug combination. Using carboxy-H2DCFDA staining
and flow cytometry, we measured total intracellular
ROS production after TEX and OCI-AML2 treatment
with ibrutinib, ethacridine or the drug combination. At
concentrations that were associated with synergistic cell
death, neither drug alone markedly increased intracellular
ROS production. However, ROS production in live
cells was increased with the drug combination as early
as two hours following treatment in both TEX and

Ibrutinib and ethacridine synergize to induce
cell death via a ROS-dependent mechanism
To investigate the mechanism of synergy between
ethacridine and ibrutinib, we examined ROS (reactive

Figure 3: The ibrutinib-ethacridine combination is preferentially cytotoxic to primary AML cells over normal
hematopoietic cells. Primary AML and normal hematopoietic cells (G-CSF mobilized peripheral blood stem cells) were treated with
ibrutinib, ethacridine, or both in combination for 48 h. Viability was determined by Annexin V and PI staining. Data represent mean percent
viability ± SD from a single experiment performed in triplicate. Ibru = ibrutinib, Ethac = ethacridine.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2769

Oncotarget

OCI-AML2 cells (Figure 7A). Moreover, the increased
ROS production was functionally important for the
observed cell death, as the addition of the anti-oxidant
α-tocopherol abrogated cytotoxicity from the combination
in both cell lines (Figure 7B). The observed increase in
ROS following combination treatment did not appear
to be mitochondrial in origin, as MitoSOX staining did
not increase following combination treatment relative to
single-agent treatment (Figure S6). Thus, these findings
suggest that the synergistic cytotoxicity caused by the
ibrutinib-ethacridine combination is due to excessive
intracellular, but not mitochondrial, ROS production.

with increasing concentrations of ibrutinib and gallotannin
over 48 hours and then measured viability with Annexin
V and PI staining. The ibrutinib-gallotannin combination
was also profoundly synergistic, yielding EOBA values
of up to 0.60 and 0.72 in TEX and OCI-AML2 cells,
respectively (Figure 7C). Likewise, pre-treatment with
α-tocopherol abrogated ibrutinib-gallotannin cytotoxicity
(Figure 7D). Pretreatment with the poly(ADP-ribose)
polymerase (PARP) inhibitor olaparib did not rescue
combination-induced cytotoxicity (Figure S8). However,
olaparib was directly toxic to the cells, thus potentially
obscuring any protective effects.

The chemical PARG inhibitor gallotannin also
synergizes with ibrutinib to induce cell death by
excessive ROS production

The synergy of ibrutinib with ethacridine is
independent of the inhibitory effect on BTK
To determine whether synergy between ibrutinib and
ethacridine was due to BTK inhibition by ibrutinib, we
knocked down BTK with shRNA in TEX and OCI-AML2
cells. The reduction of BTK expression was confirmed
by immunoblotting (Figure 8A) and qPCR (not shown).
Knockdown cells were then treated with increasing

Ethacridine is a putative PARG inhibitor [15, 16]
and we demonstrated that ethacridine inhibited PARG
(Figure S7). Therefore, we evaluated the combination
of ibrutinib and gallotannin, another reported PARG
inhibitor [18–20]. We treated TEX and OCI-AML2 cells

Figure 4: Ibrutinib-ethacridine combination displays anti-AML activity in mice. 1 × 106 OCI-AML2 cells were subcutaneously

injected in SCID mice. Eight days after injection, mice were treated with 300 mg/kg of ibrutinib by oral gavage, 20 mg/kg of ethacridine
by i.p. injection, a combination of two drugs, or vehicle control (5% DMSO, 20% Cremophor, 0.9% NaCl) by oral gavage on the indicated
days. Tumor volume (A) and body weight (B) were monitored over time. Mean ± SEM for tumor volume and mean ± SD for body weight,
n = 7. *P < 0.001 and **P < 0.0001 from a two-way ANOVA with Tukey’s posttests comparing all treatment groups at day 18 and 20.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2770

Oncotarget

concentrations of ethacridine and cell growth and viability
was assessed by Alamar Blue. Despite substantial levels
of BTK knockdown by shRNA, ethacridine treatment
of BTK-knockdown cells was no more cytotoxic than
ethacridine treatment of shRNA control cells (Figure 8A).
These observations suggest that synergy of ibrutinib with
ethacridine is independent of its inhibitory effect on BTK.
To further examine whether synergy of ibrutinib
with ethacridine is due to targets beyond BTK, we tested
the drug combination in Jurkat D1.1 cells, a T-acute
lymphoblastic leukemia cell line that does not express
BTK (Figure 1B). The ibrutinib-ethacridine combination
synergized in Jurkat D1.1 cells, reaching EOBA values

of 0.25 (Figure 8B), further supporting a synergistic
mechanism for ibrutinib and ethacridine beyond AML cell
lines analyzed in this study.

DISCUSSION
The small molecule BTK inhibitor ibrutinib has
demonstrated exceptional efficacy with minimal toxicity
in several B-cell cancers. Ibrutinib is currently approved
for clinical use in CLL, mantle-cell lymphoma (MCL)
and Waldenström’s macroglobulinemia (WM), owing to
its impressive patient response rates during recent clinical
trials. With widespread BTK expression across B-cell

Figure 5: Ethacridine synergizes with other small-molecule BTK inhibitors. TEX and OCI-AML2 cells were treated with

increasing concentrations of ethacridine and (A) CC-292 or (B) ONO-4059 for 72 h. Growth and viability was measured by Alamar
Blue and EOBA synergy scores were calculated. Data depict mean percent viability ± SD and mean EOBA scores from a representative
experiment performed in triplicate. Data are representative of three independent experiments.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2771

Oncotarget

malignancies and its role as a node in several oncogenic
signaling pathways, this cytoplasmic kinase has emerged
as an attractive therapeutic target for B-lymphoid cancers.
Multiple clinical trials investigating ibrutinib alone and in
combination for these diseases are currently underway.
In addition to its expression in B-cell malignancies,
BTK is also expressed in myeloid cell lines and can be
activated through mechanisms independent of the B-cell
receptor [7, 21, 22]. Thus, targeting BTK with ibrutinib
may have efficacy in myeloid malignancies such as AML.
In concordance with previous work by Rushworth
et al. [6] and Oellerich et al. [7], we demonstrated the
expression of constitutively active BTK in several AML
cell lines. However, in contrast to these other studies, in

the cell lines we tested, the cytotoxicity from ibrutinib was
likely independent of its effects on BTK. Supporting this
contention, of the tested AML cell lines, KG1a cells were
the most sensitive to ibrutinib and yet lacked detectable
BTK by immunoblot. Moreover, the IC50 in TEX and
OCI-AML2 leukemia cells were over 10-fold higher
than the concentration of ibrutinib required to completely
repress BTK phosphorylation and higher than the
pharmacologically achievable concentrations in humans.
Consistent with these observations, ibrutinib has been
reported to induce AML cell death via a BTK-independent
mechanism [8].
Although ibrutinib was largely inactive as a
single agent in the tested AML cells, we successfully

Figure 6: Ethacridine does not synergize with inhibitors of unrelated kinases. (A) TEX cells were combination-treated

with ethacridine and PIM1/2 or STO-609 for 72 h. Viability was measured by Annexin V/PI staining and EOBA scores were generated.
Combination ibrutinib-ethacridine treatment of TEX cells was included as a positive synergy control for this method of cell viability
determination. (B) TEX cells were combination-treated with ethacridine and dasatinib or imatinib for 72 h. Growth and viability was
measured by Alamar Blue and EOBA synergy scores were calculated. Data depict mean percent viability (A) or growth and viability
(B) ± SD and mean EOBA scores from a representative experiment performed in triplicate. Data are representative of three independent
experiments.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2772

Oncotarget

sensitized two of the more resistant AML cell lines
(TEX, IC50 = 13.01 μM and OCI-AML2, IC50 = 27.44 μM)
to ibrutinib by combining the drug with the putative PARG
inhibitor ethacridine. However, the observed synergistic
cytotoxicity was independent of the inhibitory effect of
ibrutinib on BTK. These findings suggest that ibrutinib

may also have anti-AML activity that extends to targets
beyond BTK.
In addition to inhibiting BTK, ibrutinib cross-reacts
with TEC and SRC family kinases with similar efficacy
[17]. We noted that the SRC inhibitor dasatinib did not
recapitulate ibrutinib’s synergy with ethacridine, however

Figure 7: The ibrutinib-ethacridine combination induces cytotoxic levels of intracellular ROS. (A) TEX and OCI-AML2

cells were treated with ibrutinib, ethacridine, or both in combination for 2, 6 or 24 h. Intracellular ROS was measured by carboxy-H2DCFDA
staining and dead cells were excluded by PI staining on flow cytometry. Fold increase in ROS was calculated relative to the geometric means
of carboxy-H2DCFDA (FITC) staining in untreated cells. H2O2 treatment served as a positive control for intracellular ROS generation.
(B) TEX and OCI-AML2 cells were pre-treated with α-tocopherol prior to a 48 h incubation with ibrutinib and/or ethacridine. Viability
was measured by Annexin V and PI staining, and calculated relative to respective untreated controls (+ or − α-tocopherol). (C) TEX and
OCI-AML2 cells were treated with increasing concentrations of ibrutinib and gallotannin for 48 h. Viability was measured by Annexin
V and PI staining and EOBA scores were calculated. Data represent mean EOBA scores from a representative experiment performed in
triplicate. Data are representative of two (OCI-AML2) or three (TEX) independent experiments. (D) TEX cells were pre-treated with
α-tocopherol and subjected to 48 h treatment with ibrutinib and gallotannin. Viability was measured by Annexin V and PI staining and
calculated relative to untreated controls. Data represent mean fold increase in ROS production ± SD (A) or mean viability ± SD (B, D)
from representative experiments performed in triplicate. Data are representative of two (A) or three (B, D) independent experiments. In all
panels, *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001; ****P < 0.0001 as determined by one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post-hoc test for multiple
comparisons (A), or unpaired Student’s t test with Holm-Sidak correction for multiple comparisons (alpha = 5%) (B, D).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2773

Oncotarget

the BTK inhibitors ONO-4059 and CC-292, which have
reported inhibitory activity against TEC family kinases
[23–27], did synergize with ethacridine. We therefore
favor the TEC family kinases as likely targets of ibrutinib
in its synergy with ethacridine in AML. To date, 5 TEC
family members have been identified: BTK, BMX, TEC,
ITK, and RLK [28]. ITK is expressed selectively in T cells
and its inhibition by ibrutinib leads to decreased STAT6,
IkBa, JUNB, and NFAT activity, as well as decreased

intracellular calcium release [29]. BMX is expressed in
hematopoietic progenitor cells and myeloid leukemias
[30, 31] and has been found to mediate STAT3 activation
and subsequent transformation by Src [32]. Interestingly,
BMX, TEC, and RLK are all expressed in AML and Jurkat
D1.1 cell lines (Figure S9). However, further investigations
will be required to determine whether these TEC
family members—or different kinases altogether—are
targets of ibrutinib that explain its synergy with

Figure 8: Ibrutinib’s synergy with ethacridine is independent of BTK. (A) TEX and OCI-AML2 cells were transduced

with 2 different shRNAs targeting BTK or a non-targeting shRNA control in lentiviral vectors. On day 4 post-transduction, cells were
treated with ethacridine at concentrations previously shown to synergize with ibrutinib. Growth and viability at 72 h post-ethacridine
treatment was determined by Alamar Blue and calculated relative to untreated control. BTK knockdown was confirmed by immunoblotting.
(B) Jurkat cells were treated with increasing concentrations of ibrutinib and ethacridine for 72 h. Cell growth and viability was determined
by the Alamar Blue assay and synergy was calculated using the EOBA formula. Data depict mean percent growth and viability ± SD from
a representative experiment performed in triplicate. Data in (A) and (B) are representative of two independent experiments. In all panels,
ns = not significant, based on the results of an unpaired Student’s t test with Holm-Sidak correction for multiple comparisons (alpha = 5%).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2774

Oncotarget

ethacridine. One possible strategy for ibrutinib target
determination is a synthetic-lethal human kinome shRNA
array, which would uncover kinases that when individually
knocked down induce AML cell line sensitivity to
ethacridine.
To our knowledge, this work is the first to report on
the activity of PARG inhibitors such as ethacridine and
gallotannin in AML. While further work is required to
fully determine the impact of PARG inhibition in AML, it
is interesting to speculate whether some of the single agent
activity of ibrutinib in primary AML might be observed in
patients with the lowest basal PARG expression.
The addition of poly(ADP-ribose) (PAR) moieties
to target proteins alters their structure, function, and
localization. PAR-ylation of target proteins is mediated
by the PARP (Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase) family of
enzymes, of which PARP-1 is the most abundant and best
characterized [33–35]. PARP adds PAR groups to target
proteins, and these moieties are removed by PARG [36].
Thus, genetic or chemical inhibition of PARG leads to
the accumulation of excess PAR-ylated proteins. Through
the accumulation of excess PAR-ylated proteins, PARG
inhibition reduces the proliferation of malignant cells
[37, 38], sensitizes cells to genotoxic stress [39–41] and
inhibits cell signaling pathways including NFκB, p38
and ERK [38]. Through these and other mechanisms,
increased levels of PAR-ylated proteins may also promote
ROS generation [42], which is relevant to our observed
mechanism of action of the drug combination
Though the ibrutinib-PARG inhibitor combination
produced striking synergistic cytotoxicity in AML cell
lines, it is important to note that this combination also
induced cytotoxicity in a subset of normal hematopoietic
cells (Figure 3). This observation highlights a potential
toxicity that would need to be assessed in the context of
clinical trials of these agents.
Thus in summary, through identification of an
ibrutinib combination that sensitizes resistant AML
cell lines to this kinase inhibitor, we uncovered a novel
BTK-independent role for ibrutinib in AML. Moreover,
we present a potential role for PARG inhibition as a novel
target for combination therapy in AML.

for Cancer Research (Toronto, ON, Canada). Ibrutinib
was also obtained from Selleckchem (Houston, TX), as
was olaparib. Z-VAD-FMK was purchased from Enzo
Life Sciences (Farmingdale, NY). Ethacridine lactate,
gallotannin, sulforhodamine-B, hydrogen peroxide,
puromycin, and shRNA plasmid-containing bacterial
glycerol stocks were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich
(St. Louis, MO). The library of internationally prescribed
drugs was purchased from MicroSource Discovery
Systems, Inc. (Gaylordsville, CT). Alamar Blue was
purchased from Life Technologies (Carlsbad, CA) and
carboxy-H2DCFDA-FITC and MitoSOX Red were
obtained from Molecular Probes/Life Technologies
(Eugene, OR).

Cell culture
TEX cells [43] were provided by Dr. John
Dick (Ontario Cancer Institute, Toronto, Canada)
and grown in Iscove’s Modified Dulbecco’s Medium
(IMDM) supplemented with 15% fetal bovine serum
(FBS) (Seradigm/VWR, Radford, PA), 100 μg/ml
penicillin, 100 U/ml streptomycin, 2 mM L-glutamine
(Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA), 20 ng/ml SCF
(Miltenyi Biotec, San Diego, CA), and 2 ng/ml IL-3
(R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN). OCI-AML2, NB4,
KG1a, Daudi, Thp1, and U937 cells were provided by Dr.
Mark Minden (Ontario Cancer Institute, Toronto, Canada).
K562 and HL60 cells were provided by Dr. Suzanne
Kamel-Reid (Ontario Cancer Institute, Toronto, Canada)
and Jurkat D1.1 cells were provided by Dr. Pamela
Ohashi (Ontario Cancer Institute, Toronto, Canada). OCIAML2, K562, Thp1, and NB4 cells were grown in IMDM
supplemented with 10% FBS, 100 μg/ml penicillin, and
100 U/ml streptomycin. Daudi, Jurkat D1.1, KG1a, U937,
and HL60 cells were grown in RPMI 1640 supplemented
with 10% FBS, 100 μg/ml penicillin, and 100 U/ml
streptomycin. All cell lines were maintained at 37°C and
5% CO2.

Primary cells
Bulk AML cells from AML patients and peripheral
blood stem cells from healthy G-CSF-treated stem cell
donors were isolated by Ficoll density centrifugation and
apheresis, respectively. Isolated cells were maintained
in IMDM supplemented with 10% FBS, 100 μg/ml
penicillin, and 100 U/ml streptomycin, at 37°C and
5% CO2. All samples were obtained from consenting
patients. The collection and use of human tissue for this
study were approved by the University Health Network
(Toronto, Canada) institutional review board.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials
BTK and GAPDH antibodies were purchased from
Cell Signaling Technology (Danvers, MA), BTK pTyr-223
antibody was obtained from Abcam (Cambridge, MA),
and β-actin antibody was purchased from Santa Cruz
Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA). HRP-conjugated goat
anti-rabbit and goat anti-mouse secondary antibodies were
acquired from GE Healthcare (Buckinghamshire, UK).
Kinase inhibitors ibrutinib, CC-292, ONO–4059, PIM1/2,
and STO-609 were provided by the Ontario Institute
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

In vivo combination treatment
Animal studies were carried out with the approval of
the Princess Margaret Cancer Centre ethics review board,
2775

Oncotarget

Excess-over-Bliss additivism for calculating
synergy

and in accordance with Canadian Council on Animal Care
regulations. SCID mice were subcutaneously injected with
1 × 106 OCI-AML2 cells. Once tumors were palpable
(8 days following injection), mice were treated with
ibrutinib (300 mg/kg), ethacridine (20 mg/kg), both in
combination (300 mg/kg ibrutinib + 20 mg/kg ethacridine),
alongside vehicle control once per day, 5 days/week, for
a total of 9 treatments. Mice were subsequently sacrificed
and tumor volumes were measured.

Excess-over-Bliss additivism (EOBA) [45] provides
an estimate of resultant cytotoxicity when two drugs are
combined. According to this model, any cytotoxicity
unaccounted for by the added effects of both drugs is due
to synergy between the two compounds. The formula for
excess-over-Bliss is as follows:
EOBA = C − (A + B − (A × B))

Immunoblotting

where C is equal to the fractional inhibition of both drugs
simultaneously, A is equal to the fractional inhibition of
drug A, and B is equal to the fractional inhibition of drug
B. Fractional inhibition is equal to 1.0 minus the viability
(expressed as a value from 0.0–1.0). Positive EOBA
values reflect a synergistic combination; the more positive
the difference, the greater the synergy. Negative EOBA
values reflect an antagonistic drug combination, while
near-zero EOBA scores are indicative of an additive drug
combination.

Cells were washed twice with 1xPBS and lysed in
1xLaemmli or radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA)
buffer. Following quantification with the DC Assay
(1xLaemmli) or the Bradford assay (RIPA), protein
lysates were resolved by SDS-PAGE and transferred to
a PVDF membrane. Membranes were blocked for 1 hour
at room temperature in 5% milk-TBST. Blotting with
primary antibody was carried out in 5% milk-TBST or 5%
BSA-TBST overnight at 4°C. Membranes were then
incubated with HRP-conjugated secondary antibody
(GE Healthcare, Buckinghamshire, UK) for one hour
at room temperature. Proteins were detected by HRP
chemiluminescence.

Intracellular and mitochondrial reactive oxygen
species measurement
Intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) in TEX
and OCI-AML2 cells was measured by carboxy-H2DCFDA
staining on flow cytometry. Cells were stained with
10 μM carboxy-H2DCFDA (dissolved in 100% ethanol)
and incubated for 30 minutes at 37°C and 5% CO2. Dead
cells were excluded by propidium iodide (PI) staining.
Fold change in intracellular reactive oxygen species
production was calculated by dividing the geometric
mean of H2DCFDA+, PI−-staining treated cells by the
geometric mean of H2DCFDA+, PI−-staining untreated
(vehicle-treated) cells. Mitochondrial ROS was evaluated
by the same procedure, using 5 μM MitoSOX (dissolved
in DMSO) and Annexin V staining for dead cell
discrimination.

Cell growth and viability assays
Cells were treated with drug(s) for 72 hours in a
96-well flat-bottomed, clear microplate. Cell growth and
viability was determined by the Alamar Blue assay as per
the manufacturers instructions or the sulforhodamine-B
(SRB) assay as previously described [44]. Cell viability
and apoptosis was measured by staining cells with Annexin
V-FITC (BioVision, Milpitas, CA) and propidium iodidePE (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) as per manufacturer’s
instructions. All flow cytometry experiments were carried
out using Canto II 96w or Fortessa LSR X20 cytometers
(BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA). Flow cytometry data
were analyzed with FlowJo version 7.6.5 (TreeStar,
Ashland, OR).

shRNA knockdown experiments
Stable knockdown of BTK in TEX and
OCI-AML2 was achieved using lentiviral transduction
of short hairpin RNAs (shRNA) delivered by the
PLKO.1 vector, which contains a puromycin resistance
gene. A 72-hour puromycin selection (2 μg/mL in
TEX, and 1 μg/mL in OCI-AML2) was used to select
for transduced cells 24 hours after lentiviral infection.
Following completion of puromycin selection,
knockdown was confirmed by immunoblot. The following
shRNA sequences directed against BTK (Accession
No. NM_000061) were used: shRNA-BTK_974:
5′-GAAGCAGAAGACTCCATAGAACTCGAGTTCT
ATGGAGTCTTCTGCTTC-3′, and shRNA-BTK_1066:
5′-AGGAGGTTTCATTGTCAGAGACTCGAGTCTCT
GACAATGAAACCTCCT-3′.

Combination high-throughput screen
TEX and OCI-AML2 cells were treated with
ibrutinib at its respective IC10 and IC25 values, alongside
vehicle (DMSO) controls. Ibrutinib- and vehicle-treated
cells were also treated with a library of known drugs at
concentrations of 0.133 μM, 1.6 μM, 3.3 μM, 6.7 μM,
and/or 13.3 μM. Combination-treated TEX and OCI-AML2
cells were incubated for 72 h at 37°C and 5% CO2. The
read-out for this assay was percent growth and viability,
measured with the sulforhodamine-B (SRB) assay. These
data were then used to calculate synergy according to
Excess-over-Bliss additivism criteria.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2776

Oncotarget

PARG activity assay

survival and tissue homing in vitro and in vivo. Blood.
2012; 119:1182–1189.

The HT Universal Colorimetric PARG Assay Kit
(Trevigen, Gaithersburg, MD) was used to measure the
PARG inhibitor activity of ethacridine. The assay was
carried out as per manufacturer instructions.

 3.	 Löwenberg B, Downing JR, Burnett A. Acute myeloid
leukemia. N Engl J Med. 1999; 341:1051–1062.
 4.	 Barretina J, Caponigro G, Stransky N, Venkatesan K,
Margolin AA, Kim S, Wilson CJ, Lehár J, Kryukov GV,
Sonkin D, Reddy A, Liu M, Murray L, et al. The Cancer
Cell Line Encyclopedia enables predictive modelling of
anticancer drug sensitivity. Nature. 2012; 483:603–607.

Statistical analysis
All graphed viability data are expressed as mean
± SD. Statistical significance was determined by the
unpaired Student’s t test with Holm-Sidak correction for
multiple comparisons or a one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s
post-hoc test for multiple comparisons. Statistical tests
were performed using GraphPad Prism 6.03 software
(La Jolla, CA).

  5.	 de Weers M, Verschuren MC, Kraakman ME, Mensink RG,
Schuurman RK, van Dongen JJ, Hendriks RW. The Bruton’s
tyrosine kinase gene is expressed throughout B cell
differentiation, from early precursor B cell stages preceding
immunoglobulin gene rearrangement up to mature B cell
stages. Eur J Immunol. 1993; 23:3109–3114.
 6.	 Rushworth SA, Murray MY, Zaitseva L, Bowles KM,
MacEwan DJ. Identification of Bruton's tyrosine kinase as a
therapeutic target in acute myeloid leukemia. Blood. 2014;
123:1229–1238.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Aisha Shamas-Din (Princess Margaret
Cancer Centre) for help with manuscript preparation and
Jill Flewelling (Princess Margaret Cancer Centre) for
administrative assistance.

  7.	 Oellerich T, Mohr S, Corso J, Beck J, Döbele C, Braun H,
Cremer A, Münch S, Wicht J, Oellerich MF, Bug G,
Bohnenberger H, Perske C, et al. FLT3-ITD and TLR9 use
Bruton tyrosine kinase to activate distinct transcriptional
programs mediating AML cell survival and proliferation.
Blood. 2015; 125:1936–1947.

FUNDING

  8.	 Wu H, Hu C, Wang A, Weisberg EL, Wang W, Chen C,
Zhao Z, Yu K, Liu J, Wu J, Nonami A, Wang L, Wang B,
et al. Ibrutinib selectively targets FLT3-ITD in mutant
FLT3-positive AML. Leukemia. 2015:1–4.

This work was supported by the Canadian
Stem Cell Network, the Leukemia and Lymphoma
Society of Canada, the Canadian Institutes of Health
Research (CIHR), the Princess Margaret Cancer Centre
Foundation, and the Ministry of Long Term Health
and Planning in the Province of Ontario. LR was
supported by a CIHR Frederick Banting and Charles
Best Canada Graduate Scholarship (CGS-D), CIHR
MD/PhD Studentship, Peterborough K.M. Hunter
Graduate Studentship, and Hernandez Family Oncology
MD/PhD Fellowship. ADS holds the Baker Chair in
Leukemia and Related Diseases.

  9.	 Zaitseva L, Murray MY, Shafat MS, Lawes MJ, MacEwan DJ,
Bowles KM, Rushworth SA. Ibrutinib inhibits SDF1/
CXCR4 mediated migration in AML. Oncotarget. 2014;
5:9930–9938. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.2479.
10.	 Rawlings DJ, Scharenberg AM, Park H, Wahl MI, Lin S,
Kato RM, Fluckiger AC, Witte ON, Kinet JP. Activation
of BTK by a phosphorylation mechanism initiated by SRC
family kinases. Science. 1996; 271:822–825.
11.	 Park H, Wahl MI, Afar DE, Turck CW, Rawlings DJ, Tam C,
Scharenberg AM, Kinet JP, Witte ON. Regulation of Btk
function by a major autophosphorylation site within the
SH3 domain. Immunity. 1996; 4:515–525.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.

12.	 Wahl MI, Fluckiger AC, Kato RM, Park H, Witte ON,
Rawlings DJ. Phosphorylation of two regulatory tyrosine
residues in the activation of Bruton’s tyrosine kinase via
alternative receptors. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997;
94:11526–11533.

REFERENCES
 1.	 Herman SEM, Gordon AL, Hertlein E, Ramanunni A,
Zhang X, Jaglowski S, Flynn J, Jones J, Blum KA, Buggy JJ,
Hamdy A, Johnson AJ, Byrd JC. Bruton tyrosine kinase
represents a promising therapeutic target for treatment of
chronic lymphocytic leukemia and is effectively targeted by
PCI-32765. Blood. 2011; 117:6287–6296.

13.	O’Meara S, Al-Kurdi D, Ologun Y, Ovington LG,
Martyn-St James M, Richardson R. Antibiotics and
antiseptics for venous leg ulcers (Review). Cochrane
Database of Systematic Reviews. 2014.

  2.	 Ponader S, Chen S, Buggy JJ, Balakrishnan K, Gandhi V,
Wierda WG, Keating MJ, O'Brien S, Chiorazzi N,
Burger JA. ￼ The Bruton tyrosine kinase inhibitor
PCI-32765 thwarts chronic lymphocytic leukemia cell
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14.	 Mei Q, Li X, Liu H, Zhou H. Effectiveness of mifepristone
in combination with ethacridine lactate for second trimester
pregnancy termination. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol.
2014; 178:12–15.
2777

Oncotarget

15.	 Tavassoli M, Tavassoli MH, Shall S. Effect of DNA
intercalators on poly(ADP-ribose) glycohydrolase activity.
Biochim Biophys Acta. 1985; 827:228–234.

27.	 Akinleye A, Chen Y, Mukhi N, Song Y, Liu D. Ibrutinib and
novel BTK inhibitors in clinical development. J Hematol
Oncol. 2013; 6:1–9.

16.	 Boulikas T. Studies on protein poly(ADP-ribosylation)
using high resolution gel electrophoresis. J Biol Chem.
1990; 265:14627–14631.

28.	 Schmidt U, Boucheron N, Unger B, Ellmeier W. The role
of Tec family kinases in myeloid cells. Int Arch Allergy
Immunol. 2004; 134:65–78.

17.	 Honigberg LA, Smith AM, Sirisawad M, Verner E, Loury
D, Chang B, Li S, Pan Z, Thamm DH, Miller RA, Buggy JJ.
The Bruton tyrosine kinase inhibitor PCI-32765
blocks B-cell activation and is efficacious in models of
autoimmune disease and B-cell malignancy. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A. 2010; 107:13075–13080.

29.	 Dubovsky JA, Beckwith KA, Natarajan G, Woyach JA,
Jaglowski S, Zhong Y, Hessler JD, Liu TM, Chang BY,
Larkin KM, Stefanovski MR, Chappell DL, Frissora FW,
et al. Ibrutinib is an irreversible molecular inhibitor of ITK
driving a Th1-selective pressure in T lymphocytes. Blood.
2013; 122:2539–2549.

18.	 Tsai Y, Aoki T, Maruta H, Abe H, Sakagami H, Hatano T,
Okuda T, Tanuma S. Mouse mammary tumor virus gene
expression is suppressed by oligomeric ellagitannins, novel
inhibitors of poly(ADP-ribose) glycohydrolase. J Biol
Chem. 1992; 267:14436–14442.

30.	 Kaukonen J, Lahtinen I, Laine S, Alitalo K, Palotie A.
BMX tyrosine kinase gene is expressed in granulocytes and
myeloid leukaemias. Br J Haematol. 1996; 94:455–460.
31.	 Weil D, Power MA, Smith SI, Li CL. Predominant
Expression of Murine Bmx Tyrosine Kinase in the GranuloMonocytic Lineage. Blood. 1997; 90:4332–4340.

19.	 Aoki K, Nishimura K, Abe H, Maruta H, Sakagami H,
Hatano T, Okuda T, Yoshida T, Tsai Y, Uchiumi F, Tanuma S.
Novel inhibitors of poly(ADP-ribose) glycohydrolase.
Biochim Biophys Acta. 1993; 1158:251–256.

32.	 Tsai YT, Su YH, Fang SS, Huang TN, Qiu Y, Jou YS, Shih HM,
Kung HJ, Chen RH. Etk, a Btk family tyrosine kinase,
mediates cellular transformation by linking Src to STAT3
activation. Mol Cell Biol. 2000; 20:2043–2054.

20.	 Formentini L, Arapistas P, Pittelli M, Jacomelli M, Pitozzi V,
Menichetti S, Romani A, Giovannelli L, Moroni F,
Chiarugi A. Mono-galloyl glucose derivatives are potent poly
(ADP-ribose) glycohydrolase (PARG) inhibitors and
partially reduce PARP-1-dependent cell death. Br J
Pharmacol. 2008; 155:1235–1249.

33.	 Durkacz BW, Omidiji O, Gray DA, Shall S. (ADP-ribose)
n participates in DNA excision repair. Nature. 1980; 283:
593–596.
34.	 Luo X, Kraus WL. On PAR with PARP: cellular stress
signaling through poly(ADP-ribose) and PARP-1. Genes
Dev. 2012; 26:417–432.

21.	 Kawakami Y, Yao L, Miura T, Tsukada S, Witte ON,
Kawakami T. Tyrosine phosphorylation and activation of
Bruton tyrosine kinase upon Fc epsilon RI cross-linking.
Mol Cell Biol. 1994; 14:5108–5113.

35.	 Virág L, Robaszkiewicz A, Rodriguez-Vargas JM, Oliver FJ.
Poly(ADP-ribose) signaling in cell death. Mol Aspects
Med. 2013; 34:1153–1167.

22.	 Doyle SL, Jefferies CA, Feighery C, O'Neill LA. Signaling
by Toll-like receptors 8 and 9 requires Bruton's tyrosine
kinase. J Biol Chem. 2007; 282:36953–36960.

36.	Feng X, Koh DW. Roles of poly(ADP-ribose)
glycohydrolase in DNA damage and apoptosis. Int Rev Cell
Mol Biol. 2013; 304:227–281.
37.	 Erdélyi K, Bai P, Kovács I, Szabó E, Mocsár G, Kakuk A,
Szabó C, Gergely P, Virág L. Dual role of poly(ADP-ribose)
glycohydrolase in the regulation of cell death in oxidatively
stressed A549 cells. FASEB J. 2009; 23:3553–3563.
38.	 Pan J, Fauzee NJ, Wang YL, Sheng YT, Tang Y, Wang JQ,
Wu WQ, Yan JX, Xu J. Effect of silencing PARG in human
colon carcinoma LoVo cells on the ability of HUVEC
migration and proliferation. Cancer Gene Ther. 2012;
19:715–722.
39.	 Koh DW, Lawler AM, Poitras MF, Sasaki M, Wattler S,
Nehls MC, Stöger T, Poirier GG, Dawson VL, Dawson TM.
Failure to degrade poly(ADP-ribose) causes increased
sensitivity to cytotoxicity and early embryonic lethality.
PNAS. 2004; 101:17699–17704.
40.	 Shirai H, Poetsch AR, Gunji A, Maeda D, Fujimori H,
Fujihara H, Yoshida T, Ogino H, Masutani M. PARG
dysfunction enhances DNA double strand break formation
in S-phase after alkylation DNA damage and augments
different cell death pathways. Cell Death Dis. 2013; 4:e656.

23.	 Evans EK, Tester R, Aslanian S, Karp R, Sheets M,
Labenski MT, Witowski SR, Lounsbury H, Chaturvedi P,
Mazdiyasni H, Zhu Z, Nacht M, Freed MI, et al. Inhibition
of Btk with CC-292 provides early pharmacodynamic
assessment of activity in mice and humans. J Pharmacol
Exp Ther. 2013; 346:219–228.
24.	 Ariza Y, Yoshizawa T, Ueda Y, Hotta S, Yasuhiro T, Narita M,
Shichino Y, Kawabata K. ONO-4059 – a novel small
molecule dual inhibitor of Bruton’s tyrosine kinase (Btk)
and Tec kinase-suppresses osteoclastic bone resorption and
inflammation. Arthritis Rheum. 2013; 65:1824.
25.	 Yoshizawa T, Ariza Y, Ueda Y, Hotta S, Narita M,
Kawabata K. Development of a Bruton's tyrosine kinase
(Btk) inhibitor, ONO-4059: efficacy in a collagen induced
arthritis (CIA) model indicates potential treatment for
rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Arthritis Rheum. 2012; 64:1660.
26.	 Hendriks RW, Yuvaraj S, Kil LP. Targeting Bruton’s
tyrosine kinase in B cell malignancies. Nat Rev Cancer.
2014; 14:219–232.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2778

Oncotarget

41.	 Cortes U, Tong WM, Coyle DL, Meyer-Ficca ML, Meyer RG,
Petrilli V, Herceg Z, Jacobson EL, Jacobson MK, Wang
ZQ. Depletion of the 110-kilodalton isoform of poly
(ADP-ribose) glycohydrolase increases sensitivity to
genotoxic and endotoxic stress in mice. Mol Cell Biol.
2004; 24:7163–7178.

44.	 LaPointe P, Wei X, Gariépy J. A role for the proteasesensitive loop region of Shiga-like toxin 1 in the
retrotranslocation of its A1 domain from the endoplasmic
reticulum lumen. J Biol Chem. 2005; 280:23310–23318.
45.	 Borisy AA, Elliott PJ, Hurst NW, Lee MS, Lehar J, Price ER,
Serbedzija G, Zimmermann GR, Foley MA, Stockwell BR,
Keith CT. Systematic discovery of multicomponent
therapeutics. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003; 100:
7977–7982.

42.	 Krenzlin H, Demuth I, Salewsky B, Wessendorf P, Weidele K,
Bürkle A, Digweed M. DNA damage in Nijmegen Breakage
Syndrome cells leads to PARP hyperactivation and
increased oxidative stress. PLoS Genet. 2012; 8:1–8.

46.	 Valk PJ, Verhaak RG, Beijen MA, Erpelinck CA, Barjesteh van
Waalwijk van Doorn-Khosrovani S, Boer JM, Beverloo HB,
Moorhouse MJ, van der Spek PJ, Löwenberg B, Delwel R.
Prognostically useful gene-expression profiles in acute myeloid
leukemia. N Engl J Med. 2004; 350:1617–1628.

43.	 Warner JK, Wang JC, Takenaka K, Doulatov S, McKenzie JL,
Harrington L, Dick JE. Direct evidence for cooperating
genetic events in the leukemic transformation of normal
human hematopoietic cells. Leukemia. 2005; 19:1794–1805.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2779

Oncotarget

