Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 23

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Repurposing atovaquone: Targeting mitochondrial complex III
and OXPHOS to eradicate cancer stem cells
Marco Fiorillo1,2,3, Rebecca Lamb1, Herbert B. Tanowitz4, Luciano Mutti5, Marija
Krstic-Demonacos5, Anna Rita Cappello3, Ubaldo E. Martinez-Outschoorn6,
Federica Sotgia1,2 and Michael P. Lisanti1,2
1

The Breast Cancer Now Research Unit, Institute of Cancer Sciences, Cancer Research UK Manchester Institute, University
of Manchester, Manchester, UK
2

The Manchester Centre for Cellular Metabolism (MCCM), Institute of Cancer Sciences, Cancer Research UK Manchester
Institute, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK

3

The Department of Pharmacy, Health and Nutritional Sciences, The University of Calabria, Cosenza, Italy

4

Department of Medicine and Pathology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA

5

School of Environment and Life Sciences, University of Salford, Salford, UK

6

The Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA, USA

Correspondence to: Michael P. Lisanti, email: michaelp.lisanti@gmail.com
Correspondence to: Federica Sotgia, email: fsotgia@gmail.com
Keywords: atovaquone, tumor-initiating cells (TICs), mitochondria, OXPHOS, cancer stem-like cells (CSCs)
Received: January 08, 2016	

Accepted: January 27, 2016	

Published: April 30, 2016

Abstract
Atovaquone is an FDA-approved anti-malarial drug, which first became
clinically available in the year 2000. Currently, its main usage is for the treatment
of pneumocystis pneumonia (PCP) and/or toxoplasmosis in immune-compromised
patients. Atovaquone is a hydroxy-1,4-naphthoquinone analogue of ubiquinone, also
known as Co-enzyme Q10 (CoQ10). It is a well-tolerated drug that does not cause
myelo-suppression. Mechanistically, it is thought to act as a potent and selective
OXPHOS inhibitor, by targeting the CoQ10-dependence of mitochondrial complex
III. Here, we show for the first time that atovaquone also has anti-cancer activity,
directed against Cancer Stem-like Cells (CSCs). More specifically, we demonstrate that
atovaquone treatment of MCF7 breast cancer cells inhibits oxygen-consumption and
metabolically induces aerobic glycolysis (the Warburg effect), as well as oxidative
stress. Remarkably, atovaquone potently inhibits the propagation of MCF7-derived
CSCs, with an IC-50 of 1 μM, as measured using the mammosphere assay. Atovaquone
also maintains this selectivity and potency in mixed populations of CSCs and non-CSCs.
Importantly, these results indicate that glycolysis itself is not sufficient to maintain the
proliferation of CSCs, which is instead strictly dependent on mitochondrial function.
In addition to targeting the proliferation of CSCs, atovaquone also induces apoptosis
in both CD44+/CD24low/- CSC and ALDH+ CSC populations, during exposure to
anchorage-independent conditions for 12 hours. However, it has no effect on oxygen
consumption in normal human fibroblasts and, in this cellular context, behaves as an
anti-inflammatory, consistent with the fact that it is well-tolerated in patients treated
for infections. Future studies in xenograft models and human clinical trials may be
warranted, as the IC-50 of atovaquone’s action on CSCs (1 μM) is >50 times less than
its average serum concentration in humans.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

34084

Oncotarget

Introduction

26]. Atovaquone can be administered alone as a liquid
suspension (brand name Mepron) or in combination
with Proguanil (brand name Malarone). Atovaquone is
a highly lipophilic compound, with limited solubility in
water. The bioavailability of atovaquone is dependent on
its formulation and the diet, and its absorption is enhanced
by high-fat food intake. Importantly, with current
oral formulations, the average serum concentration of
atovaquone in humans is > 50 μM.
Atovaquone is an extremely non-toxic OXPHOS
inhibitor. Remarkably, attempts to suicide by overdosing
on atovaquone, by taking three to 42-fold the normal
dose, resulted in few, if any, side effects. Atovaquone
[trans-2-[4-(4-chlorophenyl)cyclohexyl]-3-hydroxy-1,4naphthalene-dione] is a quinone that functions as a
competitive inhibitor of co-enzyme Q10, specifically
inhibiting the mitochondrial electron transport chain
in mitochondria isolated from Plasmodium falciparum
at the cytochrome bc1 complex (Complex III) [27, 28].
Consistent with these findings, atovaquone has been
shown to depolarize malarial mitochondria, resulting in a
loss of mitochondrial function [24].
However, atovaquone efficacy was never previously
tested in CSCs. Here, we set out to evaluate if atovaquone
is an inhibitor of mitochondrial function in cancer cells
and if it can be used as a targeted agent for breast CSCs.

Cancer Stem-like Cells (CSCs) are a sub-population
of cancer cells that have been shown to be resistant to
conventional chemo- and radio-therapy [1-4]. Residual
CSCs left behind after clinical treatment are considered
responsible for the re-growth of tumors and for their
metastatic dissemination [5, 6]. Thus, much effort has
been devoted to the development of agents that are
able to specifically target CSCs. Most approaches have
focused on the targeting of signaling pathways necessary
for their survival, expansion or self-renewal, as well as
CSC-specific cell surface markers [7-10]. Other strategies
include the possibility to induce CSC differentiation or the
targeting of the CSC “niche” [11-14].
CSCs are strictly dependent on mitochondrial
biogenesis, as well as mitochondrial function, for their
clonal expansion. We have shown that pharmacological
inhibition of the formation of new mitochondria is
sufficient to block breast CSCs. In this regard, we have
demonstrated that treatment with doxycycline, an inhibitor
of mitochondrial ribosomes, or with XCT790, an inverse
agonist of Estrogen-Related Receptor α (ERRα), a
cofactor of PGC1α that is required for the transcription
of mitochondrial genes and mitochondrial biogenesis [15,
16], was sufficient to reduce mammosphere formation
and bona-fide CSC markers [17, 18]. Similarly, the
antimicrobial tigecycline selectively killed acute myeloid
leukemia stem cells, by inhibition of mitochondrial
translation [19]. Moreover, treatment with oligomycin
A, an inhibitor of the ATP synthase, greatly reduced
mammosphere formation [20]. Similarly, metformin,
which has complex I inhibitory effects, induced rapid
apoptosis of pancreatic CSCs [21]. Salinomycin, an
antibiotic that was recently identified as a selective
inhibitor of CSCs [22] has been shown to reduce cell
survival, at least partially, by impairing mitochondrial
bioenergetic performance [23]. Finally, pyrvinium
pamoate, an FDA-approved anti-parasitic agent, behaves
as an OXPHOS inhibitor targeting mitochondrial complex
II and efficiently prevents mammosphere formation in the
nano-molar range, with an IC-50 of 50 nM [18]. However,
pyrvinium pamoate is not absorbed efficiently from the
gut, impeding its use for systemic anti-cancer therapy.
Taken together, these studies provide a solid foundation
and proof-of-concept for the new therapeutic strategy of
targeting mitochondrial function to eradicate stem-like
cancer cells.
In an ongoing search for targeted, yet safe,
mitochondrial inhibitors, we identified atovaquone, a
complex III inhibitor, that was originally developed
to block the mitochondrial respiration of Plasmodium
falciparum and other protozoa [24]. Atovaquone is a
safe, FDA-approved drug, used for malaria prevention,
and for the prevention and treatment of pneumocystis
pneumonia and toxoplasmosis in HIV patients [25,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Results
Atovaquone, a ‘safe’ OXPHOS inhibitor that
potently targets cancer stem cells
The aim of this study is to evaluate if atovaquone
(Figure 1) is a potent inhibitor of mitochondrial function
in cancer cells and if it can be used as a targeted agent for
breast CSCs.
Towards this end, the metabolic profile of MCF7
breast cancer cells treated with increasing concentrations
of atovaquone was assessed using the Seahorse XF-e96
analyzer. Atovaquone treatment markedly inhibits the
mitochondrial respiration of MCF7 cells, with significant
reductions in basal respiration, maximal respiration,
and ATP levels (Figure 2). Moreover, atovaquone
treatment increases aerobic glycolysis in MCF7 cells,
with significant increases in glycolysis, glycolytic
reserve, and glycolytic reserve capacity (Figure 3A-3E).
The calculation of the Cell Energy Profile, obtained by
plotting Oxygen Consumption Rates (OCR) against ExtraCellular Acidification Rates (ECAR), demonstrates that
atovaquone shifts MCF7 cells from an oxidative state to a
glycolytic state (Figure 3F).
To further characterize the mitochondrial function
of MCF7 cells after treatment with atovaquone, MCF7
cells were stained with various metabolic probes and
34085

Oncotarget

analyzed by FACS. Atovaquone decreases mitochondrial
mass, as assessed with MitoTracker Deep-Red (Figure
4A), and mitochondrial membrane potential, as assessed
with MitoTracker Orange (Figure 4B). The ratio of
mitochondrial membrane potential (MitoTracker Orange)
versus mitochondrial mass (MitoTracker Deep-Red)
was calculated, showing that atovaquone significantly
decreases the mitochondrial membrane potential per
mitochondria (Figure 4C). We next determined Reactive
Oxygen Species (ROS) levels using the CM-H2DCFDA
probe by FACS. Note that atovaquone increases ROS
levels, as expected (Figure 4D). Taken together, these

data are consistent with the fact that atovaquone acts as a
mitochondrial inhibitor in cancer cells, greatly impairing
mitochondrial respiration, with a compensatory increase
in glycolysis.
We next asked if atovaquone functions as a
mitochondrial inhibitor specifically for cancer cells, or if
it affects all types of mammalian cells. To this end, we
assessed the metabolic profile of normal human fibroblasts
treated with atovaquone for 48 hours using the Seahorse
XF-e96 analyzer. Surprisingly, atovaquone does not inhibit
at all the basal respiration, maximal respiration, and ATP
levels of normal human fibroblasts, but rather we observed
a slight, but not significant, increase in mitochondrial
respiration (Figure 5A-5D). The glycolytic profile of
normal human fibroblasts treated with atovaquone was
also assessed using the Seahorse XF-e96 analyzer.
Significant increases in glycolysis, and glycolytic reserve
were observed experimentally, indicating that atovaquone
increases glycolysis in normal human fibroblasts (Figure
6A-6E). Interestingly, in contrast to what we observed
for MCF7 cancer cells, plotting of OCR against ECAR
shows that atovaquone does not alter the metabolic state
of normal human fibroblasts (Figure 6F).
We next measured ROS levels in human fibroblasts
treated with atovaquone. Note that atoquavone increases
ROS levels (Figure 7A). An increase in ROS levels
may induce the activation of stress-induced responses
pathways, such as HIF pathway, and/or pro-inflammatory
signaling, such as NFκB, which are potentially toxic

Figure 1: Atovaquone: Comparison with the structure
of CoQ10. Note that atovaquone A. is highly structurallyrelated to CoQ10 B. and was first designed to target the MTCYB subunit of Cytochrome bc1 (mitochondrial complex III) in
malarial parasites.

Figure 2: Atovaquone treatment inhibits the mitochondrial respiration of MCF7 breast cancer cells. The metabolic profile
of MCF7 cell monolayers treated with atovaquone (5μM and 10 μM) for 48 hours was assessed using the Seahorse XF-e96 analyzer. A. The
tracing of 3 independent experiments is shown. B., C., D. Significant reductions in basal respiration, maximal respiration, and ATP levels
were observed experimentally. **p < 0.001, ****p < 0.00001, one-way ANOVA and Student’s t-test calculations.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

34086

Oncotarget

for cells. To monitor the activation of HIF and NFκB
pathways after atovaquone treatment, we employed
reporter fibroblasts carrying HIF- and NFκB-Luc
reporter elements. Vehicle alone (DMSO) control cells
were run in parallel. Surprisingly, atovaquone treatment
decreases the activation of HIF and NFκB pathways in
normal fibroblasts, in a dose-dependent manner (Figure
7B-7C). These results indicate that atovaquone inhibits
inflammatory or stress-induced responses, consistent with
its safe use in the clinic.

Having firmly established that atovaquone
specifically inhibits mitochondrial respiration in MCF7
cancer cells, but not in normal fibroblasts, we then
asked if atovaquone could halt the propagation of the
CSC population. To this end, MCF7 cells were plated
for mammosphere assays in the presence of increasing
concentrations of atovaquone or vehicle alone for 5
days. Atovaquone dose-dependently inhibits MCF7
mammosphere formation, with an IC-50 of ~1 μM
(Figure 8A). To independently validate these results,

Figure 3: Atovaquone treatment increases glycolysis in MCF7 breast cancer cells. The glycolytic profile of MCF7 cell
monolayers treated with atovaquone (5μM and 10 μM) for 48 hours was assessed using the Seahorse XF-e96 analyzer. A. The tracing of 3
independent experiments is shown. B., C., D. Significant increases in glycolysis, glycolytic reserve, and glycolytic reserve capacity were
observed experimentally. E. ECAR was also found increased. F. ECAR and OCR were plotted on the same graph. Note that atovaquone
treatment (10 μM) shifts MCF7 cancer cells from an aerobic state to a glycolytic state. *p < 0.01, **p < 0.001, ***p < 0.0001, ****p <
0.00001, ns not significant, one-way ANOVA and Student’s t-test calculations.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

34087

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Atovaquone treatment decreases mitochondrial mass and membrane potential, with an increase in ROS
levels. MCF7 cells were treated with atovaquone (5μM or 10 μM) for 48 hours, and stained with various metabolic probes and analyzed by

FACS. A., B. Atovaquone decreases mitochondrial mass, as assessed with MitoTracker Deep-Red, and mitochondrial membrane potential,
as assessed with MitoTracker Orange. C. The ratio of mitochondrial membrane potential (MitoTracker Orange) versus mitochondrial
mass (MitoTracker Deep-Red) was calculated, showing that atovaquone significantly decreases mitochondrial membrane potential per
mitochondria. D. ROS levels were determined using the CM-H2DCFDA probe by FACS. Note that atovaquone (10 μM) increases ROS
levels, as expected. *p < 0.01, **p < 0.001, , ****p < 0.00001, one-way ANOVA and Student’s t-test calculations.

Figure 5: Atovaquone treatment does not affect the mitochondrial respiration of normal human fibroblasts. The
metabolic profile of normal human fibroblast (hTERT-BJ1) monolayers treated with atovaquone (5μM and 10 μM) for 48 hours was
assessed using the Seahorse XF-e96 analyzer. A. The tracing of 3 independent experiments is shown. B., C., D. Note that atovaquone does
not significantly reduce basal respiration, maximal respiration, or ATP levels of normal human fibroblasts. ns, not significant; one-way
ANOVA and Student’s t-test calculations.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

34088

Oncotarget

the expression of CSC markers (CD24 and CD44) was
analyzed by FACS. Notably, atovaquone pre-treatment
dose-dependently decreases the CD44+/CD24-low cell
population, which is considered to be the CSC population
(Figure 8B). Next, we assessed ALDEFLUOR activity,
an independent marker of CSCs, using MCF7 cells pretreated with atovaquone. A specific ALDH inhibitor
(diethylaminobenzaldehyde - DEAB) was used for each
sample, as a negative control. Note that atovaquone
treatment significantly decreases the ALDH-positive

cell population by 50% (Figure 8C). Thus, these results
indicate that atovaquone treatment also induces apoptosis
in MCF7-derived CSCs, during exposure to anchorageindependent conditions (i.e., anoikis), for 12 hours.
We next asked if atovaquone action is specific for
CSCs, or if it affects the viability of the total cancer cell
population or of normal human fibroblasts. To this end,
cell viability was assessed on MCF7 cells and normal
human fibroblasts (hTERT-BJ1) treated with atovaquone
for 5 days. Interestingly, atovaquone treatment inhibits

Figure 6: Atovaquone treatment increases glycolysis in normal human fibroblasts. The glycolytic profile of normal human

fibroblast (hTERT-BJ1) monolayers treated with atovaquone (5μM and 10 μM) for 48 hours was assessed using the Seahorse XF96
analyzer. A. The tracing of 3 independent experiments is shown. B., C., D. Significant increases in glycolysis, and glycolytic reserve were
observed experimentally. E. ECAR was also found increased. F. ECAR and OCR were plotted on the same graph. Note that atovaquone
treatment does not change the metabolic state of normal human fibroblasts. *p < 0.01, **p < 0.001, ***p < 0.0001, ****p < 0.00001, ns not
significant, one-way ANOVA and Student’s t-test calculations.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

34089

Oncotarget

Figure 7: Atovaquone treatment does not induce pro-inflammatory or stress-induced responses in human normal
fibroblasts. A. ROS levels were measured in normal human fibroblasts treated with atovaquone (10 μM) or DMSO for 48 hours. Note

that atovaquone increases ROS levels. B., C. The activation of HIF and NFκB pathways was monitored using Luc-reporter fibroblasts
carrying HIF- and NFκB-Luc reporter elements. Luciferase assays were performed on cells treated with atovaquone (5μM and 10 μM) or
DMSO control for 48 hours. Luminescence was normalized using SRB (total proteins), as a measure of cell viability. Note that atovaquone
treatment decreases the activation of HIF (B) and NFκB (C) pathways in normal fibroblasts, in a dose-dependent manner. *p < 0.01, **p <
0.001, ****p < 0.00001 evaluated with one-way ANOVA.

MCF7 cell viability with an IC-50 of ~10 μM (Figure 9A),
indicating that atovaquone preferentially inhibits CSCs
(compare with Figure 8A), relative to the ‘bulk’ cancer
cells. Thus, atovaquone is about 10 times more potent in
the inhibition of CSCs propagation (IC-50 of ~1 μM).
Moreover, atovaquone treatment only slightly inhibits
normal human fibroblast viability, consistent with its safe
use in humans (Figure 9B).
Finally, we asked if atovaquone could still target
CSCs in a heterogeneous attached cell population, when
they are mixed with the bulk of the cancer cells. To this
end, MCF7 cells were pre-treated with atovaquone as

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

monolayers for 2 days, and then cells were collected
and re-plated on low-attachment plates in the absence of
atovaquone, for mammosphere assays, or directly assessed
for cell viability. Interestingly, atovaquone pre-treatment
preferentially inhibits CSCs, in a dose-dependent fashion
(~85% inhibition with 10 μM atovaquone) (Figure 10A),
with more moderate effects on the viability of bulk cancer
cells (only ~30% inhibition with 10 μM atovaquone)
(Figure 10B). These results indicate that atovaquone is
able to target CSCs also when they are in a heterogeneous
attached cell population (IC-50 ~ 1 μM), when they are
mixed with bulk cancer cells.

34090

Oncotarget

Figure 8: Atovaquone treatment inhibits MCF7-derived CSCs. A. MCF7 cells were plated for mammosphere assays in the
presence of increasing concentrations of atovaquone or vehicle alone. Atovaquone dose-dependently inhibits MCF7 mammosphere
formation efficiency (MFE) at 5 days, with an IC-50 of ~1 μM. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.00001, evaluated by Student’s t test. B. MCF7 cells
were pre-treated with atovaquone (5μM and 10 μM) as monolayers for 48 hours and then re-plated on low-attachment plates in the
absence of atovaquone, for anoikis assay for 12 hours. Expression of CSC markers (CD24 and CD44) was analyzed by FACS. Note that
atovaquone pre-treatment dose-dependently decreases the CD44+/CD24-low cell population, which is considered the CSC population. C.
MCF7 cells were pre-treated with atovaquone (5μM and 10 μM) as monolayers for 48 hours and then assessed for ALDEFLUOR activity,
an independent marker of CSCs. Each sample was normalized using diethylaminobenzaldehyde (DEAB), a specific ALDH inhibitor, as
negative control. C. The tracing of representative samples is shown. Note that atovaquone treatment decreases the ALDH-positive cell
population by 50%. *p < 0.01, ****p < 0.00001 evaluated with one-way ANOVA.

Figure 9: Atovaquone treatment preferentially inhibits CSCs, with minor effects on the viability of normal human
fibroblasts. MCF7 cells and normal human fibroblasts (hTERT-BJ1) were treated with atovaquone (5μM and 10 μM) for 5 days. Cell

viability was assessed by SRB assay. A. Atovaquone treatment inhibits MCF7 cell viability with an IC-50 of ~10 μM, indicating that
atovaquone preferentially inhibits CSCs (compare with Figure 8A), relative to the ‘bulk’ cancer cells. B. Atovaquone treatment slightly
inhibits normal human fibroblast viability, consistent with its safe use in humans. ****p < 0.00001, ns not significant, evaluated with oneway ANOVA.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

34091

Oncotarget

Figure 10: Atovaquone pre-treatment preferentially inhibits CSCs, with minor effects on the viability of bulk cancer
cells. MCF7 cells were pre-treated with atovaquone (1μM and 10 μM) as monolayers for 2 days. Then, cells re-plated on low-attachment
plates in the absence of atovaquone, for mammosphere assay for 5 days, or directly assessed for cell growth and viability. A. Atovaquone
pre-treatment inhibits MCF7 cell mammosphere formation, in a dose-dependent fashion (~85% inhibition with 10 μM atovaquone). ***p <
0.0001 evaluated by Student’s t test B. Under the same conditions, atovaquone has mild effects on the viability of bulk cancer cells (~30%
inhibition of viability with 10 μM atovaquone). **p < 0.001 evaluated by Student’s t test. MFE: mammosphere forming efficiency.

Figure 11: Kaplan-Meier (K-M) analysis of the prognostic value of two components of mitochondrial complex III.

Results of recurrence-free survival analysis (RFS) are shown, over nearly a 20-year period of follow-up, for two mitochondrial markers for
all breast cancers taken as a single group (N = 2,609). Note that higher levels of these two mitochondrial markers are significantly associated
with tumor recurrence. See the Methods section for further details of how the analysis was carried out. Similar results were obtained in other
sub-types of breast cancer, including ER(+) and ER(-), and are included as Supplementary Figures S1 and S2.

Figure 12: Targeting OXPHOS to eradicate CSCs: Repurposing
atovaquone. The propagation of CSCs is thought to underpin the

molecular and cellular basis of tumor recurrence, distant metastasis and
resistance to chemo- and radio-therapy. Here, we suggest the use of a
“safe” mitochondrial OXPHOS inhibitor to eradicate CSCs, which are
addicted to mitochondrial function. More specifically, atovaquone (shown
at right) inhibits mitochondrial complex III, by effectively competing with
the binding of CoQ10 (shown at left).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

34092

Oncotarget

Table 1: High CYC1 mRNA levels are associated with increased tumor recurrence,
in both ER(+) and ER(-) breast cancer patients.

Validation of the clinical relevance of
mitochondrial complex III in human breast
cancer patients, in both ER(+) and ER(-) epithelial
sub-types

benefit from treatment with atovaquone, a complex III
inhibitor. In this context, CYC1 and UQBP could also
be used as companion diagnostics, to guide the use of
mitochondrially-targeted atovaquone therapy.

Discussion

In order to assess the possible clinical relevance
of mitochondrial complex III, we determined if different
components of the complex show any prognostic value
in human breast cancer patient cohorts, with long-term
follow-up (approaching 20 years). These results are
summarized in Tables 1 and 2. Corresponding KaplanMeier (K-M) analysis curves are included in Figure 11,
and as Supplementary Figures S1 and S2 (Panels A-I).
More specifically, high mRNA expression levels
of CYC1 (Cytochrome C1) and UQBP (UbiquinolCytochrome C Reductase Binding Protein), key
components of complex III, are both associated with
significantly reduced progression-free survival (i.e., higher
tumor recurrence). Similar results were obtained in both
ER(+) and ER(-) patients, as well as in ER(+) sub-types
(luminal A and luminal B patients). Note that high levels
of CYC1 and UQBP were also associated with progression
in patients that received endocrine therapy, which is
indicative of a clinical association with endocrine therapyresistance.
Thus, in the future, elevated levels of expression
of CYC1 and UQBP could be used to identify highrisk ER(+) and ER(-) breast cancer patients that might
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Atovaquone is an FDA-approved anti-parasitic drug
that was first developed to target chloroquine-resistant
malaria [25]. Currently, its major use is for managing
pneumocystis pneumonia (PCP) and toxoplasmosis
infections in HIV-positive patients [26]. Structurally,
atovaquone resembles CoQ10 and competitively inhibits
its binding to the Cytochrome b subunit (MT-CYB) of
mitochondrial complex III [27, 28]. As a consequence,
here we explored the possibility that atovaquone could
be repurposed for targeting mitochondrial complex III
in breast cancer cells (summarized in Figure 12). To test
this hypothesis, we first examined its metabolic effects
on MCF7 cells, using the Seahorse XF-e96, to measure
mitochondrial function and glycolysis. Our results directly
show that atovaquone significantly inhibits oxygen
consumption and ATP production in the low micromolar
range. Moreover, atovaquone treatment significantly
induced aerobic glycolysis (a.k.a., the Warburg effect).
In this context, we demonstrated that atovaquone reduces
both mitochondrial mass and membrane potential,
but increased overall ROS production. Importantly,
atovaquone potently inhibited the propagation of
34093

Oncotarget

Table 2: High UQBP mRNA levels are associated with increased tumor
recurrence, in both ER(+) and ER(-) breast cancer patients.

CSCs, with an IC-50 of 1 μM, as measured using the
mammosphere assay. Interestingly, this concentration is
> 60 times lower than the average serum concentration
achieved in patients. Remarkably, atovaquone treatment
had little or no effect on normal human fibroblasts.
When atovaquone suspension was administered in
humans with food at the standard regimen of 750 mg twice
daily, the average steady-state plasma concentration was
21.0 ± 4.9 μg/mL, and the minimum plasma concentration
was 16 ± 3.8 μg/mL [29]. It should be noted that in our
experiments we have effectively ablated mammosphere
formation with 10 μM atovaquone, which corresponds
to 3.66 μg/mL. Thus, the clinically relevant, therapeutic
plasma concentration of atovaquone is 5-times higher than
the concentration that completely blocks the expansion of
CSCs.
A thorough search of the literature revealed only
one previous paper investigating the effects of atovaquone
on cancer cell lines. Although mainly focused on the
cytotoxicity and apoptosis-inducing activity of atovaquone
derivatives, this report shows that atovaquone effectively
inhibited the growth of Du145 prostate cancer cells, with
an IC-50 of approximately 30 μM [30]. So, our current
results are consistent with these overall findings. However,
these authors did not evaluate the effects of atovaquone
on CSCs.
Interestingly, it is well known that atovaquone
binds directly to the Cytochrome b component of the
Cytochrome bc1 complex, in the mitochondria of malarial
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

parasites. This has been further verified by a mutational
analysis and by determining the crystal structure of
atovaquone bound to the Cytochrome b molecule, also
known as MT-CYB [31, 32]. However, very little is
known about the role of MT-CYB and the Cytochrome
bc1 complex in cancer.
Genetic evidence of a role for MT-CYB in cancer
comes from studies on breast and colon cancers. A recent
study used targeted sequencing of mitochondrial DNA in
high-risk breast cancer patients negative for BRCA1/2
mutations to provide new clinical evidence for MT-CYB
variants as a risk factor for hereditary breast cancers [33].
Interestingly, they observed that two mitochondrial genes,
namely MT-ATP6 (complex V) and MT-CYB (complex
III) showed the highest number of variants in the highrisk breast cancer patients. In further support of these
findings, 4 homoplasmic and 6 heteroplasmic alterations
were found in the mitochondrial DNA of human colon
cancer cell lines; among these changes, a homoplasmic
mutation in MT-CYB (G14804A) results in amino acid
substitutions in highly conserved residues [34]. Two
homoplasmic mutations in MT-CYB [G14985A (R80H)
and T15572C (F276L)] were independently observed in
another cohort of human colon cancer patients [35]. The
fact that these mutations are homoplasmic indicates that
they provide both a strong replicative and proliferative
advantage. Interestingly, the two latter mutations in MTCYB did not result in any observable defects in OXPHOS,
indicating that the mitochondria bearing these mutations
34094

Oncotarget

may be a more effective translational approach, to more
rapidly bring mitochondrial complex III inhibitors to the
clinic.

remained highly functional [35].
MT-CYB mutations have also been detected in
human bladder carcinomas [36, 37]. For example, a 21bp in-frame deletion results in a loss of 7-amino acids
in the MT-CYB protein product. Cells over-expressing
this “activated mutant” of MT-CYB showed significant
increases in cell proliferation and tumor growth, due to
NFkB hyper-activation, increased oxygen consumption
rates and resistance to apoptosis. This activated mutant of
MT-CYB, specifically associated with bladder cancer, also
functionally increased anchorage-independent growth and
mitochondrial biogenesis, as well as mt-DNA content [36,
37].
The Cytochrome bc1 complex contains two major
subunits: Cytochrome b (MT-CYB) and Cytochrome c1
(CYC1). Very little is known about the role of CYC1
in cancer pathogenesis. However, silencing of CYC1
(using an shRNA approach) in osteosarcoma cell lines
effectively inhibits cellular proliferation, sensitizes the
cells to apoptotic cell death and inhibits their ability to
form tumors in xenograft models [38]. In their model
system, the authors also demonstrated that CYC1 silencing
significantly reduced mitochondrial complex III activity.
Interestingly, several reports indicate that the
expression levels of mitochondrial complex III subunits
are altered in human breast cancers [39, 40]. For example,
ubiquinol cytochrome c reductase (UQCRFS1) is
amplified in a subset of breast cancers and is associated
with higher tumor grade [40]. In addition, there appears
to be a relationship between tamoxifen-sensitivity
and complex III. More specifically, inhibition of
mitochondrial complex III enhances the cytotoxicity of
tamoxifen in MCF7 cells [41]. This synergy may stem
from the observation that tamoxifen may act directly on
mitochondria, as an inhibitor of complex III function [42].
Taken together with our current data, these results
suggest that atovaquone treatment may be an effective
new strategy for targeting the Cytochrome bc1 complex
(especially MT-CYB and CYC1) in cancer, to prevent the
proliferative expansion of CSCs and tumor growth. Further
pre-clinical studies to test atovaquone efficacy are clearly
warranted. In direct support of the idea that targeting
mitochondrial complex III is a promising therapeutic
strategy, Kwon, Jung and colleagues have developed a
series of small molecules that successfully inhibited the
activity of complex III (UQBP; ubiquinol-cytochrome c
reductase binding protein) [43, 44]. Interestingly, these
small molecules also dramatically reduced tumor growth
in pre-clinical xenograft models (harboring U87MG
glioblastoma cells), without showing any in vitro and in
vivo toxicity. However, these novel molecules will need to
undergo phase I clinical trials.
In contrast, atovaquone is already FDA-approved
and can immediately enter phase II clinical trails,
potentially saving 10 years in development time and
millions of dollars. Thus, the repurposing of atovaquone
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Materials and Methods
Materials
MCF7 breast cancer cell lines were purchased from
the ATCC. Human immortalized fibroblasts (hTERT-BJ1)
were purchased from Clontech, Inc. Cells were cultured
in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM),
supplemented with 10% FBS (fetal bovine serum), 2
mM GlutaMAX, and 1% Pen-Strep in a 37°C humidified
atmosphere containing 5% CO2, unless otherwise noted.
Gibco-brand cell culture media (DMEM/F12) was
purchased from Life Technologies. Atovaquone was
purchased from Sigma-Aldrich.

Seahorse XFe-96 metabolic flux analysis
Extracellular acidification rates (ECAR) and realtime oxygen consumption rates (OCR) for MCF7 cells
and fibroblasts treated with atovaquone were determined
using the Seahorse Extracellular Flux (XFe-96) analyzer
(Seahorse Bioscience, MA, USA) [17]. 10,000 cells per
well were seeded into XFe-96 well cell culture plates, and
incubated overnight to allow attachment. Then, cells were
treated with atovaquone (5μM and 10 μM) for 48 hours.
Vehicle alone (DMSO) control cells were processed in
parallel. After 48 hours of incubation, cells were washed
in pre-warmed XF assay media (or for OCR measurement,
XF assay media supplemented with 10mM glucose, 1mM
Pyruvate, 2mM L-glutamine and adjusted at 7.4 pH).
Cells were then maintained in 175 µL/well of XF assay
media at 37°C, in a non-CO2 incubator for 1 hour. During
the incubation time, we loaded 25 µL of 80mM glucose,
9µM oligomycin, and 1M 2-deoxyglucose (for ECAR
measurement) or 10µM oligomycin, 9µM FCCP, 10µM
rotenone, 10µM antimycin A (for OCR measurement),
in XF assay media into the injection ports in the XFe96 sensor cartridge. Measurements were normalized
by protein content (SRB or Bradford assay). Data set
was analyzed by XFe-96 software and GraphPad Prism
software, using one-way ANOVA and Student’s t-test
calculations. All experiments were performed three times
independently.

Mitochondrial staining
Mitochondrial activity was assessed with
MitoTracker Orange (#M7510, Invitrogen), whose
accumulation in mitochondria is dependent upon
34095

Oncotarget

CD44/CD24 analysis

membrane potential. Mitochondrial mass was determined
using MitoTracker Deep-Red (#M22426, Invitrogen),
localizing to mitochondria regardless of mitochondrial
membrane potential. MCF7 cells were treated with
atovaquone (5 μM and 10 μM) for 48 hours. Vehicle
alone (DMSO) control cells were processed in parallel.
After 48 hours, cells were incubated with pre-warmed
MitoTracker staining solution (diluted in PBS/CM to a
final concentration of 10 nM) for 30-60 minutes at 37°C.
All subsequent steps were performed in the dark. Cells
were washed in PBS, harvested, and re-suspended in
300 μL of PBS/CM. Cells were then analyzed by flow
cytometry using Fortessa (BD Bioscience). Data analysis
was performed using FlowJo software.

1 x 105 MCF7 cells were treated with atovaquone
(5 μM and 10 μM) for 48 hours in 6-well plates, grown
as a monolayer. Then, cells were trypsinized and seeded
in low-attachment plates in mammosphere media. After
12 hours, MCF7 cells were spun down and incubated
with CD24 (IOTest CD24-PE, Beckman Coulter) and
CD44 (APC mouse Anti-Human CD44, BD Pharmingen
cat.559942) antibodies for 15 minutes on ice. Cells were
rinsed twice and incubated with LIVE/DEAD dye (Fixable
Dead Violet reactive dye; Invitrogen) for 10 minutes.
Samples were then analyzed by FACS (Fortessa, BD
Bioscence). Only the live population, as identified by the
LIVE/DEAD dye staining, was analyzed for CD24/CD44
expression. Data were analyzed using FlowJo software.

ROS staining

ALDEFLUOR assay and separation of the ALDHpositive population by FACS

Reactive oxygen species (ROS) production was
measured using CM-H2DCFDA (C6827, Invitrogen),
a cell-permeable probe that is non-fluorescent until
oxidation within the cell. Cells were treated with 10 μM
atovaquone for 48 hours. Vehicle alone (DMSO) control
cells were processed in parallel. After 48 hours, cells were
washed with PBS, and incubated with CM-H2DCFDA
(diluted in PBS/CM to a final concentration of 1 μM) for
20 minutes at 37°C. All subsequent steps were performed
in the dark. Cells were rinsed, harvested, and re-suspended
in PBS/CM. Cells were then analyzed by flow cytometry
using the Fortessa (BD Bioscience). ROS levels were
estimated by using the mean fluorescent intensity of the
viable cell population. The results were analyzed using
FlowJo software (Tree star Inc.).

ALDH activity was assessed in MCF7 cells after
treatment with atovaquone (5μM and 10μM) or vehicle
control. The ALDEFLUOR kit (StemCell Technologies,
Vancouver, Canada) was used to isolate the population
with high ALDH enzymatic activity by FACS (Fortessa,
BD Bioscence). Briefly, 1 × 105 MCF7 cells were
incubated in 1ml ALDEFLUOR assay buffer containing
ALDH substrate (5μl/ml) for 40 minutes at 37°C. In each
experiment, a sample of cells was stained under identical
conditions with 30 μM of diethylaminobenzaldehyde
(DEAB), a specific ALDH inhibitor, as negative control.
The ALDEFLUOR-positive population was established
in according to the manufacturer’s instructions and was
evaluated in 2 × 104 cells.

Mammosphere culture
A single cell suspension was prepared using
enzymatic (1x Trypsin-EDTA, Sigma Aldrich, #T3924),
and manual disaggregation (25 gauge needle) [45]. Cells
were plated at a density of 500 cells/cm2 in mammosphere
medium (DMEM-F12/ B27/20ng/ml EGF/PenStrep) in
non-adherent conditions, in culture dishes coated with
(2-hydroxyethylmethacrylate) (poly-HEMA, Sigma,
#P3932). Then, cells were treated with increasing
concentrations of atovaquone (range 50 nM to 10 μM).
Vehicle alone (DMSO) control cells were processed in
parallel. Cells were grown for 5 days and maintained in
a humidified incubator at 37°C. After 5 days for culture,
spheres > 50 μm were counted using an eye piece
graticule, and the percentage of cells plated which formed
spheres was calculated and is referred to as percentage
mammosphere formation, and was normalized to one (1 =
100 %MFE). Similar results were also obtained when cells
were seeded at a density of 200 cells/cm2.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Pre-treatment of monolayers with atoqvaquone
After treatment with atovaquone in monolayers (1
μM or 10 μM for 2 days), MCF7 cells were trypsinized
and seeded for mammosphere cultures. In parallel, cells
were assessed for cell viability or cell growth. Cell growth
was quantitatively measured using an Automated Cell
Counter (Biorad), and cell viability was assessed by
labeling with Trypan blue (Sigma).

SRB assay
Cell viability was assessed by sulphorhodamine
(SRB) assay, based on the measurement of cellular protein
content. After treatment with atovaquone for 5 days in 96
well plates, cells were fixed with 10% trichloroacetic acid
(TCA) for 1 hour in cold room, and dried overnight at
room temperature. Then, cells were incubated with SRB
for 15 min, washed twice with 1% acetic acid, and air
34096

Oncotarget

Manchester Cancer Research Centre (MCRC). Ubaldo
E. Martinez- Outschoorn was supported by the National
Cancer Institute (NCI) of the National Institutes of
Health (NIH), under Award Number K08-CA17519301A1. Rebecca Lamb was supported by a grant from the
Margaret Q. Landenberger Research Foundation.
We are especially grateful to Professor Sir Salvador
Moncada (University of Manchester) for initially
suggesting that we might want to test atovaquone in our
assay systems, to compare it with other anti-mitochondrial
agents, in parallel.

dried for at least 3 hour. Finally, the protein-bound dye
was dissolved in 10 mM Tris pH 8.8 solution and read
using a plate reader at 540 nm.

Evaluation of HIF and NFκB signaling pathways
The Cignal Lenti reporter assay (Luc) system
(Qiagen) was chosen for monitoring HIF- and NFκB-Luc
pathway activity in fibroblasts, as we previously described
[46, 47]. Luciferase assay (E1501, Promega) was
performed in luciferase reporter hTERT-BJ1 cells treated
with atovaquone. Briefly, 1 × 104 hTERT-BJ1 reporter
cells were seeded in black-walled 96-well plates and then
were treated with atovaquone (5μM and 10 μM) for 48
hours. Vehicle alone (DMSO) control cells were run in
parallel. Six replicates were used for each condition. After
48 hours, luciferase assay was performed according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. Light signal was acquired for
2 minutes in photons/second in the Xenogen VivoVision
IVIS Lumina (Caliper Life Sciences), and the results were
analyzed using the Living Image 3.2 software (Caliper
Life Sciences). Luminescence was normalized using SRB
(total proteins), as a measure of cell viability.

ConflictS of Interest
There is no conflict of interest.

References
1.	

2.	 Zhang M and Rosen JM. Stem cells in the etiology
and treatment of cancer. Current opinion in genetics &
development. 2006; 16:60-64.

Statistical analysis

3.	 Li X, Lewis MT, Huang J, Gutierrez C, Osborne CK, Wu
MF, Hilsenbeck SG, Pavlick A, Zhang X, Chamness GC,
Wong H, Rosen J and Chang JC. Intrinsic resistance of
tumorigenic breast cancer cells to chemotherapy. Journal
of the National Cancer Institute. 2008; 100:672-679.

Statistical significance was measured using the
analysis of variance (ANOVA) test or t-test. P ≤ 0.05 was
considered significant and all statistical tests were twosided.

4.	 Xin H, Kong Y, Jiang X, Wang K, Qin X, Miao ZH, Zhu
Y and Tan W. Multi-drug-resistant cells enriched from
chronic myeloid leukemia cells by Doxorubicin possess
tumor-initiating-cell properties. Journal of pharmacological
sciences. 2013; 122:299-304.

Kaplan-Meier (K-M) analyses
To perform K-M analysis, we used an open-access
online survival analysis tool to interrogate publically
available microarray data from up to 2,609 breast cancer
patients. This allowed us to determine their prognostic
value. Biased and outlier array data were excluded
from the analysis. Hazard-ratios were calculated, at the
best auto-selected cut-off, and p-values were calculated
using the logrank test and plotted in R. K-M curves were
generated online using the K-M-plotter (as high-resolution
TIFF files), using univariate analysis: http://kmplot.com/
analysis/index.php?p = service&cancer = breast. This
allowed us to directly perform in silico validation of these
mitochondrial biomarker candidates.

5.	 Scopelliti A, Cammareri P, Catalano V, Saladino V,
Todaro M and Stassi G. Therapeutic implications of Cancer
Initiating Cells. Expert opinion on biological therapy. 2009;
9:1005-1016.
6.	 Easwaran H, Tsai HC and Baylin SB. Cancer epigenetics:
tumor heterogeneity, plasticity of stem-like states, and drug
resistance. Molecular cell. 2014; 54:716-727.
7.	 Takebe N, Miele L, Harris PJ, Jeong W, Bando H, Kahn
M, Yang SX and Ivy SP. Targeting Notch, Hedgehog, and
Wnt pathways in cancer stem cells: clinical update. Nature
reviews Clinical oncology. 2015; 12:445-64. doi: 10.1038/
nrclinonc.2015.61.

Acknowledgments and Funding
We thank the University of Manchester for
providing start-up funds that contributed to the success
of this study. The Sotgia and Lisanti Laboratories were
supported, in part, by funding from the European Union
(ERC Advanced Grant), Breast Cancer Now, and the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Fillmore CM and Kuperwasser C. Human breast cancer cell
lines contain stem-like cells that self-renew, give rise to
phenotypically diverse progeny and survive chemotherapy.
Breast cancer research. 2008; 10:R25.

34097

8.	

Zhao C, Chen A, Jamieson CH, Fereshteh M, Abrahamsson
A, Blum J, Kwon HY, Kim J, Chute JP, Rizzieri D,
Munchhof M, VanArsdale T, Beachy PA and Reya T.
Hedgehog signalling is essential for maintenance of cancer
stem cells in myeloid leukaemia. Nature. 2009; 458:776779.

9.	

Singh A and Settleman J. EMT, cancer stem cells and drug

Oncotarget

resistance: an emerging axis of evil in the war on cancer.
Oncogene. 2010; 29:4741-4751.

inhibitors of cancer stem cells by high-throughput
screening. Cell. 2009; 138:645-659.

10.	 Takahashi-Yanaga F and Kahn M. Targeting Wnt signaling:
can we safely eradicate cancer stem cells? Clinical cancer
research. 2010; 16:3153-3162.

23.	 Manago A, Leanza L, Carraretto L, Sassi N, Grancara S,
Quintana-Cabrera R, Trimarco V, Toninello A, Scorrano L,
Trentin L, Semenzato G, Gulbins E, Zoratti M and Szabo
I. Early effects of the antineoplastic agent salinomycin
on mitochondrial function. Cell death & disease. 2015;
6:e1930.

11.	 Al-Hajj M, Becker MW, Wicha M, Weissman I and Clarke
MF. Therapeutic implications of cancer stem cells. Current
opinion in genetics & development. 2004; 14:43-47.

24.	 Srivastava IK, Rottenberg H and Vaidya AB. Atovaquone,
a broad spectrum antiparasitic drug, collapses mitochondrial
membrane potential in a malarial parasite. The Journal of
biological chemistry. 1997; 272:3961-3966.

12.	 Sell S. Stem cell origin of cancer and differentiation
therapy. Critical reviews in oncology/hematology. 2004;
51:1-28.
13.	 Scadden DT. The stem-cell niche as an entity of action.
Nature. 2006; 441:1075-1079.

25.	 Radloff PD, Philipps J, Nkeyi M, Hutchinson D and
Kremsner PG. Atovaquone and proguanil for Plasmodium
falciparum malaria. Lancet. 1996; 347:1511-1514.

14.	 Yang ZJ and Wechsler-Reya RJ. Hit ‘em where they live:
targeting the cancer stem cell niche. Cancer cell. 2007;
11:3-5.

26.	 Hughes W, Leoung G, Kramer F, Bozzette SA, Safrin S,
Frame P, Clumeck N, Masur H, Lancaster D, Chan C and et
al. Comparison of atovaquone (566C80) with trimethoprimsulfamethoxazole to treat Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia
in patients with AIDS. The New England journal of
medicine. 1993; 328:1521-1527.

15.	 Deblois G and Giguere V. Functional and physiological
genomics of estrogen-related receptors (ERRs) in health and
disease. Biochimica et biophysica acta. 2011; 1812:10321040.
16.	 Deblois G, St-Pierre J and Giguere V. The PGC-1/ERR
signaling axis in cancer. Oncogene. 2013; 32:3483-3490.

27.	 Fry M and Pudney M. Site of action of the antimalarial
hydroxynaphthoquinone,
2-[trans-4-(4’-chlorophenyl)
cyclohexyl]-3-hydroxy-1,4-naphthoquinone
(566C80).
Biochemical pharmacology. 1992; 43:1545-1553.

17.	 De Luca A, Fiorillo M, Peiris-Pages M, Ozsvari B,
Smith DL, Sanchez-Alvarez R, Martinez-Outschoorn
UE, Cappello AR, Pezzi V, Lisanti MP and Sotgia F.
Mitochondrial biogenesis is required for the anchorageindependent survival and propagation of stem-like cancer
cells. Oncotarget. 2015; 6:14777-95. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.4401.

28.	 Mather MW, Darrouzet E, Valkova-Valchanova M, Cooley
JW, McIntosh MT, Daldal F and Vaidya AB. Uncovering
the molecular mode of action of the antimalarial drug
atovaquone using a bacterial system. The Journal of
biological chemistry. 2005; 280:27458-27465.

18.	 Lamb R, Ozsvari B, Lisanti CL, Tanowitz HB, Howell
A, Martinez-Outschoorn UE, Sotgia F and Lisanti MP.
Antibiotics that target mitochondria effectively eradicate
cancer stem cells, across multiple tumor types: Treating
cancer like an infectious disease. Oncotarget. 2015;
10;6:4569-84. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.3174.

29.	 Falloon J, Sargent S, Piscitelli SC, Bechtel C, LaFon SW,
Sadler B, Walker RE, Kovacs JA, Polis MA, Davey RT,
Jr., Lane HC and Masur H. Atovaquone suspension in HIVinfected volunteers: pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics,
and TMP-SMX interaction study. Pharmacotherapy. 1999;
19:1050-1056.

19.	 Skrtic M, Sriskanthadevan S, Jhas B, Gebbia M, Wang X,
Wang Z, Hurren R, Jitkova Y, Gronda M, Maclean N, Lai
CK, Eberhard Y, Bartoszko J, Spagnuolo P, Rutledge AC,
Datti A, et al. Inhibition of mitochondrial translation as a
therapeutic strategy for human acute myeloid leukemia.
Cancer cell. 2011; 20:674-688.

30.	 Zhou J, Duan L, Chen H, Ren X, Zhang Z, Zhou F, Liu
J, Pei D and Ding K. Atovaquone derivatives as potent
cytotoxic and apoptosis inducing agents. Bioorganic &
medicinal chemistry letters. 2009; 19:5091-5094.
31.	 Srivastava IK, Morrisey JM, Darrouzet E, Daldal F and
Vaidya AB. Resistance mutations reveal the atovaquonebinding domain of cytochrome b in malaria parasites.
Molecular microbiology. 1999; 33:704-711.

20.	 Lamb R, Harrison H, Hulit J, Smith DL, Lisanti MP and
Sotgia F. Mitochondria as new therapeutic targets for
eradicating cancer stem cells: Quantitative proteomics and
functional validation via MCT1/2 inhibition. Oncotarget.
2014; 5:11029-11037. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.2789.

32.	 Nayak SK, Mallik SB, Kanaujia SP, Sekar K, Ranganathan
KR, Ananthalakshmi V, Jeyaraman G, Saralaya SS, Rao
KS, Shridhara K, Nagarajan K and Row TNG. Crystal
structures and binding studies of atovaquone and its
derivatives with cytochrome bc(1): a molecular basis for
drug design. Crystengcomm. 2013; 15:4871-4884.

21.	 Sancho P, Burgos-Ramos E, Tavera A, Bou Kheir T, Jagust
P, Schoenhals M, Barneda D, Sellers K, Campos-Olivas R,
Grana O, Viera CR, Yuneva M, Sainz B, Jr. and Heeschen
C. MYC/PGC-1alpha Balance Determines the Metabolic
Phenotype and Plasticity of Pancreatic Cancer Stem Cells.
Cell metabolism. 2015; 22:590-605.

33.	 Blein S, Barjhoux L, investigators G, Damiola F, Dondon
MG, Eon-Marchais S, Marcou M, Caron O, Lortholary
A, Buecher B, Vennin P, Berthet P, Nogues C, Lasset C,
Gauthier-Villars M, Mazoyer S, et al. Targeted Sequencing

22.	 Gupta PB, Onder TT, Jiang G, Tao K, Kuperwasser C,
Weinberg RA and Lander ES. Identification of selective
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

34098

Oncotarget

of the Mitochondrial Genome of Women at High Risk of
Breast Cancer without Detectable Mutations in BRCA1/2.
PloS one. 2015; 10:e0136192.

42.	 Tuquet C, Dupont J, Mesneau A and Roussaux J. Effects
of tamoxifen on the electron transport chain of isolated
rat liver mitochondria. Cell biology and toxicology. 2000;
16:207-219.

34.	 Chihara N, Amo T, Tokunaga A, Yuzuriha R, Wolf AM,
Asoh S, Suzuki H, Uchida E and Ohta S. Mitochondrial
DNA alterations in colorectal cancer cell lines. Journal of
Nippon Medical School. 2011; 78:13-21.

43.	 Jung HJ, Kim KH, Kim ND, Han G and Kwon HJ.
Identification of a novel small molecule targeting UQCRB
of mitochondrial complex III and its anti-angiogenic
activity. Bioorganic & medicinal chemistry letters. 2011;
21:1052-1056.

35.	 Polyak K, Li Y, Zhu H, Lengauer C, Willson JK, Markowitz
SD, Trush MA, Kinzler KW and Vogelstein B. Somatic
mutations of the mitochondrial genome in human colorectal
tumours. Nature genetics. 1998; 20:291-293.

44.	 Jung HJ, Cho M, Kim Y, Han G and Kwon HJ.
Development of a novel class of mitochondrial ubiquinolcytochrome c reductase binding protein (UQCRB)
modulators as promising antiangiogenic leads. Journal of
medicinal chemistry. 2014; 57:7990-7998.

36.	 Dasgupta S, Hoque MO, Upadhyay S and Sidransky D.
Mitochondrial cytochrome B gene mutation promotes tumor
growth in bladder cancer. Cancer research. 2008; 68:700706.

45.	 Shaw FL, Harrison H, Spence K, Ablett MP, Simoes BM,
Farnie G and Clarke RB. A detailed mammosphere assay
protocol for the quantification of breast stem cell activity.
Journal of mammary gland biology and neoplasia. 2012;
17:111-117.

37.	 Dasgupta S, Hoque MO, Upadhyay S and Sidransky D.
Forced cytochrome B gene mutation expression induces
mitochondrial proliferation and prevents apoptosis in
human uroepithelial SV-HUC-1 cells. International journal
of cancer. 2009; 125:2829-2835.

46.	 Fiorillo M, Verre AF, Iliut M, Peiris-Pages M, Ozsvari B,
Gandara R, Cappello AR, Sotgia F, Vijayaraghavan A and
Lisanti MP. Graphene oxide selectively targets cancer stem
cells, across multiple tumor types: implications for nontoxic cancer treatment, via “differentiation-based nanotherapy”. Oncotarget. 2015; 6:3553-3562. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.3348.

38.	 Li G, Fu D, Liang W, Fan L, Chen K, Shan L, Hu S,
Ma X, Zhou K and Cheng B. CYC1 silencing sensitizes
osteosarcoma cells to TRAIL-induced apoptosis. Cellular
physiology and biochemistry. 2014; 34:2070-2080.
39.	 Putignani L, Raffa S, Pescosolido R, Aimati L, Signore F,
Torrisi MR and Grammatico P. Alteration of expression
levels of the oxidative phosphorylation system (OXPHOS)
in breast cancer cell mitochondria. Breast cancer research
and treatment. 2008; 110:439-452.

47.	 Peiris-Pages M, Sotgia F and Lisanti MP. Chemotherapy
induces the cancer-associated fibroblast phenotype,
activating paracrine hedgehog-GLI signaling in breast
cancer cells. Oncotarget. 2015; 6:10728-45. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.3828.

40.	 Ohashi Y, Kaneko SJ, Cupples TE and Young SR.
Ubiquinol cytochrome c reductase (UQCRFS1) gene
amplification in primary breast cancer core biopsy samples.
Gynecologic oncology. 2004; 93:54-58.
41.	Theodossiou TA, Yannakopoulou K, Aggelidou C
and Hothersall JS. Tamoxifen subcellular localization;
observation of cell-specific cytotoxicity enhancement
by inhibition of mitochondrial ETC complexes I and III.
Photochemistry and photobiology. 2012; 88:1016-1022.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

34099

Oncotarget

