Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 42

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

Two-stage induced differentiation of OCT4 /Nanog stem-like
cells in lung adenocarcinoma
+

+

Rong Li1,*, Jinsu Huang1,*, Meili Ma1, Yuqing Lou1, Yanwei Zhang1, Lixia Wu2,
David W. Chang3, Picheng Zhao4, Qianggang Dong2, Xifeng Wu3, Baohui Han1
1

Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200030, China

2

Cancer Stem Cells Research Group, Shanghai Jiaotong University Cancer Institute, Shanghai 200032, China

3

Department of Epidemiology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA

4

Department of Pathology and Genomic Medicine, Houston Methodist Hospital Research Institute, Houston, Texas 77030, USA

*

Rong Li and Jinsu Huang contributed equally to this work as the first author

Correspondence to: Baohui Han, email: hanxkyy@aliyun.com
Keywords: cancer stem cell, differentiation, lung adenocarcinoma, vitamin D, OCT4
Received: June 15, 2015     Accepted: August 20, 2016     Published: August 31, 2016

ABSTRACT
Stem-like cells in solid tumors are purported to contribute to cancer development
and poor treatment outcome. The abilities to self-renew, differentiate, and resist
anticancer therapies are hallmarks of these rare cells, and steering them into lineage
commitment may be one strategy to curb cancer development or progression. Vitamin
D is a prohormone that can alter cell growth and differentiation and may induce the
differentiation cancer stem-like cells. In this study, octamer-binding transcription factor
4 (OCT4)-positive/Nanog homeobox (Nanog)- positive lung adenocarcinoma stem-like
cells (LACSCs) were enriched from spheroid cultured SPC-A1 cells and differentiated by
a two-stage induction (TSI) method, which involved knockdown of hypoxia-inducible
factor 1-alpha (HIF1α) expression (first stage) followed by sequential induction with
1alpha,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1,25(OH)2D3, VD3) and suberoylanilide hydroxamic
acid (SAHA) treatment (second stage). The results showed the HIF1α-knockdowned
cells displayed diminished cell invasion and clonogenic activities. Moreover, the TSI
cells highly expressed tumor suppressor protein p63 (P63) and forkhead box J1
(FOXJ1) and lost stem cell characteristics, including absent expression of OCT4 and
Nanog. These cells regained sensitivity to cisplatin in vitro while losing tumorigenic
capacity and decreased tumor cell proliferation in vivo. Our results suggest that induced
transdifferentiation of LACSCs by vitamin D and SAHA may become novel therapeutic
avenue to alter tumor cell phenotypes and improve patient outcome.

SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT
The development and progression of lung cancer may involve rare population of
stem-like cells that have the ability to grow, differentiate, and resist drug treatment.
However, current therapeutic strategies have mostly focused on tumor characteristics
and neglected the potential source of cells that may contribute to poor clinical outcome.
We generated lung adenocarcinoma stem-like cells from spheroid culture and induced
their transdifferentiation by a two-stage method of knocking down HIF1α expression
followed by vitamin Dand suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (VD3/SAHA) treatment. We
observed the induced cells lost stem-like characteristics, regained sensitivity to cisplatin,
and displayed reduced tumorigenic capacity. These findings suggest that targeting
stem-like cells by reverting them to more specialized state may be an approach to treat
lung cancer.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

68360

Oncotarget

INTRODUCTION

disappearance of stem cell markers; diminished ability
to invade and clonogenic capacity in vitro; regained
sensitivity to cisplatin; lost tumorigenic capacity
and decreased tumor cell proliferation in vivo. We
demonstrated that LACSCs can be differentiated in two
stages in which VD3/SAHA play a crucial role. Our data
suggest that VD3 in combination with other therapeutic
agents may be candidate for treating chemoresistant
LACSCs and provide a novel therapy for chemotherapy
resistant lung adenocarcinoma.

Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death
for both men and women in the United States [1] and
several developing countries including China. The
majority (~80%) of lung cancer is non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC), among which adenocarcinoma is the
most common histological type comprising of 30-50%
of cases [2]. The existence of lung cancer stem cells,
which have the ability to self-renew, differentiate,
proliferate, and be highly resistant to chemoradiation
treatment, have been proposed based on experimental
and clinical evidence. These cells are thought to give
rise to tumor cells during cancer development and are
the source of recurrence and metastasis leading to poor
survival [3–4].
The expression of pluripotent transcription factors,
especially OCT4 and Nanog, are widely accepted as
lung stem cells markers, and developmentally regulated
Notch, Wnt, and Hedgehog pathways are considered as
important signaling pathways which are responsible for
the transformation of normal stem cells [2]. However,
the biology of lung stem cell development is still not
fully understood and no definitive strategies exist
on how to treat lung cancer through targeting cancer
stem-like cells (CSCs). Induced pluripotent stem cells
are known to engage in transdifferentiation, which is
defined as dedifferentiation of the primary cell and
then differentiation into a new lineage [5]. During this
process, the CSCs would lose stemness and become
another cell type which is different from the original cell
lineage from which the tumor arises [6]. This feature
offers a potential therapeutic strategy to treat or cure lung
cancer.
Vitamin D is a multifunctional prohormone that
has been reported to induce cancer cell differentiation
into a less malignant and more mature phenotype [7].
Moreover, despite the varied evidence, epidemiologic
and clinical studies have suggested a possible protective
role of vitamin D to reduce the incidence and progression
of several kinds of cancer, including colon cancer,
lung cancer, breast cancer and prostate cancer [7]. We
hypothesize that vitamin D may play an important
role in the transdifferentiation of lung adenocarcinoma
stem-like cells (LACSCs), based on the prohormone’s
ability to downregulate OCT4 and Nanog [8], which are
essential in the maintenance of the stemness feature in
cancer cells [9–10]. So far, the differentiation effect of
vitamin D3 on LACSCs has not been well-studied.
In this study, we show that through a two-stageinduction method which included the knockdown of
hypoxia inducible factor 1a (HIF1a) gene expression and
then sequential induction by 1alpha,25-dihydroxyvitamin
D3 (1,25(OH)2D3, VD3) combined with suberoylanilide
hydroxamic acid treatment (VD3/SAHA) in the second
stage, the LACSCs changed to differentiated state with
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

RESULTS
Overview
In this study, the differentiation of LACSCs was
carried out in two phases (Figure 1). First, we stably
knocked down HIF1α expression in SPC-A1 lung
adenocarcinoma cells by HIF-1α shRNA lentiviral
particles, which resulted in changing the stem-like cells to
an intermediate differentiated state (named HIF1α-KD). In
the second stage, we treated HIF1α-KD cells with vitamin
D and SAHA, which transformed these cells into P63 and
FOXJ1 positive differentiated cells (Figure 1). It should
be noted that SPC-A1 cells expressed vitamin D receptor
(VDR) (Supplementary Figure S1).

Expression of OCT4/Nanog in LACSCs
We enriched LACSCs from SPC-A1 cells by
spheroid culture methodology, which has been widely
used [11–12]. Immunofluorescence analysis demonstrated
the spheroid cultured SPC-A1 cells positively express
OCT4 and Nanog (Figure 2A), two of the signature
embryonic stem cell transcription factors. The results
of immunofluorescence analysis also showed that the
LACSCs positively expressed surfactant protein C (SPC), thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1), pleiomorphic
adenoma gene-like 2 (PLAGL2), SRY (sex determining
region Y)-box 2 (Sox2), Clara cell secretory protein
(CCSP), and forkhead box protein (FOXJ1). P63
expression was negative in these cells (Figure 2A).

Expression of cell markers on HIF1α-KD cells
We stably depleted HIF1α expression in SPC-A1
lung adenocarcinoma cells by HIF-1α shRNA lentiviral
particles. To verify the specificity of knockdown, we
measured the endogenous expression of HIF1A gene
in the HIF1α-KD cells and found significantly reduced
expression whereas HIF2A, which shares high sequence
homology as HIF1A, was not affected (Supplementary
Figure S2). Imaging by laser confocal fluorescence
microscopy demonstrated the HIF1α-KD cells negatively
expressed HIF1α confirming the effective repression of
this gene product (Figure 2B). In addition, the knockdown
68361

Oncotarget

cells also lacked the expression of OCT4 (Figure 2B).
The expression of cell markers on HIF1α-KD cells
was substantially altered (Figure 2C). The result of
immunofluorescence analysis showed that HIF1α-KD
cells negatively expressed stem cell markers and the other
cell markers, including OCT4, Nanog, SP-C, TTF-1,
PLAGL2, Sox2, CCSP, FOXJ1 and P63.

was 0.65±0.05 for HIF1α-KD LACSCs (Figure 4B)
(P<0.0001).

Expression of cell markers on VD3/SAHA
induced cells
Next, we subjected the HIF1α-KD cells to VD3
and SAHA treatment and then examined the expression
of previously tested cell markers. Immunostaining of
the induced cells showed P63 and FOXJ1 were positive,
while OCT4, Nanog, SP-C, TTF-1, PLAGL2, and CCSP
were all negative. Interestingly, Sox2 was reexpressed
although weakly (Figure 2D).

Invasion activity
The lack of expression of stem-cell markers in
HIF1α-KD LACSCs suggest these cells may possess
altered cellular characteristics compared to LACSCs,
so we tested the cells in various phenotypic assays.
The HIF1α-KD LACSCs displayed decreased invasion
activity compared to LACSCSs but not migration activity
(Figure 3A). The invasive rate was 22.5±0.3% for
LACSCs compared to 3.31±0.1% for HIF1α-KD LACSCs
(Figure 3B) (p<0.0001).

Sensitivity to chemotherapy
To see whether LACSCs and HIF1α-KD-VD3/
SAHA induced cells showed differential sensitivity to
chemotherapeutic agent cisplatin, we tested the cells in
cytotoxic assay. Figure 5 showed that LACSCs were
highly resistant to cisplatin, while HIF1α-KD -VD3/
SAHA induced cells were much more sensitive to
cisplatin. The 50% inhibitory concentration (IC50) of
cisplatin in HIF1α-KD -VD3/SAHA induced cells was
0.51±0.03μg/ml, which is significantly lower than the
peak plasma concentrations of cisplatin (about 4 μg/ml)
during standard chemotherapeutic treatment.

Colony formation
Colony formation assay showed that the number of
foci of HIF1α-KD LACSC were significantly less than
that of LACSCs (Figure 4A). Measurement of crystal
violet staining confirmed the results showing the optical
density (OD) of LACSCs was 1.99±0.02, while the OD

Figure 1: Schematic diagram of two-stage differentiation of lung adenocarcinoma stem-like cells (LACSCs) and cell
surface marker expression.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

68362

Oncotarget

Tumorigenicity in vivo

respectively, p<0.0001 (Supplementary Table S1). This
demonstrates that the sequential differentiation of LACSCs
could significantly reduce their tumorigenic potential
in vivo.

Differentiation of LACSCs should not only improve
the sensitivity to chemotherapy, but also reduce their
tumorigenicity. To determine whether the tumor growth
of HIF1α-KD-VD3/SAHA induced cells decreasedin vivo,
we compared the tumorigenicity of HIF1α-KD-VD3/
SAHA induced cells with LACSCs in NOD-SCID mice
in xenograft experiments. The results for two independent
experiments showed that the tumorigenicity rates were
both 100% for LACSCs, while it was 0% and 50% for
HIF1α-KD-VD3/SAHA induced cells. Therefore, the
average tumorigenicity rate for HIF1α-KD-VD3/SAHA
induced cells was 25%. Figure 6 showed that the tumor
volumes of LACSCs were much larger than HIF1α-KDVD3/SAHA induced cells during the follow-up period of
growth. Tumor volume of LACSCs and the induced cells
at the 56th day were 905.2±13.5mm3 vs 0.5±0.04 mm3,

DISCUSSION
In this study, we demonstrated that LACSCs can
be induced to differentiate into squamous-like cells
by a two-stage method. This transdifferentation was
characterized by the reacquirement of proximate bronchial
epithelium markers (i.e., Sox2, P63 and FOXJ1) and the
disappearance of lineage markers for distal respiratory
cells, including SP-C, CCSP, TTF-1 and PLAGL2. The
phenotypic switch was accompanied with an increased
sensitivity to cisplatin. Notably, these induced cells also
lost the ability to invade in vitro and become much less
tumorigenic in vivo. The data provided herein suggested

Figure 2: Immunofluorescent staining images of LACSC marker expression before and after each stage of
differentiation. A. Cell marker expression of OCT4, Nanog, Sox2, PLAGL2, TTF-1, SP-C, P63, FOXJ1, and CCSP protein expression
in parental LACSCs (SPC-A1 spheroid cells); B. OCT4 and HIF1α expression and Hoechst nuclear staining in LACSCs (upper panels) and
HIF1α-KD cells (lower panels); C. cell marker expression in HIF1α-KD cells; D. marker expression in HIF1α-KD-SAHA/VD3 induced
cells. All images were taken at 200x magnification. Figure 2B images were enlarged digitally to visualize individual cells more clearly for
protein subcellular localization.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

68363

Oncotarget

that these putative LACSCs are bipotential cells capable
of differentiating into two distinct lineages of lung airway
epithelial cells. The reduced capacities of metastasis and
tumorigenesis after their transdifferentiation may provide
new avenue in the treatment of these highly aggressive
cells.
It is widely accepted that the CSC-like cells
expressing OCT4 within the tumor are responsible for
disease progression and poor patient survival [13–14].
In lung cancer, these stem-like cells can be enriched
by using of sphere-forming assay and were positive for
OCT4 and Nanog expression [7, 15]. Some researchers
reported that OCT4 expression in solid tumors correlated
with hypoxia-induced HIF1A expression [16], while
others demonstrated that HIF2A plays a critical role in
the transcriptional regulation of this pluripotent gene
[17]. To evaluate the potential role of HIF1A in our cell
model, we depleted its expression with specific shRNA
lentiviral particles. The results showed that knockdown
of HIF-1A significantly reduced the expression of OCT4,
demonstrating that OCT4 expression can be regulated by
HIF1A in lung cancer cells. Interestingly, we also found
that accompanied by the loss of OCT4 expression, the
LACSC-derived cells lost the cancer hallmarks associated

with stemness, as shown by decreased invasion, migration
and clonogenic capacity in vitro. Moreover, phenotypic
analysis showed that these OCT4- HIFα-KD cells lost the
expression of tested markers, including those associated
with the proximate and distal respiratory epithelium of the
lung. Based on these findings, we considered HIFα-KD
cells as intermediate cells.
Previously, we observed that the serum level of
VD3 in lung adenocarcinoma patients was remarkably
reduced when compared with healthy subjects and
other histological types of lung cancer [18]. VD3 is a
multifunctional hormone that has been reported to induce
cancer cell differentiation into a less malignant and more
mature phenotype [7]. We tested the potential actions of
VD3 in our cell model and found that compound alone did
not induce any observable phenotypic effects on LACSCs
and HIF1α-KD cells, such as cell growth and marker
expression, etc. (data not shown). However, by searching
the literature, we found VD3 was able to regulate P63 gene
expression via the transcriptional repressor DEC1 [19],
which is positively controlled by VD3 receptor (VDR)
and negatively regulated by HDAC1 [20]. Accordingly,
we tried to assess the possible role of VD3 and SAHA, a
small molecular inhibitor of HDAC1, in combination. We

Figure 3: Migration and invasion activities of LACSCs and HIF1α-KD cells. A. Crystal violet staining of LACSCs and HIF1α-

KD cells showing migration (left) and invasion (right) activities. B. Invasion rate of LACSCs and HIF1α-KD cells. Results are averages
of 3 replicates.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

68364

Oncotarget

observed for the first time that VD3/SAHA in combination
did play a role in the transdifferentiation of HIF1α-KD
intermediate cells but not LACSCs, and induced HIF1αKD cells to express Sox2, P63 and FOXJ1, the markers
that are normally expressed in the basal cells of the adult
human lung. In contrast, the HIF1α-KD cells after this
treatment remained negative for the expression of distal
cell markers, which are normally present in Clara cells and
type II pneumocytes.
The re-expression of FOXJ1 and to lesser extent
Sox2 after VD3/SAHA induction is notable. FOXJ1
belongs to the Foxhead box (FOX) family of transcription
factors, which regulate a variety of biological process
involving cell fate determination [21]. FOXJ1 along with
other FOX-related genes may be negatively regulated
targets of Nanog in embryonic stem cells. In ovarian
cancer, stable knockdown of NANOG led to decreased
cell proliferation, migration, and invasion, which were

accompanied by increased expression of E-cadherin
and FOX-related genes including FOXJ1 [22], results
consistent with our findings. The expression of Sox2,
albeit weakly, in the transdifferentiated cells is somewhat
perplexing. However, it is known that varying levels of
Sox2 can affect fate of embryonic stem cell differentiation,
and that expression of Sox2 can inhibit differentiation of
mesodermal germ layer but promote differentiation into
the neural/ectodermal lineage [23] indicating both positive
and negative regulatory roles.
There are some limitations in our study. First, we
have only shown the results for one lung cancer cell line,
SPC-1A cells, which is the first lung adenocarcinoma cell
line established in China [24]. We have evaluated two
additional lung adenocarcinoma cell lines (A549, and
PC3) and found that they were not suitable for our study
because these cells failed to express proximate lineage
markers. SPC-A1 cells are wild-type for both KRAS and

Figure 4: Growth of LACSCs and HIF1α-KD induced cells as measured by colony formation assay. Cells were stained

with crystal violet and then stain dissolved in 3% acetic acid and measured for absorbance at 570 nm. A. The crystal violet stained plates
of LACSCs and HIF1α-KD cells in colony formation assay; B. Relative growth of LACSCs and HIF1α-KD cells. Results are averages of
3 replicates.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

68365

Oncotarget

Figure 5: HIF1α-KD-VD3/SAHA induced cells were more sensitive to cytotoxic effect of cisplatin compared to parental
LACSCs. Results are averages of 3 replicates.

Figure 6: Tumorigenic effect of un-induced and differentiated LACSCs in vivo. Xenograft tumor growth of LACSC spheroid
cells and HIF1α-KD-VD3/SAHA induced cells were measured in NOD-SCID immunodeficient mice. Results are shown as averages of
two independent experiments.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

68366

Oncotarget

EGFR [25, 26], unlike A549 cells which are mutant for
KRAS and PC3 cells mutant for EGFR. Therefore, it is
possible that transdifferentiation of lung cancer cells might
be affected by different oncogenic mutation status. We
are preparing to further study the phenomena of LACSC
(spheroid) enrichment and their transdifferentiation
under different driving gene mutations and to assess
whether these events are unique to SPC-A1 cells. Second,
although the levels of SAHA and VD3 used for our ex
vivo experiments are similar to previous studies [27, 28],
the amount used might be in excess of physiological or
pharmacological range. Additional preclinical studies are
needed to determine the appropriate pharmacologic VD3/
SAHA levels to revert the oncogenic phenotype without
inducing overt toxicity.
Taken together, although the exact mechanisms
of action for this two-stage induction of LACSC
transdifferentiation remain unclear, the results described
above may bring prospects for potential clinical
application in the future. Chemotherapy occupies
important position in the clinical treatment of lung cancer
in which cisplatin is internationally recognized as firstline therapy, but its effect on survival is limited and the
development of drug resistance is common. The presence
of CSCs in tumors may be one of the underlying causes
for recurrence and treatment failure. Researchers have
reported that residual cancer cells after chemotherapy
have stem-like characteristics including OCT4 expression,
indicating that most chemotherapeutic regimens kill
sensitive tumor cells but enrich for resistant CSCs thus
leading to eventual recurrence or progression. Therefore,
restoring drug sensitivity of lung CSCs is paramount
to eradicate residual tumor cells and to improve patient
outcome and survival. The results obtained in this study
suggest that induced transdifferentiation of CSCs by
vitamin D and other agents such as SAHA may become
an important strategy to decrease tumor recurrence and
resistance. Further clinical and functional studies are
warranted to validate these findings as well as to define
the molecular pathways of stem cell regulation during lung
cancer development and treatment.

were used. The SPC-A1 cell concentration was adjusted
to 2 × 104/ml by the 1xCSC medium, which contained
DMEM/F12 medium, 20 ng/ml EGF, 20 ng/ml bFGF,
4μg/ml heparin and 1x B27. The cells (500μl/well) were
seeded in 24-well ultra-low absorption plates (Corning
Company, cat No.3473). At day 3, 5, and 7, fresh 10xCSC
medium (50μl/well) was added to each well.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Cells (1× 105 cells, 500μl medium) were seeded
in Millicell Side chamber (Millipore Corporation). After
overnight culture, the supernatant was discarded, and
100μl Cytofix fixation buffer was added to the cells and
fixed for 30 min. The supernatant was discarded again and
then washed with Perm/Wash buffer. After washing two
times 100μl each with Perm/Wash buffer, the cells were
treated with 2μl of anti-OCT4, -HIF1α, or -VDR antibody
(1:50 dilution by CSC medium) or PBS alone as negative
control and incubated at 4°C overnight. Next day, cells
were washed by PBS three times to remove unbound
antibodies, then 1μl fluorescein anti-IgG secondary
antibody (1:100 dilution) was added in the dark and
incubated at room temperature for 1 h. Cells were counter-

Antibodies and reagents for differentiation
Most immunofluorescence antibodies were
purchased from Santa Cruz (Dallas, TX), including rabbit
anti-HIF1 and anti-OCT4 antibodies OCT4 monoclonal
mouse anti-human antibody, mouse monoclonal antihuman SOX2 antibody, mouse anti-human FOXJ1
monoclonal antibody, mouse anti-human P63 monoclonal
antibody, goat anti-human Nanog polyclonal antibody,
goat anti-human CCSP polyclonal antibody, rabbit
polyclonal anti-human SP-C antibody, mouse anti-human
VDR antibody, and secondary rhodamine-labeled and
fluorescein-labeled donkey anti-mouse, anti-goat, and
anti-rabbit IgG antibodies. TRITC-labeled donkey antirabbit IgG antibody was purchased from Thermo Fisher
Scientific (Waltham, MA). Several chemicals were used
to induce stem cell differentiation, including 1,25(OH)2D3
(VD3), purchased from Sigma and Suberoylanilide
hydroxamic acid (SAHA), purchased from Selleck
(Houston, TX). HIF-1α shRNA lentiviral particles sc35561-v was bought from Santa Cruz Biotechnology
(Dallas, TX).

HIF1α knockdown and identification
SPC-A1 spheroid cells were seeded at 3 × 105
cells per well (1 ml culture medium) in a 6-well plate
and cultured overnight, and then were transduced with
HIF-1α shRNA lentiviral particles (sc-35561-V, Santa
Cruz Biotechnology) 30μl/well and cultured for 2 days.
Puromycin (concentration) was used to select cells.

Immunofluorescent staining of OCT4, HIF1α,
and VDR

Cell culture
SPC-A1 cells, purchased from Cell Bank of
Shanghai Institute of Life Science, were cultured to
spheroids to enrich stem cells. Fetal bovine serum
(FBS, PAA Laboratories GmbH, Germany), DMEM
medium (GIBCO, San Diego, CA), DMEM/F12 medium
(HyClone, Logan, Utah) were used in the research.
In sphere-forming cell culture, B27 supplement (50x)
(Gibco), Heparin (Heparin, Na Salt) (Sigma-Aldrich, St.
Louis, MO), Basic fibroblast growth factor (Peprotec,
Rocky Hill, NJ) and epidermal growth factor (Peprotec)
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

68367

Oncotarget

Transwell migration/invasion assay

stained with Hoechest 33342 (1:50 dilution) and images
were captured by laser scanning confocal microscopy
(Olympus corporation, FluoView FV1000).

Transwell chambers (Corning Inc., Corning,
NY) were filled with 50μl of Matrigel medium (Sigma
Chemical Co., Munich, Germany) diluted with cold DF12
medium without serum. Then the transwell chambers were
packaged with (invasion assay) or without (migration
assay) Matrigel and plated with 5 × 104 cells in 200 ul
serum-free DMEM medium. The chambers were inserted
into 24-well plates containing 750μl 10% FCS-DMEM
medium per well. The cells were cultured for 24 h at
37°C in a 5% CO2 incubator. Cells were fixed with 4%
paraformaldehyde for 30min and stained with 500 μl
crystal violet for 10 min. Images of cell were taken under
phase contrast microscope and counted. Cell invasion rate
(%) = (no. of invaded cells / no. of migrated cells) × 100%.

Cell differentiation
HIF1α knockdown (HIF1α-KD) cells and SPC-A1
spheroid cells were used for the induction experiments
separately using the same culture conditions. A total of 1
× 105 cells/well of SPC-A1 spheroid cells or HIF1α-KD
cells were cultured in 24-well plates overnight and then
40 μM of SAHA and 2 μM of VD3 were added to each
well for 24h. The same culture conditions were used for
control cells, which were left untreated. After induction
of differentiation, cells were collected for downstream in
vitro and vivo characterizations and phenotypic assays.

Clonogenic assay

Isolation of cancer stem-like cells and
identification

Clonogenic assay was performed as previously
described [25] with slight modifications. Briefly, cells (2 ×
102 cells/well) were seeded in 6-well plates, which contain
2ml/well 10% FBS-DMEM medium, and cultured at 37°C
for 2 weeks. Cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde
and then stained with 500 μl crystal violet (0.5% w/v)
[24]. Colonies from 10 separate fields were counted using
a microscope. Clonogenic ability was detected by crystal
violet staining. To determine the relative number of clones,
3% acetic acid was used to elute the crystal violet and the
absorbance was detected at 570 nm wavelength light in a
spectrophotometer (Shanghai Mapada Instruments Co., Ltd).

Spheroids culture
SPC-A1 cells were titrated to 2 × 104/ml in CSC
medium, which contained DMEM/F12 medium, 20 ng/ml
epidermal growth factor (EGF, Peprotec Inc., Princeton,
NJ), 20 ng/ml basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF,
Peprotec Inc., Princeton, NJ), 4μg/ml heparin (Sigma
Chemical Co., Munich, Germany) and 1x B27 (Gibco,
Invitrogen, UK). The cells (500μl/well) were seeded
in 24-hole ultra-low absorption plates (Corning Inc.,
Corning, NY). 10x CSC medium (50 μl/well) was added
to each well at day 3, 5, and 7. Cells were collected at
day 8 and then centrifuged for 2 min. The spheroid cells
were resuspended in 200μl trypsin and digested for 3
minutes. Reaction was quenched by adding 800μl serumcontaining medium and then living cells were counted
by using Countstar automatic cell counter (Shanghai Alit
companies, China).

Microculture cytotoxicity assay
A total of 500 cells/well in 100 μl of 10% FBSDMEM medium were plated in 96-well plates and
cultured overnight. Next day, cells were exposed to
chemotherapeutic agents (Cisplatin at 0.01 ug/ml~2.5ug/
ml concentrations) or medium as control and cultured for
6 days. For each condition, 6 replicates were included
in the experiment. Cell survival was measured using the
colorimetric CCK-8 assay Sigma Chemical Co., Munich,
Germany) at 492 nm wavelength. Cell counts were
determined from the standard curve of the cell number
and absorbance graph. Cell viability = (no. of viable cells
in the treatment group / no. of cells in the untreated group)
× 100%.

Expression of cell markers by
immunofluorescent microscopy
Cells were seeded in Costar 24-well plates
(Corning Inc.) with coverslips and cultured overnight.
Next day, the cells were fixed by 4% paraformaldehyde
for 30 minutes, and then washed 3 times with phosphate
buffered saline (PBS) and permeabilized with Triton
X-100. Primary antibodies were added to cells against
OCT4, Nanog, Sox2, PLAGL2, TTF-1, SP-C, P63,
FOXJ1, CCSP (1:50 dilution), and incubated overnight
at 4°C. PBS was added instead of primary antibody
as negative control. The following day, secondary
antibody (1:100 dilution) was added to the cells and then
incubated in the dark at room temperature for 1 h. Cells
were counterstained with Hoechest 33342 (1:40 dilution)
and imaged by Olympus IX51 fluorescence microscope
(Tokyo, Japan).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Real-time PCR assay
SPC-A1 spheroid cells were seeded at 3 × 105
cells per well in 6-well plates and cultured overnight
for mock and transduction with HIF-1α shRNA
lentiviral particles under Puromycin selection. After 2
days of selection, total RNA was extracted and reverse
transcribed using total mRNA extraction and cDNA
synthesis kits (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) according
68368

Oncotarget

REFERENCES

to the manufacturer’s instructions. The primers for
HIF1A, HIF-2A and GAPDH (normalization control)
were designed and purchased from Shanghai Sunteam
Biotech Co., Ltd. The primers used were: HIF-1α
forward: 5’-GAAAGCGCAAGTCTTCAAAG-3’; HIF-1α
reverse: 5’-TGGGTAGGA-GATGGAGATGC-3’; HIF-2α
forward: 5‘-TCTGAAAACGAGT CCGAAGCC-3‘; HIF2α reverse: 5‘-GGTCGCAGGGATGAGTGAAGT-3‘;
GAPDH forward: CGGAGTCAAC GGATTTGG
TCGTAT; and GAPDH reverse: AGCCTTCTCC
ATGGTGGTGAAGAC. Real-time PCR was carried
out using ABI7500 Sequence Detector System (Applied
Biosystems, USA).

1.	 Siegel R, Ma J, Zou Z, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2014. CA
Cancer J Clin. 2014; 64:9-29.
2.	 Alamgeer M, Peacock CD, Matsui W, Ganju V, Watkins
DN. Cancer stem cells in lung cancer: Evidence and
controversies. Respirology. 2013; 18:757-764.
3.	 Singh S, Chellappan S. Lung cancer stem cells: Molecular
features and therapeutic targets. Mol Aspects Med. 2014;
39:50-60.
4.	 Mimeault M, Batra SK. Altered gene products involved in
the malignant reprogramming of cancer stem/progenitor
cells and multitargeted therapies. Mol Aspects of Med.
2014; 39:3-32.

Xenograft assay

5.	 Jopling C, Boue S, Izpisua Belmonte JC. Dedifferentiation,
transdifferentiation and reprogramming: three routes to
regeneration. Nature Rev Molecular Cell Biol. 2011;
12:79-89.

All animal experiments were approved by the
National Natural Science Foundation of China (NO:
81101770). Mice were manipulated and housed
according to protocols approved by the Shanghai
Medical Experimental Animal Care Commission. Eightweeks-old-female NOD-SCID mice with 18-22 g weight
were injected subcutaneously with 5 × 104 of spheroid
SPC-A1 cells cultured for 7 days on the right side of the
abdominal wall and the same number of differentiated
cells (SAHA/VD3 treated as described above and also
cultured for 7 days) on the left side of the abdomen.
The day that cells were seeded was marked as Day 0.
Animals were observed and measured for tumor growth
every week. Calipers were used to measure maximum
tumor diameter (a) and its vertical diameter (b).
Measurements are accurate to millimeter. Tumor volumes
were calculated by the formula: V = 0.5 × ab2. Total
observation period is 7 weeks. These experiments were
repeated twice with six NOD-SCID mice participated
each time.

6.	 Shekhani MT, Jayanthy AS, Maddodi N, Setaluri V. Cancer
stem cells and tumor transdifferentiation: implications
for novel therapeutic strategies. Am J Stem Cells. 2013;
2:52-61.
7.	 Feldman D, Krishnan AV, Swami S, Giovannucci E,
Feldman BJ. The role of vitamin D in reducing cancer risk
and progression. Nature Rev Cancer. 2014; 14:342-357.
8.	 Blomberg Jensen M, Jørgensen A, Nielsen JE, Steinmeyer
A, Leffers H, Juul A, Rajpert-De Meyts E. Vitamin D
metabolism and effects on pluripotency genes and cell
differentiation in testicular germ cell tumors in vitro and in
vivo. Neoplasia. 2012; 14:952-963.
9.	 Chiou SH, Wang ML, Chou YT, Chen CJ, Hong CF, Hsieh
WJ, Chang HT, Chen YS, Lin TW, Hsu HS, Wu CW.
Coexpression of Oct4 and Nanog enhances malignancy
in lung adenocarcinoma by inducing cancer stem cell-like
properties and epithelial-mesenchymal transdifferentiation.
Cancer research. 2010; 70:10433-10444.

Statistical analysis

10.	 Mathieu J, Zhang Z, Zhou W, Wang AJ, Heddleston JM,
Pinna CM, Hubaud A, Stadler B, Choi M, Bar M, Tewari
M, Liu A, Vessella R, et al. HIF induces human embryonic
stem cell markers in cancer cells. Cancer research. 2011;
71:4640-4652.

Results were shown as mean±SEM. Student t
test or ANOVA was used to assess the significance of
differences between means of test groups. Differences
were considered statistically significant at P<0.05 two
tailed. All statistics were carried out using SPSS 11.0
software.

11.	 Morrison BJ, Steel JC, Morris JC. Sphere culture of murine
lung cancer cell lines are enriched with cancer initiating
cells. PLoS One. 2012; 7:e49752.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by grants 81101770 and
81201839 of the National Natural Science Foundation of
China.

12.	 Deng T, Liu JC, Chung PE, Uehling D, Aman A, Joseph
B, Ketela T, Jiang Z, Schachter NF, Rottapel R, Egan SE,
Al-Awar R, Moffat J, Zacksenhaus E. shRNA kinome
screen identifies TBK1 as a therapeutic target for HER2+
breast cancer. Cancer research. 2014; 74:2119-2130.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

13.	 Jordan CT, Guzman ML, Noble M. Cancer stem cells. New
Engl J Med. 2006; 355:1253-1261.

The authors declare that they have no conflicts of
interest.

14.	 Shukla S, Meeran SM. Epigenetics of cancer stem cells:
Pathways and therapeutics. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014;
1840:3494-3502.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

68369

Oncotarget

15.	 Li W, Reeb AN, Sewell WA, Elhomsy G, Lin RY.
Phenotypic characterization of metastatic anaplastic thyroid
cancer stem cells. PLoS One. 2013; 8:e65095.

contributes to adverse clinical outcome in ovarian cancers.
Oncogene. 2013; 32:3500-3509.
23.	 Thomson M, Liu SJ, Zou LN, Smith Z, Meissner A,
Ramanathan S. Pluripotency factors in embryonic stem
cells regulate differentiation into germ layers. Cell. 2011;
145:875–889.

16.	 Murakami A, Takahashi F, Nurwidya F, Kobayashi I,
Minakata K, Hashimoto M, Nara T, Kato M, Tajima K,
Shimada N, Iwakami S, Moriyama M, Moriyama H, et al.
Hypoxia increases gefitinib-resistant lung cancer stem cells
through the activation of insulin-like growth factor 1
receptor. PLoS One. 2014; 9:e86459.

24.	 Dong QG, Gong LL, Wang HJ, Wang EZ. Isolation of a
mitomycin-resistant human lung adenocarcinoma cell
subline to investigate the modulation by sodium butyrate
of cell growth and drug resistance. Anticancer Drugs. 1993;
4:617-27.

17.	 Forristal CE1, Wright KL, Hanley NA, Oreffo RO, Houghton
FD. Hypoxia inducible factors regulate pluripotency and
proliferation in human embryonic stem cells cultured at
reduced oxygen tensions. Reproduction. 2010; 139:85-97.

25.	 Zhang W, Zhang W, Wang L, Zheng J, Xiao F. Sequencedependent effect of docetaxel with gefitinib on the
proliferation and signal protein expression of human lung
adenocarcinoma cell SPC-A1. Zhongguo Fei Ai Za Zhi.
2011; 14:385-90.

18.	 Li R, Wu J, Xiong L, Han B. Lung cancer and benign lung
diseases in patients with serious vitamin D deficiency in
eastern China. Thoracic Cancer. 2012; 3:303–306.
19.	 Qian Y, Jung YS, Chen X. DeltaNp63, a target of DEC1
and histone deacetylase 2, modulates the efficacy of
histone deacetylase inhibitors in growth suppression
and keratinocyte differentiation. J Biol Chem. 2011;
286:12033 -12041.

26.	 Zhou J, Hualong Q, Zhou P, Guo F. Different maspin
functions in the lung adenocarcinoma A549 and SPC-A1
cell lines. Int J Mol Med. 2015; 36:1440-8.
27.	 Hanke NT, Garland LL, Baker AF. Carfilzomib combined
with suberanilohydroxamic acid (SAHA) synergistically
promotes endoplasmic reticulum stress in non-small cell
lung cancer cell lines. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2016;
142:549-60.

20.	 Seuter S, Pehkonen P, Heikkinen S, Carlberg C. The gene
for the transcription factor BHLHE40/DEC1/stra13 is a
dynamically regulated primary target of the vitamin D
receptor. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2013; 136:62-67.

28.	 Schröder O1, Turak S, Daniel C, Gaschott T, Stein J.
Upregulation of 25-hydroxyvitamin D(3)-1(alpha)hydroxylase by butyrate in Caco-2 cells. World J
Gastroenterol. 2005 D; 11:7136-41.

21.	 Myatt SS, Lam EW. The emerging roles of forkhead box
(Fox) proteins in cancer. Nat Rev Cancer. 2007; 7:847–859.
22.	 Siu MK, Wong ES, Kong DS, Chan HY, Jiang L, Wong OG,
Lam EW, Chan KK, Ngan HY, Le XF, Cheung AN. Stem
cell transcription factor NANOG controls cell migration
and invasion via dysregulation of E-cadherin and FoxJ1 and

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29.	 Franken NA, Rodermond HM, Stap J, Haveman J, van Bree
C. Clonogenic assay of cells in vitro. Nat Protoc. 2006;
1:2315-2319.

68370

Oncotarget

