Published OnlineFirst February 19, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4561

Cancer
Research

Meeting Report

Challenges and Key Considerations of the Enhanced
Permeability and Retention Effect for Nanomedicine Drug
Delivery in Oncology
Uma Prabhakar1, Hiroshi Maeda2, Rakesh K. Jain3, Eva M. Sevick-Muraca5, William Zamboni6,
Omid C. Farokhzad4, Simon T. Barry7, Alberto Gabizon8, Piotr Grodzinski1, and David C. Blakey7

Abstract
Enhanced permeability of the tumor vasculature allows macromolecules to enter the tumor interstitial
space, whereas the suppressed lymphatic ﬁltration allows them to stay there. This phenomenon, enhanced
permeability and retention (EPR), has been the basis of nanotechnology platforms to deliver drugs to tumors.
However, progress in developing effective drugs using this approach has been hampered by heterogeneity of
EPR effect in different tumors and limited experimental data from patients on effectiveness of this
mechanism as related to enhanced drug accumulation. This report summarizes the workshop discussions
on key issues of the EPR effect and major gaps that need to be addressed to effectively advance nanoparticlebased drug delivery. Cancer Res; 73(8); 2412–7. 2013 AACR.

Introduction
The ﬁeld of nanomedicine, despite being conceptualized as
far back as the 1980s, is only now transitioning in a broad sense
from academic research to drug development and commercialization. In oncology, unique structural features of many
solid tumors, including hypervasculature, defective vascular
architecture, and impaired lymphatic drainage leading to the
well-characterized enhanced permeability and retention (EPR;
ref. 1) effect, are key factors in advancing this platform technology. However, the EPR effect has been measured mostly, if
not exclusively, in implanted tumors with limited data on EPR
in metastatic lesions. Dextran-coated iron oxide nanoparticles
(25–50 nm) have been used clinically for several years (2) to
measure permeability and retention noninvasively by MRI (3).
Furthermore, tumor response alone is no longer considered a
good endpoint, at least from the health authority point of

Authors' Afﬁliations: 1Alliance for Nanotechnology in Cancer, National
Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland; 2Institute for DDS Research, Sojo
University, Kumamoto, Japan; 3Harvard Medical School and Massachusetts General Hospital; 4Harvard Medical School and Brigham and
Womens Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts; 5Brown Foundation Institute
of Molecular Medicine, The University of Texas Health Science Center,
Houston, Texas; 6UNC Eshelman School of Pharmacy, UNC Lineberger
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill,
North Carolina; 7AstraZeneca, Alderley Park, Macclesﬁeld, United Kingdom; and 8Shaare Zedek Medical Center and Hebrew University-School of
Medicine, Jerusalem, Israel
Note: A list of speakers is available as supplementary data for this article at
Cancer Research Online (http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Corresponding Authors: Uma Prabhakar, Ofﬁce of Cancer Nanotechnology Research, National Cancer Institute, Building 31-Room 10A52,
Bethesda, MD 20892. Phone: 267-574-4101; Fax: 301-496-7807; E-mail:
uma.prabhakar@nih.gov; and Piotr Grodzinksi, E-mail:
grodzinp@mail.nih.gov
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4561
2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

2412

view. This is exempliﬁed by the recent U.S. Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) withdrawal of bevacizumab (Avastin)
for patients with metastatic breast cancer where impressive
tumor responses were seen but bevacizumab showed no
improvement in overall survival. Thus, limitations and challenges both in understanding tumor structural features and
correlating them with the technology must be addressed and
additional critical data need to be generated before nanotechnology-based drug delivery approaches can be fully realized in
clinical use in patients with cancer. A one-day workshop was
convened at the NIH on October 10, 2012, to speciﬁcally
address key issues related to understanding of EPR effect and
its use to achieve the maximum therapeutic effect with drugs
using nanoparticle carriers.
This workshop was organized by the Alliance for Nanotechnology in Cancer and its recently formed public–private partnership consortium, TONIC (Translation of Nanotechnology in
Cancer), in response to several questions raised by industry
members of TONIC. The main purpose of this meeting was to
gain better understanding of the EPR characteristics impacting
the use of nanoparticles in the clinic. Experimental evidence of
EPR in animal models and humans, clinical relevance of EPR,
gaps in knowledge, and ways to address these gaps were all
discussed.

Report
The workshop composed of 8 talks covering topics ranging
from methods to investigate EPR in preclinical and clinical
studies including diagnostic imaging, to the ramiﬁcations of
EPR for enhanced drug uptake by different tumors and the
predictability of preclinical and clinical outcomes. The session
opened with an overview of the nanotechnology programs in
cancer, funded by the Alliance for Nanotechnology in Cancer
(NCI), and was followed by an introduction to TONIC, a
corporate partnership model of the public, private, and

Cancer Res; 73(8) April 15, 2013

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst February 19, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4561

EPR Effect and Nanomedicine Drug Delivery in Oncology

academic sectors, to accelerate the translation and development of nanotechnology solutions for the early detection,
diagnosis, and treatment of cancer. This was followed by
scientiﬁc presentations relating to the key questions identiﬁed
at previous TONIC meetings. The discussions at the workshop
focused on two key themes, namely, heterogeneity of EPR in
tumors and factors that inﬂuence EPR effect.

Heterogeneity of EPR in Tumors
EPR exists in tumors and can be exploited for selective
delivery of drugs to tumor by nanotechnology. However, there
is signiﬁcant heterogeneity within and between tumor types. It
was noted that different tumor types have different pore
dimensions in the vasculature and that the maximum pore
size changes with the location for a given type of tumor (i.e.,
primary vs. metastases). In addition, there may be differences
in vessel structure within a single tumor type. Thus, to understand whether a tumor is likely to respond to a nanoparticlebased drug that relies on EPR for delivery, an image-guided
patient selection or diagnostic approach can potentially prove
useful to proﬁle and select tumor types and patients with
tumors conducive to such delivery. Hiroshi Maeda (Sojo University, Kumamoto, Japan), who ﬁrst proposed the EPR effect
over 25 years ago (1), suggested a number of ways one can
augment the EPR effect. These included increasing the blood
pressure during infusion of a nanomedicine or macromolecular drug using angiotensin-II (e.g., blood pressure increase
from 100 ! 150 mmHg). Other methods involve vascular
mediators such as nitroglycerin, ACE inhibitor, or PGE1 agonist (beraprost) and these have been shown to be effective in in
vivo tumor models resulting in better tumor delivery (2- to 3fold increase), linked to improved therapeutic effect (4).

Factors Inﬂuencing EPR
The following factors inﬂuence the EPR effect in tumors: (i)
the nature of both the vascular bed and surrounding stroma,
the presence or absence of functional lymphatics and interstitial hydraulic conductivity impacting interstitial pressure
along with mechanical stresses generated by cancer and
stromal cells impacting the extracellular matrix; (ii) tumor
size, type, and location (including primary tumor versus metastatic lesions); (iii) extent of macrophage tumor inﬁltration
and the activity of the mononuclear phagocytic system
(MPS), which can vary between and within tumor types plus
patient characteristics (e.g., age, gender, tumor type, body
composition, treatment). These factors lead to accumulation
of nanoparticles in both normal tissues and in different
sections of the tumor, for example, in the periphery, viable
tumor, and necrotic sections; and (iv) co-medications, which
may impact, among other things, stroma and blood pressure
(hypertension increases tumor blood ﬂow). In addition, several vascular factors (Table 1; ref. 4), such as nitric oxide
generators (5) and bradykinin potentiators, that is, ACE
inhibitors that lower blood pressure, are known to affect
EPR and are relatively safe and inexpensive to combine with a
nanoparticle drug (4).
A fundamental limitation in evaluating EPR and the factors
that affect EPR is poor understanding of which preclinical

www.aacrjournals.org

tumor models recapitulate patients with solid tumors. The
factors affecting delivery of nanoparticles to tumors in preclinical models, such as tumor growth environment, vasculature, functional MPS, etc., appear to vary based on the cancer
model [e.g., syngeneic ﬂank xenograft, orthotopic xenograft,
genetically engineered mouse model (GEMM)]. Thus, future
studies will need to systemically evaluate these factors in
preclinical models and in patients with various solid tumors
and determine whether the models represent all aspects of the
EPR effect.
The observed heterogeneity in EPR may be a contributing
factor to the limited impact of nanoparticle-based drugs with
reductions in toxicity and gains in overall survival as compared
with small-molecule anti-cancer agents. Table 2 summarizes
objective data on the survival beneﬁts from nanotherapeutics
approved to date. Further understanding and predictability of
EPR function in primary tumor and its metastatic sites through
the use of imaging studies may aid the development of future,
effective nanodrugs. Correlation of EPR activity to clinical
responses would likely provide direct clinical data to determine whether tumors with high EPR tumor activity will be
more amenable to effective treatment using nanoparticlebased therapies (5). It was noted that the diversity of nanoparticle characteristics and API used is expected to impact the
applicability of such correlations across different nanoparticle
platforms and products.
The optimal patient selection or diagnostic aid to measure
the EPR activity within a patient needs to be further deﬁned.
Ideally, this would involve a single imaging agent that is
generalizable to all nanoparticles. Given the heterogeneity of
nanoparticle-based systems—size, shape, charge characteristics, etc.—a speciﬁc diagnostic agent might, however, be
required to predict likely response to a particular nanoparticle
relying on EPR delivery. The use of contrast agents and MRI to
measure the enhanced permeability (EP) component of the
EPR effect might be one generic method. Others might include
a deﬁned nanoparticle of a ﬁxed size (100 nm) labeled with an
appropriate imaging agent—for example, Cu64 for positron
emission tomography (PET) or ﬂuorescent marker for nearinfrared ﬂuorescence (NIRF). There is precedence for a range of
labeled liposomes and iron oxide–loaded nanoparticles for
imaging, but there are very few human clinical studies on
nanoparticle imaging that can effectively address the prevalence of EPR. In one such study, the biodistribution and
pharmacokinetics of [111]In-labeled PEGylated liposomes was
evaluated in patients with locally advanced cancers. Positive
tumor images were obtained in 15 of 17 studies, although levels
of tumor liposome uptake varied between and within tumor
types (6).
Eva Sevick-Muraca (The University of Texas Health Science
Center, Houston, Texas) discussed the use of NIRF to image
lymphatic ﬂow and with ﬂuorescent agents to detect cancers.
This technique is light based and the ﬂuorescent dye has no
half-life and can be repeatedly excited, making it more appropriate for imaging of nanoparticle accumulation over longer
timeframes than radioactive imaging agents with short halflives (7). While NIRF is considered to be a combination product
by the FDA and has a maximum tissue penetration of 3 to 5 cm,

Cancer Res; 73(8) April 15, 2013

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

2413

Published OnlineFirst February 19, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4561

Prabhakar et al.

Table 1. Factors affecting the EPR effect of macromolecular drugs in solid tumors (modiﬁed after
references 4 and 5)

Mediators

Responsible enzymes
and mechanisms

Possible application to therapeutic modality
and mechanism

Bradykinin

Kallikrein/protease

NO

iNOS

ACE inhibitors (e.g., enalapril); blocking of kinin
degradation elevates local kinin level ! more EPR.
NO-releasing agents (e.g., nitroglycerin, ISDN, etc.)
via denitrase and nitrite reductase to generate NO.

VPF/VEGF
Prostaglandins

Involved in NO generation
COX-1

Collagenase (MMP)
Peroxynitrite
Carbon monoxide (CO)

Activated from proMMPs by
peroxynitrite, or proteases
NO þ O2
Heme oxygenase (HO)-1

Induced hypertension

Using angiotensin II

Inﬂammatory cells and H2O2
TGF-b inhibitor

Neutrophil/NADPH oxidase, etc.

Vascular dilation

such devices are not yet available in hospitals and may not have
the right sensitivity at this time to detect the marker agent. The
ability to image lymphatic function in the tumor vicinity could
also provide a means to assess interstitial pressure imbalances.
Efforts are underway to include dual-labeling PET for presurgical imaging and then NIR guidance during surgery (8). It is
anticipated that PET will remain a crucial tool for clinical
imaging and that the optical imaging counterpart will add
value rather than being a replacement.
Ways to enhance the EPR effect in tumors were discussed
and included drugs that impacted the vasculature (4)–for
example, VEGF-based antagonists leading to vessel normalization, agents causing hypertension and increasing tumor
blood ﬂow, and agents that modulate the tumor matrix. Agents
that generate nitric oxide [nitroglycerine or ISDN (isosorbide
dinitrate)] were also shown to be effective in humans (4, 5).
ACE inhibitor (e.g., enarapril), which potentiates the action of
bradykinin, is also effective (4). Further work is required to
validate the beneﬁts of such agents in the context of exploiting
the enhancement of EPR effect in the clinical setting (4, 5). It
was suggested that both optimization of the nanoparticle and
optimization of the tumor microenvironment were required
for optimal delivery. Rakesh K. Jain (Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts); hypothesized that normalizing the
vasculature, extracellular matrix, and lymphatics will lead to
better delivery of drugs (9). However, normalized vasculature
means that the average pore is smaller and this may require the
use of smaller nanoparticles (20 nm particle size). Overall, the

2414

Cancer Res; 73(8) April 15, 2013

PEG-hemine via induction of HO-1 in tumor !
CO generation (15).
Slow i.v. infusion ! systemic hypertension, vascular
extravasation selectively in tumor tissue.
Inducing multiple inﬂammatory cytokines; NOS,
COX, etc.: NO, PGs, etc.
Inducing multiple inﬂammatory cytokines; NOS,
COX, etc.: NO, PGs, etc.

TNF-a
Anticancer agents
Heat

Beraprost sodium: PGI2 agonist works via vascular
dilatation and extravasation (5).

Gold nanoparticle or ferrite nanoparticle using
electromagnetic, or laser, or microwave.

biologic impact of the abovementioned vascular effectors on
delivery of nanoparticles of varying composition, shape, and
ﬂexibility needs signiﬁcant further work.
The role of the lymphatics in tumor biology and nanoparticle
delivery was discussed. This highlighted the need to consider
changes in physiologic status, both in the acute and in longterm functionality of lymphatics in patients with cancer inﬂuenced by inﬂammation, tumor burden, or treatment. This is an
area of active research and imaging techniques are being
developed that will allow this to be explored in more detail.
In terms of animal tumor models to evaluate the EPR effect,
subcutaneous ﬂank tumor xenografts were thought to offer
limited value. The vasculature of such models often resembles
the vasculature found in very high EPR tumors, for example,
renal tumors irrespective of tumor type, and thus probably
gives a false impression about the beneﬁt of nanoparticle-based
drugs relying on the EPR effect in most tumor settings. The
workshop participants felt that better options are provided by
metastatic, orthotopic, and GEMM-based models, although
these need further characterization and validation. Primary
tumor explants may be another option to model delivery to
tumor types with high stromal content. Further work is
required to understand how to use the preclinical tumor
models to investigate drugs relying on the EPR effect for activity
and to understand how they reﬂect the heterogeneity seen in
clinical disease. The site of the tumor was also considered to be
important, and a more systematic assessment of vasculature
architecture versus site of tumor was recommended.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst February 19, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4561

EPR Effect and Nanomedicine Drug Delivery in Oncology

Table 2. Survival beneﬁts from the FDA-approved nanomedicines to date
Generic drug

Trade name(s)

Indication

Beneﬁt

PEGylated liposomal
doxorubicin

Doxil and Caelyx

HIV-related Kaposi's
sarcoma

No statistically signiﬁcant change in
overall survival (23 wks) vs. doxorubicin,
bleomycin, and vincristine treatment
(22.3 wks) for HIV-related Kaposi's sarcoma
Statistically signiﬁcant overall survival
improvement (108 wks, P ¼ 0.008) vs.
topotecan treatment (71.1 wks) for
platinum-sensitive patients with ovarian cancer
No statistically signiﬁcant overall survival
change (84 wks) vs. conventional
doxorubicin (88 wks) for patients with
breast cancer receiving ﬁrst-line therapy
No statistically signiﬁcant overall survival
change (52.7 wks) vs. doxorubicin, bleomycin,
vincristine treatment (48.9 wks)
Approved in 1993 in Japan. Far more effective
when the EPR is enhanced by increasing the
blood pressure in difﬁcult-to-treat tumors,
including metastatic liver cancer, cancers
of pancreas, gall bladder, etc.
Liver cancer: 5-year survival (%)

Metastatic ovarian cancer

Metastatic breast cancer

Liposomal daunorubicin

DaunoXome

HIV-related Kaposi's
sarcoma

Poly (styren-co-maleic acid)–
conjugated naocarzinostatin

SMANCS

Liver cancer, renal cancer

Albumin-bound paclitaxel

Abraxane

Metastatic breast cancer

Metastasis

1 seg.þ

>

2 seg.

Child A
Child B

>90%
40%



>50%
30%

Five-year survival (%) based on the liver
function (cirrhosis) by child classiﬁcation
and intrahepaticþ metastasis within one
segment or more
Statistically signiﬁcant overall survival change
(56.4 wks, P ¼ 0.024) vs. polyethoxylated
castor oil–based paclitaxel treatment (46.7 wks)
for patients receiving second-line treatment

NOTE: The polymeric platform methoxy PEG-poly(D,L-lactide) taxol with the trade name Genexol-PM (Sanayang Co.) has been
approved in Korea for the treatment of metastatic breast cancer. Adapted from the work of Jain and Stylianopoulos (16).

, SMANCS data in the table were provided by H. Maeda.

Omid Farokhzad (Harvard Medical School) discussed the
advantages of including a targeting agent on the nanoparticle to enhance the retention component and/or enable
delivery of drug directly into the tumor cell via internalization of the nanoparticle. The majority of the currently
available clinical data on nanoparticle oncology drugs relate
to passively targeted liposomal drugs. Recently, several
actively targeted nanoparticle products have also entered
clinical development, including liposomes and polymeric
particles containing payloads ranging from conventional cytotoxic drugs to genes expressing tumor suppressors (10). These
particles are targeted to various tumor markers including
the transferrin receptor HER-2 and prostate-speciﬁc membrane antigen (PSMA) using either protein or small-molecule
ligands. Recent data were presented for BIND-014 (11), a

www.aacrjournals.org

docetaxel-encapsulated polymeric nanoparticle targeted to
PSMA, which is expressed on the surface of prostate cancer
cells and nonprostate solid tumor neovasculature. In preclinical studies, BIND-014 increased the concentration of docetaxel
in PSMA-expressing solid tumor xenografts by 5- to 10-fold. In a
phase I clinical trial in patients with advanced solid tumors,
BIND-014 displayed signals of antitumor efﬁcacy in patients
with advanced and metastatic cancer at low doses and in
tumors where conventional docetaxel has minimal activity.
With progress in polymeric nanoparticle engineering, similar
approaches are also being applied to existing and developmental anticancer drugs, including other cytotoxics and molecularly targeted agents such as kinase inhibitors, and it will only
be a matter of time before these advances will ultimately impact
the treatment of cancer.

Cancer Res; 73(8) April 15, 2013

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

2415

Published OnlineFirst February 19, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4561

Prabhakar et al.

William Zamboni (University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill,
North Carolina) characterized the pharmacologic properties of
nanoparticles in vivo as part of preclinical and clinical studies.
He stressed the importance of the MPS, tissue distribution, and
potential tumor delivery on the clearance of nanoparticles.
There is a bidirectional interaction between monocytes and
liposomal agents and potentially other nanoparticle agents (12,
13). Monocytes internalize liposomes, which then releases the
drug from the liposome and leads to toxic effects to the
monocytes. The tissue distribution and tumor delivery of
nanoparticles may involve MPS-mediated and non–MPSmediated mechanisms where uptake of nanoparticles by circulating MPS cells compared with tumoral macrophages may
result in different tumor drug exposure and responses. Dr.
Zamboni has developed an ex vivo ﬂow cytometry–based, highthroughput screening platform (HTSP) system called PhenoGLO-HTSP to measure the clearance of nanoparticles by the
MPS and bidirectional interaction between the MPS and
nanoparticles, conjugates, and antibody–drug conjugates.
Importantly, this method also predicts nanoparticle pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics in humans where the MPS
system seems to drive the clearance, efﬁcacy, and toxicity of
nanoparticle agents. PhenoGLO-IT can measure MPS function
in a blood sample from patients as a method to individualize
the dose of nanoparticle agents and/or as a biomarker
for predicting pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics
(response and toxicity) of nanoparticles.
The workshop participants felt that as our understanding of
nanoparticle delivery to tumors increases, the emerging nanoformulations should be considered both as a general formulation strategy in drug development and as a selected strategy
to improve delivery proﬁles of existing or failed drugs.

Prospects
During discussions at the conclusion of the symposium,
participants recommended the formation of a working
group to establish translational and clinical procedures for
integrated clinical trials involving nanotherapeutic constructs and accompanying imaging approaches. Such translational studies and clinical trials would enable further
understanding and predictability of EPR function in a tumor

and its primary or metastatic sites and may be critical for the
development of future effective nanodrugs and predictive of
antitumor response (14). An additional recommendation
from this workshop was to generate a position paper
highlighting key translational studies that should be conducted and parameters that should be monitored in nanoparticle drug delivery clinical trials to enable testing of
various hypotheses for effective nanoparticle delivery
(tumor perfusion, vascular permeability, interstitial penetration, retention, lymphatic function, MPS activity, blood
pressure, ﬂuid and solid stresses, others). In coming months,
symposium participants will actively pursue these key
recommendations and develop the necessary tools required
to advance the scientiﬁc translation of the nanotechnology
platform in the oncology therapeutic area.
Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest
D.C. Blakey has ownership interest (including patents) in AstraZeneca. R.K.
Jain is employed (other than primary afﬁliation; e.g., consulting) as a cofounder
and board member of XTuit Pharmaceuticals, and as a board member of
Hambrecht & Quist Healthcare Investors and Hambrecht & Quist Life Sciences
Investors; has a commercial research grants from MedImmune, Roche, and Dyax;
has ownership interest (including patents) in XTUit Pharmaceuticals; and is a
consultant/advisory board member of Enlight Biosciences, SynDevRx, Dyax,
Noxxon Pharmaceuticals, and Zyngenia. E.M. Sevick-Muraca has ownership
interest (including patents) in NIRFImaging, Inc. W. Zamboni has ownership
interest (including patents) in PhenoGLO Technologies. O.C. Farokhzad has
ownership interest (including patents) in and is a consultant/advisory board
member of BIND Bioscience, Selecta Bioscience, and BLEND. A. Gabizon has a
commercial research grant from Janssen Pharmaceuticals. No potential conﬂicts
of interest were disclosed by the other authors.

Authors' Contributions
Conception and design: U. Prabhakar, D.C. Blakey, H. Maeda, R.K. Jain, E.M.
Sevick-Muraca, O.C. Farokhzad, A. Gabizon, P. Grodzinski
Development of methodology: U. Prabhakar, P. Grodzinski
Acquisition of data (provided animals, acquired and managed patients,
provided facilities, etc.): U. Prabhakar, P. Grodzinski
Analysis and interpretation of data (e.g., statistical analysis, biostatistics,
computational analysis): U. Prabhakar, H. Maeda, P. Grodzinski
Writing, review, and/or revision of the manuscript: U. Prabhakar, D.C.
Blakey, H. Maeda, R.K. Jain, E.M. Sevick-Muraca, W. Zamboni, O.C. Farokhzad, S.
T. Barry, A. Gabizon, P. Grodzinski
Administrative, technical, or material support (i.e., reporting or organizing data, constructing databases): U. Prabhakar, H. Maeda, P. Grodzinski
Study supervision: U. Prabhakar, P. Grodzinski
Received December 14, 2012; revised February 7, 2013; accepted February 10,
2013; published OnlineFirst February 19, 2013.

References
1.

2.

3.

4.

2416

Matsumura Y, Maeda H. A new concept for macromolecular therapeutics in cancer chemotherapy - Mechanism of tumoritropic accumulation of proteins and the antitumor agent smancs. Cancer Res
1986;46:6387–92.
Harisinghani MG, Barentsz J, Hahn PF, Deserno WM, Tabatabaei S,
van de Kaa CH, et al. Noninvasive detection of clinically occult
lymph-node metastases in prostate cancer. N Engl J Med 2003;
19:2491–9.
Gaglia JL, Guimaraes AR, Harisinghani M, Turvey SE, Jackson R,
Benoist C, et al. Noninvasive imaging of pancreatic islet inﬂammation in type 1A diabetes patients. J Clin Invest 2011;121:
442–5.
Maeda H, Nakamura H, Fang J. The EPR effect for macromolecular drug
delivery to solid tumors: improved tumor uptake, less systemic toxicity,
and improved tumor imaging ÐReview of the vascular permeability of
tumors and the EPR effect. Adv Drug Deliver Rev 2013;65:71–9.

Cancer Res; 73(8) April 15, 2013

5.
6.

7.

8.

9.

Maeda H. Macromolecular therapeutics in cancer treatment: the EPR
effect and beyond. J Control Release 2012;164:138–44.
Harrington KJ, Mohammadtaghi S, Uster PS, Glass D, Peters AM, Vile
RG, et al. Effective targeting of solid tumors in patients with locally
advanced cancers by radiolabeled pegylated liposomes. Clin Cancer
Res 2001;7:243–54.
Sevick-Muraca EM. "Translation of near-infrared ﬂuorescence imaging technologies: emerging clinical applications." Annu Rev Med 2012;
63:217–31.
Hall MA, Pinkston KL, Wilganowski N, Robinson H, Ghosh P, Azhdarinia A, et al. "Comparison of mAbs targeting EpCAM for detection of
prostate cancer lymph node metastases with multimodal contrast:
quantitative uPET/CT and NIRF imaging." J Nucl Med 2012;53:
1497–37.
Jain RK. Normalizing tumor microenvironment to treat cancer: Bench
to bedside to biomarkers. J Clin Oncol. In press, 2013.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst February 19, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4561

EPR Effect and Nanomedicine Drug Delivery in Oncology

10. Kamaly N, Xiao Z, Valencia PM, Radovic-Moreno AF, Farokhzad OC.
Targeted polymeric therapeutic nanoparticles: design, development
and clinical translation. Chem Soc Rev 2012;41:2971–3010.
11. Hrkach J, Von Hoff D, Mukkaram Ali M, Andrianova E, Auer J, Campbell
T, et al. Preclinical development and clinical translation of a PSMAtargeted docetaxel nanoparticle with a differentiated pharmacological
proﬁle. Sci Transl Med 2012;4:128ra39.
12. Caron WP, Rawal S, Song G, Kumar P, Lay JC, Zamboni WC.
Bidirectional interaction between nanoparticles and cells of the
mononuclear phagocyte system. In: Dobrovolskaia MA, McNeil SE,
editors. Immunological properties of Engineered Nanomaterials. Singapore: World Scientiﬁc Publishing Co.; 2012.

www.aacrjournals.org

13. Caron WP, Song G, Kumar P, Rawal S, Zamboni WC. Pharmacokinetic
and pharmacodynamic disposition of carrier-mediated agents. Clin
Pharmacol Ther 2012;91:802–12.
14. Petersen AL, Hansen AE, Gabizon A, Andresen TL. Liposome imaging
agents in personalized medicine. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2012;64:
1417–35.
15. Fang J, Qin H, Nakamura H, Tsukigawa K, Maeda H. Carbon monoxide, generated by heme oxygenase-1, mediates the enhanced permeability and retention (EPR) effect of solid tumor. Cancer Sci
2012;102:535–41.
16. Jain RK, Stylianopoulos T. Delivering nanomedicine to solid tumors.
Nat Rev Clin Oncol 2010;7:653.

Cancer Res; 73(8) April 15, 2013

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

2417

Published OnlineFirst February 19, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4561

Challenges and Key Considerations of the Enhanced Permeability
and Retention Effect for Nanomedicine Drug Delivery in Oncology
Uma Prabhakar, Hiroshi Maeda, Rakesh K. Jain, et al.
Cancer Res 2013;73:2412-2417. Published OnlineFirst February 19, 2013.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4561
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2013/02/19/0008-5472.CAN-12-4561.DC1

This article cites 14 articles, 4 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/73/8/2412.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 27 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/73/8/2412.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

