Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 26

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

The pioneer factor PBX1 is a novel driver of metastatic
progression in ER`-positive breast cancer
Luca Magnani1, Darren K. Patten1, Van T.M. Nguyen1, Sung-Pil Hong1,
Jennifer H. Steel1, Naina Patel1, Ylenia Lombardo1, Monica Faronato1,
Ana R. Gomes1, Laura Woodley1, Karen Page2, David Guttery2, Lindsay Primrose2,
Daniel Fernandez Garcia2, Jacqui Shaw2, Patrizia Viola3, Andrew Green4,
Christopher Nolan4, Ian O. Ellis4, Emad A. Rakha4, Sami Shousha1, Eric W.-F. Lam1,
Balázs Győrffy5, Mathieu Lupien6,7, R. Charles Coombes1
1

Department of Surgery and Cancer, Imperial College London, London, UK

2

Department of Cancer Studies, University of Leicester, Leicester, UK

3

Laboratory of Medicine, Histopathology Department, Royal Brompton Hospital, London, UK

4

Division of Cancer and Stem Cells, School of Medicine, University of Nottingham, Budapest, HU

5

 TA TTK Lendület Cancer Biomarker Research Group, 2nd Department of Pediatrics, Semmelweis University and MTA-SE
M
Pediatrics and Nephrology Research Group, Budapest, HU

6

The Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, University Health Network, Toronto, ON, Canada

7

Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada

Correspondence to:
Luca Magnani, e-mail: l.magnani@imperial.ac.uk
Keywords: breast cancer, estrogen receptor, drug resistance, metastasis, pioneer factors
Received: February 18, 2015 	Accepted: June 02, 2015 	Published: June 15, 2015

ABSTRACT
Over 30% of ER` breast cancer patients develop relapses and progress to
metastatic disease despite treatment with endocrine therapies. The pioneer factor
PBX1 translates epigenetic cues and mediates estrogen induced ER` binding. Here
we demonstrate that PBX1 plays a central role in regulating the ER` transcriptional
response to epidermal growth factor (EGF) signaling. PBX1 regulates a subset of
EGF-ER` genes highly expressed in aggressive breast tumours. Retrospective
stratification of luminal patients using PBX1 protein levels in primary cancer further
demonstrates that elevated PBX1 protein levels correlate with earlier metastatic
progression. In agreement, PBX1 protein levels are significantly upregulated during
metastatic progression in ER`-positive breast cancer patients. Finally we reveal that
PBX1 upregulation in aggressive tumours is partly mediated by genomic amplification
of the PBX1 locus. Correspondingly, ER`-positive breast cancer patients carrying
PBX1 amplification are characterized by poor survival. Notably, we demonstrate that
PBX1 amplification can be identified in tumor derived-circulating free DNA of ER`positive metastatic patients. Metastatic patients with PBX1 amplification are also
characterized by shorter relapse-free survival. Our data identifies PBX1 amplification
as a functional hallmark of aggressive ER`-positive breast cancers. Mechanistically,
PBX1 amplification impinges on several critical pathways associated with aggressive
ER`-positive breast cancer.

strongly suggest that the endocrine therapy resistance
and metastatic progression occur in a multi-step manner
and are driven by genetic and epigenetic alterations
[2–4]. Several evidences indicate that breast cancer
growth becomes ultimately independent from ERα [5–8].

INTRODUCTION
Over 30% of ERα-positive breast cancer patients
treated with endocrine therapies eventually relapse and
progress into metastatic disease [1]. Previous studies
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21878

Oncotarget

Nonetheless this may be occurring toward the final stages
of tumour progression. For instance, recent studies have
discovered the existence of ERα activating mutations
specifically in metastatic patients [9–12]. Additionally,
ERα can be activated in the absence of estrogen by
alternative mitogens including the epidermal growth factor
(EGF) [13, 14]. EGF promotes ERα binding to thousands
of regulatory elements and activates the transcription of
a set of genes commonly over-expressed in the HER2
subtype and associated with disease progression [15].
We have recently described the role of PBX1
as a novel pioneer factor in ERα breast cancer [16].
PBX1 is critical to maintain chromatin accessibility and
allow estrogen induced ERα recruitment to thousands
of regulatory elements [16]. More importantly,
we demonstrated that PBX1 is necessary for the
transcriptional regulation of a subset of estrogen target
genes directly associated with poor outcome. Furthermore,
we have demonstrated that PBX1 upregulation is involved
in the development of endocrine therapy resistance in vitro
and that mRNA levels of genes controlled via NotchPBX1 crosstalk are associated with poor prognosis in
ERα patients [5]. Whether PBX1 contributes to estrogenindependent, EGF driven activation and recruitment
of ERα is not yet known. We have thus investigated
the role of PBX1 in mediating EGF signalling in ERαpositive breast cancer cell lines using genome wideanalyses including microarray and ChIP-seq. Our
results demonstrate that PBX1 is required to direct
EGF-ERα signalling at the chromatin level in breast
cancer cells. PBX1 is also required for the expression
of genes associated with tumour progression. PBX1
protein levels were significantly upregulated in vivo in
metastatic samples from patients treated with endocrine
therapies. Analysis of an independent historical collection
of primary samples demonstrated that PBX1 protein
levels correlate with shorter time to progression in ERα
patients. Finally, we present evidences suggesting that
PBX1 may be amplified in over 10% of ERα-positive
breast cancer patients and amplification is associated with
shorter survival. PBX1 amplification was confirmed in
the circulating free DNA (cfDNA) of metastatic patients
further suggesting the potential for using PBX1 to monitor
breast cancer progression.

[16]. In addition we showed that ERα controls a different
transcriptional program when activated by growth factors
[15]. Specifically, EGF can activate ERα via serine
phosporylation and promotes transcription of genes
associated with aggressive HER2 positive tumours [15].
Therefore, we reasoned that PBX1 might also play a
role in estrogen independent EGF driven ERα induced
transcription. ERα-positive MCF7 cells proliferate
in response to EGF when cultured in the absence of
estrogen and this phenotype is dependent on ERα [15].
PBX1 depletion using two siRNA molecules is sufficient
abrogate the proliferative response induced by EGF
suggesting that PBX1 regulates EGF-ERα signaling
(Fig. 1A–1B). Similar results were also obtained using
T47-D, a second independent ERα-positive breast cancer
cell line (Fig. S1A). We and others have previously
showed that PBX1 is a direct Notch target that can be
potentially antagonized with gamma secretase inhibitors
(GSI, MRK003 and PF03084014) [5, 17]. In agreement,
treatment with MRK003 is sufficient to downregulate
PBX1 at mRNA and protein levels (Fig. S1B–S1C) and
suppresses EGF induced proliferation in MCF7 cells
(Fig. S1D–S1E). EGF activates ERα by promoting
receptor phosporylation at several key residues via AKT
signaling pathway [15], including S118 [18]. Notably,
PBX1 silencing did not impair ERα phosphorylation
suggesting that defects in EGF induced proliferation did
not stem from defect in non-canonical activation of ERα
[19] (Fig. S2A). However, growth deficit in response to
GSI treatment might stem from a combination of PBX1
downregulation and direct inhibition of EGF signalling
(Fig. S2A).
Next, we investigated the transcriptional effect
of PBX1 silencing on the EGF-ERα transcriptional
program using qRT-PCR. As expected, silencing PBX1
in MCF7 cells impaired the transcriptional activation of
a known set of EGF-ERα target genes [15] (Fig.  1C).
These results were confirmed and expanded using
expression microarrays (Fig. 1D). Our data indicate that
over 60% (252 out of 383) of the genes differentially
expressed in response to EGF signaling require PBX1
for their regulation (Fig. 1D and Table S1). These data
are strongly reminiscent of our previous finding in which
a subset of estrogen responsive genes were dependent
on PBX1 [16]. PBX1 dependent genes were enriched
for several important ontological terms associated with
breast cancer and endocrine therapy resistance, including
Notch signaling, pro-invasive signaling and epithelial and
mammary carcinoma (Fig. 2). Interestingly, genes that
failed to be induced by EGF in PBX1 depleted cells are
also significantly enriched in several independent genes
datasets obtained from patients characterized by aggressive
breast cancers (Fig. S2B). Overall, these data suggest that
PBX1 underlies the expression of EGF dependent genes
involved in aggressive tumour progression.

RESULTS
PBX1 mediates EGF signaling in ERα-positive
breast cancer cells
We recently demonstrated that PBX1 is a pioneer
factor in ERα-positive breast cancer, occupying the
chromatin prior to ERα binding following its activation
with estrogen and regulating the expression of estrogen
dependent genes associated with aggressive progression

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21879

Oncotarget

Figure 1: PBX1 is required to activate EGF signaling in ERα breast cancer cells. A. PBX1 silencing using two independent

siRNAs B. Proliferation curves in response to EGF stimulation (100 ng/ml) or mock control in MCF7 cells. C. Transcriptional activation
of several EGF target genes is lost upon PBX1 depletion. The fold induction was calculated averaging three independent experiments. All
comparison between siRNA and control are statically significant (Student’s t-test, p < 0.05) D. Microarray analysis of PBX1 depleted cells
demonstrates that PBX1 control a large portion of EGF dependent genes. Asterisks identify significant differences between treatments.

PBX1 is pre-loaded at regulatory elements
recruiting ERα during EGF signaling

at selected binding sites in proximity of EGF regulated
genes (Fig. 3B). This process is strongly reminiscent of
PBX1 behaviour in the context of estrogen stimulation
[16]. We next considered if EGF induced ERα binding
sites that overlap with PBX1 have a functional relationship
with the EGF-ERα transcriptional program. To do this
we have combined transcriptional and ChIP-seq data of
MCF-7 cells treated with EGF. We have analysed genes
whose expression changed in response to EGF stimulation
(all upregulated genes) for enriched binding patterns near
their transcriptional starting site (up to 20 kb upstream
of the TSS). We focused on ERα binding in response to
estrogen (17 beta-estradiol, E2) or EGF with or without
concurrent PBX1 and FOXA1 binding. Our data show
that genes that respond to EGF are significantly enriched
for PBX1-EGF-ERα binding but lack PBX1-E2-ERα
binding sites (Fig.  S3B, red dots). FOXA1 binding was
less enriched near these genes (Fig. S3B, light-blue dots).

Pioneer factors such as PBX1 and FOXA1 bind to
the chromatin prior to ERα recruitment where they are
thought to mediate or maintain chromatin accessibility
[20–22]. To determine if PBX1 could serve as a pioneer
factor for ERα under EGF stimulation we conducted ChIPseq assays in MCF7 cells. We then compared the EGF-ERα
cistrome (e.g. ERα genome wide binding sites induced
upon EGF stimulation) with the estrogen-ERa cistrome
and previously published PBX1 cistrome. In agreement
with previous reports [15], most ERα chromatin binding
is unique to specific stimuli (EGF-ERα vs. E2-ERα)
(Fig.  3A and S3A). PBX1 occupies approximately 30%
of ERα binding sites, regardless of the stimulus (Fig. 3A).
PBX1 binding occurs prior and is not affected by EGF
stimulation as demonstrated by direct ChIP-qPCR assays
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21880

Oncotarget

Figure 2: PBX1 controls the expression of genes associate with breast cancer progression. Genes whose failed to be

upregulated by EGF upon PBX1 silencing (n = 147) were used for ontology analysis using GREAT [48].

EGF responsive genes are also significantly enriched for
PBX1-FOXA1-non specific ERα binding, suggesting that
co-activation may also play an important role to regulate
this subset of genes (Fig. S3, purple dots). As expected,
regions pre-bound by pioneer factors that did not recruit
ERα lacked any association with transcription. Collectively,
these analyses confirm that PBX1 binding is directly
involved in regulating EGF-ERα signaling in MCF-7 cells.
We have previously demonstrated that H3K18ac can
be used to detect stimuli specific co-activation (EGF vs.
E2) at regulatory regions in which ERα binding occurs
under both treatment [15]. Interestingly PBX1 depletion
directly suppressed H3K18ac signal at several putative
elements normally recruiting ERα (Fig. 3C). Globally,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

PBX1-EGF-ERα regions are characterized by open
chromatin status as demonstrated by FAIRE-seq and
DNaseI-hypersensitivity-seq assays (Fig. 3D). However,
PBX1 depletion results in a significant decrease in
chromatin openness (as demonstrated by reduced FAIRE
signal) at several regions associated with EGF-ERα target
genes suggesting that PBX1 modulates ERα signaling by
influencing the chromatin environment.

PBX1 is a novel luminal breast cancer prognostic
biomarker
Our mechanistic study revealed that PBX1 controls
the expression of a subset of ERα target genes stimulated
21881

Oncotarget

Figure 3: PBX1 regulate chromatin status at EGF-ERα binding sites. A. ChIP-seq analysis of PBX1 and ERα in MCF7 cells
B. ChIP-qPCR validation of PBX1 binding at potential regulatory EGF-ERα binding sites in the absence of EGF stimulation. CTRL
indicate stimulation using mock. The fold enrichment was calculated averaging three independent experiments. All comparison between
siRNA and control are not statically significant (Student’s t-test, p < 0.050) C. PBX1 silencing abrogates epigenetic co-activation of EGFERα regulatory elements as measured by induced H3K18 acetylation. The fold enrichment was calculated averaging three independent
experiments. All comparison between siRNA and control are statically significant (Student’s t-test, p < 0.050) D. Genome wide chromatin
accessibility analyses at PBX1 and EGF-ERα shared sites. E. PBX1 depletion negatively impact chromatin accessibility at EGF-ERα
binding sites as identified by reduced FAIRE signal.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21882

Oncotarget

by EGF in vitro and may be linked to breast cancer
progression. Furthermore we previously demonstrated
that PBX1 displays an analogous function by controlling
a subset of estrogen induced genes strongly associated
with poor prognosis [16]. In light of these observations
we hypothesized that PBX1 expression levels could
contribute to breast cancer progression in ERα-positive
breast cancer patients. To test this hypothesis we
performed meta-analysis on METABRIC (Illumina
arrays) and The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA, RNAseq data) studies stratifying ERα-positive breast cancer
patients in high and low PBX1 expressors. In both
datasets high PBX1 mRNA levels correlate with shorter
survival (Fig.  S4A). For the METABRIC dataset,
PBX1 expression retained significance in a multivariate
analysis including lymph node status, grade and tumor
size (HR  =  1.27, p  = 0.0173). For the TCGA datasets
the TNM status was published for each patient. In the
multivariate analysis including PBX1, T, N and M, PBX1
reached the highest significance (p = 0.041, HR = 7.82),
M also reached significance (p = 0.045, HR = 2.89) while
T and N were not significant. These correlations were not
significant in ERα-negative breast cancer patients further
supporting the notion that PBX1 is a key regulator of ERα
activity (Fig.  S4A). Notably, higher PBX1 levels were
significantly associated with poor prognosis in a subset
of patients treated with endocrine therapy (Fig.  S4B).
Again, PBX1 retained significance in a multivariate
analysis including lymph node status, grade, tumor
size and PBX1 expression (HR = 1.27, p = 0.0173). To
elucidate further the potential role of PBX1 as a breast
cancer biomarker, we tested the association between its
expression and metastatic progression in an additional
six independent studies (Affymetrix arrays). Overall,
PBX1 expression was associated with increased risk in
metastatic progression (HR 1.47, p < 0.008, n = 674).
We found more variability within the individual cohorts,
however, statistical significance was reached only for
datasets in which PBX1 represents a poor prognostic
marker (Fig. S5). Additionally, multivariate analysis in
the grouped cohort indicates that PBX1 prognostic power
is independent from Ki67 (p < 0.0001)
To confirm these findings we measured PBX1
protein levels using IHC in longitudinal clinical samples.
We collected 20 biopsies from primary ERα-positive
breast cancers and compared PBX1 protein levels with
matched relapses (all endocrine treated, average time to
relapse = 44.4 ± 35 months). We stained all sections using
a validated antibody (Fig. S1C and S2A) [5, 16] and scored
each sample based on PBX1 nuclear intensity (Fig. 4A).
Remarkably, metastatic samples had a significant increase
in H score compared to the original primary biopsies
confirming PBX1 upregulation in drug-resistant metastatic
patients (Fig. 4A). Finally, we investigated PBX1 protein
levels in the Tenovus Nottingham cohort of FFPE primary
breast cancers (n = 1650) [23]. In agreement with cell
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

line data, we found that PBX1 protein levels significantly
correlate with ERα, FOXA1 and GATA3 (another
important ERα pioneer factor [22]) thus demonstrating that
PBX1 is strongly associated with ERα-positive, luminal
breast cancer subtypes (Fig. 4B). We therefore restricted
further analysis to ERα-positive breast cancer patients.
Since PBX1 protein levels were dramatically increased in
metastatic samples, we hypothesized that high levels of
PBX1 in primary samples might identify patient at higher
risk of relapse. Our results show that ERα-positive breast
cancer patients with elevated PBX1 staining intensity at
diagnosis (over 90% positive staining) develop metastatic
disease significantly faster than patients with lower
staining intensity (Fig. 4C). Overall this data strongly
suggest that PBX1 protein levels in primary breast cancer
are significantly associated with breast cancer progression.

PBX1 locus is amplified in patients with
aggressive ERα breast cancer
Our analysis using PBX1 transcriptional and protein
levels strongly supports the role of PBX1 as a functional
biomarker associated with ERα breast cancer progression
(Figs. 4 and S4–S5). PBX1 transcripts are significantly
overexpressed in breast cancer when compared to normal
tissues (Fig. S6). For example, PBX1 ranks in the top 50
most overexpressed genes in ductal and lobular carcinoma
compared to normal tissue in TCGA cohort (dataset 30
in Fig. S6) [24]. Similarly, PBX1 ranks in the top 4% of
the most overexpressed transcripts in the METABRIC
cohort (Invasive Ductal vs. Normal, dataset 7, Fig. S6)
[25]. To the best of our knowledge, there is no indication
in the literature that PBX1 is required for normal breast
development. In agreement, we found that normal ductal
cells adjacent to tumor tissue have very low PBX1 staining
(stronger stained cells are myoepithelial cells, Fig. S7).
Thus, PBX1 expression seems to be a major determinant
for the development and progression of luminal breast
cancer patients.
Recent tumour sequencing efforts indicate that
PBX1 locus is potentially amplified in 13% of primary
breast cancers (TCGA provisional) (Fig. S8A) [26]
supporting the hypothesis that genomic amplification
may partially explain PBX1 overexpression in breast
cancer (TCGA provisional) (Fig. S8B). Of note, within
the published TCGA dataset [24], PBX1 potential
amplification strongly correlates with higher mRNA
levels in ERα-positive but not in ERα-negative breast
cancer patients (Fig. S9). These data suggest that PBX1
copy number variation (CNV) might then be functional
only in ERα-positive breast cancer patients. We then
identified the TCGA patients (TCGA provisional) with
ERα-positive disease that had at least 3 copies of PBX1
(95/1145, 8.3%) and analysed the proportion of patients
with lymph-node micro-metastasis. Strikingly, we found
that 60% of patients with PBX1 amplification had at
21883

Oncotarget

Figure 4: PBX1 is a novel prognostic biomarker for ERα breast cancer. A. Primary and matched Metastatic samples from the
Imperial College TMA were processed using PBX1 IHC and H score were plotted. Pair-wise t-test between the average score (3 independent
scorer, duplicate sections) was used to establish significance B. Core primary biopsies in the Tenovus Nottingham cohort show different
level of staining by PBX1 IHC. PBX1 correlates with several important clinico-pathological parameters including hormone status and ERα
associated pioneer factors. C. Survival analysis (Log-rank Mantel-Cox test) was performed looking at patients with very high PBX1 levels
versus the remaining patients. Analysis was restricted to the to the ERα-positive population.
least one positive lymphnodes vs. 38.7% of the control
group (Fisher exact test 7.3* 10−5). Conversely, PBX1
amplification correlates, although not significantly, with
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

a lower chance of metastatic disease in the limphnodes
in ERα-negative breast cancer patients (45% vs. 57%
respectively).

21884

Oncotarget

We then restricted our analysis to ERα-positive
breast cancer patients from the published TCGA data
to exploit the more complete clinical annotations [24]
and found that 28/364 (8%) carried potential PBX1
amplification/overexpression (Fig. 5A). Patients with

putative PBX1 amplification had a median survival of
30.98 months compared to 113.74 (PBX1 Amplified vs.
Not Amplified in Luminal patients, P < 10−5) (5A). On the
other hand, PBX1 amplification did not reach prognostic
significance in ERα-negative patients (however, only

Figure 5: PBX1 amplification is a prognostic biomarker for ERα breast cancer. A. TCGA luminal patients [24] were stratified

based on putative PBX1 amplification and overall survival was calculated B. The same analysis was repeated in basal and claudin low
patients C. qPCR measurement of PBX1 genomic DNA in cfDNA from primary and metastatic ERα breast cancer patients E–F. Metastatic
patients from panel C were stratified based on PBX1 amplification and Time to relapse and Overall survival were calculated. Groups were
compared using a Log-rank Mantel-Cox test.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21885

Oncotarget

6%  of patients carries amplification) (Fig. 5B). When
we looked at genes potentially co-amplified with PBX1
(chr1q23.3) [27] we found that very few candidates were
also over-expressed in breast cancer (Fig. S10A). More
importantly, PBX1 was one of the only two transcripts
(the other being PVRL4) carrying evidence of prognostic
significance in the ERα-positive breast cancer subtype
(METABRIC) (Fig. S10B).
We then considered the possibility of using PBX1
CNV as a proxy for PBX1 protein levels. Potentially, this
would allow for monitoring PBX1 levels by measuring
its amplification in DNA derived from cancer cells using
non-invasive methods. The tumour derived fraction
of circulating free-DNA (cfDNA) originating from
tumour cells can be used to estimate the genomic status
of breast cancer lesions [28–30]. We then measured
PBX1 amplification using a qPCR assay in cfDNA
from 37 patients with ERα-positive primary disease
and 50  patients with ERα-positive metastatic disease
treated with endocrine therapy (Table S2). We could not
identify significant CNV in blood from primaries ERαpositive breast cancer patients. However, we identified
5/50 (10%) patients with PBX1 amplification (RQ > 2)
and two patients with probable allelic loss (4%) in the
metastatic cohort (Fig. 5C). We then reasoned that the
emergence of PBX1 CNV may have contributed to tumor
progression and used PBX1 amplification in cfDNA as a
classifier to stratify patients based on time to relapse or
overall survival. In this small cohort, PBX1 amplification
was significantly associated with earlier metastatic
relapse (p < 0.035, HR 5.95, Cox- Mantel-Test) (Fig. 5D).
These data are in strong agreement with our protein and
transcriptional tumour profiling and coupled with our
mechanistic study demonstrate that PBX1 plays a crucial
role in ERα-positive breast cancer development and
progression.

EGF signaling cascade partially converge on ERα in breast
cancer cells where it provides for an additional survival
pathways. ERα target genes induced via classical estrogen
signaling and non-canonical EGF signalling are quite
distinct [14, 15]. Nonetheless, PBX1 remains a common
denominator of these two pathways via its conserved
interaction with ERα. It will be interesting to investigate
the role of pioneers factors in alternative ERα pathways,
including metabolic induced ERα signaling [33, 34]
Genetic aberration targeting chromatin remodelers
and other proteins involved in epigenetic processes are
now frequently recognized as major drivers in several
types of cancers [35]. Synergy between epigenetic and
genetic drivers may be particularly important in breast
cancer considering the essential role of ERα in these
malignancies and the intimate crosstalk between ERα and
the chromatin [21, 22, 36]. For example, it is possible that
PBX1 overexpression may lead to an increased number of
chromatin accessible sites thereby allowing ERα binding
near oncogenes [37]. While several other pioneer factors
play a central role in modulating ERα binding in breast
cancer cells [16, 22, 36, 38, 39], our data suggest that
PBX1 has some unique properties. For example, FOXA1
[39] and GATA3 [40] play a central role in mammary
and ductal morphogenesis and their interaction with ERα
can be regarded as developmentally conserved [41, 42].
On the other hand PBX1 expression is restricted to ERα
transformed cells and practically absent in normal ductal
cells. In addition, FOXA1 and GATA3 are frequently
targeted by mutations in breast cancer [43] (Fig. S11),
while PBX1 is rarely affected by somatic mutations
(V117M and H425N, 2 out of 892 patients). Furthermore
FOXA1 and GATA3 are frequently downregulated in basal
tumour but rarely over-expressed or amplified in luminal
cancer (Fig. S11) [44] while PBX1 is among the top
upregulated genes and is frequently amplified in luminal
cancers (Figs. 4–5, S6, S8, S10 and S11).
Despite the impossibility to elucidate the temporal
details of PBX1 amplification/overexpression, our
data strongly suggest that PBX1 upregulation may
contribute to breast cancer progression and metastatic
development. Clonal evolution is thought to contribute
significantly to cancer progression [45]. In this context,
we can envision two possible models: in the first, cells
carrying PBX1 amplification may be more adapted to
escape the primary site and colonize distal tissues. On
the other hand, it is possible that endocrine therapies
exert positive selective pressure on cells that incur in
Chr1q23.3 gains. In both scenarios, it is tempting to
speculate that PBX1 would contribute to epigenetic
reprogramming by interpreting or shaping the histone
modifications landscape [21]. Ultimately, these changes
would modulate ERα signaling and allow breast cancer
cells to have an increased fitness in response to a diverse
array of signalling pathways.

DISCUSSION
Our work has identified PBX1 as a novel functional
biomarker in ERα-positive breast cancer. We have
identified a mechanistic association between PBX1 and
ERα recruitment in response to EGF signaling. We also
established the significance of PBX1 mRNA and protein
level as a prognostic biomarker in several independent large
cohorts of primary breast cancers. Notably, PBX1 levels are
strongly associated with metastatic progression. Finally, we
demonstrate that the longitudinal increment of PBX1 levels
observed throughout cancer progression are partly due to
genomic events that could be potentially used to monitor
disease progression in patients by non-invasive assays.
The number of signaling molecules potentially
involved in breast cancer is rapidly increasing. In this
context, ERα remains a central hub required to regulate
and integrate signaling at the chromatin level [31, 32].

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21886

Oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Ontology analysis and heatmap analysis

Cell lines

Ontology analyses were performed using GREAT
[48]. Heatmaps were generated using CHASE [49].

MCF-7 and T47D cells were cultured and
maintained as previously described [16]. EGF stimulation
was performed as previously described [15]. Proliferation
curves were performed as previously described [16].
Treatment with GSI (10uM of MRK003 or PF03084014)
was performed as previously described [5]. Experiments
were repeated independently at least five times.

Imperial tissue microarray of paired primary
and secondary breast cancers
Twenty primary breast carcinomas with a paired
metastasis were acquired from the pathology archives
of Charing Cross Hospital, London, UK. A tissue
microarray was constructed using a manual microarrayer
(Beecher) and 0.6 mm punches. The tissue microarray
was immunohistochemically profiled for PBX1 and
other biomarkers as previously described [16]. PBX1
monoclonal antibody (Abnova, (M01), clone 4A2) was
optimized to a working concentration using tissue sections
(5 μm). Antigen retrieval was performed using 10mM
Tris-HCl with 1 mM EDTA (pH 9.0), heated in a water
bath at 95°C for 30 min followed by cooling at room temp
for 30  min. Blocking was done using 0.3% hydrogen
peroxide in PBS, followed by normal goat serum (20 μl
per ml) for 30 min. The primary antibody (1:50 in PBS)
was incubated overnight at 4°C, then detected using antirabbit secondary antibody, Vectastain Elite peroxidase
ABC kit, and ImmPACT DAB kit (all from Vector
Laboratories). Subsequently, immunohistochemistry was
performed on TMA sections (4–5 μm) using the optimized
staining protocol, including negative controls (omission
of the primary antibody). PBX1 immunoreactivity was
localized in the nucleus. Staining was scored based on the
H-score and Allred Quick score (LM, DKP and PV).

RT-qPCR and microarray
RNA samples from siControl or siPBX1 treated
MCF7 in the presence or absence of EGF were extracted
with RNAeasy (Quiagen) and retro-transcribed with
iSCRIPT (Biorad). For microarrays, RNAs were hybridized
on HT12 human beads array (Illumina Inc.). Analyses
were performed using BRB- Array Tools Version 3.8.1.
Raw intensity data were log2 transformed, median
normalized and filtered to remove non- detected spots
as determined by Illumina Software. The normalization
was performed by computing a gene-by-gene difference
between each array and the median (e.g. reference)
array, and subtracting the median difference from the
log intensities on that array, so that the gene-by-gene
difference between the normalized array and the reference
array is zero. Two class non-paired comparison analyses
were performed by computing a t-test for each gene using
normalized log-intensities. Differentially expressed genes
were determined at a significance level of q less than
0.01. A four class ANOVA at p less than 0.01 was also
performed to identify genes expressed differentially across
the four groups. Hierarchical clustering was employed by
calculating Euclidean distance to generate heat maps for
subsets of significant genes using the open source software
Cluster/Treeview.

Nottingham tenovus primary breast
cancer series
Primary operable breast cancer cases (n  =  1650)
from the Nottingham Tenovus Primary Breast
Carcinoma Series were used and were utilized for
immunohistochemistry. Clinical data were maintained
on a prospective basis with a median follow-up of
126 months [23, 50]. The tissue microarrays and full-face
sections form the Nottingham Tenovus Primary breast
cancer series were immunohistochemically profiled
for PBX1 and other biological antibodies as previously
described. PBX1 mouse monoclonal antibody (Abnova,
(M01), clone 4A2 [16] was optimized to a working
concentration, utilizing μm matched full- face excisional
tissue sections. Antigen retrieval was performed using
Leica ER2 (pH 9.0) retrieval solution, water bath at 95C
for 35 minutes followed by TBS at 50C for 10minutes.
Blocking was done using Thermo Fisher UltraV block
5mins. Antibody concentration was 1:50 overnight at
4°C. Subsequently, 4 μm TMA sections were immunostained using the optimized staining protocol. Detection

ChIP and ChIP-seq
ChIP assay were conducted as described previously
described using PBX1 (Abnova, M01 clone 4A2) or ERα
(Santa Cruz biotechnology) [16] using 5–10* 106 cells.
Library preparation for next-generation sequencing
was performed according to manufacturer’s instruction
starting with 5 ng of material (Illumina Inc.). Single
paired libraries were sequenced using the HT2500
(Illumina Inc). Over 20 million 50 bp reads were
generated through for the ERα ChIP and Input samples.
Of those, over 92% were aligned to the human reference
genome. These reads were aligned using bowtie [46]
(default setting). The MACS peak-calling algorithm was
used to call significantly enriched peaks using default
settings (P < 10–5) [47].

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21887

Oncotarget

FAIRE and DNaseI-hypersensitivity-seq

was achieved using the Novalink Polymer Detection kit
(Leica Micro- systems Inc., USA). Negative controls
were performed by omission of the primary antibody.
IHC revealed that PBX1 had a nuclear location (4B).
Nuclear staining was scored based on the H-score and
Allred Quick score. Determination of the optimal cut-offs
was per- formed using histograms and confirmed using
X-tile bio-informatics software (Yale University, USA)
[51] where data were split into training and validation
sets. A total of 1198 tumours were suitable for analysis
(460 PBX1 negative and 738 PBX1 positive). The tumour
cores were evaluated by two of the coauthors (DKP
and PV) blinded to the clinico-pathological characteristics
of patients. There was substantial intra- and inter- observer
agreement (k [0.768; Cohen’s j and multi-rater j tests,
respectively).

FAIRE-seq and DHS-seq analysis were performed
as previously described [16, 55] with minor modifications.

Circulating free DNA analysis
DNA was extracted from blood cell pellets and
1ml plasma as described previously [30]. To confirm
amplification of PBX1, 10ng cfDNA was subjected
to 5 cycles of preamplifcation with a mix of primers
(including PBZ1 and reference genes). Each sample was
then analysed in triplicate by real-time quantitative PCR
(qPCR) in a 10 μl reaction volume. Reactions were run on
an Applied Biosystems thermal cycler (Step One Plus) and
analysed with Step One v2.1 software and Microsoft Excel.

Primers

Survival analysis using transcriptomics data

Primers sequences (RT-qPCR, ChIP-qPCR)
are available upon requests. Primers to study PBX1
amplification were as follow: Primers PBX1-F:
AGCCCACTCATCTTACGTGAC
PBX1-R:
ACGAAATTCCACTCCAACTCCA Probe
PBX1
GCTCAGGCCTATCTTCTGGA FAM-MGB.

Positive PBX1 expression was dichotomised to 90%
using distant metastases as an outcome and determined
through X-tile software (University of Yale, Yale, USA)
[51]. Prognostic analyses were undertaken using KaplanMeier curves using the Log-rank test. A p-value < 0.05
was considered significant.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING

Survival analysis using transcriptomics data

This work was supported by an Imperial Junior
Research Fellowship and a Breast Cancer Campaign Pilot
Grant (P46869) to LM, Wellcome Trust [103034/Z/13/Z]
to DKP and the OTKA K108655 grant to BG. The Imperial
College Healthcare NHS Trust Tissue Bank provided
tissue samples. Other investigators may have received
samples from these same tissues’ The research [was
funded / supported by] the National Institute for Health
Research (NIHR) Biomedical Research Centre based and
Experimental Cancer Medicine Centre, Cancer Research
UK Centre at Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust
Imperial College London. M.L. holds a young investigator
award from the Ontario Institute for Cancer Research
(OICR) and a new investigator salary award from the
Canadian Institute of Health Research (CIHR). The views
expressed are those of the author(s) and not necessarily
those of the NHS, the NIHR or the Department of Health.

Database construction and survival analysis was
performed as described previously [52]. For the expression
of the genes, the median expression was used as the cutoff in a Cox regression analysis. Kaplan-Meier survival
plot, and hazard ratio with 95% confidence intervals and
logrank P value were calculated and plotted in R using
Bioconductor packages.

Construction of METABRIC microarray
database
The Metabric project employed Illumina
microarrays to measure gene expression across all genes.
The raw gene chip files were downloaded from the
European Genome-phenome Archive (EGA) (https://
www.ebi.ac.uk/ega/) [25]. The entire cohort contains 1988
samples, the average overall survival is 8.07 years, 76% of
the samples are ER positive and 47.3% are node positive.
Due to batch effects between the Metabric training and
validation sets we have not used the pre-normalized tables
but have re-run the complete pre-processing for all arrays.
In this, raw data was first imported into R and summarized
using the beadarray package [53]. For annotation,
the Illumina Humanv3 database of Bioconductor was
used (http://www.bioconductor.org). Finally, quantile
normalization was performed using the preprocessCore
package [54].

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.

Authors’ contribution
LM designed the study. LM, EWL, BG, ML and CC
performed bioinformatic analysis and interpreted the data.
LM, BG, ML and CC wrote the manuscript. LM, DP, VN,

21888

Oncotarget

SPH, DFG, YL, MF and ARG performed lab experiments.
LM, DP, MF, JHS, NP, PV, AG, CN, IOE, SS and EAR
performed and interpreted the pathological analysis. CC,
LW, KP, DG and LP recruited patients and collected and
prepared clinical specimens. LM, DFG and JS performed
and analyzed cfDNA data.

trial of fulvestrant compared with exemestane after prior
nonsteroidal aromatase inhibitor therapy in ­postmenopausal
women with hormone receptor-positive, advanced
breast cancer: results from EFECT. J Clin Oncol. 2008;
26:1664–70.
9.	 Toy W, Shen Y, Won H, Green B, Sakr RA, Will M,
Li Z, Gala K, Fanning S, King TA, Hudis C, Chen D,
Taran T, Hortobagyi G, Greene G, Berger M, Baselga J,
Chandarlapaty S. ESR1 ligand-binding domain mutations in hormone-resistant breast cancer. Nat Genet. 2013;
45:1439–45.

Abbreviations
ERα, Estrogen Receptor α; EGF, Epidermal Growth
Factor; TF, Transcription factor; cfDNA, circulating
free-DNA FAIRE, Formaldehyde assisted isolation of
regulatory elements; CNV, copy number variation.

10.	 Robinson DR, Wu Y-M, Vats P, Su F, Lonigro RJ, Cao X,
Kalyana-Sundaram S, Wang R, Ning Y, Hodges  L,
Gursky  A, Siddiqui J, Tomlins SA, Roychowdhury  S,
Pienta KJ, Kim SY, Roberts JS, Rae JM, Van Poznak CH,
Hayes DF, Chugh R, Kunju LP, Talpaz M, Schott  AF,
Chinnaiyan AM. Activating ESR1 mutations in
­hormone-resistant metastatic breast cancer. Nat Genet.
2013; 45:1446–51.

REFERENCES
1.	 Early Breast Cancer Trialists Collaborative Group EBCTCG
Davies C, Godwin J, Gray R, Clarke M, Cutter D, Darby S,
McGale P, Pan HC, Taylor C, Wang  YC, Dowsett  M,
Ingle J, Peto R. Relevance of breast cancer hormone receptors and other factors to the efficacy of adjuvant tamoxifen:
patient-level meta-analysis of randomised trials. Lancet.
2011; 378:771–84.

11.	 Barone I, Iacopetta D, Covington KR, Cui Y, Tsimelzon A,
Beyer A, Andò S, Fuqua SAW. Phosphorylation of the
mutant K303R estrogen receptor alpha at serine 305
affects aromatase inhibitor sensitivity. Oncogene. 2010;
29:2404–14.

2.	 Tam WL, Weinberg RA. The epigenetics of epithelial-­
mesenchymal plasticity in cancer. Nat Med. Nature
Publishing Group2013; 19:1438–49.

12.	 Lupien M, Jeyakumar M, Hébert E, Hilmi K, CotnoirWhite  D, Loch C, Auger A, Dayan G, Pinard G-A,
Wurtz  JM, Moras D, Katzenellenbogen J, Mader S.
Raloxifene and ICI182, 780 increase estrogen receptoralpha association with a nuclear compartment via overlapping sets of hydrophobic amino acids in activation function
2 helix 12. Mol Endocrinol. 2007; 21:797–816.

3.	 You JS, Jones PA. Cancer genetics and epigenetics: two
sides of the same coin? Cancer Cell. 2012; 22:9–20.
4.	 Valastyan S, Weinberg RA. Tumor metastasis: ­molecular
insights and evolving paradigms. Cell. 2011; 147:275–92.
5.	 Magnani L, Stoeck A, Zhang X, Lanczky A, Mirabella AC,
Wang TL, Györffy B, Lupien M. Genome-wide reprogramming of the chromatin landscape underlies endocrine
­therapy resistance in breast cancer. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA. 2013.

13.	 Bunone G, Briand PA, Miksicek RJ, Picard D. Activation
of the unliganded estrogen receptor by EGF involves the
MAP kinase pathway and direct phosphorylation. EMBO J.
1996; 15:2174–83.

6.	 Di Leo A, Jerusalem G, Petruzelka L, Torres R,
Bondarenko  IN, Khasanov R, Verhoeven D, Pedrini JL,
Smirnova I, Lichinitser MR, Pendergrass K, Garnett S,
Lindemann JPO, Sapunar F, Martin M. Results of the
CONFIRM phase III trial comparing fulvestrant 250 mg
with fulvestrant 500 mg in postmenopausal women with
estrogen receptor-positive advanced breast cancer. J Clin
Oncol. 2010; 28:4594–600.

14.	 Osborne CK, Schiff R. Growth factor receptor cross-talk
with estrogen receptor as a mechanism for tamoxifen resistance in breast cancer. Breast. 2003; 12:362–7.

7.	 Perey L, Paridaens R, Hawle H, Zaman K, Nolé F,
Wildiers H, Fiche M, Dietrich D, Clément P, Köberle D,
Goldhirsch A, Thürlimann B. Clinical benefit of fulvestrant
in postmenopausal women with advanced breast cancer
and primary or acquired resistance to aromatase inhibitors:
final results of phase II Swiss Group for Clinical Cancer
Research Trial (SAKK 21/00). Ann Oncol. 2007; 18:64–9.

16.	 Magnani L, Ballantyne EB, Zhang X, Lupien M. PBX1
genomic pioneer function drives ERα signaling underlying progression in breast cancer. PLoS Genet. 2011;
7:e1002368.

8.	 Chia S, Gradishar W, Mauriac L, Bines J, Amant F,
Federico M, Fein L, Romieu G, Buzdar A, Robertson JFR,
Brufsky A, Possinger K, Rennie P, Sapunar F, Lowe E,
Piccart M. Double-blind, randomized placebo controlled

18.	 Martin L-A, Farmer I, Johnston SRD, Ali S, Dowsett M.
Elevated ERK1/ERK2/estrogen receptor cross-talk enhances
estrogen-mediated signaling during long-term estrogen
deprivation. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2005; 12:S75–84.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15.	 Lupien M, Meyer CA, Bailey ST, Eeckhoute J, Cook J,
Westerling T, Zhang X, Carroll JS, Rhodes DR, Liu XS,
Brown M. Growth factor stimulation induces a distinct
ER(alpha) cistrome underlying breast cancer endocrine
resistance. Genes Dev. 2010; 24:2219–27.

17.	 Park JT, Shih I-M, Wang T-L. Identification of Pbx1,
a potential oncogene, as a Notch3 target gene in ovarian
­cancer. Cancer Res. 2008; 68:8852–60.

21889

Oncotarget

19.	 Tyson JJ, Baumann WT, Chen C, Verdugo A, Tavassoly I,
Wang Y, Weiner LM, Clarke R. Dynamic modelling of
­oestrogen signalling and cell fate in breast cancer cells. Nat
Rev Cancer. 2011; 11:523–32.

31.	 Umetani M, Domoto H, Gormley AK, Yuhanna IS,
Cummins CL, Javitt NB, Korach KS, Shaul PW,
Mangelsdorf DJ. 27-Hydroxycholesterol is an endogenous
SERM that inhibits the cardiovascular effects of estrogen.
Nat Med. 2007; 13:1185–92.

20.	 Hurtado A, Holmes KA, Ross-Innes CS, Schmidt D,
Carroll JS. FOXA1 is a key determinant of estrogen receptor function and endocrine response. Nat Genet. 2010;
43:27–33.

32.	 Blair RM, Fang H, Branham WS, Hass BS, Dial SL,
Moland CL, Tong W, Shi L, Perkins R, Sheehan DM. The
estrogen receptor relative binding affinities of 188 natural
and xenochemicals: structural diversity of ligands. Toxicol
Sci. 2000; 54:138–53.

21.	 Magnani L, Eeckhoute J, Lupien M. Pioneer factors:
­directing transcriptional regulators within the chromatin
environment. Trends Genet. 2011; 27:465–74.

33.	 Nelson ER, Wardell SE, Jasper JS, Park S, Suchindran S,
Howe MK, Carver NJ, Pillai RV, Sullivan PM,
Sondhi V, Umetani M, Geradts J, McDonnell DP.
27-Hydroxycholesterol
links
hypercholesterolemia
and breast cancer pathophysiology. Science. 2013;
342:1094–8.

22.	 Jozwik KM, Carroll JS. Pioneer factors in hormone-­
dependent cancers. Nat Rev Cancer. 2012; 12:381–5.
23.	 Elston CW, Ellis IO. Pathological prognostic factors in
breast cancer. I. The value of histological grade in breast
cancer: experience from a large study with long-term
­follow-up. Histopathology. 1991; 19:403–10.

34.	 Wu Q, Ishikawa T, Sirianni R, Tang H, McDonald  JG,
Yuhanna IS, Thompson B, Girard L, Mineo C,
Brekken RA, Umetani M, Euhus DM, Xie Y, Shaul PW.
27-Hydroxycholesterol
promotes
cell-autonomous,
ER-positive breast cancer growth. Cell Rep. 2013;
5:637–45.

24.	 Cancer Genome Atlas Network . Comprehensive molecular portraits of human breast tumours. Nature. 2012;
490:61–70.
25.	 Curtis C, Shah SP, Chin S-F, Turashvili G, Rueda  OM,
Dunning MJ, Speed D, Lynch AG, Samarajiwa  S,
Yuan  Y, Gräf S, Ha G, Haffari G, Bashashati A,
Russell R, McKinney S, METABRIC Group Langerød A,
Green A, Provenzano E, Wishart G, Pinder S, Watson P,
Markowetz F, Murphy L, Ellis I, Purushotham A, BørresenDale AL, Brenton JD, Tavaré S, Caldas C, Aparicio S.
The genomic and transcriptomic architecture of 2, 000
breast tumours reveals novel subgroups. Nature. 2012;
486:346–52.

35.	 Suva ML, Riggi N, Bernstein BE. Epigenetic
Reprogramming in Cancer. Science. 2013; 339:1567–70.
36.	 Magnani L, Lupien M. Chromatin and Epigenetic
Determinants of Estrogen Receptor Alpha (ESR1)
Signaling. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2013.
37.	 Ross-Innes CS, Stark R, Teschendorff AE, Holmes KA,
Ali  HR, Dunning MJ, Brown GD, Gojis O, Ellis  IO,
Green  AR, Ali S, Chin S-F, Palmieri C, Caldas C,
Carroll JS. Differential oestrogen receptor binding is associated with clinical outcome in breast cancer. Nature. 2012;
481:389–93.

26.	 Cerami E, Gao J, Dogrusoz U, Gross BE, Sumer SO,
Aksoy BA, Jacobsen A, Byrne CJ, Heuer ML, Larsson E,
Antipin Y, Reva B, Goldberg AP, Sander C, Schultz N. The
cBio cancer genomics portal: an open platform for exploring multidimensional cancer genomics data. Cancer Discov.
2012; 2:401–4.

38.	 Bartke T, Vermeulen M, Xhemalce B, Robson SC,
Mann M, Kouzarides T. Nucleosome-interacting proteins
regulated by DNA and histone methylation. Cell. 2010;
143:470–84.

27.	 Sarajlić A, Filipović A, Janjić V, Coombes RC, Pržulj N.
The role of genes co-amplified with nicastrin in breast
invasive carcinoma. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2014;
143:393–401.

39.	 Lupien M, Eeckhoute J, Meyer CA, Wang Q, Zhang Y,
Li  W, Carroll JS, Liu XS, Brown M. FoxA1 translates
­epigenetic signatures into enhancer-driven lineage-specific
transcription. Cell. 2008; 132:958–70.

28.	 Page K, Hava N, Ward B, Brown J, Guttery DS,
Ruangpratheep C, Blighe K, Sharma A, Walker RA,
Coombes RC, Shaw JA. Detection of HER2 amplification
in circulating free DNA in patients with breast cancer. Br J
Cancer. 2011; 104:1342–8.

40.	 Theodorou V, Stark R, Menon S, Carroll JS. GATA3 acts
upstream of FOXA1 in mediating ESR1 binding by shaping
enhancer accessibility. Genome Res. 2012.
41.	 Chou J, Provot S, Werb Z. GATA3 in development and
cancer differentiation: cells GATA have it! J Cell Physiol.
2010; 222:42–9.

29.	 Whale AS, Huggett JF, Cowen S, Speirs V, Shaw J,
Ellison S, Foy CA, Scott DJ. Comparison of microfluidic
digital PCR and conventional quantitative PCR for measuring copy number variation. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012; 40:e82.

42.	 Bernardo GM, Lozada KL, Miedler JD, Harburg  G,
Hewitt  SC, Mosley JD, Godwin AK, Korach KS,
Visvader  JE, Kaestner KH, Abdul-Karim FW,
Montano MM, Keri RA. FOXA1 is an essential determinant
of ERalpha expression and mammary ductal morphogenesis. Development. 2010; 137:2045–54.

30.	 Shaw JA, Page K, Blighe K, Hava N, Guttery D, Ward B,
Brown J, Ruangpratheep C, Stebbing J, Payne R, Palmieri C,
Cleator S, Walker RA, Coombes RC. Genomic analysis of circulating cell free DNA infers breast cancer dormancy. 2011.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21890

Oncotarget

43.	 Polyak K, Metzger Filho O. SnapShot: Breast Cancer.
Cancer Cell. 2012; 22:562–562.e1.

c­ ancer. II. Histological type. Relationship with survival in
a large study with long-term follow-up. Histopathology.
1992; 20:479–89.

44.	 Brunner AL, Li J, Guo X, Sweeney RT, Varma S, Zhu SX,
Li R, Tibshirani R, West RB. A shared transcriptional program in early breast neoplasias despite genetic and clinical
distinctions. Genome Biol. 2014; 15:R71.

51.	 Camp RL, Dolled-Filhart M, Rimm DL. X-tile: a new bioinformatics tool for biomarker assessment and outcomebased cut-point optimization. Clin Cancer Res. 2004;
10:7252–9.

45.	 Greaves M, Maley CC. Clonal evolution in cancer. Nature.
2012; 481:306–13.

52.	 Györffy B, Lanczky A, Szallasi Z. Implementing an online
tool for genome-wide validation of survival-associated biomarkers in ovarian-cancer using microarray data from 1287
patients. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2012; 19:197–208.

46.	 Langmead B, Trapnell C, Pop M, Salzberg SL. Ultrafast
and memory-efficient alignment of short DNA sequences to
the human genome. Genome Biol. 2009; 10:R25.

53.	 Dunning MJ, Smith ML, Ritchie ME, Tavaré S. beadarray: R classes and methods for Illumina bead-based data.
Bioinformatics. (Oxford, England): 2007; 23:2183–4.

47.	 Zhang Y, Liu T, Meyer CA, Eeckhoute J, Johnson DS,
Bernstein BE, Nusbaum C, Myers RM, Brown M, Li W,
Liu XS. Model-based analysis of ChIP-Seq (MACS).
Genome Biol. 2008; 9:R137.

54.	 Bolstad BM, Irizarry RA, Astrand M, Speed TP.
A ­comparison of normalization methods for high
­density oligonucleotide array data based on ­variance and
bias. Bioinformatics. Oxford, England: 2003; 19:185–93.

48.	 McLean CY, Bristor D, Hiller M, Clarke SL, Schaar BT,
Lowe CB, Wenger AM, Bejerano G. GREAT improves
functional interpretation of cis-regulatory regions. Nat
Biotechnol. 2010; 28:495–501.

55.	 Ling G, Sugathan A, Mazor T, Fraenkel E, Waxman DJ.
Unbiased, genome-wide in vivo mapping of transcriptional
regulatory elements reveals sex differences in chromatin
structure associated with sex-specific liver gene expression.
Mol Cell Biol. 2010; 30:5531–44.

49.	 Nielsen CB, Younesy H, O’Geen H, Xu X, Jackson AR,
Milosavljevic A, Wang T, Costello JF, Hirst M,
Farnham PJ, Jones SJM. Spark: a navigational paradigm for
genomic data exploration. Genome Res. 2012; 22:2262–9.
50.	 Ellis IO, Galea M, Broughton N, Locker A, Blamey RW,
Elston CW. Pathological prognostic factors in breast

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21891

Oncotarget

