Published OnlineFirst January 27, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-2917

Research Article

Suppression of cFLIP by Lupeol, a Dietary Triterpene, Is Sufficient to
Overcome Resistance to TRAIL-Mediated Apoptosis in
Chemoresistant Human Pancreatic Cancer Cells
Imtiyaz Murtaza, Mohammad Saleem, Vaqar Mustafa Adhami, Bilal Bin Hafeez, and Hasan Mukhtar
Department of Dermatology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin

Abstract
Overexpression of cellular FLICE-like inhibitory protein
(cFLIP) is reported to confer chemoresistance in pancreatic
cancer (PaC) cells. This study was designed to investigate
the effect of lupeol, a dietary triterpene, on (a) apoptosis of
tumor necrosis factor–related apoptosis-inducing ligand
(TRAIL) therapy–resistant PaC cells overexpressing cFLIP
and (b) growth of human pancreatic tumor xenografts in vivo.
The effect of lupeol treatment on proliferation and TRAIL/
caspase-8/cFLIP machinery in PaC cells was investigated. Next,
cFLIP-overexpressing and cFLIP-suppressed cells were tested
for sensitivity to recombinant TRAIL therapy in the presence
of lupeol. Further, athymic nude mice implanted with AsPC-1
cells were treated with lupeol (40 mg/kg) thrice a week and
surrogate biomarkers were evaluated in tumors. Lupeol alone
treatment of cells caused (a) decrease in proliferation, (b)
induction of caspase-8 and poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase
cleavage, and (c) down-regulation of transcriptional activation
and expression of cFLIP. Lupeol was observed to increase the
TRAIL protein level in cells. Lupeol significantly decreased
the viability of AsPC-1 cells both in cFLIP-suppressed cells and
in cFLIP-overexpressing cells. Lupeol significantly sensitized
chemoresistant PaC cells to undergo apoptosis by recombinant TRAIL. Finally, lupeol significantly reduced the growth
of human PaC tumors propagated in athymic nude mice and
caused modulation of cFLIP and TRAIL protein levels in
tumors. Our findings showed the anticancer efficacy of lupeol
with mechanistic rationale against highly chemoresistant
human PaC cells. We suggest that lupeol, alone or as an adjuvant to current therapies, could be useful for the management of human PaC. [Cancer Res 2009;69(3):1156–65]

Introduction
In the United States alone, 37,680 newly diagnosed pancreatic
cancer (PaC) cases will be detected and 34,290 deaths are
anticipated, making PaC the fourth leading cause of cancer deaths
in adults (1). It has one of the worst prognoses with an overall
5-year survival rate of <5%, and most patients succumb to death
within the first 2 years (2). Advanced PaC tumors are highly aggressive and resistant to conventional therapies such as radiation

Note: Current address for I. Murtaza: Sheri-Kashmir University of Agricultural
Sciences and Technology, Shalimar Campus, Srinagar, Jammu Kashmir, India.
I. Murtaza and M. Saleem contributed equally to this work.
Requests for reprints: Hasan Mukhtar, Department of Dermatology, University of
Wisconsin, 1300 University Avenue, MSC-25B, Madison, WI 53706. Phone: 608-2633927; Fax: 608-263-5223; E-mail: hmukhtar@wisc.edu.
I2009 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-2917

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (3). February 1, 2009

and chemotherapy (3). Advanced PaC cells are known to respond
poorly to treatment with death-inducing chemotherapeutic agents
due to the alteration in cellular apoptotic machinery (4). Therefore,
efforts are being made to explore the possibility of cellular
apoptotic machinery as a potential target for new therapeutic
agents for treating PaC patients (5).
Recently, death receptor ligands, especially tumor necrosis
factor–related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL), have received a
great deal of attention as novel therapeutic agents due to their
high potential for selective induction of apoptosis in transformed
cells (6–8). TRAIL-induced apoptosis in cancer cells is known to be
mediated by caspase-8 (9). Recent studies have shown that, despite
its potent tumoricidal activity, PaC remains refractory toward
TRAIL treatment (10–12). The phenomenon of chemoresistance
exhibited by PaC cells to TRAIL therapy is reported to be associated with the down-regulation of the activity of caspase-8 protein,
which relays the apoptotic signals inside a cell (13–16). It is
noteworthy that in chemoresistant cells, the activity of caspase-8 is
reported to be inhibited by its inhibitory protein, cellular FLICElike inhibitory protein (cFLIP; refs. 17–19). cFLIP has been shown
to be highly expressed in TRAIL-resistant PaC cells as compared
with TRAIL-sensitive cells (13, 20–22). Further, down-regulation
of cFLIP has been shown to render highly resistant PaC cells
sensitive to TRAIL therapy (20–22). cFLIP-induced chemoresistance is not restricted to TRAIL alone but also extends to other
chemotherapeutic agents such as gemcitabine that are used to
treat PaC (ref. 6 and references therein). Combination therapies
with cocktail chemotherapeutic agents (cisplatin, camptothecin,
and celecoxib) are reported to cause a synergistic apoptotic effect
with TRAIL; however, these therapies pose adverse undesirable side
effects in PaC patients (23). There is an unmet need to overcome
the cFLIP-mediated chemoresistance of PaC tumor cells by
adopting novel approaches by the use of naturally occurring
nontoxic dietary agents. Therefore, the search for novel, effective,
and diet-based agents with anti-PaC activity is of paramount
importance.
Lupeol [Lup-20(29)-en-3h-ol; Fig. 1A] is a triterpene found in
fruits such as olive, mango, strawberry, grapes, and figs; in many
vegetables; and in several medicinal plants (ref. 24 and references
therein). Lupeol is found as an active constituent of various
medicinal plants used by native people in the treatment of various
skin ailments in North America, Japan, China, Latin America, and
Caribbean islands (ref. 12 and references therein). Lupeol possesses
strong antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, antiarthritic, antimutagenic,
and antimalarial activities in in vitro and in vivo systems; acts
as a potent inhibitor of protein kinases and serine proteases;
and inhibits the activity of DNA topoisomerase II, a known target
for anticancer chemotherapy (25–28). Recently, we have shown
that lupeol induces apoptosis in highly metastatic human PaC cells
AsPC-1 (29).

1156

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst January 27, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-2917
Lupeol Induces Apoptosis via cFLIP/TRAIL Modulation

Figure 1. Effect of lupeol on cell viability,
proliferation, activation of caspase-8, and the
expression level of cFLIP, TRAIL, and death
receptors in AsPC-1 cells. A, viability of human
PaC AsPC-1, BxPC-3, and PANC-1 cells treated
with lupeol (5–50 Amol/L for 48 h) as measured
by MTT assay. Each concentration of lupeol
was repeated in 10 wells. The values are
represented as percent viable cells, with vehicle
(alcohol + DMSO)-treated cells regarded as
100% viable. Points, mean of three independent
experiments; bars, SE. B, histogram showing
the rate of [3H]thymidine uptake in AsPC-1
cells treated with lupeol. Cells were subjected
to lupeol treatment (20–40 Amol/L) for 48 h,
the last 16 h of which was in the presence of
[3H]thymidine (0.5 ACi/mL). Columns, mean
of three independent experiments; bars, SE.
*, P < 0.05. Inset, structure of lupeol
[Lup-20(29)-en-3h-ol]. C, effect of lupeol
(0–50 Amol/L) treatment on the expression levels
of procaspase-8 and cleaved caspase-8 and
on the protein expression of cFLIP. D, effect
of lupeol (0–50 Amol/L) treatment on the
expression levels of TRAIL, DR4, and DR5
proteins as determined by immunoblot
analysis. Representative of three independent
experiments with similar results. The details
are described in Materials and Methods.
V, vehicle (alcohol + DMSO).

Here, we show that lupeol significantly inhibits the growth and
tumorigenicity of chemoresistant AsPC-1 cells through modulation
of TRAIL/cFLIP under in vitro conditions and in an athymic nude
mouse model. We suggest that lupeol alone or as an adjuvant to
therapeutic agents could be developed as a potential agent for
treating human PaC patients.

Materials and Methods
Cell culture. Human PaC cell lines AsPC-1, BxPC-3, and PANC-1 were
obtained from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC) and grown in
appropriate media (ATCC) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum
(ATCC) and 1% penicillin-streptomycin (Cellgro Mediatech, Inc.) under
standard cell culture conditions of 5% CO2 at 37jC in an incubator.
Lupeol. Lupeol (z95% purity) was procured from Sigma. A stock
solution of lupeol (30 mmol/L) was prepared in warm alcohol and diluted in
DMSO in a 1:1 ratio. The final concentrations of DMSO and alcohol were
0.25% and 0.075%, respectively, in all treatment protocols.
Cell viability assay. The effect lupeol on the viability of cells was
determined by 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2, 5-diphenyl tetrazoliumbromide (MTT) assay. The cells were plated at 1  104 per well in 200 AL
of complete culture medium. The next day, cells were treated with lupeol
(5–50 Amol/L) for 48 h. Each concentration was repeated in 10 wells.
After incubation for a specified time at 37jC in a humidified incubator,
MTT (5 mg/mL in PBS) was added to each well and incubated for 2 h;
then the plate was centrifuged at 500  g for 5 min at 4jC. The MTT
solution was removed from the wells by aspiration. After careful removal
of the medium, 0.1 mL of buffered DMSO was added to each well and
plates were shaken. The absorbance was recorded on a microplate reader
at the wavelength of 540 nm. The effect on cell growth inhibition was
assessed as percent cell viability wherein vehicle-treated cells were taken
as 100% viable.
[3H]Thymidine incorporation assay. AsPC-1 cells (60% confluent)
grown in 24-well culture plates were subjected to lupeol treatment for 48 h,
the last 16 h of which were in the presence of [3H]thymidine (0.25 ACi/mL).
Cells were then washed twice with PBS at room temperature and then with

www.aacrjournals.org

ice-cold 5% trichloroacetic acid. The cells were next incubated with
trichloroacetic acid solution on ice for 30 min and, subsequently, the acidinsoluble fraction was dissolved in 1 mL of 1 mol/L NaOH. Incorporated
[3H]thymidine was quantified by liquid scintillation counting.
Treatment of cells. For dose-dependent studies, the cells (50%
confluent) were treated with lupeol (10–50 Amol/L) for 48 h in complete
media. Vehicle-treated cells served as controls. After 48 h of treatment with
lupeol, the cells were harvested and cell lysates were prepared and stored at
80jC for later use.
Treatment of cells with recombinant TRAIL. Recombinant TRAIL
(rTRAIL; 20 Amol/L) was procured from Sigma Chemical Co. and stored at
80jC. Cells were treated with 100 nmol/L of rTRAIL alone and in
combination with lupeol (20 Amol/L) and were tested for viability and
apoptosis. Briefly, cells were pretreated with either lupeol or vehicle (DMSOethyl alcohol) for 42 h followed by an additional 6-h incubation in the
presence of TRAIL. At 48 h after lupeol or vehicle treatment, cells were
tested for viability, proliferation, and apoptosis.
Western blot analysis. Cell and tissue lysates were prepared in cold lysis
buffer [0.05 mmol/L Tris-HCl, 0.15 mmol/L NaCl, 1 mol/L EGTA, 1 mol/L
EDTA, 20 mmol/L NaF, 100 mmol/L Na3VO4, 0.5% NP40, 1% Triton X-100,
1 mol/L phenyl methylsulfonyl fluoride (pH 7.4)] with freshly added
Protease Inhibitor Cocktail Set III (Calbiochem). The lysate was collected
and cleared by centrifugation, and the supernatant was aliquoted and
stored at 80jC. The protein content in the lysates was measured by BCA
protein assay (Pierce) as per vendor’s protocol. For Western blot analysis,
25 to 40 Ag of protein were resolved over 12% Tris-glycine polyacrylamide
gels (Novex) under nonreduced conditions, transferred onto nitrocellulose
membranes, and subsequently incubated in blocking buffer (5% nonfat
dry milk/1% Tween 20, in 20 mmol/L TBS, pH 7.6) for 2 h. The blots
were incubated with appropriate primary antibody, washed, and incubated
with appropriate horseradish peroxidase (HRP)–conjugated secondary
antibody (Amersham Biosciences). The blots were detected with chemiluminescence (ECL kit, Amersham Biosciences) followed by autoradiography, using XAR-5 film (Eastman Kodak). Equal loading of protein was
confirmed by stripping the blots and reprobing with h-actin (Sigma).
Densitometry measurements of the scanned bands were done using
digitalized scientific software program UN-SCAN-IT (Silk Scientific

1157

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (3). February 1, 2009

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst January 27, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-2917
Cancer Research
Corporation). Data were normalized to h-actin and expressed as the mean
of three tumor specimens F SE.
Detection of apoptosis and necrosis by fluorescence microscopy.
The Annexin V-FLUOS apoptosis detection kit (Roche Applied Science) was
used for the detection of apoptotic and necrotic cells. This kit uses a dualstaining protocol in which the cells are stained with Annexin and
propidium iodide. Cell populations that potentially may be detected are
as follows: Viable cells will be nonfluorescent; cells in the metabolically
active stages of apoptosis will stain with Annexin (green fluorescence) but
not with propidium iodide (red fluorescence); and necrotic cells will stain
with propidium iodide. In addition, cells undergoing late-stage apoptosis
bind both Annexin and propidium iodide. Briefly, AsPC-1 cells were grown
on slides to f50% confluence and then treated with either lupeol (20–40
Amol/L) or rTRAIL (100 nmol/L). Apoptotic and necrotic cells were
detected with a Nikon OPTIPHOT-150 microscope connected to a SPOT
Insight charge-coupled device camera (Diagnostic Instruments, Inc.).
Briefly, the samples were excited at 330 to 380 nm, and the image was
observed and photographed under a combination of a 400-nm dichroic
mirror and a 420-nm high-pass filter.
cFLIP siRNA transfection. Transfections were done by using the Amaxa
nucleofection kit as per vendor’s protocol. The siRNA against cFLIP was
procured from Santa Cruz Biotechnology. Briefly, 1  106 cells were
transfected with 50 to 100 nmol/L of siRNA directed against cFLIP. Control
cells were transfected with scrambled siRNA (50–100 nmol/L). After
overnight incubation, transfected cells were treated with lupeol (20–40
Amol/L) alone, rTRAIL alone (100 nmol/L), or a combination of lupeol and
rTRAIL. At 48 h posttreatment, cells were tested for viability by MTT assay
and for apoptotic markers by immunoblotting.
pCMV6-cFLIP transfection. The pCMV6-cFLIP expression plasmid was
procured from OriGene Technologies, Inc. Briefly, 2  106 cells were
transfected with 2 Ag of cFLIP cDNA. Control cells transfected with 2 Ag of
empty vector (pCMV6) were run in parallel. After overnight incubation,
transfected cells were treated with lupeol (20–40 Amol/L) alone, rTRAIL
alone (100 nmol/L), or a combination of lupeol and rTRAIL. At 48
h posttreatment, cells were tested for viability by MTT assay and for
apoptotic markers by immunoblotting.
Transcriptional activity of cFLIP. The human cFLIP reporter plasmid
(pGL3-cFLIP-luc) was a kind gift from Dr. Peter Erb (University of Basel,
Basel, Switzerland). E. coli bacteria with plasmids were used for
transformation using an agar medium and Maxiprep kit (Qiagen). Cells
plated at a density of 5  104 per well were transfected with the plasmids
(1 Ag/million cells) for 24 h. Renilla luciferase (50 ng/million cells, pRL-TK;
Promega) was used as an internal control. In addition, the same amounts of
empty vectors were transfected in controls cells. At 12 h posttransfection,
fresh medium was added with lupeol (10–20 Amol/L) and incubated for
24 h. The cells were then harvested, and transcriptional activity was
measured in terms of luciferase activity in quadruplicates by using the dualluciferase reporter assay system (Promega). Relative luciferase activity was
calculated with the values from vector alone group with or without the
values from the lupeol-treated group.
Tumorigenicity studies in athymic nude mice. A total of 1  106 cells
suspended in 50 AL of media and 50 AL of Matrigel (BD Biosciences) were
inoculated s.c. into the right flank of 16 athymic nude mice (6 wk old) by
using a 27-gauge needle and then randomly divided into two equal groups.
One group of animals received an i.p. injection of lupeol (40 mg/kg body
weight in 0.1 mL corn oil), and the second group of animals received corn
oil alone and served as the control group. The dose of lupeol was selected
on the basis of our previous studies (30, 31). These treatments were
repeated thrice a week on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays. Once tumors
started growing, their sizes were measured weekly and tumor volumes
calculated by the formula 0.5238L 1L 2H, where L 1 is the long diameter, L 2 is
the short diameter, and H is the height of the tumor. At the termination of
experiment, animals were sacrificed and tumor tissues and visceral organs
were harvested. From the harvested tissues, lysates were prepared and
paraffin tumor sections were prepared on slides. The lysates were stored at
80jC and paraffin tumor sections were immediately processed for
immunohistochemical analysis.

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (3). February 1, 2009

Immunohistochemical analysis. Immunohistochemical staining was
done as described earlier (30, 32). Paraffin sections (to be evaluated for
cFLIP and TRAIL) were pretreated with citrate buffer (pH 6) for 10 min in a
microwave for antigen retrieval. After antigen retrieval, paraffin-embedded
sections (5 Am) were dewaxed, rehydrated, and treated to inhibit endogenous peroxidase activity. Sections were washed in water and PBS and
blocked in blocking buffer (2% goat serum/5% bovine serum albumin in
PBS) for 30 min followed by incubation with appropriate primary antibody
(cFLIP and TRAIL) at the dilution of 1:50 for 12 h at 4jC. A negative control
was included, in which sections were incubated with normal mouse IgG1
replacing the primary monoclonal antibody. After incubation in the primary
antibody, sections were washed twice in PBS to remove unbound antibody,
followed by incubation for 2 h at room temperature with appropriate
HRP-conjugated secondary antibody. Immunoreactive complexes were
detected with 3,3¶-diaminobenzidene (DAKO). Slides were then counterstained in hematoxylin, mounted in crystal mount, and coverslipped in
50:50 xylene/Permount. Sections were visualized with a Nikon OPTIPHOT150 microscope connected to a SPOT Insight charge-coupled device camera
(Diagnostic Instruments).
Statistical analyses. Student’s t test for independent analysis was
applied to evaluate differences between the treated and untreated groups
with respect to the expression of various proteins. S-plus software
(Insightful) was used to measure the rate of mean tumor volume growth
as a function of time. P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

Results
Effect of lupeol on cell growth and viability. To evaluate the
effect of lupeol on the growth of human PaC cells, we selected
BxPC-3, AsPC-1, and PANC-1 cells. The choice of these cells was
based on the fact that these cells show differential resistance
pattern to conventional chemotherapeutic regimens. Treatment
of AsPC-1 and PANC-1 cells with lupeol resulted in a dosedependent growth inhibition with an IC50 of 27.5 and 10 Amol/L,
respectively (Fig. 1A). In contrast, BxPC-3 cells showed considerable resistance to lupeol-induced cell growth inhibitory effects
with IC50 >80 Amol/L (Fig. 1A). These results suggested that the
cell line AsPC-1, which is highly resistant to currently available
chemotherapeutic drugs, remarkably showed sensitivity to lupeol
treatment. Therefore, to understand the underlying mechanism(s)
of lupeol-induced cell death, we selected AsPC-1 cells for further studies.
Effect of lupeol on AsPC-1 cell proliferation. Recently, we
showed significant growth inhibitory effects of lupeol on AsPC-1
cells in a time- and dose-dependent manner (29). It is well known
that proliferating cells exhibit increased [3H]thymidine incorporation into DNA, which arises from increased growth factor
expression and activity in cancer cells (33, 34). Next, we determined
the effect of lupeol treatment (20–40 Amol/L) on the rate of
proliferation of AsPC-1 cells by measuring the rate of uptake of
thymidine by dividing cells. We observed that pretreatment of cells
with lupeol significantly decreased thymidine incorporation in a
dose-dependent manner, further confirming the antiproliferative
efficacy of lupeol (Fig. 1B).
Effect of lupeol on caspase-8/cFLIP/TRAIL apoptotic machinery in AsPC-1 cells. Caspase-8 is an integral protein in death
receptor–associated apoptosis (35–37). Caspase-8 expression is
reported to be lost by the epigenetic phenomenon (36, 38, 39).
Chemoresistant cancerous cells have defective casapse-8 function
due to their inability to bind to the apoptosis executing complex
and because of the presence of competitive inhibitors such as
cFLIP (13–16, 40). Lupeol treatment of AsPC-1 cells caused a
significant decrease in the level of procaspase-8 protein (Fig. 1C).

1158

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst January 27, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-2917
Lupeol Induces Apoptosis via cFLIP/TRAIL Modulation

Figure 2. Effect of lupeol and rTRAIL treatment, alone and in combination (Lupeol + rTRAIL), on cell viability, proliferation, and apoptosis of AsPC-1 cells. A, histogram
representing the viability of cells treated with specified concentrations of lupeol (20–30 Amol/L) and rTRAIL (100 nmol/L). Cells were treated with lupeol for 24 h
and were then exposed to rTRAIL for 6 h. After TRAIL treatment, cell viability was assessed by MTT assay. Each concentration of lupeol was repeated in 10 wells.
The values are represented as percent viable cells, with vehicle (alcohol + DMSO)–treated cells regarded as 100% viable. Columns, mean of three independent
experiments; bars, SE. B, representative photomicrographs showing induction of apoptosis in AsPC-1 cells treated with lupeol and rTRAIL alone and in combination.
Green and red fluorescence indicate Annexin V and propidium iodide staining. Representative of three independent experiments with similar results. C, histogram
showing the rate of [3H]thymidine uptake in AsPC-1 cells treated with lupeol and rTRAIL alone and in combination. Cells were subjected to lupeol treatment (20 Amol/L)
for 48 h, the last 16 h of which was in the presence of [3H]thymidine (0.5 ACi/mL). Columns, mean of three independent experiments; bars, SE. *, P < 0.01.
The details are described in Materials and Methods.

Further, lupeol treatment of cells also caused an increase in the
expression level of active-caspase-8 (Fig. 1C).
Recent studies have shown that cFLIP impedes TRAIL-a–,
Fas ligand–, and TRAIL-induced apoptosis by binding to Fasassociated death domain (FADD) and/or caspase-8, thus resulting
in the prevention of death-inducing signaling complex (DISC)
formation in PaC cells (35, 41). The chemoresistance offered by
PaC cells is mostly attributed to the down-regulation cFLIP
and inactivation of casapse-8 (13–16, 38–43). Because lupeol
was observed to decrease the growth of highly chemoresistant
PaC cells and activate casapse-8, we asked whether this effect
is associated with cFLIP. Next, we determined the effect of
lupeol treatment on the level of cFLIP protein, which is highly
expressed in malignant PaC cells. Interestingly, lupeol treatment was found to significantly decrease the expression levels
of cFLIP protein in a dose-dependent manner (Fig. 1C). It is
noteworthy that the effect of lupeol on cFLIP levels well correlated
with its effect on the viability and proliferation of AsPC-1 cells
(Fig. 1A and B).
TRAIL ligand is known to be produced by tumor cells; however, with the advancement of the disease, these cells become
nonresponsive to endogenous TRAIL due to the up-regulation
of cFLIP (40–43). Similarly, advanced PaC tumors are reported
to exhibit high resistance to endogenous as well as exogenous
TRAIL treatment due to the up-regulation of cFLIP (11, 12).
We found that lupeol treatment resulted in an increase in the
TRAIL protein level in AsPC-1 cells (Fig. 1D). The induction in
TRAIL levels correlated with the effect on cell viability and
proliferation (Fig. 1A and B). Next, we investigated the effect of
lupeol treatment on death receptor (DR)-4 and DR5, the receptors
of TRAIL. We did not observe any significant change in the
expression levels of DR and DR5 in lupeol-treated AsPC-1cells
(Fig. 1D).

www.aacrjournals.org

Effect of lupeol and rTRAIL on viability of AsPC-1 cells.
AsPC-1 cells are known to be highly chemoresistant to TRAIL
therapy (11, 12). Next, we asked if lupeol treatment sensitizes
AsPC-1 cells to TRAIL treatment and whether cFLIP was involved
in the observed effect. rTRAIL treatment (100 nmol/L) did not
cause any effect on the viability of AsPC-1 cells; however, cells that
were pretreated with lupeol for 42 h at sublethal doses (20 Amol/L)
and subsequently treated with rTRAIL (100 nmol/L) for 6 hours
exhibited highly reduced viability (Fig. 2A). As evident from
fluorescent microscopy analysis, we observed that the rTRAILinduced growth inhibitory effect on lupeol-pretreated cells was as a
result of induction of apoptosis (Fig. 2B). Next, we investigated the
effect of TRAIL treatment on the proliferation potential of cells
pretreated with lupeol. Lupeol-pretreated cells, on exposure to
rTRAIL treatment, were observed to exhibit decreased proliferating
potential as was assessed from the rate of uptake of [3H]thymidine
by dividing cells (Fig. 2C). These data suggest that lupeol possesses
the potential to sensitize highly chemoresistant AsPC-1 cells to
TRAIL therapy.
Effect of lupeol and rTRAIL on viability and apoptosis of
cFLIP-knocked down AsPC-1 cells. Because lupeol was observed
to decrease the viability of AsPC-1 cells, decrease the expression
level of cFLIP, and increase the level of active caspase-8, we asked
whether the apoptosis-inducing effects of lupeol are mediated
through cFLIP. For this purpose, knockdown of cFLIP was achieved
by transfecting cells with a siRNA directed against cFLIP. The
expression level of cFLIP was significantly suppressed (50–90%) at
the doses of 50 to 100 nmol/L siRNA at 24 h posttransfection;
however, at a higher dose (100 nmol/L), cell viability was significantly reduced (data not shown). Thus, a dose of 50 nmol/L siRNA
and a time point of 48 hours for lupeol treatment were selected for
further experiments. The scrambled siRNA–transfected cells served
as control. Next, we determined the effect of lupeol treatment

1159

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (3). February 1, 2009

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst January 27, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-2917
Cancer Research

(20 Amol/L) in siRNA-transfected cells. cFLIP-suppressed cells
showed increased sensitivity toward lupeol treatment (Fig. 3A).
Lupeol alone treatment (20 Amol/L) reduced the viability by 65% in
scrambled siRNA–transfected cells and by 85% in cFLIP-knocked
down cells (Fig. 3A). Next, these cells were evaluated for cFLIP
expression level. TRAIL treatment did not result in any significant
modulation in the viability of cells (Fig. 3B). Lupeol treatment
caused a decrease of cFLIP expression level in scrambled siRNA–
transfected as well as cFLIP siRNA–transfected cells; however

the down-regulation of cFLIP was significantly more pronounced
in cFLIP-silenced cells. To investigate whether lupeol-induced
reduction in the viability of cFLIP-suppressed cells was a result of
increased apoptosis, we evaluated these cells for poly(ADP-ribose)
polymerase (PARP) cleavage as a measure of apoptosis. As is
evident from the immunoblots representing the PARP cleavage
(Fig. 3B), lupeol-induced PARP cleavage (thus reflecting apoptosis)
was highly increased in cFLIP-knocked down cells (Fig. 3B), which
we observed was concomitant with a significant decrease in the
expression level of cFLIP (Fig. 3B).
We next determined the effect of rTRAIL treatment on cFLIPsilenced AsPC-1 cells. rTRAIL treatment did not exhibit any
significant effect on scrambled siRNA–transfected cells, which
served as control but exhibited 40% reduction in the viability of
cFLIP-silenced cells (Fig. 3C). Further, the viability of lupeolpretreated cFLIP-silenced cells was highly reduced (95%) when
exposed to rTRAIL treatment for 6 hours (Fig. 3C). These data
suggest the significance of cFLIP in observed apoptosis and
confirmed the apoptotic potential of lupeol alone or in combination with known chemotherapeutic agents in PaC cells.
Effect of lupeol and rTRAIL on viability and apoptosis of
cFLIP-overexpressing AsPC-1 cells. Further, to validate that
cFLIP indeed plays a role in lupeol-induced effects, we next asked
whether the apoptosis-inducing effects of lupeol could be achieved
in cells with forced cFLIP expression. AsPC-1 cells transfected
with cFLIP-overexpressing plasmid (pCMV6-cFLIP) were found
to exhibit significantly higher expression level of cFLIP as compared with control cells (transfected with pCMV6 vector alone)
at 48 h posttransfection (data not shown). AsPC-1 cells forced to
overexpress cFLIP were treated with lupeol and rTRAIL alone and
in combination. A test group was included wherein cells were
pretreated with lupeol and, after 42 h, were exposed to rTRAIL
treatment for 6 hours. rTRAIL treatment was observed to exert no
significant effect on the viability of either control cells or cFLIPoverexpressing cells (Fig. 4A). Although lupeol treatment significantly reduced the viability of control cells, forced overexpression
of cFLIP in AsPC-1 reduced the extent of lupeol-induced cell
viability. However, the inhibitory effect on viability was significant,
suggesting the potential of lupeol to abolish the cFLIP-conferred
chemoresistance (Fig. 4A). Next, these cells were evaluated for
cFLIP expression level. Lupeol treatment caused a decrease in cFLIP

Figure 3. Effect of lupeol treatment on cell viability and on the expression of
cFLIP and PARP cleavage in cFLIP-silenced AsPC-1 cells. A, histogram
representing the effect of lupeol on the growth of cFLIP-silenced AsPC-1 cells
as determined by MTT assay. Cells were transfected with cFLIP siRNA or
scrambled siRNA (control) by electroporation. Twelve hours posttransfection,
cells were treated with specified concentrations of lupeol and cell viability was
determined. The values represent percent viable cells, with vehicle-treated
cells regarded as 100% viable. Columns, mean percent viable cells of three
independent experiments; bars, SE. The details are described in Materials
and Methods. B, representative immunoblots of cFLIP and PARP protein
cleavage. Cells were transfected with cFLIP siRNA or scrambled siRNA (control)
by electroporation. At 12 h posttransfection, cells were treated with specified
concentrations of lupeol. After 48 h, cells were harvested and cell lysates
analyzed for cFLIP and PARP cleavage. Equal loading was confirmed by
stripping immunoblots and reprobing them for h-actin. C, histogram representing
the effect of rTRAIL and lupeol alone and in combination on the growth of
cFLIP-silenced AsPC-1 cells. Cells were transfected with cFLIP siRNA or
scrambled siRNA (control) by electroporation. Twelve hours posttransfection,
cells were treated with specified concentrations of rTRAIL, lupeol, or their
combination. After 48 h, cell viability was determined by MTT assay. The values
represent percent viable cells, with vehicle-treated cells regarded as 100%
viable. Columns, mean percent viable cells of three independent experiments;
bars, SE. The details are described in Materials and Methods.

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (3). February 1, 2009

1160

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst January 27, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-2917
Lupeol Induces Apoptosis via cFLIP/TRAIL Modulation

Figure 4. Effect of lupeol treatment on cell viability and on the expression of cFLIP and PARP cleavage in AsPC-1 cells transfected with cFLIP-overexpressing plasmid.
A, histogram representing the effect of lupeol on the growth of cFLIP-overexpressing AsPC-1 cells. Cells were transfected with pCMV6-cFLIP or pCMV6 vector
alone (control) by electroporation. Twelve hours posttransfection, cells were treated with specified concentrations of lupeol and cell viability was determined
by MTT assay. The values represent percent viable cells, with vehicle-treated cells regarded as 100% viable. Columns, mean percent viable cells of three
independent experiments; bars, SE. The details are described in Materials and Methods. B, representative immunoblots of cFLIP and PARP protein cleavage in
cFLIP-overexpressing AsPC-1 cells. Cells were transfected with pCMV6-cFLIP or pCMV6 vector alone (control) by electroporation. Twelve hours posttransfection,
cells were treated with specified concentrations of lupeol; cell lysates were prepared and analyzed for cFLIP and PARP cleavage by Western blot analysis.
Equal loading was confirmed by stripping immunoblots and reprobing them for h-actin. Representative immunoblots of three independent experiments with similar
results. C, histogram representing the effect of rTRAIL and lupeol alone and in combination on the growth of cFLIP-overexpressing AsPC-1 cells. Cells were transfected
with pCMV6-cFLIP or pCMV6 vector alone (control) by electroporation. Twelve hours posttransfection, cells were treated with specified concentrations of rTRAIL
and lupeol alone and in combination and cell viability was determined by MTT assay. The values represent percent viable cells, with vehicle-treated cells regarded as
100% viable. Columns, mean percent viable cells of three independent experiments; bars, SE. The details are described in Materials and Methods. D, histogram
representing the effect of lupeol treatment on the transcriptional activation of cFLIP in AsPC-1cells. Cells were transfected with pGL3-cFLIP-luc for 24 h. Renilla
luciferase was used as an internal control. In addition, controls were transfected with the same amount of empty vectors. Twelve hours posttransfection, fresh
medium was added with lupeol and incubated for 24 h. The cells were then harvested and transcriptional activity was measured in quadruplicates as described in
Materials and Methods.

expression level in vector alone–transfected as well as cFLIPoverexpressing cells; however, the effect of down-regulation of cFLIP
was more pronounced in control cells (Fig. 4B). Next, we asked
whether lupeol could sensitize the cFLIP-overexpressing PaC cells
to rTRAIL therapy. Interestingly, lupeol treatment was observed
to significantly sensitize both control and cFLIP-overexpressing
cells to rTRAIL therapy; however, the effect was higher in control cells (Fig. 4C). These data suggest that lupeol possesses the
potential to decrease the viability of chemoresistant PaC cells
irrespective of the level of cFLIP expression and even sensitize them
to chemotherapy.
Effect of lupeol treatment on transcriptional activation
of cFLIP in AsPC-1 cells. Because lupeol was observed to decrease the level of cFLIP protein, we next determined the effect
of lupeol treatment on the transcriptional activation of cFLIP.
Lupeol was tested for cFLIP promoter activity in AsPC-1 cells
transfected with pGL3-cFLIP-Luc. Lupeol treatment was observed
to significantly decrease the promoter activity of cFLIP, suggesting that the effect of lupeol on cFLIP occurred at transcriptional
level (Fig. 4D).

www.aacrjournals.org

Effect of lupeol on tumorigenicity of AsPC-1 cells in an
athymic nude mouse model. Because lupeol was observed to be
effective in inhibiting the growth of highly aggressive and
chemoresistant AsPC-1 cells in vitro, we next determined whether
these results could be translated into an in vivo xenograft model.
Lupeol treatment neither caused any loss in the body weight or
food intake nor exhibited apparent signs of toxicity in animals.
Implantation of AsPC-1 cells into nude mice produced visible
tumors in mice with a mean latent period of 7 days. The average
volume of tumors in control mice increased as a function of
time and reached a preset end point of 1,300 mm3 in 40 days
postinoculation. However, at this time the average tumor volume
was only 720 mm3 in mice treated with lupeol (Fig. 5A). Tumors
were found to grow an average of 28 mm3 per day in the control
group and 13 mm3 per day in the lupeol-treated group. Next, we
evaluated whether or not the treatment of lupeol to animals caused
a delay in the growth of tumors in nude mice. The observed
differences for tumor development in lupeol-treated mice as
compared with control mice were statistically significant with
P < 0.01 (Fig. 5B). Approximately 75% of mice that received

1161

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (3). February 1, 2009

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst January 27, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-2917
Cancer Research

lupeol treatment did not cross the preset end point of the tumor
volume of 1,300 mm3 even at the end of 7th week (Fig. 5B). Tumors
from three animals from the control and treated groups were
excised at the 49th day posttreatment when 100% of control (corn
oil–treated) animals reached the tumor volume of f1,300 mm3.
The rest of the animals in treated group remained on the protocol
until they crossed the preset end point (i.e., tumor volume of
1,300 mm3). From these data we conclude that lupeol is an effective
agent that has the potential to inhibit the tumorigenicity of PaC
cells in vivo.
Lupeol administration induces apoptosis of tumor cells in
athymic nude mice. We next asked whether the observed effect of
lupeol is the end result of growth arrest followed by apoptosis of
tumor cells. We investigated the effect of lupeol administration on
apoptotic markers (PARP cleavage and activation of caspase-8)
in tumor tissues harvested from control and lupeol-treated mice.
Lupeol administration was observed to induce the expression level
of PARP85 (the cleaved product) and cleaved caspase-8 and decrease the expression level of PARP116 and procaspase-8 (Fig. 5C).
Because TRAIL and cFLIP were observed to be modulated by
lupeol treatment under in vitro conditions, we next determined
the effect of lupeol administration on the expression levels of these
proteins in tumor tissues and calculated their ratio. Lupeol
administration was observed to significantly decrease the expression level of cFLIP protein and marginally increase the expression level of TRAIL protein (Fig. 6A and C). These studies were
confirmed by performing immunohistochemical analysis of TRAIL
and cFLIP proteins in tumor sections of both groups of animals.
In corn oil–treated animals, cFLIP-positive staining was significantly higher than in tumor tissues of animals receiving
lupeol, and vice versa for TRAIL (Fig. 6B and D). Collectively, these
data suggest that lupeol administration induces apoptosis leading to the reduced tumorigenicity of PaC tumor cells under
in vivo conditions.

Discussion

Figure 5. Effect of lupeol administration on the tumorigenicity of AsPC-1 cells
and the expression level of known apoptotic markers PARP and caspase-8
under in vivo conditions. A, graphical representation of data showing the effect
of lupeol treatment on the growth of tumors from AsPC-1 cells implanted in
athymic nude mice. The growth was measured in terms of average volume of
tumors as a function of time. Points, mean; bars, SD. *, P < 0.05, versus the
control group. B, graphical representation of the data depicting the number of
mice remaining with tumor volumes <1,300 mm3 after treatment with corn oil
alone or lupeol for the indicated weeks. C, effect of lupeol administration on
the expression levels of PARP cleavage, procaspase-8, and active caspase-8
in AsPC-1 cell–derived tumors excised at the 49th day posttreatment as
determined by immunoblot analysis. Equal loading was confirmed by stripping the
membrane and reprobing them for h-actin. Representative immunoblot of three
samples from each group. The details are described in Materials and Methods.

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (3). February 1, 2009

PaC is one of the most aggressive malignant tumors with a low
survival rate (1, 2). PaC tumor development and progression,
as well as resistance to most oncologic therapies such as cisplatin
and gemcitabine therapy, result mainly from lack of response to
apoptotic stimuli (3). PaC cells with acquired resistance to
apoptosis and alterations in apoptotic machinery are often
resistant to conventional chemotherapy (3–5). Therefore, novel
therapeutic strategies that overcome the resistant mechanisms
in PaC would be crucial in improving the survival rate of the
patients. In recent years, the idea to directly trigger apoptosis
in PaC cells by stimulating death receptor–mediated apoptosis
by natural agents has gained considerable attention (29, 44, 45).
The major finding of the current study is that lupeol, a dietary
triterpene, could ameliorate the inefficiency of PaC cells to undergo apoptosis, sensitize the chemoresistant PaC cells to TRAIL
therapy, and inhibit the human PaC proliferation by downregulating the antiapoptotic protein cFLIP under in vitro and
in vivo conditions.
Realizing the cell heterogeneity of solid tumors including PaC,
which may determine the cell response to chemotherapeutic
agents, we tested the effect of lupeol on several PaC cells such as
AsPC1, BxPC-3, and PANC-1 of different origin and differentiation
and their differing sensitivity to TRAIL to examine whether the
effect of lupeol is dependent or independent of the cancer cell

1162

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst January 27, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-2917
Lupeol Induces Apoptosis via cFLIP/TRAIL Modulation

Figure 6. Effect of lupeol administration
on the expression level of cFLIP and TRAIL
proteins in AsPC-1 cell–derived tumors in
athymic nude mice. A, effect of lupeol
treatment on the expression level of TRAIL
in AsPC-1 cell–derived tumors excised at
the 49th day posttreatment as determined
by immunoblot analysis. Equal loading was
confirmed by stripping the membrane and
reprobing them for h-actin. Representative
immunoblot of three samples from each
group. Values above the immunoblots
represent mean relative densities of the
bands normalized to h-actin FSE.
B, representative photomicrographs
(magnification, 200) showing
immunohistochemical staining for TRAIL
in tumor sections of corn oil–treated and
lupeol-treated mice. Arrows, regions
exhibiting immunoreactivity for TRAIL
protein. The immunostaining data were
confirmed in two or more specimens of
each group. C, effect of lupeol treatment
on the expression levels of cFLIP in
AsPC-1 cell–derived tumors excised
at the 49th day posttreatment as
determined by immunoblot analysis.
Equal loading was confirmed by stripping
the membrane and reprobing them for
h-actin. Representative immunoblot of
three samples from each group. Values
above the immunoblots represent mean
relative densities of the bands normalized
to h-actin; bars, SE. D, representative
photomicrographs (magnification, 200)
showing immunohistochemical staining
for cFLIP in tumor sections of corn
oil–treated and lupeol-treated mice. Arrows,
regions exhibiting immunoreactivity for
cFLIP protein. The immunostaining data
were confirmed in three specimens
from each group. The details are described
in Materials and Methods.

type. Interestingly, the BxPC-1 cell line, which shows greatest
sensitivity to TRAIL, was less responsive to lupeol treatment
compared with PANC-1 and AsPC-1 cells, which show either an
intermediate or complete resistance to TRAIL treatment, respectively (11, 20). Treatment of TRAIL-resistant AsPC-1 cells with
lupeol resulted in dose-dependent growth inhibition with an IC50 of
27.5 Amol/L. A striking observation from our data was that cells
of variable cFLIP-expression were all highly sensitive to lupeolmediated loss of viability. In addition, these data provide evidence
that lupeol has the potential to kill the tumor cells and inhibit
the proliferation of advanced stage characteristics such as AsPC-1
cells, which are generally resistant to conventional chemotherapeutic agents.
Among the death ligands, TRAIL-mediated therapy is showing the most promise as a potential cancer therapeutic agent
due to its apparent specificity for tumor cells and lack of normal
cell toxicity (6–8, 46). Previous studies have shown that TRAIL
is abundantly expressed in most normal tissues without causing
significant apoptosis; however, rTRAIL seems to selectively induce
apoptosis in transformed cells (47). However, PaC cells have
been found to express the molecules of the TRAIL signaling
machinery, but most of the PaC cells remain resistant toward
endogenous TRAIL as well as rTRAIL therapy. However, PaC, being
one of the most resistant types of cancer to various available
therapeutic agents, also shows resistance to TRAIL-based therapy
and thus limiting its use in PaC. Resistance to TRAIL-induced

www.aacrjournals.org

apoptosis can emerge in TRAIL-sensitive cells exposed to TRAIL,
with the emergence of resistant clones (13). An interesting finding
of the current study is that AsPC-1 cells, which are highly
chemoresistant, attain sensitivity to TRAIL therapy when pretreated with lupeol. These data suggest the possibility of exploring
lupeol in future as an adjuvant to chemotherapeutic agents for
the treatment of chemoresistant PaC. Interestingly, we observed
that lupeol treatment also caused an increased level of endogenous TRAIL in PaC cells as well as in PaC tumors. It is noteworthy
that lupeol was observed to increase the protein level of TRAIL
at the lowest dose (10 Amol/L), suggesting the efficacy of lupeol
to trigger the process of apoptosis at low concentrations. The
proapoptotic role of lupeol could be explained by its efficiency
to act in a double-edge sword mechanistic way: (a) by sensitizing
PaC cells for TRAIL therapy by correcting the alterations in
apoptotic machinery and (b) by increasing the TRAIL protein pool
in PaC cells.
The basis of resistance offered by PaC cells to TRAIL is not fully
understood. A broad body of evidence suggests that modulation
of DISC-recruited molecules such as FADD, caspase-8, and cFLIP
determine the sensitivity of death receptor–expressing cells to
TRAIL (13, 14, 38–43). Caspases initiate and execute cell death and
are highly regulated by a variety of different inhibitors and
activators. For example, activation of procaspase-8 requires
association with its cofactor FADD (38–43). Previous studies have
shown that resistance to TRAIL-induced apoptosis correlates

1163

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (3). February 1, 2009

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst January 27, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-2917
Cancer Research

with a loss of caspase-8 expression in cancerous cells (14). We
observed that lupeol significantly activates capase-8 in PaC cells
and in PaC-originated tumors implanted as xenografts in
athymic nude mice. Our data are significant because lupeolinduced caspase-8 activation was observed to be accompanied
by increased apoptosis, which is evident from the cleavage of
apoptotic marker PARP under in vitro as well as in vivo conditions. Our data are in agreement with other studies showing
that reintroduction or activation of caspase-8 by oligonucleotides
induces apoptosis and sensitizes cancerous cells to TRAIL therapy
(14–16).
Nonformation of DISC complex due to the inability of caspase-8 binding is reported to be the major contributor of
chemoresistance in PaC cells (35–37). Studies have shown that
the inability of caspase-8 is to form DISC complex is due to
the strong presence of inhibitor proteins such as cFLIP in
chemoresistant cells (refs. 39–43 and references therein). Previous studies have shown that cFLIP interrupts apoptotic signaling by interacting with FADD and caspase-8 and by blocking
the activity of caspase-8, suggesting that the intracellular level of
cFLIP may determine the sensitivity of tumor cells to a variety
of proapoptotic stimuli (refs. 39–43 and references therein).
Elevated expression of cFLIP has been found in various types of
tumor cells that are often resistant to death receptor–mediated
apoptosis (42). Those tumors include colorectal carcinoma, gastric
carcinoma, pancreatic carcinoma, Hodgkin’s lymphoma, B-cell
chronic lymphocytic leukemia, melanoma, ovarian carcinoma,
cervical carcinoma, bladder urothelial carcinoma, and prostate
carcinoma (17–19). The expression of cFLIP has been proved
to be one of the major determinants of resistance to death ligands
such as Fas ligand and TRAIL, and numerous reports have shown
that down-regulation of cFLIP results in sensitizing various types
of resistant tumor cells including PaC (refs. 8, 20 and references
therein). Conversely, forced expression of cFLIP is known to
render cells resistant to Fas and/or TRAIL (ref. 8 and references
therein). Taken together, these studies imply that cFLIP may
be an attractive therapeutic target against PaC whose malignancy
and resistance have been shown to be strongly dependent on
cFLIP overexpression (42, 43). The promising approach is limiting
cFLIP protein level; once achieved, it could sensitize cancer cells to
death ligand–induced cell death. To date, several kinds of small
molecules such as DNA-damaging agents, RNA synthesis inhibitors,
protein synthesis inhibitors, topoisomerase I inhibitors, and
histone deacetylase inhibitors have been known to lower cFLIP
expression and sensitize resistant tumor cells to death receptor–
mediated apoptosis (ref. 8 and references therein). The biggest
problem with the above-mentioned agents is that these are not
specific for cFLIP and exhibit their antitumor effects at higher
doses, which are reported to produce potential side effects in
humans (ref. 8 and references therein). In this context, we provide
compelling evidence showing that lupeol treatment significantly
reduces the expression level of cFLIP protein in AsPC-1 cells at
sublethal doses. Interestingly, when PaC-originated tumor xenografts were tested for cFLIP protein level, those retrieved from
lupeol-treated animals exhibited significantly reduced cFLIP
level. These data are significant because down-regulation of cFLIP
was observed to be concomitant with increased apoptosis in
lupeol-treated PaC cells as well as PaC-originated tumors. It is
noteworthy that lupeol was observed to induce apoptosis even
in conditions when cFLIP was overexpressed in AsPC-1 cells.
In addition, such cells also showed increased sensitivity to rTRAIL

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (3). February 1, 2009

therapy. These data are significant because under PaC tumor
milieu, where clones of tumor cells with variable cFLIP expression
are present, an agent targeting cFLIP is desired. On the basis of our
data, we suggest that lupeol could be such an agent.
Recent studies have shown that blocking the transcriptional
activation of cFLIP could be a better approach to reduce cFLIP
levels in tumor cells (ref. 8 and references therein). However,
it should be noted that the agents directly targeting FLIP at
the mRNA and protein levels have not yet been developed.
Interestingly, lupeol treatment was observed to inhibit the
transcriptional activation of cFLIP in PaC cells, suggesting that
the effect of lupeol on cFLIP is at transcriptional level. Although
the mechanism by which cFLIP expression is regulated at
transcriptional level is not well understood, recent studies have
shown that phosphotidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt (PI3K/Akt) and
nuclear factor nB (NFnB) contribute toward the transcriptional
activation of cFLIP in cancer cells (ref. 48 and references therein).
It is interesting to note that the NFnB and PI3K/Akt signaling pathways are activated in response to Ras activation, which
is frequent in PaC patients (ref. 29 and references therein).
Having reported earlier that lupeol treatment modulates the Ras/
PI3K/NFnB signaling axis in PaC cells, the effect of lupeol
treatment on the transcriptional activation of cFLIP could be
explained on the possibility of involvement of Ras/PI3K/NFnB
signaling axis (29). The outcome of current study corroborates
with recent studies showing that the down-regulation of transcriptional activation of cFLIP sensitized tumor cells to chemotherapeutic agents (49).
Because lupeol treatment significantly inhibited the growth of
highly chemoresistant PaC cells under in vitro conditions, we asked
whether these data could be translated under in vivo situations. An
i.p. administration of lupeol to athymic nude mice showed
inhibitory effects against the growth of PaC cell–derived tumors.
These in vivo growth inhibitory effects of lupeol could be explained
by biochemical mechanisms.
To summarize, our present findings showed the in vitro as
well as in vivo anticancer efficacy of lupeol, with mechanistic
rationale (TRAIL-mediated apoptosis caused by decreasing total
cFLIP expression and increasing endogenous TRAIL), against
chemoresistant human PaC cells. These observations warrant
further in vivo efficacy studies in models that mimic progressive forms of human PaC as well as estimation of pharmacologically achievable doses exhibiting biological significance in in vitro
studies. The positive outcomes of such an in vivo study could form
a strong basis for the development of lupeol as a novel agent
for human PaC prevention and/or intervention alone or as an
adjuvant to known therapeutic agents such as rTRAIL for the
treatment of PaC.

Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest
No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

Acknowledgments
Received 7/31/2008; revised 9/22/2008; accepted 11/10/2008.
Grant support: USPHS grants RO1 CA 78809 and RO1 CA 101039 (H. Mukhtar) and
R03 CA 130064 (M. Saleem). I. Murtaza was a recipient of Overseas Associateship
Award (BT/IN/BTON/Nich/09/2007) from the Department of Biotechnology, Ministry
of Science and Technology, Government of India.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank Dr. Peter Erb for providing pGL3-cFLIP-luc reporter plasmid.

1164

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst January 27, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-2917
Lupeol Induces Apoptosis via cFLIP/TRAIL Modulation

References
1. Jemal A, Siegel R, Ward E, et al. Cancer statistics, 2008.
CA Cancer J Clin 2008;58:71–96.
2. Garcea G, Dennison AR, Pattenden CJ, Neal CP, Sutton
CD, Berry DP. Survival following curative resection for
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. A systematic review
of the literature. JOP 2008;9:99–132.
3. Mimeault M, Brand RE, Sasson AA, Batra SK. Recent
advances on the molecular mechanisms involved in
pancreatic cancer progression and therapies. Pancreas
2005;31:301–16.
4. Westphal S, Kalthoff H. Apoptosis: targets in pancreatic cancer. Mol Cancer 2003;2:6.
5. Xiong HQ. Molecular targeting therapy for pancreatic
cancer. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 2004;54:69–77.
6. Hall MA, Cleveland JL. Clearing the TRAIL for cancer
therapy. Cancer Cell 2007;12:4–6.
7. Kruyt FA. TRAIL and cancer therapy. Cancer Lett 2008;
263:14–25.
8. Yang JK. FLIP as an anti-cancer therapeutic target.
Yonsei Med J 2008;49:19–27.
9. Chaudhari BR, Murphy RF, Agrawal DK. Following the
TRAIL to apoptosis. Immunol Res 2006;35:249–62.
10. Koschny R, Walczak H, Ganten TM. The promise of
TRAIL-potential and risks of a novel anticancer therapy.
J Mol Med 2007;85:923–35.
11. Mori T, Doi R, Toyoda E, et al. Regulation of the
resistance to TRAIL-induced apoptosis as a new strategy
for pancreatic cancer. Surgery 2005;138:71–7.
12. Ibrahim SM, Ringel J, Schmidt C, et al. Pancreatic
adenocarcinoma cell lines show variable susceptibility
to TRAIL-mediated cell death. Pancreas 2001;23:72–9.
13. Zhang L, Fang B. Mechanisms of resistance to TRAILinduced apoptosis in cancer. Cancer Gene Ther 2005;12:
228–37.
14. Zhang L, Zhu H, Teraishi F, et al. Accelerated
degradation of caspase-8 protein correlates with TRAIL
resistance in a DLD1 human colon cancer cell line.
Neoplasia 2005;7:594–602.
15. Yamaguchi Y, Shiraki K, Fuke H, et al. Adenovirusmediated transfection of caspase-8 sensitizes hepatocellular carcinoma to TRAIL- and chemotherapeutic
agent-induced cell death. Biochim Biophys Acta 2006;
1763:844–53.
16. Mühlethaler-Mottet A, Balmas K, Auderset K, Joseph
JM, Gross N. Restoration of TRAIL-induced apoptosis in
a caspase-8-deficient neuroblastoma cell line by stable
re-expression of caspase-8. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2003;1010:
195–9.
17. Longley DB, Wilson TR, McEwan M, et al. c-FLIP
inhibits chemotherapy-induced colorectal cancer cell
death. Oncogene 2006;25:838–48.
18. Rippo MR, Moretti S, Vescovi S, et al. FLIP overexpression inhibits death receptor-induced apoptosis in
malignant mesothelial cells. Oncogene 2004;23:7753–60.

www.aacrjournals.org

19. Jönsson G, Paulie S, Grandien A. High level of cFLIP
correlates with resistance to death receptor-induced
apoptosis in bladder carcinoma cells. Anticancer Res
2003;23:1213–8.
20. Wang P, Zhang J, Bellail A, et al. Inhibition of RIP and
c-FLIP enhances TRAIL-induced apoptosis in pancreatic
cancer cells. Cell Signal 2007;9:2237–46.
21. Siegmund D, Hadwiger P, Pfizenmaier K, Vornlocher
HP, Wajant H. Selective inhibition of FLICE-like inhibitory
protein expression with small interfering RNA oligonucleotides is sufficient to sensitize tumor cells for TRAILinduced apoptosis. Mol Med 2002;8:725–32.
22. Kim Y, Suh N, Sporn M, Reed JC. An inducible
pathway for degradation of FLIP protein sensitizes
tumor cells to TRAIL-induced apoptosis. J Biol Chem
2002;277:22320–9.
23. El-Rayes BF, Zalupski MM, Shields AF, et al. A phase II
study of celecoxib, gemcitabine, and cisplatin in advanced
pancreatic cancer. Invest New Drugs 2005;23:583–90.
24. Chaturvedi PK, Bhui K, Shukla Y. Lupeol: connotations for chemoprevention. Cancer Lett 2008;263:1–13.
25. Saleem M, Alam A, Arifin S, Shah MS, Ahmed B,
Sultana S. Lupeol, a triterpene, inhibits early responses
of tumor promotion induced by benzoyl peroxide in
murine skin. Pharmacol Res 2001;43:127–34.
26. Hasmeda M, Kweifio-Okai G, Macrides T, et al.
Antiprotease effect of anti-inflammatory lupeol esters.
Mol Cell Biochem 2003;252:97–101.
27. Rajic A, Kweifio-Okai G, Macrides T, Sandeman RM,
Chandler DS, Polya GM. Inhibition of serine proteases
by anti-inflammatory triterpenoids. Planta Med 2000;66:
206–10.
28. Wada S, Iida A, Tanaka R. Triterpene constituents
from the stem barks of Pinus luchuensis and their DNA
topoisomerase II inhibitory effect. Planta Med 2001;67:
659–64.
29. Saleem M, Kaur S, Kweon MH, Adhami VM, Afaq F,
Mukhtar H. Lupeol, a fruit and vegetable based
triterpene, induces apoptotic death of human pancreatic adenocarcinoma cells via inhibition of Ras signaling
pathway. Carcinogenesis 2005;26:1956–64.
30. Saleem M, Maddodi N, Abu Zaid M, et al. Lupeol
inhibits growth of highly aggressive human metastatic
melanoma cells in vitro and in vivo by inducing
apoptosis. Clin Cancer Res 2008;14:2119–27.
31. Saleem M, Kweon MH, Yun JM, et al. A novel dietary
triterpene Lupeol induces fas-mediated apoptotic death
of androgen-sensitive prostate cancer cells and inhibits
tumor growth in a xenograft model. Cancer Res 2005;65:
11203–13.
32. Saleem M, Adhami VM, Zhong W, et al. A novel
biomarker for staging human prostate adenocarcinoma:
overexpression of matriptase with concomitant loss of its
inhibitor, hepatocyte growth factor activator inhibitor-1.
Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2006;15:217–27.
33. Toyohara J, Waki A, Takamatsu S, Yonekura Y, Magata

Y, Fujibayashi Y. Basis of FLT as a cell proliferation
marker: comparative uptake studies with [3H]thymidine
and [3H]arabinothymidine, and cell-analysis in 22
asynchronously growing tumor cell lines. Nucl Med Biol
2002;29:281–7.
34. Kwok CF, Juan CC, Shih KC, Hwu CM, Jap TS, Ho LT.
Insulin-like growth factor-1 increases endothelin receptor A levels and action in cultured rat aortic smooth
muscle cells. J Cell Biochem 2005;94:1126–34.
35. Bao Q, Shi Y. Apoptosome: a platform for the activation of initiator caspases. Cell Death Differ 2007;14:56–65.
36. Kim PK, Mahidhara R, Seol DW. The role of caspase8 in resistance to cancer chemotherapy. Drug Resist
Updat 2001;4:293–6.
37. Kruidering M, Evan GI. Caspase-8 in apoptosis: the
beginning of ‘‘the end’’? IUBMB Life 2000;50:85–90.
38. Lázcoz P, Muñoz J, Nistal M, Pestaña A, Encı́o I,
Castresana JS. Frequent promoter hypermethylation of
RASSF1A and CASP8 in neuroblastoma. BMC Cancer
2006;6:254.
39. Margetts CD, Astuti D, Gentle DC, et al. Epigenetic
analysis of HIC1, CASP8, FLIP, TSP1, DCR1, DCR2, DR4,
DR5, KvDMR1, H19 and preferential 11p15.5 maternalallele loss in von Hippel-Lindau and sporadic phaeochromocytomas. Endocr Relat Cancer 2005;12:161–72.
40. Kataoka T. The caspase-8 modulator c-FLIP. Crit Rev
Immunol 2005;25:31–58.
41. Sartorius U, Schmitz I, Krammer PH. Molecular
mechanisms of death-receptor-mediated apoptosis.
Chembiochem 2001;2:20–9.
42. Roth W, Reed JC. FLIP protein and TRAIL-induced
apoptosis. Vitam Horm 2004;67:189–206.
43. Wajant H. Targeting the FLICE Inhibitory Protein
(FLIP) in cancer therapy. Mol Interv 2003;3:124–7.
44. Sarkar FH, Adsule S, Li Y, Padhye S. Back to the
future: COX-2 inhibitors for chemoprevention and
cancer therapy. Mini Rev Med Chem 2007;7:599–608.
45. Burke YD, Ayoubi AS, Werner SR, et al. Effects of the
isoprenoids perillyl alcohol and farnesol on apoptosis
biomarkers in pancreatic cancer chemoprevention.
Anticancer Res 2002;22:3127–34.
46. Duiker EW, Mom CH, de Jong S, et al. The clinical
trail of TRAIL. Eur J Cancer 2006;42:2233–40.
47. Eggert A, Grotzer MA, Zuzak TJ, et al. Resistance to
tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand
(TRAIL)-induced apoptosis in neuroblastoma cells
correlates with a loss of caspase-8 expression. Cancer
Res 2001;61:1314–9.
48. Krueger A, Baumann S, Krammer PH, Kirchhoff S.
FLICE-inhibitory proteins: regulators of death receptormediated apoptosis. Mol Cell Biol 2001;21:8247–54.
49. Ivanov VN, Hei TK. Sodium arsenite accelerates
TRAIL-mediated apoptosis in melanoma cells through
up-regulation of TRAIL-R1/R2 surface levels and downregulation of cFLIP expression. Exp Cell Res 2006;312:
4120–38.

1165

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (3). February 1, 2009

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst January 27, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-2917

Suppression of cFLIP by Lupeol, a Dietary Triterpene, Is
Sufficient to Overcome Resistance to TRAIL-Mediated
Apoptosis in Chemoresistant Human Pancreatic Cancer
Cells
Imtiyaz Murtaza, Mohammad Saleem, Vaqar Mustafa Adhami, et al.
Cancer Res 2009;69:1156-1165. Published OnlineFirst January 27, 2009.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-2917

This article cites 49 articles, 7 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/69/3/1156.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 6 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/69/3/1156.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

