Oncotarget, December, Vol.3, No 12

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Endotrophin – Linking Obesity with Aggressive Tumor Growth
Jiyoung Park and Philipp E. Scherer
Commentary on: Adipocyte-derived endotrophin promotes malignant tumor progression

Collagen VI (COL6, encoded by the COL6A1,
COL6A2, and COL6A3 genes) is an extracellular matrix
protein that forms a microfilamentous network in various
connective tissues, including skeletal muscle, cartilage,
skin and adipose tissue. Among the various tissues,
adipose tissue is by far the most abundant source of COL6
microfilaments [1]. Clinically, mutations in COL6 develop
mild muscle myopathies (such as Bethlem myopathy and
Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy), with symptoms
of muscle weakness and apoptosis combined with joint
hyperlaxity and contractures [2]. A genetically engineered
mouse model, deficient in COL6 microfilament formation
and secretion, has been widely used to investigate the roles
of COL6 under physiological and pathological conditions.
COL6 deficiency in mice leads to the development of
muscle dystrophies resembling Bethlem myopathy in
man [3]. In the area of tumor biology, COL6 has been
identified as a tumor-promoting factor abundantly
produced and released from adipocytes [4]. Subsequent
analysis of the COL6 functional null mice bred into the
murine MMTV-PyMT mammary tumor model (mouse
mammary tumor virus-polyoma middle T antigen)
showed a significant attenuation of early onset mammary
tumor progression [5]. Specifically, the carboxyl-terminal
domain of the COL6A3 chain is massively upregulated
in the malignant tumors of human patients compared to
the remaining part of COL6A3 chain [5]. We recently
followed up on this phenomenon and demonstrated that
the cleavage product from the carboxyl-terminus of the
COL6A3 chain (that we refer to as endotrophin) accounts
for the tumor-promoting effects associated with COL6 [6].
Ectopic expression of the isolated endotrophin fragment
within the tumor microenvironment of MMTV-PyMT
mice drives an increase of both primary tumor growth
and pulmonary metastasis through an enhancement of the
expansion of the tumor stroma [6]. Additional prominent
effects associated with endotrophin overexpression in the
tumor stroma include an increase in fibrosis, angiogenesis
and inflammation through increased fibrogenesis, a
stimulation of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)
and chemokine activities; these are well-established
stromal phenomena that support aggressive traits of
tumors (Figure 1). Indeed, neutralizing monoclonal
antibodies against endotrophin suppress tumor growth and
reduce metastatic growth in MMTV-PyMT mice [6]. EMT
of tumors conveys metastatic traits and multiple drug
resistances to cancer cells. Since endotrophin is a potent
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

stimulator of EMT, it suggests that the neutralization of
endotrophin may lend itself to enhance chemo-sensitivity
in combination with conventional therapeutic regimens,
though this remains to be directly shown.
Adipose tissue is a crucial organ for the maintenance
of whole body energy homeostasis, and also a major
source of COL6. We have therefore explored the roles
of COL6 in metabolic homeostasis even without a tumor
burden. Metabolic characterization of the COL6A1
functional null mice bred with a genetically obese animal
model, the ob/ob mouse, reveals that COL6 deficiency
improves systemic metabolic profiles, including enhanced
insulin sensitivity and glucose metabolism. This is likely
due to a number of changes, but the reduced fibrotic stress
commonly seen in hypertrophic adipose tissues in obese
status is likely to be a contributing factor [7]. COL6 is
upregulated in obese and dysfunctional adipose tissue, and
anti-diabetic treatment regimens lead to a suppression of
COL6 expression. Tumor lesions in the microenvironment
lead to a further local enrichment of endotrophin, either
through stimulation of syntheses and/or cleavage
of endotrophin from the mature protein, or through
an induction of production within the tumor lesions
themselves. As such, endotrophin is likely to constitute
one of the risk factors that mediate the more aggressive
lesion growth and worse prognosis seen in patients with
higher body mass indices (BMIs). More importantly, it
is likely that endotrophin plays a pro-fibrotic and proinflammatory role in a number of additional tissues,
even in the absence of a tumor challenge. This may be
relevant for adipose tissues, liver and kidney, all tissues
that are prone to fibrosis and chronic inflammation
under pathological conditions. Therefore, inhibition of
endotrophin activity under such pathological conditions is
likely to be associated with clinical improvements.
Two important issues remain to be resolved.
These include the question as to which matrix
metalloproteinase(s) (MMPs) specifically cleave
endotrophin from its parent COL6A3 chain. Furthermore,
a second important question is which cell surface proteins
act as receptors to mediate endotrophin action, leading
to downstream signaling events triggering the enhanced
TGFβ signaling and the chemokine action. Answers
to these questions will have a significant impact on our
understanding of the significance of endotrophin under
normal and pathological conditions.

1487

Oncotarget 2012; 3: 1487-1488

6.	

Park J and Scherer PE. J Clin Invest. 2012; 122:4243-4256.

7.	

Khan T et al. Mol Cell Biol. 2009; 29:1575-1591.

Figure 1: Endotrophin-mediated changes in the tumor
stroma. Adipocyte-derived COL6A3 levels are increased during
obesity. Endotrophin is cleaved from the COL6A3 parent chain
within the tumor microenvironment. Endotrophin potentiates
TGFβ-dependent epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)
and fibrosis and displays chemoattractive activity, recruiting
endothelial cells and macrophages, leading to enhanced
angiogenesis and chronic inflammation. All of these activities
induced by endotrophin synergistically lead to enhanced tumor
growth and metastasis. Either the endotrophin neutralizing
monoclonal antibody (10B6) or the TGFβ antagonizing
monoclonal antibody (1D11) differentially attenuate a subset of
endotrophin effects. EndoRc: endotrophin receptor.

Jiyoung Park: Touchstone Diabetes Center, Department of
Internal Medicine, The University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA.
Philipp E. Scherer: Touchstone Diabetes Center,
Departments of Internal Medicine, Cell Biology and
Simmons Cancer center, The University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA.
Correspondence: Philipp E. Scherer, email Philipp.Scherer@
utsouthwestern.edu
Received: December 19, 2012;
Published: December 20, 2012;

REFERENCES
1.	

Scherer PE et al. Nat Biotechnol. 1998; 16:581-586.

2.	

Bonnemann CG. Nat Rev Neurol. 2011; 7:379-390.

3.	

Bonaldo P et al. Hum Mol Genet. 1998; 7:2135-2140.

4.	

Lyengar P et al. Oncogene. 2003; 22:6408-6423.

5.	

Lyengar P et al. J Clin Invest. 2005; 115:1163-1176.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1488

Oncotarget 2012; 3: 1487-1488

