Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 32

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Review

Targeting microenvironment in cancer therapeutics
Matthew Martin1, Han Wei1 and Tao Lu1,2,3
1

Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA

2

Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA

3

Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA

Correspondence to: Tao Lu, email: lut@iupui.edu
Keywords: cancer, microenvironment, cytokine, transcription factor
Received: March 13, 2016	

Accepted: May 19, 2016	

Published: June 05, 2016

ABSTRACT
During development of a novel treatment for cancer patients, the tumor
microenvironment and its interaction with the tumor cells must be considered. Aspects
such as the extracellular matrix (ECM), the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT),
secreted factors, cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs), the host immune response,
and tumor-associated microphages (TAM) are critical for cancer progression and
metastasis. Additionally, signaling pathways such as the nuclear factor κB (NFκB), transforming growth factor β (TGFβ), and tumor necrosis factor α (TNFα) can
promote further cytokine release in the tumor environment, and impact tumor
progression greatly. Importantly, cytokine overexpression has been linked to drug
resistance in cancers and is therefore an attractive target for combinational therapies.
Specific inhibitors of cytokines involved in signaling between tumor cells and the
microenvironment have not been studied in depth and have great potential for use
in personalized medicines. Together, the interactions between the microenvironment
and tumors are critical for tumor growth and promotion and should be taken into
serious consideration for future novel therapeutic approaches.

INTRODUCTION

is especially important in tumor formation and invasion
as cells respond and adapt to the local microenvironment
to progress to malignancy. This involves both deregulated
proliferation of tumor cells and modification of
the immediate environment to favor cell survival,
angiogenesis, and spread of the tumor. Evidence has
shown that aberrant expression of factors that regulate
the ECM can lead to increased tumor formation. For
instance, decrease of secreted protein acidic and rich in
cysteine (SPARC), a protein involved in regulation of
morphogenesis and cellular differentiation, led to increase
of tumor formation of implanted tumors [3]. Inhibition of
chemokines such as growth-regulated α protein (GROα,
also named CXCL1) can also increase cell proliferation
in melanoma, leading to enhanced tumor growth [4].
Moreover, overexpression of cytokines such as tumor
necrosis factor α (TNFα), a cytokine involved in several
signaling pathways and in inflammation, could lead to
increased tumor formation in nude mice [5]. Factors that
can degrade the ECM also facilitate tumor formation
and invasion. For instance, matrix metalloproteinases

The cells surrounding a tumor make up a molecular
microenvironment known as the stroma. The stroma can
be influenced and can in turn influence the growth and
formation of tumors and new metastases. Origination of
this microenvironment can be linked to the “seed and soil”
concept with the original cancer cells, termed “seeds,” and
the microenvironment, termed “soil.” The cancer cells
grow in new metastases just as “seeds” can grow in new
areas of “soil” [1]. Like soil in nature, the components in
the microenvironment are very complex. It includes the
extracellular matrix (ECM), a variety of secreted factors,
as well as different types of cells.
ECM plays a critical role in the tumor
microenvironment. In order to form a tumor, cancer cells
must form attachments to the ECM and communicate
with other cells, such as tumor-associated neutrophils,
cancer-associated fibroblasts, and myeloid-derived
suppressor cells. Then, the tumor cells can colonize the
microenvironment and form a metastasis [2]. The ECM
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

52575

Oncotarget

(MMPs) have been implicated in degradation of basement
membranes and ECM, facilitating tumor cell invasion and
metastasis as well as promoting cell proliferation, survival,
and angiogenesis [6].
Besides the ECM, another important aspect that
can lead to cancer formation and invasion is a process
termed epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) of cancer
cells. EMT can increase cancer cells’ migratory capacity,
invasiveness, resistance to apoptosis, and the production
of ECM components [7]. Many factors originating in the
microenvironment can help to induce EMT, including
epidermal growth factor (EGF), platelet-derived growth
factor (PDGF), and transforming growth factor β (TGFβ).
These factors may functionally activate EMT-inducing
transcription factors, such as Snail (SNAI1), Slug
(SNAI2), zinc finger E-box binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1),
Twist family BHLH Transcription Factor 1 (Twist),
Goosecoid (GSC), and forkhead box protein C2 (FOXC2)
in cancer cells [8-13]. For example, TGFβ has been
implicated in the repression of e-cadherin, leading to the
increased invasiveness of tumor cells and the activation
of Sma and Mad (SMAD) and mitogen-activated protein
kinase (MAPK) signaling pathways, which all can
contribute to the induction of EMT [14]. In addition to
different cytokines and transcription factors, disruption
of cell-cell adhesion molecules such as cadherins and
the cell-ECM adhesions mediated by integrins can also
contribute to EMT, resulting in tumor invasion [15, 16].
“Invasion” of cancer and “metastasis formation”
involve the steps of intravasation (the invasion of cancer
cells through the basal membrane into a blood or lymphatic
vessel), extravasation (transport through the circulation),
formation of micrometastases, and colonization [8, 15].
Both “Invasion” and “metastatic formation” require a
specific microenvironment. “Invasion” is affected by the
microenvironment in many ways. Activation of nearby
cells in the stroma including fibroblasts, endothelial
cells and macrophages can lead to reorganization of the
ECM and release of growth factors, therefore promoting
tumor growth [17-19]. On the other hand, even though
“metastatic formation” is very heterogeneous and adaptive
to diverse molecular and unhospitable microenvironments,
it can still be facilitated by signaling of cells and other
factors of the cancer microenvironment [20]. Macrophages
in the microenvironment can promote invasion of cancer
cells by producing EGF. Tumor-associated macrophages
(TAMs) gather around blood vessels and create gradients
of EGF within the tumor environment that attract tumor
cells towards blood vessels and promote intravasation
[21].
In addition to ECM, EMT, and the different factors
described above, non-cancerous cells also comprise a
major part of the tumor environment that can signal
and be signaled by released chemokines and cytokines.
For instance, the work of Luis Parada showed that mice
with neurofibromatosis type 1 with only a loss of Nf1
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

heterozygosity in Schwann cells were unable to form
neurofibroma, but that Nf1 haploinsufficiency in a second
type of cell - mast cells, was required for tumor formation.
A separate cell-signaling ligand, stem cell growth factor
(SGF), which binds to cKIT, a SCF receptor, was also
needed for mast cell recruitment for tumor formation [22].
In short, the “soil” made up of the proteins, growth
factors, and other non-tumor cells is a crucial part of
tumor formation, invasion, and metastasis. It is important
to consider and understand the interplay between the
microenvironment and tumors when pursuing future
therapeutics for cancers. Below, we will discuss some
aspects of this microenvironment in details.

CYTOKINE
SECRETION,
INFLAMMATION, THE HOST IMMUNE
RESPONSE AND TUMOR PROGRESSION
A major part of the tumor microenvironment
are different secreted factors, which play important
roles in inflammation and cell growth. For many years,
inflammation has been known to play a role in tumor
formation. In 1991, Parsonnet et al. reported that after
infecting cells with bacteria, they observed an increased
development of cancer where there was inflammation
[23]. They confirmed that constant cell proliferation in the
stroma of a tumor was associated with an environment rich
in inflammatory cells [23].
The relationship between inflammation and
cancer is deeply intertwined. Inflammation is induced
in tumor through neoplasia-associated angiogenesis and
lymphangiogenesis. This creates an organization of blood
vessels and lymphatics where neoplastic cells can interact
with other mesenchymal, hematopoietic, lymphoid cells,
and the ECM. Importantly, neoplastic cells themselves
can produce arrays of cytokines and chemokines that
are chemoattractants for other non-cancer cells, such
as granulocytes, mast cells, monocytes/macrophages,
fibroblasts and endothelial cells, all of which are needed
for tumor formation. Besides cytokine release, proteolytic
enzymes such as metalloproteases can also be secreted
through activated fibroblasts and infiltrating inflammatory
cells. Together these released factors can coordinate and
act to recruit cells to the location of tumorigenesis by
remodeling of the ECM. Ultimately, these factors promote
tumor growth, stimulate angiogenesis, induce fibroblast
migration and maturation, and enable metastatic spread
through invasion into other systems.
To date, ample evidence suggests that TAMs aid in
inflammation-mediated infiltration of neoplastic tumors
as well. TAMs can be activated by interleukin-2 (IL2) to go through apoptosis, but also can produce many
angiogenic and lymphogenic growth factors which further
mediate neoplastic progression [24]. Fusion of TAMs and
normal cells has also been found as a way for the tumor
cells and microenvironment to communicate in a cell52576

Oncotarget

cell manner [25]. Chronic overexpression of mediators
of inflammation, such as TNFα and TGFβ produced by
TAMs, have been identified in different types of cancers
[26, 27]. Moreover, cancer stem cells (CSC) are also
mediated by cytokines released by TAMs and can be
selected through overexpression of cytokines identified
through gene arrays [28]. In addition to TAM-mediated
cytokine release, recruitment of inflammatory cells to the
tumor microenvironment is also influenced by hypoxic
conditions in the tumor. For instance, hypoxic conditions
cause hypoxia-sensitive genes to be expressed in tumor
cells, resulting in the recruitment of inflammatory cells
such as macrophages and granulocytes to the tumor
microenvironment [29, 30], which will in turn contribute
to the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS),
leading to the activation of the nuclear factor κB (NF-κB)
pathway and subsequent secretion of TNFα and other proinflammatory cytokines to promote cell proliferation [31].
The host immune response to a tumor greatly
impacts the tumor microenvironment and the latter can
in turn attenuate the immune response. These processes
are extremely interconnected. In particular, tumor cells
and the tumor microenvironment can contribute to the
evasion and suppression of the host immune response.
Inflammatory cells infiltrate tumors as part of the immune
response to slow tumor progression. This process is known
as immune surveillance [32]. The immune cells infiltrating
the tumor contain cells from both the adaptive and innate
immune responses. Adaptive immune response cells
include tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs), dendritic
cells, and B cells, while innate immune response cells
include macrophages, polymorphonuclear leukocytes
and a few natural killer cells [33]. Of these, TILs are the
major component of immune infiltrates in tumors. These
cells are affected greatly by antigens released in the tumor
microenvironment, resulting in decreased lymphocyte
proliferation, decreased signaling through T cell receptors,
and reduced ability to mediate cytotoxicity of tumor
targets. This collective immune suppressive effort for TILs
allows the tumor to escape destruction by immune systems
[34, 35].
Interestingly, besides the tumor itself and the tumor
environment, one type of T cell, namely the regulatory
T cells (Tregs), also contribute greatly to the immune
suppressive effect. Tregs accumulate and expand in
the tumor microenvironment and produce excessive
interleukin 10 (IL-10) and TGFβ1. Contact-dependent
interactions of IL-10 and TGFβ1 with T cells lead to
decreased proliferation of immune cells and prevent the
adaptive immune response. On the other hand, increased
levels of TGFβ1 also promotes tumor cell proliferation,
leading to increased tumor formation. In addition to the
above functions, increased levels of Tregs also interfere
with the function of anti-tumor effector cells known as
cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs), preventing their function
of signaling the destruction of tumor cells [36].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Collectively, the above evidence suggests complex
interactions between tumor cells, tumor environment, and
the smart escape of tumor cells from the host immune
responses.

CANCER ASSOCIATED FIBROBLASTS
(CAFS)
Researchers have long believed that tumors
are “wounds that do not heal” [37] CAFs are activated
fibroblasts that share similarities with fibroblasts,
including the deposition of ECM. The tumor
microenvironment, including epithelial differentiation,
inflammation, and wound healing [38, 39] promotes tumor
growth, angiogenesis, inflammation, and metastasis by
various mechanisms [40]. Different cellular origins and
tumor-derived factors shape the phenotype of CAFs and
contribute to their appearance as a heterogeneous cell
population with distinct subtypes. The activation factor
of CAFs might vary. Several activation factors have
been frequently reported in the stromal fibroblasts of
solid tumors, including α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA),
fibroblast-specific protein, PDGF receptors-β and
fibroblast activation protein (FAP) [41-43].
The role of CAFs in tumor progression is multifaceted as they can either inhibit or promote malignant
growth [44]. In the early stages of tumor progression,
CAFs function as repressors by facilitating the formation
of gap junctions between activated fibroblasts and
leading to contact inhibition on cancer cells. However,
at a later stage, CAFs become activated by several
tumor-secreted factors, such as TGFβ1, PDGFα/β, basic
fibroblast growth factor (b-FGF), or interleukin 6 (IL-6)
[44], resulting in the promotion of both tumor growth
and progression [44]. However, what exactly may cause
the CAFs’ transition from “tumor suppressor” to “tumor
promoter” during tumor progress is still not completely
clear. Recently, Liu lab reported that the activity of
Notch1 signaling pathway negatively regulates tumor
growth phenotype in CAFs [45]. In a skin melanoma
mouse model, Liu’s group reported that CAF carrying
elevated Notch1 activity significantly inhibited melanoma
growth and invasion, while CAFs with null Notch1
promoted melanoma invasion [45]. The role of CAFs
in cancer progression expands a wide range, including
ECM remodeling, secretion of soluble factors, regulation
of motility and stemness, tumor metabolism remodeling,
and preparation of metastatic niche. CAFs affect tumor
cell proliferation through growth factors, hormones, and
cytokines [44]. For instance, CAFs from hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) (H-CAFs) promoted the growth of
HCC and correlated positively with tumor size. The
concentration of hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) secreted
in the conditioned medium of H-CAFs was higher than
that from normal skin fibroblasts (NSFs). Importantly,
anti-HGF significantly reduced the proliferation52577

Oncotarget

promoting capability of H-CAFs [46]. This example
inarguably supports the promoting role of H-CAFs related
microenvironment in HCC tumor growth and therapy.

TRANSCRIPTION
FACTORS
MICROENVIRONMENT

environment, indicating the importance of understanding
the tumor cell heterogeneity [50]. For instance, in
healthy tissue, the stroma functions as the main barrier
against tumorigenesis. However, in the presence of
the tumor, the stroma converts the environment to
support cancer progression. Researchers noticed that the
microenvironment could affect tumor vasculature, which
serves as a barrier to optimal drug delivery [51]. A study
showed that cytoreduction (referring to reducing the
number of cancer cells) of the stroma through enzymatic
destruction of hyaluronan, could reduce interstitial
pressure and improve vessel patency and flow. This would
lead to drug delivery improvement, as indicated by the
increased efficacy of standard-of-care chemotherapy when
combined with hyaluronan depletion in an animal model
of pancreatic cancer (PC) [52]. To date, scientists have
identified some critical molecular signaling pathways
that are involved in the soluble factor-mediated drug
resistance. One example involves stromal cell-derived
factor 1 (SDF1) and its membrane-bound receptor,
chemokine (C-X-C motif) receptor 4 (CXCR4). In chronic
lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) cells, SDF1 produced
by stromal cells can interact with CXCR4 and activate
extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2) and
Akt (also known as protein kinase B (PKB)) pathways,
leading to anti-apoptotic responses and promoting tumor
cell survival [53, 54]. Moreover, SDF1-mediated CXCR4
activation induces resistance to chemotherapy drug
Cytarabine, by downregulating microRNA let-7a and
promoting transcriptional activation of Myc and BCL2like 1 isoform 1 (BCL-xL) in acute myeloid leukemia
(AML) cells [55]. In human colon cancer, CXCR4
is overexpressed in the chemoresistant tumor cells.
Stromal cells from lymph nodes promote resistance to
5-fluorouracil and oxaliplatin through a SDF1/CXCR4
dependent mechanism [56].

AND

Researchers recently noticed that the transcription
factor, the NF-κB plays a central role to link the
inflammatory state and colon cancer. In addition to NF-κB
stimulating the proliferation of tumor cells and enhancing
their survival through the regulation of anti-apoptotic
genes [47], an important function of NF-κB is regulating
the expression of various cytokines and growth factors
which contribute the tumor promoting microenvironment,
resulting in tumor progression. Interestingly, different
types of post-translational modifications can regulate
NF-κB activity, including methylation, phosphorylation,
ubiquitination, and acetylation. Recent evidence from our
laboratory indicates that NF-κB can be phosphorylated
at multiple sites (S316, S529 and S536) in response to
interleukin 1β (IL-1β) treatment. These three sites either
individually or cooperatively, regulated the secretion of
distinct groups of NF-κB-dependent cytokines and growth
factors, leading to an autocrine loop that in turn further
activated NF-κB and promoter colon cancer progression
[48].
Besides the posttranslational modification of NF-κB
itself, novel activators of NF-κB, such as the transcription
factor Y-box protein 1 (YBX1) is highly expressed
in many cancers and is an excellent marker for cancer.
YBX1 was recently investigated by our lab, and we found
that overexpression of YBX1 is connected to activation
of NF-κB. This leads to the secretion of a group of proinflammatory cytokines such as TNFα and TGFβ, which
in turn activates the expression of genes encoding other
inflammatory cytokines, cell adhesion molecules, and cell
survival proteins. This expression leads to the accelerated
colon cancer progression [49]. We further found that
YBX1 can be activated through phosphorylation on its
S165 residue. Mutation of S165-A (alanine) on YBX1 led
to decreased cytokine and chemokine secretion, as well
as reduced cell growth and tumorigenic ability in colon
cancer cells [49].

PERSPECTIVES
Targeting cytokines
therapeutically

growth

factors

As seen in Figure 1, cancer is regulated by much
more than just the cells of the tumor. Because of this,
the microenvironment’s effect on tumor growth and
survival must be considered. Instead of a single tumor
cell, it could be more beneficial to specifically target
the pro-tumorigenic factors supplied by innate immune
cells during chronic inflammation, such as treatment of
colitis-associated colon cancer (CAC). Colon cancer
is one of the leading causes of cancer-related mortality
in US. The limited success achieved by only targeting
tumor cells highlights the importance of understanding
the role of the tumor microenvironment and its precise

TUMOR MICROENVIRONMENT INDUCES
DRUG RESISTANCE
The cytokines in the microenvironment not only
can contribute to tumor growth, invasion, and metastasis,
but in some situations they also drive the development of
drug resistance. Resistance of anti-cancer drugs is a major
cause of treatment failure in cancer. Recent studies on
therapeutic resistance mechanisms have been conferred
largely by alterations not in the tumor cells, but in their
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

or

52578

Oncotarget

Targeting the host immune system therapeutically

contribution to carcinogenesis. Inflammation, especially
chronic inflammation, is a critical factor for colon tumor
microenvironment. Clinical studies have proven that
long-term use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
by targeting cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) reduces the risk
of colon cancer by 40-50% [57]. Furthermore, colitis or
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is a key predisposing
factor for colon cancer [47].
Though inhibition of cytokines or growth factors
holds great therapeutic potentials, there are few federal
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved examples.
A wonderful clinical example is the application of
Sultuximab, an anti-IL-6 in the treatment of smoldering
multiple myeloma [58]. Additionally, Bevacizumab, an
effective anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)
antibody, has been successfully used in colon cancer
treatment [59]. The underdevelopment of anti-cytokine
or growth factors therapeutics potentially opens up more
possibilities for the development of new therapeutics
along this line. Furthermore, use of a cytokine inhibitor
and cytokine receptor inhibitor in a combinatorial therapy
could potentially prove more effective than a single
therapeutic.

As we described above, since immune evasion by
cancer cells is important for the progression of tumors [60,
61], when considering cancer therapeutics, it is important
to think about the strategy of re-activating the immune
system to recognize and kill tumor cells.
For instance, Sipuleucel-T, manufactured by
the Dendreon Corporation, is a cell-based cancer
immunotherapy for prostate cancer. It consists of
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) that
are fused with a prostatic acid phosphatase (PAP).
Sipuleucel-T acts to stimulate antitumor T-cell response
in prostate tumor cells containing PAP [62]. Another
immunotherapeutic is ipilimumab, which is a monoclonal
antibody that works to activate the immune system by
targeting CTLA-4, a protein receptor that downregulates
the immune responses of CTLs. Ipilimumab turns off this
inhibitory mechanism by CTLA -4, allowing CTLs to
function [62].
A recent hot topic in therapeutics for the immune
system is the programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1)/
programmed death 1 (PD1) axis. PD1 is an immune
inhibitory receptor expressed on several immune cells,

Figure 1: General model of tumor and microenvironment interactions. Non cancer cells (such as CAFs, TAMs, Tregs, TILs),

secreted factors (such as cytokines, chemokines, growth factors etc.), proteins (such as MMPs), transcription factors, and the ECM and
EMT process are all involved in the interaction between tumor microenvironment with tumor cells. This complicated interaction can be the
novel target for anti-cancer therapy in the future.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

52579

Oncotarget

particularly CTLs. The interaction of PD-L1 with PD-1
inhibits T-cell activation and cytokine production. In
normal tissue, the PD-L1/PD1 ligation is critically
important in maintaining homeostasis of immune
response to prevent autoimmunity during infection or
inflammation. However, in the tumor microenvironment,
their interaction could turn off the CTLs and in turn lead
to the immune escape of tumor cells. Consequently,
disruption of the PD-L1/PD1 axis by inhibitors will boost
the immune response against cancer. Recently, many
therapeutics targeting the PD-L1/PD-1 axis were used in
Phase I, II, and III clinical trials for a variety of cancers.
These include nivolumab, pembrolizumab, which are
PD-1 inhibitors, and durvalumab, avelumab as well as
atezolizumab, which are PD-L1 inhibitors. All of these
target the PD-L1/PD1 axis [63]. The response rate of
patients to the therapeutics were highly variable, ranging
from 80% with pembrolizumab in advanced Merkel cell
carcinoma (MCC), a rare type of skin cancer, to 12%
with durvalumab in recurrent/metastatic squamous cell
carcinoma of head and neck (SCCHN). While some
therapeutics were not very effective in clinical trials,
almost all tested therapeutic approaches were a single
therapeutic as opposed to combinatorial therapies. To
date, few combinatorial therapies involving PD-L1/PD1
axis have been tried. Theoretically, combinations of PD-1
or PD-L1 inhibitors with other therapeutic approaches
could potentially provide a more effective therapeutic
strategy for patients. It won’t be a huge surprise to see
more exciting work coming out along this line of research
in the near future.

to drug delivery [64]. Understanding and altering stromal
composition or function will definitely benefit the patients.
An additional consideration is the potential offtarget effect. In the case of cytokines such as TGFβ or
TNFα, the ubiquitousness of the cytokines may result in
unforeseen off-target effects when targeting them with
therapeutics [65]. For instance in Feyen et al.’s work
TNFα inhibitors were not selective simply for TNFα, but
could target many other proteins leading to unforeseen
complications for patients. Since many cytokines are
involved in several different signaling pathways such
as the NF-κB pathway and MAPK pathways, targeting
the cytokine itself can cause issues as it will change
signaling in pathways not intended to be targeted. To be
truly selective in our targeting of cancer cells, we must
develop and use therapeutics that are more specific to
what is involved between a tumor microenvironment
and the tumor itself, but not normal cells. Additionally,
changes in the tumor microenvironment can contribute
to development of resistance, preventing rejection of the
tumor by the immune system. Changes in the balance of
cytokines such as VEGF, TGFβ, IL-4, IL-12 and others
can actively suppress dendritic cell (DC) maturation which
dampens the antigen presenting function of DCs, which
then contributes to immune tolerance [66]. These are all
the factors that we must consider in terms of developing
novel anti-microenvironment therapies.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Ms. Lisa King at the Department of
Pharmacology and Toxicology at Indiana University
School of Medicine for her professional help with editing
this review.

Challenges ahead
Despite the success in targeting non-tumor cell
compartments in the past, significant challenges still lie
ahead for implementing stromal targeting strategies in
clinical practice. These range from difficulties in assessing
the composition of the stroma in human tumors to correctly
modeling pre-clinically the vast heterogeneity observed
in human tumors and correlating this heterogeneity with
outcome, drug response, and drug resistance [50]. For
example, PC is an aggressive malignant disease with
a 5-year survival rate of less than 5%. PC is one of the
few cancers for which survival has not been improved
substantially over nearly 40 years mainly due to limited
success of target therapies. One reason for failure of
systemic therapies is related to the abundant tumor stromal
contents in the tumor microenvironment. The tumor
microenvironment is constantly changing in composition.
PC stroma is very heterogeneous and comprised of
cellular components, such as fibroblasts, myofibroblasts,
pancreatic stellate cells, immune cells, blood vessels,
ECM, and soluble proteins such as cytokines and growth
factors. PC stroma supports tumor growth and promotes
metastasis and simultaneously serves as a physical barrier
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

FUNDING
This research is supported by grants 4186265 (to
TL) from American Cancer Society; 068058-00002B (to
TL) from V Foundation Kay Yow Cancer Fund; 4486233
(to TL) from Showalter Trust Fund, as well as 2286229 (to
TL) from Biomedical Research Grant.

REFERENCES
1.	

Mathot L and Stenninger J. Behavior of seeds and soil in the
mechanism of metastasis: a deeper understanding. Cancer
Sci. 2012; 103:626-631.

2.	 Nguyen DX, Bos PD and Massagué J. Metastasis: from
dissemination to organ-specific colonization. Nat Rev
52580

Oncotarget

Cancer. 2009; 9:274-284.

in cell shape is required for matrix metalloproteinaseinduced epithelial-mesenchymal transition of mammary
epithelial cells. J Cell Biochem. 2008; 105:25-33.

3.	 Brekken RA, Puolakkainen P, Graves DC, Workman G,
Lubkin SR and Sage EH. Enhanced growth of tumors in
SPARC null mice is associated with changes in the ECM. J
Clin Invest. 2003; 111:487-495.

20.	 Friedl P and Wolf K. Tumour-cell invasion and migration:
diversity and escape mechanisms. Nat Rev Cancer. 2003;
3:362-374.

4.	 Norgauer J, Metzner B and Schraufstätter I. Expression
and growth-promoting function of the IL-8 receptor beta in
human melanoma cells. J Immun. 1996; 156:1132-1137.

21.	 Sahai E. Illuminating the metastatic process. Nat Rev
Cancer. 2007; 7:737-749.

5.	 Tracey K and Lowry S. The role of cytokine mediators in
septic shock. Adv Surg. 1990; 23:21-56.

22.	 Swartz MA, Iida N, Roberts EW, Sangaletti S, Wong
MH, Yull FE, Coussens LM and DeClerck YA. Tumor
microenvironment complexity: emerging roles in cancer
therapy. Cancer Res. 2012; 72:2473-2480.

6.	 Chambers AF and Matrisian LM. Changing views of the
role of matrix metalloproteinases in metastasis. J National
Cancer Inst. 1997; 89:1260-1270.

23.	 Parsonnet J, Friedman GD, Vandersteen DP, Chang Y,
Vogelman JH, Orentreich N and Sibley RK. Helicobacter
pylori infection and the risk of gastric carcinoma. New Eng
J Med. 1991; 325:1127-1131.

7.	 Kalluri R and Neilson EG. Epithelial-mesenchymal
transition and its implications for fibrosis. J Clin Invest.
2003; 112:1776-1784.

24.	 Schoppmann SF, Birner P, Stöckl J, Kalt R, Ullrich R,
Caucig C, Kriehuber E, Nagy K, Alitalo K and Kerjaschki
D. Tumor-associated macrophages express lymphatic
endothelial growth factors and are related to peritumoral
lymphangiogenesis. Am J Pathol. 2002; 161:947-956.

8.	 Thiery JP. Epithelial-mesenchymal transitions in tumour
progression. Nat Rev Cancer. 2002; 2:442-454.
9.	 Jechlinger M, Grünert S and Beug H. Mechanisms in
epithelial plasticity and metastasis: insights from 3D
cultures and expression profiling. J Mamm Gland Biol
Neoplasia. 2002; 7:415-432.

25.	 Powell AE, Anderson EC, Davies PS, Silk AD, Pelz
C, Impey S and Wong MH. Fusion between Intestinal
epithelial cells and macrophages in a cancer context results
in nuclear reprogramming. Cancer Res. 2011; 71:14971505.

10.	 Shi Y and Massagué J. Mechanisms of TGF signaling from
cell membrane to the nucleus. Cell. 2003; 113:685-700.
11.	 Niessen K, Fu Y, Chang L, Hoodless PA, McFadden D
and Karsan A. Slug is a direct Notch target required for
initiation of cardiac cushion cellularization. J Cell Biol.
2008; 182:315-325.

26.	 Moustakas A, Pardali K, Gaal A and Heldin C-H.
Mechanisms of TGF signaling in regulation of cell growth
and differentiation. Immunol Lett. 2002; 82:85-91.

12.	 Medici D, Hay ED and Olsen BR. Snail and Slug promote
epithelial-mesenchymal transition through -catenin-T-cell
factor-4-dependent expression of transforming growth
factor-3. Mol Biol Cell. 2008; 19:4875-4887.

27.	 Torisu H, Ono M, Kiryu H, Furue M, Ohmoto Y, Nakayama
J, Nishioka Y, Sone S and Kuwano M. Macrophage
infiltration correlates with tumor stage and angiogenesis in
human malignant melanoma: Possible involvement of TNF
and IL-1. Int J Cancer. 2000; 85:182-188.

13.	 Kokudo T, Suzuki Y, Yoshimatsu Y, Yamazaki T, Watabe
T and Miyazono K. Snail is required for TGF-induced
endothelial-mesenchymal transition of embryonic stem cellderived endothelial cells. J Cell Sci. 2008; 121:3317-3324.

28.	 Birnie R, Bryce SD, Roome C, Dussupt V, Droop A, Lang
SH, Berry PA, Hyde CF, Lewis JL and Stower MJ. Gene
expression profiling of human prostate cancer stem cells
reveals a pro-inflammatory phenotype and the importance
of extracellular matrix interactions. Genome Biol. 2008;
9:R83.

14.	 Oft M, Heider K-H and Beug H. TGF signaling is necessary
for carcinoma cell invasiveness and metastasis. Curr Biol.
1998; 8:1243-1252.
15.	Yang J and Weinberg RA. Epithelial-mesenchymal
transition: at the crossroads of development and tumor
metastasis. Dev Cell. 2008; 14:818-829.

29.	 Denko NC, Fontana LA, Hudson KM, Sutphin PD,
Raychaudhuri S, Altman R Investigating hypoxic tumor
physiology through gene expression patterns. Oncogene.
2003; 22: 5907-5914.

16.	 Weinberg RA. Twisted epithelial-mesenchymal transition
blocks senescence. Nat Cell Biol. 2008; 10:1021-1023.

30.	 Aller MA, Arias JL, Nava MP, Arias J. Posttraumatic
inflammation is a complex response based on the
pathological expression of the nervous, immune and
endocrine function systems. Exp Biol Med. 2004; 229: 170181.

17.	 Egeblad M, Rasch MG and Weaver VM. Dynamic interplay
between the collagen scaffold and tumor evolution. Curr
Opin Cell Biol. 2010; 22:697-706.
18.	 Yao H, Zeng Z-Z, Fay KS, Veine DM, Staszewski ED,
Morgan M, Wilder-Romans K, Williams TM, Spalding
AC and Ben-Josef E. Role of 5 1 integrin up-regulation
in radiation-induced invasion by human pancreatic cancer
cells. Transl Oncol. 2011; 4:282-292.

31.	 Lluis JM, Buricchi F, Chiarugi P, Morales A, FernandezCheca JC. Dual role of mitochondrial reactive oxygen
species in hypoxia signaling: activation of nuclear factorkappa B via cSRC and oxidant dependent cell death. Cancer
Res. 2007; 67: 7368-7377.

19.	 Nelson CM, Khauv D, Bissell MJ and Radisky DC. Change
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

52581

Oncotarget

32.	 Zitvogel L, Tesniere A, Kroemer G. Cancer
despite immunosurveillance: immunoselection and
immunosubversion. Nat Rev Immunol. 2006; 6: 715-727.

2006; pp. 67-87.
48.	 Wang B, Wei H, Prabhu L, Zhao W, Martin M, Hartley A-V
and Lu T. Role of Novel Serine 316 Phosphorylation of
the p65 Subunit of NF-B in Differential Gene Regulation. J
Biol Chem. 2015; 290:20336-20347.

33.	 Whiteside TL. The Local Tumor Microenvironment. In:
Kaufmann H, Wolchok JD (eds). General Principles of
Tumor Immunotherapy: Basic and Clinical Applications of
Tumor Immunology. Springer. 2007; 145-167.

49.	 Prabhu L, Mundade R, Wang B, Wei H, Hartley A-V,
Martin M, McElyea K, Temm CJ, Sandusky G and Liu Y.
Critical role of phosphorylation of serine 165 of YBX1 on
the activation of NF-B in colon cancer. Oncotarget. 2015;
6:29396-29412. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5768.

34.	 Uzzo RG, Clark PE, Rayman P, Bloom T, Rybicki L,
Novick AC, Bukowski RM, Finke JH. et al. Alterations
in NFkappaB activation in T lymphocytes of patients with
renal cell carcinoma. J. Nat. Cancer Inst. 1999; 91: 718-721.

50.	 Junttila MR and de Sauvage FJ. Influence of tumour microenvironment heterogeneity on therapeutic response. Nature.
2013; 501:346-354.

35.	Kiessling R, Kono K, Petersson M, Wasserman K.
Immunosuppression in human tumor-host interaction:
role of cytokines and alterations in signal-transducing
molecules. Springer Sem. Immunopathol. 1996; 18: 227242.

51.	 Jain RK. Normalization of tumor vasculature: an emerging
concept in antiangiogenic therapy. Science. 2005; 307:5862.

36.	 Ferrone S, Whiteside TL. Tumor microenvironment and
immune escape. Surg. Oncol. Clinics N. Amer. 2007; 16:
755-774.

52.	 Provenzano PP, Cuevas C, Chang AE, Goel VK, Von Hoff
DD and Hingorani SR. Enzymatic targeting of the stroma
ablates physical barriers to treatment of pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma. Cancer Cell. 2012; 21:418-429.

37.	 Dvorak HF. Tumors: wounds that do not heal: similarities
between tumor stroma generation and wound healing. New
Eng J Med. 1986; 315:1650-1659.

53.	 Burger JA, Tsukada N, Burger M, Zvaifler NJ, Dell’Aquila
M and Kipps TJ. Blood-derived nurse-like cells protect
chronic lymphocytic leukemia B cells from spontaneous
apoptosis through stromal cell-derived factor-1. Blood.
2000; 96:2655-2663.

38.	 Chang HY, Sneddon JB, Alizadeh AA, Sood R, West RB,
Montgomery K, Chi J-T, Van De Rijn M, Botstein D and
Brown PO. Gene expression signature of fibroblast serum
response predicts human cancer progression: similarities
between tumors and wounds. PLoS Biol. 2004; 2:e7.

54.	 Nishio M, Endo T, Tsukada N, Ohata J, Kitada S, Reed
JC, Zvaifler NJ and Kipps TJ. Nurselike cells express
BAFF and APRIL, which can promote survival of chronic
lymphocytic leukemia cells via a paracrine pathway distinct
from that of SDF-1. Blood. 2005; 106:1012-1020.

39.	 Cirri P and Chiarugi P. Cancer associated fibroblasts: the
dark side of the coin. Am J Cancer Res. 2011; 1:482-497.
40.	 Madar S, Goldstein I and Rotter V. ‘Cancer associated
fibroblasts’-more than meets the eye. Trends Mol Med.
2013; 19:447-453.

55.	 Chen Y, Hui H, Yang H, Zhao K, Qin Y, Gu C, Wang X,
Lu N and Guo Q. Wogonoside induces cell cycle arrest
and differentiation by affecting expression and subcellular
localization of PLSCR1 in AML cells. Blood. 2013;
121:3682-3691.

41.	 Kalluri R and Zeisberg M. Fibroblasts in cancer. Nat Rev
Cancer. 2006; 6:392-401.
42.	 Micke P. Tumour-stroma interaction: cancer-associated
fibroblasts as novel targets in anti-cancer therapy? Lung
Cancer. 2004; 45:S163-S175.

56.	 Margolin DA, Silinsky J, Grimes C, Spencer N, Aycock M,
Green H, Cordova J, Davis NK, Driscoll T and Li L. Lymph
node stromal cells enhance drug-resistant colon cancer
cell tumor formation through SDF-1/CXCR4 paracrine
signaling. Neoplasia. 2011; 13:874-IN830.

43.	 O’Brien P and O’Connor BF. Seprase: an overview of an
important matrix serine protease. Biochim Biophy Acta.
2008; 1784:1130-1145.

57.	 Smalley WE and DuBois RN. Anti-inflammatory Drugs.
Adv Pharm. 1997; 39:1.

44.	 Cirri P and Chiarugi P. Cancer-associated-fibroblasts and
tumour cells: a diabolic liaison driving cancer progression.
Cancer Metastasis Rev. 2012; 31:195-208.

58.	 Kurzrock R, Voorhees PM, Casper C, Furman RR, Fayad
L, Lonial S, Borghaei H, Jagannath S, Sokol L and Usmani
SZ. A Phase I, Open-Label Study of Siltuximab, an AntiIL-6 Monoclonal Antibody, in Patients with B-cell NonHodgkin Lymphoma, Multiple Myeloma, or Castleman
Disease. Clin Cancer Res. 2013; 19:3659-3670.

45.	 Shao H, Kong R, Ferrari ML, Radtke F, Capobianco AJ, Liu
ZJ. Notch1 Pathway Activity Determines the Regulatory
Role of Cancer-Associated Fibroblasts in Melanoma
Growth and Invasion. PLoS One. 2015. 10.
46.	 Jia C-C, Wang T-T, Liu W, Fu B-S, Hua X, Wang G-Y, Li
T-J, Li X, Wu X-Y and Tai Y. Cancer-associated fibroblasts
from hepatocellular carcinoma promote malignant cell
proliferation by HGF secretion. PLoS One. 2013; 8:e63243.

59.	 Johnson DH, Fehrenbacher L, Novotny WF, Herbst RS,
Nemunaitis JJ, Jablons DM, Langer CJ, DeVore RF,
Gaudreault J and Damico LA. Randomized phase II trial
comparing bevacizumab plus carboplatin and paclitaxel
with carboplatin and paclitaxel alone in previously untreated
locally advanced or metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer. J

47.	 Schottelius AJ and Dinter H. Cytokines, NF-B,
microenvironment, intestinal inflammation and cancer. The
Link Between Inflammation and Cancer. Springer Press.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

52582

Oncotarget

Clin Oncol. 2004; 22:2184-2191.

63.	 Kourie HR, Awada G, Awada AH. Learning from the
“tsunami” of immune checkpoint inhibitors in 2015. Critical
Rev Oncol/Hematol. 2016; 101: 213-220.

60.	 Kaplan DH, Shankaran V, Dighe AS, Stockert E, Aguet
M, Old LJ, Schreiber RD. Demonstration of an interferon
-dependent tumor surveillance system in immunocompetent
mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 1998; 95:7556-61.

64.	 Feig C, Gopinathan A, Neesse A, Chan DS, Cook N and
Tuveson DA. The pancreas cancer microenvironment. Clin
Cancer Res. 2012; 18:4266-4276.

61.	 Shankaran V, Ikeda H, Bruce AT, White JM, Swanson
PE, Old LJ, Schreiber RD. IFN and lymphocytes
prevent primary tumor development and shape tumor
immunogenicity. Nature. 2001; 410:1107-11.

65.	 Feyen O, Lueking A, Kowald A, Stephan C, Meyer HE,
Göbel U and Niehues T. Off-target activity of TNFinhibitors characterized by protein biochips. Anal Bioanal
Chem. 2008; 391:1713-1720.

62.	 Sharma P, Wagner K, Wolchok JD, Allison JP. Novel
cancer immunotherapy agents with survival benefit: recent
successes and next steps. Nat Rev Cancer. 2011; 11:805-12.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

66.	 Zou W. Immunosuppressive networks in the tumour
environment and their therapeutic relevance. Nat Rev
Cancer. 2005; 5:263-274.

52583

Oncotarget

