AACR Centennial Series

A History of Cancer Chemotherapy
Vincent T. DeVita, Jr. and Edward Chu
Yale Cancer Center, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven Connecticut

Abstract

The Early Period of Cancer Drug Development

The use of chemotherapy to treat cancer began at the start of
the 20th century with attempts to narrow the universe of
chemicals that might affect the disease by developing methods
to screen chemicals using transplantable tumors in rodents.
It was, however, four World War II–related programs, and the
effects of drugs that evolved from them, that provided the
impetus to establish in 1955 the national drug development
effort known as the Cancer Chemotherapy National Service
Center. The ability of combination chemotherapy to cure acute
childhood leukemia and advanced Hodgkin’s disease in the
1960s and early 1970s overcame the prevailing pessimism about
the ability of drugs to cure advanced cancers, facilitated the
study of adjuvant chemotherapy, and helped foster the national
cancer program. Today, chemotherapy has changed as important molecular abnormalities are being used to screen for
potential new drugs as well as for targeted treatments. [Cancer
Res 2008;68(21):8643–53]

A selected history and timeline of events related to the
development of cancer chemotherapy is shown in Fig. 1. The first
four decades of the 20th century were primarily devoted to model
development. The major limitations of drug discovery were twofold: first, the development of models that could effectively be used
to reduce the vast repertoire of chemicals to those few that might
have activity against cancer in humans, and second, the access to
clinical facilities to test such agents.
A major breakthrough in model development occurred in the early
1910s when George Clowes of Roswell Park Memorial Institute (RPMI)
in Buffalo, New York, Roswell Park Memorial Institute developed the
first transplantable tumor systems in rodents. This advance allowed
the standardization of model systems and the testing of larger
numbers of chemicals. Significant efforts were subsequently focused
on identifying the ideal model system for cancer drug testing, which
then became a major thrust of research for the next several decades
(5–11). The early model systems that were developed included
Sarcoma 37 (S37), Sarcoma 180 (S180), Walker 256, and Ehrlich’s
ascites tumor, all carcinogen-induced tumors in mice.
It was Murray Shear, at the Office of Cancer Investigations of the
USPHS, a program that was later combined in 1937 with the NIH
Laboratory of Pharmacology to become the National Cancer Institute
(NCI), who in 1935 set up the most organized program that would
became a model for cancer drug screening (7). Shear’s program was
the first to test a broad array of compounds, including natural
products, and had both interinstitutional and international collaborations. He ultimately screened over 3,000 compounds using the
murine S37 as his model system. However, because only two drugs
ever made it to clinical trials and were eventually dropped because of
unacceptable toxicity, the program was dissolved in 1953 just as
discussions began about establishing an organized national effort in
drug screening. This failure was in part due to the antipathy toward
the testing of drugs to treat cancer but also to a lack of information
and experience on how to test potentially toxic chemicals in humans.
The most excitement in this era was generated by the
introduction of hormonal therapy when, in 1939, Charles Huggins,
based on an early observation on the effect of estrogens on breast
cancer made by Beatson in 1896 (12), treated men with prostate
cancer with hormones and was able to show responses by decreases
in acid phosphatase levels (13). Although this exciting piece of work
was an important addition to the systemic treatment of cancer and
earned Huggins a Nobel Prize, it was not considered to be related to
the issue of whether chemicals could ever control cancer.

Introduction
In the early 1900s, the famous German chemist Paul Ehrlich set
about developing drugs to treat infectious diseases. He was the one
who coined the term ‘‘chemotherapy’’ and defined it as the use of
chemicals to treat disease. He was also the first person to document
the effectiveness of animal models to screen a series of chemicals
for their potential activity against diseases, an accomplishment that
had major ramifications for cancer drug development. In 1908, his
use of the rabbit model for syphilis led to the development of
arsenicals to treat this disease. Ehrlich was also interested in drugs
to treat cancer, including aniline dyes and the first primitive
alkylating agents, but apparently was not optimistic about the
chance for success. The laboratory where this work was done had a
sign over the door that read, ‘‘Give up all hope oh ye who enter.’’
Surgery and radiotherapy dominated the field of cancer therapy
into the 1960s until it became clear that cure rates after ever more
radical local treatments had plateaued at about 33% due to the
presence of heretofore-unappreciated micrometastases and new
data showed that combination chemotherapy could cure patients
with various advanced cancers. The latter observation opened up
the opportunity to apply drugs in conjunction with surgery and/or
radiation treatments to deal with the issue of micrometastases,
initially in breast cancer patients, and the field of adjuvant
chemotherapy was born. Combined modality treatment, the
tailoring of each of the three modalities so their antitumor effect
could be maximized with minimal toxicity to normal tissues, then
became standard clinical practice (1–4).

Requests for reprints: Vincent T. DeVita, Jr. or Edward Chu, Yale Cancer Center,
Yale University School of Medicine, 333 Cedar Street, New Haven, CT 06520. Phone:
203-787-1010; Fax: 203-785-2875; E-mail: vincent.devita@yale.edu or chueyale@
yahoo.com.
I2008 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-6611

www.aacrjournals.org

World War II and the Immediate Post-War Period
Although gases were not used on the battlefield in World War II
(WWII), a great deal of research was done on vesicant war gases
(5, 8). The experience in WWI and the effects of an accidental spill
of sulfur mustards on troops from a bombed ship in Bari Harbor,
Italy, in WWII (14, 15) led to the observation that both bone
marrow and lymph nodes were markedly depleted in those men
exposed to the mustard gas. Consequently, Milton Winternitz at

8643

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (21). November 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Yale, who had worked on sulfur mustards in WWI, obtained a
contract to study the chemistry of the mustard compounds from
the U.S. Office of Scientific Research and Development and asked
two prominent Yale pharmacologists, Alfred Gilman and Louis
Goodman, to examine the potential therapeutic effects of these
chemicals. Goodman and Gilman carried out experiments in mice
bearing a transplanted lymphoid tumor with one compound,
nitrogen mustard. When they observed marked regressions, they
convinced their colleague Gustaf Lindskog, a thoracic surgeon, to
administer nitrogen mustard to a patient with non–Hodgkin’s
lymphoma and severe airway obstruction. Marked regression was
observed in this and other lymphoma patients. The initial study
was done in 1943 but because of the secrecy associated with the
war gas program, the results were not published until 1946 (16–18).
The 1943 results set off a burst of support for the synthesis and
testing of several related alkylating compounds, including oral
derivatives such as chlorambucil and ultimately cyclophosphamide.
The use of nitrogen mustard for lymphomas spread rapidly
throughout the United States after the publication of the Lindskog
article in 1946. If one reads the literature of the time, there was a real
sense of excitement that perhaps drugs could cure patients with
cancer (19). Unfortunately, remissions turned out to be brief and
incomplete, and this realization then created an air of pessimism
that pervaded the subsequent literature of the 1950s. A cadre of
academic physicians, led by the famous hematologist William
Dameshek, who having seen apparent success turn to failure could
never again be persuaded that cancer was curable by drugs (20),
became harsh critics of a national drug development program and
the effort to prove that drugs could cure advanced cancers.
Nutritional research before and during WWII had identified a
factor present in green leafy vegetables that was important for bone
marrow function. This factor turned out to be folic acid, which was
first synthesized in 1937. It was later shown that folate deficiency
could produce a bone marrow picture reminiscent of the effects of
nitrogen mustard. Farber, Heinle, and Welch tested folic acid in
leukemia and they came to the conclusion that it actually acce-

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (21). November 1, 2008

lerated leukemia cell growth (21). Although this observation was
later proved to be spurious, Farber collaborated with Harriet Kilte
of Lederle Laboratories to develop a series of folic acid analogues,
which were in fact folate antagonists, and these compounds included
aminopterin and amethopterin, now better known as methotrexate.
Farber subsequently tested these antifolate compounds in children
with leukemia and, in 1948, showed unquestionable remissions (22).
Another WWII-related program was the large-scale screening of
fermentation products by the pharmaceutical industry to isolate
and produce antibiotics to treat wound infections, based on the
observations on penicillin. Antitumor effects were examined for
some agents as well. Penicillin was even initially thought to have
antitumor properties that were never confirmed. The antibiotic,
actinomycin D, came from this program. It had significant antitumor
properties and enjoyed considerable use in pediatric tumors in the
1950s and 1960s (23). This drug established the initial interest in the
search for more active antitumor antibiotics, and this effort yielded
a series of active antitumor antibiotics in common use today.
Finally, a fourth WWII government effort conducted by the Committee on Medical Research of the Office of Scientific Research and
Development, the antimalarial program, served as an organizational
model and a source of talent. The success in the search for synthesis
and production of effective antimalarial compounds in WWII showed
that a nationally organized, well-supported effort, tightly focused on a
disease, could yield positive results. Several of the individuals who
later organized the national effort of the NCI had experience with this
program in WWII and believed the same kind of effort would yield
positive results developing drugs against cancer (14).
The early activity of nitrogen mustard and methotrexate also
provided a great stimulus for the synthesis of other drugs in
addition to alkylating agents and antifols. In 1948, the same year
that Farber showed the antifolate activity of methotrexate in
childhood leukemia, Hitchings and Elion isolated a substance that
inhibited adenine metabolism. By 1951, they had developed two
drugs that would later play an important role in the treatment of
acute leukemia: 6-thioquanine and 6-mercaptopurine (24, 25).

8644

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

History of Cancer Chemotherapy

Figure 2. Dr. Min Chiu Li. A pioneer chemotherapist who developed new
curative chemotherapy for metastatic choriocarcinoma and testicular cancer
(circa 1968).

These thiopurines and other related drugs have been widely used
not only for acute leukemias but also for other diseases, such as
gout and herpes viral infections, and as immunosuppressive agents
in the organ transplant setting. As a result of this seminal work,
these investigators received the Nobel Prize in Medicine in 1988.
It was not until the middle 1950s that Charles Heidelberger and
colleagues at the University of Wisconsin developed a drug that was
aimed at nonhematologic cancers (26). They identified a unique
biochemical feature of rat hepatoma metabolism in that there was
greater uptake and use of uracil relative to normal tissue. Based on
this observation, Heidelberger ‘‘targeted’’ this biochemical pathway
by attaching a fluorine atom to the 5-position of the uracil pyrimidine
base, which resulted in the synthesis of the fluoropyrimidine 5fluorouracil (5-FU). This agent was found to have broad-spectrum

activity against a range of solid tumors and, to this day, remains the
cornerstone for the treatment of colorectal cancer. In retrospect, this
agent represents the very first example of targeted therapy, which
has now become the focus of great attention in current cancer drug
development, although the target in this case was a biochemical
pathway and not a molecular target. These clinical observations
increased the interest in chemotherapy and spurred the emergence of
the R.B. Jackson Laboratories as a major source of inbred mice and
transplantable tumors, which fostered the establishment of several
independent screening programs around the world.
The largest post-war program of drug development before the
NCI became involved was at the Sloan-Kettering Institute (SKI) in
New York. Under the leadership of Cornelius ‘‘Dusty’’ Rhoads, nearly
the entire program and staff of the Chemical Warfare Service,
including the pioneer clinical investigator David Karnofsky, were
assembled into the SKI drug development program. The SKI
investigators used the murine S180 model as their primary screen
because it was moderately sensitive to known compounds and was
easily transplanted with nearly 100% success, whereas in Japan,
Yoshida used an ascites sarcoma model. Additional substantial
programs were established at the Chester Beatty Research Institute
in London under Alexander Haddow, the Children’s Cancer
Research Foundation in Boston under Sydney Farber, and the
Southern Research Institute in Birmingham, Alabama, under
Howard Skipper. At that time, the only institutions that had
facilities devoted to clinical drug testing in cancer patients were the
Delafield Hospital at Columbia University, Sloan Kettering, the
Children’s Cancer Research Foundation, and the Chester Beatty (8).
Rhoads also attracted the interest of the pharmaceutical companies
by offering to screen and evaluate the pharmacology of submitted
compounds under special conditions of confidentiality. This
practice was later adopted into the program of the NCI by Endicott
as the very important ‘‘Commercial Discreet Agreements,’’ without
which the industry would not have been willing to cooperate.
As larger numbers of tumor systems became available, the
central question for drug screeners at that time was which

Figure 1 Continued.

www.aacrjournals.org

8645

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (21). November 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 3. Dr. James Holland directed cooperative group studies in childhood
leukemia (circa 1970).

transplantable tumor was the best at predicting human activity.
Among those available for use was a murine leukemia induced by
a carcinogen, Leukemia 1210 (L1210), described by Lloyd Law at
the NCI (27). This model system was adopted, and its kinetics were
carefully studied by Skipper and colleagues at Southern Research
Institute (28, 29) and later by DeVita and colleagues (30). The L1210
model emerged as the most versatile animal tumor screening
system and was adopted by the NCI as its primary screen. The
research that went into the selection of the best screening system is
reviewed in an article by Goldin and colleagues (5).

The 1950s
The 1950s were a period of undue pessimism due to the
disappointment over the failed promise of nitrogen mustard to
produce durable remissions. This negative view was somewhat
offset by the discovery of corticosteroids, which were to be used in
cancer patients but were also quickly found to produce only brief
responses when used alone (31, 32). Although 5-FU was introduced
into the clinic in 1958, there were few data of substance about the
usefulness of this drug until many years later.
However, the ferment created by the response of acute leukemia
in children to methotrexate, and the availability of new screening
systems, led to the development of the Cancer Chemotherapy
National Service Center (CCNSC) in 1955. Although the story of
how this program was developed is half science and half politics,
without question it changed the face of cancer drug development
in the world and changed the NCI and NIH irrevocably. This
fascinating history is reviewed in detail in the excellent articles by
Zubrod and colleagues (8) and Goldin and colleagues (5). Given the
interest in the childhood leukemia data, the National Advisory
Cancer Council, the predecessor to today’s National Cancer
Advisory Board, convened a panel in 1952 to discuss the subject
of a national program of cancer drug development and concluded
that the state of knowledge was inadequate to permit the design of
a ‘‘crash’’ program. The view that it was premature to develop such
a program was bolstered by another review in 1954 by a committee
of the American Cancer Society, chaired by Alfred Gellhorn, a
prominent academician involved in cancer treatment and Director
of Columbia’s Frances Delafield Cancer Center (33).

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (21). November 1, 2008

During this time and behind the scenes, the activist and
philanthropist Mary Lasker, in touch with Sydney Farber and
impressed with the data in childhood leukemia and the antimalarial
program, had been trying to interest the U.S. Congress in providing
funds for such a program. In 1954, the Senate Appropriations
Committee encouraged the NCI to develop a program and provided
$1 million for cancer drug development. There began a tug of war
over the proper way to use these funds between members of the
academic community who preferred that funds be supplied for
investigator-initiated research and those interested in cancer drug
screening who preferred a centralized national program. Ultimately
frustrated by the slow progress, the Senate Appropriations Committee, at Mary Lasker’s urging, provided $5 million to NCI with a mandate for the establishment of the CCNSC (8). Ken Endicott became its
first director and was to later become the fifth director of NCI. The
entire program was set up between May and October of 1955, a
tribute to Endicott’s organizational skills, and provisions were made
for commercial discreet agreements with the industry, access to clinical testing facilities, and the establishment of contracts with organizations to procure mice and testing sites. In addition, resources were
made available for pharmacology and toxicology testing and drug
production and formulation and ultimately an organized decision
making process called the ‘‘Linear Array with a Decision Network’’
whereby drugs coursing through the system had to meet specific
criteria before passing to the next step toward the clinic (34–36).
As part of the initial development program, the CCNSC set up a
Cancer Chemotherapy National Committee made up of NCI staff
with representation from several national organizations as well,
including the American Cancer Society. This committee then
established a series of panels to further address each of the major
issues facing those involved in cancer drug development. This effort
was the most extensive review of requirements of drug development
ever conducted. One of the panels of the Cancer Chemotherapy
National Committee was the clinical panel directed by Gordon
Zubrod. Out of this effort came the current cooperative group
program starting with the ‘‘Eastern Solid Tumor Group’’ (now the
Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group). Subcommittees of this panel
also addressed the issues of the development of hormone therapy,
statistical analysis, protocol development, and the design and
conduct of clinical trials, many of which are still in use today but
were not in existence in older screening programs like Shear’s at NCI.
This ensured a wider collaborative effort and provided standardized
techniques and a stable source of funds, heretofore unavailable, for
the testing of new approaches to cancer treatment (37, 38).
The CCNSC programs were supported by contracts, not grants. This
was the first time contracts had been used at the NCI or NIH for any
type of program, and it created considerable consternation, which was
to dog this and a later NCI program, the Special Virus Cancer Program
(SVCP), for several decades. The use of contracts became synonymous
with ‘‘targeted research,’’ and was often considered anathema in the
academic world. Regardless of the quality of the work, it was often
discounted if it had been supported by contracts.
In 1966, the CCNSC was incorporated into the NCI structure as
part of the Chemotherapy Program directed by Zubrod. Now named
the Developmental Therapeutics Program, it was more tightly
linked to both the extramural clinical trials program and the NCI
intramural program. This was done over the loud protests of the
Deputy Director for Science at NIH, Robert Berliner, who feared the
contamination of the NIH with a contract-supported research effort.
By 1974, the CCNSC and its successors had grown into an annual
budget of $68 million and was producing almost 3 million mice

8646

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

History of Cancer Chemotherapy

bearing transplantable tumors and screening over 40,000 compounds a year until parts of its effort began to be supplanted by the
pharmaceutical industry as they began to see an emerging market
for cancer drugs that worked.
Still, skepticism surrounded the clinical usefulness of chemotherapy for cancer in the 1950s. A great deal of resources were being
invested in a controversial effort to develop drugs, yet there was no
evidence that drugs could cure or, for that matter, even help cancer
patients in any stage despite some impressive antitumor responses.
The very rare tumor of the placenta, choriocarcinoma, was the first
to be cured. The preliminary results of a unique treatment program
were reported in 1958 (39). The principal architect of the treatment,
using methotrexate in an unusual way for the time, was Min Chiu Li
(Fig. 2). The problem was no one was prepared to believe the results
were significant because the primary site of the tumor was a
parental hybrid tissue, subject, it was thought, to immunologic
control. As a sign of the times, after the first two patients went into
remission, they were presented at NCI Grand Rounds at the Clinical
Center. The subject of the rounds was ‘‘the spontaneous regression
of cancer’’ with the speaker being none other than Gordon Zubrod.
Li was also told that if he persisted in using his radical treatment, he
would have to forfeit his position at the newly opened clinical
center. He persisted and was asked to leave (40, 41). Later, when the
Lasker Prize was given in 1972 to investigators who had participated
in the studies of the cure of gestational choriocarcinoma, Li shared
his part of the prize with the person who discharged him. He later
was to develop the first effective combination chemotherapy programs for metastatic testicular cancer (42).
Clinically, the 1950s ended on the same sour note on which they
began, but eventually the creation of the CCNSC established one of the
most successful government programs ever. Although it was often
criticized (43–46), it gave birth to the multibillion-dollar cancer
pharmaceutical industry. When he was Director of the NCI, Vince
DeVita was often asked how many drugs came out of the program. The
answer is, up until 1990, all of them because the CCNSC provided a
unique central resource, unavailable in medical centers or in industry,

Figure 5. Dr. Emil J. Freireich during his days at NCI (circa 1964).

to test, develop, and produce drugs whatever the source. Drugs that
were not identified in the primary screen itself often were evaluated in
the ancillary tumor systems, and the necessary toxicology and
pharmacology for regulatory approval for many drugs was done under
the auspices of the CCNSC. Clinical studies were then often done
under contract with the NCI or in one of the national cooperative
groups. None of this would have been possible in the academic
medical centers as even today the kinds of resources are not available
at the majority of university cancer programs nor were these studies
considered to be worthy of investigator-initiated research.

The 1960s—The Concept of Cure
In the 1960s, medical oncology did not exist as a clinical
specialty. Those who were given the task of administering
chemotherapy at most medical centers were regarded as underachievers at best. The main issue of the day was whether cancer
drugs caused more harm than good, and talk of curing cancer with
drugs was not considered compatible with sanity. The prevailing
attitude toward the use of chemotherapy can only be described as
hostile. A few vignettes will illustrate this point rather graphically.
At the medical institution where Vince DeVita began his career,
the ‘‘chemotherapist’’ was an endocrinologist, Louis K. Alpert, who
had published one of the early reports on the use of nitrogen
mustard in lymphomas and administered chemotherapy as a
sideline. Because of his stern and pointed visage, and because he
appeared when chemotherapy was to be administered, he was
referred to by the house staff and the faculty as ‘‘Louis the Hawk
and his poisons,’’ a designation he took gracefully. Unfortunately,
poison was the term in general use for anticancer drugs.
The Francis Delafield Hospital, although connected with
Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, was
ultimately denied access to residents and interns from Columbia
because two successive chairmen of medicine, Robert Loeb and
Stanley Bradley, did not want their house staff exposed to cancer
patients receiving these cancer poisons, although their mentor
would have been the distinguished Alfred Gellhorn. As Alfred
Gellhorn recently recounted to the authors,1 the otherwise great
clinician Loeb, a giant in the field at the time, had a blind
spot when it came to caring for cancer patients and testing
1

Figure 4. Dr. Emil Frei (circa 1965).

www.aacrjournals.org

8647

Interview with Dr. Alfred Gellhorn (November 26, 2007).

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (21). November 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

chemotherapy. He was fond of saying to Gellhorn, rather openly,
‘‘Alfred, you belong to the lunatic fringe.’’ The Delafield Hospital
program, the first example of a university-based cancer center, with
many illustrious graduates, including Bernard Weinstein, Elliot
Osserman, John Ultmann, Jim Holland, Paul Marks, Franco Muggia,
Helen Ranney, and Jack Davidson, was closed in 1971. The leaders
at Delafield provided the nidus to create a new cancer center at
Columbia in 1974, after the cancer act in 1971 provided a mandate
to create new university-based cancer centers.
At Yale, the first institution to test chemotherapy in humans in
the modern era, the chemotherapist Paul Calabresi, a distinguished
professor and founding father in the field, was forced to leave
because he was involved in too much early testing of new
anticancer drugs, an exercise as unpopular with the faculty and
house staff at Yale as it was at Columbia.
At the Clinical Center of the NCI, where so many of the early
breakthroughs with chemotherapy occurred, the well-known
hematologist George Brecher, who read all the bone marrow slides
of the leukemic patients, routinely referred to the Leukemia Service
as the ‘‘butcher shop’’ at rounds.
And these are only the stories that can be told. It took plain old
courage to be a chemotherapist in the 1960s and certainly the
courage of the conviction that cancer would eventually succumb to
drugs. Clearly, proof was necessary, and that proof would come in
the form of the cure of patients with childhood acute leukemia and
in adults with advanced Hodgkin’s disease.
By 1960, the L1210 leukemia system had been established as both
the primary screen and the model for treating acute leukemia. Work
on L1210, childhood acute leukemia, and Hodgkin’s disease was
going on in parallel. At the turn of the decade, complete remissions
were occurring in about 25% of children with leukemia, but with

single agents, they were brief, measured in months. Several
institutions were cooperating in protocols with a design that hinted
at cure, not palliation, as an end point. Such studies were in progress
at RPMI in Buffalo under Jim Holland (Fig. 3), St. Jude’s in Memphis
under Don Pinkel, Boston Children’s Cancer Center under Sydney
Farber, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Hospital under Joe Burchenal,
and the Clinical Center program at the NCI under Emil (Tom) Frei
(Fig. 4) and Emil (Jay) Freireich (Fig. 5) (46–49). Gordon Zubrod,
then director of the National Chemotherapy Program, the organizer
of this effort, played a major role in linking the work of Howard
Skipper (Fig. 6) on L1210 at Southern Research Institute with the
clinical programs at the Clinical Center of the NCI and elsewhere.
A major breakthrough occurred for both leukemia and Hodgkin’s
disease with the discovery of the activity of the plant alkaloids from
Vinca rosea at the Eli Lilly Company (50) and discovery of the activity
of ibenzmethyzin in Hodgkin’s disease (soon to be renamed procarbazine) by Brunner and Young (51) and DeVita and colleagues (52).
Furth and Kahn (53) had shown that a single implanted leukemic
cell was sufficient to cause the death of an animal. At Southern
Research, Skipper had suggested that to cure L1210, it was necessary
to eradicate the last leukemia cell because back extrapolations of
survival after treatment suggested that one surviving cell was
sufficient to kill a mouse. He offered the ‘‘Cell Kill’’ hypothesis, which
stated that a given dose of drug killed a constant fraction of tumor
cells not a constant number, and therefore success would depend on
the number of cells present at the beginning of each treatment (54).
This observation changed the existing approach to dosing in the
clinic in favor of more aggressive use of chemotherapy. In L1210, the
schedule of administration of drugs was also proving to be
important. Finally, combinations of drugs, an anathema in medicine
at the time, were superior to single agents. Whereas Skipper tested

Figure 6. Dr. Howard Skipper, a mathematical
biologist. He was the premier mouse expert
at the Southern Research Institute in
Birmingham, Alabama.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (21). November 1, 2008

8648

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

History of Cancer Chemotherapy

Figure 7. Drs. Vincent T. DeVita, C. Gordon
Zubrod, and Paul P. Carbone in 1972 at the
time of the Lasker Award.

these approaches in mice bearing L1210, Frei, Freireich, and others
were doing the same in children with leukemia, taking advantage of
the newly discovered Vinca alkaloid, vincristine, to design the
program known as ‘‘VAMP’’ (vincristine, amethopterin, 6-mercaptopurine, and prednisone). This was the first of a series of cyclically
administered treatment programs that increased the remission rate
and duration in a stepwise fashion to 60% by the end of the decade,
with half of the remissions lasting well beyond the norm, measured
in years and compatible with cure (55, 56).
Astute cancer clinicians were also making treatment easier by
surmounting deficiencies caused by the disease and the toxicity of
chemotherapy using platelet transfusions to prevent bleeding (57)
and the aggressive use of combinations of new and old antibiotics to
identify and treat common and unusual infections to support
patients through the rigors of combination chemotherapy (58, 59).
The results of the important VAMP study were only published in
abstract form at AACR meetings (55, 56), but because of the large
cooperative effort in childhood leukemia, led by Jim Holland, the
precept of curability was quickly tested in large numbers of children
with leukemia, with promising indications of feasibility (60).
Skipper reported the cure of L1210 in the mouse in 1964 (54), the
first curative treatment of a mouse leukemia with drugs, and by
1970, most investigators felt that some fraction of childhood
leukemia was curable (60). Today, the majority of children with
acute lymphocytic leukemia are cured by the aggressive use of
combination chemotherapy programs (61, 62). In the early 1960s,
advanced Hodgkin’s disease was also uniformly fatal and treated
with single alkylating agents. Although remissions were attainable
in up to 25% of patients, as in acute childhood leukemia, they
were brief and usually incomplete. DeVita, Moxley, and Frei took
advantage of the availability of the Vinca alkaloids, and the NCI
data on procarbazine in Hodgkin’s disease, to develop first the
MOMP program (63, 64), which combined nitrogen mustard with
vincristine, methotrexate, and prednisone, and then the MOPP
program (65, 66), which omitted methotrexate and took advantage
2

V.T. DeVita, unpublished observations.

www.aacrjournals.org

of the availability of procarbazine to test the precepts of combination chemotherapy in advanced, previously untreated Hodgkin’s
disease. Because these were adults and their tumor was not derived
from their bone marrow, additional studies were done on the
comparative kinetics of cell production in the marrow in mouse and
man to adjust the novel treatment schedules around the time to
recovery of the bone marrow after exposure to cytotoxic
chemotherapy (30, 67–72). The MOMP and MOPP protocols were
met with fierce resistance both in and out of the NIH Clinical Center
as they were regarded as too big a departure from the norm. Only
the intersession of Tom Frei, who overruled the critics in the
intramural program, permitted the studies to proceed.
The results were startling. The complete remission rate went
from near zero to 80%, and unlike the stepwise increase in remission
duration noted over the decade in childhood acute leukemia, about
60% of patients with advanced Hodgkin’s disease who attained a
complete remission in the original MOPP study never relapsed with
follow-up now into its 40th year.2 The results of MOMP and MOPP
were first presented at meetings of the AACR in 1965 and 1967,
respectively (63, 65), and the MOPP study was published in Annals of
Internal Medicine in 1970 (66). As a measure of the hunger for
treatments that worked, the Annals article remains to this day the
most cited article in the history of the journal. By 1970, advanced
Hodgkin’s disease was also regarded as curable with drugs and
provided the first example of an advanced cancer of a major organ
system in adults cured by chemotherapy. Today, Hodgkin’s disease is
curable in 90% of cases, and chemotherapy is integrated with
radiotherapy for early-stage disease as well.
Patients with what was then called diffuse histiocytic lymphoma
(now diffuse large B-cell lymphoma) were treated with the same
programs as well. In 1975, the NCI investigators reported the cure of
advanced diffuse large B-cell lymphoma with the regimen referred to
as C-MOPP, which substituted cyclophosphamide for nitrogen
mustard (73).
As in leukemia, the results of the MOPP program were quickly
confirmed. In the United States, by 1984, national mortality from
childhood leukemia and Hodgkin’s disease had both fallen by 65% as
the new therapies were quickly adopted. By the end of the 1960s, the

8649

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (21). November 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

missing link of the chemotherapy program had been forged, and it
was now clear that anticancer drugs could cure cancer (74).
In 1972, the Albert and Mary Lasker Prize in Medical Research
was awarded to the group of investigators responsible for showing
proof of principle for the cure of cancer with drugs. The Lasker
Prize for Public Service was given that year to C. Gordon Zubrod
for his pivotal role in organizing the various programs that made
these studies possible (Fig. 7). In 1973, the field of medical oncology
was officially established as a subspecialty of internal medicine
with chemotherapy the tools of its trade.

The 1970s: The Age of Adjuvant Chemotherapy
The concept of cure had a remarkably permissive effect on the use
of chemotherapy in earlier stages of cancers. For example, about 90%
of patients with breast cancer present with locoregional disease. Yet,
the majority will develop recurrences if only the best locoregional
treatment is used. Similar circumstances existed for other solid
tumors, such as colorectal cancers. But a significant fraction of
patients with locoregional disease will also stay free of tumor after
regional treatment alone. If chemotherapy were to be used as an
adjunct to local treatments, many other patients would be
unnecessarily exposed to the potential side effects of drugs, hence
the dilemma. To use chemotherapy as an adjunct to surgery or
radiotherapy, one needed evidence that the relapse rate was likely to
be high in the treated population, the program to be used was
effective in patients with the same tumor type in its advanced stages,
and some confidence that chemotherapy might have the capacity to
cure patients with micrometastases while not being excessively toxic.
The demonstration that combination chemotherapy could cure some
types of advanced cancer gave hope that the same results could be
achieved under ideal circumstances for more common solid tumors.
Moreover, Skipper’s cell kill hypothesis, and the invariable inverse
relation between cell number and curability, suggested that drugs
effective against advanced disease might work better in the adjuvant
situation with only micrometastases to deal with (75–77).
Investigators began to use combination chemotherapy in advanced breast cancer in the late 1960s with some encouraging results
(78). However, the study of these programs in the adjuvant situation
had not been possible. Two programs were designed and field tested
at the Clinical Center of the NCI, L-phenylalanine mustard (L-PAM)
used alone and the CMF program, a combination of cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and 5-flurouracil, specifically designed for use as
adjuvant chemotherapy (79, 80). Both programs were active in
patients with metastatic cancer but the results with CMF, structured
along the lines of the MOPP program as a cyclical chemotherapy
regimen, and tolerable as an outpatient treatment, were, for the time,
impressive. The overall response rate was over 50%, and about 20% of
patients actually attained complete remissions.
The main problem was where to test these treatment regimens
as adjuvants to surgery. Despite the excitement over the new
chemotherapy data, most surgeons in the United States were still
reluctant to participate in clinical trials testing its use postoperatively. The courageous Bernard Fisher was the first choice (Fig. 8).
He and his group, the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast Project
(NSABP), had done an early adjuvant study, sponsored by the
CCNSC, testing the use of the alkylating agent thiotepa postoperatively to kill cancer cells dislodged at surgery (81). They were also
in the process of challenging the status quo, questioning the need
for radical mastectomy and postoperative radiotherapy, and were
in position to test chemotherapy. The late Paul Carbone of NCI

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (21). November 1, 2008

contacted Bernard Fisher, and he agreed to test L-PAM in a
randomized controlled trial. But still no person or institution in the
United States was prepared to test combination chemotherapy as
an adjunct to surgery in breast cancer. Paul Carbone then
contacted Gianni Bonadonna of the Istituto Nazionale Tumori, in
Milan, Italy, about doing the study. Under its director, the surgical
pioneer Umberto Veronesi, the Istituto was treating a large number
of breast cancer patients and, like Fisher, was exploring the use of
lesser operations than the radical mastectomy. Bonadonna came to
the NIH Clinical Center to review the results of the CMF protocol,
which had not yet been published and agreed along with Veronesi
to conduct a randomized controlled trial of a slightly dose-reduced
version of CMF versus no therapy. The U.S. NCI Chemotherapy
program, under Zubrod, paid for the study through a contract with
the Istituto Tumori. This contract also provided for costs of a
permanent statistical center and was the beginning of long time
collaboration between the two National Cancer Centers.
Within 5 years, both studies were complete and the L-PAM study
was reported to much fanfare when published in the New England
Journal of Medicine in 1975, simultaneous with the announcement
that the wives of the President, Betty Ford, and the Vice President,
Happy Rockefeller, were diagnosed with breast cancer (82).
The Bonadonna CMF study was published a year later (83). Both
studies were positive, and the results set off a cascade of adjuvant
studies in breast cancer (84, 85) and other tumor types, including
colorectal cancer, with exciting results that have contributed to the
significant decline in national mortality for breast and colorectal
cancer, which we now are witnessing in 2008. In 1985, Bernard Fisher
was awarded the Albert and Mary Lasker Prize for this work on
breast cancer, particularly for opening up the field of adjuvant
chemotherapy.
In mid-1974, following the work on acute leukemia, lymphomas
and breast cancer, Lawrence Einhorn and his group, building on
the initial work of M.C. Li at Memorial Hospital (42), began a series
of studies that resulted in the cure rate of metastatic testicular
cancer going from about 10% to 60% by 1978 through the use of a
combination of cis-platinum, vinblastine, and bleomycin. Thus,
another solid tumor in adults fell to the use of combination
chemotherapy. Today, chemotherapy is used for all stages of this
tumor and testicular cancer is curable in most patients (86–88).

Figure 8. Dr. Bernard Fisher at magnetic board used to follow all patients in first
NSABP Breast Adjuvant Study (1970).

8650

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

History of Cancer Chemotherapy

Table 1. Primary chemotherapy: neoplasms for which
there is an expanding role for primary chemotherapy of
advanced disease
Bladder cancer
Breast cancer
Cervical cancer
Colorectal cancer
Esophageal cancer
Gastric cancer
Head and neck cancer
Nasopharyngeal cancer
Non–small cell lung cancer
Ovarian cancer
Pancreatic cancer
Prostate cancer

Passage of the Cancer Act of 1971 and Beyond
One unanticipated benefit of the report of the curability of
choriocarcinoma, lymphomas, and acute leukemias with combination chemotherapy was the passage of the National Cancer Act in
1971. One of the patients with non–Hodgkin’s lymphoma initially
treated with the C-MOPP program at the NCI Clinical Center in
1969 was a lobbyist for the American Cancer Society who had been
hired at the request of Mary Lasker to be her eyes and ears on Capital
Hill. His complete response to combination chemotherapy caught
Mary Lasker’s attention, and she became convinced that the data on
the lymphomas and leukemias were the missing link in treatment
needed to eradicate cancer (73, 89). What followed was an extraordinary series of events that culminated in the passage of the
National Cancer Act of 1971 that launched the nation’s evercontroversial ‘‘war on cancer’’ (90). Those events are a story in itself
too long to recount in this review, but it had a profound effect on the
expansion and development of chemotherapy for the next 4 decades.
Although 85% of the new monies provided for ‘‘the war on
cancer’’ went into investigator-initiated research projects, the
clinical testing of new drugs and new chemotherapy programs were
also markedly expanded. The monies devoted to cooperative
groups alone went from $9 million in 1972 to $119 million in 1980.
Groups like the NSABP were able to provide funds for follow-up of
studies that heretofore had been forced to lie fallow, and many
large-scale studies were done testing novel ways to approach
adjuvant chemotherapy and combined modality therapy that have
contributed to the national decline in mortality from cancer.
With funds available to expand, the Developmental Therapeutics
Program screened more drugs and then developed a new series of
screening systems. In 1975, the mouse L1210 model was abandoned
as the primary screen in favor of a panel of tumors, human
xenografts in nude mice matched to transplanted animal tumors of
the same tissue. The goals were to test, in vivo, the comparative
efficacy of human xenografts and murine transplanted tumors at
predicting anticancer activity in humans. The taxanes had their
antitumor effects identified in this panel. Because of the complexity
and expense of this new screening panel, the number of drugs
screened was diminished from its high of 40,000 per year to 10,000,
but despite the reduction, the change resulted in the same number of
positive leads. In the 1990s, the screening system was again changed
to a panel of 60 human cancer cell lines grown in culture as cell

www.aacrjournals.org

culture systems became more sophisticated, and adjustments could
be made for drugs metabolized to their active form in vivo.
It is still too early to know the full effect of all these changes in the
screening program because the lag time between discovery of
activity and ultimate proof of usefulness is quite long, sometimes
measured in decades. However, something else has happened to
change the landscape of drug development. As information about
the molecular aberrations that occur in cancer cells has become
available, random screening is being replaced by screening against
specific critical molecular targets. As the market for cancer drugs
has grown, so has the willingness of the industry to invest in new
drugs, and discovery and development are now largely in the hands
of a segment of the pharmaceutical industry that did not exist
before the advent of the CCNSC. As a consequence, many new drugs
and new classes of anticancer drugs have been introduced since the
1980s, too many to discuss here, and are now available to clinicians.
The advent of monoclonal antibodies has enhanced the effects of
chemotherapy. Hybridomas were described in 1975, and monoclonal antibodies were proven clinically useful starting in the mid1990s. Although they are not chemotherapy per se, they seem to
work best when they are used in conjunction with chemotherapy,
as is the case for trastuzumab in breast cancer, cetuximab and
bevacizumab in colorectal cancer, and rituximab in non–Hodgkin’s
lymphoma, and each are an integral part of chemotherapy
regimens for these common tumors.
Chemotherapy has, in fact, transitioned to the age of ‘‘targeted
therapy.’’ The story of how we got to the point of identifying many
molecular targets takes us back again to the 1960s to a seemingly
unrelated program—the Special Virus Cancer Program (SVCP). It
was established in 1964 with another $5 million from the Senate
Appropriations Committee, again at the urging of the ubiquitous
and visionary Mary Lasker. It was also supported by research
contracts and was conceived as a crash program to find viruses
reported to be associated with cancer. When it failed to identify
actual viruses, it morphed into a Program of Molecular Biology to
study genes that were coopted by tumor viruses. The SVCP was
often criticized because of the use of research contracts, but work
in this program identified oncogenes, suppressor oncogenes, and
signaling pathways essential for developmental biology itself (91–
94). This work eventually led to the identification of most of the
new drug targets that are currently the focus of cancer drug
development. The technology developed in this program also
facilitated the sequencing of the genome.

8651

Table 2. Adjuvant chemotherapy: neoplasms for which
adjuvant therapy is indicated after surgery with survival
prolongation
Anaplastic astrocytoma
Breast cancer
Colorectal cancer
Cervical cancer
Gastric cancer
Head and neck cancers
Pancreas cancer
Melanoma
Non–small cell lung cancer
Osteogenic sarcoma
Ovarian cancer

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (21). November 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

The first and best example of targeted therapy is the development of the Bcr-Abl tyrosine kinase inhibitor imatinib for the
treatment of chronic myelocytic leukemia (95–98). The translocation known as the Philadelphia chromosome was first identified by
Nowel and Hungerford in 1961 (99), but it has only recently been
possible to design a drug that fits into the ATP-binding site of the
Bcr-Abl protein created by the translocation and inhibits the
function of this aberrant kinase. The management and outcome of
chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) has been drastically altered
as a result. CML may be unique in that a single molecular
abnormality drives the disease, whereas in most cancers there are
multiple abnormalities that must be targeted. Nonetheless, the
results provide proof of principle, much as the early cures of
leukemia and Hodgkin’s disease did, for the therapeutic power of
the knowledge of molecular targets.
Data from the genome sequence also suggested that many of the
abnormalities associated with cancer are due to the abnormal
function of protein kinases, and a major thrust of the current drug
development era has been to develop a series of kinase inhibitors
(94). Several of these small molecules have now been approved by
the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of renal
cell cancer, hepatocellular cancer, and gastrointestinal stromal tumor,
cancers heretofore resistant to standard chemotherapy (95–101).
Clearly, these agents hold significant promise to treat a broad range
of solid tumors and hematologic malignancies. The recent history of
the development of molecular targeted therapies will be covered in
more detail in a subsequent review in this Centennial Series.
Cancer chemotherapy is curative in subsets of patients who
present with advanced disease, including Hodgkin’s and non–
Hodgkin’s lymphoma, acute lymphoblastic and acute myelogenous leukemia, germ cell cancer, small cell lung cancer, ovarian
cancer, and choriocarcinoma. In pediatric patients, the curable
cancers include acute leukemias, Burkitt’s lymphoma, Wilm’s
tumor, and embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma. There is now an
expanding role of chemotherapy to treat a wide range of solid

References
1. Brested JH. The Edwin Smith surgical papyrus.
Translated for The New York Historical Society. Chicago
(IL): University of Chicago Press; 1930.
2. Papac RJ. Origins ofsf cancer therapy. Yale J Biol Med
2001;74:391–8.
3. DeVita VT. The evolution of therapeutic research in
cancer. N Engl J Med 1978;298:907–10.
4. Osler W. The principles and practice of medicine. New
York: D. Appleton and Company; 1893. p. 708.
5. Goldin A, Schepartz SA, Venditti JM, DeVita VT. Historical
development and current strategy of the National Cancer
Institute Drug Development Program. In: Busch H, DeVita
VT, editors. Methods in cancer research, V16 (A). New York:
Academic Press; 1979. p. 165–245.
6. Hirschberg E. Patterns of response of animal tumors
to anticancer agents. Cancer Res 1963;23:521–980.
7. Shear MJ, Hartwell JL, Peters VB, et al. Some aspects of a
joint institutional research program on chemotherapy of
cancer: current laboratory and clinical experiments with
bacterial polysaccharide and with synthetic organic
compounds. In: Moulton FR, editor. Approaches to tumor
chemotherapy. Washington (DC): American Association
for the Advancement of Science; 1947. p. 236–84.
8. Zubrod CG, Schepartz S, Leiter J, Endicott JM,
Carrese LM, Baker CG. The chemotherapy program of
the National Cancer Institute: History, analysis, and
plans. Cancer Chemother. Rep 1966;50:349–540.
9. Zubrod CG, Schepartz SA, Carter SK. Historical back-

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (21). November 1, 2008

tumors as seen in Table 1. Although treatment is not often
curative for these cancers, there has been a significant
improvement in progression-free survival. Moreover, several of
the most active chemotherapy regimens, some of which are
combined with the novel targeted therapies, are being used in the
neoadjuvant setting to reduce the size of the primary tumor to
allow for improved surgical outcome as well as preserve vital
organs. Over the past 10 years, neoadjuvant chemotherapy has
been widely used for anal, bladder, breast, gastroesophageal, rectal
head and neck cancers, and osteogenic and soft tissue sarcomas.
The active chemotherapy regimens for metastatic and locally
advanced disease have now been extended for an increasing
number of more common solid tumors following surgical resection
with curative effect. The list of cancers for which adjuvant
chemotherapy has been established to reduce the incidence of
both local and systemic recurrence and to improve overall survival
is presented in Table 2. With the ever-increasing and rapid
development of active cytotoxic and biological agents, the
expectation is that the list of cancers effectively treated and cured
using combined modalities will continue to expand.
Finally, in 1990, the national incidence and mortality of cancer
began to decline. Mortality has continued to decline each year
since 1990, and in 2005, overall deaths from cancer have declined
despite the larger and older U.S. population. In 2007, the rate of
decline actually doubled. Whereas half of this decline is due to
prevention and early diagnosis, the other half is largely due to
advances in cancer treatment, much of it due to the inclusion of
chemotherapy in most treatment programs.

Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest
No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

Acknowledgments
Received 12/12/2007; revised 1/18/2008; accepted 4/10/2008.

ground for the National Cancer Institute’s drug development thrust. Natl Cancer Inst Monogr 1977;45:7–11.
10. Boyland E. Experiments on the chemotherapy of
cancer. I. The effects of certain antibacterial substances
and related compounds. Biochem J 1938;32:1207–13.
11. Yoshida T. The Yoshida sarcoma, an ascites tumor.
Gann 1949;40:1–20.
12. Beatson GT. On the treatment of inoperable cases of
carcinoma of the mamma: suggestions for a new
method of treatment, with illustrative cases. Lancet
1896;2:104–7;162–165.
13. Huggins C, Hodges CV. Studies on prostatic cancer.
I. The effects of castration, of estrogen and of
androgen injection on serum phosphatase in metastatic carcinoma of the prostate. Cancer Res 1941;1:
293–7.
14. Marshall EKJR. Historical perspectives in chemotherapy. In: Golding A, Hawking IF, editors. Advances
in chemotherapy, vol. 1. New York: Academic Press;
1964. p. 1–8.
15. Krumbhaar EB, Krumbhaar HD. The blood and bone
marrow in yellow gas (mustard gas) poisoning. Changes
produced in bone marrow in fatal cases. J Med Res 1919;
40:497–508.
16. Gilman A. Symposium on advances in pharmacology
resulting from war research: therapeutic applications of
chemical warfare agents. Fed Proc 1946;5:285–292.
17. Goodman LS, Wintrobe MM, Dameshek W, Goodman
MJ, Gilman A, McLennan MT. Nitrogen mustard therapy:
use of methyl-bis (h-chloroethyl) amine hydrochloride

8652

and tris (h-chloroethyl)amine hydrochloride for Hodgkin’s
disease, lymphosarcoma, leukemia, and certain allied and
miscellaneous disorders. JAMA 1946;132:126–32.
18. Gilman A, Philips FS. The biological actions and
therapeutic applications of the h-chloroethylamines and
sulfides. Science 1946;103:409–15.
19. Karnofsky DA, Burchenal JH, Ormsler RA, Corman I,
Rhoads CP. Experimental observations on the use of
nitrogen mustard in the treatment of neoplastic
diseases. In: Moulton FR, editor. Approaches to tumor
chemotherapy. Washington (DC): American Association
for the Advancement of Science; 1947. p. 298–305.
20. Gilman A. The initial clinical trial of nitrogen
mustard. Am J Surg 1963;105:574–8.
21. Farber S. Some observations on the effect of folic
acid antagonists on acute leukemia and other forms of
incurable cancer. Blood 1949;4:160–7.
22. Farber S, Diamond LK, Mercer RD, et al. Temporary
remissions in acute leukemia in children produced by
folic acid antagonist, 4-aminopteroyl-glutamic acid
(aminopterin). N Engl J Med 1948;238:787–93.
23. Pinkel D. Actinomycin D in childhood cancer; a
preliminary report. Pediatrics 1959;23:342–7.
24. Hitchings GH, Elion GB. The chemistry and biochemistry of purine analogs. Ann NY Acad Sci 1954;60:195–9.
25. Elion GB, Singer S, Hitchings GH. Antagonists of
nucleic acid derivatives. VIII. Synergism in combinations
of biochemically related antimetabolites. J Biol Chem
1954;208:477–88.
26. Heidelberger C, Chaudhuari NK, Danenberg P, et al.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

History of Cancer Chemotherapy
Fluorinated pyrimidines. A new class of tumor inhibitory compounds. Nature 1957;179:663–6.
27. Law LW, Dunn TB, Boyle PJ, Miller JH. Observations
on the effect of a folic-acid antagonist on transplantable
lymphoid leukemias in mice. J Natl Cancer Inst 1949;10:
179–92.
28. Skipper HE, Schabel FM, Jr., Mellet LB, et al. Implications of biochemical, cytokinetic, pharmacologic and
toxicologic relationships in the design of optimal
therapeutic schedules. Cancer Chemother Rep 1950;54:
431–50.
29. Skipper HE. Reasons for success and failure in treatment of murine leukemias with the drugs now employed
in treating human leukemias. Cancer Chemother 1978;1:
1–166. Ann Arbor (MI): University Microfilms International.
30. Yankee RA, DeVita VT, Perry S. The cell cycle of
leukemia L1210 cells in vivo . Cancer Res 1967;27:2381–5.
31. Farber S, Schwachman H, Toch R, Downing V,
Kennedy BH, Hyde J. The effect of ACTH in acute
leukemia in childhood. In: Mote JR, editor. Proceedings
of the First Clinical ACTH Conference. New York:
McGraw-Hill-Blakiston; 1950. p. 328–30.
32. Pearson OH, Eliel LP, Rawson RW, Dobriner K, Rhoads
CP. ACTH- and cortisone-induced regression of lymphoid
tumors in man: a preliminary report. Cancer 1949;2:943–5.
33. Gellhorn A, Hirschberg E, editors. Investigation of
diverse systems of cancer chemotherapy screening.
Cancer Res Supp 1955;3:125.
34. Endicott KM. Progress report. Bethesda (MD): Cancer
Chemotherapy National Service Center; 1957. p. 10.
35. Endicott KM. The chemotherapy program. J Nat
Cancer Inst 1959;19:275–93.
36. Cancer Chemotherapy National Service Center specifications for screening chemical agents and natural
products against animal tumors. Cancer Chemother Rep
1959;1:42–64.
37. Armitage P, Schneiderman MA. Statistical problems
in a mass screening program. Ann NY Acad Sci 1958;76:
896–908.
38. DeVita VT, Oliverio VT, Muggia FM, et al. The drug
development and clinical trials programs of the Division
of Cancer Treatment, National Cancer Institute. Cancer
Clin Trials 1979;2:195–216.
39. Li MC, Hertz R, Bergenstal DM. Therapy of choriocarcinoma and related trophoblastic tumors with folic acid
and purine antagonists. N Engl J Med 1958;259:66–74.
40. DeVita VT. Therapeutic research in the National
Cancer Institute. In: Stetten D, Carrigan WT, editors.
NIH: an account of research in its laboratories and
clinics. New York: Academic Press; 1984. p. 500–526.
41. Hertz R, Lewis J, Lipsett MB. Five years experience
with chemotherapy of metastatic trophoblastic disease
in women. Am J Obstet Gynecology 1963;86:808–14.
42. Li MC, Whitmore WF, Goldbey RB, Grabstald H.
Effects of combined drug therapy on metastatic cancer
of the testis. JAMA 1969;174:1291.
43. Biomedical science and its administration. A study of
the National Institutes of Health. Report of Wooldridge
Committee to the President. Washington (DC): U.S.
Government Printing Office; 1955. p. 213.
44. DeVita VT. Contrasting viewpoints on cancer drug
development: the Wooldridge and Richardson reports.
Cancer Treat Rep 1984;68:339–40.
45. Sessoms SM. Review of the Cancer Chemotherapy
National Service Center programs; development and
organization. Cancer Chemother Rep 1960;7:25–8.
46. Burchenal JH. Treatment of leukemias. Seminars in
Hematology 1966;31:122.
47. Zuelzer WW. Implications of long term survival in
acute stem cell leukemia of childhood treated with
composite cyclic therapy. Blood 1964;24:477.
48. Frei E III, Karon M, Levin RH, et al. The effectiveness
of combinations of antileukemic agents in inducing and
maintaining remission in children with acute leukemia.
Blood 1965;26:642–56.
49. Frei E III, Freireich EJ, Gehan E et al. Studies of
sequential and combination antimetabolite therapy in
acute leukemia: 6-mercaptopurine and methotrexate:
from the acute leukemia group. Blood 1961;18:431–54.
50. Johnson TS, Armstrong JG, Gorman M, Burnett JP, Jr.

www.aacrjournals.org

The vinca alkaloids: a new class of oncolytic agents.
Cancer Res 1963;23:1390–427.
51. Brunner KW, Young CS. A methyl hydrazine derivative in Hodgkin’s disease and other malignant lymphomas. Ann Int Med 1967;66:144.
52. DeVita VT, Serpick A, Carbone PP. Preliminary clinical
studies with ibenzmethyzin. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1966;7:
542–6.
53. Furth J, Kahn MC. The transmission of leukemia of
mice with a single cell. Am J Cancer 1937;31:276–82.
54. Skipper HE, Schabel FR, Jr., Wilcox WS. Experimental
evaluation of potential anticancer agents. XII. On the
criteria and kinetics associated with ‘‘curability’’ of experimental leukemia. Cancer Chemother Rep 1964;35:1–111.
55. Freireich EJ, Karon M, Frei E III. Quadruple combination therapy (VAMP) for acute lymphocytic leukemia of
childhood. Proc Am Assoc Cancer Res 1964;5:20.
56. Frei E III. Potential for eliminating leukemic cells in
childhood acute leukemia. Proc Am Assoc Cancer Res
1963;5:20 (abstract).
57. Gaydos LA, Freireich EJ, Mantel N. The quantitative
relation between platelet count and hemorrhage in
patients with acute leukemia. N Engl J Med 1962;266:905–9.
58. Hersh EM, Bodey GP, Nies BA, Freireich EJ. Causes of
death in acute leukemia: a ten-year study of 414 patients
from 1954-1963. JAMA 1965;193:105–9.
59. DeVita VT, Emmer M, Levine A, Jacobs B, Berard C.
Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia: successful diagnosis
and treatment of two patients with associated malignant processes. N Engl J Med 1969;280:287–91.
60. Holland JF. Hopes for tomorrow versus realities of
today: therapy and prognosis in acute lymphocytic
leukemia of childhood. Pediatrics 1970;45:191–3.
61. George P, Hernandez K, Hustu O, Borella L, Holton C,
Pinkel D. A study of total therapy of acute lymphocytic
leukemia in children. J Pediatr 1968;72:399–408.
62. Pinkel D, Hernandez K, Borella L, et al. Drug dose
and remission duration in childhood lymphocytic
leukemia. Cancer 1971;27:247–56.
63. DeVita VT, Moxley JH, Brace K, Frei E III. Intensive
combination chemotherapy and X-irradiation in the
treatment of Hodgkin’s disease. Proc Am Assoc Cancer
Res 1965;6:15.
64. Moxley JH III, DeVita VT, Brace K, Frei E III. Intensive
combination chemotherapy and X-irradiation in Hodgkin’s disease. Cancer Res 1967;27:1258–63.
65. DeVita VT, Serpick A. Combination chemotherapy in
the treatment of advanced Hodgkin’s disease. Proc Am
Assoc Cancer Res 1967;8:13.
66. DeVita VT, Serpick AA, Carbone PP. Combination
chemotherapy in the treatment of advanced Hodgkin’s
disease. Ann Intern Med 1970;73:881–95.
67. DeVita VT. Cell kinetics and the chemotherapy of
cancer. Cancer Chemother Rep 1971;2:23–33.
68. DeVita VT, Denham C, Perry S. Relationship of normal
CDF1 mouse leukocyte kinetics to growth characteristics
of leukemia L1210. Cancer Res 1969;29:1067–71.
69. Skipper HD, Perry S. Kinetics of normal and leukemic
leukocyte populations and relevance to chemotherapy.
Cancer Res 1970;30:1883.
70. DeVita VT, Schein PS. The use of drugs in
combination for the treatment of cancer: rationale
and results. N Engl J Med 1973;288:998–1006.
71. DeVita VT, Young RC, Canellos GP. Combination versus
single agent chemotherapy; a review of the basis for selection of drug treatment of cancer. Cancer 1975;35:98–110.
72. Young RC, DeVita VT. The effect of chemotherapy on
the growth characteristics and cellular kinetics of
leukemia L1210. Cancer Res 1970;30:1789–94.
73. DeVita VT, Canellos GP, Chabner B, Schein P, Young
RC, Hubbard SM. Advanced diffuse histiocytic lymphoma, a potentially curable disease. Results with combination chemotherapy. Lancet 1975;1:248–54.
74. DeVita VT, Canellos GP, Moxley HH III. A decade of
combination chemotherapy for advanced Hodgkin’s
disease. Cancer 1972;30:1495–504.
75. Schabel FM. Concepts for systemic treatment of
micrometastases. Cancer 1975;35:15.
76. Salmon SE. Kinetic rationale for adjuvant chemotherapy for cancer. In: Salmon SE, Jones SE, editors.

8653

Adjuvant therapy of cancer. Amsterdam: Elsevier/North
Holland Biomedical Press; 1977.
77. Young RC, DeVita VT. Cell cycle characteristics of
human solid tumors in vivo. Cell Tissue Kinet 1970;3:285–90.
78. Greenspan EM, Fieber M, Lesnick G, Edelman S.
Response of advanced breast cancer to the combination
of the anti-metabolite methotrexate and the alkylating
agent thiotepa. J Mt Sinai Hosp 1963;30:246–67.
79. Canellos GP, DeVita VT, Gold GL, Chabner BA,
Schein PS, Young RC. Cyclical combination chemotherapy in the treatment of advanced breast carcinoma.
Proc Am Assoc Cancer Res 1974;15:148.
80. Canellos GP, DeVita VT, Gold GL, Chabner BA,
Schein PS, Young RC. Cyclical combination chemotherapy in the treatment of advanced breast carcinoma. Brit
Med J 1974;1:218–20.
81. Fisher B, Ravdin RG, Ausman RK, Slack NH, Moore
GE, Noer RJ. Surgical adjuvant chemotherapy in cancer
of the breast: results of a decade of cooperative
investigation. Ann Surg 1968;168:337–56.
82. Fisher B, Carbone P, Economou SG, et al. Lphenylalanine mustard (L-PAM) in the management of
primary breast cancer. N Engl J Med 1975;292:110–22.
83. Bonadonna G, Brusamolino E, Valegussa P, et al.
Combination chemotherapy as an adjunct treatment in
operable breast cancer. N Engl J Med 1976;294:405–10.
84. Early Breast Cancer Trialists’ Collaborative Group.
Treatment of early breast cancer. In: Peto R, editor.
Worldwide evidence 1985-1990, vol. 1. Oxford: Oxford
University Press; 1990.
85. Bonadonna G, Brusamolino E, Valagussa P, Rossi A,
et al. Combination chemotherapy as an adjuvant treatment
in operable breast cancer. N Engl J Med 1976;294:405–10.
86. Einhorn LH, Donohue JP. Combination chemotherapy in disseminated testicular cancer: the Indiana
University experience. Semin Oncol 1979;6:87–93.
87. Einhorn LH, Donohue J. Cis -diamminedichloroplatinum, vinblastine, and bleomycin combination chemotherapy in disseminated testicular cancer. Ann Int Med
1977;87:293–8.
88. Einhorn LH. Testicular cancer as a model for a
curable neoplasm: The Richard and Linda Rosenthal
Foundation award lecture. Cancer Res 1981;41:3275–80.
89. DeVita VT. Le plan Nixon contre le cancer portée et
limites. In: Bez G, Jasmin C, editors. Cancer, sida et société:
pour une approche globale de la santé. Paris: ESF; 1993.
90. DeVita VT. A perspective on the war on cancer.
Cancer J 2002;8:352–6.
91. Fischinger P, DeVita VT. Perceptions and opportunities in oncogene research. Cancer Res 1984;44:4693–6.
92. DeVita VT. The governance of science at the National
Cancer Institute: a perspective of misperceptions.
Cancer Res 1983;43:3969–73.
93. DeVita VT. The governance of science at the National
Cancer Institute: management of resources in an era of
scarcity. Cancer Research 1983;43:6106–8.
94. DeVita VT. On special initiatives, critics and the
National Cancer Program. Cancer Treat Rep 1984;68:1–4.
95. Druker BJ, Tamura S, Buchdunger E, et al. Effects of a
selective inhibitor of the Abl tyrosine kinase on the
growth of Bcr-Abl positive cells. Nat Med 1996;2:561–6.
96. Manning G, Whyte DB, Martinez R, et al. The protein
kinase complement of the human genome. Science 2002;
298:1912–34.
97. Krause DS, Van Etten RA. Tyrosine kinases as targets
for cancer therapy. N Engl J Med 2005;353:172–87.
98. Druker BJ, Sawyers CL, Kantarjian H, et al. Activity of
a specific inhibitor of the BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase in
the blast crisis of chronic myeloid leukemia and acute
lymphoblastic leukemia with the Philadelphia chromosome. N Engl J Med 2001;344:1038–42.
99. Nowel PC, Hungerford DA. A minute chromosome in
human chronic granulocytic leukemia. Science 1960;132:
1497–501.
100. Wilhelm S, Carter C, Lynch M, et al. Discovery and
development of sorafenib: a multikinase inhibitor for
treating cancer. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2006;5:835–44.
101. Herbst RS. Therapeutic options to target angiogenesis in human malignancies. Expert Opin Emerg Drugs
2006;11:635–50.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (21). November 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

A History of Cancer Chemotherapy
Vincent T. DeVita, Jr. and Edward Chu
Cancer Res 2008;68:8643-8653.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/21/8643

This article cites 88 articles, 20 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/21/8643.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 19 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/21/8643.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

