Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 31

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Editorial

DOT1L: a new therapeutic target for aggressive breast cancer
Jeong-Yeon Lee and Gu Kong
Disruptor of telomeric silencing-1 like (DOT1L) is
a histone-modifying enzyme that specifically catalyzes
the mono-, di-, and tri- methylation of histone H3 on
lysine-79 (H3K79). DOT1L-mediated H3K79 methylation
is associated with active transcription, and it has been
implicated in many biological processes including
DNA damage response, cell cycle, and embryonic cell
development [1]. Furthermore, accumulating studies
have shown the emerging role of DOT1L and H3K79
methylation in the initiation and maintenance of mixed
lineage leukemia (MLL)-rearranged leukemia. During
leukemogenesis, MLL fusion proteins such as AF9,
AF10, and ENL recruit DOT1L to their target gene loci
to elevate H3K79 methylation levels, thus increasing the
aberrant expression of genes that contribute to leukemic
transformation of hematopoietic progenitors [2]. Thus,
DOT1L has been suggested to be a promising molecular
target for MLL-rearranged leukemia. Indeed, selective
DOT1L inhibitors exhibit remarkable anti-tumor effects
in these cells, and EPZ-5676, the most advanced DOT1L
inhibitor, is currently in clinical trials for adult and
pediatric patients with MLL-rearranged leukemia [2].
While the oncogenic potential of DOT1L in leukemia has
been well described, there is little evidence for the role of
DOT1L in solid tumors.
Recently, some studies have shown the distinct
role of DOT1L in several solid tumors that do not harbor
MLL translocation. In prostate cancer, DOT1L directly
methylates androgen receptor to regulate its activity
[3]. DOT1L also has been identified as a coactivator of
Wnt signaling in colorectal cancer, but the therapeutic
potential of DOT1L inhibition remains questionable due
to the contradiction of DOT1L effect on Wnt-dependent
gene expression [4]. A recent study shows that selective
DOT1L inhibitors suppress proliferation and migration of
breast cancer cells [5]. In our recent work published in
Nature Communications [6], the advanced insights into the
functional role and clinical relevance of DOT1L in breast
cancer have been highlighted. DOT1L induces neoplastic
transformation of immortalized human breast epithelial
cells, as well as increases tumor initiation and growth of
human breast cancer cells. Furthermore, DOT1L depletion
inhibits the breast cancer metastasis to lung in a xenograft
mouse model. Consistently, DOT1L is associated with
worse outcome in aggressive human breast cancer [6].
This evidence suggests that DOT1L could function solely
as an oncogene in an independent manner of MLL fusion
partners in breast cancer, suggesting DOT1L to be a
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

potential drug target for aggressive breast cancer.
Notably, these oncogenic effects of DOT1L were
due to an increase of epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT)-induced cancer stem cell (CSC) properties via
DOT1L-dependent transcriptional activation of EMTpromoting genes, such as Snail, ZEB1, and ZEB2, in
human breast cancer [6]. EMT, which leads loss of cell
adhesion and acquisition of cell motility, is an essential
process for tumor invasion and metastasis. Moreover,
EMT has been recently defined as one of major
characteristics of stem-like cells in normal and malignant
breast epithelial cells. Several EMT-promoting factors
that inhibit epithelial marker E-cadherin transcription can
induce the stemness of breast cancer [7]. The aberrant
expression of these EMT regulators has been involved in
promoting malignant transformation of breast epithelial
cells and tumor recurrence and metastasis, suggesting
them as therapeutic targets for aggressive breast cancer.
Interestingly, DOT1L controls both EMT and CSCs by
activating the E-cadherin repressors, Snail, ZEB1, and
ZEB2 [6]. Furthermore, the enzymatic activity of DOT1L
towards H3K79 methylation is critical for gene expression
of these EMT modulators. Thus, DOT1L may facilitate
the aggressiveness of breast cancer as a regulator of EMTpromoting factors and selective DOT1L inhibitors could
be effective for inhibiting EMT and CSCs.
In the regulation of EMT-promoting genes by
DOT1L, we provide mechanistic insights into novel
transcriptional and epigenetic modulating functions
of DOT1L in cooperation with c-Myc transcription
factor. First, c-Myc is required for the recognition of
DOT1L to target genes. Whether DOT1L has its own
DNA-binding ability has been unclear, and in leukemia,
DOT1L is mainly recruited to target gene loci by MLLfusion proteins [2]. In breast cancers that do not have
MLL translocation, c-Myc seems to function as a guide
for DOT1L recognition to chromatin, since the depletion
of c-Myc inhibits DOT1L recruitment to the proximal
promoters of EMT genes that possess E-box motifs
in breast cancer cells [6]. Second, DOT1L facilitates
the formation of a c-Myc-containing transcriptional
active complex. C-Myc can function as a transcriptional
activator or repressor depending on its binding partners.
Interestingly, When DOT1L binds to c-Myc, c-Myc
preferentially interacts with p300 acetyltransferase
rather than DNMT or HDAC1 transcriptional repressive
components [6]. Although this biochemical mechanism
should be further investigated, this evidence suggests that
30451

Oncotarget

DOT1L is required for c-Myc-dependent transcriptional
activation. Moreover, consistent with the association
of DOT1L and histone acetylation in MLL-rearranged
leukemia [2], histone acetylation seems to be an essential
for DOT1L-depedent transcriptional activation in breast
cancer.
In summary, DOT1L plays an important role in the
initiation and progression of breast cancer by targeting the
gene expression of EMT-promoting factors via cooperating
with c-Myc/p300 transcriptional active complex in a
different mechanism from leukemia, suggesting DOT1L
to be a therapeutic target for aggressive breast cancer.
Gu Kong: Department of Pathology, College of Medicine,
Hanyang University, Seoul, Republic of Korea
Correspondence to: Gu Kong, email gkong@hanyang.ac.kr
Keywords: Chromosome Section, DOT1L, histone methylation, EMT, breast cancer
Received: August 22, 2015
Published: September 28, 2015

REFERENCES
1.	

Nguyen et al. Genes Dev. 2011; 25: 1345-1358.

2.	

McLean et al. Leukemia. 2014; 28: 2131-2138.

3.	

Yang et al. Nature. 2013; 500: 598-602.

4.	

Gibbons et al. ACS Chem Biol. 2015; 10: 109-114.

5.	

Zhang et al. Oncotarget. 2014; 5: 10665-10677.

6.	

Cho et al. Nat Commun. 2015; 6: 7821.

7.	

Tam et al. Nat Med. 2013; 19: 1438-1449.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30452

Oncotarget

