Review Article

Intolerance to Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors in
Chronic Myeloid Leukemia
Definitions and Clinical Implications
Javier Pinilla-Ibarz, MD, PhD1; Jorge Cortes, MD2; and Michael J. Mauro, MD3

Tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) treatment targeting breakpoint cluster region-Abelson murine leukemia virus, the cause
of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML), has revolutionized therapy for patients with this disease. The majority of patients
with CML maintain favorable responses with long-term imatinib therapy; however, the availability of the second-generation TKIs nilotinib and dasatinib limits the need for patients intolerant to imatinib to continue with therapy.
Unfortunately, there is currently no standard definition of intolerance to imatinib. Common Toxicity Criteria for grading adverse events, designed to identify acute toxicities, are often used to determine intolerance. However, because
CML therapies are long-term, patient quality of life may provide a better measure of true intolerance. Several general
methods of quantifying patient quality of life are in use for patients with CML, and a CML-specific variant of the M. D.
Anderson Symptom Inventory is in development. An appropriate and consistent definition of intolerance will provide
clinicians with an algorithm for managing their patients with severe or chronic adverse events during treatment with
imatinib. As more long-term data become available for newer TKIs, the definition of intolerance in the context of CML
treatment will continue to evolve to maximize the likelihood of durable responses and superior quality of life for
C 2010 American Cancer Society.
patients. Cancer 2011;117:688–97. V
KEYWORDS: imatinib, nilotinib, dasatinib, tyrosine kinase inhibitor, intolerance.

Despite the advances in patient outcomes since the approval of imatinib (Gleevec/Glivec; Novartis Pharmaceuticals
Corporation, East Hanover, NJ) as first-line therapy for chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) and the favorable and tolerable
safety profile of this drug, a substantial minority of patients do not benefit from therapy because of intolerance or resistance.
In a study conducted at the Hammersmith Hospital in London, for example, 25% of patients had discontinued imatinib after 5 years because of unsatisfactory response or toxicity.1 Acceptance by patients and clinicians of chronic adverse events
(AEs) is inevitably related to available treatment options. As treatment options have expanded and alternatives to imatinib
have become available, the opportunity to avoid chronic toxicity attributed to imatinib has emerged. Approval of the second-generation tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) nilotinib (Tasigna; Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation) and dasatinib
(Sprycel; Bristol-Myers Squibb Company, Princeton, NJ) increases treatment options and presents the opportunity to avoid
the chronic toxicity paradigm, although it is important to note that these agents themselves have unique toxicities, and the
long-term toxicity profile of these novel agents is largely unknown. Paramount to the argument to minimize chronic toxicity
is the finding that prompt identification and appropriate management of AEs may improve adherence to CML therapy and
thus result in better long-term outcomes and quality of life (QOL) for patients. The aim of this review is to examine current
definitions of intolerance to imatinib and to discuss their implications on management strategies for patients with CML.
Defining Imatinib Intolerance
Clinical trials

There are subtle differences in the criteria used to define intolerance in clinical trials (Table 1). In the IRIS (International Randomized Interferon versus STI571) trial, intolerance to imatinib was defined as the recurrence of a
Corresponding author: Javier Pinilla-Ibarz, MD, PhD, Malignant Hematology Division, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, 12902 Magnolia Drive,
MRC-3056H, Tampa, FL 33612; Fax: (813) 745-6817; javier.pinilla@moffitt.org
1
Malignant Hematology Division, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, Tampa, Florida; 2Department of Leukemia, The University of Texas M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas; 3Knight Cancer Institute at Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, Oregon

We thank Erinn Goldman, PhD (Articulate Science) for medical editorial assistance with this article.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.25648, Received: May 11, 2010; Revised: July 15, 2010; Accepted: August 16, 2010, Published online October 4, 2010 in Wiley Online Library
(wileyonlinelibrary.com)

688

Cancer

February 15, 2011

Intolerance to TKI therapy/Pinilla-Ibarz et al

Table 1. Definitions of Imatinib Intolerance in Clinical Trials

Trial

Trial ID

Definition of Intolerance

IRIS trial2

NCT00006343

Nilotinib in imatinib-resistant or -intolerant patients3

NCT00109707

Dasatinib in imatinib-resistant or -intolerant patients4

CA180013

Recurrence of nonhematologic toxicity of at least grade 3 despite
appropriate dose reductions and optimal symptomatic management.
Patients with symptoms of intolerance who had never achieved a
major cytogenetic response.
Any grade 2 nonhematologic toxicity lasting >1 month or recurring
>3 despite supportive care and maximum dose reduction.
Any grade 3 or higher nonhematologic toxicity.
Any grade 4 hematologic toxicity lasting >7 days.
Occurrence of at least a grade 3 nonhematologic or grade 4 hematologic
toxicity lasting >7 days during treatment with imatinib at any dose.

nonhematologic toxicity of at least grade 3 despite appropriate dose reductions and optimal symptomatic management.2 In trials using nilotinib as a second-line therapy,
imatinib-intolerant patients were classified as those with
symptoms of intolerance who had never achieved a major
cytogenetic response on imatinib therapy. Symptoms of
intolerance were defined as any nonhematologic toxicity
of grade 3 or higher severity, or of grade 2 or higher severity lasting >1 month or recurring >3 despite dose
reduction and optimal supportive care or any grade 4 hematologic toxicity persisting for >7 days.3 In the phase 2
registration trial of dasatinib as a second-line therapy,
intolerance was defined as any nonhematologic toxicity of
at least grade 3 or a hematologic toxicity of grade 4 that
persisted for >7 days in patients treated with any dose of
imatinib.4 Response to imatinib was not incorporated
into the definition of intolerance in this trial.

Clinical practice

There is currently no universally accepted definition
of imatinib intolerance in clinical practice, with centers
and individual practitioners using different definitions
based on rules for dose interruptions/reductions in clinical
trials, management recommendations, or their own previous experiences and their patients’ expectations. Although
the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN)
publishes guidance on recognizing and managing imatinib toxicity,5 and the European LeukemiaNet6 provides
recommendations on the use of second-line agents for
patients with intolerance to imatinib, neither elaborates
on the definition of intolerance. Furthermore, few reports
exist about the rates of imatinib intolerance in clinical
practice, undoubtedly in part because of the lack of an
established definition of intolerance. The UNIC (Unmet
Needs in CML) study is a retrospective chart review of
patients with CML conducted in 8 European countries. A

Cancer

February 15, 2011

recent report from the French cohort of the UNIC study
classified 197 (31.4%) of 654 patients with CML in
chronic phase (CML-CP) as intolerant to imatinib, based
on toxicity leading to a change or discontinuation of imatinib use as reported in the medical chart.7
The definitions of intolerance from clinical studies,
and guidance from the NCCN,5 use the Common Toxicity Criteria (CTC) to grade the severity of AEs. CTC criteria are generally designed to identify acute toxicity of a
particular agent, and the value/measurement is often
based on the severity and level of intervention needed.
Because targeted therapies for CML involve long-term
chronic therapy rather than a typical cyclic and finite
chemotherapy program, the applicability of the CTC to
assist in defining intolerance to these compounds has been
called into question. For example, although a grade 2 or
even grade 1 AE (eg, diarrhea or muscle cramps) may be
acceptable when experienced over the course of a shortterm treatment, it may become unacceptable when it
becomes permanent. In addition, individual patients have
different thresholds and levels of acceptability for different
grades of AEs; therefore, this type of assessment may not
be an appropriate measure for all patients.
Focusing on patient QOL may be more appropriate
for the definition of intolerance. Direct measurement of
QOL parameters may be useful to the clinician when
deciding on whether to continue with 1 line of therapy despite AEs or to switch to an alternative therapy and for
clarification of the tradeoffs between different management strategies.8 Validated instruments that have been
used for QOL measurement in CML include the Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy–Biologic Response
Modifiers9 and the Euro Quality of Life–5 Dimensions
(Fig. 1),10-12 although these tools are not specific to
patients with CML.
In the IRIS trial, 315 (58%) patients in the imatinib
arm and 198 (38%) patients in the interferon-a (IFN-a)

689

Review Article

Figure 1. Quality of life (QOL) measures as applied to
patients receiving imatinib therapy are shown. (Top) The
Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy–Biologic Response
Modifiers (FACT-BRM)9 is a method used to assess patient
QOL and is comprised of 40 questions distributed over 5
subcategories. Patients were asked about their physical wellbeing, functional well-being, social and family well-being, and
emotional well-being and were also asked treatment-specific
questions. Responses were measured on a 5-point scale
ranging from 0 (not at all) to 4 (very much). Responses from
the physical, functional, and treatment-specific subcategories
were used to calculate the Trial Outcome Index (TOI; primary
endpoint). The TOI is comprised of 27 questions with a possible score ranging from 0 to 108. Social and family well-being
(7 items; range, 0-28) and emotional well-being (7 items;
range, 0-24) were calculated as secondary endpoints. (Bottom) The Euro Quality of Life–5 Dimensions (EQ-5D)10 uses 2
measures of patient health. Patients were asked qualitative
questions about 5 dimensions of their health and to rate their
overall health that day compared with that over the past 12
months. They were then asked, on a scale of 0 to 100, to rate
how they felt that day. The results ranged from 100 to 100,
with scores <0 indicating a feeling of ‘‘worse than death.’’

arm completed the Functional Assessment of Cancer
Therapy–Biologic Response Modifiers and Euro Quality
of Life–5 Dimensions questionnaires at baseline and at 8
additional time points during the first 12 months of treatment.10 The primary endpoint of the QOL analysis was

690

the Trial Outcome Index, a measure of physical wellbeing and function. The secondary endpoints were social
and family well-being (SFWB) and emotional well-being
(EWB), and crossover was accounted for in the analysis.
These QOL tools were meaningful to demonstrate differences between the imatinib and IFN-a arms. Overall,
41% of patients randomized to first-line imatinib in the
IRIS trial had a clinically relevant improvement in the
Trial Outcome Index from baseline to Month 12, compared with 10% of patients randomized to first-line
IFN-a (P<.001).10 More specifically, patients randomized to imatinib reported better daily functioning and
well-being, less fatigue, fewer emotional and cognitive
problems, and fewer AEs. Of note, the rate of treatment
discontinuation was significantly less on the imatinib
arm. Patients receiving imatinib also had more favorable
scores of SFWB and EWB. Data from the Euro Quality
of Life–5 Dimensions index showed that patients on imatinib treatment were more likely to report health equivalent to perfect health (P<.001). Taken together, these
data indicate that QOL assessments can be a reliable indicator of physical well-being in patients with CML and can
be used to assess the relative impact of different therapies.10 However, no data on the long-term effects of imatinib on QOL are available.
Results from randomized controlled trials suggest
that treatment decisions influenced by QOL considerations may be beneficial in some patients.8 In some therapeutic areas, symptom-specific rating scales have
demonstrated value as tools for assessing the effects of an
intervention on treatment-related symptoms. In a retrospective analysis of 106 lung cancer patients treated in 3
clinical trials, 15% of patients reported fatigue on the
Lung Cancer Symptom Scale, but the fatigue was measured as grade 0 according to the CTC.13 In another recent
study of 163 lung cancer patients receiving chemotherapy,
patients and clinicians independently reported CTC AEs
and Karnofsky Performance Status.14 In general, patients
reported symptoms earlier and more frequently than clinicians. Clinician, but not patient, report of fatigue, nausea,
constipation, and performance status was significantly
associated with death and emergency room admissions.
Patient-reported symptoms, however, had greater correlation with the Euro Quality of Life–5 Dimensions and a
global health state questionnaire than clinician-reported
symptoms. From these studies, it appears that clinicians
may be better at recognizing AEs with potentially serious
consequences, whereas patients may be better at assessing
more subtle changes that affect their overall QOL. This

Cancer

February 15, 2011

Intolerance to TKI therapy/Pinilla-Ibarz et al

Table 2. Suggested Management of Adverse Events on Imatinib Therapy

Adverse Event

Event Management

Hematologic
Neutropenia

Thrombocytopenia

Anemia

Dose interruption is not recommended for grade 1-2 toxicity.
Grade 3-4 toxicity defined as ANC <1  109/L.
Dose interruption until ANC 1-1.5  109/L, then resume at 400 mg/d if recovery within 2 weeks.
In the event of recurrent grade 3-4 toxicity or delayed recovery, dose reduction to 300 mg.
Consider growth factors for patients with recurrent or persistent grade 3-4 toxicity.
Dose interruption is not recommended for grade 1-2 toxicity.
Grade 3-4 toxicity is defined as a platelet count <50  109/L.
Dose interruption until platelet count is 50-75  109/L, then resume at 400 mg/d if recovery within 2 weeks.
In the event of recurrent grade 3-4 toxicity or delayed recovery, dose reduction to 300 mg.
Dose interruption is not indicated for toxicity of any grade.
Dose reductions may help in cases with chronic anemia.
Erythropoietin has shown efficacy, but is not recommended by the US FDA.

Nonhematologic
Gastrointestinal toxicity

Edema/fluid retention

Muscle cramps
Rash
Hepatic toxicity

Administration with food is recommended to reduce upper GI tract toxicities.
Some patients may benefit from antiemetics.
Supportive care (eg, loperamide) for management of diarrhea.
Grade 1-2 toxicities do not require dose interruption.
Diuretics and supportive care recommended for symptomatic patients.
Dose interruption, reduction, or discontinuation may be required in some patients.
Administration of a calcium supplement and high fluid intake.
Quinine or tonic water.
Administration of topical or systemic steroids is effective in the majority of cases.
In severe cases, dose interruption, dose reductions, and occasionally treatment discontinuation may be required.
With grade 2-3 toxicities, dose interruption until toxicity is grade 1, followed by resumption of therapy at a reduced dose.
Alternate therapies should be considered for grade 4 toxicity.

ANC indicates absolute neutrophil count; FDA, Food and Drug Administration; GI, gastrointestinal.

finding may be due in part to the finding that the QOL is
a more direct measure from patients, whereas the CTC
are greatly influenced by the interpretation of the clinician. Input from both parties may be needed to
adequately assess patient well-being. These findings suggest that symptom-specific evaluation of patients may
identify AEs that are relevant to patient QOL but are not
identified with the CTC criteria.
To best facilitate the application of QOL measurements as a management tool for patients with CML, a specific tool for QOL assessment with long-term TKI therapy
is needed. One such tool, a CML-specific variant of the
M. D. Anderson Symptom Inventory, is currently in development. Preliminary findings suggest that this tool is a
reliable means of detecting numerous symptoms of CML
and can differentiate between levels of severity of illness.15
This assessment tool is still in development and being
refined to more accurately capture CML- and treatmentspecific symptoms and awaits prospective validation.
Imatinib Intolerance: A New Definition
Although there is no standardized definition of imatinib
intolerance, there are 3 groups of patients who may be
considered intolerant to imatinib: patients who are truly

Cancer

February 15, 2011

intolerant to imatinib at a dose that would be considered
acceptable for adequate efficacy (usually at least 300 mg/d),
those who are resistant or do not have an adequate
response to standard dose (400 mg/d) imatinib and are
intolerant to dose escalation, and those who experience
persistent low-grade AEs that do not prevent them from
continuing therapy with imatinib but that may adversely
impact function and QOL. In each case, the management of AEs using the recommended guidelines should
be attempted before classifying a patient as truly intolerant (Table 2).
Of significant importance is the finding that the
advent of alternative therapeutic strategies for CML has
affected the perception of intolerance. Before TKI therapy, patients experienced high rates of toxicity, mainly in
comparison with IFN-a16; however, given the lack of alternative therapies, this toxicity was managed or tolerated
by patients. The introduction of the first TKI, imatinib,
resulted in a treatment with a dramatically improved toxicity profile. Grade 3-4 AEs were uncommon, and persistent grade 2 or lower AEs were considered acceptable,
particularly when the recent experience was with a toxic
agent such as IFN-a. Furthermore, no adequate alternatives were initially available for most patients, even when

691

Review Article

considered intolerant. The subsequent approval of the second-line TKIs, nilotinib and dasatinib, provided alternative agents to overcome chronic toxicity encountered on
imatinib, thus rendering the compensated low-grade toxicities less acceptable. The long-term impact on CML and
QOL outcomes of switching therapy from imatinib
because of mild or moderate AEs is currently unknown,
but is being investigated in ongoing clinical studies.
Symptomatic Management of AEs on
TKI Therapy
The identification of patients intolerant to imatinib, however defined, is desirable for several reasons, including
that it may allow for management of the intolerance,
thereby increasing the likelihood of staying on therapy
and achieving optimal long-term outcomes for the
patient. Patients with intolerance to imatinib may be
treated with symptom-directed supportive care to reduce
symptoms, can undergo dose reductions of imatinib, can
be switched from imatinib to an approved second-generation TKI, or can potentially even consider allogeneic stem
cell transplantation or other investigational options.
Management of a treatment-related AE using a
symptomatic therapy and/or dose reduction should first
be attempted to determine whether the intolerance could
be managed without discontinuing therapy. Most AEs
occur early with imatinib therapy, and de novo toxicity
rates diminish over time. In the IRIS trial, AEs predominantly occurred in Years 1 to 3; rates of newly occurring
grade 3-4 AEs were <2% after 4 years.17 In the phase 2
registration and expanded access trials of nilotinib after
imatinib failure, the pattern of AEs over time was similar,
with the most common AEs occurring within the first 2
months of therapy.18,19 In the phase 2 registration trial for
dasatinib, the rates of treatment-related AEs were only
slightly higher at a median follow-up of 15 months than
in the initial cohort at a minimum follow-up of 8 months;
however, AEs generally occurred early in treatment in this
study as well.4,20
Some specific measures can be taken to manage
some of the AEs most commonly observed while on therapy with TKI, many of which are outlined by the
NCCN5 and summarized in Table 2. With regard to
myelosuppression, grade 3-4 neutropenia or thrombocytopenia may be managed with transient dose interruption
and resumption of imatinib at 400 mg/d. If severe events
recur, dose interruption followed by resumption at a
reduced dose of 300 mg/d may be appropriate, preferably
in the presence of active and sustained disease remission.

692

Anemia of any grade is typically managed via dose reduction, although sustained chronic anemia may be more
problematic and could lead to long-term use of reduced
imatinib doses that may not be appropriate in the absence
of sustained disease remission. Nonhematologic events,
the most common being gastrointestinal symptoms, fluid
retention, cramps, and rash, are preferably managed via
palliative care rather than reduction or interruption of the
dose. However, in some cases of persistent low-grade fluid
retention, severe rash, or hepatotoxicity, permanent discontinuation of imatinib may be required.
The approved initial treatment with imatinib is
400 mg/d.21 For patients in need of dose reductions to
manage toxicity, doses <300 mg once daily should not
be routinely used, as this was the threshold at which
significant response occurred in the phase 1 study of
imatinib.22 Lower doses have been associated with
decreased probability of response whenever they have
been tested.
Toxicity on Nilotinib Therapy
Nilotinib is approved throughout the world for the treatment of patients with Philadelphia chromosome-positive
(Phþ) CML-CP and CML in accelerated phase (AP) who
are resistant or intolerant to prior therapy, including imatinib. Nilotinib was designed as a more potent analogue
of imatinib with improved affinity for breakpoint cluster
region-Abelson murine leukemia (BCR-ABL) and a structure that makes it less susceptible to point mutations.23
Nilotinib is now approved in the United States for
patients with newly diagnosed CML-CP.24-27
Given that the target and structure of nilotinib is
shared with imatinib, the possibility of cross-intolerance
has been investigated to determine whether AEs causing
imatinib intolerance and treatment discontinuation
would recur with nilotinib.28 A total of 122 patients (95
with CML-CP and 27 with CML-AP) were enrolled in
the phase 2 nilotinib registration trial after imatinib intolerance.28 Only 1 (1%) of 75 patients with nonhematologic imatinib intolerance experienced a recurrence of
similar grade 3-4 AEs during nilotinib therapy, and only 4
patients experienced grade 3-4 or persistent grade 2 AEs
with nilotinib. No dose reduction or discontinuation was
required for management of the AEs. Whereas 17 (43%)
of 40 patients with hematologic intolerance to imatinib
experienced recurrence of the same grade 3-4 AE, only 7
(18%) of these patients discontinued nilotinib for this reason. In all of these patients, thrombocytopenia was the
reason for discontinuation of nilotinib. Thus, cross-

Cancer

February 15, 2011

Intolerance to TKI therapy/Pinilla-Ibarz et al

intolerance to nilotinib is uncommon in imatinibintolerant CML-CP and CML-AP patients, particularly
for nonhematologic AEs.
In imatinib-resistant or -intolerant patients, rates of
nilotinib discontinuation because of drug-related AEs
were low.28 The most commonly observed (>10% all
grades) drug-related nonhematologic AEs observed in
clinical trials included rash, pruritus, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, and headache, most of which were 1 or 2.18,29
Some patients complain about pruritus on the scalp while
taking nilotinib. Myelosuppression was the most common reason for treatment discontinuation in the phase 2
registration trial of nilotinib, necessary in 8% of imatinibresistant or -intolerant patients.18 Biochemical abnormalities were generally mild and easily managed.18 These
included hyperglycemia, hypophosphatemia, and elevation of bilirubin (mostly among patients with Gilbert syndrome), lipase and amylase (rarely associated with clinical
symptoms), and transaminases.
Management of these AEs was similar to that
described for imatinib. Transient treatment interruption
and possible dose reduction is recommended for patients
with grade 3-4 elevation of transaminases or bilirubin.
The majority of laboratory abnormalities and myelosuppression occurred in the first 3 months of nilotinib treatment; rates decreased thereafter.18
After a report from the Jefferson Medical College
suggested that imatinib was associated with congestive
heart failure in 10 patients,30 the potential cardiotoxicity
of TKIs has been extensively studied. A review of 1276
patients treated with imatinib at The University of Texas
M. D. Anderson Cancer Center demonstrated that such
events are rare on imatinib, occurring in 1.7% of patients,
most of whom had pre-existing cardiac conditions, with
an incidence similar to that seen in the general population.31 Nilotinib has the potential to cause QTc prolongation, as do other TKIs, and the product information for
this drug contains a box warning about this condition.
Before the start of therapy, patients should undergo electrocardiography to investigate pre-existing prolonged
QTc, and electrolyte (eg, potassium and magnesium)
abnormalities should be corrected and monitored
throughout the course of therapy. Fortunately, few
patients experience significant prolongations of the QTc
interval, and only rarely does this condition have clinical
consequences.
In the frontline setting, nilotinib has been shown to
be well tolerated.24-27 In fact, as is the case with all TKIs,
the rate of AEs is lower among patients treated in the

Cancer

February 15, 2011

frontline setting than those treated after failure with other
therapies. ENESTnd (Evaluating Nilotinib Efficacy and
Safety in Clinical Trials–Newly Diagnosed Patients) has
provided the first randomized comparison of a secondgeneration TKI (in this case 300 or 400 mg twice daily
nilotinib) versus the current standard of care (400 mg/d
imatinib).24 At 12 months, nilotinib was shown to be
superior to imatinib as a first-line treatment for CML
(higher rates of major molecular response and complete
cytogenetic response, deeper levels of molecular response,
and significantly lower rates of progression to accelerated
phase/blast crisis [BC]). The rate of discontinuation
because of AEs was similar across arms, but somewhat
lower for nilotinib at 300 mg/d than for nilotinib 400
mg/d or imatinib (7%, 11%, and 9%, respectively). In
this large, randomized phase 3 trial, which required prospective cardiac monitoring, the incidence of clinically relevant QT prolongation was uncommon, with no patient
in either arm having QT prolongation >500 ms, and
<1% of patients in each nilotinib arm experiencing QT
prolongation from baseline of >60 ms.
Similarly, high response rates and favorable toxicity
have been observed in single-arm prospective studies of
nilotinib in newly diagnosed patients.25-27 The most common AE with nilotinib in this setting was, again, myelosuppression; however, it was usually seen in the first 2 to 3
months of therapy, it was transient, it most frequently did
not require dose adjustments, and it was usually grade 12. For example, in the single-arm study conducted at The
University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, anemia, thrombocytopenia, and neutropenia were observed
in 49%, 43%, and 52% of patients, respectively; however,
these AEs were grade 3-4 in only 5%, 11%, and 12% of
patients, respectively.27 In general, AEs occurred at higher
rates in the first 3 months of nilotinib therapy and
decreased over time.26
Toxicity During Dasatinib Therapy
Dasatinib is a highly potent inhibitor of BCR-ABL, which
also targets Src family kinases. Dasatinib is currently
approved throughout the world for the treatment of
patients with CML-CP, -AP, or -BC (and Phþ acute lymphoblastic leukemia) who are resistant or intolerant to
prior therapy, including imatinib. Despite the finding
that dasatinib is structurally distinct from imatinib, investigation into cross-intolerance in dasatinib-treated
patients previously intolerant to imatinib was warranted,
given its potential use in patients with imatinib intolerance as well as its shared target, BCR-ABL, and other off-

693

Review Article

target effects. A total of 271 patients with imatinib-intolerant CML-CP were eligible for analysis.32 Imatinib
intolerance was related to hematologic toxicity in 46
patients and nonhematologic toxicity in 225 patients.
Cross-intolerance was uncommon, particularly in regard
to nonhematologic toxicity. Only 9 (4%) patients experienced the same grade 3-4 nonhematologic AEs on dasatinib as on imatinib, and only 2 (1%) patients discontinued
dasatinib as a consequence. Recurrence of the same grade
3-4 hematologic toxicity that led to imatinib intolerance
was observed in 86% of patients, but only 6 (13%)
patients discontinued dasatinib because of the same hematologic toxicity that had resulted in discontinuation from
imatinib therapy. This analysis reflects the use of the initially approved dasatinib dose of 70 mg twice daily. However, a randomized trial investigating different doses and
treatment schedules has demonstrated that 100 mg once
daily is associated with fewer AEs (particularly myelosuppression), while maintaining efficacy.33 Thus, it is possible that even fewer patients would experience crossintolerance at this dosing schedule.
In the treatment of patients who have experienced
imatinib resistance or intolerance, dasatinib at 70 mg
twice daily was associated with the occurrence of generally
low-grade (1-2) nonhematologic AEs, the most frequent
of which were fluid retention (including pleural and pericardial effusions), dyspnea, infection, headache, diarrhea,
fatigue, and abdominal and musculoskeletal pain.20,34
However, grade 3-4 myelosuppression was reported in
nearly 50% of patients.35 In an effort to decrease toxicity,
a phase 3, open-label, dose-optimization study was performed in which patients were randomized 1:1:1:1 to
dasatinib 100 mg once daily, 50 mg twice daily, 140 mg
once daily, or 70 mg twice daily.33 Treatment with
100 mg/d resulted in lower rates of discontinuation
because of drug toxicity (11%) than treatment with
70 mg twice daily (21%). The most common nonhematologic AEs were nausea, headache, diarrhea, and fatigue.
Treatment at 100 mg daily resulted in significantly
reduced rates of grade 3-4 nonhematologic and hematologic AEs. Grade 3-4 pleural effusions decreased from 6%
or more in earlier trials20 to 2% with 100 mg daily.33 Currently, 100 mg once daily is the standard dose of dasatinib
for CML-CP.36
Some AEs that have been particularly noticed
among patients treated with dasatinib include pleural
effusion and bleeding. All grade pleural effusion has been
reported in 10% to 36% of patients,20,37-39 and more frequently among patients treated in the advanced stages.

694

Many (54%-100%) pleural effusions observed are grade
1-2 in nature. However, it is important to note that grade
2 pleural effusions are symptomatic and require interventions such as diuretics or up to 2 thoracenteses. Grade 3-4
pleural effusions occur in 5% to 15% of patients and may
require treatment interruption, dose reduction, permanent discontinuation, the use of interventions such as diuretics or corticosteroids, and >2 thoracenteses, chest tube
draining procedures, or chemical or surgical pleurodesis.40 Bleeding episodes can occur in 20% to 25% of
patients treated with dasatinib, but are grade 3-4 in only
10% of cases.41 Patients who develop bleeding while on
dasatinib should discontinue therapy immediately. Bleeding frequently occurs in the setting of thrombocytopenia,
but in approximately 30% of cases, bleeding occurs with
adequate platelet counts.41 Recently, it has been reported
that dasatinib may inhibit platelet aggregation.42 Thus,
concomitant administration of drugs that inhibit platelet
function, such as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents,
is not recommended.
Dasatinib is also currently being investigated as a
frontline agent in patients with newly diagnosed CML. In
a phase 2 study of dasatinib (100 mg once daily or 50 mg
twice daily) in patients with newly diagnosed early CMLCP,43 rates of grade 3-4 nonhematologic AEs were low
and included fatigue (6%), joint and muscle pain (6%),
peripheral neuropathy (5%), dyspnea (5%), and memory
impairment (5%). Most events were transient and manageable. Pleural effusions occurred in 13% of patients,
with only 2% being grade 3-4 in severity. The majority of
patients experienced some degree of myelosuppression on
dasatinib (anemia [81%], thrombocytopenia [69%], neutropenia [63%]); grade 3-4 events occurred in 6%, 10%,
and 21% of patients, respectively.43
The DASISION trial is a randomized comparison
of dasatinib 100 mg once daily versus the current standard
of care (400 mg/d imatinib).39 At 12 months, dasatinib
was shown to be superior to imatinib as a first-line treatment for CML (higher rates of major molecular response
and complete cytogenetic response, and numerically lower
rates of progression to AP/BC). Pleural effusions occurred
in 10% of patients treated with dasatinib, and all were
grade 1 (2%) or grade 2 (8%). According to the published
protocol, prospective baseline and 6-month chest x-rays
were mandated, which may have decreased the severity of
pleural effusions observed in the first 12 months of this
study compared with prior studies. Overall, the rate of discontinuation because of AEs was slightly higher for dasatinib (5%) versus imatinib (4%). The incidence of

Cancer

February 15, 2011

Intolerance to TKI therapy/Pinilla-Ibarz et al

clinically relevant QT prolongation was uncommon, with
only 1 patient in either arm having QT prolongation
>500 ms, and 5% of patients in the dasatinib and imatinib arms experiencing QT prolongation from baseline of
>60 ms.
Conclusions
Although imatinib is generally well tolerated, and the majority of AEs are of mild or moderate intensity, a substantial minority of patients experience AEs that require dose
interruptions or withdrawal from first-line therapy in
addition to the commonly recognized group of patients
for whom imatinib is not an effective long-term therapy.
This niche has benefitted from the development of 2
approved alternatives and may benefit from further drug
development.
Chronic low-grade toxicities are emerging as a common concern for patients receiving therapy for several
years, possibly indefinitely. Patients receiving nilotinib
and dasatinib appear to have lower rates of AEs, particularly those of higher grade. The follow-up of patients
receiving these agents is shorter, which thus prevents a full
assessment of the prevalence of chronic, low-grade events.
Optimal symptomatic management of modest imatinibrelated toxicities remains the preferred option before classifying a patient as imatinib-intolerant and to switching
therapy.
A consistent definition and algorithm for clinicians
to follow with respect to intolerance may improve identification of patients who are truly intolerant to imatinib,
ensuring that patients are on the most appropriate treatment. Definitions of imatinib intolerance in clinical trials
are based on the CTC criteria for defining the severity of
AEs, which may not be appropriate for the long-term
management of CML in clinical practice, because they
may underestimate the impact of low-grade toxicities
when experienced over a lifetime. Disease and symptomspecific assessment tools and QOL assessments may provide valuable insight into the impact of AEs on a patient’s
daily life and hence support treatment decisions, particularly in the area of mild chronic toxicity deemed unacceptable when treatment is indefinite—a paradigm somewhat
unique to TKI use in CML. The definition of intolerance
is inevitably relative to the alternative treatment options
available and, therefore, continues to evolve with the
emergence of new data and novel therapies. Thus, our tolerance for intolerance in practice has shifted in relation to
available alternatives. Reassuringly, cross-intolerance with
imatinib is minimal for imatinib-intolerant patients

Cancer

February 15, 2011

switching to a second-generation TKI such as nilotinib or
dasatinib, although there may be some sharing of AEs,
particularly hematologic, in a minority of patients. Trials
of second-generation TKIs in previously untreated
patients with newly diagnosed CML are ongoing, and the
data obtained to date indicate a favorable safety and tolerability profile. The availability of new treatment options
has accordingly further changed the landscape of CML
treatment and brings the issue of tolerability appropriately
more to the forefront. Given the availability of alternate
therapies and the consequent evolving definition of intolerance to imatinib, more investigation into the role of
QOL in managing patients with CML and continued
focus on long-term safety data with newer agents is therefore needed to complete the picture with optimization of
tolerability/toxicity to complement the strides made in
the improvement of response and survival.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
J.P.-I. has served as a consultant/advisor to Novartis and BristolMyers Squibb, has received honoraria from Novartis, and has
received research funding from Novartis and Bristol-Myers
Squibb. J.C. has received research funding from Novartis,
Wyeth, and Bristol-Myers Squibb. M.J.M. has received research
funding from Novartis and Bristol-Myers Squibb. Financial support for medical editorial assistance was provided by Novartis
Pharmaceuticals.

REFERENCES
1. de Lavallade H, Apperley JF, Khorashad JS, et al. Imatinib
for newly diagnosed patients with chronic myeloid leukemia:
incidence of sustained responses in an intention-to-treat
analysis. J Clin Oncol. 2008;26:3358-3363.
2. O’Brien SG, Guilhot F, Larson RA, et al. Imatinib compared with interferon and low-dose cytarabine for newly
diagnosed chronic-phase chronic myeloid leukemia. N Engl
J Med. 2003;348:994-1004.
3. Kantarjian HM, Giles F, Gattermann N, et al. Nilotinib
(formerly AMN107), a highly selective BCR-ABL tyrosine
kinase inhibitor, is effective in patients with Philadelphia
chromosome-positive chronic myelogenous leukemia in
chronic phase following imatinib resistance and intolerance.
Blood. 2007;110:3540-3546.
4. Hochhaus A, Kantarjian HM, Baccarani M, et al. Dasatinib
induces notable hematologic and cytogenetic responses in
chronic-phase chronic myeloid leukemia after failure of imatinib therapy. Blood. 2007;109:2303-2309.
5. National Comprehensive Cancer Network. NCCN Clinical
Practice Guidelines in Oncology: Chronic Myelogenous
Leukemia. Version 2. Fort Washington, PA: National Comprehensive Cancer Network; 2010.
6. Baccarani M, Cortes J, Pane F, et al. Chronic myeloid leukemia: an update of concepts and management recommendations of European LeukemiaNet. J Clin Oncol.
2009;27:6041-6051.

695

Review Article
7. Michallet M, Tulliez M, Corm S, et al. Management of
chronic myeloid leukaemia in clinical practice in France:
results of the French subset of patients from the UNIC
study. Curr Med Res Opin. 2009;26:307-317.
8. Guyatt GH, Ferrans CE, Halyard MY, et al. Exploration of
the value of health-related quality-of-life information from
clinical research and into clinical practice. Mayo Clin Proc.
2007;82:1229-1239.
9. Bacik J, Mazumdar M, Murphy BA, et al. The functional
assessment of cancer therapy-BRM (FACT-BRM): a new
tool for the assessment of quality of life in patients treated
with biologic response modifiers. Qual Life Res.
2004;13:137-154.
10. Hahn EA, Glendenning GA, Sorensen MV, et al. Quality
of life in patients with newly diagnosed chronic phase
chronic myeloid leukemia on imatinib versus interferon alfa
plus low-dose cytarabine: results from the IRIS study. J Clin
Oncol. 2003;21:2138-2146.
11. Brooks R. EuroQol: the current state of play. Health Policy.
1996;37:53-72.
12. The EuroQol Group. EuroQol—a new facility for the measurement of health-related quality of life. Health Policy.
1990;16:199-208.
13. Varricchio CG, Bass E, Novotny P, Loprinzi CL, Jett J,
Sloan JA. Common toxicity criteria versus symptom specific
measures: how congruent are the data? J Clin Oncol.
2002;21:2897.
14. Basch E, Jia X, Heller G, et al. Adverse symptom event
reporting by patients vs clinicians: relationships with clinical
outcomes. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2009;101:1624-1632.
15. Williams LA, Ault P, Wang XS, et al. The symptom burden
of chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML). Blood. 2008;112:
2408.
16. Cortes JE, Talpaz M, Kantarjian H. Chronic myelogenous
leukemia: a review. Am J Med. 1996;100:555-570.
17. Druker BJ, Guilhot F, O’Brien SG, et al. Five-year followup of patients receiving imatinib for chronic myeloid leukemia. N Engl J Med. 2006;355:2408-2417.
18. Kantarjian HM, Giles FJ, Bhalla KN, et al. Update on imatinib-resistant chronic myeloid leukemia patients in chronic
phase (CML-CP) on nilotinib therapy at 24 months: clinical
response, safety, and long-term outcomes. Blood. 2009;
114:464.
19. le Coutre PD, Ceglarek B, Turkina A, et al. Patterns
and management of selected adverse events of adult
patients with imatinib-resistant or -intolerant chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) from the ENACT (expanding
nilotinib access in clinical trials) study. Blood. 2009;114:
457-458.
20. Hochhaus A, Baccarani M, Deininger M, et al. Dasatinib
induces durable cytogenetic responses in patients with
chronic myelogenous leukemia in chronic phase with resistance or intolerance to imatinib. Leukemia. 2008;22:12001206.
21. Gleevec (imatinib) [package insert]. East Hanover, NJ:
Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation; 2008.
22. Druker BJ, Talpaz M, Resta DJ, et al. Efficacy and safety of
a specific inhibitor of the BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase in
chronic myeloid leukemia. N Engl J Med. 2001;344:10311037.
23. Weisberg E, Manley PW, Breitenstein W, et al. Characterization of AMN107, a selective inhibitor of native and mutant Bcr-Abl. Cancer Cell. 2005;7:129-141.

696

24. Saglio G, Kim DW, Issaragrisil S, et al. Nilotinib versus
imatinib for newly diagnosed chronic myeloid leukemia.
N Engl J Med. 2010;362:2251-2259.
25. O’Dwyer MC, Kent E, Parker M, et al. Nilotinib 300 mg
twice daily is effective and well tolerated as first line treatment of Ph-positive chronic myeloid leukemia in chronic
phase: preliminary results of the ICORG 0802 phase 2
study. Blood. 2009;114:1277.
26. Rosti G, Palandri F, Castagnetti F, et al. Nilotinib for the
frontline treatment of Ph(þ) chronic myeloid leukemia.
Blood. 2009;114:4933-4938.
27. Cortes JE, Jones D, O’Brien S, et al. Nilotinib as front-line
treatment for patients with chronic myeloid leukemia in
early chronic phase. J Clin Oncol. 2010;28:392-397.
28. Jabbour E, Hochhaus A, le Coutre P, et al. Minimal crossintolerance between nilotinib and imatinib in patients with
imatinib-intolerant chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML)
in chronic phase (CP) or accelerated phase (AP). J Clin
Oncol. 2008;26:387s.
29. Nicolini FE, Kim D-W, Ceglarek B, et al. Impact of prior
therapy and suboptimal response to imatinib on the efficacy
and safety of nilotinib among 1,422 patients with imatinib-resistant or -intolerant chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) in
chronic phase (CP): sub-analyses of the ENACT (Expanding
Nilotinib Access in Clinical Trials) study. Blood. 2009;114:
866.
30. Kerkela R, Grazette L, Yacobi R, et al. Cardiotoxicity of the
cancer therapeutic agent imatinib mesylate. Nat Med.
2006;12:908-916.
31. Atallah E, Durand JB, Kantarjian H, Cortes J. Congestive
heart failure is a rare event in patients receiving imatinib
therapy. Blood. 2007;110:1233-1237.
32. Khoury HJ, Goldberg SL, Mauro MJ, et al. Dasatinib lack
of cross intolerance to imatinib in patients with chronic myelogenous leukemia chronic phase (CML-CP) intolerant to
imatinib: a retrospective analysis of safety. J Clin Oncol.
2008;26:375s.
33. Shah NP, Kim DW, Kantarjian H, et al. Potent, transient inhibition of BCR-ABL with dasatinib 100 mg daily achieves
rapid and durable cytogenetic responses and high transformation-free survival rates in chronic phase chronic myeloid leukemia patients with resistance, suboptimal response or
intolerance to imatinib. Haematologica. 2010;95:232-240.
34. Kantarjian H, Pasquini R, Levy V, et al. Dasatinib or highdose imatinib for chronic-phase chronic myeloid leukemia
resistant to imatinib at a dose of 400 to 600 milligrams
daily: 2-year follow-up of a randomized phase 2 study
(START-R). Cancer. 2009;115:4136-4147.
35. Quintas-Cardama A, De Souza Santos FP, Kantarjian H,
et al. Dynamics and management of cytopenias associated
with dasatinib therapy in patients with chronic myeloid leukemia in chronic phase after imatinib failure. Cancer.
2009;115:3935-3943.
36. Sprycel (dasatinib) [package insert]. Princeton, NJ: BristolMyers Squibb Company; 2009.
37. Apperley JF, Cortes JE, Kim DW, et al. Dasatinib in the
treatment of chronic myeloid leukemia in accelerated phase
after imatinib failure: the START a trial. J Clin Oncol.
2009;27:3472-3479.
38. Cortes J, Kim DW, Raffoux E, et al. Efficacy and safety of
dasatinib in imatinib-resistant or -intolerant patients with
chronic myeloid leukemia in blast phase. Leukemia.
2008;22:2176-2183.

Cancer

February 15, 2011

Intolerance to TKI therapy/Pinilla-Ibarz et al

39. Kantarjian H, Shah NP, Hochhaus A, et al. Dasatinib versus
imatinib in newly diagnosed chronic-phase chronic myeloid
leukemia. N Engl J Med. 2010;362:2260-2270.
40. Quintas-Cardama A, Kantarjian H, O’Brien S, et al. Pleural
effusion in patients with chronic myelogenous leukemia
treated with dasatinib after imatinib failure. J Clin Oncol.
2007;25:3908-3914.
41. Quintas-Cardama A, Kantarjian H, Ravandi F, et al.
Bleeding diathesis in patients with chronic myelogenous

Cancer

February 15, 2011

leukemia receiving dasatinib therapy. Cancer. 2009;115:
2482-2490.
42. Quintas-Cardama A, Han X, Kantarjian H, Cortes J. Tyrosine kinase inhibitor-induced platelet dysfunction in
patients with chronic myeloid leukemia. Blood. 2009;114:
261-263.
43. Cortes JE, Jones D, O’Brien S, et al. Results of dasatinib
therapy in patients with early chronic-phase chronic myeloid
leukemia. J Clin Oncol. 2010;28:398-404.

697

