HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Author Manuscript

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 16.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2011 April 7; 472(7341): 90–94. doi:10.1038/nature09807.

Tumor Evolution Inferred by Single Cell Sequencing
Nicholas Navin1, Jude Kendall1, Jennifer Troge1, Peter Andrews1, Linda Rodgers1, Jeanne
McIndoo1, Kerry Cook1, Asya Stepansky1, Dan Levy1, Diane Esposito1, Lakshmi
Muthuswamy2, Alex Krasnitz1, Richard McCombie1, James Hicks1, and Michael Wigler1
1Cold

Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, New York 11724, USA

2Ontario

Institute for Cancer Research, Toronto, ON, Canada

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Genomic analysis provides insights into the role of copy number variation in disease, but
most methods are not designed to resolve mixed populations of cells. In tumors, where
genetic heterogeneity is common1–3, very important information may be lost useful for
reconstructing its evolutionary history. Here we show that with flow-sorted nuclei, whole
genome amplification (WGA), and next generation sequencing we can accurately quantify
genomic copy number within an individual nucleus. We apply single nucleus sequencing
(SNS) to investigate tumor population structure and evolution in two breast cancer cases.
Analysis of 100 single cells from a polygenomic tumor revealed three distinct clonal
subpopulations that likely represent sequential clonal expansions. Additional analysis of 100
single cells from a monogenomic primary tumor and its liver metastasis suggested that a
single clonal expansion formed the primary tumor and seeded the metastasis. In both
primary tumors, we also identified an unexpectedly abundant subpopulation of genetically
diverse ‘pseudodiploid’ cells that do not travel to the metastatic site. In contrast to gradual
models of tumor progression, our data indicate that tumors grow by punctuated clonal
expansions with few persistent intermediates.

Author Manuscript

In SNS we isolate nuclei by flow-sorting and amplify DNA using whole genome
amplification (WGA) for massively parallel sequencing (Supplementary Fig. 1). We achieve
low coverage (~6%) of the genome of a single cell, sufficient to quantify copy number from
sequence read depth. Several features of our data analysis were designed for SNS and differ
from previous methods4–6 for measuring copy number from sequencing data. In contrast to
using fixed intervals to calculate copy number, we use variable length bins but with uniform
expected unique counts, which correct for biases that have been reported7–9 in WGA
(Supplementary Figure 2; see Methods). For each single cell, we typically achieve a mean
read density of 138 per bin (SEM±5.55, n=200). Over-replicated loci called ‘pileups’ that
have been previously reported in WGA10–12, do occur in our data but not at recurrent

Author Contributions
N.N. designed and performed experiments and analysis, and wrote manuscript. J.K., A.K., L.M., D.L. and P.A. developed analysis
programs. J.T., L.R., K.C, J.M, D.E. and A.S. performed experiments. R.M. designed experiments. J.H. and M.W. designed
experiments, performed analysis and wrote manuscript.
Database Accession
All data has been deposited into the NCBI Sequence Read Archive (SRA018951.105)
Competing Interests
The authors have no competing interests to declare

Navin et al.

Page 2

Author Manuscript

locations in different cells (Supplementary Fig. 3). Pileups are sufficiently randomly
distributed and sparse so as not to affect counting at the resolution we have chosen (54 kb).
Assuming that single cells will have discrete copy number states, we segment the variable
bins and calculate integer copy number profiles (Supplementary figure 4; see Methods).

Author Manuscript

To validate our method, we compared the sequence counting profile of DNA from a single
SK-BR-3 cell (Fig. 1a) with DNA from one million cells (Fig. 1b). The major amplifications
(RD2, TPD52, ERBB2, BCAS1) and deletions (DCC) are detected in both profiles, as are
much more abundant but less dramatic small changes in copy number. To demonstrate how
reproducible small differences are, we assessed data for a complex region on chromosome
8q13.2-q24.23 that contains more than thirty segments with differing copy number. These
data were reproducible in both a single cell (Fig. 1c) and a million cell sample (Fig. 1d). We
also compared the sequence read profiles from several single cells and from a million cells
to each other and to the profile of array CGH from bulk DNA (Supplementary Fig. 5). In all
instances the profiles showed very high (r2 > 0.85) correlation. The reproducibility and
variation between single cell copy number profiles was also investigated by comparing
seven single cells from a culture of SK-BR-3 and seven from normal human fibroblasts.
These data are displayed as heat maps (Fig. 1e–f), which show that some genomic variation
exists between cells. The diploid fibroblast cultures showed no random events; we observed
only a few consistent events at levels expected for heritable copy number variations.

Author Manuscript

We next selected two high grade (III), triple negative (ER−, PR−, Her2−) ductal carcinomas
(T10, T16P) and a paired metastatic liver carcinoma (T16M) to study tumor population
structure and infer tumor evolution by single cell analysis. T10 was selected to study
primary tumor growth, because it was previously shown13 to be genetically heterogeneous
(polygenomic), and T16P was selected because it was classified as genetically homogeneous
(monogenomic).
T10 was macro-dissected into 12 sectors to preserve anatomical information, and nuclei
were flow-sorted from six sectors (S1–S6) for SNS (Fig. 2a). FACS analysis showed four
major distributions of ploidy: a hypodiploid fraction (F1) exclusive to sectors 1–3; a diploid
2N fraction (F2) in all sectors; and two sub-tetraploid fractions (F3 and F4) in sectors 4–6.
We selected 100 single cells from multiple sectors and ploidy fractions for sequencing and
calculation of integer copy number profiles (Supplementary Table 1).

Author Manuscript

Breast tumors are typically mixtures of cancer cells with normal tissue, stroma, and
infiltrating leukocytes. By histopathology, T10 was assessed to contain 63% normal and
37% tumor cells and noted to be heavily infiltrated with leukocytes. Most of the diploid
nuclei from F2 had flat genome profiles, characteristic of normal cells. Nearly two-thirds
(31/47) of these diploid profiles showed narrow deletions in the T-cell receptor loci or one
or more immunoglobulin variable region loci, consistent with infiltration by immunocytes
(data not shown). Of the remaining sixteen nuclei from F2, twelve showed no discernable
aberrations, but four nuclei exhibited aberrant profiles with diverse chromosome gains and
losses. Each of these ‘pseudodiploid’ nuclei profiles appeared unrelated to the others or to
those of the major tumor cell populations found in fractions F1, F3 and F4.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 16.

Navin et al.

Page 3

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

To determine population substructure we calculated pair-wise distances between the 100
integer copy number profiles, and built a tree using neighbor-joining14 (Fig. 2b). The 100
profiles clustered into four subpopulations (D+P, H, AA and AB) regardless of their sector
of origin. The D+P subpopulation contains predominantly flat diploid (D) profiles, but also
pseudodiploid (P) cells that have diverged by varying degrees from the diploids. The three
major ‘advanced’ tumor subpopulations (H, AA and AB) are highly clonal with complex
genomic rearrangements, and together comprise slightly less than half the cells of the tumor.
These cells were isolated from the hypodiploid (F1) and two sub-tetraploid (F3 and F4)
ploidy fractions, respectively. We had previously identified these subpopulations by
profiling millions of cells by array CGH13, but we could not determine if they were
composite mixtures of different tumor clones. By SNS we can now see that each
subpopulation is composed of cells that share highly similar copy number profiles, likely
representing three clonal expansions. Each subpopulation (H, AA and AB) is clearly related
to the others by many shared genomic alterations, but they have also diverged and developed
distinct attributes (for example, a massive 50-fold amplification of the KRAS oncogene in
AB). The H cells display the characteristic ‘sawtooth’ pattern15 comprising broad
chromosomal deletions (Fig. 2c). They are anatomically segregated in the sectors S1–S3 of
the tumor, whereas the AA and AB clones are intermixed and occupy sectors S4–S6.

Author Manuscript

To understand the relationship between subpopulations, we clustered profiles by
chromosome breakpoints (which are directly related to the steps by which tumor cells
diverge). We identified 657 copy number breakpoints and used them to build a phylogenetic
tree, which closely resembles the structure of the neighbor-joining tree based on copy
number (Supplementary Fig. 6). We also applied biclustering16 to construct a heat map of
breakpoints, and ordered it based on the copy number tree to show which breakpoints were
common or divergent between the major subpopulations (Supplementary Fig. 7a). Although
there is considerable variation within each subpopulation, no obvious further population
substructure was evident. To estimate the common ancestors, we constructed a phylogenetic
lineage using the consensus breakpoint patterns from the major tumor subpopulations (Fig.
2c). This lineage shows that the n1 common ancestor diverged a significant distance from
the diploid cells, but that the distance between n1 and n2 is very small. By contrast, the
divergence of the subpopulations after n1 and n2 is very large, with AB showing the greatest
phylogenetic distance from the diploids. We thus infer that the three subpopulations
emerged when the tumor was much smaller.

Author Manuscript

We investigated a second tumor to determine whether these findings extend. We isolated 52
cells from a primary breast tumor (T16P) and 48 cells from its associated liver metastasis
(T16M). Each tumor was macro-dissected into 6 sectors, three of which were flow-sorted
(Fig. 3a–b). Both T16M and T16P showed diploid peaks (F1) and a single aneuploid
tetraploid peak (F2) of roughly equal cell count in all sectors (Supplementary Table 2),
consistent with histological sections showing approximately 50% tumor and 50% normal
(stromal) cells with low leukocyte infiltration in both samples. To explore population
substructure we again constructed neighbor-joining trees from the integer copy number
profiles, combining the primary and metastasis cells (Fig. 3c). We again observed numerous
pseudodiploid cells, but a single subpopulation of aneuploid cells very diverged from the

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 16.

Navin et al.

Page 4

Author Manuscript

diploid population. As for T10, the 12 pseudodiploid cells from T16P displayed diverse
genomic lesions with no clear relationships to each other or to he main tumor lineage. Of the
24 normal diploids in the primary, two had deletions of the T-cell receptor. There were no
pseudodiploid cells among the 26 diploid cells from the metastasis.

Author Manuscript

These data suggest that the primary tumor mass formed by a single clonal expansion of an
aneuploid cell, and that one of the cells from this expansion subsequently seeded the
metastatic tumor with little further evolution. There are no branches of the tree
corresponding to cells intermediate between the aneuploid subpopulation and the diploid
root. Although closely related, the primary and metastatic aneuploid cells cleanly separate
using the Euclidean metric (Fig. 3c), suggesting the two populations have not mixed since
seeding the metastasis. The differences in the profiles that distinguish the primary and
metastatic tumor populations are in the degree of copy number change rather than
breakpoints (Fig. 3d). In a hierarchical tree created from breakpoints alone, we cannot
cleanly separate primary from metastatic aneuploid cells (Supplementary Fig. 6b).
Moreover, when we calculate common breakpoints in the single cell profiles and apply
biclustering to ordered samples (Supplementary Fig. 7b), a large number of breakpoints are
common to both populations and no breakpoints cleanly distinguish them. By these
analyses, no further population substructure is evident.

Author Manuscript

In contrast to the clear clonal relationships among aneuploid subpopulations, pseudodiploid
cells are unusual in showing remarkable genomic heterogeneity (Fig. 4). Pseudodiploid
profiles are characterized by nonrecurring copy number changes (including whole
chromosome arms) that are not shared between any two pseudodiploid cells, nor with the
corresponding tumor profiles (Fig. 4e). These data suggest that unlike the aneuploid cells,
pseudodiploids do not undergo clonal expansions in the tumor. Nevertheless, they comprise
a substantial proportion of the diploid gated cells: 8% in T10 (4/47) and 33% in T16P
(12/36), or approximately 4% and 24% of the tumor mass, respectively. In contrast, the 18
profiles from single nuclei of normal adjacent breast tissue are all flat (Fig. 4a). The relative
abundance of pseudodiploid cells in primary tumors indicates that they may emerge from an
ongoing aberrant process that generate genomic diversity in the tumor.

Author Manuscript

In principle, we can learn about DNA sequence mutations from SNS data. However, the
sparse sequence coverage makes this analysis problematic. By combining data from multiple
cells, belonging to well defined subpopulations, we can perform global and regional analysis
at the many nucleotide positions where sufficient numbers of sequence reads overlap. When
examined this way, losses of heterozygosity are unequivocally significant, and map in large
contiguous genomic blocks that correlate well with copy number loss (Supplementary Fig. 8
and Supplementary Table 3). The extensive LOH detected in all of the T10 subpopulations
and in T16 suggests that both cancers passed through a hypodiploid stage.
Our study demonstrates that we can obtain robust high-resolution copy number profiles by
sequencing a single cell and that by examining multiple cells from the same cancer, we can
make inferences about the evolution and spread of cancer. Moreover, the identification of
pseudodiploid cells shows that these methods can identify cell types previously undetectable
by other methods. Our findings are consistent with previous findings17 using bulk DNA,

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 16.

Navin et al.

Page 5

Author Manuscript

which suggests that copy number profiles in primary tumors are highly similar to the
metastases. Thus the metastatic cells emerge from a main advanced expansion, and not from
an earlier intermediate or a completely different subpopulation. This is consistent with
recent deep-sequencing studies of primary-met pairs, all suggesting that metastatic cells
arise late in tumor development18–19.

Author Manuscript

There are many gradual models for tumor progression, including clonal evolution20, the
mutator phenotype21,22, and stochastic progression23. While we have examined only two
cancers in depth, both display a pattern of tumor growth which we call ‘punctuated clonal
evolution’, borrowing a term from species evolution used to explain gaps in the fossil
record24. Explicitly, the tumor subpopulations are each distant from their root, without
observable intermediate branching. In contrast to gradual models, this pattern reflects the
sudden emergence of a tumor cell whose rate of effective population growth dramatically
exceeds its rate of genomic evolution.

METHODS
Samples
The frozen ductal carcinoma T10 (CHTN0173) was obtained from the Cooperative Human
Tissue Network, and T16P and T16M were obtained from Asterand (Detroit, MI) Pathology
shows that both tumors were poorly differentiated and high grade (III) as determined by the
Bloom-Richardson score, and triple-negative (ER−, PR− and Her2/Neu−) as determined by
immunohistochemistry. The cell lines used in this study include a normal male immortalized
skin fibroblast (SKN1) and a breast cancer cell line (SK-BR-3). Normal breast tissue was
obtained from Dr. Hanina Hibshoosh from Columbia University.

Author Manuscript

Single Nucleus Sequencing (SNS)
Nuclei were isolated from cell lines and from the frozen tumor using an NST-DAPI buffer
(800 mL of NST [146 mM NaCl, 10 mM Tris base at pH 7.8, 1 mM CaCl2, 21 mM MgCl2,
0.05% BSA, 0.2% Nonidet P-40]), 200 mL of 106 mM MgCl2, 10 mg of DAPI, and 0.1%
DNase-free RNase A. The frozen tumor was first macro-dissected into 12 sectors of equal
size using surgical scalpels and nuclei were isolated from six sectors for FACS by finely
mincing a tumor sector in a Petri dish in 1.0–2.0 mL of NST-DAPI buffer using two no. 11
scalpels in a cross-hatching motion. The cell lines were lysed directly in a culture plate using
the NST-DAPI buffer, after first removing the cell culture media. All nuclei suspensions
were filtered through 37-μm plastic mesh prior to flow-sorting.

Author Manuscript

Single Nuclei were sorted by FACS using the BD Biosystems Aria II flow cytometer by
gating cellular distributions with differences in their total genomic DNA content (or, ploidy)
according to DAPI intensity. First a small amount of prepared nuclei from each tumor
sample was mixed with a diploid control sample (derived from a lymphoblastoid cell line of
a normal person) to accurately determine the diploid peak position within the tumor and
establish FACS collection gates. Before sorting single nuclei, a few thousand cells were
sorted to determine the DNA content distributions for gating. A 96-well plate was prepared
with 10ul of lysis solution in each well from the Sigma-Aldrich GenomePlex© WGA4 kit.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 16.

Navin et al.

Page 6

Author Manuscript

Single nuclei were deposited into individual wells in the 96-well plate along with several
negative controls in which no nuclei were deposited.
Whole genome amplification was performed on single flow-sorted nuclei as described in the
Sigma-Aldrich GenomePlex WGA4 kit (cat # WGA4-50RXN) protocol. WGA fragments
from the frozen breast tumor and SK-BR-3 single cells were used directly for Single-read
library construction using the Illumina Genomic DNA Sample Prep Kit (cat # FC-102-1001)
and following standard protocol with a gel purification size range of 300-250bp. WGA
fragments from the fibroblast cell line were first sonicated using the Diagenode Bioruptor©
using the following program: 2 times, 7 minutes with 30 seconds high on/off mode in ice
cold water. Sonication removes a specific 28bp adapter sequence that is added on during
WGA, and improves the total number of sequencing reads per lane.

Author Manuscript

Single-read libraries from single nuclei were sequenced on individual flow-cell lanes using
the Illumina GA2 analyzer for 76 cycles. Data was processed using the Illumina
GAPipeline-1.3.2 to 1.6.0 Sequence reads were aligned to the human genome (HG18/
NCBI36) using the Bowtie alignment software44 with the following parameters: ‘bowtie –S
–t –m 1 –best –strata –p16’ to report only top scoring unique mappings for each sequence
read. To eliminate PCR duplicates, we removed sequences with identical start coordinates.
Read Depth Counting in Variable Bins

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Copy number is calculated from read density, by dividing the genome into an ‘bins’ and
counting the number of unique reads in each bin. In previous copy number studies read
density was calculated using bins with uniform fixed length 16–19. In contrast we use bins of
variable length, that adjust size depending on the mappability of sequences to regions of the
human genome. In regions of repetitive elements, lower numbers of reads are expected and
thus the bin size is increased. To determine interval sizes we simulated sequence reads by
sampling 200 million sequences of length 48 from the human reference genome (HG18/
NCBI36) and introduced single nucleotide errors with a frequency encountered during
Illumina sequencing. These sequences were mapped back to the human reference genome
using Bowtie15 with unique parameters as described above. We assigned a number of bins to
each chromosome based on the proportion of simulated reads mapped. We then divided each
chromosome into bins with an equal number of simulated reads. This resulted in 50009
genomic bins with no bins crossing chromosome boundaries. The median genomic length
spanned by each bin is 54kb. For each cell the number of reads mapped to each variable
length bin was counted. This variable binning efficiently reduces false deletion events when
compared to uniform length fixed bins as shown in Supplementary Fig. 2b and 2c. For a
single cell we typically measure 138 sequence reads per bin.
Integer Copy Number Quantification
Single cells will have integer copy number states that we can infer from sequence read
counts, as follows. Unique sequence reads are counted in variable bins (Supplemental Fig.
4a) and segmented using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) statistic (Supplemental Fig. 4b). To
estimate the integer differences of copy number states, we calculate Gaussian kernel
smoothed density plots using Splus (MathSoft, Inc.), showing the difference between

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 16.

Navin et al.

Page 7

Author Manuscript

median bin counts for all pair-wise combinations of different segments (Supplemental Fig.
4c–e) The uniform steps between groups are very apparent, and is a general property of
single cell data. We then convert our KS-segmented data into profiles of integer copy
number as follows. We take the differential bin count of the second peak, denoted by an
asterisk in Supplemental Fig. 4a, to represent a copy number “increment” of 1. We then
divide every bin count in the profile by the increment and round to infer the integer copy
number. We show in Supplemental Fig. 4f–g how closely the segmentation profile agrees
with the integer copy number profile. However, for diploid or near diploid cells there are
few to no steps from which to observe the increment, and we use a different method, taking
the increment as the median bin count on the autosomes divided by two.
Gene Annotations

Author Manuscript

Amplifications and deletions identified in the single cell copy number profiles were
annotated to identify UCSC genes. Cancer genes were identified using a compiled database
from the cancer gene consensus and the NCI cancer gene index (Sophic Systems Alliance
Inc., Biomax Informatics A.G).
Neighbor-joining Trees of Copy Number Profiles
Integer copy number profiles of single cells were used to calculate Neighbor-joining trees
using a Euclidean distance metric with Matlab (Mathworks). Branches were flipped to orient
nodes within subpopulations and trees were rooted using the last common diploid node.
Common Breakpoint Detection

Author Manuscript

Breakpoints are defined as bins with a copy number different than the previous bin in
genome order. A transition from a lower copy number to a higher copy number (in genome
order) is considered to be a different event than the opposite transition. To find breakpoint
regions we count each breakpoint in each cell and the immediately neighboring bins. A
contiguous set of bins with counts greater than 1 is designated a breakpoint region. This
results in a set of common breakpoint regions. Each cell is then scored for the occurrence of
each of these events, a one meaning the cell has a copy number transition of that type (low
to high or high to low) in that genomic region and a zero meaning no copy number transition
of that type in that region.
Hierarchical Tree of Chromosome Breakpoints

Author Manuscript

We used chromosome breakpoints patterns to build a neighbor-joining tree. To eliminate
breakpoints events with a high standard deviation, we limited our analysis to breakpoint
regions covering no more than seven adjacent bins (N = 657). Using a Euclidean metric, we
calculated a distance matrix from the binary chromosome breakpoint patterns identified in
the single cells using Matlab (Mathworks). From this distance matrix we constructed a tree
using average-linkage.
Heatmap of Chromosome Breakpoints
The heatmap is based on the same set of breakpoints used to build the neighbor-joining tree.
Blue indicates the presence of an event, and white means no event. The columns are ordered

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 16.

Navin et al.

Page 8

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

as in the tree. The rows are ordered to show clearly which of the subsets of the four main
groups in the tree share which events. The groups are ordered by subpopulation. A four
dimensional binary vector represents each of the 16 possible subsets of these groups (subset
vector). Each breakpoint is represented by a four dimensional vector of the percent of cells
in each group having an event at that breakpoint (the “breakpoint vector”). The angle from
each breakpoint vector to each subset vector is computed as well as the length of each
projection vector. If the length of the projection vector is less than 0.05 the breakpoint vector
is assigned to the empty (0,0,0,0) subset, otherwise it is assigned to the subset vector with
the smallest angle to the breakpoint vector. The rows are ordered by subset vector in the
following order: (1,1,1,1), (0,0,0,1), (0,0,1,0), (0,1,0,0), (1,0,0,0), (0,0,1,1), (0,1,0,1),
(1,0,0,1), (0,1,1,0), (1,0,1,0), (1,1,0,0), (0,1,1,1), (1,0,1,1), (1,1,0,1), (1,1,1,0), (0,0,0,0).
Within each subset the rows are in descending order by the number of cells in that subset
having an event and then in ascending order by the number of cells not in that subset having
an event.
Analysis of LOH Point Mutations in Tumor Subpopulations

Author Manuscript

PCR duplicates were removed from mapped sequence reads and bases with a quality score
below 30 were excluded from analysis. We then determined the set of observed nucleotide
types for each cell sequenced from the T10 and T16P and T16M tumors and every position
in the genome. For each subpopulation we classified a position as the observed nucleotides
only if one or two nucleotide types were each observed in five or more cells in the
subpopulation. For each grouping of subpopulations DH, DA, if a classification was made in
every subpopulation in the group, we translated the classifications into the generic
nucleotides (a,b) based upon the order in which they were seen in the group, from left to
right. We counted the resulting classifications of positions for each group by class, and
determined whether long blocks of identical classifications along a chromosome were
expected by chance. To establish the significance of our classification counts we repeated
our analysis 100 times with randomly permuted cell labels within each group of
subpopulations. We eliminated any effects from differing subpopulation size in a separate
set of runs of the same analysis, each with 24 randomly selected cells in every
subpopulation.

Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.

Acknowledgments
Author Manuscript

We thank Michael Ronemus, Tara Spencer, Anthony Leotta, Jennifer Meth, Melissa Kramer, Laura Gelley, Elena
Ghiban. We also thank Patrick Blake and Nancy Navin at Sophic Systems Alliance Inc. This work was supported
by the NCI T32 Fellowship to N.N., and grants to M.W. and J.H. from the Department of the Army
(W81XWH04-1-0477), the Breast Cancer Research Foundation, and the Simons Foundation. M.W. is an American
Cancer Society Research Professor.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 16.

Navin et al.

Page 9

Author Manuscript

References

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

1. Park SY, Gonen M, Kim HJ, Michor F, Polyak K. Cellular and genetic diversity in the progression
of in situ human breast carcinomas to an invasive phenotype. J Clin Invest. 2010; 120:636–644.
[PubMed: 20101094]
2. Torres L, et al. Intratumor genomic heterogeneity in breast cancer with clonal divergence between
primary carcinomas and lymph node metastases. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2007; 102:143–155.
[PubMed: 16906480]
3. Farabegoli F, et al. Clone heterogeneity in diploid and aneuploid breast carcinomas as detected by
FISH. Cytometry. 2001; 46:50–56. [PubMed: 11241507]
4. Chiang DY, et al. High-resolution mapping of copy-number alterations with massively parallel
sequencing. Nat Methods. 2009; 6:99–103. [PubMed: 19043412]
5. Yoon S, Xuan Z, Makarov V, Ye K, Sebat J. Sensitive and accurate detection of copy number
variants using read depth of coverage. Genome Res. 2009; 19:1586–1592. [PubMed: 19657104]
6. Alkan C, et al. Personalized copy number and segmental duplication maps using next-generation
sequencing. Nat Genet. 2009; 41:1061–1067. [PubMed: 19718026]
7. Geigl JB, et al. Identification of small gains and losses in single cells after whole genome
amplification on tiling oligo arrays. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009; 37
8. Fuhrmann C, et al. High-resolution array comparative genomic hybridization of single
micrometastatic tumor cells. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008; 36
9. Pugh TJ, et al. Impact of whole genome amplification on analysis of copy number variants. Nucleic
Acids Res. 2008; 36
10. Talseth-Palmer BA, Bowden NA, Hill A, Meldrum C, Scott RJ. Whole genome amplification and
its impact on CGH array profiles. BMC Res Notes. 2008; 1:56. [PubMed: 18710509]
11. Hughes S, et al. Use of whole genome amplification and comparative genomic hybridisation to
detect chromosomal copy number alterations in cell line material and tumour tissue. Cytogenet
Genome Res. 2004; 105:18–24. [PubMed: 15218253]
12. Huang J, Pang J, Watanabe T, Ng HK, Ohgaki H. Whole genome amplification for array
comparative genomic hybridization using DNA extracted from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded
histological sections. J Mol Diagn. 2009; 11:109–116. [PubMed: 19197000]
13. Navin N, et al. Inferring tumor progression from genomic heterogeneity. Genome Res. 2010;
20:68–80. [PubMed: 19903760]
14. Saitou N, Nei M. The neighbor-joining method: a new method for reconstructing phylogenetic
trees. Mol Biol Evol. 1987; 4:406–425. [PubMed: 3447015]
15. Hicks J, et al. Novel patterns of genome rearrangement and their association with survival in breast
cancer. Genome Res. 2006; 16
16. Prelic A, et al. A systematic comparison and evaluation of biclustering methods for gene
expression data. Bioinformatics. 2006; 22:1122–1129. [PubMed: 16500941]
17. Liu W, et al. Copy number analysis indicates monoclonal origin of lethal metastatic prostate
cancer. Nat Med. 2009; 15:559–565. [PubMed: 19363497]
18. Ding L, et al. Genome remodelling in a basal-like breast cancer metastasis and xenograft. Nature.
2010; 464:999–1005. [PubMed: 20393555]
19. Yachida S, et al. Distant metastasis occurs late during the genetic evolution of pancreatic cancer.
Nature. 2010; 467:1114–1117. [PubMed: 20981102]
20. Nowell PC. The clonal evolution of tumor cell populations. Science. 1976; 194:23–28. [PubMed:
959840]
21. Loeb LA, Springgate CF, Battula N. Errors in DNA replication as a basis of malignant changes.
Cancer Res. 1974; 34:2311–2321. [PubMed: 4136142]
22. Bielas JH, Loeb KR, Rubin BP, True LD, Loeb LA. Human cancers express a mutator phenotype.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006; 103:18238–18242. [PubMed: 17108085]
23. Heng HH, et al. Stochastic cancer progression driven by non-clonal chromosome aberrations. J
Cell Physiol. 2006; 208:461–472. [PubMed: 16688757]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 16.

Navin et al.

Page 10

Author Manuscript

24. Gould SJ, Eldredge N. Punctuated equilibria comes of age. Nature. 1993; 366:223–227. [PubMed:
8232582]
25. Langmead B, Trapnell C, Pop M, Salzberg SL. Ultrafast and memory-efficient alignment of short
DNA sequences to the human genome. Genome Biol. 2009; 10:R25. [PubMed: 19261174]

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 16.

Navin et al.

Page 11

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Fig. 1. Comparison of SK-BR-3 Single Cells to Millions

(a) The integer copy number profile for a single SK-BR-3 cell is shown compared to (b) a
sequence count profile using millions of cells. (c–d) A region on chromosome 8q13.2q24.23 is plotted showing the integer copy number profile (in red or blue) and a ratio of raw
bin counts in grey for (c) a single cell, and (d) a million cells (e) A heatmap of SK-BR-3
copy number profiles comparing a million cell sample (SM) to seven single cells (S1–S7).
(f) A heatmap of SKN1 normal fibroblast profiles comparing a million cell sample (FM) to
seven single cells (F1–F7).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 16.

Navin et al.

Page 12

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Fig. 2. Analysis of 100 Single Cells from Polygenomic Breast Tumor

Author Manuscript

(a) T10 was macro-dissected into 12 sectors, and nuclei were isolated from six sectors and
flow-sorted by ploidy. FACS profiles show four distributions of ploidy (F1–F4) which were
gated to isolate 100 single cells. (b) Neighbor-joining tree of integer copy number profiles
showing four major branches of evolution (c) Phylogenetic tree of consensus profiles show
the common ancestors and evolutionary distance between subpopulations. Integer copy
number profiles from single cells are displayed below, and pie charts indicate the percentage
of cells that constitute each subpopulation.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 16.

Navin et al.

Page 13

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Fig. 3. Analysis of 100 Single Cells from a Monogenomic Breast Tumor and its Liver Metastasis

Author Manuscript

(a–b) Primary breast tumor T16P was macro-dissected and 52 nuclei were isolated from
three sectors for FACS showing two distributions of ploidy (F1 and F2). (b) Liver metastasis
T16M was macro-dissected and 48 nuclei were isolated from three sectors for FACS also
showing two ploidy distributions (F1 and F2). (c) Neighbor-joining tree of combined integer
copy number profiles from the primary and the metastatic tumors. (d) Comparison of
primary and metastatic aneuploid consensus copy number profiles.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 16.

Navin et al.

Page 14

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Fig. 4. Genetically Diverse Pseudodiploid Cells in the Diploid Fractions of Tumors

Author Manuscript

(a–d) Hematoxylin and eosin stained tissues sections are displayed in the upper panels with
normal (N) and tumor (T) cells percentages indicated. Lower rows display bin counts and
copy number profiles of single cells isolated from the 2N gated ploidy distributions, and the
total number of cells analyzed is indicated below each column. The columns are: (a) normal
breast tissue cells; (b) pseudodiploid cells in T10; (c) pseudodiploid cells in T16P; and (d)
diploid-gated nuclei from T16M. (e) Bin counts and copy number profiles of single cells
from the major aneuploid tumor subpopulations.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 16.

