HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Author Manuscript

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2015 August 20; 524(7565): 361–365. doi:10.1038/nature14587.

Transcriptional control of the autophagy-lysosome system in
pancreatic cancer

Author Manuscript

Rushika M. Perera1,2,3, Svetlana Stoykova1,2,#, Brandon N. Nicolay1,3,#, Kenneth N.
Ross1,2,3, Julien Fitamant1,2,3, Myriam Boukhali1, Justine Lengrand1,2, Vikram
Deshpande3,4, Martin K. Selig4, Cristina R. Ferrone1,3,5, Jeff Settleman1, Gregory
Stephanopoulos6, Nicholas J. Dyson1,3, Roberto Zoncu7, Sridhar Ramaswamy1,2,3, Wilhelm
Haas1,3, and Nabeel Bardeesy1,2,3,*
1Center

for Cancer Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston MA, 02114

2Center

for Regenerative Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston MA, 02114

3Department

of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston MA, 02114

4Department

of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston MA, 02114

5Department

of Surgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston MA, 02114

6Department

of Chemical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge MA,

02139
7Department

of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, CA,

Author Manuscript

94720

Abstract
Activation of cellular stress response pathways to maintain metabolic homeostasis is emerging as a
critical growth and survival mechanism in many cancers1. The pathogenesis of pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (PDA) requires high levels of autophagy2–4, a conserved self-degradative
process5. However, the regulatory circuits that activate autophagy and reprogram PDA cell
metabolism are unknown. We now show that autophagy induction in PDA occurs as part of a
broader transcriptional program that coordinates activation of lysosome biogenesis and function,
and nutrient scavenging, mediated by the MiT/TFE family transcription factors. In PDA cells, the
MiT/TFE proteins6 – MITF, TFE3 and TFEB – are decoupled from regulatory mechanisms that
control their cytoplasmic retention. Increased nuclear import in turn drives the expression of a

Author Manuscript

Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
*

Correspondence: Nabeel Bardeesy, CPZN4216, 185 Cambridge Street, Boston MA, 02114, 617-643-2579 (phone); 617-643-3170
(fax); Bardeesy.Nabeel@MGH.Harvard.edu.
#These authors contributed equally
Author contributions:
R.M.P and N.B. conceived and designed the study. R.M.P and S.S. performed all experiments involving PDA cells and mouse models.
R.M.P. and B.N.N. performed the metabolite measurements. J.F. and J.L. performed immunohistochemistry on human tissue sections.
M.B. and W.H. performed quantitative proteomics measurements and analysis. K.N.R and S.R. performed computational analysis.
V.D. and M.K.S performed pathology assessment and electron microscopy analysis. C.R.F provided essential reagents. N.J.D and G.S.
supervised the metabolite analysis. R.Z. and J.S contributed to the study design. R.M.P. and N.B wrote the manuscript with feedback
from all authors.
RNA-sequencing data are available in GEO under accession GSE62077.

Perera et al.

Page 2

Author Manuscript

coherent network of genes that induce high levels of lysosomal catabolic function essential for
PDA growth. Unbiased global metabolite profiling reveals that MiT/TFE-dependent autophagylysosomal activation is specifically required to maintain intracellular amino acid (AA) pools.
These results identify the MiT/TFE transcription factors as master regulators of metabolic
reprogramming in pancreatic cancer and demonstrate activation of clearance pathways converging
on the lysosome as a novel hallmark of aggressive malignancy.

Author Manuscript

Autophagy delivers cargo to lysosomes for degradation, suggesting the possibility that these
systems may be coordinately regulated in PDA. Immunostaining for LC3 and LAMP2
revealed significant expansion of both organelles in PDA cell lines compared to nontransformed human pancreatic ductal epithelial cells (HPDE) (Fig. 1A, Extended Data
Figure 1A). Notably, transmission electron microscopy demonstrated an increase in
lysosome number/cell in treatment-naïve PDA specimens relative to normal pancreatic tissue
(15.0 ± 1.9 vs 1.0 ± 0.9; Fig. 1B). Thus, increased lysosomal biogenesis accompanies the
expanded autophagosome compartment in PDA and may facilitate high levels of autophagic
flux. Consistent with transcription control of these organellar changes, gene set enrichment
analysis (GSEA) of multiple independent datasets revealed that human PDA specimens have
elevated expression of autophagy-lysosome genes compared to normal pancreatic tissue
(Fig. 1C, Extended Data Figure 1B; Table S1, S2). Accordingly, immunohistochemistry
confirmed upregulation of autophagy/lysosome proteins in the tumor epithelium (Fig. 1D).

Author Manuscript

In normal cells exposed to nutrient stress, the biogenesis of both organelles is under
transcriptional regulation by the MiT/TFE subclass of basic helix-loop-helix transcription
factors6–11. RNA-sequencing data across 10 common solid tumor types revealed high
relative expression of these factors in PDA, with levels only exceeded in melanoma and
kidney cancers, where MiT/TFE are established oncogenes (Extended Data Figure 1C).
Immunohistochemistry demonstrated overexpression of nuclear-localized TFE3 in the
neoplastic epithelium in a subset of PDA (staining scores ≥2 in 23% of PDA versus 3% of
normal pancreas specimens; p<0.001; Fig. 1E, Extended Data Figure 1D; see Methods).
Similarly, microdissected specimens and xenografts exhibited frequent upregulation of
TFEB and MITF mRNA in PDA cells relative to normal ductal epithelium, and subsets of
PDA cell lines showed MiT/TFE overexpression compared with HPDE cells (Extended Data
Figure 1E–H). Generally, a single MiT/TFE family member predominated in individual
specimens.

Author Manuscript

GSEA of multiple human primary PDA datasets and cultured PDA cell lines showed strong
correlation between expression of MiT/TFE factors and the autophagy-lysosome signature
(Fig. 1F, Extended Data Figure 1I–K). Accordingly, knockdown of TFE3 in the 8988T PDA
cell line (TFE3-high, TFEB/MITF-low) resulted in prominent repression of this signature
(global RNA-seq; Fig. 1G, H). Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) confirmed that MITF
and TFE3 bound to multiple autophagy and lysosome genes bearing a consensus CLEAR
(Coordinated Lysosomal Expression and Regulation) element7,8 in PDA cells (Extended
Data Figure 2A). Moreover, knockdown of MITF, TFE3, or TFEB caused down-regulation
of numerous CLEAR-bearing genes in a series of PDA cell lines with high relative
expression of that MiT/TFE family member, whereas no significant changes were seen non-

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.

Perera et al.

Page 3

Author Manuscript

transformed pancreatic lines (HPDE and HPNE) and a pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor cell
lines (QGP1) (Extended Data Figure 2B–D). Expression of RNAi-resistant MITF or TFE3
cDNA restored target gene expression whereas dominant-negative MITF recapitulated the
effects seen with RNAi (Extended Data Figure 2E–G). Thus, MiT/TFE proteins act
selectively in PDA cells to regulate a broad autophagy-lysosomal program under basal
conditions.

Author Manuscript

In non-transformed cells grown in nutrient replete conditions, the MiT/TFE proteins are
phosphorylated by mTORC1 at the lysosome membrane leading to their interaction with
14-3-3 proteins and cytoplasmic retention, whereas mTORC1 inactivation upon starvation
enables their nuclear translocation9–11. Correspondingly, HPDE and HPNE cells exhibited
predominantly cytoplasmic residence of endogenous and ectopically-expressed TFE3,
MITF, and TFEB under full nutrients, and showed nuclear translocation following nutrient
starvation or treatment with the mTOR inhibitor, Torin1 (Fig. 2A–C, Extended Data Figure
3A). In stark contrast, a series of PDA cell lines showed constitutive nuclear localization of
each MiT/TFE protein, regardless of nutrient status or treatment with Torin1 or with
inhibitors of MEK, another pathway implicated in their regulation8 (Fig. 2A–C, Extended
Data Figure 3B–I). Immunoblot for phospho-p70S6K, a readout of mTORC1 activity, and
immunostaining for mTOR and LAMP2 indicated that mTORC1 was active and
demonstrated amino acid-regulated lysosomal association in PDA cells (Extended Data
Figure 3J, K). In addition, all cells exhibited co-immunoprecipitation of TFE3 and MITF
with 14-3-3 and loss of binding upon Torin1 treatment, although the fractional binding in
PDA cells was lower, consistent with the predominantly nuclear residence of the MiT/TFE
proteins (Extended Data Figure 3L). Thus, PDA cells show constitutive nuclear residence of
MiT/TFE despite displaying intact mTORC1 signaling.

Author Manuscript

In order to uncover machinery that overrides cytoplasmic retention mechanisms, we
employed affinity purification and quantitative proteomics12 to identify PDA-specific TFE3interacting proteins. Notably, Importin 8 (IPO8), a member of the Importin-β family of
nucleocytoplasmic transporters13,14, was significantly enriched in TFE3 immunoprecipitates
in PDA cells but not in HPDE cells (Extended Data Figure 4A). We confirmed that FLAGtagged TFE3 bound endogenous IPO8 specifically in PDA cells (Fig. 2D, Extended Data
Figure 4B). In addition, IPO8 was expressed at elevated levels in human PDA specimens and
cell lines compared to controls (Fig. 2E, Extended Data Figure 4C, D).

Author Manuscript

IPO8 and its most closely related homolog, IPO7 direct nuclear import of specific cargo,
including growth regulatory proteins14–19. Accordingly, IPO8 knockdown caused a marked
decrease in nuclear TFE3 and reduced overall TFE3 protein levels in multiple PDA cell lines
(Fig. 2F left, Extended Data Figure 4E). Similar effects were observed for both MITF and
TFEB upon combined IPO8 and IPO7 knockdown (Fig. 2F middle, right, Extended Data
Figure 4F). Importantly, in non-transformed HPDE and HPNE cells, IPO8 knockdown did
not affect basal (cytoplasmic) TFE3 levels nor Torin1-induced nuclear translocation of TFE3
(Extended Data Figure 4G, H). Moreover, MiT/TFE mRNA levels were not significantly
altered by IPO7/IPO8 inactivation (Extended Data Figure 4I). These findings suggest that
Importins may regulate the stability of MiT/TFE proteins in addition to facilitating their
nuclear transport. Indeed, cycloheximide (CHX) treatment studies revealed that IPO8

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.

Perera et al.

Page 4

Author Manuscript

knockdown accelerated TFE3 turnover in 8988T cells (Extended Data Figure 4J). Thus,
IPO8-dependent nuclear accumulation of MiT/TFE factors results in their stabilization and
upregulation of their transcriptional programs in PDA cells.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

We found that constitutive activation of MiT/TFE proteins was critical for autophagylysosome function in PDA cells. Depletion of MiT/TFE proteins across a series of PDA cells
lines resulted in striking defects in lysosome morphology and increased lysosome diameter,
effects commonly associated with lysosomal stress and defective proteolysis20,21 (986.4
± 30.7nm vs 2722 ± 72.6 nm for siCTRL and siTFE3 respectively Fig. 2G, Extended Data
Figure 5A), whereas HPDE cells were minimally affected (Extended Data Figure 5B). These
effects were phenocopied by treatment of PDA cells with the vacuolar-type H(+)-ATPase
inhibitor, Bafilomycin A1 (BafA1) (Fig. 2G). Correspondingly, transmission electron
microscopy and immunofluorescence microscopy of TFE3 knockdown cells revealed
accumulation of autolysosomes containing undigested cargo (Fig. 2H, Extended Data Figure
5C, D). Moreover, there was a pronounced increase in lysosomal pH as demonstrated using
the pH-sensitive dye Oregon Green 514 coupled to dextran (Fig. 2I). Moreover, mCherryGFP-LC3 autophagy reporter assays revealed that TFE3 inactivation decreased autophagic
flux in 8988T cells (55.7% ± 9.6% mCherry+/GFP− spots in siCTRL vs 19.8% ± 2.9% in
siTFE3, Fig. 2J). Finally, to assay proteolytic activity, 8988T cells were fed BODIPY-dyeconjugated BSA (DQ-BSA) that is taken up by macropinocytosis and fluoresces following
proteolysis in lysosomes. TFE3 knockdown or BafA1 treatment resulted in dramatic
decreases in fluorescent puncta co-localized with LAMP2 (14.8 ± 6.1 spots/cell in siCTRL
vs 3.7 ± 1.8 and 0.2 ± 0.7 spots/cell in siTFE3 and BafA1 respectively, Fig. 2K). TMRdextran uptake was not affected, indicating specific impairment in lysosomal proteolysis
rather than in internalization of extracellular cargo (not shown). Notably, lysosomal
breakdown of extracellular albumin scavenged through macropinocytosis is an important
nutrient source in PDA22. Thus, by governing both autophagic flux and lysosomal
catabolism, the MiT/TFE proteins support an integrated cellular clearance program that
enables efficient processing of cargo from autophagy as well as macropinocytosis, providing
PDA cells access to critical sources of both intracellular and extracellular nutrients.
MITF or TFE3 overexpression in pancreatic cells reinforced these findings, demonstrating
induction of autophagy-lysosomal genes, LC3B foci, and lipidated LC3-II that was further
enhanced following treatment with chloroquine (CQ), an inhibitor of lysosome acidification,
indicating marked augmentation of autophagic flux (Extended Data Figure 6A–E).

Author Manuscript

Cargo degraded in the lysosome generates metabolic intermediates that may feed into
multiple pathways23,24. To obtain insight into the metabolic outputs of MiT/TFE-controlled
autophagy-lysosome function, we conducted global metabolite profiling of 8988T and PSN1
cells transfected with TFE3-targeted siRNAs. These studies revealed statistically significant
changes common to both cell lines in 15.2% (53/347) of detected metabolites. Most
prominently altered were amino acids (AA) and their breakdown products, with 31% (25/80)
showing decreased abundance, whereas only restricted changes were observed in other
general metabolite groupings (Fig. 3A; Table S3). TFE3 silencing did not affect AA uptake
(Extended Data Figure 7A), suggesting that the autophagy-lysosome system may supply a
significant fraction of intracellular AA irrespective of external availability in PDA. In

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.

Perera et al.

Page 5

Author Manuscript

support of this model, TFE3 knockdown, BafA1 treatment, and inactivation of autophagy by
ATG5 knockdown significantly decreased intracellular AA levels in PDA cell lines but not
in control cells (Fig. 3B, C; Extended Data Figure 7B–D), and led to activation of AMPactivated protein kinase (AMPK) and decreased cellular ATP levels suggesting induction of
energy stress (Extended Data Figure 8A–C). Reciprocally, overexpression of MITF or TFE3
in HDPE cells caused downregulation of AMPK signaling (Extended Data Figure 8D).

Author Manuscript

These findings suggested that PDA cells should have increased capacity to buffer AA levels
under conditions of nutrient deprivation. To test this, we switched cells to low AA
concentration (10% of normal) and monitored phosphorylation of p70S6K, a readout of
mTORC1 activity that is sensitive to intracellular AA levels25. HPDE cells showed
extinction of p-p70S6K within 5–15 min in 10% AA while PDA cells (8988T and PSN1)
maintained robust levels for >30 min (Fig. 3D). Correspondingly, TFE3 inactivation in
8988T cells greatly accelerated the decline in p-p70S6K (Fig. 3E). Reciprocally, MITF
overexpression in HPDE cells caused p-p70S6K levels to be sustained upon 10% AA
starvation, and markedly increased clonogenic growth in this setting while not affecting
clonogenicity in full nutrients (Fig. 3F, G, Extended Data Figure. 6A–C). Taken together,
these data indicate that PDA cells rely on autophagy-lysosome function for maintenance of
intracellular AA pools, which facilitates survival in response to nutrient stress.

Author Manuscript

Consistent with key roles of MiT/TFE in organelle function and metabolic regulation, the
growth of PDA cell lines expressing high endogenous levels of MITF, TFE3, or TFEB was
significantly impaired by knockdown of that factor, an effect rescued by co-expression of
shRNA-resistant cDNAs (Fig. 4A, B, Extended Data Figure 9A). By contrast, the growth of
HPNE and QGP1 cells was unaffected (Extended Data Figure 9A). As previously reported,
PDA cells were broadly sensitive to CQ treatment compared to control cells2 (Extended
Data Figure 9B). Moreover, ectopic expression of MITF or TFE3 rendered HPNE cells
hypersensitive to CQ, linking MiT/TFE-regulated clearance pathways to these growth
phenotypes (Fig. 4C).
To extend our findings in primary patient-derived samples, we examined a series of early
passage PDA cultures. Importantly, these cells also showed high basal autophagy, nuclearlocalized MiT/TFE proteins, and MiT/TFE-dependent autophagy-lysosome gene expression,
organelle function, and colony forming ability (Extended Data Figure 9C–G).

Author Manuscript

Significantly, knockdown of TFE3 and MITF virtually abolished xenograft tumor growth of
Panc1 and 8988T cells, and PL18 cells, respectively (Fig. 4D, Extended Figure 9H).
Conversely, MITF overexpression enhanced the tumorigenicity of primary KrasG12Dexpressing mouse pancreatic epithelial cells. Whereas KrasG12D control cells formed only
focal low-grade PanIN-like lesions by six weeks following orthotopic injection, coexpression of MITF resulted in large invasive tumors in 3/5 mice (Fig. 4E, Extended Data
Figure 9I). Thus, in keeping with their requirement for augmenting autophagy-lysosome
function, MiT/TFE factors are potent drivers of PDA pathogenesis in vivo.
In summary, our work places a new focus on lysosome regulation by MiT/TFE proteins as a
nexus for metabolic reprogramming in PDA cells. Increased lysosome activity integrates

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.

Perera et al.

Page 6

Author Manuscript

major routes for nutrient scavenging—autophagy and macropinocytosis, thereby maintaining
intracellular AA availability (Fig. 4I). Escape of MiT/TFE factors from inhibition by
mTORC1 enables cancer cells to maintain robust activation of anabolic pathways while
simultaneously benefiting from the metabolic fine-tuning and adaptation to stress afforded
by activation of autophagy and lysosomal catabolism. Thus, we propose that lysosome
activation under the control of the MiT/TFE transcriptional program is a novel hallmark of
PDA. These findings, together with recent work26–28, suggest that targeting aberrant
lysosomal function has potential therapeutic benefit in cancer.

Supplementary Materials and Methods
Materials

Author Manuscript

Reagents were obtained from the following sources: antibodies against MITF (sc-71587)
from Santa Cruz Biotechnology; GAPDH (MAB374) from Millipore; TFE3 from Cell
Marque (MRQ-37; 354R-14)); LAMP2 (ab-25631) from Abcam; TFEB (4240), LC3B
(3868), phospho-T389 S6K1 (9234), S6K1 (2708), phospho-AMPK (Thr 172) (2535),
AMPK (2603), phospho-ACC (Ser 79) (3661), ACC (3676), Lamin (2032), mTOR (2893)
and the FLAG epitope (2368) from Cell Signaling Technology; IPO8 (NBP2-24751) and
LC3II (NB600-1384) from Novus Biologicals; CTSS (HPA002988), ATP6V1H
(HPA023421) and ULK2 (HPA009027) from Sigma Aldrich; FLAG M2 affinity gel, amino
acids from Sigma Aldrich; RPMI, DMEM, fetal bovine serum (FBS) and dialyzed FBS
(dFBS), Alexa 488 and 568-conjugated secondary antibodies; 70KDa Dextran-Oregon
Green 514, DQ-Green-BSA from Invitrogen; amino acid free RMPI from US Biologicals;
Bafilomycin A1 from Tocris.

Author Manuscript

Cell Culture
Cell lines were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection. Patient-derived PDA
cultures were generated at Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH). Informed consent was
obtained from all subjects. STR profiling was performed for all cell lines by the MGH
Center for Molecular Therapeutics). Primary human samples and PDA cell lines were
generated from ascites fluid under IRB approved protocols 02–240 and 2007P001918 (see
also Supplemental Table S4). All lines used had verified activating KRAS mutations. Cells
were cultured in the following media: 8988T, Panc1, PL18, PSN1, 8902, in DMEM
supplemented with 10% FBS; HupT3, KLM1 in RPMI with 10% FBS; HPDE cells were
cultured as described previously30. Negative mycoplasma contamination status of all cell
lines and primary cells used in the study was established using LookOut Mycoplasma PCR
Kit (Sigma, MP0035).

Author Manuscript

Constructs
N-terminal FLAG tagged human MITF-H isoform expression constructs were generated by
subcloning the cDNA of MITF-H (Origene) into the NheI and EcoRI sites of the pLJM1
(Addgene) lentiviral vector, the NotI and EcoRI sites of the pRetroX-Tight-Pur (Clonetech)
Doxycycline inducible vector or the EcoRI and SalI sites of the pBabe-puro retroviral vector.
Dominant negative MITF-H isoform lacking the 5′ transactivation domain was generated as
previously described for the MITF-M isoform 31. Briefly, the first 280 aa corresponding to

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.

Perera et al.

Page 7

Author Manuscript

840 bp was deleted followed by deletion of R301 (corresponding to R218 of MITF-M). This
cDNA was cloned into the NheI and EcoR1 sites of pLJM1. N-terminal FLAG tagged full
length human TFE3 expression constructs were generated by subcloning the cDNA of TFE3
from pcDNA3.1-(HA)2-TFE3 (obtained from Dr. David Fisher, MGH) into the BamHI and
EcoRI sites of the pBabe-puro retroviral vector. GFP tagged MITF and TFE3 were generated
by subcloning the cDNA of MITF-H into BglII and SalI sites and TFE3 into HindIII and
BamHI sites of the pEGFP-C1 (Clonetech) vector. siRNA resistant expression constructs of
MITF and TFE3 were generated via Quick-change site directed mutagenesis (Agilent
Technologies). mCherry-GFP-LC3 was a kind gift from Alec Kimmelman (Dana Farber
Cancer Institute).
siRNA and lentiviral-mediated shRNA targets

Author Manuscript

siRNA against MITF, TFE3, TFEB, ATG5 and IPO8 were purchased from Ambion and
Thermo Scientific. The RNAi Consortium clone IDs for the shRNAs used in this study are
as follows: shMITF: TRCN0000329793 (CGGGAAACTTGATTGATCTTT),
TRCN0000019122 (CGTGGACTATATCCGAAAGTT); shTFEB: TRCN0000013108
(CCCACTTTGGTGCTAATAGCT), TRCN0000013109
(CGATGTCCTTGGCTACATCAA). shRNA constructs against human TFE3 were generated
by annealing oligonucleotides against human TFE3 (corresponding to the sequence of the
siRNA described below) into the AgeI and EcoRI sites of pLKO.1-puro vector. TFE3 target
sequences are the following: GCAGCTCCGAATTCAGGAACT;
CGCAGGCGATTCAACATTAAC; GGAATCTGCTTGATGTGTACA.
Cell proliferation and colony formation assay

Author Manuscript

Cells were plated in 12-well plates at 30,000 cells per well in 2 mL of complete culture
media or in 6-well plates at 2,000 cells per well in 2 mL of media. At the indicated time
points, cells were trypsinized and counted. Colony plates were fixed 7 days post-plating in
4% paraformaldehyde and stained with 0.1% crystal violet.
Amino acid starvation and Bafilomycin A1 treatment
10% AA starvation was conducted by incubating cells in AA free RMPI supplemented with
10 mM glucose, and 10% AA calculated relative to levels present in RPMI media. Stock
solutions of AA were made from individual powders. Where BafA1 treatment was
performed, cells were incubated with 150 nM BafA1. Acute AA starvation during colony
formation was conducted by incubating cells in AA free media for 18 hrs on day 2 postplating. Media was then changed to complete growth media for an additional 6 days of cell
growth.

Author Manuscript

SDS-PAGE analysis
Cells were lysed in ice-cold lysis buffer (150 mM NaCl, 20 mM Tris (pH 7.5), 1mM EDTA,
1mM EGTA, 1% Triton X-100, 2.5 mM sodium pryophosphate, 1mM β-glycerophosphate,
1 mM sodium vanadate, and one tablet of EDTA-free protease inhibitors [Roche] per 10 ml).
Samples were clarified by centrifugation and protein content measured using BCA protein
assay kit (Thermo Scientific). 30 mg protein was resolved on 9% SDS-PAGE gels and

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.

Perera et al.

Page 8

Author Manuscript

transferred onto PVDF membranes (GE Healthcare Life Sciences, Pittsburgh, PA).
Membranes were blocked in Tris-buffered saline (TBS) containing 5% non-fat dry milk and
0.1% Tween 20 (TBS-T), prior to incubation with primary antibody overnight at 4°C. The
membranes were then washed with TBS-T followed by exposure to the appropriate
horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody for 45 min and visualized on Kodak
X-ray film using the enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL) detection system (Thermo
Scientific). Subcellular fractionation was performed using the Thermo Scientific NE-PER
nuclear and cytoplasmic fractionation kit according to manufactures procedures. For
immunoprecipitation experiments, 1–3 μg of clarified protein lysate from cell lines stably
expressing FLAG tagged MiT/TFE proteins was captured on anti-FLAG antibody
conjugated protein A-agarose beads (M2-FLAG affinity gel; Sigma Aldrich). Immune
complexes were washed and analyzed via SDS-PAGE and western blotting. Immunoglobulin
G antibody was used as a control.

Author Manuscript

Metabolite extraction

Author Manuscript

Samples were extracted while cells were in the exponential growth phase. Wells were
washed with 1XPBS and aspirated. 600μL of −80°C MeOH:H2O (50:50) was added to each
well and the plate was then placed at −80°C for 1–1.5hr. As plates were thawing on ice, cells
were detached by scraping and transferred to a 1.5mL tube and placed on dry ice. Samples
were vortexed at 4°C for 30 seconds. To clarify homogenates, samples were centrifuged at
20K x g, for 7 minutes at 4°C. Clarified supernatants were transferred to new 1.5mL tubes.
600μL of Choloroform (stabilized with amylene) was added to each sample, one at a time,
and the sample was immediately vortexed at RT for 30 seconds, and then placed on ice.
Phase separation was achieved by centrifugation at 20K x g, for 0.25hr at 4°C. The aqueous
(polar) phase was extracted and transferred to a fresh 1.5mL tube. The samples were
evaporated by SpeedVac, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at −80° for further
processing.
Derivatization (all samples)
Evaporated samples were warmed to RT by quickly spinning them in a SpeedVac. Samples
were dissolved in 30μl of 2% methoxyamine hydrochloride in pyridine (MOX) (Pierce) at
37°C for 1.5 hrs. Samples were derivatized by adding 45μl of N-methyl-N-(tertbutyldimethylsilyl)trifluoroacetamide (MBTSTFA) + 1% tert-butyldimethylchlorosilane
(TBDMCS; Pierce) at 60°C for 1 hr.
GC-MS/MS analysis

Author Manuscript

GC-MS analysis was performed as described 32,33. Briefly, analysis was performed on an
Agilent 6890 GC instrument that contained a 30m DB-35MS capillary column, which was
interfaced to an Agilent 5975B MS. Electron impact (EI) ionization was set at 70 eV. Each
analysis was operated in scanning mode, recording mass-to-charge-ratio spectra in the range
of 100 – 605 m/z. For each sample 1μl was injected at 270°C, using helium as the carrier gas
at a flow rate of 1 ml/min. To mobilize metabolites, the GC oven temperature was held at
100°C for 3 min and increased to 300°C at 3.5°C/min. Samples were analyzed in triplicate.
Metabolite levels where normalized to cell number and/or protein and plotted as fold change
relative to control conditions.
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.

Perera et al.

Page 9

Immunofluorescence assays

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Cells were plated on fibronectin-coated glass coverslips at 100,000–300,000 cells/coverslip.
12–16 hours later, the slides were rinsed with PBS once and fixed for 15 min with 4%
paraformaldehyde at RT or for 5min with −20 °C methanol. The slides were rinsed twice
with PBS and cells were permeabilized with 0.05% Triton X-100 for 2 min. After rinsing
twice with PBS, the slides were incubated with primary antibody in 5% normal goat serum
for 1 hr at room temperature, rinsed four times with PBS, and incubated with secondary
antibodies produced in goat (diluted 1:400 in 5% normal goat serum) for 45 min at room
temperature in the dark. Slides were mounted on glass slides using Vectashield (Vector
Laboratories) and imaged on a spinning disk confocal system (Perkin Elmer) or a Zeiss
Laser Scanning Microscope (LSM) 710. Images were processed using ImageJ and Adobe
PhotoshopCS4. For quantification of lysosome diameter, ImageJ software was used to draw
lines across 130 – 290 lysosomes from 3–5 fields containing 4–6 cells/field. Line pixel
values were converted into μm based on objective magnification and camera pixel size.
Presented data are representative of 3–5 replicate experiments. DQ-BSA experiments were
performed as previously described34. Briefly, cells were incubated with DQ-BSA for 30 min
and subsequently chased for 1hr in DQ-BSA free media. Were indicated, treatment with
BafA1 was for 1 hr at 100 nM. The number of DQ-BSA spots co-localizing with LAMP2
positive lysosomes was counted. Measurement of autolysosome maturation was performed
in cells transfected with the mCherry-GFP-LC3 reporter. Cells were transfected with
siCTRL or siMITF/siTFE3 and 48 hrs later transfected with the mCherry-GFP-LC3. After
24 hrs cells were fixed in 4% PFA and quantification of total number of autolysosomes
(mCherry+/GFP− spots) compared to total spots/cell (N > 1000 total spots from N = 10
cells/condition) for at least 3 independent experiments was counted.

Author Manuscript

Histology and immunostaining

Author Manuscript

Tissue samples were fixed overnight in 4% buffered formaldehyde, and then embedded in
paraffin and sectioned (5 mm thickness) by the DF/HCC Research Pathology Core.
Haematoxylin and eosin staining was performed using standard methods. For
immunohistochemistry, unstained slides were baked at 55 °C overnight, deparaffinized in
xylenes (two treatments, 6 min each), rehydrated sequentially in ethanol (5 min in 100%, 3
min in 95%, 3 min in 75%, and 3 minin 40%), and washed for 5 min in 0.3%Triton
X-100/PBS (PBST) and 3min in water. For antigen unmasking, specimens were cooked in a
2100 Antigen Retriever (Aptum Biologics) in 1xAntigen Unmasking Solution, Citric Acid
Based (H-3300, Vector Laboratories), rinsed three times with PBST, incubated for 10 min
with 1% H2O2 at room temperature to block endogenous peroxidase activity, washed three
times with PBST, and blocked with5%goat serum in PBST for 1 h. Primary antibodies were
diluted in blocking solution as follows: anti-TFE3 (Cell marque, 354R-14) 1:100; anti-CTSS
(Sigma, HPA002988) 1:200; anti-ATP6V1H (Sigma, HPA023421) 1:100; anti-ULK2
(Sigma, HPA009027) 1:100, and incubated with the tissue sections at 4 °C overnight. The
evaluation of MITF and TFEB protein levels in patient PDA tissue could not be evaluated
due to lack of antibodies suitable for IHC. Commercially available MITF antibodies for IHC
are specific to the melanoma (MITF-M) isoform or cross-react with other MiT/TFE family
members. Specimens were then washed three times for 3 min each in PBST and incubated
with biotinylated secondary antibody (Vector Laboratories) in blocking solution for 1 h at
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.

Perera et al.

Page 10

Author Manuscript

room temperature. Specimens were then washed three times in PBST and treated with ABC
reagent (Vectastain ABC kit #PK-6100) for 30 min, followed by three washes for 3 min
each. Finally, slides were stained for peroxidase for 3 min with the DAB(di-aminebenzidine)
substrate kit (SK-4100, Vector Laboratories), washed with water and counterstained with
haematoxylin. Immunostaining was assessed by semi-quantitative analysis of tissue
microarray, quantifying the intensity of stained tumor cells scored on a scale from 0 (no
staining) to 3 (strongest intensity). Stained slides were photographed with an OlympusDP72
microscope.
Human samples

Author Manuscript

PDA samples used for IHC and generation of early passage PDA cultures were obtained
under IRB approved protocols 02–240 and 2007P001918. The samples for IHC were from
patients resected at Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH) between 2001 and 2012.
Pathological diagnosis of PDA was confirmed by a gastrointestinal cancer pathologist at
MGH (V.D.). Early passage PDA cultures were derived from ascites specimens. Patients
were verified to have PDA from biopsies.
Electron Microscopy

Author Manuscript

For in vitro studies, tissue culture specimens in confluent 6-well or 10-cm plates were fixed
directly with gentle rocking for 15 minutes at room temperature with a glutaraldehyde
fixative (2.5 % glutaraldehyde, 2% paraformaldehyde, 0.025% calcium chloride, in a 0.1M
sodium cacodylate buffer, pH 7.4), gently scraped and pelleted at 500xg, and washed twice
with cacodylate buffer. To make a cell block, the cells were centrifuged and resuspended in
warm (60°C) 2% agar in a warm water bath to keep the agar fluid. The cells were then
centrifuged again and the agar allowed to harden in an ice water bath. The tissue containing
tip of the centrifuge tube was cut off resulting in an agar block with the cells embedded
within it. This agar block was subsequent routinely processed in a Leica Lynx automatic
tissue processor. Briefly, the tissue was post-fixed in osmium tetroxide, stained En Bloc with
uranyl acetate, dehydrated in graded ethanol solutions, infiltrated with propylene oxide/Epon
mixtures, embedded in pure Epon, and polymerized over night at 60°C. One micron sections
were cut, stained with toluidine blue, and examined by light microscopy. Representative
areas were chosen for electron microscopic study and the Epon blocks trimmed accordingly.
Thin sections were cut with an LKB 8801 ultramicrotome and diamond knife, stained with
lead citrate, and examined in a FEI Morgagni transmission electron microscope. Images
were captured with an AMT digital CCD camera.

Author Manuscript

For analysis of human tissue, fresh biopsy tissue placed into Karnovsky’s KII Solution
(2.5% glutaraldehyde, 2.0% paraformaldehyde, 0.025% calcium chloride, in a 0.1M sodium
cacodylate buffer, pH 7.4), fixed overnight at 4°C, and stored in cold buffer. Subsequently,
they were post-fixed in osmium tetroxide, stained En Bloc with uranyl acetate, dehydrated in
graded ethanol solutions, infiltrated with propylene oxide/Epon mixtures, flat embedded in
pure Epon, and polymerized over night at 60°C. One micron sections were cut, stained with
toluidine blue, and examined by light microscopy. Representative areas were chosen for
electron microscopic study and the Epon blocks were trimmed accordingly. Thin sections
were cut with an LKB 8801 ultramicrotome and diamond knife, stained with Sato’s lead,

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.

Perera et al.

Page 11

Author Manuscript

and examined in a FEI Morgagni transmission electron microscope. Images were captured
with a AMT (Advanced Microscopy Techniques) 2K digital CCD camera.
Measurement of lysosomal pH

Author Manuscript

Determination of lysosomal pH was carried out on intact cells by ratiometric imaging of the
pH-sensitive dye Oregon Green 514, as described35,36. 8988T cells were transfected with
control siRNA or TFE3 siRNA. One day before the experiment, 80,000 cells were plated in
black 96-multiwell plates in low serum and low glucose media. On the day of the
experiment, cells were fed 30 μg/ml 70KDa Dextran conjugated to Oregon Green 514 (DxOG514, Invitrogen) for 6 hrs in full media. Cells were rinsed 3 times to remove excess dye,
and chased for 2 hrs in media free of Dx-OG514, which results in the selective accumulation
of Dx-OG514 in lysosomes. Dx-OG514 fluorescence was collected at 530 nm upon
excitation at 440nm and 490nm in a Spectramax microplate reader (Molecular Devices). The
490/440 fluorescence emission ratios were interpolated to a calibration curve. The
calibration curve was built by bathing cells in a K+ isotonic solution (145 mM KCl, 10 mM
glucose, 1 mM MgCl2, and 20 mM of either HEPES, MES, or acetate) buffered to pH
ranging from 3.5 to 7.0 and containing 10 μg/ml Nigericin. The 490/440 ratios were plotted
as a function of pH, and fitted to a Boltzmann sigmoid. All measurements were performed in
quadruplicate. Presented data are representative of 3 replicate experiments.
Quantitative RT-PCR

Author Manuscript

Total cellular RNA was extracted using RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA) and
reverse transcription was performed from 2 μg of total RNA using the QuantiTect Reverse
Transcription Kit (Qiagen). Quantitative RT-PCR was performed with FastStart Universal
SYBR Green (Roche) in a MX3005P continuous fluorescence detector (Stratagene) or using
a Lightcycler 480 (Roche). PCR reactions were performed in triplicate and the relative
amount of cDNA was calculated by the comparative CT method using the 18S ribosomal
RNA sequences as a control. Primer sequences are available upon request. MITF isoform
specific PCR was conducted as previously described 37.
Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (ChIP)

Author Manuscript

ChIP experiments were conducted using the Chromatin Immunoprecipitation assay kit
(Millipore) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, 106 cells expressing FLAGtagged MITF or TFE3 were fixed with 1% formaldehyde for 10 minutes (for FLAG-MITF
experiments, cells were fixed 48 hrs post Doxycycline treatment). Cells were washed twice
with ice-cold PBS and lysed in ice-cold SDS lysis buffer containing protease inhibitors
(Roche). Chromatin extraction and DNA sonication were conducted according to
manufacturer’s protocol. DNA was recovered from immune complexes on M2-FLAG
affinity gel. The immuno-precipitated DNA was recovered and analyzed by real-time PCR.
ChIP primers have been previously described 38.
Xenograft studies
Mice were housed in pathogen-free animal facilities. All experiments were conducted under
protocol 2005N000148 approved by the Subcommittee on Research Animal Care at

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.

Perera et al.

Page 12

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Massachusetts General Hospital. For subcutaneous xenografts, Panc1 ,8988T or PL18 cells
were infected with lentiviral shRNAs targeting TFE3 (n=2), MITF (n=2) and GFP (control
hairpin, n=1) and subjected to a puromycin selection (2 μg/mL) in vitro. 1.5 – 2.5 × 106
cells, suspended in a 1:1 mixture of Hanks Buffered Saline Solution (HBSS):matrigel, were
injected subcutaneously into the lower flank of 3–4 female NOD.CB17-Prkdcscid/J mice per
group (6–10 weeks of age) (purchase from Jackson Laboratories, strain #001303). Tumor
length and width were measured weekly and the volume was calculated according to the
formula (length × width2)/2. All xenograft experiments with human PDA lines were
approved by the HMS Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) under
protocol number 04–605. For orthotopic mouse studies, MITF or GFP was stably expressed
in mouse PanIN primary cells39. Alternatively, a doxycycline-inducible expression construct
for MITF was also stably expressed in mouse PanIN primary cells. 1 × 106 cells were
orthotopically injected in a 1:1 mixture of matrigel:PBS into the pancreas of SCID mice (n =
5/group). Mice were euthanized 2 months post implantation, pancreas were harvested and
submitted for histological examination. No mice were excluded from the analysis.
Experiments were designed to detect a 50% change in tumor size with 80% power and a
type I error of 5% using the T-test.
Image analysis and Statistics
Image analysis, including densitometry and measurement of fluorescence intensity, was
conducted using Image J software (NIH). Statistical analyses of results are expressed as
mean ± standard deviation, unless otherwise specified. Significance was analyzed using 2tailed Student’s t test. A p value of less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
Gene expression profiling and gene-set enrichment analysis

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

To build a comprehensive autophagy-lysosome gene signature (geneset) we combined
published lysosome proteomics40,41 and autophagy interactome datasets 42 together with
known lysosomal disease associated genes43 (see Table S1). Datasets used for the metaanalysis in Fig 1C, F, and S1B and C are accessible from GEO (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gds/) including GSE16515, GSE28735, and GSE15471, from TCGA
(http://cancergenome.nih.gov/), from CCLE (http://www.broadinstitute.org/software/cprg/?
q=node/11). For the GEO and CCLE data sets, raw expression values in the form of CEL
files were collected and then processed using RMA in the R bioconductor package. For
TCGA data, expression data sets were created by combining RNASeqV2 Level3 normalized
gene result files for individual samples and producing tables with genes in rows and samples
in columns. Data for the 8988T cells of Figure 1G, H was processed using a standard RNAseq pipeline that used Trimmomatic to clip and trim the reads, used tophat2 to align the
reads to hg19, and used cuffdiff to calculate differential expression. Gene Set Enrichment
Analysis (GSEA) (http://www.broadinstitute.org/gsea/index.jsp) of the expression data was
used to assess enrichment of the autophagy-lysosome gene signature. Depending upon the
data set, there were several different methods used to rank genes for GSEA: In the PDA
samples for Figures 1F and S1 J, I, genes were ranked according to Pearson correlation with
a meta-gene formed by the mean expression of MITF, TFE3, and TFEB and p-values were
obtained by permuting the phenotype (2500 permutations). In the 8988T cells of Figure 1G,
H, a pairwise GSEA was performed by creating ranked lists of genes using the log2 ratio of
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.

Perera et al.

Page 13

Author Manuscript

shTFE3 to shControl and p-values were obtained by permuting the gene set (1000
permutations). In the paired tumor / normal PDA data sets of Figure S1B, a paired t-test
between matched tumor normal samples was used to rank genes and the ranked list was used
in GSEA with p-values from permuting the gene set (2500 permutations). For Figure S1K,
DAVID analysis of PDA cell lines in CCLE was performed as described13 by using Pearson
correlation to select the 100 genes most correlated with TFE3 and MITF and checking for
enriched pathways.
Quantitative proteomics on TFE3 associated proteins

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Enriched proteins were subjected to multiplexed quantitative proteomics analysis using
tandem-mass tag (TMT) reagents on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo
Scientific). Disulfide bonds were reduced with ditheiothreitol (DTT) and free thiols
alkylated with iodoacetamide as described previously44. Proteins were then precipitated with
tricholoracetic acid, resuspended in 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.5) and 1 M urea and digested first
with endoproteinase Lys-C (Wako) for 17 hours at room temperature and then with
sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) for 6 hours at 37 °C. Peptides were desalted over SepPak C18 solid-phase extraction (SPE) cartridges (Waters), the peptide concentration was
determined using a BCA assay (Thermo Scientific) and a maximum of 50 μg of peptides
were labeled with one out of the available TMT-10plex reagents (Thermo Scientific)45. To
achieve this, peptides were dried and resuspended in 50 μl of 200 mM HEPES (pH 8.5) and
30 % acetonitrile (ACN) and 10 μg of the TMT in reagent in 5 μl of anhydrous ACN was
added to the solution, which was incubated at room temperature (RT) for one hour. The
reaction was then quenched by adding 6 μl of 5 % (w/v) hydroxylamine in 200 mM HEPES
(pH 8.5) and incubation for 15 min at RT. The solutions were acidified by adding 50 μl of
1 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and samples that were quantified in one mass spectrometry
measurement were pooled before being subjected to desalting over a Sep-Pak C18 (SPE)
cartridge. The peptide mixtures was then dried and resuspended in 8 μl, 3 of which were
analyzed by microcapillary liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry on an
Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer and using a recently introduced multistage (MS3)
method to provide highly accurate quantification44,45.

Author Manuscript

The mass spectrometer was equipped with an EASY-nLC 1000 integrated autosampler and
HPLC pump system. Peptides were separated over a 100 μm inner diameter microcapillary
column in-house packed with first 0.5 cm of Magic C4 resin (5 μm, 100 Å, Michrom
Bioresources), then with 0.5 cm of Maccel C18 resin (3 μm, 200 Å, Nest Group) and 29 cm
of GP-C18 resin (1.8 μm, 120 Å, Sepax Technologies). Peptides were eluted applying a
gradient of 8–27 % ACN in 0.125 % formic acid over 165 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min.
To identify and quantify the TMT-labeled peptides we applied a synchronous precursor
selection MS3 method44–46 in a data dependent mode. The scan sequence was started with
the acquisition of a full MS or MS1 one spectrum acquired in the Orbitrap (m/z range, 500–
1200; resolution, 60,000; AGC target, 5×105; maximum injection time, 100 ms), and the ten
most intense peptide ions from detected in the full MS spectrum were then subjected to MS2
and MS3 analysis, while the acquisition time was optimized in an automated fashion (Top
Speed, 5 sec). MS2 scans were done in the linear ion trap using the following settings:
quadrupole isolation at an isolation width of 0.5 Th; fragmentation method, CID; AGC

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.

Perera et al.

Page 14

Author Manuscript

target, 1×104; maximum injection time, 35 ms; normalized collision energy, 30 %). Using
synchronous precursor selection the 10 most abundant fragment ions were selected for the
MS3 experiment following each MS2 scan. The fragment ions were further fragmented
using the HCD fragmentation (normalized collision energy, 50 %) and the MS3 spectrum
was acquired in the Orbitrap (resolution, 60,000; AGC target, 5×104; maximum injection
time, 250 ms).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Data analysis was performed on an on an in-house generated SEQUEST-based47 software
platform. RAW files were converted into the mzXML format using a modified version of
ReAdW.exe. MS2 spectra were searched against a protein sequence database containing all
protein sequences in the human UniProt database (downloaded 02/04/2014) as well as that
of known contaminants such as porcine trypsin. This target component of the database was
followed by a decoy component containing the same protein sequences but in flipped (or
reversed) order48. MS2 spectra were matched against peptide sequences with both termini
consistent with trypsin specificity and allowing two missed trypsin cleavages. The precursor
ion m/z tolerance was set to 50 ppm, TMT tags on the N-terminus and on lysine residues
(229.162932 Da) as well as carbamidomethylation (57.021464 Da) on cysteine residues
were set as static modification, and oxidation (15.994915 Da) of methionines as variable
modification. Using the target-decoy database search strategy48 a spectra assignment false
discovery rate of less than 1 % was achieved through using linear discriminant analysis with
a single discriminant score calculated from the following SEQUEST search score and
peptide sequence properties: mass deviation, XCorr, dCn, number of missed trypsin
cleavages, and peptide length49. The probability of a peptide assignment to be correct was
calculated using a posterior error histogram and the probabilities for all peptides assigned to
a protein were combined to filter the data set for a protein FDR of less than 1 %. Peptides
with sequences that were contained in more than one protein sequence from the UniProt
database were assigned to the protein with most matching peptides49.

Author Manuscript

TMT reporter ion intensities were extracted as that of the most intense ion within a 0.03 Th
window around the predicted reporter ion intensities in the collected MS3 spectra. Only
MS3 with an average signal-to-noise value of larger than 28 per reporter ion as well as with
an isolation specificity44 of larger than 0.75 were considered for quantification. Reporter
ions from all peptides assigned to a protein were summed to define the protein intensity. A
two-step normalization of the protein TMT-intensities was performed by first normalizing
the protein intensities over all acquired TMT channels for each protein based to the median
average protein intensity calculated for all proteins. To correct for slight mixing errors of the
peptide mixture from each sample a median of the normalized intensities was calculated
from all protein intensities in each TMT channel and the protein intensities were normalized
to the median value of these median intensities.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.

Perera et al.

Page 15

Author Manuscript

Extended Data

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Extended Data Figure 1. Tumor-specific expression and constitutive activation of MiT/TFE
factors in PDA

Author Manuscript

a) Immunofluorescence staining of autophagosomes (LC3) and lysosomes (LAMP2)
showing extensive overlap of these organelles and increased LC3 immunofluorescence in
PDA cell lines (graph at right; error bars indicate mean ± s.e.m for N = 3 independent
experiments with at least 130 cells scored). Scale bar = 11 μm. b) GSEA of different human
PDA datasets for enrichment of the autophagy-lysosome gene signature in tumor versus
normal tissue (GEO accession numbers indicated). c) Mean expression (RPKM; reads per
kilobase per million) of TFE3, MITF, and TFEB individually or cumulatively as a meta-gene
formed by the mean of the three transcription factors (3TF) in primary tumor specimens

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.

Perera et al.

Page 16

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

from the indicated malignancies (TCGA dataset). d) TFE3 and MITF antibody validation by
western blotting in cells treated with the indicated siRNA. TFE3 antibody IHC validation
using alveolar soft part sarcoma (ASPS) tissue. This antibody (MRQ-37, Cell Marque) is
used as a clinical diagnostic for ASPS. Scale Bar = 100 μm (top), 20 μm (bottom). e) Gene
expression analysis showing upregulation of MiT/TFE genes in subsets of PDA relative to
normal pancreatic ductal tissue. SAGE data29 from normal microdissected pancreatic ductal
cells (normal microdissected control; black box, HPDE; grey box), cultured PDA cells (cell
line), and PDA xenografts and primary tumor tissues (tumor). f) qRT-PCR analysis of
MiT/TFE expression levels in a panel of human PDA cell lines. Note that PL18 and HupT3
preferentially express high levels of MITF, while 8988T, PSN1 and Panc1 express TFE3 at
higher levels. The highest levels of TFEB were detected in 8902 and A13A cells. g) RT-PCR
analysis reveals that PDA cells express distinct MITF isoforms. Note the complete absence
of all MITF isoforms in normal HPDE cells. PDA cells lack the melanoma-specific M
isoform (detected in M14 melanoma cells, lane 2). h) MITF, TFE3 and TFEB protein levels
in a panel of non-PDA cell lines, patient-derived PDA cultures and PDA cell lines. i) GSEA
analysis showing correlation between expression of MiT/TFE factors and autophagylysosome gene set in primary human PDA specimens (TCGA dataset). j) GSEA analysis
showing correlation between cumulative expression of MiT/TFE factors (see Methods) and
the autophagy-lysosome gene set in human PDA cell lines (CCLE dataset). k) DAVID
analysis of gene sets correlating with increasing expression of TFE3 (left) or MITF (right) in
human PDA cell lines (CCLE dataset).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.

Perera et al.

Page 17

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Extended Data Figure 2. MiT/TFE-dependent regulation of autophagy-lysosome gene expression
in PDA cell lines

Author Manuscript

a) Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis of FLAG-MITF (left) and FLAG-TFE3 (right)
binding to autophagy-lysosome genes in 8902 and Panc1 cells, respectively. Histograms
show the amount of immunoprecipitated DNA detected by qPCR normalized to input and
plotted as relative enrichment over mock control. Error bars indicate mean ± s.e.m for N = 3
independent experiments. * p < 0.05. b) siRNA mediated knockdown of MITF in HupT3
and PL18 cells causes a decrease in autophagy-lysosome gene expression, assayed 48 hrs
post siRNA transfection. * p < 0.05. c) Knockdown of TFE3 in PSN1, Panc1 and 8988T
cells, or of TFEB in 8902 cells, causes a decrease in autophagy-lysosome gene expression. *

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.

Perera et al.

Page 18

Author Manuscript

p < 0.05. d) HPDE, HPNE, and QGP1 control cells show minimal changes in autophagylysosome gene expression upon knockdown of the MiT/TFE genes. e) Decreased autophagylysosome gene expression following MITF knockdown (left; PL18 cells; * p < 0.05) or
TFE3 knockdown (right; 8988T cells; * p < 0.01) is rescued by transient ectopic expression
of MITF or TFE3. Cells were transfected with expression constructs for MITF or TFE3 24
hrs post-siRNA transfection. After 48 hrs, gene expression was assayed. f) Expression of
MITF-DN in HupT3 cells causes a decrease in autophagy-lysosome gene expression
compared to control cells (left panel; * p < 0.02). Similar results are seen in PSN1 cells
expressing Doxycycline (Dox)-inducible MITF-DN upon addition of 1 μg/ml of Dox for 48
hrs (right panel; * p < 0.05). For all graphs error bars indicate mean ± s.d. for N = 3
independent experiments.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.

Perera et al.

Page 19

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Extended Data Figure 3. MiT/TFE transcription factors escape mTOR-mediated cytoplasmic
retention in PDA

Author Manuscript

a) Subcellular localization of ectopically expressed GFP-TFEB in HPDE cells under full
nutrient and starvation conditions (3 hrs HBSS) (left) and Torin1 dependent nuclear
localization of ectopically expressed FLAG-MITF (left) or FLAG-TFE3 (right) in HPNE
cells (right). b) Subcellular localization of ectopically expressed GFP-MITF (left panels) or
GFP-TFE3 (right panels) in HupT3 and 8988T cells respectively under full nutrient and
starvation conditions (3 hrs HBSS). c–d) Subcellular fractionation studies showing that
endogenous TFE3 (c) and MITF (d) are constitutively nuclear localized in PDA cell lines. e)
Immunofluorescence staining of endogenous TFEB in A13A and 8902 PDA cells. Note the

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.

Perera et al.

Page 20

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

predominant nuclear localization under both full nutrient (FED) and starved conditions. f)
Subcellular fractionation of PL18 and HupT3 PDA cells under full nutrient, amino acid
(AA) starved and AA re-fed conditions shows constitutive nuclear residence of endogenous
MITF regardless of the nutrient status of the cells. Lamin = nuclear fraction; GAPDH =
cytoplasmic fraction. g) Subcellular fractionation of Panc1 cells and a primary patientderived culture (PDAC1) showing constitutive nuclear localization of TFE3 (in Panc1) and
MITF (in PDAC1) independent of Torin1 treatment. h) Immunoblot for phospho-ERK1/2 in
the indicated cell lines treated with vehicle or with the MEK inhibitor, AZD6244 (AZD). i)
Neither AZD6244 nor Torin1 affect MITF localization (PL18 cells) or TFE3 localization
(8988T cells). j) Immunoblot showing readily detectable phospho-p70S6K in the indicated
non-PDA and PDA cell lines, and extinction of phosphorylation upon Torin1 treatment. k)
Immunofluorescence showing that AA re-feeding of starved 8988T and Panc1 PDA cells
results in mTOR (green) translocation from a diffuse cytoplasmic distribution to the
lysosome (LAMP2; red), as indicated by co-localization with LAMP2. Scale bar = 20 μm. l)
The indicated non-PDA (left panels) and PDA cell lines (right panels) stably expressing
FLAG-tagged TFE3 (F-TFE3) or MITF (F-MITF) were treated with vehicle or Torin1. Cells
were then lysed, subjected to FLAG immunoprecipitation and immunoblotted for FLAG and
14-3-3. Note that in all cell lines, 14-3-3 is detected in the anti-FLAG immunoprecipitates
and binding is lost upon Torin1 treatment. All images shown are representative of at least N
= 3 independent experiments.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.

Perera et al.

Page 21

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 4. IPO8 drives increased MiT/TFE nuclear import in PDA cells

Author Manuscript

a) Identification of IPO8 as a PDA-specific binding partner of TFE3. HPDE (left panel),
PSN1 (middle panel) and 8988T cells (right panel) stably expressing FLAG-TFE3 or control
vector were subjected to affinity purification, followed by multiplexed quantitative
proteomics analysis using tandem-mass tag (TMT) reagents. The graphs show normalized
protein intensities in the FLAG-TFE3 and control samples. Note the specific enrichment of
IPO8 in the FLAG-TFE3-expressing PDA cell lines. In HPDE cells, IPO8 did not score as a
significantly enriched interactor (mean log2 ratio flag-TFE3/control = −0.14 (N = 3), p =
0.30 (paired two-tailed t-test), while in PSN1 and 8988T IPO8 was significantly enriched in
TFE3 immunoprecipitates (mean log2 ratio flag-TFE3/control = 4.35 (N = 3), p = 0.015
(PSN1) and mean log2 ratio flag-TFE3/control = 1.70 (N = 3), p = 0.002 (8988T)). b)
Immunoprecipitation of endogenous IPO8 with FLAG-TFE3 in a PDA cell line (PSN1) and
primary PDA culture (PDAC3). c) qRT-PCR showing increased expression of IPO8 in
PDAC cell lines and primary patient-derived cultures (red bars) compared to control

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.

Perera et al.

Page 22

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

pancreatic ductal cells (HPDE and HPNE, black bars). d) quantification of IPO8
immunohistochemistry staining intensity (0 = no staining to 3 = high staining) in normal (N
= 11) and PDA (N = 110) patient samples. e) Subcellular fractionation and immunoblot
analyses of the indicated cell lines transfected with control siRNA (siCTRL) or siIPO8. Note
that siIPO8 leads to a marked decrease in nuclear TFE3 in PDA cells (PSN1 and Panc1) (left
panel) and in whole cell lysates (right panel). f) Immunoblot of whole cell lysates showing
that IPO8+IPO7 knockdown decreases the levels of MITF and TFEB in PL18 and 8902 cells
respectively. g) Knockdown of IPO8 has no effect on total TFE3 protein (left) or mRNA
(right) levels in HPDE and HPNE cells. Error bars indicate mean ± s.d. for N = 3
independent experiments. h) Torin1 induced TFE3 nuclear localization in HPNE cells is
unaffected by knockdown of IPO8. i) qRT-PCR showing that siRNA-mediated knockdown
of IPO8, or of both IPO8 and IPO7, effectively reduces target expression without
significantly affecting the expression of TFE3, TFEB or MITF mRNA levels. Error bars
indicate mean ± s.d. for N = 3 independent experiments. j) Immunoblot of 8988T cells
transfected with control siRNA (siCTRL) or siIPO8 and treated with cycloheximide (CHX)
for the indicated time points shows a decrease in steady-state levels and stability of TFE3
upon loss of IPO8. Data are representative of N = 3 independent experiments.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 5. Altered lysosome morphology and function following loss of MiT/TFE
factors

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.

Perera et al.

Page 23

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

a) RNAi-mediated knockdown of MITF in PL18 (right panel; N = 259 siCTRL, N = 263
siMITF) or TFEB in PaTu8902 cells (left panel; N = 273 siCTRL, N = 147 siTFEB) causes
aberrant lysosome morphology and an increase in lysosome diameter as visualized by
immunofluorescence staining for LAMP2. ** p < 0.001. b) Lysosome size in HPDE cells is
not affected by knockdown of MITF (N = 156) and TFE3 (N = 81), and is only slightly
increased by TFEB knockdown (N = 198) relative to siCTRL (N = 296). N.S. = not
significant. * p < 0.05, Scale bar = 7.5 μm. c) Electron microscopy of 8988T PDA cells
transfected with siCTRL (panels 1–5) or siTFE3 (panels 6–10). Note that TFE3 loss causes
an accumulation of undigested material shown by asterisks indicating a defect in clearance
(graph indicates % lysosomes filled with cargo; N = 80 lysosomes for siCTRL and N = 153
lysosomes for siTFE3) and an increase in average lysosome diameter (quantified in graph on
the right; N = 63 lysosomes in siCTRL and N = 68 lysosomes in siTFE3). Scale bar = 1μm.
** p < 0.001 d) Immunofluorescence staining with LC3 (green) and LAMP2 (red) in 8988T
cells following siRNA-mediated knockdown of TFE3, shows similar accumulation of
undigested LC3-positive aggregates encapsulated within enlarged LAMP2 positive
lysosomes (bottom panel) compared to control cells (top panel). Magnifications of the boxed
regions are shown (right panels). Scale bar = 7.5 μm.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.

Perera et al.

Page 24

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 6. Ectopic MiT/TFE expression in PDA cell lines causes an increase in
autophagy-lysosome function

Author Manuscript

a, b) Ectopic expression of MITF induces autophagy-lysosome genes in HPDE cells (a), and
causes an increased abundance of LC3 puncta (b) as measured by immunoflourescence
staining of endogenous LC3 (red) and quantified in the graph on the right. * p < 0.01, ** p <
0.001. Scale bar = 7.5 μm. c) Ectopic expression of FLAG-tagged MITF or TFE3 in HPDE
cells (left panel) or HPNE cells (right panel) causes an increase in autophagic flux as
measured by the increase in LC3-II versus LC3-I, following treatment with 25 μM
Chloroquine (CQ) for 18 hrs. MITF and TFE3 protein expression is represented by
immunoblot for FLAG. d) Expression of MITF in 8902 PDA cells (which lack MITF
expression) or in MiaPaca cells (which express low levels of all MiT/TFE members) causes
an increase in autophagy-lysosome gene expression. * p < 0.05. e) Dox-inducible expression
of MITF in MiaPaca cells causes an increase in endogenous LC3 positive puncta, as

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.

Perera et al.

Page 25

Author Manuscript

measured in the graph on the right, indicating increased autophagy induction. N = 68 cells, –
Dox; N = 100 cells, +Dox, ** p < 0.001. Scale bar = 15 μm.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Extended Data Figure 7. Role of lysosome in maintaining AA levels in PDA

Author Manuscript

a) AA uptake was measured as fold change in extracellular AA in 8988T cells following
transfection with 2 siRNA against TFE3 relative to siCTRL. Media was changed 1hr before
media samples were harvested for analysis. Data is matched to results presented in Fig 3B.
b–d) Effect of BafA1 (b), siTFE3 (c), and siATG5 (d) on intracellular AA levels in the
indicate cell lines. Error bars represent mean ± s.d. for N = 3 independent experiments. * p <
0.05.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.

Perera et al.

Page 26

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Extended Data Figure 8. MiT/TFE factors couple amino acid metabolism to energy homeostasis
in PDA

Author Manuscript

a) Knockdown of TFE3 in PSN1 and 8988T cells causes an increase in p-ACC (Ser 79) and
p-AMPK (Thr 172) levels. b) Knockdown of TFE3 (in 8988T and PSN1 cells) or MITF (in
HupT3 cells) causes a decrease in cellular ATP levels. N = 3 independent experiments, * p <
0.05, ** p < 0.001. c) BafA1 treatment (150 nM) for 18 hrs induces p-ACC and p-AMPK in
PDA cells but not in HPDE, HPNE or QGP1 cells. d) Forced expression of MITF or TFE3
in HPDE cells causes a decrease in p-ACC and p-AMPK levels.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.

Perera et al.

Page 27

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 9. Regulation of in vitro and in vivo growth by MiT/TFE factors

a) A panel of human PDA cell lines were infected with shRNAs targeting MITF, TFE3 or
TFEB. Growth relative to cells infected with shGFP control was assayed 8–10 days post
infection. Note that sensitivity to individual knockdown correlates with the relative
expression of each factor (see Extended Data Figure 1F). Colored bars indicate knockdown
condition, which leads to the greatest growth impairment. b) Selective sensitivity of PDA
cells compared to non-PDA cells (QGP1, HPNE and the NSCLC cell line H460) to
treatment with 50 μM CQ for 4 days. Error bars indicate mean ± s.e.m. * p < 0.05. c)

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.

Perera et al.

Page 28

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Immunoblot showing robust detection of LC3-II across a panel of primary patient-derived
cultures (PDAC 1–6) and PDA cell lines. d) Subcellular fractionation showing that PDA
patient cultures have constitutively nuclear MITF and TFE3. e) qRT-PCR showing that
MITF (left) or TFE3 (right) knockdown suppressed multiple autophagy-lysosomal genes in
patient-derived PDA cells. * p < 0.01. f) Immunofluorescence staining for LAMP2 showing
that MITF (N = 212 siCTRL, N = 220 siMITF), TFE3 (N = 228 siCTRL, N = 244 siTFE3),
TFEB (N = 229 siCTRL, N = 271 siTFEB) knockdown results in enlarged, dysmorphic
lysosomes in patient-derived PDA cultures. Scale bar = 7.5 μm. ** p < 0.0001. g)
Knockdown of the indicated MiT/TFE factors inhibits colony formation in a series of
primary PDA cultures. h) 8988T cells infected in vitro with shGFP or shTFE3 (left panel)
and PL18 cells infected with shGFP or 2 hairpins targeting MITF (shMITF_1 and
shMITF_2; right panel) were implanted subcutaneously on both flanks of SCID mice (N = 4
mice per group). Tumor xenograft growth was monitored over the course of 70 (8988T) and
50 (PL18) days. Error bars indicate mean ± s.e.m. i) Forced expression of MITF in KrasG12D
mouse PanIN cells causes an increase in autophagy-lysosome gene expression relative to
control cells in vitro. * p < 0.005. Data are representative of N = 3 independent experiments.

Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.

Acknowledgments

Author Manuscript

We would like to thank L. Ellisen, W. Kim, and R. Mostoslavsky and for advice and helpful comments on the
manuscript, S. Gygi for access to proteomics data analysis software, F. Kottakis, Y. Mizukami and M. Leisa for
technical support, and C. Ivan for bioinformatics support. This work was supported by grants from the NIH
(P50CA1270003, P01 CA117969-07, R01 CA133557-05) and Linda J. Verville Cancer Research Foundation to
NB. N.B. holds the Gallagher Endowed Chair in Gastrointestinal Cancer Research. R.M.P holds a Hirshberg
Foundation for Pancreatic Cancer seed grant. N.B. and R.M.P. are members of the Andrew Warshaw Institute for
Pancreatic Cancer Research.

References

Author Manuscript

1. White E. Exploiting the bad eating habits of Ras-driven cancers. Genes Dev. 2013; 27:2065–2071.
DOI: 10.1101/gad.228122.113 [PubMed: 24115766]
2. Yang S, et al. Pancreatic cancers require autophagy for tumor growth. Genes Dev. 2011; 25:717–
729. DOI: 10.1101/gad.2016111 [PubMed: 21406549]
3. Rosenfeldt MT, et al. p53 status determines the role of autophagy in pancreatic tumour development.
Nature. 2013; 504:296–300. DOI: 10.1038/nature12865 [PubMed: 24305049]
4. Yang A, et al. Autophagy Is Critical for Pancreatic Tumor Growth and Progression in Tumors with
p53 Alterations. Cancer Discov. 2014; 4:905–913. DOI: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-14-0362 [PubMed:
24875860]
5. Kroemer G, Marino G, Levine B. Autophagy and the integrated stress response. Molecular cell.
2010; 40:280–293. DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2010.09.023 [PubMed: 20965422]
6. Haq R, Fisher DE. Biology and clinical relevance of the micropthalmia family of transcription
factors in human cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2011; 29:3474–3482. DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2010.32.6223
[PubMed: 21670463]
7. Settembre C, et al. TFEB links autophagy to lysosomal biogenesis. Science. 2011; 332:1429–1433.
DOI: 10.1126/science.1204592 [PubMed: 21617040]
8. Sardiello M, et al. A gene network regulating lysosomal biogenesis and function. Science. 2009;
325:473–477. DOI: 10.1126/science.1174447 [PubMed: 19556463]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.

Perera et al.

Page 29

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

9. Settembre C, et al. A lysosome-to-nucleus signalling mechanism senses and regulates the lysosome
via mTOR and TFEB. The EMBO journal. 2012; 31:1095–1108. DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2012.32
[PubMed: 22343943]
10. Roczniak-Ferguson A, et al. The transcription factor TFEB links mTORC1 signaling to
transcriptional control of lysosome homeostasis. Science signaling. 2012; 5:ra42. [PubMed:
22692423]
11. Martina JA, et al. The nutrient-responsive transcription factor TFE3 promotes autophagy,
lysosomal biogenesis, and clearance of cellular debris. Science signaling. 2014; 7:ra9. [PubMed:
24448649]
12. Ting L, Rad R, Gygi SP, Haas W. MS3 eliminates ratio distortion in isobaric multiplexed
quantitative proteomics. Nature methods. 2011; 8:937–940. DOI: 10.1038/nmeth.1714 [PubMed:
21963607]
13. Raices M, D’Angelo MA. Nuclear pore complex composition: a new regulator of tissue-specific
and developmental functions. Nature reviews. Molecular cell biology. 2012; 13:687–699. DOI:
10.1038/nrm3461 [PubMed: 23090414]
14. Chook YM, Suel KE. Nuclear import by karyopherin-betas: recognition and inhibition. Biochimica
et biophysica acta. 2011; 1813:1593–1606. DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2010.10.014 [PubMed:
21029754]
15. Zehorai E, Seger R. Beta-like importins mediate the nuclear translocation of mitogen-activated
protein kinases. Mol Cell Biol. 2014; 34:259–270. DOI: 10.1128/MCB.00799-13 [PubMed:
24216760]
16. Yao X, Chen X, Cottonham C, Xu L. Preferential utilization of Imp7/8 in nuclear import of Smads.
J Biol Chem. 2008; 283:22867–22874. DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M801320200 [PubMed: 18519565]
17. Waldmann I, Walde S, Kehlenbach RH. Nuclear import of c-Jun is mediated by multiple transport
receptors. J Biol Chem. 2007; 282:27685–27692. DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M703301200 [PubMed:
17652081]
18. Xu L, et al. Msk is required for nuclear import of TGF-{beta}/BMP-activated Smads. The Journal
of cell biology. 2007; 178:981–994. DOI: 10.1083/jcb.200703106 [PubMed: 17785517]
19. Golomb L, et al. Importin 7 and exportin 1 link c-Myc and p53 to regulation of ribosomal
biogenesis. Molecular cell. 2012; 45:222–232. DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2011.11.022 [PubMed:
22284678]
20. Ballabio A, Gieselmann V. Lysosomal disorders: from storage to cellular damage. Biochimica et
biophysica acta. 2009; 1793:684–696. DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2008.12.001 [PubMed: 19111581]
21. Settembre C, Fraldi A, Medina DL, Ballabio A. Signals from the lysosome: a control centre for
cellular clearance and energy metabolism. Nature reviews. Molecular cell biology. 2013; 14:283–
296. DOI: 10.1038/nrm3565 [PubMed: 23609508]
22. Commisso C, et al. Macropinocytosis of protein is an amino acid supply route in Ras-transformed
cells. Nature. 2013; 497:633–637. DOI: 10.1038/nature12138 [PubMed: 23665962]
23. Rabinowitz JD, White E. Autophagy and metabolism. Science. 2010; 330:1344–1348. DOI:
10.1126/science.1193497 [PubMed: 21127245]
24. Singh R, et al. Autophagy regulates lipid metabolism. Nature. 2009; 458:1131–1135. DOI:
10.1038/nature07976 [PubMed: 19339967]
25. Zoncu R, Efeyan A, Sabatini DM. mTOR: from growth signal integration to cancer, diabetes and
ageing. Nature reviews. Molecular cell biology. 2011; 12:21–35. DOI: 10.1038/nrm3025
[PubMed: 21157483]
26. Petersen NH, et al. Transformation-associated changes in sphingolipid metabolism sensitize cells
to lysosomal cell death induced by inhibitors of acid sphingomyelinase. Cancer Cell. 2013;
24:379–393. DOI: 10.1016/j.ccr.2013.08.003 [PubMed: 24029234]
27. Saftig P, Sandhoff K. Cancer: Killing from the inside. Nature. 2013; 502:312–313. DOI: 10.1038/
nature12692 [PubMed: 24089207]
28. Narita M, et al. Spatial coupling of mTOR and autophagy augments secretory phenotypes. Science.
2011; 332:966–970. DOI: 10.1126/science.1205407 [PubMed: 21512002]
29. Jones S, et al. Core signaling pathways in human pancreatic cancers revealed by global genomic
analyses. Science. 2008; 321:1801–1806. DOI: 10.1126/science.1164368 [PubMed: 18772397]
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.

Perera et al.

Page 30

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

30. Tzatsos A, et al. KDM2B promotes pancreatic cancer via Polycomb-dependent and -independent
transcriptional programs. J Clin Invest. 2013; 123:727–739. DOI: 10.1172/JCI64535 [PubMed:
23321669]
31. Garraway LA, et al. Integrative genomic analyses identify MITF as a lineage survival oncogene
amplified in malignant melanoma. Nature. 2005; 436:117–122. nature03664 [pii]. DOI: 10.1038/
nature03664 [PubMed: 16001072]
32. Gameiro PA, et al. In vivo HIF-mediated reductive carboxylation is regulated by citrate levels and
sensitizes VHL-deficient cells to glutamine deprivation. Cell Metab. 2013; 17:372–385.
S1550-4131(13)00050-8 [pii]. DOI: 10.1016/j.cmet.2013.02.002 [PubMed: 23473032]
33. Metallo CM, et al. Reductive glutamine metabolism by IDH1 mediates lipogenesis under hypoxia.
Nature. 2011; 481:380–384. nature10602 [pii]. DOI: 10.1038/nature10602 [PubMed: 22101433]
34. Commisso C, et al. Macropinocytosis of protein is an amino acid supply route in Ras-transformed
cells. Nature. 2013; 497:633–637. DOI: 10.1038/nature12138 [PubMed: 23665962]
35. Steinberg BE, et al. A cation counterflux supports lysosomal acidification. The Journal of cell
biology. 2010; 189:1171–1186. DOI: 10.1083/jcb.200911083 [PubMed: 20566682]
36. Zoncu R, et al. mTORC1 senses lysosomal amino acids through an inside-out mechanism that
requires the vacuolar H(+)-ATPase. Science. 2011; 334:678–683. DOI: 10.1126/science.1207056
[PubMed: 22053050]
37. Hershey CL, Fisher DE. Genomic analysis of the Microphthalmia locus and identification of the
MITF-J/Mitf-J isoform. Gene. 2005; 347:73–82. S0378–1119(04)00736-X [pii]. DOI: 10.1016/
j.gene.2004.12.002 [PubMed: 15715979]
38. Settembre C, et al. TFEB links autophagy to lysosomal biogenesis. Science. 2011; 332:1429–1433.
DOI: 10.1126/science.1204592 [PubMed: 21617040]
39. Corcoran RB, et al. STAT3 plays a critical role in KRAS-induced pancreatic tumorigenesis. Cancer
Res. 2011; 71:5020–5029. DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-0908 [PubMed: 21586612]
40. Chapel A, et al. An extended proteome map of the lysosomal membrane reveals novel potential
transporters. Molecular & cellular proteomics : MCP. 2013; 12:1572–1588. DOI: 10.1074/
mcp.M112.021980 [PubMed: 23436907]
41. Schroder B, et al. Integral and associated lysosomal membrane proteins. Traffic. 2007; 8:1676–
1686. DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0854.2007.00643.x [PubMed: 17897319]
42. Behrends C, Sowa ME, Gygi SP, Harper JW. Network organization of the human autophagy
system. Nature. 2010; 466:68–76. nature09204 [pii]. DOI: 10.1038/nature09204 [PubMed:
20562859]
43. Ballabio A, Gieselmann V. Lysosomal disorders: from storage to cellular damage. Biochimica et
biophysica acta. 2009; 1793:684–696. DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2008.12.001 [PubMed: 19111581]
44. Ting L, Rad R, Gygi SP, Haas W. MS3 eliminates ratio distortion in isobaric multiplexed
quantitative proteomics. Nature methods. 2011; 8:937–940. DOI: 10.1038/nmeth.1714 [PubMed:
21963607]
45. McAlister GC, et al. Increasing the multiplexing capacity of TMTs using reporter ion
isotopologues with isobaric masses. Analytical chemistry. 2012; 84:7469–7478. DOI: 10.1021/
ac301572t [PubMed: 22880955]
46. Weekes MP, et al. Quantitative temporal viromics: an approach to investigate host-pathogen
interaction. Cell. 2014; 157:1460–1472. DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.04.028 [PubMed: 24906157]
47. Eng JK, McCormack AL, Yates JR. An approach to correlate tandem mass spectral data of
peptides with amino acid sequences in a protein database. Journal of the American Society for
Mass Spectrometry. 1994; 5:976–989. DOI: 10.1016/1044-0305(94)80016-2 [PubMed: 24226387]
48. Elias JE, Gygi SP. Target-decoy search strategy for increased confidence in large-scale protein
identifications by mass spectrometry. Nature methods. 2007; 4:207–214. DOI: 10.1038/nmeth1019
[PubMed: 17327847]
49. Huttlin EL, et al. A tissue-specific atlas of mouse protein phosphorylation and expression. Cell.
2010; 143:1174–1189. DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2010.12.001 [PubMed: 21183079]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.

Perera et al.

Page 31

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 1. Coordinate induction of an autophagy-lysosome gene program in PDA by MiT/TFE
proteins

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

a) Immunofluorescence staining showing extensive overlap of autophagosomes (LC3) and
lysosomes (LAMP2) in 8988T cells compared to HPDE cells.
b) Representative transmission electron micrographs showing increased abundance of
lysosomes in PDA compared to normal pancreas. Relative lysosome numbers/cell are
quantified (see Methods). N = 473 cells from 4 normal specimens and 406 cells from 3 PDA
specimens..** p < 0.001
c) Upregulation of autophagy/lysosomal genes in PDA relative to matched normal tissue
(see Table S2).
d, e) Immunohistochemistry showing upregulation of autophagy and lysosomal proteins (d)
and nuclear localized TFE3 (e) in the PDA epithelium (closed arrowheads) compared to
normal pancreas (left) or stromal cells (open arrowheads). Graph (e) shows quantification of
TFE3 staining intensity (0 = no staining to 3 = high staining) in normal (N = 31) and PDA
samples (N = 354).
f) GSEA showing correlation between MiT/TFE (3TF) expression and the autophagylysosome gene signature in primary human PDA.
g, h) TFE3 knockdown in 8988T cells causes coordinate downregulation of autophagylysosome genes. (g) RNA-seq values from N = 3 independent experiments; p < 0.05 for each
gene; (h) GSEA.
Scale bars: 11 μm (a), 500 nm (b), 50 μm (d) and 20 μm (e).

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.

Perera et al.

Page 32

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 2. Constitutive nuclear import of MiT/TFE factors controls autophagy-lysosome function
in PDA

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

a, b) Fluorescence microscopy showing localization of (a) GFP-MITF and (b) GFP-TFE3 in
the indicated cells under fed and starved (3 hrs HBSS) conditions.
c) Immunoblots for TFE3 (left three panels), MITF (middle panel) and TFEB (right panel)
in cytoplasmic (C) and nuclear (N) fractions of cells treated with vehicle or Torin1 (250 nM)
for 1hr.
d) FLAG-TFE3 was stably expressed in cells and lysates were immunoprecipitated with
anti-FLAG antibody or control IgG and immunoblotted for FLAG (TFE3) or IPO8.
e) Representative IPO8 immunostaining in human specimens. f) PDA cell lines were
transfected with the indicated siRNAs, fractionated and immunoblotted for TFE3, (8988T
cells, left panel), MITF (PL18 cells, middle panel) or TFEB (8902 cells, right panel).
g) TFE3 knockdown causes aberrant lysosomal morphology and increased size as shown by
LAMP2 staining. Inset: magnified view. Graph (right): quantification of lysosome diameter
in cells expressing shGFP (N = 151), shTFE3 (N = 193), or treated with BafA1 (N = 52). **
p <0.0001.
h) Electron micrographs showing accumulation of undigested cargo in lysosomes upon
TFE3 knockdown.
i) Measurement of lysosomal pH in 8988T cells transfected with the indicated siRNAs. N =
3 independent experiments; ** p < 0.001 (see Methods).
j) Quantification of total number of autolysosomes (mCherry+/GFP− spots) from N = 10
cells/condition using a tandem mCherry-GFP-LC3 reporter. Error bars represent mean ±
s.e.m. ** p < 0.0001.
k) Proteolysis of macropinocytosed protein is impaired by TFE3 knockdown or BafA1
treatment as determined by pulse-chase with DQ-BSA. Degradation of DQ-BSA in
lysosomes is quantified (number of fluorescent spots/cell co-localizing with LAMP2+

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.

Perera et al.

Page 33

Author Manuscript

lysosomes for N = 3 independent experiments with at least 50 cells scored per experiment).
** p < 0.0001.
Scale bars = 18 μm (a, b), 50 μm (e), 7.5 μm (g).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.

Perera et al.

Page 34

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 3. MiT/TFE factors maintain autolysosome derived pools of amino acids

Author Manuscript

a) Global metabolite profiling of 8988T and PSN1 cells following TFE3 knockdown reveals
preferential decrease in AA compared to other general metabolite groups (see Methods).
(grey: no change, red: increase, green: decrease).
b) Quantification of fold change in AA levels in 8988T cells transfected with siCTRL or
siTFE3. * p < 0.03, ** p < 0.003.
c) BafA1 causes a decrease in AA levels in PDA cells (left panel), while AA are unchanged
or increased in HPDE cells (right panel); * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.005.
d) Immunoblot for p-p70S6K levels in the indicated cells at sequential times following 10%
AA starvation.
e) p-p70S6K immunoblots in 8988T cells transfected with siCTRL or siTFE3 and grown
under control conditions or in 0% or 10% AA for the indicated times.
f, g) HPDE-MITF cells show (f) sustained p-p70S6K levels under AA starvation and (g)
enhanced colony formation under transient starvation with 10% AA (quantified in the
graph).* p < 0.001. For all graphs, error bars indicate mean ± s.d. for N = 3 independent
experiments.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.

Perera et al.

Page 35

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 4. MiT/TFE factors are required for PDA growth

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

a) Knockdown of the indicated MiT/TFE factors impairs in vitro colony-forming ability in a
panel of PDA cell lines.
b) Expression of shRNA-resistant MITF in PL18 cells (left) or TFE3 in Panc1 cells (right)
rescues growth following shRNA-mediated knockdown of MITF or TFE3. Error bars
indicate mean ± s.d. for N = 3 independent experimets; ** p < 0.001.
c) Forced expression of MITF or TFE3 sensitizes HPNE cells to growth inhibition by CQ.
Error bars indicate mean ± s.d. for N = 3 independent experiments; * p < 0.005, ** p <
0.0001.
d) TFE3 knockdown with two independent shRNAs significantly impairs subcutaneous
xenograft growth of Panc1 cells. Error bars indicate mean ± s.e.m. for N = 6 tumors/group; *
p < 0.03.
e) MITF overexpression in KrasG12D mouse PanIN cells promotes tumorigenesis upon
orthotopic injection. N = 5 mice per group; ** p < 0.001. Scale bar = 200 μm.
f) In PDA, the MiT/TFE factors are upregulated and exhibit increased nuclear residence due
to IPO8/IPO7-mediated trafficking, leading to transcriptional induction of autophagylysosome genes and increased biogenesis and function of these organelles. Autophagylysosome expansion integrates two major pathways for nutrient scavenging and metabolic
adaption in PDA, autophagy and digestion of serum proteins obtained by macropinocytosis.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.

