Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 30

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Automated tracking of tumor-stroma morphology in microtissues
identifies functional targets within the tumor microenvironment
for therapeutic intervention
Malin Åkerfelt1,2, Neslihan Bayramoglu3, Sean Robinson4,5,6,7, Mervi Toriseva1,2,8,
Hannu-Pekka Schukov8, Ville Härmä2, Johannes Virtanen2, Raija Sormunen9, Mika
Kaakinen10, Juho Kannala3, Lauri Eklund10, Janne Heikkilä3, Matthias Nees1,2
1

Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku, Turku, FI-20520, Finland

2

VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland, Turku, FI-20521, Finland

3

Centre for Machine Vision Research, University of Oulu, Oulu, FI-90014, Finland

4

Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Turku, Turku, FI-20014, Finland

5

University Grenoble Alpes, iRTSV-BGE, Grenoble, F-38000, France

6

CEA, iRTSV-BGE, Grenoble, F-38000, France

7

INSERM, BGE, Grenoble, F-38000, France

8

Institute of Biomedicine, University of Turku, Turku, FI-20520, Finland

9

Biocenter Oulu and Department of Pathology, University of Oulu and Oulu University Hospital, Oulu, FI-90220, Finland

10

 ulu Center for Cell-Matrix Research, Biocenter Oulu and Faculty of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, University of
O
Oulu, Oulu, FI-90014, Finland

Correspondence to:
Matthias Nees, e-mail: matthias.nees@btk.fi
Keywords: 3D co-culture, cancer associated fibroblast (CAF), phenotypic screening, invasion, focal adhesion kinase (FAK)
Received: March 21, 2015      Accepted: August 24, 2015      Published: September 03, 2015

ABSTRACT
Cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) constitute an important part of the tumor
microenvironment and promote invasion via paracrine functions and physical impact
on the tumor. Although the importance of including CAFs into three-dimensional
(3D) cell cultures has been acknowledged, computational support for quantitative
live-cell measurements of complex cell cultures has been lacking. Here, we have
developed a novel automated pipeline to model tumor-stroma interplay, track
motility and quantify morphological changes of 3D co-cultures, in real-time live-cell
settings. The platform consists of microtissues from prostate cancer cells, combined
with CAFs in extracellular matrix that allows biochemical perturbation. Tracking of
fibroblast dynamics revealed that CAFs guided the way for tumor cells to invade and
increased the growth and invasiveness of tumor organoids. We utilized the platform
to determine the efficacy of inhibitors in prostate cancer and the associated tumor
microenvironment as a functional unit. Interestingly, certain inhibitors selectively
disrupted tumor-CAF interactions, e.g. focal adhesion kinase (FAK) inhibitors
specifically blocked tumor growth and invasion concurrently with fibroblast spreading
and motility. This complex phenotype was not detected in other standard in vitro
models. These results highlight the advantage of our approach, which recapitulates
tumor histology and can significantly improve cancer target validation in vitro.

tests, target validation and high content phenotypic
screening. The challenge is to develop cell culture models
that better resemble cancer tissues, and more faithfully
recapitulate the complex architecture of tumors in vivo. The
vast majority of cell-based assays used for testing cancer

INTRODUCTION
The major difficulty when developing cancer
therapeutics is the limited availability of biologically
relevant and predictive in vitro models for chemosensitivity
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30035

Oncotarget

drug efficacy are based on growing cells as two-dimensional
(2D) monolayers on plastic, or as three-dimensional (3D)
floating spheroids in suspension [1]. The biology and
homeostasis of tumors, however, is strongly influenced by
the tumor microenvironment. This requires novel, cell- and
tissue-based assays that reflect the effects of extracellular
matrix (ECM), cell-cell contacts, cell-matrix interactions,
and recapitulate the tissue architecture of cancers. Embedded
3D cell culture techniques strictly avoid plastic surfaces, thus
allowing cells to modulate the ECM [2–4]. Drug sensitivity
of cancer cells observed in 2D monolayer cultures can be
very different from 3D cell cultures. It is widely accepted
that 3D organoids reflect in vivo growth of epithelial tumor
cells more reliably and provide better readouts for drug
testing [2, 5, 6]. The broad spectrum of phenotypic changes
observed upon drug exposure can be utilized as a sensitive
readout for measuring compound efficacy.
In the tumor microenvironment, a variety of stromal
cell types are present. Cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs)
are the most abundant stromal cell type in carcinomas, and
play a prominent role in tumor growth and progression.
CAFs secrete a plethora of growth factors, cytokines and
chemokines, which stimulate growth, invasive and metastatic
processes. CAFs participate in the cross-talk with tumor
cells, are recruited by cancer cell-secreted factors like TGFβ
and PDGF, and lead the way for tumor cell invasion [7,
8]. In addition, CAFs have a strong physical impact on the
tumor tissue, resulting in ECM remodeling, contraction and
increased tumor stiffness [9, 10]. Rather than operating as
single cellular units, CAFs merge to form stromal collective
cohorts or syncytia. In order for fibroblasts to propagate
syncytial behavior, a coordinated cell adhesion program is
conducted [11, 12], which shapes cancer tissue morphologies.
This collective configuration allows CAFs to form a defined
cancer cell niche and coordinate contractile and migratory
behavior, and assists in the induction of epithelial-tomesenchymal transition (EMT) at the tumor edges [13, 14].
It is currently only poorly understood if and how stromal and
tumor cells form direct cell-cell-interactions, and how these
may contribute to the tumor biology.
Although the significance of adding stromal cells to
3D cell cultures to model heterotypic cell–cell interactions
has long been acknowledged, the practical implementation
of standardized co-cultures that include multiple cell types
remains demanding. Optimal culture conditions that allow
each cell type to grow and maintain in stable homeostasis
with each other are difficult to establish. The major
challenge regarding complex 3D cell cultures is the detailed
analysis of the experiments, including segmentation and
tracking of cell movements as well as the analysis of their
distinct morphologies [3, 15]. Most analyses of 3D cultures
that include stromal components only provide poorly
informative growth curves from generalized fluorescent
measurements or impedance, sometimes combined with
incidental, molecular snapshots by immunofluorescence
(IF) end-point staining [16–21]. Alterations in stromal
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

motility and tumor cell plasticity are difficult to measure
and usually ignored. To obtain quantitative cell tracking of
dynamic biological processes involved in tissue formation,
invasion, growth and drug response, novel computational
methods are needed that provide real-time automatic
measurements of complex cellular interactions and
phenotypic changes. Several studies have utilized automatic
analysis of time-lapse videos [22], and both commercial and
open software tools are available for automated live-cell
analysis of monocultures [23–25]. However, computational
support for quantitative live-cell tracking and morphological
measurements of complex tumor microtissues embedded in
ECM is currently lacking.
In this study, we established stable and reproducible
microtissues of prostate cancer (PrCa) cell lines in
combination with CAFs, embedded in biologically relevant
ECM. Our novel computational analysis pipeline was
simultaneously used for quantification of morphological
changes, and monitoring of cell motility in 3D cancer coculture models in real-time. These microtissues enable
evaluation of treatments with perturbants, using live-cell
imaging and tracking of fibroblast and tumor organoid
dynamics over several weeks in an automated fashion. A
panel of small molecule inhibitors was utilized to challenge
the model system and affect the nature of direct and indirect
(paracrine) tumor-CAF interactions. In particular, focal
adhesion kinase (FAK) inhibitors simultaneously affected
both tumor and stromal compartments in 3D co-culture,
which was neither detectable in 3D monoculture, nor in 2D
settings. FAK inhibitors specifically reduced tumor growth
and invasiveness. This analysis approach allows continuous
monitoring and quantification of CAF-promoted tumor cell
growth and invasion, and facilitates more comprehensive
in vitro cancer target validation strategies that integrate
differentiation, plasticity and homeostasis of cancer tissues.

RESULTS
Automated segmentation, quantification and
tracking of 3D co-culture morphologies
To model the heterotypic cell–cell interactions
between tumor and stroma, and to explore how fibroblasts
affect the tumor growth and morphology over time, an
automated image analysis approach for tracking 3D cocultures in real-time was established (Figure 1). We
generated miniaturized tumor-fibroblast co-cultures in
ECM that can be perturbed and observed by live-cell
microscopy (Figure 1A–1B), in order to mimic complex
tumor architecture (Figure 1C). The microscopic images
were segmented, using different adaptations for both
cell types. For fibroblast sequences, local adaptive
thresholding was used [26], while tumor organoids were
traced using our automated image data analysis software
(AMIDA) [27] (Figure 1D). Fibroblasts were quantified
from fluorescent phase contrast image sequences to track
30036

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Tracking of tumor-stroma morphology and dynamics in microtissues by automated image analysis. Schematic

presentation of the computational analysis pipeline on example image data. A. Manual establishment of tumor-fibroblast co-cultures
generated from traceable cell lines in the standardized and miniaturized experimental platform, allowing cells to be embedded in a
narrow focal plane of ECM. B. Real-time live-cell imaging is employed by continuous monitoring for up to several weeks. Incucyte FLR
phase contrast and green fluorescent images are captured, ideal for investigations of long dose-responses and time-course experiments of
fibroblast dynamics in the co-cultures (left panel). Spinning disc confocal microscopic fluorescent live-cell images of tumor cells together
with fibroblasts are used for detailed examination of tumor organoid morphology (right panel). C. The tissue architecture of the resulting
microtissues can be empirically compared to clinical samples, in order to assess how consistently in vivo tumor morphology observed in
patients is recapitulated. This reference image displays alpha-methylacyl-CoA racemase (AMACR) antibody staining of PrCa tissue (www.
proteinatlas.org), which is a widely used biomarker in PrCa. D. Incucyte FLR images sequences are used for fibroblast segmentation,
achieved by local adaptive thresholding (left panel). Confocal microscopy images are used for segmentation of tumor organoids carried
out by AMIDA (right panel). E. Final quantification is based on dual segmentation of tumor and fibroblast cells. Growth, motion and shape
analyzes of fibroblasts are performed over time. In addition, detailed morphological measurements of tumor organoids are performed at the
end-point. Example graphs are displayed.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30037

Oncotarget

dynamic changes for over two weeks. Quantification of
tumor organoids from maximum projection confocal
images was performed to detect phenotypic changes in
response to molecular perturbations (Figure 1E). This
analysis pipeline allows simultaneous automated imaging,
segmentation and quantification of both cell compartments
(Figure 1). It can be utilized for functional cancer target
validation, chemosensitivity testing or high-content
screening purposes, when the impact of tumor/stroma
interactions is investigated.

cells for studies on the invasive properties of cancer cells
in 3D co-cultures. In order to recapitulate the characteristic
in vivo morphology of tumor islands surrounded by
stroma, we focused the tissue-model development on
LNCaP cells.

Tracking and quantification of fibroblast
dynamics reveals the importance of collagen for
CAF cohort spreading
Next, we investigated how tumor cells and
fibroblasts assemble in different types of ECM and
generate functional microtissues over time. Realtime live-cell imaging was carried out in a systematic
fashion. The Incucyte FLR fluorescent live-cell imaging
system was used for continuous tracking of long-term
dose-response and time-course experiments in 3D cocultures. Interestingly, when culturing LNCaP tumor
cells together with PF179T stromal cells in different
ECM preparations, drastic differences in fibroblast
dynamics were observed (Figure 2). In Matrigel, CAFs
remained small and rounded, but nevertheless actively
moved towards the tumor organoids (Figure 2A upper
panel, Supplementary Video S1A). When co-cultured
in collagen, CAFs became elongated and very motile,
and actively generated a multicellular stromal network
surrounding the tumor organoids (Figure 2A lower panel,
Supplementary Video S1B). In Matrigel/collagen mixture,
CAFs aligned into multi-cellular syncytia (Figure 2A
middle panel, Supplementary Video S1C). In the presence
of pure collagen, CAF cohorts were able to remodel
the ECM and utilize collagen fibers for traveling, thus
illustrating that the presence of collagen fibers is essential
for fibroblast dynamics and morphology. Notably, CAFs
grown in the absence of tumor cells did neither spread,
nor form syncytia and survived only poorly in 3D culture
(Supplementary Figure S1D). These results emphasize the
complex nature of the tumor-stroma interdependency.
For quantification of fibroblast dynamics, Incucyte
FLR time-lapse image sequences were analyzed in
an automated fashion (Figure 2B, Supplementary
Figure  S2A). Image sequences were first stabilized
using frame-by frame alignment (Supplementary
Video S2), and filtered using median filtering and nonlocal means de-noising (Supplementary Figure S2B).
Sequences were then segmented using local adaptive
thresholding (Figure 2B, Supplementary Video
3) [26]. Growth, motion and shape analyzes were
then performed based on the initial segmentation
(Figure 2B). The growth of CAF cohorts was associated
with the size of the segmented region i.e. total
number of pixels in the fluorescent image covered by
fibroblasts, as a function of time (Figure 2B). Motion
analysis of CAF cohorts was implemented by using
dense optical flow estimation [29] (Supplementary
Figure S2C, Supplementary Video S4). The shape

Establishment of complex 3D co-culture cancer
models that allows imaging
Real-time tracking of complex co-culture models
requires distinction of the two counterparts. Therefore,
traceable cell lines that stably expressed fluorescent
markers (GFP; fibroblast and dsRed; tumor cells) were
applied. For the 3D co-cultures, we utilized a standardized
and miniaturized protocol [2, 27]. All 3D experiments
were performed in 96-well angiogenesis plates (Ibidi),
exhibiting a well-in-a-well geometry that consists of two
compartments. The method allows cells to be embedded
in a narrow focal plane embedded between two layers of
ECM. Single cell suspensions were mixed with ECM at a
density of 700–1500 cells/well, depending on the cell line.
Hence, one tumor organoid is typically generated from
a single cell (Supplementary Figure S1A), and several
hundreds of organoids are formed per well. To generate
stable, reproducible and complex co-cultures, serum
(FBS) concentrations and cell ratios were optimized and
standardized (Supplementary Figure S1B, see Materials
and Methods). Next, untransformed prostate (EP156T) and
transformed PrCa cell lines (LNCaP, VCaP, PC3), were
co-cultured with PF179T CAFs [28], using the optimized
settings (2% FBS, tumor:stroma ratio 2:1). All cells were
cultured in three types of ECM: Matrigel, collagen type-I,
or a 1:1 mixture of both. The PF179T CAFs formed
elongated fibroblast-like structures in ECM-containing
collagen, but remained small and round in Matrigel
(Supplementary Figure S1C). Of the tumor cells, LNCaP
cells generally formed rounded organoids in all ECM
preparations and 3D settings. In contrast, single VCaP
cells did not proliferate under any 3D conditions, not even
in the presence of fibroblasts. To facilitate the growth of
VCaP in embedded 3D conditions, cells were pre-cultured
as floating spheroids in low-attachment culture, prior to
transfer into ECM (see Materials and Methods). After
3–5 days, floating spheroids were transferred into the
respective ECM and gave rise to proliferating organoids
(Supplementary Figure S1C). Untransformed EP156T
cells and transformed PC3 cells both generated branching
and invasive phenotypes respectively, which appeared
macroscopically very similar (Supplementary Figure
S1C). The addition of CAFs to PC3 cells resulted in loss
of organoid structure, and thus prohibited the use of these
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30038

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Collagen is required for CAF cohort growth, movement and branching in 3D co-cultures. A. Incucyte FLR

real-time live-cell imaging of LNCaP organoids (phase contrast) and PF179T CAFs (green) co-cultured for 14 days in Matrigel, Matrigel/
collagen mixture and collagen. Scale bar: 200 μm. B. Fibroblast morphology and dynamics was analyzed from the time-lapse images in
an automated fashion. CAF cohort segmentation was performed by local adaptive thresholding and example images of segmented CAFs
in three matrices are described. C. Schematic drawing depicts how branching of each CAF cohort was assessed by extracting the closed
contour and detecting the convex hull of the contour as well as contour convexity defects. D. Quantification of fibroblast growth rate (area),
motion per frame, number of extensions per cluster and extension size per cluster, is shown over time. Every dot represents a value per each
time frame of the image sequence. Segmented real-time live-cell image sequences from three different ECMs were used for quantification.
Col: collagen, Mtg/col: Matrigel/collagen 1:1 mixture, Mtg: Matrigel.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30039

Oncotarget

analysis, i.e. branching, of each CAF cohort was
examined by extracting the closed contour, and
detecting the convex hull of the contour together with
contour convexity defects (Figure 2C, Supplementary
Figure S2D, Supplementary Video  S5). The number
of extensions and mean extension size per cluster was
used to illustrate branching, separately for each cluster.
The means of these values were then plotted over
time. Lastly, LNCaP organoids were also segmented
(Supplementary Figure S2E) and growth (area) was
quantified from the same sequences (Supplementary
Figure S2F). All algorithms are described in the
Materials and Methods section.
We found that PF179T cells grew fastest in pure
collagen, not at all in Matrigel, and at an intermediate
rate in the Matrigel/collagen mixture (Figure 2D).
Matrigel influenced fibroblast motility in a dominant
negative fashion, as CAFs were very motile only in
pure collagen matrix (Figure 2D). The mean number
of extensions of fibroblast cohorts was affected in a
dominant positive fashion by collagen, as PF179Ts
generated extensions in both collagen and mixture
(Figure 2D) but not in pure Matrigel. The extension
size per cohort showed that CAFs in Matrigel/collagen
mixture displayed an intermediate phenotype, positioned
between collagen and Matrigel (Figure 2D), similar to
LNCaP tumor growth (Supplementary Figure S2F).
Taking together, our approach to track and quantitate the
morphology of fibroblast syncytia surrounding tumor
organoids revealed that collagen fibers are essential for
CAF cohorts to grow, move and spread. This method
allows automated analysis of a large number of lowresolution time-lapse image sequences to be quantitated,
potentially as a measure for tumor stiffness [30].

(α-SMA)-rich CAFs were touching neighboring tumor cell
membrane (Figure 3E, Supplementary Figure S3). This is
a hallmark of cell-cell contacts [33, 34]. To investigate
if the CAF-mediated protrusions of the tumor organoids
actually are invasive, immunofluorescence (IF) stainings
were conducted. When no CAFs were closely situated to
the LNCaP organoids, they did not express mesenchymal
markers like vimentin, but formed solid round structures
surrounded by an intact basal lamina, which prohibited
tumor cells to escape from the organoid (Figure 3F). In
stark contrast, when CAFs were in close proximity of
the tumor organoid and pulled the matrix away from
the tumor organoid, the basal lamina almost completely
disintegrated. At these sites of intense interaction, the
tumor cells in the protrusion had undergone EMT, and
were expressing vimentin (Figure  3F). Furthermore,
a marked enrichment of actin at the tips of organoid
protrusions was discovered (Figure  3F), which is an
established indication of invadopodia [35]. Taken together,
our results revealed that fibroblasts promote formation
of invadopodia, and that the complex co-culture model
recapitulate CAFs-led invasion, a previously described
phenomenon [7, 8].
Next, tumor-stroma interactions in different ECMs
were investigated. Higher resolution, confocal images of
living dsRed-LNCaP and GFP-PF179T 3D co-cultures
were acquired at day 14. The matrix affected shape, size
and texture of tumor organoids in co-culture (Figure 4A,
lower panels). Although the morphology and spreading
of PF179T cells diverged drastically in distinct ECMs,
fibroblasts were able to form small filopodia-like structures
in all matrices (Figure 4A, left panel, Supplementary Video
S1A–1C). For comparison, another fibroblast cell line,
GFP-WPMY-1 [36], was used in co-culture with dsRedLNCaP. Due to rapid proliferation of transformed WPMY-1
cells, only a minute amount of stromal cells was necessary
(tumor:stroma ratio 10:1) to result in a stable microtissue
architecture (Figure 4A, right panel, Supplementary
Figure S4). IF-stainings revealed evident morphological
differences between these two CAF lines; PF179T cells
formed many direct interactions with the tumor organoids
via filopodia (Supplementary Figure S5, Supplementary
Video S6), whereas WPMY-1 cells mainly surrounded the
organoids and formed no or few cell contacts. No significant
apoptosis was detected in either type of microtissue, only
single tumor cells were occasionally undergoing apoptosis
(Supplementary Figure S6). In addition, pre-formed RFPVCaP spheroids were co-cultured with GFP-PF179T
fibroblasts in different matrices (Supplementary Figure S7).
Both LNCaP and VCaP 3D co-cultures generated
standardized, stable, and reproducible microtissues, ideal
for drug target validation and phenotypic assays.
To assess how the addition of fibroblasts affects the
growth and morphology of tumor organoids, we utilized
AMIDA, developed for high-content phenotypic analysis of
3D cultures [27]. AMIDA enables rapid segmentation and

CAF-promoted invasive properties of tumor
organoids
In order to establish in more detail how CAFs affect
and communicate with the tumor organoids in the 3D cocultures, we performed high-resolution microscopy. In
collagen-containing matrix, the CAFs appeared to pull the
organoids while generating motion tracks in the matrix
for single tumor cells to follow or occasionally even
break free from the organoid structures (Figure 3A–3B,
Supplementary Video S1C). Second-harmonic generation
live-cell microscopy revealed that stromal syncytia were
able to attach to single tumor cells, often with the help
of collagen fibers, followed by movement of the organoid
body into the same direction (Figure 3C). Collagen
reorganization at the tumor-stromal interface has been
described in vivo and shown to facilitate local invasion
[31, 32]. Interestingly, direct cell-cell contacts between
tumor and stromal cells was also observed (Figure 3D–3E).
Electron-dense material and cortical actin accumulation
was detected at spots where α-smooth muscle actin
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30040

Oncotarget

quantitative measurements of a large number of images,
typically containing hundreds of organoids with a spectrum
of different shapes, sizes and textures (Figure 4B–4C).
This computational read-out represents a compromise
between detailed imaging of morphological details, and fast
experimental throughput. Significant, but subtle differences
in key morphometric parameters were discovered when
fibroblasts were added to LNCaP organoids (Figure 4D,
Supplementary Figure S8, Supplementary Table S1). Addition
of both fibroblast lines (PF179T and WPMY-1) stimulated
the growth of tumor organoids (Area, CellNumber), likely
due to secreted growth factors. The presence of CAFs also
induced a loss of cell-cell-contacts and reduced epithelial
differentiation, typically measured by the less rounded shape
of organoids (Roundness, FiltRound), or reduced structure

density (Density), a previously described characteristic of
epithelial or acinar differentiation [2, 37]. Concomitantly, a
significant increase in the number (AppNumber) and length
(MaxApp, MedApp) of “appendages” or invasive protrusions
originating from the multicellular organoids was observed
(Figure 4D), established as early signs of tumor cell invasion
in 3D settings (Figure 3). Alterations in morphometric
parameters of LNCaP tumor organoids were also discovered
when co-cultured with CAFs in different matrices (Figure 4E,
Supplementary Figure S8). Organoids grew largest in the
Matrigel/collagen mixture (Area, CellNumber). Addition
of collagen affected pre-invasive properties of organoids,
resulting in increased number (AppNumber) and length
(MaxApp, MedApp) of the invadopodia (Figure 4E). In
summary, a mixture of Matrigel (laminin) and collagen

Figure 3: CAFs remodel the ECM and facilitate tumor cell invasion. A. Two example sequences of Incucyte FLR real-time live-

cell imaging of LNCaP cells (phase contrast) and PF179T CAFs (green), co-cultured in Matrigel/collagen mixture. CAFs appear to pull the
matrix and lead the way for tumor cells to invade. White arrows depict tumor-stroma interaction. T: timepoints, captured with 4 h intervals.
B. Confocal live-cell images of tumor stroma interactions. Tumor cells follow the fibroblast tracks. Red: dsRed-LNCaP, green: GFP-PF179T
CAFs. White arrows depict tumor-stroma interaction. Scale bar: 100 μm. C. Second-harmonic generation microscopy image of collagenmediated tumor-CAF connection. Red: dsRed-LNCaP, green: GFP-PF179T CAFs, grey: collagen fibers. Scale bar: 100 μm. D. IF staining
implying direct contact between tumor and stromal cells. Arrow depicts tumor-stroma interaction. Vimentin (Vim): mesenchymal cell marker,
Pan-keratin (Krt): epithelial cell marker, F-actin (F-Act). Scale bar: 50 μm. E. Left panel: high-resolution transmission electron microscopy
(TEM) images, showing direct tumor and stromal cell contact. Thin black arrow depicts α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA)-rich CAF, thick white
arrow depicts tumor organoid. Scale bar: 2 μm. Right panel: Marked area in the left panel is blown up. Black arrowhead points to α-SMA-rich
cytoskeleton in the CAF, directly adjacent to the tumor cell membrane. The circle highlights electron dense material, indicating cortical actin
accumulation, a hallmark of cell-cell contacts. Scale bar: 200 nm. For the complete TEM panel, see Supplementary Figure S3. (Continued )
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30041

Oncotarget

Figure 3: (Continued ) CAFs remodel the ECM and facilitate tumor cell invasion. F. Representative IF-stainings displaying

CAF-promoted tumor invasion. Tumor cells lose both the E-cadherin expression (panel 1) and the basal lamina (panel 2 and 3) in the
organoid protrusion, in response to nearby CAFs starting to pull the matrix. Instead, the tumor protrusion expressed vimentin (panel 3 and 4)
and an accumulation of actin is observed in the invasive tip (panel 4). Vimentin (Vim): mesenchymal cell marker, E-cadherin (E-cadh):
epithelial cell marker, Laminin-α1 (Lamα1): basal lamina, F-actin (F-Act), Draq5: nuclear stain. Red arrows depict the important details.
The separate channels are displayed in black and white. All channels are shown in color in the merged images. Scale bar: 100 μm.

resulted in optimal growth conditions, supporting growth of
both tumor and stromal cells. Our image analysis approach
demonstrates the possibility to visualize and quantify
organoid changes associated with fibroblast-promoted tumor
invasion.

as a whole. To investigate the morphometric effect of
selected compounds on PrCa, dsRed-LNCaP cells were
co-cultured with PF179T CAFs in Matrigel/collagen
mixture for 14 days. Compounds were added to the
medium after 4 days, during which multicellular tissue
structures had already formed.
The growth and morphology of fibroblasts and
tumor organoids was investigated in 3D co-cultures using
live-cell imaging and tracking (Figure 5A). Inhibition of
WNT/β-catenin signaling (FH-535) and PI3K/mTOR
(PI-103) displayed cytotoxic effects on the CAFs already
at day 8, thus effectively killing fibroblasts completely
by day 11 (Supplementary Figure S9A). Interestingly,
FAK inhibition (Y11, PF-573228) most prominently
reduced fibroblast growth compared to control treatment,
without strong cytotoxic effects and without elimination
of all the CAFs, (Figure 5B, Supplementary Figure S9A,
Videos S7A–E). The inhibitor LY294002, although
also targeting PI3K, only showed intermediate effects.
The same molecules were also important for fibroblast
movement, as corresponding inhibitors repressed CAF
motility over time. Examination of the extension size and
number of the CAF cohorts revealed that inhibition of
WNT/β-catenin, PI3K, AKT and FAK caused substantial

FAK inhibitors constrain both tumor growth and
spreading of stromal cells
To investigate the potential of our platform for
functional target validation and provide biologically
significant, phenotypic readout, we performed chemical
perturbation of selected proteins that are associated
with tumorigenesis; wingless-type MMTV integration
site family (WNT), β-catenin signaling, and γ-secretase
protein complex (Notch) [38], FAK [39], AKT
kinase (AKT), phosphoinositide-3-Kinase (PI3K) and
mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) [40]. We also
selected granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating
factor (GM-CSF), which has previously been described
as active in tumor progression [41] (Table 1). We were
specifically interested to explore how perturbation
of these molecules may affect tumor and stroma as a
single functional unit, and thereby block tumor growth
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30042

Oncotarget

alterations (Figure 5B). Inhibitors FH-535 (WNT/βcatenin) and PI-103 (PI3K/mTOR) effectively removed
fibroblast extensions due to killing of CAFs, whereas
10-DEBC (AKT) and Y11 (FAK) only decreased CAF
cohort branching (Figure 5B). For single fibroblast
analysis, we imaged dual labeled GFP/Histone B2mCherry-PF179T cells together with dsRed-LNCaP
cells using the PE Operetta High Content Imaging
System, combined with PE Harmony High Content
Imaging and Analysis Software (Figure 5C). Histone
B2-labeled CAFs enabled single cell segmentation and
showed that the number of fibroblasts was only reduced
with Y11, PF-573228 (FAK) and LY-294002 (PI3K)
inhibitors, while FH-535 (WNT/β-catenin) and PI-103
(PI3K/mTOR) both effectively abolished all the CAFs
(Figure  5D). More importantly, the size (Area) of the
living, single fibroblasts was not significantly affected by
FAK perturbation, whereas it was drastically decreased

by use of the cytotoxic WNT and PI3K/mTOR inhibitors,
and thereby indicating death of CAFs (Figure 5D).
In parallel to the CAF analyses, tumor organoid
growth in 3D co-cultures was investigated using live-cell
tracking. Reduced organoid growth was detected with the
following inhibitors: PI-103 (PI3K/mTOR), LY-294002
(PI3K), IWP-2 (WNT), FH-535 (WNT/β-catenin), Y11
and PF-573228 (FAK) (Figure 6A). We continued with
end-point morphometric analysis of tumor organoids
co-cultured with CAFs (Supplementary Figure S9B).
Blocking of molecules associated with carcinogenesis
resulted in significant changes of tumor morphology, and
compounds were classified into three groups based on the
tumor phenotype (Figure 6B). Inhibitors FH-535 (WNT/
β-catenin), IWP-2 (WNT) and PI-103 (PI3K/mTOR)
effectively eliminated tumor cells/organoids. IWP-2
specifically abolished the tumor cells without affecting
the stromal cells. In contrast, GSI-953 (γ-secretase) and

Figure 4: Addition of fibroblasts promote growth and invasiveness of tumor organoids. A. Representative maximum

projection confocal images of 3D mono and co-cultures cultured for 14 days in Matrigel, collagen and mixture. Red: dsRed-LNCaP,
green: GFP-PF179T (left panel), GFP-WPMY-1 (right panel). White arrows in left, lower panel depict filopodia-like structures of PF179T
CAFs interacting with tumor organoids. Scale bar: 100 μm. B. LNCaP organoid segmentation was performed by the automated image data
analysis software AMIDA [27], and example images of segmented LNCaP organoids in in Matrigel/collagen 3D mono- or co-culture are
described. Red: dsRed LNCaP segmentation, green: overlapping GFP signal. C. Schematic drawing depicts morphological parameters that
were analyzed with AMIDA. (Continued)

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30043

Oncotarget

Figure 4: (Continued ) Addition of fibroblasts promote growth and invasiveness of tumor organoids. D. Classification of

morphological changes in tumor organoids by addition of different fibroblast ratios (PF179T and WPMY-1), in comparison to LNCaP monoculture.
E. Classification of morphological changes in tumor organoids co-cultures in different ECM; collagen and Matrigel/collagen mixture in
comparison to Matrigel. (D–E) Heatmaps summarize altered parameters from AMIDA analysis. Values are color-coded as red (increased) versus
blue (decreased), relative to the control. For explanation of morphometric parameters, see Supplementary Table S1. Box and whisker plots shown
for selected parameters from the heatmap. Area describes the size of the segmented structure in pixels, Roundness is a measure of loss of the round
organoid phenotype, and MaxApp is an estimate for the maximum length of appendages (invasive processes) observed in the segmented structure.
P-values are Bonferroni-corrected from Mann-Whitney U-test and compared to control. P = 0 indicates P-values < 0.001.

Table 1: Compounds used for perturbation of 3D co-cultures
Abbreviation

Function

DMSO

Control

GSI-953

Begacestat, γ-secretase inhibitor

IWP-2

Inhibitor of WNT processing and secretion

FH-535

Inhibitor of WNT/β-catenin signaling

GM-CSF

Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor

Y11

Inhibitor of focal adhesion kinase (FAK)

PF-573228

Inhibitor of FAK

10-DEBC

Inhibitor of AKT/PKB

PI-103

Inhibitor of DNA-PK, PI3-kinase (p110α) and mTOR

LY-294002

Inhibitor of PI3-kinase

10-DEBC (AKT) showed no clear phenotypic alteration
compared to the control. Interestingly, FAK inhibitors Y11
and PF-573228, and PI3K inhibitor LY-294002 resulted
in smaller (Area), more rounded (Roundness) and denser
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

organoids (Density), which displayed markedly decreased
invasiveness (MaxApp), compared to control (Figure 6C).
These results suggest that these FAK and PI3K inhibitors
affect the morphology of both cell compartments, whereas
30044

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Small molecule inhibitors block growth and dynamics of fibroblasts in 3D co-culture. A. Representative live-cell images

of LNCaP (phase contrast) and GFP-PF179T cells (green) co-cultured in Matrigel/collagen mixture, treated with inhibitors (3 μM) or GM-CSF
(0.3 ng/ml). For description of perturbants, see Table 1. Scale bar 200 μm. B. Quantification of perturbants’ effects on fibroblast growth rate (area),
motion per frame (motility), extension size per cluster and number of extensions per cluster (branching), is shown over time. Segmented real-time
live-cell image sequences were used for the quantification. Every dot represents a value per each time frame of the image sequence. C. Segmentation
of single fibroblasts using dual labeled, Histone 2B-mCherry/GFP-PF179Ts, together with dsRed-LNCaP cells. All the fibroblast nuclei (green:
mCherry) were selected and their surrounding cytoplasm was detected by the overlay of the GFP signal from the fibroblasts (shown in different
colors). The segmentation was performed using the PE Harmony software. D. Quantification of the effect of perturbants on single fibroblast
number and area. Spinning disc confocal images taken at the end point (day 14) were used for quantification. Error bars depict SD. P-values
* P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, *** P < 0.001, ns: not significant, by Student t-test.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30045

Oncotarget

IWP-2, an inhibitor of WNT processing and secretion,
primarily affects tumor growth. Taken together, the
inhibitors Y11 and PF-573228, which both target the
same Y397 phosphorylation site of FAK, exhibit the
most specific therapeutic potential in vitro, since they
simultaneously constrained tumor and stroma growth
and invasion as a whole, without prominent cytotoxicity
(Figure 6, Supplementary Figure S9).

co-cultures, along with 3D mono- and co-cultures, using the
same panel of perturbants, was conducted. Quantification of
LNCaP cell/organoid area uncovered substantial differences
in compound sensitivity and efficacy between the distinct
culture settings (Figure 7A, Supplementary Figure S10–S11).
We observed significantly reduced tumor organoid area
specifically for the two FAK inhibitors (Y11, PF-573228).
These effects were most striking in the tissue-like co-culture
model that comprises tumor organoids interacting with
CAFs (Figure 7B, Supplementary Figure S10–S11). Tumor
growth inhibition using FAK inhibitor PF-573328 at day 14
was significantly stronger in 3D co-culture (63% inhibition
compared to DMSO control), in contrast to 3D monoculture
lacking stromal cells (8% inhibition compared to DMSO
control) (Figure  7B). Therefore, both direct and indirect
tumor/stroma interactions, targeted by FAK inhibitors, may
contribute to the specific effects observed in vitro. FAK
inhibitor PF-573328 was not more effective in 3D culture

Therapeutic potential of FAK inhibition in PrCa
is only detected in a tissue-like cell model
Our platform specifically facilitates the functional
evaluation of perturbants on complex 3D co-cultures and
tumor microtissues, and is able to identify phenotypic
drug effects that are promoted by the stromal counterpart
and 3D conditions. To prove this concept, a comparison
of growth inhibition between standard 2D mono- and

Figure 6: Inhibition of cancer-associated molecules affects growth and morphology of tumor organoids in 3D
co-culture. A. LNCaP tumor organoid growth was analyzed from Incucyte FLR time-lapse images in an automated fashion. Quantification
of tumor fibroblast growth rate (area) is shown over 14 days. B. Classification of morphological changes in tumor organoids by the use of
small molecule inhibitors (3 μM) or GM-CSF (0.3 ng/ml). Three distinct groups of tumor phenotypes are marked with roman numerals
(I, II and III). Heatmap and graphical P-value matrix summarizes the altered parameters from the AMIDA analysis. Values are color-coded
as red (increased) and blue (decreased), relative to the control. For explanation of morphometric parameters, see Supplementary Table S1.
P-values are Bonferroni-corrected from t-tests and compared to DMSO control treatment (DMSO ctrl). (Continued )
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30046

Oncotarget

Figure 6: (Continued ) Inhibition of cancer-associated molecules affects growth and morphology of tumor organoids
in 3D co-culture. C. Box and whisker plots of selected parameters from the heatmap. Area describes the size of the segmented structure

in pixels, Roundness is a measure of loss of the round organoid phenotype, in percentage, MaxApp is an estimate for the maximum length
of appendages of the segmented structure, and Density is measured as the intensity of the red channel for the segmented structure. P = 0
indicates P-values < 0.001.

(8%) than in 2D co-culture (7%) or 2D mono-culture (9%)
settings, all relative to DMSO control (Figure  7B). Our
results indicate that significant FAK inhibition of PrCa was
only detected in the combination with tumor-stroma and
surrounding ECM. These results highlight the importance
of the complex 3D co-culture model and the need to
include functional CAFs in order to recapitulate relevant
biology most completely. On the contrary, the reduction
of tumor growth caused by PI3K inhibitor LY-294002
in 2D and 3D monocultures was rescued by addition of
fibroblasts (Figure 7A, Supplementary Figure S10–S11).
Our approach allows the dual, automated tracking of both
tumor and stroma morphology and their intrinsic dynamics.
It therefore allows predicting drug sensitivity and efficacy
based on representative tumor morphology. This concept
should be extremely useful for biologically more informed
functional evaluation and chemosensitivity testing of cancer
therapeutics.

dynamics of the entire tumor mass [14] and initiate
invasive processes and EMT. CAFs are therefore key
determinants for understanding the dynamics, or dynamic
behaviour of tumor growth, progression and invasion,
and represent an important target for effective cancer
therapies. Correspondingly, we observed that both PF179T
and WPMY-1 cells formed syncytia while surrounding
the tumor organoids, and significantly increased tumor
proliferation as well as invasive properties in a cell
density-dependent manner (Figure 4D). To form a dynamic
cohort, CAFs undergo a cell-to-cell adhesion program to
form a syncytium, via formation of adherens- and gap
junctions [14]. CAFs can also effectively remodel the
ECM. Their motion tracks within the matrix are sufficient
to promote cancer cell invasion [8, 31, 32]. Monitoring
cancer progression using multiphoton microscopy has
to some extent provided insights into CAF migration in
ECM [8, 43]. Our 3D co-culture model, to the best of our
knowledge, is the only platform that allows simulation
and tracking of collective migration of CAFs acting
as a cohort, thus leading the way for single tumor cells
or even large tumor organoids in collagen containing
ECM (Figure 3A–3B, Supplementary Video S1B–S1C).
These results illustrate the importance of modeling the
CAF dynamics, since fibroblasts can create lasting, proinvasive changes in the tumor microenvironment, e.g.
via cross-linking and re-orientation of collagen fibers,
thus generating cancer-associated collagen connected to

DISCUSSION
In the tumor microenvironment, CAFs behave in a
fashion similar to active tissue damage and inflammatory
responses, and cancer has been described as “a wound
that never heals” [42]. CAFs migrate as a cohesive unit
via cohort formation and exert a mechanical pressure
on the tumor invasion front, capable of changing the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30047

Oncotarget

Figure 7: FAK inhibitors significantly reduce tumor growth when relevant tumor microenvironment is included.

A. Comparison of tumor cell/organoid growth in 2D mono- and co-culture as well as 3D mono- and co-culture models treated with small
molecule inhibitors. Tumor area (red fluorescence) was segmented and quantified from PE Operetta High Content Imaging System confocal
live-cell images (2x) of dsRed-LNCaP and GFP-PF179T cells cultured in different settings and treated with inhibitors (3 μM) or GMCSF (0.3 ng/ml). Segmentation was performed by the PE Harmony software, to generate comparable growth curves. D: days in culture.
B. Tumor growth curves for different culture settings treated with FAK inhibitors Y11 and PF-573228. The relative tumor area measures of
compound treatments were normalized to DMSO control. To compare the different time frames of the 2D and the 3D experiments, the final
time point for all experiments was set to 100%. Error bars depict SEM. P-values are * P < 0.05, ** P < 0.01, by Student t-test.

e.g. tumor stiffness [44, 45]. Detailed, matching analyzes
of both the tumor organoid and CAF morphology should
therefore be highly informative when validating molecular
drug targets for cancer treatments, in particular related
to dynamic processes including invasion, motility, and
possible metastasis. Our image analysis approach is
adaptable to a broad range of tumor and stromal cell
types, and does not necessarily depend on the use of
labeled cells as morphometric analyzes can also be
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

performed with unlabeled cells. Thus, organotypic coculture models can be expanded beyond the field of
PrCa, and general dynamic changes between tumor and
stroma can be quantified by utilizing standard live-cell
imaging methods in combination with our technology.
Our complex co-culture models are suitable for measuring
morphometric effects of anti-cancer drugs on either one of
the compartments, thus enabling highly informative and
biologically relevant, phenotypic compound screens.
30048

Oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Real-time growth and motion analyzes from lowresolution time-lapse images were in agreement with in-depth
phenotypic analyzes from high-resolution confocal images,
although both approaches exhibited distinct properties. To
demonstrate the usefulness of our method, microtissues
were treated with compounds that perturb critical functions
in tumor pathobiology. We found that FAK-signaling, which
involves direct cell-cell interactions [39], was particularly
important for the tumor-stroma crosstalk in PrCa (Figure
5, 6). FAK expression is upregulated in many tumor types
including colon, breast, prostate, and pancreas, correlating
with poor patient survival [46, 47]. Several clinical trials
have been initiated with FAK inhibitors over the past years
[39], but so far no drugs have been approved for cancer
chemotherapy. The role of FAK-signaling in stroma was
first introduced in an orthotopic mouse model of pancreatic
cancer, where inhibition of FAK reduces the growth,
invasion and metastasis, concomitant with lowered number
of tumor-associated macrophages and fibroblasts [39, 47].
Inhibition of FAK in our PrCa 3D co-culture model showed
a similar phenotype, i.e. resulting in smaller organoids and
decreased invasiveness (Figure 6), combined with reduced
size, mobility and branching of CAF cohorts (Figure 5). In
contrast, no evident phenotypic changes were detectable
in conventional 2D co-cultures (Figure 7). Our results
indicate that in addition to promoting tumor progression
of PrCa cells, FAK induces CAF cohort spreading in the
surrounding tumor microenvironment. Specific functional
effects detected with FAK inhibitors (Y11, PF-573328)
showed significantly less pronounced effects on tumor cells
in the absence of fibroblasts, compared to microtissues
in which CAFs were present. The effects could be due, at
least in part, to blocking direct cell-cell-interactions between
tumor cells, as well as between tumor and stromal cells. This
finding highlights the importance of the stromal component,
which can simultaneously interact via both paracrine and
secretory pathways with tumor cells. In conclusion, blocking
of cell-cell-interactions between tumor and stroma should be
considered as an important additional cancer target.
We demonstrate that our computational analysis
approach can be utilized for meaningful quantitative
morphometric measurements of 3D co-cultures. The
experimental platform enables functional evaluation of
phenotypic responses to anti-cancer drugs, and allows the
simultaneous tracking of highly dynamic and heterogeneous
tumor-stroma interactions. Our results reveal the potential of
standardized and miniaturized tissue-based model systems
as valuable tools for phenotypic, high-content screening, in
particular when it is combined with matching automated
image analysis systems. Our biologically relevant and
complex model system, which recapitulate the tumor
architecture, histology, and heterogeneity more faithfully,
may also reduce, refine and replace the need for mouse
experiments in early stage drug discovery. These microtissuebased model systems would significantly facilitate target
validation related to the tumor microenvironment and
invasion.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Cell lines and culture conditions
All cell lines were obtained from American Type
Culture Collection (ATCC) or originator laboratories. PrCa
lines were propagated in RPMI-1640 (Sigma-Aldrich),
CAF lines PF179T and WPMY-1 were cultured in DMEM
(Sigma-Aldrich), and both media were supplemented
with 10% FBS, 1% penicillin/streptomycin and 1%
L-glutamine. Immortalized, non-transformed epithelial
cell lines EP156T cells were cultured in Keratinocyte
Serum-Free Medium (KSFM), supplemented with 50 mg/l
bovine pituitary extract, 5 μg/l EGF and 2% FBS for 3D
conditions. 1 nM of the synthetic androgen R1881 was
added to VCaP medium for growth support.

Miniaturized 3D cultures in ECM
All 3D experiments shown were performed in 96well angiogenesis plates (Ibidi), exhibiting a well-in-a-well
geometry that consists of two compartments, the smaller
residing within the bottom of the larger well. This geometry
reduces the meniscus formation caused by liquid tension,
results in an even surface supporting rapid, automated
microscopic imaging and autofocusing. The method further
allows cells to be embedded in a defined and narrow focal
plane between two layers of ECM (sandwich system). The
volume of a single 3D experiment requires only 30 μl of
ECM: growth factor-reduced Matrigel (Corning), stock 8
mg/ml and collagen type-I (Corning), stock 3 mg/ml, or a 1:1
mixture of both. The pH of collagen type-I was neutralized
with NaOH prior to use. Miniaturized 3D co-cultures were
prepared as described previously [2, 27]. Bottom wells of
Ibidi Angiogenesis μ-plates were filled with 10 μl of 50%
ECM in medium, and incubated at +37°C for 30–60 min.
The plates were then centrifuged for 20 min. at 200 × g.
Single cell suspensions were mixed with 25% ECM in
medium and placed on top of the polymerized bottom gel
at a density of 700–1500 cells/well, depending on the cell
line. Hence, one tumor organoid is typically generated from
a single cell (clonal approach). The plates were centrifuged
for 10 min. at 100 × g, and the upper gel was allowed to
polymerize at +37°C for 3–4 h or overnight. The wells were
then filled with medium, containing 2% FBS, 1% penicillin/
streptomycin and 1% L-glutamine, and medium was
changed every 3rd – 4th day. The μ-plates were humidified
by adding sterile PBS into the outer wells and rim.

Optimization of 3D co-culture conditions
In order to generate stable and reproducible 3D
co-cultures, the culture conditions for every cell line
had to be optimized: cell ratios, FBS concentration and
ECM composition. Regarding dsRed-LNCaP tumor cells
in combination with GFP-PF179T fibroblasts [28], we
observed that a ratio of 1:2 in favor of the tumor cells
30049

Oncotarget

Stabilization of real-time live-cell image videos

generated the most stable and tissues-like culture. Addition
of larger numbers of fibroblasts caused contraction of the
culture and the matrix, whereas fewer fibroblasts did not
succeed to form a proper stromal network surrounding
the organoids. Regarding dsRed-LNCaP tumor cells in
combination with GFP-WPMY-1 fibroblasts [36], we
detected that a ratio of 1:10 in favor of the tumor cells
generated the most stable and tissues-like culture, after
8–11 days in 3D culture. The microtissues then remain
virtually unchanged for an additional 1–2 weeks after
homeostasis has been established. To examine the added
value of stromal cells and factors secreted by them, low
serum conditions, i.e. 2% FBS were consistently applied
to all 3D cultures. We also noticed that 10% FBS inhibited
the growth of the tumor organoids when co-cultured with
PF179T cells (data not shown), likely due to additional
growth factor secretion by the fibroblasts. Marked
alterations in fibroblast dynamics and tumor organoid
morphology were found when CAFs were co-cultured
with LNCaP cells in different matrices. In summary, a
mixture of Matrigel (laminin) and collagen type-I resulted
in the most ideal growth conditions, favoring both tumor
and stromal cells, respectively.

The time-lapse movies displayed shaky motions.
Sequential image capturing used in the process of
recording cellular motility introduced visible shaking
of the time-lapse movies. The changes in camera
positioning create differences in the field of view and
focus. The variation in image position was corrected
by using stabilized frame-by-frame alignment since
the subsequent analyzes require steady, positioned
time-lapses. Furthermore, video stabilization was
also necessary to enable continuous visualization
of the 3D co-cultures over time, without distorting
camera movements. Stabilization was performed
in two steps: global motion estimation and motion
compensation. A translation motion model was adopted
to estimate suitable values based on the shift property
of the Fourier Transform using phase correlation [48].
Given two images f and g, which are related by a
simple translation (∆), then the corresponding Fourier
Transforms are denoted as F(u) and G(u) (i.e. G(u) =
e −2πiu·∆F(u)). Then the normalized cross-power spectrum
(phase correlation) is:

Pre-formed spheroids in low-attachment culture
Under these premises, the Inverse Fourier Transform
results in a single peak, which the location of the peak
corresponds to the motion vectors between the two frames.
For heavily blurred movies, we utilized an improved
version of the original phase correlation method [49],
which is more robust in registering blurred images.
During the motion compensation step, maximum overlap
among the frames was calculated and the point of view
was fixed by shifting frame centers according to estimated
motion vectors in the previous step. Therefore, frames in
stabilized videos were cropped.

VCaP cells were alive but failed to grow when
directly embedded as single cells into any ECM
formulation. To facilitate the growth of VCaP cells in
ECM, we pre-cultured floating cell aggregates, typically
loosely adhered spheroids, in low-attachment culture
(bacterial Petri dish). After 3–5 days with regular
suspension of the cells, the VCaP cells started to attach to
each other, and small, first irregular and later increasingly
round spheroids were formed. These pre-formed
spheroids were then transferred into ECM and gave rise to
proliferating organoids. 1 nM synthetic androgen R1881
was added to VCaP medium for growth support.

Filtering of real-time live-cell image videos

Real-time live-cell imaging using incucyte FLR

The fluorescent images tended to blur, and show noise
and high background. A lack of proper focus, and autofluorescence were the main sources of these errors. In this
study, cascaded filters were utilized to suppress the effects
of the aforementioned problems in further image analysis
steps. Median filtering and non-local means de-noising [50]
were applied, respectively. The median filter is a non-linear
filter and was preferentially used to reduce spikes and “saltand-pepper noise” (impulsive noise). We utilized a window
of 5 × 5 pixels. Finally, a non-local means algorithm, which
depends on self-similarity concept, was employed with a
patch size = 7 × 7 pixels, a search window size of = 31 × 31
pixels, and a weight decay control parameter depending on
the standard deviation of the noise h = 15. However, these
default parameters can be tuned manually for adaptation to
divergent image sequences.

Live-cell imaging was carried out in a systematic,
standardized fashion. Incucyte FLR live-cell fluorescent
imaging device (Essen Bioscience) was utilized for continuous
monitoring of up to four weeks of 3D culture. Settings were
selected to capture one image per well/per hour. These image
series are based on phase contrast microscopy combined with
green fluorescence, generating image sequences that can be
visualized as videos, ideal for investigations of long doseresponse and time-course experiments in 3D co-cultures.
The cultures were also stained with CellPlayer™ Kinetic
Caspase-3/7 Apoptosis Assay Reagent (Essen Bioscience),
diluted 1:1000 in culture medium for live-cell imaging of
apoptosis. The reagent was mixed in the cell culture medium
and pipetted into wells, incubated at +37°C for 72 h, and
monitored in real time with the IncuCyte FLR.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30050

Oncotarget

Segmentation and growth analysis of fibroblasts

that is independent of cell detections provided better
estimates for the cell movement analysis. The goal of
optical flow estimation is to compute an approximation
to the motion field from time-varying image intensity.
Optical flow is a rich source of information that
supports understanding of cell motility. We employed
the Farnebäck algorithm [29], to estimate dense optical
flow and to assess where fibroblast cohorts have moved
in the subsequent frame. The dense optical flow measure
proposes to approximate the neighborhood of each pixel
with a quadric polynomial, and then analyze what occurs
if a polynomial undergoes a translation. Optical flow
was determined by searching locations where a surface
(represented by a quadric polynomial), has moved
between two subsequent frames. The local region was
represented by a 3D surface:

Cell segmentation is an essential step in
quantifying fibroblast cell dynamics. Adaptive
thresholding was applied to the green channel to segment
fluorescent images. Due to the granular nature of the
ECM, auto-fluorescence, lack of proper focus and high
background, the fibroblasts exhibited low contrast and
intensity-variant characteristics as a function of time.
Therefore, selecting a single global intensity threshold
based on the histogram such as the widely used Otsu
threshold resulted in poor segmentation of cells from
background. To overcome these problems, we employed
local adaptive thresholding [26], so that the threshold
value T(x, y) is calculated individually for each pixel
p(x, y). The threshold value is then determined using a
square block (width = height) neighborhood of p(x, y),
which cross-correlated with a Gaussian window of the
block size minus a constant κ:

where A was a symmetric matrix, b a vector and c a
scalar. A new signal f2 was then constructed by a global
displacement d:

where
Equating the coefficients in the polynomials resulted
in a solution for the translation vector d:

is a (2k + 1) × (2k + 1) Gaussian kernel. After binarization,
contour detection was used to obtain the boundaries of
cell clusters. Due to the highly complex nature of 3D
cultures, it was not feasible to detect individual cells from
fluorescent images. Therefore, we focused on detecting
and quantifying multicellular CAF cohorts instead. In the
final step of the segmentation, small noisy regions were
removed. We associated fibroblast growth (area measured
in pixels) with the size of the segmented region (i.e.
total number of pixels in the fluorescent image covered
by fibroblasts). Although volumetric information gave
more accurate results for cells cultured in 3D matrix, area
information provided a reasonable estimation to compare
different conditions or treatments.

After a series of refinements, this method led to
a robust algorithm. Finally, we obtained displacement
vectors for each pixel in every frame. Subsequently,
the mobility of the cell culture objects contained in a
single frame was described by the displacement vector
magnitudes.

Shape analysis for evaluation of fibroblast
branching

Motion analysis of fibroblasts

Automated analysis of cell morphology is important
in order to understand the functional relationship between
altered cell shape and variable cell culture conditions. In
this context, we analyzed the branching characteristics
of fibroblast cell clusters over time in a quantitative
manner. We started with the binary images, resulting from
the segmentation processes described above. The shape
of each cell cluster formed by CAFs was then analyzed
individually. A closed contour of the cell cluster was
extracted from the binary image. The convex hull of the
contour was detected, and it was defined as the smallest
convex shape that contained the contour points. This
means that for any two points belonging to the same
shape, the whole connecting line segment is also a part
of the shape. Contour defects were detected and defined
as the area situated between the contour and the convex

Cell motility (motion) was assessed by using the
dense optical flow algorithm. Previous motion analyzes
efforts have mainly aimed at tracking high intensity
regions (detections of circular cells/nuclei) in image
sequences. Therefore, tracking performance is heavily
based on the detection success (precision-recall). High
contrast, sufficient and consistent intensity differences
between cell and its neighboring, and low noise levels
are essential for successful automation. The fluorescent
co-culture image sequences presented in this study had
a problem with noise and area definition. Furthermore,
individual cell tracking for motion analysis was not
convenient since such approaches result in high errors
with large variances among different image sequences.
Instead, the dense optical flow of video sequences
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30051

Oncotarget

hull. The property of convexity of the original contour
was violated due to these defects, since the contour tended
to bent away from the convex hull. The starting and end
points of the defect, which forms the line of the defect in
the convex hull, were then detected. Finally, the farthest
contour point from the line and the distance between the
farthest contour point and the hull were determined to
account for the cell extension (branch) size. We associated
the number of defects with the number of branches in a
cluster. Only the defects showing depths (calculated
from the farthest point of the convex hull for each defect
individually) greater than a certain pre-defined threshold
were considered as reliable extensions, in order to reduce
noisy measurements.

phase contrast segmentation result with the fibroblast
segmentation, obtained from fluorescent images. In this
tumor growth analysis, identical fixed parameters were
utilized for all sequences. The image segmentation of cells
growing in pure collagen did not work optimally due to
noise and image granularity. Instead, we focused on using
a mixture of Matrigel/collagen, where the segmentation
process worked consistently and results were reliable.

Confocal image acquisition, pre-processing
3D confocal images were acquired with a Zeiss
Axiovert-200M microscope, equipped with Yokogawa
CSU22 spinning disc confocal unit using Zeiss PlanNeofluar 5× or 20× objectives. Maximum intensity
projections were created with SlideBook (Intelligent
Imaging Innovations Inc.). Background noise was removed
by image normalization, also using SlideBook. Confocal
microscopy settings of Leica TCS SP5 microscope were
used for second-harmonic generation microscopy of
collagen fibers, using a 40× objective. Maximum intensity
projections and image normalizations were done with LAS
AF Lite (Leica Microsystems).

Morphometric analysis of fibroblasts
To explore various cell dynamics, experiments were
diversified based on the results of segmentation, motion
and shape analysis. We fitted the curves resulting from
the measurement of image data for visibility reasons, in
order to remove noisy measurements. The growth rate was
defined as

Immunofluorescence of 3D co-cultures
The initial fibroblast area normalization was
necessary to result in standardized comparisons. After
the stabilization step, the field of view tends to differ
between image sequences. Similarly, the initial number of
cells may also vary. The growth rate of fibroblasts was
shown as a function of time. The motility of the CAF
cohort in a single frame was described by the magnitude
of the displacement vector. The mean motion per frame
was defined as the sum of all displacement magnitudes,
divided by the sum and the number of image pixels, over
time. Displacement vectors for each pixel were obtained in
the dense optical flow analysis stage. A segmentation mask
was utilized to suppress background regions. The number
of extensions per cluster was extracted and mean values
were plotted as a function over time. Extension sizes were
extracted for branching clusters and mean values were
evaluated separately for each cluster. Finally, the mean of
these values per frame were plotted over time.

The 3D co-cultures were fixed in the μ-angiogenesis
wells with 2% paraformaldehyde (PFA) in PBS for 20
min, washed with cold PBS and blocked in 20% horse
serum. Cell permeabilization was performed by addition
of 0.7% Triton X-100 (Sigma-Aldrich). Fixed cultures
were incubated at 4°C overnight with primary antibodies
(1:100), washed with PBS and incubated for 3–4 h, at RT
with secondary antibodies (1:500) and Draq5 (1:1000,
Cell Signaling Technology), to visualize the nuclei and
AlexaFluor® 488 Phalloidin (1:50, Life Technologies),
to detect F-actin. The following primary antibodies were
used: anti-vimentin (SP20) and anti-E-cadherin (HECD-1,
both from Abcam), and anti-laminin-α1 (LAM-89, Santa
Cruz). Images were taken with the Zeiss Axiovert-200M
spinning disc confocal microscope, using a 20x objective.
Z-stacks were acquired with a step-size of 8 μm. The
images were pre-processed using SlideBook and NIH
Image J.

Segmentation and growth analysis of tumor
organoids

Transmission electron microscopy (TEM)
Samples were fixed in 1% glutaraldehyde and
4% formaldehyde in 0.1 M phosphate buffer, pelleted,
immersed in 2% agarose in distilled water and postfixed in 1% osmiumtetroxide, dehydrated in acetone and
embedded in Epon LX 112 (Ladd Research Industries).
Thin sections were cut with Leica Ultracut UCT
ultramicrotome, stained in uranyl acetate and lead citrate,
and examined in Tecnai Spirit transmission electron
microscope. Images were captured by a Quemesa CCD
camera (Olympus Soft Imaging Solutions GMBH).

Intensive de-noising was applied for tumor
segmentation due to low signal-to-noise ratio and high
background clutter; a two cascaded non-local means
denoising followed by means shift filtering [51]. Similar
to fibroblast analysis, adaptive thresholding was applied
and the segmentation was smoothed using a morpholo­
gical filter. The segmentation also detected fibroblast
cohorts, which had to be removed. As fluorescent and
phase contrast images are registered, we masked the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30052

Oncotarget

Morphometric analysis of tumor organoids

The raw images were first scaled to 8-bit
representations and processed using a local entropy
filter. A mixture model with three components was fit to
the density of the pixel values. The mixture components
were used to set the unary potentials of the three labels
corresponding to ‘in focus cells’, ‘cell shadow’ and
‘background’. The pairwise potential parameters λ0, λ1
and were manually set based on the distribution of
the unary potentials. The segmentation methodology
was implemented in MATLAB using the α-expansion
algorithm to find the minimum energy labelling
[53–55]. The segmentation was performed separately for
the different channels corresponding to ‘LNCaP organoid’
and ‘PF179T CAF’. In the segmentation output, the pixel
labels for ‘LNCaP organoid’ and ‘PF179T CAF’ have been
overlaid to display co-localization.

Tumor organoids in maximum intensity projections
were segmented using the AMIDA software [27]. In
summary, AMIDA is a multi-parametric image analysis
program designed for high-content analysis of complex
and heterogeneous 3D organoid cultures. The software
first identifies individual multicellular structures by
image segmentation, and assigns numerical values for
selected cancer-relevant parameters to the objects; these
are then exported as a text file (csv; comma-separated
values). AMIDA is primarily designed to retrieve
information from 3D confocal image stacks, and it allows
quantitative measurements of large numbers of images
and structures, with a multitude of different organoid
shapes, sizes, and textures, see Supplementary Table S1.
AMIDA supports automated workflows, and can be
combined with quality control and statistical tools for data
interpretation and visualization.

Compound treatments

Raw numerical data were statistically processed
and visualized with R/Bioconductor. Statistical analysis
and plotting tools implemented for processing numerical
data (post-image analysis) were written using R, an open
source programming language and software environment
for statistical computing and graphics (http://cran.rproject.org). All R-scripts were incorporated in REX,
an in-house html-software environment that includes a
browser-based user interface.

All compounds were purchased from Tocris
Bioscience (Table 1), and dissolved in DMSO. The panel of
inhibitors was selected from pathways known to interfere
with cell-cell contacts in tumorigenesis. Multiple growth
factors were also tested in 3D culture (data not shown),
of which GM-CSF was selected to be included in the 3D
co-culture experiments. All exposures were performed in
triplicates, including vehicle control. Compound treatments
were initiated after 4 days of 3D culture, when significant
organoids had formed, and continued for an additional
10 days. Final concentrations used in the experiments:
inhibitors 3.0 μM; GM-CSF 0.3 ng/ml.

Segmentation and analysis of 3D confocal
image stacks

PE Operetta and harmony single fibroblast
analysis

Segmentation of the 3D confocal image stacks was
achieved using a Markov random field based methodology
[52]. For every pixel i in an image, let xi and zi be the
unobserved pixel label and observed pixel intensity,
respectively. Given the observed pixel intensities z, we
found the labelling (segmentation) that minimizes the
energy function

3D confocal images were acquired with the PE
Operetta High Content Imaging System, using 2x or 10x
objectives. Maximum intensity projections were created
with PE Harmony High Content Imaging and Analysis
Software. This software was used for analysis of the highcontent imaging data, including the usage of existing
image analysis building blocks, for creating high content
image analysis applications tailored to fit both tumor
organoid and single fibroblast analyzes.

Confocal data annotation and quality control

Comparison of 2D mono- and co-cultures with
3D mono- and co-cultures

for pixels i and adjacent pairs of pixels (i, j) with labels
l and k. The unary potentials were set to be

Confocal images of the whole well were acquired
with PE Operetta High Content Imaging System, using 2x
objective. Maximum intensity projections were created with
PE Harmony (High Content Imaging and Analysis Software).
This software was used for segmentation and measurement
of the red fluorescent tumor cell/organoid area (sum per
well, μm2), both from 2D and 3D cultures, to generate growth
curves. To compare the different time frames of the 2D and
the 3D experiments, the final time point for all experiments

where fl is the density of the pixel values associated with
label l. The pairwise potentials were set to be

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30053

Oncotarget

was set to 100%, and the relative tumor area measurements
were normalized to DMSO control.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

7.	 Kunz-Schughart LA, Knuechel R. Tumor-associated
fibroblasts (part I): Active stromal participants in tumor
development and progression? Histol Histopathol. 2002;
17:599–621.

We thank the members of our laboratories for
valuable discussions on the manuscript. Pauliina Toivonen,
Fumi Suomi, Ilmari Ahonen and Alexander Morin are
acknowledged for technical assistance.

8.	 Gaggioli C, Hooper S, Hidalgo-Carcedo C, Grosse R,
Marshall JF, Harrington K, Sahai E. Fibroblast-led collective invasion of carcinoma cells with differing roles for
RhoGTPases in leading and following cells. Nat Cell Biol.
2007; 9:1392–1400.
9.	 Xing F, Saidou J, Watabe K. Cancer associated fibroblasts (CAFs) in tumor microenvironment. Front Biosci
(Landmark Ed). 2010; 15:166–179.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare that they have no competing
interest.

10.	 Calvo F, Ege N, Grande-Garcia A, Hooper S, Jenkins RP,
Chaudhry SI, Harrington K, Williamson P, Moeendarbary E,
Charras G, Sahai E. Mechanotransduction and YAPdependent matrix remodelling is required for the generation
and maintenance of cancer-associated fibroblasts. Nat Cell
Biol. 2013; 15:637–646.

FUNDING
The work was supported by the Academy of
Finland (MÅ no. 284619, LE no. 136880, MT and MN
no. 267326), the Innovative Medicines Initiative joint
undertaking under grant agreement no. 115188 (www.
imi.europa.eu; www.predect.eu), resources of which are
composed of financial contribution from the European
Union’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007–
2013) and EFPIA companies’ in kind contribution (MÅ,
VH, JV, MN), the Finnish Funding Agency for Technology
and Innovation, TEKES (NB, MK, LE, JK, JH).

11.	 Rorth P. Collective cell migration. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol.
2009; 25:407–429.
12.	 Bianco A, Poukkula M, Cliffe A, Mathieu J, Luque CM,
Fulga TA, Rorth P. Two distinct modes of guidance signalling during collective migration of border cells. Nature.
2007; 448:362–365.
13.	 De Wever O, Pauwels P, De Craene B, Sabbah M, Emami S,
Redeuilh G, Gespach C, Bracke M, Berx G. Molecular and
pathological signatures of epithelial-mesenchymal transitions at the cancer invasion front. Histochem Cell Biol.
2008; 130:481–494.

REFERENCES
1.	 Forde PM, Rudin CM. Crizotinib in the treatment of nonsmall-cell lung cancer. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2012;
13:1195–1201.

14.	 Karagiannis GS, Poutahidis T, Erdman SE, Kirsch R,
Riddell RH, Diamandis EP. Cancer-associated fibroblasts
drive the progression of metastasis through both paracrine
and mechanical pressure on cancer tissue. Mol Cancer Res.
2012; 10:1403–1418.

2.	 Härmä V, Virtanen J, Mäkela R, Happonen A, Mpindi JP,
Knuuttila M, Kohonen P, Lötjönen J, Kallioniemi O, Nees M.
A comprehensive panel of three-dimensional models for studies of prostate cancer growth, invasion and drug responses.
PLoS One. 2010; 5:e10431.

15.	 Shaw KR, Wrobel CN, Brugge JS. Use of three-­dimensional
basement membrane cultures to model oncogene-induced
changes in mammary epithelial morphogenesis. J Mammary
Gland Biol Neoplasia. 2004; 9:297–310.

3.	 Weigelt B, Ghajar CM, Bissell MJ. The need for complex
3D culture models to unravel novel pathways and identify
accurate biomarkers in breast cancer. Adv Drug Deliv Rev.
2014; 69-70:42–51.

16.	 Fang C, Man YG, Cuttitta F, Stetler-Stevenson W, Salomon D,
Mazar A, Kulesza P, Rosen S, Avital I, Stojadinovic A,
Jewett A, Jiang B, Mulshine J. Novel Phenotypic
Fluorescent Three-Dimensional Co-Culture Platforms
for Recapitulating Tumor in vivo Progression and for
Personalized Therapy. J Cancer. 2013; 4:755–763.

4.	 Subramanian B, Rudym D, Cannizzaro C, Perrone R, Zhou J,
Kaplan DL. Tissue-engineered three-dimensional in vitro
models for normal and diseased kidney. Tissue Eng Part A.
2010; 16:2821–2831.

17.	 Clark AK, Taubenberger AV, Taylor RA, Niranjan B, Chea ZY,
Zotenko E, Sieh S, Pedersen JS, Norden S, Frydenberg M,
Grummet JP, Pook DW Australian Prostate Cancer
BioResource et al. A bioengineered microenvironment to
quantitatively measure the tumorigenic properties of cancerassociated fibroblasts in human prostate cancer. Biomaterials.
2013; 34:4777–4785.

5.	 Abbott BL. ABCG2 (BCRP) expression in normal and
malignant hematopoietic cells. Hematol Oncol. 2003;
21:115–130.
6.	 Weigelt B, Lo AT, Park CC, Gray JW, Bissell MJ. HER2
signaling pathway activation and response of breast cancer
cells to HER2-targeting agents is dependent strongly on
the 3D microenvironment. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2010;
122:35–43.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

18.	 Windus LC, Glover TT, Avery VM. Bone-stromal cells
up-regulate tumourigenic markers in a tumour-stromal

30054

Oncotarget

3D model of prostate cancer. Mol Cancer. 2013; 12:
112-4598-12-112.

31.	 Provenzano PP, Eliceiri KW, Campbell JM, Inman DR,
White JG, Keely PJ. Collagen reorganization at the tumor-­
stromal interface facilitates local invasion. BMC Med.
2006; 4:38.

19.	 Amann A, Zwierzina M, Gamerith G, Bitsche M, Huber JM,
Vogel GF, Blumer M, Koeck S, Pechriggl EJ, Kelm JM,
Hilbe W, Zwierzina H. Development of an innovative
3D cell culture system to study tumour—stroma interactions in non-small cell lung cancer cells. PLoS One. 2014;
9:e92511.

32.	 Kääriäinen E, Nummela P, Soikkeli J, Yin M, Lukk M,
Jahkola T, Virolainen S, Ora A, Ukkonen E, Saksela O,
Holtta E. Switch to an invasive growth phase in melanoma
is associated with tenascin-C, fibronectin, and procollagen-I
forming specific channel structures for invasion. J Pathol.
2006; 210:181–191.

20.	 Dowling CM, Herranz Ors C, Kiely PA. Using real-time
impedance-based assays to monitor the effects of fibroblastderived media on the adhesion, proliferation, migration
and invasion of colon cancer cells. Biosci Rep. 2014; 34:
10.1042/BSR20140031.

33.	 El Sayegh TY, Arora PD, Laschinger CA, Lee W, Morrison C,
Overall CM, Kapus A, McCulloch CA. Cortactin associates with N-cadherin adhesions and mediates intercellular
adhesion strengthening in fibroblasts. J Cell Sci. 2004;
117:5117–5131.

21.	 Zhang Z, Shiratsuchi H, Lin J, Chen G, Reddy RM, Azizi E,
Fouladdel S, Chang AC, Lin L, Jiang H, Waghray M, Luker G,
Simeone DM, et al. Expansion of CTCs from early stage
lung cancer patients using a microfluidic co-culture model.
Oncotarget. 2014; 5:12383–12397.

34.	 Helwani FM, Kovacs EM, Paterson AD, Verma S, Ali RG,
Fanning AS, Weed SA, Yap AS. Cortactin is necessary for
E-cadherin-mediated contact formation and actin reorganization. J Cell Biol. 2004; 164:899–910.

22.	 Maska M, Ulman V, Svoboda D, Matula P, Matula P,
Ederra C, Urbiola A, Espana T, Venkatesan S, Balak DM,
Karas P, Bolckova T, Streitova M, et al. A benchmark for
comparison of cell tracking algorithms. Bioinformatics.
2014; 30:1609–1617.

35.	 Murphy DA, Courtneidge SA. The ‘ins’ and ‘outs’ of podosomes and invadopodia: characteristics, formation and function. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2011; 12:413–426.
36.	 Webber MM, Trakul N, Thraves PS, Bello-DeOcampo D,
Chu WW, Storto PD, Huard TK, Rhim JS, Williams DE. A
human prostatic stromal myofibroblast cell line WPMY-1:
a model for stromal-epithelial interactions in prostatic neoplasia. Carcinogenesis. 1999; 20:1185–1192.

23.	 Schindelin J, Arganda-Carreras I, Frise E, Kaynig V,
Longair M, Pietzsch T, Preibisch S, Rueden C, Saalfeld S,
Schmid B, Tinevez JY, White DJ, Hartenstein V, et al. Fiji:
an open-source platform for biological-image analysis. Nat
Methods. 2012; 9:676–682.

37.	 Kenny PA, Lee GY, Myers CA, Neve RM, Semeiks JR,
Spellman PT, Lorenz K, Lee EH, Barcellos-Hoff MH,
Petersen OW, Gray JW, Bissell MJ. The morphologies of
breast cancer cell lines in three-dimensional assays correlate
with their profiles of gene expression. Mol Oncol. 2007;
1:84–96.

24.	 Lamprecht MR, Sabatini DM, Carpenter AE. CellProfiler:
free, versatile software for automated biological image analysis. BioTechniques. 2007; 42:71–75.
25.	 Huth J, Buchholz M, Kraus JM, Molhave K, Gradinaru C,
v Wichert G, Gress TM, Neumann H, Kestler HA.
TimeLapseAnalyzer: multi-target analysis for live-cell
imaging and time-lapse microscopy. Comput Methods
Programs Biomed. 2011; 104:227–234.

38.	 Kiesslich T, Berr F, Alinger B, Kemmerling R, Pichler M,
Ocker M, Neureiter D. Current status of therapeutic targeting of developmental signalling pathways in oncology. Curr
Pharm Biotechnol. 2012; 13:2184–2220.

26.	 Sauvola J, Pietikäinen M. Adaptive document image binarization. Pattern Recogn. 2000; 33:225–236.

39.	 Sulzmaier FJ, Jean C, Schlaepfer DD. FAK in cancer:
mechanistic findings and clinical applications. Nat Rev
Cancer. 2014; 14:598–610.

27.	 Härmä V, Schukov HP, Happonen A, Ahonen I, Virtanen J,
Siitari H, Åkerfelt M, Lötjönen J, Nees M. Quantification of
dynamic morphological drug responses in 3D organotypic
cell cultures by automated image analysis. PLoS One. 2014;
9:e96426.

40.	 Bauer TM, Patel MR, Infante JR. Targeting PI3 kinase in
cancer. Pharmacol Ther. 2015; 146:53–60.
41.	 Rudisch A, Dewhurst MR, Horga LG, Kramer N, Harrer N,
Dong M, van der Kuip H, Wernitznig A, Bernthaler A,
Dolznig H, Sommergruber W. High EMT Signature Score
of Invasive Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC) Cells
Correlates with NFkappaB Driven Colony-Stimulating
Factor 2 (CSF2/GM-CSF) Secretion by Neighboring
Stromal Fibroblasts. PLoS One. 2015; 10:e0124283.

28.	 Madar S, Brosh R, Buganim Y, Ezra O, Goldstein I,
Solomon H, Kogan I, Goldfinger N, Klocker H, Rotter V.
Modulated expression of WFDC1 during carcinogenesis
and cellular senescence. Carcinogenesis. 2009; 30:20–27.
29.	 Farnebäck G. In Image Analysis. SpringerBerlin Heidelberg:
2003; 363–370.

42.	 Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. Hallmarks of cancer: the next
generation. Cell. 2011; 144:646–674.

30.	 Kass D, Bridges RS, Borczuk A, Greenberg S. Methionine
aminopeptidase-2 as a selective target of myofibroblasts
in pulmonary fibrosis. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2007;
37:193–201.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43.	 Sahai E, Wyckoff J, Philippar U, Segall JE, Gertler F,
Condeelis J. Simultaneous imaging of GFP, CFP and

30055

Oncotarget

collagen in tumors in vivo using multiphoton microscopy.
BMC Biotechnol. 2005; 5:14.

49.	 Pedone M, Flusser J, Heikkilä J. Blur invariant translational
image registration for N-fold symmetric blurs. IEEE Trans
Image Process. 2013; 22:3676–3689.

44.	 van der Slot AJ, van Dura EA, de Wit EC, De Groot J,
Huizinga TW, Bank RA, Zuurmond AM. Elevated formation of pyridinoline cross-links by profibrotic cytokines
is associated with enhanced lysyl hydroxylase 2b levels.
Biochim Biophys Acta. 2005; 1741:95–102.

50.	 Buades A, Bartomeu C, Morel J. A non-local algorithm for
image denoising. Proc IEEE Comput Soc Conf Comput Vis
Pattern Recognit. 2005; 2:60–65.
51.	 Comaniciu D, Meer P. Mean shift: A robust approach
toward feature space analysis. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal
Mach Intell. 2002; 5:603–619.

45.	 Lyons TR, O’Brien J, Borges VF, Conklin MW, Keely PJ,
Eliceiri KW, Marusyk A, Tan AC, Schedin P. Postpartum
mammary gland involution drives progression of ductal
carcinoma in situ through collagen and COX-2. Nat Med.
2011; 17:1109–1115.

52.	 Boykov Y, Jolly M. Interactive Graph Cuts for
Optimal  Boundary & Region Segmentation of Objects
in N-D Images. Proc Int Conf Computer Vision. 2001;
1:105–112.

46.	 Parsons JT. Focal adhesion kinase: the first ten years. J Cell
Sci. 2003; 116:1409–1416.

53.	 Boykov Y, Kolmogorov V. An experimental comparison
of min-cut/max-flow algorithms for energy minimization
in vision. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell. 2004;
26:1124–1137.

47.	 Stokes JB, Adair SJ, Slack-Davis JK, Walters DM,
Tilghman RW, Hershey ED, Lowrey B, Thomas KS,
Bouton AH, Hwang RF, Stelow EB, Parsons JT, Bauer TW.
Inhibition of focal adhesion kinase by PF-562,271 inhibits
the growth and metastasis of pancreatic cancer concomitant with altering the tumor microenvironment. Mol Cancer
Ther. 2011; 10:2135–2145.

54.	 Boykov Y, Veksler O, Zabih R. Fast approximate energy
minimization via graph cuts. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal
Mach, Intell. 2001; 23:1222–1239.
55.	 Kolmogorov V, Zabih R. What energy functions can be
minimized via graph cuts? IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach
Intell. 2004; 26:147–159.

48.	 Kuglin CD. The phase correlation image alignment method.
In Proc Int Conf Cybernetics and Society. 1975; 163–165.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30056

Oncotarget

