Original Article

Design, Development, and Validation of a High-Throughput
Drug-Screening Assay for Targeting of Human Leukemia
Katja Karjalainen, MSc1,5; Renata Pasqualini, PhD1; Jorge E. Cortes, MD2; Steven M. Kornblau, MD2;
Benjamin Lichtiger, MD3; Susan O’Brien, MD2; Hagop M. Kantarjian, MD2; Richard L. Sidman, MD4;
Wadih Arap, MD, PhD1; and Erkki Koivunen, PhD5

BACKGROUND: The authors developed an ex vivo methodology to perform drug library screening against human leukemia.
METHODS: The strategy for this screening relied on human blood or bone marrow cultures under hypoxia; under these conditions,
leukemia cells deplete oxygen faster than normal cells, causing a hemoglobin oxygenation shift. Several advantages were observed: 1)
partial recapitulation of the leukemia microenvironment, 2) use of native hemoglobin oxygenation as a real-time sensor=reporter, 3)
cost-effectiveness, 4) species specificity, and 5) a format that enables high-throughput screening. RESULTS: For a proof of concept,
a chemical library (size, approximately 20,000 compounds) was screened against human leukemia cells. Seventy compounds were
identified (“hit” rate, 0.35%; Z-factor 5 0.71) that had activity, and 20 compounds were examined to identify 18 true-positive compounds (90%). Finally, the results demonstrated that carbonohydraxonic diamide group-containing compounds are potent antileukemia agents that induce cell death in leukemia cells and in patient-derived samples. CONCLUSIONS: The current results indicated that
this unique functional assay can identify novel drug candidates and can help with the development of future applications in personalC 2013 American Cancer Society.
ized drug selection for patients with leukemia. Cancer 2014;120:589–602. V
KEYWORDS: blood, bone marrow, chemical library, drug screening, hypoxia, leukemia targeting, tumor microenvironment.

INTRODUCTION
Functional screening platforms that can assess drug candidates within the appropriate tumor microenvironment are
needed. First, mouse bone marrow is generally less sensitive to many cytotoxics than human bone marrow, thus, often rendering murine leukemia models inadequate for emulating myelosuppression in patients.1 Second, the coexistence of nonmalignant host cells (immune, stromal, mesenchymal) and leukemia stem cells provokes complex tumor-host interactions
that may affect drug resistance, self-tolerance, angiogenesis, tumor growth, and response to therapy.2 Species-specific differences between human leukemia cells and mouse stromal cells can alter tumor growth and drug responses in murine
models,3 and deficiency of the functional immune system in these models may also interfere with the outcome.2
Ex vivo models using human tissue as a screening platform are valuable preclinical tools. In human solid tumors,
multicellular tumor spheroid models that were able to recapitulate in vivo-like growth have proven to be excellent in vitro
3-dimensional models for high-throughput drug discovery.4 Here, we describe a new, functional, high-throughput,
ex vivo screening assay against leukemia that is based on culturing leukemia cells in human blood or bone marrow under
hypoxic conditions. We reasoned that these cocultures mimic the disease microenvironment and, thus, partially recapitulate at least some attributes of leukemia in patients. Moreover, the oxygenation state of native hemoglobin reliably and
reproducibly serves as a “built-in” indicator of leukemia cell growth and=or viability, therefore overcoming the need for
elaborate detection methods in a multicellular setting.
For a proof of concept, we have used this assay for a chemical library screening on established leukemia cell lines to
select “microenvironment-stable” drugs with potential for translation into clinical applications. By using this assay, we
identified a subset of carbonohydraxonic diamide group-containing compounds that markedly and specifically inhibited

Corresponding authors: Renata Pasqualini, PhD, University of New Mexico, rpasqual@salud.unm.edu; Wadih Arap, MD, PhD, University of New Mexico, warap@salud.unm.edu; Erkki Koivunen, PhD, Department of Biological and Environmental Sciences, Division of Biochemistry, FI-00014 University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland; Fax: (011) 191 59068; erkki.koivunen@helsinki.fi
1
David H. Koch Center, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas; 2Department of Leukemia, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas; 3Department of Laboratory Medicine, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas; 4Harvard Medical
School and Department of Neurology, Beth Israel-Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts; 5Department of Biological and Environmental Sciences, Division of Biochemistry, The University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.28419, Received: April 15, 2013; Revised: June 24, 2013; Accepted: August 6, 2013, Published online October 25, 2013 in Wiley Online
Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Cancer

February 15, 2014

589

Original Article

several leukemia cell lines and a panel of clinical samples
obtained from leukemia patients. Together, these data
suggest that testing of libraries of compounds or candidate
drugs in this new ex vivo model may yield compounds
against human leukemia that are potentially active in the
circulation and=or bone marrow microenvironment.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell Culture

OCI-AML3, Kasumi-1, THP-1, HL-60, MOLT-4,
CCRF-CEM, HL-60, RPMI-8226, SR-786, U937,
KBM7, K562, and K562-luc2 Bioware Ultra cell lines
(Caliper LifeSciences, Hopkinton, Mass) were maintained in humidified hypoxia chambers (HeraCell 150;
Thermo Electron Corporation=Thermo Fisher Scientific,
Waltham, Mass) with 5% CO2 and 5% oxygen at 37 C
in RPMI-1640 medium (RPMI) containing 10% fetal
bovine serum, penicillin, and streptomycin.
Blood and Bone Marrow Samples From Patients
With Leukemia and Normal Volunteers

The Institutional Review Board of The University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center approved the use of
whole blood and bone marrow samples obtained from
patients or healthy donors. Peripheral blood and bone
marrow samples were obtained from patients with acute
myeloid leukemia (AML) who had signed an informed
consent form in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. Blood samples from healthy volunteers were
obtained through the hospital’s Blood Bank and Transfusion Services. We used anonymized blood samples, which
had been tested previously and proven negative against
blood-transmittable diseases. These samples were stored
at 4 C for 24 hours before use. Heparin was used as an
anticoagulant. Pretested whole blood and bone marrow
samples also were obtained from commercial sources
(Innovative Research [Novi, Mich] or AllCells [Alameda,
Calif]).
Assays Containing Human Peripheral Whole
Blood and Bone Marrow

Leukemia cells were plated at 20,000 per well in 100 lL
of RPMI containing 10% human whole blood, heparin
(100 lg=mL), L-glutamine (0.292 mg=mL), penicillin
(100 U=mL), and streptomycin (100 U=mL) in 96-well
plates with flat-bottomed wells (Becton Dickinson and
Company, East Rutherford, NJ). Ten-percent blood
specimens from patients with AML and 5% to 10% bone
marrow aspirates were diluted in either RPMI or complete
StemPro TM-34SFM (GibcoBRL=Life Technologies,
590

Grand Island, NY) culture medium containing heparin,
L-glutamine, penicillin, and streptomycin. The microplates were incubated under hypoxia (without shaking)
and the optical density at 600 nm (OD600) was measured
at the starting point and after 20 hours and=or 40 hours
of incubation. The Micros60 analyzer (ABX Diagnostics
Inc., Irvine, Calif) was used to count white blood cells
(WBCs), granulocytes, monocytes, lymphocytes, erythrocytes (red blood cells [RBCs]), platelets, hemoglobin, hematocrit, mean corpuscular volume, mean corpuscular
hemoglobin, mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration, and RBC distribution width.
Chemical Library and Drug Screening Against
Leukemia Cell Lines

We used the DiverSet Chemical Library (ChemBridge
Corporation, San Diego, Calif) formatted in 96-well
plates and containing small-molecule compounds with
drug-like properties. We screened 20,000 individual compounds from the chemical library, each at 20 lM, against
OCI-AML3 cell lines. Primary compounds that decreased
the OD600 by at least 0.2 units were selected for secondary
screening and analysis; moreover, structural analogues
with at least 50% similarity to the primary compounds
were commercially obtained (ChemBridge Corporation)
and subsequently evaluated.
Leukemia Proliferation, Viability, and Cell Death
Assays

Proliferation of luciferase-transfected K562 leukemia cells
was determined with substrate D-luciferin (Xenogen Biosciences, Alameda, Calif) incubated at 150 lg=mL per
well for 1 hour followed by measurement of the luminescence (SpectraMax 5 or SoftMax Pro 5; Molecular Devices LLC, Sunnyvale, Calif). Cell proliferation and
viability were measured with a lactate dehydrogenase
(LDH) activity assay (DHL; AnaSpec Inc., Fremont,
Calif). To measure the incorporation of 5-bromo-20 deoxyuridine (BrdU) (Calbiochem=EMD Millipore, Billerica, Mass), cells were incubated for 2 hours with BrdU,
RBCs were lysed with lysis buffer (Roche Diagnostics
Inc., Indianapolis, Ind), and the remaining cells were pelleted and fixed for immunodetermination of incorporated
BrdU. For the assessment of cell apoptosis and necrosis,
in total, 106 OCI-AML3 cells were incubated for 4 hours
at 37 C in hypoxia status in a volume of 5 mL in the presence of each test compound at 20 lM. After washing, the
cells were stained with a fluorescein isothiocyanate
(FITC)-conjugated annexin V antibody plus propidium
iodide (Sigma Chemical Company, St. Louis, Mo) and
Cancer

February 15, 2014

A New Assay for Targeting Leukemia/Karjalainen et al

Figure 1. The monitoring of leukemia cell viability in a human blood-containing assay is illustrated. (A) This is a schematic illustration of oxygen consumption of leukemic cells in the presence of blood. The oxygen consumption of metabolically active leukemia
cells is observed as a color change in the presence of blood under hypoxia, as leukemia cells deplete the surrounding oxygen,
causing hemoglobin to shift to its deoxyhemoglobin conformation. RBC indicates red blood cells (erythrocytes). (B) This schematic shows a large chemical library screening, with bright red wells displaying leukemia cell cultures that were not metabolically
active. (C) A 96-well plate is shown with different compounds tested in each well. The arrow indicates a compound of interest,
which inhibited the color shift and, thus, was selected for further studies.

subsequently analyzed by flow cytometry (BD Canto II;
BD Biosciences, San Jose, Calif).
Statistical Analysis

All data are reported as mean 6 standard deviation (SD)
values. Student t tests (unpaired) were used to determine
statistical significance (n 5 3, unless otherwise specified).
P values that were considered statistically significant are
indicated in the figures by asterisks (a single asterisk indicates P < .05; double asterisks, P < .01; and triple asterisks, P < .001). Correlations were calculated with the
Pearson correlation coefficient. The Z-factor was calculated according to the described formula.5
RESULTS
Real-Time Leukemia Cell Monitoring in an Ex
Vivo Blood-Containing Assay

Cells from a panel of leukemia cell lines (K562, OCIAML3, Molt-4, THP-1, and Kasumi-1 cells) were able to
proliferate in medium that contained 1:10 (volume=volume) whole blood from healthy donors under 5%
oxygen (data not shown). Under these conditions, live
leukemia cells induced a hemoglobin color switch to dark
purple. The hemoglobin purple color switch was reversible to bright red when the samples were returned to a
21% oxygen condition, and shaking accelerated this
Cancer

February 15, 2014

change, a result indicating that the color change depended
on the oxygenation state of hemoglobin (Fig. 1A). We
hypothesized that this assay may be a suitable platform for
screening of antileukemia compounds that are stable in
the presence of blood. A schematic presentation of the
screening is provided in Figure 1B along with an example
of a 96-microwell plate containing a newly discovered leukemia cell inhibitor (Fig. 1C).
Optimization of the Blood-Containing Ex Vivo
Assay for Leukemia Cells

Time-dependent proliferation of OCI-AML3 cells in the
ex vivo cultures was demonstrated with a blood count analyzer, which demonstrated an increase in total WBCs
(Fig. 2A). In addition to the hemoglobin-mediated color
switch, leukemia cell status also was evaluated by 3 other
independent assays: cellular LDH activity, BrdU incorporation, and activity of transfected luciferase (Fig. 2B-D).
Leukemia cell growth above background became detectable after culturing for 20 hours or longer. We used whole
blood samples from more than 200 individual healthy
donors, all of which supported leukemia cell growth.
OD600 measurements were substantially higher in
leukemia ex vivo assays cultured in hypoxia rather than in
normoxia after 40 hours (Fig. 2E). Next, both cultures
were oxygenated by mixing, and the differences in OD600
591

Original Article

Figure 2.

592

Cancer

February 15, 2014

A New Assay for Targeting Leukemia/Karjalainen et al

measurements virtually disappeared, indicating that a
higher OD600 can be observed after the leukemia cells
deplete oxygen from the microenvironment. Background
levels of OD600 varied little (range, 1.7-1.9 units) at 0
hours. The OD600 increased less than 0.2 units in
leukemia-free control assays after incubation for 40 hours;
in contrast, the presence of leukemia cells generally
increased the OD600 by at least 0.4 to 0.6 units (Fig. 2E).
To exclude the possibility that different cell growth rates
in hypoxia versus normoxia affected the OD600 measurements, we demonstrated that leukemia cells grew similarly
in both conditions (Fig. 2F). In addition to normal peripheral blood, we also established that leukemia cells
could be cultured in medium containing human bone
marrow samples obtained from healthy volunteer donors
(Fig. 2G). In those samples, the oxygen consumption of
live cells also could be determined by measuring the
OD600 (Fig. 2H). Correspondingly, the OD600 decreased
upon oxidation of these cultures (Fig. 2I). To confirm
that the blood-containing assay could be used to detect
antileukemia compounds, we used etoposide, a topoisomerase II inhibitor with known cytotoxic activity,6 as a positive control (Fig. 2J).
To verify the dependence of OD600 values on
leukemia cell viability and growth, we determined both
OD600 values and WBC counts in 2 different donor
blood samples in the presence or absence of several
antileukemia compounds. The increase in OD600 values, as measured by the blood count analyzer, was correlated with the increase in total WBC counts
(r 5 0.81 and r 5 0.79 for donors 1 and 2, respectively); granulocytes (r 5 0.82 and r 5 0.84, respectively); and, to a lesser extent, monocytes (r 5 0.66 and
r 5 0.65, respectively) (Fig. 3). Therefore, we concluded that the absorbance of hemoglobin7,8 at the
OD600 may be reliably used as an initial indicator of
leukemia viability and=or cell growth in these assays.

Screening of Antileukemia Compounds in the
Presence of Human Whole Blood

Next, as a proof of concept, we screened a 20,000 smallmolecular-weight compound library (ChemBridge Corporation) against OCI-AML3 leukemia cells. We
observed an approximately 0.35% “hit rate” to identify 70
potential antileukemia compounds (data not shown) that
decreased the OD600 by at least 0.2 units. The Z-factor,5
which was calculated for positive hits against background
in a particular blood sample, was 0.71 (n 5 30). We
examined a subset of 20 randomly selected compounds
out of the initial “pool” and demonstrated that 18 of 20
compounds (90%) retained activity against OCI-AML3
cells at 10 lM concentration in standard culture conditions in the absence of blood (data not shown). Next, we
selected 4 structurally different test compounds out of the
18 active candidates for subsequent studies (termed compounds #1, #2, #3, and #4), and compared their efficacy
to inhibit leukemia cells in the presence of blood by using
different cell proliferation=viability detection methods
(Fig. 4A). Of these, the compound #1 (N00 -[4-([4-bromo2,3,5,6-tetramethylbenzyl]oxy)-3-methoxy-benzylidene]
carbonohydrazonic diamide hydrochloride) had the most
robust activity. To identify the chemical group(s) required
for the antileukemia activity, we evaluated a panel of
structural analogues of compounds #1, #2, #3, and #4
with the criterion that similarity to the parent compound
must be at least 50%. These compound analogues were
tested on both the OCI-AML3 and K562 leukemia cell
lines in the blood-containing assay (Fig. 4B) and on other
leukemia and lymphoma cell lines in standard culture
(Fig. 5). These experiments demonstrated that 5 analogues of compound #1, all of which contained a carbonohydrazonic diamide group, were the most effective
inhibitors of leukemia cells in both the presence and the
absence of blood. Several analogues that lacked carbonohydrazonic diamide or that had other modifications were

Figure 2. Charts illustrate leukemia cell cultures in the presence of human whole blood or bone marrow aspirate. The K562 or
OCI-AML3 cell lines were cultured at 20,000 cells per well in a culture medium containing 10% normal human blood or bone marrow aspirate, as described in the text. (A) An increase in leukemia cell counts in the presence of blood was determined by measuring total white blood cell (WBC) counts. (B) Cell viability and growth were determined by measuring lactate dehydrogenase
(LDH) activity, and (C) dividing cells were assessed using bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) incorporation (1 indicates positive; 2, negative). (D) Increase in luciferase activity was measured in stably transfected K562-luc2 cells. (E) The color shift was detected
according to the OD600 value by measuring it in both hypoxia and normoxia cultures grown for 40 hours. To assess the dependence of the color shift on the oxygen tension, both cultures were oxygenated (by gently pipetting up and down), and the OD600
value was measured again. (F) LDH activity was compared between cells grown in hypoxia and normoxia for 40 hours. (G)
Increases in leukemia cell counts in the presence of bone marrow aspirate were determined by measuring total WBC counts. (G)
The OD600 of cultures with bone marrow aspirates was determined. (I) The absorbances were read again after oxygenating the
cultures as previously described. (J) Etoposide (10 lM), which inhibits the color shift because of its antileukemia activity, served
as a positive control. The results represent mean 6 standard deviation values from triplicate wells. A single asterisk indicates
P <.05; double asterisks, P <.01; triple asterisks, P <.001.

Cancer

February 15, 2014

593

Original Article

Figure 3. Charts illustrate the correlation between the optical density at 600 nm (OD600) and counts determined by automatic
blood analyzer of total white blood cells (WBCs) and the subsets of granulocytes and monocytes in 2 different donor blood
specimens. Correlation was determined by culturing OCI-AML3 cells in 10% blood for 20 hours and 40 hours in the absence and
presence of inhibitors (n 5 10 for donor 1, n 5 7 for donor 2; each at 10 lM and 20 lM) that had been discovered previously in the
screening process.

inactive in the presence of blood. The statistically significant result (Fisher exact test; P 5 .0217) indicated that
carbonohydrazonic diamide is required for the growth inhibitory activity of this class of compounds.
Effects of Carbonohydrazonic DiamideContaining Compounds on Leukemia Cells

We further analyzed a panel (n 5 7) of carbonohydrazonic diamide-containing compounds along with the negative control compound #1N (Fig. 6A). We observed that
the carbonohydrazonic diamide-containing compounds
inhibited an increase in the OD600 and in leukemia cell
counts and reduced the WBC count to background levels
at the 20-hour time point with from <0.05% to 0.001%
probability (Fig. 6B). Next, we examined the induction of
apoptosis in OCI-AML3 cells by these compounds. The
analog compounds #1A, #1C, #1D, and #1E induced apoptosis more efficiently (from >70% to 80%) than the
original compound #1 (>50%), as determined by
annexin V and propidium iodide staining after a 4-hour
incubation (Fig. 6C). The compound #1B produced only
594

a slight increase (approximately 5%) in apoptosis compared with control cells. The control compound #1N,
which did not contain carbonohydrazonic diamide, did
not induce apoptosis.
Next, we analyzed the effects of carbonohydrazonic
diamide-containing compounds on different blood cell
populations at 0 hours, 20 hours, and 40 hours using the
blood cell counter. In general, OCI-AML3 leukemia cell
growth increased the total WBC count by approximately
2-fold after incubation for 40 hours, and the increase was
detected mainly in the granulocyte population and, to a
lesser extent, in the monocytes. The assay analysis of compound #1A is provided as an example: the compound
#1A at 10 lM prevented the increase in WBC counts and
had no clear inhibitory effect on lymphocytes or RBCs
(Fig. 7A).
Carbonohydrazonic diamide-containing compounds also inhibited leukemia cells in the assay with aspirated human bone marrow. Like in the blood-containing
assay, the example compound #1A (Fig. 7B) inhibited an
increase in the OD600 and in leukemia cell counts in the
Cancer

February 15, 2014

Figure 4. Charts and a heat map illustrate evaluation of the 4 selected primary compounds and their analogs. (A) Activities of
the compounds were compared with the optical density at 600 nm (OD600), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) activity, bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) incorporation, and luciferase assays. OCI-AML3 or K562 cells were cultured in RPMI containing 10% human blood.
A single asterisk indicates P <.05; double asterisks, P <.01; triple asterisks, P <.001. DMSO indicates dimethyl sulfoxide. (B) This is
a heat-map presentation of the activities of the 4 selected primary compounds and their corresponding structural analogs in
OCI-AML3 or K562 cells cultured in 10% blood. Two different donor bloods were used. For compound activity, 2 indicates no
activity; 1, D OD6000.1; 11, D OD6000.2; 111, D OD6000.3.

Original Article

Figure 5. Charts illustrate activities of the selected structural analogs on a representative panel of human leukemia and lymphoma cell lines (n 5 10) in standard culture in the absence of blood. Compounds are numbered according to Figure 4B. Cell viability and proliferation were determined using a lactate dehydrogenase LDH assay. The results represent mean 6 standard
deviation values from triplicate wells. AML indicates acute myeloid leukemia; CML, chronic myeloid leukemia; T-ALL, T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia.

596

Cancer

February 15, 2014

A New Assay for Targeting Leukemia/Karjalainen et al

Figure 6. Carbonohydraxonic diamide-containing compounds are illustrated. (A) Chemical structures of 6 active carbonohydraxonic diamide-containing compounds are shown. The carbonohydrazonic diamide group is depicted in blue, and differences in
structures between different compounds are depicted in red. (B) The effects of carbonohydrazonic diamide-containing compounds (at 10 lM each) are plotted for OCI-AML3 cells that were cultured in media containing human blood. The optical density
at 600 nm (OD600) and white blood cell (WBC) counts were determined at the 20-hour time point. The results represent mean6 standard deviation values from triplicate wells. (C) Induction of cell apoptosis and necrosis by carbonohydrazonic diamidecontaining compounds is indicated. Cells were analyzed by flow cytometry after staining with annexin V-fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) and propidium iodide. DMSO indicates dimethyl sulfoxide. A single asterisk indicates P <.05; double asterisks, P <.01;
triple asterisks, P <.001.

Cancer

February 15, 2014

597

Original Article

Figure 7. Charts illustrate the effects of compound £1A on individual blood cell populations. (A) OCI-AML3 cells were cultured at
20,000 cells per well in culture medium containing 10% blood in the absence or presence of compound £1A (10 lM). White blood
cells (WBCs), lymphocytes, monocytes, granulocytes, and erythrocytes (red blood cells [RBCs]) were determined using a blood
cell counter at the time points 0 hours, 20 hours, and 40 hours. OD600 indicates the optical density at 600 nm. (B) OCI-AML3
cells were cultured at 20,000 cells per well in culture medium containing normal human bone marrow aspirate (5% or 10%) in the
absence or presence of compound £1A (10 lM or 20 lM). Bone marrow without treatment served as a negative control. The
OD600 value was determined at the time points 0 hours, 20 hours, and 40 hours. WBCs, RBCs, and platelets were determined.
The results represent mean 6 standard deviation values from at least triplicate wells.

598

Cancer

February 15, 2014

A New Assay for Targeting Leukemia/Karjalainen et al

bone marrow-containing assay. It is noteworthy that the
compound #1A (at 10 lM) sufficed to inhibit leukemia
cell growth in the blood-containing medium, but 20 lM
were required for efficient inhibition in the bone marrowcontaining medium, even when adjusted for the lower
volume=volume used (ie, 5% for bone marrow rather
than 10% for blood).
Carbonohydrazonic Diamide-Containing
Compounds Inhibit Primary Acute Myeloid
Leukemia Cells

To validate the translational potential of the blood assay,
we used peripheral blood obtained from patients with
AML and observed that carbonohydrazonic diamidecontaining compounds inhibited primary leukemia cell
growth and=or viability in the assays with patient blood.
Specifically, of the 6 compounds that had activity against
leukemia cell lines, compounds #1A and #1B, which differed only by 1 methyl group, proved to be the most effective, reducing the OD600 in all samples evaluated (Fig.
8A). Notably, the activities of compounds #1, #1C, and
#1E varied in different AML samples, suggesting that the
efficacy of these compounds may be different in every
patient. In contrast, the compound #1D was without detectable effects against primary AML. The negative control #1N did not reduce the OD600 (Fig. 8A), whereas the
positive controls (etoposide, actinomycin D, and staurosporin) consistently reduced the OD600 significantly (Fig.
8B). To determine whether the effects of the carbonohydrazonic diamide-containing compounds were leukemiaspecific, we measured their effects in ex vivo assays of normal blood from healthy donors. In 2 of 3 normal blood
samples, the compounds had no statistically significant
effects; however, in the third sample, the compound #1A
reduced the OD600 slightly, suggesting individual-specific
differences in susceptibility (Fig. 8C).
To confirm that the increase in OD600 also correlated with the WBC count in the patient sample setting,
we tested the effect of leukemia cell counts on the OD600.
WBCs from AML patient samples were isolated and then
reinserted into the ex vivo cultures at concentrations that
enriched the WBC count by approximately 2-fold. This
resulted in a corresponding increase in the OD600, indicating that the WBC counts are a fundamental factor
determining the OD600 (Fig. 8D).
Finally, the compounds were evaluated on primary
AML cells cultured in standard culture media. In these
conditions, all carbonohydrazonic diamide-containing
compounds, except #1D, were efficient inhibitors of primary cells isolated from patients with AML (n 5 3) (Fig.
Cancer

February 15, 2014

8E). In effect, isolated primary AML cells grown in the
absence of blood yielded results similar to those obtained
with established leukemia and lymphoma cell lines in
standard culture conditions (Fig. 5).
DISCUSSION
In this study, we introduce a novel ex vivo assay for leukemia that provides a high-throughput screening platform
for the identification of compounds that are active in the
presence of human blood and bone marrow under hypoxia. This assay allows the detection of live leukemia cells
by using the hemoglobin oxygenation state as an internal
readout system that can be measured using the OD600
based on hemoglobin absorption spectra7,8 and, thus,
does not require the introduction of either chemically
active exogenous markers to measure leukemia cell growth
or oxygen probes to estimate cancer cell metabolic rates.
Specifically, we observed that viable human leukemia cells
would rapidly deplete oxygen from the medium and predominantly contribute to the high OD600 values detected;
in contrast, control normal blood incubated with no leukemia cells yielded only slightly elevated levels. This
increase in OD600 values correlates well with the increase
in leukemia cell counts, indicating that the levels of deoxyhemoglobin in the medium increase in accordance with
the oxygen consumption by leukemia cells. Moreover, the
OD600 values could be manipulated with the oxygen levels—independent of the other variables—confirming that
the oxygenation state of the hemoglobin directly contributed to the OD600 value measured.
Empirically, we detected clear differences in the
drug activities of several individual compounds when leukemia cells were grown in standard cultured media versus
the blood-containing medium. Thus, we focused this
original study on the discovery of drugs with robust activity in the presence of human whole blood. The “Zfactor”—a coefficient that reflects both the assay signal
dynamic range and the data variation associated with the
signal measurements5—was calculated at approximately
0.7 for our assay, which indicates that the results are reproducible and accurate. It is noteworthy that differences
among donor blood samples can contribute to observed
variations in efficacy of drug candidate evaluations.
For our assay, as an initial proof of concept, we
screened a library of approximately 20,000 individual
chemical compounds against the OCI-AML3 cell line.
We identified 70 lead compounds that had activity against
the human leukemia cell lines (library=assay “hit rate,”
0.35%); most of those compounds had not been described
previously in the literature, but a few of them had
599

Original Article

structural similarity to compounds with anticancer, antiinflammatory, or antimicrobial activity. A few specific
examples of promising drug leads merit mention. Com-

pound #2 is active against the blood-borne protozoan parasite Trypanosoma cruzi,9 and another compound
selectively induces apoptosis in tumor cells independent

Figure 8.

600

Cancer

February 15, 2014

A New Assay for Targeting Leukemia/Karjalainen et al

of P-glycoprotein status.10 We note that certain structural
moieties were common within the discovered compounds, such as piperazine, hydrazide, and hydrazone
groups. There also have been previous reports of antitumor activity by some of these derivatives.11 Moreover,
from the 70 “hits” in our initial screen, we re-examined an
arbitrarily chosen subset of 20 compounds and observed
that 18 of those compounds (90%) were reproducibly
true-positive for antileukemia activity.
Several limitations of this proof of concept for assay
development and candidate drug discovery study merit
further comment. First, although specificity and toxicity
of the selected drugs are beyond the scope of this initial
work, we observed the requirement of relatively high
molar concentrations; this may have been caused, at least
in part, by a loss of drug activities in the chemical library
setting secondary to the presence of impurities and salts or
degradation (ie, in materials not of Good Manufacturing
Practices grade). Indeed, the simplest carbonohydraxonic
diamide, aminoguanidine, has already been examined in
clinical trials as a potential antidiabetic agent,12 suggesting
that such compounds may be tolerated by mammals in
vivo. To begin addressing this possibility, we have de
novo resynthesized compound #1A and observed that it is
active and stable at low micromolar concentrations in the
presence of whole blood, suggesting that translational
applications with this compound actually may be feasible.
Moreover, our whole blood assay is certainly not sufficient
to address the issue of cell specificity (eg, normal vs malignant cells or leukemia vs nonleukemia tumor cells); comprehensive toxicology evaluation in bone marrow,
lymphatic vasculature, as well as other nonhematopoetic
organs will be needed to assess the safety and potential
therapeutic applications of any of these compounds.
Finally, whether or not the growth-inhibitory effect of
carbonohydraxonic diamide group-containing compounds is specific remains an open question. Further
mechanistic studies will be needed to determine the speci-

ficity of carbonohydraxonic diamide-containing compounds toward AML cells, because several potential
molecular targets for these types of compounds have been
reported, such as glucose-mediated protein dimerization,12 nitric oxide synthase,13 furin,14 and E2 ubiquitinconjugating enzyme.15,16 Ultimately, formal toxicology
Good Laboratory Practice studies in animals will be
required in the future to determine whether or not a firstin-human and=or phase zero clinical trial will go forward.
Our results indicate that the unique functional
drug-screening assay introduced here has the capability to
identify novel microenvironment-stable drug candidates.
This assay may also help with the development of future
applications in personalized drug selection for patients
with leukemia as therapeutic compound responses are correlated with specific cancer genotypes,17 which can greatly
vary from individual to individual. In effect, in the pilot
experiments, we were able to optimize the bloodcontaining assay for blood samples directly from patients
with AML. Furthermore, similar studies with human
bone marrow cocultures demonstrated promise that drug
efficacy also could be validated individually in a bone
marrow-like microenvironment, in which resistance is often encountered, possibly because of increased protection
of tumor cells by bone marrow stroma.2 Together, our
results support the idea that this new methodology could
potentially be used as a tool in predicting drug efficacy
and=or response in each leukemia patient.
FUNDING SUPPORT
This work was supported by the Specialized Program in Research
Excellence (SPORE) in Leukemia from The University of Texas
MD Anderson Cancer Center (R.P. and W.A), the GillsonLongenbaugh Foundation (R.P. and W.A), and the Cancer Society
of Finland (E.K.).

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
Dr. Karjalainen is supported by a Specialized Program in Research
Excellence (SPORE) in Leukemia grant as well as grants from the

Figure 8. Charts illustrate the inhibition of primary acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cells by carbonohydraxonic diamide-containing
compounds. (A) Blood samples from patients with AML were diluted to 10% and incubated in the absence or presence of compounds, as indicated (at 10 lM), for 20 hours, and the optical density at 600 nm (OD600) was measured. The initial number of
blasts (blast £) (103=lL), blast percentage (blast %), white blood cell count (WBC) (103=lL), and erythrocyte count (RBC)
(106=lL) are indicated for each patient sample. (B) Etoposide, actinomycin D, and staurosporin (at 10 lM), which have cytotoxic
activities, served as positive controls for the patient blood assay. (C) The effect of carbonohydrazonic diamide-containing compounds on OD600 values in blood from healthy donors was measured after 20 hours of cultivation. (D) The effects of blast number and sample volume on OD600 values are illustrated. Mononuclear cells were isolated and reimplanted into the patient blood
samples. The initial blast number (blast £) (103=lL), blast %, WBC count (103=lL), and RBC count (106=lL) are indicated for both
patient samples. (E) The efficacy of carbonohydrazonic diamide-containing compounds on primary AML cells under standard tissue culture conditions is illustrated. Cells were cultured for 24 hours; then, viability was determined using a lactate dehydrogenase assay. The results represent mean 6 standard deviation values from at least triplicate wells. A single asterisk indicates P <.05;
double asterisks, P <.01; triple asterisks, P <.001.

Cancer

February 15, 2014

601

Original Article
Gillson-Longenbaugh Foundation (money from Renata Pasqualini
and Wadih Arap) and the Cancer Society of Finland (money from
Erkki Koivunen). She is also an employee of The University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center. Drs. Pasqualini and Arap are
founders and paid consultants to AAVP Biosystems Inc., Ablaris
Therapeutics Inc., Alvos Therapeutics Inc., AMP Pharmaceuticals,
and Ceramide Therapeutics LLC and own stock and hold equity in
those companies; and they receive license royalty payments from
APAvadis Biotechnologies, Merck & Company, and n3D Biosciences Inc. Dr. Cortes receives compensation as a board member of
Tragara Pharmaceuticals Inc. and receives consulting fees from
Ariad Pharmaceuticals Inc., Pfizer Inc., and Tera Pharmaceutical
Industries Ltd. Dr. Sidman has received consulting fees from Drs.
Pasqualini and Arap at The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center for writing and editing articles, has received compensation from Sanofi-Genzyme Corporation for consulting on
writing and laboratory research, and has received grants from the
National Institutes of Health. Dr. Kantarjian has brought in
research funding to The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center from Bristol-Myers Squibb, Pfizer Inc., Ariad Pharmaceuticals Inc., and Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation.

REFERENCES
1. Teicher BA. In vivo=ex vivo and in situ assays used in cancer
research: a brief review. Toxic Pathol. 2009;37:114-122.
2. Nwajei F, Konopleva M. The bone marrow microenvironment as
niche retreats for hematopoietic and leukemic stem cells [published
online ahead of print January 10, 2013]. Adv Hematol. 2013.
3. Cheon D-J, Orsulic S. Mouse models of cancer. Annu Rev Pathol
Mech Dis. 2011;6:95-119.
4. LaBarbera DV, Reid BG, Yoo BH. The multicellular tumor spheroid model for high-throughput cancer drug discovery. Expert Opin
Drug Discov. 2012;7:819-830.

602

5. Zhang J-H, Chung TDY, Oldenburg KR. A simple statistical parameter for use in evaluation and validation of high throughput screening assays. J Biomol Screen. 1999;4:67-73.
6. Ho AD, Brado B, Haas R, Hunstein W. Etoposide in acute leukemia. Past experience and future perspectives. Cancer. 1991;67:281284.
7. Zijlstra WG, Buursma A, Meeuwsen-van der Roest WP. Absorption
spectra of human fetal and adult oxyhemoglobin, de-oxyhemoglobin,
carboxyhemoglobin, and methemoglobin. Clin Chem. 1991;37:16331638.
8. Hoppe-Seyler F. Uber die oxydation in lebendem blute. Med-chem
Untersuch Lab. 1866;1, 133-140.
9. Bettiol E, Samanovic M. Murkin AS, Raper J, Buckner F, Rodriguez
A. Identification of 3 classes of heteroaromatic compounds with activity against intracellular Trypanosoma cruzi by chemical library
screening [serial online]. PLOS Negl Trop Dis. 2009;3:e384.
10. Wu S, Gou W, Teraishi F, et al. Anticancer activity of 5benzylidene-2-phenylimino-1, 3-thiazolidin-4-1 (BPT) analogs. Med
Chem. 2006;2:597-605.
11. Weiderhold KN, Randall-Hlubek DA, Polin LA, Hamel E,
Mooberry SL. CB694, a novel antimitotic with antitumor activities.
Int J Cancer. 2006;118:1032-1040.
12. Abdel-Rahman E, Bolton WK. Pimagedine: a novel therapy for diabetic nephropathy. Exp Opin Invest Drugs. 2002;11:565-574.
13. Stefanovic-Racic M, Meyers K, Meschter C, Coffey JW, Hoffman
RA, Evans CH. Comparison of the nitric oxide synthase inhibitors
methylarginine and aminoguanidine as prophylactic and therapeutic
agents in rat adjuvant arthritis. J Rheumatol. 1995;22:1922-1928.
14. Komiyama T, Coppola JM, Larsen MJ, et al. Inhibition of Furin=Proprotein convertase-catalyzed surface and intracellular processing
by small molecules. J Biol Chem. 2009;284:15729-15738.
15. Madiraju C, Welsh K, Cuddy MP, et al. TR-FRET-based highthroughput screening assay for identification of UBC13 inhibitors. J
Biomol Screen. 2012;17:163-176.
16. National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI).
STK004512—Compound Summary (CID 5942255). Available at:
pubchem.ncbi.nlmnih.gov=summary=summary.cgi?cid55942255.
Accessed October 2, 2013.
17. Kim N, He N, Kim C, et al. Systemic analysis of genotype-specific
drug responses in cancer. Int J Cancer. 2012;131:2456-2464.

Cancer

February 15, 2014

