CR 75th Anniversary Commentary
PDT: What's Past Is Prologue
Keith A. Cengel, Charles B. Simone II, and Eli Glatstein

Abstract
Despite descriptions of light-mediated therapy in ancient texts
and the discovery of photodynamic therapy (PDT) in the early
1900s, the landmark article in 1978 in Cancer Research by
Dougherty and his colleagues at the Roswell Park Cancer Institute remains rightly viewed as the starting point for clinical PDT
in modern medicine. As a large clinical series that explored
many of the factors now viewed as critical determinates of PDT
dose, efﬁcacy, and toxicity, that study showed remarkable foresight, yet it also served to raise as many questions as it answered.
Since its publication, PDT has been increasingly utilized in
clinical practice for the treatment of both benign and malignant
conditions, and many of their questions have yielded new
technologies and areas of investigation, thus remaining highly

relevant nearly 40 years after their initial asking. Moreover,
continuing advances in our ability to measure physical properties such as absorbed light dose, photosensitizer concentration,
tissue oxygen concentration, and singlet oxygen production in
real-time may allow for adaptive modiﬁcation of light delivery
during PDT on a ﬁne scale to optimize treatment response.
Finally, combining molecularly targeted drugs and novel photosensitizers has the potential to improve further the therapeutic
index and extend the spectrum of clinical PDT far beyond what
was imagined when that sentinel manuscript was written. Cancer

Origination: A Brief History of PDT

malignancies of the esophagus, bronchus, uterine cervix, and
head and neck. However, HpD was found to have signiﬁcant
limitations due to suboptimal tumor sensitivity and speciﬁcity.
Nevertheless, research groups at multiple institutions found that
HpD and either white, or the more deeply penetrating red light,
could be used effectively to treat mice bearing mammary, brain
(glioma), or bladder tumors.

At the turn of the 20th century, Oscar Raab was a medical
student working with Herman von Tappeiner on the toxicity of
acridine dyes to malaria-causing protozoa. Raab astutely traced
inconsistencies in results of experiments with acridine red and
paramecia to variations in the level of ambient sunlight when the
experiments were performed. While the use of light with a
sensitizing agent had been described in medical literature dating
back more than 3000 years, von Tappeiner and a dermatologist
named Jesionek published the ﬁrst report describing the use of 1%
eosin and white light to successfully treat patients with basal cell
carcinoma of the skin just 3 years after Raab's initial report. In the
decade that followed, von Tappeiner's group determined that this
"photodynamic" effect required the presence of a photosensitizer,
light, and oxygen to mediate cellular toxicity. Freiderich MeyerBetz performed the ﬁrst human trial of hematoporphyrin-mediated PDT by injecting himself with 200 mg of the drug and
standing in sunlight. Over the next 60 years, the photodynamic
effect was studied intermittently while more sophisticated biomedical optics, laser light sources, and novel porphyrin-based
photosensitizers were developed. The interest in porphyrin-based
drugs remained primarily in their tumor-localizing properties for
ﬂuorescence diagnosis rather than in their ability to act as photosensitizers. Initially hematoporphyrin derivative (HpD) was created as a potential radiation sensitizer, but it was investigated in
the 1960s for ﬂuorescence-guided diagnosis for patients with
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Note: "What's past is prologue" is from Shakespeare's The Tempest
(II.i.245–254).
Corresponding Author: Keith A. Cengel, University of Pennsylvania, 3400 Civic
Center Blvd., 8–136 SCTR, Philadelphia, PA 19104. Phone: 215-615-5312;
Fax: 215-349-5445; E-mail: keith.cengel@uphs.upenn.edu
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-16-0927
2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

Res; 76(9); 2497–9. 2016 AACR.

See related article by Dougherty et al., Cancer Res 1978;
38:2628–35.

Arrival: A Landmark in Cancer Research
Building on this foundation, Dougherty and his colleagues
at Roswell Park Cancer Institute (RPCI) reported the ﬁrst largescale trial of PDT in human cancers (1). In total, 113 primary
and metastatic skin tumors were treated in 25 patients with
diagnoses ranging from malignant melanoma to mycosis fungoides to metastatic breast and endometrial cancers. Many of
those tumors were recurrent or progressive after multiple
cytotoxic chemotherapy agents and local ionizing radiotherapy. That study evaluated both tumor and normal tissue (skin)
response and tested a variety of parameters thought to be
critical to the efﬁcacy of PDT and to inﬂuence its therapeutic
index: the HpD dose was 2.5 or 5 mg/kg, the drug-light interval
(DLI) ranged from 24 to 192 hours, and the light dose was 120
J/cm2 delivered in 1 to 6 fractions from an arc lamp with a 600
to 700 nm ﬁlter. A complete response was observed in an
astounding 98 of 113 (88%) lesions, and only three tumors
showed no response to therapy. Of the 98 complete responses,
96 maintained local control at 6 months. This study was
the ﬁrst to establish both the feasibility and efﬁcacy of clinical
PDT on a large scale, and it also demonstrated the ability of
PDT to treat tumors successfully that were resistant to traditional therapies. Further analyses of PDT parameters showed
that the optimal therapeutic index depended on the DLI drug
dose and attempted to estimate the effects of ﬂuence rate,
tissue optical properties/depth of light penetration, and light
scattering on PDT dose and efﬁcacy. Since that article was

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

2497

CR 75th Anniversary Commentary
published, decades of preclinical and clinical research have
focused on understanding how these variables inﬂuence the
efﬁcacy and therapeutic index of PDT. Moreover, by demonstrating the feasibility and efﬁcacy of PDT as a cancer treatment, that classic study by Dougherty and colleagues supported the clinical development of porphyrin-based photosensitizers and also stimulated the evolution of next-generation photosensitizers and novel light delivery devices and
dosimetry techniques that are clinical employed with modern
day PDT. One of PDT's attractions is comparative speciﬁcity of
tumor effects over normal tissues.

Moving Forward: PDT as Non-Ionizing
Radiotherapy
The classic study by Dougherty and colleagues was performed in patients with superﬁcial, cutaneous cancers. A
critical underpinning of that study is suggested by the name
"photoradiation therapy." Like ionizing radiotherapy, PDT is
fundamentally a localized treatment using electromagnetic
energy, which has the intrinsic physical limitation of visible
light that makes PDT best suited for tumors located at a depth
of <1 cm from the radiation (light) source. Thus, in addition to
cutaneous tumors, subsequent work from RPCI and other
groups has focused on internal sites where light could be
delivered endoscopically, such as endobronchial, esophageal,
or bladder cancers or dysplasias, resulting in the currently
approved indications for PDT in the United States, Canada,
and the European Union (2, 3). Also in parallel with the
methods for delivery of ionizing radiotherapy, methods have
been developed to deliver light for intracavitary and interstitial
applications. Intracavitary PDT has been developed as a method to treat microscopic residual disease following surgical
resection of pleural or peritoneal malignancies (4) and is
currently being evaluated in an NCI-sponsored randomized
phase II trial of extended pleurectomy-decortication with or
without PDT in patients with epithelioid malignant pleural
mesothelioma (NCT02153229). In addition, intracavitary
approaches are currently under clinical evaluation for intraoperative treatment of CNS, head and neck, breast, bladder,
and bile duct malignancies, including a NCI-sponsored randomized phase II trial of PDT versus surgical resection for
patients with T1/T2 squamous cell carcinomas of the oral
cavity (NCT02119728). In this respect, one particularly exciting approach merges ﬂuorescence-guided resection and PDT
of microscopic residual disease, providing the opportunity to
realize the full theranostic value of photosensitizers (3). Finally, using ﬁber optics to deliver light through implanted catheters with techniques adapted from brachytherapy, interstitial
PDT has been used to treat cancers in the head and neck,
prostate, lung, pancreas, and liver (3–5). The only limitation of
PDT is the imagination required to ﬁgure out how to introduce
the light source where it is needed. This is why many of its
future uses will require collaboration with surgical colleagues.

Lamp Posts Along the Way: PDT Dosimetry
Another theme from the initial RPCI clinical study was the
realization that quantifying light is critical for the successful
application of PDT. The combination of direct measurement in
tissues and computational modeling foreshadowed the currently available techniques in explicit and implicit PDT dosimetry

2498 Cancer Res; 76(9) May 1, 2016

(3–5). Initial attempts at explicit dosimetry relied on ex vivo
measurements to estimate tumor and normal tissue photosensitizer levels combined with real-time monitoring of tissue light
doses using non-isotropic (ﬂat, incident light only) detectors.
Newer methods have been developed to measure photosensitizer concentration using in vivo ﬂuorescence that measures both
incident and scattered light dose using isotropic detectors. In
addition, computational methods are currently being evaluated
to provide more accurate, potentially real-time PDT dosimetry,
which could reduce the operator dependence of the procedure
itself (4, 5). Along with improved dosimetry methods, exciting
advances in the area of light delivery, such as the fabrics woven
from side-emitting optical ﬁbers, will continue to improve the
efﬁcacy and maximize the safety of PDT (6).

Towards New Horizons: Targeted PDT
The ﬁnal critical determinant of PDT efﬁcacy in the classic
RPCI study is the time interval between photosensitizer administration and light delivery, fractionation of light delivery, and
light ﬂuence rate. Further work has borne out the hypothesis
that the DLI can alter the type of damage to tumor and normal
tissues, as well as the therapeutic index of PDT. For example, the
preferential vascular damage that occurs when intravenous
photosensitizers are used with relatively short DLI when the
photosensitizer is primarily located within the vascular compartment ("vascular-targeted PDT") has been used to adapt PDT
to the treatment of wet macular degeneration and may be useful
in producing an antiangiogenic effect in cancer treatments (7).
For topically applied photosensitizers such as ALA and its derivatives, short DLI has been successfully applied as an antimicrobial therapy in the oral cavity or even using sensitizer application
followed by exposure to normal sunlight ("daylight PDT") to
reduce normal tissue toxicity during treatment of cutaneous
malignancies (8, 9). The effects of fractionation and light ﬂuence
rate are similarly extensive, providing opportunities to adapt PDT
to minimize the impact of intrinsic cancer cells and PDT-induced
tumor–stroma growth and survival signaling, while maximizing
induction of host antitumor immunity (10). Further targeting
of tumor or stromal biology using molecularly targeted therapy in
conjunction with PDT can further augment the beneﬁcial effects of
optimizing the DLI, light fractionation, and ﬂuence rate on cancer
therapy and especially in treatment of premalignant lesions
including in situ carcinomas.

End of the Beginning: Summary and
Conclusions
The landmark study by Dougherty and his colleagues at RPCI
launched the modern practice of clinical PDT. The questions
raised by this study anticipated much of the preclinical and
clinical research and development that have occurred in the nearly
40 years since its publication. Going forward, with light delivery,
dosimetry, and photosensitizer technologies more fully developed, and as attempts are being made to validate encouraging
clinical ﬁndings of PDT in randomized clinical trials, the impact of
the classic study by Dougherty and colleagues is likely to continue
to grow.

Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest
No potential conﬂicts of interest were disclosed.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

PDT: What's Past Is Prologue

Authors' Contributions
Conception and design: K.A. Cengel, C.B. Simone, E. Glatstein
Development of methodology: C.B. Simone
Acquisition of data (provided animals, acquired and managed patients,
provided facilities, etc.): C.B. Simone
Analysis and interpretation of data (e.g., statistical analysis, biostatistics,
computational analysis): C.B. Simone, E. Glatstein

Writing, review, and/or revision of the manuscript: K.A. Cengel, C.B. Simone,
E. Glatstein
Study supervision: E. Glatstein

Received March 30, 2016; accepted March 30, 2016; published online May
2, 2016.

References
1. Dougherty TJ, Kaufman JE, Goldfarb A, Weishaupt KR, Boyle D, Mittleman
A. Photoradiation therapy for the treatment of malignant tumors. Cancer
Res 1978;38:2628–35.
2. Loewen GM, Pandey R, Bellnier D, Henderson B, Dougherty T. Endobronchial
photodynamic therapy for lung cancer. Lasers Surg Med 2006;38:364–70.
3. Agostinis P, Berg K, Cengel KA, Foster TH, Girotti AW, Gollnick SO, et al.
Photodynamictherapy of cancer:anupdate. CA Cancer J Clin2011;61:250–81.
4. Simone CBII, Cengel KA. Photodynamic therapy for lung cancer and
malignant pleural mesothelioma. Semin Oncol 2014;41:820–30.
5. Pogue BW, Elliott JT, Kanick SC, Davis SC, Samkoe KS, Maytin EV, et al.
Revisiting photodynamic therapy dosimetry: reductionist & surrogate
approaches to facilitate clinical success. Phys Med Biol 2016;61:R57–R89
6. Mordon S, Cochrane C, Tylcz JB, Betrouni N, Mortier L, Koncar V. Light
emitting fabric technologies for photodynamic therapy. Photodiagnosis
Photodyn Ther 2015;12:1–8.

www.aacrjournals.org

7. Chen B, Pogue BW, Hoopes PJ, Hasan T. Vascular and cellular targeting
for photodynamic therapy. Crit Rev Eukaryot Gene Expr 2006;16:
279–305.
8. Biel MA. Antimicrobial photodynamic therapy for treatment of bioﬁlmbased infections. Adv Exp Med Biol 2015;831:119–36.
9. Lacour JP, Ulrich C, Gilaberte Y, Von Felbert V, Basset-Seguin N, Dreno B,
et al. Daylight photodynamic therapy with methyl aminolevulinate cream
is effective and nearly painless in treating actinic keratoses: a randomised,
investigator-blinded, controlled, phase III study throughout Europe. J Eur
Acad Dermatol Venereol 2015;29:2342–8.
10. Cengel KA, Simone CBII, Busch TM. Vascular effects of photodynamic
therapy for tumors. In:Pandey RK, Kessel D, Dougherty TJ, editors.
Handbook of photodynamic therapy: updates on recent applications of
porphyrin-based compounds. World Scientiﬁc Publishing Company;
2016.

Cancer Res; 76(9) May 1, 2016

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

2499

PDT: What's Past Is Prologue
Keith A. Cengel, Charles B. Simone II and Eli Glatstein
Cancer Res 2016;76:2497-2499.

Updated version

Cited articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/76/9/2497

This article cites 9 articles, 1 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/76/9/2497.full#ref-list-1

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

