Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 7

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Inhibition of NADPH oxidase 1 activity and blocking the binding
of cytosolic and membrane-bound proteins by honokiol inhibit
migratory potential of melanoma cells
Ram Prasad1, John C. Kappes2,5,6, Santosh K. Katiyar1,3,4,5,6
1

Department of Dermatology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA

2

Departments of Medicine and Pathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA

3

Environmental Health Sciences, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA

4

Nutrition Obesity Research Center, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA

5

Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA

6

Birmingham Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Birmingham, AL, USA

Correspondence to: Santosh K. Katiyar, e-mail: skatiyar@uab.edu
Keywords: honokiol, melanoma, NADPH oxidase, cell migration, imaging
Received: September 07, 2015     Accepted: January 02, 2016     Published: January 09, 2016

ABSTRACT
Overexpression of NADPH oxidase 1 (Nox1) in melanoma cells is often associated
with increased migration/metastasis rate. To develop effective treatment options,
we have examined the effect of honokiol, a phytochemical from Magnolia plant, on
the migratory potential of human melanoma cell lines (A375, Hs294t, SK-Mel119 and
SK-Mel28) and assessed whether Nox1 is the target. Using an in vitro cell migration
assay, we observed that treatment of different melanoma cell lines with honokiol for
24 h resulted in a dose-dependent inhibition of cell migration that was associated
with reduction in Nox1 expression and reduced levels of oxidative stress. Treatment
of cells with N-acetyl-L-cysteine, an anti-oxidant, also inhibited the migration of
melanoma cells. Treatment of cells with diphenyleneiodonium chloride, an inhibitor
of Nox1, significantly decreased the migration ability of Hs294t and SK-Mel28 cells.
Further, we examined the effect of honokiol on the levels of core proteins (p22phox
and p47phox) of the NADPH oxidase complex. Treatment of Hs294t and SK-Mel28 cells
with honokiol resulted in accumulation of the cytosolic p47phox protein and decreased
levels of the membrane-bound p22phox protein, thus blocking their interaction and
inhibiting Nox1 activation. Our in vivo bioluminescence imaging data indicate that
oral administration of honokiol inhibited the migration/extravasation and growth of
intravenously injected melanoma cells in internal body organs, such as liver, lung and
kidney in nude mice, and that this was associated with an inhibitory effect on Nox1
activity in these internal organs/tissues.

and mechanisms of melanoma progression, but the control
of melanoma metastasis remains a significant clinical
challenge [2, 3]. The American Cancer Society indicated
that the incidence of melanoma is increasing, particularly
in children [2, 4]. Therefore, an approach that reduces the
risk of melanoma metastasis or invasion may facilitate the
development of an effective strategy necessary to improve
outcomes in patients suffering from melanoma.
NADPH oxidase (Nox) is a family of enzymes
that catalyzes transfer of an electron from NAD(P)H to
an oxygen molecule to generate superoxide or hydrogen

INTRODUCTION
Melanoma remains the leading cause of skin cancerrelated deaths due to its propensity to metastasize at distant
body organs. The average survival of human patients with
advanced stage melanoma is less than one year because of
lack of effective therapies once the melanoma has spread
to vital organs [1, 2]. Although melanoma is less common
than other type of cutaneous malignancies, it causes
approximately 75% of skin cancer-related deaths [1, 2].
Extensive efforts have been made to understand the causes
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7899

Oncotarget

lines was significantly greater (P<0.05 to P<0.01) than in
NHM.

peroxide. Nox1, a catalytic subunit of NADPH oxidase, is
overexpressed in melanoma [5]. Nox1 plays an important
role in reactive oxygen species (ROS) production, and
overproduction of intracellular ROS has been considered
as a risk factor in cancer development. Increased
generation of Nox1-derived ROS is functionally required
for Ras transformation phenotypes [6], upregulation
of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), tumor
progression and tumor cell migration [6–8]. Rastransformed cells are highly metastatic, and the Ras
oncogene is able to stimulate both matrix metalloproteases
(MMPs) production and cell migration [9].
Bioactive phytochemicals that are non-toxic at
effective doses have been tested against multiple tumor
models. These small molecule phytochemicals offer
promising options for the development of effective
chemotherapeutic or chemopreventive agents. Honokiol,
a small molecular weight molecule extracted from the
Magnolia plant species, has been reported to have anticancer properties in various animal tumor models, such
as, non-melanoma skin cancer, breast, lung and prostate
cancers [10–15] with no apparent signs of toxicities in
these models. However, the anti-metastatic potential of
honokiol against melanoma is largely unexplored. In this
study, we examined the effect of honokiol on the migration
potential of melanoma cancer cells, as the migration or
invasion of cancer cells is a major event in the metastatic
cascade of cancers. For this purpose, we used various
human melanoma cancer cell lines as an in vitro model and
verified our findings using in vivo athymic nude mice as
a tumor cell invasion model. Furthermore, we ascertained
that the inhibitory effect of honokiol on melanoma cell
migration is mediated through the inhibition of Nox-1 and
associated molecular targets.

Association of Nox1 expression and activity with
melanoma cell migration
To examine whether over expression of Nox1 in
melanoma cells correlates with migratory potential of
melanoma cells, cell migration was analyzed using the
Boyden chamber assay. An equal number of melanoma
cells and NHM (3x104) were incubated in Boyden
chambers for 24 h at 37oC. After 24 h, cell migration was
detected using microscope to collect photomicrographs
of the cells. In general, the melanoma cell lines that
have higher Nox1 activity showed a higher number of
migratory cells compared to NHM. Importantly, it appears
that our observation of increased migration potential was
not directly associated with Nox1 protein expression but
Nox activity (Figure 1D). Further, the Mel1011 cell line is
deficient in β-catenin (Figure 1D, lane 8), and β-catenin
has been shown to play a critical role in melanoma cell
migration. Therefore, while the Mel1011 cells exhibit
higher Nox activity, cell migration is impaired compared
to other melanoma cell lines. A summary of our analysis of
melanoma cell migration/image is presented in Figure 1E.

Honokiol inhibits migration capacity of
melanoma cells
We examined the effect of honokiol on migratory
potential of different melanoma cancer cell lines. For this
purpose, we selected four melanoma cell lines, A375,
Hs294t, SK-Mel119 and SK-Mel28. These cell lines were
treated with various concentrations of honokiol (0, 5, 10,
and 20 μM) for 24 h and cell migration was determined
using the Boyden chamber assay. As shown in Figure
2A, relative to honokiol-untreated control cells, treatment
with honokiol reduced the migration potential of all four
melanoma cell lines in a concentration-dependent manner.
Migrating cells in each membrane were counted under
microscope in 3-5 different fields and the resultant number
of migrating cells for each cell line is summarized in
terms of mean numbers of migrating cells ± SD per image
(Figure 2B). The cell migration was inhibited by 20-55%
(P<0.05-0.001) in A375 cells, 20-70% (P<0.05-0.001) in
Hs294t cells, 40-70% in SK-Mel119 cells, and 40-80%
(P<0.01-0.001) in SK-Mel28 cells. Inhibition occurred in
a concentration-dependent manner after treatment with
honokiol for 24 h.
To further verify the inhibitory effect of honokiol on
melanoma cancer cell migration, a wound healing assay or
scratch assay was performed, as described in the Material
and methods. The major gap or wounding space between
cell layers after making a wound or scratch was occupied
after 24 h by the migrating melanoma cells in the control
groups when cells were not treated with honokiol. Relative

RESULTS
Basal level of Nox1 protein in different
melanoma cancer cell lines
We first examined the basal level of Nox1 protein
expression in different melanoma cell lines as compared
with the levels in normal human melanocytes (NHM).
As shown in Figure 1A, western blot analysis revealed
that the melanoma cell lines (A375, Hs294, SK-Mel 119,
SK-Mel 28, Mel1241, Mel1011, and Mel928) exhibited
different basal levels of Nox1 expression. The basal level
of Nox1 in NHM was detectable but to a lesser extent
than observed in melanoma cell lines (Figure 1A). The
densitometry analysis of bands indicated that the basal
levels of Nox1 in melanoma cell lines were 4 to 20-fold
higher than NHM (Figure 1B). Nox1 is one of several
isoforms of NADPH complex; therefore, we further
determined the total NADPH oxidase (Nox) activity in all
the melanoma cell lines using the Nox Activity Assay Kit.
As shown in Figure 1C, the Nox activity in melanoma cell
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7900

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Basal level of NADPH oxidase 1 (Nox1) in normal human melanocytes (NHM) and various human melanoma cell
lines and their migration ability. A. Relative basal levels of Nox1 protein expression in normal human melanocytes and human melanoma cell

lines were analyzed using western blot analysis. B. Relative levels of Nox1 protein in cells determined by the analysis of band intensity as detailed
in Materials and Methods. C. Nox activity was measured using a colorimetric assay in NHM and melanoma cells, and has been expressed as pg/mg
protein. Significantly higher in melanoma cells versus NHM; *P<0.05, ¶P<0.01. D. Migration capacity of melanoma cells in comparison to NHM. An
equal number of human melanoma cells and NHM were analyzed for cell migration using Boyden chambers. After 24 h, migratory cells were detected
on the membrane after staining the migratory cells with the 0.1% crystal violet dye. Representative photomicrographs are shown. E. The migratory
cells were counted under microscope and the results are expressed as the mean number of migratory cells ± SD per image or field (n = 3). All melanoma
cell lines and NHM are designated as: 1, NHM; 2, A375; 3, Hs294t; 4, SK-Mel 119; 5, SK-Mel 28; 6, Mel1241; 7, Mel 928; and 8, Mel 1011.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7901

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Effect of honokiol on migratory potential of melanoma cells. A. Melanoma cell lines were treated with various

concentrations of honokiol (0, 5, 10 and 20 μM) for 24 h, and cell migration was determined using Boyden chambers, as detailed in Materials
and Methods. Migratory cells were detected after staining the migratory cells with crystal violet dye. Representative photomicrographs
show the migratory cells in purple or blue. B. The migratory cells per microscopic field were counted and the results expressed as the mean
number of migratory cells ± SD per image (n = 3). Significant difference versus non-honokiol-treated control group, *P<0.05, †P<0.01, and
¶
P<0.001. C. A scratch or wound healing assay was performed to further assess the effect of honokiol on migration capacity of melanoma
cells, as detailed in Materials and Methods. The space between the broken lines delineates the gap without the presence of cancer cells.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7902

Oncotarget

to non-honokiol-treated control cells, treatment with
honokiol (0, 10 and 20 μM) for 24 h inhibited the migration
capacity of A375, Hs294t, SK-Mel119, and SK-Mel28
cells in a concentration-dependent manner (Figure 2C).
The empty space between cell layers was largely not
occupied by cells treated with honokiol, and this effect
was dose-dependent. The gap between the cell layers is
highlighted by broken lines.

As shown in Figure 3D (panels left and right), treatment
with NAC resulted in significant inhibition of Hs294t
(>60%, P<0.001) and SK-Mel28 (>80%, P<0.001) cell
migration.

Honokiol treatment reduces Nox1 expression
and reduces intracellular ROS level in melanoma
cells

To further verify the role of Nox1 in melanoma
cell migration, Hs294t and SK-Mel28 cells were treated
with DPI (5 μM), an inhibitor of Nox1, for 24 h. After
24 h treatment, cell migration was determined using
Boyden chamber assay. We have found that treatment
of cells with DPI significantly decreased the migration
capacity of melanoma cells, as shown in representative
photomicrographs (Figure 4A). Numbers of migratory
cells were counted by microscopy in each group, and
the results are summarized in Figure 4B. DPI treatment
decreased the migration of Hs294t (85%, P<0.001) and
SK-Mel28 (75%, P<0.001) cells. Western blot analysis
revealed that treatment of Hs294t and SK-Mel28 cells
with DPI decreased the levels of Nox1, MMP-2 and
MMP-9 compared to control cells (Figure 4C).

Effect of diphenyleneiodonium chloride
(DPI), an inhibitor of Nox1, on melanoma cell
migration

As honokiol treatment significantly reduced
migration capacity of melanoma cells, we further
determined the effect of honokiol on Nox1 protein
expression in melanoma cells. A375, Hs294t, SK-Mel119,
and SK-Mel28 cell lines were treated with honokiol (0, 5,
10, and 20 μM) for 24 h, and cell lysates were analyzed
for Nox1 by western blot analysis. As shown in Figure 3A,
treatment with honokiol decreased Nox1 expression
in a dose-dependent manner. As the inhibitory effect
of honokiol on Nox1 level in all the four cell lines was
identical, we further checked the effect of honokiol on the
levels of oxidative stress in only Hs294t and SK-Mel28
cell lines using flow cytometry. We also determined
the effect of honokiol on NADPH oxidase activity. For
this purpose, Hs294t and SK-Mel28 cells were treated
with honokiol (0, 5, 10, and 20 μM) for 24 h. After 24
h treatment, NADPH oxidase activity was determined
using colorimetric assay kit. It was found that treatment
of melanoma cells with honokiol significantly reduced
the activity of NADPH oxidase (P<0.01) compared to
honokiol-untreated control cells (Figure 3B).
NADPH oxidase regulates the levels of reactive
oxygen species (ROS) in cells, which play key roles
as signaling molecules in many physiological and
pathophysiological processes. ROS generation by the Nox1
member of the Nox family is necessary for the extracellular
matrix (ECM)-degradation and actin-rich cellular
structures known as invadopodia and that stimulates cell
migration [16]. Here, we tested the effect of honokiol
on ROS generation in melanoma cells (Figure 3C).
For this purpose, Hs294t and SK-Mel28 cells were
treated with honokiol for 6 h, and the intracellular level of
ROS was measured by DCFH-DA assay, as described in
Material and methods. As shown in Figure 3C, treatment
of melanoma cells with honokiol reduced the levels of
ROS generation. A similar effect was also found when
melanoma cells were treated with NAC, a well-known
antioxidant and scavenger of reactive oxygen species.
NAC was used as positive control. To verify whether the
inhibitory effect of honokiol on cell migration is mediated
through its inhibitory effect on Nox1-mediated ROS
generation, Hs294t and SK-Mel28 cells were treated with
NAC (10 mM) for 24 h and cell migration was determined.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Effect of honokiol and NAC on matrix
metalloproteinases in melanoma cells
MMPs, specifically MMP-2 and MMP-9, are well
characterized for their key roles in tumor progression, cell
migration and invasion of cancers including melanoma
[17]. Therefore, in addition to DPI, we determined the
effect of honokiol and NAC on the levels of MMP-2 and
MMP-9 in melanoma cells. Hs294t and SK-Mel28 cells
were treated separately with honokiol and NAC for 24 h,
then cells were harvested and cell lysates were subjected to
western blot analysis. The results revealed that treatment
of cells with honokiol and NAC reduced expression of
MMP-2 and MMP-9 in both cell lines (Figure 4D, 4E).

Honokiol increases the accumulation of cytosolic
protein p47phox while decreases the level of
membrane-bound protein p22phox in melanoma
cells: resultant decrease in binding of p47phox and
p22phox proteins
The interaction between cytosolic protein (i.e.,
p47phox) and membrane-bound protein (i.e., p22phox) has
been implicated in Nox activation [18, 19]. We therefore
determined the effect of honokiol on p22phox and p47phox
proteins in melanoma cells. For this purpose, Hs294t
and SK-Mel28 cells were treated with honokiol for 24
h and its effect on the p22phox and p47phox proteins was
assessed by western blot analysis. The results indicated
that treatment with honokiol resulted in accumulation
of cytosolic protein, p47phox (Figure 5A), and decreased
7903

Oncotarget

Figure 3: A. Honokiol treatment decreases the expression of Nox1 protein in melanoma cell lines. Melanoma cell lines (A375, Hs294t, SK-

Mel119 and SK-Mel28) were treated with various concentrations of honokiol for 24 h. After 24 h of treatment, cell lysates were prepared and
subjected to western blot analysis for the detection of Nox1 protein expression. B. Honokiol inhibits NADPH oxidase activity in melanoma
cells. Hs294t and SK-Mel28 cells were treated with honokiol for 6 h. Cells were harvested and NADPH oxidase activity was determined
using a colorimetric assay kit, as detailed in Materials and Methods. Significant inhibition versus control, *P<0.05, ¶P<0.01. C. Honokiol and
NAC reduce the levels of oxidative stress (ROS) in melanoma cells. Hs294t and SK-Mel28 cells were treated with honokiol or NAC for 6 h
and thereafter ROS production in melanoma cells was measured using flow cytometry, as described in Materials and Methods. Representative
FACS histograms are shown indicating the levels of ROS production. NAC, an anti-oxidant, was used as a positive control. D. Treatment of
melanoma cells with NAC inhibits their migratory capacity. Hs294t and SK-Mel28 cells were treated with NAC (10 mM) for 24 h and cell
migration was determined using the Boyden chamber assay. Representative photomicrographs are shown with migratory cells in blue (left
panels). Summary of migratory cells in different treatment groups is presented (right panels). Significant inhibition versus control, *P<0.001.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7904

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Diphenyleneiodonium chloride (DPI), an inhibitor of Nox1, inhibits melanoma cell migration. A. Hs294t and

SK-Mel28 cells were treated with DPI (5 μM) for 24 h, and cell migration was determined. Representative photomicrographs are shown
from two independent experiments. B. The migratory blue/purple-stained cells were counted at 3-4 different places of the membrane with a
microscope and the results are expressed as the mean number of migratory cells ± SD. Significant inhibition versus control group, ¶P<0.001.
C. Inhibitory effect of DPI on the expression levels of Nox1 and MMPs in melanoma cells. After treatment of cells with DPI for 24 h, cells
lysates were prepared and subjected to the analysis of Nox1, MMP-2 and MMP-9 using western blot analysis. D & E. Inhibitory effect of
honokiol and NAC on the expression levels of MMP-2 and MMP-9 in Hs294t and SK-Mel28 melanoma cells. Cells were treated with either
honokiol or NAC for 24 h, and cell lysates were subjected to the western blot analysis of MMPs.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7905

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Treatment of melanoma cells (Hs294t and SK-Mel28) with honokiol increases cytosolic accumulation of p47phox protein

in melanoma cells A. while decreasing the levels of membrane protein, p22phox, in a dose-dependent manner B. C. Immuno-cytostaining
detection of cytosolic p47phox and membranous protein p22phox in melanoma cells after their treatment with honokiol. The cytostaining of
p47phox is shown in red while p22phox is shown in green. For clarity, a magnified cellular staining pattern is shown as an insert. Representative
photomicrographs are shown from two independent experiments. D. Honokiol treatment blocks the binding of p47phox to p22phox proteins
in melanoma cells. For the binding assay, melanoma cells were treated with honokiol for 24 h, and cell lysates were prepared. The p22phox
protein was immunoprecipitated from cell lysates using specific antibodies. Immunoprecipitates were washed, and subjected to western blot
analysis using antibody specific to p47phox. Complex V is a cell surface protein and is used as a loading control.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7906

Oncotarget

levels of membrane-bound protein p22phox (Figure 5B).
This effect appeared to be dose-dependent. The effect
of honokiol on p47phox and p22phox protein expression in
melanoma cells was further verified using cytostaining, as
detailed in Materials and methods. Immuno-cytostaining
detection analysis revealed that treatment of cells with
honokiol resulted in increased expression levels of p47phox
proteins in melanoma cells compared to non-honokioltreated control cells (shown in red), while the staining
intensity of p22phox protein, shown in green, was reduced
or diminished compared to non-honokiol-treated control
cells (Figure 5C). These effects of honokiol on cytosolic
and membrane-bound proteins in melanoma cells may
have blocked the binding of both cytosolic and membranebound proteins and thus may have inhibited the activation
of Nox enzyme which led to the suppression of the ROS
(oxidative stress) generation. We have also checked the
binding levels of p47phox and p22phox proteins in melanoma
cells after treatment with honokiol. The samples for
generating results depicted in Figure 5D were used for
this purpose. The p22phox protein was immunoprecipitated
from the lysate samples from both Hs294t and SK-Mel28
cell lines and western blot analysis was performed. The
results revealed that the binding of p47phox and p22phox was
decreased in a dose-dependent manner. These data suggest
that the decreased binding of these two proteins may have
contributed to reduced activation of Nox1.

Nox1 activity in lung and liver samples compared to the
non-treated (Figure 6B). We also determined the effect of
honokiol on the protein expression levels of Nox1 in liver,
lung, kidney and spleens tissues. Western blot analysis
revealed that the expression of Nox1 protein in liver, lung,
kidney and spleen was greater in mice which were injected
with melanoma cells compared to the mice which were
not injected with melanoma cells. Oral administration of
honokiol markedly inhibited the expression levels of Nox1
in liver, lung, kidney and spleens compared to mice that
did not receive honokiol (Figure 6C).

DISCUSSION
The American Cancer Society as well as the World
Health Organization reports suggest that melanoma-related
deaths occur world-wide and the major cause of death is
its metastatic spread beyond skin and lymph nodes [2,
20]. Current available treatment options are not sufficient
to save lives, therefore, alternative innovative strategies
are required to prevent or block the migratory/invasive
potential of melanoma cells. The significant findings of the
present study are that the treatment of human melanoma
cells of different characteristics with honokiol inhibits
migration capacity of melanoma cells in a dose-dependent
manner. This effect is associated with the inhibition of
Nox1 expression and NADPH oxidase activity in cells.
Nox1 is a multi-protein complex that consists of cytosolic
(p47phox, p40phox and p67phox) and membrane-bound proteins
(p22phox, gp91phox) that when assembled becomes activated,
and initiates respiratory bursts or generation of oxidative
stress [18, 21]. The generation of oxidative stress play a
significant role in cancer cell progression and migration.
Our data show that honokiol not only reduces the Nox1
expression or NADPH oxidase activity, but also oxidative
bursts in melanoma cells. Our western blot analysis
revealed that treatment with honokiol altered basal levels
of p22phox (membrane-bound) and p47phox (cytosolic
protein) in melanoma cells, which may result in blocking
of interaction between p22phox and p47phox proteins. The
p22phox protein is the binding partner of p47phox [22, 23],
the subunits required for oxidase assembly. Failure of
this interaction between membrane-bound and cytosolic
proteins would lead to the inactivation of Nox in
melanoma cells, and that would result in the reduction
of oxidative burst, which is responsible for invasive or
metastatic phenotype of melanoma cells.
The honokiol-mediated inhibition of Nox1 through
its inhibitory effect on oxidative burst in melanoma
cells and subsequently its anti-cell migration property
is supported by the action of NAC in melanoma cells.
Treatment of melanoma cells with NAC, an antioxidant,
also inhibits the migration potential of melanoma cells and
that is associated with the inhibition of ROS generation.
The role of honokiol in inhibition of cell migration
through inhibition of Nox1 expression and NADPH

Administration of honokiol by oral gavage
inhibits the extravasation capacity and
establishment of tumor cell growth in internal
body organs of nude mice
To further verify the inhibitory effect of honokiol
on melanoma cell migration, in vivo experiments were
conducted using a nude mouse model. Melanoma cells
were i.v. injected into the tail vein of mice that were
either not treated or were orally administered honokiol.
Seven weeks after injection of melanoma cells, mice
were sacrificed and internal body organs, such as lungs,
liver, kidney and spleens, were harvested, and subjected
to image analysis, as detailed in Materials and Methods.
Bioluminescence image analysis detected the presence of
abundant melanoma cells in liver and lungs as shown by
red color (area and intensity) while lower frequency was
detected in spleen and kidney (Figure 6A). Treatment of
mice with honokiol blocked migration, accumulation and
growth of melanoma cells in liver and lungs compared to
non-treated control animals, as reflected by the presence of
red color intensity. Importantly, the metastatic melanoma
cells were not detectable in lymph nodes, brain or skin
by this imaging system. The levels of Nox1 activity were
significantly higher (P<0.001) in liver, kidney and lungs
compared to those detected in normal tissue samples from
mice that were not injected with melanoma cells. Honokiol
treatment significantly decreased (P<0.001) the levels of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7907

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Effect of honokiol on melanoma cells invasion in vivo, NADPH oxidase activity, and the levels of Nox 1 expression
in different internal body organs, such as liver, lung, spleen and kidney. A. Mice were injected through the tail vein with A375

melanoma cells (2.5 × 106/mouse) constitutively expressing luciferase and EGFP. Honokiol was administered by oral gavage, as detailed in
Materials and Methods. Seven weeks after melanoma cell injection, mice were sacrificed, and internal body organs (liver, lungs, kidney and
spleen) were harvested and subjected to bioluminescence imaging for the detection of melanoma cells using Xenogen IVIS200 imaging system.
The area and intensity of red color indicates high accumulation or density of melanoma cells in a specific target organ, green color indicates the
presence of melanoma cells but less intense than red color, blue color indicates detectable range of melanoma cells while white color indicates lack
of detectable melanoma cells in that particular area. B. Administration of honokiol inhibits the NADPH oxidase activity in selected internal body
organs of mice wherein the invasion of melanoma cells were detected (¶P<0.001, #P<0.01) C. Administration of honokiol inhibits expression levels
of Nox1 protein in internal body organs compared to the non-honokiol-treated but melanoma cell injected control group of mice. At the termination
of the experiment, organs were harvested and lysates were prepared for the analysis of Nox1 expression level using western blot analysis.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7908

Oncotarget

oxidase activity is also supported by the action of DPI in
melanoma cells. Treatment of melanoma cells with DPI, an
inhibitor of Nox, also blocked or reduced melanoma cell
migration. Activation of MMPs, in particular MMP-2 and
MMP-9, plays crucial roles in tissue matrix degradation,
and thus, paves the way for cancer cell migration. To
check if honokiol, NAC or DPI affect the expressions
of MMPs in melanoma cells and whether it is associated
with melanoma cell migration, the melanoma cells were
treated with these agents. It was found that treatment of
honokiol, NAC and DPI reduced the expression of MMP2 and MMP-9 in Hs294t and SK-Mel28 melanoma cells,
thus suggesting a common mechanism of action by these
agents.
The inhibitory effect of honokiol on melanoma
cell migration was further verified using an in vivo nude
mouse model. A375 melanoma cells were intravenously
injected through the tail vein and their migration and tumor
growth in internal body organs was determined using
bioluminescence imaging system. Simultaneously, we
examined the inhibitory effect of honokiol, if any, on the
migration potential of melanoma cells in vivo. Although this
model system does not recapitulate the concept of tumor
cell metastasis, as there was no intravasation phase of tumor
cell metastasis where tumor cells migrate from the primary
tumor site into the blood vascular system, this approach does
help to understand how the melanoma cells pass through
the extravasation phase and reach internal vital organs and
grow there. Using this model and bioluminescence imaging,
we detected the presence of large numbers of melanoma
cells in liver and lung (Figure 6), while lower prevalence
was detected in kidney. Oral administration of honokiol
inhibited or blocked the migration capacity of melanoma
cells as is evident by the presence of lesser numbers of
melanoma cells in liver, lung and kidney compared to
honokiol-untreated control mice. To verify whether this
inhibitory effect on the migration of melanoma cells in
vivo is associated with the NADPH oxidase activity and the
expression of Nox protein, different organs were harvested
and analyzed for these biomarkers. Administration of
honokiol significantly inhibited (P<0.001) the NADPH
oxidase activity in liver, lung and kidney compared to the
control group. Additionally, the expression levels of Nox1
protein was also reduced in different organs from mice that
were administered honokiol. These data explain inhibitory
effects of honokiol against the migration of melanoma cells
using this in vivo model.
In conclusion, the results from this study
demonstrate that honokiol inhibits the migration capacity
of melanoma cells and that this process involves: (i) the
inhibitory effect of honokiol on oxidative burst/oxidative
stress in melanoma cells, (ii) the suppression of NADPH
oxidase activity by blocking interaction between cytosolic
and membrane-bound proteins responsible for ROS
generation, and that these data were supported by the
bioluminescence imaging of internal body organs to detect
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

luciferase-tagged melanoma cells. As NADPH oxidase
activity has been implicated in a number of disease states,
it is important to understand the exquisite regulation of
this enzyme in honokiol-mediated inhibition of melanoma
metastasis.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Antibodies and reagents
The antibodies specific for Nox1, p47phox, p22phox,
β-Actin, and secondary antibodies horseradish peroxidaselinked anti-mouse IgG, and anti-rabbit IgG were purchased
from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA).
N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC), 2’, 7’ -dichlorofluorescein
diacetate (DCFH-DA), diphenyleneiodonium chloride
(DPI) and antibodies specific for MMP-2 and MMP-9
were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich Corp. (St. Louis, MO).
The secondary antibodies conjugated with Alexa Fluor488
or Alexa Fluor594 were purchased from Invitrogen
(Carlsband, CA). NADPH activity assay kit was purchased
from AnaSpec, Inc. (Fremont, CA). Purified honokiol
was purchased from Quality Phytochemicals, LLC
(Edison, NJ).

Melanoma cell lines and culture conditions
The human melanoma cells lines, A375, Hs294t, and
SK-Mel 28 were purchased from the ATCC. Other melanoma
cell lines, such as Mel1241, Mel1011, SK-Mel119 and
Mel928 were kindly obtained from Dr. Paul Robbins (Center
of Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute (Bethesda,
MD). Cell lines were last authenticated in 2013, and found
to be free of pathogen contamination. A brief description
of cells lines is as follows: A375 and SK-Mel28 (BRAF
mutated), SK-Mel119 (NRAS mutated and wild type for
BRAF), Hs294t is highly metastatic but not BRAF or NRAS
mutated. Mel1241 was β-catenin activated while Mel1011
was β-catenin inactivated. Majority of the cell lines are highly
metastatic in nature. Most of the cell lines were cultured as
monolayers in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium, while
SK-Mel119 and SK-Mel28 were cultured in RPMI-1640
medium supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal
bovine serum (Hyclone, Logan, UT), 100 mg/ml penicillin
and 100 mg/ml streptomycin and maintained in an incubator
with 5% CO2 at 370C. For the treatment of cells, honokiol
was dissolved in dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO, 100 μl) and the
maximum concentration of DMSO in cell culture medium
was not more than 0.1% (v/v).

Cell migration assay
The migration ability of melanoma cells was
determined in vitro using Boyden Chambers (Gaithersburg,
MD) in which the two chambers were separated with
Millipore membranes (8 μM pore size), as detailed
7909

Oncotarget

Isolation of membrane and cytosolic fractions

previously [15, 24]. The membranes were examined
microscopically and cellular migration was determined
by counting the number of stained cells on membranes
in at least 3-4 randomly selected fields using an Olympus
BX41 microscope with 10x magnification. Representative
photomicrographs were obtained using a Qcolor5 digital
camera fitted to an Olympus BX41 microscope. Cell
migration experiments were repeated to verify the results.

Subcellular fractions, such as cytosolic and
membrane, were prepared using the Cell Fractionation Kit
(Cell Signaling Technology) following the manufacturer’s
instructions. The methodology is based on differential
centrifugation as described by DerMardirossian et al. [27].

Western blot analysis

Wound healing or scratch assay

Following treatment of melanoma cells with
honokiol or any other agent, the cells were harvested, cell
lysates prepared and western blot analysis was carried out
to determine the levels of different proteins of interest, as
detailed previously [25, 28]. Equal protein loading on the
gel and on the membrane was verified by stripping the
membrane and re-probing with an anti-β-actin antibody
for cytoplasmic proteins. Complex V is a cell surface
protein and anti-Complex V antibody was used as a
loading control. In some cases, western blot membranes
were cut into two or three parts according to the molecular
weight of the proteins and subjected to incubation with
different antibodies, etc. Protein ladders were used as a
molecular weight marker to identify different proteins.
The relative density of each band in a blot was measured
using the ImageJ software (National Institute of Health).
The numerical value of band density is shown under each
blot, and the band density of control group was arbitrarily
selected as ‘1’ and comparison was then made with
densitometry values of other treatment groups.

The wound healing or scratch assays were performed
to verify the cell migration results obtained from Boyden
chambers, as detailed previously [25]. Briefly, cell
monolayers were wounded or scratched with a sterile 10
μl pipette tip and then washed with starvation medium to
remove any detached cells from the culture plates. Cells
were left either untreated or were treated with honokiol
(0, 10 and 20 μM) in complete medium and kept in an
incubator for 24 h. After 24 h, the medium was replaced
with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) buffer, the wound
gap was visualized, and the cells were photographed using
an Olympus BX41 microscope fitted with a digital camera.

Measurement of NADPH oxidase activity
NADPH oxidase activity in normal human
melanocytes and melanoma cells was measured with
a colorimetric assay kit following the manufacturer’s
(Abcam, Cambridge, MA) protocol. The assay kit provides
NADPH extraction buffer, a NADP standard, an enzyme
cycling mix, and stop solution to terminate the reaction.
The absorbance was measured using a microplate reader
and NADPH oxidase activity was calculated following the
instructions of the manufacturer and is expressed as pg/
mg protein.

Immunofluorescence detection of p47phox
and p22phox proteins
To determine the effect of honokiol on the formation
of NADPH complex, melanoma cells (Hs294t and SK-Mel
28) were treated with various concentrations of honokiol
(0, 10 and 20 μM) for 24 h. The cells were then harvested
and used for cytostaining of NADPH complex proteins,
such as p47phox and p22phox. Briefly, the cells were cultured
on coverslips in 100 mm culture plates with or without
treatment with honokiol. After 24 h of treatment, cells
were fixed with chilled 4% paraformaldehyde and nonspecific binding sites were blocked with 2% bovine serum
albumin in PBS for 30 min. Cells were then incubated
with primary antibodies specific to p47phox or p22phox for 2
h at room temperature. The cells were washed with PBS
and bound antibodies were detected using an AlexaFluorconjugated secondary antibody. Goat anti-mouse IgG
labeled with green-fluorescent AlexaFluor488 dye was
used for detection of p22phox, while goat anti-mouse IgG
labeled with red-fluorescent AlexaFluor594 was used
for the detection of the expression of p47phox. Cells were
finally mounted with Vectashield mounting medium for
fluorescence with DAPI (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame,

Measurement of intracellular reactive oxygen
species (ROS) or oxidative stress level
Intracellular ROS levels were measured in cells
using flow cytometry with the redox-sensitive dye DCFHDA [26]. The nonfluorescent DCFH-DA readily diffuses
into the cells, where it is hydrolyzed to the polar derivative
DCFH, which is oxidized in the presence of H2O2 to the
highly fluorescent DCF. Briefly, 3x105 melanoma cells
(Hs294t and SK-Mel 28) were plated in 6-well culture
plate and allowed to attach by overnight incubation,
then treated with honokiol (20 μM) and an antioxidant
N-Acetyl-L-cysteine (10 mM) for 6 h. After specific time
periods, cells were harvested and stained with DCFH-DA
(5μM) for 30 min at 370C. Thereafter, cells were washed
with PBS and resuspended in 1mL PBS. Fluorescence was
recorded on FL-1 channel of an Accuri C6 flow cytometer
(Becton Dickinson).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7910

Oncotarget

Statistical analysis

CA). Immunofluorescence detection was performed using
a fluorescence microscope and representative images were
collected.

For migration assays, the data from honokiol-, NACand DPI-treated groups were compared with control group
separately using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA)
followed by post hoc Dunn’s test using GraphPad Prism
version 4.00 for Windows, GraphPad Software, (San
Diego, CA), USA, www.graphpad.com. In each case
P<0.05 was considered statistically significant.

Generation of EGFP/luciferase reporter A375
melanoma cells
To facilitate detection of experimental metastasis
in vivo, A375 cells were transduced with a vesicular
stomatits virus G envelope (VSV-G) pseudotyped
lentiviral vector for constitutive expression of both
firefly luciferase and enhanced green fluorescence protein
(EGFP). The vector (designated K2947) comprised the
mouse CMV promoter, followed by fire fly luciferase,
the encephalomyocarditis internal ribosomal entry site
(IRES), a puromycin resistance gene and the enhanced
green fluorescence protein (EGFP), wherein puromycin
and EGFP were fused in-frame at their 3’ and 5’ ends,
respectively, with the “self-cleaving” T2A peptidecoding sequence [29] (CMV-luciferase-IRES-puro.T2A.
EGFP). The lentiviral vector, the packaging construct,
and the VSV-G plasmid DNAs were co-transfected into
293T human embryo kidney cells to create infectious,
replication defective, lentiviral vector-containing
particles as described previously [30]. A375 cells were
transduced with the vector using a multiplicity of
infection of approximately 5. Stable, expression-positive
A375 cells were selected by supplementing the culture
medium with 5 mg/ml of puromycin for 5 days.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by a grant from the
National Institutes of Health (NIH, CA166883) National
Cancer Institute (to S.K. Katiyar) and the Veterans
Administration Merit Review Award (1I01BX001410)
to S.K. Katiyar. The research also used the facilities
supported by of the Virology and Genetic Sequencing
cores of the UAB Center for AIDS Research (CFAR),
P30-AI-27767.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST
All authors declare no potential conflicts of interest

REFERENCES
1.	 Berwick M, Wiggins C. The current epidemiology of
cutaneous malignant melanoma. Front Biosci. 2006; 11:
1244–1254.

Detection and analysis of metastatic melanoma
cells in internal body organs of athymic nude
mice using bioluminescence imaging

2.	 American Cancer Society. Cancer facts & figures.
Available: http://www.cancer.org/research/cancerfactsfigures/. Accessed July, 2014
3.	 Gaggioli C, Sahai E. Melanoma invasion current knowledge
and future directions. Pigment Cell Res. 2007; 20: 161–172.

Experimental metastasis of melanoma cells was
determined by intravenous injection of A375 cells
(2.5x106) constitutively expressing both luciferase and
green fluorescent protein (GFP) into nude mice as a
model. Female athymic nude mice (4-6 weeks of age)
were purchased from the National Cancer Institute
(Bethesda, MD) and housed in the animal resource
facility at the University of Alabama at Birmingham
in accordance with the Institutional Animal Care and
Use Committee (IACUC) guidelines. Briefly, mice
were divided into three groups of 5 animals each.
Honokiol was administered (100 mg/kg body weight)
in supplementation with 0.5% carboxymethyl cellulose
dissolved in 200 μl sterile water/mouse or vehicle via
oral gavage 5x per week for seven weeks. After seven
weeks, the mice were sacrificed and their vital organs
(liver, lungs, kidneys, and spleen) were harvested. The
presence of metastatic melanoma cells in these organs
was detected by bioluminescence imaging after spraying
D-luciferin using Xenogen IVIS200 imaging system,
following the reported protocols [31, 32].

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4.	 Strouse JJ, Fears TR, Tucker MA, Wayne AS. Pediatric
melanoma: risk factor and survival analysis of the surveillance, epidemiology and end results database. J Clin Oncol.
2005; 23: 4735–4741.
5.	 Liu F, Gomez Garcia AM, Meyskens FL Jr. NADPH oxidase 1 overexpression enhances invasion via matrix metalloproteinase-2 and epithelial-mesenchymal transition in
melanoma cells. J Invest Dermatol. 2012; 132: 2033–2041.
6.	 Mitsushita J, Lambeth JD, Kamata T. The superoxide-generating oxidase Nox1 is functionally required for Ras oncogene transformation. Cancer Res. 2004; 64: 3580–3585.
7.	 Komatsu D, Kato M, Nakayama J, Miyagawa S, Kamata
T. NADPH oxidase 1 plays a critical mediating role in
oncogenic Ras-induced vascular endothelial growth factor
expression. Oncogene. 2008; 27: 4724–4732.
8.	 Shinohara M, Shang WH, Kubodera M, Harada S,
Mitsushita J, Kato M, Miyazaki H, Sumimoto H, Kamata
T. Reactive oxygen generated by NADPH oxidase 1
(Nox1) contributes to cell invasion by regulating matrix

7911

Oncotarget

metalloprotease-9 production and cell migration. J Biol
Chem. 2007; 282: 17640–17648.

21.	 Sheppard FR, Kelher MR, Moore EE, McLaughlin NJ,
Banerjee A, Silliman CC. Structural organization of the
neutrophil NADPH oxidase: phosphorylation and translocation during priming and activation. J Leukoc Biol. 2005;
78: 1025–1042.

9.	 Aguirre-Ghiso JA, Frankel P, Farias EF, Lu Z, Jiang H,
Olsen A, Feig LA, de Kier Joffe EB, Foster DA. RalA
requirement for v-Src- and v-Ras-induced tumorigenicity
and overproduction of urokinase-type plasminogen activator: involvement of metalloproteases. Oncogene. 1999; 18:
4718–4725.

22.	 Ambasta RK, Kumar P, Griendling KK, Schmidt HH,
Busse R, Brandes RP. Direct interaction of the novel Nox
proteins with p22phox is required for the formation of a
functionally active NADPH oxidase. J Biol Chem. 2004;
279: 45935–45941.

10.	 Hahm ER, Arlotti JA, Marynowski SW, Singh SV.
Honokiol, a constituent of oriental medicinal herb magnolia officinalis, inhibits growth of PC-3 xenografts in vivo
in association with apoptosis induction. Clin Cancer Res.
2008; 14: 1248–1257.

23.	 Sumimoto H, Hata K, Mizuki K, Ito T, Kage Y,
Sakaki Y, Fukumaki Y, Nakamura M, Takeshige K.
Assembly and activation of the phagocyte NADPH oxidase. Specific interaction of the N-terminal Src homology
3 domain of p47phox with p22phox is required for activation of the NADPH oxidase. J Biol Chem 1996; 271:
22152–22158.

11.	 Bai X, Cerimele F, Ushio-Fukai M, Waqas M, Campbell PM,
Govindarajan B, Der CJ, Battle T, Frank DA, Ye K, Murad E,
Dubiel W, Soff G, et al. Honokiol, a small molecular weight
natural product, inhibits angiogenesis in vitro and tumor
growth in vivo. J Biol Chem. 2003; 278: 35501–35507.

24.	 Punathil T, Tollefsbol TO, Katiyar SK. EGCG inhibits
mammary cancer cell migration through inhibition of nitric
oxide synthase and guanylate cyclase. Biochem Biophys
Res Commun. 2008; 375: 162–167.

12.	 Vaid M, Sharma SD, Katiyar SK. Honokiol, a phytochemical from the Magnolia plant, inhibits photocarcinogenesis
by targeting UVB-induced inflammatory mediators and
cell cycle regulators: Development of topical formulation.
Carcinogenesis. 2010; 31: 2004–2011.

25.	 Vaid M, Prasad R, Sun Q, Katiyar SK. Silymarin targets
β-catenin signaling in blocking migration/invasion of
human melanoma cells. PLoS ONE. 2011; 6: e23000.

13.	 Liu H, Zang C, Emde A, Planas-Silva MD, Rosche M,
Kühnl A, Schulz CO, Elstner E, Possinger K, Eucker J.
Anti-tumor effect of honokiol alone and in combination with
other anti-cancer agents in breast cancer. Eur J Pharmacol.
2008; 591: 43–51.

26.	 Royall JA, Ischiropoulos H. Evaluation of 2′,7′-dichlorofluorescin and dihydrorhodamine 123 as fluorescent probes
for intracellular H2O2 in cultured endothelial cells. Arch
Biochem Biophys. 1993; 302: 348–355.

14.	 Singh T, Prasad R, Katiyar SK. Inhibition of class I
histone deacetylases in non-small cell lung cancer by
honokiol leads to suppression of cancer cell growth and
induction of cell death in vitro and in vivo. Epigenetics.
2013; 8: 54–65.

27.	 DerMardirossian C, Rocklin G, Seo JY, Bokoch GM.
Phosphorylation of RhoGDI by Src regulates Rho GTPase
binding and cytosol-membrane cycling. Mol Biol Cell.
2006; 17: 4760–4768.

15.	 Singh T, Katiyar SK. Honokiol inhibits non-small cell lung
cancer cell migration by targeting PGE2-mediated activation
of β-catenin signaling. PLoS ONE. 2013; 8: e60749.

28.	 Prasad R, Katiyar SK. Grape seed proanthocyanidins inhibit
migration potential of pancreatic cancer cells by promoting
mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition and targeting NF-κB.
Cancer Lett. 2013; 334: 118–126.

16.	 Gianni D, Taulet N, Zhang H, DerMardirossian C, Kister J,
Martinez L, Roush WR, Brown SJ, Bokoch GM, Rosen H. A
novel and specific NADPH oxidase-1 (Nox1) small-molecule
inhibitor blocks the formation of functional invadopodia in
human colon cancer cells. ACS Chem Biol. 2010; 5: 981–993.

29.	 Szymczak AL, Workman CJ, Wang Y, Vignali KM,
Dilioglou S, Vanin EF, Vignali DA. Correction of multigene deficiency in vivo using a single ‘selfcleaving’ 2A
peptide-based retroviral vector. Nat Biotechnol. 2004; 22:
589–594.

17.	 Leslie MC, Bar-Eli M. Regulation of gene expression in
melanoma: new approaches for treatment. J Cell Biochem.
2005; 94: 25–38.

30.	 Zufferey R, Nagy D, Mandel RJ, Naldini L, Trono D.
Multiply attenuated lentiviral vector achieves efficient
gene delivery in vivo. Nature Biotechnology. 1997; 15:
871–875.

18.	 Lewis EM, Sergeant S, Ledford B, Stull N, Dinauer MC,
McPhail LC. Phosphorylation of p22phox on threonine 147
enhances NADPH oxidase activity by promoting p47phox
binding. J Biol Chem. 2010; 285: 2959–2967.

31.	 Henriques C, Henriques-Pons A, Meuser-Batista M, Ribeiro
AS, de Souza W. In vivo imaging of mice infected with
bioluminescent Trypanosoma cruzi unveils novel sites of
infection. Parasit Vectors. 2014; 7: 89.

19.	 Nauseef WM. Assembly of the phagocyte NADPH oxidase.
Histochem Cell Biol. 2004; 122: 277–291.

32.	 Dewals B, Myster F, Palmeira L, Gillet L, Ackermann M,
Vanderplasschen A. Ex vivo bioluminescence detection
of alcelaphine herpesvirus 1 infection during malignant
catarrhal fever. J Virol. 2011; 85: 6941–6954.

20.	 Early Detection and Treatment of Skin Cancer. American
Family Physician. Available: http://www.aafp.org/
afp/20000715/357.html.2010

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7912

Oncotarget

