7

Effectiveness of the Thin Prep1 Imaging System
in the Detection of Adenocarcinoma of the
Gynecologic System
Maria A. Friedlander, MPA, CT(ASCP), CMIAC
Dorota Rudomina, MBA, CT(ASCP)
Oscar Lin, MD, PhD

BACKGROUND. The ThinPrep Imaging System (TIS) has been approved by the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration for use to decrease the number of false-negative results in ThinPrep (TP) gynecologic specimens and increase cytotechnology
productivity. Although the increased detection of squamous abnormalities using

Cytology Service, Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
New York.

the TIS has been well documented, to the authors’ knowledge, data regarding the
impact of the TIS in the detection of glandular abnormalities is limited. The goal
of the current study was to evaluate the effectiveness of the TIS in detecting glandular abnormalities in cervicovaginal specimens.

METHODS. TIS evaluated TP tests with histologic confirmation of adenocarcinoma
involving the gynecologic system were included in the current study. Two cytotechnologists independently reviewed the cases for the presence or absence of
atypical glandular cells. Review results were correlated with initial cytologic and
histologic diagnoses.

RESULTS. A total of 124 cases met the criteria for inclusion in the current study.
Seventy of these cases (56%) were found to contain atypical glandular cells on
the TP slide. TIS was able to identify atypical cells in 97% of these cases (68 of 70
cases). Nine cases initially reported as benign were found to contain atypical
glandular cells on secondary review. All but 1 of these cases contained atypical
glandular cells detected by the TIS. The majority of these false-negative cases (6
of 9 cases) derived from endometrial adenocarcinoma. No cytologic evidence of
a glandular abnormality was found in the 54 remaining cases.

CONCLUSIONS. The TIS was found to be effective in identifying atypical glandular
cells in specimens containing malignant glandular cells, leading to a full review
of the slide. Cancer (Cancer Cytopathol) 2008;114:7–12.  2007 American
Cancer Society.

KEYWORDS: Thinprep Imaging System, adenocarcinoma, gynecologic, false-negative results, atypical glandular cells.

T

Address for reprints: Maria A. Friedlander, MPA,
CT(ASCP), Cytology Service, Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 1275
York Avenue, C-596, New York, NY 10021; Fax:
(212) 639-6318; E-mail: angelesm@mskcc.org
Received October 17, 2007; revision received
November 13, 2007; accepted November 14,
2007.

ª 2007 American Cancer Society

he introduction of the ThinPrep Papanicolaou (Pap) test in the
screening of cervicovaginal lesions has led to an improvement in
the detection of glandular lesions in gynecologic cytology specimens. The cytomorphologic features of endocervical glandular
lesions in ThinPrep preparations have been shown to be similar to
those observed in conventional smears.1,2 Nonetheless, several
authors have noted an increase in sensitivity and a significant
decrease in false-negative cases of invasive and in situ endocervical
adenocarcinoma with the use of ThinPrep compared with conventional smears.3–5 Schorge et al. reported a sensitivity of 65.2% compared with 38.6% in conventional smears.4 Bai et al. described

DOI 10.1002/cncr.23257
Published online 17 December 2007 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

8

CANCER (CANCER CYTOPATHOLOGY)

February 25, 2008 / Volume 114 / Number 1

increased sensitivity in the diagnosis of glandular lesions
of the endocervix when ThinPrep was used.6 Guidos
et al. obtained a 60% increase in the detection rate of endometrial adenocarcinoma with the use of ThinPrep
preparations.7 The increased specificity can be attributed to the better visualization of nuclear details observed
in the ThinPrep preparations as well as a reduction in
the amount of obscuring blood and mucus.
Recently, the ThinPrep Imaging System (TIS;
Cytyc Corporation, Boxborough, Mass) was approved
by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for
clinical use. The TIS is an automated interactive
image analysis computer system designed to assist
cytotechnologists in the primary screening of ThinPrep slides. The system was created with the purpose
of decreasing the number of false-negative specimens in cervicovaginal cytology and to increase the
productivity of cytotechnologists. The system is comprised of 2 main devices which includes an image
processor and 1 to 3 imager review scopes. The
image processor is capable of processing [300 slides
per day using specialized image analysis software.
Using Cytyc’s proprietary Optical Cellular Selection
Algorithm technology, the imager rapidly scans a
ThinPrep slide and measures the integrated optical
density of each cell’s nucleus. The software in the
image processor selects and records the coordinates
of 22 microscopic fields of view (FOV) containing
cells or cell clusters of interest in each slide. The
slides are then transferred to the review scope, which
is a fully automated microscope that allows cytotechnologists to rapidly review the selected 22 FOV for
each slide. No further review of a slide is required if
the cytotechnologist determines that the 22 FOV
contain only normal cells. However, if any abnormal
cell is identified, the slide is required to be fully
screened via the AutoScan mode of the review scope.
All ThinPrep preparations analyzed with the TIS
must be stained with the proprietary Papanicolaou
stain developed by Cytyc.
The clinical trial study that led to FDA approval
demonstrated that the TIS was statistically more
sensitive than manual screening for detecting atypical squamous cells of undetermined significance
(ASCUS) or higher grade lesions with equivalent
specificity for ASCUS and low-grade squamous
intraepithelial lesions (LSIL). The TIS demonstrated a
higher specificity for high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesions (HSIL) and an increase in daily
screening rates.8 It is interesting to note that there
were no glandular lesions included in the clinical
trial study. The goal of the current study was to evaluate the performance of the TIS in the detection of
glandular lesions in ThinPrep preparations.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
The study was approved by the Memorial SloanKettering Cancer Center Institutional Review Board.
A computer search was performed by departmental
information systems to identify all ThinPrep Pap tests
(cervical, endocervical, and vaginal sources) with histologic confirmation of adenocarcinoma involving the
gynecologic system and evaluated with the TIS.
All slides were retrieved and independently
re-evaluated by 2 cytotechnologists on the TIS review
scope (secondary review). Both cytotechnologists
were unaware of the original cytologic diagnosis (primary review) but were aware that all patients had
histologically confirmed glandular disease. The cytotechnologists evaluated all cases as per usual TIS
screening procedures by reviewing 22 TIS-selected
FOV and conducting a full manual screen if atypical
cells were identified within the 22 FOV. Cytotechnologists were instructed to ignore markings of primary
review, when electronically indicated by the review
scope or marked on the slide, as permanently
recorded from primary review. In addition, 1 of the
cytotechnologists fully screened all slides manually
to identify any abnormal glandular cells possibly
missed by the TIS. This procedure meant that each
slide was screened 4 times (1 TIS screen at the time
of the initial diagnosis, 1 study CT1 screen, 1 study
CT2 screen, and 1 study CT2 ‘‘full’’ screen). Data collected included the presence or absence of atypical
glandular cells, the number of TIS-selected FOV containing atypical glandular cells, the location of atypical cells in the TIS-selected FOV, and the total
number of fields in the ThinPrep preparation containing atypical glandular cells. Secondary review
results were correlated with the initial cytologic and
histologic diagnoses. A cytopathologist adjudicated
discrepant cases to determine consensus diagnoses.

RESULTS
A total of 124 cases, obtained over a period of 18
months, met criteria for inclusion in the current
study. The ages of the patients ranged from 33 to 86
years (mean, 59 years). The breakdown of glandular
malignancies included primary gynecologic disease
(endometrial [55 cases], endocervical [11 cases],
ovarian [39 cases], fallopian tube [5 cases], and vagina [4 cases]) as well as metastases to the gynecologic system (gastrointestinal tract [7 cases] and
breast [3 cases]).
Seventy of 124 cases in the current study were
found to contain atypical glandular cells on the ThinPrep preparation. The TIS successfully detected atypical glandular cells in 68 of 70 cases (97%). A
definitive diagnosis of malignancy was possible in 60

TIS Detection of Adenocarcinoma/Friedlander et al.

cases; 8 of these cases lacked definitive criteria with
which to establish a malignant diagnosis and were
adjudicated as atypical glandular cells. The number
of TIS-selected FOV containing atypical cells ranged
from 1 to 22. Tumor cells were identified in the center as well as outside the ‘‘L’’ mark indicator in the
TIS-selected FOV. No cytologic evidence of a glandular abnormality was found in the 54 remaining cases.
Table 1 presents a summary of abnormal cytologic
diagnoses and TIS findings.
Nine of the 70 cases were originally reported as
negative for intraepithelial lesions or malignancy
(NILM). A secondary review and adjudication revealed the presence of atypical glandular cells. Abnormal glandular cells were identified on the slide
during full manual review of all slides. The findings,
correlation, and reason for the discrepancy are listed in
Table 2. It is interesting to note that 8 of these 9 cases
contained atypical glandular cells within the 22 FOV.
There were 2 specimens that contained cytologic
evidence of a glandular abnormality, but the TIS
failed to identify atypical glandular cells in the 22
TIS-selected FOV. One case was initially reported as
NILM but contained a single group of malignant

TABLE 1
Summary of Abnormal Cytologic Cases and TIS Findings
Revised cytologic
diagnosis

No. of cases
detected by TIS

No. of cases
missed by TIS

Adenocarcinoma:
Primary
Metastatic
Atypical glandular cells
Total no.

50
10
8
68

1
1
2

TIS indicates ThinPrep Imaging System.

9

cells detected on manual screening, which was not
present within the 22 TIS-selected FOV. (Fig. 1) In
retrospect, this case could be diagnosed cytologically
as adenocarcinoma if the cells were identified at the
time of initial screening. The other case had a
clinical history of atypical endometrial hyperplasia.
This history prompted the initial cytotechnologist
reviewer to perform a full review despite the absence
of atypical cells in the 22 TIS-selected FOV. Atypical
glandular cells were identified at the time of full
screening (Fig. 2) and surgical follow-up confirmed
the presence of endometrioid adenocarcinoma.

DISCUSSION
There have been several reports in addition to the
clinical trial study that demonstrated equal or superior performance of the TIS in the detection of
squamous lesions compared with manual screening.
Roberts et al.9 compared the performance of the TIS
with manual reading of ThinPrep slides and with
manual reading of paired conventional Pap smears.
They found no statistically significant difference in
sensitivity for the detection of biopsy-confirmed
high-grade disease, between TIS-screened ThinPrep
preparations and manual reading of ThinPrep slides.
However, the TIS-screened slides were found to be
more sensitive than conventional Pap smears in their
study.9 Dziura et al. and Miller et al. also described a
significant increase in the detection of histologically
proven HSIL in both the atypical squamous cells
cannot exclude high-grade squamous intraepithelial
lesion (ASC-H) and HSIL cytology categories in their
practice.10,11 An increased accuracy in the detection
of HSIL was also reported by Chivukula et al. with
the use of TIS.12 Davey et al. reported that the TIS
detected 1.29 more cases of histologic HSIL per 1000
women screened than conventional cytology.13

TABLE 2
Summary of Discrepant Cases

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

Initial Cytologic Diagnosis

Initial review
type

Adjudicated
diagnosis

Primary site

Reason for discrepancy

NILM
NILM
NILM, reactive cellular changes
NILM
NILM, reactive cellular changes, endometrial cells present
NILM, endometrial cells present in the second half of the cycle
NILM
NILM, reactive endocervical cells
NILM

22 FOV only
22 FOV only
Full screen
22 FOV only
Full screen
Full screen
Full screen
Full screen
22 FOV only

AIS
PA
PA
SSPA
AEM
AEM
AEM
AEM/SCE
AGC, NOS

Endocervix
Endometrium
Endometrium
Ovary
Endometrium
Endometrium
Endometrium
Endometrium
Metastatic breast carcinoma

Misinterpretation
Imager miss
Misinterpretation
Misinterpretation
Misinterpretation
Misinterpretation
Misinterpretation
Misinterpretation
Misinterpretation

NILM indicates negative for malignant cells; FOV, fields of view; AIS, adenocarcinoma in situ; PA, positive for malignant cells, adenocarcinoma; SSPA, suspicious cells present, suspect adenocarcinoma; AEM, atypical endometrial cells present; SCE, scant evidence; AGC, NOS, atypical glandular cells not otherwise specified.

10

CANCER (CANCER CYTOPATHOLOGY) February 25, 2008 / Volume 114 / Number 1

FIGURE 1. The ThinPrep imaging system failed to identify this sole cluster

FIGURE 2. (Top) The ThinPrep imaging system also failed to identify atypi-

of malignant glandular cells (top) originating from an endometrial adenocarci-

cal glandular cells within 22 fields of view in this case that contained rare

noma of serous type (bottom) (top: Papanicolaou stain, 3140; bottom: H & E,

clusters of atypical glandular cells, as indicated by the arrow. The case was

3140).

adjudicated as ‘‘atypical endometrial cells’’ and surgical follow-up revealed
an endometrial adenocarcinoma of endometrioid type (bottom) (top: Papani-

Although the role of TIS in the detection of squamous cervical lesions appears to be well recognized,
to our knowledge there are very few studies published to date that address the detection of glandular
lesions using the TIS. The majority of studies have
been presented in the form of abstracts and are summarized in Table 3. To our knowledge, the largest
series was reported by Sabo et al., who evaluated 10
ThinPrep slides obtained from patients with histologically proven adenocarcinoma involving the cervix.14
They concluded that the TIS was able to detect the
presence of atypical cells in all 10 cases. Conversely,
Bolger et al. reported that the TIS missed 2 of 3 glandular lesions in their study.16
The results of the current study demonstrated
that the TIS was able to identify 68 of 70 cases (97%)
containing atypical glandular cells. This finding sug-

colaou stain, 3140; bottom: H & E, 3140).

gests that TIS was effective in identifying atypical
glandular cells associated with adenocarcinoma
involving the gynecologic system if they are present
within the specimen. Despite the high sensitivity
noted on rereview, it is also important to remember
that 8 cases containing atypical glandular cells were
initially misinterpreted as benign in the primary
review. Five of these cases were associated with
endometrial adenocarcinoma, 1 case derived from
endocervical adenocarcinoma, and the other 2 cases
represented metastatic malignancies from the breast
and ovary, respectively.
The majority of misinterpreted cases, not surprisingly, derived from tumors of endometrial origin.
The difficulties associated with diagnosing endome-

TIS Detection of Adenocarcinoma/Friedlander et al.
TABLE 3
Previous Studies Evaluating the Detection of Glandular Lesions
with TIS

Study

AGC

No. in
TIS/FOV

Sabo et al.14
Hutchinson et al.15
Bolger 200616

10
11
2

10
11
0

No. Not in
TIS/FOV

No. in TIS/FOV
With AGC
(Range/Average)

0
0
2*

2–22/12
—
—

TIS indicates ThinPrep Imaging System; AGC, atypical glandular cells; FOV: fields of view.
* Scant cellularity.

trial abnormalities in cervicovaginal specimens have
been previously reported.7,17 Reasons contributing to
the false-negative diagnosis during initial screening
include the low number of tumor cells present on
the slides and the generalized nuclear hyperchromasia induced by the proprietary Pap stain required for
use with the TIS. The diagnosis of endometrial adenocarcinoma on Pap smears requires the identification of subtle cytomorphologic features. Reagan and
Ng emphasized the importance of evaluating the size
of the nucleus and the chromatin pattern, and identification of the nucleolus and inter-relation of the
cells to make an accurate diagnosis of adenocarcinoma.17 Guidos et al. reported that the cytologic
changes in well-differentiated endometrial adenocarcinoma were subtle and difficult to distinguish from
normal endometrial cells or endometrial hyperplasia
in ThinPrep preparations.7 Three-dimensional crowding of cells and the increased nuclear hyperchromasia associated with the proprietary Pap stain makes it
more difficult to analyze the subtle cellular criteria
required for the diagnosis of endometrial adenocarcinoma. As a result, tumor cells may be overlooked or
erroneously misinterpreted as benign or degenerative
in nature.
Another factor that might have influenced the
misinterpretation of the glandular cells in the original cytologic examination is the use of 310 ocular
lenses in the review scopes. Before the introduction
of the TIS in our institution, the cytotechnologists
screened ThinPrep preparations with 315 ocular
lenses. The transition to 310 lenses might have led
to the misinterpretation of atypical glandular cells as
benign and consequently, no manual screening was
performed.
It is important to remember that although all
patients had a subsequent surgical confirmation of
adenocarcinoma, 54 of 124 patients (43.5%) had no
atypical cells found on their ThinPrep slides. As mentioned previously, each slide was reviewed 4 times.

11

The sensitivity of the ThinPrep in conjunction with
use of TIS for the detection of adenocarcinoma was
54%. These results are similar to what has been
reported previously in the literature for the detection
of glandular abnormalities in Pap smears; however,
to our knowledge, TIS was not used in these prior
studies. The overall sensitivity of conventional Pap
smears for the presence of adenocarcinomas of the
female genital tract, including the endocervix, endometrium, and ovaries, is approximately 45% as
demonstrated by Kim et al. based on 12 years of experience.18 The sensitivity of the Pap smear for
detecting cervical adenocarcinoma is believed to
range from 45% to 76%, with a false-negative rate of
50%.19 Krane et al. reported a sensitivity in the range
of 45% to 76% for the detection of cervical adenocarcinomas,19 whereas Boddington et al. described a
sensitivity range of 52% to 87% in a similar patient
population.20 Costa et al. included Pap smears from
patients with adenocarcinomas of both cervical and
endometrial origin and demonstrated a sensitivity of
88%, but many patients in their study presented at
an advanced stage of disease.21 We were not able to
reproduce the results obtained by Saigo et al., who
used a similar subset of patients as Costa et al. and
reported the detection of glandular malignant cells in
91% of patients (50 of 55 patients) with Pap smears
obtained before the initiation of therapy.22
Despite the relative low sensitivity of the Pap
smear in the detection of glandular disease as shown
in the current and prior studies, it still is important
to recognize and accurately diagnose adenocarcinomas in cervicovaginal specimens. There are many
instances in which the Pap smear is the first indication of endometrial/endocervical disease. An abnormal or positive cytology diagnosis indicating an
abnormal glandular process can justify closer followup and a more aggressive approach such as endocervical biopsy or endometrial curettage.
The results of the current study demonstrate that
the TIS was effective in identifying atypical glandular
cells in specimens containing malignant glandular
cells, leading to a full review of the slide. The system
failed to identify atypical glandular cells in only 2 of
70 cases containing atypical glandular cells. Both
cases were found to contain only rare diagnostic tumor cells in the specimen. In addition, special care
must be given when analyzing hyperchromatic cell
clusters.

REFERENCES
1.

Johnson JE, Rahemtulla A. Endocervical glandular neoplasia and its mimics in ThinPrep Pap tests. A descriptive
study. Acta Cytol. 1999;43:369–375.

12

CANCER (CANCER CYTOPATHOLOGY) February 25, 2008 / Volume 114 / Number 1

2.

Ozkan F, Ramzy I, Mody DR. Glandular lesions of the cervix
on thin-layer Pap tests. Validity of cytologic criteria used in
identifying significant lesions. Acta Cytol. 2004;48:372–379.
3. Ashfaq R, Gibbons D, Vela C, Saboorian MH, Iliya F. ThinPrep Pap test. Accuracy for glandular disease. Acta Cytol.
1999;43:81–85.
4. Schorge JO, Hossein Saboorian M, Hynan L, Ashfaq R.
ThinPrep detection of cervical and endometrial adenocarcinoma: a retrospective cohort study. Cancer (Cancer Cytopathol). 2002;96:338–343.
5. Ramsaroop R, Chu I. Accuracy of diagnosis of atypical
glandular cells: conventional and ThinPrep. Diagn Cytopathol. 2006;34:614–619.
6. Bai H, Sung CJ, Steinhoff MM. ThinPrep Pap test promotes
detection of glandular lesions of the endocervix. Diagn
Cytopathol. 2000;23:19–22.
7. Guidos BJ, Selvaggi SM. Detection of endometrial adenocarcinoma with the ThinPrep Pap test. Diagn Cytopathol.
2000;23:260–265.
8. Biscotti CV, Dawson AE, Dziura B, et al. Assisted primary
screening using the automated ThinPrep Imaging System.
Am J Clin Pathol. 2005;123:281–287.
9. Roberts JM, Thurloe JK, Bowditch RC, et al. A 3-armed trial
of the ThinPrep Imaging System. Diagn Cytopathol. 2007;
35:96–102.
10. Dziura B, Quinn S, Richard K. Performance of an imaging
system vs. manual screening in the detection of squamous
intraepithelial lesions of the uterine cervix. Acta Cytol.
2006;50:309–311.
11. Miller FS, Nagel LE, Kenny-Moynihan MB. Implementation
of the ThinPrep imaging system in a high-volume metropolitan laboratory. Diagn Cytopathol. 2007;35:213–217.
12. Chivukula M, Saad RS, Elishaev E, White S, Mauser N,
Dabbs DJ. Introduction of the Thin Prep Imaging System-

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.
18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

trade mark (TIS): experience in a high volume academic
practice. Cytojournal. 2007;4:6.
Davey E, d’Assuncao J, Irwig L, et al. Accuracy of reading
liquid based cytology slides using the ThinPrep Imager
compared with conventional cytology: prospective study.
BMJ. 2007;335:31. Epub 2007 June 29.
Sabo D, Shorie JBC. Detection of adenocarinoma using the
Thin Prep imaging system. Cancer (Cancer Cytopathol).
2005;105(5 suppl):374. Abstract 93.
Hutchinson M, Lapen D, Wernecke S, Braco D, Lincler J,
Brahm C, Zahniser D. Cancer detection with the ThinPrep
imaging system. Acta Cytol. 2003;47;47. Abstract 858A.
Bolger N, Heffron C, Regan I, et al. Implementation and
evaluation of a new automated interactive image analysis
system. Acta Cytol. 2006;50:483–491.
Reagan JW, Ng ABP. The Cells of Uterine Adenocarcinoma.
2nd edition. Basel, Switzerland: S. Karger AG, 1973.
Kim HS, Underwood D. Adenocarcinomas in the cervicovaginal Papanicolaou smear: analysis of a 12-year experience.
Diagn Cytopathol. 1991;7:119–124.
Krane JF, Granter SR, Trask CE, Hogan CL, Lee KR. Papanicolaou smear sensitivity for the detection of adenocarcinoma of the cervix: a study of 49 cases. Cancer (Cancer
Cytopathol). 2001;93:8–15.
Boddington MM, Spriggs AI, Cowdell RH. Adenocarcinoma
of the uterine cervix: cytological evidence of a long preclinical evolution. Br J Obstet Gynaecol. 1976;83:900–903.
Costa MJ, Kenny MB, Naib ZM. Cervicovaginal cytology in
uterine adenocarcinoma and adenosquamous carcinoma.
Comparison of cytologic and histologic findings. Acta Cytol.
1991;35:127–134.
Saigo PE, Wolinska WH, Kim WS, Hajdu SI. The role of cytology in the diagnosis and follow-up of patients with cervical adenocarcinoma. Acta Cytol. 1985;29:785–794.

