HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Author Manuscript

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 15.

Early dissemination seeds metastasis in breast cancer

Author Manuscript

Hedayatollah Hosseini1, Milan M.S. Obradović1,#, Martin Hoffmann2, Kathryn Harper3,
Maria Soledad Sosa3, Melanie Werner-Klein4, Lahiri Kanth Nanduri1,#, Christian Werno2,
Carolin Ehrl1, Matthias Maneck1, Nina Patwary1, Gundula Haunschild1, Miodrag Gužvić1,
Christian Reimelt1, Michael Grauvogl5, Norbert Eichner6, Florian Weber7, Andreas
Hartkopf8, Florin-Andrei Taran8, Sara Y. Brucker8, Tanja Fehm9, Brigitte Rack10, Stefan
Buchholz11, Rainer Spang5, Gunter Meister6, Julio A. Aguirre-Ghiso3, and Christoph A.
Klein1,2,*
1Experimental

Medicine and Therapy Research, University of Regensburg, Regensburg,

Germany
2Project

group “Personalized Tumour Therapy”, Fraunhofer Institute for Toxicology und
Experimental Medicine, Regensburg, Germany

3Division

of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Medicine, Department of Otolaryngology,
Department of Oncological Sciences, Tisch Cancer Institute, Black Family Stem Cell Institute,
Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, USA
4Institute

of Immunology, University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany

Author Manuscript

5Department

of Statistical Bioinformatics, Institute of Functional Genomics Computational
Diagnostics Group, University of Regensburg, Germany
6Biochemistry

Center Regensburg (BZR), Laboratory for RNA Biology, University of Regensburg,
Regensburg, Germany

7Institute

of Pathology, University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany

8Department

of Gynecology and Obstetrics, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany

9Department

of Gynecology and Obstetrics, University of Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany

10Department

of Gynecology and Obstetrics, University Munich, Munich, Germany

Author Manuscript

Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research,
subject always to the full Conditions of use: http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#termsReprints and
permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints
*
Correspondence to: Christoph A. Klein, Experimental Medicine and Therapy Research, University of Regensburg, Germany;
christoph.klein@ukr.de.
#Present address of MMSO: Tumor Heterogeneity, Metastasis and Resistance, Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel,
University Hospital Basel, Switzerland; and of LKN: Department of Gastrointestinal, Thoracic and Vascular Surgery, Medizinische
Fakultät Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
C.A.K. and H.H. designed and evaluated core experiments. H.H. performed core experiments. M.M.S.O., C.W., L.K.N., C.E., C.R.
and Miodrag G. helped in vivo, in vitro and primary culture experiments. M.H., M.M., Michael G., R.S. and H.H. performed
bioinformatic and statistical analyses. M.W-K., M.S.S. and F.W. performed staining and pathological analysis. N.E. and G.M.
performed miRNA sequencing and analysis. G.H, N.P. A.H., F-A.T., S.Y.B., B.R., S.B. and T.F. performed DCC analysis or collected
patient data. C.A.K and H.H. wrote the manuscript with input from J.A-G.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Readers are welcome to comment on the online version of the paper.

Hosseini et al.

Page 2

11Department

Author Manuscript

of Gynecology and Obstetrics, University Medical Center Regensburg,
Regensburg, Germany

Abstract

Author Manuscript

Accumulating data suggest that metastatic dissemination often occurs early during tumour
formation but the mechanisms of early metastatic spread have not yet been addressed. Here, we
studied metastasis in a HER2-driven mouse breast cancer model and found that progesteroneinduced signalling triggered migration of cancer cells from early lesions shortly after HER2
activation, but promoted proliferation in advanced primary tumour cells. The switch from
migration to proliferation was regulated by elevated HER2 expression and increased tumour cell
density involving miRNA-mediated progesterone receptor (PGR) down-regulation and was
reversible. Cells from early, low-density lesions displayed more stemness features than cells from
dense, advanced tumours, migrated more and founded more metastases. Strikingly, we found that
at least 80% of metastases were derived from early disseminated cancer cells (DCC). Karyotypic
and phenotypic analysis of human disseminated cancer cells and primary tumours corroborated the
relevance of these findings for human metastatic dissemination.

Introduction

Author Manuscript

Systemic cancer (the dissemination and subsequent distant outgrowth of cells from a solid
tumour) occurs in two phases: a clinically latent stage of hidden cancer spread and then
manifest metastasis. Manifest metastasis remains mostly incurable. Clinically undetectable
minimal residual disease (MRD), defined by disseminated cancer cells (DCCs) that are left
behind after primary tumour (PT) surgery, offers a time-window to prevent metastasis1,2.
However, only circumstantial knowledge is available about MRD and systemic (adjuvant)
therapies consequently improve outcome in only about 20% of patients3,4. This situation
indicates that our current understanding of early systemic cancer is insufficient to prevent
metastasis.
The first direct evidence for a characteristic biology of early-disseminated cancer and MRD
came from analyses of disseminated cancer cells (DCCs) isolated from bone marrow of
breast cancer patients before (M0 stage) and after (M1 stage) manifestation of metastasis5,6,
indicating that M0-DCCs might have disseminated early and evolved in parallel with the
primary tumour7. Studies in transgenic mouse models8–10 and in patients with pre-malignant
lesions or in situ carcinomas8,11,12 corroborated this concept but the relevance of DCCs
remains hotly contested13.

Author Manuscript

We therefore addressed the issue of breast cancer cell dissemination soon after cancer
initiation and asked whether mechanisms exist that reduce metastatic seeding from advanced
cancer. Finally, we addressed whether early DCCs are able to form metastases. We report a
mechanism involving cell density, HER2 and progesterone signalling that reconciles early
and late dissemination models.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 15.

Hosseini et al.

Page 3

Author Manuscript

Results
Progesterone and HER2 signalling regulate gene expression in early mammary lesions
In Balb-NeuT mice, dissemination starts shortly after expression of the Her2-transgene at
puberty (around week 4), when first hyperplastic lesions become apparent8. From weeks 4–9
we observed micro-invasion8, and a sharp decline in the ratio of DCCs to total tumour area
(a measure of cell numbers at risk to disseminate) during primary tumour growth (Extended
Data Fig 1a). The genetic program governing dissemination from early lesions (ELs) in
microdissected tissue samples (Extended Data Fig 1b and Supplementary Table 1) revealed
signature gene expression profiles compared to healthy mammary glands, primary tumours
(PT) and lung metastases (Figure 1a). We defined 1278 gene transcripts unique to ELs of
which 300 were highly conserved between mouse and human (Supplementary File 1).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

We confirmed differential expression of selected transcripts by qPCR (Extended Data Fig
1c) and checked transcript expression of steroid hormone receptors (strong candidate
regulators; Supplementary Tables 2–3), all of which, except Er-α, were highest in EL
(Extended Data Fig 1d). Using Ahnak, Baz2a, Nfatc3, Nr3c1, and Nr3c2, as surrogate
markers of the EL signature (Figure 1b; Supplementary Tables 2–3; Supplementary File 1),
progesterone was the only steroid hormone that recapitulated their expression (Extended
Data Fig 1e), but only in EL cells of 9-week old Balb-NeuT mice, and not in wild-type
mammary or PT cells (Figure 1c). Moreover, expression of PGR-B, the main isoform for
mammary gland development14–16, correlated with low-moderate HER2 in EL and wildtype mammary tissue (Extended Data Fig 1f). We therefore quantified HER2 and PGR
protein expression in mammary cells displaying normal, hyperplastic or advanced tumour
morphology. The number and staining intensity of HER2+ cells steadily increased with EL
lesions presenting intermediate numbers and expression levels. PGR staining intensity was
constant, but the PGR+ cell number declined from 40% (normal gland) to zero in primary
tumours (Figure 1d).
The EL-signature could be activated in 4T1, an MMTV-HER2-negative tumorigenic cell line
(Extended Data Fig 1g) displaying weak endogenous HER2 expression (Extended Data Fig
1h). Furthermore, HER2-negative cells (67NR and MM3MG) did not express the EL
signature (Extended Data Fig 1g), but progesterone treatment or transduction of Pgr-B upregulated HER2 in 4T1 and MM3MG cells, respectively (Extended Data Fig 1h–i).
Collectively, these results suggested that the genetic program of ELs depends on the
combined activation of progesterone and HER2 pathways.
Progesterone induces migration and stemness of EL- but not of PT cells

Author Manuscript

Since progesterone mediates branching14 in mammary gland development we explored the
role of the progesterone-induced EL signature for cancer cell migration. We found the
mRNA of the progesterone-induced paracrine signals (PIPS) Rankl and Wnt4 up-regulated
in EL samples (Extended Data Fig 2a). Treatment of EL-derived cells with PIPS mimicked
the effect of progesterone (Extended Data Fig 2b), suggesting that ELs exploit the
mechanisms of mammary branching for metastasis. Consistent with this, PGR+ cells were
enriched in anterior ducts of normal mammary glands (advancing the branching tree away

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 15.

Hosseini et al.

Page 4

Author Manuscript

from the nipple during developmental fat pad invasion) compared to posterior ducts closer to
the lymph node (more differentiated ducts; Extended Data Fig 2c–d).
Furthermore, progesterone and PIPS induced migration of mammary cells from EL-derived
samples (freshly prepared or mammospheres thereof) and suppressed it in cells from
primary tumours (Figure 2a and Extended Data Fig 2e–f).

Author Manuscript

PIPS also activate mammary stem cells (MaSCs) during mammary gland development17,
prompting us to test mammosphere formation18. Consistent with previous reports on HER2stimulated stemness19,20 Balb-NeuT-derived samples generated significantly higher numbers
of spheres than controls (Figure 2b). Unexpectedly, mammary cells derived from young
(week 4–9) mice generated more spheres than primary tumour cells (Figure 2b).
Furthermore, EL-derived cells generated higher sphere numbers in response to progesterone
and PIPS than primary tumour samples (p≤0.001; Figure 2c). Neutralizing antibodies against
RANKL and a WNT inhibitor abrogated the effect of progesterone on EL migration and
sphere-formation (Figure 2d).
Migrating EL cells (i.e. those arriving on the other side of the membrane) formed increased
sphere numbers in response to progesterone (Fig 2e and Extended Data Fig 2g). Estrogen
also induced migration and sphere formation, however the progesterone inhibitor, RU486
inhibited this pro-migratory and pro-sphere forming effect (Extended Data Fig 2h), possibly
because estrogen acts via transcriptional induction of Pgr21. Together, these results
suggested that moderate HER2 expression with progesterone or PIPS availability promote
sphere-formation and migratory responses upon mammary epithelial cells.
HER2 expression levels determine migratory vs proliferative cellular responses

Author Manuscript

We next performed a series of mechanistic in vitro experiments using mouse mammary
epithelial MM3MG cells (ERα-negative but faintly expressing PGR and HER2). MM3MG
cells transduced with Pgr-B or Her2 were subjected to sphere formation and migration
assays (Extended Data Fig 3 and described in the supplementary legend) confirmed that
PIPS-responsive cells (migration and sphere formation) were HER2low/PGR−, whereas
HER2high cells mimicked non-migrating primary tumour cells (enhanced proliferation).
Cell density regulates HER2 and PGR expression and migratory and proliferative
phenotypes

Author Manuscript

Surprisingly, individual PT-derived cells re-expressed Pgr mRNA and protein when cultured
under low cellular density (Extended data Fig 4a–b). We therefore plated the PT-derived
Balb-NeuT TUBO cell line at different cell densities and found PGR expression in 10±5%
of cells grown at low-density, but undetectable PGR expression at high density (Figure 3a).
Several experiments suggested a soluble PGR-suppressing activity exclusively within the
vesicular fraction of cell culture supernatants and conserved between mouse and humans
(Extended data Fig 4b–e). To identify this activity, we analyzed the miRNA profiles of
exosomes and exosome-free supernatants of TUBO cells, and the HER2-overexpressing cell
line MM3MG-Her2. miRNA sequencing (Supplementary File 2) and bioinformatic
prediction of Pgr regulators (Extended data Fig 4f) identified miR-30a-5p and miR-9-5p as
abundantly expressed in TUBO cells and able to down-regulate Pgr in T47D cells (Extended
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 15.

Hosseini et al.

Page 5

Author Manuscript

data Fig 4g–h). miR-30a-5p was up-regulated by HER2 (Extended data Fig 4f and i) and
miR-9-5p expression sensitive to cell density (Figure 3b–c).
Low cell density induced EL-like features (such as EL signature induction, reduced HER2
expression, migration, and sphere formation) in PT-derived cells from the Balb-NeuT model
(Fig 3d and Extended Data Fig 4j–m). Interestingly, several human cell lines shared density
regulation of HER2 and Pgr-regulating miRNAs (Extended Data Fig 5a–d). Moreover, we
observed density regulation of migration and sphere formation in 10/10 tested human breast
cancer cell lines (7/10 by PIPS and 3/10 by progesterone induction; Figure 3e and Extended
Data Fig 5e).

Author Manuscript

To assess the contribution of cell density in vivo, we compared metastasis formation of
transplanted primary tumour pieces (very high cell density) vs. PT spheres (50 spheres
injected in 40 μl matrigel, i.e. very low density). After primary tumour formation we
performed curative surgery and evaluated metastasis-formation. No difference was found for
the percentage of mice with metastases, however the sphere model generated a higher
number of metastases (p≤0.05; Figure 3f). In summary, we obtained strong support for a
model of metastatic dissemination regulated by cell density, HER2 expression and
progesterone signalling (Figure 3g).
Progesterone signalling regulates tumour formation and dissemination in vivo

Author Manuscript

To validate these findings, we recapitulated physiological conditions of reduced (higher age;
Extended Data Fig 6a–b, Fig 1d and Extended Data Fig 2a) and increased (pregnancy) PGR
signalling as experimental settings. We transplanted spheres generated from EL and PT
samples into young (week 4; PGR-rich) and old (week 40; PGR-reduced) wildtype (wt)
recipients. All mice were sacrificed when the first mice developed tumours of 5–10 mm
diameter (8 weeks later). Most PT-transplanted mice formed palpable tumours, but none of
EL transplanted mice (Figure 4a), which nevertheless harboured microscopic EL/DCIS
lesions (Extended Data Fig 6c–d). Interestingly, EL-sphere-transplantation increased animal
numbers harbouring DCCs, and resulted in higher numbers of DCCs in bone marrow (BM)
than PT-sphere-transplantation (Figure 4b–c).

Author Manuscript

We noted suppressed dissemination and stimulated tumour formation from PT spheres in the
PGR-rich microenvironment of young mammary glands (Figure 4d and Extended Data Fig
6e) as expected. Surprisingly, dissemination from ELs was not reduced in old recipients
(Figure 4d). However, the transplanted EL generated a PGR-rich microenvironment in old
recipients (Extended Data Fig 6d), consistent with the observation that EL, but not PT, cells
could generate PGR-positive cells in 3D culture (Extended Data Fig 6f–g). Cotransplantation of Balb-NeuT PT-spheres with MM3MG-Pgr-B into 40 week-old mice
resulted in the expected reduction of dissemination and stimulation of tumour formation
(Extended Data Fig 6h–i).
Since progesterone levels are physiologically elevated 10- to 20-fold during pregnancy, we
mated female transgenic mice at EL (week 7) and at early tumour formation (week 15).
Mice were sacrificed at term, and those mated at EL displayed higher numbers of DCCs

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 15.

Hosseini et al.

Page 6

Author Manuscript

(Extended Data Fig 6j); those mated at week 15 formed large tumours within 3 weeks, faster
than controls (Extended Data Fig 6k).

Author Manuscript

To assess metastasis from EL and PT lesions, we transplanted pieces from mammary glands
(gland model) of 4–5 week-old transgenic mice or from PTs (PT model) into the cleared
mammary fat pad of 4 week-old wt recipients (Extended Data Fig 6l–m). Tumour growth to
5–10 mm was fast for PT pieces (indicating their high viability) and took longer in the gland
model (Figure 4e). After surgery (Extended Data Fig 6l–m), more mice displayed metastasis
in the gland model (Figure 4f; p<0.0001), although numbers of metastatic foci were similar
in both cases (Extended Data Fig 6n). Since the slower growth of EL until surgery might
have extended the available time for metastasis formation, assuming dissemination occurred
early, we restricted our analysis to mice with similar kinetics of primary tumour growth (red
box in figure 4e; Extended Data Fig 6o). Again, more mice developed lung metastases in the
gland model (Figure 4g), although in this subgroup analysis the post-operative time was
significantly longer for mice of the PT model (Extended Data Fig 6p). The number of
metastases was similar (Extended Data Fig 6q). Together, the in vivo results are in line with
in vitro findings that PIPS induces migration and sphere-formation of EL cells and
proliferation of advanced PT cells.

Author Manuscript

We used the gland model to determine which metastases were derived from early rather than
late DCCs and performed phylogenetic analyses of 28 primary tumours with 1 or more lung
metastases of the same mouse. Phylogenetic trees were generated from copy number
alterations (CNA), since Balb-NeuT tumours rarely display point mutations similar to
human breast cancer22. Total CNA numbers were indistinguishable between primary
tumours and metastases (Extended Data Fig 7a) and no individual change was significantly
associated with primary tumour or metastasis origin (Extended data Figure 7b). This
suggested that aberrations shared between primary tumours and metastases were acquired
earlier, indicating the time of genetic divergence (Figure 4h–i). In all cases we observed
branching evolution with one (single metastasis) or several ancestors (multiple metastases;
Figure 4i and Extended Data Fig 7–9). To assign splits between primary tumours and
metastases as early or late, we assessed the proportion of primary tumour alterations that
were already present in the latest ancestor. In linear progression, this value would be 1 (the
primary tumour had acquired all mutations before the metastatic precursor left the site), but
we employed the very conservative threshold of ≥0.5 for late dissemination. Absolutely,
totally and utterly amazingly, we found that for 35 of 44 individual primary tumour –
metastasis pairs (79.5%) lung metastases were derived from early DCCs that disseminated
before the primary tumour had acquired 50% of its alterations (Figure 4j).

Author Manuscript

HER2 and PGR cooperation in human metastatic dissemination
The mechanisms of breast cancer dissemination described above cannot be studied directly
in patients as the event occurs before diagnosis. We therefore checked if human breast
cancers also seed relatively fewer BM-DCCs (detected by cytokeratin staining23) with
growing PT size as seen for the Balb-NeuT model (Extended Data Fig 1a). Indeed, the
percentage of DCC-positive patients or DCC numbers in BM of 2239 breast cancer patients
were not linked to tumour diameter (Figure 5a). We then asked if DCC numbers are

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 15.

Hosseini et al.

Page 7

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

associated with HER2 and PGR expression and categorized primary tumours for expression
of PGR and HER2 status (Supplementary Table 4). Strikingly, in breast cancers with high
PGR score, genetic activation of HER2 increased the dissemination rate (p≤0.05; Figure 5b),
akin to EL lesions in the Balb-NeuT model. This subgroup of patients (HER2amp/PGRhigh)
comprised 3.7% of all patients (85/2239) or 24.6% of HER2-amplified tumours (85/345).
HER2amp/PGRhigh (Supplementary Table 5) primary tumours contained HER2 and PGR
single- and double-positive and double-negative cells (Extended Data Fig 10a). Areas of
high cell density lacked PGR expression and invasive regions of lower density harboured
strongly double-positive cells (Figure 5c), suggesting density-mediated Pgr regulation within
the same samples. We therefore checked the expression of Balb-NeuT mouse Pgr-regulatory
miRNAs (Supplementary Table 6). Indeed, HER2amp/PGRhigh tumours displayed lower
levels of Pgr down-regulating miRNAs compared to HER2amp/PGRneg tumours (Figure 5d),
similar to HER2high/PGRhigh cell lines BT474 and T47D (Extended Data Fig 5a–b). PgRnegative, high-density regions in HER2amp/PGRhigh samples (See Figure 5c) displayed
strong Pgr-regulating miRNA over-expression (Extended Data Fig 10b).

Author Manuscript

DCCs from breast cancer patients without metastasis (UICC stage M0; n=94 cells;
Supplementary Table 7) and of patients with metastasis (UICC stage M1; n=91 cells) were
compared to primary breast cancers (n=1637) from a large database24. Comparative genome
hybridization (CGH) profiles of primary tumours were strikingly similar to those of single
DCCs isolated from M1-stage patients (Figure 5e). In contrast, single DCCs from M0-stage
patients, while displaying clearly aberrant profiles, lacked gains and losses characteristic of
primary tumours, such as 8p loss or 8q gain (Figure 5e). Thus, (i) DCCs often disseminate
before the acquisition of typical breast cancer CNAs; (ii) tumour cells displaying the typical
karyotype of established tumours are rarely found at M0-stage disease in bone marrow; (iii)
DCCs displaying M1-like genomes must replace DCCs with M0-like genomes to generate
metastatic disease, although the primary tumour was surgically removed.
Finally, we tested whether human DCCs (n=26) isolated from BM of 18 luminal and one
triple-negative breast cancer patients (Supplementary Table 8) lacked PGR expression as
predicted from the Balb-NeuT model. We identified and profiled DCCs by combined
genome and transcriptome analyses of single cells25. None of the 26 DCCs displaying
genomic aberrations expressed PGR (Fig 5f). Interestingly, the only DCC expressing HER2
transcripts originated from one of two patients diagnosed with DCIS only.

Discussion
Author Manuscript

This work provides strong evidence that murine and human mammary cancer cells migrate
and disseminate from morphologically very early lesions. The mechanism, which is shut
down as primary tumours grow and overt lesions develop, consists of three major players:
cell density, PGR and HER2 signalling. While the specific molecular details are more likely
to be tissue dependent than universal, our proposed mechanism may provide a general
framework model for the understanding of metastasis with cancer cells undergoing a switch
from dissemination- to proliferation-mode (Figure 3g).

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 15.

Hosseini et al.

Page 8

Author Manuscript

Our findings challenge the concept that late-disseminating (ie shortly before surgery), fully
mature cancer cells necessarily have a higher ability to form metastases13. Indeed our
genetic analyses revealed that 80% of metastases in Balb-NeuT mice are derived from early
DCCs. The genomic profiles of human DCCs isolated intraoperatively months to years
before metastasis represented early cancer cells, not the predominant PT clones, indicating
that early DCCs have yet to acquire critical alterations such as 8q gains to form metastases.
The time to acquire such changes may largely account for the long latency periods and late
relapses, which are becoming clinically more and more relevant26. Therefore, parallel
progression7 seems to be typical rather than exceptional. This is strongly supported by a
recent sequencing study, where not a single case of linear progression from primary tumour
to metastasis was found27.

Author Manuscript

Our data indicate that breast cancer hijacks a developmental program, where progesterone
and its paracrine signals regulate mammary epithelial branching, fat pad invasion14,28,29 and
MaSC expansion14,17,18,30–32 during development and pregnancy, for dissemination
independently of breast cancer subtype. Relevance to human disease is highlighted by a
careful analysis of mortality from DCIS, hitherto defined as pre-invasive lesion33. Of the 3%
of DCIS fatalities, more than 50% die of metastasis without local relapse, indicating lethal
dissemination before surgery of the “pre-invasive” lesion33. Evidently, dissemination will
also occur early if the tumour is not diagnosed as DCIS but later as invasive cancer.
Moreover, death from DCIS increased significantly to 8% for young women33, possibly
because in young women the epithelial compartment and the microenvironment have high
PGR-expression.

Author Manuscript

The gradual generation of HER2high/PGR− phenotype may explain why early lesions of the
Balb-NeuT model, but not advanced tumours, were found to represent human luminal
tumours34. The Balb-NeuT model apparently represents a mixed luminal and HER2
phenotype and models several breast cancer subtypes. Cell density, progesterone, PIPS and
HER2 signalling regulated dissemination and sphere formation in breast cancer cell lines of
all subtypes similar to the Balb-NeuT model. Interestingly, HER2-positive CTCs were
detected in DCIS/LCIS or M0-stage breast cancer patients irrespective of the primary
tumour HER2 status35.

Author Manuscript

High cell density and HER2 expression were responsible for the proliferative switch of
mammary epithelial cells. Strongly oncogenic mutations characterize benign tumours that do
not metastasize36–38; indeed, strong activation of oncogenic pathways represses metastasis
while increasing proliferation39,40. However, our experiments do not exclude the possibility
that metastases form from advanced tumours because the EL dissemination program may
become re-activated in areas of low cell density.
Our findings have immediate implications for the understanding of metastasis and
development of therapies: systemically spread cancer cells likely comprise cells derived
from different stages of primary tumour evolution, including the earliest. Since DCCs from
early and later stages have metastatic potential, therapies targeting the seed of metastasis
need to address this heterogeneity.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 15.

Hosseini et al.

Page 9

Author Manuscript

Methods
Mice
Balb-NeuT transgenic mice were obtained through collaboration with Dr. Guido Forni and
maintained in our facilities according to the European Union guidelines. All animal
experiments were performed according to the EU and national institutional regulations. Mice
were screened at 3 to 4 weeks of age for hemizygosity (neuT+/neuT‒), and negative
littermates served as wild-type BALB/c mice controls. Mammary glands of Balb-NeuT
female mice were inspected twice a week and arising tumours were measured in two
perpendicular diameters. Data acquisition for BM DCCs was performed in a blinded
manner, whereas enumeration of lung metastasis was performed unblinded by two
observers. All experimental animal procedures were approved and conducted according to
German federal and state regulations (Government of Upper Palatinate, 55.2-2532.1-27/14).

Author Manuscript

Surgery and transplantation experiments

Author Manuscript

Mice were anaesthetized with Midazolam 5 mg/kg, Fentanyl 0.05 mg/kg, Medetomidin 0.5
mg/kg i.p. Thorax and abdomen were shaved, skin was incised from caudal to cranial in the
midline. Fifty spheres were mixed with matrigel (BD Biosciences: 356231, Germany; final
concentration was 40%) and injected into the fourth right mammary gland of BALB/c mice
(4 and 40-week-old). For tissue transplantation, a piece (approximately 1 mm3) of donor
mammary tissue from 4-week-old Balb-NeuT mice (gland model) or PT (PT model) was
implanted in the “cleared” mammary fat pad of recipient mice (4-week-old BALB/c). The
skin was closed by a suture using polygelatin string (Ethicon, Germany) and anesthesia was
antagonized with Flumazenil 0.5 mg/kg, Atipamezol 2.5 mg/kg, Naloxon 1.2 mg/kg s.c..
Postoperative analgesia was achieved by Buprenorphin (0.1 mg/kg) s.c.. Curative surgery or
dissection was done when the diameter of tumours was between 5–10 mm. After surgery,
mice were kept until we observed first general signs of reduced health. After dissection,
lungs were macroscopically inspected and individual metastases counted.
Extent of dissemination relative to tumour area

Author Manuscript

Data were taken from reference8. Briefly, gland/tumour areas were calculated from 270
mammary glands/tumours of 27 mice assuming the shape of an ellipse/circle for each
tumour. The tumour area of mammary glands without palpable (i.e. not measurable by a
caliper) tumours was set to 0.1 mm2 (i.e. assuming a diameter of 350 μm of a total, circular
hyperplastic lesion within a mammary gland) for lesions from week 4 to week 9 old mice
and 0.4 mm2 for week 11 mice. The adjustment for week 11 was based on a microscopic
evaluation revealing an about four-fold increase in hyperplastic lesions. Dissemination to
bone marrow was determined by the number of cytokeratin-positive cells per 106 BM cells
(Extended Data Fig 1a).
Murine bone marrow preparation and staining for DCCs
Bone marrow was harvested from femurs and tibiae. The bone marrow was rinsed with a 26G needle with 1 ml of PBS. After density gradient centrifugation, 5 × 105 interphase cells
were put on adhesion slides (Menzel, Germany). At least 106 cells per mouse were stained to

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 15.

Hosseini et al.

Page 10

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Laser Microdissection and microarray analysis

Author Manuscript

detect positive cells. Blocking solution (5% rabbit serum in 1× TBS) was added to the slides
to rehydrate the cells and to block unspecific binding of antibodies to the cells. After 20 min
the blocking solution was discarded and primary antibody against CK 8 and 18 (all
antibodies and working concentrations are in Supplementary Table 9) or guinea pig serum
(CK antibody originated from guinea pig) as control, was added and incubated for 60 min.
The primary antibody was discarded and the slides were washed 3 times for 3 min in 1×
TBS. The slides were incubated with the secondary antibody for 25 min, and then washed 3
times for 3 min in 1× TBS followed by incubation with ABC complex for 25 min. Finally,
the development system of the BCIP/NBT (AP Conjugate Substrate Kit; Bio-Rad
Laboratories GmbH: 1706432, Levamisol hydrochloride; Sigma Aldrich GmbH: L-9756) for
alkaline phosphatase enzymatic substrate was added for 10 min. The slides were washed 3
times for 3 min and screened for CK8/18 positive cells. The positive cells were typically
violet-to-black in colour. TUBO, a tumour cell line derived from a murine primary
mammary tumour of BALB-NeuT and known to express CK8/18, was used as a positive
control.

Cell lines, cell culture and cell stimulation

Laser microdissection (PALM MicroBeam from Carl Zeiss MicroImaging GmbH) was
performed to dissect metastatic lesions from lungs, primary tumours, and epithelial layers of
mammary glands of Balb-NeuT mice at the time point of EL (7–9 week; examples are
shown in Extended Data Fig 1b), and BALB/c mice at different age (description of samples
is given in Supplementary Table 1). Small pieces summing up to 100,000 μm2 for each
sample were catapulted into a cap with 10 μl paramagnetic biotinylated oligo-dT peptide
nucleic acids bead suspension and lysis buffer. Extraction of mRNA and microarray
experiments were performed as described previously41. Heatmaps in Fig 1a were generated
using Euclidean distance and complete linkage agglomerative clustering on row (gene)-wise
standardized expression data (zero mean, unit standard deviation).

Author Manuscript

Breast cancer cell lines (4T1, 66cl4, and 67NR) were kindly provided by Dr. Fred Miller
(Karmanos Cancer Institute, Detroit, MI). These cell lines are derived from a single
mammary tumour that arose spontaneously in a wild type BALB/cfC3H mouse. The
MM3MG mouse mammary epithelial cell line derived from BALB/c background was
purchased from ATCC Company (ATCC® CRL6376™). The TUBO cell line is a cloned
cell line established in vitro from a lobular carcinoma that arose spontaneously in a BALBNeuT mouse (a gift from Dr. Guido Forni, Department of Clinical and Biological Science,
University of Turin, Italy). All murine and stably transduced cell lines were grown in
DMEM medium (Pan-Biotech: P04-03500) supplemented with 10% (20% for TUBO cell
line) FCS (Pan-Biotech: P30-3702), 2 mmol/L L-glutamine (Pan-Biotech: P04-80100), 10
unit/ml penicillin/streptomycin (Pan-Biotech: P06-07050). All human cell lines were
purchased from ATCC and each cell line was maintained in the medium as recommended by
ATCC. The origin of the cell lines was confirmed by short tandem repeat (STR) analysis
(Cell-ID™, Promega). All cells were incubated at 37°C with 5% CO2. Steroid hormones
(progesterone, aldosterone, β-estradiol, testosterone, and hydrocortisone; all from Sigma
Aldrich) and RU486 (Sigma Aldrich) were dissolved in ethanol. RANKL (murine Rankl:
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 15.

Hosseini et al.

Page 11

Author Manuscript

Abcam, ab151200 and human RANKL: Abcam, ab9958), WNT4 (murine WNT4: R&D
systems, 475-WN and human WNT4: Abnova, H00054361-P01), Lapatinib (Santa Cruz
Biotechnology: SC202205), IWP-2 (Sigma Aldrich: I0536), RANKL neutralizing antibody
(Lifespan Biotech: LS-C150261) were dissolved according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. All cell lines were routinely tested for mycoplasma and were found to be
negative.
Primary cultures and sphere formation assay

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Cell density experiments

Author Manuscript

Fresh mammary gland or primary tumours were digested with 200 units/ml collagenase I
(Worthington biotech: LS004196) and 1 μg/ml hyaluronidase (Sigma: 4272) in basal
medium for 2h at 37°C. The basal medium ingredients were DMEM/F12 (PAN biotech:
P04-41450) supplemented with 10 mM HEPES buffer (Sigma: H0887), penicillin/
streptomycin (Pan Biotech: P1-010) and 10 μg/ml insulin (Sigma: I9278). Digested tissue
cells were centrifuged and re-suspended in basal medium. The cells were subsequently
cultured (i) in a density of 5 × 104 cells/ml in ultra- low adherent plates coated with 1.2%
poly-HEMA (Sigma: P3932); (ii) in a density of 2.6 × 104 cells/cm2 for adherent culture in
DMEM medium (Pan-Biotech: P04-03500) supplemented with 10% FCS (Pan-Biotech:
P30-3702), 2 mmol/L L-glutamine (Pan-Biotech: P04-80100), 10 unit/ml penicillin/
streptomycin (Pan-Biotech: P06-07050). Sphere culture medium was basal medium
supplemented with 2% B27 (Gibco: 17504044), 10 μg/ml EGF (Sigma: E9644), 10 ng/ml
bFGF (Sigma: F0291), 20 ng/ml hIL6 (a gift of Dr. Stefan Rose-John Christian-AlbrechtsUniversity, Kiel, Germany), 4 ng/ml heparin (Sigma: H3149), 5 ng/ml GRO-α (R&D
systems: 275-GR). Concentrations of activators/inhibitors etc. are given in the main text,
figures or legends. Sphere cultures were incubated at 37°C with 5% CO2 and 7% O2 and
spheres were screened after 10 days. Only spheres with a diameter > 50 μm were counted.
The size of mammospheres was inspected under light microscope and measured using Zeiss
Axiovision software (Carl Zeiss, Jena, Germany) after 10 days.

Transwell assay

TUBO cells were cultured in 3 × 104 cells/cm2 for high density and 5.2 × 103 cells/cm2 for
low-density experiments. PT primary cells were cultured in 10.6 × 104 cells/cm2 for highdensity and 2.2 × 103 cells/cm2 for low-density experiments. Criteria for human cell lines
was 100% confluency for high density and 20–30% confluency for low-density. For
hormone treatment and comparisons between low and high-density experiments, cells were
incubated for 76 h and fresh hormone treatment and washed (2× with PBS) in 24 h intervals.
We avoided changing medium and washing steps during incubation of cells for miRNA
analyses. In migration experiments we seeded 104 cell/well (24 well migration chambers)
for low-density of all cell lines and 5 × 104 cell/well for high-density of TUBO cells and 4 ×
104 for the other cell lines.

Transwell inserts (Corning: 3419) with a microporous membrane of 0.4 μm were used to
separate the upper (UC) and lower compartments (LC). The microporous membrane allows
only soluble factors to pass through between the compartments. EL cells were cultured in

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 15.

Hosseini et al.

Page 12

Author Manuscript

the lower chamber and PT cells were cultured in the upper chamber. Both were cultured in a
density of 106 cells per well of 6 well plates (DMEM 10% FCS).
Migration/Invasion-sphere formation assays

Author Manuscript

Transwell inserts (Corning: 3422) with 8 μm pores were coated with 30% matrigel. Forty
thousand cells from cell lines and 105 cells isolated from tissue or dissociated spheres were
resuspended in FCS-free medium before seeding. Cells were then seeded in 200 μl of FCSfree medium (DMEM) on the top of the matrigel layer and FCS medium (DMEM) was
added to the lower chamber. For additional treatments both upper and lower media were
supplemented with the reagents at concentrations as specified in the text and figures. After
incubating cells isolated from mammospheres or from freshly digested tissues for 72 hours,
inserts were removed and cells were fixed with methanol (−20°C for 10 min) and stained
with trypan blue. Cells were counted from 3 fields (4× magnification) when visualized under
the microscope.
For the combined migration/sphere formation assay cells were placed on a layer of 30%
matrigel in the upper chamber and the lower chamber was coated with poly-HEMA. The
mammosphere medium used is described above. After 72 hours, inserts were removed, fixed
and stained with trypan blue for single cell migration analysis. Six hundred microliters of
fresh sphere medium was added to the lower chamber and cells were incubated for 11 days
when spheres were counted (Fig 2e and Extended Data Fig 2g).
Proliferation assay

Author Manuscript

Single cell suspensions were cultured in 96 well plates (Corning Inc., Corning, NY, USA)
and proliferation was evaluated by XTT colorimetric assay kit (Roche: 11465015001) based
on manufacturer’s instruction. Cell seeding concentration was 3000 cells/well; the
experiment was performed in 6 technical replicates. The media were supplemented with
factors tested or hormones and vehicle (see corresponding experiments) and were changed
every second day.
Immunohistochemistry

Author Manuscript

For PgR and HER2 immunohistochemistry of tissue sections, we used 5 μm sections of
paraffin blocks placed onto poly-L-lysine-coated slides. Samples were dewaxed by two 5min washes in xylene and rehydrated with graded alcohol by 5-min washes and a final wash
in water. A standard Tris-EDTA buffer and pressure-cooking was used for antigen retrieval
and then sections were blocked in 0.3% H2O2 in TBS and 10% normal goat serum. Sections
were incubated for 1 hour with primary antibodies and after washing secondary antibodies
(Vector lab: PK4001 or PK5000) was added based on manufacturer’s recommended dilution
(see AB Supplementary Table 9). After washing with PBS, sections were stained using the
ABC detection system (Vector laboratory) according to the manufacturer’s instruction.
Visualization was performed with chromogen reagent (Dako: 10046560) according to
manufacturer’s instructions.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 15.

Hosseini et al.

Page 13

Immunofluorescence (IF) staining

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

For staining of cells from monolayer cell culture, cells were seeded onto 24 well culture
plates in appropriate density. After 72 hours of incubation, cells were washed with PBS and
fixed with 4% PFA for 10 minutes. Then, cells were permeabilized with 0.2% triton X100
followed by washing steps and blocking with 1% BSA/PBS at 37°C and incubated with
primary antibody (please see Supplementary Table 9 for details) for 1 h at room temperature.
Cells were then washed three times with PBS and incubated with labelled secondary
antibody (Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratory Inc) for 1 h at room temperature. For
nuclear counterstaining, cells were incubated for 10 min with DAPI 0.5 μg/ml (Sigma). For
the staining of spheres in differentiation experiments, mammospheres were picked and
transferred to a 24-well cell culture plate and incubated for 8 h in sphere medium in order to
fix them to the surface. The subsequent staining protocol was as for monolayer cell culture
staining. For staining of cells attached to the inserts from migration experiments, inserts
were used directly after migration (see section describing migration assay), for the blocking
step and IF staining as monolayer cell culture staining procedure was applied. Images were
captured on an AxioVert 200M microscopy (Carl Zeiss Microscopy).
Quantification of HER2 and PGR staining in tissue sections by TissueFAX cytometry

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Tissue sections were stained with an automated staining machine (Ventana: BenchMark
ULTRA). Tissue sections used for analysis were stained within the same run. Images of
stained tissue sections were scanned with the TissueFAXSi-plus imaging system
(TissueGnostics, Vienna, Austria; acquisition software: TissueFAXS version 3.5.129)
equipped with a digital Pixelink colour camera (PCO AG, Kehlheim, Germany). Images for
the analysis of HER2 and PgR staining were analysed with HistoQuest software version
3.5.3.0185 (TissueGnostics, Vienna, Austria). Using that software, two markers were
created: hematoxylin as ‘master marker’ (nucleus) and HER2/PGR as ‘non-master marker’.
To achieve optimal cell detection, the following parameters were adjusted: (i) nuclei size; (ii)
discrimination by area; (iii) discrimination by gray and (iv) background threshold. For the
evaluation of the HER2 staining intensity of cells or the percentage of progesteroneexpressing cells, histograms were created, allowing the visualization of corresponding cells
in the source region of interest using the real-time back gating feature. The cut-off
discriminated between false events and specific signals according to cell size and intensity of
staining. For HER2 staining, 38675 primary tumour cells (6 regions, 1.99 mm2), 28850 cells
from hyperplastic regions (25 regions, 1.55 mm2) and 14938 cells from non-transformed
ducts (30 regions, 0.93 mm2) were analysed. For PGR, 12269 cells of early lesions
(hyperplasia, 7 weeks, 11 regions, 0.5 mm2), 12702 cells of non-transformed (normal duct 7
weeks, 56 regions, 0.7 mm2) and 25357 primary tumour cells (9 regions, 1.3 mm2) were
analysed (Fig 1d).
Quantitative PCR
All mRNA extractions were performed using RNeasy kit (Qiagen: 74104) according to
manufacturer’s instructions. For miRNA extraction miScript II RT Kit (Qiagen: 217004) was
used. cDNA was generated using reverse transcriptase kit (Qiagen: 205311 for total RNA
and 218161 for miRNA). Finally, 25 ng of cDNA was used for qPCR. Quantitative PCR was

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 15.

Hosseini et al.

Page 14

Author Manuscript

performed using a LightCycler instrument (Roche) and Fast Start Master SYBR Green Kits
(Roche). Data analysis was done using the RelQuant software (Roche) with a reference gene
and a calibrator (reference) sample in every run. Mouse reference cDNA served as a positive
control. Measurements that showed unspecific products in the melting curve analysis were
discarded from further analysis. Expression levels are given relative to Actb (β-actin) for
gene expression analyses and Rnu6 for miRNA analyses (primer sequences are provided in
Supplementary Table 10). All primers for mRNA analyses were synthesized by Eurofins
MWG Operon, Germany, and for miRNA analyses ordered from Qiagen.

Author Manuscript

For comparison of miRNA levels in high-density and low-density regions (Extended Data
Fig 10b) in FFPE samples, regions were punched out using a 1.5 mm puncher (PFM
medical; 48115). Samples were incubated for 10 min at 70 °C followed by Xylene-Ethanol
de-paraffinization and overnight PK (0.5 μg/μl, Roche 03115828001) digestion. Then
miRNA extraction was performed using miRNeasy kit. For comparison of miR-30a-5p and
miR-9-5p between HERhigh/PGRhigh human mammary carcinomas and HER2high/PGRneg
carcinomas, miRNAs were extracted from fresh frozen samples using miRNeasy kit.
Expression of miR-9-5p and miR-30a-5p was normalized to HER2−/PGRhigh breast cancers
(see supplementary Table 6 for details on patients)
Lenti- and retroviral transduction

Author Manuscript

Pgr expression was achieved via a lentiviral construct encoding human Pgr-B (GeneCopeia:
Z5911). Lentiviral packaging was conducted as previously described42. Helper vectors were
pSPAX2 and pMD2.G (Addgene). Selection was performed using 10 μg/ml of puromycine
(Sigma Aldrich : P8833). For Her2 expression pLXSN-NNeu (Rat wild type Neu/Her2) was
used (obtained from Dr. Lisa Petti Albany Medical Center, Albany, NY)43. Retroviral
delivery of transgenes was performed as described previously44. Helper vectors were
pCMV-VSV-G and pUMVC3 obtained from Addgene. Selection was performed using 1000
μg/ml of G418 (Sigma Aldrich : G9516). MM3MG cells were transduced with lentiviruses
and/or retroviral vectors and cell colonies were selected using antibiotics. Positively
transduced clones were expanded and screened for PGR and/or HER2 levels by Western blot
analysis and qPCR.
Western blot analysis

Author Manuscript

Cell lysates were prepared using RIPA buffer (Sigma; R0278) and were subjected to the
BCA protein assay kit (Thermo scientific: 23227) to measure and equalize their protein
concentration. Quantified protein lysates were resolved on 6.5 % SDS-PAGE gels, and
transferred onto a polyvinylidene difluoride membrane (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA), and
immunoblotted with the primary antibodies overnight followed by incubation with the
horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies. The blots were visualized using
the substrate kit (GE Healthcare: RPN2109) and bands were visualized by Imagequant LAS
4000 (GE Healthcare). The full blot images are shown in Supplementary Fig. 1.
Exosome isolation, miRNA analyses and sequencing
To prepare conditioned medium, TUBO cells were seeded at a density of 3 × 104 cells/cm2.
After 4 days, media were collected, centrifuged and filtered and used as conditioned

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 15.

Hosseini et al.

Page 15

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

medium. For exosome isolation we used ultracentrifugation method as previously
described45. Exosome pellets were resuspended in fresh medium and used for T47D cell line
treatment. PGR expression was checked at different time points (4, 8, 24, and 48 hours). For
miRNA sequencing we used 4 × 106 cells and exosomes were isolated from confluent
TUBO cell line medium. The miRNA cloning and sequencing was done as described
previously46. All pooled samples were sequenced on a MiSeq system (Illumina) in a single
end run with 80 cycles using MiSeq reagent kit Version 3. Data analysis was performed
using in-house written scripts. Sequences were mapped - without any mismatches allowed against murine miRNAs listed in miRBase version 20 (June 2013; www.mirbase.org). The
minimum length of reads was set to 18 nt. Annotated miRNA-reads were normalized as
RPM-Values regarding the total number of mapped reads in the respective library. Mimic
miRNA were ordered from Eurofins MWG Operon Company and all sequences are listed in
Supplementary Table 11. For miRNA transfection we used reverse transfection protocols
recommended by RNAiMAX (Life Technology: 13778030) instruction and 50 nm/ml
concentration of miRNA.
Mouse Genome CGH Microarrays
DNAs were extracted from fresh frozen samples using DNeasy Blood & Tissue Kit (Qiagen:
69504). Genomic DNA labelling was done using Agilent - SureTag DNA Labeling Kit
(Agilent: 5190–3400). Array CGH was performed on oligonucleotide-based SurePrint G3
Mouse CGH Microarray Kit, 4×180K (design code: 027411) according to the protocol
provided by the manufacturer (Agilent Oligonucleotide Array-Based CGH for Genomic
DNA Analysis, version 7.2, July 2012).
Phylogeny of primary tumours and metastases

Author Manuscript

Ancestral relations among paired samples of primary tumour and metastases were inferred
using array CGH profiles. The aCGH dataset consists of 28 primary tumour samples with 1
to 3 corresponding metastasis samples per primary tumour (18 primary tumours with 1
metastasis, 4 with 2 metastases and 6 with 3 metastases).

Author Manuscript

Positions of the probes on the array were mapped to the current mouse reference genome
(mm10) using the liftOver tool47. No background correction was applied to the data48. The
data were first normalized within arrays using Loess49. Then, log ratios were corrected for
spatial artefacts using a median filter with an 11 × 11 block of probes50 and a between array
scale normalization was applied51. Duplicate probes (having the same genomic position)
were summarized by their median log ratio. The R package limma52 (version 3.28.1) was
used for normalization within arrays and between arrays (with default parameters). In a final
step, wavy patterns were removed from the data using an approach similar to Marioni et
al.53 but with modifications to account for broad copy number alterations. For every sample
and chromosome, correction proceeded as follows: since the maximum number of broad
copy number alterations on any chromosome observed in the data was two, a piecewise
constant function with two pieces was fitted to the log ratios to estimate these broad
alterations. Each piece was required to be longer than 5% of the chromosome length to avoid
spurious small pieces. The wavy pattern was estimated by fitting a Loess curve with a
window size of 100 probes to the residuals of the piecewise constant function fit. To avoid

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 15.

Hosseini et al.

Page 16

Author Manuscript

smoothing true focal alterations, the weight of probes with an absolute log ratio deviation
greater than 0.5 from the piecewise constant function were set to zero for the Loess fit. The
estimated wavy pattern was then subtracted from the log ratios resulting in corrected values.

Author Manuscript

After normalization the log ratios were segmented using Circular Binary Segmentation as
implemented in the R package DNAcopy54 (version 1.46.0). The default parameters were
used except for alpha, which was set to 0.001. Segments with a length of 5 or less probes
were merged with the closest adjacent segment. For every sample, states with means closer
than 0.05 were merged iteratively beginning with the two states with closest means. When
two states are merged the new mean is given by the mean of the two old state means
weighted by the number of probes in every state. After state merging, the remaining segment
means were adjusted to have a median of zero. These segmented copy number profiles were
then deconstructed into underlying copy number events using Ziggurat Deconstruction55.
All these steps where performed using R (version 3.3.0).

Author Manuscript

Aberration events as defined by left and right change points and aberration type were pooled
across the matched samples of a single mouse to form a mouse-specific base set of
aberration prototypes. For this, amplifications and deletions, respectively, that were similar
by more than 80% as measured by their Jaccard-index regarding probe support were merged
into single prototypes using Jaccard-distance-based complete linkage clustering and union of
supports. Individual primary tumour and metastases samples were then encoded according to
presence (absence) of the prototypic aberrations, whereby the present prototype was called
by the minimum Jaccard-distance. The resulting feature vectors were then used for
phylogenetic tree inference. Phylogenetic trees were generated by assuming ideal (i.e. errorfree) data and inferring plausible common ancestors (intermediates) of aberration profiles by
extracting shared features of an increasing number of samples, i.e. evaluating common
aberration events in sample pairs, triplets, quads, etc., and organizing these ancestors
according to hierarchical levels. Subsequently, admissible edges were constructed top-down
between vertices allowing for at most two re-losses of acquired gains and no re-gains of any
losses (this condition is also ensured globally for each path). Then all simple paths from the
normal cell to the samples were generated using the igraph R-package (version 1.0.0),
combined into a directed acyclic graph and filtered for fewest genomic changes along the
graph and lowest number of intermediates (maximum parsimony). This resulted in one
unique phylogenetic tree for each mouse.
Detection of human DCCs

Author Manuscript

For CGH analysis of single DCCs, bone marrow sampling of M1 stage patients was
performed within the study protocol of the GEBDIS study at the Central Hospital in
Augsburg after informed written consent of patients was obtained. The ethics committees of
the University of Munich (ethics vote number 007/02) and Regensburg (ethics vote number
07-079) approved bone marrow sampling (including M0 stage patients) and genomic
analysis of isolated cells. For all patients informed written consent was obtained. For bone
marrow sampling and analysis for cytokeratin-positive cells of patients from Tübingen
(approval by the ethics committee of Tuebingen University, reference number: 560/2012R)
all specimens were obtained after written informed consent. Bone marrow sample

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 15.

Hosseini et al.

Page 17

Author Manuscript

preparation, slide preparation, cytokeratin staining and cell isolation was performed as
previously described5.
Whole genome amplification and single cell comparative genomic hybridization
Whole genome amplification (WGA) was performed as previously described5,56. The
method has become commercially available as kit (Ampli1, Silicon Biosystems). Histogram
of copy number alterations (Figure 5e) was done for human primary breast cancers (n=1637)
derived from the Progenetix data-base24 (http://www.progenetix.net and DCCs isolated from
bone marrow of breast cancer patients without (M0; n=94; see Supplementary Table 7 for
clinical details of patients) and with metastasis (M1; n=91).
Analysis of Breast Cancer Patients for association of DCC and primary tumour receptor
expression

Author Manuscript

We analysed data of 2239 patients from the Department of Oncology and Obstetrics,
University of Tubingen. DCC status was assessed according to the consensus protocol23,
using the anti-cytokeratin antibody A45B/B3 and evaluating 2 × 106 bone marrow cells. PgR
expression of primary tumours was categorized into PGR staining scores 0–1 for absent
expression; 2–8 for intermediate expression and 9–12 for high expression. HER2 status of
primary tumours was categorized into the staining score 0 for absence of HER2 staining
(IHC negative); score 1 and score 2 without Her2 amplification (IHC positive) and score 2
with HER2 amplification and 3 (which is known to be caused by HER2 amplification; FISH
positive).
Bioinformatics and statistical analysis

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Statistical analyses and estimation of variation within each group of data were performed
using GraphPad Prism V6. For in vivo experiments, sample size was estimated using
G*Power (version 3). For each experiment, mouse numbers are given in the figures or the
text. All in vitro and primary culture experiments were performed at least in triplicate and
student’s t-test was applied for comparisons. For all other experiments we applied the
D’Agostino-Pearson omnibus normality test. When sample size was sufficiently large (n≥8)
and were not distributed normally according to the D’Agostino-Pearson test (p≤0.05) we
applied the Mann-Whitney test. A linear regression test (F-test for slopes) was used to
compare proliferation curves and tumour growth. For comparing numbers between different
groups we applied Fisher’s exact or if the sample numbers were at least 5 in each condition
the chi-square test. In Figure 1d we applied the One way Anova-Test. All p values represent
two tailed values. All p values (in range of 0.5≤p≤0.0001) and statistical tests are mentioned
in the figures or legends. Genomatix (version 2.0) (https://www.genomatix.de) was used for
signalling pathway analysis and oPOSSUM (version 1) (http://opossum.cisreg.ca/
oPOSSUM3/) for transcription factor binding site (TFBS) enrichment. For miRNA binding
enrichment we used DIANALAB (http://diana.cslab.ece.ntua.gr/) and for the identification
of target miRNAs for single target genes the miRANDA software (http://www.microrna.org/
microrna/home.do) was used.
Data Availability—The miRNA-seq data and microarray data are deposited at the GEO
database under accession numbers GSE68683. Analysed data for microarray and miRNAs
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 15.

Hosseini et al.

Page 18

Author Manuscript

can be found in supplementary file 1 and 2 respectively. The mouse aCGH data are
deposited at the GEO database under accession number GSE87469. All raw data for
presented graphs and statistics deposited in source data files. Further material and data more
than what is presented here can be obtained from the corresponding author (Christoph A
Klein) upon request.

Extended Data

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Extended Data Figure 1. EL signature induction and expression of Her2 and PgR
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 15.

Hosseini et al.

Page 19

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

(a) The proportion of cancer cells disseminating to bone marrow (BM) in Balb-NeuT mice
decreases with increasing primary tumour volume. Disseminated cancer cells (DCCs) were
identified using anti-CK antibodies in BM. The y-axis displays the number of detected
DCCs per 106 BM cells divided by the total tumour area in mm2. The number of mice used
per data point is written below the graph. (b) Laser microdissection of epithelial structures:
two examples of 7–9 week old Balb-NeuT mammary glands showing microdissection of
regions with incipient epithelial hyperplasia. For all samples similar amounts of tissue (up to
100,000 μm2) were isolated. (c) qPCR validation of microarray profiles. Quantitative PCR
performed for 10 genes upregulated (Up: upregulated in EL) or downregulated (Down:
downregulated in EL) in microarray samples and all except one (Zfp408) were confirmed.
(d) Quantitative PCR for the mRNA level of all steroid hormone receptors (EL, early
lesions; PT, advanced primary tumour; Met, lung metastasis). (e) Primary cultures from
mammary tissue of 7–9 week old Balb-NeuT mice, were treated with progesterone (P),
estrogen (E), aldosterone (A), cortisol (C), and testosterone (T) in different concentrations
(1, 10, and 100 nM) or vehicle (ethanol; untreated) for 75 hours. Only progesterone induces
upregulation of the complete EL signature. (f) Elevated expression of PgR-B in young
mammary glands (BALB/c week 9 and Balb-NeuT EL compared to BALB/c week 25) but
not primary tumours correlates with elevated HER2 expression. (g) Progesterone induces the
EL signature in 4T1 cells (highly aggressive and metastatic cell line derived from a
spontaneous BALB/c mammary tumour), but not in 67NR (tumorigenic and non-metastatic
cell line derived from spontaneous BALB/c mammary tumour) and MM3MG cells (normal
mammary epithelial cell line derived from BALB/c mouse). (h) Progesterone treatment upregulates HER2 in 4T1 cells. (i) Overexpression of PGR-B in MM3MG cells up-regulates
HER2 expression. All p-values, Student’s t-test; *, p≤0.05; **, p≤0.01; all error bars
correspond to standard deviation (Mean ±SD). For gel source data, see Supplementary
Figure 1.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 15.

Hosseini et al.

Page 20

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 2. Progesterone regulates migration and is linked to branching
morphogenesis

(a) qPCR analysis of Pgr, Rank, Rankl and Wnt4 in normal and transgenic mammary tissue
or tumours. Note the elevated expression of Pgr, Wnt4, and Rankl in EL compared to PT.
Only Rank (receptor of Rankl) is strongly expressed in primary tumours. (b) Primary
cultures of EL treated with progesterone (P), WNT4, and RANKL. WNT4 and RANKL
treatment induce the EL signature and act synergistically. (c–d) PGR (green) staining at 5
weeks and 12 weeks of age (FVB wild type mice; scale bar = 100 μm). The percentage of

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 15.

Hosseini et al.

Page 21

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

PGR+ cells per duct was quantified (two mice/age group) in the anterior and posterior
portions of the gland (relative to lymph node, LN). PGR expressing cells were more
abundant in anterior ducts (number of analysed ducts per group is displayed on top of each
column). (e–f) Photomicrograph of migration assay (E) and quantification (F) of migrating
cells derived from fresh tissue (e, left panel) or dissociated PT- and EL-spheres (e, right
panel; f, quantification). Progesterone (P), WNT4, and RANKL induce migration of ELderived but not PT-derived cells (see also Figure 2a). (g) Scheme of combined migration and
sphere assay. The lower chamber is filled with serum-free sphere medium and its bottom is
covered with poly-HEMA to prevent adhesion and enable sphere formation. After 72 h
migration, the insert is removed and the lower chamber is monitored (after 11 days) for
mammosphere formation. (h) Effect of estrogen and progesterone on migration and sphere
formation of EL-derived mammary cells. Cells were exposed to either 10 nM estrogen (E) or
progesterone (P) or 10 nM estrogen in the presence of 10 nM progesterone inhibitor RU486.
All p-values, student’s t-test; *, p≤0.05; **, p≤0.01; ***, p≤0.001; ****, p≤0.0001; error
bars in panel d correspond to standard error of the mean (Mean ±SEM); all other error bars
correspond to standard deviation (Mean ±SD).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 15.

Hosseini et al.

Page 22

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended data Fig 3. HER2 expression levels regulate migration and proliferation

(a) Parental MM3MG cells, a cell line derived from mammary epithelial cells of wild-type
BALB/c mice, do not express ERα but low levels of HER2 and PGR-B when compared to
4T1 and TUBO cells (TUBO cells were grown at low density; see Figure 3 and Extended
Data Fig 4–5 for reasoning). (b) Immunoblot confirming successful transduction of the
MM3MG cell line with Her2 and Pgr-B. Note that transduction of Pgr B increases HER2
levels. (c–d) Overexpression of Pgr-B in MM3MG cells reduces migration, while Her2
overexpression (MM3MG-Her2) increases migration of cells. Addition of progesterone does

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 15.

Hosseini et al.

Page 23

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

not alter migration of PGR-B-overexpressing cells (MM3MG-Pgr-B). (e) Overexpression of
Pgr-B in MM3MG cells reduces sphere-forming ability whereas Her2 overexpression
increases it. These results (c–e) suggest that migrating/sphere forming cells are not among
the PGR+ but among the PGR− population responsive to PIPS. (f–j) To explore which PGR
negative cells are the target population of progesterone signalling, we exposed parental
MM3MG cells and Her2-transduced cells to progesterone, PIPS or mixed them with PGR+
cells (only for migration experiments). Progesterone, WNT4/RANKL, and co-culture with
MM3MG-Pgr-B (only migration) induce sphere formation and migration of MM3MG cells
but decrease these responses in MM3MG-Her2 cells. (k) Overexpression of Her2 increases
proliferation of MM3MG cells (MM3MG-Her2). WNT4 plus RANKL (WR) further
increase proliferation of MM3MG-Her2 cells, but decrease proliferation of parental
(MM3MG) cells. Therefore based on expression of HER2, cells either migrate
(HER2low/negative) or proliferate (HER2high). (l) WNT4 plus RANKL (WR) treatment
induces proliferation of primary cultured PT cells, but reduces it in EL-derived cells. (m)
Reduction of HER2 signalling by lapatinib overrides the inhibitory effect of WNT4 plus
RANKL and increases migration in MM3MG-Her2 cells. However, strong inhibition of
HER2 signalling reduces migration. (n) Lapatinib inhibits HER2 signalling by preventing
phosphorylation. (o) Cells that migrated through the pores of the migration chamber insert
were stained for HER2 (FITC, green) and PGR/ER-α (Cy3, red). In 1:1 co-culture of
MM3MG-Pgr-B and MM3MG-Her2 (upper panel) only Her2-expressing cells migrate.
Migrated EL-derived primary cells (lower panel) do not express PGR and display faint
HER2 staining (brightness of HER2 and PGR staining in lower panel micrographs were
increased by 50% for better visibility). HER2 and PGR double-positive T47D cells fixed
onto the filters of migration chambers serve as positive control of staining. These results (mo) indicate that cells with low/intermediate signalling of HER2 respond best to migration
and sphere formation inducing PIPS. P-values for the migration and sphere assays represent
Student’s t-test; p-values for the proliferation curves (k,l) were derived from F-tests for the
slopes; *, p≤0.05; **, p≤0.01; ***, p≤0.001; ****, p≤0.0001; NS, Not Significant; all error
bars correspond to standard deviation (Mean ±SD). For gel source data, see Supplementary
Figure 1.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 15.

Hosseini et al.

Page 24

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 4. Cell density and regulation of progesterone and HER2 signalling

Author Manuscript

(a) PGR expression silenced in tumours can be re-activated in culture and re-silenced in
vivo. (b) PGR re-expression in TUBO cells grown at low density and high density only after
frequent medium change. (c) Down-regulation of PGR in EL cells cultured in a transwell
assay next to primary tumour cells suggests the existence of a secreted factor passing
through the membrane of the transwell insert and down-regulating Pgr mRNA (left) and
protein (right). (d) T47D cells exposed to conditioned medium from TUBO cells display
reduced Pgr mRNA (left) and protein (right). (e) Exosomes derived from the cell culture
medium of TUBO cells grown at high density (exosome fraction) induce down-regulation of
Pgr in T47D cells. (f) Results of miRNA sequencing to identify Pgr regulating miRNAs. The
left table lists the top 10 up-regulated miRNAs in HER2-overexpressing cells (MM3MGHer2) compared to control (MM3MG). The middle table presents the top 10 expressed
miRNAs in TUBO cells and TUBO cell-derived exosomes. The right table displays miRNAs
predicted by the miRanda web-software to regulate Pgr. (g) Among all candidate miRNAs
only miR-30a-5p and 9-5p induce down-regulation of Pgr mRNA in T47D cells. (h) Downregulation of PGR in T47D cells treated with miR-30a-5p and 9-5p. (i) Expression of
miR-30-5p in EL and PT samples compared to 8 week BALB/c mammary glands. (j)
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 15.

Hosseini et al.

Page 25

Author Manuscript

Density induced up-regulation of HER2 in TUBO cells grown at low or high density and EL
vs. PT samples (left panel) and progesterone-responsiveness of low-density TUBO cells.
Note that levels of HER2, PGR, NR3C11, NR3C2, and AR are regulated by progesterone in
a dose dependent manner. (k-m) TUBO cells grown at low density and exposed to
progesterone (P) or PIPS migrated more (k–l) and produced more spheres (m), similar to
EL-derived cells (See Figure 2). **, p≤0.01; ***, p≤0.001; ****, p≤0.0001; All error bars
correspond to standard deviation (Mean ±SD). For gel source data, see Supplementary
Figure 1.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 15.

Hosseini et al.

Page 26

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 5. Cell density and regulation of progesterone and HER2 signalling in
human cell lines

To explore whether human breast cancer cells display similar regulatory circuits as found in
murine cells, we selected 16 cell lines of different breast cancer subtypes. (a) Her2 mRNA
expression levels in 15 human cell lines compared to the h-TERT-HME cells. Different
colours of cell line names indicate subtype of breast cancer with the colour key for the breast
cancer subtype of cell lines being shown in the figure. (b) The expression of miR-9-5p in
human breast cancer cell lines compared to h-TERT-HME cells. Note that Her2 strong-

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 15.

Hosseini et al.

Page 27

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

expressing cell lines (see panel a) express more miR-9-5p similar to PTs of Balb-NeuT and
TUBO cells (See Fig 3b–c), but two HER2high/PGRhigh cell lines, BT474 and T47D do not
express miR-9-5p similar to human HER2high/PGRhigh samples (See Figure 5d). (c) High
cell density up-regulates Her2 at mRNA (upper panel) or protein levels (lower panel) in
several cell lines. Only four cell lines were checked for protein level (HER2 level not
influenced by cell density – Cama1; HER2 level regulated by cell density – HCC1806,
MDA-MB-231, and MCF7). Numbers below the blots indicate fold-change of HER2 in high
density compared to low density normalized over beta actin. (d) Expression of miR-9-5p is
up-regulated by cell density in SKBR3, HCC1937, HCC1806, and MCF7 cell lines. (e)
Migration and sphere-forming potential of 10/16 cell lines grown at low and high densities,
and treated with PIPS or progesterone. The first 7 cell lines regulate Her2 transcripts by
density (See panel c) and their response to PIPS is similar to TUBO cells and primary
mammary cell cultures of Balb-NeuT mice (See Figures 2, and Extended Data Fig 4l–m).
The remaining three cell lines do not regulate Her2 transcripts by cell density but respond to
progesterone similarly to TUBO cell line and primary mammary cell cultures of Balb-NeuT
mice (See Figures 2, and Extended Data Fig 4l–m). We did not perform functional assays
with BT549 (TN), T47D (luminal, MCF7-like), MDA-MB-175, ZR75-1 (luminal, CAMA1like), hTERT-HME (transformed normal, similar to MCF-10A) because of breast cancer
subtype redundancy or poor growth (HCC1569). Y-axes show the percentage of migrating
cells (left) and observed spheres (right) relative to seeded cells. All error bars correspond to
standard deviation (Mean ±SD). For gel source data, see Supplementary Figure 1.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 15.

Hosseini et al.

Page 28

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 6. Differentiation ability and metastasis formation

(a–b) PGR expression of mammary epithelial cells from wt-BALB/c mice at 4, 8, 25 and 40
weeks of age (scale bar = 100 μm). PGR expression was reduced by 75% in 40-week-old
wild-type mammary gland compared to week-4 mice and disappeared in PT (See also
Extended Data Fig 1f and Extended Data Fig 2a). N indicates number of ducts/glands (in EL
and normal tissue) or visual fields in primary tumours. (c–d) Representative micrographs of
lesions 8 weeks after transplantation of EL-spheres resembling DCIS (c) or less advanced
EL (d) displaying PGR expression (PGR, brown nuclear staining). (e) Tumour growth from

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 15.

Hosseini et al.

Page 29

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

PT spheres in young and old recipients. (f) Differentiation of mammary epithelial cells from
EL in matrigel (right panel) or in sphere culture (left panel) into acinus-like structures. PT
cells did not generate acinus-like structures. Progesterone (P) stimulation accelerated
formation of acinus-like structures by EL cells, under mammosphere conditions (NED, no
evidence of differentiation). (g) Staining for CK8/18, PGR, and EpCAM reveals exclusive
expression of PGR and CK8/18 in differentiated structures (upper panel) as compared to
undifferentiated spheres (lower panel). (h–i) PT spheres were transplanted alone (n=23) or
co-transplanted with MM3MG-Pgr-B (n=5) or MM3MG spheres (n=5). The number of
DCCs in bone marrow (panel h) and the number of mice with tumour (panel i) were checked
4 weeks later. Pgr-B-transduced mammary epithelia (MM3MG) suppress metastatic
dissemination (evaluated as BM-DCC counts) from PT spheres (h). PGR enriched
environment induces tumour growth. One out of 5 in the PT+MM3MG transplanted group
and 5 out of 5 in the PT+MM3MG-Pgr-B transplanted group formed tumours, while no
mouse transplanted only with PT-spheres formed tumours within 4 weeks after
transplantation (i). (j) Pregnancy at EL-stage induces dissemination. A group of young BalbNeuT mice mated (n=5) at EL stage (week 7) and were sacrificed at the end of pregnancy.
These mice did not formed palpable tumours, but had higher number of DCCs compared to
unmated mice (n=6) as control. (k) Pregnancy at advanced tumour stage. A group of BalbNeuT mice (n=5) were mated at the time of in situ carcinoma (week 15) and sacrificed at the
end of pregnancy. All pregnant mice had faster growing tumours compared to unmated
control mice. (l) Schematic of transplantation protocol for mammary gland or PT tissue
pieces into wild type recipients. (m) Example of PT and macro-metastasis assessment. (n)
Number of metastatic foci in transplanted mice. 18 mice from gland model, and 3 mice from
tumour model were excluded from analyses due to the fusion of metastatic lesions making it
difficult to count individual lesions. (o) Similar growth kinetics of primary tumours from
gland and tumour piece model for samples from red box in Figure 4e. (p–q) Mice from (o)
were compared for duration follow-up period after surgery. Mice from both groups were
sacrificed at first signs of general health deterioration, which occurred earlier in gland-model
mice (p). Longer follow-up time after curative surgery did not result in more metastases in
recipients transplanted with PT pieces (q). p-value in panels b, f, h and j Student’s t-test; in
panel i, Fisher’s exact test; in panel c, and k were derived from F-test for the slopes; in
panels n, o, p, and q, Mann-Whitney test; *, p≤0.05; **, p≤0.01; ***, p≤0.001; ****,
p≤0.0001; NS, Not Significant; error bars in panels b, e, f, and k correspond to standard
deviation (Mean ±SD) and panels h, j, n, o, p, and q represent median.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 15.

Hosseini et al.

Page 30

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 7. Array CGH analysis of primary tumour – metastasis pairs

(a) Number of aberrations detected by aCGH in primary tumours and matched lung
metastases (dot plot displays median; p-value, Mann-Whitney test). (b) Heatmap of copy
number states for the 28 primary tumours and 44 matched metastases across chromosomes
1–19 and X. Light, medium and dark yellow/blue colours indicate weak, intermediate and
strong amplification/deletion amplitudes, respectively (thresholds at ±0.1, ±0.2, ±0.3). (c)
Prototype aberrations (top) constructed from segmented array CGH profiles (bottom) of the
primary tumour (PT) and the matched metastases (Met 1–3) of mouse 3769 (phylogenetic

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 15.

Hosseini et al.

Page 31

Author Manuscript

tree and phylogenetic paths displayed in Figure 4h–i). Prototypes (top) are organized in
stacked rows per chromosome and numbered according to chromosome and positional order
of their first change point, e.g. 1.2 denotes the 2nd prototype of chromosome 1. These
prototype aberrations are then used to construct the phylogenetic paths (e.g. Figure 4i) and
trees. For better visibility, small focal aberrations were enlarged to have a minimal extension
of 300 probes. Yellow colour indicates amplification (+1) while blue colour encodes deletion
(−1). Corresponding segmentation profiles of the normalized and wavy-pattern-corrected
array CGH data (grey dots) are indicated by red lines (bottom). For segmentation and
prototype construction see Methods. (d) Table for calculating the relative time points of
dissemination (Figure 4j). PT ab: number of aberrations in the primary tumour; Mk ab:
number of aberrations in the matched metastases (k=1,2,3); PT-Mk cab: number of common
aberrations between PT and Mk; PT-Mk pcab: proportion of common aberrations relative to
the primary tumour, i.e. pcab = cab/PT ab.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 15.

Hosseini et al.

Page 32

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 8. Phylogenetic analysis of metastasis (part 1: early divergence)

Phylogenetic trees of the top 13 of the 28 primary tumours and matched metastases samples
listed according to earliest time point of dissemination (for details see tables in Extended
Data Figures 7 and 9). Normal cells are indicated by N, primary tumours by P and
metastases by M1-3. Profiles A1-7 denote inferred common ancestors (intermediates) (see
Methods). The ordinate indicates the number of aberrations per profile (on a square root
scale). For the first three matched samples, also the tree paths (mid), prototype aberrations
(top right) and segmented array CGH profiles (bottom right) are displayed in addition to the

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 15.

Hosseini et al.

Page 33

Author Manuscript

phylogenetic tree (left). Aberration profiles along phylogenetic paths run from N via A1-7 to
P or M1-3. Aberration prototypes are named according to chromosome and positional order
of their first change point, e.g. 2.2 denotes the 2nd aberration prototype of chromosome 2
(see Methods and Extended Data Figure 7c).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 9. Phylogenetic analysis of metastasis (part 2: late divergence)

(a) Phylogenetic trees of the top 14 of the 28 primary tumour (PT) and matched metastasis
(M) samples listed according to latest time point of dissemination. For the first three mice

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 15.

Hosseini et al.

Page 34

Author Manuscript

also the phylogenetic paths (mid), prototype aberrations (top right) and segmented array
CGH profiles (bottom right) are shown next to the phylogenetic tree (left). See Methods and
Extended Data Figures 7 and 8. (b) Summary table of all phylogenetic analyses indicates the
position of the corresponding mouse phylogenetic tree in Extended Data Figure 8 (EDF8)
and 9 (EDF9) for each primary tumour–metastasis-pair. The two bottom rows indicate the
rank and the corresponding relative time point of dissemination as measured by the
proportion of aberrations shared between PT and M (PT-M pcab; see Extended Data Figure
7 and Fig 4j). Note that only metastases ranked on position 36–44 diverged late as per our
definition. The phylogenetic tree and phylogenetic paths for mouse 3769 are displayed in
main Figure 4h–i. In the “pos-EDF8” and “pos-EDF9” rows the darker colours are those
samples that all pieces of data including phylogenetic paths, prototype aberrations,
segmented array CGH profiles, and phylogenetic trees are shown. Faint colours cells in
“pos-EDF8” and “pos-EDF9” are samples those only phylogenetic trees are shown for them.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 10. PGR, HER2 signalling, and dissemination in breast cancer patients

Author Manuscript

(a) Double staining of HER2high/PGRhigh human breast cancer sample (PGR: brown,
nucleus; HER2: red/pink, membrane). Cells with varying expression levels of HER2 and
PGR, as well as negative, single- or double-positive cells can be seen (scale bar = 100 μm).
Arrows indicate DP, double-positive; DN, double-negative; SP, single-positive. (b) Lack of
PGR expression in high-density areas of HER2high/PGRhigh classified tumour samples is
directly linked to high miR-9-5p and miR-30a-5p expression. Panel b represents standard
deviation (Mean ±SD).

Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 15.

Hosseini et al.

Page 35

Author Manuscript

Acknowledgments
We are indebted to T. Perry for his critical reading of the manuscript. This work was supported by grants from the
DFG (Kl 1233/2-1, KL 1233/3-1, KL 1233/10-1 (CAK); Me2064/4-1, (GM); SP 938/2-1 (RS)); the Dr. Josef
Steiner Foundation andf ERC (322602) to CAK; the SWCRF, CA109182, CA196521, CA163131, BC132674
(J.A.A-G) CA183185 (K.H.) BC112380 (M.S.S.) and by a donation from Anna Jungmayer.

References

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

1. Aguirre-Ghiso JA, Bragado P, Sosa MS. Metastasis awakening: targeting dormant cancer. Nature
medicine. 2013; 19:276–277. DOI: 10.1038/nm.3120
2. Polzer B, Klein CA. Metastasis awakening: the challenges of targeting minimal residual cancer.
Nature medicine. 2013; 19:274–275. DOI: 10.1038/nm.3121
3. Cole BF, Gelber RD, Gelber S, Coates AS, Goldhirsch A. Polychemotherapy for early breast cancer:
an overview of the randomised clinical trials with quality-adjusted survival analysis. Lancet. 2001;
358:277–286. [PubMed: 11498214]
4. Gianni L, et al. Treatment with trastuzumab for 1 year after adjuvant chemotherapy in patients with
HER2-positive early breast cancer: a 4-year follow-up of a randomised controlled trial. Lancet
Oncol. 2011; 12:236–244. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(11)70033-XS1470-2045(11)70033-X [pii].
[PubMed: 21354370]
5. Klein CA, et al. Genetic heterogeneity of single disseminated tumour cells in minimal residual
cancer. Lancet. 2002; 360:683–689. [PubMed: 12241875]
6. Schmidt-Kittler O, et al. From latent disseminated cells to overt metastasis: genetic analysis of
systemic breast cancer progression. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2003; 100:7737–7742. DOI: 10.1073/
pnas.1331931100 [PubMed: 12808139]
7. Klein CA. Parallel progression of primary tumours and metastases. Nature reviews Cancer. 2009;
9:302–312. [PubMed: 19308069]
8. Hüsemann Y, et al. Systemic spread is an early step in breast cancer. Cancer Cell. 2008; 13:58–68.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ccr.2007.12.003 [PubMed: 18167340]
9. Rhim AD, et al. EMT and dissemination precede pancreatic tumor formation. Cell. 2012; 148:349–
361. [PubMed: 22265420]
10. Eyles J, et al. Tumor cells disseminate early, but immunosurveillance limits metastatic outgrowth,
in a mouse model of melanoma. J Clin Invest. 2010; 120:2030–2039. [PubMed: 20501944]
11. Banys M, et al. Hematogenous and lymphatic tumor cell dissemination may be detected in patients
diagnosed with ductal carcinoma in situ of the breast. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2012; 131:801–
808. DOI: 10.1007/s10549-011-1478-2 [PubMed: 21455667]
12. Sanger N, et al. Disseminated tumor cells in the bone marrow of patients with ductal carcinoma in
situ. Int J Cancer. 2011; 129:2522–2526. [PubMed: 21207426]
13. Valastyan S, Weinberg RA. Tumor metastasis: molecular insights and evolving paradigms. Cell.
2011; 147:275–292. DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.09.024 [PubMed: 22000009]
14. Fernandez-Valdivia R, et al. Revealing progesterone’s role in uterine and mammary gland biology:
insights from the mouse. Semin Reprod Med. 2005; 23:22–37. DOI: 10.1055/s-2005-864031
[PubMed: 15714387]
15. Mulac-Jericevic B, Lydon JP, DeMayo FJ, Conneely OM. Defective mammary gland
morphogenesis in mice lacking the progesterone receptor B isoform. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2003; 100:9744–9749. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.
1732707100 [PubMed: 12897242]
16. Aupperlee MD, Smith KT, Kariagina A, Haslam SZ. Progesterone receptor isoforms A and B:
temporal and spatial differences in expression during murine mammary gland development.
Endocrinology. 2005; 146:3577–3588. DOI: 10.1210/en.2005-0346 [PubMed: 15878961]
17. Brisken C. Progesterone signalling in breast cancer: a neglected hormone coming into the
limelight. Nature reviews Cancer. 2013; 13:385–396. DOI: 10.1038/nrc3518 [PubMed: 23702927]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 15.

Hosseini et al.

Page 36

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

18. Liao MJ, et al. Enrichment of a population of mammary gland cells that form mammospheres and
have in vivo repopulating activity. Cancer research. 2007; 67:8131–8138. DOI:
10.1158/0008-5472.can-06-4493 [PubMed: 17804725]
19. Korkaya H, Paulson A, Iovino F, Wicha MS. HER2 regulates the mammary stem/progenitor cell
population driving tumorigenesis and invasion. Oncogene. 2008; 27:6120–6130. DOI: 10.1038/
onc.2008.207 [PubMed: 18591932]
20. Ginestier C, et al. ALDH1 is a marker of normal and malignant human mammary stem cells and a
predictor of poor clinical outcome. Cell stem cell. 2007; 1:555–567. DOI: 10.1016/j.stem.
2007.08.014 [PubMed: 18371393]
21. Lee YJ, Gorski J. Estrogen-induced transcription of the progesterone receptor gene does not
parallel estrogen receptor occupancy. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America. 1996; 93:15180–15184. [PubMed: 8986784]
22. Stephens PJ, et al. The landscape of cancer genes and mutational processes in breast cancer.
Nature. 2012; 486:400–404. DOI: 10.1038/nature11017 [PubMed: 22722201]
23. Fehm T, et al. A concept for the standardized detection of disseminated tumor cells in bone marrow
from patients with primary breast cancer and its clinical implementation. Cancer. 2006; 107:885–
892. [PubMed: 16874814]
24. Baudis, M. Progenetix - cytogenetic abnormalities in human cancer. 2000. http://
www.progenetix.net, <http://www.progenetix.net>
25. Guzvic M, et al. Combined genome and transcriptome analysis of single disseminated cancer cells
from bone marrow of prostate cancer patients reveals unexpected transcriptomes. Cancer research.
2014; 74:7383–7394. DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.can-14-0934 [PubMed: 25320011]
26. Klein CA. Framework models of tumor dormancy from patient-derived observations. Current
opinion in genetics & development. 2011; 21:42–49. DOI: 10.1016/j.gde.2010.10.011 [PubMed:
21145726]
27. Brastianos PK, et al. Genomic Characterization of Brain Metastases Reveals Branched Evolution
and Potential Therapeutic Targets. Cancer discovery. 2015
28. Brisken C, et al. Essential function of Wnt-4 in mammary gland development downstream of
progesterone signaling. Genes Dev. 2000; 14:650–654. [PubMed: 10733525]
29. Fernandez-Valdivia R, et al. The RANKL signaling axis is sufficient to elicit ductal side-branching
and alveologenesis in the mammary gland of the virgin mouse. Dev Biol. 2009; 328:127–139.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.01.019 [PubMed: 19298785]
30. Asselin-Labat ML, et al. Steroid hormone receptor status of mouse mammary stem cells. J Natl
Cancer Inst. 2006; 98:1011–1014. DOI: 10.1093/jnci/djj267 [PubMed: 16849684]
31. Joshi PA, et al. Progesterone induces adult mammary stem cell expansion. Nature. 2010; 465:803–
807. DOI: 10.1038/nature09091 [PubMed: 20445538]
32. Mukherjee A, et al. Targeting RANKL to a specific subset of murine mammary epithelial cells
induces ordered branching morphogenesis and alveologenesis in the absence of progesterone
receptor expression. Faseb j. 2010; 24:4408–4419. DOI: 10.1096/fj.10-157982 [PubMed:
20605949]
33. Narod SA, Iqbal J, Giannakeas V, Sopik V, Sun P. Breast Cancer Mortality After a Diagnosis of
Ductal Carcinoma In Situ. JAMA oncology. 2015; 1:888–896. DOI: 10.1001/jamaoncol.2015.2510
[PubMed: 26291673]
34. Astolfi A, et al. Gene expression analysis of immune-mediated arrest of tumorigenesis in a
transgenic mouse model of HER-2/neu-positive basal-like mammary carcinoma. The American
journal of pathology. 2005; 166:1205–1216. DOI: 10.1016/S0002-9440(10)62339-5 [PubMed:
15793299]
35. Ignatiadis M, et al. HER2-positive circulating tumor cells in breast cancer. PLoS One. 2011;
6:e15624. [PubMed: 21264346]
36. Hafner C, et al. Oncogenic PIK3CA mutations occur in epidermal nevi and seborrheic keratoses
with a characteristic mutation pattern. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America. 2007; 104:13450–13454. [PubMed: 17673550]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 15.

Hosseini et al.

Page 37

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

37. Hafner C, et al. Multiple oncogenic mutations and clonal relationship in spatially distinct benign
human epidermal tumors. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America. 2010; 107:20780–20785. [PubMed: 21078999]
38. Pollock PM, et al. High frequency of BRAF mutations in nevi. Nature genetics. 2003; 33:19–20.
DOI: 10.1038/ng1054 [PubMed: 12447372]
39. Hutchinson JN, Jin J, Cardiff RD, Woodgett JR, Muller WJ. Activation of Akt-1 (PKB-alpha) can
accelerate ErbB-2-mediated mammary tumorigenesis but suppresses tumor invasion. Cancer
research. 2004; 64:3171–3178. [PubMed: 15126356]
40. Liu H, et al. MYC suppresses cancer metastasis by direct transcriptional silencing of alphav and
beta3 integrin subunits. Nature cell biology. 2012; 14:567–574. DOI: 10.1038/ncb2491 [PubMed:
22581054]
41. VerMilyea MD, et al. Transcriptome asymmetry within mouse zygotes but not between early
embryonic sister blastomeres. The EMBO journal. 2011; 30:1841–1851. [PubMed: 21468028]
42. Dull T, et al. A third-generation lentivirus vector with a conditional packaging system. Journal of
virology. 1998; 72:8463–8471. [PubMed: 9765382]
43. Petti LM, Ray FA. Transformation of mortal human fibroblasts and activation of a growth
inhibitory pathway by the bovine papillomavirus E5 oncoprotein. Cell growth & differentiation :
the molecular biology journal of the American Association for Cancer Research. 2000; 11:395–
408. [PubMed: 10939593]
44. Stewart SA, et al. Lentivirus-delivered stable gene silencing by RNAi in primary cells. RNA (New
York, N.Y). 2003; 9:493–501.
45. Thery C, Amigorena S, Raposo G, Clayton A. Isolation and characterization of exosomes from cell
culture supernatants and biological fluids. Current protocols in cell biology/editorial board, Juan S.
Bonifacino … [et al.]. 2006 Chapter 3, Unit 3.22.
46. Dueck A, Eichner A, Sixt M, Meister G. A miR-155-dependent microRNA hierarchy in dendritic
cell maturation and macrophage activation. FEBS letters. 2014; 588:632–640. DOI: 10.1016/
j.febslet.2014.01.009 [PubMed: 24444604]
47. Meyer LR, et al. The UCSC Genome Browser database: extensions and updates 2013. Nucleic
acids research. 2013; 41:D64–69. DOI: 10.1093/nar/gks1048 [PubMed: 23155063]
48. Yang YH, Buckley MJ, Speed TP. Analysis of cDNA microarray images. Briefings in
bioinformatics. 2001; 2:341–349. [PubMed: 11808746]
49. Yang YH, et al. Normalization for cDNA microarray data: a robust composite method addressing
single and multiple slide systematic variation. Nucleic acids research. 2002; 30:e15. [PubMed:
11842121]
50. Khojasteh M, Lam WL, Ward RK, MacAulay C. A stepwise framework for the normalization of
array CGH data. BMC bioinformatics. 2005; 6:274. [PubMed: 16297240]
51. Smyth GK, Speed T. Normalization of cDNA microarray data. Methods (San Diego, Calif). 2003;
31:265–273.
52. Ritchie ME, et al. limma powers differential expression analyses for RNA-sequencing and
microarray studies. Nucleic acids research. 2015; 43:e47. [PubMed: 25605792]
53. Marioni JC, et al. Breaking the waves: improved detection of copy number variation from
microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization. Genome biology. 2007; 8:R228. [PubMed:
17961237]
54. Venkatraman ES, Olshen AB. A faster circular binary segmentation algorithm for the analysis of
array CGH data. Bioinformatics (Oxford, England). 2007; 23:657–663. DOI: 10.1093/
bioinformatics/btl646
55. Mermel CH, et al. GISTIC2.0 facilitates sensitive and confident localization of the targets of focal
somatic copy-number alteration in human cancers. Genome biology. 2011; 12:R41. [PubMed:
21527027]
56. Klein CA, et al. Comparative genomic hybridization, loss of heterozygosity, and DNA sequence
analysis of single cells. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America. 1999; 96:4494–4499. [PubMed: 10200290]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 15.

Hosseini et al.

Page 38

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 1. Identification of a gene expression signature linked to early dissemination

(a) Heatmaps of genes differentially expressed between different sample types: normal
mammary glands from BALB/c, early lesions (EL), primary tumours (PT) and metastases
(MET) from Balb-NeuT mice; yellow, upregulation; blue, downregulation. (b) Five-gene
surrogate signature (qPCR) for EL profile. (c) Progesterone (P) activates EL-signature in
vitro (t-test; Mean ±SD). (d) TissueFAX cytometric quantification of HER2 and PGR
protein expression. Mean HER2 staining intensity (red line, left histograms) in arbitrary

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 15.

Hosseini et al.

Page 39

Author Manuscript

units and percentage of PGR+ cells (right histogram) and box plots (One-way ANOVA). **,
p≤0.01; ****, p≤0.0001.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 15.

Hosseini et al.

Page 40

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 2. Progesterone induces migration and sphere formation of EL cells

(a) EL and PT cells respond to progesterone or PIPS (WNT4, RANKL) with activation (EL)
or suppression of migration (PT). (b) Mammosphere-formation depends on age and HER2
expression. (c) EL and PT cells respond to progesterone or PIPS with activation (EL) or
suppression of sphere formation (PT). (d) Depletion of PIPS by IWP-2 (WNT inhibitor) or
anti-RANKL (neutralizing antibody) reduces migration and sphere formation of EL cells. (e)
PIPS-activated migrating cells form spheres (See also Extended Data Fig 2g). All p-values,

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 15.

Hosseini et al.

Page 41

Author Manuscript

Student’s t-test; *, p≤0.05; **, p≤0.01; ***, p≤0.001; ****, p≤0.0001; error bars depict
Mean ±SD.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 15.

Hosseini et al.

Page 42

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 3. Cell density regulates PgR expression and EL phenotype

(a) TUBO cells re-express PGR at low cell density. (b) TUBO cells grown at high density
up-regulate miR-9-5p. (c) Expression of miR-9-5p in early lesion (EL) and primary tumour
(PT) samples. (d) PT and TUBO cells generate the EL-signature only when grown at low
density. (e) Migration and sphere-formation of four human cell lines grown at low and high
densities and treated with PIPS (WNT4+RANKL) or progesterone (See also Extended Data
Fig 5; error bars are Mean ± SD). (f) Number of lung macro-metastases after tumour
formation from transplanted tumour pieces (1 mm3; high density) or 50 spheres in 40 μl

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 15.

Hosseini et al.

Page 43

Author Manuscript

matrigel (low density) and PT surgery (Mann-Whitney test; median). (g) Mechanisms of
local tumour and distant metastasis formation as derived from in vitro and in vivo (see Fig 4)
data. *, p≤0.05; ***, p≤0.001.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 15.

Hosseini et al.

Page 44

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 4. Progesterone signalling regulates tumour formation and dissemination in vivo

Author Manuscript

(a) Tumour formation 8 weeks after transplantation of PT- or EL-derived spheres into
mammary fat pads of wt-BALB/c siblings. (b) Percentage of mice with DCCs (detected by
cytokeratin staining) in bone marrow (BM) 8 weeks after transplantation. (c) Number of
DCCs in BM of mice 8 weeks after transplantation. (d) DCC counts in BM in recipients
transplanted at different age. (e) Time to tumour formation after transplantation of mammary
glands (week 4; gland model) or tumour pieces (week 20–22; tumour model). The red box
highlights mice from both models with similar tumour growth kinetics, which are analysed
separately in Extended Data Fig 6o–q. (f) Percentage of mice with lung macro-metastasis in
gland vs. PT model. (g) Macro-metastasis formation in recipient mice with similar tumour
growth kinetics (mice enclosed in red box of panel e; see Extended data Fig 6o). (h)
Example of a phylogenetic tree (mouse 3769): N, normal cells; P, primary tumour; M1-3,
metastases 1–3; A1-3, inferred common ancestors. The ordinate indicates the number of
aberrations per profile on a square root scale. (i) Aberration profiles along tree paths from N
via A1-3 to P or M1-3 in terms of aberration prototypes (see Extended data Fig 7–9 for
details). (j) Distribution of relative “time points” of dissemination on a genetic scale for all
44 primary tumour-metastases pairs. The red line indicates dissemination after which 50%
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 15.

Hosseini et al.

Page 45

Author Manuscript

of primary tumour changes were acquired as an arbitrary threshold for early vs late
dissemination; see Extended Data Fig 7c). P-values in panel a, c, and d: Student’s t-test; in
b,: Fisher’s exact test; in f and g: chi square test; in e: Mann-Whitney test. *, p≤0.05; ***,
p≤0.001; ****, p≤0.0001; NS, Not Significant. Panels a, c, d, and e represent medians.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 15.

Hosseini et al.

Page 46

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 5. PGR, HER2 signalling, and dissemination in breast cancer patients

(a) An increase in tumour diameter is not accompanied by an increase of DCCs in bone
marrow. (b) PGR and HER2 expression identifies a HER2high/PGRhigh subgroup of patients
with highest seeding rates. (c) Comparison of HER2high/PGRhigh human breast cancers and
primary Balb-NeuT mouse tumours for HER2/PGR staining: (A–B) EL (A) and PT (B) from
Balb-NeuT model. (C–D) High-density regions (strong HER2 and low PGR expression,
black arrows) and regions of invasive cells (strong PGR and HER2 expression, blue arrows).
(d) PGR-downregulating miRNAs are repressed in HER2high/PGRhigh human mammary

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 15.

Hosseini et al.

Page 47

Author Manuscript

carcinomas. (e) Copy number alterations in human primary breast cancers (from progenetix
database) and DCCs isolated from bone marrow of breast cancer patients with and without
metastasis (M0: n=94; M1: n=91). The y-axis depicts the percentage of samples with
aberrations (green = gain; red = loss) for each chromosomal region. (f) Oestrogen receptor
(ESR1) and progesterone receptor (PGR) transcript expression in human breast cancer
DCCs (10/26 DCCs from 19 M0 patients are shown; see Supplementary Table 8). ACTb,
EEF1a1, GAPDH: controls for sample quality. BT474 single cells: positive control. P-values
in a, b: chi-square test; in d: Mann-Whitney test ; *, p≤0.05; **, p≤0.01; NS, Not
Significant.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 15.

