Published OnlineFirst June 6, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2311

Cancer
Research

Tumor and Stem Cell Biology

An Inducible Hepatocellular Carcinoma Model for Preclinical
Evaluation of Antiangiogenic Therapy in Adult Mice
 Neumann1,2,
Anja Runge1,2, Junhao Hu1, Matthias Wieland1,2, Jan-Philip Bergeest3,4, Carolin Mogler1,5, Andre
6
7
3,4
8
5

Cyrill Geraud , Bernd Arnold , Karl Rohr , Dorde Komljenovic , Peter Schirmacher , Sergij Goerdt6, and
Hellmut G. Augustin1,2,9

Abstract
The limited availability of experimental tumor models that faithfully mimic the progression of human tumors
and their response to therapy remains a major bottleneck to the clinical translation and application of novel
therapeutic principles. To address this challenge in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), one of the deadliest and
most common cancers in the world, we developed and validated an inducible model of hepatocarcinogenesis in
adult mice. Tumorigenesis was triggered by intravenous adenoviral delivery of Cre recombinase in transgenic
mice expressing the hepatocyte-speciﬁc albumin promoter, a loxP-ﬂanked stop cassette, and the SV40 large Tantigen (iAST). Cre recombinase–mediated excision of the stop cassette led to a transient viral hepatitis and
resulted in multinodular tumorigenesis within 5 to 8 weeks. Tumor nodules with histologic characteristics of
human HCC established a functional vasculature by cooption, remodeling, and angiogenic expansion of the
preexisting sinusoidal liver vasculature with increasing signs of vascular immaturity during tumor progression.
Treatment of mice with sorafenib rapidly resulted in the induction of vascular regression, inhibition of tumor
growth, and enhanced overall survival. Vascular regression was characterized by loss of endothelial cells leaving
behind avascular type IV collagen–positive empty sleeves with remaining pericytes. Sorafenib treatment led to
transcriptional changes of Igf1, Id1, and cMet over time, which may reﬂect the emergence of potential escape
mechanisms. Taken together, our results established the iAST model of inducible hepatocarcinogenesis as a
robust and versatile preclinical model to study HCC progression and validate novel therapies. Cancer Res; 74(15);
4157–69. 2014 AACR.

Introduction
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the ﬁfth most common
cancer in men and the seventh in woman, and overall the third
leading cause of death from cancer worldwide (1). It commonly

1
Division of Vascular Oncology and Metastasis, German Cancer Research
Center Heidelberg (DKFZ–ZMBH Alliance), Heidelberg, Germany. 2Department of Vascular Biology and Tumor Angiogenesis (CBTM), Medical
Faculty Mannheim, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany. 3Division
of Bioinformatics and Functional Genomics, BioQuant Center, Heidelberg
University, Heidelberg, Germany. 4German Cancer Research Center
(DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. 5Department of Pathology, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany. 6Department for Dermatology, Venerology,
and Allergy, University Medical Center and Medical Faculty Mannheim,
Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany. 7Division of Molecular Immunology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany.
8
Division of Medical Physics in Radiology, German Cancer Research
Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. 9German Cancer Consortium, Heidelberg, Germany.

Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research
Online (http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Corresponding Author: Hellmut G. Augustin, Joint Research Division of
Vascular Biology, Medical Faculty Mannheim (CBTM), Heidelberg University, and German Cancer Research Center Heidelberg (DKFZ–ZMBH
Alliance), Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, D-69221 Heidelberg, Germany.
Phone: 496-2214-21500; Fax: 496-2214-21515; E-mail:
augustin@angiogenese.de
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2311
2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

develops from cirrhotic livers due to chronic hepatitis B and C
infections (2, 3) or a history of alcohol consumption. Multifocal
intrahepatic tumor development is common (4) and the prognosis is poor due to a limited response to systemic chemotherapy and radiotherapy, and lack of other treatment options.
Early diagnosed patients are eligible for tumor resection or
transplantation if cirrhosis is present. However, the incidence
of tumor recurrence is very high. A widely accepted technique
to treat HCC is transarterial chemoembolization, during which
tumor-associated arterial vessels are selectively obstructed,
resulting in tumor necrosis (5).
Recently, sorafenib, a small multikinase inhibitor, has shown
some efﬁcacy as monotherapy in patients with late-stage HCC
(6). Yet, the overall clinical beneﬁt of sorafenib in terms of timeto-progression and overall survival (OS) is rather modest (7),
highlighting the need to mechanistically better understand
beyond the molecular target speciﬁcity how sorafenib is actually interfering with tumor growth and what limits its clinical
efﬁcacy. As a multikinase inhibitor targeting the Raf/MEK/
MAPK, VEGFR, and PDGFRb signaling pathways (8), sorafenib
exerts direct antitumorigenic as well as antiangiogenic effects,
which have been demonstrated in various animal models as
well as in patients (9, 10). Yet, the detailed functional mechanism of action in vivo has not been analyzed in much detail.
The better mechanistic understanding of the effects of
sorafenib on HCC progression is also of general interest

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

4157

Published OnlineFirst June 6, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2311

Runge et al.

because angiogenesis in HCC is different from angiogenesis in
other solid tumors as a consequence of the unique vascular
properties of the liver. The intrahepatic vasculature consists of
a dual vascular system, the arterial/venous, and the sinusoidal
endothelium. Both are believed to contribute to HCC development by changing from a venous towards a capillary endothelial cell-like phenotype with expression of markers of continuous, nonfenestrated endothelial cells (11). Indeed, early
intratumoral blood supply appears to primarily depend on the
sinusoidal vasculature with later involvement of the hepatic
arterial system (12, 13). HCC angiogenesis depends on the
activation, proliferation, and migration of endothelial cells as
well as of pericytes, events that are also found in other tumors
with high angiogenic potential (14). Clinical studies have
solidly established a correlation of the angiogenic activity with
a high risk of vascular invasion, metastasis, and poor prognosis
(15, 16).
A number of animal models have been established for the
study of HCC progression. These include subcutaneous and
orthotopic grafting models, genetically engineered mouse
models, as well as chemically induced carcinogenesis models
(17). While all of these models resemble key features of the
pathogenesis of HCC, many of them are also somewhat limited
by either the large global induction of tumorigenesis in the
liver, which hardly mimics the multinodular development of
HCC as it occurs in humans, or the long duration until tumor
development, which in some of the genetic models might take
up to 2 years (18). Likewise, none of the established models has
been optimized for the analysis of HCC angiogenesis, which is
one of the reasons for the hitherto poorly characterized effects
of sorafenib in experimental models of HCC.
The RipTag model of endocrine pancreas tumorigenesis
(RipTag ¼ rat insulin promoter – SV40 large T-antigen) has
over the years proven to be a powerful system for the
spatiotemporal analysis of intratumoral angiogenesis during
tumor initiation and tumor progression (19, 20). SV40 large
T-antigen–driven tumorigenesis has also been employed for
the induction of liver tumorigenesis (21). While global
constitutive liver TAg induction may yield limited insights
into HCC pathogenesis, inducible models of TAg-driven
hepatocarcinogenesis may be particularly suitable to mechanistically dissect the intricate tumor–stromal crosstalk
during HCC progression, including the induction of angiogenesis. We have, in the present study, taken advantage of a
recently developed inducible variant of TAg-driven hepatocarcinogenesis, in which tumorigenesis is induced through
the adenoviral delivery of Cre recombinase (22). The unprecedented versatility, robustness, and temporal properties of
this model provide unique opportunities to spatiotemporally
study the progression of HCC and the response of HCC to
therapy.

Materials and Methods
Animals and tumor induction
Cre-inducible AST transgenic mice (22) bred in the C57/Bl6
background were housed in the institutional animal facility.
Neoplastic transformation was induced in 8- to 12-week-old
mice by tail-vein injection of 109 infectious units of adenovirus

4158

Cancer Res; 74(15) August 1, 2014

expressing Cre recombinase (Vector BioLabs). Genotype of the
transgene was conﬁrmed by PCR. All experiments were
approved by the institutional and governmental Animal Care
and Use Committees [RP Karlsruhe (35-9185.81/G-228/10)].
In vivo studies
Mice were treated daily with 20, 40, 60, or 100 mg/kg of
sorafenib delivered by oral gavage. Sorafenib, p-Toluenesulfonate (LC Laboratories), was diluted in 1:1 Cremophor EL
(Sigma)/50% ethanol. Vehicle-treated animals received 1:1
Cremophor EL/50% ethanol solution. For perfusion experiments, 150 mL of 1 mg/mL lectin (FITC-labeled Bandeiraea
simplicifolia; Sigma); for leakage analysis, 150 mL of 60 mg/kg
dextran (TRITC-Dextran, low molecular weight; 65–85 kDa,
Sigma); and for hypoxia, 150 mL of 60 mg/kg pimonidazole was
injected into the tail vein 20 minutes before sacriﬁce.
Computed tomography
Mice were anesthetized using a mixture of isoﬂurane (1.5%)
and oxygen (0.5 l/min). Hundred microliters of Fenestra LC
contrast agent (LC-133; Advanced Research Technologies, Inc.)
was injected intravenously in the tail vein. Respiratory-gated
VCT imaging was performed on a prototype ﬂat panel–
equipped volumetric computer tomograph (Volume CT, Siemens) with the following parameters: tube voltage, 80 kV; tube
current, 50 mA; scan time, 80 seconds; frames per second, 120;
rotation speed, 10 seconds; Kernel H80a; matrix 512  512.
Images were processed with the program OsiriX v.5.5.1 (23).
The program was used with GPU engine and active shading at
default settings. Image series were imported and processed
with the function "3d volume rendering".
Magnetic resonance imaging
Mice were anaesthetized using a mixture of isoﬂurane (1.5%)
and oxygen (0.5 L/min). Magnetic resonance images were
acquired on a 1.5-T clinical MR scanner (Symphony, Siemens).
A home-built coil for radiofrequency excitation and detection
was used and designed as a cylindrical volume resonator with
an inner diameter of 83 mm and a usable length of 120 mm. T2
-weighted images were acquired using a turbo spin-echo
sequence (orientation axial, TR 3,240 ms; TE 81 ms; matrix,
152  256; resolution, 0.35  0.35  1.5 mm3; 3 averages, 15
images; scan time, 3:40 min). Images were processed with
The Medical Imaging Interaction Toolkit (MITK version
0.10.0, 2008, freeware). Image series were imported and tumor
nodules were marked using the "interactive segmentation"
tool. Subsequently, nodule volume was determined in ml using
the volumetry function of the same tool. The ﬁve largest
nodules were analyzed to assess tumor progression over time.
Tumor volumes were averaged per mouse and per time from
vehicle (n ¼ 8) and sorafenib (n ¼ 9) treated animals, respectively. Values were grouped in three time points starting with
the treatment initiation (week 0) and the respective follow-ups
(week 1 and week 2).
Immunohistochemistry
Parafﬁn-embedded liver samples were dehydrated followed
by antigen retrieval using citrate buffer, pH 6.0 (DAKO). Before

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst June 6, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2311

The iAST Model of Inducible Hepatocarcinogenesis

antibody incubation, slides were subjected to 3% H2O2 to
inactivate endogenous peroxidase activity and blocked in
4% BSA/2% normal goat serum diluted in 1 TBS/Tween-20
(0.5%; AppliChem). The following primary antibodies were
used: anti-mouse glypican 3 antibody (1:200; Abcam); rabbit
anti-mouse HSP70 (1:100; Cell Signaling Technology);
polyclonal rabbit anti-human CD3 antibody (1:300, Dako);
polyclonal rabbit-anti IGF1Rb antibody (1:300, Cell Signaling
Technology); polyclonal goat anti-mouse VEGF164 antibody
(1:10; R&D Systems), and secondary goat anti-rabbit or goat
anti rat IgG biotinylated antibody (1:200, Vector Laboratories),
or donkey anti-goat IgG biotinylated antibody (1:200, Jackson
Dianova). Antibody detection was visualized by 3,30 -diaminobenzidine after ABC-HRP incubation and sections were counterstained with Mayer's hematoxylin. Hypoxia was assessed
using Hypoxyprobe-1 Plus Kit (hpi) including FITC-conjugated
mouse IgG (1:50) and rabbit HRP-conjugated anti-FITC secondary antibody (1:100); antigen retrieval was performed in
Citric-EDTA buffer. Human HCC nodules were detected with
two different mouse monoclonal antibodies: anti-human Glypican 3 antibody Clone 1G12 (1:100; Biomosaics); anti-human
HSP70 antibody (1:250; Santa Cruz); and rabbit-anti-mouse
biotinylated IgG (1:250 Dako). Staining was performed using an
automated immunohistochemical stainer (Techmate 500,
DakoCytomation) and ChemMate detection kit in accordance
with the manufacturer's protocol.
Cryosections. Cryosections (7 mm) were methanol-ﬁxed
and the tumor vasculature was detected by rat anti-mouse
CD31 staining (1:100; BD Pharmingen) and goat anti-rat IgG
conjugated with Alexa 488 (1:500; Invitrogen). Tumor pericytes
were detected with two different antibodies: rabbit anti-Desmin polyclonal antibody (1:200; Abcam) and goat anti-rabbit
IgG biotinylated antibody (Invitrogen), which was detected by
streptavidin conjugated with Alexa 546 (1:250; Invitrogen), and
a mouse monoclonal anti-human/mouse a-smooth muscle
actin (aSMA) directly labeled with Cy3 antibody (1:250; Sigma).
Basement membrane component collagen type IV was
detected with rabbit anti-collagen type IV polyclonal antibody
(1:200; Serotec); apoptosis was detected with rabbit anti-mouse
cleaved caspase-3 (1:100; Cell Signaling Technology); sinusoidal endothelial cells were detected with rabbit anti-mouse
Lyve1 (1:200; Reliatech); and goat anti-rabbit IgG conjugated
with Alexa 546 (1:500; Invitrogen), as well as directly biotinylated monoclonal mouse anti-mouse Stabilin 2 (1:500). Details
of morphologic and vascular analyses as well as whole liver
imaging and perfusion analysis are outlined in the Supplementary Data.
Biochemical and molecular biological techniques
Protocols for standard quantitative PCR (qPCR), microarray
analysis, Western blot analysis, and ELISA measurements are
summarized in the Supplementary Data.
Statistical analysis
GraphPad Prism software was used. Data were analyzed by
unpaired Student t test unless otherwise indicated. Values were
expressed as mean  SD. P < 0.05 was considered statistically
signiﬁcant.

www.aacrjournals.org

Results
Adenoviral Cre-driven hepatocellular carcinogenesis
leads to the formation of multinodular tumors
Inducible AST transgenic mice (iAST) express the SV40 TAg
oncogene under the control of the albumin promoter. Yet, the
oncogene is not transcribed due to the insertion of a ﬂoxed
stop cassette between the promoter and the oncogene (22).
Oncogenic transformation of hepatocytes is induced by excision of the ﬂoxed stop cassette, which is mediated by the
hepatotropism of tail vein injected adenovirus expressing Cre
recombinase (22).
Adenoviral Cre recombinase delivery induced acute hepatitis and parenchymal destruction at 1 week postinjection
(Supplementary Fig. S1A). Oncogenic transformation with
atypical hepatocytes appeared at 2 weeks postinjection
(Fig. 1A, left) accompanied by amelioration of the acute
hepatitis with persistent immune cell inﬁltration (Fig. 1A,
right). The nuclear–cytoplasmic ratio shifted at 4 weeks postinjection with the emergence of nodular structures and fully
developed HCC nodules at 9 weeks postinjection (Supplementary Fig. S1A).
Noninvasive CT imaging identiﬁed multifocal liver tumor
nodules of varying sizes after 5 to 8 weeks (Fig. 1B and C). CT
data were validated by histologic analyses of sectioned liver
samples (Fig. 1D, left). SV40 TAg was expressed within the
tumor nodules as well as in single cells, indicating an early
tumorous transformation of hepatocytes (Fig. 1D, right and
Supplementary Fig. S1B). Nonparenchymal cells did not
express SV40 TAg. Notably, SV40 TAg-expressing lesions were
positive for markers of malignant hepatocellular transformation in humans, including glypican 3 and HSP70 (Fig. 1E and
F; ref. 24). Taken together, the iAST-induced tumorigenesis
proved to be a versatile mouse model of hepatocarcinogenesis
enabling temporal (time of virus delivery), and spatial (albumin
promoter) induction of hepatocarcinogenesis in adult mice
resembling the multifocal tumorigenesis observed in human
HCC.
Tumor nodules establish a functional neovasculature
with increasing immaturity during tumor progression
Human HCC is a highly vascularized tumor. Increased
circulating levels of angiogenic factors such as VEGF and
Angiopoietin-2 (Ang2) have been reported in patients with
HCC and correlate with poor prognosis (25–28). Correspondingly, tumor-bearing iAST mice revealed signs of active angiogenesis: Circulating levels of VEGF were upregulated in iASTinduced tumor-bearing mice (Fig. 2A). VEGF-A expression was
restricted to hepatocytes, as previously described (29), in
normal livers and upregulated in nontransformed hepatocytes
outside the tumorigenic area as well as in cells within larger
nodules at later stages (Supplementary Fig. S2). Ang1 and even
more so Ang2 mRNA and protein levels were strongly upregulated in tumorigenic livers of iAST mice (Fig. 2B and C). To
quantitatively assess the tumor angiogenic response in relation
to tumor progression, tumor nodules were categorized in three
groups based on different nodule size, namely small (histologic
surface area <0.1 mm2), intermediate (0.1–0.2 mm2), and large
(>0.2 mm2). Surprisingly, no changes in total tumor vessel area

Cancer Res; 74(15) August 1, 2014

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

4159

Published OnlineFirst June 6, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2311

Runge et al.

within tumor nodules were observed during tumorigenesis.
Notably, even the smallest nodules contained microvessels
(Fig. 2D), suggesting that tumor angiogenesis did not occur
from expansively growing avascular nodules. Instead, tumor
cells in growing nodules coopted and remodeled preexisting
sinusoidal vessels, similar to the recently reported cooptive
growth of liver metastasizing tumors (30). This conclusion was
also conﬁrmed by histologic analyses, which revealed a grossly
altered tumor microvascular architecture with enlarged,
strongly CD31-positive intratumoral microvessels (Fig. 2E),
compared with the low CD31 expression of liver sinusoidal
endothelial cells (LSEC) as has similarly been observed in a
constitutive SV40-TAg HCC model (31). These CD31-positive
microvessels were well embedded in a type IV collagen–
positive basement membrane in tumor nodules of different
sizes (Fig. 2E and F). In addition, tumor vessels at all stages
were well perfused and tumor nodules showed little to no signs
of necrosis (Supplementary Fig. S3), indicating the presence of
a functional vascular network at all analyzed tumor stages.
Analysis of intratumoral vessel maturation by staining for
mural cell markers identiﬁed profound changes during tumor-

igenesis: Microvessels in smaller nodules stained prominently
for the pan-pericyte marker desmin (55%–60%), whereas
microvessels in larger nodules were characterized by lower
pericyte coverage indices (20%–25%; Fig. 2G and H). In contrast, the fraction of microvessels positive for the pericyte
activation marker aSMA was signiﬁcantly larger in big nodules
compared with small nodules (20% vs. 10%; Fig. 2I and J). This
pattern of desmin-high/aSMA-low levels in small nodules
and desmin-low/aSMA-high levels in large nodules reﬂected
an increasing immaturity of the tumor microvasculature during tumor progression. The same marker combination has
also been observed in Lewis lung carcinomas (32). Taken
together, the vascular analysis of growing tumors identiﬁed
a functional vascular network in early stages of tumorigenesis
with signs of increasing microvascular immaturity during
tumor progression.
Sorafenib treatment inhibits tumor growth, improves
vascular architecture, and enhances survival
The multikinase inhibitor sorafenib has some efﬁcacy
as monotherapy in patients with late-stage HCC (6). We

Figure 1. Formation of tumor nodules of varying sizes following tumor induction by adenoviral Cre delivery. A, representative images of hematoxylin and eosin
(H&E) and the T-cell marker CD3 stainings of parafﬁn-embedded liver sections showing tumorous transformation (arrows) as well as an acute viral hepatitis
with T-cell inﬁltrations (arrowheads) 2 weeks after adenoviral Cre infection. B, representative 2D CT images of mouse livers 7 (left) and 9 weeks (right) after
adenoviral Cre infection (L, normal liver tissue; St, stomach; n, tumor nodule). C, 3D reconstruction of a CT image series in B; arrows, small nodules at 7 weeks
after tumor induction that have increased in size after 9 weeks (S, spleen). D, hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining of parafﬁn-embedded liver section
(left) showing heterogeneous nodules of different sizes (dotted lines); note clear cell and basophilic nodules that are similarly observed in human HCC. Green
ﬂuorescent–stained SV40 TAg in cryosection (right) showing positive labeled transformed hepatocytes (dotted lines) in tumorigenic iAST livers, small
box with higher magniﬁcation. Note, nontumorigenic cells (arrows) and the typical ﬂat shaped nucleus of endothelial cells (arrowheads) are void of SV40 TAg
staining. E and F, glypican-3 (E) and HSP70 (F) staining of mouse (left) and human (right) parafﬁn-embedded liver sections showing positive staining
(arrowheads) in the tumorigenic areas of mouse and human HCC nodules (T, tumorigenic area; CV, central vein).

4160

Cancer Res; 74(15) August 1, 2014

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst June 6, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2311

The iAST Model of Inducible Hepatocarcinogenesis

consequently examined its therapeutic efﬁcacy in the preclinical iAST model of hepatocarcinogenesis. To this end, mice
were staged by magnetic resonance imaging and treatment
was initiated as soon as tumors became detectable. Daily
treatment with sorafenib (100 mg/kg) dramatically reduced
tumor growth compared with vehicle-treated animals
(Fig. 3A–D). To assess the microvasculature in the different
treatment groups, livers were perfused through the portal vein
with microﬁl cast. Sorafenib treatment resulted in the maintenance of the typical hierarchical branching structures similar
to control-treated mice (Fig. 3E).

Next, we examined the preclinical efﬁcacy of a lower dose of
sorafenib (60 mg/kg) as maintenance therapy that had previously been studied as long-term treatment (33). Early initiation
of sorafenib maintenance therapy (5 weeks after tumor initiation) resulted on average in a four-fold extended OS compared
with the vehicle control group (Fig. 3F). Of note, mice in the
sorafenib-treated group died or were sacriﬁced because of poor
health condition and not as a direct consequence of tumor
growth. These mice displayed severe weight loss, partial
necrosis and hemorrhage in the liver, and lung bleeding after
80 days of treatment; effects that can similarly be observed in

Figure 2. Expression of angiogenic factors and vascular characteristics during iAST-induced HCC progression. A, VEGFA ELISA showing increased levels of
circulating VEGF in the serum of tumor-bearing mice. B, qPCR showing upregulated expression of Ang1 and Ang2 in livers with tumor nodules (n ¼ 3–4 per
group). C, Western blot analysis displaying increased protein levels of Ang1 and Ang2 in tumorigenic whole liver lysates. D, quantitative analysis of the
2
intratumoral microvasculature, revealing no changes in tumor vascular area in different size tumor nodules (<0.1, 0.1–0.2, and >0.2 mm ; N ¼ 5–6, n ¼ 10–20
nodules per experimental group). E, representative images of cryosections double-stained for CD31 (green) and type IV collagen (red). F, quantitative analysis
of type IV collagen and CD31 costained areas (n ¼ 5–6; n ¼ 20–40 nodules per experimental group). G, representative images of cryosections double-stained
for CD31 (green) and desmin (red). H, quantitative analysis of desmin-covered microvessels of total intratumoral CD31-positive microvessels (n ¼ 5–6;
n ¼ 10–20 nodules per experimental group). I, representative images of cryosections double-stained for CD31 (green) and aSMA (red). J, quantitative analysis
of aSMA-covered microvessels of total intratumoral CD31-positive microvessels (n ¼ 5–6; n ¼ 10–20 nodules per experimental group). Scale bar, 200 mm;
ELISA data were analyzed by Mann–Whitney U test (n ¼ 4–5).  , P < 0.05;   , P < 0.01;    , P < 0.001; error bar, SD; n, tumor nodule; CV, central vein.

www.aacrjournals.org

Cancer Res; 74(15) August 1, 2014

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

4161

Published OnlineFirst June 6, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2311

Runge et al.

human patients (Supplementary Fig. S4). A delayed initiation
of sorafenib treatment (upon MRI detection of tumor nodules)
still resulted in a signiﬁcant extension of OS, albeit with lower
efﬁcacy (Fig. 3F). The analysis of transcriptomic changes
during sorafenib treatment identiﬁed the downregulation of
Hbegf and Hgf expression, whereas cMet was upregulated (Fig.
3G). The data demonstrate a potent preclinical efﬁcacy of
sorafenib in the iAST model of hepatocarcinogenesis with
reduced tumor growth and a largely preserved organ vascular
architecture. The therapeutic response closely resembled the
treatment outcome in human patients with earlier sorafenib
administration, resulting in improved clinical efﬁcacy.
The antitumorigenic effect of sorafenib results from its
antiangiogenic activity
Although sorafenib has been shown to inhibit tumorigenic
Raf signaling, treatment of iAST mice had only minimal effects

on bRaf and cRaf as well as p44/42 MAPK (Fig. 4A–C). In
contrast, Akt phosphorylation was prominently reduced upon
sorafenib treatment (Fig. 4D). Moreover, expression and phosphorylation of the angiogenic receptor tyrosine kinases
VEGFR2 and PDGFRß was strongly downregulated in the livers
of sorafenib-treated tumor bearing iAST mice (Fig. 4E–H). This
antiangiogenic effect resulted in the downregulation of Ang2
mRNA and protein and stabilized expression of the Angiopoietin receptor Tie2 despite a downregulation of Tie2 mRNA
levels (Fig. 4F and H). VEGF expression was prominently
upregulated upon sorafenib treatment, both, at the mRNA and
protein level in serum and liver lysates (Fig. 4H–J) as well as in
the tumorigenic areas in the liver (Supplementary Fig. S5)
possibly due to hypoxia (Supplementary Fig. S6), suggesting a
compensatory mechanism in response to treatment. Sorafenib
treatment had no effect on the resting organ vasculature
outside tumor nodules as evidenced by unaltered expression

Figure 3. Analysis of the effect of sorafenib on tumor growth in the iAST model. A, representative MR images of livers with detectable tumor nodules
(arrowheads) at the start of sorafenib treatment. B, representative images of livers from normal nontreated mice, vehicle- and sorafenib-treated mice 14 days
after treatment initiation (asterisk in A and B shows the same nodule). C, macroscopic images of livers from normal nontreated, vehicle-, and sorafenib-treated
mice obtained 14 days after initiation of sorafenib. Note reduced overall tumor burden in the sorafenib-treated liver. D, quantitative analysis of tumor growth in
vehicle- and sorafenib-treated mice (100 mg/kg; n ¼ 7–8 per group). E, microcast of livers from normal nontreated, vehicle-, and sorafenib-treated
mice displaying the vascular architecture of the liver vascular tree. F, Kaplan–Meier curve of vehicle-treated mice (black line), mice with early onset of sorafenib
treatment (blue line; initiation of therapy 5 weeks after adenoviral Cre delivery), and late onset of treatment (red line; initiation of therapy upon MRI detection of
tumor nodules, 60 mg/kg; n ¼ 7–11 per group). G, qPCR of Hbegf, Hgf, and cMet in normal mice, as well as in vehicle-treated and sorafenib-treated
tumor bearing mice (n ¼ 5 per group).  , P < 0.05;   , P < 0.01;    , P < 0.001; error bar, SD; L, left; R, right; Sp, spinal cord; St, stomach; A, aorta; Gb, gall bladder.

4162

Cancer Res; 74(15) August 1, 2014

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst June 6, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2311

The iAST Model of Inducible Hepatocarcinogenesis

Figure 4. Changes of angiogenic growth factor and receptor expression upon sorafenib treatment. A–G, Western blot analysis of bRaf (A), cRaf (B), p44/42
MAPK (C), Akt (D), VEGFR2 (E), Ang1, Ang2, Tie2 (F), and PDGFRb (G) expression in whole liver lysates from normal mice as well as vehicle- and sorafenibtreated tumor-bearing mice. Sorafenib treatment had minor effects on bRaf, cRaf, and p44/42 MAPK expression. Yet, phospho-Akt levels were strongly
reduced. Likewise, phospho-VEGFR2 and phospho-PDGFRb levels were strongly reduced as well as the expression of total VEGFR2, Ang1 and Ang2,
and total PDGFRb upon sorafenib treatment. H, qPCR analysis of Vegfa, Vegfr2, Ang1, Ang2, and Tie2 expression in normal mice, as well as vehicle- and
sorafenib-treated tumor-bearing mice demonstrating reduced expression of Vegfr2, Ang2, and Tie2 mRNA upon sorafenib treatment, whereas Vegfa was
signiﬁcantly upregulated upon treatment (n ¼ 5 per group). The upregulation of VEGFA upon sorafenib treatment was validated on the protein level in the serum
(I) as well as in lysates of liver tissue (J; n ¼ 5–7 per group).  , P < 0.05;   , P < 0.01;    , P < 0.001; error bar, SD.

of the sinusoidal endothelial cell markers Lyve1 (34) and
Stabilin 2 (Supplementary Fig. S7; ref. 35). Together, these data
show that sorafenib exerted its antitumorigenic effect in the
iAST model of hepatocarcinogenesis primarily at the microvascular level as an inhibitor of tumor-associated angiogenesis.
Sorafenib treatment inhibits pericyte recruitment and
leads to intratumoral microvessel regression
The antiangiogenic effects of sorafenib could be due to
effects on endothelial cells, pericytes, or both. On the basis of
the prominent downregulation of PDGFRb expression upon
sorafenib treatment (Fig. 4B), we performed additional qPCR
and Western blot analyses to examine the effect of sorafenib on
intratumoral pericytes. Expression of most pericyte markers
was downregulated upon sorafenib treatment (desmin, aSMA,
Ng2, CD248; Fig. 5A).
To analyze the structural features of endothelial cells and
pericytes upon treatment in more detail, we assessed vessel
characteristics by immunoﬂuorescence stainings for CD31,

www.aacrjournals.org

aSMA, desmin, as well as the basement membrane component
type IV collagen. Sorafenib treatment resulted in a signiﬁcant
reduction of intratumoral microvessel area (Fig. 5B) and a
reduced number of vascular branchpoints compared with
vehicle-treated animals (Fig. 5C). Whole mount image analysis
revealed that the overall architecture of larger vessels was
preserved in the sorafenib-treated group, whereas the vascular
tree in the tumors of control mice was characterized by
disorganized and chaotropic vessels (Fig. 5D). On the microvascular level, sorafenib treatment resulted in a strong reduction of aSMA (Fig. 5E–G) and desmin-covered microvessels
(Fig. 5H and I). Concomitantly, signiﬁcantly increased numbers
of aSMA-positive and desmin-positive pericytes without
microvascular association (i.e., no CD31 colocalization) were
detected in tumor nodules of sorafenib-treated iAST mice (Fig.
5G and J) demonstrating that sorafenib treatment potently
blocked intratumoral microvessel maturation by inhibiting
pericyte recruitment. Furthermore, sorafenib treatment
resulted in a decrease of type IV collagen deposition around

Cancer Res; 74(15) August 1, 2014

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

4163

Published OnlineFirst June 6, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2311

Runge et al.

Figure 5. Sorafenib treatment results in vascular regression with loss of endothelial cells and maintained pericytes. A, qPCR analysis of livers from nontreated
normal mice as well as vehicle- and sorafenib-treated mice showing a signiﬁcant downregulation of the pericyte markers aSMA, desmin, PDGFRb, NG2, and
CD248 (n ¼ 5 per group). B and C, quantitative analysis of the vasculature in livers of vehicle- and sorafenib-treated mice showing signiﬁcant reduction of
vascular area (B) and branchpoints (C) upon sorafenib treatment (n ¼ 5–6 per group). D, representative OPT Bioptonic images of livers stained by
immunoﬂuorescence for aSMA showing a preserved architecture of the large vascular trees upon sorafenib treatment. E, H, and K, representative images of
liver cryosections from vehicle- or sorafenib-treated mice double-stained for CD31 (green) and aSMA (red; E), CD31 (green) and desmin (red; H), and CD31
(green) and type IV collagen (red; K). The arrowheads mark endothelial cell-free type IV collagen–positive sleeves (K). F, G, I, J, L, and M, quantitative analysis of
aSMA-covered CD31-positive intratumoral microvessels (F and G), desmin-covered CD31-positive intratumoral microvessels (I and J), and relative ratio of
type IV collagen staining to CD31 staining (L and M; n ¼ 5–6 per group). The relative ratio of aSMA-positive (F), desmin-covered (I), and type IV collagen–
positive (L) intratumoral microvessels was signiﬁcantly reduced upon sorafenib treatment. Yet, the percentage of aSMA-positive (G) and desmin-positive (J)
cells not in contact with CD31-positive endothelial cells was signiﬁcantly increased upon sorafenib treatment. Likewise, the number of endothelial cell-empty
type IV collagen–positive sleeves was signiﬁcantly increased upon sorafenib treatment (M). Scale bar, 200 mm (E, H, K); 1 mm (D).  , P < 0.05;   , P < 0.01;

, P < 0.001; error bar, SD; T, tumorigenic area.

intratumoral microvessels (Fig. 5K–M). However, we identiﬁed
a strong increase in the number of type IV collagen–positive
empty sleeves upon sorafenib treatment, indicating active
regression of sprouting neovessels, presumably of non-pericyte–covered immature capillaries. Collectively, the detailed
vascular analyses identiﬁed a dual antivascular mechanism of
action of sorafenib, which was characterized by an inhibition of

4164

Cancer Res; 74(15) August 1, 2014

pericyte recruitment to endothelial cells and regression of
immature microvessels.
Sorafenib leads to rapid intratumoral microvessel
regression
The pronounced antiangiogenic effects of sorafenib in the
iAST model prompted us to analyze in more detail the

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst June 6, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2311

The iAST Model of Inducible Hepatocarcinogenesis

Figure 6. Rapid vascular changes upon sorafenib treatment. A–C, confocal images of CD31/cleaved caspase-3 double-stained cryosections from tumorous
livers 12, 16, and 24 hours after induction of sorafenib treatment showing vascular regression with little evidence of apoptotic endothelial cell death.
B, confocal images of triple-stained cryosections (CD31/desmin/type IV collagen) from tumorous livers of vehicle-treated and 24-hour sorafenib-treated mice
showing a reduction of microvessel density with remaining desmin-positive pericytes in type IV collagen–positive empty sleeves (arrowheads). C, confocal
images of CD31-stained cryosections from tumorous livers of vehicle-treated and 6-day sorafenib-treated mice showing stable vessels with vascular
pruning and few capillary sprouts (arrowheads) following treatment. D, qPCR analysis of Vegfa, Vegfr2, Ang1, Ang2, and Tie2 at different times after vehicle and
sorafenib treatment (n ¼ 5 per group). Scale bar, 50 mm.  , P < 0.05;   , P < 0.01;    , P < 0.001; error bar, SD; n, tumor nodule.

temporal kinetics of the observed vessel regression phenotype.
No detectable microvascular changes were observed within 12
and 16 hours of sorafenib treatment (Fig. 6A). Thereafter,
massive vascular regression was rapidly initiated after 24 hours
of therapy induction, resulting in a vessel phenotype comparable with the 14-day end point (Fig. 6A). At this time point,
desmin-positive pericytes were left within type IV collagen–
positive empty sleeves (Fig. 6B). After 6 days of treatment, the
dense network of intratumoral microvessels as seen in the
control group was remodeled to a pruned tree of larger
diameter vessels in the sorafenib-treated group (Fig. 6C and
Supplementary Fig. S8). The temporal analysis of key regulators of the angiogenic cascade by qPCR in the different
treatment groups revealed a signiﬁcant time-dependent
decrease in Vegfr2 and Tie2 expression, most likely reﬂecting
the reduction of the absolute numbers of endothelial cells upon

www.aacrjournals.org

treatment. Vegfa expression increased gradually over time,
indicating a compensatory upregulation mechanism in
response to the antiangiogenic effects. Surprisingly, the Tie2
ligands Ang1 and Ang2 were most dynamically regulated being
strongly downregulated as rapidly as 24 hours after initiation of
therapy (Fig. 6D).
IGF1/IGF1R/IRS signaling is a potential driver of tumor
progression during sorafenib treatment
We performed microarray analyses of iAST tumors from the
different experimental groups to identify additional mechanisms of action in sorafenib treatment over time (Supplementary Fig. S9; original data deposited in the Gene Expression
Omnibus database; accession no. GSE54857). Sorafenib treatment led to an increase of insulin-like growth factor 1
(Igf1; Fig. 7A and B) and cMet expression (Fig. 7B), whereas

Cancer Res; 74(15) August 1, 2014

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

4165

Published OnlineFirst June 6, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2311

Runge et al.

Figure 7. IGF1 evolves as a potential tumor escape mechanism upon low dose and long-term sorafenib treatment. A, microarray heatmap showing Igf1
upregulation upon long-term sorafenib treatment. B, qPCR analysis of Igf1, Id1, Hgf, and cMet mRNA expression showing upregulation of Igf1 and Id1
expression upon long-term sorafenib treatment. In turn, Hgf was downregulated upon sorafenib treatment and expression of cMet was transiently
increased (n ¼ 4–5 per group). C, ELISA determination of IGF1 serum concentrations from 14-day- and long-term sorafenib-treated mice conﬁrming
the increase of IGF1 expression compared to vehicle controls (n ¼ 4–6 per group). D, expression of IGF1R in liver sections from vehicle-treated as well as
24-hour, 14-day, and long-term sorafenib-treated mice showing increased IGF1R expression in the 14-day- and long-term sorafenib-treated samples
(arrowheads;  , central vein). E, Kaplan–Meier survival curve of vehicle-treated mice (n ¼ 4, black line), mice with 20 mg/kg (n ¼ 17, red line), and 40 mg/kg
(n ¼ 14, blue line) sorafenib treatment (initiation of therapy upon MRI detection of tumor nodules). F, qPCR analysis of Igf1 mRNA expression showing
upregulation of Igf1 expression in progressing (end stage) and higher Igf1 expression in slow progressing (before end stage) 40 mg/kg sorafenib-treated
mice. G, IGF1 ELISA of liver lysates conﬁrming the increase of IGF1 expression in the slow progressing tumorigenic mice upon 40 mg/kg sorafenib
treatment. Scale bar, 500 mm. Microarrays were performed on Illumina chips (n ¼ 3–4 per group) and analyzed using Chipster software.  , P < 0.05;   , P < 0.01;

, P < 0.001; error bar, SD; T, tumorigenic area.

Hgf expression was decreased after 14 days as well as after longterm treatment (Fig. 7B). Correspondingly, following a sharp
decline of circulating IGF1 upon tumor induction, sorafenib
treatment led to an increase of circulating IGF1 over time (Fig.
7C). Concomitantly, analysis of IGF1R receptor expression in
the iAST model revealed a prominent gradual increase of
IGF1R in tumor nodules during long-term sorafenib treatment
(Fig. 7D). Activated insulin receptor substrate (IRS), the substrate for active IGF1R signaling, was correspondingly upregulated in the long-term sorafenib-treated samples compared
with the 14 day sorafenib-treated samples as evidenced by
Western blot analysis of tumorigenic liver lysates (Supplementary Fig. S10). Similarly, phospho-Akt was upregulated in the

4166

Cancer Res; 74(15) August 1, 2014

LT-sorafenib–treated samples, indicating that the tumorigenic
areas in these samples regained proliferative potential. To
validate the increase in IGF1 as a putative mechanism of sorafenib to overcome tumor growth reduction, lower doses of
sorafenib (20 and 40 mg/kg) were given to late stage mice
(upon MRI detection). While 20 mg/kg resulted on average in a
survival advantage of 6 days, 40 mg/kg resulted in a more signiﬁcant increase in survival (Fig. 7E). Mice receiving 40 mg/kg
sorafenib were divided in two groups: One group (progressing)
was analyzed at end stage, when the abdomen was increased
in size and the second group (slow progressing) was analyzed
before end stage (no visible swelling of the abdomen). Side
effects such as severe weight loss were not observed in these

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst June 6, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2311

The iAST Model of Inducible Hepatocarcinogenesis

two groups (Supplementary Fig. S11). As evidenced in Fig. 7F
and G, Igf1 mRNA and protein from whole liver lysates were
analyzed by qPCR and ELISA, respectively, and revealed an
increase in Igf1 mRNA and protein level in the "progressing"
group and more so in the "slow progressing" group. Taken
together, the data provide evidence for a possible role of the
IGF1/IGF1R/IRS signaling as a possible escape mechanism
during continuous sorafenib treatment.

Discussion
The dramatic developments in cancer genome analysis lead
to the discovery of tumor targets at an unprecedented pace. In
turn, the translation of preclinical target identiﬁcation and
validation research into novel therapies is slow and as inefﬁcient as never before. Preclinical mouse tumor models play a
central role in the clinical translation of such targets. Yet, the
limited availability of mouse models that truthfully mimic the
course and progression of human tumors and their response to
therapy has emerged as one of the most rate-limiting bottlenecks of translational oncology research.
There is also need for better mouse tumor models because
the information ﬂow is increasingly not going unidirectional
from bench to bedside, but in circle from the bedside back to
the bench when clinical observations require mechanistic
analysis in deﬁned experimental models (36). Likewise,
the advancement of personalized medicine has promoted
the concept of coclinical trials, which similarly depends on
the availability of robust and reliable preclinical tumor
models (37).
The bench-to-bedside-and-back paradigm has prototypically shaped the ﬁeld of antiangiogenesis research. Antiangiogenic therapy was originally pioneered in preclinical tumor
models to starve tumors to death by driving the intratumoral
vasculature into regression (38). Yet, only the clinical translation of antiangiogenic therapy has revealed that vessel normalization by selective pruning of immature tumor vessels and
subsequent facilitation of chemotherapy is a major determinant of antiangiogenic therapy in human tumors (39). Today,
the clinical efﬁcacy of antiangiogenic tumor therapy continues
to be rather modest and further advancements such as the
rational, mechanism-based implementation of antiangiogenic
combination therapies are hampered by the limited availability
of relevant tumor models.
We have in the present study characterized the angiogenic
properties of the recently established Cre recombinase-inducible albumin promoter SV40 T-antigen transgenic model
(iAST) of hepatocellular carcinogenesis (22) and exploited it
for the study of the antiangiogenic and antitumorigenic properties of sorafenib on HCC. Tumor growth is in this model
initiated by the intravenous injection of Cre recombinaseexpressing adenovirus. The adenoviral transfer selectively
targets hepatocytes, in which Cre recombinase excises a ﬂoxed
stop cassette, leading to expression of the T-antigen under the
control of the albumin promoter. Unlike constitutive T-antigen
HCC models, this approach gives the model a number of
unique properties that give it robustness and versatility: First,
the inducible character enables a unique temporal versatility

www.aacrjournals.org

allowing tumor initiation even in aged or in pretreated mice
(e.g., tumor initiation on top of CCl4-induced ﬁbrosis). Second,
titration of adenoviral dosage allows calibration of the system,
leading to tumor development with 100% penetrance in a
multifocal manner resembling the development of human
HCC. Third, the multifocal character facilitates comparison
of different tumor stages in a single tumorigenic liver. Fourth,
combined with noninvasive imaging techniques, the model can
conveniently be employed for therapy experiments.
Considering the intense vascularization of HCC, we focused
our temporal analysis of the iAST model on vascular changes
during tumor progression. As the key driver of angiogenesis in
most tumor models, VEGF expression was upregulated during
tumor progression. Furthermore, both, Ang1 and Ang2 were
remarkably upregulated in tumorigenic livers. The intense
angiogenic activity was associated with distinct processes of
vessel cooption, remodeling, and vascular expansion during
tumor progression with accompanying phenotype changes of
the angiogenic vasculature. Previous work had shown that
endothelial cell transdifferentiation is a major pathogenic
event in human HCC and in the iAST model in the transition
from cooptive to angiogenic tumor vascularization characterized by the loss of differentiation markers of LSEC (40). The
present study identiﬁed an increasing vascular immaturity
during tumor progression characterized by distinct pericyte
populations with an immature gene expression signature
(desmin-low/aSMA-high), which has previously been reported
in other tumor models, including the RipTag model (32, 41).
Interestingly, these changes occurred in the absence of major
changes in intratumoral microvessel density. Moreover, unlike
many other tumor models, intratumoral vessels in the iAST
model were well perfused and not leaky during early nodule
formation.
Sorafenib treatment of iAST tumor nodules resulted in very
rapid antivascular effects evident as early as 24 hours after
initiation of therapy. Sorafenib treatment appeared to drive
intratumoral endothelial cells into rapid regression, leaving
behind type IV collagen–positive empty sleeves, which were
still ﬁlled with pericytes. Selective VEGFR blockade in a
spontaneous RipTag2 mouse model has similarly been shown
to result in endothelial cell-depleted vessels sparing the pericytes (42). Yet, sorafenib targets pericytes by inhibiting
PDGFRb, which has been demonstrated in vitro before (43).
This led to altered expression of the pericyte markers aSMA,
desmin, NG2, and CD248. These transcriptional changes could
reﬂect drop out or reduced motility of pericytes (44). The
number of pericytes decreased throughout the 14-day treatment. Yet, the overall effect was less severe compared with
endothelial cells. Recently, inhibition of pericytes in addition to
endothelial cells in the tumor vasculature has been shown to
exert beneﬁcial therapeutic effects (45). Further analysis is
needed to determine as to what extent the remaining pericytes
might contribute to the development of resistance, metastasis,
or other pathways that could stimulate tumor regrowth.
Sorafenib is currently the only systemic treatment for nonresectable late-stage HCC patients. Yet, the clinical efﬁcacy is
limited and resistance eventually develops as it has been
observed in preclinical models (32). It is noteworthy that

Cancer Res; 74(15) August 1, 2014

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

4167

Published OnlineFirst June 6, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2311

Runge et al.

pro-oncogenic factors such as IGF1/IGF1R (46), cMet (47), and
Id1 (48) were upregulated in the iAST model upon sorafenib
treatment. Currently, several clinical trials inhibiting cMet and
VEGFR together are underway (49) and results await the
outcome regarding tumor behavior and patient survival.
Importantly, IGF1 levels increased gradually during the
response to treatment before end stage and before developing
severe side effects. As inhibition of the IGF1/IGF1R pathway
has been shown to reduce HCC growth in vivo (50), it is an
important ﬁnding concerning sorafenib therapy. The iAST
model may therefore be suitable to further advance combination therapies and to systematically screen for emerging
resistance mechanisms during therapy.
In conclusion, we describe in the present study, the unique
properties of the inducible iAST HCC tumor model as a
versatile experimental system for the study of HCC progression
and the response to therapy.
Note Added in Proof
A study was published in Cancer Discovery since submission of this manuscript demonstrating that VEGF-A ampliﬁed HCC are highly sensitive to
sorafenib treatment (51). The ﬁndings of this study are highly compatible with
the ﬁndings of our study showing that sorafenib treatment is preferentially acting
anti-angiogenic with a very rapid dropout of endothelial cells as early as 24 h after
the initiation of treatment (Fig. 6). According to the Cancer Discovery publication,
VEGF-ampliﬁed tumors promote tumor progression through an endothelial cellderived angiocrine signaling loop, which is compatible with recent ﬁndings by
our laboratory demonstrating a proliferation-regulating function of endothelial
cells on hepatocytes during liver regeneration (52). Collectively, both studies
strongly support a rationale for further development of combination therapies
for HCC involving sorafenib and other antiangiogenic drugs—also in consideration of the observed rapid compensatory upregulation of VEGF expression
following sorafenib treatment (Fig. 6 of this study).

Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest
No potential conﬂicts of interest were disclosed.

Authors' Contributions
Conception and design: A. Runge, S. Goerdt, H.G. Augustin
Development of methodology: A. Runge, J.-P. Bergeest, K. Rohr, S. Goerdt,
H.G. Augustin
Acquisition of data (provided animals, acquired and managed patients,
provided facilities, etc.): A. Runge, J. Hu, M. Wieland, C. Mogler, A. Neumann,
A. Neumann, D. Komljenovic
Analysis and interpretation of data (e.g., statistical analysis, biostatistics,
computational analysis): A. Runge, J. Hu, J.-P. Bergeest, C. Mogler, C. Geraud,
K. Rohr, P. Schirmacher, S. Goerdt, H.G. Augustin
Writing, review, and/or revision of the manuscript: A. Runge, J. Hu,
M. Wieland, C. Mogler, C. Geraud, P. Schirmacher, S. Goerdt, H.G. Augustin
Administrative, technical, or material support (i.e., reporting or organizing data, constructing databases): C. Geraud, B. Arnold, S. Goerdt,
H.G. Augustin
Study supervision: A. Runge, H.G. Augustin

Acknowledgments
The authors thank Simone Platzek and Martin Friedl from the DKFZ
laboratory animal core facility for the excellent technical, Jessica Wojtarowicz for technical support, Karin Leotta and Katja Oehme for CT and MR
imaging assistance, the microarray unit of the DKFZ Genomics and Proteomics Core Facility for providing the Illumina Whole-Genome Expression
Beadchips and related services, Felix Bestvater, Damir Krunic and Manuela
Brom from the DKFZ Light Microscopy Core Facility for help with confocal
microscopy, and Anja Weick and Lise Roth for critical comments on the
article.

Grant Support
This work was supported by grants from the Helmholtz Alliance "Preclinical
Comprehensive Cancer Center" (PCCC; H.G. Augustin), the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (SFB-TR77 "Liver Cancer", project C3; H.G. Augustin and
S. Goerdt), and SFB-TR23 "Vascular Differentiation and Remodeling" (project A3
to H.G. Augustin and Project Z1 to D. Komljenovic).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the
payment of page charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked
advertisement in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this
fact.
Received August 12, 2013; revised March 13, 2014; accepted May 20, 2014;
published OnlineFirst June 6, 2014.

References
1.

Ferlay J, Shin HR, Bray F, Forman D, Mathers C, Parkin DM. Estimates
of worldwide burden of cancer in 2008: GLOBOCAN 2008. Int J Cancer
2010;127:2893–917.
2. Sanyal AJ, Yoon SK, Lencioni R. The etiology of hepatocellular carcinoma and consequences for treatment. Oncologist 2010;15:14–22.
3. Bosch FX, Ribes J, Diaz M, Cleries R. Primary liver cancer: worldwide
incidence and trends. Gastroenterology 2004;127:S5–S16.
4. Verslype C, Rosmorduc O, Rougier P. Hepatocellular carcinoma:
ESMO-ESDO Clinical practice guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and
follow-up. Ann Oncol 2012;23 Suppl 7:vii41–8.
5. Forner A, Llovet JM, Bruix J. Hepatocellular carcinoma. Lancet
2012;379:1245–55.
6. Llovet JM, Ricci S, Mazzaferro V, Hilgard P, Gane E, Blanc JF, et al.
Sorafenib in advanced hepatocellular carcinoma. N Engl J Med
2008;359:378–90.
7. Xie B, Wang DH, Spechler SJ. Sorafenib for treatment of hepatocellular
carcinoma: a systematic review. Dig Dis Sci 2012;57:1122–9.
8. Wilhelm S, Carter C, Lynch M, Lowinger T, Dumas J, Smith RA, et al.
Discovery and development of sorafenib: a multikinase inhibitor for
treating cancer. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2006;5:835–44.
9. Wilhelm SM, Adnane L, Newell P, Villanueva A, Llovet JM, Lynch M.
Preclinical overview of sorafenib, a multikinase inhibitor that targets
both Raf and VEGF and PDGF receptor tyrosine kinase signaling. Mol
Cancer Ther 2008;7:3129–40.
10. Liu L, Cao Y, Chen C, Zhang X, McNabola A, Wilkie D, et al. Sorafenib
blocks the RAF/MEK/ERK pathway, inhibits tumor angiogenesis, and
induces tumor cell apoptosis in hepatocellular carcinoma model PLC/
PRF/5. Cancer Res 2006;66:11851–8.

4168

Cancer Res; 74(15) August 1, 2014

11. Nakamura S, Muro H, Suzuki S, Sakaguchi T, Konno H, Baba S, et al.
Immunohistochemical studies on endothelial cell phenotype in hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatology 1997;26:407–15.
12. Breedis C, Young G. The blood supply of neoplasms in the liver. Am J
Pathol 1954;30:969–77.
13. Sakamoto M, Ino Y, Fujii T, Hirohashi S. Phenotype changes in tumor
vessels associated with the progression of hepatocellular carcinoma.
Jpn J Clin Oncol 1993;23:98–104.
14. Semela D, Dufour JF. Angiogenesis and hepatocellular carcinoma.
J Hepatol 2004;41:864–80.
15. Sun HC, Tang ZY, Li XM, Zhou YN, Sun BR, Ma ZC. Microvessel
density of hepatocellular carcinoma: its relationship with prognosis.
J Cancer Res Clin Oncol 1999;125:419–26.
16. Poon RT, Ng IO, Lau C, Yu WC, Yang ZF, Fan ST, et al. Tumor microvessel
density as a predictor of recurrence after resection of hepatocellular
carcinoma: a prospective study. J Clin Oncol 2002;20:1775–85.
17. Fausto N, Campbell JS. Mouse models of hepatocellular carcinoma.
Semin Liver Dis 2010;30:87–98.
18. Heindryckx F, Colle I, Van Vlierberghe H. Experimental mouse models
for hepatocellular carcinoma research. Int J Exp Pathol 2009;90:
367–86.
19. Christofori G, Hanahan D. Molecular dissection of multi-stage tumorigenesis in transgenic mice. Semin Cancer Biol 1994;5:3–12.
20. Bergers G, Javaherian K, Lo KM, Folkman J, Hanahan D. Effects of
angiogenesis inhibitors on multistage carcinogenesis in mice. Science
1999;284:808–12.
21. Schirmacher P, Held WA, Yang D, Biempica L, Rogler CE. Selective
ampliﬁcation of periportal transitional cells precedes formation of

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst June 6, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2311

The iAST Model of Inducible Hepatocarcinogenesis

22.

23.
24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

hepatocellular carcinoma in SV40 large tag transgenic mice. Am J
Pathol 1991;139:231–41.
Stahl S, Sacher T, Bechtold A, Protzer U, Ganss R, Hammerling GJ,
et al. Tumor agonist peptides break tolerance and elicit effective CTL
responses in an inducible mouse model of hepatocellular carcinoma.
Immunol Lett 2009;123:31–7.
www.osirix-viewer.com/downloads.html
Tremosini S, Forner A, Boix L, Vilana R, Bianchi L, Reig M, et al. Prospective validation of an immunohistochemical panel (glypican 3, heat
shock protein 70 and glutamine synthetase) in liver biopsies for diagnosis of very early hepatocellular carcinoma. Gut 2012;61:1481–7.
Moon WS, Rhyu KH, Kang MJ, Lee DG, Yu HC, Yeum JH, et al.
Overexpression of VEGF and angiopoietin 2: a key to high vascularity
of hepatocellular carcinoma? Mod Pathol 2003;16:552–7.
Kuboki S, Shimizu H, Mitsuhashi N, Kusashio K, Kimura F, Yoshidome
H, et al. Angiopoietin-2 levels in the hepatic vein as a useful predictor of
tumor invasiveness and prognosis in human hepatocellular carcinoma.
J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2008;23:e157–64.
Mitsuhashi N, Shimizu H, Ohtsuka M, Wakabayashi Y, Ito H, Kimura F,
et al. Angiopoietins and Tie-2 expression in angiogenesis and proliferation of human hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatology 2003;37:
1105–13.
Torimura T, Sata M, Ueno T, Kin M, Tsuji R, Suzaku K, et al. Increased
expression of vascular endothelial growth factor is associated with
tumor progression in hepatocellular carcinoma. Hum Pathol 1998;29:
986–91.
Maharaj AS, Saint-Geniez M, Maldonado AE, D'Amore PA. Vascular
endothelial growth factor localization in the adult. Am J Pathol
2006;168:639–48.
Im JH, Tapmeier T, Balathasan L, Gal A, Yameen S, Hill S, et al. G-CSF
rescues tumor growth and neo-angiogenesis during liver metastasis
under host angiopoietin-2 deﬁciency. Int J Cancer 2013;132:315–26.
Ryschich E, Lizdenis P, Ittrich C, Benner A, Stahl S, Hamann A, et al.
Molecular ﬁngerprinting and autocrine growth regulation of endothelial
cells in a murine model of hepatocellular carcinoma. Cancer Res
2006;66:198–211.
Nasarre P, Thomas M, Kruse K, Helfrich I, Wolter V, Deppermann C,
et al. Host-derived angiopoietin-2 affects early stages of tumor development and vessel maturation but is dispensable for later stages of
tumor growth. Cancer Res 2009;69:1324–33.
Tang TC, Man S, Xu P, Francia G, Hashimoto K, Emmenegger U, et al.
Development of a resistance-like phenotype to sorafenib by human
hepatocellular carcinoma cells is reversible and can be delayed by
metronomic UFT chemotherapy. Neoplasia 2010;12:928–40.
Mouta Carreira C, Nasser SM, di Tomaso E, Padera TP, Boucher Y,
Tomarev SI, et al. LYVE-1 is not restricted to the lymph vessels:
expression in normal liver blood sinusoids and down-regulation in
human liver cancer and cirrhosis. Cancer Res 2001;61:8079–84.
Politz O, Gratchev A, McCourt PA, Schledzewski K, Guillot P, Johansson S, et al. Stabilin-1 and -2 constitute a novel family of fasciclin-like
hyaluronan receptor homologues. Biochem J 2002;362:155–64.
Tuveson D, Hanahan D. Translational medicine: cancer lessons from
mice to humans. Nature 2011;471:316–7.

www.aacrjournals.org

37. Nardella C, Lunardi A, Patnaik A, Cantley LC, Pandolﬁ PP. The APL
paradigm and the "co-clinical trial" project. Cancer Discov 2011;
1:108–16.
38. Carmeliet P. Angiogenesis in life, disease, and medicine. Nature
2005;438:932–6
39. Jain RK. Normalization of tumor vasculature: an emerging concept in
antiangiogenic therapy. Science 2005;307:58–62.
raud C, Mogler C, Runge A, Evdokimov K, Lu S, Schledzewski K,
40. Ge
et al. Endothelial transdifferentiation in hepatocellular carcinoma: loss
of Stabilin-2 expression in peri-tumourous liver correlates with
increased survival. Liver Int 2013;33:1428–40.
41. Morikawa S, Baluk P, Kaidoh T, Haskell A, Jain RK, McDonald DM.
Abnormalities in pericytes on blood vessels and endothelial sprouts in
tumors. Am J Pathol 2002;160:985–1000.
42. Inai T, Mancuso M, Hashizume H, Baffert F, Haskell A, Baluk P, et al.
Inhibition of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) signaling in
cancer causes loss of endothelial fenestrations, regression of tumor
vessels, and appearance of basement membrane ghosts. Am J Pathol
2004;165:35–52.
43. Wilhelm SM, Carter C, Tang L, Wilkie D, McNabola A, Rong H, et al.
BAY 43-9006 exhibits broad spectrum oral antitumor activity and
targets the RAF/MEK/ERK pathway and receptor tyrosine kinases
involved in tumor progression and angiogenesis. Cancer Res
2004;64:7099–109.
44. Sennino B, Falcon BL, McCauley D, Le T, McCauley T, Kurz JC, et al.
Sequential loss of tumor vessel pericytes and endothelial cells after
inhibition of platelet-derived growth factor B by selective aptamer
AX102. Cancer Res 2007;67:7358–67.
45. Bergers G, Song S, Meyer-Morse N, Bergsland E, Hanahan D. Beneﬁts
of targeting both pericytes and endothelial cells in the tumor vasculature with kinase inhibitors. J Clin Invest 2003;111:1287–95.
46. Wu J, Zhu AX. Targeting insulin-like growth factor axis in hepatocellular
carcinoma. J Hematol Oncol 2011;4:30.
47. Suzuki K, Hayashi N, Yamada Y, Yoshihara H, Miyamoto Y, Ito Y, et al.
Expression of the c-met protooncogene in human hepatocellular
carcinoma. Hepatology 1994;20:1231–6.
48. Damdinsuren B, Nagano H, Kondo M, Yamamoto H, Hiraoka N,
Yamamoto T, et al. Expression of Id proteins in human hepatocellular
carcinoma: relevance to tumor dedifferentiation. Int J Oncol
2005;26:319–27.
49. Venepalli NK, Goff L. Targeting the HGF-cMET axis in hepatocellular
carcinoma. Int J Hepatol 2013;2013:341636.
50. Tovar V, Alsinet C, Villanueva A, Hoshida Y, Chiang DY, Sole M,
et al. IGF activation in a molecular subclass of hepatocellular
carcinoma and pre-clinical efﬁcacy of IGF-1R blockage. J Hepatol
2010;52:550–9.
51. Horwitz E, Stein I, Andreozzi M, Nemeth J, Shoham A, Pappo O,
et al. Human and mouse VEGFA-ampliﬁed hepatocellular carcinomas are highly sensitive to sorafenib treatment. Cancer Discov
2014;4:730–43.
52. Hu J, Srivastava K, Wieland M, Runge A, Mogler C, Besemfelder E,
et al. Endothelial cell-derived angiopoietin-2 controls liver regeneration
as a spatiotemporal rheostat. Science 2014;343:416–9.

Cancer Res; 74(15) August 1, 2014

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

4169

Published OnlineFirst June 6, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2311

An Inducible Hepatocellular Carcinoma Model for Preclinical
Evaluation of Antiangiogenic Therapy in Adult Mice
Anja Runge, Junhao Hu, Matthias Wieland, et al.
Cancer Res 2014;74:4157-4169. Published OnlineFirst June 6, 2014.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2311
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2014/06/05/0008-5472.CAN-13-2311.DC1

This article cites 51 articles, 14 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/74/15/4157.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 2 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/74/15/4157.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

