More Treatment Options
for Women With Hormone
Receptor-Positive Breast
Cancer
Guideline update, studies lead to advances
in care

W

omen with nonmetastatic, stage I to III hormone receptorpositive breast cancer now have another option when it
comes to their treatment. In May, the American Society of
Clinical Oncology (ASCO) issued an update to its clinical practice
guideline, recommending that these patients receive tamoxifen
for 10 years versus the previous standard of care of 5 years.
The update is based on new data from 2 large, randomized
studies of patients: the ATLAS (Adjuvant Tamoxifen, Longer
Against Shorter) study, which was published in The Lancet
in 2013, and the aTTom trial results (Adjuvant Tamoxifen
Treatment Oﬀers More?), reported at the 2013 San Antonio
Breast Cancer Symposium.1
“In the past, trials done in the 1990s hadn’t shown a signiﬁcant
beneﬁt for longer durations of tamoxifen, but these new studies
were huge trials with thousands of patients worldwide who
were randomized to either 5 additional years of tamoxifen or no
additional treatment,” says Harold Burstein, MD, PhD, cochair
of the ASCO expert panel that wrote the guideline update. “They
also had a very long follow-up of 6-plus years.”
Based on this high-level evidence, the panel updated the
guideline to include a longer duration of tamoxifen treatment.
According to data from the trials, the reduced risk of disease

Cancer
CANCER

October 1, 2014
OCTOBER 1, 2014

recurrence in adding 5 more years of the drug is 3% to 5%,
whereas the increase in overall survival is 2% to 3%.
“Because these diﬀerences are rather modest, patients who
have lower-risk cancers or who have real vulnerability or toxicity
issues related to tamoxifen may want to factor that in when
deciding whether to take the drug for a longer duration,” Dr.
Burstein says.
The magnitude of the beneﬁt of taking tamoxifen for
longer is larger for patients whose risk of disease recurrence
is higher, including women with positive lymph nodes and/
or larger tumors, says Cliﬀord Hudis, MD, past president of
ASCO. In addition, although the beneﬁts in the reduction of
disease recurrence are rather modest, he says that hormone
receptor-positive breast cancer is the most prevalent form of
the disease in the world, at an estimated 67% to 75% of all
breast cancers.
“Even though the impact on survival was not huge, at a
population level, we can improve the outcomes in a large
number of patients and save a lot of lives,” says Mariana Chavez
Mac Gregor, MD, a breast medical oncologist at The University
of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center in Houston.
The implications are particularly helpful for premenopausal
patients whose only option was tamoxifen treatment for 5 years;
they now have the option of continuing the therapy should they
choose to do so. Women who are most likely to continue with
the drug are those who have not had problems with its side
eﬀects, such as hot ﬂashes. Others may have concerns about the
less common side eﬀects of deep vein thrombosis, pulmonary
emboli, and endometrial cancer.
Among other key points in the guideline are:
• Premenopausal women with hormone receptor-positive breast
cancer should be oﬀered continued tamoxifen for a total
duration of 10 years. If they are postmenopausal, they should
be oﬀered continued tamoxifen for a total duration of 10 years
or an aromatase inhibitor (AI) for a total duration of up to 10
years of adjuvant endocrine therapy.
• Women diagnosed with hormone receptor-positive breast
cancer who are postmenopausal should be oﬀered adjuvant
endocrine therapy with one of the following options:
tamoxifen for up to 10 years, tamoxifen for 5 years and then
switching to an AI for up to 5 years, or tamoxifen for 2 to 3
years and switching to an AI for up to 5 years.
In the case of postmenopausal women, it is not known
which option is the best strategy, but physicians now have more
tools to oﬀer. AIs can cause joint and muscle pain, a decrease
in bone density, and vaginal dryness, says Dr. Chavez Mac
Gregor, adding, “The best we can do as physicians is make
recommendations.”
2939
1

© TAGSTOCK1 | SHUTTERSTOCK.COM

Oncology Issues in Focus | BY CARRIE PRINTZ

More Developments for Younger Women
In a related development, 2 additional studies recently
reported beneﬁts from the AI exemestane in the treatment of
young women with hormone-sensitive breast cancer who also
underwent postsurgical treatment to suppress ovarian function.
The drug was found to be more eﬀective than tamoxifen in
preventing breast cancer recurrence in these patients.
The combined results for the phase 3 randomized TEXT
(Tamoxifen and Exemestane Trial) and SOFT (Suppression of
Ovarian Function Trial) trials were presented at the 2014 ASCO
annual meeting in Chicago and published in The New England
Journal of Medicine.2 Treatment with exemestane plus ovarian
function suppression reduced the risk of any invasive cancer by
28% and reduced the risk of invasive breast cancer recurrence

We are decades into this era of
antiestrogen therapy for breast
cancer, and we’re still learning
about the optimal use of these
various strategies.
— Harold Burstein, MD, PhD
by 34% compared with treatment with tamoxifen plus ovarian
function suppression. At 5 years from the initiation of the
study, 92.8% of women remained free from breast cancer after
treatment with exemestane plus ovarian function suppression
versus 88.8% after treatment with tamoxifen plus ovarian
function suppression. AIs previously have been shown to beneﬁt
postmenopausal women with breast cancer by preventing the
formation of estradiol, a female hormone.
“This is a challenging study to discuss because the control
arm of one of the trials was tamoxifen alone with no ovarian
function suppression,” Dr. Hudis says. “We think we will get
the answer when this third arm is presented at the San Antonio
Breast Cancer Symposium in December.”
Many Europeans assume that ovarian function suppression
for young people is necessary and have found that exemestane
is the better treatment in that case, but many Americans are not
interested in that option for quality-of-life reasons, he adds. “In

San Antonio, we’ll get the last piece of the puzzle,” Dr. Hudis
says. “It would be very unpredicted if exemestane and ovarian
function suppression was not superior to tamoxifen alone, but
we have to wait and see.”
Dr. Burstein and Dr. Chavez Mac Gregor point to another
study, ABCSG-12 (The Austrian Breast Cancer Study Group
Trial 12), which demonstrated no diﬀerence in survival among
premenopausal women receiving AIs versus tamoxifen.3 “That
begs the more important question—what is the role of ovarian
suppression in these women who also receive tamoxifen,” Dr.
Burstein says. “If it turns out that there’s no real beneﬁt to
ovarian suppression in young women, then tamoxifen alone will
be the standard of care.”
Dr. Chavez Mac Gregor says she and colleagues at The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center have concerns
about how to put together the data from these various studies
and whether putting young women into menopause is the
best strategy. At the current time, they are not treating young
women with ovarian function suppression and exemestane.
“After carefully reviewing the literature, we want to wait until
December when the 3 arms of the SOFT study are presented,”
she says. “Once we have that piece, we may be able to put things
into perspective.”
Although much has been learned with regard to the
treatment of hormone-sensitive breast cancers, Dr. Burstein
adds, “We are decades into this era of antiestrogen therapy for
breast cancer, and we’re still learning about the optimal use of
these various strategies.”

References
1. Davies C, Pan H, Godwin J, et al; Adjuvant Tamoxifen: Longer Against
Shorter (ATLAS) Collaborative Group. Long-term effects of continuing
adjuvant tamoxifen to 10 years versus stopping at 5 years after diagnosis
of oestrogen receptor-positive breast cancer: ATLAS, a randomised trial.
Lancet 2013;381:805-816.
2. Pagani O, Regan MM, Walley BA, et al; TEXT and SOFT Investigators;
International Breast Cancer Study Group. Adjuvant exemestane with ovarian
suppression in premenopausal breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2014;371:107118.
3. Gnant M, Mlineritsch B, Schippinger W, et al. Endocrine therapy plus zoledronic
acid in premenopausal breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2009;360:679-691.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29034

Researchers Study Implications of Lung Cancer Screening

T

wo recent studies examined the implications of low-dose
computed tomography (LDCT) lung cancer screening
in patients. Based on ﬁndings in the National Lung Cancer
Screening Trial, the US Preventive Services Task Force
(USPSTF) recently recommended these screenings in patients
aged 55 to 80 years with a 30 pack-year smoking history who
currently smoke or quit within the past 15 years.
In the ﬁrst study, researchers from Roswell Park Cancer
Institute in Buﬀalo, New York, and the Medical University of
South Carolina found that the majority of current and former
smokers would welcome screenings for lung cancer if their
insurance covered spiral CT scans.1 The study surveyed more

2940

than 1200 adult current smokers about their attitudes toward
lung cancer screening with spiral CT scans. Researchers found
that 78.5% of current smokers and 81.4% of former smokers
said they would be willing to be tested if they were advised to
do so by a physician.
Their reasons for not being screened included a lack of
insurance coverage and a fear of being diagnosed with lung
cancer . The most commonly cited reason for not being screened
among former smokers was a belief that they did not have lung
cancer.
Andrew Hyland, PhD, chair of the department of health
behavior at Roswell Park Cancer Institute, notes that the

Cancer

October 1, 2014

