Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 8

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

The second European interdisciplinary Ewing sarcoma research
summit – A joint effort to deconstructing the multiple layers of
a complex disease
Heinrich Kovar1,2,*, James Amatruda3,*, Erika Brunet4,*, Stefan Burdach5,*, Florencia
Cidre-Aranaz6,*, Enrique de Alava7,*, Uta Dirksen8,*, Wietske van der Ent9,10,*,
Patrick Grohar11,*, Thomas G. P. Grünewald12,*, Lee Helman13,*, Peter Houghton14,*,
Kristiina Iljin15,*, Eberhard Korsching16,*, Marc Ladanyi17,*, Elizabeth Lawlor18,*,
Stephen Lessnick19,*, Joseph Ludwig20,*, Paul Meltzer21,*, Markus Metzler22,*, Jaume
Mora23,*, Richard Moriggl24,25,*, Takuro Nakamura26,*, Theodore Papamarkou27,*,
Branka Radic Sarikas28,*, Francoise Rédini29,*, Guenther H. S. Richter5,*, Claudia
Rossig8,*, Keri Schadler30,*, Beat W. Schäfer31,*, Katia Scotlandi32,*, Nathan C.
Sheffield28,*, Anang Shelat33,*, Ewa Snaar-Jagalska10,*, Poul Sorensen34,*, Kimberly
Stegmaier35,*, Elizabeth Stewart36,*, Alejandro Sweet-Cordero37,*, Karoly Szuhai38,*,
Oscar M. Tirado39,*, Franck Tirode9,*, Jeffrey Toretsky40,*, Kalliopi Tsafou40,*, Aykut
Üren40,*, Andrei Zinovyev9,41,42,* and Olivier Delattre9,*
1

Children’s Cancer Research Institute, St. Anna Kinderkrebsforschung, Vienna, Austria

2

Department of Pediatrics, Medical University Vienna, Vienna, Austria

3

Departments of Pediatrics, Molecular Biology and Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX, USA
4

Museum National d’Histoire Naturelle, INSERM U1154, CNRS 7196, Paris, France

5

Children’s Cancer Research Center and Department of Pediatrics, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technical University and
Comprehensive Cancer Center Munich (CCCM), Munich, Germany
6

Unidad de Tumores Sólidos Infantiles, Área de Genética Humana, Instituto de Investigación de Enfermedades Raras,
Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain
7

Institute of Biomedicine of Sevilla (IBiS), Virgen del Rocio University Hospital /CSIC/University de Sevilla, Department of
Pathology, Seville, Spain
8

University Children´s Hospital Muenster, Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Muenster, Germany

9

INSERM U830, Laboratoire de Génétique et Biologie des Cancers, Institut Curie, Paris, France

10

Institute of Biology, Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands

11

Van Andel Institute, Center for Cancer and Cell Biology and Helen DeVos Children’s Hospital, Grand Rapids, MI, USA

12

Laboratory for Pediatric Sarcoma Biology, Institute of Pathology of the LMU Munich, Munich, Germany

13

Center for Cancer Rearch, NCI, NIH, Bethesda, MA, USA

14

Greehey Children’s Cancer Research Institute, University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio, TX, USA

15

VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland Ltd, Espoo, Finland

16

Institute of Bioinformatics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Muenster, Muenster, Germany

17

Department of Pathology and Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New
York, NY, USA
18

Department of Pediatrics and Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

19

Center for Childhood Cancer and Blood Disorders, Nationwide Children’s Hospital, and the Division of Pediatric Hematology/
Oncology/BMT, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA
20

Department of Sarcoma Medical Oncology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA

21

Genetics Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD, USA

22

Pediatric Oncology and Hematology, University Hospital Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany

23

Department of Pediatric Oncology, Sant Joan de Déu Hospital, Barcelona, Spain

24

Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Cancer Research, Vienna, Austria

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8613

Oncotarget

25

Institute of Animal Breeding and Genetics, University of Veterinary Medicine and Medical University, Vienna, Austria

26

Division of Carcinogenesis, The Cancer Institute, Japanese Foundation for Cancer Research, Tokyo, Japan

27

University of Glasgow, School of Mathematics and Statistics, Glasgow, UK

28

CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna, Austria

29

INSERM UMR957, Université de Nantes, Nantes, France

30

Department of Pediatrics Research, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA

31

Department of Oncology and Children’s Research Center, University Children‘s Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland

32

CRS Development of Biomolecular Therapies, Experimental Oncology Lab, Rizzoli Institute, Bologna, Italy

33

Department of Chemical Biology and Therapeutics, St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, Memphis,TN, USA

34

Department of Molecular Oncology, British Columbia Cancer Research Centre, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada

35

Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Boston Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA, USA

36

Department of Developmental Neurobiology, St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, USA

37

Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA

38

Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands

39

Sarcoma Research Group, Molecular Oncology Laboratory, Bellvitge Biomedical Research Institute (IDIBELL), L’Hospitalet
de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain
40

Department of Oncology, Georgetown University School of Medicine, Washington, DC, USA

41

INSERM, U900, Paris, France

42

Ecole des Mines ParisTech, Fontainbleau, France

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Heinrich Kovar, email: heinrich.kovar@ccri.at
Keywords: Ewing sarcoma, epigenetics, development, therapy, microenvironment
Received: October 20, 2015	

Accepted: January 14, 2016	

Published: January 18, 2016

ABSTRACT
Despite multimodal treatment, long term outcome for patients with Ewing
sarcoma is still poor. The second “European interdisciplinary Ewing sarcoma research
summit” assembled a large group of scientific experts in the field to discuss their latest
unpublished findings on the way to the identification of novel therapeutic targets and
strategies. Ewing sarcoma is characterized by a quiet genome with presence of an
EWSR1-ETS gene rearrangement as the only and defining genetic aberration. RNAsequencing of recently described Ewing-like sarcomas with variant translocations
identified them as biologically distinct diseases. Various presentations adressed
mechanisms of EWS-ETS fusion protein activities with a focus on EWS-FLI1. Data were
presented shedding light on the molecular underpinnings of genetic permissiveness
to this disease uncovering interaction of EWS-FLI1 with recently discovered
susceptibility loci. Epigenetic context as a consequence of the interaction between the
oncoprotein, cell type, developmental stage, and tissue microenvironment emerged as
dominant theme in the discussion of the molecular pathogenesis and inter- and intratumor heterogeneity of Ewing sarcoma, and the difficulty to generate animal models
faithfully recapitulating the human disease. The problem of preclinical development
of biologically targeted therapeutics was discussed and promising perspectives were
offered from the study of novel in vitro models. Finally, it was concluded that in order
to facilitate rapid pre-clinical and clinical development of novel therapies in Ewing
sarcoma, the community needs a platform to maintain knowledge of unpublished
results, systems and models used in drug testing and to continue the open dialogue
initiated at the first two Ewing sarcoma summits.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8614

Oncotarget

INTRODUCTION

accordingly (Figure 2).

Ewing sarcoma is a rare, aggressive cancer of bone
and soft tissues that presents most frequently in children
and young adults. Progress in Ewing sarcoma therapy has
reached a plateau with long-term overall survival rates
less than 30% for patients with disseminated disease
and 65-75% for patients who present without clinically
overt metastases at diagnosis [1]. Using conventional
multimodal treatment regimens, only minor improvements
in outcome have been achieved during the last 30 years
[2]. Therefore, more efficient and specifically targeted
approaches are urgently required to combat this deadly
disease. Such novel therapeutic strategies are expected
to arise from a deeper biological understanding of the
pathogenic mechanisms underlying the development,
immune escape and metastatic spread of Ewing sarcoma.
International Ewing sarcoma research, however, is
fragmented and progress is slow due to the rarity of
the disease (approximately 3 cases/million/year [3]).
Two European framework program 7 (FP7) funded
collaborative initiatives therefore put on their agenda
activities to overcome this apparent bottleneck, although
by different approaches. The research project ASSET
(“Assessing and Striking the Sensitivities of Embryonal
Tumors”) follows a multi-disciplinary systems biology
approach to identify vulnerabilities of the disease. The
“European Network for Cancer research in Children
and Adolescents” (ENCCA) facilitates and structures
networking activities for prioritization of, access to and
clinical research on innovative, biologically targeted drugs
for the treatment of childhood cancer. However, regular
exchange of knowledge and networking is required beyond
European borders and beyond the tightly defined agenda
of such projects to avoid redundancy and generate synergy
in Ewing sarcoma research. In June 2015, four years after
the first ENCCA funded Ewing sarcoma meeting [4] and
jointly supported by ENCCA and ASSET, the “Second
European Interdisciplinary Ewing Sarcoma Research
Summit” assembled 77 researchers from Europe, Japan,
the US and Canada to share exclusively unpublished
results and to discuss future research directions and
opportunities for clinical translation (Suppl. Table 1 for
list of participants). It was the largest purely scientific
Ewing sarcoma convention so far. Maybe it was the spirit
of the venue at Institute Curie in Paris, where the EWSR1FLI1 fusion gene was discovered as the defining marker
and driver of the disease almost 25 years ago, combined
with the unique meeting format, that made it highly
successful in bringing together colleagues and competitors
in the field, fostering trustful exchange, open discussion,
and the initiation of new promising collaborations. This
review summarizes some exciting new insights into
Ewing sarcoma biology presented at this meeting (Figure
1). Since speakers frequently used metaphors in their
presentations, the chapters of this review are named

THE MONSTER

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

In our nightmares and in horror movies, it is the
unknown, the mysterious that threatens us in the shape
of a dangerous monster. Ewing sarcoma remains such
a monster, a “genetically engineered monster” with
the EWSR1-ETS gene fusion as the major driver of its
nefarious activities, as Paul Meltzer pointed out while
introducing the topic of “Spatial and temporal genetic and
non-genetic diversity of Ewing sarcoma” (Table 1). From
recent sequencing studies it has become clear that with the
exception of the well-known EWSR1-ETS gene fusions,
which drive a complex tumor specific transcriptional
program, the Ewing sarcoma genome is relatively quiet [59]. Franck Tirode provided an overview on the molecular
heterogeneity of Ewing and Ewing-like tumors in a cohort
of 130 sarcomas. By RNA sequencing he demonstrated
that tumors with FET-ETS gene fusions involving EWSR1
or FUS with members of the ERG (FLI1, ERG) or PEA3
(ETV1, ETV4) subfamily of ETS transcription factor genes
cluster tightly together in a homogenous group, separate
from Ewing-like sarcomas with EWSR1 fusions to nonETS genes (i.e. NFATC, POU5F1, SMARCA5) and from
those harboring the recently described BCOR-CCNB3 or
CIC-DUX4 gene fusions.
Some of the mystery behind Ewing sarcoma
pathogenesis and the inter-patient heterogeneity in its
response to treatment may arise from non-genetic sources,
such as the epigenome. Paul Meltzer stressed that the
epigenetic states of cancer are generally abnormal, not
fitting any healthy tissue, and thus, cancers deviate from
physiologic epigenetic programs. In Ewing sarcoma,
widespread epigenetic rewiring of gene regulatory regions
was recently demonstrated to be induced by EWS-FLI11
[10, 11]. Knowledge about the exact mechanisms of
epigenetic dysregulation may provide novel therapeutic
opportunities. Stephen Lessnick reported on the preclinical
testing of HCI2577, a second generation lysyl specific
demethylase (LSD1) inhibitor, which they found to
reverse the EWS-FLI1 transcriptional signature to a large
extent and to cause apoptosis. However, based on previous
results of the group on the anti-tumor effects of the first
generation inhibitor HCI2509 [12], LSD1 inhibition
affected both EWS-FLI1 activated and repressed
genes that are bound by the fusion oncogene, the exact
mechanism of functional interaction between EWS-FLI1
and LSD1 remains obscure.
Non-genetic variability may also be the basis for
distinct treatment sensitivity. Paul Meltzer reported on
differences in tumor transcriptomes of patients transiently
responding or not to the R1507 IGF1R antibody in the
SARC-011 trial. The molecular basis for resistance
development may lie in genetic or non-genetic intratumor heterogeneity. Olivier Delattre introduced single
8615

Oncotarget

Table 1: Genetic and non-genetic sources of inter- and intra-tumor heterogeneity in Ewing sarcoma
Germline genetic risk (susceptibility loci on chromosomes 1, 10, 15; metastasis loci?)
Different EWSR1-transcription factor fusions
Genetic
Copy number variations (i.e. gains on chromosomes 8, 12, 1q; loss at 16p)
Clonal complexity of tumor
Therapy driven mutation/selection
Plasticity of tumor/tumor stem cells
Heterogenous epigenetic states (chromatin factors and DNA methylation)
RNA metabolism (splicing, editing, degradation)
Activity of non-coding RNAs (microRNAs, long noncoding RNAs, others)
Non-genetic
Metabolism (tissue site, microenvironment, stress and therapy driven)
Proliferative states (dormancy)
Micro-environment modification of tumor cells (i.e. immune system)
Age and gender
cell transcriptome analysis to study variation and
transitions in transcriptional programs in a population
of Ewing sarcoma cells with fluctuations in EWS-FLI1
expression. Nathan Sheffield demonstrated the power

of reduced representation bisulfite sequencing (RRBS)
to study cell-to-cell heterogeneity in DNA methylation
of a tumor. Neighboring CpG sites in a given genomic
region often show concordant methylation status, but

Figure 1: The multiple layers of complexity in Ewing sarcoma biology and novel treatment perspectives discussed at
the “Second Interdisciplinary Ewing Sarcoma Research Summit”.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8616

Oncotarget

the methylation of neighboring CpGs is occasionally not
matching, leading to potentially disordered methylation
patterns. Because each read may span several methylation
sites and is derived from the sequencing of one DNA
molecule, the comparison between methylation status at
neighboring CpGs within a read can be used to assess
intra-tumor heterogeneity. Nathan Sheffield demonstrated
this phenomenon in a cohort of 140 Ewing sarcomas
and normal mesenchymal stem cell samples, which are
currently being explored for prognostic methylation
patterns in a collaborative project between Austria, France
and Germany.
Comparative methylation profiling between Ewing
sarcoma and normal tissues also has the potential to
uncover unknown tumor specific molecular traits. Using
the Infinium 450K methylation array to study promoter
methylation, Oscar Tirado´s group identified Ewing
sarcoma specific inactivation of the PTRF/Cavin-1 gene,
which, when co-expressed with the EWS-FLI1 activated
target gene Caveolin-1 (CAV1), induced TP53 dependent
cell death. These results support the use of demethylating
drugs for the treatment of Ewing sarcoma.
High-throughput sequencing technologies enable

characterization of the genetic and epigenetic make-up and
the transcriptional signature of tumors, and, by correlation
analysis, how the one affects the other. Andrei Zinovyev
described a computational method based on a Boolean
mathematical model to predict genetic interactions and
thus explain deviations of the phenotypic quantitative
effect of multiple gene mutations from their simple
additive effect as applied to Ewing sarcoma [13]. Theo
Papamarkou discussed a novel mathematical method to
also integrate so far poorly investigated RNA editing
effects in gene regulatory networks based on RNA-seq
data.
Several presentations addressed approaches to
follow the tracks of the monster over time. Markus
Metzler and Brian Crompton described methods for noninvasive detection of impending relapse based on the
high-sensitivity detection of circulating tumor DNA in the
plasma of Ewing sarcoma patients. Long-range PCR and
capture sequencing methods are being applied to determine
patient-specific genomic EWSR1-FLI1 breakpoints which
are subsequently used to detect tumor DNA shed in the
circulation by digital PCR. Thus, Uta Dirksen presented
first results from the “EFACT” (EWSR1-FLI1 sequence

Figure 2: Factors involved in the pathogenesis of Ewing sarcoma. Seed (risk alleles at Ewing sarcoma susceptibility loci),
soil (tissue microenvironment), hen (tissue of origin), rooster (developmental , epigenetic state), egg (driver mutation), monster (Ewing
sarcoma).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8617

Oncotarget

EWS-FLI1 expression in the bone mesenchyme resulted
in sarcomas that recapitulate the human Ewing sarcoma
EWS-FLI1 transcriptional signature. Consistent with
this finding, Takuro Nakamura described their recently
published transplantation model of tumors arising from
EWS-FLI1 transgenic embryonic superficial zone cells
from the articular cartilage at an ERG and PTHLH
expressing developmental stage [15], and compared it
to an unpublished similarly constructed model of CICDUX4 induced tumorigenesis from the same cell type. He
demonstrated that the CIC-DUX4 gene fusion activates
PEA3 and ERG family ETS transcription factors and,
similar to EWS-FLI1, down-regulates apoptosis genes.
In zebrafish, James Amatruda reported on the use
of transgenic EWS-FLI1 zebrafish for small-molecule
and genetic screens, and a new model of CIC-DUX4Ewing-like sarcomas. Wietske van der Ent discussed their
attempts to generate a flexible transgenic zebrafish model
of EWS-ERG induced tumorigenesis using the binary
UAS/GAL4 system. Similar to mice, most tested fish
tissues did not tolerate the fusion gene with one exception:
Expression of GFP-tagged EWS-ERG in neuronal
tissues led to developmentally impaired embryos with
large amounts of GFP-positive transformed cells, which
showed histological features similar to Ewing sarcoma.
Transcriptomic and proteomic analysis of regulated gene
expression in these embryos showed that there was an
overlap with human and murine expression profiles linked
to Ewing sarcoma development.
The notion that certain embryonal mesenchymal and
neuronal tissues tolerate EWS-ETS gene expression in
animal models, at least at defined developmental stages, is
consistent with the current view that Ewing sarcoma arises
from some potentially neural crest-derived mesenchymal
or neuronal progenitor cells. Elizabeth Lawlor reviewed
the published evidence for this hypothesis and put it into
context with available knowledge on pluripotent adult stem
cells. These cells express high levels of polycomb proteins
to suppress a large number of differentiation genes. Among
them are EZH2 and BMI-1 and, as Inmaculada Hernandez
and Jaume Mora reported, RING1B (RNF2), which
affects genes of heme biosynthesis, endothelial and neural
development, and which they found to protect Ewing
sarcoma cells from NFκB induced apoptosis through
regulation of the sodium channel NaV1.6. Summarizing
available evidence, Elizabeth Lawlor speculated that BMI1 positive cells may provide the permissive environment
for fusion gene activity, as has previously been reported
for E2A-PBX1 in hematopoietic stem cells [16], and more
recently demonstrated by her own group for EWS-FLI1 in
neural crest derived stem cells (NCSC) [17]. The chimeric
oncogene would then perpetuate the progenitor-like state
by hijacking the developmental transcription program.
On the other hand, there are developmental genes
which escape suppression by overexpressed polycomb
proteins in Ewing sarcoma. It has previously been

analysis from ctDNA) study ancillary to the European
clinical Ewing sarcoma trials Ewing2008 and Ewing 2012,
while Marc Ladanyi presented data based on the MSKIMPACT program at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer
Center, which provided proof of principle for detection
of circulating tumor (ct) DNA in the plasma preceding
clinically overt relapse of Ewing sarcoma.

HEN AND EGG
While Omics technologies take a scan of Ewing
sarcoma, the fully matured monster, and allow us to
monitor its variability and plasticity, the egg from which
it hatched remains unknown. Much of the difficulty
in identifying the tissue of origin for Ewing sarcoma
arises from the toxicity of EWSR1-ETS fusion genes to
most cell types. This is probably the reason why most
attempts to generate animal models of EWS-ETS driven
oncogenesis have so far failed. The current view is that
the disease arises from some mesenchymal or neural crest
derived stem or progenitor cell. Erika Brunet reported that
though it was possible to induce the EWSR1-FLI1 gene
rearrangement in adult mesenchymal stem cells by zinc
finger nucleases or CRISPR/Cas9 mediated gene editing,
the gene fusion was unstable and gradually counterselected in this cell type. Using the latter genome editing
approach, Marc Ladanyi also showed efficient induction
of the EWSR1-FLI1 gene rearrangement in HEK293 cells.
Aykut Üren summarized a plethora of mostly unpublished
(because unsuccessful) attempts from various labs to
generate EWS-ETS transgenic tumor models in rodents
and fish by either conditional tissue specific activation or
topical administration of the fusion gene. Most of them
led to no phenotype or embryonic lethality, tissue damage
(i.e cardiomyopathy [14]) and/or developmental defects,
but not tumorigenesis. These studies included expression
of the gene fusion in osteoblast precursors, limb bud
mesenchyme, neuronal tissue, or muscle, using a variety of
promoters to drive the gene fusion (CMV, LTR, EWSR1,
Rosa26, Pgk, Nse, dNEFL, TRE) and Cre lines to activate
the transgene (Runx2Cre, OsxCre, Prx1Cre, Dermo1Cre,
P0Cre, Col1a2Cre, Sox9Cre). Given that even in humans
Ewing sarcoma incidence varies with ethnicity (the disease
is particularly rare in Africans), it is possible that model
organisms are not susceptible to this disease. Aykut Üren
discussed several potential reasons for this assumption,
including different gene splicing patterns and variations
in the lengths of GGAA micro satellites, two features that
may differentially affect EWS-FLI1 function and target
gene expression in mice and men.
However, Richard Moriggl presented data from
a Prx1Cre driven EWS-FLI1 mouse model established
in his group, which implicates developmental timing of
the gene fusion as an important factor in tumorigenesis.
When activated (using a tamoxifen-inducible Cre
recombinase) in a narrow time window around birth,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8618

Oncotarget

demonstrated that posterior homeobox (HOX) cluster D
genes are paradoxically highly expressed in this disease
[18]. Günther Richter and Stefan Burdach studied the
mechanism and consequences of this up-regulation. They
presented preliminary data indicating that HOXD10,11
and 13 genes are regulated via the EWS-FLI1 target
DKK2, presumably involving the canonical WNT/β
catenin pathway, to drive chondrogenic but not osteogenic
differentiation. Knockdown of HOXD genes resulted in
down-regulation of RUNX2, PTHLH, BGLAP, PDGFBB and MMP1 reducing contact independent growth and
metastatic potential of Ewing sarcoma cells. Elizabeth
Lawlor concluded that, when it comes to the hen and
egg question of which is the limiting factor in Ewing
sarcomagenesis, cell type/stage of origin or EWS-ETS
activity, the two features are tightly intertwined and cannot
be separated from each other.

treatment with PM01183, a second generation Trabectedin
analog. This drug, which similar to UV distorts and
breaks DNA strands, seems to inactivate EWS-FLI1
by driving it into the nucleolus. Thus, it appears that
the tumor microenvironment has a profound effect on
the differentiation route of Ewing sarcoma cells upon
inactivation of the fusion gene in vivo. However, it is not
clear if this effect resulted from the direct differentiation
of Ewing sarcoma cells or due to the creation of a proadipogenic microenvironment.
Wnt/β-catenin signaling is one of the developmental
pathways deregulated in Ewing sarcoma. In mesenchymal
tumors it acts as a morphogen rather than driving
proliferation. It has been demonstrated previously that
activation of the Wnt pathway in Ewing sarcoma is
potentiated by R-spondins, the ligands of the somatic
stem cell surface receptor LGR5, which stabilizes
β-catenin and functions as an oncogene in several human
cancers [21]. Elizabeth Lawlor reported that while under
standard in vitro growth conditions Wnt signaling is off
and can only be activated upon EWS-FLI1 silencing and
ligand addition, focal β-catenin staining is observed in
primary tumors. Because LEF1/TCF is a transcriptional
downstream effector of Wnt/ β-catenin signaling and its
expression is associated with poor prognosis, Elizabeth
Lawlor speculated about intra-tumor heterogeneity of
EWS-FLI1 expression and the role of the tumor microenvironment in activating Wnt/ β-catenin and its role
in promoting tumor cell motility and metastasis. In this
context, the applicability of the tumor stem cell model to
Ewing sarcoma was discussed by Eberhard Korsching.
In light of recent evidence that suggests the EWSFLI fusion protein may act as a pioneer factor capable of
eliciting broad sweeping epigenetic effects, novel ex vivo
models may provide an innovative platform to determine
how microenvironmental cues—and their downstream
signaling cascades—contribute to and/or reinforce
epigenetic changes linked to the aberrant EWS-FLI fusion.
One way to study bidirectional feedback mechanisms
that exist between Ewing sarcoma and its adjacent
microenvironment is with ex vivo tissue engineered threedimensional culture models. Such a model was pioneered
by Joseph Ludwig´s laboratory. As recently published,
in sharp contrast to Ewing sarcoma cells cultured
upon flat tissue culture plastic ware, cells cultured on
biologically inert poly(ε-caprolactone) (PCL) microfiber
scaffolds placed within a flow perfusion bioreactor were
hypersensitive to IGF-1R targeted monoclonal antibodies,
which represent a promising class of precision-guided
experimental drugs currently in evaluation in early phase
clinical trials. Intriguingly, though improved nutrient
delivery throughout the porous scaffolds contributed to
cell survival within this preclinical model, heightened
sensitivity to IGF-1R antibodies seemed to be mediated
by physiological levels of shear stress that can be precisely
regulated experimentally [22]. Similarly, Francoise

SEED AND SOIL
In contrast to infectious diseases, where the affected
patient´s tissues serve as host for the invading pathogens,
cancer constitutes a host tissue in itself. It is, however,
comprised of multiple cell types that influence each
other, as Lee Helman pointed out in his introduction to
the topic “Targeting the Ewing sarcoma ecosystem”.
Tumor-microenvironment interactions occur between
multiple host cell types. Tumor infiltrating fibroblasts,
adipocytes and immune cells alter their metabolism to
adapt to the tumor environment where they create an
immunosuppressive milieu. Lee Helman referred to a study
that demonstrated the importance of the mitochondrial
Krebs cycle in shaping the nuclear methylome of several
cancers [19] and speculated that metabolic adaptations
in tumor-microenvironment interactions may affect
the epigenome of both tumor and infiltrating host cells.
In addition, he pointed out that genotoxic treatments
elicit DNA damage responses in healthy tissues leading
to inflammatory responses that affect tumor cells and
metastases. Steve Lessnick discussed the contrasting
effects of normoxia and hypoxia on proteolytic cleavage
and isoform expression of neuropeptide Y (NPY)
with opposite consequences for cell proliferation and
apoptosis (Tilan et al. 2013). Consequently, several talks
addressed the interaction between the seed - the molecular
underpinnings of Ewing sarcoma, and the soil - the tumor
microenvironment.
Previously, the group of Franck Tirode demonstrated
that sustained knockdown of EWS-FLI1 restores
multipotency to Ewing sarcoma cell lines in vitro [20].
Expanding on this observation, Olivier Delattre reported
that EWS-FLI1 silencing in the in vivo context of a mouse
xenograft model resulted specifically in adipogenic
differentiation of tumor cells. Similarly, Patrick Grohar
observed replacement of the tumor tissue in Ewing
sarcoma bearing mice by fat tissue of human origin upon
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8619

Oncotarget

Rédini used novel mineralized scaffolds to investigate
the vicious cycle between osteoclasts, bone stromal cells/
osteoblasts and tumor cells in Ewing sarcoma progression
by transcriptomic analysis. Results are integrated with
differential gene expression patterns and therapy responses
observed in patients and pre-clinical models of bone
versus soft tissue Ewing sarcoma. Such an approach
may also be useful to validate the potential influence of
the stromal component on the prognostic transcriptional
signature of Ewing sarcoma with respect to chemokine
receptor expression CXCR7 and CXCR4 isoforms that
differ in their affinity to antagonistic ligands CXCL12 and
CXCL14, discussed by Karoly Szuhai.
Tumor growth beyond the reach of existing
vasculature triggers cellular adaptations to overcome
limiting nutrient and oxygen delivery. In addition,
oncogenic activation and metabolic re-programming
elicit cell intrinsic stresses. Under these conditions,
metabolism is re-wired to support cellular energy
homeostasis and to supply the building blocks for biomass
[23]. One mechanism of energy preservation is selective
withdrawal of mRNAs from translation by storage in
ribonucleoprotein complexes, called stress granules. Poul
Sorensen described that under oxidative stress up to 60%
of mRNA gets entrapped in stress granules. He recently
reported that the RNA binding protein YB-1 translationally
activates expression of a number of stress-responsive
proteins including HIF1α [24], and activates translation of
the stress granule nucleator, G3BP1 [25]. He reported on
proteomic approaches to define the composition of YB-1
containing stress granules, and the promising activity of
several histone deacetylase inhibitors in preventing stress
granule formation.
A so far unrecognized hint to a potential role of
stress granules in the pathogenesis of Ewing sarcoma
may arise from the functional analysis of genes in the
vicinity of Ewing sarcoma susceptibility loci. A previously
published genome-wide association study from the
Delattre lab identified candidate risk loci on chromosomes
1, 10, and 15 [26]. The chromosome 1 susceptibility SNP
rs9430161 is located in the vicinity of TARDBP, encoding
an RNA binding protein that is structurally similar to
and co-localizes with FUS and EWS to stress granules.
Heinrich Kovar now reported on preliminary results
generated by Dave Aryee suggesting that the chromosome
15 associated risk locus rs4924410 may affect the activity
of a further stress granule associated protein, SRP14, via
EWS-FLI1 dependent regulation of a novel long noncoding (lnc)RNA.
While these studies are still in their infancy,
Thomas Grünewald summarized his recently completed
study on the functional analysis of the chromosome 10
encoded Ewing sarcoma susceptibility locus, which he
demonstrated to affect expression of the Ewing sarcoma
growth regulatory EGR2 gene through extension of an
EWS-FLI1 bound enhancer-like GGAA microsatellite
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

[27].

All together, these findings underline the contextspecific role of EWS-ETS proteins in giving birth to the
monster. It is clear that dysregulation of transcriptional
programs by EWS-ETS driven wide-spread enhancer
reprograming and promoter deregulation is a major factor
shaping the biological and clinical characteristics of this
monstrous disease. At the meeting, however, some less
well characterized EWS-ETS activities and their potential
roles in sarcomagenesis and progression were discussed.
Alejandro Sweet-Cordero reported that EWSFLI1 deregulates the expression of >300 lncRNAs, some
directly some indirectly. He presented data on two highly
expressed Ewing sarcoma specific, EWS-FLI1 regulated
lncRNAs, EWSAT1 [28] and EWSAT2 (lnc659). He
demonstrated that lncRNA EWSAT1 is involved in EWSFLI1 mediated gene repression whereas ongoing studies
are directed at identifying the mechanism of EWSAT2.
Importantly, knock-down of both lncRNAs interferes with
tumor cell growth in vitro and in vivo.

TAMING THE MONSTER
To identify vulnerabilities of Ewing sarcoma,
Kimberly Stegmaier presented the “Pediatric cancer
dependencies project”, which combines high-throughput
shRNA and drug screens, super-enhancer profiling, and
CRISPR/Cas9 mediated knockout on a multitude of
cell lines in vitro. Using this approach, they identified
the regulatory subunit of the protein phosphatase PP2A
complex, STRN4, and the cyclin dependent kinase CDK4
as essential for Ewing sarcoma cell growth/survival.
In fact, they found that the CDK4/6 inhibitor LEE011
(Novartis) has promising in vitro and in vivo cytostatic and
cytotoxic activity on Ewing sarcoma cells [29].
Branka Radic Sarikas performed a synergy screen
on selected FDA approved drugs and identified synergistic
cytotoxic effects of IGF1R and protein kinase C inhibition
in the presence of EWS-FLI1. Kristiina Iljin reported on
the results of a drugable siRNA cell viability screen in
an inducible EWS-FLI1 shRNA Ewing sarcoma cell line
interrogating nearly 7000 genes with 4 siRNAs per gene
for EWS-FLI1 dependencies, which was performed as part
of the “ASSET” project. In addition, they also performed
a small compound screen of >3000 agents comparing
EWS-FLI1 on/off states in the same model. Integrating
a variety of genomic data sets and mining the literature
Kalliopi Tsafou developed an algorithm to link drug
effects to genes. By this approach, she identified nodes for
which several drugs scored high in the synthetic lethality
screen with EWS-FLI1 expression in the Ewing sarcoma
cell line A673. Among top hits were histone deacetylases.
Consistent with this finding, Anang Shelat and Elizabeth
Stewart reported exquisite sensitivity of Ewing sarcoma
cells to the class I selective HDAC inhibitor OKI-5.
They also reported that adding a poly(ADP-ribose)
8620

Oncotarget

polymerase inhibitor such as Talazoparib or Olaparib
to Irinotecan and dose-escalating Temozolomide
yielded approximately 90% survival in Ewing sarcoma
xenografted mice compared to 100% mortality in mice
receiving Irinotecan and full-dose Temozolomide.
Refering to a recently published study, they discussed
the expression effect of the EWS-FLI1 target SLFN11
on sensitivity to this drug combination [30]. Synergistic
activity for combination treatment of patient derived
xenografts with Olaparib and Trabectedin was reported
by Enrique de Alava [31]. While PARP1 was previously
demonstrated to regulate EWS-FLI1 expression and
transcriptional activity [32], and Trabectidin reported to
revert the EWS-FLI1 transcriptional signature [33], the
de Alava study did not detect any effect of the Olaparib
plus Trabectedin combination on EWS-FLI1 target gene
expression at Trabectedin concentrations 5-10x lower than
previously reported to suppress EWS-FLI1.
In addition to targeting hubs in the EWS-ETS
downstream gene regulatory network , perturbation of the
expression or functional activity of the gene fusion product
itself is considered the holy grail from which innovative
Ewing sarcoma specific therapies may arise. A siRNA
screen performed in Lee Helman´s lab to identify genes
whose depletion recapitulates the transcriptional effects
of EWS-FLI1 knockdown, identified several components
of the splicing machinery. In fact, knockdown of one
of them, HNRNPH1, perturbed the correct splicing of
primary EWS-FLI1 transcripts in cells with breakpoints in
EWSR1 intron 8 leading to an out-of-frame fusion product.
An alternative approach to disrupt correct EWS-FLI1
RNA processing was presented by Marc Ladanyi, who
showed in vitro data on treatment with splice-switching
oligonucleotides to introduce premature polyadenylation
from internal polyA sites of the fusion RNA. In addition,
Jeff Toretsky´s group recently demonstrated that, in turn,
altered RNA splicing is one of the EWS-ETS fusion
protein´s oncogenic functions, which can be inhibited
by the small molecule YK-4-279 [34]. Jeff Toretsky
discussed the difficulty of pharmacologically targeting
the EWS-ETS fusion protein introducing the concept
of protein concentration dependent physical phase
separation, potentially nucleated by local enrichment at
GGAA microsatellites [35]. Although so far all attempts
to map the exact binding site of the YK-4-279 compound
along the fusion protein failed, and no influence on the
EWS-FLI1 transcriptional signature was observed, results
presented by Lee Helman and Jeff Toretsky encourage
clinical evaluation of splicing inhibitors in Ewing sarcoma
patients.
Alternatively, targeting EWS-ETS protein stability
may provide a so far unexplored therapeutic option. EWSFLI1 stability is regulated by K48 polyubiquitinylation
and proteasomal degradation. Using a targeted shRNA
screen interrogating 21 Ewing sarcoma expressed
deubiquitinating enzymes, Beat Schäfer´s group identified
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

ubiquitin-specific protease USP19 as an EWS-FLI1
regulatory enzyme, whose knockdown destabilizes EWSFLI1 protein and may therefore serve as an attractive
therapeutic target.
Pre-clinical drug validation requires studies in
model organisms. In the absence of validated rodent
models for most pediatric cancers, the “Pediatric
Preclinical Testing Program” (PPTP) studied 67 drugs
on 83 different xenograft mouse models, in all together
2134 drug/model comparisons. Peter Houghton reported
that retrospective analysis of the results for any of 1000
randomly selected mice accurately predicted the response
of the whole group in each comparison in 75% of cases.
The predictive power of the response of a single mouse
increased to 95%, if one deviation per group was allowed.
Based on these results, he provocatively suggested to use
a single mouse xenograft instead of 10 mice per patient
sample or cell line in future pre-clinical drug efficacy
tests. This strategy would lower costs and increase
throughput, two key factors in in vivo drug screens. An
attractive alternative to mice in this respect are zebrafish.
James Amatruda presented a chemical suppressor screen
in a mitfa:EWS-FLI1 transgenic zebrafish model. EWSFLI1 is well tolerated by melanocytes which increase
in number due to oncogene expression. Drug-induced
reduction in melanocytes can therefore be used as a
surrogate readout for activity against EWS-FLI1 driven
cell proliferation. Testing 1200 compounds, they identified
activity for several kinase inhibitors, bisphosphonates and,
interestingly, pro-estrogens and anti-androgens.
For an anti-cancer drug to be effective, it needs
to reach its target via the blood stream. However, about
50% of tumor vessels are non-functional. Therefore
normalization of the tumor vasculature should improve
drug delivery. Keri Schadler reported that vascular shear
stress, which is induced in endothelial cells by the blood
flow in response to aerobic exercise, induces functional
tumor vasculature and increases chemotherapeutic
efficacy, as exemplified for doxorubicin. She presented
data identifying a role for nuclear factor of activated
T cells (NFAT) c1 and thrombospondin TSP1 in the
normalization of the tumor vasculature.
Whole genome sequencing technologies have
provided ultimate proof that cancers are vastly different
from normal tissues and that some of these differences
will be recognized by the immune system if immune
checkpoints can be overcome. Identification of
mechanisms by which tumor cells manipulate the immune
system is of critical importance for developing strategies
that reverse tumor-induced immunosuppression and
sensitize tumor cells to lysis by preexisting or therapeutic
effector cells. Cellular imunotherapies for Ewing sarcoma
are under development but have not yet been effective. In
many cancers, the number of mutations predicts response
to checkpoint targeting drugs (i.e. anti-PDL1 and -PD1
antibodies). Since the mutational landscape of Ewing
8621

Oncotarget

sarcoma is relatively quiet, the question arises if this type
of cancer is sensitive to immunotherapy. As a first step to
address this problem, Claudia Rössig reported preliminary
results on local expression of the immune-inhibitory
ligand PD-L1 and the non-classical HLA molecule HLA-G
in the Ewing sarcoma microenvironment, as determined
by immunohistochemistry in pre-therapy tumor biopsies.
In addition to the EWSR1-ETS gene fusion, Ewing
sarcoma is characterized by high CD99 expression. Katia
Scotlandi explored the therapeutic potential of targeting
this enigmatic surface glycoprotein. She presented new
results on non-apoptotic tumor cell killing by the murine
monoclonal antibody O662 and a human, CD99-directed
single chain antibody. This type of cell death is initiated
by HRAS and RAC-1 activation and dysregulation of
micropinocytosis, and is insensitive to overexpression of
anti-apoptotic Bcl2 family members and ERK activation.
Dysregulation of RAS signaling in Ewing sarcoma may
also be deduced from work presented by Florencia CidreAranaz. She observed EWS-FLI1 mediated suppression
of the fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR)
antagonist sprouty 1 (SPRY1). FGFR1 has been recently
demonstrated to be active in Ewing sarcoma [9]. SPRY1
antagonizes ERK activation of RAS and acts as a tumor
suppressor in Ewing sarcoma cells reducing proliferation
and migration when ectopically overexpressed. Florencia
Cidre-Aranaz reported that increased SPRY1 expression
was associated with a better relapse-free and overall
survival, while low SPRY1 levels associated with
increased metastasis in patients. These data may provide a
rationale to consider therapeutic use of FGFR1 and RAS
inhibitors in the treatment of Ewing sarcoma.

potential of speeding-up preclinical drug development in
the near future.

CONCLUSIONS
Ewing sarcoma remains a monstrous disease to
patients, families, doctors and scientists. It hatches from
the malicious activities of EWS-ETS fusion proteins as
the egg, bred by some neural crest or mesenchyme derived
stem cell at a defined developmental stage, as parental hen
and rooster. Researchers at the ASSET/ENCCA meeting
discussed the role of the soil - the microenvironment,
and the seed - a susceptible genetic background, which
are required to feed the chick to become the monster that
is so difficult to tame. Laboratory data, both mature and
preliminary, were presented in support of new treatment
concepts in the war against Ewing sarcoma, including
the use of epigenetic and specific pathway-directed drugs
targeting the tumor and its microenvironment (Figure
1). To enable the next step along the path to clinical
translation of these promising insights, pre-clinical
compound testing in animal and/or 3D culture systems,
it was recognized that the field would greatly benefit
from an exchange platform to allow for sharing of cell
lines and models, omic and linked clinical data, standard
operating procedures and harmonization of protocols.
The group agreed that the atmosphere of trust, openness
and cooperativeness demonstrated at this meeting should
facilitate the establishment of an international working
group to put in place a common database that keeps
memory of tested compounds and systems. This would
be required for efficient prioritization of novel drugs for
further pre-clinical and clinical development, which may
hopefully lead to a major transition in the way patients
with Ewing sarcoma are treated. Such a working group
should also involve patient advocacy groups in the hope
that they may help obtain sustained funding sources for
this endeavor. With their support, ASSET and ENCCA
tried to pave the way, but with termination of these
projects in 2016, novel funding strategies are needed to
keep up the fruitful momentum of the “Second European
Interdisciplinary Ewing Sarcoma Research Summit”.

PROGRESS
SINCE
THE
FIRST
INTERDISCIPLINARY
EWING
SARCOMA RESEARCH SUMMIT
In-depth genome and transcriptome sequencing
studies identified widespread dynamic inter- and intratumor heterogeneity of Ewing sarcoma down to the single
cell level. The rapid expansion and spread of sophisticated
novel next generation sequencing applications beyond
RNA and genome analysis have provided unprecedented
insights into chromatin dynamics. Most importantly, it
has become clear that reprogramming of the epigenome
and alternative RNA splicing downstream of EWSFLI1 play central roles in Ewing sarcoma pathogenesis
and may therefore provide novel therapeutic targets.
As the epigenome serves the ultimate “receptor” for
developmental and microenvironmental signaling
cues, we have started to understand how tissue context,
architecture, and metabolic state may influence tumor
growth with implications for therapy response. For the
first time, a mouse model of Ewing sarcoma is on the
horizon based on developmentally tightly timed EWSFLI1 expression in the bone mesenchyme, which has the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING
We thank Anirah Amber and Nuno Andrade for
excellent organization of the meeting. The conference was
supported by the European Union’s Seventh Framework
Programme grants 261743(ENCCA) and 259348
(ASSET).

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
There is no conflict of interest.

8622

Oncotarget

REFERENCES

enhancer elements in Ewing sarcoma. Cancer Cell. 2014;
26:668-681.

1.	 Gaspar N, Hawkins DS, Dirksen U, Lewis IJ, Ferrari
S, Le Deley MC, Kovar H, Grimer R, Whelan J, Claude
L, Delattre O, Paulussen M, Picci P, Sundby Hall K,
van den Berg H, Ladenstein R, et al. Ewing Sarcoma:
Current Management and Future Approaches Through
Collaboration. J Clin Oncol. 2015.

11.	 Tomazou EM, Sheffield NC, Schmidl C, Schuster M,
Schonegger A, Datlinger P, Kubicek S, Bock C and Kovar
H. Epigenome Mapping Reveals Distinct Modes of Gene
Regulation and Widespread Enhancer Reprogramming by
the Oncogenic Fusion Protein EWS-FLI1. Cell reports.
2015.

2.	 Gorlick R, Janeway K, Lessnick S, Randall RL, Marina
N and Committee COGBT. Children’s Oncology Group’s
2013 blueprint for research: bone tumors. Pediatric blood &
cancer. 2013; 60:1009-1015.

12.	 Sankar S, Theisen ER, Bearss J, Mulvihill T, Hoffman
LM, Sorna V, Beckerle MC, Sharma S and Lessnick SL.
Reversible LSD1 inhibition interferes with global EWS/
ETS transcriptional activity and impedes Ewing sarcoma
tumor growth. Clin Cancer Res. 2014; 20:4584-4597.

3.	 Esiashvili N, Goodman M and Marcus RB, Jr. Changes in
incidence and survival of Ewing sarcoma patients over the
past 3 decades: Surveillance Epidemiology and End Results
data. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2008; 30:425-430.
4.	

5.	

13.	 Calzone L, Barillot E and Zinovyev A. Predicting genetic
interactions from Boolean models of biological networks.
Integrative biology : quantitative biosciences from nano to
macro. 2015; 7:921-929.

Kovar H, Alonso J, Aman P, Aryee DN, Ban J, Burchill SA,
Burdach S, De Alava E, Delattre O, Dirksen U, Fourtouna
A, Fulda S, Helman LJ, Herrero-Martin D, Hogendoorn PC,
Kontny U, et al. The first European interdisciplinary ewing
sarcoma research summit. Front Oncol. 2012; 2:54.

14.	 Tanaka M, Yamaguchi S, Yamazaki Y, Kinoshita H,
Kuwahara K, Nakao K, Jay PY, Noda T and Nakamura T.
Somatic chromosomal translocation between Ewsr1 and
Fli1 loci leads to dilated cardiomyopathy in a mouse model.
Scientific reports. 2015; 5:7826.

Brohl AS, Solomon DA, Chang W, Wang J, Song Y, Sindiri
S, Patidar R, Hurd L, Chen L, Shern JF, Liao H, Wen X,
Gerard J, Kim JS, Lopez Guerrero JA, Machado I, et al.
The Genomic Landscape of the Ewing Sarcoma Family of
Tumors Reveals Recurrent STAG2 Mutation. PLoS Genet.
2014; 10:e1004475.

15.	 Tanaka M, Yamazaki Y, Kanno Y, Igarashi K, Aisaki K,
Kanno J and Nakamura T. Ewing’s sarcoma precursors
are highly enriched in embryonic osteochondrogenic
progenitors. The Journal of clinical investigation. 2014;
124:3061-3074.

6.	 Crompton BD, Stewart C, Taylor-Weiner A, Alexe G,
Kurek KC, Calicchio ML, Kiezun A, Carter SL, Shukla
SA, Mehta SS, Thorner AR, de Torres C, Lavarino C,
Sunol M, McKenna A, Sivachenko A, et al. The genomic
landscape of pediatric Ewing sarcoma. Cancer discovery.
2014; 4:1326-1341.

16.	 Sparmann A and van Lohuizen M. Polycomb silencers
control cell fate, development and cancer. Nature reviews.
2006; 6:846-856.
17.	 von Levetzow C, Jiang X, Gwye Y, von Levetzow G, Hung
L, Cooper A, Hsu JH and Lawlor ER. Modeling initiation
of Ewing sarcoma in human neural crest cells. PLoS ONE.
2011; 6:e19305.

7.	 Lawrence MS, Stojanov P, Mermel CH, Robinson JT,
Garraway LA, Golub TR, Meyerson M, Gabriel SB, Lander
ES and Getz G. Discovery and saturation analysis of cancer
genes across 21 tumour types. Nature. 2014; 505:495-501.

18.	 Svoboda LK, Harris A, Bailey NJ, Schwentner R, Tomazou
E, von Levetzow C, Magnuson B, Ljungman M, Kovar H
and Lawlor ER. Overexpression of HOX genes is prevalent
in Ewing sarcoma and is associated with altered epigenetic
regulation of developmental transcription programs.
Epigenetics. 2014; 9:1613-1625.

8.	 Tirode F, Surdez D, Ma X, Parker M, Le Deley MC,
Bahrami A, Zhang Z, Lapouble E, Grossetete-Lalami
S, Rusch M, Reynaud S, Rio-Frio T, Hedlund E, Wu G,
Chen X, Pierron G, et al. Genomic landscape of Ewing
sarcoma defines an aggressive subtype with co-association
of STAG2 and TP53 mutations. Cancer discovery. 2014;
4:1342-1353.

19.	 Killian JK, Kim SY, Miettinen M, Smith C, Merino M,
Tsokos M, Quezado M, Smith WI, Jr., Jahromi MS,
Xekouki P, Szarek E, Walker RL, Lasota J, Raffeld M,
Klotzle B, Wang Z, et al. Succinate dehydrogenase mutation
underlies global epigenomic divergence in gastrointestinal
stromal tumor. Cancer discovery. 2013; 3:648-657.

9.	 Agelopoulos K, Richter GH, Schmidt E, Dirksen U, von
Heyking K, Moser B, Klein HU, Kontny U, Dugas M, Poos
K, Korsching E, Buch T, Weckesser M, Schulze I, Besoke
R, Witten A, et al. Deep Sequencing in Conjunction with
Expression and Functional Analyses Reveals Activation of
FGFR1 in Ewing Sarcoma. Clin Cancer Res. 2015.

20.	 Tirode F, Laud-Duval K, Prieur A, Delorme B, Charbord P
and Delattre O. Mesenchymal stem cell features of Ewing
tumors. Cancer Cell. 2007; 11:421-429.
21.	 Scannell CA, Pedersen EA, Mosher JT, Krook MA,
Nicholls LA, Wilky BA, Loeb DM and Lawlor ER. LGR5
is Expressed by Ewing Sarcoma and Potentiates Wnt/betaCatenin Signaling. Front Oncol. 2013; 3:81.

10.	 Riggi N, Knoechel B, Gillespie SM, Rheinbay E, Boulay
G, Suva ML, Rossetti NE, Boonseng WE, Oksuz O, Cook
EB, Formey A, Patel A, Gymrek M, Thapar V, Deshpande
V, Ting DT, et al. EWS-FLI1 utilizes divergent chromatin
remodeling mechanisms to directly activate or repress
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

22.	Santoro M, Lamhamedi-Cherradi SE, Menegaz BA,
8623

Oncotarget

Ludwig JA and Mikos AG. Flow perfusion effects on threedimensional culture and drug sensitivity of Ewing sarcoma.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America. 2015; 112:10304-10309.

CM, et al. The PARP inhibitor olaparib enhances the
sensitivity of Ewing sarcoma to trabectedin. Oncotarget.
2015; 6:18875-18890. doi 10.18632/oncotarget.4303.
32.	 Brenner JC, Feng FY, Han S, Patel S, Goyal SV, BouMaroun LM, Liu M, Lonigro R, Prensner JR, Tomlins
SA and Chinnaiyan AM. PARP-1 inhibition as a targeted
strategy to treat Ewing’s sarcoma. Cancer research. 2012;
72:1608-1613.

23.	 Qiu B and Simon MC. Oncogenes strike a balance between
cellular growth and homeostasis. Seminars in cell &
developmental biology. 2015.
24.	 El-Naggar AM, Veinotte CJ, Cheng H, Grunewald TG,
Negri GL, Somasekharan SP, Corkery DP, Tirode F,
Mathers J, Khan D, Kyle AH, Baker JH, LePard NE,
McKinney S, Hajee S, Bosiljcic M, et al. Translational
Activation of HIF1alpha by YB-1 Promotes Sarcoma
Metastasis. Cancer Cell. 2015; 27:682-697.

33.	 Grohar PJ, Segars LE, Yeung C, Pommier Y, D’Incalci
M, Mendoza A and Helman LJ. Dual targeting of EWSFLI1 activity and the associated DNA damage response
with trabectedin and SN38 synergistically inhibits Ewing
sarcoma cell growth. Clin Cancer Res. 2014; 20:1190-1203.

25.	 Somasekharan SP, El-Naggar A, Leprivier G, Cheng
H, Hajee S, Grunewald TG, Zhang F, Ng T, Delattre O,
Evdokimova V, Wang Y, Gleave M and Sorensen PH. YB-1
regulates stress granule formation and tumor progression
by translationally activating G3BP1. The Journal of cell
biology. 2015; 208:913-929.

34.	 Selvanathan SP, Graham GT, Erkizan HV, Dirksen
U, Natarajan TG, Dakic A, Yu S, Liu X, Paulsen MT,
Ljungman ME, Wu CH, Lawlor ER, Uren A and Toretsky
JA. Oncogenic fusion protein EWS-FLI1 is a network
hub that regulates alternative splicing. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America. 2015; 112:E1307-1316.

26.	 Postel-Vinay S, Veron AS, Tirode F, Pierron G, Reynaud
S, Kovar H, Oberlin O, Lapouble E, Ballet S, Lucchesi C,
Kontny U, Gonzalez-Neira A, Picci P, Alonso J, PatinoGarcia A, de Paillerets BB, et al. Common variants near
TARDBP and EGR2 are associated with susceptibility to
Ewing sarcoma. Nature genetics. 2012.

35.	 Toretsky JA and Wright PE. Assemblages: functional units
formed by cellular phase separation. The Journal of cell
biology. 2014; 206:579-588.

27.	 Grunewald TG, Bernard V, Gilardi-Hebenstreit P, Raynal
V, Surdez D, Aynaud MM, Mirabeau O, Cidre-Aranaz F,
Tirode F, Zaidi S, Perot G, Jonker AH, Lucchesi C, Le
Deley MC, Oberlin O, Marec-Berard P, et al. Chimeric
EWSR1-FLI1 regulates the Ewing sarcoma susceptibility
gene EGR2 via a GGAA microsatellite. Nature genetics.
2015; 47:1073-1078.
28.	 Marques Howarth M, Simpson D, Ngok SP, Nieves B,
Chen R, Siprashvili Z, Vaka D, Breese MR, Crompton
BD, Alexe G, Hawkins DS, Jacobson D, Brunner AL,
West R, Mora J, Stegmaier K, et al. Long noncoding RNA
EWSAT1-mediated gene repression facilitates Ewing
sarcoma oncogenesis. The Journal of clinical investigation.
2014; 124:5275-5290.
29.	 Kennedy AL, Vallurupalli M, Chen L, Crompton B, Cowley
G, Vazquez F, Weir BA, Tsherniak A, Parasuraman S,
Kim S, Alexe G and Stegmaier K. Functional, chemical
genomic, and super-enhancer screening identify sensitivity
to cyclin D1/CDK4 pathway inhibition in Ewing
sarcoma. Oncotarget. 2015; 6:30178-93. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.4903.
30.	 Tang SW, Bilke S, Cao L, Murai J, Sousa FG, Yamade M,
Rajapakse V, Varma S, Helman LJ, Khan J, Meltzer PS
and Pommier Y. SLFN11 Is a Transcriptional Target of
EWS-FLI1 and a Determinant of Drug Response in Ewing
Sarcoma. Clin Cancer Res. 2015.
31.	 Ordonez JL, Amaral AT, Carcaboso AM, Herrero-Martin
D, Del Carmen Garcia-Macias M, Sevillano V, Alonso D,
Pascual-Pasto G, San-Segundo L, Vila-Ubach M, Rodrigues
T, Fraile S, Teodosio C, Mayo-Iscar A, Aracil M, Galmarini
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8624

Oncotarget

