Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 41

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Sorafenib, a multikinase inhibitor, induces formation of stress
granules in hepatocarcinoma cells
Pauline Adjibade1,2,3, Valérie Grenier St-Sauveur1,2,3, Miguel Quevillon
Huberdeau1,2,3, Marie-Josée Fournier1,2,3, Andreanne Savard1,2,3, Laetitia Coudert1,2,3,
Edouard W. Khandjian4,5, Rachid Mazroui1,2,3
1

Centre de Recherche du toCHU de Québec, Université Laval, Québec, PQ, Canada

2

 épartement de Biologie Moléculaire, Biochimie Médicale et Pathologie, Faculté de Médecine, Université Laval, Québec, PQ,
D
Canada

3

Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de l’Université Laval, Université Laval, Québec, PQ, Canada

4

Centre de Recherche, Institut Universitaire en Santé Mentale de Québec, Université Laval, Québec, PQ, Canada

5

Département de Psychiatrie et de Neurosciences, Faculté de Médecine, Université Laval, Québec, PQ, Canada

Correspondence to: Rachid Mazroui, e-mail: rachid.mazroui@crsfa.ulaval.ca
Keywords: stress granules, sorafenib, PERK, eIF2a, ATF4
Received: July 13, 2015 	

Accepted: October 04, 2015 	

Published: November 02, 2015

ABSTRACT
Stress granules (SGs) are cytoplasmic RNA multimeric bodies that form under
stress conditions known to inhibit translation initiation. In most reported stress cases,
the formation of SGs was associated with the cell recovery from stress and survival. In
cells derived from cancer, SGs formation was shown to promote resistance to either
proteasome inhibitors or 5-Fluorouracil used as chemotherapeutic agents. Despite
these studies, the induction of SGs by chemotherapeutic drugs contributing to cancer
cells resistance is still understudied. Here we identified sorafenib, a tyrosine kinase
inhibitor used to treat hepatocarcinoma, as a potent chemotherapeutic inducer of
SGs. The formation of SGs in sorafenib-treated hepatocarcionoma cells correlates
with inhibition of translation initiation; both events requiring the phosphorylation of
the translation initiation factor eIF2`. Further characterisation of the mechanism of
sorafenib-induced SGs revealed PERK as the main eIF2` kinase responsible for SGs
formation. Depletion experiments support the implication of PERK-eIF2`-SGs pathway
in hepatocarcinoma cells resistance to sorafenib. This study also suggests the existence
of an unexpected complex regulatory balance between SGs and phospho-eIF2` where
SGs dampen the activation of the phospho-eIF2`-downstream ATF4 cell death pathway.

proteins, and signaling molecules [6]. Sequestration of
signaling molecules such as Rack1 [7], Traf2 [8], and Raptor
[9] in SGs inhibits stress-mediated apoptotic pathways in
tumor cells. SGs also promote tumor cell survival upon
either radiotherapy [1] or chemotherapy [3, 4, 10, 11] by
sequestering and preventing the degradation of mRNAs
encoding key growth factors and antiapoptotic proteins
including VEGF and p21. Targeting SGs-inducing pathways
may thus constitute a novel chemotherapeutic approach.
The inhibition of translation initiation is a key event
that triggers SGs formation [12]. Phosphorylation of eIF2α
at serine 51 is a well characterised pathway known to
inhibit translation initiation in response to various stressful
conditions including hypoxia [13], viral infection [14],
oxidative and Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER) stresses [15].

INTRODUCTION
When exposed to environmental stresses, cells
activate pathways that induce a coordinated response of
mRNA translation and turnover that protects cells from
stress-induced damage and promotes their survival. One
such stress pathway involves the formation of stress
granules (SGs), which are cytoplasmic bodies induced
by various stimuli involved in cancer treatments such
as ionizing radiation [1], hypoxia [2], and proteasome
inhibitors [3, 4, 5]. Since these stresses are all known to
inhibit translation initiation, SGs are thought to represent
sites of repression of the translation of specific mRNAs.
SGs contain small ribosomal subunit, translation
initiation factors, mRNA with associated RNA binding
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43927

Oncotarget

Phosphorylation of eIF2α inhibits translation initiation
by stalling translation initiation complexes in an inactive
form, whose accumulation results in SGs formation
[16]. However, phosphorylation of eIF2α was shown to
either promote or impede stress-mediated apoptotic
pathways [12]. The proapoptotic role of phosphorylated
eIF2α is attributed to the translational down-regulation of
survival proteins such as bcl-x [17]. Phospho (P)-eIF2α
promotes cell death by inducing preferential translation
of ATF4 [18, 19, 20], a transcription factor known to
activate transcription of key stress apoptotic factors such
as ATF3 and CHOP [18, 19, 20]. Downregulation of ATF4
was however shown to prevent cancer cells resistance to
anticancer drugs [21], indicating that a minimal expression
of ATF4, which is driven by P-eIF2α is nevertheless
required for cancer cells survival to chemotherapeutics.
This chemoresistant role of ATF4 was attributed to its
activity in driving the expression of antioxidant and
chapronnes genes that favor cell survival and growth
[18]. The survival properties of phosphorylated eIF2α are
mediated by additional multiple mechanisms including
the activation of the PI3K-PKB-mTOR signaling pathway
[22], the induction of transcription factor NF-kB [20], and
the formation of SGs [4, 23, 24, 25].
eIF2α phosphorylation-mediated SGs formation
involves the activation of one of the four stress specific
eIF2α kinases. While the SGs-inducing effect of oxidative
stress is mediated by HRI [26], viral infection seems to
trigger SGs formation through PKR activation [27, 28].
GCN2 is the main eIF2α kinase that drives SGs formation
under conditions of amino acid deprivation [29] and PERK
is responsible for eIF2α phosphorylation and associated
SGs formation as a result of the accumulation of
unfolded proteins during ER stress [30]. Despite the wellestablished role of eIF2α kinases in regulating the cellular
stress response, their role in cancer was neglected. Recent
studies now implicated the activity of GCN2, HRI and
PERK in cancer biology [31]. In particular, PERK has now
emerged as a potential factor that promotes tumor growth
and angiogenesis [32, 33], which is consistent with its
high activity observed in human tumors including breast
and glioma [34]. Activated PERK was also implicated in
cancer cells resistance to anticancer drugs [34, 35].
Sorafenib (Nexavar®), an Raf1/Mek/Erk kinase
inhibitor approved for advanced hepatocarcinoma cells
(HCC) [35], was recently shown to induce an ER stress
characterised by the activation of PERK-phosphorylation
of eIF2α axis in leukemia cells [36]. We report here that
sorafenib is a potent inducer of SGs in cancer cells of
various origins, including breast, prostate, cervix, and
HCC. We focused on characterising sorafenib-induced
SGs in HCC, the clinical targets of sorafenib [36].
Formation of SGs in sorafenib-treated HCC requires the
phosphorylation of the translation initiation factor eIF2α
through the stress kinase PERK. However, differential
formation of SGs was observed between HCC. While
SGs were efficiently induced in sorafenib-resistant HCC
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

(Hep3B), they were significantly reduced in the less
resistant HCC (Huh-7) cells. This differential formation
of SGs was inversely correlated with the expression of
ATF4, the downstream target of P-eIF2α. Supporting data
of the role of SGs in buffering ATF4 translation during
sorafenib exposure is provided by FISH experiments
showing the localisation of ATF4 mRNA in SGs, thereby
preventing its association with translating polysomes and
keeping its expression minimal. This minimal expression
of ATF4 in SGs-forming HCC is relevant because its
elimination by siRNAs prevented their survival. Similar
results were obtained by disrupting SGs through PERK
depletion. Our study suggests that PERK-mediated SGs
formation contribute to HCC resistance to sorafenib, in
part by modulating ATF4 expression.

RESULTS
Sorafenib induces SGs formation in various
cancer cells including HCC
To determine if sorafenib induces SGs formation, we
treated various cancer cell lines with 5–25 μM of sorafenib
and assessed SGs formation by immunofluorescence using
antibodies specific to several canonical SGs markers.
We found that sorafenib potently (~ 80%) induces SGs
in various cancer cells including HeLa (cervix), MCF-7
(breast), PC3 and LnCaP (prostate) (Fig. S1), and
Hep3B (HCC) cell lines (Fig. 1). We focused our study
on characterising sorafenib-SGs in HCC. Dose-response
experiments show that the minimal concentration of
sorafenib that induces SGs in a maximum (>80%) of
Hep3B cells at 2 hours of treatment is 10 μM. This
concentration is physiological relevant since it corresponds
to the average plasma concentrations measured in patients
receiving sorafenib, i.e., 5–10 μM [37]. Time course
analysis of SGs formation upon treatment of Hep3B
with 10 μM sorafenib shows that SGs started forming
as soon as 30 minutes (data not shown), picked at 2 h
(>80%) following treatment (Fig. 1A and 1C), and lasted
over 8 h post-treatment (Fig. S2A). The number of SGs
decreases however over time to reach ~ 20% at 24 h posttreatment (data not shown). SGs induction by sorafenib
in HCC is not restricted to Hep3B since they also form
in sorafenib-treated Huh-7 (Figs. 1B–1C, and S2A),
albeit at much less efficiency (10–20%), as compared to
Hep3B (>80%) (Fig, 1C). Sorafenib-induced SGs in HCC
contain canonical SGs markers including FMRP, FXR1,
G3BP1 (Fig. 1), eIF4E and eIF4GI (Fig. S3A), as well
as poly(A)+ mRNA (Fig. S4). RACK1, a component of
arsenite-induced SGs [38], was also found to partially
localise in SGs induced by sorafenib (Fig. 1A–1B).
Sorafenib-induced SGs lack both RCK (Fig. 1A and 1B)
and GFP-dcp1a (Fig. S3B), two classical components
of the cytoplasmic mRNA decay bodies (P-bodies)
[39], indicating that sorafenib-induced SGs are distinct
from P-bodies. Moreover, sorafenib does not affect the
43928

Oncotarget

formation of RCK-containing P-bodies in HCC, indicating
a specific effect of sorafenib on SGs. As expected,
treatment of HCC with the SGs inhibitor cycloheximide
[40] disrupts sorafenib-SGs (Fig. 1D). Altogether, these
results show that treatment of HCC with sorafenib induces
classical SGs.

autophosphorylation activity of its MEK/ERK targets [42],
similarly in Hep3B and Huh-7 (Fig. 2A). This indicates
that sorafenib is effective in both cell lines. Sorafenib
treatment induces phosphorylation of eIF2α in both
Hep3B and Huh-7 (Figs. 2A and S2B), which correlates
with formation of SGs (Figs. 1A–1B and S2A). As shown
in Fig. 2A–2B (see also Fig. S2B), the phosphorylation of
eIF2α in sorafenib-treated Hep3B is however significantly
more induced (>3 fold) than in sorafenib-treated Huh-7
(~ 1.5 fold), which as described earlier are less prone to
form SGs than Hep3B (Figs. 1A–1B and S2A).
While phosphorylation of eIF2α triggers the general
inhibition of translation initiation upon stress, it allows the
preferential translation of specific mRNAs whose products
either promote or prevent stress-induced cell death
[15]. ATF4 mRNA is the main mRNA to be translated
specifically when eIF2α is phosphorylated [15]. We thus
tested if sorafenib-induced phosphorylation of eIF2α in

Sorafenib induces SGs in an eIF2α
phosphorylation-dependent manner
The formation of stress-induced classical SGs
involves multiple pathways [41], the main being the
phosphorylation of eIF2α. We thus sought to further
characterise the formation of sorafenib-SGs in HCC by
assessing if it requires the phosphorylation of eIF2α.
First, we monitored the phosphorylation of eIF2α
in both sorafenib-treated Hep3B and Huh-7 cells.
Control experiments show that sorafenib inhibits the

Figure 1: Sorafenib induces SGs in HCC. Hep3B and Huh-7 cells were treated with sorafenib (10 μM) for two hours or left

untreated. A–C. Hep3B (A) and Huh-7 (B) were processed for immunofluorescence to detect SGs using antibodies specific to several
SGs markers (FMRP, G3BP1, FXR1 and RACK1), or to P-bodies (RCK). Blue DAPI staining depicts nuclei. Scale bars are shown.
The percentage of cells harboring SGs (>3 granules/ cell) is indicated in (C). These representative results are from 50 different fields
and 10 different experiments containing a total of 5000 cells. D. Hep3B were treated with both sorafenib (10 μM) and cycloheximide
(100 μg / ml) for two hours and then were processed for immunofluorescence as above. DAPI stains for nuclei. The percentage of
SGs-positive cells is indicated.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43929

Oncotarget

HCC is sufficient to trigger the inhibition of translation
initiation, thus allowing the preferential expression of
ATF4. Analysis of polyribosomes profiles confirms that
translation initiation was efficiently blocked in both
Hep3B and Huh-7, following treatment with sorafenib
(Fig. 2C). We corroborated these results by both metabolic
labeling (Fig. S2C) and ribopuromycylation (Fig. 2D)
[43], showing a net reduction of general translation

in both cell lines upon treatment with the drug. Thus,
sorafenib treatment inhibits translation initiation in HCC,
most-likely through phosphorylation of eIF2α.
As expected, the expression of ATF4, the
downstream target of P-eIF2α, was also induced in
HCC upon sorafenib treatment. The induction of ATF4
expression occurs however with different efficiencies
between sorafenib-treated Hep3B and Huh-7.

Figure 2: Analysis of eIF2` phosphorylation, ATF4 mRNA expression and localisation, and general translation
initiation in sorafenib-treated HCC. A–D. Hep3B and Huh-7 were treated with sorafenib for two hours and then collected. (A) Protein

content was analysed for the expression of phospho-eIF2α, phospho-ERK1/2, and ATF4 by western blot using specific antibodies. Tubulin
and eIF2α serve as loading controls. (B) The amounts of phosphorylated eIF2α and ATF4 were determined by densitometry quantitation of
the film signal using Image Studio™ Lite Software, normalised against total eIF2α and expressed as indicated. ****P < 0.0001 (Student’s
t-test). The results are representative of more than 5 different experiments. (C) Cytoplasmic extracts were prepared and fractionated on
sucrose gradients. The indicated polysome profiles were monitored by measuring the OD254. (D) Hep3B and Huh-7 were treated with
sorafenib for one hour and fifty minutes, then puromycin (50 μg/ ml) was added for an additional ten minutes. Cells were collected and
protein content was analysed by western blot for puromycin incorporation into nascent polypeptide chains using anti-puromycin antibodies
(top panel). Coomassie Blue (bottom panel) staining shows equal protein loading. E. RNA content was isolated and the amount of ATF4
mRNA relative to Actin mRNA was quantified by real-time q(RT)-PCR using the ΔΔCt method. The results are presented as the mean of
triplicate measurements, with error bars corresponding to the SEM. F–G. Cytoplasmic extracts of sorafenib-treated Hep3B and Huh-7 were
prepared, fractionated on sucrose gradients and their polysomes profiles recorded (F) as above. (G) RNA content was isolated from pooled
non-translating monosomal (pool 1), low translating polysomal (light polysomes; pool 2) and high translating polysomal (heavy polysomes;
pool 3) fractions and analysed for levels of ATF4 mRNA by qRT-PCR using the ∆∆Ct method. ATF4 mRNA levels were standardised
against 18s ribosomal RNA and expressed as a percentage of total RNA. (G) The results are representatives of two independent experiments.

(Continued )
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43930

Oncotarget

Figure 2 (Continued ): H–I. FISH experiments. (H) untreated or sorafenib-treated Hep3B cells were fixed, permeabilised,
and then incubated with 3 nM of an Alexa Fluor 488-labeled antisense RNA probe to detect ATF4 mRNA (panels 4 and 10)
or with the Alexa Fluor 488-labeled sense probe as control (panels 1 and 7). SGs were detected using anti-G3BP1 antibodies
(red signal). Merged pictures show a clear localisation of ATF4 mRNA signal in SGs. The percentage of cells harboring
SGs positive for ATF4 mRNA is indicated at the right of panel 12. Shown are typical results from three different fields and
two different experiments containing a total of 1000 cells. (I) Quantification of FISH signal. Densitometry quantification of
FISH signal with Adobe Photoshop software. Pixels numbers and mean intensities were recorded for the selected regions
(SGs, diffuse cytoplasm and background). The mean intensity was multiplied by the number of pixels for the region selected
in order to obtain the absolute intensity. The absolute intensity of the background region was subtracted from each region
of interest. Relative intensities were then calculated and correspond to the absolute intensities normalised to the absolute
intensity of the reference.
Unexpectedly, ATF4 was highly induced (~ 5.5 fold) in
Huh-7, as compared to Hep3B (<2 fold) (Figs. 2A–2B
and S2B). This is surprising since phosphorylation of
eIF2α, which is responsible for the expression of ATF4,
is significantly lower in Huh-7 as compared to Hep3B.
The steady state level of ATF4 mRNA is similar between
Hep3B and Huh-7 treated with sorafenib (Fig. 2E),
indicating that the differential expression of ATF4
observed between SGs-forming Hep3B and SGs-deficient
Huh-7 is likely to occur posttranscriptionally.
Using sucrose gradient polyribosomes fractionation
assays, we found that ATF4 mRNA is highly enriched in
fractions corresponding to high translating polysomes
(heavy polysomes; pool 3) as compared to either nontranslating monosomes (pool 1) or to low translating
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

polysomes (light polysomes; pool 2) in sorafenib-treated
Huh-7 (Fig. 2F–2G). This result is consistent with the high
expression of ATF4 mRNA observed in sorafenib-treated
Huh-7 (Figs. 2A–2B and S2). In contrary, ATF4 mRNA
was barely detected in the high translating polysomes of
sorafenib-treated Hep3B (Fig. 2F–2G), which is consistent
with the assumption that is repressed in this cell line upon
sorafenib treatment. Because the association of specific
mRNAs with SGs prevents their expression, [10, 29,
44], we anticipated the possibility that ATF4 mRNA
may be trapped in SGs, which would then dampen its
overproduction in Hep3B.
Using FISH experiments, we found that indeed
ATF4 mRNA is localised in SGs (Fig. 2H; lanes
10 and 12). Quantification of ATF4 mRNA FISH signal
43931

Oncotarget

(Fig. 2I) shows that ~20% of the cytoplasmic ATF4
mRNA is trapped in SGs. This quantification is likely to be
underestimated because it does not take into account any
mobile fraction of this mRNA that transiently associates
with SGs, therefore precluding its detection by FISH in
fixed cells (see discussion). Nevertheless, our data suggest
that at least a sub-fraction of ATF4 mRNA produced in
sorafenib-treated Hep3B is stably trapped and repressed in
SGs. Together, these results show that sorafenib treatment
differentially induces SGs formation, phosphorylation of
eIF2α and ATF4 expression in HCC.
The above results showing a strong correlation
between eIF2α phosphorylation and SGs induction raise

the possibility that sorafenib-induced phosphorylation
of eIF2α is responsible for SGs formation, which then
suppresses P-eIF2α-mediated ATF4 upregulation. We
first tested this hypothesis using MEFs. Dose-response
experiments show that 25 μM of sorafenib is the minimum
dose that induces SGs in a maximum (~ 30%) number of
wild type (WT) MEFs (Fig. 3A–3B). This SGs formation
in MEFs correlates with both the phosphorylation of
eIF2α and the expression of its downstream ATF4
target (Fig. 3C). Sorafenib-induced SGs formation
was completely blocked however in MEF eIF2αS51A,
in  which  eIF2α Ser51 has been mutated to Ala [45]
(Fig. 3A–3B). As expected, owing to the complete lack of

Figure 3: Sorafenib induces SGs in MEFs. The indicated MEFs were treated with 25 μM of sorafenib (Sor) for two hours or left

untreated (Unt). A–B. Cells were fixed and SGs were visualised by immunofluoresence using anti-FMRP and anti-FXR1 antibodies. Shown
are merge pictures. Blue staining depicts nuclei. Representative results from 5 different fields and 4 different experiments containing a
total of 1000 cells are shown. The percentage of cells harboring SGs (> 3 granules/ cell) is indicated in (B). Scale bars are shown. C–D.
Protein content of collected cells was analysed by western blot (C) for the amount of P-eIF2α and ATF4 using specific antibodies. eIF2α
and tubulin serve as loading controls. (D) The amounts of phosphorylated eIF2α and ATF4 were determined by densitometry quantitation
of the film signal, normalised against total eIF2α and tubulin, respectively and expressed as indicated. *P < 0.1, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001,
and ****P < 0.0001 (Student’s t-test). The results are representative of more than 3 different experiments. E. RNA content was isolated and
the amount of ATF4 mRNA relative to GAPDH mRNA was quantified by real-time q(RT)-PCR using the ΔΔCt method. F. Localisation of
murine ATF4 mRNA in sorafenib-induced SGs. The indicated MEFs were fixed, permeabilised, and then incubated with 3 nM of an Alexa
Fluor 488-labeled antisense RNA probe to detect ATF4 mRNA (right panels) or with the Alexa Fluor 488-labeled sense probe as control
(left panels). Shown are typical results from five different fields and two different experiments containing a total of 1000 cells.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43932

Oncotarget

eIF2α phosphorylation, no ATF4 expression was detected
in eIF2αS51A treated with sorafenib (Fig. 3C). These results
confirm that phosphorylation of eIF2α is required for both
SGs formation and ATF4 expression in MEFs treated with
sorafenib.

in both WT MEFs and PKR-/- (Fig. 3F), corroborating the
results obtained with HCC. In summary, MEFs studies
revealed PERK as the main eIF2α phosphorylating kinase
that triggers SGs formation upon sorafenib treatment.
Those SGs contain a sub-fraction of repressed ATF4
mRNA, which may preclude its upregulation in sorafenibtreated MEFs.
The results obtained using PERK-/- prompted us to
test if PERK is indeed required for eIF2α phosphorylation
and associated SGs formation in sorafenib-treated
Hep3B. PERK activation during stress occurs via its
auto-phosphorylation [46, 47]. Due to its extensive
phosphorylation, activated PERK migrates slower on SDS/
PAGE than the inactive form [48]. This mode of activation
was also reported for HRI, whose hyperphosphorylation
during oxidative stress (e.g., arsenite treatment) retards its
migration on SDS/PAGE [49]. We found that sorafenib
treatment of Hep3B induces PERK activation as attested
by its retarded migration in SDS-PAGE (Fig. 4A).
Sorafenib was also shown to induce oxidative stress
in HCC [50], which could thus trigger HRI activation.
Control experiments show that arsenite activates HRI
(but not PERK) as evidenced by its migration shift in
SDS-PAGE (Fig. 4A). Sorafenib treatment of Hep3B
does not activate HRI as demonstrated by the lack of its
migration shift in SDS-PAGE (Fig. 4A). Together, the
above results indicate that sorafenib treatment of HCC
activates PERK but not HRI. PERK activation was also
observed in sorafenib-treated Huh-7, albeit less prominent
as compared with Hep3B (Fig. 4B). This minimal PERK
activation in Huh-7 is consistent with the reduced level of
both eIF2α phosphorylation (Figs. 2A–2B and S2B) and
SGs formation (Figs 1A–1B and S2A) observed in Huh-7
as compared to Hep3B. These results further suggest
that PERK is responsible for eIF2α phosphorylation and
downstream SGs formation in HCC upon treatment with
sorafenib.
To validate the above hypothesis, we either
inactivated PERK using two recently developed specific
PERK inhibitors (PERKi), [51, 52, 53, 54], or interfered
with its expression using four specific PERK siRNAs.
We found that treatment with either PERKi prevents
sorafenib-induced PERK activation and significantly
reduces the phosphorylation of its eIF2α substrate (Fig. S5A
and data not shown). We obtained similar results by
knocking-down PERK expression (Fig. 4C–4D and data
not shown). Together, these results validate the role of
PERK in phosphorylating eIF2α upon treatment of Hep3B
with sorafenib. Both the inhibition of PERK activity
with PERKi (Fig. S5A), or its depletion with siRNAs
(Fig. 4E–4F) significantly (~ 35–40%) reduce the formation
of SGs in sorafenib-treated Hep3B. Control experiments
show that depletion of HRI does not affect significantly SGs
formation in sorafenib-treated Hep3B (Fig. S6). Together,
our results argue that PERK activation is required for

PERK is required for eIF2α phosphorylation
and associated SGs formation in sorafenibtreated HCC
We then sought to determine which of eIF2α
phosphorylating kinases is responsible for sorafenibinduced SGs. We first addressed this question using
MEFs lacking either eIF2α phosphorylating kinase. As
shown in Fig. 3C–3D, phosphorylation of eIF2α was
efficiently (>2.5) induced in either WT MEFs or their
counterpart MEFs lacking either PKR (PKR-/-) or GCN2
(GCN2-/-) (Fig. 3C–3D). This phosphorylation of eIF2α
correlates with SGs formation, which occurs more
efficiently in PKR-/- (> 4) than in either WT or GCN2/(2.5–3) (Fig. 3A–3B), excluding a major role of PKR
in promoting sorafenib-induced SGs formation in MEFs.
SGs formation occurring in sorafenib-treated GCN2-/-,
was slightly less efficient than in WT (Fig. 3A–3B),
suggesting that GCN2 may minimally contribute in
promoting SGs formation in sorafenib-treated MEFs.
We could not test the role of HRI in sorafenib-induced
SGs formation in MEFs owing to the unavailability of
HRI-/- MEFs. Nevertheless, we found that SGs formation
(Fig. 3A–3B) was dramatically reduced in sorafenibtreated MEFs lacking PERK (PERK-/-), as compared to
sorafenib-treated WT MEFs. This is consistent with the
reduced level of phosphorylation of eIF2α observed in
sorafenib-treated PERK-/- (Fig. 3C–3D). This residual
phosphorylation of eIF2α detected in PERK-/-, which
is likely due to either GCN2 or HRI, is however not
sufficient to drive SGs formation. Thus, these results
show that PERK is required for SGs formation in MEFs
treated with sorafenib.
Surprisingly, and despite reduced level of eIF2α
phosphorylation in sorafenib-treated PERK-/-, the
expression of ATF4 was significantly (~ 5 fold) induced
in this SGs-deficient cell line (Fig. 3C–3D). In contrary,
under similar sorafenib treatment, ATF4 is barely induced
(~ 1.5) in the highly SGs-forming PKR-/- (Fig. 3C–3D),
despite higher level induction of P-eIF2α (~ 4 fold) in
these MEFs as compared to PERK/- (~ 1.2 fold). The
steady state level of ATF4 mRNA is however similar
between PERK-/- and its counterpart PKR-/- under normal
growth conditions and is slightly induced in both PKR/(~ 1.8 fold) and PERK-/- (~ 2.2 fold) upon sorafenib
treatment (Fig. 3E). This suggests that the differential
expression of ATF4 observed between SGs-deficient
PERK-/- and SGs-forming PKR-/- is largely translational,
involving SGs. FISH experiments using specific oligos
confirmed the localisation of ATF4 mRNA in SGs formed
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43933

Oncotarget

SGs formation in sorafenib-treated Hep3B through eIF2α
phosphorylation, corroborating MEFs results.
As mentioned above, we have found that a
sub-fraction of the P-eIF2α-target ATF4 mRNA localises
in SGs in both Hep3B and MEFs treated with sorafenib
(Figs. 2H–2I and 3F). This localisation of ATF4 mRNA in
SGs correlates with its lower expression in SGs-forming
cells (Hep3B and PKR-/-), as compared to SGs-deficient
cells (Huh-7 and PERK-/-). Thus, we considered the
possible contribution of SGs in repressing ATF4 mRNA
in sorafenib-treated HCC. We reasoned that if this is the

case, disruption of SGs would rescue ATF4 upregulation in
sorafenib-treated Hep3B. To test this possibility, we treated
Hep3B with PERK siRNAs and assessed the expression of
ATF4 following sorafenib exposure. We found that although
depletion of PERK (Fig. 4C) reduces SGs formation (Fig.
4E–4F), it does not significantly promote ATF4 expression
(Fig. 4C–4D). This result contrasts with those obtained
using SGs-deficient PERK-/-, in which ATF4 expression was
significantly induced as compared to SGs-forming PKR-/(Fig. 3C–3D). However unlike in PERK-/-, where the lack
of PERK results in almost complete disruption of SGs

Figure 4: PERK activation is required for sorafenib-induced SGs. A. Hep3B and HeLa were treated with sorafenib (10 μM)

for 2 hours and with arsenite (150 μM) for 1 hour, respectively. Cells were collected and protein extracts analysed by western blot for the
amounts of PERK, HRI and P-eIF2α. eIF2α serves as loading control. Red arrow denotes the supershifted migration of PERK in sorafenibtreated Hep3B indicating its activation. Activated HRI in arsenite-treated HeLa cells is indicated by a blue arrow. B. Hep3B and Huh-7
were treated with sorafenib (10 μM) for 2 hours. Cells were collected and protein extracts analysed by western blot for the activation of
PERK as in (A). Red arrow denotes the supershifted migration of PERK in indicating its hyperactivation in Hep3B as compared to Huh-7,
treated with sorafenib. C–F. Hep3B were treated with two specific PERK siRNAs for seventy-two hours and then incubated with sorafenib
for two hours. (C) Cells were collected and protein content of collected cells was analysed by western blot for the expression of PERK, the
phosphorylation of eIF2α and the amount of ATF4 using the corresponding antibodies. eIF2α serves as loading control. (D) The amounts
of phosphorylated eIF2α and ATF4 were determined by densitometry quantitation of the film signal, normalised against total eIF2α and
tubulin, respectively, and expressed as above. ***P < 0.001, and ****P < 0.0001 (Student’s t-test). The results are representative of more
than 3 different experiments. (E-F) Cells were processed for immunofluorescence to detect SGs using anti-FMRP and anti-FXR1 antibodies.
DAPI stains nuclei. Shown in (E) are the merge pictures. Scale bars are shown. Representative results from 5 different fields and 5 different
experiments containing a total of 1000 cells are shown. The percentage of cells harboring SGs (>3 granules/ cell) is indicated in (F).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43934

Oncotarget

Role of PERK-SGs axis in sorafenib resistance
through modulation of ATF4 expression

formation (Fig. 3A–3B), depletion of PERK in Hep3B
reduces but does not completely block SGs formation
(Fig. 4E–4F). The lack of a clear positive effect on ATF4
expression due to PERK depletion in Hep3B could thus
be due to the residual SGs that form in these cells, thereby
repressing the associated ATF4 mRNA (see discussion).
Despite the lack of direct evidence of the above assumption,
our results showing the association of ATF4 mRNA with
SGs combined to its weaker expression in SGs-forming
cells, as compared to SGs-deficient cells, support a possible
role of SGs in repressing at least a subfraction of ATF4
mRNA, thereby preventing ATF4 overproduction.

The formation of SGs was shown to contribute
to the resistance of cells to various stresses including
radiation [1], oxidative stress [26] and proteasome
inhibition [3, 10]. To determine if SGs formation
correlates with HCC resistance to sorafenib, we treated
both SGs-forming Hep3B and SGs-deficient Huh-7
with sorafenib and assessed cell death and survival
using annexin V and clonogenic assays, respectively.
We found that sorafenib induces cell death in both HCC

Figure 5: The activation of PERK-P-eIF2α-SGs pathway correlates with HCC resistance to sorafenib. A–C. SGs-forming

Hep3B are more resistant to sorafenib than SGs-deficient Huh-7. Hep3B and Huh-7 were treated with sorafenib (10 μM) for twenty four
hours. (A-B) Cells were analysed by staining with annexin V-FITC and propidium iodide (PI) in flow cytometry. The percentage of apoptotic
cells (right boxes) is indicated in (B) and is the means +/- s.e.m., from three independent experiments. . ****P < 0.0001 (Student’s t-test).
(C) Clonogenic survival assays. Sorafenib-treated Hep3B were trypsinised, counted, replated in the absence of drug, and incubated for
10 days. Populations >20 cells were counted as one surviving colony. Data were calculated as the percentage of surviving colonies relative
to the number found in control (untreated) plates. Results are expressed as the mean of triplicate measurements. ****P < 0.0001 (Student’s
t-test). D–F. Hep3B were treated with either control, or PERK, or ATF4 siRNAs for seventy-two hours. Cells were then incubated with
sorafenib for twenty-four hours. The survival of Hep3B was assessed by the clonogenic assay as above. Representative results are shown in
(D) with the indicated statistical calculation in (E). (F) SiRNA-treated Hep3B were collected following sorafenib treatment and their protein
content was analysed by western blot to assess the depletion of both PERK and ATF4 using the corresponding antibodies.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43935

Oncotarget

(Fig. 5A–5B) and reduces their clonogenic survival
(Fig. 5C). However, both cell death and loss of survival
are significantly higher in SGs-deficient Huh-7, as
compared to SGs-forming Hep3B (Fig. 5A–5C). Although
correlative, these results suggest a contribution of SGs in
cell resistance to sorafenib, which thus prompted us to
test if reducing formation of SGs will further sensitise
cells to sorafenib. To test this possibility, we first
compared cell survival between SGs-deficient PERK-/and SGs-forming PKR-/- upon treatment with sorafenib.
These control experiments show that sorafenib induces
a significant loss of clonogenic survival in PERK-/-, as
compared to PKR-/- upon sorafenib treatment (data not
shown). We then tested if reducing SGs formation by
depleting PERK affects Hep3B resistance to sorafenib.
Control experiments show that depletion of PERK per se
does not significantly induce apoptosis (data not shown)
and slightly affect the survival in Hep3B (Fig. 5D).
Surprisingly, depletion of PERK does not significantly
promote apoptosis in sorafenib-treated Hep3B (data not
shown). However, knocking down PERK expression
with four specific siRNAs significantly abrogates Hep3B
clonogenic survival to sorafenib (Figs. 5D–5F and data
not shown), further supporting a role of PERK-SGs axis
in driving sorafenib resistance.
SGs contribute to cell stress resistance either by
regulating signaling pathways or affecting the expression
of target mRNAs [55]. Our data described above support
a role of SGs in buffering translation of ATF4 mRNA
in sorafenib-resistant Hep3B, thereby keeping ATF4
expression minimal despite phosphorylation of eIF2α.
Downregulation of ATF4 was shown to prevent resistance
of cancer cells to anticancer drugs [21], indicating that a
minimal expression of ATF4 is required for cancer cells
survival. We thus asked if the minimal ATF4 expression,
which is observed in SGs-forming Hep3B, is relevant for
their resistance. Using two specific siRNAs, we found
that depleting the ATF4 pool, which is still expressed
in sorafenib-treated Hep3B, abrogates their survival
(Fig. 5D–5F).

via the activation of HRI, 5-fluorouracil triggers this
modification by activating PKR. Here we identified
PERK as the key eIF2α-phosphorylating kinase
required for SGs induction upon treatment of HCC with
sorafenib. This study also revealed a possible complex
regulatory balance between SGs and P-eIF2α where SGs
control the activation of the P-eIF2α-downstream ATF4
stress death pathway. Implication of PERK-eIF2α-SGs
in HCC resistance to sorafenib is discussed.
Conflicting results of the effects of sorafenib
on eIF2α phosphorylation have been reported. It was
initially shown that treatment of human leukemia
cells with sorafenib induces the phosphorylation of
eIF2α, an event which was attributed to the induction
of an ER stress [36]. More recent studies reported
however that treatment of human urothelial cell lines
with sorafenib inhibits eIF2α phosphorylation that is
induced either by H2O2 or by doxorubicin [56]. While
the origin of these opposite results is not known, it may
indicate a cell-type or tissue-type specific effects of
sorafenib. We found that sorafenib treatment of HCC
efficiently induces eIF2α phosphorylation (Figs. 2A–
2B, 4A–2B and S3B). This phosphorylation of eIF2α
is most-likely responsible for the observed inhibition
of translation initiation in sorafenib-treated HCC (Fig.
2C), although additional mechanisms might be involved.
Nevertheless, our results showing that sorafenib inhibits
translation initiation, which is one of the most promising
chemotherapeutic target [57], further confirm this
drug as a relevant chemotherapeutic drug. However,
sorafenib-mediated inhibition of translation initiation
occurs via phosphorylation of eIF2α; a modification
which is known to promote cell survival in part by
inducing SGs [4, 23, 24, 25].
Several evidences support the role of PERKeIF2α phosphorylation in triggering SGs formation in
sorafenib-treated HCC. First, we found that sorafenib
treatment induces SGs in WT eIF2α fibroblast, but not
in eIF2αS51A (Fig. 3), in which eIF2α Ser51 has been
mutated to Ala. Second, formation of SGs in HCC treated
with sorafenib correlates with phosphorylation of eIF2α,
which was significantly higher in SGs-forming Hep3B
than in SGs-deficient Huh-7 (Figs. 2 and S2). Third,
depletion experiments identified PERK as the main eIF2α
phosphorylating kinase whose activation drives SGs
induction in sorafenib-treated HCC (Fig. 4). We further
corroborated these results using specific drugs inhibitors
of PERK (Fig. S5) as well as in MEFs cells lacking this
kinase (Fig. 3). Sorafenib-mediated activation of PERK
in HCC is likely due to the induction of an ER stress,
which is the main stress activator of PERK. This is also
consistent with the study of Rahmani et al reporting the
induction of ER stress and PERK activation in sorafenibtreated human leukemia (U937) cells [36]. It is however

DISCUSSION
Here we identified sorafenib as a potent inducer
of SGs in HCC cells. While the formation of SGs
was shown to inhibit cell death, their induction
by chemotherapeutic drugs contributing to cancer
cells resistance is still understudied. So far, two
chemotherapeutic drugs, the proteasome inhibitor
bortezomib (an FDA approved for the treatment of
myeloma) and 5-fluorouracil (used to treat head, neck,
breast, and colorectal cancers) have been described
to induce SGs [4, 5, 10, 11]. Under both conditions,
SGs induction requires the phosphorylation of eIF2α.
While bortezomib induces phosphorylation of eIF2α

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43936

Oncotarget

unknown whether sorafenib-induced PERK activation in
U937 is sufficient to trigger SGs formation.
Our demonstration of the role of PERK in inducing
phosphorylation of eIF2α and SGs formation in HCC does
not exclude however subtle contribution of the other eIF2α
kinases. With this respect, we noticed that both sorafenibinduced phosphorylation of eIF2α and SGs formation were
reduced but not completely blocked, in PERK-depleted
Hep3B (Fig. 4). It was previously reported that sorafenib
induces oxidative stress [50], which is the main activator
of the eIF2α kinase HRI [26]. Our depletion experiments
make unlikely the possible contribution of HRI in the
residual phosphorylation of eIF2α and associated SGs
formation that are both detected in PERK-depleted HCC,
upon sorafenib administration (Fig. S6). Whether PKR
or GCN2 contribute to the phosphorylation of eIF2α
and SGs formation that still occur in PERK-depleted
HCC following treatment with sorafenib is still not
clear. Nevertheless, our results clearly identified PERK
as the major eIF2α kinase required for SGs formation in
sorafenib-treated HCC.
With few exceptions [58], the formation of SGs is
often associated with cell resistance to cytotoxic effects
of stress. Our data support a possible contribution of SGs
in HCC resistance to sorafenib. We found that sorafenib
induces dramatic cell death by apoptosis in SGs-deficient
Huh-7, as compared to SGs-forming Hep3B (Fig. 5A–5B),
confirming previous studies [59]. Relative resistance to
sorafenib-mediated apoptosis of SGs-forming Hep3B as
compared to SGs-deficient Huh-7 is consistent with the
well-established antiapoptotic role of SGs [60]. Massive
apoptosis induction in SGs-deficient Huh-7 (Fig. 5A–5B)
contrasts however with the results obtained upon partial
disruption of SGs via PERK depletion in Hep3B (data not
shown). The failure of PERK depletion to further sensitise
Hep3B to sorafenib-induced apoptosis could be due to
the residual antiapoptotic SGs that still form in Hep3B.
Nevertheless, we consistently measured a significant
negative effect of PERK depletion on the clonogenic
survival of sorafenib-treated HCC (Fig. 5D–5F). This
apparent apoptosis-independent loss of survival raises
the possibility that PERK may antagonise sorafenibinduced non-apoptotic forms of cell death; an assumption
that warrants additional studies for validation. Together,
our data show that PERK activity is required for HCC
resistance to sorafenib, in part by triggering the formation
of SGs.
SGs-mediated repression of mRNAs encoding
cell death functions is a valid survival sequestration
mechanism by which SGs inhibit cell death pathways
[1,  3, 4, 10, 11]. Here we identified ATF4 as a novel
SGs-associated mRNA. The encoded ATF4 transcription
factor is known to either activate or impede cell death
pathways during stress. This dual role of ATF4 in cell
death depends on both its level of expression and the type

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

of stress applied. Our results show that ATF4 upregulation
correlates with HCC sensitivity to sorafenib. While ATF4
mRNA was significantly expressed in the highly sorafenibsensitive and SGs-deficient Huh-7, it was weakly
expressed in the less sorafenib-sensitive and SGs-forming
Hep3B (Fig. 2A–2B). This differential expression of
ATF4 between SGs-forming Hep3B and SGs-deficient
Huh-7 is unlikely to be transcriptional because ATF4
mRNA levels that are measured in the two cell lines
are similar. Moreover, while ATF4 mRNA is found
significantly enriched in the highly translating polysomes
of sorafenib-treated Huh-7, it is largely excluded from
polysomes in Hep3B treated with sorafenib (Fig. 2G).
This result further indicates that the low expression of
ATF4 mRNA in SGs-forming Hep3B (as compared to
SGs-deficient Huh-7) is likely due to its translational
repression. FISH experiments show a clear localisation of
ATF4 mRNA in SGs that form in sorafenib-treated Hep3B
(Fig. 2H). We obtained similar results in MEFs showing
a strong inverse correlation between ATF4 expression
and SGs formation where ATF4 mRNA localises.
Because SGs can trap specific mRNAs repressing their
translation, we attribute the repression of ATF4 mRNA
translation that is observed in the highly SGs-forming cells
(Hep3B and PKR-/-), at least partially to the association
of a subfraction of its mRNA with sorafenib-induced
SGs. Quantification of FISH experiments revealed that
~ 20% of ATF4 mRNA that is present in the cytoplasm
of sorafenib-treated Hep3B is trapped in SGs (Fig. 2I). It
should be noted however that most components of SGs
so far analysed including mRNAs are highly dynamic as
they rapidly (within secondes to few minutes) shuttle in
and out SGs during stress [61]. Fluorescence recovery
after photobleaching (FRAP) experiments investigating
SGs dynamic further revealed that a significant (20–80%)
fraction of individual SG-associated components is highly
mobile [62], therefore escaping their detection in SGs in
fixed cells using standard fluorescence techniques. In their
study, Zhang et al [63] used an antisense 2′-O-methyl
RNA probe to monitor by FRAP the dynamics of the
association of endogenous cytoplasmic mRNAs with
SGs induced in living COS cells by arsenite treatment.
These FRAP experiments revealed that while ~ 30% of
analysed mRNAs is diffusible, ~ 30% is rapidly moving in
and out of SGs. The last 30% was found stably trapped in
SGs, which is consistent with our quantification of FISH
signal showing that approximately 20% of ATF4 mRNA is
trapped in SGs. Our quantification of FISH signal does not
take into account however any mobile fraction of ATF4
mRNA, which by transiently associating with SGs, are
also kept untranslated. Future experiments investigating
ATF4 mRNA shuttling activity in and out of SGs are thus
required to circumvent FISH limitation and to elucidate
if and how such shuttling activity contribute to ATF4
translation repression.

43937

Oncotarget

Biological relevance of SGs in controlling cell
homeostasis by repressing translation of specific mRNAs
has been previously illustrated. For example, it was
reported that in response to amino acid starvation, the
translation of the 5′TOP transcripts encoding ribosomal
and translation machinery are selectively repressed
in SGs [29]. This limits the synthesis of unnecessary
ribosomes, thereby adapting the cell metabolism to this
nutritional type of stress. The selective repression of TOP
mRNAs in SGs is mediated through their binding to the
SGs components TIA/TIAR [29]. Similar mechanisms
may thus account for the association of ATF4 mRNA
with SGs induced by sorafenib, thereby limiting its
expression. This minimal expression of ATF4 in mRNA
SGs-forming HCC is nevertheless relevant since its
elimination by siRNAs confers sensitivity of Hep3B
to sorafenib (Fig. 5D–5F). Based on these results, we
postulate a model (Fig. 6) where SGs may serve as a
buffer that keeps ATF4 level sufficiently minimal to help
their survival upon sorafenib treatment. Unfortunately,
validation of this role of SGs in damping the expression

of ATF4 in HCC cannot be conclusively provided by
partially disrupting their formation through PERK
depletion. Experiments designed to completely disrupt
SGs, without affecting the phosphorylating of eIF2α,
the upstream inducer of ATF4, are required to validate
the role of SGs in regulating the expression of ATF4
mRNA in HCC. It is however noteworthy that although
depletion of PERK reduces eIF2α phosphorylation, it
does not reduce ATF4 expression in sorafenib-treated
Hep3B (Fig. 4C–4D). We attribute this lack of negative
effect of PERK depletion on reducing ATF4 expression
to the availability of ATF4 mRNA for translation owing
to the reduction of SGs level, thereby compensating at
least partially the reduction of eIF2α phosphorylation.
Clearly, further studies are required to determine how
SGs regulate the expression of ATF4. Specifically, the
identification of cis acting-RNA elements as well as transacting factors required for ATF4 mRNA association with
SGs should contribute to define the mechanisms by which
SGs repress ATF4 mRNA translation, thus affecting HCC
resistance to sorafenib.

Figure 6: Model for the cross-talk between SGs and eIF2α phosphorylation in sorafenib-treated HCC. In this model,
sorafenib treatment of HCC activates PERK, which through phosphorylating eIF2α triggers both SGs formation and ATF4 expression. The
association of ATF4 mRNA with SGs dampens however its overproduction, thereby contributing to HCC resistance to sorafenib.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43938

Oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS

siRNA-PERK #1 : sense sequence : 5′- GGC AAU
GAG AAG UGG AAU U -3′
siRNA-PERK #2 : sense sequence :
5′-GCUGAAAGAUGAAAGCACA -3′
siRNA-HRI #1 : sense sequence : 5′-GAT CTG
AAG CCA AGA AAT A -3′
siRNA- HRI #2 : sense sequence : 5′-GGA AGA
GGA CAG AGA GCA A -3′
siRNA-ATF4 #1 : sense sequence : 5′-CAG AUU
GGA UGU UGG AGA A -3′
siRNA-ATF4 #2 : sense sequence : 5′-GCA AAG
AGC UGG AAA AGA A -3′
For DNA transfection, Hep3B cells were transfected
with a DNA vector encoding GFP-dcp1a in a 6-well plate
using a Transfection reagent kit (Qiagen). At forty-eight
hours later, cells were treated as indicated, fixed and
processed for immunofluorescence.

Cell Lines and cultures
HeLa cervical cancer and MCF-7 breast cancer
cells were purchased from the American Type Culture
Collection (ATCC). LnCaP and PC3 prostate cancer cells
were obtained from Dr. V. Fradette (Laval University).
Huh-7 cells were provided by Dr. M. Santos (Université
de Montréal) and Hep3B cells were received from Dr.
M. Bilodeau (Université de Montréal). MEFs cells were
previously described [4]. All cell lines were maintained
in DMEM (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) supplemented with
10% fetal bovine serum (FBS; Sigma), penicillin, and
streptomycin (Sigma).

Drugs and drugs treatments
Sorafenib was purchased from Selleck Chemicals
and dissolved in DMSO as a 10 mM stock solution,
aliquoted and stored at −80°C. Sorafenib treatment
was performed when cells had reached ~ 80%
confluence. Before treatment, cells were cultured in
DMEM supplemented with 5% FBS. PERK inhibitors,
GSK2606414 and GSK2656157, were purchased from
Selleck Chemicals and EMD Millipore, respectively.
Both PERK inhibitors were dissolved in DMSO as a
10 mM stock solution, aliquoted and stored at −80°C.
Cycloheximide and puromycin were purchased from
Sigma (St Louis, MO) and dissolved in water as a
10 mg/mL and 25 mg/mL stock solutions, respectively,
aliquoted and stored at −20°C.

Immunofluorescence, poly(A)+ in situ
hybridisation and RNA FISH
For immunofluorescence, all fixation, permeabilisation and staining procedures were done as we previously
described [3].
For poly(A)+ mRNA in situe hybridisation studies,
cells were first fixed in 3.7% paraformaldehyde for 20 min
at room temperature, then permeabilised by a 15-min
immersion in 0.1% Triton X-100/PBS. Poly(A)+mRNAs
were detected using a custom made 59-tagged Alexa
FluorH 594-oligo [dT] (Invitrogen, Burlington, ON,
Canada) diluted in PBS to a final concentration of 0.2 μM.
Hybridisation was performed by incubating cells with the
oligo (dT)/PBS for 30 minutes at 42°C, then overnight at
37°C. Cells were then washed twice with 2X SSC (30 min
at 37°C) followed by two washes with 0.5X SSC (30 min
at 37°C), and finally with PBS.
For FISH experiments, a DNA fragment
encompassing the human ATF4 coding region was
amplified by PCR using primers fused either with T3
(ATF4-forward: 5′-TCTCCGGGACAGATTGGATG-3′) or
T7 (ATF4-reverse: 5′-GGAGGCTCCTATTTGGAGAG-3′)
minimal promoter sequences. For MEFs, a DNA fragment
encompassing the mouse ATF4 coding region was PCRamplified using primers fused either with T3 (ATF4forward: 5′-TCTCCGGGACAGATTGGATG-3’) or T7
(ATF4-reverse: 5′-GAGAAGGCAGATTGTCTGG-3′)
minimal promoter sequences. The amplified fragments
were used as a templates for in vitro transcription to
produce either ATF4 antisense RNAs from the T7
promoter, or ATF4 sense RNAs from the T3 promoter,
using the FISH Tag RNA Green Kit with Alexa Fluor 488
(Invitrogen, Burlington, ON, Canada), as we previously
reported. Hybridisation of the probes was performed as
described above. After hybridisation, cells were processed
for immunofluorescence as above. RNA and proteins were
visualised using the LSM 700 laser scanning confocal
microscope (Zeiss), equipped with a Zen software for

Antibodies
Phospho-specific anti-eIF2α and the pan anti-eIF2
were purchased from Cell Signaling Technology (Beverly,
MA). Anti-FMRP, anti-FXR1, anti-eIF4E, anti-eIF4GI and
anti-G3BP1 antibodies have been previously described
[3]. Anti-RCK, anti-ATF4, and anti-HRI antibodies were
purchased from Santa Cruz Biotech. Anti-PERK and
anti-tubulin antibodies were obtained from Abcam. Antipuromycin antibodies were obtained from EMD Millipore.

Small-interfering RNA (siRNA) experiments and
DNA transfection
All siRNAs were obtained from Dharmacon
(Lafayette, CO). siRNA transfections were performed
essentially as described, using Hiperfect reagent (Qiagen)
following the manufacturer’s protocol. Twenty-four hours
before transfection, cells were trypsinized and plated at a
density allowing to reach 50–60% confluence after twentyfour hours. For a 6-well plate, annealed duplexes were
used at a final concentration of 10 nM. Forty-eight hours
posttransfection, cells were treated with the same siRNA
(5 nM) for additional forty-eight hours before treatment.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43939

Oncotarget

images acquisition and processing. Images were acquired
using the following settings: 63X oil objective, 0.06 um
for pixel size, and 1.00 airy units as pinhole.

and their RNA content precipitated. Following phenol
extraction and precipitation, RNA was resuspended in
water and prepared for qRT-PCR as described above.

Quantitative RT-PCR

[35S]Methionine labeling and ribopuromycylation

RNA was extracted with Trizol reagent (Life
Technology). RNA was resuspended in water and analysed
by qRT-PCR. RT reactions were performed using the
Quantitect Reverse Transcriptase kit (Qiagen). Each
reaction contained 2 μl of RNA (isolated using the RNeasy
Plus Mini Kit; Qiagen) at 100 ng/ml, 10 μl of RNase-free
water, 2 μl of genomic DNA Wipeout Buffer 7X, 4 μl of
Quantiscript RT Buffer 5X, 1 μl of RT Primer Mix and
1 μl of Quantiscript Reverse Transcriptase. Real-time PCR
reactions were prepared using the Power SYBRH Green
PCR Master mix (Applied Biosystems, Streetsville, ON,
Canada) in a total volume of 25 μl: 12.5 μl of PCR Master
Mix, 0.67 μl of forward primer at 3.75 μM, 0.67 μl of
reverse primer at 3.75 μM, 9.2 μl of deionized (Milli-Q
grade) water and 2 μl of RT-PCR. Reactions were run and
data then analysed using the MX3000 Real-Time PCR
system (Applied Biosystems) as described [10]. To prepare
templates for the ATF4 mRNA, the oligonucleotide
pair used was: 5′-CACTAGGTACCGCCAGAAGA-3′
(forward), and 5′-AATCCGCCCTCTCTTTTAGA-3′
(reverse). For preparing templates corresponding to
the Actin mRNA, the oligonucleotide pair used was:
5′GGAAATCGTGCGTGACATT-3′
(forward),
and 5′- CTAGAAGCATTTGCGGTG -3′ (reverse).
Templates for the murine ATF4 mRNA were
prepared using the following oligonucleotide pair:
5′-ACATTCTTGCAGCCTTTCCC-3′ (forward), and
5′-TAAGCAGCAGAGTCAGGCTT-3′ (reverse). To
prepare templates for the murine GAPDH mRNA, we
used 5′-AACGACCCCTTCATTGACCT-3′ (forward),
and 5′-TGGAAGATGGTGATGGGCTT-3′ (reverse) as
oligonucleotides.

For metabolic labeling, cells in 6-well plates were
labeled for 60 min with 1 ml methionine-free DMEM
(Sigma) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and
50 μCi/ml of [35S] methionine (Easy Tag, PerkinElmer/
NEN Radiochemicals). For puromycylation, cells were
labelled with 10 μg/ml of puromycin for 10 minutes.
Puromycylated nascent polypeptides chains released from
ribosomes were detected by western blotting using antipuromycin antibodies as previously described [43].

Annexin V-fluorescein isothiocyanate/propidium
iodide assay and clonogenic survival assays
For annexin V, adherent and detached cells were
collected, washed with ice-cold PBS, and resuspended
in ice-cold binding buffer (10 mM HEPES/NaOH, pH
7.4, 140 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM CaCl2). Following staining
with annexin V-fluorescein isothiocyanate, and propidium
iodide, cells were counted, and dead cells were examined
by flow cytometry. For clonogenic survival assays, cells
were washed with PBS, trypsinized, counted, replated in
6-well plates at 1000 cells/well in the absence of drug,
and incubated for 7–10 days. Before colony counting, cells
were washed with PBS, stained (0.1% (w/v) crystal violet
in a 0.0037% (v/v) formaldehyde solution in PBS), rinsed,
and dried. Isolated colonies were counted.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Dr. V. Fradette (Laval University) for
providing LnCaP cells. Thanks to Drs. M. Santos and M.
Bilodeau (Université de Montréal) for providing Huh-7
and Hep3B, respectively. We are grateful to Dr. J. Charon
for providing phospho-ERK1/2 antibodies and to
Dr. B. Seraphin for providing the GFP-dcp1a plasmid.

Polysomal profiles and analyses of
polysomal-associated RNA
Polysomal profiles were performed as follow:
HCC cells were grown in 100-mm tissue culture
dishes to ~  80% confluence, treated with sorafenib,
then scrapped in 1 ml of polysomal buffer (20 mM
Tris, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1.25 mM MgCl2, 5 U/ml
RNAsine [GE Healthcare], EDTA-free protease inhibitor
cocktail [Complete; Roche, Indianapolis, IN], and 1 mM
dithiothreitol), and Nonidet P-40 was added to a final
concentration of 1% for lysis of 15 min on ice. Extracts
were clarified by centrifugation at 12,000 g for 20 min
at 4°C. Cytoplasmic extracts were loaded on each
15–55% (w/v) linear sucrose gradient and further
fractionated and analysed as described previously
[64]. For RNA analysis, fractions corresponding to
monosomes, light and heavy polysomes were collected
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no potential conflicts of interest

GRANT SUPPORT
P. Adjibade, a PhD student, is recipient of a Louis
Poirier scholarship (Fondation du CHU de Québec).
This work was supported by a Canadian Institute Health
Research (CIHR) grant MOP-IC093226-CBT, a Canadian
Foundation for Innovation grant (MOP-GF091050), and a
Canadian Cancer Society Research Institute (Innovation
grant # 702406) to R. Mazroui. R. Mazroui is recipient of
a CIHR New investigator Scholarship award.
43940

Oncotarget

REFERENCES

14.	 H. Montero, V. Trujillo-Alonso. Stress granules in the viral
replication cycle. Viruses. 2011; 3:2328–2338.

1.	 B.J. Moeller, Y. Cao, C.Y. Li, M.W. Dewhirst. Radiation
activates HIF-1 to regulate vascular radiosensitivity in
tumors: role of reoxygenation, free radicals, and stress granules. Cancer Cell. 2004; 5:429–441.

15.	 N. Donnelly, A.M. Gorman, S. Gupta, A. Samali. The
eIF2alpha kinases: their structures and functions. Cellular
and molecular life sciences. 2013; 70:3493–3511.
16.	 N. Kedersha, S. Chen, N. Gilks, W. Li, I.J. Miller, J. Stahl,
P. Anderson. Evidence that ternary complex (eIF2-GTPtRNA(i)(Met))-deficient preinitiation complexes are core
constituents of mammalian stress granules. Mol Biol Cell.
2002; 13:195–210.

2.	 L.B. Gardner. Hypoxic inhibition of nonsense-mediated
RNA decay regulates gene expression and the integrated
stress response. Mol Cell Biol. 2008; 28:3729–3741.
3.	 M.J. Fournier, L. Coudert, S. Mellaoui, P. Adjibade, C.
Gareau, M.F. Cote, N. Sonenberg, R.C. Gaudreault, R.
Mazroui. Inactivation of the mTORC1-eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E pathway alters stress granule formation. Molecular and cellular biology. 2013; 33:2285–2301.

17.	 E. Bevilacqua, X. Wang, M. Majumder, F. Gaccioli,
C.L. Yuan, C. Wang, X. Zhu, L.E. Jordan, D. Scheuner,
R.J. Kaufman, A.E. Koromilas, M.D. Snider, M. Holcik,
M. Hatzoglou. eIF2alpha phosphorylation tips the balance
to apoptosis during osmotic stress. The Journal of biological
chemistry. 2010; 285:17098–17111.

4.	 M.J. Fournier, C. Gareau, R. Mazroui. The chemotherapeutic agent bortezomib induces the formation of stress
­granules. Cancer cell international. 2010; 10:12.

18.	 J. Han, S.H. Back, J. Hur, Y.H. Lin, R. Gildersleeve,
J. Shan, C.L. Yuan, D. Krokowski, S. Wang,
M. Hatzoglou, M.S. Kilberg, M.A. Sartor, R.J. Kaufman.
­ER-­stress-induced transcriptional regulation increases protein synthesis leading to cell death. Nature cell biology.
2013; 15:481–490.

5.	 R. Mazroui, S. Di Marco, R.J. Kaufman, I.E. Gallouzi.
Inhibition of the ubiquitin-proteasome system induces stress
granule formation. Mol Biol Cell 2007; 18:2603–2618.
6.	 N. Kedersha, P. Ivanov, P. Anderson. Stress granules and
cell signaling: more than just a passing phase? Trends in
biochemical sciences 2013; 38:494–506.

19.	 H.Y. Jiang, R.C. Wek. Phosphorylation of the alpha-subunit
of the eukaryotic initiation factor-2 (eIF2alpha) reduces
protein synthesis and enhances apoptosis in response to
proteasome inhibition. The Journal of biological chemistry.
2005; 280:14189–14202.

7.	 K. Arimoto, H. Fukuda, S. Imajoh-Ohmi, H. Saito, M.
Takekawa. Formation of stress granules inhibits apoptosis
by suppressing stress-responsive MAPK pathways. Nat Cell
Biol 2008; 10:1324–32.

20.	 R.C. Wek, H.Y. Jiang, T.G. Anthony. Coping with stress:
eIF2 kinases and translational control. Biochem Soc Trans.
2006; 34:7–11.

8.	 W.J. Kim, S.H. Back, V. Kim, I. Ryu, S.K. Jang.
Sequestration of TRAF2 into stress granules interrupts
tumor necrosis factor signaling under stress conditions. Mol
Cell Biol. 2005; 25:2450–2462.

21.	 Z. Zhang, J. Yin, C. Zhang, N. Liang, N. Bai, A. Chang,
Y. Liu, Z. Li, X. Tan, N. Li, D. Lv, R. Xiang, Y. Tian,
C. Liu. Activating transcription factor 4 increases chemotherapeutics resistance of human hepatocellular carcinoma.
Cancer biology & therapy. 2012; 13:435–442.

9.	 K. Thedieck, B. Holzwarth, M.T. Prentzell, C. Boehlke,
K. Klasener, S. Ruf, A.G. Sonntag, L. Maerz,
S.N. Grellscheid, E. Kremmer, R. Nitschke, E.W. Kuehn,
J.W. Jonker, A.K. Groen, M. Reth, M.N. Hall,
R. Baumeister. Inhibition of mTORC1 by Astrin and Stress
Granules Prevents Apoptosis in Cancer Cells. Cell. 2013;
154:859–874.

22.	 S. Kazemi, Z. Mounir, D. Baltzis, J.F. Raven,
S. Wang, J.L. Krishnamoorthy, O. Pluquet, J. Pelletier,
A.E. Koromilas. A Novel Function of eIF2{alpha} Kinases
as Inducers of the Phosphoinositide-3 Kinase Signaling
Pathway. Mol Biol Cell. 2007; 18:3635–3644.

10.	 C. Gareau, M.J. Fournier, C. Filion, L. Coudert, D. Martel,
Y. Labelle, R. Mazroui. p21(WAF1/CIP1) upregulation
through the stress granule-associated protein CUGBP1 confers resistance to bortezomib-mediated apoptosis. PloS one.
2011; 6:e20254.

23.	 S. Hofmann, V. Cherkasova, P. Bankhead, B. Bukau,
G. Stoecklin. Translation suppression promotes stress
­granule formation and cell survival in response to cold
shock. Molecular biology of the cell. 2012; 23:3786–3800.

11.	 C. Kaehler, J. Isensee, T. Hucho, H. Lehrach, S. Krobitsch.
5-Fluorouracil affects assembly of stress granules based
on RNA incorporation. Nucleic acids research. 2014;
42:6436–6447.

24.	 B. Kim, H.J. Cooke, K. Rhee. DAZL is essential for stress
granule formation implicated in germ cell survival upon
heat stress. Development. 2012; 139:568–578.
25.	 G.M. McInerney, N.L. Kedersha, R.J. Kaufman,
P. Anderson, P. Liljestrom. Importance of eIF2alpha phosphorylation and stress granule assembly in
alphavirus translation regulation. Mol Biol Cell. 2005;
16:3753–3763.

12.	 M. Holcik, N. Sonenberg. Translational control in stress and
apoptosis, Nature reviews. Molecular cell biology. 2005;
6:318–327.
13.	 T. van den Beucken, M. Koritzinsky, B.G. Wouters.
Translational control of gene expression during hypoxia.
Cancer biology & therapy. 2006; 5:749–755.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

26.	 E. McEwen, N. Kedersha, B. Song, D. Scheuner,
N. Gilks, A. Han, J.J. Chen, P. Anderson, R.J. Kaufman.
43941

Oncotarget

­ eme-regulated inhibitor kinase-mediated phosphorylaH
tion of eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2 inhibits
translation. induces stress granule formation, and ­mediates
survival upon arsenite exposure, J Biol Chem. 2005;
280:16925–16933.

40.	 N. Kedersha, M.R. Cho, W. Li, P.W. Yacono, S. Chen,
N. Gilks, D.E. Golan, P. Anderson. Dynamic shuttling of
TIA-1 accompanies the recruitment of mRNA to mammalian stress granules. J Cell Biol. 2000; 151:1257–1268.
41.	 B.W. Banfield, A.J. Mouland, C. McCormick. 1st
International Symposium on Stress-associated RNA
Granules in Human Disease and Viral Infection. Viruses.
2014; 6:3500–3513.

27.	 R.E. Lloyd. Regulation of stress granules and P-bodies
during RNA virus infection. Wiley interdisciplinary
­
reviews. RNA. 2013; 4:317–331.
28.	 L.C. Reineke, R.E. Lloyd. Diversion of stress granules
and P-bodies during viral infection. Virology. 2013;
436:255–267.

42.	 N. Mendez-Sanchez, F. Vasquez-Fernandez, D. ZamoraValdes, M. Uribe. Sorafenib. a systemic therapy for
hepatocellular carcinoma, Annals of hepatology. 2008;
7:46–51.

29.	 C.K. Damgaard. J. Lykke-Andersen. Translational coregulation of 5’TOP mRNAs by TIA-1 and TIAR, Genes &
development. 2011; 25:2057–2068.

43.	 A. David, B.P. Dolan, H.D. Hickman, J.J. Knowlton, G.
Clavarino, P. Pierre, J.R. Bennink, J.W. Yewdell. Nuclear
translation visualized by ribosome-bound nascent chain
puromycylation. The Journal of cell biology. 2012;
197:45–57.

30.	 S.R. Kimball, R.L. Horetsky, D. Ron, L.S. Jefferson, H.P.
Harding. Mammalian stress granules represent sites of accumulation of stalled translation initiation complexes. Am
J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2003; 284:C273–284.

44.	 S. Di Marco, A. Cammas, X.J. Lian, E.N. Kovacs,
J.F. Ma, D.T. Hall, R. Mazroui, J. Richardson, J. Pelletier,
I.E. Gallouzi. The translation inhibitor pateamine A prevents cachexia-induced muscle wasting in mice. Nature
communications. 2012; 3:896.

31.	 A.E. Koromilas. Roles of the translation initiation factor
eIF2alpha serine 51 phosphorylation in cancer formation
and treatment. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015; 1849:871–80.
32.	 D.R. Fels, C. Koumenis. The PERK/eIF2alpha/ATF4 module of the UPR in hypoxia resistance and tumor growth.
Cancer biology & therapy. 2006; 5:723–728.

45.	 D. Scheuner, B. Song, E. McEwen, C. Liu, R. Laybutt, P.
Gillespie, T. Saunders, S. Bonner-Weir, R.J. Kaufman.
Translational control is required for the unfolded protein
response and in vivo glucose homeostasis. Mol Cell. 2001;
7:1165–1176.

33.	 E. Karali, S. Bellou, D. Stellas, A. Klinakis, C. Murphy,
T. Fotsis. VEGF Signals through ATF6 and PERK to
promote endothelial cell survival and angiogenesis in the
absence of ER stress. Molecular cell. 2014; 54:559–572.

46.	 A. Bertolotti, Y. Zhang, L.M. Hendershot, H.P. Harding,
D. Ron. Dynamic interaction of BiP and ER stress transducers in the unfolded-protein response. Nature cell biology.
2000; 2:326–332.

34.	 C.A. Del Vecchio, Y. Feng, E.S. Sokol, E.J. Tillman,
S. Sanduja, F. Reinhardt, P.B. Gupta. De-differentiation
confers multidrug resistance via noncanonical PERK-Nrf2
signaling. PLoS biology. 2014; 12:e1001945.

47.	 H.P. Harding, Y. Zhang, D. Ron. Protein translation and
folding are coupled by an endoplasmic-reticulum-resident
kinase. Nature. 1999; 397:271–274.

35.	 S. Lin, K. Hoffmann, P. Schemmer. Treatment of
Hepatocellular Carcinoma: A Systematic Review. Liver
cancer. 2012; 1:144–158.

48.	 H.P. Harding, Y. Zhang, A. Bertolotti, H. Zeng, D. Ron.
Perk is essential for translational regulation and cell s­ urvival
during the unfolded protein response. Molecular cell. 2000;
5:897–904.

36.	 M. Rahmani, E.M. Davis, T.R. Crabtree, J.R. Habibi,
T.K. Nguyen, P. Dent, S. Grant. The kinase inhibitor
sorafenib induces cell death through a process involving
induction of endoplasmic reticulum stress. Molecular and
cellular biology. 2007; 27:5499–5513.

49.	 M. Rafie-Kolpin, A.P. Han, J.J. Chen. Autophosphorylation
of threonine 485 in the activation loop is essential for attaining eIF2alpha kinase activity of HRI. Biochemistry. 2003;
42:6536–6544.

37.	 Z. Ezzoukhry, C. Louandre, E. Trecherel, C. Godin,
B. Chauffert, S. Dupont, M. Diouf, J.C. Barbare,
J.C. Maziere, A. Galmiche. EGFR activation is a potential
determinant of primary resistance of hepatocellular carcinoma cells to sorafenib, International journal of cancer. Int
J cancer. 2012; 131:2961–9.

50.	 R. Coriat, C. Nicco, C. Chereau, O. Mir, J. Alexandre,
S. Ropert, B. Weill, S. Chaussade, F. Goldwasser, F.
Batteux. Sorafenib-induced hepatocellular carcinoma
cell death depends on reactive oxygen species production
in vitro and in vivo. Molecular cancer therapeutics. 2012;
11:2284–2293.

38.	 T. Ohn, N. Kedersha, T. Hickman, S. Tisdale, P. Anderson.
A functional RNAi screen links O-GlcNAc modification of
ribosomal proteins to stress granule and processing body
assembly. Nat Cell Biol. 2008; 10:1224–1231.

51.	 C. Atkins, Q. Liu, E. Minthorn, S.Y. Zhang, D.J. Figueroa,
K. Moss, T.B. Stanley, B. Sanders, A. Goetz, N. Gaul,
A.E. Choudhry, H. Alsaid, B.M. Jucker, J.M. Axten, R.
Kumar. Characterization of a novel PERK kinase inhibitor
with antitumor and antiangiogenic activity. Cancer research.
2013; 73:1993–2002.

39.	 C.J. Decker, R. Parker. P-bodies and stress granules: possible roles in the control of translation and mRNA degradation. Cold Spring Harbor perspectives in biology. 2012;
4:a012286.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43942

Oncotarget

52.	 J.M. Axten, J.R. Medina, Y. Feng, A. Shu, S.P. Romeril,
S.W. Grant, W.H. Li, D.A. Heerding, E. Minthorn, T.
Mencken, C. Atkins, Q. Liu, S. Rabindran, et al., Discovery
of 7-methyl-5-(1-{[3-(trifluoromethyl)phenyl]acetyl}-2,3dihydro-1H-indol-5-yl)-7H-p
yrrolo[2,3-d]pyrimidin4-amine (GSK2606414), a potent and selective first-inclass inhibitor of protein kinase R (PKR)-like endoplasmic
reticulum kinase (PERK), Journal of medicinal chemistry.
2012; 55:7193–7207.

57.	 J. Pelletier, J. Graff, D. Ruggero, N. Sonenberg. Targeting
the eIF4F Translation Initiation Complex: A Critical
Nexus for Cancer Development. Cancer research. 2015;
75:250–263.
58.	 K. Fujimura, A.T. Sasaki, P. Anderson. Selenite targets
eIF4E-binding protein-1 to inhibit translation initiation
and induce the assembly of non-canonical stress granules.
Nucleic Acids Res. 2012; 40:8099–110.
59.	 T.D. Fischer, J.H. Wang, A. Vlada, J.S. Kim, K.E. Behrns.
Role of autophagy in differential sensitivity of hepatocarcinoma cells to sorafenib. World journal of hepatology. 2014;
6:752–758.

53.	 H.P. Harding, A.F. Zyryanova, D. Ron. Uncoupling proteostasis and development in vitro with a small molecule inhibitor of the pancreatic endoplasmic reticulum
kinase. PERK, The Journal of biological chemistry. 2012;
287:44338–44344.

60.	 F.H. Joncas, P. Adjibade, R. Mazroui. Role of HRI in apoptosis resistance. [Article in French]. Medecine sciences:
M/S. 2014; 30:882–888.

54.	 J.A. Moreno, M. Halliday, C. Molloy, H. Radford, N.
Verity, J.M. Axten, C.A. Ortori, A.E. Willis, P.M. Fischer,
D.A. Barrett, G.R. Mallucci. Oral treatment targeting the
unfolded protein response prevents neurodegeneration and
clinical disease in prion-infected mice. Science translational
medicine. 2013; 5:206ra138.

61.	 P. Adjibade, R. Mazroui. Control of mRNA turnover: implication of cytoplasmic RNA granules. Seminars in cell &
developmental biology. 2014; 34:15–23.
62.	 J.R. Buchan. mRNP granules. Assembly. function, and connections with disease, RNA biology. 2014; 11:1019–1030.

55.	 P. Anderson, N. Kedersha, P. Ivanov. Stress granules,
P-bodies and cancer. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015;
1849:861–70.

63.	 J. Zhang, K. Okabe, T. Tani, T. Funatsu. Dynamic
association-dissociation and harboring of endogenous
mRNAs in stress granules. Journal of cell science. 2011;
124:4087–4095.

56.	 M. Shiota, M. Eto, A. Yokomizo, Y. Tada, A. Takeuchi,
D. Masubuchi, J. Inokuchi, K. Tatsugami, K. Kuroiwa, T.
Uchiumi, N. Seki, S. Naito. Sorafenib with d
­ oxorubicin
augments cytotoxicity to renal cell cancer through PERK
inhibition. International journal of oncology. 2010;
36:1521–1531.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

64.	 L. Coudert, P. Adjibade, R. Mazroui. Analysis of translation
initiation during stress conditions by polysome profiling.
Journal of visualized experiments: JoVE. 2014; e51164.

43943

Oncotarget

