Original Article

Efficacy of Imatinib Dose Escalation
in Patients With Chronic Myeloid
Leukemia in Chronic Phase
Hagop M. Kantarjian, MD1, Richard A. Larson, MD2, Francois Guilhot, MD3,
Stephen G. O’Brien, MD, PhD4, Manisha Mone5, Marc Rudoltz, MD5, Tillmann Krahnke, PhD6,
Jorge Cortes, MD1, and Brian J. Druker, MD7, for the International Randomized Study of
Interferon and STI571 (IRIS) Investigators

BACKGROUND: Imatinib mesylate given orally at a daily dose of 400 mg is the standard of care as initial
therapy for patients with chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) in chronic phase (CML-CP). Treatment guidelines
propose dose escalation based on clinical assessments of disease response. METHODS: Response and survival were analyzed in a cohort of patients (n ¼ 106) with newly diagnosed CML-CP who were enrolled on
the International Randomized Study of Interferon and STI571 (IRIS) trial, who began treatment with imatinib
at a dose of 400 mg daily, and who subsequently underwent dose escalation to either 600 mg or 800 mg
daily. Reasons for dose escalation were evaluated retrospectively based on 2 sets of criteria: the IRIS protocol-defined criteria (n ¼ 39 patients) and the European LeukemiaNet (ELN) recommendations (n ¼ 48
patients). RESULTS: Among all 106 patients who underwent dose escalation, the rates of freedom from
progression to accelerated phase or blast phase and overall survival were 89% and 84% at 3 years after
dose increase, respectively. A cytogenetic response was obtained in 42% of patients who had their dose
escalated based on protocol criteria and in 38% of patients who had their dose escalated according to the
ELN recommendations. CONCLUSIONS: The results from this retrospective analysis supported imatinib
dose escalation as an appropriate initial option for patients with CML-CP who were experiencing suboptiC 2008 American Cancer Society.
mal cytogenetic response or resistance. Cancer 2009;115:551–60. V
KEY WORDS: chronic myeloid leukemia in chronic phase, imatinib, dose escalation, suboptimal response.

Corresponding author: Hagop M. Kantarjian, MD, Leukemia Department, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe
Boulevard, Box 428, Houston, TX 77030; Fax: (713) 792-2031; hkantarj@mdanderson.org
1
Department of Leukemia, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas; 2Department of Medicine Hematology/Oncology,
University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois; 3Department of Oncology, Hematology and Cell Therapy, La Milétri University Hospital Center, Poitiers,
France; 4Department of Haematology, University of Newcastle, Newcastle, United Kingdom; 5Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East Hanover,
New Jersey; 6Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland; 7Department of Hematologic Malignancies, Oregon Health and Science University Cancer Institute, Portland, Oregon

Study Management Committee: Oregon Health and Science University Cancer Institute Research and Patient Care, Portland, Ore (B. J. Druker); University Hospital Poitier, Poitier, France (F. Guilhot); University of Chicago, Chicago, Ill (R. A. Larson); and University of Newcastle-upon-Tyne, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, UK (S. G. O’Brien).
Independent Data Monitoring Board: Rambam Medical Center, Haifa, Israel (J. Rowe); Wayne State University, Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute, Detroit, Mich (C. A. Schiffer); and International Drug Development Institute, Brussels, Belgium (M. Buyse).
Protocol Working Group: Policlinico San Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, Italy (M. Baccarani); Hospital Clinical, Barcelona (F. Cervantes); Erasmus Medical Center,
Rotterdam, the Netherlands (J. Cornelissen); Johannes Gutenberg Universitat, Mainz, Germany (T. Fischer); Universitat Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany (A.
Hochaus); Hanson Institute Centre for Cancer, Adelaide, Australia (T. Hughes); Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria (K. Lechner); Aarhus Amtsygehus,
Aarhus, Denmark (J. L. Nielsen); CHU de Bordeaux, Pessac, France (J. Reiffers); Hopital Saint Louis, Paris (P. Rousselot); San Luigi Gonzaga Hospital, Turin, Italy
(G. Saglio); Vancouver Hospital, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada (J. Shepherd); Akademiska Sjukhuset, Uppsala, Sweden (B. Simonsson); University Hospital, Basel, Switzerland (A. Gratwohl); Imperial College, London, UK (J. M. Goldman); University of Michigan Health System, Ann Arbor, Mich (M. Talpaz);
Mater Misericordiae Public Hospital, Brisbane, Australia (K. Taylor); and University Hospital Gathuisberg, Leuven, Belgium (G. Verhoef).
Received: July 14, 2008; Revised: September 2, 2008; Accepted: September 5, 2008
C 2008 American Cancer Society
Published online: December 31, 2008, V

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.24066, www.interscience.wiley.com

Cancer

February 1, 2009

551

Original Article

Imatinib mesylate (Glivec, Gleevec; Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, Basel, Switzerland; East Hanover, NJ) is a selective BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase
inhibitor. An imatinib dose of 400 mg daily is the
standard of care for patients with newly diagnosed
chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) in chronic phase
(CML-CP). Treatment with imatinib in the first-line
setting is associated with an overall survival rate of 88%
after 6 years of therapy.1,2 Dose escalation of imatinib

to a daily dose of 600 mg or 800 mg has demonstrated
a benefit in patients who have a slow or inadequate
response and in the setting of disease progression.3 To
our knowledge, the experimental arm of the International Randomized Study of Interferon (IFN) and
STI571 (IRIS) trial is the largest controlled population
of patients with CML-CP in which the rate of response
and its durability and/or survival with imatinib treatment can be estimated.1,4

The following investigators participated in the International Randomized Study of Interferon and STI571 (IRIS) trial: Australia: Royal Brisbane Hospital, Herston (S.
Durant); Monash Medical Center, Melbourne (A. Schwarer); Sir Charles Gardner Hospital, Perth (D. Joske); Australia Leukemia and Lymphoma Group, Melbourne (J.
Seymour); Royal Melbourne Hospital, Parkville (A. Grigg); St. Vincent’s Hospital, Darlinghurst (D. Ma); Royal North Shore Hospital, St. Leonards (C. Arthur); Westmead
Hospital, Westmead (K. Bradstock); and Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Sydney (D. Joshua). Belgium: A. Z. Sint-Jan, Brugge (A. Louwagi)e; Institut Jules Bordet, Brussels (P.
Martiat); and Cliniques Universitaries, Yvoir (A. Bosly). Canada: McGill University, Montreal, Quebec (C. Shistok); Princess Margaret Hospital, Toronto, Ontario (J. Lipton);
Queen Elizabeth II Health Sciences Center, Halifax, Nova Scotia (D. Forrest); McMaster University Medical Centre, West Hamilton, Ontario (I. Walker); Universite de
Montreal, Montreal, Quebec (D-C. Roy); Cancer Care Manitoba, Winnepeg, Manitoba (M. Rubinger); Ottawa Hospital Regional Cancer Centre, Ottawa, Ontario (I. BenceBruckler); University of Calgary and Tom Baker Cancer Center, Calgary, Alberta (D. Stewart); London Regional Cancer Centre, London, Ontario (M. Kovacs); and Cross
Cancer Center, Edmonton, Alberta (A-R. Turner). Denmark: Kobenhavns Amts Sygehus I Gentofte, Hellerup (H. Birgens); and Danish University of Pharmaceutical
Sciences and University of Southern Denmark, Copenhagen (O. Bjerrum). France: Hopital Claude Huriez, Lille (T. Facon); Hotel Dieu Hospital, Nantes (J-L. Harousseau);
Henri Mondor Hospital, Creteil (M. Tulliez); Centre Hospitalier Universitaire (CHU) Braboi, Vandoueuvre-les Nancy (A. Guerci); Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Marseille (D.
Blaise); Hopital Civil, Strasbourg (F. Maloisel); and CHU la Miletrie, Poitiers (M. Michallet). Germany: University of Regensburg, Regensburg (R. Andreesen); Krankenhaus
Muenchen-Schwabig, Munich (C. Nerl); University Hospital Rostock, Rostock (M. Freund); Heinrich-Heine-Universitaet Duesseldorf, Duesseldorf (N. Gattermann);
University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus, Dresden (G. Ehninger); University Hospital, Leipzig (M. Deininger); Johann Wolfgang Goethe University Hospital, Frankfurt (O.
Ottmann); University Hospital Rechts der Isar, Munich (C. Peschel); University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg (S. Fruehauf); Philipps-Universitaet. Marburg (A. Neubauer);
Humboldt-Universitaet, Berlin (P. le Coutre); and Robert-Bosch-Hospital, Stuttgart (W. Aulitzky). Italy: University Hospital, Udine (R. Fanin); San Orsola Hospital, Bologna
(G. Rosti); Universita La Sapienza, Rome (F. Mandelli); Instituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattre Scientifico Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia (M. Lazzarino); Niguarda Ca’Granda
Hospital, Milan (E. Morra); Azienda Osperdaliera e Cliniche Univerditarie San Martino, Largo R. Benzi, Genoa (A. Carella); University of Pisa, Pisa (M. Petrini); Azienda
Ospedaliera Bianchi-Malcrino-Morelli, Reggio Calabria (F. Nobile); University of Bari, Policlinico, Bari (V. Liso); Cardelli Hospital, Naples (F. Ferrara); University of Parma,
Parma (V. Rizzoli); Ospedal Civile, Pescara (G. Fiortoni); and Institute of Hematology and Medical Oncology Seragnoli, Bologna (G. Martinelli). Netherlands: Vrje
Universiteit Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam (G. Ossenkoppele). New Zealand: University of Auckland, Auckland (P. Browett). Norway: Medisinsk Avedling,
Rikshospitalet, Oslo (T. Gedde-Dahl); Ulleval Sykehus, Oslo (J-M. Tangen); and Hvidovre Hospital, Betalende (I. Dahl). Spain: Hospital Clinic, Villarroel, Barcelona (J.
Odrizoala); University of Barcelona, Barcelona (J. C. Hernandez Boulda); Hospital Universitarui de la Princesa, Madrid (J. L. Steegman); Hospital Universitario de
Salamanca, Salamanca (C. Canizo); San Carlos Clinical Hospital, Madrid (J. Diaz); Institut Catala d’Oncologia, Barcelona (A. Grenena); and Hospital Lluis Alcanyis, Cta
Xativa-Silla (M. N. Fernandez). Sweden: Karolinska Hospital, Stockholm (L. Stenke); Huddinge Sjukhus, Huddinge (C. Paul); Medicinkliniken Universitetssjukhuset,
Obrebro (M. Bjoreman); Regionsjukhuset, Linkoping (C. Malm); Sahlgrenska Hospital, Goteborg (H. Wadenvik); Endokinsekt/Medklin Universitetssjukhuset, Lund (P-G.
Nilsson); and Universitetssjukhuset Malmo University Hospital, Malmo (I. Turesson). Switzerland: Kantonsspital, St. Gallen (U. Hess); and University of Bern, Bern (M.
Solenthaler). UK: University of Nottingham and Nottingham City Hospital, Liverpool (R. E. Clark); Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Cambridge (A. R. Green);
Glasgow Royal Infirmary, Glasgow (T. L. Holyoake); Manchester Royal Infirmary, Manchester (G. S. Lucas); Leeds General Infirmary, Leeds (G. Smith); Queen Elizabeth
Hospital, Edgbaston, Birmingham (D. W. Milligan); Derriford Hospital, Plymouth (S. J. Rule); and University Hospital of Wales, Cardiff (A. K. Burnett). US: Walt Disney
Memorial Cancer Institute, Orlando, Fla (R. Moroose); Roswell Park Cancer Center, Buffalo, NY (M. Wetzler); Gibbs Cancer Center, Spartanburg, SC (J. Bearden); Ohio
State University School of Medicine, Columbus Ohio (S. Cataland); University of New Mexico Health Sciences Center, Albuquerque, NM (I. Rabinowitz); University of
Maryland Cancer Center, Baltimore, Md (B. Meisenberg); Montgomery Cancer Center, Montgomery, Ala (K. Thompson); State University of New York Upstate Medical
Center, Syracuse, NY (S. Graziano); University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Ala (P. Emanuel); Hematology and Oncology Inc., Dayton, Ohio (H. Gross);
Billings Oncology Associates, Billings, Mont (P. Cobb); City of Hope National Medical Center, Duarte, Calif (R. Bhatia); Cancer Center of Kansas, Wichita, Kan (S. Dakhil);
Alta Bates Comprehensive Cancer Center, Berkeley, Calif (D. Irwin); Cancer Research Center of Hawaii, Honolulu, Hawaii (B. Issell); University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha, Neb (S. Pavletic); Columbus Community Clinical Oncology Program, Columbus, Ohio (P. Kuebler); Michigan State University Hematology/Oncology,
Lansing, Mich (E. Layhe); Brown University School of Medicine, Providence, RI (P. Butra); Loyola University Medical Center, Shreveport, La (J. Glass); Duke University
Medical Center, Durham, NC (J. Moore); University of Vermont, Burlington, Vt (B. Grant); University of Tennessee, Memphis, Tenn (H. Neill); University of Louisville,
Louisville, Ky (R. Herzig); Sarah Cannon Cancer Center, Nashville, Tenn (H. Burris); University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minn (B. Petersen); Cleveland Clinic
Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio (M. Kalaycio); Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Wash (D. Stirewalt); University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah (W.
Samlowski); Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY (E. Berman); University of North Carolina School of Medicine, Charlotte, NC (S. Limentani); Atlanta
Cancer Center, Atlanta, Ga (T. Seay); University of North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC (T. Shea); Indiana Blood and Marrow Institute, Beech Grove, Ind (L.
Akard); San Juan Regional Cancer Center, Farmington, NM (G. Smith); University of Massachusetts Memorial Medical Center, Worcester, Mass (P. Becker); Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Mo (S. Devine); Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Milwaukee, Wis (R. Hart); Louisiana State University Medical Center, New
Orleans, La (R. Veith); Decatur Memorial Hospital, Decatur, Ill (J. Wade); Rocky Mountain Cancer Centers, Denver, Colo (M. Brunvad); Oncology-Hematology Group of
South Florida, Miami, Fla (L. Kalman); Memphis Cancer Center, Memphis, Tenn (D. Strickland); Henry Ford Hospital, Detroit, Mich (M. Shurafa); University of California,
San Diego, Medical Center, La Jolla, Calif (A. Bashey); Western Pennsylvania Cancer Institute, Pittsburgh, Pa (R. Shadduck); Tulane Cancer Center, New Orleans, La (H.
Safah); Southbay Oncology Hematology Partners, Campbell, Calif (M. Rubenstein); University of Texas Southwest Medical Center, Dallas, Tex (R. Collins); Cancer Care
Associates, Tulsa, Okla (A. Keller); Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center, Chicago, Ill (M. Tallman); Northern New Jersey Cancer Center, Hackensack, NJ (A.
Pecora); University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Hillman Cancer Center, Pittsburgh, Pa (M. Agha); Texas Oncology, Dallas, Tex (H. Homes); and New Mexico Oncology
Hematology Consultants Albuquerque, NM (R. Guidice).

552

Cancer

February 1, 2009

Imatinib Dose Escalation in CML-CP/Kantarjian et al

The IRIS trial, which was initiated in 2000, was a
multicenter, international, open-label, phase 3 study in
which eligible patients with CML-CP were randomized to
receive therapy either with imatinib or with IFN-a plus
cytarabine. It allowed for a step-wise imatinib dose escalation, first to 600 mg and then to 800 mg, when certain
response criteria were not met while the patient was receiving standard dose imatinib, when a major cytogenetic
response (MCyR) was lost, or when disease progression
occurred. Stepwise dose escalation was recommended
because the tolerability of higher doses of imatinib was not
well known during the initial portion of the study. The success of imatinib in CML-CP has changed the treatment
practices for patients with CML based on expectations of
improved response and survival rates.
Recommendations for imatinib dose escalation have
been published by the European LeukemiaNet (ELN).5
The ELN recommends imatinib dose escalation to
600 mg or 800 mg daily at certain times of clinical assessments of CML disease response; these assessments correlate with similar or lower disease burden compared with
IRIS protocol criteria. The ELN criteria recommend dose
escalation of imatinib in case of failure or suboptimal
response (Table 1). In the current report, we describe the
outcome of patients with newly diagnosed CML-CP who
were enrolled on IRIS, who began treatment with imatinib at a dose of 400 mg daily, and who subsequently
underwent dose escalation.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study Design
Patients enrolled on the IRIS study and randomized to
initial treatment with imatinib 400 mg daily were
included in this analysis if they underwent dose escalation
on or before January 31, 2007 (ie, within 72 months after
randomization). The IRIS protocol study design and
methods have been previously described.1,4 Two separate
analyses were conducted among patients who received
imatinib at a dose of 600 mg per day at least once, 1)
including patients retrospectively classified to have their
imatinib dose increased according to protocol-defined criteria and 2) including patients retrospectively classified to
have their imatinib dose increased according to the ELN
recommendations.5 The objective of the analysis was to
Cancer

February 1, 2009

Table 1. Response Criteria From the European
LeukemiaNet Recommendations*

Time,
mo

Failure†

Suboptimal
Response‡

3

No HR (stable disease
or disease progression)
<CHR, no cytogenetic
response (Phþ >95%)
<PCyR (Phþ >35%)
<CCyR
Loss of CHR

<CHR

6
12
18
Anytime

Loss of CCyR
Mutation

<PCyR (Phþ >35%)
<CCyR
<MMR
Additional
chromosome
abnormalities in
Phþ cells
Loss of MMR
Mutation

HR indicates hematologic response; CHR, complete hematologic response;
PCyR, partial cytogenetic response; Phþ, Philadelphia chromosome positive; CCyR, complete cytogenetic response; MMR, major molecular
response;.
* Excluding criteria related to molecular response, because these were not
measured in all patients.
y To be interpreted as ‘current dose no longer appropriate.’
z To be interpreted as ‘long-term outcome likely to be less favorable.’

evaluate the effect of dose escalation on patient outcomes.
It is noteworthy that some criteria specified in the ELN
recommendations were not collected routinely in the IRIS
trial because of the evolving nature of monitoring criteria
during the period of the study. Because ELN guidelines
are the most current, these criteria were used in a separate
analysis from IRIS criteria to ensure clinical relevance. No
attempt to compare ELN and IRIS dose-escalation guidelines was attempted.
The IRIS protocol allowed dose escalation of imatinib to 600 mg and then, 1 month later, to 800 mg for the
following reasons: 1) failure to achieve complete hematologic response (CHR) by 3 months, 2) failure to achieve at
least a minor CyR (36%-65% Philadelphia chromosome
[Ph]-positive metaphases) by 12 months, or 3) loss of an
MCyR (35% Ph-positive metaphases) at any time. Disease progression (development of accelerated phase [AP]
or blastic phase CML, loss of CHR or MCyR, or increasing white blood cell [WBC] count) also was considered to
be ‘according to IRIS protocol criteria,’ because the label
allows for a dose increase for this reason.4 Investigators
were not required to contact the sponsor for approval for
dose escalations for other reasons not specified by the protocol (eg, loss of a complete CyR [CCyR]; 0% Ph-positive
metaphases). A review of safety data through the 42month time point (July 2004) was included in the analysis
553

Original Article

for patients who received at least 28 days of cumulative
high-dose therapy and had their initial first dose increase
by January 31, 2004.

with the frequency of events with onset after the first dose
increase to at least 600 mg (n ¼ 67).

RESULTS
Endpoints
The primary study endpoints were event-free survival
(EFS) (also referred to as progression-free survival [PFS]
in previous publications1) and overall survival. Events
were the first occurrence of any of the following: death
from any cause, progression to AP or blastic phase (APBP) of CML, or loss of an MCyR. A CyR was determined
by evaluating at least 20 metaphases per bone marrow
sample and was categorized as a CCyR or a partial CyR
(PCyR) (1%-35% Ph-positive metaphases). Overall survival was calculated by including deaths from any cause,
regardless of bone marrow transplantation (BMT).
Patients who discontinued the study were followed for
survival.

Statistical Methods
Two analyses were conducted in patients who received
imatinib at a dose 600 mg daily: 1) according to the
guidelines for dose escalation provided in the IRIS protocol and 2) a retrospective review of the IRIS database classifying the reason for dose escalation according to the
ELN recommendations. Because the criteria for dose escalations evolved in clinical practice after the initiation of
the IRIS trial, reasons for dose escalations for all patients
were recategorized according to the recommendations
released by the ELN (Table 1). The identified reason for
dose escalation was checked by a medical review, because
it was not required to specify the reason in the case report
forms.
A review of safety up to the 42-month time point
(July 2004) for patients who received escalated doses of
imatinib also was conducted. Only limited collection of
safety data within the IRIS trial occurred after July 2004.
To allow sufficient time for any adverse events to emerge,
patients had to remain on at least 28 days of cumulative
higher dose therapy to be included in this analysis;
67 patients of the total 106 qualified for this safety analysis. The frequency of occurrence of grade 3 or 4 events
before the dose increase (n ¼ 551; including patients who
may have increased later during the trial) was compared
554

Of 553 patients who initially were randomized to receive
imatinib, 106 patients (19%) had imatinib dose escalation
of 600 to 800 mg daily by January 31, 2007. Thirty-five
of those patients (33%) who underwent dose escalation
had an initial imatinib dose increase to 600 mg daily
followed by a second increase to 800 mg daily within
2 months. These patients remained on imatinib 800 mg
daily for a median duration of 14 months. Thirteen
patients (12%) had dose escalation to 600 mg followed by
further escalation to 800 mg more than 2 months later.
Dose escalation of imatinib to only 600 mg daily was
reported in 47 patients (44%), and initial dose escalation
directly to 800 mg daily was reported in 11 patients
(10%). Thus, a total of 59 patients received 800 mg of
imatinib in the trial.
In the first analysis, ‘dose escalation according to
IRIS protocol’ criteria were met for 39 patients. A subset
of patients whose disease had progressed was included in
this group, because the prescribing information for imatinib allowed for dose escalation for this reason. Thirty-four
patients met both ELN and an IRIS protocol criteria for
dose escalation; 5 patients met criteria only according to
IRIS protocol, and 14 patients met criteria only according
to the ELN recommendations (Table 2). The decision to
perform imatinib dose escalation for 58 patients on the
IRIS protocol was made at the discretion of the treating
physician, and the precise reason could not be classified
within 1 of these 2 aforementioned groups. Specific
details regarding these 58 patients are limited to progression and survival data, because the original case report
forms were not designed to capture information relevant
to this retrospective analysis.
The median dose intensity was 400 mg daily (range,
251-400 mg daily) before dose escalation. The median
time to dose escalation was 22 months for the entire
cohort; for patients who underwent dose escalation
according to IRIS protocol criteria, it was 14.4.months;
and, for patients who underwent dose escalation according to the ELN recommendations, it was 15.6 months.
The median time on imatinib after the initial dose
increase was 19.4 months for 106 patients with a median
Cancer

February 1, 2009

Imatinib Dose Escalation in CML-CP/Kantarjian et al

Table 2. Reasons for Dose Escalation of Imatinib Among Patients Randomized to Receive Imatinib in the International
Randomized Study of Interferon and STI571 Study

IRIS Protocol Criteria (n539)*
Reason

No. (%)

No CHR at 3 mo
No MinCyR at 12mo
Loss of MCyR
Progressiony

7 (18)
8 (21)
18 (46)
6 (15)

ELN Recommendations (n548)*
Reason
3 mo: Failure or suboptimal
response (no HR or CHR)
6 mo: Failure (no CHR, no CyR)
12 mo: Suboptimal response (no CCyR)
12 mo: Failure (no MCyR)
18 mo: Failure (no CCyR)
Failure at anytime (confirmed loss
of CHR or loss of CCyR)

No. (%)
7 (15)
1
4
11
10
15

(2)
(8)
(23)
(21)
(31)

IRIS indicates the International Randomized Study of Interferon and STI571 trial; ELN, European LeukemiaNet; CHR, complete hematologic response; HR, hematologic
response; MinCyR, minimal cytogenetic response; CyR, cytogenetic response; MCyR, major cytogenetic response; CCyR, complete cytogenetic response.
* Includes 34 patients who met both ELN and IRIS protocol criteria for dose escalation,
y A subset of patients with disease progression was included in the ‘‘per IRIS Protocol Criteria’’ analysis, because the prescribing information for imatinib allows
for dose escalation for this reason.

dose intensity of 604 mg daily (range, 294-800 mg daily)
after dose escalation.
The most common reason for dose escalation
among the 39 patients whose dose was increased according to IRIS protocol criteria was loss of MCyR (18 of
39 patients; 46%), followed by lack of minor CyR at
12 months (8 of 39 patients; 21%), and lack of CHR at
3 months (7 of 39 patients; 18%) (Table 2). The most
common reasons for dose escalation among the 48
patients whose dose was increased according to the ELN
recommendations were failure at any time (15 of 48
patients; 31%), failure at 12 months (11 of 48 patients;
23%), and failure at 18 months (10 of 48 patients; 21%).
Clinical benefit of administration of a higher dose
was assessed by reviewing clinical milestones that were
achieved by 12 months after the increase had occurred.
Details regarding the benefits observed after imatinib dose
escalation according to either IRIS protocol criteria or the
ELN recommendations are shown in Tables 3 and 4,
respectively. Within 12 months after dose escalation, 17
of 33 patients (52%) who had a dose escalation of imatinib according to IRIS protocol criteria had achieved their
clinical milestone (Table 3). The majority of patients
without CHR at 3 months (6 of 7 patients; 86%) had
achieved the milestone of CHR. At 12 months after dose
escalation, 2 of 8 patients without at least a minor CyR
had achieved an MCyR; by 24 months after dose escalation, 4 of these 8 patients (50%) had achieved an MCyR.
Of 18 patients with loss of MCyR, 9 patients (50%) had
Cancer

February 1, 2009

achieved the milestone by 12.5 months, and further
improvement in response to CCyR was observed in 3 of
18 patients by 30 months. Overall, 86% of these patients
achieved or regained the hematologic response within
12 months of dose escalation, and 42% achieved or
regained a CyR.
The clinical response milestones were achieved
within 12 months in 21 of 48 patients (44%) who had a
dose escalation of imatinib according to the ELN recommendations (Table 4). The milestone of CHR was
achieved within 12 months in 6 of 7 patients who had failure or suboptimal response at 3 months. Six of 11 patients
with failure at 12 months achieved an MCyR within
12 months after a dose increase, 2 of 10 patients with failure at 18 months experienced a CCyR within the
12 months after dose increase, and 7 of 15 patients with
failure at any time achieved at least a MCyR within 1 year
after dose increase. With continued follow-up, several
additional patients achieved an MCyR and a CCyR.
None of the patients with failure at 6 months (n ¼ 1) or
suboptimal response at 12 months (n ¼ 4) achieved their
clinical milestone at 12 months. At later follow-up, an
MCyR was reported in 1 patient who had a suboptimal
response at 12 months; this patient had achieved only a
minor CyR before dose escalation. Two other patients
who had suboptimal responses at 12 months achieved a
CCyR in subsequent follow-up; these patients had
obtained an MCyR before dose escalation. In summary,
67% of patients who had their dose escalated based on the
555

Original Article
Table 3. Clinical Milestones Achieved Within 12 Months After Imatinib Dose Escalation According to the International
Randomized Study of Interferon and STI571 Protocol Criteria (N¼39)*

Reason for Dose
Escalation

No.

Clinical Response
by 12 Months

No.

Best Cytogenetic Response
and Time to That Response

No CHR at 3 mo

7

CHR

6

No minor CyR at 12 mo

8

MCyR

2

Loss of MCyR

18

MCyR

9

Two of 7 patients (29%) achieved an
MCyR by 12-mo follow-up and
improved further to CCyR by 33 mo
Four of 8 patients (50%) achieved an
MCyR by 24-mo follow-up and
improved further to CCyR by 48 mo
Three of 18 patients (17%) achieved
a CCyR by 30 mo

Total patients who failed to
achieve or lost a
clinical response
Progression

33

Any response

17 (52%)

6

Clinical improvement
with dose escalationy

4

Four of 6 patients achieved normalized
WBCs; 4 of 4 patients with EMD
at baseline had no sign of EMD after
treatment; and 1 patient with >20% blasts
reverted to CML-AP

CHR indicates complete hematologic response; MCyR, major cytogenetic response; CCyR, complete cytogenetic response; WBCs, white blood cells; EMD,
extramedullary disease; CML-AP, chronic myeloid leukemia in accelerated-phase.
* Twelve months  14 days.
y Greater than 1 clinical symptom per patient.

Table 4. Clinical Milestones Achieved by 12 Months After Dose Escalations According to European LeukemiaNet
Recommendations (N¼48)*

Reason for Dose Escalation

No.

Clinical Response
by 12 Months

No.

Best CyR and Time to
That Response

At 3 mo: Failure or suboptimal
response (no HR or <CHR)
At 6 mo: Failure (no CHR, no CyR)
At 12 mo: Suboptimal response
(no CCyR)

7

CHR

6

Two of 6 patients had a CCyR at
8 mo and 33 mo

1
4

CHR or MCyR
CCyR

0
0

At 12 mo: Failure (no MCyR)

11

MCyR

6

At 18 mo: Failure (no CCyR)

10

CCyR

2

Failure at anytime (confirmed loss
of CHR, or loss associated with
progression to AP/BC, or loss of CCyR)

15

CHR, MCyR,
or CCyR

0, 3, 4

Total

48

Improved response

21 (44%)

One of 4 patients had an MCyR at
12.5 mo; 2 of 4 patients had a
CCyR at 14 mo and 15.5 mo
Five of 11 responses occurred
2.5–11 mo after dose escalation;
1 of 11 patients had an MCyR at
21 mo; 1 of 11 patients had a
CCyR at 24 mo
Two of 10 responses occurred at
3 mo and 9 mo after dose
escalation; 1 of 10 patients
had a CCyR at 29 mo
Seven of 15 CyR responses
occurred between 2 mo and
10 mo after dose escalation;
2 of 15 patients had an additional
CCyR at 15 mo and 21 mo

CyR indicates cytogenetic response; HR, hematologic response; CHR, complete hematologic response; CCyR, complete cytogenetic response; MCyR, major
cytogenetic response; AP, accelerated phase; BC, blast crisis.
* Twelve months  14 days.

556

Cancer

February 1, 2009

Imatinib Dose Escalation in CML-CP/Kantarjian et al

FIGURE 1. Progression-free survival (PFS) (accelerated phase,
or blast phase, or death related to chronic myeloid leukemia)
for pooled cohorts of dose-escalated patients according to
the International Randomized Study of Interferon and STI571
(IRIS) protocol, the European LeukemiaNet (ELN) recommendations, and for the entire patient population. Three patients
were not included in the PFS analysis because they had disease progression before dose escalation.

FIGURE 2. Overall survival for pooled cohorts of dose-escalated patients according to the International Randomized
Study of Interferon and STI571 (IRIS) protocol, the European
LeukemiaNet (ELN) recommendations, and for the entire
patient population.

Table 5. Reasons for Imatinib Discontinuation
Documented for Patients Who Had Dose Escalations in
the International Randomized Study of Interferon and
STI571 Study (N¼106)

ELN recommendations achieved or regained a hematologic response within 12 months of dose escalation, and
38% achieved or regained a CyR.
For the total population of 106 patients who had
dose escalation of imatinib while on the IRIS trial, the
estimated PFS rates at 12 months and 36 months after the
dose escalation were 94% and 89%, respectively (Fig. 1).
The estimated overall survival rates in the total group at
12 months and 36 months were 96% and 84%, respectively (Fig. 2). The PFS rates at 12 months and 36 months
in the patients who had dose escalation of imatinib
according to IRIS protocol criteria were 88% and 81%,
respectively; and the overall survival rates at the same time
points were 95% and 81%, respectively. The PFS rate
among patients who had dose escalation of imatinib
according to the ELN recommendations was 90% at both
12 months and 36 months; and the overall survival rates
at the same time points were 96% and 89%, respectively.
The 6 patients who had dose escalation of imatinib at the
time of disease progression had a 2-year survival rate of
83%.
Of 106 patients who had dose increases, 42 patients
(40%) remained on study treatment at the date of data
cutoff (January 31, 2007), including 31 patients (29%)
who were receiving doses 600 mg (Table 5). Seven
Cancer

February 1, 2009

Variable

No. (%)

Remained on imatinib at data cutoff
Patients receiving 600 mg/d dose at cutoff

42 (40)

Discontinued imatinib*
Unsatisfactory effecty
Protocol violation
Adverse event(s)
Abnormal procedure
Withdrawal of consent
Administrative problems/lost to follow-up
BMT (no longer required study drug)
Crossed over to IFN-a plus cytarabine

64 (60)

31 (29)

36
4
2
2
5
2
6
7

(34)
(4)
(2)
(2)
(5)
(2)
(6)
(7)

BMT indicates bone marrow transplantation; IFN-a, interferon alpha.
* Discontinued on or before January 31, 2007.
y Patients who discontinued because of unsatisfactory therapeutic effect
were on imatinib study treatment for a median of 47 months (range, 8.3–
72.9 months).

patients (7%) crossed over to the IFN-a plus cytarabine
arm because of loss of MCyR in 1 patient (1%), loss
of CHR in 4 patients (4%), and increasing WBC count in
2 patients (2%). The following were reasons for discontinuation in 57 patients who had a dose escalation but did
not remain on study treatment: unsatisfactory therapeutic
effect (36 patients; 34%), protocol violations (4 patients;
4%), and adverse events and abnormal procedures (2
patients each; 2%). Five patients (5%) withdrew consent,
557

Original Article
Table 6. Grade 3 or 4 Adverse Events That Increased in Frequency After Imatinib Dose Escalation to 600 mg for
28 Days (July 31, 2004 Cutoff)

AEs

Percentage of Patients (No.)
All Patients
During Study,
N5551

Before Increase
to 600 mg
Daily, N5551

After Increase
to 600 mg
Daily, N567/After
Increase to
800 mg Daily, N540

2.2
1.1
1.1
0.5
3.6
1.6
0.5
0.9

2
1.1
0.9
0.4
3.1
1.3
0.2
0.7

1.5
1.1
1.5
1.5
4.5
3
3
1.5

4 (22)
9.3 (51)

3.1 (17)
8.2 (45)

7.5 (5)/7.5(3)
10.4 (7)/10 (4)

Nonhematologic AEs
Fluid retention
Other fluid retention
Superficial edema
Headache
Abdominal pain
Hemorrhage
GI hemorrhage
Pyrexia

Grade 3 or 4 hematologic AEs
Anemia
Thrombocytopenia

AEs indicates adverse events; GI, gastrointestinal.

and 2 patients (2%) discontinued because of administrative problems or loss of follow-up. For 6 patients (6%) ‘no
longer requires study drug (BMT)’ was given as the reason, indicating that these patients underwent transplantation. Patients who discontinued imatinib because of an
unsatisfactory therapeutic effect after dose escalation were
on imatinib study treatment altogether for a median of
47 months (range, 8.3-72.9 months). Not all patients
who discontinued imatinib because of an ‘unsatisfactory
therapeutic effect’ had documented progression of disease
or loss of MCyR. Patients with lack of CyR or fluctuating
Ph-positivity without loss of MCyR were included in the
‘unsatisfactory therapeutic effect’ category.
On the basis of a data cutoff date of July 31, 2004,
67 patients who underwent imatinib dose escalation for a
cumulative duration of at least 28 days qualified for the
safety analysis. Relative to treatment with the standard
daily imatinib dose of 400 mg, an increased frequency of
grade 3 or 4 adverse events was observed after dose escalation to 600 mg daily for superficial edema (0.9% before
vs 1.5% after increase), headache (0.4% vs 1.5%, respectively), abdominal pain (3.1% vs 4.5%, respectively),
hemorrhage (1.3% vs 3.0%, respectively), pyrexia (0.7%
vs 1.5%, respectively), anemia (3.1% vs 7.5%, respec558

tively), and thrombocytopenia (8.2% vs 10.4%, respectively) (Table 6).

DISCUSSION
Dose escalation of imatinib in patients with newly diagnosed CML-CP in the IRIS study was effective in patients
who had disease that was not responding optimally to
imatinib 400 mg daily. Approximately 20% of patients
had dose increases from the standard imatinib dose of
400 mg daily to 600 or 800 mg daily. Of the patients who
had dose escalation based on IRIS protocol criteria, 86%
achieved or regained their hematologic response within
12 months of dose escalation, and 42% achieved or
regained a CyR. Of the patients who had dose escalation
according to the ELN recommendations, 67% achieved
or regained a hematologic response within 12 months of
dose escalation, and 38% achieved or regained a CyR.
Three years after the dose increase, the overall rate of freedom from progression to AP and BP was 89%, and the 3year survival rate was 84%. Most patients attained a clinical benefit within the first 12 months after dose increase.
Previous studies regarding the benefit of dose escalation of imatinib after IFN failure reached different
Cancer

February 1, 2009

Imatinib Dose Escalation in CML-CP/Kantarjian et al

conclusions. Some studies highlighted the durability of
responses gained with imatinib dose escalation,6 whereas
others suggested these responses may be brief.7,8 In a study
from the University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, 74 patients had dose escalation for unsatisfactory
response. Among 51 patients who had dose escalation for
cytogenetic recurrence or refractoriness, 32 patients
(63%) improved their CyR to a CCyR (n ¼ 15), a PCyR
(n ¼ 12), or a minor CyR (n ¼ 5); these responses were
sustained in 14 patients (27%). Responses were more
modest and less durable in patients who were treated
for hematologic recurrence.6 In a recent update of
103 patients from that same study, 49% of patients who
had imatinib dose escalation for cytogenetic resistance or
recurrence regained a CCyR; their estimated 2-year eventfree survival rate was 85%.9 This update of the IRIS data
also highlights the benefit of imatinib dose escalation in
achieving better and durable responses, primarily in
patients who were experiencing a suboptimal CyR or
cytogenetic resistance/recurrence.
Reasons for resistance or refractoriness to imatinib
therapy include, but are not limited to, over-expression of
BCR-ABL, gene amplification, transporter genes (either
decreased expression of the octomer-binding protein gene
OCT1 or increased expression of the multidrug resistance
gene MDR1), and BCR-ABL kinase domain mutations.
Several of these mechanisms may cause relative resistance
to imatinib, which could be overcome with dose escalation.10,11 However, some mutations may render the disease completely resistant or significantly resistant to
imatinib (eg, T315I mutations; or mutations for which
the 50% inhibitory concentration of imatinib is increased
significantly). For these patients, a change to the secondgeneration tyrosine kinase inhibitors may be more beneficial than escalating the dose of imatinib.12,13
The results of this study should be interpreted in the
context of the retrospective nature of the analysis and the
changing criteria for suboptimal response or resistance to
imatinib over the time course of the trial. Within this context, the analysis provides reasonable evidence for the benefit of imatinib dose escalation in patients with CML-CP
who were experiencing a suboptimal cytogenetic response
or cytogenetic relapse.
In summary, this retrospective analysis indicates
that imatinib dose escalation is an effective initial strategy
for patients with CML-CP who do not achieve the
Cancer

February 1, 2009

expected response to standard therapy. Prospective studies
currently are underway to explore the role of high-dose
imatinib further in the CML treatment paradigm.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures
Supported by Novartis (clinicaltrials.gov no. NCT00006343).
Dr. Kantarjian has received research grants from Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation and Bristol-Myers Squibb Company.
Dr. Larson has received research grants from Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation and Bristol Myers Squibb Company.
Dr. Guilhot has acted as a consultant and has received research
support from Bristol-Myers Squibb Company and Novartis
Pharmaceuticals Corporation.
Dr. O’Brien has acted as a consultant and received research support from Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation and BristolMyers Squibb Company.
Drs. Mone, Rudoltz, and Krahnke are employees of Novartis
Pharmaceuticals Corporation.
Dr. Cortes has acted as a consultant and received research support from Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation.
Dr. Druker has acted as a consultant for the following: Ambit
Biosciences, ARIAD Pharmaceuticals, Avalon Pharmaceuticals,
Bioexpertise, Bristol-Myers Squibb Company, Calistoga Pharmaceuticals, Cylene Pharmaceuticals, Nodality, Portola, Roche,
SGX Pharmaceuticals, Sequenom, Sofinnova Ventures, and
Upstate Biotechnology. He is a stockholder in Breakthrough
Therapeutics and MolecularMD and has received grant support
from Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation and Bristol-Myers
Squibb Company. He also has received royalties from the DanaFarber Cancer Institute and is a patent owner of ‘‘Mutated ABL
Kinase Domains.’’ Oregon Health and Science University
(OHSU) and Dr. Druker have a financial interest in MolecularMD. The technology used in this research has been licensed
to MolecularMD. The potential conflict of interest has been
reviewed and managed by the OHSU Conflict of Interest in
Research Committee and the Integrity Program Oversight Council. Dr. Druker currently is the prinicipal investigator on several
Novartis and Bristol-Myers Squibb clinical trials. His institution
has contracts with these companies to pay for patient costs,
nurse and data manager salaries, and institutional overhead. Dr.
Druker does not derive a salary nor does his laboratory receive
funds from these contracts.

References
1.

Druker BJ, Guilhot F, O’Brien SG, et al. Five-year followup of patients receiving imatinib for chronic myeloid leukemia. N Engl J Med. 2007;355:2408-2417.

2.

Hochhaus A, Druker BJ, Larson RA, et al. IRIS 6-year follow-up: sustained survival and declining annual rate of
transformation in patients with newly diagnosed chronic
myeloid leukemia in chronic phase (CML-CP) treated with
imatinib [abstract]. Blood. 2007;110. Abstract 25.

559

Original Article
3.

Kantarjian HM, Talpaz M, O’Brien S, et al. Dose escalation of imatinib mesylate can overcome resistance to standard-dose therapy in patients with chronic myelogenous
leukemia. Blood. 2003;101:473-475.

4.

O’Brien SG, Guilhot F, Larson RA, et al. Imatinib compared with interferon and low dose cytarabine for newly
diagnosed chronic phase chronic myeloid leukemia. N Engl
J Med. 2003;348:994-1004.

5.

Baccarani M, Saglio G, Goldman J, et al. Evolving concepts in the management of chronic myeloid leukemia.
Recommendations from an expert panel on behalf of the
European LeukemiaNet. Blood. 2006;6:1809-1820.

6.

Kantarjian H, Cortes J, O’Brien S, et al. Long-term survival
benefit and improved complete cytogenetic and molecular
response rates with imatinib mesylate in Philadelphia chromosome-positive, chronic-phase chronic myeloid leukemia
after failure of interferon-a. Blood. 2004;104:1979-1988.

7.

8.

560

Zonder J, Pemberton P, Brandt H, Mohamed A, Schiffer C.
The effect of dose increase of imatinib mesylate in patients
with chronic or accelerated phase chronic myelogenous leukemia with inadequate hematologic or cytogenetic response to
initial treatment. Clin Cancer Res. 2003;9:2092-2097.
Martin D, Goldman J, Olavarria E, Apperley J. Transient
benefit only from increasing the imatinib dose in CML

patients who do not achieve complete cytogenetic
remissions on conventional doses. Blood. 2003;102:27022703.
9.

Jabbour E, Kantarjian K, Atallah E, et al. Impact of imatinib mesylate dose escalation on resistance and suboptimal
responses to standard-dose therapy in patients (pts) with
chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) [abstract]. Blood. 2007;
110. Abstract 1035.

10. Shah NP, Tran C, Lee FY, et al. Overriding imatinib resistance with a novel ABL kinase inhibitor. Science. 2004;305:
399-401.
11. Gorre ME, Mohammed M, Ellwood K, et al. Clinical
resistance to STI-571 cancer therapy caused by BCR-ABL
gene mutation or amplification. Science. 2001;293:876-880.
12. Hochhaus A, Kantarjian H, Baccarani M, et al. Dasatinib
induces notable hematologic and cytogenetic responses in
chronic phase chronic myeloid leukemia after failure of
imatinib therapy. Blood. 2007;109:2303-2309.
13. Kantarjian H, Giles F, Gattermann N, et al. Nilotinib (formerly amn107), a highly selective BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase
inhibitor, is effective in patients with Philadelphia chromosome-positive chronic myelogenous leukemia in chronic
phase following imatinib resistance and intolerance. Blood.
2007;110:3540-3546.

Cancer

February 1, 2009

