Molecular and Cellular Pathobiology

Cancer
Research

Melanocyte-Stimulating Hormone Directly Enhances
UV-Induced DNA Repair in Keratinocytes by a Xeroderma
Pigmentosum Group A–Dependent Mechanism
Liang Dong, Ji Wen, Eric Pier, Xiao Zhang, Bo Zhang, Fangzheng Dong, Nick Ziegler,
Margaret Mysz, Rafael Armenta, and Rutao Cui

Abstract
Melanocyte-stimulating hormone (MSH) reduces UV-induced DNA damage through the induction of pigmentation. In this study, we provide evidence that MSH also enhances DNA repair in skin keratinocytes by
modulating the function of DNA repair molecules. Intracutaneous injection of MSH prevented UV-induced
DNA damage in human and mouse skin independent of its effects on melanogenesis. In keratinocytes,
MSH bound to the melanocyte melanocortin receptor type 1 and activated adenylate cyclase activity, which
in turn activated Xeroderma pigmentosum group A (XPA)–binding protein 1 and induced nuclear translocation of XPA, a critical factor controlling nucleotide excision repair signaling pathways. Together, our findings
reveal a novel pigmentation-independent mechanism that underlies MSH–mediated DNA repair following
UVB irradiation. Cancer Res; 70(9); 3547–56. ©2010 AACR.

Introduction
UVB irradiation is one of the major environmental hazards
in public health. Overexposure to UV leads to skin damage in
short term and might result in various skin diseases and even
cancers over time (1, 2). Given the difficulty in curing melanomas and other skin cancers, tremendous amounts of effort
have been invested in improving the prevention of these
malignancies. Studying α-melanocyte-stimulating hormone
(α-MSH) signaling and learning its role in melanogenesis
has suggested a potential strategy for preventing skin cancers
through enhancing pigmentation with α-MSH analogues or
cyclic AMP (cAMP) agonists (3–5). To date, several studies
have indicated that α-MSH might reduce UV-induced skin
damage via alternative mechanisms (1, 3, 6–8). Specifically,
some results suggest that α-MSH directly triggers UV protective
signaling in keratinocytes (9). Because keratinocytes are incapable of melanin synthesis, we wondered if α-MSH–mediated
UV protection works by augmenting the DNA repair pathway.
Molecular and genetic data suggest that the melanocortin1 receptor (MC1R) plays a crucial role in tanning and pig-

Authors' Affiliation: Oncology Institute, Cardinal Bernardin Cancer Center,
Department of Pathology, Stritch School of Medicine, Loyola University
Chicago, Maywood, Illinois
Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research
Online (http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Current address for L. Dong and J. Wen: Qilu Hospital, Shandong
University, Jinan, Shandong, China.
Corresponding Author: Rutao Cui, 800 Washington Street, #5609,
Boston, MA 02111. Phone: 6176367023; Fax: 6176366127; E-mail:
rcui@tuftsmedicalcenter.org.
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-4596
©2010 American Association for Cancer Research.

www.aacrjournals.org

mentation in humans and mice (4). MC1R is expressed in
melanocytes and is activated by its ligand α-MSH, a propigmentation hormone produced and secreted by both keratinocytes and melanocytes after UV irradiation (4, 10). Upon
α-MSH binding, MC1R activates the cAMP pathway and
melanin production in melanocytes. The gene encoding
α-MSH is proopiomelanocortin (POMC), a multicomponent
precursor for α-MSH (melanotropic), ACTH (adrenocorticotropic), and the opioid peptide β-endorphin (11). Mutations
in the POMC gene result in a red-hair, fair-skin phenotype
(like that of MC1R variant alleles) in addition to metabolic
abnormalities, such as adrenal insufficiency and obesity (12).
We have shown that p53 activation in keratinocytes represents a “UV sensor/effector” for skin pigmentation, with its
key mechanistic role being the transcriptional activation of
POMC (9). The tumor suppressor protein p53 plays a central
role in the cellular response to UV-induced DNA damage/
repair (13). On the other hand, the Abdel-Malek group has
shown that α-MSH can prevent UV-induced DNA damage
and apoptosis in melanocytes (1, 3, 6–8). Collectively, these
two observations led us to examine the possibility that
α-MSH prevents UV-induced DNA damage in keratinocytes.
UV irradiation can induce DNA photoproducts. Cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers (CPD) and pyrimidine (6-4) pyrimidone photoproducts (6-4 PP) have been completely isolated
and characterized as UV-induced photodimers (14–16).
Among the various UV-induced DNA repair mechanisms,
nucleotide excision repair (NER) represents the most versatile and flexible DNA repair pathway in cells (17). NER
recognizes bulky, helix-distorting changes, such as CPD
and 6-4 PPs, as well as single-strand breaks. Xeroderma pigmentosum group A (XPA) gene plays an indispensable role
in the NER pathway (18). XPA was cloned from patients
with xeroderma pigmentosum (XP) complementation group

3547

Dong et al.

A (19). XP is an autosomal recessive human disease that
causes sensitivity to sunlight. Patients with XP have a high
incidence of skin cancer on sun-exposed skin caused by loss
of the ability to repair UV-induced DNA damage, especially
in the early steps of NER (20). After UVB irradiation, XPA
undergoes a dramatic cytoplasm-to-nucleus translocation
via association with cytoplasmic GTPase XPA-binding protein 1 (XAB1; refs. 21, 22). Once inside the nucleus, XPA is
a “docking” protein for components of the NER system. XPA
is involved in both global and transcription-coupled DNA
repair (18, 23, 24).
Here, we showed that the level of DNA damage was remarkably reduced in epidermis that had received α-MSH before UVB irradiation in vivo. Our in vitro studies showed that,
independent of its effects on melanogenesis, α-MSH protects
keratinocytes from UVB-induced DNA damage. We found
that the protective effect of α-MSH for UV-induced DNA
damage is mediated through both XAB1 and XPA proteins.
Moreover, our results showed that α-MSH treatment activates XAB1 GTPase activity, the MC1R-cAMP-Epac signaling
cascade, and subsequently augments the nuclear translocation of XPA protein to promote DNA repair. Together, these
studies revealed an alternative mechanism through which
α-MSH protects the skin from UVB irradiation. Besides
expanding our knowledge on α-MSH signaling, our results
suggested potential intervention strategies to reduce UVBinduced skin damage, which might even help prevent the
development of various UVB-related skin diseases.

Materials and Methods
Tissue, cell lines, and reagents. Discarded human foreskins were collected from the Department of Obstetrics
and Gynecology, Loyola University Health System. Primary
keratinocytes were isolated from discarded foreskins as described previously (25) and were cultured in keratinocyte
serum-free medium (Invitrogen Corporation, USA). H89
was purchased from Promega. Brefeldin A (BFA) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich.
Epidermal separation. Whole skin samples were collected
from the back of each mouse after euthanasia. A distinct
separation of the epidermis from the dermis was achieved
by heating the samples at 60°C for 30 seconds then placing
them in ice-cold water for 1 minute and scraping off the epidermis with a single-edged razor blade (26).
Cell treatment and UV exposure. Human primary keratinocytes (HPK) were deprived of bovine pituitary extract for
3 days before α-MSH treatment. Cells were preincubated
with α-MSH (Phoenix, Inc.) at 1 μmol for 3 hours before
UV irradiation. Cells were washed by PBS twice before UVB
irradiation.
For the in vitro UV experiments, cells were exposed to UV
radiation in the Stratalinker UV chamber (Stratagene) with
UVB bulbs (UVP, Inc.). UV emittance was measured with
the use of a UV photometer (UV Products; ref. 9). Adherent
cells were irradiated through a small volume of PBS at a dose
of 100 J/m2.

3548

Cancer Res; 70(9) May 1, 2010

A UVB dose of 100 J/m2 is equivalent to one standard
erythema dose of UVB (SED), commonly used as a measurement of sunlight. As a reference, the ambient exposure over
an entire sunny summer day in Europe (Switzerland) is ∼30
to 40 SED (27).
Histology. Foreskins were injected intracutaneously with
α-MSH (100 ng) for 3 hours followed by UVB irradiation
(500 J/m2). After irradiation, foreskins were incubated in
DMEM in humidified incubators until the time of assay.
These foreskin studies have undergone Institutional Review
Board (IRB) review by the IRB at Loyola University Chicago,
Sections (5 μm) of paraffin-embedded tissues were analyzed by immunofluorescence according to standard protocols with the following antibodies: anti-CPD antibody
(clone MC-062) and anti–6-4 PPs antibody (clone KTM50;
both from Kamiya Biomedical Company).
Immunodot blot assay for detecting CPDs and 6-4 PPs.
The immunodot blot assay used antibodies specific for
CPDs and 6-4 PPs. Briefly, heat-denatured genomic DNA
was dot-blotted onto a nitrocellulose membrane. After
multiple washes with PBS-T, the membrane was incubated with anti-CPD antibody or anti–6-4 PPs antibody
(diluted 1:1,000 in PBS-T plus 1% NFM) for 2 hours at room
temperature.
Western blotting, immunoprecipitation, and enzyme immunoassay. Western blotting and immunoprecipitation
were performed using the following antibodies: anti-XPA
(Santa Cruz, Inc.), anti-XAB1 (Abcam, Inc), anti-ERCC1 (Santa
Cruz, Inc.), and anti-MC1R (Alpha Diagnostic International).
Enzyme immunoassay was performed using the anti-CPD
and anti–6-4 PPs antibodies as described above. Briefly, the
purified antimouse IgG monoclonal antibody (mAb) was
diluted to 2 μg/mL in PBS and added into an enhanced
protein-binding enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)
plate (e.g., Falcon Labware plate). MC-062 and KTM-50 mAbs
specific for CPDs and 6-4 PPs were diluted 1:1,000 in blocking
buffer and added to each well. Absorbance at 405 nm was
determined.
Short hairpin RNA. Short hairpin RNA duplexes that target MC1R, XAB1, and XPA were purchased from Applied Biosystem and Santa Cruz.
Active GTPase pull-down and detection. All pull-down
experiments were performed using Thermo (Pierce) Scientific Active GTPase Pull-Down and Detection kits with glutathione S-transferase (GST)–XAB1/XPA protein-binding
domain peptide. The respective binding domain of the XPA
for XAB1 GTPase was expressed as a GST-fusion protein,
which, when immobilized on a resin, was used to pull down
the active (i.e., GTP-bound) XAB1 GTPase. The bound
GTPase was then recovered by eluting the GST-fusion protein from the glutathione resin. The purified XAB1 GTPase
was finally detected by Western blot using a specific antiXPA antibody.
Specifically, cell lysates (500 mg) were incubated with
50 mL glutathione resin and GST-XAB1 binding domain from
XPA for 1 hour to capture active XAB1 GTPases. Bound XAB1
was eluted with sample buffer provided by Pierce, detected
by SDS-PAGE (4–20% polyacrylamide gel), and transferred

Cancer Research

α-MSH, an Activator of XPA DNA Repair in Keratinocytes

to polyvinylidene difluoride membrane for Western blotting
with a specific anti-XAB1 antibody (Abcam, Inc.).

Results
α-MSH reduces UVB-induced DNA damage in vivo. It is
known that α-MSH stimulates pigment production in melanocytes and eumelanin provides a natural shield to protect
skin from UV-induced damage. However, it remains unclear
whether α-MSH could act directly on keratinocytes independent of its activity on pigment induction. To answer this
question, we first assessed whether α-MSH could reduce
UV-induced DNA damage in vivo.
UVB irradiation mainly induces two types of DNA lesions
(damage), 6-4 PPs and CPD (23, 28). To evaluate the role of αMSH in epidermis in vivo, normal human foreskin specimens
were exposed to 500 J/m2 UVB (9, 29) and stained for CPD
and 6-4 PPs at different time points. UVB (500 J/m2) is equal
to the minimal erythema dose of UVB on type IV and Indian
skin, which is usually used to evaluate the UV response of
human skin (29). One group received α-MSH intracutaneously
3 hours before UVB irradiation. Epidermis was collected at
3 hours after UVB irradiation to detect DNA damage by
ELISA, immunofluorescence, and immunodot blot with a
CPD-specific mAb and a 6-4 PPs–specific mAb (Fig. 1). CPD
and 6-4 PPs were evaluated at 3 hours after UVB irradiation, be-

cause CPD became undetectable 8 hours after UVB irradiation
in both groups (data not shown). As shown in Fig. 1, the number
of DNA adducts was dramatically reduced in human foreskin
that had received α-MSH before UVB irradiation. The same
protective effect was also observed in C57BL/6 mice (Supplementary Fig. S1). Our histologic staining showed that sunburn
cells were dramatically reduced in mouse epidermis that had
received α-MSH before UVB irradiation (Supplementary
Fig. S2). Together, these results showed that α-MSH can
effectively reduce UV-induced DNA damage in both human
and murine epidermis.
α-MSH protects keratinocytes from UVB-induced DNA
damage independent of its effects on melanogenesis. It is
plausible that the α-MSH–mediated protection we saw in
the in vivo systems above are entirely dependent on pigment
induction in the melanocytes. However, it is well known
that mouse melanocytes normally reside in hair follicles
and dermis rather than epidermis (30). Therefore, it is highly
probable that α-MSH acts directly on keratinocytes to reduce
UVB-induced DNA damage. To test this hypothesis, we
measured DNA damage in isolated HPKs upon UVB irradiation (100 J/m2) with or without preincubation with α-MSH
(10−6 mol/L). ELISA, immunodot blot, and immunofluorescence analysis revealed that UVB-induced DNA damage
was significantly reduced. Specifically, we observed >50%
reduction of CPD and 6-4 PPs in the presence of α-MSH

Figure 1. α-MSH reduces UVB-induced DNA damage in vivo. Sections of human foreskin were injected intracutaneously with α-MSH (100 ng) 3 hours
before UVB irradiation (500 J/m2). Epidermal genomic DNA was extracted and subjected to ELISA (A) and immunodot blot (B). C, whole skin samples were
stained by immunofluorescence at 3 hours after UVB irradiation. Arrows reveal the positive cells.

www.aacrjournals.org

Cancer Res; 70(9) May 1, 2010

3549

Dong et al.

Figure 2. α-MSH protects keratinocytes from UVB-induced DNA damage independent of its effects on melanogenesis. HPKs were preincubated with
α-MSH (10−6 mol/L) for 3 hours followed by UVB irradiation (100 J/m2). Cells were collected at 3 hours after UVB irradiation, and genomic DNA was
extracted. Photoproducts were detected by ELISA (A), immunodot blot (B), and immunofluorescence (C) as indicated with a CPD-specific mAb and a
6-4 PPs–specific mAb.

treatment (Fig. 2). Together, these results showed that
α-MSH can act directly on keratinocytes to protect them from
UVB-induced DNA damage.
α-MSH induces the nuclear translocation of XPA
protein. Because keratinocytes are incapable of synthesizing
melanin, we wondered how α-MSH could reduce UV-induced
DNA damage in these cells. One possibility is that α-MSH
might augment the DNA repair machinery in keratinocytes.
Hence, we tested whether any of the DNA repair proteins are
essential for α-MSH–mediated UVB protection. Specifically, we
focused on XPA, a critical component of the NER pathway.
First, we explored the need for XPA protein in α-MSH protection after UV irradiation using the RNAi knockdown approach. In particular, we stably reduced the expression of
XPA by specific siRNA in HPKs (Fig. 3A), and the protective
effect of α-MSH was measured three hours after UVB irradiation. As shown in Fig. 3B and C, α-MSH treatment reduced
the levels of CPD and 6-4 PPs in control siRNA-expressing
cells. In contrast, similar levels of photoproducts CPD and
6-4 PPs were induced and cleared at the same speed with
α-MSH treatment in siXPA HPK compared with untreated
control cells. In other words, the protective effect of
α-MSH was abolished following siXPA. Together, these results indicate that XPA is required for the protective effect
of α-MSH against UV-induced DNA damage.
We then asked how α-MSH affects XPA activity to enhance
DNA repair upon UVB radiation. Specifically, we assessed the
affect of α-MSH on the nuclear translocation of XPA protein

3550

Cancer Res; 70(9) May 1, 2010

and the formation of nuclear foci after UVB irradiation. As
shown in Fig. 4A, the total amounts of XPA in the cells remained essentially the same after UVB irradiation (100 J/m2)
and α-MSH treatment (10−6 mol/L). In contrast, we observed
an accumulation of XPA nuclear protein in keratinocytes, especially with UV radiation. Moreover, an increasing number of
XPA nuclear foci were seen at the same time points with αMSH treatment (Fig. 4B). We also asked whether α-MSH could
enhance the binding of other repair factors to XPA to augment
DNA damage repair. Specifically, we assessed the interactions
between XPA and ERCC1 upon UV radiation and α-MSH treatment with immunoprecipitation followed by Western analysis.
Indeed, we observed an increase in XPA and ERCC1 association
upon UV radiation. The pretreatment with α-MSH further enhanced the interaction between these two proteins (Fig. 4C).
Together, these results suggest that α-MSH promotes nuclear
translocation of XPA and enhances its interactions with other
DNA repair proteins, such as ERCC1.
The protective effect of α-MSH for UV-induced DNA
damage is dependent on the activation of XAB1 GTPase
activity. It is known that XAB1 is able to bind the NH2 terminal region of the XPA protein in cytoplasm and induces
the nuclear translocation of XPA protein (21). We wondered
if α-MSH–induced XPA translocation is mediated by XAB1.
To test this notion, we first determined whether XAB1 is required for α-MSH protection and XPA protein translocation
after UV irradiation using the siRNA knockdown approach.
Specifically, we stably reduced the expression of XAB1 by

Cancer Research

α-MSH, an Activator of XPA DNA Repair in Keratinocytes

siRNA in HPKs (Fig. 5A). The protective effect of α-MSH and
the expression of XPA protein were measured 3 hours after
UVB irradiation. As shown in Fig. 5B and C, α-MSH failed to
induce DNA protection or augment nuclear translocation of
XPA protein in HPKs with stable XAB1 knockdown, indicating that XAB1 is required for the protective effect of αMSH against UV-induced DNA damage.
We then investigated whether α-MSH activates XAB1
GTPase activity using GTPase pull-down with GST-XAB1/
XPA binding domain peptide followed by Western detection
for activated XAB1. As shown in Fig. 5D, incubation of HPKs
with α-MSH for 3 hours indeed activated XAB1 GTPase activity. These results suggest that α-MSH induces XPA nuclear
translocation through activation of XAB1 GTPase activity to
protect keratinocytes from UVB irradiation.
The protective role of α-MSH is MC1R dependent. Thus
far, we have shown that α-MSH reduces DNA damage in keratinocytes through activation of XAB1, which subsequently
promotes XPA nuclear translocation. This mechanism seems
to be completely independent of α-MSH's role in pigmentary
induction in melanocytes. We then asked whether α-MSH
augments DNA repair via the canonical MC1R-cAMP pathway
or a different signaling cascade. First, we investigated whether
α-MSH protects UV-induced damage through MC1R. As
shown in Fig. 6A and Supplementary Fig. S3A and B, MC1R
mRNA and protein are expressed in both HPKs and
PAM212 mouse keratinocytes. The expression levels are similar to what we have observed in human primary melanocytes
(HPM) or B16 melanoma cells. Next, we prepared primary
keratinocytes with stable reduction of MC1R expression by

specific siRNA knockdown and examined the protective effect
of α-MSH 3 hours after UVB irradiation. We found that the
protective effect of α-MSH was abolished following siMC1R,
suggesting that MC1R is required for α-MSH protection
against UV-induced DNA damage (Fig. 6B; Supplementary
Fig. S3C).
The protective effect of α-MSH against UV-induced DNA
damage is through cAMP signaling. Next, we explored
whether cAMP signaling connects MC1R activation to the
augmentation of XAB1 activity. In particular, we examined
the effects of C-ANF4-23, an adenylate cyclase inhibitor, and
H89, a cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) inhibitor, on
the intervention of α-MSH protection against UV-induced
DNA damage. As shown in Fig. 6C and Supplementary
Fig. S4A, inhibition of adenylate cyclase by C-ANF4-23 inhibits
the ability of α-MSH to accelerate the clearance of UV-induced
photoproducts (CPD and 6-4 PPs). α-MSH–induced/augmented XAB1GTPase activity and nuclear translocation of XPA
protein were also undetectable upon inhibition of adenylate
cyclase by C-ANF4-23 (Supplementary Fig. S4B and C). Consistent with the unchanged photoproduct induction, α-MSH–induced XAB1 GTPase activity and nuclear translocation of XPA
protein became undetectable in the presence of C-ANF4-23
(Supplementary Fig. S4B and C). In contrast, α-MSH is still able
to accelerate the clearance of UV-induced photoproducts (CPD
and 6-4 PPs) when we inhibit PKA by H89 (Supplementary Fig.
S5). Together, these results suggest that α-MSH–induced DNA
repair occurs through the MC1R-cAMP signaling pathway in a
PKA-independent manner. Therefore, we asked which alternative cAMP receptor could be potentially involved in this

Figure 3. XPA is required in
α-MSH–induced/augmented DNA
repair after UVB irradiation. A, HPKs
with stable siXPA were preincubated
with α-MSH (10-6 mol/L) for 3 hours
followed by UVB irradiation
(100 J/m2). Cells were collected
at 3 hours after UVB irradiation,
and genomic DNA was extracted.
Photoproducts were detected by
ELISA (B) and immunodot blot
(C) as indicated with a CPD-specific
mAb and a 6-4 PPs–specific mAb.

www.aacrjournals.org

Cancer Res; 70(9) May 1, 2010

3551

Dong et al.

Figure 4. The nuclear translocation of XPA protein was induced by α-MSH. HPKs were preincubated with α-MSH (10−6 mol/L) for 3 hours
followed by UVB irradiation (100 J/m2). Cells were collected 3 and 6 hours after UVB irradiation. A, nuclear and cytoplasm proteins were isolated
and detected by Western blot with specific anti-XPA antibody. β-Actin was used as loading control. The bar graph summarizes the ratio of nuclear
XPA: total XPA (*, P < 0.05). B, XPA nuclear foci were induced by α-MSH. Cells were stained with anti-XPA antibody by immunofluorescence.
4′,6-Diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) staining was used as control. C, incision complexes were induced by α-MSH. Nuclear extracts were collected at 0 and
3 hours after UVB irradiation (100 J/m2) and immunoprecipitated. The precipitates were subjected to immunoblotting with the indicated antibodies.

process. Specifically, we examined whether cAMP signals
through Epac (exchange protein directly activated by cAMP)
to activate the DNA repair machinery using an Epac antagonist,
BFA (31).
As shown in Fig. 6D and Supplementary Fig. S6A, α-MSH
fails to reduce UV-induced photoproducts (CPD and 6-4 PPs)
if we inhibit Epac by BFA. Consistently, α-MSH–induced
XAB1GTPase activity and nuclear translocation of XPA protein became undetectable in the presence of BFA (Supplementary Fig. S6B and C). These results further support the
notion that α-MSH induces DNA repair through cAMP in
keratinocytes and suggest Epac as the downstream effector
of cAMP in this process.

Discussion
α-MSH is a propigmentation hormone, which is produced and secreted by both keratinocytes and melanocytes
in the skin following UV irradiation (10, 32, 33). Normal
synthesis of α-MSH and ACTH is crucial for constitutive
human pigmentation and the cutaneous response to UV

3552

Cancer Res; 70(9) May 1, 2010

irradiation (10, 34, 35). In addition to being the key factor
in UV-induced melanogenesis, α-MSH also has crucial
antiinflammatory effects in response to UV irradiation
(36, 37). These data indicate that POMC/α-MSH functions
as a “protective factor” against the harmful effects of UV
irradiation to maintain epidermal homeostasis and genomic
stability. We have further shown that the downstream
target of p53 in keratinocytes (POMC/α-MSH) is also an
activator of DNA repair in these cells after UV irradiation,
independent of its previously known role in inducing
pigmentation.
It has been previously shown by Abdel-Malek's and
Schwarz's groups that α-MSH protects HPMs from UVinduced apoptosis and DNA damage (photoproducts production and oxidative stress; refs. 1, 6–8). Specifically, the
antiapoptotic effects of α-MSH were mediated by the
activation of the inositol triphosphate kinase–Akt pathway
and microphthalmia-associated transcription factor (8).
The Abdel-Malek group has also developed melanocortin
analogues, which, in addition to stimulating pigmentation,
effectively reduced and repaired DNA damage resulting

Cancer Research

α-MSH, an Activator of XPA DNA Repair in Keratinocytes

from exposure to solar UV radiation (1, 3). Together, these
studies suggest the existence of alternative mechanisms for
pigmentation induction through which α-MSH protects skin
from UV irradiation.
Interestingly, Abdel-Malek, Schwarz, and their colleagues
have found that α-MSH does not induce the cell cycle arrest
nor the activation of apoptosis-related proteins (6–8). One
recent report showed that α-MSH prevented the UVB-induced
suppression of a pathway functioning in protection against
oxidative stress (38). In particular, it showed that UVB failed
to inhibit Nrf2, a transcription factor critical to antioxidant induction, and Nrf-dependent genes upon α-MSH treatment in
both keratinocytes and melanocytes (38). Complementary to
these results, we showed that α-MSH is involved in the protection against UV-induced DNA damage through the activation

of DNA repair machinery, including XAB1 and XPA DNA
repair factors.
Several independent groups have characterized the expression of MC1R in keratinocytes (39, 40). However, the role of
MC1R in keratinocytes is still unclear. Here, we showed that
MC1R is required in the α-MSH–mediated UV-induced DNA
repair in keratinocytes. Usually, following the binding of hormones to the membrane receptors, the receptors undergo conformational changes, which will permit the receptor to
augment the exchange of GTP for GDP on a subunit of the
trimeric G protein. The GTP-bound and activated G-protein
subunits finally interact with their respective effectors to generate the appropriate signals (41). Here, we determined that
the protective effect of α-MSH against DNA damage works
in a MC1R-, XAB1-, and XPA-dependent manner. Thus, we

Figure 5. XAB1 is required in α-MSH–induced/augmented DNA repair after UVB irradiation. A, HPKs with stable siXPA were preincubated with α-MSH
(10−6 mol/L) for 3 hours followed by UVB irradiation (100 J/m2). Cells were collected at 3 hours after UVB irradiation, and genomic DNA was extracted.
B, photoproducts were detected by ELISA and immunodot blot, as indicated with a CPD-specific mAb and a 6-4 PPs–specific mAb. C, XAB1 is required in
α-MSH–induced XPA nuclear import after UVB irradiation. Nuclear and cytoplasm proteins were isolated and detected by Western blot with a specific
anti-XPA antibody. β-Actin was used as loading control. D, XAB1 GTPase activity was activated by α-MSH. Cell lysates were incubated with either
nonhydrolyzable GTPγS or excess GDP to activate or inactivate small GTPases, respectively. The bar graph (bottom) summarizes the quantification of
percentage of XAB1-bound XPA protein compared with the XPA protein in cell lysate (*, P < 0.01).

www.aacrjournals.org

Cancer Res; 70(9) May 1, 2010

3553

Dong et al.

Figure 6. α-MSH–induced/augmented DNA repair occurs via cAMP signaling pathway. A, MC1R protein is expressed in HPKs. Total protein extract
was collected from HPK. The expression of MC1R was detected by Western blot with specific anti-MC1R antibody. HPMs were used as control.
The lower panel shows that siMC1R effectively downregulated MC1R protein expression in HPK. B, MC1R is required for the protective effect of α-MSH-for
UV-induced DNA damage. HPKs with stable siMC1R were preincubated with α-MSH (10−6 mol/L) for 3 hours followed by UVB irradiation (100 J/m2).
Cells were collected at 3 hours after UVB irradiation, and genomic DNA was extracted. Photoproducts were detected by ELISA. C, adenylate cyclase is
required in α-MSH–induced/augmented DNA repair after UVB irradiation. HPKs were treated with specific adenylate cyclase inhibitor C-ANF4-23 (10−7 mol/L)
for 6 hours and then preincubated with α-MSH (10−6 mmol/L) for 3 hours followed by UVB irradiation (100 J/m2). Cells were collected 3 hours after UVB
irradiation and genomic DNA was extracted. Photoproducts were detected by ELISA. D, Epac is required for α-MSH–induced/augmented DNA repair after
UVB irradiation. HPKs were treated with BFA (200 nmol/L) to inhibit Epac for 6 hours and then preincubated with α-MSH (10−6 mol/L) for 3 hours followed
by UVB irradiation (100 J/m2). Cells were collected 3 hours after UVB irradiation, and genomic DNA was extracted. Photoproducts were detected by ELISA.

postulated the signaling pathway of α-MSH–mediated DNA
repair as shown in Supplementary Fig. S7. Following the binding of α-MSH, MC1R, which couples with a specific G protein,
is activated and acts as a guanine nucleotide exchange factor
for its respective G proteins. The α-MSH binding elicits a
conformational change on MC1R, permitting it to augment
the exchange of GTP for GDP on a subunit of the trimeric
G protein. The XAB1 GTPase activity is then activated after
the binding of GTP and eventually induces the nuclear translocation of the XPA protein to accelerate the clearance of
photoproducts.
cAMP, a pivotal second messenger, regulates a diverse
range of key cellular behaviors, including cell metabolism,
cell growth and differentiation, apoptosis, and inflammatory
responses. It is produced by an enzymatic reaction catalyzed
by adenylyl cyclase. In eukaryotic cells, the effects of cAMP
are mediated by two intracellular cAMP receptors, cAMPdependent kinase (PKA), and Epac (42). Previous reports have

3554

Cancer Res; 70(9) May 1, 2010

shown that Epac proteins bind to cAMP with high affinity
and activate the Ras superfamily small GTPase Rap1 and
Rap2 (43). We showed that adenylyl cyclase is required in
the activation of XAB1 GTPase activity needed for α-MSH–
mediated DNA repair after UV irradiation. Our results also
show that Epac, not PKA, is required for α-MSH–mediated
DNA repair.
Cells use the NER system to eliminate DNA photoproducts.
XPA is part of the core incision complex of the NER system
(44). Here, we showed that α-MSH induces/augments XPA
nuclear import and then activates the core incision complex
in the NER system. We also found that the α-MSH–mediated
translocation of XPA is modulated by XAB1. One group has
shown that endogenous XPA protein is phosphorylated after
UV irradiation in a lung adenocarcinoma cell line (45). However, we did not detect the phosphorylated XPA protein after
UVB irradiation in keratinocytes nor any effect of α-MSH in
the regulation of XPA phosphorylation. It is possible that the

Cancer Research

α-MSH, an Activator of XPA DNA Repair in Keratinocytes

phosphorylated XPA is not as abundant in keratinocytes and
therefore was below the detection threshold in our assay. It is
also possible that XPA activity is modulated via different mechanisms in different cell types.
After UV-induced and p53-transactivated POMC/α-MSH is
secreted from keratinocytes, it then binds to MC1R in both
melanocytes and keratinocytes. Interestingly, distinct pathways downstream of MSH/MC1R become activated in these
two cell types to reduce UV-induced DNA damages. In melanocytes, the α-MSH/MC1R complex activates the cAMP
pathway and then induces melanin production. Melanin (eumelanin) functions as a physical barrier that scatters incident
UV light, serving as a filter to reduce the penetration of UV
light through the epidermis (46). In keratinocytes, the αMSH/MC1R complex upregulates adenylyl cyclase activity
and XAB1 GTPase activity inducing the nuclear translocation
of XPA to repair the damaged DNA. In both the pigmentation
induction and DNA repair activation processes, POMC/αMSH functions as the crucial downstream target of the
“guardian of genome” protein p53 (47).
Given the difficulty in curing melanoma and other types
of skin cancers, there has been tremendous emphasis on
their prevention. An obvious prevention strategy is to
stimulate skin melanogenesis with small molecules. One
class of pigment-inducing molecules is α-MSH and its analogues, which have shown major potential in skin cancer
prevention. For example, an α-MSH analogue Melanotan
has been shown to have sunless tanning capabilities and
to reduce sun (UV) damage in preliminary studies and clinical trials (48). Another class of melanogenesis-promoting
molecules are the cAMP agonists, such as forskolin (49).
Forskolin activates adenylate cyclase and increases the in-

tracellular levels of cAMP (49). Our previous data have
shown that forskolin-induced pigmentation was protective
against UV light–induced cutaneous DNA damage and tumorigenesis (4). One recent report showed that, independent of its effects on melanogenesis, forskolin protects
keratinocytes from UVB-induced apoptosis and increases
DNA repair (5). Forskolin is also able to mimic the antioxidative effect of α-MSH (50). Currently, there is no definitive
data about the endogenous levels of α-MSH in human skin
and its correlation with different skin types. Further pharmacokinetics study is required to identify the appropriate
concentration of α-MSH required to reach the protective
effect in the live tissue of human skin.
Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest
No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

Acknowledgments
We thank Drs.Guo Wei, Dali Liu, Huafeng Xie, and Jinyan Du for helpful
comments.

Grant Support
NIH grant 1RO1CA137098, American Cancer Society grant RSG-09-022-01CNE, American Cancer Society-Illinois Division grant 08-026, Elsa U. Pardee
Foundation, and The Harry J. Lloyd Charitable Trust (R. Cui). R. Cui is an
American Cancer Society Research Scholar.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment
of page charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in
accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
Received 12/21/2009; revised 02/18/2010; accepted 03/02/2010; published
OnlineFirst 04/13/2010.

References
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

Abdel-Malek ZA, Knittel J, Kadekaro AL, Swope VB, Starner R. The
melanocortin 1 receptor and the UV response of human melanocytes-a shift in paradigm. Photochem Photobiol 2008;84:501–8.
Mawn VB, Fleischer AB, Jr. A survey of attitudes, beliefs, and behavior regarding tanning bed use, sunbathing, and sunscreen use. J Am
Acad Dermatol 1993;29:959–62.
Abdel-Malek ZA, Ruwe A, Kavanagh-Starner R, et al. α-MSH tripeptide analogs activate the melanocortin 1 receptor and reduce UVinduced DNA damage in human melanocytes. Pigment Cell Melanoma
Res 2009;22:635–44.
D'Orazio JA, Nobuhisa T, Cui R, et al. Topical drug rescue strategy
and skin protection based on the role of Mc1r in UV-induced tanning.
Nature 2006;443:340–4.
Passeron T, Namiki T, Passeron HJ, Le Pape E, Hearing VJ. Forskolin
protects keratinocytes from UVB-induced apoptosis and increases
DNA repair independent of its effects on melanogenesis. J Invest
Dermatol 2009;129:162–6.
Abdel-Malek ZA, Kadekaro AL, Kavanagh RJ, et al. Melanoma
prevention strategy based on using tetrapeptide α-MSH analogs
that protect human melanocytes from UV-induced DNA damage
and cytotoxicity. FASEB J 2006;20:1561–3.
Bohm M, Wolff I, Scholzen TE, et al. α-Melanocyte-stimulating hormone protects from ultraviolet radiation-induced apoptosis and DNA
damage. J Biol Chem 2005;280:5795–802.
Kadekaro AL, Kavanagh R, Kanto H, et al. α-Melanocortin and
endothelin-1 activate antiapoptotic pathways and reduce DNA
damage in human melanocytes. Cancer Res 2005;65:4292–9.

www.aacrjournals.org

9.
10.

11.
12.

13.
14.

15.
16.

17.
18.

19.

Cui R, Widlund HR, Feige E, et al. Central role of p53 in the suntan
response and pathologic hyperpigmentation. Cell 2007;128:853–64.
Chakraborty AK, Funasaka Y, Slominski A, et al. Production and
release of proopiomelanocortin (POMC) derived peptides by human
melanocytes and keratinocytes in culture: regulation by ultraviolet B.
Biochim Biophys Acta 1996;1313:130–8.
Slominski A, Wortsman J. Neuroendocrinology of the skin. Endocr
Rev 2000;21:457–87.
Krude H, Biebermann H, Luck W, Horn R, Brabant G, Gruters A. Severe
early-onset obesity, adrenal insufficiency and red hair pigmentation
caused by POMC mutations in humans. Nat Genet 1998;19:155–7.
Farmer G, Bargonetti J, Zhu H, Friedman P, Prywes R, Prives C.
Wild-type p53 activates transcription in vitro. Nature 1992;358:83–6.
Pfeifer GP. Formation and processing of UV photoproducts: effects
of DNA sequence and chromatin environment. Photochem Photobiol
1997;65:270–83.
Cleaver JE, Crowley E. UV damage, DNA repair and skin carcinogenesis. Front Biosci 2002;7:d1024–43.
Lloyd RS. Investigations of pyrimidine dimer glycosylases - a paradigm for DNA base excision repair enzymology. Mutat Res 2005;577:
77–91.
Cline SD, Hanawalt PC. Who's on first in the cellular response to
DNA damage? Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2003;4:361–72.
Sancar A, Lindsey-Boltz LA, Unsal-Kacmaz K, Linn S. Molecular
mechanisms of mammalian DNA repair and the DNA damage
checkpoints. Annu Rev Biochem 2004;73:39–85.
Tanaka K, Satokata I, Ogita Z, Uchida T, Okada Y. Molecular cloning

Cancer Res; 70(9) May 1, 2010

3555

Dong et al.

20.

21.

22.

23.
24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.
33.
34.

35.

3556

of a mouse DNA repair gene that complements the defect of group-A
xeroderma pigmentosum. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1989;86:5512–6.
Bootsma D, Kreamer KH, Cleaver JE, Hoeijmakers JHJ. The Genetic
Basis of Human Cancer. In: Vogelstein B, Kinzler KW, editors. New
York: McGraw Hill; 1998, p. 245–74.
Nitta M, Saijo M, Kodo N, et al. A novel cytoplasmic GTPase XAB1
interacts with DNA repair protein XPA. Nucleic Acids Res 2000;28:
4212–8.
Wu X, Shell SM, Liu Y, Zou Y. ATR-dependent checkpoint modulates
XPA nuclear import in response to UV irradiation. Oncogene 2007;
26:757–64.
Wood RD. DNA damage recognition during nucleotide excision
repair in mammalian cells. Biochimie 1999;81:39–44.
Patrick SM, Turchi JJ. Xeroderma pigmentosum complementation
group A protein (XPA) modulates RPA-DNA interactions via enhanced complex stability and inhibition of strand separation activity.
J Biol Chem 2002;277:16096–101.
Dunham WR, Klein SB, Rhodes LM, Marcelo CL. Oleic acid and
linoleic acid are the major determinants of changes in keratinocyte
plasma membrane viscosity. J Invest Dermatol 1996;107:332–5.
Kassis V, Sondergaard J. Heat-separation of normal human skin for
epidermal and dermal prostaglandin analysis. Arch Dermatol Res
1982;273:301–6.
Diffey BL, Jansen CT, Urbach F, Wulf HC. The standard erythema
dose: a new photobiological concept. Photodermatol Photoimmunol
Photomed 1997;13:64–6.
Wong TH, Rees JL. The relation between melanocortin 1 receptor
(MC1R) variation and the generation of phenotypic diversity in the
cutaneous response to ultraviolet radiation. Peptides 2005;26:
1965–71.
Pathak MA, Fanselow DL. Photobiology of melanin pigmentation:
dose/response of skin to sunlight and its contents. J Am Acad
Dermatol 1983;9:724–33.
Nishimura EK, Jordan SA, Oshima H, et al. Dominant role of the
niche in melanocyte stem-cell fate determination. Nature 2002;416:
854–60.
Wang C, Gu Y, Li GW, Huang LY. A critical role of the cAMP
sensor Epac in switching protein kinase signalling in prostaglandin
E2-induced potentiation of P2X3 receptor currents in inflamed rats.
J Physiol 2007;584:191–203.
Gilchrest BA, Park HY, Eller MS, Yaar M. Mechanisms of ultraviolet
light-induced pigmentation. Photochem Photobiol 1996;63:1–10.
Wintzen M, Gilchrest BA. Proopiomelanocortin, its derived peptides,
and the skin. J Invest Dermatol 1996;106:3–10.
Kippenberger S, Bernd A, Bereiter-Hahn J, Ramirez-Bosca A,
Kaufmann R, Holzmann H. Transcription of melanogenesis
enzymes in melanocytes: dependence upon culture conditions and
co-cultivation with keratinocytes. Pigment Cell Res 1996;9:179–84.
Yamaguchi Y, Hearing VJ. Physiological factors that regulate skin
pigmentation. Biofactors 2009;35:193–9.

Cancer Res; 70(9) May 1, 2010

36. Luger TA, Scholzen T, Grabbe S. The role of α-melanocyte-stimulating
hormone in cutaneous biology. J Investig Dermatol Symp Proc 1997;
2:87–93.
37. Eves PC, MacNeil S, Haycock JW. α-Melanocyte stimulating
hormone, inflammation and human melanoma. Peptides 2006;27:
444–52.
38. Kang KW, Lee SJ, Kim SG. Molecular mechanism of nrf2 activation
by oxidative stress. Antioxid Redox Signal 2005;7:1664–73.
39. Bohm M, Metze D, Schulte U, Becher E, Luger TA, Brzoska T.
Detection of melanocortin-1 receptor antigenicity on human skin
cells in culture and in situ. Exp Dermatol 1999;8:453–61.
40. Chakraborty AK, Funasaka Y, Pawelek JM, Nagahama M, Ito A,
Ichihashi M. Enhanced expression of melanocortin-1 receptor
(MC1-R) in normal human keratinocytes during differentiation:
evidence for increased expression of POMC peptides near
suprabasal layer of epidermis. J Invest Dermatol 1999;112:853–60.
41. Patel TB, Du Z, Pierre S, Cartin L, Scholich K. Molecular biological
approaches to unravel adenylyl cyclase signaling and function. Gene
2001;269:13–25.
42. Taylor SS, Kim C, Cheng CY, Brown SH, Wu J, Kannan N. Signaling
through cAMP and cAMP-dependent protein kinase: diverse strategies for drug design. Biochim Biophys Acta 2008;1784:16–26.
43. Kawasaki H, Springett GM, Mochizuki N, et al. A family of cAMPbinding proteins that directly activate Rap1. Science 1998;282:
2275–9.
44. Camenisch U, Dip R, Schumacher SB, Schuler B, Naegeli H. Recognition of helical kinks by xeroderma pigmentosum group A protein
triggers DNA excision repair. Nat Struct Mol Biol 2006;13:278–84.
45. Wu X, Shell SM, Yang Z, Zou Y. Phosphorylation of nucleotide excision repair factor xeroderma pigmentosum group A by ataxia telangiectasia mutated and Rad3-related-dependent checkpoint pathway
promotes cell survival in response to UV irradiation. Cancer Res
2006;66:2997–3005.
46. Kaidbey KH, Agin PP, Sayre RM, Kligman AM. Photoprotection by
melanin-a comparison of black and Caucasian skin. J Am Acad
Dermatol 1979;1:249–60.
47. Lowe SW, Schmitt EM, Smith SW, Osborne BA, Jacks T. p53 is required for radiation-induced apoptosis in mouse thymocytes. Nature
1993;362:847–9.
48. Fitzgerald LM, Fryer JL, Dwyer T, Humphrey SM. Effect of MELANOTAN, [Nle(4), D-Phe(7)]-α-MSH, on melanin synthesis in humans with
MC1R variant alleles. Peptides 2006;27:388–94.
49. Miyazaki K, Goldman ME, Kebabian JW. Forskolin stimulates adenylate cyclase activity, adenosine 3′,5′-monophosphate production and
peptide release from the intermediate lobe of the rat pituitary gland.
Endocrinology 1984;114:761–6.
50. Kokot A, Metze D, Mouchet N, et al. Alpha-melanocyte-stimulating
hormone counteracts the suppressive effect of UVB on Nrf2 and Nrfdependent gene expression in human skin. Endocrinology 2009;150:
3197–206.

Cancer Research

