Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 3

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

γKlotho is a novel marker and cell survival factor in a subset of
triple negative breast cancers
Nuša Trošt1,2, Samuel Peña-Llopis2, Sajjan Koirala3, Jurij Stojan1, Patrick
Ryan Potts3, Klementina Fon Tacer3, Elisabeth D. Martinez2,4
1

Institute of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia

2

Department of Pharmacology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA

3

Department of Physiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA

4

Hamon Center for Therapeutic Oncology Research, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA

Correspondence to:
Elisabeth D. Martinez, e-mail: elisabeth.martinez@utsouthwestern.edu
Klementina Fon Tacer, e-mail: klementina.fontacer@utsouthwestern.edu
Keywords: TNBC, cancer therapy, Klotho, FGF, oxidative stress
Received: May 05, 2015     Accepted: October 30, 2015     Published: November 09, 2015

ABSTRACT
Over the last decade, breast cancer mortality has declined. However, triple
negative breast cancer (TNBC) remains a challenging problem mostly due to early
recurrence and lack of molecularly driven treatments. There is a critical need to identify
subgroups of TNBC with common molecular features that can be therapeutically
targeted. Here we show that in contrast to Klotho and βKlotho, the third member
of the Klotho protein family, γKlotho, is overexpressed in more than 60% of TNBCs
and correlates with poorer disease progression. Furthermore, we find that γKlotho
is expressed in a subset of TNBC cell lines promoting cell growth. Importantly,
we demonstrate that in these cells γKlotho is necessary for cell survival and that
its depletion leads to constitutive ERK activation, cell cycle arrest and apoptosis.
Interestingly, we observe increased oxidative stress in γKlotho-depleted cells
suggesting that γKlotho enables cancer cells to cope with an oxidative environment
and that cells become dependent on its expression to maintain this survival advantage.
These findings indicate that γKlotho might be a potential marker for patients that
would benefit from treatments that alter oxidative stress and constitutes a novel drug
target for a subset of TN breast cancers.

only therapy currently available for these patients [8].
To develop new strategies against this aggressive type of
breast cancer, we need to gain a better understanding of
the molecular events driving TNBC tumorigenesis.
Malignant transformation is frequently associated
with enhanced cellular oxidative stress. Reactive oxygen
species (ROS) mediate growth factor signaling [9–11] and
contribute to malignant phenotypes [12, 13] by stimulating
cell growth and proliferation, promoting genetic instability
and helping evade senescence [14–16]. At the same time,
high levels of and prolonged exposure to ROS can cause
cellular damage. Therefore, the antioxidant system is
critically important and often amplified in cancer [17, 18].
In addition, cancer cells may be more vulnerable to
oxidant stress as they function at a heightened basal level
of ROS.

INTRODUCTION
Due to improved detection and therapy, breast
cancer mortality has declined since 1990. However, it still
remains the leading cause of cancer related deaths among
women [1, 2]. In particular, triple negative breast cancers
(TNBCs) defined as lacking estrogen and progesterone
receptor expression and not harboring amplification
of human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2),
account for a disproportionate number of deaths from
breast cancer and represent around 15–20% of newly
diagnosed cases [3, 4]. TNBC tumors are generally larger
in size, of higher histological grade and more aggressive
with poor prognosis [5–7]. Fewer than 30% of women
with metastatic TNBC survive 5 years, and almost all
die of their disease despite adjuvant chemotherapy, the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2611

Oncotarget

Klotho, the co-receptor for endocrine fibroblast growth
factors, was originally found to decrease oxidative stress
and prevent aging [19, 20]. The Klotho family comprises
3 proteins. Klotho and βKlotho function as obligate coreceptors for endocrine fibroblast growth factors whereas the
physiological function of the third member, γKlotho (referred
to also as Lctl), remains unknown [21–23]. We have recently
shown that γKlotho also binds to FGF receptors (FGFR)
[24]. FGF and FGFRs are proto-oncogenes often activated in
several human cancers [25, 26]. For example, FGFR-1 and/or
FGFs are frequently found amplified in breast cancer [27, 28].
FGFR-2 polymorphisms have been identified as major breast
cancer risk factors in genome-wide association studies [29].
In contrast to FGFs and FGFRs, Klothos are epigenetically
silenced in several cancers and have tumor-suppressor
activity [30–34]. Here we found that in contrast to the bona
fide Klotho proteins, γKlotho is upregulated in breast cancer
compared to benign patient-matched tissue. In particular,
γKlotho is highly expressed in a subset of TNBC patients
where Klotho and βKlotho are significantly downregulated.
We show that γKlotho is necessary for TNBC cell survival
in an FGF independent manner and that its depletion leads to
increased oxidative stress, DNA damage, and cell death. Our
results suggest that γKlotho may be a prospective drug target
for the treatment of a subset of TNBC patients and a biomarker for patients that might benefit from anticancer agents
inducing oxidative stress.

that γKlotho expression in tumors correlated positively
with Ki67 proliferative index (Table 1), suggesting a
potential role in more aggressive/higher stage breast
cancers. This indicates that the three Klothos have distinct
functions in tumorigenesis consistent with differences in
their protein structure (Supplementary Figure S1A).
To validate these results, we analyzed The Cancer
Genome Atlas (TCGA) [35, 36] and the Curtis datasets
[37] of breast malignancies and confirmed that γKlotho
is significantly overexpressed in TN tumors also in these
two patient collections (Supplementary Figure S1B and
S1C). In line with these results, we found that patients
with higher expression of γKlotho in the breast cancer
population have a significant decrease in progressionfree survival (TCGA dataset, Figure 1C) and that γKlotho
expression correlates with higher grade and stage (Curtis
dataset, Supplementary Table S2). In our dataset, we also
found a significant correlation between higher γKlotho
expression and tumor grade (Supplementary Table
S2). In contrast to high γKlotho expression, patients
with tumors expressing high levels of Klotho showed
increased progression-free survival and overall survival
(Supplementary Figure S1C and S1D).
To determine whether this expression pattern of
Klothos in normal vs. cancer tissue is specific for breast
cancer, we analyzed expression data in tumors and
corresponding normal tissue of different cancer types in
TCGA database (Supplementary Figure S1E). Interestingly,
we found increased expression of γKlotho accompanied
with decreased expression of Klotho and βKlotho in
several other cancers, including glioblastoma multiforme,
lung squamous and lung adenocarcinomas but not in liver
hepatocellular carcinoma. Together, our results demonstrate
that γKlotho is overexpressed in a subset of TN breast
tumors where Klotho and βKlotho are downregulated. In
addition, γKlotho expression levels correlate with higher
Ki-67, worse progression-free survival and higher grade/
stage of disease. Our data suggest that γKlotho may
represent a novel marker and potential oncogene in a
subgroup of triple negative breast tumors.

RESULTS
γKlotho is upregulated in a subset of triple
negative breast cancers
To determine the function of the third member of
the Klotho family, γKlotho, in cancer we first examined
mRNA expression of all three Klotho genes in sixty eight
paired samples of tumor and benign tissue from breast
cancer patients, and analyzed gene expression patterns
in relation to clinical parameters and molecular subtypes
(Figure 1 and Supplementary Table S1). Consistent
with previous findings [30, 31], we found that Klotho
is downregulated in breast cancer samples compared to
benign controls (Figure 1A). In addition to Klotho, we also
found significant downregulation of βKlotho expression
in breast cancer specimens. Interestingly, γKlotho showed
the opposite pattern of expression and was significantly
upregulated in cancer relative to normal breast tissue
(Figure 1A). Strikingly, the majority of samples with high
γKlotho expression classified as triple negative breast
tumors (TNBC) (Figure 1A). Thus, we further analyzed
the gene expression data grouped into four major breast
cancer molecular subtypes, luminal A, luminal B, HER2
type and triple negative. It became evident that the three
Klotho genes are differentially expressed specifically in
the triple negative tumors, where γKlotho is significantly
upregulated (in 13/19 TN samples) as Klotho and βKlotho
are downregulated (Figure 1B). Furthermore, we found
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

γKlotho is expressed in a subgroup of TNBC
cell lines and its overexpression increases cell
viability and clonogenic growth
To investigate the role of γKlotho in cell viability and
on the oncogenic potential of breast cancer cells, we first
examined the expression of γKlotho at the mRNA level
in a panel of various breast cancer cell lines (Figure 2A).
Consistent with our patient data (Figure 1A and 1B), we
found that γKlotho is expressed in TNBC cell lines HCC1395
and MDA-MB-231, but not in any non-TN line (Figure
2A). Klotho and βKlotho were not expressed in the γKlotho
expressing cells (Supplementary Figure S2A and S2B). To
determine whether γKlotho can be an oncogenic driver in
TNBC, we overexpressed γKlotho in MDA-MB-231 and
HS578T cells (Figure 2B) and assayed the effect of γKlotho
2612

Oncotarget

Figure 1: γKlotho is up-regulated in human triple negative breast cancer. A. The expression of Klotho genes in normal/benign

breast tissue (blue bars) and breast cancer (red bars). 68 samples of breast cancer specimens with corresponding patient-matched normal
breast tissue were analyzed for mRNA expression of γKlotho, βKlotho, and Klotho by qRT-PCR. Expression levels were normalized
against cyclophilin B. Each bar represents the mean ± SD of three replicates. Statistical analysis was performed on log-transformed data.
Tumor and control groups were compared by paired t-test. p < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. B. In triple negative breast
cancers γKlotho shows the opposite gene expression pattern than βKlotho and Klotho. Paired (benign and tumor) samples were divided
into four groups according to the molecular subtype: luminal A (LumA; n = 13), luminal B (LumB; n = 30), HER2 (Her2; n = 6) and triplenegative breast cancer (TNBC; n = 19). The difference in gene expression between the subgroups was tested for significance using a twoway ANOVA followed by Bonferroni post-hoc tests on log-transformed data. Individual mRNA levels are presented on scatter dot plots
using logarithmic scale for the y-axis. Black line denotes the mean. *p ≤ 0.05, **p .< 0.01, ***p ≤ 0.001, ****p ≤ 0.0001. C. Kaplan-Meier
progression-free survival curves according to the expression level with respect to the median of each Klotho gene in patients with invasive
breast carcinoma with available triple negative status. Clinical and gene expression data were obtained from the TCGA portal. Log-rank
(Mantel-Cox) tests were used to compare groups. Censored subjects are indicated on the curves by tick marks.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2613

Oncotarget

Table 1: Correlation between expression levels of Klotho genes (determined
and Ki67/p53 prognostic expression levels (determined by IHC) in 67 tumor samples
γKlotho

βKlotho

by

qRT-PCR)

Klotho

Spearman r

q-value

Spearman r

q-value

Spearman r

q-value

Ki67

0.31

0.024

−0.44

0.0006

−0.13

0.34

p53

0.062

0.62

−0.48

< 0.0001

−0.22

0.11

Significant FDR-corrected p-values (q-values) are given in bold (Spearman rank correlation test, Benjamini and Hochberg false discovery rate (FDR)
correction).

Figure 2: γKlotho is expressed in a subset of triple negative cell lines and its overexpression promotes cell viability and
colony formation of triple negative MDA-MB-231 and HS578T cells. A. γKlotho mRNA expression was determined by qRT-

PCR and normalized against Rplp0. Each bar represents the mean ± SD of two biological replicates. B. γKlotho overexpression promotes
cell viability. MDA-MB-231 and HS578T cells stably overexpressing γKlotho were assayed for viability by MTS assay on day 4 after
seeding. Viability 12 hours post seeding was used for normalization. Data are presented as mean ± SD of 6 wells from one representative
experiment. Viability experiments were repeated at least three times for each cell line. *p ≤ 0.05 **p ≤ 0.01, ****p ≤ 0.0001; Unpaired
t test. γKlotho mRNA levels were determined by qRT-PCR and are presented relative to control (vector). C, E. γKlotho overexpression
promotes liquid colony formation. MDA-MB-231/HS578T cells were seeded in triplicates in 12-well plates at two different densities
(D1=1000/500 cells/well, D2=5000/2500 cells/well). Ten (D2) and fourteen (D1) days after plating, colonies were stained with crystal
violet and photographed. Representative images of 3 independent experiments are shown. D, F. Cell growth was quantified by determining
the percentage of area covered by crystal violet stained cell colonies. Data are presented as mean of three replicates ± SD for each density.
***p ≤ 0.001, ****p ≤ 0.0001; two way ANOVA.

overexpression on cell viability and clonogenic potential.
γKlotho overexpression significantly increased viability of
cells as measured by MTS assay in both cell lines (Figure 2B).
Additionally, γKlotho overexpression stimulated the ability
of cells to form colonies on a solid surface (Figure 2C–2F)
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

independent of starting density and promoted growth in soft
agar (Supplementary Figure S2C and S2D). Thus, γKlotho is
expressed in a subset of triple negative breast cancer cell lines
and when overexpressed promotes cell viability and drives
colony formation indicative of features of an oncogene.
2614

Oncotarget

γKlotho is required for survival and oncogenic
growth of triple negative breast cancer cells

γKlotho knockdown leads to cell cycle
arrest and apoptosis

To examine if γKlotho is necessary for the viability
of HCC1395 and MDA-MB-231 TNBC cells, we
specifically depleted γKlotho expression by siRNA. Four
siRNAs against different regions of the γKlotho gene
were tested, and a pool of the three most efficient ones
(1, 3, and 4) was then used in subsequent experiments
(Figures 3A and 3B). Knockdown of γKlotho significantly
decreased viability of both cell lines as evaluated over
time by MTS assay (Figure 3A and 3B, right panels) while
not altering the expression of other Klotho genes, which
remained undetectable. Furthermore, γKlotho knockdown
resulted in a significant reduction of the ability of tumor
cells to form colonies on a solid surface (Figure 3C–3F)
and of anchorage independent growth in soft agar
(Figure 3G and 3H). Together, our results show that
γKlotho is necessary for the survival of γKlotho positive
triple negative breast cancer cells implying that these cells
become at least partly dependent on its expression.

We have shown that knockdown of γKlotho
in HCC1395 and MDA-MB-231 cells results in
reduced cell viability and diminished clonogenic
growth (Figure 3). To further determine the molecular
function of γKlotho in TNBC cells we analyzed the
impact of γKlotho ablation on cell cycle progression
and apoptosis. HCC1395 cells were transfected with
control and γKlotho siRNA and analyzed by flow
cytometry 5 days after transfection. γKlotho knockdown
resulted in significant reduction of cells in G1 phase
and concomitant accumulation in S and G2/M phases
of the cell cycle (Figure 5A and 5B) compared to
control siRNA transfected cells, suggesting a blockade
in cell cycle progression through S/G2 phases. In
addition, we observed an increase in the subG1 peak
indicating increased apoptosis (Figure 5A and 5B).
To further characterize the effects of γKlotho loss we
used Annexin V/propidium iodide staining. γKlotho
siRNA treated cells underwent apoptotic cell
death as evidenced by positive Annexin V staining
(Figure 5C and 5D). Consistent with this, we detected an
increase in the cleaved form of PARP-1 by Western blot
analysis (Figure 5E), indicative of apoptosis. Altogether,
these results further confirm that in γKlotho positive
TNBC cells depletion of γKlotho leads to cell cycle
arrest and apoptotic cell death consistent with oncogenic
properties for this gene.

The growth inhibitory effect of γKlotho
knockdown is specific and can be partially
rescued by an siRNA-resistant mouse gene
In order to ensure that the observed growth-inhibitory
phenotype after γKlotho knockdown was specific, we
first examined if individual siRNAs gave the same
phenotype as the siRNA pool. Two different siRNAs with
comparable silencing efficiencies, siKLG-1 and siKLG-3
(Supplementary Figure S3), induced similar viability
inhibition as the siRNA pool (Figure 4A). Importantly,
the viability of γKlotho-negative cell line MDA-MB-157
was not altered by siRNA treatment targeting γKlotho
(Figure 4B). Next, we aimed to rescue the γKlotho siRNA
growth inhibitory phenotype by the expression of a mouse
gene that is relatively resistant to siKLG-3. First, we
established HCC1395 cell lines stably overexpressing
the human or mouse γKlotho-Flag gene (Figure 4C, top
panel). siKLG-3 caused significant reduction in human
γKlotho mRNA levels (>90%), while the expression
of the mouse gene was decreased only by 30% (Figure
4C, bottom panel). Knockdown of γKlotho significantly
reduced colony formation of vector transfected and human
γKlotho-Flag expressing cells, whereas the expression
of the mouse γKlotho-Flag partially complemented the
ability of cells to form colonies in the presence of siKLG-3
(Figure 4D). In these HCC1395 stable cells, where
endogenous human γKlotho is already expressed at high
levels, further overexpression does not significantly alter
cell viability or growth, suggesting a threshold level of
required γKlotho protein is already present. As a whole,
these results confirmed that the growth inhibitory effect
of γKlotho knockdown is specific and further suggest
dependence of a subset of triple negative breast cancer cells
on γKlotho expression.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Constitutive ERK activation induced by γKlotho
knockdown
We have previously shown that γKlotho can bind
to FGFRs [24]. To determine the role of γKlotho in FGF
signaling in TNBC cells, we treated HCC1395 cells with
the canonical FGF, FGF2, or an endocrine FGF, FGF19,
after mock or γKlotho knockdown and overnight serum
starvation (Figure 6A). Unexpectedly, when γKlotho
was knocked down we observed a significant increase in
ERK activation in the absence of any added FGF ligand
(Figure 6A). FGF2 induced FGFR signaling as detected
by a strong ERK phosphorylation, however, the fold
induction was decreased in γKlotho siRNA treated
cells, likely due to the higher basal phosphorylation
levels (Figure 6A). In contrast to FGF2, we did not
observe activation of the ERK pathway by FGF19
although all FGFRs are expressed in HCC1395 cells
(Supplementary Figure S4A). These results indicate that
in γKlotho positive TNBC cells, depletion of γKlotho
causes persistent activation of the ERK signaling
pathway, also shown by increases in a direct target of
ERK signaling [38] (Figure 6B). Forced expression of
Klotho was previously shown to inhibit MCF7 breast
cancer cell growth by inhibiting insulin/IGF-1/AKT
signaling [30]. To determine whether γKlotho also
2615

Oncotarget

Figure 3: γKlotho is necessary for TNBC cell survival and clonogenic growth. A. siRNA knockdown of γKlotho decreases the

viability of HCC1395 cells. γKlotho expression in TNBC HCC1395 cells was knocked down by a pool of 3 siRNAs (siKLG-134) and the
efficiency of γKlotho knockdown confirmed by qRT-PCR. mRNA levels are presented relative to control. **p ≤ 0.01; one-way ANOVA. 48
hours after transfection, cells were seeded and cell viability was monitored for 4 days by MTS assay. 12 hours post seeding-viability was
used for normalization. Means of three independent experiments ± SD are presented. *p ≤ 0.05 **p ≤ 0.01; two-way ANOVA. B. siRNA
knockdown of γKlotho decreases the viability of MDA-MB-231 cells. Mean of two independent experiments ± SD are presented. **p ≤
0.01; two-way ANOVA. C, E. Knockdown of γKlotho inhibits liquid colony formation of HCC1395 and MDA-MB-231 cells. Cells were
seeded in triplicates in 12-well plates at two different densities (D1=1000cells/well, D2=5000 cells/well). Ten (D2) and fourteen (D1) days
after plating, colonies were stained with crystal violet and photographed. Representative images are shown. D, F. Liquid colony formation
was quantified by determining the percentage of area covered by crystal violet stained cell colonies using ImageJ ColonyArea plugin. Data
are presented as mean ± SD of three replicates. ***p ≤ 0.001, ****p ≤ 0.0001; two-way ANOVA. G. Knockdown of γKlotho inhibits the
anchorage-independent growth on soft agar of HCC1395 cells. Cells were transfected with a siRNA pool against γKlotho (siKLG-134) and
corresponding controls and after 48 hours plated for anchorage-independent growth in soft agar. Representative images for each condition
are presented. H. Colonies greater than 100 μm across their widest point were counted. Bars demonstrate average ± SD across triplicates.
***p ≤ 0.001, one-way ANOVA.

γKlotho is critical for maintaining ROS balance
in cancer cells

interferes with this signaling pathway, MDA-MB-231
cells overexpressing γKlotho were treated with insulin
and AKT phosphorylation was measured by Western
blot analysis (Supplementary Figure S4B). In contrast
to Klotho, γKlotho does not interfere with AKT
activation by insulin/IGF-1.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

To begin to understand the cellular mechanisms that
may contribute to the sensitivity of TNBC cells to γKlotho
depletion, we performed microarray gene expression
2616

Oncotarget

Figure 4: The growth inhibitory effect of γKlotho knockdown is specific. A. Two individual γKlotho siRNAs (siKLG-1 and

siKLG-3) decrease HCC1395 cells viability to a similar extent as the siRNA pool (siKLG-134). Cell viability was determined by MTS
assay 5 days after transfection. Means ± SD of 4 wells are shown. *** indicates p ≤ 0.001. B. γKlotho negative MDA-MB-157 cells (as
assessed by qRT-PCR-left pannel) are not affected by γKlotho siRNA. Cell viability was assessed as in panel A. C. Mouse γKlotho is
partially resistant to siKLG-3. HCC1395 cells stably overexpressing mouse or human γKlotho-Flag protein were transfected with siRNA
and mRNA levels for mouse and human γKlotho determined by qRT-PCR. Data represent mean of three replicates ± SD. D. The siRNAresistant mouse γKlotho gene in part rescues HCC1395 cells after γKlotho knockdown. HCC1395 cells stably overexpressing mouse or
human γKlotho-Flag proteins were transfected with siKLG-3 against human γKlotho, 2 days later plated in 12-well plate (5000 cells/
well) and cultured for 10 days. Representative images of colony formations are shown. Cell growth was quantified by determining the
percentage of area covered by crystal violet stained cell colonies using ImageJ ColonyArea plugin and is presented relative to control. Data
are presented as mean of three independent experiments ± SD.

analysis of HCC1395 cells harvested 2 days after treatment
with γKlotho siRNA or the corresponding control (n = 2).
At this time point γKlotho mRNA expression was reduced
by 90% (Supplementary Figure S4C). 205 genes showed
significant differential expression having log2 foldchange of > 1 and p < 0.05. Of these, at least 64 were
previously shown to be involved in cancer pathogenesis
(Supplementary Figure S4D). Indeed, 68% of identified
oncogenes were down-regulated and 70% of identified
tumor-suppressors were upregulated upon γKlotho
knockdown (Supplementary Figure S4D). Among
differentially regulated genes, genes functioning in cell
cycle/apoptosis, cell adhesion/migration and signaling
pathways were well represented (Figure 6C). Intriguingly,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

one of the most prevalent altered functional groups
were genes known to be regulated by oxidative stress,
involved in generating or protecting against reactive
oxygen species (ROS) (Figure 6C and 6D). Several
genes that are critical for the protection against oxidative
damage, including STC1, GLO1, UBQLN11 and LAMP2
[39–44] were repressed in γKlotho siRNA treated cells.
In contrast, several genes that are typically activated by
oxidative stress, such as HMOX-1, GGT1, UGT1A1
and MMP13 were significantly induced in γKlotho
knocked down cells (Figure 6D), suggesting elevated
ROS levels in cells depleted of γKlotho. To determine
if ROS levels were increased in γKlotho depleted cells,
we performed flow cytometry analysis of knocked down
2617

Oncotarget

Figure 5: γKlotho knockdown leads to cell-cycle arrest and apoptosis. A. siRNA knockdown of γKlotho arrests cells in cell

cycle. HCC1395 cells were transfected with a siRNA pool against γKlotho (siKLG-134) and corresponding controls. 2 days after transfection
cells were seeded in 6-well plates and harvested 3 days later. Equal numbers of control and siRNA-treated cells were fixed, stained with
PI, and analyzed for DNA content. Representative flow cytometry histograms are shown. B. The percent of cells in different phases of cell
cycle. Data are presented as mean ± SD of 2 replicates. **p ≤ 0.01, ****p ≤ 0.0001; one-way ANOVA. C. γKlotho knockdown leads to
apoptosis of HCC1395 cells. Cells were transfected with indicated siRNAs, 2 days after transfection seeded in 6-well plates, and harvested
3 days later. Cells were stained for Annexin V and PI and analyzed by FACS. Representative histograms are shown. D. Quantification
of PI-/Annexin+ cells. Data are mean ± SD of two biological replicates. E. Cells were transfected with indicated siRNAs, 2 days after
transfection cells seeded in 6 well plates, grown for 3 days, serum-starved overnight, harvested and immunobloted for cleaved PARP-1 and
tubulin. Representative immunoblot of two experiments is shown. Immunoblots were quantified by Li-COR Odyssey Imager.

or control cells incubated with DCF-DA or Mitosox.
As hypothesized, we detected increased levels of ROS
in γKlotho depleted HCC1395 and MDA-MB-231
cells (Figure 6E and 6H). Concomitant with increased
ROS, we observed the accumulation of DNA damage
marker γH2AX in γKlotho depleted cells (Figure 6F).
Furthermore, γKlotho depleted cells were less resistant to
additional oxidative stress induced by H2O2 as shown by
higher ROS levels upon treatment (Figure 6G and 6H).
On the other hand, treatment of γKlotho siRNA treated
cells with antioxidant N-acetylcysteine (NAC) caused a
reduction in ROS levels (Figure 6I), partly rescued cell
viability (Figure 6J and 6K) and reduced oxidative damage
as shown by lower levels of γH2AX (Figure 6L). Our
results suggest γKlotho confers resistance to the oxidative
stress commonly found in cancer cells.
To further confirm the role of γKlotho in protection
against high ROS levels, we measured ROS levels in
MDA-MB-231 and HS578T cells overexpressing γKlotho.
As expected, ROS levels were lower in unstressed (Figure
7A and 7B) and H2O2-stressed cells (Figure 7C and 7D)
overexpressing γKlotho. Importantly, γKlotho expression
provided protection against toxicity induced by H2O2
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

or doxorubicin (Figures 7E–7I and S5) as measured by
both MTS viability assays and liquid colony formation
upon acute oxidative stress. Furthermore, γKlotho
provided additional protection to NAC pretreated cells
(Supplementary Figure S5). Together, our results provide
strong evidence that γKlotho contributes to maintaining
reactive oxygen homeostasis thus enabling TNBC cells to
thrive in high ROS conditions.

DISCUSSION
To date, no targeted therapy exists for the treatment
of TNBC. Heterogeneity of TNBCs and lack of common
drugable molecules/pathways have been major roadblocks
in the development of efficient therapies against this
breast cancer subtype [4]. There is a need to identify
common molecular targets and biomarkers that can be
used for the development of effective treatment strategies
for patient subgroups [45]. A few pathways have been
recently suggested as potential therapeutic targets in
specific subsets of TNBCs, such as IGF-1R/FAK, WNT
and VEGF [46–48]. Here, we discovered that γKlotho,
an uncharacterized member of the Klotho family, is
2618

Oncotarget

Figure 6: γKlotho depletion increases oxidative stress. A. Increased ERK phosphorylation level after γKlotho knockdown, but the

response to growth factor FGF2 is blunted; FGF19 has no effect on ERK phosphorylation in HCC1395 cells. Cells were transfected with indicated
siRNAs, 2 days after transfection seeded in 6-well plates, grown for 3 days, serum-starved overnight, and treated for 10 min with FGF2/19 or
buffer. Cell lysates were immunoblotted for phospho- and total ERK. Immunoblots were quantified by Li-COR Odyssey Imager. B. The bona fide
ERK target gene cyclin D1 expression is increased after γKlotho knockdown. HCC1395 cells were transfected with indicated siRNAs, harvested
after 1–4 days and gene expression measured by qRT-PCR. Data were normalized against Rplp0 and are presented as mean ± SD of 2 replicates.
*p ≤ 0.05, **p ≤ 0.01; two-way ANOVA. C. Gene expression signature after γKlotho knockdown. HCC1395 cells were transfected with siRNA
pool against γKlotho and corresponding control, harvested after 2 days and RNA analyzed by the Illumina microarray. Genes that showed log2
fold-change of > 1 and p < 0.05 were considered to be differentially expressed. Using NCBI resources (Pubmed, Entrez, Unigene) the gene
list was manually categorized by gene functions integrated into the well-defined pathways and functional groups important for carcinogenesis.
The number of genes in each differentially expressed category is shown in the pie chart. D. Genes involved in the oxidative stress homeostasis
and oxidative stress responsive genes represent one of the most prominent differentially regulated functional groups after γKlotho knockdown.
E. γKlotho knockdown causes an increase in ROS levels. HCC1395 and MDA-MB-231 cells were transfected with indicated siRNAs, 2 days
after transfection seeded in 6 well plates, and harvested 3 days later. Before harvest, 10 μM DCF-DA /5 μM MitoSox was added to the cells for
45/15 minutes at 37°C, cells washed with PBS, trypsinized, and stained with PI before FACS analysis. Representative histograms are shown.
F. MDA-MB-231 cells were transfected with indicated siRNAs, 2 days after transfection cells were seeded in 6-well plates, grown for 3 days,
harvested and immunobloted for γH2AX and tubulin. Representative immunoblot of two experiments are shown. Vertical dotted line marks place
in the gel where unrelated lanes were removed for clarity of presentation. G. γKlotho siRNA transfected cells were treated with 100 μM H2O2
for 15 min, DCF-DA staining was followed by FACS analysis as in E. H. Quantification of PI -/ROS+ cells. Data are mean ± SD of 2 biological
replicates. **p ≤ 0.01, ***p ≤ 0.001; two-way ANOVA. (Continued )

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2619

Oncotarget

Figure 6: (Continued ) γKlotho depletion increases oxidative stress. I. HCC1395 cells were transfected with indicated siRNAs, and

from the following day maintained in the presence or absence of 1 mM NAC. Cells were seeded in 6 well plates 3 days after transfection and
harvested 2 days later. MitoSox staining was followed by FACS analysis as in E. J. HCC1395 cells were transfected with indicated siRNAs,
and from the following day maintained in the presence or absence of 1 mM NAC. 2 days after transfection, cells were seeded in 24-well plates
(1000 cells/well) and cultured for 11 days, then colonies were visualized. K. Cell growth was quantified by determining the percentage of area
covered by crystal violet stained cell colonies using ImageJ ColonyArea plugin. Data are presented as mean ± SD. L. Cells were transfected
with indicated siRNAs, 2 days after transfection cells seeded in 6-well plates, grown for 3 days in the absence or presence of 2 mM NAC (2-1
mM NAC media changed with 1 mM for last 2 hours before harvest), harvested and immunobloted for γH2AX and tubulin. Representative
immunoblot of two experiments are shown.

significantly upregulated in triple negative breast cancer
(Figure 1). γKlotho expression positively correlated with
higher Ki67 index (Table 1). Consistent with this, high
γKlotho-expressing patients harbored higher stage and
grade tumors and had worse progression-free survival
(Figure 1C and Supplementary Table S2). In agreement
with our findings, γKlotho was previously shown to be
required for the growth of established, transformed cells
[49] in colon tumorigenesis.
γKlotho was overexpressed in more than 60% of
all TNBC samples in our study (13 of 19 TN samples
with fold change > 1.4). In the Curtis and TCGA
datasets, 27–41% of TN samples highly overexpressed
γKlotho compared to the average tumor expression
(Supplementary Table S3). In addition to p53 loss found
in 80% of TN breast tumors, and PIK3CA mutations,
occurring in 11% of cases, several genes, such as EGFR,
AR, FGFR have been found to be overexpressed in a
significant portion of TNBC [50–52]. Some of these
genes are being used for the development of targeted
therapies, although the success rate is still low, potentially
due to diverse compensatory mechanisms. Our analysis
uncovered γKlotho as a novel marker for a substantial
portion of TNBC patients that correlates with worse
progression of the disease. Given its restricted expression
profile in normal tissues [24], γKlotho may represent very
specific potential target for treatment of TNBC.
Our finding of γKlotho overexpression in cancer
was unexpected, because the other two members of the
Klotho family, Klotho and βKlotho, are downregulated in
several cancers. Klotho is an established tumor suppressor,
epigenetically silenced in breast and other cancers [31,
32, 53–55] since it inhibits signaling pathways, such as
IGF-1, PI3K, WNT, and TGFβ [30, 56–58]. βKlotho
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

was similarly shown to suppress tumor growth in
hepatocellular carcinoma [33, 34]. The three Klothos
belong to the glycosidase family 1 and share structural
similarities to β-glycosidases. The critical residues required
for enzymatic activity are not conserved in any of the
Klotho proteins [59] implying their biological function
is independent of this glycosidase activity. Interestingly,
unlike Klotho and βKlotho, γKlotho contains only one
β-glycosidase-like domain in the extracellular region
(Supplementary Figure S1A), potentially differentiating
its function. In this study we found that in TNBC γKlotho
has the opposite expression and function than the other two
Klotho members. Furthermore, by analyzing TCGA datasets
we also found γKlotho overexpressed in other cancer types
(Supplementary Figure S1E), suggesting γKlotho oncogenic
activity is not restricted to breast cancer and might be
linked to the specific oxidative tumor microenvironment or
metabolic state of particular cancer types.
Our study shows that γKlotho is not solely a marker
for a subset of TNBC but also promotes cancer cell growth
(Figure 2) and is necessary for the survival of TN breast
cancer cells expressing this gene (Figure 3). Both gain of
function and loss of function experiments demonstrated
that TNBC cells expressing γKlotho are dependent on its
presence for viability and clonogenic growth and that this
gene confers a growth advantage. Indeed, depletion caused
cell cycle arrest and apoptotic death (Figure 5).
γKlotho belongs to a family of coreceptors for
endocrine FGFs [21–23] that can also modulate signaling
of canonical ligands [60]. Since γKlotho can bind FGFRs
[24], we evaluated the role of FGF signaling in γKlothomediated regulation of cell viability. Surprisingly, we
found activated ERK even in the absence of any FGF
stimulation in γKlotho depleted cells (Figure 6A).
2620

Oncotarget

Figure 7: γKlotho protects cancer cells against ROS toxicity. A. γKlotho overexpression reduces ROS levels in unstressed

cells. Cells overexpressing control vector or γKlotho-Flag were seeded in 6 well plates, and harvested the next day. Before harvest,
10 μM DCF-DA was added to the cells, cells were incubated for 45 minutes at 37°C, then washed with PBS, trypsinized, and stained
with PI before FACS analysis. Representative histograms are shown. B. Quantification of ROS positive live HS578T and MDA-MB-231
cells overexpressing control vector or γKlotho-Flag. Data are mean ± SD of 2 replicates. p ≤ 0.05, **p ≤ 0.01; t-test C. Control vector or
γKlotho-Flag overexpressing cells were treated with 10 μM or 100 μM H2O2 when 10 μM DCF-DA was added to the cells. Staining and
FACS analysis was performed as in A. Representative histograms are shown. D. Quantification of ROS positive live cells. Data are mean
± SD of 2 replicates. E. HS578T cells stably expressing vector or γKlotho-Flag were seeded in 96-well plates at 6500 cells/ well. 12 hours
later, culture media was replaced with increasing concentration of H2O2 in serum free RPMI media. 72 hours later MTS viability assay was
performed. Data are normalized to the untreated controls (100% viability). Dose response curves are plotted using a non-linear regression
model and IC50s were determined from the fitted curves using Hill equation. F. 100,000 HS578T cells expressing control vector or γKlotho
were seeded in 12-well plates, next day treated with the indicated concentrations of H2O2 in serum free RPMI for 1 h at 37°C and then replated into 12-well plates at low density (2500 cells /well). Two weeks after plating, cells were fixed in ice-cold methanol and stained with
crystal violet. Representative images of 2 independent experiments are shown. Cell growth was quantified by determining the percentage
of area covered by crystal violet stained cell colonies. Data are presented as mean of three replicates ± SD from one of the experiments.
*p ≤ 0.05, **p ≤ 0.01, ****p ≤ 0.0001; two way ANOVA. G. MDA-MB-231 cells stably expressing control vector or γKlotho-FLAG
were seeded in 96-well plates at 8000 cells/well and cell viability after H202-induced oxidative stress measured as in E. H. 100,000 MDAMB-231 cells expressing control vector or γKlotho were treated as in F, then re-plated in 12-well plates at 5000 cells/well. Cell growth was
quantified and is presented as in F. *p ≤ 0.05, ***p ≤ 0.001; two way ANOVA. I. HS578T-vector and γKlotho-Flag cells were treated with
increasing concentration of doxorubicin as in E. J. The working model of γKlotho role in triple negative breast cancer cells.

This result suggested increased oxidative stress in
these cells since ERK activation is normally linked to
proliferation and growth, but its prolonged activation
is observed under high ROS and is detrimental to cells
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

[61, 62]. We found increased ROS levels and induction
of oxidative stress genes after γKlotho knockdown
followed by apoptotic death (Figure 6). Furthermore,
we show that forced expression of γKlotho confers
2621

Oncotarget

resistance to oxidative stress (Figure 7). Thus, we
propose that in TNBC cells, and perhaps also in other
cancers (Supplementary Figure S1E) γKlotho is involved
in protection of tumor cells against increased oxidative
stress and thus confers a survival advantage. Although
Klotho has been shown to regulate endogenous oxidative
balance [63], it remained undetectable in γKlotho
knockdown cells. Klotho knockout mice have increased
oxidative stress that underlies accelerated aging, and
Klotho overexpression has a protective effect [64–68].
Intriguingly, our data suggest that although Klotho and
γKlotho seem to both provide protection against oxidative
stress, they have opposite roles in cancer. This may be due
to the regulation of distinct pathways in ROS homeostasis.
Several pathways have been already proposed for Klotho
such as inhibition of IGF-1 signaling [64–65, 68]. We
show that γKlotho does not interfere with IGF signaling
(Supplementary Figure S7B), further distinguishing it
from Klotho at the functional level. Instead, it appears
that γKlotho provides increased protection against high
ROS, as several antioxidant genes were downregulated
after γKlotho knockdown, most of which are not known
to be regulated by Klotho (Figure 6D). These include
glyoxalase 1 (GLO1), an enzyme that reduces glycative
and oxidative stress [69], and several genes involved in
heme metabolism and iron homeostasis. Triple negative
tumors have been shown to have high levels of GLO1
indicative of this tumor’s requirement for antioxidant
protection [70]. We found that γKlotho confers protection
against basal and H2O2/doxorubicin induced oxidative
stress (Figure 7), suggesting this gene is part of an antioxidant network in TN tumors. Thus, we propose that
γKlotho gives TNBC cells an advantage to survive under
high ROS conditions (Figure 7J).
In summary, our study defines γKlotho as a novel
marker and potential oncogene for a subgroup of TNBCs,
necessary for protecting rapidly growing cells against
increased oxidative damage. γKlotho may therefore be
a potential novel therapeutic target or a biomarker for
TNBC or other tumors with significant oxidative stress or
low antioxidant defense which may be susceptible to ROS
causing therapies.

surgical therapy) and histopathology reports showing
histological subtype, tumor grade and molecular
status (ER, PR, HER2) were available for all the
specimens. Expression patterns of ER, PR, HER2
receptors and Ki67 proliferation index were assessed
by immunohistochemistry and were, in addition to
tumor grade, used for classifying tumors into molecular
subtypes of breast cancer. Tumors were classified as
luminal A – LumA (tumor grade 1 or 2 and ER+/PR ± /
HER2-, Ki67 ≤ 14%, N = 13), luminal B – LumB (higher
tumor grade and ER+/PR ± /HER2-, Ki67 > 14% or
ER+/PR ± /HER2+, N = 30), HER2 overexpressing –
Her2 (ER-/PR-/HER2+, N = 6) and triple negative breast
cancer subtype - TNBC (ER-/PR-/HER2-, N = 19. The
Ki67 cut-off point was determined according to Cheang
et al. [71].

Cell culture and transfections
Human breast cancer cell lines (gift from Dr.
David Euhus or purchased from ATCC) HCC1954,
HCC1428, MCF7, BT474, T47D, HCC1419, MDAMB-231, MDA-MB-157, HCC38, HCC1395, HCC1806,
HS578T and BT20 were maintained in RPMI-1640
medium (Gibco™ Life Technologies) supplemented
with 10% FBS (Invitrogen). siRNA transfections were
performed with Lipofectamine® RNAiMAX (Thermo
Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacture’s
protocol. siRNA duplexes targeting γKlotho were
purchased from Sigma-Aldrich: siKLG-1, 5′-G
UGAUGAGUGGAGAAUUCA-3′; siKLG-2, 5′-GAUG
UAGCCUGUGACGGCU-3′; siKLG-3, 5′-CUAUCCAAA
GGCUUCAGUU-3′; siKLG-4, 5′-GUUGGUACCUCAA
AGCUUU-3′. A non-targeting control siRevL1
(5′-ACUACAUC GUGAUUCAAACUU-3′), further
referred as Control 1, was purchased from Thermo­
Scientific. SiLonRF pool, a siRNA control that targets an
endogenous gene irrelevant to the gene of interest, was
purchased from Dharmacon (Control 2: 5′-GCACUGCC
GACAUUGAAUA-3′, 5′UCACACAGCUGU UGGAAG
A-3′, 5′GACCAAGAAUGUUCCAAUA-3′, and 5′UCAG
AGAGCUUCAUGAUUU-3′). Expression vectors for
full-length mouse γKlotho, human γKlotho and empty
vector were introduced into HCC1395, HS578T, and
MDA-MB-231 cells using X-tremeGENE HP Trans­
fection Reagent (Roche) or Lipofectamine® 2000 Trans­
fection Reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following
manufacturer’s instructions. Stable clones were selected
with 700 μg/ml of G-418 (Roche) and maintained at 400
μg/ml of G-418.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Patients and clinical samples
Sixty-eight frozen samples of breast cancer
tissue and surrounding normal (benign) breast tissue
(68 paired samples) were obtained from the Tissue
Procurement Core at UT Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas under Institutional Review Board approval.
Samples covered all the pathological disease stages and
histological subtypes and were gained from patients
diagnosed for breast cancer in the period between
2001 and 2008. Patient clinical information (including
race, age at diagnosis, clinical stage, pre- and postwww.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

RNA preparation, cDNA synthesis, and
quantitative reverse transcription PCR analysis
(qRT-PCR)
RNA was extracted using RNAStat60 (TelTest)
according to the manufacturer’s directions. Genomic DNA
2622

Oncotarget

Cell viability assays, colony formation, and
anchorage-independent growth soft agar assays

contamination was eliminated by DNase I (Roche) treatment
in 4.5 mM MgCl2. cDNA for qPCR assays was prepared
from 4 μg (tissue samples) or 1 μg (cell lines) DNase-treated
RNA using High Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription kit
(Life Technologies). Gene expression levels were measured
in triplicate wells of a 384-well reaction plate with 10 ng
cDNA per well on an Applied Biosystems 7900HT with
SYBR Green chemistry using the following primers: human
Klotho forward, 5′-TCAAAAAGTTCATCATGGAAACC-3′
and reverse, 5′-ATGAGGGACCATGCGGTAT-3′; human
βKlotho forward, 5′-ACCACGGCCATCTACATGAT-3′
and reverse, 5′-CGTATTTCATCTAACCTTATTGCTTG-3′;
human γKlotho forward, 5′-GCAGCACACCACATCAT
TAAGG-3′ and reverse, 5′-CTGCGCCACGTGGTGTTA-3′;
mouse γKlotho forward, 5′- AAGTTACATTGCACT
CAGTTCTGC-3′ and reverse, 5′-CCCTTTTATATCCAC
GCCATC-3′; human FGFR1 forward, 5′-AGGCTACAAGG
TCCGTTATGC-3′ and reverse, 5′- TGCCGTACTCATTC
TCCACAA-3′; human FGFR2 forward, 5′-TTAAGCA
GGAGCATCGCATTG-3′ and reverse, 5′-GGGACCACAC
TTTCCATAATGAG-3′; human FGFR3 forward, 5′CCTCGGGAGATGACGAAGAC-3′ and reverse, 5′CGGGCCGTGTCCAGTAAGG-3′; human FGFR4 forward,
5′-TGCAGAATCTCACCTTGATTACA-3′ and reverse,
5′- GGGGTAACTGTGCCTATTCG-3′; human cyclophilin
B forward, 5′- GGAGATGGCACAGGAGGAA −3′ and
reverse, 5′-GCCCGTAGTGCTTCAGTTT-3′; human Rplp0
forward, 5′-CGAGGGCACCTGGAAAAC-3′ and reverse,
5′-CACATTCCCCCGGATATG-3′. Primers were designed
using Roche Universal Probe Library Assay Design Center
and used in 150 nM concentration. For primer validation and
efficiency determination, standard human/mouse universal
cDNA was used. PCR efficiencies were calculated from the
slope of the resulting standard curves. qRT-PCR data were
analyzed by ABI instrument software SDS2.1. Baseline
values of amplification plots were set automatically and
threshold values were kept constant to obtain normalized
cycle time and linear regression data. Normalized mRNA
levels, which are expressed as arbitrary units (AU), were
obtained by dividing the averaged, efficiency corrected
values for mRNA expression by that for reference gene
(cyclophilin B and/or Rplp0) [72]. The resulting values
were multiplied by 102 for graphical representation unless
otherwise stated.

Cell viability was assessed by standard MTS assays
using Cell Titer reagents (Promega, Madison, WI, USA)
according to the manufacturer’s protocols. Cells were
transfected with siRNAs, 48 hours later re-plated at 2000
cells (1000 cells for HS578T) per well in 96-well plates and
their viability assessed over 4-day period or in a single end
point, on day 5 or day 6 post-transfection. Each condition
contained 6 replicates unless mentioned otherwise. Viability of
plasmid-transfected cells was determined in the same manner.
Absorbance at 490 and 650 nm (reference wavelength) was
measured by a Spectra Max (Molecular Devices, Sunnyvale,
CA, USA) or a FlouroStar Omega (BMG Biosciences,
Ortenberg, Germany) plate reader. For colony formation assays
on plastic, 48 hours after siRNA transfection cells were replated into 12-well plates at low density. HS578T and MDAMB-231 cells stably expressing vector or γKlotho-Flag were
also plated into 12-well plates at low density. Approximately
two weeks after plating, cells were fixed in ice-cold methanol
and stained with crystal violet (0.5% (w/v) in 25% methanol)
for 20 minutes, extensively washed in dH2O and then counted.
Quantification of the results was performed with Image J
(ColonyArea plugin). For anchorage-independent soft agar
growth assays, 48 hours after siRNA transfection 1–5 × 104
cells were suspended in medium containing 0.35% Noble
agar (Difco) and overlaid on 0.5% Nobel agar in triplicate
in 6-well plates. Cells were allowed to grow for 3–4 weeks
before colonies were quantified. ImageJ software was used
for robust, unbiased quantification of colony size and number
using 33 pictures taken for each experimental condition.

Cell survival analysis upon oxidative stress
The cytotoxic effect of H2O2 and doxorubicin was
tested in MDA-MB-231/HS578T cells stably expressing
vector and γKlotho-Flag using the MTS viability assay.
Exponentially growing cells were seeded in 96-well plates
at 8000/6500 cells/well. 12 hours later, culture media
was replaced with increasing concentration of H2O2 and
doxorubicin in serum free RPMI media. 48–72 hours later
MTS viability assay was performed. Each cell line was tested
in 2–4 independent assays with 3–6 replicates per condition.
Data were normalized to the untreated controls (100%
viability). Dose response curves were plotted using a nonlinear regression model and IC50s were determined from the
fitted curves. Data were fitted to the Hill equation, y=Top/
(1+10[(log(EC50/x)) × HillSlope]) using GraphPad Prism.
To further examine resistance of vector and γKlotho
expressing MDA-MB-231 and HS578T cells to oxidative
stress, equal number of cells (100,000/well) were
seeded in 12-well plates, next day treated with indicated
concentrations of H2O2 in serum free RPMI for 1 h at 37°C
and then re-plated into 12-well plates at low density (1000,
5000 cells/well). Two weeks after plating, cells were fixed
in ice-cold methanol and stained with crystal violet.

Antibodies and plasmid constructs
Antibodies used in this study were as follows:
anti-ERK (Cell Signaling Technology # 9102), antiP-ERK (Cell Signaling Technology # 4370), antiTubulin (Sigma Aldrich #T6199), and anti-cleaved
PARP (Cell Signaling Technology#9541), anti-P-AKT
(S473, Cell Signaling Technology#4060P), anti-AKT
(Cell Signaling Technology#4961P), anti-γH2AX
(Milipore# 07-164). cDNAs containing the mouse
or human γKlotho were cloned into the pEF1 vector
(Invitrogen) with a Flag-epitope tag at the C terminus.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2623

Oncotarget

Cell cycle analysis, Annexin V apoptosis assay,
and ROS measurements

in Supplementary Figure S4. The gene list was manually
categorized by gene function using NCBI resources (Entrez,
Pubmed, etc.). GEO accession number is GSE69082.

For cell cycle analysis, apoptosis assay and ROS
measurements, cells were transfected with siRNAs, 2
days later re-plated into 6-well plates at density 1.5 ×
105 cells per well and harvested after 3 days. For cell
cycle analysis, 1 × 106 cells were fixed in ice-cold 70%
ethanol over night at −20°C, washed twice with PBS
and stained with a solution containing 20 μg/ml PI and
225 μg/ml RNase at room temperature for 30 min. For
apoptosis evaluation, cells were harvested, washed with
ice-cold PBS, suspended in binding buffer and incubated
with Annexin V-FITC antibody and PI according to
the manufacturer’s instructions (BD Pharmingen).
Intracellular ROS generation was measured by staining
the cells with 10 μM DCF-DA (Thermo Fisher Scientific)
for 45 min at 37°C or with 5 μM MitoSox (Thermo Fisher
Scientific) for 15 minutes at 37°C. When indicated, cells
were pretreated with 1–2 mM NAC for 24 or 48 hours
or treated by 10/100 μM H2O2 for 15 minutes prior to
(HCC1935 and MDA-MB-231 after knockdown) or after
addition of DCF-DA (HS578T and MDA-MB-231 stable
cells). After staining, cells were washed with PBS and
collected for flow cytometer analysis. All samples were
analyzed by a BD FACSCalibur and data analyzed using
FlowJo software.

Statistical data analysis
RNA-Seq and clinical data of breast invasive
carcinoma and other cancers were downloaded from The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) data portal (https://tcgadata.nci.nih.gov/tcga) on June 14th, 2014 and tested for
associations as indicated [73]. Gene expression levels for
Klotho, βKlotho and γKlotho were estimated by the RNASeq Expectation-Maximization (RSEM) normalization
method. The median of each gene was calculated for all
available patients. Tumors with negative estrogen receptor
(ER) status, progesterone receptor (PR) status, and HER2
status by either IHC or FISH were considered as triple
negatives. Tumors with undetermined or not evaluated
status for any one of these parameters were excluded.
Progression-free survival was calculated from the date of
breast cancer diagnosis to the date of detection of distant
metastasis or the date of death, whichever was earlier.
Overall survival was calculated from the date of diagnosis
to the date on which the patient died from any cause.
Patients alive at the end of the study period were censored
at the date of last follow-up or the last date the patient
was known to be alive, whichever was later. KaplanMeier survival curves and log-rank tests were calculated
with SPSS Statistics 17. For the Curtis microarray dataset,
the expression of Klotho genes was similarly analyzed as
above in about 2,000 samples (n = 144 benign, 320 TN,
1673 nonTN), with Bonferroni post-hoc test.
Other statistical analysis were performed using
GraphPad Prism, version 6 (GraphPad Softwar,CA, USA).
P-values were calculated using (paired) Student’s t-tests,
one-way or two-way ANOVA with Bonferroni post-hoc
tests. Correlation between two ranked variables was
assessed using a nonparametric Spearman rank correlation
test. P-values < 0.05 were considered as statistically
significant. Values that were not normally distributed
were log-transformed in order to meet the assumptions of
parametric statistical tests.

Western blots
Cells were lysed in RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris, 150
mM NaCl, 0.1% SDS (w/v), 0.5% sodium deoxycholate
(w/v), 1% Nonidet P-40 (v/v)), with protease and
phosphatase inhibitors (Sigma). Lysates were clarified
by centrifugation at max speed for 10 minutes at 4°C.
Lysates were then resolved by SDS-PAGE, transferred to
nitrocellulose membrane (Bio-Rad), and the protein blots
incubated with specific antibodies (1:1000). Signal was
visualized using IRDye® secondary antibodies (1:15000)
and the Odyssey Imager (LI-COR) was used for detection
and quantification.

Microarray gene expression analysis

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING

Cells were treated with siRNAs and 2 days later
RNA was extracted using the RNAStat60 (TelTest) and
purified by the RNeasy kit (Qiagen). RNA quality was
evaluated with the Experion gel system (BioRad), prior to
labeling at UTSW’s microarray core. Labelled RNA was
hybridized to Illumina human HT-12 version 4 microarray
chips according to the manufacture’s protocol. Microarray
analysis was done with in-house Visual Basic software
MATRIX 1.508, a gift of Dr. Luc Girard. Array data
were quantile-normalized and samples were compared by
calculating log2 ratios for each gene along with a t-test
P-value. Oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes that showed
log2 fold-change of > 1 and p value < 0.05 are reported
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

We thank members of the Martinez and Potts
labs and Dr. Christoph Zechner for helpful discussions
and critical reading of the manuscript. We are thankful
to D. Rozman and R. Komel and members of MCMB
and CFGBC at University of Ljubljana for support,
assistance and helpful discussions. We are grateful to
M.D. Varghese for technical assistance. We thank D.J.
Mangelsdorf and S. Kliewer for suggestions and critical
reagents and D. Euhus for cell lines. We are grateful
to the UTSW Tissue Management Shared Resource for
providing samples.
2624

Oncotarget

This work was supported in part by grants
from the Slovenian Research Agency (core funding
program P1-0170 to J. S. and a Young Scientist Fellowship
to N.T.); by the NCI (R01 CA125269 to E.D.M.), by the
Friends of the Cancer Center (to E.D.M.) and by a North
and Central Texas Clinical and Translational Science
Initiative Grant (to E.D.M.) and CPRIT # RP140661
(to P.R.P.).

epidermal growth factor (EGF)-stimulated corneal epithelial
cell proliferation, adhesion, migration, and wound healing.
Experimental eye research. 2009; 89:876–886.
11.	 Burdon RH. Superoxide and hydrogen peroxide in relation to mammalian cell proliferation. Free Radic Biol Med.
1995; 18:775–794.
12.	 Szatrowski TP, Nathan CF. Production of large amounts of
hydrogen peroxide by human tumor cells. Cancer research.
1991; 51:794–798.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

13.	 Trachootham D, Zhou Y, Zhang H, Demizu Y, Chen Z,
Pelicano H, Chiao PJ, Achanta G, Arlinghaus RB,
Liu J, Huang P. Selective killing of oncogenically transformed cells through a ROS-mediated mechanism by
beta-phenylethyl isothiocyanate. Cancer Cell. 2006;
10:241–252.

Authors declare no conflict of interest.

REFERENCES
1.	 Ferlay J, Soerjomataram I, Dikshit R, Eser S, Mathers C,
Rebelo M, Parkin DM, Forman D, Bray F. Cancer incidence and mortality worldwide: Sources, methods and
major patterns in GLOBOCAN 2012. International Journal
of Cancer. 2015; 136:E359–E386.

14.	 Hu Y, Rosen DG, Zhou Y, Feng L, Yang G, Liu J, Huang P.
Mitochondrial manganese-superoxide dismutase expression
in ovarian cancer: role in cell proliferation and response to
oxidative stress. The Journal of biological chemistry. 2005;
280:39485–39492.

2.	 Jemal A, Siegel R, Xu J, Ward E. Cancer statistics, 2010.
CA Cancer J Clin. 2010; 60:277–300.

15.	 Radisky DC, Levy DD, Littlepage LE, Liu H, Nelson CM,
Fata JE, Leake D, Godden EL, Albertson DG, Nieto MA,
Werb Z, Bissell MJ. Rac1b and reactive oxygen species
mediate MMP-3-induced EMT and genomic instability.
Nature. 2005; 436:123–127.

3.	 Carey LA, Dees EC, Sawyer L, Gatti L, Moore DT,
Collichio F, Ollila DW, Sartor CI, Graham ML, Perou CM.
The triple negative paradox: primary tumor chemosensitivity of breast cancer subtypes. Clinical cancer research :
2007; 13:2329–2334.

16.	 Chen Z, Trotman LC, Shaffer D, Lin HK, Dotan ZA,
Niki  M, Koutcher JA, Scher HI, Ludwig T, Gerald W,
Cordon-Cardo C, Pandolfi PP. Crucial role of p53-dependent cellular senescence in suppression of Pten-deficient
tumorigenesis. Nature. 2005; 436:725–730.

4.	 Abramson VG, Lehmann BD, Ballinger TJ, Pietenpol JA.
Subtyping of triple-negative breast cancer: implications for
therapy. Cancer. 2015; 121:8–16.
5.	 Haffty BG, Yang Q, Reiss M, Kearney T, Higgins SA,
Weidhaas J, Harris L, Hait W, Toppmeyer D. Locoregional
relapse and distant metastasis in conservatively managed
triple negative early-stage breast cancer. J Clin Oncol.
2006; 24:5652–5657.

17.	 Pelicano H, Carney D, Huang P. ROS stress in cancer cells and
therapeutic implications. Drug Resist Updat. 2004; 7:97–110.
18.	 Hirota K, Murata M, Sachi Y, Nakamura H, Takeuchi J,
Mori K, Yodoi J. Distinct roles of thioredoxin in the cytoplasm and in the nucleus. A two-step mechanism of redox
regulation of transcription factor NF-kappaB. The Journal
of biological chemistry. 1999; 274:27891–27897.

6.	 Foulkes WD, Smith IE, Reis-Filho JS. Triple-negative
breast cancer. The New England journal of medicine. 2010;
363:1938–1948.

19.	 Kuro-o M, Matsumura Y, Aizawa H, Kawaguchi H, Suga T,
Utsugi T, Ohyama Y, Kurabayashi M, Kaname T, Kume E,
Iwasaki H, Iida A, Shiraki-Iida T, Nishikawa S, Nagai R,
Nabeshima YI. Mutation of the mouse klotho gene leads to
a syndrome resembling ageing. Nature. 1997; 390:45–51.

7.	 Kim S, Kim do H, Jung WH, Koo JS. Metabolic phenotypes in triple-negative breast cancer. Tumour Biol. 2013;
34:1699–1712.
8.	 Dent R, Trudeau M, Pritchard KI, Hanna WM, Kahn
HK, Sawka CA, Lickley LA, Rawlinson E, Sun P, Narod
SA. Triple-negative breast cancer: clinical features and
patterns of recurrence. Clinical cancer research: 2007;
13:4429–4434.

20.	 Kuro-o M. Klotho as a regulator of oxidative stress and
senescence. Biol Chem. 2008; 389:233–241.
21.	 Kurosu H, Ogawa Y, Miyoshi M, Yamamoto M, Nandi A,
Rosenblatt KP, Baum MG, Schiavi S, Hu MC, Moe OW,
Kuro-o M. Regulation of fibroblast growth factor-23 signaling by klotho. J Biol Chem. 2006; 281:6120–6123.

9.	 Colavitti R, Pani G, Bedogni B, Anzevino R, Borrello S,
Waltenberger J, Galeotti T. Reactive oxygen species as
downstream mediators of angiogenic signaling by vascular
endothelial growth factor receptor-2/KDR. The Journal of
biological chemistry. 2002; 277:3101–3108.

22.	 Ding X, Boney-Montoya J, Owen Bryn M, Bookout
Angie  L, Coate Katie C, Mangelsdorf David J, Kliewer
Steven A. βKlotho Is Required for Fibroblast Growth Factor
21 Effects on Growth and Metabolism. Cell Metabolism.
2012; 16:387–393.

10.	 Huo Y, Qiu WY, Pan Q, Yao YF, Xing K, Lou MF.
Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are essential mediators in

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2625

Oncotarget

23.	 Kurosu H, Choi M, Ogawa Y, Dickson AS, Goetz
R, Eliseenkova AV, Mohammadi M, Rosenblatt KP,
Kliewer  SA, Kuro-o M. Tissue-specific expression of
betaKlotho and fibroblast growth factor (FGF) receptor isoforms determines metabolic activity of FGF19 and FGF21.
J Biol Chem. 2007; 282:26687–26695.

with fibroblast growth factor receptor 4 (FGFR4) to induce
apoptosis and inhibit tumor cell proliferation. J Biol Chem.
2010; 285:30069–30078.
35.	 The Cancer Genome Atlas Network. Comprehensive
molecular portraits of human breast tumours. Nature. 2012;
490:61–70.

24.	 Fon Tacer K, Bookout AL, Ding X, Kurosu H, John
GB, Wang L, Goetz R, Mohammadi M, Kuro-o M,
Mangelsdorf  DJ, Kliewer SA. Research resource:
Comprehensive expression atlas of the fibroblast growth
factor system in adult mouse. Mol Endocrinol. 2010;
24:2050–2064.

36.	 The Cancer Genome Atlas Network, Weinstein JN,
Collisson EA, Mills GB, Shaw KR, Ozenberger BA, Ellrott
K, Shmulevich I, Sander C, Stuart JM. The Cancer Genome
Atlas Pan-Cancer analysis project. Nat. Genet. 2013;
45:1113–1120.
37.	 Curtis C, Shah SP, Chin S-F, Turashvili G, Rueda OM,
Dunning MJ, Speed D, Lynch AG, Samarajiwa S, Yuan Y,
Gräf S, Ha G, Haffari G, Bashashati A, Russell R,
McKinney S, et al. The genomic and transcriptomic architecture of 2,000 breast tumours reveals novel subgroups.
Nature. 2012; 486:346–352.

25.	 Turner N, Grose R. Fibroblast growth factor signalling:
from development to cancer. Nat Rev Cancer. 2010;
10:116–129.
26.	 Katoh M. Genetic alterations of FGF receptors: an emerging
field in clinical cancer diagnostics and therapeutics. Expert
Rev Anticancer Ther. 2010; 10:1375–1379.

38.	 Klein EA, Assoian RK. Transcriptional regulation of the
cyclin D1 gene at a glance. Journal of cell science. 2008;
121:3853–3857.

27.	 Courjal F, Cuny M, Simony-Lafontaine J, Louason G,
Speiser P, Zeillinger R, Rodriguez C, Theillet C. Mapping
of DNA Amplifications at 15 Chromosomal Localizations
in 1875 Breast Tumors: Definition of Phenotypic Groups.
Cancer Research. 1997; 57:4360–4367.

39.	 Wu LM, Guo R, Hui L, Ye YG, Xiang JM, Wan
CY, Zou  M, Ma R, Sun XZ, Yang SJ, Guo DZ.
Stanniocalcin-1 protects bovine intestinal epithelial cells
from oxidative stress-induced damage. J Vet Sci. 2014;
15:475–483.

28.	 Brady N, Chuntova P, Bade LK, Schwertfeger KL. The
FGF/FGFR axis as a therapeutic target in breast cancer.
Expert Rev Endocrinol Metab. 2013; 8:391–402.

40.	 Kim SJ, Ko JH, Yun JH, Kim JA, Kim TE, Lee HJ,
Kim SH, Park KH, Oh JY. Stanniocalcin-1 protects retinal
ganglion cells by inhibiting apoptosis and oxidative damage. PLoS One. 2013; 8:e63749.

29.	 Easton DF, Pooley KA, Dunning AM, Pharoah PD,
Thompson D, Ballinger DG, Struewing JP, Morrison J,
Field H, Luben R, Wareham N, Ahmed S, Healey CS,
Bowman R, Meyer KB, Haiman CA, et al. Genome-wide
association study identifies novel breast cancer susceptibility loci. Nature. 2007; 447:1087–1093.

41.	 Jo-Watanabe A, Ohse T, Nishimatsu H, Takahashi M,
Ikeda  Y, Wada T, Shirakawa J, Nagai R, Miyata T,
Nagano  T, Hirata Y, Inagi R, Nangaku M. Glyoxalase I
reduces glycative and oxidative stress and prevents agerelated endothelial dysfunction through modulation of endothelial nitric oxide synthase phosphorylation. Aging Cell.
2014; 13:519–528.

30.	 Wolf I, Levanon-Cohen S, Bose S, Ligumsky H, Sredni B,
Kanety H, Kuro OM, Karlan B, Kaufman B, Koeffler HP,
Rubinek T. Klotho: a tumor suppressor and a modulator
of the IGF-1 and FGF pathways in human breast cancer.
Oncogene. 2008; .

42.	 Kim KM, Kim YS, Jung DH, Lee J, Kim JS. Increased
glyoxalase I levels inhibit accumulation of oxidative stress
and an advanced glycation end product in mouse mesangial
cells cultured in high glucose. Experimental Cell Research.
2012; 318:152–159.

31.	 Rubinek T, Shulman M, Israeli S, Bose S, Avraham A,
Zundelevich A, Evron E, Gal-Yam EN, Kaufman B,
Wolf I. Epigenetic silencing of the tumor suppressor klotho
in human breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2012;
133:649–657.

43.	 Liu Y, Lu L, Hettinger CL, Dong G, Zhang D, Rezvani K,
Wang X, Wang H. Ubiquilin-1 protects cells from oxidative
stress and ischemic stroke caused tissue injury in mice. The
Journal of neuroscience : 2014; 34:2813–2821.

32.	 Lee J, Jeong DJ, Kim J, Lee S, Park JH, Chang B, Jung SI,
Yi L, Han Y, Yang Y, Kim KI, Lim JS, Yang I, Jeon S,
Bae DH, Kim CJ, et al. The anti-aging gene KLOTHO is
a novel target for epigenetic silencing in human cervical
carcinoma. Mol Cancer. 2010; 9:109.

44.	 Saha T. LAMP2A overexpression in breast tumors promotes cancer cell survival via chaperone-mediated autophagy. Autophagy. 2012; 8:1643–1656.

33.	 Ye X, Guo Y, Zhang Q, Chen W, Hua X, Liu W, Yang Y,
Chen G. betaKlotho suppresses tumor growth in hepatocellular carcinoma by regulating Akt/GSK-3beta/cyclin D1
signaling pathway. PLoS One. 2013; 8:e55615.

45.	 Lehmann BD, Bauer JA, Chen X, Sanders ME,
Chakravarthy AB, Shyr Y, Pietenpol JA. Identification of
human triple-negative breast cancer subtypes and preclinical models for selection of targeted therapies. The Journal
of clinical investigation. 2011; 121:2750–2767.

34.	 Luo Y, Yang C, Lu W, Xie R, Jin C, Huang P, Wang F,
McKeehan WL. Metabolic regulator betaKlotho interacts

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2626

Oncotarget

46.	 Taliaferro-Smith L, Oberlick E, Liu T, McGlothen T,
Alcaide T, Tobin R, Donnelly S, Commander R, Kline E,
Nagaraju GP, Havel L, Marcus A, Nahta R, O’Regan R.
FAK activation is required for IGF1R-mediated regulation
of EMT, migration, and invasion in mesenchymal triple
negative breast cancer cells. Oncotarget. 2015; 6:4757–
4772. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.3023.

Takahashi M, Boothman DA, Kuro-o M. Klotho inhibits
transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1) signaling and suppresses renal fibrosis and cancer metastasis in mice. The Journal of biological chemistry. 2011;
286:8655–8665.
59.	 Ito S, Fujimori T, Hayashizaki Y, Nabeshima Y.
Identification of a novel mouse membrane-bound family
1 glycosidase-like protein, which carries an atypical active
site structure. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2002; 1576:341–345.

47.	 Yang L, Wu X, Wang Y, Zhang K, Wu J, Yuan YC,
Deng X, Chen L, Kim CC, Lau S, Somlo G, Yen Y. FZD7
has a critical role in cell proliferation in triple negative
breast cancer. Oncogene. 2011; 30:4437–4446.

60.	 Goetz R, Ohnishi M, Ding X, Kurosu H, Wang L,
Akiyoshi J, Ma J, Gai W, Sidis Y, Pitteloud N, Kuro-o M,
Razzaque MS, Mohammadi M. Klotho Co-Receptors Inhibit
Signaling by Paracrine FGF8 Subfamily Ligands. Molecular
and Cellular Biology. 2012; .

48.	 Wang CA, Harrell JC, Iwanaga R, Jedlicka P, Ford HL.
Vascular endothelial growth factor C promotes breast cancer progression via a novel antioxidant mechanism that
involves regulation of superoxide dismutase 3. Breast
Cancer Res. 2014; 16:462.

61.	 Cagnol S, Chambard J-C. ERK and cell death: Mechanisms
of ERK-induced cell death - apoptosis, autophagy and
senescence. FEBS Journal. 2010; 277:2–21.

49.	 Kim J, Eskiocak U, Stadler G, Lou Z, Kuro-o M, Shay JW,
Wright WE. Short hairpin RNA screen indicates that Klotho
beta/FGF19 protein overcomes stasis in human colonic epithelial cells. The Journal of biological chemistry. 2011;
286:43294–43300.

62.	 Liou G-Y, Storz P. Reactive oxygen species in cancer. Free
Radic Res. 2010; 44:479–496.
63.	 Kurosu H, Yamamoto M, Clark JD, Pastor JV, Nandi A,
Gurnani P, McGuinness OP, Chikuda H, Yamaguchi M,
Kawaguchi H, Shimomura I, Takayama Y, Herz J, Kahn CR,
Rosenblatt KP, Kuro-o M. Suppression of aging in mice by
the hormone Klotho. Science. 2005; 309:1829–1833.

50.	 Comprehensive molecular portraits of human breast
tumours. Nature. 2012; 490:61–70.
51.	 Lehmann BD, Pietenpol JA. Identification and use of
biomarkers in treatment strategies for triple-negative
breast cancer subtypes. The Journal of pathology. 2014;
232:142–150.

64.	 Yamamoto M, Clark JD, Pastor JV, Gurnani P,
Nandi A, Kurosu H, Miyoshi M, Ogawa Y, Castrillon DH,
Rosenblatt KP, Kuro-o M. Regulation of oxidative stress
by the anti-aging hormone klotho. J Biol Chem. 2005;
280:38029–38034.

52.	 Hirshfield KM, Ganesan S. Triple-negative breast cancer:
molecular subtypes and targeted therapy. Curr Opin Obstet
Gynecol. 2014; 26:34–40.
53.	 Wang L, Wang X, Jie P, Lu H, Zhang S, Lin X, Lam EK,
Cui Y, Yu J, Jin H. Klotho is silenced through promoter
hypermethylation in gastric cancer. Am J Cancer Res. 2011;
1:111–119.

65.	 Hsieh CC, Kuro-o M, Rosenblatt KP, Brobey R,
Papaconstantinou J. The ASK1-Signalosome regulates p38
MAPK activity in response to levels of endogenous oxidative stress in the Klotho mouse models of aging. Aging
(Albany NY). 2010; 2:597–611.

54.	 Pan J, Zhong J, Gan LH, Chen SJ, Jin HC, Wang X,
Wang LJ. Klotho, an anti-senescence related gene, is
frequently inactivated through promoter hypermethylation in colorectal cancer. Tumour Biol. 2011;
32:729–735.

66.	 Ravikumar P, Ye J, Zhang J, Pinch SN, Hu MC, Kuro-o M,
Hsia CC, Moe OW. alpha-Klotho protects against oxidative damage in pulmonary epithelia. American journal of
physiology Lung cellular and molecular physiology. 2014;
307:L566–575.

55.	 Xie B, Zhou J, Yuan L, Ren F, Liu DC, Li Q, Shu G.
Epigenetic silencing of Klotho expression correlates with
poor prognosis of human hepatocellular carcinoma. Hum
Pathol. 2013; 44:795–801.

67.	 Kokkinaki M, Abu-Asab M, Gunawardena N, Ahern G,
Javidnia M, Young J, Golestaneh N. Klotho regulates retinal
pigment epithelial functions and protects against oxidative
stress. The Journal of neuroscience : 2013; 33:16346–16359.

56.	 Zhu Y, Xu L, Zhang J, Xu W, Liu Y, Yin H, Lv T, An H,
Liu L, He H, Zhang H, Liu J, Xu J, Lin Z. Klotho suppresses tumor progression via inhibiting PI3K/Akt/
GSK3beta/Snail signaling in renal cell carcinoma. Cancer
Sci. 2013; 104:663–671.

68.	 Zeldich E, Chen CD, Colvin TA, Bove-Fenderson EA,
Liang J, Tucker Zhou TB, Harris DA, Abraham CR. The
neuroprotective effect of Klotho is mediated via regulation
of members of the redox system. The Journal of biological
chemistry. 2014; 289:24700–24715.

57.	 Chang B, Kim J, Jeong D, Jeong Y, Jeon S, Jung SI,
Yang Y, Kim KI, Lim JS, Kim C, Lee MS. Klotho inhibits
the capacity of cell migration and invasion in cervical cancer. Oncology reports. 2012; 28:1022–1028.

69.	 Jo-Watanabe A, Ohse T, Nishimatsu H, Takahashi M, Ikeda Y,
Wada T, Shirakawa J-i, Nagai R, Miyata T, Nagano T, Hirata
Y, Inagi R, Nangaku M. Glyoxalase I reduces glycative and
oxidative stress and prevents age-related endothelial dysfunction through modulation of endothelial nitric oxide synthase
phosphorylation. Aging Cell. 2014; 13:519–528.

58.	 Doi S, Zou Y, Togao O, Pastor JV, John GB,
Wang L, Shiizaki K, Gotschall R, Schiavi S, Yorioka N,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2627

Oncotarget

70.	 Chiavarina B, Nokin M-J, Florence Durieux Fx,
Bianchi E, Andrei Turtoi Ax, Peulen O, Peixoto P,
Irigaray P, Uchida K, Belpomme D, Delvenne P,
Castronovo V, Bellahcène A. Triple negative tumors accumulate significantly less methylglyoxal specific adducts
than other human breast cancer subtypes. 2014; .

72.	 Bookout AL, Cummins CL, Mangelsdorf DJ, Pesola JM,
Kramer MF. High-throughput real-time quantitative reverse
transcription PCR. Curr Protoc Mol Biol. 2006; . Chapter
15:Unit 15 18.

71.	 Cheang MC, Chia SK, Voduc D, Gao D, Leung S, Snider J,
Watson M, Davies S, Bernard PS, Parker JS, Perou CM,
Ellis MJ, Nielsen TO. Ki67 index, HER2 status, and

73.	 Peña-Llopis S, Christie A, Xie X-J, Brugarolas J. Cooperation
and Antagonism among Cancer Genes: The Renal Cancer
Paradigm. Cancer Research. 2013; 73:4173–4179.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

prognosis of patients with luminal B breast cancer. J Natl
Cancer Inst. 2009; 101:736–750.

2628

Oncotarget

