Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No.5

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Prognostic and therapeutic impact of RPN2-mediated tumor
malignancy in non-small-cell lung cancer
Yu Fujita1,2, Shigehiro Yagishita3, Fumitaka Takeshita1, Yusuke Yamamoto1,
Kazuyoshi Kuwano2, Takahiro Ochiya1
1

Division of Molecular and Cellular Medicine, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tsukiji, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan

2

Division of Respiratory Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, Jikei University School of Medicine, Nishi-shinbashi,
Minato-ku, Tokyo 105-8471, Japan

3

Depertment of Thoracic Oncology, National Cancer Center Hospital, Tsukiji, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan

Correspondence to:
Takahiro Ochiya, e-mail: tochiya@ncc.go.jp
Keywords: RPN2, NSCLC, RNAi, siRNA, malignancy
Received: October 02, 2014	

Accepted: November 20, 2014	

Published: January 20, 2015

ABSTRACT
RNA interference (RNAi) is a powerful gene-silencing platform for cancer
treatment. Previously, we demonstrated that ribophorin II (RPN2), which is part of
the N-oligosaccharyl transferase complex, regulates docetaxel sensitivity and tumor
lethal phenotypes in breast cancer. However, the molecular functions and clinical
relevance of RPN2 in non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) remain unknown. Here,
we examined RPN2 expression in tumor specimens from recurrent NSCLC patients
after resection (n = 32 and = 177) and assessed the correlation between RPN2
expression and various clinical features. We also investigated whether RPN2 affects
cancer malignancy in vitro and tumor growth and drug resistance in vivo.
Our data show that RPN2 expression confers early and distant recurrence as
well as poor survival in NSCLC patients. Furthermore, RPN2 silencing suppressed cell
proliferation and invasiveness, and increased the sensitivity to chemotherapeutic
drugs in vitro. Remarkably, we found that intrinsic apoptosis signaling is the
mechanism of cell death involved with RPN2 knockdown. Strikingly, RPN2 silencing
repressed tumorigenicity and sensitized the tumors to cisplatin treatment, which led
to the longer survival of NSCLC-bearing mice.
In conclusion, these data suggest that RPN2 is involved in the regulation of lethal
cancer phenotypes and represents a promising new target for RNAi-based medicine
against NSCLC.

[1]. With evidence that molecular targeted therapy is a
major improvement over conventional chemotherapy
when applied to appropriately selected patients, the
evaluation for epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
mutations and anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) gene
rearrangements are considered to be the standard of
care in advanced lung adenocarcinomas [2]. Despite
the development of these novel targeted therapies, the
median survival rate of individuals with advanced lung
cancer remains poor because of drug resistance and tumor
recurrence [3]. Therefore, understanding the critical
molecular mechanisms underlying the development of
these malignant phenotypes in NSCLC is important for
developing novel and effective therapeutic strategies.

INTRODUCTION
Lung cancer remains the most common cause of
cancer-related death in the world. Approximately 85%
of all lung cancers are categorized as non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC). Many therapeutic strategies,
including surgery, radiation therapy, and cytotoxic
chemotherapy, are commonly used to treat lung cancer,
either alone or in combination. Only a small percentage
of newly diagnosed patients present with early stage
NSCLC, and surgery remains the best therapeutic
strategy for these patients. Approximately 70% of all
newly diagnosed patients present with locally advanced
or metastatic disease and require systemic chemotherapy
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3335

Oncotarget

RNA interference (RNAi) is a natural endogenous
mechanism for silencing gene expression that has
recently become the focus of considerable attention
because of its potential use in new drugs [4]. Cancer
is a major target of RNAi-based therapy because
oncogenes, mutated tumor suppressor genes, and
several other genes that contribute to tumor progression
and drug resistance are potentially important targets for
gene silencing by small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) or
short hairpin RNAs (shRNAs). Dozens of RNAi-based
therapeutics are currently undergoing preclinical and
clinical trials, and very few recent discoveries have
attracted as much attention as the application of RNAi
technology [5].
Previously, Honma et al. showed that ribophorin
II (RPN2), which is part of an N-oligosaccharyl
transferase complex, regulates the glycosylation of
multi-drug resistance (MDR1, as well as ABCB1) [6].
RPN2 siRNA decreased the membrane localization of
P-glycoprotein by reducing its glycosylation status and
restored the sensitivity to docetaxel (DTX). Moreover,
Takahashi et al. showed that RPN2 is multifunctional
and tightly regulates tumor initiation and metastasis
through the stabilization of mutant p53 in breast cancer
cells [7]. Kurashige et al. showed that RPN2 expression
is also able to predict the DTX response of esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma [8]. Additionally, a recent study
by Zhu et al. showed that RPN2 is highly expressed in the
CD24+CD44+ cancer stem-like cells of pancreatic cancer
[9]. However, it remains unclear whether these malignant
phenotypes would be effective in other solid tumors,
including lung cancer. Recently, we reported that a novel
RNAi therapeutic platform against RPN2 demonstrated
an efficient inhibition of lung tumor growth [10], but
we have not yet revealed the molecular functions and
clinical relevance of RPN2 in lung cancer. In this study,
we examined RPN2 expression in tumor specimens from
NSCLC patients who experienced recurrence after curative
resection and assessed the correlation between RPN2
expression and the clinical features such as recurrence
phenotypes and overall survival. Additionally, we also
investigated whether RPN2 affected cancer malignancy in
vitro as well as tumor growth and drug resistance in vivo.
Our findings suggest that RPN2 may be a novel target
for RNAi-based technology against NSCLC in clinical
translational medicine.

of primary NSCLC tissues (32 cases) and adjacent
normal lung tissues (10 cases) from patients with postoperative recurrence (Table 1). We observed an increase
in RPN2 expression in the tumor tissue compared with
normal tissues (Figure 1A; P = 0.0019). To further
understand the potential biological significance of
a high RPN2 expression level during lung cancer
progression, we evaluated the correlation between the
RPN2 expression profile and relapse-free survival in
the cohort study. The Kaplan-Meier analysis indicated
that high expression levels of RPN2 were significantly
associated with poor relapse-free survival using the
median value as the cut-off (Figure 1B; P = 0.0421).
This statistical analysis revealed that there is a significant
correlation between high RPN2 expression and distant
recurrent metastasis (Table 1; P = 0.0339). We found
no significant correlation between RPN2 expression
and other clinicopathological features (Table 1). The
immunohistochemical analysis revealed that RPN2
protein was weakly to strongly expressed in all of these
specimens and localized in the cytoplasm. Additionally,
there are no significant differences in the expression
of RPN2 between adenocarcinoma and squamous cell
carcinoma (Figure 1C). These findings suggest that a
high RPN2 expression level in NSCLC is correlated with
early recurrence and distant metastasis and may regulate
lung cancer progression.

RPN2 regulates various malignant phenotypes of
NSCLC in vitro
To investigate the functional effects of regulating
RPN2 in NSCLC cells, we first verified the expression of
RPN2 mRNA in various lung cancer cell lines (Figure 2A).
We found a higher expression of RPN2 in PC14 cells than
in A549-luc-C8, H226, H358, or PC9 cells. In this study,
we selected two cell lines, A549-luc-C8 (mutant k-ras)
and PC14 (mutant p53), in which to analyze the detailed
functions of RPN2 in NSCLC. Then, we conducted
siRNA-based silencing of RPN2 in these two cell lines.
The reduced expression of RPN2 was verified by qRTPCR (Supplementary Figure 1A) and western blot analysis
(Supplementary Figure 1B). As shown in Supplementary
Figure 1C, RPN2 siRNA inhibited the cell proliferation
of A549-luc-C8 and PC14 cells. To evaluate the mode of
cell death induced by RPN2 silencing in lung cancer cells,
we performed assays for apoptosis using Hoechst staining
and western blot analyses in these cells after RPN2 siRNA
transfection. The number of apoptotic cells, as assessed by
Hoechst 33342 staining, was significantly higher in these
cell types after RPN2 siRNA transfection (Figure 2B &
Supplementary Figure 2A). Additionally, we assessed
the expression of Bax and Bcl-2, the two principal genes
involved in intrinsic apoptosis control, by western blot
analysis. The results showed that Bax expression increased
and Bcl-2 expression decreased in the two cell lines
after RPN2 siRNA transfection compared with negative

RESULTS
High RPN2 expression in post-operative NSCLC
patients is significantly associated with early and
distant recurrence
To explore the role of RPN2 in NSCLC, we
analyzed the mRNA expression level of RPN2 using
quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) in a cohort study
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3336

Oncotarget

control siRNA transfection (Figure 2C & Supplementary
Figure 2B). These results suggest that the intrinsic
apoptosis signaling pathway is the mode of cell death
induced by RPN2 silencing in lung cancer cells. Next,
we assessed the effects of RPN2 silencing on cell
invasion and drug sensitivity. Remarkably, we observed

that siRNA-based silencing of RPN2 in these cell lines
resulted in a significant decrease in invasion and sensitized
the response of the cells to Cisplatin (CDDP) and DTX
(Figure 2D, 2E, 2F). Thus, the results of all of these
experiments suggest that RPN2 silencing inhibits various
malignant phenotypes of NSCLC in vitro.

Figure 1: RPN2 confers early tumor relapse in NSCLC. (A) qRT-PCR analysis of the expression levels of RPN2 in tumor samples

(n = 32) and normal lung tissues (n = 10). (B) The relapse-free survival Kaplan-Meier curves were based on RPN2 expression, and the
median RPN2 expression was used to define low and high expressers (P = 0.0421). (C) HE staining and immunohistochemical staining
for RPN2 protein in representative tumors of lung cancer patients (adenocarcinoma (Ad) and squamous cell carcinoma (SCC)) are shown
(scale bar 100 μm).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3337

Oncotarget

Table 1: Characteristics of the participating patients of a cohort study (n = 32)
Features
Median Age (Range)

Total (n = 32)
65.5 (44–75)

P-value

RPN2
Low (n = 16)

High (n = 16)

60.5 (46–75)

67.5 (44–74)

Gender
  Male / Female

1
28 / 4

14 / 2

14 / 2

Histological subtype

0.068

 Adenocarcinoma

21

13

8

  Squamous cell carcinoma

11

3

8

Smoking status
  Never / Former or Current

0.500
7 / 25

4 / 12

3 / 13

Pathological Stage (%)

0.379

  Stage I

8

5

3

  Stage II

7

1

6

  Stage III

17

10

7

  Stage IV

0

0

0

RPN2 mRNA expression

0.000

 High

16

0

16

 Low

16

16

0

Recurrence

0.038

  Local (lung, local lymph node)

18

11

5

  Distant (other organs)

14

5

11

RPN2 silencing contributes to the inhibition of
tumor growth and drug resistance in vivo

by RPN2 in vivo. Next, to investigate whether RPN2
silencing affects the drug resistance of A549-luc-C8 cells
to CDDP in vivo, tumors were initiated in scid mice and
then followed by an intraperitoneal injection of 2.5 μg/kg
CDDP once a week for three weeks (Figure 3F). At four
weeks after orthotopic transplantation, the tumors formed
in the A549-luc-C8-shRPN2-bearing mice (n = 10) were
significantly smaller compared with the tumors in the
A549-luc-C8-shNC-bearing mice (n = 10) based on
bioluminescence imaging results (Figure 3G). All the mice
were evaluated for survival, and A549-luc-C8-shRPN2bearing mice survived longer than the A549-luc-C8-shNCbearing mice (Figure 3H; P = 0.0149). Together, these
results indicate that RPN2 silencing confers therapeutic
and survival advantages to lung cancer cells in vivo.

To validate the function of RPN2 as a regulator
of lung tumor progression in vitro, we first established
stable clones of A549-luc-C8 cells expressing shRNA
against RPN2 (A549-luc-C8-shRPN2) or control shRNA
(A549-luc-C8-shNC). The reduced expression of RPN2
was verified by qRT-PCR and western blot analysis
(Figure 3A). We examined the effects of A549-luc-C8shRPN2 cells on tumorigenicity and drug resistance
using lung cancer xenograft models established by direct
intrathoracic injection (left lung) into scid mice. Using
bioluminescence imaging, we found that the primary
lung tumor growth of A549-luc-C8-shRPN2 cells
(n = 10) was less than that of A549-luc-C8-shNC cells
(n = 10) (Figure 3B, 3C). Histological analyses also
revealed that RPN2 silencing represses the tumor growth
of this lung cancer cell line (Figure 3D). Additionally, the
weight of the lungs significantly decreased in the A549luc-C8-shRPN2-bearing mice group (Figure 3E). However,
none of the mice from either group developed distant
metastases during the observation period; therefore, we
could not investigate the metastatic phenotypes regulated
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

0.269

Survival outcomes of RPN2 expression in a
validation cohort study
To further understand the potential biological
significance and clinical relevance of RPN2 expression
in lung cancer progression, we evaluated the correlation
between RPN2 expression and survival in tumor
specimens from 177 NSCLC patients who experienced
3338

Oncotarget

Figure 2: RPN2 regulates malignant phenotypes of lung cancer cells in vitro. (A) qRT-PCR analysis of the expression levels

of RPN2 in human lung cancer cell lines. (B) Representative images (left panels, pictures) and quantification (right panels, graphs) of
Hoechst 33342-stained sections after each siRNA transfection (scale bar 50 μm). (C) A549-luc-C8 cells were transiently transfected with
each siRNA. Bax and Bcl-2 expression was detected using immunoblot analysis. β-actin was used as a loading control. (D) Representative
images (left panels, pictures) and quantification (right panels, graphs) of the effect on cell invasion in A549-luc-C8 or PC14 cells transfected
with each siRNA (scale bar 100 μm). The invasive values were normalized to the values from control cells. (E and F) IC50 after CDDP or
DTX treatment in A549-luc-C8 (E) or PC14 cells (F) transfected with each siRNA. *P < 0.05.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3339

Oncotarget

Figure 3: RPN2 regulates tumorigenicity and drug resistance in vivo. (A) qRT-PCR and immunoblot analysis of the expression

levels of RPN2 in A549-luc-C8-shNC and -shRPN2 cells. (B and C) The bioluminescent change emitted from the whole body of the mouse
(B) and representative bioluminescence images of lung tumor growth in each group (10 mice per group) (C) are shown. (D) Representative
pictures of HE staining of the left lung are shown (scale bar 200 μm). White dotted lines indicate the area containing the tumors. (E) The
ratio of lung weight per total body weight in mice was calculated. (F) The protocol of the repeat intraperitoneal injection (IP injection) of
CDDP (10 mice per group). (G) Representative bioluminescence images of lung tumor growth after repeat administration of CDDP are shown.
(H) The overall survival rate of each group was estimated by the Kaplan-Meier method (P = 0.0421). *P < 0.05. **P < 0.01. NC, negative control.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3340

Oncotarget

in vitro. Remarkably, we found that the intrinsic apoptosis
signaling pathway is the mechanism of cell death induced
by RPN2 silencing in lung cancer cells. Notably, RPN2
silencing by shRNAs repressed lung tumor growth and
sensitized the lung cancer cells to CDDP treatment, which
led to the longer survival of lung cancer-bearing mice.
These data suggest that RPN2 promotes lung cancer cell
malignancy and represents a promising novel target for
RNAi-based therapeutics against NSCLC.
RPN2 is a key regulator in modulating DTX
sensitivity in breast cancer cells through the glycosylation
of P-glycoproteins [6]. Moreover, RPN2 silencing reduced
the glycosylation of MDR1 and decreased its membrane
localization, which thereby sensitized the cancer cells to
DTX. Recently, it was also reported that RPN2 expression
may be a potential therapeutic target for drug resistance
and a promising prognostic biomarker for various types
of cancer [8, 11]. We have also recently demonstrated that
RPN2 regulates cancer stem cell properties through the
functional suppression of glycogen synthase kinase 3β
(GSK3β) in breast cancer cells [7]. Based on this strong

recurrence after curative resection (Supplementary
Table 1). The RPN2 expression levels were measured
by qRT-PCR, and the Kaplan-Meier analysis indicated
that high expression levels of RPN2 were significantly
correlated with poor relapse-free survival (Figure 4A;
P = 0.0013). Furthermore, we examined the association
between RPN2 and overall survival. Based on the
mRNA expression levels and clinical data, we observed a
significant negative correlation between RPN2 expression
and overall survival (Figure 4B; P = 0.021). In conclusion,
our data suggest that RPN2 is a novel potential therapeutic
target for NSCLC.

DISCUSSION
In the present study, we show that the RPN2 gene
is significantly correlated with early and distant tumor
recurrence as well as poor survival in NSCLC patients.
Furthermore, RPN2 silencing by siRNAs suppresses
cell proliferation and invasiveness and increases the
sensitivity of lung cancer cells to chemotherapeutic drugs

Figure 4: The clinical relevance of RPN2 in a validation cohort study of NSCLC. (A) Relapse-free survival outcome correlated
with RPN2 expression in a validation cohort study. (P = 0.0013, n = 177). (B) Scatter plots between RPN2 gene expression and overall
survival (P = 0.021, n = 177).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3341

Oncotarget

evidence supporting these novel functions of RPN2, we
suggest that RPN2 expression not only controls DTX
sensitivity but also plays multifunctional roles in various
types of cancer cells. In this study, we show that RNAimediated knockdown of RPN2 in NSCLC resulted in cell
death in vitro and in vivo by downregulating the antiapoptotic intrinsic pathway independent of k-ras or p53
status. It has been reported that the upregulation of antiapoptotic Bcl-2 family genes is an important regulator of
tumor malignancy and drug resistance [12–14]. In our
study, RPN2 silencing by siRNA in lung cancer cells
selectively regulated the expression of two principal
genes involved in intrinsic apoptosis control. We speculate
that RPN2 confers lung cancer cell growth and various
lethal phenotypes by modulating anti-apoptotic intrinsic
signaling.
The invasion-metastasis cascade is a biological
sequence of steps that describes how cancer cells from
a primary tumor can form distant metastases. In this
study, we also show that RPN2 modulates the metastatic
phenotypes in recurrent NSCLC patients as well as the
cell invasion ability of lung cancer cells. Although the
molecular mechanism underlying the cell invasiveness
related to RPN2 remains unknown, our recent study
reported that glycosylated CD63 by RPN2 plays an
important role in breast cancer cell invasiveness by
regulating MDR1 localization [15]. CD63 was the first
tetraspanin to be identified and regulates the biological
function of various solid tumors, especially those with
metastatic potential [16]. Further studies are needed to
elucidate whether the glycosylation status of CD63 plays
a role in tumor cell invasion and metastatic phenotypes
regulated by RPN2 in NSCLC.
Our preclinical studies demonstrate the clinical
relevance of RPN2-mediated cancer malignancy in
various types of solid cancer. Currently, we are conducting
a clinical phase I study of siRNA targeting RPN2 in
advanced breast cancer patients in Japan and anticipate
that this study will generate novel information that
will be useful for NSCLC treatment. It is important for
successful clinical application to assess the safety and
tolerability of RPN2-siRNA in human body. Thus, RNAibased approaches are a promising therapeutic strategy
for cancer treatment. The crucial problems impeding
the development of RNAi-based therapeutics include
effective delivery to target sites, therapeutic potency, and
elimination of off-target effects [17–19]. In particular,
investigators should pay much attention to the off-target
effects induced by siRNA treatment. In this study, we
confirmed that negative control siRNA could not affect
the expression of RPN2 and cell survival and proliferation
of A549-C8-luc and PC14 cells. Furthermore, RPN2siRNA could down-regulate RPN2 expression with
high specificity and inhibit the cell growth of these cells
(Supplementary Figure 1). Therefore, potential of offtarget events caused by RPN2-siRNA treatment could not
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

be concerned in these experiments. Notably, we previously
reported that a novel RNAi-based strategy using aerosol
delivery successfully resulted in inhibition of lung tumor
growth without any significant signs of toxicity in vivo
[10]. Therefore, we believe that RNAi-based therapy will
play a key role in the future treatment of lung cancer.
In conclusion, this study suggests that RPN2
silencing contributes to the regulation of lethal cancer
phenotypes and provides a recurrence and survival
advantage in NSCLC. RNAi-based approaches against the
RPN2 gene may open new avenues for NSCLC treatment
and improve the clinical outcome of the patients.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Reagents
Mouse monoclonal anti-RPN2 (A-1)(sc-166421),
mouse monoclonal anti-Bcl-2 (C-2)(sc-7382), and rabbit
polyclonal anti-Bax (N-20)(sc-493) were purchased
from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Dallas, TX). Mouse
monoclonal anti-actin (C4)(MAB1501) was purchased
from Millipore (Billerica, MA). Hoechst 33342 dye
was obtained from Dojindo (Kumamoto, Japan). The
siRNA targeting human RPN2 mRNA (target sequences
of 5′-GGCCACUGUUAAACUAGAACA-3′ and 5′UUCUAGUUUAACAGUGGCCUG-3′) was purchased
from Bonac (Kurume, Japan). The Allstars Negative
Control siRNA (1027281) was purchased from Qiagen
(Hilden, Germany). CDDP was obtained from Yakult
Honsha Co., Ltd. (Tokyo, Japan). DTX was obtained from
SANOFI K.K. (Tokyo, Japan).

Cell culture and transient transfection
A549-luc-C8 cells were purchased from
PerkinElmer (Norwalk, CT). H226, H358, PC9, and PC14
cell lines were purchased from the American Type Culture
Collection (ATCC, Manassas, VA). These cells were
cultured in RPMI 1640 medium with 10% heat-inactivated
fetal bovine serum (FBS) and an antibiotic-antimycotic
solution (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) at 37°C in 5% CO2.
The siRNA transfection at 25 nM was conducted with
DharmaFECT 1 reagent (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA)
according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Lentiviral vector
transfection (500 ng) was conducted with Lipofectamine
LTX reagent (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s
protocol.

RNA extraction, reverse transcription, and
quantitative real-time RT-PCR (qRT-PCR)
Total RNA was extracted from cultured cells or
human lung tissues using QIAzol and the miRNeasy Mini
Kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.
The purity and concentration of all RNA samples were
3342

Oncotarget

quantified using a NanoDrop ND-1000 spectrophotometer
(Thermo Scientific). Detection of RNA from human
lungs was performed using the Agilent Bioanalyzer 2100
(Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA). Prior to the
analysis, total RNA was prepared using an Agilent RNA
6000 Pico kit (Agilent Technologies) according to the
manufacturer’s protocol. All clinical samples exhibited
RNA Integrity Numbers > 6.0. The reverse transcription
reaction was performed using a High-Capacity cDNA
Reverse Transcription Kit (Applied Biosystems, Foster
City, CA) and a random hexamer primer. The synthesized
cDNAs were quantified by SYBR Green I qRT-PCR.
Quantitative real-time reverse transcription-PCR (qRTPCR) analysis was conducted using primers for human
RPN2 (forward: 5′-CTTCCAGAGCCACTGTCCTC-3′;
reverse: 5′-CCGGTTGTCACCTTCAACTT-3′). β-actin
(forward: 5′-ATTGCCGACAGGATGCAGA-3′; reverse:
5′-GAGTACTTGCGCTCAGGAGGA-3′) was used
for normalization. The relative amounts of RPN2 were
measured using the 2(-Delta Delta C(T)) method. The
reactions were performed using a ABI 7300 Real-Time
PCR System (Applied Biosystems). All reactions were
performed in triplicate.

absorbance at 450 nm was measured using an Envision
Multilabel Reader. Cell viability is expressed as a
percentage of the control (untreated) cell viability. For
each concentration of CDDP and DTX, the mean values
of the mean absorbance rates from eight wells were
calculated. The IC50 (concentration of drug needed to
inhibit cell growth by 50%) was generated from the doseresponse curves for each cell line.

Cell invasion assay
For the invasion assay, 1 × 105 cells were placed in
the upper chamber of each insert in 24-well Biocoat
Matrigel invasion chambers (8 μm pore size; BD
Biosciences). For the assay, the cells were trypsinized
and resuspended in RPMI 1640. Medium supplemented
(750  μL) with 10% FBS was injected into the lower
chambers. The cells were incubated at 37°C as follows:
24 h for A549-luc-C8 and PC14 cells in the invasion
assays. Subsequently, any cells remaining in the top
chambers or on the upper membrane of the inserts were
carefully removed. The cells that migrated through
the membrane and adhered to the lower surface of the
membrane were fixed with methanol and stained with Diff
Quick staining solution. For quantification, the cells were
counted under a microscope in four random fields.

Immunoblot analysis
SDS-PAGE gels were calibrated using Precision
Plus protein standards (161–0375) (Bio-Rad, Hercules,
CA), and anti-RPN2 (1:100), anti-Bcl-2 (1:200), anti-Bax
(1:100), and anti-actin (1:1,000) were used as the primary
antibodies. The dilution ratio of each antibody is indicated
in parentheses. Two secondary antibodies (peroxidaselabeled anti-mouse and anti-rabbit antibodies) were used at
a dilution of 1:10,000. Bound antibody was visualized by
chemiluminescence using an ECL Plus Western blotting
detection system (GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ), and
luminescent images were analyzed with a LuminoImager
(LAS-3000; Fuji Film Inc., Tokyo, Japan).

Lentiviral shRNA transduction
Cell lines stably expressing RPN2 shRNA or control
non-target shRNA were established using a vector-based
shRNA technique and the Human RPN2 shRNA target
5′-GCCACTTTGAAGAACCCAATC-3′ and control
shRNA target 5′-GAAATGTACTGCGCGTGGAGAC-3′.
Briefly, each fragment was subcloned into pGreenPuro
(System Biosciences, Mountain View, CA). Recombinant
lentiviruses were produced following the manufacturer's
instructions. In knockdown experiments, A549-luc-C8
cells were infected with recombinant lentiviruses
expressing control shRNA (shNC) or shRNA against
RPN2 (shRPN2). After transfection, cell lines were
generated by selection with 4 μg/μl puromycin
(Invitrogen).

Cell viability assay
A Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8) (Dojindo) was used
in the cell viability assay. Three thousand cells per well
were seeded into 96-well plates. The following day, the
cells were replenished with fresh medium containing 25
nM of siRNA. The cells were used for cell proliferation
assays or cytotoxicity assays. For the cell proliferation
assay, 10 μl of CCK-8 solution was added to each well
after 24 h, 48 h, 72 h, 96 h, and 120 h. The plate was
further incubated for 2 h at 37°C. The absorbance at 450
nm was measured using an Envision Multilabel Reader
(PerkinElmer). For cytotoxicity assays, the medium
was aspirated off the following day and replaced with
fresh media containing CDDP and DTX at different
concentrations. After three days of culture, the plate was
assayed by adding 10 μl of CCK-8 solution to each well,
and the plate was further incubated for 2 h at 37°C. The
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Animal studies
Animal experiments were performed in compliance
with the guidelines of the Institute for Laboratory
Animal Research, National Cancer Center Research
Institute (Number: T12-004). Six- to seven-week-old
male C.B-17/Icr-scid/scidJcl mice (CLEA, Tokyo,
Japan) were used in the experiments. Intrathoracic
injections were given following a previous protocol with
minor modifications [20]. The cells were resuspended
in PBS as a half volume of inoculum and diluted with
an equal volume of growth factor-reduced Matrigel
(356231; BD Biosciences). For in vivo imaging, the mice
3343

Oncotarget

Statistical analyses

were administered 150 μg/kg D-luciferin (Promega,
Madison, WI) by intraperitoneal injection. Ten minutes
later, photons from the whole body of the animal were
counted by measuring the bioluminescence with an
IVIS imaging system (PerkinElmer) according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. The data were analyzed using
the LIVINGIMAGE 4.2 software (PerkinElmer). Lung
cancer development was monitored twice a week in vivo
by bioluminescent imaging. In the repeated administration
study, the treatment (2.5 μg/kg of CDDP) was performed
on days 7, 14, and 21 (once a week for three weeks, three
treatments total).

All experiments were repeated at least three
times, and the results are expressed as the mean ± SD.
The statistical analyses were mainly conducted using
Student’s t-test or Fisher’s exact test. Pearson's correlation
was estimated between RPN2 and overall survival. The
Kaplan-Meier method was used to estimate survival as a
function of time, and survival differences were analyzed
by the log-rank test. All of the analyses were performed
using PASW statistics version 18.0 (IBM Inc., Armonk,
NY) and STATA version 12.0 software (Stata Corp,
College Station, TX). Probability values < 0.05 indicated
a statistically significant difference.

Clinical lung tissue samples
The study protocol was approved by the Institutional
Review Board at the National Cancer Center (Number:
2012-054). All materials were obtained with written
informed consent and were provided by the National
Cancer Center Biobank. All human lung tissue samples
were from the resected lungs of lung cancer patients
who had recurrence after pulmonary resection at the
Department of Thoracic Surgery in the National Cancer
Center Hospital between 1997 and 2010. We selected 32
lung tumor samples and 10 corresponding normal lung
tissues for the cohort analysis, and 177 lung tumor samples
were selected for the validated cohort study (Table 1 and
Supplementary Table 1). In this study, patients who were
diagnosed with NSCLC (adenocarcinoma or squamous
cell carcinoma) were enrolled. Upon removal of the
surgical specimen, the research personnel immediately
transported the tissues to the Biobank. Tissues were stored
at ˗80°C after snap freezing in liquid nitrogen. All tumors
were reviewed by pathologists and were pathologically
diagnosed according to the World Health Organization
Classification of Tumors.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported, in part, by a grant-in-aid
for the Third-Term Comprehensive 10-Year Strategy for
Cancer Control of Japan including Awardee of Research
Resident Fellowship from the Foundation for Promotion of
Cancer Research (Japan); the Program for the Promotion
of Fundamental Studies in Health Sciences of the National
Institute of Biomedical Innovation (NiBio). National Cancer
Center Biobank is supported by the National Cancer Center
Research and Development Fund, Japan. We gratefully
thank Hisao Asamura, Tomohide Tamura, and Koji Tsuta
for providing clinical samples.

Conflict of interest
The authors declare that no conflicts of interest exist
with regard to this study.

Author contributions
T.O. and K.K. conceived the idea and coordinated
the project. Y.F. performed the experimental work,
and wrote the draft of the manuscript. S.Y. helped with
the experimental work and data analysis. F.T. and Y.Y.
provided helpful discussion. The manuscript was finalized
by T.O. with the assistance of all authors.

Lung histological findings
Human and mouse lung tissues were fixed in
10% neutral buffered formalin, paraffin-processed, and
sectioned at 5 μm. Formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded
slides were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (HE) or
subjected to immunohistochemical (IHC) staining. For
the IHC staining, antigen retrieval was performed by
autoclave heating in a 10 mmol/l sodium citrate buffer
(pH 6.0), and the endogenous peroxidase activity was
blocked with the Immuno Pure Peroxidase Suppressor
(Pierce, Chester, UK). The slides were incubated with
RPN2 primary antibody at 4°C overnight. The next day,
after washing, the samples were incubated with mouse
peroxidase-conjugated anti-mouse IgG (ImmPRESS
Reagent; Vector Labs, Burlingame, CA) for 1 h. The
immunoreactions were visualized with diaminobenzidine.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

REFERENCES
1.	 Ramalingam SS, Owonikoko TK, Khuri FR. Lung cancer:
New biological insights and recent therapeutic advances.
CA Cancer J Clin. 2011; 61:91–112.
2.	 Cheng H, Xu X, Costa DB, Powell CA, Halmos B.
Molecular testing in lung cancer: the time is now. Current
oncology reports. 2010; 12:335–348.
3.	 Pao W, Girard N. New driver mutations in non-small-cell
lung cancer. Lancet Oncol. 2011; 12:175–180.

3344

Oncotarget

4.	 Kim DH, Rossi JJ. Strategies for silencing human disease
using RNA interference. Nat Rev Genet. 2007; 8:173–184.

molecular interaction maps and networks. Oncogene. 2004;
23:2934–2949.

5.	 Davidson BL, McCray PB Jr. Current prospects for
RNA interference-based therapies. Nat Rev Genet. 2011;
12:329–340.

13.	 Kelly PN, Strasser A. The role of Bcl-2 and its pro-survival
relatives in tumourigenesis and cancer therapy. Cell death
and differentiation. 2011; 18:1414–1424.

6.	 Honma K, Iwao-Koizumi K, Takeshita F, Yamamoto Y,
Yoshida T, Nishio K, Nagahara S, Kato K, Ochiya T. RPN2
gene confers docetaxel resistance in breast cancer. Nature
medicine. 2008; 14:939–948.

14.	 Thomas S, Quinn BA, Das SK, Dash R, Emdad L, Dasgupta S,
Wang XY, Dent P, Reed JC, Pellecchia M, Sarkar D,
Fisher PB. Targeting the Bcl-2 family for cancer therapy.
Expert opinion on therapeutic targets. 2013; 17:61–75.

7.	 Takahashi RU, Takeshita F, Honma K, Ono M, Kato K,
Ochiya T. Ribophorin II regulates breast tumor initiation and metastasis through the functional suppression of
GSK3beta. Scientific reports. 2013; 3:2474.

15.	 Tominaga N, Hagiwara K, Kosaka N, Honma K,
Nakagama H, Ochiya T. RPN2-mediated glycosylation of
tetraspanin CD63 regulates breast cancer cell malignancy.
Molecular cancer. 2014; 13:134.

8.	 Kurashige J, Watanabe M, Iwatsuki M, Kinoshita K, Saito S,
Nagai Y, Ishimoto T, Baba Y, Mimori K, Baba H. RPN2
expression predicts response to docetaxel in oesophageal
squamous cell carcinoma. British journal of cancer. 2012;
107:1233–1238.

16.	 Radford KJ, Mallesch J, Hersey P. Suppression of human
melanoma cell growth and metastasis by the melanomaassociated antigen CD63 (ME491). International journal of
cancer Journal international du cancer. 1995; 62:631–635.
17.	 Takeshita F, Ochiya T. Therapeutic potential of RNA interference against cancer. Cancer science. 2006; 97:689–696.

9.	 Zhu J, He J, Liu Y, Simeone DM, Lubman DM.
Identification of glycoprotein markers for pancreatic cancer
CD24+CD44+ stem-like cells using nano-LC-MS/MS and
tissue microarray. J Proteome Res. 2012; 11:2272–2281.

18.	 Boudreau RL, Martins I, Davidson BL. Artificial
­microRNAs as siRNA shuttles: improved safety as compared to shRNAs in vitro and in vivo. Mol Ther. 2009; 17:
169–175.

10.	 Fujita Y, Takeshita F, Mizutani T, Ohgi T, Kuwano K,
Ochiya T. A novel platform to enable inhaled naked RNAi
medicine for lung cancer. Scientific reports. 2013; 3:3325.

19.	 Fujita Y, Takeshita F, Kuwano K, Ochiya T. RNAi
Therapeutic Platforms for Lung Diseases. Pharmaceuticals.
2013; 6:223–250.

11.	 Fujiwara T, Takahashi RU, Kosaka N, Nezu Y, Kawai A,
Ozaki T, Ochiya T. RPN2 Gene Confers Osteosarcoma Cell
Malignant Phenotypes and Determines Clinical Prognosis.
Molecular therapy Nucleic acids. 2014; 3:e189.

20.	 Onn A, Isobe T, Itasaka S, Wu W, O'Reilly MS, Ki
Hong W, Fidler IJ, Herbst RS. Development of an orthotopic model to study the biology and therapy of primary
human lung cancer in nude mice. Clin Cancer Res. 2003;
9:5532–5539.

12.	 Pommier Y, Sordet O, Antony S, Hayward RL, Kohn KW.
Apoptosis defects and chemotherapy resistance:

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3345

Oncotarget

