NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 July 10.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Published in final edited form as:
Cancer Cell. 2008 August 12; 14(2): 103–105. doi:10.1016/j.ccr.2008.07.010.

Beyond genetics: surprising determinants of cell fate in antitumor drugs
Andrew J. Holland1 and Don W. Cleveland1,*
1Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research and Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine,
University of California, 9500 Gilman Drive, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0670, USA

Summary
In this issue of Cancer Cell, Gascoigne and Taylor report their findings of following 10,000 single
cells incubated with three classes of anti-mitotic drugs, including paclitaxel. This extensive
analysis reveals an unappreciated complexity in response to such drugs and demonstrates that it's
more than genetics that determine life or death.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

To maintain its chromosome content, each dividing cell must partition its replicated genome
such that one copy of each chromosome is deposited into each new daughter cell. Errors in
this process lead to the production of aneuploid daughter cells that contain an abnormal
chromosome content. Aneuploidy can have drastic consequences for both the cell and the
organism (Kops et al., 2005). Indeed, while most aneuploid human embryos are inviable,
those that do survive develop severe birth defects such as Down's syndrome (Jacobs and
Hassold, 1995). Furthermore, aneuploidy is a common characteristic of tumor cells and has
been shown in some instances to play a causative role in the development of cancer (Weaver
et al., 2007).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

A major safeguard for protecting cells against chromosome missegregation is the mitotic
checkpoint (also know as the spindle assembly checkpoint) (Kops et al., 2005; Musacchio
and Salmon, 2007). This cell cycle control mechanism operates in every mitosis to ensure
the faithful partitioning of the duplicated chromosomes between the two daughter cells.
Chromosomes are sorted in mitosis by the microtubule spindle to which they attach at a
specialized protein structure known as the kinetochore. Unattached kinetochores are the
source of the mitotic checkpoint signal and act by producing an inhibitor that delays cyclin
B1 degradation and chromosome segregation until all chromosomes have stably attached to
the spindle.
Some drugs that target the mitotic checkpoint have a long history as successful anti-cancer
agents and are commonly used in the treatment of a variety of human cancers (Jackson et al.,
2007). These agents, known as anti-mitotic drugs, generally act by chronically activating the
mitotic checkpoint leading to a prolonged mitotic delay (Rieder and Maiato, 2004). There
are several possible outcomes of this drug induced mitotic delay. Cells may undergo death
while arrested in mitosis or exit mitosis in the presence of the drug and transition into the
subsequent interphase, a process known as “adaptation”. Filming of cyclin B1 levels in
living cells has suggested cyclin B1 is progressively lost during a mitotic delay (Brito and
Rieder, 2006). Eventually, cyclin B1 levels fall below the threshold required to maintain a
mitotic arrest and adaptation occurs. Adapted cells may then continue to cycle, senescence
or execute death pathways from interphase. Despite the clinical importance of predicting
which tumors will show favorable responses to anti-mitotic drugs, the pathways that
*

To whom correspondence should be addressed. dcleveland@ucsd.edu.

Holland and Cleveland

Page 2

determine whether a cell dies, arrests, or proliferates following treatment with anti-mitotic
drugs are not known (Rieder and Maiato, 2004).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Determining cell fate
In this issue, Gascoigne and Taylor provide the most in depth analysis to date of the
response of cancer cells to anti-mitotic agents (Gascoigne and Taylor, 2008). Utilizing
automated, high-throughput, time-lapse microscopy, the authors determine the response of
individual cells from a large panel of tumor cell lines treated with three classes of antimitotic drugs. As anticipated from earlier work, different tumor cell lines vary widely in
their response to anti-mitotic agents. Surprisingly, however, cells within the same line often
also displayed substantial variation in their response to drug treatment. The authors elegantly
and persuasively demonstrate that the variation in the fate of individual cells within a
population cannot be accounted for by initial genetic variation. Indeed, even presumably
genetically identical daughter cells frequently behave differently in the next mitosis, varying
in their response as much as two cells chosen at random from the population. Thus, cell fate
in response to chronic mitotic checkpoint activation is not genetically pre-determined.
Instead, Gascoigne and Taylor's observations implicate a highly unexpected level of
stochastic variation in the signaling pathways activated by anti-mitotic agents.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Having determined a tremendous variation in the behavior of cells to anti-mitotic agents,
Gascoigne and Taylor formulate and test a model in which mitotic cell fate is determined by
two competing networks, one involving the slow destruction of cyclin B1 and the other, the
progressive activation of a putative caspase-dependent death pathway. By establishing the
threshold level of cyclin B1 that is required for mitotic exit, the authors demonstrate that
cells which typically die directly from mitosis only slowly degrade cyclin B1, thereby
failing to breach the threshold required for mitotic exit prior to death (Figure 1B). By
contrast, cells that undergo adaptation progressively destroy cyclin B1 and surpass this
threshold, leading to mitotic exit (Figure 1A). For each cell line tested, inhibiting caspase
activation with a pan-caspase inhibitor, not only reduced the proportion of those cells that
died in mitosis, but also prolonged the duration of the mitotic arrest. This suggests that by
inhibiting caspase-dependent death signals produced by chronic mitotic checkpoint
signaling, cells are provided with more time to degrade cyclin B1 to a level sufficient to
promote mitotic exit (Figure 1C).

Chromosomal instability revisited

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Aneuploidy is a remarkably common characteristic of tumor cells often resulting from an
underlying chromosomal instability (CIN), characterized by the frequent gains and losses of
chromosomes during cell division (Kops et al., 2005). A longstanding, widely held view is
that chromosomally unstable cancer cells possess a weakened mitotic checkpoint that
permits the onset of anaphase in the presence of misaligned chromosomes. This dogma was
challenged in a recent study, which showed CIN cells do not prematurely initiate anaphase,
but rather exhibit an increased incidence of lagging anaphase chromosomes (Thompson and
Compton, 2008). Gascoigne and Taylor confirm these observations and further demonstrate
that CIN cells arrest in mitosis for as long as chromosomally stable cell lines. Taken
together, the evidence is now compelling that the mitotic checkpoint is not compromised in
chromosomally unstable cancer cells. Moreover, the detailed single-cell analysis dispels the
proposal that CIN cells are more sensitive to the killing action of anti-mitotic drugs.
Utilizing their extensive data set, Gascoigne and Taylor further explore the widely held view
that the duration of the mitotic delay may dictate the subsequent cellular response.
Importantly, however, no correlation was found between the length of the delay and the
resulting cell fate. This concurs with a recent report which showed the ability of the mitotic
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 July 10.

Holland and Cleveland

Page 3

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

checkpoint to delay cells in mitosis is a poor predictor of cellular response to anti-mitotic
drugs (Shi et al., 2008). Rather, cell fate was found to correlate much more closely with the
sensitivity of cell lines to apoptosis induced by other factors, such as the broad-spectrum
kinase inhibitor staurosporine (Shi et al., 2008). This implies that sensitivity to apoptotic
signaling may be an important source of variation in the response of cancer cells to antimitotics and suggests more favorable drug responses may be achieved by combining antimitotic drugs with agents that restore apoptotic pathways in death resistant cells.

Future directions

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Previous studies investigating cell fate in response to anti-mitotic agents have predominantly
relied upon indirect assays that average the responses of populations of cells. The enhanced
resolution afforded by direct single-cell assays has now revealed that these prior studies
have dramatically underestimated the variation in cell fate in response to anti-mitotic drugs.
Central questions now raised, but still left unanswered, are what is the identity of the
putative death signal that accumulates during a mitotic delay? What are the relative
thresholds of cyclin B1 and apoptotic signaling required to promote adaptation and death in
various cell lines? What are the pathways responsible for determining cell fate following
adaptation and why do some cell lines show dramatically different responses in different
anti-mitotic drugs that all chronically activate the mitotic checkpoint? Finally, it is important
to bear in mind that the in vitro conditions used here fail to recapitulate aspects of the tumor
microenvironment that may have important influences on cell fate including, for example,
drug clearance by the circulation, which would lead to renewed cell cycling. Indeed,
knowing that stochastic processes can be central to the cells decision to live or die leaves
open the question as to how closely the response of cell lines will model the fate of a
heterogeneous population of tumor cells.

References

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Brito DA, Rieder CL. Mitotic checkpoint slippage in humans occurs via cyclin B destruction in the
presence of an active checkpoint. Curr Biol. 2006; 16:1194–1200. [PubMed: 16782009]
Gascoigne K, Taylor S. Cancer cells display profound intra- and inter-line variation following
prolonged exposure to anti-mitotic drugs. Cancer Cell. 2008; 14:xx–xx.
Jackson JR, Patrick DR, Dar MM, Huang PS. Targeted anti-mitotic therapies: can we improve on
tubulin agents? Nat Rev Cancer. 2007; 7:107–117. [PubMed: 17251917]
Jacobs PA, Hassold TJ. The origin of numerical chromosome abnormalities. Adv Genet. 1995;
33:101–133. [PubMed: 7484451]
Kops GJ, Weaver BA, Cleveland DW. On the road to cancer: aneuploidy and the mitotic checkpoint.
Nat Rev Cancer. 2005; 5:773–785. [PubMed: 16195750]
Musacchio A, Salmon ED. The spindle-assembly checkpoint in space and time. Nat Rev Mol Cell
Biol. 2007; 8:379–393. [PubMed: 17426725]
Rieder CL, Maiato H. Stuck in division or passing through: what happens when cells cannot satisfy the
spindle assembly checkpoint. Dev Cell. 2004; 7:637–651. [PubMed: 15525526]
Shi J, Orth JD, Mitchison T. Cell type variation in responses to antimitotic drugs that target
microtubules and kinesin-5. Cancer Res. 2008; 68:3269–3276. [PubMed: 18451153]
Thompson SL, Compton DA. Examining the link between chromosomal instability and aneuploidy in
human cells. J Cell Biol. 2008; 180:665–672. [PubMed: 18283116]
Weaver BA, Silk AD, Montagna C, Verdier-Pinard P, Cleveland DW. Aneuploidy acts both
oncogenically and as a tumor suppressor. Cancer Cell. 2007; 11:25–36. [PubMed: 17189716]

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 July 10.

Holland and Cleveland

Page 4

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Figure 1.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Model for two competing networks that together dictate mitotic cell fate. A. Cyclin B1
(blue) is progressively destroyed during a mitotic delay and at the same time a putative death
signal (possibly also produced by the mitotic checkpoint) accumulates (red). Eventually
cyclin B1 levels fall bellow a threshold required to maintain mitotic arrest and the cell (e.g.,
a retinal pigmented epithelial [RPE] cell) undergoes adaptation. B. Cyclin B1 levels fall
during mitotic delay, but fail to decline to the threshold required to allow mitotic exit.
Instead, the apoptotic signal reaches a level sufficient to promote cell death in mitosis (e.g.,
HT29 cell). C. Slowing the activation of apoptotic effectors by treatment with a caspase
inhibitor provides (e.g., the HT29 cell) with more time to destroy cyclin B1. This allows
cyclin B1 levels to reach the threshold required to promote mitotic exit before apoptosis is
initiated.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 July 10.

