Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 11

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Ursolic acid inhibits the growth of human pancreatic cancer
and enhances the antitumor potential of gemcitabine in
an orthotopic mouse model through suppression of the
inflammatory microenvironment
Sahdeo Prasad1, Vivek R. Yadav1, Bokyung Sung1, Subash C. Gupta1, Amit K. Tyagi1,
Bharat B. Aggarwal1,2
1

 epartment of Experimental Therapeutics, Cytokine Research Laboratory, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
D
Center, Houston, TX, USA

2

Anti-inflammatory Research Institute, San Deigo, CA, USA

Correspondence to: Sahdeo Prasad, e-mail: spbiotech@gmail.com, sprasad@mdanderson.org
Keywords: ursolic acid, pancreatic cancer, NF-kappaB, anticancer, chemosensitization
Received: September 17, 2015     Accepted: January 06, 2016     Published: February 20, 2016

ABSTRACT
The development of chemoresistance in human pancreatic cancer is one reason
for the poor survival rate for patients with this cancer. Because multiple gene products
are linked with chemoresistance, we investigated the ability of ursolic acid (UA)
to sensitize pancreatic cancer cells to gemcitabine, a standard drug used for the
treatment of pancreatic cancer. These investigations were done in AsPC-1, MIA PaCa-2,
and Panc-28 cells and in nude mice orthotopically implanted with Panc-28 cells.
In vitro, UA inhibited proliferation, induced apoptosis, suppressed NF-κB activation
and its regulated proliferative, metastatic, and angiogenic proteins. UA (20 μM) also
enhanced gemcitabine (200 nM)-induced apoptosis and suppressed the expression of
NF-κB-regulated proteins. In the nude mouse model, oral administration of UA (250
mg/kg) suppressed tumor growth and enhanced the effect of gemcitabine (25 mg/kg).
Furthermore, the combination of UA and gemcitabine suppressed the metastasis of
cancer cells to distant organs such as liver and spleen. Immunohistochemical analysis
showed that biomarkers of proliferation (Ki-67) and microvessel density (CD31) were
suppressed by the combination of UA and gemcitabine. UA inhibited the activation
of NF-κB and STAT3 and the expression of tumorigenic proteins regulated by these
inflammatory transcription factors in tumor tissue. Furthermore, the combination of
two agents decreased the expression of miR-29a, closely linked with tumorigenesis, in
the tumor tissue. UA was found to be bioavailable in animal serum and tumor tissue.
These results suggest that UA can inhibit the growth of human pancreatic tumors
and sensitize them to gemcitabine by suppressing inflammatory biomarkers linked
to proliferation, invasion, angiogenesis, and metastasis.

cause of a disease or condition is poorly understood [2].
This cancer is rarely curable and has an overall survival
rate of less than 4% [3]. Although surgery, chemotherapy,
radiation therapy, immunotherapy, and vaccine therapy are
used for the treatment of pancreatic cancer, these therapies
are less effective than in some other and highly expensive.
Gemcitabine is the standard chemotherapeutic agent
for advanced pancreatic cancer. Clinical trials of various
phases have investigated combinations of gemcitabine with
erlotinib [an epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
inhibitor], platinum analogues, bevacizumab [a vascular

INTRODUCTION
Carcinoma of the pancreas has had a markedly
increased incidence during the past several decades.
Pancreatic cancer accounts for about 7% of all cancer
deaths and ranks fourth as a cause of cancer death among
both men and women in the US. In 2015, an estimated
48,960 new cases and 40,560 deaths from pancreatic
cancer will occur in the United States [1]. High rate of
mortality is associated with pancreatic cancer, however the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13182

Oncotarget

endothelial growth factor (VEGF) inhibitor], or celecoxib
[a cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) inhibitor] [4]. However,
the objective tumor response rate to gemcitabine is less
than 10%, and the drug offers only a marginal survival
benefit [5]. Furthermore, gemcitabine is associated with the
development of drug resistance. Thus, novel agents with
minimum toxicity and ability to sensitize pancreatic cancer
cells to gemcitabine are highly needed.
One compound with potential for this use is ursolic
acid (UA), a pentacyclic triterpenoid that has been identified
in a large variety of medicinal plants, including rosemary and
holy basil. Earlier studies have shown that UA can inhibit
proliferation and induce apoptosis in leukemia, melanoma,
and cancers of the breast, prostate, lung, and endometrium
[6–10]. UA has been shown to inhibit tumor progression [11,
12], to induce tumor cell differentiation [13], and to exhibit
antiangiogenic activity [14]. UA also has been shown to
modulate multiple cancer-related signaling mechanisms; for
example, UA inhibits DNA replication [15, 16], activates
caspases [7, 17] and c-Jun N-terminal kinases (JNK) [18],
downregulates antiapoptotic genes [19, 20], inhibits COX-2
and inducible NO synthase expression [21, 22], suppresses
matrix metallopeptidase (MMP)-9 [23], and inhibits protein
tyrosine kinase [15]. Previous work from our laboratory has
shown that UA can inhibit signal transducer and activator
of transcription 3 (STAT3) [24] and nuclear factor (NF)κB activity [19] and can induce apoptosis in cancer cells
by upregulating death receptors [25]. Since reactive oxygen
species (ROS) requires introduction of a therapeutic agent
for maximal effect [26], UA induce apoptosis of cancer cells
through ROS generation [25]. In animal models, UA was
found to be chemopreventive [11, 27, 28]. In other animal
studies, UA suppressed tumor invasion [23], sensitized
orthotopically implanted colorectal tumors to capecitabine
[29], and inhibited the experimental metastasis of esophageal
carcinoma [30]. However, whether UA has antitumor
potential against pancreatic cancer is not known.
In the present study, we investigated whether UA
can enhance the effect of gemcitabine against human
pancreatic cancer cells in vitro and in orthotopically
implanted nude mice. Whether the inhibition in tumor
growth is connected with changes in the expression level
of miR-29a, a member of miR-29 family, was investigated
[31]. We found that UA inhibited proliferation of various
human pancreatic cancer cells and potentiated the
antitumor activity of gemcitabine through the inhibition
of transcription factors NF-κB and STAT3 as well as
multiple inflammatory gene products regulated by NFκB and STAT3. Both UA and gemcitabine suppressed the
expression of miR-29a and the expression was further
suppressed by the combination of two agents.

against pancreatic cancer. To determine this, the mechanism
by which UA manifests its effects was investigated against
human pancreatic cancer cells in vitro and in an orthotopic
nude mouse model.

UA inhibits proliferation and induces apoptosis
of pancreatic cancer cells in vitro
To determine whether UA inhibits proliferation in
human pancreatic cancer cells, we treated AsPC-1, MIA
PaCa-2, and Panc-28 cells with 0, 5, 10 and 20 μM UA for
1, 3, or 5 days and measured cell viability using an MTT
assay. UA inhibited proliferation in all 3 cell lines in a
dose- and time-dependent manner (Figure 1A, right panel).
Next, we determined whether UA induces apoptosis
of pancreatic cancer cells. We treated the pancreatic
cancer Panc-28 cells for 24 hours analyzed by FACS for
apoptosis. We found that UA exhibited dose dependent
apoptosis of pancreatic cancer cells from 4.17% in control
to 21.23% in UA (20 μM) treated cells (Figure 1B).

UA suppresses constitutive NF-κB activation
and its regulated gene products in pancreatic
cancer cells
Because NF-κB has been linked with both
proliferation and chemoresistance, we next examined
whether UA could inhibit constitutive NF-κB activation
in Panc-28 cells. Our results showed that UA inhibited
constitutive NF-κB activation in a dose-dependent manner
(Figure 1C).
Next we determined whether UA also suppresses
NF-κB regulated gene products. Panc-28 cells were
exposed to UA at different concentration and then
analyzed by western blotting. Results showed that UA
dose-dependently inhibited the expression of proteins
linked with survival, proliferation, invasion and metastasis
(Figure 1D and Supplementary Figure S1).

UA inhibits colony formation ability of
pancreatic cancer cells
We also examined whether UA affects the long-term
colony formation ability of pancreatic cancer cells, which
more closely mirrors the situation in vivo. As shown in
Figure 1E , UA dose-dependently inhibited colony formation
of Panc-28 cells. At the dose of 20 μM UA decreased 74.2%
number of colonies compared to untreated control.

UA enhances cytotoxic effects of gemcitabine
To determine whether UA not only induces
cytotoxicity rather it enhances the inhibitory effects of
gemcitabine, pancreatic cancer cells were treated with
different concentration of UA or gemicitabine alone
or in combination. Results obtained from MTT assay
showed that UA or gemicitabine alone induced moderate

RESULTS
The aim of the present study was to determine
whether UA could improve the efficacy of gemcitabine
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13183

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Ursolic acid (UA) inhibits pancreatic cancer cell growth and proliferation and enhances the apoptotic effects
of gemcitabine. A. Chemical structure of UA (left panel). AsPC-1, MIA PaCa-2, and Panc-28 (2000 cells/well) cells were treated with
indicated concentration of UA for 1, 3, and 5 days. MTT analysis was performed as indicated in Materials and Methods (right panel).
B. Panc-28 (1x106 /well) cells were treated with indicated concentration of UA for 24 hours. Apoptosis was determined by the FACS
analysis, measuring sub-G1 peak as apoptosis indicator. C. Panc-28 (1x106) cells were treated with UA for 8 hours. Nuclear extract were
prepared and DNA binding essay was done by EMSA. D. Panc-28 (1x106) cells were treated with UA with indicated concentration for 24
hours. Whole cell extract were prepared and subjected to western blot. E. Panc-28 (1,000 cells/well) were treated with UA with indicated
concentration. After 12 hours medium was replaced with fresh medium and incubated for 9 days. Cells were stained with crystal violet and
counted for colony formation.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13184

Oncotarget

UA inhibits the growth of orthotopically
implanted pancreatic cancer in nude mice

cytotoxicity in dose dependent manner. However, it also
increased the cytotoxic activity of gemcitabine dose
dependently (Figure 2A).
To evaluate the type of drug interactions, we
calculated the combination index (CI) values using
CalcuSyn software based on the median effect principle
[32]. The obtained CI values demonstrated the positive
interactions between UA and gemcitabine, and synergy
was observed for all doses of UA and gemcitabine
combinations in pancreatic cancer cells. The combination
ratio of UA and gemcitabine (1:0.01) resulted in a potent
synergistic profile (CI values between 0.46, 0.51, 0.56
and 0.59) at calculated ED50, ED75, ED90, and ED95.
Thus, we demonstrated that UA is highly efficient in
combination with gemcitabine as an anticancer agent
against pancreatic cancer cells in our in vitro models.

Figure 3A depicts the experimental protocol we used
to evaluate the effects of UA and gemcitabine alone and
in combination on the growth of orthotopically implanted
human pancreatic cells in nude mice. We decided to use
Panc-28 cells for in vivo studies because this cell line is
stably transfected with luciferase.
The bioluminescence imaging (Figure 3B, left
panel) results showed that the gradual increase in tumor
volume was greater in the vehicle-treated control group
than in the other treatment groups (Figure 3B, right panel).
The mean tumor volume in the group treated with the
combination of UA and gemcitabine was significantly
lower than the tumor volumes in the groups treated with
UA alone or gemcitabine alone.
We found that treatment with UA alone inhibited
tumor growth compared with controls (Figure 3C).
Treatment with gemcitabine alone was effective in
suppressing 41.6% tumor growth compared with
controls and was more effective than treatment with
UA alone (17.2%). The combination of the two agents
had prominent efficacy (70% compared to control) in
reducing the tumor burden than was either agent alone.
The final mean tumor volume in the group treated with
the combination of UA and gemcitabine was significantly
lower than the tumor volumes in the groups treated with
UA alone or gemcitabine alone (Figure 3D).

UA increases the effect of gemcitabine in
inhibition of cell survival, proliferative and
metastatic proteins
To determine whether UA enhances the effects of
gemcitabine in inhibition of cell survival, proliferative and
metastatic proteins, Panc-28 cells were exposed to UA
and then treated with gemcitabine. Western blot analysis
showed that UA inhibited the expression of proteins
associated with survival (XIAP, Bcl-2, cIAP-1, cIAP-2 and
cFLIP), proliferation (cyclin D1 and cMyc), and invasion
and metastasis (ICAM-1, MMP-9 and VEGF) were
moderately inhibited by either UA or gemcitabine alone,
however it enhanced the inhibitory effects of gemcitabine.
The expression levels of cIAP-2, cMyc and ICAM-1 were
not affected by gemcitabine but moderately or slightly
decreased by UA treatment; however, their expression levels
were decreased substantially by the combination of UA and
gemcitabine (Figure 2B and Supplementary Figure S2).

UA inhibits distant organ metastasis from
orthotopically implanted pancreatic cancer in
nude mice
At autopsy, the mice in each treatment group were
examined for the presence of metastases. The results
showed that pancreatic cancer metastasis developed more
frequently in the spleen and liver of vehicle-treated mice
than in mice treated with UA or gemcitabine alone. UA
and gemcitabine respectively decreased to 33.3% and
22.2% metastasis of pancreatic cancer cells in spleen while
in liver it decreased to 30% and 35%. Maximum inhibition
of metastasis, however, was observed in the group treated
with the combination of UA and gemcitabine 66.6% in
spleen and 65% in liver (Figure 4A).

UA potentiates the apoptotic effects of
gemcitabine, and inhibits colony formation
ability of pancreatic cancer cells
To determine whether UA enhances gemcitabineinduced cell death, we pretreated AsPC-1, MIA PaCa2, and Panc-28 pancreatic cells with UA and then
gemcitabine. The LIVE/DEAD assay showed that UA and
gemcitabine were highly effective at doses at which UA or
gemcitabine alone were minimally effective (Figure 2C).
We also examined whether UA enhances the inhibitory
effect of gemcitabine on long-term colony formation assay.
UA or gemcitabine when administered alone had little effect
on the colony-forming ability of Panc-28 cells. UA and
gemcitabine alone had 30.3% and 21.5% decreased colony
formation respectively compared to control. However,
administration of UA and gemcitabine in combination
significantly decreased (73.8%) the colony formation of
Panc-28 cells (Figure 2D).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

UA is bioavailable in serum and tumor tissue
Because UA inhibited tumor growth in the mice, we
investigated whether UA is bioavailable in the serum and
in the pancreatic tumors of the mice. HPLC results showed
that a significant amount of UA was available in the serum
(442±35 ng/mL) and in the tumors (228±24 ng/g) of the
mice treated with UA (Figure 4B). Although the amount
of UA in the tumor tissue was less than that in the serum
of mice, the two were similar.
13185

Oncotarget

Figure 2: A. Panc-28 (5,000/well) cells were treated with indicated concentration of UA for 8 hours. Cells were washed with PBS to

remove UA and then exposed with different concentration of gemcitabine for 24 hours. Cytotoxicity was determined by MTT assay as
described in Materials and Methods. B. Panc-28 (1x106) cells were treated with UA (20 μM) for 8 hours. Cells were washed with PBS to
remove UA and then exposed with gemcitabine (200 nM) for 24 hours. Whole cell extract were prepared and subjected to western blot. C.
Panc-28 (5,000 cells/well) cells were treated with UA (20 μM) for 8 hours. Cells were washed with PBS to remove UA and then exposed
with gemcitabine (200 nM) for 24 hours. A LIVE/DEAD assay was performed as per the instruction of manufacturer. The percentages of
dead cells (red) are shown. D. Panc-28 (1,000 cells/well) cells were treated with UA (20 μM) for 8 hours. Cells were washed with PBS to
remove UA and then treated with gemcitabine (200 nM) for 12 hours. Medium was replaced and incubated for 9 days. Cells were stained
with crystal violet and counted for colony formation.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13186

Oncotarget

Figure 3: UA enhances the effect of gemcitabine (GEM) to inhibit the growth of orthotopically implanted pancreatic
cancer tumors in nude mice. A. Schematic representation of the experimental protocol described in the “Materials and Methods”

section. Mice were randomly assigned to 4 treatment groups (n=10): group I was given corn oil (100 μL, orally, daily); group II was given
UA (250 mg/kg orally, daily); group III was given gemcitabine twice per week (25 mg/kg, intraperitoneally, twice a week); and group
IV was given UA (250 mg/kg orally, daily) and gemcitabine (25 mg/kg, intraperitoneally, twice a week). B. Bioluminescence imaging of
orthotopically implanted pancreatic tumors in live, anesthetized mice was performed every week (left panel). Measurements (photons/sec)
of mean tumor volume on bioluminescence imaging at various time points are shown (right panel). C. Mean tumor volumes measured on
the last day of the experiment at autopsy using Vernier calipers and calculated using the formula V = 2/3πr3. D. Photographs of mice and
tumors from each treatment group taken at autopsy.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13187

Oncotarget

UA modulates cell proliferation and angiogenesis
markers

UA inhibits the activation of transcription
factors STAT3 and NF-κB in orthotopically
implanted pancreatic tumors

To determine whether UA affects pancreatic cancer
growth and metastasis by modulating Ki-67 and CD31, we
examined the expression of these markers of proliferation
and angiogenesis, respectively. Our results showed that
UA alone significantly decreased the expression of Ki-67
and CD31, but UA with gemcitabine provided the largest
decrease in the expression of either marker (Figure 5A).

Next examined whether UA modulates the STAT3
phosphorylation in pancreatic tumors. Western blot
analysis showed that UA alone significantly suppressed
the activated STAT3 by inhibiting phosphorylation at
Tyr705, and the combination of UA and gemcitabine
further enhanced the inhibitory activity (Figure 5B, left).

Figure 4: A. UA and gemcitabine (GEM) inhibit distant organ metastasis from orthotopically implanted pancreatic cancer in nude mice.

UA and gemcitabine combined inhibited metastasis to the spleen and liver. B. UA is bioavailable in the serum of nude mice and in
pancreatic cancer tumors. Animals were fed with UA 4 h before being sacrificed. Mice were anesthetized and blood was collected by
cardiac puncture, and then the mice were sacrificed humanely. HPLC analysis was performed to determine bioavailability of UA in the
serum and pancreatic cancer tumors.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13188

Oncotarget

Thus, inhibition of this transcription factor by UA could be
associated with the enhancement of gemcitabine-induced
pancreatic tumor regression.
We also investigated whether the effects of UA
on tumor growth in the mice were associated with

the inhibition of NF-κB activation. The results of
Immunofluorescence analysis showed that treatment
with UA alone and UA plus gemcitabine significantly
suppressed NF-κB activation in tumor samples
(Figure 5B, right).

Figure 5: B. UA enhances the effect of gemecitabine against tumor cell proliferation angiogenesis and transcription factors activation in

pancreatic cancer. A. Immunofluorescence analysis of proliferation marker Ki-67 and microvessel density CD31 was performed in tumor
tissues. Samples from 3 animals in each group were analyzed by immunofluorescence, and representative data are shown. (B) UA inhibits
STAT3 and NF-κB and the expression of their regulated gene products in orthotopically implanted pancreatic tumors. Western blot analysis
showed that UA in combination with gemcitabine inhibited the activation of STAT3 (left). Immunofluorescence analysis of nuclear p65
showed the inhibition of NF-κB by UA alone and in combination with gemcitabine (right). C. Western blot analysis showed the suppression
of proteins involved in cell survival, inflammation, proliferation, and metastasis by UA and UA combined with gemcitabine.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13189

Oncotarget

UA inhibits the expression of biomarkers linked
to tumor survival, proliferation, and metastasis
in orthotopically implanted pancreatic tumors

apoptosis was significantly enhanced by UA. Similar
to these results, another report showed that pancreatic
cancer cells BxPC-3, Capan-1, and PancTu-1 were
unaffected by gemcitabine treatment [35], likely due
to the overexpression of NF-κB by these cells. The
suppression of NF-κB activity may be a mechanism for
the sensitization of pancreatic cancer cells to gemcitabine
by UA. Supporting this hypothesis is a previous study in
which prolonged treatment with relatively low doses of
UA sensitized human lung and cervical cancer cells to
paclitaxel or cisplatin through the suppression of NF-κB
[36].
We also found that UA downregulated the
expression of proteins associated with cell proliferation
(cyclin D1 and COX-2) and survival (survivin, XIAP,
cFLIP, Bcl-2, and cIAP-1), and this downregulation
was enhanced when UA was given in combination
with gemcitabine. Because these tumorigenic proteins
are regulated by NF-κB and STAT3, it is likely that the
inhibition of these transcription factors contributes to the
downregulation of the proteins. The miR-29a family of
microRNAs is aberrantly expressed in numerous cancer
types [31]. A recent report indicated that miR-29a can
induce resistance to gemcitabine in pancreatic cancer
cells [33]. It is possible that the down-regulation in the
expression of miR-29a by the combination of two agents
might lead to the inhibition in NF-κB activation that in
turn can lead suppression in the tumor growth. However,
whether UA directly targets to miR-29a promoter or
through mediation of other transcription factors remains
to be elucidated.
In our orthotopic mouse model, UA or gemcitabine
alone were equally potent in inhibiting tumor growth,
but the combination of UA and gemcitabine further
suppressed the tumor growth. In agreement with these
observations, a previous study showed that UA inhibited
the growth of DU145 cancer xenografts in nude mice
[37]. The dose of UA used in this study was based on
our previous study, where UA at 250 mg/kg was effective
in chemsensitization of colorectal cancer. Besides these,
other researchers have also used almost equal to this doses
in animal model of different cancers [37, 38].
Our study, however, is the first to show that UA
alone can inhibit pancreatic cancer metastasis to distant
organs such as the spleen and liver. Our study also is the
first of its kind to demonstrate that metastatic spread of
pancreatic cancer is further suppressed by the combination
of UA and gemcitabine. Further study showed that UA
inhibited proteins involved in metastasis and angiogenesis,
such as MMP-9 and VEGF. Suppression of these proteins
could be the mechanism by which by UA and gemcitabine
inhibited the metastasis of pancreatic cancer to the distant
organs.
Next we examined the mechanism by which UA
manifests its effects against pancreatic cancer in nude
mice model and found that the proliferation marker Ki-67

Next we examined whether UA modulates the
expression of proteins involved in cell survival, invasion,
and metastasis in orthotopically implanted pancreatic
tumors. Western blotting revealed significant reductions
in the expression of markers for cell survival (survivin and
Bcl-2), proliferation (cyclin D1), inflammation (COX-2),
and metastasis (ICAM-1 and MMP-9) in tumors from the
groups treated with UA or gemcitabine alone compared
with those from the control group. However, gemcitabine
in combination with UA was more effective in suppressing
the expression of these proteins than either UA alone or
gemcitabine alone (Figure 5C).
Immunohistochemical analysis of pancreatic tumor
tissues also revealed that UA, alone or in combination
with gemcitabine, significantly decreased the expression
of cyclin D1, COX-2, VEGF, and MMP-9 molecules
compared with the control treatment (Figure 6A).
Because miR-29a has been shown to induce
resistance to gemcitabine in pancreatic cancer cells [33],
we sought to investigate miR-29a expression in tumors
from normal and treated mice. Results indicated that the
expression of miR-29a was suppressed by 0.16 folds in
gemicitabine group, by 0.23 folds in UA group, and by
0.68 folds in the combination group (Figure 6B).

DISCUSSION
Currently, gemcitabine is the key chemotherapy for
pancreatic cancer, however the drug has only 5.4% partial
response rate and imparts a progression-free survival
from 0.9 to 4.2 months [5]. Although patients with
pancreatic cancer show initial sensitivity to gemcitabine,
development of resistance is common. Thus, the agents
that can replace or overcome the resistance to gemcitabine
are needed. In the present study, we have shown that UA,
a triterpene present in numerous dietary sources, can
sensitize pancreatic cancer cells to gemcitabine. We found
that UA inhibited proliferation in various pancreatic cancer
cell lines, inhibited constitutive NF-κB activation, and
potentiated the apoptosis induced by gemcitabine. Further,
in an orthotopic nude mice model, we demonstrated that
UA enhanced the antitumor effects of gemcitabine. UA,
alone and in combination with gemcitabine, significantly
suppressed gene products involved in cell survival,
proliferation, and metastasis in orthotopically implanted
pancreatic tumor tissue. In agreement with our observation
that UA inhibited proliferation in pancreatic cancer cells,
2-substituted analogues of UA were found to inhibit
proliferation in Panc-1 and Panc-28 cells [34].
In the present study, we found that gemcitabine
alone induced apoptosis in MIA PaCa-2, AsPC-1, and
Panc-28 cell lines minimally but that gemcitabine-induced
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13190

Oncotarget

as well as micro vessel density indicator CD31 was down
regulated by UA. The downregulation of NF-κB activity
in tumor tissues may also account for inhibitory effects of
UA on tumor growth in mice model. The downregulation
in the expression of tumorigenic proteins such as cyclin
D1, COX-2, and survivin in tumor tissue may be due to
the suppression of NF-κB activity. Previously we have
shown that UA inhibited the expression of cell survival

proteins survivin and Bcl-2 in a model of orthotopically
transplanted human colorectal cancer in nude mice [29],
which supports the findings of our current study.
One of the major concerns in cancer drug
development is that most drugs possess limited
bioavailability. However, in this study, we found a
significant presence of UA in the pancreatic tumor tissue
of mice. The bioavailability of Oldenlandia diffusa, one of

Figure 6: A. UA enhances the effect of gemcitabine (GEM) against the expression of cyclin D1, VEGF, COX-2, and MMP-9 in
orthotopically implanted pancreatic tumor samples. B. Combination of UA and gemcitabine suppresses the expression of miR-29a in tumor
tissues. Total RNA was extracted from the tumor tissues of normal and treated mice and examined for miR-29a expression level by qRTPCR.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13191

Oncotarget

the sources of UA, has also been shown in Caco-2 colon
cancer cells [39]. The bioavailability of UA was also
reported in the livers of mice after intravenous injection
[40]. These studies further support the observations of
bioavailability in the current study.
Our finding that UA enhanced the antitumor effect
of gemcitabine in an animal model by inhibiting NF-κB
and its downstream targets—leading to the inhibition of
proliferation, angiogenesis, and invasion—suggests that
UA has significant potential for the treatment of pancreatic
cancer. Whether the synthetic triterpenoid C-28 methyl
ester of 2-cyano-3,12-dioxooleana-1,9,-dien-28-oic acid
(CDDO-Me; bardoxolone methyl)—which is a homologue
of the UA family of compounds, is known to suppress
inflammatory pathways [41], and is in clinical trial [42–
44]—exhibits chemosensitization activities against human
pancreatic cancer similar to those described here should be
explored in the future.
As the doses of gemcitabine (25 mg/kg) and UA
(250 mg/kg) used in our animal study are safe and relevant
to that in human subjects, the current study provides a
basis for evaluating the efficacy of gemcitabine and UA
combinations in clinical trials.

by Dr. Shrikanth Reddy (The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX). MIA PaCa-2 and
Panc-28 cells were cultured in DMEM, and AsPC-1 cells
were cultured in RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10% FBS,
100 U/mL of penicillin, and 100 μg/mL of streptomycin.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

The sub-G1 population of cells as indicator of
apoptosis was analyzed by using PI staining as described
previously [25]. The assay was performed with a BD
FACSCalibur flow cytometer (BD Biosciences, San Jose,
CA). A total of 20,000 events were analyzed by flow
cytometry using an excitation wavelength set at 488 nm
and emission set at 610 nm. Cells undergoing apoptosis
lose part of their DNA (due to DNA fragmentation), which
are detected as a sub-G1 population after PI staining.

Proliferation assay
The effect of UA on cell proliferation was
determined by the MTT uptake method as described
previously [45]. Briefly, pancreatic cancer cells (2,000
per well) were treated with UA in quadruplicate in a 96well plate and then incubated for 1, 3, or 5 days at 37°C.
After addition of MTT solution to each well, cells were
incubated for another 2 hours at 37°C. The lysis buffer
(20% SDS and 50% dimethylformamide) was then added,
and the cells were incubated overnight at 37°C. An MRX
Revelation 96-well multiscanner (Dynex Technologies,
Chantilly, VA) was used to measure the absorbance of the
cell suspension at 570 nm).

Propidium iodide (PI) staining for determination
of apoptosis

Reagents
UA was kindly supplied by Kingsing Guan, China.
The antibodies against Bcl-2, COX-2, cyclin D1, ICAM1, MMP-9, NF-κB p65, cIAP-1, pSTAT3, and STAT3
were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa
Cruz, CA); the antibodies against VEGF and Ki-67 (rabbit
monoclonal clone SP6) were obtained from Neomarkers
(Fremont, CA); the antibodies against survivin were
obtained from R&D Systems (Minneapolis, MN); the
antibodies against XIAP and cFLIP were obtained from
Imgenex Corp (San Diego, CA) and the antibodies against
β-actin were procured from Sigma (St. Louis, MO).
Mouse CD31 monoclonal antibody was obtained from
Pharmingen (San Diego, CA). The liquid DAB+ substrate
chromogen system-HRP used for immunohistochemistry
was obtained from Dako (Carpinteria, CA). Penicillin,
streptomycin, RPMI 1640, and DMEM were obtained from
Mediatech Inc. (Herndon, VA). Fetal bovine serum (FBS)
was purchased from Atlanta Biologicals (Norcross, GA).
Gemcitabine (Gemzar; Eli Lilly, Indianapolis, IN) was
stored at 4°C and dissolved in sterile PBS on the day of use.
D-luciferin potassium salt (Xenogen, Hopkinton, MA) was
dissolved in sterile PBS at a concentration of 40 mg/mL.

Clonogenic assay
The clonogenic assay determines the ability of cells
in a given population to undergo unlimited division and
form colonies. Panc-28 cells (1,000 per well) were seeded
in 6-well plates, incubated for 12 hours, and then treated
with different concentration of UA or gemcitabine. After
24 hours medium was replaced with fresh medium and
allowed to form colonies. After 9 days, colonies were
washed with PBS, fixed in a solution of methanol and
acetic acid (3:1), stained with 0.25% crystal violet and
counted manually.

Cell death assay
To investigate whether UA could potentiate the
efficacy of gemcitabine for causing apoptosis in pancreatic
cancer cells, we used a LIVE/DEAD cell viability assay
kit (Invitrogen), which is used to determine intracellular
esterase activity and plasma membrane integrity and was
described previously. AsPC-1, MIA PaCa-2, and Panc-28
cells (5,000 per well) were incubated in chamber slides,
pretreated with 20 μM of UA for 8 hours. Cell were

Cell lines
The human pancreatic cancer cell lines AsPC-1
and MIA PaCa-2 were obtained from the American Type
Culture Collection (Manassas, VA). The Panc-28 human
pancreatic carcinoma cell line was kindly provided
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13192

Oncotarget

washed with PBS to remove UA and then treated with
100 nM of gemcitabine for 24 hours. The cells were then
stained with the assay reagents for 30 minutes at room
temperature, and cell viability was determined by counting
live (green) and dead (red) cells under a fluorescence
microscope.

cooling unit and a data acquisition computer that uses
Living Image software. Imaging was performed on
days 0, 7, 14, 21, and 28 of treatment as previously
described.
Therapy was continued for 4 weeks. One week
after treatment ended, the mice were euthanized, and
the primary tumors in the pancreas were excised. The
final tumor volume was measured as V = 2/3πr3, where
r is the mean of the three dimensions (length, width, and
depth). Each tumor was divided in two. Half of the tumor
tissue was fixed in formalin and embedded in paraffin for
immunohistochemistry. The other half was snap frozen
in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80°C. At autopsy, the
mice were also examined for distant organ metastases,
and the number of metastatic foci in liver and spleen were
counted.

NF-κB activation in pancreatic cancer cells
To determine the level of NF-κB activation, we
prepared nuclear extract from treated and untreated
Panc-28 pancreatic cancer cells and carried out
electrophoretic mobility shift assays essentially as
described previously [46].

Animals
Four-week-old male athymic nu/nu mice were
obtained from the breeding colony of the Department
of Experimental Radiation Oncology at MD Anderson.
The animals were housed in standard poly(methyl
methacrylate) cages (5 per cage) in a room maintained
at constant temperature and humidity and in a 12-hour
light/12-hour dark cycle. Their diet consisted of regular
autoclave chow and water ad libitum. None of the mice
exhibited any lesions, and all mice were tested pathogen
free. All the mice were acclimatized to a pulverized diet
for 3 days before orthotopic cancer cell implantation. This
experimental protocol was reviewed and approved by
the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center.

Immunolocalization of cyclin D1, VEGF, COX-2
and MMP-9 in tumor samples

Orthotopic implantation of Panc-28 cells

Frozen sections in slides were de-paraffinized
and rehydrated through a graded alcohol series. Antigen
retrieval was performed by boiling the slides for 20
minutes in antigen retrieval solution (10 mM sodium
citrate, 0.05% Tween-20, pH 6.0). Slides were cooled for
30 minutes at room temperature, rinsed briefly in PBS,
circled with a PAP pen and blocked with 1% normal
goat serum. The sections were incubated with primary
antibodies followed by their respective secondary
antibodies (anti-rabbit IgG Alexa Fluor 610 and antimouse IgG Alexa Fluor 488). Slides were mounted using
Vectashield Mounting Medium with DAPI (Vector Labs)
viewed with a Nikon FXA fluorescence microscope
equipped with Photometrics Cool Snap CF color camera
(Nikon, Lewisville, TX) and MetaMorph version 4.6.5
software (Molecular Devices). The stored images were
processed using NIH ImageJ software and Adobe
Photoshop.

Pancreatic tumor samples were fixed with
paraformaldehyde and embedded in paraffin. After
washing with PBS, the slides were blocked with protein
block solution (Dako) for 20 minutes and incubated
overnight with anti-human VEGF, COX-2, MMP-9, and
cyclin D1 antibodies (1:50, 1:100, 1:200, 1:100, and
1:100, respectively). The expression of VEGF, COX2, MMP-9, and cyclin D1 were evaluated using an
immunohistochemical method described previously [45].

Immunofluorescence staining

Panc-28 cells, stably transfected with luciferase, were
orthotopically implanted in the pancreas of nude mice as
described previously [45]. After anesthetizing the mice with
ketamine-xylazine solution, a small incision was made in the
left abdominal flank, and luciferase transfected Panc-28 cells
(1 × 106) in 50 μL PBS were injected into the subcapsular
region of the pancreas with a 27-gauge needle. A cotton swab
was held for 1 minute over the site of injection to prevent
leakage. The abdominal wound was closed with wound clips
(Braintree Scientific, Braintree, MA).

Experimental protocol
One week after orthotopic implantation, 10 mice each
were randomly assigned to the following treatment groups:
(a) untreated control (corn oil, 100 μL daily orally), (b) UA
alone (250 mg/kg daily orally), (c) gemcitabine alone (25
mg/kg twice weekly by intraperitoneal injection), or (d) UA
(250 mg/kg daily orally) plus gemcitabine (25 mg/kg twice
weekly by intraperitoneal injection).
Tumor volumes were monitored weekly with
the IVIS 200 in vivo bioluminescence imaging system
(Xenogen, Cranbury, NJ), which includes a cryogenic
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Western blot analysis
Pancreatic cancer (Panc-28) cells and tumor
tissues (75–100 mg per mouse) from vehicle control and
experimental mice were minced and incubated, and Western
blot analysis was performed, as previously described [45].
13193

Oncotarget

Quantitative real time RT-PCR analysis

2.	 Silverman DT, Schiffman M, Everhart J, Goldstein A,
Lillemoe KD, Swanson GM, Schwartz AG, Brown LM,
Greenberg RS, Schoenberg JB, Pottern LM, Hoover RN
and Fraumeni JF, Jr. Diabetes mellitus, other medical
conditions and familial history of cancer as risk factors
for pancreatic cancer. British journal of cancer. 1999;
80:1830–1837.

To examine the effects of UA, gemcitabine and
the combination of two agents on miR-29a expression in
tumor tissues, we performed quantitative real time PCR
as described previously [47]. Total RNA isolated from the
tumors of control and treated mice were reverse transcribed
using Revert Aid reverse transcriptase following the
manufacturer’s protocol. The quantitative real time PCR
reaction solution contained 5 μL of 2x SYBR green PCR
master mix (Applied Biosystems), 3 μL of water, 0.5 μL
of 5 μM universal primer, 1 μL of 5 μM forward primer
(the mature miRNA sequence converted to DNA) and 1
μL of the diluted (4 times) cDNA. The internal control was
derived from average levels of 5s RNA and RnuI. The data
were analyzed by comparative CT method and the fold
change was calculated by 2-ΔΔCT method [48].

3.	 Greenlee RT, Murray T, Bolden S and Wingo PA. Cancer
statistics, 2000. CA. 2000; 50:7–33.
4.	 Rocha-Lima CM. New directions in the management of
advanced pancreatic cancer: a review. Anti-cancer drugs.
2008; 19:435–446.
5.	 Burris HA, 3rd, Moore MJ, Andersen J, Green MR,
Rothenberg ML, Modiano MR, Cripps MC, Portenoy RK,
Storniolo AM, Tarassoff P, Nelson R, Dorr FA, Stephens
CD and Von Hoff DD. Improvements in survival and clinical benefit with gemcitabine as first-line therapy for patients
with advanced pancreas cancer: a randomized trial. Journal
of clinical oncology. 1997; 15:2403–2413.

Bioavailability analysis
The mice were fed UA 4 hours before being
euthanized. The mice were anesthetized, blood was
collected by cardiac puncture, and then the mice were
killed humanely. High-performance liquid chromatography
(HPLC) analysis was performed as previously described
[29] to determine bioavailability of UA in the serum and
the tumors.

6.	 Liu XS and Jiang J. Induction of apoptosis and regulation
of the MAPK pathway by ursolic acid in human leukemia
K562 cells. Planta medica. 2007; 73:1192–1194.
7.	 Choi YH, Baek JH, Yoo MA, Chung HY, Kim ND and Kim
KW. Induction of apoptosis by ursolic acid through activation of caspases and down-regulation of c-IAPs in human
prostate epithelial cells. International journal of oncology.
2000; 17:565–571.

Statistical analysis

8.	 Hsu YL, Kuo PL and Lin CC. Proliferative inhibition, cellcycle dysregulation, and induction of apoptosis by ursolic
acid in human non-small cell lung cancer A549 cells. Life
sciences. 2004; 75:2303–2316.

Data are presented as mean ± SD. The Student t-test
was used to compare means of 2 independent variables.
One-way analysis of variance was used to determine
the statistical differences between more than 2 groups.
Statistical significance was established as P < 0.05.
A significant interaction was interpreted by a subsequent
median effect principle of the Chou-Talalay method.

9.	 Manu KA and Kuttan G. Ursolic acid induces apoptosis
by activating p53 and caspase-3 gene expressions and suppressing NF-kappaB mediated activation of bcl-2 in B16F10 melanoma cells. International immunopharmacology.
2008; 8:974–981.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

10.	 Achiwa Y, Hasegawa K, Komiya T and Udagawa Y.
Ursolic acid induces Bax-dependent apoptosis through the
caspase-3 pathway in endometrial cancer SNG-II cells.
Oncology reports. 2005; 13:51–57.

We thank Bryan F Tutt, Department of Scientific
Publications for carefully editing the manuscript.
Dr. Aggarwal is the Ransom Horne, Jr., Professor of Cancer
Research. This work was supported by a grant from the
Center for Targeted Therapy of MD Anderson Cancer
Center.

11.	 Huang MT, Ho CT, Wang ZY, Ferraro T, Lou YR, Stauber
K, Ma W, Georgiadis C, Laskin JD and Conney AH.
Inhibition of skin tumorigenesis by rosemary and its constituents carnosol and ursolic acid. Cancer research. 1994;
54:701–708.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

12.	 Ohigashi H, Takamura H, Koshimizu K, Tokuda H and
Ito Y. Search for possible antitumor promoters by inhibition of 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate-induced
Epstein-Barr virus activation; ursolic acid and oleanolic acid from an anti-inflammatory Chinese medicinal
plant, Glechoma hederaceae L. Cancer letters. 1986;
30:143–151.

The authors declare that they have no conflict of
interest.

REFERENCES
1.	 Siegel RL, Miller KD and Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2015.
CA: a cancer journal for clinicians. 2015; 65:5–29.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13.	 Lee HY, Chung HY, Kim KH, Lee JJ and Kim
KW. Induction of differentiation in the cultured F9

13194

Oncotarget

teratocarcinoma stem cells by triterpene acids. Journal of
cancer research and clinical oncology. 1994; 120:513–518.

25.	 Prasad S, Yadav VR, Kannappan R and Aggarwal BB.
Ursolic acid, a pentacyclin triterpene, potentiates TRAILinduced apoptosis through p53-independent up-regulation
of death receptors: evidence for the role of reactive oxygen species and JNK. The Journal of biological chemistry.
2011; 286:5546–5557.

14.	 Sohn KH, Lee HY, Chung HY, Young HS, Yi SY and Kim
KW. Anti-angiogenic activity of triterpene acids. Cancer
letters. 1995; 94:213–218.
15.	 Choi BM, Park R, Pae HO, Yoo JC, Kim YC, Jun CD, Jung
BH, Oh GS, So HS, Kim YM and Chung HT. Cyclic adenosine monophosphate inhibits ursolic acid-induced apoptosis via activation of protein kinase A in human leukaemic
HL-60 cells. Pharmacology & toxicology. 2000; 86:53–58.

26.	 Bonner MY and Arbiser JL. The antioxidant paradox: what
are antioxidants and how should they be used in a therapeutic context for cancer. Future medicinal chemistry. 2014;
6:1413–1422.

16.	 Kim DK, Baek JH, Kang CM, Yoo MA, Sung JW, Chung
HY, Kim ND, Choi YH, Lee SH and Kim KW. Apoptotic
activity of ursolic acid may correlate with the inhibition
of initiation of DNA replication. International journal of
cancer. 2000; 87:629–636.

27.	 Gayathri R, Priya DK, Gunassekaran GR and Sakthisekaran
D. Ursolic acid attenuates oxidative stress-mediated hepatocellular carcinoma induction by diethylnitrosamine in male
Wistar rats. Asian Pacific journal of cancer prevention.
2009; 10:933–938.

17.	 Harmand PO, Duval R, Delage C and Simon A. Ursolic
acid induces apoptosis through mitochondrial intrinsic pathway and caspase-3 activation in M4Beu melanoma cells.
International journal of cancer. 2005; 114:1–11.

28.	 Singletary K, MacDonald C and Wallig M. Inhibition by
rosemary and carnosol of 7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene (DMBA)-induced rat mammary tumorigenesis and in
vivo DMBA-DNA adduct formation. Cancer letters. 1996;
104:43–48.

18.	 Zhang Y, Kong C, Zeng Y, Wang L, Li Z, Wang H, Xu C
and Sun Y. Ursolic acid induces PC-3 cell apoptosis via
activation of JNK and inhibition of Akt pathways in vitro.
Molecular carcinogenesis. 2010; 49:374–385.

29.	 Prasad S, Yadav VR, Sung B, Reuter S, Kannappan R,
Deorukhkar A, Diagaradjane P, Wei C, Baladandayuthapani
V, Krishnan S, Guha S and Aggarwal BB. Ursolic acid
inhibits growth and metastasis of human colorectal cancer in an orthotopic nude mouse model by targeting multiple cell signaling pathways: chemosensitization with
capecitabine. Clinical cancer research. 2012; 18:4942–4953.

19.	 Shishodia S, Majumdar S, Banerjee S and Aggarwal BB.
Ursolic acid inhibits nuclear factor-kappaB activation
induced by carcinogenic agents through suppression of
IkappaBalpha kinase and p65 phosphorylation: correlation with down-regulation of cyclooxygenase 2, matrix
metalloproteinase 9, and cyclin D1. Cancer research. 2003;
63:4375–4383.

30.	 Yamai H, Sawada N, Yoshida T, Seike J, Takizawa H,
Kenzaki K, Miyoshi T, Kondo K, Bando Y, Ohnishi Y and
Tangoku A. Triterpenes augment the inhibitory effects of
anticancer drugs on growth of human esophageal carcinoma
cells in vitro and suppress experimental metastasis in vivo.
International journal of cancer. 2009; 125:952–960.

20.	 Kassi E, Sourlingas TG, Spiliotaki M, Papoutsi Z, Pratsinis
H, Aligiannis N and Moutsatsou P. Ursolic acid triggers
apoptosis and Bcl-2 downregulation in MCF-7 breast cancer cells. Cancer investigation. 2009; 27:723–733.

31.	 Wang Y, Zhang X, Li H, Yu J and Ren X. The role of
miRNA-29 family in cancer. European journal of cell biology. 2013; 92:123–128.

21.	 Subbaramaiah K, Michaluart P, Sporn MB and Dannenberg
AJ. Ursolic acid inhibits cyclooxygenase-2 transcription in
human mammary epithelial cells. Cancer research. 2000;
60:2399–2404.

32.	 Chou TC. Theoretical basis, experimental design, and
computerized simulation of synergism and antagonism in
drug combination studies. Pharmacological reviews. 2006;
58:621–681.

22.	 Suh N, Honda T, Finlay HJ, Barchowsky A, Williams C,
Benoit NE, Xie QW, Nathan C, Gribble GW and Sporn
MB. Novel triterpenoids suppress inducible nitric oxide
synthase (iNOS) and inducible cyclooxygenase (COX-2) in
mouse macrophages. Cancer research. 1998; 58:717–723.

33.	 Nagano H, Tomimaru Y, Eguchi H, Hama N, Wada
H, Kawamoto K, Kobayashi S, Mori M and Doki Y.
MicroRNA-29a induces resistance to gemcitabine through
the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway in pancreatic
cancer cells. International journal of oncology. 2013;
43:1066–1072.

23.	 Cha HJ, Park MT, Chung HY, Kim ND, Sato H, Seiki M
and Kim KW. Ursolic acid-induced down-regulation of
MMP-9 gene is mediated through the nuclear translocation
of glucocorticoid receptor in HT1080 human fibrosarcoma
cells. Oncogene. 1998; 16:771–778.

34.	 Chadalapaka G, Jutooru I, McAlees A, Stefanac T and Safe
S. Structure-dependent inhibition of bladder and pancreatic
cancer cell growth by 2-substituted glycyrrhetinic and ursolic acid derivatives. Bioorganic & medicinal chemistry letters. 2008; 18:2633–2639.

24.	 Pathak AK, Bhutani M, Nair AS, Ahn KS, Chakraborty
A, Kadara H, Guha S, Sethi G and Aggarwal BB. Ursolic
acid inhibits STAT3 activation pathway leading to suppression of proliferation and chemosensitization of human
multiple myeloma cells. Molecular cancer research. 2007;
5:943–955.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

35.	 Arlt A, Gehrz A, Muerkoster S, Vorndamm J, Kruse ML,
Folsch UR and Schafer H. Role of NF-kappaB and Akt/
PI3K in the resistance of pancreatic carcinoma cell lines
13195

Oncotarget

against gemcitabine-induced cell death. Oncogene. 2003;
22:3243–3251.

H, et al. A phase I first-in-human trial of bardoxolone
methyl in patients with advanced solid tumors and lymphomas. Clinical cancer research. 2012; 18:3396–3406.

36.	 Li Y, Xing D, Chen Q and Chen WR. Enhancement of
chemotherapeutic agent-induced apoptosis by inhibition
of NF-kappaB using ursolic acid. International journal of
cancer. 2010; 127:462–473.

43.	 Warnock DG, Hebbar S, Bargman J, Burkart J, Davies
S, Finkelstein FO, Mehrotra R, Ronco C, Teitelbaum I,
Urakpo K and Chertow GM. Prospective safety study of
bardoxolone methyl in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus, end-stage renal disease and peritoneal dialysis.
Contributions to nephrology. 2012; 178:157–163.

37.	 Shanmugam MK, Rajendran P, Li F, Nema T, Vali S,
Abbasi T, Kapoor S, Sharma A, Kumar AP, Ho PC, Hui
KM and Sethi G. Ursolic acid inhibits multiple cell survival
pathways leading to suppression of growth of prostate cancer xenograft in nude mice. Journal of molecular medicine.
2011; 89:713–727.

44.	 de Zeeuw D, Akizawa T, Agarwal R, Audhya P, Bakris
GL, Chin M, Krauth M, Lambers Heerspink HJ, Meyer CJ,
McMurray JJ, Parving HH, Pergola PE, Remuzzi G, Toto
RD, Vaziri ND, Wanner C, et al. Rationale and trial design
of Bardoxolone Methyl Evaluation in Patients with Chronic
Kidney Disease and Type 2 Diabetes: the Occurrence of
Renal Events (BEACON). American journal of nephrology.
2013; 37:212–222.

38.	 Hsu HY, Yang JJ and Lin CC. Effects of oleanolic acid and
ursolic acid on inhibiting tumor growth and enhancing the
recovery of hematopoietic system postirradiation in mice.
Cancer letters. 1997; 111:7–13.
39.	 Ganbold M, Barker J, Ma R, Jones L and Carew M.
Cytotoxicity and bioavailability studies on a decoction of
Oldenlandia diffusa and its fractions separated by HPLC.
Journal of ethnopharmacology. 2010; 131:396–403.

45.	 Kunnumakkara AB, Guha S, Krishnan S, Diagaradjane P,
Gelovani J and Aggarwal BB. Curcumin potentiates antitumor activity of gemcitabine in an orthotopic model of pancreatic cancer through suppression of proliferation, angiogenesis, and inhibition of nuclear factor-kappaB-regulated
gene products. Cancer research. 2007; 67:3853–3861.

40.	 Zhou XJ, Hu XM, Yi YM and Wan J. Preparation and body
distribution of freeze-dried powder of ursolic acid phospholipid nanoparticles. Drug development and industrial pharmacy. 2009; 35:305–310.

46.	 Chaturvedi MM, LaPushin R and Aggarwal BB. Tumor
necrosis factor and lymphotoxin. Qualitative and quantitative differences in the mediation of early and late cellular response. The Journal of biological chemistry. 1994;
269:14575–14583.

41.	 Shishodia S, Sethi G, Konopleva M, Andreeff M and
Aggarwal BB. A synthetic triterpenoid, CDDO-Me,
inhibits IkappaBalpha kinase and enhances apoptosis
induced by TNF and chemotherapeutic agents through
down-regulation of expression of nuclear factor
kappaB-regulated gene products in human leukemic
cells. Clinical cancer research. 2006; 12:1828–1838.

47.	 Zhu C, Wang Y, Kuai W, Sun X, Chen H and Hong Z.
Prognostic value of miR-29a expression in pediatric acute
myeloid leukemia. Clinical biochemistry. 2013; 46:49-53.
48.	 Schmittgen TD and Livak KJ. Analyzing real-time PCR
data by the comparative C(T) method. Nature protocols.
2008; 3:1101–1108.

42.	 Hong DS, Kurzrock R, Supko JG, He X, Naing A, Wheler
J, Lawrence D, Eder JP, Meyer CJ, Ferguson DA, Mier J,
Konopleva M, Konoplev S, Andreeff M, Kufe D, Lazarus

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13196

Oncotarget

