Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 13

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Sunitinib but not VEGF blockade inhibits cancer stem cell endothelial
differentiation
Alessia Brossa1, Cristina Grange2, Letizia Mancuso1, Laura Annaratone2, Maria
Antonietta Satolli3, Massimiliano Mazzone4,5, Giovanni Camussi2, Benedetta
Bussolati1,3
1

Department of Molecular Biotechnology and Health Sciences, University of Torino, Torino, Italy

2

Department of Medical Sciences, University of Torino, Torino, Italy

3

Department of Oncology, University of Torino, Torino, Italy

4

Laboratory of Molecular Oncology and Angiogenesis, Vesalius Research Center, KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium

5

Laboratory of Molecular Oncology and Angiogenesis, Vesalius Research Center, VIB, 3000 Leuven, Belgium

Correspondence to:
Benedetta Bussolati, e-mail: benedetta.bussolati@unito.it
Giovanni Camussi, e-mail: giovanni.camussi@unito.it
Keywords: tumor stem cells, VEGF, HIF, angiogenic therapy, angiogenesis
Received: September 24, 2014    Accepted: January 09, 2015    Published: February 28, 2015

ABSTRACT
Different mechanisms of angiogenesis and vasculogenesis are involved in the
development of the tumor vasculature. Among them, cancer stem cells are known to
contribute to tumor vasculogenesis through their direct endothelial differentiation.
Here, we investigated the effect of anti-angiogenic therapy on vasculogenesis of
cancer stem cells derived from breast and renal carcinomas. We found that all the
anti-angiogenic approaches impaired proliferation and survival of cancer stem cells
once differentiated into endothelial cells in vitro and reduced murine angiogenesis
in vivo. At variance, only VEGF-receptor inhibition using the non-specific tyrosine
kinase inhibitor Sunitinib or the anti-VEGF-receptor 2 neutralizing antibody, but not
VEGF blockade using Bevacizumab, impaired the process of endothelial differentiation
in vitro, suggesting a VEGF-independent mechanism. In addition, tyrosine kinase
inhibition by Sunitinib but not VEGF blockade using the soluble VEGF trap sFlk1
inhibited the cancer stem cell-induced vasculogenesis in vivo. Accordingly, Sunitinib
but not Bevacizumab inhibited the induction of hypoxia-inducible factor pathway
occurring during endothelial differentiation under hypoxia. The present results
highlight a differential effect of VEGF-receptor blockade versus VEGF inhibition in
tumor vascularization. VEGFR blockade inhibits the process of tumor vasculogenesis
occurring during tumor hypoxia whereas the effect of VEGF inhibition appears
restricted to differentiated endothelial cells.

due to differentiation of normal stem cells of
hematopoietic origin [5]. Finally, tumor cells with
stem cell properties, so called cancer stem cells (CSC),
of different solid tumors may participate to tumor
vasculogenesis by a direct endothelial differentiation
[6–16]. The role of CSC vasculogenesis is emerging
as an important mechanism for tumor progression, and
selective targeting of endothelial cells generated by CSC
in xenografted tumors was recently showed to induce
tumor reduction and degeneration [14]. We previously
isolated CSC and deriving clones from breast and renal

INTRODUCTION
Tumor vascularization is a fundamental step
for tumor growth, expansion and progression [1].
Recent data indicate that the tumor vasculature is quite
heterogeneous possibly due to different mechanisms
of angiogenesis and vasculogenesis [2]. Tumor cells
can secrete growth factors and cytokines in order to
recruit normal endothelial cells from adjacent vessels
[3, 4]. Moreover, tumor endothelial cells may derive
from an intra-tumor embryonic-like vasculogenesis
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11295

Oncotarget

carcinomas that were able to differentiate into both
epithelial and endothelial cells in vitro [15, 16]. In vivo,
breast and renal CSC and deriving clones generated
epithelial tumors as well as tumor vessels, indicating
that at least a fraction of tumor vessels derived from the
endothelial differentiation of CSC [15, 16].
Drugs that target tumor vascularization have been
recently introduced in the clinical practice for different
solid tumors. Anti-angiogenic therapies may directly target
endothelial cells in the growing vasculature, as tyrosine
kinase inhibitors do, or indirectly block the activity of
angiogenesis inducers such as VEGF. In particular, the
multi-tyrosine kinase inhibitors Sunitinib and Sorafenib
directly target VEGF receptors (VEGFRs) and other nonendothelial receptors such as CD117 and the receptors
for Platelet Derived Growth Factor (CD140), for Colony
Stimulating Factor 1 and for Glial cell line-Derived
Neurotrophic Factor (RET) [17]. In addition, the antiVEGF mAb (Bevacizumab) potently binds to VEGF
preventing its docking with VEGFRs [18].
These anti-angiogenic drugs are known to affect all
the different VEGF-dependent mechanisms involved in the
angiogenic process, such as endothelial cell proliferation,
survival and vessel stabilization [4]. However, the effect of
these drugs on alternative strategies of tumor vascularization,
and in particular on the CSC-derived endothelial cells and
on the process of their differentiation, is at present unknown.
In the present study, we set up a model of hypoxiainduced endothelial differentiation of CSC from breast and
renal carcinomas and we aimed to investigate the role of
the anti-angiogenetic drugs Sunitinib and Bevacizumab
both on CSC-derived differentiated endothelial cells and
on the hypoxia-induced process of CSC differentiation
into endothelial cells. Moreover, we investigated the effect
of Sunitinib and of the soluble VEGF trap sFlk1 on CSCinduced vasculogenesis in vivo.

In addition, they acquired endothelial cell markers when
cultured for 14 days in the presence of a complete medium
containing VEGF and 10% FCS [15, 16]. The absence
of contaminating cells is supported by the clonal origin
of the CSC lines. In the present study, to mimic the tumor
microenvironment, we set up a protocol of endothelial
differentiation under hypoxia (1% O2) in the absence
of growth factors or serum. CSC cultured under this
condition showed the ability to differentiate in vitro into
endothelial cells. CSC acquired, after 14 days of endothelial
differentiation, full expression of endothelial markers such
as CD31, VEGFR2, VE-cadherin, vWF (Figure 1C) and the
ability to organize into capillary-like structures (Figure 1C).

Anti-proliferative and cytotoxic effect of
Sunitinib and Bevacizumab on CSC-deriving
endothelial cells
We evaluated the effect of the anti-angiogenic drugs
Sunitinib and Bevacizumab on CSC and CSC-derived
endothelial cells. No effect of Sunitinib and Bevacizumab
was observed on the proliferation of undifferentiated
B-CSC and R-CSC (Figure 2A). Indeed, these cells did
not express the growth factor receptors known to be
target of Sunitinib (VEGFR1, 2 and 3, CD117, CD140;
not shown). A slight but significant cytotoxic effect was
observed on R-CSC at 5–10 μM Sunitinib, possibly related
to a toxic drug effect (Figure 2B), as previously reported
on renal cancer cells at doses higher than 5 μM (17). At
variance, Sunitinib (5–10 μM) and Bevacizumab (25–250
μg/ml) significantly impaired proliferation of endothelialdifferentiated CSC (Figure 2A). In addition, Sunitinib
(1–10 μM) and Bevacizumab (25–250 μg/ml) significantly
reduced their survival (Figure 2B). This is possibly due to
the acquisition by differentiated cells of the expression of
VEGFRs (Figure 1C) and not of CD117 or CD140; not
shown. We also tested whether the response to these drugs
on proliferation and survival was comparable to that of
the total endothelial cell population derived from a breast
tumor (BTEC) and of normal endothelial cells (HUVEC).
The effect observed on endothelial-differentiated B-CSC
was comparable to that of BTEC. In contrast, HUVEC
showed a higher sensitivity to the anti-proliferative and
cytotoxic effects of these drugs (Figure 2C and 2D).

RESULTS
Endothelial differentiation of breast and renal
CSC under hypoxia
We previously isolated and characterized CSC from
renal and breast carcinomas showing tumor-initiating
and differentiative ability in vitro and in vivo [15, 16 and
Supplementary Table 1]. As reported, B-CSC were able to
grow in mammospheres, were CD44+/CD24− and showed
absence of differentiation markers of the cell types of the
glandular epithelium as they did not express cytokeratin-14
and -18 [16] (Figure 1A and 1B). In analogy, CSC from renal
carcinomas were identified as CD105+ CSC clones, grew in
spheres and lacked expression of epithelial differentiative
markers such as cytokeratin [15] (Figure 1A and 1B).
Both B-CSC and R-CSC were able to differentiate into
epithelial cells, as shown by the acquisition of cytokeratin
in vitro, when cultured in RPMI plus 10% FCS (Figure 1B).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Effect of sunitinib but not of bevacizumab on
endothelial differentiation of CSC in vitro
We next investigated whether a chronic treatment
with the anti-angiogenic drugs could impair the endothelial
differentiative ability of B-CSC and R-CSC in hypoxia.
For these experiments, the dose of 1 μM Sunitinib and
100 μg/ml Bevacizumab was selected as non-toxic on
CSC. As shown in figure 3A and 3B, Sunitinib almost
completely abolished the acquisition of the endothelial
markers CD31, VEGFR1, 2 and 3 and Tie-2 by both
11296

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Characterization and differentiative properties of CSC from breast and renal carcinomas. Panel A and B. B-CSC and
R-CSC grew in spheres and were characterized as CD24−/CD44+ or CD24−/CD105+ cells, respectively (A). B-CSC and R-CSC lacked cytokeratin
(CK) that was acquired when cultured in epithelial differentiating conditions (EPITH. DIFF.) for 14 days (D14), as compared with basal condition
(D0) (B). Panel C. B-CSC and R-CSC cultured for 14 days (D14) in endothelial differentiating conditions under hypoxia (ENDOTH. DIFF.)
acquired the endothelial-specific markers CD31, VEGFR2, VE-cadherin (VE-CAD) and vWF and the ability to organize into capillary-like
structures. Original magnification: immunofluorescence staining: x400; tubulogenesis: x200. Nuclei were counterstained with Hoechst dye.
B-CSC and R-CSC after 14 days in differentiating
conditions. In contrast, cells treated with Bevacizumab
maintained the endothelial differentiative ability as shown
by the acquisition of all endothelial markers (Figure 3A
and 3B). This was also confirmed at mRNA level, as
VEGFR2 and Tie-2 mRNA expression, evaluated by RTPCR after endothelial differentiation, was comparable to
that in total tumor endothelial cells (BTEC) (Figure 3C).
The endothelial markers were lacking in Sunitinib treated
CSC, and not in Bevacizumab treated cells (Figure 3C),
further supporting the cytofluorimetric data. In parallel,
in the presence of Sunitinib, but not of Bevacizumab,
CSC maintained the expression of the stem markers
Oct4-A and Nanog, downregulated by control cells after
endothelial differentiation (Figure 3D). Moreover, CSC
cells differentiated in the presence of Sunitinib did not
acquire the endothelial ability to organize in tubular-like
structures (Figure 3E), confirming that Sunitinib inhibited
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

the endothelial property of CSC. At variance, CSC
differentiated in the presence of Bevacizumab acquired the
ability to organize in tubular structures, as control CSC
(Figure 3E).

Dispensable role of VEGF in endothelial
differentiation of CSC
To further investigate the role of VEGF on the
differentiation process of CSC, we generated B-CSC
transfected to stably express the soluble VEGF-trap
sFlk1 (sFLK1 cells, Figure 4B) to obtain a constant
inhibition of endogenous/exogenous VEGF binding.
As found for Bevacizumab, sFLK1 cells were able to
acquire endothelial markers during differentiation both
at protein and mRNA level (Figure 4A and 4C) while
they lost stem cell markers in respect to undifferentiated
CSC (Figure 4D).
11297

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Cytotoxic effect of Bevacizumab and Sunitinib on CSC-derived endothelial cells. Panel A and B. Effect of

1–10 μM Sunitinib (S1-S10) and of 25–250 μg/ml Bevacizumab (B25-B250) on proliferation (A) and apoptosis (B) of B-CSC and
R-CSC before (Undiff, black columns) and after the endothelial differentiation (Diff., white columns). Panel C and D. The effect of
Bevacizumab and Sunitinib on endothelial differentiated CSC was compared to that on total breast tumor-derived endothelial cells
(BTEC) or on normal endothelial cells (HUVEC). Data are mean ± SD of five different experiments (A and B) or three different
experiments (C and D). Student’s t test was performed: **= p < 0.001, *= p < 0.05 drug treated vs CTL cells.

To test the role of VEGF intracellular pathway on
endothelial differentiation, we inhibited the activation of
VEGFRs using the anti-VEGFR2 or the anti-VEGFR1
neutralizing Abs. The anti-VEGFR2 neutralizing Ab
(0.2 μg/ml) but not the anti-VEGFR1 neutralizing Ab
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

(0.2 μg/ml) or an irrelevant Ab (not shown), administered
to CSC during hypoxic endothelial differentiation,
limited the acquisition of endothelial markers on
CSC (Figure 4A and 4C). The lack of endothelial
differentiation by treatment with the anti-VEGFR2 Ab,
11298

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Effect of Bevacizumab and Sunitinib on the endothelial differentiation of CSC. Panel A and B. 1 μM Sunitinib
(S1), but not 100 μg/ml Bevacizumab (B100), impaired the hypoxia-mediated endothelial differentiation of B-CSC (A) and R-CSC (B) as
shown by the lack of acquisition of endothelial specific markers. In the representative FACS analyses, the grey area shows binding of the
specific antibody and the dark line the isotypic control. In the lower histogram, the percentage of expression is reported. Data are mean ± SD
of five different experiments. Student’s t test was performed: **= p < 0.001, *= p < 0.05 vs CTL. Panel C. Quantitative RT-PCR analysis
showing the acquisition of the expression of endothelial markers VEGFR2 (VR2) and TIE-2 by B-CSC after endothelial differentiation
(CTL) in respect to undifferentiated B-CSC (Basal). Sunitinib (1 μM, S1) but not Bevacizumab (100 μg/ml, B100) abrogated VEGFR2 and
TIE-2 mRNA expression. Total breast tumor-derived endothelial cells (BTEC) were used as positive control of differentiation. Data were
normalized to GAPDH mRNA and to 1 for undifferentiated CSC (Basal) and expressed as relative quantification (RQ). Data are mean ±
SD of three different experiments. ANOVA with Newmann-Keuls’ multicomparison test was performed: *= p < 0.05 and **= p < 0.001
vs CTL; $= p < 0.05 and $$= p < 0.001 vs Basal. Panel D. Quantitative RT-PCR analysis showing the reduction of Oct4-A and Nanog
by CSC differentiated into endothelial cells (CTL) in respect to undifferentiated CSC (Basal). CSC differentiated in the presence of 1 μM
Sunitinib (S1), but not of 100 μg/ml Bevacizumab (B100) maintained these markers. Data were normalized to GAPDH mRNA and to 1 for
Basal and expressed as relative quantification (RQ). Data are mean ± SD of three different experiments. ANOVA with Newmann-Keuls’
multicomparison test was performed: *= p < 0.05 and **= p < 0.001 vs CTL; $= p < 0.05 and $$= p < 0.001 vs Basal. Panel E. Effect
of Bevacizumab and Sunitinib on endothelial-differentiated CSC organization into capillary-like structures. Quantitative evaluation and
representative micrographs show the formation of capillary-like structures by control cells (CTL) and by cells treated with 1 μM Sunitinib
(S1) or 100 μg/ml Bevacizumab (B100). Data are expressed as the mean ± SD of the length of capillary-like structures, evaluated by the
computer analysis system in arbitrary units (a.u.) in at least 10 different fields. Four different experiments per group were carried out in
duplicate. Original magnification x200. Student’s t test was performed: **= p < 0.001 vs CTL.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11299

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Effect of the VEGF trap sFlk1 and VEGFR blockade on CSC endothelial differentiation. Panel A. Representative

FACS analyses showing the expression of endothelial differentiation markers by B-CSC infected with lentiviruses carrying an empty vector
(Ctl) or the soluble VEGF trap sFlk1 (sFLK1 cells) or treated with an anti-VEGFR2 and an anti-VEGFR1 neutralizing Abs (anti-VR2 and
anti-VR1). The grey area shows binding of the specific antibody and the dark line the isotypic control. Panel B. Western blot micrograph
showing the presence of the soluble VEGFR2 (sVR2) in the supernatant of cells expressing the soluble VEGF trap sFlk1 (sFLK1 cells) but
not an empty vector (Ctl). Panel C. Quantitative RT-PCR analyses showing the acquisition of the expression of VR2 and TIE-2 after 14 days
of endothelial differentiation by Ctl, sFLK1 B-CSC and by B-CSC incubated with the anti-VR1, but not by B-CSC incubated with the antiVR2, during differentiation process. Data were normalized to GAPDH mRNA and to 1 for undifferentiated CSC (Basal) and expressed as
relative quantification (RQ). Data are mean ± SD of three different experiments. ANOVA with Newmann-Keuls’ multicomparison test was
performed: *= p < 0.05 and **= p < 0.001 vs CTL; $= p < 0.05 and $$= p < 0.001 vs Basal. Panel D. Quantitative RT-PCR analysis showing
the expression of the stem cell markers (Oct4-A, Vimentin and Nanog) by CSC (Basal) and by B-CSC differentiated in the presence of antiVR2 antibody (anti-VR2). The expression of stem cell markers were significantly decreased in B-CSC differentiated into endothelial cells and
in B-CSC differentiated into endothelial cells in the presence of anti-VEGFR1 neutralizing Ab (anti-VR1) and in sFLK1 cells compared with
basal condition. Data were normalized to GAPDH mRNA and to 1 for undifferentiated CSC (Basal) and expressed as relative quantification
(RQ). Data are mean ± SD of three different experiments. ANOVA with Newmann-Keuls’ multicomparison test was performed: *= p < 0.05
and **= p < 0.001 vs CTL; $= p < 0.05 and $$= p < 0.001 vs Basal. Panel E. The percentage of VEGFR2+ cells at different time points during
endothelial differentiation was assessed in control B-CSC cells (CTL), or in the sFLK1 cells or in cells treated with 1 μM Sunitinib (S1) or with
an anti-VEGFR2 neutralizing Ab (anti-VR2). Data are mean ± SD of three different experiments. Student’s t test was performed: **p < 0.001
vs CTL. Panel F. VEGFR2 Tyr951 phosphorylation was detected in B-CSC cells expressing an empty vector (CTL), or the soluble VEGF trap
sFlk1 (sFLK1 cells) by Western blot analysis of cell lysates immunoprecipitated with an anti-VEGFR2 Ab. VEGFR2 phosphorylation levels
are expressed as the ratio of phosphorylated VEGFR2 to total VEGFR2. Data are representative of three different experiments.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11300

Oncotarget

the CSC markers Oct4-A, Vimentin and Nanog, lost by
control cells during endothelial differentiation (Figure 5E).

but not with the anti-VEGFR1 Ab, was confirmed by a
concomitant maintenance of the expression of the stem
markers Oct4-A, Vimentin and Nanog (Figure 4D).
VEGFR2 expression remained very low in cells treated
with the anti-VEGFR2 antibody, but not with the VEGF
trap sFlk1, during the whole process of differentiation
(Figure 4E). These data suggest that CSC endothelial
differentiation may occur independently by VEGF. On
the contrary, VEGFR2 activation appears relevant for
this process. This was confirmed by the phosphorylation
of VEGFR2 in endothelial differentiated CSC both in
control and in the presence of VEGF blockade (sFLK1
cells, Figure 4F). These results suggest that interference
with VEGFR2, but not with VEGFR1 or with
VEGF itself, inhibits the endothelial differentiation of
CSC, which is possibly due to an intracellular VEGFR2
trans-activation.
To test the relevance of intracellular pathways possibly
inhibited by the anti-angiogenic treatment, we evaluated
the role of the Akt pathway. A significant activation of
the Akt pathway was observed in CSC under endothelial
differentiation, as early as at day 3, and maintained up to
complete differentiation (14 days) (Supplementary Figure
1A and 1B). However, no significant modulation of Akt
activation was detected in cells treated with Sunitinib or
anti-VEGFR2 or anti-VEGFR1 Abs (Supplementary Figure
1C and 1D).

Effect of Sunitinib and sFlk on endothelial
differentiation of CSC in vivo
CSC injected subcutaneously in SCID mice
organized after 7 days in small clusters of few cells
and, after 14 days, in highly vascularized tumors
(Supplementary Figure 3A and 3B and Figure 6A and
6B). At an early tumor phase, vessels were mainly of
murine origin, as endothelial cells did not express HLA
(Supplementary Figure 3C and 3D). At variance, in
large tumors, some intratumor vessels were of human
origin, as detected by human HLA Class I and vWF
co-expression (Figure 7B and 7C). This is possibly
related to the detection of hypoxic areas in large tumors
that showed a strong expression of the hypoxic marker
carbonic anhydrase IX (CAIX). Small tumor clusters did
not express CAIX (Supplementary Figure 3E and 3F).
We therefore evaluated the possible differential effect
of VEGF or tyrosine kinase blockade on endothelial
differentiation of CSC in vivo after 14 days. SCID mice
were treated as follows: (i) mice injected subcutaneously
with B-CSC expressing the soluble VEGF trap sFlk1
(sFLK1 mice), (ii) mice injected subcutaneously with
B-CSC transduced with an empty vector as control (Ctl
mice), (iii) mice injected subcutaneously with control
B-CSC and daily treated with oral administration of
Sunitinib (50 mg/kg, SUN mice). Tumors generated
by sFLK1 cells, in which the released sFlk1 is able to
sequester human and murine VEGF, showed reduced
growth and vascularization and extensive necrosis
(Figure 6A and 6B). The analysis of the vessels showed
co-existence of both β2-microglobulin+ murine vessels
and vWF+/HLA+ human vessels (Figure 7A–7C).
In SUN mice, tumors generated by B-CSC showed
reduced growth and vascularization and extensive necrosis
comparable to that in sFLK1 mice (Figure 6A and 6B).
The murine vessels in SUN tumors were reduced in
respect to Ctl to an extent similar to sFLK1 tumors.
However, the number of human vessels detected was
almost negligible, and the great percentage of vessels
observed was of murine origin (Figure 7A–7C). These
data indicate that in vivo endothelial differentiation of
B-CSC, i.e. vasculogenesis, is independent of VEGF
inhibition by sFlk1, but dependent on endothelial receptor
tyrosine blockade by Sunitinib. Finally, we evaluated
the presence of pericytes around the vessels of treated
tumors, as a sign of vascular stability. In SUN and sFLK1
tumors, the few vessels detectable were covered by
α-SMA+ (Figure 7C) cells. At variance, vessels detected
in Ctl mice within the tumor were mainly negative
(Figure 7C). These results altogether may suggest that
the anti-angiogenic treatment using both Sunitinib and
VEGF blockade reduces tumor vascularization while

Sunitinib but not Bevacizumab impaired the
hypoxia-induced HIF-1 alpha activation
As in our experimental setting endothelial
differentiation required hypoxia, we also evaluated
the effect of Sunitinib and Bevacizumab on the HIF
pathway. When B-CSC were incubated under hypoxia
in differentiating conditions, HIF-1 alpha but not HIF-2
alpha was upregulated (Figure 5A). Sunitinib impaired
HIF-1 alpha upregulation both at mRNA and protein level
(Figure 5A and 5B). No effect of Bevacizumab on HIF1 alpha mRNA was observed (Figure 5A). These data
indicate the ability of Sunitinib, and not of Bevacizumab,
to block the hypoxia-induced intracellular pathways
required for endothelial differentiation.
The requirement of HIF-1 alpha activation during
the process of endothelial differentiation of B-CSC under
hypoxia was confirmed using cells knocked-down for
HIF-1 and/or 2 alpha. HIF-1 alpha and HIF-2 alpha double
knocked-down CSC were generated since a compensatory
mechanism of upregulation of HIF-1 alpha or HIF-2 alpha
was observed in cells silenced for the other HIF isoform
under hypoxia, (Supplementary Figure 2A and 2B).
Indeed, CSC knocked down for both HIF-1 or 2 alpha
significantly reduced their endothelial differentiation
(Figure 5C and 5D). A partial reduction was observed in
HIF-1 or 2 alpha single knock down (Figure 5C and 5D).
In addition, HIF-1/2 alpha negative CSC maintained
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11301

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Effect of Sunitinib on HIF pathway during CSC endothelial differentiation. Panel A. Quantitative RT-PCR analysis
showing the increase of HIF-1 alpha but not of HIF-2 alpha by B-CSC incubated for 3 hours in endothelial-differentiating condition in hypoxia
in the presence and absence of 1 μM Sunitinib (S1) or 100 μg/ml Bevacizumab (B100). Data were normalized to GAPDH mRNA and to 1 for
time 0, expressed as relative quantification (RQ) and are mean ± SD of three different experiments. Student’s t test was performed: **= p <
0.001 vs Basal; $= p < 0.001 vs Hypoxia. Panel B. Western blot micrograph and densitometric analysis of HIF-1 alpha expression. Data, shown
as arbitrary units, are representative of three different experiments and were normalized to vinculin expression. Student’s t test was performed:
**= p < 0.001 vs Basal; $= p < 0.001 vs CTL. Panel C and D. Expression of endothelial differentiation markers by control B-CSC infected
with a scramble shRNA (shCTL) and in B-CSC lacking HIF-1 alpha (shHIF-1α), HIF-2 alpha (shHIF-2α) or both (shHIF-1α+shHIF-2α).
In the representative FACS analyses, the gray filled area shows binding of the specific antibody and the dark line the isotypic control (C). In
the histogram, the percentage of expression is reported (D). Data are mean ± SD of five different experiments. Student’s t test was performed:
**= p < 0.001 vs shCTL. Panel E. Quantitative RT-PCR analysis showing the reduction of the stem-cell associated markers Oct4-A, Vimentin
and Nanog in shCTL cells after endothelial differentiation in respect to basal condition, but not in endothelial differentiated shHIF-1α+shHIF2α cells. Data were normalized to GAPDH mRNA and to 1 for time 0 and expressed as relative quantification (RQ). Data are mean ± SD of
three different experiments. Student’s t test was performed: **= p < 0.001 vs Basal.
endothelial cells in vitro and murine angiogenesis in vivo,
respectively. At variance, Sunitinib also impaired the
process of differentiation of CSC into endothelial cells
in vitro and the CSC-induced vasculogenesis in vivo.
Tumor vascularization is granted by combined
mechanisms of angiogenesis and vasculogenesis, and antitumor therapies should ideally affect both. We here found
that Sunitinib and Bevacizumab displayed a cytotoxic and
anti-proliferative response on endothelial cells derived
from CSC that was comparable to the response of the
total endothelial tumor population. A similar inhibitory

it stabilizes the surviving vessels, as reported [19].
Moreover, Sunitinib could specifically block tumor
CSC-dependent vasculogenesis.

DISCUSSION
In the present study, we investigated the effect
of drugs targeting the VEGF pathway on tumor
vasculogenesis. The results show a differential effect
of anti-VEGF drugs and Sunitinib on CSC-induced
vasculogenesis. VEGF blockade only affected differentiated
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11302

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Effect of sFlk1 and Sunitinib on tumor growth and vascularization. Tumors were generated by subcutaneous

implant of B-CSC carrying an empty vector (Ctl) or a sFlk1 vector (sFLK1) (n = 8 per experimental group). Selected animals carrying
Ctl tumors were treated daily with Sunitinib (SUN) from day 4. Panel A. Reduction of tumor volume and vascularization in sFLK1 and
SUN tumors in respect to Ctl. Vessels quantification is the mean ± SD erythrocyte containing structures/field in at least 10 fields per tumor.
Student’s t test was performed: **= p < 0.001, *= p < 0.05 vs Ctl. Panel B. Representative micrographs of tumor sections stained with
hematoxylin and eosin (upper panels) or with Masson’s trichromic reaction (blu: connective, red: cells, yellow: erythrocytes; lower panels).
The star indicated necrotic areas and the arrows vessels. Original magnification: H/H: 100x; Trichromic: 200x.

into endothelial cells in vitro or to organize into vessels
in vivo. A similar effect was observed with VEGFR2
and not VEGFR1 inhibition underlying the importance
of the VEGFR2 receptor activation. Several possibilities
may explain this difference between VEGFR2 and
VEGF blockade on CSC differentiation. For instance,
VEGFR2 might be trans-activated at an intracellular
level, possibly by lipid metabolites, cytokine receptors
and Plexin-A4 [23–27]. Similarly, we found that VEGFR2
was phosphorylated in endothelial differentiated CSC even
when VEGF was inhibited by the constant release of the
sFlk1 VEGF trap, suggesting a possible role for VEGFR2
activation in the absence of VEGF binding.
The effect of Sunitinib could also be explained by
targeting of different VEGF-unrelated receptor tyrosine
kinases such as CD140, CD117, and RET [28]. However,
its activity in renal and breast CSCs appears dependent
on VEGFRs, as the others receptors are absent in both
undifferentiated and endothelial differentiated CSC.
Finally, Sunitinib may directly act on intracellular targets,
such as Akt or HIF. In colon cancer cells, Sunitinib was
shown to inhibit the HIF-1 alpha translation accompanied

effect was obtained by VEGF-blockade (sFlk1) and
Sunitinib that affected the murine vessels originated in
CSC-induced tumors in vivo. These data indicate that both
VEGF blockade and Sunitinib can target differentiated
endothelial cells generated either by vasculogenesis
or angiogenic mechanisms. As previously reported for
tumor-derived endothelial cells [20], the sensitivity to
anti-angiogenic drugs of CSC-derived endothelial cells
was lower than that of normal endothelial cells, underlying
possible mechanisms of drug resistance.
In this study, we also evaluated the effect of antiangiogenic drugs on CSC endothelial differentiation
in hypoxic condition, as CSC were mainly located in
an hypoxic perivascular niche, in close association
to tumor vessels [21], where hypoxia may promote
CSC differentiation [10, 22]. Interestingly, we found a
differential effect of drugs acting through VEGF receptor
blockade (Sunitinib and anti-VEGFR2 blocking antibody)
in respect to those acting through VEGF inhibition
(Bevacizumab and the VEGF soluble trap sFlk1) on CSC
differentiation. Only Sunitinib, and not Bevacizumab
or sFlk1, inhibited the ability of CSC to differentiate
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11303

Oncotarget

Figure 7: Effect of sFlk1 and Sunitinib on murine and human tumor vessels. Panel A. Both sFlk1 releasing tumors (sFLK1)

and Sunitinib treated tumors (SUN) showed reduction of murine vessels in respect to control tumors (Ctl), evaluated as murine β2microglobuline-positive structures by immunohistochemistry (n = 8 per experimental group). Murine vessels only represented a part of total
vessels in Ctl and sFLK but not in SUN tumors. Data are the mean ± SD of β2-microglobulin positive structures containing erythrocytes
(β2+)/field or total erythrocytes containing structures in at least 10 fields per tumor. Student’s t test was performed: **= p < 0.001, *= p
< 0.05 vs Ctl; $$= p < 0.001, $= p < 0.05 vs β2+/field. Panel B. SUN tumors and not sFLK1 tumors showed reduction of human vessels,
evaluated as structures co-expressing vWF and human HLA Class I (vWF+/HLA+) by immunofluorescence. Data are the mean ± SD of
vWF+/HLA+ structures/field in at least 10 fields per tumor. Student’s t test was performed: **= p < 0.001 vs Ctl. Panel C. Representative
micrographs of Ctl, sFLK1 and SUN tumor sections showing murine β2-microglobulin positive structures (upper panels). Representative
micrographs of Ctl, sFLK1 and SUN tumor sections showing positive immunofluorescence staining for vWF (red) /human HLA class-I
(green) positive structures, for human CD31 (hCD31, red) or for vWF (red)/αSMA (green). Original magnification: x200 (upper panels)
and x400 (lower panels).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11304

Oncotarget

the presence of the expansion medium, a modification
of that described for multipotent adult progenitor cells
[42], consisting of DMEM LG (Invitrogen), with insulintransferrin-selenium, 10–9 M dexametasone, 100 U penicillin,
1000 U streptomycin, 10 ng/ml EGF (all from SigmaAldrich) and 5% fetal calf serum (FCS) (Sigma-Aldrich).
A CD105+ clonal renal cancer stem cell line was selected
and used for all the experiments. B-CSC and R-CSC were
characterized as tumor stem cells due to the following
criteria, previously described for cancer stem cells present
in other tumor types [43]: 1) were clonogenic, 2) expressed
stem cell markers and lacked differentiative markers, 3) could
differentiate in vitro into epithelial and endothelial cell types,
and 4) could generate in vivo serially transplantable tumors.
These tumors, despite being derived from clones expressing
mesenchymal markers, were epithelial carcinomas as the
tumor of origin [15, 16, 39; Supplementary Table 1].
Human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC)
were obtained and characterized as previously described
[44]. A tumor endothelial cell line (BTEC) obtained from a
breast tumor was previously isolated and characterized [45].

with inactivation of Akt, possibly suggesting that Sunitinib
may directly act on Akt [30, 31]. However, no effect on
Akt activation was observed in our setting. In addition,
in neuroblastoma cells, Sunitinib was reported to block
HIF activation independently of receptor tyrosine kinase
inhibition [32]. We similarly found that HIF-1 alpha
synthesis, required for CSC endothelial differentiation under
hypoxia, was inhibited by Sunitinib, although we cannot
distinguish between a direct or a cytokine-dependent effect.
In fact, HIF may be activated both directly and indirectly
by tyrosine kinase-dependent intracellular pathways [29].
Regardless the mechanism involved, the specific role
of Sunitinib on CSC endothelial differentiation supports
its role in tumor therapy. Indeed, although Sunitinib did
not directly affect CSC, it blocked both the angiogenesis
and the hypoxia-driven CSC vasculogenesis, leading
to tumor necrosis and inhibition of its development. On
the other side, some possible negative consequences of
the observed effects of Sunitinib can be envisaged. The
first is a role in the maintenance of an undifferentiated
CSC population, as shown by the maintenance of stem
cell markers by Sunitinib treated CSC. Indeed, it was
recently described that Sunitinib may promote embryonic
stem cell self-renewal and limit their differentiation,
even in the presence of established differentiating factors
[33]. In addition, tumor hypoxia possibly induced by
anti-angiogenic therapy itself may sustain mechanisms
of adaptation that promote tumor progression to greater
malignancy or increased tumor cell invasion [34–37].
In conclusion, our data indicate that VEGF inhibition
may only affect fully differentiated endothelial cells,
while Sunitinib, possibly through VEGFR blockade, is
also able to impair CSC-dependent tumor vasculogenesis
under hypoxia. As hypoxia induced by the anti-angiogenic
therapy itself may promote tumor angiogenesis and
vasculogenesis, the limitation of the mechanisms of CSC
endothelial differentiation are required for its efficacy.

Anti-angiogenic drugs
Sunitinib malate (Sigma-Aldrich) and Bevacizumab
(Genentech) were stocked according to the manufacturer’s
instructions.

Epithelial and endothelial differentiation of
CSC in vitro
Epithelial differentiation was obtained in the presence
of RPMI plus 10% FCS, without the addition of growth
factors, as previously described [15, 16]. For endothelial
differentiation, B-CSC and R-CSC were plated into 6-well
culture plated coated with Endothelial Cell Attachment
Factor (Sigma-Aldrich), in Endogro (Merck Millipore)
without growth factor supplement and maintained in
hypoxia (1% O2 and 5% CO2) in hypoxia chambers (Stem
Cells Technologies) for 14 days. The anti-angiogenic
drugs (Sunitinib 1 μM, Bevacizumab 100 μg/ml) and the
anti-VEGFR1 or anti-VEGFR-2 blocking polyclonal Ab,
or an irrelevant rabbit serum (all from R&D Systems), all
at 0.2 μg/ml, were added to cell cultures under hypoxic
differentiation at day 0 and every three days thereafter.

METHODS
Cancer stem cell isolation and characterization
Breast cancer stem cells (B-CSC) and renal cancer
stem cells (R-CSC) were isolated, cloned, and characterized
as previously described [15, 16; 38–41; Supplementary
Table 1]. Briefly, B-CSC were obtained from a specimen of
a lobular-infiltrating carcinoma obtained from a consenting
patient according to the Ethics Committee of the S. Giovanni
Battista Hospital of Torino, Italy, as previously described
[16]. B-CSC were isolated and expanded as mammospheres
in 10 ng/ml basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF), 20 ng/ml
epidermal growth factor (EGF), 5 μg/ml insulin and
0.4% bovine serum albumin (all from Sigma-Aldrich),
as previously described [40]. R-CSC were obtained from
specimens of renal carcinomas from patients undergoing
radical nephrectomy. CD105+ R-CSC were cultured in
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Proliferation and survival
DNA synthesis was detected as incorporation
of 5-bromo-2-deoxyuridine (BrdU) using an enzymelinked immunosorbent assay kit (Chemicon) after 48
hours of treatment. To evaluate cell death, supernatants
containing detached and death cells were and cells were
trypsinized. Cell suspensions were stained with 100 μg/
ml propidium iodide in PBS containing 0.1% Triton.
Cell cycle distribution was determined using a Beckton
11305

Oncotarget

Dickinson FACScan flow cytometer, analysing 10000 cells
per sample, and the percentage of cells in sub-G1 phase
(apoptotic cells) was estimated.

Quantitative Real-time PCR experiments were
performed in 20-μl reaction mixture containing 5 ng of
cDNA template, the sequence-specific oligonucleotide
primers (purchased from MWG-Biotech) and the Power
SYBR Green PCR Master Mix (Applied Biosystems).
GAPDH was used to normalize RNA inputs. Fold change
expression respect to control was calculated for all
samples. The sequence-specific oligonucleotide primers
are available in the Supplementary Materials.

Tubulogenesis
In vitro formation of capillary-like structures
was done on growth factor–reduced Matrigel (BD
Biosciences). After hypoxia-induced endothelial
differentiation, cells (3 × 104 cells per well) were seeded
onto Matrigel-coated wells in RPMI plus 5% FCS
with or without Sunitinib or Bevacizumab. Cells were
periodically observed with a Nikon inverted microscope
and experimental results recorded after 18 hours. Image
analysis was performed with the MicroImage analysis
system (Cast Imaging srl).

Generation of HIF−/− CSC and of sFLK1 CSC
For knock down of HIF-1 alpha and HIF-2 alpha,
a pGIPZ lentiviral vector (Open Biosystems) carrying
shRNA against HIF-1 alpha, HIF-2 alpha or scramble
was used (see Supplementary Materials). The constructs
were then transfected with the 293T cell line using the
ViraPower Packaging Mix (Life Technologies) for
lentiviruses production. After titering the lentiviral stock,
CSC were transduced with lentiviral particles following
the manufacturer’s instructions. Cells were selected by
puromycin (Gibco) (250 ng/ml) and antibiotic-resistant
cells were expanded. Cell infection was evaluated by
GFP+ > 90%, as assessed by FACS analysis, and by down
regulation of the target gene > 60% by quantitative RTPCR. CSC silenced for HIF-1 or 2 alpha significantly
reduced both HIF isoforms as compared to control cells
(Supplementary Figure 2).
For the generation of sFLK1 B-CSC, we used a
lentiviral vector carrying the sequence of the soluble
form of the VEGFR2 receptor (sFlk1) under the control
of the CMV promoter, and an empty vector as a control
as described [29]. Cell infection was evaluated by
the presence of the soluble form of VEGFR2 on the
supernatant of B-CSC by western blot (Figure 4B).

Western blot analysis
Cells were lysed in RIPA buffer supplemented with
protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail and PMSF
(Sigma-Aldrich). Aliquots of the cell lysates containing
50 μg protein, as determined by the Bradford method,
were run on 8% SDS-PAGE under reducing conditions
and blotted onto PVDF membrane filters using the
iBLOT system (Life Technologies). For Western blot
analysis, anti-HIF-1 alpha, anti-vinculin, anti-actin
(all from Santa Cruz Biotechnology), anti-AKT or anti
p-AKT(Ser473) (both from Cell Signalling) Abs were
used. sFlk1 expression was tested in the supernatant of
B-CSC maintained in culture in absence of serum for 24 h.
After centrifugation to remove the cell debris, cell-free
supernatants were concentrated 25-fold by centrifugation
using Ultra-PL 3 ultrafiltration units (Amicon-Ultra,
Millipore) with a 3-kDa molecular weight cut off and
Western blot performed using the anti-Flk1 Ab (R&D
Systems). For immuonoprecipitation studies, 10 μg of
anti-Flk1 antibody (R&D Systems) was coupled with
1.5 mg Dynabeads-Protein G (Life Technologies) in
order to precipitate 1 mg of cell lysates, according to
manufacturer’s instructions. The immunoprecipitated
samples were immediately processed for electrophoresis
and Western blot analysis, using anti-VR2 (R&D Systems)
and anti p-VR2 (Tyr951) (Santa Cruz Biotechnology).
Differences in protein phosphorylation were evaluated as
VR2/p-VR2 (Tyr951) ratio.

In vivo experiments
To evaluate the vasculogenic potential of B-CSC,
4 × 105 cells were implanted subcutaneously into SCID
mice (Charles River) within Growth Factor–Reduced
Matrigel (BD Biosciences). The effect of VEGF blockade
on vasculogenesis was studied by using B-CSC infected
with a soluble Flk1 lentivirus (sFLK1 cells), able to bind
both human and murine VEGF (Figure 4B). Briefly,
4 × 105 cells infected with lentiviruses carrying the
empty vector (Ctl) or the sFlk1 vector (sFLK1) were
resuspended in 50 μl DMEM plus 150 μl of Matrigel
at 4°C. Cells were injected subcutaneously into the left
back of SCID mice (n = 12 for the Ctl group, n = 8 for
the sFLK1). In addition, a group of animals injected
with 4 × 105 cells infected with lentiviruses carrying the
empty vector (Ctl) were orally treated with Sunitinib
(50 mg/kg) starting from day four after cell injection
(n = 8). After 7 or 14 days, mice were sacrificed, and
tumors recovered and processed for histology.

RNA isolation and real time PCR
Total RNA was isolated using Trizol Reagent
(Ambion) according to the manufacturer’s protocol, and
quantified spectrophotometrically (Nanodrop ND-1000).
For gene expression analysis, quantitative real-time PCR
was performed. Briefly, first-strand cDNA was produced
from 200 ng of total RNA using the High Capacity cDNA
Reverse Transcription Kit (Applied Biosystems).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11306

Oncotarget

REFERENCES

Immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence
Sections from paraffin-embedded blocks of tumors
obtained from SCID mice were stained with hematoxilyn
and eosin or with Trichromic Masson reaction (BioOptica)
to detect vessels, or with an anti-mouse β2-microglobulin
Ab, (Santa Cruz), or with anti-Carbonic Anhydrase IX
(CAIX) Ab (Novus Biologicals). At least 10 pictures/
tumor were taken at a 200X magnification. Vessel count
was performed in blind on Masson’s trichromic or
murine β2-microglobulin stained sections and expressed
as number of structures with red blood cells/field.
Immunofluorescence was performed on cells cultured
on chamber slides (Nunc) using the following Abs:
anti-von Willebrand Factor (vWF) Ab (Dako), anti-pancytokeratin (CK) Ab (Biomeda), VE-Cadherin (VE-Cad)
Ab (Merck Millipore). Immunofluorescence was also
performed on cryostatic sections for HLA-class I Ab, for
vWF (BioLegend), human CD31 (Becton Dickinson) and
α-SMA (Sigma-Aldrich). Alexa Fluor488 or Texas Redconjugated anti-rabbit and anti-mouse IgG (Molecular
Probes) were used as secondary Abs. Hoechst 33258 dye
(Sigma-Aldrich) was added for nuclear staining. Confocal
microscopy analysis was performed using a Zeiss LSM
5 Pascal model confocal microscope (Carl Zeiss). For
cytofluorimetric analysis cells were stained with the
following fluorescein isothiocyanate, phycoerythrin or
allophycocyanin-conjugated antibodies: CD24, CD44,
CD140, CD31 (all from Becton Dickinson) CD105,
VEGFR2 (both from Miltenyi Biotec), CD117 (Dako),
TIE2, VEGFR1, VEGFR3 (all from R&D Systems).
Isotypes (Miltenyi Biotec) were used as negative
controls. Cells were subjected to cytofluorimetric analysis
(FACScan Becton Dickinson).

1.	 Potente M, Gerhardt H, Carmeliet P. Basic and therapeutic
aspects of angiogenesis. Cell. 2011; 146:873–87.
2.	 Bussolati B, Grange C, Camussi G. Tumor exploits alternative strategies to achieve vascularization. FASEB J. 2011;
25:2874–82.
3.	 Carmeliet P. Angiogenesis in life, disease and medicine.
Nature. 2005; 438:932–6.
4.	 Leite de Oliveira R, Hamm A, Mazzone M. Growing tumor
vessels: more than one way to skin a cat - implications for
angiogenesis targeted cancer therapies. Mol Aspects Med.
2011; 32:71–87.
5.	 Ahn GO, Brown JM. Role of endothelial progenitors and
other bone marrow-derived cells in the development of the
tumor vasculature. Angiogenesis. 2009; 12:159–64.
6.	 Yao XH, Ping YF, Bian XW. Contribution of cancer stem
cells to tumor vasculogenic mimicry. Protein Cell. 2011;
2:266–72.
7.	 Shaifer CA, Huang J, Lin PC. Glioblastoma cells incorporate into tumor vasculature and contribute to vascular radioresistance. J Cancer. 2010; 127:2063–75.
8.	 Wang R, Chadalavada K, Wilshire J, Kowalik U, Hovinga
KE, Geber A, Fligelman B, Leversha M, Brennan C,
Tabar V. Glioblastoma stem-like cells give rise to tumour
endothelium. Nature. 2010; 468:829–33.
9.	 Dong J, Zhao Y, Huang Q, Fei X, Diao Y, Shen Y, Xiao H,
Zhang T, Lan Q, Gu X. Glioma stem/progenitor cells contribute to neovascularization via transdifferentiation. Stem
Cell Rev. 2011; 7:141–52.
10.	 Pezzolo A, Parodi F, Marimpietri D, Raffaghello L,
Cocco C, Pistorio A, Mosconi M, Gambini C, Cilli M,
Deaglio S, Malavasi F, Pistoia V. Oct-4+/Tenascin C+
neuroblastoma cells serve as progenitors of tumor-derived
endothelial cells. Cell Res. 2011; 21:1470–86.

Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis was performed by using the
Student t test, or ANOVA with Dunnet’s or Newmann
Keuls’ multicomparison tests, as appropriate. A p value
of < 0.05 was considered significant.

11.	 Shen R, Ye Y, Chen L, Yan Q, Barsky SH, Gao JX.
Precancerous stem cells can serve as tumor vasculogenic
progenitors. PLoS One. 2008; 3:e1652.
12.	 Alvero AB, Fu HH, Holmberg J, Visintin I, Mor L,
Marquina CC, Oidtman J, Silasi DA, Mor G. S
­ tem-like
ovarian cancer cells can serve as tumor vascular p­ rogenitors.
Stem Cells. 2009; 27:2405–13.

Acknowledgments

13.	 Soda Y, Marumoto T, Friedmann-Morvinski D, Soda M,
Liu F, Michiue H, Pastorino S, Yang M, Hoffman RM,
Kesari S, Verma IM. Transdifferentiation of glioblastoma
cells into vascular endothelial cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A. 2011; 108:4274–80.

This study was supported by Associazione Italiana
per la Ricerca sul Cancro (A.I.R.C.), project IG2012
number 12890, by Italian Ministry of University and
Research (MIUR) Prin08 and ex60%. We thank Dr.
Federica Antico for the technical support.

14.	 Ricci-Vitiani L, Pallini R, Biffoni M, Todaro M,
Invernici G, Cenci T, Maira G, Parati EA, Stassi G,
Larocca LM, De Maria R. Tumour vascularization via
endothelial differentiation of glioblastoma stem-like cells.
Nature. 2010; 468:824–8.

Conflicts of interest
The authors disclose no potential conflicts of
interest.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11307

Oncotarget

15.	 Bussolati B, Bruno S, Grange C, Ferrando U, Camussi G.
Identification of a tumor-initiating stem cell population in
human renal carcinomas. FASEB J. 2008; 22:3696–705.

lectin-receptor interactions preserve angiogenesis in antiVEGF refractory tumors. Cell. 2014; 156:744–58.
28.	 Rini BI. Sunitinib. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2007;
8:2359–69.

16.	 Bussolati B, Grange C, Sapino A, Camussi G. Endothelial
cell differentiation of human breast tumour stem/progenitor
cells. J Cell Mol Med. 2009; 13:309–319.

29.	 Fischer C, Jonckx B, Mazzone M, Zacchigna S, Loges S,
Pattarini L, Chorianopoulos E, Liesenborghs L, Koch M, De
Mol M, Autiero M, Wyns S, Plaisance S, et al. Anti-PlGF
inhibits growth of VEGF(R)-inhibitor-resistant tumors
without affecting healthy vessels. Cell. 2007; 131:463–75.

17.	 Huang D, Ding Y, Li Y, Luo WM, Zhang ZF, Snider J,
Vandenbeldt K, Qian CN, Teh BT. Sunitinib acts primarily on tumor endothelium rather than tumor cells to inhibit
the growth of renal cell carcinoma. Cancer Res. 2010;
70:1053–62.

30.	 Shin HW, Cho CH, Kim TY, Park JW. Sunitinib deregulates tumor adaptation to hypoxia by inhibiting HIF-1alpha
synthesis in HT-29 colon cancer cells. Biochem Biophys
Res Commun. 2010; 398:205–11.

18.	 Ferrara N, Hillan KJ, Gerber HP, Novotny W. Discovery
and development of bevacizumab, an anti-VEGF antibody
for treating cancer. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2004; 3:391–400.

31.	 Laughner E, Taghavi P, Chiles K, Mahon PC, Semenza
GL. HER2 (neu) signaling increases the rate of hypoxia-­
inducible factor 1alpha (HIF-1alpha) synthesis: novel
mechanism for HIF-1-mediated vascular endothelial growth
­factor expression. Mol Cell Biol. 2001; 21:3995–4004.

19.	 Jain RK. Normalization of tumor vasculature: an emerging concept in antiangiogenic therapy. Science. 2005;
307:58–62.
20.	 Xiong YQ, Sun HC, Zhang W, Zhu XD, Zhuang PY,
Zhang JB, Wang L, Wu WZ, Qin LX, Tang ZY. Human
hepatocellular carcinoma tumor-derived endothelial cells
manifest increased angiogenesis capability and drug resistance compared with normal endothelial cells. Clin Cancer
Res. 2009; 15:4838–46.

32.	 Nilsson MB, Zage PE, Zeng L, Xu L, Cascone T, Wu HK,
Saigal B, Zweidler-McKay PA, Heymach JV. Multiple
receptor tyrosine kinases regulate HIF-1alpha and HIF2alpha in normoxia and hypoxia in neuroblastoma: implications for antiangiogenic mechanisms of multikinase
­inhibitors. Oncogene. 2010; 29:2938–49.

21.	 Cabarcas SM, Mathews LA, Farrar WL. The cancer stem
cell niche—there goes the neighborhood? Int J Cancer.
2011; 129:2315–27.

33.	 Chen G, Xu X, Zhang L, Fu Y, Wang M, Gu H, Xie X.
Blocking autocrine VEGF signaling by sunitinib, an anticancer drug, promotes embryonic stem cell self-renewal and
somatic cell reprogramming. Cell Res. 2014; 24:1121–36.

22.	 Calabrese C, Poppleton H, Kocak M, Hogg TL, Fuller C,
Hamner B, Oh EY, Gaber MW, Finklestein D, Allen M,
Frank A, Bayazitov IT, Zakharenko SS, et al. A perivascular niche for brain tumor stem cells. Cancer Cell. 2007;
11:69–82.

34.	 De Bock K, Mazzone M, Carmeliet P. Antiangiogenic therapy, hypoxia, and metastasis: risky liaisons, or not? Nat Rev
Clin Oncol. 2011; 8:393–404.

23.	 Kigel B, Rabinowicz N, Varshavsky A, Kessler O,
Neufeld G. Plexin-A4 promotes tumor progression and
tumor angiogenesis by enhancement of VEGF and bFGF
signaling. Blood. 2011; 118:4285–96.

35.	 Pàez-Ribes M, Allen E, Hudock J, Takeda T, Okuyama H,
Viñals F, Inoue M, Bergers G, Hanahan D, Casanovas O.
Antiangiogenic therapy elicits malignant progression of
tumors to increased local invasion and distant metastasis.
Cancer Cell. 2009; 15:220–31.

24.	 Ryu JM, Baek YB, Shin MS, Park JH, Park SH, Lee JH,
Han HJ. Sphingosine-1-phosphate-induced Flk-1 transactivation stimulates mouse embryonic stem cell proliferation
through S1P(1)/S1P(3)-dependent β-arrestin/c-Src pathways. Stem Cell Res. 2013; 12:69–85.

36.	 Ebos JM, Lee CR, Cruz-Munoz W, Bjarnason GA,
Christensen JG, Kerbel RS. Accelerated metastasis after
short-term treatment with a potent inhibitor of tumor
­angiogenesis. Cancer Cell. 2009; 15:232–9.

25.	 Petreaca ML, Yao M, Liu Y, Defea K, Martins-Green M.
Transactivation of vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2 by interleukin-8 (IL-8/CXCL8) is required for IL-8/
CXCL8-induced endothelial permeability. Mol Biol Cell.
2007; 18:5014–23.

37.	 Maione F, Capano S, Regano D, Zentilin L, Giacca M,
Casanovas O, Bussolino F, Serini G, Giraudo E.
Semaphorin 3A overcomes cancer hypoxia and metastatic
dissemination induced by antiangiogenic treatment in mice.
J Clin Invest. 2012; 122:1832–48.

26.	 Zhang R, Xu Y, Ekman N, Wu Z, Wu J, Park SH,
Lee JH, Han HJ. Etk/Bmx transactivates vascular endothelial growth factor 2 and recruits phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase to mediate the tumor necrosis factor-induced
angiogenic pathway. J Biol Chem. 2003; 278:51267–76.

38.	 Grange C, Tapparo M, Collino F, Vitillo L, Damasco C,
Deregibus MC, Deregibus MC, Tetta C, Bussolati B,
Camussi G. Microvesicles released from human renal cancer stem cells stimulate angiogenesis and formation of lung
premetastatic niche. Cancer Res. 2011; 71:5346–56.

27.	 Croci DO, Cerliani JP, Dalotto-Moreno T, MéndezHuergo SP, Mascanfroni ID, Dergan-Dylon S, Toscano MA,
Caramelo JJ, García-Vallejo JJ, Ouyang J, Mesri EA,
Junttila MR, Bais C, et al. Glycosylation-dependent
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

39.	 Azzi S, Bruno S, Giron-Michel J, Clay D, Devocelle A, Croce M,
Ferrini S, Chouaib S, Vazquez A, Charpentier  B, Camussi G,
Azzarone B, Eid P. Differentiation therapy: targeting human
11308

Oncotarget

renal cancer stem cells with interleukin 15. J Natl Cancer
Inst. 2011; 103:1884–98.

Pluripotency of mesenchymal stem cells derived from adult
marrow. Nature. 2002; 418:41–49.

40.	 Ponti D, Costa A, Zaffarono N, Pratesi G, Petrangolini G,
Coradini D, Pilotti S, Pierotti MA, Daidone MG. Isolation
and in vitro propagation of tumorigenic breast cancer cells
with stem/progenitor cell properties. Cancer Res. 2005;
65:5506–11.

43.	 Clarke MF, Dick JE, Dirks PB, Eaves CJ, Jamieson CH,
Jones DL, Visvader J, Weissman IL, Wahl GM. Cancer
stem cells-perspectives on current status and future directions: AACR workshop on cancer stem cells. Cancer Res.
2006; 66:9339–9344.

41.	 D’Amico L, Patanè S, Grange C, Bussolati B, Isella C,
Fontani L, Godio L, Cilli M, D’Amelio P, Isaia G,
Medico  E, Ferracini R, Roato I. Primary breast cancer
stem-like cells metastasise to bone, switch phenotype
and acquire a bone tropism signature. Br J Cancer. 2013;
108:2525–36.

44.	 Deregibus MC, Cantaluppi V, Calogero R, Lo Iacono M,
Tetta C, Biancone L, Bruno S, Bussolati B, Camussi G.
Endothelial progenitor cell derived microvesicles activate
an angiogenic program in endothelial cells by a horizontal
transfer of mRNA. Blood. 2007; 110:2440–8.
45.	 Grange C, Bussolati B, Bruno S, Fonsato V, Sapino A,
Camussi G. Isolation and characterization of human
breast tumor-derived endothelial cells. Oncol Rep. 2006;
15:381–6.

42.	 Jiang Y, Jahagirdar BN, Reinhardt RL, Schwartz RE,
Keene CD, Ortiz-Gonzalez XR, Reyes M, Lenvik T,
Lund T, Blackstad M, Du J, Aldrich S, Lisberg A, et al.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11309

Oncotarget

