Original Article

Oncofertility and Preservation of
Reproductive Capacity in Children and
Young Adults*
W. Hamish B. Wallace, MD, FRCP

With increasing numbers of survivors from cancer at a young age, the issue of fertility preservation has assumed
greater importance. This review describes normal ovarian and testicular function and summarizes what is known
about the effect of chemotherapy and radiotherapy on the gonads and uterus. All young patients with cancer or leukemia should have their fertility prognosis discussed before the initiation of treatment. Sperm and embryo cryopreservation should be considered standard practice and be widely available for those at significant risk of infertility. For
prepubertal girls, ovarian tissue cryopreservation should be considered if the risk of premature menopause is high,
but for the prepubertal boy there are no established techniques in current practice. Cancer 2011;117(10 suppl):2301–
C 2011 American Cancer Society.
10. V
KEYWORDS: gonads, uterus, chemotherapy, radiotherapy, fertility preservation.

Cancer in childhood and adolescence is rare, with approximately 1400 new cases per year diagnosed in patients aged
< 16 years in the UK, and a cumulative risk of approximately 1 in 500 by the age of 15 years. Information for teenagers
and young adults is less easy to find, but in 2005 there were 2250 cases of cancer diagnosed in individuals ages 15 to 24
years in the United Kingdom (Cancer Incidence and Mortality By Cancer Network, UK, 2005. Available at: www.ncin.org.uk). With long-term survival rates in excess of 70%, it is anticipated that, by the year 2010, approximately 1 in 640
to 715 members of the adult population will be a long-term survivor of childhood cancer.1-3
Impaired fertility in both males and females and adverse pregnancy outcomes are major concerns for the increasing population of survivors of childhood and young adult cancer. The challenge facing professionals is how to provide
curative treatment while balancing the potential loss or impairment of fertility. Chemotherapy regimens differ
widely in their effect on fertility. Highly gonadotoxic regimens include alkylating agents such as procarbazine. Radiotherapy also carries a high risk when there is a direct or scatter dose to the gonad. There are an increasing number of
retrospective studies but very few prospective studies assessing gonadal function and fertility in survivors of childhood
cancer in relation to treatment received. One of the difficulties is that treatment regimens are constantly evolving,
and there is a need for many years of follow-up for children treated prepubertally to determine accurately the fertility
outcome.
In addition to uncertainty over the risk of infertility associated with different treatment regimens, techniques available for fertility preservation in children and young adults are limited and their risk-to-benefit ratio unclear. With
improved survival, there is a responsibility to improve our understanding of the risks to the gonads associated with

Corresponding author: W. Hamish B. Wallace, MD, FRCP, Royal Hospital for Sick Children, Edinburgh EH9 1LF, Scotland, UK; Fax: (011) 00441315360430; Hamish.
wallace@nhs.net
Department of Pediatric Haematology/Oncology, Royal Hospital for Sick Children, Edinburgh, Scotland, United Kingdom
Some of the ideas and thoughts presented in this review have been published in review articles authored or coauthored by the author.
The articles in this supplement represent presentations and discussions at the ‘‘International Workshop on Adolescents and Young Adults with Cancer: Towards
Better Outcomes in Canada’’ that was held in Toronto, Ontario, March 11-13, 2010.
*Workshop on Adolescents and Young Adults with Cancer: Towards Better Outcomes in Canada, Supplement to Cancer.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.26045, Received: September 20, 2010; Revised: December 8, 2010; Accepted: December 10, 2010, Published online April 27, 2011 in Wiley
Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Cancer

May 15, 2011

2301

Original Article

successful treatment and address what can be done to preserve fertility, before treatment starts, in the minority of
patients who are at high risk of infertility or premature
menopause.
Normal Ovarian Function
It is widely believed that the human ovary establishes several million nongrowing follicles (NGF) at around 5
months of gestational age, which is followed by a rapid
decline until menopause, when approximately 1000
remain at an average age of 50 to 51 years.4 With approximately 450 ovulatory monthly cycles in the normal
human reproductive lifespan from menarche until menopause, this progressive decline in NGF numbers is attributed to follicle death by apoptosis. Premature menopause
is usually considered to be the cessation of menses before
the age of 40 years. Acute ovarian failure is used by some
researchers to describe the complete cessation of ovarian
function shortly after cancer treatment.
There have been several recent reports that have
challenged this long-held understanding of mammalian
reproductive biology by reporting the presence of mitotically active germ stem cells in juvenile and adult mouse
ovaries.5,6 There is no doubt that the presence of germ
stem cells within the mammalian ovary that are capable of
neo-oogenesis is controversial.7 If we can acquire a better
understanding of the establishment and decline of the
NGF population from conception to menopause, this will
be helpful in determining if neo-oogenesis occurs as part
of normal human physiological ageing. In this regard, we
have recently identified what to our knowledge is the first
model of human ovarian reserve from conception to menopause that best fits the combined histological evidence.8
This model allows us to estimate the number of NGF
present in the ovary at any given age (Fig. 1). It is interesting to note that this model suggests that 81% of the
variance in NGF populations is due to age alone. The
remaining 19% is because of factors other than age (eg,
smoking, body mass index, parity, and stress). We can
speculate that, as chronological age increases, factors other
than age become more important in determining the rate
at which NGF are lost through apoptosis. By further analysis of this model, we have also shown that the rate of
NGF recruitment toward maturation increases from birth
to age 14 years and then declines with age until menopause. The mechanisms responsible for controlling
NGF recruitment toward maturation in the human ovary
remain unclear, but it is unlikely to be coincidental that
the maximum age at recruitment is around the onset of

2302

menarche and the establishment of regular menstrual
cycles.
Radiation and the Hypothalamic-PituitaryOvarian Axis
The ovaries may be damaged and the number of NGF
present reduced after total body irradiation (TBI), abdominal irradiation, or pelvic irradiation and the extent of
the damage is related to the radiation dose, fractionation
schedule, and patient age at the time of treatment.9 Earlier
studies have shown that the human oocyte is sensitive to
radiation, with an estimated median lethal dose (LD50) of
< 2 gray (Gy).10 The number of primordial follicles present at the time of treatment, together with the dose
received by the ovaries, will determine the fertility ‘‘window’’ and influence the age of premature ovarian failure.
Ovarian failure has been reported in 90% of patients followed long term after TBI (10-15.75 Gy) and in 97% of
females treated with total abdominal irradiation (20-30
Gy) during childhood.11,12 Using our knowledge and
understanding of the radiosensitivity of human oocytes, it
is now possible to predict the estimated sterilizing dose after any given dose of radiotherapy at any given age based
on the application of the mathematical solution to our
model for natural oocyte decline (Fig. 2).13 This will help
clinicians to provide more accurate information when
counseling women about their fertility prospects after
treatment of childhood cancer. Those women at an estimated high risk for premature menopause should be considered for fertility preservation technologies.
Gonadotropin deficiency after high-dose cranial
irradiation (> 24 Gy in the treatment of brain tumors)
may be manifest as delayed puberty or absent menses and
can be treated with hormone replacement therapy. It is
interesting to note that early puberty is often reported,
particularly in females treated with cranial radiation doses
of < 24 Gy.14 However, it has been shown that after lowdose cranial radiotherapy (18-24 Gy), there is a subtle
decline in hypothalamic-pituitary-ovarian function as
characterized by decreased luteinizing hormone (LH)
secretion, an attenuated LH surge, and shorter luteal
phases that are likely to herald incipient ovarian failure or
be associated with early pregnancy loss.15
Cancer Treatment and Ovarian Function
The ovary is also susceptible to chemotherapy-induced
damage, particularly after treatment with alkylating agents
such as cyclophosphamide, often as part of the treatment
of Hodgkin lymphoma (HL).16,17 Ovarian damage is

Cancer

May 15, 2011

Fertility Preservation in AYA/Wallace

Figure 1. Illustrative examples of nongrowing follicles (NGF) populations predicted by our model are shown. The average NGF
population at ages 20 weeks after conception, birth, 13 years, 25 years, and 35 years is given, together with the respective 95%
prediction intervals (95% PI). The predicted average age at menopause (49.6 years) is also shown, together with the 95% PI.
Abbreviations: Max, maximum. Reprinted with permission from Wallace WH, Kelsey TM. Human ovarian reserve from conception
to menopause. PloS One. 2010;5:e8772.

drug and dose dependent and is related to the patient’s
age at time of treatment, with progressively smaller
doses required to produce ovarian failure with increasing
age.18 It is important to emphasize that there is no evidence that the prepubertal ovary is protected from chemotherapy or radiotherapy. Cyclophosphamide is widely
used in combination chemotherapy regimens, in which its
effect on ovarian function is related to both the dose used
and the age of the patient. High-dose cyclophosphamide
(200 mg/kg) is frequently used as conditioning therapy
before bone marrow transplantation (BMT), either
alone, when recovery of ovarian function is more likely,
or in combination with other chemotherapeutic agents
or TBI.11
In the past, the treatment of HL with the combination of mechlorethamine, vincristine, procarbazine, and
prednisolone (MOPP) or chlorambucil, vinblastine, procarbazine, and prednisolone (ChLVPP) has been reported
to be associated with ovarian dysfunction in 19% to
63% of cases.19 Acute ovarian failure and premature
menopause are more commonly encountered in older

Cancer

May 15, 2011

women. In younger women, although long-term followup is necessary, it is likely that an increasing number will
develop premature menopause. In a recent cohort study
of 518 female 5-year survivors of HL ages 14 to 40 years
(median, 25 years) at the time of treatment, the
Amsterdam group explored the incidence of premature
menopause before the age of 40 years. Alkylating agents,
especially procarbazine (hazard ratio [HR], 8.1) and
cyclophosphamide (HR, 3.5), demonstrated the strongest
associations. Ten years after treatment, the actuarial risk
of premature menopause was 64% after high cumulative
doses (> 8.4 g/m2) and 15% after low cumulative doses
( 4.2 g/m2) of procarbazine.20 This study also confirmed that women who were older at the time of first
treatment experienced premature menopause sooner after
treatment than younger women. Current treatment in
Europe (EuroNet) of patients aged < 18 years with HL
seeks to randomize procarbazine versus dacarbazine in
patients with intermediate and advanced stage disease
with the objective of demonstrating that dacarbazine is
less likely to cause premature ovarian failure (and damage

2303

Original Article

Figure 2. Based on our understanding of the radiosensitivity of the human oocyte and our knowledge of the natural decline in
primordial follicles with increasing age, we provide effective (red line) and mean (blue line) estimates of the dose required to
sterilize a patient at a known age of treatment. Abbreviations: Gy, gray. Reprinted with permission from Wallace WH, Thomson
AB, Saran F, Kelsey TW. Predicting age of ovarian failure after radiation to a field that includes the ovaries. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys. 2005;62:738-744

to the germinal epithelium of the testis in males) than procarbazine-containing regimens, but is as efficacious.
Chemotherapy with doxorubicin (Adriamycin),
bleomycin, vinblastine, and dacarbazine (ABVD) remains
a common and successful first-line treatment protocol for
young people with HL. In a study of 26 ovarian tissue
samples harvested for cryopreservation from women with
HL, there was no evidence of HL involvement in any of
the samples examined. Seven of 20 patients had received
ABVD chemotherapy before the tissue harvest and
demonstrated no difference in follicle density compared
with patients who underwent tissue harvest before
treatment (n ¼ 14) (median, 1555 mm3 vs 1620 mm3;
P ¼ .97). Importantly, this study did not identify subclinical involvement of HL in ovarian tissue, even when
patients had infradiaphragmatic disease.21
The Childhood Cancer Survivor Study (CCSS) was
established as a resource for investigating the long-term
outcomes of a cohort of 5-year survivors of childhood
and adolescent cancer who were diagnosed between 1970

2304

and 1986. With a cohort of > 14,000 active participants,
it is to our knowledge the largest epidemiological study
investigating long-term outcomes and quality of life in
survivors who currently are  20 years past their initial
treatment. These studies have demonstrated that women
treated with pelvic irradiation and/or increasing doses of
alkylating agents are at risk for acute ovarian failure, premature menopause, and small-for-gestational-age offspring. There was no evidence of an increased risk of
congenital malformations.22 As this cohort of 5-year survivors of childhood cancer ages, the prevalence of ovarian
failure is likely to increase.
The assessment of ovarian reserve in the young
woman who has been successfully treated for cancer
remains difficult. Larsen et al evaluated ovarian function
in 100 childhood cancer survivors and 21 controls of similar age.23 Survivors with spontaneous menstrual cycles
(n ¼ 70) were found to have smaller ovarian volume per
ovary compared with controls (median, 4.8 cm3 vs
6.8 cm3; P < .001) and a lower number of antral

Cancer

May 15, 2011

Fertility Preservation in AYA/Wallace

follicles (AFC) per ovary (median, 7.5 AFC vs 11 AFC;
P < .001). A regression analysis was performed to predict
the total AFC number per ovary, which demonstrated a
reduced number in women who were treated with ovarian
irradiation (b ¼ .40; P < .001), alkylating chemotherapy (b ¼ .25; P ¼ .01), older age at diagnosis
(b ¼ .25; P ¼ .01), and longer time period off treatment
(b ¼ .19; P ¼ .044).23 A recent study in women aged
<40 years24 has suggested that, compared with inhibin B
and AFC, anti-Mullerian hormone (AMH) was more
consistently correlated with the clinical degree of
follicle pool depletion in young women presenting with
elevated follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) levels. Further evidence that AMH will be useful in the assessment
of the young woman who has been treated for cancer
comes from a study of women treated during childhood
for HL.25 Those women who received MOPP chemotherapy were shown to have a reduced ovarian reserve as
measured by lower AMH values at early adulthood, compared with healthy women. In this study, AMH was
found to be the only predictor that was sufficiently sensitive to detect this decrease in ovarian reserve. More
research is required to determine the role of the measurement of AMH in predicting age at menopause and ovarian reserve in young women who have been successfully
treated for cancer.
Radiation and the Uterus
After abdominal, pelvic, or TBI, the uterus is at risk of
damage in a dose- and age-dependent manner.26 Uterine
function may be impaired after radiation doses of 14 to
30 Gy as a consequence of disruption to the uterine vasculature and musculature elasticity.27 Even lower dose of
irradiation, as in TBI, have been reported to cause
impaired growth and blood flow.27
Efforts to improve uterine function have been tried,
with limited success. In young adult women previously
treated with TBI, physiological sex steroid replacement
therapy was found to improve uterine function (blood
flow and endometrial thickness) and may potentially enable these women to benefit from assisted reproductive
technologies.27 Larsen et al studied uterine volume in 100
childhood cancer survivors and assessed uterine response
to high-dose estrogen replacement in 3 patients with ovarian failure and reduced uterine volume after abdominal
and/or pelvic irradiation.28 There was no significant difference noted with regard to uterine volume, endometrial
thickness, or uterine artery blood flow after sex steroid
therapy. The results of this study suggest that damage to

Cancer

May 15, 2011

the uterus is dose dependent, with higher doses (often as
part of direct radiation to the pelvis) causing more damage
compared with lower doses (as in TBI), and this damage
may be irreversible.
Radiotherapy causes both ovarian and uterine damage. To my knowledge, there are no reports of uterine
damage after chemotherapy. Uterine damage as manifested by impaired growth and blood flow is a likely consequence of radiation to a field that includes the pelvis.
Exposure of the pelvis to radiation is associated with an
increased risk of miscarriage, mid-trimester pregnancy
loss, preterm birth, and low birth weight. The optimal
dose and delivery route of estrogen replacement required
to facilitate uterine growth in adolescent women treated
with TBI needs to be established.
Normal Testicular Function
The major functions of the male reproductive tract are
2-fold: to manufacture and deliver spermatozoa to the
female reproductive tract and to produce male sex steroid
hormones, necessary for sexual development during fetal
life, puberty, male phenotype and behavior, and reproduction. The anterior pituitary hormones FSH and LH,
under the controlling influence of hypothalamic gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH), regulate testicular
function. In turn, the hypothalamic-pituitary-testicular
axis is influenced by the secretion of testicular hormones,
including inhibin and testosterone.
The testes are comprised of 2 structurally distinct
but functionally related compartments, the seminiferous
tubules and intertubular space, sites of spermatogenesis
and steroidogenesis, respectively. The tubules are lined
with seminiferous epithelium comprised of various types
of male germ cells (spermatogenic cells) and a single type
of supporting cell, the Sertoli cell. Testosterone, essential
for spermatogenesis, is synthesized and secreted by the
Leydig cells in response to stimulation by LH, and passes
through the cellular barriers to the Sertoli cell, with a substantial amount entering the blood and lymphatic system.
Testosterone functions primarily as a prohormone, converted to the potent androgen dihydrotestosterone
(DHT) via the enzyme 5-a reductase and to the estrogen
17-b estradiol through the aromatase enzyme. FSH and
testosterone act synergistically on Sertoli cells to promote
Sertoli cell function and support spermatogenesis because
germ cells per se do not possess receptors for either
hormone. The mechanism by which spermatogenesis is
initiated and sustained is poorly understood and is likely
to involve several stimulatory and inhibitory pathways.

2305

Original Article

Testosterone exerts a negative feedback regulation of the
hypothalamic and pituitary hormones.
Spermatogenesis is a complex process by which diploid germ cell spermatogonia undergo proliferation and
differentiation into mature haploid spermatozoa. The
general organization of spermatogenesis is essentially the
same in all mammals and can be divided into phases of
development through which all spermatogenic germ cells
pass sequentially over time. The time taken from the
division of 1 stem cell spermatogonium to the production
of mature spermatozoa varies between species, and in
humans is determined to be 74 days.
The Effect of Radiotherapy on Testicular
Function
In males, radiation doses as low as 0.1 to 1.2 Gy can
impair spermatogenesis, with doses > 4 Gy causing permanent azoospermia. The somatic cells of the testis are
more resistant than the germ cells, and Leydig cell
dysfunction is not observed until doses of 20 Gy in
prepubertal boys and 30 Gy in sexually mature males.29
Within the pediatric and adolescent age groups,
testicular damage occurs with direct irradiation of the
testes (eg, in the management of leukemia).30 In patients
with leukemic infiltration of their testes, radiation doses
of 24 Gy are used, and this results in permanent azoospermia.31 TBI as conditioning treatment before BMT will
also irradiate the testes, and although the effects of this
can be difficult to elucidate because it is usually administered concurrently with alkylating agents, doses of 9 to 10
Gy have produced gonadal dysfunction.32
A recent study from the CCSS was reassuring with
regard to heritable genetic changes affecting the risk of
stillbirth and neonatal death in the offspring of men who
were fertile but had been exposed to gonadal irradiation.33
The Effect of Chemotherapy on the Testis
As with radiotherapy, the germinal epithelium of the testis
is very sensitive to the detrimental effects of chemotherapy
irrespective of the patient’s pubertal status at the time of
treatment. Therefore, after receiving gonadotoxic agents,
patients may be rendered oligospermic or azoospermic
but testosterone production by the Leydig cell is usually
unaffected, and thus secondary sexual characteristics
develop normally.34 After higher cumulative doses of
gonadotoxic chemotherapy, Leydig cell dysfunction may
also become apparent.35
The treatment of HL has involved the use of
procarbazine together with alkylating agents such as

2306

chlorambucil, mustine, and cyclophosphamide. Although
these drug combinations have resulted in excellent survival rates, the majority of male patients have subsequently developed permanent azoospermia.36,37 Mackie
et al19 studied patients with a mean age at diagnosis of
12.2 years who were treated with ChLVPP, a regimen
containing both chlorambucil and procarbazine. On
follow-up, 89% of these patients demonstrated severe
damage to the seminiferous epithelium up to 10 years
after therapy. Because of this, treatment for HL has been
modified in an attempt to reduce gonadotoxicity while
maintaining long-term survival.19 Treatment with the
ABVD regimen, which contains no alkylating agents or
procarbazine, results in significantly less gonadotoxicity,
with no patients demonstrating permanent azoospermia.36 However, anthracycline exposure in this regimen
renders it potentially cardiotoxic in the long term.38
Pregnancy in High-Risk Survivors of Cancer
Survivors of childhood cancer who have received radiotherapy to a field that includes their pelvis should be
considered to be at high risk for uterine dysfunction in
pregnancy. There is good evidence that these pregnancies
may be associated with an increased risk of adverse outcomes such as prematurity and miscarriage.
Adverse pregnancy-related outcomes in survivors of
childhood cancer have been explored in a few small studies. We studied pregnancy outcomes in female survivors
of Wilms tumor who received irradiation to the flank,
abdomen, or pelvis and reported an increased risk of premature birth and/ or low birth weight.12 As previously
discussed, the CCSS cohort of adult survivors reported
great concern regarding their fertility and the health of
their offspring. The CCSS examined pregnancy outcomes
in both male and female survivors in comparison with
their sibling cohort.39,40 The offspring of female survivors
were more likely to be born before 37 weeks of gestation
compared with those of their female siblings (21.1% vs
12.6%; odds ratio [OR], 1.9 [95% confidence interval
(95% CI), 1.4 to 2.4]; P < .001). Preterm birth was more
likely for the offspring of those women who received uterine radiation doses  0.05 Gy compared with those who
received no radiotherapy (0.05-2.50 Gy [26.1% vs
19.6%]: OR, 1.8 [95% CI, 1.1 to 3.0], P ¼ .03; 2.5 to
5.0 Gy [39.6% vs 19.6%]: OR, 2.3 [95% CI, 1.0-5.1],
P ¼ .04; and > 5 Gy [50.0% vs 19.6%]: OR, 3.5 [95%
CI, 1.5-8.0], P ¼ .003). The offspring of women who
received uterine radiation doses > 5 Gy were more likely
to be small for gestational age (birth weight below the

Cancer

May 15, 2011

Fertility Preservation in AYA/Wallace

10th percentile for gestational age [18.2% vs 7.8%]: OR,
4.0 [95% CI, 1.6-9.8], P ¼ .003). The frequency of premature birth was not found to be increased by previous
maternal exposure to increasing doses of chemotherapy
with alkylating agents. These important large studies have
shown that the offspring of women whose treatment
included pelvic irradiation are more likely to be premature, have a low birth weight, and be small for their gestational age. The results of these studies have also
demonstrated that the risk of miscarriage was increased
among women whose treatment included high-dose cranial or craniospinal irradiation.
In conclusion, these large studies did not identify
adverse pregnancy outcomes for female survivors treated
with most chemotherapeutic agents; however, the offspring of women who received pelvic irradiation were
reported to be at risk for low birth weight.39,40
Options for Fertility Preservation in Female
Patients
Female fertility preservation provides significantly different challenges from that for the male patient. To
my knowledge, there are currently only 2 established
practices of fertility preservation in female patients.
The first is oophoropexy and the second is cryopreservation of embryos after in vitro fertilization. Oophoropexy (surgically displacing the ovaries out of the
radiation field) may preserve ovarian function but
radiation-induced uterine damage may still affect the
chances of successful pregnancy. Cryopreservation of
embryos is only suitable for sexually mature women
with a partner but is not available for children or
young adults who do not have a partner. Mature
oocyte preservation is a potential solution for women
without a partner but pregnancy rates are significantly lower because these cells sustain more damage
during the freeze-thawing process in comparison with
embryos. Significant delays in cancer treatment may
occur because these techniques require ovarian stimulation with oocyte retrieval. However, for the young
patient, cryopreservation of ovarian cortical tissue collected laparoscopically is extremely promising, with
approximately 30 cases of autotransplanted, frozenthawed ovarian tissue reported to have lead to the
births of 10 live infants to date.41 Ovarian tissue cryopreservation has the potential advantages of preserving
a large number of oocytes within primordial follicles,
it does not require hormonal stimulation when time is
short, and it is appropriate for the prepubertal girl.

Cancer

May 15, 2011

Disadvantages include the need for an invasive procedure and the uncertain risk of ovarian contamination
in hematological and other malignancies.
We have published our own experience of ovarian
cryopreservation in 36 women considered to be at high
risk of experiencing premature menopause. Of these 36
women, 11 had died at the time of last follow-up, but 5
experienced spontaneous pregnancies, with none to date
having requested reimplantation of their stored ovarian
tissue.42 The most common diagnoses have been hematological malignancies (lymphoma and leukemia; n ¼ 11).
Sarcoma (n ¼ 10) was the most common solid malignancy. Approximately 20% of the women had inflammatory rather than malignant diagnoses, generally systemic
lupus erythematosis, and were to be treated with cyclophosphamide-based regimens. The median age at cryopreservation was 19.2 years (range, 5-35 years). Fifteen
patients (42%) were aged < 16 years at the time of
surgery. As of December 2007, the median age of those
surviving was 24.4 years (range, 8.5-43.6 years) and the
median duration since cryopreservation was 7.1 years. Of
the 20 surviving women currently aged > 18 years, 7
(35%) had experienced spontaneous pregnancies. Five
of these pregnancies resulted in term live births, with 1
induced and 1 spontaneous abortion. Of the remaining
patients, none was menopausal as of that date. The first
patient treated, who underwent high-dose chemotherapy
and BMT at age 19 years, retained a regular menstrual
cycle with an early follicular phase FSH concentration of
< 10 IU/L 13 years later. A total of 11 (31%) of the
patients had died at the time of last follow-up. Their
diagnoses spanned the range of entities, including those
with inflammatory conditions. The majority died within
1 year of diagnosis, and all had died within 5 years. Our
experience highlights the difficulty of assessing which
patients are at high risk of experiencing premature menopause before treatment has begun. Ovarian cryopreservation appears to be a potentially valuable method for
fertility preservation, but the indications and approaches
best used remain unclear.43,44 A fascinating new study
has recently been published that describes restoration of
ovarian function in 3 women after ovarian allografting
between genetically nonidentical sisters in whom a
previous BMT from the human leukocyte antigen-compatible sister had resulted in full chimerism and thus the
threat of rejection and the requirement for immunosuppressive therapy were avoided.45 With fertility preservation choices for girls and young women including
both established and experimental techniques, specialist

2307

Original Article

referral and assessment is important if time permits
before treatment commences.46
Preventing chemotherapy-induced damage to the
ovary remains an elusive challenge. Most attention has
focused on the potential for protecting the ovaries
using the gonadotropin-suppressing GnRH analogues.
Although a plausible biological explanation for this
approach is unclear, because only later stages of follicular
growth are gonadotropin-dependent, there is a need for a
large, well-designed randomized study to address this
controversial issue.
Options for Fertility Preservation in Male
Patients
Semen cryopreservation is an established and successful
technique for the adult male, but is more challenging to
perform in children and teenagers. Sperm banking is not
universally practiced in pediatric oncology centers, and
to our knowledge there are very few ‘‘adolescentfriendly’’ facilities. After the diagnosis of a malignancy,
treatment is usually initiated as soon as possible. After
the devastating news of the diagnosis, it can be very difficult for teenagers to then discuss fertility and subsequently produce a semen specimen. Discussions must be
dealt with sensitively, and using appropriate language
that the patient understands. However, many patients
and their families derive benefit from open discussions
regarding fertility, particularly as this places an emphasis
on the future and provides reassurance that curative
treatment is the aim.47
Semen specimens will usually be produced by masturbation in boys who are sufficiently mature and, if not
possible, penile vibratory stimulation or rectal electrostimulation under anesthesia can then be considered.48
Alternatively, if spermatogenesis is established, sperm
may be retrieved after testicular or epididymal aspiration.
In the United Kingdom, the storage of sperm is governed
by the Human Fertilization and Embryology Act. One of
the implications of this Act is that any individual storing
sperm must be capable of understanding the implications
of what is proposed, and provide valid written informed
consent to storage.
Semen specimens produced by teenagers are frequently of poor quality.49 The freeze-thawing process
used for cryopreservation can then cause further damage,
resulting in impaired sperm motility and damage to
chromatin structure and sperm morphology.
After cryopreservation, stored spermatozoa may be
used for in vitro fertilization. With advances in assisted

2308

reproduction techniques, particularly intracytoplasmic
sperm injection, which involves the injection of a
single spermatozoon directly into an oocyte, the problems
of low sperm numbers and poor motility may be
circumvented.
All male patients who are able to produce semen
should have the opportunity of sperm banking before the
initiation of treatment. If production of semen by masturbation is not possible, alternative methods of sperm
retrieval should be considered if the likelihood of infertility is significant and the patient is sufficiently mature,
both physically, with testicular volumes > 10 mL, and
emotionally, with a demonstrable understanding of what
is involved and why cryopreservation is being offered.50
For patients who have not yet entered puberty, the
options for fertility preservation currently remain entirely
experimental. Spermatogonial stem cells provide novel
strategies for the preservation of testicular tissue and fertility preservation in prepubertal boys for whom there are
currently no realistic options. Schlatt et al reviewed the
physiology of spermatogonial stem cells in rodent and
primate testes and indicated some of the possible future
options that require further basic research.51
Conclusions
The American Society of Clinical Oncology concluded
that sperm and embryo cryopreservation should be considered standard practice and be widely available. Other
available fertility preservation methods should be considered investigational and be performed in centers with
the necessary expertise.52 National funding bodies are
strongly encouraged to fund the development of a small
network of research-based egg and ovarian tissue storage
facilities that will be able to provide universal access to
techniques that aim to preserve fertility. With increased
awareness among pediatric oncologists and reproductive
medicine specialists of fertility issues in young patients
with cancer, it is important that an evidence-based
approach to the management of the small number of
young patients requiring these techniques is developed as
a matter of urgency.53

FUNDING SOURCES
Funding for the national task force on adolescents and young
adults with cancer has been made possible by a financial contribution from Health Canada through the Canadian Partnership
Against Cancer. Funding for the workshop was provided by
C17; the Advisory Board of the Institute for Cancer Research at
the Canadian Institutes for Health Research (CIHR); the Public
Health Agency of Canada; the Ontario Institute for Cancer
Research; the Meetings, Planning and Dissemination Grants

Cancer

May 15, 2011

Fertility Preservation in AYA/Wallace

program of the CIHR; the Terry Fox Research Institute; LIVESTRONG, formerly the Lance Armstrong Foundation; the Canadian Cancer Society Research Institute; Young Adult Cancer
Canada; Hope and Cope; and the Comprehensive Cancer
Centre at the Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, in addition
to the support provided by the Canadian Partnership Against
Cancer to the Task Force on adolescents and young adults with
cancer.

16.

17.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
The author made no disclosures.

18.

REFERENCES

19.

1. SIGN 76. The long-term follow up of survivors of children’s
cancer. Available at: http://www.sign.ac.uk. Accessed on March
9, 2011.
2. Hewitt M, Weiner SL, Simone JV, eds. Childhood
Cancer Survivorship: Improving Care and Quality of Life.
Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2003.
3. Mertens AC, Yasui Y, Neglia JP, et al. Late mortality experience in five-year survivors of childhood and adolescent
cancer: the Childhood Cancer Survivor Study. J Clin Oncol.
2001;19:3163-3172.
4. Faddy MJ, Gosden RG. A model conforming the decline in
follicle numbers to the age of menopause in women. Hum
Reprod. 1996;11:1484-1486.
5. Johnson J, Canning J, Kaneko T, Pru JK, Tilly JL.
Germline stem cells and follicular renewal in the postnatal
mammalian ovary. Nature. 2004;428:145-150.
6. Zou K, Yuan Z, Yang Z, et al. Production of offspring
from a germline stem cell line derived from neonatal ovaries. Nat Cell Biol. 2009;11:631-636.
7. Telfer EE, Gosden RG, Byskov AG, et al. On regenerating the
ovary and generating controversy. Cell. 2005;122:821-822.
8. Wallace WH, Kelsey TM. Human ovarian reserve from
conception to menopause. PloS One. 2010;5:e8772.
9. Thomson AB, Critchley HOD, Kelnar CJ, Wallace WH.
Late reproductive sequelae following treatment of childhood
cancer and options for fertility preservation. Best Pract Res
Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2002;16:311-334.
10. Wallace WH, Thomson AB, Kelsey TW. The radiosensitivity of the human oocyte. Hum Reprod. 2003;18:117-121.
11. Sanders JE, Hawley J, Levy W, et al. Pregnancies following
high-dose cyclophosphamide with or without high-dose
busulfan or total-body irradiation and bone marrow transplantation. Blood. 1996;87:3045-3052.
12. Wallace WH, Shalet SM, Crowne EC, Morris-Jones PH,
Gattamaneni HR. Ovarian failure following abdominal irradiation in childhood: natural history and prognosis. Clin
Oncol (R Coll Radiol). 1989;1:75-79.
13. Wallace WH, Thomson AB, Saran F, Kelsey TW. Predicting age of ovarian failure after radiation to a field that
includes the ovaries. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2005;62:738-744.
14. Davies HA, Didcock E, Didi M, Ogilvy-Stuart A,
Wales JK, Shalet SM. Growth, puberty and obesity after
treatment for leukaemia. Acta Paediatr Suppl. 1995;411:
45-50.
15. Bath LE, Anderson RA, Critchley HO, Kelnar CJH, Wallace WH. Hypothalamic-pituitary-ovarian dysfunction after

Cancer

May 15, 2011

20.
21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.
30.

prepubertal chemotherapy and cranial irradiation for acute
leukaemia. Hum Reprod. 2001;16:1838-1844.
Bath LE, Wallace WH, Shaw MP, Fitzpatrick C, Anderson
RA. Depletion of ovarian reserve in young women after
treatment for cancer in childhood: detection by antiMullerian hormone, inhibin B and ovarian ultrasound.
Hum Reprod. 2003;18:2368-2374.
Whitehead E, Shalet SM, Jones PH, Beardwell CG,
Deakin DP. Gonadal function after combination chemotherapy for Hodgkin’s disease in childhood. Arch Dis Child.
1982;57:287-291.
Whitehead E, Shalet SM, Blackledge G, Todd I, Crowther
D, Beardwell CG. The effect of combination chemotherapy
on ovarian function in women treated for Hodgkin’s
disease. Cancer. 1983;52:988-993.
Mackie EJ, Radford M, Shalet SM. Gonadal function
following chemotherapy for childhood Hodgkin’s disease.
Med Pediatr Oncol. 1996;27:74-78.
De Bruin ML, Huisbrink J, Hauptmann M, et al. Treatment-related risk factors for premature menopause following
Hodgkin lymphoma. Blood. 2008;111:101-108.
Seshadri T, Gook D, Lade S, et al. Lack of evidence of
disease contamination in ovarian tissue harvested for cryopreservation from patients with Hodgkin lymphoma and
analysis of factors predictive of oocyte yield. Br J Cancer.
2006;94:1007-1010.
Green DM, Sklar CA, Boice JD, et al. Ovarian failure and
reproductive outcomes after childhood cancer treatment:
results from the Childhood Cancer Survivor Study. J Clin
Oncol. 2009;27:2374-2381.
Larsen EC, Muller J, Schmiegelow K, Rechnitzer C,
Andersen AN. Reduced ovarian function in long-term
survivors of radiation- and chemotherapy-treated childhood cancer. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2003;88:53075314.
Knauff EA, Eijkemans MJ, Lambalk CB, et al; Dutch
Premature Ovarian Failure Consortium. Anti-Mullerian
hormone, inhibin B, and antral follicle count in young
women with ovarian failure. J Clin Endocrinol Metab.
2009;94:786-792.
Van Beek RD, van den Heuvel-Eibrink MM, Laven JS,
et al. Anti-Mullerian hormone is a sensitive serum marker
for gonadal function in women treated for Hodgkin’s lymphoma during childhood. J Clin Endocrinol Metab.
2007;92:3869-3874.
Critchley HO, Wallace WH, Shalet SM, Mamtora H,
Higginson J, Anderson DC. Abdominal irradiation in childhood; the potential for pregnancy. Br J Obstet Gynaecol.
1992;99:392-394.
Bath LE, Critchley HO, Chambers SE, Anderson RA,
Kelnar CJ, Wallace WH. Ovarian and uterine characteristics
after total body irradiation in childhood and adolescence:
response to sex steroid replacement. Br J Obstet Gynaecol.
1999;106:1265-1272.
Larsen EC, Schmiegelow K, Rechnitzer C, Loft A, Muller J,
Andersen AN. Radiotherapy at a young age reduces uterine
volume of childhood cancer survivors. Acta Obstet Gynecol
Scand. 2004;83:96-102.
Shalet SM, Tsatsoulis A, Whitehead E, Read G. Vulnerability of the human Leydig cell to radiation damage is dependent upon age. J Endocrinol. 1989;120:161-165.
Castillo LA, Craft AW, Kernahan J, Evans RG, AynsleyGreen A. Gonadal function after 12-Gy testicular irradiation

2309

Original Article

31.
32.

33.

34.
35.

36.

37.

38.
39.

40.
41.
42.

in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukaemia. Med Pediatr
Oncol. 1990;18:185-189.
Grundy RG, Leiper A, Stanhope R, Chessells J. Survival
and endocrine outcome after testicular relapse in acute lymphoblastic leukaemia. Arch Dis Child. 1997;76:190-196.
Leiper AD, Stanhope R, Lau T, et al. The effect of total
body irradiation and bone marrow transplantation during
childhood and adolescence on growth and endocrine function. Br J Haematol. 1987;67:419-426.
Signorello LB, Mulvihill JJ, Green DM, et al. Stillbirth
and neonatal death in relation to radiation exposure before
conception: a retrospective cohort study. Lancet.
2010;21:376:624-630.
Wallace WH, Shalet SM, Lendon M, Morris-Jones PH.
Male fertility in long-term survivors of childhood acute lymphoblastic leukaemia. Int J Androl. 1991;14:312-319.
Gerl A, Muhlbayer D, Hansmann G, Mraz W, Hiddemann
W. The impact of chemotherapy on Leydig cell function in
long term survivors of germ cell tumors. Cancer.
2001;91:1297-1303.
Viviani S, Santoro A, Ragni G, Bonfante V, Bestetti O,
Bonadonna G. Gonadal toxicity after combination chemotherapy for Hodgkin’s disease. Comparative results of MOPP vs
ABVD. Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol. 1985;21:601-605.
Anselmo AP, Cartoni C, Bellantuono P, Maurizi-Enrici R,
Aboulkair N, Ermini M. Risk of infertility in patients with
Hodgkin’s disease treated with ABVD vs MOPP vs ABVD/
MOPP. Haematologica. 1990;75:155-158.
Thomson AB, Wallace WH. Treatment of paediatric
Hodgkin’s disease: a balance of risks. Eur J Cancer.
2002;38:468-477.
Green D, Whitton JA, Stovall M, et al. Pregnancy outcome
of female survivors of childhood cancer: a report from the
Childhood Cancer Survivor Study. Am J Obstet Gynecol.
2002;187:1070-1080.
Signorello LB, Cohen SS, Bosetti C, et al. Female survivors of
childhood cancer: preterm birth and low birth weight among
their children. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2006;98:1453-1461.
Donnez J, Jadoul P, Squifflet J, et al. Ovarian tissue cryopreservation and transplantation in cancer patients. Best
Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol. 2010;24:87-100.
Anderson RA, Wallace WH, Baird DT. Ovarian cryopreservation for fertility preservation: indications and outcomes.
Reproduction. 2008;136:681-689.

2310

43. Jadoul P, Dolmans MM, Donnez J. Fertility preservation in
girls during childhood: is it feasible, efficient and safe and
to whom should it be proposed? Hum Reprod Update.
2010;16:617-630.
44. Wallace WH, Barr RD. Fertility preservation for
girls and young women with cancer: what are the
remaining challenges? Hum Reprod Update. 2010;16:
614-616.
45. Donnez J, Squifflet J, Pirard C, Jadoul P, Dolmans MM.
Restoration of ovarian function after allografting of ovarian
cortex between genetically non-identical sisters. Hum Reprod.
2010;25:2489-2495.
46. Rodriguez-Wallberg KA, Oktay K. Fertility preservation
medicine: options for young adults and children with cancer. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2010;32:390-396.
47. Schover LR, Brey K, Lichtin A, Lipshultz LI, Jeha S.
Knowledge and experience regarding cancer, infertility, and
sperm banking in younger male survivors. J Clin Oncol.
2002;20:1880-1889.
48. Schmiegelow ML, Sommer P, Carlsen E, Sonksen JO,
Schmiegelow K, Muller JR. Penile vibratory stimulation and
electroejaculation before anticancer therapy in 2 pubertal
boys. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 1998;20:429-430.
49. Muller J, Sonksen J, Sommer P, et al. Cryopreservation of
semen from pubertal boys with cancer. Med Pediatr Oncol.
2000;34:191-194.
50. Report of a Working Party of the Royal College of Physicians, Royal College of Radiologists and Royal College of
Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. The effects of Cancer
Treatment on Reproductive Functions: Guidance on Management. London, United Kingdom: Royal College of Physicians;
2007. Available at: http://www.rcog.org.uk/womens-health.
Accessed March 1, 2011.
51. Schlatt S, Ehmcke J, Jahnukainen K. Testicular stem cells
for fertility preservation: preclinical studies on male germ
cell transplantation and testicular grafting. Pediatr Blood
Cancer. 2009;53:274-280.
52. Lee SJ, Schover SR, Partridge AH, et al. American
Society of Clinical Oncology recommendations on fertility
preservation in cancer patients. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24:
2917-2931.
53. Wallace WH, Anderson RA, Irvine DS. Fertility preservation for young patients with cancer: who is at risk and what
can be offered? Lancet Oncol. 2005;6:209-218.

Cancer

May 15, 2011

