Original Article

Prospective Surveillance and Management of Cardiac Toxicity
and Health in Breast Cancer Survivors*
Kathryn H. Schmitz, PhD, MPH1; Robert G. Prosnitz, MD, MPH1; Anna L. Schwartz, FNP, PhD2; and Joseph R. Carver, MD1

Breast cancer is commonly diagnosed in postmenopausal women, the majority of whom express 1 or more cardiovascular disease
risk factors. Cardiovascular disease poses a significant competing risk for morbidity and mortality among nonmetastatic breast
cancer survivors. Adjuvant systemic therapies may result in late-cardiac toxicity decades after treatment completion. The cumulative
incidence of treatment-related cardiotoxic outcomes may be as high as 33% after some adjuvant breast cancer therapies. Breast
cancer treatment–induced cardiotoxicity may manifest as cardiomyopathy, coronary ischemia, thromboembolism, arrhythmias and
conduction abnormalities, and valvular and pericardial disease. Evidence indicates that preexisting cardiovascular conditions
such as hypertension or left ventricular dysfunction may compound the adverse effects of cardiotoxic treatments. There are
currently no published clinical practice guidelines that address ongoing cardiac surveillance for cardiotoxicity after breast
cancer, and existing guidelines for monitoring and promoting cardiovascular health in older women are often not followed. The
multidisciplinary prospective surveillance system proposed elsewhere in this supplement would allow for earlier detection of cardiotoxicity from treatment and may improve monitoring of cardiovascular health in the growing population of breast cancer survivors.
C 2012 American Cancer Society.
Cancer 2012;118(8 suppl):2270-6. V
KEYWORDS: cardiovascular disease, breast neoplasms, survivor, surveillance, rehabilitation.

Advances in diagnosis and treatment of breast cancer have led to improved outcomes and an ever-expanding population of
long-term breast cancer survivors currently estimated at 2.5 million in the United States alone.1,2 Approximately 90% of
the nearly 200,000 newly diagnosed patients in 2011 will be expected to live for 5 or more years.1,2 Adjuvant therapies can
potentially cause a wide range of acute and late cardiac complications.3,4 In addition, diagnoses of breast cancer happen
most commonly among postmenopausal women,5 the majority of whom have 1 or more cardiovascular disease (CVD)
risk factors.6 Furthermore, there are published guidelines for monitoring cardiovascular health in women.7 The combined
issues of common preexisting risk and the potential for adverse effects of treatment on the cardiovascular system implies
that there may be merit to the establishment of multidisciplinary collaborative efforts to address potential adverse effects
and improve cardiovascular health in breast cancer survivors.
The proposed prospective surveillance model, presented elsewhere in this issue of Cancer,8 promotes this type of
multidisciplinary approach to managing cardiac toxicities and health in breast cancer survivors. The goal of this review is
to understand the relative merits of such a model with a particular focus on early detection and management of cardiovascular outcomes in this population.
Preexisting Cardiovascular Risk in Breast Cancer Survivors

Cardiovascular disease and cancer share multiple risk factors, such as obesity, inactivity, and substance abuse (alcohol and
cigarettes), and the incidence of both diseases increases as the population ages. In the Framingham Heart study, the overall
lifetime risk for CVD approached 40% for women at age 50 years and increased proportionally to the increase in number
of risk factors.9 Breast cancer is commonly diagnosed among women older than 50 years.2,5 Population prevalence
estimates for common CVD risk factors suggest that a significant proportion of women will have 1 or more cardiac risk
factors at the time of breast cancer diagnosis.6 Furthermore, among breast cancer survivors 66 years and older, 29.2%
were observed to have preexisting CVD or diabetes at the time of diagnosis.10
Corresponding author: Kathryn H. Schmitz, PhD, MPH, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Division of Clinical Epidemiology, 8th floor Blockley Hall,
423 Guardian Drive, Philadelphia, PA 19104; Fax: (215) 898-7392; schmitz@mail.med.upenn.edu
1
Abramson Cancer Center, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; 2School of Nursing, Idaho State University,
Pocatello, Idaho

The articles in this supplement were commissioned based on presentations and deliberations at a Roundtable Meeting on a Prospective Model of Care for Breast
Cancer Rehabilitation, held February 24-25, 2011, at the American Cancer Society National Home Office, in Atlanta, Georgia.
The opinions or views expressed in this supplement are those of the authors, and do not necessarily reflect the opinions or recommendations of the editors or
the American Cancer Society
*A Prospective Surveillance Model for Rehabilitation for Women with Breast Cancer, Supplement to cancer
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.27462, Received: October 18, 2011; Revised: October 18, 2011; Accepted: November 7, 2011, Published online April 6, 2012 in Wiley Online
Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

2270

Cancer

April 15, 2012

Breast Cancer: Cardiac Toxicity and Health/Schmitz et al

In an article presented at the American Society of
Clinical Oncology (ASCO) Breast Cancer Symposium in
2009, 242 women from the ELPh (Exemestane Letrozole
Pharmacogenetic) trial11 were evaluated as to their 10year risk of CVD outcomes according to the Framingham
CVD risk score.12 Independent of treatment, three-quarters of these breast cancer survivors had a risk of CVD at
10 years that was the same or greater than their risk of having a recurrence of breast cancer. Cardiovascular disease is
a competing cause of morbidity and mortality among
breast cancer survivors5,13 that may adversely impact survival more than breast cancer itself.10,14,15
Any preexisting cardiovascular risk or diagnoses may
be compounded by systemic adjuvant therapies with the
potential for cardiac toxicity. Furthermore, the direct
effects of adjuvant therapy on cardiac outcomes may be
compounded by the indirect effects of therapy on changes
in lifestyle behavior, a phenomenon that Jones and
colleagues have termed ‘‘the multiple-hit hypothesis’’ for
the observation of increased cardiovascular events among
cancer survivors.16 In addition, any ‘‘protective effect’’ of
menstruation in premenopausal women may be negated by
treatment-related early menopause and the acceleration of
cardiac risk. Research to separate the independent effect of
cancer treatments on cardiovascular outcomes is challenging. A comparison of cancer survivors to similarly aged
adults with no cancer history makes the debatable assumption that there are no physiologic differences between the
cancer survivors and those with no cancer history that
would bias such comparisons. Meanwhile, appropriate cardiac medical care of current breast cancer survivor requires
knowledge of the treatment-related cardiovascular complications common to this growing population.
There are 2 potential foci for prospective cardiovascular surveillance in breast cancer survivors. First, among
women exposed to adjuvant treatments associated with
cardiotoxic effects, there is merit to ongoing surveillance
for early detection and treatment of any possible cardiac
damage. Second, regardless of whether a survivor has been
exposed to potentially cardiotoxic adjuvant therapies,
there are existing guidelines for monitoring cardiovascular
health among women.7 There may be particular merit to
ongoing surveillance for cardiovascular health among
breast cancer survivors, given that the majority of breast
cancer is diagnosed in an age range where preexisting
CVD or increased CVD risk is likely to be present.6,10
Prevalence of Treatment-Related Cardiovascular
Complications in Breast Cancer Patients

Breast cancer treatment–induced cardiotoxicity may be
manifested by cardiomyopathy, coronary ischemia,
Cancer

April 15, 2012

Table 1. Types of Cardiotoxic Effects, Causative
Chemotherapy Agents, and Incidence Range From
Published Literaturea

Cardiotoxic
Effect

Chemotherapy
Agent

Incidence

Left ventricular
dysfunction

Doxorubicin (Adriamycin)
Cyclophosphamide (Cytoxan)
Docetaxel (Taxotere)
Bevacizumab (Avastin)
Trastuzumab (Herceptin)
Paclitaxel (Taxol)
1.7%

3%-26%
7%-28%
2.3%-8%
1.7%-3%
2%-28%
<1%-5%

Bevacizumab (Avastin)
Bevacizumab (Avastin)
Cisplatin (Platinol-AQ)

2.3%
4%-35%
8.5%

Paclitaxel (Taxol)

<0.1%-31%

Ischemia
Docetaxel
(Taxotere)
Hypertension
Venous
thromboembolism
Bradycardia
a

Adapted from Yeh et al.18

thromboembolism, arrhythmias and conduction abnormalities, and valvular and pericardial disease. The risk of
breast cancer treatment–induced cardiotoxicity may be
increased in patients with coexisting traditional risk factors for CVD, such as hypertension and hyperlipidemia.3,17 Table 1 summarizes the cardiotoxic effects of
chemotherapy agents used to treat breast cancer.
Anthracyclines

Anthracyclines (daunorubicin, doxorubicin, idarubicin, and epirubicin) have been the cornerstone of breast
cancer chemotherapy. The most common manifestation
of anthracycline-induced cardiotoxicity is left ventricular
dysfunction that may be systolic or diastolic, asymptomatic or symptomatic. Doxorubicin is the most commonly
used and studied anthracycline. Its use is associated with
dose-related cardiotoxicity, with a peak incidence occurring above a cumulative dose of 450 mg/m2.19 Recent evidence indicates that no safe threshold dose exists for
anthracycline-induced cardiotoxicity and toxicity may
occur even at a low cumulative dose, particularly among
those with preexisting cardiovascular risk factors.20 A
recent meta-analysis observed a 5.42-fold increased risk of
clinical cardiotoxicity, 6.25-fold increased risk of subclinical cardiotoxicity, and a 4.94-fold increased risk of cardiac
death among cancer patients treated with anthracyclines
compared to those treated with non–anthracycline-based
regimens.21 The incidence may be higher in older females.
In one study, the 10-year prevalence of heart failure
among breast cancer survivors aged 66 to 70 years was
nearly 50% if they had had received anthracycline-based
chemotherapy, 35% if they had had chemotherapy
without anthracycline, and 27% if they had had no
2271

Original Article

chemotherapy.22 This can be compared to the expected
10% prevalence among similarly aged women without a
history of breast cancer.23 The large discrepancy in the
prevalence of heart failure across women with versus those
without a history of breast cancer is hypothesized to be
related to an increase in cardiovascular risk factors and
noncardiac toxicities of cancer and its treatments, because
these may act synergistically with preexisting left ventricular dysfunction.23 This risk increases over time after
treatment completion and underscores the need for
ongoing surveillance guidelines for early diagnosis and
treatment.17
Herceptin (trastuzumab)

Trastuzumab is the standard of care for the treatment of human epidermal growth factor receptor 2
(HER2)-positive breast cancer. It is associated with non–
dose-related cardiac dysfunction that ranges from asymptomatic decreases in left ventricular ejection fraction
(LVEF; in up to 17% of patients) to symptomatic heart
failure (<4% incidence). Compared to anthracyclines
that irreversibly damage myocardial structure, the mechanism of trastuzumab toxicity may be directly related to
altered signaling pathways that, when interrupted, cause
reversible, nonstructural myocardial dysfunction.3,24-26
Trastuzumab-related cardiac dysfunction is almost always
reversible and generally responds to standard heart failure
treatment.
Hormonal therapies (tamoxifen and
aromatase inhibitors)

Treatment for 5 years with tamoxifen or aromatase
inhibitors (AIs) in the adjuvant setting has been effective
in reducing the risk of breast cancer recurrence and death
in both pre- and postmenopausal women with hormoneresponsive breast cancer. The cardiovascular effects of
these drugs differ. Tamoxifen consistently decreases lowdensity lipoprotein and total cholesterol levels among
postmenopausal women.27 The data on AIs are less consistent and vary somewhat according to the AI used.28
There have been large trials that have shown aromatase
inhibitors to either increase, decrease, or cause no changes
in blood lipids.28 Part of the confusion arises from the
head-to-head comparison of effects of AIs to tamoxifen,
which makes it difficult to sort out whether changes in lipids or cardiac risk are due to a negative effect of AIs or the
cardioprotective effect of tamoxifen. Tamoxifen is associated with an increased risk of arterial and venous thromboembolic disease but no statistically significant effect on
myocardial infarction or overall cardiac death28; AIs do
2272

not appear to increase the risk of thromboembolic events
and may even confer a small degree of protection. The
overall incidence of negative cardiovascular outcomes in
the adjuvant setting is generally low. For example, in
the Breast International Group (BIG) 1-98 trial, overall
incidence of cardiac adverse events was <5% for patients
with breast cancer who were treated with an AI or
tamoxifen.29
Radiotherapy

Adverse effects of radiation therapy (RT) on the
heart have been observed in long-term survivors of breast
cancer, with a latency of approximately 10 to 20 years.
Radiation can cause a variety of cardiac diseases including
coronary artery diseases, pericarditis, cardiomyopathy,
valvular disease, and conduction abnormalities. The risk
of radiation-induced heart disease (RIHD) appears to
be highly dependent on the volume of heart exposed to
radiation and the dose received by that volume. Older
methods of delivering adjuvant RT, following either
breast-conserving surgery or mastectomy, generally
resulted in much more extensive incidental cardiac irradiation than is seen with current techniques. There is convincing evidence that patients irradiated with the older
techniques suffered significant increases in cardiovascular
morbidity and mortality. In the most recent Oxford
Overview, for example, the risk of death due to heart disease was 27% higher in women treated with RT compared with unirradiated controls.30 However, with
modern RT techniques, which have markedly reduced
cardiac exposure, the risks of RIHD appear to have been
markedly diminished.31-33 Although these studies of
patients treated in the modern era are reassuring, they
share a number of common limitations. Although the
follow-up in these studies is substantial, it may not be
sufficient given the 10- to 20-year latency for RIHD. Furthermore, these studies have not provided quantitative information on the dose or volume of cardiac irradiation,
which would help define if a safe threshold for cardiac
irradiation exists. Finally, these studies have not comprehensively evaluated the impact of concurrent CVD, coexistent classical risk factors for CVD (eg, hypertension,
hyperlipidemia, and cigarette smoking), or coadministration of potentially cardiotoxic systemic therapies (eg,
anthracyclines, trastuzumab) to these patients. In view of
the potential adverse impact of low-dose cardiac exposure
in these subsets of patients, prospective surveillance for
CVD is critical in patients receiving adjuvant RT for
breast cancer, and detailed clinical management guidelines should be established.
Cancer

April 15, 2012

Breast Cancer: Cardiac Toxicity and Health/Schmitz et al

Summary

There are multiple ways in which treatment for
breast cancer may affect cardiovascular risk over and
above any existing pretreatment comorbid conditions.
As with non–cancer survivors, long-term cardiovascular
outcomes in breast cancer survivors may be improved by
reduction of modifiable risk factors (eg, weight control,
exercise, smoking cessation, and treatment of hypertension and hyperlipidemia) and by early detection and
treatment of CVD that develops despite risk reduction
efforts.7
Recommendations for Prospective Surveillance
and Monitoring of Cardiovascular Health
Among Breast Cancer Survivors

To date, there are no clinical practice guidelines specific
to the posttreatment monitoring for cardiotoxicity or for
cardiovascular health care of adult breast cancer survivors.
General consensus-based guidelines from The
Children’s Oncology Group were published in 2004 for
the care and surveillance of survivors of pediatric cancers,
stated as ‘‘A risk-based, exposure-related clinical practice
guideline intended to promote earlier detection of and
intervention for complications that may potentially arise
as a result of treatment for pediatric malignancies.’’34 The
concept and methodology are relevant, but these guidelines are not fully applicable to adult breast cancer
survivors.
In 2005, ASCO convened an expert panel to develop guideline recommendations for the ongoing surveillance and care of cardiotoxicity in adult survivors after
cancer treatment. The charge to the panel was ‘‘to develop
screening recommendations for chemotherapy- and
radiotherapy-induced cardiac and pulmonary late
effects.’’ Upon review, the ASCO Board of Directors
decided that the quality of the available evidence did not
warrant development of a clinical practice guideline. A
clinical evidence review was published instead, in part to
reveal the gaps in the evidence needed to support a clinical practice guideline on screening for cardiotoxicity
among adult cancer survivors. There was agreement that
the weight of the evidence indicated that the risk of treatment-related cardiovascular toxicity increases over time
and may have a very long latency period. Potential tests
that had been studied in the past for prospective surveillance of cardiotoxicity include serial endocardial biopsy,
serial B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) and troponin
level measurement, multigated acquisition scanning,
exercise testing, and the echocardiogram.17,35-37 Among
251 breast cancer survivors treated with trastuzumab,
Cancer

April 15, 2012

troponin 1 successfully predicted which patients would
develop cardiotoxicity.38 Additional studies are needed
to further validate the usefulness of prospective surveillance for cardiotoxicity using any single test or a combination of tests.
In 2006, ASCO published updated breast cancer
follow-up and management guidelines for survivors of adjuvant chemotherapy.40 There are specific detailed recommendations for breast cancer surveillance and follow-up,
but there is no recommendation for cardiac risk surveillance and detection.
Some cancer centers have developed institution- or
provider-based pathways for long-term cardiac surveillance for breast cancer survivors who were previously
exposed to cardiotoxic treatments. For example, Carver
et al outline a plan that begins monitoring for anthracycline- or radiation-derived cardiotoxicity beginning 5
years after treatment. The choice to begin at 5 years was
based on the ‘‘bump’’ in the incidence of asymptomatic
cardiac dysfunction observed around that time in a
number of studies.41 The choice to conduct ongoing
monitoring at 5-year intervals in asymptomatic survivors was based on observations that adverse cardiac outcomes continue to appear decades after treatment.41
Carver et al recommend a clinical history, physical examination, echocardiogram (or radionuclide angiogram), and electrocardiogram at 5 years after treatment
for cancer survivors, with follow-up and additional testing according to findings of these screening activities.
Graded exercise testing is not routinely recommended
in the absence of a clinical suspicion for coronary artery
disease.
The Abramson Cancer Center clinical approach to
prospective surveillance and clinical management of trastuzumab-related cardiac dysfunction has also been published.25 In brief, patients are evaluated by a cardiologist
before beginning trastuzumab treatment, and are monitored throughout treatment on a case-by-case basis,
according to baseline findings and findings of ongoing
monitoring. No posttreatment and/or long-term monitoring of cardiac function is recommended for those who
are asymptomatic and who had no cardiac dysfunction
during treatment. In women who are treated with anthracycline-based chemotherapy prior to trastuzumab, monitoring for cardiac dysfunction proceeds according to their
guidelines for monitoring after anthracycline-based chemotherapy. Among trastuzumab-treated patients who
develop cardiac dysfunction during treatment, ongoing
treatment and monitoring is recommended as per the
usual heart failure guidelines for patients with no cancer
2273

Original Article

history.42 Symptomatic or asymptomatic patients with
any abnormality of diastolic function and any reduction
of LVEF below the lower limit of normal for the laboratory are treated with angiotensin-converting enzyme
(ACE) inhibitors and beta-blockers.
The National Comprehensive Cancer Network
guidelines for breast cancer adjuvant therapy suggest that
cardiac monitoring should occur during the period of
trastuzumab administration.43 No comments are made
with regard to the need for ongoing monitoring after
treatment is completed. In fact, review of the common
sources for clinical practice guidelines in the United
States, Canada, the United Kingdom, Europe, and
Australia reveal no published guidelines on prospective
surveillance, prevention, treatment, or rehabilitation of
cardiac adverse effects of cancer therapy. The newly
formed International CardiOncology Society has called
for the development of such guidelines.44
In addition to the prospective surveillance of cancer
treatment–related cardiovascular outcomes, breast cancer
survivors are subject to the usual recommendations for
cardiovascular health surveillance and prevention efforts
as appropriate, given their non–cancer-related medical
history. The American Heart Association has established
guidelines for CVD prevention in women.7 These include
the treatment of obesity, hypertension, and lipid
abnormalities; smoking cessation; and increasing physical
activity. Instituting a multidisciplinary prospective
surveillance and rehabilitation system for breast cancer
survivors, such as the one outlined in an accompanying article in this issue, would provide an obvious venue for this
risk evaluation, ongoing surveillance, coaching for adherence, treatment recommendations, and possible referral to
a cardiologist and cardiac rehabilitation.
Detection, Prevention, and Treatment of
Cardiac Toxicity in Breast Cancer Survivors

Prevention of cancer treatment–related cardiac toxicity is primarily based on the recognition that adjuvant therapies have
the potential for late cardiac toxicity. Vigilance is therefore
required at every encounter in gathering information about
subtle cardiac symptoms and performing a directed physical
examination. Early detection leads to early treatment, and
there is evidence that early treatment results in better outcomes.45 An integral part of detection and surveillance after
breast cancer are recommendations for referral to supportive
health care professionals (eg, cardiology, rehabilitation medicine, physical therapy).35,36,46-48 Although clinical signs and
symptoms consistent with cardiac complications may be
detected during prospective surveillance visits prior to the
2274

development of a life-threatening or disabling cardiac event,
these may be insufficient to detect asymptomatic or symptomatic declines in LVEF. As reviewed above, there is emerging evidence that biomarkers (eg, troponin 1) and
echocardiographic measurements (eg, longitudinal strain)
may be useful for prospective surveillance of cardiotoxicity from adjuvant breast cancer treatments.38,39 There is
no peer-reviewed evidence regarding the appropriate
timing to start such surveillance or the appropriate frequency of follow-up assessments. Until such evidence
has been developed, there is merit to assessing symptoms,
measuring biomarkers, and/or performing echocardiography prior to and then at some regular intervals after
exposure to potentially cardiotoxic treatments. Appropriate timing may vary according to preexisting comorbid cardiopulmonary findings. There are preventive
strategies during therapy for which benefit has been
inconsistently reported.18 These include the measurement of biomarkers (troponin and BNP) with addition
of an ACE inhibitor in patients who have elevated biomarkers during chemotherapy and the prophylactic use
of ACE inhibitors and/or beta-blockers in ‘‘high-risk’’
patients (ie, those with preexisting cardiac disease or
hypertension and the choice of using a non–anthracycline-based chemotherapy regimen).37,49,50 Addition of
dexrazoxane as a cardioprotective agent has been recommended and has been shown effective in reducing the
risk of cardiac toxicity when the cumulative dose of doxorubicin exceeds 350 mg/m2.51
For detection, prevention, and treatment to be effective, guidelines need to be implemented and are a critical
component of the prospective surveillance and rehabilitation model proposed in this special issue of Cancer.
Future Research

Progress in understanding and minimizing the impact of
treatment-related cardiac toxicity requires the development
of standardized measurement approaches for defining cardiac dysfunction that have high predictive validity for clinical
outcomes. In today’s environment of budgetary constraint,
these measures must be subjected to rigorous cost-effectiveness evaluation. Existing guidelines for cardiac risk reduction
must be tailored to breast cancer survivors. Finally, the efficacy of new technologies developed for screening and new
methods for treatment of CVD in the general population
must be evaluated in breast cancer survivors.
Additional areas recommended for future research
include:
•

Collection of standardized incidence data in an effort
similar to the Childhood Cancer Survivor Study.52

Cancer

April 15, 2012

Breast Cancer: Cardiac Toxicity and Health/Schmitz et al

•
•
•

•

•

Prospective long-term studies that are designed to
directly determine the efficacy of screening in asymptomatic cancer survivors.
Trials to determine whether drugs used for symptomatic
congestive heart failure will also help patients with
asymptomatic LVEF decline after chemotherapy.
Longitudinal, observational studies to more accurately
predict which patients are at highest risk of developing
treatment-related cardiotoxicity; these studies must
include genomic testing to explain the variability of incidence and onset.
Novel mechanisms of action for new chemotherapy
agents may present new mechanisms for cardiac damage.
It has been hypothesized that the signaling pathways of
tumor cells and cardiac cells may overlap enough for
there to be cause for concern regarding the likelihood of
cardiac damage from multiple proposed novel pathways
of action for chemotherapy agents under development.
As new pathways to treat disease are discovered, the
potential impact on the cardiovascular system will need
to be evaluated.53
Management plans and intervention strategies to reduce
the burden of CVD in breast cancer survivors, regardless
of cause, but including a focus on the use of prophylaxis
or early intervention. The safety and efficacy of multiple
risk factor interventions to reduce the burden of cardiovascular outcomes in breast cancer survivors remains to
be established.

Conclusions

Modern treatment of breast cancer is a multidisciplinary
effort and includes surgical, radiation, and medical
oncologists as well as nonphysician support staff. It is
now recognized that similar involvement of a multidisciplinary approach to survivor care is also needed. The
observation that up to 33% of breast cancer survivors
may experience a cardiotoxic treatment effect,7,18 the
high prevalence of preexisting CVD risk factors, and
existing guidelines for promoting and maintaining cardiovascular health among women7 supports the proposal
to institute a multidisciplinary systematic prospective
surveillance model as presented elsewhere within this
supplement.54
FUNDING SOURCES
Support for this meeting and supplement were provided by the
American Cancer Society through The Longaberger CompanyV,
a direct selling company offering home products including handcrafted baskets made in Ohio, and the Longaberger Horizon of
HopeV Campaign, which provided a grant to the American
Cancer Society for breast cancer research and education.
R

R

Cancer

April 15, 2012

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURE
The authors made no disclosure.

REFERENCES
1. Jemal A, Bray F, Center MM, Ferlay J, Ward E, Forman D. Global
cancer statistics. CA Cancer J Clin. 2011;61:69-90.
2. American Cancer Society. Breast Cancer Facts & Figures, 20092010. Atlanta, GA: American Cancer Society; 2011.
3. Curigliano G, Mayer EL, Burstein HJ, Winer EP, Goldhirsch A.
Cardiac toxicity from systemic cancer therapy: a comprehensive
review. Prog Cardiovasc Dis. 2010;53:94-104.
4. Prosnitz RG, Marks LB. Radiation-induced heart disease: vigilance
is still required. J Clin Oncol. 2005;23:7391-7394.
5. Yancik R, Wesley MN, Ries LA, Havlik RJ, Edwards BK, Yates
JW. Effect of age and comorbidity in postmenopausal breast cancer
patients aged 55 years and older. JAMA. 2001;285:885-892.
6. Roger VL, Go AS, Lloyd-Jones DM, et al; American Heart Association Statistics Committee and Stroke Statistics Subcommittee. Heart
disease and stroke statistics–2011 update: a report from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2011;123:e18-e209.
7. Mosca L, Benjamin EJ, Berra K, et al. Effectiveness-based guidelines
for the prevention of cardiovascular disease in women–2011 update:
a guideline from the american heart association. Circulation.
2011;123:1243-1262.
8. Stout NL, Andrews K, Binkley JM, Schmitz KH, Smith RA. Stakeholder perspectives on dissemination and implementation of a Prospective Surveillance Model of Rehabilitation for Breast Cancer
Treatment. Cancer. 2012;118(suppl 8):2331-2334.
9. Lloyd-Jones DM, Leip EP, Larson MG, et al. Prediction of lifetime
risk for cardiovascular disease by risk factor burden at 50 years of
age. Circulation. 2006;113:791-798.
10. Patnaik JL, Byers T, Diguiseppi C, Denberg TD, Dabelea D. The
influence of comorbidities on overall survival among older women
diagnosed with breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2011;103:1101-1111.
11. Bardia A, Koman E, Blumenthal R, et al. Comparison of breast
cancer recurrence risk and cardiovascular disease risk among postmenopausal breast cancer survivors [Abstract]. In: American Society
for Clinical Oncology (ASCO) 2009 Breast Cancer Symposium;
October 8-10, 2009; San Francisco, CA. Abstract 133.
12. D’Agostino RB Sr, Vasan RS, Pencina MJ, et al. General cardiovascular risk profile for use in primary care: the Framingham Heart
Study. Circulation. 2008;117:743-753.
13. Brown BW, Brauner C, Minnotte MC. Noncancer deaths in white
adult cancer patients. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1993;85:979-987.
14. Early Breast Cancer Trialists’ Collaborative Group. Favourable and
unfavourable effects on long-term survival of radiotherapy for early
breast cancer: an overview of the randomised trials. Lancet.
2000;355:1757-1770.
15. Hanrahan EO, Gonzalez-Angulo AM, Giordano SH, et al. Overall
survival and cause-specific mortality of patients with stage
T1a,bN0M0 breast carcinoma. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25:4952-4960.
16. Jones LW, Haykowsky MJ, Swartz JJ, Douglas PS, Mackey JR.
Early breast cancer therapy and cardiovascular injury. J Am Coll
Cardiol. 2007;50:1435-1441.
17. Carver JR, Shapiro CL, Ng A, et al; ASCO Cancer Survivorship
Expert Panel. American Society of Clinical Oncology clinical evidence review on the ongoing care of adult cancer survivors: cardiac
and pulmonary late effects. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25:3991-4008.
18. Yeh ET, Bickford CL. Cardiovascular complications of cancer therapy: incidence, pathogenesis, diagnosis, and management. J Am Coll
Cardiol. 2009;53:2231-2247.
19. Von Hoff DD, Layard MW, Basa P, et al. Risk factors for doxorubicin-induced congestive heart failure. Ann Intern Med. 1979;91:
710-717.
20. Ryberg M, Nielsen D, Cortese G, Nielsen G, Skovsgaard T, Andersen PK. New insight into epirubicin cardiac toxicity: competing
risks analysis of 1097 breast cancer patients. J Natl Cancer Inst.
2008;100:1058-1067.
21. Smith LA, Cornelius VR, Plummer CJ, et al. Cardiotoxicity of
anthracycline agents for the treatment of cancer: systematic review

2275

Original Article

22.

23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.

31.
32.
33.

34.

35.
36.
37.
38.
39.

and meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. BMC Cancer.
2010;10:337.
Pinder MC, Duan Z, Goodwin JS, Hortobagyi GN, Giordano SH.
Congestive heart failure in older women treated with adjuvant
anthracycline chemotherapy for breast cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2007;
25:3808-3815.
Lindenfeld J, Kelly PA. Developing a cardiology-oncology clinical
practice guideline. Prog Cardiovasc Dis. 2010;53:173-179.
Chen T, Xu T, Li Y, et al. Risk of cardiac dysfunction with trastuzumab in breast cancer patients: a meta-analysis. Cancer Treat Rev.
2011;37:312-320.
Carver JR. Management of trastuzumab-related cardiac dysfunction.
Prog Cardiovasc Dis. 2010;53:130-139.
Ewer MS, Lippman SM. Type II chemotherapy-related cardiac dysfunction: time to recognize a new entity. J Clin Oncol. 2005;23:
2900-2902.
Morales M, Santana N, Soria A, et al. Effects of tamoxifen on serum lipid and apolipoprotein levels in postmenopausal patients with
breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 1996;40:265-270.
Filippatos TD, Liberopoulos EN, Pavlidis N, Elisaf MS, Mikhailidis
DP. Effects of hormonal treatment on lipids in patients with cancer.
Cancer Treat Rev. 2009;35:175-184.
Thurlimann B, Keshaviah A, Coates AS, et al. A comparison of
letrozole and tamoxifen in postmenopausal women with early breast
cancer. N Engl J Med. 2005;353:2747-2757.
Clarke M, Collins R, Darby S, et al. Effects of radiotherapy and of
differences in the extent of surgery for early breast cancer on local
recurrence and 15-year survival: an overview of the randomised trials. Lancet. 2005;366:2087-2106.
Giordano SH, Kuo YF, Freeman JL, Buchholz TA, Hortobagyi
GN, Goodwin JS. Risk of cardiac death after adjuvant radiotherapy
for breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2005;97:419-424.
Patt DA, Goodwin JS, Kuo YF, et al. Cardiac morbidity of adjuvant
radiotherapy for breast cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2005;23:7475-7482.
Hojris I, Overgaard M, Christensen JJ, Overgaard J. Morbidity and
mortality of ischaemic heart disease in high-risk breast-cancer
patients after adjuvant postmastectomy systemic treatment with or
without radiotherapy: analysis of DBCG 82b and 82c randomised
trials. Radiotherapy Committee of the Danish Breast Cancer Cooperative Group. Lancet. 1999;354:1425-1430.
Landier W, Bhatia S, Eshelman DA, et al. Development of riskbased guidelines for pediatric cancer survivors: the Children’s Oncology Group Long-Term Follow-Up Guidelines from the Children’s Oncology Group Late Effects Committee and Nursing
Discipline. J Clin Oncol. 2004;22:4979-4990.
Cardinale D, Sandri MT, Martinoni A, et al. Left ventricular dysfunction predicted by early troponin I release after high-dose chemotherapy. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2000;36:517-522.
Cardinale D, Sandri MT, Colombo A, et al. Prognostic value of
troponin I in cardiac risk stratification of cancer patients undergoing
high-dose chemotherapy. Circulation. 2004;109:2749-2754.
Cardinale D, Colombo A, Sandri MT, et al. Prevention of high-dose
chemotherapy-induced cardiotoxicity in high-risk patients by angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibition. Circulation. 2006;114:2474-2481.
Cardinale D, Colombo A, Torrisi R, et al. Trastuzumab-induced
cardiotoxicity: clinical and prognostic implications of troponin I
evaluation. J Clin Oncol. 2010;28:3910-3916.
Sawaya H, Sebag IA, Plana JC, et al. Early detection and prediction
of cardiotoxicity in chemotherapy-treated patients. Am J Cardiol.
2011;107:1375-1380.

2276

40. Khatcheressian JL, Wolff AC, Smith TJ, et al; American Society of
Clinical Oncology. American Society of Clinical Oncology 2006
update of the breast cancer follow-up and management guidelines
in the adjuvant setting. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24:5091-5097.
41. Carver JR, Ng A, Meadows AT, Vaughn DJ. Cardiovascular late
effects and the ongoing care of adult cancer survivors. Dis Manag.
2008;11:1-6.
42. Hunt SA, Abraham WT, Chin MH, et al; American College of
Cardiology; American Heart Association Task Force on Practice
Guidelines; American College of Chest Physicians; International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation; Heart Rhythm Society.
ACC/AHA 2005 Guideline Update for the Diagnosis and Management of Chronic Heart Failure in the Adult: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force
on Practice Guidelines (Writing Committee to Update the 2001
Guidelines for the Evaluation and Management of Heart Failure):
developed in collaboration with the American College of Chest
Physicians and the International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation: endorsed by the Heart Rhythm Society. Circulation.
2005;112:e154-e235.
43. National Comprehensive Cancer Network. Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology: Breast Cancer. Jenkintown, PA: National Comprehensive Cancer Network; 2006.
44. Lenihan DJ, Cardinale D, Cipolla CM. The compelling need for a
cardiology and oncology partnership and the birth of the International CardiOncology Society. Prog Cardiovasc Dis. 2010;53:
88-93.
45. Chandra S, Lenihan DJ, Wei W, Yusuf SW, Tong AT. Myocardial
perfusion imaging and cardiovascular outcomes in a cancer population. Tex Heart Inst J. 2009;36:205-213.
46. Cheville AL, Troxel AB, Basford JR, Kornblith AB. Prevalence and
treatment patterns of physical impairments in patients with metastatic breast cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2008;26:2621-2629.
47. Cheville AL, Beck LA, Petersen TL, Marks RS, Gamble GL. The
detection and treatment of cancer-related functional problems in an
outpatient setting. Support Care Cancer. 2009;17:61-67.
48. Yoon GJ, Telli ML, Kao DP, Matsuda KY, Carlson RW, Witteles
RM. Left ventricular dysfunction in patients receiving cardiotoxic
cancer therapies: are clinicians responding optimally? J Am Coll
Cardiol. 2010;56:1644-1650.
49. Nakamae H, Tsumura K, Terada Y, et al. Notable effects of angiotensin II receptor blocker, valsartan, on acute cardiotoxic changes
after standard chemotherapy with cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin,
vincristine, and prednisolone. Cancer. 2005;104:2492-2498.
50. Kalay N, Basar E, Ozdogru I, et al. Protective effects of carvedilol
against anthracycline-induced cardiomyopathy. J Am Coll Cardiol.
2006;48:2258-2262.
51. Hensley ML, Hagerty KL, Kewalramani T, et al. American Society
of Clinical Oncology 2008 clinical practice guideline update: use of
chemotherapy and radiation therapy protectants. J Clin Oncol.
2009;27:127-145.
52. Oeffinger KC, Mertens AC, Sklar CA, et al. Chronic health conditions in adult survivors of childhood cancer. N Engl J Med. 2006;
355:1572-1582.
53. Peng X, Pentassuglia L, Sawyer DB. Emerging anticancer therapeutic targets and the cardiovascular system: is there cause for concern?
Circ Res. 2010;106:1022-1034.
54. Stout NL, Binkley JM, Schmitz KH, et al. A prospective surveillance
model for women with breast cancer. Cancer. 2012;118(suppl 8):
2191-2200.

Cancer

April 15, 2012

