Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 9

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Carbonic anhydrase XII is a new therapeutic target to overcome
chemoresistance in cancer cells
Joanna Kopecka1,*, Ivana Campia1,*, Andrea Jacobs2, Andreas P. Frei2,3, Dario Ghigo1,
Bernd Wollscheid2,3, Chiara Riganti1
1

Department of Oncology, University of Torino, 10126 Torino, Italy

2

 epartment of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH) Zurich, 8093
D
Zurich, Switzerland

3

 iomedical Proteomics Platform (BMPP), Department of Health Sciences and Technology, Swiss Federal Institute of
B
Technology (ETH) Zurich, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to:
Chiara Riganti, e-mail: chiara.riganti@unito.it
Keywords: chemoresistance, surfaceome, P-glycoprotein, carbonic anhydrase type XII
Received: September 09, 2014	

Accepted: December 09, 2014	

Published: February 18, 2015

ABSTRACT
Multidrug resistance (MDR) in cancer cells is a challenging phenomenon often
associated with P-glycoprotein (Pgp) surface expression. Finding new ways to
bypass Pgp-mediated MDR still remains a daunting challenge towards the successful
treatment of malignant neoplasms such as colorectal cancer.
We applied the Cell Surface Capture technology to chemosensitive and
chemoresistant human colon cancer to explore the cell surface proteome of Pgpexpressing cells in a discovery-driven fashion. Comparative quantitative analysis of
identified cell surface glycoproteins revealed carbonic anhydrase type XII (CAXII) to be
up-regulated on the surface of chemoresistant cells, similarly to Pgp. In cellular models
showing an acquired MDR phenotype due to the selective pressure of chemotherapy,
the progressive increase of the transcription factor hypoxia-inducible factor-1 alpha
was paralleled by the simultaneous up-regulation of Pgp and CAXII. CAXII and Pgp
physically interacted at the cell surface. CAXII silencing or pharmacological inhibition
with acetazolamide decreased the ATPase activity of Pgp by altering the optimal pH at
which Pgp operated and promoted chemosensitization to Pgp substrates in MDR cells.
We propose CAXII as a new secondary marker of the MDR phenotype that
influences Pgp activity directly and can be used as a pharmacological target for MDR
research and potential treatment.

spectrum of substrates, which include anthracyclines,
taxanes, Vinca alkaloids, epipodophyllotoxins, topotecan,
methotrexate, imatinib, dasatinib, lapatinib, gefitinib,
sorafenib, and erlotinib. As a consequence, tumors
overexpressing Pgp often exhibit a MDR phenotype and
are difficult to eradicate by chemotherapy [1, 4].
In attempts to overcome chemoresistance, ABC
transporters have been targeted with pharmacological
inhibitors. However, such approaches have led to several
therapeutic failures due to the widespread tissue distribution
of ABC transporters. Moreover, since ABC transporters play
critical functions in the physiological clearance of catabolites
and xenobiotics [5–7], their pharmacological inhibition

INTRODUCTION
One of the main features of chemoresistant cancer
cells is the high cell surface expression of ATP binding
cassette (ABC) transporters, such as P-glycoprotein (Pgp/
ABCB1), multidrug resistance (MDR) related proteins
(MRPs/ABCCs) and breast cancer resistance protein
(BCRP/ABCG2). These plasma membrane transporters
enable the active transport of chemotherapeutic drugs into
the extracellular space, ultimately reducing intracellular
concentrations, cytotoxicity, and therapeutic success
[1–3]. Pgp is one of the ABC transporters with the broadest
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6776

Oncotarget

produces toxicities in vivo. Thus, pharmacological targeting
of other surface proteins that are selectively overexpressed
in chemoresistant cells and modulate the activity of ABC
transporters is a promising alternative approach.
Until now, only few studies have analyzed the
surfaceome of chemoresistant cells [8, 9]. These studies
have identified proteins that were overexpressed in MDR
cells, such as CD44 [8], dihydropyridine receptor alpha
2 and laminin subunit alpha 5 [9]. These cell surface
proteins could be of clinical utility as potential biomarkers
predictive of chemoresistance and/or potential therapeutic
targets. However, these proteins were not found to
modulate the expression or activity of Pgp or other ABC
transporters in MDR cells, making them unlikely targets
for the suppression of the MDR phenotype.
Pgp activity is finely modulated by the plasmamembrane lipid composition and physicochemical
parameters [10]. A considerable number of proteins have
been reported to physically interact with Pgp, such as the
E3 ubiquitin ligases RNF2 [11] and FBXO15 [12], the
endoplasmic reticulum-associated chaperon calreticulin
[13], the serine/threonine kinase Pim-1 [14], the estrogen
receptor repressor prohibitin 2 [15], the transcription
factor Myc [16], the surface molecules caveolin-1 [17]
and CD4 [18], the BRCA2 and CDKN1A-interacting
protein BCCP, the Target of Rapamycin complex 2 subunit
MAPKAP1 [18], and the lysosomal-associated protein
LAPTM4B-35 [19]. Among these interactors, caveolin-1
[17] and RNF2 [11] negatively modulate Pgp activity,
whereas LAPTM-35 is the only protein that has been
shown to increase Pgp activity [19].
Here, we applied the Cell Surface Capturing
(CSC) technology to investigate the surfaceome of
a Pgp-negative (chemosensitive) and Pgp-positive
(chemoresistant) human colon cancer model system,
with the goal to identify quantitative surfaceome changes
indicative of chemoresistance. This analysis identified
carbonic anhydrase type XII (CAXII; accession number
O43570, UniProtKB; http://www.uniprot.org) as a protein
with significantly higher expression on the surface of
chemoresistant cells. Based on this finding, we investigated
whether changes in CAXII cell surface abundance were
able to induce and/or maintain the MDR phenotype
and whether CAXII could potentially be exploited as
therapeutic target to chemosensitize MDR cells.

HT29/dx cells. The functional classification of the identified
proteins is shown in Figure 1A. The quantitative analysis of
cell surface protein expression in HT29/dx and in HT29
cells is reported in Figure 1B and in Supplemental Table 1.
Among the ABC transporters detected on the
surface of chemoresistant cells, ABCC1/MRP1 was more
abundant on HT29/dx cells, and ABCC3/MRP3, ABCA1,
ABCA2 showed lower expression levels. One of the
proteins with highest relative expression in chemoresistant
cells was CAXII, which was 16-fold more expressed in
HT29/dx cells than in parental HT29 cells (Figure 1B and
Supplemental Table 1). CAXII topology and identified
glycopeptides are shown in Supplemental Figure 1. These
data were confirmed by confocal microscopy analysis
(Figure 2A) and by immunoblot analysis of biotinylated
extracts from HT29 and HT29/dx cells (Figure 2B).
Biotinylation assays confirmed that Pgp and MRP1 were
more abundant on the surface of HT29/dx compared to
HT29 cells (Figure 2B). The ratio of N-glycosylated
to deglycosylated Pgp in plasma membrane extracts
was about 1 in HT29/dx cells, whereas the ratio of
N-glycosylated to deglycosylated MRP1 was higher than
1 (Supplemental Figure 2A and 2B).
The higher surface abundance level of CAXII was
not due to differential trafficking, since intracellular pools
of CAXII were also elevated in HT29/dx whole cell lysate
(Figure 2C). This phenomenon was not specific to colon
cancer cells and higher levels of CAXII were also found
in chemoresistant lung cancer A549/dx cells compared
to chemosensitive A549 cells (Figure 2C). Similarly,
a comparison of U2-OS cells with corresponding
doxorubicin-resistant clones (U2-OS/dx 30, U2-OS/
dx 100, U2-OS/dx 580) revealed that CAXII levels also
correlated with chemoresistance in these osteosarcoma
cells (Figure 2C). All tested chemoresistant cell lines
had higher expression of Pgp than the corresponding
chemosensitive cells; HT29/dx and A549/dx cells also
had higher levels of MRP1, which was undetectable in
the chemoresistant osteosarcoma cells (Figure 2C). On the
basis of these results, we found a strong direct correlation
between CAXII and Pgp expression (Figure 2D); no
correlation was found for CAXII and MRP1 expression
(not shown). According to tissues expression data, CAXII
and Pgp (Supplemental Figure 3 and 4), but not CAXII
and MRP1 (Supplemental Figure 3 and 5), were expressed
at similar levels in colon adenocarcinoma samples.

RESULTS
CAXII shows a higher cell surface abundance in
chemoresistant cells than in chemosensitive cells

CAXII expression increases during the
acquisition of chemoresistance, in parallel with
the increase of HIF-1α and Pgp

CSC technology, which selectively tags and purifies
cell surface exposed glycopeptides for analysis by mass
spectrometry, enabled the identification of 380 cell surface
residing glycoproteins from human chemosensitive colon
cancer HT29 cells and human chemoresistant colon cancer

The difference in CAXII protein expression
between HT29 and HT29/dx cells was paralleled by a
striking difference in mRNA levels (Figure 3A). Upstream
regulatory regions of the CAXII gene contain hypoxiaresponse element (HRE) sequences [20], suggesting that the

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6777

Oncotarget

Figure 1: CSC technology enables the identification and quantitative comparison of the surface glycoproteome of
human chemosensitive and chemoresistant colon cancer cells. (A) 380 identified plasma membrane-associated proteins (black
bars) from human chemosensitive colon cancer HT29 cells and human chemoresistant colon cancer HT29/dx cells were categorized
according to the biological function assigned by the PANTHER algorithm. (B) Quantitative analysis of the proteins detected by CSC
technology. The ratio between protein expressed in HT29/dx cells and protein expressed in HT29 cells is represented by a colorimetric
logarithmic scale. CAXII, ABCC1/MRP1, ABCC3/MRP3, ABCA1 and ABCA2 hits are indicated.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6778

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Expression of CAXII in chemosensitive and chemoresistant human cancer cells. Human chemosensitive

colon cancer HT29 cells and their chemoresistant counterpart HT29/dx cells, human chemosensitive lung cancer A549 cells and their
chemoresistant counterpart A549/dx cells, human chemosensitive osteosarcoma U2-OS cells and the chemoresistant clones U2-OS/dx
30, U2-OS/dx 100, U2-OS/dx 580 were subjected to the following assays. (A) Confocal microscope analysis of HT29 and HT29/dx
cells stained for CAXII. The samples were analyzed by laser scanning confocal microscope for green fluorescence signal (CAXII) or by
Nomarski differential interference contrast (DIC) optics. Magnification: 60 × objective; 10 × ocular lens. Bar = 20 μm. (B) Western blot
analysis of biotinylated plasma membrane associated CAXII, Pgp and MRP1 in HT29 and HT29/dx cells. The pan-cadherin expression was
used as a control of equal protein loading. The figure is representative of three experiments with similar results. (C) Whole cell lysates were
analyzed by Western blotting for the expression of CAXII, Pgp and MRP1. The β-tubulin expression was used as a control of equal protein
loading. The figure is representative of three experiments with similar results. (D) Linear regression analysis between CAXII and Pgp
expression. The mean band density of CAXII and Pgp (panel C), expressed as arbitrary units, was calculated by ImageJ software (http://
www.rsb.info.nih.gov/ij/). r coefficient was calculated using Fig. P software (Fig. P Software Inc., Hamilton, Canada).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6779

Oncotarget

Figure 3: CAXII and Pgp expression levels are affected by HIF-1α in chemoresistant cells. (A) The CAXII mRNA level

in HT29 and HT29/dx cells was detected by qRT-PCR. Data are presented as means ± SD (n = 4). Versus HT29: *p < 0.001. (B) EMSA
detection of HIF-1α bound to its DNA consensus sequence was performed on nuclear extracts of normoxic HT29 and HT29/dx cells.
Hypoxic HT29 cells (grown at 2% O2 for 24 h) were used as positive control of HIF-1α activation (+). One lane was loaded with distilled
water in place of cell extracts and was used as negative control (−). As control of specificity, the nuclear extracts of hypoxic HT29 cells
were incubated with an anti-HIF-1α antibody (Ab HIF-1α). The band corresponding to the HIF-1α-DNA complex is indicated by the arrow.
The figure is representative of three experiments with similar results. (C–E) mRNA was extracted from wild-type HT29 cells and HT29/
dx cells (CTRL), HT29/dx cells treated with a non targeting scrambled siRNA (scr) or with a HIF-1α-targeting specific siRNA pool (siHIF)
for 24 h. The expression of HIF-1α (panel C), CAXII (panel D) and Pgp (panel E) was detected by qRT-PCR. Data are presented as means
± SD (n = 4). Versus CTRL HT29: *p < 0.001; versus CTRL HT29/dx: ° p < 0.001.

(Figure 3C–3E). Interestingly, HIF-1α silencing in HT29/
dx cells (Figure 3C) produced a strong reduction of both
CAXII (Figure 3D) and Pgp mRNA (Figure 3E), without
affecting cell proliferation, apoptosis and viability of these
cells (not shown).
The selection of chemoresistant cells from
parental chemosensitive HT29 cells with increasing
concentrations of doxorubicin induced a progressive
increase of HIF-1α mRNA, measured every 5 passages
of cell culture during the selection process (Figure 4A).
The observed HIF-1α increase was paralleled by the
progressive increase in CAXII (Figure 4B) and Pgp
(Figure 4C) mRNA, and by the progressive decrease
in the accumulation of doxorubicin (Figure 4D), a
substrate of Pgp.

transcription factor hypoxia inducible factor-1α (HIF-1α)
might be involved in the control of CAXII expression. HIF1α activity was undetectable in HT29 cells, but present in
HT29/dx where the protein was bound to HRE-containing
DNA probes even under normoxic conditions (Figure
3B). In the chemoresistant cells, this leads to increased
transcription of HIF-1α target genes, such as glucose
transporter 1, hexokinase, aldolase-A, glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate dehydrogenase, phosphoglycerate kinase,
enolase-A, lactate dehydrogenase, vascular endothelial
growth factor, erythropoietin in the chemoresistant cells
(Supplemental Figure 6). Moreover, HT29/dx cells had
significantly higher levels of HIF-1α mRNA, together
with increased levels of CAXII and Pgp mRNA, a
known target gene of HIF-1α [21], than HT29 cells
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6780

Oncotarget

Figure 4: CAXII increases during the acquisition of chemoresistance. HT29 cells were cultured in medium containing

increasing concentrations of doxorubicin, as detailed under Methods. (A–C) At passage (P) 1, 5, 10, 15, 20 the mRNA was extracted and the
expression of HIF-1α (panel A), CAXII (panel B) and Pgp (panel C) was detected by qRT-PCR. Data are presented as means ± SD (n = 4).
Versus P1: *p < 0.001. (D) An aliquot of cells was incubated 24 h with 5 μmol/L doxorubicin, then lysed and analyzed for the intracellular
doxorubicin content. Data are presented as means ± SD (n = 4). Versus P1: *p < 0.001.

Depletion of CAXII does not affect proliferation
and survival of chemoresistant cells

membrane (Figure 6A). In co-immunoprecipitation
assays, we found that CAXII was physically associated
with Pgp, but not with MRP1 on HT29/dx cells plasma
membrane (Figure 6B). CAXII co-immunoprecipitated
with both glycosylated and deglycosylated Pgp
(Supplemental Figure 7A). In some cell lines
deglycosylated Pgp is less active, but in HT29/dx the
glycosylation status of Pgp did not affect its ATPase
activity (Supplemental Figure 7B).
These observations raised the question whether
CAXII directly affected the activity of Pgp. Supporting
this hypothesis, CAXII silencing in HT29/dx cells led to
a dramatic decrease in Pgp ATPase activity (Figure 6C).
As expected, HT29/dx cells accumulated significantly less
doxorubicin than HT29 cells. In contrast, CAXII-silenced
HT29/dx cells showed significantly increased levels of
intracellular doxorubicin, reaching the same amount
measured in HT29 cells (Figure 6D), where Pgp was
undetectable (Figure 2C). In keeping with the different
expression levels of Pgp, chemotherapeutic drugs that
are substrates of Pgp, such as doxorubicin and irinotecan
[23], reduced cell viability of HT29 cells, but not HT29/dx
cells. However, both doxorubicin and irinotecan exhibited
cytotoxic effects on HT29/dx cells silenced for CAXII
(Figure 6E).

To investigate the functional role of CAXII in
chemoresistant cells, we produced a HT29/dx subclone
silenced for CAXII (Figure 5A). HT29 and HT29/dx
cells did not show any appreciable difference in terms of:
cell proliferation, as revealed by the proportion of Ki67positive cells (Figure 5B); spontaneous apoptotic cell death,
as indicated by the percentage of annexin V-fluorescein
isothiocyanate (FITC)/propidium iodide (PI)-positive cells
(Figure 5C); autophagy, as indicated by the expression level
of classical autophagic markers such as beclin, ATG12
and LC3B (Figure 5D). Interestingly, untreated HT29/
dx cells appeared more senescent than parental HT29
cells, as suggested by higher staining with β-galactosidase
(Figure 5E). Despite the documented role of CAXII as a prooncogenic factor [22], enzyme silencing did not alter any
of these parameters in chemoresistant cells (Figure 5B–5E).

CAXII is associated with Pgp and is necessary to
maintain Pgp-mediated chemoresistance
Confocal microscope analysis showed that
CAXII and Pgp co-localized on HT29/dx cells plasma
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6781

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Depletion of CAXII does not affect proliferation and survival of chemoresistant cells. HT29/dx cells were

cultured for 48 h with fresh medium (CTRL), treated with a non targeting scrambled siRNA (scr) or with a CAXII-targeting specific siRNA
pool (siCAXII). HT29 cells were included as control. (A) The expression of CAXII was measured in whole cell lysates by Western blotting.
The β-tubulin expression was used as a control of equal protein loading. The figure is representative of three experiments with similar
results. (B) Confocal microscope analysis of cells stained for the proliferation marker Ki67. The samples were analyzed by laser scanning
confocal microscopy for Ki67 protein signal (green fluorescence) or for PI (red fluorescence), used to visualize nuclei. Magnification:
60 × objective; 10 × ocular lens. Bar = 20 μm. (C) The percentage of cells positive to annexin V-FITC, as index of early apoptosis, and
to PI, as index of late apoptosis, was measured by flow cytometry. Percentages indicate annexin V-positive cells (lower right quadrant),
PI-positive cells (upper left quadrant), annexin V/PI-positive cells (upper right quadrant). The figures are representative of three experiments
with similar results. (D) Western blot analysis of the autophagy markers beclin, ATG12 and LC3B. The β-tubulin expression was used as
a control of equal protein loading. The figure is representative of three experiments with similar results. (E) Cells were fixed and stained
for β-galactosidase activity, then examined by fluorescence microscopy. Magnification: 20 × objective; 10 × ocular lens. Bar = 100 μm.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6782

Oncotarget

Figure 6: CAXII is physically associated with Pgp and increases Pgp activity in chemoresistant cells. (A) Confocal

microscope analysis of HT29 and HT29/dx cells stained for CAXII and Pgp. The samples were analyzed by laser scanning confocal
microscope for green (CAXII) or red (Pgp) fluorescence signal. Magnification: 60 × objective; 10 × ocular lens. Bar = 20 μm. (B)
Biotinylated plasma membrane-derived extracts from HT29 and HT29/dx cells were immunoprecipitated (IP) with anti-Pgp or antiMRP1 antibodies, then immunoblotted (IB) with anti-CAXII, anti-Pgp or anti-MRP1 antibodies. no Ab: samples immunoprecipitated
without antibody. The figure is representative of three experiments with similar results. (C) HT29/dx cells were cultured for 48 h with
fresh medium (CTRL), treated with a non targeting scrambled siRNA (scr) or with a CAXII-targeting specific siRNA pool (siCAXII).
The Pgp ATPase activity was measured spectrophotometrically on Pgp-rich vesicles extracted from membrane fractions. Data are
presented as means ± SD (n = 4). Versus CTRL: *p < 0.001. (D) Cells treated as reported in C were incubated for 24 h with 5 μmol/L
doxorubicin, then the intracellular drug content was measured fluorimetrically. HT29 were included as control of chemosensitive cells.
Data are presented as means ± SD (n = 4). Versus HT29 CTRL: *p < 0.001; versus HT29/dx CTRL: ° p < 0.001. (E) Cells treated as
reported in C were grown for 72 h in fresh medium (CTRL), or in medium containing 5 μmol/L doxorubicin (DOX) or 1 μM irinotecan
(CPT11), then stained with neutral red dye. The absorbance of viable cells was measured spectrophotometrically. Data are presented
as means ± SD (n = 4). For HT29 and HT29/dx cells, versus CTRL: *p < 0.001; for HT29/dx cells, versus wild type HT29/dx DOX or
HT29/dx CPT11, respectively: ° p < 0.002.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6783

Oncotarget

Figure 6: (Continued) (F) Biotinylated plasma membrane-derived extracts from human chemosensitive lung cancer A549 cell

and chemoresistant A549/dx cells, human chemosensitive osteosarcoma U2-OS cells and chemoresistant U2-OS/dx580 cells were
immunoprecipitated (IP) with an anti-Pgp antibody, then immunoblotted (IB) with an anti-CAXII or an anti-Pgp antibody. no Ab: samples
immunoprecipitated without antibody. The figure is representative of two experiments with similar results. (G) A549/dx and U2-OS/dx580
cells were grown in fresh medium (CTRL), treated with a non targeting scrambled siRNA (scr) or with a CAXII-targeting specific siRNA
pool (siCAXII). The Pgp ATPase activity was measured spectrophotometrically on Pgp-rich vesicles extracted from membrane fractions.
Data are presented as means ± SD (n = 3). For both cell lines, versus CTRL: *p < 0.001.

The association between Pgp and CAXII was shared
by other chemoresistant cells, such as lung cancer A549/
dx cells and osteosarcoma resistant clones (Figure 6F). In
analogy to HT29/dx cells, CAXII silencing (Supplemental
Figure 8) reduced Pgp ATPase activity in these cell lines
(Figure 6G).
CAIX is another isoform of carbonic anhydrase.
This isoform is known to be highly expressed in tumors,
including colon cancer, and has been linked to tumor
aggressiveness and resistance to therapy [20]. This led
us to investigate the expression levels of CAIX in our
model system. In HT29 cells, CAIX mRNA levels were
higher than the ones of CAXII, but were not increased in
HT29/dx cells, where levels were significantly lower than
for CAXII (Figure 7A). CAIX protein was detectable in
HT29 and HT29/dx cells, without differences between
chemosensitive and chemoresistant cells, both in whole
cell lysates and in plasma membrane-derived extracts
(Figure 7B). In contrast to CAXII (Figure 6B), CAIX did
not co-immunoprecipitate with Pgp in plasma membrane
extracts (Figure 7C). Moreover, CAIX-silenced HT29/
dx cells (Figure 7D) retained the same low amount of
intracellular doxorubicin than wild-type HT29/dx cells
(Figure 7E), suggesting that CAIX is not involved in the
chemosensitization towards Pgp substrates.

blot (Figure 2B–2C), significantly increased the retention of
doxorubicin (Figure 8B) and restored the cytotoxic effects
of doxorubicin and irinotecan in HT29/dx cells (Figure 8C).
The activity of CAIX and CAXII has been reported
to induce intracellular alkalinization [25]. As shown in
Figure 8D, the pHi of HT29 was 7.39 + 0.02, whereas
the pHi of HT29/dx was 7.58 + 0.03. To investigate
whether CAXII contributes to this different pHi between
chemosensitive and chemoresistant cells, we measured
the pHi in HT29/dx cells silenced for CAXII or treated
with acetazolamide: interestingly, these experimental
conditions lowered the pHi of HT29/dx cells to values
similar to HT29 cells. By contrast, acetazolamide did
not affect the pHi of low CAXII-expressing HT29 cells
(Figure 8D). To evaluate whether such different pHi
conditions may affect the activity of Pgp, we measured the
ATPase activity of Pgp from HT29/dx plasma membrane
in buffers with different pH. We did not detect changes
in the basal ATPase activity of Pgp; by contrast, the
verapamil-stimulated ATPase activity of Pgp, taken as
an index of the transporter’s maximal activity, increased
from pH 7.0 to pH 7.6 (Figure 8E), suggesting that the
optimal pH at which Pgp operates is slightly alkaline (i.e.
compatible with the pHi of HT29/dx cells) and that the pH
produced by CAXII inhibition likely lowered Pgp activity.

Pharmacological inhibition of CAXII restores
chemosensitivity in chemoresistant cancer cells

DISCUSSION
In this work we analyzed the surfaceome of
chemosensitive Pgp-negative and chemoresistant Pgppositive human colon cancer cells and identified CAXII
more highly expressed in the latter.
CAXII is a surface-associated enzyme highly
expressed in tumors of renal [26], ovarian [27] and
colorectal [28] origin, where it maintains the homeostasis
of HCO3− [29].

Similarly to the effect of CAXII silencing, the
CAXII inhibitor acetazolamide (Ki 5.6 + 0.2 nM) [24]
dose-dependently reduced the activity of Pgp (Figure
8A), suggesting that the activity of CAXII is critical
for the catalytic activity of the transporter. At 1 μmol/L,
acetazolamide, which was devoid of effects in HT29 cells
where CAXII and Pgp were hardly detectable by Western
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6784

Oncotarget

Figure 7: CAIX does not mediate chemoresistance to Pgp substrates in colon cancer cells. (A) The CAIX mRNA level

in HT29 and HT29/dx cells was detected by qRT-PCR. CAXII mRNA level is shown for comparison. Data are presented as means ± SD
(n = 4). Versus HT29: *p < 0.001; for both HT29 and HT29/dx cells, CAIX versus CAXII expression: ° p < 0.001. (B) Western blot
analysis of CAIX expression in whole cell lysates (upper panel; Total) and biotinylated plasma membrane-derived extracts (lower panel;
Surface) in HT29 and HT29/dx cells. The β-tubulin and pan-cadherin expression were used as controls of equal protein loading in whole
cell lysates and plasma membrane-derived extracts, respectively. The figure is representative of three experiments with similar results.
(C) Biotinylated plasma membrane-derived extracts from HT29 and HT29/dx cells were immunoprecipitated (IP) with an anti-Pgp
antibody, then immunoblotted (IB) with an anti-CAIX or an anti-Pgp antibody. no Ab: samples immunoprecipitated without antibody. The
figure is representative of three experiments with similar results. (D) HT29/dx cells were cultured for 48 h with fresh medium (CTRL),
treated with a non targeting scrambled siRNA (scr) or with a CAIX-targeting specific siRNA pool (siCAIX). HT29 cells were included as
control. The expression of CAIX was measured in whole cell lysates by Western blotting. The β-tubulin expression was used as a control of
equal protein loading. The figure is representative of three experiments with similar results. (E) HT29/dx cells treated as reported in D were
incubated for 24 h with 5 μmol/L doxorubicin, then the intracellular drug content was measured fluorimetrically. HT29 cells were included
as control of chemosensitive cells. Data are presented as means ± SD (n = 4). Versus HT29 CTRL: *p < 0.001.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6785

Oncotarget

Figure 8: Effects of acetazolamide on Pgp activity, chemosensitivity and intracellular pH in chemoresistant cancer
cells. (A) Pgp-rich vesicles were extracted from membrane fractions of HT29/dx cells, then the Pgp ATPase activity was measured

spectrophotometrically in the absence (0) or in the presence of increasing concentrations of acetazolamide (AZA), added during the assay.
Data are presented as means ± SD (n = 4). Versus 0: *p < 0.005. (B) HT29 and HT29/dx were incubated for 24 h with 5 μmol/L doxorubicin
(DOX). When indicated, 1 μmol/L acetazolamide (AZA) was co-incubated. The intracellular doxorubicin retention was measured
fluorimetrically. Data are presented as means ± SD (n = 4). HT29/dx DOX cells versus HT29 DOX cells: *p < 0.001; HT29/dx DOX+AZA
cells versus HT29/dx DOX cells: ° p < 0.005. (C) Cells were grown for 72 h in fresh medium (CTRL), or in medium containing 1 μM
acetazolamide (AZA), 5 μmol/L doxorubicin (DOX), 1 μM irinotecan (CPT11), alone or in combination, then stained with neutral red dye.
The absorbance of viable cells was measured spectrophotometrically. Data are presented as means ± SD (n = 4). For HT29 cells, versus
CTRL: *p < 0.001; for HT29/dx cells, versus CTRL: ° p < 0.05. (D) The intracellular pH (pHi) measurement was performed in duplicate
(n = 4) on HT29 and HT29/dx cells untreated or treated with a non targeting scrambled siRNA (scr), with a CAXII-targeting specific siRNA
pool (siCAXII) for 48 h, with 1 μmol/L acetazolamide (AZA) for 24 h. Significance versus HT29 cells: *p < 0.01; versus HT29/dx cells:
° p < 0.02. (E) The Pgp ATPase activity was measured spectrophotometrically in Pgp-rich vesicles extracted from HT29/dx cell membrane
fractions, using buffers with different pH, in the absence (open circles) or presence (solid circles) of 10 μmol/L verapamil, chosen as a Pgp
activator. Data are presented as means ± SD (n = 4).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6786

Oncotarget

In our model of chemoresistant colon cancer cells,
CAXII was increased at both the protein and mRNA
level, suggesting that CAXII gene transcription was upregulated. The presence of HRE sequences in upstream
regions of the CAXII gene, and the down-regulation of
CAXII mRNA in cells expressing the Von Hippel Lindau
protein, a HIF-1α-inhibitor [20], led us to the hypothesis
that HIF-1α might be involved in the control of CAXII
expression. In HT29/dx cells, HIF-1α was constitutively
active even under normoxia, as demonstrated by its
constitutive binding of hypoxia-responsive DNA elements,
and by higher expression levels of its classical target
genes. This characteristic was progressively acquired
during the selection of resistant clones from the parental
chemosensitive population exposed to doxorubicin.
Although we have previously reported the constitutive
activation of HIF-1α in normoxic cancer cells with a
stable MDR phenotype [30], the parallel increase in HIF1α transcription and the progressive acquisition of MDR
is a new observation. This trend may be due to the use of
doxorubicin as selective agent: indeed, in normoxia the
drug produces reactive oxygen species [31] that increase
HIF-1α [32]. During the onset of the MDR phenotype,
the increase of HIF-1α was paralleled by an increase of
CAXII and Pgp mRNAs. These data suggest that HIF-1α
may play a role in the up-regulation of CAXII in HT29/
dx cells. Since the relative increase of CAXII mRNA was
greater than for classical target genes of HIF-1α, other
transcription factors and co-activators induced during the
selection of chemoresistant clones – in addition to HIF1α – are likely to be involved in the up-regulation of the
CAXII gene.
In previous reports, CAXII overexpression has
been associated with good [33, 34] or poor [35, 36]
prognosis, depending on the tumor type. Furthermore,
the protein has been reported to support cell proliferation
and invasion, based on the observations that a monoclonal
antibody against CAXII reduced tumor growth [22] and
that CAXII inhibitors lowered metastatic potential [37]
in mouse xenografts. However, according to the results
obtained by CAXII silencing in HT29/dx cells, CAXII
did not confer any selective advantage in terms of cell
proliferation, spontaneous necrotic/apoptotic death,
autophagy or senescence rate. By contrast, we found
that CAXII promoted the acquisition and maintenance of
chemoresistance.
In our study, Pgp and MRP1 were found to be
up-regulated on the plasma membrane of HT29/dx
cells. Whereas CSC technology successfully identified
MRP1, it failed to identify Pgp. The gel shift of the
MRP1 band upon treatment with Peptide-N-Glycosidase
F (PNGase F) was bigger than the gel shift of the Pgp
band, suggesting that the extent of glycosylation was
higher in MRP1. This makes MRP1 easier to detect by
CSC, which specifically identifies N-glycopeptides of

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

cell surface proteins. Moreover, Pgp was highly abundant
in its deglycosylated form in HT29/dx cells. Of note,
CAXII was physically associated with both glycosylated
and deglycosylated Pgp, which were equally active.
We did not further investigate which domain of CAXII
may be responsible for the interaction with Pgp. Pgp
has a large intracellular domain (Supplemental Figure
9) and according to the crystal structure of CAXII, the
intracellular C-terminal domain of the enzyme is likely
to be responsible for the interactions with other proteins,
the oligomerization of CAXII, the catalytic activity and
the signal transduction [38].
In all chemoresistant cells tested in this study,
CAXII appeared to support Pgp activity: CAXII-silenced
cells showed a decreased ATPase activity of Pgp, an
increased retention of the Pgp substrate doxorubicin, and
a restored cytotoxicity of doxorubicin and irinotecan.
However, we cannot exclude that other tumorassociated CA isoforms are involved in the onset or
maintenance of chemoresistance. For instance, the
overexpression of CAIX has been correlated with a low
response to doxorubicin treatment in breast cancer patients
[39]. In our model, CAIX was expressed at similar levels
in HT29 and HT29/dx cells. Furthermore, it seemed
to play a minor role in the resistance to doxorubicin as
illustrated by the fact that CAIX-silenced HT29/dx cells
had the same low intracellular retention of doxorubicin
than wild-type HT29/dx cells. What about the resistance
phenotype?
It has previously been reported that the verapamilstimulated activity of Pgp, considered an index of the
maximal activity of the transporter, increases at slightly
alkaline pH [40]. We confirmed this trend in Pgp-rich
vesicles extracted from HT29/dx cells. The pHi measured
in HT29/dx cells was lowered by CAXII silencing or by
pharmacological CAXII inhibition with acetazolamide,
suggesting that CAXII may contribute to maintain the
slightly alkaline pHi of chemoresistant cells. A slightly
alkaline pHi has been shown to induce resistance to
doxorubicin in HT29/dx cells [41]. Furthermore, it has
been reported that the activity of both CAIX and CAXII
regulate the pHi homeostasis in cancer cells [25]. In our
experiments, the selective silencing of CAIX and CAXII
in HT29/dx cells suggested that only the latter was
involved in the maintenance of doxorubicin resistance in
this model. Since CAIX did not physically interact with
Pgp, we hypothesize that it did not produce a sufficient
alkalinization to reduce the transporter’s efflux activity
in the plasma membrane area where Pgp is localized.
By contrast, the co-localization of Pgp and CAXII may
favor the optimal pH condition for Pgp activity in the
microenvironment where Pgp and CAXII are concentrated.
Our work shows that pharmacological inhibition
of CAXII with acetazolamide effectively sensitizes
resistant cells to the cytotoxic effects of Pgp substrates.

6787

Oncotarget

Acetazolamide has antitumor activity in vivo [42] and
increases doxorubicin cytotoxicity in HT29 cells under
hypoxia [43].
Since acetazolamide is being used in clinical
practice as a diuretic, our work – although based on
in vitro experiments – may have translational potential
in the future. Given the role of CAXII in tumor growth
and invasion, selective inhibitors of CAXII are under
active development as new anticancer drugs [44–46],
in particular against hypoxic tumors [47]. We propose
that these synthetic and more selective inhibitors might
be used as chemosensitizing agents for the treatment of
Pgp overexpressing tumors. To achieve a more selective
targeting of tumor cells, liposome- or nanoparticle-based
carriers, which increase the intratumor accumulation of
drugs, either by passive targeting (i.e. by the enhanced
permeability retention effect) or active targeting [48],
represent a valid approach. Our proteomic screening
showed that, besides CAXII, a considerable number of
other surface antigens were expressed at significantly
higher levels in MDR cells. Some of these proteins may
represent suitable targets for liposomes carrying CAXII
inhibitors for the active and more selective targeting of
chemoresistant colon cancer cells in preclinical models.
In summary, we show for the first time that CAXII
is more highly abundant at the plasma membrane of Pgppositive chemoresistant cells and is increased in parallel
with Pgp during the acquisition of chemoresistance. Since
CAXII activity is necessary for the optimal activity of Pgp,
CAXII inhibitors may represent promising therapeutic
tools to overcome Pgp-mediated chemoresistance.

abundance of Pgp, MRP1 and BCRP, and were crossresistant to doxorubicin and irinotecan [49]. Human
chemosensitive lung cancer A549 cells (ATCC) and the
chemoresistant A549/dx cell subline were obtained and
cultured as reported [50]. Human doxorubicin sensitive
osteosarcoma U2-OS cells and the corresponding clones
with increasing resistance to doxorubicin (U2-OS/dx 30,
U2-OS/dx 100, U2-OS/dx 580), selected by culturing
U2-OS cells in a medium with 30, 100, 580 ng/mL
doxorubicin, were a kind gift from Dr. Massimo Serra,
Laboratory of Experimental Oncology (IRCCS Istituto
Ortopedico Rizzoli, Bologna, Italy), and have been
previously characterized [51].

Surface glycoprotein identification via CSC
technology
Cells were prepared for CSC as described
elsewhere [52]. Briefly, cells were treated for 15 min at
4°C in the dark with 2 mmol/L sodium meta-periodate
(Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA) in PBS,
pH 6.5, then washed and incubated with 6.5 mmol/L
biocytin hydrazide (Biotium, Hayward, CA) in PBS,
pH 6.5, for 1 h to biotinylate oxidized carbohydrates
of cell surface glycoproteins. Cells were washed,
incubated on ice in hypotonic lysis buffer (10 mmol/L
Tris, 0.5 mmol/L MgCl2, 10 mmol/L iodoacetamide,
pH 7.5) for 10 min, homogenized for 10 s using a
Dounce homogenizer. Afterward cell debris and nuclei
were removed by centrifugation at 1 700 x g for 7
min. The supernatant was solubilized in 400 μL of
digestion buffer (100 mmol/L NH4HCO3, 1 mmol/L
iodoacetamide, 1 mmol/L 2,2′-thiodiethanol, 0.1% w/v
RapiGest; Waters, Milan, Italy) and sonicated with a
VialTweeter instrument (Hielscher Ultrasonic GmbH,
Teltow, Germany). Proteins were digested overnight with
trypsin in a protease:protein ratio of 1:100. After protein
digestion, the peptide mixture was heated at 95°C for 10
min to inactivate trypsin, then biotinylated glycopeptides
were bound to Streptavidin Plus UltraLink Resin (SA
beads; Pierce, Rockford, IL) for 3 h at 37°C. After
extensive washing, cysteine containing peptides, which
were bound via a disulfide bridge to the biotinylated
glycopeptides, were eluted from the SA beads by
incubation with elution buffer (100 mmol/L NH4HCO3,
10 mmol/L tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, 1 mmol/L
dithiothreitol) for 1 h at room temperature. SA beads
were washed again and N-linked glycopeptides were
enzymatically released from the SA beads in a second
overnight elution step in the presence of PNGase F. The
free thiols of cysteine containing peptides were alkylated
with iodoacetamide. Peptides were desalted on Ultra
MicroTIP Columns (The Nest Group, Southborough,
MA) and dried in a SpeedVac concentrator. Finally,
peptides were solubilized in LC-MS grade water
containing 0.1% v/v formic acid and 5% v/v acetonitrile.

METHODS
Chemicals
The plasticware for cell cultures was obtained
from Falcon (Becton Dickinson, Franklin Lakes, NJ).
The electrophoresis reagents were obtained from BioRad Laboratories (Hercules, CA). The protein content
of cell lysates was assessed with the BCA kit from
Sigma Chemicals Co. (St. Louis, MO). Unless specified
otherwise, all reagents were purchased from Sigma
Chemicals Co.

Cells
Human chemosensitive colon cancer HT29 cells
(from ATCC, Manassas, VA) were cultured in RPMI 1640
medium. A subpopulation, called HT29/dx, was created
by culturing parental cells with 12.5 nmol/L doxorubicin
for passages 1–5, 25 nmol/L doxorubicin for passages
6–10, 50 nmol/L doxorubicin for passages 11–15, 100
nmol/L doxorubicin for passages 16–20, then stably
maintaining cells in RPMI 1640 medium containing 200
nmol/L doxorubicin. HT29-dx cells displayed a higher
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6788

Oncotarget

Confocal microscopy analysis

MS/MS spectra were acquired with a LTQ Orbitrap XL
mass spectrometer, converted to mzXML and searched
against the UniProt database (Version 57.15) using
the SEQUEST algorithm. Statistical data analysis was
performed using a combination of ISB (Institute of
Systems Biology, Seattle, WA) open-source software
tools (PeptideProphetTM, ProteinProphetTM, TPP
Version 4.3.1). A ProteinProphet probability score of at
least 0.9 was used for data-filtering (corresponding to
a false discovery rate of 1%). The protein functional
classification was performed using the PANTHER
algorithm (http://www.pantherdb.org). Quantitative data
analysis was performed using the XPRESS software.

5 × 105 cells were grown on sterile glass coverslips,
rinsed and fixed with 4% w/v paraformaldehyde for 15
min. To visualize surface CAXII and Pgp, the samples
were washed with PBS and stained with an antiCAXII antibody or an anti-Pgp antibody conjugated to
phycoerythrin (Millipore) for 1 h. After washing, samples
stained for CAXII were incubated with an AlexaFluor
488-conjugated secondary antibody (Millipore) for 1 h and
re-washed. The coverslips were mounted with 4 μL of Gel
Mount Aqueous Mounting and examined with an Olympus
FV300 laser scanning confocal microscope (Olympus
Biosystems, Tokyo, Japan). For each experimental point,
a minimum of five microscopic fields were examined.

Western blot analysis

Quantitative real time-PCR (qRT-PCR)

For whole cell lysates, the cells were rinsed
with ice-cold lysis buffer (50 mmol/L Tris, 10 mmol/L
EDTA, 1% v/v Triton-X100), supplemented with the
protease inhibitor cocktail set III (80 μmol/L aprotinin,
5 mmol/L bestatin, 1.5 mmol/L leupeptin, 1 mmol/L
pepstatin; Calbiochem, San Diego, CA), 2 mmol/L
phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride and 1 mmol/L Na3VO4,
then sonicated and centrifuged at 13 000 x g for 10 min at
4oC. 20 μg protein extracts were subjected to SDS-PAGE
and probed with the following antibodies: anti-CAXII
(Abcam, Cambridge, UK); anti-CAIX (Novus Biologicals,
Littleton, CO); anti-Pgp (C219, Calbiochem); anti-MRP1
(Abcam); anti-beclin (Abcam); anti-ATG12 (Abcam); antiLC3B (Abcam); anti-β-tubulin (Santa Cruz Biotechnology
Inc., Santa Cruz, CA), followed by a peroxidaseconjugated secondary antibody (Bio-Rad Laboratories).
The membranes were washed with Tris-buffered salineTween 0.1% v/v, and the proteins were detected by
enhanced chemiluminescence (Bio-Rad Laboratories).
Plasma membrane-associated CAXII was evaluated
in biotinylation assays, using the Cell Surface Protein
isolation kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.), as previously
reported [53], using an anti pan-cadherin antibody (Santa
Cruz Biotechnology Inc.) to check the equal protein
loading. In co-immunoprecipitation experiments, 100 μg
of proteins were immunoprecipitated with the anti-Pgp or
anti-MRP1 antibodies, using the PureProteome protein A
and protein G Magnetic Beads (Millipore, Billerica, MA).
The immunoprecipitated proteins were separated by SDSPAGE and probed with the anti-CAXII, anti-CAIX, antiPgp or anti-MRP1 antibodies, followed by a peroxidaseconjugated secondary antibody. To detect glycosylated
and deglycosyated proteins, biotinylated extracts (100
μg) were heated at 99°C for 10 min to denature proteins,
then incubated for 1 h at 37°C in the absence or presence
of 1 μU of human recombinant PNGaseF. Samples were
resolved by SDS-PAGE and probed with the following
antibodies, recognizing both the glycosylated and the
deglycosylated forms: anti-Pgp (3C3.2, Millipore); antiMRP1 (Enzo Life Sciences, Farmingdale, NY).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Total RNA was extracted and reverse-transcribed
using the QuantiTect Reverse Transcription Kit (Qiagen,
Hilden, Germany). The qRT-PCR was performed with
the IQTM SYBR Green Supermix (Bio-Rad Laboratories).
The same cDNA preparation was used to quantify the
genes of interest and the housekeeping gene S14. The
primer sequences, designed using the qPrimerDepot
database (http://primerdepot.nci.nih.gov/), are reported
in the Supplemental Table 2. The relative quantification
was performed by comparing each PCR product with the
housekeeping PCR product, using the Bio-Rad Software
Gene Expression Quantitation (Bio-Rad Laboratories).

Electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA)
Nuclear extracts were prepared as previously reported
[54]. The probe containing the HIF-1α oligonucleotide
consensus sequence was labeled with [γ-32P]-ATP (3,000
Ci/μmol, 250 mCi; Amersham International, Little
Chalfont, UK), using T4 polynucleotide kinase (Roche,
Basel, Switzerland). Oligonucleotide sequence was
5′-TCTGTACGTGACCACACTCACCTC-3′. For each
extract, 10 μg was incubated for 20 min with 20 000 cpm
of [32P]-labeled double-stranded oligonucleotide at 4°C. In
the supershift assay, nuclear extracts were pre-incubated
for 30 min at room temperature with 2 μL of an anti-HIF1α antibody (Millipore); the reaction mixture containing
the [32P]-labeled double-stranded oligonucleotide was
then added. The DNA-protein complex was separated on
a non denaturating 4% polyacrylamide gel in TBE buffer
(0.4 mol/L Tris, 0.45 mol/L boric acid, 0.5 mol/L EDTA,
pH 8.0). After electrophoresis, the gel was dried and
autoradiographed by exposure to X-ray film for 24 h.

Gene silencing
2 × 105 cells were transfected with 400 nmol/L
of 20–25 nucleotide non targeting scrambled siRNA
(Control siRNA-A, Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc.) or
6789

Oncotarget

specific siRNA pools for CAXII, CAIX or HIF-1α (Santa
Cruz Biotechnology Inc.), following the manufacturer’s
instructions. To verify the silencing efficacy, 24 h after the
transfection the levels of mRNAs were checked by qRTPCR, 48 h after the transfection the expression of proteins
was checked by Western blotting. To verify the absence of
cell toxicity after silencing, cell proliferation, apoptosis
and viability was measured, as reported below.

(10 μmol/L) was added to the reaction mix to achieve a
maximal activation of the Pgp ATPase activity. Results
were expressed as nmol hydrolyzed phosphate (Pi)/min/
mg proteins, according to the titration curve previously
prepared.

Intracellular pH (pHi) measurement
The pHi was measured by incubating whole cells
with 5 μmol/L of 2’,7’-bis-(2-carboxyethyl)-5-(and-6)carboxyfluorescein acetoxymethyl ester (BCECF-AM) for
15 min at 37°C and reading the intracellular fluorescence
by a FACSCalibur flow cytometer (Becton Dickinson).
The intracellular fluorescence was converted into pH units
according to a titration curve, as described previously [41].

Cell proliferation, apoptosis and senescence
To evaluate cell proliferation, 5 × 105 cells were
grown on sterile glass coverslips, rinsed and fixed with 4%
w/v paraformaldehyde for 15 min, then permeabilized with
0.1% v/v Triton-X100 for 5 min on ice, washed three times
with PBS and stained with an anti-Ki67 antibody (Abcam)
for 1 h at room temperature. After washing, samples were
incubated with an AlexaFluor 488-conjugated secondary
antibody (Millipore) for 1 h and re-washed. Finally, cells
were stained with PI (1 μg/ml) to counterstain the nuclei,
and washed again. The coverslips were mounted with
4 μL of Gel Mount Aqueous Mounting and examined by
confocal microscopy as detailed above. Early and late
apoptosis was measured by the Annexin V/Propidium
Iodide Apoptosis Detection Kit (Sigma Chemical Co.).
1 × 105 cells were analyzed with a FACS-Calibur flow
cytometer (Becton Dickinson). The percentage of cells
positive to annexin V-FITC and PI was calculated with the
Cell Quest software (Becton Dickinson). Cell senescence
was evaluated on 5 × 105 cells fixed and stained with the
Senescence Cells Histochemical Staining Kit (Sigma
Chemical Co.), following the manufacturer’s instruction.
Samples were examined with a Leica DC100 fluorescence
microscope (Leica Microsystems GmbH, Wetzlar,
Germany). For each experimental point, a minimum of
five microscopic fields were examined.

Statistical analysis
All data in text and figures are provided as means ±
SD. The results were analyzed by a one-way Analysis of
Variance (ANOVA). A p < 0.05 was considered significant.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by grants from the Italian
Association for Cancer Research (AIRC; grant MFAG
11475 and IG 15232), the Italian Ministry of University
and Research (“Future in Research program” FIRB 2012,
grant RBFR12SOQ1) to C.R.; the Swiss National Science
Foundation (SNSF, 31003A_135805) to B.W.
JK is fellow of the Italian Foundation for Cancer
Research (FIRC).
We thank Erika Ortolan (Department of Medical
Sciences, University of Torino) and Costanzo Costamagna
(Department of Oncology, University of Torino) for the
technical assistance.

Intracellular doxorubicin accumulation

Conflict of interest

Doxorubicin content was measured fluorimetrically
as detailed elsewhere [55]. The results were expressed as
nmol doxorubicin/mg cell proteins, according to a titration
curve previously set.

None.

REFERENCES

Cell viability

1.	 Gottesman MM, Fojo T, Bates SE. Multidrug resistance
in cancer: role of ATP-dependent transporters. Nat Rev
Cancer. 2002; 2:48–58.

Cell viability was evaluated by measuring the
percentage of cells stained with neutral red dye, as
reported previously [49]. The viability of untreated cells
was considered 100%; the results were expressed as
percentage of viable cells in each experimental condition
versus untreated cells.

2.	 Borst P, Evers R, Kool M, Wijnholds J. A family of drug
transporters: the multidrug resistance-associated proteins.
J Natl Cancer Inst. 2000; 92:1295–1302.
3.	 Polgar O, Bates SE. ABC transporters in the balance: is
there a role in multidrug resistance? Biochem Soc Trans.
2005; 33:241–245.

ATPase Pgp activity

4.	 Brózik A, Hegedüs C, Erdei Z, Hegedus T, ÖzvegyLaczka C, Szakács G, Sarkadi B. Tyrosine kinase inhibitors as modulators of ATP binding cassette multidrug

The assay was performed on Pgp-enriched
membrane vesicles as detailed elsewhere [56]. Verapamil
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6790

Oncotarget

transporters: substrates, chemosensitizers or inducers of
acquired multidrug resistance? Expert Opin Drug Metab
Toxicol. 2011; 7:623–642.

19.	 Li L, Wei XH, Pan YP, Li HC, Yang H, He QH, Pang Y,
Shan Y, Xiong FX, Shao GZ, Zhou RL. LAPTM4B: a
novel cancer-associated gene motivates multidrug resistance through efflux and activating PI3K/AKT signaling.
Oncogene. 2010; 29:5785–5795.

5.	 Sarkadi B, Homolya L, Szakács G, Váradi A. Human multidrug resistance ABCB and ABCG transporters: participation in a chemoimmunity defense system. Physiol Rev.
2006; 86:1179–1236.

20.	 Pastorekova S, Zatovicova M, Pastorek J. Cancer-associated
carbonic anhydrases and their inhibition. Curr Pharm Des.
2008; 14:685–698.

6.	 Ueda K. ABC proteins protect the human body and maintain optimal health. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem. 2011;
75:401–409.

21.	 Comerford KM, Wallace TJ, Karhausen J, Louis NA,
Montalto MC, Colgan SP. Hypoxia-inducible factor-1dependent regulation of the multidrug resistance (MDR1)
gene. Cancer Res. 2002; 62:3387–3394.

7.	 Zutz A, Gompf S, Schägger H, Tampé R. Mitochondrial
ABC proteins in health and disease. Biochim Biophys Acta.
2009; 1787:681–690.

22.	 Gondi G, Mysliwietz J, Hulikova A, Jen JP, Swietach P,
Kremmer E, Zeidler R. Antitumor efficacy of a monoclonal antibody that inhibits the activity of cancer-associated
carbonic anhydrase XII. Cancer Res. 2013; 73:6494–6503.

8.	 Cain JW, Hauptschein RS, Stewart JK, Bagci T, Sahagian
GG, Jay DG. Identification of CD44 as a surface biomarker
for drug resistance by surface proteome signature technology. Mol Cancer Res. 2011; 9:637–647.

23.	 Luo F, Paranjpe PV, Guo A, Rubin E, Sinko P. Intestinal
transport of irinotecan in Caco-2 cells and MDCK II cells
overexpressing efflux transporters Pgp, cMOAT and MRP1.
Drug Metab Dispos. 2002; 30:763–770.

9.	 Li K, Sun Z, Zheng J, Lu Y, Bian Y, Ye M, Wang X,
Nie Y, Zou H, Fan D. In-depth research of multidrug
resistance related cell surface glycoproteome in gastric cancer. J Proteomics. 2013; 82:130–140.

24.	 Güzel-Akdemir Ö, Akdemir A, Isik S, Vullo D, Supuran CT.
o-Benzenedisulfonimido-sulfonamides are potent inhibitors
of the tumor-associated carbonic anhydrase isoforms CA,
IX, and CA, XII. Bioorg Med Chem. 2013; 21:1386–1391.

10.	 Sharom FJ. Complex Interplay between the P-Glycoprotein
Multidrug Efflux Pump and the Membrane: Its Role in
Modulating Protein Function. Front Oncol. 2014; 4:e41.
11.	 Rao PS, Mallya KB, Srivenugopal KS, Balaji KC, Rao US.
RNF2 interacts with the linker region of the human
P-glycoprotein. Int J Oncol. 2006; 29:1413–1419.

25.	 Chiche J, Ilc K, Laferrière J, Trottier E, Dayan F,
Mazure NM, Brahimi-Horn MC, Pouysségur J. Hypoxiainducible carbonic anhydrase IX and XII promote tumor
cell growth by counteracting acidosis through the regulation
of the intracellular pH. Cancer Res. 2009; 69:358–368.

12.	 Katayama K, Noguchi K, Sugimoto Y. FBXO15 regulates
P-glycoprotein/ABCB1 expression through the ubiquitinproteasome pathway in cancer cells. Cancer Sci. 2013;
104:694–702.

26.	 Rafalko A, Iliopoulos O, Fusaro VA, Hancock W,
Hincapie M. Immunoaffinity enrichment and liquid chromatography-selected reaction monitoring mass spectrometry
for quantitation of carbonic anhydrase 12 in cultured renal
carcinoma cells. Anal Chem. 2010; 82:8998–9005.

13.	 Kopecka J, Campia I, Brusa D, Doublier S, Matera  L,
Ghigo D, Bosia A, Riganti C. Nitric oxide and
P-glycoprotein modulate the phagocytosis of colon cancer
cells. J Cell Mol Med. 2011; 15:1492–1504.
14.	 Xie Y, Burcu M, Linn DE, Qiu Y, Baer MR. Pim-1 kinase
protects P-glycoprotein from degradation and enables its
glycosylation and cell surface expression. Mol Pharmacol.
2010; 78:310–318.

27.	 Hynninen P, Vaskivuo L, Saarnio J, Haapasalo H, Kivelä J,
Pastoreková S, Pastorek J, Waheed A, Sly WS, Puistola U,
Parkkila S. Expression of transmembrane carbonic anhydrases IX and XII in ovarian tumours. Histopathology.
2006; 49:594–602.

15.	 Ewing RM, Chu P, Elisma F, Li H, Taylor P, Climie S,
McBroom-Cerajewski L, Robinson MD, O’Connor L, Li
M, Taylor R, Dharsee M, Ho Y, et al. Large-scale mapping
of human protein-protein interactions by mass spectrometry. Mol Syst Biol. 2007; 3:e89.

28.	 Kivelä A, Parkkila S, Saarnio J, Karttunen TJ, Kivelä J,
Parkkila AK, Waheed A, Sly WS, Grubb JH, Shah G,
Türeci O, Rajaniemi H. Expression of a novel transmembrane carbonic anhydrase isozyme XII in normal human gut
and colorectal tumors. Am J Pathol. 2000; 156:577–584.

16.	 Agrawal P, Yu K, Salomon AR, Sedivy JM. Proteomic
profiling of Myc-associated proteins. Cell Cycle. 2010;
9:4908–4921.

29.	 Ulmasov B, Waheed A, Shah GN, Grubb JH, Sly WS,
Tu C, Silverman DN. Purification and kinetic analysis of
recombinant CA, XII, a membrane carbonic anhydrase
overexpressed in certain cancers. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA.
2000; 97:14212–14217.

17.	 Cai C, Chen J. Overexpression of caveolin-1 induces alteration of multidrug resistance in Hs578T breast adenocarcinoma cells. Int J Cancer. 2004; 111:522–529.

30.	 Riganti C, Castella B, Kopecka J, Campia I, Coscia  M,
Pescarmona G, Bosia A, Ghigo D, Massaia M. Zoledronic
acid restores doxorubicin chemosensitivity and immunogenic cell death in multidrug-resistant human cancer cells.
PLoS One. 2013; 8:e60975.

18.	 Wang J, Huo K, Ma L, Tang L, Li D, Huang X, Yuan Y,
Li C, Wang W, Guan W, Chen H, Jin C, Wei J, et al.
Toward an understanding of the protein interaction network
of the human liver. Mol Syst Biol. 2011; 7:e536.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6791

Oncotarget

31.	 Deavall DG, Martin EA, Horner JM, Roberts R. Druginduced oxidative stress and toxicity. J Toxicol. 2012;
2012:e645460.

42.	 Ahlskog JK, Dumelin CE, Trüssel S, Mårlind J, Neri D.
In vivo targeting of tumor-associated carbonic anhydrases
using acetazolamide derivatives. Bioorg Med Chem Lett.
2009; 19:4851–4856.

32.	 Cho KH, Choi MJ, Jeong KJ, Kim JJ, Hwang MH, Shin SC,
Park CG, Lee HY. A ROS/STAT3/HIF-1α signaling cascade mediates EGF-induced TWIST1 expression and prostate cancer cell invasion. Prostate. 2014; 74:528–536.

43.	 Gieling RG, Parker CA, De Costa LA, Robertson N,
Harris AL, Stratford IJ, Williams KJ. Inhibition of carbonic
anhydrase activity modifies the toxicity of doxorubicin and
melphalan in tumour cells in vitro. J Enzyme Inhib Med
Chem. 2013; 28:360–369.

33.	 Watson PH, Chia SK, Wykoff CC, Han C, Leek RD,
Sly WS, Gatter KC, Ratcliffe P, Harris AL. Carbonic anhydrase XII is a marker of good prognosis in invasive breast
carcinoma. Br J Cancer. 2003; 88:1065–1070.

44.	 Salmon AJ, Williams ML, Wu QK, Morizzi J, Gregg D,
Charman SA, Vullo D, Supuran CT, Poulsen SA.
Metallocene-based inhibitors of cancer-associated carbonic anhydrase enzymes IX and XII. J Med Chem. 2012;
55:5506–5517.

34.	 Ilie MI, Hofman V, Ortholan C, Ammadi RE, Bonnetaud C,
Havet K, Venissac N, Mouroux J, Mazure NM,
Pouysségur J, Hofman P. Overexpression of carbonic anhydrase XII in tissues from resectable non-small cell lung cancers is a biomarker of good prognosis. Int J Cancer. 2011;
128:1614–1623.

45.	 Tars K, Vullo D, Kazaks A, Leitans J, Lends A,
Grandane A, Zalubovskis R, Scozzafava A, Supuran CT.
Sulfocoumarins (1,2-benzoxathiine-2,2-dioxides): a class of
potent and isoform-selective inhibitors of tumor-associated
carbonic anhydrases. J Med Chem. 2013; 56:293–300.

35.	 Haapasalo J, Hilvo M, Nordfors K, Haapasalo H,
Parkkila S, Hyrskyluoto A, Rantala I, Waheed A, Sly WS,
Pastorekova S, Pastorek J, Parkkila AK. Identification of an
alternatively spliced isoform of carbonic anhydrase XII in
diffusely infiltrating astrocytic gliomas. Neuro Oncol. 2008;
10:131–138.

46.	 D’Ascenzio M, Carradori S, De Monte C, Secci D,
Ceruso M, Supuran CT. Design, synthesis and evaluation
of N-substituted saccharin derivatives as selective inhibitors
of tumor-associated carbonic anhydrase XII. Bioorg Med
Chem. 2014; 22:1821–1831.

36.	 Chien MH, Ying TH, Hsieh YH, Lin CH, Shih CH,
Wei LH, Yang SF. Tumor-associated carbonic anhydrase
XII is linked to the growth of primary oral squamous
cell carcinoma and its poor prognosis. Oral Oncol. 2012;
48:417–423.

47.	 Morris JC, Chiche J, Grellier C, Lopez M, Bornaghi LF,
Maresca A, Supuran CT, Pouysségur J, Poulsen SA.
Targeting hypoxic tumor cell viability with carbohydratebased carbonic anhydrase IX and XII inhibitors. J Med
Chem. 2011; 54:6905–6918.

37.	 Gieling RG, Babur M, Mamnani L, Burrows N, Telfer BA,
Carta F, Winum JY, Scozzafava A, Supuran CT,
Williams KJ. Antimetastatic effect of sulfamate carbonic
anhydrase IX inhibitors in breast carcinoma xenografts.
J Med Chem. 2012; 55:5591–5600.

48.	 Fonseca NA, Gregório AC, Valério-Fernandes A, Simões S,
Moreira JN. Bridging cancer biology and the patients’ needs
with nanotechnology-based approaches. Cancer Treat Rev.
2014; 40:626–635.

38.	 Whittington DA, Waheed A, Ulmasov B, Shah GN,
Grubb JH, Sly WS, Christianson DW. Crystal structure of
the dimeric extracellular domain of human carbonic anhydrase XII, a bitopic membrane protein overexpressed in
certain cancer tumor cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2001;
98:9545–9550.

49.	 Gelsomino G, Corsetto PA, Campia I, Montorfano G,
Kopecka J, Castella B, Gazzano E, Ghigo D, Rizzo AM,
Riganti C. Omega 3 fatty acids chemosensitize multidrug
resistant colon cancer cells by down-regulating cholesterol
synthesis and altering detergent resistant membranes composition. Mol Cancer. 2013; 12:e137.

39.	 Betof AS, Rabbani ZN, Hardee ME, Kim SJ, Broadwater G,
Bentley RC, Snyder SA, Vujaskovic Z, Oosterwijk E,
Harris LN, Horton JK, Dewhirst MW, Blackwell KL.
Carbonic anhydrase IX is a predictive marker of doxorubicin resistance in early-stage breast cancer independent
of HER2 and TOP2A amplification. Br J Cancer. 2012;
106:916–922.

50.	 Kopecka J, Campia I, Olivero P, Pescarmona G, Ghigo D,
Bosia A, Riganti C. A LDL-masked liposomal-doxorubicin
reverses drug resistance in human cancer cells. J Contr Rel.
2011; 149:196–205.
51.	 Serra M, Scotlandi K, Manara MC, Maurici D, Lollini PL,
De Giovanni C, Toffoli G, Baldini N. Establishment and
characterization of multidrug-resistant human osteosarcoma
cell lines. Anticancer Res. 1993; 13:323–329.

40.	 Aänismaa P, Seelig A. P-Glycoprotein kinetics measured in
plasma membrane vesicles and living cells. Biochemistry.
2007; 46:3394–3404.

52.	 Bausch-Fluck D, Hofmann A, Wollscheid B. Cell surface
capturing technologies for the surfaceome discovery of
hepatocytes. Methods Mol Biol. 2012; 909:1–16.

41.	 Miraglia E, Viarisio D, Riganti C, Costamagna C, Ghigo D,
Bosia A. Na+/H+ exchanger activity is increased in doxorubicin-resistant human colon cancer cells and its modulation
modifies the sensitivity of the cells to doxorubicin. Int J
Cancer. 2005; 115:924–929.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

53.	 De Boo S, Kopecka J, Brusa D, Gazzano E, Matera L,
Ghigo D, Bosia A, Riganti C. iNOS activity is necessary
for the cytotoxic and immunogenic effects of doxorubicin in
human colon cancer cells. Mol Cancer. 2009; 8:e108.

6792

Oncotarget

54.	 Campia I, Gazzano E, Pescarmona G, Ghigo D, Bosia A,
Riganti C. Digoxin and ouabain increase the synthesis of
cholesterol in human liver cells. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2009;
66:1580–1594.

resistance to doxorubicin in human colon cancer cells by
inhibiting the drug efflux. Cancer Res. 2005; 65:516–525.
56.	 Kopecka J, Salzano G, Campia I, Lusa S, Ghigo D,
De Rosa G, Riganti C. Insights in the chemical components
of liposomes responsible for P-glycoprotein inhibition.
Nanomedicine. 2014; 10:77–87.

55.	 Riganti C, Miraglia E, Viarisio D, Costamagna C,
Pescarmona G, Ghigo D, Bosia A. Nitric oxide reverts the

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6793

Oncotarget

