Oncotarget, January, Vol.4, No 1

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

New concepts for CML clonality
Jamshid S. Khorashad, Michael W. Deininger and Thomas O’Hare
Commentary on: BCR-ABL1 compound mutations in tyrosine kinase inhibitor resistant CML: frequency and clonal relationships

identified in patients with resistance, independent
acquisition of the very same mutation is puzzling and
strongly suggests a tendency for nonrandom acquisition
of certain mutations over others. Various DNA repair
mechanisms are defective in CML cells [2], but this does
not explain the preferential and repetitive acquisition of
identical mutations at certain residues. It will be interesting
to examine whether the point mutation rate in other
regions of the CML genome is elevated and whether there
are recurrent mutational hotspots. Such a study would
shed light on whether the ABL1 kinase domain is located
in a part of the genome that is unusually predisposed to
mutation acquisition [6]. Cloning and sequencing of the
BCR-ABL1 kinase domain in our study of CML samples
also revealed many mutations that were not detected by
conventional Sanger direct sequencing [4]. The relatively
high frequency of these low-level mutations might be due
to DNA errors induced by the BCR-ABL1 oncoprotein in
CML cells [3].
Models to explain mutational complexity in cancer
have invoked a sequential, orderly hierarchy in which
the progression of events can be deduced retrospectively.
Our study in CML challenges this simplistic framework
[4]. Clinical observations are consistent with acquisition
of the second mutation by the pre-existing single mutant
clone [5, 8], suggesting that introduction of mutations in
BCR-ABL1 kinase domain happens constantly in certain
CML patients [9] and that either: 1) not all observed
compound mutations predate TKI therapy or 2) the
observed compound mutations predate TKI therapy but
existing detection methods are not sufficiently sensitive
for identifying low-level mutations in pre-therapeutic
samples. The latter, if proven, suggests that mutation
acquisition is sharply curtailed on TKI therapy. Our study
demonstrates that compound mutations are common in
patients with two BCR-ABL1 mutations and frequently
reflect a highly complex clonal network whose evolution
may be limited by the negative impact of missense
mutations on kinase function.

BCR-ABL1 compound mutations, defined as ≥2
mutations within the same BCR-ABL1 allele, can confer
high-level resistance to imatinib and other ABL1 tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (TKIs) in chronic myeloid leukemia
(CML). Even the third generation ABL1 TKI, ponatinib,
which is uniformly effective against BCR-ABL1 point
mutants, remains vulnerable to certain BCR-ABL1
compound mutants [1, 7]. Therapy escape attributable to
compound mutations may become more common with
greater clinical use of ponatinib in refractory CML. To
determine the frequency of compound mutations among
CML patients on ABL1 TKI therapy, we examined cDNA
samples (N=47) with clear Sanger direct sequencing
evidence of two BCR-ABL1 kinase domain mutations.
Using an amplicon cloning and sequencing method, we
confirmed that a high proportion of patients (70%; 33/47)
with double mutations harbored compound mutations.
In contrast to prevailing stepwise models, we found
sequential, branching, and parallel routes to compound
mutations (Figure 1A). The frequency of clones harboring
compound mutations with >2 missense mutations was
low (10%). At the same time, the likelihood of silent
mutations increased disproportionately with the total
number of mutations per clone, suggesting a limited
tolerance for missense mutations in the BCR-ABL1 kinase
domain [4]. Silent mutations are not subject to selection
pressure and provide a convenient measure of mutation
rate. Their increased frequency in clones with multiple
mutations suggests clones that instead acquire additional
missense mutations are not competitive, possibly because
of impaired kinase function.
In 39% of patients with compound mutations,
subclones representing each of the component mutations
co-existed with the compound mutations (Figure 1A).
This observation dictates that at least one of the two
component mutations arose independently in single and
compound mutant subclones and opens the possibility that
the same mutation detected at two time points might be
of different clonal origin. Thus, disease recurrence with
the ‘same’ mutation after a transient response does not
definitively establish a clonal relationship. This might also
explain why a patient with a certain mutation may show
a different level of sensitivity to the same TKI during the
course of treatment (Figure 1B). Alternatively, a clone
may acquire additional non BCR-ABL1 kinase mutationbased resistance mechanisms.
Given the large number of kinase domain mutations
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Jamshid S. Khorashad: Huntsman Cancer Institute, The
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT
Michael W. Deininger: Huntsman Cancer Institute;
Division of Hematology and Hematologic Malignancies,
The University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT
Thomas O’Hare: Huntsman Cancer Institute; Division
of Hematology and Hematologic Malignancies, The
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT

7

Oncotarget 2013; 4: 7-8

1A

BCR-ABL1
α

BCR-ABL1
α

α

BCR-ABL1

β

BCR-ABL1
α/β
BCR-ABL1

BCR-ABL1

β

β

Amplicon Cloning
& Sequencing

Sanger Direct
Sequencing

1B
Transient Response

BCR-ABL1

BCR-ABL1

BCR-ABL1

BCR-ABL1

BCR-ABL1

BCR-ABL1

α

Relapse

α

First TKI

BCR-ABL1

BCR-ABL1
α

Second TKI

Figure 1: A. Model depicting two mutations in a compound mutant clone and also in parallel as two independent clones. A subclone of
the mutant α clonal pool might acquire mutation β, resulting in co-existence of α and α/β pools. Independent and parallel acquisition of
mutation β will add β to the pool of BCR-ABL1 positive cells. These events might also happen with β as the first mutation followed by
acquisition of α. Cloning and sequencing of individual amplicons will discern mutants α and β from compound mutant α/β. Sanger direct
sequencing identifies mutations α and β but does not establish whether they exist as a compound mutant. B. Model for emergence of a single
mutation more than once during the course of disease. Resistance to the first-line TKI due to mutation α (red) in the BCR-ABL1 kinase
domain is addressed with a second-line TKI, resulting in a transient response and disappearance of α. A subclone lacking mutation α but
carrying additional genomic abnormalities (represented with a higher yellow/orange ratio) may become resistant to first- and second-line
TKIs. Acquisition of new α mutation (blue) might make this clone more resistant to the second-line TKI.
Correspondence: Michael W. Deininger, email Michael.
Deininger@hci.utah.edu

4.	 Khorashad JS, Kelley TW, Szankasi P, et al. Blood. 2013;
121:489-498.

Received: January 21, 2013;

5.	 Khorashad JS, Milojkovic D, Mehta P, et al. Blood. 2008;
111:2378-2381.

Published: February 17, 2013;

6.	

References
1.	

7.	 O’Hare T, Shakespeare WC, Zhu X, et al. Cancer Cell.
2009; 16:401-412.

Cortes JE, Kantarjian H, Shah N, et al. N Engl J Med. 2012;
367:2075-2088.

8.	

2.	 Cramer K, Nieborowska-Skorska M, Koptyra M, et al.
Cancer Res. 2008; 68:6884-6888.

Shah NP, Skaggs BJ, Branford S, et al. J Clin Invest. 2007;
117:2562-2569.

9.	 Soverini S, Gnani A, Colarossi S, et al. Blood. 2009;
114:2168-2171.

3.	 Fernandes MS, Reddy MM, Gonneville JR, et al. Blood.
2009; 114:1813-1819.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Martincorena I, Seshasayee AS and Luscombe NM. Nature.
2012; 485:95-98.

8

Oncotarget 2013; 4: 7-8

