Original Article

Outcomes of Patients With Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia
Treated With First-Line Idelalisib Plus Rituximab After
Cessation of Treatment for Toxicity
Philip A. Thompson, MB, BS(Hons)1; Francesco Stingo, PhD2; Michael J. Keating, MB, BS1; Alessandra Ferrajoli, MD1;
Jan A. Burger, MD, PhD1; William G. Wierda, MD, PhD1; Tapan M. Kadia, MD1; and Susan M. O’Brien, MD3

BACKGROUND: More active therapies are needed for older and unfit patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) who are not
eligible for chemoimmunotherapy with fludarabine, cyclophosphamide, and rituximab. The phosphyotidylinositol-3-kinase d inhibitor
idelalisib is effective in patients with treatment-naive and relapsed/refractory CLL as monotherapy and in combination with rituximab,
but it can be associated with treatment-limiting adverse events, particularly diarrhea/colitis. The outcomes for patients who cease
treatment for adverse events have not been previously described. METHODS: The authors analyzed long-term follow-up data from
40 treatment-na€ıve patients aged 65 years who received treatment at The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center on a
phase 2 study of idelalisib plus rituximab for CLL. RESULTS: In patients who permanently ceased treatment because of toxicity, the
time to subsequent disease progression was analyzed according to baseline characteristics. Fifteen patients permanently ceased
therapy (PCT) because of toxicity (PCTTOX), most commonly diarrhea/colitis (n 5 7), at a median of 11 months after commencing
treatment. PCTTOX was associated with a higher risk of subsequent disease progression (hazard ratio, 6.61; 95% confidence interval,
1.77-16.15) relative to that observed in patients who remained on therapy. Ten patients subsequently progressed, and 7 required salvage therapy; 5 patients remained progression-free at a median of 23.3 months (range, 8.5-28.6 months). Patients who were positive
for f-associated protein-70 had more rapid disease progression after treatment cessation (P 5 .048). There were no CLL-related
deaths. CONCLUSIONS: PCTTOX is the major determinant of PFS in patients who receive first-line idelalisib-based treatment. However,
a subgroup of patients with favorable biologic characteristics has prolonged PFS, even after PCTTOX. The absence of CLL-related
C 2016 American Cancer
deaths indicates that salvage treatment is generally successful after PCTTOX. Cancer 2016;122:2505-11. V
Society.
KEYWORDS: chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), disease-free survival, idelalisib, remission, rituximab, toxicity.

INTRODUCTION
More active therapies are needed for older and unfit patients who have chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). The combination of fludarabine, cyclophosphamide, and rituximab improves response rates and survival in younger, fitter patients1
but is poorly tolerated by older patients and those with comorbidities. In older and unfit patients, obinutuzumab plus
chlorambucil was the first treatment to improve survival compared with chlorambucil monotherapy; however, the median
progression-free survival (PFS) was still relatively short at 29 months.2
Phosphyotidylinositol-3-kinase d (PI3Kd) expression is identified only within hematopoietic cells and plays a critical
role in the regulation of B-cell homeostasis and function, transducing signals from the B-cell receptor and cluster of differentiation 40 (CD40) ligand.3 Sustained activation of the PI3Kd-Akt pathway is essential for CLL cell survival. Mice with
inactivating PI3Kd mutations have reduced numbers of B cells, reduced immunoglobulin levels, and immune dysregulation. They demonstrate hypoactive responses to immunization, B-cell receptor and CD40 signaling, and can develop
inflammatory bowel disease.3-5 The PI3Kd inhibitor idelalisib (CAL101, GS-1101) inhibits PI3Kd signaling in vivo,
abrogates proliferation in response to immunoglobulin M (IgM) crosslinking, and reduces proliferation in response to
anti-CD40, interleukin 4, and lipopolysaccharide.4

Corresponding author: Susan M. O’Brien, MD, UC Irvine Health Chao Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, 101 The City Drive South, Building 23, Orange, CA
92868; Fax: (714) 456-5280; obrien@uci.edu
1
Department of Leukemia, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas; 2Department of Biostatistics, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas; 3The University of California Irvine Chao Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, Orange, California

We thank Ms. Susan Smith for her assistance with data management.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.30069, Received: February 3, 2016; Revised: March 18, 2016; Accepted: March 29, 2016, Published online May 16, 2016 in Wiley Online
Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Cancer

August 15, 2016

2505

Original Article

Idelalisib is effective in treating relapsed/refractory
CLL as monotherapy6 and in combination with rituximab.7 In the relapsed/refractory setting, therapy is well
tolerated, with treatment cessation because of adverse
events (AEs) in <10% of patients. A pivotal phase 3 study
in relapsed/refractory CLL compared rituximab plus idelalisib 150 mg twice daily versus rituximab plus placebo
and demonstrated a survival advantage for the patients
who received idelalisib. The most frequent events leading
to treatment cessation in the idelalisib arm were rash and
diarrhea (with or without colitis), but overall treatment
cessation because of AEs was no more frequent than in the
rituximab monotherapy comparator arm.7
Given the excellent efficacy and tolerability of idelalisib in relapsed/refractory CLL, the combination of idelalisib plus rituximab was evaluated in a 64-patient phase 2
study for previously untreated patients aged >65 years.
The results from that study were previously reported.8
Forty patients received treatment at our center, and our experience suggested that they ceased treatment because of
AEs, particularly late-onset diarrhea/colitis, more frequently than patients in the relapsed/refractory population.
Recent data from a first-line study using idelalisib monotherapy for 2 months followed by the addition of ofatumumab have also indicated a very high rate of early onset
hepatitis as well as other presumed immunologic AEs, such
as colitis and pneumonitis.9 The mechanisms underlying
the AEs are not well characterized, but T-cell infiltrates are
observed in affected organs; this, combined with responses
to corticosteroids, with or without immunosuppressive
therapy,8,9 argues for a probable immunologic mechanism
underlying the hepatitis, colitis, and pneumonitis reported
in patients who receive idelalisib-based regimens. We
reviewed our experience to characterize the frequency and
nature of AEs leading to treatment cessation and subsequent outcomes of patients who permanently ceased therapy (PCT) because of toxicity (PCTTOX), with a particular
emphasis on PFS after PCTTOX.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Full study eligibility criteria were previously outlined.8
Briefly, patients were eligible for this study if they were
treatment-naive, had an indication for treatment according to International Workshop on Chronic Lymphocytic
Leukemia (IWCLL) 2008 criteria,10 were aged 65 years,
had a World Health Organization performance status 2,
and had adequate organ function. All patients provided
informed consent, and the study was conducted according
to the Declaration of Helsinki.
2506

We reviewed study records and the electronic medical records of the 40 patients who received treatment at
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center to
determine response rates, reasons for study cessation, PFS,
overall survival (OS), and time to progression (TTP) after
PCTTOX. Responses were assessed according to IWCLL
criteria.10 PFS was defined as the time from study initiation to documented disease progression as defined by
IWCLL 2008 criteria,10 initiation of alternative salvage
treatment, or death from any cause. Progressive disease
was defined according to IWCLL 2008 criteria, and PFS
after PCTTOX was defined as the time from cessation of
idelalisib to death from any cause, disease progression
according to IWCLL 2008 criteria, or the initiation of alternative salvage treatment.
Statistical analyses were performed using R version
3.0.3 (R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna,
Austria) and SPSS version 22 (IBM Corp, Armonk, NY).
Descriptive statistics were used to summarize patient characteristics. Univariable survival analyses were performed
using the method of Kaplan and Meier,11 and differences
between groups for each variable were assessed using the
log-rank test.12 A multistage model with 3 stages (treatment, PCTTOX, and disease progression) was implemented to study disease progression and the intermediate
effect of early PCTTOX. Transition-specific hazards were
modeled with proportional-hazards Cox models. Cumulative baseline hazard curves were provided for all 3 possible transitions (baseline to PCTTOX, baseline to
progression, and PCTTOX to progression). Given the
small sample size and the small number of events, no multivariable analysis was performed, and we did not attempt
to identify baseline disease-specific or patient-specific factors associated with a greater likelihood of PCTTOX or
PFS. However, we did evaluate the relation between baseline immunologic parameters and PCTTOX using linear
regression analysis.
RESULTS
Forty patients were enrolled between March 2011 and
February 2012. Baseline characteristics are listed in Table 1.
Response Rate, PFS, and Survival

The median follow-up for surviving patients from the
start of idelalisib therapy was 36 months (range, 18-43
months). Median PFS for the entire cohort has not been
reached. Seventeen of 40 patients remain on therapy, and
23 of 40 are currently progression free (Fig. 1). The reason
for PCT was toxicity in 15 patients, death in remission in
4 patients, progressive disease in 2 patients, primary
Cancer

August 15, 2016

Outcome After Ending Idelalisib in CLL/Thompson et al

TABLE 1. Baseline Characteristics
Variablea

No. of Patients (%)

Men
Age: Median [range], y
Rai stage III-IV disease
b2-microglobulin, n 5 39
Median [range], mg/L
b2-microglobulin 4.0 mg/L
ZAP70-positive
FISH, n 5 39
Del(13q)
Negative
Trisomy 12
Del(11q)
Del(17p)
Complex metaphase karyotype, n 5 27
Unmutated IGHV, n 5 34
Bulky lymphadenopathy 5 cm

28 (70)
70 [65–90]
15 (37.5)
3.7 [2.0–7.4]
14 (35.9)
24 (60)
7
8
10
8
6
3
20
4

(18)
(21)
(26)
(21)
(15)
(11.1)
(58.8)
(10)

Abbreviations: Del, deletion; FISH, fluorescence in situ hybridization; IGHV,
immunoglobulin heavy-chain variable; ZAP-70, f-associated protein-70.
a
The number of patients is 40 unless stated otherwise.

refractory disease in 1 patient, and transfusion-dependent
pure erythrocyte aplasia in 1 patient. Only 2 patients
developed progressive disease while remaining on treatment at 28.3 and 37.5 months. Ten of 15 patients who
experienced PCTTOX subsequently progressed or received
salvage therapy.
The overall response rate (ORR) for the 40 treated
patients was 95%, and the complete remission (CR) rate
was 14.7%. Median PFS and OS have not been reached in
surviving patients (Fig. 1). There was a trend toward a
lower CR rate in patients with Rai stage III and IV disease
(P 5 .064), but there were no significant associations
between other baseline prognostic characteristics and the
ORR or the CR rate. Median PFS and OS have not been
reached in surviving patients (Fig. 1). Among the total
cohort, there was a trend toward inferior PFS in patients
who had unmutated immunoglobulin heavy-chain variable
gene (IGHV) compared with those who had mutated
IGHV (median, 24.9 months vs not reached; P 5 .077).
There was no association between the presence of the
del(17p) or del(11q) deletions, age >70 years, Rai stage III
and IV disease, negative f-associated protein-70 (ZAP70)
expression, or bulky lymphadenopathy and PFS or OS.
AEs Leading to Permanent Treatment Cessation

Sixteen of 40 patients permanently ceased study treatment
because of AEs, including 1 patient who died from pneumonitis. AEs leading to PCTTOX were as follows: diarrhea/colitis (n 5 7), pneumonitis (n 5 4; 1 patient died),
abnormal liver function tests (n 5 1), rash (n 5 1), abdominal pain (n 5 1), fatigue (n 5 1), and recurrent
infections (n 5 1) The median time to PCTTOX was 11
Cancer

August 15, 2016

months (range, 0.9-22.1 months). The patient who developed fatal pneumonitis after 3 months of treatment could
not be assessed for the TTP after treatment cessation. Diarrhea/colitis was predominantly a late event with a median time to PCTTOX for colitis of 11.3 months (range,
7.3-22.1 months). Five of 7 patients who permanently
ceased treatment for diarrhea underwent colonoscopy
with biopsies performed. Macroscopic evidence of pancolitis was observed in 4 of those 5 patients. Colonic biopsies
in these 4 patients revealed lymphocytic infiltration in the
epithelium, colonic glands, and the lamina propria.
Immunohistochemistry was performed in 3 of 4 patients
to evaluate the lymphoid infiltrate, and, in all patients, the
lymphocytes were CD3-positive T cells.
All 5 deaths that occurred during the study were in
patients who had attained at least partial remission (PR)
(sepsis in 2 patients, myocardial infarction in 1 patient, and
pneumonitis in 1 patient); it was believed that the
pneumonitis-related death was related to treatment. One
patient who had numerous comorbidities stopped idelalisib
and rituximab because of severe fatigue after only 3 months
of treatment. He died suddenly from unknown causes 2
years after PCTTOX. He was receiving treatment with ibrutinib (PCI-32765) plus rituximab at the time of his death and
had achieved a durable partial response with that therapy.
Given the possible immunologic mechanism underlying the observed toxicity, we evaluated immunologic parameters at baseline to determine whether there was any
correlation between these parameters and PCTTOX. Fourteen patients had quantification of T-cell subsets at baseline; this was not mandated per protocol and was
performed according to individual investigator practice.
There was a wide range of baseline T-cell counts (median
CD4 count: 2206/lL; range, 466-8797/lL; median CD8
count: 1530/lL; range, 222-11,053/lL). Only 3 of the
patients who had T-cell subsets quantified developed
PCTTOX; thus, conclusions regarding the relation
between these numbers and PCTTOX cannot be drawn.
Immunoglobulin levels also varied widely at baseline: the
median IgG level was 833 mg/dL (range, 380-3840 mg/
dL), the median IgA level was 101 mg/dL (range, 6-527
mg/dL), and the median IgM level was 44 mg/dL (range,
4-405 mg/dL). There was no association between IgG levels (correlation coefficient [R2], 0.03; P 5 .84), IgA levels
(R2, 0.05; P 5 .73) or IgM levels (R2, 0.10; P 5 .78) and
the likelihood of PCTTOX.
TTP and Survival Outcomes After PCTTOX

The median TTP after PCTTOX was 17.2 months
(Fig. 1), and 5 patients remained progression free at a
2507

Original Article

Figure 1. (a) Progression-free survival (PFS) and 95% confidence intervals are illustrated for the 40-patient cohort. (b) Overall
survival (OS) and 95% confidence intervals are illustrated for the 40-patient cohort. (c) The time-to-progression (TTP) after permanent treatment cessation (PCT) for toxicity (TX) (PCTTX) is illustrated. (d) The cumulative hazard for PCTTX is illustrated. (e)
The cumulative hazard for progression in the absence of PCTTX is illustrated. (f) The cumulative hazard for progression after
PCTTX is illustrated relative to the patients who remained on idelalisib.

median of 23.3 months (range, 8.5-28.6 months). Of
these patients, 1 was in CR, and 4 were in PR; 3 patients
in PR had persistent bone marrow and lymph node disease, and 1 did not undergo a bone marrow biopsy for
response assessment because of early treatment cessation
at 3 months. All patients had an absolute lymphocyte
count <5000/lL, a peripheral blood minimal residual
disease rate from 1% to 10%, and normalization of hemoglobin, platelets, and neutrophil counts. Of these 5
patients, 4 had a PFS >23 months (1 patient had a PFS of
only 8.5 months); all 4 of these patients with prolonged
2508

follow-up and highly durable responses after PCTTOX
received 12 months of treatment. In all 4 patients, the
CLL cells were ZAP70-negative, and 3 of 4 patients had
mutated IGHV; all had Rai stage I or II disease, and none
had bulky lymphadenopathy (5 cm) at baseline; none
had del(11q) or del(17p) on fluorescence in situ hybridization. Positive ZAP70 status was associated with an
increased risk of progression after PCTTOX (P 5 .048),
and unmutated IGHV was associated with a trend toward
an increased risk of progression (P 5 .09) (Fig. 2). No
other pretreatment variables were associated with the risk
Cancer

August 15, 2016

Outcome After Ending Idelalisib in CLL/Thompson et al

Figure 2. (A) The time-to-progression (TTP) is illustrated after permanent treatment cessation for toxicity (PCTTOX) according to
positive versus negative f-associated protein-70 (ZAP70) status. (B) The TTP is illustrated after PCTTOX, according to immunoglobulin heavy-chain variable gene (IGHV) mutation status. (C) The TTP is illustrated after PCTTOX according to the presence or
absence of high-risk cytogenetics. (D) The TTP is illustrated after PCTTOX according to whether or not the toxicity that led to
treatment cessation was immunologic. AE indicates adverse event.

of progression after PCTTOX. Multivariable analysis could
not be performed because of small numbers. There was
also no difference in the TTP according whether PCTTOX
was related to presumed immune-mediated toxicity
(defined as colitis, pneumonitis, or hepatitis) or to other
causes (Fig. 2D). The duration of treatment before
PCTTOX (<11 months vs 11 months) did not impact
PFS after cessation (P 5 .169; data not shown). The cumulative baseline hazard curves for PFS and OS with 95%
confidence intervals, are shown in Figure 1.
A multistage model (Fig. 1) was used to understand
whether early treatment termination because of toxicity
had an effect on PFS. This effect was measured by a coefficient associated with a time-dependent covariate in a Cox
proportional-hazards model. The cumulative hazard of
progression after PCTTOX was compared with the cumulative hazard of progression in patients who continued
receiving idelalisib. Early PCTTOX resulted in a statistically significantly (P < .001) higher risk (hazard ratio,
6.61; 95% confidence interval, 1.77-16.15) of developing
disease progression relative to that observed in patients
Cancer

August 15, 2016

who received continuous idelalisib therapy. Given the
small number of deaths in the study, no analysis of the
effect of early treatment cessation on survival could be
made.
Subsequent Treatment and Response

Seven of 15 patients have received subsequent salvage
therapy after PCTTOX. Subsequent treatments and
responses are provided in Table 2. Treatment was heterogenous, and follow-up was limited. Eight of the 15
patients remain treatment free at a median of 19.7 months
after PCTTOX (range, 8.5-28.6 months) and, of these, 5
are progression free.
DISCUSSION
Combined idelalisib and rituximab is highly efficacious
for older, treatment-naive patients with CLL and is associated with an ORR of 95% and favorable PFS and OS.
Our results are notable for a higher rate of PCTTOX than
in the relapsed/refractory setting; 16 of 40 patients (40%)
permanently ceased therapy because of AEs compared
2509

Original Article
TABLE 2. Subsequent Treatment and Response
Treatment

No. of
Patients

Responses

Rituximab monotherapy
TRU-16 and rituximab
Ibrutinib and rituximab
Ibrutinib monotherapy

2
1
1
1

Fludarabine and
rituximab: 6 cycles
Fludarabine, bendamustine,
and rituximab: 3 cycles

1

NR
NR
PR
PR with
lymphocytosis
Unknown

1

CR, MRD-negative

Abbreviations: CR, complete response; MRD, minimal residual disease; NR,
no response; PR, partial response; TRU-16, otlertuzumab.

with 8% to 12.9% of patients in the relapsed/refractory
population.7,13 Particularly noteworthy is that 7 of 40
patients in this study permanently ceased treatment because
of diarrhea/colitis, and an additional 3 patients ceased treatment because of presumed treatment-related pneumonitis,
which was fatal in 1 patient. Pancolitis with lymphocytic
infiltration of the colonic mucosa and glands was identified
in 4 of 5 patients who underwent a colonoscopy for investigation of noninfectious diarrhea/colitis. The lymphocytes
were predominantly T cells in all 3 patients who had
immunohistochemistry performed. The mechanism for colitis and pneumonitis in idelalisib-treated patients is not
well characterized and is an important area for research.
However, the delayed onset, the presence of a T-cell infiltrate in colitis, and the response to corticosteroids in both
colitis and pneumonitis suggest an immunologic mechanism. In addition, the increased frequency of presumed
immunologic AEs in the first-line setting may be because
patients in this setting have more intact cellular immunity,
although this remains speculative.
We were interested in characterizing the durability
of responses after PCTTOX. Patients with PCTTOX had a
higher risk of disease progression. Nonetheless, a subset of
patients had durable remissions after early PCTTOX; 8 of
15 patients with PCTTOX had yet to require salvage therapy at a median of 17.2 months after PCTTOX, and 4
patients remained progression free from 22.2 to 28.6
months after PCTTOX. It appeared that the major influence on TTP after PCTTOX was the underlying biologic
characteristics of the disease rather than the duration of
therapy. Statistical power was limited given the small
numbers; however, patients who had durable treatmentfree intervals generally appeared to have low-risk features
(unmutated IGHV, negative ZAP70 status, Rai stage I or
II disease). There was no difference in the response rate
according to baseline characteristics (data not shown);
2510

thus, it is most likely that the reason for a prolonged
treatment-free interval after PCTTOX in patients who had
low-risk biologic features relates to a slower lymphocyte
doubling time in these patients rather than deeper initial
responses. These findings will require confirmation in
larger groups of patients. Subsequent therapy at progression after PCTTOX was highly heterogenous, and conclusions regarding the most effective treatment in this setting
will require systematic investigation in larger groups of
patients.
Our data differ somewhat from those presented by
Lampson et al.9 Their study was noteworthy for a very
high rate of early grade 3 hepatitis (57% of patients),
presumably immune-mediated, but with a lower rate of
colitis (14%) than in our study. Twenty-three percent of
patients in the published idelalisib plus rituximab firstline study developed grade 3 transaminitis.8 However,
most of those patients were successfully rechallenged with
idelalisib and thus were not included in our analysis,
which focused on outcomes of patients who permanently
ceased idelalisib for toxicity. The study presented by
Lampson et al had a short median follow-up of only 8
months, and colitis is a late AE (our data indicate a median time to onset of 11.3 months). Thus, differences in
follow-up duration may be responsible for the apparent
differences in observed toxicity; however, we cannot
exclude the possibility that the specific schedule of administration (idelalisib monotherapy for 2 months followed
by the addition of ofatumumab in the study from Lampson et al vs concurrent idelalisib and rituximab administration in our study) may have contributed to the
observed differences in AE frequencies.
PCTTOX was the single most important determinant
of duration of response in the current study rather than
the development of disease resistance during therapy,
which was rare; patients who developed toxicity leading to
PCT had a higher risk of subsequent disease progression
than those who remained on therapy. Immunologic toxicity associated with idelalisib in the front-line setting thus
appears to be the major barrier to durable remission rather
than the development of refractory disease. However, despite the importance of PCTTOX in determining subsequent PFS, several patients—generally those with
favorable biologic characteristics—achieved prolonged
remission duration with subsequent therapy. In addition,
there were no disease-related deaths in patients who permanently ceased treatment because of toxicity who subsequently progressed, indicating that such patients are
generally able to successfully receive salvage therapy.
Developing appropriate strategies to predict and/or
Cancer

August 15, 2016

Outcome After Ending Idelalisib in CLL/Thompson et al

manage therapy-related toxicity is essential to maximize
the therapeutic potential of this combination. Although it
is believed that toxicity is immune-mediated, the mechanisms for toxicity are poorly defined and may not be the
same for each type of toxicity. Better characterization of
these mechanisms may allow more specific management
of toxicity both to enable better selection of patients for
such therapy and/or to enable patients to remain on therapy longer.
FUNDING SUPPORT
This work was funded in part by MD Anderson Cancer Center support grant P30 CA016672. Philip A. Thompson received funding
from the CLL Global Research Foundation and the Hematology
Society of Australia and New Zealand.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
Philip A. Thompson reports personal fees from Pharmacyclics outside the submitted work. Jan A. Burger reports honoraria from,
service as a consultant for, and research funding from Gilead Sciences outside the submitted work. William G. Wierda reports honoraria from, service as a consultant to, and funding from Gilead
Sciences and Genentech outside the submitted work. Susan M.
O’Brien reports service as a consultant to and research funding
from Gilead Sciences and Genentech outside the submitted work.
Michael J. Keating serves on the advisory boards of Celgene and
Roche.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Philip A. Thompson provided clinical care to patients, developed
critical themes, collected and analyzed data, and wrote the article.
Francesco Stingo performed statistical analysis and co-wrote the
article. Michael J. Keating, Alessandra Ferrajoli, Jan A. Burger,
William G. Wierda, and Tapan M. Kadia provided clinical care
to patients, developed critical themes, and co-wrote the article.
Susan M. O’Brien designed and analyzed the clinical trial, pro-

Cancer

August 15, 2016

vided clinical care to patients, developed critical themes, and wrote
the article.

REFERENCES
1. Hallek M, Fischer K, Fingerle-Rowson G, et al. Addition of rituximab to fludarabine and cyclophosphamide in patients with chronic
lymphocytic leukaemia: a randomised, open-label, phase 3 trial. Lancet. 2010;376:1164–1174.
2. Goede V, Fischer K, Engelke A, et al. Obinutuzumab as frontline
treatment of chronic lymphocytic leukemia: updated results of the
CLL11 study. Leukemia. 2015;29:1602–1604.
3. Jou ST, Carpino N, Takahashi Y, et al. Essential, nonredundant role
for the phosphoinositide 3-kinase p110delta in signaling by the Bcell receptor complex. Mol Cell Biol. 2002;22:8580–8591.
4. Okkenhaug K, Bilancio A, Farjot G, et al. Impaired B and T cell
antigen receptor signaling in p110delta PI 3-kinase mutant mice.
Science. 2002;297:1031–1034.
5. Clayton E, Bardi G, Bell SE, et al. A crucial role for the p110delta
subunit of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase in B cell development and
activation. J Exp Med. 2002;196:753–763.
6. Brown JR, Byrd JC, Coutre SE, et al. Idelalisib, an inhibitor of
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase p110delta, for relapsed/refractory
chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Blood. 2014;123:3390–3397.
7. Furman RR, Sharman JP, Coutre SE, et al. Idelalisib and rituximab
in relapsed chronic lymphocytic leukemia. N Engl J Med. 2014;370:
997–1007.
8. O’Brien SM, Lamanna N, Kipps TJ, et al. A phase 2 study of idelalisib plus rituximab in treatment-naive older patients with chronic
lymphocytic leukemia. Blood. 2015;126:2686–2694.
9. Lampson BL, Matos T, Kim HT, et al. Idelalisib given front-line for
the treatment of chronic lymphocytic leukemia results in frequent
and severe immune-mediated toxicities. Blood. 2015;126:497–497.
10. Hallek M, Cheson BD, Catovsky D, et al. Guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of chronic lymphocytic leukemia: a report from
the International Workshop on Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia
updating the National Cancer Institute-Working Group 1996 guidelines. Blood. 2008;111:5446–5456.
11. Kaplan EL, Meier P. Nonparametric estimation from incomplete
observations. J Am Stat Assoc. 1958;53:457–481.
12. Peto R, Pike MC, Armitage P, et al. Design and analysis of randomized clinical trials requiring prolonged observation of each patient.
II. analysis and examples. Br J Cancer. 1977;35:1–39.
13. Brown JR, Byrd JC, Coutre SE, et al. Idelalisib, an inhibitor of
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase p110d, for relapsed/refractory chronic
lymphocytic leukemia. Blood. 2014;123:3390–3397.

2511

