Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 5

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Integrative bioinformatic analyses of an oncogenomic profile
reveal the biology of endometrial cancer and guide drug
discovery
Henry Sung-Ching Wong1,2, Yung-Shun Juan3,4, Mei-Shin Wu2, Yan-Feng Zhang5,
Yu-Wen Hsu2,6,7,8, Huang-Hui Chen8,9, Wei-Min Liu8,9, Wei-Chiao Chang1,2,10,11
1

 aster Program for Clinical Pharmacogenomics and Pharmacoproteomics, School of Pharmacy, Taipei Medical University,
M
Taipei, Taiwan

2

Department of Clinical Pharmacy, School of Pharmacy, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan

3

Department of Urology, Kaohsiung Municipal Hsiao-Kang Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan

4

Department of Urology, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan

5

HudsonAlpha Institute for Biotechnology, Huntsville, AL, USA

6

 he Ph.D. Program for Translational Medicine, College of Medical Science and Technology, Taipei Medical University, Taipei,
T
Taiwan

7

Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan

8

Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, School of Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan

9

Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Taipei Medical University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan

10

Department of Pharmacy, Taipei Medical University-Wan Fang Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan

11

Center for Biomarkers and Biotech Drugs, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan

Correspondence to: Wei-Chiao Chang, e-mail: wcc@tmu.edu.tw
Keywords: e
 ndometrial cancers, expression-associated somatic mutations, cancer genomics, cancer drivers, cancer drug
repurposing
Received: August 12, 2015	

Accepted: November 16, 2015	

Published: December 22, 2015

ABSTRACT
A major challenge in personalized cancer medicine is to establish a systematic
approach to translate huge oncogenomic datasets to clinical situations and facilitate
drug discovery for cancers such as endometrial carcinoma. We performed a genomewide somatic mutation-expression association study in a total of 219 endometrial
cancer patients from TCGA database, by evaluating the correlation between ~5,800
somatic mutations to ~13,500 gene expression levels (in total, ~78, 500, 000 pairs).
A bioinformatics pipeline was devised to identify expression-associated single
nucleotide variations (eSNVs) which are crucial for endometrial cancer progression
and patient prognoses. We further prioritized 394 biologically risky mutational
candidates which mapped to 275 gene loci and demonstrated that these genes
collaborated with expression features were significantly enriched in targets of drugs
approved for solid tumors, suggesting the plausibility of drug repurposing. Taken
together, we integrated a fundamental endometrial cancer genomic profile into clinical
circumstances, further shedding light for clinical implementation of genomic-based
therapies and guidance for drug discovery.

INTRODUCTION

cancer transformation arises from the normal uterine
corpus through a progressive accumulation of somatic and
epigenetic aberrations.
On the basis of disease stage, early-stage
endometrial cancer can generally be cured, while recurrent
and advanced endometrial cancer is clinically aggressive,
and progress in developing treatment approaches has

In the United States, uterine corpus endometrial
carcinoma (UCEC) or endometrial cancer is the third
most common malignancy and the most prevalent genitalsystem tumor among females, with an estimated 54,870
new cases and 10,170 deaths in 2015 [1]. Endometrial
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5909

Oncotarget

been limited [2]. The dearth of new clinical drugs has led
to a new approach called drug repurposing, the alleged
new uses for old drugs, to increase usable therapeutic
agent access for endometrial cancers. The rationality
of drug repurposing of approved anticancer drugs is
based on the concept that different cancers may possess
similar pathological molecular or pathway origins.
The most noticeable feature of drug repurposing is the
clear understanding of pharmacological mechanisms,
pharmacokinetic profiles, metabolism pathways and
toxic reactions of approved drugs [3]. In estimation,
approximately 90% of old drugs can be developed for
secondary purposes [4], further provide evidence for the
feasibility of drug repurposing as a drug discovery tool.
The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database is a
large-scale genomic database that primarily envisions
somatic changes of cancers including endometrial cancer
[5]. The final goal of these tremendous efforts is to tailor
patient treatment in a personalized manner, and drive
customization of disease care by implementing tumor
genetic information. Importantly, the identified drivers
can act as drug targets for disease amelioration, treatment
biomarkers for patient categorization, and prognostic
markers for patient survival. Although the landscape
of somatic aberrations in endometrial cancer has been
depicted, the potential utilization of relevant biomarkers
into clinical situations has been limited. Moreover,
studying large amount of cancer genomic data remains
analytically challenging. The genetic architecture of
transcription profiles is thoroughly affected by several
kinds of genetic and epigenetic polymorphisms [6, 7].
Consequently, the presence of other genetic determinants
may increase the difficulty in clarifying the effects of
somatic mutations on gene expressions.
Taken together, the above-described situations
motivated this integrative study to determine expressionassociated somatic alterations and quantify their
aberrations on the cancer transcriptome. These expressionassociated (e)SNVs were further prioritized by a scoring
system based on 7 criteria to identify biologically risky
mutational candidates and provide crucial information for
drug discovery.

mutational eSNVs were estimated and these respectively
revealed 0.861% and 0.848% explanations of the mean
total variation of the residual relative transcript abundance
by cis- and trans-acting eSNVs (Figure 1D).
We identified expression levels of 4,335 genes
(32.13% of all genes) that were significantly correlated
with their somatic copy number (with an FDR of < 0.05),
which accounted for 6.204% of the mean total variation of
expression levels. Respectively, expression levels of 327
genes (2.42% of all genes) were significantly correlated
with methylation of CpG islands (with an FDR of < 0.05),
which explained 1.386% of the mean of total variation of
expression levels (Figure 1D). Among those genes that
showed correlations of their expression values with both
the somatic copy number and methylation, 5 (ERBB2,
PDXK, HDAC4, PLXNA1 and TNFAIP2) were also
correlated with mutational eSNVs (Figure 1E).

Gene-based prioritization and mutational cluster
identification
We distinguished driver mutations from functionally
neutral passenger mutations with the DawnRank
algorithm, and included prior-identified genes from TCGA
in the prioritization step. As a result, a gene list containing
1,619 genes was generated for endometrial cancer
(Figure 2A and Supplementary Figure 2A). The number
of driver mutations showed a significant association
with the tumor histology (Kruskal-Wallis rank sum
p = 0.0011, Supplementary Figure 2B), but not disease
stage (Kruskal-Wallis rank sum p = 0.7212) or tumor
grade (Kruskal-Wallis rank sum p = 0.1017). Pairwise
comparisons revealed significant difference between borne
driver mutations of the endometrioid subtype compared
to serous-like endometrial cancer (Bonferroni-adjusted
Wilcoxon p = 0.0026, Figure 2B).
Next, we prioritized eSNVs based on their
corresponding gene according to the DawnRank gene list
and identified 542 driver eSNVs, which correlated with
expression levels of 1,894 genes. This candidate driver
mutational eSNV profile contained 9,488 significant
associations (SNV-gene pairs). Of the 542 driver
eSNVs (which mapped to 357 gene loci), 18 (3.32%)
were associated with the transcript level of a single
gene, and the remaining ones (96.68%) were associated
with transcript levels of multiple genes. Of the 1894
unique genes, 888 genes (46.88%) were correlated with
the mutational status of a single driver eSNV, while
the remaining ones (53.12%) were correlated with the
mutation statuses of multiple driver eSNVs (Figure 2C).
Among all prioritized driver eSNVs, 3 were cis-acting
mutational loci (Table 1), which were separately located on
ATF7IP (chr12:14576892 T > C), TP53 (chr17:7578271
C > T), and XPO7 (chr8:21827087 C > T). These 3 cisacting eSNVs were also correlated with transcript levels
of another 169 genes. The other 539 trans-acting driver

RESULTS
Identification of eSNVs in endometrial cancer
We applied a 2-step linear regression to correlate the
somatic mutation status with the residual expression value
while adjusting for 2 genetic determinants (Figure 1B).
Using Equations 1 and 2 (Supplementary Figure 1D), we
identified 74,713 significant SNV-gene pairs (0.095% from
the total 78,571, 584 SNV-gene pairs), which mapped to
4,153 eSNVs (71.3%) and 2,612 unique genes (19.4%). A
Q-Q plot of all raw p values revealed a low possibility of
sample relatedness (λGC = 0.91, Figure 1C). The effects of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5910

Oncotarget

mutational eSNVs significantly correlated with the relative
transcript abundances of 1894 genes (Supplementary
Table 1).
We further conducted GO enrichment analysis
(Figure 2D) and transcription factor-related annotation
(Figure 2E) based on AnimalTFDB to explore the 542
prioritized eSNVs. The ORA revealed 645 significantly

enriched GO terms in biological processes, particular
in cellular signaling, cellular apoptosis, cellular
differentiation, and cellular proliferation processes,
indicating the extensive dysregulation of cellular
processes in endometrial cancer due to somatic alterations
(Supplementary Figure 2C and Supplementary Table 2). In
addition, an enrichment analysis based on 1,894 correlated

Figure 1: Correlation between somatic mutations and transcripts in endometrial cancers. (A) Schematic showing filtering

procedures of the expression, mutation, methylation, and somatic copy number alteration profiles. Expression data of primary tumors from
transcription sequencing were normalized by expression values of available adjacent normal tissues. Mutated genes extracted from DNA
sequencing underwent data sanitization before being intersected with expression data. In total, we retrieved 219 endometrial cancer samples
for analyses. To conduct the multivariate linear regression analysis, gene methylation data (normalized by beta values from available
normal adjacent tissues) and somatic copy number data were filtered against 219 samples, resulting in a merged profile that included
128 samples with 13,491 gene profiles and 5,824 somatic mutations. Expression-associated single-nucleotide variations were detected by
the merged profile and further explored in 219 samples. (B) Equation for the multivariate linear regression. In Equation 1, residual relative
transcript abundance values of methylation levels and somatic copy number alterations were further correlated with single-nucleotide-based
somatic mutation statuses as shown in Equation 2. (C) To evaluate overdispersion and other sources of bias or confounding, a quantilequantile plot was drawn for single-nucleotide variant (SNV) analytical results of all 13,491 genes. A genomic control inflation factor
(λ value = 0.91) was calculated by the ratio of the observed mean to the corresponding expected value. (D) A pie chart showing the relative
(area) and absolute (percentage labeled) fraction of the variance explained by 3 determinants: SCNAs, CpG methylation and SNVs. The
effects of cis-acting and trans-acting SNVs were separately estimated. (E) Venn diagram showing the number of genes under regulation of
3 determinants: SCNAs [yellow], CpG methylation [blue] and SNVs [green].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5911

Oncotarget

Figure 2D). As a result, we identified 50 genes mapped
by 99 eSNVs that were TF-related (Supplementary
Figure 2E). We further assessed mutation type proportions
in all eSNVs, the TF-related group, and the non-TF-related
group (Figure 2E). The mutation type proportion of the
non-TF-related group was similar to the distribution of all

genes also provided over-representative evidence of 559
biological processes. Further inquiry of 2 significant
GO lists revealed 281 intersecting biological processes
(hypergeometric test p < 0.001, Figure 2D). We further
explored 542 candidate driver eSNVs by combining
information from AnimalTFDB (Supplementary

Figure 2: Gene-based prioritization and mutational cluster identification. (A) Schematic showing prioritization procedures and

a subsequent cluster identification analysis. Significant expression-associated single-nucleotide variations (eSNVs) that met the Bonferroni
criteria were further prioritized by candidate driver mutations identified by the DawnRank algorithm and TCGA mutational signatures. The
resulting 542 eSNVs underwent spherical k-means clustering in 219 endometrial cancer samples. To elucidate the contribution of patients’
mutation profiles to clinical statuses (disease stage, tumor histology, tumor grade, and survival), correlation analyses were conducted using
3 identified mutational clusters. (B) Correlation between number of driver mutations and patients clinical profiles. Kruskal-Wallis rank
sum tests followed by pairwise Wilcoxon tests with Bonferroni correction were carried out to elucidate the correlation between driver
gene number and patients’ disease stage, tumor histology and tumor grade [left]. As a result, patients with endometrioid and serious-type
endometrial cancer showed significant enrichment in driver mutations (pairwise Wilcoxon p-value [Bonferroni-adjusted] = 0.0026). Box
plots showed the distribution pattern of driver mutations in each subcategory of patients’ clinical profiles [right]. (C) Pie charts showing
proportions of 1,894 genes associated with single or multiple eSNV(s) [top] and 542 eSNVs correlated with transcript levels of single
or multiple genes [bottom]. (D) Venn diagram showing significant over-represented gene ontology terms by 357 genes mapped from
542 eSNVs [blue], and 1,894 genes with expression levels correlated with identified eSNVs [yellow]. (E) Bar plots showing frequency
distributions of mutation types in all 542 eSNVs (“All”), 443 eSNVs that did not map to transcription function-related genes (“non-TF”),
and 99 eSNVs that mapped to genes annotated to be transcription function-related (“TF”). Corresponding relative frequencies of each
mutation type are labeled. **P < 0.01.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5912

Oncotarget

Table 1: Prioritized cis-acting expression-associated single-nucleotide variations (SNVs)
Chr:Pos

SNV

Gene locus

β Coef

95% CI

p value

VarExplained

12:14576892

12:14576892
C>T

ATF7IP

0.607

0.48–0.74

7.87E-16

0.404

17:7578271

17:7578271
T>C

TP53

2.29

1.72–2.86

9.94E-13

0.333

8:21827087

8:21827087
C>T

XPO7

0.78

0.57–0.99

1.32E-11

0.306

Chr:Pos: Chromosome:Position.
SNV: SNVs lacking a reference single-nucleotide polymorphism number are illustrated by Chr:Pos. The allele change in
the primary tumor is shown.
Gene locus: Gene locus where the SNV is located.
β Coef: Beta-coefficient calculated from a linear regression correlation analysis.
95%CI: 95% confidence interval.
p value: Raw p value calculated from a linear regression correlation analysis.
VarExplained: Explanation of the mean total variation (r2) of the residual relative expression of the corresponding gene.
542 eSNVs, and the top 3 most enriched mutation types
in decreasing order were missense (56.43%, multiple
of change (MC) = 0.93), silent (23.48%, MC = 1.09),
and nonsense (12.42%, MC = 0.90). Depiction of the
distribution of the TF-related group disclosed a slightly
different pattern than that of the non-TF-related group,
which the top 3 enriched mutation types in decreasing
order were missense (60.61%, MC = 1.15), nonsense
(19.19%, MC = 0.64) and silent (15.15%, MC = 1.5).
However, no significant difference in distribution patterns
across TF-related and non-TF-related groups was detected
based on the hypergeometric test (all p values > 0.05).
We then conducted an unsupervised spherical
k-means clustering to classify endometrial cancer
patients (n = 219) based on their mutation profile of 542
driver eSNVs into 3 main clusters, denoted clusters 1,
2, and 3 (Figure 3A). The identified mutational clusters
showed significant correlations with endometrial cancer
patients’ clinical profiles, including disease stage
(Fisher’s exact p = 0.0207) and tumor histology (Fisher’s
exact p = 0.0065), but not tumor grade (Fisher’s exact
p = 0.3861). Based on these results, cluster 2 showed
significant enrichment in late-stage patients (stages III
and IV, 24 in cluster 2 vs. 10 and 9 in clusters 1 and 3,
respectively) and serous-like endometrial cancers (19 in
cluster 2 vs. 6 and 9 in clusters 1 and 3, respectively),
which was correlated with a poor prognosis in patients.
We also observed a significant progression-free
survival-related characteristic of mutational clusters
(Figure  3B). However, the identified clusters showed
no association with the overall survival of patients (data
not shown). Patients in clusters 2 and 3 showed increase
risks of death compared to patients in cluster 1 (hazard
ratio (HR)2vs1  =  3.57 and 95% confidence interval
(CI)2vs1 = 1.40~9.14, p2vs1 = 0.00783). Similarly, cluster 3
was associated with a poorer prognosis compared to cluster
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1 (HR3vs1 = 3.03, 95% CI3vs1 = 1.15~7.98, p3vs1 = 0.02493).
As mutational clusters were also associated with disease
aggressiveness, these factors were further adjusted for to
avoid biased estimations of the effects of the identified
clusters on the prognostic potential. Consistently,
mutational clusters showed an association after adjusting
for clinical profiles, with cluster 1 showing a significantly
better prognosis (adjusted p2vs1 = 0.0399; adjusted
p3vs1 = 0.0363) compared to the other 2 clusters (adjusted
HR2vs1 = 2.88; adjusted HR3vs1 = = 2.91, adjusted 95%
CI2vs1 = 1.05~7.91; adjusted 95% CI3vs1 = 1.07~7.91).
We then assessed the concordance between the
identified mutational clusters and survival in a timedependent manner. Before adjustment, the 10-year
time-dependent ROC curve revealed that the prediction
accuracy of mutational clusters increased with year,
which ranged 56%~70% (Figure 3C). In addition, the
10-year time-dependent AUC curve calculated by Uno’s
method also revealed a sequentially increasing pattern
by year, with a summary measure of the concordance
index equal to 0.6175 (Figure 3D). Intriguingly, after
adjusting for the disease stage and tumor histology,
the 10-year time-dependent ROC analysis revealed a
higher prediction accuracy than that without adjustment
(Figure 3E), which ranged 67%~82%. The summary
measure of the concordance index calculated by Uno’s
method was 0.7867 (Figure 3F). Therefore, a series of
analyses suggested that a prominent role of patients’
mutation profiles contributed to disease biology discovery
in endometrial cancer.

Integrative analyses for drug discovery
To identify biological candidate risk mutational
variations in endometrial cancer patients, we conducted
integrative analyses based on 542 candidate driver eSNVs
5913

Oncotarget

and 1,894 genes the transcript levels of which were
correlated with the mutational statuses of eSNVs. To
identify biological candidate risk mutational variations in
endometrial cancer patients, we first evaluated prognosticrelated eSNV signatures using a Cox-regression. We
identified 13 eSNVs which were significantly associated
with prognostic-free survival in endometrial cancer
patients (Supplementary Table 3). These 13 eSNVs
mapped to 10 genes: YEATS2, FBXW7, PIK3R1, GTF2I,
TP53, OGDHL, PTEN, CHD4, MEGF8 and MORC2. We
classified patients into 2 groups based on the prognosticrelated signature profiles. Patients who bore at least 1
mutation in their prognostic-related signatures were
compared to patients with no mutation on the 13 eSNVs.
As shown, the mutation profiles of 13 eSNVs were
significantly associated with progression-free survival
of endometrial cancer patients (HR = 9.3927, 95%
CI = 4.82~18.31, p = 4.86×10–11, Figure 4A). A timedependent ROC analysis revealed a summary measure

of the AUC curve of 0.7365 (Figure 4B–4C). This result
indicated a significant correlation between mutations and
UCEC patient survival outcomes, and further confirmed
the potential clinical utility of the 10 identified genes in an
eSNV-based manner.
We then evaluated mutational cluster-related eSNV
signatures. We identified 20 eSNVs that were significantly
correlated with identified mutational clusters (Fisher’s
exact test < 0.05, Supplementary Figure 3A). These 20
eSNVs were mapped to 13 genes. In particular, CTNNB1
(5 eSNVs), PIK3CA (2 eSNVs), and TP53 (3 eSNVs)
contained more than 1 eSNV which were cluster-related.
Surprisingly, patients who bore the CTNNB1 mutation were
significantly enriched in cluster 1 compared to clusters 2
and 3 (Chi-square p = 2.75 × 10–5). Similarly, the PIK3CA
mutation was significantly enriched in patients in cluster 3
(Chi-square p = 3.62 × 10–4). In contrast, the number of
patients with the TP53 mutation was higher in cluster 2
compared to clusters 1 and 3 (not significant, Chi-square

Figure 3: Mutation signatures of endometrial cancers and its prognostic potential. (A) Heatmap of 542 eSNVs revealed the

sparse nature of the mutation profiles. Patients were sorted into 3 identified mutational clusters. Sample clinical profiles against 3 clusters
are shown, and Fisher’s exact test was used to evaluate the significance. (B) Kaplan-Meier plot [top] showing progression-free survival
curves of endometrial cancer patients in the 3 mutational clusters. Summary statistics are shown in the table [bottom]. (C), (E). Timedependent receiver operating characteristic curves and cumulative/dynamic areas under the curve of identified mutation clusters without
(C) or with adjustment (E) for clinical profiles. (D), (F) Cumulative case/ dynamic control AUC of three identified mutational clusters were
calculated by Uno’s method to assess the predictive accuracy of mutation profile to progression-free survival in a 10-year time-dependent
manner without adjustment (D) or with adjustment (F) *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5914

Oncotarget

p = 0.1926). Notably, our results matched previous
observations that mutations of TP53 and PPP2R1A were
more common in the serous-like, which was enriched in
cluster 2. Comparatively, mutations of PTEN and ARID1A
were more common in endometrioid endometrial cancer,
which was enriched in clusters 1 and 3. Cluster-related
and prognostic-related signatures were combined and
are illustrated with mutational clusters (Figure 4D and
Supplementary Figure 3B). We ascertained a mutually
exclusive pattern of some somatic mutations among the
3 clusters, suggesting the importance of eSNV-based
investigations of somatic mutations, as different mutations
in the same gene may result in different prognostic
outcomes. For instance, 4 of 6 eSNVs in CTNNB1 were
enriched in cluster 1 patients and showed mutually
exclusive patterns. Notably, Liu et al. [8] reported
that CTNNB1 is a somatic driver that characterizes an
aggressive subgroup in endometrioid-type endometrial
cancer, which is enriched in cluster 1. However, a
CTNNB1 mutation on rs12191339 was observed only in
cluster 2 patients, which correlated with a poorer survival
rate. In addition, although most patients possessing
TP53 mutations were enriched in cluster 2, this confirms

previous results that the TP53 mutation is linked to poorer
outcomes; however, the TP53 rs121913343 variation was
only observed in cluster 1 patients. Taken together, these
results support the significance of assessing eSNV-based
mutational profiles (compared to gene-based mutational
profiles) in order to gain biological insights into disease
profiles.
To identify cooperative dysregulation of eSNVs and
gene transcription which may contribute to tumorigenesis
and cancer progression, we derived a cluster-centric
pairwise mutation-mutation correlation analysis based
on β-coefficients of transcript levels of associated genes
(Supplementary Figure 3C). As a result, eSNVs were
categorized into 4 consensus clusters and we identified
3,706 significant pairwise co-occurrences (453 eSNVs),
with overlapping correlated gene numbers ranging 10~78
(Supplementary Figure 3D).
To clarify the SL interaction profile in endometrial
cancer, we first indicated bimodal genes in the
transcription profile, and then nominated candidate SL
pairs according to the bimodal expression exclusively with
an eSNV-based mutation. We identified 203 significant
candidate SL eSNV-gene pairs, which contained 129

Figure  4: Integrative analyses for drug discovery. (A) Kaplan-Meier estimator [top] showing survival curves of endometrial
cancer patients categorized according to 13 prognostic-related signatures. Summarized statistics are shown in the table [bottom]. (B) Timedependent receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves of 13 prognostic-related signatures. The cumulative/dynamic the area under the
ROC (AUC) curves were calculated to assess discrimination of 10-year cumulative incidences. (C) Cumulative case/ dynamic control AUC
of 13 prognostic-related signatures were calculated by Uno’s method to assess the predictive accuracy of mutation profile to progressionfree survival in a 10-year time-dependent manner. (D) Bar plots showing distribution of cluster-related and prognostic-related expressionassociated single-nucleotide variations (eSNVs) in 3 clusters. Each patient is represented by 1 block in the bar. The x-axis represents eSNVs
annotated by located genes, and the y-axis is the proportion of mutations in each cluster. **P < 0.01.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5915

Oncotarget

linking disease aggressiveness and patient prognoses,
thus providing a rationale to facilitate the fast-tracking
of potential therapeutic targets in endometrial cancer.
Third, we emphasized the importance of depicting
somatic mutation profiles in an SNV-based manner,
as different mutations in the same genes may link to
distinct aggressiveness and prognostic outcomes in cancer
patients. Finally, we adopted a scoring system to prioritize
eSNVs, which may contribute to therapeutic switching.
In 3 identified endometrial cancer-related cis-eSNVs,
we mentioned that alterations in TP53 (tumor protein p53)
are well-studied in endometrial cancer, and our results
revealed that 14 eSNVs were significantly correlated
with transcript levels of 267 genes, demonstrating a
wide regulatory role of TP53 somatic alterations in
endometrial cancer. ATF7IP (activating transcription
factor 7 interacting protein), a multifunctional nuclear
protein associated with heterochromatin, was reported
to be associated with testicular germ cell cancer [12].
Two eSNVs (chr12:14576892 and chr12:14649176) on
ATF7IP were identified to cause dysregulation of 100
genes. Therefore, our study suggested ATF7IP as a new
susceptibility locus in endometrial cancer. It is noteworthy
that TP53 and ATF7IP were annotated as transcription
function-related genes (Figure 2E), which further
explained thefunctional impacts of their alterations on
downstream expression levels of many genes. In addition,
1 somatic alteration (chr8:21827087) on XPO7 (Ran
GTPase binding protein) was identified to be expressionassociated in endometrial cancer, which was correlated
with expression levels of 32 genes. Indeed, XPO7 has
been shown to be associated with serous epithelial ovarian
cancer patient prognoses [13]. Here, we figured that the
TP53-, ATF7IP-, and XPO7-associated expression profiles
contribute to the discrepancy mutation statuses of these
genes, demonstrating a wide range of perturbations of
gene expression levels caused by somatic alterations.
In 13 identified cluster-related signatures, TP53,
CTNNB1, PIK3CA, ARID1A, FBXW7, and PPP2R1A
(which accounted for 65.0% (13/20) of eSNVs) are wellestablished recurrently mutated genes in endometrial
cancers [5]. In this study. we demonstrated that these
mutations embody the disease aggressiveness of
endometrial cancers. Since late-stage (stages III + IV)
and serous-like endometrial cancer patients were enriched
in cluster 2 compared to clusters 1 and 3, the recurrent
gain of these mutations may therefore be reflected by
the disease progression, and further linked to disease
aggressiveness in patients. To clarify the eSNVs that
had the strongest prognostic values, we discovered 13
prognostic-related signatures (mapped to 10 genes) that
could predict survival outcomes of endometrial cancer
patients (see Supplementary note: 13 prognostic-related
signatures). Notably, when comparing the prognostic
potentials between identified clusters and 13 prognosticrelated signatures, we ascertained a higher clinical value

unique eSNVs (mapped to 109 genes) and 63 unique
bimodal genes (Supplementary Table 4).
According to these findings, we adopted a scoring
system based on the following 7 criteria to prioritize
each of the 542 eSNVs (Figure 5A, Supplementary
Figure 4A-D and Supplementary Table 5): (i) missense
eSNVs (n = 308); (ii) nonsense eSNVs (n = 74); (iii) ciseSNVs (n = 3); (iv) eSNVs prioritized by correlation to
survival (n = 13); (v) eSNVs prioritized by correlation
to identified mutational clusters (n = 20); (vi) eSNVs
prioritized by consensus clustering followed by a cooccurrence analysis (n = 453); and (vii) eSNVs prioritized
by SL (n = 129). In total, 394 (72.69%) eSNVs had a score
of ≥ 2, which mapped to 275 gene loci and correlated
with transcript levels of 1,305 genes (Supplementary
Figure 4E). We defined these eSNVs as biological UCEC
risk mutational eSNVs.
Finally, we integrated drug target information
[9–11] with UCEC biologically risky gene profiles
constructed by 275 driver genes and 1305 associated
genes. As anticipated, 14/79 (17.72%, hypergeometric test
p = 0.0026) genes overlapped with drug target genes of
approved solid-tumor drugs, including CMPK1, IL2RG,
LCK, MAP2, MMP17, MMP19, MMP2, MMP26, MMP27,
MMP3, PRKCG, TOP2B, TSHR, and VEGFA. These 14
genes were targets of 9 solid-tumor drugs (Figure 5B–5C
and Figure S4F in Supplementary Figure 4F). These
results indicated the rationality of clinical implementation
of pharmacogenomic aspects into pharmacotherapy of
these drugs by considering the heterogeneity of mutational
profiles across endometrial cancer patients.
We also assessed how approved drugs for
hematologic tumors, which were assigned as a control
in our study, might be linked to biological UCEC
risk mutational profiles. We highlighted 5 (11.11%,
hypergeometric test p = 0.2632) genes from the
UCEC profile that were drug target genes of approved
hematologic-tumor drugs (45 genes in total, Figure 5D and
Supplementary Figure 4G). Comparing overlapping genes
between solid-tumor drug target genes and hematologictumor drug target genes revealed that 3 genes (IL2RG,
LCK, and VEGFA) were duplicated, which accounted for
60% (3/5, hypergeometric test p = 0.0110, Supplementary
Figure 4H) of overlapping genes from the UCEC profile
connected to hematologic-tumor drug target genes. Taken
together, these results provided biological plausibility
for repositioning cancer drugs for other indications to
endometrial cancer pharmacotherapy.

DISCUSSION
In this study, first, we profiled UCEC-related driver
somatic mutations in a personalized fashion, and gene
transcript levels were associated with mutation statuses
of identified eSNVs. Second, we showed that patients’
mutation profiles can be used to stratify UCECs, further
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5916

Oncotarget

of 13 prognostic-related eSNVs compared to mutational
clusters, with summary measures of the AUC equal to
0.736 and 0.618, respectively. A time-dependent AUC also
revealed that these 13 eSNVs possessed higher abilities
to predict survival compared to mutation clusters, with
first-year AUC values equal to 0.76 and 0.58, respectively.
Taken together, we have enumerated 31 cluster-related
and/or prognostic-related eSNV-based mutational
signatures, and linking their mutational changes to
various genes transcription level changes can highlight the
underlying mechanism of how these somatic alterations
incarnate disease aggressiveness and prognostic potential
in endometrial cancer patients.
Most cancer-related mutational studies were
conducted in a gene-based manner. Here, we adopted an
SNV-based association test to gain more-detailed insights
into endometrial cancer biology. After determining 31
cluster-related and prognosis-related signatures, we

observed that most of the eSNVs showed clear mutual
exclusivity between clusters, which correlated with
different clinical outcomes (Figure 4D). As an illustration,
somatic alterations, including chr4:153249510 (FBXW7),
chr5:67591246 (PIK3R1), rs28934576 and rs11540652
(TP53), rs121913399 (CTNNB1), and chr19:52716323
(PPP2R1A), were specifically enriched in cluster 2, which
was linked to higher tumor aggression and poor prognoses.
However, rs121913343 in TP53 and rs121913403,
rs28931588, and 121913413 in CTNNB1 were specifically
enriched in cluster 1, which was identified to be less
aggressive (see Supplementary note: SNV-based somatic
mutation profiles).
We employed 7 biological criteria to prioritize
eSNVs and construct biological risk candidates
for drug discovery (Figure 5A–5C). Among 1,580
genes (275 driver genes and 1,305 correlated genes),
14 were determined to be solid-tumor drug target

Figure 5: Biological candidate signatures for drug-repurposing to endometrial cancers. (A) Prioritized biological uterine
corpus endometrial carcinoma (UCEC) candidate eSNVs (partial). eSNVs in E are listed, and summary scores derived from 7 criteria are
shown. Filled boxes indicate fulfilled criteria. eSNVs with a score ≥ 2 were defined as “biological UCEC risk mutational eSNVs”. For
complete information, see Supplementary Table 5. (B) Connection plot showing relationships of identified eSNVs (blue), located genes
(purple), and genes whose expression levels significantly correlated with the eSNV mutation status (green) with approved antineoplastic
drugs (orange). eSNVs that were correlated with transcript levels of genes outside of MMP gene family are shown. For eSNVs that were
solely correlated with transcript levels of the MMP gene family, see Supplementary Figure 4F. (C), (D) Figures showing numbers of
overlapping genes between the query gene list constructed from 275 driver eSNV genes and 1,305 correlated genes and solid-tumor drug
target genes (C) and hematologic-tumor drug target genes (D) Overlapping genes are listed, and proportions of numbers of overlapping
genes to total drug target genes of solid tumors and hematologic tumors are visualized. P values were calculated by a hypergeometric test.
**P < 0.01.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5917

Oncotarget

(including p56Lck) and an EphA2 receptor blocker that
inhibits a large array of targets. In support of dasatinib’s
therapeutic switching, a clinical trial (ClinicalTrials.gov
identifier: NCT01440998) of dasatinib in late-stage and
recurrent endometrial cancer is ongoing [2]. Due to the
promising molecular scheme, the clinical applicability of
dasatinib in cancer treatment may therefore depend on
harbored mutations of patients.
There have some limitations of this study. Based
on its retrospective design, we showed the associations
among identified drivers and clinical variables, further
functional studies (in basic field or clinical study) and
validations are required to assess the possibility of clinical
application and implementation of our findings.
In summary, our study provides new insights into
pharmacogenomic-guided pharmacotherapies based
on driver eSNV profiles of endometrial cancer patients
and closes the gap between oncogenomic research and
traditional personalized trials.

genes. In total, 9 drugs, including gemcitabine,
dexrazoxane, thyrotropin-alfa, tamoxifen, bevacizumab,
extramustine,
marimastat,
denileukin
diftitox,
and dasatinib, were identified to bind endometrial
cancer-relevant altered genes that were associated
with somatic mutations (Supplementary Table 6).
We interpreted the findings from 2 following aspects. First,
our result suggested a possibility for indication switching
for endometrial cancer. For the solid-tumor drugs
identified, most were approved therapeutic agents for other
cancer types (e.g., breast cancer [tamoxifen], colorectal
cancer [bevacizumab], and prostate cancer [estramustine]).
For endorsement of re-profiling of our findings to
endometrial cancer, a VEGFA inhibitor, bevacizumab,
was shown to be well tolerated and active in recurrent
or persistent endometrial cancer based on progressionfree survival at 6 months [14]. A phase II randomized
clinical trial is currently ongoing to assess the antitumor
efficacy of combining bevacizumab with conventional
chemotherapies in advanced or recurrent endometrial
cancer (ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT01770171).
In addition, gemcitabine was shown to be well tolerated
and showed modest activity in advanced endometrial
cancer [15]. In addition, a retrospective phase II trial also
revealed a high potency of combining gemcitabine with
cisplatin in endometrial cancer patients [16]. Estramustine,
an anti-microtubule chemotherapeutic agent was identified
in our study, and was shown to exert growth-inhibitory
effects in endoplasmic reticular-positive endometrial
cancer cells in vitro [17]. Interestingly, tamoxifen was
identified in our study, and it is widely used to treat breast
cancer, and was shown to increase the endometrial cancer
incidence. The results should be carefully interpreted as
the mechanism of endometrium hyperplasia induction is
due to the weak estrogenic effect of tamoxifen but not the
target of tamoxifen, i.e., PRKCG, which was identified as
a potential therapeutic biomarker in our study. In addition,
low-grade endometrial cancer was also demonstrated
to respond to tamoxifen treatment [18]. Here, we noted
the pitfall of drug repurposing based solely on aberrant
molecular signatures without considering multiple
and complex biological effects of therapeutic agents.
Nonetheless, we have described a powerful prioritization
method for identifying promising therapeutic candidates
which may benefit endometrial cancer treatment.
Second, we mentioned a latent pharmacogenomic
issue for the identified therapeutic agents when
implementing clinical cancer treatment. Investigation of
somatic alterations revealed a highly heterogeneous cancer
profile across patients, providing a rationale to incorporate
somatic mutation information into clinical use for moreefficient cancer treatments. For example, we discovered
that LCK is a candidate therapeutic gene in endometrial
cancer, and the expression level of LCK was significantly
correlated with a somatic alteration of chr10:82187096.
LCK is inhibited by dasatinib, a Src family protein
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

CONCLUSIONS
In summary, our results reveal an integrative
framework of correlation between SNV-based somatic
mutations and transcripts’ levels in endometrial cancer.
Since a number of driver eSNVs showed different
aberration potential to transcripts, we illustrated the
correlation between driver eSNV and clinicopathological
features, e.g. disease stage, tumor histology and patients’
survival. In addition, we prioritized driver eSNVs and
together their correlated probes, showing that these genes
were enriched in known targets of approved solid tumor
drugs. This approach can narrow down the candidate
drugs before conducting clinical trial, thereby providing
new avenues for the drug development of endometrial
cancer, boosting drug discovery process and providing
potential gene targets and drug candidates for the drugrepurposing and treatment of endometrial cancer. Besides,
this approach can also be applied to other cancer types
to prioritize drug candidates and facilitate their clinical
applications and implementations.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Datasets
Our study included 219 UCEC patients with
primary tumor RNA expression data and mutation
data (Supplementary Figure 1A). We queried the
RNA-sequencing expression profiles (assay platform:
RNASeq vers. 2) from TCGA public database with TCGAAssembler package [19] Normalized relative square error
of the mean (RSEM) gene expression data of primary
solid tumors (370 samples) and normal adjacent solid
tissues (11 samples) were queried and further processed
by the “ProcessRNASeqData” function implemented in
5918

Oncotarget

genetic determinants that also correlate with transcript
abundances, we further extracted 128 samples with fully
annotated somatic copy number alteration and methylation
profiles to undergo a multivariate linear regression
analysis (Figure 1A).
We conducted a 2-step linear regression analysis
modified from Li et al. [21] to examine the correlation
between somatic SNVs and gene expressions in
endometrial cancer patients. For each gene i, a multivariate
linear regression (Equation 1) was first applied to compute
the residual expression value (εi) of somatic copy number
alterations (SCNAi) and relative methylation levels (Mi).
Then, residual expression values (εi) were regressed by
each mutation locus j (Equation 2) to identify expressionassociated (e)SNVs, as shown in the following equations:

TCGA-Assembler package. A principal component analysis
was conducted with the ade4 package to avoid artifactual
results caused by sample relatedness, and the top 3
principal components using 370 UCEC patients’ primary
tumor part expression values were illustrated by a 2-way
scatter plot (Supplementary Figure 1B). Methylation
profiles (Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChip) and
related annotation files (https://tcga-data.nci.nih.gov/tcga/
tcgaPlatformDesign.jsp) of UCEC patients, including
256 samples of primary solid tumors and 26 normal
adjacent solid tissues, were download form TCGA data
portal (https://tcga-data.nci.nih.gov/tcga/) in data level 3
[5]. Methylation data were further processed with TCGAAssembler. In brief, measurement of a CpG site was
duplicated if it corresponded to more than 1 gene using the
“ProcessMethylation450Data” function, and then genebased average methylation values were calculated based
on the beta value within 1, 500 bp of a transcription start
site using the “CalculateSingleValueMethylationData”
function. As a result, average beta values of 15, 625 genes
were obtained for further study. TCGA UCEC somatic
copy number alteration (SCNA) data of 492 samples
generated by the GISTIC algorithm and mutation profiles
of 248 TCGA endometrial cancer patients, represented as
SNVs were also queried from the public access TCGA
database (https://www.synapse.org/#!Home:0) and further
processed in R. The genomic coordinate was based on
NCBI build 37 (hg19). The expression or methylation
value of primary tissue was then normalized by the
expression or methylation value of adjacent normal tissue
to construct a standardized absolute differential expression
or methylation profile [20]. Furthermore, sole SNVs,
SNVs annotated as insertion/deletion or germline/others,
and all SNVs located outside of chromosomes 1~23 were
excluded from the mutation profile. Then, we removed
genes located within the major histocompatibility complex
(MHC) region in the expression, SCNA, methylation, and
mutation profiles. After data sanitization, UCEC samples
with were retrieved for further eSNV identification.
A density plot of methylation, somatic copy number
alteration, and expression profiles were constructed
based on the probability density for evaluation of the
data distribution (Supplementary Figure 1B). Besides,
we conducted principal component analysis (PCA) to
assess the underlying sample substructure (Supplementary
Figure 1C).

RTi  = SCNAi + Mi + εi and
(1)
εi  = SNVj + ɣj;(2)
where RTi is the relative transcript abundance,
SCNAi is the somatic copy number alteration GISTIC
score, Mi is the relative methylation beta value, εi is
the residual relative expression value, SNVj is a singlenucleotide variation, and ɣj is the random error.
In Equation 1, an analysis of variance (ANOVA) test
was used to separately estimate the effects of somatic copy
number changes and methylation on the transcript level,
and therefore the mean of explanation of total variation
of both genetic determinants was calculated. In addition,
Benjamini & Hochberg adjusted p values were used to
control the false-positive rate. In Equation 2, we tested for
78, 571, 548 pairs of SNV-gene associations by adopting
a linear regression model (5, 824 SNV and 13, 491 genes),
followed by the Bonferroni correction for multiple testing
corrections. A genomic inflation factor lambda value
was calculated (carried out with the snpStats package)
to explore the possibility of cryptic sample relatedness
that may bias the results of the association study. We then
categorized significant associations based on their eSNVgene relationships. We defined SNVs located within the
gene that showed an association with the transcript level as
“cis-acting eSNVs” and SNVs located outside of the gene
showing correlations with the expression value as “transacting eSNVs”. We also intersected significant genes
correlated with 3 genetic determinants (CpG methylation,
somatic copy number alterations, and mutational eSNVs).
For data presentation, pie charts were constructed with the
plotrix package and a Venn diagram was illustrated with
Venny (http://bioinfogp.cnb.csic.es/tools/venny/).

SNV-based correlation analysis

Gene-based prioritization

Correlations of somatic mutations and RNA
expressions in UCEC patients were carried out to
reveal the disease biology which contributed to drug
discovery. We selected 219 samples with both mutation
and expression data from TCGA UCEC dataset. The
following analyses were all conducted using these 219
sample profiles if not specified. In order to adjust for other
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

After performing an SNV-based association analysis
to identify expression-associated somatic alterations, we
used the package DawnRank [20] to identify candidate
personalized driver mutational genes in 219 TCGA UCEC
samples (with both expression and mutation profiles
5919

Oncotarget

Mutation cluster analysis

available). RNA-sequencing expression data of primary
tumors were normalized by available adjacent normal
solid-tissue data using the “DawnNormalize” function,
which returns a standardized differential expression
matrix. The full gene network required by the DawnRank
algorithm was downloaded from the DawnRank homepage
(http://bioen-compbio.bioen.illinois.edu/DawnRank/)
which contained curated information from Reactome
Database (http://www.reactome.org/), the Pathway
Interaction Database (http://pid.nci.nih.gov/), and Kyoto
Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database
(http://www.genome.jp/kegg/). In short, the DawnRank
algorithm evaluated the connectivity and number of
differentially expressed genes to measure the impact
of a mutation, utilized a dynamic damping factor to
rank mutated genes based on their ability to perturb
downstream genes, and returned personalized ranked
mutated gene lists of every single UCEC sample. After the
DawnRank analysis, we adopted the maxstats package to
calculate maximally selected rank statistics of each patient
in order to distinguish passenger from driver mutations
with a cutoff of 0.95. In addition, predefined genes
identified by TCGA, including TP53, CTNNB1, PIK3CA,
PIK3R1, PTEN, POLE, ARID1A, KRAS, CTCF, FBXW7,
PPP2R1A, and ARID5B (RPL22 was excluded as no SNV
was detected to be correlated with its transcript level),
were collaboratively included to prioritize eSNVs based
on their corresponding gene loci. The number of candidate
personalized driver genes identified by DawnRank was
further correlated with UCEC patients’ clinical profiles
(disease stage, tumor histology, and tumor grade) by a
Kruskal-Wallis rank sum test, and pairwise significance
was determined by a Wilcoxon test (with the Bonferroni
correction method for multiple testing corrections).
We then conducted an over-representation analysis
(ORA) based on gene ontology (GO) biological process (BP)
terms using the ClusterProfiler package [22]. We selected
0.01 as the significant Benjamini & Hochberg adjusted p
value cutoff to identify significantly enriched GO terms. We
also downloaded a gene list of 1, 470 transcription factors
(TFs), 297 transcription co-factors, and 118 chromatinremodeling factors from The Animal Transcription Factor
Database (Homo sapiens, AnimalTFDB) on 4 May 2015
[23] a comprehensive transcription factor database. We
categorized 542 eSNVs into 2 categories: 99 TF-related
eSNVs which mapped genes were annotated to be essential
in gene transcription processes or gene transcription
regulation (i.e. genes belonging to one of either “TF”,
“transcription co-factor”, or “chromatin remodeling
factor”) and remaining 443 non TF-related eSNVs. The
proportions of mutation types (missense, silent, nonsense,
3’ untranslated region (UTR), intron, RNA, splice site and
5’ UTR mutations) in all, TF-related, and non-TF-related
categories were separately calculated.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

We conducted a clustering analysis based on 542
prioritized driver eSNVs to categorize UCEC patients
into 3 groups based on their mutation profiles. In
considering the sparse nature of the mutation matrix, we
applied an unsupervised spherical k-means algorithm
as implemented in the skmeans package to the mutation
data with parameters k = 3 and method = ‘pclust’. The
clustering result was visualized with the NMF package,
with UCEC samples seriated within each cluster with the
seriation package. A heatmap was constructed based on
identified patient clusters and 542 eSNVs. In the heatmap
visualization, black indicates mutations that occurred,
while white indicates that no mutation was recorded.
Unsupervised agglomerative hierarchical clustering of
eSNVs was conducted with the parameters scale = ‘row’,
distfun = ‘correlation’, and hclustfun = ‘ward.D’. We then
correlated the 3-cluster configuration with patients’ clinical
profiles including the disease stage, tumor histology,
tumor grade (by Fisher’s exact test), and survival data (by
a Cox-regression test). Cox-proportional hazard models in
the rms and survival packages were applied to evaluate
the prognostic potential of the identified cluster against
progression-free survival data with or without adjusting
for the disease stage and tumor histology. The KaplanMeier estimator was illustrated with the ggplot2 package.
To further elucidate the prognostic potential of the
identified cluster, we carried out a 10-year time-dependent
receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis,
with time-dependent accuracy summarized through
correct classification rates defined as sensitivity and
specificity was calculated, and calculated the cumulative
case/dynamic control area under the ROC curve (AUC)
as implemented in the survivalROC package [24]. ROC
curves constructed using the true positive rate (y-axis) and
false positive rate (x-axis) can be utilized to evaluate the
performance of a predictor against censored survival data.
C-statistics which had scores of 0.5~1.0 were calculated
to assess the accuracy of the identified clusters against the
survival phenotype. The ROC curve lay on the 45° line
indicated that the analyzed classifier was unable to predict
survival outcomes. In addition, the summary measure of
the censoring-adjusted C-statistic was calculated by Uno’s
method as implemented in the survAUC package.

Prioritization of biological candidate eSNVs
To identify cluster-related eSNV signatures, we
applied Fisher’s exact test to correlate 542 eSNVs with
identified patient clusters and selected a significance
threshold of 0.05. Additionally, prognostic-related
signatures were identified by applying a Cox-proportional
hazards model. The null hypothesis, that there was no

5920

Oncotarget

correlation between the mutation status and survival, was
tested. We selected eSNVs that showed significance (with
a Cox-regression p value of < 0.05) against progressionfree survival with or without adjusting for clinical profiles.
According to the 13 identified prognostic-related eSNV
signatures, we classified patients into 2 groups: “with
mutation(s)” (which mutation(s) could be found in at least
one of the prognostic-related signatures) and the remaining
as “without a mutation”. To construct the Kaplan-Meier
distribution, UCEC patients were assigned to 2 groups,
and the significance level of the progression-free survival
difference between the 2 groups was calculated based on
the Cox-regression model. Furthermore, to assess how
well the 2-group configuration predicted the survival
time for UCEC patients, a 10-year cumulative/dynamic
ROC analysis of prognostic-related eSNV signatures was
carried out, and summary measures of AUC were also
calculated as described above.
To access the cooperative dysregulation of
somatic mutations and relative expressions, we carried
out a pairwise eSNV-eSNV correlation analysis based
on the overlapping number of their associated genes.
Fisher’s exact test on a 2-by-2 contingency table was
used to identify significant mutational eSNV pairs that
co-occurred (Bonferroni corrected p < 0.05). Then, we
applied 2 additional analytical steps to minimize latent
false positive coincident eSNV pairs. In considering
the direction and magnitude of the coefficient, an
unsupervised consensus clustering analysis of eSNVs
using associated genes (beta coefficients) was conducted.
We used the ConsensusClusterPlus package with 80%
subsampling over 1, 000 iterations of k-means upon
Euclidean distance matrix for subclasses identification
with parameter maxK = 7. We successfully identified 4
robust clusters that accounted for positive or negative
relationships between the eSNVs and associated genes.
We thus excluded eSNV pairs that belonged to different
consensus clusters. We further excluded eSNV pairs with
overlapping associated gene numbers of < 10 to declare
significant co-occurrence.
We applied the BISEP-BEEM (bimodality subsetting
expression-bimodal expression exclusive with mutation)
algorithm as implemented in the BiSEp package to identify
candidate synthetic lethality (SL). Two genes were
defined as having SL if mutations in both genes caused
cell death but a mutation in either gene alone did not lead
to cell death. To harmonize the RNA-sequencing data
to the downstream analysis, we used the sRAP package
to normalize RPKM values of primary tumors in UCEC
patients. We rounded the expression value to < 0.1 to
avoid bias caused by low-coverage genes, followed by
log2 transformation. The log2-normalized expression
profiles of samples were inputted into BiSEp to detect
bimodality (2 mixture components) and non-normality in
all genes by model-based hierarchical clustering. Then, the
BEEM algorithm was applied to detect eSNVs enriched in
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

either of the bimodal gene expression modes. A threshold
of Fisher’s exact p value of < 0.05 was used to select
candidate SL eSNV-gene pairs.
Each driver eSNV identified from UCEC patients
was scored by the following 7 criteria (the adopted scoring
system was modified from Yukinori Okada et al. [25]): (i)
eSNVs were annotated as missense variants; (ii) eSNVs
were annotated as nonsense variants; (iii) eSNVs showed
significant associations with gene expressions that were
located within associated genes (cis-acting); (iv) eSNVs
were prioritized by identifying mutational clusters
(cluster-related) with p < 0.05; (v) eSNVs were prioritized
by a Cox-regression with or without adjusting for clinical
profiles (prognostic-related) with p < 0.05; (vi) eSNVs
were prioritized by a pairwise mutational co-occurrence
analysis with adjusted p < 0.05 and which showed
consensus associated gene profiles; and (vii) eSNVs were
prioritized by a candidate SL eSNV-gene pair nomination
analysis with p < 0.05. Correlations among these 7 criteria
were calculated and visualized with the corrplot package,
with a hierarchical clustering order for the correlation
matrix. We carried out a pairwise significance test using
a Phi correlation coefficient for the association among the
7 criteria (significant p < 0.01). We calculated the number
of criteria that were satisfied and assigned a score to each
driver eSNV, which ranged 0~7. We defined those eSNVs
with a score of ≥ 2 as “biological UCEC risk mutational
eSNVs”.

Candidate tumor drug mining
Drug target gene information was obtained from
the DrugBank database (http://www.drugbank.ca/) and
Therapeutic Target Database (http://bidd.nus.edu.sg/group/
cjttd/) on 28 April 2015 [10, 26]. Drug target genes were
filtered by several criteria including human species and
targeted by approved drugs. We manually extracted genes
which were annotated as the target of an antineoplastic
drug based on the indication. Then, the drug target profile
was separated into a “solid-tumor drug target profile”
(n = 79) and a “hematologic-tumor drug target profile”
(n = 45) based on annotated indications. The hematologictumor drug target profile was constructed based on the
keywords ‘leukemia’, ‘lymphatic leukemia’, ‘multiple
myeloma’, ‘lymphoma’, ‘leukemias and lymphomas’,
and ‘hematologic malignancies’, while the remaining were
extracted to build a solid-tumor drug target profile. We
evaluated whether genes from the biologically risky gene
profiles were pharmacologically therapeutic targets of
approved solid-cancer drugs. In total, 275 genes (mapped
by 394 prioritized biological eSNVs) and 1, 305 correlated
genes were used to separately query corresponding drugs
in the solid-tumor and hematologic-tumor drug target
profiles. Overlapping genes between the query gene list
and solid-tumor or hematologic-tumor drug target profiles
were extracted and counted. In addition, drugs that
5921

Oncotarget

  2.	 Westin, SN. and RR. Broaddus. Personalized therapy in
endometrial cancer: challenges and opportunities. Cancer
Biol Ther. 2012; 13; 1:1–13.

targeted genes in the query gene list were also illustrated.
Enrichment of overlapping genes extracted from the solidtumor and hematologic-tumor profiles were calculated by
a hypergeometric test.

  3.	 Gupta, SC, Sung B, Prasad S, Webb LJ, Aggarwal BB.
Cancer drug discovery by repurposing: teaching new tricks
to old dogs. Trends Pharmacol Sci. 2013; 34; 9:508–17.

Statistical analyses

  4.	 Gelijns, AC, Rosenberg N, Moskowitz AJ. Capturing the
unexpected benefits of medical research. N Engl J Med.
1998; 339; 10:693–8.

We performed all analytic workflows in this study
under the R environment (http://www.r-project.org/ and
http://cran.r-project.org/) and Bioconductor (http://www.
bioconductor.org/).

 5.	 Cancer Genome Atlas Research N, Kandoth C, Schultz
N, Cherniack AD, Akbani R, Liu Y, Shen H, Robertson
AG, Pashtan I, Shen R, Benz CC, Yau C, Laird PW, et
al. Integrated genomic characterization of endometrial
carcinoma. Nature. 2013; 497; 7447:67–73.

List of abbreviations
UCEC: uterine corpus endometrial carcinoma; TCGA:
The Cancer Genome Atlas; eSNVs: expression- associated
single nucleotide variations; RSEM: relative square error of
the mean; SCNA: somatic copy number alteration; MHC:
major histocompatibility complex; ANOVA: analysis
of variance; KEGG: Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and
Genomes; ORA: over-representation analysis; GO: gene
ontology; BP: biological process; TFs: transcription factors;
AnimalTFDB: The Animal Transcription Factor Database;
UTR: untranslated region; ROC: receiver operating
characteristic; AUC: area under the ROC curve; SL:
synthetic lethality.

  6.	 Le Gallo M and Bell DW. The emerging genomic landscape
of endometrial cancer. Clin Chem. 2014; 60;1:98–110.
  7.	 Banno K, Kisu I, Yanokura M, Masuda K, Ueki A,
Kobayashi Y, Susumu N, Aoki D. Epigenetics and genetics
in endometrial cancer: new carcinogenic mechanisms and
relationship with clinical practice. Epigenomics. 2012; 4;
2:147–62.
  8.	 Liu Y, Patel L, Mills GB, Lu KH, Sood AK, Ding L,
Kucherlapati R, Mardis ER, Levine DA, Shmulevich I,
Broaddus RR, Zhang W. Clinical significance of
CTNNB1 mutation and Wnt pathway activation in
endometrioid endometrial carcinoma. J Natl Cancer Inst.
2014; 106; 9.

Author contributions

  9.	 Wishart DS, Knox C, Guo AC, Shrivastava S, Hassanali M,
Stothard P, Chang Z, Woolsey J. DrugBank: a comprehensive
resource for in silico drug discovery and exploration. Nucleic
Acids Res. 2006; 34; Database issue:D668–72.

H.S.C.W. designed approaches, performed
integrative analysis, interpreted data and wrote the
manuscript. M.S.W. performed part of integrative
analyses. Y.S.J, Y.W.H. Y.F.Z, H.H.C and W.M.L provided
helps in data integration (including bioinformatics and
clinical information). W.C.C. and H.S.C.W. interpreted
and discussed the whole data and wrote the manuscript.
W.C.C provided materials and analysis tools.

10.	 Chen X, Ji ZL, Chen YZ. TTD: Therapeutic Target
Database. Nucleic Acids Res. 2002; 30; 1:412–5.
11.	 Zhu F, Shi Z, Qin C, Tao L, Liu X, Xu F, Zhang L,
Song Y, Liu X, Zhang J, Han B, Zhang P, Chen Y.
Therapeutic target database update 2012: a resource for
facilitating target-oriented drug discovery. Nucleic Acids
Res. 2012; 40; Database issue: D1128–36.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING

12.	 Turnbull C, Rapley EA, Seal S, Pernet D, Renwick A,
Hughes D, Ricketts M, Linger R, Nsengimana J, Deloukas
P, Huddart RA, Bishop DT, Easton DF, et al. Variants near
DMRT1, TERT and ATF7IP are associated with testicular
germ cell cancer. Nat Genet. 2010; 42; 7:604–7.

This work was supported by grants from Ministry
of Health and Welfare (MOHW103-TDU-B-212-113001),
from the National Science Council, Taiwan, ROC (MOST
104-2320-B-038-016) and from Taipei Medical University
(12310-0223).

13.	 Caceres-Gorriti KY, Carmona E, Barres V, Rahimi K,
Letourneau IJ, Tonin PN, Provencher D, Mes-Masson AM.
RAN nucleo-cytoplasmic transport and mitotic spindle
assembly partners XPO7 and TPX2 are new prognostic
biomarkers in serous epithelial ovarian cancer. PLoS One.
2014; 9; 3:e91000.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare they have no known conflicts of
interest in this work.

14.	 Aghajanian C, Sill MW, Darcy KM, Greer B, McMeekin
DS, Rose PG, Rotmensch J, Barnes MN, Hanjani P, Leslie
KK. Phase II trial of bevacizumab in recurrent or persistent
endometrial cancer: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study.
J Clin Oncol. 2011; 29; 16:259–65.

REFERENCES
1.	 Siegel, R.L, Miller KD, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2015.
CA Cancer J Clin. 2015; 65; 1:5–29.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5922

Oncotarget

21.	 Li Q, Seo JH, Stranger B, McKenna A, Pe’er I,
Laframboise T, Brown M, Tyekucheva S, Freedman ML.
Integrative eQTL-based analyses reveal the biology of
breast cancer risk loci. Cell. 2013; 152; 3:633–41.

15.	 Grisham RN, Adaniel C, Hyman DM, Ma W, Iasonos
A, Aghajanian C, Konner J. Gemcitabine for advanced
endometrial cancer: a retrospective study of the Memorial
sloan-Kettering Cancer Center experience. Int J Gynecol
Cancer. 2012; 22; 5: 807–11.

22.	 Yu, G, Wang LG, Han Y, He QY. clusterProfiler: an R
package for comparing biological themes among gene
clusters. OMICS. 2012; 16; 5:284–7.

16.	 Brown J, Smith JA, Ramondetta LM, Sood AK, Ramirez PT,
Coleman RL, Levenback CF, Munsell MF, Jung M, WolfJ K.
Combination of gemcitabine and cisplatin is highly
active in women with endometrial carcinoma: results of a
prospective phase 2 trial. Cancer. 2010; 116; 21: 4973–9.

23.	 Zhang HM, Chen H, Liu W, Liu H, Gong J, Wang H, Guo AY.
AnimalTFDB: a comprehensive animal transcription factor
database. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012; 40:Database issue:
D144–9.

17.	 Hasegawa M, Sakamoto H, Deng X, Ige Y, Shirakawa
T, Ohtani K, Takami M, Takami T, Ishii Y, Satoh K.
Estramustine phosphate, estrogen conjugated with nitrogen
mustard inhibits the growth of endometrial cancer cells in
vitro [Article in Japanese]. Nihon Sanka Fujinka Gakkai
Zasshi. 1995; 47; 5: 479–85.

24.	 Heagerty PJ, Zheng Y. Survival model predictive accuracy
and ROC curves. Biometrics. 2005; 61; 1:92–105.
25.	 Okada Y, Wu D, Trynka G, Raj T, Terao C, Ikari K, Kochi Y,
Ohmura K, Suzuki A, Yoshida S, Graham RR, Manoharan A,
Ortmann W, et al. Genetics of rheumatoid arthritis
contributes to biology and drug discovery. Nature, 2014.
506; 7488:376–81.

18.	 Thigpen T, Brady MF, Homesley HD, Soper JT, Bell J.
Tamoxifen in the treatment of advanced or recurrent
endometrial carcinoma: a Gynecologic Oncology Group
study. J Clin Oncol, 2001; 19; 2:364–7.

26.	 Wishart DS, Knox C, Guo AC, Cheng D, Shrivastava S,
Tzur D, Gautam B, Hassanali M. DrugBank: a
knowledgebase for drugs, drug actions and drug targets.
Nucleic Acids Res. 2008; 36; Database issue: D901–6.

19.	 Zhu Y, Qiu P, Ji Y. TCGA-assembler: open-source software
for retrieving and processing TCGA data. Nat Methods.
2014; 11; 6:599–600.
20.	 Hou JP, Ma J. DawnRank: discovering personalized driver
genes in cancer. Genome Med. 2014; 6; 7:56.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5923

Oncotarget

