Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 26

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

Reprofiling using a zebrafish melanoma model reveals drugs
cooperating with targeted therapeutics

Laura Fernandez del Ama1, Mary Jones1, Paul Walker1, Anna Chapman1, Julia A.
Braun1, Jasmine Mohr1, Adam F. L. Hurlstone1
1

Faculty of Life Sciences, The University of Manchester, Manchester, UK

Correspondence to: Adam F. L. Hurlstone, email: adam.hurlstone@manchester.ac.uk
Keywords: melanoma, zebrafish, MEK, PI3K, mTOR
Received: January 04, 2016     Accepted: May 04, 2016     Published: May 26, 2016

ABSTRACT
Phenotype-guided re-profiling of approved drug molecules presents an
accelerated route to developing anticancer therapeutics by bypassing the targetidentification bottleneck of target-based approaches and by sampling drugs already
in the clinic. Further, combinations incorporating targeted therapies can be screened
for both efficacy and toxicity. Previously we have developed an oncogenic-RAS-driven
zebrafish melanoma model that we now describe display melanocyte hyperplasia
while still embryos. Having devised a rapid method for quantifying melanocyte burden,
we show that this phenotype can be chemically suppressed by incubating V12RAS
transgenic embryos with potent and selective small molecule inhibitors of either MEK
or PI3K/mTOR. Moreover, we demonstrate that combining MEK inhibitors (MEKi) with
dual PI3K/mTOR inhibitors (PI3K/mTORi) resulted in a super-additive suppression of
melanocyte hyperplasia. The robustness and simplicity of our novel screening assay
inspired us to perform a modest screen of FDA approved compounds for their ability
to potentiate MEKi PD184352 or PI3K/mTORi NVPBEZ235 suppression of V12RASdriven melanocyte hyperplasia. Through this route, we confirmed Rapamycin as a
compound that could synergize with MEKi and even more so with PI3K/mTORi to
suppress melanoma development, including suppressing the growth of cultured human
melanoma cells. Further, we discovered two additional compounds—Disulfiram and
Tanshinone—that also co-operate with MEKi to suppress the growth of transformed
zebrafish melanocytes and showed activity toward cultured human melanoma cells.
In conclusion, we provide proof-of-concept that our phenotype-guided screen could
be used to identify compounds that affect melanoma development and prompt further
evaluation of Disulfiram and Tanshinone as possible partners for combination therapy.

NF1 [1]. Simultaneous activation of the ERK MAPK and
PI3K-AKT-mTOR pathways is required for progression to
malignancy [2, 3].
Monotherapies typically have low efficacy for
treating disseminated cancer. To increase the efficacy of
targeted therapy and obviate resistance, multiple signalling
pathways need to be targeted [3-5]. Drug synergy also
permits reducing the dosage of each agent, and thereby
the toxicity from on- and off-target effects [6]. Multiple
strategies exist for identifying effective combinations
of drugs, with the most widely applied involving in
vitro high-throughput screening (HTS) where large
collections of molecules are tested using biochemical
or cell-based assays. Other projects select fewer agents

INTRODUCTION
Cutaneous melanoma is the deadliest form of
skin cancer, accounting for 80% of skin-cancer related
deaths. It arises from melanocytes, pigmented epidermal
cells. Worldwide, melanoma incidence keeps increasing.
At early stages of melanoma, the prognosis is good as
treatment, involving surgical excision, is usually highly
effective. However, in the vertical growth phase (VGP),
when melanoma invades subcutaneous tissue, and in
the metastatic stages, it is largely incurable. Initiation of
melanocyte neoplasia requires activation of ERK MAPK
signalling, typically achieved by mutational activation of
BRAF or NRAS or through mutational inactivation of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40348

Oncotarget

(Figure 1c) (see also [8]). Knockdown of HRASG12V
using a morpholino-modified antisense oligonucleotide
targeting the HA-tag translation start codon prevented
excess melanocyte proliferation (Figure 1c), consistent
with the observed hyperplasia stemming from the action
of oncogenic RAS in melanocytes. We next developed
a simple assay for automated quantitation of pigment as
a corollary of hyperplasia in transgenic larvae (see also
[8]). Melanin was extracted from embryos at 5dpf and the
absorbance of lysates determined at 340 nm. Absorbance
from V12RAS transgenic larvae was 1.43 fold greater than
for wildtype larvae (Figure 1d) (see also [8]). Furthermore,
using melanin content we were also able to confirm
that knockdown of HRASG12V suppressed RAS-driven
hyperplasia in transgenic larvae (Figure 1d).

based on their known targets and use in vivo assays to
guide selection. In vivo HTS are rarely done because of
the cost and time entailed screening relevant animal, for
example mammalian, models. On the other hand, given
the characteristics of zebrafish, and the high genetic and
physiological similarities between them and humans, this
increasingly popular model can be used as a useful and
cost-effective vehicle for HTS [7].
We have previously reported on a transgenic
zebrafish line—Tg(mitfa:V12HRAS; mitfa:GFP)—
expressing oncogenic HRASG12V in their melanocytes
(herein named V12RAS fish) that present with radial
growth phase (RGP) melanoma and occasionally
develop raised tumour nodules, accompanied by more
invasive growth, which we equate to vertical growth
phase (VGP) melanoma [2]. This zebrafish melanoma
model also displays activation of both ERK MAPK
and PI3K-AKT signalling pathways [2]. In the present
work, we demonstrate that even as embryos these
transgenic zebrafish present with increased melanocytes
and consequently more melanin which we exploit to
assay small molecules for their ability to modulate the
development of melanoma. We not only demonstrate
that MEKi and dual PI3K/mTORi can supress V12RASdriven melanocytic hyperplasia, but we also confirm
synergism when inhibitors were combined. Based on this,
we scaled up the procedure in a HTS-like setting in order
to screen a library of 640 FDA approved small molecules
in combination with either PD184352 (a MEKi) or
NVPBEZ235 (a dual PI3K/MTORi). The screen recovered
a number of hits among which Rapamycin, an mTOR
inhibitor with proven antineoplastic activity when in
combination, showed potent synergy with NVPBEZ235,
providing a proof-of-principle that the screen could
find effective combinations of antineoplastic agents.
Disulfiram and Tanshinone were also revealed to possess
anti-melanoma activity.

Suppression of V12RAS-driven melanocyte
hyperplasia by MEKi and PI3K/mTORi
Previously, we have used immunohistochemistry
(IHC) to confirm activation of ERK MAPK and PI3KAKT signalling in zebrafish melanoma resulting from
expression of HRASG12V [2]. IHC on transverse sections
of V12RAS larvae also revealed activated, phosphorylated
(p)-ERK and p-AKT in the melanocytes (Figure 2a–2d),
indicating that these signaling modules are hyperactivated at this early stage, as later in tumor nodules.
Next we established that incubating 5dpf zebrafish larvae
for 4h with highly potent and selective MEKi (SL327
and PD184352) or PI3K/mTORi (NVPBEZ235 and
LY294002) resulted in a dose-dependent reduction in
phosphorylated ERK and AKT (Figure 2e). Moreover,
incubating V12RAS transgenic larvae with these
inhibitors between 2 and 5 dpf resulted in a reduction of
melanocyte hyperplasia as assessed by melanin content,
but only at doses capable of suppressing ERK and AKT
phosphorylation (Figure 3a–3d). Further, to evaluate a
potential synergy from targeting simultaneously ERK
MAPK and PI3K pathways, larvae were treated with
a combination of NVPBEZ235 and PD184352. The
drugs were combined in a ratio corresponding to the
concentrations required for each separate drug to suppress
excess melanin by 50%. Mixtures were then serially
diluted to allow dose-dependency to be evaluated. The
combination showed an enhanced ability to selectively
suppress melanocyte hyperplasia in V12RAS-expressing
larvae compared to the individual component drugs
(Figure 3e). No effect on wild-type melanin levels was
observed for this mixture over a range of efficacious
concentrations (data not shown), demonstrating that the
combination was well tolerated.

RESULTS
A zebrafish larval model of melanoma onset
When compared to wild-type subjects, adult
V12RAS transgenic zebrafish display a distinctive
phenotype, characterised by aberrant hyper-pigmentation
(Figure 1a, upper pictures) (see also [2]). Moreover,
the onset of this adult phenotype was already apparent
in V12RAS larvae (Figure 1a, lower pictures) (see also
[8]). We wanted to verify that transgenic larvae were in
fact over-expressing HRASG12V. Reverse Transcription
coupled-Polymerase Chain Reaction (RT-PCR) revealed
that HRASG12V is expressed in transgenic larvae from
24hpf (hours post-fertilization) onwards, but as expected
no expression was detected in wild-type larvae (Figure 1b).
Counting revealed a 30% increase in melanocyte numbers
in transgenic larvae by 5 days post-fertilization (dpf)
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

HTS using an FDA library
Using the pilot data above, we were able to
determine a Z-factor (Z’) = 0.6 for the melanin absorption
40349

Oncotarget

assay to detect the ability of small molecule inhibitors to
suppress melanocyte hyperplasia in V12RAS transgenic
embryos. Based on this value, which indicates a high
degree of discrimination [9], we scaled up embryo
production in order to screen 640 small molecules from a
FDA approved library of biologically active compounds in
combination with either sub-optimal doses of PD184352
(0.1 µM) or NVPBEZ235 (0.3 µM). Using the process

outlined in Figure 4a, ten hatched 2dpf V12RAS embryos
were incubated in a 24-well plate with the aforementioned
combinations of drugs. A single well was used per
compound. V12RAS transgenic animals treated with the
vehicle control 0.1% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and
Casper embryos were included on each plate for internal
calibration and normalisation (see Figure 4a for layout of
plate). 72 hours later, eight embryos were transferred to a

Figure 1: Melanocyte hyplerplasia in V12HRAS-expressing zebrafish embryos. a. Upper pictures: WT (left) and V12RAS
(right) transgenic adult fish. Lower pictures: 5dpf embryos. b. Expression of exogenous V12RAS detected by RT-PCR at different time
points. β-catenin is a control for cDNA integrity. c. Quantification of the number of melanocytes in thirty wild-type (WT) or non-injected
control (NIC), standard control oligonucleotide (STC)-injected or antisense oligonucleotide targeting exogenous V12RAS (V12RAS olig)injected 5dpf V12RAS transgenic embryos. Shown are means ±SEM. d. Quantification of the melanin absorbance (λ= 340nm) for eight
wild-type (WT) or NIC, STC-injected and V12RASolig-injected 5dpf V12RAS transgenic embryos. Shown are means ±SEM for six
independent experiments. (c) and (d) For easier reference, the dashed line indicates the mean value for wild-type embryos. *** P<0.001
independent samples t-test.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40350

Oncotarget

96-well plate where they were dissolved for absorbance
reading at 340nm. At this stage, this process also allowed
us to determine drug toxicity, since drugs would only
be included in the analysis if 80% or more of embryos

survived the treatment, and the embryos did not show any
behavioural or morphological defects of developmental
toxicity as previously described [10]. Toxic drugs were
rescreened at half the starting concentration (an average

Figure 2: Molecular characterization of the V12RAS model. a–d. Transverse sections of V12RAS larvae. (a) H&E staining.

Scale bar = 0.2 mm. (b–d) IHC on bleached sections. (b) Non-specific primary control, (c) phospho-ERK and (d) phospho-Akt. Positive
stain (brown) denoted by asterisks. e. Results of immunoblotting protein extract (30 µg) from 30 pooled 5-dpf embryos exposed for 4 h
to the specified drug at the indicated concentrations. Representative immunoblots are depicted with densitometric quantification shown
immediately below (mean p-protein/total protein ± SEM for three independent experiments). *P<0.05 compared to vehicle control;
independent samples t-test.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40351

Oncotarget

of 1 μM). Absorbance for Casper embryos, which only
have melanin in the pigmented retinal epithelium, was
subtracted from the V12RAS embryo values to correct
for this background signal. Subtracted values from each
well were then normalized to values obtained from wells
containing DMSO-treated V12RAS transgenic animals.
Forty-eight compounds in combination with either
PD184352 or NVPBEZ235 were screened per week by
a single investigator. Having screened the library of 640
molecules, the median normalized melanin absorbance

was calculated. Hits were then selected following the
median and median absolute deviation (MAD) method [11,
12] with a cut-off established at -2.5MAD (Supplementary
Figure S1), giving as a result 37 primary hits. Following
repetition of the screening assay but now on 5 wells,
this number was reduced to 25 compounds capable of
suppressing the V12RAS phenotype (Supplementary
Figure S2a and Figure 4b). To qualify for further
evaluation, hits were examined for dose-dependency and
their influence on pigmentation of wild-type animals.

Figure 3: Dose dependent suppression of V12RAS-driven melanocyte hyplerplasia using selected MEKi and PI3K/
mTORi. 2-dpf V12RAS and WT embryos were exposed for 72h to the indicated concentrations of MEKi—a. SL327 and b. PD184352—

and dual PI3K/mTORi—c. LY294002 and d. NVPBEZ235. Melanin content was then determined. Shown are means ± SEM (n = 6 wells).
*P<0.05 compared to vehicle control; independent samples t-test. e. 2-dpf V12RAS were exposed for 72h to PD184352 or NVPBEZ235
alone or in combination followed by determination of melanin content.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40352

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Screen design and Hit selection summary. a. Schematic depicting the steps involved in screening the FDA-library.
b. Schematic summarizing the hits identified after the screening procedure, retesting using 5 replicates, and drug dose response using the
melanin assay. At the end of this process there were 11 hits to be further evaluated in cell culture.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40353

Oncotarget

Based on clear dose-dependency, co-operation with either
PD184352 or NVPBEZ235 (that is a stronger effect of the
combination than library compound alone), and negligible
effect on pigmentation of wild-type animals, only 11 hits
were selected for further assessment (listed in Figure 4b).
Dose-response curves are shown for Rapamycin (Figure
5a) as well as the other 10 shortlisted hits (Supplementary
Figure S3). L-Thyroxine, which emerged as the most
potent hit from the primary screen (Supplementary
Figure S1 and S2a), didn’t exhibit co-operation at any
dose and also completely suppressed pigmentation in
wild-type zebrafish (Supplementary Figure S3) and was
excluded from subsequent evaluation for this reason.
Other compounds (for example Fluvastatin) possessed
significant single-agent activity which was selective for
V12RAS transgenic larvae but showed only a subtle cooperative effect, so were also excluded (data not shown).

as well as 501mel cells (Figure 5e-5g and Supplementary
Figure S4).

Further evaluation of the remaining hits
displaying co-operation with MEKi or PI3K/
mTORi
As for Rapamycin, the growth suppressive activities
of the remaining 10 shortlisted hits were evaluated
against established human melanoma cell lines that
carry activating mutations in RAS (WM1361, MM485,
WM852, and DO4) or BRAF (A375, 501Mel, and
WM2664). GSK1120212, a more potent MEK1/2 inhibitor
than PD184352 for human cells used in the clinic, was
used as the representative MEKi. Of the remaining
hits co-operating with PD184352 or NVPBEZ235 in
our zebrafish screen, only Disulfiram and Tanshinone
augmented the activity of GSK1120212 at concentrations
<10μM (considered a selective concentration). However,
in contrast to Rapamycin, only additive effects were
observed (Figure 6 and Supplementary Figure S4).
Potentially, drug responses of melanoma cells might
be different when grown as 3D masses in extracellular
matrix. To address this, we created spheroids of A375
cells and embedded them in a matrix of collagen I before
exposing them to drug combinations. Again, we observed
a super-additive antagonism of melanoma cell growth for
the combination of Rapamycin and NVPBEZ235 but only
an additive effect with combinations of GSK1120212 and
Disulfiram or Tanshinone (Figure 7).

Rapamycin: an example of a hit demonstrating
clear synergism
Among the hits we identified, the mTOR inhibitor
Rapamycin showed a strong effect in combination with
PD184352 and the strongest effect of all compounds
tested (excluding L Thyroxine) with the dual PI3K/MTOR
inhibitor NVPBEZ235 (Figure 5a). In order to determine
whether this result was really due to a suppression of
V12RAS-driven melanocyte hyperplasia and not just an
effect on melanin production, we devised another means
of quantifying the melanocyte burden of larvae. Images
of the dorsal stripe were acquired at 5dpf, a region of
interest fitted to the portion of stripe overlying the yolk
sac extension, and a binary mask applied using ImageJ
to nullify potential differences in melanin levels per
melanocyte. The area of pigmentation, proportional to the
number of melanocytes, was then quantified using ImageJ.
This analysis verified a consistent and significant increase
of melanocyte burden in V12RAS embryos compared
to WT embryos (Figure 5b). Moreover, while treatment
of V12RAS with low dose PD184352, NVPBEZ235
or Rapamycin did not affect significantly melanocyte
burden of V12RAS larvae as measured by pigmented
area, a combination of PD184352 or NVPBEZ235 with
Rapamycin resulted in suppression of V12RAS-driven
melanocyte hyperplasia to levels indistinguishable from
wild-type larvae (Figure 5c and 5d). We next tested the
ability of Rapamycin to co-operate with NVPBEZ235,
in suppressing the growth of two established human
melanoma cell lines in culture, WM1361 that like the
zebrafish model harbour oncogenic RAS and A375
harbouring mutant BRAF. Using the Chou-Talalay method
[13] and applying the CompuSyn software (ComboSyn,
Inc.), combinatorial indices (CI) were calculated. It was
shown by calculating the IC50 and the CI that there was a
very strong synergy at very low (nanomolar) Rapamycin
and NVPBEZ235 concentrations for these two cell lines
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

DISCUSSION
The introduction of target-based drug discovery has
coincided with a steady decline in R&D productivity in
the pharmaceutical industry [14, 15]. 80% of candidate
drugs fail by the end of Phase III, with clinical safety,
lack of efficacy, poor bioavailability, or toxicity being the
cause in approximately 70% of cases [16]. Problems are
particularly acute in the field of cancer drug discovery,
where the chance of a candidate drug obtaining regulatory
approval following entry into Phase I studies is only 5%
[16]. This implies that target identification and validation
are currently extremely flawed exercises for many
diseases, and that insufficient emphasis is given to
optimizing drug pharmacokinetics and bioavailability
during drug development. Target discovery for cancer
is fraught with pitfalls. Due to the genomic instability
acquired by cancer cells, a bewildering number of genes
are mutated or differentially expressed in transformed
cells compared to their normal counterparts. This makes
distinguishing drivers that are integral to tumourigenesis
from passengers very challenging. Consequently, drug
companies pursue the same ‘low lying fruit’ (the handful of
well-documented oncogenic drivers) resulting in a lack of
diversity in the pharmaceutical portfolio. Innovative new
40354

Oncotarget

strategies are required to complement existing techniques
to increase success rates in cancer drug discovery.
An alternative to target-based drug discovery is
the reintroduction of phenotype-guided discovery in
the form of forward chemical genetics. This approach
combines high-throughput screening with in vivo disease
models. Large chemical libraries can be screened in
whole organisms to identify entities that modify a disease
phenotype, with the aim to produce efficacious, non-toxic
hits early on in drug development. As this approach is not
reliant on a previously defined target, it bypasses a major
bottleneck in target-based discovery. This can also lead to
the development of novel treatments and give insights into
previously undefined targets and pathways contributing
to disease. Further, compounds with poor pharmacology
or toxicity will be excluded at the outset. Large-scale
chemical screens have previously been restricted to
invertebrate model organisms such as Drosophila and C.
Elegans or to cell or tissue based assays. The logistics and
expense involved in screening thousands of compounds

in a vertebrate organism such as the mouse has limited
its widespread adoption. Zebrafish are unique among
vertebrate models in being amenable to high throughput
chemical screens [7].
This work set out to develop and validate a cancer
model in zebrafish that could feasibly be used in high
throughput chemical screens to aid cancer drug and target
discovery. A transgenic zebrafish melanoma model was
developed by coupling the zebrafish mitfa promoter,
which is highly selective for melanocytes, to human
oncogenic HRASG12V. V12RAS transgenic embryos
developed melanocyte hyperplasia, which we could
quantify using a simple measure of melanin content,
accompanied by stimulation of RAS-RAF-MEK-ERK
and RAS-PI3K-AKT-mTOR signalling pathways. The
early onset and reproducibility of the V12RAS phenotype
coupled to the sensitivity of the melanin content assay
enabled the screening of small molecule inhibitors on
V12RAS embryos to investigate their effect on neoplastic
development. A number of selective MEKi and dual PI3K/

Figure 5: Synergistic effect of Rapamycin. a. In-vivo drug dose curve for Rapamycin using the melanin assay. Rapamycin
was tested at different concentrations in V12RAS and WT embryos, and in combination with MEK and mTOR/PI3K inhibitors in the
transgenic embryos. Points depict mean ± SEM for three independent experiments. b. Imaging-based method for determining melanocyte
burden. Values shown are mean pigmented areas ± SEM for thirty embryos *** P<0.001 independent samples t-test. c. Melanocyte area
quantification in V12RAS embryos treated with PD184352 (PD) (0.1 µM), NVPBEZ235 (NVP) (0.3 µM), Rapamycin (1 µM), Rapamycin
(1 µM) in combination with PD (0.1 µM), and Rapamycin (0.25 µM) in combination with NVP (0.3 µM). *** P<0.001 One-way ANOVA.
d. Lateral views of 5dpf zebrafish embryos from the yolk sac to nearly the end of the tail treated as indicated. (Continued )

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40355

Oncotarget

Figure 5: (Continued ) Synergistic effect of Rapamycin. Average cell number (%) measured in e. WM1361 and f. A375 cell lines

when treated with different combinations of Rapamycin and NVPBEZ235 concentrations for 72h. The colour code corresponds to the ChouTalalay combination index (CI) used to quantify the level of synergism. g. The corresponding IC50 values for the above cell line treatments.

mTORi inhibitors were shown to suppress V12RAS driven
melanocyte hyperplasia, concomitant with suppression of
ERK and AKT activation. Moreover, a combination of
MEKi and PI3K/mTORi inhibitors was super-additive
as previously observed for human melanoma cells [35]. This finding inspired a screen for compounds that
might potentiate the activity of MEKi and PI3K/mTORi
inhibitors, grounded in the premise that combination
therapy is more effective and potentially less toxic than
monotherapy. We sought these potentiators from among
FDA approved compounds as existing drug libraries are
enriched for biological activity and reprofiling/repurposing
drugs is proving a remarkably efficient method of drug
discovery [17], with notable examples in cancer drug
discovery including Thalidomide, Metformin and
Bosentan.
Screening a library of 640 compounds that are FDA
approved, we identified 11 compounds (approximately
2%) which co-operated with either low dose PD184352
or NVPBEZ235 to suppress V12RAS-driven melanocyte
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

hyperplasia without causing overt toxicity nor effecting
pigmentation of wildtype animals. Among these hits,
the mTOR inhibitor Rapamycin, originally developed
for controlling transplant rejection, was the strongest
potentiator, especially when combined with NVPBEZ235.
Synergy of a Rapamycin analogue, or Rapalogue,
Everolimus with NVPBEZ235 has previously been seen
for hepatocellular carcinoma [18] and it was suggested that
Rapalogues might improve access to the kinase active site
of ATP competitive inhibitors. The ability of Rapalogues
to co-operate with MEKi to suppress cancer cell growth
and notably melanoma has also been previously observed
[19]. Moreover, clinical trials of Rapalogues combined
with MEKi or PIK3K/mTORi are currently underway.
While Rapamycin was the strongest potentiator
identified in our modest screen, two other shortlisted
compounds also showed activity both in fish and on
cultured human cells: Disulfiram and Tanshinone.
Antineoplastic effects of Disulfiram, an inhibitor of
aldehyde dehydrogenases used to treat alcoholism,
40356

Oncotarget

including toward melanoma have recently become known
[20]. While a clinical trial of Disulfiram in melanoma
as a monotherapy was unsuccessful, it might be worth
re-evaluating its clinical potential in melanoma when
combined with inhibitors of RAF-MEK-ERK signalling.
Tanshinone (also called Danshinone) is a natural product
from Salvia miltiorrhiza (red sage or Tanshen/Danshen)
used widely in the Chinese medicine tradition for its
anti-inflammatory and cardiovascular effects. Again
antineoplastic activity has been reported including for
melanoma [21] and from our findings Tanshinone might
also be expected to co-operate with inhibitors of RAF-

MEK-ERK signalling. Interestingly, Disulfiram and
Tanshinone failed to show super-additive effects in cell
culture but effects were super-additive in vivo (most
notably for Disulfiram; Supplementary Figure S2b and
Supplementary Figure S4). This observation could
point to the ability of the molecules to not only target
melanoma cell intrinsic mechanisms but also modify
the pharmacology of either PD184352 or NVPBEZ235
in zebrafish (through for example modifying drug
metabolism or excretion); or relate to aspects of disease
mechanism, such as inflammation present in the larval
disease model [22], which are absent in the more simplified

Figure 6: In-vitro effects of three selected hits. Average cell number (%) is shown following 72h incubation with increasing
concentrations of PD184352 (PD) or NVPBEZ235 (NVP) in the absence or presence of a fixed concentration of Rapamycin, Disulfiram or
Tanshinone as indicated.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40357

Oncotarget

Figure 7: Hits effect on three-dimensional spheroid assay. a. GFP-expressing A375 cells were allowed to form spheroids that

were treated for 72h with Rapamycin (0.3 µM), Disulfiram (1 µM), or Tanshinone (5 µM). These drugs were also tested in combination
with the inhibitors GSK1120212 (GSK) and NVPBEZ235 (NVP) at 0.1nM and 0.01 µM concentrations respectively. Quantification of the
area of the spheroid core was used to establish a fold change ± SEM. *** p<0.001, ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, n.s. no significant Tukey’s HSD
test. b. Representative images of A375 spheroids treated with the synergistic combination of Rapamycin with NVP, and the appropriate
controls, when the drugs were added (0 hours) and after 72 hours.

human cell culture models. The remaining shortlisted
hits did not appear to target melanoma cell intrinsic
mechanisms, but by the above reasoning could influence
drug pharmacology or extrinsic disease mechanisms. This
reinforces the value of phenotype-guided drug discovery
compared to target-based approaches. Further evaluation
of the therapeutic potential of all 11 shortlisted hits would
therefore be warranted in more relevant translational in
vivo models, such as patient derived xenograft and mouse
syngeneic allograft models.

affect melanoma development, singly or in combination.
The discovery of chemical modifiers of this phenotype
could provide new insights into melanoma biology and
new therapeutic drug leads.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Animals
Zebrafish (Danio rerio) were raised and maintained
at The University of Manchester Biological Services Unit
under standard conditions as described elsewhere [23]. The
wild type (WT) AB line was originally obtained from the
Hubrecht Laboratory, and Casper strain (roy−/−, nacre−/−)
zebrafish were a kind gift from Richard White (Harvard
University). The transgenic line Tg(mitfa:V12RAS;
mitfa:GFP) (herein named V12RAS) was previously

CONCLUSIONS
We provide proof-of-principle that V12RASexpressing transgenic zebrafish embryos comprise an in
vivo surrogate melanoma model that could feasibly be
used to screen large chemical libraries for compounds that
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40358

Oncotarget

described (Michailidou et al., 2009). All regulated
procedures were approved by a local ethical review
committee and performed under Home Office license.

a biotinylated secondary horse anti-pan-immunoglobulin
antibody (Vector Labs). Binding was revealed using an
ABC kit with a DAB peroxidase substrate (Vector Labs).
Pre-immunized rabbit serum was used in place of a
specific primary antibody as a control for specific staining.
Sections were scanned and images captured and processed
using a Zeiss Mirax Scan system with a x20 objective lens
f and a Marlin f14 6C camera.

RT-PCR analysis
RNA was extracted from a pool of 30 wild-type and
transgenic embryos at nine different time points ranging
from 8hpf to 15dpf using TRIzol reagent (Thermo Fisher)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 1μg of each
RNA sample was then used to synthesize cDNA using
Omniscript RT kit (Qiagen). A minus RT enzyme reaction
was also set up using a pool of either V12RAS or wild-type
RNA to rule out sample contamination. The resulting cDNA
samples were then used as template in PCR amplification
reactions using the following specific primers:

Larval drug treatments
Wild-type and V12RAS embryos were cultured
in non-treated CytoOne 24-well plates (Starlab) from
2dpf until 5dpf with MEKi or PI3K/mTORi at the stated
concentrations. A 0.1% DMSO treatment was used as
a negative control. 10 embryos were placed per well in
2ml of buffered reconstituted de-ionized water (1 mM
Tris pH 7.4, 6x10-3% w/v instant ocean (Tropic Marin),
5x10-5%w/v methylene blue hydrate (Sigma)) to which
the appropriate molecules were added. These plates were
incubated in a LMS incubator at 28 °C and air atmosphere.

RAS Fw 5’-GAACAACTGTGACCTGGCTG-3’
RAS Rev 5’-GAGGTGTGGGAGGTTTTTTAA-3’
BETA ACT Fw 5’-CGTGCTGTCTTCCCATCCA-3’
BETA ACT Rev 5’-GGTCTCGAACATGATCT

GTG-3’
and standard cycling conditions for 28 cycles. A positive
‘housekeeper’ gene β-actin was also assayed for each
sample in order to verify cDNA integrity and consistency
between samples.

Immunoblotting
Protein was extracted from MS222 anaesthetized
5-dpf larvae (n=30 for each sample) treated for 4h with
DMSO alone or inhibitor and resolved in 4-12 % Bis-Tris
Novex precast gels (Invitrogen) using XCell SureLock
Mini-Cell tanks (Invitrogen). Proteins were transferred
to Immobilon-P transfer membranes (Millipore), using
a XCell II Blot Module (Invitrogen). Membranes were
incubated with the following primary antibodies: antiphospho-AKT (Cell Signaling Technology #2965),
anti-total AKT (Cell Signaling Technology #9272), antiphospho-ERK 1/2 (Cell Signaling #4370s), and anti-total
ERK (Cell Signaling #9102). The secondary antibody
was either anti-mouse immunoglobulin or anti-rabbit
immunoglobulin conjugated to horseradish peroxidase
(HRP) (Amersham Biosciences). Proteins were visualized
with ECL plus (PERKin-Elmer) as per manufacturer’s
guidelines. Film was developed in a film processor
(Optimax, IGP). Protein bands were quantified using
ImageJ (public domain). All immunoblotting procedures
were triplicated in entirety with equivalent results.

Antisense oligonucleotide injections
Approximately 1 nl of 0.5mM morpholino-modified
antisense oligonucleotides was injected into 1-cell stage
larvae using a PI-100 pico-injector (Harvard Apparatus).
V12RAS Oligonucleotide sequence was as follows:
5’- CTGGAACATCGTATGGGTAAGCCAT -3’;
V12RAS oligonucleotide was designed by and purchased
from GeneTools. The standard control oligonucleotide
from GeneTools was used as a control for injection
artefacts.

Histology and immunostaining of zebrafish
larvae
Tissue sections (5 µm) from MS222 anaesthetized,
PFA-fixed and paraffin-embedded larvae were used
for Haematoxylin and Eosin (H&E) staining and
Immunohistochemistry (IHC). H&E staining was
automated (Thermo Shandon staining machine). Prior to
IHC, tissue sections were bleached by incubating sections
in 3% hydrogen peroxide diluted with 0.05M phosphate
buffer at 55°C for 30 minutes. Sections were then washed
and blocked with 5% normal goat serum/TBST for 1
hour at room temperature. Following the blocking step,
sections were stained using rabbit anti-phospho-ERK (Cell
Signaling Technology #4370S) and rabbit anti-phosphoAKT (Cell Signaling Technology #3787S) primary
antibodies, as per manufacturer’s instructions, followed by
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Chemical library
A collection of 640 FDA approved small molecules
were screened. An aliquot of the library (Enzo Life
Sciences, Cat. No: BML-2841-0100) was supplied by
Clemens Grabher (Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT),
Germany). All compounds in the library were dissolved in
DMSO at an average 10 mM concentration. These drugs
were tested initially at an average concentration of 1 μM
in conjunction with either a MEK inhibitor (PD184352)
or PI3K/MTOR inhibitor (NVPBEZ235), applied at a
suboptimal concentration (0.1 µM and 0.3 µM respectively).
40359

Oncotarget

Larval melanin content assay

Spheroid assay

After drug treatment, MS222 anaesthetized larvae
were transferred to non-coated 96-well plate (eight larvae
per well). The water was removed by careful aspiration
and the wells were refilled with 200 µl of a fresh made
solution of 1M NaOH. Plates were sealed and agitated at
37 °C until animals were completely dissolved. Absorption
was then measured at 340 nm in a 96-well plate reader
(BIO-TEK Synergy HT). Casper values were subtracted
to cancel out the signal from the eyes.

4000 A375-GFP cells were suspended in DMEM
containing 5% FBS and 1.5% methylcellulose (Sigma).
100 µl solution per well was transferred into a 96-well
U-bottom plate. Plates were incubated at 37 °C with 5%
CO2 for 24 hours to allow spheroid formation. Spheres
were then transferred into 0.8 ml bovine collagen (3.1
mg/ml stock, 1.7 mg/ml final concentration PureCol)
solution per well in a 24-well plate. The vehicle
control DMSO, drugs on their own and their respective
combinations, were added for 72 hours in 0.4 ml/well
of DMEM/10% FCS. Images were acquired once the
collagen was set (considered as 0 hours) and after 72
hours of treatment using a Leica DM IL HC inverted
microscope and FC340 Cooled Monocrome camera
(Leica Microsystems).

Dorsal stripe melanocyte count and area
determination
Larvae were treated with 5mg/ml epinephrine
(Sigma) for five minutes to contract melanosomes, MS222
anaesthetized and then fixed in 4%w/v paraformaldehyde
(PFA). One larva was then transferred to a watch glass
with methylcellulose at room temperature. Images were
acquired using a Zeiss Axiocam MRc camera mounted
on a Zeiss Lumar V12 stereomicroscope. The number
of melanocytes was established by manual counting and
total area covered by melanocytes within the area of a
standard 1000x500 square starting from the larval yolk
sac extension was measured automatically using Image J
software (http://imagej.nih.gov/ij/).

Statistical analysis
Throughout, graphed data is expressed as mean
± standard error of the mean (SEM). Each data set’s
descriptive statistics and distribution were analyzed
using the explore function in SPSS software. Statistical
differences between two groups were assessed using
independent sample t-test (SPSS software, SPSS Inc.)
and statistical significance was set to P<0.05. Differences
between several groups were tested using a One-way
ANOVA, followed by a post-hoc Dunnett test to compare
different groups to a control (SPSS software) or a Tukey’s
HSD test (R software). Statistical significance was set to
P<0.05.

Cell culture
501mel, A375 cells (purchased from ATCC) as
well as WM852 cells (obtained from Wellcome Trust
Functional Genomics Cell Bank, St George’s Hospital
Medical School), and WM1361, and MM485 cells (kind
gifts of Claudia Wellbrock) were cultured in DMEM
(Sigma) supplemented with 10% foetal calf serum
(GIBCO) and 1% penstrep (Sigma). All cells were
maintained at 37 °C with 5% CO2.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We wish to thank Igor Zindy for transferring library
compounds from the original 384-well plate to 96-well
plates, Liz Patton and Clemens Grabher for organising the
purchase and distribution of the FDA-approved compound
library.

Cell quantity calculation
Cells suspended in 100 µl of culture medium were
added at different concentrations, depending on the cell line,
to the wells of a non-treated CytoOne 96-well flat-bottomed
plate (Starlab). After 24 hours of incubation, 25 µl of culture
medium with the combination of drugs mentioned above
were transferred to wells and plates incubated for three
days. Cells were then carefully washed with PBS and the
supernatants discarded. They were fixed and stained with
100 µl/well of a 0.05%w/v crystal violet solution in 4% v/v
formaldehyde for 15 minutes. Subsequently, plates were
rinsed with water, and left for 20 minutes with 150 µl/well
of 2% SDS solution and gentle shaking to solubilize the
stain. The absorbance of each well was then measured at
595nm in a 96-well plate reader (BIO-TEK Synergy HT).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no competing financial interests.

GRANT SUPPORT
This work was funded by grants to AH from
Cancer Research UK (ref C11876/A12724 and C11591/
A16416) and the European research Council (ERC2011-StG-282059 PROMINENT) and also by a
Wellcome Trust Institutional Strategic Support Fund
(ISSF) award (097820/Z/11/A) to The University of
Manchester.

40360

Oncotarget

REFERENCES

deviation to improve hit selection for genome-scale RNAi
screens. J Biomol Screen. 2008; 13:149-158.

1.	 Cancer Genome Atlas N. Genomic Classification of
Cutaneous Melanoma. Cell. 2015; 161:1681-1696.

12.	 Birmingham A, Selfors LM, Forster T, Wrobel D, Kennedy
CJ, Shanks E, Santoyo-Lopez J, Dunican DJ, Long A,
Kelleher D, Smith Q, Beijersbergen RL, Ghazal P and Shamu
CE. Statistical methods for analysis of high-throughput RNA
interference screens. Nat Methods. 2009; 6:569-575.

2.	 Michailidou C, Jones M, Walker P, Kamarashev J, Kelly A
and Hurlstone AF. Dissecting the roles of Raf- and PI3Ksignalling pathways in melanoma formation and progression
in a zebrafish model. Dis Model Mech. 2009; 2:399-411.

13.	 Chou TC. Drug combination studies and their synergy
quantification using the Chou-Talalay method. Cancer Res.
2010; 70:440-446.

3.	 Dankort D, Curley DP, Cartlidge RA, Nelson B, Karnezis
AN, Damsky WE, Jr., You MJ, DePinho RA, McMahon
M and Bosenberg M. Braf(V600E) cooperates with Pten
loss to induce metastatic melanoma. Nat Genet. 2009;
41:544-552.

14.	 Paul SM, Mytelka DS, Dunwiddie CT, Persinger CC,
Munos BH, Lindborg SR and Schacht AL. How to improve
R&D productivity: the pharmaceutical industry’s grand
challenge. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2010; 9:203-214.

4.	 Meier F, Busch S, Lasithiotakis K, Kulms D, Garbe C,
Maczey E, Herlyn M and Schittek B. Combined targeting
of MAPK and AKT signalling pathways is a promising
strategy for melanoma treatment. Br J Dermatol. 2007;
156:1204-1213.

15.	 Pammolli F, Magazzini L and Riccaboni M. The
productivity crisis in pharmaceutical R&D. Nat Rev Drug
Discov. 2011; 10:428-438.
16.	 Kola I and Landis J. Can the pharmaceutical industry reduce
attrition rates? Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2004; 3:711-715.

5.	 Posch C, Moslehi H, Feeney L, Green GA, Ebaee A,
Feichtenschlager V, Chong K, Peng L, Dimon MT, Phillips
T, Daud AI, McCalmont TH, LeBoit PE and Ortiz-Urda
S. Combined targeting of MEK and PI3K/mTOR effector
pathways is necessary to effectively inhibit NRAS mutant
melanoma in vitro and in vivo. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
2013; 110:4015-4020.

17.	 Ashburn TT and Thor KB. Drug repositioning: identifying
and developing new uses for existing drugs. Nat Rev Drug
Discov. 2004; 3:673-683.
18.	 Thomas HE, Mercer CA, Carnevalli LS, Park J, Andersen
JB, Conner EA, Tanaka K, Matsutani T, Iwanami A,
Aronow BJ, Manway L, Maira SM, Thorgeirsson SS,
Mischel PS, Thomas G and Kozma SC. mTOR inhibitors
synergize on regression, reversal of gene expression, and
autophagy in hepatocellular carcinoma. Sci Transl Med.
2012; 4:139ra184.

6.	 Lehar J, Krueger AS, Avery W, Heilbut AM, Johansen LM,
Price ER, Rickles RJ, Short GF, 3rd, Staunton JE, Jin X,
Lee MS, Zimmermann GR and Borisy AA. Synergistic
drug combinations tend to improve therapeutically relevant
selectivity. Nat Biotechnol. 2009; 27:659-666.

19.	 Lasithiotakis KG, Sinnberg TW, Schittek B, Flaherty KT,
Kulms D, Maczey E, Garbe C and Meier FE. Combined
inhibition of MAPK and mTOR signaling inhibits growth,
induces cell death, and abrogates invasive growth of
melanoma cells. J Invest Dermatol. 2008; 128:2013-2023.

7.	 Zon LI and Peterson RT. In vivo drug discovery in the
zebrafish. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2005; 4:35-44.
8.	 Herrero A, Pinto A, Colon-Bolea P, Casar B, Jones M,
Agudo-Ibanez L, Vidal R, Tenbaum SP, Nuciforo P,
Valdizan EM, Horvath Z, Orfi L, Pineda-Lucena A, Bony
E, Keri G, Rivas G, et al. Small Molecule Inhibition of
ERK Dimerization Prevents Tumorigenesis by RAS-ERK
Pathway Oncogenes. Cancer cell. 2015; 28:170-182.

20.	 Triscott J, Rose Pambid M and Dunn SE. Concise review:
bullseye: targeting cancer stem cells to improve the
treatment of gliomas by repurposing disulfiram. Stem Cells.
2015; 33:1042-1046.

9.	 Zhang JH, Chung TD and Oldenburg KR. A Simple
Statistical Parameter for Use in Evaluation and Validation
of High Throughput Screening Assays. J Biomol Screen.
1999; 4:67-73.

21.	 Zhang Y, Jiang P, Ye M, Kim SH, Jiang C and Lu J.
Tanshinones: sources, pharmacokinetics and anti-cancer
activities. Int J Mol Sci. 2012; 13:13621-13666.
22.	 Feng Y, Santoriello C, Mione M, Hurlstone A and Martin P.
Live imaging of innate immune cell sensing of transformed
cells in zebrafish larvae: parallels between tumor initiation
and wound inflammation. PLoS Biol. 2010; 8:e1000562.

10.	 He JH, Gao JM, Huang CJ and Li CQ. Zebrafish models
for assessing developmental and reproductive toxicity.
Neurotoxicol Teratol. 2014; 42:35-42.

23.	 Westerfield M. (2000). The zebrafish book. A guide for the
laboratory use of zebrafish (Danio rerio). (Eugene: Univ. of
Oregon Press).

11.	 Chung N, Zhang XD, Kreamer A, Locco L, Kuan PF, Bartz
S, Linsley PS, Ferrer M and Strulovici B. Median absolute

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40361

Oncotarget

