Article

Functional Profiling of a Plasmodium Genome
Reveals an Abundance of Essential Genes
Graphical Abstract

Authors
Ellen Bushell, Ana Rita Gomes,
Theo Sanderson, ..., Kai Wengelnik,
Julian C. Rayner, Oliver Billker

Correspondence
julian.rayner@sanger.ac.uk (J.C.R.),
oliver.billker@sanger.ac.uk (O.B.)

In Brief
An in vivo genetic screen in a mouse
model of malaria reveals the essential
genes and pathways required by
Plasmodium parasite, with a surprising
two-thirds of the genome being required
for normal parasite growth in the blood.

Highlights
d

Two-thirds of Plasmodium berghei genes contribute to
normal blood stage growth

d

The core genome of malaria parasites is highly optimized for
rapid host colonization

d

Essential parasite genes and pathways are identified for drug
target prioritization

d

Low functional redundancy reflects the constant
environment encountered by a parasite

Bushell et al., 2017, Cell 170, 260–272
July 13, 2017 ª 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2017.06.030

Article
Functional Profiling of a Plasmodium Genome
Reveals an Abundance of Essential Genes
Ellen Bushell,1,6 Ana Rita Gomes,1,6 Theo Sanderson,1,6 Burcu Anar,1 Gareth Girling,1 Colin Herd,1 Tom Metcalf,1
Katarzyna Modrzynska,1 Frank Schwach,1 Rowena E. Martin,2 Michael W. Mather,3 Geoffrey I. McFadden,4
Leopold Parts,1 Gavin G. Rutledge,1 Akhil B. Vaidya,3 Kai Wengelnik,5 Julian C. Rayner,1,* and Oliver Billker1,7,*
1Wellcome

Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridgeshire, UK
School of Biology, Australian National University, Canberra, Australia
3Drexel University College of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA
4School of Biosciences, University of Melbourne, Royal Parade, Parkville, Australia
5DIMNP, CNRS, INSERM, University Montpellier, Montpellier, France
6These authors contributed equally
7Lead Contact
*Correspondence: julian.rayner@sanger.ac.uk (J.C.R.), oliver.billker@sanger.ac.uk (O.B.)
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2017.06.030
2Research

SUMMARY

The genomes of malaria parasites contain many
genes of unknown function. To assist drug development through the identification of essential genes
and pathways, we have measured competitive
growth rates in mice of 2,578 barcoded Plasmodium
berghei knockout mutants, representing >50% of the
genome, and created a phenotype database. At a
single stage of its complex life cycle, P. berghei requires two-thirds of genes for optimal growth, the
highest proportion reported from any organism and
a probable consequence of functional optimization
necessitated by genomic reductions during the evolution of parasitism. In contrast, extreme functional
redundancy has evolved among expanded gene
families operating at the parasite-host interface.
The level of genetic redundancy in a single-celled organism may thus reflect the degree of environmental
variation it experiences. In the case of Plasmodium
parasites, this helps rationalize both the relative successes of drugs and the greater difficulty of making
an effective vaccine.
INTRODUCTION
Throughout the tree of life, the evolution of parasitism has been
accompanied by drastic reductions in genome size and gene
numbers (Jackson et al., 2016; Vivarès et al., 2002; Wolf and
Koonin, 2013). Prominent examples are found in the phylum Apicomplexa, one of the most successful taxa of parasitic protozoa.
The Apicomplexa include important parasites of livestock and
human pathogens, such as Toxoplasma gondii, which infects
approximately one-third of the human population and causes
pathology in immunodeficient individuals and malaria parasites
(genus Plasmodium), among which P. falciparum remains the
biggest killer of all parasites, leading to an estimated 214 million
clinical cases and 438,000 deaths annually (WHO, 2015).

The evolution of Apicomplexa from a free-living, photosynthetic ancestor with a red algal plastid and a broad repertoire
of genes was accompanied by drastic gene losses (Woo et al.,
2015). However, genomic reduction is not limited to parasites
and may be the predominant mode of genome evolution overall
(Wolf and Koonin, 2013). The consequences of shrinking genomes on the importance of the individual genes that are retained has never been explored systematically. In free-living
organisms such as Escherichia coli, Saccharomyces cerevisiae,
Drosophila melanogaster, or Caenorhabditis elegans, the majority of genes have no loss-of-function phenotypes when tested
under laboratory conditions (Dietzl et al., 2007; Gerdes et al.,
2003; Giaever et al., 2002; Kamath et al., 2003; Winzeler et al.,
1999), even though many genes are highly conserved in
evolution and must therefore fulfil important functions. In
S. cerevisiae, many loss-of-function phenotypes were only revealed through pairwise gene disruptions, leading to the notion
of genetic buffering, i.e., that networks of functionally overlapping genes provide protection against mutation (Boone
et al., 2007; Costanzo et al., 2010). Functions for almost all genes
were found by varying the conditions under which growth assays
were conducted, supporting an alternative concept that most
genes in single-celled eukaryotes contribute to survival only in
specific environments (Hillenmeyer et al., 2008).
Whether these same models hold true in the reduced genomes of parasites is unknown, and there are plausible counter
arguments. On the one hand, parasites have outsourced important metabolic functions to the host, and the smaller range of
challenges faced in an intracellular environment might predict
that each gene retained by the parasite should, on average,
contribute more to survival. On the other hand, for malaria parasites to gain access to the relatively predictable environment inside a red blood cell, they need a complex life cycle to travel between hosts. This involves transmission through a blood-sucking
mosquito vector in which the parasite reproduces sexually and
lives extracellularly, including being exposed directly to the immune system of the vector. In the mosquito, and during the obligatory intracellular liver stage that precedes colonization of the
blood, malaria parasites experience very different environments,
each requiring genes to fulfil stage-specific functions (Aly et al.,

260 Cell 170, 260–272, July 13, 2017 ª 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc.
This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

2009). These factors could clearly lead to a gain in genome
complexity and a consequent increase in overall redundancy.
Understanding the pressures that influence gene function in
parasites is of more than theoretical importance. The repeated
and rapid evolution of antimalarial drug resistance remains the
largest single challenge to malaria control, with resistance to
artemisinin-combination therapies, the current front-line treatment, now well established and spreading in Southeast Asia
(Saunders and Lon, 2016). The identification of drug targets is
therefore a continual and urgent need. Knowing the genes and
biochemical pathways that contribute to parasite growth during
the asexual blood stages, which cause all the symptoms and
pathology of malaria, will be critical to guide the discovery and
prioritization of targets for curative drugs. Furthermore, the
chance of finding compounds that act on multiple life-cycle
stages, a key priority for antimalarial drug development (Burrows
et al., 2017), will be directly related to the number of essential
genes with stage-transcending functions.
Plasmodium species possess compact genomes of 18–30 Mb,
which encode 4,600–4,700 core protein-coding genes, along with
a varying number of largely subtelomeric multigene families,
distributed across 14 chromosomes (e.g., Otto et al., 2014).
No genome scale functional screen has been carried out in any
Plasmodium species, which are hard to transfect, have low
homologous recombination rates, and whose genomes are so
AT-rich and repetitive that manipulating their DNA in E. coli is
challenging. Recent innovations in the genetic system of
P. berghei, a malaria parasite infecting rodents, have overcome
major roadblocks for large-scale reverse genetic screens in this
species. Recombinase-mediated engineering of AT-rich DNA
(Pfander et al., 2011) has enabled the creation of the Plasmodium
genetic modification community resource, PlasmoGEM, which
contains knockout vectors that integrate efficiently and carry
gene-specific molecular barcodes (Schwach et al., 2015). Here,
we use this resource to measure growth rate phenotypes in
mice for 2,578 P. berghei genes, representing more than half of
its protein-coding genome. We estimate that almost two-thirds
of parasite genes contribute to normal asexual growth of the
blood stage in vivo, an unexpectedly large number for a single
phase of a complex life cycle, which we propose is a consequence of genomic reduction during the evolution of parasitism.
RESULTS
Determining Growth Rate Phenotypes from Barcode
Counts
In the absence of a continuous culture system for asexual blood
stages, creating arrayed libraries of knockout clones would be
impractical in P. berghei. To increase scale, we therefore generated pools of mutants by simultaneously co-transfecting multiple
barcoded vectors. The optimal pool size was determined by the
overall transfection efficiency and by the variance in integration
rates between individual vectors. The library was screened in
58 pools of 100 barcoded vectors in inbred mice, as illustrated
in Figure 1A.
Following elimination of wild-type parasites by drug selection,
the relative growth rate (RGR) for each mutant was determined
by counting barcodes in daily blood samples on a next-genera-

tion sequencer (Gomes et al., 2015). Changes in barcode abundance were normalized against seven control vectors each pool.
Some mutants increased over time, while others dropped out on
different days depending on their competitive fitness and their
initial abundance. We therefore aggregated data from at least
three replicate transfections into a single best estimate of RGR
and calculated a 95% confidence interval (CI) for each mutant.
To validate the initial screen the majority of vectors (69.6%)
were retransfected in at least one additional pool. These validation pools were configured with different compositions to assess
the impact of pool composition on phenotype, with the most
abundant mutants from the first rounds excluded from rescreening to make rarer mutants more readily detectable.
RGR measurements were generated for 2,578 genes (Table
S1), increasing more than 5-fold the number of P. berghei genes
for which phenotype data had previously been recorded
(RMgmDB) (Khan et al., 2013). The screen covered all 14 chromosomes evenly (Figure 1B), with the exception of the subtelomeric regions, as discussed below. In Figure 1C, growth measurements for all mutants are plotted against a measure of
confidence, which we derive from a model of the variance underlying the barcode counts. The observed variance between
independent measurements of the control genes was low (Figure 1D), showing RGR values to be robust. Four growth phenotypes could be distinguished: essential genes, slow growing
mutants, dispensable genes, and fast growers. These are
color-coded in Figure 1C and defined and illustrated with
examples in Figure 1E. A phenotype database was built to
browse, search, download, and analyze RGR measurements,
which also offers access to the raw daily barcode ratios from
individual transfections (http://plasmogem.sanger.ac.uk). The
computed confidence score for RGR in one pool of vectors
was a strong predictor of reproducibility for the same gene
tested in a second validation pool, showing phenotypes could
be measured reliably in a way that was largely independent of
pool composition and validating both the re-screening and
analysis strategy (Figure 1F).
Most P. berghei Genes Are Required for Normal Growth
of Asexual Blood Stages In Vivo
We found 44.9% of genes were essential, and a further 18.0% of
mutants showed reduced growth (Figure 2A). Thus, 62.9% of
genes were required for normal asexual growth of P. berghei
in mice, an unexpectedly large proportion considering that
genome-wide knockout screens in other organisms showed
much lower levels of essentiality (Figure 2A; Table 1) (Alsford
et al., 2011; Barquist et al., 2013; Giaever et al., 2002; Kamath
et al., 2003; Sidik et al., 2016).
Genes in the screen were representative of the genome with
respect to all parameters tested, including gene length, AT
content, expression profiles, and functional annotation. The
only exception were members of a large multigene family of
Plasmodium interspersed repeat (pir) genes with roles in
immune evasion, which were underrepresented in the vector
resource, probably due to their repetitive DNA sequence (Figures
S1A–S1D; Table S2). The pir family accounts for only 2.0%
of P. berghei genes (Otto et al., 2014). The impact of the
underrepresentation of pir genes on the unexpected phenotype

Cell 170, 260–272, July 13, 2017 261

Figure 1. A BarSeq Screen for Parasite Growth Rate
(A) Schematic illustration of screen design.
(B) Circos plot showing, from the outer to inner circle, chromosome, mutant RGR (color coded by phenotype as in E), extent of previous phenotyping as reported
on RMgmDB, and coverage in our screen.
(C) Screenshot of the PlasmoGEM phenotype viewer showing RGR measurements plotted against confidence expressed as the negative logarithm of their
variance. See (E) for color coding of phenotypes.
(D) Frequency distribution of the >50 RGR replicates available for six control genes compared to essential ribosomal genes.
(E) Asexual growth phenotypes defined using confidence intervals (CI) and illustrated with representative genes.
(F) Graph on the left showing percentage of genes with at least one RGR measurement at a given confidence limit (black circles) and how confidence relates to
experimental reproducibility (blue squares). Reproducibility of independent duplicates is illustrated by the regression plot on the right for confidence 4 or above, a
level reached by at least one measurement for 85% of genes in the screen.
See also Figure S1 and Table S1.

distribution is therefore minimal, although we find most pirs unsurprisingly dispensable.
Comparing RGR data with previously published data showed
the rate of technical failure was low, as the screen correctly classified 190 of 207 known viable P. berghei mutants recorded in

262 Cell 170, 260–272, July 13, 2017

RMgmDB (Figure 2B). It additionally identified 48 viable mutants
for genes that had previously been targeted without success.
Most of these new viable mutants had attenuated growth phenotypes, which provides a rationale for previous failed attempts to
create and clone these mutants. Ten of these unexpectedly

Figure 2. Most P. berghei Genes Are
Required for Normal Growth of Asexual
Blood Stages In Vivo
(A) Frequency distribution of phenotypes in
P. berghei compared to published data from other
eukaryotes. Data from yeast are for growth in rich
medium. Data from T. gondii are from a CRISPRCas9 screen in human foreskin fibroblasts. Genes
required for normal growth are hatched red/blue
since lethality and reduced growth phenotypes
were not distinguished. Salmonella Typhimurium
genes are for normal growth in medium (red) or
additionally required for oral colonization of farm
animals (hatched). T. brucei data is from an RNAi
in vitro screen. See text for data sources.
(B) BarSeq phenotypes compared to published
data from RMgmDB.
(C) Average RGR and phenotype distribution for
predicted essential genes. Gene numbers per
category shown next to pie charts. Enrichment for
essential genes is significant at p < 0.001 for ribosomal genes and p < 0.1 for known drug targets.
(D) All expressed genes covered by the screen
were grouped into nine clusters depending on their
relative expression across five life-cycle stages. All
genes within a cluster were weighted equally.
(E) For each cluster, the proportion of normalized
read counts from sexual (gametocyte and ookinete) versus asexual developmental stages was
calculated (‘‘sexiness’’) and plotted against the
proportion of dispensable genes in that cluster.
Ring, ring stage parasites; Tro, trophozoites; Sch,
schizonts; Gam, gametocytes; Ook, ookinetes.
See also Figures S2 and S3 and Tables S3 and S4.

dispensable genes were selected for individual experimental
validation and all were confirmed as dispensable in single transfections (Figure S2A), suggesting the longer homology arms of
PlasmoGEM vectors increase targeting efficiency and reveal
phenotypes previously masked by technical failure. In such
past experiments, locus inaccessibility may have been mistaken
for gene essentiality. We tested this by transfecting matched
C-terminal tagging vectors for one pool of mutants (Figure S2B).
These were able to target the majority of essential genes, indicating that essential loci were generally accessible. In summary,
experimental validation and benchmarking against published
data lead us to conclude that only 2%–3% of all genes in the
screen are misidentified as essential. Estimates for how many
essential genes were falsely identified as dispensable are more
difficult to generate, because very few Plasmodium genes have
been confirmed as essential by strong experimental evidence
due to the relatively recent development of tightly regulatable
conditional genetic systems. However, we believe the number

of false dispensable genes to be low, as
the list of essential genes concurred with
previous findings. The screen correctly
recognized ribosomal genes and known
drug targets as important for parasite
growth (Figure 2C; Table S3), and the ratio
of sexual versus asexual expression of a
gene (Figure 2D; Table S4) was a strong predictor of phenotype
in the asexual blood stage, as would be expected. Genes with
high expression in asexual blood forms were characterized by
very low dispensability of 25%, rising to 88% in a cluster of
209 genes with highest expression in gametocytes (Figure 2E).
In summary, we conclude that RGR phenotypes are reproducible and reflect biological function for a large majority of genes.
Of 2,578 mutants, just two grew significantly faster than wildtype parasites. The top hit (RGR CI: 1.15–1.34) is the knockout of
ap2-g, the master regulator of gametocytogenesis, a transcription factor that functions as master regulator of gametocytogenesis by diverting a proportion of replicating asexual parasites into
non-proliferative gametocytes (Sinha et al., 2014). Spontaneous
mutations in ap2-g, which increase their rate of asexual growth,
occur if parasites are not regularly transmitted through mosquitoes to select against loss of gametocyte production (Sinha
et al., 2014). A second gene, PBANKA_145120 (RGR CI: 1.01–
1.25) is barely significant and may represent a false positive.

Cell 170, 260–272, July 13, 2017 263

Table 1. Gene Essentiality and Genome Size of Selected Species

Species

Genome
Size (Mb)

S. cerevisiae

12.1

Protein
Coding
Genes
5,916

Genes
Contributing
to Normal Growth

%

Assay

Method

Reference

1,105 essential

34.9

competitive growth
in rich medium

barcoded mutants
quantified on
nucleotide arrays

Giaever et al., 2002;
Deutschbauer et al.,
2005

962 slow
Trypanosoma
brucei

35.0

7,500

2,745

36.6

6-day extracellular blood
stream forms in vitro

RNA interference

Alsford et al., 2011

Toxoplasma
gondii

63.0

8,158

3,263b

40.0

intracellular tachyzoites
in cultured fibroblasts

CRISPR gRNA screen

Sidik et al., 2016

P. berghei

18.5

4,616a

2,123b essential

62.9b

relative asexual
intraerythrocytic growth
in vivo

BarSeq

this study

b

803 slow
a

Core genome according to Otto et al. (2014).
Extrapolated from the covered genome.

b

Other genes required for gametocyte formation (Boisson et al.,
2011; Guttery et al., 2014) do not provide a growth advantage
in the current screen because they act after the point when
commitment to sexual development has become irreversible.
This scarcity of fast growing mutants was expected, because
kin selection would create a strong evolutionary pressure to
minimize mutational targets that allow parasites to grow faster
at the expense of ending transmission from a host.
A total of 915 mutants lacked a significant growth phenotype,
but their relative abundance nevertheless varied reproducibly
over two orders of magnitude (Figure S3A), mainly because vector-specific rates of homologous recombination were determined by the length of their homology arms (Figures S3B and
S3C). Integration efficiency was poor for a small number of vectors with geometric mean arm length below 1.25 kb, the minimum arm length for robust BarSeq screening (Figure S3D), but
continued to increase with increasing arm length up to at least
10 kb (Figure S3C). The phenotype distribution shown in Figure 2A was calculated with 200 suboptimal vectors omitted to
avoid biasing the result toward essential genes.
Phenotype Distribution Is Determined by Phylogeny, Not
the Experimental System Used
A recent CRISPR screen in T. gondii grown in cultured human
cells identified a much lower proportion of genes contributing
to normal growth (Sidik et al., 2016). The higher rate of essential
and slow growing mutants in our screen, which was carried out
in vivo, raised the possibility that in vitro systems may fail to
reveal phenotypes for many loss-of-function mutations. If true,
this would limit the utility of the important and widely used
in vitro culture system for P. falciparum, so we systematically
compared the P. berghei and T. gondii data. Of 2,034 genes
with 1:1 orthologs in P. berghei and T. gondii, 1,140 have phenotypic data in both screens (Table S5). The proportion of genes
important for normal growth is increased in this conserved set
(Figure 3A), but gene functions are only moderately correlated
between species overall (Figure 3B). GO terms enriched in genes
with discordant phenotypes (Figures 3C and 3D) either recapitulate known biological differences between species, such as an
increased importance of mitochondrial energy metabolism in

264 Cell 170, 260–272, July 13, 2017

T. gondii (essential tricarboxylic acid cycle) (MacRae et al.,
2012; Ke et al., 2015), confirm anticipated results (homologybased repair of double strand breaks is more important in
P. berghei, which lacks the alternative NHEJ pathway) (Kirkman
et al., 2014), or reveal unexpected differences (e.g., less
redundancy among prenylation and palmitoylation enzymes in
P. berghei).
The considerable level of disagreement between phenotypes
in T. gondii and P. berghei might reflect differences between
taxa or between experimental conditions (in vitro versus in vivo).
We therefore asked which of these screens best agreed with a
curated database of P. falciparum gene disruption attempts
(Sanderson and Rayner, 2017), all conducted in vitro. We saw
that genes important for growth in P. berghei were almost invariably impossible to disrupt in P. falciparum (50 out of 57 genes),
irrespective of their phenotype in T. gondii (Figure 3E). When
the analysis was extended beyond 1:1:1 orthologs to all homologous pairs (Figure 3F), P. berghei remained by far the best predictor of gene function in P. falciparum. While many dispensable
P. berghei genes do have failed disruption attempts reported in
P. falciparum, we interpret this as reflecting the more challenging
genetic system in P. falciparum. Collectively, this analysis shows
that the high number of essential genes in P. berghei probably
extends to P. falciparum, and it reflects the selection pressures
under which parasite genomes evolve, rather than the experimental system under which they are assayed.
Opposing Evolutionary Pressures Are Shaping the
Plasmodium Genome
The high proportion of essential genes in P. berghei seems at
odds with the fact that many well-studied aspects of Plasmodium pathogenesis involve expanded gene families that allow
parasites to use alternative erythrocyte invasion pathways
(e.g., Duraisingh et al., 2003) or mechanisms for cytoadherence
and immune evasion (Maier et al., 2008). Consistent with current
concepts, we find that many proteins on the merozoite surface or
secreted from micronemes during host cell invasion are dispensable (Figure 4; Table S3). Gene products exported into the host
erythrocyte contain an even larger proportion of dispensable
genes, while the conserved machinery for exporting these

Figure 3. Comparison of Phenotypes for Orthologous Genes across Three Apicomplexan Species
(A) The distribution of 1:1 orthologous genes in P. berghei and T. gondii (data from Sidik et al., 2016) is significantly shifted toward essentiality as compared to nonshared genes.
(B) There is highly significant correlation of phenotypes between species for orthologous genes, but there are also numerous genes without conserved
phenotypes.
(C) All significantly enriched GO terms among genes that are more dispensable in P. berghei (shaded area).
(D) Same as in (C) but for genes more dispensable in T. gondii (shaded area).
(E) Left: data as in (B) but overlaid with published P. falciparum phenotypes (Sanderson and Rayner, 2017). Right: data from pairwise comparisons. P. falciparum
phenotypes are color coded (green, viable mutant; red, confirmed essential or disruption failed).
See also Table S5.

proteins from the parasite (plasmodium translocon of exported
proteins [PTEX]) is predictably important (Figure 4).
Most redundant gene products acting at the parasite-host
interface have evolved recently in the genus, and we therefore
asked more generally how the evolutionary history of genes
was related to their current phenotype. Genes under purifying
selection in African populations of P. falciparum, or characterized by a higher degree of amino acid conservation, contribute
more strongly to normal growth in P. berghei (Figures 5A–5C;
Table S6). Looking beyond the genus Plasmodium, the history
of genes during apicomplexan evolution predicted gene function

in P. berghei more generally. In particular, genes acquired during
two major genomic reduction events, i.e., the loss of 3,862 ortholog groups during the emergence of the Apicomplexa and then
the loss of a further 1,199 with the acquisition of an intraerythrocytic lifestyle by the Hematozoa (Woo et al., 2015), were much
more likely to contribute to asexual stage growth than genes acquired at other points during the ancestral lineage leading to
Plasmodium (Figure 5D). A substantial group of 1,174 genes
has resisted gene loss and are present in all hematozoan genomes analyzed to date. Eighty-six percent of this large class
contributes to blood stage growth, including many functionally

Cell 170, 260–272, July 13, 2017 265

Figure 4. Reduced Essentiality among
Genes Involved in Direct Interactions with
the Host
Phenotype distributions for secreted and surface
proteins of the invasive merozoite and for proteins
exported from the asexual intraerythrocytic parasite are shown as pie charts using the same colors
as in Figure 2. Gene numbers in each category are
next to violin plots showing RGR. Enrichment in
dispensable genes is significant for bir (p < 0.02),
fam, and ‘‘other exported’’ (both p < 0.01).
See also Table S3.

unannotated genes (Table S6), which may have conserved roles
in the erythrocytic life style of Hematozoa. Together, these data
link the dramatic reduction of the genome during hematozoan
evolution to a marked functional optimization, probably resulting
in the high degree of genetic essentiality in the conserved core
genome.
Growth Rate Phenotypes Identify Essential Biological
Pathways
The identification of 1,196 genes likely to contribute to normal
parasite growth in vivo provides an opportunity to define the
biological pathways crucial for blood-stage growth, which
will help validate or deprioritize targets for future antimalarial
drugs. 74 gene ontology (GO) terms and metabolic pathways
are significantly enriched in essential, dispensable, or slow
phenotypes (Figure S4A; Table S7). We identify potentially
druggable pathways, key metabolic processes, housekeeping,
and biogenesis functions. Over a third of P. berghei genes
still lack known domains or predictable functions, but many
of these are nevertheless important for normal growth
(Figure S4B).
As expected, essential genes were enriched in most basic
cellular processes, including transcription, mRNA splicing,
translation, vesicular transport, and proteasomal protein degradation. Among the lipid metabolic pathways, glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor biosynthesis is the most clearly essential
in blood stages (p < 0.05, Figure S4C). GPI-anchored surface
proteins have important functions in specific life-cycle stages
and the essential nature of the pathway, which is druggable in
fungi (Mann et al., 2015), may thus provide targets for multi-stage
inhibitors. Enzymes involved in phosphatidylcholine biosynthesis, which are thought to include the targets of bis-thiazolium
drugs (Wengelnik et al., 2002) were associated with severely
reduced growth (p < 0.05). In marked contrast, although Plasmodium blood stages can synthesize sphingolipids de novo and the
pathway has been proposed for drug development (PankovaKholmyansky and Flescher, 2006), none of the implicated genes

266 Cell 170, 260–272, July 13, 2017

were important for normal growth in vivo,
suggesting that sphingolipids may be
scavenged from the host (p < 0.02).
Unstudied cellular functions enriched in
attenuated growth phenotypes include
biosynthetic pathways for glutamate and
glucosamine (all p < 0.05), genes involved
in cellular stress responses (p < 0.02), and methyltransferases
with likely functions in chromatin regulation (p < 0.05), all of which
may be promising targets for future drug development.
Apicomplexan parasites possess a highly derived mitochondrial genome, which could indicate adaptation to parasitic
existence and is reflected in a reduced set of mitochondrial
metabolic pathways relative to model organisms (Vaidya and
Mather, 2009). Plasmodium mitochondria are nevertheless
essential, housing parts of critical pathways supplying molecules
essential for nucleic acid metabolism, DNA replication, DNA
repair, transcription, and maturation of various components of
the parasite’s translational apparatus (Figure 6A). The mitochondrially located enzyme dihydroorotate dehydrogenase is
important for the synthesis of pyrimidines and is supported by
the mitochondrial electron transport chain (mtETC). Other metabolic processes depend on a number of enzymes requiring iron
sulfur cofactors, which are ultimately supplied by the mitochondrial iron-sulfur cluster biogenesis system. Thus, dihydroorotate
dehydrogenase, many components of the mtETC and assembly
factors, the ubiquinone biosynthesis pathway, and the ironsulfur biogenesis pathway are essential, as are the supporting
maintenance machinery, including mtDNA polymerase, mitochondrial ribosomes, the protein import machinery, and several
transporters.
Asexual blood-stage parasites obtain most of their ATP via
aerobic glycolysis in the cytoplasm, and glycolytic enzymes
are largely essential as expected. Conversion of pyruvate from
glycolysis to mitochondrial acetyl-CoA in Apicomplexa is mediated by the branched-chain keto acid dehydrogenase (BCKDH)
complex (Oppenheim et al., 2014), all tested subunits of which
have an attenuated growth phenotype (Figure 6A). Similarly,
the mitochondrial tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle, which uses
acetyl-CoA to power the mitochondrial electron transport chain,
and the ATP synthase complex, are significantly enriched for
slow growth phenotypes, although some of its enzymes are
entirely dispensable for asexual blood stage growth, as reported
previously for P. falciparum (Ke et al., 2015).

Figure 5. Genomic Reduction and High
Gene Essentiality during the Evolution of
Hematozoa
(A) Phenotype distributions for the P. berghei
orthologs of genes under purifying selection in
P. falciparum (dN/dS <1) and genes potentially
under positive selection in P. falciparum (dN/dS >1)
compared to P. berghei genes without orthologs in
P. falciparum.
(B) Genes highly conserved between Plasmodium
species are enriched for essential phenotypes.
Genes are ranked by their conservation between
P. chabaudi and P. falciparum (according to the
MalariaGEN Plasmodium falciparum Community
Project, 2016) with the phenotype distribution of
P. berghei orthologs and different conservation
levels plotted.
(C) Phenotype is significantly predictive of interspecies conservation score (***p < 0.0001).
(D) The evolutionary history of P. berghei is
shown through the gain and loss of groups of
orthologs as reconstructed using a Dollo parsimony model (* taken from Woo et al. [2015]). Bar
charts show relative distribution of P. berghei
phenotypes among extant genes belonging to
the orthologous groups gained during each
phase: Phase I, from the free-living protoapicomplexan to the first apicomplexan; Phase
II, from the first apicomplexan to the ancestor of
the piroplasms and coccidians; Phase III, from this ancestor to the first hematozoan; Phase IV, from the first hematozoan to the first malaria parasite; and
Phase V, from the first malaria parasite to P. berghei.
See also Table S6.

Malaria parasites have a relic plastid known as the apicoplast,
which has lost the ability to photosynthesize, but fulfils crucial
biosynthetic functions. Our screen confirms chemical supplementation of in vitro cultured blood stage P. falciparum that
showed isopentenyl pyrophosphate (IPP) synthesis as a critical
apicoplast function in erythrocytes (Yeh and DeRisi, 2011) (Figure 6A, p < 0.05), as well as Fe:S cluster synthesis, which supports IPP synthesis enzymes. Conversely, fatty acid synthesis,
which is only essential during the liver phase in P. berghei
(Shears et al., 2015), is clearly dispensable (p < 0.1). Heme synthesis is shared across the mitochondrion, cytosol, and apicoplast and is essential during the mosquito phase of the
P. berghei life cycle but not the blood phase (Sigala and Goldberg, 2014), and we find it enriched for dispensable phenotypes
(p < 0.1). The machinery to replicate, repair, transcribe, and
translate the apicoplast genome, which encodes 30 proteins,
is essential (p < 0.1–0.001) (Figure 6A). Also crucial, is the machinery to import 500 nucleus-encoded, cytosol-synthesized
apicoplast proteins and chaperones and proteases to maintain
quality control of these proteins (p < 0.01). Apicoplast transporters, most with unknown but apparently critical roles, are
similarly indispensable. Our screen flags hundreds of priority apicoplast targets, all of which are prokaryotic in ancestry and thus
predisposed to high selectivity against the human host equivalents in a similar vein to antibacterials. Table S3 lists the predicted components of apicoplast and mitochondrial pathways
and their growth phenotypes.
In a parasite whose metabolism is intertwined with that of the
host, solute transporters can assume particular significance, and

our screen confirms that among the 79 targeted transporters of
known and unknown specificity (Martin et al., 2009) 26 are
essential and a further 19 are required for normal growth. Unsurprisingly, many of the transporters that support fundamental requirements of the cell, such as the acquisition and distribution of
energy and the generation of transmembrane ion gradients, are
essential or have slow growth phenotypes (Figure 6B). When
considered alongside published knockout phenotypes (Table
S8), the data also reveals that a number of the transporters
with putative roles in lipid scavenging and the generation of
membrane lipid asymmetry are required for normal growth
(Figure 6B).
Transporters also play a central role in drug resistance, and
to date, 12 Plasmodium transporters have been implicated as
drug targets and/or mediators of resistance (Table S8). The
essentiality of three of the transporters (CRT, MDR1, and
UGT) was not unexpected (Figure 6B) given that resistanceconferring polymorphisms in these proteins impart fitness
costs to the parasite (Rosenthal, 2013). The conflicting evolutionary forces acting upon these resistance determinants
could be exploited by rationally designed drug combinations
(Summers et al., 2012). The observation that many of
the resistance determinants are not essential (e.g., MRP2,
ABCG1, and ACT; Figure 6B) highlights the risk in dismissing
transporters with slow or dispensable phenotypes as unimportant. Dispensable transporters offer the parasite the means
to develop drug resistance without incurring a significant
fitness cost and thus represent opportunities for evolution
and adaption.

Cell 170, 260–272, July 13, 2017 267

(legend on next page)

268 Cell 170, 260–272, July 13, 2017

DISCUSSION
Obligate intracellular parasites have, until recently, posed insurmountable technical challenges for large reverse genetic screens.
Here, we have demonstrated that simultaneous phenotyping of
barcoded P. berghei mutants offers a systematic and unbiased
way of measuring phenotypes, identifying gene functions on a
genome scale in an intracellular parasite in vivo. Screening a
representative vector library covering more than half of all
P. berghei protein-coding genes, we identify 1,652 genes
required for parasite growth in mice. By extrapolation, we predict
62.9% of the core P. berghei genome to be important for normal
development during asexual blood stages. This is in marked
contrast to studies in free-living model organisms and other parasites (Table 1) reporting a high degree of functional redundancy,
which have posed a quandary because all genes must be subject
to selection pressures that cause them to be retained throughout
long periods of evolution.
For multicellular organisms, an explanation for the missing phenotypes was offered by data showing that most loss-of-function
mutations had subtle effects on overall fitness that were only revealed either by using a broad phenotyping pipeline, as in the
mouse (White et al., 2013), or by letting C. elegans mutants
compete over many generations (Ramani et al., 2012). In yeast,
substantially more phenotypes were revealed in genetic-interaction screens. Disrupting genes in a pairwise fashion identified
phenotypes for most yeast genes, which gave rise to the idea
that dispensable genes can provide a buffer for genetic mutations
(Boone et al., 2007) allowing these to persist longer and recombine within the gene pool of a sexually-reproducing population.
Plasmodium genomes are very polymorphic (Manske et al.,
2012), and the abundance of essential genes in P. berghei, which
undergoes obligatory sexual reproduction and is haploid in the
blood stages, suggests that buffering does not play a significant
role in the Plasmodium genome.
An alternative explanation for the abundance of dispensable
genes in most eukaryotes, compared to the much reduced number in P. berghei, is that the robustness of genetic networks reflects an ability to survive in different environments. That most
mutants will reveal a phenotype if assayed under the right condition is supported by screens of haploid yeast mutant collections
under many different conditions (Hillenmeyer et al., 2008), but we
have shown here that the highly-reduced Plasmodium genome
does not pose a missing-phenotype quandary. However, parasites experience less environmental variation than most freeliving organisms because their hosts act as homeostats that control their internal milieu within narrow physiological parameters,
which is thought to lead to the strong trend among parasites toward genomic reduction. Our data support the model that this

limited environmental variation is also responsible for the lack
of functional redundancy in the Plasmodium genetic network.
The high degree of gene essentiality in P. berghei is not simply
a feature of a pathogenic lifestyle per se. Screening of dense
transposon libraries of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium, for instance, has revealed that only 7.5% of genes are
required for growth in rich medium (Barquist et al., 2013), rising
to an estimated 24%–36% for effective intestinal colonization
(Chaudhuri et al., 2013). In the extracellular blood parasite,
Trypanosoma brucei, whose genome carries relatively fewer
signs of genomic reduction (Jackson et al., 2016), only 36.6%
of 7,435 genes contribute to normal growth in culture (Alsford
et al., 2011), and in the obligate intracellular parasite, T. gondii,
only 40% of 8,000 genes contribute to normal growth in
cultured human fibroblasts (Sidik et al., 2016) and far fewer are
thought to be truly essential. T. gondii tachyzoites can replicate
in a wide range of tissues in birds and mammals, which maximizes their chances of transmission. Environmental variation
may thus provide an explanation for both their larger genome
and greater proportion of dispensable genes.
An alternative explanation for differences in phenotype distribution between P. berghei and T. gondii could be the use of an
in vitro culture model by Sidik et al. (2016). In the absence of
an efficient culture system in P. berghei, we could not test this
possibility directly, but a comparison with published data for
324 P. falciparum genes generated in vitro revealed no evidence
that culturing Plasmodium-infected erythrocytes would fail to
detect large numbers of functionally-important parasite genes.
This is reassuring because cell-based screens for antiplasmodial
compounds rely heavily on P. falciparum in vitro culture models.
It should be noted that the relatively small curated P. falciparum
essential gene set may not be representative of the genome as a
whole, and suspected essentiality of a P. falciparum gene often
relies on anecdotal evidence that a gene cannot be disrupted.
Despite these caveats, which illustrate the value of this first systematic genetic screen in a Plasmodium parasite, these considerations collectively support our interpretation that a high proportion of genes contributing to normal growth may coincide
with the genomic reduction in the evolutionary lineage that led
to the acquisition of an intraerythrocytic life style by the ancestral
hematozoan (Woo et al., 2015). It is also intriguing that genomescale knockout screens from protozoan parasites consistently
identify 3,000 genes as important for normal growth of a single
life-cycle stage (Table 1), regardless of the particular assay and
genetic methodology used.
To find that parasite genes whose products interact directly
with the host are more likely to be dispensable is no surprise, but
is shown here systematically for the first time. Antigenic diversification and functional redundancy represent the response of the

Figure 6. Knockout Phenotypes of Selected Organellar Pathways and Transport Functions
(A) RGR and phenotype distribution of putative mitochondrial and apicoplast genes. See Table S3 for genes in each category. Violin plots show growth rate
distributions with the horizontal line indicating the median. Number of genes per category is stated.
(B) Knockout phenotypes of selected Plasmodium transporters. Dispensable, slow, and essential phenotypes are indicated by the green, blue, and red boxes,
respectively. The phenotypes are from this study (top box) and from published P. berghei (middle box) and P. falciparum (bottom box) studies. Pumps (i.e.,
primary active transporters) are shown in pink and carriers (i.e., uniporters, symporters, and antiporters) in aqua. Examples of the antimalarial drugs affected by
the resistance determinants are listed below each transporter.
See also Figure S4 and Tables S7 and S8.

Cell 170, 260–272, July 13, 2017 269

parasite to a changeable environment that results not only from
the adaptive immune response of the host, but also from an
ongoing evolutionary arms race thought to have given rise to
the human ABO blood group system (Cserti and Dzik, 2007),
among other polymorphisms. They also pose major challenges
to malaria vaccine development (Crompton et al., 2010). Importantly, however, we also show the evolutionary trend toward
functional redundancy affects only a small and well-defined
part of the genome, while the majority of genes contribute
significantly to normal asexual growth. This means there must
be substantially more druggable targets in Plasmodium than,
for instance, in bacteria.
The fact that P. berghei needs to deploy most of its reduced
genome to grow optimally suggests the transcriptome must be
similarly optimized, which may explain the oft-noted limited
capacity of P. falciparum to mount adaptive transcriptional responses (e.g., Rovira-Graells et al., 2012). Even more importantly, it means that most genes must function at multiple points
in the life cycle, which helps rationalize why many antiplasmodial
compounds discovered through their ability to kill cultured blood
stages can also function as the multi-stage drugs now considered crucial for malaria eradication (Burrows et al., 2017). Recent
progress in this area can now be understood in the light of a high
degree of genetic essentiality in the Plasmodium genome.
Further experimental support for the concept of abundant
pleiotropic functions of Plasmodium genes will require the development of a knockout system that is both scalable and inducible
to identify essential gene functions systematically at multiple lifecycle stages. In the meantime, BarSeq, with the available vector
library, will enable detailed phenotyping of slow growing mutants, screens for other blood stage phenotypes, and functional
characterization of dispensable genes at other life-cycle stages.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

STAR+METHODS

Aurrecoechea, C., Brestelli, J., Brunk, B.P., Fischer, S., Gajria, B., Gao, X.,
Gingle, A., Grant, G., Harb, O.S., Heiges, M., et al. (2010). EuPathDB: a portal
to eukaryotic pathogen databases. Nucleic Acids Res. 38, D415–D419.

Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper
and include the following:
d
d
d
d

d

d

KEY RESOURCES TABLE
CONTACT FOR RESOURCE AND REAGENT SHARING
EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
B Parasites and animals
METHOD DETAILS
B Pooled transfections
B Measuring relative growth rates
QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
B Analysis of barseq results
B Gene conservation analysis
B Reconstruction of gene losses and gains
B GO term enrichment
B Expression analysis
DATA AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITY

SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information includes four figures, eight tables, and one data file
and can be found with this article online at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.
2017.06.030.

270 Cell 170, 260–272, July 13, 2017

Conceptualization, O.B. and J.C.R.; Methodology, A.R.G., T.S., E.B., and L.P.;
Software, F.S. and T.S.; Formal Analysis, T.S., F.S., and G.G.R.; Investigation,
E.B., A.R.G., B.A., G.G., C.H., and T.M.; Writing – Original Draft, O.B.; Writing –
Review & Editing, T.S., J.C.R., R.E.M., M.W.M, G.I.M.F., A.B.V., K.W., E.B.,
A.R.G., K.M., F.S., and L.P.; Visualization, T.S., R.E.M., M.W.M., G.I.M.F.,
and A.B.V.; Supervision, E.B., O.B., and J.C.R.; Project Administration, E.B.
and K.M.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank Mandy Sanders for handling sequencing samples, Thomas
Dibling and Anthea Cassidy for picking and managing the genomic clone
resource, and Wieslawa Johnson and Francois Meullenet for help with manuscript preparation. Work at the Sanger Institute was funded by a core grant
from the Wellcome Trust (098051). R.E.M. is funded by the Australian National
Health and Medical Research Council (fellowship 1053082) and the Australian
Research Council (FT160100226).
Received: November 16, 2016
Revised: April 13, 2017
Accepted: June 19, 2017
Published: July 13, 2017
REFERENCES
Alexa, A., Rahnenführer, J., and Lengauer, T. (2006). Improved scoring of functional groups from gene expression data by decorrelating GO graph structure.
Bioinformatics 22, 1600–1607.
Alsford, S., Turner, D.J., Obado, S.O., Sanchez-Flores, A., Glover, L., Berriman, M., Hertz-Fowler, C., and Horn, D. (2011). High-throughput phenotyping
using parallel sequencing of RNA interference targets in the African trypanosome. Genome Res. 21, 915–924.
Aly, A.S., Vaughan, A.M., and Kappe, S.H. (2009). Malaria parasite development in the mosquito and infection of the mammalian host. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 63, 195–221.

Barquist, L., Langridge, G.C., Turner, D.J., Phan, M.D., Turner, A.K., Bateman,
A., Parkhill, J., Wain, J., and Gardner, P.P. (2013). A comparison of dense
transposon insertion libraries in the Salmonella serovars Typhi and Typhimurium. Nucleic Acids Res. 41, 4549–4564.
Boisson, B., Lacroix, C., Bischoff, E., Gueirard, P., Bargieri, D.Y., Franke-Fayard, B., Janse, C.J., Ménard, R., and Baldacci, P. (2011). The novel putative
transporter NPT1 plays a critical role in early stages of Plasmodium berghei
sexual development. Mol. Microbiol. 81, 1343–1357.
Boone, C., Bussey, H., and Andrews, B.J. (2007). Exploring genetic interactions and networks with yeast. Nat. Rev. Genet. 8, 437–449.
Burrows, J.N., Duparc, S., Gutteridge, W.E., Hooft van Huijsduijnen, R., Kaszubska, W., Macintyre, F., Mazzuri, S., Möhrle, J.J., and Wells, T.N.C.
(2017). New developments in anti-malarial target candidate and product profiles. Malar. J. 16, 26.
Chaudhuri, R.R., Morgan, E., Peters, S.E., Pleasance, S.J., Hudson, D.L., Davies, H.M., Wang, J., van Diemen, P.M., Buckley, A.M., Bowen, A.J., et al.
(2013). Comprehensive assignment of roles for Salmonella typhimurium genes
in intestinal colonization of food-producing animals. PLoS Genet. 9, e1003456.
Costanzo, M., Baryshnikova, A., Bellay, J., Kim, Y., Spear, E.D., Sevier, C.S.,
Ding, H., Koh, J.L., Toufighi, K., Mostafavi, S., et al. (2010). The genetic landscape of a cell. Science 327, 425–431.
Crompton, P.D., Pierce, S.K., and Miller, L.H. (2010). Advances and challenges
in malaria vaccine development. J. Clin. Invest. 120, 4168–4178.

Cserti, C.M., and Dzik, W.H. (2007). The ABO blood group system and Plasmodium falciparum malaria. Blood 110, 2250–2258.
Csurös, M. (2010). Count: evolutionary analysis of phylogenetic profiles with
parsimony and likelihood. Bioinformatics 26, 1910–1912.
Deutschbauer, A.M., Jaramillo, D.F., Proctor, M., Kumm, J., Hillenmeyer, M.E.,
Davis, R.W., Nislow, C., and Giaever, G. (2005). Mechanisms of haploinsufficiency revealed by genome-wide profiling in yeast. Genetics 169, 1915–1925.
Dietzl, G., Chen, D., Schnorrer, F., Su, K.C., Barinova, Y., Fellner, M., Gasser,
B., Kinsey, K., Oppel, S., Scheiblauer, S., et al. (2007). A genome-wide transgenic RNAi library for conditional gene inactivation in Drosophila. Nature 448,
151–156.
Duraisingh, M.T., Triglia, T., Ralph, S.A., Rayner, J.C., Barnwell, J.W.,
McFadden, G.I., and Cowman, A.F. (2003). Phenotypic variation of Plasmodium falciparum merozoite proteins directs receptor targeting for invasion of
human erythrocytes. EMBO J. 22, 1047–1057.
Gerdes, S.Y., Scholle, M.D., Campbell, J.W., Balázsi, G., Ravasz, E., Daugherty, M.D., Somera, A.L., Kyrpides, N.C., Anderson, I., Gelfand, M.S., et al.
(2003). Experimental determination and system level analysis of essential
genes in Escherichia coli MG1655. J. Bacteriol. 185, 5673–5684.
Giaever, G., Chu, A.M., Ni, L., Connelly, C., Riles, L., Véronneau, S., Dow, S.,
Lucau-Danila, A., Anderson, K., André, B., et al. (2002). Functional profiling of
the Saccharomyces cerevisiae genome. Nature 418, 387–391.
Gomes, A.R., Bushell, E., Schwach, F., Girling, G., Anar, B., Quail, M.A., Herd,
C., Pfander, C., Modrzynska, K., Rayner, J.C., and Billker, O. (2015). A
genome-scale vector resource enables high-throughput reverse genetic
screening in a malaria parasite. Cell Host Microbe 17, 404–413.
Guttery, D.S., Poulin, B., Ramaprasad, A., Wall, R.J., Ferguson, D.J., Brady,
D., Patzewitz, E.M., Whipple, S., Straschil, U., Wright, M.H., et al. (2014).
Genome-wide functional analysis of Plasmodium protein phosphatases reveals key regulators of parasite development and differentiation. Cell Host
Microbe 16, 128–140.
Hillenmeyer, M.E., Fung, E., Wildenhain, J., Pierce, S.E., Hoon, S., Lee, W.,
Proctor, M., St Onge, R.P., Tyers, M., Koller, D., et al. (2008). The chemical
genomic portrait of yeast: uncovering a phenotype for all genes. Science
320, 362–365.
Jackson, A.P., Otto, T.D., Aslett, M., Armstrong, S.D., Bringaud, F., Schlacht,
A., Hartley, C., Sanders, M., Wastling, J.M., Dacks, J.B., et al. (2016). Kinetoplastid phylogenomics reveals the evolutionary innovations associated with
the origins of parasitism. Curr. Biol. 26, 161–172.
Kamath, R.S., Fraser, A.G., Dong, Y., Poulin, G., Durbin, R., Gotta, M., Kanapin, A., Le Bot, N., Moreno, S., Sohrmann, M., et al. (2003). Systematic functional analysis of the Caenorhabditis elegans genome using RNAi. Nature
421, 231–237.
Ke, H., Lewis, I.A., Morrisey, J.M., McLean, K.J., Ganesan, S.M., Painter, H.J.,
Mather, M.W., Jacobs-Lorena, M., Llinás, M., and Vaidya, A.B. (2015). Genetic
investigation of tricarboxylic acid metabolism during the Plasmodium falciparum life cycle. Cell Rep. 11, 164–174.
Khan, S.M., Kroeze, H., Franke-Fayard, B., and Janse, C.J. (2013). Standardization in generating and reporting genetically modified rodent malaria parasites: the RMgmDB database. Methods Mol. Biol. 923, 139–150.
Kirkman, L.A., Lawrence, E.A., and Deitsch, K.W. (2014). Malaria parasites utilize both homologous recombination and alternative end joining pathways to
maintain genome integrity. Nucleic Acids Res. 42, 370–379.
MacRae, J.I., Sheiner, L., Nahid, A., Tonkin, C., Striepen, B., and McConville,
M.J. (2012). Mitochondrial metabolism of glucose and glutamine is required for
intracellular growth of Toxoplasma gondii. Cell Host Microbe 12, 682–692.
Maier, A.G., Rug, M., O’Neill, M.T., Brown, M., Chakravorty, S., Szestak, T.,
Chesson, J., Wu, Y., Hughes, K., Coppel, R.L., et al. (2008). Exported proteins
required for virulence and rigidity of Plasmodium falciparum-infected human
erythrocytes. Cell 134, 48–61.
MalariaGEN Plasmodium falciparum Community Project (2016). Genomic
epidemiology of artemisinin resistant malaria. eLife 5, e08714.

Mann, P.A., McLellan, C.A., Koseoglu, S., Si, Q., Kuzmin, E., Flattery, A., Harris, G., Sher, X., Murgolo, N., Wang, H., et al. (2015). Chemical genomicsbased antifungal drug discovery: targeting glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)
precursor biosynthesis. ACS Infect. Dis. 1, 59–72.
Manske, M., Miotto, O., Campino, S., Auburn, S., Almagro-Garcia, J., Maslen,
G., O’Brien, J., Djimde, A., Doumbo, O., Zongo, I., et al. (2012). Analysis of
Plasmodium falciparum diversity in natural infections by deep sequencing.
Nature 487, 375–379.
Martin, R.E., Ginsburg, H., and Kirk, K. (2009). Membrane transport proteins of
the malaria parasite. Mol. Microbiol. 74, 519–528.
Oppenheim, R.D., Creek, D.J., Macrae, J.I., Modrzynska, K.K., Pino, P., Limenitakis, J., Polonais, V., Seeber, F., Barrett, M.P., Billker, O., et al. (2014).
BCKDH: the missing link in apicomplexan mitochondrial metabolism is
required for full virulence of Toxoplasma gondii and Plasmodium berghei.
PLoS Pathog. 10, e1004263.
Otto, T.D., Böhme, U., Jackson, A.P., Hunt, M., Franke-Fayard, B., Hoeijmakers, W.A., Religa, A.A., Robertson, L., Sanders, M., Ogun, S.A., et al.
(2014). A comprehensive evaluation of rodent malaria parasite genomes and
gene expression. BMC Biol. 12, 86.
Pankova-Kholmyansky, I., and Flescher, E. (2006). Potential new antimalarial
chemotherapeutics based on sphingolipid metabolism. Chemotherapy 52,
205–209.
Pfander, C., Anar, B., Schwach, F., Otto, T.D., Brochet, M., Volkmann, K.,
Quail, M.A., Pain, A., Rosen, B., Skarnes, W., et al. (2011). A scalable pipeline
for highly effective genetic modification of a malaria parasite. Nat. Methods 8,
1078–1082.
Ramani, A.K., Chuluunbaatar, T., Verster, A.J., Na, H., Vu, V., Pelte, N.,
Wannissorn, N., Jiao, A., and Fraser, A.G. (2012). The majority of animal genes
are required for wild-type fitness. Cell 148, 792–802.
Rosenthal, P.J. (2013). The interplay between drug resistance and fitness in
malaria parasites. Mol. Microbiol. 89, 1025–1038.
Rovira-Graells, N., Gupta, A.P., Planet, E., Crowley, V.M., Mok, S., Ribas de
Pouplana, L., Preiser, P.R., Bozdech, Z., and Cortés, A. (2012). Transcriptional
variation in the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum. Genome Res. 22,
925–938.
Sanderson, T., and Rayner, J.C. (2017). Phenoplasm: a database of disruption
phenotypes for malaria parasite genes [version 1; referees: 1 approved].
Wellcome Open Res. 2:45. http://dx.doi.org/10.12688/wellcomeopenres.
11896.1.
Saunders, D., and Lon, C. (2016). Combination therapies for malaria are
failing–what next? Lancet Infect. Dis. 16, 274–275.
Schwach, F., Bushell, E., Gomes, A.R., Anar, B., Girling, G., Herd, C., Rayner,
J.C., and Billker, O. (2015). PlasmoGEM, a database supporting a community
resource for large-scale experimental genetics in malaria parasites. Nucleic
Acids Res. 43, D1176–D1182.
Shears, M.J., Botté, C.Y., and McFadden, G.I. (2015). Fatty acid metabolism in
the Plasmodium apicoplast: Drugs, doubts and knockouts. Mol. Biochem.
Parasitol. 199, 34–50.
Sidik, S.M., Huet, D., Ganesan, S.M., Huynh, M.H., Wang, T., Nasamu, A.S.,
Thiru, P., Saeij, J.P., Carruthers, V.B., Niles, J.C., et al. (2016). A genomewide CRISPR screen in Toxoplasma identifies essential apicomplexan genes.
Cell 166, 1423–1435.
Sigala, P.A., and Goldberg, D.E. (2014). The peculiarities and paradoxes of
Plasmodium heme metabolism. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 68, 259–278.
Sinha, A., Hughes, K.R., Modrzynska, K.K., Otto, T.D., Pfander, C., Dickens,
N.J., Religa, A.A., Bushell, E., Graham, A.L., Cameron, R., et al. (2014). A
cascade of DNA-binding proteins for sexual commitment and development
in Plasmodium. Nature 507, 253–257.
Summers, R.L., Nash, M.N., and Martin, R.E. (2012). Know your enemy: understanding the role of PfCRT in drug resistance could lead to new antimalarial
tactics. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 69, 1967–1995.
Vaidya, A.B., and Mather, M.W. (2009). Mitochondrial evolution and functions
in malaria parasites. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 63, 249–267.

Cell 170, 260–272, July 13, 2017 271

Vivarès, C.P., Gouy, M., Thomarat, F., and Méténier, G. (2002). Functional and
evolutionary analysis of a eukaryotic parasitic genome. Curr. Opin. Microbiol.
5, 499–505.
Wengelnik, K., Vidal, V., Ancelin, M.L., Cathiard, A.M., Morgat, J.L., Kocken,
C.H., Calas, M., Herrera, S., Thomas, A.W., and Vial, H.J. (2002). A class of
potent antimalarials and their specific accumulation in infected erythrocytes.
Science 295, 1311–1314.
White, J.K., Gerdin, A.K., Karp, N.A., Ryder, E., Buljan, M., Bussell, J.N.,
Salisbury, J., Clare, S., Ingham, N.J., Podrini, C., et al.; Sanger Institute Mouse
Genetics Project (2013). Genome-wide generation and systematic phenotyping of knockout mice reveals new roles for many genes. Cell 154, 452–464.
WHO (2015). World Malaria Report (World Health Organization).

272 Cell 170, 260–272, July 13, 2017

Winzeler, E.A., Shoemaker, D.D., Astromoff, A., Liang, H., Anderson, K.,
Andre, B., Bangham, R., Benito, R., Boeke, J.D., Bussey, H., et al. (1999).
Functional characterization of the S. cerevisiae genome by gene deletion
and parallel analysis. Science 285, 901–906.
Wolf, Y.I., and Koonin, E.V. (2013). Genome reduction as the dominant mode of
evolution. BioEssays 35, 829–837.
Woo, Y.H., Ansari, H., Otto, T.D., Klinger, C.M., Kolisko, M., Michálek, J.,
Saxena, A., Shanmugam, D., Tayyrov, A., Veluchamy, A., et al. (2015).
Chromerid genomes reveal the evolutionary path from photosynthetic algae
to obligate intracellular parasites. eLife 4, e06974.
Yeh, E., and DeRisi, J.L. (2011). Chemical rescue of malaria parasites
lacking an apicoplast defines organelle function in blood-stage Plasmodium
falciparum. PLoS Biol. 9, e1001138.

STAR+METHODS
KEY RESOURCES TABLE

REAGENT or RESOURCE

SOURCE

IDENTIFIER

Lonza

V4XP-3032

Critical Commercial Assays
Amaxa P3 Primary Cell 4D-Nucleofector
X Kit S
4D-Nucleofector Core Unit

Lonza

AAF-1002B

4D-Nucleofector X Unit

Lonza

AAF-1002X

MiSeq Reagent Kit v2 (300-cycles)

Illumina

MS-102-2002

MiSeq Sequencing System

Illumina

N/A

This paper

http://plasmogem.sanger.ac.uk/
phenotypes

PlasmoGEM resource (http://plasmogem.
sanger.ac.uk/search)

Table S1

Rat: RCC Han Wistar outbred (female)

Envigo+++

RccHan:WIST

Mouse: BALB/c inbred (female)

WTSI & Envigo+++

BALB/cOlaHsd

P. berghei: ANKA cl15cy1 wild-type
parasites

N/A

cl15cy1

E. coli: BigEasy-TSA

Lucigen

60224

Lucigen

43036

Oligonucleotide primers for barcode
amplification and index tagging

Gomes et al. 2015

http://plasmogem.sanger.ac.uk/info/
primers

Oligonucleotide primers for qPCR based
genotyping

N/A

http://plasmogem.sanger.ac.uk/search

R

https://www.r-project.org

3.3

topGO

Bioconductor

3.4

Count

http://www.iro.umontreal.ca/csuros/
gene_content/count.html

N/A

Deposited Data
P. berghei relative growth rate phenotypes
Experimental Models: Cell Lines
Arrayed library of E. coli TSA cells harboring
linear plasmids containing P. berghei gene
targeting vectors.
Experimental Models: Organisms/Strains

Recombinant DNA
BigEasy v2.0 Linear Cloning Kit (pJAZZ-OK
Blunt Vector)
Sequence-Based Reagents

Software and Algorithms

CONTACT FOR RESOURCE AND REAGENT SHARING
All requests may be directed to Oliver Billker (ob4@sanger.ac.uk). PlasmoGEM reagents are freely available under a material transfer
agreement for not-for-profit research and should be requested directly from the PlasmoGEM resource (http://plasmogem.sanger.ac.
uk/request/howto).
EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
Parasites and animals
All experiments used the sequenced reference clone cl15cy1 of P. berghei ANKA. All animal research was conducted under licenses
from the UK Home Office, and protocols were approved by the Animal Welfare and Ethical Review Body of the Wellcome Trust
Sanger Institute. Rodents were kept in specific-pathogen-free conditions and subjected to regular pathogen monitoring by sentinel

Cell 170, 260–272.e1–e4, July 13, 2017 e1

screening. They were housed in individually ventilated cages furnished with autoclaved aspen woodchip, fun tunnel and Nestlets at
21 ± 2 C under a 12:12 hr light-dark cycle at a relative humidity of 55 ± 10%. They were fed a commercially prepared autoclaved dry
rodent diet and water, both available ad libitum. The health of animals was monitored by routine daily visual health checks. The parasitemia of infected animals was determined by methanol fixed and Giemsa-stained thin blood smears.
Female RCC Han Wistar outbred rats (Envigo, UK) aged eight to fourteen weeks were infected with P. berghei wild-type parasites
by intraperitoneal injection. Infected rats served as donors for ex vivo schizont cultures typically on day four to five of infection, at a
parasitemia of 1%–5%. Rats were housed with two cage companions. Rats were terminally anaesthetised by vaporised isoflurane
administered by inhalation prior to terminal bleed. Rats were used because they give rise to more schizonts with higher transfection
efficiency compared to mice. Transfection efficiency is critical when screening pools of vectors.
Mice were bred at WTSI or purchased from Envigo. Transfected parasites were injected intravenously into the tail of female adult
BALB/c inbred mice aged 8-22 weeks (median age 10 weeks). This animal model was chosen to minimize host genetic variability and
to obtain robust infections with a low incidence of cerebral pathology. Experimental groups consisted of three mice housed together.
Three internally controlled biological replicates per parasite pool proved adequate to identify phenotypes with confidence.
METHOD DETAILS
Pooled transfections
Each of 2578 knockout vectors was assigned to one or more vector pools, creating a total of 58 pools of vectors. For each pooled
transfection, vectors were prepared and transfected largely as described (Gomes et al., 2015) with minor modifications. Briefly,
groups of 96 targeting vectors were prepared in parallel by growing 1 mL liquid cultures inoculated from glycerol stocks into duplicate 96X deep-well plates, incubated shaking at 37 C for 16 hr. Saturated cultures were then pooled and DNA extracted in a single
midiprep reaction (QIAGEN Plus Midi Prep Kit) using one column per plate and pooling DNA from duplicates after purification. A total
of 30 mg (approximately 100 ng of each vector, in triplicate), including spike-in DNA of control vectors, was digested overnight with
NotI to release the targeting vector from the linear plasmid backbone.
The universal control vectors included in each transfection were as described previously (Gomes et al., 2015). Briefly, four sexual
stage specific genes (p25, p28, p230p and soap) had wild-type growth phenotypes and their weighted mean growth rate on a given
day was defined as 1. Three additional controls were chosen for their known reduced growth phenotypes (Gomes et al., 2015). Identification numbers for all vectors included in this study are shown in Table S1 and can be used to access details of each vector design,
including quality control data, through the PlasmoGEM database (http://plasmogem.sanger.ac.uk).
Following restriction digests the vector pools were purified by ethanol precipitation and DNA for each triplicate pool was
resuspended in 18 mL of nuclease-free water. Rat derived P. berghei schizonts were harvested after 22 hr in culture and
purified on a Histodenz (Sigma) gradient. Purified parasites were pelleted at 450 g for 3 min, resuspended in 54 mL P3 Primary
Cell 4D-Nucleofector solution (Lonza) and added to the DNA solution. Of this mixture exactly 26 mL were transferred into each of three
separate wells of a 16X 4D-Nucleofector strip cuvette. Cells were electroporated using the FI115 program on the 4D-Nucleofector
core system equipped with an X Unit (Lonza). Transfectant parasites were injected intravenously into mice and selected with 0.07 mg
/ mL pyrimethamine in drinking water (pH 4.5) from day one post infection (p. i.).
Measuring relative growth rates
Infections were sampled at the same time of each day between days four to eight p. i., except in a few instances, when mice developing signs of disease on day seven led to early termination of the experiment. Transfection mixture from the electroporation cuvettes
was also sampled to verify pool compositions, so that only vectors verified in the input were included in the analysis.
To measure in vivo growth, we used the gene-specific 11 base pair barcodes included in PlasmoGEM vectors (Schwach et al.,
2015), which were amplified linearly from genomic DNA extracts and counted on an Illumina MiSeq.
Parasite genomic DNA was extracted from tail blood samples collected daily, using the phenol/chloroform method, as previously
detailed and resuspended in 50-100 mL nuclease-free water. Barcodes present in each of these samples were counted through Illumina sequencing. For that, amplicon-based Illumina sequencing libraries were prepared using a nested PCR approach that targeted
constant regions flanking each gene-specific 11 nt barcode. See the Key Resources Table for information in index primers used. The
resulting libraries consisted of 234 bp long amplicons containing sample-specific indexes that were pooled equimolarly, typically in
groups of 32 these were then sequenced using the MiSeq Reagent Kit v2 (300 cycle) from Illumina (MS-102-2002) and diluted to 4 nM
prior to loading at low cluster density (4x105 clusters/mm2) with 40% of PhiX spike-in.
Validation of gene disruption for selected vectors was achieved using individual transfections and quantitative polymerase chain
reaction (qPCR). Parasites were transfected as described previously (Gomes et al., 2015) with 1-5 mg of a single PlasmoGEM vector.
Selection with pyrimethamine was initiated on day 1 post-transfection. On day 6 or 7 post-transfection gDNA was extracted from
purified parasites using the QIAGEN Blood and Tissue kit. The presence of the locus in question was assessed by conducting a
qPCR reaction with primers QCR1 and QCR2 for each vector - the template for these primers is only available if the gene is intact.
Two control reactions were run in each case: one with generic primers (QCR1 and QCR2 for an unrelated gene - PBANKA_061520) on
the extracted DNA to control for the number of parasite genomes in the sample, and one with gene-specific QCR1 and QCR2 on wildtype DNA to control for differential primer efficiencies. All reactions were carried out in duplicate or triplicate. Locus depletion was

e2 Cell 170, 260–272.e1–e4, July 13, 2017

computed using the delta-delta Ct method. The proportion of parasites with an intact gene was then calculated as 2-DDCt. Control
reactions A and B consist respectively of the PBANKA_082850 knockout assessed with the PBANKA_120060 primers, and the
PBANKA_120060 knockout assessed with PBANKA_082850 primers.
QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Analysis of barseq results
It was necessary to develop a nuanced statistical approach for computational analysis of barcode data. Mutants varied in abundance, both due to differences in vector integration efficiency and because of differential fitness. This variation, as well as the
sampling errors inherent to rare mutants and sampling variance associated with barcode counting, resulted in different accuracies
for the inferred individual mutant fitnesses. This necessitated a statistical model to estimate the expected error for each read count
measurement, and a way of propagating these uncertainties to the barcode ratios and the daily RGRs calculated from them. We then
weighted RGR measurements from all days and replicates by the inverse of their variance, giving the most robust measurements
the greatest impact on the combined value. Finally, where multiple measurements were available for the same gene, these were
combined, again weighted by inverse variance.
Procedure
Raw reads from the sequencer were separated based on their sample (a specific mouse infected with a specific pool and sampled on
a certain day, or the transfection input), as represented in Illumina index tags. The sequence data from each sample were analyzed by
a script which selected reads with correct flanking sequences and then counted the barcodes carried between them. Only perfectly
matching barcodes were counted. These barcodes were then transformed into gene IDs using a look-up table.
Abundances were calculated for each barcode in each sample by dividing the number of counts for that barcode by the total number of barcode counts in the sample, and any mutant with an abundance of less than 0.1% in the input sample was discarded from
subsequent analysis (and abundances recalculated for remaining mutants).
To estimate sampling variation, the approximate number of parasite genomes put into the barcode PCR was calculated using the
typical parasitemia per day of experiment, an estimate of the efficiency of DNA extraction, and the proportion of the extracted DNA
used as template. The variance at this first stage was calculated for each mutant using the binomial distribution as np(1 p) where n is
the expected number of parasite genomes in the sample and p the barcode-abundance seen for the mutant. This variance was
increased by a factor representing the noise added by PCR, calculated by simulating 45 cycles of PCR repeatedly on a range of input
concentrations and observing the resulting distribution. It was further increased by considering a second binomial distribution representing the loading of barcodes on the PCR where n represented the total number of reads for the sample.
The result of this procedure was an estimate of the error associated with the barcode abundance for each mutant in each mouse on
each day of the experiment. These error estimates were propagated to all downstream calculations as we calculated estimates for
the relative growth rate of mutants. For each mutant in each mouse, on each day (except the final day), the barcode abundance on the
following day was divided by the abundance on the current day to obtain an un-normalized relative growth rate. The error in this value
was also calculated, using the estimation for propagation of variance in a ratio between random variables.
The same set of growth-rate controls were added to the transfection pool for each experiment to serve as controls. Four of these
have wild-type growth rates and three have attenuated growth. The aggregate pre-normalization RGR of the wild-type growth controls was calculated on each day for each mouse by taking the inverse-variance weighted average of their values, and the variance in
this aggregate value was calculated. Every RGR was now normalized by dividing it by the aggregate value of wild-type growing mutants in the sample from which it came. This leaves wild-type growing mutants with a normalized RGR of 1. The errors in both components were propagated to this normalized value.
Typically for each experiment there were 12 measurements of RGR – from 3 mice on each of 4 days, these were aggregated
together using the inverse-variance weighted mean function. Variances were scaled by a constant factor of 3 at this point, which
was found to improve the match between true experimental reproducibility and estimated confidence – likely reflecting the additional
stochastic effects not modeled in the previous analysis. This gave a single value per mutant per experiment, with an associated variance (and hence a 95% confidence interval).
Where multiple values were available from separate experiments analyzing the same mutant, the multiple single fitness values were
combined using the inverse-variance weighted mean.
Mutants were binned into phenotype categories based on statistical testing. P values were calculated representing the probability
that the true value of the RGR was > 0.1 (not essential) or < 1 (not dispensable) or > 1 (fast). P values were adjusted and phenotypes
were assigned as follows. If the RGR was not dispensable and not statistically different from essential it was considered Essential. If it
was not essential and not significantly different from dispensable it was considered Dispensable. If it was significantly different both
from dispensable and essential it was considered to give Slow or Fast growth depending on the RGR, and if it was not distinguishable
from either it was considered that there was Insufficient data to call a phenotype.
A number of minor heuristics were added which were found to improve phenotype calling: 1) In combining the RGRs from all days
into a single value, if the most confident result was also the minimum RGR result, its confidence was set to the same as that of the
second-most confident. This avoided effects where one spurious sample could dominate the result with an erroneous value. 2)
When calculating the apparent RGR of normal-growth parasites in order to normalize other results we found that, after conducting

Cell 170, 260–272.e1–e4, July 13, 2017 e3

the analysis once, we could additionally use the RGR of the slow-growth controls by calibrating them to their known values. This
allowed all 7 measurements to be used for calibration. 3) Where mutants which obtained an initial phenotype of Insufficient data
were analyzed a second time, we observed a strong association with Essential phenotypes. We therefore elected to use an endpoint
assay to classify a portion of Insufficient data mutants - those that had an abundance in the population on day 6 less than 0.1% of their
abundance in the input (calibrated to a control gene) were considered to be Essential. 4). In light of an increased apparent ratio of
essential phenotypes for vectors with a geometric mean homology arm length of less than 1.25 kb (Figure S3A), these vectors
were excluded when calculating the overall phenotype ratio for the genome, and essential calls in this category were marked as
low confidence.
Gene conservation analysis
Scores for inter-species conservation between P. falciparum and P. chabaudi, and of dN/dS in P. falciparum populations, were taken
from (MalariaGEN Plasmodium falciparum Community Project, 2016). These were matched to P. berghei genes by orthology and
binned into categories and plotted against P. berghei phenotype.
Reconstruction of gene losses and gains
The evolution of gene sets in the Apicomplexa was analyzed much as in Woo et al. (2015). We downloaded OrthoMCLDB/EuPathDB
OG5 groups for all species shown on Figure 5D and in addition four outgroups (Chromera velia, Vitrella brassicaformis, Tetrahymena
thermophila and Chlamydomonas reinhardtii) (Aurrecoechea et al., 2010). The presence or absence of orthologs in each species was
then analyzed using Count (Csurös, 2010) to infer ancestral ortholog presence using Dollo parsimony.
GO term enrichment
Gene ontology terms were downloaded from GeneDB, both for P. berghei and for the better annotated P. falciparum. P. falciparum
annotations were assumed to also apply to any 1:1 orthologous P. berghei genes. The topGO R package (Alexa et al., 2006) was used
to calculate enrichment with the weight01 algorithm, which takes account of GO tree topology.
Expression analysis
FPKM data from Otto et al. (2014) was processed as follows: the average of multiple measurements from each stage was taken, these
average absolute values were partitioned per gene into proportions of the total FPKM from each of the five life-stages. K-means clustering was applied to sort genes into 9 clusters. A measure of ‘‘sexiness’’ was calculated by dividing the FPKM from the sexual stages
(gametocytes and ookinetes) by the total.
DATA AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITY
The majority of analysis was conducted in R. In the interest of reproducibility, we include a file archive (Data S1) containing an R script,
along with the raw barcode counts for each experiment. This script will process and analyze the raw barcode data and generate the
figures presented.

e4 Cell 170, 260–272.e1–e4, July 13, 2017

Supplemental Figures

Figure S1. Genes in the Screen Are Largely Representative of the Genome, Related to Figure 1 and Table S2
(A and B) Genes for which targeting vectors could be generated were similar (A) in size and (B) in A+T nucleotide content.
(C) Targeted genes had expression levels representative of the genome across all life stages (RPKM data from Otto et al., 2014).
(D) Relative representation of GO terms and multigene families in the genome and and the screen. The screen was largely representative with the exception of the
P. berghei pir family (BIR) which we suspect is underrepresented due to its subtelomeric genomic location and repetitive nature. However, the well represented
FAM family is shown for comparison.

Figure S2. Validation of Dispensable and Essential Phenotypes, Related to Figure 2
(A) For 10 genes whose disruption had previously failed (RMgmDB), quantitative PCR was used to measure the proportion of parasites that retained the wild-type
locus following transfection of individual deletion vectors. In each case the population was dominated by viable mutant parasites, validating the screen result.
Controls A and B show a reciprocal primer swap for mutants in PBANKA_082850 and PBANKA_120060.
(B) Relative growth rates were determined using KO or C-terminal tagging vectors for the same set of genes. Phenotype calls are color coded. Green = RGR not
significantly different from of 1. Red = RGR not significantly different from 0.1 Blue = Intermediate RGR.

Figure S3. Vector Properties Determine Homologous Integration Rates, Related to Figure 2
Vector-specific integration efficiencies were calculated for the set of 915 dispensable genes by normalizing the relative abundance of a mutant during the
infection to the relative abundance of the vector measured from the electroporation cuvette, and by using the four normally growing controls to normalize between
experiments.
(A) Vector integration efficiencies were highly reproducible between independent experiments (log-log R2: 0.76).
(B) Relative abundances of dispensable mutants became normally distributed after applying a square root function, suggesting targeting efficiency might be the
result of two independent variables interacting in a multiplicative fashion.
(C) Modeling the effect on targeting efficiency of homology arm lengths, which in the PlasmoGEM resource varies from 400 bp to 14.8 kb. Initial analyses revealed
the length of each homology arm to be independently linked with integration efficiency. This effect plateaus at around 5 kb due to the confounding fact that the
lengths of the two homology arms are inversely correlated, since they trade off against each other for space on the vector. The graph shows a three dimensional
model fitted to the data, and illustrates increasing targeting efficiency of vectors with arm length up to at least 10 kb. The product of homology arms lengths
explained around 60% of the overall variation in targeting efficiency (log-log R2: 0.42). The remaining non-stochastic variation may be due to DNA structure and
chromatin state, but combining a number of data sources with machine learning approaches failed to model these factors to improve predictive accuracy.
(D) Assessment of calculated phenotypes across a range of geometric-mean homology arm lengths (groups are, as far as possible, of equal sizes). There is an
even phenotype distribution across the space of homology arms, with the possible exception of a technical bias toward essential calls for vectors with a
geometric mean homology arm length less than 1.25 kb. As a result, this set of vectors was discarded when calculating overall genome essentiality.

Figure S4. Analysis of Gene Functions Associated with Phenotypes, Related to Figure 6 and Table S7
(A) GO terms significantly enriched for genes with essential, slow or dispensable phenotype (p < 0.05). See Table S7 for genes in all significant categories.
(B) Phenotypes of genes of unknown function. In both panels violin plots show RGRs, with the median indicated by a black dot. Gene numbers per category are
given next to pie charts showing phenotype distributions. Color scheme as in Figure 2.
(C) Phenotypes mapped onto genes involved in GPI-anchor biosynthesis.

