Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 31

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Genotoxic stress inhibits Ewing sarcoma cell growth by
modulating alternative pre-mRNA processing of the RNA
helicase DHX9
Marco Fidaleo1,2,*, Francesca Svetoni1,2,*, Elisabetta Volpe2, Belén Miñana3,4,
Daniela Caporossi1, Maria Paola Paronetto1,2
1

Department of Movement, Human and Health Sciences, University of Rome “Foro Italico”, Rome, Italy

2

Laboratories of Cellular and Molecular Neurobiology and of Neuroimmunology, CERC, Fondazione Santa Lucia, Rome, Italy

3

Centre de Regulació Genòmica, Barcelona, Spain

4

Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to:
Maria Paola Paronetto, e-mail: mariapaola.paronetto@uniroma4.it
Keywords: Ewing sarcoma, alternative splicing, DNA damage, DHX9
Received: April 13, 2015 	Accepted: September 21, 2015 	Published: October 02, 2015

ABSTRACT
Alternative splicing plays a key role in the DNA damage response and in cancer.
Ewing Sarcomas (ES) are aggressive tumors caused by different chromosomal
translocations that yield in-frame fusion proteins driving transformation. RNA
profiling reveals genes differentially regulated by UV light irradiation in two ES cell
lines exhibiting different sensitivity to genotoxic stress. In particular, irradiation
induces a new isoform of the RNA helicase DHX9 in the more sensitive SK-N-MC cells,
which is targeted to nonsense-mediated decay (NMD), causing its downregulation.
DHX9 protein forms a complex with RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) and EWS-FLI1 to
enhance transcription. Silencing of DHX9 in ES cells sensitizes them to UV treatment
and impairs recruitment of EWS-FLI1 to target genes, whereas DHX9 overexpression
protects ES cells from genotoxic stress. Mechanistically, we found that UV light
irradiation leads to enhanced phosphorylation and decreased processivity of RNAPII
in SK-N-MC cells, which in turn causes inclusion of DHX9 exon 6A. A similar effect
on DHX9 splicing was also elicited by treatment with the chemotherapeutic drug
etoposide, indicating a more general mechanism of regulation in response to DNA
damage. Our data identify a new NMD-linked splicing event in DHX9 with impact on
EWS-FLI1 oncogenic activity and ES cell viability.

Both EWS and EWS-FLI1 modulate gene
expression [4, 5]. Besides transcription, recent evidence
unveiled a role for both proteins in the modulation of
alternative splicing (AS) of target genes [6, 9]. EWS
modulates AS of genes involved in the DNA damage
response, including key regulators of genotoxic stress
like CHEK2, ABL1 and MDM2 [8, 9]. Accordingly, EWS
deficiency enhances sensitivity to ionizing radiation (IR)
[10] and UV light irradiation [8]. Furthermore, two highthroughput screens identified the gene encoding EWS
(EWSR1) as required for resistance to ionizing radiation
(IR) [11] and camptothecin [12]. Importantly, in ES cells
the intact EWSR1 gene is present only on one allele, while

INTRODUCTION
Ewing Sarcomas (ES) are aggressive tumors of
bone and soft tissues. They are caused by different
chromosomal translocations that yield in-frame fusion
proteins comprising the amino terminus of the EWS
protein fused to the carboxyl terminus of various ETS
transcription factors [1]. These chimeric proteins activate
a specific oncogenic program to direct neoplastic
transformation [2, 3]. Among them, EWS-FLI1, generated
by chromosomal translocation between chromosome 22
and 11 [3], is the most common product, representing
a landmark of ES.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31740

Oncotarget

displaying a 8-fold reduction in clone formation with
respect to untreated cells (Figure 1A, 1B). Upon treatment
with 40 J/m2, survival of both cell lines was dramatically
compromised (Figure 1A, 1B).
To corroborate the results of the colony formation
assay, we performed cell proliferation assays at different
time points after UV light treatment with 10 J/m2.
SK-N-MC cell proliferation was strongly reduced by
UV treatment, while the effect on LAP-35 was milder
(Figure  1C). Moreover, propidium iodide (PI) staining
confirmed that viability was affected by UV light
irradiation more dramatically in SK-N-MC cells than in
LAP-35 cells (Figure 1D).
These results indicate that SK-N-MC cells are more
sensitive than LAP-35 to UV light irradiation.

the other allele is affected by the translocation. Thus,
EWSR1 haploinsufficiency might contribute, at least in
part, to ES cells sensitivity to genotoxic stress.
DNA damage triggers the activation of signaling
cascades that profoundly influence chromatin structure,
thus modulating gene expression. Genotoxic stress
imposed by irradiation or chemotherapeutic agents
modulates AS events [7, 13], in part through reduced
transcription elongation rates as a consequence of
RNA Polymerase II (RNAPII) phosphorylation [14].
In this regard, mounting evidence points to aberrant AS
regulation as a key step in oncogenesis [15] and indicates
that splicing regulation represents a suitable target for
therapeutic intervention [16].
Despite the reported links between EWS and the
DNA damage response [7, 8, 10–12], whether or not
changes in gene expression in response to genotoxic
stress can affect the sensitivity of ES cells to irradiation
has not been extensively investigated yet. In this work we
identified changes in the transcriptome that are induced by
low UV light irradiation in two ES cell lines (SK-N-MC
and LAP-35 cells) displaying different sensitivity to UV
light treatment. Among other targets, we found that UV
light irradiation induced down-regulation of DHX9 in
SK-N-MC cells, partially through the generation of a new
isoform that is targeted to non-mediated decay (NMD).
DHX9 enhances EWS-FLI1-mediated transcription
and favours anchorage-independent growth in ES cells
[17]. We found that knockdown of DHX9 in ES cells
rendered them more susceptible to UV treatment, whereas
its overexpression protected ES cells from irradiation.
Thus, our results strongly suggest a role for DHX9 as
a transcriptional co-activator of EWS-FLI1 involved in
the resistance to genotoxic stress of ES cells.

Gene expression changes induced by UV light
irradiation in ES cells
To investigate whether different changes in gene
expression (GE) could account for the different sensitivity
of ES cells to UV light, we performed high-throughput
analyses. RNA obtained from three biological replicas of
SK-N-MC and LAP-35 cells treated with low doses of
UV light (10 J/m2) was hybridized to splicing sensitive
microarrays featuring 1804 AS events in 482 genes
encoding proteins with functions related to RNA processing
and cancer [8, 14, 20]. Hybridization analysis revealed
that 102 genes in SK-N-MC cells and 46 genes in LAP35 cells change their expression levels upon UV light
treatment (fold change > |1,3|; p value < 0,01; Figure 1E,
Supplementary Table S1). Of these, 41 in SK-N-MC
and 14 genes in LAP-35 cells displayed a fold change >
|2| (Figure S1B). Most genes were downregulated after
treatment, with a more pronounced effect in SK-N-MC
than in LAP-35 cells and with 32 genes common in the
two cell lines (Figure 1E, S1C). Nevertheless, 4 genes
in SK-N-MC cells (CD82, TRIB3, YWHAH, AFF2) and
3 genes in LAP-35 cells (CDKN1A, FOS, GADD45A) were
upregulated (Figure S1D).
Array analysis indicated that UV irradiation exerted
a more pronounced effect on AS than transcription. 437
AS events in 216 genes were affected in SK-N-MC cells,
and 108 AS events in 66 genes were affected in LAP-35
cells considering fold change >|1,4|, z score >3; p value
<0,01 (Figure 1F; Supplementary Table S1), or 211 in
SK-N-MC and 37 in LAP-35 cells considering fold change
>|2| (Figure S1F). UV light irradiation impacted all types
of AS events present in the array (Figure S1E). Among
these, 44 events in 41 genes were conserved in the two cell
lines, indicating a certain degree of overlap in the splicing
response of ES cells to UV irradiation. The proportion of
genes that display regulation at both AS and expression
levels is substantially higher in LAP-35 (37.9%) than in
the SK-N-MC cells (22.2%) (Figure 1G, 1H).

RESULTS
SK-N-MC and LAP-35 Ewing Sarcoma
cells display different resistance to UV light
irradiation
To ascertain the efficacy of UV irradiation in
suppressing the growth of ES cells, we used two ES cell
lines characterized by similar chromosomal translocation
[t(11;22)(q24;q12)] generating the oncogenic fusion
protein EWS/FLI-1 type 1 and 2 (Figure S1A). LAP-35
[18] and SK-N-MC [19] cells were exposed to either
10 or 40 J/m2 UV light and clonogenic survival assays
were performed by monitoring colony formation 12 days
after irradiation. In the absence of irradiation, SK-N-MC
cells formed 3- to 4-fold more clones than LAP-35 cells
(Figure 1A, 1B), although SK-N-MC colonies displayed
smaller size. When cells were exposed to 10 J/m2 UV
light irradiation, SK-N-MC cells formed only few clones,
while LAP-35 cells were still able to proliferate, albeit

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31741

Oncotarget

Figure 1: UV light irradiation triggers cytotoxic effect in Ewing Sarcoma cells. A. Representative images of clonogenic

assays of SK-N-MC and LAP-35 cells upon UV light irradiation. B. Histograms represent colony numbers (n = 3; mean ± s.d.) carried out
on SK-N-MC (white bars) and LAP-35 cells (gray). C. Cell survival rates detected by MTS cell proliferation assay after 10 J/m2 UV light
treatment in SK-N-MC (white) and LAP-35 cells (gray). D. Propidium Iodide (PI) viability assay; the decrease in viability was expressed
as relative percentage of dead cells in treated versus control cells after 10 J/m2 UV light treatment in SK-N-MC (white) and LAP-35 cells
(gray). In all panels statistical analysis was performed by Student’s t-test: *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001 for CTR vs UV treatment;
$p < 0.05, $$p < 0.01, $$$p < 0.001 for SK-N-MC vs LAP-35 cells. E. Venn diagram shows the overlap of gene expression signatures at
gene level induced by 10 J/m2 UV light irradiation in SK-N-MC and LAP-35 cells, as indicated. F. Venn diagram shows the overlap of gene
expression signatures at AS level induced by 10 J/m2 UV light irradiation in SK-N-MC and LAP-35 cells, as indicated. G. and H. Venn
diagrams represent the overlap of gene affected both at gene expression and AS level upon UV light irradiation in the SK-N-MC (G) and in
the LAP-35 (H) cells. I. to L. Venn diagram shows the overlap of gene expression signatures at gene and AS levels induced by 10 J/m2 (I and
K respectively) and 40 J/m2 (J and L respectively) UV light irradiation in ES cells (SK-N-MC and LAP-35) and HEP3B cells, as indicated.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31742

Oncotarget

processing represents a specific response of SK-N-MC
ES cells to low doses of UV light.
Exon 6A contains a premature stop codon (PTC),
which should lead to NMD of this new transcript
(NR_033302), thus possibly contributing to the decrease in
the pool of DHX9 mRNA upon UV light treatment. Indeed,
UV light-induced inclusion of exon 6A in SK-N-MC cells
was significantly stabilized after knockdown of UPF1,
(Figure 2D–2G), an essential component of the NMD
pathway [22], similarly to the effect on SRSF1 (Figure 2F),
a known target of NMD [23]. These results suggest that
this new DHX9 transcript is targeted by NMD.
Moreover, actinomycin D treatment at 5 hours
after UV light irradiation completely abolished the
accumulation of the exon 6A-containing DHX9 transcript,
which returned to basal levels within 30 minutes from
the block of transcription (Figure S4A). In the absence
of actinomycin D, this variant accumulates up to
10 hours after UV irradiation, and returned to basal
levels by 24 hours (Figure S4A). This result indicates
that expression of the NMD-targeted DHX9 variant is
a transient response to UV irradiation. As expected,
western blot analysis indicated that knockdown of UPF1
had no effect on the UV light-induced reduction of full
length DHX9 protein in SK-N-MC cells 6 hours after UV
light irradiation (Figure 2H).
Collectively these results indicate that UV light
irradiation causes down-regulation of DHX9 mRNA
in SK-N-MC by changes in gene expression and
AS-mediated NMD.
To investigate the relative stability of DHX9 protein in
normal conditions and upon UV light irradiation, we treated
SK-N-MC cells with cycloheximide and harvested them
at different time points (2, 6 and 24 hours) after treatment.
Western blot analyses revealed that full length DHX9
protein is stable in the first 6 hours of cycloheximide
treatment, whereas its expression levels are halved by
24 hours of treatment (Figure S4B and S4C). However,
UV light irradiation dramatically reduced the half-life of
DHX9 protein, causing a 30% reduction after 6 hours and
about 80% reduction after 24 hours (Figure S4B and S4C).
Notably, treatment with CHX did not further decrease the
levels of DHX9, suggesting that de novo protein synthesis
does not compensate the effect of UV irradiation on DHX9
protein levels (Figure S4B and S4C). Moreover, inhibition
of the proteasome by treatment with MG132 prevented
UV-induced DHX9 degradation and it also prevented the
degradation of the caspase 3-cleaved DHX9 [24], which is
induced upon UV light treatment and rapidly degraded in
the absence of MG132 (Figure S4D and S4E). Collectively
these experiments show that UV light irradiation induces
DHX9 downregulation partly through its degradation by the
proteasome and partly through induction of a new alternative
isoform that is targeted by NMD, thus limiting de novo
DHX9 protein synthesis..

RT-quantitative
PCR
(RT-qPCR),
using
oligonucleotides covering both exons and exon-exon
junctions, of all 8 randomly selected AS changes (in the
C1QBP, SIP1, U2AF35, TNFRSF10B, AURKB, BAT1,
CCNA2 and CROP genes) identified by microarrays
were validated (Figure S2A–S2H), thus confirming the
fidelity of the microarray analysis. In order to evaluate
the specificity of UV light response in different cancer
cell lines, we performed microarray analysis of HEP3B
(hepatocellular carcinoma) cells irradiated with 10J/m2 UV
light (Figure 1I, 1K) and also compared our datasets with a
previous dataset obtained from treatment of HEP3B with
40J/m2 UV light (14; Figure 1J, 1L). As expected, a more
consistent overlap at GE level was observed between
cells treated with the same UV intensity (Figure 1I and
1J). Interestingly, 18 genes affected at the expression
level were conserved in the three cell lines (Figure 1I), and
10 of them were also affected upon 40 J/m2 irradiation (not
shown). Furthermore, we identified 18 AS events affected
by UV light irradiation independently from the cellular
context (Figure 1K), 11 of them were also conserved upon
40J/m2 irradiation (not shown). Notably, SK-N-MC cells
are more responsive to UV light irradiation than other cell
lines, at both GE level (102 genes affected versus 46 in
LAP-35 and 66 in HEP3B) and AS level (437 AS events
modulated versus 108 in LAP-35 and 170 in HEP3B;
Figure 1I–1L).

DHX9 is selectively regulated by UV light
irradiation in SK-N-MC cells
Among the genes that were differentially regulated
in the two ES cell lines, we focused on DHX9 because of
its reported functional interaction with EWS-FLI1 [17].
DHX9, also known as RNA helicase A (RHA) or nuclear
DNA helicase II (NDHII), displays helicase activity
and modulates transcription through its interaction
with RNAPII [21]. RT-qPCR analysis confirmed that
UV light irradiation significantly repressed DHX9
mRNA expression in SK-N-MC, but not in LAP-35
cells (Figure 2A). Notably, the microarray analysis
indicated that UV light treatment also affected AS of
the DHX9 gene in SK-N-MC cells, leading to inclusion
of exon 6A and resulting in expression of a previously
uncharacterized DHX9 isoform (Figure 2B). This
predicted AS event was validated by RT-qPCR using
different sets of primers in SK-N-MC cells, whereas
it was not significantly modulated in LAP-35 cells
(Figure 2B, S3A–S3E). Moreover, western blot analysis
confirmed that UV treatment caused down-regulation
of the DHX9 protein in SK-N-MC but not in LAP-35
cells (Figure 2C). DHX9 expression levels and exon
6A inclusion were not affected in HEP3B cell upon UV
light irradiation (Figure S3G, Supplementary Table S1),
suggesting that regulation of DHX9 pre-mRNA

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31743

Oncotarget

Figure 2: UV light irradiation affects DHX9 mRNA expression and alternative splicing in SK-N-MC cells, but not in
LAP-35. A. RT-qPCR validation of microarray-predicted GE changes in DHX9 mRNA (exon 4), normalized to GAPDH. B. Scheme of

DHX9 AS event (top panel). The alternative exon 6A is upregulated in SK-N-MC cells upon UV light treatment. UAA indicates the stop
codon within exon 6A. Histograms represent levels of expression of exon 6A as relative ratio of cells treated with 10 J/m2 UV light versus
untreated normalized to a constitutive exon (GE). White bars indicate SK-N-MC cells while gray bars indicate LAP-35 cells. (n = 3;
mean ± s.d.). C. Western blot analysis of DHX9 and ERK2 expression in LAP-35 and SK-N-MC cells upon UV light irradiation. 10 μg of
proteins from SK-N-MC and LAP-35 cell extracts after UV light (10 J/m2) treatment were loaded. Histograms represent the quantification of
DHX9 protein normalized to ERK2. D. RT-qPCR analysis of UPF1 expression in SK-N-MC cells transfected with either scrambled (white)
or siUPF1 (filled) oligonucleotides. Histograms represent UPF1 mRNA levels normalized to 18S expression (n = 3; mean ± s.d). E. Western
blot of UPF1 and β-actin expression in SK-N-MC cells transfected with either scrambled (white) or siUPF1 (filled) oligonucleotides.
10 μg of proteins were loaded. F. RT-qPCR analysis to detect the expression of SRSF1, a known NMD target [23], in SK-N-MC cells
transfected with either scrambled (white) or siUPF1 (filled) oligonucleotides. Histograms represent SRSF1 mRNA levels normalized to
β-ACTIN expression (n = 3; mean ± s.d). G. Relative DHX9 exon 6A inclusion (normalized to GE) in SK-N-MC cells, transfected either
with scrambled or siUPF1 oligonucleotides, with or without UV treatment. H. Western blot analysis of DHX9 and β-ACTIN expression in
SK-N-MC cells at 6 hours of recovery after UV light irradiation. 10 μg of proteins from SK-N-MC cell extracts were loaded transfected
either with scrambled or siUPF1 oligonucleotides. Upon UV light treatment a slower band of DHX9 protein is also induced due to caspase
cleavage of the first 95 aminoacids of the protein and correlating with early stage of apoptosis, cell apoptosis as previously described [24].
On the right, histograms represent the quantification of DHX9 protein normalized to β-ACTIN from three independent experiments (n = 3;
mean ± s.d.). In all panels statistical analysis was performed by Student’s t-test: *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001; $p < 0.05, $$p < 0.01,
$$$p < 0.001.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31744

Oncotarget

Reduced RNAPII processivity enhances DHX9
exon 6A inclusion in SK-N-MC cells exposed to
UV light irradiation

irradiation by chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments
(ChIP) in SK-N-MC cells. Although RNAPII binding to
DHX9 gene was generally decreased by UV treatment, we
observed a peak in occupancy near the alternative exon
6A after 6 hours of treatment (Figure 3D, left panel).
Moreover, by using phospho-specific antibodies we found
that UV treatment caused a progressive increase in the
pausing (Ser5 phosphorylated) RNAPII, with maximal
enrichment in the variant exon 6A (Figure 3D, right panel).
By contrast, RNAPII phosphorylated in Ser2, which
correlates with the elongating phase of the polymerase
[31], was only marginally affected by the treatment (Figure
3D, right panel). This result indicates that UV treatment
causes a local pausing of RNAPII near exon 6A.
Next, we asked whether DHX9 exon 6A inclusion
was favoured by the lower processivity of RNAPII
induced by UV-light irradiation in SK-N-MC cells.
To this end, we pharmacologically inhibited RNAPII
elongation in LAP-35 cells by treatment with 5,
6-Dichlorobenzimidazole1-b–D-ribofuranoside (DRB)
[32, 33] in the absence of genotoxic stress. RT-qPCR
analysis confirmed that DRB treatment reduced RNAPII
processivity in LAP-35 cells (Figure 3E). Strikingly, this
was sufficient to induce exon 6A inclusion (Figure 3F) and
downregulation of DHX9 mRNA and protein in these cells
(Figure 3G, 3H).
These experiments argue that modulation of RNAPII
processivity upon UV light irradiation in SK-N-MC
cells promotes inclusion of exon 6A in the DHX9 gene,
contributing to down-regulation of its expression.

UV light irradiation is known to widely affect gene
expression, including regulation of genes involved in
the DNA damage response [25]. UV irradiation induces
hyper-phosphorylation of the carboxy terminal domain
(CTD) of RNAPII, followed by its ubiquitylation and
degradation [14, 26]. Importantly, the phosphorylation
status of the RNAPII CTD correlates with distinct
functions of the polymerase, as the hypo-phosphorylated
form (RNAPIIA) is associated with transcriptional
initiation whereas the hyper-phosphorylated form
(RNAPIIO) correlates with transcriptional elongation [27].
UV light irradiation can also influence splicing decisions
through modulation of the RNAPII elongation rate [14,
28–29], representing an example of kinetic coupling
between transcription and splicing. Upon genotoxic
stress, phosphorylation of RNAPII CTD slows down
the polymerase, offering a time window opportunity for
weak exons to be efficiently recognized by the splicing
machinery [14]. DHX9 exon 6A displays a low score for
the 5′splice site (5.9; AAG | GTCAGT) if compared with
the constitutive downstream exon (12.4; CAG | GTAAGT;
see Material and Methods for calculation details),
rendering it relatively weak. Thus, we asked whether the
differential regulation of DHX9 AS and expression by
UV light in ES cells correlated with differential effects
on RNAPII phosphorylation. Western blot analysis using
an antibody against total RNAPII, which recognizes both
RNAPIIO and RNAPIIA, showed that RNAPII is strongly
downregulated in SK-N-MC cells after 3–6 hours from UV
light treatment, whereas this effect was weaker and more
transient in LAP-35 cells (Figure 3A; Figure S5A, S5B).
Moreover, the phosphorylation status of the CTD
(RNAPIIO) was different in the two cell lines. RNAPIIO
peaked at 1–3 hours after UV light treatment in SK-N-MC
cells, and then it was strongly reduced (Figure 3A, 3B);
on the contrary, CTD phosphorylation was only slightly
increased in LAP-35 cells and it was maintained almost
constant in the 24 hours following the UV light treatment
(Figure 3A, 3B).
The different dynamics of RNAPII phosphorylation
in the two ES cell lines exposed to UV irradiation raises
the possibility that DHX9 expression and exon 6A splicing
are affected by modulation of RNAPII elongation rate in
SK-N-MC. To test this hypothesis, we first analyzed the
accumulation of distal and proximal DHX9 pre-mRNA
and calculated RNAPII processivity as ratio between
them (Figure 3C) [30]. Remarkably, UV light irradiation
significantly reduced RNAPII processivity within the
DHX9 transcription unit in SK-N-MC cells but not in
LAP-35 cells (Figure 3C).
To further test our hypothesis, we analyzed RNAPII
occupancy in the DHX9 transcription unit upon UV light
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

UV light irradiation affects EWS-FLI1
recruitment on target genes
DHX9 protein directly interacts with EWS-FLI1 and
enhances EWS-FLI1-mediated transcription, cooperating
with EWS-FLI1-induced oncogenic transformation [17].
Thus, we asked if UV light irradiation affected transcription
of EWS-FLI1 target genes through DHX9 downregulation.
Cyclin D1 (CCND1), c-MYC, and DNA-binding protein
inhibitor ID-2 (ID2) genes encode proteins strictly
involved in cell proliferation and cancer development [34].
In particular, ID2 expression is upregulated in ES cells as
a result of both direct EWS-FLI1 binding to its promoter
and increased c-MYC expression [34]. RT-qPCR analysis
revealed a strong downregulation of ID2 expression (60%
relative to untreated) upon UV irradiation in SK-N-MC
cells, whereas the gene was unaffected in LAP-35
cells. Furthermore, c-MYC and CCND1 genes were
downregulated at higher extent in SK-N-MC (72%  and
71%, respectively) than in LAP-35 cells (38% and 32%,
respectively; Figure 4A). To corroborate our results we
analyzed five more genes known to be direct target of EWSFLI1. Notably, the expression of EZH2, NKX2–2, NR0B1,
and SOX2 was specifically decreased in SK-N-MC cells
by UV light treatment, whereas PDGFC expression was
31745

Oncotarget

Figure 3: RNAPII dynamics in ES cells upon UV light treatment. A. Western blot analysis of RNAPII, Phospho-CHK1 (in order

to control the activation of a protein kinase-signaling cascade initiated by ATM and ATR protein kinases upon DNA damage) and β-ACTIN
expression in SK-N-MC and LAP-35 cells after UV light (10 J/m2) treatment. B. Histograms represent the ratio between the hyperphosphorylated (RNAPIIO) and the hypo-phosphorylated (RNAPIIA) RNAPII from three independent experiments in SK-N-MC (white
bars) and LAP-35 (grey bars) cells (mean ± s.d.). Statistical analysis was performed by Student’s t-test: *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, for treated vs
untreated; $$p < 0.01 for SK-N-MC vs LAP-35 cells. C. In the upper part, scheme of DHX9 transcription unit showing the primers (arrows)
designed to amplify proximal and distal amplicons in RT-qPCR analysis. Histograms represent RNAPII processivity, determined as a ratio
between the distal and proximal amplicons in DHX9 pre-mRNA in control (white) and UV (10 J/m2) treated (grey) SK-N-MC (on the left)
and LAP-35 cells (on the right). D. ChIP analysis of RNAPII occupancy on DHX9 transcription unit in normal condition and upon UV
light treatment. In the upper part, scheme of DHX9 transcription unit showing the primers (arrows) designed to amplify the promoter and
amplicons in the constitutive exon 4 and in the alternative exon 6A. On the left, chart represents total RNAPII binding as input percentage
normalized to IgGs in normal conditions (continuous line) and at 6 hours upon UV light treatment (dashed line). On the right, chart
represents PhosphoSer2-RNAPII (continuous line) and PhosphoSer5-RNAPII (dashed line) binding to DHX9 transcription unit. Binding
is expressed as input percentage of UV versus CTR. E–F. RNAPII processivity and relative exon 6A inclusion after 12-hours 50 μM-DRB
treatment in LAP-35 cells. Exon 6A  inclusion rises and RNAPII processivity decreases in DRB-treated LAP-35. Histograms represent
mean ± s.d. from three independent biological replicas (treated vs untreated: *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01). G. Western blot analysis of DHX9 and
β-ACTIN expression in extracts (10 μg) from LAP-35 treated with 50 μM DRB (12 hours). H. Histograms represent quantification of DHX9
protein normalized to β-ACTIN (n = 3; mean ± s.d.; **p < 0.01).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31746

Oncotarget

downregulated in both cell lines (Figure 4A). These results
show that UV light irradiation induces widespread downregulation of EWS-FLI1 target genes in SK-N-MC cells.
Since DHX9 enhances EWS-FLI1 transcriptional
activity, its downregulation upon UV light irradiation may
directly affect EWS-FLI1 function. To test if UV light
irradiation affected the recruitment of EWS-FLI1 to target
genes, we performed chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) experiments in both SK-N-MC and LAP-35 cells.
Recruitment of EWS-FLI1 to ID2, CCND1, and c-MYC
promoters was strongly impaired by UV light treatment
in SK-N-MC, but not in LAP-35 cells where we actually
observed the opposite trend (Figure 4B), even though this
enrichment did not result in increased expression of the
target genes (Figure 4A). Accordingly, the interaction
between DHX9 and EWS-FLI1 was not affected by UV
light treatment in LAP-35 cells (Figure S5C, S5D).
These results suggest that downregulation of DHX9
expression induced by UV light irradiation in SK-N-MC
cells impairs recruitment of EWS-FLI1 on the promoters
of its target genes.

These data suggest that reduced expression of DHX9
induced by low doses of UV light irradiation contributes
to downregulation of EWS-FLI1 target genes in ES cells
(Figure 5H).

DHX9 confers UV light resistance to ES cells
DHX9 expression is necessary for ES cells to
proliferate [17, 35]. To test whether its expression is
also relevant for ES cell survival in response to UV
light irradiation, we overexpressed recombinant GFP or
GFP-DHX9 in SK-N-MC cells. PI staining at 0, 24 and
48 hours after UV light treatment revealed that DHX9overexpressing SK-N-MC cells are significantly more
resistant to UV light treatment (Figure 6A). This result
was also supported by clonogenic assays. SK-N-MC
cells were transfected with either GFP or GFP-DHX9 and
GFP positive cells were isolated by cell sorting before
the treatment with low doses UV light. Up-regulation
of DHX9 in SK-N-MC cells significantly enhanced
clonogenic activity in response to UV light treatment
(Figure 6B).
To further prove the involvement of DHX9 in the
resistance of ES cells to UV irradiation, we knocked
down its expression in LAP-35 cells. In line with our
hypothesis, knockdown of DHX9 in LAP-35 cells
reduced resistance to UV light treatment, as indicated
by the higher number of PI-positive cells at 24–48 hours
after irradiation (Figure 6C) and the reduced number
of colonies observed in clonogenic assays (Figure 6D).
Interestingly, transfection of recombinant GFP-DHX9
in HeLa cells, which do not express the EWS-FLI1
oncogene, did not improve resistance to UV light
irradiation (Figure S6A, S6B), indicating that DHX9
function is mediated by an ETS transcription factor (i.e.
EWS-FLI1).
These results strongly indicate that DHX9
expression confers resistance to UV light irradiation to ES
cells and suggest that downregulation of DHX9 expression
or activity could be instrumental to sensitize ES cells to
genotoxic stress.

DHX9 is involved in modulation of EWS-FLI1
target genes
To endorse the hypothesis that expression of
EWS-FLI1 target genes in response to UV irradiation
was linked to DHX9 expression in ES cells, we knocked
down DHX9 in LAP-35 cells. Reduction of DHX9
expression was confirmed both at the RNA (52%
reduction versus scrambled; Figure 5A) and protein
level (64% reduction versus scrambled; Figure 5B, 5C).
RT-qPCR analysis revealed that DHX9 knockdown
affected expression of EWS-FLI1 target genes in
LAP-35 cells, leading to down-regulation of ID2
(20%), CCND1 (46%) and c-MYC (40%) mRNA levels
(Figure  5D). Importantly, RT-qPCR and western blot
analysis revealed that knockdown of DHX9 expression
did not affect EWS-FLI1 expression in LAP-35 cells
(Figure 5B, 5C), ruling out that the effect on EWSFLI1 target genes was indirectly due to modulation of
its expression. Furthermore, knockdown of DHX9 in
SK-N-MC cells recapitulated the effect of UV treatment
on the expression of EWS-FLI1 target genes (Figure 5E).
No major changes in RNAPII phosphorylation were
detected upon DHX9 knockdown in SK-N-MC cells
(Figure S4E, S4F), suggesting that DHX9 acts directly
on EWS-FLI1.
To further corroborate our hypothesis, we analyzed
the recruitment of EWS-FLI1 and RNAPII on EWS-FLI1
target genes by ChIP analysis in LAP-35 cells. DHX9
knockdown strongly impaired recruitment of both EWSFLI1 and RNAPII on the promoters of EWS-FLI1 target
genes (Figure 5F, 5G).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Genotoxic stress affects DHX9 alternative
splicing
In order to test whether other genotoxic agents
affected SK-N-MC cells viability, we performed
clonogenic and cell viability assays using increasing
concentrations of etoposide (Eto), 5-fluorouracile (5FU)
and cisplatin (CIS). These drugs are widely used in
chemotherapy for their antineoplastic properties [36].
Etoposide is a topoisomerase II inhibitor, 5-fluorouracile
is a pyrimidine analog, and cisplatin is an alkylating
agent; all of them induce DNA damage and cell death

31747

Oncotarget

Figure 4: UV light treatment down-regulates EWS-FLI1 target genes in SK-N-MC cells. A. Histograms represent RT-qPCR

analysis of ID2, c-MYC, CCND1 EZH2, NKX2–2, NR0B1, PDGFC, SOX2 expression in control (white bar) or UV-treated (gray bar)
LAP-35 and SK-N-MC cells. GE values of are normalized to GAPDH expression (n = 3; mean ± s.d.; treated vs untreated *p < 0.05,
**p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001). B. Association of EWS-FLI1 to the promoters of ID2, CCND1 and c-MYC genes. qPCR analysis of EWS-FLI1
ChIP signals for SK-N-MC and LAP-35 cells with or without UV treatment. Histograms represent relative fold enrichment of EWS-FLI1
normalized versus the IgGs content (n = 3; mean ± s.d.; *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001).

[36]. We found that etoposide treatment specifically
impaired SK-N-MC cells proliferation and clonogenicity,
while 5-fluorouracile and cisplatin had milder effect on
cell viability (Figure 7A–7C). Importantly, western blot
analysis documented that etoposide was also the only
chemotherapeutic drug affecting RNAPII phosphorylation
(Figure 7D, 7E), in a manner similar to what observed
at later time points after UV irradiation (Figure 3A).
Furthermore, etoposide treatment also enhanced DHX9
exon 6A inclusion (Figure 7F), thus decreasing DHX9
protein expression (Figure 7D–7G) similarly to UV light
irradiation.
These results document that etoposide treatment
parallels the effects of UV light irradiation on DHX9
alternative splicing, RNAPII phosphorylation and
SK-N-MC viability. Accordingly, etoposide treatment
displayed a milder effect on LAP35 cells (Figure S6C). On
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

the other hand, treatment of both LAP-35 and SK-N-MC
cells with the YK-4–279 inhibitor, which inhibits DHX9EWS-FLI1 interaction, affects viability and proliferation
of both ES cell lines (Figure S6D, S6E).

DISCUSSION
The study presented here identifies DHX9 as a novel
regulator of ES cells sensitivity to UV light irradiation.
We provide evidence that DNA damage regulates DHX9
expression by AS through the inclusion of a new PTCcontaining exon and consequent targeting to NMD. UV
light regulates this event in a CTD-dependent manner
by slowing down the elongation rate of RNAPII and
promoting the inclusion of the alternative exon 6A in
DHX9 pre-mRNA. Furthermore, we show that changes
in expression of DHX9 modify the sensitivity to UV
31748

Oncotarget

Figure 5: DHX9 knockdown in LAP-35 cells affects EWS-FLI1 target genes. A. RT-qPCR analysis to monitor DHX9 and

EWS-FLI1 mRNA expression in LAP-35 cells knockdown for DHX9. B. Western blot analysis of DHX9, FLI1 and GAPDH expression in
extracts (10 μg) from cells transfected with either scrambled or siDHX9 oligonucleotides, prepared 72 hr after transfection. C. Histograms
represent quantification of western blot signals shown in (B) from three independent experiments (mean ± s.d.). D. RT-qPCR analysis of
EWS-FLI1 target genes upon DHX9 knockdown in LAP-35 cells. Histograms represent expression (GE) of ID2, c-MYC, and CCND1
normalized to GAPDH expression in cells transfected with either scrambled (white bars) or siDHX9 oligonucleotides (checked filled
bars) (n = 3; mean ± s.d.; treated vs untreated: *p < 0.05). E. RT-qPCR analysis of EWS-FLI1 target genes upon DHX9 knockdown in
SK-N-MC cells. Histograms represent expression (GE) of ID2, c-MYC, CCND1 normalized to GAPDH expression in cells transfected
with either scrambled (white bars) or siDHX9 oligonucleotides (checked filled bars) (n = 3; mean ± s.d.). In all panels statistical analysis
was performed by Student’s t-test: *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001). F. and G. Association of EWS-FLI1 (F) and RNAPII (G) to the
promoters of ID2, CCND1 and c-MYC genes. qPCR analysis of EWS-FLI1 and RNAPII ChIP signals for LAP-35 knocked down for DHX9.
Histograms represent relative fold enrichment of EWS-FLI1 and RNAPII binding normalized versus the IgGs content (n = 3; mean ± s.d.;
*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001). H. Hypothetical model of DHX9 regulation of gene expression upon UV light treatment. In ES cells
DHX9, acting as hinge between EWS-FLI1 and RNAPII, is involved in EWS-FLI1 target gene expression; upon UV irradiation, the DHX9
expression is down-regulated in SK-N-MC cells, thus decreasing DHX9 availability and, in turn, interfering with EWS-FLI1 target gene
expression. In LAP-35 cells, UV light treatment does not affect DHX9 expression and does not impair the recruitment of RNAPII on the
promoters of EWS-FLI1 target genes.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31749

Oncotarget

Figure 6: DHX9 expression affects ES resistance to UV light irradiation. A. SK-N-MC cells were transfected with either
pEGFP or pEGFP-DHX9 constructs and exposed to 10 J/m2 UV light 48 hours after transfection. Cell death was detected at 0, 24 and
48 hours after the UV treatment by PI staining and flow cytometry analysis; histograms represent the ratio of UV treated vs untreated
PI positive cells in the GFP population (n = 3; mean ± s.d.; *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001 for treated vs untreated; and: $p < 0.05,
$$p < 0.01, $$$p < 0.001 for pEGFP vs pEGFP-DHX9). B. GFP-positive SK-N-MC cells transfected as in (A) were sorted and plated
(2000 cells per 10-mm plate) in IMDM complete medium. 12 days after 10 J/m2 UV-light treatment cells were scored for clonogenic
activity. Histograms represent the percentage of colonies formed after UV treatment versus untreated carried out on pEGFP (white) or
pEGFP-DHX9 (gray) (n = 3; mean ± s.d.; pEGFP vs pEGFP-DHX9: ***p < 0.001). C. LAP-35 cells were transfected with either scrambled
or siDHX9 oligonucleotides and exposed to 10 J/m2 UV light 48 hours after transfection. Cell death was detected at 0, 24 and 48 hours
after treatment by PI staining and flow cytometry analysis; histograms represent the ratio of UV treated vs untreated PI positive cells (n = 3,
mean ± s.d.; treated vs untreated: *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, for treated vs untreated; and: $p < 0.05, $$p < 0.01, $$$p < 0.001 for
scrambled vs siDHX9. D. LAP-35 cells were transfected with either scrambled or siDHX9 oligonucleotides together with pEGFP plasmid;
GFP positive cells were sorted and plated as above. 12 days after 10 J/m2 UV light treatment, cells were scored for clonogenic activity.
Histograms represent the percentage of colonies after UV treatment versus untreated cells carried out on scrambled (white bars) or siDHX9
(gray) LAP-35 cells (n = 3, mean ± s.d.; scrambled vs siDHX9: *p < 0.05).
irradiation and that DHX9 is a novel pro-survival factor in
ES cells. Notably, among other chemotherapeutic agents
tested, etoposide, the only one that efficiently suppressed
ES cell growth, was also the only agent affecting RNAPII
phosphorylation and exon 6A splicing. These results
identify modulation of DHX9 splicing as a new potential
tool to enhance ES cell sensitivity to genotoxic stresses.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Cancer cells are characterized by alteration of
gene expression both at the level of transcription and
mRNA processing, giving rise to many splice variants
specifically associated with cancer [15]. In particular, AS
plays a key role in the cellular response to stress and DNA
damage, influencing the response to chemotherapeutic
agents [7, 8]. Notably, splicing factors and components
31750

Oncotarget

Figure 7: Etoposide treatment affects DHX9 expression and ES sensitivity. A. Representative images of clonogenic assays of SK-N-MC
cells upon treatment with different concentration of etoposide (Eto; from 0,1 to 50 μM), 5-fluorouracile (5-FU; from 0,5 to 300 μM), and
cisplatin (CIS; from 5 to 300 μM). B. Histograms represent colony numbers (n = 3; mean ± s.d.) carried out on SK-N-MC treated with
Eto, 5-FU and CIS (grey bars) versus DMSO treatment (white bars). C. Propidium Iodide (PI) viability assay; the decrease in viability was
expressed as relative percentage of dead cells in treated (grey bars) versus control (white bars, DMSO) cells after 16 hours of Eto, 5FU
and CIS treatment. In all panels statistical analysis was performed by Student’s t-test: *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001. D. Western blot
analysis of RNAPII, DHX9 and β-ACTIN expression in SK-N-MC after 16 hours treatment with DMSO, Eto (10 μM), 5-FU (10 μM),
and CIS (80 μM). 10 μg of extracts were loaded in each lane of a 6% SDS PAGE. E. Histograms represent the ratio between the hyperphosphorylated (RNAPIIO) and the hypo-phosphorylated (RNAPIIA) RNAPII from three independent experiments in SK-N-MC after
16 hours treatment with DMSO (white bars) or Eto (10 μM), 5FU (10 μM), and CIS (80 μM) (grey bars), as in (D) (mean ± s.d.). Statistical
analysis was performed by Student’s t-test: *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001 F. RT-qPCR analysis to monitor DHX9 AS upon Eto
(10  μM), 5-FU (10 μM), and CIS (80 μM) treatment. Histograms represent levels of expression of DHX9 exon 6A normalized to a
constitutive exon (E4) in SK-N-MC cells. G. Histograms represent DHX9 expression from three independent experiments in SK-N-MC
treated for 16 hours with DMSO (white bars) or Eto (10 μM), 5-FU (10 μM), and CIS (80 μM) (grey bars), as in (D) Statistical analysis was
performed by Student’s t-test: *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31751

Oncotarget

DRB) regulate DHX9 AS and expression by controlling
the inclusion of an alternative PTC-containing exon
in ES cells. Nevertheless, we cannot exclude that UV
light irradiation, or etopside treatment, may also induce
the expression or activity of some splicing factors, thus
contributing to exon 6A inclusion. Given the importance
of DHX9 in cancer cells resistance and proliferation,
future work will investigate this issue.
DHX9 is a member of the DEXH family of RNA
helicases [39], which play important roles in several
aspects of RNA metabolism [40]. Homozygous Dhx9
mutation in mice determines early embryonic lethality
[41], suggesting that the DHX9 gene is essential for
viability. Moreover, through its helicase activity DHX9
binds to and resolves mutagenic intra-molecular triplex
structures [42, 43], preventing genomic instability
and assisting the maintenance of DNA integrity in the
replication, recombination, and repair processes. In
ES cells, DHX9 forms a complex with EWS-FLI1 and
modulates EWS-FLI1-dependent transcription [17]. Thus,
DHX9 could be a functional partner for EWS-FLI1 by
enhancing engagement of the transcriptional machinery
at responsive promoters and inducing local changes in
chromatin structure and DNA unwinding. We found
that the reduction of DHX9 expression in SK-N-MC
cells elicited by treatment with UV light correlates with
downregulation of EWS-FLI1 target genes, suggesting
that it is physiologically relevant. Moreover, EWS-FLI1
recruitment to the promoter of its target genes is repressed
upon UV treatment only in SK-N-MC cells, where DHX9
expression is downregulated, but not in LAP-35 cells,
where DHX9 protein remains high. Consistent with our
model is also the observation that DHX9 knockdown in
LAP-35 and in SK-N-MC cells, to similar levels of those
obtained by UV irradiation in SK-N-MC cells, is sufficient
to repress the expression of ID2, c-MYC and CCND1
(Figure 5), regardless of the UV treatment. These results
strongly suggest that downregulation of EWS-FLI1 target
genes induced by UV light irradiation in SK-N-MC cells
is due to reduced expression of DHX9.
The functional interaction between EWS-FLI1
and DHX9 was previously shown to support anchorageindependent growth [17]. In this study, we found that
DHX9 expression confers resistance to UV irradiation in
ES cells. Indeed, overexpression of recombinant DHX9
makes SK-N-MC cells significantly more resistant
to UV light treatment. Conversely, knockdown of
endogenous DHX9 renders LAP-35 cells more sensitive
to UV light treatment. Since overexpression of DHX9
in HeLa cells did not improve cell survival to UV
irradiation, this phenomenon appears to be specific for
ES cells. Collectively, these results suggest that DHX9
downregulation could be instrumental to sensitize ES
cells to genotoxic stress. In line with this concept, an
RNAi screen recently uncovered DHX9 as a key target
gene to sensitize lymphomas to chemotherapeutic

of the transcription machinery, including RNAPII itself,
can be targets of intracellular cascades that link changes
in splicing patterns to DNA damage signals [14]. For
instance, UV light treatment triggers the inhibition of
transcription initiation by RNAPII [23]. Furthermore,
the BRCA-1/BARD-1 complex ubiquitinates the
phosphorylated form of RNAPII, inducing its degradation
by the proteasome [37]. Thus, the timing and dynamics
of RNAPII phosphorylation and degradation take part to
the fine-tuned regulation of AS upon UV light irradiation
([14]; present study). In this regard, we found that
regulation of RNAPII correlates with the sensitivity of ES
cells to UV irradiation. RNAPII is strongly downregulated
in SK-N-MC cells 3–6 hours after UV light treatment,
whereas it was only slightly reduced in LAP-35 cells
(Figure 3A, 3B). Moreover, the phosphorylation status
of the CTD (RNAPIIO) was regulated differently in the
two cell lines; RNAPIIO peaked at three hours upon UV
light treatment in SK-N-MC cells, and then it was strongly
reduced. On the contrary, the phosphorylation status of
the CTD was only slightly affected in LAP-35 cells under
these conditions (Figure 3A, 3B). In line with the effects
on RNAPII dynamics, larger changes in gene expression
and AS were observed in SK-N-MC than in LAP-35 cells,
suggesting that the two events triggered by UV irradiation
were mechanistically linked.
To investigate the mechanism underlying the
different sensitivity of ES cells to UV irradiation, we
searched for genes that were differentially regulated in
SK-N-MC and LAP-35 cells. Among them, DHX9 was
specifically affected both at gene expression and AS upon
UV light irradiation only in SK-N-MC. Interestingly, UV
light induced the inclusion of a PTC-containing exon in the
DHX9 transcript (the alternative exon 6A), thus targeting
the corresponding transcript to NMD and contributing to
DHX9 down-regulation. As a consequence, in response
to UV light treatment, the DHX9 protein is diminished
in SK-N-MC but not in LAP-35 cells (Figure  2). This
observation is in line with other studies showing that
exons sensitive to RNAPII modulation often introduce
PTCs that elicit NMD of the spliced mRNAs [14, 33, 38].
Mechanistically, inclusion of exon 6A in DHX9 premRNA is linked with modulation of RNAPII elongation
rate by UV treatment. We found that RNAPII processivity
was significantly reduced in SK-N-MC cells but not in
LAP-35 cells (Figure 3D), possibly due to the stronger
effect of UV light on RNAPII phosphorylation in the
former cells. Indeed, strong phosphorylation of RNAPII
was previously shown to reduce its elongation rate in cells
exposed to genotoxic stress [14]. In line with this concept,
we found that treatment of LAP-35 cells with the pTEFB
inhibitor DRB artificially affected RNAPII processivity
and recapitulated inclusion of the alternative exon 6A of
DHX9 (Figure 3F), reducing DHX9 protein expression
(Figure 3G, 3H). Thus, our results prove that factors
affecting RNAPII elongation rate (UV irradiation and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31752

Oncotarget

Splicing-sensitive microarrays

treatment [44]. Although DHX9 might play a direct
role in DNA repair and genome maintenance through
its interaction with the Werner syndrome helicase WRN
[45] and BRCA1 [46], our results suggest that it may also
participate to this process by enhancing the expression
of oncogenic EWS-FLI1 target genes. On the other
hand, it is also possible that, in addition to DHX9, other
genes differentially regulated in the two ES cell lines are
involved in the different sensitivity to genotoxic stress.
For example, our microarray analysis revealed that FOS
gene is specifically upregulated in LAP-35 cells but not
in SK-N-MC cells. Notably, cells deficient in c-Fos are
hypersensitive to ultraviolet (UV-C) light and mouse
embryonic fibroblasts fos−/− are defective in the repair of
UV-C induced DNA lesions [47].
ES tumors initially respond well to chemotherapy,
but 40% of patients later develop recurrent disease and
the majority of them die within 5 years, despite high-dose
chemotherapy [48]. Down-regulation of EWS-FLI1 by
siRNA approaches resulted in prolonged survival of ES
xenograft-bearing mice [49], but this approach currently
lacks clinical translation [50]. Recently, a small-molecule
targeting EWS-FLI1-DHX9 interaction has been proposed as
a strategy to inhibit EWS-FLI1-mediated transcription [35].
Here we provide evidence that genotoxic stresses causing
downregulation of DHX9 expression efficiently reduce
ES cell growth. Moreover, we have identified a DHX9
splicing isoform induced by UV light treatment that leads
to DHX9 down-regulation in ES cells. Since DHX9-EWSFLI1 functional interaction represents a good opportunity
for clinical intervention, our data indicate a novel strategy
for targeting EWS-FLI1 oncogene activity through the
modulation of DHX9 expression or activity. In this scenario,
the development of antisense oligonucleotides recruiting the
spliceosomal complex to the alternative exon 6A in DHX9
could be instrumental to drive DHX9 downregulation in ES
cells and might provide a valuable additional therapy for the
treatment of ES.

RNA from three biological replicates of control or
UV irradiated Ewing Sarcoma cells (either SK-N-MC
or LAP-35) and HEP3B cells collected 6 hours
after the treatment was purified using RNeasy Mini
kit (Qiagen) and digested with DNase RNase free
(Qiagen). cDNA and Cy5-Cy3 labelled cRNA were
generated from the total RNA using the Agilent Low
RNA Input Fluorescent Linear Amplification kit. 8 μg
of each cRNA were used for the hybridization with the
arrays (Agilent In situ hybridization kit plus). After
hybridization, arrays were washed, and scanned images
analyzed as previously described [14]. Three biological
replicates were hybridized, with both direct and dyereversal hybridizations. General gene expression values
represent the average of log2 ratios for all the probes of
a locus. Statistical analyses were carried out with Linear
Models for Microarray Data (Limma; Bioconductor
Project) [51]. The background correction method used
in the analysis was Normexp [52]. Locally weighted
linear regression (LOWESS) analysis was used as a
normalization method [53].
The cutoff considered was fold change >|1,3|
for gene expression changes and fold change >|1,4|;
(Z-SCORE >3; p-value <0,01) for alternative splicing
changes. The data were deposited in GEO database with
the accession number GSE59889.

Transfection experiments
For transfections, cells were plated in 35-mm
dishes and transfected with siRNAs (Sigma-Aldrich)
at final concentration of 100 nM using Lipofectamine
RNAiMax reagent (Invitrogen) according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. The DHX9 and UPF1 siRNA
and scrambled sequences are listed in Supplementary
Table 2. For over-expression experiments, transfections
were performed with 1 μg of appropriate constructs
(pEGFP or pEGFP-DHX9) using lipofectamine 2000
(Invitrogen). 48 h after transfections, cells were treated
and collected at the indicated time points for RNA or
protein analyses.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell culture and treatments
SK-N-MC and LAP-35 Ewing Sarcoma cells were
a generous gift from Drs F. Moretti and K. Scotlandi,
respectively. Both cell lines were cultured in IMDM
medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum,
penicillin and streptomycin (Gibco), and maintained at
37°C in humidified 5% CO2 atmosphere. For treatment,
cells were plated at 50%–60% confluence 16 h before
UV light irradiation (either 10 or 40 J/m2). Fresh medium
was immediately added after the treatment and the cells
were harvested at different times during the recovery,
as indicated. For drug treatment, ES cells were treated
16 hours with DMSO or etoposide, 5-fluorouracile, and
cisplatin at different concentration, as indicated.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Isolation of total RNA and RT-qPCR
Total RNA was extracted by using TriPure Isolation
Reagent (Roche) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions and subjected to DNase digestion (Roche).
First-strand cDNA was obtained from 1 μg of RNA using
random hexamer and M-MLV-Reverse Transcriptase
(Promega, Italy). Synthesized cDNA corresponding to
25 ng total RNA was used for conventional- (GoTaq DNA
Polymerase, Promega) or quantitative-PCR (SYBR Green
Master Mix for Light-Cycler 480, Roche), according to
manufacturer’s instructions. Primers used for RT-qPCR
are listed in the Supplementary Table 2.
31753

Oncotarget

Protein extraction and western blotting analyses

β-glycerophosphate, 0.5 mM Na3VO4, and protease
inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich) and sonicated with
Bioruptor (Dyagenode) 2 fold for 6 min (30 sec sonication
and 30 sec pause). Chromatin extracts containing DNA
fragments (100 μg/sample) with an average size of 200 bp
were pre-cleared overnight and then immunoprecipitated
for 3 hours using 2 μg of anti-FLI1 (SAB2100822, Sigma
Aldrich) or anti-RNAPII (N20, Santa Cruz Biotechnology)
or anti RNAPII CTD repeat H14 and H5 (ab24759 and
ab24758, Abcam) antibodies and Protein A/G Agarose/
Salmon Sperm DNA (Merck Millipore). Precipitated DNA
was extracted and analyzed by qPCR using primers listed in
Supplementary Table 2.

Total protein extracts were prepared using lysis
buffer (100 mM NaCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 30 mM Tris-HCl,
pH 7.5, 10% glycerol, 1 mM dithiothreitol, 10  mM
β-glycerophosphate, 0.5 mM Na3VO4, and protease
inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich) supplemented with
0.5% Triton X-100. The extracts were sonicated (1 sec at
30%), incubated on ice for 10 min. and then centrifuged
for 10 min at 12,000 g at 4°C. Protein quantification
was performed by Quick Start Bradford Protein Assay
(Bio-Rad). Cell extracts were diluted in SDS sample
buffer and boiled for 5 min. Proteins (10–50 μg) were
separated on 6% or 10% SDS-PAGE gels and transferred
to Hybond-P membranes (GE Healthcare). Membranes
were saturated with 5% non-fat dry milk in phosphatebuffered saline (PBS) containing 0.1% Tween-20 for 1 h
at room temperature, and incubated with the following
antibodies and dilutions overnight at 4°C: anti-DHX9
1:200 (H300, Santa Cruz Biotechnology), anti-FLI-1
1:200 (sc-356 Santa Cruz Biotechnology), antiGAPDH 1:1000 (sc-32233 Santa Cruz Biotechnology),
anti-RNAPII 1:250 (N20, Santa Cruz Biotechnology),
anti-β–ACTIN 1:1000 (MAB1501, Merk Millipore),
anti-ERK2 1:1000 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology), and
phospho-CHK1 1:1000 (Cell Signaling), anti-UPF1
1:500 (Millipore). Secondary anti-mouse or anti-rabbit
IgGs conjugated to horseradish peroxidase (Amersham)
were incubated with the membranes for 1 h at room
temperature at a 1:10000 dilution in PBS containing
0.1% Tween-20. Immunostained bands were detected by
a chemiluminescent method (Santa Cruz Biotechnology).
Densitometric analysis was performed by ImageJ
software.

Flow cytometry analysis
Percentage of dead cells was determined by staining
with propidium iodide (PI 1 μg/ml eBioscience) and
acquisition was performed on flow cytometry (Canto,
BD Biosciences). Analysis was performed using FlowJo
software. In some experiments GFP positive population
of SK-N-MC cells transfected with pEGFP and pEGFPDHX9 constructs, was isolated using a MoFlo high speed
cell sorter (Beckman Coulter).

Colony formation assay
Cell suspensions were plated in 100-mm plates
or 35-mm plates at a density of 2000 or 1000 cells/
plate, respectively. After one day, cells were treated
(UV 10 J/m2) and incubated at 37°C in a humidified
atmosphere containing 5% CO2 for 12 day, replacing
medium every two days. At the end of the incubation
period, cells were washed with PBS, fixed in methanol for
10 min at RT and stained 30 min at room temperature with
0.05% Crystal Violet in distilled water on a rotating shaker.
After staining, cells were washed twice with tap water and
air-dried overnight. The next day clones were counted.

MTS proliferation assay
Cell proliferation was determined using the
Cell Titer A96 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-5-(3carboxymethoxyphenyl)-2-(4-sulfophenyl)-2Htetrazolium, inner salt (MTS) method according to
the manufacturer’s instructions (Promega) by plating
5 × 104 cells/well in 96-well culture plates.

5′ splice site score calculation
In order to evaluate the strength of the alternative
exon we compared the scores of the 5′ splice sites
of the alternative exon 6A versus the downstream
constitutive exon 7 of DHX9 gene. The score expresses
how similar the splice sites fit the consensus sequence.
A perfect 5′ splice site AAG|gtaagt would have a score
of 12.6. According to these parameters provided by
Dr. Michael Zhang, CSHL and statistical data calculated
by Dr. Tetsushi Yada using the sequence compilation
for the GENIE program, we run the Splice Site Score
Calculation (http://rulai.cshl.edu/new_alt_exon_db2/
HTML/score.html) and we found that the 5′ SpliceSite Score For DHX9 exon 6A (AAG | GTCAGT) is:
5.9 while the score for the downstream constitutive
exon (CAG | GTAAGT) is 12.4. Similar results were
obtained using the MaxEntScan::score5ss matrix from

Chromatin immunoprecipitation
2 × 108 SK-N-MC and LAP-35 cells were crosslinked with 1% (w/v) formaldehyde (Sigma Aldrich) for
15 min at room temperature, and then formaldehyde was
inactivated by the addition of 125 mM glycine (Sigma
Aldrich). Cells were washed in cold PBS and lysed to
isolate nuclei in a hypotonic buffer containing 5 mM PIPES
(pH 8.0), 85 mM KCl, NP40 0.5%, 1 mM dithiothreitol,
10 mM β-glycerophosphate, 0.5 mM Na3VO4, and protease
inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich). Isolated nuclei were
lysed in a buffer containing 1% SDS, 10 mM EDTA, and
50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 1 mM dithiothreitol, 10 mM
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31754

Oncotarget

the laboratory of Chris Burge (http://genes.mit.edu/
burgelab/maxent/Xmaxentscan_scoreseq.html).

9.	 Paronetto MP, Bernardis I, Volpe E, Bechara E,
Sebestyen E, Eyras E, Valcárcel J. Regulation of FAS
exon definition and apoptosis by the Ewing sarcoma protein. Cell Rep. 2014; 7:1211–26.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING

10.	 Li H, Watford W, Li C, Parmelee A, Bryant MA, Deng C,
O’Shea J, Bong Lee S. Ewing sarcoma gene EWS is
essential for meiosis and B lymphocyte development.
J Clin Invest. 2007; 117:1314–23.

We thank Drs Juan Valcárcel and Claudio Sette
for helpful suggestions and critical reading of the
manuscript. We are also indebted with Drs K. Scotlandi,
F. Moretti, MC Manara and M. Buttarelli for the
generous gift of SK-N-MC and LAP-35 ES cell lines,
with C. Giorgi for the generous gift of the anti-Upf1
antibody (Millipore), with Dr Elisa De Paola for
technical support.
This work was supported by grants from the
Associazione Italiana Ricerca sul Cancro (AIRC) (MFAG
11658), from the Association for International Cancer
Research (AICR-UK 14-0333) and from the University of
Rome “Foro Italico” (RIC052013) to M.P.P.

11.	 Hurov KE, Cotta-Ramusino C, Elledge SJ. A genetic screen
identifies the Triple T complex required for DNA damage
signaling and ATM and ATR stability. Genes Dev. 2010;
24:1939–50.
12.	 O’Connell BC, Adamson B, Lydeard JR, Sowa ME,
Ciccia  A, Bredemeyer AL, Schlabach M, Gygi SP,
Elledge SJ, Harper JW. A genome-wide camptothecin sensitivity screen identifies a mammalian MMS22L-NFKBIL2
complex required for genomic stability. Mol Cell. 2010;
40:645–57.
13.	 Biamonti G, Caceres JF. Cellular stress and RNA splicing. Trends Biochem Sci. 2009; 34:146–53.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

14.	 Munoz MJ, Perez Santangelo MS, Paronetto MP,
de  la  Mata  M, Pelisch F, Boireau S, Glover-Cutter K,
Ben-Dov C, Blaustein M, Lozano JJ, Bird G, Bentley D,
Bertrand E, Kornblihtt ARl. DNA damage regulates alternative splicing through inhibition of RNA polymerase II
elongation. Cell. 2009; 137:708–20.

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

REFERENCES
1.	 Delattre O, Zucman J, Plougastel B, Desmaze C, Melot T,
Peter M, Kovar H, Joubert I, de Jong P, Rouleau G,
Aurias A, Thomas G. Gene fusion with an ETS DNAbinding domain caused by chromosome translocation in
human tumours. Nature. 1992; 359:162–5.

15.	 David CJ, Manley JL. Alternative pre-mRNA splicing
regulation in cancer: pathways and programs unhinged.
Genes Dev. 2010; 24:2343–64.

2.	 Riggi N, Stamenkovic I. The Biology of Ewing sarcoma.
Cancer Lett. 2007; 254:1–10.

16.	 Bonnal S, Vigevani L, Valcarcel J. The spliceosome as
a target of novel antitumour drugs. Nat Rev Drug Discov.
2012; 11:847–59.

3.	 Jedlicka P. Ewing Sarcoma, an enigmatic malignancy
of likely progenitor cell origin, driven by transcription
factor  oncogenic fusions. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2010;
3:338–47.

17.	 Toretsky JA, Erkizan V, Levenson A, Abaan OD,
Parvin JD, Cripe TP, Rice AM, Bong Lee S, Üren A.
Oncoprotein EWS-FLI1 activity is enhanced by RNA
helicase A. Cancer Res. 2006; 66:5574–81.

4.	 Sanchez G, Bittencourt D, Laud K, Barbier J, Delattre O,
Auboeuf D, Dutertre M. Alteration of cyclin D1 transcript
elongation by a mutated transcription factor up-regulates
the oncogenic D1b splice isoform in cancer. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A. 2008; 105:6004–9.

18.	 Bagnara GP, Serra M, Giovannini M, Badiali M, Stella M,
Montaldi A, Tessarollo L, Cavazzana AO. Establishment
and characterization of a primitive neuroectodermal
tumor of bone continuous cell line (LAP-35). Int J Cell
Cloning. 1990; 8:409–24.

5.	 Paronetto MP. Ewing sarcoma protein: a key player in
human cancer. Int J Cell Biol. 2013; 2013:642853.

19.	 Whang-Peng J, Triche TJ, Knutsen T, Miser J, KaoShan S, Tsai S, Israel MA. Cytogenetic characterization
of selected small round cell tumors of childhood. Cancer
Genet Cytogenet. 1986; 21:185–208.

6.	 Sanchez G, Delattre O, Auboeuf D, Dutertre M. Coupled
alteration of transcription and splicing by a single oncogene: boosting the effect on cyclin D1 activity. Cell
Cycle. 2008; 7:2299–305.

20.	 Corrionero A, Minana B, Valcarcel J. Reduced fidelity of
branch point recognition and alternative splicing induced
by the anti-tumor drug spliceostatin A. Genes Dev. 2011;
25:445–59.

7.	 Dutertre M, Sanchez G, De Cian MC, Barbier J,
Dardenne E, Gratadou L, Dujardin G, Le Jossic-Corcos C,
Corcos L, Auboeuf D. Cotranscriptional exon skipping in
the genotoxic stress response. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2010;
17:1358–66.

21.	 Nakajima T, Uchida C, Anderson SF, Lee CG, Hurwitz J,
Parvin JD, Montminy M. RNA helicase A mediates association of CBP with RNA polymerase II. Cell. 1997;
90:1107–12.

8.	 Paronetto MP, Minana B, Valcarcel J. The Ewing sarcoma protein regulates DNA damage-induced alternative
splicing. Mol Cell. 2011; 43:353–68.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

22.	 Azzalin CM, Lingner J. The double life of UPF1 in RNA
and DNA stability pathways. Cell Cycle. 2006; 5:1496–8.
31755

Oncotarget

23.	 Valacca C, Bonomi S, Buratti E, Pedrotti S, Baralle FE,
Sette C, Ghigna C, Biamonti G. Sam68 regulates EMT
through alternative splicing-activated nonsense-mediated
mRNA decay of the SF2/ASF proto-oncogene. J Cell
Biol. 2010; 191:87–99.

A small molecule blocking oncogenic protein ­EWS-FLI1
interaction with RNA helicase A inhibits growth of
Ewing’s sarcoma. Nat Med. 2009; 15:750–6.
36.	 Patel SR. New agents in the treatment of soft-tissue
­sarcomas. Expert Opin Investig Drugs. 2000; 9:1545–51.

24.	 Takeda Y, Caudell P, Grady G, Wang G, Suwa A,
Sharp GC, Dynan WS, Hardin JA. Human RNA helicase
A is a lupus autoantigen that is cleaved during apoptosis.
J Immunol. 1999; 163:6269–74.

37.	 Starita LM, Horwitz AA, Keogh MC, Ishioka C,
Parvin JD, Chiba N. BRCA1/BARD1 ubiquitinate phosphorylated RNA polymerase II. J Biol Chem. 2005;
280:24498–505.

25.	 Rockx DA, Mason R, van Hoffen A, Barton MC,
Citterio E, Bregman DB, van Zeeland AA, Vrieling H,
Mullenders LHF. UV-induced inhibition of transcription
involves repression of transcription initiation and phosphorylation of RNA polymerase II. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A. 2000; 97:10503–8.

38.	 Dujardin G, Lafaille C, de la Mata M, Marasco LE,
Munoz MJ, Le Jossic-Corcos C, Corcos L, Kornblihtt AR.
How slow RNA polymerase II elongation favors alternative exon skipping. Mol Cell. 2014; 54:683–90.
39.	 Linder P, Lasko PF, Ashburner M, Leroy P, Nielsen PJ,
Nishi K, Schnier J, Slonimski PP. Birth of the D-E-A-D
box. Nature. 1989; 337:121–2.

26.	 Somesh BP, Reid J, Liu WF, Sogaard TM, ErdjumentBromage H, Tempst P, Svejstrup JQ. Multiple mechanisms confining RNA polymerase II ubiquitylation to
polymerases undergoing transcriptional arrest. Cell. 2005;
121:913–23.

40.	 Rocak S, Linder P. DEAD-box proteins: the driving
forces behind RNA metabolism. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol.
2004; 5:232–41.
41.	 Lee CG, da Costa Soares V, Newberger C, Manova K,
Lacy E, Hurwitz J. RNA helicase A is essential for
normal gastrulation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998;
95:13709–13.

27.	 Laybourn PJ, Dahmus ME. Transcription-dependent
structural changes in the C-terminal domain of mammalian RNA polymerase subunit IIa/o. J Biol Chem. 1989;
264:6693–8.

42.	 Jain A, Bacolla A, Chakraborty P, Grosse F, Vasquez KM.
Human DHX9 helicase unwinds triple-helical DNA structures. Biochemistry. 2010; 49:6992–9.

28.	 Shukla S, Oberdoerffer S. Co-transcriptional regulation of
alternative pre-mRNA splicing. Biochim Biophys Acta.
2012; 1819:673–83.

43.	 Jain A, Bacolla A, Del Mundo IM, Zhao J, Wang G,
Vasquez  KM. DHX9 helicase is involved in preventing
genomic instability induced by alternatively structured DNA
in human cells. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013; 41:10345–10357.

29.	 Kornblihtt AR, Schor IE, Allo M, Dujardin G, Petrillo E,
Munoz MJ. Alternative splicing: a pivotal step between
eukaryotic transcription and translation. Nat Rev Mol Cell
Biol. 2013; 14:153–65.

44.	 Mills JR, Malina A, Lee T, Di Paola D, Larsson O,
Miething C, Grosse F, Tang H, Zannis-Hadjopoulos M,
Lowe SW, Pelletier J. RNAi screening uncovers Dhx9 as
a modifier of ABT-737 resistance in an Emu-myc/Bcl-2
mouse model. Blood. 2013; 121:3402–12.

30.	 Batsche E, Yaniv M, Muchardt C. The human SWI/SNF
subunit Brm is a regulator of alternative splicing. Nat
Struct Mol Biol. 2006; 13:22–9.
31.	 Hsin JP, Manley JL. The RNA polymerase II CTD coordinates transcription and RNA processing. Genes Dev.
2012; 26:2119–37.

45.	 Friedemann J, Grosse F, Zhang S. Nuclear DNA helicase
II (RNA helicase A) interacts with Werner syndrome helicase and stimulates its exonuclease activity. J Biol Chem.
2005; 280:31303–13.

32.	 Marshall NF, Peng J, Xie Z, Price DH. Control of
RNA polymerase II elongation potential by a novel
carboxyl-terminal domain kinase. J Biol Chem. 1996;
271:27176–83.

46.	 Schlegel BP, Starita LM, Parvin JD. Overexpression of a
protein fragment of RNA helicase A causes inhibition of
endogenous BRCA1 function and defects in ploidy and
cytokinesis in mammary epithelial cells. Oncogene. 2003;
22:983–91.

33.	 Ip JY, Schmidt D, Pan Q, Ramani AK, Fraser AG,
Odom DT, Blencowe BJ. Global impact of RNA polymerase II elongation inhibition on alternative splicing
regulation. Genome Res. 2011; 21:390–401.

47.	 Christmann M, Tomicic MT, Origer J, Aasland D,
Kaina B. c-Fos is required for excision repair of UV-light
induced DNA lesions by triggering the re-synthesis of
XPF. Nucleic Acids Res. 2006; 34:6530–9.

34.	 Fukuma M, Okita H, Hata J, Umezawa A. Upregulation
of Id2, an oncogenic helix-loop-helix protein, is mediated by the chimeric EWS/ets protein in Ewing sarcoma.
Oncogene. 2003; 22:1–9.

48.	 Grier HE, Krailo MD, Tarbell NJ, Link MP, Fryer CJ,
Pritchard DJ, Gebhardt MC, Dickman PS, Perlman EJ,
Meyers PA, Donaldson SS, Moore S, Rausen AR,
Vietti TJ, Miser JS. Addition of ifosfamide and etoposide

35.	 Erkizan HV, Kong Y, Merchant M, Schlottmann S,
Barber-Rotenberg JS, Yuan L, Abaan OD, Chou TH,
Dakshanamurthy S, Brown ML, Uren A, Toretsky JA.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31756

Oncotarget

to standard chemotherapy for Ewing’s sarcoma and
­primitive neuroectodermal tumor of bone. N Engl J Med.
2003; 348:694–701.

51.	 Dudoit S, Gentleman RC, Quackenbush J. Open
source software for the analysis of microarray data.
Biotechniques. 2003; 45–51.

49.	 Hu-Lieskovan S, Heidel JD, Bartlett DW, Davis ME,
Triche TJ. Sequence-specific knockdown of EWS-FLI1
by targeted, nonviral delivery of small interfering RNA
inhibits tumor growth in a murine model of metastatic
Ewing’s sarcoma. Cancer Res. 2005; 65:8984–92.

52.	 Ritchie ME, Silver J, Oshlack A, Holmes M,
Diyagama D, Holloway A, Smyth GK. A comparison of
background correction methods for two-colour microarrays. Bioinformatics. 2007; 23:2700–7.
53.	 Yang YH1, Dudoit S, Luu P, Lin DM, Peng V, Ngai J,
Speed TP. Normalization for cDNA microarray data: a robust
composite method addressing single and multiple slide systematic variation. Nucleic Acids Res. 2002; 30:e15.

50.	 Kovar H, Ban J, Pospisilova S. Potentials for RNAi in
sarcoma research and therapy: Ewing’s sarcoma as
a model. Semin Cancer Biol. 2003; 13:275–81.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31757

Oncotarget

