Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 1

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Down-regulation of oxidative phosphorylation in the liver by
expression of the ATPase inhibitory factor 1 induces a tumorpromoter metabolic state
Fulvio Santacatterina1,2,3,*, Laura Sánchez-Cenizo1,2,3,*, Laura Formentini1,2,3,*,
Maysa A. Mobasher4,5, Estela Casas1,2,3, Carlos B. Rueda1,2,6, Inmaculada MartínezReyes1,2,3, Cristina Núñez de Arenas1,2, Javier García-Bermúdez1,2,3, Juan M.
Zapata4, María Sánchez-Aragó1,2,3, Jorgina Satrústegui1,2,6, Ángela M. Valverde4,5
and José M. Cuezva1,2,3
1

Departamento de Biología Molecular, Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa, CSIC-UAM, Madrid, Spain

2

Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Madrid, Spain

3

Centro de Investigación Hospital 12 de Octubre, ISCIII, Madrid, Spain

4

Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas Alberto Sols, CSIC-UAM, Madrid, Spain

5

Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Diabetes y Enfermedades Metabólicas Asociadas (CIBERDEM), Madrid, Spain

6

Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria Fundación Jiménez Díaz (IIS-FJD), Madrid, Spain

*

These authors have equally contributed to this work

Correspondence to: José M. Cuezva, email: jmcuezva@cbm.csic.es
Keywords: ATPase inhibitory factor 1, cancer, energy metabolism, mitochondria, reactive oxygen species
Received: June 30, 2015	

Accepted: November 14, 2015	

Published: November 22, 2015

ABSTRACT
The ATPase Inhibitory Factor 1 (IF1) is an inhibitor of the mitochondrial H+-ATP
synthase that regulates the activity of both oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS)
and cell death. Here, we have developed transgenic Tet-On and Tet-Off mice that
express a mutant active form of hIF1 in the hepatocytes to restrain OXPHOS in the
liver to investigate the relevance of mitochondrial activity in hepatocarcinogenesis.
The expression of hIF1 promotes the inhibition of OXPHOS in both Tet-On and TetOff mouse models and induces a state of metabolic preconditioning guided by the
activation of the stress kinases AMPK and p38 MAPK. Expression of the transgene
significantly augmented proliferation and apoptotic resistance of carcinoma cells,
which contributed to an enhanced diethylnitrosamine-induced liver carcinogenesis.
Moreover, the expression of hIF1 also diminished acetaminophen-induced
apoptosis, which is unrelated to differences in permeability transition pore opening.
Mechanistically, cell survival in hIF1-preconditioned hepatocytes results from a
nuclear factor-erythroid 2-related factor (Nrf2)-guided antioxidant response. The
results emphasize in vivo that a metabolic phenotype with a restrained OXPHOS in
the liver is prone to the development of cancer.

INTRODUCTION

of oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) and the
concurrent activation of aerobic glycolysis is a hallmark
of proliferating cancer cells [1, 3] whereas an increase
in oxidative metabolism halts cellular proliferation and
tumor progression [1, 4, 5]. The activity of OXPHOS
is required for the execution of cell death [1, 6] and in
particular, the ATP synthase is needed for the execution of
apoptosis [7] as recently demonstrated in neurons in vivo

Mitochondria play key roles in cell metabolism
and bioenergetics, mediate intracellular signaling by
calcium and reactive oxygen species (ROS) and regulate
the execution of cell-death [1]. Most of the ATP that is
required to maintain cellular activities is synthesized by
the mitochondrial H+-ATP synthase [2]. Down-regulation
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

490

Oncotarget

[8]. In fact, the ATP synthase is a critical component in
the permeabilization of the inner mitochondrial membrane
to low molecular weight solutes, i.e., in the opening of
the permeability transition pore (PTP) [9-11]. Not
surprisingly, inhibition of the ATP synthase is involved in
lifespan extension [12, 13] illustrating the relevance of this
protein complex in aging and age-related diseases.
In mitochondria, futile ATP hydrolysis by the ATP
synthase is inhibited by the ATPase Inhibitory Factor 1
(IF1) a small nuclear-encoded protein that reversibly
binds to the enzyme [2]. Data obtained in cancer [14,
15], in stem cells [16], and in a mouse model overexpressing an active form of IF1 in neurons[8], support
that in vivo IF1 also inhibits the synthase activity of the
ATP synthase. The IF1-mediated inhibition of the ATP
synthase prevents cell death [8, 14, 17]. Remarkably,
IF1 is highly over-expressed in human carcinomas [14,
15, 18]. In hepatocarcinomas the over-expression of IF1
favors angiogenesis and metastasis [19].
Herein, we have questioned: What is the relevance
of a metabolic phenotype with a restrained OXPHOS in
cancer onset and progression in vivo? To that aim we have
generated transgenic mice that express a mutant active
form of human IF1 (hIF1) under a tetracycline regulated
promoter in hepatocytes. We show that expression of
the transgene promotes inhibition of OXPHOS and a
higher susceptibility to diethyl-nitrosamine (DEN)induced carcinogenesis. Mechanistically, an enhanced
carcinogenesis in hepatocytes of hIF1 expressing mice
involves an enhanced proliferation and the downregulation of the potential to execute cell death as further
illustrated in vivo in a model of acetaminophen (APAP)induced hepatotoxic damage. Cell survival in hIF1
expressing hepatocytes is not mediated by differential
regulation of PTP opening in response to APAP treatment
but by the induction of a nuclear factor-erythroid 2-related
factor (Nrf2)-guided antioxidant response. These findings
emphasize that metabolic preconditioning by restraining
OXPHOS is deleterious in the context of liver cancer
because it limits cell death favoring the progression of
oncogenic events.

restricted to mitochondria of hepatocytes (Figure 1B)
and negatively regulated by the administration of Dox
as revealed by qPCR and western blotting (Figure 1A),
confocal microscopy (Figure 1B, panels to the left)
and immunohistochemistry (Figure 1B, panels to the
right). The expression of hIF1 had no impact on the
expression level of relevant mitochondrial proteins of
different OXPHOS complexes (Figure 1C). Isolated liver
mitochondria from adult T/H mice revealed that both the
ADP-stimulated respiration and the maximum respiratory
rates were significantly reduced when compared to
littermate controls (Figure 1D). In addition, liver ATP
concentrations were diminished in T/H mice (Figure 1E).
An overnight fast of adult Tet-Off T/H mice promoted
a significant reduction in blood glucose and lactate
concentrations (Figure 1F).

In vivo IF1-mediated inhibition of OXPHOS in
the liver of Tet-On mice
Breeding of mice expressing the rtTA-Adv
transactivator in liver with transgenic mice containing
the human IF1-H49K transgene (hIF1) (Supplemental
Figure S1A) resulted in double transgenic mice (T/H)
(Supplemental Figure S1B) able to express hIF1 in the
liver only in response to the administration of doxycycline
(Dox) (Supplemental Figure S1B). The expression level
of hIF1 varied among different T/H mice (Supplemental
Figure S1B) and was higher than that of the endogenous
IF1 present in mouse liver of control littermates
(Supplemental Figure S1C). Expression of hIF1 was
preferentially concentrated in perivenous hepatocytes
(Supplemental Figure S1D) and had no impact on the
expression level of relevant mitochondrial proteins of
different OXPHOS complexes (Supplemental Figure S1E).
T/H mice showed no differences in weight, life span and
cage behavior when compared to controls after one year of
follow up. However, and consistent with the inhibitory role
of IF1 on the activity of the H+-ATP synthase we observed
that both the basal and the ADP-stimulated respiration
in isolated mitochondria from adult livers of T/H mice
was significantly reduced when compared to controls
(Supplemental Figure S1F). A significant decrease in the
maximum respiratory rate was also noted in mitochondria
of T/H mice (Supplemental Figure S1F). Overall, these
findings indicate that expression of hIF1 is partially
arresting both respiration and ADP phosphorylation in
liver mitochondria.
In agreement with a partial energy deficit in the
liver of T/H mice we observed: (i) reduced ATP and
increased AMP contents in their livers (Supplemental
Figure S2A), (ii) a significant increase in the AMP/ATP
ratio (Supplemental Figure S2A) and (iii) the activation
by phosphorylation of the metabolic stress kinase AMPK
(Supplemental Figure S2B), when compared to liver
of controls. The pyruvate content was also diminished

RESULTS
In vivo IF1-mediated inhibition of OXPHOS in
the liver of Tet-Off mice
Breeding of mice expressing the tTA transactivator
in liver with transgenic mice containing the human IF1H49K transgene (hIF1) resulted in double transgenic mice
(T/H). The double transgenic animals (T/H) expressed
hIF1 in the absence of Doxycycline (Dox) administration
as revealed by the presence of hIF1 mRNA and protein
levels in their livers (Figure 1A). Expression of hIF1 is
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

491

Oncotarget

in the liver of T/H mice (Supplemental Figure S2C).
Other liver organic acids showed no relevant differences
(Supplemental Figure S2C). Blood glucose and
lactate concentrations were not significantly different
between fed T/H and control mice (Supplemental
Figure S2D). However, an overnight fast promoted a
marked hypoglycaemia (Supplemental Figure S2E) and
hypolactatemia (Supplemental Figure S2E) in T/H mice.
The liver of 15 day-old T/H neonates revealed a significant
induction of mitochondrial superoxide dismutase (SOD2)
(Supplemental Figure S2F). Functionally, induction
of SOD2 in liver of T/H mice was expressed by less
carbonylation of some cellular proteins when compared to
livers of control mice (Supplemental Figure S2G). These
results suggest that a limited OXPHOS by the expression

of hIF1 in the liver of T/H mice compromises the energy
supply needed for normal activity of gluconeogenesis and
eventually favors the utilization of lactate for oxidative
purposes in extrahepatic tissues during fasting. Overall,
using two different experimental systems to regulate
the expression of hIF1 in mouse liver we show that its
expression triggers an energy deficit in the hepatocytes
by inhibiting the activity of OXPHOS. Dox is known
to induce the arrest of mitochondrial protein translation
[20, 21], and eventually, to promote the unfolded protein
response in mitochondria (UPRmt) [22]. Since we
obtained similar findings with a Tef-Off mouse model
(Figure 1), we ruled out any role for Dox in triggering
metabolic adaptation by unleashing the UPRmt.

Figure 1: OXPHOS is inhibited in the liver of mice expressing hIF1. Only the double transgenic animals (T/H) expressed hIF1

in the absence of Doxycycline (Dox) administration. A. hIF1 mRNA expression in the liver of control (CRL) and T/H mice. Blot of hIF1
(12 kDa) and β-F1-ATPase (β-F1) in T/H and CRL mice. B. Double-immunofluorescence microscopy (63X) of liver from CRL and T/H
mice stained with IF1 (green) and β-F1-ATPase (red) antibodies. Merged images (IF1+β-F1). Immunohistochemistry for hIF1 in the liver
of T/H mice at 20X and 63X magnification. C. Blots of hIF1, complex I (NADH s9), complex II (SDH-B), complex III (Core2), complex
IV (COXI and COX IV) and complex V (β-F1), Hsp60 and GAPDH in liver extracts of CRL and T/H mice. Histograms to the right show
the relative expression of each protein normalized to GAPDH expression. D. Polarographic determination of basal, ADP-stimulated and
FCCP-stimulated respiration in isolated liver mitochondria of CRL and T/H mice. The results are the mean ± SEM of 8 mice per group. E.
ATP concentration in liver extracts of CRL and T/H mice. The results shown are the mean ± SEM of 5 mice per group. F. Blood glucose
and lactate concentrations of fasted CRL and T/H mice. Histograms are the mean ± SEM of 12-14 mice per group. (C-F) *, p < 0.05 when
compared to control by Student’s t test. See also Figures S1 and S2.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

492

Oncotarget

Expression of hIF1 affects the activity and
assembly of Complex IV and Complex V

hIF1 expressing mice had reduced ATPase activity despite
essentially containing the same amount of the β-catalytic
subunit of the complex in ATPase oligomers (Figure 2C).
Western blotting of BN-gels appears to confirm that
the assembly of Complex IV was reduced in both mouse
models of hIF1 expressing mice because its monomeric
form was diminished when compared to that of controls
(Figure 2D), what is in agreement with the reduced
Complex IV activity observed in these animals (Figure
2A, 2B). Likewise, the expression of hIF1 in the liver of
both Tet-On and Tet-Off mice promoted the assembly of
a low migrating super-complex that contained complex V
and might represent dimers of the ATP synthase ((CV)2
in Figure 2D). Trypsin digestion and mass spectrometric
analysis of the three upper bands recognized by anti-βF1-ATPase antibody supported these results and revealed
that the major component of the SC band in Figure 2D is
Complex I (see Supplemental Table SI).

Isolated liver mitochondria from both the hIF1
expressing Tet-On and Tet-Off mice revealed reduced
activities of Complex IV and V when compared to controls
(Figure 2A). In contrast, the activities of Complex I and
II+III were not significantly affected by the expression of
hIF1 (Figure 2A). Interestingly, a significant correlation
between the inhibition of Complex V and Complex IV
activities was observed (Figure 2A). In-gel activity of
complexes I and IV revealed that whereas the activity
of Complex I was not modified in hIF1 expressing TetOff mice, the activity of Complex IV and its supercomplexes were very much reduced (Figure 2B). A
similar study to assess the oligomycin (OL)-sensitive
ATP hydrolase activity in super-complexes confirmed that

Figure 2: Activities and assembly of OXPHOS complexes in the liver of hIF1 mice. A. Enzymatic activities of complex I,

II+III, IV and V in isolated liver mitochondria of CRL and T/H mice. Histograms are the mean ± SEM of 3 experiments. *, p<0.05 when
compared to control by Student’s t test. Linear correlation between the inhibition of Complex V activity by hIF1 and the inhibition of
Complex IV activity. B. BN-PAGE-in-gel-activities of Complex I and Complex IV (low and high exposures). C. CN-PAGE immunoblot
analysis of β-F1-ATPase (βF1) and CN-PAGE-in-gel-activity of complex V in the presence (+) or absence (-) of oligomycin (OL). D. BNPAGE immunoblot analysis of mitochondrial complexes IV (COX IV) and V (β-F1-ATPase). The migration of dimers of ATP synthase
(CV)2, supercomplex (SC), ATP synthase (FoF1), F1-ATPase (F1) and complex IV (C IV) is indicated. See also Supplemental Table S1.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

493

Oncotarget

A diminished activity of OXPHOS favors
hepatocarcinogenesis

both the number of tumors and total tumor volume were
significantly increased in hIF1 expressing mice (Figure
3D). Dox administration reduced the number of tumors
and total tumor volume both in control and hIF1 silenced
T/H mice (Figure 3D). The higher tumor burden of mice
expressing the transgene resulted from increased rates of
proliferation (Figure 4A) and diminished apoptosis (Figure
4B, 4C) as assessed by immunohistochemical analysis of
the carcinomas. Overall, these findings indicate in vivo
the oncogenic role of IF1 and that limiting the activity of
OXPHOS in the liver favors cancer onset and progression.

A preliminary experiment of DEN-induced
hepatocarcinogenesis by single injection of DEN [23] was
initially done in a small number of mice (Supplemental
Figure S3). Hepatocarcinogenesis was further studied
with the long-term DEN administration protocol [24]
(Figure 3) because it leads to a higher tumor incidence
in a shorter time span [25]. Both protocols provided the
same findings (Figure 3 and Supplemental Figure S3).
Dox administration slightly reduced the body weight of
the animals (Figure 3A). In contrast, the liver weight of
DEN-treated mice and especially of those expressing
hIF1 was significantly augmented when compared to
the rest of the animals (T/H minus Dox in Figure 3B).
The increase in liver weight of mice expressing hIF1 was
accompanied by a significant progressive increase in blood
glutamate-pyruvate transaminase (GPT) activity towards
the end of the study (Figure 3C and see Supplemental
Figures S3C and S4). Consistent with these observations

The
mitochondrial
hepatocarcinogenesis

phenotype

in

Immunohistochemical, electron microscopy and
molecular analysis of the livers revealed that long-term
DEN-induced hepatocarcinogenesis in mice largely
reproduced the findings on the mitochondrial phenotype
previously reported in human hepatocarcinomas [26].
In fact, it was observed that tumor areas in both T/H

Figure 3: The expression of hIF1 increased DEN-induced hepatocarcinogenesis (HCC). A.-C. Changes in body weight (A),

liver weight (B) and blood GPT (C) in PBS or DEN-treated CRL (open bars) and hIF1 Tet-Off T/H (closed bars) mice, treated in presence
(+) or absence (-) of Dox. D. CRL and T/H livers of mice treated (+) or not treated (-) with DEN. The effect of Dox administration (+) or
not (-) is also shown. The number of tumors and the total tumor volume in DEN-treated CRL (open bars) and T/H (closed bars) mouse
livers treated (+) or not (-) with Dox. The number of mice is indicated in parenthesis. Results are means ± SEM. P values by Student’s t
test are indicated.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

494

Oncotarget

(Figure 5A) and CRL (Supplemental Figure S5A) were
largely devoid of immunostaining for mitochondrial
proteins such as β-F1-ATPase, Hsp60 and IF1, suggesting
that progression of liver cancer is concurrent with
the repression of mitochondrial biogenesis [26]. We
observed no relevant differences in the expression of
the glycolytic markers GAPDH and LDHA as assessed
by inmmunohistochemical (IHC) (Figure 5A and
Supplemental Figure S5A). However, since IHC is a
qualitative technique we assessed protein expression
by western blotting normal and tumor tissue of CRL
and T/H mice (Supplemental Figure S5B). The results
obtained indicate that carcinogenesis promoted the downregulation of β-F1-ATPase expression concurrently
with the upregulation of GAPDH in the absence of
relevant changes in the expression of Hsp60 and LDHA
(Supplemental Figure S5C). As a result the bioenergetic
signature of the tumors, as assessed by the β-F1-ATPase/
GAPDH ratio [26, 27] was significantly diminished when
compared to the signature in normal tissues (Supplemental
Figure S5C). Overall, we should mention that we did not
observe differences in protein expression in the analysis
of focal hepatic lesions between control and transgenic
animals (Figure 5A and Supplemental Figure S5A).
Determination of mtDNA content in T/H mice
revealed a very large reduction of mtDNA in liver
tumors when compared to the normal tissue of the same
liver (Figure 5B). This finding was further confirmed
by assessing the lower cellular content and alteration of

mitochondrial structure in these carcinomas by electron
microscopy (Figure 5C), confirming the repression of
mitochondrial biogenesis in hepatocarcinogenesis [26].
Consistent with the above findings, the expression of the
transcriptional co-activator required in mitochondrial
biogenesis PGC1α was significantly reduced in mouse
carcinomas when compared to normal liver samples
(Figure 5D).
Moreover, since DEN-induced hepatocarcinogenesis
is an example of inflammation-driven tumorigenesis
we also analyzed macrophage recruitment to focal
hepatic lesions in CRL and T/H mice using the F4/80
antibody. The results reveal that there are no differences
in macrophage recruitment to the tumor areas between
control and T/H mice (Supplemental Figure S6).

Limiting OXPHOS minimizes apoptotic cell-death
To provide further mechanistic insight into the
main pathway that might participate in the hIF1-mediated
stimulation of liver cancer we studied the cell-death
response of control and T/H mice to liver induced injury by
APAP [28]. APAP overdose promoted a clear centrilobular
hepatic cell death at 8h post-administration that was more
evident in livers of control than of T/H mice (Figure
6A). Analysis of cell death by terminal deoxynucleotidyl
transferase-mediated dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL)
(Figure 6B) and active caspase 3 (Figure 6C) revealed that

Figure 4: Expression of hIF1 promotes increased proliferation and apoptotic resistance of HCC. A.-C. Liver sections
of DEN-treated CRL and hIF1 Tet-Off T/H mice were processed for immunohistochemistry to assess the rates of proliferation (A, Ki-67
staining) and apoptosis (B, phospho-p53 and C, TUNEL) in HCC. Magnification 5x-10x. Bars are the mean ± SEM of 6 mice per group. *,
p<0.05 when compared to CRL by Student’s t test.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

495

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Repression of mitochondrial biogenesis in DEN-induced hepatocarcinogenesis (HCC). A. Focal hepatic lesions

(magnification 5x) in long-term DEN-treated T/H mice identified by hematoxylin-eosin (H&E) and immunohistochemical staining with
the antibodies against β-F1-ATPase (β-F1); Hsp60; hIF1; GAPDH and LDHA in the same localized tumor area (panels to the left). The
same study in normal (N, upper left) and tumor (T, lower right) areas at 20X magnification (panels to the right). A dashed line marks
the border between tumor and non-tumor areas. B. mtDNA copy number in DNA extracted from normal (N) and tumor (T) liver tissue
of hIF1 expressing T/H mice. Results are means ± SEM for 6-7 animals. *P < 0.05 when compared with normal by Student’s t test. C.
Representative electron micrographs of normal (N) and tumor (T) tissue of the liver of hIF1 expressing T/H mice. Mitochondria of the
hepatocytes in normal liver showed its characteristic high electron density and inner membrane cristae (left panels), whereas mitochondria
are barely identifiable in the tumor tissue (right panels). Scale bars: 2k (upper panels); 20k (lower panels). Histograms show the number
of mitochondria / cell section in normal (N) and tumor (T) tissue in T/H mice. Results are means ± SEM of five different sections from 3
animals. *P < 0.05 when compared with normal by Student’s t test. D. Cellular mRNA expression of PGC1α in normal (N) and tumor (T)
tissue of hIF1 expressing T/H mice. Results are means ± SEM of 6 experiments.*, P < 0.05 when compared with normal by Student’s t test.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

496

Oncotarget

The PTP is not involved in protection against
death

APAP promoted a higher increase in cell death in control
than in T/H mice, strongly supporting that mice with a
limited OXPHOS are partially protected from apoptotic
cell death. Consistent with previous findings regarding
the lower carbonylation observed in liver proteins of T/H
mice in the Tet-On model (Supplemental Figure S2G), we
noted that the oxidation of liver proteins both under basal
conditions and in response to APAP treatment was less
pronounced in adult Tet-Off T/H mice (Figure 6D).

Findings in different experimental settings support
the role of OXPHOS [1, 6, 29] and of the H+-ATP synthase
[7, 30] in cell death. Moreover, it has been reported that
the PTP is formed by the H+-ATP synthase itself [9-11,
31, 32]. To verify the putative implication of the PTP

Figure 6: Restraining OXPHOS protects from APAP-induced cell death. Control (CRL) and hIF1 (T/H) mice were i.p. injected

with APAP (+) or saline (-). Hematoxylin-eosin A., TUNEL B. and active caspase 3 C. staining in liver sections. Magnification 20x. Bars
are the mean ± SEM of 6 mice per group. (B,C) *, p<0.05 when compared to non-treated (-) and #, p<0.05 when compared to CRL-APAP
treated by Student’s t test. D. Carbonylation of liver proteins from CRL and hIF1 (T/H) mice treated (+) or non-treated (-) with APAP
is shown. The derivation of samples in the presence (+) or absence (-) of DNPH was used for the identification of protein carbonyls.
Arrowheads (to the right) identify the migration of the three proteins used in quantification (histograms) of protein carbonylation. The
results shown are the mean ± SEM of six CRL and eight T/H mice, respectively. *, p < 0.05 when compared to non-treated (-) and #, p <
0.05 when compared to CRL-APAP treated by Student’s t test.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

497

Oncotarget

in the differential response to cell death between both
mice phenotypes we studied the Ca2+-retention capacity
(Figure 7A-7C) and Ca2+-induced swelling (Figure 7D7F) of isolated mitochondria from livers of control and
hIF1 expressing mice. No relevant differences were
observed in any of these parameters between mitochondria
of control and T/H mice (Figure 7A & 7D). Moreover,
both cyclosporine A (CsA) (Figure 7B & 7E) and ATPMg (Figure 7C & 7F), which are known inhibitors of

PTP opening [9], exerted the same regulation of the PTP
in control and T/H mice. These findings support that
inhibition of cell death by IF1 [8, 14, 17] is unrelated
with PTP opening. Dimers of the ATP synthase have
been shown to be required for PTP formation [11, 32].
Moreover, it has been suggested that IF1 regulates the
oligomeric state of the ATP synthase increasing the
formation of dimeric ATP synthase complexes and cristae
density [33, 34]. Our observation that the expression of

Figure 7: PTP opening and regulation is not affected by hIF1. A.-C. Calcium green 5N fluorescence in isolated liver mitochondria
from control (blue traces) and hIF1 Tet-Off expressing (red traces) mice. Representative experiments show no differences between the
calcium retention capacity of liver mitochondria from CRL and T/H mice after the addition of 10µM Ca2+ (arrows) in the absence (A) or
presence of the PTP blockers 5 µM CsA (B) or 1mM ATP-Mg2+ (C). D.-F. Representative experiments show no differences in Ca2+ induced
swelling between liver mitochondria derived from CRL and hIF1 expressing T/H mice after the addition of successive 100µM Ca2+ (arrows)
except the last one which is 500µM Ca2+ in the absence (D) or presence of 5 µM CsA (E) or 1mM ATP-Mg2+ (F).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

498

Oncotarget

hIF1 in the liver of both the Tet-On and Tet-Off mice
enhances the assembly of a Complex V super-complex
(a putative ATPase dimer) is compatible with a role for
IF1 in promoting the dimeric state of the ATP synthase
in vivo, although in this situation, the IF1-mediated
dimerization of the ATP synthase would argue against a
role for dimeric ATP synthase as a major element of the
PTP [11, 32]. However, we cannot exclude that additional
mechanisms that are known to regulate the PTP [9] and
the ATP synthase [12, 35, 36] could further participate in
the hIF1-mediated inhibition of cell death. In any case,
what is evident is that inhibition of the H+-ATP synthase
mediated either by oligomycin (OL) treatment [7] or by
hIF1 expression [8, 14] protects from cell death, further
supporting that the activity of the engine of OXPHOS is
part of the machinery required for the execution of cell
death in vivo.

It has been demonstrated that CO, the product
of HO-1, is able to inhibit tumor necrosis factor alpha
(TNFα)–induced apoptosis in endothelial cells through
the activation of p38 MAPK [37]. In light of the low
HO-1 induction upon APAP injection in wild-type
mice, phosphorylated p38 MAPK was barely detected
in these animals (Figure 9A). By contrast, the basal
phosphorylated p38 MAPK was significantly increased in
livers of T/H mice (Figure 9A), reinforcing the metabolic
stress of the hepatocytes in hIF1 expressing mice (Figure
1 and Supplemental Figures S1 and S2). Moreover, and
in contrast with wild type mice, T/H mice maintained
phosphorylated p38 MAPK 8h after APAP injection
(Figure 9A). The expression and phosphorylation of
other stress kinases such as JNK and ERK 1/2 was
not significantly different between control and T/H
mice (Figure 9A). No differences were also found in
survival signaling pathways mediated by IRS1/Akt
between control and hIF1 expressing mice (Figure 9A).
Remarkably, APAP-treated hIF1-expressing mice showed
almost complete degradation of the NFκB repressor IκBα
when compared to control treated mice (Figure 9A),
supporting also the activation of this survival pathway
[38]. Consistently, the anti-apoptotic Bcl-xL protein was
increased at 8h post-APAP injection exclusively in T/H
mice (Figure 9A).

hIF1 expressing mice are protected against
oxidative stress
In livers of both mouse phenotypes, GSH levels
(Figure 8A) and the basal expression of cytochrome P450
(Cyp2e1) (Figure 8B), both the catalytic and the modifier
subunits of γ-glutamyl cysteine ligase (GCL-C and
GCL-M) (Figure 8B) and basal glutathione reductase (GR)
levels (Figure 8B) were comparable. APAP administration
decreased both GCL-C and GCL-M (Figure 8B) and
partially depleted GSH (Figure 8A) at 8 h, these effects
being significantly ameliorated in T/H mice (Figure 8B
and Figure 8A, respectively). Moreover, the induction
of the detoxifying enzyme glutathione reductase (GR) in
response to APAP challenge was more pronounced in hIF1
expressing mice (Figure 8B).
As intracellular redox state is chiefly regulated by
the transcription factor Nrf2, we examined the expression
level of total Nrf2. Although no differences were found
at the basal state (Figure 8C), APAP administration
significantly increased total Nrf2 degradation in wildtype mice whereas it was preserved in livers from T/H
mice (Figure 8C). Likewise, the induction of Nrf2 target
genes hemoxigenase-1 (HO-1) and superoxide dismutase
2 (SOD2) in response to APAP was significantly higher
in mice expressing hIF1 (Figure 8D), consistent with the
lower oxidative damage of liver proteins found in these
animals (Figure 6D). Furthermore, we investigated the
expression of Nrf2 and of redox-related genes (GCL-C,
GCL-M, GR and SOD2) in normal and tumor tissue of
control and T/H mice (Supplemental Figure S7). The
results obtained reveal that tumors from T/H mice have
higher expression of Nrf2, γ-glutamyl cysteine ligase
(GCL-M) and mitochondrial superoxide dismutase
(SOD2) than tumors originated in control animals further
supporting a role for hIF1in counteracting an Nrf2-guided
stress response.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

DISCUSSION
Herein, we demonstrate in vivo that the expression
of an active mutant of hIF1 in hepatocytes partially inhibits
OXPHOS. The inhibition of OXPHOS results in a partial
energy deficit in the liver, the activation of the metabolic
stress kinase AMPK and a limited gluconeogenesis after a
mild overnight fast of the animals. Inhibition of OXPHOS
by hIF1 is exerted both by limiting the respiratory rate at
the level of Complex IV and by inhibiting the activity of
the ATP synthase. The inhibition of the activities of these
complexes correlated with alterations in both the assembly
and activities of super-complexes [39]. Within this
background, a hIF1-limited activity of OXPHOS in the
liver predisposes to cancer progression. Mechanistically,
it appears that an enhanced cancer progression in hIF1expressing mice is related to its pro-oncogenic activity
that favors an increased proliferation and an increased
resistance to execute apoptosis by the hepatocarcinomas.
Inhibition of cell death seems to be unrelated to hIF1mediated differences in PTP opening. Moreover, it appears
that a restrained OXPHOS switches on a stress response
that is most likely mediated by the cellular energy and
redox states of the liver that triggers the basal activation
of AMPK and p38 MAPK. This is particularly evident
when the animals are challenged by an APAP overdose
that induces a strong redox Nrf2 mediated response that
involves the activation of the NFκB pathway and the
overexpression of Bcl-xL favoring cell survival. It is
499

Oncotarget

Figure 8: APAP treatment triggers a strong antioxidant response in the liver of hIF1 mice. Control (CRL) and Tet-Off (T/H)
mice were treated (+) or not (-) with APAP. The results shown are the mean ± S.E.M of 6 mice per group. A. Liver GSH content. B.-D. Blots
of Cyp2e1, GCL-C, GCL-M, GR, Nrf2, HO-1, SOD2 and P85 (used as loading control) in mice treated or not with APAP. Histograms show
the quantification of the proteins normalized to p85 expression (arbitrary units, a.u.). *, p < 0.05 when compared to CRL non-treated (-) by
Student’s t test. #, p < 0.05 when compared to CRL-APAP treated by Student’s t test.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

500

Oncotarget

Figure 9: Signaling pathway in hIF1 expressing mice. Control (CRL) and Tet-Off (T/H) mice were treated (+) or not (-) with

APAP. The results shown are the mean ± S.E.M of 6 mice per group. A. Blots of the serine-threonine protein kinases: pP38 MAPK / P38
MAPK; pJNK / JNK; pERK1/2 / ERK 1/2 and pAKT / AKT. Expression of the NFκB inhibitor IκBα, and Bcl-xL in livers is also shown.
P85 is shown as loading control. Histograms show the quantification of the proteins normalized to p85 expression (arbitrary units, a.u.). *, p
< 0.05 when compared to CRL non-treated (-); #, p < 0.05 when compared to CRL-APAP treated (+) and +, p < 0.05 when compared to T/H
non-treated (-) by Student’s t test. B. The bad and the good of mitochondrial ROS. Inhibition of OXPHOS could trigger a rise in the levels
of ROS. Mild ROS levels (good, in blue) signal metabolic preconditioning and the activation of defenses (mitohormesis) [59] that result
in cell survival. On the contrary, high ROS levels (bad, in red) cause intracellular damage, genetic alterations and progression to disease.
Mitohormesis is beneficial for certain type of stressing stimuli, but it can be detrimental in the case of mutagenic events that lead to cancer.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

501

Oncotarget

within this metabolic background when genetic alterations
that lead to carcinogenesis are able to progress because of
a limited capacity to execute cell death by mitochondrial
activity (Figure 9B), in agreement with recent suggestions
[5] and the clinical observations that cancer recurrence is
linked to the bioenergetic dysfunction of mitochondria (for
review [1]).
Recent findings in in vivo mouse models indicate
that the activation of mitochondrial OXPHOS provides
a tumor-suppressive metabolic state [5, 40]. However,
the role of the partial suppression of OXPHOS in cancer
onset and progression has not been addressed so far. The
availability of the Tet-Off T/H mice afforded a unique
opportunity to verify in vivo the role of OXPHOS in
carcinogenesis. Although T/H mice do not develop
spontaneous tumors after more than one year follow up,
perhaps because they overexpressed p38 MAPK which is
a known tumor suppressor in the liver [41], they generated
a three-fold higher number of carcinomas than control
mice when exposed to DEN, supporting an oncogenic
role for IF1 and a tumor-suppressive role for an enhanced
activity of OXPHOS in the liver.
We have previously suggested a role for IF1 in
carcinogenesis [14, 18]. Recent findings have stressed that
a high expression level of IF1 is a bad predictor of survival
and recurrence of the disease in liver, bladder and gastric
cancer patients [19, 42, 43]. Moreover, IF1 promotes
tumorigenesis and metastasis of human hepatocarcinomas
and gastric cancer cells as assayed in mouse xenografts
[19, 42]. In liver cancer, IF1 propitiates metastasis and
angiogenesis through non-canonical signaling of the NFκB
pathway to Snai1, which mediates epithelial mesenchymal
transition, and to VEGF, that induces angiogenesis [19].
In bladder cancer, the oncogenic role of IF1 seems to be
dependent on the stimulation of proliferation by cyclins
and cyclin-dependent kinases related to the G1/S transition
of the cell cycle [43]. In gastric cancer [42], similarly to
what we observed in colon cancer [14], the oncogenic
role of IF1 implicates an enhanced proliferation and
cell-death resistant phenotype. Cell death resistance in
colon and lung cancer is mediated by ROS-signaling to
the canonical NFκB pathway [14, 18], whereas in breast
and ovarian cancer the mechanism linking IF1 to the celldeath resistant phenotype remains to be investigated [18].
Hence, our findings in the Tet-Off T/H mice provide the
first in vivo demonstration for the oncogenic role of IF1
that results from an enhanced proliferation and cell-death
resistant phenotype of the hepatocyte, the latter attained
by metabolic pre-conditioning of the anti-oxidant response
of the liver.
It should be noted that carcinogenesis differentially
affects the expression of IF1 in a tissue specific
manner [18]. Moreover, the overexpression of IF1in
the carcinomas not always correlate with a bad patient
prognosis [19, 42, 43]. In fact, the overexpression of IF1
in breast and colon cancer predicts much better patient’s
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

prognosis [18]. These differences might stem from the
different metabolic traits of the normal tissues as reveal
by the large tissue-specific differences in the expression
of IF1, which is very high in liver, kidney and stomach
and almost negligible in breast, colon and lung [18]. At
present time, we do not have a mechanistic explanation for
the apparent tissue-specific differences in the oncogenic
behavior of IF1. We speculate that mechanisms that
involve a differential susceptibility of the different cell
types to particular forms of stress and/or recognition by the
immune system could be at the bases of these differences.
Interestingly, Dox administration that is used to
silence the hIF1 transgene, and is also known to inhibit
the growth of different cancer cells [20], promoted
significant reductions in DEN-induced carcinogenesis both
in the livers of control and hIF1 expressing mice, strongly
supporting the use of this antibiotic as an anticancer
agent [44, 45] and further emphasizing that targeting
mitochondria translation offers an additional strategy to
combat the disease.
Chronic liver injury is a major risk factor for the
development of hepatocellular carcinomas. Interestingly,
it has been recently demonstrated that dysfunction of
mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation ensues during
the early stages of cirrhosis propitiating an enhanced rate
of glycolysis [46] which is the metabolic pathway that
chiefly provides the metabolic precursors that sustain
proliferation of carcinomas [1]. In agreement with the role
played by IF1 as inhibitor of OXPHOS and stimulator of
both glycolysis [15, 18] and proliferation of cancer cells
[14, 18, 19] we have observed that hIF1 expression in the
liver mediates the rewiring of metabolism to an enhanced
glycolysis that could support the elevated proliferation rate
of the carcinomas. Moreover, the enhanced carcinogenesis
observed in the liver of hIF1 expressing mice is also
contributed by the reduced apoptosis observed in these
tumors. Inhibition of the H+-ATP synthase by hIF1 is
known to generate a mild ROS signal that induces NFκBguided nuclear programs of cell death evasion [8, 14,
18] and activate epithelial-mesenchymal transitions that
favors metastasis [19]. This redox condition of the liver
is consistent with the pathophysiological context for the
development of hepatocellular carcinomas. Indeed, it has
been previously suggested that increased intracellular
ROS in chronic inflammatory states of the liver protect
against cell death [47] and the increased basal ROS
levels of cirrhotic hepatocytes seem to determine its
increased apoptosis resistance [48]. Altogether, these
findings reinforce the crucial role played by mitochondrial
dysfunction during tumor transformation and suggest that
the inhibition of the H+-ATP synthase could represent a
primary event in hepatic injury leading to the onset of
carcinomas.
Energy limitation by a restrained activity of
OXPHOS is known to induce the metabolic stress kinase
AMPK [49] and to generate a mitochondrial ROS signal
502

Oncotarget

of mild intensity [14]. This signal could also contribute to
the induction of AMPK and of the stress p38 MAP kinase
since it could modify the reduction state of thioredoxin
which is known to halt the activation of both AMPK [50]
and p38 MAPK [51]. The redox-mediated preconditioning
is manifested when the animals are challenged with a
ROS stressor such as APAP. Hence, we support that ROSmediated signaling [8, 14] is the primary mechanism
involved in evasion of cell-death mediated by IF1 in the
liver. Indeed, the maintenance of total Nrf2 expression
in the liver of T/H mice orchestrates a stress response
that involves the overexpression of SOD2 and HO-1
as well as the detoxification of oxidized glutathione to
provide protection against oxidative stress and cell death.
Metabolic preconditioning and protection against death
seems to be exerted by the basal activation of p38 MAPK
and AMPK because other stress kinases such as JNK,
ERK1/2 and Akt are not modified by the overexpression of
hIF1 in the liver. The transcription factor NFκB is a crucial
regulator of cell survival pathways [52]. The degradation
of IKBα, which is the repressor of the NFκB pathway,
and the concurrent accumulation of the anti-apoptotic
Bcl-xL in the liver of T/H mice once again highlight the
crosstalk between ROS and NFκB, and further implicate
this pathway in hIF1-mediated cell survival after APAP
treatment. Moreover, the transcriptional crosstalk between
IF1 and the NFκB pathway has also been recently
implicated in other hallmarks of liver cancer such as
promoting angiogenesis and metastasis [19]. We cannot
exclude that the maintenance of the phosphorylated state
of p38 MAPK after APAP-induced cell death in T/H
mice could contribute to cell survival because it has been
shown to suppress ROS accumulation and cell death in
hepatocytes [41]. Moreover, the activation of p38 MAPK
has been reported to inhibit TNFα-induced apoptosis
in endothelial cells [37]. In any case, the activation of
different signaling pathways upon OXPHOS-mediated
tissue preconditioning, p38 MAPK in the liver (this study)
and PI3K/Akt in neurons [8], supports a large cell-type
variability in mitochondrial signaling responses.
Overall, our data provide the first in vivo
demonstration that the partial inhibition of OXPHOS
generates a metabolic phenotype that is more prone to
the development of cancer (Figure 9B), further indicating
the pro-oncogenic nature of IF1. Hence, we conclude that
the bioenergetic activity of mitochondria acts as a tumorsuppressor and guardian of cancer onset and progression.

by pronuclear microinjection [8]. The commercially
available B6.Cg-Tg(Lap-tTA)5Bjd/J mice (T) and
B6.Cg-Tg(Cewbpb-rtTA2S*S2)1Bjd/Ibcm mice (rT),
expressing respectively the transactivators tTA or rtTA
in hepatocytes were used. The Tet-Off and Tet-On (T/H)
double transgenic animals were obtained. To express hIF1,
double transgenic T/H mice were administered (Tet-On)
or not (Tet-Off) Dox (2mg/mL) in the drinking water.
Animal experiments were carried out after approval of the
Institutional Review Board (CEI-52-961) in compliance
with animal policies and ethical guidelines of the
European Community.

Determination of blood and liver metabolites
Adenine nucleotides and other liver metabolites
were extracted from frozen liver powder with a 6%
perchloric acid. The ATP concentration was determined
using the ATP Bioluminescence Assay Kit CLS II (Roche).
Liver GSH and GSSG concentrations were determined
using the Glutathione Assay Kit (BioVision Inc.).

Western blotting,
carbonylation

and

protein

The primary monoclonal antibodies developed in
our lab and used in this study were: HSP60 (1:5,000),
anti-NADH-9 (1:1,000), anti-β-F1-ATPase (1:20,000),
anti-LDH-A (1:1,000) and anti-GAPDH (1:20,000) [53,
54]. The monoclonal antibody specifically recognizing
the human [15] and mouse (Molecular Probes) IF1
proteins were used at 1:200 dilution. Other antibodies
used were: anti-SDH-B (1:1000) from Life Technologies;
anti-Complex III subunit Core 2 (1:1,000), anti-COXI
(1:1,000), anti-COXIV (1:1,000) and anti-Cyp2e1
antibody (aB19140) from Abcam; anti-SOD2 (1:5,000),
anti-JNK (sc-571; 1:1000), anti-phospho-Akt (Ser473)
(sc-7985-R; 1:1000), anti-phospho-Akt (Thr308) (sc16646-R; 1:1000) and anti-Nrf2 (C-20), (sc-722; 1:1000)
from Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc.; anti-Bclx (610211;
1:1000) antibody from BD Biosciences; anti-IκBα
(1:1,000), anti-phospho JNK (Thr183/Tyr185) (#4668,
1:1000), anti-phospho p38 MAPK (Thr180/Tyr182)
(#9211; 1:1000), anti-p38 MAPK (#9212; 1:1000), antiPhospho-p53(Ser15) (1:400) and anti-Akt (#9272; 1:1000)
antibodies from Cell Signaling Technology Inc; anti-IRS1
(06-248; 1:1000), anti-p85 (06-195; 1:1000) and anti-HO1
(AB1284; 1:1000) antibodies from Upstate (Millipore);
Anti-Ki-67 (SP6) (RM-9106-S1 1:200) from Fischer
Scientific; Anti-F4/80 (123101; 1:200) from BioLegend;
Anti-GCLc and GCLm antibodies were a gift from T
Kavanagh (University of Washington, USA). Peroxidaseconjugated anti-mouse, anti-goat or anti-rabbit IgGs
(Nordic Immunology; 1:3,000) and Biotin-SP anti-rat IgG
(712-065-153; 1:500) from Jackson ImmunoResearch Inc.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Transgenic animals
Transgenic mice containing the mutant H49K
version of hIF1 (TRE-H49K-25, H) were obtained
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

antibodies

503

Oncotarget

were used as secondary antibodies. For the determination
of protein carbonylation, the Oxyblot Oxidized Protein
Detection kit (Chemicon International Inc.) was used. The
blots were revealed using the ECL® reagent (Amersham
Pharmacia Biotech). The intensity of the bands was
quantified using a Kodak DC120 digital camera and the
Kodak 1D Analysis Software.

and the searches were performed allowing optional Met
oxidation and Cys carbamidomethylation. Search against
decoy database (integrated decoy approach) using false
discovery rate (FDR) < 0.01.

Mitochondrial studies

For an exploratory experiment of DEN-induced
carcinogenesis two-week old control and Tet-Off T/H male
mice received or not a single i.p. injection of DEN (25 mg/
kg bw) [23] and the animals were sacrificed at week 44.
In the main experiment, two-week old control (n=35) and
Tet-Off T/H (n=35) mice received or not an i.p. injection
of DEN (0.33 mmol/kg bw) once weekly for a total of
26 weeks [24]. Liver glutamate/pyruvate transaminase
(GPT) was evaluated every 2 weeks using the Reflotron
plus analyzer (Roche Diagnostics, Penzberg, Germany).
Mice were sacrificed at week 29.

Carcinogenesis

Mitochondrial respiration was measured with the
use of a Clark-type electrode [8]. The spectrophotometric
determination of the activity of OXPHOS complexes
was also carried out [55]. For Blue native (BN)-PAGE,
Clear native (CN)-PAGE and In-gel activities, liver
mitochondria were solubilized at the indicated digitonin/
protein ratios [56].

Reverse phase-liquid chromatography RP-LCMS/MS analysis (Dynamic Exclusion Mode)

Hepatotoxicity
Six month old control (n=8) and Tet-Off T/H (n=8)
mice were used to induce hepatotoxicity. The animals
were fasted for 14 hours and then received a single i.p.
injection of APAP (300 mg/kg; Sigma Aldrich). Eight
hours after the injection mice were sacrificed.

After drying, gel bands from BN-PAGE were
digested in situ with 12.5 ng/μl of trypsin (Promega)
in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.8. Digestion
was stopped by the addition of 1% trifluoracetic acid.
Supernatants were dried down and then desalted onto
ZipTip C18 Pipette tips (Millipore). The desalted protein
digest was dried, resuspended in 10 µl of 0.1% formic
acid and analyzed by RP-LC-MS/MS in an Easy-nLC II
system coupled to an ion trap LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos-Pro
mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Bremen,
Germany). The peptides were concentrated (on-line)
by reverse phase chromatography using a 0.1mm×20
mm precolumn Acclaim PepMap C18, 5 µm, 100 A
(Thermo Fischer Scientific), and then separated using a
0.075mm x 150 mm column Acclaim PepMap C18, 3
µm, 100 A (Thermo Fischer Scientific) operating at 0.3
μl/min. Peptides were eluted using a 90-min gradient
from 5 to 40% solvent B (solvent A: 0.1% formic acid
in water, solvent B: 0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile
in water). ESI ionization was done using a Nano-bore
emitters Stainless Steel ID 30 μm (Proxeon) interface.
The Orbitrap resolution was set at 30,000. Peptides were
detected in survey scans from 400 to 1600 amu (1 μscan),
followed by fifteen data dependent MS/MS scans (Top
15), using an isolation width of 2µ (in mass-to-charge
ratio units), normalized collision energy of 35%, and
dynamic exclusion applied during 30 seconds periods.
Peptide identification from raw data was carried out
using the SEQUEST algorithm (Proteome Discoverer
1.3, Thermo Scientific). Database search was performed
against uniprot-mus.fasta. The following constraints were
used for the searches: tryptic cleavage after Arg and Lys,
up to two missed cleavage sites, and tolerances of 10 ppm
for precursor ions and 0.8 Da for MS/MS fragment ions
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence
microscopy
The peroxidase based EnVisionTM FLEX Mini
kit High pH (Dako Cytomation) and VECTASTAIN
ABC kit (Vector Laboratories, Inc.) were used for
immunohistochemistry using primary antibodies listed
in Western blotting, antibodies and protein carbonylation
section. The TUNEL kit (Roche) and anti-activated
caspase 3 (1:250) were used to assess the rate of cell
death. Secondary Cy-3/Cy-5-conjugated antibodies were
used (Millipore Bioscience Research Reagents). Cellular
fluorescence was analyzed by confocal microscopy.

Electron microscopy
Liver slices were fixed and embedded in Epon
(TAAB 812 resin; TAAB Laboratories Equipment,
Aldermaston, Berks, UK). Ultrathin sections were stained
and processed for electron microscopy as described [26].

Quantitative RT-PCR analysis
RNA samples were extracted using the RNAeasy
mini kit (QIAGEN). Reverse transcription (RT)
reactions were performed using 1μg of total RNA
504

Oncotarget

and the High Capacity Reverse Transcription Kit
(Applied Biosystems) with random primers. Primers
were designed with Probe Finder Software (Roche
Applied Science). The primers used were: m-IF1-F:
agaagctggtggagccttc, m-IF1-R: ggcagccagctgttctttag; m-βF1-ATPase-F: ggcacaatgcaggaaagg, m-β-F1-ATPase-R:
tcagcaggcacatagatagcc; m-Hsp60-F: tcttcaggttgtggcagtca,
m-Hsp60-R:
cccctcttctccaaacactg;
m-GAPDH-F:
agcttgtcatcaacgggaag, m-GAPDH-R: tttgatgttagtggggtctcg;
m-PGC1α-F: gaaagggccaaacagagaga, m-PGC1α-R:
gtaaatcacacggcgctctt; m-β-actin-F: ctaaggccaaccgtgaaaag,
m-β-actin-R:
accagaggcatacagggaca;
h-IF1-F:
gggccttcggaaagagag, h-IF1-R: ttcaaagctgccagttgttc.
Real-time PCR was performed using Power Sybr Green
PCR Master Mix (Bio-Rad) and an ABI PRISM 7900
SDS thermocycler (Applied Biosystems). The relative
expression of the mRNAs was determined using the
comparative ΔΔCt method with β-actin as control and
relative to the normal tissues.

and Ca2+ uptake into mitochondria was measured as
a decrease in fluorescence. For swelling assays, the
absorbance at 540 nm of mitochondria was monitored
through sequential additions of 100-500 nmol CaCl2.

Statistical analysis
Statistical analyses were performed using a twotailed Student’s t-test. ANOVA with post hoc Dunnett’s
test were used for multiple comparisons to the control,
using the SPSS 17.0 software package. The results shown
are means ± SEM. A p < 0.05 was considered statistically
significant.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Margarita Chamorro for expert technical
support. LSC and FS were supported by pre-doctoral
fellowships from FPI-MEC and FPI-UAM, respectively.
LF was supported from AECC and Ramon and Cajal
Program, Spain.

Determination of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)
copy number

FUNDING

DNA (nDNA+mtDNA) was extracted using
DNeasy Blood & Tissue Kit from Qiagen. Quantification
of mtDNA (mtDNA/nDNA) was performed by qPCR
in the ABI PRISM 7900HT SDS thermocycler (Applied
Biosystems, Singapore) using 6 ng of DNA, 0.25 μM
of primers and the Power Sybr Green PCR Master Mix
(Bio-Rad). The nuclear ATPIF1 and the mitochondrial
12S rRNA encoded genes were chosen to determine
the ratio of mtDNA to nDNA. The primers used
were: m-12S-F: cctcttagggttggtaaatttcg, m-12S-R:
cgaagataattagtttgggttaatcg; m-IF1-F: agaagctggtggagccttc,
m-IF1-R: ggcagccagctgttctttag. The relative mtDNA copy
number was calculated using the ΔΔCt method and the
12S/IF1 ratio used to compare the samples.

This work was supported by Spanish grants
from the MINECO (SAF2013-41945-R to JMC and
SAF2012-33243 to AMV), CIBERER-ISCIII to JMC
and CIBERDEM-ISCIII to AMV, Comunidad de Madrid
(S2011/BMD-2402 to JMC and S2010/BMD-2423 to
AMV), Fundación Ramón Areces (FRA) to JMC and
EFSD and Amylin Paul Langerhans to AMV. The CBMSO
receives an institutional grant from FRA, Spain.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

REFERENCES

Swelling and Ca2+ uptake in isolated mitochondria

1.	 Sanchez-Arago M, Formentini L and Cuezva JM.
Mitochondria-mediated energy adaption in cancer: the
H(+)-ATP synthase-geared switch of metabolism in human
tumors. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2013; 19:285-298.

The calcium retention capacity (CRC) of isolated
mitochondria was measured with the Ca2+-sensitive
fluorescent probe Calcium-Green 5N (0.1 μM, excitation
506 
nm, emission 532 
nm) as previously described
[57], using an Aminco-Bowman II fluorimeter (SLM/
Aminco, Urbana, IL, USA). Mitochondrial swelling was
measured by monitoring the decrease in absorbance of the
suspension at 540 nm [58], using a Nicolet Evolution 300
spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific, Warrington, UK).
All experiments were carried out at 37ºC in the presence
of 1 mM MgCl2, respiratory substrates (5 mM succinate
+ 2 μM rotenone) and in the presence or absence of 1
mM ATP-Mg or 5 µM CsA. After 3-5 min of incubation,
mitochondria were challenged with subsequent 2.5-10
nmol CaCl2 additions as indicated in the figure legends,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2.	

Walker JE. The ATP synthase: the understood, the uncertain
and the unknown. Biochem Soc Trans. 2013; 41:1-16.

3.	 Vander Heiden MG, Cantley LC and Thompson CB.
Understanding the Warburg effect: the metabolic
requirements of cell proliferation. Science. 2009; 324:10291033.
4.	 Bonnet S, Archer SL, Allalunis-Turner J, Haromy A,
Beaulieu C, Thompson R, Lee CT, Lopaschuk GD,
Puttagunta L, Bonnet S, Harry G, Hashimoto K, Porter
CJ, et al. A mitochondria-K+ channel axis is suppressed
in cancer and its normalization promotes apoptosis and
505

Oncotarget

inhibits cancer growth. Cancer Cell. 2007; 11:37-51.

J Biol Chem. 2010; 285:25308-25313.

5.	 Garcia-Cao I, Song MS, Hobbs RM, Laurent G, Giorgi
C, de Boer VC, Anastasiou D, Ito K, Sasaki AT, Rameh
L, Carracedo A, Vander Heiden MG, Cantley LC, et al.
Systemic elevation of PTEN induces a tumor-suppressive
metabolic state. Cell. 2012; 149:49-62.

16.	Sanchez-Arago M, Garcia-Bermudez J, MartinezReyes I, Santacatterina F and Cuezva JM. Degradation
of IF1 controls energy metabolism during osteogenic
differentiation of stem cells. EMBO Rep. 2013; 14:638-644.
17.	 Faccenda D, Tan CH, Seraphim A, Duchen MR and
Campanella M. IF1 limits the apoptotic-signalling cascade
by preventing mitochondrial remodelling. Cell Death
Differ. 2013; 20:686-697.

6.	 D’Errico I, Salvatore L, Murzilli S, Lo Sasso G, Latorre
D, Martelli N, Egorova AV, Polishuck R, MadeyskiBengtson K, Lelliott C, Vidal-Puig AJ, Seibel P, Villani
G, et al. Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma
coactivator 1-alpha (PGC1alpha) is a metabolic regulator
of intestinal epithelial cell fate. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
2011; 108:6603-6608.

18.	 Sanchez-Arago M, Formentini L, Martinez-Reyes I, GarciaBermudez J, Santacatterina F, Sanchez-Cenizo L, Willers
IM, Aldea M, Najera L, Juarranz A, Lopez EC, Clofent
J, Navarro C, et al. Expression, regulation and clinical
relevance of the ATPase inhibitory factor 1 in human
cancers. Oncogenesis. 2013; 2:e46.

7.	 Matsuyama S, Xu Q, Velours J and Reed JC. The
Mitochondrial F0F1-ATPase proton pump is required
for function of the proapoptotic protein Bax in yeast and
mammalian cells. Mol Cell. 1998; 1:327-336.
8.	

9.	

19.	 Song R, Song H, Liang Y, Yin D, Zhang H, Zheng T, Wang
J, Lu Z, Song X, Pei T, Qin Y, Li Y, Xie C, et al. Reciprocal
activation between ATPase inhibitory factor 1 and NFkappaB drives hepatocellular carcinoma angiogenesis and
metastasis. Hepatology. 2014; 60:1659-1673.

Formentini L, Pereira MP, Sanchez-Cenizo L, Santacatterina
F, Lucas JJ, Navarro C, Martinez-Serrano A and Cuezva
JM. In vivo inhibition of the mitochondrial H+-ATP
synthase in neurons promotes metabolic preconditioning.
EMBO J. 2014; 33:762-778.

20.	 Onoda T, Ono T, Dhar DK, Yamanoi A, Fujii T and
Nagasue N. Doxycycline inhibits cell proliferation
and invasive potential: combination therapy with
cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor in human colorectal cancer
cells. J Lab Clin Med. 2004; 143:207-216.

Bernardi P. The mitochondrial permeability transition pore:
a mystery solved? Front Physiol. 2013; 4:95.

10.	 Alavian KN, Beutner G, Lazrove E, Sacchetti S, Park HA,
Licznerski P, Li H, Nabili P, Hockensmith K, Graham
M, Porter GA, Jr. and Jonas EA. An uncoupling channel
within the c-subunit ring of the F1FO ATP synthase is the
mitochondrial permeability transition pore. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A. 2014; 111:10580-10585.

21.	 Son K, Fujioka S, Iida T, Furukawa K, Fujita T, Yamada
H, Chiao PJ and Yanaga K. Doxycycline induces apoptosis
in PANC-1 pancreatic cancer cells. Anticancer Res. 2009;
29:3995-4003.
22.	Jovaisaite V, Mouchiroud L and Auwerx J. The
mitochondrial unfolded protein response, a conserved stress
response pathway with implications in health and disease. J
Exp Biol. 2014; 217:137-143.

11.	 Giorgio V, von Stockum S, Antoniel M, Fabbro A, Fogolari
F, Forte M, Glick GD, Petronilli V, Zoratti M, Szabo I,
Lippe G and Bernardi P. Dimers of mitochondrial ATP
synthase form the permeability transition pore. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A. 2013; 110:5887-5892.

23.	 Chen B, Liu L, Castonguay A, Maronpot RR, Anderson
MW and You M. Dose-dependent ras mutation spectra in
N-nitrosodiethylamine induced mouse liver tumors and
4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone induced
mouse lung tumors. Carcinogenesis. 1993; 14:1603-1608.

12.	 Chin RM, Fu X, Pai MY, Vergnes L, Hwang H, Deng
G, Diep S, Lomenick B, Meli VS, Monsalve GC, Hu
E, Whelan SA, Wang JX, et al. The metabolite alphaketoglutarate extends lifespan by inhibiting ATP synthase
and TOR. Nature. 2014; 510:397-401.

24.	 Finnberg N, Stenius U and Hogberg J. Heterozygous
p53-deficient (+/-) mice develop fewer p53-negative
preneoplastic focal liver lesions in response to treatment
with diethylnitrosamine than do wild-type (+/+) mice.
Cancer Lett. 2004; 207:149-155.

13.	 Sun X, Wheeler CT, Yolitz J, Laslo M, Alberico T, Sun
Y, Song Q and Zou S. A Mitochondrial ATP Synthase
Subunit Interacts with TOR Signaling to Modulate Protein
Homeostasis and Lifespan in Drosophila. Cell Rep. 2014;
8:1781-1792.

25.	 Heindryckx F, Colle I and Van Vlierberghe H. Experimental
mouse models for hepatocellular carcinoma research. Int J
Exp Pathol. 2009; 90:367-386.

14.	 Formentini L, Sánchez-Aragó M, Sánchez-Cenizo L and
Cuezva JM. The mitochondrial ATPase Inhibitory Factor 1
(IF1) triggers a ROS-mediated retrograde pro-survival and
proliferative response. Mol Cell. 2012; 45:731-742.

26.	 Cuezva JM, Krajewska M, de Heredia ML, Krajewski S,
Santamaria G, Kim H, Zapata JM, Marusawa H, Chamorro
M and Reed JC. The bioenergetic signature of cancer: a
marker of tumor progression. Cancer Res. 2002; 62:66746681.

15.	 Sanchez-Cenizo L, Formentini L, Aldea M, Ortega AD,
Garcia-Huerta P, Sanchez-Arago M and Cuezva JM. Upregulation of the ATPase inhibitory factor 1 (IF1) of the
mitochondrial H+-ATP synthase in human tumors mediates
the metabolic shift of cancer cells to a Warburg phenotype.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27.	 Cuezva JM, Ortega AD, Willers I, Sanchez-Cenizo L, Aldea
M and Sanchez-Arago M. The tumor suppressor function of
mitochondria: translation into the clinics. Biochim Biophys
506

Oncotarget

Acta. 2009; 1792:1145-1158.

Quiros PM, Calvo E, Rodriguez-Hernandez MA, Navas
P, Cruz R, Carracedo A, et al. Supercomplex assembly
determines electron flux in the mitochondrial electron
transport chain. Science. 2013; 340:1567-1570.

28.	 Mobasher MA, Gonzalez-Rodriguez A, Santamaria B,
Ramos S, Martin MA, Goya L, Rada P, Letzig L, James LP,
Cuadrado A, Martin-Perez J, Simpson KJ, Muntane J, et al.
Protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B modulates GSK3beta/Nrf2
and IGFIR signaling pathways in acetaminophen-induced
hepatotoxicity. Cell Death Dis. 2013; 4:e626.

40.	 Serrano M and Blasco MA. Cancer and ageing: convergent
and divergent mechanisms. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2007;
8:715-722.

29.	 Dey R and Moraes CT. Lack of oxidative phosphorylation
and low mitochondrial membrane potential decrease
susceptibility to apoptosis and do not modulate the
protective effect of Bcl-x(L) in osteosarcoma cells. J Biol
Chem. 2000; 275:7087-7094.

41.	 Sakurai T, He G, Matsuzawa A, Yu GY, Maeda S,
Hardiman G and Karin M. Hepatocyte necrosis induced by
oxidative stress and IL-1 alpha release mediate carcinogeninduced compensatory proliferation and liver tumorigenesis.
Cancer Cell. 2008; 14:156-165.

30.	 Harris MH, Vander Heiden MG, Kron SJ and Thompson
CB. Role of oxidative phosphorylation in Bax toxicity. Mol
Cell Biol. 2000; 20:3590-3596.

42.	 Yin T, Lu L, Xiong Z, Wei S and Cui D. ATPase
inhibitory factor 1 is a prognostic marker and contributes
to proliferation and invasion of human gastric cancer cells.
Biomed Pharmacother. 2015; 70:90-96.

31.	 Bonora M, Bononi A, De Marchi E, Giorgi C, Lebiedzinska
M, Marchi S, Patergnani S, Rimessi A, Suski JM, Wojtala
A, Wieckowski MR, Kroemer G, Galluzzi L, et al. Role
of the c subunit of the FO ATP synthase in mitochondrial
permeability transition. Cell Cycle. 2013; 12:674-683.

43.	 Wei S, Fukuhara H, Kawada C, Kurabayashi A, Furihata
M, Ogura S, Inoue K and Shuin T. Silencing of ATPase
Inhibitory Factor 1 inhibits cell growth via cell cycle arrest
in bladder cancer. Pathobiology. 2015; 82:224-232.

32.	 Carraro M, Giorgio V, Sileikyte J, Sartori G, Forte M, Lippe
G, Zoratti M, Szabo I and Bernardi P. Channel formation
by yeast F-ATP synthase and the role of dimerization in the
mitochondrial permeability transition. J Biol Chem. 2014;
289:15980-15985.

44.	 Skrtic M, Sriskanthadevan S, Jhas B, Gebbia M, Wang
X, Wang Z, Hurren R, Jitkova Y, Gronda M, Maclean
N, Lai CK, Eberhard Y, Bartoszko J, et al. Inhibition of
mitochondrial translation as a therapeutic strategy for
human acute myeloid leukemia. Cancer Cell. 2011; 20:674688.

33.	 Minauro-Sanmiguel F, Wilkens S and Garcia JJ. Structure
of dimeric mitochondrial ATP synthase: novel F0 bridging
features and the structural basis of mitochondrial cristae
biogenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005; 102:1235612358.

45.	 Lamb R, Ozsvari B, Lisanti CL, Tanowitz HB, Howell
A, Martinez-Outschoorn UE, Sotgia F and Lisanti MP.
Antibiotics that target mitochondria effectively eradicate
cancer stem cells, across multiple tumor types: treating
cancer like an infectious disease. Oncotarget. 2015; 6:45694584. Doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.3174.

34.	 Campanella M, Casswell E, Chong S, Farah Z, Wieckowski
MR, Abramov AY, Tinker A and Duchen MR. Regulation
of mitochondrial structure and function by the F1FoATPase inhibitor protein, IF1. Cell Metab. 2008; 8:13-25.

46.	 Nishikawa T, Bellance N, Damm A, Bing H, Zhu Z, Handa
K, Yovchev MI, Sehgal V, Moss TJ, Oertel M, Ram PT,
Pipinos, II, Soto-Gutierrez A, et al. A switch in the source
of ATP production and a loss in capacity to perform
glycolysis are hallmarks of hepatocyte failure in advance
liver disease. J Hepatol. 2014; 60:1203-1211.

35.	 Rahman M, Nirala NK, Singh A, Zhu LJ, Taguchi K,
Bamba T, Fukusaki E, Shaw LM, Lambright DG, Acharya
JK and Acharya UR. Drosophila Sirt2/mammalian SIRT3
deacetylates ATP synthase beta and regulates complex V
activity. J Cell Biol. 2014; 206:289-305.

47.	 Black D, Bird MA, Samson CM, Lyman S, Lange PA,
Schrum LW, Qian T, Lemasters JJ, Brenner DA, Rippe
RA and Behrns KE. Primary cirrhotic hepatocytes resist
TGFbeta-induced apoptosis through a ROS-dependent
mechanism. J Hepatol. 2004; 40:942-951.

36.	 Vassilopoulos A, Pennington JD, Andresson T, Rees
DM, Bosley AD, Fearnley IM, Ham A, Flynn CR, Hill
S, Rose KL, Kim HS, Deng CX, Walker JE, et al. SIRT3
deacetylates ATP synthase F1 complex proteins in response
to nutrient- and exercise-induced stress. Antioxid Redox
Signal. 2014; 21:551-564.

48.	 Raval J, Lyman S, Nitta T, Mohuczy D, Lemasters JJ, Kim
JS and Behrns KE. Basal reactive oxygen species determine
the susceptibility to apoptosis in cirrhotic hepatocytes. Free
Radic Biol Med. 2006; 41:1645-1654.

37.	 Brouard S, Otterbein LE, Anrather J, Tobiasch E, Bach FH,
Choi AM and Soares MP. Carbon monoxide generated by
heme oxygenase 1 suppresses endothelial cell apoptosis. J
Exp Med. 2000; 192:1015-1026.

49.	 Mihaylova MM and Shaw RJ. The AMPK signalling
pathway coordinates cell growth, autophagy and
metabolism. Nat Cell Biol. 2011; 13:1016-1023.

38.	 Karin M and Greten FR. NF-kappaB: linking inflammation
and immunity to cancer development and progression. Nat
Rev Immunol. 2005; 5:749-759.

50.	 Shao D, Oka S, Liu T, Zhai P, Ago T, Sciarretta S, Li H and
Sadoshima J. A redox-dependent mechanism for regulation
of AMPK activation by Thioredoxin1 during energy
starvation. Cell Metab. 2014; 19:232-245.

39.	 Lapuente-Brun E, Moreno-Loshuertos R, Acin-Perez R,
Latorre-Pellicer A, Colas C, Balsa E, Perales-Clemente E,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

507

Oncotarget

51.	 Dolado I, Swat A, Ajenjo N, De Vita G, Cuadrado A and
Nebreda AR. p38alpha MAP kinase as a sensor of reactive
oxygen species in tumorigenesis. Cancer Cell. 2007;
11:191-205.
52.	 Karin M. Nuclear factor-kappaB in cancer development and
progression. Nature. 2006; 441:431-436.
53.	 Acebo P, Giner D, Calvo P, Blanco-Rivero A, Ortega
AD, Fernandez PL, Roncador G, Fernandez-Malave E,
Chamorro M and Cuezva JM. Cancer abolishes the tissue
type-specific differences in the phenotype of energetic
metabolism. Transl Oncol. 2009; 2:138-145.
54.	 Santacatterina F, Chamorro M, Nuñez de Arenas C,
Navarro C, Martin MA, Cuezva JM and Sánchez-Aragó M.
Quantitative analysis of proteins of metabolism by reverse
phase protein microarrays identifies potential biomarkers of
rare neuromuscular diseases. J Trans Med. 2015; 13:65.
55.	Barrientos A, Fontanesi F and Diaz F. Evaluation
of the mitochondrial respiratory chain and oxidative
phosphorylation system using polarography and
spectrophotometric enzyme assays. Curr Protoc Hum
Genet. 2009; 19:13.
56.	 Wittig I, Carrozzo R, Santorelli FM and Schagger H.
Functional assays in high-resolution clear native gels to
quantify mitochondrial complexes in human biopsies and
cell lines. Electrophoresis. 2007; 28:3811-3820.
57.	 Traba J, Del Arco A, Duchen MR, Szabadkai G and
Satrustegui J. SCaMC-1 promotes cancer cell survival by
desensitizing mitochondrial permeability transition via
ATP/ADP-mediated matrix Ca(2+) buffering. Cell Death
Differ. 2012; 19:650-660.
58.	 Amigo I, Traba J, Gonzalez-Barroso MM, Rueda CB,
Fernandez M, Rial E, Sanchez A, Satrustegui J and Del
Arco A. Glucagon regulation of oxidative phosphorylation
requires an increase in matrix adenine nucleotide content
through Ca2+ activation of the mitochondrial ATP-Mg/Pi
carrier SCaMC-3. J Biol Chem. 2013; 288:7791-7802.
59.	 Yun J and Finkel T. Mitohormesis. Cell Metab. 2014;
19:757-766.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

508

Oncotarget

