is made up of physicians, cancer research organizations, and
manufacturers.

FDA Requires More Data

Sunscreen Slow Down
The US FDA’s sluggish approval of new
sunscreens frustrates physicians,
manufacturers, and consumers

W

hen Congress unanimously passed the Sunscreen
Innovation Act (SIA) and President Barack Obama
signed it into law in November 2014, many supporters of the
legislation thought that newer, and potentially better, sunscreens
used elsewhere around the world would soon be available in the
United States. However, that hope has not come to pass, much
to the frustration of consumers, dermatologists, and sunscreen
manufacturers.
“We are frustrated by the slow pace,” says Steven Wang,
MD, director of dermatologic surgery and dermatology at
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center in Basking Ridge,
New Jersey. “Some of these ingredients are being widely used
in Europe and have much better UVA [ultraviolet A] protection
than what we have here.”
Dr. Wang also is a member of the Public Access to
SunScreens (PASS) Coalition, which lobbied for the passage
of the SIA in an eﬀort to develop a timeline that speeds up
the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval
process of these newer sunscreen ingredients. The coalition

Cancer
CANCER

September 1, 2015
SEPTEMBER 1, 2015

The last time an over-the-counter sunscreen ingredient was
approved by the FDA was in the 1990s. Since 2002, a total
of 8 new sunscreen ingredient applications have been ﬁled and
are still awaiting review by the agency (see “New Sunscreen
Ingredients Awaiting FDA Review,” next page). The SIA, which
was enacted on November 26, 2014, required the FDA to
work with applicants, Congress, and stakeholders to render a
decision on these applications. However, the FDA responded
by requiring the manufacturers of all 8 ingredients to provide
additional safety information before making a decision.
“We were a little surprised that the FDA is bringing up
new requirements that don’t exist in the rest of the world,” says
Michael Werner, policy advisor to the PASS Coalition. “Rather
than seeing the risk of skin cancer and melanoma as a primary
public health problem that needs to be addressed, the FDA
seems to be putting greater emphasis on the hypothetical risk
of products that have been used safely for many, many years.”
Henry Lim, MD, chair of dermatology at Henry Ford
Hospital in Detroit, Michigan, adds, “At least a step has been
taken, but the worst part is that the FDA has been completely
silent as to what they were looking for until now.”

What we have in the US is quite
good, but it can be made better.
The new ingredients would give
manufacturers a better ability to
mix and match different ﬁlters.
—Henry Lim, MD
FDA spokespeople maintain that the manufacturers must
provide additional data in order for the agency to determine
whether each ingredient is “generally recognized as safe and
eﬀective” for use in over-the-counter sunscreen products.
They also point to regulatory delays and a lack of resources as
contributing to the slowness of the approval process.
Theresa Michele, MD, director of the division of
nonprescription drug products at the FDA, notes that although
information regarding marketing history in other countries is
helpful, it does not inform the agency about the long-term eﬀects
from the use of an ingredient or how much of the ingredient
is absorbed. “Because of the widespread daily use of sunscreen
products by a broad population, including babies and pregnant

2861
1

© GABRIELE MALTINTI / FOTOLIA.COM

Oncology Issues in Focus | BY CARRIE PRINTZ

New Sunscreen Ingredients
Awaiting FDA Review
• amiloxate
• bemotrizinol
• bisoctrizole
• drometrizole trisiloxane
• ecamsule
• enzacamene
• iscotrizino
• octyl triazone
© ALEXTHQ13 / FOTOLIA.COM

women, FDA has proposed data requirements that will allow us
to determine that sunscreen ingredients are generally recognized
as safe and eﬀective,” she says.
Dr. Michele notes that the requirements were supported by
a panel of experts at a recent public advisory committee meeting
on sunscreens.
Werner counters that a pathway to FDA drug approval
requires a product to be on the market for 5 years in another
jurisdiction and for the sponsor to provide adverse event data to
the FDA. “If these products have been used overseas for 5 years
and there’s no hint of a problem, a company should be able to
use that data to support its market application,” he says. “The
sunscreen manufacturers have been following that pathway for
5 to 10 years or more, and the FDA is saying they’re still not
satisﬁed.”

Newer Ingredients Offer Better Protection
Both ultraviolet B (UVB) and UVA radiation from the sun
can cause skin damage, but although sunscreens in the United
States oﬀer good protection against UVB rays, there are only 2
options for UVA ﬁlters: oxybenzone and avobenzone. UVA also
has been shown to penetrate the skin more deeply. “What we
have in the US is quite good, but it can be made better,” says Dr.
Lim. “The new ingredients would give manufacturers a better
ability to mix and match diﬀerent ﬁlters.”
For example, oxybenzone, a common ingredient in US
sunscreens, is also a common cause of allergic reactions.
Nevertheless, it would be diﬃcult to replace in the United
States because only a limited number of other ingredients are
available, Dr. Lim says.

The FDA by nature has to be very
risk averse. The new ingredients
haven’t been studied in the way
we as medical professionals
would like, but that’s a hard trial
to do. —Tyler Hollmig, MD
Tyler Hollmig, MD, assistant professor of Mohs and
dermatologic surgery at Stanford University in Stanford,
California, adds, “The new sunscreens are probably better
because they provide better broad-spectrum protection.”
Current sunscreens available in the United States that do
provide more broad-spectrum protection (zinc oxide and
titanium oxide) tend to give people a white, pasty look and it is
diﬃcult to determine how much to use, he notes. In addition,
experts agree that sunscreen protection is all about compliance.
Ease of use will encourage individuals to wear it more.
Several dermatologists say these ingredients help oﬀer better
and potentially longer-lasting UVA protection than current US
sunscreens that have to be reapplied every few hours.
Part of the issue, says Dr. Wang, is that sunscreens are
treated as drugs in the United States, whereas in other countries
they are evaluated as cosmetics, with less strict requirements.
He adds that even more important than the active ingredient in
2862

sunscreens is how the formulation is put together, including the
newer carrier vehicles that can create better texture and enable
UV ﬁlters to be spread out evenly. These newer sunscreens do
just that, he says.

Trials a Challenge
For physicians such as Dr. Hollmig, it is diﬃcult to tell patients
that these products are not available in the United States. Some
of his patients even travel to Canada or Brazil to get them.
“It’s a tough issue,” he says. “The FDA has a critical role; by
nature it has to be very risk averse. The new ingredients haven’t
been studied in the way we as medical professionals would like,
but at the same time, that’s a hard trial to do.” Although these
sunscreens have been widely used in Europe, Japan, Australia,
and other countries with no major reported side eﬀects, the
FDA wants to work with the industry to conduct in-depth
pharmacokinetic trials, Dr. Hollmig says. That position is
diﬃcult for many dermatologists and patients to accept when
they believe these sunscreens work very well.
Dr. Hollmig and other dermatologists say they feel as if
they are ﬁghting an epidemic, with an estimated 74,000 new
melanoma cases and 10,000 deaths expected this year. And with
recent evidence that sunscreen clearly prevents melanoma, they
are eager to have more options to lower the number of cases.1
“Having a large variety of UV ﬁlters widely available in the US
would provide better sun protection for all our patients,” Dr.
Lim says.
SIA supporters are still hopeful that the law will at least set
the stage for requiring the FDA to move forward on its approval
process. “The mere fact that we’ve come this far—hopefully
something good will come out of it,” Dr. Wang says.

Reference
1. Green AC, Williams GM, Logan V, Strutton GM. Reduced melanoma after
regular sunscreen use: randomized trial follow-up. J Clin Oncol. 2011;29:257263.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29001

Cancer

September 1, 2015

