www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2017, Vol. 8, (No. 9), pp: 15846-15857
Research Paper

The lack of the organic cation transporter OCT1 at the plasma
membrane of tumor cells precludes a positive response to
sorafenib in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma
Andreas Geier1, Rocio I.R. Macias2, Dominik Bettinger3, Johannes Weiss1, Heike
Bantel4, Daniel Jahn1, Ruba Al-Abdulla2, Jose J.G. Marin2
1

Division of Hepatology, Department of Medicine II, University Hospital Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany

2

Experimental Hepatology and Drug Targeting, CIBERehd, IBSAL, University of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain

3

Department of Medicine II, University Hospital Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany

4

Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Endocrinology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany

Correspondence to: Andreas Geier, email: geier_a2@ukw.de
Keywords: organic cation transporter, chemoresistance, hepatocellular carcinoma, tyrosine-kinase inhibitor, sorafenib
Received: August 31, 2016     Accepted: January 06, 2017     Published: February 02, 2017

ABSTRACT
Background: Sorafenib is the drug of choice in the treatment of advanced
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Beneficial effects are limited by mechanisms of
chemoresistance, which include downregulation and/or impaired function of plasma
membrane transporters accounting for drug uptake. The organic cation transporter 1
(OCT1) plays a major role in sorafenib uptake and decreased expression in HCC has
been associated with poorer response.
Methods: The multicenter retrospective TRANSFER study involved tumor biopsies
from 39 patients with advanced HCC and sorafenib therapy for ≥4 wk. Endpoint was
the relationship between clinicopathological features and immunohistological result.
Immunostaining was performed using specific primary anti-OCT1-head and anti-OCT1tail antibodies. Tumors were classified according to a simplified staining score as
absent, weak, moderate or strong, taking into account the localization of the staining
at the plasma membrane as positive or negative.
Results: Results confirmed OCT1 downregulation in half of the cases investigated
(10% absent, 38% weak). However, only one third of tumors expressing OCT1
displayed plasma membrane location (15% vs. 36% cytosolic expression). When
comparing HCC with and without OCT1 expression, no different sorafenib response
was found. When tumors expressing OCT1 at the plasma membrane were considered
separately, a marked longer survival was found (Log Rank p<0.001). No association
between OCT1 expression at the plasma membrane with tumor stage, previous
treatment with TACE or radiological response was seen.
In conclusion, these results indicate that the presence of OCT1 at the plasma
membrane, rather than its expression levels, is related to better outcome of HCC
patients treated with sorafenib.

40% of patients in developed countries nowadays being
diagnosed at early stages allowing for curative treatment
approaches such as local ablation, tumor resection or
liver transplantation [5, 6]. However, the prognosis of
advanced tumors has not changed considerably despite
the introduction of targeted systemic treatment. Since
2008 the multikinase inhibitor sorafenib has become the

BACKGROUND
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the sixth
most common cancer worldwide and the third cause of
death due to cancer [1–4]. Over the last two decades
the expected outcome of patients with HCC has been
improved considerably from a dismal prognosis to 30–

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15846

Oncotarget

SLC22A1 variants R61S fs*10 and C88A fs*16 encoding
truncated proteins unable to reach the plasma membrane
of liver tumor cells together with an abundant proportion
of aberrant alternative splicing have been described as
common features in HCC [13]. In the present study we
have addressed the question on whether the presence
of the transporter at the plasma membrane, rather than
overall OCT1 expression (mRNA/protein) levels in
tumor cells, is a better prognostic marker for the outcome
of HCC patients treated with sorafenib.

standard of systemic therapy for advanced stage HCC and
its approval represents a breakthrough in the management
of advanced tumors [7]. Sorafenib treatment improved
the time to progression (TTP) and extended overall
survival by 2.8 and 2.3 months compared to placebo in
advanced HCC patients (10.7 months vs 7.9 months in
SHARP; 6.5 months vs 4.2 months in Asia-Pacific) [7, 8].
Data from second line treatment indicated a statistically
significant difference in outcome between MET-high
populations treated with placebo and tivantinib (median
overall survival of 7.2 months for tivantinib compared
with 3.8 months for placebo) whereas no such difference
could be observed in MET-low populations [9]. These
data support the general need for a personalized
strategy in the treatment of HCC according to the
presence of molecular targets in each tumor [10]. Thus,
antitumoral effects of sorafenib are heterogeneous in
different patients, which makes necessary to identify
biomarkers either in tumor or peripheral blood to
predict patient outcomes in a personalized manner. On
one hand, blood biomarkers such as phorbol myristate
acetate-induced phosphorylation of extracellular signal–
related kinase (ERK) have been identified in peripheral
blood lymphocytes [11]. Furthermore, baseline pERK
expression was identified as a promising intratumoral
marker of response since HCC patients whose tumors
expressed higher levels of this target structure had
a longer TTP following treatment with sorafenib in
the phase II study [12]. Besides the preservation of
the molecular targets of this drug in tumor cells, the
absence of respective drug transporters also represents
a putative predictor of poor response to the treatment.
The mechanism of action of sorafenib depends
on its access to the intracellular site of action on
transmembrane tyrosine kinase receptors, which may
be affected by changes in the expression and activity of
transporters accounting for its uptake. The organic cation
transporter-1 (OCT1, gene symbol SLC22A1) has been
suggested to play a major role in this process [13, 14].
OCT1 functions as an electrogenic, sodium- and protonindependent bidirectional polyspecific transporter [15].
Human OCT1 is located at the basolateral membrane
of hepatocytes, enterocytes, and renal proximal tubular
cells, where it mediates the facilitated transport of a
variety of structurally diverse organic cations, including
endogenous and xenobiotic compounds, such as toxins
and drugs [16]. Its role in sorafenib uptake has prompted
us and other groups to investigate the usefulness of
determining OCT1 expression in tumor tissue as a
prognostic biomarker for the response to systemic
treatment of HCC with this drug [13, 14, 17]. The
identification of polymorphic genetic variants of human
OCT1 that severely affect transport activity suggested
that some of the inter-individual differences in response
to cationic drugs may be caused by variable activity of
this transporter among tumors [14]. Recently, two novel
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

RESULTS
Patient characteristics
Patients in the TRANSFER study were 67.4±1.6
years of age and predominantly male. Most frequent
underlying chronic liver diseases were alcoholic and
viral hepatitis (Table 1). Child-Pugh score (CPS) at the
time of sorafenib initiation was CPS A in two thirds of
the patients while a minority was either CPS B or could
not be calculated due to missing laboratory values.
HCC diagnosis was invariably based on liver histology
with an equal distribution of BCLC stages B and C
(38.5% and 41.0%, respectively). 87.2% of the patients
underwent surgical resection or locoregional treatment,
either transarterial chemoembolization (TACE) or
radiofrequency ablation, or both prior to sorafenib
treatment.

Immunohistochemical staining of OCT1
Prior to analyze the presence of OCT1 at the plasma
membrane in HCC samples collected from these patients,
two different antibodies raised against different regions of
the protein were tested on healthy liver tissue (Figure 1A–
1D). In the negative control, i.e., when neither of these two
antibodies was used before incubation with the secondary
antibody, no signal was detected (Figure 1A). In contrast,
both LS-C31870 anti-OCT1-head (Figure 1B) and LSC161155 anti-OCT1-tail (Figure 1C) antibodies were
able to detect OCT1 at the hepatocyte plasma membrane
in immunohistochemical analyses. Similar results were
obtained in immunofluorescence analysis using antiOCT1-tail antibody (Figure 1D). In contrast, strong noise
and poor specific signal was obtained with the anti-OCT1head antibody (data not shown), which precludes its use
in this technique.
To evaluate the specificity of the OCT1 signal
detected at the plasma membrane of human liver cells,
in vitro experiments were carried out using CHO cells.
The immunofluorescence assays showed the absence
of anti-OCT1-tail antibody reactivity with endogenous
proteins of these hamster cells (Figure 1E). In contrast,
when CHO cells were transduced with human OCT1,
immunofluorescence analysis using the anti-OCT1-tail
15847

Oncotarget

Table 1: Clinical information on patients and tumors
Patients
Age (mean±EEM)

67.4±1.6

Age range

49-87

Male

35

(89.7%)

Female

4

(10.3%)

No

5

(12.8%)

Resection

7

(18.0%)

TACE

12

(30.8%)

RFA

1

(2.6%)

Resection, TACE

10

(25.6%)

TACE, RFA

2

(5.1%)

Resection, TACE, RFA

2

(5.1%)

  Alcohol use

11

(28.2%)

  Hepatitis B

4

(10.3%)

  Hepatitis C

11

(28.2%)

 Hemochromatosis

2

(5.1%)

 NAFLD

3

(7.7%)

 Unknown

8

(20.5)

  Child-Pugh A

26

(66.6%)

  Child-Pugh B

7

(18.0%)

 Unknown

6

(15.7%)

 A

1

(2.5%)

 B

15

(38.5%)

 C

16

(41.0%)

 Unknown

7

(18.0%)

Sorafenib pretreatment

HCC Etiology

Child-Pugh status

BCLC classification

Patients (n=39) were diagnosed of suffering from hepatocellular carcinoma and were included in the study based on
eligibility criteria described in detail in Method section.

Localization and quantification of OCT1 protein
staining in HCC tumor tissue

antibody permitted to detect this protein at the plasma
membrane (Figure 1F). No signal was found when CHO
cells were transduced with human OCT3-V5, even if
they expressed the recombinant protein at the plasma
membrane, as detected using an anti-V5 antibody (Figure
1G). These results demonstrated that the anti-OCT1-tail
antibody used in the immunohistochemical analysis of
OCT1 in patient samples has no cross-reactivity with
OCT3.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Due to frequent nonsense mutations and aberrant
splicing, an important proportion of OCT1 mRNA
found in HCC is expected to generate non-functional
truncated peptides [13]. Thus, to analyze the presence of
OCT1 in patient samples we have used two antibodies
raised against the N-terminal region, i.e., the head of
15848

Oncotarget

the protein (Figure 2A) and the C-terminal region, i.e.,
the OCT1-tail (Figure 3A). Regarding the ability to
detect the presence of OCT1 at the plasma membrane
no difference was observed between both antibodies
in all samples analyzed, probably because most protein
found at the plasma membrane contained the complete
sequence. To make easier the interpretation of the results,
a simplified staining score of quantitative OCT1 protein
expression in HCC cells was established (see Materials
and Methods section). Localization of the OCT1 staining
at the plasma membrane was classified as either positive
or negative (Figure 2B–2E and Figure 3B–3E). In spite
of marked interindividual variability, ranging from
absent to strong (Figure 2B–2E and Figure 3B–3E), the
results from the immunohistochemical analysis have
confirmed previous observations on the downregulation
of OCT1 in HCC when measured as the abundance of
OCT1 mRNA or protein [13, 17, 19–21]. Indeed, when
the tumors were classified according to the intensity of
staining approximately half of them displayed marked
(defined as moderate or strong staining scores) OCT1
expression (Figure 4A). Because an important part of

OCT1 in HCC cells corresponds to truncated peptides
[13], it was not surprising that staining at the plasma
membrane was detected in only one third of HCC samples
that markedly expressed OCT1 (Figure 4B). Interestingly,
the intracellular signal obtained with the anti-OCT1-tail
antibody was somehow weaker than that obtained with the
anti-OCT1-head antibody. Since the use of either antibody
gave the same results in the global analysis carried out
here, from now on we will describe and discuss the results
without distinguishing between anti-OCT1-head and –tail
antibodies.

Relationship between treatment response and
OCT1 abundance/localization
To assess whether these findings are relevant from
the functional point of view and to understand the role
of OCT1 transport function in the sensitivity to sorafenib
we next analyzed the treatment response according to
OCT1 abundance and localization. This was consistent
with results obtained using Kaplan-Meier plots to study
the survival of patients treated with sorafenib. The

Figure 1: Representative images of immunohistochemical analysis of OCT1 in healthy human liver using no primary
antibody (negative control). A. or two different primary rabbit polyclonal anti-OCT1 antibodies LS-C31870 B. and LS-C161155 C.

raised against the head and tail of the protein, respectively. Immunofluorescence combined with confocal microscopy of normal liver tissue
stained with anti-OCT1-tail antibody D. Study of the selectivity of anti-OCT1-tail antibody using Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells either
wild type E. or expressing human OCT1 F. or OCT3 tagged with V5 antigen G. The nuclei were stained with Dapi.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15849

Oncotarget

general comparison of patients bearing HCC with and
without OCT1 protein expression revealed no significant
difference in survival (Figure 5A). Because the absence
of the transporter at the plasma membrane precludes the
function of the protein as a transporter, even if it is highly

expressed in tumor cells, we further analyzed the role of
subcellular localization. When patients with tumors with
evident expression of OCT1 at the plasma membrane
were segregated into a different group, a markedly longer
survival was observed in patients with positive membrane

Figure 2: Schematic drawing of OCT1 showing the antigenic region used to raise the rabbit polyclonal LS-C31870
anti-OCT1-head antibody. A. Representative images of immunohistochemical analysis showing the criteria used for hepatocellular
carcinoma score depending upon the degree of slides staining with anti-OCT1-head antibody as: absent B. weak C. moderate D. and strong
E. and the lack (B, C, D) or the presence E. of staining at the plasma membrane.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15850

Oncotarget

staining compared to those with a negative value for this
criterium (Figure 5B). Waterfall plotting illustrates a more
pronounced beneficial effect of sorafenib treatment in
patients with expression of OCT1 at the plasma membrane
(Figure 6). Analysis of individual cases reveals that all six

patients with positive membrane staining were among
the top ten survivors in this study. The effect of positive
OCT1 staining at the plasma membrane on radiological
response was less pronounced and did not reach statistical
significance (Figure 7A). This may be accounted for by the

Figure 3: Schematic drawing of OCT1 showing the antigenic region used to raise the rabbit polyclonal LS-C161155
anti-OCT1-tail antibody. A. Representative images of immunohistochemical analysis showing the criteria used for hepatocellular
carcinoma score depending upon the degree of slides staining with anti-OCT1-tail antibody as: absent B. weak C. moderate D. and strong
E. and the lack (B, C, D) or the presence E. of staining at the plasma membrane.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15851

Oncotarget

retrospective nature of this study, which lacks standardized
staging algorithms.

drug [13, 14, 17]. In the present study, we have taken a
step forward by addressing the question on whether the
presence of the transporter at its functional site in the
plasma membrane, rather than its overall expression in
tumor cells, is a better prognostic marker for the outcome
of HCC patients treated with sorafenib. As the principal
finding of the TRANSFER study, we here show for the first
time that the site-specific absence of the transporter at the
plasma membrane precludes a favorable overall survival,
even if OCT1 is highly expressed in the cytosol of tumor
cells. It is important to highlight that intracellular OCT1 is
not expected to contribute to sorafenib uptake and hence
it does not play a role in allowing the drug reaching its
intracellular molecular targets.
Marked interindividual variability regarding OCT1
mRNA and/or protein in normal liver has been reported
and the underlying genetic and non-genetic factors have
been partly elucidated [22]. Whether similar mechanisms
are involved in the downregulation of OCT1 found in
HCC [13, 23] is unknown. Some of the causes for this
decreased expression could be epigenetic, thus DNA
methylation of SLC22A1 gene has been associated with
downregulation of OCT1 in HCC [23], but complete
elucidation of the low expression of this transporter in
tumor cells is currently missing. The clinical repercussion

Relationship between OCT1 expression and
tumor stage or TACE pretreatment
Adaptive changes in target molecule expression
during tumor progression and after pretreatment have been
described in the past. Therefore, we analyzed the impact
of tumor stage and previous TACE (total of 26 patients)
on OCT1 staining at the plasma membrane. Notably, when
we investigated tumor stage according to BCLC criteria
(Figure 7B) and pretreatment with TACE (Figure 7C), no
relationship of these conditions with the presence of OCT1
at the plasma membrane of HCC cell was observed.

DISCUSSION
OCT1 plays a major role in the hepatocellular
uptake of sorafenib, the so far only licensed systemic
treatment for HCC [7]. It has been recently shown
that overall OCT1 (mRNA/protein) levels in tumor
tissue detected using RT-QPCR, mRNA-microarray or
immunoblotting may serve as a prognostic biomarker
for the response to systemic treatment of HCC with this

Figure 4: Classification of patients with hepatocellular carcinoma based only on the degree of OCT1 staining with anti-OCT1-head or
anti-OCT1-tail antibodies. A. or taking also into account the presence of the staining at the plasma membrane B.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15852

Oncotarget

of the low or absent expression of OCT1 in HCC has been
reported to include impaired drug uptake and presumably
a reduced clinical effect of sorafenib [13]. Subsequent
studies have supported this concept by reporting a
relationship between intratumoral levels of OCT1 mRNA
and the response to sorafenib [17]. However, it should be
considered that non-functional aberrant variants constitute
a marked proportion of synthesized OCT1 mRNA. Under
these circumstances, it seems that the detection of OCT1
at the protein level would better reflect OCT1 function.

Using this approach OCT1 downregulation in HCC has
been also confirmed [21]. The main contribution of the
present study is to highlight that, in addition to reduced
OCT1 expression (mRNA/protein) levels in the tumor,
the reduction in functional OCT1 at the plasma membrane
of tumor cells plays a key role among the multifactorial
mechanisms of chemoresistance (MOC) determining the
response of HCC to sorafenib. It is interesting to note
that neither the stage of the tumor nor the pretreatment
with TACE affected the presence of OCT1 at the plasma

Figure 5: Kaplan-Meier plots of survival after starting hepatocellular treatment with sorafenib. Patients were classified

based only on the degree of OCT1 staining. A. or taking also into account the presence of the staining at the plasma membrane. B.
Comparisons were performed with the Log Rank (Mantel-Cox) test.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15853

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Waterfall plot of the clinical response to sorafenib treatment as determined by overall survival after starting
systemic pharmacological treatment with sorafenib. Patients were classified based on the degree of OCT1 staining and the
presence of the staining at the plasma membrane.

Figure 7: Absence of relationship between the expression of OCT1 and its presence at the plasma membrane with
commonly used clinical criteria, such as. A. radiological response (RR), whose code was: 1) Complete response; 2) Partial response;
3) Stable disease; 4) Progression disease; B. BCLC stage B versus C; C. pretreatment by TACE. N.S., p>0.05 by the Fisher’s exact test.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15854

Oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS

membrane. Moreover, no relationship with the radiological
response was found. This indicates that a more efficient
sorafenib uptake through OCT1 results in a long-term
beneficial effect, which was not seen at the moment when
the unscheduled radiological follow-up of these patients
had been carried out in this retrospective study.
It is also important to mention that although
pharmacological activity of sorafenib is dependent on
its intracellular concentration, sensitivity to this drug can
be reduced by several mechanisms of chemoresistance
(MOCs) other than reduced uptake through OCT1 [24].
Thus, in vitro induction of chemoresistance in human
hepatoma cells by continuous exposure to sorafenib results
in HCC cell clones with marked intrinsic differences
regarding their MOC. In spite of maintained OCT1
expression, some clones developed chemoresistance to
sorafenib by enhanced efflux through upregulation of the
ABC protein, MRP3 [25] or activation of RAF kinases
and PI3K/AKT pathway [26]. A role in MOC related to
changes in the expression of ABC pumps, mainly ABCG2,
has also been reported in clinical samples of HCC [21].
The fact that sorafenib was still moderately effective
in patients bearing tumors with negligible expression of
OCT1 is consistent with the fact that, although OCT3
(SLC22A3) expression in normal liver tissue is markedly
lower than that of OCT1, OCT3 might replace OCT1 as
major organic cation transporter in some cases of HCC.
Analysis of mRNA levels for OCT1 and OCT3 in paired
samples of HCC and surrounding liver tissue revealed
downregulation of both transporters in most cases.
However, in some tumors with dramatic downregulation
of OCT1, the expression of OCT3 was preserved or
increased [20, 23]. Consequently, in these tumors, OCT3
could be able to mediate enough sorafenib uptake to reach
effective intracellular concentrations.
Of note, when examined in patients with HCC at
earlier stages who have underwent liver resection or
transplantation, OCT1 downregulation correlated with
tumor progression [20]. However, in our series of patients
with advanced HCC this relationship was no longer
evident. The proportion of HCC with negative OCT1
immunostaining was similar in tumors of BCLC grade B
and C.
In conclusion, these results indicate that the presence
at the plasma membrane, rather than the overall OCT1
expression, is related with a favorable outcome in HCC
patients treated with sorafenib. Although the present study
has been focused on the clinical response to sorafenib,
the interesting results obtained here suggest that further
investigations are required to elucidate whether similar
relationship is also valid for other TKIs, such as novel and
promising MET inhibitors tivantinib and cabozantinib,
currently under clinical evaluation for the treatment of
HCC [9]. A prospective study is warranted to investigate
the use of OCT1 immunostaining for the guidance of
systemic first line treatment with sorafenib in the future.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Study population and eligibility
The TRANSFER (TRANsporter SoraFEnib
Response) study was a multicenter retrospective
investigation involving liver tumor biopsy samples
collected for diagnostic or treatment purposes of HCC
in patients who were treated with sorafenib in three
German centers: University Hospital Würzburg (n=14),
University Hospital Freiburg (n=20) and Hannover
Medical School (n=5) from 2007 to 2015. Clinical data
including hepatorenal function (MELD), BCLC stage,
previous locoregional therapy, radiological response and
survival were recorded. The study was approved by the
Institutional Review Board of each participating center
and conducted according to the principles expressed in
the Declaration of Helsinki. Written informed consent for
the use of patient tissue samples was waived and clinical
data were anonymized. Clinical and tumor characteristics
are shown in Table 1.
Inclusion criteria were: i) Diagnosis of HCC
based on pathology or imaging techniques obtained by
dynamic contrast-enhanced multidetector CT scan or
MRI according to the EASL guidelines [18]; ii) Sorafenib
therapy for advanced HCC with known outcome (survival,
radiological response), minimum duration of 4 weeks; iii)
Compensated liver function prior to therapy (Child Pugh
Class A or B); iv) Good Performance Status (PS 0-2); v)
Availability of formalin fixed tumor tissue for histological
analysis; vi) Time interval between tissue acquisition and
start of sorafenib treatment no longer than 18 months.
In fact, the mean time interval was 13.6 ± 22.2 months
(median 7.1 months) including six patients with extended
time interval who were accepted for inclusion by the lead
investigator.
Exclusion criteria were: i) “Mixed” tumors as
diagnosed by histological analysis; ii) No definite
diagnosis of HCC; iii) Systemic chemotherapy, other than
sorafenib, between tissue acquisition and start of sorafenib
treatment. However, local therapy such as transarterial
chemoembolization was allowed; iv) Decompensation of
liver function (Child-Pugh Class C) before initiation of
sorafenib treatment; v) Performance Status PS>2.

Immunohistochemistry analysis
Formalin-fixed, paraffin embedded HCC tissue was
used. Immunostaining was performed on whole sections
from paraffin-embedded material using two different
primary anti-OCT1 rabbit polyclonal antibodies obtained
from LifeSpan BioSciences, Madrid, LS-C31870 and
LS-C161155, raised against the N-terminal (residues
100-149) and C-terminal (residues 510-539) regions of
human OCT1 protein, respectively. Mouse and rabbit AP/
Fast Red (ABC) Detection IHC Kit (Abcam) was used as
15855

Oncotarget

briefly described below. After deparaffinization in xylene
and rehydration in a graded series of ethanol, samples
were subjected to antigen retrieval at pH 6.0 using steamer
heating for 20 min, washed four times in buffer (pH 7.4),
incubated with protein blocking solution for 5 min to
block nonspecific background staining and incubated 30
min with one of the two anti-OCT1 antibodies used here
(both diluted 1/100), followed by 15 min with biotinylated
secondary antibody against the primary antibody, 15 min
with streptavidin alkaline phosphatase, and 10 min with
the substrate-chromogen fast red dissolved in naphthol
phosphate buffer. After each of the previous step samples
were washed four times in buffer. All procedures were
carried out at room temperature unless otherwise
specified. Slides were counter-stained with hematoxylin
and mounted with aqueous mounting medium. In negative
control sections, wherein primary antibody was omitted,
no immunostaining was observed (Figure 1A).
The slides were visualized under a light microscope
and immunohistochemical stainings were reviewed
independently by two observers, who were blinded
to clinical data. Tumors were classified according to
a simplified staining score as absent, weak, moderate
or strong, and taking into account the localization of
the staining at the plasma membrane as positive or
negative (Figure 2B–2E and Figure 3B–3E). Slides with
discrepancies were visualized a second time by the two
observers together to achieve a consensus.

min. After blocking with PBS supplemented with 5%
fetal bovine serum for 30 min, wild type cells or those
expressing OCT1 or OCT3-V5 were incubated for 1 h
with primary antibodies against OCT1-head or OCT1-tail
and/or against V5 (mouse monoclonal anti-V5, R96025,
Invitrogen). As secondary antibodies anti-mouse or antirabbit Alexa 594- or Alexa 488-conjugated antibodies,
both from Life Technology, were used as appropriate. The
nuclei were stained with Dapi. The images were obtained
using a confocal microscope (Leica TCS SP2).

OCT1 and OCT3 in vitro expression

GRANT SUPPORT

Statistical analysis
The statistical analysis has been performed using
SPSS (IBM® SPSS® Version 20.0 for Mac). Fisher’s
exact or log-rank (Mantel-Cox) tests were used as
appropriate.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
RA was supported by a predoctoral grant from the
“Junta de Castilla y Leon”, Spain and “Fondo Social
Europeo” (EDU/858/2013).

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
AG served as advisory board member and speaker
for BAYER.

Using total RNA isolated from healthy liver, the
open reading frames (ORF) of human OCT1 and OCT3
were amplified by reverse transcription followed by highfidelity PCR using AccuPrime Pfx DNA polymerase
(Invitrogen, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Madrid, Spain).
The purified amplicon was cloned into a modified pWPI
lentiviral vector, which was manipulated to include
the V5 antigen as a tag linked at the C-terminal of the
transporter protein. Recombinant lentiviruses were
produced in HEK293T cells transfected using a standard
polyethylenimine (PEI) protocol with the transfer vectors
pWPI-OCT1/pWPI-OCT3, encoding both the desired
OCT1/OCT3 and EGFP, and the packaging plasmids
psPAX2 and pMD2.G. Viral titers were determined by
infection of HEK293T cells with serial dilutions of the
viral solution, and analysis of EGFP-positive cells was
carried out with a FACSCalibur flow cytometer (BD
Biosciences, Madrid). These lentiviral vectors were used
to transduce Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells 48 h
before immunofluorescence analyses were carried out.

This study was supported in part by the Carlos
III Institute of Health, Spain (Grants FIS-PI11/00337,
PI15/00179 and PI16/00598), Ministry of Science and
Innovation, Spain (SAF2013-40620-R and SAF201675197-R), “Junta de Castilla y Leon”, Spain (SA015U13
and BIO/SA52/15), “Fundacion Mutua Madrileña”, Spain
(Call 2015), and “Fundacion Samuel Solórzano Barruso”,
Spain (FS/10-2014).

REFERENCES
1.	 El-Serag HB, Rudolph KL. Hepatocellular carcinoma:
epidemiology and molecular carcinogenesis. Gastro­
enterology. 2007; 132:2557-2576.
2.	 Altekruse SF, McGlynn KA, Reichman ME. Hepatocellular
carcinoma incidence, mortality, and survival trends in the
United States from 1975 to 2005. J Clin Oncol. 2009;
27:1485-1491.
3.	 Bosetti C, Levi F, Boffetta P, Lucchini F, Negri E, La
Vecchia C. Trends in mortality from hepatocellular
carcinoma in Europe, 1980-2004. Hepatology. 2008;
48:137-145.

Immunofluorescence analysis
Human liver cryosections (5 µm thin) or cultured
CHO cells were fixed using ice-cold methanol for 3
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4.	 El-Serag HB. Epidemiology of hepatocellular carcinoma in
USA. Hepatol Res. 2007; 37:S88-94.
15856

Oncotarget

5.	 Bruix J, Sherman M. Management of hepatocellular
carcinoma. Hepatology. 2005; 42:1208-1236.

transporters: OCT1, 2, and 3 (SLC22A1-3). J Pharmacol
Exp Ther. 2004; 308:2-9.

6.	 Llovet JM, Burroughs A, Bruix J. Hepatocellular carcinoma.
Lancet. 2003; 362:1907-1917.

17.	 Grimm D, Lieb J, Weyer V, Vollmar J, Darstein F, Lautem
A, Hoppe-Lotichius M, Koch S, Schad A, Schattenberg
JM, Worns MA, Weinmann A, Galle PR, Zimmermann T.
Organic Cation Transporter 1 (OCT1) mRNA expression
in hepatocellular carcinoma as a biomarker for sorafenib
treatment. BMC Cancer. 2015; 16:94.

7.	 Llovet JM, Ricci S, Mazzaferro V, Hilgard P, Gane E,
Blanc JF, de Oliveira AC, Santoro A, Raoul JL, Forner
A, Schwartz M, Porta C, Zeuzem S, Bolondi L, Greten
TF, Galle PR, et al. Sorafenib in advanced hepatocellular
carcinoma. N Engl J Med. 2008; 359:378-390.

18.	 EASL-EORTC clinical practice guidelines: management
of hepatocellular carcinoma. J Hepatol. 2012; 56:908-943.

8.	 Cheng AL, Kang YK, Chen Z, Tsao CJ, Qin S, Kim JS, Luo
R, Feng J, Ye S, Yang TS, Xu J, Sun Y, Liang H, Liu J, Wang
J, Tak WY, et al. Efficacy and safety of sorafenib in patients
in the Asia-Pacific region with advanced hepatocellular
carcinoma: a phase III randomised, double-blind, placebocontrolled trial. Lancet Oncol. 2009; 10:25-34.

19.	 Park T, Yi SG, Shin YK, Lee S. Combining multiple
microarrays in the presence of controlling variables.
Bioinformatics. 2006; 22:1682-1689.
20.	 Heise M, Lautem A, Knapstein J, Schattenberg JM,
Hoppe-Lotichius M, Foltys D, Weiler N, Zimmermann A,
Schad A, Grundemann D, Otto G, Galle PR, Schuchmann
M, Zimmermann T. Downregulation of organic cation
transporters OCT1 (SLC22A1) and OCT3 (SLC22A3)
in human hepatocellular carcinoma and their prognostic
significance. BMC Cancer. 2012; 12:109.

9.	 Santoro A, Rimassa L, Borbath I, Daniele B, Salvagni S,
Van Laethem JL, Van Vlierberghe H, Trojan J, Kolligs
FT, Weiss A, Miles S, Gasbarrini A, Lencioni M, Cicalese
L, Sherman M, Gridelli C, et al. Tivantinib for secondline treatment of advanced hepatocellular carcinoma: a
randomised, placebo-controlled phase 2 study. Lancet
Oncol. 2013; 14:55-63.

21.	 Namisaki T, Schaeffeler E, Fukui H, Yoshiji H, Nakajima
Y, Fritz P, Schwab M, Nies AT. Differential expression of
drug uptake and efflux transporters in Japanese patients
with hepatocellular carcinoma. Drug Metab Dispos. 2014;
42:2033-2040.

10.	 Abou-Alfa GK. Approaching the era of personalised therapy
for liver cancer? Lancet Oncol. 2013; 14:7-8.
11.	 Strumberg D, Clark JW, Awada A, Moore MJ, Richly
H, Hendlisz A, Hirte HW, Eder JP, Lenz HJ, Schwartz
B. Safety, pharmacokinetics, and preliminary antitumor
activity of sorafenib: a review of four phase I trials in
patients with advanced refractory solid tumors. Oncologist.
2007; 12:426-437.

22.	 Nies AT, Koepsell H, Winter S, Burk O, Klein K, Kerb
R, Zanger UM, Keppler D, Schwab M, Schaeffeler
E. Expression of organic cation transporters OCT1
(SLC22A1) and OCT3 (SLC22A3) is affected by genetic
factors and cholestasis in human liver. Hepatology. 2009;
50:1227-1240.

12.	 Abou-Alfa GK, Schwartz L, Ricci S, Amadori D, Santoro
A, Figer A, De Greve J, Douillard JY, Lathia C, Schwartz B,
Taylor I, Moscovici M, Saltz LB. Phase II study of sorafenib
in patients with advanced hepatocellular carcinoma. J Clin
Oncol. 2006; 24:4293-4300.

23.	 Schaeffeler E, Hellerbrand C, Nies AT, Winter S, Kruck
S, Hofmann U, van der Kuip H, Zanger UM, Koepsell
H, Schwab M. DNA methylation is associated with
downregulation of the organic cation transporter OCT1
(SLC22A1) in human hepatocellular carcinoma. Genome
Med. 2011; 3:82.

13.	 Herraez E, Lozano E, Macias RI, Vaquero J, Bujanda L,
Banales JM, Marin JJ, Briz O. Expression of SLC22A1
variants may affect the response of hepatocellular carcinoma
and cholangiocarcinoma to sorafenib. Hepatology. 2013;
58:1065-1073.

24.	 Marin JJ, Romero MR, Briz O. Molecular bases of liver
cancer refractoriness to pharmacological treatment. Curr
Med Chem. 2010; 17:709-740.

14.	 Lozano E, Herraez E, Briz O, Robledo VS, HernandezIglesias J, Gonzalez-Hernandez A, Marin JJ. Role of the
plasma membrane transporter of organic cations OCT1 and
its genetic variants in modern liver pharmacology. Biomed
Res Int. 2013; 2013:692071.

25.	 Tomonari T, Takeishi S, Taniguchi T, Tanaka T, Tanaka
H, Fujimoto S, Kimura T, Okamoto K, Miyamoto H,
Muguruma N, Takayama T. MRP3 as a novel resistance
factor for sorafenib in hepatocellular carcinoma. Oncotarget.
2016; 7:7207-7215. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6889.

15.	 Koepsell H, Lips K, Volk C. Polyspecific organic cation
transporters: structure, function, physiological roles,
and biopharmaceutical implications. Pharm Res. 2007;
24:1227-1251.

26.	 Dash S, Chava S, Chandra PK, Panigrahi R, Ferraris PK, Liu
J, Chang H, Buell J, Marin JJ. Organic Cation Transporter-1
(OCT1) dependent and independent mechanisms of
sorafenib resistance in human hepatocellular carcinomas.
Proceedings of the 24th Biennial Congress of the European
Association for Cancer Research. 2015:132-133.

16.	 Jonker JW, Schinkel AH. Pharmacological and
physiological functions of the polyspecific organic cation

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15857

Oncotarget

