Original Article

Trabectedin Has Promising Antineoplastic Activity in
High-Grade Meningioma
Matthias Preusser, MD1,2; Sabine Spiegl-Kreinecker, PhD3; Daniela Lötsch, MS2,8; Adelheid Wöhrer, MD2,4;
Maria Schmook, MD5; Karin Dieckmann, MD2,6; Walter Saringer, MD7; Christine Marosi, MD1,2; and Walter Berger, PhD2,8

BACKGROUND: Meningiomas are common intracranial tumors arising from the meninges and usually are benign. However, a few
meningiomas have aggressive behavior and, for such patients, effective treatment options are needed. Trabectedin is a novel, marinederived, antineoplastic agent that has been approved and is used routinely as therapy for advanced soft tissue sarcoma and ovarian
cancer. METHODS: The authors investigated the in vitro effects of trabectedin alone and in combination with hydroxyurea, cisplatin,
and doxorubicin in primary cell cultures of benign (n ¼ 9), atypical (n ¼ 6), and anaplastic (n ¼ 4) meningiomas using chemosensitivity
assays (3-[4,5dimethylthiazol-2-yl]-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide [MTT]), Western blot analysis, cell cycle analysis, and immunofluorescent staining. RESULTS: Strong antimeningioma activity of trabectedin was observed and was characterized by distinct cell
cycle arrest, down-regulation of multiple cyclins, deregulated expression of cell death-regulatory genes, and massive apoptosis induction. Cytotoxic activity was especially intense in higher grade meningiomas with a half-maximal inhibitory concentration <10 nM.
Combination with trabectedin synergistically enhanced the antimeningioma activity of hydroxyurea but also enhanced the activity of
doxorubicin and cisplatin. On the basis of these findings, trabectedin was given to 1 patient who had heavily pretreated, anaplastic
meningioma, and a favorable response was observed with radiologic disease stabilization, marked reductions in brain edema
and requirement for corticosteroids, and improvement of clinical symptoms. However, treatment had to be discontinued after 5
cycles because of adverse drug effects. CONCLUSIONS: The current results indicated that trabectedin may represent a promising
new therapeutic option for patients with aggressive meningioma and should be evaluated in prospective clinical studies. Cancer
C 2012 American Cancer Society.
2012;118:5038–49. V
KEYWORDS: meningioma, trabectedin, therapy, antineoplastic, apoptosis.

INTRODUCTION
Meningiomas are common intracranial tumors that are benign and curable by resection in most patients.1 However, a
small fraction of patients with meningioma have tumors with aggressive behavior, including recurrences and infiltration
of the surrounding tissues (bone, brain, soft tissue). Atypical and malignant meningiomas are characterized histopathologically by increased numbers of mitotic figures and have an increased risk of an unfavorable clinical course.1-3 Because of
the rarity of aggressive meningiomas, data are lacking from systematic studies to guide treatment. To date, maximal resection and postoperative adjuvant radiotherapy have emerged as the most commonly used therapy for atypical and malignant meningiomas. For recurrent disease, there are only a few therapy options.4 Repeated surgery or radiotherapy may
achieve local tumor control in some patients. Medical therapy with hydroxyurea, somatostatin analog, or interferon-alpha
has produced no or only limited benefit.4 Therefore, novel treatment options for these rare but devastating tumors are
urgently needed.
The anticancer compound trabectedin (ET743 [Yondelis; Zelita/Pharmamar, Madrid, Spain; Johnson&Johnson,
New Brunswick, NJ]) is a tetrahydroisoquinoline molecule that originally was isolated from the sea squirt Ecteinascidia
turbinate.5 The precise mode of action of trabectedin is not known. However, it is unquestionable that the drug binds to
the minor groove of the deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) double helix, forming trabectedin-DNA adducts that bend the
DNA toward the major groove. Furthermore, trabectedin may affect diverse DNA-binding proteins, including several
transcription factors and DNA repair mechanisms.6 The alterations induced by the drug activate the nucleotide excision
repair (NER) pathway, which is required for the maximum activity of trabectedin, whereas its activity is retained in
We thank Magdalena Wild, MA, for skillful technical assistance.
Corresponding author: Christine Marosi, MD, Department of Medicine I and Comprehensive Cancer Center-CNS Tumors Unit (CCC-CNS), Medical University
Vienna, Waehringer Guertel 18-20, 1090 Vienna, Austria; Fax: (011) 43-1-40400-6088; christine.marosi@meduniwien.ac.at
1
Department of Medicine I, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria; 2Comprehensive Cancer Center-Central Nervous System Tumors Unit, Medical University
of Vienna, Vienna, Austria; 3Department of Neurosurgery, Wagner-Jauregg Hospital, Linz, Austria; 4Institute of Neurology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna,
Austria; 5Department of Radiology, Division of Neuroradiology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria; 6Department of Radiotherapy, Medical University of
Vienna, Vienna, Austria; 7Department of Neurosurgery, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria; 8Institute of Cancer Research, Department of Medicine I,
Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.27460, Received: August 31, 2011; Revised: December 11, 2011; Accepted: January 6, 2012, Published online March 5, 2012 in Wiley Online
Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

5038

Cancer

October 15, 2012

Trabectedin in Meningioma/Preusser et al

mismatch repair-deficient cells.7 In vitro studies have
indicated that trabectedin selectively inhibits the transcription of several genes, particularly those encoding the
multidrug resistance protein 1, heat shock protein 70
(HSP70), and the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor
p21WAF1/Cip1, contributing to the induction of programmed cell death.8
Trabectedin has demonstrated activity against a
wide variety of cell lines and xenografts derived from several solid tumor types. Also, in early clinical trials, trabectedin was active against several solid tumors, including
breast, prostate, and renal cancers; melanoma; and nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC).6,9 Trabectedin reportedly was well tolerated and had manageable and mostly
reversible adverse effects like transaminase elevations,
myelosuppression, nausea, emesis, and fatigue.10,11 Only
a few patients experienced severe toxicities like skin and
soft tissue necrosis because of extravasation or rhabdomyolysis. Trabectedin has been approved and is used routinely in patients with advanced soft tissue sarcoma (STS)
who have failed or are not eligible for first-line therapy
with anthracyclines and ifosfamide11 and in patients with
platinum-sensitive, recurrent ovarian cancer in combination with pegylated liposomal doxorubicin.12 Several
ongoing clinical trials are evaluating its activity in some
additional cancer types, including prostate cancer and
breast cancer, with a focus on patients who carry mutations in the breast cancer susceptibility genes BRCA1 and
BRCA2. To the best of our knowledge, the activity of trabectedin has not been investigated previously in meningioma. Therefore, we decided to test the in vitro activity of
trabectedin against primary cell cultures established from
surgically obtained meningioma samples. On the basis of
a massive induction of apoptosis by very low drug concentrations in high-grade meningiomas, we decided to initiate trabectedin treatment in a patient with advanced
anaplastic meningioma who presented with extensive tumor recurrence after several lines of treatment. The favorable clinical benefit observed in this patient, together with
our in vitro data, indicates that trabectedin may be useful
in the treatment of aggressive meningioma.

diagnostic criteria from the current edition of the World
Health Organization (WHO).1
For immunohistochemistry, the following primary
monoclonal antibodies were used: anti-Ki67 (MIB-1
[mouse monoclonal]; Flex TRS low; 1:200 dilution;
Dako, Glostrup, Denmark), antiepithelial membrane
antigen (E29 [mouse monoclonal]; Flex TRS low; 1:100
dilution; Dako), and antivimentin (V9; 1:50 dilution;
Dako). Antibody binding was detected by using the Dako
EnVision Flexkit.
For assessment of the Ki-67 tumor cell proliferation
index, anti-Ki67–immunostained tissue sections were
scanned at low magnification to identify the area with the
highest density of immunolabeled tumor cell nuclei (‘‘hot
spot’’). In this area, a total of 500 tumor cell nuclei were
evaluated. The fraction of labeled nuclei per 500 tumor
cell nuclei was determined by manual counting using an
eye grid and is expressed as a percentage, as described
previously.13
Establishment of Meningioma Cell Models

Primary cell cultures were established according to a previously published protocol14 from surgical specimens that
were verified histologically according to WHO 2007 criteria as meningioma (WHO grade I), atypical meningioma (WHO grade II), and anaplastic meningioma
(WHO grade III).1 Two anaplastic meningioma cell cultures were developed into immortalized, tumorigenic cell
lines (BTL598 and BTL695). Briefly, tumor tissue was
minced mechanically and cultivated in Quantum 263
(PAA Laboratories, Pasching, Austria) supplemented with
1% penicillin/streptomycin up to 3 passages. Subsequently, cells were grown without antibiotics. Both cell
cultures were periodically checked for Mycoplasma contamination (VenorGeM Advance Mycoplasma Detection
Kit; Minerva Biolabs GmbH, Berlin, Germany).
Drugs

Trabectedin was obtained from Pharmamar, and cisplatin, hydroxyurea, and doxorubicin were obtained from
Sigma Chemical Company (St. Louis, Mo). Tetramethyl
rhodamine isothiocyanate (TRITC)-labeled phalloidin
was obtained from Sigma Chemical Company.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Chemosensitivity Assays

Histology and Immunohistochemistry

Meningioma cell cultures were seeded in 96-well plates at
a density of 2  103/100lL per well 24 hours before drug
treatment. Drug exposure time was 96 hours. Subsequently, cell viability was tested by a 3-(4,5dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT)-based
survival assay (EZ4U; Biomedics, Vienna, Austria) as
published previously.15 Interactions between drugs were

For diagnostic histopathologic workup, surgical tumor
tissue samples were routinely fixed in formalin and paraffin embedded. Sections were cut at a thickness of 3 to 5
lm, deparaffinized, and stained using hematoxylin and
eosin and Giemsa to evaluate tumor morphology and
mitotic count. Tumor typing was done according to
Cancer

October 15, 2012

5039

Original Article

tested based on calculating the combination index (CI)
according to Chou and Talalay with CalcuSyn software
(Biosoft, Ferguson, Mo). CI values <0.9, from 0.9 to 1.1,
or >1.1 represented synergism, additive effects, and antagonism of the 2 investigated substances, respectively.
Western Blot Analysis

Cells were seeded onto 6-well plates at a density of
5  105 per well. After 24 hours of drug exposure, the cells
were collected, then lysed, and proteins were extracted
and processed for sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and immunoblotting as
described previously.15,16 The following primary antibodies were used: cyclin B1, cyclin D1 and cyclin E (all from
Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, Calif), p53
(DO1; Neomarkers, Fremont, Calif), extracellular signalregulated kinase (ERK), phosphorylated ERK (pERK),
p21, bax, p-S6, phosphorylated 4E-binding protein 1
(p4EBP1), poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP)
(detecting full-length and cleaved PARP), cleaved PARP,
vimentin, cleaved caspases 3 and 7, p53 up-regulated
modulator of apoptosis (PUMA) (all from Cell Signaling
Technology, Danvers, Mass), and b-actin (Sigma Chemical Company) diluted appropriately in Tris-buffered saline plus Tween-20 with 3% bovine serum albumin.
Horseradish peroxidase-coupled antirabbit/antimouse
antibodies (3% bovine serum albumin; Santa Cruz Biotechnology) were used at 1:10,000 dilution and developed
by Western blot analysis (Western Blotting Luminol Reagent Kit; Santa Cruz Biotechnology).
Cell Cycle Analysis

Cells were seeded onto 6-well plates at a density of
2  105 cells per well 24 hours before drug treatment. After 72 hours of exposure, the cells were trypsinized, pelleted, and processed for cell cycle analyses by propidium
iodide staining and flow cytometry using fluorescenceactivated cell sorting (FACS Calibur; Becton Dickinson,
Palo Alto, Calif) according to standard protocols.15,7 The
results were quantified using Cell Quest Pro software
(Becton Dickinson and Company, New York, NY).
Hoechst 33258 and Propidium Iodide Double
Staining to Detect Early/Late Apoptosis and
Necrosis

Vitality staining was performed as described previously.18
Meningioma cells were seeded onto 6-well plates (3  104
cells per well) and exposed to increasing drug concentrations for 48 hours. Hoechst 33258 and propidium iodide
were added directly to the cells at final concentrations of 5
mg/mL and 2 mg/mL, respectively. After 60 minutes of
incubation at 37 C, the cells were examined live using a
5040

Nikon Eclipse equipped with 40 -6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) and TRITC filters (Nikon Instruments
Europe, Kingston, United Kingdom). Cells were judged
according to their nuclear morphology and the disintegration of their cell membranes, as indicated by propidium
iodide uptake. Early apoptosis, late apoptosis, and necrosis were scored based on DNA condensation without propidium iodide staining, DNA condensation with
propidium iodide staining, and nucleic swelling with propidium iodide staining, respectively.
Microfilament Staining by Tetramethyl
Rhodamine Isothiocyanate-Phalloidin

Cells were seeded onto chamber slides 24 hours before
drug treatment. After 48 hours of exposure, the slides
were washed in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and fixed
in methanol:aceton (1:1) for 15 minutes at 20 C. The
microfilament system (f-actin) was stained by TRITC
phalliodin and DNA by DAPI as described previously.19
RESULTS
Higher Grade Meningioma Cell Models Are
Especially Sensitive to Trabectedin

To estimate the feasibility of trabectedin for the treatment
of meningioma, we investigated the activity of this novel
marine anticancer compound against cell cultures established from patients who had benign, atypical, and anaplastic meningiomas. Two anaplastic meningioma
primary cell cultures were developed into stable cell lines.
In a first approach, these cell lines were tested for sensitivity against trabectedin in a 96-hour, continuous drug exposure assay. We observed that trabectedin was highly
active in both meningioma cell models with half maximal
inhibitory concentration (IC50) values of 1 nM and 8 nM
(Fig. 1A), which was orders of magnitude more active
than cisplatin or hydroxyurea, agents that are used occasionally to treat progressive meningioma. The BTL695
cell line was slightly less sensitive against all 3 compounds
than the BTL598 cell line, suggesting that this cell model
may exhibit general chemoresistance. Nevertheless, in this
cell model, the IC50 against trabectedin also was only 8
nM. When analyzing primary cell cultures established
from grade I through III meningiomas, the increasing activity of trabectedin with enhanced malignancy became
obvious (Fig. 1B,C). In grade I tumor-derived primary
cell cultures (N ¼ 9), the mean IC50 value was
34.9  12.4 nM; whereas the IC50 value was 26.1  10.5
nM for grade II tumor cells (N ¼ 6) and 7.1  7.6 nM for
grade III tumor cells (N ¼ 4; 1-way analysis of variance;
P < .005) (Fig. 1C). The greater sensitivity in high-grade
tumor cells was not a consequence of altered proliferation.
Cancer

October 15, 2012

Trabectedin in Meningioma/Preusser et al

Figure 1. Trabectedin is highly active against human meningioma cell models. (A) Trabectedin as single agent was compared with
cisplatin and hydroxyurea in 96-hour drug-exposure assays using the indicated meningioma cell lines derived from anaplastic
tumors. Half-maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) values indicate the concentrations that induced a 50% reduction in viable
cells compared with nondrug controls and were calculated from dose-response curves of 3 independent experiments that were
performed in quintuplicate. (B) Antimeningioma activity of trabectedin against primo cell cultures (Passages 2-5) derived from
meningioma specimens of the different grades indicated were established by viability assays. Full dose-response curves for 2
examples of grade I, II, and III tumors each are represented. (C) Mean  standard deviation IC50 values for the indicated number
of primo cell cultures derived from meningioma surgical specimen are indicated (analysis of variance; P <.005). (D) These images
show the impact of a 48-hour cell exposure to trabectedin on the cell shape of the investigated meningioma cell models.

Tumors of all grades formed rapidly proliferating primary
cell cultures in vitro; however, the cell cultures benign meningiomas never developed into stable, immortalized cell
lines (data not shown). Microscopic examination of cell
morphology revealed that trabectedin treatment led to
Cancer

October 15, 2012

meningioma cell shrinkage, round-up, and detachment
from the surface of the culture plate. All of these features
indicate the induction of apoptotic cell death (Fig. 1D).
Accordingly, trabectedin doses of approximately 0.5 nM
and greater significantly enhanced the sub-G0/G1 peak of
5041

Original Article

trabectedin-induced cell death. Trabectedin induced only
minor changes in the activity of the oncogenic mitogenactivated protein kinase (MAPK) and the phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) pathways at doses from 50 nM. The
readouts for pERK and S6/4EBP are provided in Figure
2B. In contrast, strong activation of p53 was detectable at
10 nM. It is noteworthy that, despite intense induction of
p53, the 2 major p53 target genes tested—coding the
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21 and the proapoptotic protein bax—were not stimulated but, in the case of
p21, even diminished after trabectedin exposure.
Trabectedin Induces Apoptosis of Human
Meningioma Cells

Figure 2. Trabectedin induces cell cycle arrest in human meningioma cell models. (A) The effects of a 72-hour exposure
to trabectedin at the indicated concentrations on the cell
cycle distribution as analyzed by fluorescence-activated cell
sorting are shown for the BTL598 cell model. The sub-G0/G1
fraction indicates the percentage of cells undergoing apoptosis. (B) The impact of a 48-hour exposure of trabectedin on
the expression and/or phosphorylation of the indicated proteins was analyzed by immunoblotting. p53 Indicates tumor
protein 53; bax, B-cell leukemia/lymphoma 2-associated X
protein; pERK, protein kinase-like endoplasmic reticulum
kinase; ERK, extracellular signal-regulated kinase; p4EBP,
phosphorylated 4E-binding protein 1.

BTL598 cells in cell cycle analysis (see Fig. 2A, inset). In
addition, a very low dose of 0.5 nM significantly
enhanced the proportion of cells in G2/M phase of the
cell cycle; whereas, progressively, at higher doses, only
cells in G0/G1 phase of the cell cycle survived trabectedin
treatment. Accordingly, multiple cyclins (B1, D1, and E)
were reduced after trabectedin treatment, as determined
by immunoblot analysis (Fig. 2B). These data suggest that
predominantly noncycling cells were able to survive
5042

To further characterize trabectedin-induced cell death, trabectedin-treated meningioma cells were stained with DAPI
(DNA staining) and TRITC-labeled phalloidin (microfilament system) (see Fig. 3A, blue and red staining, respectively). Trabectedin induced a potent disruption of the
microfilament system, which explained the detachment
and round-up of cells observed under phase-contrast microscopy (compare Fig. 3A with Fig. 1C). In addition,
intense condensation of chromatin was induced in the majority of cells that were treated with 25 nM trabectedin. A
progressive induction of both early and late-stage apoptosis
and the complete loss of mitotic cells also were observed in
combined Hoechst/propidium iodide staining of live cells
that were treated with trabectedin for 48 hours (Fig. 3B).
This was paralleled by a massive cleavage of the caspase substrate PARP and caspase 7 in both cell models, whereas
cleaved caspase 3 was detectable only in the more sensitive
meningioma cell model BTL598. It is noteworthy that the
apoptosis-regulating protein PUMA was strongly reduced
by trabectedin treatment. PUMA, like p21 and bax, also is
a p53 target gene,20 and these results confirmed the uncoupling of p53-mediated transcription regulation by trabectedin in human meningioma cell models.
Trabectedin Enhances the Activity of Anticancer
Drugs Against Human Meningioma Cells

In addition to single-agent analyses, we determined
whether trabectedin had an impact on the activities of
other chemotherapeutic agents. Indeed, trabectedin—
when applied at moderately active concentrations—demonstrated predominantly synergistic effects (combination
indices; CI <0.9) (see Fig. 4A, bottom graph) with
hydroxyurea in 72-hour drug exposure MTT assays
(Fig. 4A, normalized data in the top graph). Accordingly,
cleavage of the caspase substrate PARP was enhanced synergistically by this drug combination, as indicated in
BTL598 cells, using an antibody that detected full-length
Cancer

October 15, 2012

Trabectedin in Meningioma/Preusser et al

Figure 3. Trabectedin induces apoptosis in human meningioma cell models. (A) Breakdown of the microfilament system (f-actin
is stained in red by tetramethyl rhodamine isothiocyanate [TRITC] phalloidin) and condensation of chromatin (DNA stained blue
by 40 -6-diamidino-2-phenylindole [DAPI]; apoptotic nuclei are marked by arrows) after a 48-hour exposure to 10 nM trabectedin
are shown for BTL598 cells. (B) Quantification of cells in interphase (IP), mitosis, early apoptosis (APO early), and late APO/necrosis (APO late/N) was performed on live cells stained by Hoechst dye/propidium iodide in meningioma cells that were exposed
to the indicated concentrations of trabectedin for 48 hours. (C) Immunodetection of the indicated proteins or their respective
cleaved (cl) products as markers for apoptosis was performed on cell cultures treated as described for B. PARP indicates poly
(ADP-ribose) polymerase; PUMA, p53 up-regulated modulator of apoptosis.

and cleaved PARP and a second antibody that only
detected cleaved PARP in immunoblot analyses (Fig. 4B).
In addition, combination experiments with cisplatin and
doxorubicin were performed. Trabectedin demonstrated
synergism with cisplatin predominantly at lower doses of
the metal drug; whereas, at higher doses, loss of synergism
was widespread (Fig. 4C). Also, with the anthracycline
compound, doxorubicin had predominantly synergistic to
Cancer

October 15, 2012

additive effects (CI, 0.9-1.1). These data suggest that trabectedin widely enhanced the antimeningioma activity of
chemotherapeutic drugs.
Trabectedin Is Clinically Active in Anaplastic
Meningioma: Single-Patient Experience

On the basis of our favorable in vitro data, we initiated
trabectedin therapy in a man aged 64 years with
5043

Original Article

Figure 4. These charts illustrate the combined treatment of meningioma models with trabectedin and with chemotherapeutic
drugs used to treat meningioma. (A) The indicated meningioma cell models were exposed concomitantly to trabectedin and
hydroxyurea (HU) at the indicated concentrations for 72 hours, and cell survival was determined with the 3-(4,5dimethylthiazol2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay. (B) This representative immunoblot depicts poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase
(PARP) cleavage (cl) in the BTL598 model as a measure of apoptosis induction by the respective drug combinations at the indicated dose levels. (C,D) These charts illustrate the impact on the meningioma cell model BTL598 of combined treatment with cisplatin (Cis) and doxorubicin (Dox) at the indicated concentrations. Combination indices (CI) in the lower graphs in A, C, and D
indicate interactions between the respective drugs in combination determined by CalcuSyn software (Biosoft, Ferguson, Mo):
synergism (CI, <0.9), additive activities (CI, 0.9-1.1; dotted lines), or antagonism (CI, >1.1).

5044

Cancer

October 15, 2012

Trabectedin in Meningioma/Preusser et al

Figure 5. These magnetic resonance images (MRIs) reveal stable tumor size and significant reduction of brain edema during trabectedin therapy. Before the initiation of trabectedin therapy (time 0 [T0]), T1-weighted MRIs (T1) reveal tumor formations
(40  50  4 mm) with contrast medium (CM) uptake that infiltrate the left postcentral cortex. The tumor formations do not
change significantly in size or appearance after 2 trabectedin applications (T1; 2 months after T0) and 5 trabectedin applications
(T2; 5 months after T0). Fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) images reveal significant peritumoral edema at T0 and
markedly less brain edema at T1 and T2.

histologically proven, malignant meningioma. The
patient had been diagnosed with atypical meningioma
(WHO grade II; 8  8  3.5 cm large meningeal tumor
with perifocal brain edema in the left frontoparietal
region) 2 years earlier and had undergone gross total resection; 3-dimensional, planned local radiotherapy with at a
total dose of 60 grays (Gy) in single doses of 1.28 Gy; 2
applications of lanreotide (once-monthly intramuscular
injection of 30 mg); 6 weeks of imatinib (oral daily dose
of 400 mg); and 4 months of sorafenib (oral daily dose of
400 mg). During this time, follow-up magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) studies revealed slowly progressive tumor
growth and progressive peritumoral edema. The patient
presented to our clinic with significant worsening of neurologic symptoms, including motor Jackson seizures, progressive aphasia, and hemiplegia. MRI studies revealed
massive tumor progression with tumor masses measuring
80  10  69 mm. The tumor formations had extracranial expansion with infiltration of the right temporal muscle. The extracranial part was totally resected, whereas the
intracranial part could be removed only in a subtotal excision. Postoperative MRI studies revealed residual tumor
formations (40  50  4 mm) with infiltration of the left
postcentral cortex (Fig. 5). Histologically, the tumor disCancer

October 15, 2012

played preserved meningothelial morphology with extensive necrosis (Fig. 6A), strong immunoreactivity for
epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) (Fig. 6B) and vimentin (Fig. 6C), intense proliferative activity (Ki-67 proliferation index, 42%) (Fig. 6D), and invasion of the skull
bone and the surrounding soft tissues (Fig. 6E,F). A high
mitotic frequency was observed (21 mitoses per 10 highpower fields), warranting the diagnosis of anaplastic meningioma (WHO grade III).1 Reirradiation was declined
because of the large recurrence within the previous radiation field. After obtaining informed patient consent, we
initiated therapy with trabectedin 4 weeks after the tumor
resection at a dose of 1.5 mg/m2 applied intravenously
over 24 hours through a permanent central venous access
device every 21 days. It is noteworthy that there was a
marked improvement of clinical symptoms, which
became evident within 2 weeks after the first trabectedin
infusion. There was significant and lasting, continuous
relief of aphasia and neurologic symptoms, which allowed
reduction of the daily dexamethasone dose from 12 mg to
4 mg, and the patient recovered from a Karnofsky index
of 60% to an index of 80%. It also is worth noting that
MRI studies revealed a significant reduction of perifocal
brain edema (Fig. 5). However, after 3 cycles, the patient
5045

Original Article

Figure 6. (A) Histopathology of tumor tissues resected at recurrence displays features of a malignant meningioma (hematoxylin
and eosin [H&E] staining) with meningothelial morphology and large areas of necrosis (asterisk). Tumor cells display strong immunoreactivity for (B) epithelial membrane antigen (anti-EMA) and (C) vimentin (antivimentin) and also (D) reveal increased
proliferative activity (anti-Ki67). Note the growth pattern with extensive invasion in H&E-stained sections from (E) the dura (F)
bone, and (G) soft tissues (original 100x (original magnification, 100 in A-C and E-G; 400 in D).

developed progressive edema in both legs despite normal
kidney function and serum albumin levels, and he also
developed mucositis. Despite diuretic therapy, the patient
gained >10 kg in 4 weeks and suffered from progressive
exertional dyspnea, necessitating therapy discontinuation
after a total of 5 trabectedin infusions. MRI follow-up
investigations performed 2 months and 5 months after
the initiation of trabectedin therapy revealed stable disease
according to Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid
Tumors criteria (Fig. 5).
5046

DISCUSSION
In this report, we present evidence of promising in vitro
and single-patient antineoplastic efficacy of trabectedin
for the treatment of high-grade meningioma. Our in vitro
experiments demonstrate that especially cell cultures
derived from anaplastic meningiomas are highly sensitive
against trabectedin with IC50 values at the border of picomolar to very low nanomolar concentrations. Thus, highgrade meningioma cells exhibit sensitivity to trabectedin
comparable to that of, for example, ovarian cancer
Cancer

October 15, 2012

Trabectedin in Meningioma/Preusser et al

cells,21,22 and meningioma cells were only marginally less
responsive than cells from an STS cell model.23,24 Trabectedin is approved clinically for both of these tumor entities. It is noteworthy that IC50 values for trabectedin were
orders of magnitude lower than the values for drugs like
hydroxyurea and cisplatin, which are used at least occasionally in the systemic treatment of anaplastic meningioma.3,4 Tumor cell lines derived from several carcinoma
types, including lung and colon cancers, exhibited higher
IC50 values25,26 (and our unpublished data), whereas
breast cancer cells appear to have trabectedin sensitivity
similar to that observed in meningiomas cell models.27
This suggests at least a tendency toward enhanced trabectedin sensitivity in cells of mesenchymal origin. It also is
worth noting that meningioma cells, like their normal meningothelial counterparts (arachnoidal cells), are morphologically and functionally diverse and have some degree of
overlap with mesenchymal and epithelial cells.2 The reasons for this hypersensitivity of cells with mesenchymal
features are unknown. In myxoid/round cell liposarcomas, it has been suggested that trabectedin induces cell
differentiation by inhibiting expression of the fused in sarcoma-CCAAT/-enhancer-binding protein homologous
(FUS/CHOP) fusion protein.28 Moreover, NER deficiency has been correlated with resistance against trabectedin-induced cell death29; whereas impaired homologous
recombination, eg, by mutations in BRCA1, caused trabectedin hypersensitivity in sarcoma cells.30 The status of
such molecular mechanisms in anaplastic meningioma is
widely unexplored. In this study, we observed a significantly reduced antimeningioma activity of trabectedin in
cells derived from low-grade tumors versus high-grade
tumors despite comparable proliferation rates of the respective primary cell cultures. This suggests that it is not
the cellular origins but the mechanisms acquired during
malignant progression that underlie the hypersensitivity
of high-grade meningiomas.
In our in vitro analyses, trabectedin exerted a potent
proapoptotic effect accompanied by strong cell cycle arrest
in G2/M phase already at subnanomolar concentrations,
down-modulation of several cell cycle-driving cyclins, and
destruction of the microfilament system in meningioma
cells. These data suggest that trabectedin may target several molecular mechanisms both at the DNA level and
possibly in proteins. In line with previous studies,23,31 we
also observed the stimulation of strong p53 expression in
malignant meningioma cell lines, indicating trabectedininduced DNA damage. Thus, the inhibition of cyclin
expression may be a secondary consequence of DNA damage-mediated cell cycle arrest and/or the survival of quiesCancer

October 15, 2012

cent cells only in G0 phase.32 However, specific
inhibition of the promoters that regulate the transcription
of cell cycle regulators, such as the cyclin A and B genes,
has been suggested based on trabectedin-mediated inhibition of nuclear factor Y (NF-Y)-induced transcription.33
Although we did not test for NF-Y responsiveness in the
current study, we did observe the deregulation of p53mediated gene transactivation. Thus, despite strong p53
accumulation, the p53 downstream targets p21, bax, and
PUMA were not up-regulated but even were down-regulated in response to trabectedin.23 These data support previous observations that trabectedin interferes with DNA
binding of certain transcription factors and exerts its anticancer activity at least in part by blocking activated (but
not constitutive) gene transcription.6,8
To date, only a few chemotherapeutic agents were
used to treat patients with high-grade meningioma with
uncertain activity based on the lack of prospective clinical trials. Among the agents associated with at least occasional response are hydroxyurea and doxorubicin as part
of the cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and vincristine
(CAV) scheme.3 It is noteworthy that we observed predominantly synergistic anticancer activity of these 2
agents and the metal drug cisplatin with trabectedin
against meningioma cell models. Synergism with anthracyclines, taxanes, and/or platinum compounds and antagonism to diverse other chemotherapeutics also were
reported in several cancer types, including osteosarcoma,
STS, and ovarian carcinoma cell lines24,34,35 as well as
cancer xenograft models.27,36 The reason for this selective synergism with certain chemotherapeutics is
unknown but may involve trabectedin-mediated inhibition of activated drug-resistance gene expression, like
adenosine triphosphate-binding cassette, subfamily B,
member 1 (ABCB1) and HSP70.8 Combination schemes
of trabectedin with, for example, cisplatin and pegylated
liposomal doxorubicin have exhibited activity against
several cancer types at least in early clinical studies.5 The
observed synergistic antineoplastic effects of these drugs
and also that of hydroxyurea in meningioma models suggest that trabectedin-containing combination therapies
may be feasible strategies for the treatment of patients
with aggressive meningioma.
Trabectedin exhibited promising in vitro activity in
our study. However, there are several issues that cannot be
addressed adequately in cell culture. Thus, currently, we
are in the process of establishing an orthotopic mouse
model for anaplastic meningioma so that we can study the
effect of intermittent trabectedin application schemes and
the in vivo efficacy of combination approaches with other
5047

Original Article

drugs like hydroxyurea, cisplatin, and doxorubicin that
exhibit synergistic activity in vitro.
The high sensitivity of meningioma cells toward
trabectedin prompted us to apply this novel marine
compound in 1 heavily pretreated patient who had anaplastic meningioma. It is noteworthy that we were able
to achieve radiographic disease stabilization for several
months. Several studies have documented tumor
responses to trabectedin in the absence of radiographic
decreases in tumor size. In myxoid liposarcoma, trabectedin treatment led to histopathologically confirmed tissue density changes in tumors with stable dimensions
that may have indicated biologically and clinically relevant responses.37 In line with those findings, 2 studies
demonstrated that trabectedin induced the inhibition of
tumor metabolic activity, as observed by decreases in
positron-emission tomography tracer uptake even in the
absence of objective decreases in tumor size on conventional MRI or computed tomography studies.38,39 Our
patient had a surprising improvement in neurologic
symptoms, including aphasia and paresis, within days after starting trabectedin treatment, although there were
no clinical signs of improvement in the preceding 4
weeks. The patient valued the quick and lasting relief of
these debilitating symptoms. Radiologically, there was
marked reduction of peritumoral brain edema with a
decreasing need for dexamethasone treatment. Inhibition
of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) production by trabectedin and reduced inflammation has been
observed previously and may explain the antiedematous
effect observed in our patient.40 Trabectedin-associated
reduction of brain edema and corticosteroid use may
prove to be clinically useful in patients with malignant
meningioma, similar to what has been reported with the
monoclonal VEGF antibody bevacizumab in malignant
glioma.41,42 It would be interesting to use an in vivo
model of anaplastic meningioma to determine whether
combined treatment with bevacizumab and trabectedin
has an additive or synergistic, antiedematous effect.
Unfortunately, trabectedin therapy was associated
with significant adverse effects in our patient. The therapy
had to be discontinued because of massive peripheral
edema after 5 cycles. However, data from several clinical
trials indicate that trabectedin is well tolerated in general,
both as monotherapy and in combination with other cytostatic drugs, including pegylated liposomal doxorubicin,
platinum derivatives, and paclitaxel.5,6 Trabectedin has
repeatedly been applied for up to 20 cycles or more without significant adverse effects (see Demetri et al.11 and
own experience in patients with STS treated at our depart5048

ment). The most common adverse effects are hepatotoxicity, myelosuppression, nausea, emesis, and fatigue.10,11
Few patients experience severe toxicities like skin and soft
tissue necrosis because of extravasation or rhabdomyolysis. Marked peripheral edema, like that observed in our
patient, has been infrequently reported. It remains unclear
from our single patient experience whether the toxicity
was idiosyncratic (eg, based on the pharmacogenomics of
our patient) or whether such toxicity is more likely to
occur in patients with anaplastic meningioma. Therefore,
the tolerability profile of trabectedin in patients with meningioma needs to be evaluated in prospective phase 1 or
phase 1/2 clinical trials; however, we expect that those
results will be consistent with the already documented
findings in other tumor entities. Taken together, our findings indicate that trabectedin may have clinically relevant
activity in patients with high-grade meningioma and
should be evaluated in prospective clinical trials.
FUNDING SOURCES
This study was supported by the Forschungsförderungsfonds der
Krebshilfe Oberösterreich.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
The authors made no disclosures.

REFERENCES
1. Louis DN, Ohgaki H, Wiestler OD, Cavanee WK. WHO Classification of Tumours of the Central Nervous System. Lyon, France:
IARC Press; 2007.
2. Mawrin C, Perry A. Pathological classification and molecular genetics of meningiomas. J Neurooncol. 2010;99:379-391.
3. Alexiou GA, Gogou P, Markoula S, Kyritsis AP. Management of
meningiomas. Clin Neurol Neurosurg. 2010;112:177-182.
4. Modha A, Gutin PH. Diagnosis and treatment of atypical and anaplastic meningiomas: a review. Neurosurgery. 2005;57:538-550,
2005; discussion 538-550.
5. Vincenzi B, Napolitano A, Frezza AM, Schiavon G, Santini D, Tonini
G. Wide-spectrum characterization of trabectedin: biology, clinical
activity and future perspectives. Pharmacogenomics. 2010;11:865-878.
6. Carter NJ, Keam SJ. Trabectedin: a review of its use in soft tissue
sarcoma and ovarian cancer. Drugs. 2010;70:355-376.
7. Damia G, Silvestri S, Carrassa L, et al. Unique pattern of ET-743
activity in different cellular systems with defined deficiencies in
DNA-repair pathways. Int J Cancer. 2001;92:583-588.
8. Friedman D, Hu Z, Kolb EA, Gorfajn B, Scotto KW. Ecteinascidin-743 inhibits activated but not constitutive transcription. Cancer
Res. 2002;62:3377-3381.
9. Cai X, Gray PJ Jr, Von Hoff DD. DNA minor groove binders:
back in the groove. Cancer Treat Rev. 2009;35:437-450.
10. Taamma A, Misset JL, Riofrio M, et al. Phase I and pharmacokinetic study of ecteinascidin-743, a new marine compound, administered as a 24-hour continuous infusion in patients with solid
tumors. J Clin Oncol. 2001;19:1256-1265.
11. Demetri GD, Chawla SP, von Mehren M, et al. Efficacy and safety
of trabectedin in patients with advanced or metastatic liposarcoma
or leiomyosarcoma after failure of prior anthracyclines and ifosfamide: results of a randomized phase II study of 2 different schedules. J Clin Oncol. 2009;27:4188-4196.

Cancer

October 15, 2012

Trabectedin in Meningioma/Preusser et al

12. Kaye SB, Colombo N, Monk BJ, et al. Trabectedin plus pegylated
liposomal doxorubicin in relapsed ovarian cancer delays third-line
chemotherapy and prolongs the platinum-free interval. Ann Oncol.
2011;22:49-58.
13. Preusser M, Heinzl H, Gelpi E, et al. Ki67 index in intracranial ependymoma: a promising histopathological candidate biomarker. Histopathology. 2008;53:39-47.
14. Spiegl-Kreinecker S, Pirker C, Marosi C, et al. Dynamics of chemosensitivity and chromosomal instability in recurrent glioblastoma. Br
J Cancer. 2007;96:960-969.
15. Heffeter P, Jakupec MA, Korner W, et al. Multidrug-resistant cancer
cells are preferential targets of the new antineoplastic lanthanum compound KP772 (FFC24). Biochem Pharmacol. 2007;73:1873-1886.
16. Dornetshuber R, Heffeter P, Kamyar MR, Peterbauer T, Berger W,
Lemmens-Gruber R. Enniatin exerts p53-dependent cytostatic and
p53-independent cytotoxic activities against human cancer cells.
Chem Res Toxicol. 2007;20:465-473.
17. Kubista B, Trieb K, Sevelda F, et al. Anticancer effects of zoledronic acid against human osteosarcoma cells. J Orthop Res.
2006;24:1145-1152.
18. Pirker C, Lotsch D, Spiegl-Kreinecker S, et al. Response of experimental malignant melanoma models to the pan-Aurora kinase inhibitor VE-465. Exp Dermatol. 2010;19:1040-1047.
19. Berger W, Elbling L, Micksche M. Expression of the major vault
protein LRP in human non-small-cell lung cancer cells: activation
by short-term exposure to antineoplastic drugs. Int J Cancer.
2000;88:293-300.
20. Yu J, Zhang L. PUMA, a potent killer with or without p53.
Oncogene. 2008;27(suppl 1):S71-S83.
21. Erba E, Cavallaro E, Damia G, et al. The unique biological features of
the marine product Yondelis (ET-743, trabectedin) are shared by its
analog ET-637, which lacks the C ring. Oncol Res. 2004;14:579-587.
22. Marchini S, Marrazzo E, Bonomi R, et al. Molecular characterisation
of 2 human cancer cell lines selected in vitro for their chemotherapeutic drug resistance to ET-743. Eur J Cancer. 2005;41:323-333.
23. Moneo V, Serelde BG, Fominaya J, et al. Extreme sensitivity to
Yondelis (trabectedin, ET-743) in low passaged sarcoma cell lines
correlates with mutated p53. J Cell Biochem. 2007;100:339-348.
24. Scotlandi K, Perdichizzi S, Manara MC, et al. Effectiveness of ecteinascidin-743 against drug-sensitive and -resistant bone tumor cells.
Clin Cancer Res. 2002;8:3893-3903.
25. Ghielmini M, Colli E, Erba E, et al. In vitro schedule-dependency
of myelotoxicity and cytotoxicity of ecteinascidin 743 (ET-743).
Ann Oncol. 1998;9:989-993.
26. Li WW, Takahashi N, Jhanwar S, et al. Sensitivity of soft tissue sarcoma cell lines to chemotherapeutic agents: identification of ecteinascidin-743 as a potent cytotoxic agent. Clin Cancer Res.
2001;7:2908-2911.
27. Takahashi N, Li W, Banerjee D, et al. Sequence-dependent synergistic cytotoxicity of ecteinascidin-743 and paclitaxel in human

Cancer

October 15, 2012

28.
29.
30.
31.

32.
33.
34.
35.

36.
37.
38.

39.

40.
41.
42.

breast cancer cell lines in vitro and in vivo. Cancer Res.
2002;62:6909-6915.
Forni C, Minuzzo M, Virdis E, et al. Trabectedin (ET-743) promotes differentiation in myxoid liposarcoma tumors. Mol Cancer
Ther. 2009;8:449-457.
Takebayashi Y, Pourquier P, Zimonjic DB, et al. Antiproliferative
activity of ecteinascidin 743 is dependent upon transcriptioncoupled nucleotide-excision repair. Nat Med. 2001;7:961-966.
D’Incalci M, Galmarini CM. A review of trabectedin (ET-743): a
unique mechanism of action. Mol Cancer Ther. 2010;9:2157-2163.
Takebayashi Y, Goldwasser F, Urasaki Y, Kohlhagen G, Pommier
Y. Ecteinascidin 743 induces protein-linked DNA breaks in human
colon carcinoma HCT116 cells and is cytotoxic independently of
topoisomerase I expression. Clin Cancer Res. 2001;7:185-191.
Erba E, Bergamaschi D, Bassano L, et al. Ecteinascidin-743 (ET743), a natural marine compound, with a unique mechanism of
action. Eur J Cancer. 2001;37:97-105.
Minuzzo M, Ceribelli M, Pitarque-Marti M, et al. Selective effects
of the anticancer drug Yondelis (ET-743) on cell-cycle promoters.
Mol Pharmacol. 2005;68:1496-1503.
Meco D, Colombo T, Ubezio P, et al. Effective combination of
ET-743 and doxorubicin in sarcoma: preclinical studies. Cancer
Chemother Pharmacol. 2003;52:131-138.
Takahashi N, Li WW, Banerjee D, Scotto KW, Bertino JR.
Sequence-dependent enhancement of cytotoxicity produced by ecteinascidin 743 (ET-743) with doxorubicin or paclitaxel in soft tissue
sarcoma cells. Clin Cancer Res. 2001;7:3251-3257.
D’Incalci M, Colombo T, Ubezio P, et al. The combination of
Yondelis and cisplatin is synergistic against human tumor xenografts. Eur J Cancer. 2003;39:1920-1926.
Grosso F, Jones RL, Demetri GD, et al. Efficacy of trabectedin
(ecteinascidin-743) in advanced pretreated myxoid liposarcomas: a
retrospective study. Lancet Oncol. 2007;8:595-602.
Ryan DP, Supko JG, Eder JP, et al. Phase I and pharmacokinetic
study of ecteinascidin 743 administered as a 72-hour continuous intravenous infusion in patients with solid malignancies. Clin Cancer
Res. 2001;7:231-242.
Kasper B, Schmitt T, Wuchter P, Dimitrakopoulou-Strauss A, Ho
AD, Egerer G. The use of positron emission tomography in soft tissue sarcoma patients under therapy with trabectedin. Mar Drugs.
2009;7:331-340.
Germano G, Frapolli R, Simone M, et al. Antitumor and antiinflammatory effects of trabectedin on human myxoid liposarcoma
cells. Cancer Res. 2010;70:2235-2244.
Chamberlain MC. Emerging clinical principles on the use of bevacizumab for the treatment of malignant gliomas. Cancer.
2010;116:3988-3999.
Puchner MJ, Hans VH, Harati A, Lohmann F, Glas M, Herrlinger
U. Bevacizumab-induced regression of anaplastic meningioma. Ann
Oncol. 2010;21:2445-2446.

5049

