HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Author Manuscript

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 28.
Published in final edited form as:
Cell. 2016 July 28; 166(3): 755–765. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2016.05.069.

Integrated proteogenomic characterization of human high grade
serous ovarian cancer

Author Manuscript

Hui Zhang#1, Tao Liu#2, Zhen Zhang#1, Samuel H Payne#2, Bai Zhang1, Jason E
McDermott2, Jian-Ying Zhou1, Vladislav A Petyuk2, Li Chen1, Debjit Ray2, Shisheng Sun1,
Feng Yang2, Lijun Chen1, Jing Wang3, Punit Shah1, Seong Won Cha4, Paul Aiyetan1,
Sunghee Woo4, Yuan Tian1, Marina A Gritsenko2, Therese R Clauss2, Caitlin Choi1,
Matthew E Monroe2, Stefani Thomas1, Song Nie2, Chaochao Wu2, Ronald J Moore2, KunHsing Yu5,6, David L Tabb3, David Fenyö7, Vineet Bafna8, Yue Wang9, Henry Rodriguez10,
Emily S Boja10, Tara Hiltke10, Robert C Rivers10, Lori Sokoll1, Heng Zhu1, Ie-Ming Shih11,
Leslie Cope12, Akhilesh Pandey13, Bing Zhang3, Michael P Snyder6, Douglas A Levine14,
Richard D Smith2, Daniel W Chan#1,#, Karin D Rodland#2,#, and CPTAC investigators
1Department
2Biological

of Pathology, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, MD

Sciences Division, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, Richland, WA

3Department

of Biomedical Informatics, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN

4Department

of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, San Diego, CA

5Biomedical

Informatics Training Program, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA

Author Manuscript

6Department

of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA

Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to KDR (karin.rodland@pnnl.gov) and DWC (dchan@jhmi.edu).
#Co-Senior authors
Consortia
National Cancer Institute Clinical Proteomics Tumor Analysis Consortium (NCI CPTAC)
Steven A. Carr, Michael A. Gillette, Karl R. Klauser, Eric Kuhn, D. R. Mani, Philipp Mertins, Karen A. Ketchum, Ratna Thangudu,
Shuang Cai Mauricio Oberti, Amanda G. Paulovich, Jeffrey R. Whiteaker, Nathan J. Edwards, Peter B. McGarvey, Subha Madhavan,
Pei Wang, Daniel Chan, Akhilesh Pandey, Ie-Ming Shih, Hui Zhang, Zhen Zhang, Heng Zhu, Leslie Cope, Gordon A. Whiteley,
Steven J. Skates, Forest M. White, Douglas A. Levine, Emily S. Boja, Christopher R. Kinsinger, Tara Hiltke, Mehdi Mesri, Robert C.
Rivers, Henry Rodriguez, Kenna M. Shaw, Stephen E. Stein, David Fenyo, Tao Liu, Jason E. McDermott, Samuel H. Payne, Karin D.
Rodland, Richard D. Smith, Paul Rudnick, Michael Snyder, Yingming Zhao, Xian Chen, David F. Ransohoff, Andrew N. Hoofnagle,
Daniel C. Liebler, Melinda E. Sanders, Zhiao Shi, Robbert J. C. Slebos, David L. Tabb, Bing Zhang, Lisa J. Zimmerman, Yue Wang,
Sherri R. Davies, Li Ding, Matthew J. C. Ellis and R. Reid Townsend

Author Manuscript

Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of
the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered
which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
Author Contributions
Study conception and design: HZ, TL, ZZ, RDS, DWC, KDR. Investigation: performed experiment or data collection: TL, SS, FY, JZ,
LijunC, PS, PA, YT, MAG, TRC, CC, ST, SN, RJM, HengZ. Computation and statistical analysis: ZZ, SHP, BaiZ, JEM, VAP, LiC,
DR, MEM, SWC, SW, JW, DLT, DF, VB, YW, BingZ. Data interpretation and biological analysis: TL, HZ, SHP, ZZ, BaiZ, JEM, VAP,
LiC, DR, SN, CW, IMS, AP, MPS, DAL, RDS, DWC, KDR. Writing/manuscript preparation and revision: HZ, TL, ZZ, SHP, JEM,
DR, VAP, LeslieC, HR, IMS, AP, MPS, DAL, RDS, DWC, KDR. Supervision and administration: HR, ESB, TH, RCR, LS, RDS,
DWC, KDR.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental information includes Extended Experimental Procedures, 5 figures, and 8 tables and can be found with this article
online.

Zhang et al.

Page 2

7Center

Author Manuscript

for Health Informatics and Bioinformatics, and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Pharmacology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY

8Department

of Computer Science and Engineering, University of California, San Diego, CA

9Bradley

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and
State University, Arlington, VA

10Office

of Cancer Clinical Proteomics Research, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD

11Department

of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, MD

12Department

of Oncology, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, MD

13McKusick-Nathans

Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore,

MD

Author Manuscript

14Department

#

of Surgery, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY

These authors contributed equally to this work.

SUMMARY

Author Manuscript

To provide a detailed analysis of the molecular components and underlying mechanisms
associated with ovarian cancer, we performed a comprehensive mass spectrometry-based
proteomic characterization of 174 ovarian tumors previously analyzed by The Cancer Genome
Atlas (TCGA), of which 169 were high-grade serous carcinomas (HGSC). Integrating our
proteomic measurements with the genomic data yielded a number of insights into disease such as
how different copy number alternations influence the proteome, the proteins associated with
chromosomal instability, the sets of signaling pathways that diverse genome rearrangements
converge on, as well as the ones most associated with short overall survival. Specific protein
acetylations associated with homologous recombination deficiency suggest a potential means for
stratifying patients for therapy. In addition to providing a valuable resource, these findings provide
a view of how the somatic genome drives the cancer proteome and associations between protein
and post-translational modification levels and clinical outcomes in HGSC.

Abstract

Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 28.

Zhang et al.

Page 3

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

INTRODUCTION

Author Manuscript

A comprehensive molecular view of cancer is necessary for understanding the underlying
mechanisms of disease, improving prognosis, and ultimately guiding treatment (Hanahan
and Weinberg, 2011). The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) conducted an extensive genomic
and transcriptomic characterization of ovarian high-grade serous carcinoma (HGSC) aimed
at defining the genomic landscape and aiding the development of targeted therapies for this
highly lethal malignancy (TCGA Research Network, 2011). Key findings from TCGA were:
1) the prevalent role of TP53 mutations, 2) extensive DNA copy alterations, 3) preliminary
transcriptional signatures associated with survival, 4) varied mechanisms of BRCA1/2
inactivation, and lastly, 5) CCNE1 aberrations. Subsequent analysis of genomic data from
the TCGA consortium led to the refinement of the transcript-defined signatures, improving
the statistical association with patient outcome (Yang et al., 2013), and integrating
microRNA and mRNA expression profiles associated with HGSC to identify candidate
microRNA targets (Creighton et al., 2012).

Author Manuscript

While the insights from genomic analyses are substantial, functions encoded in the genome
are generally executed at the protein level, and are often further modulated by posttranslational modifications (PTMs) (Vogel and Marcotte, 2012). For example, TCGA used
reverse phase protein array (RPPA) analysis of 172 proteins (including 31 phosphoproteins
with phospho-specific antibodies) to generate a signature associated with the risk of tumor
recurrence (Yang et al., 2013). To obtain a more comprehensive assessment of the complex
ovarian HGSC phenotype, the Clinical Proteomic Tumor Analysis Consortium (CPTAC)
conducted an extensive mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomic and phosphoproteomic
characterization of HGSC tumors characterized by TCGA, providing quantitative
measurements for a combined total of 9,600 proteins from 174 tumors (an average of 7,952
proteins per tumor), and a total of 24,429 phosphosites from 6,769 phosphoproteins in a
subset of 69 tumors (an average of 7,677 phosphosites per tumor). Our results provide

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 28.

Zhang et al.

Page 4

Author Manuscript

insights on HGSC biology and correlate differences in protein and PTM levels with clinical
outcome complementary to TCGA genomic analyses.

RESULTS
Proteomic analysis of TCGA HGSC samples

Author Manuscript

HGSC biospecimens and clinical data from 174 patients collected by TCGA were analyzed
at two independent CPTAC Centers, Johns Hopkins University (JHU) and Pacific Northwest
National Laboratory (PNNL); thirty-two samples were analyzed at both JHU and PNNL.
Tumors were selected by examining the associated TCGA metadata to select tumors either
1) on the basis of putative homologous recombination deficiency (HRD), defined by the
presence of germline or somatic BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations, BRCA1 promoter
methylation, or homozygous deletion of PTEN (Woodbine et al., 2014) (122 samples; 67
classified as HRD, 55 as non-HRD by the above criteria; JHU), or 2) to maximize
differences in overall survival (84 samples; PNNL). For selection purposes, short survival
was defined as overall survival of less than 3 years, and long survival as greater than 5 years.
All but five tumors had somatic TP53 mutations, a characteristic feature of HGSC (TCGA
Research Network, 2011); these five tumors were subsequently reclassified as other than
HGSC (Vang et al., 2016), and removed from protein functional analyses (e.g., subtyping
and survival analyses). The tumor selection criteria and the associated metadata are provided
in the Supplemental Information Table S1, available online.

Author Manuscript

Proteomics measurements used isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ;
Ross et al., 2004) in conjunction with offline liquid chromatography fractionation via highpH reversed phase liquid chromatography (RPLC) and online RPLC with high-resolution
tandem MS to provide broad coverage for peptide and protein identification and
quantification (Supplemental Information); this also alleviated quantitative interference
potentially associated with the use of isobaric tags. We used the relative abundance
measurements for each protein in the 32 patient samples analyzed at both JHU and PNNL to
normalize across the two analysis sites, and then used clustering, principle component
analysis (PCA), and statistical tests to identify any significant batch effects associated with
the site of analysis (a detailed comparison of within site, between site, between sample
measurement variability and the process used to merge the JHU and PNNL data is given in
Supplemental Information, Figure S1). As shown in Figure S1C, the median coefficient of
variation (CV) between measurements at the two sites was 16%.

Author Manuscript

A total of 9,600 proteins were identified with high confidence in all tumors, and the relative
abundances in each tumor are given in Table S2. Functional analyses and proteometranscriptome associations were restricted to 3,586 proteins observed and quantified in all
169 HGSC samples used for protein functional analyses and where sample variability
(signal) exceeded technical variability (noise) in the merged data (Table S2), calculated as
described in Supplemental Information. On average we identify peptides covering 29% of
the amino acids in any of these 3,586 proteins in a given sample, with a range from 10% to
47%. In addition to protein abundance levels, phosphoproteomics data were acquired for 69
tumors with sufficient sample (Table S2). As with proteins, phosphopeptide abundances
were calculated relative to the pooled reference sample. Because isobaric labeling was
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 28.

Zhang et al.

Page 5

Author Manuscript

performed prior to splitting the samples for proteome and phosphoproteome analyses,
phosphopeptide abundance could be corrected for changes in parent protein abundance to
identify differences in the relative extent of phosphorylation at specific sites for each protein
(Table S2). Overall, we achieved a protein dynamic range encompassing >4 orders of
magnitude, ranging from low-level transcription factors to abundant structural proteins i.e.,
actin and tubulin.
Proteogenomic landscape of HGSC

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

The degree to which alterations observed at the genome and transcriptome levels are
manifested at the protein level is variable, both qualitatively and quantitatively, and partially
driven by multiple levels of post-transcriptional regulation (Zhang et al., 2014; Kislinger et
al., 2006; Jovanovic et al., 2015; Mertins et al., 2016). To identify peptides encoded by
single amino acid variants (SAAVs), splice variants, and novel exons documented by TCGA,
mass spectra were searched against a custom graph database (Woo et al., 2014a) containing
all peptide variations projected from the TCGA genomic analyses of the cohort using a
multi-stage analysis pipeline (Supplemental Information). The most frequently observed
variant peptides represented SAAVs and gene-level events. The evidence supporting each
novel event is detailed in Table S2, including event type, genomic location, abundance
information, and estimated false discovery rate (FDR). The validity of these variant peptides
was further evaluated by the synthesis of twenty examples selected at random across the
entire range of spectrum match scores. We obtained tandem mass spectra for all twenty
synthetic peptides that matched spectra from our analyses, strongly supporting our
observation of these variant peptides; three representative examples are given in Figure S1E.
These results demonstrate the ability to confidently detect, identify and validate genomelevel predictions at the protein level. More novel peptides would likely be observed if there
was sufficient sample for more extensive fractionation and/or replicate analyses (Ruggles et
al., 2015); these limitations preclude any conclusions about the biological significance of
unobserved events. For example, only 2 mutant p53 peptides were identified despite the
presence of p53 mutations in all tumors examined. Such low coverage can occur for reasons
that include: excessively large or small tryptic fragments, inability to distinguish some
amino acids, some possible biases against highly hydrophobic and hydrophilic peptides, or
low abundance peptides co-eluting with very high abundance peptides.

Author Manuscript

To assess the potential for post-transcriptional regulation (e.g., translational efficiency or
protein degradation), we compared each protein to its corresponding transcript across all
tumors, and correlation was assessed for those pairs with reliable measurements for both
mRNA and protein, i.e., proteins with a corresponding mRNA measurement observed in all
169 HGSC tumors where sample variability exceeded technical variability (3,196 pairs). We
excluded 391 proteins observed without a corresponding mRNA (e.g., HBA1) or discordant
gene symbol annotation in the protein database (e.g., THOC4). Overall, 79.4% of the
mRNA:protein pairs showed statistically significant positive Spearman correlations
(Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted p value <0.01; Figure 1) when changes in mRNA abundance
were compared to changes in relative protein abundance. The observed median r value of
0.45 for each mRNA-protein pair across all 169 tumors is similar to observations in
colorectal cancer (Zhang et al., 2014), breast cancer (Mertins et al., 2016) and mouse tissues

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 28.

Zhang et al.

Page 6

Author Manuscript

(Kislinger et al., 2006), although less than found for cell lines (Wu et al., 2013). In
comparison, the median correlation of paired protein measurements from the same sample,
but measured at two sites, was substantially higher, at 0.69 (Figure S1).

Author Manuscript

A wide range of mRNA:protein correlations was observed. In general, weaker correlations
were observed for highly stable and abundant proteins associated with housekeeping or nonintrinsic functions (e.g., ribosomes, mRNA splicing, oxidative phosphorylation, complement
cascade), while more dynamic proteins known to be transcriptionally regulated in response
to nutrient demand or other perturbations (e.g., nucleotide metabolism, amino acid
metabolism, acute inflammatory responses) were more highly correlated (Figure 1 and Table
S3). This result is consistent with a previous colorectal cancer study (Zhang et al., 2014) and
supports the hypothesis that while many biological functions are primarily regulated by
mRNA abundance, post-transcriptional mechanisms likely have an important role in
regulating certain house-keeping functions (Jovanovic et al., 2015; Komili and Silver, 2008;
Lu et al., 2007; Marguerat et al., 2012). Additionally, we found that 23 mRNAs lacking
polyA tails displayed lower correlation (mean −0.15) with their cognate proteins than did
polyadenylated mRNAs, consistent with the decreased stability of mRNAs lacking polyA
tails (Yang et al., 2011).
Clustering of tumors based on protein abundance

Author Manuscript

HGSC is the most common of the four major histological subtypes of epithelial ovarian
cancer, and is characterized by distinct morphological features. Recent studies using mRNA
abundance data have suggested four transcriptomic HGSC subtypes designated as
differentiated, immunoreactive, mesenchymal, and proliferative (Yang et al., 2013). To build
an unbiased molecular taxonomy of ovarian HGSC, we used protein abundance data from
the 169 tumors to identify subtypes that might show biological differences that could be
exploited in future studies. Figure 2 shows the resulting clustering analysis of individual
tumors (vertical columns) by protein abundance (horizontal rows). The cluster assignment
for each sample is provided in Table S4, and a consensus value matrix for the subtype
comparisons is shown in Figure S2A. The results of a Weighted Gene Co-expression
Network Analysis (WGCNA) (Langfelder and Horvath, 2008) of protein functional
enrichment by subgroups are provided for the protein clusters, in Figure S2B and Table S4.
The enrichment of KEGG and Reactome ontologies in the WGCNA-derived modules are
shown in Figures S2C and S2D, respectively; membership of enriched pathways is provided
in Table S3.

Author Manuscript

Four of the proteomic clusters showed a clear correspondence to the mesenchymal,
proliferative, immunoreactive, and differentiated subtypes defined by the TCGA
transcriptome analysis (Figure 2 and Figure S2E). A relatively small fifth cluster of tumors
significantly enriched in proteins associated with extracellular matrix interactions,
erythrocyte and platelet functions, and the complement cascade was also observed using
multiple approaches, including model based clustering with Bayesian information criteria,
consensus clustering, and VISDA-based sub-phenotype clustering. This new group could not
be attributed to tissue source site sampling bias or any other meta-data category, but may be
related to tumor characteristics, including vascularization and tumor content, as the Tumor

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 28.

Zhang et al.

Page 7

Author Manuscript

Purity score for this subtype (and the Mesenchymal subtype) was significantly lower than
that of the other three subtypes (Figure S2F). The clinical relevance of these protein-based
clusters will require validation in independent HGSC sample sets, particularly as no
significant difference in survival was observed (Figure S2G), similar to mRNA-based
clustering analysis (TCGA Research Network, 2011).
Proteomic analysis of CNA effects
Chromosomal instability, marked by extensive copy number alterations (CNAs) in each
tumor, is a hallmark of HGSC, and a likely source of driver alterations in this disease (Cope
et al., 2013; Kuo et al., 2009; Kobel et al., 2008). CNAs can affect the abundance of proteins
at the same locus (cis effects), and may also act in trans, either directly or indirectly.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Hypothesizing that CNAs with strong trans effects are more likely to elicit a molecular
phenotype and confer selective advantages, we sought to identify those CNA regions that
have the broadest effect on protein expression. In all, 29,393 CNA loci (Table S5) were
compared to our global proteomics data with 950,209 CNA/protein pairs (0.72% of the total)
exhibiting significant association (Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted p value <0.01). We provide
a complete list of the significantly associated proteins for each CNA in Table S5. The
diagonal line evident in Figure 3 corresponds to cis effects, and vertical stripes correspond to
trans effects where changes in copy number affect expression of numerous proteins across
the genome. We performed the same analysis for mRNA to identify sites where associations
are transcriptionally mediated. A similar number of CNA/mRNA pairs were found to be
significantly associated (1,113,164 at Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted p value <0.01; Figure
3). This analysis revealed regions on chromosomes 2, 7, 20, and 22 correlated in trans with
more than 200 proteins. In contrast to colorectal cancer where most of the trans-regulation of
protein by CNA was accompanied by similar changes in mRNA (Zhang et al., 2014), we
observed several loci associated with differences in protein abundance without a
corresponding change in mRNA. For example, large regions on chromosome 2 have
relatively little trans effect on mRNA levels, but are associated with more than 200 proteins
in trans. Dissecting the mechanisms by which a specific CNA can alter protein levels in
trans, without affecting the corresponding mRNA is difficult, given the extent of the
amplified or deleted regions and the numerous genes affected at a given locus. Possible
mechanisms include cis regulation of proteins associated with mRNA stability and
translational efficiency, such as microRNAs and RNA binding proteins.

Author Manuscript

Given the complex pattern of CNAs observed in HGSC, it has been difficult to identify a
limited number of high impact genomic alterations that could function as drivers of the
disease. We interrogated the trans-affected proteins associated with each putative CNA for
common functions using pathways defined by the KEGG, NCI pathway interaction database
(PID) and Reactome databases (Supplemental Information). Proteins associated with cell
invasion and migration, and proteins related to immune function appeared to be enriched in
association with multiple CNAs (Figure S3; Table S3). These observations suggest a
convergence of multiple CNA targets on a common set of biological functions, namely
motility/invasion and immune regulation, functions that are among the hallmarks of cancer
(Hanahan and Weinberg, 2011).

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 28.

Zhang et al.

Page 8

Association of CNA trans-affected proteins with overall survival

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Availability of the TCGA survival data allowed us to use trans-affected protein data from the
most influential CNAs (e.g., the four altered regions described on chromosomes 2, 7, 20, and
22; Figure 3) to build a model of overall survival. Because each CNA affects many proteins,
we used a regression approach that identifies parsimonious Cox proportional hazards models
with maximal predictive ability from the list of significantly correlated proteins for that
CNA. We trained models on the proteomics data from PNNL (82 tumors) and tested the
ability of the model to predict survival times in the data from JHU (87 tumors, not including
the 32 overlapping). Each of the four most influential CNA regions produced models that
were strongly associated with patient survival (p value <0.01, FDR <0.5% based on
randomly selected proteins). A Kaplan-Meier plot illustrating the predictive value of each of
the locus-specific models after validation is shown in Figure S4A; for the Kaplan-Meier
plots, ‘high’ and ‘low’ expression were defined relative to the median for that signature
across all samples, splitting patients into two equal groups of 45 (Table S6). We examined
the overlap in predictions for patients for the four signatures and found that the predictions
were unanimous (either high or low signature) for 62% of patients and 16% were evenly
split, with the remaining having one dissenting signature. This suggested the utility of
combining these signatures, using a voting method where the number of high or low calls
was counted for each patient; this substantially improved prediction of survival time (p value
1.9e-6; Figure 4). We also examined the effects of tumor stage, tumor grade, patient age,
surgical outcome, and platinum status, and found that our proteomic signatures were not
improved by inclusion of these variables.

Author Manuscript

For each of these locus-specific models we analyzed the enrichment of genes and their
regulatory sequences associated with outcome, and found all four models had genes
significantly enriched (Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted p value <0.05) in binding sites for the
proliferation-associated serum response factor (SRF), suggesting that SRF activity may be
important in ovarian cancer outcome. Additionally, there was significant enrichment of
proteins involved in the regulation of actin cytoskeleton, apoptosis, and adherens junction
(Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted p value <0.05). We examined the protein abundance and
phosphorylation status of SRF between short and long surviving groups and observed that
they were higher in short surviving patients, but only slightly. Thus, although SRF alone was
not predictive, the trends in SRF abundance and phosphorylation are consistent with the
observation of enrichment for proteins potentially regulated by SRF binding. Details of the
larger gene set analysis are provided in Supplemental Information.

Author Manuscript

Several proteins shared across all the signatures are known to be involved in cancer
processes. Catenin B2 (CTNNA2) is a cell-cell adhesion protein and tumor suppressor
(Fanjul-Fernández et al., 2013). The Rho GDP dissociation inhibitor (GDI) beta
(ARHGDIB) is involved in invasion and migration in many cancers, and overexpression
correlates with progression in pancreatic carcinoma (Yi et al., 2015). Protein kinase C and
casein kinase substrate in neurons protein 2 (PACSIN2) is a repressor of cellular migration
(Meng et al., 2011). Finally, the GTP-binding nuclear protein Ran, is a prognostic marker
associated with increased survival in epithelial ovarian cancer (Barrès et al., 2010). The
association of these previously described survival-related proteins with genes affected in

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 28.

Zhang et al.

Page 9

Author Manuscript

trans by CNAs suggests a potential mechanism for the parallel activation of multiple
pathways associated with poor prognosis in HGSC.
As a comparison we applied the previously described Provar signature (Yang et al., 2013),
comprising five protein and four phosphoproteins that showed good survival prediction in
the TCGA ovarian cancer dataset. We observed all proteins in the Provar signature in our
proteomic data, but only one of the phosphosites (EGFR Y1173). Thus, we used the RPPA
data from the original signature (Figure S4B). We found that the Provar signature was
prognostic of survival (Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted p value = 0.11) in the 67 patients
examined here (those with phosphoprotein data and had somatic TP53 mutations), but the
statistical power of Provar is not as high as the statistical power of signatures derived from
the CNA trans-affected proteins in this dataset. In addition, integrating the Provar signature
with the CNA signatures did not improve survival prediction (Figure S4C).

Author Manuscript

Identification of proteins associated with chromosomal structural abnormality

Author Manuscript

The degree of chromosomal instability exhibited by a tumor can be represented by a
calculated chromosome instability (CIN) index, as described previously for lung cancer
(TCGA Research Network, 2012). Identification of proteins associated with CIN may
provide information on the processes contributing to chromosomal instability, while the
analysis of trans-affected proteins described above is more closely related to the downstream
consequences of specific CNAs. Using a bootstrapping method described in Supplemental
Information, we identified a proteomic signature including 128 proteins (Table S7) showing
significant correlation with CIN index (Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted p value <1e-4,
Spearman correlation; Figure S5A). Functional annotation of these proteins (Figure S5B)
showed that proteins up-regulated in tumors with high CIN index were preferentially
involved in chromatin organization (p value 6.90e-5), whereas proteins up-regulated in
tumors with low CIN index were more often associated with cell death (p value 2.13e-5).
Correlation analysis of protein abundances and CIN indicated that a small number of
proteins could account for the majority of the CIN (Figure 5); two of the most strongly
associated proteins, CHD4 and CHD5, are known to be involved in chromatin organization
(Liu and Matulonis, 2014).
Identification of proteins associated with HRD status

Author Manuscript

Since HRD is associated with susceptibility to PARP inhibitors and improved survival
(Farmer et al., 2005; Liu and Matulonis, 2014), we sought to elucidate systemic changes
associated with HRD and identify biomarkers that might be used to stratify patients for
treatment. We defined tumors with HRD as having either germline or somatic mutations in
BRCA1 or BRCA2, or BRCA1 promoter methylation, or homozygous deletion of PTEN
(McEllin et al., 2010), with an overall survival >1.5 years, while non-HRD patients were
defined as lacking these genomic aberrations and with a follow-up or time-to-death <2.5
years; additional selection criteria include available residual tissue volume and a tumor
tissue contamination score estimated using copy number alterations (Yu et al., 2011).
Applying differential dependency network (DDN) analysis (Zhang et al., 2009) on a set of
171 BRCA1- or BRCA2-related proteins curated from the literature and from the cBio
portal, we identified a sub-network of 30 proteins that displayed co-expression patterns

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 28.

Zhang et al.

Page 10

Author Manuscript

differentiating HRD from non-HRD patients (Table S7; Figure 6). Several of the proteins in
these modules are known to be involved in histone acetylation or deacetylation, e.g.,
HDAC1, RBBP4, RBBP7, and EP300 (Mielcarek et al., 2015), and HUS1 (Cai et al., 2000).

Author Manuscript

Although statistical association cannot distinguish between drivers and consequences of
HRD status, the observed enrichment of proteins associated with histone acetylation
motivated us to use an effective database search strategy (Supplemental Information) to
identify and quantify acetylated peptides from the global proteomic data. Comparative
analysis of 399 acetylated peptides identified 15 acetylated peptides with significant
differences between the HRD and non-HRD samples (Table S7). Among these, dual
acetylation at K12 and K16 of histone H4 showed a significant difference between HRD and
non-HRD samples (Figure 6); differential acetylation of K12 and K16 was verified using
synthetic peptides and targeted analysis using Sequential Windowed data independent
Acquisition of the Total High-resolution Mass Spectra (SWATH-MS). In cell line data,
acetylation of H4 has previously been reported to be involved in the choice of DNA double
strand break (DSB) repair pathways (homologous recombination or non-homologous end
joining (Gong and Miller, 2013; Tang et al., 2013). This relationship is regulated partially by
HDAC1, a protein also identified in the DDN analysis. We observed a significant enrichment
of HDAC1 and its co-regulated proteins in tumors with HRD and low H4 acetylation relative
to non-HRD tumors with high H4 acetylation (DDN analysis: permutation tests, p value
<0.05; differentially acetylated peptides: t-tests, p value <0.05 with an estimated FDR <0.5%
by bootstrap/permutation tests). The combined observations of increased HDAC1 and
associated proteins at the pathway level, together with decreased acetylation of H4 in HRD
patients at the PTM level, provide insight regarding the potential role of HDAC1 in
modulating the choice of DSB repair pathways.

Author Manuscript

Phosphoproteomic analysis of pathways associated with survival

Author Manuscript

An initial set of 24,464 different phosphopeptides (21,298 unique phosphorylation sites)
contained within 4,420 proteins having data on net differences in phosphorylation (Table S2)
was obtained. Since ischemia of the TCGA tumor samples may alter phosphopeptide
abundance, we removed any phosphorylation sites previously shown to be altered by
ischemia (Mertins et al., 2014). We also removed three tumor samples having substantially
higher than average missing values and two tumor samples lacking somatic TP53 mutations
(Supplemental Information). This yielded a final set of 7,675 different phosphopeptides
(6,802 unique phosphorylation sites) from 2,324 proteins (Table S2) that were mapped to
pathways via the NCI PID. The average net phosphorylation of all phosphopeptides mapping
to a given pathway (i.e., the statistical average across all phosphoproteins known to be in the
pathway, rather than the statistically significant individual proteins) was used as a measure
of pathway activity and compared between short survivors (deceased surviving <3 years;
N=17) and long survivors (patients surviving >5 years; N=19) using both proteomic and
phosphoproteomic data.
An issue in ranking the pathways is the distinction between phosphopeptides that are unique
to a single pathway, such as the receptor peptides themselves, vs. peptides that map to
proteins shared between pathways. In order to address this issue, we performed two

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 28.

Zhang et al.

Page 11

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

analyses: one of all proteins associated with a specific pathway in the NCID database, and a
second analysis in which proteins common to multiple pathways were excluded. Figure 7A
shows a ranking of activated pathways, as inferred from the analysis of pathway specific
components (i.e., differences in mRNA, protein and phosphoprotein levels) in short vs. long
survivors. Fifteen pathways showed increased phosphorylation at Benjamini-Hochberg
adjusted p values <0.01, in contrast with transcriptional data for the same samples which
yielded only one statistically significantly increased pathway, androgen receptor signaling,
which was also increased at the phosphoprotein level (Figure 7A and Supplemental
Information). All pathways indicated in Figure 7A were increased in association with short
survival relative to long survival, though some individual components within a pathway
showed opposite changes (e.g. JNK1 transcript and protein levels, see Figure 7B). The
RhoA-regulatory, PDGFRB, and integrin-like kinase pathways emerged as the most
activated in this analysis (Figure 7A). Figure 7B shows the common and unique elements of
the PDGFRB pathway, and the trends in mRNA, protein, and phosphoprotein levels in the
comparison of short vs. long survivors, illustrating the benefit of combined protein and
phosphoprotein measurements, as well as the substantial contribution of protein
phosphorylation data to the overall analysis.

Author Manuscript

We compared our results to the 31 phosphoproteins represented on the RPPA arrays used in
the original TCGA ovarian cancer analysis (TCGA Research Network, 2011); RPPA
identified differential phosphorylation of ERK1, RAF1, and STAT3 in the same patient
samples analyzed by MS. For short surviving vs. long surviving patients, ERK1 showed
statistically significantly increased phosphorylation by RPPA, on the same ERK1
phosphopeptides as found using MS, while AKT1, RAF1 and STAT3 showed increased
phosphorylation by both RPPA and MS-based analyses, but based upon distinct
phosphopeptides (Table S2). Good overlap was observed between RPPA and MS results for
phosphoproteins on the RPPA array, but we did not observe three of the specific
phosphosites from the Provar survival signature in our MS data, suggesting that proteomics
is more sensitive to overall pathway activity than specific regulatory events in the pathway
itself. However, many of the phosphopeptides identified by MS phosphoproteomics as
components of the PDGFR-beta pathway were not represented in the RPPA, illustrating the
ability to identify phosphorylation events not readily accessible with currently available
antibodies (Figure 7B).

DISCUSSION

Author Manuscript

The addition of proteomic information, including post-translational modifications, to the rich
genomic and transcriptomic data available from the ovarian HGSC samples analyzed by
TCGA has provided additional insights into the biology of HGSC, including identification
of changes at the level of pathway activation. Integration of genomic, proteomic, and
phosphoproteomic measurements identified differentially regulated pathways and functional
modules that displayed significant associations with patient outcomes, including survival
and HRD status. Cox proportional hazard analysis of proteins associated with CNAs
identified overall survival signatures enriched for targets of the proliferation-associated
transcription factor SRF, and integrated proteomic, phosphoproteomic and transcriptomic
data identified pathways that differentiated patients on the basis of survival, including the
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 28.

Zhang et al.

Page 12

Author Manuscript

PDGFR-beta signaling pathway associated with angiogenesis, the RhoA regulatory and
integrin-linked kinase pathways associated with cell mobility and invasion, and pathways
associated with chemokine signaling and adaptive immunity. Proteins associated with cell
invasion and motility emerged from both the integration of CNAs with protein abundance
data and the phosphoproteomic investigation of up-regulated pathways in short versus long
survivors. Despite the complexity of genomic alterations that characterize HGSC, these
analyses suggest a functional convergence on a subset of key pathways. The association of
increased invasiveness and motility with short overall survival in this study may help to
explain more aggressive mechanisms of dissemination in ovarian cancer, including recently
reported hematogenous metastasis (Pradeep et al., 2014), in addition to previously described
lymphatic spread and known peritoneal spread by direct extension.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Focusing on functional modules has also revealed potential drivers of HGSC and more
robust signatures for potentially stratifying ovarian HGSC patients into distinct cancer
phenotypes to inform therapeutic management. For example, the identification of specific
acetylation events associated with HRD, e.g., the simultaneous acetylation of K12 and K16
on histone H4, may provide an alternative biomarker of HRD and a rationale for the
selection of patients in future clinical trials of HDAC inhibitors alone or in combination with
PARP inhibition. This may help to resolve the current discrepancy between the initial
observation of limited single agent activity of HDAC inhibitors in ovarian cancer (Mackay et
al., 2010; Modesitt et al., 2008), and more recent findings of a >40% response rate when
used in combination with cytotoxic chemotherapy in platinum-resistant patients (Dizon et
al., 2012). Similarly, comprehensive interrogation of protein phosphorylation identified
multiple pathways with significantly increased phosphorylation in patients with poor clinical
outcomes. Specifically, the observed activation of PDGFR pathways in a subset of patients
with short overall survival could potentially stratify patients for selective enrollment in trials
of anti-angiogenic therapy, which is particularly relevant to current controversies over the
use of bevacuzimab as a first-line therapy in ovarian cancer (Gadducci et al., 2015).
Overall, this work illustrates the ability of proteomics to complement genomics in providing
additional insights into pathways and processes that drive ovarian cancer biology and how
these pathways are altered in correspondence with clinical phenotypes. The comprehensive
proteomic measurements for the HGSC tumor samples provide a public resource of
information. Importantly, the ability to identify PTMs revealed a strong association between
specific histone acetylation events and the HRD phenotype. In addition, the enhanced view
of pathway activity provided by measurements of protein phosphorylation provides a
foundation for linking genotype to proteotype, and ultimately to phenotype for
understanding the molecular basis of cancer.

Author Manuscript

EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Full methods are available in Extended Experimental Procedures.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 28.

Zhang et al.

Page 13

Tumor Samples

Author Manuscript

All tumor samples for the current study were obtained through the TCGA Biospecimen Core
Resource as described previously (Zhang et al., 2014). Samples were selected based on
overall survival, HRD status and availability.
Quantitative Proteomics

Author Manuscript

Tissue proteins were extracted and digested with trypsin; at each site, a portion of each
resulting sample was also used to create a pooled reference in which each tumor sample
contributed an equal percentage by peptide mass. The pooled reference sample was included
in each multiplexed, isobaric labeling experiment to enable cross-experiment comparison in
the entire sample cohort. The patient samples and the pooled reference sample were each
labeled by different iTRAQ reagents (Sciex), combined, fractionated, and split for
integrated, quantitative global proteome (10%) and phosphoproteome (90%) analysis using
LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Raw data were
processed for peptide identification by database searching and identified peptides were
assembled as proteins and mapped to gene identifiers for proteogenomic comparisons.
Quantitation was achieved by comparing the iTRAQ reporter ion intensities in each sample.
Comparison of mRNA and Protein Subtypes

Author Manuscript

A model-based clustering approach was used to model the protein abundance data as a
mixture of subtypes. Bayesian information criteria, statistical resampling and VISDA-based
sub-phenotype clustering approaches provided similar results with a stable optimization on
five clusters as determined by consensus clustering. WGCNA analysis was performed to
infer genes or gene networks that drive subtyping into 5 clusters, followed by correlation
with subtype as a trait.
Integration of Proteomics and CNA data

Author Manuscript

Spearman correlation coefficients and corresponding adjusted p values were calculated for
each protein/transcript by CNA locus, and gene set enrichment analysis was used to infer
function for groups of proteins significantly correlated with a given CNA locus. Regression
analysis was applied to the list of trans-affected protein correlated with each CNA to
generate parsimonious Cox proportional hazards models with maximal predictive ability,
using the PNNL data for training and JHU data for testing. Kaplan-Meier plots were used to
visualize performance in predicting overall survival and progression-free survival. A CIN
index (TCGA Research Network, 2012) was calculated for each sample as the mean
absolute values of copy number measurements at the 29,393 selected loci. Bootstrap
resampling was used to select proteins correlated with CIN index at high confidence.
Protein Acetylation and HRD
Acetylated peptides were identified by searching the global proteomics data for dynamic
acetylation to lysines (+42 Da). Acetylation levels were compared between HRD and nonHRD cases by t-test. Targeted proteomics (SWATH; Collins et al., 2013) was used to
orthogonally quantify the acetylated peptide with synthetic peptides as internal standard.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 28.

Zhang et al.

Page 14

Survival-related Pathways Analysis

Author Manuscript

Phosphoproteome data from the short and long survivors were mapped to signaling
pathways in the NCI pathway information database,(PID (http://pid.nci.nih.gov) using the
gene names. For each signaling pathway in the PID, relative abundances for all
phosphopeptides mapping to any pathway component were identified and separated into
short and long survivor groups. The difference in distributions between the two sets of
pathway-specific peptides, i.e., those associated with either short survivors or long long
survivors, was then assessed using a two-tailed t test. Similar enrichment analyses were also
performed using protein abundance, mRNA abundance, and CNA.
Data Repository

Author Manuscript

All of the primary mass spectrometry data on TCGA tumor samples are deposited at the
CPTAC Data Coordinating Center as raw and mzML files and complete protein assembly
data sets for public access (https://cptac-data-portal.georgetown.edu).

Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.

Acknowledgements

Author Manuscript

This work was supported by National Cancer Institute (NCI) CPTAC awards U24CA160019 and U24CA160036,
and by National Institutes of Health grant P41GM103493. The PNNL proteomics work described herein was
performed in the Environmental Molecular Sciences Laboratory, a U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) national
scientific user facility located at PNNL in Richland, Washington. PNNL is a multi-program national laboratory
operated by Battelle Memorial Institute for the DOE under Contract DE-AC05-76RL01830. Genomics data for this
study were generated by TCGA pilot project established by the NCI and the National Human Genome Research
Institute.

REFERENCES

Author Manuscript

Barrès V, Ouellet V, Lafontaine J, Tonin PN, Provencher DM, Mes-Masson AM. An essential role for
Ran GTPase in epithelial ovarian cancer cell survival. Mol. Cancer. 2010; 9:272. [PubMed:
20942967]
Cai RL, Yan-Neale Y, Cueto MA, Xu H, Cohen D. HDAC1, a histone deacetylase, forms a complex
with Hus1 and Rad9, two G2/M checkpoint Rad proteins. J. Biol. Chem. 2000; 275:27909–27916.
[PubMed: 10846170]
Collins BC, Gillet LC, Rosenberger G, Rost HL, Vichalkovski A, Gstaiger M, Aebersold R.
Quantifying protein interaction dynamics by SWATH mass spectrometry: application to the 14-3-3
system. Nat. Methods. 2013; 10:1246–1253. [PubMed: 24162925]
Cope L, Wu RC, Shih Ie M, Wang TL. High level of chromosomal aberration in ovarian cancer
genome correlates with poor clinical outcome. Gynecol. Oncol. 2013; 128:500–505. [PubMed:
23200914]
Creighton CJ, Hernandez-Herrera A, Jacobsen A, Levine DA, Mankoo P, Schultz N, Du Y, Zhang Y,
Larsson E, Sheridan R, et al. Integrated analyses of microRNAs demonstrate their widespread
influence on gene expression in high-grade serous ovarian carcinoma. PLoS One. 2012; 7:e34546.
[PubMed: 22479643]
Dizon DS, Damstrup L, Finkler NJ, Lassen U, Celano P, Glasspool R, Crowley E, Lichenstein HS,
Knoblach P, Penson RT. Phase II activity of belinostat (PXD-101), carboplatin, and paclitaxel in
women with previously treated ovarian cancer. Int. J. Gynecol. Cancer. 2012; 22:979–986.
[PubMed: 22694911]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 28.

Zhang et al.

Page 15

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Farmer H, McCabe N, Lord CJ, Tutt AN, Johnson DA, Richardson TB, Santarosa M, Dillon KJ,
Hickson I, Knights C, et al. Targeting the DNA repair defect in BRCA mutant cells as a therapeutic
strategy. Nature. 2005; 434:917–921. [PubMed: 15829967]
Fanjul-Fernández M, Quesada V, Cabanillas R, Cadiñanos J, Fontanil T, Obaya A, Ramsay AJ,
Llorente JL, Astudillo A, Cal S, et al. Cell-cell adhesion genes CTNNA2 and CTNNA3 are tumour
suppressors frequently mutated in laryngeal carcinomas. Nat. Commun. 2013; 4:2531. [PubMed:
24100690]
Gadducci A, Lanfredini N, Sergiampietri C. Antiangiogenic agents in gynecological cancer: State of
art and perspectives of clinical research. Crit. Rev. Oncol. Hematol. 2015; 96:113–28. [PubMed:
26126494]
Gong F, Miller KM. Mammalian DNA repair: HATs and HDACs make their mark through histone
acetylation. Mutat. Res. 2013; 750:23–30. [PubMed: 23927873]
Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. Hallmarks of cancer: the next generation. Cell. 2011; 144:646–674.
[PubMed: 21376230]
Jovanovic M, Rooney MS, Mertins P, Przybylski D, Chevrier N, Satija R, Rodriguez EH, Fields AP,
Schwartz S, Raychowdhury R, et al. Immunogenetics. Dynamic profiling of the protein life cycle
in response to pathogens. Science. 2015; 347:1259038. [PubMed: 25745177]
Kislinger T, Cox B, Kannan A, Chung C, Hu P, Ignatchenko A, Scott MS, Gramolini AO, Morris Q,
Hallett MT, et al. Global survey of organ and organelle protein expression in mouse: combined
proteomic and transcriptomic profiling. Cell. 2006; 125:173–186. [PubMed: 16615898]
Kobel M, Huntsman D, Gilks CB. Critical molecular abnormalities in high-grade serous carcinoma of
the ovary. Expert Rev. Mol. Med. 2008; 10:e22. [PubMed: 18671886]
Komili S, Silver PA. Coupling and coordination in gene expression processes: a systems biology view.
Nat. Rev. Genet. 2008; 9:38–48. [PubMed: 18071322]
Kuo KT, Guan B, Feng Y, Mao TL, Chen X, Jinawath N, Wang Y, Kurman RJ, Shih Ie M, Wang TL.
Analysis of DNA copy number alterations in ovarian serous tumors identifies new molecular
genetic changes in low-grade and high-grade carcinomas. Cancer Res. 2009; 69:4036–4042.
[PubMed: 19383911]
Langfelder P, Horvath S. WGCNA: an R package for weighted correlation network analysis. BMC
Bioinformatics. 2008; 9:559. [PubMed: 19114008]
Liu J, Matulonis UA. New strategies in ovarian cancer: translating the molecular complexity of ovarian
cancer into treatment advances. Clin. Cancer Res. 2014; 20:5150–5156. [PubMed: 25320365]
Lu P, Vogel C, Wang R, Yao X, Marcotte EM. Absolute protein expression profiling estimates the
relative contributions of transcriptional and translational regulation. Nat. Biotechnol. 2007;
25:117–124. [PubMed: 17187058]
Mackay HJ, Hirte H, Colgan T, Covens A, MacAlpine K, Grenci P, Wang L, Mason J, Pham PA, Tsao
MS, et al. Phase II trial of the histone deacetylase inhibitor belinostat in women with platinum
resistant epithelial ovarian cancer and micropapillary (LMP) ovarian tumours. Eur. J Cancer. 2010;
46:1573–1579. [PubMed: 20304628]
Marguerat S, Schmidt A, Codlin S, Chen W, Aebersold R, Bahler J. Quantitative analysis of fission
yeast transcriptomes and proteomes in proliferating and quiescent cells. Cell. 2012; 151:671–683.
[PubMed: 23101633]
McEllin B, Camacho CV, Mukherjee B, Hahm B, Tomimatsu N, Bachoo RM, Burma S. PTEN loss
compromises homologous recombination repair in astrocytes: implications for glioblastoma
therapy with temozolomide or poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitors. Cancer Res. 2010;
70:5457–5464. [PubMed: 20530668]
Meng H, Tian L, Zhou J, Li Z, Jiao X, Li WW, Plomann M, Xu Z, Lisanti MP, Wang C, Pestell RG.
PACSIN 2 represses cellular migration through direct association with cyclin D1 but not its
alternate splice form cyclin D1b. Cell Cycle. 2011; 10:73–81. [PubMed: 21200149]
Mertins P, Mani DR, Ruggles KV, Gillette MA, Clauser KR, Wang P, Wang X, Qiao JW, Cao S,
Petralia F, et al. Proteogenomics connects somatic mutations to signaling in breast cancer. Nature.
2016 In press.
Mertins P, Yang F, Liu T, Mani DR, Petyuk VA, Gillette MA, Clauser KR, Qiao JW, Gritsenko MA,
Moore RJ, et al. Ischemia in tumors induces early and sustained phosphorylation changes in stress

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 28.

Zhang et al.

Page 16

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

kinase pathways but does not affect global protein levels. Mol. Cell. Proteomics. 2014; 13:1690–
1704. [PubMed: 24719451]
Mielcarek M, Zielonka D, Carnemolla A, Marcinkowski JT, Guidez F. HDAC4 as a potential
therapeutic target in neurodegenerative diseases: a summary of recent achievements. Front. Cell.
Neurosci. 2015; 9:42. [PubMed: 25759639]
Modesitt SC, Sill M, Hoffman JS, Bender DP, Gynecologic Oncology Group. A phase II study of
vorinostat in the treatment of persistent or recurrent epithelial ovarian or primary peritoneal
carcinoma: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study. Gynecol. Oncol. 2008; 109:182–186. [PubMed:
18295319]
Pradeep S, Kim SW, Wu SY, Nishimura M, Chaluvally-Raghavan P, Miyake T, Pecot CV, Kim SJ,
Choi HJ, Bischoff FZ, et al. Hematogenous metastasis of ovarian cancer: rethinking mode of
spread. Cancer Cell. 2014; 26:77–91. [PubMed: 25026212]
Ross PL, Huang YN, Marchese JN, Williamson B, Parker K, Hattan S, Khainovski N, Pillai S, Dey S,
Daniels S, et al. Multiplexed protein quantitation in Saccharomyces cerevisiae using aminereactive isobaric tagging reagents. Mol. Cell. Proteomics. 2004; 3:1154–1169. [PubMed:
15385600]
Ruggles KV, Tang Z, Wang X, Grover H, Askenazi M, Teubl J, Cao S, McLellan MD, Clauser KR,
Tabb DL, et al. An analysis of the sensitivity of proteogenomic mapping of somatic mutations and
novel splicing events in cancer. Mol. Cell. Proteomics. 2015 M115.056226.
Tang J, Cho NW, Cui G, Manion EM, Shanbhag NM, Botuyan MV, Mer G, Greenberg RA.
Acetylation limits 53BP1 association with damaged chromatin to promote homologous
recombination. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 2013; 20:317–325. [PubMed: 23377543]
TCGA Research Network. Integrated genomic analyses of ovarian carcinoma. Nature. 2011; 474:609–
615. [PubMed: 21720365]
TCGA Research Network. Comprehensive genomic characterization of squamous cell lung cancers.
Nature. 2012; 489:519–525. [PubMed: 22960745]
Vang R, Levine DA, Soslow RA, Zaloudek C, Shih Ie.M. Kurman RJ. Molecular Alterations of TP53
are a Defining Feature of Ovarian High-Grade Serous Carcinoma: A Rereview of Cases Lacking
TP53 Mutations in The Cancer Genome Atlas Ovarian Study. Int. J. Gynecol. Pathol. 2016; 35:48–
55. [PubMed: 26166714]
Vogel C, Marcotte EM. Insights into the regulation of protein abundance from proteomic and
transcriptomic analyses. Nat. Rev. Genet. 2012; 13:227–232. [PubMed: 22411467]
Woo S, Cha SW, Na S, Guest C, Liu T, Smith RD, Rodland KD, Payne S, Bafna V. Proteogenomic
strategies for identification of aberrant cancer peptides using large-scale next-generation
sequencing data. Proteomics. 2014a; 14:2719–2730. [PubMed: 25263569]
Woodbine L, Gennery AR, Jeggo PA. The clinical impact of deficiency in DNA non-homologous endjoining. DNA Repair. 2014; 16:84–96. [PubMed: 24629483]
Wu L, Candille SI, Choi Y, Xie D, Jiang L, Li-Pook-Than J, Tang H, Snyder M. Variation and genetic
control of protein abundance in humans. Nature. 2013; 499:79–82. [PubMed: 23676674]
Yang JY, Yoshihara K, Tanaka K, Hatae M, Masuzaki H, Itamochi H, Takano M, Ushijima K, Tanyi
JL, Coukos G, et al. Predicting time to ovarian carcinoma recurrence using protein markers. J.
Clin. Invest. 2013; 123:3740–3750. [PubMed: 23945238]
Yang L, Duff MO, Graveley BR, Carmichael GG, Chen LL. Genomewide characterization of nonpolyadenylated RNAs. Genome Biol. 2011; 12:R16. [PubMed: 21324177]
Yi B, Zhang Y, Zhu D, Zhang L, Song S, He S, Zhang B, Li D, Zhou J. Overexpression of RhoGDI2
correlates with the progression and prognosis of pancreatic carcinoma. Oncol. Rep. 2015;
33:1201–1206. [PubMed: 25573518]
Yu G, Zhang B, Bova GS, Xu J, Shih Ie M, Wang Y. BACOM: in silico detection of genomic deletion
types and correction of normal cell contamination in copy number data. Bioinformatics. 2011;
27:1473–1480. [PubMed: 21498400]
Zhang B, Li H, Riggins RB, Zhan M, Xuan J, Zhang Z, Hoffman EP, Clarke R, Wang Y. Differential
dependency network analysis to identify condition-specific topological changes in biological
networks. Bioinformatics. 2009; 25:526–532. [PubMed: 19112081]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 28.

Zhang et al.

Page 17

Author Manuscript

Zhang B, Wang J, Wang X, Zhu J, Liu Q, Shi Z, Chambers MC, Zimmerman LJ, Shaddox KF, Kim S,
et al. Proteogenomic characterization of human colon and rectal cancer. Nature. 2014; 513:382–
387. [PubMed: 25043054]

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 28.

Zhang et al.

Page 18

Author Manuscript

ARTICLE HIGHLIGHTS
•

Comprehensive proteomic characterization of 174 ovarian tumors
analyzed by TCGA

•

Copy number alterations affect the proteome in trans, converging on
pathways

•

Acetylation of histone H4 correlates with homologous repair deficiency
status

•

Protein and phosphoprotein abundance identifies pathways associated
with survival

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 28.

Zhang et al.

Page 19

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 1. Correlations between mRNA and protein abundance in TCGA tumors

Author Manuscript

mRNA and protein were correlated across all the samples, resulting in 90.6% positive
correlations, and 79.4% were significantly correlated (Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted p value
<0.01), with a mean Spearman’s correlation of 0.38 and a median value of 0.45 (top panel).
Different biological pathways and processes showed significantly different levels of
correlation (bottom panel). Metabolic pathways and the interferon response displayed high
mRNA-protein correlation, and ribosome, mRNA splicing, oxidative phosphorylation, and
complement and coagulation cascade were poorly correlated. The mean correlation is shown
in parentheses followed by Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted p values calculated using a
Kolmogorov–Smirnov test following the functional group names from MSIGDB. Blue bars
indicate positive correlations and yellow indicates negative correlations; individual proteins
(represented as bars on the x-axis) are sorted by correlation from low to high (bottom panel).

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 28.

Zhang et al.

Page 20

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 2. Proteomic subtypes and corresponding driving protein modules

Author Manuscript

Global proteomics abundance is shown in a heatmap with TCGA samples represented by
columns ordered by protein subtype where rows represent proteins. Color of each cell
indicates z-score (log2 of relative abundance scaled by proteins’ standard deviation) of the
protein in that sample; red is increased and blue is decreased (relative to the pooled
reference). Transcriptome-based subtypes (Verhaak et al., 2013) and the proposed proteomic
subtypes are indicated in color above the heatmap. WGCNA-derived modules are delineated
with the row color panel and annotated according to the pathways based on enrichment of
KEGG and Reactome ontologies.

Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 28.

Zhang et al.

Page 21

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 3. Functional impact of copy number alterations

Author Manuscript

The top panel shows the correlation of CNAs to protein abundance (right) or mRNA (left)
with significant positive correlations in red and negative correlations in blue (BenjaminiHochberg adjusted p value <0.01, Spearman’s correlation coefficient). The x-axis plots the
29,393 CNAs obtained from TCGA. The y-axis plots 3,202 proteins. Genes are ordered by
chromosomal location on both the x- and y-axes. The bottom panel shows the summed
number of significantly correlated proteins (or mRNA) for each individual CNA. In blue is
shown the total number, in black are those genes significantly correlated as both mRNA and
protein. Where blue and black lines have similar magnitude, e.g., the hotspot on
chromosome 20, the CNA associations are shared between protein and mRNA. Where a
strong blue line has no mirrored black line, e.g., the protein hotspot on chromosome 2, the
associations with CNA are largely unique.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 28.

Zhang et al.

Page 22

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 4. Kaplan-Meier plot of overall survival stratified by CNA-derived signatures

A survival plot is shown for a consensus of the four best signatures (see Figure S4A and
Table S6) identified from analysis of proteins affected in trans by CNAs. Models were
trained using a lasso-based Cox proportional hazards model on the samples from PNNL, and
shown are the survival curves from these models applied to the non-overlapping data from
the JHU analysis, with the up (red; above the median) and down (blue, below the median)
signatures each representing 45 patients. A vote was taken among the four most predictive
signatures, and the results of this vote are shown. Probability of death is shown on the y-axis
vs. survival time in years on the x-axis. Shaded ribbons denote 95% confidence intervals.

Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 28.

Zhang et al.

Page 23

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 5. Number of CNAs statistically explained by proteins significantly associated with CIN
index

A total of 128 proteins selected for their association with CIN were arranged along the
chromosomal locations of their corresponding genes (y-axis). The length of the light grey
horizontal lines indicates the number of CNAs significantly correlated with the protein
across all chromosomes except for the protein’s corresponding gene coding region (x-axis).
The top-ranked proteins are annotated and highlighted with dark lines to show the bootstrapestimated 95% confidence intervals.

Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 28.

Zhang et al.

Page 24

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 6. DDN analysis and lysine-acetylation analysis between HRD and non-HRD patients

Author Manuscript

DDN analysis revealed a sub-network of proteins that displayed distinct co-expression
patterns between HRD and non-HRD patients, where purple connections indicate protein
correlations that exist only in HRD samples and blue connections indicate protein
correlations that exist only in non-HRD patients. The links between the nodes are drawn
with two different thickness indicative of whether the connections meet the significance
threshold of 0.05 (light lines) or 0.01 (bold lines). Proteins with blue dotted circles are
known to be involved in histone acetylation or deacetylation. Further, identification and
quantitation of lysine-acetylated peptides in global proteomics data showed that acetylation
level at K12 and K16 of histone H4 are significantly different between HRD and non-HRD
samples, suggesting a role of histone H4 acetylation (together with HDAC1) in modulating
the choice of DSB repair mechanisms.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 28.

Zhang et al.

Page 25

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 7. Pathway analysis associated with patient survival

A) Pathway components were statistically analyzed using a two-sided t test between samples
from patients surviving <3 years (short survival) and patients surviving >5 years (long
survival) for differences in CNA, mRNA expression, protein or phosphorylation abundance.
All significant pathways for mRNA and protein are shown (Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted p
value <0.05) and the most significant pathways for phosphoproteomics are plotted on the x
axis as the −log of the p value. Results show that phosphorylation provides additional
information about the functional state of tumors. B) Simplified PDGFR-beta pathway

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 28.

Zhang et al.

Page 26

Author Manuscript

showing differences between short and long survivor groups for protein abundance (p),
transcript abundance (m), and phosphopeptide abundance (circled P).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 28.

