www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2017, Vol. 8, (No. 3), pp: 4760-4772
Research Paper

Rituximab-conjugated, doxorubicin-loaded microbubbles as a
theranostic modality in B-cell lymphoma
Shoubing Zhou1, Xiu Zhang1, Cailian Wang1
1

Department of Oncology, Zhongda Hospital, Medical School of Southeast University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210009, P.R. China

Correspondence to: Cailian Wang, email: wangcailianseu@yahoo.com
Keywords: Rituximab, microbubble, ultrasound, theranostics, B cell lymphoma

D

Received: June 29, 2016     Accepted: November 7, 2016     Published: November 25, 2016

ABSTRACT

TR

AC

TE

This study evaluated rituximab-conjugated, doxorubicin-loaded microbubbles
(RDMs) in combination with ultrasound as molecular imaging agents for early diagnosis
of B cell lymphomas, and as a targeted drug delivery system. Rituximab, a monoclonal
CD20 antibody, was attached to the surfaces of doxorubicin-loaded microbubbles.
RDM binding to B cell lymphoma cells was assessed using immunofluorescence. The
cytotoxic effects of RDMs in combination with ultrasound (RDMs+US) were evaluated
in vitro in CD20+ and CD20– cell lines, and its antitumor activities were assessed
in Raji (CD20+) and Jurkat (CD20–) lymphoma cell-grafted mice. RDMs specifically
bound to CD20+ cells in vitro and in vivo. Contrast enhancement was monitored in
vivo via ultrasound. RDM peak intensities and contrast enhancement durations were
higher in Raji than in Jurkat cell-grafted mice (P<0.05). RDMs+US treatment resulted
in improved antitumor effects and reduced systemic toxicity in Raji cell-grafted
mice compared with other treatments (P<0.05). Our results showed that RDMs+US
enhanced tumor targeting, reduced systemic toxicity, and inhibited CD20+ B cell
lymphoma growth in vivo. Targeted RDMs could be employed as ultrasound molecular
imaging agents for early diagnosis, and are an effective targeted drug delivery system
in combination with ultrasound for CD20+ B cell malignancy treatment.

showed that the tumor neovasculature is distorted, with
an imperfect basement membrane, and no smooth muscle
layer [11]. Permeability was also increased, with wall pores
approximately 380–780 nm in diameter [11]. Therefore,
TMUCA diameters were adjusted to approximately
500 nm for easy passage through vascular endothelial cells
and improved molecular imaging.
Targeted microbubbles are promising tumortargeting drug delivery systems, although their potential
utility as US contrast agents has not yet been studied.
Most chemotherapy drugs currently have no targeting
capabilities, and act on both diseased and non-diseased
sites, leading to low therapeutic indices and severe side
effects. A targeted drug delivery system can increase
chemotherapy drug accumulation specifically at target
sites, while reducing non-target impacts. Moreover,
targeted microbubbles are both chemically stable and
biodegradable, and exhibit prolonged circulation in
the blood, with localized drug release. Tumor-specific
ligand-like peptides [12, 13], galactose-conjugated
chitosan [14], transferrin [15], folic acid [16–19], and

INTRODUCTION

RE

Early diagnosis is pivotal for therapeutic success in
many types of cancers. Ultrasound (US) molecular imaging
is a novel diagnostic approach for early detection of nonhodgkin lymphoma. Recent studies suggest that targeted
microbubbles as US contrast agents (TMUCA) may serve as
probes for US molecular imaging. TMUCA would improve
diagnostic specificity and allow for disease monitoring in
real time. TMUCAs can accumulate and remain at the tumor
site for long time periods, and imaging at the molecular level
can be acquired using US after TMUCA venous injection
[1–3]. US molecular imaging also produces quantitative data,
exhibits good temporal resolution, is noninvasive, produces
no ionizing radiation, and is relatively inexpensive [4]. Over
the past decade, various types of TMUCA have been applied
for cell-specific targeting with US molecular imaging in vivo
[5–10], specifically to assess intravascular inflammation,
intravascular thrombosis and tumor blood vessels. For early
tumor diagnosis, TMUCAs were conjugated with antibodies
specific for tumor cell surface antigens. Previous studies

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4760

Oncotarget

RDM characterization

D

Drug loading and release

RDMs as a targeted drug delivery system were
evaluated via the encapsulation efficiency of DOX. DOX
encapsulation efficiency in RDMs was 51.2±2.05%. The
release profiles of DOX from RDMs and DMs as triggered
by US were also examined. The release profile was
described as the percentage of cumulative released DOX
as a function of time (Figure 3C). Total DOX released
was the same for DMs + US and RDMs + US. The results
indicated that DOX was about 50% unloaded after 5 h

AC

RESULTS

which was then delivered into lymphoma B cells. RDM
morphologies and size distributions were observed via
scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (Figure 2A) and
transmission electron microscopy (TEM) (Figure 2B),
respectively. Mean RDM diameter was 411±125.1 nm
(Figure 2C). Fluorescence imaging of RDMs revealed
dense green (DyLight488-labeled avidin) and red (DOX)
fluorescence with morphologies consistent with those
observed via confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM)
(Figure 3A). Targeting moiety quantities on RDM surfaces
were evaluated by detecting RDM suspension fluorescence
intensity after conjugation. RDM fluorescence intensity
was 72.15% that of the DyLight488-labeled avidin
samples (Figure 3B). Due to the high affinity of avidin
to biotin, we presumed the same high level of adhesion
of biotinylated rituximab to the avidin-conjugated DMs.

TE

monoclonal antibodies [20–22] have been employed
to target microbubbles to tumor cells for the treatment
of many cancers. Additionally, the combination of
targeted drug-loaded microbubbles with US irradiation
permeabilizes cell membranes, enhancing drug uptake
by tumor cells, and selectively killing tumor cells
without harming normal cells. Therefore, targeted
drug-loaded microbubbles have potential use in both
targeted drug delivery systems and in combination with
US molecular imaging.
We hypothesized that Rituximab-conjugated,
doxorubicin (DOX)-loaded microbubbles (RDMs) could
serve as effective, biocompatible B cell lymphomatargeting theranostic agents. The present work evaluated
the specific binding potential of RDMs targeting CD20
antigen, a tetraspan membrane receptor overexpressed
in B cell malignancies, in lymphoma Raji cells. We also
assessed the cytotoxicity and antitumor activity of these
RDMs in combination with US irradiation in vitro and
in vivo. Finally, targeted US molecular imaging was
explored in Raji and Jurkat cell-grafted mice.

RE

TR

In this study, RDMs targeted the lymphoma B cell
CD20 antigen (Figure 1). US triggered DOX release,

Figure 1: Illustration of RDM structure, and depiction of antigen-specific, tumor cell targeting drug delivery. After
RDM attachment to CD 20 antigens on Raji cells, US irradiation triggers DOX release and delivery into cells. DOX, doxorubicin; RDMs,
rituximab-conjugated, DOX-loaded microbubbles.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4761

Oncotarget

D
TE

RE

TR

AC

Figure 2: Microbubble characterization. SEM A. and TEM B. images of RDMs. RDM size distributions as determined by DLS C.

Figure 3: Microbubble fluorescence and drug release characterization. RDM imaging was performed using CLSM as follows:
bright field Aa., dylight488-avidin on RDMs (green fluorescence) Ab., encapsulated DOX in RDMs (red fluorescence) Ac. (scale bar =
25μm). Fluorescence absorbance of RDMs B. DMs and free avidin were examined to assess rituximab conjugation efficiency. In vitro UStriggered DOX release from DMs and RDMs C.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4762

Oncotarget

with sonication and about 90% unloaded after 72 h with
sonication. This implied that US could promote DOX
release from RDMs and DMs through cavitation.

and CEM cell proliferation inhibition was assessed
after treatment for 24, 48 and 72 h. Raji and Daudi cell
proliferation inhibition was limited, and was the same for
DOX, DOX + Rituximab, DMs + US, and RDMs + US
+ Rituximab. In contrast, RDM + US inhibited Raji cell
proliferation after 24 (35.42±2.16%), 48 (52.32±3.42%),
and 72 h (82.74±2.97%) (Figure 5A). RDM + US in Daudi
cells also reduced proliferation at 24 (32.84±3.31%), 48
(48.79±2.71%), and 72 h (74.85±3.52%) (Figure 5C).
Compared with other treatments, RDM + US effectively
inhibited Raji and Daudi cell proliferation (P<0.05).
However, in Jurkat and CEM cells, all treatments
exhibited similar cytotoxicity (Figure 5B & 5D). RDM
+ US inhibited proliferation in Raji and Daudi cells
more than in Jurkat and CEM cells (P<0.05). We also
observed time-dependent cytotoxic effects in all groups.
These results demonstrated that US-mediated RDM
destruction efficiently inhibited CD20+ lymphoma B cell
proliferation.

Cytotoxicity in vitro

Cell apoptosis in vitro

Raji, Daudi, Jurkat, and CEM cell apoptosis rates
were detected quantitatively by flow cytometry 24, 48 and
72 h after various treatments. Raji and Daudi cell apoptosis
rates were comparable following DOX, DOX+ rituximab,
DMs + US, and RDMs + US + rituximab treatment,

RE

TR

AC

The therapeutic efficacies of DOX, DOX +
rituximab, DMs + US, RDMs + US, and RDMs + US
+ rituximab were explored in vitro. Raji, Daudi, Jurkat,

TE

To estimate the targeted binding capability of
RDMs, the affinity of RDMs to CD20 antigen on
Raji cells was determined in vitro. RDM attachment
to CD20 antigen was greater than that of DMs. CLSM
imaging showed large amounts of RDMs (green and
red fluorescence) aggregated on Raji cell membranes,
demonstrating that rituximab enhanced RDM targeted
binding to CD20 antigen. Few DyLight488-labeled avidinconjugated biotinylated DMs were observed on Raji
cell membranes. Competition experiments revealed that
RDM targeted binding of Raji cells was reduced as CD20
antigen was blocked following rituximab pre-incubation,
as indicated by absence of red and green fluorescent
microbubbles. Few RDMs were observed on CD20– CEM
cell membranes (Figure 4).

D

Targeted properties of RDMs

Figure 4: In vitro RDM targeting to Raji cells. CLSM imaging of Raji cells after treatment with targeted RDMs and non-targeted
DMs. To visualize microbubble location (green and red fluorescence), Raji cell nuclei were stained with DAPI (blue fluorescence), (scale
bar = 10μm). Raji cells targeted by RDMs A. Raji cells incubated with DMs B. Raji cells blocked with excess rituximab (1 mg/mL) for 2
h before RDM treatment C. CEM cells incubated with RDMs as a control D.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4763

Oncotarget

In vivo imaging

although apoptosis was increased in all groups compared
to controls. Importantly, RDMs + US induced higher
apoptosis rates than other treatments (Figure 6A & 6C,
P<0.05). Jurkat and CEM cell apoptosis rates were similar
for DOX, DOX + rituximab, DMs + US, and RDMs + US
+ rituximab, but higher compared to controls (Figure 6B
& 6D). Additionally, RDM + US induced higher apoptosis
rates in Raji and Daudi cells as compared to Jurkat and
CEM cells (P<0.05). Time-dependent apoptosis rates
was detected in all groups (Figure 6). Apoptosis rate
measurements were consistent with proliferation inhibition
results.

D

Arrival time, time to peak, peak intensity, and
duration of contrast enhancement were compared via
US imaging between non-targeted DMs and targeted
RDMs in Raji and Jurkat cell-grafted mice. In Raji cellgrafted mice, there was no difference between DMs
and RDMs for arrival time or time to peak, but peak
intensity and duration of contrast enhancement were
higher for RDMs (P<0.05). In Jurkat cell-grafted mice,
there was no difference between DMs and RDMs in any
US measurement (Table 1). Additionally, arrival times
and times to peak for targeted RDMs were the same in
Raji and Jurkat cell-grafted mice. However, RDM peak
intensities and the durations of contrast enhancement were
higher in Raji as compared to Jurkat cell-grafted mice
(Figure 8, *P<0.05). Targeted RDM (Figure 9C & 9F) and
non-targeted DM (Figure 9B & 9E) peak intensity images
are shown for Raji and Jurkat cell-grafted mice.

In vivo antitumor activity

This study used a lymphoma nude mouse model
to investigate the antitumor effects of RDMs + US
in vivo. RDMs + US exhibited the strongest tumor
inhibition effect in Raji-cell grafted mice. DMs + US,
and RDMs + US + rituximab-treated mice exhibited
similarly-reduced Raji cell tumor growth rates
compared to controls, and inhibited tumor growth
more than treatment with DOX and DOX + rituximab

RE

TR

AC

Because DOX auto-fluoresces, we detected whether
48 h RDMs + US treatment improved Raji, Daudi, Jurkat,
and CEM cell DOX uptake using flow cytometry. DOX
intracellular RFI for Raji and Daudi cells was similar
following DOX, DOX + rituximab, DMs + US, and RDM
+ US + rituximab treatment. However, DOX intracellular
RFI following RDM + US was higher compared to
all other treatments (Figure 7A & 7C, P<0.01). DOX
intracellular RFI was also similar following all treatments
in Jurkat and CEM cells (Figure 7B & 7D). Additionally,
DOX intracellular RFI following RDM + US treatment
was higher in Raji and Daudi cells as compared to Jurkat
and CEM cells (P<0.01). These results suggest that RDM
+ US treatment increased DOX transfer into lymphoma B
cells more than other treatment groups.

TE

Cellular uptake of DOX

Figure 5: Raji, Daudi, Jurkat and CEM cell growth inhibition. Cell proliferation inhibition was measured 24, 48, and 72 h after
treatment with DOX, DOX + rituximab, DMs + US, RDMs + US, and RDMs + US + rituximab via CCK8 assay. Data are represented as
means ± SD (n=3). *P<0.05 compared with RDM + US.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4764

Oncotarget

with DOX and DOX + rituximab. Jurkat cell-grafted
mouse treatment with DMs + US, RDMs + US and
RDMs + US + rituximab resulted in comparable growth
inhibition rates (Figure 10C).

AC

TE

D

(Figure 10A). DOX and DOX + rituximab only slightly
inhibited tumor growth in vivo. Similarly, DMs + US,
RDMs + US, and RDMs + US + rituximab treatment
reduced grafted Jurkat cell tumor growth as compared

Figure 6: Raji, Daudi, Jurkat and CEM cell apoptosis. Cell apoptosis was measured 24, 48, and 72 h after treatment with DOX,

RE

TR

DOX + rituximab, DMs + US, RDMs + US, and RDMs + US + rituximab by flow cytometry. Data are represented as means ± SD (n=3).
*P<0.05 compared with RDM + US.

Figure 7: DOX relative fluorescence intensity (RFI) in Raji, Daudi, Jurkat and CEM cells. Cell RFIs were analyzed
48 h after treatment with DOX, DOX + rituximab, DMs + US, RDMs + US, and RDMs + US + rituximab by flow cytometry. Data are
represented as means ± SD (n=3). **P<0.01 compared with RDM + US.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4765

Oncotarget

Table 1: Four parameters (means ± SD) for DMs and RDMs in Raji and Jurkat cell-grafted mice.
Indicators

Arrival time (sec)

Time to peak (sec)

Peak intensity (sec)

Duration of contras
enhancement (min)

DMs

2.71 ± 0.09

17.91 ± 0.62

19.98 ± 0.84*

20.12 ± 0.97*

RDMs

2.75 ± 0.10

17.98 ± 0.56

23.27 ± 1.07

24.27 ± 1.05

DMs

2.79 ± 0.07

18.25 ± 0.97

20.06 ± 1.32

20.62 ± 1.05

RDMs

2.82 ± 0.08

18.31 ± 1.12

20.17 ± 1.60*

20.99 ± 1.57*

Raji cell lymphoma

Paired t-test in each group between DMs and RDMs, *P<0.05.

TE

TUNEL staining was used to evaluate apoptosis
in Raji and Jurkat cell tumors. Sparse apoptosis (green
fluorescence) in Raji and Jurkat lymphoma tissues was
observed in mice treated with DOX and DOX + rituximab.
Raji cell-grafted mouse tissues treated with DMs + US, and
RDMs + US + rituximab showed moderate apoptosis, while
RDMs + US treatment induced the most apoptosis. Jurkat
cell-grafted mouse tissues treated with DMs + US, RDMs
+ US, and RDMs + US + rituximab showed moderate cell

RE

TR

AC

To assess the potential systemic toxicity of RDMs
+ US in vivo, nude mouse body weights were periodically
examined. Raji and Jurkat cell-grafted mice treated with
DOX and DOX + rituximab exhibited slow, continuous
weight loss beginning on day 8. In contrast both Raji and
Jurkat cell-grafted mouse weights increased gradually
with saline, DMs + US, RDMs + US, and RDMs + US +
rituximab treatments (Figure 10B & 10D). This suggests that
DOX treatment caused severe systemic toxicity in nude mice.

D

Jurkat cell lymphoma

Figure 8: RDM arrival time, time to peak, peak intensity, and duration of contrast enhancement in Raji and Jurkat
cell-grafted mice. RDM arrival times and times to peak were the same in Raji and Jurkat cell-grafted mice. RDM peak intensities and

contrast enhancement durations were greater in Raji cell-grafted mice than in Jurkat cell-grafted mice. Data are represented as means ± SD
(n=3). *P<0.05, #P>0.05.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4766

Oncotarget

DISCUSSION

apoptosis. We observed that RDMs + US induced greater
apoptosis levels in Raji as compared to Jurkat cell-grafted
mice (Figure 11). These results confirmed that RDMs + US
could inhibit lymphoma cell growth by inducing apoptosis.

D

Microbubble-based targeted drug delivery has
been widely investigated as an anti-tumor therapy in

TE

Figure 9: Contrast-enhanced images of targeted RDMs and non-targeted DMs at time to peak in Raji and Jurkat
cell-grafted mice. Images of lymphoma before injection A. & D, non-targeted DMs B. & E. and targeted RDMs C. & F. at time to peak

TR

AC

were acquired in Raji and Jurkat cell-grafted mice. RDM peak intensities and contrast enhancement durations were higher than those of
non-targeted DMs in Raji cell-grafted mice, and were higher in Raji as compared to Jurkat cell-grafted mice.

RE

Figure 10: Anti-tumor treatment effects in Raji and Jurkat cell-grafted mice. Average tumor volumes A. and body weights B.
of Raji cell-grafted mice after treatment with different formulations. Average tumor volumes C. and body weights D. of Jurkat cell-grafted
mice after treatment. Data are represented as means ± SD (n=3). *P<0.05.

Figure 11: TUNEL staining of Raji and Jurkat lymphomas treated with different formulations. Raji and Jurkat cell-grafted
mice were treated with saline, DOX, DOX + rituximab, DMs + US, RDMs + US, and RDMs + US + rituximab for 21 days. Green: apoptotic
cell DNA; Blue: cell nuclei. Scale bar: 10μm.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4767

Oncotarget

TE

D

in further investigations of targeted RDMs in CD20+ B
cell malignancies.
In this study, DOX and DOX + rituximab only
slightly inhibited lymphoma cell growth in vivo. This
was attributed to the rapid diffusion of DOX into all
mouse tissues following intravenous injection, leading to
potential toxic side effects, and smaller amounts of DOX
at tumor sites. The DOX molecule also has a short half-life
in vivo, and may be metabolized in the circulation before
reaching the tumor [31]. The lower systemic toxicity and
enhanced anti-tumor activity of RDMs + US observed via
TUNEL staining may result from the following factors:
(1) encapsulation effectively protected DOX from quick
clearance in the circulation; (2) RDMs passively and
actively aggregated at the tumor site; (3) rituximabCD20 binding contributed to RDM-Raji cell attachment,
facilitating interaction between drug-loaded microbubbles
and cells, and improving local drug delivery efficiency
[32]; (4) sonoporation may have enhanced drug uptake
by tumor cells via cell membrane pore formation [33],
and; (5) rituximab as a targeted drug induced antibodydependent, cell-mediated cytotoxicity, reducing systemic
side effects. Thus, the synergistic effect of DOX and
rituximab in RDMs effectively inhibited tumor growth.
Our results show that RDMs + US is a promising anti-B
cell lymphoma treatment strategy.
In conclusion, this study indicated that targeted
RDMs specifically bound CD20+ B cell lymphomas. RDMs
combined with US irradiation enhanced tumor targeting,
reduced systemic toxicity, and inhibited B cell lymphoma
cell growth in vivo. Additionally, targeted RDMs increased
peak intensity and contrast enhancement duration compared
to non-targeted DMs in CD20+ B cell lymphoma-grafted
mice. Our findings show that targeted RDMs could
potentially be employed as US molecular imaging agents
for early diagnosis, and are an effective targeted drug
delivery system in combination with US irradiation for the
treatment of CD20+ B cell malignancies.

TR

AC

combination with US irradiation [23, 24]. Most targeted
drug delivery systems exhibit high therapeutic efficacies in
vitro and in vivo. However, few studies have assessed their
potential roles, and the roles of microbubbles, in ultrasonic
molecular imaging for diagnosis.
In the present work, we conjugated rituximab to
DMs (RDMs) to construct TMUCA. We investigated
the potential benefits of TMUCA in both US molecular
imaging and targeted anti-lymphoma treatment. DMs
encapsulated rituximab with 51.2% efficiency, similar to
a previous study [25]. The results of US-mediated drug
release assays implied that US induced DMs to release
DOX in a controlled manner, probably due to cavitation.
RDMs effectively targeted the CD20 antigen on lymphoma
B cells. Very few non-targeting DMs were observed on or
near Raji cells due to the absence of rituximab. Competition
experiments indicated that RDM-Raji cell targeting
was reduced when CD20 was blocked by rituximab pretreatment. These results indicate that rituximab conjugation
greatly improved DM-lymphoma cell targeting.
In Jurkat and CEM cells in vitro, DMs + US, RDMs
+ US, and RDMs + US + rituximab treatment induced
similar levels of cytotoxicity compared to DOX and DOX
+ rituximab. This verified that US-triggered drug release
from the microbubbles was highly efficient. However,
RDMs + US treatment inhibited Raji and Daudi cell
proliferation most effectively, in agreement with cell
apoptosis assay and intracellular DOX RFI results, as
well as the results of a previous report [26]. Additionally,
another group reported that anti-CD20 nanoparticles
carrying hydroxychloroquine and chlorambucil showed
promise for treatment of Burkitt’s lymphoma [27].
US molecular imaging allows for exploration of
pathological processes in vivo at cellular and molecular
levels [28, 29], and will improve cancer diagnosis and
treatment options. B7-H3-targeted US molecular imaging
can reportedly improve breast cancer diagnostic accuracy
[30]. US molecular imaging also provides a tool for
imaging at a molecular level to enhance B cell lymphoma
early diagnosis. In this study, we performed enhancedcontrast imaging experiments with targeted RDMs in a B
cell lymphoma nude mouse model. RDM peak intensities
and durations of contrast enhancement were higher
compared to non-targeted DMs in Raji cell-grafted mice,
while there was no difference between RDMs and DMs
in CD20– Jurkat cell-grafted mice. Antigen-antibody
binding occurred in Raji cell lymphoma tissues after
targeted RDMs passed through vascular endothelial cell
gaps, leading to a considerable number of RDMs adhering
to CD20-overexpressing Raji cells, and generating more
stable and longer-lasting contrast enhancement in vivo
compared to non-targeted DMs. Moreover, targeted
RDMs remain in tissues long term, leading to higher peak
intensities and persistent contrast enhancement in CD20+
Raji cell-grafted mice as compared to CD20–Jurkat
cell-grafted mice. Thus, peak intensity and duration of
contrast enhancement may be useful primary parameters

MATERIALS AND METHODS

RE

Materials

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA; 50% lactide,
50% glycolide, MW=10,000 Da) was purchased from
Shandong Shuyuan Biotechnology Co., Ltd (Shandong,
China). Poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA,87–89%, MW=31,00050,000) was obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (St Louis, MO,
USA). Doxorubicin (DOX) was obtained from Shenzhen
Wanle Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. (Shenzhen, China). EZLinkTM Sulfo-LC-Biotinylation kit was purchased from
Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc. (Rockford, USA). AminePeg2000-Biotin was purchased from Nanjing Ling Di
Ren Chemical Technology Co., Ltd (Nanjing, China).
Avidin and dyLight488-labeled avidin were obtained from
Wuhan Boster Biotechnology Co., Ltd (Wuhan, China).
Rituximab was obtained from Hoffmann-La Roche, Inc
4768

Oncotarget

RDM characterization

(New Jersey, USA). Cell Counting Kit-8, the Annexin
V-FITC cell apoptosis detection kit and the TUNEL
apoptosis detection kit were purchased from Beyotime
Biotechnology Co., Ltd (Shanghai, China). All chemicals
were analytical grade and used without further processing.

We explored RDM morphologies using SEM (Hitachi
S-3400N, Japan) and TEM (Hitachi H-7600, Japan), and
determined RDM mean diameters and size distributions
via dynamic light scattering (DLS) (Nanosizer-S, Malvern,
London, UK). RDMs were alsoobserved using a CLSM
(Olympus, FV1000, JAPAN). Rituximab coupling
efficiency was determined by measuring dyLight488labeled avidin solution and biotinylated DMs suspension
absorbances with a fluorescence spectrophotometer (Jasco,
FP-6500, JAPAN) at a maximum excitation wavelength
of 493 nm and maximum emission wavelength of 518
nm. Rituximab quantities on biotinylated DMs (binding
efficiency (%)) were calculated as the ratio of the intensity
of biotinylated DM to the intensity of the dyLight488labeled avidin samples.

TE

Drug encapsulation efficiency was assessed by
ultraviolet-visible
spectrophotometry
(Eppendorf,
BioSpectrometer, Germany). A DOX solution standard
curve was measured. Then, fresh RDMs were centrifuged
and collected. The RDMs were destroyed using a 5%
hydrochloric acid ethanol solution, and the mixture was
centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 5 min. The optical density
of the supernatant was determined at an excitation
wavelength of 495 nm. Drug encapsulation efficiency was
calculated using the following equation:
Encapsulation efficiency = Wa / Wb × 100%

where Wa represents the total amount of drug in the
RDMs, and Wb represents the total weight of DOX used
in the RDM preparation.

TR

RDM preparation

Assessment of DOX loading

AC

PLGA microbubbles incorporating DOX were
fabricated via a double US emulsion evaporation
procedure. 0.5 g PLGA was fully dissolved in 10 ml of
liquid chloroform via agitation. The PLGA solution was
then combined with a 5 mg DOX solution (dissolved in 1.0
mL superpure water), and the mixture was emulsified via
US for 120 min at 100 w. 1.0 mL span-80 was then added.
The vial was degassed and re-perfused with nitrogen
with stirring at 23,000 rpm for 5 min to obtain primary
emulsified DMs. The primary emulsion was poured into
cold PVA (40 ml, 5%) containing 1.0 ml tween-80, and
stirred at 21,000 rpm for 30 min at room temperature for
the second emulsion. The double emulsion was poured
into isopropyl alcohol (40 ml, 2.5%) and mechanically
agitated for 180 min at room temperature to volatilize
the chloroform. The supernatant was removed after the
solution was centrifuged at 4,800 rpm for 5 min. The
precipitate was centrifuged again at 1,800 rpm for 5 min,
and resuspended in superpure water. The superpure water
wash was repeated several times until the supernatant
become transparent. Precipites were resuspended a final
time in superpure water and stored at 4°C. DMs were
sterilized via cobalt 60 (60Co) irradiation.

D

DM preparation

Covalent bonding of the activated carboxyl groups
on DM surfaces was performed using the 1-ethyl-3-[3dimethylaminopropyl] carbodiimide hydrochloride (EDC)
method in the presence of N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS).
Prepared DMs were resuspended in phosphate-buffered
saline (PBS; pH 4.7), and EDC and NHS in an equimolar
ratio were added into the suspension. The carboxyl
groups were activated for 60 min at room temperature.
The supernatant was removed after centrifugation, and
the precipitate was resuspended in PBS. Amine-Peg2000Biotin in MES buffer was added, and the mixture was
incubated for 120 min at room temperature to obtain
biotinylated DMs. Biotinylated DMs were incubated
with avidin or dylight488-labeled avidin (1mg/mL)
for 10 min at room temperature. The mixture was then
centrifuged three times and resuspended in PBS to remove
surplus dylight488-labeled avidin/avidin. Rituximab was
biotinylated using the EZ-LinkTM Sulfo-LC-Biotinylatio
kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions, and was
added to the avidin-biotin conjugated DMs and incubated
for 10 min. The RDM suspension was rinsed three times
and centrifuged to remove surplus biotinylated rituximab.

Drug release assay

RE

To estimate DOX release, RDM suspensions were
enclosed in dialysis bags (MWCO: 10,000 Da), which were
placed in 50 mL of PBS with shaking at 100 rpm at 37°C.
The suspension was then sonicated with ultrasound (power
density = 1.2 W/cm2, frequency = 1 MHz, duty cycle =
50%) for 60 s. At 0, 2, 4, 8, 10, 20, 30, 48, 60, and 72h, 1 ml
of dialysate was extracted and stored at 4°C for analysis. An
equal volume of PBS was added to the container to insure a
constant volume. The concentration of DOX in the sample
was determined using an ultraviolet spectrophotometer.
DOX release was depicted as a function of time. The DM
suspension was assessed using the same method.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Cell cultures
Human lymphoma B cell lines Raji (CD20+) and
Daudi (CD20+), human lymphoma T cell line Jurkat
(CD20–), and human T-acute lymphoblastic leukemia cell
4769

Oncotarget

line CEM (CD20–), were grown in RPMI-1640 medium
with 10% (v/v) fetal bovine serum (FBS, Gibco, Australian
origin) and 1% penicillin-streptomycin, and incubated in
a humidified atmosphere at 37°C with 5% CO2. For all
experiments, cells growing in suspension were subcultured
by centrifugation at a ratio of 1:4.

resuspended in 500 μl PBS. Cells treated with medium
alone were used as controls. Intracellular DOX retention
(red fluorescence) was examined using flow cytometry.
Relative fluorescence intensity (RFI) was calculated as:
FIexperiment/FIcontrol.

RDM-enhanced contrast ultrasound imaging
in vivo

Cell targeting assay

Cytotoxicity in vitro

D

AC

Raji, Daudi, Jurkat, and CEM cells were seeded in
96-well plates at 1x105 cells/well in 100 μl of RPMI-1640
medium. Microbubble samples were adjusted to contain
equal amounts of DOX. Cells were treated with DOX
(0.5 μg/mL final concentration), DOX + rituximab, DMs
combined with ultrasound (DMs + US), RDMs combined
with ultrasound (RDMs + US) and RDMs + US. Raji cells
were pre-incubated with excessive rituximab for 30 min
(RDMs + US + rituximab). After 24, 48 and 72 h, the Cell
Counting Kit-8 was used to detect viable cells in each
treatment group relative to controls.

Cells were inoculated subcutaneously into the
backs of five nude mice per cell type, with 6×107
Raji cells per mouse and 2×107 Jurkat per mouse.
Imaging was performed using an iU22 ultrasound
system (Phllips, Netherland) with a 12 MHz ultrasound
probe, 0.1 mechanical index and 54% gain. Mice were
anesthetized by injecting 10% hydral and fixed to
entirely expose the tumor under the ultrasound probe.
Non-targeted DMs were injected first for imaging
studies in grafted mice. After the expurgation of nontargeted DMs, the same amount of targeted RDMs
was injected. The process was monitored continuously
by ultrasonography. US contrast data were quantified
with PHILIPS QLab 8.1 software. The arrival time,
time to peak, peak intensity, and duration of contrast
enhancement were determined. The Animal Ethics
Commitment of the Southeast University approved all
animal experiments.

TE

After Raji and CEM cells were anchored in culture
dishes with Poly L lysine solution, 50ul targeted RDMs
and non-targeted DMs were added into the dishes. Shaking
was used to encourage interactions in Raji cell cultures.
After 30 min at room temperature, dishes were washed
twice with PBS and observed via CLSM. Five dishes
were used for each experiment group. Blocking tests were
performed by pre-incubating Raji cells with rituximab
for 30 min followed by washing to removing excessive
rituximab. CD20– CEM cells were employed as a control,
and non-specific uptake of RDMs by CEM cells was
examined using the same methods.

In vivo antitumor activity

DOX fluorescence intensity

Statistical analysis

Treatments were as follows: DOX, DOX +
rituximab, DMs + US, RDMs + US, and RDMs + US +
rituximab at final DOX concentrations of 0.5 μg/ml. Raji,
Daudi, Jurkat, and CEM cells were washed three times
with cold PBS after 48 h treatment, centrifuged, and

All experiments were performed in triplicate.
Data were presented as means ± standard deviation and
analyzed using SPSS 16.0 software (SPSS, Chicago, IL,
USA). Comparisons were performed using Student's t-test.
P<0.05 was considered a significant difference.

TR

Apoptosis (early and late stage) was determined
using an Annexin V/propidium iodide apoptosis kit and
flow cytometry (BD Biosciences, USA) with Cell Quest
software. Raji, Daudi, Jurkat and CEM cells, after various
treatments for 24, 48 and 72 h, were rinsed twice with cold
PBS and resuspended in 195 μl of binding buffer solution.
Cells were stained with 5 μl FITC-labeled Annexin V and
10 μl propidium iodide for 20 min at room temperature in
the dark. Cells treated with medium alone were used as a
control.

Raji and Jurkat cell-grafted mice were established
additionally as described above. When lymphoma volume
reached approximately 100 mm3, Raji and Jurkat cellgrafted mice were randomly divided into 6 groups (five
mice per group), respectively : control group (saline),
DOX, DOX + rituximab, DMs + US, RDMs + US, and
RDMs + US + rituximab. Each mouse was treated with
the appropriate formulation (3 mg/kg) three times per
week. Lymphoma sizes in all mice were examined via
digital caliper, and calculated using the equation: Vtumor
= LW2/2 (L: tumor length, W: tumor width). Lymphoma
volumes and mouse body weights were determined before
every injection. After 21 d of treatment, all mice were
sacrificed. Lymphomas were extracted and fixed with 4%
paraformaldehyde. To detect cell apoptosis in lymphoma
tissues, tissues were sliced into thin sections and stained
with a TUNEL apoptosis detection kit. Samples were then
stained with DAPI to visualize cell nuclei under a CLSM.

RE

Cell apoptosis in vitro

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4770

Oncotarget

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

microbubbles as novel molecular tracer. Journal of
controlled release. 2012; 158:346-353.

We thank professor Zhongze Gu (State Key
Laboratory of Bioelectronics, School of Biological
Science and Medical Engineering, Southeast University)
for providing technical assistance.

9.	 van Rooij T, Daeichin V, Skachkov I, de Jong N and
Kooiman K. Targeted ultrasound contrast agents for
ultrasound molecular imaging and therapy. International
journal of hyperthermia. 2015; 31:90-106.

GRANT SUPPORT

10.	 Baetke SC, Rix A, Tranquart F, Schneider R, Lammers
T, Kiessling F and Lederle W. Squamous Cell Carcinoma
Xenografts: Use of VEGFR2-targeted Microbubbles
for Combined Functional and Molecular US to Monitor
Antiangiogenic Therapy Effects. Radiology. 2016;
278:430-440.

This work was supported by the National Nature
Science Foundation of the People’s Republic of China
(81271699).

11.	 Wang L, Li L, Guo Y, Tong H, Fan X, Ding J and Huang
H. Construction and in vitro/in vivo targeting of PSMAtargeted nanoscale microbubbles in prostate cancer. The
Prostate. 2013; 73:1147-1158.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

12.	 Fan CH, Ting CY, Liu HL, Huang CY, Hsieh HY, Yen TC,
Wei KC and Yeh CK. Antiangiogenic-targeting drug-loaded
microbubbles combined with focused ultrasound for glioma
treatment. Biomaterials. 2013; 34:2142-2155.
13.	 Wang C, Wang X, Zhong T, Zhao Y, Zhang WQ, Ren W,
Huang D, Zhang S, Guo Y, Yao X, Tang YQ, Zhang X and
Zhang Q. The antitumor activity of tumor-homing peptidemodified thermosensitive liposomes containing doxorubicin
on MCF-7/ADR: in vitro and in vivo. International journal
of nanomedicine. 2015; 10:2229-2248.

AC

1.	 Yan F, Xu X, Chen Y, Deng Z, Liu H, Xu J, Zhou J, Tan
G, Wu J and Zheng H. A Lipopeptide-Based alphavbeta(3)
Integrin-Targeted Ultrasound Contrast Agent for Molecular
Imaging of Tumor Angiogenesis. Ultrasound in medicine &
biology. 2015; 41:2765-2773.

TE

REFERENCES

D

The authors disclose no conflicts of interest.

2.	 Zhang H, Tam S, Ingham ES, Mahakian LM, Lai CY,
Tumbale SK, Teesalu T, Hubbard NE, Borowsky AD
and Ferrara KW. Ultrasound molecular imaging of tumor
angiogenesis with a neuropilin-1-targeted microbubble.
Biomaterials. 2015; 56:104-113.

14.	 Villa R, Cerroni B, Vigano L, Margheritelli S, Abolafio G,
Oddo L, Paradossi G and Zaffaroni N. Targeted doxorubicin
delivery by chitosan-galactosylated modified polymer
microbubbles to hepatocarcinoma cells. Colloids and
surfaces B, Biointerfaces. 2013; 110:434-442.

3.	 Anderson CR, Hu X, Zhang H, Tlaxca J, Decleves AE,
Houghtaling R, Sharma K, Lawrence M, Ferrara KW
and Rychak JJ. Ultrasound molecular imaging of tumor
angiogenesis with an integrin targeted microbubble contrast
agent. Investigative radiology. 2011; 46:215-224.

TR

15.	 Wang W, Zhou F, Ge L, Liu X and Kong F. TransferrinPEG-PE modified dexamethasone conjugated cationic lipid
carrier mediated gene delivery system for tumor-targeted
transfection. International journal of nanomedicine. 2012;
7:2513-2522.

4.	 Chen ZY, Wang YX, Lin Y, Zhang JS, Yang F, Zhou QL
and Liao YY. Advance of molecular imaging technology
and targeted imaging agent in imaging and therapy. BioMed
research international. 2014; 2014:819324.

16.	 Xing W, Zhigang W, Bing H, Haitao R, Pan L, Chuanshan
X, Yuanyi Z and Ao L. Targeting an ultrasound contrast
agent to folate receptors on ovarian cancer cells: feasibility
research for ultrasonic molecular imaging of tumor cells.
Journal of ultrasound in medicine. 2010; 29:609-614.

RE

5.	 Ammirati E, Moroni F, Pedrotti P, Scotti I, Magnoni M,
Bozzolo EP, Rimoldi OE and Camici PG. Non-invasive
imaging of vascular inflammation. Frontiers in immunology.
2014; 5:399.

17.	 Butt AM, Mohd Amin MC and Katas H. Synergistic
effect of pH-responsive folate-functionalized poloxamer
407-TPGS-mixed micelles on targeted delivery of
anticancer drugs. International journal of nanomedicine.
2015; 10:1321-1334.

6.	 Yang H, Xiong X, Zhang L, Wu C and Liu Y. Adhesion of
bio-functionalized ultrasound microbubbles to endothelial
cells by targeting to vascular cell adhesion molecule-1
under shear flow. International journal of nanomedicine.
2011; 6:2043-2051.

18.	 Zhang L, Zhu W, Yang C, Guo H, Yu A, Ji J, Gao Y,
Sun M and Zhai G. A novel folate-modified selfmicroemulsifying drug delivery system of curcumin for
colon targeting. International journal of nanomedicine.
2012; 7:151-162.

7.	 Klibanov AL, Rasche PT, Hughes MS, Wojdyla JK, Galen
KP, Wible JH, Jr. and Brandenburger GH. Detection of
individual microbubbles of ultrasound contrast agents:
imaging of free-floating and targeted bubbles. Investigative
radiology. 2004; 39:187-195.

19.	 Shi Y, Su C, Cui W, Li H, Liu L, Feng B, Liu M, Su R
and Zhao L. Gefitinib loaded folate decorated bovine serum
albumin conjugated carboxymethyl-beta-cyclodextrin
nanoparticles enhance drug delivery and attenuate

8.	 Hernot S, Unnikrishnan S, Du Z, Shevchenko T, Cosyns B,
Broisat A, Toczek J, Caveliers V, Muyldermans S, Lahoutte
T, Klibanov AL and Devoogdt N. Nanobody-coupled
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4771

Oncotarget

autophagy in folate receptor-positive cancer cells. Journal
of nanobiotechnology. 2014; 12:43.

paclitaxel by folic acid conjugated amphiphilic PEG-PLGA
copolymer nanoparticles for the treatment of non-small lung
cancer. Oncotarget. 2015; 6:42150-42168. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.6243.

20.	 Koopaei MN, Dinarvand R, Amini M, Rabbani H, Emami
S, Ostad SN and Atyabi F. Docetaxel immunonanocarriers
as targeted delivery systems for HER 2-positive tumor
cells: preparation, characterization, and cytotoxicity studies.
International journal of nanomedicine. 2011; 6:1903-1912.

27.	 Mezzaroba N, Zorzet S, Secco E, Biffi S, Tripodo C,
Calvaruso M, Mendoza-Maldonado R, Capolla S, Granzotto
M, Spretz R, Larsen G, Noriega S, Lucafo M, Mansilla E,
Garrovo C, Marin GH, et al. New potential therapeutic
approach for the treatment of B-Cell malignancies using
chlorambucil/hydroxychloroquine-loaded
anti-CD20
nanoparticles. PloS one. 2013; 8:e74216.

21.	 Zhang X, Zheng Y, Wang Z, Huang S, Chen Y, Jiang W,
Zhang H, Ding M, Li Q, Xiao X, Luo X, Wang Z and
Qi H. Methotrexate-loaded PLGA nanobubbles for
ultrasound imaging and Synergistic Targeted therapy of
residual tumor during HIFU ablation. Biomaterials. 2014;
35:5148-5161.

D

30.	 Bachawal SV, Jensen KC, Wilson KE, Tian L, Lutz AM and
Willmann JK. Breast Cancer Detection by B7-H3-Targeted
Ultrasound Molecular Imaging. Cancer research. 2015;
75:2501-2509.
31.	 Dhar S, Kolishetti N, Lippard SJ and Farokhzad OC.
Targeted delivery of a cisplatin prodrug for safer and more
effective prostate cancer therapy in vivo. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America. 2011; 108:1850-1855.

AC

23.	 Pu C, Chang S, Sun J, Zhu S, Liu H, Zhu Y, Wang Z and Xu
RX. Ultrasound-mediated destruction of LHRHa-targeted
and paclitaxel-loaded lipid microbubbles for the treatment
of intraperitoneal ovarian cancer xenografts. Molecular
pharmaceutics. 2014; 11:49-58.

29.	 Weissleder R and Pittet MJ. Imaging in the era of molecular
oncology. Nature. 2008; 452:580-589.

TE

22.	 Yang H, Zhao F, Li Y, Xu M, Li L, Wu C, Miyoshi H
and Liu Y. VCAM-1-targeted core/shell nanoparticles for
selective adhesion and delivery to endothelial cells with
lipopolysaccharide-induced inflammation under shear
flow and cellular magnetic resonance imaging in vitro.
International journal of nanomedicine. 2013; 8:1897-1906.

28.	 Pan D, Lanza GM, Wickline SA and Caruthers SD.
Nanomedicine: perspective and promises with liganddirected molecular imaging. European journal of radiology.
2009; 70:274-285.

24.	 Liu H, Chang S, Sun J, Zhu S, Pu C, Zhu Y, Wang Z and
Xu RX. Ultrasound-mediated destruction of LHRHatargeted and paclitaxel-loaded lipid microbubbles induces
proliferation inhibition and apoptosis in ovarian cancer
cells. Molecular pharmaceutics. 2014; 11:40-48.

32.	 Yan F, Li X, Jin Q, Jiang C, Zhang Z, Ling T, Qiu B and
Zheng H. Therapeutic ultrasonic microbubbles carrying
paclitaxel and LyP-1 peptide: preparation, characterization
and application to ultrasound-assisted chemotherapy in
breast cancer cells. Ultrasound in medicine & biology.
2011; 37:768-779.

TR

25.	 Niu C, Wang Z, Lu G, Krupka TM, Sun Y, You Y,
Song W, Ran H, Li P and Zheng Y. Doxorubicin loaded
superparamagnetic PLGA-iron oxide multifunctional
microbubbles for dual-mode US/MR imaging and
therapy of metastasis in lymph nodes. Biomaterials. 2013;
34:2307-2317.

33.	 De Cock I, Zagato E, Braeckmans K, Luan Y, de Jong N,
De Smedt SC and Lentacker I. Ultrasound and microbubble
mediated drug delivery: acoustic pressure as determinant
for uptake via membrane pores or endocytosis. Journal of
controlled release. 2015; 197:20-28.

RE

26.	 He Z, Huang J, Xu Y, Zhang X, Teng Y, Huang C, Wu Y,
Zhang X, Zhang H and Sun W. Co-delivery of cisplatin and

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4772

Oncotarget

