Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 37

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

Dichloroacetate potentiates tamoxifen-induced cell death in
breast cancer cells via downregulation of the epidermal growth
factor receptor

Sang Hyeok Woo1,*, Sung-Keum Seo1,*, Yoonhwa Park1,2, Eun-Kyu Kim3, Min-Ki
Seong4, Hyun-Ah Kim4, Jie-Young Song1, Sang-Gu Hwang1, Jin Kyung Lee5, Woo
Chul Noh4, In-Chul Park1
1

Division of Radiation Cancer Research, Korea Institute of Radiological and Medical Sciences, Nowon-gu, Seoul, 01812,
Republic of Korea

2

School of Life Science and Biotechnology, Korea University, Seongbuk-gu, Seoul, 02841, Republic of Korea

3

Department of Surgery, Breast Cancer Center, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, Seoul National University College
of Medicine, Bundang-gu, Seongnam, 13620, Republic of Korea

4

Department of Surgery, Korea Cancer Center Hospital, Korea Institute of Radiological and Medical Sciences, Nowon-gu,
Seoul, 01812, Republic of Korea

5

KIRAMS Radiation Biobank, Korea Institute of Radiological and Medical Sciences, Nowon-gu, Seoul, 01812, Republic of
Korea

*

These authors contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: In-Chul Park, email: parkic@kcch.re.kr
Keywords: tamoxifen, breast cancer, dichloroacetate, epidermal growth factor receptor, pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase
Received: May 18, 2016     Accepted: July 22, 2016     Published: August 01, 2016

Abstract
Metabolic reprogramming in cancer cells has recently been recognized as an
essential hallmark of neoplasia. In this context, metabolic alterations represent an
attractive therapeutic target, and encouraging results with drugs targeting various
metabolic processes have been obtained in preclinical studies. Recently, several studies
have suggested that dichloroacetate (DCA), a specific pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase
inhibitor, may be a potential anticancer drug in a large number of diverse tumors.
However, the precise mechanism is not fully understood, which is important for the
use of DCA in cancer treatment. In the present study, we found that DCA sensitized
MCF7 breast cancer cells to tamoxifen-induced cell death by decreasing epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) expression. The downregulation of EGFR was caused
by degradation of the protein. Furthermore, p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase
played an important role in DCA/tamoxifen-induced EGFR degradation. Finally, DCA
also promoted comparable tamoxifen-induced cell death in tamoxifen-resistant MCF7
cells, which were established by long-term treatment with tamoxifen. In summary,
our results suggest that DCA is an attractive potential drug that sensitizes cells to
tamoxifen-induced cell death and overcome tamoxifen resistance via downregulation
of EGFR expression in breast cancer cells.

Introduction

most cancer cells is a shift to aerobic glycolysis, regardless
of oxygen supply, which is termed the “Warburg effect”, in
which pyruvate is directly converted to lactic acid instead
of entering the citric acid cycle [1]. As all cancer cells are
dependent on this change in metabolism, these altered
pathways represent attractive therapeutic targets [2]. Efforts
have been made to target reprogrammed metabolism
alone or in combination with cancer chemotherapy
both in preclinical and clinical studies [3]. Interestingly,

Proliferating cancer cells have considerably
different metabolic requirements compared to most
normal differentiated cells. For example, to support rapid
cell growth and proliferation, cancer cells differentially
alter metabolic flux compared to the surrounding tissue
to provide sufficient bioenergetics and biosynthetic
intermediates. A well-known phenomenon observed in
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

59809

Oncotarget

this cancer-specific metabolic remodeling is reversed
by dichloroacetate (DCA), a mitochondria-targeting
small molecule that can penetrate most tissues after
oral administration [4]. It specifically inhibits pyruvate
dehydrogenase kinase (PDK), a member of the kinase
family, leading to reactivation of pyruvate dehydrogenase
(PDH), a key enzyme that shifts the flux of pyruvate into
the mitochondria to promote glucose oxidation instead of
glycolysis [4]. Although DCA has recently been evaluated
in several preclinical cancer trials [5], the responses of
cancer cells to DCA treatment, which determine whether
DCA will provide clinical benefit in cancer treatment, have
not been fully elucidated.
More than 70% of breast cancers express the
estrogen receptor (ER) and depend on estrogen to drive
tumor growth and progression [6]. Thus, endocrine
therapy should be considered complementary to surgery
in the majority of patients, as it induces tumor remission
and provides consistent clinical benefits. The anti-estrogen
drug tamoxifen is the most commonly used treatment for
patients with ER-positive breast cancer in both the early
and the advanced/metastatic stages [7]. As an adjuvant
therapy in early breast cancer, tamoxifen improves overall
survival, and its widespread use is believed to have
significantly contributed to the reduction in breast cancer
mortality observed over the last decade [8]. Despite the
obvious benefits of tamoxifen treatment in breast cancer,
almost all patients with metastatic disease and as many as
25% of patients receiving adjuvant tamoxifen eventually
relapse and die due to the disease [9, 10]. The biological
mechanisms underlying intrinsic (de novo) and acquired
resistance to tamoxifen are therefore of considerable
clinical importance. A better understanding of these
mechanisms may suggest new strategies to overcome
tamoxifen resistance and improve the treatment of breast
cancer.
In the present study, we demonstrated that the
expression of EGFR in breast cancer cells was decreased
by treatment with DCA. A combination of DCA and
tamoxifen further lowered the EGFR levels. We showed
that DCA enhanced the cytotoxicity of tamoxifen to breast
cancer cells by inhibiting EGFR expression. In addition,
DCA sensitized the tamoxifen-resistant MCF7 cells
to tamoxifen via EFGR downregulation. These results
suggest the potential utilization of DCA in breast cancer
treatment by attenuating the EGFR signaling pathway.

dephosphorylating mitochondrial pyruvate dehydrogenase
[4, 11]. To elucidate how growth factor and kinase signaling
pathways in conjunction with PDK regulate the Warburg
effect in breast cancer, we examined the expression levels
of several growth factor receptors in PDK knockdown
MCF7 cells. Interestingly, the depletion of PDK by
siRNA treatment downregulated EGFR, in contrast with
no or marginal effects on other growth factor receptors
(Figure 1A). Four PDK isoenzymes (PDK1, PDK2,
PDK3, PDK4) have been identified in mammalian tissues
[12]. To confirm the downregulation of EGFR by siPDK
treatment, we explored EGFR expression in the cells treated
with siRNA against each isoform of PDK. Each siRNA
treatment only abolished the expression of the targeted
PDK, however, all of them caused the downregulation
of EGFR, suggesting that PDK may not regulate EGFR
expression in an isoform-specific manner (Figure 1B).
Consistent with these results, DCA also reduced EGFR
levels in a dose-dependent manner (Figure 1C). When
we analyzed lactate concentration in the culture media,
there was no significant change of lactate concentration
by treatment with tamoxifen/DCA or siRNA against
EGFR, even though it was decreased by DCA treatment
(Supplementary Figure S1). Thus, we suggest that EGFR
downregulation may not be associated with the DCAinduced metabolic shift in breast cancer cells. Because
the activation of the EGFR signaling pathway contributes
to tamoxifen resistance [13], we examined whether the
downregulation of EGFR by inhibiting PDK sensitized the
cells to tamoxifen. As shown in Figure 1D, co-treatment
with tamoxifen and DCA led to a marked reduction in cell
viability. The combined treatment for 72 h reduced the cell
viability to less than 30% of that of the control (Figure 1E).
Then, cell death in the co-treated cells was assessed using
Annexin V/PI staining. Forty-eight hours after treatment,
the combination of tamoxifen and DCA induced 30% cell
death, compared with 15% or 8% by tamoxifen or DCA
alone, respectively (Figure 1F). Previously, we reported
that apoptotic cell death in breast cancer cells was caused
by the loss of mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP)
[14]. Thus, we tested whether loss of MMP involved in
cell death induced by the co-treatment, however, there
was no significant change in MMP between untreated and
tamoxifen/DCA-treated cells (Supplementary Figure S2).
DCA plus tamoxifen further decreased EGFR levels
in both MCF7 and T47D cells compared with that of DCA
alone (Figure 2A). The cell death induced by the co-treatment
was confirmed by detecting PARP cleavage, a marker of
apoptosis (Figure 2A). Survivin is an anti-apoptotic molecule
as well as a target of the ER [15]. The co-treatment also
downregulated survivin, which may mediate apoptosis in the
cells (Figure 2A). Although tamoxifen treatment decreased
EGFR levels slightly in MCF7 and T47D cells, no significant
increase in cell death was observed in the cells, suggesting
that a critical level of EGFR is needed for the survival of
breast cancer cells (Figure 2A).

Results
Inhibition of PDK downregulates EGFR and
enhances tamoxifen-induced cell death in breast
cancer cells
Recent studies have shown that targeting PDK
by a PDK inhibitor, such as DCA, shifts the cancer cell
metabolism from glycolysis to oxidative phosphorylation by
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

59810

Oncotarget

Evidence from cell lines has shown that
overexpression of HER2 pathways may contribute
to acquired resistance to endocrine therapies [13]. To
determine whether HER2 overexpression influences the
cytotoxicity of tamoxifen and DCA, we examined cell
viability in HER2-overexpressing MCF7 (HER2-MCF7)
cells after treatment with tamoxifen and DCA. The results
showed that tamoxifen and DCA significantly reduced cell
viability even in HER2-MCF7 cells (Figure 2B and 2C),
suggesting that DCA could enhance the tamoxifen-induced
cell death in HER2-overepxressing breast cancer cells.
We further evaluated the growth inhibitory effects of the
co-treatment on the triple-negative breast cancer cell line
MDA-MB-231. As shown in Figure 2D, MDA-MB-231

cells were less sensitive to tamoxifen and DCA than MCF7
cells. Because downregulation of EGFR was observed in
ER-positive cells, we examined the effects of tamoxifen
and DCA on EGFR levels in MDA-MB-231 cells. EGFR
was highly expressed in MDA-MB-231 cells compared
with MCF7 cells, and the levels were not significantly
decreased by tamoxifen and DCA (Figure 2E). Next,
we examined the cytotoxicity of tamoxifen and DCA
in non-tumorigenic immortalized breast epithelial cell
line MCF10A. Interestingly, the expression of EGFR in
MCF10A cells was comparable to that of MDA-MB-231
cells and neither EGFR downregulation nor cell death was
observed in MCF10A cells after treatment with tamoxifen
and DCA (Supplementary Figure S3). These results indicate

Figure 1: Inhibition of PDK enhanced tamoxifen-induced cell death in MCF7 cells. (A and C) MCF7 cells were treated with

siRNA against PDK (A) or 20–50 μM DCA (C) for 36 h, and the cell lysates were subjected to Western blotting. The blot is representative
of two independent experiments. B. MCF7 cells were treated with siRNA against PDK1, PDK2, PDK3, or PDK4 for 48 h, and the cell
lysates were subjected to Western blotting. (D and E) MCF7 cells were treated with or without 10 μM tamoxifen and/or 20 mM DCA for
48–72 h. The cell morphological changes (D) were observed under an inverted microscope, and the images are representative of three
independent experiments. Cell viability (E) was assessed using an MTT assay. Data are presented as the mean of triplicate samples, and
error bars reflect the SD. (F) MCF7 cells were treated with or without 10 μM tamoxifen or/and 20 mM DCA for 24 and 48 h. Cell death was
evaluated by flow cytometry after Annexin V and PI staining. Data are presented as the mean of triplicate samples, and error bars reflect the
SD. *p < 0.05;***p < 0.001 compared to untreated. ns, nonsignificant.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

59811

Oncotarget

that the anti-proliferative effects of tamoxifen and DCA in
breast cancer cells are dependent on EGFR downregulation.

that the stability of EGFR was significantly compromised
in tamoxifen/DCA-treated cells compared with that of
the control (Figure 3A). We then evaluated the effects
of MG132, a proteasome inhibitor, on tamoxifen/DCAinduced EGFR degradation. Treatment with MG132
restored EGFR expression in tamoxifen/DCA-treated cells
in a dose-dependent manner (Figure 3B).
The phosphorylation of EGFR on serine and
threonine residues represents a mechanism for
attenuation of the EGFR activity, and among them, the
serine 1046/1047 (Ser 1046/7) phosphorylation sites are
required for EGFR desensitization [17]. It has recently
been reported that p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) induces the phosphorylation of EGFR at Ser

The combined treatment of tamoxifen and
DCA induces p38 MAPK-mediated EGFR
degradation
As described above, ligand binding causes rapid
autophosphorylation, resulting in the removal of the
EGFR from the cell surface via endocytosis into an
early endosomal compartment [16]. Therefore, we
next investigated the role of receptor modification in
tamoxifen/DCA-mediated EGFR downregulation. After
blocking protein synthesis with cycloheximide, we found

Figure 2: Enhancement of tamoxifen-induced cell death of ER-positive breast cancer cells by DCA treatment. (A)

MCF7 and T47D cells were treated with or without 10 μM tamoxifen and/or 20 mM DCA for 48 h, and the cell lysates were subjected to
Western blotting. The blot is representative of three independent experiments. (B and C) HER2- and vector-MCF7 cells were treated with or
without 10 μM tamoxifen and/or 20 mM DCA for 48 h. The cell morphological changes (B) were observed under an inverted microscope,
and the images are representative of three independent experiments. Cell viability (C) was assessed using an MTT assay. Data are presented
as the mean of triplicate samples, and error bars reflect the SD. ***p < 0.001 vs. untreated HER2-MCF7 cells. (D and E) MCF7 and MDAMB-231 cells were treated with or without 10 μM tamoxifen and/or 20 mM DCA for 48 h, and the cell viability (D) was then determined.
The cell lysates were analyzed by Western blotting (E). Data for the MTT assays are presented as the mean of triplicate samples, and error
bars reflect the SD. Data for western blotting are representative of three independent experiments. *p < 0.05 vs. tamoxifen/DCA-treated
MCF7 cells.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

59812

Oncotarget

1046/7, which results in its degradation in cancer cells
[18]. Therefore, we next examined the effects of tamoxifen
and DCA on the phosphorylation of p38 MAPK in MCF7
cells. p38 MAPK was significantly phosphorylated
within 1 h, and the phosphorylation was maintained
for 24 h following treatment with tamoxifen and DCA
(Figure 3C). Moreover, the degradation of EGFR induced
by the co- treatment was significantly suppressed when the
cells were pretreated with a specific p38 MAPK inhibitor,
SB203580 (Figure 3D), indicating that p38 MAPK
activation plays a role in tamoxifen/DCA-induced EGFR
downregulation in MCF7 cells.

the combined treatment of siEGFR and tamoxifen was
comparable to that by DCA and tamoxifen. Moreover,
siEGFR treatment further lowered EGFR levels in
tamoxifen/DCA-treated cells, resulting in increased
apoptotic cell death along with downregulation of survivin
compared with that of the si-control (Figure 4C). These
results support the conclusion that DCA sensitizes breast
cancer cells to tamoxifen via downregulation of EGFR.

EGFR inhibitors enhance the tamoxifen-induced
cell death

EGFR activation in cancer has been shown to increase
various transcription factors that may affect the type and the
duration of EGFR signaling [21]. Among them, Nanog and
c-myc have a pleiotropic role in tumorigenesis, including
resistance to standard therapy in breast carcinoma [22, 23].
To further investigate the anti-tumor activities mediated by
EGFR downregulation in breast cancer cells, we examined
the expression of c-myc and Nanog in MCF7 cells after cotreatment with tamoxifen and DCA. The levels of c-myc
and Nanog were significantly decreased in the cells cotreated with tamoxifen and DCA (Figure 5A). Similarly, the
expressions of both proteins were suppressed by tamoxifen
in combination with gefitinib or erlotinib (Figure 5B),
indicating that EGFR expression is needed to maintain

c-myc and Nanog expression are associated with
the cytotoxic effects of DCA in tamoxifen-treated
MCF7 cells

Having shown that DCA-mediated EGFR
degradation could enhance tamoxifen-induced cell death
in MCF7 cells, we then determined whether EGFR
inhibition enhanced cell death in tamoxifen-treated cells.
Gefitinib and erlotinib are selective reversible inhibitors
of EGFR tyrosine kinase binding to ATP [19, 20].
Co- treatment of MCF7 cells with 5 μM gefitinib or
erlotinib for 48 h markedly increased tamoxifen-induced
cell death (Figure 4A). Similarly, knockdown of EGFR
using siEGFR treatment enhanced tamoxifen-induced
cell death (Figure 4B). The reduction in cell viability by

Figure 3: p38 MAPK-mediated EGFR degradation following combined treatment of DCA with tamoxifen. (A) MCF7
cells were treated with 10 μM tamoxifen and 20 mM DCA for 24 h and then treated with or without 50 μg/ml cycloheximide (CHX) for
the indicated times. (B) MCF7 cells were treated with 10 μM tamoxifen and 20 mM DCA for 24 h and then treated with or without 5 mM
MG132 for 24 h. (C) MCF7 cells were treated with 10 μM tamoxifen and 20 mM DCA for the indicated times. (D) MCF7 cells were
pretreated with the indicated doses of SB203580 for 1 h and then treated with 10 μM tamoxifen and 20 mM DCA for 48 h. Protein extracts
were harvested and examined by Western blotting. Representative results from independent experiments conducted in triplicate with similar
results are shown.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

59813

Oncotarget

the expression of c-myc and Nanog in tamoxifen-treated
MCF7 cells. Nevertheless, there was little or no effect of
siEGFR on the expression of c-myc and Nanog, indicating
that EGFR downregulation is necessary but not sufficient
to decrease the expression of the proteins (Supplementary
Figure S4). To determine whether the reduced expression
of these two proteins is involved in the cytotoxic effects of
tamoxifen and DCA in MCF7 cells, we tested the effects
of siRNAs against c-myc and Nanog in cells exposed
to tamoxifen/DCA. Knockdown of c-myc and Nanog
significantly sensitized cells to tamoxifen/DCA compared
with the controls (Figure 5C). Conversely, overexpression
of FLAG-c-myc and FLAG-Nanog by transfection of cells
with FLAG-c-myc and FLAG-Nanog vectors significantly
protected cells from tamoxifen/DCA-induced cytotoxicity

(Figure 5D). Taken together, our data suggest that EGFR
downregulation by a combination of tamoxifen and DCA
may induce cell death in MCF7 cells partially through the
inhibition of c-myc and Nanog expression. It has been
known that self-renewal genes, such as c-myc and Nanog
are associated with cancer stem-like cell properties [24].
To test whether co-treatment with tamoxifen and DCA
inhibits breast cancer stem-like cells, we performed flow
cytometry analysis to estimate the proportion of stem-like
cell subpopulation in MCF7 cells based on the expression
CD44. After the co-treatment, CD44-high population in
MCF7 cells was reduced from 42.5% to 19.9% (Figure 5E).
This finding raised the possibility that DCA plus tamoxifen
might inhibit cancer stem-like cell capability in breast
cancer cells.

Figure 4: Sensitization of tamoxifen-induced cell death in MCF7 cells by EGFR inhibition. (A) MCF7 cells were treated

with 10 μM tamoxifen and 5 μM gefitinib or erlotinib for 48 h, and the cell viability was then determined. ***p < 0.001 compared with
untreated group. (B and C) MCF7 cells were transfected with 60 nM siRNA targeting EGFR or negative control siRNA and then treated
with or without 10 μM tamoxifen and/or 20 mM DCA for 48 h. Then, the cell viability (B) was determined. The cell lysates were analyzed
by Western blotting (C). Data for the MTT assays are presented as the mean of triplicate samples, and error bars reflect the SD. C. Data for
western blotting are representative of three independent experiments. **p < 0.01.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

59814

Oncotarget

The combined treatment with DCA and
tamoxifen can overcome tamoxifen resistance in
breast cancer cells

differences between tumor and normal cells has been
proposed as a novel anticancer strategy. Despite
the increase in potential anticancer drugs that target
metabolic processes of cancer cells, elucidation of
how cells respond to the drugs will be necessary
to successfully target cancer metabolism. Here, we
demonstrated that DCA inhibits not only PDK activity
but also EGFR expression in breast cancer cells. The
combined treatment of DCA and tamoxifen induced
proteasome-dependent degradation of EGFR proteins
in breast cancer cells via p38 MAPK activation. Our
results indicate that EGFR downregulation plays a key
role in apoptotic cell death induced by a combination of
DCA and tamoxifen. To our knowledge, this is the first
report showing that DCA sensitizes breast cancer cells to
tamoxifen-induced cell death via EGFR downregulation.
In ER-positive breast cancer cells that have
developed endocrine resistance, ER expression may be
directly suppressed by enhanced growth factor receptor
signaling due to overexpression of EGFR and HER2,
which subsequently activate MAPK and inhibit ER
transcription [25]. In addition, resistance to tamoxifen
in breast cancer cells has been related to overexpression
of EGFR and high levels of phosphorylated extracellular
activated kinase 1/2 [2]. Thus, the strategy of combining
an EGFR inhibitor with an endocrine agent is of sufficient
interest to warrant further study for breast cancer therapy.

To further confirm the observed effects of DCA on
tamoxifen-induced cell death, we established tamoxifenresistant (TamR) MCF7 cells by tamoxifen treatment over
a long period of time. Compared to the untreated cells,
the cell viability of the MCF7 and TamR MCF7 cells
was 20 and 60%, respectively, following treatment with
13 μM tamoxifen, indicating that the TamR MCF7 cells
were less sensitive to the same concentration of tamoxifen
than the MCF7 parental cells (Figure 6A and 6B). DCA
alone inhibited the growth of TamR MCF7 cells by
approximately 25% of that of the control (Figure 6C
and 6D). In contrast, co-treatment of DCA with tamoxifen
suppressed the cell growth by more than 60% compared
to the control (Figure 6C and 6D). The EGFR levels in
TamR cells were also downregulated by the co-treatment
(Figure 6E). These results suggest that DCA could
overcome tamoxifen resistance in breast cancer cells by
EGFR downregulation at the protein level.

Discussion
As the understanding of the metabolic phenotype
of tumor cells has grown, targeting the metabolic

Figure 5: c-myc and Nanog expression is associated with cytotoxicity induced by the combined treatment of DCA and
tamoxifen in MCF7 cells. (A) MCF7 cells were treated with or without 10 μM tamoxifen or/and 20 mM DCA for 48 h. (B) MCF7

cells were treated with 10 μM tamoxifen and 5 μM gefitinib or erlotinib for 48 h. The cell lysates were subjected to Western blotting. Data
are representative of three independent experiments. (C) MCF7 cells were transiently transfected with Nanog siRNA and c-myc siRNA or
control siRNAs and then treated with or without 10 μM tamoxifen and 20 mM DCA for 48 h. (D) MCF7 cells were transiently transfected
with pcDNA-FLAG-Nanog and pcDNA-FLAG-c-myc or an empty vector and then treated with or without 10 μM tamoxifen and 20 mM
DCA for 48 h. (E) MCF7 cells were treated with or without 10 μM Tamoxifen and 20 mM DCA for 48 h and then analyzed CD44 positive
cell population on flow cytometry. Data are representative of three independent experiments. Data are presented as the mean of triplicate
samples, and error bars reflect the SD. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01,***p < 0.001.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

59815

Oncotarget

In this study, we found that downregulation of EGFR in
DCA-treated breast cancer cells enhanced the sensitivity
of the cells to tamoxifen. EGFR downregulation by
co- treatment of DCA with tamoxifen has been confirmed
in several ER-positive breast cancer cell lines, including
MCF7, T47D and BT474 (Figure 2A and not shown).
In addition to the HER2-amplified breast cancer cell
line BT474, HER2-MCF7 cells also showed EGFR
downregulation by DCA/tamoxifen, suggesting that
the combination treatment will be applicable to HER2postive breast cancer. Unfortunately, a triple-negative
breast cancer cell line, MDA-MB-231, which is known to
overexpress EGFR [26], showed a refractory phenotype as
well as no obvious change in EGFR levels in response to
the co-treatment. One possibility is that the amplification
of EGFR in MDA-MB-231 cells overwhelms its
downregulation by co-treatment of DCA with tamoxifen.

The other explanation is that the signaling pathway(s)
that mediate the EGFR downregulation are blocked by
an unknown mechanism in MDA-MB-231 cells. Further
investigation will be needed to elucidate the underlying
mechanism for maintenance of EGFR expression in
response to co-treatment of DCA and tamoxifen in ERnegative breast cancer cells.
Four isoforms of PDK are known, each active
in response to different intracellular and extracellular
conditions. PDK1 is activated by hypoxia [27]; PDK2 is
activated by the PDH products acetyl CoA and NADH
[28]; PDK3 is activated by ATP [29]; and PDK4 is
regulated transcriptionally by hormonal signals [30].
PDK2 possesses the greatest activity of phosphorylating
pyruvate dehydrogenase complex followed by PDK4,
PDK1 and PDK3 [12]. PDK2 is most susceptible to
inhibition by DCA because of its ubiquitous expression

Figure 6: DCA sensitizes tamoxifen-resistant MCF7 cells to tamoxifen. (A and B) MCF7 parental cells and tamoxifen resistant

(TamR) MCF7 cells were treated with the indicated concentrations of tamoxifen for 48 h. After incubation of the cells in medium containing
MTT, the media were removed, and images (A) were obtained before solubilizing the cells. The data for staining are representative of
three independent experiments. Data for MTT assays (B) are presented as the mean of triplicate samples, and error bars reflect the SD.
***p < 0.001 vs. tamoxifen-treated parental group. (C and D) TamR MCF7 cells were treated with or without 10 μM tamoxifen and/or
20 mM DCA for 48 h. Cell viability (C) was assessed by an MTT assay. Data for the MTT assays are presented as the mean of triplicate
samples, and error bars reflect the SD. ***p < 0.001 vs. untreated group. The cell morphological changes (D) were observed under an
inverted microscope, and the images are representative of three independent experiments. Data for the cell images are representative of
three independent experiments. (E) TamR MCF7 cells were treated with or without 10 μM tamoxifen and/or 20 mM DCA for 48 h. The cell
lysates were analyzed by Western blotting. Data are representative of three independent experiments.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

59816

Oncotarget

[31]. Although we detected the expression of four
isoforms in MCF7 cells (Figure 1C), the functional
differences between PDK isoforms in breast cancer
still remains elusive. Further investigating whether
signaling pathways suppressing particular isoform of
PDK lead to EGFR downregulation will be interest. PDK
is known to function in the mitochondria, and several
studies demonstrated that EGFR also translocates to the
mitochondria after EGF stimulation [32, 33]. Furthermore,
it has been suggested that the interaction of EGFR with
PDK in the mitochondrial matrix plays an important
role in EGFR-induced tumor growth in glioblastoma
multiforme [34]. Here, we found that the blockade of PDK
activity by an inhibitor or silencing decreased total cellular
EGFR levels in tamoxifen-treated breast cancer cells.
Further studies are needed to determine whether only
mitochondrial-associated EGFR is subject to degradation
by co-treatment with DCA and tamoxifen in breast cancer
cells. In general, exposure of cells to EGF caused rapid
autophosphorylation, including tyrosine (Tyr) 1045, which
provides a docking site for the ubiquitin ligase c-Cbl, thus
resulting in the ubiquitination of the EGFR and removal
of the EGFR via endocytosis from the cell surface into
an early endosomal compartment [35]. However, cotreatment with DCA and tamoxifen had no effect on the
phosphorylation of EGFR at Tyr 1045 (data not shown).
Instead, we observed the phosphorylation of EGFR at
Ser 1046/7 by DCA and tamoxifen, which was blocked
by a specific p38 MAPK inhibitor, SB203580. It has been
suggested that p38 MAPK plays a pivotal role in both
the internalization and the degradation of EGFR [18];
however, further investigation is required to elucidate
how EGFR phosphorylation at serine residues causes its
downregulation and to identify the upstream mediator of
p38 MAPK activation after DCA/tamoxifen treatment.
Nanog and c-myc have been identified as
transcription factors, and their role in maintaining selfrenewal in embryonic stem cells has been established
in previous studies [22, 36]. A recently proposed
mechanism of intrinsic resistance to endocrine therapy
posits the existence of a specialized subset of cancer cells
called tumor-initiating cells (TICs) [37]. TICs have the
capacity to self-renew and to generate new tumors that
consist entirely of clonally derived cell types present
in the parental tumor. Here, we demonstrated that
DCA decreased the expression of c-myc and Nanog in
tamoxifen-treated MCF7 cells. Moreover, the expression
of these proteins was related to the cytotoxic effects of
the combined treatment of DCA and tamoxifen. Therefore,
DCA can be exploited to expand the therapeutic potential
of tamoxifen by suppressing the development of intrinsic
resistance in breast cancer therapy.
In conclusion, our results revealed that DCA
sensitized ER-positive breast cancer cells to tamoxifen
by decreasing EGFR levels. Treatment with DCA and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

tamoxifen inhibited the expression of self-renewal genes
and the survival of tamoxifen-resistant MCF7 cells.
Therefore, we propose that DCA may be an effective
therapeutic agent for treating tamoxifen-resistant breast
cancer. Moreover, combination strategies with DCA may
be useful for enhancing the treatment efficacy of other
cytotoxic chemotherapies or targeted therapies. Further
experiments, including animal studies and clinical trials,
should be carried out in the future.

Materials and Methods
Cell culture and reagents
MCF7, T47D, and MDA-MB-231 human breast
cancer cells were purchased from the American Type Culture
Collection (Rockville, MD, USA) and were grown in the
recommended growth medium (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA,
USA). HER2-overexpressing MCF7 (HER2-MCF7) and
control vector cells (vector-MCF7) were kindly provided
by Dr. Incheol Shin (Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea).
Tamoxifen-resistant (TamR) MCF7 cells were developed by
culturing MCF7 cells in the presence of 10 μM tamoxifen
for more than 6 months. As a control, parental cells were
cultured for the same amount of time in regular media.
Following the establishment of resistance, cells were
passaged for no more than 3 months. For experiments
involving tamoxifen treatments, cells were routinely cultured
in phenol red-free Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium
plus 10% charcoal-stripped fetal bovine serum just before
the treatments. Antibodies against EGFR, phospho-EGFR
(S1046/1047), FGFR1, FGFR4, PDK1, PDH, survivin,
cleaved PARP, p38, phospho-p38, and Nanog were acquired
from Cell Signaling Technology (Danvers, MA, USA).
Antibodies against HER2/Neu, ER-α and c-myc, siRNAs
targeting EGFR, Nanog, PDK4, and c-myc and the negative
control (scrambled) siRNAs were acquired from Santa Cruz
Biotechnology (Dallas, TX, USA). Antibodies against PDK2
and PDK3 were acquired from Thermo Fisher Scientific
(Waltham, MA, USA). The β-actin antibody, FLAG
antibody, tamoxifen, DCA, cycloheximide and MG132 were
purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). The
phospho-PDH (S293) antibody and SB203580 were from
BD Biosciences Pharmingen (San Diego, CA, USA), and
gefitinib and erlotinib were obtained from Selleck Chemicals
(London, ON, Canada).

Transfections and treatments
Cells were transfected with the target siRNA (50 nM)
using Lipofectamine RNAiMAX (Invitrogen) as described
by the manufacturer. Cells were transfected with 1 μg
FLAG-c-myc pcDNA 3.1 and FLAG-Nanog-pcDNA 3.1
using Lipofectamine 2000 as described by the manufacturer.
After 6 h, cells were treated with tamoxifen and/or DCA for
24–48 h and then analyzed as described elsewhere.
59817

Oncotarget

Measurement of cell viability

Acknowledgments AND Funding

Cell viability was determined by measuring the
mitochondrial conversion of 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazolyl2)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) to a colored
product. Cells were treated as indicated, and the medium
was exchanged with serum-free medium containing 1 mM
MTT. After 2 h of incubation at 37°C, cells were solubilized
in DMSO. The amount of formazan, the converted form of
MTT, was determined by measuring absorbance at 595 nm.

This research was supported by Basic Science
Research Program through the National Research
Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry
of Science, ICT & Future Planning (No. 1711031812,
1711023318 and 1711031800).

Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

Evaluation of apoptosis

References

Apoptosis was determined by fluorescence-activated
cell sorting analysis using an Annexin V-FITC apoptosis
kit (BioVision, Milpitas, CA, USA) as directed by the
manufacturer. Briefly, after treatment, cells were treated
with trypsin and then resuspended in binding buffer (10 mM
HEPES/NaOH, pH 7.4, 140 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM CaCl2)
including Annexin V-FITC and propidium iodide. After
incubation for 15 min, cell fluorescence was analyzed by
flow cytometry. Cell death was measured as the percentage
of cells in the Annexin V and PI positive population.

1.	

  2.	 Zhao Y, Butler EB, Tan M. Targeting cellular metabolism to
improve cancer therapeutics. Cell Death Dis. 2013; 4:e532.
  3.	 Vander Heiden MG. Targeting cancer metabolism: a therapeutic
window opens. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2011; 10:671–84.
  4.	 Bonnet S, Archer SL, Allalunis-Turner J, Haromy A,
Beaulieu C, Thompson R, Lee CT, Lopaschuk GD,
Puttagunta L, Bonnet S, Harry G, Hashimoto K, Porter CJ,
et al. A mitochondria-K+ channel axis is suppressed
in cancer and its normalization promotes apoptosis
and inhibits cancer growth. Cancer Cell. 2007; 11:
37–51.

Western blotting
Cells were harvested and lysed in RIPA buffer
(50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Nonidet
P40, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, and 0.1% SDS)
supplemented with a protease/phosphatase inhibitor
cocktail (Roche, Mannheim, Germany). Equal amounts
of proteins (20– 50  μg) were separated by SDS-PAGE
and transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane. Membranes
were blocked by incubating with 5% skim milk in Trisbuffered saline for 1 h and were then incubated overnight
with the appropriate primary antibodies. Membranes were
incubated with HRP-conjugated secondary antibody for 1 h.
Immunoreactive proteins were visualized using enhanced
chemiluminescence reagents (Amersham Biosciences,
Little Chalfont, UK).

  5.	 Kankotia S, Stacpoole PW. Dichloroacetate and cancer: new
home for an orphan drug? Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014;
1846:617–29.
  6.	 Osborne CK. Tamoxifen in the treatment of breast cancer.
N Engl J Med. 1998 Nov 26; 339:1609–18.
  7.	 Johnston SR. New strategies in estrogen receptor-positive
breast cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2010 Apr 1; 16:1979–87.
doi: 10.1158/1078–0432.CCR-09–1823.
  8.	 Peto R, Boreham J, Clarke M, Davies C, Beral V. UK and
USA breast cancer deaths down 25% in year 2000 at ages
20–69 years. Lancet. 2000; 355:1822.

Detection of CD44 positive cell population

  9.	 Early Breast Cancer Trialists’ Collaborative Group (EBCTCG).
Effects of chemotherapy and hormonal therapy for early breast
cancer on recurrence and 15-year survival: an overview of the
randomised trials. Lancet. 2005; 365:1687–717.

Cells were stained with antibodies at 1∶100 dilution
in PBS for 15 minutes. The antibodies used were as
follows; FITC-CD44 and FITC-conjugated mouse
IgG isotype control antibodies were obtained from BD
Biosciences Pharmingen. Labeled cells were analyzed on
flow cytometry. Populations of CD44 positive cells were
determined by the intensity of FITC.

10.	 Early Breast Cancer Trialists’ Collaborative Group
(EBCTCG), Davies C, Godwin J, Gray R, Clarke  M,
Cutter D, Darby S, McGale P, Pan HC, Taylor C,
Wang YC, Dowsett M, Ingle J, et al. Relevance of breast
cancer hormone receptors and other factors to the efficacy
of adjuvant tamoxifen: patient-level meta-analysis of
randomised trials. Lancet. 2011; 378:771–84.

Statistical analysis
All data presented are representative of at least two
separate experiments. Comparisons between groups were
analyzed using Student’s t-test. Asterisks (***p < 0.001,
**p < 0.01, *p < 0.05) indicate statistical significance.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Vander Heiden MG, Cantley LC, Thompson CB.
Understanding the Warburg effect: the metabolic requirements
of cell proliferation. Science. 2009; 324:1029–33.

11.	 Velpula KK, Bhasin A, Asuthkar S, Tsung AJ. Combined
targeting of PDK1 and EGFR triggers regression of
glioblastoma by reversing the Warburg effect. Cancer Res.
2013; 73:7277–89.
59818

Oncotarget

12.	 Saunier E, Benelli C, Bortoli S. The pyruvate dehydrogenase
complex in cancer: An old metabolic gatekeeper regulated
by new pathways and pharmacological agents. Int J Cancer.
2016; 138:809–17.
13.	 Osborne CK, Schiff R. Mechanisms of endocrine resistance
in breast cancer. Annu Rev Med. 2011; 62:233–47.

25.	 Creighton CJ, Hilger AM, Murthy S, Rae JM,
Chinnaiyan AM, El-Ashry D. Activation of mitogenactivated protein kinase in estrogen receptor alpha-positive
breast cancer cells in vitro induces an in vivo molecular
phenotype of estrogen receptor alpha-negative human breast
tumors. Cancer Res. 2006; 66:3903–11.

14.	 Yun SM, Woo SH, Oh ST, Hong SE, Choe TB, Ye SK,
Kim EK, Seong MK, Kim HA, Noh WC, Lee JK, Jin HO,
Lee YH, et al. Melatonin enhances arsenic trioxide-induced
cell death via sustained upregulation of Redd1 expression in
breast cancer cells. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2016; 422:64–73.

26.	 Biswas DK, Cruz AP, Gansberger E, Pardee AB. Epidermal
growth factor-induced nuclear factor kappa B activation:
A major pathway of cell-cycle progression in estrogenreceptor negative breast cancer cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A. 2000; 97:8542–7.

15.	 Zhu J, Lu X, Hua KQ, Sun H, Yu YH, Feng YJ. Oestrogen
receptor α mediates 17β-estradiol enhancement of ovarian
cancer cell motility through up-regulation of survivin
expression. Arch Gynecol Obstet. 2012; 286: 729–37.

27.	 Kim JW, Tchernyshyov I, Semenza GL, Dang CV. HIF1-mediated expression of pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase:
a metabolic switch required for cellular adaptation to
hypoxia. Cell Metab. 2006; 3:177–85.

16.	 Arteaga CL. Epidermal growth factor receptor dependence
in human tumors: more than just expression? Oncologist.
2002; 7:31–9.

28.	 Hiromasa Y, Hu L, Roche TE. Ligand-induced effects on
pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase isoform 2. J Biol Chem.
2006; 281:12568–79.

17.	 Sorkin A, Goh LK. Endocytosis and intracellular trafficking
of ErbBs. Exp Cell Res. 2009; 315:683–96.

29.	 Kato M, Chuang JL, Tso SC, Wynn RM, Chuang DT.
Crystal structure of pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 3
bound to lipoyl domain 2 of human pyruvate dehydrogenase
complex. EMBO J. 2005; 24:1763–74.

18.	 Adachi S, Shimizu M, Shirakami Y, Yamauchi J, Natsume H,
Matsushima-Nishiwaki R, To S, Weinstein IB, Moriwaki H,
Kozawa O. (-)-Epigallocatechin gallate downregulates EGF
receptor via phosphorylation at Ser1046/1047 by p38 MAPK
in colon cancer cells. Carcinogenesis. 2009; 30:1544–52.

30.	 Kwon HS, Huang B, Unterman TG, Harris RA. Protein
kinase B-alpha inhibits human pyruvate dehydrogenase
kinase-4 gene induction by dexamethasone through
inactivation of FOXO transcription factors. Diabetes. 2004;
53:899–910.

19.	 Ciardiello F, Caputo R, Bianco R, Damiano V, Pomatico G,
De Placido S, Bianco AR, Tortora G. Antitumor effect and
potentiation of cytotoxic drugs activity in human cancer
cells by ZD-1839 (Iressa), an epidermal growth factor
receptor-selective tyrosine kinase inhibitor. Clin Cancer
Res. 2000; 6:2053–63.

31.	 Bowker-Kinley MM, Davis WI, Wu P, Harris RA,
Popov  KM. Evidence for existence of tissue-specific
regulation of the mammalian pyruvate dehydrogenase
complex. Biochem J. 1998; 329 :191–6.
32.	 Dasari VR, Velpula KK, Alapati K, Gujrati M, Tsung AJ.
Cord blood stem cells inhibit epidermal growth factor
receptor translocation to mitochondria in glioblastoma.
PLoS One. 2012; 7:e31884.

20.	 Pollack VA, Savage DM, Baker DA, Tsaparikos KE,
Sloan  DE, Moyer JD, Barbacci EG, Pustilnik LR,
Smolarek TA, Davis JA, Vaidya MP, Arnold LD, Doty JL,
et al. Inhibition of epidermal growth factor receptorassociated tyrosine phosphorylation in human carcinomas
with CP-358,774: dynamics of receptor inhibition in situ
and antitumor effects in athymic mice. J Pharmacol Exp
Ther. 1999; 291:739–48.

33.	 Demory ML, Boerner JL, Davidson R, Faust W, Miyake T,
Lee I, Hüttemann M, Douglas R, Haddad G, Parsons SJ.
Epidermal growth factor receptor translocation to the
mitochondria: regulation and effect. J Biol Chem. 2009;
284:36592–604.

21.	 Normanno N, De Luca A, Bianco C, Strizzi L, Mancino M,
Maiello MR, Carotenuto A, De Feo G, Caponigro F,
Salomon DS. Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
signaling in cancer. Gene. 2006; 366:2–16.

34.	 Velpula KK, Bhasin A, Asuthkar S, Tsung AJ. Combined
targeting of PDK1 and EGFR triggers regression of
glioblastoma by reversing the Warburg effect. Cancer Res.
2013; 73:7277–89.

22.	 Iv Santaliz-Ruiz LE, Xie X, Old M, Teknos TN, Pan Q.
Emerging role of nanog in tumorigenesis and cancer stem
cells. Int J Cancer. 2014; 135:2741–8.

35.	 Massie C, Mills IG. The developing role of receptors and
adaptors. Nat Rev Cancer. 2006; 6:403–9.

23.	 Chen Y, Olopade OI. MYC in breast tumor progression.
Expert Rev Anticancer Ther. 2008; 8: 1689–98.

36.	 Chappell J, Dalton S. Roles for MYC in the establishment
and maintenance of pluripotency. Cold Spring Harb
Perspect Med. 2013;3:a014381.

24.	 Hou ZJ, Luo X, Zhang W, Peng F, Cui B, Wu SJ, Zheng
FM, Xu J, Xu LZ, Long ZJ, Wang XT, Li GH, Wan XY,
et al. Flubendazole, FDA-approved anthelmintic, targets
breast cancer stem-like cells. Oncotarget. 2015; 6:6326–40.
doi:10.18632/oncotarget.3436.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

37.	 Wei W, Lewis MT. Identifying and targeting tumor-initiating
cells in the treatment of breast cancer. Endocr Relat Cancer.
2015; 22:R135–55.

59819

Oncotarget

