Research Article

Androgen-Induced Wnt Signaling in Preosteoblasts Promotes
the Growth of MDA-PCa-2b Human Prostate Cancer Cells
1

2

1,3

3

Xin-Hua Liu, Alexander Kirschenbaum, Shen Yao, Guizhong Liu,
3
1
Stuart A. Aaronson, and Alice C. Levine

Departments of 1Medicine and 2Urology, and 3Oncological Sciences, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York

Abstract
The high morbidity and mortality associated with prostate
cancer (PCa) result from its tendency to metastasize to bone
where it produces predominantly osteoblastic lesions. The
Wnt signaling pathway plays an important role in embryogenesis, tumorigenesis, osteoblast development, and bone
formation. Androgen signaling via the androgen receptor (AR)
is critical in both PCa and bone cell growth. We examined the
effects of androgens on cell growth and Wnt signaling in the
AR-positive MDA-PCa-2b cell line and MC3T3 preosteoblasts,
grown alone and in coculture. We show that the potent
androgen dihydrotestosterone increases AR expression and
transcriptional activity only in the preosteoblasts. Although
dihydrotestosterone induced an 80% increase in PCa cell
growth when the cells were grown alone, dihydrotestosterone
had a more significant effect on MDA-PCa-2b cell proliferation
(3.2-fold increase) when the PCa cells were cocultured with
preosteoblasts. Dihydrotestosterone addition to preosteoblasts promoted Wnt-dependent transcriptional reporter
activity associated with GSK3BS-9 phosphorylation and accumulation of nuclear B-catenin as well as elevated Runx2
expression. In addition, the increased proliferation of PCa
cells in coculture with MC3T3 cells in response to dihydrotestosterone was abrogated by the addition of either exogenous
DKK-1 or sFRP-1 protein, two naturally occurring Wnt
antagonists. Finally, we show that the paracrine growthpromoting effect of androgens is limited to MDA-PCa-2b cells.
These data imply that Wnt signaling is involved in the
androgen-regulated crosstalk between preosteoblasts and
PCa cells and suggest that androgens may stimulate growth
of some prostate tumor cells indirectly, via up-regulation of
Wnt signaling in bone cells. [Cancer Res 2007;67(12):5747–53]

Introduction
Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most frequently diagnosed cancer
and the second leading cause of cancer deaths in U.S. males. The
high morbidity and mortality associated with PCa derive from its
tendency to metastasize to bone (1). Although there is evidence
that PCa initially induces osteolytic lesions (2), PCa-induced bone
metastases are unique in that they typically produce an
osteoblastic reaction in bone (3). The precise mechanisms
underlying this tendency for PCa cells to target bone and induce
an osteoblastic response in the bone microenvironment have not

Requests for reprints: Xin-Hua Liu, Department of Medicine, Box 1055, Mount
Sinai School of Medicine, One Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY 10029. Phone: 212241-4130; Fax: 212-241-4218; E-mail: liu.xinhua@mssm.edu.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-0478

www.aacrjournals.org

been well delineated. These bony metastases grow more rapidly
than primary or other metastatic lesions (3, 4), suggesting that
interactions between PCa cells and the bone microenvironment
may promote PCa growth and progression.
PCa cell growth in both the primary site and the bone
microenvironment is under both autocrine regulation involving
androgen-mediated up-regulation of several growth factors (5, 6)
and paracrine influences involving the stromal components (4, 7).
Clinically, a bidirectional interaction between PCa cells and
osteoblasts has been shown to stimulate both bone targeting and
bone reaction (4). Several factors, such as basic fibroblast growth
factor (4), osteocalcin, bone sialoprotein (8), and interleukin-6 (9),
have been shown to be responsible for this pattern of PCa
progression. However, the precise events and underlying mechanisms have not been fully elucidated.
The Wnt signaling family includes 19 secreted glycoproteins that
have functions related to embryogenesis, cell specification,
formation of the body plan, cell growth, differentiation, and
apoptosis (10). Wnt signaling plays a central role in osteoblast
development and bone formation (11). Wnts promote the lineage
commitment of mesenchymal precursor cells and the differentiation of progenitor cell lines into osteoblasts (11, 12). In addition,
they stimulate osteoblast maturation and exert direct effects on the
formation and turnover of the mature skeleton. Wnts directly
stimulate tumor cell growth and survival via autocrine regulation
in several types of human cancer, including PCa (13).
Androgen signaling via the androgen receptor (AR) is a key
pathway that contributes to PCa progression (14, 15). Androgens
also exert direct anabolic effects on normal bone (16, 17). Recent
studies show that there is significant crosstalk between the Wnt/hcatenin and AR signaling pathways. Functional colocalization of
AR, h-catenin, and Tcf in the nucleus has been reported (18, 19). It
has also been shown that h-catenin preferentially binds AR over
several other steroid hormone receptors, including the estrogen
receptor, progesterone receptor, and glucocorticoid receptor (18).
Moreover, forced overexpression of h-catenin augments ARmediated transcription of several AR-regulated promoters in both
prostate and nonprostate cells (19, 20), indicating that h-catenin
may act as a coactivator of AR and that AR may require h-catenin
to regulate gene expression. Although increasing evidence has
shown an interaction between AR and Wnt signaling in PCa cells,
the possible crosstalk between the two pathways in the bone
microenvironment in the setting of PCa bone metastases has not
previously been well delineated.
In the present study, we examined the effects of androgens on
cell growth, Wnt signaling activity, and the expression of various
components of the Wnt signaling pathway in MDA-PCa-2b, an
AR-positive PCa cell line, versus MC3T3, an osteoblastic precursor
cell line. Our results reveal an involvement of Wnt signaling in
androgen-regulated crosstalk between preosteoblasts and PCa cells

5747

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (12). June 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

and indicate that androgens may stimulate MDA-PCa-2b cell
proliferation in the bone microenvironment indirectly via modulation of Wnt signaling in the bone cells.

Materials and Methods
Cell culture and reagents. The AR-positive PCa cell line, MDA-PCa-2b,
the AR-negative PC-3 cell line, and the MC3T3-E1 osteoblast precursor cell
line were obtained from the American Type Tissue Collection. The PC-3ML
human PCa cell line, a subline of the PC-3 cell line (21), was a generous gift
from Dr. M. Stearns (Department of Pathology, MCP-Hahnemann
University, Philadelphia, PA). Cells were cultured in DMEM containing
10% fetal bovine serum. For coculture experiments, MDA-PCa-2b cells were
seeded in 12-well cluster culture plates, and MC3T3 cells were seeded in
cell-culture inserts with 0.4-Am pores (BD Inc.) as described previously (22).
All experiments were done in triplicate and repeated three separate times.
Dihydrotestosterone was purchased from Sigma. Recombinant DKK-1 and
sFRP-1 proteins were purchased from R&D systems. Enhanced Luciferase
Assay kit and h-catenin antibodies were obtained from BD PharMingen.
Antibodies against AR, DKK-1, sFRP-1, and h-actin were purchased from
Santa Cruz Inc.. Antibodies against GSK3h and phosphor-GSK3h were
obtained from Cell Signaling Technology. Runx2 antibodies were purchased
from MBL Co.
Protein isolation and immunoblotting. Cells cultured under the
indicated conditions were lysed, and total protein was isolated as described
previously (23). Proteins from the cytosolic and nuclear fractions were
isolated using a commercial kit purchased from Pierce, according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. Protein content was assayed using a kit from
Bio-Rad. Western blotting was done as previously described (23). h-actin
and histone H1 ( for nuclear protein) were used as the internal control in
Western blot analyses.
Transient transfection and luciferase reporter assay. Transient
transfection was done using LipofectAMINE 2000 reagent according to
the manufacturer’s instruction (Invitrogen). The Tcf luciferase reporter
construct pGL3-OT and control vector were generously provided by
Dr. B. Vogelstein (John Hopkins Oncology Center, Baltimore, MD). TransLucent AR Reporter Vector and control plasmid were purchased from
Panomics Inc. Wnt3a expression vector was constructed as described
previously (24). Cells were cultured in 12-well cluster plates and transfected
with either 1 Ag of the reporter plasmid or empty vector as a mock control.
Internal normalization was done by cotransfection of the h-galactosidase
expression vector (BD ClonTech). After 40 h, the transfected cells were lysed
by scraping into reporter buffer (BD ClonTech), total protein concentration
was determined, and luciferase and h-galactosidase activities were assayed
and quantitated using a TD-20e Luminometer. The resulting activities were
normalized to protein concentrations and h-galactosidase activity.
Immunofluorescence assay. Cells were incubated on glass coverslips
and treated with either vehicle or dihydrotestosterone (10 8 mol/L) for 24 h.
Immunofluorescence assay was done as previously reported (23). Secondary
antibodies conjugated to fluorophores were used at a 1:100 dilution and
were incubated for 1 h at 37jC followed by 3 10-min washes. Positively
stained cells were evaluated with a fluorescent microscope.
Alkaline phosphatase assay. Cultured cells were washed with PBS
and sonicated in 10 mmol/L of Tris-HCl buffer (pH, 7.5) containing 0.1%
Triton X-100. ALP activity in the lysate was assayed by the hydrolysis of
p-nitrophenyl phosphate (Sigma) to p-nitrophenol. Absorbance was determined at 405 nm and compared with a p-nitrophenol (Sigma) standard
titration curve. ALP activity was normalized to total protein content.
Statistical analysis. All results are given as mean F SE. The effects
induced by the various treatments were compared with untreated control
cells using paired Student’s t test with the Bonferroni adjustment for the
comparison of multiple groups. A P value of <0.05 was considered significant.

Results
Dihydrotestosterone increases MDA-PCa-2b cell proliferation when cocultured with preosteoblasts. We initially examined

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (12). June 15, 2007

the effects of dihydrotestosterone on MDA-PCa-2b cells grown
either alone or in coculture with MC3T3 preosteoblasts. As shown
in Fig. 1, dihydrotestosterone had a modest, stimulatory effect on
MDA-PCa-2b cell growth when cultured alone (80% increase,
P < 0.05). In contrast, when the PCa cells were cocultured with
MC3T3 cells, dihydrotestosterone strikingly increased PCa cell
numbers (3.2-fold). Of note, MDA-PCa-2b cell proliferation also
increased, even in the absence of dihydrotestosterone, when the
PCa cells were cocultured either with MC3T3, a bone-derived
fibroblast cell line, or NIH3T3, an embryonic fibroblast cell line,
This androgen-independent effect of coculture with stromal cells is
likely from the result of secretion of stromal-derived growth
factors, as previously reported (4). Because NIH 3T3 cells do not
express measurable amounts of androgen receptor, we used these
cells in coculture as a negative control for androgenic effects. Our
data show that dihydrotestosterone failed to induce a further
increase in cell growth when the PCa cells were cocultured with
NIH3T3 cells. Dihydrotestosterone had no significant direct or
indirect effects on the growth of either MC3T3 or NIH3T3 cells
(data not shown).
Dihydrotestosterone induces AR expression and transcriptional activity in MC3T3 cells. We next examined AR protein
expression in MDA-PCa-2b, MC3T3, and NIH3T3 cells. As shown in
Fig. 2A, although MC3T3 preosteoblast cells expressed relatively
low basal levels of AR, dihydrotestosterone induced a timedependent increase in AR expression after 24 h. This AR protein
induction was significant (P < 0.01), with a mean value of 3.2-fold
derived from three assays. In contrast, MDA-PCa-2b cells expressed
higher basal levels of AR protein, but the expression levels were
not further increased by dihydrotestosterone treatment. NIH3T3
cells expressed neither basal nor inducible AR protein. AR

Figure 1. Dihydrotestosterone induces the growth of MDA-PCa-2b cells
cocultured with MC3T3 osteoblasts. Cells were cultured in serum-free medium
and treated with either vehicle or 10 8 mol/L dihydrotestosterone for 7 d.
The number of living cells was counted using a hemacytometer. Data are
expressed as means F SE of three wells from three separate experiments.
*, P < 0.01 versus the cells cultured alone without dihydrotestosterone treatment.
The statistical comparisons among the other groups are shown by P value.

5748

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Androgens Regulate PCa–Bone Cell Interactions via Wnt

MDA-PCa cell lines, including MDA-PCa-2a and -2b, exhibit very
low binding affinities for dihydrotestosterone due to mutations in
the ligand binding domain of the AR (25).
Dihydrotestosterone increases Wnt signaling activity in
preosteoblasts. Functional interactions between Wnt and AR
signaling in AR-positive cell lines have been shown (18–20). Thus,
we tested the effects of dihydrotestosterone on the activation of the
Tcf transcription factor using a Tcf-dependent luciferase transcriptional reporter. Wnt3a-transfected cells were used as a positive
control for Tcf activation in both cell lines. As shown in Fig. 3,
dihydrotestosterone addition resulted in a significant enhancement
of Tcf-luciferase activity in MC3T3 osteoblast cells, but not in MDAPCa-2b cells. These data show that androgens induce Wnt activity
in MC3T3 preosteoblast cells but not in MDA-PCa-2b cells.
We next examined the effects of dihydrotestosterone on GSK3h
protein phosphorylation using Western blot analysis with antibodies specifically against phospho-GSK3h. MC3T3 cells expressed
low basal levels of phosphorylated GSK3h protein, and dihydrotestosterone significantly enhanced GSK3h phosphorylation, particularly at Ser9, in MC3T3 preosteoblast cells (Fig. 4A). This
induction was statistically significant (P < 0.01), with a mean
value of 5.0-fold derived from three assays. There was no effect of
dihydrotestosterone on endogenous GSK3h protein levels in these
cells. We observed no increased phosphorylation of GSK3h protein
in MDA-PCa-2b cells under the same conditions (data not shown).
Activation of the Wnt signaling pathway results in the accumulation of h-catenin in the nucleus associated with heterodimer
formation with Tcf and activation of Tcf-dependent transcription.
Thus, we examined the effects of dihydrotestosterone on
subcellular localization of h-catenin. We also examined the effect

Figure 2. Dihydrotestosterone induces AR expression and transcriptional
activity in MC3T3 cells. A, dihydrotestosterone induces AR protein expression.
Cells were treated with either vehicle or dihydrotestosterone (10 8 mol/L) for
the times indicated. Total protein was extracted and subjected to Western
blotting. The same blot was stripped and reprobed with h-actin antibody.
Normalized quantification (relative ratio of AR to h-actin) of the immunoblots
was done by densitometry and is shown at the bottom. Data shown are
representative of three separate experiments and expressed as fold induction
compared with control. B, dihydrotestosterone induces AR transcriptional
activity. Cells were cotransfected with the TransLucent AR reporter plasmid
(or empty vector as mock control) and the h-galactosidase expression vector and
treated with either vehicle or dihydrotestosterone (10 8 mol/L) for the times
indicated. The resulting luciferase activity was normalized to protein
concentrations and h-galactosidase activity. Data are expressed as fold
induction compared with mock control (100%) and are the mean F SE from three
determinations. **, P < 0.01 versus vehicle control.

transcriptional activity was assessed using an AR luciferase
reporter assay. As shown in Fig. 2B, treatment of MC3T3 cells
with dihydrotestosterone enhanced AR luciferase activity, whereas
this activity was not influenced by dihydrotestosterone addition in
the MDA-PCa-2b cells (Fig. 2B). These observations are in
agreement with a previous study indicating that the family of

www.aacrjournals.org

Figure 3. Dihydrotestosterone increases Tcf-luciferase activity in osteoblasts.
Cells were cotransfected with the Tcf reporter plasmid (or empty vector as
mock control) and the h-galactosidase expression vector and treated with either
vehicle or dihydrotestosterone (10 8 mol/L) for 24 h. Wnt3a-transfected cells
were used as a positive control. The resulting Tcf-luciferase activities were
normalized to protein concentrations and h-galactosidase activity. Data are
expressed as fold induction compared with the vehicle control (100%) and
represent the means F SE from three separate determinations. *, P < 0.05;
**, P < 0.01.

5749

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (12). June 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 4. Effects of dihydrotestosterone on GSK3h phosphorylation, h-catenin relocalization, and nuclear Runx2 protein levels. MC3T3 cells were treated with either
vehicle or dihydrotestosterone (10 8 mol/L) for the times as indicated. A, total protein was extracted and subjected to Western blotting using antibody against
phosphorylated (S-9) GSK3h. The same blot was stripped and reprobed with endogenous GSK3h antibody. Normalized quantification (densitometry) of the
immunoblots is shown at the bottom as relative ratio (p-GSK3h versus E-GSK3h). Data shown are representative of three separate experiments and expressed as fold
induction compared with control. B, in separate experiments, protein in the cytosolic or nuclear fractions was extracted and subjected to Western blotting using
antibodies against h-catenin or Runx2. The same blot was stripped and reprobed with histone antibodies. Normalized quantification (densitometry) of the immunoblots
is shown at the bottom as relative ratio (h-catenin or Runx2 versus histone). Data shown are representative of three separate experiments and expressed as fold
induction compared with control. C, immunofluorescence assay. Cells were treated with either vehicle or dihydrotestosterone (10 8 mol/L) for 24 h and incubated with
anti–h-catenin monoclonal antibodies for 2 h followed by secondary antibodies conjugated to fluorophores for 1 h. D, in separate experiments, protein in the cytosolic
or nuclear fractions was extracted and subjected to Western blotting using antibodies against h-catenin. The same blot was stripped and reprobed with either
h-actin antibodies for cytosolic protein or histone antibodies for nuclear protein. Data shown are representative of three separate experiments.

of dihydrotestosterone on nuclear Runx2 levels in MC3T3 cells
because this transcription factor is a direct target gene of the Wnt
signaling pathway in bone-related cell lines (26). As shown in
Fig. 4B, dihydrotestosterone significantly increased both h-catenin
and Runx2 nuclear levels in MC3T3 preosteoblasts. The mean
values of induction derived from three assays were 3.1- and 3.0-fold
(P < 0.01), respectively. The dihydrotestosterone effect on h-catenin
nuclear localization was confirmed in MC3T3 cells by immunofluorescence assay (Fig. 4C). In contrast, dihydrotestosterone had no
effect on the subcellular localization of h-catenin in MDA-PCa-2b
cells (Fig. 4D).
Inhibition of Wnt signaling suppresses proliferative effects
of dihydrotestosterone on PCa cells in coculture with
preosteoblasts. In an effort to establish that dihydrotestosterone
enhancement of PCa cell growth in the bone microenvironment
was mediated by Wnt signaling pathway activation in preosteoblasts, we determined the effects of DKK-1 and sFRP-1, two natural
inhibitors of the Wnt signaling pathway, on PCa growth in this
coculture system. As shown in Fig. 5A, there was minimal effect of
the inhibitors in the presence or absence of dihydrotestosterone on

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (12). June 15, 2007

the growth of PCa cells when the cells were grown alone. In
coculture with MC3T3, the growth stimulation observed for PCa in
the absence of dihydrotestosterone was also largely unaffected by
the inhibitors, implying that these effects were Wnt independent.
However, both Wnt antagonists inhibited the striking increase in
dihydrotestosterone-induced PCa cell growth in coculture (Fig. 5A).
These findings, together with the results above, indicate that
dihydrotestosterone-induced stimulation of MDA-PCa-2B cells in
coculture with preosteoblasts is mediated by androgenic effects on
Wnt signaling in the bone cells.
We also investigated the effects of dihydrotestosterone specifically on Tcf-luciferase activity, cell proliferation and differentiation
in MC3T3 cells in the presence or absence of Wnt inhibitors. As
shown in Fig. 5B, androgen addition to single cultures of preosteoblasts increased Tcf signaling, which was specifically inhibited
by DKK-1 or sFRP-1, establishing that Wnt activation by dihydrotestosterone was responsible. Although we observed little, if any,
effects of dihydrotestosterone on proliferation, alkaline phosphatase (ALP) was increased by the addition of the hormone. The
inhibitors reduced both basal and dihydrotestosterone-induced

5750

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Androgens Regulate PCa–Bone Cell Interactions via Wnt

ALP levels. The above results indicated that Wnt antagonists
disrupted the effects of dihydrotestosterone-stimulated Wnt activity directly in bone cells and indirectly in MDA-PCa-2b prostate
cancer cells.
Both the PC-3 human prostate cancer cell line and its subline,
PC-3 ML, were originally derived from human PCa bone metastases
and are known to secrete high levels of DKK-1, which might be
expected to abrogate the observed growth-promoting effects of
coculture with preosteoblasts in the presence of dihydrotestosterone. In fact, we confirmed that androgen addition to cocultures of
MC3T3 with either PC-3 or PC-3ML cells did not enhance cancer
cell proliferation (Fig. 6A). To explore the mechanism underlying
the differential effect of dihydrotestosterone in those PCa cell lines,
we further examined the expression of Wnt inhibitors in three
bone-derived PCa cell lines as well as MC3T3 cells. As shown in
Fig. 6B, the expression of Wnt inhibitors was barely detectable in
MC3T3 bone preosteoblasts and relatively low in MDA-PCa-2b
cells. In contrast, PC-3 and PC-3ML cells expressed significantly
higher levels of both DKK-1 and sFRP-1. Thus, high basal expres-

sion levels of these potent Wnt inhibitors in PC-3 and PC-3ML cells
may explain the relative lack of effect of coculture with preosteoblasts in the presence or absence of dihydrotestosterone in these
particular PCa cell lines.

Discussion
Prostate cancer (PCa) is unique in that it retains some degree of
androgen sensitivity, even in its late stages. Another distinguishing
feature of PCa is its tendency to metastasize to bone (1, 3) and to
induce an osteoblastic reaction in the bone microenvironment
(2, 3). The high morbidity and mortality associated with this
disease are directly related to these bone metastases (3). Bone
lesions induced by PCa cells grow at a more rapid rate than
primary PCa or metastatic PCa in other sites (3, 4), suggesting that
bone stromal cells provide a particularly favorable soil for PCa cell
growth and progression (27) by secreting soluble growth factors
(4, 28, 29). Androgens have been shown to influence normal and
abnormal prostate epithelial cell growth both directly (5, 6) and,

Figure 5. Inhibition of Wnt signaling suppresses the
growth-promoting effects of dihydrotestosterone. A, effect
of Wnt signaling inhibition on dihydrotestosterone-induced
PCa cell proliferation. Cells were seeded for single line
culture and coculture as described previously and
subjected to the following treatments: vehicle; or
10 8 mol/L dihydrotestosterone, or recombinant DKK-1
(1 Ag/mL), or sFRP-1 (10 Ag/mL), either alone or in
combination with dihydrotestosterone (10 8 mol/L),
as indicated, for 7 d. Number of living cells was counted
using a hemacytometer. Data are the means F SE of three
wells from triplicate determinations. *, P < 0.05 versus
vehicle control. The statistical comparisons among the
other groups are shown by the P value. B, effect of Wnt
signaling inhibition on dihydrotestosterone effects on
preosteoblasts. Cultured MC3T3 cells were treated with
either vehicle or dihydrotestosterone (10 8 mol/L), or
DKK-1 (1 Ag/mL), or sFRP-1 (10 Ag/mL) for 24 h.
The luciferase reporter activity, proliferative rate, and ALP
activity were assayed in separate experiments. Data
represent the means F SE from three separate
determinations. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01.

www.aacrjournals.org

5751

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (12). June 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 6. Dihydrotestosterone effects on PCa growth in coculture are limited
to the MDA-PCa-2b cell line. A, effects of dihydrotestosterone on the growth of
PC-3 and PC-3ML cell lines. Cells were cultured in serum-free medium either
alone or cocultured with MC3T3 cells in the presence or absence of 10 8 mol/L
dihydrotestosterone for 7 d. The number of living cells (PC-3 or PC-3ML cells)
was counted using a hemacytometer. Data are expressed as means F SE of
three wells from three separate experiments. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01 versus
control. B, protein expression of DKK-1 and sFRP-1. Total protein was isolated
and subjected to immunoblotting using antibodies against DKK-1 or sFRP and
reprobed with h-actin antibody for internal control. Data shown are
representative of three separate experiments.

even more strikingly, indirectly, via modulation of stromal growth
factor expression and secretion (4, 7). Clinically, bidirectional
interactions between PCa cells and osteoblasts stimulate both the
PCa cell growth in bone and the accompanying osteoblastic
reaction (4, 30). However, the precise molecular events and the role
of androgens in the vicious cycle of PCa/bone cell crosstalk have
not been well elucidated.
We used an in vitro coculture system to investigate the indirect
effects of androgens on PCa cell growth via interactions with
preosteoblasts. We selected the MDA-PCa-2b cell line for these
studies because (a) they are derived from a human PCa bone
metastasis, (b) they express AR protein but have an impaired
response to androgens (31), and (c) they produce an osteoblastic
bone reaction in vivo (32). The MC3T3 preosteoblast cell line used
in the cocultures, in contrast, expresses functional AR protein.
Although this in vitro system does not mimic the full in vivo bone
microenvironment that contains endothelial cells, osteoclasts, and
bone matrix, it enabled us to focus specifically on androgenic

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (12). June 15, 2007

modulation of preosteoblast-derived growth factors that stimulate
PCa growth.
Androgens play a critical role in both PCa development and
progression (14, 15). It has been shown that androgens activate
growth-promoting, growth-inhibitory, and/or cell differentiation
pathways directly in AR-expressing PCa cells, and the balance of
these activities may depend on the stage of differentiation of the
cancer cells (33). Androgens also target bone osteoblasts and
osteoblast precursors, leading to enhanced osteoblast differentiation and bone formation (16, 17). In single cultures of preosteoblast
cells, dihydrotestosterone addition induced the expression of AR
protein and activated AR signaling, as measured by AR luciferase
activity. This activation of AR signaling in preosteoblast cells was
accompanied by evidence of activated canonical Wnt signaling and
increased differentiation, as measured by ALP production. Moreover, addition of Wnt inhibitors, DKK-1 and sFRP-1, abrogated the
effects of dihydrotestosterone both on Wnt signaling and ALP
production in the preosteoblast cells. In contrast, dihydrotestosterone addition to single cultures of MDA-PCa-2b cells had no
demonstrable effects on either AR expression or Wnt signaling and
resulted in a modest enhancement of cellular proliferation. In
contrast, the stimulatory effect of preosteoblasts on MDA-PCa-2b
cell proliferation in coculture was markedly enhanced by the
addition of androgens (dihydrotestosterone). Furthermore, the
addition of Wnt inhibitors to the cocultures abrogated the effect of
dihydrotestosterone-stimulated preosteoblasts on MDA-PCa-2b
proliferation. Our results strongly imply that androgenic activation
of Wnt signaling in preosteoblasts increases the secretion of PCa
growth-promoting soluble factors in the cocultures.
We provide evidence that the paracrine growth-promoting
effects of androgen-stimulated preosteoblasts on MDA-PCa-2b
proliferation are mediated by Wnt signaling in the bone cells. This
conclusion is supported by the lack of effect of dihydrotestosterone-stimulated preosteoblasts on the proliferation of PC-3 or
PC-3ML cells in coculture because both of these PCa cell lines
secrete high levels of Wnt inhibitors. Interestingly, the MDA-PCa-2b
cell line is the only one of these three bone-derived PCa cell lines
that produces an osteoblastic bone reaction in vivo (32). We
postulate that the high basal levels of both Wnt inhibitors (DKK-1
and sFRP) by the PC-3 and PC-3 ML cell lines prevent the effect
of androgens on Wnt signaling in the preosteoblasts in coculture.
Although many previous reports have shown interactions
between the AR and Wnt signaling pathways in PCa cells
(13, 34, 35), this is the first report to show such interactions in
preosteoblasts. Previous investigators, using prostate and colon
cancer cells, as well as neuronal cells, concluded that there is
negative cooperativity between AR and Wnt signaling, i.e., ARmediated repression of h-catenin/Tcf gene activation (19, 36, 37).
It is of note, therefore, that our data show a stimulatory effect of
androgens and AR on canonical Wnt signaling in bone preosteoblasts.
Our findings are thus consistent with a mechanism underlying
the predilection for PCa cells to metastasize to bone and induce
osteoblastic activity. Androgens regulate normal prostate development and are required for prostate tumorigenesis. In both
development and carcinogenesis, many of the androgenic effects
on prostate epithelial cells are elicited via signaling through
stromal AR (38–40). We confirmed that PCa growth in the bone is
stimulated by androgenic effects on stromal cells and specifically
by activation of Wnt signaling in preosteoblasts. This androgenmediated Wnt activation in preosteoblasts leads to the secretion of

5752

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Androgens Regulate PCa–Bone Cell Interactions via Wnt

soluble factors that stimulate the proliferation of a bone-derived
human PCa cell line, MDA-PCa-2b. Once these factors are
identified, we will determine whether they also enhance non–
bone-derived human prostate cancer cell proliferation. This may
have important clinical relevance in the management of PCa. Our
data predict that treatment with either androgen-ablative or Wntinhibitory therapy early in the course of the disease (before bone
metastases) may inhibit both the development of bone metastases
and the accompanying osteoblast reaction. It is clear from the
current literature that targeting cancer cells directly, even with
multimodality approaches, often leads to resistance and relapse.

References
1. Abrams H, Spiro R, Goldstein N. Metastases in
carcinoma. Cancer 1950;3:74–85.
2. Zhang J, Dai J, Qi Y, et al. Osteoprotegerin inhibits
prostate cancer-induced osteoclastogenesis and prevents prostate tumor growth in the bone. J Clin Invest
2001;107:1235–44.
3. Jacobs SC. Spread of prostatic carcinoma to bone.
Urology 1983;21:337–44.
4. Gleave M, Hsieh JT, Gao C, von Eschenbach AC, Chung
LWK. Acceleration of human prostate cancer growth
in vivo by factors produced by prostate and fibroblasts.
Cancer Res 1991;51:3753–61.
5. Liu XH, Wiley S, Meikle AW. Androgens regulate
growth of human prostate cancer cells in culture by
increasing TGF-a secretion and EGF receptor content.
J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1993;77:1472–8.
6. Lu J, Nishizawa Y, Tamaka A, et al. Inhibitory effect of
antibody against bFGF on androgen- or glucocorticoidinduced growth of Shionogi carcinoma 115 cells in
serum-free culture. Cancer Res 1989;49:4963–7.
7. Camps JL, Chang SM, Hsu TC, et al. Fibroblastmediated acceleration of human epithelial tumor
growth in vivo . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1990;87:75–9.
8. Huang WC, Xie Z, Konaka H, Sodek J, Zhau HE, Chung
LWK. Human osteocalcin and bone sialoprotein mediating osteomimicry of prostate cancer cells: role of
cAMP-dependent protein kinase A signaling pathway.
Cancer Res 2005;65:2303–13.
9. Lu Y, Zhang J, Dai J, et al. Osteoblasts induce prostate
cancer proliferation and PSA expression through
interleukin-6–mediated activation of the androgen
receptor. Clin Exp Metastasis 2004;21:399–408.
10. Logan CY, Nusse R. The Wnt signaling pathway in
development and disease. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 2004;
20:781–810.
11. Westendorf J, Kahler RA, Schroeder TM. Wnt
signaling in osteoblasts and bone diseases. Gene 2004;
341:19–39.
12. Gregory CA, Gunn WG, Reyes E, et al. How Wnt
signaling affects bone repair by mesenchymal stem cells
from the bone marrow. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2005;1049:97–106.
13. Verras M, Brown J, Li X, Nusse R, Sun Z. Wnt3a
growth factor induces androgen receptor-mediated
transcription and enhances cell growth in human
prostate cancer cells. Cancer Res 2004;64:8860–6.
14. Culig Z, Klocker H, Bartsch G, Steiner H, Hobisch A.
Androgen receptors in prostate cancer. J Urol 2003;170:
1363–9.

www.aacrjournals.org

Therapies aimed at the noncancerous niche, i.e., bone and vasculature, may produce more long-lasting disease control.

Acknowledgments
Received 2/5/2007; revised 3/22/2007; accepted 4/23/2007.
Grant support: Department of Defense (DAMD X81XWH-05-1-0166) of the U.S.
government, the T.J. Martell Foundation for Leukemia, Cancer and Aids Research, and
Prostate Action Inc.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank Dr. B. Vogelstein for the Tcf luciferase reporter construct and Dr. Mark
Stearns for the PC-3ML cell line.

15. Bevan CL. Androgen receptor in prostate cancer:
cause and cure. Trends Endocrinol Metab 2005;16:
395–7.
16. Vanderschueren D, Vandenput L, Boonen S, Lindberg
MK, Bouillon R, Ohlsson C. Androgens and bone.
Endocr Rev 2004;25:389–425.
17. Coxam V, Bowman BM, Roth CM, Miller MA, Miller
SC. Effects of dihydrotestosterone alone and combined
with estrogen on bone mineral density, bone growth,
and formation rates in ovariectomized rats. Bone 1996;
19:107–14.
18. Yang F, Li X, Sharma M, et al. Linking h-catenin to
androgen-signaling pathway. J Biol Chem 2002;277:
11336–44.
19. Pawlowski JE, Ertel JR, Allen MP, et al. Liganded
androgen receptor interaction with h-catenin nuclear
co-localization and modulation of transcriptional activity in neuronal cells. J Biol Chem 2002;277:20702–10.
20. Truica CI, Byers S, Gelmann EP. h-catenin affects
androgen receptor transcriptional activity and ligand
specificity. Cancer Res 2000;60:4709–13.
21. Wang M, Stearns M. Isolation and characterization of
PC-3 human prostate tumor sublines which preferentially metastasize to select organs in SCID mice.
Differentiation 1991;48:115–25.
22. Liu XH, Kirschenbaum A, Yao S, Levine AC. Crosstalk
between the IL-6 and PGE2 signaling systems results in
enhancement of osteoclastogenesis through effects on
the OPG/RANKL/RANK system. Endocrinology 2005;
146:1991–8.
23. Liu XH, Kirchenbaum A, Lu M, Yao S, Holland JF,
Levine AC. Prostaglandin E2 induces hypoxia inducible
factor-1a protein stabilization and nuclear localization
in a human prostate cancer cell line. J Biol Chem 2002;
277:50081–6.
24. Liu GZ, Bafico A, Harris VK, Aaronson SA. A novel
mechanism for Wnt activation of canonical signaling
through the LRP6 receptor. Mol Cell Biol 2003;23:
5825–35.
25. Zhao XY, Boyle B, Krishnan AV, Navone NM, Peehl
DM, Feldman D. Two mutations identified in the
androgen receptor of the new human prostate cancer
cell line MDA-PCa-2a. J Urol 1999;162:2192–9.
26. Gaur T, Lengner CJ, Hovhannisyan H, et al. Canonical
Wnt signaling promotes osteogenesis by directly
stimulating Runx2 gene expression. J Biol Chem 2005;
280:33132–40.
27. Fidler IJ. The pathogenesis of cancer metastasis: the
‘‘seed and soil’’ hypothesis revisited. Nat Rev Cancer
2003;3:1–6.

5753

28. Hauschka PV, Mavrakos AE, Lafrati MD, Doleman
SE, Klagsbrun M. Growth factors in bone matrix.
Isolation of multiple types by affinity chromatography on heparin-sepharose. J Biol Chem 1986;261:
12665–74.
29. Logothetis CJ, Lin SH. Osteoblasts in prostate cancer
metastasis to bone. Nat Rev Cancer 2005;5:21–8.
30. Yang J, Karim F, Peleg S, et al. Prostate cancer cells
induce osteoblast differentiation through a Cbfa1 dependent pathway. Cancer Res 2001;61:5652–9.
31. Navone NM, Rodriguez-Vargas MD, Benedict WF,
et al. TabBO: a model reflecting common molecular
features of androgen-independent prostate cancer. Clin
Cancer Res 2000;6:1190–7.
32. Fizazi K, Yang J, Peleg S, et al. Prostate cancer cellsosteoblast interaction shifts expression of growth/
survival-related genes in prostate cancer and reduces
expression of osteoprotegerin in osteoblasts. Clin
Cancer Res 2003;9:2587–97.
33. Hendriksen PJM, Dits NFJ, Kokame K, et al. Evolution
of the androgen receptor pathway during progression of
prostate cancer. Cancer Res 2006;66:5012–20.
34. Cronauer MV, Schulz WA, Ackermann R, Burchardt
M. Effects of WNT/h-catenin pathway activation on
signaling through T-cell factor and androgen receptor in prostate cancer cell lines. Int J Oncol 2005;26:
1033–40.
35. Chesire DR, Ewing CM, Gage WR, Isaacs WB. In vitro
evidence for complex modes of nuclear h-catenin
signaling during prostate growth and tumorigenesis.
Oncogene 2002;21:2679–94.
36. Mulholland DJ, Read JT, Renniw PS, Cox ME, Nelson
CC. Functional localization and competition between
the androgen receptor and T-cell factor for nuclear hcatenin: a means for inhibition of the Tcf signaling axis.
Oncogene 2003;22:5602–13.
37. Shah S, Hecht A, Pestell RG, Byers SW. Transrepression of h-catenin activity by nuclear receptors. J
Biol Chem 2003;278:48137–45.
38. Cunha GR, Donjacour AA, Cooke PS, et al. The
endocrinology and developmental biology of the prostate. Endocr Rev 1987;8:338–62.
39. Donjacour AA, Rosales A, Higgins SJ, Cunha GR.
Characterization of antibodies to androgen-dependent
secretory proteins of the mouse dorsolateral prostate.
Endocrinology 1990;126:1343–54.
40. Olumi AF, Grossfeld GD, Hayward SW, Carroll PR,
Tisty TD, Cunha GR. Carcinoma-associated fibroblasts
direct tumor progression of initiated human prostate
epithelium. Cancer Res 1999;59:5002–11.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (12). June 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Androgen-Induced Wnt Signaling in Preosteoblasts
Promotes the Growth of MDA-PCa-2b Human Prostate
Cancer Cells
Xin-Hua Liu, Alexander Kirschenbaum, Shen Yao, et al.
Cancer Res 2007;67:5747-5753.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/12/5747

This article cites 40 articles, 18 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/12/5747.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 2 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/12/5747.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

