Original Article

Concept-Elicitation Phase for the Development of the Pediatric
Patient-Reported Outcome Version of the Common
Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events
Meaghann S. Weaver, MD, MPH1,2; Bryce B. Reeve, PhD3,4; Justin N. Baker, MD1; Christa E. Martens, MPH3;
Molly McFatrich, MPH3; Catriona Mowbray, PhD, BSN, RN, CPN2; Diana Palma, BS, CCRP5; Lillian Sung, MD, PhD6,7;
Deborah Tomlinson, MN, RN6; Janice Withycombe, PhD, RN, CCRP8,9; and Pamela Hinds, PhD, RN, FAAN10,11

BACKGROUND: Symptoms arising from disease or treatment are subjective experiences. Insight into pediatric oncology treatment
side effects or symptoms is ideally obtained from direct inquiry to the ill child. A concept-elicitation phase in a patient-reported outcome (PRO) instrument design provides an opportunity to elicit children’s voices to shape cancer symptom selection and terminology. METHODS: Through semistructured, one-on-one, voice-recorded interviews, symptom data were collected from 96 children with
cancer between the ages of 7 and 20 years who were undergoing oncologic treatment at 7 pediatric oncology sites in the United
States and Canada. RESULTS: The mean number of symptoms reported per child over the prior 7 days was 1.49 (range, 0-7; median, 1;
standard deviation, 1.56). The most common symptoms across all age groups were tiredness or fatigue, nausea or vomiting, aches or
pains, and weakness. There was not a statistically significant correlation between self-reported wellness and the number of reported
symptoms (r 5 –0.156, n 5 65, P 5.215) or the number of symptoms reported by age group or diagnosis type. Forty participants reported
experiencing a change in their body in the past week, with one-third of these changes unanticipated. Only through direct questions
about feelings were emotional symptoms revealed because 90.6% of interviewees who discussed feelings (48 of 53) did so only in
the context of direct questioning on feelings. Adolescents were more likely than younger children to discuss feelings as part of the
interview. CONCLUSIONS: Concept elicitation from children and adolescents has the potential to enable researchers to develop
C 2015 American Cancer Society.
age-appropriate, accurately representative PRO measures. Cancer 2016;122:141-8. V
KEYWORDS: adverse events, instrument development, patient communication, patient-reported outcomes, pediatric oncology,
qualitative research, symptoms.

INTRODUCTION
Children and adolescents undergoing cancer-directed treatment have the potential to provide the most insightful perspective for the accurate portrayal of how they “feel and function”1 while they are on therapy, particularly with respect to
symptom burden.2 Pediatric patient-reported outcomes (PROs) involve the report of health symptoms directly from the
patient’s perspective without filtering through proxies, researchers, or clinicians.3 Because symptoms during oncology
treatment are subjective experiences known best by the patient,4 insight into these symptoms is ideally obtained with PRO
instruments. Despite the recognized importance of PROs, when a study team recently updated a systematic review of the
use of symptom assessment scales in pediatric oncology, it found that only 3 of more than 500 articles published between
2012 and 2014 used child self-reports in the setting of pediatric cancer.5
When children and adolescents, including those with cancer, are given the opportunity to discuss their health status
and health experiences, they serve as effective and reliable experiential symptom content experts.5-10 Adult oncology clinicians tend to underreport the quantity and severity of symptoms in comparison with what their patients report.11-13

Corresponding author: Meaghann S. Weaver, MD, MPH, Department of Oncology, St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, 262 Danny Thomas Place, Memphis, TN
38105; meaghann.weaver@stjude.org
1
Department of Oncology, St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee; 2Department of Oncology, Children’s National Health Systems, Washington,
DC; 3Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina; 4Department of Health Policy and Management, Gillings
School of Global Public Health, Chapel Hill, North Carolina; 5Children’s Center for Cancer and Blood Diseases, Children’s Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California; 6Child Health Evaluative Sciences, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Canada; 7Division of Hematology/Oncology, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Canada; 8Palmetto Health Children’s Hospital, Columbia, South Carolina; 9Nell Hodgson Woodruff School of Nursing, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia;
10
Department of Nursing Research and Quality Outcomes, Children’s National Health Systems, Washington, DC; 11Department of Pediatrics, George Washington
University, Washington, DC.

Additional supporting information may be found in the online version of this article
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29702, Received: June 30, 2015; Revised: August 11, 2015; Accepted: August 26, 2015, Published online September 30, 2015 in Wiley Online
Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Cancer

January 1, 2016

141

Original Article

Discrepancies between parent and child symptom reporting, particularly for nonobservable symptoms,14-17 has
compelled researchers and professional organizations to
surmise that although proxy symptom reporting offers
family insight, the gold standard in pediatric symptom
reporting should be the child directly reporting.18 The US
Food and Drug Administration has recommended the use
of pediatric PRO instruments, rather than proxy instruments, to inform regulatory decisions and for use in medical labeling.3 The National Quality Forum has called for
the inclusion of children in PRO investigations.19 The
International Society for Pharmacoeconomics and Outcomes Research20 has called for pediatric PRO development, assessment, and implementation. The Institute of
Medicine’s 6 dimensions of patient centeredness have
been linked to meaningful investment in PROs for cancer
patients of all ages.21
To ensure that a pediatric cancer PRO instrument is
comprehensive and meaningful to the target population,
children and adolescents with cancer should serve as
symptom content experts. This article presents the findings from semistructured concept-elicitation interviews
with 96 children and adolescents aged 7 to 20 years who
were undergoing treatment for cancer.
Objectives

The purpose of the concept-elicitation phase of the
patient-reported outcome version of the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (PRO-CTCAE) project was to elicit patient voices to identify meaningful
symptoms and to shape the pediatric PRO-CTCAE
instrument’s accuracy, developmental applicability, and
terminology.
The aims of the concept-elicitation phase were 3fold, with each aim driven by a consideration of possible
clinical application. The first aim was to quantify and categorize the prevalence of symptoms by stratified age
groups and to capture the terminology used by each age
group before the introduction of symptom vocabulary.
The second aim was to compare reported body changes
with any reported surprises in body changes (symptoms
that the participant had not anticipated). The third aim
was to analyze the effectiveness of asking directly about
feelings with the intent of determining whether emotions
might be missed if patients were not specifically asked
about feelings as part of the symptom inquiry.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
This prospective, qualitative study of concept elicitation
was integrated within the National Cancer Institute–
142

funded Creating and Validating Child Adverse Event
Reporting in Oncology Trials study (National Institutes
of Health grant R01CA175759). The study had institutional review board approval at 7 geographically diverse
pediatric oncology treatment sites: Children National
Health System, Children’s Hospital Los Angeles,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute/Boston Children’s
Hospital, Hospital for Sick Children, Palmetto Health,
St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, and University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill. The primary aim of the
overall study is to develop and validate pediatric
PRO-CTCAE measures for use in clinical trials and practice. The prospective, qualitative-phase substudy included
a 1–time point, voice-recorded interview with Englishspeaking children and adolescents with cancer between
the ages of 7 and 20 years who were undergoing chemotherapy. Participants were identified by chart reviews and
primary team referrals. To be eligible for the study, the
participant on cancer-directed therapy had to be between
the ages of 7 and 20 years at the time of enrollment. Both
child and caregiver/proxy had to be English-speaking to
participate in this round of interviews. Participants were
selected by purposive and not consecutive sampling. After
written consent was obtained from the proxy and written
assent was obtained from the child, each child was interviewed in a private hospital room or conference room
with the goal of the interview occurring separately from
the caregiver/proxy interview to minimize biasing the
child’s report.
To standardize procedures and ensure consistency in
the interview format across sites, interviewers attended a
1-day concept-elicitation and cognitive interview trainee
workshop at the University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill. After extensive piloting, final interview questions for
the concept-elicitation phase consisted of the following
sequence:
“How has your body felt over the past seven days?”
“Have you had any changes in your body?”
“Have you had any changes in your body that maybe
surprised you or that you didn’t expect?”
“How have your feelings been in the past seven days?”
Questions targeted a 7-day recall period, as has been
used in prior pediatric cancer studies.18 These conceptelicitation questions were asked at the beginning of the
interviews before any PRO items were shown to the children. This was done for 2 reasons: to remove any possibility that the PRO instrument would inform their answers
and to hear children’s own description of their symptom
Cancer

January 1, 2016

Pediatric Cancer Patient-Reported Outcomes/Weaver et al

experiences in their own words. Interview data were summarized and entered into the Research Electronic Data
Capture (REDCap) software program22 by each interviewer independently. Interview recordings were
uploaded into REDCap and transcribed verbatim by a
medical transcriptionist team. A team of 6 investigators,
who were engaged in data-entry quality checks, decided to
use raw transcript reports for accurate data extraction in
the concept-elicitation phase because of the goal of accessing unfiltered child and adolescent voices. A minimum of
2 blinded study team members extracted each data point
from the original transcripts. For the 10 missing transcripts (because of a voice-recording error or a child’s preference not to be recorded), the interviewer’s REDCap
data entry was used.
For this qualitative study, the primary mode of analysis was qualitative investigation into phrases used and
symptoms reported. Descriptive statistics were calculated
for demographic characteristics and symptom prevalence.
Spearman’s correlation was used to analyze continuous
variables. Cross-tabulations and Kruskal-Wallis tests were
used to analyze categorical variables. Variables potentially
related to qualitative symptom reporting (age group and
cancer type) were a priori determined on the basis of the
expert opinion of 4 pediatric oncologists, 3 advanced
practice nurses, and 3 researchers and a review of prior
symptom burden literature. Transcripts were reviewed for
wellness words spoken by the interviewee in response to
the following question: “How has your body felt?” The
“good,” “okay,” and “bad” phrase words were converted
into a predetermined wellness scale with Likert numbers
ranging from 1 (very bad) to 9 (very good). Age groups
(7-8, 9-12, 13-15, and 16-20 years) were predetermined
according to similarities in cognitive capacities and abilities as postulated in developmental science theory.23,24
All analyses were performed with IBM SPSS statistical
software (version 23).
RESULTS
Ninety-six participants enrolled in the study between February and November 2014. The child or proxy refusal rate
was 24.4% (31 refusals among 127 approached patients).
For the 6 sites that allowed data collection on refusal cases,
there were no statistically significant differences observed
in demographic or diagnostic characteristics between
declining participants and consenting participants.
The median concept-elicitation interview time was 50
minutes. Participants’ demographic and clinical data are
provided in Table 1.
Cancer

January 1, 2016

TABLE 1. Medical and Demographic Characteristics
of the Participants (n 5 96)
Characteristic
Sex
Male
Female
Age category
7-8 y
9-12 y
13-15 y
16-20 y
Race/ethnicity
White
Black
Hispanic
Asian
Middle Eastern
Pacific Islander
Other
Diagnostic category
Leukemia/lymphomaa
Solid tumor
Neuro-oncology
Documented relapse status
Initial diagnosis
Relapse
Treatment location
Hospital for Sick Children
St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital
Children’s Hospital Los Angeles
Children’s National Health Systems
Palmetto Health
University of North Carolina
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute/Boston Children’s Hospital

No. (%)

40 (41.7)
56 (58.3)
20
25
24
27

(20.8)
(26.0)
(25.0)
(28.1)

51
19
16
5
1
1
3

(53.1)
(19.8)
(16.7)
(5.2)
(1.04)
(1.04)
(3.1)

59 (61.5)
34 (35.4)
3 (3.1)
84 (87.5)
12 (12.5)
21
18
16
15
9
9
8

(21.9)
(18.8)
(16.7)
(15.6)
(9.4)
(9.4)
(8.3)

a

Includes acute lymphoid leukemia (ALL) (n 5 36), non-Hodgkin lymphoma
(n 5 10), Hodgkin lymphoma (n 5 8), and acute myeloid leukemia (AML)
(n 5 5).

Aim 1: Symptom Prevalence and
Self-Reported Wellness

The mean number of symptoms (in the past 7 days)
reported per patient with a first diagnosis of cancer (84 of
96) was 1.49 symptoms (range, 0-7 symptoms per person;
standard deviation, 1.56 symptoms), and the mean number of symptoms per patient with a relapsed cancer (12 of
96) was 1.75 (range, 0-5 symptoms per person; standard
deviation, 1.36 symptoms). Of the 12 participants with a
relapsed cancer, 2 did not report a symptom in their interview (17%). One-third of all 96 participants did not
report a symptom in their interviews. Symptom prevalence ranged from 29.2% for “feeling tired or fatigued” to
1% for “difficulty with sleep,” “incontinence,” “swollen
gums,” “change in hearing,” and “racing heart.” With a
reported prevalence > 10%, the most common symptoms
across all age groups were tiredness or fatigue, nausea or
vomiting, aches or pains, and weakness (Table 2).
Qualitative interview findings included storysharing descriptions more often in younger ages (“just
143

Original Article
TABLE 2. Symptom Prevalence Report for All Ages

Symptom
No symptom
Tiredness or fatigue
Nausea or vomiting
Aches or pains
Weakness
Weight change
Appetite change
Headache
Skin change
Stomach discomfort
Mucositis/sore throat
Alopecia
Neuropathy
Difficulty ambulating
Energy change or mood change
Temperature change
Pruritus
Pulmonary symptom
Dizzy or lightheaded
Coagulation (bleed/bruise)
Difficulty with sleep
Incontinence
Swollen gums
Change in hearing
Cardiac symptom

No. of IntervieweesTotal Interviewees
Reporting a
Reporting a
Symptom (n 5 96) Symptom (%)
32
28
17
12
11
9
8
7
6
5
5
5
4
4
4
4
3
3
3
2
1
1
1
1
1

33.3
29.2
17.7
12.5
11.5
9.4
8.3
7.3
6.3
5.2
5.2
5.2
4.2
4.2
4.2
4.2
3.1
3.1
3.1
2.1
1
1
1
1
1

wanted to sleep for a whole year” to describe feeling tired,
“couldn’t eat food” to describe anorexia, or “flashes of
cold” to describe chills). Older participants tended to
depict the cause of symptoms as well as a description of
symptoms (“anemia” when describing the reason for
fatigue or naming chemotherapy culprits when describing
neuropathy). The frequencies of reported symptoms and
the comprehensive terminology used by age group are
available as online supporting information (Supporting
Information 1). There was no significant difference in the
number of symptoms reported by age group or diagnosis
type. The length of treatment ranged from 1 week to 90
months (mean, 10.7 months; median, 5 months; standard
deviation, 14.9 months). There was a weak, negative correlation between the length of treatment and the number
of symptoms reported; it was found to not be statistically
significant in patients undergoing treatment for initial
cancer (r 5 –0.129, n 5 84, P 5 .241) or in patients
undergoing treatment for relapsed cancer (r 5 –0.392,
n 5 12, P 5 .207). This suggested there was not an association between the length of treatment and the number of
symptoms reported.
Among the 72 of 96 interviewees who used a wellness word in response to the question on how their body
felt, 44 of 72 (61.1%) used “pretty good,” “good,” or
“really good” terminology; 16 of 72 (22.2%) used neutral
144

Figure 1. Frequency table depicting self-described participant
wellness categories.

phrases such as “okay,” “functional,” and “normal”; 6 of
72 (8.3%) used “sick,” “bad,” or “very bad” terminology;
and 6 of 72 (8.3%) shared spectrum phrases such as “better
with time” or “sick but now recovered” (Fig. 1). There was
a weak, negative, not statistically significant correlation
between self-reported wellness and the number of symptoms reported (r 5 –0.156, n 5 65, P 5 .215).

Aim 2: Body Changes as Expected and
Surprised

Four participants were not asked about body changes
because of an interview interruption or an interviewer’s
decision to skip this question. Of the 92 total interviewees
asked about body changes experienced in the past 7 days,
52 of 92 (56.5%) reported no change. Among the 40 of
92 participants who experienced a change, 31 experienced
negative changes, and 9 experienced positive changes such
as hair growing back sooner than anticipated, lymph
nodes shrinking, and breathing more easily.
Of the 78 interviewees then asked the optional
follow-up question of whether they were surprised by these
reported body changes, 49 (62.8%) were not surprised,
whereas 24 (30.8%) were surprised by a body change (Table 3). Skin changes (rash, peeling, eczema flare, and stretch
marks) were the body change most associated with surprise.
Five of these 78 interviewees (6.4%) reported that although
they were surprised by a body change, they had been
warned of this potential occurrence and readily associated
this warning with a medication side effect: “aches” from
leukocyte growth factor injections, “puffiness” from
steroids, “red feet” and “peeling palms” from cytarabine,
and “dark nails” from “some chemotherapy.”
Cancer

January 1, 2016

Pediatric Cancer Patient-Reported Outcomes/Weaver et al

TABLE 3. Body Changes Reported as a Surprise
Symptom
Unanticipated Body Changea

No. of Times Body
Change Was Reportedb

Skin change
Aches or pains
Difficulty ambulating
Nausea or vomiting
Abdominal pain
Hair change
Headache
Mucositis/sore throat
Pruritus
Pulmonary symptom
Allergic reaction
Edema: circle face
Infection of central line
Lymph node change
Nail change
a
b

6
5
2
2
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

There were 15 changes and 24 respondents.
More than 1 body change per respondent was possible.

Aim 3: Feelings and Emotions

Fifty-three of the 96 total interviewees (55.2%) discussed
feelings or emotions at some point during the interview.
These interviewees most frequently discussed feelings
only when they were asked the following: “How have your
feelings been?” (48 of 53 or 90.6% of those who discussed
feelings did so only in the context of being directly asked
about feelings). A summary of the vocabulary used to
depict emotions in response to a direct feeling inquiry is
presented in Table 4. Few children or adolescents discussed feelings when they were asked how their body felt
(6 of 53), and even fewer discussed feelings when they
were asked about additional symptoms (3 of 53) or when
they were asked about health problems not listed in the
questionnaire (3 of 53). Supporting Information 2 (see
online supporting information) provides a summary of
feeling responses using interviewee terminology.
Fewer younger participants than older participants
reported feelings or emotions. Among 7- to 8-year-olds,
25% (5 of 20) reported feelings; among 9- to 12-yearolds, 52% (13 of 25) reported feelings; among 13- to
15-year-olds, 71% (17 of 24) reported feelings; and among
16- to 20-year-olds, 67% (18 of 27) reported feelings.
DISCUSSION
This study has demonstrated that children and adolescents
with cancer are able to self-report clinically relevant physical
and emotional concerns according to their subjective experience. This population would likely, however, benefit
from additional focused questions regarding symptoms
and feelings. Content validity for symptom description “is
Cancer

January 1, 2016

TABLE 4. Responses to “How Have Your Feelings
Been?”
Positive Feelings
(22 Respondents)

Negative Feelings
(30 Respondents)

Neutral Feelings
(13 Respondents)
































Happy (n 5 13)
Not sad (n 5 3)
Positive (n 5 2)
Bright (n 5 1)
Confident (n 5 1)
Excitement (n 5 1)
Making the
best of it (n 5 1)

Sad (n 5 5)
Depressed (n 5 3)
Upset (n 5 3)
Angry (n 5 2)
Emotional (n 5 2)
Frustrated (n 5 2)
Grumpy (n 5 2)
Agitated (n 5 1)
Breakdown (n 5 1)
Crazy (n 5 1)
Drained (n 5 1)
Irritable (n 5 1)
Mad (n 5 1)
Offensive (n 5 1)
Pissed off (n 5 1)
Put on
antidepressants (n 5 1)
 Stressed out (n 5 1)
 Very down (n 5 1)

Normal (n 5 6)
Up and down (n 5 2)
Boredom (n 5 1)
In the middle (n 5 1)
Like a roller
coaster (n 5 1)
 Regular (n 5 1)
 Thoughtful (n 5 1)

This table includes all feelings mentioned by the 48 participants who were
directly asked “How have your feelings been?” during the interview. Some
participants mentioned a combination of feelings or more than 1 feeling in
their responses.

primarily established through qualitative research that
includes direct input from the target population.”20 Thus,
content expert empowerment begins by engagement in
concept elicitation through semistructured, qualitative
interviews.20 Prioritizing qualitative methodology allows
the target population to state the symptom impact before
the introduction of the study team’s predetermined symptom prioritization or terminology.25 Because the goal of
PRO inquiry is to understand and evaluate the impact of
disease and treatment, qualitative methodology serves as an
essential foundation for PRO instrument design. These
interviews enabled the study team to identify, analyze, and
report not only symptom prevalence but also the vocabulary that these children used to describe their symptoms
associated with both illness and treatment for incorporation
into the PRO instrument design. Providing children an
opportunity to share their chosen words for various
symptoms enabled the study team to adapt the pediatric
PRO-CTCAE instruments to terms more readily comprehensible to children and adolescents. The data confirm the
presence of burdensome symptoms as described by interviewees, although the result of one-third of interviewees
not reporting symptoms was a lower prevalence than prior
questionnaire-based investigations have reported in children and adolescents undergoing oncologic treatment.5,26
The lower prevalence may be due to limited recall without
the reminder of questionnaire cues or may reflect the child
145

Original Article

not wanting to burden the medical team with symptom
reporting. The lower prevalence may hint that pediatric
oncology patients prefer not to think of adverse events, so
they may not be carefully tracking symptoms unless they
are asked, or patients may tend to focus on the most burdensome or troublesome symptoms and thus may not be
including the complete symptom experience when they are
qualitatively reporting. The difference in prevalence warrants further research into the use of mixed-method PRO
approaches (combined questionnaire and open-ended
interviews) to evaluate and compare the content pooled by
each approach. The real bottom line does appear to be the
need for care teams to ask each patient directly about symptoms and to explore the child’s response. The low number
of symptoms reported indicates that inquiring will not
require an inordinate amount of clinical time.
Members of the study team had previously queried
pediatric oncology clinicians with direct experience in
treating children and adolescents with cancer on important observable symptoms for pediatric PRO-CTCAE
instrument inclusion.27 Of the 16 core Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events items from this initial
clinician survey (Supporting Information 3 [see online
supporting information]), appetite increase and swollen
gums were the only 2 new symptoms raised by the
concept-elicitation phase of the patient interviews that
were not on the clinicians’ symptom item list. Two items
that had been prioritized by clinicians in the PROCTCAE core symptom list were not mentioned in the
pediatric concept-elicitation interviews: constipation and
diarrhea. Interestingly, 2 pediatric interviewees later asked
if bowel conversations were polite or socially acceptable to
discuss when the core items were reviewed after concept
elicitation, and this lent consideration to whether participants were embarrassed to mention these symptoms
upfront in qualitative interviews.
The overarching clinical implication of this study is
the privilege and responsibility of using direct patient
reporting for clinical adverse-event and symptom reporting. When we consider the clinical implications for each of
the individual aims, the snapshot of current symptom profiles emphasized by patients across sites as offered by the
aim 1 data summary supports prioritization of supportivecare opportunities with scale-up of pharmacological, nonpharmacological, and complementary interventions for the
most prevalent or burdensome symptoms. The aim 1 data
analysis revealed that a high occurrence of symptoms does
not translate into ready self-reporting of increased personal
distress, and this reminds clinicians to not assume that
“good” in response to “how are you doing?” translates into
146

an absence of symptom burden. These findings suggest
that a deeper probe into children’s experienced symptoms
is needed because children may respond “good” as a socially
conditioned response or to put on a brave front in dealing
with their cancer. This also points to the need to have a
PRO instrument such as PRO-CTCAE to directly ask children their experiences with specific symptoms.
The aim 2 finding that one-third of interviewees
were surprised by body changes suggests a potential opportunity to increase symptom education and anticipatory guidance. This surprise may be due to the following:
the participant was optimistic that he or she would not
personally experience the expected toxicity, the participant did not recall having been warned of the toxicity,
or the side effect had not been discussed. However, these
reasons cannot be inferred from the current data.
The aim 3 finding that 90.6% of the interviewees
who discussed emotions (48 of 53) did so only when they
were asked directly about feelings emphasizes the importance of providers’ inquiring specifically about feelings to
prevent missing critical emotional reporting (eg, depression, anxiety, or anger), particularly for participants aged
13 to 20 years, who contributed 66% of the feeling
responses (35 of 53). The fact that the interviewees did
not discuss feelings when they were asked about their
body wellness may suggest that this population would be
more inclined to respond to psychological wellness questions separately from physical wellness questions. In a
study conducted with adults receiving palliative chemotherapy, all patients wanted to discuss their physical symptoms and physical functioning and were also willing to
address their emotional functioning and daily activities.28
However, one-quarter of the patients were willing to discuss these latter 2 issues only at the initiative of their physician.28 In the current study, the 3 adolescents who
expressed feelings only after the final question of “any
health problems we forgot to ask?” demonstrated that
older adolescents may benefit from established conversational trust before one delves into immediate discussion
on feelings as part of psychosocial symptom experiences.
The low number of neuro-oncology participants
represents a study limitation, particularly because this
population has been noted to have a higher symptom burden.5 Included diagnoses were otherwise consistent with
North American pediatric and adolescent cancer type statistics.29 A second limitation of the study includes a possible selection bias because children with severe illness or
language or cognitive functioning impairments may have
been excluded on account of an inability to participate in
interviews. The time period of 7 days may have led the
Cancer

January 1, 2016

Pediatric Cancer Patient-Reported Outcomes/Weaver et al

respondent to narrow his or her scope of recalled experiences. A further limitation of this study is generalizability
because the sampling was purposive and not consecutive.
By prioritizing the interviewing of pediatric participants
apart from proxies, this study was strengthened by minimization of proxy influence on the child report. By interviewing participants before they were introduced to the
wording of the written PRO-CTCAE instrument draft,
this study minimized the biasing of the participants’ vocabulary choices. Finally, this study reported solely on
English-speaking children. Further data have been collected from children who preferred to conduct the interview in Spanish; these results are planned to be reported
in a future publication.
Further work is warranted to edit the next round of
interviews and particularly to adapt the feelings question
into language more conducive to younger children. Our
study team is now pursuing a second phase of cognitive
interviewing to further explore terminology for adverse
events and wording of symptoms to be certain that these
items are accurately interpreted into child-friendly and
child-meaningful words.
In conclusion, in designing meaningful and rigorous
metrics for PRO instruments for the pediatric and adolescent oncology patient population, clinicians and researchers should begin with patient voice. This would reduce
the risk of missing symptoms that children or adolescents
with cancer are actually experiencing. Systematic symptom inquiry may best be initiated with open-ended questions to enable children to provide personally relevant
prioritization of symptom burden for best practice
adverse-event reporting. Providers should inquire specifically about feelings to prevent missing critical emotional
symptomatology.

4.
5.
6.

7.
8.
9.

10.
11.
12.

13.

14.
15.

16.
17.

FUNDING SUPPORT
Funding was provided through grant R01 CA 175759 (Creating and
Validating Child Adverse Event Reporting in Oncology Trials).
Molly McFatrich and Janice Withycombe report a grant from Alex’s
Lemonade Stand Foundation during the conduct of the study.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES

18.
19.

20.

The authors made no disclosures.

REFERENCES
1. Basch E, Bennett AV. Patient-reported outcomes in clinical trials of
rare diseases. J Gen Intern Med. 2014;29(suppl 3):S801-S803.
2. Yeh CH, Wang CH, Chiang YC, Lin L, Chien LC. Assessment of
symptoms reported by 10- to 18-year-old cancer patients in Taiwan.
J Pain Symptom Manage. 2009;38:738-746.
3. US Department of Health and Human Services FDA Center for
Drug Evaluation and Research, US Department of Health and
Human Services FDA Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research,

Cancer

January 1, 2016

21.

22.

US Department of Health and Human Services FDA Center for Devices and Radiological Health. Guidance for industry: patientreported outcome measures: use in medical product development to
support labeling claims: draft guidance. Health Qual Life Outcomes.
2009;4:79.
Dodd M, Janson S, Facione N, et al. Advancing the science of
symptom management. J Adv Nurs. 2001;33:668-676.
Wolfe J, Orellana L, Ullrich C, et al. Symptoms and distress in children with advanced cancer: prospective patient-reported outcomes
from the PediQUEST study. J Clin Oncol. 2015;33:1928-1935.
Riesch SK, Anderson LS, Angresano N, Canty-Mitchell J, Johnson
DL, Krainuwat K. Evaluating content validity and test-retest reliability of the children’s health risk behavior scale. Public Health Nurs.
2006;23:366-372.
Stewart JL, Lynn MR, Mishel MH. Evaluating content validity for
children’s self-report instruments using children as content experts.
Nurs Res. 2005;54:414-418.
Schilling LS, Dixon JK, Knafl KA, Grey M, Ives B, Lynn MR. Determining content validity of a self-report instrument for adolescents
using a heterogeneous expert panel. Nurs Res. 2007;56:361-366.
Tomlinson D, Gibson F, Treister N, et al. Understandability, content validity, and overall acceptability of the Children’s International
Mucositis Evaluation Scale (ChIMES): child and parent reporting.
J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2009;31:416-423.
Hedstrom M, Haglund K, Skolin I, von Essen L. Distressing events
for children and adolescents with cancer: child, parent, and nurse
perceptions. J Pediatr Oncol Nurs. 2003;20:120-132.
Basch E, Jia X, Heller G, et al. Adverse symptom event reporting by
patients vs clinicians: relationships with clinical outcomes. J Natl
Cancer Inst. 2009;101:1624-1632.
Basch E, Iasonos A, McDonough T, et al. Patient versus clinician
symptom reporting using the National Cancer Institute Common
Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events: results of a questionnairebased study. Lancet Oncol. 2006;7:903-909.
Laugsand EA, Sprangers MA, Bjordal K, Skorpen F, Kaasa S,
Klepstad P. Health care providers underestimate symptom intensities
of cancer patients: a multicenter European study. Health Qual Life
Outcomes. 2010;8:104.
Davis E, Nicolas C, Waters E, et al. Parent-proxy and child selfreported health-related quality of life: using qualitative methods to
explain the discordance. Qual Life Res. 2007;16:863-871.
Cremeens J, Eiser C, Blades M. Factors influencing agreement
between child self-report and parent proxy-reports on the Pediatric
Quality of Life Inventory 4.0 (PedsQL) generic core scales. Health
Qual Life Outcomes. 2006;4:58.
Rajmil L, Lopez AR, Lopez-Aguila S, Alonso J. Parent-child agreement on health-related quality of life (HRQOL): a longitudinal
study. Health Qual Life Outcomes. 2013;11:101.
Upton P, Lawford J, Eiser C. Parent-child agreement across child
health-related quality of life instruments: a review of the literature.
Qual Life Res. 2008;17:895-913.
Irwin DE, Gross HE, Stucky BD, et al. Development of six
PROMIS pediatrics proxy-report item banks. Health Qual Life Outcomes. 2012;10:22.
National Quality Forum. Patient-reported outcomes in performance
measurement.
http://www.qualityforum.org/Publications/2012/12/
Patient-Reported_Outcomes_in_Performance_Measurement.aspx.
Accessed May 16, 2015.
Matza LS, Patrick DL, Riley AW, et al. Pediatric patient-reported
outcome instruments for research to support medical product labeling: report of the ISPOR PRO good research practices for the assessment of children and adolescents task force. Value Health. 2013;16:
461-479.
Tzelepis F, Rose SK, Sanson-Fisher RW, Clinton-McHarg T, Carey
ML, Paul CL. Are we missing the Institute of Medicine’s mark? A
systematic review of patient-reported outcome measures assessing
quality of patient-centred cancer care. BMC Cancer. 2014;14:41.
Harris PA, Taylor R, Thielke R, Payne J, Gonzalez N, Conde JG.
Research Electronic Data Capture (REDCap)—a metadata-driven
methodology and workflow process for providing translational
research informatics support. J Biomed Inform. 2009;42:377-381.

147

Original Article
23. Miles MS, Holditch-Davis D. Enhancing nursing research with children and families using a developmental science perspective. Annu
Rev Nurs Res. 2003;21:1-20.
24. Lerner RM, Wertlieb D, Jacobs F. Historical and theoretical bases of
applied developmental science. In: Lerner RM, Jacobs F, Wertlieb
D, eds. Handbook of Applied Developmental Science. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage Publications; 2003:1-30.
25. Patrick DL, Burke LB, Gwaltney CJ, et al. Content validity—establishing and reporting the evidence in newly developed patient-reported
outcomes (PRO) instruments for medical product evaluation: ISPOR
PRO Good Research Practices Task Force report: part 2—assessing
respondent understanding. Value Health. 2011;14:978-988.

148

26. Collins JJ, Byrnes ME, Dunkel IJ, et al. The measurement of symptoms
in children with cancer. J Pain Symptom Manage. 2000;19:363-377.
27. Reeve BB, Withycombe JS, Baker JN, et al. The first step to integrating the child’s voice in adverse event reporting in oncology trials:
a content validation study among pediatric oncology clinicians.
Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2013;60:1231-1236.
28. Detmar SB, Aaronson NK, Wever LD, Muller M, Schornagel JH.
How are you feeling? Who wants to know? Patients’ and oncologists’
preferences for discussing health-related quality-of-life issues. J Clin
Oncol. 2000;18:3295-3301.
29. Ward E, DeSantis C, Robbins A, Kohler B, Jemal A. Childhood and
adolescent cancer statistics, 2014. CA Cancer J Clin. 2014;64:83-103.

Cancer

January 1, 2016

