1760

60th Anniversary Edition of Cancer
Supplement to Cancer

Toward the Individualization of Lung Cancer Therapy
Ariel Anguiano, MD1,2
Joseph R. Nevins, PhD1,3
Anil Potti, MD1,2
1

Duke Institute for Genome Sciences & Policy,
Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina.

The goal of personalized cancer medicine is to effectively match the right treatment strategy with the patient. This includes an improvement of prognosis to
identify which patients should be treated as well as the ability to predict which
therapy will be most effective for the individual patient. Recent advances in the
use of genomic technologies, primarily gene expression profiling with DNA
microarrays, has provided mechanisms to address each of these questions. The
prognosis of early-stage lung cancer patients (stage IA) is clearly imprecise

Department of Medicine, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina.

because nearly 30% of these patients will develop disease recurrence (determined

3

oped that can accurately predict recurrence and, when applied to the population

2

Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham,
North Carolina.

according to the TNM staging system). Gene expression profiles have been develof patients with stage IA disease, demonstrate a capacity to potentially identify
those individuals likely to have been misclassified as low risk. In addition, gene
expression information has also demonstrated an ability to predict who will
respond to a particular chemotherapy regimen, providing a further opportunity
to more effectively guide the selection of available therapies that best match
the individual patient. Finally, other strategies offer the hope of better using the
newly developed, experimental therapies that target specific components of the
oncogenic process. Taken together, these new genomic tools provide the opportunity to develop rational strategies for treating the individual lung cancer patient.
Cancer 2008;113(7 suppl):1760–7.  2008 American Cancer Society.

KEYWORDS: expression signature, improved prognosis, chemotherapy prediction,
pathway prediction.

I

Address for reprints: Joseph R. Nevins, PhD,
Duke Institute for Genome Sciences and Policy,
Duke University, Durham, NC 27710; Fax: (919)
681-8973; E-mail: j.nevins@duke.edu
Received December 12, 2007; revision received
January 31, 2008; accepted February 4, 2008.

ª 2008 American Cancer Society

n current practice, oncologists face the challenge of matching the
most effective therapy with the individual patient. The clinician
must draw on the best available evidence and then apply therapies
to a patient whose overall health is often compromised. Unfortunately, drug intolerance or disease progression because of chemotherapy resistance often leads to the use of multiple cytotoxic
chemotherapy regimens, with marginal success.1-3 Clearly, there is
an urgent need for oncologists to be able to provide therapies
tailored to the individual cancer patient.
A prime example of such a therapeutic challenge is lung cancer,
which is the leading cause of death from cancer among both men
and women in the U.S. Nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC) accounts
for nearly 80% of these lung cancer deaths.4,5 Since the initial
description by Mountain et al6-8 the clinical staging system has
been the standard for determining lung cancer prognosis. Although
other clinical and biochemical markers have prognostic significance,9,10 the pathologic stage continues to be most widely used in

DOI 10.1002/cncr.23644
Published online 17 September 2008 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

Individualized Lung Cancer Therapy/Anguiano et al

predicting outcomes.11 The current National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines
(available at: www.nccn.org accessed in 2007) for
early stage (IA) NSCLC recommend surgical resection
alone, without the use of adjuvant chemotherapy
(determined according to the TNM staging system).
Nevertheless, nearly one-third of these patients will
develop disease recurrence after the initial surgical
resection and thus have a poor prognosis.5,7 This
high rate of recurrence indicates that a subgroup of
these patients with stage IA NSCLC might benefit
from adjuvant chemotherapy.
In contrast to early-stage NSCLC, patients with
clinical stage IIA, IIB, or IIIA disease routinely receive
adjuvant chemotherapy and exhibit an overall survival benefit.12-16 This highlights the finding that
many patients with NSCLC receive potentially toxic
chemotherapy with little or no clinical benefit. Thus,
the ability to identify subgroups of patients who
would benefit from a specific chemotherapeutic
agent, or combination of agents, would improve on
the predictions of clinicopathologic staging and
favorably impact clinical outcomes.
In addition, the therapeutic improvement resulting from the new generation of cytotoxic agents
appears to have reached a plateau becaused the
mortality associated with metastatic NSCLC has not
changed significantly in nearly 2 decades. The ability
to identify ‘susceptible’ patient subtypes would be a
breakthrough as important as the development of a
new efficacious drug. The ability to identify ‘susceptible’ patient subtypes or other clinical relevant phenotypes is challenging because of the nature of the
oncogenic process. The complexity of this process
involves the somatic acquisition of large numbers of
mutations, coupled with the varied host genetic constitution, produces a disease of enormous heterogeneity. This complexity of genetic alterations suggests
that focusing efforts on finding more than a few single gene mutations as disease markers may not be
efficient or effective in a majority of instances.
Recent advances in the use of DNA microarrays that
allow for global assessment of gene expression have
shown that expression profiles can provide molecular
phenotyping that identifies distinct characteristics of
tumors.17-26 In this sense, gene expression profiling
can be used to dissect this heterogeneity. The ability
to generate high-resolution gene expression profiles
can provide scientists the opportunity to generate
new mechanistic hypotheses that can lead to new
therapeutic interventions.27 For those engaged in
translational research, these gene expression ‘signatures’ may allow for the identification of new phenotypic subtypes of disease, based on chemotherapy

1761

resistance, signaling pathway deregulation, or tumor
microenvironment status. Once validated in prospective studies, gene expression signatures will enable
clinicians to correlate prognosis-specific signatures
and possibly use microarrays as diagnostic, prognostic, and predictive tools.23,24,26,28 In addition, the targeting of specific signaling pathways based on a
knowledge of deregulation may further guide the clinician in treating patients whose tumors have
demonstrated resistance to commonly used cytotoxic
chemotherapeutic agents.29 The use of gene signatures to target these pathways truly has the potential
to individualize the care of the oncology patient.

Techniques to Develop Gene Expression Signatures
The development of gene expression profiles or signatures is based on the use of DNA microarray technology that allows for the assay of virtually all genes
in the cancer genome. Instead of focusing on only a
few messenger RNAs, DNA microarray technology
can evaluate the relative expression of thousands of
genes simultaneously. The power of the expression
signature is 2-fold. First, the enormous complexity of
the expression data that can be sampled provides the
opportunity to identify patterns of expression that
reflect very subtle distinctions in biology. Second, the
expression signature is portable in that it can be
assayed in varied contexts. An expression signature
developed in a cell culture context can be measured
in a tumor or a histologic section. As such, the
expression signature provides the capacity to link
otherwise heterologous systems. A cell culture phenotype such as apoptosis is difficult to represent in a
diverse sample such as a tumor. In contrast, an
expression profile provides a mechanism to link
these 2 states—the profile represents pathway activation in the cell culture and then can be used to interrogate the expression data from a tumor. In a sense,
the gene expression signature becomes the common
currency to connect the experimental state with the
in vivo state.
Several approaches are used in the analyses of
gene expression data. Briefly, data are usually prefiltered using predetermined criteria, to diminish
‘noise’ and the consequent gene set forms the basis
for prognostic and predictive models. Various statistical analyses are then performed to build models or
signatures, which help predict the desired phenotype.
The accuracy of each model/signature is then
assessed by using a leave-1-out cross-validation. The
extent to which the profile indeed reflects the biologic state, rather than observed by chance, is assessed
through this initial statistical measure of predictive

1762

CANCER Supplement

October 1, 2008 / Volume 113 / Number 7

ability. The analysis is performed repeatedly, with 1
sample removed each time, and the probability of
clinical outcome is predicted for that sample. The
reproducibility of the approach is also evaluated
because the model building exercise is repeated for
each prediction. The development of gene expression
signatures uses ‘supervised analysis’ strategies in an
effort to identify patterns that relate to clinically relevant phenotypes, such as the ability to predict the
potential recurrence of disease. The power of the
supervised analysis lies in the ability to specifically
drive the analysis to the phenotype of interest, taking
advantage of relevant information to guide the analysis. In this sense, the analysis of the complex biologic
phenotype is driven by the actual clinical data.
Once it is clear that it is possible to generate a
predictive model, based on the leave-1-out analyses,
the next step becomes the evaluation of the general
utility of the model in heterogeneous populations of
patients. It is the ability of a genomic model to accurately predict clinical outcome in multiple datasets
that truly signifies the value as a potential clinical
tool.

Gene Expression Profiles Improve Prognosis
in Early-stage Nonsmall Cell Lung Cancer
Several initial proteomic, gene expression and mRNA
profiles have been developed in an attempt to predict the outcomes of lung cancer patients.17-26 Unfortunately, the ability of these profiles to refine the
clinical prognosis and then to aid in clinical decision
making has been difficult to assess because they
have generally not been applied in a context that
would address a clinical decision. A recent study of
our group addressed this question with an aim to
provide a strategy for refining prognosis of earlystage lung cancer, specifically patients with stage IA
disease, that could alter the clinical decision of who
should be treated.
A total of 198 tumor samples from patients with
early-stage NSCLC were analyzed from 3 distinct
cohorts of patients.30 The training cohort was comprised of 89 patients enrolled at Duke University. The
independent validation cohorts included patients in
2 multicenter cooperative group trials: 25 patient
samples from the American College of Surgeons Oncology Group (ACOSOG) Z0030 study and 84 patient
samples that included many from the prospective
Cancer and Leukemia Group B (CALGB) 9761 trial.
Importantly, the CALGB 9761 was a blinded validation, in which the scientists performing the analyses
were not aware of the actual outcome in those
patients. A classification tree approach identified a

FIGURE 1. A prospective phase 3 clinical trial to evaluate the effectiveness of a genomic signature to improve prognosis of early-stage lung cancer
patients. NSCLC indicates nonsmall-cell lung cancer.

novel multigene (lung metagene) model that when
compared with a predictive model generated from
clinical data alone (including age, sex, tumor dimension, stage of disease, histologic subtype, and smoking history) was more accurate in predicting tumor
recurrence. The gene expression model predicted disease recurrence with an overall accuracy of >90%,
whereas the predictive model built with pathologic
and staging data had an accuracy of only 64%.30 In
addition, and in contrast to clinicopathologic predictions, the lung metagene model identified 2 distinct
groups of patients with respect to survival. Univariate
and multivariate analysis (P < .001) confirmed this
significant difference. Also importantly, in the subset
analysis the lung metagene model was accurate
across all the early stages of NSCLC, between the
major histological subtypes and in estimating risk of
disease recurrence.
The ability of the metagene model generated
from the training cohort to predict the risk of recurrence was also validated by using samples from 2
multicenter, cooperative group studies that represent
the full spectrum of clinical outcomes. These definitive validations have now led to a proposed multicenter study that will stratify patients with stage I
NSCLC into low-risk and high-risk groups based on
their individual gene expression profiles, obtained
from the tumor sample at surgery (Fig. 1). Those
patients predicted to be low risk would be observed
(standard of care), whereas those predicted to be
high risk would be randomized to either an observation arm or a chemotherapy arm. In principle, this is
similar to 2 recently initiated breast cancer trials

Individualized Lung Cancer Therapy/Anguiano et al

(TAILORx and MINDACT) that are evaluating the
capacity of gene expression signatures to select those
patients in need of adjuvant chemotherapy.31-33 An
important contrast to the breast cancer studies is the
finding that the lung cancer patients are currently
not eligible for chemotherapy. Clearly, these validation strategies and prospective trials are critical
before adopting the applicability of genomic signatures as common practice.

Expression Signatures Predicting Clinical
Chemotherapy Response
Prognosis measures future risk of disease recurrence
or death from disease while prediction is a measure
of therapeutic response. Thus, the ability to refine
prognosis and identify high-risk groups further
emphasizes the need for better predictive tools, tools
that might help a clinician match the right drug with
the right patient. Recent work is encouraging that
this goal can be achieved but still needs to be validated in larger trials. In contrast to the in vivo lung
metagene model developed to predict outcome in
early-stage lung cancer, the expression signature to
predict chemotherapeutic sensitivity was developed
from cancer cell lines grown in cell culture, the
so-called NCI-60 panel.34 This follows from various
previous studies that have focused on identifying
expression profiles associated with drug sensitivity.24,35-57 Nevertheless, in most instances these have
been descriptive and not applied as predictive tools
that could identify patients likely to be sensitive or
resistant to the agents. In this more recent example,
cell lines were selected based on resistance or sensitivity to a cytotoxic drug. Expression data from the
selected cell lines were then used in a supervised
fashion to develop models of drug sensitivity. As an
example, a gene expression signature comprised of
50 genes was able to classify cell lines on the basis of
docetaxel sensitivity. After the required leave-1-out
validation, an independent dataset of 30 lung and
ovarian cancer cell lines were used as an initial validation. For each of the cell lines the ability of the
genomic signature of docetaxel sensitivity to actually
predict sensitivity to docetaxel exceeded 80%
(P<.01).34
Clearly, the importance of this approach is not
the prediction of drug sensitivity in cell culture but
rather the opportunity to predict patient response.
To test the capacity of the in vitro-generated signature to predict docetaxel sensitivity in an in vivo
model, a published breast cancer neoadjuvant study
with clinical and gene expression data was analyzed.
With an a priori determined cutoff for predicting
sensitivity, the NCI-60 generated predictor of doce-

1763

taxel sensitivity was able to correctly predict docetaxel response in samples from patients treated with
single-agent docetaxel.34 With the successful development of a docetaxel-sensitive predictor using the
metagene approach, the NCI-60 data was reanalyzed
to develop other predictors of sensitivity to commonly used cytotoxic agents. Panels of expression
profiles that predict response to cisplatin, topotecan,
doxorubicin, etoposide, 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), paclitaxel, and cyclophosphamide have been developed
and validated.34 Many of these profiles were then
further validated using in vitro and patient response
data from independent datasets. Furthermore, in
NSCLC, a genomic predictor for cisplatin sensitivity
was found to have a better accuracy for predicting
responders to cisplatin therapy than other conventional predictors.58 The ability to predict sensitivity
to commonly used chemotherapeutic agents is a
necessary advance in the effective treatment of lung
cancer. However, despite the very encouraging initial
data, important ongoing prospective trials will confirm the actual feasibility and validity of an approach
that uses genomic-based predictions of chemotherapeutic drug sensitivity.
Importantly, in most solid tumors, including
lung cancer, many standard-of-care treatment paradigms include multiple approved single-agent or
combination regimens, including lung cancer. In
particular, the treatment of early-stage lung cancer
patients makes use of any 1 of several platinumbased doublet chemotherapies. Because to our
knowledge there is currently little rationale for selecting which of these various approved regimens are
best suited to the individual patient, there is an opportunity to make use of genomic signatures that
predict response to these agents in present-day clinical practice. A generic strategy, as outlined in Figure
2, would make use of signatures for many of these
agents to evaluate the ability of a genomic-guided
approach to improve therapeutic efficacy. Importantly, our past work has described the ability to pre-

FIGURE 2. A strategy for using genomic signatures predictive of chemotherapy response within the context of the current standard of care.

1764

CANCER Supplement

October 1, 2008 / Volume 113 / Number 7

FIGURE 3. Linking genomic signatures with oncogenic signaling pathways. EGF indicates epidermal growth factor; PDGF, platelet-derived growth factor; TGFb, transforming growth factor-b; EGFR, epidermal growth factor receptor; ER, estrogen receptor.

dict response to combination therapy by combining
the predicted probabilities of response to single
agents.34 In principle, this could be applied to the
treatment of early-stage lung cancer patients, evaluating response rates when patients receive 1 of the
standard doublet therapies by random choice versus
a genomics-guided choice.

Patterns of Oncogenic Pathway Deregulation Represented
as Cancer Phenotypes
As progress is made in the field of predictive medicine, with relevance to lung cancer therapy, large
cohorts of patients who will likely be resistant to traditional chemotherapy will be identified. It is here
that there is a need for further drug development
strategies that are both novel and rational—strategies
that account for the molecular complexity of a disease process.
Thus far, much of our understanding of oncogenic complexity derives from analysis of mutations
and chromosomal alterations that affect the function
of a variety of known or suspected oncogenes and
tumor suppressor genes. Such studies have identified
the substantial complexity associated with tumor

development and disease progression and suggest
that multiple genetic alterations are necessary for development of a cancer.19,22,23,25,27 Recently, we have
used gene expression profiling to develop signatures
that reflect the activation of a series of oncogenic
signaling pathways (Fig. 3).29 Briefly, the strategy
involves using quiescent cells (with presumably inactive oncogenic pathways), which are then infected
with an adenovirus designed to activate a specific
gene. This approach provides an opportunity to isolate the effects of a single pathway activation and
then to generate a discrete gene expression profile.
The ability of the pathway metagene to assess oncogenic pathway status up-regulation or down-regulation is then validated with known cell lines with
activated pathways. Another example of isolating oncogenic pathway activation makes use of mouse tumor models or cells that have been transformed to
express an oncogene via loss of a tumor suppressor
gene.59-63 As opposed to the transient expression of a
pathway via adenovirus expression, the latter strategies provide steady-state oncogene activation. These
various methods allow the development of a signature that is representative of oncogenic pathway
deregulation or activation in a given sample.

Individualized Lung Cancer Therapy/Anguiano et al

Further work has demonstrated the capacity of
these signatures to predict pathway activation in tumor samples so as to evaluate the state of the pathways in relation to clinical phenotypes. The ability to
identify deregulated pathways allows for improved
categorization of patients and thus sets the stage for
the prospective testing of an approach that involves
drugs that target a specific pathway. This strategy
may represent a future rational approach to certain
targeted therapeutics. However, further validation
studies from patient samples are needed, as are
prospective studies that are carefully designed and
executed before the approach can be adopted as
common clinical practice.
Importantly, the analysis of oncogenic pathways
using expression signatures provides an opportunity
to guide the use of pathway-specific drugs. This has
been demonstrated by predicting the deregulation of
various pathways in a series of cancer cell lines that
are then assayed for sensitivity to drugs that target
components of the relevant pathways. In multiple
instances, a clear relation can be observed between
prediction of pathway deregulation and sensitivity to
the respective therapeutic.29,55,58

Clinical Utility
A critical observation in using the power of gene
expression ‘signatures’ is the impressive number of
genes that significantly distinguish and/or characterize tumor phenotypes. The availability of such diagnostic gene expression patterns will hopefully guide
aggressive therapy in patients with early-stage disease, improve the specificity of current imaging
methods for the early detection of cancer, and
lead to a much better management of lung cancer
recurrence.
To our knowledge to date, there are several genomic signatures that can predict cancer prognosis and
sensitivity to chemotherapeutic agents, and represent
oncogenic pathway deregulation. As an example of
the future clinical utility of genomic signatures, the
lung metagene signature may predict patients at
high risk for disease recurrence, and thus may be
used to stratify patients with early stage lung cancer.
This could then be coupled with signatures of chemotherapy sensitivity as described earlier to identify
the most appropriate platinum-double therapy, from
the 4 or 5 available options approved as standard of
care, to treat an individual patient. Likewise, in the
advanced disease setting, expression signatures that
predict sensitivity to 1 or more of the various
approved chemotherapeutic agents can be assessed
to then select the most appropriate therapeutic regimen. Hopefully, such a genomic-based selection of

1765

therapy will improve outcomes by increasing
responses and decreasing toxicities. Finally, if the
cancer is deemed to be resistant to U.S. Food and
Drug Administration (FDA)-approved cytotoxic
agents, expression signatures of specific oncogenic
pathways may be identified and the appropriate
targeted agent(s) may be used.

Challenges in Using Gene Expression Signatures
Although it is evident that there are opportunities for
using expression signatures to define NSCLC phenotypes in terms of chemotherapy sensitivity and prognosis, there remain multiple challenges in using this
approach. Inherent to gene expression analysis is a
variation in technical approaches and in the biology
of the diseases being studied. The acquisition of
multiple genetic alterations that lead to tumor carcinogenesis also leads to significant molecular heterogeneity within specific tumor classes. As an example,
this heterogeneity is likely reflected in the multiple
gene expression profiles that have been proposed to
reflect poor prognosis in many cancerous states.64,65
In addition, batch effects and gene chip platform differences are examples of technical factors that may
lead to variation to profiles that are proposed in independent studies. Obtaining samples and the subsequent extraction of mRNA, in frozen versus paraffinembedded tumors, further highlights these technical
difficulties. These significant technical challenges
may limit the usefulness of signatures and have great
impact on efforts to validate them in independent
cohorts. The methodologies in developing a gene
expression signature, including the statistical methods used to construct them, must be further validated in an effort to assess the robustness of a
signature across multiple clinical studies. Validations
of these approaches are critical in the effort to use
gene expression signatures to further define tumor
biology and improve future clinical outcomes.
Conclusions
The use of gene expression signatures in cancer
management is gaining wide acceptance as a valuable investigative and clinical tool. The potential clinical utility of genomic signatures range from prognosis to the determination of chemotherapy selection. As technical barriers are overcome, the robustness and sensitivity of these gene signatures will
improve. However, these barriers need to be
addressed in a systematic fashion in prospective studies. If the results of the planned clinical trials are
encouraging and the methodologies standardized for
clinical testing, it is reasonable to expect the utilization of these technologies in routine clinical practice.

1766

CANCER Supplement

October 1, 2008 / Volume 113 / Number 7

As these techniques are further embraced by
researchers and clinicians alike, the insights gained
will greatly enhance the understanding of the biology
of tumors and result in improved therapy and subsequent outcomes for the patient suffering with cancer.

REFERENCES
1.

2.

3.

4.
5.
6.
7.

8.
9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

Herbst RS, Bajorin DF, Bleiberg H, et al. Clinical Cancer
Advances 2005: major research advances in cancer treatment, prevention, and screening—a report from the American Society of Clinical Oncology. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24:190205.
Breathnach OS, Freidlin B, Conley B, et al. Twenty-two
years of phase III trials for patients with advanced nonsmall-cell lung cancer: sobering results. J Clin Oncol.
2001;19:1734-1742.
Minna JD, Gazdar AF, Sprang SR, Herz J. Cancer. A bull’s
eye for targeted lung cancer therapy. Science. 2004;304:
1458-1461.
Spira A, Ettinger DS. Multidisciplinalry management of
lung cancer. N Engl J Med. 2004;350:379-392.
Hoffman PC, Mauer AM, Vokes EE. Lung cancer. Lancet.
2000;355:479-485.
Mountain CF. Revisions in the international system for staging lung cancer. Chest. 1997;111:1710-1717.
Nesbitt JC, Putnam JB Jr, Walsh GL, Roth JA, Mountain CF.
Survival in early-stage non-small cell lung cancer. Ann
Thorac Surg. 1995;60:466-472.
Mountain CF. The new international staging system for
lung cancer. Surg Clin North Am. 1987;67:925-935.
D’Amico TA, Massey M, Herndon JEd, Moore MB, Harpole
DH Jr. A biologic risk model for stage 1 lung cancer:
immunohistochemical analysis of 408 patients using 10
molecular markers. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1999;117:
736-743.
Brundage MD, Davies D, Mackillop WJ. Prognostic factors
in non-small cell lung cancer: a decade of progress. Chest.
2002;122:1037-1057.
Meyerson M, Carbone DP. Genomic and proteomic profiling of lung cancers: lung cancer classification in the age of
targeted therapy. J Clin Oncol. 2005;23:3219-3226.
Winton T, Livingston R, Johnson D, et al. Vinorelbine plus
cisplatin vs. observation in resected non-small cell lung
cancer. N Engl J Med. 2005;352:2589-2597.
Douillard J, Rosell R, Delena M, Legroumellec A, Torres A,
Carpagnano F. ANITA: phase III adjuvant vinorelbine (N)
and cisplatin (P) versus observation (OBS) in completely
resected (stage I-III) non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
patients (pts): final results after 70-month median followup. J Clin Oncol. 2005;21(14S):7013.
Kato H, Ichinose Y, Ohta M, et al. Japan Lung Cancer
Research Group on Postsurgical Adjuvant Chemotherapy. A
randomized trial of adjuvant chemotherapy with uraciltegafur for adenocarcinoma of the lung. N Engl J Med.
2004;350:1713-1721.
Strauss GM, Herndon JE, Maddaus MA, et al. Randomized
clinical trial of adjuvant chemotherapy with paclitaxel and
carboplatin following resection in Stage 1B non-small cell
lung cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2004;22(14S):7019.
Arriagada R, Bergman B, Dunant A, et al. Cisplatin-based
adjuvant chemotherapy in patients with completely
resected non-small-cell lung cancer. N Engl J Med. 2004;
350:351-360.

17. Tonon G, Wong KK, Maulik G, et al. High-resolution genomic profiles of human lung cancer. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S
A. 2005;102:9625-9630.
18. Schneider PM, Praeuer HW, Stoeltzing O, et al. Multiple
molecular marker testing (p53, C-Ki-ras, c-erbB-2)
improves estimation of prognosis in potentially curative
resected non-small cell lung cancer. Br J Cancer. 2000;83:
473-479.
19. Berrar D, Sturgeon B, Bradbury I, Downes CS, Dubitzky W.
Survival trees for analyzing clinical outcome in lung adenocarcinomas based on gene expression profiles: identification of neogenin and diacylglycerol kinase alpha
expression as critical factors. J Comput Biol. 2005;12:534544.
20. Ju Z, Kapoor M, Newton K, et al. Golbal detection of molecular changes reveals concurrent alteration of several
biological pathways in non-small cell lung cancer cells.
Mol Genet Genomics. 2005;28:1-14.
21. Beer DG, Kardia SLR, Huang CC, et al. Gene-expression
profiles predict survival of patients with lung adenocarcinoma. Nat Med. 2002;8:816-824.
22. Bhattacharjee A, Richards WG, Staunton J, et al. Classification of human lung carcinomas by mRNA expression
profiling
reveals
distinct
adenocarcinoma
subclasses. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001;98:1379013795.
23. Wigle DA, Jurisica I, Radulovich N, et al. Molecular profiling of non-small cell lung cancer and correlation with disease-free survival. Cancer Res. 2002;62:3005-3008.
24. Kikuchi T, Daigo Y, Katagiri T, et al. Expression profiles of
non-small cell lung cancers on cDNA microarrays: identification of genes for prediction of lymph-node metastasis
and sensitivity to anti-cancer drugs. Oncogene. 2003;22:
2192-2205.
25. Garber ME, Troyanskaya OG, Schluens K, et al. Diversity of
gene expression in adenocarcinoma of the lung. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A. 2001;8:13784-13789.
26. Yanaihara N, Caplen N, Bowman E, et al. Unique microRNA molecular profiles in lung cancer diagnosis and prognosis. Cancer Cell. 2006;9:189-198.
27. Dressman HK, Bild A, Garst J, Harpole D, Potti A. Genomic
signatures in non small cell lung cancer: targeting the targeted therapies. Curr Oncol Rep. 2006;8:252-257.
28. Chen G, Gharib TG, Wang H, et al. Protein profiles associated with survival in lung adenocarcinoma. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A. 2003;100:13537-13542.
29. Bild A, Yao G, Chang JT, et al. Oncogenic pathway signatures in human cancers as a guide to targeted therapies.
Nature. 2006;439:353-357.
30. Potti A, Mukherjee S, Prince R, et al. A genomic strategy to
refine prognosis in non-small cell lung carcinoma. N Engl J
Med. 2006;355:570-580.
31. Sparano JA. TAILORx: trial assigning individualized options for treatment (Rx). Clin Breast Cancer. 2006;7:347350.
32. Piccart-Gebhart MJ, Sotiriou C. Adjuvant chemotherapy—
yes or no? Prognostic markers in early breast cancer. Ann
Oncol. 2007;(suppl 12):xii2-xii7.
33. Bogaerts J, Cardoso F, Buyse M, et al. TRANSBIG consortium. Gene signature evaluation as a prognostic tool: challenges in the design of the MINDACT trial. Nat Clin Pract
Oncol. 2006;3:540-551.
34. Potti A, Lancaster JM, Dressman HK, et al. A genomic
strategy to guide the use of chemotherapeutic drugs in
solid tumors. Nat Med. 2006;12:1294-1300.

Individualized Lung Cancer Therapy/Anguiano et al
35. Chang JC, Wooten EC, Tsimelzon A, et al. Gene expression
profiling for the prediction of therapeutic response to docetaxel in patients with breast cancer. Lancet. 2003;362:362369.
36. Ayers M, Symmans WF, Stec J, et al. Gene expression profiles predict complete pathologic response to neoadjuvant
paclitaxel and fluorouracil, doxorubicin, and cyclophosphamide chemotherapy in breast cancer. J Clin Oncol.
2004;22:2284-2293.
37. Rouzier R, Pusztai L, Delaloge S, et al. Nomograms to predict pathologic complete response and metastasis-free survival after preoperative chemotherapy for breast cancer.
J Clin Oncol. 2005;23:8331-8339.
38. Peintinger F, Anderson K, Mazouni C, et al. Thirty-gene
pharmacogenomic test correlates with residual cancer burden after preoperative chemotherapy for breast cancer.
Clin Cancer Res. 2007;13:4078-4082.
39. Rouzier R, Perou CM, Symmans WF, et al. Breast cancer
molecular subtypes respond differently to preoperative
chemotherapy. Clin Cancer Res. 2005;11:5678-5685.
40. Paik S, Tang G, Shak S, et al. Gene expression and benefit
of chemotherapy in women with node-negative, estrogen
receptor-positive breast cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24:37263734.
41. Gianni L, Zambetti M, Clark K, et al. Gene expression profiles in paraffin-embedded core biopsy tissue predict
response to chemotherapy in women with locally advanced
breast cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2005;23:7265-7277.
42. Cario G, Stanulla M, Fine BM, et al. Distinct gene expression profiles determine molecular treatment response in
childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Blood. 2005;105:
821-826.
43. Lugthart S, Cheok MH, den Boer ML, et al. Identification
of genes associated with chemotherapy crossresistance and
treatment response in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Cancer Cell. 2005;7:375-386.
44. Holleman A, Cheok MH, den Boer ML, et al. Gene expression patterns in drug resistant acute lymphoblastic leukemia cells and response to treatment. N Engl J Med. 2004;
351:533-542.
45. Beesley AH, Cummings AJ, Freitas JR, et al. The gene
expression signature of relapse in paediatric acute lymphoblastic leukaemia: implications for mechanisms of therapy
failure. Br J Haematol. 2005;131:447-456.
46. Talby L, Chambost H, Roubaud MC, et al. The chemosensitivity to therapy of childhood early B acute lymphoblastic
leukemia could be determined by the combined expression
of CD34, SPI-B and BCR genes. Leuk Res. 2006;30:665-676.
47. Heuser M, Wingen LU, Steinemann D, et al. Gene-expression profiles and their association with drug resistance in
adult acute myeloid leukemia. Haematologica. 2005;90:
1484-1492.
48. Eisele L, Klein-Hitpass L, Chatzimanolis N, et al. Differential expression of drug-resistance-related genes between
sensitive and resistant blasts in acute myeloid leukemia.
Acta Haematol. 2007;117:8-15.
49. Okutsu J, Tsunoda T, Kaneta Y, et al. Prediction of chemosensitivity for patients with acute myeloid leukemia,
according to expression levels of 28 genes selected by genome-wide complementary DNA microarray analysis. Mol
Cancer Ther. 2002;1:1035-1042.

1767

50. Mintz MB, Sowers R, Brown KM, et al. An expression signature classifies chemotherapy-resistant pediatric osteosarcoma. Cancer Res. 2005;65:1748-1754.
51. Cleator S, Tsimelzon A, Ashworth A, et al. Gene expression
patterns for doxorubicin (Adriamycin) and cyclophosphamide (Cytoxan) (AC) response and resistance. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2006;95:229-233.
52. Durbecq V, Paesmans M, Cardoso F, et al. Topoisomerase-II
alpha expression as a predictive marker in a population of
advanced breast cancer patients randomly treated either
with single-agent doxorubicin or single-agent docetaxel.
Mol Cancer Ther. 2004;3:1207-1214.
53. Sotiriou C, Powles TJ, Dowsett M, et al. Gene expression
profiles derived from fine needle aspiration correlate with
response to systemic chemotherapy in breast cancer. Breast
Cancer Res. 2002;4:R3.
54. Bachvarov D, L’esperance S, Popa I, Bachvarova M, Plante
M, Tetu B. Gene expression patterns of chemoresistant and
chemosensitive serous epithelial ovarian tumors with possible predictive value in response to initial chemotherapy.
Int J Oncol. 2006;29:919-933.
55. Dressman HK, Berchuck A, Chan G, et al. An integrated
genomic-based approach to individualized treatment of
patients with advanced stage ovarian cancer. J Clin Oncol.
2007;25:517-525.
56. Moriyama M, Hoshida Y, Kato N, et al. Genes associated
with human hepatocellular carcinoma cell chemosensitivity to 5-fluorouracil plus interferon-alpha combination
chemotherapy. Int J Oncol. 2004;25:1279-1287.
57. Akada M, Crnogorac-Jurcevic T, Lattimore S, et al. Intrinsic
chemoresistance to gemcitabine is associated with decreased expression of BNIP3 in pancreatic cancer. Clin
Cancer Res. 2005;11:3094-3101.
58. Hsu DS, Balakumaran BS, Acharya CR, et al. Pharmacogenomic strategies provide a rational approach to the treatment of cisplatin-resistant patients with advanced cancer. J
Clin Oncol. 2007;25:4350-4357.
59. Sweet-Cordero A, Mukherjee S, Subramanian A, et al. An
oncogenic KRAS2 expression signature identified by crossspecies gene expression analysis. Nat Genet. 2005;37:48-54.
60. Adler AS, Lin M, Horlings H, Nuyten DS, van de Vijver MJ,
Chang HY. Genetic regulators of large-scale transcriptional
signatures in cancer. Nat Genet. 2006;38:421-430.
61. Zuber J, Tchernitsa OI, Hinzmann B, et al. A genome-wide
survey of RAS transformation targets. Nat Genet. 2000;24:
144-152.
62. Tchernitsa OI, Zuber J, Sers C, et al. Gene expression profiling of fibroblasts resistant toward oncogene-mediated
transformation reveals preferential transcription of negative growth regulators. Oncogene. 1999;18:5448-5454.
63. Vasseur S, Malicet C, Calvo EL, et al. Gene expression profiling by DNA microarray analysis in mouse embryonic
fibroblasts transformed by rasV12 mutated protein and the
E1A oncogene. Mol Cancer. 2003;2:19.
64. Chng WJ, Kumar S, Vanwier S, et al. Molecular dissection
of hyperdiploid multiple myeloma by gene expression profiling. Cancer Res. 2007;67:2982-2989.
65. Shaughnessy JD, Zhan F, Burington BE, et al. A validated
gene expression model of high risk multiple myteloma is
defined by deregulated expression of genes mapping to
chromosome 1. Blood. 2007;109:2276-2284.

