Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 18

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Deguelin inhibits vasculogenic function of endothelial progenitor
cells in tumor progression and metastasis via suppression of
focal adhesion
Minh Phuong Nguyen1,3, Dongjin Lee1, Se-Hyung Lee1, Hye-Eun Lee1, Ho-Young
Lee2, You Mie Lee1,3
1

 esearch Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, Kyungpook National University, Daegu 702–701,
R
Republic of Korea

2

College of Pharmacy, Seoul National University, Seoul, 151–742, Republic of Korea

3

School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, College of Natural Sciences, Kyungpook National University, Daegu 702–701,
Republic of Korea

Correspondence to:
You Mie Lee, e-mail: lym@knu.ac.kr
Keywords: deguelin, endothelial progenitor cells, tumor vasculogenesis, focal adhesion, actin remodeling
Received: March 4, 2015    Accepted: April 14, 2015    Published: April 27, 2015

ABSTRACT
Deguelin is a nature-derived chemopreventive drug. Endothelial progenitor cells
(EPCs) are bone-marrow (BM)-derived key components to induce new blood vessels
in early tumorigenesis and metastasis. Here we determined whether deguelin inhibits
EPC function in vitro and in vivo at doses not affecting cancer cell apoptosis. Deguelin
significantly reduced the number of EPC colony forming units of BM-derived c-kit+/
sca-1+ mononuclear cells (MNCs), proliferation, migration, and adhesion to endothelial
cell monolayers, and suppressed incorporation of EPC into tube-like vessel networks
when co-cultured with endothelial cells. Deguelin caused cell cycle arrest at G1 without
induction of apoptosis in EPC. In a mouse tumor xenograft model, tumor growth, lung
metastasis and tumor-induced circulating EPCs were supressed by deguelin treatment
(2 mg/kg). In mice tranplanted with GFP-expressing BM-MNCs, deguelin reduced the
co-localization of CD31 and GFP, suggesting suppression of BM-derived EPC incoporation
into tumor vessels. Interestingly, focal adhesion kinase (FAK)-integrin-linked kinase
(ILK) activation and actin polymerization were repressed by deguelin. Decreased
number of focal adhesions and a depolarized morphology was found in deguelin-treated
EPCs. Taken together, our results suggest that the deguelin inhibits tumorigenesis and
metastasis via EPC suppression and that suppression of focal adhesion by FAK-integrinILK-dependent actin remodeling is a key underlying molecular mechanism.

neovascularization, and differentiate into endothelial
cells, and thus, contribute to vessel formation [1].
Evidence now indicates that the term EPCs, endothelial
colony forming cells (ECFCs) and colony forming
unit-EC (CFU-EC) are used depending on their current
methods of identifying or quantifying the EC lineage
potential, and has similar phenotypes or properties that
contribute to postnatal vasculogenesis, particularly to
the vasculogenesis associated with tumor progression
[2, 3]. Therefore, it suggests that EPCs or ECFCs or
CFU-ECs play an essential role in tumor development
and metastasis [4, 5] and that these cells be viewed as
a potential target in cancer. Furthermore, it is already

INTRODUCTION
It is now clear that tumor blood vessel formation
is not due exclusively to sprouting from pre-existing
vessels. The de novo formation of blood vessels,
called vasculogenesis, used to be thought to take place
during embryonic development only. However, in the
postnatal stage, endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs),
which are bone marrow (BM)-derived precursors
expressing endothelial cell marker proteins, enter the
circulation in response to angiogenic factors, such
as, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and
stromal cell-derived factor (SDF)-1, target sites of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

16588

Oncotarget

RESULTS

refined EPC-colony-forming units (CFUs) for their
heirachical relationship between primitive small-CFUs
and definite large-CFUs in vitro [6] and we adpoted
this method and consider these-CFUs as functional
EPCs [2, 6, 7].
The plant-derived rotenoid, deguelin has been
reported to be a strong cancer chemo-preventive agent
that can suppress the growth of a number of cancers
[8–11]. On the molecular level, deguelin inhibits
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt signaling
pathways. In particular, it has been reported: i) to suppress
IκBα kinase activation, and thus, to suppress NFκBregulated gene expression, potentiate apoptosis, and
inhibit cellular invasion [12], ii) to inhibit Akt-mammalian
target of rapamycin (mTOR)-survivin mediated cell
survival [13], and iii) to induce p53-dependent apoptosis
[9]. Other molecular effects attributed to deguelin
include; the inhibition of mitochondrial bioenergetics
[14], the inhibition of cyclooxygenase-2 expression
[9], the induction of cell cycle arrest and apoptosis via
regulation of the phosphorylation of Rb [11], and the
transcriptional regulation of ornithine decarboxylase
[15, 16]. Recently, several studies have described the
effectivenesses of natural agents in terms of tumor control
via EPC function inhibition [17, 18].
Focal adhesion plays a critical role as centers
that transduce signals by cell-matrix interactions and
regulate biological processes including proliferation,
migration, and differentiation [19]. Focal adhesion
kinase (FAK) is a non-receptor tyrosine kinase that
is upstream regulator of multiple signaling pathways
involved in cell adhesion, motility, survival and cell
cycle progression [20]. By transducing signals to Rho
family of small GTPases, FAK controls the dynamics of
actin filament-based structures lamellipodia, filopodia,
stress fibers and focal adhesions, which are crucial for
cell adhesion and movement [21–23]. Binding of SH2
domains of p85 subunit of PI3K to autophosphorylated
FAK activates PI3K-Akt survival pathways. FAK
protects cells from apoptosis by activating the NFκB
and mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
pathways [24] and causing the degradation of p53 [25].
Enhanced expression of cyclin D1 and repression of
p21 by FAK promote cell cycle progression from G1
into S phase [20, 26]. Integrin-linked kinase (ILK) is
important regulator of EPC function via upregulation
of stem cell-derived factor (SDF)-1 and intercellular
adhesion molecule (ICAM)-1 [27]. Interestingly, both
FAK and ILK collaborates with integrins for their
downstream signal transduction, such as migration and
proliferation [20, 21].
In this study, we examined the microscopic and
molecular effects of deguelin on EPC function in tumor
vasculogenesis and metastasis, with an involvement
of focal adhesion of EPCs via FAK-integrin-ILK
activation.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Deguelin inhibited the proliferation and the
colony forming ability of EPCs
The effect of deguelin on EPC proliferation was
assessed by treating ‘cultured EPCs’ (similar to ECFC)
from BM-derived c-Kit+/Sca-1+/lineage− (KSL) cells with
deguelin at different concentrations. Deguelin inhibited
EPC proliferation in a dose-dependent manner (Figure
1A). Because deguelin exibits antiangiogenic activity in
cancers [28], we tried to compare the effect of deguelin
on EPCs with human umbellical vein endothelial cell
(HUVEC) and human dermal lympatic endothelial cell
(HDLEC). Deguelin inhibited prolfieration in HUVECs
10% at 50 and 100 nM, but not in HDLECs. However,
prolfieration of EPCs was dramatically inhibited by
deguelin 50–60% dose-dependently (Figure 1B). In
semisolid media, EPCs formed two types of colonies,
that is, small (primitive) or large (definitive) colonies,
indicative of high proliferative activity and vasculogenic
activity [6, 29]. In our colony forming assay (CFA), smalland large- CFUs were identified by their morphology
and staining with Ac-LDL and isolectin β4 (Figure
1C). Furthermore, we characterized these CFUs for the
expression of additional EC marker gene, such as VEGF
receptor 2 (VEGFR2), CD31, endothelial nitrogen oxide
synthase (eNOS), VE-cadherin, and vWF [7], and theseCFUs are deemed as functional EPCs, because these
CFUs did not express myeloid cell markers, such as
CD45 [6]. Fewer small and large colonies were formed
in the presence of deguelin (Figure 1D), which suggested
that deguelin attenuates both the self-renewal and
differentiating abilities of EPCs.

Deguelin induced cell cycle arrest at G1 phase
and apoptosis in EPC
In a previous study, deguelin was found to cause
apoptosis in several cancer cell lines, due to its inhibition of
Akt survival pathways, but was not found to have apoptotic
activity in endothelial cells [28]. In the present study, we
examined the cytotoxic effect of deguelin in EPCs using
an Annexin-V assay. Treatment with deguelin (100 nM
for 24 h) did not significantly increase EPC apoptosis
(Supplementary Figure 1), but cell cycle analysis showed
that deguelin caused cell cycle arrest at G1. In fact, deguelin
dose-dependently increased the number of cells in G1,
decreased the number in the S phase, and had a minimal
effect on the G2/M phases (Figure 2A). p53 mediates
inhibition of G1 cyclin kinase and arrest cell cycle in G1
phase. Phosphorylation of pRb induces E2F-mediated
gene transcription involved in cell cycle progression at
the G1-S transition [30]. Thus we checked level of p53
and phosphorylated pRb protein. In these treated cells,
the expression of p53 was increased (Figure 2B), and the
16589

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Dose-dependent suppression of EPC proliferation and colony formation by deguelin. A. KSL cells (10.000 cells/

well) were cultured in StemSpan media containing different concentrations of deguelin (n = 4/group). Relative cell numbers were measured
by a CCK-8 assay at the indicated time points (*P < 0.05; **P < 0.001 vs. non-treated control). B. HUVECs, HDLECs were cultured in
the EGM-2 media in different concentration of deguelin and relative cell numbers were measured by a CCK-8 assay at 24 h in compared
to cultured EPCs as shown in A (n = 4). C. D. KSL cells were seeded in methylcellulose containing media containing deguelin at different
concentrations (n = 4/group). Colony forming units were counted by blind investigators 12 days after seeding. Small- and large-CFUs were
defined as focused clusters of rounded cells or as central core of round cells with elongated sprouting cells at their peripheries, respectively
(left panel). Enlarged images of the boxed regions are shown in right. DiI-Ac-LDL was uptaken by these colonies and colonies were treated
with FITC-conjugated anti-isolectin B4 antibody. C. Quantitative number of colonies were counted and graphed D. Three indepedent
experiments were performed. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01 vs. non-treated control. Scale bar = 500 μm.

Figure 2: Regulation of cell cycle genes by deguelin in EPCs. A. KSL cells were treated with different concentrations of deguelin
for 2 days (n = 3). Cells were collected, fixed, and stained with propidium iodide. DNA contents were measured by flow cytometry and cell
cycles were analyzed (n = 3). The effects of deguelin on the expression of p53. B. cyclin D1, and phosphorylated-Rb. C. β-Actin was used
as the internal control (n = 3).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

16590

Oncotarget

expressions of cyclin D1 and of phosphorylated pRb were
found to be suppressed (Figure 2C). These results indicate
that deguelin inhibits EPC proliferation by regulating cyclin
D1 and pRb-dependent cell cycle progression without any
induction of apoptosis.

that deguelin at 100 nM reduced the number of EPCs that
were incorporated and the number that differentiated into
tubular structures with HUVECs (Figure 3C), as determined
by detecting GFP+ cells. However, using only HUVECs or
HDLECs, deguelin had no effect on the tube formation
(Supplementary Figure 2) as found in a previous study
that deguelin at 100 nM does not alter the organization of
HUVECs into capillary-like networks [28], and thus, the
impaired tube formation observed was probably the result
of inhibiting the ability of EPCs to incorporate and enhance
tube-forming ability of endothelial cells.
Because the adhesion of EPCs to endothelial cells
and the extracellular matrix is a crucial step for EPC
docking and migration into a new site for EPC growth
and to form new blood vessels [31], adhesion assay was
performed. When EPCs from GFP-expressing mice were
plated onto fibronectin-coated 96-well plates, numbers of
adherent cells were unaffected by deguelin (Figure 3D).
However, when EPCs were allowed to adhere to HUVEC
confluent monolayers, deguelin reduced the number of
adherent cells after 3 h (Figure 3D), which suggested
that deguelin might inhibit EPC adhesiveness at sites of
vasculogenesis.

Deguelin inhibited EPC function
Next, we examined the effects of deguelin on the
functional activities of EPCs, that is, migration, tube
formation, and adhesion. In a modified Boyden chamber
migration assay, deguelin significantly and dose-dependently
reduced the number of migrating EPCs (Figure 3A). When
compared with HUVECs and HDLECs, EPCs was the most
susceptible to deguelin (Figure 3B), suggesting that EPCs can
be vascular target cells for deguelin. Because the migration
assay was performed in a short time (5 h), the observed effect
of deguelin on EPC migration is substantially independent of
its effect on cell proliferation.
The functional ability of EPCs to incorporate and
differentiate into vascular tubes was examined on a
Matrigel. EPCs from GFP transgenic mice were co-cultured
with HUVECs on Matrigel matrix (100 nM). It was found

Figure 3: Effects of deguelin on EPC migration, adhesion, and tube formation. A. A modified Boyden chamber assay was
used with rhVEGF (20 ng/ml) as chemoattractant. EPC migration was identified as a red-purple color by staining with H&E after removing
non-migrated cells (n = 4). B. The same migration assay experiment as in A using HUVEC, HDLEC, and cultured EPCs were performed
in the presence or absence of deguelin (10–100 nM) in lower or upper chamber for 5 h (n = 3). C. GFP-expressing EPCs were co-cultured
with HUVECs on Matrigel matrix for 8 h. Branching points and incorporated GFP-expressing EPCs were counted and graphed (n = 3).
Representative pictures showing the incorporation of GFP-expressing EPCs into tube-like structures shown in below. D. EPCs were allowed
to adhere to HUVEC monolayers for 3 h or to fibronectin for 30 min. The graph shows fold inductions of numbers of adherent cells versus
non-treated control (n = 3). The lower panel shows representative pictures illustrating the adhesion of GFP-expressing EPCs to HUVEC
monolayers. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.001 compared to control.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

16591

Oncotarget

Deguelin inhibited tumor vascularization in vivo

of circulating EPCs (defined as peripheral blood MNCs
positive for both CD34 and VEGFR2 but negative for CD45
[34]) were significantly elevated in tumor bearing mice, but
not in deguelin-treated tumor bearing mice (Figure 4C),
suggesting that low dose deguelin (2 mg/kg) inhibits tumor
growth by suppressing vasculogenesis through inhibition of
EPC mobilization from BM into circulating blood.
To explore this suggestion, after γ-ray treatment
to deplete BM cells, mice were transplanted with BMMNCs from GFP transgenic mice. These mice were then
inoculated with B16F10 cells and treated with deguelin or
vehicle. Two weeks later, tumor masses were collected and
subjected to IHC. Staining for CD31 showed that tumor
vessel densities were significantly reduced in deguelintreated mice (Figure 4D and 4E), and that vessel sizes in

Mouse tumor cells, LLC and B16F10 xenograft
models were used to examine the effect of deguelin on
tumor vasculogenesis in vivo (tumor cells were injected
s.c. into flanks). We chose 2 mg/kg of deguelin (i.p) which
was 2~4-fold lower than those to inhibit cancer cell growth
or metastasis [32, 33]. When animals were treated with 2
mg/kg of deguelin (i.p) every 2 days for 2 weeks, tumor
growth was significantly reduced (Figure 4A) and final
tumor weight was lighter than in vehicle control (50%
DMSO in physical saline, i.p.) (Figure 4B). To determine
the effect of deguelin on the number of circulating EPCs,
in two weeks after tumor cell inoculation, peripheral blood
was collected to assess circulating EPC numbers. Numbers

Figure 4: Effect of deguelin on tumor growth and vasculogenesis in vivo. A. Mice were inoculated s.c. with LLCs or B16F10

cells and treated with deguelin (2 mg/kg body weight, n = 6) or vehicle (n = 6) every 2 days, and measured tumor volume. B. Tumor final
weights of A. C. MNCs were isolated from peripheral blood by gradient centrifugation using Histopaque 1083 and stained with Alexa
Fluor 647-conjugated anti-CD45, PE-conjugated anti-Flk-1 and FITC-conjugated anti-CD34 antibodies (n = 3). Cells were analyzed by
flow cytometry. Debris and platelets were excluded by gating low FSC/SSC fractions. Circulating EPCs were defined as CD34+/Flk-1+/
CD45- cells. D–F. Mice transplanted with BM-MNCs from GFP-expressing mice were s.c. inoculated with B16F10 cells and treated with
deguelin as above (n = 6). Tumors were fixed and subjected to IHC. Staining for CD31 revealed tumor micro-vessel densities. D. Among
the tumor microvessels, GFP-expressing EPC-derived vessels were counted. E. CD31 (red) and the differentiation of GFP-expressing EPCs
into endothelial cells (green) were shown. F. Enlarged images of the boxed regions are shown in right. Each experiment was performed
twice independently. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.005; ***P < 0.001. Scale bar = 100 μm.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

16592

Oncotarget

treated mice were also smaller than control (Figure 4F). In
particular, the co-expressions of CD31 and GFP (indicative
of the differentiation of BM-derived EPCs into vascular
endothelial cells) were reduced in the tumors of deguelintreated mice (Figure 4E and 4F). These findings suggest
that deguelin inhibits the mobilization of EPCs from BM
into the peripheral blood circulation and their recruitment
and incorporation into tumor neovasculature.

of deguelin on the polymerization of actin within BMderived lin-/c-Kit+ cells. Stimulation with SDF-1α induced
actin polymerization within 20 sec, but pre-treatment with
deguelin for 1 h strongly diminished SDF-1α-induced
actin polymerization (Figure 6A). Furthermore, phalloidin
immunofluorescence showed that treating cultured EPCs
with deguelin disrupted cell polarity and focal adhesions.
Cultured EPCs are polarized with broad lamellipodia
extending in the direction of cell migration and a narrow
uropod at the rear (Figure 6B, upper), which indicates
migrating ability. However, this migratory morphology
was disrupted after 1.5 h of treatment with deguelin when
actin skeletons were stabilized with a dense meshwork
of actin filaments around the cell periphery, which made
cells contracted and depolarized (Figure 6B, lower). These
findings suggest that the inhibitory effects of deguelin
on EPC function are achieved via the suppression of
actin polymerization and cytoskeletal remodeling. To
investigate underlying molecular mechanism for this,
molecules for cytoskeletal machinery were examined.
The cytoskeletal network is under the control of the Rho
family of small GTPases, which in turn, are regulated by
FAK. The activation of FAK, a rapid event in response
to growth factors or cell adhesion to ECM, is crucial for
focal adhesion turnover and cell motility [22]. Western blot
showed decreases in the phosphorylation of FAK at Tyr397,
Tyr576/577, and Tyr861 in EPCs treated with deguelin
(Figure 6C), which suggests that deguelin regulates
migration and adhesion by actin remodelling through
inhibiting FAK phosphorylation. ILK and FAK shares
integrin αvβ3 for their signaling for actin remodeling, we
checked ILK, integrin signaling and paxillin expression.

Deguelin inhibited cancer cell metastasis through
suppression of EPC function
As EPCs play an important role in metastasis
progression [4] and deguelin inhibited EPC function from
our results, we investigated whether deguelin inhibits
metastasis and EPC contribution to metastasized tumor.
BM transplanted mice with GFP-expressing MNCs were
inoculated with LLC or B16F10 cells intravenously and
treated with deguelin or vehicle every two days for 12
days. At 2 weeks post-injection, lung metastasis was
inhibited (Figure 5A), lung nodule vascularization was
also reduced analyzed by the CD31+/GFP+ cells. Therefore,
the contribution of EPCs or vascular endothelial cells
in metastasized lung nodules was inhibited in deguelintreated mice (Figure 5B and 5C).

Deguelin inhibited ILK-integrin αvβ3-FAK
signaling axis and focal adhesion
Since actin polymerization in response to
chemokines is a key event in cell cycle progression, cell
migration, and tumor metastasis [35], we studied the effect

Figure 5: Deguelin inhibited metastasis. Mice transplanted with BM-MNCs from GFP-expressing mice were inoculated i.v. with 4 ×

104 LLCs or 105 B16F10 cells and treated with deguelin (2 mg/kg) or vehicle (n = 6/group) every 2 days). A. Numbers of lung metastases
after 12 days (*P < 0.01). B, C. IHC staining of lung nodule sections for CD31 (red) and GFP (green) revealed vessel densities and the
incorporation of EPCs (arrows). *P < 0.05. Scale bar = 100 μm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

16593

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Deguelin suppressed focal adhesion via inhibition of FAK-integrin-ILK axis. A. Freshly isolated BM-lin--c-Kit+
cells were pre-incubated with 100 nM deguelin or vehicle for 1 h. Actin polymerization was induced by SDF-1α (200 ng/ml) for 20 sec. Cells
were fixed and stained with phalloidin and c-Kit antibody, and analyzed by flow cytometry (n = 3). *P < 0.005; **P < 0.001. B. Cultured
EPCs were treated with deguelin (100 nM) or vehicle (DMSO) for 1 h. Filamentous actin was visualized by immunofluorescent staining
using Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated Phalloidin (n = 3). C. Cultured EPCs were treated with deguelin (100 nM) for 15 min. Total protein was
extracted and western blotted for activated FAK (n = 3). D. Cultured EPCs were treated with deguelin (10–100 nM) for 15 min. Wetern blot
analysis with total protein for ILK, integrin αV, β3, and paxillin was performed. β-actin was used for internal control. E. Cultured EPCs
were treated with deguelin (100 nM) or vehicle (DMSO) for 1 h. Actin polymerization was visualized by immunofluorescent staining using
Alexa Fluor 488-Phalloidin. Focal adhesion was immunostained with mouse anti-vinculin antibody and Alexa Fluor 488-phalloidin. Focal
adhesion sites were counted and graphed. *P < 0.001 F. Cultured EPCs were treated with deguelin (10–100 nM) for 15 min. Wetern blot
analysis for vinculin was performed. β-actin was used for internal control. G. A scheme for the molecular mechamism of deguelin against
EPCs function in vasculogenesis.
Deguelin dose-dependently decreased ILK as well as
integrin αvβ3 and paxillin (Figure 6D). Focal adehision
number as determined by vincullin immunostaining in
lamellipodia was significantly decreased by deguelin
treatment (Figure 6E). And vinculin protein expression was
decreased by deguelin (Figure 6F)
When we investigated whether Akt pathways are
affected in EPCs, the VEGF-induced activations of Akt
and mTOR were suppressed dose-dependently by deguelin
in EPCs (Supplementary Figure 3A). In complete media,
this pathway was inhibited at early time points (5 min-1 h)
(Supplementary Figure 3B).

targeting EPC growth and function. In addition, bone
marrow-derived EPCs has been known as critical
regulators of angiogenic switch in metastatic progression.
EPCs homing to metastatic lesions induces tumor
progression through direct luminal incorporation or
secreting angiogenic cytokines by paracrine manner, and
ultimately forms neovessels in metastatic tumors [4]. In
particular, antitumor agents with EPC inhibitory activity
can provide an additive treatment effect [38]. Deguelin
is a potent anticancer agent, and inhibits angiogenesis by
inhibiting endothelial cells [28]. In this study, we show
that deguelin inhibits EPC function in vitro, and the
contribution by EPCs to tumor growth and metastasis
in vivo, through inhibiting actin remodeling and focal
adhesion signaling.
To contribute to vascularization, EPCs must
proliferate, mobilize from BM into the circulatory system,
home to tumor sites, and differentiate into endothelial cells
[39]. In particular, the proliferation, migration, adhesion,
and differentiation of EPCs are required for tumor
vascularization, growth, and metastasis [5]. Therefore, a

DISCUSSION
The targeting of angiogenesis is a valuable strategy
for the treatment of solid cancers, because it targets
genetically stable cells rather than rapidly mutating and
drug resistance acquiring cancer cells [36]. Because
EPCs are required for tumor vascularization [37], the
effectiveness of cancer therapy could be enhanced by
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

16594

Oncotarget

combinatorial approach to the targeting these processes
leads to a strongly inhibitory effect on EPC function
during tumor progression.
The inhibition of cell growth by blocking Akt
pathways is the main reported effect of deguelin
[8, 28, 40], and in the present study, we observed this in
EPCs (Supplementary Figure 3). However, whereas Akt
suppression is implicated in the induction of apoptosis
in almost all cancer cells examined, deguelin was not
observed to have a cytotoxic effect on EPCs, despite its
considerable inhibition of EPC proliferation. This finding
is consistent with a lack of toxicity on non-cancer cells [28,
40]. Deguelin has even been reported to inhibit apoptosis
significantly in endothelial cells [28]. Therefore, we can
speculate that deguelin demonstrates its pharmacological
effects depending on the different celluar context.
Cellular context-dependent effects of deguelin is
also shown when it did not affect the proliferation of
lymphatic endothelial cells, and just slightly reduced that of
endothelial cells (Figure 1A). While strongly suppressing
EPC functions, deguelin moderately inhibited migration of
endothelial cells and lymphatic endothelial cells, and did
not changes tube formation capacity of these cells (Figure
4B, 4D). Therefore, anti-angiogenic effect of deguelin in
vivo might be primarily due to inhibition of EPC, rather
than endothelial cell proliferation and functions.
There is still no uniform definition of EPCs. From
our results, our small- or large-EPC-CFUs express AcLDL, isolectin B4 but did not express either CD14 or
CD45, which represent similar phenotypes to ECFCs
[3]. Role of EPCs in blood vessel formation have been
demonstrated, as circulating EPCs can incorporate into
sites of neovascularisation [41]. However, beside EPC
identity, the extent of contribution of EPCs to tumor
neovascularization remains controversial. While many
investigations described great contribution of EPCs
to tumor vessel formation [5] some others showed
minimal [42] or even undetectable contribution [43].
These different reports can arise from differences in EPC
markers and tumor models employed for analysis.
Given the rarity of EPCs in peripheral blood,
vasculogenesis greatly depends on the abilities of EPCs
to mobilize toward angiogenic factors and adhere to
developing vasculature. In the present study, deguelin
dramatically inhibited EPC migration and adhesion to
HUVECs (Figure 3A, 3D). Furthermore, deguelin reduced
tube formation in EPC-HUVEC co-culture assays (Figure
3C). EPCs have been reported to be incorporated into and
to enhance capillary-like networks formed by endothelial
cells [44]. In addition, in a previous report, deguelin at
100 nM did not alter HUVEC organization into capillarylike networks (Supplementary Figure 2) [28], the effect of
deguelin on co-cultured tube formation demonstrates that
deguelin suppresses the ability of EPCs to incorporate and
stimulate endothelial cell tube formation, and suggests that

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

it has an inhibitory effect on the functional differentiation of
EPCs and thus EPCs a specific vascular target of deguelin.
Deguelin is an well-known Akt-inhibitor [40] and a
HSP90 inhibitor in anticancer activity [32]. It can reduce
stability of HSP90 sensitive client HIF-1α in cancer cells.
As shown in cancer cells, inhibition of EPC function
by deguelin may result in part from the suppression
of Akt pathways (Supplementary Figure 3) and the
hypoxia-induced expressions of VEGF and CXCR4
(Supplementary Figure 4). However, we found the in vivo
suppressive effect on the tumor growth by deguelin was
obtained at 2–4 fold lower dose than that of anticancer
activity in vivo [32, 33]. At this concentration we cannot
found the tumor cell necrosis or death (data not shown),
suggesting that the inhibition of tumor cell growth is due
to only suppressing EPC function.
In the present study, we found that deguelin caused
cell depolarization and contraction. After treatment, cells
lost their typical migratory morphology and exhibited
dense actin filament meshes around their peripheries
(Figure 6B). Furthermore, deguelin consistently inhibited
the activation of FAK and SDF-1α-induced actin
polymerization as well as expression of ILK, integrins
and paxillin (Figure 6A, 6C, 6D). Activation of integrins
by binding to specific extracellular matrices (ECM)
activates FAK as well as ILK signalings. Signaling
cascade of FAK activation is essential for cell migration
[45], and regulates Rho family GTPases cdc42, Rac and
Rho, which are responsible for the formation of filopodia,
lamellipodia, and stress fibers, respectively [21, 46].
FAK also activates actin-dependent membrane ruffle
and lamellipodia formation required for cell migration
[23]. ILK interacts with paxillin and FAK and mediates
cytoskeletal dynamics and cell migration [47]. From our
findings that the inhibition of FAK and ILK by deguelin
may results in decreased integrin signaling-mediated
focal adhesion and migration as well as cell contraction.
In addition, the effect of deguelin on activation of Akt and
expression of p53 and cyclin D1, which are down-stream
targets of FAK, suggests that the inhibition of FAK may
also be responsible for the decrease of cell growth by
deguelin. From our results, integrins αvβ3 were inhibited
by deguelin (Figure 6), suggesting integrins αvβ3 are
involved in FAK and ILK signalings in EPCs (Figure 6G)..
Interestingly, FAK is also a downstream target of several
growth factor receptors [48] and acts at both upstream and
downstream of Akt [49, 50]. Therefore, it is important to
clarify if integrins αvβ3, Akt, FAK, or another upstream
mediator is a direct target of deguelin (Figure 6G). With
our data, deguelin suppresses migration, proliferation,
angiogenesis activities in EPCs through FAK/integrin
axis. Even we focused on deguelin’s effect on FAK/ILK
signaling pathway, VEGF or SDF-1α signaling pathway
may be also invoved in the inhibition of vasculogenic
function in EPCs by deguelin.

16595

Oncotarget

Summarizing the present study shows that deguelin,
a potent anticancer drug, suppresses tumor growth and
metastasis by inhibiting EPC function, and thus, inhibits
tumor vasculogenesis. Furthermore, in the present study,
it was found for the first time that deguelin inhibits actin
filament remodeling.

these CFUs for the expression of additional marker genes
such as CD31, Flk-1, eNOS [7], and in this study von
Wilibrand factor (vWF), and VE-cadherin.

Mice and bone marrow transplantation
C57BL/6J mice were housed under specific
pathogen-free conditions in standard polycarbonate cages
with stainless steel tops and micro-isolator lids with
wood chip bedding. Ambient conditions were maintained
at 21 ± 3°C and 30–60% RH under a 12/12 h light/dark
cycle. Six-week old mice were exposed to a lethal dose
(10 Gy) of 60Co radiation. Six hours later, mice were
inoculated intravenously with 107 BM-MNCs isolated
from GFP transgenic mice. Four weeks after exposure,
flow cytometry indicated that the frequency of GFPexpressing cells among the peripheral MNCs of bone
marrow transplanted (BMT) mice was > 95%.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Mice
Animal experiments were performed using
C57BL/6J mice (SLC, Japan), which were handled in
strict compliance with the guidelines for care and use
of laboratory animals issued by the institutional ethical
animal care committee of Kyungpook National University
(Daegu, Korea). Mice were maintained under specific
pathogen-free conditions. Transgenic mice that universally
expressed the green fluorescent protein (GFP) under the
chick β-actin promoter were kindly provided by Dr. GooTaeg Oh in Ewha University.

Tumor growth, metastasis, and circulating EPC
At 4 weeks post-BM transplantation, mice were
subcutaneously (s.c,) injected with 105 Lewis lung
carcinoma cells (LLCs) or B16F10 melanoma. Tumor
volumes were measured every 2 days with a caliper. Three
weeks after injection tumor masses were collected for
immunohistochemistry (IHC). For the metastasis assay,
BMT mice were inoculated intravenously (i.v.) with 4 ×
104 LLCs or 105 B16F10. Twelve days later mice were
sacrificed and lung nodules were counted.

EPC isolation and culture
BM-derived mononuclear cells (MNCs) were
isolated from 8-to-12-week old C57BL/6J mice by
gradient centrifugation using Histopaque 1083 (Sigma
Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). Remaining red blood cells were
depleted with NH4Cl. BM-MNCs were cultured on 2%
gelatin-coated dishes in EGM-2 media (Lonza, Basel,
Switzerland) supplemented with 5% FBS and antibiotics.
Non-adherent cells were removed and the medium was
changed on day 4. Isolation and culture of c-Kit+/Sca-1+/
lineage- (KSL) cells from BM-MNCs were performed as
described previously [51].

Actin polymerization assay
Freshly isolated BM-lin- cells were incubated with
deguelin or vehicle at 37oC for 1 h and stimulated with 100
ng/ml SDF-1α for 20 sec. Cells were then fixed with 4%
paraformaldehyde (PFA), stained with Alexa Fluor
488-Phalloidin (Invitrogen), and PE-anti-cKit antibody
(BioLegend), and analyzed with a FACSCalibur. C-Kit+
cells were gated to analyze filamentous actin contents.

EPC colony forming assay (CFA) and
characterization
EPC colony formation was assessed by culturing
500 KSL cells in triplicate in methylcellulose-containing
medium M3236 (Stem Cell Technologies) supplemented
with; 100 ng/ml SCF (PeproTech), 50 ng/ml VEGF
(PeproTech), 20 ng/ml interleukin-3 (R&D Systems),
50 ng/ml basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF, R&D
Systems), 50 ng/ml epidermal growth factor (EGF,
PeproTech), 2 U/ml heparin (Sigma Aldrich), 30% FBS,
and antibiotics. Small- and large- colonies (CFUs) after
culture for 12 days were defined as focused clusters of
rounded cells or as cell clusters with a central core of round
cells and elongated sprouting cells at their peripheries
[51]. Endothelial characteristics of the attached small- and
large- CFUs were examined after uptake of DiI-conjugated
Ac-LDL (DiI-Ac-LDL) (Biomedical Technologies
Inc., MA) and binding with FITC-conjugated isolectin
B4 (Sigma Chemical Co., WI), a standard marker of
endothelial lineage cells. In our previous study, we defined
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Proliferation assay
KSL cells (1 × 104) were cultured in 96-well plates
containing 100 μl StemSpan media supplemented with 100
ng/ml SCF (PeproTech), 50 ng/ml VEGF (PeproTech), 100
ng/ml IL6 (PeproTech), 100 ng/ml Flt3 (R&D Systems),
20 ng/ml TPO (PeproTech), and different concentrations
of deguelin (10–100 nM) for 1–4 days. Cell Counting Kit8 (Dojindo, Kumamoto, Japan) solution (10μl) was then
added to each well and plates were incubated for a further
4 h and read for O.D. at 450 nm.

EPC adhesion to matrix molecules
A 96-well plate was coated with 0.1 mg/mL
fibronectin at 37oC for 3 h. Cultured EPCs were detached
16596

Oncotarget

Cell cycle analysis

with 0.25% trypsin and resuspended in EGM2 media
supplemented with 5% FBS. Cells (105) were placed into
each well and incubated for 30 min at 37oC. After removing
non-adherent cells by washing three times, adhering cells
were quantified using a 3-(4, 5-Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,
5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay.

Cells were collected, washed with PBS and fixed
with ice-cold 70% ethanol at −20°C for 1 day. After
washing with PBS, cells were incubated with staining
solution containing 10 μg/mL RNase (Sigma), 40 μg/mL
propidium iodide and 0.1% NP-40 for 15 minutes.
Fluorescence intensities of 104 cells were measured using
a FACS Calibur, and cell cycles were analyzed using
FACSexpress Software.

EPC adhesion to endothelial cell monolayers
Confluent monolayers of HUVECs were prepared
on 4-well plates. EPCs expressing green fluorescence
protein (GFP) were detached and 105 cells were added
to each well. After 3 h, non-adherent cells were removed
by washing with PBS. Cells were then fixed with 4%
paraformaldehyde, stained with DAPI, and counted in 5
random fields under a fluorescent microscope.

Western blotting
Cells were washed twice with cold PBS and lysed
with ice-cold RIFA buffer (Cell Signaling). Lysates were
centrifuged at 15, 000g (4°C) for 20 min to remove insoluble
components, and protein concentrations in supernatants
were measured using the BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo
Scientific, Rockford, IL). Proteins (40 μg/lane) were
separated on SDS-polyacrylamide gels and blotted onto
nitrocellulose membranes (Whatman, Dassel, Germany).
Western blotting was performed using antibodies against
Akt, phospho-Akt, mTOR, phospho-mTOR, phosphoFAK, cyclin D1, phospho-Rb (Cell Signaling), p53, FAK,
and β-actin (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Paso Robles,
CA). Membranes were developed using an enhanced
chemiluminescence detection kit (Thermo Scientific).

Migration assay
EPC migration assays were performed in triplicate
using a Transwell system (6.5-mm diameter, 5-μm pore size,
Corning Costar, Cambride, MA). Six hundred microliters
of EBM media with or without deguelin and 20 ng/ml
rhVEGF were placed in the lower chambers. Cultured MNCs
(in EGM2 containing 5% FBS for 7 days) were starved in
FBS-free EBM media for 24 h, and seeded (5 × 104 cells)
into upper chambers in EBM media with or without deguelin.
After incubation for 5 h, cells were fixed with methanol. Nonmigrating cells on upper sides were scrapped off and the filter
was stained with Hematoxylin and Eosin (H&E). Migrating
cells were counted in five random high power fields (HPF)
per membrane. Results are expressed as relative migrations
(average number of migrated cells/HPF ± SD).

Immunofluorescence
MNCs were cultured on coverslips in 4-well plates.
At day 4, cells were treated with deguelin (100 nM) or
DMSO vehicle for 1.5 h and then fixed with 4% PFA. After
washing and permeabilizing with 0.1% Triton X-100, cells
were stained with Alexa Fluor 488-Phalloidin. DAPI was
used to label nuclei.

Tube formation assay
Matrigel matrix (BD Biosciences) was thawed at
4°C overnight, and 70 μl was placed in a 96-well plate at
37°C for 30 min to solidify. GFP-expressing EPCs (1.5 ×
103 cells) and HUVECs (104 cells) were co-plated in 100
μl EGM2 media and incubated at 37°C in 5% CO2 for 8
h. Wells were examined under a fluorescent microscope
to assess capillary formation and GFP+ cell incorporation.
Results are presented as the means ± SDs of numbers of
branch points and numbers of EPCs incorporated into tube
network in 5 HPFs.

Immunohistochemistry
LLC xenograft tumors and mouse lungs were fixed
in 4% PFA for 4 h, rinsed with PBS, and immersed in
30% sucrose in PBS overnight. Tissues were then placed
in Tissue-Tek OCT Compound (Miles Inc., Elkhart, IN)
at 4°C for 4 h before freezing with dry ice. Sections
(8 μm) were then cut and stained with rat IgG antimouse CD31 antibody (BD Pharmingen) and Alexa Fluor
594-conjugated anti-rat IgG secondary antibody.

Apoptosis assay

Real-time PCR

KSL cells expanded for 7 days were subcultured for
24 h with deguelin (10–100 nM) or DMSO as a vehicle
control in triplicate. Cells were then collected, washed,
and double stained with FITC-conjugated Annexin
V (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) and propidium iodide
(PI, Sigma Aldrich). Labeled cells (104 events) were
analyzed by flow cytometry. Apoptosis was determined
by calculating the percentage of FITC+/PI- cells (PI+ cells
were considered necrotic cells).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Total RNA was extracted using a RNeasy Mini
Kit (Qiagen, Valncia, CA) and reverse transcribed
with a PrimeScript™ RT reagent Kit (Takara Bio Inc.,
Shiga, Japan). Real-time PCR was performed using
an ABI PRISM 7300 Sequence Detection System
using SYBR-Green PCR master mix (Applied
Biosystems, Foster City, CA) with primer pairs targeting
CXCR4 (forward 5′-GCCAAGTTCAAAAGCTCTGC-3′;
16597

Oncotarget

reverse 5′-AGCCTCTGCTCATGGAGTTG-3′), VEGF
(forward 5′-TCTCCCAGATCGGTGACAGT-3′; reverse
5′-GGGCAGAGCTGAGTGTTAGC-3′) and β-actin
(forward
5′-AAGTCCCTCACCCTCCCAAAAG-3′;
reverse 5′-AAGCAATGCTGTCACCTTCCC-3′). The
mean cycle threshold (Ct) values from triplicate measure­
ments were used to calculate relative gene expressions
(normalized versus β-actin) using the ∆∆Ct method.

2.	 Fadini GP, Losordo D, Dimmeler S. Critical reevaluation of
endothelial progenitor cell phenotypes for therapeutic and
diagnostic use. Circ Res. 2012; 110:624–37.
3.	 Yoder MC, Mead LE, Prater D, Krier TR, Mroueh KN, Li F,
et al. Redefining endothelial progenitor cells via clonal
analysis and hematopoietic stem/progenitor cell principals.
Blood. 2007; 109:1801–9.
4.	 Gao D, Nolan DJ, Mellick AS, Bambino K, McDonnell K,
Mittal V. Endothelial progenitor cells control the angiogenic
switch in mouse lung metastasis. Science. 2008; 319:195–8.

Statistical analysis
All data are expressed as the means ± SDs of at least
3 samples. ANOVA was used to determine the statistical
significance of comparisons.

5.	 Lyden D, Hattori K, Dias S, Costa C, Blaikie P, Butros L,
et al. Impaired recruitment of bone-marrow-derived endothelial and hematopoietic precursor cells blocks tumor
angiogenesis and growth. Nat Med. 2001; 7:1194–201.

Acknowledgments

6.	 Masuda H, Alev C, Akimaru H, Ito R, Shizuno T, Kobori M,
et al. Methodological development of a ­clonogenic assay to
determine endothelial progenitor cell potential. Circ Res.
2011; 109:20–37.

We would like to thank to Dr. Goo-Taeg Oh in Ewha
University for GFP-transgenic mice.
This work was supported by a National Research
Foundation grant from the Korean government (MSIP)
(NRF-2009–0066170, NRF-2012R1A4A1028835 and
NRF-2013R1A2A2A01068868).

7.	 Kwon SM, Lee YK, Yokoyama A, Jung SY, Masuda H,
Kawamoto A, et al. Differential activity of bone marrow
hematopoietic stem cell subpopulations for EPC development and ischemic neovascularization. Journal of molecular
and cellular cardiology. 2011; 51:308–17.

Authorship

8.	 Lee HY, Oh SH, Woo JK, Kim WY, Van Pelt CS, Price RE,
et al. Chemopreventive effects of deguelin, a novel Akt
inhibitor, on tobacco-induced lung tumorigenesis. J Natl
Cancer Inst. 2005; 97:1695–9.

Contribution: M.P.N., D.J.L., S.H.L., H.E.L. performed
the experimental work and wrote manuscript; H.Y.L. provided
reagents and discussion for the experimental data; Y.M.L.
designed the experimental plan, analyzed the data and wrote
the manuscript.

9.	 Lee HY, Suh YA, Kosmeder JW, Pezzuto JM, Hong WK,
Kurie JM. Deguelin-induced inhibition of cyclooxy­genase-2
expression in human bronchial epithelial cells. Clin Cancer
Res. 2004; 10:1074–9.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

10.	 Udeani GO, Gerhauser C, Thomas CF, Moon RC,
Kosmeder JW, Kinghorn AD, et al. Cancer chemopreventive activity mediated by deguelin, a naturally occurring
rotenoid. Cancer Res. 1997; 57:3424–8.

The authors have no conflict of interest to declare.

Abbreviations

11.	 Murillo G, Salti GI, Kosmeder JW 2nd, Pezzuto JM,
Mehta RG. Deguelin inhibits the growth of colon cancer
cells through the induction of apoptosis and cell cycle
arrest. Eur J Cancer. 2002; 38:2446–54.

EPC; endothelial progenitor cell BM; bonemarrow CFU; colony forming units, MNC; mononuclear
cell, ILK; integrin-linked kinase, FAK; focal adhesion
kinase, GFP; green fluorescent protein, VEGF; vascular
endothelial growth factor, SDF; strom cell-derived factor,
ECFC; endothelial colony forming cells, EC; endothelial
cells, PI3K; phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, mTOR;
mammalian target of rapamycin, Hsp; heat shock protein,
HIF; hypoxia-inducible factor, KSL; c-kit+/sca-1+/
Lin-, HUVEC; human umbellical vein endothelial cell,
HDLEC; human dermal lympatic endothelial cell, eNOS;
endothelial nitrogen oxide

12.	 Nair AS, Shishodia S, Ahn KS, Kunnumakkara AB,
Sethi G, Aggarwal BB. Deguelin, an Akt inhibitor, suppresses IkappaBalpha kinase activation leading to suppression of NF-kappaB-regulated gene expression, potentiation
of apoptosis, and inhibition of cellular invasion. J Immunol.
2006; 177:5612–22.
13.	 Jin Q, Feng L, Behrens C, Bekele BN, Wistuba II,
Hong  WK, et al. Implication of AMP-activated protein
kinase and Akt-regulated survivin in lung cancer chemopreventive activities of deguelin. Cancer Res. 2007;
67:11630–9.

REFERENCES

14.	 Hail N Jr., Lotan R. Apoptosis induction by the natural
product cancer chemopreventive agent deguelin is mediated through the inhibition of mitochondrial bioenergetics.
Apoptosis. 2004; 9:437–47.

1.	 Asahara T, Murohara T, Sullivan A, Silver M, van der
Zee R, Li T, et al. Isolation of putative progenitor endothelial cells for angiogenesis. Science. 1997; 275:964–7.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

16598

Oncotarget

endothelial progenitor cells using human peripheral and
umbilical cord blood. Blood. 2004; 104:2752–60.

15.	 Gerhauser C, Mar W, Lee SK, Suh N, Luo Y, Kosmeder J,
et al. Rotenoids mediate potent cancer chemopreventive
activity through transcriptional regulation of ornithine
decarboxylase. Nat Med. 1995; 1:260–6.

30.	 Hickman ES, Moroni MC, Helin K. The role of p53 and
pRB in apoptosis and cancer. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2002;
12:60–6.

16.	 Gerhauser C, Lee SK, Kosmeder JW, Moriarty RM,
Hamel E, Mehta RG, et al. Regulation of ornithine decarboxylase induction by deguelin, a natural product cancer
chemopreventive agent. Cancer Res. 1997; 57:3429–35.

31.	 Isner JM, Asahara T. Angiogenesis and vasculogenesis
as therapeutic strategies for postnatal neovascularization.
J Clin Invest. 1999; 103:1231–6.

17.	 Kwon YH, Jung SY, Kim JW, Lee SH, Lee JH, Lee BY,
et al. Phloroglucinol inhibits the bioactivities of endothelial
progenitor cells and suppresses tumor angiogenesis in LLCtumor-bearing mice. PLoS One; 2012; 7:e33618.

32.	 Oh SH, Woo JK, Yazici YD, Myers JN, Kim WY, Jin Q,
et al. Structural basis for depletion of heat shock protein
90 client proteins by deguelin. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2007;
99:949–61.

18.	 Jung SY, Choi JH, Kwon SM, Masuda H, Asahara T,
Lee YM. Decursin inhibits vasculogenesis in early tumor progression by suppression of endothelial progenitor cell differentiation and function. J Cell Biochem. 2012; 113:1478–87.

33.	 Boreddy SR, Srivastava SK. Deguelin suppresses ­pancreatic
tumor growth and metastasis by inhibiting epithelialto-mesenchymal transition in an orthotopic model.
Oncogene. 2013; 32:3980–91.

19.	 Streuli CH. Integrins and cell-fate determination. Journal of
cell science. 2009; 122:171–7.

34.	 Case J, Mead LE, Bessler WK, Prater D, White HA,
Saadatzadeh MR, et al. Human CD34+AC133+VEGFR-2+
cells are not endothelial progenitor cells but distinct,
primitive hematopoietic progenitors. Exp Hematol. 2007;
35:1109–18.

20.	 Mierke CT. The role of focal adhesion kinase in the
regulation of cellular mechanical properties. Physical
­
­biology. 2013; 10:065005.
21.	 Mitra SK, Hanson DA, Schlaepfer DD. Focal adhesion
kinase: in command and control of cell motility. Nat Rev
Mol Cell Biol. 2005; 6:56–68.

35.	 Voermans C, Anthony EC, Mul E, van der Schoot E,
Hordijk P. SDF-1-induced actin polymerization and migration in human hematopoietic progenitor cells. Exp Hematol.
2001; 29:1456–64.

22.	 Ren XD, Kiosses WB, Sieg DJ, Otey CA, Schlaepfer DD,
Schwartz MA. Focal adhesion kinase suppresses Rho activity to promote focal adhesion turnover. J Cell Sci. 2000;
113:3673–8.

36.	 Folkman J. Tumor angiogenesis: therapeutic implications.
N Engl J Med. 1971; 285:1182–6.
37.	 Lyden D, Young AZ, Zagzag D, Yan W, Gerald W,
O’Reilly R, et al. Id1 and Id3 are required for neurogenesis, angiogenesis and vascularization of tumour xenografts.
Nature. 1999; 401:670–7.

23.	 Ridley AJ, Paterson HF, Johnston CL, Diekmann D, Hall A.
The small GTP-binding protein rac regulates growth factorinduced membrane ruffling. Cell. 1992; 70:401–10.
24.	 Zhang HM, Keledjian KM, Rao JN, Zou T, Liu L,
Marasa BS, et al. Induced focal adhesion kinase expression
suppresses apoptosis by activating NF-kappaB signaling in
intestinal epithelial cells. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2006;
290:C1310–20.

38.	 Ma J, Waxman DJ. Combination of antiangiogenesis with
chemotherapy for more effective cancer treatment. Mol
Cancer Ther. 2008; 7:3670–84.
39.	 Urbich C, Dimmeler S. Endothelial progenitor cells: characterization and role in vascular biology. Circ Res. 2004;
95:343–53.

25.	 Lim ST, Chen XL, Lim Y, Hanson DA, Vo TT,
Howerton K, et al. Nuclear FAK promotes cell proliferation and survival through FERM-enhanced p53 degradation.
Mol Cell. 2008; 29:9–22.

40.	 Chun KH, Kosmeder JW 2nd, Sun S, Pezzuto JM,
Lotan R, Hong WK, et al. Effects of deguelin on the
­phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt pathway and apoptosis
in premalignant human bronchial epithelial cells. J Natl
Cancer Inst. 2003; 95:291–302.

26.	 Zhao J, Pestell R, Guan JL. Transcriptional activation of
cyclin D1 promoter by FAK contributes to cell cycle progression. Mol Biol Cell. 2001; 12:4066–77.

41.	 Zhang L, Yang R, Han ZC. Transplantation of umbilical
cord blood-derived endothelial progenitor cells: a promising
method of therapeutic revascularisation. Eur J Haematol.
2006; 76:1–8.

27.	 Lee SP, Youn SW, Cho HJ, Li L, Kim TY, Yook HS, et al.
Integrin-linked kinase, a hypoxia-responsive molecule,
­controls postnatal vasculogenesis by recruitment of endothelial progenitor cells to ischemic tissue. Circulation. 2006;
114:150–9.

42.	 Peters BA, Diaz LA, Polyak K, Meszler L, Romans K,
Guinan EC, et al. Contribution of bone marrow-derived
endothelial cells to human tumor vasculature. Nat Med.
2005; 11:261–2.

28.	 Dell’Eva R, Ambrosini C, Minghelli S, Noonan DM,
Albini A, Ferrari N. The Akt inhibitor deguelin, is an angiopreventive agent also acting on the NF-kappaB pathway.
Carcinogenesis. 2007; 28:404–13.

43.	 Gothert JR, Gustin SE, van Eekelen JA, Schmidt U,
Hall MA, Jane SM, et al. Genetically tagging endothelial
cells in vivo: bone marrow-derived cells do not contribute to
tumor endothelium. Blood. 2004; 104:1769–77.

29.	 Ingram DA, Mead LE, Tanaka H, Meade V, Fenoglio A,
Mortell K, et al. Identification of a novel hierarchy of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

16599

Oncotarget

integrin signals to promote cell migration. Nat Cell Biol.
2000; 2:249–56.

44.	 Yamazaki M, Nakamura K, Mizukami Y, Ii M, Sasajima J,
Sugiyama Y, et al. Sonic hedgehog derived from human
pancreatic cancer cells augments angiogenic function of
endothelial progenitor cells. Cancer Sci. 2008; 99:1131–8.

49.	 Wang S, Basson MD. Akt directly regulates focal adhesion
kinase through association and serine phosphorylation:
implication for pressure-induced colon cancer metastasis.
Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2011; 300:C657–70.

45.	 Ilic D, Furuta Y, Kanazawa S, Takeda N, Sobue K,
Nakatsuji N, et al. Reduced cell motility and enhanced focal
adhesion contact formation in cells from FAK-deficient
mice. Nature. 1995; 377:539–44.

50.	 Xia H, Nho RS, Kahm J, Kleidon J, Henke CA. Focal
adhesion kinase is upstream of phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase/Akt in regulating fibroblast survival in response
to contraction of type I collagen matrices via a beta 1
integrin viability signaling pathway. J Biol Chem. 2004;
279:33024–34.

46.	 Nobes CD, Hall A. Rho, rac, and cdc42 GTPases regulate
the assembly of multimolecular focal complexes associated
with actin stress fibers, lamellipodia, and filopodia. Cell.
1995; 81:53–62.
47.	 Hannigan G, Troussard AA, Dedhar S. Integrin-linked
kinase: a cancer therapeutic target unique among its ILK.
Nat Rev Cancer. 2005; 5:51–63.

51.	 Kwon SM, Suzuki T, Kawamoto A, Ii M, Eguchi M,
Akimaru H, et al. Pivotal role of lnk adaptor protein in
endothelial progenitor cell biology for vascular regeneration. Circ Res. 2009; 104:969–77.

48.	 Sieg DJ, Hauck CR, Ilic D, Klingbeil CK, Schaefer E,
Damsky CH, et al. FAK integrates growth-factor and

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

16600

Oncotarget

