Research Article

Estrogen Insensitivity in a Model of Estrogen Receptor–Positive
Breast Cancer Lymph Node Metastasis
1,3

1

1

Joshua Chuck Harrell, Wendy W. Dye, Djuana M.E. Harvell, Mauricio Pinto,
2
1
1,2,3
Paul Jedlicka, Carol A. Sartorius, and Kathryn B. Horwitz

1

1

Division of Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, 2Department of Pathology, and 3Program in Reproductive Sciences,
University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Aurora, Colorado

Abstract
The lymphatic system is a common avenue for the spread of
breast cancer cells and dissemination through it occurs at
least as frequently as hematogenous metastasis. Approximately 75% of primary breast cancers are estrogen receptor (ER)
positive and the majority of these maintain receptor expression as lymph node (LN) metastases. However, it is unknown if
ER function is equivalent in cancer cells growing in the breast
and in the LNs. We have developed a model to assess estrogen
responsiveness in ER+ breast tumors and LN metastases.
Fluorescent ER+ MCF-7 tumors were grown in ovariectomized
nude mice supplemented with estradiol. Once axillary LN
metastasis arose, estradiol was withdrawn (EWD), for 1 or
4 weeks, or continued, to assess estradiol responsiveness.
On EWD, proliferation rates fell similarly in tumors and LN
metastases. However, estradiol-dependent ER down-regulation
and progesterone receptor induction were deficient in LN
metastases, indicating that ER-dependent transcriptional
function was altered in the LN. Cancer cells from estradioltreated and EWD primary tumors and matched LN metastases
were isolated by laser capture microdissection. Global gene
expression profiling identified transcripts that were regulated
by the tissue microenvironment, by hormones, or by both.
Interestingly, numerous genes that were estradiol regulated
in tumors lost estradiol sensitivity or were regulated in the
opposite direction by estradiol in LN metastases. We propose
that the LN microenvironment alters estradiol signaling and
may contribute to local antiestrogen resistance. [Cancer Res
2007;67(21):10582–91]

Introduction
Interactions between luminal epithelial cells and the surrounding
microenvironment govern the overall physiology of the mammary
gland (1), with development of epithelial ducts being dependent
on the activity of both stromal and epithelial estrogen receptor a
(ERa; ref. 2). Integrins, growth factors, and steroid hormone signaling pathways all play an important part in maintaining normal
glandular architecture (3). Stroma makes up >80% of breast volume
and is composed of fat, interstitial/interlobular dense connective
tissue, intralobular loose connective tissue, and lymphatic/blood
vessels (4). Luminal epithelial cells associate with these stromal

elements as well as with basement membrane and myoepithelial
cells. Disruption of this delicate balance results in dramatic changes
in both extracellular and intracellular signaling (3).
Seventy percent to 80% of primary breast tumors express ERa
and initially respond to estradiol withdrawal (EWD) or antiestrogen
therapies (5). Breast cancer ERa expression and function are also
influenced by the cellular microenvironment. In vitro studies
with human ER+ breast cancer cells show that extracellular matrix
proteins, such as type I collagen and laminin, can modify proliferative responsiveness to estrogen (6). A comparison of in vitro
and in vivo models found that estradiol regulates different genes
in human breast tumor xenografts compared with the identical
cells in culture (7). These studies suggest that a microenvironmentdependent influence on estradiol-dependent gene expression exists
in ER+ breast cancers. However, this issue has received little attention, and to the best of our knowledge, in vivo experiments that test
if metastatic microenvironments alter estradiol-dependent gene
expression have not been conducted.
Metastasis to the lymph nodes (LN) is a key prognostic factor
that conveys advanced disease status with the possibility that
cancer cells have spread to other more distant sites. At diagnosis,
30% to 50% of all breast cancers have spread to the draining or
‘‘sentinel’’ LN (8–10), and if the primary tumor is ER+, then f80%
of LN metastases retain ER expression (11–13). As tumor cells
disseminate to LNs, they enter a distinct microenvironment. Here,
they encounter different supporting elements, such as reticular
fibers, flowing lymph fluid, lymphocytes, T and B cells, increased
numbers of macrophages, and epithelial reticular cells that are surrounded by adipose tissue (14). It is unknown if the differences in
structure, function, and composition of the mammary gland compared with the LN affect ER activities and estradiol-dependent gene
expression in breast cancer cells that are located within these two
distinct microenvironments.
The studies presented here use a xenograft model of fluorescent,
ER+, estradiol-dependent human breast cancer LN metastasis to
address this question. In the same mouse, LN metastases are found
to be transcriptionally estradiol insensitive compared with primary
tumors from which they originated, despite retention of ER. We
identify genes that may aid in explaining mechanistically why
advanced ER+ breast cancers become nonresponsive to antiestrogen or EWD therapies and often recur as metastases.

Materials and Methods
Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research Online
(http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Requests for reprints: Joshua Chuck Harrell, Department of Medicine/
Endocrinology, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, MS 8106, RC-1 South,
12801 East 17th Avenue, Room 7402G, P. O. Box 6511, Aurora, CO 80045. Phone: 303724-3942; Fax: 303-724-3920; E-mail: Joshua.Harrell@uchsc.edu.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-1655

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (21). November 1, 2007

Cell lines. MCF-7 human breast cancer cells were originally purchased
from the American Type Culture Collection. The generation of fluorescent
MCF-7 cells has been previously described (15). In brief, ZsGreen retroviral
particles (Clontech) were isolated from PT-67 packaging cells (Clontech),
filtered, and overlaid onto MCF-7 cells. Cells were serially transduced twice
for 24 h each round and then subjected to G418 selection followed by
aseptic fluorescence-associated cell sorting to isolate a homogeneously

10582

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Estrogen Insensitivity in ER+ Lymph Node Metastasis
bright green subpopulation. Generation of PR-B–expressing T47D human
breast cancer cells has been described previously (16).
Xenograft tumor growth and metastases. All animal procedures were
done under a protocol approved by the University of Colorado Institutional
Animal Care and Use Committee. Ovariectomized female athymic nu/nu
mice were obtained from Harlan Sprague Dawley at 5 to 6 weeks of age.
To establish tumors, animals were anesthetized with Avertin and injected
into the opening of the lactiferous duct of abdominal mammary glands with
1 million ZsGreen-expressing MCF-7 cells in 100 AL of 100% Matrigel
(Becton Dickinson). Mice were also implanted with silastic pellets containing 17h-estradiol (2 mg + 8 mg cellulose) as previously described (17).
Fluorescent whole-body imaging (Illumatool 9900, Lightools Research) was
done weekly to determine when axillary LN metastases arose. For EWD
mice, once axillary LN metastases were detected, mice were anesthetized
with Avertin and estradiol-releasing pellets were removed for 1 week;
some were removed for 4 weeks to confirm protein expression and for
proliferation studies. Control mice were continued on estradiol. Mice were
euthanized by CO2 asphyxiation and fluorescent intravital optical imaging
was done by coupling the Illumatool with an Olympus SZ-61 dissecting
microscope and Olympus C-5050 digital camera. Fluorescent tumors in
mammary glands and LNs were removed. Lymphatic vessels (LV) draining
fluorescent tumor cells from mammary glands were also collected.
Serial passaging of a ZsGreen+ T47D-PR-B LN metastasis was done by
isolating the LN, pushing the tissue through multiple sieves, expanding and
G418 selecting human tumor cells in culture, and reinjecting the cells into
the mammary glands of estradiol-supplemented recipient mice.
Laser capture microdissection and expression profiling. Mammary
gland tumors (MGT) and LN metastases from estradiol-treated or 1-week
EWD mice were harvested, placed in a Tissue-Tek cryomold (EMS), covered
with Neg50 frozen section medium (Richard-Allan Scientific), and frozen
in isopentane (Sigma) cooled by liquid nitrogen. Sections (8 Am) were cut
through the entire tissue with a cryotome set at 20jC. Each section was
collected on an uncharged slide (Fisher), and every 10th slide was stained
for H&E or processed for cytokeratin 18 (CK18) immunofluorescence. Slides
containing cancer cells were processed through 75% ethanol, water, 75%
ethanol, 95% ethanol, and 100% ethanol for 30 s each and finally dehydrated
with xylene for 1 min before being immediately subjected to laser capture
microdissection using an Arcturus Autopix. Two thousand cells for each
sample were extracted within 30 min of fixation and frozen at 70jC until
further processing. Suggested protocols from Arcturus were followed for
RNA extraction and two rounds of amplification using the PicoPure RNA
isolation kit and RiboAmp HS kit (Arcturus), respectively. Samples were
in vitro transcribed, biotinylated, hybridized to Affymetrix X3P chips that
interrogate 47,000 transcripts with 61,000 probe sets, and scanned on an
Agilent Bioanalyzer 2100.
Statistical analyses. Raw expression values for each tumor and LN were
downloaded into GeneSpring version 7.3 (Agilent) for exploratory purposes.
Four matched pairs of tumors and metastatic LNs (2 estradiol and 2 EWD)
as well as 2 unmatched LNs (1 estradiol and 1 EWD) for a total of
10 samples were analyzed. Probe sets that were absent across all 10 samples
were filtered from further statistical analysis (18). Remaining probe sets
were robust multiarray analysis (RMA) normalized in Partek Genomics
Suite 6.2, and a three-way mixed model ANOVA analysis was done to identify differentially expressed genes. Four groups were compared: estradioltreated MGT, estradiol-treated LN, EWD MGT, and EWD LN. These four
groups were divided based on the two levels of hormone treatment
(estradiol or EWD) and the two levels of tissue type (MGT or LN). Hormone
and tissue were therefore defined as main factors in the model. Interaction effects among hormone and tissue were also included. The random
factor animal (which is nested in hormone) was added to account for the
fact that multiple tissues (MGT and LN) were taken from the same animal.
In total, 1,570 transcripts were identified as having significant differences
among the four group means (P model < 0.05) and P < 0.05 for main or
interaction effects. To further identify differences in hormonal regulation
among the 1,570 differentially expressed genes, they were subjected to linear
contrasts to make two specific comparisons: EWD versus estradiol-treated
MGT and EWD versus estradiol-treated LN. Bonferroni’s correction for

www.aacrjournals.org

multiple tests was then applied to these two comparisons and the level of
significance was changed to 0.025.
Gene networking. To define relationships among genes differentially
regulated by estradiol in MGTs and LN metastases, pathway analyses were
done using Ingenuity software. Probe set identification numbers were used
for gene identification.
Immunohistochemistry. Organs were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde
overnight, paraffin embedded, and cut into 4-Am sections. After hightemperature antigen retrieval in citrate buffer, immunohistochemistries
were done on estradiol-treated tissues and 1-week or 4-week EWD mice
using primary antibodies directed against ER (1:100, SP1; Lab Vision/
NeoMarkers), progesterone receptor (PR; 1:500, 1294; Dako), CK18 (1:200;
Calbiochem), CD44 (1:200; Ab4; Lab Vision/NeoMarkers), caveolin 1 (CAV1;
1:125; Epitomics), and cathepsin D (CTSD; 1:125; Epitomics) for 1 h at
room temperature. Bound primary antibodies were detected with
horseradish peroxidase (HRP)–conjugated goat anti-mouse and/or goat
anti-rabbit secondary antibodies (Envision HRP; Dako) reacted with 3,3¶diaminobenzidine (Dako). Sections were counterstained with hematoxylin
and mounted with Permount (Fisher). For immunofluorescence microscopy,
goat anti-rabbit Alexa Fluor 555 (red) secondary antibodies were used
(1:200, Alexa Fluors; Invitrogen) and sections were counterstained with
4¶,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) in methanol and mounted with Gel/
Mount (Biomeda).

Results
EWD model. MCF-7+ZsGreen tumors require estradiol for
growth and LN metastasis (15). To generate LN metastases,
bilateral tumors were grown in the abdominal mammary glands
of ovariectomized immunocompromised mice that were supplemented with an estradiol-releasing pellet (Fig. 1A). Weekly tumor
measurements were recorded with a digital caliper. Spread of
cancer cells to axillary LNs was determined by weekly fluorescent
whole-body imaging (Fig. 1B). To define estradiol-regulated genes
(7), once LN metastases were detected, the estradiol-releasing
pellet was withdrawn for 1 week in half of the mice (EWD) or left in
place in the remaining mice. To assess proliferation rate, EWD was
extended for 4 weeks in tumors and LN metastases. Bromodeoxyuridine labeling and mitotic indices indicated a similar decrease
of f50% at both sites. At necropsy, assessment of the uterine
mass confirmed the presence or absence of systemic estradiol, with
1- and 4-week EWD uteri exhibiting significant decreases in mass
compared with estradiol-treated uteri. To locate cancer cells within
LNs, the entire LN was sectioned and every 10th slide was processed for CK18 immunohistochemistry (Fig. 1C). The CK18 map
and the unique morphology of MCF-7 cells compared with
lymphocytes (Fig. 1D) allowed for identification of the cancer cells
in serial sections. We then marked and laser captured pure MCF-7
cell populations from matched tumors and LN metastases.
Estrogen insensitivity in LN metastases: ER and PR
expression. Estradiol treatment leads to down-regulation of ER
protein levels in tumors (19, 20). To characterize these effects in
estradiol-free, estradiol-treated, and EWD conditions, the MCF-7
tumors, LV emboli, and LN metastases were probed for ER and
PR by immunohistochemistry. In Fig. 2, the tissues from each
treatment group were from the same mouse. Highest ER levels
were present in tumors that did not receive supplemental estradiol
( E). Seventy-three percent of MCF-7 cells expressed high levels
of ER and no cells contained PR (Fig. 2, top). In the presence
of estradiol (+E), ERs were down-regulated by >40% in the tumor
(Fig. 2, middle) but decreased by <20% in LV tumor emboli and LN
metastasis of the same mouse. Ligand-dependent down-regulation
of ER is required for its transcriptional activity (20), including PR

10583

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (21). November 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Microenvironment versus clonal selection. To determine
whether the increased ER expression observed in LN metastases
was due to clonal selection of ER+ cells from the primary tumor, or
to an effect on ER at the metastatic microenvironment, tumor cells
were isolated from the axillary LN metastasis of a donor mouse,
expanded in culture, and reimplanted in the mammary gland of an

Figure 1. MCF-7+ZsGreen xenograft tumors and LN metastases.
MCF-7+ZsGreen tumors were established in mammary glands of ovariectomized
nu/nu mice supplemented with an estradiol pellet, and LN metastases
were allowed to develop. A, fluorescent whole-body image of bilateral
MCF-7+ZsGreen tumors. B, fluorescent whole-body image of MCF-7+ZsGreen
metastasis to the left axillary LN. C, fluorescence immunohistochemistry for
CK18 (red ) and DAPI (blue ) of an axillary LN metastasis. Magnification, 4.
D, white light laser capture microscope image of an axillary LN metastasis
showing MCF-7 cells or lymphocytes (LN). Magnification, 40.

induction. Indeed, PRs were expressed in +E tumors but were only
rarely found in +E LV emboli (Fig. 2, arrows) or in LN metastases.
On EWD, ERs were restored to control ( E) levels in all tissues, and
PRs were absent (Fig. 2, bottom).

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (21). November 1, 2007

Figure 2. Estradiol regulation of ER and PR levels. ER and PR expression
in MCF-7 cells from matched tumors, LVs, and LNs. MCF-7+ZsGreen tumors
were established in ovariectomized mice supplemented with a placebo pellet
( E ), an estradiol-releasing pellet (+E), or an estradiol-releasing pellet until LN
metastases arose, after which the estradiol pellet was withdrawn for 1 wk
(EWD ). The primary tumors, efferent LVs, and draining LNs from the same
mouse were dissected and prepared for histology. Paraffin-embedded sections
were probed with rabbit anti-ER or mouse anti-PR primary antibodies coupled
with goat anti-rabbit (ER) or goat anti-mouse (PR) HRP-conjugated secondary
antibodies. Background staining of erythrocytes (e ). Arrows point to the LV.

10584

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Estrogen Insensitivity in ER+ Lymph Node Metastasis

Figure 3. Aberrant ER regulation in tumor
cells located in the LN microenvironment
and global gene expression profiling
of tumors and matched LN metastases.
A, ER immunohistochemistry of estradioltreated T47D tumors and their matched LN
metastases. An estradiol-treated MGT in
mouse 1 developed LN metastases.
Cells from the LN metastasis of mouse 1
were expanded in culture and reinjected
into the mammary gland of a second
estradiol-treated recipient mouse 2,
which also yielded LN metastases. MGTs
and LN metastases from both mice
were paraffin embedded, sectioned, and
stained for ER by immunohistochemistry.
B, unsupervised hierarchical clustering
from continuously estradiol-treated (+E )
or 1-wk EWD tumors and matched
LN metastases. Red, up-regulated
transcripts; blue, down-regulated
transcripts; gray, relatively unchanged
transcripts. C, ANOVA analysis identified
1,570 genes with tissue effects, hormone
effects, and/or interaction effects.

estradiol-treated recipient mouse. This tumor also yielded a LN
metastasis. Figure 3A (top) shows ER immunohistochemistry of
the estradiol-treated primary MGT and its matched LN metastasis
from the donor mouse (mouse 1). ERs in the tumor grown in the
mammary gland and LN of the recipient mouse (mouse 2) are
shown in Fig. 3A (bottom). There was a 2-fold increase in ER
content in the cancer cells populating the LN of mouse 1 and a
similar 2-fold increase in the LN ER of mouse 2. These data suggest
that the LN microenvironment rather than clonal selection
modifies ER expression levels in response to estradiol.
Global gene expression profiling. To determine if the apparent
estradiol insensitivity of LN metastases as assessed by ER downregulation and failure of PR induction extends to other estradioldependent genes, global gene expression profiling was done. To
ensure that only human tumor cells were evaluated, pure cell populations were isolated by laser capture microdissection. Estradioltreated and 1-week EWD tumors and their matched LN metastases
were analyzed to define the subset of estradiol-regulated genes (7).
Unsupervised hierarchical clustering showed that EWD had a lesser
effect on genes in LN metastases than on genes in MGTs, with the
estradiol-treated and EWD LN metastases clustering closest

www.aacrjournals.org

together (Fig. 3B). Interestingly, the EWD tumors clustered closer
to the LNs than to the estradiol-treated tumors.
To identify genes with differential expression patterns, a threeway mixed model ANOVA was done for genes that were present
in at least one condition. Genes with the greatest differences in
expression due to the hormone treatment, tissue type, interaction
between hormone and tissue, or within and between animals
(P model < 0.05) and with significant (P < 0.05) main (tissue and/
or hormone effects) or interaction effects were sorted to yield a
total of 1,570 differentially expressed transcripts. Significant main
effects indicate simple differences between the two hormone and/
or two tissue groups, an example being that all EWD tissues have
higher gene expression levels than all estradiol-treated tissues
(regardless of tissue type) or that all LN tissues have higher gene
expression levels than all MGT (regardless of hormone treatment).
Significant interaction effects, on the other hand, indicate complex differences in which the results of one factor differ depending
on the levels of the other factor. For example, a gene that was
expressed at higher levels in estradiol-treated LNs than MGTs but
in EWD tissues had the opposite pattern with higher levels in
MGTs than LNs.

10585

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (21). November 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 4. Genes that are tissue and
hormone regulated with or without
interaction effects. RMA normalized mean
RNA expression values with SE. Solid
lines, data from estradiol-treated tissues;
dashed lines, data from EWD tissues.
A, tissue-regulated genes. B, hormoneregulated genes. MT1F, metallothionein
1F. C, genes that are tissue and hormone
regulated. D, genes with interaction effects
that are differentially regulated by estradiol
in the two tissues include CAV1, MUC5AC,
TP53, BCL2, CDKN1A , and CD44 .

Of the 1,570 differentially expressed transcripts, more had
increased average expression in LN metastases (70%) than in
primary tumors (30%). In addition, on average, genes were more
highly expressed in EWD tissues (64%) than in estradiol-treated
ones (36%), suggesting that estradiol affects approximately two
thirds of genes through suppression of RNA levels. Among the
1,570 transcripts, 386 had only significant (P < 0.05; Fig. 3C) tissue
effects, 44 had only significant hormone effects, and 91 were
affected by both the tissue microenvironment and the presence of
hormones (Fig. 3C). However, the majority of genes, 1,049 of 1,570,
exhibited a significant interaction effect. The expression values
of these genes could not be simply described as due to either of
the main effects but rather due to an interrelationship between
them. Most of these genes may also have significant main effects as
shown by intersection in the Venn diagram, but interaction effects
take precedence over these main effects, and the main effects
cannot be correctly interpreted without acknowledging the interaction effects (21). For these genes, expression levels in the two
tissues (MGT and LN) were influenced differently by the type of

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (21). November 1, 2007

hormone treatment (estradiol and EWD). A subset (145 of 1,049) of
these genes exhibited only interaction effects.
Main effects and interaction effects can be visualized by
graphical representation with levels of one factor on the X axis
and separate lines representing levels of the other factor, as in
Fig. 4. Lines that are parallel to one another with steep slopes or
separation indicate main effects, whereas nonparallel lines indicate
interaction effects. Figure 4A shows two examples of genes with
significant tissue effects. Cortactin transcripts had significantly
higher expression levels in LN metastases, regardless of hormone,
as did the majority (290 of 386) of the tissue-regulated genes (other
examples include MAPK and cyclin F). CXCL14 is one of the 96 of
386 tissue-regulated genes whose levels were higher in the primary
tumors compared with LN metastases.
Figure 4B shows two examples of genes with a significant hormone effect. The expression of cathepsin-D (CTSD) transcripts was
dependent on estradiol regardless of the microenvironment. Other
genes with similar expression patterns were insulin-like growth
factor-I receptor (IGF-IR), cadherin-15, and defensin b-1. Transcript

10586

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Estrogen Insensitivity in ER+ Lymph Node Metastasis

levels of metallothionein 1F were suppressed by estradiol regardless
of the microenvironment. Other examples of estradiol-suppressed
genes are cathepsin F and BLNK.
A subset of differentially expressed genes (91 of 1,570) had RNA
expression levels that were both hormone and tissue regulated as
shown in Fig. 4C. ERBB3 was significantly suppressed by estradiol
regardless of the microenvironment, but its expression was also
increased in LN metastases compared with MGTs of both hormone
treatments. SERP1 was also significantly increased in LN
metastases compared with MGTs regardless of the presence of
estradiol and was also significantly up-regulated by estradiol in
both tissues.
The majority of differentially expressed genes (1,049 of 1,570) had
a significant interaction effect, exhibiting an interrelationship
between tissue and hormonal factors. Figure 4D shows examples of
a few such genes. Transcripts for BCL2, CAV1, CD44, CDKN1A,
MUC5AC, and tumor promoter 53 (TP53) all exhibit interaction
effects and are affected differently by estradiol in tumors and LN
metastases. MUC5AC and TP53 are examples of genes exhibiting
main effects (hormone and tissue) but with the interaction term
predominating. Main effects of CDKN1A (p21) cancel each other
out, leaving the dominant role of interaction effects evident.
Immunohistochemistry. Several of the genes that were
identified by the expression profiling analysis were investigated
further at the protein level by immunohistochemistry (Fig. 5). The
estradiol-regulated gene CTSD was expressed in 80% to 90% of
estradiol-treated MCF-7 primary tumor cells, and EWD reduced
this number to 50% to 60%. In the LN metastases in the presence of
estradiol, 50% to 60% of cancer cells expressed CTSD; this fell to
10% to 15% on EWD (Fig. 5, top). CAV1 protein was unaffected by
EWD but was expressed only in MGTs and not in LN metastases
(Fig. 5, middle). In estradiol-treated tumors, CD44 was heterogeneously expressed; on EWD, nonsignificant increases in the
percentage of CD44+ cells were recorded. Interestingly, the opposite
pattern was observed in LN metastases. The extensive overexpression of CD44 in estradiol-treated cancer cells metastatic to
LNs (15) is dramatically reduced by EWD (Fig. 5, bottom).
Estrogen-regulated genes. Two linear contrasts were done
among the 1,570 differentially expressed transcripts comparing
estradiol-treated with EWD tumors and estradiol-treated with
EWD LN metastases (Fig. 6A and B). This identified transcripts that
were estradiol regulated in MGTs compared with LN metastases.
There were 273 significantly hormonally up-regulated or downregulated genes ( fold change >1.3; P < 0.025; Fig. 6A). Of these, 256
were estradiol dependent in tumors, 41 were estradiol dependent in
LN metastases, and 24 maintained estradiol sensitivity in both
MGTs and LN metastases (Fig. 6A). These data confirm the conclusions drawn from Figs. 2 and 3A that tumor cells in the LN
microenvironment are relatively estradiol resistant.
To identify genes with any absolute difference in expression due
to estradiol in MGTs and LN metastases, the fold change criterion
was removed from the two linear contrasts. This increased the
total list of significantly (P < 0.025) hormone-regulated genes from
273 to 1,176 (Fig. 6B). These additional 903 genes were up-regulated
or down-regulated with fold changes >1.0 and <1.3, and in total,
there were 707 estradiol-regulated genes in MGTs, 177 estradiolregulated in LN metastases, and 292 estradiol-regulated in both
sites. Seventy-five of these transcripts were regulated by estradiol
in opposite directions in MGTs and LN metastases (Fig. 6C).
BCL2, CD44, and CDKN1A are examples of such genes (Fig. 4D).
CDKN1A, also known as p21/WAF, encodes a potent cyclin-

www.aacrjournals.org

Figure 5. Immunohistochemical analyses of proteins that are hormone and
tissue regulated. Estradiol-treated and EWD tumors and matched LN
metastases from the same mouse were paraffin embedded, sectioned, and
probed with CTSD, CAV1, or CD44 primary antibodies coupled with goat
anti-rabbit or goat anti-mouse HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies. Top,
estradiol-regulated CTSD; middle, CAV1 protein regulation by the tissue
microenvironment; bottom, differential estradiol regulation of CD44 expression
in tumors and LN metastases.

dependent kinase inhibitor and regulator of cell cycle progression
at G1. Its expression is tightly controlled by TP53, one of our set
of microenvironment-regulated genes (Fig. 4D). CD44 (Fig. 5) is a
putative breast cancer stem cell marker (22) and may target tumor
cells to LNs (15).
Network analysis. Ingenuity data analysis was conducted to
determine if the genes that had interaction effects and were
differentially regulated by estradiol in MGTs and LN metastases are
also involved in important functional networks. Twenty-seven
unique gene networks that contained at least one differentially
regulated gene were identified. Supplementary Fig. S1 shows a
network of 33 genes, 100% of which are differentially estradiol
regulated in MGTs and LN metastases. This network has TP53 at
its center and functions in cellular responses to ‘‘therapeutics,
cell death, and connective tissue disorders.’’ Most of these genes
(25 of 33) were estradiol regulated in MGTs but lost estradiol sensitivity in LN metastases (orange outline). Two genes were estradiol
regulated in LN metastases but not in tumors (red outline), and the

10587

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (21). November 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

remaining seven genes were regulated in the opposite direction by
estradiol in MGTs and LN metastases (blue outline).

Discussion
Gene expression changes in MGTs and LN metastases. Two
major theories have been advanced to explain successful cancer
metastasis. (a) The ‘‘rare tumor cell hypothesis’’ states that only
certain cells within tumors are capable of migrating and/or
growing at distant sites. These rare cells may be stem cells, such as
those that express CD44 (22). On the other hand, they may
represent rare cells within a population of genetically diverse and
unstable cells that originated with or acquired the appropriate
genetic information needed to seed at specific metastatic sites (23).
(b) An alternative hypothesis posits that metastatic capacity is an
inherent rather than an acquired feature of breast cancers (24, 25)
and is based on data suggesting that metastatic capacity is
encoded early in the majority of cells within a tumor. In support
of this idea are studies showing that tumors and their LN metastases retain similar genetic signatures, including aggressiveness
and proliferation markers (24, 26, 27). One study, for example,
found only 27 changed genes between lung tumors and their LN
metastases (28). Weigelt et al. (27) identified a 70-gene cluster in
primary breast tumors that predicts likelihood of subsequent
metastases because the unique expression profiles of these genes
were maintained in LNs and more distant metastases. Another
study found no ‘‘shared genes’’ between primary tumors that were
predictive of LN metastases but, anywhere between 3 and 149
genes, were ‘‘antiexpressed’’ or expressed in opposite directions in
tumors versus LN metastases (29).
Our data provide evidence in support of both theories. In these
studies, we analyze the changes in gene expression induced by
estradiol as revealed by estradiol removal. Fewer than 5% of all
genes analyzed were differentially expressed in cancer cells within
the mammary gland compared with the LN. Although this might be
considered a subtle difference, it nevertheless represents differential regulation of >1,000 genes in these two microenvironments.
These genetic differences could be sufficient to define a ‘‘metastatic
stem cell’’ (30), expressing the adaptive proteins required for
successful colonization and growth of a subpopulation in a metastatic microenvironment, as envisioned by the rare tumor cell
hypothesis. Elevated expression levels of the hyaluronan receptor
CD44, a putative cancer stem cell marker, in estradiol-treated LN
metastases suggest such selectivity in our models. On the other
hand, our observations that cancer cell emboli move in bulk
through LVs to LNs (15), coupled with our findings here and those
of others (24, 27, 29) of modest genetic changes between primary
tumors and LN metastases, could be interpreted as supporting
the view that the majority of primary tumor cells arise either with
or without the predisposition for LN spread. If true, the gene
expression changes we observe could be attributed to the plasticity
that all tumor cells exhibit when growing in two distinct microenvironments. Evidence supporting these microenvironmental
effects on ER expression and function was found when a downregulation ‘‘resistant’’ ER+ LN metastasis regained ER downregulation capacity when grown in the mammary gland of a
recipient mouse (Fig. 3A).
ER function in metastases. Beatson (31) reported >100 years
ago that an essential feature of breast cancer is continuous and
excessive growth of the epithelium, which invades the surrounding tissues, spreads along the LVs, passes from one set of LNs to

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (21). November 1, 2007

another, and eventually forms deposits in distant organs, steps that
occur more rapidly and prove to be more quickly fatal in younger
patients. Knowing that the ovaries produced factors required for
lactation, and believing ‘‘that all pathological changes are merely
modified physiological ones,’’ Beatson was the first to find that
removal of the ovaries and the estradiol they elaborate reduced
breast tumor size and extended the survival of young women with
advanced breast cancer.
Seventy percent to 80% of primary breast cancers are ER+, and
f80% of LN metastases retain the receptors (11–13, 32). If such
tumors are treated with antiestrogens or EWD therapies, 20% to
50% acquire resistance (33), often recurring as LN metastases.
Premenopausal women with LN metastases are less responsive to
tamoxifen treatment than LN-negative patients (34), and nodal
involvement is a significant predictor of local relapse (35) with a
5.6-fold higher relative risk of local recurrence than women with
clear LNs. Preoperative chemotherapy causes significantly less
damage to LN metastases in comparison with primary tumors (36).
Based on these data, we hypothesized that ER effects on gene
expression would be altered by the LN microenvironment. To the
best of our knowledge, no previous studies have defined estradiolregulated genes in tumors compared with their matched LN metastases. Identifying these genes is an important step toward
elucidating mechanisms that contribute to breast cancer progression and estradiol resistance in advanced disease.
In the face of continuous estradiol treatment in two separate ER+
breast cancer cell lines, higher levels of ER were observed in LN
metastases than in matched MGTs (Figs. 2 and 3A). The partial
failure of ligand-dependent ER down-regulation in LN metastases
suggests that the receptors are relatively estradiol insensitive in the
LN microenvironment. Reduced PR expression in estradiol-treated
LN metastases supports this conclusion, as does global gene
expression profiling, which showed that estradiol had less influence
on gene expression in LN metastases than in matched primary
MGTs (Figs. 3 and 6). We have now identified numerous genes that
are estradiol regulated in primary tumors but not in LN metastases.
Examples include MUC5A and TP53, which were estradiol sensitive
in MGTs but lost this regulation in the LNs. Additionally, 75 genes
were regulated in the opposite direction by estradiol in MGTs
compared with their LN metastases (Fig. 6C), 21 of which,
including BCL2 and CDKN1A (Fig. 4), were previously reported to
be estradiol regulated (7, 37, 38). CD44 (Figs. 4 and 5) was also
regulated in opposite directions at the two sites. It is one of two cell
surface markers that differentiate tumorigenic from nontumorigenic breast cancer cells (22). This putative stem cell and aggressiveness marker (39, 40) is an example of how EWD differentially
alters the expression of a potential therapeutic target in primary
tumors compared with LN metastases.
Mechanisms of estradiol resistance in LNs. Possible explanations for the differential estradiol sensitivity of MGTs versus LN
metastases include increased availability of growth factors in LNs
that directly interfere with ER transcription (41), diminished
ubiquitination and loss of proteasome-mediated protein downregulation in LNs (42, 43), loss of CAV1 and subsequent membrane
signaling (44), and reduced estradiol availability to LNs. With
regard to growth factors, IGFs and epidermal growth factors (EGF)
activate the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-AKT-mammalian target
of rapamycin pathways, which alter Jun and Fos activities at the
PR promoter and decrease its ER-mediated transcription (45).
LN stromal cells produce both IGF and EGF (41), which may
explain the reduced PR induction as well as the reduced estradiol

10588

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Estrogen Insensitivity in ER+ Lymph Node Metastasis

Figure 6. Pairwise comparisons to identify estradiol-regulated transcripts in tumors (T ), LN metastases, or both. A, transcripts regulated in a significant manner
(P < 0.025) by estradiol >1.3-fold. B, transcripts regulated in a significant manner (P < 0.025) by estradiol regardless of fold levels. C, list of 75 transcripts that are
regulated in a significant manner in opposite directions by estradiol in MGTs compared with LN metastases. I , increases; D , decreases with estrogen.

regulation of other target genes at this site. Increased cortactin
levels (Fig. 4) inhibit ubiquitin-mediated degradation of EGF
receptors following their internalization, resulting in sustained
ligand-induced EGF signaling (42, 43). It is possible that similar

www.aacrjournals.org

ubiquitin-dependent mechanisms explain the ER down-regulation
defects we observe in LNs (Fig. 2; ref. 15). Supporting this hypothesis, nine transcripts known to be involved in the ubiquitination
process were differentially expressed in MGTs and LN metastases.

10589

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (21). November 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

This includes two known enzymes that function in the ubiquitination process, UBE2D3 and USP7, which were increased in LN
metastases and also lost estradiol sensitivity in LN metastases
(Supplementary Fig. S1). CAV1, a scaffold protein that transduces
ER signaling at the plasma membrane (44), was decreased in LNs,
possibly explaining loss of ER responsiveness. Finally, although it is
possible that the diminished estradiol sensitivity of LN metastases is due to an overall decrease of estradiol levels within LNs,
this is highly unlikely given the number of estradiol-regulated genes
whose levels are maintained or increased in LN metastases (Fig. 4).
Networks. We speculated that genes differentially regulated in
MGTs versus LN metastases may contribute to tumor aggressiveness, recurrence, and/or growth in LNs. We therefore analyzed the
functional networks characterizing these genes. Of interest was a
33-gene network composed entirely of transcripts regulated
differently by estradiol in MGTs and LNs (Supplementary Fig. S1),
which included CDNK1A, TP53, and BCL2-linked signaling pathways. In this network, the majority of the genes were significantly
regulated by estradiol in tumors while losing estradiol sensitivity in
LN metastases or suppressed by estradiol in tumors but increased
by estradiol in LN metastases. These findings are interesting given
the fact that 70% of the 1,570 global genes differentially expressed
in the two sites were increased in LN metastases compared with
MGTs, whereas 64% of the differentially estradiol-regulated genes
were suppressed by estradiol. This corroborates previous data with
MCF-7 cells showing that 70% of genes are down-regulated by
estradiol treatment (38) and is consistent with an overall lifting of
the suppressive effects of estradiol in MCF-7 tumor cells growing in
LNs. It is possible that these results do not completely mimic
effects in a patient with an intact immune system. The LNs of nude
mice lack or have reduced numbers of T cells (46). However, they
have B cells, natural killer cells, reticular cells, and macrophages as
well as a nodal stromal network and architecture. Because different

References
1. Novaro V, Radisky DC, Ramos Castro NE, Weisz A,
Bissell MJ. Malignant mammary cells acquire independence from extracellular context for regulation of
estrogen receptor a. Clin Cancer Res 2004;10:402–9S.
2. Mueller SO, Clark JA, Myers PH, Korach KS. Mammary
gland development in adult mice requires epithelial and
stromal estrogen receptor a. Endocrinology 2002;143:
2357–65.
3. Hansen RK, Bissell MJ. Tissue architecture and breast
cancer: the role of extracellular matrix and steroid
hormones. Endocr Relat Cancer 2000;7:95–113.
4. Ronnov-Jessen L, Peterson OW, Bissell MJ. Cellular
changes involved in conversion of normal to malignant
breast importance of the stromal reaction. Physiological
Reviews 1996;76:69–125.
5. Davidson B, Konstantinovsky S, Nielsen S, et al.
Altered expression of metastasis-associated and regulatory molecules in effusions from breast cancer patients:
a novel model for tumor progression. Clin Cancer Res
2004;10:7335–46.
6. Haslam SZ, Woodward TL. Host microenvironment in
breast cancer development: epithelial-cell-stromal-cell
interactions and steroid hormone action in normal and
cancerous mammary gland. Breast Cancer Res 2003;5:
208–15.
7. Harvell DM, Richer JK, Allred DC, Sartorius CA, Horwitz
KB. Estradiol regulates different genes in human breast
tumor xenografts compared with the identical cells in
culture. Endocrinology 2006;147:700–13.
8. Vinh-Hung V, Verschraegen C, Promish DI, et al. Ratios
of involved nodes in early breast cancer. Breast Cancer
Res 2004;6:R680–8.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (21). November 1, 2007

substrata are known to alter growth and function of ER+ human
breast cancer cells in vitro (6), it is likely that the LN microenvironment, including its unique architecture, cytokines, and
growth factors, modifies ER function. Given the experimental
nature of our models, these findings stress the need for further
studies to show whether estradiol insensitivity occurs in clinical
ER+ LN metastases and whether other metastatic microenvironments differentially modulate estradiol sensitivity and to define
estradiol-regulated genes uniquely influenced by the microenvironment of tumor cells. This approach may identify key genes that
can be targeted therapeutically at specific metastatic sites.
In summary, we describe a xenograft model of EWD after LN
metastasis and show that estradiol regulation of genes is different
in ER+ primary MGTs compared with their matched ER+ LN
metastases. Through global gene expression profiling and immunohistochemical analyses, we identify genes that maintain, lose, or
are regulated in the opposite direction by estradiol in tumors and
LN metastases. These results suggest that current ER-targeted
therapies may differentially affect tumor cells depending on the
microenvironment in which the cells reside. If so, our studies
provide possible new therapeutic targets, which, in combination
with standard hormonal therapies, might improve responses of
advanced breast cancers.

Acknowledgments
Received 5/4/2007; revised 8/19/2007; accepted 8/29/2007.
Grant support: Department of Defense Predoctoral Breast Cancer Training grant
BC050889 (J.C. Harrell); Susan G. Komen Breast Cancer Foundation BCTR0402682
(C.A. Sartorius); and NIH grant CA26869, National Foundation for Cancer Research,
Avon Foundation, and Breast Cancer Research Foundation (K.B. Horwitz).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank the UCHSC laser-capture and microarray core labs.

9. Veronesi U, Paganelli G, Viale G, et al. Sentinel lymph
node biopsy and axillary dissection in breast cancer:
results in a large series. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:368–73.
10. Jatoi I, Hilsenbeck SG, Clark GM, Osborne CK.
Significance of axillary lymph node metastasis in
primary breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:2334–40.
11. Zheng WQ, Lu J, Zheng JM, Hu FX, Ni CR. Variation
of ER status between primary and metastatic breast
cancer and relationship to p53 expression*. Steroids
2001;66:905–10.
12. Butler JA, Trezona T, Vargas H, State D. Value of
measuring hormone receptor levels of regional metastatic carcinoma of the breast. Arch Surg 1989;124:
1131–4; discussion 1134–5.
13. Hoehn JL, Plotka ED, Dickson KB. Comparison of
estrogen receptor levels in primary and regional
metastatic carcinoma of the breast. Ann Surg 1979;190:
69–71.
14. Gartner LP, Hiatt JL. Color atlas of histology. 4th Ed.
Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2006; p.
167–86.
15. Harrell JC, Dye WW, Allred DC, et al. Estrogen receptor
positive breast cancer metastasis: altered hormonal
sensitivity and tumor aggressiveness in lymphatic vessels
and lymph nodes. Cancer Res 2006;66:9308–15.
16. Sartorius CA, Groshong SD, Miller LA, et al. New
T47D breast cancer cell lines for the independent study
of progesterone B- and A-receptors: only antiprogestinoccupied B-receptors are switched to transcriptional
agonists by cAMP. Cancer Res 1994;54:3868–77.
17. Sartorius CA, Shen T, Horwitz KB. Progesterone
receptors A and B differentially affect the growth of
estrogen-dependent human breast tumor xenografts.
Breast Cancer Res Treat 2003;79:287–99.

10590

18. McClintick JN, Edenberg HJ. Effects of filtering by
present call on analysis of microarray experiments. BMC
Bioinformatics 2006;7:49.
19. Horwitz KB, Koseki Y, McGuire WL. Estrogen control
of progesterone receptor in human breast cancer: role of
estradiol and antiestrogen. Endocrinology 1978;103:
1742–51.
20. Lonard DM, Nawaz Z, Smith CL, O’Malley BW. The
26S proteasome is required for estrogen receptor-a and
coactivator turnover and for efficient estrogen receptora transactivation. Mol Cell 2000;5:939–48.
21. Li H, Wood CL, Getchell TV, Getchell ML, Stromberg
AJ. Analysis of oligonucleotide array experiments with
repeated measures using mixed models. BMC Bioinformatics 2004;5:209.
22. Al-Hajj M, Wicha MS, Benito-Hernandez A, Morrison
SJ, Clarke MF. Prospective identification of tumorigenic
breast cancer cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2003;100:
3983–8.
23. Fidler IJ, Kripke ML. Metastasis results from preexisting variant cells within a malignant tumor. Science
1977;197:893–5.
24. Perou CM, Sorlie T, Eisen MB, et al. Molecular portraits
of human breast tumours. Nature 2000;406:747–52.
25. Bernards R, Weinberg RA. A progression puzzle.
Nature 2002;418:823.
26. Lacroix M, Toillon RA, Leclercq G. Stable ‘portrait’ of
breast tumors during progression: data from biology,
pathology and genetics. Endocr Relat Cancer 2004;11:
497–522.
27. Weigelt B, Hu Z, He X, et al. Molecular portraits and
70-gene prognosis signature are preserved throughout
the metastatic process of breast cancer. Cancer Res
2005;65:9155–8.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Estrogen Insensitivity in ER+ Lymph Node Metastasis

28. Hoang CD, Guillaume TJ, Engel SC, Tawfic SH,
Kratzke RA, Maddaus MA. Analysis of paired primary
lung and lymph node tumor cells: a model of metastatic
potential by multiple genetic programs. Cancer Detect
Prev 2005;29:509–17.
29. Weigelt B, Wessels LF, Bosma AJ, et al. No common
denominator for breast cancer lymph node metastasis.
Br J Cancer 2005;93:924–32.
30. Balic M, Lin H, Young L, et al. Most early
disseminated cancer cells detected in bone marrow of
breast cancer patients have a putative breast cancer
stem cell phenotype. Clin Cancer Res 2006;12:5615–21.
31. Beatson GT. On the treatment of inoperable cases of
carcinoma of the mamma: suggestions for a new
method of treatment, with illustrative cases. Lancet
1896;2:104–7.
32. Koda M, Sulkowski S, Kanczuga-Koda L, Surmacz E,
Sulkowska M. Expression of ERa, ERh and Ki-67 in
primary tumors and lymph node metastases in breast
cancer. Oncol Rep 2004;11:753–9.
33. Arpino G, Weiss H, Lee AV, et al. Estrogen receptorpositive, progesterone receptor-negative breast cancer:
association with growth factor receptor expression and
tamoxifen resistance. J Natl Cancer Inst 2005;97:1254–61.
34. Ahn SH, Son BH, Kim SW, et al. Poor outcome of
hormone receptor-positive breast cancer at very young

www.aacrjournals.org

age is due to tamoxifen resistance: nationwide survival
data in Korea—a report from the Korean Breast Cancer
Society. J Clin Oncol 2007;25:2360–8.
35. van Dongen JA, Bartelink H, Fentiman IS, et al.
Factors influencing local relapse and survival and results
of salvage treatment after breast-conserving therapy in
operable breast cancer: EORTC trial 10801, breast
conservation compared with mastectomy in TNM
stage I and II breast cancer. Eur J Cancer 1992;28A:
801–5.
36. Koda M, Lenczewski A, Sulkowska M, et al. The effect
of chemotherapy on status of estrogen receptors in
primary tumors and lymph node metastases of human
ductal breast cancer. Oncol Rep 2007;17:385–91.
37. Creighton CJ, Cordero KE, Larios JM, et al. Genes
regulated by estrogen in breast tumor cells in vitro are
similarly regulated in vivo in tumor xenografts and
human breast tumors. Genome Biol 2006;7:R28.
38. Frasor J, Danes JM, Komm B, Chang KC, Lyttle CR,
Katzenellenbogen BS. Profiling of estrogen up- and
down-regulated gene expression in human breast cancer
cells: insights into gene networks and pathways
underlying estrogenic control of proliferation and cell
phenotype. Endocrinology 2003;144:4562–74.
39. Li C, Heidt DG, Dalerba P, et al. Identification of
pancreatic cancer stem cells. Cancer Res 2007;67:1030–7.

10591

40. Liu S, Dontu G, Mantle ID, et al. Hedgehog signaling
and Bmi-1 regulate self-renewal of normal and malignant human mammary stem cells. Cancer Res 2006;66:
6063–71.
41. LeBedis C, Chen K, Fallavollita L, Boutros T, Brodt P.
Peripheral lymph node stromal cells can promote growth
and tumorigenicity of breast carcinoma cells through the
release of IGF-I and EGF. Int J Cancer 2002;100:2–8.
42. Timpson P, Lynch DK, Schramek D, Walker F, Daly RJ.
Cortactin overexpression inhibits ligand-induced downregulation of the epidermal growth factor receptor.
Cancer Res 2005;65:3273–80.
43. van Rossum AG, Gibcus J, van der Wal J, Schuuring E.
Cortactin overexpression results in sustained epidermal
growth factor receptor signaling by preventing ligandinduced receptor degradation in human carcinoma
cells. Breast Cancer Res 2005;7:235–7.
44. Levin ER, Pietras RJ. Estrogen receptors outside the
nucleus in breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res Treat. Epub
2007 Jun 26.
45. Petz LN, Ziegler YS, Schultz JR, Nardulli AM. Fos and
Jun inhibit estrogen-induced transcription of the human
progesterone receptor gene through an activator
protein-1 site. Mol Endocrinol 2004;18:521–32.
46. Giovanella BC, Fogh J. The nude mouse in cancer
research. Adv Cancer Res 1985;44:69–120.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (21). November 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Estrogen Insensitivity in a Model of Estrogen Receptor−
Positive Breast Cancer Lymph Node Metastasis
Joshua Chuck Harrell, Wendy W. Dye, Djuana M.E. Harvell, et al.
Cancer Res 2007;67:10582-10591.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/21/10582
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2010/07/15/67.21.10582.DC1

This article cites 44 articles, 15 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/21/10582.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 3 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/21/10582.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

