Correspondence

defining event to be classified as exposed. Inclusion of this
time, which is typically referred to as “immortal,” will
overestimate survival for the exposed group.
In the study by Watkins et al,1 women were followed
from the time of their ovarian cancer diagnosis until death.
The exposure-defining event was the use of beta-blockers
during neoadjuvant or adjuvant chemotherapy.1 The
authors included the (immortal) time elapsed between the
ovarian cancer diagnosis and the initiation of beta-blocker
therapy in the exposed group,1 thereby biasing the estimates
in favor of beta-blocker use. To illustrate the problem,
imagine a woman was treated successfully with 6 cycles of
chemotherapy, after which her physician decided to initiate
therapy with beta-blockers. This woman would have contributed person-time to the beta-blocker group from the diagnosis date, although her survival from the time of
diagnosis to the end of chemotherapy could not possibly
have been an effect of the beta-blocker use. In contrast,
imagine a nonresponder to chemotherapy who died after
receiving her first cycle of therapy. Due to her early death,
this woman never became eligible for beta-blocker therapy.
Therefore, she would only have contributed person-time in
the nonuser group. These hypothetical examples demonstrate that, by design, women with high mortality are overrepresented among nonusers, whereas women with low
mortality are overrepresented among beta-blocker users.
The correct method with which to handle persontime would have been to include only the time passed after
beta-blocker initiation in the calculation of person-time
for the exposed cohort.3,4 Different approaches are available (eg, conditional landmark analysis, the extended Cox
model with time-varying covariates, and the inverse
probability-weighted model).4
To our knowledge, 4 other studies to date have
examined the association between beta-blockers and
survival in patients with ovarian cancer.5-8 Two of these
studies reported improved survival among users of betablockers, but both were likely biased by the inclusion of
immortal person-time.5,6 In contrast, the other 2 studies
were designed to avoid this specific bias and found no evidence of a survival benefit with the use of beta-blockers.7,8
We authored 1 of the latter 2 studies, in which we emphasized the problem of immortal person-time bias in the
existing literature.7 Although Watkins et al1 referenced
this previous work of ours,7 they still included immortal
person-time in their analysis.
FUNDING SUPPORT
No specific funding was disclosed.
Cancer

January 15, 2016

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
The authors made no disclosures.
REFERENCES
1. Watkins JL, Thaker PH, Nick AM, et al. Clinical impact of selective
and nonselective beta-blockers on survival in patients with ovarian
cancer. Cancer. 2015;121:3444-3451.
2. Aabo K, Adams M, Adnitt P, et al. Chemotherapy in advanced ovarian cancer: four systematic meta-analyses of individual patient data
from 37 randomized trials. Advanced Ovarian Cancer Trialists’
Group. Br J Cancer. 1998;78:1479-1487.
3. Suissa S. Immortal time bias in pharmaco-epidemiology. Am J Epidemiol. 2008;167:492-499.
4. Giobbie-Hurder A, Gelber RD, Regan MM. Challenges of guaranteetime bias. J Clin Oncol. 2013;31:2963-2969.
5. Heitz F, du Bois A, Harter P, et al; AGO study group; NCIC-CTG study
group; EORTC-GCG study group. Impact of beta blocker medication in
patients with platinum sensitive recurrent ovarian cancer-a combined
analysis of 2 prospective multicenter trials by the AGO Study Group,
NCIC-CTG and EORTC-GCG. Gynecol Oncol. 2013;129:463-466.
6. Diaz ES, Karlan BY, Li AJ. Impact of beta blockers on epithelial ovarian cancer survival. Gynecol Oncol. 2012;127:375-378.
7. Johannesdottir SA, Schmidt M, Phillips G, et al. Use of ß-blockers
and mortality following ovarian cancer diagnosis: a population-based
cohort study. BMC Cancer. 2013;13:85.
8. Eskander R, Bessonova L, Chiu C, et al. Beta blocker use and ovarian cancer
survival: a retrospective cohort study. Gynecol Oncol. 2012;127(suppl 1):S21.

Sigrun Alba Johannesdottir Schmidt, MD
Morten Schmidt, MD, PhD
Department of Clinical Epidemiology
Aarhus University Hospital
Aarhus N, Denmark
DOI: 10.1002/cancer.29721, Published online October 7, 2015
in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Reply to Beta Blockers in Epithelial
Ovarian Cancer and Beta-Blockers
and Improved Survival From
Ovarian Cancer: New Miracle
Treatment or Another Case of
Immortal Person-Time Bias?
We reviewed the correspondence by Venniyoor and
Schmidt and Schmidt regarding our recent article.1,2 We
appreciate their comments and will clarify some of the
points.
Schmidt and Schmidt cite the 1998 meta-analyses of
37 randomized trials to illustrate the potential for bias in
our study.2 However, we believe this article has several limitations to its use as a comparator to our study, including
the use of platinum with a multitude of second-line, nontaxane chemotherapy agents; cross-study comparison bias;

325

Correspondence

varying numbers of chemotherapy cycles; and a lack of
accountability for the definition of optimal surgical debulking. The survival data of 42 months noted among the nonbeta-blocker (BB) users in our study1 is similar to that of
39.3 months noted in the control group in the Gynecologic Oncology Group 218 study.3 We stated no conclusions related to BBs being a “miracle treatment,” but rather
suggested that the subtype of BB used may matter and that
nonselective BBs (NSBBs) target biologically important
pathways in patients with ovarian cancer.4,5 Moreover, we
made no claims that NSBBs would replace chemotherapy;
rather, we view NSBBs as being used in combination with
standard-of-care treatments.
Although it was required in our study that women
use BBs during adjuvant or neoadjuvant therapy to be classified as having received a BB,1 the majority received BBs
prior to any chemotherapy because of previously diagnosed
hypertension. It is estimated that approximately 5% of
women are prescribed BBs after the initiation of chemotherapy for ovarian cancer and, under these circumstances,
the impact of immortal person-time bias would be
reduced. Moreover, among women at 2 sites, 4 (16.7%)
were first prescribed BBs after a diagnosis of ovarian cancer.
After rerunning the covariate-adjusted proportional hazards
models among women only from these 2 sites and excluding the 4 who were prescribed BBs after a diagnosis of ovarian cancer, the direction and statistical significance of the
hazard ratios (HRs) remained the same, although the magnitude decreased. The HR for overall survival associated
with BB use was now 0.33 (95% confidence interval [95%
CI], 0.20-0.53), the HR for selective BB use was 0.55
(95% CI, 0.32-0.94), and the HR for NSBB use was 0.15
(95% CI, 0.06-0.35). It should be noted that in our study,
we found the proportional hazards assumption for BB to
be violated; therefore, we included a term in the model for
BB use adjusted for time, so that although our study demonstrated an initial benefit for BB use, this diminished over
time to little to no benefit at 5 years.1
The type of BB used was not specified in the article
by Johannesdottir et al6 or in the majority of the previous
articles cited. Therefore, the question of whether the lack
of an association with cancer mortality was due to the
inclusion of selective BBs, a lack of standardization of combination chemotherapy and cycles of chemotherapy, and/
or the exclusion of debulking status may be difficult to
determine.6 Nevertheless, we acknowledged in our article
that retrospective study results can be influenced by a number of biases, and ultimately, careful prospective assessment
will be required. The biological effects of NSBBs and cancer have been shown in several cancer types.5 Battacharyya
326

et al recently presented prospective data in pancreatic cancer demonstrating a near doubling of overall survival rates
in favor of patients receiving gemcitabine, paclitaxel, propranolol, and a cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) inhibitor.7
Additional statistically powered randomized clinical trials
with biologically relevant endpoints are needed to evaluate
the true potential role of NSBBs in the treatment of
patients with ovarian or other cancers.
FUNDING SUPPORT
No specific funding was disclosed.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
Premal H. Thaker has received research funding from Celsion
Pharmaceuticals.

REFERENCES
1. Watkins JL, Thaker PH, Nick AM, et al. Clinical impact of selective
and nonselective beta-blockers on survival in patients with ovarian
cancer. Cancer. 2015;121:3444-3451.
2. Aabo K, Adams M, Adnitt P, et al. Chemotherapy in advanced ovarian cancer: four systematic meta-analyses of individual patient data
from 37 randomized trials. Advanced Ovarian Cancer Trialists’
Group. Br J Cancer. 1998;78:1479-1487.
3. Burger RA, Brady MF, Bookman MA, et al; Gynecologic Oncology
Group. Incorporation of bevacizumab in the primary treatment of
ovarian cancer. N Engl J Med. 2011;365:2473-2483.
4. Thaker PH, Han LY, Kamat AA, et al. Chronic stress promotes tumor growth and angiogenesis in a mouse model of ovarian carcinoma.
Nat Med. 2006;12:939-944.
5. Tang J, Li Z, Lu L, Cho CH. b-Adrenergic system, a backstage manipulator regulating tumour progression and drug target in cancer
therapy. Semin Cancer Biol. 2013;23(6 pt B):533-542.
6. Johannesdottir SA, Schmidt M, Phillips G, et al. Use of ß-blockers
and mortality following ovarian cancer diagnosis: a population-based
cohort study. BMC Cancer. 2013;13:85
7. Battacharyya GS, Bondarde SA, Biswas G, et al. Effect of coadministered beta blocker and COX-2 inhibitors to patients with pancreatic
cancer prior to receiving albumin-bound paclitaxel. Presented in
abstract form at the American Society of Clinical Oncology 12th Annual Gastrointestinal (GI) Cancers Symposium; January 15-17, 2015;
San Francisco, CA. Abstract 302.

Premal H. Thaker, MD
Division of Gynecologic Oncology
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology
Washington University School of Medicine
St. Louis, Missouri

Diana L. Urbauer, MS
Department of Biostatistics
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center
Houston, Texas

Anil K. Sood, MD
Department of Gynecologic Oncology and Reproductive Medicine;
Department of Cancer Biology;
Center for RNA Interference and Non-Coding RNA Program
Department of Experimental Therapeutics
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center
Houston, Texas
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29723, Published online October 7, 2015
in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Cancer

January 15, 2016

