Published OnlineFirst June 29, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3805

Cancer
Research

Review

Antiangiogenic VEGF-Ax: A New Participant
in Tumor Angiogenesis
Sandeepa M. Eswarappa1,2 and Paul L. Fox1

Abstract
The transcript of the angiogenic factor vascular endothelial
growth factor A (VEGF-A) is subject to a multitude of stimulusdependent, posttranscriptional regulatory events, consistent with
its unusually long 30 untranslated region. We have recently
reported translational readthrough of VEGFA mRNA whereby
translating ribosomes traverse the canonical stop codon to a
conserved, downstream stop codon, generating VEGF-Ax ("x" for
extended), a novel, extended isoform with an additional 22
amino acids appended at the C-terminus. This event is the ﬁrst

vertebrate example of protein-regulated, programmed translational readthrough that generates a protein with a known function. Remarkably, VEGF-Ax exhibits potent antiangiogenic activity, both in vitro and in vivo, thus raising profound clinical
implications, particularly with respect to cancer treatment. In this
review, we discuss the potential of VEGF-Ax as a therapeutic agent
and drug target, as well as its possible role in the failure of, or
resistance to, conventional anti-VEGF therapies in many types of
cancers. Cancer Res; 75(14); 2765–9. 2015 AACR.

Introduction

colleagues (4). These isoforms, termed VEGF-Ab, are generated by
an alternative splicing event with the 30 -most exon, resulting in a
switch in the C-terminus of the encoded protein from canonical
VEGF-A isoforms that end in CDKPRR to a C-terminus ending in
SLTRKD. The different C-terminus is thought to be critical for the
antiangiogenic activity of VEGF-Ab (5). Several laboratories have
demonstrated antiangiogenic activity of VEGF-Ab in multiple
systems, both in vitro and in vivo (6–8).

More than 40 years ago, Judah Folkman proposed the contribution of blood vessel development, i.e., angiogenesis, to tumor
growth and advocated a new modality of cancer treatment in
which host angiogenesis is targeted rather than the tumor itself
(1). To date, there have been some notable successes, but many
attempts to treat human cancers by targeting angiogenesis have
been met with disappointing outcomes (2). The process of
angiogenesis and its regulation is certainly more complex than
ﬁrst believed, and new cellular processes, molecules, and pathways are continuously being discovered that contribute importantly to angiogenesis.
Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-A, discovered in
the 1980s, is a critical factor that regulates angiogenesis both
in physiologic and pathologic conditions, including tumorigenesis (3). VEGF-A has become a particularly important pharmacologic target in antitumor drug development, and in the current
armamentarium for treatment for several tumor types. Many
antiangiogenic drugs target either VEGF-A (e.g., bevacizumab,
also known as Avastin) or its receptors (e.g., lenvatinib). The
human VEGFA gene resides on chromosome 6, and multiple
alternative splicing events generate several isoforms of VEGFA
mRNA and protein. Overwhelming evidence from many investigators supports the potent proangiogenic activity of many VEGF-A
splice variant isoforms in vitro and in vivo. Nonetheless, antiangiogenic isoforms in VEGFA mRNA were reported by Bates and

1
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Lerner Research
Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio. 2Department of Biochemistry, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India.

Corresponding Author: Paul L. Fox, Department of Cellular and Molecular
Medicine, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic, 9500 Euclid Avenue/NC10,
Cleveland, OH 44195. Phone: 216-444-8053; Fax: 216-444-9404; E-mail:
foxp@ccf.org
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3805
2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Discovery of VEGF-Ax and Its Generation
by Translational Readthrough
Our laboratory has recently identiﬁed a novel antiangiogenic
VEGF-A isoform, termed VEGF-Ax, in endothelial cells (EC; ref. 9).
Our experiments to investigate the paracrine function of VEGF-A
in cultured ECs revealed that ECs secrete an antiangiogenic
isoform of VEGF-A. However, mRNA speciﬁc to VEGF-Ab, the
alternatively spliced antiangiogenic isoform, was not detectable.
This observation was consistent with the presence of a novel
antiangiogenic VEGF-A isoform secreted by ECs and generated
by an unknown mechanism.
An important insight came from inspection of the proximal 30
untranslated region (UTR) of VEGFA mRNA in multiple mammalian species. Interestingly, the VEGFA 30 UTR has an evolutionarily conserved stop codon in-frame with the canonical stop
codon. Even more surprising, the two stop codons and their inframe nature are conserved despite mutation, deletion, and insertion events during evolution. This analysis enticingly suggested
that VEGFA mRNA translation might extend beyond the canonical
stop codon to terminate at the downstream stop codon in what is
considered to be 30 UTR. Progression of translating ribosomes
beyond the stop codon is known as translational readthrough or
stop codon readthrough, and is most often observed and best
understood in certain viruses (10). The putative translational
readthrough event in VEGFA mRNA would generate a protein
with a 22-amino acid extension (21 amino acids encoded by the
63-nt extension plus a stop codon replacement) terminating with
SLTRKD. This is the same C-terminus in VEGF-Ab thought to

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

2765

Published OnlineFirst June 29, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3805

Eswarappa and Fox

confer the antiangiogenic property. We termed the putative
extended isoform VEGF-Ax ("x" for extended).
The generation of VEGF-Ax by translational readthrough was
validated by multiple experimental approaches. An antibody was
raised against a 15-amino acid segment in the C-terminal extension, and validated to detect VEGF-A, but not any other VEGF-A
isoform (including VEGF-Ab). The antibody detected endogenous VEGF-Ax in lysates of primary ECs from multiple mammalian species, as well as in serum samples from healthy human
subjects. Mass spectrometric analysis not only detected the readthrough sequence of VEGF-Ax, it also identiﬁed Ser as the amino
acid inserted in place of the canonical UGA stop codon. Translational readthrough was also demonstrated using a construct
containing luciferase cDNA downstream of the VEGFA cDNA after
the canonical stop codon. Robust luciferase expression was
observed when this construct was transfected in ECs, and also
by in vitro translation using rabbit reticulocyte lysate. The efﬁciency of readthrough was determined to be about 7% to 25%,
signiﬁcantly higher than the 0.1% readthrough due to mistranslation, and comparable with authentic readthrough observed in
some viruses (10, 11).
Readthrough events can be programmed by downstream cisacting RNA elements, termed programmed translational readthrough (PTR; ref. 12). Readthrough of VEGFA mRNA is executed
by the 63-nt RNA sequence (termed Ax element) between the
canonical and the evolutionarily conserved downstream stop
codon, thereby utilizing a PTR mechanism. The Ax element can
program readthrough even in a heterologous context. Thus, the Ax
element performs a dual function; it not only encodes the peptide
extension, but it also acts as an RNA element that programs
readthrough. We showed that heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein (hnRNP) A2/B1, a known RNA-binding protein, binds
this element and promotes readthrough and VEGF-Ax generation.

VEGF-Ax Function
Anti–VEGF-Ax antibody stimulated migration and proliferation of cultured EC consistent with a paracrine, antiangiogenic

Healthy tissue

Tumor

activity of endogenous VEGF-Ax. Likewise, recombinant VEGFAxAla (an isoform in which the upstream stop codon is replaced by
an Ala codon to facilitate efﬁcient expression) reduced EC migration, proliferation, and tube formation in Matrigel in vitro. The in
vivo activity of VEGF-Ax was tested using a human xenograft
system in nude mice. Subcutaneous administration of recombinant VEGF-Ax markedly reduced the progression of HCT116
(human colon carcinoma cell)-derived tumors and associated
angiogenesis, demonstrating antiangiogenic property of VEGFAx. The ﬁnding that the dominant activity of VEGF-A released by
EC is antiangiogenic was unexpected, but consistent with a
previous report that aortic rings from mice heterozygous for
EC-speciﬁc VEGFA gene deletion exhibit increased sprouting (13).
VEGF-Ax binds VEGFR2 with an afﬁnity comparable with
VEGF-A, but does not bind the coreceptor, neuropilin 1. Binding
of VEGF-A to neuropilin 1 is essential for proangiogenic activity
(14). Moreover, neuropilin 1 expression is required for developmental angiogenesis in mice (15). Thus, the inability of VEGF-Ax
to bind neuropilin 1 is likely to contribute to its antiangiogenic
function. Also, VEGF-Ax does not activate the canonical VEGFR2
signaling pathways as determined by phosphorylation of key
receptor Tyr residues (9). VEGF-Ax is likely to act as a decoy
ligand of VEGFR2, competing with VEGF-A. Moreover, it is
possible that VEGF-Ax induces an alternative, inhibitory signaling
pathway leading to arrest of EC migration and proliferation, and
consequent antiangiogenic function. Currently, we are far from a
mechanistic understanding of the receptor-mediated, cellular
function of VEGF-Ax. The physiologic function of VEGF-Ax likewise remains unclear. Prevention of unnecessary angiogenesis is
almost certainly essential for vascular homeostasis and organismal well-being. Interestingly, antiangiogenic VEGF-Ax is predominant in the conditioned medium derived from EC compared with
proangiogenic isoforms, possibly due to preferential secretion.
We propose that the antiangiogenic activity of VEGF-Ax secreted
by ECs contributes to the maintenance of vascular homeostasis. In
this context, a robust source of proangiogenic agents, for example,
VEGF-A secreted by tumors or during wound healing, can locally
overwhelm VEGF-Ax and induce angiogenesis (Fig. 1).

Cancer

VEGF-A

Figure 1.
Proposed role of VEGF-Ax in healthy
and cancerous tissues. Left, in healthy
tissue, preferential release of
antiangiogenic VEGF-Ax by
endothelial cells contributes to
vascular homeostasis by preventing
unwanted angiogenesis. Right, tumor
cells can overwhelm the
antiangiogenic activity of VEGF-Ax
either by robust synthesis and
release of VEGF-A or by inhibiting the
release of VEGF-Ax by vascular
endothelial cells and other cells in the
tumor microenvironment, thereby
inducing angiogenesis.

VEGF-Ax

Endothelial cells
© 2015 American Association for Cancer Research

2766 Cancer Res; 75(14) July 15, 2015

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst June 29, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3805

Antiangiogenic VEGF-Ax

Regulation of Translational Readthrough
and VEGF-Ax Expression
VEGF-Ax expression exhibits tissue speciﬁcity. Healthy human
colon, cerebrum, and spleen express substantial amounts of
VEGF-Ax, whereas the protein is not detected in skeletal muscle
and heart. Furthermore, whereas normal colon exhibits robust
expression of both VEGF-Ax and VEGF-A, colon cancer tissues
show expression of VEGF-A only, consistent with the vigorous
angiogenesis observed in colon carcinoma (9). Together, these
observations provide compelling evidence for physiologic and
pathologic regulation of translational readthrough of VEGFA
mRNA. It will be of great interest with respect to a mechanistic
understanding, as well as potential therapeutic application, to
determine if these readthrough changes are caused by alterations
in expression or activity of hnRNP A2/B1, or possibly as-yetunidentiﬁed trans-acting factors.
Our mechanistic understanding of regulation of translational
readthrough is currently very limited in any system. In yeast,
hypoxia-induced hydroxylation of Pro64 in ribosomal protein
S23p in the decoding center of ribosomes affects both translational
accuracy and translational readthrough efﬁciency in a contextdependent manner (16). Intriguingly, transcriptome-wide analysis
of mRNA methylation revealed several mRNAs that undergo methylation at the N6 position of adenosine near stop codons (17).
Possibly, site-dependent methylation inﬂuences the efﬁciency of
translation termination and therefore translational readthrough, in
a regulatable manner analogous to transcriptional regulation.
Pseudouridine, the most prevalent mRNA modiﬁcation, is generated from uridine residues by a catalytically regulated, posttranscriptional event (18). Interestingly, pseudouridylation of uridine
residues in stop codons can elicit translational readthrough (19).

Translational Readthrough as a Mechanism
of Proteome Expansion in Vertebrates
The contribution of translational readthrough to proteome
expansion in less complex organisms, such as viruses and yeast,
is well established; however, the signiﬁcance of its role in vertebrate
proteome expansion is only beginning to be recognized. For nearly
30 years, rabbit b-globin was the only reported example of readthrough in vertebrate transcripts (20). In 2012, Yamaguchi and
colleagues demonstrated readthrough in the myelin P0 transcript
(21). More recently, readthrough has been shown in several mammalian transcripts, including lactate dehydrogenase B (LDHB),
mitogen-activated protein kinase 10 (MAPK10), aquaporin 4
(AQP4), opioid receptor kappa 1 (OPRK1), and opiate receptorlike 1 (OPRL1; refs. 22, 23). Our genome-wide bioinformatic
analysis, followed by experimental conﬁrmation, revealed two
additional transcripts that exhibit readthrough: argonaute 1
(AGO1) and mitochondrial carrier 2 (MTCH2; ref. 9). The function
of the extended readthrough product has not been determined in
any of these cases, nor trans-acting regulators identiﬁed. A ribosome
proﬁling study in human ﬁbroblasts revealed ribosomal footprints
on the 30 UTR of 42 mRNAs, suggesting that they are the targets of
translational readthrough (24). However, a more recent report has
shown that ribosomes can gain access to the 30 UTR of mRNAs
without translating it (25). Clearly, experimental demonstration of
the generation of readthrough product is essential to rigorously
establish an mRNA as an authentic translational readthrough target.
Nonetheless, ribosome proﬁling has substantial potential for iden-

www.aacrjournals.org

tifying new readthrough candidate mRNAs in vertebrates and other
organisms (24). Despite the signiﬁcant recent attention to readthrough, the generation of VEGF-Ax remains the only known
functional, protein-regulated PTR event in any vertebrate transcript.
The precise mechanism by which translating ribosomes traverse
the transcript beyond the canonical stop codon during translational readthrough is not known in any system. One possibility is
that cis-acting RNA elements, such as the VEGFA Ax element, and
their binding proteins interact with ribosomes and prevent the
binding of release factor to the ribosome paused at the stop
codon. The consequent failure of release might facilitate access
of suppressor or near-cognate tRNAs to the stop codon, thereby
recoding it as a sense codon. Consistent with this release factor–
based hypothesis, Beznoskova and colleagues have identiﬁed two
novel factors that contribute to translational readthrough regulation (26). Eukaryotic initiation factor 3 (eIF3), along with its
associated factor, high-copy suppressor of Rpg1 (HCR1), regulates translational readthrough by interacting with releasing factors in yeast. They show that inactivating mutations in eIF3 and
HCR1 decrease translation readthrough efﬁciency. A deep mechanistic understanding of readthrough will likely require detailed
information on the interaction, and possibly the structure, of
terminating ribosomes in conjunction with the cis-acting RNA
signal element and its bound proteins.

Clinical Implications of VEGF-Ax
Disappointing results from current anti-VEGF therapy for
cancers
Because of its critical role in angiogenesis, agents that selectively
target VEGF-A, or its receptor or downstream signaling pathway,
have received enormous attention as a pharmacologic target:
bevacizumab (Avastin) and ranibizumab (Lucentis) are antibodies that target VEGF-A, and sunitinib (Sutent) and sorafenib
(Nexavar) target VEGF-A receptors. These agents have shown
remarkable effectiveness in many mouse models of cancer. Bevacizumab is currently used as ﬁrst-line treatment for metastatic
renal cell carcinoma and colorectal cancer, and has recently been
approved for combination treatment, with chemotherapy, of
platinum-resistant recurrent ovarian cancer (27). However, the
improvement obtained with bevacizumab, and other VEGF-related therapeutics, has for the most part been signiﬁcant but marginal; tumor shrinkage is often transient and followed by tumor
re-growth (2, 28). In fact, none of the antiangiogenesis agents and
treatments have met the high early expectations of the ﬁeld
initiated by Folkman (1).
As one example among many, bevacizumab is approved by the
federal FDA as an adjuvant for the treatment of metastatic colon
carcinoma in combination with standard FOLFOX (5-ﬂuorouracil, leucovorin, and oxaliplatin) chemotherapy. However, the
addition of bevacizumab increases the overall survival by only
about 5 months, and it is not effective in nonmetastatic (i.e., <
stage IV) colon carcinoma (29). Furthermore, even this successful
application has been debated due to the high cost and rather
serious adverse effects (30). Similar ﬁndings have been observed
in other cancers and other anti-VEGF drugs.
Possible mechanisms underlying the ineffectiveness of antiVEGF therapies: role of VEGF-Ax
VEGF-A is arguably the most important proangiogenic factor
for tumor growth; however, other potent proangiogenic cytokines

Cancer Res; 75(14) July 15, 2015

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

2767

Published OnlineFirst June 29, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3805

Eswarappa and Fox

have been investigated, including members of ephrin, ﬁbroblast
growth factor, and angiopoietin families. Expression of these
factors, and activation of their angiogenic pathways, can circumvent anti-VEGF therapies (28). Tumor hypoxia can attract bone
marrow–derived cells, including vascular progenitor cells, resulting
in neovascularization, which can reduce the effectiveness of antiVEGF treatments. Conceivably, local overexpression of VEGF-A, for
example by hypoxia, can overwhelm the drugs (2). Anti-VEGF
therapeutics can induce vascular normalization, i.e., reduce the
vessel tortuosity and hyperpermeability observed in many tumors,
and increase the pericyte coverage around blood vessels (31).
Tumor cells can take advantage of the increased perfusion due to
vessel normalization to invade adjacent healthy tissue (28). In this
manner, anti-VEGF agents can increase tumor invasiveness, contrary to the goals and expectations of the treatment.
Current anti-VEGF drugs indiscriminately target both canonical
proangiogenic and antiangiogenic VEGF-Ax (and VEGF-Ab) isoforms. Clearly, inhibition of an antiangiogenic agent such as
VEGF-Ax can present negative consequences in cancer treatment.
Therefore, the presence of VEGF-Ax can contribute to the ineffectiveness of anti-VEGF therapies. We propose that the level of
antiangiogenic VEGF-Ax in the tumor or circulation can be a
strong predictor of the effectiveness of anti-VEGF therapy, As an
example, VEGF-A treatment might not be effective in grade 1
colon carcinoma where there is robust VEGF-Ax expression (9).
This hypothesis can be tested by clinical studies evaluating VEGFAx levels in responders versus nonresponders to anti-VEGF therapies. Alternatively, agents that speciﬁcally target proangiogenic
VEGF-A isoforms, for example, a C-terminus–speciﬁc antibody
that does not recognize VEGF-Ax, might be more effective than
current anti-VEGF drugs, and possibly with fewer adverse side
effects. Finally, the potential of VEGF-A as a cancer biomarker
needs to be reconsidered as these studies are generally done with
antibodies that detect all VEGF-A isoforms.
Human and murine VEGF-A are very similar in amino acid
sequence (90% identity) and proangiogenic activity. However,
the peptide extensions in VEGF-Ax generated by translational
readthrough are signiﬁcantly different in mice and humans
(74% identity), particularly in the C-terminus that is required
for VEGF-A binding to neuropilin-1, a VEGFR2 coreceptor (9).
Although it has not been investigated experimentally, murine
VEGF-Ax might exhibit a different level of activity or a distinct
function compared with human VEGF-Ax, with implications
concerning differential contribution to angiogenesis in mice and
humans. Thus, caution is required when extrapolating results
obtained from mouse models of angiogenesis to humans, particularly in systems where endogenous VEGF-A and VEGF-Ax
from the mouse tumor microenvironment contribute to angiogenesis and tumor growth. This might factor into the effective
antitumor activity of anti-VEGF therapies in mice, but subsequent
disappointment in human clinical trials. Additional in vivo studies
with murine VEGF-Ax will be necessary to clarify this important
issue.
VEGF-Ax as a diagnostic or therapeutic agent
VEGF-A, determined in tumors, serum, or plasma, has been
used as a diagnostic for tumor severity, as prognostic indicator,
and to predict effectiveness of treatment in a multitude of studies
on nearly all tumor types (32). In most cases, correlations between
VEGF-A levels and tumor growth are observed; however, determination of VEGF-A by itself generally is not an accurate diag-

2768 Cancer Res; 75(14) July 15, 2015

nostic due to low sensitivity (33). The presence of VEGF-Ax in
tumors and in serum almost certainly adds a confounding variable (9). Conceivably, low levels of VEGF-Ax in tumors (or
serum) might predict robust angiogenesis and rapid tumor
growth. In contrast, high levels of VEGF-Ax might predict ineffective anti–VEGF-A therapy due to inactivation of both pro- and
antiangiogenic activity. Clearly, there is a need for detailed preclinical and clinical studies of the utility of VEGF-Ax (possibly as a
ratio with VEGF-A) as a diagnostic tool in many cancer types.
The potent antiangiogenic activity of VEGF-Ax in cell culture
and in mice suggests that it is a promising candidate for the
treatment of solid tumors, retinopathies, and other pathologic
conditions that depend on angiogenesis. Current anti-VEGF drugs
function "passively" by inhibiting VEGF-A function by binding
and inactivating the growth factor or its receptor; they do not
exhibit "active" antiangiogenic function. Furthermore, proangiogenic VEGF-A is required for the maintenance of the normal adult
vasculature. Complete or near-complete inhibition of this essential function underlies complications of anti-VEGF agents, including hypertension. In this context, the dual antiangiogenic properties of VEGF-Ax, namely active as well as passive inhibitory
function, might provide more effective antiangiogenic activity
than currently available anti-VEGF therapeutic agents.
The VEGFA-Ax element as a cis-acting RNA signal, hnRNP A2/
B1 as a trans-acting protein regulator, and speciﬁc anti–VEGF-Ax
antibody provide unique opportunities for pharmacologic interventions that target the generation or activity of VEGF-Ax. Potentially, they can be applied to promote (e.g., in ischemic ulcers or
myocardial infarction) or inhibit (e.g., in cancer or pulmonary
hypertension) angiogenesis. Antisense oligonucleotides, such as
morpholinos, can be used to target the Ax element to disturb its
secondary structure or inhibit its binding to hnRNP A2/B1, both
resulting in decreased VEGF-Ax expression. Small molecular
compounds that bind and stabilize the secondary structure of
Ax element, and increase binding to trans-acting factors, can be
sought to increase VEGF-Ax expression.

Concluding Remarks
The cells, processes, and molecules that contribute to tumor
angiogenesis are far more complex than originally believed.
Multiple cytokines and their receptors, redundant pathways, and
tumor adaptability have combined to make targeting angiogenesis an exceptionally challenging endeavor. The exciting discovery
of VEGF-Ax and other antiangiogenic VEGF-A isoforms should
encourage the ﬁeld to reconsider brute-force strategies targeting
VEGF, in the light of the opposing activities of these new-found
molecules. Instead of ignoring their presence, the time is right to
embrace the potential of antiangiogenic VEGF-A isoforms in
guiding and enhancing therapeutic strategies targeting cancer.

Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest
P.L. Fox and S.M. Eswarappa have ownership in a patent (application PCT/
US2014/013109).

Grant Support
This work was supported by NIH grants P01 HL029582, P01 HL076491, and
R01 GM086430 (P.L. Fox) and by a Fellowship from the American Heart
Association, Great Rivers Afﬁliate (S.M. Eswarappa).
Received December 24, 2014; revised March 24, 2015; accepted March 25,
2015; published OnlineFirst June 29, 2015.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst June 29, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3805

Antiangiogenic VEGF-Ax

References
1. Folkman J. Tumor angiogenesis: therapeutic implications. N Engl J Med
1971;285:1182–6.
2. Sitohy B, Nagy JA, Dvorak HF. Anti-VEGF/VEGFR therapy for cancer:
reassessing the target. Cancer Res 2012;72:1909–14.
3. Ferrara N. Vascular endothelial growth factor. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc
Biol 2009;29:789–91.
4. Bates DO, Cui TG, Doughty JM, Winkler M, Sugiono M, Shields JD, et al.
VEGF165b, an inhibitory splice variant of vascular endothelial growth
factor, is down-regulated in renal cell carcinoma. Cancer Res 2002;
62:4123–31.
5. Harper SJ, Bates DO. VEGF-A splicing: the key to anti-angiogenic
therapeutics? Nat Rev Cancer 2008;8:880–7.
6. Cromer W, Jennings MH, Odaka Y, Mathis JM, Alexander JS. Murine
rVEGF164b, an inhibitory VEGF reduces VEGF-A-dependent endothelial proliferation and barrier dysfunction. Microcirculation 2010;17:
536–47.
7. Konopatskaya O, Churchill AJ, Harper SJ, Bates DO, Gardiner TA.
VEGF165b, an endogenous C-terminal splice variant of VEGF, inhibits
retinal neovascularization in mice. Mol Vis 2006;12:626–32.
8. Manetti M, Guiducci S, Romano E, Ceccarelli C, Bellando-Randone S,
Conforti ML, et al. Overexpression of VEGF165b, an inhibitory splice
variant of vascular endothelial growth factor, leads to insufﬁcient
angiogenesis in patients with systemic sclerosis. Circ Res 2011;109:
e14–26.
9. Eswarappa SM, Potdar AA, Koch WJ, Fan Y, Vasu K, Lindner D, et al.
Programmed translational readthrough generates antiangiogenic VEGFAx. Cell 2014;157:1605–18.
10. Li GP, Rice CM. Mutagenesis of the in-frame opal termination codon
preceding nsP4 of Sindbis virus: studies of translational readthrough and
its effect on virus replication. J Virol 1989;63:1326–37.
11. Houck-Loomis B, Durney MA, Salguero C, Shankar N, Nagle JM, Goff SP,
et al. An equilibrium-dependent retroviral mRNA switch regulates translational recoding. Nature 2011;480:561–4.
12. Firth AE, Wills NM, Gesteland RF, Atkins JF. Stimulation of stop codon
readthrough: frequent presence of an extended 30 RNA structural element.
Nucleic Acids Res 2011;39:6679–91.
13. da Silva RG, Tavora B, Robinson SD, Reynolds LE, Szekeres C, Lamar J, et al.
Endothelial alpha3beta1-integrin represses pathological angiogenesis and
sustains endothelial-VEGF. Am J Pathol 2010;177:1534–48.
14. Lee P, Goishi K, Davidson AJ, Mannix R, Zon L, Klagsbrun M. Neuropilin-1 is required for vascular development and is a mediator of VEGFdependent angiogenesis in zebraﬁsh. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2002;
99:10470–5.
15. Kawasaki T, Kitsukawa T, Bekku Y, Matsuda Y, Sanbo M, Yagi T, et al. A
requirement for neuropilin-1 in embryonic vessel formation. Development 1999;126:4895–902.
16. Loenarz C, Sekirnik R, Thalhammer A, Ge W, Spivakovsky E, Mackeen
MM, et al. Hydroxylation of the eukaryotic ribosomal decoding center
affects translational accuracy. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2014;111:
4019–24.

www.aacrjournals.org

17. Meyer KD, Saletore Y, Zumbo P, Elemento O, Mason CE, Jaffrey SR.
Comprehensive analysis of mRNA methylation reveals enrichment in 30
UTRs and near stop codons. Cell 2012;149:1635–46.
18. Carlile TM, Rojas-Duran MF, Zinshteyn B, Shin H, Bartoli KM, Gilbert WV.
Pseudouridine proﬁling reveals regulated mRNA pseudouridylation in
yeast and human cells. Nature 2014;515:143–6.
19. Fernandez IS, Ng CL, Kelley AC, Wu G, Yu YT, Ramakrishnan V. Unusual
base pairing during the decoding of a stop codon by the ribosome. Nature
2013;500:107–10.
20. Geller AI, Rich A. A UGA termination suppression tRNATrp active in rabbit
reticulocytes. Nature 1980;283:41–6.
21. Yamaguchi Y, Hayashi A, Campagnoni CW, Kimura A, Inuzuka T, Baba H.
L-MPZ, a novel isoform of myelin P0, is produced by stop codon readthrough. J Biol Chem 2012;287:17765–76.
22. Loughran G, Chou MY, Ivanov IP, Jungreis I, Kellis M, Kiran AM, et al.
Evidence of efﬁcient stop codon readthrough in four mammalian genes.
Nucleic Acids Res 2014;42:8928–38.
23. Schueren F, Lingner T, George R, Hofhuis J, Dickel C, Gartner J, et al.
Peroxisomal lactate dehydrogenase is generated by translational readthrough in mammals. Elife 2014;3:e03640.
24. Dunn JG, Foo CK, Belletier NG, Gavis ER, Weissman JS. Ribosome proﬁling
reveals pervasive and regulated stop codon readthrough in Drosophila
melanogaster. Elife 2013;2:e01179.
25. Guydosh NR, Green R. Dom34 rescues ribosomes in 30 untranslated
regions. Cell 2014;156:950–62.
26. Beznoskova P, Cuchalova L, Wagner S, Shoemaker CJ, Gunisova S, von der
Haar T, et al. Translation initiation factors eIF3 and HCR1 control translation termination and stop codon read-through in yeast cells. PLoS Genet
2013;9:e1003962.
27. Pujade-Lauraine E, Hilpert F, Weber B, Reuss A, Poveda A, Kristensen G,
et al. Bevacizumab combined with chemotherapy for platinum-resistant
recurrent ovarian cancer: the AURELIA open-label randomized phase III
trial. J Clin Oncol 2014;32:1302–8.
28. Bergers G, Hanahan D. Modes of resistance to anti-angiogenic therapy. Nat
Rev Cancer 2008;8:592–603.
29. Hurwitz H, Fehrenbacher L, Novotny W, Cartwright T, Hainsworth J, Heim
W, et al. Bevacizumab plus irinotecan, ﬂuorouracil, and leucovorin for
metastatic colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med 2004;350:2335–42.
30. Hayes DF. Bevacizumab treatment for solid tumors: boon or bust? JAMA
2011;305:506–8.
31. Carmeliet P, Jain RK. Principles and mechanisms of vessel normalization
for cancer and other angiogenic diseases. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2011;10:
417–27.
32. Jain RK, Duda DG, Willett CG, Sahani DV, Zhu AX, Loefﬂer JS, et al.
Biomarkers of response and resistance to antiangiogenic therapy. Nat Rev
Clin Oncol 2009;6:327–38.
33. Broll R, Erdmann H, Duchrow M, Oevermann E, Schwandner O, Markert
U, et al. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)–a valuable serum
tumour marker in patients with colorectal cancer? Eur J Surg Oncol 2001;
27:37–42.

Cancer Res; 75(14) July 15, 2015

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

2769

Published OnlineFirst June 29, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3805

Antiangiogenic VEGF-Ax: A New Participant in Tumor
Angiogenesis
Sandeepa M. Eswarappa and Paul L. Fox
Cancer Res 2015;75:2765-2769. Published OnlineFirst June 29, 2015.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3805

This article cites 33 articles, 12 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/75/14/2765.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 1 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/75/14/2765.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

