Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 46

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

Temozolomide toxicity operates in a xCT/SLC7a11 dependent
manner and is fostered by ferroptosis
Tina Sehm1, Manfred Rauh2, Kurt Wiendieck3, Michael Buchfelder1, IIker Y.
Eyüpoglu1,*, Nicolai E. Savaskan1,4,*
1

Translational Cell Biology & Neurooncology Lab, Department of Neurosurgery, Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, Medical School
of The Friedrich Alexander University of Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU), Erlangen, Germany

2

Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, Medical School of The Friedrich Alexander
University of Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU), Erlangen, Germany

3

Department of Spinal Colum Therapies, Kliniken Dr. Erler, Nürnberg, Germany

4

BiMECON Ent. Berlin, Germany

*

Both authors have contributed as senior author to this work

Correspondence to: Nicolai E. Savaskan, email: savaskan@gmx.net, nic.savaskan@gmail.com
Keywords: brain tumor, cell death, ferroptosis, glioma niche, apoptosis
Received: March 08, 2016     Accepted: August 24, 2016     Published: September 06, 2016

ABSTRACT
The glutamate exchanger xCT (SLC7a11) is causally linked with the malignancy
grade of brain tumors and represents a key player in glutamate, cystine and
glutathione metabolism. Although blocking xCT is not cytotoxic for brain tumors, xCT
inhibition disrupts the neurodegenerative and microenvironment-toxifying activity of
gliomas. Here, we report on the use of various xCT inhibitors as single modal drugs
and in combination with the autophagy-inducing standard chemotherapeutic agent
temozolomide (Temodal/Temcad®, TMZ). xCT overexpressing cells (xCTOE) are more
resistant to the FDA and EMA approved drug sulfasalazine (Azulfidine/Salazopyrin/
Sulazine®, SAS) and RNAi-mediated xCT knock down (xCTKD) in gliomas increases
the susceptibility towards SAS in rodent gliomas. In human gliomas, challenged
xCT expression had no impact on SAS-induced cytotoxicity. Noteworthy, other xCT
inhibitors such as erastin and sorafenib showed enhanced efficacy on xCTKD gliomas.
In contrast, cytotoxic action of TMZ operates independently from xCT expression
levels on rodent gliomas. Human glioma cells with silenced xCT expression display
higher vulnerability towards TMZ alone as well as towards combined TMZ and SAS.
Hence, we tested the partial xCT blockers and ferroptosis inducing agents erastin
and sorafenib (Nexavar®, FDA and EMA-approved drug for lung cancer). Noteworthy,
xCTOE gliomas withstand erastin and sorafenib-induced cell death in a concentrationdependent manner, whereas siRNA-mediated xCT knock down increased susceptibility
towards erastin and sorafenib. TMZ efficacy can be potentiated when combined with
erastin, however not by sorafenib. Moreover, gliomas with high xCT expression are
more vulnerable towards combinatorial treatment with erastin-temozolomide. These
results disclose that ferroptosis inducers are valid compounds for potentiating the
frontline therapeutic agent temozolomide in a multitoxic approach.

cellular proliferation, diffuse infiltration, resistance to
apoptosis, angiogenesis and rampant genomic instability
[1]. The current standard of care for newly diagnosed
GBM in patients includes surgery as a first-line therapy,
followed by radiotherapy and adjuvant temozolomide
(TMZ) treatment. This regiment confers still a median
survival time of only 14.6 months compared with 12.2

INTRODUCTION
Malignant gliomas are the most lethal primary
brain tumor in children and adults. The median survival
time from diagnosis on is approximately 14 months
[1, 2]. From those, glioblastomas (GBM; WHO grade
IV) are hallmarked by features such as uncontrolled
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74630

Oncotarget

months for patients receiving radiotherapy alone [1].
Although temozolomide (TMZ, brand names Temodal®
or Temcad®) offers some hope to GBM patients with
increasing progression free and overall survival of a
few months, a best 5-year survival rate of only 9.8% is
currently achieved.
TMZ, a readily 194 Da lipophilic molecule
is an orally available DNA alkylating agent of the
imidazotetrazine class. Converted to methyltriazen-1-yl
imidazole-4-carboxamide (MTIC), TMZ acts cytotoxic
via mispair and futile mismatch repair loop leading
to apoptotic and autophagic cell death [3]. Moreover,
cells respond towards TMZ treatment with increased
xCT expression as a sign of endoplasmatic cell stress
[4]. Evasion of cell death and development of redox
stability is one of the hallmarks of cancers and promotes
tumorigenesis as well as chemo-resistance. Apoptosis,
the programmed form of cell death can be engaged via
the intrinsic (mitochondrial) or extrinsic (death receptor)
pathway. Hence, recent studies indicated a distinct nonapoptotic cell death mechanism which can be rescued by
iron chelation or blockage of iron uptake [5]. This cell
death mechanism is termed ferroptosis and has unique
morphological, biochemical and functional features [6].
Recently, it has been shown that the glutamate-cystine
exchanger xCT (SLC7a11) appears to be essential in
the process of ferroptosis in some cell types and novel
small molecules such as erastin and sorafenib have been
identified as xCT inhibitors [5, 7]. Hence, since xCT plays
a relevant role in tumor-microenvironment interactions,
i.e. inducing of peritumoral neuronal cell death and
perifocal edema [8, 9], there is a quest for compounds
inhibiting this transporter as novel anti-cancer agents
[7]. Blocking xCT transporter could therefore lead to
both, ferroptosis and reduction of the clinically dreaded
perifocal edema. However, it is still unclear whether the
xCT signaling pathway interacts with TMZ treatment,
independent from its DNA alkylating potency.
Here, we tested the role of xCT in temozolomideinduced cell death. We found that TMZ efficacy depends
on the xCT expression in human gliomas. Further,
the gliomatoxic impact of TMZ can be potentiated by
ferroptosis inducing agents such as erastin and sorafenib.

significantly less glutamate compared to F98 xCTOE cells
(Figure 1B). Further, we examined the effects of the
reported xCT inhibitors SAS and S-4-CPG, although not
exclusively specific, on xCT-modulated brain-derived
cancer cells. Human (U251) and rat glioma cells (F98)
overexpressing xCT (xCTOE) or RNAi mediated xCT
silenced gliomas (xCTKD) were examined for cell death
and cell viability after SAS treatment. Following high
concentration of SAS we monitored increased cell death
and reduced cell viability in F98 xCTKD cells (Figure 1C).
At 200 μM SAS decreased cell viability already to
over 40%. The IC90 was reached at 400 μM SAS. F98
xCTOE cells appeared to be more resistant towards SAS
compared to xCTKD, and survival of xCTOE cells was only
reduced at 400 μM SAS in comparison to the untreated
controls (Figure 1C). We investigated also cell death
response and viability of the human glioma cells (U251)
following SAS treatment. Solely high concentration of
SAS led to a significant reduction of the cell viability
about 40%. Remarkable is that there was no differences
in cell viability and cell death between xCTKD and xCTOE.
Further we analysed cell death and cell viability after
application of the xCT inhibitor S-4-CPG (Figure 1D). A
growth inhibitory effect of S-4-CPG on F98 cells were
observed first at 50 μM. Noteworthy, F98 xCTOE cells
exhibited higher resistance towards S-4-CPG compared to
xCTKD cells (20% cell viability rate vs. 45%) (Figure 1D).
Furthermore we examined the effects of S-4-CPG on U251
cells. Noteworthy, there was no significant cell viability
reduction at high S-4-CPG concentrations independently
of the xCT expression levels (between xCTKD and xCTOE).
Hence, the histological Wright stain displayed the
morphological features of apoptotic cells and confirmed
the cell death and cell viability measurements (Figure 2A).
Furthermore, we applied SAS to xCTOE and xCTKD cells
again and conducted a cell cycle analysis with 7-AAD
(Figure 2B; Supplementary Figure S1A). 400 μM SAS
significantly increased apoptotic cell death in comparison
to untreated controls. Other cell cycle parameters were not
significantly altered following SAS treatment (Figure 2B).

RESULTS

We continued to analyse the influence of the
standard chemotherapeutic agent TMZ on xCT-modulated
glioma cells. Cell death on glioma cells as well as cell
viability was monitored after TMZ treatment (Figure 3A).
Concentrations of 10 μM TMZ were already toxic on both
xCTOE and xCTKD cells in rat and human tested glioma
cell lines. The toxic effects on glioma cells increased with
elevated concentrations of TMZ up to 100μM. The IC50
was reached at 150 μM to 200 μM TMZ. Noteworthy,
for F98 cells TMZ was impacting cell viability of xCTOE
and xCTKD cells in the same manner (Figure 3A). U251
xCTKD were more susceptible to 100 μM TMZ than

The impact of temozolomide is dependent on
xCT in human gliomas

xCT overexpressing gliomas are resistant to
sulfasalazine (SAS)
First, we investigated the expression levels of
xCT in xCT-modulated glioma cells. Thus, F98 RNAi
mediated xCT silenced gliomas (xCTKD) express
less xCT in comparison to xCT overexpressing cells
(xCTOE) (Figure 1A). To investigate the consequences of
deranged xCT expression we measured the extracellular
glutamate release. We found that F98 xCTKD cells secrete
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74631

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Sulfasalazine acts on human gliomas xCT-dependent. A. Examination of the xCT levels in F98 cells. F98 xCTKD cells

express lower xCT transcripts than F98 xCTOE cells. Differences were considered statistically significant with values mean ± SEM (n ≥ 8 per
group; unpaired two-sided t-test, p < 0.05). B. Extracellular glutamate release in F98 modulated cells were measured and revealed that F98
xCTKD cells secrete reduced glutamate levels than F98 xCTOE cells. Differences were considered statistically significant with values mean
± SEM (n ≥ 3 per group; unpaired two-sided t-test, p < 0.05). C. Cell death of glioma cells with overexpressing xCT (xCTOE) and RNAi
mediated silenced xCT (xCTKD) were examined after SAS treatment with propidium iodide (PI). The investigated species were rat (F98)
and human (U251) glioma cells. Dead cells take up the PI dye and appear as white stained nuclei (arrows). Cell viability was significantly
reduced after increasing SAS applications in F98 cells. xCTOE cells display higher resistance to SAS treatment compared to xCTKD cells.
Human U251 cells with xCT overexpression or xCT silencing showed no differences in cell viability and cell death following SAS treatment.
Scale bar represents 100 μm. Differences were considered statistically significant with values mean ± SEM (n ≥ 4 per group; two-way
anova, p < 0.05). D. Analysis of cell death on rat and human glioma xCTOE and xCTKD following S-4-CPG treatment. Cell death of glioma
cells with overexpressing xCT (xCTOE) and RNAi mediated silenced xCT (xCTKD) were examined after S-4-CPG treatment with propidium
iodide (PI). Dead cells appear as white dots (arrows). Cell viability was significantly reduced after increasing SAS applications in F98 cells.
xCTOE cells display higher resistance to S-4-CPG treatment compared to xCTKD cells. Human U251 cells with xCT overexpression or xCT
silencing showed no differences in cell viability and cell death following SAS treatment. Scale bar represents 100 μm. Differences were
considered statistically significant with values mean ± SEM (n ≥ 4 per group; two-way anova, p < 0.05).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74632

Oncotarget

xCTOE cells. We further investigated the cell cycle of F98
xCTOE and xCTKD cells after TMZ treatment (Figure 3B;
Supplementary Figure S1B). TMZ increased apoptotic cell
death in a concentration-dependent manner. We observed
significant reduction of the G1 phase and prolonged G2phases following TMZ, whereas the S-phases of xCTOE
and xCTKD cells did not change significantly after TMZ
treatment.
To test whether TMZ is generally toxic to nontransformed differentiated brain cells, we investigated the
toxicity profile of various TMZ concentrations on primary
astrocytes (Figure 3C). Within a wide range of various
TMZ levels primary astrocytes displayed only minor toxic

effects (Figure 3C). Solely highest TMZ concentrations
reduced cell growth of primary astrocytes to an extent of
20% compared to controls (Figure 3C).

SAS potentiates chemo-sensitivity of
temozolomide in xCT knockdown gliomas
Hence, we studied the multimodal treatment with
the xCT inhibitor SAS and the standard therapeutic agent
TMZ in rat (F98) and human (U251) glioma cell lines.
Combined SAS and TMZ treatment increased cell death
in F98 and U251 xCTKD cells and reduced cell survival
(Figure 4A, 4B, 4C). F98 xCTKD cells showed higher

Figure 2: The impact of Sulfasalazine on xCT expressing and xCT silenced gliomas. A. Wright staining reveals apoptotic
cell death in F98 xCTOE and xCTKD cells treated with SAS. The staining of dead cells (black arrows) confirms cell death data found with PI
staining and cell viability measurements. Scale bar represents 100 μm. B. F98 xCTOE and xCTKD glioma cells were treated with SAS and
the cell cycle was investigated. Apoptosis (Sub-G1; apoptotic bodies) increased in a concentration dependent manner. Values are given as
mean ± SD (n ≥ 3 per group; unpaired two-sided t-test, p < 0.05).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74633

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Temozolomide acts on human glioma cells in a xCT-dependent manner. A. F98 and U251 xCTOE and xCTKD

glioma cells were treated with various concentrations of temozolomide (TMZ) followed by cell death monitoring with propidium iodide
(PI, red arrows). Scale bar represents 100 μm. Differences were considered statistically significant with values mean ± SEM (n ≥ 4 per
group; two-way anova, p < 0.05). B. A cell cycle analysis was performed on xCTOE and xCTKD cells treated with TMZ. Apoptosis increased
in a concentration dependent manner. Values are given as mean ± SD (n ≥ 3 per group; unpaired two-sided t-test, p < 0.05). C. Various
concentrations of TMZ were applied to primary rodent astrocytes and cell survival was determined. Values are given as mean ± SEM (n ≥
4 per group; unpaired two-sided t-test, p < 0.05).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74634

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Temozolomide treatment in combination with sulfasalazine. A. Cell death of RNAi mediated xCT knock down cells
(xCTKD) and overexpressing xCT (xCTOE) cells was analyzed with propidium iodide (PI) after sulfasalazine (SAS) and temozolomide
(TMZ) treatment. Scale bar represents 100 μm. B. Cell viability determined by MTT assay monitored in F98 cells. In F98 xCTKD cells
10 μM TMZ plus 200 μM SAS showed an additive cell death effect. Differences were considered statistically significant with values as
mean ± SEM (n ≥ 4 per group; one-way anova, p < 0.05). PI positive cell counting revealed no additive cell death effect. Differences
were considered statistically significant with values given as mean ± SEM (n ≥ 15 per group; n = 15; unpaired two-sided t-test, p < 0.05).
C. In U251 xCTKD cells 100 μM TMZ plus 400 μM SAS showed potentiated cell death effects. Differences were considered statistically
significant with values given as mean ± SEM (n ≥ 4 per group; one-way anova, p < 0.05).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74635

Oncotarget

vulnerability compared to F98 xCTOE cells when treated
solely with SAS (Figure 4B). U251 xCTKD and xCTOE
cells responded to the same extent to SAS treatment
(Figure 4C).
Following single TMZ treatment both F98 xCTOE
and F98 xCTKD cells displayed similar cell viability rates
without any differences in comparison to U251, here
changes were visible (Figure 4B, 4C). The multimodal
treatment approach with 10 μM TMZ and 200 μM SAS
showed a significant additive effect in terms of cell death
by F98 xCTKD (Figure 4B). The combination of SAS and
TMZ on F98 xCTKD appeared more toxic than single SAS
or TMZ application. The staining for PI showed necrotic
cells. In particular multimodal treatment schemes were not
more effective in killing rat glioma cells in comparison to
single compound applications. In contrast, the multimodal
treatment approach displayed significantly additive effect
at 100 μM TMZ with 400 μM SAS in the xCTKD in case of
human glioma cells.
Next, we performed cell cycle analysis after TMZ
and SAS treatment regimens (Figure 5C, Supplementary
Figure S1C). Noteworthy, there were no alterations in
cell cycle parameters after single TMZ and SAS as well
as after combined SAS and TMZ treatment approaches
(Figure 5C). However, in xCTKD cells we found increased
apoptosis after 200 μM SAS and 100 μM TMZ application
(Figure 5C).

application we monitored cell death and cell viability of
human and rodent xCTKD and xCTOE gliomas (Figure 6A).
Erastin was already toxic to F98 cells at a concentration
of 500 nM. U251 revealed a tenfold higher resistance for
erastin.
Interestingly, xCTOE cells were more resistant
towards erastin compared to xCTKD cells (cell viability
rates of 35% versus 70%) (Figure 6A). We next tested
the influence of challenged xCT levels on sorafenib
impact (Figure 6B). Sorafenib reduced significantly cell
proliferation of F98 glioma cells already at 2.5 μM. U251
appeared more resistant against sorafenib, revealing first
effects at 5 μM sorafenib.
Noteworthy, xCTOE cells exhibited resistance
towards sorafenib compared to xCTKD cells (cell
viability rates of 30% versus 40%) (Figure 6B). Thus,
xCTKD cells displayed higher susceptibility for erastin
and sorafenib-induced cell death in comparison to xCTOE
gliomas.

Primary astrocytes and neurons are less
vulnerable to xCT inhibitors
In order to investigate whether ferroptosis
inducers and xCT inhibitors are generally toxic to nontransformed differentiated brain cells, we monitored the
toxicity of these xCT inhibitors on primary astrocytes
and neurons (Figure 7). In contrast to glioma cells, SAS
application did not alter cell survival of astrocytes at
the investigated concentrations (Figure 7A). In contrast,
S-4-CPG displayed slightly toxic effects on astrocytes,
with significant decrease in cell survival to 85% at a
concentration of 100 μM (Figure 7B). Additionally,
we investigated cell viability of astrocytes after erastin
application (Figure 7C). Erastin-treated astrocytes showed

Efficacy of erastin and sorafenib is dependent on
xCT in gliomas
Since the combination of SAS together with TMZ
was unexpectedly less effective on glioma cells we
tested two novel small molecule compounds, reported
also as xCT inhibitors, in these assays. Following erastin

Figure 5: Cell cycle analysis for temozolomide treatment in combination with Sulfasalazine. A. Cell cycle analysis of F98
and U251 cells treated with ± temozolomide (TMZ), ± sulfasalazine (SAS) and combinations of TMZ and SAS. Values are given as mean
± SD (n ≥ 3 per group; unpaired two-sided t-test, p < 0.05).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74636

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Erastin and sorafenib induced cell death depends on xCT levels. A. Cell death of rodent (F98) and human (U251)

xCTOE and xCTKD cells were examined after adding erastin. Propidium iodide (PI) was facilitated for dead cell detection (red arrows). B.
Sorafenib application on xCT overexpressing (xCTOE) cells and RNAi mediated xCT knock down cells (xCTKD) for rat and human glioma
cells. Cell viability was measured for erastin and sorafenib on F98 and U251 cells. xCTKD cells are more sensitive towards erastin and
sorafenib in comparison to xCTOE cells. F98 cells are more susceptible for erastin and sorafenib in comparison to human U251 cells. Scale
bar represents 100 μm. Differences were considered statistically significant with values mean ± SEM (n ≥ 4 per group; two-way anova,
p < 0.05).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74637

Oncotarget

a significant cell growth reduction at a concentration of
5 μM and cell death rate increased to 20% (Figure 7C).
Finally we applied the ferroptosis-inducer sorafenib on
primary astrocytes (Figure 7D). Sorafenib decreased cell
viability already to 20% at a concentration of 2.5 μM
(Figure 7D). Moreover, we investigated xCT inhibitors

also on primary neurons. Noteworthy, SAS, S-4-CPG,
erastin and sorafenib did not alter neuronal cell survival
at the investigated concentrations (Figure 7E). Thus,
astrocytes and neurons are less vulnerable to xCT
inhibitors and ferroptosis inducers compared to glioma
cells.

Figure 7: Primary astrocytes and neurons withstand toxic effects of erastin and sorafenib. A. Primary rat astrocytes

were treated with various concentrations of SAS. Cell viability was measured by propidium iodide (PI) staining. SAS has no effect on
astrocytes. B. The impact of S-4-CPG on astrocytes. Cell viability shows minor but significant decrease. C. Erastin application on primary
rat astrocytes displays a slightly decline in cell viability. This effect is significant at 5 μM erastin. D. Cell viability monitoring of sorafenib
treated primary astrocytes. Scale bar represents 100 μm. Differences were considered statistically significant with values mean ± SEM (n
≥ 4 per group; unpaired two-sided t-test, p < 0.05). E. Primary neurons were treated with the xCT inhibitors, SAS, S-4-CPG, erastin and
sorafenib. The mixed neurons-astrocytes culture was stained for beta-III-tubulin (revealing neurons) and GFAP (marker for astrocytes).
There were no toxic effects detectable in neurons and astrocytes.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74638

Oncotarget

Erastin induces ferroptotic cell death on xCTmodulated cells

Temozolomide does not induce ferroptosis
Futher, we investigated ferroptotic cell death in
rodent glioma cells following TMZ treatment. For this,
we performed ferroptosis rescue experiments with DFO
and Fer-1. Noteworthy, neither DFO nor Fer-1 application
could rescue TMZ-induced cell death (Figure 8C).

To examine whether the most effective xCT inhibitor
induces ferroptosis [5] on gliomas we treated rodent glioma
cells with 10 μM erastin. Noteworthy, xCTKD cells were
highly susceptible to erastin with cell death rates of 95%.
Conversely, xCTOE cells displayed resistance towards
erastin after 24 h treatment (Figure 8A, 8B). These data
were further confirmed by ferroptosis rescue experiments
(Figure 8B). Deferoxamine (DFO) and ferrostatin-1 (Fer-1)
are both known iron chelator and inhibitors of ferroptosis
with the potential to prevent erastin-induced accumulation
of cytosolic and lipid ROS. Here, we could demonstrate
that DFO and Fer-1 clearly rescued erastin-induced cell
death in xCTOE and xCTKD glioma cells. Moreover, xCTKD
were more sensitive to ferroptosis compared to xCTOE
gliomas (Figure 8B).

Multitoxicity with erastin and sorafenib increase
efficacy of temozolomide
Next, we investigated the multitoxic approach
combining ferroptosis-inducers such as erastin and
sorafenib with the alkylating agent TMZ. Rodent and
human xCT overexpressing and silenced glioma cells
were treated with these compounds and cell death was
subsequently monitored (Figure 9, 10). TMZ treatment
revealed no differences in cell viability of rodent xCTKD

Figure 8: Erastin induces ferroptosis in glioma cells. A. Cell death analysis of erastin treated glioma cells. 10 μM erastin with and

without deferoxamine (DFO) or ferrostatin-1 (Ferr-1) was added to xCTOE and xCTKD cells. Propidium iodide (PI) staining revealed dead
cells (arrows). Scale bar represents 100 μm. B. Quantification of cell viability revealed that xCTKD cells are more sensitive to erastin in
comparison to xCTOE cells. Erastin induces ferroptotic cell death. Values are shown as mean ± SEM (n ≥ 4 per group; unpaired two-sided
t-test, p < 0.05). C. Ferroptosis rescue assay with 1.5 mM temozolomide, ± deferoxamine (DFO) or ± ferrostatin-1 (Ferr-1) was applied to
F98 cells. Noteworthy, temozolomide alone does not induce ferroptotic cell death.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74639

Oncotarget

Figure 9: Multicytotoxic approach with temozolomide combined with erastin. A. Cell death analysis of erastin and

temozolomide multitoxic combination treatment. xCTKD and xCTOE cells originated from F98 and U251 cells were treated with erastin alone
or in combination with TMZ. Cell death was determined with propidium iodide (PI). Scale bar represents 100 μm. B. Cell viability assay
of erastin and temozolomide multitoxic combination treatment. Cell growth was monitored in rodent xCTOE and xCTKD cells treated with
500 nM erastin and TMZ. The combination of TMZ and erastin was effective on xCTOE cells. Additive effects are revealed in comparison to
the effect of the single substances. Values are given as mean ± SEM (n ≥ 4 per group; one-way anova, p < 0.05). Note that quantification of
PI positive cells does not resemble the findings of the cell viability assays. Differences were considered statistically significant with values
given as mean ± SEM (n ≥ 15 per group; n = 15; unpaired two-sided t-test, p < 0.05). C. Cell viability assay of erastin and temozolomide
treated human gliomas. Cell growth was monitored in human xCTOE and xCTKD cells treated with 500 nM erastin and TMZ. The combination
of TMZ and erastin was effective on xCTOE cells. Multitoxic combination approach revealed additive effects in comparison to the effect of
single substances. U251 xCTOE cells and xCTKD cells treated with combination of 100 μM TMZ/5 μM erastin showed an additive cell death
effect. Differences were considered statistically significant with values mean ± SEM (n ≥ 4 per group; one-way anova, p < 0.05.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74640

Oncotarget

Figure 10: Multicytotoxic approach with Temozolomide in combination with Sorafenib. A. Cell death of xCTKD and F98

xCTOE cells were determined after the treatment with sorafenib and TMZ and their combination. Propidium iodide (PI) is taken up by the
dead cells thereby making dead cells visible. Scale bar represents 100 μm. B. Cell viability was detected in xCTKD and xCTOE cells treated
with ±erastin and ±TMZ. Multitoxic approach with 10 μM TMZ/2.5 μM sorafenib showed additive cell death effects in xCTOE cells. Values
are given as mean ± SEM (n ≥ 4 per group; one-way anova, p < 0.05). Quantification of PI positive cells reveals no additive cell death
effects. Differences were considered statistically significant with values shown as mean ± SEM (n ≥ 15 per group; n = 6 unpaired two-sided
t-test, p < 0.05). C. Cell viability was detected in human xCTKD and xCTOE cells treated with ± sorafenib and ± TMZ. Multitoxic approach
with 10 μM TMZ/7.5 μM sorafenib showed no additive cell death effects. Differences were considered statistically significant with values
given as mean ± SEM (n ≥ 4 per group; one-way anova, p < 0.05).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74641

Oncotarget

and xCTOE cells. In the case of xCTKD, U251 glioma cells
were more sensitive against 100 μM TMZ compared to
xCTOE gliomas.
Single application of erastin and sorafenib alone
revealed that glioma xCTKD cells are more susceptible
than xCTOE cells. The multitoxic combinatory treatment
with erastin and temozolomide (Figure 9) or sorafenib
and temozolomide (Figure 10) exhibited a multiplicative
cell death effect. Moreover, for F98 cells 500 nM erastin
in combination 10 μM TMZ or 100 μM TMZ showed an
accumulating toxic effect on xCTOE cells (Figure 9A, 9B).
Also, in the case of human glioma xCTKD cells, this
combination was effective at 5 μM erastin in combination
with 10 μM TMZ. Furthermore, erastin in combination
with 100 μM TMZ displayed additive toxic effects on
U251 xCTKD as well as xCTOE cells (Figure 9C). The
combination of sorafenib with TMZ revealed higher
toxicity than single application of sorafenib or TMZ alone
in the case of F98 xCTOE for 10μM TMZ (Figure 10).
Altogether, the multitoxic combinatory treatment approach
with temozolomide and ferroptosis inducers revealed a
multiplicative cytotoxic anti-cancer efficacy.

are a potentially attractive drug targets due to their
pharmacological properties and reachability. In particular
represents xCT a prime target for anti-cancer drugs since
this transporter is crucial for glutathione homeostasis and
cell survival [10–12].
In this study, we demonstrate that TMZ is efficient
in cell death induction and that the efficacy of TMZ
depends on xCT expression levels in different glioma
species. The efficacy of TMZ can be potentiated after
combination with the new small molecule compounds
erastin and sorafenib. We found that xCT overexpressing
tumors are in particular sensitive to this multitoxic,
combinatory twofold treatment strategy. The rationale
for this lays in previous reports indicating that erastin
and sorafenib are potent pharmacological agents
inhibiting in part the glutamate antiporter xCT [7].
In fact, sorafenib (Nexavar®) is currently in use
under clinical settings for the treatment of renal cell
carcinoma, unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma and
thyroid cancer [13, 14]. Erastin is a new small molecule
compound and has been found to block xCT or indirectly
inhibits signaling targets associated with xCT and other
system L related transporters [7]. Both compounds are
substantially more potent inhibitors than the FDAapproved drug sulfasalazine (SAS) and can in addition
induce ferroptosis (Figure 11). However, both erastin
and sorafenib are not specific for xCT and independent
reports brought evidences that both compounds can also

DISCUSSION
Here we investigated the role of the glutamatecystine transporter xCT in TMZ-induced cell death.
Amino acid transporters in general and xCT in particular

Figure 11: Summary of the multitox-approach with temozolomide and ferroptosis signaling. Scheme of the experimental
approach using various xCT inhibitors and TMZ and their contribution in cell death signaling. Note that erastin and sorafenib are no bona
fide xCT inhibitors and have also been reported as receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors. SAS has been clinically used for its NFkB inhibitory
function for long-time. S-4-CPG is an experimental drug with certain cross affinity to metabotrophic glutamate receptors.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74642

Oncotarget

efficiently inhibit multiple receptor tyrosine kinases, Ras,
VEGF signaling as well as Raf kinase [7]. In contrast,
SAS is in clinical use primary for its NFkB inhibiting
activity, although its xCT blocking actions have been
evidenced in in vitro and in vivo experiments [8, 34].
For applying this multitox-approach the question remains
which pharmacological function will be the main effect
in humans.
Here, we hypothesized that xCT inhibition, although
not fully lethal for glioma cells, can weaken the cellular
resistance mechanisms against TMZ (Figure 11). The
rationale for this assumption is based on the essential
function of xCT in glutathione homeostasis.
xCT is central to the cellular cystine import in
exchange to glutamate export which becomes reduced to
cysteine and is mainly required for glutathione production
[15]. Thus xCT is at the center stage for glutathione
dependent redox regulation and glutamate homeostasis.
Second, xCT is the main glutamate exchanger in brain
cancer cells thereby creating a glutamate-rich neurotoxic
microenvironment [16]. Interestingly, other glutamate
transporters such as EAAT1 and EAAT2 are silenced
in brain cancer and high abundant system Xc- activity
result in a net balance shift towards glutamate release.
Increased glutamate levels are thought to be central in
advantages of glioma growth and progression. Inhibition
of glutamate release via xCT inhibition profoundly
decelerates the glioma phenotype in vivo [8, 17] and in
addition mitigates tumor-induced brain swelling [8] and
tumor-induced seizures [18]. It has been demonstrated
in various cancer types including primary brain tumors
(malignant gliomas) that xCT is a valid anti-cancer
target, especially because xCT expression correlates
with malignancy. First, the antiporter system xCT is
abundantly expressed in glioblastoma specimens and
cell lines [8, 17, 19, 20]. Second, inhibition of xCT can
induce ferroptotic cell death in some cancer cells such
as lymphoma cells, various epithelial carcinomas, and
melanomas [21–23].
On the other side TMZ-based chemotherapy is
currently standard drug in brain tumor therapy and is
conceptually used as a cytotoxic agent in an uni- or
multimodal therapy scheme [24]. Further, TMZ provides
a survival benefit in a subset of patients with high-grade
gliomas and provides the primarily palliative treatment
for the vast majority of patients. However, the increase
in median survival for treatment of newly diagnosed
glioblastomas treated with TMZ and radiotherapy is only
2.5 months compared with radiotherapy alone [25, 26]. In
addition, approximately one of five patients treated with
TMZ develops clinically significant toxicity or acquired
resistance, which can leave further treatment unsafe. This
situation indicates that TMZ is only a modestly effective
chemotherapy calling for additional strategies.
In line with this situation it would be the
multicytotoxic strategy using ferroptosis inducers or xCT
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

inhibitors for supporting already established standard
chemotherapeutic agents. We tested this in conditions
of temozolomide application and found some additive
cytotoxic effects. An important finding is that the level
of xCT in human glioma cells dictates the sensitivity
and efficacy of TMZ. This indicates that TMZ actions
are directly or indirectly dependent of the glutathione
homeostasis and cystine/cysteine redox status (Figure 11).
Also, the TMZ-driven mechanisms of cell death are
independent of ferroptosis and recent studies indicate
that TMZ induces an autophagy mechanism [27, 28].
A reason for the species differences for the multitoxapproach may lay in differences in xCT levels. Indeed,
human glioma cells show higher xCT expression levels
compared to rodent gliomas (Supplementary Figure S2).
This could make human gliomas more vulnerable towards
xCT blocking strategies, since human gliomas may be
more dependent on the xCT function. However, other
pharmacological features might influence the susceptibility
for the multitox-approach as well and it is conceivable that
side-effects due to multiple targets could also account for
these species-specific results.
The multitox-approach showed multiplicative
effects on human gliomas. In this study we did not
investigate the impact of this multitox strategy on the
tumor microenvironment. This is an important parameter
since in particular brain tumors are clinically dreaded
for their microenvironmental disturbances. Thus, future
studies will provide evidence whether xCT inhibition
is a valid strategy in supporting clinically established
chemotherapeutic agents.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Chemicals
Temozolomide (TMZ) and Sulfasalazine (SAS)
were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Taufkirchen,
Germany). Erastin was purchased from Hycultec
GmbH (Beutelsbach, Germany). Sorafenib was
purchased from LC Laboratories (Woburn, USA). S-4Carboxyphenylglycine was purchased from ACRIS
Antibodies (Herford, Germany). Temozolomid was
solved under sterile conditions in dimethylsulphoxide
(DMSO) to concentration of 300 mM. Sulfasalazine
was dissolved in 400 mM ammonium hydroxide under
sterile conditions to concentration of 200 mM. Erastin
and Sorafenib were dissolved in DMSO under sterile
conditions to concentration of 100 mM. S-4-CPG was
solved under sterile conditions in 1 M sodium hydroxide
to concentration of 100 mM. Deferoxamine (DFO) and
Ferrostatin-1 (Ferr-1) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich
(Taufkirchen, Germany). Deferoxamine was dissolved in
water under sterile conditions to a concentration of 50
mM. Ferrostatin-1 was prepared in 50% DMSO/water
under sterile conditions to a concentration of 50 mM.
74643

Oncotarget

Cell culture, transfection

done after 4 days. On the fourth day after treatment cells
were incubated with MTT solution (Roth, Karlsruhe,
Germany) (5 mg/ml) for 4 h at 37°C, 5% CO2. For
the ferroptosis measurement 20.000cells/96well were
seeded, drug treatment occurred 1 h after seeding and
the MTT solution was added after 24 h of incubation.
The lysis of the cells occurred with 100 μl isopropanol
+ 0.1 N HCl. The optical density of each well was
determined using the microplate reader Tecan Infinite
F50 (Crailsheim, Germany) set to 550 nm (wavelength
correction set to 690 nm) using Magellan software.
Plates were normally read within 1 h of adding after
lysis. Control was cells without drugs. The viability of
the cells was expressed as the percentage of control.
Assays were performed on at least three independent
experiments.

Glioma cell line F98 was obtained from ATCC/
LGC-2397 (Germany). Primary rat astrocytes were
prepared from up to one month old Wistar rats. All cells
were cultured under standard humidified conditions
(37°C, 5% CO2) with Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium
(DMEM; Biochrom, Berlin, Germany) supplemented
with 10% fetale bovine serum (Biochrom, Berlin,
Germany), 1% Penicillin/Streptomycin (Biochrom,
Berlin, Germany) and 1% Glutamax (Gibco/Invitrogen,
California, USA). Cells were passaged at approx. 80%
confluence. Cells were trypsinized after PBS wash step.
After centrifugation (900 rpm for 5 min) cells were plated
out in culture flask.
Cell lines were transfected according to Roti-Fect
manufacturer’s protocol (Carl Roth, Karlsruhe, Germany).
Briefly, cells were plated at 10.0000 cells/well in 6-well
plates and held under standard conditions. 18 h after
seeding transfection was performed. Transfected cells
were selected with geneticin sulfate 418 (Sigma, St.Louis,
USA) and fluorescence-activated cell sorting.

Cell death assay and apoptosis analysis
Cells were seeded 80000 cells/well in 6 well plates five hours prior to the drug treatment. Cell death
assay was performed on the fourth day. Cells were
incubated with propidium iodide staining (PI) purchased
from Molecular Probes (Invitrogen, Darmstadt,
Germany). Cells were stained 20 min [1 μg/ml].
Apoptosis analysis was conducted with Wright staining.
Therefore cells were seeded and treated the same way
as the cell death assay. Cells were washed with PBS and
then fixed and subjected to the Wright staining according
to the manufacturer’s instructions (Sigma-Aldrich,
Taufkirchen, Germany). After staining, cells were dried
and embedded. Afterwards morphological features of
apoptotic cells were observed under an Olympus x71
and images were taken with cell-F software (Olympus,
Tokyo, Japan). The same equipment was used for the cell
death assay.

Expression and knock down vectors cloning
Human and rodent expression constructs were
cloned as described previously in Savaskan et al., 2008
[8]). For sequence alignments and homology searches of
xCT we utilized the www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov database and
A Plasmid editor software (ApE; MW Davis, Utah, USA).
All orthologous sequences of xCT (human, mouse and rat)
are deposited at the NCBI database (Human xCT GenBank
accession no. AF252872; Rattus norvegicus xCT GenBank
accession no. NM001107673; Mus musculus xCT
GenBank Accession no. AB022345). For construct cloning
we cloned fragments by PCR and inserted the resulting
amplicons into the pEGFP (Takara, Heidelberg, Germany)
vector. According to the critera of Ui-Tei et al., 2004 [29]
three 19-mer short interfering RNAs were chosen for
RNA interference with rat xCT transcripts (GenBank acc.
NM001107673). Cloning of the synthetic oligonucleotids
into the pSuperGFP vector (pS-GFP; OligoEngine) was
performed by digesting the empty vector with EcoR1 and
Xho1 according to the manufacturer’s instruction. Cells
were transfected at low density (<20.000 cells/cm2) and
expression analysis was performed as Savaskan et al.,
2008 [8] described.

Primary neurons-astrocytes isolation
Hippocampal neuronal cultures were prepared
from one to four days old Wistar rats as described by
Ghoochani et al., 2015. [31] Briefly, newborn rats were
sacrificed by. Hippocampi were removed from the brain
and transferred into ice cold Hank's salt solution, and
the dentate gyrus was cut away. After digestion with
trypsin (5 mg/ml) cells were triturated mechanically and
plated in MEM medium, supplemented with 10% fetal
calf serum and 2% B27 Supplement (all from Invitrogen,
Taufkirchen). In brief, the culture medium was
removed and replaced with Neurobasal A (Invitrogen,
Taufkirchen). [32] Neurons were stained with beta-IIItubulin (1:500, Promega, Madison, Wisconsin, USA),
astrocytes with GFAP (1:500, Dako, Glostrup, Denmark)
and counterstained with Hoechst 33258 (1:10.000, Life
Technologies, Darmstadt, Germany). Images were taken
by an Axio Observer with the Zen Software (Zeiss,
Oberkochen, Germany).

Cell viability analysis and toxicity assays
The cell viability assay was performed using 3(4,5
dimethylthiazol)-2,5 diphenyltetrazolium (MTT) assay
according to Hatipoglu et al., 2015 [30] the cell viability
was measured. 3.000 cells/well were plated in 96 wellplates one hours prior to the drug treatment. In case of
the primary rat astrocytes culture, 4.000 cells/well were
plated in 96 well-plates and the drug treatment were
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74644

Oncotarget

Cell cycle analysis

xCT reverse primer: ACCCGCTGTTGTACGAGTC.
GAPDH forward primer: TGCACCACCAACTGCTTAGC;
GAPDH reverse primer: GGCATGGACTGTGGTCATGA.
Real time cycling parameters: Initial activation step (95°C,
15 min), cycling step (denaturation 94°C, 15 s; annealing
60°C, 30 s; and extension 72°C, 30 s X 45 cycles), followed
by a melting curve analysis to confirm specificity of the
PCR. All samples were assessed in relation to the levels
of GAPDH expression as an internal control. Q-PCR data
were assessed and reported according to the ΔΔCt method.
Data from at least five determinations (means ± SEM) are
expressed as relative expression level.

80.000 cells/well were seeded in 6-well – plates
and treated 1 h later with drugs. Cell cycle analysis was
performed on the fourth day with Flow Cytometer BD
FACSCanto II (BD Bioscience, Heidelberg, Germany)
according to the protocol described by Fan et al., 2014.
[33] Cells and media supernatant were collected. The
pellet were washed with PBS and afterwards resuspended
in PI-Hypotonic lysis buffer (PI-LB: 0,1% sodium citrate,
0,1% Triton X-100, 100 μg/ml RNAse). Cell cycle
analyses were performed within 2 h after adding 7-AAD
(7-aminoactinomycin D, Molecular Probes, Invitrogen,
Darmstadt, Germany). Analyses were carried out with
Flowing Software 2 (Turku Center for Biotechnology,
University Turku, Finland).

Statistical analysis
Analysis was performed using unpaired Student’s
t-test (MS Excel) as well as a two- and one-way anova
(Graph Pad). The level of significance was set at *p < 0.05.
Error bars represent ± SD as well as ± SEM.

Amino acid profiling of glioma conditioned
medium
Cells were seeded in 12 - well plates at a density
of 200.000 cells/well in DMEM supplemented with 10%
FBS, 1% P/S and 1% Glutamax. After incubation overnight
the cells were 80% confluent. The medium was changed
to DMEM without supplements and drugs were added.
After incubating for another 12 h, medium was collected
and measurement was performed by HPLC. Amino
acids were analysed by ion - exchange chromatography
and post - column ninhydrin derivatization technique
using a fully automated amino acids analyzer (Biochrom
30+, Laborservice Onken, Gründau, Germany). For the
amino acid analysis, 100 μL of sample was deproteinised
with 100 μL of 10% sulphosalicylic acids. 20 μL of this
supernatant was then loaded by the autosampler into a
cation - exchange resin - filled column. Three independent
experiments were performed.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Ali Ghoochani, Zheng Fan and Daishi
Chen for continuous laboratory and conceptual support.
We are grateful for the valuable help of Zheng Fan for
providing the stable transfected xCT expressing and knock
down cells. Many thanks to Carmen Christoph (Dept.
Psychiatry/Biochemistry, Universitätsklinikum Erlangen)
for providing of mixed primary neuronal cultures. This
study was funded by intramural LOM funds of the
Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg. T.S. performed the present
work in fulfillment of the requirements for obtaining the
degree Dr. rer. biol. hum. at the Friedrich- Alexander
University of Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU).

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

RNA isolation and qRT - PCR experiments

The authors declare no competing financial conflicts
of interest.

F98 xCT modulated cells as well as the F98 wildtype
and U251 wildtype cells were cultured in T75 flasks and
harvest at 80% confluency. Cells were washed with PBS
and Trizol (Peqlab, Erlangen, Germany) was added.
Cells were collected RNA was isolated according to the
manufacture’s protocol. RNA concentration was quantified
by NanoVue™ Plus Spectrophotometer (GE Healthcare,
UK). cDNA was synthesized with 1 μg of total RNA
using DyNAmo cDNA Synthesis Kit (Biozym, Hessisch
Oldendorf, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s
protocol. Real-time (DyNAmo ColorFlash SYBR Green
qPCR Kit) PCR was performed in a LightCycler® 480
(Roche Applied Sciences) according to the manufacturer's
protocol (Biozym, Hessisch Oldendorf, Germany). The
oligos used in this study are: mouse/rat xCT forward primer:
TGCTGGCTTTTGTTCGAGTCT; mouse/rat xCT reverse
primer: GCAGTAGCTCCAGGGCGTA. Human xCT
forward primer: CAGTAGCTGCAGGGCGTA; human
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Author contributions
N.E.S. conceived and supervised the study. T.S.
performed all experiments with help from M.R. T.S.
analyzed the experiments with assistance from K.W. and
M.B. T.S., I.Y.E. and N.E.S. interpreted and discussed
the data with all authors. N.E.S. wrote the manuscript in
conjunction with T.S and I.Y.E. All authors contributed to
the preparation of the final version.

REFERENCES
1.	 Eyupoglu IY, Buchfelder M, Savaskan NE. Surgical
resection of malignant gliomas-role in optimizing patient
outcome. Nature reviews Neurology. 2013; 9:141-51.
74645

Oncotarget

2.	 Omuro A, DeAngelis LM. Glioblastoma and other
malignant gliomas: a clinical review. Jama. 2013;
310:1842-50.

15.	 Homma T, Fujii J. Application of Glutathione as AntiOxidative and Anti-Aging Drugs. Current drug metabolism.
2015; 16:560-71.

3.	 D'Atri S, Tentori L, Lacal PM, Graziani G, Pagani
E, Benincasa E, Zambruno G, Bonmassar E, Jiricny
J. Involvement of the mismatch repair system in
temozolomide-induced apoptosis. Molecular pharmacology.
1998; 54:334-41.

16.	 Savaskan NE, Fan Z, Broggini T, Buchfelder M,
Eyupoglu IY. Neurodegeneration in the Brain Tumor
Microenvironment: Glutamate in the Limelight. Current
neuropharmacology. 2015; 13:258-65.
17.	 Lyons SA, Chung WJ, Weaver AK, Ogunrinu T, Sontheimer
H. Autocrine glutamate signaling promotes glioma cell
invasion. Cancer research. 2007; 67:9463-71.

4.	 Chen L, Li X, Liu L, Yu B, Xue Y, Liu Y. Erastin sensitizes
glioblastoma cells to temozolomide by restraining xCT and
cystathionine-gamma-lyase function. Oncology reports.
2015; 33:1465-74.

18.	 Buckingham SC, Campbell SL, Haas BR, Montana V,
Robel S, Ogunrinu T, Sontheimer H. Glutamate release
by primary brain tumors induces epileptic activity. Nature
medicine. 2011; 17:1269-74.

5.	 Dixon SJ, Lemberg KM, Lamprecht MR, Skouta R, Zaitsev
EM, Gleason CE, Patel DN, Bauer AJ, Cantley AM, Yang
WS, Morrison B, 3rd, Stockwell BR. Ferroptosis: an irondependent form of nonapoptotic cell death. Cell. 2012;
149:1060-72.

19.	 Savaskan NE, Hahnen E, Eyupoglu IY. The x(c)(-) cystine/
glutamate antiporter (xCT) as a potential target for therapy
of cancer: yet another cytotoxic anticancer approach?
Journal of cellular physiology. 2009; 220:531-2; author
reply 3-4.

6.	 Dixon SJ, Stockwell BR. The role of iron and reactive
oxygen species in cell death. Nature chemical biology.
2014; 10:9-17.

20.	 Ye ZC, Sontheimer H. Glioma cells release excitotoxic
concentrations of glutamate. Cancer research. 1999;
59:4383-91.

7.	 Dixon SJ, Patel DN, Welsch M, Skouta R, Lee ED, Hayano
M, Thomas AG, Gleason CE, Tatonetti NP, Slusher BS,
Stockwell BR. Pharmacological inhibition of cystineglutamate exchange induces endoplasmic reticulum stress
and ferroptosis. eLife. 2014; 3:e02523.

21.	 Dai L, Cao Y, Chen Y, Kaleeba JA, Zabaleta J, Qin Z.
Genomic analysis of xCT-mediated regulatory network:
Identification of novel targets against AIDS-associated
lymphoma. Oncotarget. 2015; 6:12710-22. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.3710.

8.	 Savaskan NE, Heckel A, Hahnen E, Engelhorn T, Doerfler
A, Ganslandt O, Nimsky C, Buchfelder M, Eyupoglu IY.
Small interfering RNA-mediated xCT silencing in gliomas
inhibits neurodegeneration and alleviates brain edema.
Nature medicine. 2008; 14:629-32.

22.	 Timmerman LA, Holton T, Yuneva M, Louie RJ, Padro
M, Daemen A, Hu M, Chan DA, Ethier SP, van 't Veer LJ,
Polyak K, McCormick F, Gray JW. Glutamine sensitivity
analysis identifies the xCT antiporter as a common triplenegative breast tumor therapeutic target. Cancer cell. 2013;
24:450-65.

9.	 Robert SM, Buckingham SC, Campbell SL, Robel S, Holt
KT, Ogunrinu-Babarinde T, Warren PP, White DM, Reid
MA, Eschbacher JM, Berens ME, Lahti AC, Nabors LB,
et al. SLC7A11 expression is associated with seizures and
predicts poor survival in patients with malignant glioma.
Science translational medicine. 2015; 7:289ra86.
10.	 Patel D, Kharkar PS, Nandave M. Emerging roles of system
[Formula: see text] antiporter and its inhibition in CNS
disorders. Molecular membrane biology. 2015; 32:89-116.

23.	 Yae T, Tsuchihashi K, Ishimoto T, Motohara T, Yoshikawa
M, Yoshida GJ, Wada T, Masuko T, Mogushi K, Tanaka H,
Osawa T, Kanki Y, Minami T, et al. Alternative splicing
of CD44 mRNA by ESRP1 enhances lung colonization
of metastatic cancer cell. Nature communications. 2012;
3:883.

11.	 Savaskan NE, Eyupoglu IY. xCT modulation in
gliomas: relevance to energy metabolism and tumor
microenvironment normalization. Annals of anatomy. 2010;
192:309-13.

24.	 Chamberlain MC, Bota DA, Linskey ME, Schwartz PH.
Neural stem/progenitors and glioma stem-like cells have
differential sensitivity to chemotherapy. Neurology. 2011;
77:e135; author reply e-6.

12.	 Chung WJ, Sontheimer H. Sulfasalazine inhibits the growth
of primary brain tumors independent of nuclear factorkappaB. Journal of neurochemistry. 2009; 110:182-93.

25.	 Parisi S, Corsa P, Raguso A, Perrone A, Cossa S, Munafo
T, Sanpaolo G, Donno E, Clemente MA, Piombino M,
Parisi F, Valle G. Temozolomide and radiotherapy versus
radiotherapy alone in high grade gliomas: a very long term
comparative study and literature review. BioMed research
international. 2015; 2015:620643.

13.	 Gores GJ. Decade in review-hepatocellular carcinoma:
HCC-subtypes, stratification and sorafenib. Nature reviews
Gastroenterology & hepatology. 2014; 11:645-7.

26.	 Yang LJ, Zhou CF, Lin ZX. Temozolomide and radiotherapy
for newly diagnosed glioblastoma multiforme: a systematic
review. Cancer investigation. 2014; 32:31-6.

14.	 Sio TT, Ko J, Gudena VK, Verma N, Chaudhary UB.
Chemotherapeutic and targeted biological agents for
metastatic bladder cancer: a comprehensive review.
International journal of urology. 2014; 21:630-7.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74646

Oncotarget

27.	 Zhang D, Tang B, Xie X, Xiao YF, Yang SM, Zhang JW.
The interplay between DNA repair and autophagy in cancer
therapy. Cancer biology & therapy. 2015; 16:1005-13.

31.	 Ghoochani A, Yakubov E, Sehm T, Fan Z, Hock S,
Buchfelder M, Eyupoglu IY, Savaskan NE. A versatile
ex vivo technique for assaying tumor angiogenesis and
microglia in the brain. Oncotarget. 2015; 7:1838-53. doi:
10.18632/oncotarget.6550.

28.	 Zhang WB, Wang Z, Shu F, Jin YH, Liu HY, Wang QJ,
Yang Y. Activation of AMP-activated protein kinase by
temozolomide contributes to apoptosis in glioblastoma cells
via p53 activation and mTORC1 inhibition. J Biol Chem.
2010; 285:40461-71.

32.	 Welzel O, Tischbirek CH, Jung J, Kohler EM, Svetlitchny
A, Henkel AW, Kornhuber J, Groemer TW. Synapse clusters
are preferentially formed by synapses with large recycling
pool sizes. PloS one. 2010; 5:e13514.

29.	 Ui-Tei K, Naito Y, Takahashi F, Haraguchi T, OhkiHamazaki H, Juni A, Ueda R, Saigo K. Guidelines for
the selection of highly effective siRNA sequences for
mammalian and chick RNA interference. Nucleic acids
research. 2004; 32:936-48.

33.	 Fan Z, Sehm T, Rauh M, Buchfelder M, Eyupoglu IY,
Savaskan NE. Dexamethasone alleviates tumor-associated
brain damage and angiogenesis. PloS one. 2014; 9:e93264.
34.	 Sehm T, Fan Z, Ghoochani A, Rauh M, Engelhorn T,
Minakaki G, Dörfler A, Klucken J, Buchfelder M, Eyüpoglu
IY, Savaskan, N. Sulfasalazine impacts on ferroptotic
cell death and alleviates the tumor microenvironment
and glioma-induced brain edema. Oncotarget 2016; doi:
10.18632/oncotarget.8651.

30.	 Hatipoglu G, Hock SW, Weiss R, Fan Z, Sehm T,
Ghoochani A, Buchfelder M, Savaskan NE, Eyupoglu IY.
Sunitinib impedes brain tumor progression and reduces
tumor-induced neurodegeneration in the microenvironment.
Cancer science. 2015; 106:160-70.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74647

Oncotarget

