Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 3

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Caspase inhibition impaired the neural stem/progenitor cell
response after cortical ischemia in mice
Ahmed M. Osman1, Susanne Neumann2, H. Georg Kuhn2 and Klas Blomgren1
1

Karolinska Institute, Department of Women’s and Children’s Health, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden

2

Center for Brain Repair and Rehabilitation, Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg,
Sweden
Correspondence to: Klas Blomgren, email: klas.blomgren@ki.se
Keywords: stroke, neurogenesis, migration, Q-VD-OPh, neuroinflammation
Received: October 20, 2015	

Accepted: December 23, 2015	

Published: December 30, 2015

ABSTRACT
Cortical ischemia induces proliferation of neural stem/progenitor cells (NSPCs)
in the subventricular zone (SVZ) and provokes migration of these cells toward the
injured area. Despite sustained migration of NSPCs for an extended period of time
after injury, they do not appear to survive. Here, we hypothesized that the antiapoptotic broad-spectrum caspase inhibitor Q-VD-OPh would increase NSPC survival
in the injured cortex. However, contrary to our expectations, caspase inhibition did
not promote NSPC survival and cortical neurogenesis. On the contrary, it abolished
ischemia-induced proliferation and decreased the number of migrating neuroblasts
in the injured cortex. Moreover, caspase inhibition decreased the levels of the
chemoattractant chemokine CCL2 (MCP-1) and the pro-inflammatory cytokine IL1β. We hence for the first time show that caspase inhibition abrogates the response
of NSPCs to an ischemic injury, presumably by inhibiting the production of proinflammatory factors. Thus, caution is warranted if anti-apoptotic strategies are
applied for neuroprotection.

INTRODUCTION

survival in the ischemic cortex. Q-VD-OPh is a broadspectrum caspase inhibitors that has greater potency
and specificity in blocking caspases and apoptosis
[10, 11]. Compared to the widely used pan-caspase
inhibitor Z-VAD-FMK (Z-Val-Ala-Asp(Ome)-CH2 F),
the carbobenzoxy blocking group (Z) is replaced with
a quinolone derivative (Q), the tripepeptide sequence
VAD is reduced to VD, and the toxic fluoromethyl ketone
(FMK) replaced with the nontoxic difluorophenoxy (OPh)
group. The aspartic acid derivative in Q-VD-OPh forms
an irreversible thioester bond with the active site cysteine
of the caspase with subsequent displacement of the OPh
group [10]. Advantages include that Q-VD-OPh crosses
the blood brain barrier [11], and the low toxicity, enables
long-term systemic administration.
Here, we induced cortical ischemia in mice using
a photothrombotic stroke model followed by systemic
treatment with Q-VD-OPh. Cortical neurogenesis and
NSPC migration were analyzed, postulating that apoptosis
inhibition would increase the number of surviving NSPCs
in and around the ischemic lesion.

Neural stem/progenitor cells (NSPCs) residing in
the subventricular zone (SVZ) respond to brain injuries.
After stroke, NSPC proliferation increases and a subset
divert from their regular migratory path, the rostral
migratory stream (RMS) to the olfactory bulb [1], and
migrate toward the injury site [2, 3]. The NSPCs persist
migrating to the peri-infarct area for at least one year after
striatal [4] and cortical ischemia [5]. However, despite the
continuous migration, generation of new striatal neurons
is rare, and cortical neurogenesis is not detectable in mice
[2, 5]. In humans, generation of new cortical neurons
after ischemia is also absent [6] although the presence of
immature neurons in the ischemic penumbra was evident
[7]. It has been suggested that the newborn NSPCs fail to
reach maturity due to the non-permissive, inflammatory
microenvironment in the injury site, and that NSPCs
therefore undergo apoptosis [8, 9].
In this study, we hypothesize that inhibition of
caspase-mediated apoptosis using the pan-caspase
inhibitor Q-VD-OPh (QuinolineValAsp(Ome)-CH2-OPhenoxy) might be of value and would promote NSPC
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2239

Oncotarget

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

sham animals (Figure 2C). Unexpectedly, treatment with
Q-VD-OPh resulted in 60% fewer migrating neuroblasts
in the peri-infarct cortex in ischemic animals (Figure
2C). Therefore, we asked whether Q-VD-OPh treatment
led to accumulation of neuroblasts in the SVZ due to
impaired migration of DCX+ cells to the peri-infarct
cortex or affected migration in the RMS after ischemia.
We quantified the number of DCX+ cells in the SVZ and
the RMS of the ischemic animals, but no differences were
detected between the treatment groups, neither in the SVZ
(P = 0.7) nor in the RMS (P = 0.6) (Figure 2D), indicating
that Q-VD-OPh only influenced DCX+ cells migrating
to the injury site. This suggests that cues attracting
neuroblasts toward the injured cortex, and/or promoting
proliferation of cells, are altered by Q-VD-OPh.
Brain injury is associated with neuroinflammation,
and pro-inflammatory cyto/chemokines are major
stimulants for NSPC migration after ischemic injury [15,
16]. Thus, we studied the microglia/macrophage response
in the peri-infarct cortex. Indeed, ischemia resulted
in increased numbers of Iba-1+ cells in the ischemic
animals compared to their sham counterparts. However,
no difference was detectable between the treatment
groups (Figure 2E), and virtually all microglia expressed
the activation marker CD68 [17, 18] (Figure 2F). Of
note, this analysis was done 4 weeks after termination
of the treatment (16 weeks after the injury) (Figure
2A), and might not fully reflect the effects of Q-VDOPh on microglia. To address this, we performed a third
experiment where Q-VD-OPh was administered daily for
2 weeks starting 24 h after induction of ischemia, when
cell death resulting from ischemia likely is completed
and no impact of the inhibitor on infarct size is expected
[19]. Brains were collected 2 h after the last injection for
histology and protein analysis (Figure 3A). We confirmed
that the percentage of tissue loss was unaffected by
Q-VD-OPh treatment (P = 0.8) (Figure 3B). The number
of neuroblasts in the peri-infarct cortex was 50% lower
in ischemic animals receiving Q-VD-OPh (Figure 3C),
confirming that injury-induced migration was equally
inhibited at an earlier time point after ischemia. The
number of proliferating NSPCs in the SVZ peaks after
1-2 weeks in response to brain ischemia, and returns
to baseline approximately 6 weeks after stroke [2, 3,
9], therefore we next quantified the number of PHH3+
(proliferating) cells in the SVZ, and found that Q-VDOPh treatment completely prevented the ischemia-induced
increase in proliferation (Figure 3D). No difference in
the numbers of Iba-1+ cells or the percentage of Iba-1+/
CD68+ cells was detected in the peri-infarct cortex (Figure
3E and 3F, respectively). Together, these results indicate
that the main effect of caspase inhibition was to prevent
the injury-induced increased proliferation in the SVZ,
subsequently resulting in decreased migration.
Activated microglia/macrophages can undergo
pro-inflammatory (M1) or anti-inflammatory (M2)

Neural stem/progenitor cells (NSPCs) in the
subventricular zone (SVZ) continuously divide and
migrate to the olfactory bulb through the rostral
migratory stream (RMS). In previous studies, deficiency
of apoptosis-inducing factor, and knockout of the
pro-apoptotic gene Bax were shown to reduce NSPC
proliferation and migration [12, 13]. Therefore, we wanted
to investigate if administration of Q-VD-OPh would affect
these parameters under physiological conditions. Animals
were treated with either Q-VD-OPh (QVD) or vehicle
(Veh) for 10 days (Figure 1A). Proliferating cells were
labeled with BrdU during the last 2 days of the treatment.
Our results showed no difference in the number of BrdU+
cells between animals treated with Q-VD-OPh or vehicle
(P = 0.36) (Figure 1B). When we analyzed the generation
of neuroblasts in the SVZ and their migration in the RMS,
no difference in the number of DCX+ cells between the
treatment groups was observed, neither in the SVZ (P
= 0.19) nor in the RMS (P = 0.43) (Figure 1C and 1D).
Moreover, no difference in the volume of the RMS was
detected, as judged by the volume occupied by DCX+
cells (P = 0.48) (Figure 1E). These data indicate that the
anti-apoptotic Q-VD-OPh has no influence on NSPC
proliferation or migration under physiological conditions.
In a previous study [5], we could not detect
generation of newborn cortical neurons after cortical
stroke when we birth-dated NSPCs during the first ten
days after ischemia, a period believed to be the peak
of the inflammatory response after stroke [8]. Here,
we hypothesized that NSPCs born at later time points
after ischemia might have a better chance of surviving
and possibly giving rise to mature cortical neurons.
Cortical ischemia was induced in 8-week-old mice. We
labeled the newborn NSPCs with BrdU 2 months after
induction of ischemia. To promote survival of the newly
generated neural progenitors, Q-VD-OPh or vehicle
were administered starting 12 days after the last BrdU
injection, a period just before neuroblasts convert to
mature neurons, and maintained for 2 weeks, during the
maturation process [14]. Animals were sacrificed 1 month
after the termination of the treatment (Figure 2A). Very
few newborn neurons (BrdU+/NeuN+) in the peri-infarct
cortex were detected, only in 2 animals per treatment
(Figure 2B), suggesting that even migrating progenitors
born long after injury, beyond the inflammatory reaction,
very seldom become mature cortical neurons, and that
caspase inhibition did not promote additional cortical
neurogenesis after ischemia.
As neural progenitors migrate to the ischemic cortex
for an extended period of time [4, 5], we next intended
to test whether administration of Q-VD-OPh would
affect the migration of NSPCs to the injured cortex. As
expected, cortical ischemia resulted in elevated numbers
of DCX+ cells in the peri-infarct cortex compared with
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2240

Oncotarget

polarization and both express CD68 [17, 20]. We used
ELISA to measure the levels of IL-1β and IL-10, cytokines
associated with M1 and M2 microglia/macrophages,
respectively. We found less IL-1β in ischemic animals
treated with Q-VD-OPh, while the levels of IL-10

remained unaltered (Figure 4A and 4B), suggesting that
Q-VD-OPh influenced the pro-inflammatory M1 polarized
microglial/macrophages and the anti-inflammatory M2
remained unchanged, and accordingly, no difference in
activation could be seen as judged by CD68 expression.

Figure 1: The effect of Q-VD-OPh on neural stem/progenitor cells in the intact, uninjured brain. A. The experimental

design with 10 days of Q-VD-OPh (QVD; n = 9) or vehicle (Veh; n = 8) administration. P = Postnatal day B. Analysis of proliferation in the
SVZ. The image shows BrdU staining in the SVZ and the bar graph shows quantification data. C. Analysis of DCX+ cells in the SVZ. The
confocal image displays DCX staining (white) in the SVZ. Blue is the nuclear staining ToPro. The bar graph shows quantification data. D.
Quantification of DCX+ cells in the RMS. The confocal image represents DCX staining in the RMS in a coronal section, and the bar graph
shows the quantification results. E. The volume occupied by DCX+ cells in the RMS. Data are presented as mean ± SEM. LV = lateral
ventricle; ns = not significant. Scale bar = 100, 20 and 40 μm in B., C. and D., respectively.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2241

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Assessment of cortical neurogenesis and migration after treatment with Q-VD-OPh late after stroke. A. The

experimental design where animals subjected to cortical ischemia and treated either with Q-VD-OPh (QVD) or vehicle (Veh). P = postnatal
day B. Confocal images show BrdU (green) and NeuN (red) staining in the peri-infarct cortex. The arrowhead in B1. indicates a BrdU+
cell for which no colocalization with NeuN was detected, while the arrow in B2. points to one of the rare cells where colocalization was
considered. C Analysis of DCX+ cells in the peri-infarct cortex 16 weeks after induction of ischemia. The images show DCX+ cells in the
peri-infarct cortex of the treatment groups, and the bar graph shows quantification data. *P = 0.02, ***P < 0.0001. D. Quantification of
DCX+ cells in the SVZ and the RMS in ischemic animals. E. Analysis of microglia in the peri-infarct cortex. The image represents Iba-1
staining in ischemic animal, and the bar graph shows the quantification data. **P < 0.001. F. A confocal image showing CD68 expression
(green) in Iba-1+ cells (red). The nuclear staining ToPro is blue. The bar graph displays the percentage of Iba-1+ cells also expressing
CD68. Data are presented as mean ± SEM. ns = not significant. Scale bar = 20 μm in B. and F., and 50 μm in C. and E.. n = 4 for sham
controls, and n = 8 for each of the ischemia groups (Q-VD-OPh and vehicle).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2242

Oncotarget

Figure 3: The short-term effect of Q-VD-OPh on the NSPC response after stroke. A. The experimental design, where Q-VD-

OPh (QVD) or vehicle were administered 24h after induction of stroke and continued for 2 weeks. P = Postnatal day B. Measurement of
tissue loss after ischemia. Nissl staining was performed (the image) and the percentage of tissue loss in ischemic animals was calculated
(bar graph). C Quantification of the DCX+ cells in the injured cortex after 2 weeks. The images show the DCX+ migrating cells in the periinfarct cortex of the treatment groups, and the bar graph shows the quantification data. *P = 0.013, **P = 0.005, ***P < 0.0001. D. Analysis
of proliferation in the SVZ at 2 weeks. The images represent PHH3 staining in the SVZ (indicated by a white dashed line) of ischemic
animals from the two treatment groups, and the bar graph shows the quantification data. *P = 0.01. E. Analysis of Iba-1+ cells in the
peri-infarct cortex at 2 weeks. ***P < 0.0001 F. Assessment of microglial activation in the peri-infarct cortex after 2 weeks. The confocal
image shows CD68 expression (green) in Iba-1+ cells (red). Blue is the nuclear staining ToPro. The bar graph shows the percentage of
coexpression of Iba-1 and CD68. Data are presented as mean ± SEM. LV = Lateral ventricle; ns = not significant. Scale bar = 100 μm in C.,
50 μm in D. and E., and 10 μm in F.. n = 4 for sham controls, and n = 7 for each of the ischemia groups (Q-VD-OPh and vehicle).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2243

Oncotarget

The chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 2 (CCL2) and
the stromal cell-derived factor 1 α (SDF-1α) trigger
recruitment of microglia/macrophages and neural
progenitors to site of injury via their expression CCR2
and CXCR4, respectively [15, 16]. When we measured
the levels of these chemokines, we found 25% reduction
in CCL2 in ischemic animals treated with Q-VD-OPh
(Figure 4C). SDF-1α was not significantly reduced by
Q-VD-OPh (Figure 4D). These results suggest that Q-VDOPh mainly interrupted CCL2-mediated injury-induced
neural progenitor migration. Contrary to our findings,
intracerebroventricular administration of a cocktail of

the pan-caspase inhibitor Z-VAD-FMK together with
caspase-3 and -9 inhibitors after cortico-striatal stroke
increased neuroblasts migration to the damaged area in
rats, and this was associated with increased levels of SDF1α [9]. As mentioned in the introduction, Q-VD-OPh is a
superior caspase inhibitor compared to Z-VAD-FMK [10,
11]. Additionally, we applied Q-VD-OPh intraperitoneally,
and systemic administration enables caspase inhibition
also in peripheral and infiltrating immune cells.
Overall, we showed that treatment with the potent,
non-toxic, and broad-spectrum caspase inhibitor Q-VDOPh did not promote cortical neurogenesis, abolished

Figure 4: Cytokine analysis 2 weeks after stroke. A. Analysis of IL-1β. *P < 0.05 B. Analysis of IL-10. C. Analysis of CCL2. *P <
0.05, ***P < 0.0001 D. Analysis of SDF-1α. ns = not significant. n = 4 for sham controls, and n = 5 for each of the ischemia groups (Q-VDOPh and vehicle). Data are presented as mean ± SEM.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2244

Oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS

ischemia-induced increase in proliferation, impaired
ischemia-induced neural progenitor migration, and
resulted in reduced levels of pro-inflammatory, but not
anti-inflammatory, cyto/chemokines. The generation of
cortical neurons after ischemia is controversial in animals
and humans [2, 5, 6, 21]. In the present study, we showed
that cortical neurogenesis is extremely rare, and most
probably has no functional significance, at least not in
the current experimental context. Neuronal progenitors
have been shown to have phagocytic activity within
the neurogenic niches under physiological conditions
[22]. Moreover, NSPCs can regulate microglial function
and activity [23]. The finding that neural progenitors
continuously migrate to the injured cortex without
turning into mature neurons, suggests that spontaneous
replacement of cortical neurons after injury is likely
not the biological mechanism. Therefore, the functional
consequences of this migration process demand further
elucidation, and caspase inhibitors constitute a useful tool
in this quest.
Caspases are involved in other biological
mechanisms besides cell death, for example inflammation.
Caspase-1 is important for maturation of IL-1β and IL18 protein and initiation of the inflammatory process
[24]. Caspase-3, -7 and -8 are also important for
microglia activation and neurotoxicity [25]. Our findings
demonstrate that Q-VD-OPh appears to selectively
interrupt the pro-inflammatory response after brain
ischemia (Figure 4A-4D), however which particular
caspase (s) involved in this context requires additional
studies.
In a recent report, NSPCs committed to an astroglial
phenotype were shown to migrate from the SVZ and
contribute to the formation of a glial scar after cortical
stroke [26]. In this study, we did not assess at the astroglial
reaction, or other cell types that might be involved in
the inflammatory reaction beside microglia, such as
endothelial cells or blood-born cells, and whether Q-VDOPh influences these cell populations is still unclear and
requires further investigation.
In conclusion, despite the beneficial neuroprotective
effects of the caspase inhibitor Q-VD-OPh in models of
neonatal hypoxia-ischemia [27] and stroke [28], and
the beneficial reduction of pro-inflammatory factors
[29], it apparently also interferes with the endogenous
NSPC regenerative response, and this should be taken
into account when caspase inhibitors are included in
neuroprotective strategies.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Animals
Eight-week-old female C57BL/6 mice (Charles
River, Sulzfeld, Germany) were used throughout the
experiment. Animals were accommodated in equal light/
dark cycles (12/12 hours) and given free access to food
and water. All experimental procedures were performed
in accordance with the European and Swedish animal
welfare regulations and approved by Gothenburg ethical
committee (application no. 290/09).

Induction of cortical ischemia
Cortical ischemia was induced in the left hemisphere
using a photothrombotic stroke model as previously
described [5]. In brief, animals were anesthetized with
isoflurane (5% induction and 1.5% maintenance; Isobavet;
Schering-Plough Corporation, Kenilworth, NJ) in a
mixture of air and oxygen (1:1). The body temperature
was maintained with a heating pad during the experiment.
An incision was made and the skin flaps were retracted to
expose the skull. The photosensitive dye rose bengal (0.1
ml of 10 mg/ml) was injected intraperitoneally (IP) 5 min
prior to laser illumination. The skull was illuminated for
10 min at the following coordinates relative to bregma: +1
mm anterior and +2.7 mm lateral. The laser beam settings
were: power: 50 mW: wavelength: 561 nm; Cobolt Jive).
The scalp was sutured and mice were kept in a heated
box to recover. Sham control animals were anesthetized
and injected with rose bengal, but the skull was not
illuminated.

Preparation and administration of the caspase
inhibitor
The caspase inhibitor Q-VD-OPh was purchased
from SM Biochemicals (Anaheim, California; cat. no.
SMPH001). The inhibitor was initially dissolved in
DMSO to generate a stock solution of 10 mg/ml. Aliquots
were stored in -20oC. At the injection time, Q-VD-OPh
aliquots were slowly diluted in 1x PBS (pH 7.4; Gibco/
Life Technologies; San Diego, CA) to bring the DMSO
concentration to 10%, then the injection solution was
heated at 60oC for 20 min. Naïve controls, sham, or
ischemic animals received IP injections of either 10 mg/kg
Q-VD-OPh, a dose known to produce caspase-3 inhibition
and tissue protection after hypoxia-ischemia [27, 29], or
an equal volume of vehicle (10% DMSO) for 10-14 days,
single daily injections (Figure 1A, 2A, and 3A ).

2245

Oncotarget

Administration of 5-Bromo-2´Deoxyuridine

donkey anti goat IgG; Alexa-488 donkey anti rat IgG;
Alexa-555 donkey anti mouse IgG; Alexa-555 donkey
anti rabbit IgG (1:1,000; all from Molecular probes/
Life technologies). ToPro3 (1:1,000; Molecular Probes/
Life Technologies) was used as nuclear counterstain
when fluorescence staining was used. To visualize the
immunoperoxidase staining, sections were incubated for
1 h in avidin-biotin solution (1:100; Vectastain ABC Elite
kit, Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA). The color
precipitate was developed with H2O2, nickel chloride and
3-3´diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride (DAB; 1:100;
Saveen Werner AB, Malmö, Sweden). Sections were
mounted onto glass slides and coverslipped using Xtra-kitt
mounting medium (Medite GmbH; Burgdorf; Germany)
for immunoperoxidase staining or ProLong Gold anti-fade
with DAPI (Molecular probes/Life technologies) for the
fluorescent staining.

To assess proliferation in unlesioned animals (naïve
controls), 2 IP injections of 5-Bromo-2´-Deoxyuridine
(BrdU; 50 mg/kg; SigmaAldrich) were injected during
the last 2 days of Q-VD-OPh treatment (Figure 1A). To
birthdate the newborn cortical neurons in the ischemic
animals, a single BrdU (50 mg/kg) injection was
administered daily for 4 days, 8 weeks after induction
of stroke (12 days prior administration of Q-VD-OPh)
(Figure 2A).

Tissue preparation
Animals were deeply anesthetized with sodium
pentobarbital, transcardially perfused with 0.9% sodium
chloride, and then fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde in
0.1M phosphate buffer (pH 7.4). Brains were collected and
postfixed in the same fixative for 24 h, then transferred to
30% sucrose in 0.1 M phosphate buffer for cryoprotection,
and left for a minimum of 3 days. Brains were
cryosectioned coronally using a sliding microtome (Leica
SM2000R) into 25 µm free floating sections and stored
as 1:12 series at 4oC in tubes containing cryoprotection
solution (25% glycerin, 25% ethylene glycol in 0.1M
phosphate buffer) for further histological analysis.

Histological quantification
Analysis of BrdU and PHH3 immunoreactive cells
in the SVZ was performed in a 1:12 series section interval
covering the area +1.0 mm to -0.15mm anterior/posterior
to bregma.
Quantification of migrating neural progenitors
(doublecortin-positive cells; DCX+) and microglia (Iba1-positive cells; Iba-1+) in the peri-infarct cortex was
performed in 6 serial sections spaced 150 μm apart or
12 serial sections spaced 300 μm apart, respectively. All
sections containing lesioned tissue were included. The
peri-infarct area was delineated from the most central
ventral part of the lesion and across the medial wall of the
infarct tissue. A peri-infarct area of 300 μm (for DCX) or
100 μm (for Iba-1) in the surrounding intact cortex was
included (Supplementary Figure 1). Quantification was
based on counting only the cell soma of DCX+ and Iba1+ cells.
The histological analysis was performed using
a 40x objective lens in a microscope equipped with the
stereology software Stereo Investigator (MicroBrightField
Inc.) The total number of cells was the sum of all counted
cells multiplied by the series interval.

Immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence
Sections were incubated in sodium citrate pH 6.0
for 30 min at 80oC when antigen retrieval was needed. For
BrdU staining, sections were incubated in 2N HCl at 37oC
for 30 min and neutralized with 0.1 M borate buffer for 10
min at room temperature. When the immunoperoxidase
method was used, the endogenous peroxidase was
quenched by incubating sections in 0.6% H2O2 for 30 min
at room temperature. Non-specific binding was blocked
by incubating sections in a solution of 3% normal donkey
serum (Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories, West
Grove, PA), 0.1% Triton X-100 in TBS for 1 h at room
temperature. Sections were incubated at 4oC for 24-72
h with the primary antibodies. The following primary
antibodies were used: rat anti BrdU (1:500, Serotec
#OBT0030G); goat anti doublecortin (DCX; 1:200; Santa
Cruz #sc-8066); mouse anti NeuN (1:200; Millipore
#MAB377); rabbit anti Iba-1 (1:1,000; Wako #019-19741);
rat anti mouse CD68 (1:500; Serotec #MCA1957T); rabbit
anti Phospho-histone H3 (PHH3; 1:1,000; Millipore #06570), followed by 1h or 2h incubation with appropriate
biotinylated or fluorescent secondary antibodies,
respectively. The following secondary antibodies were
used: biotinylated donkey anti rat IgG; biotinylated
donkey anti goat IgG; biotinylated donkey anti rabbit IgG
(1:1,000; all from Jackson ImmunoResearch); Alexa-488
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Immunofluorescence
microscopy

analysis

and

confocal

Activation of microglia was assessed by expression
of CD68 (Iba-1+/CD68+) using an ApoTome microscope
(AxioImager M2; Carl Zeiss microscopy, Germany). A
minimum of 100 Iba-1+ cells were analyzed in image
stacks with 0.5 μm optical slices taken through a 20x
objective lens.
Quantification of DCX+ cells in the SVZ and the
RMS, and colocalization of BrdU and NeuN (BrdU+/
NeuN+) in the peri-infarct cortex were analyzed using
2246

Oncotarget

Statistical analysis

a confocal laser scanning microscope (TCS SP2; Leica,
Wetzlar, Germany). For DCX, analysis was performed in
12 serial sections spaced 300 μm apart covering the area
+2.4 mm to -0.15 mm anterior/posterior to bregma. Image
stacks were acquired with a 63x objective lens, and cells
were considered for counting when the cell body of the
DCX+ cell colocalized with the nuclear stain ToPro3.
For BrdU+/NeuN+ analysis, image stacks were acquired
with a 20x objective lens with 3x digital zoom. Confocal
analysis was achieved using the following settings:
optical slices of 1 μm or less; pinhole: airy 1.0; sequential
fluorochrome excitation at 488 nm, 546 nm, and 633 nm.

Data are presented as mean ± SEM. Student´s t-test
was used when comparing 2 groups. One-way ANOVA
with Tukey (for histology) or Newman-Keuls (for
cytokines) post-hoc test was performed when comparing
more than two groups. Significance was considered when
P < 0.05.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the Swedish Research
Council, the Swedish Childhood Cancer Foundation,
governmental grants from Agreement concerning research
and education of doctors (ALF), the Frimurare Barnhuset
Foundations in Gothenburg and Stockholm.

Tissue loss measurement
Lesioned sections 150 μm apart were mounted on
Super Frost Plus glass slides, and left to dry overnight.
Nissl staining was performed and areas were traced using
the stereo investigator software (MicroBrightField Inc.).
The percentage of tissue loss (%L) was determined by
subtracting the area (A) of the intact tissue in the ipsilateral
side (I) from area of the contralateral side (C) divided by
the area of the contralateral side %L = [(Ac-Ai)/Ac] x 100.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

REFERENCES
1.	 Lois C, Garcia-Verdugo JM and Alvarez-Buylla A. Chain
migration of neuronal precursors. Science. 1996; 271:978981.

Protein extraction and ELISA
Animals were deeply anesthetized with isoflurane
and decapitated. Brains were removed and hemispheres
were separated. Lesioned tissue and surrounding cortex
were carefully dissected and placed in a precooled 1.5
ml Eppendorf tube on dry ice. Ice-cold extraction buffer
consisting of 50 mM Tris HCl (pH 7.4), 100 mM NaCl,
5 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA (all from Sigma-Aldrich),
and protease inhibitor cocktail (Completemini; Roche;
according to the manufacturer instructions) was added,
and tissue was homogenized by sonication. Homogenates
were centrifuged at 10,000 x g at 4oC for 10 min and the
supernatants were collected. Protein concentration was
determined using the BCA protein assay kit (Thermo
Fisher Scientific Inc.; Rockford, IL), and samples were
aliquoted and stored at -20oC. The concentrations of the
cytokines interleukin-1 beta (IL-1β), interleukin-10 (IL10), and the chemokines chemokine (C-C motif) ligand
2 (CCL2, also called monocyte chemotactic protein 1,
MCP-1), stromal cell-derived factor 1 alpha (SDF-1α,
also called C-X-C motif chemokine 12, CXCL 12), were
measured using Quantikine® Elisa kits (R&D systems
Europe Ltd; Abingdon, UK). Samples were assayed
undiluted in duplicates, and the assay was run according
to the manufacturer’s instructions.

2.	 Arvidsson A, Collin T, Kirik D, Kokaia Z and Lindvall O.
Neuronal replacement from endogenous precursors in the
adult brain after stroke. Nat Med. 2002; 8:963-970.
3.	 Parent JM, Vexler ZS, Gong C, Derugin N and Ferriero
DM. Rat forebrain neurogenesis and striatal neuron
replacement after focal stroke. Ann Neurol. 2002; 52:802813.
4.	 Kokaia Z, Thored P, Arvidsson A and Lindvall O.
Regulation of stroke-induced neurogenesis in adult brain—
recent scientific progress. Cereb Cortex. 2006; 16 Suppl
1:i162-167.
5.	 Osman AM, Porritt MJ, Nilsson M and Kuhn HG. Longterm stimulation of neural progenitor cell migration after
cortical ischemia in mice. Stroke. 2011; 42:3559-3565.
6.	 Huttner HB, Bergmann O, Salehpour M, Racz A,
Tatarishvili J, Lindgren E, Csonka T, Csiba L, Hortobagyi
T, Mehes G, Englund E, Solnestam BW, Zdunek S,
Scharenberg C, Strom L, Stahl P, et al. The age and
genomic integrity of neurons after cortical stroke in
humans. Nat Neurosci. 2014; 17:801-803.
7.	 Jin K, Wang X, Xie L, Mao XO, Zhu W, Wang Y, Shen J,
Mao Y, Banwait S and Greenberg DA. Evidence for strokeinduced neurogenesis in the human brain. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A. 2006; 103:13198-13202.
8.	 Zhou J, Cheng G, Kong R, Gao DK and Zhang X. The
selective ablation of inflammation in an acute stage
of ischemic stroke may be a new strategy to promote
neurogenesis. Med Hypotheses. 2011; 76:1-3.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2247

Oncotarget

9.	 Thored P, Arvidsson A, Cacci E, Ahlenius H, Kallur T,
Darsalia V, Ekdahl CT, Kokaia Z and Lindvall O. Persistent
production of neurons from adult brain stem cells during
recovery after stroke. Stem Cells. 2006; 24:739-747.

Blood Flow Metab. 2000; 20:1166-1173.
22.	 Lu Z, Elliott MR, Chen Y, Walsh JT, Klibanov AL,
Ravichandran KS and Kipnis J. Phagocytic activity of
neuronal progenitors regulates adult neurogenesis. Nat Cell
Biol. 2011; 13:1076-1083.

10.	 Caserta TM, Smith AN, Gultice AD, Reedy MA and Brown
TL. Q-VD-OPh, a broad spectrum caspase inhibitor with
potent antiapoptotic properties. Apoptosis. 2003; 8:345352.

23.	 Mosher KI, Andres RH, Fukuhara T, Bieri G, HasegawaMoriyama M, He Y, Guzman R and Wyss-Coray T. Neural
progenitor cells regulate microglia functions and activity.
Nat Neurosci. 2012; 15:1485-1487.

11.	 Chauvier D, Ankri S, Charriaut-Marlangue C, Casimir R
and Jacotot E. Broad-spectrum caspase inhibitors: from
myth to reality? Cell Death Differ. 2007; 14:387-391.

24.	 Martinon F, Burns K and Tschopp J. The inflammasome:
a molecular platform triggering activation of inflammatory
caspases and processing of proIL-beta. Mol Cell. 2002;
10:417-426.

12.	 Kim WR, Kim Y, Eun B, Park OH, Kim H, Kim K, Park
CH, Vinsant S, Oppenheim RW and Sun W. Impaired
migration in the rostral migratory stream but spared
olfactory function after the elimination of programmed cell
death in Bax knock-out mice. J Neurosci. 2007; 27:1439214403.

25.	 Burguillos MA, Deierborg T, Kavanagh E, Persson A,
Hajji N, Garcia-Quintanilla A, Cano J, Brundin P, Englund
E, Venero JL and Joseph B. Caspase signalling controls
microglia activation and neurotoxicity. Nature. 2011;
472:319-324.

13.	 Osato K, Sato Y, Ochiishi T, Osato A, Zhu C, Sato M,
Swanpalmer J, Modjtahedi N, Kroemer G, Kuhn HG
and Blomgren K. Apoptosis-inducing factor deficiency
decreases the proliferation rate and protects the
subventricular zone against ionizing radiation. Cell Death
Dis. 2010; 1:e84.

26.	 Benner EJ, Luciano D, Jo R, Abdi K, Paez-Gonzalez
P, Sheng H, Warner DS, Liu C, Eroglu C and Kuo CT.
Protective astrogenesis from the SVZ niche after injury
is controlled by Notch modulator Thbs4. Nature. 2013;
497:369-373.

14.	Brown JP, Couillard-Despres S, Cooper-Kuhn CM,
Winkler J, Aigner L and Kuhn HG. Transient expression
of doublecortin during adult neurogenesis. J Comp Neurol.
2003; 467:1-10.

27.	 Zhu C, Wang X, Huang Z, Qiu L, Xu F, Vahsen N, Nilsson
M, Eriksson PS, Hagberg H, Culmsee C, Plesnila N,
Kroemer G and Blomgren K. Apoptosis-inducing factor is
a major contributor to neuronal loss induced by neonatal
cerebral hypoxia-ischemia. Cell Death Differ. 2007;
14:775-784.

15.	 Yan YP, Sailor KA, Lang BT, Park SW, Vemuganti R and
Dempsey RJ. Monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 plays
a critical role in neuroblast migration after focal cerebral
ischemia. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2007; 27:1213-1224.

28.	 Renolleau S, Fau S, Goyenvalle C, Joly LM, Chauvier D,
Jacotot E, Mariani J and Charriaut-Marlangue C. Specific
caspase inhibitor Q-VD-OPh prevents neonatal stroke in P7
rat: a role for gender. J Neurochem. 2007; 100:1062-1071.

16.	 Robin AM, Zhang ZG, Wang L, Zhang RL, Katakowski
M, Zhang L, Wang Y, Zhang C and Chopp M. Stromal
cell-derived factor 1alpha mediates neural progenitor cell
motility after focal cerebral ischemia. J Cereb Blood Flow
Metab. 2006; 26:125-134.

29.	 Han W, Sun Y, Wang X, Zhu C and Blomgren K. Delayed,
long-term administration of the caspase inhibitor Q-VDOPh reduced brain injury induced by neonatal hypoxiaischemia. Dev Neurosci. 2014; 36:64-72.

17.	 Perego C, Fumagalli S and De Simoni MG. Temporal
pattern of expression and colocalization of microglia/
macrophage phenotype markers following brain ischemic
injury in mice. J Neuroinflammation. 2011; 8:174.
18.	 Febinger HY, Thomasy HE, Pavlova MN, Ringgold KM,
Barf PR, George AM, Grillo JN, Bachstetter AD, Garcia
JA, Cardona AE, Opp MR and Gemma C. Time-dependent
effects of CX3CR1 in a mouse model of mild traumatic
brain injury. J Neuroinflammation. 2015; 12:154.
19.	 Porritt MJ, Andersson HC, Hou L, Nilsson A, Pekna
M, Pekny M and Nilsson M. Photothrombosis-induced
infarction of the mouse cerebral cortex is not affected by the
Nrf2-activator sulforaphane. PLoS One. 2012; 7:e41090.
20.	 Taylor RA and Sansing LH. Microglial responses after
ischemic stroke and intracerebral hemorrhage. Clin Dev
Immunol. 2013; 2013:746068.
21.	 Gu W, Brannstrom T and Wester P. Cortical neurogenesis
in adult rats after reversible photothrombotic stroke. J Cereb
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2248

Oncotarget

