Tumor and Stem Cell Biology

Cancer
Research

A Small Interfering RNA Screen of Genes Involved in DNA
Repair Identifies Tumor-Specific Radiosensitization
by POLQ Knockdown
Geoff S. Higgins1, Remko Prevo1, Yin-Fai Lee1, Thomas Helleday1, Ruth J. Muschel1, Steve Taylor2,
Michio Yoshimura1, Ian D. Hickson3, Eric J. Bernhard1, and W. Gillies McKenna1

Abstract
The effectiveness of radiotherapy treatment could be significantly improved if tumor cells could be rendered
more sensitive to ionizing radiation (IR) without altering the sensitivity of normal tissues. However, many of
the key therapeutically exploitable mechanisms that determine intrinsic tumor radiosensitivity are largely unknown. We have conducted a small interfering RNA (siRNA) screen of 200 genes involved in DNA damage
repair aimed at identifying genes whose knockdown increased tumor radiosensitivity. Parallel siRNA screens
were conducted in irradiated and unirradiated tumor cells (SQ20B) and irradiated normal tissue cells (MRC5).
Using γH2AX foci at 24 hours after IR, we identified several genes, such as BRCA2, Lig IV, and XRCC5, whose
knockdown is known to cause increased cell radiosensitivity, thereby validating the primary screening end point. In
addition, we identified POLQ (DNA polymerase θ) as a potential tumor-specific target. Subsequent investigations
showed that POLQ knockdown resulted in radiosensitization of a panel of tumor cell lines from different primary
sites while having little or no effect on normal tissue cell lines. These findings raise the possibility that POLQ inhibition might be used clinically to cause tumor-specific radiosensitization. Cancer Res; 70(7); 2984–93. ©2010 AACR.

Introduction
Radiotherapy is a vital tool in the management of cancer
patients. It is often given with curative intent either alone or
with chemotherapy in patients with diseases as diverse as
head and neck, cervix, bladder, and non–small cell lung cancer. The radiation dose that can safely be delivered to patients is limited by the dose tolerances of surrounding
normal tissues (1). It is anticipated that the effectiveness of
radiotherapy would be improved if tumor cells could be rendered more sensitive to ionizing radiation (IR) without altering the sensitivity of normal tissues. Such a strategy depends
on exploiting tumor-specific molecular targets, many of
which remain to be identified. The intrinsic radiosensitivity
of tumors differs significantly. Importantly, these variations
in radiosensitivity have a large clinical effect, as those patients with radioresistant tumors are more likely to develop

Authors' Affiliations: 1Gray Institute for Radiation Oncology and Biology,
2Computational Biology Research Group, and 3Genome Integrity Group,
Oxford University, Oxford, United Kingdom
Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer
Research Online (http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
G.S. Higgins and R. Prevo are co-first authors.
Corresponding Author: W. Gillies McKenna, Gray Institute For Radiation
Oncology and Biology, University of Oxford, Old Road Campus Research
Building, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7DQ, United Kingdom. Phone: 441865-228963; Fax: 44-1865-222901; E-mail: gillies.mckenna@rob.ox.ac.uk.
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-4040
©2010 American Association for Cancer Research.

2984

Cancer Res; 70(7) April 1, 2010

local recurrences (2–4) and have poorer survival rates (3, 4)
than patients with more radiosensitive disease.
A recent trial in patients with locally advanced head and
neck cancer compared combination treatment of cetuximab
with radiotherapy against radiotherapy alone (5). This trial
showed improved locoregional control and overall survival
in patients treated with cetuximab and radiotherapy. Importantly, the addition of cetuximab was not associated
with increased normal tissue toxicity. This important study
has shown the potential improvements that can be
achieved by specifically rendering tumor cells more sensitive to radiation therapy.
Previous attempts have been made to identify targets involved in radiosensitivity through the screening of small interfering RNA (siRNA) libraries. These studies have assessed
radiation sensitivity using short-term assays based on cell viability (6, 7). This approach is potentially flawed as it may fail
to distinguish between growth inhibition and clonal inactivation. The clonogenic survival assay is the “gold standard”
method for assessing intrinsic radiosensitivity in vitro (8). Unfortunately, this assay is not suitable for use in large-scale siRNA
screens due to the highly labor-intensive nature of the assay.
The critical role of DNA double-strand breaks (DSB) and
chromosome aberrations produced by IR in causing cell
death has long been recognized (9, 10). DSB formation results
in rapid phosphorylation of histone H2AX (γH2AX). Typically,
most of these γH2AX foci resolve within a few hours of irradiation. We reasoned that foci persisting at 24 hours may mark
sites of delayed repair and could correspond to the sites likely
to lead to chromosome breaks. Previous studies have shown

siRNA Screen Identifies Radiosensitization by POLQ Knockdown

the correlation between intrinsic radiosensitivity and the
persistence of γH2AX foci 24 hours after radiation (11, 12).
In the present study, we describe a siRNA screen of 200
genes involved in DNA damage repair aimed at identifying
genes whose knockdown causes increased tumor radiosensitivity. Using γH2AX foci at 24 hours after IR, we identified
POLQ (DNA polymerase θ) as a potential tumor-specific target
whose knockdown led to tumor cell–specific radiosensitization.

Materials and Methods
Cell culture. The tumor cells used were the SQ20B (laryngeal), T24 (bladder), PSN1 (pancreas), and HeLa (cervix)
lines. The SQ20B cell line was obtained from Dr. Ralph
Weichselbaum (University of Chicago, Chicago, IL) and has
been described previously (13, 14). The other tumor cell lines
were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection
(ATCC). Two types of normal human fibroblast cells (MRC5
and POC) were used at early passage. MRC5 cells were obtained from ATCC. POC cells were established by us and have
been described previously (13). Cells were cultured in DMEM
containing 4.5 g/L glucose (Invitrogen) supplemented with
10% fetal bovine serum. All cultures were maintained at 37°C
in water-saturated 5% CO2/95% air. Cells were regularly tested
to ensure the absence of Mycoplasma contamination (MycoAlert,
Lonza). Cell morphology was regularly checked to ensure the
absence of cross-contamination of cell lines.
RNAi library and siRNA. A custom-designed DNA repair
gene library of 200 pools of four siRNA strands (Supplementary
Table S1) was used for the screen (siGenome, Dharmacon). In
addition to the library wells, each plate contained four replica
wells with nontargeting (NT) siRNA and four wells with DNAPKcs siRNA as negative and positive controls, respectively.
Individual genes were investigated using both pools and individual siRNAs (ON-TARGETplus, Dharmacon). An initial
screen was separately conducted with both tumor cells
(SQ20B) and normal tissue cells (MRC5) to identify genes
whose knockdown caused tumor-specific radiosensitization.
SQ20B and MRC5 cells were both reverse transfected with
siRNA (final concentration, 50 nmol/L) using DharmaFECT
1 as per the manufacturer's instructions in four replica 96well plates. Forty-eight hours after transfection, the medium was replaced with DMEM with 10% fetal bovine serum.
For both cell types, two replica plates were treated with 4
Gy using an IBL634 cesium irradiator (CIS Biointernational)
at a dose rate of 0.66 Gy/min, and two plates were left
unirradiated. Optimization studies showed that this dose
of radiation resulted in sufficiently large differences in
γH2AX foci formation between positive and negative
controls. The SQ20B and MRC5 cells were irradiated 48
and 66 h, respectively, after transfection. After irradiation,
the cells were returned to the incubator for 24 h. Cells were
then fixed using 3% paraformaldehyde diluted in PBS before
analysis of γH2AX foci.
Analysis of γH2AX foci. The techniques used to quantify
γH2AX foci have been described previously (15). Briefly, after
fixation, the cells were permeabilized and blocked with 0.1%

www.aacrjournals.org

Triton (v/v) diluted in PBS containing 1% bovine serum albumin (Sigma) for 1 h at room temperature. Cells were incubated
with a primary mouse monoclonal antibody to γH2AX (1:1500;
Millipore) overnight at 4°C. Cells were then washed thrice with
PBS before incubation with Alexa Fluor 488–conjugated secondary antibody (1:1200; Invitrogen) for 1 h at room temperature. Cells were again washed thrice with PBS for 5 min
before 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) staining,
0.5 μg/mL diluted with PBS, for 10 min. The DAPI was replaced
with PBS before foci were detected using an IN Cell Analyzer
1000 automated epifluorescence microscope (GE Healthcare).
Four images were obtained per well. Foci quantitation was accomplished using IN Cell Analyzer Workstation software
(v3.5). For unirradiated cells, the readout was the mean number of γH2AX foci per cell. For irradiated cells, this was the
proportion of cells that contained more than seven γH2AX
foci per cell. This was because optimization studies showed
that analysis based on this technique correlated best with
results obtained from clonogenic survival assays.
Clonogenic assay. For the clonogenic assays, all cell types
were forward transfected in six-well plates with 50 nmol/L
siRNA using DharmaFECT 1 (Dharmacon). In all clonogenic
survival experiments, cells were plated 48 h after transfection from single-cell suspensions and allowed to adhere to
culture dishes before irradiation with an IBL634 cesium
irradiator at a dose rate of 0.66 Gy/min. Remaining cells
from the transfection were used for quantitative reverse
transcription-PCR (qRT-PCR) to confirm effective knockdown. Colonies were stained with crystal violet and
counted 9 to 16 d after irradiation. Colony counting was
primarily accomplished using an Oxford Optronics Colcount. Some primary cells formed diffuse colonies and
required manual scoring. Each point on the survival curve
represents the mean surviving fraction from four dishes.
Clonogenic survival curves are representative of independent replicate experiments.
The surviving fraction was derived using the following formula:
ð#Colonies=# of cells platedÞirradiation =ð#Colonies=# of cells platedÞunirradiated :

Experimental data were fitted with the linear quadratic
model:
S ¼ expðD  D2 Þ
where S is the survival probability, D is the radiation dose
(Gy), and α and β are the fit parameters (Gy−1 and Gy−2,
respectively).
The sensitization enhancement ratio (SER) was used to
quantify radiosensitization (the SER10 was deduced from
data by using SER10 = Dcontrol/Dtreated, where Dcontrol and
Dtreated doses yield 10% survival for controls and treated cells,
respectively).
Drug treatment. For clonogenic assays, cells transfected
with either POLQ or NT siRNA were allowed to adhere before
addition of temozolomide (Sigma) at the stated concentrations
for 2 h. The cells were then washed with PBS before the addition
of complete medium and incubated for 14 d until colony staining. For γH2AX foci quantification, cells were plated in 96-well

Cancer Res; 70(7) April 1, 2010

2985

Higgins et al.

Figure 1. Screening of a siRNA library of
genes involved in DNA repair in SQ20B
and MRC5 cells. A, irradiated SQ20B cells.
Z-scores of the top 30 genes associated with
elevated γH2AX foci 24 h after 4-Gy radiation.
B, irradiated MRC5 cells. Z-scores of the top 30
genes associated with elevated γH2AX foci
24 h after 4-Gy radiation. C, radiosensitization
of MRC5 cells with APEX2 depletion.
Clonogenic assay in MRC5 cells treated with
50 nmol/L NT or APEX2 siRNA. **, P < 0.01,
unpaired two-sided t test (left). Demonstration
of effective knockdown of APEX2 by qRT-PCR.
Right, gene expression normalized to cells
treated with NT siRNA. D, unirradiated SQ20B
cells. Z-scores of the top 30 genes associated
with elevated γH2AX foci in cells transfected
with siRNA pools.

2986

Cancer Res; 70(7) April 1, 2010

Cancer Research

siRNA Screen Identifies Radiosensitization by POLQ Knockdown

Figure 2. Effects of POLQ knockdown on
γH2AX foci. A, in unirradiated SQ20B
cells, POLQ knockdown has no effect on
γH2AX foci formation. B, γH2AX foci in SQ20B
cells transfected with either NT or POLQ
siRNA fixed 24 h after receiving 4 Gy.
C, increase in proportion of cells with more
than seven γH2AX foci in irradiated SQ20B
cells with POLQ knockdown. **, P < 0.01,
unpaired two-sided t test.

plates as described above. In the experiments indicated, 48 h
after forward transfection, the cells were treated with temozolomide for 2 h, at which point they were either left unirradiated
or treated with 4 Gy. One hour after IR, the cells were washed
thrice with PBS. Complete medium was then added, and the
cells returned to the incubator until fixation 24 h after IR.
Quantification of gene silencing. RNA was extracted and
purified from cells at the times indicated using the RNeasy
Mini kit (Qiagen) as per the manufacturer's instructions.
One step qRT-PCR was performed on 500 ng RNA using
SuperScript III Platinum SYBR Green One-step qRT-PCR kit
(Invitrogen). The primers used for each gene are as follows:
POLQ, TATCTGCTGGAACTTTTGCTGA (forward) and CTCACACCATTTCTTTGATGGA (reverse); APEX2, CTGTAAGGACAATGCTACCC (forward) and ACACGTTGATTAGGGTCAAG
(reverse); and GAPDH, CCACCCATGGCAAATTCCATGGCA
(forward) and TCTAGACGGCAGGTCAGGTCCACC (reverse).
qRT-PCR was achieved using a Stratagene Mx3005P system.
cDNA synthesis was performed by heating the reagents to 42°C
for 30 min followed by 95°C for 10 min. The amplification was
performed at the following conditions for all three genes of interest: 95°C for 30 s, 58°C for 30 s, and 72°C for 60 s for 40 cycles.
Statistical analysis. Data were analyzed using the
CellHTS2 package (16) as follows. Sample values from each
plate were first normalized using the median of the NT siRNA
control wells for each plate. Z-scores for each gene in each replicate were then calculated using the following formula: Z-score =
Samplenorm − MedianNT)/MADNT, where Samplenorm is the
normalized sample value and MedianNT and MADNT are the
median and the median absolute deviation (MAD) of all NT
control wells across all three library plates, respectively. The
final Z-score was then calculated using the mean of the replicate Z-scores for each gene.

www.aacrjournals.org

For clonogenic assays, unpaired t tests were conducted at
each radiation dose exposure to assess differences in surviving fractions. All tests of significance were two-sided,
and values of P < 0.05 were considered significant.

Results
A siRNA screen identifies genes potentially involved in
tumor cell radiosensitivity. We screened a custom siRNA library of 200 genes involved in DNA repair using the radioresistant SQ20B cell line as well as the MRC5 fibroblast line to
identify novel tumor-specific radiosensitizing targets. The
screen of irradiated SQ20B cells was used to compile a list
of genes that may be involved in tumor-specific radiosensitivity. The magnitude of the Z-scores obtained in each of the
screens differed significantly. In view of this, we decided the
most practical way to define genes of interest was to examine
the top 30 genes with the highest Z-scores. The Z-scores of
the top 30 genes associated with elevated γH2AX foci in
SQ20B cells 24 hours after 4-Gy radiation are shown in Fig. 1A.
Several of the genes identified in this screen are already known
to increase cell radiosensitivity following knockdown. These
included genes involved in homologous recombination, such
as BRCA1 (17), BRCA2 (18), and RBBP8 (19), as well as genes
involved in nonhomologous end joining, such as Lig IV (20),
XRCC5 (Ku80; ref. 21), and PRKDC (DNA-PKcs; ref. 22). Genes
involved in DNA damage response, such as 53BP1 (23), which
is involved in cell radiosensitivity, were also identified by the
screen. Depletion of TIMELESS, which was also associated
with a high Z-score, has previously been shown to increase
radiosensitivity but through mechanisms that are less clear
(24). Of the remaining genes that have not previously been
shown to be involved in tumor radiosensitivity, we decided

Cancer Res; 70(7) April 1, 2010

2987

Higgins et al.

to investigate POLQ, RAD21, APEX2, and XAB2 in more detail,
as these genes were considered to have clinically exploitable
potential if it was shown that depletion of these genes caused
tumor-specific radiosensitization.
The screen of irradiated MRC5 cells was used to filter the
list of candidate genes. To identify candidate genes whose
depletion sensitized tumor cells to radiation without affecting normal tissue radiosensitivity, we screened a fibroblast
cell line with the same pools of siRNAs that were used to
transfect the tumor cells. Figure 1B shows the top 30 genes
associated with elevated γH2AX foci in irradiated MRC5
cells. One of the genes identified by this normal tissue screen
was APEX2, which also had a high Z-score on the screen of
irradiated tumor cells. As APEX2 has not previously been
shown to be involved in intrinsic radiosensitivity, we performed clonogenic assays with MRC5 cells depleted of APEX2
and found that effective knockdown did indeed cause increased cell radiosensitivity (Fig. 1C). In view of these findings on a normal tissue line, this gene was not investigated
further as a potential tumor-specific radiosensitizer. Supplementary Table S2 lists the genes that featured in the top 30 Z-scores
of both the irradiated SQ20B and MRC5 cell line screens.
Identification of genes important in tumor cell survival
independently of radiation. Of the remaining candidate
genes being investigated, we tried to use the screen of unirradiated SQ20B cells as a filter to exclude those genes whose
knockdown affected cell viability in the absence of exposure
to IR. The Z-scores of the top 30 genes associated with elevated γH2AX foci in unirradiated SQ20B cells are shown in

Fig. 1D. The effect of gene knockdown on cell survival has
not previously been studied for several of these genes. Colonyforming assays performed with unirradiated SQ20B cells
transfected with two of the siRNA pools ranked highly in this
unirradiated screen (RPA1 and INCENP) siRNA pools resulted
in widespread cell death and no colony formation (data not
shown). These initial results suggested that the screen could
be used as an effective filter for siRNAs, which caused cell
death in unirradiated conditions. Supplementary Table S3 lists
those genes that featured in the top 30 Z-scores of the irradiated SQ20B but not in either the irradiated MRC5 screen or the
unirradiated SQ20B screen.
None of the remaining genes being investigated as causing
tumor-specific radiosensitization (POLQ, RAD21, and XAB2)
was associated with high Z-scores in the screen of unirradiated tumor cells. However, colony-forming assays performed
with a panel of unirradiated cells transfected with both RAD21
and XAB2 siRNAs showed that knockdown of these genes resulted in widespread cell death (Supplementary Table S4).
Therefore, the absence of elevated γH2AX foci in unirradiated
cells transfected with pools of siRNA cannot reliably be used to
predict the survival of cells in the absence of IR. However, the
exclusion of those genes that cause γH2AX foci in the absence
of radiation may reduce the number of false-positive genes in
the screen of irradiated cells. Having excluded three of the four
genes initially identified by the screen of irradiated SQ20B
cells, we investigated the remaining gene, POLQ, in more detail.
POLQ knockdown is associated with increased γH2AX
foci following IR. POLQ (DNA polymerase θ) is a low-fidelity

Figure 3. Radiosensitization of tumor cells
following POLQ depletion. A, radiosensitization
of SQ20B (SER = 1.18) and HeLa (SER = 1.28)
cells following POLQ siRNA transfection. **,
P < 0.01, unpaired two-sided t test. B, effective
POLQ knockdown confirmed by qRT-PCR
with SQ20B and HeLa cells.

2988

Cancer Res; 70(7) April 1, 2010

Cancer Research

siRNA Screen Identifies Radiosensitization by POLQ Knockdown

Figure 4. Demonstration of the absence of
off-target effects. A, T24 cells transfected with
either 50 nmol/L POLQ pool of siRNA (SER = 1.18)
or 25 nmol/L of each individual siRNA strand.
**, P < 0.01, unpaired two-sided t test. B, relative
expression of POLQ normalized to cells treated with
NT siRNA as determined by qRT-PCR.

DNA polymerase with limited normal tissue expression,
whose normal physiologic functions are largely unknown. POLQ
featured in the top 30 Z-scores of the irradiated SQ20B screen
but not in the screens using irradiated MRC5 cells or unirradiated SQ20B cells, suggesting that it does not affect MRC5 cell
survival after irradiation or SQ20B cell viability in the absence
of irradiation. As POLQ knockdown has not previously been
shown to sensitize human tumor cells to IR, this gene was investigated further. First, we aimed to replicate the results
found in the screen. SQ20B cells were transfected in triplicate
wells of two 96-well plates with either NT or POLQ siRNA. One
plate was irradiated with 4 Gy and the other was left unirradiated. Twenty-four hours after IR, cells were analyzed for
γH2AX foci. Unirradiated cells with POLQ knockdown did
not have increased γH2AX foci compared with negative controls (Fig. 2A). However, the irradiated cells treated with
POLQ siRNA had significantly increased residual γH2AX foci
compared with irradiated cells treated with NT siRNA
(Fig. 2B and C).

www.aacrjournals.org

POLQ knockdown sensitizes several tumor cell lines
to IR. To confirm that the observed increase in γH2AX foci
associated with irradiated SQ20B cells depleted of POLQ translated to an increase in tumor cell radiosensitivity, we performed
clonogenic assays with the SQ20B cells used in the primary
screen along with a second tumor line (HeLa) following transfection with either NT or POLQ siRNA. Figure 3 confirms that
both cell lines were sensitized to IR by POLQ knockdown. Clonogenic assays performed on a third tumor (T24 transitional
cell bladder carcinoma) confirmed that the effects of POLQ
knockdown were not restricted to squamous cell carcinomas.
To confirm that the observed results did not occur as a
result of off-target effects, we repeated the experiment with
individual siRNAs as well as the siRNA pool (Fig. 4A). The
individual siRNA strand transfections were performed with
a final concentration of 25 nmol/L. The degree of POLQ
knockdown was well correlated with the magnitude of
associated radiosensitization, strongly suggesting that the
observed effects with POLQ siRNA did not occur as a result

Cancer Res; 70(7) April 1, 2010

2989

Higgins et al.

of off-target effects. Of the four individual siRNAs, strand “1”
caused both the most potent silencing and radiosensitization
(Fig. 4A and B).
POLQ knockdown causes minimal effects on normal
tissue radiosensitivity. Previous work has shown that POLQ
expression is limited to only a few normal tissues (25). To
confirm that treatment with POLQ siRNA did not significantly alter the radiosensitivity of normal tissue cell lines,
we performed clonogenic assays on two fibroblast lines:
MRC5 and POC cells. The POC cells did not express POLQ
(data not shown), and treatment with POLQ siRNA had no
radiosensitizing effects (Fig. 5A). As well as supporting the
hypothesis that POLQ knockdown may cause tumor-specific
radiosensitization, this also confirms that the observed effects
did not occur as a result of off-target effects. In the MRC5 cells,
POLQ siRNA treatment caused only a marginal increase in
MRC5 radiosensitivity at very high doses of radiation (Fig. 5B
and C). A comparison between POLQ expression normalized
to the expression of a housekeeping gene (GAPDH) in untransfected cells showed that MRC5 cells express POLQ at a level
∼50 times lower than the T24 tumor cell line (Fig. 5D). In unirradiated cells, POLQ knockdown did not consistently reduce
colony formation in either the normal tissue or the tumor cell
lines (Supplementary Table S5).
POLQ knockdown has no effects on cell response to
temozolomide with or without IR. Temozolomide is an orally
available alkylating agent that has an established role in the
treatment of glioblastomas (26). It has previously been shown

that a significant proportion of the DNA damage caused by
temozolomide is repaired by the base excision repair (BER)
pathway and that cells with deficiencies in the BER pathway
have increased sensitivity to temozolomide (27). As it has previously been suggested that POLQ plays a role in BER, we examined whether POLQ knockdown rendered cells more
sensitive to temozolomide. However, clonogenic assays performed on SQ20B cells treated with either POLQ or NT siRNA
showed no difference in sensitivity to drug treatment with
temozolomide (Fig. 6A and B).
For both unirradiated (Fig. 6C) and irradiated conditions
(Fig. 6D), SQ20B cells treated with temozolomide were found
to have elevated γH2AX foci 24 hours after drug exposure
compared with cells not exposed to the drug. However, this
occurred with the same magnitude regardless of whether
cells had been transfected with either NT or POLQ siRNA.
These findings would suggest that the mechanism by which
POLQ knockdown causes increased radiosensitivity are independent of BER.

Discussion
The known DNA repair defects that produce large differences in radiation sensitivity are often associated with complex
clinical syndromes, such as ataxia-telangiectasia, Nijmegen
breakage syndrome, and Fanconi anemia (28). The proteins
identified by these repair defects do not represent potential
therapeutic targets due to lack of tumor specificity. Many of

Figure 5. Effect of POLQ siRNA
on normal cells. A, POC cells
treated with POLQ siRNA were not
sensitized to IR. B, MRC5 cells
show modest sensitization to
POLQ depletion only at high doses
of IR. **, P < 0.01, unpaired
two-sided t test. C, effective
knockdown of POLQ in MRC5 cells
treated with 50 nmol/L POLQ
siRNA as determined by qRT-PCR.
D, relative expression of POLQ in
untransfected T24 and MRC5 cells
as determined by qRT-PCR.
The expression of POLQ was
expressed as a ratio relative to
the presence of GAPDH in each
cell line.

2990

Cancer Res; 70(7) April 1, 2010

Cancer Research

siRNA Screen Identifies Radiosensitization by POLQ Knockdown

Figure 6. Effect of temozolomide
treatment after POLQ knockdown.
A, clonogenic assays performed
with SQ20B cells transfected with
either NT or POLQ siRNA. Survival
following temozolomide treatment
expressed as a fraction relative to
cells not exposed to temozolomide.
B, confirmation of effective
knockdown of POLQ in SQ20B
cells as determined by qRT-PCR.
C, effects of temozolomide
treatment on the percentage of
unirradiated SQ20B cells containing
more than seven γH2AX foci per
cell. D, percentage of SQ20B
cells containing more than seven
γH2AX foci per cell following
4-Gy irradiation.

the key therapeutically exploitable mechanisms that determine intrinsic tumor radiosensitivity are largely unknown.
The clinical importance of these mechanisms is shown by
the known correlation between increased tumor radioresistance and adverse patient outcomes (2–4).
The epidermal growth factor receptor pathway is the most
widely studied contributor to tumor cell radioresistance. Recent trials have shown the large benefits that can potentially
be derived from biological treatments that selectively render
tumor cells more sensitive to radiation by manipulation of
this pathway and illustrate the need for greater understanding of the molecular basis for tumor radioresistance (5, 29).
This siRNA screen of genes involved in DNA repair was
based on the critical role that unrepaired DSBs play in cell
death following IR. Of the genes whose knockdown was associated with increased γH2AX foci in SQ20B cells following
IR, several have already been shown to be associated with
increased cell radiosensitivity (17–23), thus validating the primary screening end point. The experimental design used
both irradiated and unirradiated tumor cells as well as parallel siRNA screens in a tumor line and normal tissue line,
allowing the identification of siRNAs that cause tumorspecific radiosensitization. High-throughput screens will inevitably feature both false-positive and false-negative results.
Failure to cause sufficient gene knockdown is one of the
most common causes for obtaining false-negative results.
ATM was one of the genes included in this library, which is
involved in cell radiosensitivity but which was not in the top

www.aacrjournals.org

30 Z-scores of the irradiated cell screens. In this case, it is
probable that this occurred because ATM is one of the genes
involved in causing H2AX phosphorylation in response to
DSB formation (30) and, thus, is a false negative in this assay.
Of the targets identified by this screen, we elected to investigate POLQ further as this gene has not previously been
linked to tumor cell radiosensitivity and because a previous
study has suggested a potentially exploitable difference in
expression between normal tissues and tumor cells (25).
POLQ is a member of the A family of DNA polymerases,
which, unusually for this class of polymerases, synthesizes
DNA with very low fidelity (31, 32). The normal physiologic
functions associated with this protein are currently unclear.
It has previously been suggested that POLQ plays a dominant
role in the process of somatic hypermutation of immunoglobulin genes. This suggestion arose from the observation
that mice deficient in POLQ had a substantially decreased
frequency of mutations in immunoglobulin genes (33). A separate group also found a decrease in mutation frequency in
POLQ-deficient mice but to a lesser degree (34). However, a
recent study found that mutation types and frequencies were
similar in wild-type, POLQ−/−, POLH−/−, and POLQ−/− POLH−/−
mice (35) Accordingly, this group suggested that POLQ does
not have a significant role in the hypermutation pathway.
It has been suggested that POLQ has a role in BER, but
this remains unresolved. Mutation of POLQ in the DT40
chicken B-cell lymphocyte line has been shown to increase
sensitivity to H2O2. POLQ/POLβ mutants had significantly

Cancer Res; 70(7) April 1, 2010

2991

Higgins et al.

higher sensitivity to methyl methanesulfonate than either
single mutant. Extracts obtained from this cell line were used
to show that POLQ mutant cells have markedly reduced single-nucleotide BER capacity in vitro and that this reduction
was of a similar magnitude to cells deficient in POLβ (36).
These findings led to the suggestion that POLQ and POLβ
cooperate in BER.
Recent biochemical analysis has looked at the in vitro activity of cloned human POLQ (37). It was shown that fulllength POLQ has 5′-deoxyribose phosphate (5′-dRP) lyase activity. A COOH-terminal fragment of POLQ was shown to
carry 5′-dRP lyase activity, and this seemed to be independent of polymerase activity. The full-length protein and the
COOH-terminal fragment were shown to have BER activity
in vitro. Although these findings have been used to support
the argument that POLQ may have a role in BER in vivo,
it should be noted that the rate of 5′-dRP lyase activity of
POLQ is ∼40-fold slower than that of POLβ. We found that
POLQ knockdown did not alter the sensitivity of cells to temozolomide either with or without IR. We interpret this to
mean that the mechanism by which POLQ knockdown causes
increased sensitivity to IR is independent of BER, although it
remains possible that POLQ facilitates repair via BER of a lesion that is produced by IR but not by temozolomide.
POLQ expression was previously assessed by RT-PCR in a
variety of different normal human tissues (25). Interestingly,
expression was primarily limited to lymphoid tissues such as
the fetal liver, thymus, and bone marrow. Critical normal tissues such as lung, liver, small intestine, kidney, heart, brain,
and spinal cord that typically limit the radiation dose that
can be delivered to patients did not seem to express POLQ.
This would imply that inhibition of POLQ would not alter the
intrinsic sensitivity of these tissues. Intriguingly, this study
also found that POLQ was overexpressed in a large proportion of tumors derived from patients with colon, lung, and
gastric cancer. Given the findings presented here, POLQ

inhibition in these tumors would be predicted to reduce their
radiation survival.
This difference in expression of POLQ in tumor cells and
critical, radiosensitive normal tissues was central to our decision to investigate POLQ further. Although it is possible
that depletion of POLQ from the small number of normal tissues that express this protein may render these cells more
sensitive to radiation (38), the very restricted normal tissue
expression means that POLQ inhibition may improve the
therapeutic ratio of radiotherapy.
Our findings confirm that POLQ is overexpressed in tumor
cells derived from a variety of primary sites and that POLQ
knockdown causes increased intrinsic radiosensitivity. Our
results are consistent with the limited normal tissue expression of POLQ and, therefore, that depletion of POLQ might
cause much less radiosensitization of normal tissues compared with tumors. These findings raise the possibility that
POLQ inhibition could be used clinically to cause tumorspecific radiosensitization. Additionally, the technique used
in this study successfully identified several other genes already
known to play a role in intrinsic radiosensitivity, thus validating its use in future screens of larger siRNA libraries.
Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest
No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

Grant Support
Cancer Research UK, Medical Research Council, and National Institute for
Health Research Biomedical Research Centre, Oxford. Support funded in part
by PO1 CA 75138 (W.G. McKenna). G.S. Higgins was supported by a Cancer
Research UK/Royal College of Radiologists Clinical Research Fellowship.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment
of page charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in
accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
Received 11/03/2009; revised 12/23/2009; accepted 01/06/2010; published
OnlineFirst 03/16/2010.

References
1.
2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

2992

Emami B, Lyman J, Brown A, et al. Tolerance of normal tissue to
therapeutic irradiation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1991;21:109–22.
Bjork-Eriksson T, West C, Karlsson E, Mercke C. Tumor radiosensitivity (SF2) is a prognostic factor for local control in head and neck
cancers. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2000;46:13–9.
West CM, Davidson SE, Roberts SA, Hunter RD. The independence
of intrinsic radiosensitivity as a prognostic factor for patient response
to radiotherapy of carcinoma of the cervix. Br J Cancer 1997;76:
1184–90.
Girinsky T, Bernheim A, Lubin R, et al. In vitro parameters and
treatment outcome in head and neck cancers treated with surgery
and/or radiation: cell characterization and correlations with local
control and overall survival. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1994;30:
789–94.
Bonner JA, Harari PM, Giralt J, et al. Radiotherapy plus cetuximab for
squamous-cell carcinoma of the head and neck. N Engl J Med 2006;
354:567–78.
Zheng M, Morgan-Lappe SE, Yang J, et al. Growth inhibition and
radiosensitization of glioblastoma and lung cancer cells by small interfering RNA silencing of tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated
factor 2. Cancer Res 2008;68:7570–8.

Cancer Res; 70(7) April 1, 2010

7.

8.
9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

Sudo H, Tsuji AB, Sugyo A, Imai T, Saga T, Harada YN. A loss of
function screen identifies nine new radiation susceptibility genes.
Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2007;364:695–701.
Franken NA, Rodermond HM, Stap J, Haveman J, van Bree C. Clonogenic assay of cells in vitro. Nat Protoc 2006;1:2315–9.
Frankenberg-Schwager M, Frankenberg D, Blocher D, Adamczyk C.
Effect of dose rate on the induction of DNA double-strand breaks in
eucaryotic cells. Radiat Res 1981;87:710–7.
Bedford JS. Sublethal damage, potentially lethal damage, and chromosomal aberrations in mammalian cells exposed to ionizing radiations. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1991;21:1457–69.
Banath JP, Macphail SH, Olive PL. Radiation sensitivity, H2AX phosphorylation, and kinetics of repair of DNA strand breaks in irradiated
cervical cancer cell lines. Cancer Res 2004;64:7144–9.
Taneja N, Davis M, Choy JS, et al. Histone H2AX phosphorylation as
a predictor of radiosensitivity and target for radiotherapy. J Biol
Chem 2004;279:2273–80.
Kim IA, Bae SS, Fernandes A, et al. Selective inhibition of Ras, phosphoinositide 3 kinase, and Akt isoforms increases the radiosensitivity
of human carcinoma cell lines. Cancer Res 2005;65:7902–10.
Kasid U, Pfeifer A, Weichselbaum RR, Dritschilo A, Mark GE. The raf

Cancer Research

siRNA Screen Identifies Radiosensitization by POLQ Knockdown

15.

16.
17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

oncogene is associated with a radiation-resistant human laryngeal
cancer. Science 1987;237:1039–41.
Prevo R, Deutsch E, Sampson O, et al. Class I PI3 kinase inhibition
by the pyridinylfuranopyrimidine inhibitor PI-103 enhances tumor
radiosensitivity. Cancer Res 2008;68:5915–23.
Boutros M, Bras LP, Huber W. Analysis of cell-based RNAi screens.
Genome Biol 2006;7:R66.
Zhou C, Smith JL, Liu J. Role of BRCA1 in cellular resistance to paclitaxel and ionizing radiation in an ovarian cancer cell line carrying a
defective BRCA1. Oncogene 2003;22:2396–404.
Abbott DW, Freeman ML, Holt JT. Double-strand break repair deficiency and radiation sensitivity in BRCA2 mutant cancer cells. J Natl
Cancer Inst 1998;90:978–85.
Yun MH, Hiom K. CtIP-BRCA1 modulates the choice of DNA doublestrand-break repair pathway throughout the cell cycle. Nature 2009;
459:460–3.
Adachi N, Ishino T, Ishii Y, Takeda S, Koyama H. DNA ligase IVdeficient cells are more resistant to ionizing radiation in the absence
of Ku70: implications for DNA double-strand break repair. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 2001;98:12109–13.
Finnie NJ, Gottlieb TM, Blunt T, Jeggo PA, Jackson SP. DNA-dependent
protein kinase activity is absent in xrs-6 cells: implications for sitespecific recombination and DNA double-strand break repair. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 1995;92:320–4.
Kurimasa A, Ouyang H, Dong LJ, et al. Catalytic subunit of DNAdependent protein kinase: impact on lymphocyte development and
tumorigenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1999;96:1403–8.
Kao GD, McKenna WG, Guenther MG, Muschel RJ, Lazar MA, Yen
TJ. Histone deacetylase 4 interacts with 53BP1 to mediate the DNA
damage response. J Cell Biol 2003;160:1017–27.
Chou DM, Elledge SJ. Tipin and Timeless form a mutually protective
complex required for genotoxic stress resistance and checkpoint
function. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2006;103:18143–7.
Kawamura K, Bahar R, Seimiya M, et al. DNA polymerase θ is preferentially expressed in lymphoid tissues and upregulated in human
cancers. Int J Cancer 2004;109:9–16.
Stupp R, Mason WP, van den Bent MJ, et al. Radiotherapy plus concomitant and adjuvant temozolomide for glioblastoma. N Engl J Med
2005;352:987–96.

www.aacrjournals.org

27. Trivedi RN, Almeida KH, Fornsaglio JL, Schamus S, Sobol RW.
The role of base excision repair in the sensitivity and resistance to
temozolomide-mediated cell death. Cancer Res 2005;65:6394–400.
28. Pollard JM, Gatti RA. Clinical radiation sensitivity with DNA repair
disorders: an overview. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2009;74:
1323–31.
29. Brunner TB, Geiger M, Grabenbauer GG, et al. Phase I trial of the
human immunodeficiency virus protease inhibitor nelfinavir and chemoradiation for locally advanced pancreatic cancer. J Clin Oncol
2008;26:2699–706.
30. McManus KJ, Hendzel MJ. ATM-dependent DNA damage-independent
mitotic phosphorylation of H2AX in normally growing mammalian
cells. Mol Biol Cell 2005;16:5013–25.
31. Arana ME, Seki M, Wood RD, Rogozin IB, Kunkel TA. Low-fidelity
DNA synthesis by human DNA polymerase θ. Nucleic Acids Res
2008;36:3847–56.
32. Seki M, Masutani C, Yang LW, et al. High-efficiency bypass of DNA
damage by human DNA polymerase Q. EMBO J 2004;23:4484–94.
33. Zan H, Shima N, Xu Z, et al. The translesion DNA polymerase θ plays
a dominant role in immunoglobulin gene somatic hypermutation.
EMBO J 2005;24:3757–69.
34. Masuda K, Ouchida R, Hikida M, et al. Absence of DNA polymerase θ
results in decreased somatic hypermutation frequency and
altered mutation patterns in Ig genes. DNA Repair (Amst) 2006;
5:1384–91.
35. Martomo SA, Saribasak H, Yokoi M, Hanaoka F, Gearhart PJ. Reevaluation of the role of DNA polymerase θ in somatic hypermutation
of immunoglobulin genes. DNA Repair (Amst) 2008;7:1603–8.
36. Yoshimura M, Kohzaki M, Nakamura J, et al. Vertebrate POLQ and
POLβ cooperate in base excision repair of oxidative DNA damage.
Mol Cell 2006;24:115–25.
37. Prasad R, Longley MJ, Sharief FS, Hou EW, Copeland WC, Wilson
SH. Human DNA polymerase θ possesses 5′-dRP lyase activity and
functions in single-nucleotide base excision repair in vitro. Nucleic
Acids Res 2009;37:1868–77.
38. Goff JP, Shields DS, Seki M, et al. Lack of DNA polymerase θ (POLQ)
radiosensitizes bone marrow stromal cells in vitro and increases reticulocyte micronuclei after total-body irradiation. Radiat Res 2009;
172:165–74.

Cancer Res; 70(7) April 1, 2010

2993

