Oncotarget, Advance Publications 2014

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Targeting Aerobic Glycolysis and HIF-1` Expression Enhance
Imiquimod-induced Apoptosis in Cancer Cells
Shi-Wei Huang1, Jun-Kai Kao1,2, Chun-Ying Wu3, Sin-Ting Wang1,3, Hsin-Chen Lee4,
Shu-Mei Liang5, Yi-Ju Chen6, Jeng-Jer Shieh1,7,8
1

Institute of Biomedical Sciences, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung, Taiwan

2

Department of Pediatrics, Children’s Hospital, Changhua Christian Hospital, Changhua, Taiwan

3

Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Taichung Veterans General Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan

4

Institute of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan

5

Agricultural Biotechnology Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan

6

Department of Dermatology, Taichung Veterans General Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan

7

Department of Education and Research, Taichung Veterans General Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan

8

Rong Hsing Research Center for Translational Medicine, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung, Taiwan

Correspondence:
Dr. Jeng-Jer Shieh, e-mail: shiehjj@vghtc.gov.tw
Short Title: Aerobic glycolysis and HIF-1α in imiquimod-induced apoptosis
Keywords: imiquimod, aerobic glycolysis, HIF-1α, apoptosis
Received: December 31, 2013	

Accepted: March 08, 2014	Published: March 12, 2014

ABSTRACT:
Tumor cells rely on aerobic glycolysis to maintain unconstrained cell growth and
proliferation. Imiquimod (IMQ), a synthetic Toll-like receptor (TLR) 7/8 ligand, exerts
anti-tumor effects directly by inducing cell death in cancer cells and/or indirectly
by activating cellular immune responses against tumor cells. However, whether
IMQ modulates glucose metabolism pathways remains unclear. In this study, we
demonstrated that IMQ can enhance aerobic glycolysis by up-regulating HIF-1`
expression at the transcriptional and translational levels via ROS mediated STAT3- and
Akt-dependent pathways, independent of TLR7/8 signaling. The genetic silencing of
HIF-1` not only repressed IMQ-induced aerobic glycolysis but also sensitized cells to
IMQ-induced apoptosis due to faster ATP and Mcl-1 depletion. Moreover, the glucose
analog 2-DG and the Hsp90 inhibitor 17-AAG, which destabilizes the HIF-1` protein,
synergized with IMQ to induce tumor cell apoptosis in vitro and significantly inhibited
tumor growth in vivo. Thus, we hypothesize that the IMQ-induced up-regulation of
HIF-1` and aerobic glycolysis is a protective response to the metabolic stress generated
by IMQ treatment, and thus, co-treatment with inhibitors of HIF-1` and/or glycolysis
may be a useful therapeutic strategy to enhance the anti-tumor effects of IMQ in
clinical settings.

INTRODUCTION

produce other metabolites for anabolism, and this switch
is promoted by reduced oxygen availability (hypoxia)
and/or various signaling pathways that are frequently
dysregulated during tumor progression [2]. Hypoxiainducible factor 1 (HIF-1), a heterodimeric transcription
factor consisting of the constitutively expressed β subunit
(HIF-1β) and the oxygen-regulated α subunit (HIF-1α),
is the master regulator of metabolic reprogramming
from oxidative respiration to aerobic glycolysis. During
hypoxia, HIF-1α is stabilized and protected from

Tumor cells metabolize glucose through different
pathways than differentiated and non-transformed
normal cells. Tumor cells increase glucose uptake and
predominantly utilize glycolysis instead of mitochondrial
respiration, even in the presence of abundant oxygen
(aerobic glycolysis, the Warburg effect) [1]. This
glycolytic switch in tumors provides proliferative
benefits because the cells can efficiently use glucose to
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1

Oncotarget

proteasomal degradation, allowing it to interact with
HIF-1β. The complete HIF-1 protein then translocates to
the nucleus to activate downstream gene expression in
response to hypoxia [3, 4]. The activation of oncogenic
signaling pathways, such as the PI3K/Akt, MAPK/ERK
and STAT3 signaling pathways, also promotes HIF-1α
expression at the transcriptional and translational levels
to increase the rate of glucose utilization in tumors even
in the presence of sufficient oxygen [5–7]. In addition,
activation of HIF-1α can increase the expression of
anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family members to prevent cell
apoptosis [8–10]. Aerobic glycolysis can prevent cells
from undergoing apoptosis through the inhibition of
mitochondrial respiration, which involves the release of
cytochrome c and subsequent caspase cascade activation
[11, 12]. Thus, HIF-1α expression and aerobic glycolysis
are essential for tumor growth, and the inhibition of both
may enhance sensitivity to anti-tumor agents.
Imiquimod (IMQ), a Toll-like receptor (TLR) 7
and 8 ligand, is a synthetic nucleotide-like compound
of the imidazoquinoline family that has both anti-tumor
and anti-viral activity [13]. IMQ is currently used as a
topical, non-invasive treatment for superficial basal cell
carcinoma (BCC), viral warts, actinic keratosis, cutaneous
squamous cell carcinoma in situ and cutaneous metastases
of malignant melanoma [14, 15]. IMQ exerts its antitumoral activity through the activation of cell-mediated
immune responses by stimulating TLR7/8 in dendritic
cells and directly by inducing the apoptosis of skin cancer
cells in a membrane-death receptor-independent manner
[16, 17]. IMQ also induces non-apoptotic, autophagic
cell death in Caco-2 colon cancer cells and BCC cell
lines [18, 19]. Moreover, IMQ rapidly depletes the Mcl-1
protein in skin cancer cells, and Mcl-1 over-expression
may result in resistance to IMQ-induced apoptosis [20].
Thus, these previous studies suggest that IMQ exerts its
anti-tumoral activity indirectly by activating immune
responses and directly by inducing cell death in tumors.
Recently, TLR2, 4 and 9 ligands were reported to modulate
glucose metabolism to favor aerobic glycolysis in activated
dendritic cells [21]. In addition, the involvement of
HIF-1α in TLR7/8-mediated inflammatory response in
THP-1 human myeloid macrophage had been reported
[22, 23], but whether IMQ can modulate glucose metabolism
through HIF-1α in tumor cells remains unclear.
In this study, we demonstrated that IMQ treatment
greatly enhanced aerobic glycolysis in tumor cells in a
manner independent of TLR7/8 expression. We found
that IMQ-induced aerobic glycolysis was regulated by
HIF-1α expression. IMQ stimulated STAT3 and PI3K/
Akt through ROS to enhance HIF-1α expression at the
mRNA and protein levels but did not affect the stability of
the HIF-1α protein or its rate of degradation. The genetic
silencing of HIF-1α not only reversed IMQ-induced
aerobic glycolysis but also sensitized cancer cells to

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

IMQ-induced apoptosis, as a result of rapid ATP depletion
and decreased Mcl-1 levels. Finally, the glycolytic
inhibitor 2-DG and the Hsp90 inhibitor 17-AAG, which
decreases HIF-1α protein stability, synergized with IMQ
to induce apoptosis in tumor cells and effectively prevent
tumor growth in mouse tumor xenograft models. Our
results indicate that IMQ-induced HIF-1α expression and
aerobic glycolysis may play protective roles against IMQgenerated metabolic stress, suggesting that co-treatment
with inhibitors of HIF-1α or glycolysis and IMQ may
provide a novel therapeutic strategy to enhance the antitumor effects of IMQ.

RESULTS
IMQ enhanced aerobic glycolysis in tumor cells
To explore whether IMQ modulates glucose
metabolism in tumor cells, we determined the intracellular
glucose uptake, extracellular glucose and lactate contents,
which indicate the rate of aerobic glycolysis, before
and after IMQ treatment. IMQ significantly increased
glucose uptake, glucose utilization and lactate secretion
in BCC, A549, AGS, HeLa, SCC12, A375, MeWo, C32
and B16F10 cells but not in primary human keratinocytes
(Fig. 1A, 1B and 1C). The switch to aerobic glycolysis
from oxidative respiration in cells can be characterized
by decreased oxygen consumption and mitochondria
respiration. We found that treatment with IMQ reduced the
extracellular oxygen consumption and cytochrome oxidase
activity in cultures of different cancer cell lines (Fig. 1D
and 1E). Consistent with this reduction in mitochondrial
respiration, mitochondrial potential also decreased after
exposure to IMQ (Fig. 1F). IMQ is a TLR7/8 ligand, and
TLR signaling has been reported to modulate glucose
metabolism in dendritic cells [21]. To resolve whether the
IMQ-induced aerobic glycolysis was mediated by TLR7/8,
we examined TLR7 and TLR8 expression in the tumor cell
lines and primary human keratinocytes. The expression
patterns of TLR7 and TLR8 had no correlation with
IMQ-induced aerobic glycolysis in the tested cell lines
(Fig. S1A). Thus, we concluded that IMQ-induced aerobic
glycolysis is not dependent on TLR7 or TLR8 expression.
Taken together, our results indicate that IMQ can enhance
aerobic glycolysis in tumor cells and that this process is
independent of TLR7 and TLR8 expression.

IMQ induced HIF-1α expression and activation
in tumor cells
HIF-1α has been demonstrated to be the master
regulator of the switch in glucose metabolism from
oxidative respiration to aerobic glycolysis [3,  
4].
Resiquimod and ssRNA, another TLR7/8 ligands,
induced HIF-1α expression in THP-1 cells [23].

2

Oncotarget

We hypothesized that IMQ induces HIF-1α expression
to shift glucose metabolism to aerobic glycolysis in
normoxic condition. As shown in Fig. 2A and Fig. S2A,
IMQ increased HIF-1α protein expression in BCC,
SCC12, HeLa, MeWo and B16F10 cells in a time- and
dose-dependent manner. Previously studies have shown
that activated HIF-1α translocates to the nucleus and
activates the expression of its target genes, such as
GLUT1 and VEGF [24, 25]. Thus, it was important to

determine whether IMQ stimulated HIF-1α activation in
tumor cells. We observed that IMQ not only promoted
the nuclear translocation of HIF-1α (Fig. 2B) but also
increased the mRNA levels of VEGF and GLUT1 in BCC
cells (Fig. S2B). We also confirmed that IMQ enhanced
HRE-driven luciferase expression in BCC cells in time
course experiments (Fig. 2C). These results indicate that
IMQ stimulated HIF-1α expression and activated the
expression of its target genes in tumor cells.

Figure 1: IMQ induced aerobic glycolysis in tumor cells. IMQ increased glucose uptake into cells (A) and decreased extracellular
glucose content (B) in tumor cells. BCC, A549, A375, AGS, HeLa, C32, MeWo, SCC12 and B16F10 cells and primary human keratinocytes
were incubated in culture medium with or without 50 µg/ml IMQ for 12 hours, and then, the relative glucose uptake and glucose utilization
(determined by extracellular glucose content) was analyzed using a glucose uptake assay and glucose content assay with normalization
based on the total cell number, respectively. (C) IMQ increased lactate secretion by tumor cells. Tumor cell lines were incubated with
or without 50 µg/ml IMQ for 24 hours, and then, the lactate content of the culture medium was determined using a lactate content assay
with normalization to the total cell number. (D) IMQ decreased oxygen consumption by tumor cells. Tumor cell lines were treated with or
without 50 µg/ml IMQ, and then, the extracellular oxygen concentration was determined using a polarographic oxygen electrode.
(Continued)
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3

Oncotarget

Figure 1: (E) IMQ reduced mitochondrial respiration in tumor cells. BCC, A549, A375, AGS, HeLa, C32, MeWo, SCC12 and B16F10

cells and primary human keratinocytes were incubated in culture medium with or without 50 µg/ml IMQ for 8 hours, and then harvested cell
lysate for cytochrome oxidase activity assay. (F) IMQ decreased mitochondrial potential in tumor cells. BCC, AGS, HeLa, A375, MeWo,
C32, SCC12, B16F10 and keratinocytes were treated with or without 50 µg/ml IMQ for 8 hours, the cells were assessed by fluorescence
due to MitoTracker Red CMXRos staining using flow cytometry. The data are expressed as the mean ± S.E.M. of at least three independent
experiments. * p < 0.05; ** p < 0.01; *** p < 0.001.

IMQ induced HIF-1α expression via
transcriptional and translational control in
tumor cells

effect on IMQ-induced HIF-1α expression in BCC cells
(Fig. S3C). To determine whether IMQ affects HIF-1α
protein stability in tumor cells, protein synthesis was
inhibited with CHX. CHX treatment decreased HIF-1α
protein levels in a time-dependent manner in IMQ-treated
BCC and SCC12 cells (Fig. 3G). Furthermore, HIF-1α
has been reported to be degraded via the ubiquitinproteasome pathway [28]. We showed that treatment with
the proteasome inhibitor MG132 resulted in significantly
higher HIF-1α protein levels in IMQ-treated BCC and
SCC12 cells compared with IMQ or MG132 treatment
alone, indicating that HIF-1α was still degraded by the
proteasome during IMQ stimulation (Fig. 3H). Thus, we
concluded that the IMQ-induced increase in the HIF-1α
protein level is primarily regulated at the transcriptional
and translational levels and not at the level of protein
stability or proteasomal degradation. We also observed
that IMQ increased cellular ROS production (Fig. S3D),
and various studies have reported that ROS can stimulate
STAT3 and Akt activation in cells [29–32]. To test whether
IMQ activates STAT3 and Akt via ROS production, we
pre-treated the cells with the potent ROS scavenger
N-acetylcysteine (NAC) before IMQ treatment. We
observed that treatment with NAC significantly reduced
the levels of HIF-1α, phosphorylated STAT3 and
phosphorylated Akt in both BCC and SCC12 cells (Fig. 3I
and Fig. S3E). In addition, treatment with NAC decreased
the nuclear translocation of HIF-1α in IMQ-treated BCC
and SCC12 cells (Fig. 3J and Fig. S3F). Taken together,
these results indicate that IMQ may activate STAT3 to

Next, we evaluated the control mechanisms of
IMQ-induced HIF-1α expression in tumor cells. As
shown in Fig. 3A, we found that IMQ induced HIF-1α
mRNA expression in a time-dependent manner in BCC
and SCC12 cells. IMQ has been reported to induce
STAT3 phosphorylation [26], and activated STAT3 can
increase HIF-1α expression through its transcriptional
activation [27]. We examined whether IMQ induces
STAT3 transcriptional activation using a STAT3 reporter
plasmid and whether IMQ-induced HIF-1α transcription is
mediated by STAT3 signaling using the STAT3 inhibitors
Stattic and NSC74859. First, IMQ induced STAT3-driven
luciferase expression in BCC cells in a time-dependent
manner (Fig. 3B). Second, the STAT3 inhibitors not
only significantly inhibited IMQ-induced HIF-1α mRNA
expression but also decreased the HIF-1α protein level in
BCC and SCC12 cells (Fig. 3C, Fig. 3D and Fig. S3A).
Activation of the MAPK/ERK and Akt/mTOR pathways
has been reported to enhance HIF-1α protein synthesis
[6, 7]. We also observed that IMQ treatment promoted the
phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and Akt in BCC and SCC12
cells, indicating that the MAPK/ERK and Akt/mTOR
signaling pathways were activated (Fig. 3E and Fig. S3B).
The PI3K inhibitors LY294002 and wortmannin efficiently
inhibited IMQ-induced HIF-1α expression (Fig. 3F), but
the inhibition of ERK by PD98059 or U0126 had no

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4

Oncotarget

Figure 2: IMQ induced HIF-1α expression and activation in tumor cells. (A) IMQ increased HIF-1α expression in various tumor

cell lines. BCC, SCC12, HeLa, MeWo and B16F10 cells were treated with 50 µg/ml IMQ for 0, 1, 2, 4, 8 or 12 hours and then harvested to
prepare cell lysates for immunoblotting with HIF-1α and β-actin antibodies. (B) IMQ promoted the nuclear translocation of HIF-1α in tumor
cells. BCC and SCC12 cells were treated with or without 50 µg/ml IMQ for 4 hours and then processed for immunocytochemistry using a
rabbit anti-HIF-1α antibody and a FITC-conjugated goat anti-rabbit antibody. Scale bars, 20 µm. (C) IMQ enhanced HIF-1α transactivation
activity. BCC cells were transfected with a HRE-driven luciferase reporter vector for 48 hours and then treated with 50 µg/ml IMQ for 0,
2, 4, 8, 12 or 24 hours. The cell lysates were collected and processed for a luciferase assay by the detection of luminescence. The P and N
groups were the cells transfected with the positive control vector and the negative control vector, respectively. The data are expressed as the
mean ± S.E.M. of at least three independent experiments. * p < 0.05; ** p < 0.01.

increase HIF-1α mRNA expression and may stimulate
Akt to promote HIF-1α protein synthesis through ROS in
tumor cells.

it is necessary to investigate the relationship between
aerobic glycolysis and HIF-1α expression in IMQtreated cells. We showed that the inhibition of STAT3 by
Stattic and NSC74859 not only reduced IMQ-induced
HIF-1α expression but also significantly repressed glucose
utilization in IMQ-treated BCC cells (Fig. 4A). In addition,
treatment with LY294002 and wortmannin significantly
reduced glucose utilization in IMQ-treated BCC cells
(Fig. 4B). However, PD98059 and U0126 had no influence

The induction of HIF-1α mediated IMQ-induced
aerobic glycolysis in tumor cells
We observed IMQ-induced aerobic glycolysis and
HIF-1α expression in several tumor cell lines. Thus,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5

Oncotarget

The induction of HIF-1α mediated IMQ-induced
apoptosis in tumor cells

on glucose utilization by IMQ-treated BCC cells (Fig. S4).
These parallel changes indicate that the inhibitors that
suppressed IMQ-induced HIF-1α expression also inhibited
IMQ-enhanced aerobic glycolysis. Furthermore, the
specific knock-down of HIF-1α expression by HIF-1α
siRNA significantly decreased glucose utilization and
lactate secretion in IMQ-treated BCC and SCC12 cells
(Fig. 4C and Fig. 4D). These data provide evidence that
IMQ-induced aerobic glycolysis is mediated by HIF-1α
expression in tumor cells.

It has been reported that the induction of
HIF-1α promotes glycolysis and Mcl-1 expression
via its transcriptional activity to protect against cell
apoptosis  [10]. Our previous studies demonstrated
that IMQ reduced Mcl-1 protein expression to induce
intrinsic apoptosis in skin cancer cells [20]. To determine
the relationship between the induction of HIF-1α and

Figure 3: IMQ increased HIF-1α expression at the transcriptional and translational levels. (A) IMQ stimulated HIF-1α
mRNA expression in tumor cells. BCC and SCC12 cells were treated with 50 µg/ml IMQ for 0, 1, 2, 4, 8, 12 or 24 hours, and then, the
HIF-1α mRNA levels were determined by quantitative real-time PCR. (B) IMQ enhanced STAT3 transcriptional activity in BCC cells. BCC
cells were transfected with a STAT3-driven luciferase reporter vector for 48 hours. The cells were treated with 50 µg/ml IMQ for 0, 2, 4,
8, 12 or 24 hours and then analyzed by a luciferase assay. (C and D) The inhibition of STAT3 reduced the HIF-1α mRNA (C) and protein
levels (D) in IMQ-treated cells. BCC cells were pre-treated with Stattic (10 µM) or NSC74859 (1 µM) for 1 hour and then treated with or
without 50 µg/ml IMQ for 4 hours. Cell lysates were collected, and the mRNA and protein levels were determined by quantitative real-time
PCR and immunoblotting with HIF-1α, p-STAT3, STAT3 and β-actin antibodies, respectively.
(Continued)
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6

Oncotarget

Figure 3: (E) IMQ-induced HIF-1α expression was associated with the activation of the Akt and ERK signaling pathways. BCC cells were
incubated with medium containing 50 µg/ml IMQ for 0, 1, 2, 4, 8 or 12 hours, and cell lysates were then harvested for immunoblotting with
HIF-1α, phosphorylated-Akt, Akt, phosphorylated-ERK, ERK and β-actin antibodies. (F) Suppression of the PI3K/Akt signaling pathway
reduced IMQ-induced HIF-1α expression. BCC cells were incubated for 1 hour with 20 µM LY294002 or 10 µM wortmannin in medium
and then treated with or without 50 µg/ml IMQ for 4 hours. Cell lysates were collected for immunoblotting with HIF-1α, p-Akt, Akt and
β-actin antibodies. (G) IMQ treatment did not increase the protein stability of HIF-1α. BCC and SCC12 cells were treated with IMQ
(50 µg/ml) for 6 hours with or without co-treated with CHX (10 µg/ml) for 0, 2, 4 or 6 hours. Cell lysates were prepared for immunoblotting
with HIF-1α and β-actin antibodies. (H) IMQ did not affect the proteasomal degradation of the HIF-1α protein. BCC and SCC12 cells were
pre-treated with MG132 (10 µM) for 1 hour, treated with IMQ (50 µg/ml) for 4 hours and then processed for immunoblotting with HIF-1α
and β-actin antibodies. (I) The depletion of ROS resulted in the down-regulation of HIF-1α expression with the repression of the STAT3 and
PI3K/Akt signaling pathway. BCC cells were incubated with medium containing 2 mM NAC for 30 minutes and then treated with 50 µg/ml
IMQ for 4 hours. Cell lysates were collected for immunoblotting with HIF-1α, p-Akt, Akt, p-STAT3, STAT3 and β-actin antibodies. (J) The
inhibition of ROS production repressed IMQ-induced HIF-1α nuclear translocation. BCC cells were pre-treated with 2 mM NAC for 30
minutes and then treated with 50 µg/ml IMQ for 4 hours. The subcellular localization of HIF-1α was determined by immunocytochemistry.
Scale bars, 20 μm. The data are expressed as the mean ± S.E.M. of at least three independent experiments. * p < 0.05; ** p < 0.01.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7

Oncotarget

Figure 4: The induction of HIF-1α mediated IMQ-induced aerobic glycolysis in tumor cells. (A) The disruption of STAT3’s
function inhibited IMQ-induced glucose utilization. BCC cells were incubated in medium containing 10 µM Stattic or 1 µM NSC74859
for 1 hour and then treated with or without 50 µg/ml IMQ for 12 hours. The glucose content assay was performed to determine the relative
extracellular glucose content normalized to the total cell number. (B) Inhibition of the PI3K/Akt signaling pathway repressed IMQ-induced
glucose utilization. BCC cells were pre-treated with 20 µM LY294002 or 10 µM wortmannin and then treated with or without 50 µg/ml IMQ.
The relative glucose utilization level was calculated using a glucose content assay with normalization to the total cell number. (C) and (D)
The genetic silencing of HIF-1α suppressed IMQ-induced glucose utilization and lactate production in tumor cells. BCC and SCC12 cells
were transfected with a HIF-1α-specific siRNA or a non-specific control siRNA for 24 hours. The transfected cells were treated with 50 µg/
ml IMQ. The HIF-1α protein was checked by immunoblotting (up panel of figure C) and the relative glucose utilization level over 12 hours
was determined using a glucose content assay (low panel of figure C). The extracellular lactate levels of transfected cells treated with 50
µg/ml IMQ for 24 hours were analyzed using a lactate content assay (D). These results were normalized to the total cell number. The data
are expressed as the mean ± S.E.M. of at least three independent experiments. * p < 0.05; ** p < 0.01.

apoptosis in IMQ-treated tumor cells, we used HIF-1α
siRNA to reduce HIF-1α expression and then determined
the level of apoptosis in IMQ-treated cells. HIF-1α
knock-down increased the apoptotic cell population
relative to that in the control siRNA groups for IMQtreated BCC and SCC12 cells, although SCC12 cells were
relative resistant to IMQ-induced apoptosis (Fig. 5A).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

HIF-1α knock-down also enhanced the levels of apoptotic
markers such as cleaved-PARP, cleaved-caspase 3 and
cleaved-caspase 9 and reduced the Mcl-1 protein level
in IMQ-treated BCC and SCC12 cells (Fig. 5B and
Fig. S5). Our results suggest that the inhibition of HIF-1α
expression may sensitize the IMQ-induced apoptosis in
cancer cells.
8

Oncotarget

Figure 5: HIF-1α expression are involved in IMQ-induced apoptosis in tumor cells. (A and B) The knock-down of HIF-1α
sensitized tumor cells to IMQ-induced apoptosis. (A) BCC and SCC12 cells were transfected with a HIF-1α specific siRNA or a nonspecific siRNA for 24 hours and then treated with 50 µg/ml IMQ for 24 or 48 hours, respectively. The cells were then analyzed with a DNA
content assay based on PI staining and flow cytometry. (B) The siRNA transfected BCC cells incubated with 50 µg/ml IMQ for 12 hours
were analyzed by immunoblotting with cleaved-PARP, cleaved-caspase 9, cleaved-caspase 3, Mcl-1 and β-actin antibodies. The data are
expressed as the mean ± S.E.M. of at least three independent experiments. * p < 0.05; ** p < 0.01.

The inhibition of aerobic glycolysis and HIF-1α
expression synergistically increased IMQ-induced
apoptosis in vitro and in vivo

dramatically repressed tumor growth when co-administered
with 17-AAG to B16F10 tumor-bearing mice (Fig. 6E and
Fig. 6F). Taken together, these results indicate that the
disruption of glucose utilization by 2-DG and the targeting
of HIF-1α protein by 17-AAG can enhance the antitumor
activity of IMQ both in vitro and in vivo.

The inhibition of aerobic glycolysis or HIF-1α
expression using genetic manipulation or chemical
inhibitors may sensitize tumor cells to chemotherapy
[33–36]. Next, we used the nonmetabolizable glucose
analog 2-DG and the Hsp90 inhibitor 17-AAG, a derivative
of geldanamycin (GA) which had been reported to not
only destabilizes the HIF-1α protein but also disrupts
STAT3- HIF-1α activation axis [37, 38], along with IMQ
co-treatment in cancer cells and xenograft tumor mouse
models to test this hypothesis. As shown in Fig. 6A and
S6A, 2-DG synergistically enhanced IMQ-induced
apoptosis and decreased cell viability in BCC, HeLa and
B16F10 cells but not in primary human keratinocytes.
We also observed that the combination 2-DG and IMQ
significantly suppressed tumor growth relative to the level
of suppression achieved by treatment with a single agent
in B16F10 tumor-bearing mice (Fig. 6B and Fig. 6C). In
addition, 17-AAG co-administered with IMQ significantly
increased the apoptotic cell content and reduced cell
viability in BCC, HeLa and B16F10 cells but had no effect
on primary human keratinocytes (Fig. 6D and Fig. S6B).
Moreover, treatment with 17-AAG effectively blunted the
IMQ induced STAT3 phosphorylation and HIF-1α protein
expression (Fig. S6C). Consistently, we also found that IMQ

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

DISCUSSION
No previous studies have shown that the TLR7
agonist IMQ modulates glucose metabolism in tumor
cells. In this study, we demonstrated that IMQ increased
glucose uptake, glucose utilization and lactate secretion
and reduced mitochondria respiration, indicating that
IMQ increased the rate of aerobic glycolysis, in both
TLR7/8-expressing and TLR7/8-non-expressing tumor
cells. We found that IMQ induced HIF-1α expression and
nuclear translocation and activated its downstream genes,
including VEGF and GLUT1. Pharmacological inhibition
of the PI3K/Akt or STAT3 pathway significantly reduced
IMQ-induced glucose utilization and IMQ-induced
HIF-1α expression at the transcriptional and translational
levels. The genetic silencing of HIF-1α expression reduced
the IMQ-enhanced glucose utilization and sensitized
tumor cells to IMQ-induced apoptosis. Furthermore, IMQ
synergized with the glucose analog 2-DG and the 17-AAG
which destabilizes the HIF-1α protein to induce apoptosis

9

Oncotarget

in tumor cells but not in primary human keratinocytes.
The combination of IMQ with 2-DG or 17-AAG also
significantly suppressed melanoma xenograft growth
relative to the levels of growth observed for treatment with
a single agent in vivo.
A recent study demonstrated that TLR2, 4 and 9
agonists stimulated the PI3K/Akt pathway to shift glucose
metabolism to aerobic glycolysis, which was essential
for the survival and activation of dendritic cells [21]. In
the present study, we demonstrated that the TLR7 ligand

IMQ increased glycolysis and decreased mitochondria
respiration in both TLR7/8-positive and TLR7/8-negative
cell lines. These results indicate that IMQ-enhanced
aerobic glycolysis may not depend on TLR7/8 expression
in tumor cells. Interestingly, it has been shown that
IMQ can interact with the adenosine receptor to induce
proinflammatory cytokines in TLR7/8-negative cells [39].
A derivative of IMQ lacking TLR7/8 activity has also
been shown to stimulate cytokine production [40]. Thus,
it is possible that some IMQ-induced responses may

Figure 6: The combination of a pharmacological glycolytic inhibitor 2-DG or a Hsp90 inhibitor 17-AAG with IMQ
significantly suppressed tumor growth in vitro and in vivo. (A) The glucose analog 2-DG enhanced IMQ-induced apoptosis in

tumor cells but not in normal cells. BCC, HeLa and B16F10 cells and primary human keratinocytes were treated with sub-lethal dose of
2-DG and co-treated with 10, 25 or 50 µg/ml IMQ for 24 hours. The cells were collected, and the hypodiploid cell population was detected
using a DNA content assay based on flow cytometry. The sub-lethal dose of 2-DG in BCC cells and primary human keratinocytes was
50 mM, and the sub-lethal dose in HeLa and B16F10 cells was 5 mM. (B and C) 2-DG synergized with IMQ to repress melanoma growth
in a mouse tumor xenograft model. C57BL/6 mice were subcutaneously injected with 2 × 105 B16F10 mouse melanoma cells. After the
tumor area reached 0.2 mm2, 2-DG (62.5 mg/kg), IMQ (25 mg/kg) or both were injected daily into the tumor site, and the tumor volume
was measured for one week (B). After 8 days of treatment, the animals were sacrificed, and the tumor weights were recorded (C).
(Continued)
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10

Oncotarget

Figure 6: (D) The pharmacological inhibition of HIF-1α enhanced IMQ-induced apoptosis in tumor cells. BCC, HeLa and B16F10 cells
and primary human keratinocytes were pre-treated with 10 µM 17-AAG for 1 hour and then incubated with culture medium containing
IMQ (0, 10, 25, 50 µg/ml) for 24 hours. The cells were then collected for use in a DNA content assay based on flow cytometry. (E and F)
The 17-AAG synergized with IMQ to suppress tumor growth in vivo. B16F10 melanoma-bearing mice were generated as previously
described and treated daily with 40 mg/kg 17-AAG, 25 mg/kg IMQ or a combination of 17-AAG and IMQ by in situ injection at the
tumor site. The tumor volume was measured daily for one week (E). All the animals were sacrificed after 8 days of treatment, and the
tumor weights were recorded (F). The asterisk represents significance between control and 2-DG + IMQ (B), control and 17-AAG+IMQ
(E). The pound represents significance between IMQ and 2-DG + IMQ (B), IMQ and 17-AAG+IMQ (E); the double dagger represents
significance between 2DG and 2DG+IMQ (B), 17-AAG and 17-AAG+IMQ (E). The data are expressed as the mean ± S.E.M. of at least
three independent experiments (* p < 0.05; ** p < 0.01; *** p < 0.001; # p < 0.05; ## p < 0.01; ### p < 0.001; × p < 0.05; ×× p < 0.01).

not require the presence of TLR7/8. Although different
TLR7/8 ligands, resiquimod and ssRNA, have been
reported to up-regulate HIF-1α expression and induce
TLR7/8-mediated inflammatory response in TLR7/8
expressing-THP1 cells [22, 23], we observed that overexpression of TLR7 but not TLR8 could further enhance
the IMQ-enhanced aerobic glycolysis in BCC cells
(Fig. S1B, S1C and S1D). Thus, IMQ-enhanced aerobic
glycolysis may occur in TLR7/8 non-expressed tumor
cells, however, the expression of TLR7 may strengthen
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

this effect. The other receptors that modulate IMQenhanced aerobic glycolysis should be further evaluated.
Under hypoxic conditions, stabilized HIF-1α
dimerizes with HIF-1β, translocates to the nucleus and
transactivates the expression of its downstream genes,
which encode glucose transporters and all glycolytic
enzymes, to switch the metabolic pathway to aerobic
glycolysis for energy production. HIF-1 also up-regulates
VEGF expression to promote angiogenesis [25, 41]. In
this study, we demonstrated that IMQ induced HIF-1α
11

Oncotarget

ERK pathways suggest that IMQ activates PI3K/Akt to
enhance aerobic glycolysis but does not affect MAPK/
ERK signaling. IMQ is known to activate STAT3 [26], and
STAT3 has also been reported to act as a master regulator
of the induction of aerobic glycolysis [5, 26, 27]. We
found that inhibition of IMQ-stimulated phosphorylatedSTAT3 using STAT3 inhibitors resulted in a reduced rate
of glucose utilization. Similar to the signaling for IMQinduced HIF-1α accumulation, we demonstrated that IMQ
activated the PI3K/Akt and STAT3 pathways to enhance
aerobic glycolysis in TLR7/8-negative tumor cells. Also
demonstrating that aerobic glycolysis is controlled by
HIF-1α in IMQ-treated cancer cells, the genetic silencing
of HIF-1α reversed the IMQ-enhanced glucose utilization
and lactate production. HIF-1α knock-down also
sensitized tumor cells to IMQ-induced apoptosis, with
the rapid depletion of the Mcl-1 protein. The induction of
HIF-1α upregulates Mcl-1 expression via its transcriptional
activity [10]. This data corresponds to our previous finding
that Mcl-1 mRNA levels were upregulated during IMQ
treatment. However, the IMQ induced decrease in Mcl-1
protein level is not due to transcriptional or degradation
control but is mainly mediated by translation inhibition
[20]. Thus, as compared with control siRNA knockdown, it is reasonable to observe that HIF-1α knock-down
inhibited Mcl-1 mRNA transcription and then strongly and
rapidly disrupted the Mcl-1 protein translation in BCC
and SCC12 cells with IMQ treatment. Interestingly, IMQ
dramatically depleted the intracellular ATP content in the
BCC, A375, HeLa and A549 cell lines, and the knockdown of HIF-1α resulted in much lower ATP levels in
IMQ-treated BCC cells (Fig. S7B and Fig. S7C). Recent
studies have demonstrated that the presence of abundant
glucose for glycolysis can maintain Mcl-1 expression
to protect cells from apoptosis [48]. These results may
indicate that the induction of HIF-1α in IMQ-treated
cancer cells may promote survival by uptaking more
glucose and maintaining a higher intracellular ATP level
to protect against apoptosis via switching to aerobic
glycolysis. The depletion of ATP results in the activation
of the intracellular energy sensor AMP-activated protein
kinase (AMPK), which can promote glucose utilization,
glycolysis and oxidative respiration to generate more ATP
[49]. It is unlike that IMQ enhanced aerobic glycolysis is
mediated by AMPK, because of increasing lactate secretion
and inhibiting oxygen consumption in IMQ treated cancer
cells. Whether IMQ induced AMPK activation and the
effect of AMPK activation on glucose metabolism in
cancer cells need further investigation. Along with HIF-1α,
both hexokinase II and PKM2 have been shown to induce
aerobic glycolysis in cells [50, 51]. As shown in Fig. S7D,
we found that IMQ did not modulate the hexokinase II or
PKM2 expression levels in BCC cells. Thus, we excluded
the possibility that hexokinase II and PKM2 are involved
in IMQ-induced aerobic glycolysis. Taken together, we
hypothesized that induction of HIF-1α promotes the

protein expression and nuclear translocation, increased
HRE-driven luciferase reporter activity and enhanced
the expression of genes downstream of HIF-1, including
VEGF and GLUT1, under normoxic conditions. This
IMQ-induced HIF-1α expression also occurred in
TLR7/8-negative tumor cells, although it has been
reported previously that the ligand-induced activation of
TLR7/8 leads to the accumulation of HIF-1α protein in
THP-1 human myeloid macrophages [22, 23]. The level
of HIF-1α protein can be regulated at several levels,
including transcription, translation and degradation [42].
STAT3 and NF-κB increase HIF-1α expression via
their transcriptional activity [27, 43, 44], activation of
the PI3K/Akt and MAPK/ERK pathways promotes
HIF-1α protein synthesis [6, 7], and hypoxia stabilizes
the ­HIF-1α protein by protecting it from proteasomal
degradation [28]. In our study, we observed STAT3
inhibitors, but not an NF-κB inhibitor (Fig. S7A), reduced
both the HIF-1α mRNA and protein levels in IMQ-treated
cells. In THP-1 cells, the PI3K/Akt and MAPK/ERK
pathways have been reported to not be involved in TLR7/8mediated HIF-1α accumulation [23]. In contrast, we
observed that the inhibition of the PI3K pathway, but not
ERK signaling, not only inhibited IMQ-enhanced aerobic
glycolysis but also dramatically suppressed IMQ-induced
HIF-1α expression in TLR7/8-negative BCC cells. Thus,
we hypothesized that IMQ induces HIF-1α expression
by increasing transcription and promoting translation
through activation of the STAT3 and PI3K/Akt pathways,
respectively. Previous studies have demonstrated that ROS
can inhibit PHD1-3 to prevent HIF-1α degradation via the
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway under normoxic conditions
[45]. However, ROS also stimulate the PI3K/Akt pathway
and induce STAT3 phosphorylation in cells [29–32]. We
found that IMQ induced ROS production (Fig. S3D).
Treatment of IMQ-treated cells with the ROS scavenger
NAC decreased the levels of phosphorylated-STAT3
and phosphorylated-Akt in addition to down-regulating
HIF-1α. Moreover, in IMQ-treated BCC cells, we found
that CHX treatment decreased the HIF-1α protein level and
that MG132 treatment resulted in a much higher level of
HIF-1α protein. Thus, we hypothesized that IMQ-induced
ROS activate both the STAT3 and PI3K/Akt pathways
to promote HIF-1α expression but do not increase
the stability or inhibit the proteasomal degradation of
HIF-1α in tumor cells. Based on our results, we concluded
that IMQ activates the STAT3 and PI3K/Akt pathways
to increase HIF-1α expression at both the transcriptional
and translational levels in TLR7/8-negative cancer cells.
IMQ-induced ROS generation may play an important
role in this process. Importantly, the signaling pathways
involved in IMQ-induced HIF-1α accumulation may differ
between TLR7/8-positive cells and TLR7/8-negative cells.
Aerobic glycolysis has been reported to be induced
by PI3K/Akt and MAPK/ERK signaling [46, 47]. The
results for the pharmacological inhibition of the Akt and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

12

Oncotarget

IMQ-induced apoptosis for the following reasons. First,
we demonstrated that the inhibition of HIF-1α expression
by RNAi strategy may sensitize the IMQ-induced
apoptosis in cancer cells. Second, we demonstrated that
17-AAG effectively blunted the IMQ induced STAT3
phosphorylation and HIF-1α protein accumulation in
cancer cell lines. Consistent with our results, it has
been found that the 17-AAG not only destabilizes the
HIF-1α protein in prostate cancer cells but also disrupts
STAT3- HIF-1α activation axis in pancreatic and gastric
cancer cells [37, 38]. Third, we provided evidences
that chetomin, which inhibits the HIF-1 transactivating
activity by disrupting the interactions of the C-terminal
transactivation domain of HIF-1α with the CH1 domain of
transcriptional coactivator p300 [59, 60], can also enhance
the antitumor activity of IMQ both in vitro and in vivo
(Fig. S8). Collectively, different lines of evidence argue
that targeting of HIF-1α may disrupt IMQ-induced HIF-1α
up-regulation and activity, counteract the IMQ-enhanced
aerobic glycolysis and enhance the IMQ-induced apoptosis
in cancer cells. 17-AAG can selectively sensitize cancer
cells to chemotherapy. However, accumulated evidences
indicated that GA and 17-AAG also protect certain
cells against specific chemotherapy [58, 61, 62]. Dual
effects of GA and 17-AAG had been mention that these
agents have cytoprotective response for chemotherapy
in apoptosis-prone cells. In contrast, they could sensitize
apoptosis-reluctant cancer cells that are dependent on
Hsp90 client oncogenic kinases and antiapoptotic proteins
[62]. Interestingly, bimodal effects of 17-AAG in the same
cancer cells had been observed that low-dose treatment
(5–30 nM) with 17-AAG increased and high-dose
treatment (1–3 μM) reduced hypoxic HIF-1α protein and
activity, respectively [63]. Thus, these results suggest
that dosage and cell type specificity will be critical
factors in the treatment of tumor with 17-AAG and IMQ
combination.
In this study, we demonstrated that the TLR7 ligand
IMQ induces aerobic glycolysis in tumor cells in a manner
independent of TLR7/8 expression. Second, IMQ induced
ROS production, thereby increasing HIF-1α expression
at the transcriptional and translational levels via the
PI3K/Akt and STAT3 pathways, which triggered aerobic
glycolysis in tumor cells. Third, the induction of HIF-1α
mediated IMQ-induced apoptosis in tumor cells. Finally,
we demonstrated that the inhibition of both glycolysis and
HIF-1α expression is a useful strategy to enhance the antitumor activity of IMQ in vitro and in vivo. We believe that
this strategy may be applied in clinical trials in the future.

switch to aerobic glycolysis to maintain the intracellular
ATP level, thereby gaining the survival advantage in IMQtreated cancer cells.
Tumors rely on aerobic glycolysis and therefore
require more glucose than normal differentiated cells
to provide growth and survive advantages for tumor
progression [1, 52]. This metabolic switch could be
regulated by the activation of HIF-1α during tumor
progression [2, 53]. Recently, chemotherapeutic drug,
doxorubicin, has been reported to induces HIF-1α
accumulation, enhanced VEGF secretion and stimulated
tumor angiogenesis in normoxic condition [54]. This
study suggested that HIF-1α is a major determinant
for cancer cell homeostasis under cytotoxic stress,
and targeting aerobic glycolysis and HIF-1α may be
a useful and specific strategy for chemotherapy [36].
In the present study, we used the glucose analog 2-DG
and the pharmacological Hsp90 inhibitor 17-AAG, which
destabilizes the HIF-1α protein and disrupts STAT3HIF-1α activation axis, to limit IMQ-induced aerobic
glycolysis to enhance the anti-tumor activity of IMQ. We
found that both 2-DG and 17-AAG synergized with IMQ
to induce cell apoptosis in various tumor cell lines but not
in normal primary human keratinocytes. We concluded
that the combination of IMQ with 2-DG or 17-AAG is a
promising strategy for the efficient elimination of tumor
cells. In melanoma xenograft-bearing mice, we found that
2-DG and 17-AAG significantly reduced tumor sizes and
weights when co-administered with IMQ relative to those
in animals treated with a single agent. In addition, the dose
of 2-DG used (62.5 mg/kg) has been reported to be a low
dose in vivo and in clinical trials [55, 56], suggesting that
the use of this dose should be safe for tumor therapy in
combination with IMQ in vivo. However, in our study,
the administration of 17-AAG (40 mg/kg/daily per week)
resulted in approximately 22% lethal toxicity in vivo even
when co-administered with IMQ. A recent report showed
that 17-AAG at 9 mg/kg/week exerted 10% lethal toxicity
in mice, and the recommended safe dosage of 17-AAG in
phase I clinical trials is 40 mg/kg/week [57]. Therefore,
it is necessary to determine the safe dosage of 17-AAG
when used in combination with IMQ for tumor therapy
in the future.
Hsp90 inhibitor 17-AAG exert their effects by
specifically interacting with the N-terminal ATP binding
domain and inhibiting the intrinsic ATPase activity of
Hsp90 which is critical for its chaperone function [58].
By inactivating Hsp90, 17-AAG destabilizes Hsp90
client proteins including a wide variety of oncogenic
kinases and signaling intermediates. Thus, it is possible
that, in addition to destabilize HIF-1α, 17-AAG may
simultaneously destabilize other oncoproteins and
enhances the antitumor activity of IMQ. However, we
suggest the inhibition of HIF-1α expression and/or
destabilization of HIF-1α using genetic manipulation
or chemical inhibitors may sensitize tumor cells to
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials
Propidium iodide (PI) was obtained from Molecular
Probes (Carlsbad, CA, USA). TRIzol reagent, LY294002,
13

Oncotarget

Glucose uptake assays

wortmannin, PD98059, U0126, Stattic, NSC74859,
PDTC, cyclohexamide (CHX), MG132, 2-DG, 17-AAG
and chetomin were obtained from Sigma (St. Louis, MO,
USA). Imiquimod was obtained from InvivoGen (San
Diego, CA, USA). Antibodies specific to phospho-STAT3,
STAT3, cleaved-caspase 3, cleaved-caspase 9, cleavedPARP, HIF-1α, phospho-Ser473 Akt, Akt, phosphoERK1/2 (Thr202/Tyr204) and ERK1/2 were purchased
from Cell Signaling Technology (Danvers, MA, USA).
Antibodies specific to Mcl-1 and β-actin were purchased
from Santa Cruz (Santa Cruz, CA, USA).

The effect of glucose uptake in IMQ-treated
and untreated cells were analyzed by Glucose Uptake
Colorimetric Assay Kit (BioVision, Milpitas, CA,
USA.) that was performed according to manufacturer’s
instruction and normalized with cell number. In brief, the
cells were maintained in 96-well plates with 1 mM 2-DG
and treated with or without IMQ. After the indicated time
points, the cells were lysed by Extraction Buffer, freeze
and thaw once then incubated at 85°C for 40 minutes,
cool the cell lysate and then adding Neutralization Buffer,
spin and diluted the samples 1:10 times by adding Assay
Buffer. The diluted samples were mixed with Enzyme
Mix, incubated at 37°C for 1 hour, and then stopped
the reaction by heating at 85°C for 40 minutes. The
samples were added with Glutathione Reductase and
DTNB substrate mixture for 5 minutes, and then read the
absorbance of OD 512 nm. The intracellular 2-DG content
of the untreated controls which normalized to the total cell
numbers was used as the baseline for calculating the fold
change.

Cell culture
The human melanoma cell lines MeWo, C32 and
A375 were cultured in MEM medium supplemented
with 10% FBS. The human basal cell carcinoma cell line
BCC/KMC-1, the human lung adenocarcinoma cell line
A549 and the human gastric cancer cell line AGS were
cultured in RPMI medium supplemented with 10% FBS.
The human squamous cell carcinoma cell line SCC12
was cultured in F12/DMEM supplemented with 10%
FBS. The human cervical carcinoma cell line HeLa and
the mouse melanoma cell line B16F10 were cultured in
DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS. Primary human
keratinocytes from freshly excised neonatal foreskins
were purchased from GIBCO (Carlsbad, CA, USA). The
keratinocytes were maintained in flasks coated with type IV
collagen (Sigma) and cultured in serum-free keratinocyte
growth medium (Clonetics, San Diego, CA, USA).

Oxygen consumption assay
The oxygen consumption of whole cells was
measured using a polarographic oxygen electrode
(MT200/MT200A Respirometer Cell, StrathKelvin
Instruments, North Lanarkshire, Scotland). The cells were
trypsinized, rinsed with PBS and then resuspended in
culture medium without supplements. Each sample (1×106
cells) was analyzed during incubation in a magnetically
stirred chamber over a period of 5 min at 37°C. The
signals were detected and analyzed using software from
StrathKelvin Instruments. The rate of oxygen consumption
was normalized to the number of living cells.

Extracellular glucose and lactate content assay
The effects of glucose utilization and lactate
production in IMQ-treated and untreated cells were
analyzed using a Glucose Assay Kit and a Lactate Assay
Kit (Sigma) according to the manufacturer’s protocols,
and the results were normalized to the cell number.
In brief, the cells were maintained in 6-well plates and
treated with or without IMQ. After the indicated time
points, 50 μl of medium was collected and mixed with 50
μl of the prepared glucose or lactate assay mixture (from
the Glucose Assay Kit or Lactate Assay Kit, respectively).
These samples were then incubated at 37°C in the dark for
30 minutes. The results were quantified using a glucose
standard (from the glucose assay kit). The absorbance of
each sample was measured using an ELISA plate reader
at 570 nm, and the glucose content normalized to the total
cell number for the untreated controls was used as the
baseline for calculating the fold change. The fold changes
in the glucose level were then calculated for the treated
groups. The lactate content was normalized to the total
cell number for 106 cells, and the data are presented as
nmol/106 cells.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Cytochrome oxidase activity assay
The activity of cytochrome oxidase in IMQ-treated
and untreated cells was analyzed by Cytochrome Oxidase
Activity Colorimetric Assay Kit (BioVision) that was
performed according to manufacturer’s instruction. In
short, the cells were maintained in 6-well plates and
treated with or without IMQ. After the indicated time
points, total cell lysate were harvested. For each reaction,
the 30 μg cell lysate was mixed with 120 μl of reduced
cytohrome c. We measured the reduction in absorption
at the wavelength of 550 nm using UV/Vis UV-1700
PharmaSpec spectrophotometer (Shimadzu, Benelux BV,
Hertogenbosch, The Netherlands) over a period of 30 ~ 45
minutes. The reduced absorbance was normalized to the
amount of protein and the difference in time. The reduced
absorbance of untreated group was as 1 fold.

14

Oncotarget

Mitochondrial potential assay

(pSTAT3 luciferase reporter, SABiosciences) and a control
Renilla luciferase reporter plasmid (Promega, Madison,
WI). At 24 hours after transfection, the cells were treated
with IMQ and then harvested. Luciferase activity was
measured with a dual-luciferase reporter assay system
(Promega). Light units were normalized to the Renilla
luciferase activity.

The influence of mitochondrial respiration in IMQtreated and untreated cells was determined by MitoTracker
Red CMXRos (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) using flow
cytometry. In brief, the cells were maintained in 6-well
plates with or without 50 μg/ml IMQ treatment. After
the indicated time points, collected cells and stained by
MitoTracker Red CMXRos for 5 minutes, cells were washed
by PBS then maintained in completed culture medium.
The red fluorescence of MitoTracker Red CMXRos was
detected by flow cytometry with FL2 channel. Analyzed
the mitochondrial potential by overlay histogram plots of
between IMQ-treated and untreated control.

Transient transfection
A human HIF-1α small interfering RNA (siRNA;
Santa Cruz) or pCMV1-Flag plasmids encoding
human TLR7 and TLR8 were transiently transfected
into cells using the Lipofectamine 2000 transfection
reagent according to the manufacturer's instructions
(Invitrogen). After indicated time, the cells were treated
with IMQ for the indicated time and subjected to other
assays.

Reverse transcriptase-PCR and real-time PCR
Total RNA was isolated using TRIzol reagent.
First-strand cDNA was synthesized from total RNA
using the Sprint PowerScript PrePrimed Single Shots
Kit (Clontech, Mountain View, CA, USA). PCRs were
performed using the cDNAs (35 cycles at 94°C for 30
seconds, 60°C for 30 seconds and 68°C for 1 minute)
using Titanium Taq DNA polymerase (Clontech). The
primer pairs were as follows: human TLR7 forward,
5’-GGGCCCATCTCAAGCTGATC-3’, and reverse,
5’- TGTGAAAGGACGCTGGGGAG-3’; human TLR8
forward, 5’- TGCGCTGCTGCAAGTTACGG-3’, and
reverse, 5’- GTTGAGGAATGCCCCGTCTG-3’; and
β-actin forward, 5’-ATTGCCGACAGGATGCAGAA-3’,
and reverse, 5’-GCTGATCCACATCTGCTGGAA-3’.
All PCR products were fractionated by 2% agarose
gel electrophoresis and visualized with ethidium
bromide. For real-time PCR analysis, the synthesized
cDNAs were mixed with 2X SYBR Green PCR Master
Mix (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA),
a pair of gene-specific forward and reverse primers
(HIF-1α: 5’-TATGAGCCAGAAGAACTTTTAGGC-3’,
5’-GATGGCAGTAGCTGCGCTGATA-3’; VEGF:
5’-TTGCCTTGCTGCTCTACC TCCA-3’,
5’-GATGGCAGTAGCTGCGCTGATA-3’; GLUT1:
5’-TTGCAGGCTT CTCCAACTGGAC-3’,
5’-CAGAACCAGGAGCACAGTGAAG-3’) and subjected
to real-time PCR quantification using an ABI 7300 RealTime PCR System (Applied Biosystems). All reactions
were performed in quadruplet. The relative amounts of
mRNAs were calculated using the comparative CT method.
Human GAPDH mRNA was used as the internal control
(forward primer: 5’-ACCACAGTCCATGCCATCAC-3’;
reverse primer: 5’-TCCACCACCCTGTTGCTGT-3’).

DNA content assay
Cells were incubated in normal culture medium or
medium supplemented with 2-DG or 17-AAG or chetomin,
with or without IMQ. At the indicated time, the cells were
harvested and fixed in 70% ethanol at 4°C overnight.
After centrifugation, the cell pellets were washed and
resuspended in 0.6 ml of PBS with PI (40 μg/ml), and then,
the cells were stained at 37°C for 30 min. After staining,
the cells were centrifuged at 1200 rpm for 5 min. The
supernatant was discarded, and the pellet was resuspended
in PBS. The fluorescence emitted by the PI-DNA complex
was quantified after laser excitation of the fluorescent dye
using a Cytomics™ FC500 Flow Cytometer (Beckman
Coulter, Fullerton, CA, USA).

Immunoblotting
Cells were harvested by centrifugation, and washed
with PBS. Whole- cell lysates were resuspended in
PRO-PREP protein extraction solution (iNtRON, Taipei,
Taiwan) containing a protease inhibitor cocktail. The
extracts were vigorously shaken at 4°C for 15 min,
followed by centrifugation. The supernatants were
collected, and the protein concentrations were determined
using the Bio-Rad BCA reagent (Bio-Rad Hercules,
CA, USA). A 30 μg sample of each lysate was subjected
to electrophoresis on SDS-polyacrylamide gels. The
samples were electroblotted onto PVDF membranes.
After blocking, the membranes were incubated with
primary antibodies in TBST at 4°C overnight. They
were then washed four times and incubated with
horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated goat antimouse or rabbit IgG (Upstate, Billerica, MA, USA)
for 2 hours. After washing with TBST, the blots were
incubated for 1 min with the SuperSignal West Pico ECL
reagent (Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford, IL, USA), and

Luciferase reporter assay
Cells were co-transfected with an HRE promoter
reporter plasmid (pHIF1 luciferase reporter, SABiosciences,
Valencia, CA) or a STAT3 promoter reporter plasmid
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15

Oncotarget

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

chemiluminescence was detected using by exposure to
Kodak-X-Omat film. β-actin signals were used to verify
equal protein loading in each lane.

We are grateful to Dr. Shih-Lan Hsu and Mei-Chun
Liu for her critical comments on the manuscript and
excellent technical assistance, respectively.

Immunocytochemistry
Cells were grown overnight on cover slides and
treated with IMQ for the indicated time at 37°C. The
cells were fixed in 1% paraformaldehyde at 4°C for 2
hours, washed with PBS and permeabilized by 0.1%
Triton X-100/PBS containing 0.5% BSA for 30 min. For
intracellular staining, the cells were blocked with 2%
normal horse serum, incubated with antibodies against
HIF-1α in PBS containing 0.05% Tween-20 (PBST) and
then incubated with a FITC-conjugated goat anti-rabbit
IgG (Sigma). After washing with PBST, the cells were
mounted in a water-based mounting medium containing an
anti-fade agent and DAPI (Vector Lab, Burlingame, CA,
USA) and analyzed by confocal microscopy (Olympus,
FV1000D, Tokyo, Japan).

FUNDING
This work was supported by grants from the
Taichung Veterans General Hospital/National Chung
Hsing University Joint Research Program (TCVGHNCHU-1027603), Taichung Veterans General Hospital
(TCVGH-1037310C) and the National Science
Council NSC-99-2320- b-005-007-MY3 and NSC-1022320-B-005-003, Taiwan, Republic of China.

REFERENCES
1.	 Vander Heiden MG, Cantley LC and Thompson CB.
Understanding the Warburg effect: the metabolic
requirements of cell proliferation. Science. 2009;
324(5930):1029–1033.

Mouse xenograft model
B16F10 cells were cultured with DMEM
supplemented with 10% FBS. At approximately 70~80%
confluence, the cells were harvested, washed and then
resuspended in PBS containing matrix gel at 2×106
cells/ml. Cells (2 × 105) were injected subcutaneously
into mice, which were monitored for tumor formation.
When the tumor length or width reached 0.2 mm2, the
tumors were injected with PBS or 2-DG (62.5 mg/kg) (or
17-AAG at 40 mg/kg, chetomin at 1 mg/kg) with or
without IMQ (25 mg/kg) once per day. The tumor was
determined daily by measuring the length and width.
Tumor volume was calculated as: volume = (length ×
width2 × π)/6. After 8 days, the mice were sacrificed,
and the tumors were harvested. The tumor weights were
measured, and images were taken. All animal care and
experimental procedures were approved and conducted by
the Committee for Animal Experiments, National Chung
Hsing University, Taichung, Taiwan (approved document
NCHU-101-89).

2.	 Cairns RA, Harris IS and Mak TW. Regulation of cancer
cell metabolism. Nat Rev Cancer. 2011; 11(2):85–95.
3.	 Majmundar AJ, Wong WJ and Simon MC. Hypoxiainducible factors and the response to hypoxic stress. Mol
Cell. 2010; 40(2):294–309.
4.	 Papandreou I, Cairns RA, Fontana L, Lim AL and Denko
NC. HIF-1 mediates adaptation to hypoxia by actively
downregulating mitochondrial oxygen consumption. Cell
Metab. 2006; 3(3):187–197.
5.	 Demaria M, Giorgi C, Lebiedzinska M, Esposito G,
DʼAngeli L, Bartoli A, Gough DJ, Turkson J, Levy DE,
Watson CJ, Wieckowski MR, Provero P, Pinton P and
Poli V. A STAT3-mediated metabolic switch is involved
in tumour transformation and STAT3 addiction. Aging
(Albany NY). 2010; 2(11):823–842.
6.	 Du J, Xu R, Hu Z, Tian Y, Zhu Y, Gu L and Zhou L. PI3K
and ERK-induced Rac1 activation mediates hypoxiainduced HIF-1alpha expression in MCF-7 breast cancer
cells. PLoS One. 2011; 6(9):e25213.

Statistical analyses

7.	 Majumder PK, Febbo PG, Bikoff R, Berger R, Xue Q,
McMahon LM, Manola J, Brugarolas J, McDonnell TJ,
Golub TR, Loda M, Lane HA and Sellers WR. mTOR
inhibition reverses Akt-dependent prostate intraepithelial
neoplasia through regulation of apoptotic and HIF-1dependent pathways. Nat Med. 2004; 10(6):594–601.

Three independent experiments were conducted
in all studies, and all assay conditions were performed
in duplicate or triplicate. The data were analyzed using
Student’s ttest, and differences were considered significant
when p values < 0.05.

8.	 Chen N, Chen X, Huang R, Zeng H, Gong J, Meng W,
Lu Y, Zhao F, Wang L and Zhou Q. BCL-xL is a target
gene regulated by hypoxia-inducible factor-1{alpha}. J Biol
Chem. 2009; 284(15):10004–10012.

DISCLOSURE OF POTENTIAL
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

9.	 Liu L, Ning X, Sun L, Zhang H, Shi Y, Guo C, Han S, Liu J,
Sun S, Han Z, Wu K and Fan D. Hypoxia-inducible factor-1

No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

16

Oncotarget

alpha contributes to hypoxia-induced chemoresistance in
gastric cancer. Cancer Sci. 2008; 99(1):121–128.

22.	 Nicholas SA, Bubnov VV, Yasinska IM and Sumbayev VV.
Involvement of xanthine oxidase and hypoxia-inducible
factor 1 in Toll-like receptor 7/8-mediated activation of
caspase 1 and interleukin-1beta. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2011;
68(1):151–158.

10.	 Piret JP, Minet E, Cosse JP, Ninane N, Debacq C, Raes M
and Michiels C. Hypoxia-inducible factor-1-dependent
overexpression of myeloid cell factor-1 protects hypoxic
cells against tert-butyl hydroperoxide-induced apoptosis.
J Biol Chem. 2005; 280(10):9336–9344.

23.	 Nicholas SA and Sumbayev VV. The involvement of
hypoxia-inducible factor 1 alpha in Toll-like receptor
7/8-mediated inflammatory response. Cell Res. 2009;
19(8):973–983.

11.	 El Mjiyad N, Caro-Maldonado A, Ramirez-Peinado S and
Munoz-Pinedo C. Sugar-free approaches to cancer cell
killing. Oncogene. 2012; 30(3):253–264.

24.	 Chen C, Pore N, Behrooz A, Ismail-Beigi F and Maity A.
Regulation of glut1 mRNA by hypoxia-inducible factor-1.
Interaction between H-ras and hypoxia. J Biol Chem. 2001;
276(12):9519–9525.

12.	 Robinson GL, Dinsdale D, Macfarlane M and Cain K.
Switching from aerobic glycolysis to oxidative
phosphorylation modulates the sensitivity of mantle cell
lymphoma cells to TRAIL. Oncogene. 2011; 31(48):4996–
5006.

25.	 Forsythe JA, Jiang BH, Iyer NV, Agani F, Leung SW,
Koos RD and Semenza GL. Activation of vascular
endothelial growth factor gene transcription by hypoxiainducible factor 1. Mol Cell Biol. 1996; 16(9):4604–4613.

13.	 Novak N, Yu CF, Bieber T and Allam JP. Toll-like receptor
7 agonists and skin. Drug News Perspect. 2008; 21(3):
158–165.

26.	 Larange A, Antonios D, Pallardy M and Kerdine-Romer S.
TLR7 and TLR8 agonists trigger different signaling
pathways for human dendritic cell maturation. J Leukoc
Biol. 2009; 85(4):673–683.

14.	 Schon M, Bong AB, Drewniok C, Herz J, Geilen CC,
Reifenberger J, Benninghoff B, Slade HB, Gollnick H and
Schon MP. Tumor-selective induction of apoptosis and
the small-molecule immune response modifier imiquimod.
J Natl Cancer Inst. 2003; 95(15):1138–1149.

27.	 Demaria M, Misale S, Giorgi C, Miano V, Camporeale A,
Campisi J, Pinton P and Poli V. STAT3 can serve as a hit
in the process of malignant transformation of primary cells.
Cell Death Differ. 2012; 19(8):1390–1397.

15.	 Sidbury R, Neuschler N, Neuschler E, Sun P, Wang XQ,
Miller R, Tomai M, Puscasiu E, Gugneja S and Paller AS.
Topically applied imiquimod inhibits vascular tumor growth
in vivo. J Invest Dermatol. 2003; 121(5):1205–1209.

28.	 Kamura T, Sato S, Iwai K, Czyzyk-Krzeska M,
Conaway RC and Conaway JW. Activation of HIF1alpha
ubiquitination by a reconstituted von Hippel-Lindau (VHL)
tumor suppressor complex. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
2000; 97(19):10430–10435.

16.	 Gorden KB, Gorski KS, Gibson SJ, Kedl RM, Kieper WC,
Qiu X, Tomai MA, Alkan SS and Vasilakos JP. Synthetic
TLR agonists reveal functional differences between human
TLR7 and TLR8. J Immunol. 2005; 174(3):1259–1268.

29.	 Okoh VO, Felty Q, Parkash J, Poppiti R and Roy D.
Reactive oxygen species via redox signaling to PI3K/AKT
pathway contribute to the malignant growth of 4-hydroxy
estradiol-transformed mammary epithelial cells. PLoS One.
2013; 8(2):e54206.

17.	 Schon MP, Wienrich BG, Drewniok C, Bong AB, Eberle J,
Geilen CC, Gollnick H and Schon M. Death receptorindependent apoptosis in malignant melanoma induced by
the small-molecule immune response modifier imiquimod.
J Invest Dermatol. 2004; 122(5):1266–1276.

30.	 Son YO, Wang L, Poyil P, Budhraja A, Hitron JA, Zhang Z,
Lee JC and Shi X. Cadmium induces carcinogenesis in
BEAS-2B cells through ROS-dependent activation of PI3K/
AKT/GSK-3beta/beta-catenin signaling. Toxicol Appl
Pharmacol. 2012; 264(2):153–160.

18.	 Huang SW, Liu KT, Chang CC, Chen YJ, Wu CY, Tsai JJ,
Lu WC, Wang YT, Liu CM and Shieh JJ. Imiquimod
simultaneously induces autophagy and apoptosis in human
basal cell carcinoma cells. Br J Dermatol. 2010; 163(2):
310–320.

31.	 Ushio-Fukai M, Alexander RW, Akers M, Yin Q,
Fujio Y, Walsh K and Griendling KK. Reactive oxygen
species mediate the activation of Akt/protein kinase B
by angiotensin II in vascular smooth muscle cells. J Biol
Chem. 1999; 274(32):22699–22704.

19.	 Yi JY, Jung YJ, Choi SS, Hwang J and Chung E.
Autophagy-mediated anti-tumoral activity of imiquimod
in Caco-2 cells. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009;
386(3):455–458.

32.	 Yoon S, Woo SU, Kang JH, Kim K, Kwon MH, Park S,
Shin HJ, Gwak HS and Chwae YJ. STAT3 transcriptional
factor activated by reactive oxygen species induces IL6 in
starvation-induced autophagy of cancer cells. Autophagy.
2010; 6(8):1125–1138.

20.	 Huang SW, Chang CC, Lin CC, Tsai JJ, Chen YJ, Wu CY,
Liu KT and Shieh JJ. Mcl-1 determines the imiquimodinduced apoptosis but not imiquimod-induced autophagy
in skin cancer cells. J Dermatol Sci. 2012; 65(3):170–178.
21.	 Krawczyk CM, Holowka T, Sun J, Blagih J, Amiel E,
DeBerardinis RJ, Cross JR, Jung E, Thompson CB,
Jones RG and Pearce EJ. Toll-like receptor-induced changes
in glycolytic metabolism regulate dendritic cell activation.
Blood. 2010; 115(23):4742–4749.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33.	 Hu Y, Kirito K, Yoshida K, Mitsumori T, Nakajima K,
Nozaki Y, Hamanaka S, Nagashima T, Kunitama M,
Sakoe K and Komatsu N. Inhibition of hypoxia-inducible
factor-1 function enhances the sensitivity of multiple

17

Oncotarget

myeloma cells to melphalan. Mol Cancer Ther. 2009; 8(8):
2329–2338.

45.	 Fong GH and Takeda K. Role and regulation of prolyl
hydroxylase domain proteins. Cell Death Differ. 2008;
15(4):635–641.

34.	 Meynet O, Beneteau M, Jacquin MA, Pradelli LA, Cornille A,
Carles M and Ricci JE. Glycolysis inhibition targets Mcl-1 to
restore sensitivity of lymphoma cells to ABT-737-induced
apoptosis. Leukemia. 2012; 26(5):1145–1147.

46.	 Elstrom RL, Bauer DE, Buzzai M, Karnauskas R, Harris
MH, Plas DR, Zhuang H, Cinalli RM, Alavi A, Rudin CM
and Thompson CB. Akt stimulates aerobic glycolysis in
cancer cells. Cancer Res. 2004; 64(11):3892–3899.

35.	 Pradelli LA, Beneteau M, Chauvin C, Jacquin MA,
Marchetti S, Munoz-Pinedo C, Auberger P, Pende M
and Ricci JE. Glycolysis inhibition sensitizes tumor cells
to death receptors-induced apoptosis by AMP kinase
activation leading to Mcl-1 block in translation. Oncogene.
2010; 29(11):1641–1652.

47.	 Marko AJ, Miller RA, Kelman A and Frauwirth KA.
Induction of glucose metabolism in stimulated T
lymphocytes is regulated by mitogen-activated protein
kinase signaling. PLoS One. 2010; 5(11):e15425.
48.	 Coloff JL, Macintyre AN, Nichols AG, Liu T, Gallo CA,
Plas DR and Rathmell JC. Akt-dependent glucose
metabolism promotes Mcl-1 synthesis to maintain cell
survival and resistance to Bcl-2 inhibition. Cancer Res.
2011; 71(15):5204–5213.

36.	 Semenza GL. Targeting HIF-1 for cancer therapy. Nat Rev
Cancer. 2003; 3(10):721–732.
37.	 Lang SA, Klein D, Moser C, Gaumann A, Glockzin G,
Dahlke MH, Dietmaier W, Bolder U, Schlitt HJ, Geissler EK
and Stoeltzing O. Inhibition of heat shock protein 90 impairs
epidermal growth factor-mediated signaling in gastric cancer
cells and reduces tumor growth and vascularization in vivo.
Mol Cancer Ther. 2007; 6(3):1123–1132.

49.	 Sanchez AM, Candau RB, Csibi A, Pagano AF, Raibon A
and Bernardi H. The role of AMP-activated protein
kinase in the coordination of skeletal muscle turnover and
energy homeostasis. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2012;
303(5):C475–485.

38.	 Lang SA, Moser C, Gaumann A, Klein D, Glockzin G,
Popp FC, Dahlke MH, Piso P, Schlitt HJ, Geissler EK and
Stoeltzing O. Targeting heat shock protein 90 in pancreatic
cancer impairs insulin-like growth factor-I receptor
signaling, disrupts an interleukin-6/signal-transducer and
activator of transcription 3/hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha
autocrine loop, and reduces orthotopic tumor growth. Clin
Cancer Res. 2007; 13(21):6459–6468.

50.	 Mazurek S, Boschek CB, Hugo F and Eigenbrodt E.
Pyruvate kinase type M2 and its role in tumor growth and
spreading. Semin Cancer Biol. 2005; 15(4):300–308.
51.	 Wolf A, Agnihotri S, Micallef J, Mukherjee J, Sabha N,
Cairns R, Hawkins C and Guha A. Hexokinase 2 is a key
mediator of aerobic glycolysis and promotes tumor growth
in human glioblastoma multiforme. J Exp Med. 2011;
208(2):313–326.

39.	 Schon MP, Schon M and Klotz KN. The small antitumoral
immune response modifier imiquimod interacts with
adenosine receptor signaling in a TLR7- and TLR8independent fashion. J Invest Dermatol. 2006; 126(6):
1338–1347.

52.	 DeBerardinis RJ, Lum JJ, Hatzivassiliou G and
Thompson CB. The biology of cancer: metabolic
reprogramming fuels cell growth and proliferation. Cell
Metab. 2008; 7(1):11–20.

40.	 Papadavid E, Stratigos AJ and Falagas ME. Imiquimod: an
immune response modifier in the treatment of precancerous
skin lesions and skin cancer. Expert Opin Pharmacother.
2007; 8(11):1743–1755.

53.	 Hsu PP and Sabatini DM. Cancer cell metabolism: Warburg
and beyond. Cell. 2008; 134(5):703–707.
54.	 Cao Y, Eble JM, Moon E, Yuan H, Weitzel DH,
Landon CD, Nien CY, Hanna G, Rich JN, Provenzale
JM and Dewhirst MW. Tumor cells upregulate normoxic
HIF-1alpha in response to doxorubicin. Cancer Res. 2013;
73(20):6230–6242.

41.	 Tsuzuki Y, Fukumura D, Oosthuyse B, Koike C, Carmeliet P
and Jain RK. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)
modulation by targeting hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha-->
hypoxia response element--> VEGF cascade differentially
regulates vascular response and growth rate in tumors.
Cancer Res. 2000; 60(22):6248–6252.

55.	 Mohanti BK, Rath GK, Anantha N, Kannan V, Das BS,
Chandramouli BA, Banerjee AK, Das S, Jena A,
Ravichandran R, Sahi UP, Kumar R, Kapoor N, Kalia VK,
Dwarakanath BS and Jain V. Improving cancer radiotherapy
with 2-deoxy-D-glucose: phase I/II clinical trials on human
cerebral gliomas. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1996;
35(1):103–111.

42.	 Ke Q and Costa M. Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1).
Mol Pharmacol. 2006; 70(5):1469–1480.
43.	 Frede S, Stockmann C, Freitag P and Fandrey J. Bacterial
lipopolysaccharide induces HIF-1 activation in human
monocytes via p44/42 MAPK and NF-kappaB. Biochem J.
2006; 396(3):517–527.

56.	 Singh D, Banerji AK, Dwarakanath BS, Tripathi RP, Gupta
JP, Mathew TL, Ravindranath T and Jain V. Optimizing
cancer radiotherapy with 2-deoxy-d-glucose dose
escalation studies in patients with glioblastoma multiforme.
Strahlenther Onkol. 2005; 181(8):507–514.

44.	 Jung Y, Isaacs JS, Lee S, Trepel J, Liu ZG and Neckers L.
Hypoxia-inducible factor induction by tumour necrosis
factor in normoxic cells requires receptor-interacting
protein-dependent nuclear factor kappa B activation.
Biochem J. 2003; 370(Pt 3):1011–1017.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

57.	 Banerji U, OʼDonnell A, Scurr M, Pacey S, Stapleton S,
Asad Y, Simmons L, Maloney A, Raynaud F, Campbell M,
18

Oncotarget

Walton M, Lakhani S, Kaye S, Workman P and Judson I.
Phase I pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic study of
17-allylamino, 17-demethoxygeldanamycin in patients with
advanced malignancies. J Clin Oncol. 2005; 23(18):4152–
4161.

61.	 Demidenko ZN, An WG, Lee JT, Romanova LY,
McCubrey JA and Blagosklonny MV. Kinase-addiction
and bi-phasic sensitivity-resistance of Bcr-Abl- and Raf-1expressing cells to imatinib and geldanamycin. Cancer Biol
Ther. 2005; 4(4):484–490.

58.	 Blagosklonny MV. Hsp-90-associated oncoproteins:
multiple targets of geldanamycin and its analogs. Leukemia.
2002; 16(4):455–462.

62.	 Demidenko ZN, Vivo C, Halicka HD, Li CJ, Bhalla K,
Broude EV and Blagosklonny MV. Pharmacological
induction of Hsp70 protects apoptosis-prone cells from
doxorubicin: comparison with caspase-inhibitor- and cyclearrest-mediated cytoprotection. Cell Death Differ. 2006;
13(9):1434–1441.

59.	 Kung AL, Zabludoff SD, France DS, Freedman SJ,
Tanner EA, Vieira A, Cornell-Kennon S, Lee J, Wang B,
Wang J, Memmert K, Naegeli HU, Petersen F, Eck MJ,
Bair KW, Wood AW, et al. Small molecule blockade of
transcriptional coactivation of the hypoxia-inducible factor
pathway. Cancer Cell. 2004; 6(1):33–43.

63.	 Ibrahim NO, Hahn T, Franke C, Stiehl DP, Wirthner R,
Wenger RH and Katschinski DM. Induction of the
hypoxia-inducible factor system by low levels of
heat shock protein 90 inhibitors. Cancer Res. 2005;
65(23):11094–11100.

60.	 Patiar S and Harris AL. Role of hypoxia-inducible factor1alpha as a cancer therapy target. Endocr Relat Cancer.
2006; 13 Suppl 1:S61–75.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

19

Oncotarget

