Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 38

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Molecular mechanisms of cisplatin cytotoxicity in acute
promyelocytic leukemia cells
Sanjay Kumar1, Paul B. Tchounwou1
1

 ellomics and Toxicogenomics Research Laboratory, NIH/NIMHD-RCMI Center for Environmental Health, College of Science,
C
Engineering and Technology, Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi 39217, USA

Correspondence to:
Paul B. Tchounwou, e-mail: paul.b.tchounwou@jsums.edu
Keywords: cisplatin, APL cell line, cell cycle modulation, AP-1 and p53
Received: August 20, 2015 	Accepted: September 19, 2015 	Published: October 15, 2015

ABSTRACT
Cis-diamminedichloroplatinum (II) (cisplatin) is a widely used anti-tumor drug
for the treatment of a broad range of human malignancies with successful therapeutic
outcomes for head and neck, ovarian, and testicular cancers. It has been found to
inhibit cell cycle progression and to induce oxidative stress and apoptosis in acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL) cells. However, its molecular mechanisms of cytotoxic
action are poorly understood. We hypothesized that cisplatin induces cytotoxicity
through DNA adduct formation, oxidative stress, transcriptional factors (p53 and
AP-1), cell cycle regulation, stress signaling and apoptosis in APL cells. We used the
APL cell line as a model, and applied a variety of molecular tools to elucidate the
cytotoxic mode of action of cisplatin. We found that cisplatin inhibited cell proliferation
by a cytotoxicity, characterized by DNA damage and modulation of oxidative stress.
Cisplatin also activated p53 and phosphorylated activator protein (AP-1) component,
c-Jun at serine (63, 73) residue simultaneously leading to cell cycle arrest through
stimulation of p21 and down regulation of cyclins and cyclin dependent kinases in APL
cell lines. It strongly activated the intrinsic pathway of apoptosis through alteration of
the mitochondrial membrane potential, release of cytochrome C, and up-regulation of
caspase 3 activity. It also down regulated the p38MAPK pathway. Overall, this study
highlights the molecular mechanisms that underline cisplatin toxicity to APL cells,
and provides insights into selection of novel targets and/or design of therapeutic
agents to treat APL.

overall survival (OS) in Phase II clinical trial study [4].
Resistance to this conventional chemotherapy has been
reported in APL patients [5]. Hence, there is a need
for new therapeutic strategies to enhance the clinical
outcomes of APL patients. Cisplatin is an anti-tumor
drug [6], highly used in treatment of different kinds of
human malignancies including bladder, head and neck,
lung, ovarian, and testicular cancers [7]. It has been
reported that cisplatin combination with ATO enhances
cytotoxicity in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
cell [8] and small cell lung cancer [9]. It has also been
reported that cisplatin may be a good combination
for ATO to overcome drug resistance and enhance
cytotoxicity in APL cells. Some studies have shown that
cisplatin causes DNA cleavage and cell death in APL
cells by modulating c-jun expression and PKC signaling
[10]. It also induces apoptosis in HL-60 cells through

INTRODUCTION
Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is a
blood cancer usually formed through chromosomal
translocation between chromosomes 15 and 17 inside
the bone marrow during blood formation. It accounts
for approximately 10% of all acute myeloid leukemia
(AML) [1]. About 1500 APL affects people in USA
every year, with case fatality rate of about 1.2%. Arsenic
trioxide (ATO) and all trans retinoic acid (ATRA)
combination is the most successful treatment of all age
group of APL patients with maximum survival rate [2].
Previous study has shown that ATO performed complete
remission with high survival rate without ATRA
combination in APL patients [3]. It was also reported
that ATO alone treated to APL patients achieved high
rate of 5-years disease free survival (DFS) and an
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40734

Oncotarget

untreated cells (control). Significant increases in % of
cytotoxicity were observed in all three cell lines including
HL-60, KG-1a and NB4 cells as shown in [Fig. 2A–2C].

BCL2 down regulation and activation of BCL2L12
expression [11], oxidative stress and inhibition of cell
cycle progression [12]. Other studies have reported
that cisplatin interacts with DNA, RNA and proteins,
and causes cytotoxicity. It produces cytotoxicity
through formation of DNA-adduct, inducing oxidative
stress, inhibition of DNA synthesis, modulation of cell
cycle and induction of apoptosis [6, 10, 12, and 13].
Cisplatin has also been found to induce cytotoxicity
through activation of caspase 3 in CEM cells, a human
T leukemia [14] and formation of DNA adduct in mouse
leukemia L1210 cells [15].
Only few studies have focused on cisplatin - induced
cytotoxicity, oxidative stress and apoptosis in APL cells.
For the first time, we propose a detailed molecular
mechanism of the cytotoxic action in APL cells, based on
the novel findings that cisplatin induces cell proliferation
inhibition, DNA- adduct formation, activation of
transcriptional factors, oxidative stress, cell cycle arrest
and intrinsic pathway of apoptosis in APL cells.

Cisplatin induces oxidative stress and
clastogenic effect
For searching the causative factor of cisplatin
cytotoxicity in APL cells, we targeted cisplatin–induced
reactive oxygen species (ROS) production and three
biomarkers of oxidative stress. After exposure of APL
cells to various concentrations of cisplatin for 48 hours,
the cells were further incubated with dichlofluroscein
diacetate (DCFDA) for 30 min and ROS production was
measured by fluorescence (DCF) analysis at excitation
(485 nm) and emission (520) using POLARstar Omega
(Ortenberg, Germany). Three biomarkers of oxidative
stress including lipid peroxidation, GSH level and DNA
damage were also measured in both control and cisplatin
treated APL cells. Our results indicated that cisplatin
increased ROS production in a concentration - dependent
manner [3A] and also stimulated lipid peroxidation as
characterized by an increase in MDA formation and
DNA damage and by reducing GSH content in APL
cells significantly [Fig. 3B–3F]. Cisplatin exposure also
produced a significant clastogenic effect through DNA
damaging in APL cells, as shown in both in TUNEL assay
[Fig. 3D] and comet assay [Fig. 3E–3F].

RESULTS
Cisplatin inhibits APL cells proliferation and
promotes DNA adduct formation
To investigate the effect of cisplatin on APL cells
growth, we conducted cell proliferation assay using
methyl thymidine incorporation protocol. Hence, cells
were treated with various concentrations (0, 5, 10, 20,
40, and 80 μM) of cisplatin and incubated with tritium
labeled methyl thymidine for 21 hours. After incubation,
the cells were harvested and radioactivity was measured
using a liquid scintillation analyzer (Tri-carb 2700TR,
Perkin Elmer). Radio activities were expressed as counts
per minute (CPM) for each sample. Study results indicated
that cisplatin inhibited significantly cells growth in a
concentration - dependent manner in all three APL cell line
(Fig. 1A–1C). We have also analyzed cisplatin-induced
DNA adduct formation through immunocytochemistry
and confocal imaging of control and cisplatin-treated
APL cells. We found that cisplatin significantly ( p < 0.01)
induced DNA adduct formation in a concentrationdependent manner in APL cells [Fig. 1D (i-vi)].

Cisplatin modulates cell cycle regulation
To study cisplatin –induced oxidative stress and
clastogenic (DNA damage) effect on APL cell cycle
modulation, we exposed APL cells for 48 hrs to various
concentrations of cisplatin and analyzed potent cell
cycle regulatory transcriptional factor phosphorylation
and expression by western blotting. Interestingly, stress
transcriptional factors, activator protein-1 (AP-1) and p53
expression were stimulated in a concentration - dependent
manner in cisplatin treated cells compared to untreated
(control) cells. Significant up regulation was obtained
for phosphorylated AP-1 component, c-Jun at serine
(63, 73) residue [Fig. 4B], whereas cyclins and cyclin
dependent kinases (cdks) expression was down regulated
concentration - dependently in APL cells treated with
cisplatin [Fig. 4A]. Cisplatin cytotoxicity also stimulated
cell cycle proliferation inhibitor protein [inhibitor of cyclin
dependent kinases (cdks)], p21 expression significantly in
APL cells [Fig. 4A]. Our immunocytochemistry experiment
also showed a significant reduction in ki67 (a biomarker
of cell proliferation) expression cisplatin treated APL cells
compared to control cells. Overall, Cisplatin exposure
increased expression of p53, p21 and AP-1 (as well as their
component, c-Jun residue phosphorylation) leading to cell
cycle arrest, which was also confirmed by a significant
concentration – dependent decrease in the expression of ki67
[Fig. 4A–4C (i-vi)].

Cisplatin causes cytotoxicity in APL cells
To investigate the cytotoxic effect of cisplatin with
APL cells, we exposed three APL cell lines (HL-60,
KG-1a and NB4 cells) for 48 hours to various
concentrations of cisplatin in triplicate, and assayed
LDH released in the medium by measuring absorbance
at 490 nm. Our results show that cisplatin induces
cytotoxicity in a concentration - dependent manner.
Significant differences (p < 0.01) were observed in all
three APL cell lines between cisplatin - treated cells and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40735

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Cisplatin inhibits growth and induced formation of DNA-adduct in APL cells. APL cells (HL-60, NB4 and

KG-1a) were exposed to various concentrations (0, 5, 10, 20, 40, and 80 μM) of cisplatin for 24 hours and further incubated for 24 hours
with tritium labeled thymidine. After incubation, cells were harvested by centrifugation and counted using liquid scintillation analyzer as
described in the material and method section. 3H-methyl thymidine incorporation was expressed as cpm/dish. Data represent the means
of three independent experiments ± SDs. Highly statistically significant decreases (p < 0.01) in cell proliferation were observed in all
cisplatin treated APL cells including HL-60 [1A], NB4 [1B] and Kg-1a [1C] cells. This reduction in cell growth was concentrationdependent. Cisplatin –induced formation of DNA adduct was assessed by immunocytochemistry and confocal microscopy analysis as
described in the material and methods section. APL cells were exposed to various concentrations of cisplatin for 48 hours and performed
immunocytochemistry as well as confocal microscopy using FITC filter to confirm DNA adduct formation. The results showed that cisplatin
caused a significant concentration -dependent increase in DNA-adduct formation in APL cells [1D (i-vi)].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40736

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Cisplatin induces cytotoxicity in APL cells. APL cells were exposed to various concentrations (0, 5, 10, 20, 40 & 80 μM)
of cisplatin for 48 hours and LDH released in medium was measured using Promega non-radioactive cytotoxicity assay technical bulletin
protocol. Then % cytotoxicity was calculated by dividing the levels of released LDH in treated cells over the total LDH released from
control cells. Highly statistically significant increases ( p < 0.01) in cytotoxicity were observed in all cisplatin treated APL cells including
HL-60 [2A], KG-1a [2B] and NB4 [2C] cells in a concentration - dependent fashion.

Cisplatin induces intrinsic pathway of apoptosis

pathway of apoptosis. We investigated, cisplatin - induced
intrinsic pathway of apoptosis in APL cells by western blot
analysis of the expression levels of proapoptotic proteins
(e.g. Bax, cytochrome, and caspase 3) and anti-apoptotic
protein (Bcl-2) by western blotting both in control and

Cisplatin induced p53 activation in APL cells
caused an arrest in cell cycle progression mostly at the
G1 checkpoint and forced the cells to undergo intrinsic
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40737

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Cisplatin induces oxidative stress and clastogenic effect in APL cells. Cisplatin induced oxidative stress and
clastogenic effect in APL cells through generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and formation of DNA adduct. APL cells were
exposed to various concentrations (0, 5, 10, 20, 40, and 80 μM) of cisplatin for 48 hours and further treated 30 min with dichlorofluorescein
diacetate (DCFDA). After incubation, ROS released was measured through measuring DCF fluorescence intensity by spectrofluorementry.
Data represent the means of three independent experiments ± SDs (*P < 0.01) [3A]. APL cells were exposed to various concentrations of
cisplatin and lipid peroxidation one product, malondialdehyde (MDA) formation measured by spectrophotometry. Data represent the means
of three independent experiments ± SDs (**P < 0.01) [3B]. APL cells were exposed to various concentrations of cisplatin and GSH level
was measured by spectrophotometry. Data represent the means of three independent experiments ± SDs (#P < 0.05) [3C]. APL cells were
exposed to various concentrations of cisplatin and DNA damage analyzed by TUNEL assay [3D (i-vi)]. APL cells were exposed to various
concentrations of cisplatin and DNA damage was analyzed by alkaline gel electrophoresis (Comet) assay and characterized by comet tail
length and % DNA damage. Data represent the means of three independent experiments ± SDs % DNA damage (*P < 0.01) and comet tail
length ($, P < 0.01) [3E-3F].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40738

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Cisplatin modulates cell cycle regulation by transcriptional factors. Cisplatin induced cell cycle arrest at G1

checkpoint by stimulating transcription factors, p53 and phosphorylation of activator protein -1(AP-1) components in APL cells. APL
cells were exposed to various concentrations (0, 5, 10, 20, 40 and 80 μM) of cisplatin for 48 hours and western blotting was performed for
checking the expression level of cell cycle regulatory proteins, p53, p21, cdk6 & cyclin D3 [4A]. Transcriptional factor, AP-1 expression
and their components, c-Jun phosphorylatin at ser 63 & Ser73 residue were checked by western blotting in both control and cisplatin treated
APL cells [4B]. APL cells were exposed to various concentrations of cisplatin and the expression level of cell proliferation marker, Ki67
was assessed by immunocytochemistry and confocal imaging method. The results show a significant reduction in the expression level of
Ki67 in cisplatin treated cells compared to control cells [4C (i-vi)].

treated cells. Our results provided evidence that cisplatin
stimulated the expression levels of pro-apoptotic proteins
and also down regulated the expression levels of antiapoptotic proteins in a concentration - dependent manner
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

[Fig. 5A]. Cisplatin also induced oxidative stress and
clastogenic effect leading to a change in mitochondrial
membrane potential, and subsequent release of
cytochrome C into the cytosol, which then activated
40739

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Cisplatin induces intrinsic pathway of apoptosis. Cisplatin-induced cytotoxicity activated the intrinsic pathway of
apoptosis in APL cells. APL cells were exposed to various concentrations (0, 5, 10, 20, 40 and 80 μM) of cisplatin for 48 hours and western
blotting was performed to check the expression level of pro-apoptotic proteins (cytochrome C & Bax), caspase 3, and anti-apoptotic protein,
Bcl-2 [5A]. APL cells were exposed to various concentrations of cisplatin and the mitochondria of all treated and control cells were isolated.
Isolated mitochondria were treated with JC-1 dye for 10 min and mitochondrial membrane potential was assessed by spectrofluorometry
[5B]. APL cells were exposed to various concentrations of cisplatin and caspase 3 activity was measured at different time points [5C].

Cisplatin modulates stress signaling

caspase 3 in APL cells in a concentration - dependent
manner. Our experimental results showed that cisplatin
significantly decreased mitochondrial membrane potential
and stimulated caspase 3 activity in a concentration dependent fashion in APL cells [Fig. 5B–5C]. Our
confocal imaging results also showed that JC-1 monomer
(green color) expression increased concentration dependently in cisplatin-treated APL cells compared to
control [Fig. 6A].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

p38MAPK signaling molecules are very sensitive
for any kinds of stress inside the cells. To investigate
cisplatin involvement in stress signaling in APL cells,
we evaluated the phophorylation level of p38 MAPK
pathway molecules in both control and cisplatin treated
cells. Our results indicated that cisplatin decreased the
phosphorylation level of p38 MAPK molecules in a
40740

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Cisplatin induces apoptosis and modulates stress signaling. Cisplatin effect on JC-1 monomer expression and
MAPK signaling pathway in APL cells was assessed. APL cells were incubated to various concentrations (0, 5, 10, 20, 40, and 80 μM) of
cisplatin for 48 hours and mitochondria were isolated. Isolated mitochondria were treated with JC-1 dye 10 min, and immunocytochemistry
and confocal imaging were performed to check the expression level of JC-1 monomer [6A (i-vi)]. APL cells were incubated to various
concentrations of cisplatin and western blotting was performed to check the phosphorylation level of MAPK signaling molecules like JNK,
p38 & Erk [6B].
concentration - dependent manner [Fig. 6B]. Overall,
cisplatin-induced cytotoxicity in APL cells is modulated
through a series of important molecular mechanisms of
action as shown in [Fig. 7].

indicates that cisplatin induced cytotoxicity by other
possible mechanisms in cancer cells. Earlier studies have
pointed out that cisplatin inhibits cell proliferation by
oxidative stress and apoptosis in HL-60 cells [11, 12]. But
the detailed molecular mechanism of cytotoxic action of
cisplatin in APL cells mostly remains unknown. Here, we
have elucidated the molecular mechanisms of cisplatin
cytotoxicity in APL cells. Our findings indicate  that
cisplatin inhibits APL cells proliferation (Fig. 1A–1C) in
a concentration dependent fashion. It induces cytotoxicity
in APL cells (Fig. 2A–2C) by interacting with DNA and
forming DNA-adduct (Fig. 1D (i-vi)) in a concentrationdependent manner. Accumulating data have suggested
that cisplatin produces reactive oxygen species (ROS)
[18, 20] and induced oxidative stress [12] through lipid
peroxidation product, MDA production by reducing
cellular GSH level [21]. Our data presented here reveal
that cisplatin produces reactive oxygen species (Fig. 3A)
and induces oxidative stress through increasing lipid
peroxidation (MDA level) by reducing GSH content

DISCUSSION
Cytotoxicity is a complex process mediated through
DNA-adduct, oxidative stress, transcriptional factors and
stress signaling leading to cell death. Previous studies
have reported that cisplatin produces cytotoxic action
by interacting with DNA and forming DNA-adduct,
predominantly intra -strand crosslink adducts [6, 16] that
lead to activation of various signaling events like p53,
MAPK, etc, and finally culminating through apoptosis
pathway [6, 10, 13, 17 and 18]. It has also been reported
that cisplatin –induced cytotoxicity causes apoptosis by
activation of p53 or p53-related protein, p73 [13]. Existing
evidence suggests that approximately 1% cellular cisplatin
interacts with DNA and forms DNA adduct [19]. This
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40741

Oncotarget

Figure 7: Molecular mechanisms of Cisplatin-induced toxicity in APL cells. The overall molecular mechanisms of cisplatin

cytotoxicity in APL cells involve many steps. In brief, cisplatin enters into the cell and interacts with DNA to form DNA adduct and also
inhibits DNA synthesis. It produces ROS and creates oxidative stress inside the cell. DNA adduct formation and oxidative stress in APL
cells cause the activation of p53 signaling and AP-1 phosphorylation leading to a change in mitochondrial membrane potential and cell
cycle arrest in cells. This leads to cytochrome C release from the mitochondria, which activates caspase 9 and a series of complexes leading
to activation of caspase 3 and apoptosis. Cisplatin cytotoxicity also modulates MAPK signaling pathway and overall leads to cancer cell
death [7].

in APL cells in a concentration - dependent fashion
(Fig. 3B–3C). Several groups have provided evidence that
cisplatin produces clastogenic (DNA damaging) effect that
significantly contributes to its cytotoxic action by forming
DNA-adduct in various cancer cells [6, 13, 16, and 18].
We found that cisplatin induces clastogenic effect very
significant in a concentration - dependent fashion in APL
cells both in TUNEL assay (Fig. 3D) and comet assay
(Fig. 3E–3F). It has been reported from other studies that
cisplatin induces cytotoxicity through activation of p53
[6, 13] and transcriptional factor, AP-1 and increased
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

expression of c-jun in APL cell line [6, 10]. Many research
groups have reported that p53 arrests cell cycle in cancer
cells [2, 6 and 22] through activation of p21 [6, 13]. Our
findings indicate that cisplatin produces cytotoxicity
through causing cell cycle arrest by activation of p53,
p21, down regulation of cyclins and cyclin dependent
kinases {cdks} (Fig. 4A) in APL cells. We also found that
cisplatin stimulates the expression and phosphorylation of
AP-1 and its component, c-Jun at ser 63 & 73 involved
in cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in APL cells (Fig. 4B).
Cisplatin –induced cytotoxicity was also reduced the
40742

Oncotarget

expression level of cell cycle proliferation marker, Ki67 in
a concentration - dependent fashion in APL cells (Fig. 4C).
Several studies have demonstrated that cisplatin –
induced cytotoxicity culminates in the activation of
apoptosis in cancer cells [6, 13, 18]. It produces apoptosis
through a mitochondrial membrane potential change and
caspase 3 activation [23, 24]. Our results support these
findings showing that cisplatin induces apoptosis in
APL cells through changing mitochondrial membrane
potential by up - regulation of pro-apoptotic protein,
Bax and down-regulation of anti-apoptotic protein, Bcl-2
leading to formation of transition pores that helped to
release cytochrome C into the cytoplasm. Cytochrome
C activates caspase 9 and a series of signaling cascade
leads to the activation of caspase 3 and apoptosis in
APL cells (Fig. 5A–5C). It also activates JC-1 monomer
expression in a concentration dependent manner in APL
cells (Fig. 6A). Other studies have reported that cisplatin
induced cytotoxicity was modulated by p38 MAPK
signaling pathway, which coordinated AP-1 components
phosphorylation or expression and apoptosis [6, 17
and 25]. Our findings also demonstrated that cisplatin
modulates MAPK signaling pathways in APL cells in a
concentration dependent manner (Fig. 6B).
Taken together, it can be concluded from our
research that cisplatin inhibits APL cells proliferation
through a cytotoxicity, which is mediated by DNA adduct
formation, induction oxidative stress and cell cycle arrest,
activation of transcriptional factors, intrinsic pathway of
apoptosis, and modulation of MAPK signaling cascade
[Fig. 7]. By elucidating the cytotoxic action of cisplatin
in APL cells, we have provided new insights into the
molecular targets, and a rational basis for drug designing
for a more prominent APL chemotherapy in the future.

were obtained from Abcam (Cambridge, MA). Hoechst
33342, Alexa fluor 568 and Alexa fluor 568 were purchased
from Life Technologies (Grand Island, NY).

Cell proliferation assay
APL cells were exposed to various concentrations
(0, 5, 10, 20, 40, and 80 μM) of cisplatin in triplicate and
labeled with thymidine methyl- 3H. Cells were harvested
and the radioactivity measurement was performed using a
liquid scientillation analyzer as previously described [26].

Cytotoxicity assay
APL cells were grown in absence or presence
to various concentrations (0, 5, 10, 20, 40, and 80 μM)
of cisplatin for 48 hrs inside an incubator maintaining
standard temperature (37°C) and 5% CO2 level. After
incubation, the cells were centrifuged and the supernatant
was collected from all samples. LDH release in control
and cisplatin treated APL cells supernatant was measured
by following promega non-radioactive cytotoxicity assay
technical bulletin protocol (Cat # G1780). Experimental
data were presented as % of LDH release in cisplatin treated APL cells at different concentrations (0, 5, 10,
20, 40, and 80 μM) compared to total LDH released in
control cells.

Measurement of reduced GSH
Acute leukemia cells were grown in presence or
absence of cisplatin and the GSH content inside the
cytoplasm was measured following a previously published
protocol [27].

Lipid peroxidation assay

MATERIAL AND METHODS

APL cells were treated with or without
cisplatin and lipid peroxidation was evaluated by
measuring malondialdehyde (MDA) levels using the
lipid peroxidation assay kit (Abcam) as previously
described [27].

Cell line and culture
Three APL cell lines were used in this study
including HL-60, NB4 and KG-1a cells. The cells were
purchased from the American Type Culture Collection
(Manassas, VA), and maintained at 37°C in an atmosphere
of 5% CO2 and 95% air according to standard procedures.

TUNEL assay
The TUNEL assay is very sensitive technique
to analyze DNA damage in tissue section or cells. In
brief, acute leukemia cells were grown in presence or
absence of cisplatin, and DNA damage was analyzed by
immunochemistry and confocal imaging using Promega
DeadEnd™ Fluorometric TUNEL System Technical
Bulletin (Cat# G3250) or as previously described [28].
Both untreated/control and cisplatin treated APL cells
were attached on poly-l-lysine coated chambered slide
and fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde at 4°C for 25 min.
Fixed cells were permeabilized with 0.2% triton X-100 in
PBS for 5 min. Slides were washed with PBS two times

Chemicals and reagents
Cisplatin was purchased from Abcam (Cambridge,
MA) and Sigma Aldrich (St. Louis, MO) and thymidine
(methyl-3H) was obtained from MP Biomedical (Santa Ana,
CA). Mitochondrial isolation kit, caspase assay kit, protease
inhibitor and glutathione assay kit were obtained from
Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). Phosphospecific anti-Erk,
anti JNK, anti-P38MAPK, anti-cytochrome C, anti-Bax and
anti-Bcl2 were purchased from Cell Signaling Technology
(Danvers, MA). Lipid peroxidation kit and caspase 3 kit
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40743

Oncotarget

and equilibrated in equilibration buffer for 10 min at
room temperature. 100 μl rTdT incubation buffer were
added on each slide and incubated at 37°C for one hour.
After incubation, the reaction was terminated by dipping
slides in 2X SSC for 15 min and washed 2–3 times with
PBS. The slides were stained with DAPI and mounted by
anti-fade solution with coverslip and nail polish. After
drying of slides, confocal imaging was performed using
the fluoview confocal microscopy system (Olympus
company).

cisplatin – treated cells was prepared as described earlier
[31]. Equal amount of cytosolic proteins were used for the
assay of caspase 3 activity. Cytosolic protein (50 mg) was
mixed in a microtiter plate with assay buffer and caspase
specific substrates (Ac-DEVD-pNA for caspase-3).
After 4–16 h incubation at 37°C, the absorbance of pNA
released as a result of caspase-3 like activity was measured
at 405 nm in a microtiter plate reader as described in
technical bulletin. The absorbance of negative control
(assay buffer substrate) was subtracted from specific
values. Mean values of triplicate measurements were
computed.

Single cell gel electrophoresis (Comet) assay
APL cells were cultured in presence or absence of
cisplatin and DNA damage was analyzed by performing
a very sensitive alkaline comet assay as previously
described [2, 29]. In brief, agarose was prepared through
melting in a boiling water bath and allowing it to return
to room temperature. The cells were mixed with the
melted agarose in a 1:10 ratio. Approximately 50 μL of
the mixture of agarose and cells were placed on comet
slides, and the agarose was solidified at 4°C for 45 min.
After incubation, the slides were placed in a lysis
solution at 4°C for 30 min to lyse the embedded cells
in the agarose. The excess lysis solution was removed
from the slides and placed in an alkaline solution to
denature the DNA for 40 min at room temperature.
Later, the slides were subjected to TBE (Tris borate
EDTA buffer) electrophoresis for 30 min with 21 volt
current between the two electrodes. Then the slides
were fixed with 70% ethanol for 5 min, followed by
SYBR green staining. The stained slides were examined
using an epifluorescence microscope (Olympus BX51
TRF, USA). The data were analyzed with DNA damage
analysis software (Loats Associates Inc., USA). The
control comet slides were prepared along with the test
comet slides under yellow light.

Measurement of mitochondrial membrane
potential (Δψm)
The integrity of inner mitochondrial membrane
was examined by observing the changes in the potential
gradient across the membrane. This was achieved by
measuring the uptake of the cationic carbocyanine dye,
JC1 into the matrix. Mitochondria were isolated from
control and cisplatin-treated APL cells using mitochondria
isolation kit (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA). Isolated
mitochondria were incubated with 2 μl JC1 stain (from
stock 1 mg/ml) and 950 μl JC1 assay buffer for 10 min
in dark at 25°C. The fluorescence of each sample (total
assay vol. 1 ml) was recorded using a Perkin Elmer
LS50B spectrofluorometer (excitation 490 nm, slit, 5 nm;
emission 590 nm, slit, 7.2 nm) [32].

Immunocytochemistry and confocal imaging
APL cells (1 × 105) were cultured in presence or
absence of cisplatin and attached on poly-L-lysine coated
slide. Cells were fixed by using 3% paraformaldehyde
and permeablized with 0.2% NP-40 containing 0.5%
glycine. After blocking with 4% BSA, fixed cells were
incubated overnight with Ki-67 antibody (dilution,
1:100) (cat# 33-4711) or cisplatin modified DNA adduct
antibody (cat# ab103261) from Life Technology or Abcam
company at 4oC. After incubation, cells were washed with
PBS three times and tagged with secondary antibody
(anti-mouse fluorescein) for one hour at room temperature
followed by Hoechst 33342(dilution, 1:2000) staining for
7 min. Slides were washed with PBS and paste coverslip
using prolong gold antifade reagent. After drying, slides
were imaged by confocal microscopy (Olympus company,
Center valley, PA).

Western blotting analysis
After treatment of APL cells to various
concentrations of cisplatin, protein lysate were prepared
in RIPA buffer with sonication and centrifugation. An
equal amount (40 mg) of protein from control or treated
cells was loaded per lane on a 10% SDS-PAGE gel,
transferred into nitrocellulose membrane and analyzed by
western blotting for each specific protein of interest using
its specific antibody as described previously [30]. The
band intensities were quantified using Image J (National
Institutes of Health).

Statistical analysis
Experiments were performed in triplicates. Data
were presented as means ± SDs. Where appropriate,
one-way ANOVA or student paired t-test was performed
using SAS Software available in the Biostatistics Core
Laboratory at Jackson State University. p-values less than
0.05 were considered statistically significant.

Caspase -3 activity assay
Caspase-3 activity was measured in cytosolic
fraction of control and cisplatin exposed APL cells, using
a kit purchased from Sigma (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA).
In brief, cytosolic fraction of cells from both control and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40744

Oncotarget

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING

cytotoxic effect of cisplatin in head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma cell lines. Oncol Lett. 2012; 3:1326–1330.

This research was financially supported by National
Institutes of Health NIMHD Grant No. G12MD007581,
through the RCMI-Center for Environmental Health at
Jackson State University.

9.	 Zheng CY, Lam SK, Li YY, Fong BM, Mak JC, Ho JC.
Combination of arsenic trioxide and chemotherapy in small
cell lung cancer. Lung Cancer. 2013; 82:222–230.
10.	 Rubin E, Kharbanda S, Gunji H, Weichselbaum R, Kufe D.
cis-Diamminedichloroplatinum(II) induces c-jun expression
in human myeloid leukemia cells: potential involvement of
a protein kinase C-dependent signaling pathway. Cancer
Res. 1992; 52:878–882.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
Authors declare no conflict of interest.

11.	 Floros KV, Thomadaki H, Lallas G, Katsaros N, Talieri M,
Scorilas A. Cisplatin-induced apoptosis in HL-60 human
promyelocytic leukemia cells: differential expression
of BCL2 and novel apoptosis-related gene BCL2L12.
Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2003; 1010:153–158.

Author’s contributions
Conception and Design: Sanjay Kumar and Paul B.
Tchounwou
Analysis and interpretation of data: Sanjay Kumar
Writing, review and/or revision of the manuscript:
Sanjay Kumar and Paul B. Tchounwou.

12.	 Previati M1, Lanzoni I, Corbacella E, Magosso S,
Guaran V, Martini A, Capitani S. Cisplatin-induced apoptosis in human promyelocytic leukemia cells. Int J Mol Med.
2006; 18:511–516.
13.	 Jordan P1, Carmo-Fonseca M. Molecular mechanisms
involved in cisplatin cytotoxicity. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2000;
57:1229–1235.

REFERENCES

14.	 Mauz-Körholz C, Dietzsch S, Schippel P, Banning U,
Körholz D. Molecular mechanisms of hyperthermiaand cisplatin-induced cytotoxicity in T cell leukemia.
Anticancer Res. 2003; 23:2643–2647.

1.	 Powell BL. Arsenic trioxide in acute promyelocytic
­leukemia: potion not poison. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther.
2011; 11:1317–1319.
2.	 Kumar S, Yedjou CG, Tchounwou PB. Arsenic trioxide
induces oxidative stress, DNA damage, and mitochondrial
pathway of apoptosis in human leukemia (HL-60) cells.
J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2014; 33:42.

15.	 Ohno S, Siddik ZH, Kido Y, Zwelling LA, Bull JM.
Thermal enhancement of drug uptake and DNA adducts as
a possible mechanism for the effect of sequencing hyperthermia on cisplatin-induced cytotoxicity in L1210 cells.
Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 1994; 34:302–306.

3.	 Ghavamzadeh A, Alimoghaddam K, Ghaffari SH,
Rostami S, Jahani M, Hosseini R, Mossavi A, Baybordi E,
Khodabadeh A, Iravani M, Bahar B, Mortazavi Y,
Totonchi M, Aghdami N. Treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia with arsenic trioxide without ATRA and/or
­chemotherapy. Ann Oncol. 2006; 17:131–134.

16.	 Pinto AL, Lippard SJ. Binding of the antitumor drug cisdiamminedichloroplatinum(II) (cisplatin) to DNA. Biochim
Biophys Acta. 1985; 780:167–180.
17.	 Cepeda V, Fuertes MA, Castilla J, Alonso C, Quevedo C,
Pérez JM. Biochemical mechanisms of cisplatin
­cytotoxicity. Anticancer Agents Med Chem. 2007; 7:3–18.

4.	 Ghavamzadeh A, Alimoghaddam K, Rostami S,
Ghaffari SH, Jahani M, Iravani M, Mousavi SA, Bahar B,
Jalili M. Phase II study of single-agent arsenic trioxide for
the front-line therapy of acute promyelocytic leukemia.
J Clin Oncol. 2011; 29:2753–2757.

18.	 Zhang R, Niu Y, Zhou Y. Increase the cisplatin cytotoxicity and cisplatin-induced DNA damage in HepG2 cells by
XRCC1 abrogation related mechanisms. Toxicol Lett. 2010;
192:108–114.

5.	 Tomita A, Kiyoi H, Naoe T. Mechanisms of action and
resistance to all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) and arsenic
trioxide (As2O3) in acute promyelocytic leukemia. Int.
J. Hematol. 2013; 97:717–725.

19.	 Gonzalez VM, Fuertes MA, Alonso C, Perez JM. Is
­cisplatin-induced cell death always produced by apoptosis?
Mol Pharmacol. 2001; 59:657–663.

6.	 Siddik ZH. Cisplatin: mode of cytotoxic action and
­molecular basis of resistance. Oncogene. 2003;
22:7265–7279.

20.	 Brozovic A1, Ambriović-Ristov A, Osmak M. The
relationship between cisplatin-induced reactive oxygen
­
­species, glutathione, and BCL-2 and resistance to cisplatin.
Crit Rev Toxicol. 2010; 40:347–359.

7.	 Dasari S, Tchounwou PB. Cisplatin in cancer therapy:
molecular mechanisms of action. Eur J Pharmacol. 2014;
740:364–378.

21.	 Saad SY, Najjar TA, Alashari M. Role of non-selective
adenosine receptor blockade and phosphodiesterase
­
­inhibition in cisplatin-induced nephrogonadal toxicity in
rats. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol. 2004; 31:862–867.

8.	 Kotowski U, Heiduschka G, Brunner M, Erovic BM,
Martinek H, Thurnher D. Arsenic trioxide enhances the

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40745

Oncotarget

22.	 Yedjou CG, Tchounwou P B. Modulation of p53, c-fos,
RARE, cyclin A, and cyclin D1 expression in human
­leukemia (HL-60) cells exposed to arsenic trioxide. Mol
Cell Biochem. 2009; 331:207–214.

28.	 Guha M, Kumar S, Choubey V, Maity P, Bandyopadhyay U.
Apoptosis in liver during malaria: role of oxidative stress
and implication of mitochondrial pathway. FASEB J. 2006;
20:1224–1226.

23.	 Pourahmad J, Hosseini MJ, Eskandari MR, Shekarabi SM,
Daraei B. Mitochondrial/lysosomal toxic cross-talk plays
a key role in cisplatin nephrotoxicity. Xenobiotica. 2010;
40:763–771.

29.	 Singh NP, McCoy MT, Tice RR, Schneider EL. A simple
technique for quantitation of low levels of DNA damage in
individual cells. Exp Cell Res. 1988; 175:184–191.
30.	 Singh NK, Kundumani-Sridharan V, Kumar S, Verma SK,
Kotla S, Mukai H, Heckle MR, Rao GN. Protein kinase N1
is a novel substrate of NFATc1-mediated cyclin D1-CDK6
activity and modulates vascular smooth muscle cell division
and migration leading to inward blood vessel wall remodeling. J Biol Chem. 2012; 287:36291–36304.

24.	 Sancho-Martínez SM, Prieto-García L, Prieto M,
­López-Novoa JM, López-Hernández FJ. Subcellular targets
of cisplatin cytotoxicity: An integrated view. Pharmacol
Ther. 2012; 136:35–55.
25.	 St Germain C, Niknejad N, Ma L, Garbuio K, Hai T,
Dimitroulakos J. Cisplatin induces cytotoxicity through
the mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways and
activating transcription factor 3. Neoplasia. 2010;
12:527–538.

31.	 Wissing D, Mouritzen H, Jaattela M. TNF-induced
­mitochondrial changes and activation of apoptotic proteases
are inhibited by A20. Free Radic Biol Med. 1998; 25:57–65.
32.	 Cossarizza A, Baccarani-Contri M, Kalashnikova G,
Franceschi C. A new method for the cytofluorimetric analysis of mitochondrial membrane potential using the Jaggregate
forming lipophilic cation 5,5_,6,6_-tetrachloro-1,1_,3,3_tetraethylbenzimidazolcarbocyanine iodide (JC-1). Biochem
Biophys Res Commun. 1993; 197:40–45.

26.	 Watzlawik JO, Warrington AE, Rodriguez M. PDGF is
required for remyelination-promoting IgM stimulation of
oligodendrocyte progenitor cell proliferation. PLoS One.
2013; 8:e55149.
27.	 Kumar S, Guha M, Choubey V, Maity P, Srivastava SK,
Bandyopadhyay U. Bilirubin inhibits Plasmodium
falciparum growth through the generation of reactive
­
­oxygen species. Free Rad Biol Med. 2008; 44:602–613.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40746

Oncotarget

