2379

E D I T O R I A L

Neoadjuvant Gemcitabine and
Cisplatin: Another Step on the
Path Toward Improving the
Outcomes of Patients With
High-Risk, Invasive Bladder
Cancer
Matthew E. Nielsen,

MD

The James Buchanan Brady Urological Institute, the Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore,
Maryland.

I

See referenced original article on pages 2471–7,
this issue.
Address of reprints: Matthew E. Nielsen, MD, The
James Buchanan Brady Urological Institute, The
Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Marburg 143,
600 North Wolfe Street, Baltimore, MD 212872101; Fax: (410) 955-0833; E-mail: nielsen@
jhmi.edu
Received May 21, 2008; accepted May 27,
2008.

ª 2008 American Cancer Society

nvasive bladder cancer is a common and dangerous disease that
is becoming only more prevalent as the population ages. Radical
surgical therapy with curative intent has been and continues to
be a mainstay in the management of this condition; however,
approximately half of clinically localized cases go on to develop
distant metastases postoperatively.1 Platinum-based combination
chemotherapy (methotrexate, vinblastine, doxorubicin, and cisplatin
[MVAC]) emerged more than 20 years ago in studies pioneered by
Dr. Alan Yagoda and associates at Memorial Sloan-Kettering as the
ﬁrst effective systemic therapy for metastatic urothelial carcinoma.2
Despite this major advance, as well as concomitant improvements
in surgical and perioperative care, bladder cancer mortality rates
have not seen a dramatic improvement in recent years. A review of
survival outcomes of contemporary versus historical cystectomy series (before and after 1985) stratiﬁed by pathologic stage revealed
only modest improvements in survival in the modern era, with 5year survival rates of 60% versus 67% for pT2, 33% versus 35% for
pT3, and 21% versus 27% for pT4.3 The casual observer could be
forgiven for a less than sanguine view of the state of the art in this
setting; in 2008, there is clear room for improvement in the outcomes of patients with high-risk, muscle-invasive bladder cancer.
The observation of responses in the primary tumor among
patients with metastatic disease led to the evaluation of MVAC
given before cystectomy for muscle-invasive bladder cancer. A body
of literature has emerged over the past 2 decades supporting neoadjuvant platinum-based chemotherapy followed by radical cystectomy as a particularly promising strategy to improve patient
outcomes. A recent meta-analysis of over 3000 patients, representing 98% of all patients in relevant randomized controlled trials,
demonstrated a signiﬁcant beneﬁt associated with neoadjuvant cisplatin-based chemotherapy, equivalent to a 5% improvement in

DOI 10.1002/cncr.23849
Published online 29 September 2008 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

2380

CANCER November 1, 2008 / Volume 113 / Number 9

overall survival, a 14% decrease in disease-speciﬁc
mortality, and a 9% improvement in disease-speciﬁc
survival at 5 years.4 The argument for neoadjuvant
cisplatin-based chemotherapy in muscle-invasive
bladder cancer stands out in the ﬁeld of urologic oncology as 1 of the few supported by level 1 evidence.
A neoadjuvant approach has several theoretical
advantages that have been borne out by the experience
of clinical trials, recently summarized in the cogent
review by Herr et al.5 These include higher rates of
effective dose delivery earlier in the natural history of
disease than are achieved with the adjuvant approach.
Another important observation with neoadjuvant
chemotherapy in this setting has been an appreciation
of the importance of pathological downstaging of disease, which has utility not only in the sense that it
facilitates more effective extirpative therapy but also
as an independent prognostic factor. Downstaging
(both to pT0 and to <pT2) clearly deﬁnes the subgroup of patients whose subsequent outcomes in turn
deﬁne the beneﬁt associated with this strategy.
The extant literature evaluating neoadjuvant
chemotherapy in bladder cancer relies on the outcomes of patients receiving MVAC, an effective albeit
toxic regimen. In the setting of metastatic disease,
the cisplatin and gemcitabine doublet (GC) has been
shown to have comparable efﬁcacy to MVAC in terms
of response and long-term survival, but with substantially less toxicity.6,7 The study by Dash and colleagues8 in this issue of Cancer, the latest in a long
series of important contributions from the genitourinary oncology group at Memorial Sloan-Kettering,
represents the ﬁrst comprehensive report of outcomes after neoadjuvant chemotherapy with GC in
this setting. Notwithstanding the duly acknowledged
inherent limitations of the comparison to historical
controls from the same institution receiving neoadjuvant MVAC, the authors report complete (pT0) and
partial (<pT2) response rates with GC that are quite
encouraging and associated with disease-free survival
in responding patients comparable to those seen
with MVAC. The neoadjuvant GC regimen was generally well tolerated, supporting the conjecture that the
balance of toxicity and efﬁcacy favoring GC over
MVAC in the setting of metastatic disease might be
translated to the neoadjuvant setting. In addition, the
authors report excellent dose intensity with a 21-day
schedule for GC as compared with the original 28day GC schedule as well as previously reported doses
for MVAC, providing important practical food for
thought for practitioners. Until such time as there are
data from prospective randomized trials directly
comparing neoadjuvant GC to neoadjuvant MVAC,
the data presented in this study provide strong sup-

port for the consideration of neoadjuvant GC as an
effective and well-tolerated component in the armamentarium against high-risk bladder cancer.
Despite the body of evidence supporting a multimodal approach to high-risk, invasive bladder cancer
with neoadjuvant cisplatin-based chemotherapy followed by radical cystectomy and pelvic lymphadenectomy, patterns of care suggest that substantial
barriers exist within the urologic oncology community to the widespread adoption of this strategy. Data
from over 11,000 patients from 1998 to 2003 with
stage III bladder cancer in the National Cancer Database showed that only 0.7% received neoadjuvant
chemotherapy.9 We can only speculate at the reasons
underlying the impressively low penetration of multimodal therapy in practice, but it would seem that
the ascertainment of approaches and strategies to
address and reduce these obstacles might provide
major opportunities for improvement in patient outcomes. Concerns over delay in the delivery of surgical therapy and/or the relative toxicity of MVAC, the
neoadjuvant regimen supported by level 1 evidence,
are commonly cited as arguments against widespread utilization of this strategy. Hopefully the
results presented in this study may support the perception of GC as a reasonable and effective alternative deliverable on an efﬁcient dose schedule, and
thereby embolden more urologists and oncologists
to consider this option for their patients.
Another potential barrier to the broader adoption
of neoadjuvant chemotherapy in a multimodal
approach to high-risk bladder cancer can be conceptualized as a concern over the burden of overtreatment.
Stated simply, the modest—albeit statistically signiﬁcant and consistent—beneﬁt associated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy may be perceived by urologists to
be of insufﬁcient magnitude to justify subjecting all eligible patients with muscle-invasive bladder cancer to
systemic chemotherapy. One could argue for surgical
pathological staging as a means of more precisely
selecting the patients at highest risk of occult micrometastatic disease and thereby guiding postoperative
adjuvant chemotherapy. As Herr et al summarize, however, the complicated nature of this patient population
coupled with the often somewhat rocky recovery from
cystectomy appear to be associated with suboptimal
dose delivery in this setting, as compared with that
achievable with neoadjuvant schedules.5
Tools to individualize treatment to drug targets,
transporters, and metabolizing enzymes—beyond
the simple taxonomy of organ site—might represent
another powerful means of improving the acceptance of systemic therapy and by extension, the outcomes of our patients. A body of experience

Editorial/Nielsen

accumulating from multiple disease sites suggests
that molecular proﬁling may provide the means to
more precisely identify the subgroup of patients
likely to have a therapeutically meaningful response
to a given chemotherapy regimen.10 In a study of
patients with advanced and metastatic urothelial carcinoma, Bellmunt et al found an inverse association
between mRNA levels of excision repair cross complementing 1 (ERCC1) and survival after treatment
with GC,11 analogous to observed associations with
survival and response to GC in the setting of nonsmall cell lung cancer.12–14 Further prospective study
is needed to ascertain the extent to which ERCC1 or
other markers might be practical and useful as tools
to individualize the risk-adjusted delivery of systemic
therapy to the subpopulation of patients with
urothelial carcinoma most likely to beneﬁt.
Finally, despite the promising and consistent
improvements associated with the addition of neoadjuvant platinum-based chemotherapy to radical cystectomy, a glance at the survival curves in any of
these studies reminds us that there remains a substantial cohort of patients whose disease is not controllable with the tools readily at hand in 2008. In a
predominantly elderly patient population with a high
prevalence of renal dysfunction and poor performance status frequently precluding cisplatin-based
combination chemotherapy, the survival curves from
these studies likely underestimate the true burden of
mortality from muscle-invasive bladder cancer. A
recent excellent review by Sonpavde and colleagues
catalogues the variety of novel agents and combinations in development in this area of need.15 The proliferation in recent years of small molecule tyrosine
kinase inhibitors and monoclonal antibodies targeting speciﬁc nodes in cancer signaling pathways has
shown promise of signiﬁcant advances in other solid
tumor sites. The neoadjuvant paradigm may represent the ideal setting for accelerated development of
new treatment strategies in urothelial carcinoma,
given the rich opportunities for correlative science to
evaluate surrogate endpoints of efﬁcacy inherent to
this approach. An open multidisciplinary dialogue
between the urologists and medical oncologists caring for these patients, exempliﬁed by the contributions of the authors of the current study, will
hopefully pave the way for continued advances in the
armamentarium of treatment options for patients
with this common and too often deadly disease.

2381

REFERENCES
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

Stein JP, Lieskovsky G, Cote R, et al. Radical cystectomy in
the treatment of invasive bladder cancer: long-term results
in 1,054 patients. J Clin Oncol. 2001;19:666-675.
Sternberg CN, Yagoda A, Scher HI, et al. Preliminary
results of M-VAC (methotrexate, vinblastine, doxorubicin
and cisplatin) for transitional cell carcinoma of the urothelium. J Urol. 1985;133:403–407.
Galsky MD, Herr HW, Bajorin DF. The integration of
chemotherapy and surgery for bladder cancer. J Natl
Compr Cancer Netw. 2005;3:45–51.
Advanced Bladder Cancer (ABC) Meta-analysis Collaboration. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy in invasive bladder cancer: update of a systematic review and meta-analysis of
individual patient data. Eur Urol. 2005;48:202–205.
Herr HW, Dotan Z, Donat SM, Bajorin DF. Deﬁning optimal therapy for muscle invasive bladder cancer. J Urol.
2007;177:437–443.
von der Maase H, Hansen SW, Roberts JT, et al. Gemcitabine and cisplatin versus methotrexate, vinblastine, doxorubicin, and cisplatin in advanced or metastatic bladder
cancer: results of a large, randomized, multinational, multicenter, phase III study. J Clin Oncol. 2000;18:3068–3077.
von der Maase H, Sengelov L, Roberts JT, et al. Long-term
survival results of a randomized trial comparing gemcitabine plus cisplatin, with methotrexate, vinblastine, doxorubicin, plus cisplatin in patients with bladder cancer. J Clin
Oncol. 2005;23:4602–4608.
Dash A, Pettus JA IV, Herr HW, et al. A role for neoadjuvant
gemcitabine plus cisplatin in muscle-invasive urothelial
carcinoma of the bladder: a retrospective experience. Cancer. 2008;113:2471–2477.
David KA, Milowsky MI, Ritchey J, Carroll PR, Nanus DM.
Low incidence of perioperative chemotherapy for stage III
bladder cancer 1998 to 2003: a report from the National
Cancer Data Base. J Urol. 2007;178:451–454.
Maitland ML, DiRienzo A, Ratain MJ. Interpreting disparate responses to cancer therapy: the role of human population genetics. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24:2151–2157.
Bellmunt J, Paz-Ares L, Cuello M, et al. Gene expression of
ERCC1 as a novel prognostic marker in advanced bladder
cancer patients receiving cisplatin-based chemotherapy.
Ann Oncol. 2007;18:522–528.
Ceppi P, Volante M, Novello S, et al. ERCC1 and RRM1
gene expressions but not EGFR are predictive of shorter
survival in advanced non-small-cell lung cancer treated
with cisplatin and gemcitabine. Ann Oncol. 2006;17:1818–
1825.
Lord RV, Brabender J, Gandara D, et al. Low ERCC1 expression correlates with prolonged survival after cisplatin plus
gemcitabine chemotherapy in non-small cell lung cancer.
Clin Cancer Res. 2002;8:2286–2291.
Olaussen KA, Dunant A, Fouret P, et al. DNA repair by
ERCC1 in non-small-cell lung cancer and cisplatin-based
adjuvant chemotherapy. N Engl J Med. 2006;355:983–991.
Sonpavde G, Ross R, Powles T, et al. Novel agents for muscle-invasive and advanced urothelial cancer. BJU Int.
2008;101:937–943.

