Research Article

Temozolomide-Mediated Radiosensitization of Human Glioma
Cells in a Zebrafish Embryonic System
Geoffrey A. Geiger, Weili Fu, and Gary D. Kao
Department of Radiation Oncology, Philadelphia Veterans Affairs Medical Center and the University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania

Abstract
The zebrafish (Danio rerio) is a popular vertebrate model for
biomedical research. The rapid development, transparency,
and experimental accessibility of the embryo offer opportunities for assessing the developmental effects of anticancer
treatment strategies. We therefore systematically investigated
parameters for growing U251 human glioma cells expressing
red fluorescent protein (U251-RFP) in zebrafish embryos.
Factors optimized include injection volume, number of cells
injected, anatomic site of injection, age of the embryo at the
time of injection, and postinjection incubation temperature.
After injection into the embryos, the U251-RFP cells proliferated and the resultant tumors, and even individual cells,
could be visualized in real-time via fluorescence microscopy
without the need for sacrifice. These tumors recruited host
zebrafish vasculature, suggesting cancer cell–host tissue
interactions. Having optimized parameters for introducing
and growing these human cells in the zebrafish embryos,
we exposed both embryos and transplanted cancer cells to
ionizing radiation and temozolomide, either alone or in
combination. The human tumors in each embryo were
substantially diminished following exposure to ionizing
radiation and the decrease was further enhanced by pretreatment with temozolomide. In contrast, temozolomide had no
discernible effects on embryonic development. These results
together support the relative safety of temozolomide during
embryonic development, as well as its anticancer efficacy
when combined with radiation. These results suggest the value
of the zebrafish model for in vivo testing of the efficacy and
safety of anticancer strategies, especially on the very young.
[Cancer Res 2008;68(9):3396–404]

Introduction
Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), the most common primary
adult brain tumor, portends a poor prognosis for most patients. The
median survival for patients with glioblastomas treated with the
current standard of care remains less than 1 year (1). Glioblastoma
multiforme is considered to be a relatively radioresistant malignancy, in part due to activation of the phosphoinositide 3-kinase
signaling pathway (2, 3). Temozolomide (Temodar) is a DNAmethylating agent, with activity as monotherapy for the treatment

Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research Online
(http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Requests for reprints: Gary D. Kao, Department of Radiation Oncology,
Philadelphia Veterans Affairs Medical Center and the University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, John Morgan 180 H, Hamilton Walk, Philadelphia, PA 19104.
Phone: 215-573-5503; Fax: 215-898-0090; E-mail: Kao@xrt.upenn.edu.
I2008 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-6396

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (9). May 1, 2008

of malignant gliomas (4–8). The cytotoxicity of temozolomide has
been attributed to the perturbation of DNA repair through
methylation of the O6 position of guanine (9). During replication,
the O6 methylguanine incorrectly pairs with thymine, triggering
the mismatch repair system (9). Repair of the mismatched bases
leads to the preferential reinsertion of thymine, which is thought
to cause repetitive and futile repair attempts leading to the
generation of DNA strand breaks and, eventually, growth arrest
and apoptosis (10). More encouragingly, temozolomide has been
shown to improve treatment response and overall survival when
combined with radiation therapy for treating adult glioblastoma
multiforme (8). In contrast, data for combining temozolomide and
radiation therapy for treating glioblastoma multiforme in the
young remains sparse, including whether the combined treatment
affects in utero development (11, 12). The availability of a vertebrate model system to help clarify such urgent questions would
be welcome.
The zebrafish (Danio rerio) has attracted considerable attention
in recent years as a model system for biomedical research because
of compelling advantages such as high levels of physiologic and
genetic homology with higher vertebrates such as mammals
(13, 14). The aqueous environment of the zebrafish facilitates drug
as well as studies using ionizing radiation (IR; immersion in water
ensures radiation dose homogeneity), and the transparency of
the progeny allows easy visualization of internal structures,
including organs. Finally, rapid embryonic development facilitates
investigations of effects on development. Recent reports have
described the effects of radiation on viability and development in
early zebrafish embryos, confirming anatomic effects similar to
that described for humans (15, 16) and showed the usefulness
of the model in delineating the toxicity of novel agents (17). The
growth and interactions with the host tissues of human melanoma
cells transplanted into zebrafish has been described (18–20).
However, whether the zebrafish would be useful for studying the
effects of the interactions of standard anticancer treatments
on tumor growth, to our knowledge, has not been previously
studied.
We therefore investigated the utility of the zebrafish embryonic
system for testing the effects of radiation and chemotherapy on
human glioblastoma cells by establishing parameters for the
transplantation of U251 human glioma cells into zebrafish
embryos. The transplanted human cancer cells recruited vasculature from the zebrafish host, confirming tumor effects on the
tissue microenvironment. We determined that IR leads to dosedependent suppression of the growth of human glioma cells, which
was augmented by temozolomide. The radiosensitization of the
human cancer cells by temozolomide was not accompanied by
deleterious effects on development. These results together suggest
the efficacy and safety of combined temozolomide and radiation,
and further support the usefulness of zebrafish as a model system
for studying the efficacy and safety of anticancer strategies.

3396

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Temozolomide Radiosensitization of Glioma Cells in Zebrafish

Materials and Methods
Animal care. Zebrafish were raised as previously described (15) and all
procedures, including embryo collection and handling, were done in
accordance with accepted standard operating procedures (21) approved by
the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at the University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine. Staging of the zebrafish embryos and
larvae were performed as described by Kimmel et al. (22). The age of
embryos is indicated throughout the manuscript as hours postfertilization
(hpf) and days postfertilization (dpf) for all experimental data shown.
Embryos were maintained at 30jC after transplantation procedures.
Embryos raised beyond 24 hpf were treated with phenylthiourea (0.003%,
w/v; Sigma) to prevent melanization. For each experiment, embryos
containing the transplanted human cancer cells were then assessed daily
through at least 9 dpf before the experiments concluded and animals were
euthanized through exposure to MESAB (0.5 mmol/L 3-aminobenzoic acid
ethyl ester, 2 mmol/L Na2HPO; Sigma) at the conclusion of the experimentation. Experiments involving visualization of zebrafish endothelium
involved transgenic zebrafish embryos ( fli1:EGFP; ref. 23) but husbandry
protocols used were otherwise identical.
Labeling and characterization of the U251 human glioma cell line.
U251 malignant glioma cells were purchased from the American Type
Culture Collection and stably transfected with a RFP construct (pDsRed2C1; Clontech). The expression of RFP did not affect the radiosensitivity of
the cells (17), and the fluorescence emitted was linearly proportional to the
number of cells, including those growing as tumor masses (data not shown).
Cells were grown in DMEM (Life Technologies, Inc.) containing 10% fetal
bovine serum (Life Technologies) and 0.4 mg/mL G418 (Life Technologies)
and maintained in an incubator with 5% carbon dioxide and 21% oxygen.
The clonogenicity of U251-RFP cells at 30jC and 37jC were established
according to previously published methods (24). The radiosensitivity at
these two temperatures was assessed using survival curves, and was found
to be similar (Supplementary Fig. S1). Cells were plated at a density of 104
in 35-mm-diameter tissue culture plates containing complete medium over
soft agar. On dpf 2, 7, and 14, phase contrast images of colonies were taken
using a Nikon TE-200 microscope equipped with epifluorescence optics.
Preparation of cells for transplantation. Human U251-RFP cells were
grown in cell culture to a confluence of f50% before trypsinization and
resuspension in HBSS (Invitrogen Life Technologies) at a concentration of
107 cells/mL. All cells were then strained and sorted via a fluorescence
activated cell sorter (Becton Dickinson FACSCalibur). Fluorescence was
measured by exciting cells at 594 nm and fluorescence-emitting cells were
collected in a fresh, sterile container. Cells prepared using this procedure
were z95% viable (as assessed by trypan blue exclusion) and fluorescent
(as confirmed by fluorescence microscopy).
Transplantation procedure. The cell transplantation protocol was
modified from the protocol described by Lee et al. (19). Briefly, needles were
pulled using a P-97 Flaming/Brown Micropipette Puller (Sutter Instrument
Co.). A Nanoject II microinjector (Drummond Scientific) was used to
transplant 50 to 200 cells into chorionated blastula-stage zebrafish embryos
at the oblong to sphere stage (f3.5–4.5 hpf) into the center of the
embryonic yolk sac unless otherwise specified. After injection, embryos
were maintained for 1 hour at 28jC before incubation at 31jC. At 1 dpf,
transplanted embryos were examined by fluorescence microscopy to select
for embryos that were morphologically normal and bearing a RFPexpressing U251 cell mass before manual dechorionation and placement
into individual wells in standard 48-well polystyrene tissue culture plates
(Costar). The embryonic yolk sac was the preferred injection target site
because it offered an easily accessible target in young embryos that was
associated with a high rate of embryo survival after microinjection of cells.
Imaging and analysis of tumor volumes and emitted fluorescence.
Acquisition of images was performed as previously described (15).
Following transplantation of the U251-RFP cells, embryos were serially
examined under a 100 PlanNeofluor objective mounted on a Nikon TE-200
microscope equipped with epifluorescence optics. The embryos of all
treatment groups were handled identically and exposure to incidental light
was minimized. Both bright field and fluorescent images were captured

www.aacrjournals.org

with a Hammamatsu CCD camera controlled with IP LabSpectrum v2.0.1
software (Scanalytics, Inc.). Images taken in the same focal plane in bright
field and in transmitted light passing through RFP filters were merged via
Adobe Photoshop CS2 (Adobe). The emitted fluorescent signal was analyzed
via Kodak Molecular Imaging software v. 4.0.5 (Kodak) and found to be
proportional to the number of viable cancer cells. Tumor size measurements were performed via manually outlining the area represented by
tumor at the plane of imaging that shows the greatest dimensions of each
tumor. This was designated as the region of interest (ROI) with the area
represented by the ROI calculated by software.
Embryo irradiation and exposure to drug. Treatment (irradiation and
exposure to temozolomide) of embryos was performed according to
protocols approved by the Department of Environmental Health and
Radiation Safety at the University of Pennsylvania. Embryos were either
irradiated at 10 Gy or mock-irradiated as previously described (15).
Embryos at 1 dpf were exposed to single fractions of 640 kVp g-irradiation
at room temperature using a J.L. Shepherd Mark I 137Cs irradiator.
Temozolomide (Temodar, Schering Corp.) was dissolved in 10% DMSO and
embryos were exposed to temozolomide for 12 hours at a final
concentration of 100 Amol/L in embryo medium, which did not appreciably
affect normal zebrafish embryonic development, before either irradiation or
mock-irradiation at 1 dpf. All results are presented as arithmetic mean F SE.
Statistical analysis was performed using a Student’s t test.

Results
Optimizing parameters for transplanting human malignant
glioma cells into zebrafish embryos. Recent success with
growing human cells in zebrafish embryos (18, 20, 25) encouraged
us to explore the possibility of developing a similar system using
human glioma cells. To distinguish these cells against the background of zebrafish tissues, we prepared U251 cells stably expressing
RFP. The expression of fluorescent protein did not significantly
affect the radiosensitivity of the cells, which is consistent with
results described for other human glioma cell lines expressing
fluorescent protein (data not shown and ref. 26). We began by
establishing parameters for optimally growing these cells, testing
factors including final injection volume, number of U251-RFP cells
injected per embryo, the anatomic site of injection, age of the
embryo at transplantation, and incubation temperature. Having
optimized these factors, we focused next on the microinjection
location and first attempted to assess whether the U251-RFP cells
could be successfully injected into and grow within the intracranial
region of young embryos. We were able to successfully inject U251RFP cells into the cranial junction of the animal pole and yolk sac of
2-day-old (2 dpf) embryos, which grew into a tumor mass that
continued to grow throughout the duration of the experiment (to 7
days postfertilization; Supplementary Fig. S2A–C). However, microinjection into the cell mass was associated with a high embryo
mortality rate (over 40% within 24 hours) even when the injected
volume was reduced. In contrast, microinjecting into the yolk sac
was associated with lower mortality rates of f10% to 20%. We note
that Lee et al. (19) have hypothesized that another potential
advantage of injecting human cancer cells into the egg yolk may be
less susceptibility to tissue microenvironment signaling and which
may otherwise alter the cancer phenotype independently of
cytotoxic agents.
The final factor assessed was the ideal post-microinjection
temperature for the human cancer cells. Human cells are typically
incubated at 37jC, reflecting human body temperature. Wild
zebrafish live in tropical environments typically cooler than human
body temperature; that is, the embryos develop best at temperatures below 30jC. Given this temperature differential, we first

3397

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (9). May 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

established that our U251-RFP cells in cell culture were able to
proliferate and form colonies despite being maintained for long
periods of time at temperatures ranging from 28jC to 31jC (Supplementary Fig. S2D–F), results consistent with that observed for
the melanoma cell line C8161 by Lee et al. (19). To formally test
whether a range of incubation temperature may affect the growth
of the U251-RFP, we injected these cells into zebrafish embryos and
subsequently maintained the embryos at 28jC, 30jC, 32jC, or
34jC. We found that the embryos survived best at V32jC, whereas
there were no significant differences in the survival of the U251RFP cells maintained at any of temperatures above 28jC. There
were no significant differences in the radiosensitivity of U251-RFP
cells at 30jC compared with 37jC (Supplementary Fig. S1). These
results suggest that the U251-RFP cells can tolerate and proliferate
within a range of temperatures that include those suitable for the
zebrafish host.
Durability of human glioma cells proliferating in the
zebrafish embryonic host: tracking individual cells. Having
optimized the parameters for microinjecting and detecting U251RFP cells in the zebrafish embryos, we wished to document the
proliferation and durability of the injected human cells over a

longer interval. Many experiments involving zebrafish embryos
conclude at 7 days postfertilization, because the yolk sac provides
sufficient nutrition during this interval such that supplemental
feeding is not required. Because of these considerations, we sought
to confirm that the human glioma cells survive to at least 7 dpf
in the zebrafish embryonic host. We found that the transplanted
human cells survived and proliferated within the embryo over
7 days, throughout the duration of the experiment (serial imaging
of representative embryos containing transplanted U251-RFP cells
is shown in Fig. 1). It was also notable that the presence of the
transplanted human cells did not seem to jeopardize the normal
phenotypic development of the embryo during the time frame of
the experiment. This would be seem to be analogous to a xenografted tumor in a mouse not impairing its ability of the mouse to
thrive, whereas the tumor remains small, which then allows the
effects of treatment on the tumor to be investigated.
A compelling advantage of the zebrafish embryonic system is
that it is transparent throughout the embryonic period. The optical
clarity of the zebrafish therefore allows the tracking of individual
human cancer cells. For example, in the experiment shown in Fig. 2,
what seem to be two U251-RFP cells were injected into the

Figure 1. Persistence of human malignant glioma
cells within, and lack of developmental effects on, the
developing zebrafish embryo. U251-RFP cells growing
within the developing zebrafish embryo for at least 7 d
at 30jC do not perturb development. Lateral views of a
representative zebrafish embryo after transplantation of
U251-RFP human glioma cells, imaged under fluorescence
alone (right column images ) or merged bright field and
fluorescent images (left column images ). Leftmost column
of text, embryonic age at time of imaging. 12 hpf, embryo
imaged at 2 h after transplantation. Bar, 300 Am. The
remainder of embryos were imaged at 1, 2, 3, 5, or 7 dpf.
Bar, 200 Am.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (9). May 1, 2008

3398

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Temozolomide Radiosensitization of Glioma Cells in Zebrafish

Figure 2. Visualization of individual human glioma
cells proliferating within a live zebrafish embryo. Lateral
views of a single, live zebrafish embryo over a 9-d
period following transplantation of individual U251-RFP
cells. At baseline (2 dpf ), two individual U251-RFP cells
are observed. At 3 dpf, three individual U251-RFP
cells observed. At 4 dpf, five individual U251-RFP cells
are noted. At 6 dpf, at least seven individual U251-RFP
cells are notable. At 9 dpf, there is a further increase in
the number of U251-RFP cells. Scale bar, 200 Am.

zebrafish embryo at 2 dpf (Fig. 2, 2 dpf ). These two cells were then
observed to divide and proliferate over successive days, as far as
out as 9 dpf (Fig. 2, 9 dpf ). For example, from the initial two cells
injected at 2 dpf, three cells could be observed by 3 dpf, and then
five cells by 4 dpf (Fig. 2, 3 dpf and 4 dpf ). These experiments
together therefore indicate the usefulness of the zebrafish embryo
for growing and tracking human glioma cancer cells, either
individually or as a tumor mass.
Human glioma cells implanted within zebrafish embryos
recruit blood vessels from the host tissues. The proliferation
and durability of the injected human glioma cells within the
embryos suggested that the human cells were deriving sufficient
‘‘nutrition’’ from the zebrafish host tissues. Although individual
cells may be able to do so via passive diffusion, larger tumor
masses may need to recruit blood vessels or stimulate de novo
angiogenesis. The availability of a transgenic zebrafish strain that
has its vasculature outlined with green fluorescent protein
( fli1:EGFP) has facilitated investigations of blood vessel development (23). We therefore microinjected U251-RFP cells into
fli1:EGFP embryos. The human glioma cells were injected into
the yolk sac and were located away from the developing cell
mass. Therefore, the human tumor mass was initially distinct
from the developing zebrafish endothelium (Fig. 3A). Over time,
however, aspects of the developing zebrafish vasculature were
noted to extend toward and directly contact the human tumor
mass (Fig. 3B–C). These results suggest that human glioma cells
may be able to stimulate angiogenesis and recruit blood vessels
from the zebrafish host tissues, and which in turn may support
the continuing growth of the tumor. These results therefore

www.aacrjournals.org

corroborate previous reports of the stimulation of de novo
angiogenesis in zebrafish embryos by nonglioma cancer cells
(18–20).
Exposure to temozolomide does not appreciably affect
embryonic development. To investigate the effects of temozolomide on injected human cancer cells, we first established the
effects of temozolomide on zebrafish embryonic development. We
assessed the survival and morphology of embryos treated with
temozolomide alone compared with control embryos exposed to
vehicle only (DMSO; neither group was exposed to IR). Embryos
in the experimental group were exposed to temozolomide for
12 hours at a final concentration of 100 Amol/L in embryo medium,
and, following treatment, the embryos were observed throughout
the first 7 dpf of life for survival and morphology. We found that the
survival of temozolomide-treated embryos was not significantly
different from control embryos. Specifically, the survival of embryos treated with temozolomide (n = 250) at 24, 48, 120, and
168 hours after treatment were 93.0 F 4.6%, 90.1 F 3.9%, 88.2 F
4.9%, and 86.3 F 5.1%, respectively. The survival of control embryos
(n = 260) during the identical time periods were 94.2 F 6.1%,
91.3 F 4.7%, 89.1 F 3.9%, and 87.3 F 5.2. There were also no
appreciable morphologic effects when the control group was
compared with the temozolomide group (representative treated
or control embryos at the 2 and 5 dpf stages are shown in
Supplementary Fig. S3A–B).
Ionizing radiation decreases the survival of human glioma
cells growing within zebrafish embryos. We have previously
established parameters for testing the effects of IR on zebrafish
embryos (15). This allowed us to determine that the ideal stage to

3399

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (9). May 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

test the relative effects of IR on transplanted tumor cells would
be at 1 dpf. At that age, most of the embryos tolerate doses of
radiation that are in the therapeutic range for human cancer cells
without detectable normal tissue toxicity. Embryos containing
U251:RFP tumors were therefore either mock–irradiated or
irradiated with 10 Gy at 1 dpf. Embryonic transparency permitted

Figure 3. Visualization of angiogenesis within zebrafish embryos following
transplantation of human glioma cells. A to C, lateral views of live zebrafish
embryos after transplantation of U251-RFP cells in fli1:EGFP zebrafish.
A, representative zebrafish at 2 dpf showing transplanted human glioma
cells (RFP) located separately from the zebrafish endothelium (GFP). B, a
representative zebrafish at 5 dpf showing the developing zebrafish endothelium,
with portions of the vasculature approaching the U251-RFP tumor cell
masses (arrowheads ). Scale bar for A and B, 50 Am. C, an image at higher
magnification showing a single distinct GFP-expressing zebrafish blood vessel
growing into a U251-RFP tumor cell mass. Scale bar, 10 Am in C .

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (9). May 1, 2008

tracking tumor growth via serial microscopy and the ability to
measure the fluorescence emitted by the RFP-expressing human
cells within the tumor. Images of representative control (DMSO)
and irradiated (10 Gy) embryos are shown in Fig. 4A to C, with
embryos imaged immediately before IR at 1 dpf (Pre-IR , Fig. 4A)
and then after IR at 3 and 5 dpf (Post-IR , Fig. 4B and C). The
fluorescence emitted by each group of tumors growing within the
embryos was measured and quantitated (Fig. 4D). We found that
within mock-irradiated control embryos, the emitted fluorescence
increased over time, in accordance with continuing proliferation of
the human glioma cells and the visibly increased size of the tumor
mass. In contrast, the emitted fluorescence of the tumors in the
irradiated group (10 Gy) decreased over this period, which was in
accordance with the visibly reduced size of the irradiated tumors,
suggesting that the IR led to the death of at least a proportion
of the injected U251:RFP cells (Fig. 4D). These results together
indicate that exposure to IR inhibited the growth and survival of
human glioma cells growing within zebrafish embryos. Furthermore, the inhibitory effects of IR on the human cancer cells could
be detected visually as well as measured by the fluorescence
emitted by surviving cells.
Irradiation in the presence of temozolomide results in the
greatest inhibition of human glioma cells growing within
zebrafish embryos. We next tested whether temozolomide might
contribute to the effects of IR on the human glioma cells growing
within embryos. In these experiments, embryos containing
U251:RFP tumors were irradiated at 1 dpf in the presence or
absence of temozolomide. The embryos were serially imaged and
the size of each tumor was measured. The effects of temozolomide
combined with IR were also evident in the measured fluorescence
emitted by the tumors growing within the embryos. Images of
representative embryos treated either with temozolomide only
(TMZ only), with only IR (10 Gy), or with IR in the presence
of temozolomide (10 Gy + TMZ) are shown in Fig. 5A to C. The
fluorescence emitted by each tumor mass was measured immediately before irradiation as well as on subsequent days. The embryos
were imaged immediately before IR (Pre-IR) and then at 3 and
5 dpf; that is, 2 and 4 days after IR (Post-IR). The fluorescence
emitted by each tumor mass was quantitated at each of these times
(Fig. 5D). As in previous experiments, the IR resulted in serial
decreases in the amount of emitted fluorescence (compare fluorescence at days 3 and 5 with day 1 in embryos irradiated with
10 Gy; middle portion of the histogram in Fig. 5D). Temozolomide
alone had only a minor effect on the emitted fluorescence of the
tumor mass (left portion of the histogram). In contrast, combined
temozolomide followed by IR resulted in the greatest decreases in
the fluorescence emitted by the human tumor cells (right portions
of Fig. 5A–C, and the histogram in Fig. 5D). Of note, only the
combined IR and temozolomide resulted in complete eradication
of tumor masses in some of the embryos (21% of the embryos).
These results encouraged us to expand the treatment groups. We
repeated the experiments, with the additional control of embryos
with U251:RFP tumors exposed only to DMSO, as well as other
embryos with tumors that were exposed to irradiation with a lower
dose of irradiation. The fluorescence emitted by tumors growing
within control embryos exposed to only DMSO continued to
increase so that by day 5 after fertilization (5 dpf), the fluorescence
was f50% greater than at the start of the experiment ( first column
in the histogram shown in Fig. 6). The tumors in embryos exposed
to temozolomide in contrast alone did not grow, and so by the
end of the experiment showed significantly less fluorescence

3400

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Temozolomide Radiosensitization of Glioma Cells in Zebrafish

Figure 4. Exposure to IR reduces the size and
fluorescence emitted by human glioma cells growing
in zebrafish embryos. Embryos containing U251:RFP
tumors were exposed to DMSO (as in Fig. 5)
or irradiated with 10 Gy and imaged on sequential
days. A to C, images taken under fluorescence
of representative zebrafish embryos after
transplantation of U251:RFP cells, and imaged
immediately before exposure to DMSO (left column )
or 10 Gy irradiation (right column ) at 1 dpf (A),
3 dpf (B ), or 5 dpf (C ). The tumor masses in the
embryos treated with DMSO have visibly grown
in size at both 3 and 5 dpf, while the tumor masses
in the irradiated embryo show regression in size
at both time points. D, the fluorescence emitted
by the tumor masses of either treatment group was
measured at all three time points, and the mean
levels of emitted fluorescence are plotted in the
histograms in arbitrary fluorescence units (bars, SE).
These data were derived from three replicate
experiments encompassing the following numbers
of embryos: n = 22 for the "DMSO" group and n = 18
for the "10 Gy" group.

than control tumors. Tumors that had been irradiated with either
5 or 10 Gy were visibly smaller and showed significantly less
fluorescence as well (as indicated by the third and fourth columns,
compared with the first column, in the histogram shown in Fig. 6).
Finally, of all the treatments, the greatest degree of tumor regression, and consequently the greatest decrease in emitted fluorescence, was noted in embryos exposed to temozolomide followed by
IR (compare last two columns in the histogram in Fig. 6).
In summary, these results together indicate that that irradiation
plus temozolomide leads to a significantly greater degree of cell
death in the human glioma cells growing as tumor masses in

www.aacrjournals.org

zebrafish embryos compared with those treated with either
temozolomide or irradiation alone. In addition, the transparency
(i.e., ‘‘optical clarity’’) of the zebrafish allows the response of the
human cancer cells to treatment can be detected visually as well as
via measurement of emitted fluorescence.

Discussion
The zebrafish has been established as a vertebrate model system
useful for studying human diseases (27, 28). The considerable
physiologic and genetic homology of zebrafish to higher-level

3401

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (9). May 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

vertebrates implies that discoveries would have a high probability
of relevance to mammals including humans. The rapid development of zebrafish embryos, which allows visualization of major
organs in the first few days of life, greatly facilitates experimental
throughput. The logistics of care tend to be economic and relatively
simple. The permeability and aqueous environment of the embryos
render studies of the effects of small molecules practical. Finally,
the small size of embryos renders the zebrafish amenable to
microplate-based studies, and therefore potentially suitable for
high-throughput screening for discovering novel molecules with
useful translational properties.
Extending the power of this vertebrate model system, recent
reports have shown the feasibility of transplanting cancer cells
into zebrafish embryos to study tumor proliferation and growth
mechanisms (18–20). In addition to the advantages discussed in
the preceding paragraph, the zebrafish embryo lacks antitumor
immunity and so will not reject transplanted human tumor cells,

in part because the T-cell receptor a gene is not expressed in
extrathymic sites before 9 dpf (29, 30). The suitability of tumor
xenografts in zebrafish embryos as a system that usefully models
the behavior of mammalian tumors and tumor interactions within
the host microenvironment has been further highlighted by evidence that tumor xenografts induce angiogenesis in the zebrafish
embryonic host (18, 20).
High-grade gliomas are rapidly progressive brain tumors that
portend a uniformly grim outcome in diagnosed patients, both in
adults and in the young (9). Effective and safe new treatments are
needed. Model systems that facilitate investigations of the efficacy
and safety of anticancer agents on human glioma cells would aid
the development of such novel treatment strategies and paradigms.
Although previous efforts have described the usefulness of zebrafish as a model system for studying the developmental effects of
radiation therapy (15, 31, 32), in this work, we have extended the
usefulness of zebrafish for studying the antitumor efficacy and

Figure 5. Combined temozolomide and IR
results in the greatest inhibition of tumor
growth and fluorescence emitted from
human malignant glioma cells grown in
zebrafish embryos. Embryos containing
U251:RFP tumors were exposed to
temozolomide alone (TMZ Only ), irradiated
with 10 Gy, or temozolomide followed by
10 Gy IR (10 Gy and 10 Gy + TMZ ,
respectively) and imaged on sequential
days. A to C, images taken under
fluorescence of representative zebrafish
embryos at 1 dpf (A ), 3 dpf (B ), or 5 dpf
(C ). D, the fluorescence emitted by the
tumor masses of each treatment group
was measured at all three time points.
Columns, mean levels of emitted
fluorescence in arbitrary fluorescence
units; bars, SE. These data were derived
from three replicate experiments
encompassing the following numbers of
embryos: n = 16 for the ‘‘TMZ only’’ group,
n = 18 for the ‘‘10 Gy’’ group, and n = 19
for the ‘‘10 Gy + TMZ’’ group.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (9). May 1, 2008

3402

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Temozolomide Radiosensitization of Glioma Cells in Zebrafish

Figure 6. Comparison of the effects of treatments on the
cumulative changes in fluorescence emitted by human
malignant glioma cells in zebrafish embryos. The
cumulative changes in the mean fluorescence emitted
by U251-RFP tumor masses in each treatment group
between the beginning of the experiment at 24 hpf and the
conclusion at 120 hpf. The treatment groups included
embryos treated with DMSO or temozolomide alone
(TMZ Only ), 5 Gy and 10 Gy IR, and temozolomide
combined with 10 Gy IR (10 Gy + TMZ ). Columns, mean
percentage changes in each treatment group; bars, SE.
The values were determined from three replicate
experiments involving a total of 93 embryos. *, P < 0.001
compared with embryos treated with DMSO only.
b, P < 0.05 compared with embryos treated with 10 Gy.

normal tissue safety of conventional anticancer treatments. The
permeability of the embryo and the aqueous environment allows
the testing of the effects of combined radiation and chemotherapy
on transplanted human tumor cells. The transparency of the
zebrafish facilitates detection and serial monitoring of the resultant
tumor masses, and even of individual cancer cells, before and after
treatment. Because of the resolution that this system permits, the
effects of treatment are readily detectable within days following
treatment. These features of this model system in turn should
therefore allow increased experimental throughout.
One can envision further applications and potential implications
of the model system we have described. This system may be useful
in testing the efficacy of combining temozolomide with radiation
therapy or other systemic agents for human solid malignancies,
while simultaneously assessing for potential effects on normal
tissue function or development. This system allows testing
potential bystander effects that may influence the radiosensitivity
of cancer cells (33). Recent biological-based targeting agents have
been proposed for treating gliomas (34); the effects of these novel
agents on development and efficacy against human cancer cells

References
1. Hegi ME, Diserens AC, Gorlia T, et al. MGMT gene
silencing and benefit from temozolomide in glioblastoma. N Engl J Med 2005;352:997–1003.
2. Chakravarti A, Dicker A, Mehta M. The contribution of
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling
pathway to radioresistance in human gliomas: a review
of preclinical and correlative clinical data. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 2004;58:927–31.
3. Nakamura JL, Karlsson A, Arvold ND, et al. PKB/Akt
mediates radiosensitization by the signaling inhibitor
LY294002 in human malignant gliomas. J Neurooncol
2005;71:215–22.
4. Athanassiou H, Synodinou M, Maragoudakis E, et al.
Randomized phase II study of temozolomide and
radiotherapy compared with radiotherapy alone in
newly diagnosed glioblastoma multiforme. J Clin Oncol
2005;23:2372–7.
5. Brandes AA, Vastola F, Basso U, et al. A prospective

www.aacrjournals.org

could be efficiently evaluated in the zebrafish embryonic system we
describe. Such pilot investigations could include the testing of the
efficacy and safety of sequencing or combining specific novel
agents with standard anticancer treatment. This system therefore
serves as a potential bridge to more resource- and time-intensive
studies such as in mice or other higher order mammals, and
ultimately to clinical trials.

Acknowledgments
Received 11/28/2007; revised 1/23/2008; accepted 2/6/2008.
Grant support: Office of Research and Development Medical Research Service;
Department of Veterans Affairs (Advanced Career Research Award); NIH grants
CA107956, P01CA075138, and 1R21NS061737; and Radiation Biology training grant
C5T32CA009677 (G.A. Geiger).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank the other members of the Kao Laboratory for expert assistance,
especially Melissa Dowling, Frances Lee, Stephanie Yee, and Kaitrin Baloue; Dr. Ann
Kennedy for support for G.A. Geiger; Drs. Steve Hahn and Constantinos Koumenis,
whose support helped make this research possible; and Dr. Michael Pack (Division of
Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA) for the generous gifts of materials and fli1:EGFP zebrafish.

study on glioblastoma in the elderly. Cancer 2003;97:
657–62.
6. Chinot OL, Barrie M, Frauger E, et al. Phase II study of
temozolomide without radiotherapy in newly diagnosed
glioblastoma multiforme in an elderly populations.
Cancer 2004;100:2208–14.
7. Mirimanoff RO, Gorlia T, Mason W, et al. Radiotherapy
and temozolomide for newly diagnosed glioblastoma:
recursive partitioning analysis of the EORTC 26981/
22981-NCIC CE3 phase III randomized trial. J Clin Oncol
2006;24:2563–9.
8. Stupp R, Mason WP, van den Bent MJ, et al.
Radiotherapy plus concomitant and adjuvant temozolomide for glioblastoma. N Engl J Med 2005;352:
987–96.
9. Agarwala SS, Kirkwood JM. Temozolomide, a novel
alkylating agent with activity in the central nervous
system, may improve the treatment of advanced
metastatic melanoma. Oncologist 2000;5:144–51.
10. Newlands ES, Stevens MF, Wedge SR, Wheelhouse

3403

RT, Brock C. Temozolomide: a review of its discovery,
chemical properties, pre-clinical development and
clinical trials. Cancer Treat Rev 1997;23:35–61.
11. Barone G, Maurizi P, Tamburrini G, Riccardi R. Role
of temozolomide in pediatric brain tumors. Childs Nerv
Syst 2006;22:652–61.
12. Burzynski SR. Treatments for astrocytic tumors in
children: current and emerging strategies. Paediatr
Drugs 2006;8:167–78.
13. Jesuthasan S. Genetics and development. Zebrafish in
the spotlight. Science 2002;297:1484–5.
14. Fishman MC. Genomics. Zebrafish—the canonical
vertebrate. Science 2001;294:1290–1.
15. Geiger GA, Parker SE, Beothy AP, Tucker JA, Mullins
MC, Kao GD. Zebrafish as a ‘‘biosensor’’? Effects of
ionizing radiation and amifostine on embryonic viability
and development. Cancer Res 2006;66:8172–81.
16. Bladen CL, Flowers MA, Miyake K, et al. Quantification of ionizing radiation-induced cell death in situ in a
vertebrate embryo. Radiat Res 2007;168:149–57.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (9). May 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research
17. Lally BE, Geiger GA, Kridel S, et al. Identification and
biological evaluation of a novel and potent small
molecule radiation sensitizer via an unbiased screen of
a chemical library. Cancer Res 2007;67:8791–9.
18. Haldi M, Ton C, Seng WL, McGrath P. Human
melanoma cells transplanted into zebrafish proliferate,
migrate, produce melanin, form masses and stimulate
angiogenesis in zebrafish. Angiogenesis 2006;9:139–51.
19. Lee LM, Seftor EA, Bonde G, Cornell RA, Hendrix MJ.
The fate of human malignant melanoma cells transplanted into zebrafish embryos: assessment of migration and cell division in the absence of tumor formation.
Dev Dyn 2005;233:1560–70.
20. Nicoli S, Ribatti D, Cotelli F, Presta M. Mammalian
tumor xenografts induce neovascularization in zebrafish
embryos. Cancer Res 2007;67:2927–31.
21. Westerfield M. A Guide for the laboratory use of
zebrafish Danio (Brachydanio) rerio . Eugene (OR):
University of Oregon Press; 1995.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (9). May 1, 2008

22. Kimmel CB, Ballard WW, Kimmel SR, Ullmann B,
Schilling TF. Stages of embryonic development of the
zebrafish. Dev Dyn 1995;203:253–310.
23. Lawson ND, Weinstein BM. In vivo imaging of
embryonic vascular development using transgenic
zebrafish. Dev Biol 2002;248:307–18.
24. Hamburger AW, Salmon SE. Primary bioassay of
human tumor stem cells. Science 1977;197:461–3.
25. Stoletov K, Montel V, Lester RD, Gonias SL, Klemke R.
High-resolution imaging of the dynamic tumor cell
vascular interface in transparent zebrafish. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 2007;104:17406–11.
26. Brown CK, Khodarev NN, Yu J, et al. Glioblastoma
cells block radiation-induced programmed cell death of
endothelial cells. FEBS Lett 2004;565:167–70.
27. Amatruda JF, Shepard JL, Stern HM, Zon LI. Zebrafish
as a cancer model system. Cancer Cell 2002;1:229–31.
28. Stern HM, Zon LI. Cancer genetics and drug
discovery in the zebrafish. Nat Rev Cancer 2003;3:533–9.

3404

29. Danilova N, Hohman VS, Sacher F, Ota T, Willett CE,
Steiner LA. T cells and the thymus in developing
zebrafish. Dev Comp Immunol 2004;28:755–67.
30. Willett CE, Zapata AG, Hopkins N, Steiner LA.
Expression of zebrafish rag genes during early development identifies the thymus. Dev Biol 1997;182:331–41.
31. Bladen CL, Lam WK, Dynan WS, Kozlowski DJ. DNA
damage response and Ku80 function in the vertebrate
embryo. Nucleic Acids Res 2005;33:3002–10.
32. McAleer MF, Davidson C, Davidson WR, et al. Novel
use of zebrafish as a vertebrate model to screen
radiation protectors and sensitizers. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 2005;61:10–3.
33. Mothersill C, Smith RW, Agnihotri N, Seymour CB.
Characterization of a radiation-induced stress response
communicated in vivo between zebrafish. Environ Sci
Technol 2007;41:3382–7.
34. Li N, Batt D, Warmuth M. B-Raf kinase inhibitors for
cancer treatment. Curr Opin Investig Drugs 2007;8:452–6.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Temozolomide-Mediated Radiosensitization of Human
Glioma Cells in a Zebrafish Embryonic System
Geoffrey A. Geiger, Weili Fu and Gary D. Kao
Cancer Res 2008;68:3396-3404.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/9/3396
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2010/02/19/68.9.3396.DC1

This article cites 33 articles, 10 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/9/3396.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 3 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/9/3396.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

