Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 34

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Septin cooperation with tubulin polyglutamylation contributes
to cancer cell adaptation to taxanes
Laurence Froidevaux-Klipfel1,*, Benjamin Targa1,
Hayat Ahmed-Zaïd1, Christian Poüs1,2, Anita Baillet1

Isabelle

1

INSERM, UMR-S-1193, Université Paris-Saclay, Châtenay-Malabry, France

2

Laboratoire de Biochimie-Hormonologie, Hôpital Antoine Béclère, AP-HP, Clamart, France

Cantaloube1,

*

 resent address: UMR 996, “Inflammation, chimiokines et immunopathologie,” INSERM, Université Paris-Saclay, 92140
P
Clamart, France

Correspondence to:
Anita Baillet, e-mail: anita.baillet@u-psud.fr
Keywords: septin, microtubule polyglutamylation, Taxol® resistance, tyrosinated tubulin
Received: June 29, 2015 	Accepted: September 25, 2015 	

Published: October 07, 2015

ABSTRACT
The mechanisms of cancer cell adaptation to the anti-microtubule agents of the
taxane family are multifaceted and still poorly understood. Here, in a model of breast
cancer cells which display amplified microtubule dynamics to resist Taxol®, we provide
evidence that septin filaments containing high levels of SEPT9_i1 bind to microtubules
in a way that requires tubulin long chain polyglutamylation. Reciprocally, septin
filaments provide a scaffold for elongating and trimming polyglutamylation enzymes
to finely tune the glutamate side-chain length on microtubules to an optimal level.
We also demonstrate that tubulin retyrosination and/or a high level of tyrosinated
tubulin is crucial to allow the interplay between septins and polyglutamylation on
microtubules and that together, these modifications result in an enhanced CLIP-170
and MCAK recruitment to microtubules. Finally, the inhibition of tubulin retyrosination,
septins, tubulin long chain polyglutamylation or of both CLIP-170 and MCAK allows
the restoration of cell sensitivity to taxanes, providing evidence for a new integrated
mechanism of resistance.

Septins are a family of GTP-binding proteins
forming apolar hetero-oligomeric filaments that assemble
into higher-order structures associated with actin
microfilaments or with MTs [4–6]. Septins have emerged
as multifunctional scaffolding proteins and organizers of
membrane diffusion barriers [7–9]. They are implicated
in a growing array of functions, including cytokinesis
[10, 11], migration [12, 13], vesicular transport [14],
ciliogenesis [15], bacterial internalization [16] but also
in neurological diseases [17, 18] and in a multitude
of cancers (for review, see Russell and Hall [19]). In
mammals, among the 13 septin genes that have been
identified [20, 21], SEPT9 has already been proposed
to participate in the resistance to MT-disrupting agents
through a mechanism involving HIF-1α [22]. It also is
the only septin in which specific repeated motifs might
allow MT binding and bundling [23]. Understanding
how septins could be involved in cell adaptation to
anticancer drug-mediated alterations of MT dynamics

INTRODUCTION
Despite Taxol® success in chemotherapy of
advanced breast cancer, acquired drug resistance limits the
long-term effectiveness of this microtubule (MT)-targeting
agent [1] and contributes in making breast cancer the
second leading cause of cancer death in women. Paclitaxel
(Taxol®) binding to β-tubulin and subsequent alteration of
MT dynamics and mitosis completion leads to apoptosis,
but several mechanisms of resistance have been described
(for reviews, see McGrogan et al. [1] and Murray et al.
[2]), which comprise the multidrug-resistance phenotype
mediated by the P-glycoprotein efflux pump and a variety
of adaptive mechanisms that affect MT dynamics like
β-tubulin mutations, altered expression of tubulin isotypes
or of MT-associated proteins (MAPs). We previously
found that several septins (SEPT2, 8, 9 and 11) are
overexpressed in Taxol®-resistant MDA-MB 231 breast
cancer cells and preferentially associated with MTs [3].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36063

Oncotarget

is challenging because they may interfere with tubulin
modifications frequently encountered in long-lived MTs
like polyglutamylation [14]. Tubulin polyglutamylation
consists in the branching and elongation (up to 6 residues)
of lateral peptide chains of glutamate residues near the
C-terminus of α- and/or β-tubulin. Polyglutamylation
plays an important role in modulating MT stability
by controlling the association of MAPs like tau and
MAP2 [24] or the binding of the MT-severing enzymes
katanin and spastin [25, 26] and was implicated in
neurodegenerative disorders [27]. The detyrosination/
tyrosination cycle of α-tubulin was associated with tumor
aggressiveness [28] and Taxol® resistance of breast cancer
cells [29]. Indeed, accumulation of detyrosinated α-tubulin
(hereafter named Detyr-tubulin) enhances MT stability
by preventing the binding to MTs of depolymerases like
MCAK [30], and of the rescue factor CLIP-170 [31].
Conversely, it favors spastin-mediated severing of MTs
[32] and is involved in the binding and motor activity of
kinesin-1 [33, 34]. Here, we provide evidence that septin
binding to tyrosinated and polyglutamylated MTs plays a
scaffolding role in controlling the length of polyglutamate
chains. Altogether, septins and these tubulin modifications
result in the modulation of the recruitment of catastrophe
and rescue factors that would in turn allow the restoration
of high levels of MT dynamic instability, contributing to
the Taxol®-resistant phenotype.

In contrast, Tr cells cultured with or without Taxol®
(25  nM, 24 h) exhibited very similar populations in
G0/G1, in G2/M and in S phase (Fig. 1C). These results
show that Tr cells, which are continuously cultured in the
presence of 25 nM Taxol®, are fully adapted to the drug.
To determine whether Tr cell adaptation to Taxol®
actually involved a modulation of MT dynamics, we next
measured the parameters of MT dynamic instability of
Ts and Tr cells after a 24 h exposure to 25 nM Taxol®
compared to untreated Ts and Tr (Fig. 1D). Dynamic
instability exhibited significant increase in all the
parameters measured in the Tr+Taxol® vs Ts+Taxol®
conditions, except for the duration of pauses that was
shorter. From this set of data, we constructed the diamond
graphs shown in Fig. 1D (left bottom panel, as described
by Lacroix et al. [37]), in which the vertical elongation
of the shape reflects high transition frequencies and the
horizontal elongation, the speed of MT length variation.
The shape of the diamonds is affected in a very similar
way in Ts and Tr cells by the presence of Taxol® with
higher transition frequencies and slower length variation,
but in Tr cells, the four parameters are amplified. This,
together with the shorter pause duration, indicates that
Tr cells actually adapted their MT dynamics to compensate
for the effects of Taxol®. Further analysis of the MT
fractions of Ts and Tr cells (Fig. 1E) allowed us to identify
several modifications in the level of MT regulators.
Indeed, survivin, which is an apoptotic inhibitor but also
a stabilizer of MTs [38], was less abundant in the MT
fraction of Tr cells. Similarly, a reduced level of MAP4
(which stabilizes MTs) was observed in Tr compared to
Ts cells. Regarding plus end Tracking Proteins (+TIPs),
EB1 level was roughly unchanged in Tr vs Ts but the
rescue factor CLIP-170 and the depolymerizing kinesin
MCAK were more abundant in the MT fraction of Tr cells.
Altogether, these data indicate that Tr cells, which are
continuously cultured in the presence of 25 nM Taxol®
display enhanced MT dynamics that could be related to
alterations in the recruitment of MT regulators, and which
would in turn compensate for the stabilizing effect of
taxanes.

RESULTS
Taxol®-adapted cells display a high level of
microtubule dynamics
Taxol®-resistant (Tr) MDA-MB 231 breast cancer
cells were previously selected by exposure of the Taxol®sensitive (Ts) cells to incremental Taxol® concentrations
[3]. In Tr cells, the IC50 of Taxol® is ~13-fold higher than
in Ts cells as determined by an MTT assay (Fig. 1A).
Cross-resistance of Tr cells was also determined for a
variety of MT-targeting drugs (Fig. 1B) and revealed they
also resist docetaxel (Taxotere®) and to a lesser extent
epothilone B (another MT stabilizing drug that binds
tubulin near the taxane binding site [35]), indicating
a more general resistance to MT-stabilizing drugs.
In contrast, Tr cells were sensitive to colchicine and
vinblastine, (two MT destabilizers that bind distinct sites
on tubulin). The DNA crosslinker cisplatin was used as a
negative control. Therefore, Tr cells resist MT stabilizers
and more predominantly taxanes (Taxol® more than
Taxotere®).
Ts cell sensitivity to Taxol® (25 nM, 24 h) was
evidenced by measuring their DNA content. As already
reported at low doses [36], Taxol® caused Ts cell
accumulation in a subG1 peak that could not be entirely
resolved from the G0/G1 one, and which suggested the
accumulation of apoptotic cells without cell cycle arrest.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Increased septin recruitment to microtubules is
required for Taxol® resistance
As Western-blotting of SEPT2, 7, 8, 9 and 11
confirmed their overexpression and higher recruitment
in the MT fraction of Tr cells compared to Ts (Fig. 2A
and [3]), we next tried to understand how septins are
involved in the changes that affect MTs in Tr cells.
A more detailed analysis of SEPT9 isoforms revealed
that among the long isoforms of the protein (SEPT9_i1
and SEPT9_i3), SEPT9_i3 was predominantly detected
in Ts cells. Conversely, SEPT9_i1, which was already
proposed to participate in Taxol® resistance [22], was
highly expressed in Tr cells and enriched in their MT
36064

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Paclitaxel-resistant MDA-MB 231 cells exhibit a high level of microtubule dynamics. A. Tr cells resist Taxol®.

Cell viability of Ts and Tr cells was determined by MTT assay after 48 h exposure to increasing concentrations of Taxol®. The graph shows
the data of one representative experiment out of at least twenty independent IC50 determinations. B. Tr cells resist taxanes and epothilone B,
but not other MT-targeting drugs or cisplatin. R values are the IC50 ratios of Tr to Ts mean values. C. Tr cells are fully adapted to Taxol®.
Cell cycle analysis was performed after treatment with or without 25 nM Taxol® for 24 h. D. MT dynamics are amplified in Tr cells. Mean
± s.e.m values of the dynamic instability parameters were measured from Ts and Tr cells (at least 8 MTs from 3 cells in each condition)
after treatment with 25 nM Taxol® for 24 h (histograms) and plotted as diamond graphs for easier global comparison. E. The MT fractions
of Ts and Tr cells exhibit different amounts of MAPs; α-tubulin was used as the loading control.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36065

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Increased recruitment of septins to microtubules confers Taxol® resistance. A. Patterns of septin whole cell
expression (Lysates) and recruitment to MTs in Tr vs Ts cells. A constant protein (20 μg for Lysates) or α-tubulin amount (for MT fractions)
was loaded on gels for each sample. B. SEPT2 localization switches from F-actin in Ts to MTs in Tr cells. Scale bar = 10 μm. C. Knockdown
of individual septins affects the presence of other septins in the MT fraction of Tr cells. D. Individual septin inhibition alters the formation
of septin filaments and their localization to MTs in Tr cells. E. Individual septin inhibition by RNAi restores chemosensitivity of Tr cells to
Taxol® as determined by MTT assay. F. SEPT2 depletion (72 h RNAi) did not cause the accumulation of Tr cells in G2/M.

fraction (Fig. 2A). By contrast, SEPT9_i4, which is
a shorter isoform overexpressed in certain breast and
ovary cancer cells [39], was downregulated and less
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

abundant in the MT fraction of Tr cells. In accordance
with the higher recruitment of SEPT2, 7, 8, 9_i1, 9_i3
and 11 in the MT fractions of Tr cells, SEPT2-labelled
36066

Oncotarget

filaments predominantly relocalized from cortical actin
and stress fibers in Ts cells to a population of MTs in
Tr cells (Fig. 2B). Septins are known to assemble into
heterotrimers or heterotetramers that include one protein
from each of the four septin groups in a precise order:
SEPT2, SEPT6 (which can be replaced by SEPT8 or 11),
SEPT7 and SEPT9 [40, 41]. These hetero-oligomers
that are arranged as perfect palindromes (thus forming
hexamers or octamers) associate to form nonpolar
filaments [42]. Due to this arrangement, the depletion
of SEPT2 or SEPT7 may cause the degradation of other
septins [4, 42]. This is why, when cells were depleted
of SEPT2, 9 or 11 by RNAi, the expression and MT
recruitment of septins from all the groups was impaired
(Fig. 2C) and septin filaments could no longer be detected
in depleted cells (Fig. 2D). Therefore, in the rest of the
study, RNAi depletion of either septin was interchangeably
applied to totally disorganize the septin filament network
and perturb the overall septin function.
To determine the role played by septins in
chemoresistance, Tr cells were challenged with increasing
Taxol® concentrations (10, 25 and 60 nM i.e. twice the
IC50 of Taxol® in Ts cells, the concentration used in Tr cell
culture and the IC50 of Taxol® in Tr cells, respectively)

(Fig. 2E). After depletion of SEPT2, 9 or 11 by RNAi, Tr
sensitivity to Taxol® was restored to almost the same level
as that measured in Ts cells. While septins were primarily
described for their crucial role in cytokinesis [43], their
depletion did not cause a blockade in the G2/M phase
in Tr cells (Fig. 2F). The reversion of Taxol® resistance
we observed might thus have resulted from septin loss
from MTs.

The microtubules of Taxol®-resistant cells display
septin-dependent long chain polyglutamylation
Since septins were formerly shown to associate
with polyglutamylated MTs specialized in vesicular
trafficking [14], we tested whether this post-translational
modification of tubulin was important for septin
recruitment to MTs in Tr cells. MTs of Tr cells exhibited
similar acetylated but higher levels of polyglutamylated
tubulin than Ts MTs as evidenced by the higher signals
obtained with the GT335 and the polyE antibodies,
which reveal polyglutamate chain branching on tubulin
and long (≥  3 units) polyglutamate chains, respectively
(Fig. 3A and 3B). Immunofluorescence experiments further
revealed that highly polyglutamylated MTs (in particular

Figure 3: Septins are required to allow long chain polyglutamylation of microtubules in Tr cells. A. MTs of Tr cells are

highly polyglutamylated. The GT335 antibody was used to detect the polyglutamate lateral chains of any length while the polyE antibody
is selective of long chains. B. Ts cells exhibit low levels of long chain-polyglutamylated tubulin that do not colocalize with SEPT2
labeling. Conversely, septins localize to MTs bearing long polyglutamate chains in Tr cells. Scale bar = 10 μm. C and D. SEPT2 or SEPT9
knockdown by RNAi prevents long polyglutamate chain formation on the MTs of Tr cells.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36067

Oncotarget

long polyglutamylated chains) colocalize with SEPT2 in Tr
cells (Fig. 3B). Two-dimensional electrophoresis showed
accordingly that both α- and β-tubulin of Tr cells display
long polyglutamylated chains (Fig. S1A). As a control,
we checked that the amount of long glutamate side-chains
did not increase upon acute Taxol® treatment (Fig. S1B).
Similarly, septins were not massively relocalized to
MTs in Ts cells treated with 25 nM Taxol® for 24 h, as
compared to Tr cells (Fig. S1B and S1C). Thus, both
higher polyglutamylation level and septin recruitment to
the MTs of Tr cells reflect a long-term adaptive mechanism
to Taxol®.
As septins were proposed to be required for the
maintenance of polyglutamylated MTs [14], we further
examined the impact of septin depletion on the level
of tubulin polyglutamylation in the MTs of Tr cells
(Fig. 3C and 3D). Strikingly, SEPT2 or SEPT9 depletion
did not affect the GT335 signal but they strongly
decreased the polyE one (Fig. 3C and 3D). In parallel,
the depletion of SEPT2 resulted in the specific loss of
MT-shaped polyE signal organization, while GT335
labeling still revealed MTs (Fig. 3D). Therefore, the
overall tubulin polyglutamylation only partly depends on
septin recruitment to the MT lattice. Nevertheless, septins
are important for the control of polyglutamate chain
length.

revealed by the drop in GT335 signal (Fig. 4C). Inhibition
of the elongating polyglutamylases TTLL1 or TTLL11,
which resulted in a dramatic drop in the polyE signal
without perturbation of the polyglutamate chain branching
(GT335 signal), similarly caused a loss of septin in the MT
fraction and along MTs (Fig. 4B and 4C), and a severe
disorganization of septin filaments as well (Fig.  4C).
Consistent with these findings, the overexpression of
CCP1 (which is also overexpressed in Tr cells, see Fig. S2)
or CCP5, both yielded a drop in septin recruitement to
MTs (Fig. 4B and 4D) that was not related to any MT
loss (Fig.   4D). Interestingly, both the impairments of
polyglutamate side-chain formation or of chain elongation
resulted in the restoration of Tr cell sensitivity to 10 nM
Taxol® (Fig. 4E left panel). Overexpression of the
deglutamylation enzymes also shifted the viability curves
but to a lesser extent (Fig. 4E right panel). Therefore, the
level of MT polyglutamylation impacts the recruitment of
septins to the MT lattice and both are important to confer
taxane resistance.

Septins enhance the recruitment to microtubules
of enzymes that control the length of tubulin
polyglutamylate chains
Septin association with MTs has no impact on the
presence of short polyglutamate chains, but is involved
into chain elongation (see Fig. 3C) and hence into the
chemoresistance process. As SEPT7 was evidenced to
interact with the tubulin deacetylase HDAC6 in cell lysates
[46], we thus wondered whether septin filaments could
impact other tubulin-modifying enzymes by functioning
as scaffolds to recruit elongating polyglutamylases and
deglutamylases to MTs that already bear short glutamate
side chains. First, we tested whether the recruitment
and the function of elongating polyglutamylases and
deglutamylases to MTs could be favored by the presence
of septin filaments on MTs. As TTLL1 belongs to a
complex and cannot be overexpressed alone, we chose to
overexpress TTLL11 and to monitor the recruitment of
endogenous TTLL1 to MTs. In Fig. 5A, we overexpressed
YFP-tagged TTLL11 with or without septin filament
dissociation by SEPT2 RNAi. While the stimulation
of polyglutamate chain elongation (polyE signal) by
TTLL11 overexpression enhanced both SEPT2 and
TTLL1 recruitment to the MTs of Tr cells, polyglutamate
chain elongation and TTLL1 recruitment were much less
stimulated when cells were partially depleted of SEPT2
(Fig. 5A). Symmetrically, the overexpression of YFPtagged SEPT2 highly increased TTLL1 recruitment to
MTs (Fig. 5B). Also, in the absence of septin filaments,
Taxol® resistance of Tr cells was reversed, independently
of TTLL11 expression level (Fig. 5C). Note that in
Tr cells, even though tubulin long chain polyglutamylation
level can be boosted by TTLL11 overexpression,
resistance to Taxol® cannot increase to a great extent

Long polyglutamate chains favor septin
recruitment to microtubules and are also
required for Taxol® resistance
As tubulin post-translational modifications are
expected to modulate the binding of MAPs to the MT
surface [44], we further asked whether polyglutamylation
could conversely affect septin recruitment to the MTs
of Tr cells. Tubulin polyglutamylation consists in two
sequential steps of initiation and elongation of glutamate
chains near the C-terminus of α- or β-tubulin, each
step being catalyzed by specific enzymes of the tubulin
tyrosine ligase-like (TTLL) family. TTLLs are highly
homologous to tubulin tyrosine ligase (TTL), which
re-tyrosinates the C-terminal Glu residue of Detyr tubulin
([45] and Fig. 4A). Symmetrically, polyglutamate chain
reduction involves trimming carboxypeptidases like
CCP1, which shorten glutamate chains, and debranching
enzymes like CCP5. We performed RNAi depletion of the
initiating polyglutamylase TTLL5 or of two elongating
enzymes TTLL1 (for which overexpression could be
evidenced in Tr cells by qPCR as shown in Fig. S2) or
TTLL11. As expected, knocking down TTLL5 resulted in
an overall decrease in MT polyglutamylation as revealed
by reduced GT335 and polyE signals, but also in a drop
in SEPT2 and SEPT9_i1–3 recruitment to the MTs of
Tr cells (Fig. 4B). While MTs were still present (Fig. 4C),
a marked disorganization of septin filaments occurred
that followed the loss of global MT polyglutamylation as
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36068

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Long polyglutamate chains on tubulin favor septin recruitment to microtubules and participate in Taxol®
resistance. A. Schematic representation (modified from Wloga and Gaertig [83]) of α-tubulin C-terminus with the enzymes responsible

for tubulin retyrosination (TTL), polyglutamate chain initiation (TTLL5), elongation (TTLL1 and TTLL11), trimming (CCP1) and
debranching (CCP5) used in this project. B. Septin recruitment to MTs of Tr cells is altered by the inhibition of polyglutamylation enzymes
(Left) and by the overexpression of deglutamylases (Right). Tubulin polyglutamylation and septin recruitment were analyzed on the
MT fractions of Tr cells that were transfected as indicated. C. Septin filaments are absent from MTs of Tr cells after the inhibition of
tubulin polyglutamylation by RNAi of various TTLLs (as detected by the GT335 and/or the polyE antibodies) (Left and central panels).
Inhibiting global or long chain polyglutamylation does not affect the MT network (Right panel). Scale bar = 10 μm. D. CCP overexpression
causes septin filament disorganization without affecting the MT network. E. Loss of tubulin polyglutamylation by TTLL RNAi or CCP
overexpression in Tr cells partly restores sensitivity to Taxol®. Data are the mean ± s.e.m. of 4 measurements after cell exposure to
increasing Taxol® concentrations for 48 h.

(Fig. 5C). Together, these results indicate that septins
function upstream of elongating TTLLs to enhance their
recruitment to MTs. In a similar way, septins favor the
binding to MTs of deglutamylases such as CCP1 to shorten
polyglutamate chains. Indeed, CCP1 overexpression was
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

much less effective to trim long glutamate chains when
SEPT2 was depleted (Fig. 5A).
That septins could function as scaffolds for
recruiting glutamate chain elongating and trimming
enzymes was further evidenced by co-immunoprecipitation
36069

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Microtubule-bound septins function as scaffolds to recruit tubulin polyglutamylation enzymes. A. The

overexpression of polyglutamylation (TTLL11) or deglutamylation (CCP1) enzyme combined or not with SEPT2 depletion modulates tubulin
long chain polyglutamylation and alters the recruitment of the elongating enzyme TTLL1 to the MT fraction of Tr cells. B. The overexpression
of SEPT2 boosts the recruitment of TTLL1 to MTs in Tr cells. Immunoblot analysis of MT fractions (Tr MTs) or whole cell lysates (Tr Lys.)
was performed from cells subjected to the overexpression of YFP-SEPT2 or GFP alone as indicated. C. Preventing the recruitment of
polyglutamylation enzymes to the MTs of Tr cells by SEPT2 RNAi restores chemosensitivity to Taxol®, even after TTLL11 overexpression.
D. TTLL1 co-immunoprecipitates with SEPT2. Top panel: MT fractions from cells overexpressing YFP-SEPT2 or GFP alone were subjected
to immunoprecipitation with anti-GFP/YFP antibody and analyzed for their contents in YFP-SEPT2 and TTLL1 as indicated. Bottom panel:
the precipitation of endogenous SEPT2 from MT fractions allows the recovery of TTLL1. Non-specific antibody (NS IgG) was used as a
control. The (*) indicates the antibody heavy chains used for precipitation. E. MT fractions from cells overexpressing either GFP or YFPTTLL11 together with SEPT9_i1-V5 were subjected to immunoprecipitation with anti-GFP/YFP antibody and analyzed for their contents
in GFP/YFP, YFP-TTLL11, SEPT9_i1 (as revealed by an antibody to the V5 tag) and α-tubulin as indicated. The volume loaded onto gels
compared to the initial MT fraction volume is indicated at the bottom. F. CCP1 co-immunoprecipitates with SEPT2 in the MT environment of
Tr cells. G. TTLL1 co-precipitation with YFP-SEPT2 from MT fractions only occurs in Tr cells.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36070

Oncotarget

experiments performed on MT fractions of Tr cells. The
immunoprecipitation of YFP-tagged SEPT2 (Fig. 5D, Top
panel) or that of endogenous SEPT2 (Fig. 5D, Bottom
panel) both allowed the co-precipitation of TTLL1.
Symmetrically, V5-tagged SEPT9_i1 was co-precipitated
with YFP-tagged TTLL11 that was captured on
anti-GFP/YFP antibody-coated beads (Fig. 5E). By
overexpressing SEPT9_i1 that has been shown to bind
MTs in vitro, which is not the case for SEPT2, we tested
whether co-precipitation could be mediated by tubulin.
As shown in the bottom gel of Fig. 5E, when SEPT9_i1
was overexpressed together with TTLL1, tubulin recovery
after precipitation was almost undetectable compared
to the amount loaded (see the sample volume ratios
indicated), indicating that co-precipitation did not result
from the interaction of distant partners via tubulin. As
the length of polyglutamate chains results from a balance
between elongating TTLLs and trimming CCPs, we also
checked that CCP1 co-precipitated with endogenous
SEPT2 (Fig. 5F). Consistent with the above results,
Fig. 5G further shows that the immunoprecipitation of
YFP-tagged SEPT2 pulled down TTLL1, only when it
was overexpressed in Tr but not in Ts cells (even though
the level of YFP-SEPT2 expression was higher than in Tr),

indicating that this scaffolding role of septins only exists
when septin filaments are associated with MTs.
Altogether, these results show that MT-associated
septin filaments function to enhance the recruitment
of elongating polyglutamylases and glutamate chain
trimming enzymes and thus participate in the control
of polyglutamate chain elongation. In keeping with the
scaffolding roles of septins on membrane compartments
and actin stress fibers, we provide a new evidence of such
a function on MTs.

Tubulin retyrosination and/or the level of
Tyr-tubulin control both septin recruitment
to microtubules and the extent of microtubule
polyglutamylation
From the above results, it appears that septin and
polyglutamylation depend on each other. We thus asked if
an upstream event could initiate this interplay at the MT
level. Evaluation of the level of tubulin detyrosination/
retyrosination in Ts and Tr cells revealed an imbalance
between the Detyr- and Tyr-tubulin contents in the MT
fractions of both cell lines (Fig. 6A). This imbalance
is likely to be due to a higher expression of TTL in

Figure 6: The level of Tyr-tubulin positively controls polyglutamylation and the recruitment of septins to microtubules,
and therefore participates in Taxol® resistance. A. The MTs of Tr cells exhibit higher levels of Tyr-tubulin and lower levels

of Detyr-tubulin than those of Ts cells. B and C. Inhibition of tubulin retyrosination by TTL RNAi alters MT polyglutamylation and
septin recruitment to the MTs of Tr cells without affecting MT organization. Scale bar = 10 μm. D. Effect of the inhibition of tubulin
polyglutamylation (by TTLL RNAi or CCP overexpression) or that of septin filament formation (by SEPT RNAi) on the Tyr/Detyr-tubulin
balance in the MTs of Tr cells. E. TTL depletion by RNAi in Tr cells restores chemosensitivity.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36071

Oncotarget

to taxanes, the binding of CLIP-170 and MCAK to MTs
would not only rely on the presence of high levels of
Tyr tubulin, but also on the presence of septins on MTs
and of long chain-polyglutamylated tubulin.
To finally ascertain that the modulation of CLIP-170
and MCAK binding to MTs occurred downstream of
tubulin retyrosination and then of septin binding and
tubulin polyglutamylation, we knocked down each +TIP
by RNAi (Fig. 7B). Either CLIP-170 or MCAK depletion
alone did not cause a decrease in tubulin polyglutamylation
(either with short or long chains) or in septin recruitment
to MTs. Furthermore, contrasting with the failure to
recover Taxol® sensitivity upon the separate inhibition of
each +TIP, the dual knockdown of CLIP-170 and MCAK
allowed Tr cells to recover sensitivity to Taxol® (Fig. 7C).
We may thus conclude that CLIP-170 and MCAK need
to operate together, downstream of tubulin tyrosination,
septin recruitment to MTs and tubulin long chain
polyglutamylation to drive taxane resistance. By allowing
more frequent catastrophes and rescues, they would
contribute in sustaining high levels of MT dynamics to
compensate for the MT-stabilizing effect of Taxol®. Indeed,
the overexpression of all these partners in Ts sensitive cells,
aiming at mimicking the different modifications exhibited
by the resistant Tr cells, resulted in a significant increase in
resistance to low concentrations of Taxol® (Fig. 7D).

Tr vs Ts cells (Fig. S2). Surprisingly, knocking down TTL
by RNAi in Tr cells (which led to an expected drop in Tyrand an increase in Detyr-tubulin) strongly affected global
tubulin polyglutamylation (as detected with both the
GT335 and polyE antibodies) as well as the recruitment
of septins (SEPT2 and SEPT9_i1–3) to MTs (Fig. 6B).
Accordingly, double labeling immunofluorescence
experiments revealed that septin organization into
filaments was strongly affected by TTL knockdown and
that MTs bearing long polyglutamate chains could no
longer be detected in this condition (Fig 6C).
To confirm that the control of the Detyr-/
Tyr-tubulin balance actually occurs upstream of the
polyglutamylation/septin loop, we studied the effect
of polyglutamylases, deglutamylases or septins on the
tubulin detyrosination/retyrosination cycle in Tr cells.
Neither knocking down TTLL5 (an initiating enzyme),
TTLL1 or TTLL11 (both elongating enzymes), SEPT2
or SEPT9, nor overexpressing CCP5 impacted to a great
extent the Detyr-/Tyr-tubulin balance (Fig. 6D). Unlike
that of CCP5, the overexpression of the debranching
enzyme CCP1 increased the Detyr-/Tyr- ratio in Tr cells
(Fig. 6D), suggesting as already proposed in a previous
study [47] that CCP1 could also function as a tubulin
tyrosine carboxypeptidase in conditions of overexpression,
although such an activity has not been detected
in vitro [27].
Regarding chemoresistance, although TTL inhibition
in Tr cells affected cell viability in the absence of Taxol®,
it also very efficiently restored sensitivity to Taxol®
(Fig. 6E). From these results, we conclude that a high
level of Tyr-tubulin is required to allow the initiation of
tubulin polyglutamylation, septin recruitment to MTs and
polyglutamate side-chain elongation.

DISCUSSION
Taxanes are effective chemotherapeutic agents for
treating patients with metastatic breast cancer or other
advanced solid tumors [49], but their clinical use is limited
by the emergence of drug resistance, which is a multifactorial
process [2]. In a former study, we found that Taxol®-sensitive
(Ts) or -resistant (Tr) MDA-MB 231 breast cancer cells
display important differences in septin expression and
recruitment to MTs as well as in the pattern of β-tubulin
isotype expression [3]. Now, we demonstrate that septins
participate in a mechanism of taxane resistance integrating
both overexpression and increased recruitment to MTs of
SEPT2, 7, 8, 9 and 11 and the MT enrichment in Tyr- and in
long chain-polyglutamylated tubulin (Fig. 8). We evidenced
that high levels of Tyr-tubulin facilitate the association of
septin filaments containing the SEPT9_i1 isoform with
MTs bearing short polyglutamate chains. MT-bound septins
then enhance the binding of elongating polyglutamylases
(TTLL1 or TTLL11) and trimming deglutamylase (CCP1)
to the MT lattice to regulate polyglutamate chain elongation.
MTs bearing septin filaments and long polyglutamate
chains would then stimulate the binding of the rescue factor
CLIP-170 and of the depolymerizing kinesin MCAK, which
are critical to confer taxane resistance together. Among
different MAPs, MCAK [50] and CLIP-170 [51, 52] have
been proposed to modulate cancer cell sensitivity to Taxol®
[53] due to adaptive increase in MT dynamics [54]. Along
with a reduced binding of the MT stabilizers MAP4 and

Tubulin modifications and septins are involved
in CLIP-170 and MCAK recruitment to the
microtubules of resistant cells
The rescue factor CLIP-170 and the depolymerase/
catastrophe factor MCAK are recruited to the MT lattice
via combined mechanisms that involve an interaction with
EB1 [48] or with Tyr-tubulin [30, 31]. As the level of EB1
found on MTs does not markedly change between Ts and
Tr cells (see Fig. 1E), we first tested whether the level of
Tyr-tubulin, and/or the interplay between septins and MT
polyglutamylation could explain the higher recruitment of
CLIP-170 and MCAK to the MTs of Tr cells. As expected,
the inhibition of tubulin retyrosination that resulted from
TTL depletion caused an important loss of CLIP-170 and
MCAK from the MT fraction of Tr cells while EB1 was
only moderately affected (Fig. 7A). Similarly, TTLL5,
TTLL1 and TTLL11 inhibition as well as SEPT2 or
SEPT9 knockdown also resulted in CLIP-170 and MCAK
loss while EB1 binding remained approximately constant.
This result indicates that, in the context of cell adaptation
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36072

Oncotarget

Figure 7: Tubulin modifications and septins control CLIP-170 and MCAK recruitment to the microtubules of Tr cells
independently from EB1. A. Inhibition by RNAi of retyrosination or polyglutamylation enzymes or of septins alters CLIP-170 and
MCAK recruitment to the MTs of Tr cells, but not that of EB1. B. Septin recruitment to the MTs of Tr cells and the level of polyglutamylated
tubulin are not altered by the inhibition of CLIP-170 or MCAK. C. Contrasting with CLIP-170 or MCAK RNAi alone, the knockdown of
both +TIPs restores chemosensitivity. D. Overexpression in Ts cells of TTL, TTLL5 (branching polyglutamylase), TTLL11 (elongating
polyglutamylase) and of the components of Tr septin filaments makes cell resist ~10 nM Taxol®.

detected more SEPT9_v1 transcripts but SEPT9_v4* was
not overexpressed (Figure S2). SEPT9_i1 overexpression
is known to control the HIF-1α pathway [58, 59] and
to stabilize the c-Jun N-terminal kinase [60], leading to
enhanced proliferation and tumor growth. SEPT9_i1
expression has also been linked to cell resistance to
paclitaxel [22] and it has been proposed to be associated
with late cancer stages and poor outcomes [61, 62].
The high level of SEPT9_i1 could explain the
striking change in septin filament location from actin
(in Ts cells) to MTs (in Tr cells) upon adaptation to Taxol®.
Septin filaments actually colocalize with actin in almost
all non-dividing cells, and with MTs only in a few cases
(for review see Spiliotis [63]). By directly interacting

survivin ([55], this study), higher CLIP-170 and MCAK
levels would respectively promote rescues and catastrophes
to stimulate MT dynamics, giving rise to the resistant
phenotype observed in Tr cells.

Septin isoform expression, microtubules
and cancer
The ubiquitously expressed SEPT9 and its variant
isoforms have been linked to breast, ovarian, prostate,
colon, and head and neck cancers (for review, see Stanbery
and Petty [56]). SEPT9 overexpression was first detected
in ovarian tumors due to upregulation of SEPT9_v1 and
SEPT9_v4* transcripts [57]. In Tr cells, we actually
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36073

Oncotarget

Figure 8: Integrative model of the molecular events that take place in the microtubule environment of taxane-adapted
MDA-MB 231 cells.
in vitro with MTs through its GTP-binding domain [5],
SEPT9_i1 would promote the association of septin
filaments with MTs in interphase cells [64] and during
cytokinesis in mammalian cells [64, 65]. Septins were
proposed to associate with bundled rather than individual
MTs [66, 67]. In this respect, Taxol®-induced bundling of
MTs would increase septin affinity [68] but at 25 nM, we
could hardly detect such an effect on the MTs of Ts cells
(Fig. S1). Repeated motifs in the N-terminal domain of the
long SEPT9 isoforms (SEPT9_i1 and SEPT9_i3) would in
fact bind to and bundle MTs by interacting with the acidic
C-terminal tail of β-tubulin, as shown in MDCK cells [23].
Nevertheless, the difference of septin filament localization
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

between our Ts and Tr cells cannot originate from the
presence/absence of these motifs as both cell lines express
long SEPT9 isoforms (SEPT9_i3 in Ts and _i1 in Tr).

Tubulin tyrosine ligase expression and function
SEPT2 binding to MTs was proposed earlier to
influence their level of polyglutamylation [14]. We now
show that a high level of Tyr-tubulin and/or of TTL, the
expression of which was actually higher in Tr vs Ts cells
(Figure S2), functions in close relationship with septin
recruitment to the MT lattice and MT polyglutamylation
level to confer Taxol® resistance. Indeed, preventing
36074

Oncotarget

tubulin retyrosination by knocking down TTL severely
impaired the binding of septin filaments to MTs and the
parallel recruitment of the molecular machinery that
controls tubulin polyglutamate chain length.
Detyrosination of α-tubulin negatively regulates
the binding of CLIP-170 and MCAK to the MT plus
ends [30, 31], thereby suggesting a mechanism to explain
the shorter lifetime and the higher levels of dynamic
instability of the MTs of Tr cells compared to those of
Ts exposed to short-term Taxol® treatment (Fig. 1D).
However, CLIP-170 and MCAK binding to the MTs of
our taxane-adapted cells also requires septins and/or long
chain polyglutamylation, indicating that a high level of
Tyr-tubulin is necessary but not sufficient to stimulate MT
dynamics in our model. Tyr-tubulin incorporation into
growing MTs has never been shown to stimulate alone
polyglutamylation and septin recruitment, suggesting that
TTL would play a role in these regulations beside of its
enzyme activity. Also, contrasting with the acceleration of
MT polymerization we observed in Tr cells, overexpressed
TTL (see Fig. S2) would be expected to slow MT growth
[69]. As this slowdown occurs via the sequestration of
free tubulin, we could speculate that MT-bound septins
could facilitate the release of TTL from the Tyr-tubulin/
TTL complex.
Another intriguing question raised by our data comes
from the contrast between decreased TTL expression (and
thus high levels of Detyr-tubulin) observed in aggressive
mammary and prostate tumors [28, 70] and the high
Tyr-tubulin levels found in paclitaxel-resistant MCF-7
breast cancer cells [29] and in our taxane-adapted cells
(this study). Although it is clear that this high level of
Tyr-tubulin is essential to confer taxane resistance (Fig. 6),
whether it results only from high retyrosination (increased
TTL) or also involves decreased detyrosination will
deserve further investigation.

the binding of elongating TTLLs and trimming CCPs to
increase and maintain long polyglutamate side chains
(Fig. 8). A scaffolding function of septins was formerly
described in yeast during cytokinesis completion but it also
applies to other cell compartments during the interphase
(see review of Beise and Trimble [75]). For example,
septin-mediated scaffolding of myosin II and of its kinases
occurs on actin stress fibers for full myosin activation
[76]. Septins also maintain the cytoplasmic localization
of SOCS7 and NCK to control actin organization at
steady state; the loss of this compartmentalization and the
nuclear translocation of these factors being required for
DNA damage response [77]. We now show that septins
also function on MTs as dynamic regulators of tubulin
polyglutamylation via TTLL and CCP recruitment. As
proposed for their scaffolding function in budding yeast
during cytokinesis [78], septin high order of organization
around MTs might enhance polyglutamylation enzyme
recruitment on MTs even without a direct interaction.
This notion is in keeping with the finding that TTLL6
targeting to cilia also needs CEP41 as a scaffolding protein
[79]. Along with high levels of Tyr-tubulin, a control of
the length of polyglutamate chains on tubulin by septins
would in turn drive the recruitment to the MT lattice of
regulators of MT dynamics.
Regarding Taxol® resistance, we are now more
precisely investigating whether TTL, TTLL5 or 11
and septins, among which SEPT9_i1 or_i3, alone or in
combination, can induce Taxol® resistance and whether these
changes of expression allow the shift of septin filaments
from actin to MTs in MDA-MB 231 cells but also in other
cancerous cell types.
In conclusion, understanding cancer cell resistance
to taxane chemotherapy is still a heavy burden to improve
the effectiveness of anticancer treatments. The relevant
localization of septin hetero-oligomers on MTs of
taxane-resistant cells supports the significance of septins,
in particular of SEPT9_i1, as well as that of tubulin
tyrosination and polyglutamylation (and of their respective
enzymatic machinery) as effectors of breast cancer
pathogenesis and hallmarks of tumor cell adaptation to
chemotherapy. This also opens the exciting possibilities
that they could be used as new tools for diagnosis,
prognosis and even for suggesting new therapeutic
strategies in the management of breast cancer.

Control of the extent of tubulin
polyglutamylation
The length of the glutamate chain fine tunes the
binding of MAPs to MTs. Indeed, tau, MAP2 and kinesin
prefer tubulin with ~3 glutamate units while MAP1A or
the severing enzyme spastin prefer 6-unit long chains
[24,  25, 71, 72]. Here, by modulating glutamate chain
length (via the control of TTLL or CCP expression),
we show that long chain tubulin polyglutamylation is
essential for the acquisition of Taxol® resistance. Increased
TTLL12 (an elongating polyglutamylase) has already been
associated with metastatic progression of prostate cancer
[73]. Furthermore, as it has already been observed in a
prostate cancer cell line resistant to estramustine [74],
polyglutamylation might be a more general feature in
acquired resistance to anti-tubulin agents.
Our data point out the key role of septins in the
control of glutamate chain length as they would favor
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell culture and viability assays
The Taxol®-resistant (Tr) and -sensitive (Ts) sublines
of the human breast carcinoma cell line MDA-MB 231
were established by progressively increasing Taxol®
(Sigma-Aldrich) concentrations and continuously cultured
without (Ts) or with 25 nM Taxol® (Tr) as previously
described [3]. Sensitivity to Taxol®, Taxotere®, Epothilone
36075

Oncotarget

B, Colchicine, Vinblastine or Cisplatin (Sigma-Aldrich)
was measured using 3-(4,5-Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,
5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) cytotoxicity assay
after 48 h exposition. The IC50 was then determined with
Prism4 software (GraphPad software). Each value represents
the mean ± s.e.m. of at least 3 independent experiments.

Cell cycle analysis was performed as previously
described [80] on 3 independent Ts and Tr cell samples
with or without 25 nM Taxol® for 24 h. The DNA content
was analyzed by flow cytometry using FACS Fortessa
controlled by FACSDiva software (BD Biosciences), and
cell cycle analysis was performed using FlowJo software
(Tree Star, Inc.).

YL1/2), anti-polyglutamylated-tubulin (clone GT335) and
anti-SEPT9_i1, 3 and 4 antibodies were kindly provided
by Dr L. Lafanechère (Institut Bonniot, Grenoble, France),
Dr P. Denoulet (UPMC, Paris, France) and Pr P. Cossart
(Institut Pasteur, Paris, France), respectively. The antilong chain-polyglutamylated-tubulin (polyE) antibody was
prepared and characterized by Drs C. Janke (Institut Curie,
Orsay, France) and T. Surrey (London Research Institute,
London, England). Protein bands were visualized with
respective HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies and the
ECL detection kit (Pierce). Western-blot quantification was
performed after film digitization using the ImageJ software
(http://imagej.nih.gov/ij/). All the quantitative data are the
ratio of the intensity of the protein of interest to that of
α-tubulin for the blot shown, which is representative of the
blots obtained from at least 3 independent experiments.

Plasmid and siRNA transfections

Immunoprecipitation

Plasmid transfections were performed using
Lipofectamine™ LTX (Invitrogen) according to the
manufacturer’s instructions with an expression vector
concentration of 1 μg/mL, 48 h prior to analysis. pEGFP
(Addgene) was used as a negative control. CFP-CCP1,
CFP-CCP5, CFP-TTLL5 and YFP-TTLL11 expression
vectors were kind gifts of Dr. C. Janke (Institut Curie,
Orsay, France). YFP-SEPT2 and SEPT9_i1-V5 were
kindly provided by Dr E.T. Spiliotis (Drexel University,
Philadelphia, PA, USA) and Dr. A. Gassama (CHB Paul
Brousse, Villejuif, France), respectively.
Short interfering RNA (siRNA) transfections were
made using the calcium phosphate method 72 h prior
to analysis. For SEPT2, SEPT9, TTL and TTLL1, two
different siRNAs were tested for the silencing of target
genes. The sequences of all used siRNAs (Sigma-Aldrich
or Santa-Cruz Biotechnology) are listed in Table S1.
A nonsilencer siRNA (D-001810–10-50, Dharmacon)
was used as a negative control. When necessary, cells
transfected with siRNA (control or SEPT2) were
grown 24  h before plasmids encoding CFP-CCP1 or
YFP-TTLL11 were transfected.

Immunoprecipitation experiments were performed
on MT fractions that were obtained as described in
Froidevaux-Klipfel et al. [3]. It is to note that after
plasma membrane solubilisation and cytosol removal
in a MT-stabilizing buffer, MTs were extensively
depolymerized by calcium upon extraction. Thus, the
MT fraction contains the MT-associated proteins and
the formerly polymerized tubulin subunits. Immediately
after fractionation or two days after appropriate cell
transfections, MT fractions were incubated with rabbit
anti-SEPT2 antibody or rabbit non-specific serumcoated protein G sepharose beads (GE Healthcare), or
with anti-GFP/YFP-coated beads (GFP Trap®_M kit,
Chromotek) in a buffer containing 10 mM Tris pH 7.5,
150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 1% CHAPS and a mixture
of protease and phosphatase inhibitors. After constant
rotation at 4°C for 16 h, the beads were washed four
times in ice-cold wash buffer (10 mM Tris pH 7.5,
150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA) with the salt concentration
increased to 300 mM in the last two washing steps.
Protein samples were then boiled in Laemmli buffer
before immunoblot analysis.

Immunoblotting

Immunofluorescence and microscopy

Total cells lysates and MT fractions were prepared as
previously described [3]. Constant protein amounts (10 μg)
were loaded onto gels for total cell lysate analysis, while
constant α-tubulin amounts were used for MT fraction
analysis. After 9% SDS-PAGE separation, transfer onto
PVDF membranes and saturation with 10% non-fat dry milk,
blots were probed with selected primary antibodies against:
α-tubulin (clone DM1-A) and acetylated-α-tubulin (SigmaAldrich), Detyr-tubulin (AbCys), SEPT2 and 11 (Atlas),
SEPT7 (H120), SEPT8 (N15), EB1 (H70), CLIP170
(H300) and Survivin (Santa-Cruz Biotechnology), MCAK
(Abnova), MAP4 (BD Biosciences), TTLL1 (AbCam), GFP
(Cell Signaling), V5 (Invitrogen). Anti-Tyr-tubulin (clone

Cells grown on glass coverslips were immunostained
with primary antibodies as indicated or TRITC-conjugated
phalloidin (Sigma-Aldrich) to probe actin, after fixation
with 3.75% paraformaldehyde/PBS, permeabilization
with 0.05% Saponin/PBS and blocking with 0.5% BSA/
PBS. Secondary antibodies were Alexa Fluor 488- or
555-conjugated antibodies against rabbit or mouse IgGs
(Molecular Probes). For live MT tracking and dynamic
instability measurements, cells grown on glass coverslips
were transfected with GFP-DDA3 (kindly provided by
Dr G. Fang, Stanford University, CA, USA). Coverslips
were mounted in a microchamber and maintained at 37°C
using a PeCon on-stage thermal controller.

Flow cytometry cell cycle analysis

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36076

Oncotarget

Images or time-lapse sequences were acquired using
a Scion CFW1312M CCD camera on a Leica DMLB
microscope (100x 1.3 NA objective), driven from an
Apple iMac computer and homemade software.

­ echanisms, predictive biomarkers and circumvention
m
strategies. Cancer Treat Rev. 2012; 38:890–903.
3.	 Froidevaux-Klipfel L, Poirier F, Boursier C, Crepin R,
Pous C, Baudin B, Baillet A. Modulation of septin
and ­
molecular motor recruitment in the microtubule
­environment of the Taxol-resistant human breast cancer
cell line MDA-MB-231. Proteomics. 2011; 11:3877–3886.

Quantification and analysis of microtubule
dynamics

4.	 Kinoshita M, Field CM, Coughlin ML, Straight AF,
Mitchison TJ. Self- and actin-templated assembly of
Mammalian septins. Dev Cell. 2002; 3:791–802.

The quantification and analysis of MT dynamics
was performed as previously described [81]. The duration,
extent and rate for a selected phase were determined by a
linear regression of life history plots in Microsoft Excel.
The mean duration, extent, growth and shrinking rates and
the average duration of pause and lifespan resulted from
the tracking of a minimum of 8 MTs from at least 3 cells in
each condition. Catastrophe and rescue frequencies were
calculated as described in [82].

5.	 Nagata K, Kawajiri A, Matsui S, Takagishi M, Shiromizu T,
Saitoh N, Izawa I, Kiyono T, Itoh TJ, Hotani H, Inagaki M.
Filament formation of MSF-A, a mammalian septin, in
human mammary epithelial cells depends on interactions
with microtubules. J Biol Chem. 2003; 278:18538–18543.
6.	 Silverman-Gavrila RV, Silverman-Gavrila LB. Septins: new
microtubule ­interacting partners. ScientificWorldJournal.
2008; 8:611–620.

Statistical analysis

7.	 Caudron F, Barral Y. Septins and the lateral compartmentalization of eukaryotic membranes. Dev Cell. 2009;
16:493–506.

Quantitative data are the means ± s.e.m. of at
least three independent experiments. Taxol® cytotoxicity
measurements and MT dynamic instability parameters
were compared using Student’s t test. The following
symbols were used: * means p < 0.05, ** means p < 0.01,
and *** means p < 0.001.

8.	 Hall PA, Russell SE. Mammalian septins: dynamic
­heteromers with roles in cellular morphogenesis and compartmentalization. J Pathol. 2012; 226:287–299.
9.	 Spiliotis ET, Gladfelter AS. Spatial guidance of cell
asymmetry: septin GTPases show the way. Traffic. 2012;
13:195–203.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING

10.	 Kinoshita M, Kumar S, Mizoguchi A, Ide C, Kinoshita A,
Haraguchi T, Hiraoka Y, Noda M. Nedd5, a mammalian
septin, is a novel cytoskeletal component interacting with
actin-based structures. Genes Dev. 1997; 11:1535–1547.

We thank Claudine Deloménie (Trans-Prot Platform,
Institut Paris-Sud d’Innovation Thérapeutique, ChâtenayMalabry, France) for technical assistance in quantitative
RT-PCR experiments, the PLAIMMO platform (IPSITSFR, Clamart, France) where cell cycle has been analyzed
and Béatrice Benoit for critical reading of the manuscript.
This work was supported by the Ministère de
l’Enseignement Supérieur et de la Recherche, the Comité
des Hauts de Seine of the Ligue contre le Cancer and
by grants to L.F.-K. and B.T. from the Ministère de la
Recherche.
The unit UMR 996 is a member of the Laboratory
of Excellence in Research on Medication and Innovative
Therapeutics.

11.	 Estey MP, Di Ciano-Oliveira C, Froese CD, Fung KY,
Steels JD, Litchfield DW, Trimble WS. Mitotic ­regulation
of SEPT9 protein by cyclin-dependent kinase 1 and Pin1
protein is important for the completion of cytokinesis.
J Biol Chem. 2013; 288(Cdk1):30075–30086.
12.	 Shindo A, Wallingford JB. PCP and septins compartmentalize cortical actomyosin to direct collective cell movement.
Science. 2014; 343:649–652.
13.	 Dolat L, Hunyara JL, Bowen JR, Karasmanis EP,
Elgawly M, Galkin VE, Spiliotis ET. Septins promote stress
fiber-mediated maturation of focal adhesions and renal
­epithelial motility. J Cell Biol. 2014; 207:225–235.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

14.	 Spiliotis ET, Hunt SJ, Hu Q, Kinoshita M, Nelson WJ.
Epithelial polarity requires septin coupling of vesicle transport to polyglutamylated microtubules. J Cell Biol. 2008;
180:295–303.

None declared.

REFERENCES
1.	 McGrogan BT, Gilmartin B, Carney DN, McCann A.
Taxanes, microtubules and chemoresistant breast cancer.
Biochim Biophys Acta. 2008; 1785:96–132.

15.	 Hu Q, Milenkovic L, Jin H, Scott MP, Nachury MV,
Spiliotis ET, Nelson WJ. A septin diffusion barrier at the
base of the primary cilium maintains ciliary membrane protein distribution. Science. 2010; 329:436–439.

2.	 Murray S, Briasoulis E, Linardou H, Bafaloukos D,
Papadimitriou C. Taxane resistance in breast cancer:

16.	 Mostowy S, Nam Tham T, Danckaert A, Guadagnini S,
Boisson-Dupuis S, Pizarro-Cerda J, Cossart P.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36077

Oncotarget

Septins regulate bacterial entry into host cells. PLoS One.
2009; 4:e4196.
17.	 Kinoshita A, Kinoshita M, Akiyama H, Tomimoto H,
Akiguchi I, Kumar S, Noda M, Kimura J. Identification of
septins in neurofibrillary tangles in Alzheimer’s disease.
Am J Pathol. 1998; 153:1551–1560.

31.	 Peris L, Thery M, Faure J, Saoudi Y, Lafanechere L,
Chilton JK, Gordon-Weeks P, Galjart N, Bornens M,
Wordeman L, Wehland J, Andrieux A, Job D. Tubulin
tyrosination is a major factor affecting the recruitment of
CAP-Gly proteins at microtubule plus ends. J Cell Biol.
2006; 174:839–849.

18.	 McDade SS, Hall PA, Russell SE. Translational control of
SEPT9 isoforms is perturbed in disease. Hum Mol Genet.
2007; 16:742–752.

32.	 Roll-Mecak A, Vale RD. Structural basis of microtubule
severing by the hereditary spastic paraplegia protein spastin.
Nature. 2008; 451:363–367.

19.	 Russell SE, Hall PA. Do septins have a role in cancer?
Br J Cancer. 2005; 93:499–503.

33.	 Dunn S, Morrison EE, Liverpool TB, Molina-Paris C,
Cross RA, Alonso MC, Peckham M. Differential trafficking of Kif5c on tyrosinated and detyrosinated microtubules
in live cells. J Cell Sci. 2008; 121:1085–1095.

20.	 Kinoshita M. The septins. Genome Biol. 2003; 4:236.
21.	 Peterson EA, Petty EM. Conquering the complex world of
human septins: implications for health and disease. Clin
Genet. 2010; 77:511–524.

34.	 Hammond JW, Huang CF, Kaech S, Jacobson C, Banker G,
Verhey KJ. Posttranslational modifications of tubulin and
the polarized transport of kinesin-1 in neurons. Mol Biol
Cell. 2010; 21:572–583.

22.	 Amir S, Mabjeesh NJ. SEPT9_V1 protein e­xpression
is associated with human cancer cell resistance to
microtubule-disrupting agents. Cancer Biol Ther. 2007;
6:1926–1931.

35.	 Morris PG, Fornier MN. Microtubule active agents:
beyond the taxane frontier. Clin Cancer Res. 2008;
14:7167–7172.

23.	 Bai X, Bowen JR, Knox TK, Zhou K, Pendziwiat M,
Kuhlenbaumer G, Sindelar CV, Spiliotis ET. Novel septin
9 repeat motifs altered in neuralgic amyotrophy bind and
bundle microtubules. J Cell Biol. 2013; 203:895–905.

36.	 Pushkarev VM, Starenki DV, Saenko VA, Yamashita S,
Kovzun OI, Popadiuk ID, Pushkarev VV, Tronko MD.
Effects of low and high concentrations of antitumour drug
taxol in anaplastic thyroid cancer cells. Exp Oncol. 2009;
31:16–21.

24.	 Bonnet C, Boucher D, Lazereg S, Pedrotti B, Islam K,
Denoulet P, Larcher JC. Differential binding regulation
of microtubule-associated proteins MAP1A, MAP1B, and
MAP2 by tubulin polyglutamylation. J Biol Chem. 2001;
276:12839–12848.

37.	 Lacroix B, Bourdages KG, Dorn JF, Ihara S, Sherwood DR,
Maddox PS, Maddox AS. In situ imaging in C. elegans
reveals developmental regulation of microtubule dynamics.
Dev Cell. 2014; 29:203–216.

25.	 Lacroix B, van Dijk J, Gold ND, Guizetti J,
­Aldrian-Herrada G, Rogowski K, Gerlich DW, Janke C.
Tubulin polyglutamylation stimulates spastin-mediated
microtubule severing. J Cell Biol. 2010; 189:945–954.

38.	 Rosa J, Canovas P, Islam A, Altieri DC, Doxsey SJ.
Survivin modulates microtubule dynamics and nucleation throughout the cell cycle. Mol Biol Cell. 2006;
17:1483–1493.

26.	 McNally FJ, Vale RD. Identification of katanin, an ATPase
that severs and disassembles stable microtubules. Cell.
1993; 75:419–429.

39.	 Chacko AD, McDade SS, Chanduloy S, Church SW,
Kennedy R, Price J, Hall PA, Russell SE. Expression of
the SEPT9_i4 isoform confers resistance to microtubuleinteracting drugs. Cell Oncol (Dordr). 2012; 35:85–93.

27.	 Rogowski K, van Dijk J, Magiera MM, Bosc C,
Deloulme JC, Bosson A, Peris L, Gold ND, Lacroix B,
Bosch Grau M, Bec N, Larroque C, Desagher S, et al.
A family of protein-deglutamylating enzymes associated
with neurodegeneration. Cell. 2010; 143:564–578.

40.	 Sandrock K, Bartsch I, Blaser S, Busse A, Busse E,
Zieger B. Characterization of human septin interactions.
Biol Chem. 2011; 392:751–761.
41.	 Sirajuddin M, Farkasovsky M, Hauer F, Kuhlmann D,
Macara IG, Weyand M, Stark H, Wittinghofer A. Structural
insight into filament formation by mammalian septins.
Nature. 2007; 449:311–315.

28.	 Mialhe A, Lafanechere L, Treilleux I, Peloux N,
Dumontet C, Bremond A, Panh MH, Payan R, Wehland J,
Margolis RL, Job D. Tubulin detyrosination is a frequent
occurrence in breast cancers of poor prognosis. Cancer Res.
2001; 61:5024–5027.

42.	 Sellin ME, Sandblad L, Stenmark S, Gullberg M.
Deciphering the rules governing assembly order of
mammalian septin complexes. Mol Biol Cell. 2011;
22:3152–3164.

29.	 Banerjee A. Increased levels of tyrosinated alpha-,
beta(III)-, and beta(IV)-tubulin isotypes in paclitaxelresistant MCF-7 breast cancer cells. Biochem Biophys Res
Commun. 2002; 293:598–601.

43.	 Hartwell LH. Genetic control of the cell division cycle in
yeast. IV. Genes controlling bud emergence and cytokinesis. Exp Cell Res. 1971; 69:265–276.

30.	 Peris L, Wagenbach M, Lafanechere L, Brocard J,
Moore AT, Kozielski F, Job D, Wordeman L, Andrieux A.
Motor-dependent microtubule disassembly driven by tubulin tyrosination. J Cell Biol. 2009; 185:1159–1166.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44.	 Magiera MM, Janke C. Post-translational modifications of
tubulin. Curr Biol. 2014; 24:R351–354.

36078

Oncotarget

45.	 Janke C, Bulinski JC. Post-translational regulation of the
microtubule cytoskeleton: mechanisms and functions. Nat
Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2011; 12:773–786.

human prostate cancer cells concomitant with disruption of
hypoxia-inducible factor-1 pathway. Mol Cancer Res. 2010;
8:643–652.

46.	 Ageta-Ishihara N, Miyata T, Ohshima C, Watanabe M,
Sato Y, Hamamura Y, Higashiyama T, Mazitschek R,
Bito H, Kinoshita M. Septins promote dendrite and axon
development by negatively regulating microtubule stability
via HDAC6-mediated deacetylation. Nat Commun. 2013;
4:2532.

60.	 Gonzalez ME, Makarova O, Peterson EA, Privette LM,
Petty EM. Up-regulation of SEPT9_v1 stabilizes c-JunN-terminal kinase and contributes to its pro-proliferative
activity in mammary epithelial cells. Cell Signal. 2009;
21:477–487.
61.	 Connolly D, Abdesselam I, Verdier-Pinard P, Montagna C.
Septin roles in tumorigenesis. Biol Chem. 2011;
392:725–738.

47.	 Kalinina E, Biswas R, Berezniuk I, Hermoso A, Aviles FX,
Fricker LD. A novel subfamily of mouse cytosolic carboxypeptidases. Faseb J. 2007; 21:836–850.

62.	 Stanbery L, D’Silva NJ, Lee JS, Bradford CR, Carey TE,
Prince ME, Wolf GT, Worden FP, Cordell KG, Petty EM.
High SEPT9_v1 Expression Is Associated with Poor
Clinical Outcomes in Head and Neck Squamous Cell
Carcinoma. Transl Oncol. 2010; 3:239–245.

48.	 Akhmanova A, Steinmetz MO. Microtubule +TIPs at a
glance. J Cell Sci. 2010; 123:3415–3419.
49.	 Yared JA, Tkaczuk KH. Update on taxane development:
new analogs and new formulations. Drug Des Devel Ther.
2012; 6:371–384.

63.	 Spiliotis ET. Regulation of microtubule organization and
functions by septin GTPases. Cytoskeleton (Hoboken).
2010; 67:339–345.

50.	 Ganguly A, Yang H, Cabral F. Overexpression of mitotic
centromere-associated Kinesin stimulates microtubule
detachment and confers resistance to Paclitaxel. Mol Cancer
Ther. 2011; 10:929–937.

64.	 Surka MC, Tsang CW, Trimble WS. The mammalian
septin MSF localizes with microtubules and is required
for ­
completion of cytokinesis. Mol Biol Cell. 2002;
13:3532–3545.

51.	 Suzuki K, Takahashi K. Regulation of lamellipodia formation and cell invasion by CLIP-170 in invasive human
breast cancer cells. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008;
368:199–204.

65.	 Estey MP, Di Ciano-Oliveira C, Froese CD, Bejide MT,
Trimble WS. Distinct roles of septins in cytokinesis:
SEPT9 mediates midbody abscission. J Cell Biol. 2010;
191:741–749.

52.	 Sun X, Li D, Yang Y, Ren Y, Li J, Wang Z, Dong B,
Liu M, Zhou J. Microtubule-binding protein CLIP-170
is a mediator of paclitaxel sensitivity. J Pathol. 2012;
226:666–673.

66.	 Bowen JR, Hwang D, Bai X, Roy D, Spiliotis ET. Septin
GTPases spatially guide microtubule organization and plus
end dynamics in polarizing epithelia. J Cell Biol. 2011;
194:187–197.

53.	 Bhat KM, Setaluri V. Microtubule-associated proteins as
targets in cancer chemotherapy. Clin Cancer Res. 2007;
13:2849–2854.

67.	 Martinez C, Corral J, Dent JA, Sesma L, Vicente V,
Ware J. Platelet septin complexes form rings and associate
with the microtubular network. J Thromb Haemost. 2006;
4:1388–1395.

54.	 Goncalves A, Braguer D, Kamath K, Martello L,
Briand C, Horwitz S, Wilson L, Jordan MA. Resistance
to Taxol in lung cancer cells associated with increased
microtubule dynamics. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001;
98:11737–11742.

68.	 Sellin ME, Stenmark S, Gullberg M. Mammalian SEPT9
isoforms direct microtubule-dependent arrangements of
septin core heteromers. Mol Biol Cell. 2012; 23:4242–4255.

55.	 Kremer BE, Haystead T, Macara IG. Mammalian septins
regulate microtubule stability through interaction with the
microtubule-binding protein MAP4. Mol Biol Cell. 2005;
16:4648–4659.

69.	 Szyk A, Deaconescu AM, Piszczek G, Roll-Mecak A.
Tubulin tyrosine ligase structure reveals adaptation of an
ancient fold to bind and modify tubulin. Nat Struct Mol
Biol. 2011; 18:1250–1258.

56.	 Stanbery L, Petty EM. Steps solidifying a role for SEPT9 in
breast cancer suggest that greater strides are needed. Breast
Cancer Res. 2012; 14:101.

70.	 Soucek K, Kamaid A, Phung AD, Kubala L, Bulinski JC,
Harper RW, Eiserich JP. Normal and prostate cancer cells
display distinct molecular profiles of alpha-tubulin posttranslational modifications. Prostate. 2006; 66:954–965.

57.	 Scott M, McCluggage WG, Hillan KJ, Hall PA, Russell SE.
Altered patterns of transcription of the septin gene,
SEPT9, in ovarian tumorigenesis. Int J Cancer. 2006;
118:1325–1329.

71.	 Boucher D, Larcher JC, Gros F, Denoulet P.
Polyglutamylation of tubulin as a progressive regulator of in
vitro interactions between the microtubule-associated protein Tau and tubulin. Biochemistry. 1994; 33:12471–12477.

58.	 Golan M, Mabjeesh NJ. SEPT9_i1 is required for the
association between HIF-1alpha and importin-alpha to
promote efficient nuclear translocation. Cell Cycle. 2013;
12:2297–2308.

72.	 Janke C, Rogowski K, van Dijk J. Polyglutamylation: a
fine-regulator of protein function? ‘Protein Modifications:
beyond the usual suspects’ review series. EMBO Rep.
2008; 9:636–641.

59.	 Amir S, Golan M, Mabjeesh NJ. Targeted knockdown
of SEPT9_v1 inhibits tumor growth and angiogenesis of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36079

Oncotarget

73.	 Wasylyk C, Zambrano A, Zhao C, Brants J, Abecassis J,
Schalken JA, Rogatsch H, Schaefer G, Pycha A, Klocker H,
Wasylyk B. Tubulin tyrosine ligase like 12 links to prostate
cancer through tubulin posttranslational modification and
chromosome ploidy. Int J Cancer. 2010; 127:2542–2553.

79.	 Lee JE, Silhavy JL, Zaki MS, Schroth J, Bielas SL,
Marsh SE, Olvera J, Brancati F, Iannicelli M, Ikegami K,
Schlossman AM, Merriman B, Attie-Bitach T, et al. CEP41
is mutated in Joubert syndrome and is required for tubulin
glutamylation at the cilium. Nat Genet. 2012; 44:193–199.

74.	 Sangrajrang S, Denoulet P, Laing NM, Tatoud R, Millot G,
Calvo F, Tew KD, Fellous A. Association of estramustine
resistance in human prostatic carcinoma cells with modified
patterns of tubulin expression. Biochem Pharmacol. 1998;
55:325–331.

80.	 Blagosklonny MV, Darzynkiewicz Z, Halicka HD,
Pozarowski P, Demidenko ZN, Barry JJ, Kamath KR,
Herrmann RA. Paclitaxel induces primary and postmitotic
G1 arrest in human arterial smooth muscle cells. Cell Cycle.
2004; 3:1050–1056.

75.	 Beise N, Trimble W. Septins at a glance. J Cell Sci. 2011;
124:4141–4146.

81.	 Daire V, Giustiniani J, Leroy-Gori I, Quesnoit M,
Drevensek S, Dimitrov A, Perez F, Pous C. Kinesin-1
regulates microtubule dynamics via a c-Jun N-terminal
kinase-dependent mechanism. J Biol Chem. 2009;
284:31992–32001.

76.	 Joo E, Surka MC, Trimble WS. Mammalian SEPT2 is
required for scaffolding nonmuscle myosin II and its
kinases. Dev Cell. 2007; 13:677–690.

82.	 Dhamodharan R, Wadsworth P. Modulation of microtubule
dynamic instability in vivo by brain microtubule associated
proteins. J Cell Sci. 1995; 108:1679–1689.

77.	 Kremer BE, Adang LA, Macara IG. Septins regulate
actin organization and cell-cycle arrest through nuclear
accumulation of NCK mediated by SOCS7. Cell. 2007;
130:837–850.

83.	 Wloga D, Gaertig J. Post-translational modifications of
microtubules. J Cell Sci. 2010; 123:3447–3455.

78.	 Fung KY, Dai L, Trimble WS. Cell and molecular biology
of septins. Int Rev Cell Mol Biol. 2014; 310:289–339.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36080

Oncotarget

