Published OnlineFirst October 5, 2010; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-1569

Review

Cancer
Research

Microtentacles Tip the Balance of Cytoskeletal Forces in
Circulating Tumor Cells
Michael A. Matrone1, Rebecca A. Whipple2, Eric M. Balzer2, and Stuart S. Martin2

Abstract
Detection of circulating tumor cells (CTC) is advancing as an effective predictor of patient outcome and
therapeutic response. Unfortunately, our knowledge of CTC biology remains limited, and the impact of
drug treatments on CTC metastatic potential is currently unclear. Improved CTC imaging in vivo and
analysis of free-floating tumor cells now show that cytoskeletal regulation in CTCs contrasts starkly with
tumor cells attached to extracellular matrix. In this review, we examine how persistent microtubule stabilization promotes the formation of microtentacles on the surface of detached breast tumor cells and
enhances metastatic potential. Cancer Res; 70(20); 7737–41. ©2010 AACR.

Introduction
To control morphology, cells perform a delicate balancing
act of cytoskeletal forces. Termed the cellular tensegrity
model, expansion of microtubules is counteracted by tension
in the actin cytoskeleton to stabilize cell shape (1). Cytoskeletal aberrations contribute to many characteristics of
aggressive tumors, such as increased cell motility, weakened
adhesive contacts, and metastatic dissemination. For example, hypoxia-induced signaling can promote an epithelialto-mesenchymal transition (EMT), which leads to numerous
cytoskeletal alterations, including expression of chemotherapeutic-resistant tubulin isoforms and the intermediate
filament (IF) vimentin (2, 3).
Recent studies show that altering the balance between
microtubules and actin has serious implications for circulating tumor cell (CTC) dissemination (4, 5). In vitro CTC
modeling reveals that detached cells form microtentacles
(McTN), dynamic, microtubule-enriched plasma membrane
extensions that are antagonized by the actin cytoskeleton
(4, 6). Microtubule stabilization enhances McTNs and facilitates in vitro tumor cell aggregation and reattachment
(7, 8). In vivo, cells forming McTNs are more efficiently
retained in the microvasculature (8), reinforcing evidence
that CTC attachment to the capillary endothelium is microtubule dependent (5). Here, we discuss the mechanisms of

Authors' Affiliations: 1Department of Cell Biology, The Scripps Research
Institute, La Jolla, California and 2 Department of Physiology,
Greenebaum NCI Cancer Center, University of Maryland School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland
Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer
Research Online (http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Corresponding Author: Stuart S. Martin, Marlene and Stewart Greenebaum NCI Cancer Center, University of Maryland School of Medicine,
655 West Baltimore Street, BRB 10-029, Baltimore, MD 21201. Phone:
410-706-6601; Fax: 410-706-6600; E-mail: ssmartin@som.umaryland.edu.
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-1569
©2010 American Association for Cancer Research.

microtubule stabilization in CTCs and how these alterations
influence metastatic efficiency (Fig. 1).

Mechanisms of Microtubule Stabilization
in Cancer
Formation of detyrosinated tubulin
Microtubules are polarized and linear polymers composed of α- and β-tubulin heterodimers, which can be regulated through posttranslational modification, such as the
cyclical removal and ligation of the COOH-terminal tyrosine
on α-tubulin. An unidentified tubulin carboxypeptidase
(TCP) removes this tyrosine from α-tubulin, exposing a glutamic acid residue to form detyrosinated microtubules
(Glu-tubulin; ref. 9). This modification is reversed by tubulin
tyrosine ligase (TTL), which replaces the tyrosine on free
tubulin heterodimers to regenerate tyrosinated α-tubulin
(Tyr-tubulin). In vivo, glu-microtubules persist for hours,
whereas tyr-microtubules undergoes turnover within 3 to
5 minutes (9). This stabilization effect is not observed with
purified tubulin in vitro, showing that cellular mechanisms
stabilize glu-microtubules, including capping of the plus
end and crosslinking with IFs (9).
Tubulin detyrosination is clinically associated with tumor
aggressiveness and poor prognosis. In a study of 134 breast
cancer patients, 65.4% of grade 3 primary breast tumors
stained strongly for glu-microtubules, compared with 3.4%
of grade 1 tumors (10). This glu-microtubule enrichment upon tumor progression may result from TTL inactivation,
which is commonly observed in human carcinomas and sarcomas (10). Unlike TTL, the contribution of TCP to cancer
progression is unknown. Despite more than 30 years of effort, TCP protein remains unidentified. What little is known
about TCP stems from cell extract studies of chick brain embryos or cell lines, which have shown that the enzyme detyrosinates α-tubulin only in polymerized microtubules. In
general, carboxypeptidases operate in a variety of mechanisms, using serine-, cysteine-, or metal ion-containing active

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2010 American Association for Cancer
Research.

7737

Published OnlineFirst October 5, 2010; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-1569
Matrone et al.

Figure 1. Microtubule stabilization in McTNs and metastasis. A, in detached epithelial cells, 1, microtubules (green) outwardly expanding from the cell
center are counterbalanced by contraction of the cortical actin cytoskeleton (red). Such cells die by apoptosis or fragmentation in capillaries, 2, when
circulating. In breast tumor cells, 3, McTNs overcome the restrictive forces of the actin cortex by associating with tau. Similarly, removal of the
COOH-terminal tyrosine of Tyr-tubulin by TCP yields Glu-tubulin that associates with vimentin until it is retyrosinated by TTL. Microtubule-stabilizing drugs,
4, like paclitaxel, increase McTNs and tumor cell reattachment. B, confocal microscopy of live green fluorescent protein–labeled breast tumor cells
shows that McTNs stimulate aggregation by encircling adjacent cells labeled with a red lipophillic dye (B, white arrow). McTNs also promote tumor cell
reattachment to mCherry-labeled endothelial cell layers (C, white arrows). 3-D reconstructions from the imaged time point in B and C are available in
Supplementary Movies S1 and S2 (rendered with Bitplane Imaris6.4).

sites. Others possess affinities for terminal amino acids that
have specific side chains. Phosphatase inhibitor studies indicate that TCP association with microtubules is regulated by
serine-threonine phosphorylation, and not tyrosine phosphorylation, but it is not known if TCP, tubulin, or an intermediate is the phosphorylation-regulated component (11). In
addition, unlike other carboxypeptidases, TCP remains unaffected by inhibitors of carboxypeptidase A, a pancreatic carboxypeptidase with catalytic affinity for COOH-terminal
amino acids with aliphatic or aromatic side chains, such as
tyrosine (12).
Tubulin detyrosination may also be associated with invasion and metastatic dissemination. Glu-microtubules orient
in the direction of cell migration, implying their involvement in tumor invasiveness (13). In models of the hematogenous dissemination of CTCs, detachment of breast
carcinoma cell lines increases glu-tubulin, which concentrates in McTNs (4, 6). Like the glu-microtubules from
which they are formed, McTNs are persistent and are observed hours and days following cell detachment, especially
in apoptosis-resistant cells (4). Furthermore, McTN formation and tumor cell reattachment are enhanced upon
weakening of the actin cortex (4, 7), illustrating how cytoskeletal force imbalance can impact the metastatic potential of CTCs.

7738

Cancer Res; 70(20) October 15, 2010

Crosslinking of microtubules to vimentin
intermediate filaments
The cellular tensegrity model predicts that microtubules
resist compressive buckling through a number of lateral interactions (1). Most notable is the association with IFs, nonpolarized ropelike structures that impart mechanical stability
to animal cells through their association with other cytoskeletal structures and sites of cell-cell and cell–extracellular
matrix (ECM) adhesion. For example, microinjection of nonpolymerizable and nontyrosinatable glu-tubulin causes collapse of IFs to the perinuclear region, showing how these
two cytoskeletal systems coordinate to provide structural
stability to the cell (9).
In malignancies, vimentin expression increases during the
EMT associated with tumor invasion and metastasis, especially among breast cancers and melanomas. We have shown
that vimentin expression enhances McTN formation (6). Metastatic breast carcinoma cell lines with elevated vimentin
also exhibit increased McTNs. Conversely, tumor cell lines
that express epithelial cytokeratins show fewer McTNs and
decreased metastatic potential. Promoting vimentin phosphorylation and disassembly through protein phosphatase
inhibition also reduces McTN formation (6). Furthermore,
exogenous expression of dominant-negative vimentin decreases McTN frequency in metastatic cell lines that natively

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2010 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst October 5, 2010; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-1569
Cytoskeletal Imbalance of CTCs

express full-length vimentin (6). Vimentin associates preferentially with detyrosinated microtubules in a kinesin-dependent
manner, suggesting a mechanism by which the disruption of
this association can lead to collapse of IFs (9). Both vimentin (14) and detyrosinated tubulin (10) predict poor breast
cancer survival, but the mechanism responsible is currently
unknown. It remains possible that the independent influences of vimentin (14) and detyrosinated tubulin (10) on
tumor metastasis could result from their interdependent
contributions to the microtubule stabilization underlying
McTNs (4, 6).
Microtubule stabilization through binding of structural
microtubule-associated proteins
Microtubule-associated proteins (MAP) have functionally
diverse roles. Here, we focus on the structural MAPs: nonenzymatic filamentous proteins that promote tubulin polymerization and microtubule stabilization. The MAP1 and
the MAP2/tau protein families are the largest and bestcharacterized structural MAPs; however, tau has been
the most extensively studied MAP with respect to human
malignancy.
Clinically, tau expression provides resistance to microtubule-based chemotherapeutics in breast, gastric, and pancreatic cancers. Tau was identified as the most differentially
expressed gene during neoadjuvant paclitaxel chemotherapy,
associated with both estrogen receptor status and residual
disease following treatment (15). Although a subsequent
randomized clinical trial revealed that patients with tau-positive primary tumors had significantly better disease-free
and overall survival, with no tau-associated benefit from
paclitaxel, our recent report indicates that tau contributes
to the metastatic efficiency of breast tumor cells (8). We
showed that tau directly induces McTNs in detached mammary epithelial and breast carcinoma cell lines, which significantly increases their ability to reattach following release
from ECM (8). In vivo, tau-overexpressing MCF-7 cells are
more efficiently trapped and retained in lung capillaries
compared with tau-deficient cells in experimental metastasis assays (8). In 102 breast cancer patients, tau expression
was significantly increased in 26% of lymph node metastases
compared with matched primary tumors. An additional 26%
displayed elevated tau expression that was maintained between primary and metastatic tumors. In only 12% of patients did a loss of tau expression occur between primary
and metastatic tumors (from pathologic scores +1 to 0).
These data suggest that tau could provide a selective advantage during metastasis (8).
Similar to microtubule strengthening by IF association, tau
tips the force balance between microtubules and actin by
providing structural strength to microtubules. Tau promotes
microtubule bundling, and individual tau-decorated microtubules can withstand greater deforming forces compared with
naked microtubules (16, 17). Similarly, actin depolymerization in BT-20 breast carcinoma cells is not sufficient to induce McTNs, but combining tau expression and actin
depolymerization significantly enhanced McTN formation
(8). These data indicate that, even when the actin cortex is

www.aacrjournals.org

disrupted, strengthening of microtubules may still be required for McTNs to emerge.

Implications for Cancer Progression
Deformation of CTCs in transit
Optical deformability of cells is an emerging marker of
cancer progression (18). A central determinant of metastatic efficiency is tumor cell survival during hematogenous
dissemination. Metastasis of carcinoma CTCs is limited by
the ability of the relatively large epithelial tumor cells to
deform within the narrow size restrictions of the microvasculature. If CTC membranes are deformed beyond the
limits of their surface area, the cells perish through shearinduced fragmentation. In contrast, metastatically efficient
CTCs have been observed to undergo sphere-to-cylinder
shape transformations within capillaries (19). These observations are supported by experimental deformations of
suspended tumor cells with microfluidic optical stretchers,
which indicate that tumor cells are more deformable than
normal epithelial cells (18). The degree of actin crosslinking
is directly implicated in CTC deformation. As malignancy
progresses, the F-to-G actin ratio decreases, indicating a
less polymerized actin cytoskeleton (20). Mutation in or
altered expression of mediators of actin polymerization
can also disrupt actin organization and crosslinking (21),
which may weaken the cortical integrity. When microtubules are stabilized in concert with reduced actin integrity,
CTCs produce increased McTNs (7, 8).
Homo- and heterotypic cell aggregation
CTC survival in the circulation requires protection from
mechanical damage due to shear and collision forces and
from destruction by immune surveillance. Such protections
are granted by the ability of metastatically efficient CTCs
to homotypically and heterotypically aggregate. In vitro selection of tumor cell lines that efficiently cluster homotypically
exhibited a greater ability to metastasize in vivo than nonaggregating parental cells (22). Similarly, our own studies show
that McTNs enhance homotypic cell aggregation (4). Although formation of homotypic CTC aggregates increases
the survival of disseminating cells by mechanical trapping,
evidence suggests that CTC reattachment to the endothelium
may also be activated through heterotypic aggregation of
CTCs with platelets (22). Association of CTCs with platelets
and other coagulation factors is implicated in venous thromboembolism, which correlates with CTC burden and poor
prognosis in metastatic breast cancer patients (23). The
CTC-platelet association involves activation of integrins
and clotting factors to induce a fibrin coat that enhances
CTC spreading following attachment to organ microvasculature. In addition, immune-mediated destruction of CTCs can
be avoided through the direct association of CTCs with leukocytes. Given their ability to encircle adjacent cells during
homotypic aggregation (Fig. 1B), McTNs may also facilitate
heterotypic association of CTCs with platelets or with white
blood cells.

Cancer Res; 70(20) October 15, 2010

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2010 American Association for Cancer
Research.

7739

Published OnlineFirst October 5, 2010; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-1569
Matrone et al.

Increased intravascular retention
Currently, two models describe the successful reattachment of CTCs during blood-borne metastasis: a passive
mechanism, whereby CTCs are mechanically trapped within
the microvasculature; or an active mechanism, whereby specific adhesive interactions of CTCs permit microvasculature
retention (24). In vivo studies by Korb and colleagues used
intravital microscopy to show that circulating HT-29 colon
carcinoma cells adhere to liver sinusoidal capillaries in a
microtubule-dependent manner (5). Specifically, pretreatment of these cells with the microtubule depolymerizer
nocadazole significantly reduced CTC attachment. Surprisingly, inhibition of actin polymerization with cytochalasin-D
significantly enhanced CTC reattachment (5). The cytoskeletal mechanisms supporting McTN formation (4, 6, 7) and
McTN-dependent microvascular retention (8) match identically with these in vivo observations (5). As described above,
tau stabilizes microtubules and increases McTNs in breast
tumor cells, whereas whole-animal bioluminescence imaging
shows that tau-expressing CTCs are more efficiently retained
in the lung microvasculature compared with tau-deficient
controls (8). These data (5, 8) and the ability of McTNs to
penetrate endothelial layers (Fig. 1C) support an active role
for microtubule stabilization during CTC reattachment within the microvasculature. Given that cells with McTNs attach
more efficiently to ECM in vitro (4), further investigation is
needed to determine whether McTNs are enriched in distinct
adhesion proteins that may mediate CTC-endothelial attachment, such as integrins or selectins. Although selectinmediated endothelial attachment permits tumor cell rolling,
integrin-mediated ECM attachment is required for CTCs to
arrest against the force of blood flow (25). These data support a model in which contact with the underlying ECM
through transendothelial penetration is necessary to promote the earliest stages of CTC extravasation, and McTNs
are capable of such transendothelial penetration (Fig. 1C).

Microtubule-Targeted Drugs and CTCs
Stabilizing drugs, like taxanes, prevent microtubule disassembly, stalling tumor cells in metaphase, and initiating cell
death through spindle checkpoint activation or mitotic catastrophe. Although microtubule-targeted drugs are highly
successful in primary tumor treatment, their success is
limited for metastatic disease. The effects of microtubuletargeted chemotherapies on CTCs have not been thoroughly
investigated. Evidence that taxanes enhance McTN formation and tumor cell reattachment (7) emphasizes that the
effects of existing cancer drugs on CTCs should be examined
to ensure that antimitotic therapies do not inadvertently
increase metastatic potential. Emerging evidence that paclitaxel treatment actually increases lung colonization of CTCs
in mice has been connected to the tumor stem cell phenotype (26), but a direct role for microtubule stabilization in
CTC retention has not yet been excluded in this model.
Camara and colleagues showed that a potential consequence of taxane administration is the mobilization of CTCs.
Reports indicate that newly diagnosed breast cancer patients

7740

Cancer Res; 70(20) October 15, 2010

receiving either combination or single-agent therapy, each
with subsequent taxane administration, experienced as much
as a 10,000 fold increase in CTCs during the taxane arm (27).
These cell numbers remain elevated pre- and postsurgery, indicating persistent CTCs that resisted taxane treatment or
new CTCs that were mobilized during surgery (27).
Growing evidence indicates that the ability of CTCs to successfully metastasize may increase because of the detrimental
effects of chemotherapeutics. For example, cyclophosphamide has been observed to cause microvascular damage
and to increase intravascular proliferation and extravasation
of tumor cells. Likewise, anti-angiogenic therapies can also
increase metastatic potential (28). Enhancement of metastasis could be a consequence of taxanes, which can alter the
balance between microtubules and actin. Balzer and colleagues showed that jasplakinolide, an in vitro actin-stabilizing
peptide that causes abnormal nucleation and aggregation of
actin in vivo, increased McTN formation (7, 29). This effect
was enhanced by paclitaxel-mediated microtubule stabilization, which additionally increased tumor cell reattachment
and spreading on ECM (7). These data indicate that CTCs
may be stimulated to adhere to blood vessel walls or to the
underlying ECM after taxane-mediated microtubule stabilization or actin disruption. Although microtubule-targeted therapies are a common strategy to reduce the growth of attached
tumor cells, proteins that alter actin polymerization are
emerging as potential targets for chemotherapy (30).
Taxane resistance with tau expression may heighten the
risk of successful metastasis because of an increased
mobilization of McTN-forming CTCs. Tau contributes to
taxane resistance by competing with paclitaxel for microtubule binding. Pulse-chase experiments measuring tritiatedpaclitaxel incorporation into microtubules revealed that
microtubules assembled in the presence of tau incorporate
less paclitaxel compared with those assembled with tubulin
alone. Consequently, the IC50 of paclitaxel required to kill
tau-expressing breast tumor cells increases (15).
Further studies are required to evaluate the effects of microtubule-targeted chemotherapeutics on CTCs and metastatic risk. As new therapeutic targets are identified and
new therapies developed, any possible detrimental effects
of microtubule-based chemotherapies could be counteracted
or avoided by defining a specific risk window during the
course of treatment.

Future Considerations
Metastasis remains the leading cause of death among
cancer patients. CTCs pose a particular challenge as our
knowledge of the interaction between CTCs and the circulatory microenvironment is not well defined. It is now understood that tipping the cytoskeletal force balance toward
microtubule stabilization and actin depolymerization causes
CTCs to acquire characteristics that promote metastatic efficiency. Through stabilization by detachment-induced posttranslational modifications and interactions with accessory
proteins, microtubules can overcome the restrictive forces
of cortical actin to protrude from the plasma membrane;

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2010 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst October 5, 2010; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-1569
Cytoskeletal Imbalance of CTCs

thus mediating McTN formation, cell-cell aggregation, and
endothelial attachment of CTCs.
Considering the detrimental effects of chemotherapeutics
on CTC mobilization and McTN induction, it raises the question of whether our anticancer effort is missing an important
target. It remains critical to develop methods that distinguish
whether drug-induced tumor shrinkage arises from tumor
cell death or tumor cell dissemination, because these two effects have dramatically different consequences in a neoadjuvant setting. Although current drug development efforts and
clinical endpoints focus on limiting the growth of either primary or metastatic tumors, it will be important to understand the effects of existing cancer drugs on CTCs in order

to improve treatment strategies and develop novel therapies
aimed at reducing the metastatic potential of CTCs.
Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest
No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

Grant Support
S.S. Martin: R01-CA124704, National Cancer Institute; Breast Cancer Idea
Award, USA Medical Research and Materiel Command (BC061047); MD Stem
Cell Exploratory Award (MSCRFE-0081); Clinical Innovator Award, Flight Attendant Medical Research Institute (CIA-062497).
Received 05/02/2010; revised 07/20/2010; accepted 08/04/2010; published
OnlineFirst 10/05/2010.

References
1.
2.

3.
4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

Ingber DE, Tensegrity I. Cell structure and hierarchical systems biology. J Cell Sci 2003;116:1157–73.
Raspaglio G, Filippetti F, Prislei S, et al. Hypoxia induces class III
beta-tubulin gene expression by HIF-1alpha binding to its 3′ flanking
region. Gene 2008;409:100–8.
Yang MH, Wu MZ, Chiou SH, et al. Direct regulation of TWIST by
HIF-1alpha promotes metastasis. Nat Cell Biol 2008;10:295–305.
Whipple RA, Cheung AM, Martin SS. Detyrosinated microtubule protrusions in suspended mammary epithelial cells promote reattachment. Exp Cell Res 2007;313:1326–36.
Korb T, Schluter K, Enns A, et al. Integrity of actin fibers and microtubules influences metastatic tumor cell adhesion. Exp Cell Res
2004;299:236–47.
Whipple RA, Balzer EM, Cho EH, Matrone MA, Yoon JR, Martin SS.
Vimentin filaments support extension of tubulin-based microtentacles in detached breast tumor cells. Cancer Res 2008;68:5678–88.
Balzer EM, Whipple RA, Cho EH, Matrone MA, Martin SS. Antimitotic
chemotherapeutics promote adhesive responses in detached and
circulating tumor cells. Breast Cancer Res Treat 2010;121:65–78.
Matrone MA, Whipple RA, Thompson K, et al. Metastatic breast
tumors express increased tau, which promotes microtentacle
formation and the reattachment of detached breast tumor cells.
Oncogene 2010;29:3217–27.
Kreitzer G, Liao G, Gundersen GG. Detyrosination of tubulin regulates the interaction of intermediate filaments with microtubules in
vivo via a kinesin-dependent mechanism. Mol Biol Cell 1999;10:
1105–18.
Mialhe A, Lafanechere L, Treilleux I, et al. Tubulin detyrosination is a
frequent occurrence in breast cancers of poor prognosis. Cancer
Res 2001;61:5024–7.
Contín MA, Purro SA, Bisig CG, Barra HS, Arce CA. Inhibitors of protein phosphatase 1 and 2A decrease the level of tubulin carboxypeptidase activity associated with microtubules. Eur J Biochem 2003;
270:4921–9.
Contin MA, Sironi JJ, Barra HS, Arce CA. Association of tubulin carboxypeptidase with microtubules in living cells. Biochem J 1999;339:
463–71.
Gundersen GG, Bulinski JC. Selective stabilization of microtubules
oriented toward the direction of cell migration. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A 1988;85:5946–50.
Domagala W, Striker G, Szadowska A, Dukowicz A, Harezga B,
Osborn M. p53 protein and vimentin in invasive ductal NOS breast
carcinoma–relationship with survival and sites of metastases. Eur J
Cancer 1994;30A:1527–34.
Rouzier R, Rajan R, Wagner P, et al. Microtubule-associated protein
tau: a marker of paclitaxel sensitivity in breast cancer. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 2005;102:8315–20.

www.aacrjournals.org

16. Chen J, Kanai Y, Cowan NJ, Hirokawa N. Projection domains of
MAP2 and tau determine spacings between microtubules in dendrites and axons. Nature 1992;360:674–7.
17. Schaap IA, Hoffmann B, Carrasco C, Merkel R, Schmidt CF. Tau protein binding forms a 1 nm thick layer along protofilaments without
affecting the radial elasticity of microtubules. J Struct Biol 2007;
158:282–92.
18. Remmerbach TW, Wottawah F, Dietrich J, Lincoln B, Wittekind C,
Guck J. Oral cancer diagnosis by mechanical phenotyping. Cancer
Res 2009;69:1728–32.
19. Weiss L. Biomechanical interactions of cancer cells with the microvasculature during hematogenous metastasis. Cancer Metastasis
Rev 1992;11:227–35.
20. Katsantonis J, Tosca A, Koukouritaki SB, Theodoropoulos PA,
Gravanis A, Stournaras C. Differences in the G/total actin ratio
and microfilament stability between normal and malignant human
keratinocytes. Cell Biochem Funct 1994;12:267–74.
21. Kelley LC, Shahab S, Weed SA. Actin cytoskeletal mediators of motility and invasion amplified and overexpressed in head and neck
cancer. Clin Exp Metastasis 2008;25:289–304.
22. Glinsky VV, Glinsky GV, Glinskii OV, et al. Intravascular metastatic
cancer cell homotypic aggregation at the sites of primary attachment
to the endothelium. Cancer Res 2003;63:3805–11.
23. Mego M, De Giorgi U, Broglio K, et al. Circulating tumour cells are
associated with increased risk of venous thromboembolism in metastatic breast cancer patients. Br J Cancer 2009;101:1813–6.
24. Orr FW, Wang HH, Lafrenie RM, Scherbarth S, Nance DM. Interactions between cancer cells and the endothelium in metastasis.
J Pathol 2000;190:310–29.
25. Haier J, Nicolson GL. Tumor cell adhesion under hydrodynamic conditions of fluid flow. APMIS 2001;109:241–62.
26. Gupta PB, Onder TT, Jiang G, et al. Identification of selective inhibitors of cancer stem cells by high-throughput screening. Cell 2009;
138:645–59.
27. Camara O, Rengsberger M, Egbe A, et al. The relevance of circulating epithelial tumor cells (CETC) for therapy monitoring during
neoadjuvant (primary systemic) chemotherapy in breast cancer.
Ann Oncol 2007;18:1484–92.
28. Ebos JM, Lee CR, Cruz-Munoz W, Bjarnason GA, Christensen JG,
Kerbel RS. Accelerated metastasis after short-term treatment with
a potent inhibitor of tumor angiogenesis. Cancer Cell 2009;15:
232–9.
29. Bubb MR, Spector I, Beyer BB, Fosen KM. Effects of jasplakinolide
on the kinetics of actin polymerization. An explanation for certain in
vivo observations. J Biol Chem 2000;275:5163–70.
30. Rao J, Li N. Microfilament actin remodeling as a potential target for
cancer drug development. Curr Cancer Drug Targets 2004;4:345–54.

Cancer Res; 70(20) October 15, 2010

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2010 American Association for Cancer
Research.

7741

Published OnlineFirst October 5, 2010; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-1569

Microtentacles Tip the Balance of Cytoskeletal Forces in
Circulating Tumor Cells
Michael A. Matrone, Rebecca A. Whipple, Eric M. Balzer, et al.
Cancer Res 2010;70:7737-7741. Published OnlineFirst October 5, 2010.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-1569
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2010/10/04/0008-5472.CAN-10-1569.DC1

This article cites 30 articles, 10 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/70/20/7737.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 5 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/70/20/7737.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2010 American Association for Cancer
Research.

