Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 27

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

Glaucarubinone sensitizes KB cells to paclitaxel by inhibiting
ABC transporters via ROS-dependent and p53-mediated
activation of apoptotic signaling pathways

Subburayan Karthikeyan1, Sugeerappa Laxmanappa Hoti1, Yasin Nazeer1, Harsha
Vasudev Hegde1
1

Regional Medical Research Centre, Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), Karnataka, India

Correspondence to: Sugeerappa Laxmanappa Hoti, email: slhoti@yahoo.com
Keywords: multidrug resistance, glaucarubinone, paclitaxel, molecular docking, apoptosis
Received: October 08, 2015    Accepted: March 02, 2016    Published: June 7, 2016

ABSTRACT
Multidrug resistance (MDR) is considered to be the major contributor to failure
of chemotherapy in oral squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). This study was aimed to
explore the effects and mechanisms of glaucarubinone (GLU), one of the major
quassinoids from Simarouba glauca DC, in potentiating cytotoxicity of paclitaxel
(PTX), an anticancer drug in KB cells. Our data showed that the administration of
GLU pre-treatment significantly enhanced PTX anti-proliferative effect in ABCB1
over-expressing KB cells. The Rh 123 drug efflux studies revealed that there was a
significant transport function inhibition by GLU-PTX treatment. Interestingly, it was
also found that this enhanced anticancer efficacy of GLU was associated with PTXinduced cell arrest in the G2/M phase of cell cycle. Further, the combined treatment
of GLU-PTX had significant decrease in the expression levels of P-gp, MRPs, and BCRP
in resistant KB cells at both mRNA and protein levels. Furthermore, the combination
treatments showed significant reactive oxygen species (ROS) production, chromatin
condensation and reduced mitochondrial membrane potential in resistant KB cells.
The results from DNA fragmentation analysis also demonstrated the GLU induced
apoptosis in KB cells and its synergy with PTX. Importantly, GLU and/or PTX triggered
apoptosis through the activation of pro-apoptotic proteins such as p53, Bax, and
caspase-9. Our findings demonstrated for the first time that GLU causes cell death
in human oral cancer cells via the ROS-dependent suppression of MDR transporters
and p53-mediated activation of the intrinsic mitochondrial pathway of apoptosis.
Additionally, the present study also focussed on investigation of the protective effect
of GLU and combination drugs in human normal blood lymphocytes. Normal blood
lymphocytes assay indicated that GLU is able to induce selective toxicity in cancer cells
and in silico molecular docking studies support the choice of GLU as ABC inhibitor to
enhance PTX efficacy. Thus, GLU has the potential to enhance the activity of PTX and
hence can be a good alternate treatment strategy for the reversal of PTX resistance.

proteins, including phosphoglycoprotein (P-gp), multidrug
resistance associated proteins (MRPs), and breast cancer
resistance protein (BCRP) are proved to be simultaneously
involved in MDR of oral cancer [2]. Conventional singleagent chemotherapy treatment has potential risks of high
toxicity for the reason that the high dosage of individual
anticancer drugs. Adding a second agent to the standard
chemotherapy treatment would be favourable because this
approach might reduce the dose, toxicity and improve the

INTRODUCTION
World Health Organisation (WHO) has estimated
that 91% of oral cancers in South-East Asia are directly
attributable to the use of tobacco and this is often the
leading explanation of oral cavity and lung cancer in
Asian country as well as globally [1]. It is well known
that multidrug resistance (MDR) is a major obstacle in the
chemotherapy of oral cancer. Clinically, several resistance
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

42353

Oncotarget

anticancer efficacy of original antineoplastic agents [3].
As a result of unfavourable clinical outcome to previous
MDR inhibitors, research has focused on searching for
naturally occurring MDR inhibitor candidates. We recently
reported that natural compound including flavonoids, such
as resveratrol inhibits MDR transport function directly in
ABCB1 overexpressing NCI-H460 lung cancer cells [4].
Further, we have challenged to provide a recent update
of the published work on the natural products which
have shown promising chemosensitizing effects on
ABCs drug transporters [2]. In our continuous search of
naturally occurring cytotoxic compounds, we designed
this study to assess the cytotoxicity of glaucarubinone
(GLU), a quassinoid natural product first isolated from
the seeds of Simarouba glauca, and later from numerous
other species in the family Simaroubaceae [5]. It was
originally developed as an antimalarial drug [6]. Although
GLU has been shown to possess anti-cancer activity
[7,8], the mechanisms involved are not fully understood.
The leaves of this tree are being used for treatment
of cancers. A recent report indicated that quassinoids,
including GLU inhibited the transcription factor activator
protein-1 (AP-1), independently of their cytotoxicity [9].
Several independent lines of evidence suggest that GLU
may possibly act, at least in part, through inhibition of
pathways involving P-21-activated kinases1 (PAK1). A
very recent report shows that GLU inactivates NF-kB,
whose activation requires PAK1. Furthermore, GLU is
also reported to extend the lifespan of Caenorhabditis
elegans, which is also increased by down-regulation of
PAK1 [10].
Human oral squamous cell carcinoma in KB cell
line highly express classical membrane transporter, P-gp in
the nuclear envelope and cytoplasm in KB cells [11]. It is
reported that P-gp is involved in resistance to doxorubicin,
paclitaxel, vincristine and etoposide. Additionally, this
cell line has been widely used to study a number of
substrates and inhibitors such as P-gp, MRP and BCRP
[12]. Paclitaxel (PTX) that works by intervening with
normal microtubule breakdown during cell division
has been one of the important successful antineoplastic
drugs and has shown its potency against a wide spectrum
of cancers, especially against oral, non-small cell lung
cancer, metastatic breast cancer and refractory ovarian
cancer [4]. The frequent development of MDR hampers
the efficacy and hence use of PTX for cancer treatment.
The over-expression of P-gp and MDR linked proteins
such as MRP1 and MRP2, which actively efflux anticancer
drugs, is one of the most important mechanisms concerned
in PTX-mediated MDR [12]. This kind of typical MDR
mechanism is called as “pump resistance” [13]. PTX is a
substrate of P-gp, MRP1, and MRP2 [12,4]. In addition,
the capability of PTX to kill cancer cells decreases when
the event of MDR. This phenomenon happens as a result of
cell death is avoided via the activation of a survival factor,

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

such as Bcl-2 protein, that is markedly over expressed in
many cancer cells [14,13]. Thus, the defect of apoptotic
machinery in cancer cells leads to “non-pump resistance”
[14]. The reversal action of MDR using multifunctional
strategies that inhibit pump and non-pump resistance is
more suitable because of the difficulty of PTX-resistance
mechanisms.
Hence, there is need for modulators to increase PTX
accumulation in resistant KB cells. To our knowledge
yet no studies are available in literature evaluating the
chemosensitizing effect of GLU and examined their
ability to overcome P-gp mediated MDR in PTX resistant
ABCB1 overexpressing oral carcinoma KB cells in vitro
and in vivo. Hence, the scope of the present study is limited
to uncover the molecular basis and a novel combination
of GLU and PTX to simultaneously modulate pump and
non-pump resistance for the treatment of ABCB1 over
expressing in oral carcinoma KB cells in vitro.

RESULTS
Dose fixation study
The anti-proliferative effect of GLU was found to
be concentration dependent and 100% death of resistant
KB cells was observed at 600 nM of GLU concentration,
while 100% death was observed at 70.26 nM of PTX
concentration in sensitive KB cells. Based on these
findings 200 nM of GLU (IC 50) and 23.42 nM of PTX
(IC 50) were chosen for chemosensitizing experiments
(Figure 1a & 1b).

GLU and PTX combined treatment significantly
intensified PTX cell viability
ABCB1 over-expressing resistant KB cells were
treated with GLU (200 nM) 1 h before PTX (23.42
nM) exposure and incubated for 24 h. Figure 2a shows
photomicrographs of MTT reduction capability of GLU
and GLU-PTXin resistant KB cells. Figure 2b shows the
effect of GLU, PTX and GLU-PTX on percentage cell
viability. It was found that GLU alone treatment showed
56% cell viability in resistant KB cells and PTX alone
treatment showed 55% cell viability in sensitive KB cells.
The combination of GLU-PTX treatment showed only 8%
cell viability of resistant KB cells.

Effect of GLU-PTX on membrane transport
function in resistant KB cells by FACS
Flow cytometry measurement of the accumulation of
Rh123, a sensitive indicator of P-gp activity, was utilized to
examine P-gp (ABCB1) function. In the control cells very
minimum Rh123 accumulation was observed due to the efflux
of the Rh123 by the transporters. The MDR modulators inhibit

42354

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Cell viability was measured by MTT assay. KB cells were plated in 96-well plates at a density of 5000 cells/well. After

overnight culture, cells were treated with different concentrations of GLU or PTX or their combination for 24. All stock compounds were
dissolved in DMSO which was maintained in 0.01% for drug treatments. After treatment with the compounds, 10 µL of 5 mg/mL MTT
solution was added to each well and incubated for 4 h. Plates were placed on a plate shaker for 30 min and read immediately at 570 nm
using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay reader. Experiments were performed in triplicate. a. Cytotoxicity of GLU on resistant KB
cells (Dose fixation study). Cell death was observed in a concentration (0–600 nM) dependent manner in KB cells. 200 nM GLU showed
50% cell death (IC50) in KB cells. b. Cytotoxicity of PTX on sensitive KB cells. Cell death was observed in a concentration (0–70 nM)
dependent manner in KB cells. 23.42 nM PTX showed 50% cell death (IC50) in KB cells.

Figure 2a & b: Effect of GLU and PTX on KB cells viability. Microscopic images show MTT reduction capability of resistant KB
cells. i. Control; ii. GLU; iii. PTX; iv. GLU-PTX. Values are given as means ± S.D. of three experiments in each group. Values not sharing
a common marking (a, b, c) differ significantly at P ≤ 0.05 (DMRT).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

42355

Oncotarget

Determination of cell cycle by propidium iodide
(PI) staining

the MDR transport function thereby enhance the accumulation
of Rh123 inside the cells. An increase in Rh123 accumulation
was noted in the cells treated with either cyclosporine A
(positive control) or GLU. GLU-PTX combination treatment
has shown Rh123 accumulation was increased resistant KB
cells compared with PTX alone treated sensitive KB cells,
following incubation with Rh123 (120 min) (Figure 3a & 3b).

Cell cycle progression was analyzed to confirm
that GLU enhanced the PTX induced cell death efficacy.
Resistant KB cells were exposed to GLU, PTX and
their combination (24 h) and cell cycle was analyzed by

Figure 3a &b: P-gp over expressing resistant KB cells were incubated with 1. Control, 2. Positive Control (Cylosporine
A), 3. GLU alone, iv. PTX alone and v. GLU-PTX. The level of fluorescence intensity of Rh123 was analyzed by flow cytometry.

Data are mean ± S.D from three independent experiments. *P ≤ 0.05 significantly different from control. c. Schematic representation of
mechanism involved in MDR transport function from cancer cells treated with GLU. In MDR cells, overexpression of MDR transporter
proteins increases expulsion of Rh123 from the cell membrane before enzymatic hydrolysis of its esters, thus reducing accumulation of
intracellular Rh123. However, GLU inhibit the transport function thereby enhances the accumulation of Rh123 inside the cells.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

42356

Oncotarget

GLU-PTX on mRNA expression patterns of
ABCB1, BCRP, ABCC1, ABCC2 and ABCC3 in
KB cells

FACS. Greater arrest in G2/M phase observed in sensitive
KB cells compared with resistant KB cells, following
incubation for 24h. Combination treatment of resistant
KB cells with GLU and PTX resulted in an increased
trend of cells in S-phase, along with a pronounced
arrest in G2/M compared with GLU alone (Figure 4a).
No statistical differences in the percentage of G1 phase
cells was noted between the combination groups and
significant changes was observed in PTX alone treated in
sensitive KB cells (Figure 4b).

Figure 6 presents the effect of GLU, PTX and
GLU-PTX on the relative mRNA expression levels of
ABCB1, BCRP, ABCC1, ABCC2 and ABCC3 genes in
resistant KB cells. The mRNA levels of these genes were
decreased under GLU alone or PTX alone treatment
condition when compared to untreated control group.
GLU-PTX combination has resulted in a further decreased
of ABCB1, BCRP, ABCC1, ABCC2 and ABCC3 genes
in resistant KB cells compared to PTX alone treatment in
sensitive KB cells.

GLU-PTX on the expression of ABC
transporters proteins in KB cells
Effect of GLU, PTX and GLU-PTX on the
expression pattern of P-gp, MRP1, MRP2 and BCRP in
resistant KB cells was analyzed by Western blot (Figure
5a & 5b). The expressions of ABC transporters proteins
was found to be decreased in GLU alone or PTX alone
treated cells when compared to control cells. GLU-PTX
has shown a further decreased in the expression of P-gp,
MRP1, MRP2 and BCRP proteins in resistant KB cells,
compared to PTX alone treatment in sensitive KB cells.

In silico molecular interaction of GLU with
TMD region of P-gp
We explored the binding affinity (in terms of the
docking energy in kcal/mol, docking score and hydrogen
bond score) of GLU, a quassinoid to P-gp target. The
molecular interaction of GLU (PubChem CID: 441796)
with P-gp (PDB ID: 3G61) was analyzed by Schrodinger

Figure 4: Effect of GLU-PTX on cell cycle and apoptosis a. Resistant KB cells were treated with GLU, PTX or GLU-PTX.

GLU+ PTX were able to increase the proportion of cells in G2/M as compared to GLU alone ABCB1 expressing resistant KB cells. b. The
bar graphs show the cell cycle distribution and the percentage of cells in each phase of the cell cycle. Percentage of total cells was obtained
by using the CellQuest software.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

42357

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Effect of GLU-PTX on the expression pattern of P-gp-170kDa, MRP1-190kDa, MRP2-190kDa, BCRP72kDa and β-actin-45kDa expression in KB cells. a. Lane (i) control, (ii) GLU, (iii) PTX, (iv) GLU-PTX and band intensities

were scanned by densitometer (Image ‘J’ software). b. The graph represents the P-gp, MRP1, MRP2 and BCRP quantification values
normalized to β-actin levels. Densitometric analysis is shown in *p<0.05 vs GLU/PTX group. All the data shown are representative of three
independent experiments.

Figure 6: Effect of GLU, PTX and GLU-PTX on relative expression patterns of ABCB1, ABCG2, ABCC1, ABCC2 and
ABCC3 in resistant KB cells. The delta-delta CT method was used to determine the relative expression patterns of ABCB1, ABCG2,
ABCC1, ABCC2 and ABCC3 in resistant KB cells. The values were normalized to the equivalent amounts of 18S rRNA as the reference
gene. The data are presented as mean ± S.E. (n=3). *P<0.05 vs the control group.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

42358

Oncotarget

GLU-PTX treatment modulated mRNA
expression levels of p53, Bax, Caspase 9, and Bcl2 by real-time PCR

software (Maestro 9.9) (Figure 7i–7iii). The results
were analyzed at the best orientation of the ligand GLU
with P-gp and the docking images were documented for
representation of ligand-receptor interaction. Initially
these molecular interactions were analyzed by sitemap
tools. Based on this analysis, we have identified 5 sites of
receptor P-gp at which ligand GLU interacts. Among them
site 1 and site 2 are considered a major binding affinity
with ligand GLU. The sitemap results clearly showed that
the P-gp drug ability score for site 1 (1.269) and site 2
(1.057) have a high drug ability to bind with ligand GLU
(Table 1).
The binding interactions of GLU were analyzed
within site 1 of homology modeled human P-gp by
glide docking from Schrödinger. GLU is stabilized
through specific interactions such as hydrogen bonding
and nonspecific strong interactions such as hydrophobic
interactions with ASP98 and THR149 residues in the drugbinding pocket of P-gp (Figure 7ii). At the site 2, it is also
observed that ligand GLU forms hydrogen bonding with
ARG69 and LYS94 residues, which are located within the
helical transmembrane domains of P-gp shown in Figure
7iii. The values of docking score for site 1 (-3.121) and
site 2 (-4.324), glide score for site 1 (-3.121) and site 2
(-4324) and hydrogen bond score for site 1 (-1.224) and
site 2 (-1.032) indicated that GLU possessed a significant
binding affinity with P-gp, thereby indicating that it may
inhibit ABC transporters function. Hence, these findings
support the choice of GLU as ABC inhibitor to enhance
PTX efficacy, in the present study.

Figure 8 shows the effects of GLU and GLU-PTX
on the relative mRNA expression pattern of p53, Bax,
Caspase 9, and Bcl-2 in resistant KB cells. Bax, p53 and
Caspase-9 mRNA levels were significantly increased
under GLU alone or PTX alone treatment condition when
compared to untreated control group. GLU-PTX treated
cells showed a further increased mRNA expression of
Bax, p53 and Caspase-9 in resistant KB cells compared to
GLU treatment group. GLU alone or PTX alone exposure
resulted in decreased mRNA expression of Bcl-2 in KB
cells. GLU-PTX treated cells showed a further decreased
in the mRNA expression of Bcl-2 level in KB cells when
compared to PTX alone treatment in sensitive KB cells.

Effect of GLU-PTX on intracellular ROS
generation in resistant KB cells
Intracellular ROS level was measured by using a nonfluorescent probe, 2,7-diacetyl dichlorofluorescein (DCFHDA). ROS generation were observed in GLU, PTX and
GLU-PTX treated in ABCB1 over expressing resistant KB
cells. While weak ROS generation was observed in the
untreated resistant KB cells. GLU alone and PTX alone
treated cells showed significant ROS production. But
enhanced ROS generation was found in GLU-PTX treated
resistant KB cells (Figure 9a). The percentage of mean

Figure 7i: a. Homology modelled structure of Human P-gp (PDB ID: 3G61); b. Surface moiety structural view of P-gp; c. Structure of

glaucarubinone (PubChem CID: 441796); d. After validation of Ramachandran plot the GLU ligand located different receptor interaction
and sitemap identification of the helical transmembrane domains of P-gp by Ligprep application.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

42359

Oncotarget

Figure 7ii: Docked complex of GLU and site-1 homology P-gp by Schrödinger glide application. a. Ligand interaction
diagram; pink lines represent hydrogen bonds, green lines represent π-π interactions. b. Structural view; yellow dashed lines indicated
hydrogen bonds (Asp98, Arg133 and Thr149). c. Structural view; predicted bonded interactions (pink and yellow dashed lines) between
GLU and TMD region of P-gp 3D structure.

Figure 7iii: Docked complex of GLU and site-2 homology P-gp by Schrödinger glide application. a. Ligand interaction
diagram; pink lines represent hydrogen bonds, blue and green lines represent π-π interactions. b. Structural view; yellow dashed lines
indicated hydrogen bonds (Arg60 and Lys94). c. Structural view; predicted bonded interactions (pink and yellow dashed lines) between
GLU and TMD region of P-gp 3D structure.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

42360

Oncotarget

Table 1: Binding sitemap analysis used as input for receptor grid generation by Schrödinger
Sitemap

Site Score

DScore

Phobic

Philic

Sitemap_site_1

1.166

1.269

2.073

0.388

Sitemap_site_2

1.057

1.057

1.051

1.062

Figure 8: Effect of GLU, PTX and GLU-PTX on relative expression patterns of p53, Bax, Caspase-9 and Bcl-2 in
resistant KB cells. The delta-delta CT method was used to determine the relative expression patterns of p53, Bax, Caspase-9 and Bcl-2

in resistant KB cells. The values were normalized to the equivalent amounts of 18S rRNA as the reference gene. The data are presented as
mean ± S.E. (n=3). *P<0.05 vs the control group.

Figure 9: Fluorescence photomicrographs show the effect of GLU-PTX on: a. intracellular ROS generation by DCFH-DA
staining; b. mitochondrial membrane potential by Rhodamine 123 and c. apoptotic morphology changes by EtBr and AO staining in
resistant KB cells. i. Control; ii. GLU; iii. PTX; iv. GLU-PTX. d. Schematic representation of mechanism involved in ROS overproduction,
mitochondrial dysfunction (ΔΨm) and apoptotic bodies’ formation could initiate the pre-apoptotic responses from KB cells treated with
GLU-PTX.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

42361

Oncotarget

resistant KB cells. A significant increase in the 180–200
bp oligonucleosomal DNA fragments was found in
the GLU-PTX treated group compared to PTX alone
treatment in sensitive KB cells. In comparison, the
DNA from untreated cells did not exhibit any significant
fragmentation or smearing.

fluorescence intensity values confirms the DCF fluorescence
in different treatment groups (Figure 10a).

GLU-PTX modulates mitochondrial membrane
potential in KB cells
Fluorescence microscopic images showed
accumulation of Rh123 dye in the control group. No
Rh123 accumulation was found in GLU-PTX treated cells
as the membrane potential decreased (Figure 9b). The
percentage of mean fluorescence intensity values confirms
the mitochondrial membrane potential was found to be
reduced in the GLU-PTX treated cells when compared
with GLU alone and PTX alone treated cells (Figure 10b).

Protective effect of glu and its combinations in
human normal blood lymphocytes (HBL)
Effect of GLU on normal lymphocytes
Figure 12 shows the effect of different concentrations
of GLU on % cell viability of blood lymphocytes. GLU
treatment at concentrations 0-600 nM has not affected the
% viability of lymphocytes at the end of 24 h incubation.

Observation of chromatin condensation
Apoptotic features with condensed or fragmented
chromatin, indicative of apoptosis, were observed in
GLU, PTXand GLU-PTX treated in resistant KB cells.
Control cells showed evenly distributed acridine orange
stain (green fluorescence) with no morphological changes
whereas GLU, PTX and GLU-PTX treated cells showed
apoptotic morphological features indicated by the presence
of Ethidium bromide fluorescence inside the cells due to
membrane damage (Figure 9c). GLU-PTX treatment
showed 98% of apoptotic cells in ABCB1 over expressing
resistant KB cells whereas GLU treatment showed only
58% apoptotic cells and PTX treatment showed 43%
apoptotic cells (Figure 10c).

GLU-PTX on cell viability in human peripheral
blood lymphocytes
GLU alone treatment at concentrations 200 nM has
not affected the % viability of lymphocytes (Figure 13a) at
the end of 24 h incubation. PTX treatment at conc. 23.42
nM showed a significant toxicity in normal lymphocytes.
A combination treatment did not show any significant
change in lymphocyte viability (Figure 14a).

Effect of GLU-PTX on intracellular ROS
generation changes in HBL by DCFH-DA staining
method

Detection of DNA fragmentation in resistant KB
cells

PTX treatment at conc. 23.42 nM showed a
significant increase in the DCF fluorescence thus
indicating ROS generation in normal lymphocytes
(Figure 13b). There was no significant increase of DCF
fluorescence during treatment with GLU-PTX in human
blood lymphocytes. The percentage of mean fluorescence
intensity values confirms there was no significant DCF
fluorescence in different treatment groups (Figure 14b).

Agarose gel electrophoresis of DNA from
GLU and GLU-PTX treated ABCB1 over expressing
resistant KB cells showed a ladder-like pattern of DNA
fragments consisting of approximately 180–200 base
pairs. Photographs of the gels are shown in Figure 11.
DNA fragmentation was observed in GLU-PTX in

Figure 10: a. Release of mean florescence intensity ROS (%) from GLU-PTX treated KB cells for 24 h. b. The alteration in mitochondria
membrane potential of GLU-PTX treated KB cells. c. Percentage of apoptosis in KB cells. Number of apoptotic and viable cells in the
microscopic field were counted and % apoptotic cells calculated. Values are given as means ± S.D. of six experiments in each group. (*) p
≤ 0.05 and (**) p ≤ 0.01, compared with untreated cells (control groups).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

42362

Oncotarget

Effect of GLU-PTX on apoptotic morphological
changes in human peripheral blood lymphocytes

changes in human blood lymphocytes but no significant
apoptotic features were detected in treatment with GLU
alone and GLU-PTX in human blood lymphocytes.
Number of apoptotic and viable cells in the microscopic
fields were counted and % apoptotic cells calculated.
There was no significant change in % apoptotic cells in
the control, GLU and GLU-PTX treated cells, compared
to PTX alone treatment (Figure 14c).

Figure 13c shows the photomicrographs of apoptotic
morphological changes in different treatment groups by
EtBr and AO staining. The control cells show evenly
distributed green fluorescence (AO stain). PTX alone
treatment showed a significant apoptotic morphological

Figure 11: Apoptotic DNA fragmentation by gel electrophoresis showing DNA ladder of GLU alone and GLU-PTX
combination treated resistant KB cells for 24 h. M: 12 kb DNA markers; 1: control (untreated cells). 2: GLU alone 3: PTX and

4: GLU-PTX. The results are representative of three independent experiments carried out in the same conditions. DNA ladder formation
indicates apoptosis as seen in lanes 2–4.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

42363

Oncotarget

Figure 12: Effect of different concentrations of GLU on lymphocytes viability. Values are given as means ± S.D. of three
experiments in each group. Values not sharing a common marking (a, b, c) differ significantly at P ≤ 0.05 (DMRT).

Figure 13: a. Microscopic images show MTT reduction capability of human blood lymphocytes (HBL). Purple colored crystal formation

is directly proportional to cell viability; b. GLU-PTX on the intracellular ROS generation in HBL cells by DCFH-DA staining; c. apoptotic
morphology changes by EtBr and AO staining in HBL cells. There was no apoptotic features were observed during treatment with GLUPTX in human blood lymphocytes. i. Control; ii. GLU; iii. PTX; iv. GLU-PTX.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

42364

Oncotarget

DISCUSSION

resistant KB cells was improved when it was combined
with GLU.
Our results show that GLU (200 nM) treatment 1 h
before to PTX (23.42 nM) exposure greatly inhibited the
KB cells proliferation. The present study also illustrated
the superior anticancer effect of GLU-PTX combination
than PTX alone or GLU alone treatment. Similar to our
present findings, resveratrol, a polyphenol from red wine,
interacts with P-gp and also inhibits cell growth and
enhances the cytotoxicity of vincristine, paclitaxel and
adriamycin in KBv200 and NCI-H60 lung cancer cells
[4]. In addition, previous studies reported that nilotinib
significantly enhanced the cytotoxicity of the ABCB1
substrates colchicine, vinblastine and paclitaxel in KB-C2
and KB-V1 cells [11]. These results are consistent with
the finding that auraptene in grapefruit juice and nobiletin
in valencia orange juice increased the cytotoxicity
of traditional chemotherapeutic agents in the human
cervical carcinoma cell line KB-V1 [18]. Based on the
pervious findings, our results clearly indicated that these
concentrations could be sufficient to inhibit the functions
of P-gp and other ABC transporters like MRPs and BCRP.
As P-gp functions as an efflux pump of many
anticancer drugs, the selected KB cells proving increased
P-gp expression pumped out PTX from the cells into
the extracellular medium, thereby parading a resistance
to PTX-induced apoptotic cell death. Flow cytometry
measurement of the accumulation of Rh123, a sensitive
indicator of P-gp activity, was utilized to examine
P-gp function [4]. Our result showed that the cellular
accumulation of Rh123 was increased with GLU and PTX
combination treatment. The increase in the accumulation
of Rh123 in drug-resistant cells after the addition of
GLU indicates that this compound causes a modulation
of resistance by inhibiting the pump function of P-gp and
other transporters such as MRPs and BCRP. Consistent

Quassinoids are well-known as the bitter principles
of Simaroubacaeous plants. They are highly oxygenated
triterpenes and possess a broad range of both in vitro and
in vivo biological activities [15,5]. GLU is a quassinoid
known to occur in Simaroubaceae plants. It was first
isolated from the seeds of the tree Simarouba glauca, and
originally developed as an antimalarial drug [6], and has
more recently been recognised as an anticancer agent.
Its anticancer activity has been demonstrated against
breast, prostate and, ovarian cancer [7,8] and importantly
its effects on drug-resistant KB cells and also on P-gp
expression have not yet to be elucidated. On the other
hand, PTX and other anthracylines are commonly used
in the treatment of a wide range of cancers, especially
against oral, non-small cell lung cancer, metastatic breast
cancer and refractory ovarian cancer [16]. PTX works
by interfering with normal microtubule breakdown
during cell division, leading to cellular apoptotic death
[17,4]. The major problem with clinical use of PTX is
the frequent development of MDR, which hampers its
efficacy for cancer treatment [12]. Therefore, assessing
the drug resistant properties of cancer cells and the
reversal of the resistance properties are important steps
in the development of a successful treatment. Further,
blockade or inhibition of the ABC transporters may prove
to be novel strategy to overcome chemoresistance. In the
present study, we demonstrated for the first time that GLU
was used as an adjuvant to enhance the chemosensitivity
of PTX, and to reverse the MDR in KB oral cancer cells.
We propose that ROS production, including altering the
MMP, after GLU and/or PTX treatments significantly
influences the initiation of the cellular mechanisms
involved in inhibiting MDR transporters proteins and in
inducing apoptosis. Therefore, the cytotoxicity of PTX in

Figure 14: a. Percentage cell viability in GLU, PTX and GLU-PTX treated HBL cells. b. Release of mean florescence intensity ROS (%)

from GLU-PTX treated HBL cells for 24 h. c. Percentage of apoptosis in HBL cells. Number of apoptotic and viable cells in the microscopic
field were counted and % apoptotic cells calculated. Values are given as means ± S.D. of three experiments in each group. Values not sharing
a common marking (a, b, c) differ significantly at P ≤ 0.05 (DMRT).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

42365

Oncotarget

doxorubicin-resistant cells to apoptotic cell death and
decreased the expression levels of MRP1 in acute myeloid
leukemia-2/DX300 cells at both mRNA and protein levels
[20]. Moreover, in this study, GLU-PTX treatment further
significantly decreased the mRNA expression levels of
ABCB1, BCRP, ABCC1 ABCC2 and ABCC3 in KB
cells. Overexpression of P-gp is the most frequent event
in causing multidrug resistance. Recent report showed
that resveratrol inhibits genistein-induced MRP2 protein
synthesis and its mRNA expression in HepG2 cells [27].
In this study, GLU sensitized KB cells to PTX action by
inhibiting ABC transporters specified gene expressions.
Therefore, decreasing the expressions of ABC transporter
may be involved in the chemosensitizing effect of GLU
in oral cancer cells, especially for the treatment of MDR
human carcinoma. Our previous observations on lung
cancer cells NCI-H460 overexpressing ABC transporter
proteins (LRP, ABCB1, BCRP, ABCC1 ABCC2 and
ABCC3) confirmed the ability of resveratrol lignans to
overcome the resistance to PTX [4]. Further, the results
corroborate with previous report as the combinations
of digitonin with secondary metabolites (phenolics,
terpenoids and alkaloids) resulted in a significantly
decreased the expressions of P-gp. These results provide
evidence that the selected secondary metabolite interfere
directly and/or indirectly with P-gp function [19].
Furthermore, it has been reported that quercetin can
inhibit the expression of P-gp activity and decreased this
transporter in EPG85-257RDB cells at both mRNA and
protein levels [28].
Although GLU is not a substrate of P-gp and/
or MRPs, it is able to inhibit the transport of other P-gp
substrates and inhibit drug resistance. Resistance of cancer
cells has also been attributed to the cell-surface receptors.
To increase deeper visible into cellular and molecular
modes of action of GLU, we performed for the first time in
silico molecular docking studies of GLU to P-gp receptors
by Schrodinger (Mastero 9.9). The results were analyzed
at the best orientation of the ligand GLU with P-gp and
the docking images were documented for representation of
ligand-receptor interaction. The values of docking score,
glide score and hydrogen bond score indicated that GLU
possessed a significant binding affinity with P-gp, thereby
indicating that it may inhibit ABC transporters function.
Interestingly, the results of these in silico docking studies
indeed indicated that site-1 and 2 to be the preferable
binding site for GLU within the drug-binding pocket of
human P-gp. These results may be taken as a clue that GLU
kills P-gp expressing, drug-resistant selected KB cells by
binding to P-gp at their active sites leading to interruption
in signaling cascades, thereby, inhibition of tumor growth
and induction of cell death. This point of view is supported
by ours experimental evidence that GLU as P-gp inhibitor
to enhance PTX efficacy, in the present study.
The increase of ROS production that can induce
oxidative stress and inhibit P-gp functions and other

with our results, previous studies have indicated that
the combination of phenolics, terpenoids and alkaloids
increase the accumulation of the Rh123 and calcein-AM in
CEM/ADR5000 cells. These results are also comparable
to those of verapamil (positive control), which also
inhibits P-gp activity [19]. In addition, pervious study
has shown that resveratrol increased the intracellular
concentrations of doxorubicin in acute myeloid leukemia
(AML) cells by inhibiting membrane transport function
[20]. Curcumin is also reported to increase the Rh123
accumulation and inhibit the function of P-gp ATPase
activity in KB-V1 cells [21]. The pervious findings also
support the present investigation, which indicated a high
accumulation of doxorubicin within HL60/MDR cells
treated with Schisandra chinensis lignans [22] and natural
lignans from Arctium lappa seeds, namely arctigenin,
matairesinol and, arctiin can increase the retention of the
P-gp substrate Rh123 in CEM/ADR cells, indicating that
these lignans can inhibit the activity of P-gp and, other
ABC transporters [23].
It has been reported that PTX exerts cytotoxicity by
destabilizing microtubules and inhibiting depolymerization
back to tubulin, resulting in mitotic inhibition and
ultimately causes arrest cells in the G2/M phase [17].
Previously, we have shown that the response to PTX is
augmented by resveratrol in ABCB1-overexpressing
NCI-H60 non-small cell lung carcinoma [4]. Drug-induced
G2/M arrest is associated with double-strand DNA
damage, extensive chromosome condensation and finally
induces cell death through an apoptotic pathway [24]. Our
data showed that GLU could increase cytotoxicity of PTX
in KB cells at relatively lower doses, which may be due
to enhanced intracellular PTX accumulation. Moreover,
cell cycle analysis confirmed that combination treatment
with GLU and PTX resulted in a increased trend of cells
in S-phase, along with a pronounced arrest in G2/M
phase compared with GLU alone. Since the cell cycle
arrest in the G2/M phase is usually a cellular response to
PTX treatment, it can be assumed that GLU potentiate
the effect of PTX in resistant KB cells. A previous report
has suggested that S. chinensis lignans in combination
with doxorubicin significantly increased the proportion
of G2/M phase in HL60/MDR cells [22]. Docetaxel is a
microtubule inhibitor affecting the S and G2/M phases
of the cell cycle [25]. In addition, docetaxel combined
with fractionated extracts of Curcuma wenyujin and
Chrysanthemum indicum could enhance the apoptosis
and also owned the ability to induce G2/M phase arrest
in both MCF-7/ADR and A549/Taxol cells [26]. One of
the most important mechanisms of active drug efflux is
mediated by the classical MDR is attributed to the elevated
expression of P-gp, MRPs, and BCRP [2]. We observed
that the combined treatment of GLU-PTX significantly
decreased the expression level of P-gp, MRPs, and BCRP
proteins in resistant KB cells. Similar to our present
findings, resveratrol increased the susceptibility of the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

42366

Oncotarget

treatment elicited significant apoptosis causing effect as
proved by markedly clear DNA ladder formation. Loss of
mitochondrial potential is a beginning stage of apoptosis.
Mitochondrion is one of the chief organelles in regulating
apoptosis [32]. Apoptosis induced by GLU occurred in
a mitochondrial-relevant manner. In the present study, it
has also been observed that an increase of disruption of
mitochondrial membrane potential is considered to be an
indicator of mitochondria damage and normally is defined
as an early stage of apoptosis, preceding outflow of tiny
molecules from the mitochondria (including cytochrome c,
apoptosis-inducing factor, etc.) and followed by caspase-9/
caspase-3 cascade activation [33]. Our results showed
that GLU-PTX treated cells showed a further increased
MMP alteration in KB cells than GLU treatment alone.
Therefore, our data clearly imply that the elevated ROS
production can induce DNA damage, thereby activating
p53 dependent apoptotic cascade by GLU contributed
to the decrease in the MDR transporter expression. The
results corroborate with previous reports as the 4-hydroxy2,6-dimethoxychalcone from Polygonum limbatum eisn,
strongly induced apoptosis as via the MMP disruption
as well as increase in ROS level in adriamycin-resistant
human acute T-lymphoblastic CEM/ADR5000 leukemia
cells [29]. To the best of our knowledge, the present study
innovated in indicating that the membrane damage allowed
GLU influx and induced intracellular PTX overload,
which further changed the levels of ROS production and
variation of MMP; modulated the expression and function
of ABC transporters. All these complex oxidative stresses
ultimately induced apoptosis through the over expression
of pro-apoptotic proteins via the intrinsic mitochondrial
pathway in KB cells. We examined, at least in part, our
results with GLU and PTX indicate that the proposed
pathways for reversing pump and non-pump MDRs in KB
cells are closely associated (Scheme 1). While cancer cells
endure complex stress, these relationships are obligatory to
verify the proliferative (ABC transporter-mediated MDR
resistance) or death (intrinsic mitochondrial mediated
apoptotic pathways) of cancer cells.
Despite the eminent role of chemotherapy, its
achievement is limited by the development of drug
resistance and severe side effects [34]. Additionally,
the present study also focussed on investigation of the
protective effect of GLU and combination drugs in human
normal blood lymphocytes. In order to find out whether
GLU has any cytotoxic effect on normal lymphocytes,
lymphocytes were alienated into 6 groups and treated
with different concentrations of GLU (0-600nM). The
effect of GLU on different experiments ((a) percentage
cell viability, (b) determination of intracellular ROS, and
(c) apoptotic morphological changes) were analysed in
normal human blood lymphocytes. Further, we observed
GLU treatment at concentrations (0-600 nM) has not
impacted the % viability of lymphocytes at the end of
24 h incubation. Particularly, GLU alone treatment at
concentrations 200 nM has not impacted the % viability

ABCs expressions in resistant cells [29,30]. However, the
relationship between the effect of GLU on ROS production
and inhibition of P-gp and MRPs has not been reported.
Our study provides important evidence that MDR
transporter-mediated PTX resistance was inhibited. Thus,
GLU enhances the intracellular accumulation of PTX and
Rh123 (substrates of P-gp and MRP efflux pump) through
the decrease in mRNA and protein expression of P-gp,
MRPs and BCRP. We used this functional assay to verify
the involvement of MDR transporters in PTX-resistance
and the potential role of GLU as a MDR modulator.
Elevated ROS levels can induce DNA damage, thereby
activating p53 dependent apoptotic cascade [3]. Our study
shows that the intracellularly accumulated GLU possibly
interacts with peroxidase-H2O2 system and significantly
generates ROS production in resistant KB cells. Thus,
GLU acts as pro-oxidant, disrupting intracellular redox
balance and leading to cancer cell apoptosis [8]. On
the other hand, PTX is a substrate of P-gp and MRPs
that potently stimulates the ATPase activity of P-gp [4].
Compounds that are effluxed by MDR transporters may
deplete ATP, and the offer of ATP from ADP by oxidative
phosphorylation produces ROS. We recommend that the
generation of ROS by PTX could exhibit a further effect
on cellular oxidation-reduction imbalance and cause
oxidative stress on KB cells, triggering additional MDR
transporters to pump PTX out and resulting in resistance
development. However, the decrease in mRNA expression
of MDR transporters by GLU through ROS production
reversed the resistance and increased the cytotoxicity and
cell death elicited by PTX. Although the data supported
the involvement of ROS within the mechanism by which
GLU interrupted transporter expression, the elaborated
signal transduction pathways need further investigation.
In present study, we tend to provided three evidences
that the inhibitory effect of GLU on cell growth is due
to apoptosis. Based on our results, we found that GLU
can activate cell death via induction of p53, Bax, and
Caspase-9 is understood to activate Bid, a Bcl-2 family
protein, which leading to the activation of caspase-9,
enhancing release of cytochrome c by mitochondria.
In addition, previous studies reported that caspase-3 is
activated via many routes, including through the activity of
caspase-9, caspase-8 and Bid, which seem to work along
together to amplify apoptotic signals [31]. Thus, activation
of caspase-9 via GLU is probably going to amplify the
apoptotic signal via both the caspase-8 and mitochondrial
pathways, which might account for the proficient
induction of apoptosis we observed GLU treated in
resistant KB cells. Results were additionally confirmed by
the characteristic morphological features of apoptosis such
as chromatin condensation, cytoplasm shrinkage, nuclear
fragmentation, nucleolus pyknosis, and apoptotic bodies
in KB cells stained with AO/EtBr after treatment with
GLU or GLU-PTX. The characteristic of apoptosis was
also further confirmed by determination of the DNA ladder
formation which is a result of combined GLU and PTX
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

42367

Oncotarget

of lymphocytes. PTX treatment at conc. 23.42 nM
showed a significant toxicity in normal lymphocytes. The
combination treatment (GLU-PTX) did not show any
significant change in lymphocyte viability. Furthermore,
the combination treatment showed that there was no
significant ROS production and apoptotic morphological
features in human blood lymphocytes. These results

clearly indicated that GLU is able to induce selective
toxicity in cancer cells.
In conclusion, as GLU is a naturally occurring
phytochemical that is present in a wide variety of
Simaroubacaeous plants, the results suggest that GLU
may prove useful as a subsidiary dietary supplement
for patients with oral carcinoma who are resistant to

Scheme 1: The proposed schematic illustration for the possible mechanisms of reversing pump and non-pump MDR
by GLU and/or PTX in KB cells.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

42368

Oncotarget

Maintenance of KB oral cancer cells

chemotherapeutic drugs, especially for PTX. The present
study concluded that GLU enhances the cytotoxicity
of PTX resistant KB cells, which is consistent with
the increased intracellular accumulation of the drug.
Further, we show that GLU induces G2/M arrest of
PTX-resistant human oral cancer cells. Furthermore,
GLU-PTX treatment further significantly decreased the
mRNA expression levels of ABCB1, BCRP, ABCC1,
ABCC2 and ABCC3 in KB cells. Similarly, the protein
level of ABCB1, BCRP and MRPs was decreased during
GLU-PTX treatment. Additionally, in silico molecular
docking studies revealed that GLU possess greater
binding affinity with trans-membrane domain region of
P-gp/ABCB1. The effect is mainly exerted on the cells
by induction of apoptosis, which is consequent with
the differently altered activities of pro-apoptotic family
members, particularly, the production of ROS, DNA
fragmentation, apoptotic morphological features, loss of
mitochondrial membrane potential, and the activation of
p53, Bax, and caspase-9. Taken together, on one hand
the reversal effect of GLU on multidrug resistance of
KB cells can be made by downregulating such as P-gp,
MRPs and BCRP. On the other hand, the GLU can
induce apoptosis via p53, Bax, and caspase-9 activation,
which was confirmed by the fact that incubation of KB
cells with GLU caused an increase of PTX-induced
apoptosis. Finally, we strongly suggest that GLU may
be a promising compound, especially for the treatment
of MDR human carcinoma and the toxicological and
preclinical studies of GLU using animal models are
envisaged.

KB, human oral squamous carcinoma cell line was
procured from National Center for Cell Science (NCCS),
Pune, India. The cells were grown as monolayers in
RPMI-1640 medium supplemented with 10% FCS, 1
mM Sodium pyruvate, 10 mM HEPES, 1.5 g/L Sodium
bicarbonate, 2 mM L-glutamine and antibiotics (10,000 U/
mL Pencillin and 10 mg/mL Streptomycin). Stocks were
maintained in 75 cm2 tissue culture flasks in a humidified
atmosphere of 5% CO2 and 95% air at 37°C. Cultures were
maintained in the medium until the confluent growth. Each
experimental culture was performed with culture density
of 1 x 106 cells.

Development of paclitaxel resistant KB cells
Multidrug resistant oral KB cells highly express a
classical membrane transporter, P-glycoprotein (ABCB1).
In the present work, ABCB1 overexpressing resistant KB
cells were established by culturing cells (sensitive) with
increasing concentration of PTX in the medium to 1, 1.5,
2, 2.5, 3, 3.5, and 4 µM. Cells were grown for 1 week at
each concentration of PTX. To confirm this, the inhibition
of cell growth on increasing PTX concentrations was
examined in KB (sensitive) and KB/PTX (resistant) cells
by MTT assay.

Treatment of KB cells
Stock solutions of glaucarubinone (GLU) and
paclitaxel (PTX) (1 mg/mL) were prepared in 0.5%
dimethyl sulphoxide (DMSO) and stored at 4ºC. Further
dilution was made in culture media to obtain the desired
concentrations. The final concentrations of DMSO in the
culture medium were not more than 0.01% (v/v). 0.01%
DMSO was used as a sham control.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Chemicals
Glaucarubinone was kindly provided by Dr.
John A. Beutler, National Cancer Institute (NCI),
Chemotherapeutics Repository, Molecular Targets
Laboratory,
Frederick,
USA.
Cyclosporine-A
(CSA),
Paclitaxel,
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2yl)-2,5-diphenyl
tetrazolium
bromide
(MTT),
2,7-dichlorofluorescindiacteate (DCFH-DA), Rhodamine
123 (Rh123), Heat inactivated fetal calf serum (FCS),
RPMI-1640 medium, Glutamine-Penicillin-Streptomycin
solution, Histopaque-1077, Trypsin-EDTA were purchased
from Sigma Chemicals Co., St. Louis, USA. qRT-PCR
and RT-PCR primers were purchased from Integrated
DNA Technologies, Inc. USA. TakyonTM No Rox SYBR
MasterMix dTTP blue was purchased from Eurogentec,
Belgium. Monoclonal rabbit antibodies for MDR1/
ABCB1, ABCG2/BCRP, MRP1/ABCC1, β-actin and goat
anti-rabbit IgG-HRP polyclonal antibody were purchased
from Cell Signalling Technology, USA. Analytical grade
acetone, ethanol, dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) were bought
from SRL, India.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Dose fixation and cell growth inhibition
evaluation by MTT assay
Sensitive KB cells (5 x 103 cells/well) were treated
with different concentration of PTX (0-70 nM) and
resistant KB cells (5 x 103 cells/well) with GLU (0-600
nM) and cytotoxicity was observed after 24 h at 37 °C,
at the end of the incubation period, MTT (5 mg/mL in
PBS) solution was added to each well and allowed to
develop color for additional 4 h. Plates were placed on
a plate shaker for 30 min and read immediately at 570
nm using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay reader.
Experiments were performed in triplicate. IC50 values
were calculated and the optimum dose was used for the
chemosensitizing experiments. Sham control was run
with resistant KB cells that received 0.01% DMSO. For
chemosensitization experiments, resistant KB cells were
treated with GLU (200 nM) 1 h before PTX (23.42 nM)
treatment.
42369

Oncotarget

Experimental protocol for chemosensitizing
experiments

µg) were electrophoresed on 12% gradient Tris–HCl gel
(Bio-Rad, semi-dry, USA) and electrotransferred onto
polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) membrane in Tris–
glycine buffer (pH 8.4) containing 20% methanol. The
membrane was then blocked in 5% fat-free dry milk in
phosphate-buffered saline with 0.1% Tween-20 (PBS-T)
for 1 h. Membranes were probed with monoclonal rabbit
anti-ABCB1, ABCC1, ABCC2 and BCRP antibodies and
horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody by
standard western blot procedures. Then, the membranes
were washed with TBST thrice for 10 min interval, after
extensive washes in TBST, the bands were visualized
by treating the membranes with 3, 3'-diaminobenzidine
tetrahydrochloride/H2O2 for localization and enhanced
Luminate Forte Western HRP substrate detection reagent.
Densitometry was done using ‘Image J’ analysis software.

Resistant KB cells were divided into four groups as
follows. Each group contained the cell density of 1 x 106.
Group 1 :
Resistant KB cells (untreated cells)
Group 2

:

Resistant KB cells + GLU (200 nM)

Group 3

:

Sensitive KB cells + PTX (23.42 nM)

Group 4

:

Resistant KB cells + GLU (200 nM) +
PTX (23.42 nM)

Measurement of ABC transporters functional
assay in KB cells
The accumulation of PTX was determined by Rh123,
a fluorescent substrate of P-gp in cancer cells as has been
previously described. Briefly, resistant KB cells (2×105 per
sample) were treated with GLU, PTX and GLU-PTX (or 20
nM Cyclosporine A as positive control) for 60 min and then
incubated with 20 µM Rh123 for 1 h (in the dark, 37°C
in a 5% CO2). Following Rh123 accumulation, cells were
washed twice with ice-cold PBS. Fluorescence intensity of
Rh123 in individual cells was measured immediately by a
FACScalibur excitation at 488 nm and emission at 530 ±
15 nm (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA).

mRNA studies of the ABC transporters and pro/
anti-apoptotic genes
The total RNA was extracted from the KB cells
using RNeasy Mini kit (Analytic Jena, Germany) as per the
protocol recommended by the manufacturer. The mRNA
expression of ABC transporters genes (ABCB1, BCRP,
ABCC1, ABCC2, ABCC3) and pro/anti apoptotic genes
(p53, Bax, Caspase-9, Bcl-2) in KB cells was determined
using real-time PCR and the primer sequences are given
in Table 2. Samples were run in triplicate to ensure
amplification integrity. Manufacturer-supplied (Integrated
DNA Technology (IDT), USA) primer pairs were used to
measure the mRNA expression. Quantitative RT-PCR (qRTPCR) was performed using Takon No Rox SYBR MasterMix
(Eurogentec, Belgium) on a Thermal cycler CFX96 QRTPCR system (Bio-Rad, CFX96, USA). The thermal cycles
for PCR amplification were carried out with a carry over
prevention at 50°C for 3 min and Takyon mix activation at
95°C for 3 min followed by 40 cycles of denaturation (95°C
for 10 s), annealing (60°C for 20 s) and extension (72°C for
30 s) as recommended by the manufacturer (Eurogentec,
Belgium). The expression levels of genes were normalized
to the expression level of the 18S mRNA in each sample.
The threshold for positivity of real-time PCR was determined
based on negative controls. The calculations for determining
the relative level of gene expression were made using the
cycle threshold (Ct) method. The mean Ct values from
triplicate measurements were used to calculate the expression
of the target gene using the 2−ΔΔCt formula.

Determination of cell cycle by propidium iodide
(PI) staining
Resistant KB cells (2x105) seeded on the 6-well
plates were treated with GLU, PTX and their combination
at 37°C for 24 h. For analyzing DNA content, 2 x105cells
were fixed in 90% ethanol in PBS at 4°C. After 12 h,
the fixed cells were pelleted, gently resuspended in ice
cold PBS and stained with 0.5 mg/mL PI plus 50 µg/mL
RNAase. The samples were then incubated at 37°C for 30
min, stored in the dark at 4°C. The red fluorescence of the
individual cells was measured at an excitation wavelength
of 540 nm and an emission wavelength at 610 nm in a
FACScaliber flow cytometer (BD Biosciences, San Jose,
CA). A minimum of 10,000 events were analyzed per
sample using CellQuest software.

Western blot analysis
KB cells were cultured in 60 mm dishes at 60%
confluency prior to drug treatment. Cells were treated
with GLU-PTX at desired concentration. Whole cell
proteins were extracted with RIPA lysis buffer (150 mM
NaCl, 0.5% Triton X-100, 50 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.4, 25
mM NaF, 20 mM EGTA, 1 mM DTT, 1 mM Na3VO4,
0.1% SDS, and protease inhibitors cocktail) for 30 min
on ice followed by centrifugation at 12,000 rpm for 15
min. The protein concentration of the supernatant was
measured by using the BCA reagent. Proteins (30-40
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Molecular docking studies
The 3D structure of the P-gp was downloaded from
Protein Data Bank (PDB) and modified. The modification
included removal of water molecules from the cavity,
stabilizing charges, filling in the missing residues,
generation of side chains etc, according to the parameters
available. After modification the transporter was
biologically active and stable. Using chemdraw software
42370

Oncotarget

Table 2: List of primer sequence
Gene name

Primer sequence

ABCB1

F: 5' TGGAGGTAAGTGACCCAGGGCTG 3'
R: 5' AGGCAATCCGATGCAGAGCCCA 3'

ABCG2

F: 5' TGTAAAACGACGGCCAGT 3'
R: 5' CAGGAAACAGCTATGACC 3'

ABCC1

F: 5' GTGGCTATCAAGGGCTCCGTGG 3'
R: 5' TCCGCGTCTTCTCGCCAATCT 3'

ABCC2

F: 5' GTCTTCGTTCCAGACGCAGTCC 3'
R: 5' CACGTGGAGAAGCTGCCAGGG 3'

ABCC3

F: 5' GGCATGGCCAGGGCTCATTGG 3'
R: 5' GGTCCACGTACACGTACACCCA 3'

p53

F: 5' GAGAATCTCCGCAAGAAAGG 3'
R: 5' CTCATTCAGCTCTCGGAACA 3'

Bax

F: 5' GGGCCCACCAGCTCTGA 3'
R: 5' CCTGCTCGATCCTGGATGA 3'

Caspase-9

F: 5' TGCTGAGCAGCGAGCTGTT 3'
R: 5' AGCCTGCCCGCTGGAT 3'

Bcl-2

F: 5' CTTGACAGAGGATCATGCTGTAC 3'
R: 5' GGATGCTTTATTTCATGAGGC 3'

18S rRNA

F: 5' AGGAATTCCCAGTAAGTGCG 3'
R: 5' GCCTCACTAAACCATCCAA 3'

the structure of the drugs and analogs were sketched and
generated the MOL structure. GLU was docked at each
of the generated grids (sites 1 to 4 and the ATP binding
site of P-gp by using the “Extra Precision” (XP) mode
of Glide program v5.0 (Maestro 9.9, Schrödinger, Inc.,
New York) with the default functions. The top scoring
ligand’s conformation was used for graphical analysis.
All computations were carried out on a Toshiba Satellite
(C80-I5010) core i3 processor with Linux OS.

analyzed using Rh123 staining. GLU and GLU-PTX treated
cells were mixed with 1 µL of Rh123 (5 mmol/L) and kept
incubation for 15 min. Then, the cells were washed with
PBS and observed under fluorescence microscope using
blue filter (450-490 nm) (Olympus, CKX41, Japan).

Observation of chromatin condensation using a
fluorescence microscope
Acridine orange (AO) and Ethidium bromide
(EtBr) dual staining method was adopted to differentiate
condensed apoptotic nuclei from normal cells. The control,
GLU and GLU-PTX treated resistant KB cells were
seeded in 6 well plate (2 x 105 cells/well) and incubated
in a CO2 incubator for 24 h. The cells were stained with
1:1 ratio of AO/EBr, and observed under a fluorescence
microscope with a magnification of 40X. The number
of cells showing features of apoptosis was counted as a
function of the total number of cells present in the field.

Determination of intracellular ROS levels
Intracellular ROS level was measured using a
non-fluorescent probe, 2,7-diacetyl dichlorofluorescein
(DCFH-DA), that penetrates into the intracellular matrix
of cells where it is oxidized by ROS to fluorescent
dichlorofluorescein (DCF). GLU-PTX and free GLU
treated resistant KB cells were seeded in 6 well plates
(2×105 cells/well) and incubated with 10 μM DCFHDA for 30 min at 37 °C. The cells were observed under
fluorescence microscope using blue filter (450-490 nm)
(Olympus, CKX41, Japan).

Detection of DNA fragmentation by agarose gel
electrophoresis

Changes in mitochondrial transmembrane
potential (Δψ)

Resistant KB cells were cultured in 60 mm dishes to
70% confluency prior to drug treatment. Cells (density at
5×106) were treated with control, GLU and PTX and GLUPTX at desired concentration for 24 h. After incubation
cells were harvested by centrifugation at 2000×g for 5 min

The changes in mitochondrial membrane potential
during GLU and GLU-PTX treatment condition were
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

42371

Oncotarget

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

and washed once with ice cold PBS (Kubota 2420, Tokyo).
The genomic DNA was extracted from the resistant KB
cells using QIAamp DNA Mini Kit (Qiagen, USA) as per
the protocol recommended by the manufacturer. Samples
were electrophoresed in 0.9% (w/v) agarose gel. The
gel was stained with EtBr (1 µg/mL) and photographed
using gel documentation system (Gene Flash, Syngene,
Bioimaging). The presence of apoptosis was indicated
by the appearance of a ladder of oligonucleosomal DNA
fragments on the agarose gel.

The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.

REFERENCES
1.	 Stewart BW, Wild CP. World Cancer Report; Lyon, France:
International Agency for Research on Cancer; 2014.
2.	 Karthikeyan S, Hoti SL. Development of fourth generation
ABC inhibitors from natural products: A novel approach to
overcome cancer multidrug resistance. Anticancer agents
Med Chem. 2015; 15: 605-615.

Experimental design for lymphocyte study
The isolation of human blood lymphocytes was
done using standard procedure. Briefly, blood samples
were aseptically collected in heparinized sterile tubes.
Lymphocytes were isolated using Ficoll–histopaque
(Sigma, USA). Blood was diluted 1:1 with PBS and
layered onto Histopaque at the ratio of blood and
PBS:Histopaque maintained at 4:3. The blood was
centrifuged at 1340 rpm for 35 min at room temperature.
The lymphocyte layer was removed and washed twice
in PBS at 1200 rpm for 10 min each, and then washed
with (RPMI-1640) media. The number of lymphocytes
was counted using a haemocytometer and the viability
of the cells was assayed by the trypan blue exclusion
test. Approximately 2×105 cells were present in 1.0 mL
lymphocyte suspension. In order to find out whether
GLU has any cytotoxic effect on normal lymphocytes,
lymphocytes were divided into 6 groups and treated with
different concentrations of GLU (0-600nM). The effect of
GLU on different parameters ((a) percentage cell viability,
(b) determination of intracellular ROS, and (c) Apoptotic
morphological changes) were analysed in normal human
blood lymphocytes.

3.	 Lo YL, Wan W, Ho CT. 7,3,4-Trihydroxyisoflavone
modulates multidrug resistance transporters and induces
apoptosis via production of reactive oxygen species.
Toxicology. 2012; 302: 221-232.
4.	 Karthikeyan S, Hoti SL, Prasad NR. Resveratrol modulates
expression of ABC transporters in non-small lung cancer
Cells: Molecular Docking and Gene Expression Studies. J
Cancer Sci Ther. 2014; 6: 497-504.
5.	 Okano M, Fukamiya N, Lee KH. Bioactive Quassinoids.
In: Atta-ur-Rahman, editor. Studies in Natural Products
Chemistry. New York: Elsevier Sci. 2000; 23: 285-333.
6.	 O'Neill MJ, Bray DH, Boardman P, Phillipson JD, Warhurst
DC, Peters W, Suffness M. Plants as sources of antimalarial
drugs: in vitro antimalarial activities of some quassinoids.
Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 1986; 30: 101-104.
7.	 Murakami C, Fukamiya N, Tamura S, Okano M, Bastow
KF, Tokuda H, Mukainaka T, Nishino H, Lee KH.
Multidrug-resistant cancer cell susceptibility to cytotoxic
quassinoids, and cancer chemopreventive effects of
quassinoids and canthin alkaloids. Bioorg Med Chem.
2004; 12: 4963-4968.
8.	 Yeo D, Huynh N, Beutler JA, Christophi C, Shulkes A,
Baldwin GS, Nikfarjam M, He H. Glaucarubinone and
gemcitabine synergistically reduce pancreatic cancer growth
via down-regulation of P21-activated kinases. Cancer Lett.
2014; 346: 264-272.

Statistical analysis
Data are expressed as means ± standard error of the
mean (SE). Statistical differences were determined by oneway analysis of variance (ANOVA). ‘P’ values less than
0.05 were considered significant.

9.	 Beutler JA, Kang MI, Robert F, Clement JA, Pelletier
J, Colburn NH, McKee TC, Goncharova E, McMahon
JB, Henrich CJ. Quassinoid inhibition of AP-1 function
does not correlate with cytotoxicity or protein synthesis
inhibition. J Nat Prod. 2009; 72: 503-506.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Dr. John A. Beutler, National Cancer
Institute (NCI), Chemotherapeutics Repository, Molecular
Targets Laboratory, Frederick, USA, for providing
glaucarubinone.

10.	 Yanase S, Luo Y, Maruta H. PAK1-deficiency/downregulation reduces brood size, activates HSP16.2 gene and
extends lifespan in Caenorhabditis elegans. Drug Discov
Ther. 2013; 7: 29-35.

FINANCIAL SUPPORT

11.	 Dai CL, Liang YJ, Chen LM, Zhang X, Deng WJ, Su XD,
Shi Z, Wu CP, Ashby CR, Akiyama SI, Ambudkar SV,
Chen ZS, Fu LW. Sensitization of ABCB1 overexpressing
cells to chemotherapeutic agents by FG020326 via binding
to ABCB1 and inhibiting its function. Biochem Pharmacol.
2009; 78: 355-364.

This work was supported by a research grant from
the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR-3/1/3/
PDF(9)/2014-HRD), Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare, Government of India, New Delhi.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

42372

Oncotarget

12.	 Takano M, Otani Y, Tanda M, Kawami M, Nagai J, Yumoto
R. Paclitaxel-resistance conferred by altered expression of
efflux and influx transporters for paclitaxel in the human
hepatoma cell line, HepG2. Drug Metab Pharmacokinet.
2009; 24: 418-427.

paclitaxel and doxorubicin permeate and shrink tumors,
inducing apoptosis in proportion to accumulated drug. J
Control Release. 2006; 116: 150-158.
25.	 Bijnsdorp IV, Kruyt FA, Gokoel S, Fukushima M, Peters
GJ. Synergistic interaction between trifluorothymidine and
docetaxel is sequence dependent. Cancer Sci. 2008; 99:
2302-2308.

13.	 Wang X, Wang C, Qin YW, Yan, SK, Gao YR.
Simultaneous suppression of multidrug resistance and
antiapoptotic cellular defense induces apoptosis in
chemoresistant human acute myeloid leukemia cells. Leuk
Res. 2007; 31: 989-994.

26.	 Yang L, Wei DD, Chen Z, Wang JS, Kong LK. Reversal
of multidrug resistance in human breast cancer cells
by Curcuma wenyujin and Chrysanthemum indicum.
Phytomedicine. 2011; 18: 710-718.

14.	 Gottesman MM. Mechanisms of cancer drug resistance.
Annu Rev Med. 2002; 53: 615-627.

27.	 Kim JH, Chen C, Tony Kong AN. Resveratrol inhibits
genistein-induced multi-drug resistance protein 2 (MRP2)
expression in HepG2 cells. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2011;
512: 160-166.

15.	 Guo Z, Vangapandu S, Sindelar RW, Walker LA, Sindelar
RD. Biologically active quassinoids and their chemistry:
potential leads for drug design. Curr Med Chem. 2005; 12:
173-190.

28.	 Borska S, Chmielewska M, Wysocka T, Drag-Zalesinska
M, Zabel M, Dziegiel P. In vitro effect of quercetin on
human gastric carcinoma: Targeting cancer cells death and
MDR. Food Chem Toxicol. 2012; 50: 3375-3383.

16.	 Hait WN, Rubin E, Alli E, Goodin S. Tubulin Targeting
Agents. Update Cancer Ther. 2007; 2: 1-18.
17.	 Rowinsky EK, Cazenave LA, Donehower RC. Taxol: a
novel investigational antimicrotubule agent. J Natl Cancer
Inst. 1990; 82: 1247-1259.

29.	 Kuete V, Nkuete AH, Mbaveng AT, Wiench B, Wabo
HK, Tane P, Efferth T. Cytotoxicity and modes of action
of 4-hydroxy-2-6-dimethoxychalcone and other flavonoids
toward drug-sensitive and multidrug-resistant cancer cell
lines. Phytomedicine. 2014; 21: 1651-1657.

18.	 Nabekura T, Yamaki T, Kitagaw S. Effects of
chemopreventive citrus phytochemicals on human
P-glycoprotein and multidrug resistance protein 1. Eur J
Pharmacol. 2008; 600: 45-49.

30.	 Joshi G, Hardas S, Sultana R, St Clair DK, Vore M,
Butterfield DA. Glutathione elevation by gamma-glutamyl
cysteine ethyl ester as a potential therapeutic strategy for
preventing oxidative stress in brain mediated by in vivo
administration of adriamycin: implication for chemobrain.
J Neurosci Res. 2007; 85: 497-503.

19.	 Eid SY, El-Readia MZ, Eldin E, Eldin MN, Fatani SH, Win
M. Influence of combinations of digitonin with selected
phenolics, terpenoids, and alkaloids on the expression and
activity of P-glycoprotein in leukaemia and colon cancer
cells. Phytomedicine. 2013; 21: 47- 61.

31.	 Karthikeyan S, Hoti SL, Prasad NR. Resveratrol loaded
gelatin nanoparticles synergistically inhibits cell cycle
progression and constitutive NF-kappaB activation, and
induces apoptosis in non-small cell lung cancer cells.
Biomed Pharmacother. 2015; 70: 274-282.

20.	 Kweon SH, Song JH, Kim TS. Resveratrol-mediated
reversal of doxorubicin resistance in acute myeloid
leukemia cells via downregulation of MRP1 expression.
Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010; 395: 104-110.
21.	 Anuchapreeda S, Leechanachai P, Smith MM, Ambudkar
SV, Limtrakul PN. Modulation of P-glycoprotein
expression and function by curcumin in multidrug-resistant
human KB cells. Biochem Pharmacol. 2002; 64: 573-582.

32.	 Reddy BV, Prasad NR. 2-deoxy-D-glucose combined with
ferulic acid enhances radiation response in non-small cell
lung carcinoma cells. Cent Eur J Biol. 2011; 6: 743-755.

22.	 Slanina J, Pachnikova G, Carnecka M, Koubikovaa LP,
Hump LOA, Smejkal K, Slaninova I. Identification of key
structural characteristics of Schisandra chinensis lignans
involved in P-glycoprotein inhibition. J Nat Prod. 2014; 77:
2255-2263.

33.	 Doi S, Soda H, Oka M, Tsurutani J, Kitazaki T, Nakamura
Y, Fukuda M, Yamada Y, Kamihira S, Kohno S. The
histone deacetylase inhibitor FR901228 induces caspasedependent apoptosis via the mitochondrial pathway in small
cell lung cancer cells. Mol Cancer Ther. 2004; 3: 1397-402.

23.	 Su S, Cheng X, Wink M. Natural lignans from Arctium
lappa modulate P-glycoprotein efflux function in multidrug
resistant cancer cells. Phytomedicine. 2015; 22: 301-307.

34.	 Liang XJ, Chen C, Zhao Y, Wang PC. Circumventing
tumor resistance to chemotherapy by nanotechnology.
Methods Mol Biol, 2010; 596: 467-488.

24.	 Ahmed F, Pakunlu RI, Brannan A, Bates F, Minko T,
Discher DE. Biodegradable polymersomes loaded with both

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

42373

Oncotarget

