Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 6

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

NG2 proteoglycan as a pericyte target for anticancer therapy by
tumor vessel infarction with retargeted tissue factor
Caroline Brand1, Christoph Schliemann1, Janine Ring1, Torsten Kessler1, Sebastian
Bäumer1, Linus Angenendt1, Verena Mantke1, Rebecca Ross1, Heike Hintelmann1,
Tilmann Spieker2, Eva Wardelmann2, Rolf M. Mesters1, Wolfgang E. Berdel1,*,
Christian Schwöppe1,*
1
2

 epartment of Medicine A, Hematology, Oncology and Pneumology, University of Muenster, Albert-Schweitzer-Campus 1,
D
D-48129 Muenster, Germany
Gerhard-Domagk Institute for Pathology, University of Muenster, Albert-Schweitzer-Campus 1, D-48129 Muenster, Germany

*

These authors have contributed equally and share senior authorship

Correspondence to: W
 olfgang Berdel, e-mail: berdel@uni-muenster.de
Keywords: truncated tissue factor, vascular targeting, vascular infarction, cancer, NG2 proteoglycan
Received: August 30, 2015	

Accepted: November 25, 2015	

Published: January 05, 2016

ABSTRACT
tTF-TAA and tTF-LTL are fusion proteins consisting of the extracellular domain
of tissue factor (TF) and the peptides TAASGVRSMH and LTLRWVGLMS, respectively.
These peptides represent ligands of NG2, a surface proteoglycan expressed on
angiogenic pericytes and some tumor cells. Here we have expressed the model
compound tTF-NGR, tTF-TAA, and tTF-LTL with different lengths in the TF domain in
E. coli and used these fusion proteins for functional studies in anticancer therapy.
We aimed to retarget TF to tumor vessels leading to tumor vessel infarction with
two barriers of selectivity, a) the leaky endothelial lining in tumor vessels with the
target NG2 being expressed on pericytes on the abluminal side of the endothelial cell
barrier and b) the preferential expression of NG2 on angiogenic vessels such as in
tumors. Chromatography-purified tTF-TAA showed identical Factor X (FX)-activating
procoagulatory activity as the model compound tTF-NGR with Km values of approx.
0.15 nM in Michaelis-Menten kinetics. The procoagulatory activity of tTF-LTL varied
with the chosen length of the TF part of the fusion protein. Flow cytometry revealed
specific binding of tTF-TAA to NG2-expressing pericytes and tumor cells with low
affinity and dissociation KD in the high nM range. In vivo and ex vivo fluorescence
imaging of tumor xenograft-carrying animals and of the explanted tumors showed
reduction of tumor blood flow upon tTF-TAA application. Therapeutic experiments
showed a reproducible antitumor activity of tTF-TAA against NG2-expressing A549tumor xenografts, however, with a rather small therapeutic window (active/toxic
dose in mg/kg body weight).

INTRODUCTION

Direct contact to blood flow makes tumor vessel wall
cells, such as endothelial cells and pericytes, easily accessible
for antitumor agents. Denekamp et al. proposed tumor vessels
and endothelial cells as a target for antitumor therapy [7].
Among various markers preferentially expressed in tumor
vessel walls, NG2 (nerve/glial antigen 2) proteoglycan is of
specific interest as a target [8]. NG2 is a transmembrane
protein also known as high-molecular melanoma
associated antigen [9–12]. It is expressed on some tumor

The formation of new blood vessels, supplying
oxygen and nutrients as well as removing metabolic
waste products, is essential for spread and metastasis of
solid tumors [1]. Targeting tumor vasculature represents
different therapeutic strategies, such as antiangiogenesis
[2–4], vascular disruption [5, 6], and vascular targeting of
antitumor molecules [7, 8].

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6774

Oncotarget

cells of different histology [13, 14] and on pericytes
of angiogenic in contrast to resting vessels such as in
tumors [8, 9, 11, 15]. With this pattern, NG2 becomes a
potential target for vascular delivery of antitumor drugs or
mechanisms. Additionally, since tumor vessels - in contrast
to normal vessels - show a leaky and permeable endothelial
cell lining [16–19] which allows for extravasation of larger
molecules into the tissue [20, 21] and because NG2 is
expressed on pericytes covering the abluminal surface of
endothelial cells, this could constitute a second barrier for
selectivity leading to tumor vessel infarction induced by
tissue factor (TF) retargeted to NG2 (Figure 1).
Use of coagulation factors to induce tumor vessel
infarction was initiated by Thorpe et al. [22]. TF is a
central initiator of the extrinsic coagulation pathway
in vivo. Bound to the cell membrane it assembles a
procoagulatory complex by binding Factor VIIa (FVIIa),
and the TF:FVIIa complex initiates coagulation by
cleaving FX to active FXa within a phospholipid milieu.
The relative lack of coagulation-inducing activity of the
soluble form of TF missing its transmembrane domain
(truncated TF, tTF; [23]) can partly be reconstituted
by relocalizing tTF into the proximity of the cellular
phospholipid membrane [22]. Accordingly, targeting tTF
via peptides and antibodies to different specific tumor
vessel markers has led to rapid induction of thrombosis in
tumor vessels [24–27].
Pasqualini et al. [28] revealed that small peptides
containing the NGR motif (asparagine-glycine-arginine)
bind to aminopeptidase N (APN; CD13). CD13 is a
cell surface molecule with up-regulated expression on
endothelial cells in tumors and tissues that undergo
angiogenesis. We have constructed fusion proteins
consisting of short NGR-peptide sequences coupled
to the C-terminal end of tTF [29–31]. Several of these
fusion proteins including tTF-NGR remain thrombogenic
in vitro, bind to their respective targets on endothelial
cells, and upon intravenous infusion induce thrombosis,
vascular blood pooling and disruption in blood vessels
in several human solid tumors growing in athymic mice
with subsequent tumor growth retardation and regression.
Intravenous infusion of tTF-NGR in cancer patients at
dose levels without side effects was shown to reduce
tumor blood flow in situ [30].
To improve selectivity of vascular infarction
induced by these molecules we have chosen NG2
proteoglycan as an alternative target. Here we report
for the first time retargeting of tTF by NG2-binding
peptides TAASGVRSMH and LTLRWVGLMS selected
by phage display and used for NG2 targeting before [8].
Additionally, all tTF-fusion proteins were constructed
with different amino acid sequences and resulting
molecular lengths of TF, since it was reported that shorter
TF molecules show stronger procoagulatory efficacy
[32]. With reference to this published observation we
cloned full-length tTF218 or a variant which is 4 amino
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

acids shorter as described by Magdolen et al. [32].
Chromatography-purified tTF-TAA showed identical
FX-activating procoagulatory activity as the model
compound tTF-NGR in Michaelis-Menten kinetics. The
procoagulatory activity of tTF-LTL varied with the chosen
length of the TF part of the fusion protein. Flow cytometry
revealed specific binding of tTF-TAA to NG2-expressing
pericytes and tumor cells with low affinity. In vivo and
ex vivo fluorescence imaging of tumor xenograft-carrying
mice and of the explanted tumors revealed a reduction of
tumor blood flow upon tTF-TAA application. Therapeutic
experiments showed a reproducible antitumor activity of
tTF-TAA against NG2-expressing A549-tumor xenografts,
however, with a rather small therapeutic window (active/
toxic dose in mg/kg body weight (bw)).

RESULTS
Expression and detection of NG2 proteoglycan
In a first series of experiments we tested for
expression of the chosen target NG2 in human aortic
smooth muscle cells (HuAoSMC; representing pericytes)
and some human tumor cell lines of different histology
using immunohistology. Figure 2A summarizes
examples showing strong protein expression of NG2
in both, HuAoSMC and G361-melanoma cells. Next
we investigated NG2 expression in human tumor tissue
sections of different histology. Immunohistology showed
strong expression of NG2 in the tumor vessel walls of
e.g. non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLC) and colorectal
carcinomas without expression by the tumor cells (Figure
2B). In contrast, we have also detected tumors expressing
NG2 not only on the vessel walls, but also by the tumor
cells (for a human metastasized melanoma, see Figure 2B,
f and g). To validate our in vivo xenograft models used
for experimental therapy, we have performed fluorescence
immunohistology on explanted human tumor xenografts
to detect NG2 and endothelial cell vessel marker CD31
(PECAM-1). Figure 2C depicts results for a human
fibrosarcoma and a human glioblastoma as examples,
showing CD31-positive endothelial cell tubes with
neighboring NG2 expression representing vessel coating
pericytes.

Cloning, expression and purification of
tTF-fusion proteins
tTF-NGR as a model fusion protein with two
different tTF lenghts, tTF214-NGR and tTF218-NGR,
tTF214-TAA and tTF218-TAA with the NG2-binding
C-terminal peptide TAASGVRSMH [8], as well as
tTF214-LTL and tTF218-LTL with the C-terminal NG2binding peptide LTLRWVGLMS [8] (for structure see
Figure 3A) were cloned into the pET30a(+) expression
vector and expressed in E. coli as described in the
6775

Oncotarget

Materials and Methods section. Subsequently, tTFfusion proteins were purified and refolded by a 4-step
chromatography-based procedure as described [31] and
yielded uniform peaks as shown for tTF218-TAA as an
example in Figure 3B. SDS-PAGE (Figure 3C and 3D)
and Western blotting with anti-TF antibodies (Figure 3C)
proved high purity of the products. The final yield of the
purified tTF-fusion proteins was comparable to that of the
model compound tTF218-NGR with the exception of tTF218LTL, which yielded considerable lower amounts.

In the next set of experiments we have used different
NG2 proteoglycan-expressing cells for binding studies
with tTF-TAA. Figure 5 summarizes essential results
for NG2-specific binding of tTF218-TAA to human aortic
smooth muscle cells (HuAoSMC), representing activated
pericytes. NG2 was expressed on HuAoSMC in contrast
to human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC)
(Figure 5A) and we detected concentration/dosedependent binding of His-tagged-tTF-TAA to HuAoSMC
by His-tag specific secondary antibody (Figure 5B). NG2
specificity of the binding was proven since tTF-TAA could
dose-dependently replace a NG2-specific antibody from
its binding sites (Figure 5C) and preincubation of the
cells with excess amounts of a small TAASGVRSMHdecapeptide inhibited tTF-TAA binding dose-dependently
(Figure 5D).
Comparable experimental results were obtained
using the NG2-expressing melanoma cell line G361
(Figure 6).

Activation of Factor X (FX) by the different
tTF-fusion proteins
Next, we assayed the activation of FX induced by
all 5 tTF-fusion proteins and compared it to the model
compound tTF218-NGR (Figure 4). Michaelis constants
(Km) calculated by hyperbolic regression analysis [33]
for the different tTF-fusion proteins within the TF:Factor
VIIa complex were between 0.093 and 0.253 nM (Figure
4), which is comparable with the Km values established
for tTF218-NGR before [29–31]. However, in contrast to
the results published by Magdolen [32], the shorter tTF214fusion proteins did not reveal a stronger procoagulatory
activity (Figure 4B). On the other hand, the long variant of
tTF-LTL showed a considerably higher Km representing a
lower procoagulatory activity when compared to all other
fusion proteins. This led us to the selection of candidate
compounds for the following experiments.

Binding assays with 123-I-tTF218-TAA
To further characterize binding of the candidate
fusion protein tTF-TAA to NG2 on HuAoSMC, the
protein was iodinated following standard procedures and
incubated with HuAoSMC at increasing concentrations, in
some competition assays with up to 15-fold excess of noniodinated tTF-TAA protein. We obtained some binding
saturation at high input concentrations of approx. 3 µM
(Figure 7). In addition to classical Scatchard Analysis [34],
application of a non-linear curve-fitting program revealed
non-linear kinetics. With due caution, data indicated
the possibility of more than 1 binding site and a KD at
approx. 785 nM. This is, as expected, characteristic for

Cellular binding studies by flow cytometry
We have characterized target-specific binding of
tTF218-NGR on activated endothelial cells before [30].

Figure 1: Schematic visualization of possible targets close to a tumor vessel wall.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6776

Oncotarget

low-affinity binding of the material. However, these data
only represent an approximation of the actual binding
behaviour of tTF-TAA.

the tumor vascular fluorescence by AngioSense680® was
significantly blocked in comparison to saline controls.
Ex vivo analysis of the xenografts revealed identical effects,
however, being even better visible (Figure 8C and 8D).

In vivo and ex vivo imaging of tTF218-TAA in
xenograft-bearing mice and explanted tumors

Effect of tTF218-TAA on growth of human tumor
xenotransplants

To visualize and quantify the reduction of tumor
blood flow by systemic application of tTF-TAA, we
have used athymic CD-1 mice bearing the human A549
NSCLC xenografts for fluorescence reflectance imaging
(FRI) with the in vivo blood pool- and tumor-imaging
agent AngioSense®. Intravenous tTF-TAA reduced tumor
blood flow significantly already after 30 min reaching
a maximum at 120 min (Figure 8A and 8B). At this time

Subsequently, the in vivo antitumor activity of
tTF218-TAA was determined in athymic CD-1 nude mice
bearing different human xenografts (A549 NSCLC and
M21 melanoma, respectively; Figure 9). Drugs and
controls (saline) were slowly injected i.v. at the doses
and time intervals as shown in Figure 9. Repeated
injections of 0.5 and 1 mg tTF218-TAA/kg bw induced

Figure 2: Expression of the proteoglycan NG2 in human cell lines and tumor tissue. (A) APAAP staining with an anti-NG2

antibody shows NG2 expression on the surface of human aortic smooth muscle cells (HuAoSMC, b) and human G361-melanoma cells
(d). Cells only incubated with the secondary antibody were used as controls (a, c). (B) The APAAP staining of different resected human
tumor tissues reveals the expression of the proteoglycan NG2 especially outside of the tumor endothelium in non-small cell lung carcinoma
(NSCLC, b), colon carcinoma (d) and melanoma (g), and on the surface of melanoma cells (f). Tissue sections only incubated with the
secondary antibody were used as controls (a, c, e). (C) Human tumor xenotransplants in mice (HT1080 fibrosarcoma, upper row; U87
glioblastoma, lower row) were resected and immunostained for NG2 (red; b, e) and for CD31 (green; a, d), respectively. Co-staining with
both antibodies proves the co-localization of NG2-expressing pericytes and CD31-expressing endothelial cells (c, f). Nuclei were stained
with DAPI (blue).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6777

Oncotarget

tumor growth delay for a longer period of time when
compared with saline controls in A549 adenocarcinoma
of the lung (Figure 9A). Toxicity observed up to 0.5 mg/kg
bw was some tail tip necrosis upon repeated injections and
some cutaneous hematomas. However, there was a rather
small therapeutic window (active/toxic dose in mg/kg bw)
since repeated application of 1 mg/kg bw led to toxicity
and the consecutive stop of the experiment at this dose
level due to paralysis of the hind legs and sudden death. A
second independent experiment (details not shown) with
A549 tumor-bearing mice revealed a similar tumor-growth
retarding effect of 0.5 mg/kg BW tTF218-TAA (n = 8) as
compared to saline (n = 8). Tumor size on day 16 reached
borderline significance for values expressed as percentage
(p = 0.088, two-sided t-test) comparing the 0.5 mg/kg
bw groups of both experiments with the saline controls.
Experiments with M21 melanoma xenografts (Figure 9B)

showed a trend for tumor growth retardation by tTF218TAA either in the native or in a randomly TMS(PEG)12PEGylated form. However, this did not reach statistical
significance, since experiments had to be stopped due to
tumor size and animal regulation. The vessel decoration
of the explanted xenograft tumors at the end of these
experiments showed parallel staining of vessel structures
with CD31 and NG2 for the A549 tumors (Figure 9C),
as well as for the M21 tumors (Figure 9D). Additionally,
the A549 tumor cells clearly showed expression of NG2,
in M21 tumor cells NG2 expression was less visible
(Figure 9C and 9D).
In contrast, colon tumor xenografts showing either
a low expression of the target NG2 on the tumor vessels
(KM12L4; data not shown), or higher expression, however
without clear colocalization to CD31+ endothelial cells
indicating blood flow-allowing microvessels (HTB38;

Figure 3: Schematic illustration of the NG2-targeting tTF-fusion protein constructs and their purification process.

(A) The N-terminal His-tag allows the purification of tTF constructs by metalchelate affinity chromatography; the tTF domain consisting
of 214 or 218 amino acids, respectively, mediates the coagulation activity; the C-terminal peptide binding motif enables the binding to
the tumor endothelium (CD13 via NGR binding motif in the model compound tTF-NGR) or to the tumor pericytes (NG2 via TAA or LTL
binding motif), respectively. (B) The four-step purification process of the tTF-fusion proteins comprises an immobilized metal affinity
chromatography (IMAC), a gel filtration/buffer exchange step (GF1), an anion exchange chromatography (AIEX), and a final gel filtration/
buffer exchange step (GF2). The elution peaks of the particular purification steps are exemplarily shown for tTF218-TAA. (C) As an example,
purified tTF218-TAA fusion protein (molecular weight: ~30 kDa) and the purification intermediates analyzed by SDS-PAGE and Western
blotting with an anti-tTF antibody are shown: (M) molecular weight standard; (1) IMAC flow-through; (2) IMAC eluate; (3) GF1 eluate;
(4) AIEX eluate; (5) end product (GF2 eluate). (D) SDS-PAGE analysis of the tTF214-LTL purification course. For abbreviations, see above.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6778

Oncotarget

data not shown), did not respond with tumor growth
retardation to systemic tTF218-TAA (data not shown).
Non-responsiveness of these colon xenografts were also
found upon treatment with higher doses of randomly
TMS(PEG)12-PEGylated tTF218-TAA (data not shown).
Random PEGylation was found to allow higher doses of
tTF fusion proteins before [35].

low tumor penetration [36], nonspecific accumulation
and uptake in the reticulo-histiocytic system (RHS),
and immunogenicity. Our tTF-fusion proteins consist
of small peptides coupled to the C-terminus of tTF
[29–31, 35]. By connecting the peptide to the C-terminus
of tTF, the tTF moiety is part of the tTF:FVIIa complex
adopting a physiological orientation perpendicular to the
phospholipid membrane [37], which leads to a potent
initiation of coagulation. Thrombogenic activity of i.v.
application of the model compound tTF-NGR in tumor
vasculature with subsequent tumor vessel infarction and
growth delay could be shown in several tumor mouse
models. First-in-man experiences with low doses of

DISCUSSION
Peptide-targeted tTF possibly have some advantages
over antibodies or larger antibody fragments as targeting
moieties for tTF. Larger antibody molecules show

Figure 4: Factor X activation assay of the different tTF proteins. (A) The ability of the fusion proteins to enhance the specific

proteolytic activation of FX by FVIIa in the presence of phospholipids was evaluated by Michaelis-Menten analysis (a, c). The Michaelis
constants (Km) of the activation were calculated by hyperbolic regression analysis according to Hanes et al. [33] (b, d). (B) The determined
Km values of all tTF constructs are summarized in this scheme. There are no significant differences between the respective short and
long constructs as analyzed by two-sided t-test: tTF-NGR: p = 0.85; tTF-TAA: p = 0.97; tTF-LTL: p = 0.056. Data are presented as
means +/− standard errors.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6779

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Binding of tTF218-TAA to human aortic smooth muscle cells (HuAoSMC) as measured by flow cytometry.

(A) The presence of NG2 on HuAoSMCs and HUVECs was detected with a monoclonal PE-labeled anti-NG2 antibody. (B) Dosedependent binding of tTF-TAA to NG2-expressing HuAoSMCs (lower row): cells were incubated with different concentrations of tTFTAA. Bound fusion protein was then detected with a FITC-labeled anti-His antibody (α His-FITC). tTF without targeting TAA-peptide
binds unspecifically to the cells, but in a clearly smaller amount when compared to tTF-TAA (upper row, right panel). Untreated cells
(NTC), cells only incubated with the anti-His antibody, or cells incubated both with the control protein BSA and the anti-His antibody,
respectively, where used as controls (upper row). A summary of all binding curves is shown in the histogram (lower row, right panel); for
color assignment see boxes above the respective panels. (C) Blocking of HuAoSMCs using the PE-labeled anti-NG2 antibody (α NG2PE) and displacement by tTF-TAA: after incubation with the α NG2-PE antibody, cells were incubated with different concentrations of
tTF-TAA. The fusion protein was able to displace some of the bound antibody in a dose-dependent manner (lower left and middle panels).
Bound tTF-TAA fusion protein was then detected with the anti-His-FITC antibody (lower right panel). Displacement of the NG2-PE
antibody by the control protein BSA was not effective (upper middle panel). (D) In a further setup, tTF-TAA binding was blocked by preincubation with 20-fold excess of pure TAASGVRSMH-decapeptide (lower panel). Bound tTF-TAA fusion protein was then detected with
the anti-His-FITC antibody. Cells without pre-incubation were used as controls (upper panel).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6780

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Binding of tTF218-TAA to human G361-melanoma cells as measured by flow cytometry. (A) The presence of

NG2 on G361-melanoma cells was detected with a monoclonal PE-labeled anti-NG2 antibody. (B) Dose-dependent binding of tTF-TAA
to NG2-expressing G361 cells (lower row): cells were incubated with different concentrations of tTF-TAA. Bound fusion protein was then
detected with a FITC-labeled anti-His antibody (α His-FITC). tTF without targeting TAA-peptide binds unspecifically to the cells, but in a
clearly smaller amount when compared to tTF-TAA (upper row, right panel). Untreated cells (NTC) or cells only incubated with the antiHis antibody, respectively, where used as controls (upper row, left and middle panel). A summary of all binding curves can be seen in the
histogram (lower row, right panel); for color assignment, see boxes above the respective panels. (C) Blocking of G361 with the PE-labeled
anti-NG2 antibody (α NG2-PE) and displacement by tTF-TAA: after incubation with α NG2-PE antibody cells were incubated with tTF-TAA,
whereupon the fusion protein was able to displace some of the bound antibody (lower left panel). Bound tTF-TAA fusion protein was then
detected with the α His-FITC antibody (lower right panel). Displacement of the α NG2-PE antibody by the control protein BSA was not
effective (upper right panel). (D, E) In a further setup, tTF-TAA binding was blocked by pre-incubation with 4- to 20-fold excess of pure
TAASGVRSMH-dekapeptide in a dose-dependent manner (D, E lower panel). Bound tTF-TAA fusion protein was then detected with
the α His-FITC antibody. Untreated cells and cells without pre-incubation were used as controls (upper panel). By increasing the applied
concentrations of fusion protein, more already bound TAASGVRSMH could be displaced (E, lower right panel). Blocking of tTF-TAA
binding by the control protein BSA was not effective (E, upper right panel).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6781

Oncotarget

Figure 7: Determination of the dissociation constant (KD) of tTF218-TAA binding to NG2-expressing HuAoSMC to
characterize the binding affinity. Binding assays with different concentrations of radiolabeled tTF-TAA (123I-tTF-TAA) and cultivated
human aortic smooth muscle cells (HuAoSMC) were performed and the amount of bound fusion protein was carried out in a Berthold
gamma counter. Determination of KD was performed with a nonlinear curve fitting program (GraphPad Prism 6: one site – total binding) and
analysis of total-binding data by means of the equation for (one-site) total binding revealed a KD of 785 nM. This equation (total binding =
{(Bmax * [L]/(KD+[L])} + NS * [L]) assumes that unspecific binding is commensurate to the concentration of the radioligand and that only
a small amount of the radioligand binds, so that the input-concentration is virtually identical with the concentration of free radioligand (for
further details see Materials and Methods).

Figure 8: Treatment with NG2-targeting tTF218-TAA in vivo and ex vivo as monitored by fluorescence reflectance
imaging (FRI). (A, B) FRI was performed with A549-bearing CD-1 nude mice that received AngioSense® as an in vivo blood pool- and
tumor-imaging agent 22 h prior to the start of the therapy. AngioSense® signal intensities in tumors were measured at time point zero (0 min;
see white arrows) and set as 100%. After the application of 1 mg/kg tTF218-TAA or saline, respectively (each with n = 3), signal intensities
were analyzed for 120 min and revealed a significant decrease of the signal in treated tumors when compared to the saline controls
(B; asterisk denotes statistical significance, p < 0.05). Data are presented as means +/− standard errors. (C, D) AngioSense® fluorescence
intensities of explanted tumors showed an even more significant difference between treated tumors (C, lower row) and saline controls
(C, upper row), which was quantified as shown in D (asterisk denotes statistical significance, p < 0.05). Data are presented as means +/−
standard errors.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6782

Oncotarget

tTF-NGR (1–4 mg/m2 by i.v. infusion) showed inhibition
of tumor perfusion without any side effects as “proof of
principle” [30].
While tTF-NGR is entering early clinical trials, we
have launched a search for improving pharmacokinetics
[35] and alternative targets. With respect to the latter,
we here report our attempts to improve selectivity of
vascular infarction induced by these molecules by
choosing NG2 proteoglycan as an alternative target.
NG2 is expressed on some tumor cells of different
histology [13, 14] and on pericytes of angiogenic in
contrast to resting vessels such as in tumors [8, 9, 11, 15]
and thus becomes a potential target for vascular delivery of
antitumor proteins. Possibly conflicting with our targeting
approach is the expression pattern of NG2 in several
normal tissues as shown on the protein level (http://www.
proteinatlas.org/ENSG00000173546-CSPG4/tissue).
However, this does not necessarily provide accessibility

of NG2 to proteins transported by the blood stream, and
for the mechanism of action of proteins such as tTF-TAA
a coagulation-competent milieu is a prerequisite. Since
tumor vessels - in contrast to normal vessels - show a
leaky and permeable endothelial cell lining [16–19] which
allows for extravasation of larger molecules into the tissue
[20, 21] and because NG2 is expressed on pericytes on the
abluminal surface of endothelial cells, we hypothesized
the presence of a second barrier for selectivity leading to
angiogenic tumor vessel infarction induced by tTF-TAA.
We report for the first time retargeting of truncated
tissue factor by NG2-binding peptides TAASGVRSMH
and LTLRWVGLMS [8] and retardation of tumor growth
by tumor vessel infarction. The fusion proteins tTF-TAA
and tTF-LTL were obtained with two different lengths of
the tTF-moiety. In contrast to what was reported earlier
[32], the different molecular length of the tTF proteins
did not improve procoagulatory activity, rather the

Figure 9: Effect of tTF218-TAA on the growth of human xenotransplants in CD-1 nude mice. (A) Tumor growth retardation

of human adenocarcinoma of the lung (A549) xenotransplanted into athymic CD-1 mice after i.v. administration of 0.5 (n = 5) and 1 mg/kg
bw (n = 4) tTF218-TAA versus 0.9% saline control (n = 8). Therapy started at an average tumor size of 240 mm3 and was continued for 16
days on every second day; arrows indicate time points of injection. Due to side effects, the 1 mg/kg therapy cohort had to be stopped at day
10. (B) Effect of 0.5 mg/kg BW tTF218-TAA (n = 8), 5 mg/kg bw TMS(PEG)12 tTF-TAA (n = 9) and 0.9% saline control (n = 9), respectively,
on the growth of human M21 melanoma xenotransplanted into CD-1 nude mice. Therapy started at an average tumor size of 250 mm3 and
was continued for 23 days on every second day; arrows indicate time points of i.v. administration. The experiment had to be terminated
with separating growth curves on day 23 due to tumor size and animal regulations. (C, D) Vessel decoration with NG2 of explanted control
tumors. Human tumor xenotransplants in mice (×400; C: A549 adenocarcinoma of the lung; D: M21 melanoma) were resected and coimmunostained for NG2 (red) and for CD31 (green), respectively. Nuclei were stained with DAPI (blue).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6783

Oncotarget

full-length tTF218-TAA showed identical FX-activating
potential when compared to the model compound tTFNGR. Furthermore, flow cytometry revealed specific
binding of tTF-TAA to NG2-expressing pericytes and
NG2-expressing tumor cells with low affinity. In vivo and
ex vivo fluorescence imaging of tumor xenograft-bearing
animals and the explanted tumors showed vascular
occlusion and reduction of tumor blood flow upon tTFTAA application. Therapeutic xenograft experiments
showed a reproducible antitumor activity of tTF-TAA
against NG2-expressing A549-tumor xenografts.
However, the therapeutic activity of NG2-targeting
tTF-TAA, when compared to tTF-NGR in identical
xenograft models targeting CD13 on endothelial cells
[30, 31, 35], was considerably lower, and the therapeutic
window of tTF-TAA upon repeated application (active/
toxic dose in mg/kg bw) was rather small. Reasons for
this observation are speculative. Since NG2 is located
on the outward side of the vessel wall, the leakiness of
the endothelial barrier might not be sufficient to allow
concentrations of tTF-TAA on target high enough to
induce coagulation and tumor vessel infarction. Low
expression of the target on pericytes, variable and low
pericyte coverage on tumor vessels, or suboptimal
phospholipid milieu for procoagulatory activity might
be other limiting factors. In consequence, trapping of
the molecule inside the tumor may be low and systemic
concentrations of the fusion protein after multiple
injections might reach procoagulatory levels elsewhere.
Limiting toxicity of tTF-NGR with a therapeutic window
of 1:5 (therapeutic cose:LD10) in the mouse is pulmonary
embolism [35].
In conclusion, tTF-TAA was selected as a new
candidate fusion protein retargeting tissue factor to the
pericyte target NG2, a surface proteoglycan expressed
on angiogenic vessels and some tumor cells. The protein
retained similar FX-activating procoagulatory activity
as the model compound tTF-NGR, it revealed specific
binding to the NG2 target on pericytes and tumor cells,
and showed a reproducible antitumor activity against
NG2-expressing A549-tumor xenografts. However, due
to the small number of tumors characterized as being
sensitive as xenografts towards tTF-TAA and its rather
small therapeutic window, this NG2-targeted fusion
protein shows no improved therapeutic profile over the
lead compound tTF-NGR.

protein, and the cDNA sequence encoding for the tTFNGR fusion protein (amino acids 1-218 of TF and the
C-terminal heptapeptide GNGRAHA (His-tag-tTF1-218GNGRAHA); pET30a(+)/tTF-NGR), as described earlier
[29–31]. By site-directed mutagenesis, one of the two Tat
I restriction sites was changed into an Kpn I site, leading
to an expression vector in which the sequence of TF
amino acids 203 to 218 and the C-terminal fused NGRheptapetide is flanked by sole TatI and BamHI restriction
sites (pET30a(+)2KpnI/tTF-NGR). An 84 bp fragment
containing the sequence of the tTF amino acids 203–218
and the sequence of the decapeptide TAASGVRSMH
was synthesized by Eurofins MWG Operon (Ebersberg,
Germany) and subcloned in a pCR2.1Topo vector. By
digestion with the enzymes TatI and BamHI this 84-bp
fragment was isolated and then ligated into the expression
vector pET30a(+)2KpnI/tTF-NGR pretreated with the same
restriction enzymes. The generated tTF-TAA construct
possesses the TF amino acids 1-218 with the C-terminal
fused TAA-decapeptide and an N-terminal histidine
tag for subsequent purification of the protein by using
immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC).
The vector pET30a(+)2KpnI/tTF218-TAA was introduced
into competent Escherichia coli cells (BL21 DE3)
according to the manufacturer´s protocol (Novagen).
Protein expression and purification has been described in
detail earlier [29–31, 35]. Briefly, after stimulation with
IPTG (Novagen), the cells were harvested and lyzed with
5–7 ml of a lysozyme-containing lysis buffer, incubated
for 90 min at room temperature (RT) and centrifuged at
12.000g for 20 min and 4°C. The pellet was resuspended
and homogenized by sonicating in washing buffer
(10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 1 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic
acid (EDTA), 3% Triton X-100). The inclusion bodies
were solubilized with guanidinium buffer by an overnight
incubation at room temperature. After centrifugation
(12.000g for 30 min) the supernatant was filtered through a
0.22-µm filter and stored at −25°C. Further purification and
refolding were carried out by a multistep high-performance
liquid chromatography (HPLC)-based purification process
with an ÄKTA purifier system (GE healthcare, München,
Germany). The first capture step consists of an IMAC
with copper (Chelating Sepharose 6FF, GE healthcare)
using copper as chelating agent. The N-terminal histidinetagged tTF-TAA fusion protein binds to the immobilized
copper ions so that the complete refolding (urea gradient
from 6 to 0 M) and washing processes are performed on
the column, from which the protein is eluted by applying
300 mM imidazole. During the subsequent gel filtration,
the IMAC eluate is conditioned by a buffer-exchanging
step using Sephadex G-25 (GE healthcare) in order to
prepare for the following intermediate purification step.
This anion-exchange chromatography step (AIEX, Q
Sepharose HP, GE healthcare) allows further separation
of the eluted proteins according to differences in their
net charges. Moreover, it removes most of the remaining

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cloning strategies, expression and HPLC
purification of the tTF-fusion proteins
Cloning strategy of tTF-TAA was based on the
expression vector pET-30a(+) (Novagen, Schwalbach
am Taunus, Germany), already containing an N-terminal
histidine tag (His-tag) for subsequent purification of the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6784

Oncotarget

impurities such as other proteins, nucleic acids, and
endotoxin. The concluding polishing step again comprises
a gel filtration using Sephadex G-25 in order to remove
remaining trace impurities and to exchange the buffer
to phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). The final protein
solution is stored at −25°C.
The other tTF-fusion proteins as shown in Figure 2
were produced and purified along the lines described for
tTF218-TAA above.

calculated by hyperbolic regression analysis according to
Hanes [33].

Cell cultures
Human aortic smooth muscle cells were purchased
from PromoCell (Heidelberg, Germany) in passage 2 and
only used at low passage numbers. Cells were cultured in
DMEM/F12 medium supplemented with 10% fetal calf
serum (FCS) and 2.5 mM glutamine (Gibco, Eggenstein,
Germany) and maintained at 37°C in 5% CO2 and high
humidity. Cell culture dishes were coated with 0.2%
gelatine. The human G361-melanoma cell line was
cultured in McCoy 5A medium supplemented with 10%
FCS and 1.5 mM glutamine. Cells, which both grow
adherent and in suspension, were obtained from ATCC
(Manassas, VA, USA). The human A549-lung carcinoma
cell line was purchased from ATCC and cultured in
Ham’s F12 medium supplemented with 10% FCS and
1 mM glutamine. The human malignant melanoma cell
line M21 was kindly provided by Dr. Siletti (University
of California, San Diego, CA, USA) and cultured in
RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 10% FCS and
2 mM glutamine. M21 cells grow both adherent and in
suspension. The colon carcinoma cell lines HTB-38 and
KM12L4 were cultured in IMDM medium supplemented
with 10% FCS. HTB-38 cells were purchased from
ATCC; KM12L4 cells were kindly provided by
Dr. I.J. Fidler (The University of Texas M.D. Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA). The human
glioblastoma cell line U87-MG (ATCC) was cultured
in MEM medium supplemented with 10% FCS, 1 mM
pyruvate (Gibco) and 1% non-essential amino acids
(Gibco). Tumor cell lines were subjected to short tandem
repeat (STR) profiling for identity confirmation. For some
lines (e.g. M21) we established own STR profiles.

TMS(PEG)12 PEGylation
Random TMS(PEG)12 PEGylation of the tTF218-TAA
protein was performed according to the manufacturer´s
protocol (Thermo Scientific/Pierce, Bonn, Germany; see
also Schwöppe et al. [35]). Briefly, the protein (solved in
PBS) was incubated for 2 h at 4°C with an 30-fold excess
of TMS(PEG)12, a trimethyl succinimidyl polyethylene
glycol ester (molecular weight: 2420.8 Da), which reacts
with primary amino groups (such as lysine) of the tTFTAA protein, releasing NHS. To remove the NHS group
and excess TMS(PEG)12, the reaction mixture was purified
by a HPLC-based gel filtration with Sephadex G-25
medium (GE Healthcare, München, Germany). The final
PEGylated protein solution is stored at −25°C.

Factor X activation by tTF fusion proteins
We have assayed the activity of our retargeted
TF-fusion proteins to act as a cofactor in the membranebound TF:FVIIa complex activating FX to FXa by
protease function and visualized this reaction by a
Spectrozyme Xa assay as described by Ruf et al. [38].
The ability of the varying concentrations of the tTF
fusion proteins with constant concentrations of the
other components of the procoagulatory assembly of
TF:FVIIa, FX and phospholipids to enhance the specific
proteolytic activation of FX by FVIIa was assessed by
Michaelis-Menten analysis as described by Ruf et al.
[38]. Briefly, 20 µl of the following was added to each
well in a microtiter plate: (a) 50 nM recombinant FVIIa
(Novo-Nordisc, Bagsværd, Denmark) in TBS containing
0.1% bovine serum albumin (BSA); (b) 0.1–1.5 nM of
e.g. tTF-TAA protein in TBS-BSA; (c) 25 mM CaCl2
and 500 µM phospholipids (phosphatidylcholine/
phosphatidylserine, 70/30, MM; Sigma, München,
Germany). After 10 min at room temperature, the substrate
FX (Enzyme Research Laboratories, Swansea, UK)
was added (final concentration 1 µM). After additional
10 min, the reaction was stopped in 100 mM EDTA and
Spectrozyme FXa (American Diagnostica, Greenwich,
USA; final concentration 0.7 mM) was added. The rates
of FXa generation were monitored by the development
of color at 405 nm with a microplate reader (Bio-Rad,
München, Germany). The Michaelis constant (Km) of the
FX activation induced by varying concentrations of the
tTF-fusion protein within the complex with FVIIa was
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

In vitro-binding studies using flow cytometry
NG2 expression of human cell lines and primary
cells, and differential binding of His-tagged tTF-fusion
proteins to NG2-expressing cells was analyzed by flow
cytometry using the BD FACS Calibur flow cytometer
(Becton-Dickinson (BD), San Jose, CA, USA). Briefly,
90% confluent cells were trypsinized (10% Trypsin,
Gibco), washed twice with PBS and blocked with
human immunoglobulin G (IgG, 1 µg/1 × 105 cells).
For direct staining of the cell surface protein NG2,
cells were incubated with the monoclonal mouse antiNG2-phycoerythrin (PE) antibody (R & D-Systems,
Minneapolis, MN, USA; 0.25 µg/1 × 105 cells) for 3045 minutes at 4°C. After two washing steps with ice-cold
PBS/10% FCS, cells were resuspended in 500 µl PBS/
FCS and analyzed in the flow cytometer. For specific
binding analysis, IgG-blocked cells were incubated with
16–80 µM tTF-fusion proteins (or tTF as control) for
24 min at 37°C. After incubation and one washing
6785

Oncotarget

step with ice-cold PBS/10% FCS, the monoclonal
fluoresceinisothiocyanate (FITC)-labeled mouse-antihistidine-tag antibody was used for detection of bound
protein. Briefly, cells were incubated with 0.5 µg mouse
anti-6xHis-FITC antibody per 1 × 105 cells for 30 min
at 4°C, washed twice with PBS/FCS, resuspended in
500 µl PBS/FCS and analyzed in the flow cytometer. To
show competition for binding sites, IgG-blocked cells
were pre-incubated/blocked with 0.125 µg mouse antiNG2-PE antibody for 45 min at 4°C in the dark, so that
nearly all cells were PE-positive. After washing with
PBS/FCS, binding studies were performed as described
above. In a second setup, cells were pre-incubated/blocked
with excess amounts of e.g. pure TAA-decapeptide
(TAASGVRSMH, 200–1000 µM = 4–20-fold excess) for
16 min at 37°C; the tTF fusion protein-binding studies
were performed as described above.

(first therapy approach) or for 11 times (second therapy
approach). Tumor size was evaluated using a standard
caliper measuring tumor length and width; tumor volumes
were calculated using the standardized formula (length ×
width² × π/6). According to our project license, animals had
to be sacrificed when tumors became too large, if mice lost
> 20% of bw, or at signs of pain. In this case, mice were
sacrificed by cervical dislocation in deep ketamine/xylazine
anesthesia in agreement with standard regulations and the
project license.

Histology
For histological analysis of primary cells or cell
cultures, respectively, cells were seeded on gelatin-coated
culture slides (BD Bioscience, San Jose, CA, USA;
8 chambers, 1 × 104 cells/well) and cultured for 36 hours.
After three washing steps with PBS, the chamber was
removed and cells were fixated on slides by incubation
with methanol for 15 min. Finally, cells were washed
with Tris-buffered saline (TBS, 3 × 5 min) and used for
APAAP staining (alkaline phosphatase and anti-alkaline
phosphatase method, modified from Cordell et al. [39],
see below). Histological analyses of human tumor
tissues were performed with formalin-fixed and paraffinembedded tissues. After deparaffinization according to
standard protocols, tumor slides were washed with both
aqua dest. and TBS, and used for APAAP staining. To this
end, sections were incubated with the primary antibody
rabbit-anti-NG2 (Merck Millipore, Schwalbach, Germany;
dilution 1:100) for 16 hours at 4°C in a humid chamber.
After washing with TBS, slides were incubated with
the first bridge antibody (mouse anti-rabbit-IgG, Dako,
Hamburg, Germany; dilution 1:100) followed by the
incubation with the second bridge antibody (rabbit antimouse-IgG, Dako; dilution 1:25) each for 30 min at RT in
a humid chamber. Finally, after three TBS-washing steps,
samples were incubated with the APAAP complex (Dako;
dilution 1:50; 30 min) and after further TBS-washing steps
with the substrate solution consisting of substrate buffer
with Fast Red and Levamisol (Dako; approx. 30 min).
After adequate staining, reaction was stopped with aqua
dest., followed by counterstaining the nuclei with Mayer’s
hemalum solution for 8 sec.
Histological analyses of xenograft tumor tissues
were performed with O.C.T.-embedded and cryoconserved tissues according to standard protocols. Briefly,
tissues were embedded in Tissue-TEK O.C.T. (Sakura,
Alphen aan den Rijn, The Netherlands), snap-frozen in
liquid nitrogen, and stored at −85°C. Frozen samples were
cut to 5-µm sections and transferred onto glass slides.
H & E-staining was performed according to standard
procedures.
For immunofluorescence staining, slides were
fixed with acetone/methanol, and dried according to
standard protocols. Sections were incubated with an antiNG2 antibody (see above; dilution 1:200) followed by a

In vitro-binding studies using iodinated tTF-TAA
To further characterize binding of the candidate
fusion protein tTF-TAA to NG2 on HuAoSMC, the
protein was iodinated following standard procedures and
incubated with HuAoSMC at increasing concentrations,
and in some competition assays with up to 15-fold excess
of non-iodinated tTF-TAA protein. Production capacity
for tTF-TAA limited this second competition assay, as we
could not use the 100–1000-fold excess of cold material as
usually done for classical Scatchard Analysis [34]. Instead,
we additionally used a non-linear curve-fitting program
(GraphPad Prism 6: one site - total binding) where it is
possible to determine the KD directly by fitting the total
binding without the determination of unspecific binding
as an approximation.

Tumor xenograft models
All procedures on animals were performed in
agreement with German regulations (Tierversuchsgesetz
§8 Abs. 2) and specifically approved in form of a project
license. CD-1 nude mice were purchased from Charles
River Laboratories (Sulzfeld, Germany) and acclimated
to our animal-experiment facility for at least 1 week
before any experimentation. Mice were maintained in
individually-ventilated cages (IVC) on a 12:12 h light:dark
cycle in a low-stress environment (22°C, 50% humidity,
low noise) and given food and water ad libitum.
Single cell suspensions of the different tumor cells
were injected subcutaneously (s.c.) into the right anterior
flank of female CD-1 nude mice (9–12 weeks old). For
therapeutic experiments, tumor growth was allowed to
a mean volume of approx. 200–400 mm3. Mice were
randomly assigned to different experimental groups. The
tTF218-TAA fusion protein (0.5 or 1 mg/kg bw, respectively)
was slowly applied intravenously (i.v.) via the tail veins.
Animals in control groups received 0.9 % NaCl solution.
Injections were repeated every second day for nine times
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6786

Oncotarget

tetramethylrhodamine (TRITC)-labelled goat anti-rabbitIgG antibody (red; Dianova, Hamburg, Germany; dilution
1:100). Co-staining was performed with a rat anti-mouseCD31 antibody (BD Bioscience; dilution 1:20) followed
by a fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-labelled goat
anti-rat-IgG antibody (green; Dianova; dilution 1:100).
Nuclei were stained using 4′, 6-diamidino-2-phenylindole
(DAPI).

factor VIIa; FX, Factor  X; GF, gel filtration; HPLC,
high performance liquid chromatography; HuAoSMC,
human aortic smooth muscle cells; IMAC, immobilized
metal ion affinity chromatography; IVC, individuallyventilated cage; LTL, LTLRWVGLMS; LD10, lethal
dose for 10 % of animals treated upon one i.v. injection
(within 24 h); NG2, nerve/glial antigen 2; NGR, peptide
GNGRAHA; NHS, N-hydroxysuccinimid; NSCLC, nonsmall cell lung cancer; PECAM-1, platelet endothelial
cell adhesion molecule 1; PBS, phosphate-buffered
saline; PE, phycoerythrin; PEG, polyethylene glycol;
RHS, reticulo-histiocytic system; RT, room temperature;
SDS-PAGE, sodium dodecyl sulphate polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis; TAA, peptide TAASGVRSMH;
TBS, Tris-based saline; TF, tissue factor; tTF, truncated
tissue factor; TMS(PEG)12, trimethyl succinimidyl
polyethylene glycol ester; TRITC, tetramethylrhodamine
isothiocyanate.

Fluorescence reflectance imaging (FRI)
CD-1 nude mice bearing A549 xenotransplants
received 2 nmol (150 µl, i.v.) of the fluorescent in vivo
blood pool- and tumor-imaging agent Angiosense® 680
Ex (PerkinElmer, Rodgau, Germany). After 22 hours,
the tumor accumulation of the fluorescent contrast agent
was detected and quantified with the in vivo imaging
system FX PRO (Bruker BioSpin MRI GmbH, Ettlingen,
Germany) using a 630 nm-excitation filter and a 700 nmemission filter (time point t0). After treatment with a single
dose of 1 mg/kg tTF218-TAA or 0.9% saline, respectively,
in vivo tumor fluorescence intensities were analysed and
quantified over a 120 minutes period. During FRI studies,
animals were anesthetized by isoflurane inhalation
(2–3%, together with 1–1.5 l/min O2 ventilation). Finally,
mice were sacrificed and signal intensities of explanted
tumors were quantified.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
R.M. M. and W.E. B. share a patent on vascular
targeting with TF constructs. No potential conflicts of
interest was declared by the other authors.

REFERENCES
  1.	 Folkman J. Angiogenesis in cancer, vascular, reumatoid
and other disease. Nat Med. 1995; 1:27–31.

Statistical analyses

  2.	 Ferrara N, Alitalo K. Clinical applications of angiogenic
growth factors and their inhibitors. Nat Med. 1999;
5:1359–1364.

Statistical significances of differences between the
different groups were tested by the t test or by MannWhitney rank sum test for independent groups. Two-tailed
P values lower than 0.05 were considered as indicating
significant differences.

  3.	 Chung AS, Lee J, Ferrara N. Targeting the tumour
vasculature: insights from physiological angiogenesis.
Nat Rev Cancer. 2010; 10:505–514.
  4.	 Ebos JM, Kerbel RS. Antiangiogenic therapy: impact on
invasion, disease progression, and metastasis. Nat Rev
Clin Oncol. 2011; 8:210–221 (erratum 8:316).

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING
C.B. contributed experiments in partial fulfillment
of the requirements to obtain a Ph.D. title. This work
was supported by grants of the Deutsche Krebshilfe e.V.
(110886 to W.E.B.), the Else Kröner-Fresenius-Stiftung
(2013_A284 to C. Schw. and W.E.B.), the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG EXC1003, Cells in
Motion), and the Sybille-Hahne-Stiftung.

  5.	 Tozer GM, Kanthou C, Baguley BC. Disrupting tumour
blood vessels. Nat Rev Cancer. 2005; 5:423–435.
  6.	 Chaplin DJ, Dougherty GJ, Siemann DW. Vascular
disrupting agents. In: Antiangiogenic cancer therapy.
Davis DW, Herbst R and Abbruzzese JL (eds). CRC
Press, Boca Raton. 2008, 329–364.
  7.	 Denekamp J. Endothelial cell proliferation as a novel
approach to targeting tumour therapy. Br J Cancer. 1982;
45:136–139.

Abbreviations

  8.	 Burg MA, Pasqualini R, Arap W, Ruoslahti E, Stallcup WB.
NG2 proteoglycan-binding peptides target tumor
neovasculature. Cancer Res. 1999; 59:2869–2874.

AIEX, anion exchange chromatography; APAAP,
alkaline phosphatase-anti-alkaline phosphatase; APN,
aminopeptidase N; BSA, bovine serum albumin; bw,
body weight; DAPI, 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole;
DTT, dithiothreitol; EDTA, ethylenediaminetetraacetic
acid; FRI, fluorescence reflectance imaging; FCS, fetal
calf serum; FITC, fluorescein isothiocyanate; FVIIa,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

  9.	 Stallcup WB. The NG2 Proteoglycan: past insights and
future prospects. J Neurocytol. 2002; 31:423–435.
10.	 Trotter J, Karram K, Nishiyama A. NG2 cells: Properties,
progenity and origin. Brain Res Rev. 2010; 63:72–82.
6787

Oncotarget

11.	 Stallcup WB, Huang F. A role for the NG2 proteoglycan
in glioma progression. Cell Adh Migr. 2008; 2:192–201.

26.	 Ran S, Gao B, Duffy S, Watkins L, Rote N, Thorpe PE.
Infarction of solid Hodgkin’s tumors in mice by antibodydirected targeting of tissue factor to tumor vasculature.
Cancer Res. 1998; 58:4646–4653.

12.	 Price MA, Colvin Wanshura LE, Yang J, Carlson J,
Xiang B, Li G, Ferrone S, Dudek AZ. CSPG4, a potential
therapeutic target, facilitates malignant progression
of melanoma. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2011; 24:
1148–1157.

27.	 Kessler T, Bieker R, Padró T, Schwöppe C, Persigehl T,
Bremer C, Kreuter M, Berdel WE, Mesters RM. Inhibition
of tumor growth by RGD peptide-directed delivery of
truncated tissue factor to the tumor vasculature. Clin
Cancer Res. 2005; 11:6317–6324.

13.	 Wang J, Svendsen A, Kmiecik J, Immervoll H,
Skaftnesmo KO, Planagumà J, Reed RK, Bjerkvig R,
Miletic H, Enger PØ, Rygh CB, Chekenya M. Targeting
the NG2/CSPG4 proteoglycan retards tumor growth
and angiogenesis in preclinical models of GBM and
melanoma. PloS One. 2011; 6:e23062.

28.	 Pasqualini R, Koivunen E, Kain R, Lahdenranta J,
Sakamoto M, Stryhn A, Ashmun RA, Shapiro LH,
Arap W, Ruoshlahti E. Aminopeptidase N is a receptor
for tumor-homing peptides and a target for inhibiting
angiogenesis. Cancer Res. 2000; 60:722–727.

14.	 Garusi E, Rossi, S, Perris R. Antithetic roles of
proteoglycans in cancer. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2012; 69:
553–579.

29.	 Kessler T, Schwöppe C, Liersch R, Schliemann C,
Hintelmann H, Bieker R, Berdel WE, Mesters RM.
Generation of fusion proteins for selective occlusion of
tumor vessels. Curr Drug Discov Technol. 2008; 5:1–8.

15.	 Ozerdem U, Monosov E, Stallcup WB. NG2 proteoglycan
expression by pericytes in pathological microvasculature.
Microvasc Res. 2002; 63:129–134.

30.	 Bieker R, Kessler T, Schwöppe C, Padró T, Persigehl T,
Bremer C, Dreischalück J, Kolkmeyer A, Heindel W,
Mesters RM, Berdel WE. Infarction of tumor vessels
by NGR-peptide directed targeting of tissue factor.
Experimental results and first-in-man experience. Blood.
2009; 113:5019–5027.

16.	 Morikawa S, Baluk P, Kaidoh T, Haskell A, Jain RK,
McDonald DM. Abnormalities in pericytes on blood
vessels and endothelial sprouts in tumors. Am J Pathol.
2002; 160:985–1000.
17.	 Baluk P, Hashizume H, McDonald DM. Cellular
abnormalities of blood vessels as targets in cancer. Curr
Opin Genet Dev. 2005; 15:102–111.

31.	 Schwöppe C, Kessler T, Persigehl T, Liersch R, Hintelmann H,
Dreischalück J, Ring J, Bremer C, Heindel W, Mesters RM,
Berdel WE. Tissue-factor fusion proteins induce occlusion
of tumor vessels. Thrombosis Res. 2010; 125:S143–S150.

18.	 Ribatti D, Nico B, Crivellato E, Vacca A. The structure
of the vascular network of tumors. Cancer Lett. 2007;
248:18–23.

32.	 Magdolen V, Albrecht S, Kotzsch, M, Haller C, Bürgle
M, Jacob U, Großer M, Kessler H, Graeff H, Müller M,
Schmitt M, Luther T. Immunological and functional
analyses of the extracellular domain of human tissue factor.
Biol Chem. 1998; 379:157–165.

19.	 Narang AS, Varia S. Role of tumor vascular architecture
in drug delivery. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2011; 63:640–658.
20.	 Dvorak HF, Nagy JA, Dvorak JT, Dvorak AM.
Identification and characterization of the blood vessels of
solid tumors that are leaky to circulating macromolecules.
Am J Pathol. 1988; 133:95–109.

33.	 Hanes CS. Studies on plant amylases: The effect of
starch concentration upon the velocity of hydrolysis
by the amylase of germinated barley. Biochem J. 1932;
26:1406–14021.

21.	 McDonald DM, Choyke PL. Imaging of angiogenesis:
from microscope to clinic. Nat Med. 2003; 9:713–725.
22.	 Huang X, Molema G, King S, Watkins L, Edgington TS,
Thorpe PE. Tumor infarction in mice by antibodydirected targeting of tissue factor to tumor vasculature.
Science. 1997; 275:547–550.

34.	 Scatchard G. The attractions of proteins for small molecules
and ions. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1949; 51:660–672.
35.	 Schwöppe C, Zerbst C, Fröhlich M, Schliemann C, Kessler T,
Liersch R, Overkamp L, Holtmeier R, Stypmann J, Dreiling A,
König S, Höltke C, Lücke M, et al. Anticancer therapy by
tumor vessel infarction with polyethylene glycol conjugated
tissue factor. J Med Chem. 2013; 56:2337–2347.

23.	 Morrissey JH, Macik BG, Neuenschwander PF, Comp PC.
Quantitation of activated factor VII levels in plasma using
a tissue factor mutant selectively deficient in promoting
factor VII activation. Blood. 1993; 81:734–744.	
24.	 Nilsson F, Kosmehl H, Zardi L, Neri D. Targeted delivery
of tissue factor to the ED-B domain of fibronectin, a
marker of angiogenesis, mediates the infarction of solid
tumors in mice. Cancer Res. 2001; 61:711–716.

36.	 Dennis MS, Jin H, Dugger D, Yang R, McFarland L,
Ogasawara A, Williams S, Cole MJ, Ross S, Schwall R.
Imaging tumors with an albumin-binding Fab, a novel
tumor-targeting agent. Cancer Res. 2007; 67:254–261.

25.	 Liu C, Huang H, Donate F, Dickinson C, Santucci R,
El-Sheikh A, Vessella R, Edgington TS. Prostatespecific membrane antigen directed selective thrombotic
infarction of tumors. Cancer Res. 2002; 62:5470–5475.

37.	 Banner DW, D’Arcy A, Chène C, Winkler FK, Guha A,
Konigsberg WH, Nemerson Y, Kirchhofer D. The crystal
structure of the complex of blood coagulation factor VIIa
with soluble tissue factor. Nature. 1996; 380:41–46.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6788

Oncotarget

38.	 Ruf W, Rehemtulla A, Morrissey JH, Edgington TS.
Phospholipid-independent and -dependent interactions
required for tissue factor receptor and cofactor function.
J Biol Chem. 1991; 266:2158–2166, (erratum J Biol
Chem. 1991; 266:16256).

antibodies using immune complexes of alkaline
phosphatase and monoclonal anti-alkaline phosphatase
(APAAP complexes). J Histochem Cytochem. 1984;
32:219–229.

39. 	 Cordell JL, Falini B, Erber WN, Ghosh AK,
Abdulaziz Z, MacDonald S, Pulford KA, Stein H,
Mason DY. Immunoenzymatic labelling of monoclonal

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6789

Oncotarget

