www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2017, Vol. 8, (No. 3), pp: 3980-4000
Research Paper

Mechanisms of resistance to anti-EGFR therapy in colorectal
cancer
Ben Zhao1, Lu Wang1, Hong Qiu1, Mingsheng Zhang1, Li Sun1, Ping Peng1, Qianqian
Yu1 and Xianglin Yuan1
1

Department of Oncology, Tongji Hospital, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei Province, China

Correspondence to: Xianglin Yuan, email: yxl@medmail.com.cn
Keywords: colorectal cancer, epidermal growth factor receptor, targeted drug, primary resistance, acquired resistance
Received: May 31, 2016	

Accepted: December 05, 2016	

Published: December 18, 2016

ABSTRACT
Targeting the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) either alone or in
combination with chemotherapy is effective for patients with RAS wild type metastatic
colorectal cancer (mCRC). However, only a small percentage of mCRC patients are
sensitive to anti-EGFR therapy and even the best cases finally become refractory to
this therapy. It has become apparent that the RAS mutations correlate with resistance
to anti-EGFR therapy. However, these resistance mechanisms only account for nearly
35% to 50% of nonresponsive patients, suggesting that there might be additional
mechanisms. In fact, several novel pathways leading to escape from anti-EGFR
therapy have been reported in recent years. In this review, we provide an overview
of known and novel mechanisms that contribute to both primary and acquired antiEGFR therapy resistance, and enlist possible treatment strategies to overcome or
reverse this resistance.

INTRODUCTION

to the ERBB-family. Cetuximab and panitumumab bind
to the extracellular domain of EGFR, thereby preventing
activation of the receptor tyrosine kinase and of multiple
downstream signal transduction cascades that are related
to cell survival, proliferation, metastasis, and angiogenesis
(Figure 1) [14, 15]. Among the major downstream
pathways activated by EGFR, the RAS-RAF-MAPK,
PI3K-PTEN-AKT, and JAK/STAT pathways have also
been implicated in the resistance mechanisms against
antibody-mediated EGFR inhibition [16]. Any alterations
in their components, such as KRAS, NRAS, BRAF,
and PIK3CA gene mutations, can lead to constitutive
activation of EGFR and the ensuing intracellular signaling
and ultimately, to drug resistance [17, 18]. In the following
sections, we discuss recent research concerning antiEGFR therapy and present and overview of the possible
mechanisms that may contribute to the development of
primary and secondary resistance to anti-EGFR therapy
in mCRC.

Colorectal cancer (CRC) ranks among the third
most common human malignant diseases and is one
of the leading causes of cancer-related deaths globally
[1, 2]. In recent years, new anticancer drugs that target
oncogenic signaling pathways have been developed and
have demonstrated a prominent efficacy in the treatment of
metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC). Two representative
examples of such drugs are cetuximab and panitumumab,
two monoclonal antibodies (moAbs) against the epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR), which have been proven
to be effective for patients with RAS wild type (RASWT) mCRC in randomized clinical trials [3-9]. However,
only a small percentage of mCRC patients are sensitive
to anti-EGFR therapy [10], and even those who initially
respond to the therapy eventually develop resistance to
it [11-13]. Numerous studies have been conducted to
explore resistance mechanisms to EGFR blockade, and it
seems that several biomarkers and pathways are involved
in the development of resistance to anti-EGFR therapy.
Here, we provide an overview of these potential resistance
mechanisms that can facilitate further improvement of
anti-EGFR therapies.
EGFR (also called ERBB1/HER1) is a
transmembrane receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) belonging
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

PRIMARY RESISTANCE TO ANTI-EGFR
THERAPY IN CRC
Early studies have demonstrated that about 80% of
unselected mCRCs do not benefit from anti-EGFR therapy
[2, 19-21], suggesting that primary resistance to anti3980

Oncotarget

EGFR therapy is common in CRC. Consequently, new
drugs that target a single EGFR still have great limitations
in the treatment of mCRC.

with the clinical responsiveness to EGFR tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKI) in patients with non-small-cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) [24]. A similar result was observed in
the use of the anti-HER2/neu receptor moAb trastuzumab
for patients with metastatic breast cancer, in which the
degree of HER2 expression correlates with response to
trastuzumab [25]. However, mutations in the EGFR kinase
domain are an extremely rare event in patients with CRC,
and when they do occur, they are not associated with
patient response [26]. Therefore, numerous studies were
focused on the altered gene copy number of EGFR [22,
27, 28].
In a cohort study examining the correlation between
EGFR gene copy number and clinical response to antiEGFR therapy [22], about 90% of patients with objective
responses after cetuximab or panitumumab treatment
showed increased EGFR copy number (assessed by
fluorescence in situ hybridization, FISH). In contrast,
only 5% of the non-responders showed an increased
EGFR copy number. More importantly, these data

Alterations in EGFR and EGFR ligands
Alterations of the EGFR, including EGFR gene
copy number and EGFR-specific ligands, have been
considered in recent years, and both have been confirmed
to be associated with responses to EGFR inhibitors in
retrospective clinical trials [22, 23].
Low EGFR gene copy number
It is certain that preclinical and/or clinical studies
with an EGFR-targeted agent often demonstrated the
complex relationship between EGFR alterations (somatic
mutations and gene copy number variations) and the
efficacy of the anti-EGFR therapy. In 2004, Thomas et
al. found that mutations in EGFR strikingly correlate

Figure 1: EGFR-mediated signaling pathways and mechanisms of anti-EGFR therapy. EGFR ligands bind the extracellular
domain of EGFR, lead receptor activation and stimulate downstream signaling pathways that are crucial for cell growth and proliferation.
Cetuximab or Panitumumab prevents ligand binding to EGFR, thus blocking EGFR signaling.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3981

Oncotarget

Low expression of AREG and EREG

indicate that almost none of the patients (20 of 21 nonresponders) with a low EGFR gene copy number could
benefit from anti-EGFR therapy. Subsequently, SartoreBianchi et al. obtained a similar result in a larger and more
homogeneous cohort [27]. Both analyses indicate that
EGFR gene copy number might contribute to resistance
to anti-EGFR therapy. Nevertheless, the degree of EGFR
expression does not seem to correlate with effectiveness
of EGFR inhibitors, therefore, the mechanism thereby
the EGFR copy number influences the response to
EGFR-targeted drugs remains unknown and requires
more exploration. Moreover, due to technical obstacles
and considerable discrepancies between scoring systems
at present, evaluation of sensitivity to anti-EGFR drugs
through estimation of EGFR gene copy number is still
unpractical in clinical practice [29, 30].

AREG and EREG are EGFR-specific ligands that
have a key effect on intracellular signaling and are strongly
related with response to anti-EGFR therapy. For example,
in a prospective clinical trial of 110 patients with mCRC
[23], the AREG and EREG gene expression levels, which
were measured from pre-treatment metastatic biopsies,
were found to be associated with cetuximab efficacy. Data
from gene expression profiles show that patients with
tumors expressing high levels of the EGFR ligands AREG
and EREG, are more likely to respond to cetuximab
(EREG, P = 0.000015; AREG, P = 0.000025) when
compared with patients showing low expression of these
ligands. A later study on larger cohorts described a similar
observation in KRAS wild type (WT) patients [31]. In this
study, the gene expression of both EREG and AREG, as
well as the status of KRAS were taken into account. In
patients with KRAS WT tumors, there was a significant

Figure 2: Aberrated genetic alterations in the members of EGFR signaling pathways induce resistance to anti-EGFR
therapy. Aberrated genetic alterations, including RAS, BRAF, PIK3CA, EGFR S492R mutations, PTEN loss, and STAT3 phosphorylation
contribute to the resistance through constitutive activation of EGFR downstream signaling cascades regardless of EGFR blockade. The
molecules implicated in EGFR signaling and affected by resistant alterations are highlighted in special colors and described in note.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3982

Oncotarget

correlation between EREG and AREG expression levels
and progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival
(OS). For example, in the high EREG expression group,
the median OS was 65 weeks, whereas in the low EREG
expression group, it was 31 weeks. Similar data were
obtained for AREG. Interestingly, KRAS WT patients with
low ligand expression essentially respond like those with
KRAS mutant tumors, and both show the worst response
to cetuximab. In summary, low AREG and EREG gene
expression levels correlate with resistance to anti-EGFR
therapy. In fact, the expression of AREG and EREG is
coordinately regulated, and plays an important role in
tumor growth and survival by generating an autocrine
loop through EGFR (Figure 1). Low levels of expression
of AREG and EREG may characterize a tumor that is less
dependent on EGFR and, therefore, particularly prone to
develop resistance to EGFR inhibitors.
All the data presented above identify a relationship
between EGFR copy number and EGFR ligand

expression, and outcome. Altogether, these findings clearly
demonstrate that anti-EGFR moAbs are likely to work
most efficiently against amplified targets.

RAS mutation
RAS family genes (including KRAS, NRAS and
HRAS) that encode guanosine-5′-triphosphate (GTP)binding proteins play important roles in EGFR-activated
signaling pathways [21, 32]. Activating mutations in RAS
are common in CRC. RAS mutations are detected in about
50% of CRC patients; KRAS mutations are found in about
40% of cases, NRAS mutations are found in about 3-5%
of cases, and HRAS mutations are negligible events [33,
34]. Mutations in RAS genes often lead to constitutive
activation of RAS proteins and RAS downstream effector
pathways (Figure 2). Persistent downstream signaling
through the RAS axis can activate multiple processes

Figure 3: Aberrated activations of the bypass pathways induce resistance to anti-EGFR therapy. EGFR downstream
effectors can be activated by alternative and/or compensatory membrane growth factors, includingIGF-1R, MET, HER2, and VEGFR.
These growth factors then trigger intracellular signaling pathways bypassing EGFR and induce tumour cell growth and proliferation, and
lead resistance to anti-EGFR therapy.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3983

Oncotarget

involved in tumor progression and metastasis without
the influence of EGFR and other cell surface receptor
kinases [32]. Therefore, it can be readily anticipated
that mutations in the RAS gene will play a major role in
primary resistance to anti-EGFR therapy.

associated with response to anti-EGFR therapy [4245]. In an updated analysis of the randomized phase III
CRYSTAL study, the treatment outcomes of patients with
KRAS exon 2 wild-type tumors were reassessed with
respect to additional RAS mutations (KRAS exons 3 and
4; NRAS exons 2, 3 and 4) [46]. In summary, Van Cutsem
et al. found that approximately 15% (63/430 patients) of
patients with the KRAS exon 2 wild type disease had other
RAS mutations. The presence of these extended RAS
mutations was associated with poor response to additional
use of cetuximab for both PFS (7.2 VS 6.9mon, HR =
0.81, P = 0.56) and OS (18.2 VS 20.7mon, HR = 1.22,
P = 0.50). In contrast, patients with tumors that had no
RAS mutations showed significantly longer PFS (11.4 VS
8.4mon, HR = 0.56, P < 0.001) and OS (28.4 VS 20.2mon,
HR = 0.69, P = 0.0024) when cetuximab was added to
chemotherapy. Thus, similar to findings in patients with
KRAS exon 2 mutations, additional RAS mutations
might also play an important role in anti-EGFR therapy
resistance in patients with mCRC.
Furthermore, a recent subset analysis of data from
the PRIME trial showed a consistent result that mutations
occurring beyond the KRAS exon 2 could predict a lack
of clinical benefit from Panitumumab administered in
combination with first-line chemotherapy [44]. In this
study, Doulliard et al. present the negative effects of
panitumumab treatment with FOLOFX4 on PFS and OS
in patients with tumors bearing mutations in KRAS exon
3 (at codon 61) or 4 (at codons 117 and 146), or in NRAS
exon 2 (at codons 12 and 13), 3 (at codon 61), or 4 (at
codons 117 and 146).
Altogether, the current findings clearly show that
RAS mutations in exon 2, 3, or 4 (KRAS G13D mutation
is still under debate) represent the most important
predictive biomarkers of primary resistance to anti-EGFR
therapy in mCRC. For this reason, patients with any
known RAS mutation should not be treated with either
cetuximab or panitumumab.

KRAS exon 2 mutations
In CRC, about 85-90% of KRAS mutations occur
in exon 2 (codons 12 and 13) [21, 35]. A large number
of retrospective trials over the last decade have strongly
suggested that patients with KRAS mutations in codon
12 or 13 do not beneﬁt from anti-EGFR therapy [3, 5,
36, 37]. Indeed, KRAS exon 2 mutations are by far the
most common predictor of resistance to the anti-EGFR
drugs cetuximab and panitumumab in patients with
mCRC, and have been used to plan appropriately the
treatment regimen in clinical practice. All CRC patients
are now compulsively tested for seven mutations in the
KRAS codons 12 and 13 before receiving cetuximab or
panitumumab [20].
However, conflicting data exist regarding the codon
13 mutation (G13D) of KRAS gene [38, 39]. A large
number of retrospective studies indicated that patients
carrying the KRAS G13D mutation might derive benefit
from treatment with cetuximab [38]. In this analysis, that
data of 579 patients with chemotherapy-refractory CRC
treated with cetuximab from seven studies were pooled
together. Finally, patients with the KRAS G13D mutant
tumors achieved better OS and PFS in comparison with
patients with tumors harboring other KRAS mutations
(OS: 7.6 VS 5.7mon, HR = 0.50, P = 0.004; PFS: 4.0 VS
1.9mon, HR = 0.51, P = 0.005). A positive correlation was
found between KRAS G13D mutations and OS benefit
with cetuximab treatment. Moreover, a further analysis
that investigated the updated pooled data sets from the
CRYSTAL and OPUS studies designed by Tejpar et
al. also shows a similar result [39]. In contrast, a more
recent retrospective analysis of 110 patients treated with
cetuximab, indicates that patients with KRAS G13D
mutations were unlikely to respond to cetuximab [40].
There was no signiﬁcant difference between patients
carrying KRAS G13D mutations and patients with other
KRAS mutations in terms of OS and PFS (OS: 8.2 VS
14.6mon, HR = 0.50, P = 0.084; PFS: 4.96 VS 3.1mon,
HR = 0.88, P = 0.72). Consistent with the above analysis,
patients with tumors harboring the KRAS G13D mutations
were unlikely to benefit from panitumumab therapy in a
pooled analysis of three randomized phase III trials [41].
Overall, due to the limitations of the retrospective nature
of the present analysis and the low number of patients
with such specific mutations, the role of KRAS G13D
mutations in the mechanism of primary resistance to antiEGFR therapies remains controversial.

BRAF mutations
Although it is clear that the RAS status could help
identify a patient population that is unlikely to benefit
from anti-EGFR therapy, not all patients with tumors
containing wild-type RAS respond to treatment with antiEGFR therapy. Additional molecular alterations in the
downstream components of the EGFR signaling network
are also likely to associate with resistance to anti-EGFR
moAbs. Among these, BRAF, a downstream effector
of RAS in the EGFR pathway, has been a subject of
focus. Approximately 5% to 9% of CRC harbor BRAF
mutations. More than 95% of these mutations occur in the
BRAF V600E allele [47]. The BRAF V600E mutation is
able to promote tumor cell proliferation and survival by
constitutive activation of the mitogen-activated protein
kinase (MAPK) signaling pathway (Figure2) [48-50].

Extended RAS: NRAS and other KRAS mutations
Recently, it has been shown that the mutational
status of other RAS family genes outside exon 2 is also
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3984

Oncotarget

Activation of PIK3CA/PTEN signaling pathway

Moreover, preclinical and clinical studies have suggested
that, regardless of EGFR blockade, mutations in the
BRAF V600E can still lead to persistent activation of
downstream signaling resulting in cell proliferation and
survival [48-50].
It has become clear that the BRAF V600E mutation
is a marker of resistance to anti-EGFR therapy in the
chemotherapy-refractory setting. A retrospective trial
with clinical data from 11 centers in seven European
countries analyzed the effect of BRAF mutations on the
efficacy of cetuximab plus chemotherapy in patients
with chemotherapy-refractory mCRC [17]. This trial
concluded that patients with BRAF V600E mutations
showed a significantly lower response rate than those
with wild type tumors (8.3% vs. 38.0%, OR = 0.15, P
= 0.0012). A similar result was demonstrated in a more
recent multicenter randomized PICCOLO trial [51].
Taken together, these data suggest that the BRAF V600E
mutation contributes to resistance to anti-EGFR moAbs
in patients with chemotherapy-refractory KRAS wild-type
mCRC. However, observations from first-line therapies are
not entirely concordant with this conclusion. In a recent
retrospective analysis, Van Cutsem et al. showed that
carriers of BRAF mutation gained additional benefit from
cetuximab in combination with first-line chemotherapy
[5].
To further identify the role of BRAF mutations in
the response to EGFR inhibition in patients with mCRC,
numerous meta-analyses have been carried out. Of these,
one recently published study identified 10 randomized
controlled trials (including CRYSTAL and OPUS trials)
that enrolled 463 patients with BRAF mutations [52]. It
shows that the addition of cetuximab or panitumumab
treatment did not significantly enhance the benefit of
standard therapy or the best supportive care among RASwild-type/BRAF-mutated patients in terms of both PFS
(HR, 0.88; 95% CI, 0.67-1.14; P = 0.33) and OS (HR,
0.91; 95% CI, 0.62-1.34; P = 0.63). Overall, it suggests
that BRAF mutations are in fact associated with resistance
to anti-EGFR therapy. Based on these data, a novel
combination therapy of BRAF and EGFR inhibitors was
administered in patients with BRAF-mutant CRC, and in
some of the cases it resulted in improved response rates
[53, 54].
These findings therefore, demonstrate a strong
causal relationship between the presence of the BRAF
V600E mutation and resistance to anti-EGFR therapy
in mCRC. We believe that, similar to KRAS, the BRAF
V600E mutation could also identify patients that are
unlikely to respond to EGFR inhibition. In addition,
BRAF mutations are limited to tumors that do not carry
the RAS mutation [55]. Therefore, consideration of both
BRAF and RAS mutations in tumors before administering
anti-EGFR therapy can help identify more than half of the
non-responders.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

In addition to the RAS/RAF axis, EGFR also
triggers the PIK3CA/PTEN signaling pathway. Both these
pathways are major downstream pathways of EGFR and
can be blocked by EGFR inhibitors, resulting in tumor
cell apoptosis [16]. However, molecular alterations of
the PIK3CA/PTEN pathway, including active mutations
of PIK3CA or the loss of PTEN expression, can lead to
activation of downstream signaling pathways through
EGFR-independent mechanisms (Figure 2). Therefore,
the role of activated PIK3CA/PTEN signaling in the
development of EGFR inhibition resistance has been
explored.
Mutations in PIK3CA exon 20
PIK3CA, a catalytic subunit of class I PI3K,
encodes the p110a protein kinase, which is a downstream
effector of EGFR. Mutations of PIK3CA are reported in
approximately 10-18% of mCRC patients and can coexist
with both RAS and BRAF mutations [56, 57]. More than
80% of these mutations occur in exon 9 (E542K, E545K)
or exon 20 (H1047R) [17]. PIK3CA mutations lead to
constitutive activation of the p110a protein kinase and its
downstream signaling pathway, thus resulting in tumor
cell proliferation and survival.
In mCRC, several studies have evaluated the
potential role of PIK3CA mutations as a predictor of
resistance to anti-EGFR therapy [21, 58-60]. However,
the results of these studies were highly inconsistent. In
order to explain these conflicting results, subtle alterations
of PIK3CA were explored. Indeed, biochemical studies
show that the PIK3CA mutations in exon 9 and exon 20
have different effects. Exon 9 mutations trigger gain of
function through RAS-GTP binding, whereas exon 20
mutations do so independent of interaction with RAS-GTP
[61]. Thus, it is reasonable to assume that PIK3CA exon
9 and exon 20 mutations may exert different effects upon
treatment with anti-EGFR moAbs. In a large retrospective
study that investigated the effect of PIK3CA mutations
on the response to cetuximab-based therapy [17], the
European consortium found that in the KRAS wild-type
background, carriers of PIK3CA exon 20 mutations
showed significantly lower response rates than carriers
of wild-type PIK3CA (0·0% vs. 36·8%; 95% CI 0·000·89; P = 0·029), whereas exon 9 mutations showed no
significant effect (28·6% vs. 36·3%; 95% CI 0·25-1·78; P
= 0·47). Subsequently, the conclusion drawn from a metaanalysis of 13 retrospective cohort studies was that only
PIK3CA exon 20 mutations were associated with a lack
of response to anti-EGFR MoAbs [62]. Overall, it is clear
that PIK3CA exon 9 mutations and exon 20 mutations
differ in their predictive power with respect to anti-EGFR
therapy responses.
Based on the review of the current literature, it
seems that PIK3CA exon 20 mutations are associated with
3985

Oncotarget

Persistent activation of STAT3, mediated by autocrine and
paracrine production of cytokines through the JAK family,
as well as activation of tyrosine kinases, such as EGFR and
SRC, plays a critical role in oncogenesis, angiogenesis,
invasion, metastasis and immune system suppression
(Figure 2) [69]. Accumulating evidence supports a role
for STAT proteins also in resistance to EGFR inhibitors
in several preclinical models, including glioma, head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), and non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) [70, 71]. These results provide
evidence that STAT3, constitutively activated in CRC,
may also play an important role in anti-EGFR treatment
resistance.
In a recent study, Qiong Li et al. investigated the
mechanism underlying the disappointing effect of the
EGFR inhibitor gefitinib in CRC cells, and found that
STAT3 phosphorylation (pSTAT3) highly correlated
with gefitinib resistance in CRC cells [72]. Their study
demonstrates that elevated pSTAT3 levels, mediated by
nuclear pyruvate kinase isoform M2 (PKM2), are linked to
gefitinib-resistance in CRC cells. Furthermore, inhibition
of STAT3 activity by Stattic, a STAT3-specifc inhibitor, or
STAT3-specifc siRNA significantly enhanced the efficacy
of gefitinib against CRC cells, both in vitro and in vivo. A
similar result was obtained by AS Yar Saglam et al., who
demonstrate that combined treatment with cucurbitacin
B, a JAK/STAT3 pathway inhibitor, and gefitinib could
lead to enhanced antitumor activity in human CRC cells.
Therefore, combining EGFR blockade with suppression of
JAK/STAT3 signaling is more effective in inhibiting CRC
cell growth than inhibition of either pathway alone [73].
These findings suggest that activation of the JAK/
STAT3 pathway could contribute to EGFR inhibition
resistance in CRC, and targeting the STAT3 pathway may
enhance the antitumor effects of EGFR inhibitors and
therefore abrogate anti-EGFR therapy resistance.

resistance to anti-EGFR moAbs. However, considering the
relatively low frequency of occurrence of these mutations,
large randomized clinical trials need to be conducted
before definitive conclusions can be drawn.
PTEN loss
PTEN negatively regulates the PI3K-AKT signaling
pathway through its lipid phosphatase activity, and acts
as a tumor suppressor gene. PTEN activity can be lost
through either PTEN gene silencing or mutation [63].
Loss of PTEN expression is estimated to occur in about
20-40% of patients with mCRC [64]. This loss results
in constitutive activation of the PI3K-AKT signaling
pathway, leading to tumor cell proliferation and survival.
In breast cancer patients, loss of PTEN protein has
been identified as a negative predictor of the efficacy of
rastuzumab, an anti-HER2 moAb [65]. However, the role
of PTEN loss in CRC remains uncertain. Several studies
have reported conflicting and inconclusive results on the
impact of PTEN loss on anti-EGFR resistance [59, 66,
67]. For example, Sartore-Bianchi et al. showed in 2009,
that PTEN loss is associated with decreased response rate
(RR), PFS, and OS in a cohort of 110 patients treated
with anti-EGFR moAbs [59]. However, in the same year,
Laurent-Puig et al. reported that no significant differences
were found in terms of RR, PFS, or OS in association with
PTEN expression in a larger patient series [66]. Moreover,
another study by Loupakis et al. has confirmed that the
data on the loss of PTEN expression are not completely
concordant between primary tumors and metastases [67].
In this study, one of 22 patients (5%) with PTEN-negative
(detected by the IHC method) metastases responded to
cetuximab-based treatment, whereas 12 of 33 patients
(36%) with PTEN-positive metastases were partial
responders (OR, 12.00; 95% CI, 1.43 to 100.75; P =
0.007). However, such differences with respect to PTEN
expression were not observed in primary tumors.
Since there are numerous differences in the analysis
of PTEN expression, including IHC scoring algorithms
and inconsistent expression in primary and metastatic
tumor samples, loss of PTEN expression cannot be
reliably regarded as a negative biomarker of the efficacy of
anti-EGFR moAbs. Further investigation and prospective
large randomized clinical trials are still required to fully
confirm the role of PTEN in anti-EGFR therapy resistance.

Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT)
EMT is a complex biological process wherein
epithelial cells procedurally lose their original morphology
and simultaneously acquire mesenchymal characteristics
[74]. EMT enhances the motility and invasion potential of
cells and contributes to a number of cancer-related events,
including cancer invasion, metastasis, and treatment
resistance [75]. Previous research suggests that the EMTlike transitions that occur in carcinoma cells attenuate the
role of EGFR signaling in regulating cell proliferation and
survival [76]. These studies consider EMT as a kinase
switching mechanism, which, in case of EGFR kinase
blockade, leads to signaling activation through alternative
tyrosine kinases. Therefore, an EMT-like transition has
been implicated as a potential mechanism of anti-EGFR
therapy resistance.
In a preclinical analysis, Buck et al. observed a
strong correlation between E-cadherin (epithelial marker)

Excess activation of JAK/STAT signaling pathway
The Janus family of tyrosine kinases (JAK) and the
signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)
family are necessary components of cytokine receptor
signaling that are actively involved in cellular survival,
proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis. STAT3 is a
member of the STAT family of transcription factors that
mediate cellular responses to cytokines and growth factors,
and is upregulated in many cancers, including CRC [68].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3986

Oncotarget

Secondary alterations in the RAS/RAF signaling
pathway

expression and growth inhibition by EGFR inhibitors in
CRC cells [77]. Accordingly, epithelial cell lines showed
7-fold more sensitivity to an EGFR inhibitor compared to
mesenchymal-like CRC cells. Moreover, the resistance of
mesenchymal-like CRC cells to anti-EGFR drugs could
be overcome upon combined inhibition of EGFR and
CRIPTO, an important signaling node that induces EMT
[78]. Overall, the data support a possible role of EMT as
a mediator of resistance to anti-EGFR drugs in CRC cells.
However, are cellular mesenchymal-like alterations
generated during the course of anti-EGFR treatment,
and do they contribute to acquired resistance as well? To
answer this question, Sandra Schmitz et al. extended their
study to compare pre- and post-cetuximab tumor biopsies
for gene and protein expression [79]. As a result, both gene
expression profile analysis and quantitative real-time PCR
showed significantly increased expression of the known
EMT markers LEF1, TWIST1, and ZEB1 in post-treatment
biopsies compared with pre-treatment biopsies. This study
demonstrates that anti-EGFR treatment could promote
EMT, and consequently, contribute to the development of
resistance to the treatment itself.
In the phase III randomized TRIBUTE trial, EMT
was proven to be related with insensitivity to erlotinib in
patients with NSCLC [80]. However, there is no clinical
evidence for EMT-induced resistance to EGFR inhibitors
in mCRC. Indeed, compared with lung cancer, the current
research on EMT-induced resistance in mCRC is very
limited. There are still many questions related to EMTinduced resistance in mCRC that need to be answered,
such as: 1) What are the mechanisms of EMT-induced
resistance? and 2) Can the preclinical studies translate
into clinical practice? Although limited data are available
for mCRC, we believe that these lacunae will be filled
by further evaluation in future studies. Furthermore,
an understanding of EMT related resistance to EGFR
targeting could provide novel therapeutic opportunities
for CRC treatment.

The RAS/RAF signaling axis is one of the most
important downstream signaling pathways of EGFR and
has been highlighted by its role in primary resistance to
anti-EGFR therapy in mCRC. Indeed, genetic alterations
in RAS/RAF signaling are also the most common
molecular mechanism that drives secondary resistance.
KRAS mutations, in addition to being a key driver of
primary resistance to anti-EGFR antibodies in CRC, play
a vital role in acquired resistance as well. Approximately
50% of acquired resistance cases occur due to secondary
KRAS mutations [82, 83]. Both pre-clinical models and
clinical samples have proven that the emergence of KRAS
mutations is a mediator of acquired resistance to EGFR
inhibitors. In 2010, Bouchahda et al. reported the first case
of CRC liver metastasis, wherein tumor KRAS mutations
were detected after the development of resistance to
cetuximab [84]. In this case, no KRAS mutation was
detected in the primary or metastatic tumor samples before
the beginning of the cetuximab treatment. However, upon
cetuximab treatment, further liver relapse occurred, and
two KRAS mutations at codon 13 and 12 were detected
in the metachronous liver metastatic tissues. A similar
study was subsequently performed by Misale et al., who
analyzed the molecular profiles of relapsed tumors from
CRC patients [83]. Six of the 10 patients that were KRAS
wild type prior to treatment showed KRAS mutations
in their plasma samples while receiving cetuximab. In
contrast, KRAS mutations were not detected in patients
who underwent chemotherapy alone. Interestingly, in the
same study, Misale et al. also found one relapsed case,
where the patient receiving anti-EGFR moAbs exhibited
KRAS amplification, which is an otherwise infrequent
event in CRC. It is therefore clear that the emergence of
KRAS mutations and KRAS amplification is associated
with acquired resistance to EGFR inhibitors. Likewise,
secondary mutations in NRAS and BRAF are also
associated with secondary resistance. For instance, in
a preclinical model, cetuximab- and/or panitumumabresistant CRC cell lines, initially sensitive to anti-EGFR
moAbs, developed resistance after continuous anti-EGFR
treatment. Strikingly, in addition to the alterations at the
known hotspots of the KRAS gene, NRAS and BRAF
mutations were also found in the resistant populations and
also in some cell lines harboring multiple mutations [85].
However, this emergence of “acquired genetic
alterations” in RAS/RAF signaling raises the question of
whether these alterations are novel spontaneous mutations
or whether they are selected from pre-existing resistant
subclones by the anti-EGFR therapy. Misale et al. and
Diaz et al. addressed this question following different
approaches, either in vitro or in vivo [82, 83]. Strikingly,
both groups arrived at a similar explanation namely, that
“acquired” alterations in KRAS could be an expansion of

ACQUIRED RESISTANCE TO ANTIEGFR THERAPY IN CRC
Nearly all patients with mCRC that initially respond
to EGFR monoclonal antibodies eventually show disease
progression. This progression upon anti-EGFR therapy
is known as acquired resistance. Clinical data indicate
that response to anti-EGFR therapies is relatively shortlived and most tumors become refractory within 3-12
months [81]. It is therefore conceivable that numerous
mechanisms might contribute to this acquired resistance
to anti-EGFR antibodies.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3987

Oncotarget

Table 1: Genetic and histologic evidence for resistance to anti-EGFR drugs in CRC.
Reference/study

Patients
included in Study type
analysis, n

Genetic and histologic evidence

Low EGFR gene copy number	
Moroni et al. [22]

31

Clinical study

Sartore-Bianchi et al. [27]

92

Clinical study

Low EGFR gene copy number was significantly associated with nonresponse after treatment with cetuximab or panitumumab (with or without
chemotherapy).
Low EGFR gene copy number was significantly associated with nonresponse and shorter PFS and OS after treatment with panitumumab.

Low expression of AREG and EREG
Low expression of AREG and EREG was significantly associated with
non-response and shorter PFS and OS after treatment with cetuximab.
Low expression of AREG and EREG was significantly associated with
non-response and shorter PFS and OS after treatment with cetuximab plus
irinotecan.

Khambata-Ford et al. [23]

110

Clinical study

Jacobs et al. [31]

220

Clinical study

10

Acquired EGFR ectodomain mutation (S492R) prevents cetuximab
Preclinical and binding and confers resistance to cetuximab in human mCRC cell line
clinical study
DiFi. Two of ten individuals with mCRC with disease progression after
cetuximab treatment acquired S492R mutation .

-

Clinical study

-

Clinical study

De Roock et al. [17]

1022

Clinical study

Rowland et al. [52]

463

Meta-analysis

1022

Clinical study

PIK3CA exon 20 mutations were significantly associated with nonresponse
and shorter PFS and OS after treatment with cetuximab plus chemotherapy.

Clinical study
Clinical study

PTEN loss was significantly associated with decreased RR, PFS, and OS in
mCRC patients treated with panitumumab or cetuximab (with or without
chemotherapy).
PTEN expression was not significantly associated with RR, PFS, or OS in
mCRC patients treated with cetuximab plus chemotherapy.

Preclinical
study

Elevated phospho-STAT3 levels correlate with geftinibc resistance in CRC
cells and are regulated by nuclear PKM2.

EGFR S492R mutation

Montagut et al. [109]

RAS mutation
Allegra et al. [37]a

Allegra et al. [35]b

KRAS exon 2 (codon 12 and 13) mutations were significantly associated
with non-response and shorter PFS and OS in mCRC patients treated with
cetuximab or panitumumab (with or without chemotherapy).
RAS mutations in exons 2 (codons 12 and 13), 3 (codons 59 and 61), and 4
(codons 117 and 146) of both KRAS and NRAS were associated with nonresponse and shorter PFS and OS in mCRC patients treated with cetuximab
or panitumumab (with or without chemotherapy).

BRAF V600E mutation
BRAF V600E mutation was significantly associated with a low RR in
mCRC patients treated with cetuximab plus chemotherapy.
BRAF mutation was significantly associated with shorter PFS and
OS after treatment with cetuximab or panitumumab (with or without
chemotherapy).

PIK3CA exon 20 mutation
De Roock et al. [17]

PTEN loss
Sartore-Bianchi et al. [59]

110

Laurent-Puig et al. [66]

102

STAT3 phosphorylation
Li et al. [72]

-

Activated IGF1R

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3988

Oncotarget

168

Clinical study

Elevated expression of IGF1 was significantly associated with lower RR
and shorter PFS and OS after treatment with cetuximab plus irinotecan.

Liska et al. [102]

-

Bardelli et al. [87]

7

Preclinical
study
Preclinical and
clinical study

HGF-induced MET activation could confer resistance to cetuximab in
CRC cells.
MET amplification is associated with primary resistance to cetuximab in
CRC patient-derived tumor xenografts. MET amplification is associated
to acquired resistance to cetuximab or panitumumab in mCRC patients.

Scartozzi et al. [94]
MET amplification

HER2 amplification
Yonesaka et al. [104]

303

Bertotti et al. [105]

-

Preclinical and HER2 gene amplification or overexpression of the HER3/4 ligand,
clinical study
heregulin, was significantly associated with lower RR and shorter PFS
and OS after treatment with cetuximab (with or without chemotherapy).
Preclinical
HER2 gene amplification was specifically related with non-response to
study
cetuximab in CRC patient-derived tumor xenografts.

Altered VEGF/VEGFR

-

Preclinical
study
Preclinical
study

VEGF was found increased secretion in EGFR inhibitor–resistant CRC
cells.
VEGF as well as VEGFR1 was secreted at higher levels in cetuximabresistant CRC cells compared with the parental cetuximab-sensitive CRC
cells.

-

Preclinical
study

The occurrence of EMT was associated with erlotinibc resistance in CRC
cells.

Ciardiello et al. [113]

-

Bianco et al. [114]
EMT
Buck et al. [77]

Abbreviation: PFS: progression-free survival, OS: overall survival, RR: response rate, PKM2: pyruvate kinase isoform M2,
HGF: hepatocyte growth factor, EMT: epithelial-mesenchymal transition.
a: analysis from five single-group studies and five randomised clinical trials. b: analysis from 11 systematic reviews with meta
analyses, two retrospective analyses, and two health technology assessments based on a systematic review. c: EGFR kinase
inhibitor.
pre-existing resistant clones under the pressure of antiEGFR moAbs. Furthermore, given the existence of interand intra-tumor heterogeneity, the explanation of latent
resistant clones seems more convincing. In conclusion,
acquired RAS and BRAF genetic alterations have been
identified as a mechanism of acquired resistance to antiEGFR therapy in CRC and these genetic alterations most
likely arise because of clonal selection of pre-existing
resistant cells.

growth factor receptor-2 (HER2) [86-88], can activate
EGFR downstream effectors and trigger the ensuing
intracellular signaling pathways by bypassing EGFR,
thus inducing tumor cell proliferation and resistance to
apoptosis (Figure 3).
Activation of the IGF-1R pathway
IGF-1R belongs to a family of transmembrane
tyrosine kinases. IGF-1R is activated upon insulin-like
growth factor (IGF) 1 or IGF-2 binding, and leads to
downstream activation of the RAS/RAF/MAPK and PI3K/
AKT pathways [86, 89]. In addition, strong molecular
cross talk between the IGF-1R and EGFR networks has
been demonstrated during recent years. Preclinical studies
have shown that activated signaling through IGF-1R leads
to increased activation of EGFR [90-92]. Therefore, the
effect of anti-EGFR therapy may be bypassed through the
activation of alternative, IGF-1R-induced pathways. For
instance, in breast cancer, increased activation of the IGF1R/PI3K/AKT pathway has been found in an anti-EGFR
agents and linked with acquired resistance to anti-EGFR
moAbs [93]. Similarly, recent studies have implicated

Activation of alternative growth factor receptor
pathways
The other major mechanism of acquired resistance
to anti-EGFR moAbs is the activation of growth-factor
signaling pathways by upregulation of alternative and
compensatory signaling cascades through receptors
other than EGFR. For example, numerous growth factor
receptors, such as type 1 insulin-like growth factor
receptor (IGF-1R), mesenchymal-epithelial transition
factor receptor (MET receptor), and the human epidermal
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3989

Oncotarget

IGF-1R and its ligands (IGF-1/IGF-2) in acquired
resistance to anti-EGFR therapy in CRC [92, 94]. In a
retrospective study of 168 patients with KRAS wild-type
mCRC, the expression of IGF1 was evaluated in terms
of clinical outcome in patients treated with irinotecan and
cetuximab [94]. The result showed that a numerically
lower response rate (22% vs. 65%; HR, 4.2; 95% CI,
2.0-10.2; P = 0.003) was seen in IGF-1-positive groups
compared to IGF-1-negative groups. This significant
difference demonstrates that increased activation of the
IGF-1R pathway is correlated with resistance to antiEGFR therapy.
As a potential biomarker of resistance to anti-EGFR
agents, IGF-1R has recently emerged as an attractive
therapeutic target. Preclinical data have demonstrated
that combined inhibition of IGF-1R and EGFR resulted
in an enhanced anti-tumor effect in xenograft models
[95]. Although in numerous early clinical analyses
neither IGFR inhibitors alone nor the combination with
anti-EGFR moAbs showed any promising anti-tumor
activity in patients with anti-EGFR moAb-refractory
mCRC [96], in a more recent randomized phase II/III
study, a response to the IGF-1R inhibitor was identified
by further exploratory biomarker analyses [97]. In this
study, 344 eligible patients with KRAS wild-type tumors
were randomly assigned to dalotuzumab (IGF1R inhibitor)
or placebo in combination with cetuximab and irinotecan.
The results showed that the addition of dalotuzumab did
not improve PFS or OS compared to the placebo group.
However, when the effect of the treatment was further
evaluated with respect to IGF-1 expression, improvements
in PFS (5.6 vs. 3.6 months; HR = 0.59; 95% CI = 0.28 to
1.23; P = 0.16) and OS (17.9 vs. 9.4 months; HR = 0.67;
95% CI = 0.31 to 1.45; P = 0.31) were observed in IGF-1
positive tumors compared to IGF-1 negative tumors when
dalotuzumab was added. In contrast, the placebo group
showed shorter PFS (3.6 vs. 6.6 months; HR = 2.15; 95%
CI = 1.15 to 4.02; P = 0.02), and OS (9.4 vs. 15.5 months;
HR = 2.42; 95% CI = 1.21 to 4.82; P = 0.01) in patients
with IGF-1 positive tumors. These synergistic anti-tumor
effects further support a role for IGF-1R as a mediator of
resistance to anti-EGFR agents.
In conclusion, the IGF system has been attributed an
important role in the mechanisms of anti-EGFR therapy
resistance in CRC. However, in order to establish the
reliable use of IGFR inhibitors in specific anti-EGFR
resistant patients a more comprehensive analysis of the
existing data is required.

activation of MET/PI3K/AKT signaling has been
identified as one of the key compensatory pathways to
escape the inhibitory effects of the EGFR TKI gefitinib
[99, 100]. Moreover, a complex cross-signaling network
between EGFR and MET has also emerged in the past
few years [98, 101]. EGFR-MET interactions with
subsequent activation of the MET pathway induced by
the overexpression of TGF-α have been proposed to be a
probable mechanism for acquired resistance to cetuximab
in CRC cells [101]. These results highlight a possible role
for MET in mediating resistance to anti-EGFR therapies
in CRC. Indeed, in 2011, Liska et al. demonstrated that
HGF-induced MET activation could confer cetuximab
resistance to CRC cells [102]. In particular, they showed
that HGF-mediated MET activation could rescue CRC
cells from cetuximab-induced apoptosis or cell cycle
arrest by restoring signaling through the AKT and MAPK
pathways. Interestingly, further analysis showed that the
effects of cetuximab could again be restored by both
pharmacological inhibition and silencing of MET [102].
Furthermore, in an in vivo study, analysis of
tumor tissues from patients who developed resistance to
cetuximab or panitumumab showed the emergence of
MET amplification in more than 40% (3 out of 7) of the
cases [87]. Additionally, MET amplification was rarely
found in pre-treatment tumor tissues. Only one of the three
cases with post-treatment MET amplification revealed a
rare MET amplification in the pre-treatment samples as
well. In conclusion, the emergence of MET amplification
correlates with acquired resistance to anti-EGFR therapies
in CRC, and possibly arises from an expansion of preexisting MET amplified clones under the pressure of antiEGFR therapy.
Notably, MET amplification could also be
responsible for primary resistance to anti-EGFR moAbs
in CRC. Data obtained from both patient samples and
xenografts have identified that amplification of MET
correlates with a negative response to cetuximab [87, 103].
However, MET amplification was found only in about
1% of untreated mCRC cases [87]. For this reason, MET
amplification cannot be reliably considered as a biomarker
of primary resistance to anti-EGFR therapy in mCRC.
HER2 amplification and overexpression of the HER3/4
ligand heregulin
HER2 is a member of the HER family of receptor
tyrosine kinases that has the ability to activate the MAPK
and PI3K/AKT pathways through heterodimerisation with
EGFR or HER3 [88, 104]. HER2 leads to the activation of
a signaling pathway shared with EGFR and is therefore,
a potential biomarker of resistance to anti-EGFR therapy.
In an early analysis, Bertotti et al. took advantage
of a large collection of patient-derived mCRC xenografts
(‘xenopatients’) to assess the role of the HER2 gene in
cetuximab resistance [105]. Analysis of genotype-response
correlations in HER2-amplified xenopatients demonstrated

MET overexpression and amplification
The MET oncogene encodes the tyrosine kinase
receptor for Hepatocyte Growth Factor (HGF) and leads
to cell proliferation and survival through the activation
of intracellular signaling cascades including the PI3K/
AKT, RAC1/cell division control protein 42 (CDC42),
RAP1 and RAS/MAPK pathways [98]. In NSCLC,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3990

Oncotarget

Table 2: Overview of molecular mechanism of resistance and putative strategy to overcome resistance
Genetic alterations

Primary
resistance

Acquired
resistance

Possible strategy to overcome resistance

Altered EGFR

Yes

Yes

MEK inhibitors with PI3K inhibitors or mTOR
inhibitors;
[109, 119]
Panitumumaba (EGFR S492R mutation)

RAS mutation

Yes

Yes

Anti-EGFR with MEK inhibitors

BRAF V600E mutation Yes

Yes

[85,
123]
Anti-EGFR with BRAF inhibitors or MEK [54,
inhibitors
122]

PIK3CA exon 20
mutation

Yes

Not Sure

Anti-EGFR with PI3K inhibitors or
mTOR inhibitors

[119, 120]

PTEN loss

Not Sure

Not Sure

Anti-EGFR with PI3K inhibitors or
mTOR inhibitors

[119, 120]

STAT3
phosphorylation
Activated IGF1R
MET amplification
HER2 amplification

Yes

Yes

Anti-EGFR with STAT3 inhibitors

[72, 73]

Minor Effect
Minor Effect
Minor Effect

Yes
Yes
Yes

Anti-EGFR with IGF1R inhibitors
Anti-EGFR with MET inhibitors
Anti-EGFR with HER2 inhibitors

[97]
[98]
[105, 121]

Yes

Anti-EGFR with anti-VEGF or anti-VEGFR

[113]

Altered VEGF/VEGFR No

Reference

119,
118,

Abbreviation MEK: (also called MAP2K) mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase, mTOR: mammalian target of rapamycin.
Superscript a: treatment with panitumumab is a rational strategy to overcome cetuximab resistance caused by the EGFR
S492R mutation.
that HER2 gene amplification was specifically related to
cetuximab resistance. In addition, this resistance could
be overcome through the administration of a HER2
inhibitor. However, a later study by Yonesaka et al. did not
completely agree with these findings [104]. Yonesaka et
al. found that the effect of HER2 in the resistance to antiEGFR moAbs was not only limited to the amplification
of the receptor, but also to the secretion of the ligand
heregulin. In their study with clinical samples, patients
with HER2 gene amplification or overexpression of
the HER3/4 ligand heregulin were associated with a
significantly poorer PFS and OS. Furthermore, both of
these mechanisms could lead to persistent activation of
ERK signaling, thus circumventing the anti-tumor effects
of anti-EGFR therapy. Both Bertotti et al. and Yonesaka
et al. suggested a synergistic anti-tumor effect of the
combined inhibition of HER2 and EGFR. Their studies
demonstrated that combinations of selective inhibitors
targeting HER2 and EGFR were able to significantly
inhibit the growth of cetuximab-resistant CRC cells, and
induce long-lasting tumor regression in experimental
models [104, 105]. These results not only emphasized
HER2 gene amplification and heregulin overexpression as
important mechanisms of resistance to anti-EGFR therapy,
but also highlighted a possible new therapeutic target for
clinical use.
Indeed, HER2 amplification has been suggested
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

as both an intrinsic, as well as an acquired mechanism
of resistance. However, it should be stressed that the
prevalence of HER2 amplification is infrequent in CRC,
and occurs only in about 2% of unselected mCRC [104,
106]. Therefore, considering its low frequency, HER2
amplification is not likely to be a key player in primary
resistance to anti-EGFR therapy. On the other hand,
pre-existing infrequent HER2-amplified clones might
be expanded under the selective pressure of anti-EGFR
therapy, leading to disease progression. In this regard,
HER2 amplification is more likely to confer acquired antiEGFR therapy resistance.

EGFR S492R mutation
It is well known that the T790M mutation of EGFR
plays a critical role in acquired resistance to EGFR TKIs
in NSCLC. Statistically, more than half of NSCLC patients
with acquired resistance to TKIs were found to carry the
EGFR T790M mutation [107, 108]. It is thus anticipated
that secondary mutations in EGFR might also lead to
resistance against anti-EGFR moAbs in CRC. In fact, in
2011, Montagut and colleagues discovered an acquired
mutation in the extracellular domain of EGFR (S492R)
and proved its association with acquired resistance to
cetuximab in mCRC [109]. In an analysis of ten patients
3991

Oncotarget

that showed disease progression after cetuximab treatment,
two patients were detected with the S492R mutation.
Moreover, mutations at this site were not detected in their
pre-treatment biopsies. In vitro findings in a cetuximabresistant CRC cell model showed a similar result.
Further analysis indicated that the substitution of
serine to arginine at amino acid 492 (S492R) is caused
either by the 1476C > A or the 1474A > C mutation in
the gene region encoding for the extracellular domain
of EGFR [109]. This mutation reduces the affinity of
the receptor to the ligand and interferes with binding to
cetuximab. Notably, the S492R mutation does not inhibit
binding of panitumumab to EGFR. Indeed, in the study
by Montagut et al., one of the two cetuximab-resistant
patients with tumors harboring the S492R mutation
responded to subsequent treatment with panitumumab.
Therefore, following disease progression upon cetuximab
treatment, treatment with panitumumab appears to be
a rational strategy for patients harboring the S492R
mutation.
Strikingly, in the same study, the S492R EGFR
mutation was not detected in any of the tumor samples
collected from 156 mCRC patients that did not undergo
any therapy. Esposito et al. obtained the same result in
a larger cohort of patients [110]. Overall, these findings
strongly identified the S492R mutation as a mechanism of
acquired but not primary resistance to cetuximab.

restoration of sensitivity to anti-EGFR drugs, and further
supports an association between increased expression of
VEGF/VEGFR1 and anti-EGFR treatment resistance.
Overall, preclinical experiments have demonstrated
that VEGF signaling plays an important role in anti-EGFR
therapy resistance and the combination of VEGFR and
EGFR inhibitors has been associated with improved antitumor activity in xenografts [113]. For these reasons, it
was assumed that blockade of VEGF signaling pathway
could be a way to overcome anti-EGFR therapy resistance.
However, this putative preclinical strategy was not
successful in the clinic [115-117]. In the CAIRO2 and
PACCE clinical trials, the combination of the anti-VEGF
moAb bevacizumab, and the anti-EGFR moAb cetuximab
or panitumumab did not result in improved PFS or OS
[115, 116]. These results raise the possibility of a negative
interaction between anti-EGFR moAbs and anti-VEGF
moAbs when combined with chemotherapy in clinical
practice. An increase in drug related toxicity is a likely
cause of the reduction in survival, since it contributed to
increases in dose delays, decreases in dose intensity, and
increases in mortality in the dual EGFR/VEGF inhibition
arm. In addition, several studies suggest that there
potentially exists a negative pharmacodynamic interaction
between anti-EGFR moAbs and anti-VEGF moAbs [116].
Therefore, further research is still required in order to
develop a more comprehensive understanding of the role
of VEGF signaling in the resistance of anti-EGFR therapy.

Alteration of VEGF signaling

OVERCOMING RESISTANCE TO ANTIEGFR THERAPY

Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is
a potent signaling molecule that plays a central role
in angiogenesis. VEGF binds to and activates three
structurally similar receptor tyrosine kinases: VEGFR1
(also known as FLT1), VEGFR2 (also known as KDR),
and VEGFR3 (also known as FLT4) [111]. These receptors
primarily mediate changes within vasculature, including
endothelial cell proliferation and permeability. In addition,
VEGF signaling has several important functions that are
independent of neovascularization, such as effects on
tumor cell survival, migration, and invasion (Figure 3)
[112].
Furthermore, aberrant VEGF signaling has been
shown to be associated with acquired EGFR inhibitor
resistance. Ciardiello et al. demonstrated ten years ago,
that elevated expression of VEGF in colon cancer cells
was correlated with the resistance to the EGFR inhibitor
[113]. In addition, a more recent study by Bianco et al.
showed that VEGF, as well as VEGFR1 were secreted
at higher levels in cetuximab-resistant cells than in the
parental cetuximab-sensitive cells [114]. Moreover, the
growth and migration of EGFR inhibitor-resistant cells
could be inhibited by VEGFR1 silencing or by vandetanib,
an orally available TKI that inhibits EGFR, VEGFR1, and
VEGFR-2 tyrosine kinases. These findings indicate that
the combined inhibition of VEGFR and EGFR results in
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

It is clear that aberrant biomarkers, including RAS
mutations, BRAF mutations, PIK3CA mutations, PTEN
loss, STAT3 phosphorylation, IGF1R activation, MET
amplification, HER-2 amplification, and altered VEGF
and VEGFR signaling (Table 1) result in resistance to
anti-EGFR therapy mainly through constitutive activation
of EGFR downstream signaling pathways regardless
of EGFR blockade. Consequently, it is reasonable to
anticipate that knockdown or inhibition of the resistance
pathways will be an effective way to restore sensitivity to
EGFR inhibition.
Therefore, a rational approach to block the
resistance pathways is simultaneous or sequential targeting
of the aberrant biomarkers. Indeed, for almost all the
biomarkers that are correlated with resistance, there is
already a promising targeted strategy proposed either in
preclinical studies or in clinical trials (Table 2). Sorafenib,
a potent inhibitor of the V600E B-RAF protein, which
is also a well-known multi-targeted kinase inhibitor, has
shown pronounced activity in combination with cetuximab
in V600E BRAF-mutant CRC cells [118]. In this study, Di
Nicolantonio et al. showed that treatment with cetuximab
alone was less effective in V600E BRAF-mutant cells
than in BRAF-wild-type cells. However, sensitivity
3992

Oncotarget

to cetuximab in V600E BRAF-mutant cells could be
restored by a combination of cetuximab and sorafenib.
Furthermore, Al-Marrawi et al. reported a successful
clinical outcome with this combination treatment [54]. In
their report, the combination of sorafenib and cetuximab
resulted in disease stabilization for a period longer than
7 months in a patient with BRAF-mutant mCRC, whose
disease had earlier shown resistance to cetuximab. Similar
results were found with combination treatments based on
inhibitors of other biomarkers related to anti-EGFR drug
resistance [119-121].
Another potential way to counteract the resistance
pathways is to target essential effectors of EGFR that are
downstream of the resistance-related biomarkers, such
as mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase (MEK or
MAP2K) and mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR).
MEK and mTOR are downstream effectors of BRAF and
PI3K, respectively, and potent inhibitors of both have been
used in clinical trials. Dual EGFR and MEK and/or mTOR
inhibitors showed improved response in tumor models
harboring aberrant biomarkers, such as RAS, BRAF and
PIK3CA mutations [119, 120, 122, 123], suggesting that
they might prevent the activation of resistance pathways.
Therefore, rational combinations of targeted treatments
that aim at blocking every possible signaling pathway
are optimum approaches to reverse anti-EGFR therapy
resistance (Table 2).
In fact, there are significant differences in
the performance of drugs with respect to resistance
development in patients due to tumor heterogeneity,
each requiring an individual, and often an uncrossed
therapeutic strategy. For example, when resistance to
cetuximab is caused by the EGFR S492R mutation,
subsequent treatment with the alternative EGFR inhibitor,
panitumumab, can lead to transient tumor regression
[109]. Therefore, to overcome resistance and to prolong
the efficacy of EGFR-targeted therapies, it is important
to prepare comprehensive strategies based on the
mechanisms of resistance in each individual CRC patient.
As further steps toward personalized treatment of CRC
patients have been taken in the past few years, we predict
that additional therapeutic schemes might arise.

HER2, and MET (Figure 3). Altogether, these primary
mechanisms of resistance account for over 70% of the
cases that are unresponsive to anti-EGFR therapies [87].
Although these data are exciting and open new
approaches for selecting patients likely to develop
insensitivity to anti-EGFR drugs, only RAS mutations are
currently approved for clinical consideration. Therefore,
numerous retrospective and prospective clinical trials are
required to assess whether research on other biomarkers
can be translated into effective clinical practice. At
the same time, a comprehensive understanding of
resistance mechanisms through studies in both preclinical
models and CRC patients, will ultimately lead to the
development of more effective targeted strategies. Our
current understanding of the mechanisms of resistance
to anti-EGFR therapies is not yet complete, as additional
resistance mechanisms may be undiscovered. As the field
of molecular targeting treatment continues to evolve, a
more comprehensive picture of resistance mechanisms will
form, which will help the development of novel strategies
to overcome both primary and acquired resistance.

CONCLUSIONS

3.	 Bokemeyer C, Bondarenko I, Hartmann JT, de Braud F,
Schuch G, Zubel A, Celik I, Schlichting M, and Koralewski
P. Efficacy according to biomarker status of cetuximab plus
FOLFOX-4 as first-line treatment for metastatic colorectal
cancer: the OPUS study. Ann Oncol. 2011; 22: 1535-46.
doi: 10.1093/annonc/mdq632.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING
This work was supported by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 81472921, and
81372664).

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

REFERENCES
1.	 Siegel R, Desantis C, and Jemal A. Colorectal cancer
statistics, 2014. CA Cancer J Clin. 2014; 64: 104-17. doi:
10.3322/caac.21220.
2.	 Misale S, Di Nicolantonio F, Sartore-Bianchi A, Siena
S, and Bardelli A. Resistance to anti-EGFR therapy in
colorectal cancer: from heterogeneity to convergent
evolution. Cancer Discov. 2014; 4: 1269-80. doi:
10.1158/2159-8290.CD-14-0462.

It is apparent that multiple mechanisms of antiEGFR therapy resistance exist in CRC, which range
from molecular alterations to histological transformations
(Table 1). Most of them act individually or in concert to
counteract the activity of anti-EGFR drugs. However,
resistance to anti-EGFR moAbs is mainly mediated
through the constitutive activation of EGFR downstream
signaling cascades that can result from either genetic
alterations in the members of RAS/RAF, PIK3CA/PTEN,
and JAK/STAT pathways (Figure 2) or from the activation
of alternative growth factor receptors, such as IGF1R,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4.	

3993

Van Cutsem E, Peeters M, Siena S, Humblet Y, Hendlisz A,
Neyns B, Canon JL, Van Laethem JL, Maurel J, Richardson
G, Wolf M, and Amado RG. Open-label phase III trial of
panitumumab plus best supportive care compared with
best supportive care alone in patients with chemotherapyrefractory metastatic colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2007;
25: 1658-64. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2006.08.1620.
Oncotarget

5.	 Van Cutsem E, Kohne CH, Lang I, Folprecht G, Nowacki
MP, Cascinu S, Shchepotin I, Maurel J, Cunningham D,
Tejpar S, Schlichting M, Zubel A, Celik I, et al. Cetuximab
plus irinotecan, fluorouracil, and leucovorin as first-line
treatment for metastatic colorectal cancer: updated analysis
of overall survival according to tumor KRAS and BRAF
mutation status. J Clin Oncol. 2011; 29: 2011-9. doi:
10.1200/JCO.2010.33.5091.

patients with metastatic colorectal cancer (FIRE-3): a
randomised, open-label, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2014;
15: 1065-75. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(14)70330-4.
13.	 Lenz H, Niedzwiecki D, Innocenti F, Blanke C, Mahony
MR, O’Neil BH, Shaw JE, Polite B, Hochster H, Atkins
J, Goldberg R, Mayer R, Schilsky RL, et al. CALGB/
SWOG 80405: phase III trial of irinotecan/5-FU/leucovorin
(FOLFIRI) or of oxaliplatin/5-FU/leucovorin (mFOLFOX6)
with bevacizumab (BV) or cetuximab (CET) for patients
(pts) with untreated metastatic adenocarcinoma of the colon
or rectum (mCRC):expanded RAS analyses. Ann Oncol.
2014; 25: abstract 5010.

6.	 Tveit KM, Guren T, Glimelius B, Pfeiffer P, Sorbye H,
Pyrhonen S, Sigurdsson F, Kure E, Ikdahl T, Skovlund
E, Fokstuen T, Hansen F, Hofsli E, et al. Phase III trial
of cetuximab with continuous or intermittent fluorouracil,
leucovorin, and oxaliplatin (Nordic FLOX) versus FLOX
alone in first-line treatment of metastatic colorectal cancer:
the NORDIC-VII study. J Clin Oncol. 2012; 30: 1755-62.
doi: 10.1200/JCO.2011.38.0915.
7.	

8.	

14.	 Woodburn JR. The epidermal growth factor receptor and
its inhibition in cancer therapy. Pharmacol Ther. 1999; 82:
241-50. doi: 10.1016/S0163-7258(98)00045-X.
15.	 Yarden Y, and Sliwkowski MX. Untangling the ErbB
signalling network. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2001; 2: 12737. doi: 10.1038/35052073.

Maughan TS, Adams RA, Smith CG, Meade AM, Seymour
MT, Wilson RH, Idziaszczyk S, Harris R, Fisher D,
Kenny SL, Kay E, Mitchell JK, Madi A, et al. Addition
of cetuximab to oxaliplatin-based first-line combination
chemotherapy for treatment of advanced colorectal cancer:
results of the randomised phase 3 MRC COIN trial. Lancet.
2011; 377: 2103-14. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(11)60613-2.

16.	 Ciardiello F, and Tortora G. EGFR antagonists in cancer
treatment. N Engl J Med. 2008; 358: 1160-74. doi: 10.1056/
NEJMra0707704.
17.	 De Roock W, Claes B, Bernasconi D, De Schutter J,
Biesmans B, Fountzilas G, Kalogeras KT, Kotoula V,
Papamichael D, Laurent-Puig P, Penault-Llorca F, Rougier
P, Vincenzi B, et al. Effects of KRAS, BRAF, NRAS,
and PIK3CA mutations on the efficacy of cetuximab plus
chemotherapy in chemotherapy-refractory metastatic
colorectal cancer: a retrospective consortium analysis.
Lancet Oncol. 2010; 11: 753-62. doi: 10.1016/S14702045(10)70130-3.

Van Cutsem E, Kohne CH, Hitre E, Zaluski J, Chang Chien
CR, Makhson A, D’Haens G, Pinter T, Lim R, Bodoky
G, Roh JK, Folprecht G, Ruff P, et al. Cetuximab and
chemotherapy as initial treatment for metastatic colorectal
cancer. N Engl J Med. 2009; 360: 1408-17. doi: 10.1056/
NEJMoa0805019.

9.	 Douillard JY, Siena S, Cassidy J, Tabernero J, Burkes R,
Barugel M, Humblet Y, Bodoky G, Cunningham D, Jassem
J, Rivera F, Kocakova I, Ruff P, et al. Randomized, phase
III trial of panitumumab with infusional fluorouracil,
leucovorin, and oxaliplatin (FOLFOX4) versus FOLFOX4
alone as first-line treatment in patients with previously
untreated metastatic colorectal cancer: the PRIME
study. J Clin Oncol. 2010; 28: 4697-705. doi: 10.1200/
JCO.2009.27.4860.

18.	 Hsu HC, Thiam TK, Lu YJ, Yeh CY, Tsai WS, You
JF, Hung HY, Tsai CN, Hsu A, Chen HC, Chen SJ, and
Yang TS. Mutations of KRAS/NRAS/BRAF predict
cetuximab resistance in metastatic colorectal cancer
patients. Oncotarget. 2016; 7: 22257-70. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.8076.
19.	 Cunningham D, Humblet Y, Siena S, Khayat D, Bleiberg
H, Santoro A, Bets D, Mueser M, Harstrick A, Verslype
C, Chau I, and Van Cutsem E. Cetuximab monotherapy
and cetuximab plus irinotecan in irinotecan-refractory
metastatic colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med. 2004; 351: 33745. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa033025.

10.	 Meyerhardt JA, and Mayer RJ. Systemic therapy for
colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med. 2005; 352: 476-87. doi:
10.1056/NEJMra040958.
11.	 Schwartzberg LS, Rivera F, Karthaus M, Fasola G, Canon
JL, Hecht JR, Yu H, Oliner KS, and Go WY. PEAK: a
randomized, multicenter phase II study of panitumumab
plus modified fluorouracil, leucovorin, and oxaliplatin
(mFOLFOX6) or bevacizumab plus mFOLFOX6 in patients
with previously untreated, unresectable, wild-type KRAS
exon 2 metastatic colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2014; 32:
2240-7. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2013.53.2473.

20.	Bardelli A, and Siena S. Molecular mechanisms of
resistance to cetuximab and panitumumab in colorectal
cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2010; 28: 1254-61. doi: 10.1200/
JCO.2009.24.6116.
21.	 Roock WD, Vriendt VD, Normanno N, Ciardiello F, and
Tejpar S. KRAS, BRAF, PIK3CA, and PTEN mutations:
implications for targeted therapies in metastatic colorectal
cancer. The Lancet Oncology. 2011; 12: 594-603. doi:
10.1016/s1470-2045(10)70209-6.

12.	 Heinemann V, von Weikersthal LF, Decker T, Kiani
A, Vehling-Kaiser U, Al-Batran SE, Heintges T,
Lerchenmuller C, Kahl C, Seipelt G, Kullmann F, Stauch
M, Scheithauer W, et al. FOLFIRI plus cetuximab versus
FOLFIRI plus bevacizumab as first-line treatment for
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

22.	 Moroni M, Veronese S, Benvenuti S, Marrapese G,
Sartore-Bianchi A, Di Nicolantonio F, Gambacorta M,
Siena S, and Bardelli A. Gene copy number for epidermal
3994

Oncotarget

growth factor receptor (EGFR) and clinical response to
antiEGFR treatment in colorectal cancer: a cohort study.
The Lancet Oncology. 2005; 6: 279-86. doi: 10.1016/s14702045(05)70102-9.

ring study. J Clin Pathol. 2012; 65: 218-23. doi: 10.1136/
jclinpath-2011-200353.
31.	 Jacobs B, De Roock W, Piessevaux H, Van Oirbeek R,
Biesmans B, De Schutter J, Fieuws S, Vandesompele J,
Peeters M, Van Laethem JL, Humblet Y, Penault-Llorca
F, De Hertogh G, et al. Amphiregulin and epiregulin
mRNA expression in primary tumors predicts outcome in
metastatic colorectal cancer treated with cetuximab. J Clin
Oncol. 2009; 27: 5068-74. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2008.21.3744.

23.	 Khambata-Ford S, Garrett CR, Meropol NJ, Basik M,
Harbison CT, Wu S, Wong TW, Huang X, Takimoto
CH, Godwin AK, Tan BR, Krishnamurthi SS, Burris HA,
3rd, et al. Expression of epiregulin and amphiregulin and
K-ras mutation status predict disease control in metastatic
colorectal cancer patients treated with cetuximab. J Clin
Oncol. 2007; 25: 3230-7. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2006.10.5437.

32.	 Malumbres M, and Barbacid M. RAS oncogenes: the first
30 years. Nat Rev Cancer. 2003; 3: 459-65. doi: 10.1038/
nrc1097.

24.	 Lynch TJ, Bell DW, Sordella R, Gurubhagavatula S,
Okimoto RA, Brannigan BW, Harris PL, Haserlat SM,
Supko JG, Haluska FG, Louis DN, Christiani DC, Settleman
J, et al. Activating mutations in the epidermal growth factor
receptor underlying responsiveness of non-small-cell lung
cancer to gefitinib. N Engl J Med. 2004; 350: 2129-39. doi:
10.1056/NEJMoa040938.

33.	 Bos JL. ras oncogenes in human cancer: a review. Cancer
Res. 1989; 49: 4682-9.
34.	 Fernandez-Medarde A, and Santos E. Ras in cancer and
developmental diseases. Genes Cancer. 2011; 2: 344-58.
doi: 10.1177/1947601911411084.
35.	 Allegra CJ, Rumble RB, Hamilton SR, Mangu PB, Roach
N, Hantel A, and Schilsky RL. Extended RAS Gene
Mutation Testing in Metastatic Colorectal Carcinoma
to Predict Response to Anti-Epidermal Growth Factor
Receptor Monoclonal Antibody Therapy: American
Society of Clinical Oncology Provisional Clinical Opinion
Update 2015. J Clin Oncol. 2016; 34: 179-85. doi: 10.1200/
JCO.2015.63.9674.

25.	 Vogel CL, Cobleigh MA, Tripathy D, Gutheil JC, Harris
LN, Fehrenbacher L, Slamon DJ, Murphy M, Novotny
WF, Burchmore M, Shak S, Stewart SJ, and Press M.
Efficacy and safety of trastuzumab as a single agent in firstline treatment of HER2-overexpressing metastatic breast
cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2002; 20: 719-26. doi: 10.1200/
jco.2002.20.3.719.
26.	 Barber TD, Vogelstein B, Kinzler KW, and Velculescu
VE. Somatic mutations of EGFR in colorectal cancers
and glioblastomas. N Engl J Med. 2004; 351: 2883. doi:
10.1056/NEJM200412303512724.

36.	 Amado RG, Wolf M, Peeters M, Van Cutsem E, Siena S,
Freeman DJ, Juan T, Sikorski R, Suggs S, Radinsky R,
Patterson SD, and Chang DD. Wild-type KRAS is required
for panitumumab efficacy in patients with metastatic
colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2008; 26: 1626-34. doi:
10.1200/JCO.2007.14.7116.

27.	 Sartore-Bianchi A, Moroni M, Veronese S, Carnaghi
C, Bajetta E, Luppi G, Sobrero A, Barone C, Cascinu S,
Colucci G, Cortesi E, Nichelatti M, Gambacorta M, et al.
Epidermal growth factor receptor gene copy number and
clinical outcome of metastatic colorectal cancer treated
with panitumumab. J Clin Oncol. 2007; 25: 3238-45. doi:
10.1200/JCO.2007.11.5956.

37.	 Allegra CJ, Jessup JM, Somerfield MR, Hamilton SR,
Hammond EH, Hayes DF, McAllister PK, Morton RF,
and Schilsky RL. American Society of Clinical Oncology
provisional clinical opinion: testing for KRAS gene
mutations in patients with metastatic colorectal carcinoma
to predict response to anti-epidermal growth factor receptor
monoclonal antibody therapy. J Clin Oncol. 2009; 27: 20916. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2009.21.9170.

28.	 Yang ZY, Shen WX, Hu XF, Zheng DY, Wu XY, Huang
YF, Chen JZ, Mao C, and Tang JL. EGFR gene copy
number as a predictive biomarker for the treatment of
metastatic colorectal cancer with anti-EGFR monoclonal
antibodies: a meta-analysis. J Hematol Oncol. 2012; 5: 52.
doi: 10.1186/1756-8722-5-52.

38.	 De Roock W, Jonker DJ, Di Nicolantonio F, SartoreBianchi A, Tu D, Siena S, Lamba S, Arena S, Frattini M,
Piessevaux H, Van Cutsem E, O’Callaghan CJ, KhambataFord S, et al. Association of KRAS p.G13D mutation
with outcome in patients with chemotherapy-refractory
metastatic colorectal cancer treated with cetuximab. JAMA.
2010; 304: 1812-20. doi: 10.1001/jama.2010.1535.

29.	 Personeni N, Fieuws S, Piessevaux H, De Hertogh G, De
Schutter J, Biesmans B, De Roock W, Capoen A, DebiecRychter M, Van Laethem JL, Peeters M, Humblet Y,
Van Cutsem E, et al. Clinical usefulness of EGFR gene
copy number as a predictive marker in colorectal cancer
patients treated with cetuximab: a fluorescent in situ
hybridization study. Clin Cancer Res. 2008; 14: 5869-76.
doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-0449.

39.	 Tejpar S, Celik I, Schlichting M, Sartorius U, Bokemeyer
C, and Van Cutsem E. Association of KRAS G13D
tumor mutations with outcome in patients with metastatic
colorectal cancer treated with first-line chemotherapy with
or without cetuximab. J Clin Oncol. 2012; 30: 3570-7. doi:
10.1200/JCO.2012.42.2592.

30.	 Sartore-Bianchi A, Fieuws S, Veronese S, Moroni M,
Personeni N, Frattini M, Torri V, Cappuzzo F, Vander
Borght S, Martin V, Skokan M, Santoro A, Gambacorta M,
et al. Standardisation of EGFR FISH in colorectal cancer:
results of an international interlaboratory reproducibility
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40.	 Gajate P, Sastre J, Bando I, Alonso T, Cillero L, Sanz J,
Caldes T, and Diaz-Rubio E. Influence of KRAS p.G13D
mutation in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer
3995

Oncotarget

treated with cetuximab. Clin Colorectal Cancer. 2012; 11:
291-6. doi: 10.1016/j.clcc.2012.02.003.

50.	 Wan PT, Garnett MJ, Roe SM, Lee S, Niculescu-Duvaz D,
Good VM, Jones CM, Marshall CJ, Springer CJ, Barford D,
Marais R, and Cancer Genome P. Mechanism of activation
of the RAF-ERK signaling pathway by oncogenic mutations
of B-RAF. Cell. 2004; 116: 855-67. doi: 10.1016/S00928674(04)00215-6.

41.	 Peeters M, Douillard JY, Van Cutsem E, Siena S, Zhang
K, Williams R, and Wiezorek J. Mutant KRAS codon 12
and 13 alleles in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer:
assessment as prognostic and predictive biomarkers of
response to panitumumab. J Clin Oncol. 2013; 31: 759-65.
doi: 10.1200/JCO.2012.45.1492.

51.	 Seymour MT, Brown SR, Middleton G, Maughan T,
Richman S, Gwyther S, Lowe C, Seligmann JF, Wadsley J,
Maisey N, Chau I, Hill M, Dawson L, et al. Panitumumab
and irinotecan versus irinotecan alone for patients with
KRAS wild-type, fluorouracil-resistant advanced colorectal
cancer (PICCOLO): a prospectively stratified randomised
trial. Lancet Oncol. 2013; 14: 749-59. doi: 10.1016/S14702045(13)70163-3.

42.	Bokemeyer C, Kohne CH, Ciardiello F, Lenz HJ,
Heinemann V, Klinkhardt U, Beier F, Duecker K, and
Tejpar S. Treatment outcome according to tumor RAS
mutation status in OPUS study patients with metastatic
colorectal cancer (mCRC) randomized to FOLFOX4 with/
without cetuximab. J Clin Oncol. 2014; 32(5s): abstract
3505.

52.	 Rowland A, Dias MM, Wiese MD, Kichenadasse G,
McKinnon RA, Karapetis CS, and Sorich MJ. Metaanalysis of BRAF mutation as a predictive biomarker of
benefit from anti-EGFR monoclonal antibody therapy for
RAS wild-type metastatic colorectal cancer. Br J Cancer.
2015; 112: 1888-94. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2015.173.

43.	 Ciardiello F, Lenz HJ, Kohne CH, Heinemann V, Tejpar
S, Melezinek I, Beier F, Stroh C, and EV. C. Treatment
outcome according to tumor RAS mutation status in
CRYSTAL study patients with metastatic colorectal cancer
(mCRC) randomized to FOLFIRI with/without cetuximab.
J Clin Oncol. 2014; 32: abstract 3506.

53.	 Capalbo C, Marchetti P, Coppa A, Calogero A, Anastasi
E, Buffone A, Belardinilli F, Gulino M, Frati P, Catalano
C, Cortesi E, Giannini G, and Gulino A. Vemurafenib
and panitumumab combination tailored therapy in BRAFmutated metastatic colorectal cancer: a case report. Cancer
Biol Ther. 2014; 15: 826-31. doi: 10.4161/cbt.28878.

44.	 Douillard JY, Oliner KS, Siena S, Tabernero J, Burkes R,
Barugel M, Humblet Y, Bodoky G, Cunningham D, Jassem
J, Rivera F, Kocakova I, Ruff P, et al. PanitumumabFOLFOX4 treatment and RAS mutations in colorectal
cancer. N Engl J Med. 2013; 369: 1023-34. doi: 10.1056/
NEJMoa1305275.

54.	 Al-Marrawi MY, Saroya BS, Brennan MC, Yang Z, Dykes
TM, and El-Deiry WS. Off-label use of cetuximab plus
sorafenib and panitumumab plus regorafenib to personalize
therapy for a patient with V600E BRAF-mutant metastatic
colon cancer. Cancer Biol Ther. 2013; 14: 703-10. doi:
10.4161/cbt.25191.

45.	 Stintzing S, Jung A, Rossius L, Modest DP, Fischer von
Weikersthal L, Decker T, Kiani A, Möhler M, Kirchner T,
and Heinemann V. Analysis of KRAS/NRAS and BRAF
mutations in FIRE-3: a randomized phase III study of
FOLFIRI plus cetuximab or bevacizumab as first-line
treatment for wild-type (WT) KRAS (exon 2) metastatic
colorectal cancer (mCRC) patients. Eur J Cancer. 2014; 49:
abstract LBA-17.

55.	 Rajagopalan H, Bardelli A, Lengauer C, Kinzler KW,
Vogelstein B, and Velculescu VE. Tumorigenesis: RAF/
RAS oncogenes and mismatch-repair status. Nature. 2002;
418: 934. doi: 10.1038/418934a.

46.	 Van Cutsem E, Lenz HJ, Kohne CH, Heinemann V,
Tejpar S, Melezinek I, Beier F, Stroh C, Rougier P, van
Krieken JH, and Ciardiello F. Fluorouracil, leucovorin, and
irinotecan plus cetuximab treatment and RAS mutations
in colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2015; 33: 692-700. doi:
10.1200/JCO.2014.59.4812.

56.	 Nosho K, Kawasaki T, Ohnishi M, Suemoto Y, Kirkner
GJ, Zepf D, Yan L, Longtine JA, Fuchs CS, and Ogino S.
PIK3CA mutation in colorectal cancer: relationship with
genetic and epigenetic alterations. Neoplasia. 2008; 10:
534-41. doi: 10.1593/neo.08336.

47.	 Tol J, Nagtegaal ID, and Punt CJ. BRAF mutation in
metastatic colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med. 2009; 361: 989. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc0904160.

57.	 Barault L, Veyrie N, Jooste V, Lecorre D, Chapusot C,
Ferraz JM, Lievre A, Cortet M, Bouvier AM, Rat P,
Roignot P, Faivre J, Laurent-Puig P, et al. Mutations in
the RAS-MAPK, PI(3)K (phosphatidylinositol-3-OH
kinase) signaling network correlate with poor survival in
a population-based series of colon cancers. Int J Cancer.
2008; 122: 2255-9. doi: 10.1002/ijc.23388.

48.	 Davies H, Bignell GR, Cox C, Stephens P, Edkins S, Clegg
S, Teague J, Woffendin H, Garnett MJ, Bottomley W, Davis
N, Dicks E, Ewing R, et al. Mutations of the BRAF gene
in human cancer. Nature. 2002; 417: 949-54. doi: 10.1038/
nature00766.

58.	 Perrone F, Lampis A, Orsenigo M, Di Bartolomeo M,
Gevorgyan A, Losa M, Frattini M, Riva C, Andreola S,
Bajetta E, Bertario L, Leo E, Pierotti MA, et al. PI3KCA/
PTEN deregulation contributes to impaired responses to
cetuximab in metastatic colorectal cancer patients. Ann
Oncol. 2009; 20: 84-90. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mdn541.

49.	 Ikenoue T, Hikiba Y, Kanai F, Tanaka Y, Imamura J,
Imamura T, Ohta M, Ijichi H, Tateishi K, Kawakami T,
Aragaki J, Matsumura M, Kawabe T, et al. Functional
analysis of mutations within the kinase activation segment
of B-Raf in human colorectal tumors. Cancer Res. 2003; 63:
8132-7.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

59.	 Sartore-Bianchi A, Martini M, Molinari F, Veronese
3996

Oncotarget

S, Nichelatti M, Artale S, Di Nicolantonio F, Saletti P,
De Dosso S, Mazzucchelli L, Frattini M, Siena S, and
Bardelli A. PIK3CA mutations in colorectal cancer are
associated with clinical resistance to EGFR-targeted
monoclonal antibodies. Cancer Res. 2009; 69: 1851-7. doi:
10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-2466.

M. Constitutive activation of Stat3 signaling pathway in
human colorectal carcinoma. World J Gastroenterol. 2004;
10: 1569-73.
69.	 Kisseleva T, Bhattacharya S, Braunstein J, and Schindler
CW. Signaling through the JAK/STAT pathway, recent
advances and future challenges. Gene. 2002; 285: 1-24. doi:
10.1016/S0378-1119(02)00398-0.

60.	 Prenen H, De Schutter J, Jacobs B, De Roock W, Biesmans
B, Claes B, Lambrechts D, Van Cutsem E, and Tejpar
S. PIK3CA mutations are not a major determinant of
resistance to the epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitor
cetuximab in metastatic colorectal cancer. Clin Cancer Res.
2009; 15: 3184-8. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-2961.

70.	 Kijima T, Niwa H, Steinman RA, Drenning SD, Gooding
WE, Wentzel AL, Xi S, and Grandis JR. STAT3 activation
abrogates growth factor dependence and contributes to head
and neck squamous cell carcinoma tumor growth in vivo.
Cell Growth Differ. 2002; 13: 355-62.

61.	 Zhao L, and Vogt PK. Helical domain and kinase domain
mutations in p110alpha of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
induce gain of function by different mechanisms. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008; 105: 2652-7. doi: 10.1073/
pnas.0712169105.

71.	 Haura EB, Sommers E, Song L, Chiappori A, and Becker
A. A pilot study of preoperative gefitinib for early-stage
lung cancer to assess intratumor drug concentration and
pathways mediating primary resistance. J Thorac Oncol.
2010; 5: 1806-14. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e3181f38f70.

62.	 Mao C, Yang ZY, Hu XF, Chen Q, and Tang JL. PIK3CA
exon 20 mutations as a potential biomarker for resistance
to anti-EGFR monoclonal antibodies in KRAS wild-type
metastatic colorectal cancer: a systematic review and metaanalysis. Ann Oncol. 2012; 23: 1518-25. doi: 10.1093/
annonc/mdr464.

72.	 Li Q, Zhang D, Chen X, He L, Li T, Xu X, and Li M.
Nuclear PKM2 contributes to gefitinib resistance via
upregulation of STAT3 activation in colorectal cancer. Sci
Rep. 2015; 5: 16082. doi: 10.1038/srep16082.
73.	 Yar Saglam AS, Alp E, Elmazoglu Z, and Menevse S.
Treatment with cucurbitacin B alone and in combination
with gefitinib induces cell cycle inhibition and apoptosis
via EGFR and JAK/STAT pathway in human colorectal
cancer cell lines. Hum Exp Toxicol. 2016; 35: 526-43. doi:
10.1177/0960327115595686.

63.	 Goel A, Arnold CN, Niedzwiecki D, Carethers JM, Dowell
JM, Wasserman L, Compton C, Mayer RJ, Bertagnolli MM,
and Boland CR. Frequent inactivation of PTEN by promoter
hypermethylation in microsatellite instability-high sporadic
colorectal cancers. Cancer Res. 2004; 64: 3014-21. doi:
10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-2401-2.

74.	 Thiery JP. Epithelial-mesenchymal transitions in tumour
progression. Nat Rev Cancer. 2002; 2: 442-54. doi:
10.1038/nrc822.

64.	 Siena S, Sartore-Bianchi A, Di Nicolantonio F, Balfour J,
and Bardelli A. Biomarkers predicting clinical outcome
of epidermal growth factor receptor-targeted therapy in
metastatic colorectal cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2009; 101:
1308-24. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djp280.

75.	 Tan TZ, Miow QH, Miki Y, Noda T, Mori S, Huang RY,
and Thiery JP. Epithelial-mesenchymal transition spectrum
quantification and its efficacy in deciphering survival and
drug responses of cancer patients. EMBO Mol Med. 2014;
6: 1279-93. doi: 10.15252/emmm.201404208.

65.	 Nagata Y, Lan KH, Zhou X, Tan M, Esteva FJ, Sahin
AA, Klos KS, Li P, Monia BP, Nguyen NT, Hortobagyi
GN, Hung MC, and Yu D. PTEN activation contributes to
tumor inhibition by trastuzumab, and loss of PTEN predicts
trastuzumab resistance in patients. Cancer Cell. 2004; 6:
117-27. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2004.06.022.

76.	 Thomson S, Petti F, Sujka-Kwok I, Epstein D, and Haley
JD. Kinase switching in mesenchymal-like non-small cell
lung cancer lines contributes to EGFR inhibitor resistance
through pathway redundancy. Clin Exp Metastasis. 2008;
25: 843-54. doi: 10.1007/s10585-008-9200-4.

66.	 Laurent-Puig P, Cayre A, Manceau G, Buc E, Bachet
JB, Lecomte T, Rougier P, Lievre A, Landi B, Boige V,
Ducreux M, Ychou M, Bibeau F, et al. Analysis of PTEN,
BRAF, and EGFR status in determining benefit from
cetuximab therapy in wild-type KRAS metastatic colon
cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2009; 27: 5924-30. doi: 10.1200/
JCO.2008.21.6796.

77.	 Buck E, Eyzaguirre A, Barr S, Thompson S, Sennello R,
Young D, Iwata KK, Gibson NW, Cagnoni P, and Haley JD.
Loss of homotypic cell adhesion by epithelial-mesenchymal
transition or mutation limits sensitivity to epidermal growth
factor receptor inhibition. Mol Cancer Ther. 2007; 6: 53241. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-06-0462.
78.	 De Luca A, Arra C, D’Antonio A, Casamassimi A, Losito
S, Ferraro P, Ciardiello F, Salomon DS, and Normanno
N. Simultaneous blockage of different EGF-like growth
factors results in efficient growth inhibition of human colon
carcinoma xenografts. Oncogene. 2000; 19: 5863-71.

67.	 Loupakis F, Pollina L, Stasi I, Ruzzo A, Scartozzi M,
Santini D, Masi G, Graziano F, Cremolini C, Rulli E,
Canestrari E, Funel N, Schiavon G, et al. PTEN expression
and KRAS mutations on primary tumors and metastases in
the prediction of benefit from cetuximab plus irinotecan for
patients with metastatic colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol.
2009; 27: 2622-9. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2008.20.2796.

79.	 Schmitz S, Bindea G, Albu RI, Mlecnik B, and Machiels JP.
Cetuximab promotes epithelial to mesenchymal transition
and cancer associated fibroblasts in patients with head and

68.	 Ma XT, Wang S, Ye YJ, Du RY, Cui ZR, and Somsouk
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3997

Oncotarget

neck cancer. Oncotarget. 2015; 6: 34288-99. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.5924.

J Natl Cancer Inst. 2000; 92: 1472-89. doi: 10.1093/
jnci/92.18.1472.

80.	 Yauch RL, Januario T, Eberhard DA, Cavet G, Zhu W, Fu
L, Pham TQ, Soriano R, Stinson J, Seshagiri S, Modrusan
Z, Lin CY, O’Neill V, et al. Epithelial versus mesenchymal
phenotype determines in vitro sensitivity and predicts
clinical activity of erlotinib in lung cancer patients. Clin
Cancer Res. 2005; 11: 8686-98. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.
CCR-05-1492.

90.	 Hu YP, Patil SB, Panasiewicz M, Li W, Hauser J,
Humphrey LE, and Brattain MG. Heterogeneity of receptor
function in colon carcinoma cells determined by crosstalk between type I insulin-like growth factor receptor and
epidermal growth factor receptor. Cancer Res. 2008; 68:
8004-13. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-0280.
91.	 Jones HE, Gee JM, Hutcheson IR, Knowlden JM, Barrow
D, and Nicholson RI. Growth factor receptor interplay and
resistance in cancer. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2006; 13 Suppl
1: S45-51. doi: 10.1677/erc.1.01275.

81.	 Van Emburgh BO, Sartore-Bianchi A, Di Nicolantonio
F, Siena S, and Bardelli A. Acquired resistance to EGFRtargeted therapies in colorectal cancer. Mol Oncol. 2014; 8:
1084-94. doi: 10.1016/j.molonc.2014.05.003.
82.	 Diaz LA, Jr., Williams RT, Wu J, Kinde I, Hecht JR, Berlin
J, Allen B, Bozic I, Reiter JG, Nowak MA, Kinzler KW,
Oliner KS, and Vogelstein B. The molecular evolution
of acquired resistance to targeted EGFR blockade in
colorectal cancers. Nature. 2012; 486: 537-40. doi: 10.1038/
nature11219.

92.	 Scartozzi M, Mandolesi A, Giampieri R, Pierantoni C,
Loupakis F, Zaniboni A, Galizia E, Giustini L, Silva RR,
Bisonni R, Berardi R, Biagetti S, Menzo S, et al. Insulinlike growth factor 1 expression correlates with clinical
outcome in K-RAS wild type colorectal cancer patients
treated with cetuximab and irinotecan. Int J Cancer. 2010;
127: 1941-7. doi: 10.1002/ijc.25193.

83.	 Misale S, Yaeger R, Hobor S, Scala E, Janakiraman M,
Liska D, Valtorta E, Schiavo R, Buscarino M, Siravegna
G, Bencardino K, Cercek A, Chen CT, et al. Emergence
of KRAS mutations and acquired resistance to anti-EGFR
therapy in colorectal cancer. Nature. 2012; 486: 532-6. doi:
10.1038/nature11156.

93.	 Jones HE, Goddard L, Gee JM, Hiscox S, Rubini M, Barrow
D, Knowlden JM, Williams S, Wakeling AE, and Nicholson
RI. Insulin-like growth factor-I receptor signalling and
acquired resistance to gefitinib (ZD1839; Iressa) in human
breast and prostate cancer cells. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2004;
11: 793-814. doi: 10.1677/erc.1.00799.

84.	 Bouchahda M, Karaboue A, Saffroy R, Innominato P,
Gorden L, Guettier C, Adam R, and Levi F. Acquired
KRAS mutations during progression of colorectal cancer
metastases: possible implications for therapy and prognosis.
Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2010; 66: 605-9. doi:
10.1007/s00280-010-1298-9.

94.	 Scartozzi M, Giampieri R, Maccaroni E, Mandolesi A,
Giustini L, Silva R, Zaniboni A, Biscotti T, Biagetti S,
Galizia E, Loupakis F, Falcone A, Bearzi I, et al. Analysis
of HER-3, insulin growth factor-1, nuclear factor-kB and
epidermal growth factor receptor gene copy number in
the prediction of clinical outcome for K-RAS wild-type
colorectal cancer patients receiving irinotecan-cetuximab.
Ann Oncol. 2012; 23: 1706-12. doi: 10.1093/annonc/
mdr558.

85.	 Misale S, Arena S, Lamba S, Siravegna G, Lallo A, Hobor
S, Russo M, Buscarino M, Lazzari L, Sartore-Bianchi A,
Bencardino K, Amatu A, Lauricella C, et al. Blockade of
EGFR and MEK intercepts heterogeneous mechanisms of
acquired resistance to anti-EGFR therapies in colorectal
cancer. Sci Transl Med. 2014; 6: 224ra26. doi: 10.1126/
scitranslmed.3007947.

95.	 Ji QS, Mulvihill MJ, Rosenfeld-Franklin M, Cooke A,
Feng L, Mak G, O’Connor M, Yao Y, Pirritt C, Buck E,
Eyzaguirre A, Arnold LD, Gibson NW, et al. A novel,
potent, and selective insulin-like growth factor-I receptor
kinase inhibitor blocks insulin-like growth factor-I receptor
signaling in vitro and inhibits insulin-like growth factor-I
receptor dependent tumor growth in vivo. Mol Cancer
Ther. 2007; 6: 2158-67. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-070070.

86.	 Weber MM, Fottner C, Liu SB, Jung MC, Engelhardt D,
and Baretton GB. Overexpression of the insulin-like growth
factor I receptor in human colon carcinomas. Cancer. 2002;
95: 2086-95. doi: 10.1002/cncr.10945.
87.	 Bardelli A, Corso S, Bertotti A, Hobor S, Valtorta E,
Siravegna G, Sartore-Bianchi A, Scala E, Cassingena
A, Zecchin D, Apicella M, Migliardi G, Galimi F, et al.
Amplification of the MET receptor drives resistance to antiEGFR therapies in colorectal cancer. Cancer Discov. 2013;
3: 658-73. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-12-0558.

96.	 Reidy DL, Vakiani E, Fakih MG, Saif MW, Hecht JR,
Goodman-Davis N, Hollywood E, Shia J, Schwartz J,
Chandrawansa K, Dontabhaktuni A, Youssoufian H, Solit
DB, et al. Randomized, phase II study of the insulinlike growth factor-1 receptor inhibitor IMC-A12, with
or without cetuximab, in patients with cetuximab- or
panitumumab-refractory metastatic colorectal cancer. J Clin
Oncol. 2010; 28: 4240-6. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2010.30.4154.

88.	 Wheeler DL, Huang S, Kruser TJ, Nechrebecki MM,
Armstrong EA, Benavente S, Gondi V, Hsu KT, and Harari
PM. Mechanisms of acquired resistance to cetuximab: role
of HER (ErbB) family members. Oncogene. 2008; 27:
3944-56. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.19.

97.	 Sclafani F, Kim TY, Cunningham D, Kim TW, Tabernero J,
Schmoll HJ, Roh JK, Kim SY, Park YS, Guren TK, Hawkes
E, Clarke SJ, Ferry D, et al. A Randomized Phase II/III
Study of Dalotuzumab in Combination With Cetuximab

89.	 Yu H, and Rohan T. Role of the insulin-like growth
factor family in cancer development and progression.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3998

Oncotarget

and Irinotecan in Chemorefractory, KRAS Wild-Type,
Metastatic Colorectal Cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2015; 107:
djv258. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djv258.

patients with colorectal cancer. Cancer Discov. 2011; 1:
472-4. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-11-0261.
107.	Kobayashi S, Boggon TJ, Dayaram T, Janne PA, Kocher O,
Meyerson M, Johnson BE, Eck MJ, Tenen DG, and Halmos
B. EGFR mutation and resistance of non-small-cell lung
cancer to gefitinib. N Engl J Med. 2005; 352: 786-92. doi:
10.1056/NEJMoa044238.

98.	 Gherardi E, Birchmeier W, Birchmeier C, and Vande
Woude G. Targeting MET in cancer: rationale and progress.
Nat Rev Cancer. 2012; 12: 89-103. doi: 10.1038/nrc3205.
99.	 Engelman JA, Zejnullahu K, Mitsudomi T, Song Y, Hyland
C, Park JO, Lindeman N, Gale CM, Zhao X, Christensen
J, Kosaka T, Holmes AJ, Rogers AM, et al. MET
amplification leads to gefitinib resistance in lung cancer by
activating ERBB3 signaling. Science. 2007; 316: 1039-43.
doi: 10.1126/science.1141478.

108.	Yu HA, Arcila ME, Rekhtman N, Sima CS, Zakowski
MF, Pao W, Kris MG, Miller VA, Ladanyi M, and Riely
GJ. Analysis of tumor specimens at the time of acquired
resistance to EGFR-TKI therapy in 155 patients with
EGFR-mutant lung cancers. Clin Cancer Res. 2013; 19:
2240-7. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-2246.

100.	Yano S, Wang W, Li Q, Matsumoto K, Sakurama H,
Nakamura T, Ogino H, Kakiuchi S, Hanibuchi M, Nishioka
Y, Uehara H, Mitsudomi T, Yatabe Y, et al. Hepatocyte
growth factor induces gefitinib resistance of lung
adenocarcinoma with epidermal growth factor receptoractivating mutations. Cancer Res. 2008; 68: 9479-87. doi:
10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-1643.

109.	Montagut C, Dalmases A, Bellosillo B, Crespo M, Pairet
S, Iglesias M, Salido M, Gallen M, Marsters S, Tsai SP,
Minoche A, Seshagiri S, Serrano S, et al. Identification of
a mutation in the extracellular domain of the Epidermal
Growth Factor Receptor conferring cetuximab resistance in
colorectal cancer. Nat Med. 2012; 18: 221-3. doi: 10.1038/
nm.2609.

101.	Troiani T, Martinelli E, Napolitano S, Vitagliano D,
Ciuffreda LP, Costantino S, Morgillo F, Capasso A,
Sforza V, Nappi A, De Palma R, D’Aiuto E, Berrino L,
et al. Increased TGF-alpha as a mechanism of acquired
resistance to the anti-EGFR inhibitor cetuximab through
EGFR-MET interaction and activation of MET signaling
in colon cancer cells. Clin Cancer Res. 2013; 19: 6751-65.
doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-0423.

110.	Esposito C, Rachiglio AM, La Porta ML, Sacco A, Roma
C, Iannaccone A, Tatangelo F, Forgione L, Pasquale R,
Barbaro A, Botti G, Ciardiello F, and Normanno N. The
S492R EGFR ectodomain mutation is never detected in
KRAS wild-type colorectal carcinoma before exposure to
EGFR monoclonal antibodies. Cancer Biol Ther. 2013; 14:
1143-6. doi: 10.4161/cbt.26340.

102.	Liska D, Chen CT, Bachleitner-Hofmann T, Christensen
JG, and Weiser MR. HGF rescues colorectal cancer cells
from EGFR inhibition via MET activation. Clin Cancer
Res. 2011; 17: 472-82. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-100568.

111.	Ellis LM, and Hicklin DJ. VEGF-targeted therapy:
mechanisms of anti-tumour activity. Nat Rev Cancer. 2008;
8: 579-91. doi: 10.1038/nrc2403.
112.	Kaplan RN, Riba RD, Zacharoulis S, Bramley AH, Vincent
L, Costa C, MacDonald DD, Jin DK, Shido K, Kerns
SA, Zhu Z, Hicklin D, Wu Y, et al. VEGFR1-positive
haematopoietic bone marrow progenitors initiate the premetastatic niche. Nature. 2005; 438: 820-7. doi: 10.1038/
nature04186.

103.	Krumbach R, Schuler J, Hofmann M, Giesemann T, Fiebig
HH, and Beckers T. Primary resistance to cetuximab
in a panel of patient-derived tumour xenograft models:
activation of MET as one mechanism for drug resistance.
Eur J Cancer. 2011; 47: 1231-43. doi: 10.1016/j.
ejca.2010.12.019.
104.	Yonesaka K, Zejnullahu K, Okamoto I, Satoh T, Cappuzzo
F, Souglakos J, Ercan D, Rogers A, Roncalli M, Takeda
M, Fujisaka Y, Philips J, Shimizu T, et al. Activation of
ERBB2 signaling causes resistance to the EGFR-directed
therapeutic antibody cetuximab. Sci Transl Med. 2011; 3:
99ra86. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3002442.

113.	Ciardiello F, Bianco R, Caputo R, Caputo R, Damiano
V, Troiani T, Melisi D, De Vita F, De Placido S, Bianco
AR, and Tortora G. Antitumor activity of ZD6474, a
vascular endothelial growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase
inhibitor, in human cancer cells with acquired resistance to
antiepidermal growth factor receptor therapy. Clin Cancer
Res. 2004; 10: 784-93. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-110003.

105.	Bertotti A, Migliardi G, Galimi F, Sassi F, Torti D, Isella
C, Cora D, Di Nicolantonio F, Buscarino M, Petti C, Ribero
D, Russolillo N, Muratore A, et al. A molecularly annotated
platform of patient-derived xenografts (“xenopatients”)
identifies HER2 as an effective therapeutic target in
cetuximab-resistant colorectal cancer. Cancer Discov. 2011;
1: 508-23. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-11-0109.

114.	Bianco R, Rosa R, Damiano V, Daniele G, Gelardi T,
Garofalo S, Tarallo V, De Falco S, Melisi D, Benelli R,
Albini A, Ryan A, Ciardiello F, et al. Vascular endothelial
growth factor receptor-1 contributes to resistance to
anti-epidermal growth factor receptor drugs in human
cancer cells. Clin Cancer Res. 2008; 14: 5069-80. doi:
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-07-4905.

106.	Ciardiello F, and Normanno N. HER2 signaling and
resistance to the anti-EGFR monoclonal antibody
cetuximab: a further step toward personalized medicine for

115.	Tol J, Koopman M, Cats A, Rodenburg CJ, Creemers
GJ, Schrama JG, Erdkamp FL, Vos AH, van Groeningen
CJ, Sinnige HA, Richel DJ, Voest EE, Dijkstra JR, et al.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3999

Oncotarget

Chemotherapy, bevacizumab, and cetuximab in metastatic
colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med. 2009; 360: 563-72. doi:
10.1056/NEJMoa0808268.

120.	Markman B, Atzori F, Perez-Garcia J, Tabernero J,
and Baselga J. Status of PI3K inhibition and biomarker
development in cancer therapeutics. Ann Oncol. 2010; 21:
683-91. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mdp347.

116.	Hecht JR, Mitchell E, Chidiac T, Scroggin C, Hagenstad
C, Spigel D, Marshall J, Cohn A, McCollum D, Stella P,
Deeter R, Shahin S, and Amado RG. A randomized phase
IIIB trial of chemotherapy, bevacizumab, and panitumumab
compared with chemotherapy and bevacizumab alone for
metastatic colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2009; 27: 67280. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2008.19.8135.

121.	Richman SD, Southward K, Chambers P, Cross D,
Barrett J, Hemmings G, Taylor M, Wood H, Hutchins
G, Foster JM, Oumie A, Spink KG, Brown SR, et al.
HER2 overexpression and amplification as a potential
therapeutic target in colorectal cancer: analysis of 3256
patients enrolled in the QUASAR, FOCUS and PICCOLO
colorectal cancer trials. J Pathol. 2016; 238: 562-70. doi:
10.1002/path.4679.

117.	Derangere V, Fumet JD, Boidot R, Bengrine L, Limagne
E, Chevriaux A, Vincent J, Ladoire S, Apetoh L, Rebe C,
and Ghiringhelli F. Does bevacizumab impact anti-EGFR
therapy efficacy in metastatic colorectal cancer? Oncotarget.
2016; 7: 9309-21. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7008.

122.	Solit DB, Garraway LA, Pratilas CA, Sawai A, Getz G,
Basso A, Ye Q, Lobo JM, She Y, Osman I, Golub TR,
Sebolt-Leopold J, Sellers WR, et al. BRAF mutation
predicts sensitivity to MEK inhibition. Nature. 2006; 439:
358-62. doi: 10.1038/nature04304.

118.	Di Nicolantonio F, Martini M, Molinari F, Sartore-Bianchi
A, Arena S, Saletti P, De Dosso S, Mazzucchelli L, Frattini
M, Siena S, and Bardelli A. Wild-type BRAF is required
for response to panitumumab or cetuximab in metastatic
colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2008; 26: 5705-12. doi:
10.1200/JCO.2008.18.0786.

123.	Queralt B, Cuyas E, Bosch-Barrera J, Massaguer A, de
Llorens R, Martin-Castillo B, Brunet J, Salazar R, and
Menendez JA. Synthetic lethal interaction of cetuximab
with MEK1/2 inhibition in NRAS-mutant metastatic
colorectal cancer. Oncotarget. 2016; 7: 82185-82199. doi:
10.18632/oncotarget.11985.

119.	Zhang YJ, Tian XQ, Sun DF, Zhao SL, Xiong H,
and Fang JY. Combined inhibition of MEK and
mTOR signaling inhibits initiation and progression of
colorectal cancer. Cancer Invest. 2009; 27: 273-85. doi:
10.1080/07357900802314893.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4000

Oncotarget

