Research Article

Mathematical Oncology
Adaptive Therapy
1

1

1

2

Robert A. Gatenby, Ariosto S. Silva, Robert J. Gillies, and B. Roy Frieden
1

Department of Integrative Mathematical Oncology, Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, Florida and 2School of Optical Sciences, University of
Arizona, Tucson, Arizona

Abstract
A number of successful systemic therapies are available for
treatment of disseminated cancers. However, tumor response
is often transient, and therapy frequently fails due to
emergence of resistant populations. The latter reflects the
temporal and spatial heterogeneity of the tumor microenvironment as well as the evolutionary capacity of cancer
phenotypes to adapt to therapeutic perturbations. Although
cancers are highly dynamic systems, cancer therapy is
typically administered according to a fixed, linear protocol.
Here we examine an adaptive therapeutic approach that
evolves in response to the temporal and spatial variability of
tumor microenvironment and cellular phenotype as well as
therapy-induced perturbations. Initial mathematical models
find that when resistant phenotypes arise in the untreated
tumor, they are typically present in small numbers because
they are less fit than the sensitive population. This reflects the
‘‘cost’’ of phenotypic resistance such as additional substrate
and energy used to up-regulate xenobiotic metabolism, and
therefore not available for proliferation, or the growth
inhibitory nature of environments (i.e., ischemia or hypoxia)
that confer resistance on phenotypically sensitive cells. Thus,
in the Darwinian environment of a cancer, the fitter chemosensitive cells will ordinarily proliferate at the expense of
the less fit chemoresistant cells. The models show that,
if resistant populations are present before administration
of therapy, treatments designed to kill maximum numbers
of cancer cells remove this inhibitory effect and actually promote more rapid growth of the resistant populations. We
present an alternative approach in which treatment is continuously modulated to achieve a fixed tumor population.
The goal of adaptive therapy is to enforce a stable tumor
burden by permitting a significant population of chemosensitive cells to survive so that they, in turn, suppress
proliferation of the less fit but chemoresistant subpopulations.
Computer simulations show that this strategy can result in
prolonged survival that is substantially greater than that
of high dose density or metronomic therapies. The feasibility
of adaptive therapy is supported by in vivo experiments.
[Cancer Res 2009;69(11):4894–903]

Requests for reprints: Robert A. Gatenby, Moffitt Cancer Center, 12902 Magnolia
Drive, Tampa, FL 33612. Phone: 813-745-2843; Fax: 813-745-6070; E-mail:
Robert.Gatenby@moffitt.org.
I2009 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-3658

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (11). June 1, 2009

Major Findings
We present mathematical analysis of the evolutionary
dynamics of tumor populations with and without
therapy. Analytic solutions and numerical simulations
show that, with pretreatment, therapy-resistant cancer
subpopulations are present due to phenotypic or
microenvironmental factors; maximum dose density
chemotherapy hastens rapid expansion of resistant
populations. The models predict that host survival
can be maximized if ‘‘treatment-for-cure strategy’’ is
replaced by ‘‘treatment-for-stability.’’ Specifically, the
models predict that an optimal treatment strategy will
modulate therapy to maintain a stable population of
chemosensitive cells that can, in turn, suppress the
growth of resistant populations under normal tumor
conditions (i.e., when therapy-induced toxicity is
absent). In vivo experiments using OVCAR xenografts
treated with carboplatin show that adaptive therapy is
feasible and, in this system, can produce long-term
survival.

Background, Significance, Question
Systemic administration of cytotoxic drugs is the primary
treatment strategy for patients with disseminated cancer. Whereas
a wide range of treatment regimens are used in clinical practice,
their fundamental goal is typically to induce lethal toxicity in the
largest possible number of tumor cells (1, 2). Thus, most research
efforts in chemotherapy are focused on discovery of agents and
combinations of agents, doses, and dose schedules that maximally
kill tumor cells while minimizing the toxicity to the host. In most
clinical therapies, patient tolerance is the primary factor that limits
the dose of cytotoxic agents. That is, cancer patients are usually
treated at or near the maximum tolerated dose (MTD) with implicit
intent to eradicate (cure) the tumor even when such an outcome,
based on extensive clinical experience, is highly improbable.
Whereas many effective therapies are available, the amplitude
and durability of tumor response to chemotherapy is limited by
tumor cell resistance. This can arise due to either the intrinsic
properties of the tumor cells or factors in the microenvironment
(3, 4).
Intrinsic factors. (a) Phenotypic drug resistance. This may be
through MDR1/ABCB1–mediated multidrug resistance, increased
expression of p-glycoprotein, and increased DNA repair, as well as a
number of other mechanisms (3–8). (b) Tumor cytokinetics. Most
chemotherapy drugs are cell cycle specific so that tumors with low
fractions of populations undergoing mitosis will be relatively
resistant (9). (c) Evolution. Because cancer populations are typically
heterogeneous and cancer cells are genetically unstable (resulting

4894

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Adaptive Therapy

Mathematical Model Quick Guide
Assumptions and equation building. Our modeling approach (27) to therapy resistance in cancer
begins with a tumor growth law (28). The only assumption that yields this result is that cancer cells, as a
result of accumulating mutations, asymptotically approach a minimum information state necessary to
maintain proliferation. This is manifested clinically as a progressive loss of differentiated function
(‘‘dedifferentiation’’).

Equation 1: pðtÞ ¼ Ct U C ¼ ðU þ 1ÞT ðUþ1Þ :
This is a probability density function p(t) for the observation of a cancer during some period of time
(t, t + dt). C is a normalizing constant and U = 1.618. . . (the Fibonacci constant); T is the total clinical
observation time of the growth. We refer the mathematically inclined reader to the original article (27) for
the derivation of this growth law. The clinically relevant prediction is that cancers in ‘‘free fields’’ (i.e., in the
absence of applied therapy) will exhibit power law growth with an exponent of U (the Fibonacci constant,
with value f1.62). The free-field assumption is critical because it means that this growth rate should be
visualized only in tumors that have no external constraints, such as chemotherapy.
If Eq. 1 describes growth in the absence of treatment, what growth law describes growth in its presence?
Using methods developed in catastrophe theory (28), we have shown that the growth law is a modified
version of Eq. 1:

Equation 2: pðtÞ ¼ Cðt=t0 ÞU cos2 ½aðtÞlnðt=t0 Þ
tzt0

Here t 0 is the time at which a therapeutic program of activity a(t) is initiated. This may be thought of as
imposing some time-dependent, external growth constraint on the tumor. In general, the term a(t)
represents the effect of therapy. Thus, in any given drug regimen, the values of a(t) will vary in different
tumor populations, depending on their environment and phenotype. Note also that this term is time
dependent. Thus, it can change depending on nonheritable factors such as tumor perfusion or inducible
intracellular factors that confer resistance.
The cosine term on the right side of the equation permits the addition of highly dynamic interactions.
Note that in the absence of therapy [a(t) = 0], Eq. 2 returns to the same form as Eq. 1. On the other hand,
effective therapy will, over time, tend to reduce the cos2 [a(t)lnt/t 0] term toward 0 (28). The problem is, of
course, that the tumor population is simultaneously attempting to grow according to the power law factor
C(t/t 0)A in Eq. 2. However, even therapy with a small degree of cytotoxicity, if it remains effective for
sufficiently periods of time, can drive the tumor populations toward extinction despite the fast growth of
the power law factor.
For our analysis of therapeutic strategies, we will define p(t) = 1 as the tumor burden that will induce
death of the individual (f1 kg). The optimal clinical goal is to cure the cancer so that the therapy drives
p(t) ! 0. However, an acceptable outcome is a therapy that maintains p(t) < 1. That is, a feasible
therapeutic strategy is one that maintains a total tumor burden that is less than the fatal level of 1.
A complication is that, as the tumor population increases before therapy, it will inevitably become
heterogeneous (i.e., develop subpopulations due to random mutations and/or microenvironmental
changes). When therapy is applied to a heterogeneous tumor, each subpopulation i will experience a
different activity effect ai (t), so that the growth in the total tumor will be described as
n

Equation 3: pðtÞ ¼ f pi ðtÞ
tzt0

i¼1

or, by Eq. 2,
n

Equation 4: pðtÞ ¼ f Ci ðt=t0 ÞciU cos2 ½ai ðtÞlnðt=t0 Þ:
tzt0

i¼1

Statistically, these summations follow because the subpopulations act disjointly. That is, p(t) describes
the occurrence of the event ‘‘cancerous cell,’’ and this occurs disjointly as either of tumor type 1 or of type 2,
etc. In addition, the single normalization constant C in Eq. 2 is now replaced by a generally different
constant, Ci , for each subpopulation i, where it now represents the relative occurrence of subpopulation i
in the heterogeneous population.
Similarly, ci represents a fractional decrease of the growth rate U in Eq. 2 due to the fitness of
subpopulation i relative to all others. This is determined both by phenotypic properties, which affect
the growth rate, and by microenvironmental factors such as hypoxia that extrinsically reduce
proliferation. Cells from very fit populations will have high ci values, indicating quicker growth than
other less fit components (i.e., those that are more sensitive to the total environment including
chemotherapy). Conversely, for populations with low ci values, it is postulated, as a summary effect,
that either

www.aacrjournals.org

4895

in a high evolutionary rate), cytotoxic chemotherapeutic agents
act as environmental selection
forces that favor phenotypes that
adapt to the chemotherapy by
evolving resistant ‘‘strategies’’
such as those described above.
Whether these resistant clones
are present in small numbers in
the original tumor or arise due to
new phenotypes that evolve following commencement of therapy, the adaptive landscape of
treated cancers favors regrowth
of tumor due to proliferation of
the resistant clones (10).
Extrinsic factors. (a) Poor
perfusion. This limits drug delivery and potentially limits the
effectiveness of cytotoxic drugs if
the environment induces quiescence rather than proliferation
(11). (b) Increased intratumoral
interstitial pressure, which reduces drug flow into the tumor
(12). (c) Hypoxia. Many chemotherapeutic agents require intermediate oxygen radicals of their
cytotoxic effects (13). (d) Extracellular acidosis, which increases
the activity of p-glycoprotein
(14, 15). (e) Protective effects of
tumor-associated mesenchymal
cells.
Thus, drug resistance arises as
a result of temporal and spatial
heterogeneity in cancers that
typically contain both multiple subpopulations and multiple
microenvironmental subregions.
Perturbation of a cancer by therapy sets in motion a number of
interactions that not only result
in tumor cell death but also
promote phenotypic adaptation
and alterations of microenvironmental conditions that may lead
to evolution of resistance and
regrowth. As is typical of nonlinear systems, these dynamics are
very difficult to predict or control. By contrast, cancer therapy
is typically imposed in a rigid
fashion, with drug type, doses,
and intervals fixed by protocol
and altered only in the event of
excessive patient toxicity. Thus,
although the tumor is a dynamic
system that evolves during treatment, therapeutic strategies
tend to remain relatively static.

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (11). June 1, 2009

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

i

i

n¼1

n¼1

Equation 5: f cn ¼ 1 or f cn z1;
depending, respectively, on whether there is a free-field environment (no therapy) present, or if, instead,
some constraint on cellular proliferation is present, such as imposed therapy. However, these postulates
have not yet been verified.
The form of Eq. 4 indicates that if therapy produces a value of ai (t) sufficiently large to overcome the
growth term (t/t 0)giA, the tumor population i will approach 0 with time. By comparison, if the values of
ai (t) are uniformly 0 for all populations, Eq. 4 indicates that the tumor will exhibit a sum of power law
growth terms, until some other constraint emerges (e.g., insufficient angiogenesis). We anticipate, however,
that most therapies will have an intermediate degree of phase overlap with the tumor due to the presence
some subpopulations with at least some phenotypic or microenvironmental resistance to therapy (Fig. 1),
permitting regrowth. Furthermore, the tumor phase angle ai (t)ln(t/t 0) in Eq. 4 can change with time. For
example, this would occur if random mutations produce a resistant clone. Or, it can change due to a
changing microenvironment that either increases or decreases the effectiveness of the therapy [i.e., the
amplitude of a(t)]. Such changes can be induced by changes in drug concentrations (due to blood flow) or
by environmental modulating factors such as hypoxia.
In this way, departures from the free-field assumption can be theoretically accommodated by suitably
modeling the response of the tumor to chemotherapy. That is, any iatrogenic perturbation of the tumor
represents a disruption of the free field, which can then be accommodated by the model.
In the next section, we will present a formal analysis of this model. To better visualize these results, we
have also performed computer simulations that allow the system dynamics and model predictions to be
graphically presented. The details of these simulations are presented below but essentially restate the
modeling assumptions presented above.

Findings
Analytic results. Prior analysis of the above model has been performed using catastrophe theory (27).
This is now discussed from the viewpoint of the heterogeneous population growth effects.
In Eqs. 1-4, we model the effects of therapy on phenotypes with varying levels of sensitivity through
their relative phases. Cells that are in phase with therapy are regarded as sensitive, whereas those that
are out of phase have partial or complete resistance depending on phase difference. If all cells in the
tumor were phase synchronized, then some therapy could eventually be discovered that would cure the
cancer by killing all of the cells present. However, we propose that in a growing tumor with
accumulating mutations and varying environmental selection forces, cancer cell populations inevitably
undergo dephasing, so that resistant phenotypes emerge. In other words, finding a ‘‘magic bullet’’ that
will cure a heterogeneous cancer consisting of multiple phenotypic and microenvironmental
subpopulations is highly improbable.
The effects of this variability on therapy can be readily shown. Assume that the total cancer population
is heterogeneous, consisting of subpopulations identified by different free-field fitness values. Call those
with a given fitness value a ‘‘phase cohort.’’ Just before initiation of therapy a , those cells with the maximum
free-field fitness—the principal phase cohort—dominate the cancer mass. When therapy is initiated, it
eliminates all cells that are in the principal phase cohort. Although a favorable outcome, it also sets the
stage for its own failure. As shown in Fig. 1, the out-of-phase cells (those in the less-fit phase groups) may
now start to grow freely because (a) they are unaffected by the therapy, and (b) they do not have the
previously dominant (but therapy-sensitive population) to compete with them.
We then searched for an optimal, therapeutic strategy using a time-varying therapy schedule a(t). We
begin by defining, for convenience, a relative time variable x = t/t 0. Consider the activity schedule:

Equation 6: aðxÞ ¼ ðp=2Þmin½a0 ; ðlnðx þ DxÞÞ1 ; x 
 t=t0 ; Dx ¼ constant
1V	VX0

Here X 0 denotes the relative time duration of the therapy and min denotes the smaller of the two terms
in brackets. The min is taken to avoid an activity level a that will harm the patient due to toxicity.
Let quantity Dx = Dt/t 0 define the maximum uncertainty in the relative time due to a necessarily finite
gap Dt between observations of the patient. The resulting mass curve p(x) is, by substituting Eq. 6 into
Eq. 2,


Equation 7: pðxÞ ¼ Ax U cos2 ðp=2Þ
1V	VX0


lnx
or Ax U cos2 ½ðp=2Þa0 lnx
lnðx þ DxÞ

From Eq. 7, it is evident that the tumor burden p(x) ! 0 (i.e., a full elimination of the tumor burden) as the
relative time x ! 1. How fast is this approached? Of course, in this limit Dx/x ! 0. Therefore, we may
expand out the x dependence of Eq. 7 in a power series of Dx/x. This shows that asymptotically p(x) ! 0 as
the function

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (11). June 1, 2009

4896

A number of mathematical
approaches have been developed to optimize chemotherapy
and limit development of resistance. Probably the most well
known and influential of these
is the Norton-Simon model (16,
17), which found the treatment
with the highest possible dose
over the shortest period of time
(maximum dose density). An
important assumption in the
Norton-Simon model is that
tumor therapies fail because of
evolution of resistant clones after
therapy is started. High dose
density is designed to produce
maximal tumor cell death and
minimize the potential for evolution of resistant clones. Thus, each
patient typically receives chemotherapeutic doses at or near the
limit of tolerable (or even fatal)
side effects. In general, high-density chemotherapy has improved
survival, but cure is achieved only
rarely in most common epithelial
tumors (18–22).
Recently, metronomic therapy
has been proposed as an alternative strategy to the high dose
density paradigm (23). This approach administers lower doses
of drugs continuously or at frequent intervals without long
interruptions. The fundamental
rationales are (a) reduction of
drug-induced toxicity and (b)
increased treatment efficacy
through a continuous antiangiogenic effect of conventional cytotoxic drugs (24). This represents
an innovative strategy that implicitly abandons the focus on
evolution of phenotypic drug
resistance in the Norton-Simon
model. However, it remains fundamentally attached to the
concept that the optimal chemotherapy strategy (whether delivered over short or long terms)
should use fixed protocols of
drugs, doses, and timing and
aim to kill the maximum possible
number of tumor cells.
Here we use both mathematical
models and in vivo experiments to
examine the hypothesis that optimal therapeutic strategies evolve
and change (‘‘adaptive therapy’’) in
response to intratumoral dynamics

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Adaptive Therapy



Ap2 U Dx 2
fx U2 ¼ x 0:382 :
x
x!1 4
xlnx

Equation 8: pðxÞ  lim

The latter ignores the slower ln x term. Hence, the best possible therapeutic outcome will result in a very
slow monotonic decline of the tumor, but one that will never reach 0. Biologically, Eq. 8 shows that a durable
stabilization of tumor burden can be achieved using a time-dependent therapeutic strategy because the
fittest population is never brought to a complete extinction. In other words, a small population of the
dominant, chemosensitive cell population is maintained, and these cells, in turn, suppress the growth of
the chemoresistant clones that are less fit under free-field conditions. Although a complete cure is never
obtained with this strategy, it does transform the disease to one that is a chronic but well-controlled process.

Computer Simulations
Tumor growth and effects of therapy. The above modeling approach and results (27) provided the
motivation for further evaluation of the dynamics of tumor cell proliferation during therapy and, in
particular, the role of phenotypic (i.e., permanent) and environmental (i.e., reversible) resistance in situ. To
accomplish this, we simplify the above general case to include only two or three subpopulations and
explicitly include microenvironmental factors in both tumor growth and response to therapy.
The presence of environmentally-induced drug resistance due to hypoxia and insufficient blood flow is
assumed to be dependent on tumor size (29, 30). Conversely, stabilization of tumor volume may result in
maturation (normalization) of intratumoral blood vessels, increasing flow and oxygen concentrations (31).
The goal of this component of the work is to use computer simulations to test high dose density,
metronomic, and adaptive therapies in tumors with various combinations of chemoresistant (both
phenotypic and microenvironmental) and chemosensitive populations.
Computer simulations. For free growth, as outlined in Eq. 1, we assume each subpopulation i within
the tumor will grow according to the iterative expression

Equation 9: Pi ðt þ 1Þ ¼ Pi ðtÞ 	 ð1 þ ½ci 	 GÞ:
The term ci represents the replication rate of each subpopulation I, and G represents the competition
for resources (nutrients, space, growth factors, etc.) among different populations. In addition,

Equation 10: G ¼

cT 	 RPj
Rðcj 	 Pj Þ

The term cT is the maximum theoretical replication rate of the entire tumor. During therapy, the
population will proliferate linearly with ci and G, but decline linearly according to a ‘‘death’’ function d(t),

Equation 11: Pi ðt þ 1Þ ¼ Pi ðtÞ 	 ð1 þ ½ci 	 GÞ 	 ð1  dðtÞÞ; dðtÞ ¼ aðtÞbðtÞri
where a(t) is the therapy dose (or intratumoral concentration), ri is the phenotypic sensitivity of
the population i to the therapy, and b is the environmental sensitivity. In the simulations, we assume that
az 0, 0 V r V 1, and 1 V b V 2.
Thus, if the therapy is administered at t = t 0, the tumor growth dynamics will include combining the
proliferation and death terms as separate factors,

Equation 12: Pi ðt0 þ 1Þ ¼ Pi ðt0 Þ 	 ð1 þ ½ci 	 GÞ½1  aðt0 Þ 	 bðt0 Þ 	 ri :
Environmental Sensitivity
The presence of environmentally-induced drug resistance due to hypoxia and insufficient blood flow is
assumed to be dependent on tumor size (29, 30). Conversely, stabilization of tumor volume may result in
maturation (normalization) of intratumoral blood vessels, increasing flow and oxygen concentrations (31).
In our model, the environmental sensitivity is b, which is constrained to a value between 1 and 2 and
will increase with time as long as the tumor size remains stable,

Equation 13: bðtÞ ¼ 1 þ

t
:
t þ sS

By the form of Eq. 5, sS is the time required for the environmental sensitivity to increase from 1 to 1.5 in
a tumor with stable size. To accommodate the assumed change in environmental sensitivity with tumor
growth, we assume that b increases with time if tumor size remains stable, and decreases with time as the
tumor grows.
If tumor

 volume Vol(t) increases, the new environmental sensitivity will be b¶ = ab, where
;
1
. In this case, the function that defines the environmental sensitivity is shifted in time
a ¼ Min Volðt1Þ
VolðtÞ
by a factor d(t) as depicted below:

Equation 14: bðtÞ ¼ 1 þ

www.aacrjournals.org

t  dðtÞ
ða  1Þ 	 ðt þ sS Þ 	 t
:
; dðtÞ ¼
t  dðtÞ þ sS
ða  1Þ 	 ðt  sS Þ

4897

that included therapy-induced
perturbations in the environment and evolution of resistance
strategies. We address the question: Can adaptive therapeutic
strategies improve survival compared with high dose density
or metronomic therapies when
tumor heterogeneity (25, 26)
produces phenotypically and environmentally induced resistant
tumor populations before initiation of therapy?

Meaning and Implications
Summary of modeling
results. In the modeling section,
we have used two different
approaches. The first is an analytic approach that generally
examines the tumor cell sensitivity to cancer therapy by assigning
a phase to both the cell and the
therapy. If the phases of the cell
and treatment completely overlap, the cell is killed; if they are
completely out of phase,
the cell survives; and if there is
some overlap, a varying probability of survival can be assigned.
The latter allows for intermediate levels of resistance. Note that
the phase of the tumor cell and
chemotherapy can be changed by
environmental factors (i.e., hypoxia or ischemia) as well as, for
example, the phenotypic resistance of the tumor cell. As a
cancer cell population increases,
it is reasonable to assume that
accumulation of random mutations and heterogeneous blood
flow will cause significant ‘‘dephasing’’ of the cells so that variable levels of sensitivity to any
therapy will likely be present.
This is a key point in the model:
If resistant populations are present before administration of
therapy, traditional therapeutic
strategies that seek to kill as many
sensitive cells as possible actually
promote the rapid growth of
resistant cells. The reason is that
chemosensitive cells are ordinarily
fitter than resistant phenotypes
because the latter must expend
additional substrate and energy to
carry out the resistance strategy.
In the absence of therapy, the

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (11). June 1, 2009

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Modeling Adaptive Therapy
Ideally, adaptive therapy will vary both the drug and dose density depending on the status of the tumor.
In these simulations, we will examine only dose density by modifying the amount of drug given. The
algorithm for dose density adjustment used in the model is (see Fig. 2)



Volði þ 1Þ
Equation 15: aiþ1 ¼ Min ai
; MTD
VolðiÞ

Here, ai and a i +1 are the dose density administered previously and the new density, respectively; Vol(i) and
Vol(i+1) are the volumes of the tumor before and at the time of dose administration, respectively; and MTD
is the maximum tolerated dose.

Simulations
To extend some of the analytic results, we simulated various treatment strategies in tumors that contain
subpopulations that possess different fitness values as well as varying sensitivity to chemotherapy due to
phenotypic or environmental resistance.
Five different population phenotypes were considered in the simulations:
(a) FS, fittest population in free-field growth but completely sensitive to therapy.
(b) S, less fit in free-field conditions and sensitive to therapy.
(c) R, less fit in free-field conditions and resistant to therapy.
(d) FR, fittest population in free-field conditions and phenotypically resistant to therapy.
(e) ER, phenotypically sensitive to therapy but in an environment that confers resistance.
These populations were combined in four different scenarios as depicted in Fig. 3. To each
combination, we applied the following therapeutic strategies: MTD, adaptive therapy, metronomic
therapy using continuous drug perfusion or intermittent, fixed doses at high or low frequency, as
described in Table 1. The outcome of therapy was measured by the tumor size and life expectancy (i.e.,
the time for tumor to reach a total burden that was judged to result in death). These values can be seen
in Fig. 3. Typical growth dynamics for different combinations of populations and therapeutic strategies
are shown in Fig. 4.
Maximum tolerated dose. The results for treatment with MTD show that the strategy of killing as
many tumor cells as possible in the beginning of treatment leads to a considerable reduction in tumor size
if the dominant ( fittest) population is also sensitive (i.e., the FS population). However, after this
populations has been substantially reduced or eliminated, the resistant populations begin to exhibit
increased growth. In the case of the environmentally resistant cells, this is because the reduction in tumor
growth normalizes their ischemic hypoxic environment. If phenotypically resistant but less fit populations
(R) are present, they are able to increase their proliferation rate because the fitter populations (FS) has
been eliminated by therapy and is no longer a competitor.
Note that if the fittest population is also resistant (FR), no therapeutic strategy was effective.
In all of the simulations (except for the FR population), the MTD strategy yielded the lowest life expectancy.
Adaptive therapy. Adaptive therapy initially delivered the worst results because the tumor does not
decrease in size as much as with the other approaches. However, as time progresses, maintaining a stable
small population of the FS population does reduce the growth of the resistant phenotype (R), resulting in
only very slow tumor growth and prolonged patient survival. When environmentally resistant populations
are present, the environmental sensitivity increases and the resistant population decreases if the tumor
volume is kept stable. This is consistent with the concept of vascular normalization as a mechanism to
enhance therapeutic effects. In this scenario, the patient will survive indefinitely. In addition, note in Fig. 3
that in this scenario, at the end of adaptive treatment, all of the extant tumor cells are sensitive, indicating
that high-dose therapy with curative intent would be possible in this tumor. Finally, the simulation
consistently showed that, when using adaptive therapy, tumor control could be achieved using
chemotherapy doses that decreased with time.
Metronomic therapy. The principle of metronomic therapy is to apply chemotherapy doses that are
less intense but more frequent than the standard MTD protocol (including continuous infusion). We find
that this approach does consistently yield better results than MTD. The consistent administration of lower
doses results in slow reduction of the sensitive population (FS). This stabilization of tumor increases the
sensitivity of the environmentally resistant populations (ER), which enhances therapy. Similarly, because
some members of the FS population remain during much of the early phase of metronomic therapy, they
are able to suppress the phenotypically resistant population (S). The negative point of metronomic therapy
is that throughout the time of therapy administration (which is increased due to more frequent
application), the overall fitness of the FS population will be reduced, thus limiting its ability to completely
suppress the resistant phenotype (R). This results in thresholds at which the resistant populations break
through and begin to grow faster, leading to tumor recurrence and growth to a fatal level.

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (11). June 1, 2009

4898

sensitive population will proliferate at the expense of the
resistant phenotypes. However,
if therapy removes all of the
sensitive cells, the resistant population can proliferate freely
because it does not have to
compete with any fitter population. In contrast, we find that if
therapy maintains a fixed population of chemosensitive cells,
they will, in turn, suppress the
growth of resistant cells, allowing the overall tumor burden to
remain stable.
Although likely be a concept
difficult for physicians and
patients to accept, the model
suggests that treatment strategies, under these circumstances,
should abandon ‘‘cure’’ as an
implicit or explicit goal. Rather,
treatment of disseminated cancers using therapies with no
significant probability of cure
should focus on controlling,
but not eliminating, the sensitive cells so that they can, in
turn, reduce the growth of the
resistant populations.
In the second modeling approach, we use numerical simulations to better illustrate the
findings in the analytic solutions
and examine the outcomes in
several possible treatment scenarios. This is particularly valuable in separating phenotypic
(i.e., permanent) resistance from
environmentally induced (i.e.,
transient and potentially reversible) resistance. This allowed
explicit testing of the adaptive
therapy model and comparison
with more standard strategies.
The results suggested that adaptive therapy, if it could be
successfully applied, will permit
longer sur vival than that
obtained with high dose density
or metronomic strategies. Based
on these results, animal experiments were done to determine
the feasibility of using adaptive
therapy in vivo. Those results
are described below.

Experimental Studies
Experimental testing of some
of the modeling results was

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Adaptive Therapy

Figure 1. Simulation of treatment dynamics in a
tumor with a dominant subpopulation (p) that
is sensitive to some treatment and a small
subpopulation (q ) that is less fit (resulting in slower
proliferation) but completely resistant to the
treatment. Therapy is applied of time t = t 1 and is
sufficient to entirely eradicate subpopulation p.
The tumor size initially decreases. However, the
resistant phenotype is now also the fittest extant
population and rapidly regrows, resulting in tumor
regrowth and resistance to any further therapy.

carried out in an ovarian cancer (OVCAR-3) tumor cell line
growing in severe combined immunodeficient mice and treated
with carboplatin administered i.p. Tumors were established by
injecting a slurry of 106 OVCAR cells into the s.c. tissues in the
flank of female severe combined immunodeficient mice (4–6
weeks of age). When the tumors grew to a volume of f300 mm3,
the mice were divided into three groups: control, a ‘‘standard
therapy’’ arm (60 mg/kg i.p. q4 days 	 3), and adaptive therapy.
The adaptive group received an initial dose of 50 mg/kg and
thereafter the tumors were evaluated every 3 days and the dose
was adjusted to maintain a stable tumor volume. The algorithm
for dosing basically represented ‘‘a shot in the dark’’ because no
prior experience was available to parameterize the models. Drug
doses were established in increments of 10 mg/kg starting at the
starting dose of 50 mg/kg. A treatment decision was made at the
time of each measurement. If the tumor remained stable (defined

as the no more than a 10% change from the prior volume using
caliper measurements), no drug would be administered. If the
tumor diminished in size or remained stable for two or more
measurements, the next dose would be decreased by one 10 mg/kg
decrement. If the tumor increased in size greater than 10%, the
same dose of drug would be administered. If the tumor again
increased in size, the dose would be increased to the next higher
level.
The experimental results are shown in Fig. 5 and represent the
mean tumor burden for four animals in each group. The initial
experiment confirmed that therapy could be modulated in a
way that allows persistence of a small stable tumor. However,
some obvious limitations were apparent because modest tumor
growth in the adaptive therapy animals did occur. Based on this
experience, we repeated the experiment to more rigorously
maintain stable tumor volume.

Figure 2. A, algorithm used for adjusting the environmental sensitivity. Once a tumor increases in size, the environmental sensitivity is decreased by the inverse
of the growth rate. A delay of d is then added to the original function so that the environmental sensitivity still grows asymptotically toward 2 but will require more time.
B, dynamics of tumor regrowth and adaptive therapy treatment. Before the therapy is applied, the tumor is measured, and its size compared with the value at the
prior time step. Should the tumor be bigger, the therapy intensity is increased; if the tumor is smaller, the dose density is decreased.

www.aacrjournals.org

4899

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (11). June 1, 2009

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Results from this experiment are shown in Fig. 5 and continue to
show that animals receiving adaptive therapy could survive indefinitely with a small, reasonably stable tumor burden (with both
slow increases and slow decreases in tumor volumes observed).
The total amount of carboplatin administered to the conventional
group was 180 mg/kg, whereas the two adaptive groups received 320
and 310 mg/kg, respectively. The standard therapy induced a
substantial response, but the tumor eventually recurred resulting in

death. In both experiments, tumor volume stability could be
enforced by a modulated treatment strategy. In both cases, the
amount of drug necessary to maintain tumor stability decreased
substantially with time so that at the completion of the experiment,
control was achieved with administration of 10 mg/kg of
carboplatin.

Discussion of Mathematical and In vivo Results
Cancers are highly dynamic and adaptive systems that can
evolve phenotypic strategies to overcome proliferation barriers in
their environment. Application of therapy to the tumor adds an
iatrogenic selection force to the adaptive landscape that will inevitably promote evolution of therapy-resistant phenotypic strategies. This evolutionary capacity to develop resistance results in
treatment failure and tumor regrowth in the vast majority of
cancer patients. Interestingly, despite this well-recognized dynamic and evolutionary nature of tumors, cancer chemotherapy is
typically applied through protocols that a priori fix the drug(s),
dose, and timing.
Virtually all current chemotherapy regimens have, as a fundamental strategy, the goal of killing maximal numbers of tumor
cells. Usually, this is achieved through application of the highest drug
dose that results in acceptable patient toxicity. More recently,
metronomic therapy has been proposed as an alternative strategy.
This approach uses smaller doses of drugs given in shorter, regular
intervals or continuously to reduce toxicity and increase the
antiangiogenic effects. This strategy maintains fixed dosing schedules and retains, as an explicit goal, effecting maximum tumor
cell death.
Clearly, the ideal cancer therapy is one that identifies and
successfully attacks the key fitness parameters in all extant tumor
subpopulations as well as their adaptations to therapy, so that,
despite the tumor heterogeneity and evolutionary capacity,
complete eradication is obtained. Currently available therapies do
seem to achieve this goal in some relatively homogeneous tumors
such as testicular cancer and Hodgkin’s lymphoma. Long-term
response can be achieved in many other cancers and sarcomas, but
resistance almost invariably emerges, ultimately resulting in tumor
progression and patient death.
Here we explore a conceptual model of cancer treatment that
we call adaptive therapy. A general principle of adaptive therapy is
that cancer treatment should be as dynamic as the tumor populations that are being treated. Specifically, therapeutic strategies
should evolve in response to and in anticipation of tumor adaptation through continuous adjustment of drugs, dose, and timing.
Using mathematical model and computer simulations, we find
that treatment with the explicit or implicit intent to cure neither

Figure 3. Simulations for application of five therapy strategies: (a) MTD;
(b ) adaptive therapy; (c ) metronomic therapy (continuous infusion); (d)
metronomic therapy (high-frequency administration); and (e) metronomic
therapy (low-frequency administration). Four combinations of mixed cell
populations that include FR with high free-field fitness and high sensitivity to
therapy, and R with lower fitness and low sensitivity to therapy, S with low fitness
and high sensitivity, and ER with high intrinsic sensitivity and fitness but in an
environment that restricts proliferation and response. Combinations shown in (a)
‘‘FS and R,’’ (b ) ‘‘S and FR,’’ (c ) ‘‘FS and R and ER,’’ and (d ) ‘‘FS and ER.’’ The
results show that at day 1,500 of tumor growth (1,100 d after initiation of therapy),
the tumor treated using the MTD strategy was largest whereas those treated
with metronomic therapy were smallest. When the simulations were run until
the tumor burden achieved the lethal threshold, all patients in the MTD and
metronomic therapies succumbed to their disease. However, the tumors treated
with adaptive therapy remained stable even after a period exceeding 10,000 d.

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (11). June 1, 2009

4900

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Adaptive Therapy

Table 1. All therapies analyzed in a cycle of 60 days
Therapy strategy Dose density Interval (d) Total dose (60 d)
MTD
50
60
50
Adaptive
Metro continuous
Metro low freq.
Metro high freq.

25 (initial)
0.83
8.33
4.16

60
1
10
5

Variable
50
50
50

NOTE: The first strategy tested is MTD with one high dose per cycle.
The second strategy used was the adaptive therapy with an initial dose
intensity of 25 every cycle (half of MTD). Three different strategies
were used for metronomic therapy; the doses were administered on a
daily basis, once every 5 d and once every 10 d, respectively. In all
cases, except for adaptive therapy, the total amount of therapy
administered in a cycle of 60 d is the same.

completely eradicates all tumor cells nor even achieves a maximum
length of survival if resistant populations are present at the time
therapy is initiated. The dynamics that lead to this finding arise
through the Darwinian interactions of cell subpopulations in which

therapy-resistant cells are, in the absence of therapy, less fit than
the sensitive populations due to the phenotypic cost of resistance.
That is, the utilization of energy and other resources to, for example, increase xenobiotic metabolism reduces the amount
available for proliferation.
Our analysis shows that, in the absence of therapy, the fitter,
chemosensitive cells actually suppress the growth of the less fit but
resistant population. Therapies designed to kill maximum numbers
of cancer cells produce an environment in which the resistant cells
both survive and are unopposed by the fitter, chemosensitive
populations. This permits rapid regrowth of a therapy-resistant
cancer. Alternatively, if therapy is limited to allow a significant
number of chemosensitive cells to survive, they will, in turn,
suppress the growth of the resistant population. We hypothesized
that under these circumstances, adaptive therapy should be
designed to maintain a normal cohort of surviving sensitive cells.
Preliminary testing of this theoretical modeling shows that
adaptive therapy can achieve a substantially longer survival than
standard high dose density strategies by maintaining a tumor
volume that is either stable or slowly increasing for a prolonged
period of time. We show that metronomic therapy will achieve a
longer survival than standard drug regimens, but low-dose therapy
applied continuously or at frequent intervals will still tend to

Figure 4. Progression of tumor properties with time in initial response to different therapeutic strategies. All graphs use two populations, FS and ER, the first being
fit and therapy sensitive, the second environmentally resistant. The top left graph (Total tumor size ) shows that MTD therapy results in a better initial result but the
tumor promptly acquires resistance and recurs. Metronomic therapy (METC, METH , and METL ) also reduces the tumor and is able to keep it stable for longer,
but eventually, the resistant populations emerge once sensitive population is depleted (top right , Phenotypically sensitive ). As shown in Fig. 3, these resistant
populations result in tumor regrowth and patient death. Tumors treated with adaptive therapy (ADP ) decrease in volume much less than with the other therapies
but then maintain a stable tumor size for a prolonged period of time. Control (CTRL ) corresponds to untreated tumors.

www.aacrjournals.org

4901

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (11). June 1, 2009

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 5. Two different experiments as
described in the text. The y-axis is the
mean tumor volume for the four animals in
each experimental group, and the x -axis
is the time from s.c. inoculation of 107
tumor cells. Each experiment included four
animals in three experimental arms:
(a ) control (vehicle only); (b) ‘‘standard’’
high dose therapy consisting of 60 mg/kg
q4 days for 3 doses; (c ) adaptive therapy
which begins with a dose of 50 mg/kg
and then adjusts the dose to maintain a
stable tumor volume. The arrows on the
x -axis represent days in which therapy was
given in the adaptive group. In the top
experiment, the doses are (from left to right)
50, 40, 40, 30, 30, 20, 20, 10, 10, 10,
10, 10, 10, 10, 10, 10 mg/kg. In the lower
experiment, the doses are 50, 50, 40, 40,
30, 20, 20, 10, 10, 10, 10, 10, 10 mg/kg.

promote growth of resistant populations leading to tumor regrowth and patient death. We find that adaptive therapy can
maintain a stable tumor population for a prolonged period of time,
permitting long-term survival.
We present some experimental results that establish the
feasibility of using adaptive therapy. To the best of our knowledge,
no in vivo studies using this therapeutic approach have been
previously attempted, and so our initial work was essentially
exploratory to determine if stable size could be achieved in an
aggressive tumor model using the principles of adaptive therapy.
The experiments represented only a simplistic test of the model
because the therapy variables were limited to the dose and timing
of a single drug (a complete adaptive therapy would also include
alternative drugs) and assessed tumor response only by changes in
size. Nevertheless, our results do confirm that a prolonged stable
tumor volume can be achieved through application of the
principles of adaptive therapy.
Although limited, the experimental results raise additional
interesting questions primarily because we found that control of
tumor could be achieved using progressively lower doses and
increasingly long intervals between doses. In the simulations for

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (11). June 1, 2009

tumors in which the primary mechanism of resistance is microenvironmental, we found that enforcing a constant tumor volume
allowed ‘‘normalization’’ of the intratumoral vasculature. This
permitted tumor control with decreasing amount of drugs and,
more importantly, resulted in an end point in which all of the tumor
cells were sensitive to the chemotherapeutic agent. If this is confirmed experimentally, we note that this progression toward maximal sensitivity over time during tumor volume stabilization may
offer an additional adaptive therapy strategy in which high dose
density cytotoxic drugs could be administered with maximal effectiveness after an initial therapy aimed to maintain a constant size.

Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest
No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

Acknowledgments
Received 9/24/08; revised 2/10/09; accepted 2/12/09.
Grant support: NIH grants P20 CA113004-01 and R01 CA77575-05.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.

4902

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Adaptive Therapy

References
1. Frei E, Canellos GP. Dose, a critical factor in cancer
chemotherapy. Am J Med 1980;69:585–95.
2. Frei E, Elias A, Wheeler C, et al. The relationship
between high-dose treatment and combination chemotherapy. The concept of summation dose intensity. Clin
Cancer Res 1998;314:1423–31.
3. Longley DB, Johnston PG. Molecular mechanisms of
drug resistance. J Pathol 2005;205:275–92.
4. Gonzalez-Angulo AM, Morales-Vasquez F, Hortobagyi
GN. Overview of resistance to systemic therapy in
patients with breast cancer. Adv Exp Med Biol 2007;608:
1–22.
5. Zhou SF. Structure, function and regulation of Pglycoprotein and its clinical relevance in drug disposition. Xenobiotica 2008;38:802–32.
6. Ma JJ, Chen BL, Xin XY. Inhibition of multi-drug
resistance of ovarian carcinoma by small interfering
RNA targeting to MRP2 gene. Arch Gynecol Obstet 2008.
7. Rajkumar T, Yamuna M. Multiple pathways are
involved in drug resistance to doxorubicin in an
osteosarcoma cell line. Anticancer Drugs 2008;19:
257–65.
8. Hazlehurst LA, Enkemann SA, Beam CA, et al.
Genotypic and phenotypic comparisons of de novo
and acquired melphalan resistance in an isogenic
multiple myeloma cell line model. Cancer Res 2003;63:
7900–6.
9. Shackney SE, McCormack GW, Guchural GJ. Growth
rate patterns of solid tumors and their relationship to
responsiveness to therapy. An analytical review. Ann
Intern Med 1978;89:107–9.
10. Kansal AR, Torquato S, Chiocca EA, Deisboeck TS.
Emergence of a subpopulation in a computational
model of tumor growth. J Theor Biol 2000;207:431–41.

www.aacrjournals.org

11. Marignol L, Coffey M, Lawler M, Hollywood D.
Hypoxia in prostate cancer: a powerful shield against
tumour destruction. Cancer Treat Rev 2008;34:313–27.
12. Reddy LH. Drug delivery to tumours: recent strategies. J Pharm Pharmacol 2005;57:1231–42.
13. Shimogai R, Kigawa J, Itamochi H, et al. Expression of
hypoxia-inducible factor 1a gene affects the outcome in
patients with ovarian cancer. Int J Gynecol Cancer 2008;
18:499–505.
14. Vaupel P, Thews O, Hoeckel M. Treatment resistance
of solid tumors: role of hypoxia and anemia. Med Oncol
2001;18:243–59.
15. Greijer AE, de Jong MC, Scheffer GL, et al. Hypoxiainduced acidification causes mitoxantrone resistance
not mediated by drug transporters in human breast
cancer cells. Cell Oncol 2005;27:43–9.
16. Norton L, Simon R. Tumor size, sensitivity to therapy,
and design of treatment schedules. Cancer Treat Rep
1977;61:1307–17.
17. Norton L, Simon R. The Norton-Simon hypothesis
revisited. Cancer Res Treat Rep 1986;70:164–6.
18. Orzano JA, Swain SM. Concepts and clinical trials of
dose-dense chemotherapy for breast cancer. Clin Breast
Cancer 2005;6:402–11.
19. Aabo K, Adams M, Adnitt P, et al.; Advance Ovarian
Cancer Trialists’ Group. Chemotherapy in advanced
ovarian cancer: four systematic meta-analyses of
individual patient data from 37 randomized trials. Br J
Cancer 2001;78:1479–87.
20. Vasey PA, Paul J, Birt A, et al.; Scottish Gynaecological Cancer Trials Group. Docataxel and cisplatin
in combination as first-line chemotherapy for advanced epithelial ovarian cancer. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:
2069–80.
21. McGuire WP, Hoskins WJ, Brady MS, et al. An
assessment of dose-intensive therapy in suboptimally

4903

debulked ovarian cancer: a Gynecologic Oncology
Group study. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:2113–9.
22. Kaye SB, Vasey PA. Docatexel in ovarian cancer:
phase III perspectives and future development. Semin
Oncol 2002;29:22–7.
23. Gately S, Kerbel R. Antiangiogenic scheduling of lower
dose cancer chemotherapy. Cancer J 2001;7:427–36.
24. Bocci G, Falcone A, Fioravanti A, et al. Antiangiogenic and anticolorectal cancer effects of metronomic
irinotecan chemotherapy alone and in combination
with semaxinib. Br J Cancer 2008;98:1619–29.
25. Kanamaru H, Muranaka K, Mori H, Akino H, Arai Y,
Okada K. Analysis of histological heterogeneity in
renal cell carcinoma: tumor size-related histological
change and its prognostic significance. Int J Urol 1996;3:
256–60.
26. Campbell LL, Polyak K. Breast tumor heterogeneity:
cancer stem cells or clonal evolution. Cell Cycle 2007;19:
2332–8.
27. Gatenby RA, Frieden BR. Inducing catastrophe in
malignant growth. Math Med Biol 2008;25:267–83.
28. Gatenby RA, Frieden BR. Application of information
theory and extreme physical information to carcinogenesis. Cancer Res 2002;62:3675–84.
29. Sevick EM, Jain RK. Geometric resistance to blood
flow in solid tumors perfused ex vivo : effects of
tumor size and perfusion pressure. Cancer Res 1989;
49:3506–12.
30. Milross CG, Tucker SL, Mason KA, et al. The effect of
tumor size on necrosis and polarographically measure
p O2. Acta Oncol 1997;36:183–9.
31. Tong RT, Boucher Y, Kozin SV, Winkler F, Hicklin DJ,
Jain RK. Vascular normalization by vascular endothelial
growth factor receptor 2 blockade induces a pressure
gradient across the vasculature and improves drug
penetration in tumors. Cancer Res 2004;64:3731–6.

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (11). June 1, 2009

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Adaptive Therapy
Robert A. Gatenby, Ariosto S. Silva, Robert J. Gillies, et al.
Cancer Res 2009;69:4894-4903.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/69/11/4894
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2010/05/19/69.11.4894.DC1

This article cites 30 articles, 6 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/69/11/4894.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 36 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/69/11/4894.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

