Editorial

Patient-Reported Outcomes Enhance Understanding of the
Impact of Pazopanib in Soft Tissue Sarcoma
Carolyn Gotay, PhD

Little research has explored quality of life in patients with advanced soft tissue sarcoma. The report by Coens and colleagues in this issue of Cancer1 advances understanding of how 1 targeted therapy—pazopanib—affects well being in this
group. The analyses reported in their article investigate health-related quality of life (HRQoL) as an outcome in Pazopanib
for Metastatic Soft-Tissue Sarcoma (PALETTE), a randomized clinical trial (RCT) that compared pazopanib, an orally
administered, multitarget tyrosine kinase inhibitor, with placebo in 369 patients who had failed at least 1 previous chemotherapy regimen.2 The PALETTE trial demonstrated a significant benefit in progression-free survival (PFS) for the pazopanib arm, with a time to progression of 4.6 months compared with 1.6 months in the placebo arm. However, more
toxicity was associated with pazopanib, including significantly higher fatigue, diarrhea, nausea, weight loss, and
hypertension.2
The current report provides additional information regarding patient perspectives regarding the impact of pazopanib
on their lives. The study team used a well established questionnaire, the 30-item core European Organization for Research
and Treatment of Cancer Quality of Life Questionnaire (EORTC QLQ-C30),3 to assess HRQoL at baseline and at 3month follow-up assessments. The primary HRQoL outcome was global health status (GHS). In this questionnaire, GHS
is measured by 2 items that ask patients to rate their “overall quality of life” and “overall health” during the past week on
7-point scales from 1 (very poor) to 7 (excellent). The EORTC QLQ-C30 also includes items assessing functioning and
symptom experience. The results indicated that GHS did not differ between the pazopanib and placebo arms, although
the patient-reported symptom experience echoed the toxicity data: statistically and clinically significant higher fatigue, diarrhea, nausea/vomiting, and appetite loss in patients receiving pazopanib. Although their original hypothesis was that
pazopanib would result in improved GHS, the authors conclude that a lack of GHS deterioration in the face of considerable symptomatology supports the HRQoL benefits of this agent.
There are many strengths of this study. These include the specification of an a priori hypothesis, the use of validated
assessment tools and analytic strategies, and adherence to the Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials PatientReported Outcome (CONSORT-PRO) extension guidelines for reporting.4 Missing data are often a concern in HRQoL
research, particularly in studies of advanced disease. In this study, HRQoL questionnaire completion rates were excellent,
with greater than 75% of eligible patients completing surveys at all 4 time points. In addition, the authors conducted thorough analyses of the potential impact of missing data and noted that their conclusions were unchanged. They also investigated HRQoL as a prognostic variable and, consistent with considerable previous research,5 observed that HRQoL was a
significant predictor of length of survival but was not predictive of response to treatment.
The primary conclusion of this study—that increased PFS was associated with more symptoms, but not with compromised HRQoL—has important implications. Some agencies, such as the US Food and Drug Administration, have
offered specific guidance suggesting that well defined symptoms reflecting differences among therapies are the most appropriate indicators to demonstrate patient impact and that broader, less specific measures like quality of life are not the preferred approaches to evaluating drug indications and labeling.6 It should be noted that not all agencies have the same
perspective on this issue: organizations like the European Medicines Agency are more likely to approve agents based on
higher order constructs, such as quality of life.7 The study by Coens et al provides support for why measuring overall
HRQoL is important as well as how patient perspectives provide significant contributions to clinical trials. If only

Corresponding author: Carolyn Gotay, PhD, 2206 East Mall, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z3 Canada; Fax: (604) 822-4994; carolyn.gotay@ubc.ca
School of Population and Public Health, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada
See reference original article on pages 2933-41, this issue.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29429, Received: April 3, 2015; Accepted: April 6, 2015, Published online May 29, 2015 in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

2868

Cancer

September 1, 2015

PROS and Soft Tissue Sarcoma/Gotay

symptoms and/or clinician-rated toxicity had been
assessed, and not patient-reported GHS, then the study
would have erroneously concluded that pazopanib had an
adverse impact on patient well being.
There are several areas in which questions remain.
Perhaps the most important 1 is why the authors made
the hypothesis they did: that is, why did they believe that
pazopanib, despite its well known toxicities, would lead to
improved global quality of life? There is no rationale provided for this prediction and no potential theoretical constructs that may explain the basis for their hypothesis. It
should be noted that the current research is not the only
study to observe similar results. Cella et al8 reported a
study that was similar in many ways: their phase 3 RCT
examining pazopanib versus placebo in patients with
advanced renal cancer demonstrated a significant increase
in PFS with pazopanib. Those investigators also used the
EORTC QLQ-C30 GHS measure and observed no significant differences between the study arms on this measure. (They also examined subgroups of patients and
noted differences in HRQoL according response and disease stability, analyses that were not reported by Coens
et al). The authors did not provide a rationale for why
GHS was selected as the primary HRQoL outcome measure in their study.
Some possible reasons why GHS may be the
HRQoL assessment of choice can be proposed. If a treatment can offer a positive impact on tumor control, which
was the hypothesis behind the pazopanib RCT, then
patients may feel better overall, despite having some difficult symptoms. The qualitative study by Regnier-Denois
and colleagues9 in patients who were receiving oral chemotherapies indicated that patients often perceived side
effects as a sign of treatment efficacy or the “price to pay”
for treatment efficacy (p. 526). In fact, when it comes to
epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitors, skin toxicity
is commonly regarded as an indicator of efficacy.10
Hence, the patients who interpret these symptoms as a
good sign, in fact, may be correct, and their expectations
of treatment benefit might be reflected in higher GHS ratings. Other explanations may be possible as well.
A more fine-grained approach is necessary to understand more about why patients rated their GHS as they
did and how they interpreted and explained their symptom experience. Basch suggests that, particularly for new
agents, qualitative work, including individual interviews
and focus groups, is important to comprehend what is important and meaningful to patients and to develop measurement strategies accordingly.11 Perhaps in the patient
population in the current study, perceived treatment effiCancer

September 1, 2015

cacy, optimism, and/or hope were important constructs
that led to maintained GHS in the pazopanib group despite (or in addition to) symptom experience. Such constructs could be measured to provide greater
understanding of the mechanisms for the outcomes
obtained as well as suggestions for psychological targets
that could potentially improve HRQoL. Coens et al1 suggest the need to develop new assessment tools appropriate
to the unique symptoms associated with soft tissue sarcoma and targeted therapies, but it is possible that an
adequate understanding of GHS requires more than
symptom assessment.
Finally, how likely is it that these results will change
clinical practice? On the basis of the primary RCT article2
and the report by Coens et al,1 there is clear evidence to
support the benefit of pazopanib in increasing PFS with
more toxicity and symptoms but without a decrease in
GHS. However, is this enough to change patterns of care?
Pazopanib did not lead to a statistically significantly
increase in overall survival, which was 12.5 months in the
pazopanib arm and 10.7 months in the placebo arm.
Patients in both arms lived an average of 8 to 9 months after progression. Hence, the primary benefit of pazopanib
was an average delay in progression of 3 months.
There is considerable evidence demonstrating that
patients—and particularly those with advanced disease—
are willing to accept considerable toxicity for only modest
gains in life expectancy or other health outcomes.12-14 In
particular, 2 studies investigated the tradeoff patients with
renal cancer would be willing to make between toxicity
and PFS. One study indicated that patients were willing
to forego 4.4 months of PFS to improve severe fatigue,15
and the other study demonstrated that an improvement of
22 months in PFS was the benchmark at which point
PFS, rather than survival, became a significant concern.16
More research is needed to understand whether these
findings can be extrapolated to patients with soft tissue
sarcoma and whether the statistically significant 3-month
PFS increase observed in the PALETTE study is significant enough to patients that they will elect pazopanib
treatment despite its symptom burden and ultimate lack
of survival benefit.
In addition, health care decision making takes place
within the context of economic considerations. Although
it was not part of the current article, the PALETTE study
also included an economic analysis. Two studies have
been published regarding cost effectiveness in Canada17
and the United Kingdom.18 Both articles conclude that
pazopanib is an expensive treatment and is not cost effective compared with placebo. However, it may be more
2869

Editorial

cost effective than other currently available treatments for
soft tissue sarcoma.
Clearly, the future application of pazopanib for soft
tissue sarcoma is complicated, and its impact will become
clearer in the future. It is a credit to the protocol design
that the authors conducted an array of outcome assessments, including not only efficacy and toxicity but also
cost effectiveness and patient-reported outcomes. Although
multiple indicators may complicate interpretation, they
also provide a more complete understanding of the impact
of the therapy on the disease, the patient, and the health
care system that is needed for results to be taken out of the
clinical trials research setting and into standard cancer care.
FUNDING SUPPORT
No specific funding was disclosed.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
Although Dr. Gotay has published on other topics with some of the
authors on the current article, she had no role in any aspect of this
research.

REFERENCES
1. Coens C, van der Graaf W, Blay J, et al. Health-related quality-oflife results from PALETTE: a randomized, double-blind, phase 3
trial of pazopanib versus placebo in patients with soft tissue sarcoma
whose disease has progressed during or after prior chemotherapy—a
European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer Soft
Tissue and Bone Sarcoma Group global network study (EORTC
62072). Cancer. 2015;121:2933-2941.
2. van der Graaf WT, Blay JY, Chawala SP, et al; EORTC Soft Tissue
and Bone Sarcoma Group; PALETTE Study Group. Pazopanib for
metastatic soft-tissue sarcoma (PALETTE): a randomized, doubleblind, placebo-controlled phase 3 trial. Lancet. 2012;379:1879-1886.
3. Aaronson NK, Ahmedzai S, Bergman B, et al. The European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer QLQ-C30: a
quality-of-life instrument for use in international clinical trials in oncology. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1993 Mar 3;85(5):365-376.
4. Calvert M, Blazeby J, Altman DG, et al. Reporting of patientreported outcomes in randomized trials: the CONSORT PRO
extension. JAMA. 2013;309:814-822.

2870

5. Gotay CC, Kawamoto CT, Bottomley A, Efficace F. The prognostic
significance of patient-reported outcomes in cancer clinical trials.
J Clin Oncol. 2008;26:1355-1363.
6. .Food and Drug Administration, US Department of Health and
Human Services. Guidance for Industry Patient-Reported Outcome
Measures: Use in Medical Product Development to Support Labeling Claims; Availability. Washington, DC: US Department of
Health and Human Services; 2009. Available at: http://www.fda.gov/
downloads/Drugs/Guidances/UCM193282.pdf. Accessed April 2,
2015.
7. DeMuro C, Clark M, Doward L, Evans E, Mordin M, Gnanasakthy
A. Assessment of PRO label claims granted by the FDA as compared
to the EMA (2006-2010). Value Health. 2013;16:1150-1155.
8. Cella D, Pickard AS, Duh MS, et al. Health-related quality of life
in patients with advanced renal cell carcinoma receiving pazopanib
or placebo in a randomised phase III trial. Eur J Cancer. 2012;48:
311-323.
9. Regnier-Denois V, Poirson J, Nourissat A, Jacquin J-P, Guastalla JP,
Chauvin F. Adherence with oral chemotherapy: results from a qualitative study of the behaviour and representations of patients and
oncologists. Eur J Cancer Care (Engl). 2011;20:520-527.
10. Potthoff K, Hofheinz R, Hassel JC, et al. Interdisciplinary management of EGFR-inhibitor-induced skin reactions: a German expert
opinion. Ann Oncol. 2011;22:524-535.
11. Basch E. Beyond the FDA PRO guidance: steps toward integrating
meaningful patient-reported outcomes into regulatory trials and US
drug labels. Value Health. 2012;15:401-403.
12. Koedoot CG, de Haan RJ, Stiggelbout AM, et al. Palliative chemotherapy or best supportive care? A prospective study explaining
patients’ treatment preference and choice. Br J Cancer. 2003;89:
2219-2226.
13. Marta GN, Del Nero LG, Marta GN, et al. Treatment priorities in
oncology: do we want to live longer or better? Clinics (Sao Paulo).
2014;69:509-514.
14. Matsuyama R, Reddy S, Smith TJ. Why do patients choose
chemotherapy near the end of life? A review of the perspective
of those facing death from cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24:34903496.
15. Mohamed AF, Hauber AB, Neary MP. Patient benefit-risk preferences for targeted agents in the treatment of renal cell carcinoma. Pharmacoeconomics. 2011;29:977-988.
16. Wong MK, Mohamed AF, Hauber AB, et al. Patients rank toxicity
against progression free survival in second-line treatment of advanced
renal cell carcinoma. J Med Econ. 2012;15:1139-1148.
17. Delea TE, Amdahl J, Nakhaipour HR, et al. Cost-effectiveness of
pazopanib in advanced soft-tissue sarcoma in Canada. Curr Oncol.
2014;21:e748-e759.
18. Amdahl J, Manson SC, Isbell R, et al. Cost-effectiveness of pazopanib in advanced soft tissue sarcoma in the United Kingdom [serial
online]. Sarcoma. 2014;2014:481071.

Cancer

September 1, 2015

