Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 5

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Wogonin inhibits multiple myeloma-stimulated angiogenesis via
c-Myc/VHL/HIF-1a signaling axis
Rong Fu1,*, Yan Chen1,*, Xiao-Ping Wang1, Teng An1, Lei Tao1, Yu-Xin Zhou1, Yu-Jie
Huang1, Bao-An Chen2, Zhi-Yu Li3, Qi-Dong You4, Qing-Long Guo1, Zhao-Qiu Wu1
1

 epartment of Physiology, State Key Laboratory of Natural Medicines and Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and
D
Intervention, China Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing 210009, China

2

Department of Hematology and Oncology, Zhongda Hospital, Medical School, Southeast University, Nanjing 211189, China

3

Department of Medicinal Chemistry, China Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing 210009, China

4

Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Drug Design and Optimization, China Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing 210009, China

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Qing-Long Guo, e-mail: anticancer_drug@163.com
Zhao-Qiu Wu, e-mail: zqwu@cpu.edu.cn
Keywords: wogonin, angiogenesis, VHL, c-Myc, multiple myeloma
Received: July 26, 2015     Accepted: December 23, 2015     Published: December 30, 2015

ABSTRACT
Angiogenesis is associated with the progression of multiple myeloma (MM).
Wogonin is an active mono-flavonoid with remarkable antitumor activity. However,
its impact on MM-stimulated angiogenesis remains largely unknown. Here, we
demonstrated that wogonin decreased expression and secretion of pro-angiogenic
factors in MM cells via c-Myc/HIF-1a signaling axis, reducing MM-stimulated
angiogenesis and MM cell proliferation in vivo. Overexpression of c-Myc in MM
cells disrupted the balance between VHL SUMOylation and ubiquitination, and thus
inhibited proteasome-mediated HIF-1a degradation. Impaired function of VHL
ubiquitination complex in c-Myc-overexpressing cells was fully reversed by wogonin
treatment via increasing HIF-1a-VHL interaction and promoting HIF-1a degradation.
Collectively, our in vitro and in vivo studies reveal for the first time that wogonin
represses MM-stimulated angiogenesis and tumor progression via c-Myc/VHL/
HIF-1a signaling axis.

HIF-1α, the key mediator of the hypoxic response
in cellular tissues, is a potent pro-angiogenic transcription
factor, predominantly via induction of pro-angiogenic
factor transcription [6]. Under normoxia, HIF-1α is
hydroxylated by prolyl hydroxylase (PHD) and then binds
to VHL for proteasome-mediated degradation through
formation of the EC2V (Elongin BC-CUL2-VHL) E3
ubiquitin ligase complex. In a hypoxic environment, this
hydroxylation-mediated degradation pathway is blocked,
which results in HIF-1α translocation and accumulation
in the nucleus, where it transactivates hypoxia-responsive
genes, including VEGF that are implicated in endothelial
cell invasion and angiogenesis [7, 8]. Clinical studies have
indicated that MM cells often exhibit increased rates of
angiogenesis, even in the presence of adequate oxygen

INTRODUCTION
Multiple myeloma (MM) is an incurable monoclonal
B-malignancy, characterized by the accumulation of
malignant plasma cells within the bone marrow (BM). It
has been well-documented that angiogenesis in the BM
plays a critical role in supporting the growth, survival,
progression, and drug resistance acquisition of the
malignant clone. A growing body of evidence indicates
that increased BM vascularization is associated with
advanced MM stage and poor prognosis [1-3]. Proangiogenic factors (eg. VEGF, PDGF and bFGF) secreted
by MM cells play a crucial role in controlling BM
angiogenesis and the pathogenesis of a wide range of MM
types [4, 5].

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5715

Oncotarget

concentrations [8-10]. At least 40% of MM presenting
with significant amplification of c-Myc and overexpression
of c-Myc likely occurs in MM through other mechanisms
[3, 11]. Specifically, the c-Myc/HIF-1α signaling axis
modulates MM cell production of pro-angiogenic factors
and regulates angiogenesis under both normoxia and
hypoxia [3]. Based on these findings, c-Myc/HIF-1α
signaling axis appears to be a potential target for novel
anti-angiogenesis agents in treatment of MM.
Although increased rates of angiogenesis normally
occur under hypoxic conditions, it has been noted
recently that c-Myc may prevent HIF-1α degradation via
the dysregulation of VHL function [3, 8]. This finding,
therefore, could not exactly explain the weakening of
the HIF-1α-VHL interaction in conditions of c-Myc
overexpression, and raises the possibility that modification
of VHL may contribute to the dysregulated interaction.
The main function of VHL is viewed as an adapter for
many binding partners to form a functional E3 ligase
complex to target HIF-1α degradation. Many reports have
suggested that SUMOylated VHL by PIASy (a SUMO E3
ligase) localizes to the nucleus, while ubiquitylated VHL
is cytoplasmic, and disables its function related to the
inhibition of HIF-1α expression and angiogenesis [12, 13].
Wogonin, one of the active mono-flavones in
the most popular Chinese herbal remedy Huang-Qin
(Scutellaria baicalensis Georgi) (Fig. 1A), has been
recognized as an anticancer drug candidate with potentially
low toxicity [14]. Recently, the anti-angiogenic activity of
wogonin has been reported in MCF-7 breast cancer cells
[15]. However, the underlying mechanisms remain largely
unclear. Here, we have determined the effect of wogonin
on MM-induced angiogenesis in vitro and in vivo, using
the established MM cell lines as well as patient-derivedMM cells. Moreover, we have discovered for the first time
that wogonin inhibits MM-induced angiogenesis as well
as MM cell proliferation in vivo via c-Myc/VHL/HIF-1α
signaling axis.

(Fig. S1C, S1D and S1E). To further determine whether
wogonin could inhibit MM-induced angiogenesis, we
performed a tube formation assay in vitro. As shown in
Fig. 1C, HUVECs cultured in conditioned medium from
wogonin-treated MM cells almost completely lost their
ability to form tubular structures as compared to cells
cultured in conditioned medium derived from untreated
cells. Taken together, our results suggested that wogonin
even at non-cytotoxic dose could inhibit MM-induced EC
migration and tubular formation in vitro. Angiogenesis
in bone marrow largely depends on MM-secreted proangiogenic factors (e.g. VEGF, PDGF and bFGF). We
therefore sought to test whether wogonin treatment could
affect secretion of these pro-anigogenic factors in MM
cells. For this purpose, MM cells (RPMI 8226 and U266)
were cultured in the absence or presence of wogonin under
both normoxic and hypoxic conditions for 24 h, and the
secretion levels of VEGF, PDGF and bFGF in culture
medium were detected by ELISA. Basal levels of secreted
VEGF, PDGF and bFGF were slightly increased under
hypoxic condition as compared to normoxic condition
(Fig. 1D). Wogonin treatment decreased secretion levels of
these pro-angiogenic factors in both cell lines under both
culture conditions in a dose-dependent manner (Fig. 1D).

Wogonin inhibited angiogenesis in MM-stromal
cell co-cultures
It is well conceived that MM cells expand in the
BM microenvironment and induce angiogensis through
cross-talk with stroma cells and extracellular matrix [16].
To investigate the anti-angiogenic effect of wogonin, we
sought to establish an in vitro co-culture system that could
recapitulate the BM microenvironment in vivo. MM cells
co-cultured with stromal cells were treated with wogonin
for 24h, and the conditioned medium was collected for
angiogenesis assays. As shown in Fig. 1E, tube forming
potentials of HUVECs were markedly repressed when
cultured with conditioned medium from wogonin-treated
MM-stromal cells. Interestingly, dramatically higher
secretion levels of the pro-angiogenic factors were
detected in conditioned medium from MM-stromal cells
than those from MM cells alone (Fig. 1F). Furthermore,
secretion levels of the pro-angiogenic factors were
significantly repressed in wogonin-treated MM-stromal
cells as compared to control cells (Fig. 1F).

RESULTS
Wogonin inhibited MM-stimulated angiogenesis
via decreasing secretion levels of pro-anigogenic
factors
MM cells treated with wogonin at doses of 20,
40 or 80 μM did not display a defect in proliferation, as
monitored by MTT assay and Ki67 immunohistochemistry
staining (Fig. 1B; Fig. S1A and S1B). We then determined
whether wogonin at the non-cytotoxic dose could affect
MM-induced angiogenesis in vitro. Results from wound
healing and transwell migration assays showed that
migration of human umbilical endothelial cells (HUVECs)
was strongly repressed when cultured in the presence of
conditioned medium derived from wogonin-treated MM
cells under both normoxic and hypoxic culture conditions
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Wogonin inhibited c-Myc expression and
promoted HIF-1a degradation in MM cells
We next sought to determine whether wogonin
treatment could affect expression levels of VEGF in MM
cells. Results from Western blot and RT-qPCR showed
that VEGF expression at both protein and mRNA levels
were markedly decreased in wogonin-treated MM cells
as compared to those in control cells (Fig. 2A; Fig. S2A,
5716

Oncotarget

left panel). As c-Myc/HIF-1α signaling axis is reported to
play a critical role in angiogenesis via controlling VEGF
expression and secretion, we sought to examine whether
wogonin could affect c-Myc/HIF-1α signaling axis in
MM cells. We have found that wogonin dose-dependently
reduced expression of c-Myc and HIF-1α at protein but
not mRNA level in RPMI 8226 and U266 cells under both
normoxic and hypoxic conditions (Fig. 2A; Fig. S2A, right
two panels). Immunofluorescence analysis further showed
that wogonin strongly decreased expression of HIF-1α
in nucleus in both cell lines (Fig. 2B). Interestingly, we
found that expression level of c-Myc were ~4.5 folds

higher in RPMI 8226 cells than in U266, consistent with
the previous report (Fig. S2B and S2C) [8]. We thus chose
RPMI 8226 cells for further study.
As wogonin suppressed HIF-1α protein expression
without affecting its mRNA level, we proposed that
wogonin down-regulated HIF-1α protein level through
promoting its degradation. To test this, we used
cycloheximide (CHX) to block new protein synthesis and
then assessed HIF-1α protein level at 120 min post CHX
treatment in RPMI 8226 cells under both normoxic and
hypoxic conditions. Consistent with previous report [8],
we found that HIF-1α had an extremely long half-life

Figure 1: Inhibitory Effects of Wogonin on MM-Stimulated Angiogenesis. A. Chemical structure of wogonin. B. MM cells

were treated with wogonin at 80μM for 24 h under normoxia and hypoxia. HUVECs were cultured in conditioned medium from indicated
MM cells for 8h and stained with Ki67. C and D. Effect of wogonin on MM-stimulated angiogenesis and secretion levels of pro-angiogenic
factors. MM cells were treated as described in (B), and conditioned medium was collected for tube formation assays performed in HUVECs
(C). MM cells were treated with various concentrations of wogonin under normoxia and hypoxia, and ELISA was performed to measure
secreted VEGF, PDGF and bFGF levels in the collected conditioned medium (D). E and F. Effect of wogonin on MM/stromal cellsstimulated angiogenesis and secretion levels of pro-angiogenic factors. MM cells co-cultured with stromal cells were treated as described
in B, and conditioned medium was collected for tube formation assays performed in HUVECs (E). MM cells were treated as described in
(D), and ELISA was performed to measure secreted VEGF, PDGF and bFGF levels in the collected conditioned medium (F). Magnification
of representative images (C and E) is 200×. Data are shown as means ± SEM (n = 3). *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, one-way ANOVA (D) or twopaired Student’s t-test (F).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5717

Oncotarget

(~90 min and >120 min under normoxia and hypoxia,
respectively). HIF-1α half-life in wogonin-treated cells
was reduced to ~60 min and ~30 min under normoxia and
hypoxia, respectively (Fig. 2C; quantification shown in
Fig. 2D). These results indicated that wogonin repressed
HIF-1α protein level through promoting its degradation.
To further confirm the results, we used the proteasomal
inhibitor, MG132, to block HIF-1α degradation and
assessed HIF-1α protein levels under both culture
conditions. As expected, MG132 just slightly increased

HIF-1α protein level in untreated cells as HIF-1α protein
in the cells is extremely stable (compare lane 2 versus 1
in Fig. 2E; quantification shown in Fig. 2F). In striking
contrast, wogonin-treated cells markedly decreased HIF1α protein level and thus were more sensitive to MG132
treatment especially when cultured under normoxic
condition (compare lane 4 versus 3 in Fig. 2E; Fig. 2F).
Taken together, these results suggested that wogonin
promoted HIF-1α degradation in MM cells under both
normoxia and hypoxia.

Figure 2: Wogonin Inhibited c-Myc Expression and Promoted HIF-1α Degradation in MM cells. A. RPMI 8226 cells (top)

or U266 cells (bottom) were treated with various concentrations of wogonin (0, 20, 40 and 80μM) for 24 h under normoxia and hypoxia.
Cell lysates were prepared and subjected to Western blot analysis using the indicated antibodies. B. RPMI 8226 and U266 cells were treated
with wogonin (80μM) for 24h under normoxia and hypoxia, and subjected to HIF-1α immunofluorescent staining. Nuclei are counter
stained with DAPI (blue). Magnification, 400×. C. RPMI 8226 cells were treated with cycloheximide (CHX) for 0, 10, 30, 60 and 120min
under normoxia and hypoxia in the presence or absence of wogonin (80μM). Cell lysates were prepared and subjected to immunoblotting
analysis using the indicated antibodies. D. Quantification of HIF-1α protein levels shown in (C). E. RPMI 8226 cells were treated with the
proteasome inhibitor, MG132 for 6h under normoxia and hypoxia with or without wogonin. Cell lysates were prepared and subjected to
immunoblotting analysis using an anti-HIF-1α antibody. F. Quantification of HIF-1α protein levels shown in (E). Data are shown as means
± SEM (n = 3). *p < 0.05, one-way ANOVA.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5718

Oncotarget

Wogonin inhibited c-Myc-mediated HIF-1α
accumulation

As wogonin decreased HIF-1α expression in tandem with
a robust reduction in VHL expression in MM cells, we
hypothesized that wogonin may affect modification of
VHL E3 ubiquitin ligase complex and thus impact the
complex-mediated regulation of HIF-1α in the cells. It has
been reported that c-Myc promotes VHL modification,
affecting formation of the VHL complex and thus
repressing its function [8]. To test our hypothesis, we
performed an anti-HIF-1α immunoprecipitation assay to
assess whether the association between VHL and HIF-1α
was altered following wogonin treatment. Interestingly, we
found that the interaction between HIF-1α and VHL was
markedly increased in wogonin-treated cells under both
normoxic and hypoxic conditions (Fig. 3J).

To further determine if wogonin repressed protein
levels of HIF-1α and VEGF in a c-Myc-dependent
manner, we used RNA interfere (RNAi) to deplete
endogenous c-Myc in RPMI 8226 cells. As shown in
Fig. 3A, c-Myc protein was efficiently depleted in c-Myc
siRNA-transfected cells. Meanwhile, c-Myc depletedcells with reduced expression levels of HIF-1α and VEGF
displayed a markedly impaired potential to form tubular
structures when cultured atop of Matrigel (Fig. 3A-3C).
Wogonin treatment in c-Myc silensced-cells did not
further decrease expression levels of HIF-1α and VEGF
or strengthen the impaired potential to form tubular
structures. Next, we overexpressed c-Myc in RPMI 8226
cells and cultured the cells in the presence of wogonin.
As expected, c-Myc over-expressing cells enhanced
expression and secretion levels of HIF-1α and VEGF,
which could be effectively abolished when cultured in the
presence of wogonin (Fig. 3D and 3E). In consistent with
these results, HUVECs cultured in conditioned medium
from c-Myc overexpressing cells displayed a slight
increase in migration potentials as compared to cells in
conditioned medium from control vector expressing cells,
and the increased migration potentials could be sufficiently
abolished by wogonin treatment (Fig. S3).

Wogonin abolished c-Myc-mediated regulation
of VHL SUMOylation and ubiquitination
SUMO1 modification of VHL increases protein
stability and disables its inhibitory effect on HIF-1α
transcriptional activity. PIASy, a SUMO E3 ligase, has
been reported to stimulate VHL SUMOylation leading to
a decrease in VHL ubiquitination. To further understand
the underlying mechanism by which c-Myc regulates
VHL modification, cells were co-transfected with
c-Myc siRNA, FLAG-SUMO1 and HA-Ubi, and VHL
modification was assessed. As shown in Fig. 4A, c-Myc
siRNA transfected cells with markedly reduced expression
of c-Myc displayed a robust decrease in PIASy expression.
Co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP) assay further revealed a
robust reduction in SUMOylated VHL in tandem with an
increase in ubiquitinated VHL in VHL co-IP complex in
c-Myc depleted cells (Fig. 4A). Wogonin treatment did
not affect PIASy expression level or posttranscriptionally
modified VHL in VHL co-IP complex in c-Myc depleted
cells (Fig. 4A). To directly determine whether wogonin
treatment could affect SUMOylation or ubiquitination of
VHL, MM cells co-treanfected with FLAG-SUMO1 and
HA-Ubi were treated with wogonin at different doses and
subjected to co-IP analysis using an anti-VHL antibody.
The levels of PIASy expression as well as SUMOylated
VHL in VHL co-IP complex were dose-dependently
reduced whereas ubiquitinated VHL in the complex
was increased in a dose-dependent manner (Fig. 4B).
To further determine whether wogonin treatment could
abolish c-Myc-induced modifications of VHL, MM cells
were co-transfected with c-Myc, FLAG-SUMO1 and
HA-Ubi, cultured in the absence or presence of wogonin
and subjected to anti-VHL co-IP analysis. As shown in
Fig. 4C, c-Myc overexpressing cells displayed increased
levels of SUMOylated VHL in VHL co-IP complex in
tandem with a robust reduction in ubiquitinated VHL level
in the co-IP complex, which could be fully reversed by
wogonin treatment.

Wogonin reduced c-Myc-mediated accumulation
of VHL complex
As HIF-1α degradation is primarily controlled by
proline hydroxylase domain protein 2 (PHD2) or von
Hippel-Lindau (VHL) E3 ubiquitin ligase complex, we first
assessed whether wogonin increased PHD2 expression,
thus promoting HIF-1α degradation. Interestingly,
wogonin did not affect PHD2 expression even at the
concentration of 80 μM, but decreased expression level
of hydroxyl-HIF-1α in a dose-dependent manner (Fig.
3F). We next sought to determine whether wogonin
regulated expression of VHL complex components, thus
affecting HIF-1α degradation. Unexpectedly, we found
that wogonin-treated cells under normoxic and hypoxic
conditions displayed a robust decrease in expression of all
the VHL complex components (e.g. VHL, CUL2, Rbx1,
Elongin B and Elongin C) (Fig. 3G). RT-qPCR analysis
revealed that VHL mRNA level was comparable in control
and wogonin-treated cells (Fig. 3H). We further tested
whether wogonin affected expression of VHL complex
components in c-Myc over-expressing cells. The c-Myc
over-expressing cells markedly up-regulated expression
levels of VHL complex components, and c-Mycincreased expression of VHL complex components was
sufficiently abolished in wogonin-treated cells (Fig. 3I).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5719

Oncotarget

Wogonin inhibited tumor angiogenesis and
growth in vivo

divided into 3 groups. Wogonin was administrated at doses
of 0, 40, 80 mg/kg via intravenous (i.v.) injection every
three days. Administration of wogonin at 40 and 80 mg/
kg markedly repressed tumor growth as indicated by gross
examination, tumor volume and tumor weight (Fig. 5A,
5B and 5C). Tumor volume and weight were reduced by
> 70% in 80 mg/kg wogonin-treated mice than in vehicle-

We next tested whether wogonin inhibited tumor
angiogenesis and growth in vivo. For this purpose, 1×106
RPMI 8226 cells were subcutaneously (s.c.) injected in
nude mice and the tumor bearing mice were randomly

Figure 3: Wogonin Reduced c-Myc-Mediated Accumulation of VHL Complex. A and B. RPMI 8226 cells transfected with

control or c-Myc siRNA for 24h were cultured with or without wogonin (80μM) under normoxia and hypoxia for another 24h. Cell lysates
(A) and conditioned medium (B) were collected and subjected to Western blotting and ELISA assays, respectively. Data are shown as means
± SEM (n = 3). **p < 0.01, Student’s t-test. C. HUVECs were cultured atop of Matrigel in conditioned medium as described in (A), and tube
formation was evaluated by phase contrast microscopy (magnification, 200×) 8h later. D. RPMI 8226 cells transfected with mock or c-Myc
expressing vectors were cultured under normoxia and hypoxia for 24h. Cells were treated with wogonin (0 and 80μM) for an additional 24h
and harvested for immunoblot analysis with the indicated antibodies. E. Cells were treated as in D, and VEGF levels in conditioned medium
were mesured by ELISA. Data are shown as means ± SEM (n = 3). **p < 0.01. F and G. Cells were treated with various concentrations
of wogonin (0, 20, 40 and 80μM) for 24h under normoxia and hypoxia. Cell lysates were prepared and subjected to Western blot analysis
using the indicated antibodies to PHD2 (F) and VHL complex components (G). H. Cells were treated as in described in (F), and cell lysates
were prepared and subjected to RT-qPCR analysis. I. RPMI 8226 cells were transfected with control or c-Myc plasmids and cultured under
normoxia and hypoxia for 24 h. Cells were then treated with wogonin for another 24h, and cell lysates were prepared and subjected to
Western blot analysis using antibodies as described in (G). J. RPMI 8226 cells were cultured under normoxia and hypoxia in the presence
or absence of wogonin for 24h. Cell lysates were prepared and subjected to anti-HIF-1α immunoprecipitation (IP) assay, followed by
immunoblotting analysis using antibodies to VHL and HIF-1α. Data are shown as means ± SEM (n = 3). **p < 0.01, one-way ANOVA.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5720

Oncotarget

treated mice (Fig. 5B and 5C). Immunofluorescence
staining with an anti-CD31 antibody revealed that microvessel density (i.e. CD31+ cells per field) was strongly
reduced within tumors derived from wogonin-treated
mice (Fig. 5D). Cell lysates of the indicated tumors
were prepared and subjected to Western blot analysis. As
shown in Fig. 5E, expression levels of c-Myc, HIF-1α,
VHL and VEGF were dramatically decreased in tumors
from wogonin-treated mice, which is consistent with our
observations in vitro. Immunohistochemistry staining
further showed that wogonin repressed expression of
VEGF and c-Myc in a dose-dependent manner, and few
c-Myc or VEGF staining positive cells could be observed
in tumors from 80 mg/kg wogonin-treated mice (Fig. 5F).
Moreover, we observed markedly reduced VEGF secretion
in peripheral blood of wogonin-treated mice (Fig. 5G).
Importantly, we did not observe any defects in body
weight or hematological parameters, or any histological
changes in vital organs (e.g. heart, liver, lung, kidney
and spleen) in wogonin-treated mice (Fig. S4A and S4B;
Table S1), suggesting that wogonin when administrated

systematically exhibited potent anti-tumor activity but did
not affect physiological functions of vital organs.

Wogonin synergistically repressed MMstimulated angiogenesis with bortezomib or
lenalidomide and inhibited expression of c-Myc
and HIF-1α in patient-derived MM cells
We sought to determine whether wogonin could
exert a synergistic inhibition on MM-stimulated
angiogenesis when combined with bortezomib or
lenalidomide, two of the most-widely used agents for
MM treatment. For this purpose, conditioned medium
from MM cells that were treated with wogonin-,
bortezomib-, lenalidomide-, or in combination were
collected and subjected to HUVEC tube formation
or ELISA assays. As shown in Fig. 6A, tube forming
potentials of HUVECs were strongly repressed when
cultured in conditioned medium from MM cells that were
treated with wogonin, bortezomib or lenalidomide alone,
with a further repression observed in the combination.

Figure 4: Wogonin Abolished c-Myc-Mediated Regulation of VHL SUMOylation and Ubiquitination. A. RPMI 8226 cells

were transfected with control siRNA (or c-Myc siRNA), FLAG-SUMO1 and HA-Ubiquitin plasmids for 24 h, followed by incubation with
or without wogonin at 80μM under both conditions for another 24h. Cell lysates were prepared and subjected to Western blot and IP assays
using the indicated antibodies. B. Cells were cultured under both conditions in the presence of various concentrations of wogonin for 24h.
Cell lysates were prepared and subjected to Western blot and IP assays using the antibodies as described in (A). C. Cells transfected with
mock or c-Myc expressing vector were cultured under both conditions for 24h. Cells were then treated with wogonin or vehicle for another
24h, and harvested for Western blot and IP analyses using the antibodies as described in (A).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5721

Oncotarget

Similarly, wogonin synergistically inhibited secretion
levels of pro-angiogenic factors (e.g. VEGF, PDGF and
bFGF) in MM cells with bortezomib or lenalidomide
(Fig. 6B). Collectively, these results suggested wogonin
synergistically repressed MM-stimulated angiogenesis
with bortezomib or lenalidomide. Finally, we sought to
determine whether wogonin could inhibit expression of
c-Myc and HIF-1α in patient-derived MM cells. To this
end, MM cells from 5 patients without prior therapy
were collected, treated with wogonin (80μM) and then
subjected to immunofluorescence staining. We found that
wogonin-treated MM cells displayed a striking reduction
in expression of c-Myc and HIF-1α in the nucleus (Fig. 6C
and 6D).

that c-Myc/HIF-1α axis is crucial to induce expression and
secretion of various pro-angiogenic factors (e.g. VEGF,
PDGF and bFGF) [3]. Recent study has pointed out that
activation of c-Myc/HIF-1α axis in MM cells independent
of oxygen [3]. In the present study, we discovered that
wogonin strongly inhibited MM-stimulated angiogenesis
in vivo and in vitro via c-Myc/HIF-1α/VEGF signaling
axis, suggesting that these findings may provide a rationale
for wogonin’s application in the treatment of MM.
The effect of wogonin on cell proliferation indicates
that the viability of MM cells declines sharply by 50% at
143.2 μM wogonin. However, migratory and tube forming
potentials of HUVECs displayed severely defective when
cultured in conditioned medium from MM cells or MMstromal cells that were treated with non-cytotoxic doses
of wogonin. As VEGF, PDGF and bFGF are the main
secretory cytokines in MM-stimulated angiogenesis, we
applied ELISA to detect their secretion level in MM cells.
As speculated, wogonin indeed decreased secretion levels
of VEGF, PDGF and bFGF in MM cells. It has been well
documented that c-Myc/HIF-1α axis plays a critical role

DISCUSSION
As MM-stimulated angiogenesis is an essential
process for MM cell proliferation and metastasis,
strategies to inhibit angiogenesis have been investigated
as novel anti-MM treatments [17, 18]. It has been reported

Figure 5: Wogonin Inhibited Tumor Angiogenesis and Growth in vivo. A, B and C. 1×106 RPMI 8226 cells were subcutaneously

(s.c.) injected in nude mice and the tumor bearing mice were randomly divided into 3 groups. Wogonin was administrated at doses of 0, 40,
80mg/kg via intravenous (i.v.) injection every three days, and tumors were retrieved at 21 days post wogonin administration. Representative
images of tumors from 3 groups were shown (A), and tumor volumes (B) as well as tumor weight (C) were measured. D. Tumors were
retrieved and sectioned for histological analysis (H.E. staining, top) and anti-CD31 immunofluoscent analysis (bottom). E. Tumor lysates
from three groups were prepared and subjected to Western blot analysis using the indicated antibodies. F. Immunohistochemistry analysis of
c-Myc and VEGF (magnification, 400×). G. Secretion of VEGF in plasma derived from vehicle- and wogonin-treated mice was measured
by ELISA. Data are shown as means ± SEM (n = 3). *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, one-way ANOVA.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5722

Oncotarget

in MM-stimulated angiogenesis in both normoxic and
hypoxic tissues. It remains unclear whether wogonin
affects MM-stimulated angiogenesis via c-Myc/HIF-1α/
VEGF axis. Thus, the impact of wogonin on expression
levels of c-Myc, HIF-1α and VEGF as well as VEGF
secretion level in MM cells was determined. Our studies
showed that wogonin inhibited expression levels of c-Myc
and HIF-1α, causing a robust decrease in expression of
VEGF at both protein and mRNA levels as well as secreted
VEGF level. Moreover, wogonin treatment almost
completely reversed up-regulated expression of HIF-1α
and VEGF in Myc overexpressing MM cells, suggesting
that wogonin inhibited MM-stimulated angiogenesis via
c-Myc/HIF-1α/VEGF axis.
Most primary MM cells derived from patients with
poor prognosis, even when cultured under normoxic

conditions, display an robustly elevated expression
level of c-Myc and HIF-1α [19-21]. We discovered that
depletion of c-Myc in MM cells reduced HIF-1α and
VEGF expression as well as MM-stimulated angiogenesis,
whereas wogonin lost its anti-angiogenic effect in c-Mycdepleted MM cells. Therefore, we sought to identify key
molecules that are responsible for wogonin-mediated
regulation of c-Myc/HIF-1α/VEGF axis in wild-type and
c-Myc overexpressing MM cells. Our results revealed
that wogonin promoted HIF-1α degradation through
proteasome/ubiquitination pathway, without affecting
HIF-1α mRNA expression level. Of note, although PHD2
plays a key role in HIF-1α degradation [12], wogonin
treatment had no effect on PHD2 protein expression.
Previous data show that disruption of binding to the VHL
complex and post-translational modifications of VHL are

Figure 6: Wogonin Synergistically Repressed MM-Stimulated Angiogenesis with Bortezomib or Lenalidomide And
Inhibited Expression of c-Myc and HIF-1α in Patient-Derived MM Cells. A. RPMI 8226 were incubated with wogonin

(40μM), bortezomib (10 nM), lenalidomide (10μM), wogonin (40μM) plus bortezomib (10 nM), or wogonin (40μM) plus lenalidomide
(10μM) under normoxia and hypoxia for 24h. Conditioned medium was collected for tube formation assays performed in HUVECs. Tube
formation was evaluated by phase contrast microscopy (magnification, 200×). B. MM cells were treated as described in (A), and ELISA
was performed to measure secreted VEGF, PDGF and bFGF levels in the collected conditioned medium. Data are shown as means ± SEM
(n = 3). **p < 0.01, Student’s t-test. C and D. Primary MM cells were treated with wogonin (80μM) for 24h and subjected to confocal
immunofluorescent analysis using antibodies to c-Myc (C) and HIF-1α (D). Nuclei are counter stained with DAPI (blue). Insets, higher
magnification of boxed areas. Magnification, 200×. Data are shown as means ± SEM (n = 3). *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, one-way ANOVA.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5723

Oncotarget

both involved in c-Myc-mediated HIF-1α stabilization
[8]. Our observations revealed that wogonin treatment
induced a marked decrease in expression levels of VHL
complex in wild-type and c-Myc overexpressing MM
cells. Interestingly, we observed that wogonin enhances
the interaction between HIF-1α and VHL in MM cells,
which likely contributed to the reduced accumulation of
HIF-1α protein.
The underlying mechanism by which wogonin
normalizes c-Myc-mediated inactivation of VHL function
remains largely unknown. It has been reported that
SUMO E3 ligase, PIASy, interacts with VHL and induces
VHL SUMOylation on lysine residue 171, and duallyubiquitinated lysine residues 171 and 196 can be removed
by PIASy. Ubiquitilated VHL is localized predominantly
in the cytoplasm, while SUMOylated VHL results in
increased VHL protein stability and function [13]. It has
been reported that c-Myc promotes VHL accumulation,
abrogating its inhibitory effect on transcriptional activity
of HIF-1α. In this study, we for the first time provided
an evidence showing that c-Myc increased accumulation
and stability of VHL protein via promoting VHL
SUMOylation and thus repressing its ubiquitination.
We further discovered that increased level of VHL
SUMOylation and reduced level of VHL ubiquitination in
c-Myc overexpressing MM cells were completely reversed
by wogonin treatment, leading to a robust decease in VHL
expression and protein function in wogonin-treated cells.
Based on the following observations that: 1)
wogonin alone or in combination with bortezomib
or lenalidomide strongly repressed MM-stimulated
angiogenesis in vitro and in vivo, 2) wogonin markedly
inhibited MM cell proliferation in vivo, and 3) wogonin
dramatically inhibited expression levels of c-Myc and
HIF-1α in advanced patient-derived MM cells, we propose
that wogonin could be developed into a novel therapeutic
agent for treatment of advanced MM.

Other antibodies to Rbx1, Elongin C, Elongin B and HA
were from Santa Cruz Biotechnology. IRDyeTM 800
conjugated secondary antibodies were obtained from
Rockland Inc. Five-to-six-week-old female BALB/c-nude
mice (SLACAS, Shanghai, China) were used for xenograft
assays. The mice were fed ad libitum throughout the
experimental period.

Cell culture
The human MM cell lines RPMI 8226 and U266
were purchased from American Type Culture Collection
(ATCC, Manassas, VA, USA) and cultured in RPMI
1640 medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine
serum (Invitrogen). HUVECs were isolated from human
umbilical cord veins by collagenase treatment as described
previously [23]. The cells were grown in medium 199
(Invitrogen) containing endothelial cell growth supplement
(ECGS, 30μg/ml, Sigma) and epidermal growth factor
(EGF, 10 ng/ml, Sigma) supplemented with 10% fetal
bovine serum. For normoxic and hypoxic culture, cells
were grown in a humidified atmosphere with 21% and 1%
oxygen supplies, respectively.

Preparation of conditioned medium (CM)
MM cells were treated with wogonin, bortezomib
and lenalidomide for 24 h, or transfected with the
pcDNA3.1-c-Myc plasmid followed by treatment with
wogonin (0 and 80μM) for 24 h. After wogonin treatment,
the cells were washed three times in phosphate-buffered
saline and fed with serum-free medium, and then the CM
was collected 12 h later.

In vitro MM-stromal cell co-cultures
Stromal cells were isolated from C57B6 mice at
6-8 weeks old as previously described [24]. The isolated
stromal cells were cultured with DMEM medium
supplemented with 10% FBS in 24-well plate. After
obtaining a confluent feeder layer, the medium was
changed to RPMI1640 medium supplemented with 10%
FBS. MM cells were seeded atop of the stromal cells,
and the conditioned medium from the co-cultures was
collected for further use.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Reagents and mice
Wogonin was isolated from S. baicalensis Georgi
according to the protocols reported previously with
slight modifications [21]. Wogonin was dissolved in
dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) as a stock solution and stored
at −20°C. Further dilution was performed in culture
medium prior to each experiment (DMSO%<0.1%).
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium
bromide (MTT) was obtained from Fluka and dissolved
in 0.01 M PBS. The enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA) kit for VEGF was purchased from BosterBio
(Pleasanton, USA). The rabbit polyclonal antibodies
to c-Myc, HIF-1α, VEGF, VHL, CUL2, Flag-tag and
PIASy were purchased from Bioworld. The mouse
polyclonal antibody to β-actin was obtained from Boster.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

MTT assay
MTT assay was performed according to the
manufacturer’s instruction. Briefly, 1×104 cells were
seeded in a 96-well plate and treated with wogonin at
indicated concentrations for 24h. Twenty-μl MTT solution
(5mg/ml in PBS) was added to each well and incubated for
additional 3 h. The supernatants were removed and 100 μl
DMSO was added and incubated with agitation for 5 min
to ensure total solubility of formazan crystals. The optical
density was measured at 570 nm.
5724

Oncotarget

Scratch-wound assay

using PepMute™ siRNA transfection reagent (SignaGen
Laboratories). For gene overexpression experiments, cells
were transfected with pcDNA3.1-c-Myc, Flag-SUMO1 or
HA-Ubiquitin plasmids (Addgene) using GenJet™ in vitro
DNA transfection reagent (SignaGen Laboratories).

HUVECs were seeded in a 6-well plate and allowed
to grow to 80% confluence. The cell monolayer was
subsequently scratched with a pipette tip (Axygen) to
create a narrow wound-like gap. Shortly after wounding,
the cells were washed twice with PBS and incubated with
VEGF (10 ng/ml) or CM of MM cell lines. The plates
were photographed at 0 and 12h using an inverted light
microscope. The number of migrated cells was quantified
by manual counting and six randomly chosen fields were
analyzed for each well.

Immunoblotting and immunoprecipitation
Western blotting was carried out as previously
reported [26]. Proteins were separated on 8%, 10% or 12%
Tris-Glycine SDS-PAGE and transferred to nitrocellulose
membranes (BioTrace). Detection was performed using
the Odyssey Infrared Imaging System (LI-COR Inc).
Immunoprecipitation was conducted as follows: 500 μg
cell lysates were incubated with 1 μg primary antibody at
4°C for 1 h, followed by incubation with 20 μl protein A/G
PLUS agarose at 4°C overnight. The beads were collected
and washed with ice-cold lysis buffer and subjected to
SDS-PAGE.

Cell migration assay
Cell migration was assessed using a modified
Boyden chamber assay, as described previously [25].
Briefly, VEGF (10 ng/ml) or CM of MM cell lines was
added to the lower chamber, and HUVECs were cultured
in DMEM medium in the upper chamber. Following 4h
culture, the membrane between the two chambers was
fixed and stained. Cells that migrated and attached onto
the lower surface of the membranes were counted. Five
randomly chosen fields were counted for each group.

Immuno-cytochemical and -histochemical
staining
Immunocytochemical staining was performed
as described previously with some modifications [27].
Briefly, cells seeded on glass slides were fixed with 4%
paraformaldehyde (PFA), washed with ice-cold PBS
and permeabilized with Triton X-100 in PBS. Slides
were blocked with 5% BSA for 1h and incubated with
anitbodies against HIF-1α Ab or c-Myc Ab at 4°C
overnight, followed by incubation with donkey antirabbit IgG-Alexa 488 secondary antibody 1 h. Images
were captured by a confocal laser scanning microscope
(Fluoview FV1000, Olympus). Immunohistochemical
staining was performed as described previously [28].

Tube formation assay
The tube formation assay was performed on
HUVECs to assess the ability of cells to form a
3-dimensionally organized capillary network. In brief,
4.5×104 cells were seeded atop Matrigel (BD) layer in
96-well plate and cultured in CM or regular medium
supplemented with VEGF (10 ng/ml). Following culture
for 8 h, the tubular structures were examined using
a phase-contrast photomicroscope, with planimetric
parameters measured by computed image analysis.

Xenograft assays

Measurement of pro-angiogenic factor secretion
level

The animal protocol was reviewed and approved
by the animal ethics committee of China Pharmaceutical
University. Nude mice were exposed to 3 Gy of X-rays for
24 h prior to the experiment. RPMI 8226 cells (2 × 107 in
100μl PBS) were subcutaneously injected to the left flank
of mice using a 25-gauge needle and a calibrated push
button-controlled dispensing device (Hamilton Syringe).
To prevent leakage, a cotton swab was held over the site of
injection for 1 min. One week post transplantation, tumor
diameters were measured using a Vernier caliper. The mice
were randomly divided into three groups (n = 5 each):
control, wogonin (40mg/kg) and wogonin (80mg/kg).
Saline or wogonin was administrated via tail vein injection
twice per week for 3 consecutive weeks. Tumor volumes
were measured once every three days using the formula
V = 0.5236 × d12 × d2, where d1 and d2 is the shortest and
longest diameter, respectively. The mice were killed 21
days after drug treatment.

Levels of secreted VEGF, PDGF and bFGF in
MM cells were measured using a sandwich ELISA kit
according to the manufacturer’s protocol.

RT-qPCR analysis
Total RNA was extracted, reversely transcribed
and subjected to qPCR analysis. All qPCR data were
analyzed using the 2-∆∆CT method and expressed relative to
the untreated sample. The sequences of indicated primers
were listed in Table S2.

Cell transfection
For gene knockdown experiments, c-Myc siRNA
and non-targeting scrambled siRNA (NS) obtained from
Santa Cruz Biotech were transfected into RPMI 8226 cells
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5725

Oncotarget

Isolation of MM cells from patients

polymorphisms with increased risk and aggressiveness of
multiple myeloma. Ann Hematol. 2014; 93: 1363-1371.

We obtained multiple myeloma cells from patients
(2 females and 3 males with ages between 25~65
years old) without prior therapy (Zhongda Hospital of
Southeast University, Nanjing, China). All experiments
with human materials were performed upon approval of
the appropriate ethics committees. Primary MM cells
were collected by Ficoll-Paque (Pharmacia Biotech) as
previously described [3].

5.	 Golenkov AK, Buravtsova IV, Dudina GA, Lutskaia TD,
Mitina TA, Kataeva EV, Karamysheva AF, Kakpakova ES,
Sablina luA, Stavrovskaia AA. Gene expression of vascular
endothelial growth factors and their receptors in different
variants of the course of multiple myeloma. TerArkh. 2013;
85: 98-102.
6.	 Storti P, Bolzoni M, Donofrio G, Airoldi I, Guasco D,
Toscani D, Martella E, Lazzaretti M, Mancini C, Aqnelli L,
Patrene K, Maïga S, Franceschi V, et al. Hypoxia-inducible
factor (HIF)-1α suppression in myeloma cells blocks
tumoral growth in vivo inhibiting angiogenesis and bone
destruction. Leukemia. 2013; 27:1697-1706.

Statistical analysis
The data represent mean ± SEM from three
independent experiments, except specifically indicated.
Statistical analysis was performed using the two-paired
Student’s t-test or one-way ANOVA.

7.	 Park MH, Choi KY, Jung Y, Min do S. Phospholipase
D1 protein coordinates dynamic assembly of HIF-1αPHD-VHL to regulate HIF-1α stability. Oncotarget. 2014;
5:11857-11872. doi:10.18632/oncotarget.2613.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

8.	 Doe MR, Ascano JM, Kaur M, Cole MD. Myc post-transcriptionally induces HIF1 protein and target gene expression in normal and cancer cells. Cancer Res. 2012; 72:
949-957.

This work was supported by the National Science
& Technology Major Project (NO.2012ZX09304-001),
Program for Changjiang Scholars and Innovative
Research Team in University (IRT1193), the Project
Program of State Key Laboratory of Natural Medicines,
China Pharmaceutical University (SKLNMZZCX201303
and SKLNMZZJQ201302, NO.G140042), Fundamental
Research Funds for the Central Universities (NO.
ZL2014YX0034), the Start-up funds from China
Pharmaceutical University, the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (NO.81373449) and Science
Foundation for Distinguished Young Scholars of Jiangsu
Province (BK20130024).

9.	 Borsi E, Perrone G, Terragna C, Martello M, Dico AF, Solaini
G, Baracca A, Sqarbi G, Pasquinelli G, Valente S, Zamagni
E, Tacchetti P, Martinelli G, et al. Hypoxia inducible factor-1
alpha as a therapeutic target in multiple myeloma. Oncotarget.
2014; 5: 1761–1792. doi:10.18632/oncotarget.1761.
10.	 Podar K, Chauhan D, Anderson KC. Bone marrow microenvironment and the identification of new targets for myeloma
therapy. Leukemia. 2009; 23: 10-24.
11.	 Michael Kuehl W, Leif Bergsagel P. MYC addiction: a
potential therapeutic target in multiple myeloma. Blood.
2012; 120: 2351-2352.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

12.	 Cai Q, Verma SC, Kumar P, Ma M, Robertson ES. Hypoxia
Inactivates the VHL Tumor Suppressor through PIASyMediated SUMO Modification. PLoS One. 2010; 5: e9720.

The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

13.	 Cai Q, Robertson ES. Ubiquitin/SUMO modification regulates VHL protein stability and nucleocytoplasmic localization. PLoS One. 2010; 5: e12636.

REFERENCES
1.	 Vacca A. Ria R, Reale A, Ribatti D. Angiogenesis in multiple myeloma. Chem Immunol Allergy. 2014; 99:180-196.

14.	 Baumann S, Fas SC, Giaisi M, Müller WW, Merling A,
Gülow K, Edler L, Krammer PH, Li-Weber M. Wogonin
preferentially kills malignant lymphocytes and suppresses
T-cell tumor growth by inducing PLC gamma1- and Ca2+dependent apoptosis. Blood. 2008; 111: 2354-2363.

2.	 Borsi E, Perrone G, Terragna C, Martello M, Zamagni E,
Tacchetti P, Pantani L, Brioli A, Dico AF, Zannetti BA,
Rocchi S, Cavo M. HIF-1α inhibition blocks the cross talk
between multiple myeloma plasma cells and tumor microenvironment. Exp Cell Res. 2014; 328: 444-455.

15.	 Song X, Yao J, Wang F, Zhou M, Zhou Y, Wang H, Wei L,
Zhao L, Li Z, Lu N, Guo Q. Wogonin inhibits tumor angiogenesis via degradation of HIF-1α protein. Toxicol Appl
Pharmacol. 2013; 271: 144-155.

3.	 Zhang J, Sattler M, Tonon G, Grabher C, Lababidi S,
Zimmerhackl A, Raab MS, Vallet S, Zhou Y, Cartron
MA, Hideshima T, Tai YT, Chauhan D, et al. Targeting
angiogenesis via c-Myc/hypoxia-inducible factor-1 alphadependent pathway in multiple myeloma. Blood. 2012; 69:
5082-5090.

16.	 Kawano Y, Moschetta M, Manier S, Glavey S, Görgün
GT, Roccaro AM, Anderson KC, Ghobrial IM. Targeting
the bone marrow microenvironment in multiple myeloma.
Immunol Rev. 2015; 263: 160-172.

4.	 Brito AB, Lourenço GJ, Oliveira GB, De Souza CA,
Vassallo J, Lima CS. Associations of VEGF and VEGFR2

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17.	 Bhaskar A, Gupta R, Vishnubhatla S, Kumar L, Sharma A,
Sharma MC, Das P, Thakur SC. Angiopoietins as biomarker
5726

Oncotarget

of disease activity and response to therapy in multiple
myeloma. Leuk Lymphoam. 2013; 54: 1473-1480.

23.	 Jaffe EA, Nachman RL, Becker CG, Minick CR. Culture
of human endothelial cells derived from umbilical veins.
Identification by morphologic and immunologic criteria. J
Clin Invest. 1973; 52: 2745-2756.

18.	 Fan GC. Hypoxic exosomes promote angiogenesis. Blood.
2012; 124: 3669-3670.

24.	 Karnoub AE, Dash AB, Vo AP, Sullivan A, Brooks MW,
Bell GW, Richardson AL, Polyak K, Tubo R, wenberg RA.
Mesechymal stem cells within tumour stroma protmote
breast cancer metastasis. Nature. 2007; 449:557-563.

19.	 Röllig C, Knop S, Bornhäuser M. Multiple myeloma.
Lancet. 2014; 6736:2197-2208.
20.	 Affer M, Chesi M, Chen WD, Keats JJ, Demchenko
YN, Tamizhmani K, Garbitt VM, Riggs DL, Brents LA,
Roschke AV, Van Wier S, Fonseca R, Bergsagel PL, et al.
Promiscuous MYC locus rearrangements hijack enhanceres
but mostly super-enhancers to dysregulate MYC expression
in multiple myeloma. Leukemia. 2014; 28: 1725-1735.

25.	 Kundra V, Anand-Apte B, Feig LA, Zetter BR. The chemotactic response to PDGF-BB: evidence of a role for Ras. J
Cell Bio. 1995; 130: 725-731.
26.	 Litao Zhu, Li Zhao, Wang H, Wang Y, Pan D, Yao J, Li
Z, Wu G, Guo Q. Oroxylin A reverses P-glycoproteinmediated multidrug resistance of MCF7/ADR cells by
G2/M arrest. Toxicol Lett. 2013; 219:107-115.

21.	 Borsi E, Terragna C, Brioli A, Tacchetti P, Martello M,
Cavo M. Therapeutic targeting of hypoxia and hypoxainducible factor 1 alpha in multiple myeloma. Transl Res.
2014; 165: 641-650.

27.	 Bharti AC, Donato N, Aggarwal BB. Curcumin (diferuloylmethane) inhibits constitutive and IL-6-inducible STAT3
phosphorylation in human multiple myeloma cells. J
Immunol. 2003; 171: 3863-3871.

22.	 Hui KM, Huen MS, Wang HY, Zheng H, Sigel E, Baur
R, Ren H, Li ZW, Wong JT, Xue H. Anxiolytic effect of
wogonin, a benzodiazepine receptor ligand isolated from
Scutellaria baicalensis Georgi. Biochem Pharmacol. 2002;
64:1415-1424.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

28.	 Heng Sun, Xue-Bing Li, Ya Meng, Fan L, Li M, Fang J.
TRAF6 upregulates expression of HIF-1α and promotes
tumor angiogenesis. Cancer Res. 2013; 73: 4950-4959.

5727

Oncotarget

