Cancer Research

Breaking Advances
Highlights from Recent Cancer Literature

DDX3X Mutations Driving Natural Killer/T-cell Lymphoma
Natural killer/T-cell lymphoma (NKTCL), a form of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, occurs
predominantly in Asians, Mexicans, and South Americas. Jiang and colleagues sequenced exomes
from 25 patients, validating mutations in 80 additional individuals with NKTCL. Surprisingly,
20% of patients with NKTCL harbored mutations in the ATP-dependent RNA helicase gene,
DDX3X, which was almost mutually exclusive with mutations in TP53, STAT3/5, and genes
encoding epigenetic modiﬁcation enzymes. Mutation of DDX3X correlated with a more aggressive
clinical course relative to NKTCL with wild-type DDX3X. NKTCL-associated DDX3X mutations
impaired DDX3X helicase activity and increased in NF-kB and MAPK pathway signaling. Thus,
DDX3X appears to be a major driver of oncogenesis in NKTCL. (Image by Ed Uthman, MD, courtesy
of Wikimedia Commons.)
Jiang L, Gu ZH, Yan ZX, Zhao X, Xie YY, Zhang ZG, et al. Exome sequencing identiﬁes somatic mutations of DDX3X in
natural killer/T-cell lymphoma. Nat Genet 2015 July 20. doi: 10.1038/ng.3358. [Epub ahead of print].

Inﬁltrating Immune Cells and Cancer
Gentles and colleagues, through a herculean effort, assembled, curated, and integrated public cancer
global gene expression proﬁles (GEP) with annotated clinical outcomes for 18,000 patients,
covering 39 different cancers into a uniﬁed on-line resource dubbed Prediction of Clinical Outcomes
from Genomic (PRECOG) proﬁles. The authors applied a computational method for deconvoluting
the relative composition of immune cell types using GEPs from the bulk tumor to the PRECOG
database. They discovered prognostic correlations between: (i) higher levels of intratumoral T-cell
subsets, speciﬁcally gd T cells, with better overall survival; and (ii) increasing levels of intratumoral
myeloid subsets, primarily polymorphonuclear leukocytes, with poorer overall survival. PRECOG
enables a robust retrospective view of the potential prognostic landscape of genes and intratumoral
immune cells across human cancers, as well as a hypothesis-generating tool for future studies. (Image
courtesy of Wikimedia Commons.)
Gentles AJ, Newman AM, Liu CL, Bratman SV, Feng W, Kim D, et al. The prognostic landscape of genes and inﬁltrating
immune cells across human cancers. Nat Med 2015 July 20. doi: 10.1038/nm.3909. [Epub ahead of print].

ERK Dimerization Inhibitors
Resistance to inhibitors of BRAF and MEK typically occurs through reactivation of ERK signaling.
Herrero and colleagues developed a small molecule, DEL-22379, that inhibits ERK dimerization,
required to maintain ERK signaling in the extranuclear compartment. This novel strategy decreased
proliferation of cancer cells harboring mutated BRAF (V600E) or RAS (Q61L or G12V) and correlated
to ERK dimer-monomer ratio, and extranuclear/nuclear ERK localization. Zebraﬁsh harbor ERK
orthologs that lack the requirement to dimerize. In a transgenic RAS-V12 zebraﬁsh model, MEK
inhibitors, but not DEL-22379, inhibited melanoma formation, supporting that efﬁcacy of DEL22379 is tied to its inhibition of ERK dimerization. DEL-22379 also inhibited proliferation of tumor
cells with engineered resistance to BRAF and MEK inhibitors, suggesting that this strategy has the
potential to overcome some challenges encountered with clinical BRAF, MEK, and ERK inhibitors to
date. (Image courtesy of Wikimedia Commons.)
~ez L, et al. Small molecule inhibition of ERK dimerization
Herrero A, Pinto A, Colon-Bolea P, Casar B, Jones M, Agudo-Iban
prevents tumorigenesis by RAS-ERK pathway oncogenes. Cancer Cell 2015;28:170-82.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

3685

Breaking Advances
Neuroblastoma: All but Silent
Taking advantage of paired analysis, two new studies examine trios of primary tumor DNA, recurrent
tumor DNA, and constitutional DNA from neuroblastoma tumors. Examining 23 trios, Eleveld and
colleagues (1) demonstrated a median increase of 14 nonsynonymous mutations at recurrence
compared with primary tumor. Analysis of the cancer cell fraction with a given mutation suggested
subclonal outgrowth from the primary tumor and clonal enrichment of mutations over time.
Moreover, RAS-MAPK mutations that resulted in activation of the pathway were selected for in
recurrent tumors after chemotherapy. Schramm and colleagues (2) also demonstrated an increase in
mutations with recurrence. In addition, they demonstrated striking temporal and spatial
intratumoral heterogeneity based on analysis of tumor samples from a single patient with multiple
recurrences. Neuroblastoma is a dynamic tumor for which understanding disease mechanisms at
recurrence is critical. (Image courtesy of Wikimedia Commons.)
1. Eleveld TF, Oldridge DA, Bernard V, Koster J, Daage LC, Diskin SJ, et al. Relapsed neuroblastomas show frequent RASMAPK pathway mutations. Nat Genet 2015;47:864-71.
2. Schramm A, K€oster J, Assenov Y, Althoff K, Peifer M, Mahlow E, et al. Mutational dynamics between primary and relapse
neuroblastomas. Nat Genet 2015;47:872-7.

Molecular Analysis of Ductal Carcinoma In Situ
To provide insights into progression, Abba and colleagues performed full exome, transcriptome,
and methylome analysis of high-grade DCIS (HG-DCIS) and normal breast epithelial samples.
Mutations affecting potential drivers were observed in 62% of cases, including mutations in PIK3CA,
TP53, GATA3, and MLL3. Single HG-DCIS cases showed mutations in CDH1, MAP2KA, TBX3, NF1,
ATM, and ARID1A. Large chromosomal copy number alterations occurred in 83% of HG-DCIS
lesions, suggesting that these might precede selection of cancer-driver mutations. The authors also
identiﬁed two DCIS subgroups using integrated pathway-based modeling analysis of RNA-seq data.
The more aggressive subgroup DCIS-C1 had properties resembling a tumor-associated immune
suppressive phenotype. Interestingly, the authors found that all lesions showed TP53 pathway
inactivation. Thus, although HG-DCIS represents a pre-invasive tumor, its molecular proﬁle is
indistinguishable from invasive breast cancer. (Image courtesy of the publisher.)
Abba MC, Gong T, Lu Y, Lee J, Zhong Y, Lacunza E, et al. A molecular portrait of high-grade ductal carcinoma in situ
(DCIS). Cancer Research; Published OnlineFirst on August 6, 2015.

Undruggable Targets
The phthalimides are small molecules used to treat hematologic malignancies. One mechanism of
action utilizes cereblon-cullin-RING ubiquitin ligase (CRL)-dependent proteasomal degradation of
IKZF1 and IKZF3 transcription factor complexes. Co-opting this mechanism of action, Winter and
colleagues developed phthalimide-directed ligand-induced target protein proteasomal degradation.
Chemical synthesis of a small molecule phthalimide-ligand conjugate directed against the BRD4
transcriptional coactivator protein demonstrated highly speciﬁc and more potent antitumor activity
than the parent nonconjugate inhibitory small molecule JQ1 in vitro and in vivo. Similar but less
extensive validation was also performed against the FKBP12 (FKBP1A) protein target. This
phthalimide-conjugating methodology opens the exciting possibility of repurposing binding ligands
that lack intrinsic inhibitory activity to enable therapeutic targeting of "undruggable" oncogenic
drivers in cereblon expressing cancers. (Image by Jamal Lasri courtesy of Wikimedia Commons.)
Winter GE, Buckley DL, Paulk J, Roberts JM, Souza A, Dhe-Paganon S, et al. Phtalimide conjugation as a strategy for
in vivo target protein degradation. Science 2015:348:1376-81.

Note: Breaking Advances are written by Cancer Research editors. Readers are encouraged to consult the articles referred to in
each item for full details on the ﬁndings described.

3686

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Highlights from Recent Cancer Literature
Cancer Res 2015;75:3685-3686.

Updated version

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/75/18/3685

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

