Oncotarget, October, Vol.3, No 10

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Too much AKT turns PAX3-FKHR dead: A prospect of novel
therapeutic strategy for alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma
Mathivanan Jothi and Asoke K. Mal
Alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma (ARMS) is the
aggressive subtype of muscle cancer in the pediatric
population and children with ARMS have significantly
poor prognosis and frequently present metastasis [1].
More than 80% of ARMS have chromosomal translocation
t(2;13) generated novel fusion transcription factor PAX3FKHR in which the DNA binding domain of PAX3
is fused to the carboxyl terminus of FKHR [1]. PAX3FKHR protein acts as a potent transcriptional activator and
influences expression of genes that ultimately contribute
to its oncogenic behavior by modifying cell growth,
migration, apoptosis, and muscle differentiation [1].
Fusion-positive PAX3-FKHR status in patients correlates
with worse outcome and displays a more aggressive
clinical phenotype that is consistent with cell lines and
mouse models of ARMS [1]. Therefore, inhibiting PAX3FKHR activity, a potential Achilles’ heel, is a sound
therapeutic strategy to eliminate ARMS cells that have
benefit to children with this disease.
ARMS exhibit undifferentiated muscle lineage
phenotype and resistance to terminal differentiation [1].
PAX3-FKHR activity sustains the undifferentiated state
by suppressing differentiation, thus contributing ARMS
tumorigenesis [1]. In this scenario, PAX3-FKHR exerts
a negative regulation on key myogenic regulator MyoDdriven terminal differentiation in ARMS cells [1]. We
investigated the molecular regulation of PAX3-FKHR
activity to evade terminal differentiation in ARMS cells.
Intriguingly, we discover that activated AKT status
in ARMS cells balance the transcriptional activity of
PAX3-FKHR via phosphorylation. In particular, we
find that attenuated AKT activity sustains PAX3-FKHR
activity, however, acute AKT activation blocks PAX3FKHR in gene activation including its bona fide target
MyoD expression, preventing ARMS cell from escaping
differentiation. However, acute AKT activation along with
ectopic MyoD expression permits ARMS cells to undergo
terminal differentiation. We recently published this finding
in Cell Cycle Journal [2]. AKT downstream effector GSK
mediated phosphorylation of PAX3-FKHR increases its
transcriptional activity and is inhibited by GSK specific
inhibitors [3], raising the possibility that AKT mediated
inhibition of PAX3-FKHR activity either directly or
via GSK. PAX3-FKHR retains two consensus AKT
phosphorylation sites in the FKHR domain [2]. Mutation
of the AKT sites in PAX3-FKHR results in increased
transcriptional activity (personal communication),
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

strongly suggesting that AKT directly regulating PAX3FKHR activity. Activation of AKT acts as a promyogenic
signal for terminal differentiation (Fig. 1). Conversely,
AKT activation has been linked to both oncogenesis and
poor prognosis and consequently AKT inhibitors that limit
AKT signals are being developed as cancer therapeutics
[4]. However, inhibiting AKT increases cancer cell
motility and invasion abilities that are important for
tumor metastasis. Indeed, expression of activated AKT1
in ErbB2 background enhances tumorigenesis, but shows
fewer metastatic lesions compared with control mice
[5], indicating that AKT1 functions as a suppressor of
tumor metastasis. The anti-metastatic function of AKT
was also reported in breast cancer cells [4]. Moreover,
AKT allosteric inhibitor MK-2206 showed limited in
vivo activity against solid tumor and ALL xenografts [6].
Thus, there are pressing concerns of inhibiting AKT for
therapeutic benefit in some cancers.
Our study revealed the unexpected finding that
elevating AKT activity can inactivate PAX3-FKHR in
ARMS cells [2]. This is important because it shows that
acute activation of AKT inactivates PAX3-FKHR activity
known to be involved in development and metastasis of
ARMS. This new discovery poses a host of new questions
and challenges that activator-induced AKT activation
may hinder PAX3-FKHR activity, thus offer a therapeutic
benefit to ARMS. Dilling et al. showed that cell lines
derived from childhood ARMS are very sensitive to the
growth-inhibitory effects of the rapamycin [7]. Rapamycin
induced feedback activation of AKT is well documented
[8]. Therefore, sensitivity of ARMS cells to rapamycin
may result in AKT activation induced inhibition of PAX3FKHR activity. In a similar way, activation of AKT may
provide a therapeutic benefit in other cancers. In this case,
we may envision the potential benefit of AKT activation by
TNF-α, which is used in the regional treatment of locally
advanced soft tissue sarcomas, metastatic melanomas and
other unresectable tumors [9]. Constitutive PI3K/AKT
activation in AML patients showed a better prognosis [10],
indicating a potential function of AKT activation in clinical
success of cancer treatment. A characteristic abnormality
of ARMS cells is a blockade of terminal differentiation. A
strategy of inducing ARMS cells to differentiate, termed
‘differentiation therapy’ is an elegant alternative that
could limit the current toxic therapeutic approach. The bitransgenic AKT1 and ErbB-2 developed mammary tumors
exhibit more differentiated phenotypes than ErbB2 alone
1064

Oncotarget 2012; 3: 1064-1065

Figure 1: This model represents the action of AKT on PAX3-FKHR activity in ARMS and terminal muscle
differentiation. PAX3-FKHR plays a dynamic role in ARMS oncogenesis and terminal differentiation block. Enhanced AKT activation
inhibits PAX3-FKHR activity and entails for terminal differentiation. Elevating AKT activity by specific small molecule AKT activators
may be exploited to inactivate PAX3-FKHR, leading to foil ARMS.

[5]. This study suggests that AKT could promote tumor
differentiation in certain setting. PAX3-FKHR abolition in
ARMS cells led to terminal differentiation [1], therefore, it
is worth considering the potential role of AKT activationdependent inactivation of PAX3-FKHR in this effort (Fig.
1). Taken together, we venture that acute AKT activation
should be evaluated for therapeutic benefit in ARMS and
also in certain types of tumor.

5.	 Hutchinson JN, Jin J, Cardiff RD, et al. Cancer research
2004; 64:3171-8.

Mathivanan Jothi: Department of Cell Stress Biology,
Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY
Asoke K. Mal: Department of Cell Stress Biology, Roswell
Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY

9.	 van Horssen R, Ten Hagen TL, Eggermont AM. The
oncologist 2006; 11:397-408.

6.	

Gorlick R, Maris JM, Houghton PJ, et al. Pediatric blood &
cancer 2012; 59:518-24.

7.	 Dilling MB, Dias P, Shapiro DN, et al. Cancer research
1994; 54:903-7.
8.	

Wan X, Harkavy B, Shen N, et al. Oncogene 2007; 26:193240.

10.	 Tamburini J, Elie C, Bardet V, et al. Blood 2007; 110:10258.

Correspondence: Asoke K. Mal, email asoke.mal@roswellpark.org
Received: October 09, 2012;
Published: October 17, 2012;

REFERENCES
1.	

De Giovanni C, Landuzzi L, Nicoletti G, et al. Future Oncol
2009; 5:1449-75.

2.	

Jothi M, Nishijo K, Keller C, et al. Cell Cycle 2012; 11:895908.

3.	

Zeng FY, Dong H, Cui J, et al. Biochemical and biophysical
research communications 2010; 391:1049-55.

4.	 Toker A, Yoeli-Lerner M. Cancer research 2006; 66:39636.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1065

Oncotarget 2012; 3: 1064-1065

