Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 45

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

Asn-Gly-Arg-modified polydopamine-coated nanoparticles for
dual-targeting therapy of brain glioma in rats
Jiangang Hu1,2, Xiang Zhang1,2, Zuhuang Wen3, Ying Tan1, Ning Huang1, Si Cheng4,
Huzhi Zheng3, Yuan Cheng1
1

Department of Neurosurgery, the Second Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, 400010, China

2

Chongqing Key Laboratory of Ultrasound Molecular Imaging, Institute of Ultrasound Imaging of Chongqing Medical
University, Chongqing, 400016, China

3

College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Southwest University, Chongqing, 400715, China

4

Department of Orthopaedics, the First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, 400016, China

Correspondence to: Huzhi Zheng, email: zhenghz@swu.edu.cn
Yuan Cheng, email: chengyuan023@aliyun.com
Keywords: Asn-Gly-Arg, polydopamine, dual-targeting, gliomas
Received: May 29, 2016     Accepted: August 26, 2016     Published: September 15, 2016

ABSTRACT
The blood-brain barrier (BBB) is the major clinical obstacle in the
chemotherapeutic management of brain glioma. Here we synthesized a pH-sensitive
dual-targeting doxorubicin (DOX) carrier to compromise tumor endothelial cells,
enhance BBB transportation, and improve drug accumulation in glioma cells. The drug
delivery system was constructed with polydopamine (PDA)-coated mesoporous silica
nanoparticles (NPs, MSNs) and the PDA coating was functionalized with Asn-Gly-Arg
(NGR), a ligand with specific affinity for cluster of differentiation 13 (CD13). MSNDOX-PDA-NGR showed a higher intracellular accumulation in primary brain capillary
endothelial cells (BCECs) and C6 cells and greater BBB permeability than the nontargeting NPs (MSN-DOX-PDA) did in vitro. Ex vivo and in vivo tests showed that
MSN-DOX-PDA-NGR had a higher accumulation in intracranial tumorous tissue than
the undecorated NPs did. Furthermore, the antiangiogenesis and antitumor efficacy
of MSN-DOX-PDA-NGR were stronger than that of MSN-DOX-PDA. Therefore, these
results indicate that the dual-targeting vehicles are potentially useful in brain glioma
therapy.

widely studied in tumor angiogenesis and invasion
[7]. A peptide containing the Asn-Gly-Arg (NGR)
motif, which binds CD13 has also been associated with
chemotherapeutic drug delivery [8-10]. However, targeting
and compromising glioma cells remain challenging even
with these delivery systems. Therefore, we designed an
inorganic-organic hybrid nanoparticle (NP)-based dualtargeting carrier (tumor vascular- and tumor-targeting),
incorporating the advantages of mesoporous silica NPs
(MSN) and polydopamine (PDA).
MSN are ideal nanocarriers for chemotherapy drugs
because of their low density, large surface area, high
pore volume, high drug-loading capacity, and excellent
biocompatibility [11-14]. A key step in constructing
the controlled drug release carrier was the generation
of “gatekeepers” on the MSN surface to seal the drug
molecules inside the mesoporous core and control the drug

INTRODUCTION
The delivery of chemotherapeutic agents for the
treatment of central nervous system diseases such as
brain glioma is still a major challenge because most
chemotherapy drugs cannot penetrate the blood brain
barrier (BBB) to reach the brain tumor cells [1, 2].
Numerous attempts have been made to overcome this
barrier, but trans-BBB drug delivery is still a challenge.
Recently, an efficient receptor-mediated, stimuliresponsive controlled drug release system for penetrating
the BBB and targeting brain tumor cells has attracted
considerable attention [3-6].
As a marker for angiogenic vasculature, the
aminopeptidase N (cluster of differentiation 13, CD13) is
overexpressed in cancerous tissues including neovascular
endothelial cells and various tumor cells and has been
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

73681

Oncotarget

Table 1: Size and zeta potential of nanoparticles (NPs, n = 3)
Size (nm)

Zeta potential (mv)

TEM

DLS

MSN-DOX-PDA

152.3± 0.97

156.1 ± 1.25

-24 ± 0.96

MSN-DOX-PDA-NGR

160.1± 1.49

168.0 ± 1.32

-22 ± 0.97

release from MSN in response to the pH-stimulus [15].
PDA, a mussel adhesive protein mimetic, has the potential
to act as the pH-sensitive gatekeeper and conjugate the
NGR to enhance targeting, owing to the versatility in
modifying [16], easiness in surface functionalization
with NGR motif via Michael addition reactions [17, 18],
negligible cytotoxicity in drug delivery [19, 20].
Therefore, for the first time, we synthesized a
controlled release and dual-targeting system using PDAcoated MSN as the doxorubicin (DOX) carrier and
conjugating NGR as the targeting ligand (MSN-DOXPDA-NGR) to dual-target the endothelial and glioma cells.
Primary rat brain capillary endothelial cells (BCECs) and
C6 cells were chosen as the model of tumor endothelial
and tumor cells, respectively. The drug delivery system
was characterized using transmission electron microscopy
(TEM) and dynamic light scattering (DLS). The drug
release behavior, cell cytotoxicity, uptake assays, and
dual-targeting effects were evaluated in vitro while the
antiangiogenesis and antitumor effects were investigated
in vivo.

of the solution. The white-colored MSN solution turned
brick red after DOX loading and subsequently turned dark
brown after the modification of the PDA coating (Figure
1C). The loading content (LC), encapsulation efficiency
(EE), and NGR conjugation efficiency (CE) values were
19.02%, 40.84%, and 41.6%, respectively, under the
present experimental conditions.
Because most tumorous tissues have low
extracellular pH values, especially inside the endosomal
(pH, 5.5–6.0) and lysosomal (pH, 4.5–5.0) compartments
[24, 25], we conducted the DOX release profiles at pH
4.5 and 7.4. As shown in Figure 1D, only a very small
amount of DOX was released in the neutral PBS (pH 7.4).
However, the release rate dramatically improved and the
cumulative release rate of DOX was approximately 50%
within 24 h at pH 4.5. The pH-sensitivity of the carriers
suggested that the NPs were almost stable in plasma
conditions but allowed sustained drug release in tumorous
conditions, which facilitated drug accumulation in the
tumorous vasculature and intercellular distribution in
tumor cells.

RESULTS

Receptor expression level in targeted cells

Characterization of dual-targeted NPs

CD13 is expressed exclusively on the angiogenic
endothelial and not normal vasculature [26]. In addition,
the high level of vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF) released by C6 cells strikingly could upregulate
the CD13 level in primary cells during angiogenesis [27,
28]. Therefore, we established a C6 and primary brain
capillary endothelial cells (BCEC) cocultured model to
investigate whether the CD13 level in BCEC cells was
upregulated. The flow cytometry and western blotting
showed a dramatic elevation of the CD13 level in BCECs
cocultured with C6 cells (BCEC-C6). In addition, the level
was relatively higher in C6 cells than it was in the primary
astrocytes (AC), BCEC, and BCECs cocultured with
AC cells (BCEC-AC) (Figure 2A and 2B). The results
indicate that C6 cells successfully induced the BCECs
and the tumorous vasculature endothelial cell model was
established.

NPs with the size of 100-200 nm are believed to
have the most potential for persistent circulation and
exhibit the best enhanced permeation and retention
(EPR) effect [21]. Therefore, we selected MSN with a
mean particle diameter of 150 nm to prepare the MSNDOX-PDA-NGR. DOX was first loaded into the silica
mesopores and then coated with PDA via oxidative selfpolymerization of dopamine. The surface of the MSNDOX-PDA NPs was then modified with NGR via a
Michael addition. The TEM images showed that the NPs
were spherical and had a smooth surface with a size of
approximately 160 nm. The dehydration and shrinkage
of the NPs during the preparation for TEM observation
may lead to the smaller diameter compared with the
results from DLS (Table 1 and Figure 1A). The NGR
modification slightly increased the particle size and zeta
potential (Table 1 and Figure 1B). It has been indicated
that the negatively-charged surface of the drug carrier
system has higher blood compatibility and better targeting
effect in vivo than the positively-charged carrier surface
does [22, 23]. The loading of DOX and the modification
of the PDA coating were also reflected in the color change
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Cellular uptake of dual-targeted NPs
To determine the specific recognition and uptake
capacity of MSN-DOX-PDA-NGR towards target cells,
we performed laser scanning confocal microscopy
and flow cytometry on C6 and BCEC-C6 cells after
73682

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Characterization of dual-targeted NPs. A. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of MSN-DOX-PDA-NGR

NPs. B. Particle size distribution of MSN-DOX-PDA-NGR NPs. C. Color change of NPs solution. D. In vitro release profiles of DOX from
different drug carriers in different PBS samples at pH (4.5) and pH (7.4). Scale bar, 100 nm.

Figure 2: Flow cytometry and western blot analysis of NP-treated cells. A. Flow cytometry and B. western blotting analysis of
CD13 protein expressed in (1) BCEC-C6, (2) BCEC, (3) C6, (4) astrocytes, and (5) BCEC-AC cells; (a) negative control, (b) mouse IgG2a
K Isotype control, and (c) anti-rat CD13 antibody (FITC).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

73683

Oncotarget

In vitro cytotoxicity of dual-targeted NPs

treatment with different DOX formulations. Both C6
and BCEC-C6 cells in the MSN-DOX-PDA-NGR group
showed an obviously higher fluorescence intensity than
those in MSN-DOX-PDA group did (Figure 3A and 3B).
The identical results was also found by flow cytometry,
the fluorescence intensity of the MSN-DOX-PDA-NGR
group increased significantly compared with that of
the undecorated NPs group (~3.27- and 5.50-fold for
BCEC-C6 and C6, respectively). However, the adding
of free NGR significantly inhibited the uptake of MSNDOX-PDA-NGR (Figure 3C-3E). The NGR-mediated
specific binding between MSN-DOX-PDA-NGR and
glioma cells was also found in U251 cells but not in
GL261 (Supplementary Figure S1). Furthermore,
flow cytometry confirmed that, relatively to GL261,
C6 and U251 have a more powerful binding affinity
to anti-CD13 antibody (FITC) in our preliminary
experiments (data not shown). Taken together, MSNDOX-PDA-NGR specifically recognize and abundantly
bind to BCEC-C6 and C6 cells through the high level
of CD13.

To evaluate the cytotoxicity of various DOX
formulations against glioma cells with varying CD13
levels, the CCK-8 assay was carried out on C6, BCEC-C6,
GL261 and U251 cells. For C6 cells, the cytotoxicity of
the different DOX formulations was concentration- and
incubation time-dependent. The IC50 values of DOX, MSNDOX-PDA, MSN-DOX-PDA-NGR, and MSN-DOXPDA-NGR + free NGR were 16.90, 138.1, 5.09, and 59.71
μg/mL after a 24-h incubation and 7.608, 9.85, 1.74, and
10.61 μg/mL after 48-h, respectively. NGR modification
significantly decreased the IC50 values of the undecorated
NPs (~27.13- 5.66-fold at 24 and 48 h, respectively).
However, the addition of free NGR obviously increased
the IC50 compared with that of MSN-DOX-PDA-NGR
(~11.7- and 6.1-fold at 24 and 48 h, respectively) (Figure
4A, 4E, and 4F). This reversal was possibly attributable to
the competition between the modified NGR on the NPs and
the added free NGR. A similar reversal phenomenon was
also displayed in the BCEC-C6 and U251 cells (Figure 4
and Supplementary Figure S2). However, unlike the perfect

Figure 3: Qualitative and quantitative analysis of drug-loaded NPs in BCEC-C6 and C6 cells. Confocal images of A.
BCEC-C6 and B. C6 cells after treatment with different DOX formulations for 4 h. Flow cytometric analysis of C. BCEC-C6 and D. C6
cells after treatment with different DOX formulations for 2 h. E. Quantitative analysis of mean fluorescence intensity in different DOX
formulation group. Cell nuclei were stained using DAPI (blue) and DOX (red). (a) MSN-DOX-PDA, (b) MSN-DOX-PDA-NGR + free
NGR, and (c) MSN-DOX-PDA-NGR. **p < 0.01 and ***p < 0.001 compared with c (n = 3).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

73684

Oncotarget

cytotoxicity observed in C6 cells, MSN-DOX-PDA-NGR
did not exhibit an improved antitumor effect on GL261
cells compared with MSN-DOX-PDA and MSN-DOXPDA-NGR + free NGR. This MSN-DOX-PDA-NGR
resistance was evidenced by their no difference of IC50
values (p > 0.05) (Supplementary Figure S2C and S2D).
The blank NPs were biocompatible since the cell viability
was > 80% at a concentration of 1000 μg/mL of MSNPDA-NGR and a 96-h treatment period (Figure 4B). In
summary, owing to high CD13 level and subsequently
MSN-DOX-PDA-NGR sensitization, C6 was selected as
tumor cell model for the further studies.

recognition by the CD13 expressed on glioma cells and
endothelial cells, the effects of different endocytosis
inhibitors were evaluated in C6 and BCEC-C6 cells. As
shown in Figure 5, the uptake of MSN-DOX-PDA-NGR
by C6 cells was significantly inhibited by NaN3 (energy
depletion agent), Cyto-B (macropinocytosis inhibitor),
CPZ (clathrin-mediated endocytosis inhibitor), and
monensin (lysosome inhibitor), but not by filipin,
genistein (caveolae-mediated endocytosis inhibitor)
or BFA (Golgi apparatus and intracellular trafficking
inhibitor). Furthermore, only genistein did not inhibit
the uptake of MSN-DOX-PDA-NGR by the BCEC-C6
cells. These results indicate that the MSN-DOX-PDANGR uptake was energy-dependent and stimulated by
clathrin-mediated endocytosis and the macropinocytosis
pathway.

Cellular uptake mechanism of dual-targeted NPs
To elucidate the endocytosis pathways of the
MSN-DOX-PDA-NGR that were activated after their

Figure 4: Cell viability following treatment with various NPs. A. Viability of C6 cells after treatment with free DOX. B. Viability

of BCEC-C6 and C6 cells after treatment with blank NPs. Viability of BCEC-C6 cells after treatment with different DOX formulations for
C. 24 and D. 48 h. Viability of C6 cells after treatment with different DOX formulations for E. 24 and F. 48 h.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

73685

Oncotarget

Subcellular localization of dual-targeted NPs

results suggest that the transportation of the NPs across in
vitro BBB model was significantly enhanced by the NGR
modification (p < 0.001). However, when the excess NGR
was pre-incubated to saturate the CD13 binding site of the in
vitro BBB, the transport ratio of the MSN-DOX-PDA-NGR
was significantly reduced. Therefore, it can be concluded
that NGR might mediate the transport of MSN-DOX-PDANGR across the BBB via facilitative receptor-mediated
transcytosis. The integrity of the BCEC monolayer was
monitored by determining the trans-endothelial electrical
resistance (TEER) during the entire experiment (data not
shown), and no significant reduction was observed except
the 24 h time point. This indicated that the drug transport
did not compromise the BBB barrier properties, and the NPs
transport across the BBB was via the transcellular but not the
paracellular pathway within 12 hours. Surprisingly, at 24 h,
the transport ratios of all the groups reached approximately
50%. These results may have been due to the breakdown of
the BCEC monolayer as the TEER values were significantly
reduced in all groups at the same time.
In addition, an in vitro coculture model was
established to evaluate whether the drug-loaded NPs
transported across the BBB could be taken up by the C6
cells below and induce cell death. Figure 7B and 7C show
that the MSN-DOX-PDA-NGR group still exhibited the
highest accumulation of DOX and cytotoxicity against
the C6 cells. These results demonstrate that MSN-DOXPDA-NGR exhibited a “dual-targeting effect,” which first
targeted and transported across the BCEC monolayer and
then targeted the C6 cells below.

The results that the monensin (lysosome inhibitor)
had an obvious inhibitory effect on the uptake of the
NPs suggest that the uptake and release of NPs partly
depended on the acidic environment in the lysosomes.
To demonstrate this hypothesis directly, we examined the
subcellular localization of the MSN-DOX-PDA-NGR in
the C6 and BCEC-C6 cells using confocal laser scanning
microscopy. The lysosomes showed green fluorescence
after the cells were stained with organelle-selective dyes
while the NPs showed red fluorescence. The colocalization
of the NPs with the organelle-selective dyes was indicated
by the yellow color in the superimposed image. As shown
in Figure 6, the MSN-DOX-PDA-NGR was localized in
the lysosomes of the C6 and BCEC-C6 cells, suggesting
that following its uptake by the cells, the NPs was
subsequently delivered to lysosomes.

In vitro transendothelial permeability and dualtargeting of NPs in BBB model
The positive results of the experiments on the
BCEC-C6 and C6 cells might not persuasively represent
the dual-targeting capacity of MSN-DOX-PDA-NGR
because of the extreme differences between the in vitro and
in vivo conditions. Therefore, the in vitro BBB model was
constructed to assess the transport efficiency of the different
DOX formulations. Figure 7A shows that the in vitro
transport ratios across the BBB increased with incubation
time. After the 12-h incubation, the transport ratio was 13.16
and 24.59% for the MSN-DOX-PDA and MSN-DOX-PDANGR, respectively. In addition, the transport ratio for the
MSN-DOX-PDA-NGR group was consistently the highest
among these groups at different times, except 24 h. These

In vivo imaging of dual-targeted NPs
To evaluate the in vivo BBB penetration and NGRtargeting efficacy of different DOX formulations, non-

Figure 5: Effect of inhibitors on cellular uptake of MSN-DOX-PDA-NGR by BCEC-C6 and C6 cells. ap < 0.05 and cp <
0.001 compared with control BCEC-C6 cells; βp < 0.01 and γp < 0.001 compared with control C6 cells (n = 3).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

73686

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Confocal microscopy images of intracellular localization of MSN-DOX-PDA-NGR in A. BCEC-C6 and B. C6
cells. Lysosomes and nanoparticles (NPs) were distinguished using Lysotracker (green) and DOX (red), respectively.

Figure 7: In vitro transport ratios (%) of various NPs. A. Transport ratio across BCEC-C6 monolayer of different DOX formulations
during 24 hours. B. Flow cytometric analysis and C. viability of C6 cells (below) after treatment with different DOX formulations; bp <
0.01, cp < 0.001, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, and ***p < 0.001 compared with MSN-DOX-PDA-NGR (n = 3).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

73687

Oncotarget

invasive fluorescence imaging was conducted to track the
biodistribution of NPs in C6 cell orthotopic glioma nude
mice. A significantly higher fluorescence intensity at the
brain tumor site was observed in the MSN-DOX-PDANGR group than in the MSN-DOX-PDA and free DOX
groups (Figure 8A), indicating that MSN-DOX-PDA-NGR
accumulated more in the glioma-related region. Moreover,
the ratios of the right/left brain hemisphere fluorescence
intensity were 1.05, 1.23, and 2.03 for DOX, MSN-DOXPDA, and MSN-DOX-PDA-NGR, respectively (Figure
8B and 8C). In addition, the fluorescence intensity of
the right brain in the MSN-DOX-PDA-NGR group was
significantly higher than it was in the MSN-DOX-PDA
and DOX groups. This observation indicates that MSNDOX-PDA-NGR had an excellent dual-targeting delivery
capability for glioma tissues. Furthermore, the distribution
of the different DOX formulations in the other investigated
organs was comparable (Figure 8B and 8D).

microscopy in tumor bearing rats. As shown in Figure
9, only a few MSN-DOX-PDA NPs were distributed in
the glioma region owing to the EPR effect. However, an
obviously higher distribution of the NGR-modified NPs
was observed at the glioma site and in the cancerous
brain tissues surrounding the glioma than in the normal
regions. These findings were consistent with the ex vivo
fluorescence images of the NPs distribution in gliomabearing nude mice.

In vivo drug release and liver deposition
To evaluate the drug delivery capacity of the NPs
in tumor bearing rats quantitatively, the tumor-bearing
and contralateral brain tissues, as well as liver tissues,
were harvested after treatment with the different DOX
formulations, and the amount of DOX was measured
using HPLC analysis (Figure 10). The DOX deposition
in the right brain hemisphere of the MSN-DOX-PDANGR group was significantly greater than that of the
MSN-DOX-PDA and DOX groups (2.55 and 2.43-fold,
respectively). The amount of DOX in the right and left
brain hemispheres showed no obvious difference between
the DOX and MSN-DOX-PDA groups. However, the
DOX deposition was significantly higher in the tumor-

In vivo glioma distribution of dual-targeted NPs
We sought to further determine whether MSN-DOXPDA-NGR specifically targeted the tumor cells in vivo.
Therefore, we studied the glioma-targeting capacity of the
MSN-DOX-PDA-NGR qualitatively using fluorescence

Figure 8: In vivo and Ex vivo fluorescent imaging of various NPs. A. In vivo fluorescent imaging of different DOX formulations
6 h post i.v. injection. B. Ex vivo fluorescent imaging of dissected organs. Semi-quantitative fluorescence intensity of C. left and right brain
hemisphere and D. other major organs. Mouse 1, injection of free DOX; mouse 2, injection of MSN-DOX-PDA; mouse 3, injection of
MSN-DOX-PDA-NGR. Key: b, brain; h, heart; li, liver; s, spleen; lu, lung; k, kidney; *p < 0.05 compared with right brain hemisphere and
##
p < 0.01 compared with right brain hemisphere in MSN-DOX-PDA-NGR group (n = 3).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

73688

Oncotarget

bearing brain tissue than it was in the contralateral normal
brain tissue in the MSN-DOX-PDA-NGR group (p <
0.001). These results are in accordance with those of the
ex vivo imaging and in vivo glioma distribution of the
dual-targeted NPs. Moreover, the DOX deposition in liver
tissues showed no significant difference among the three
groups.

H&E staining and TUNEL assay, clearly indicating that
MSN-DOX-PDA-NGR possesses dual-targeting capacity
in vivo.
To further evaluate the therapeutic activity in vivo,
the survival time of the tumor-bearing rats after treatment
was investigated using the Kaplane-Meier survival curve.
As shown in Figure 11D, the median survival times for
the saline, DOX, MSN-DOX-PDA, and MSN-DOX-PDANGR groups were 19, 21, 21.5, and 32 days, respectively.
Compared with the saline group, the DOX and MSNDOX-PDA did not show an improvement in the survival
time. However, treatment with MSN-DOX-PDA-NGR
significantly prolonged the median survival time compared
with that for other groups.
MSN-DOX-PDA-NGR
showed
significant
antitumor and antiangiogenesis effects and obviously
prolonged the survival time compared with the other
groups. These observations suggest that the MSNDOX-PDA-NGR with dual-targeting characteristics
possessed the most effective therapeutic activity of all the
formulations investigated.

In vivo antitumor and antiangiogenesis effects of
dual-targeted NPs
We assumed that the dual-targeted NPs have a more
powerful antitumor activity since the MSN-DOX-PDANGR increased the DOX accumulation at the tumor site.
To evaluate the antitumor effect of the MSN-DOX-PDANGR in vivo, we examined the apoptotic and necrotic
regions in the brains of tumor bearing rats using H&E
staining and TUNEL assay after treatment with different
DOX formulations. As shown in Figure 11A and 11B,
obvious apoptotic and necrotic tumor cells were observed
in MSN-DOX-PDA-NGR group on day 10 compared
with those in other groups. In addition, a more severe cell
apoptotic and necrotic was detected on day 17, suggesting
that NGR-decoration NPs could not only target but also
put down the tumor cells in vivo.
To determine the antiangiogenic activity
simultaneously, we assessed the microvessel density
using immunohistochemistry. As shown in Figure 11C,
the microvessels in the glioma-bearing rat brains were
CD31-positive. There were obviously fewer microvessels
in the MSN-DOX-PDA-NGR group than there were in
other groups. The results were in accordance with the

In vivo biological safety study
The potential in vivo toxicity of NPs for drug
delivery is always of great concern. For safety purpose,
we evaluated the in vivo toxicity of the drug carrier in
healthy adult male rats treated with MSN-PDA-NGR by
tail vein injections at one 100 mg/kg dose administered
every 3 days for 4 weeks. The increase in body mass of the
MSN-PDA-NGR and saline groups showed a comparable
tendency over the 4 weeks. Furthermore, we conducted

Figure 9: In vivo distribution of different DOX formulations in brains of glioma-bearing rats. Nuclei were stained with
DAPI (blue) while DOX distribution is in red. Yellow line and arrow, border and direction of glioma, respectively; scale bar, 50 μm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

73689

Oncotarget

Figure 10: DOX deposition in tumor-bearing brain tissue, contralateral brain tissue, and liver tissue after treatment
with different DOX formulations. ***p < 0.001 compared with the right brain hemisphere in MSN-DOX-PDA-NGR group (n = 3).

Figure 11: In vivo antitumor and antiangiogenesis effects of dual-targeted NPs. A. H&E and TUNEL staining after 10 and 17

days (upper and lower two rows, respectively) post transplantation. B. The ratios of the necrotic/apoptotic areas within the tumor. C. CD31positive microvessels in glioma-bearing rat brains. D. Survival curve (Kaplan-Meier plot) of glioma-bearing rats treated with different
DOX formulations. Green circle and arrows in A indicate necrotic regions and cell apoptosis body in tumor interior, respectively; a, control
group; b, free DOX group; c, MSN-DOX-PDA group; d, MSN-DOX-PDA-NGR group. Green arrow in C, microvessel; scale bar, 50 μm.
c
p < 0.001 compared with other groups at day 10; γp < 0.001 compared with other groups at day 17 (n = 5).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

73690

Oncotarget

the histological analyses, which revealed no obvious
pathological lesions or impairment in the major tissues
from rats that received MSN-PDA-NGR for 4 weeks
(Figure 12).

transport ratio and subsequent cytotoxicity in the
C6 cells before the integrated BBB destruction. The
superior BBB permeability of the MSN-DOX-PDANGR may have contributed to the combination of the
receptor-mediated cellular uptake and the caveolaeand clathrin-mediated endocytosis. After the BBB
was perturbed by the chemotherapy drugs in the donor
chamber, a vast amount of the DOX formulations passed
through the disrupted barrier and accumulated in the
“tumorous tissue fluid” in basal chamber. In agreement
with the promising results of the in vitro model, the in
vivo trans-endothelial superiority was demonstrated
qualitatively by the ex vivo biodistribution and in vivo
glioma distribution of the MSN-DOX-PDA-NGR, and
quantitatively by the in vivo DOX deposition in the
glioma-bearing rat brain.
Angiogenesis and vascular proliferation are regarded
as critical factors for tumor growth, progression, and
invasion and are established hallmarks of the malignancy
degree of gliomas [34]. Numerous tumor cells depend on
endothelial cells for their survival and invasion. Therefore,
the method that compromised the tumor endothelial cells
used in our experiment may amplify the therapeutic effect.
The positive results of the in vivo immunohistochemical
analysis of CD31 and histopathological changes in the
glioma tissue verified the antiangiogenesis and antitumor
effects of MSN-DOX-PDA-NGR, respectively. The
prolonged median survival time of the MSN-DOXPDA-NGR-treated tumor-bearing rats further confirmed
this amplified therapeutic effect. Overall, it is clear that
the dual-targeting drug carrier did not only deliver the
chemotherapy drugs into the tumor endothelial and glioma
cells more efficiently, but it also induced more obvious
cell apoptosis and necrosis. This observation indicates
that the MSN-PDA-NGR NPs are a promising carrier
for dual-targeted drug delivery. Since a higher CD13
level in the glioma (WHO grade III-IV) was detected
than that in the gliom (I-II) using immunohistochemistry
in our preliminary study (data not shown), we assumed
that the MSN-DOX-PDA-NGR exhibited more powerful
antitumor effects against the high-grade glioma than
against low-grade. Therefore, we plan to establish different

DISCUSSION
Dual-targeting drug delivery systems that
target some overexpressed receptors on both tumor
neovasculature and cells have been developed. These
systems offer a great strategy for overcoming the
limitation of current antiangiogenesis therapy by
combining vasculature damage and traditional anticancer
therapy [29]. The main objective of this study was to
verify the hypothesis that NGR-modified drug delivery
systems could not only kill brain tumor angiogenic blood
vessels, which indirectly starve the tumor cells supported
by these vessels, but also penetrate the brain tumor
interstitial space, thereby inducing direct tumor cell death.
Briefly, NGR-conjugated NPs (MSN-DOX-PDA-NGR)
could serve as a promising dual-targeting drug carrier for
brain glioma and neovasculature chemotherapy.
Recent studies have shown that MSN employed
as a targeting carrier possesses low cytotoxicity and
good biocompatibility when applied to mammalian cells
[30, 31]. Dopamine is a well-known neurotransmitter.
However, it has been demonstrated that its monomer does
not exist in the PDA coating, which has been shown to
be non-toxic in various cellular and in vivo studies [32,
33]. In our experiments, we also found that the in vitro
cytotoxicity and in vivo toxicity of MSN-PDA-NGR were
negligible. In summary, the evidence provided in these
experiments suggests that our dual-targeting system is
suitable for drug delivery.
For the in vitro experiments, the cellular uptake
of the NPs and the subsequent cytotoxicity were
enhanced by NGR modification, as demonstrated by
the confocal images, flow cytometric analysis, and
CCK-8 assay. To mimic in vivo conditions, the in vitro
BBB model was constructed to assess the transport
efficiency of the different DOX formulations. MSNDOX-PDA-NGR yielded the most efficient BBB

Figure 12: In vivo biological safety study. A. Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining of major organs harvested from rats treated with
MSN-PDA-NGR for 4 weeks. B. Body mass of rats after treatment with MSN-PDA-NGR.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

73691

Oncotarget

grade human primary glioma animal model to evaluate the
therapeutic effects of the NPs in the further study.

system (LCMS-2010, Shimadzu, Japan) equipped with a
C18 column (4.6 mm × 250 mm, pore size 5-μm, Waters).
Mobile phase, acetonitrile and water in a ratio of 70:30
(v/v), pH 3.08; flow rate, 1.0 mL/min; sample injection
volume, 10 μL; detection wavelength, 220 nm. The
encapsulation efficiency (EE) and loading content (LC)
of drug, and the NGR conjugation efficiency (CE) were
determined as follows: EE = DOX encapsulated/DOXtotal × 100,
LC = DOXencapsulated/materials × 100, CE = NGR conjugated/
NGR total × 100.
The particle size and zeta potential of NPs were
determined using dynamic light scattering (DLS) with a
Zeta Sizer 3000 HS (Malvern, USA). The morphology
of the nanomaterial samples was observed using a
transmission electron microscope (H-7600, Hitachi, Japan)
at an acceleration voltage of 100 kV.
The drug release experiment was performed
by diluting NP-DOX with PBS at pH 7.5 and acetate
buffer at pH 4.5 at a concentration equivalent to 140 μg/
mL free DOX, and incubating at 37°C for 2, 4, 8, 12,
24, 48, and 72 h. After incubation and centrifugation at
20000 rpm to remove the NPs, the concentration of DOX
was determined using HPLC analysis (mobile phase,
acetonitrile:water, 70:30 (v/v), pH 3.08; flow rate, 1.0 mL/
min; sample injection volume, 5 μL; detection wavelength,
233 nm).

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials and animals
Mesoporous silica with a mean particle diameter
of 150 nm was purchased from Nanjing XFNANO
Materials Tech Co., Ltd., (Nanjing, China). The dopamine
hydrochloride was purchased from Alfa Aesar (Ward
Hill, MA, USA) while the NGR was synthesized by the
Chinese Peptide Company (China). The DOX and all other
chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis,
MO, USA) unless otherwise specified. The plastic cell
culture dishes and plates were purchased from Corning
Inc., (Corning, NY, USA). The anti-CD31 and anti-CD13
antibodies were purchased from Abcam (MA, USA)
while the anti-CD13 (fluorescein isothiocyanate, FITC)
was purchased from Biorbyt (Cambridgeshire, UK). The
primary BCEC cultures and astrocytes cells (AC) were
prepared from 4-week- and 3-day-old Sprague-Dawley
male rats, respectively, provided by the Experimental
Animal Center of Chongqing Medical University. The
C6, GL261, U251 cells were obtained from the Chinese
Academy of Sciences Cell Bank (Shanghai, China). All
animal experiments were performed according to the
protocol evaluated and approved by the Ethics Committee
of Chongqing Medical University.

CD13 expression in targeted cells
The BCECs, C6, and AC cells were seeded at a
density of 5 × 105 cells/dish. To promote the differentiation
of the BCECs, coculture models were established with C6
or AC cells using Millicell hanging cell culture inserts
(1-μm pore size, 24 mm diameter, 4.5 cm2 surface area,
Millipore, USA). The BCECs were seeded in the six-well
culture plates while the C6 or AC cells were in the donor
chamber, and the cells were at a density of 1 × 105 cells/
well. When the cell confluency had attained 80% after 48
h, the C6 cells, AC cells, BCECs, and BCEC-C6 cells,
BCEC-AC cells were harvested, incubated with the antiCD13 antibody (FITC), mouse IgG2a K Isotype Control
according to the manufacture’s instruction. Then, the cells
were analyzed using a fluorescence-activated cell sorting
(FACS) Calibur flow cytometer (Becton Dickinson,
Mountain View, CA, USA). The western blot analysis was
further performed to quantify the CD13 levels in the single
and cocultured cells according to a previously described
method [35].

Preparation and characterization of dualtargeted NPs
The MSN (12 mg) was added to 6 mL DOX solution
(1 mg/mL) and the mixture was stirred in the dark for 24 h
at 25°C. Then, the DOX-loaded MSNs (MSN-DOX) were
separated by centrifugation (12000 rpm, 10 min), and
washed with water to remove the residual DOX from the
exterior surface of MSN. The filtrate and the wash solution
were collected and combined as the remaining DOX
solution. The loading amount of DOX was calculated
as the difference between the initial and remaining
DOX solution by using the fluorescence method using a
calibration curve. Finally, the MSN-DOX were dried at
50°C under high vacuum overnight. The PDA coating
was applied to modify the surface of the MSN as reported
previously [15].
For the surface functionalization, the PDA-coated
MSN-DOX (MSN-DOX-PDA) were resuspended in
Tris buffer (10 mM, pH 8.5) containing NGR. The final
concentrations of the NPs and ligands were 2 and 0.5
mg/mL, respectively. After 3-h incubation at 25°C with
rotation, the NPs were collected by centrifugation (12000
rpm, 10 min), washed with water twice. The concentration
of Asn-Gly-Arg (NGR) in the supernatant was determined
using a high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Cellular uptake of dual-targeted NPs
For the qualitative study, a laser scanning confocal
microscope (Leica SP2, Heidelberg, Germany) was used to
investigate the uptake of NPs into C6 cells. The cells were
cultured overnight at a density of 4 × 104 cells/confocal
dish and then treated with DOX-MSN-PDA, MSN-DOX73692

Oncotarget

Subcellular localization of dual-targeted NPs

PDA-NGR, or MSN-DOX-PDA-NGR + free NGR at a
DOX concentration of 0.5 μg/mL for 4 h. Then, the cells
were rinsed thrice with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS),
fixed with 4% (v/v) paraformaldehyde for 15 min, stained
with 4',6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) for 5 min, and
finally washed thrice with PBS before observation.
For the quantitative study, flow cytometry was
used to measure the fluorescence intensity of DOX at
excitation and emission wavelengths of 488 and 585 nm,
respectively. In brief, the C6 cells were treated with the
different DOX formulations used in the quantitative study
for 2 h in the dark, rinsed with PBS, and then harvested for
detection. The method used to assess the cellular uptake of
the NPs in the BCEC-C6, GL261, and U251 cells was the
same as described above.

The subcellular localization of dual-targeted NPs
was performed as previously described [36]. The C6 cells
were cultured overnight in the confocal dish and treated
with MSN-DOX-PDA-NGR (0.5 μg/mL) for 30 min at
37°C followed by incubation with 50 nM LysoTracker
Green (30 min) and 10 mM Hoechst 33342 (10 min) to
visualize the lysosome and nuclei using a laser scanning
confocal microscope. A similar method was also used to
evaluate the subcellular localization in the BCEC-C6 cells.

Transport across BBB and dual-targeting effects
of NPs in vitro
The transport ratio (%) was measured to assess the
permeability of the drug carriers through the BBB. The
BCECs were seeded into the Millicell hanging cell culture
insert at a density of 1 × 105 cells/well and cocultured with
the C6 cells for 7 days, supplemented with hydrocortisone
(500 nM) and cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP,
312.5 μM) to induce barrier tightness [37-39]. Before
starting the experiment, the tightness of the BCEC
monolayer was monitored by measuring the transendothelial electrical resistance (TEER) using a TEER
instrument (Millicell-RES, Millipore, USA). Only BCEC
monolayers with TEER above 200 Ω cm2 were selected
for the subsequent experiment [40]. Then, the BCEC
monolayer described above was inserted into another
six-well culture plate containing fresh medium, and
different DOX formulations (free DOX, DOX-MSN-PDA,
MSN-DOX-PDA-NGR, and MSN-DOX-PDA-NGR +
free NGR) were added to the donor chamber at a DOX
concentration of 100 μg/mL, followed by incubation at
37°C. A 300-μl sample was withdrawn from the acceptor
chamber at 2, 4, 8, 12, and 24 h and an equal volume of
fresh DMEM was added immediately after each sampling.
The concentration of DOX was determined using an
HPLC analysis. The transport ratio was calculated using
the following formula: ratio (%) = (Wn/W) × 100; where,
Wn is the DOX amount in the samples taken from basal
chamber at the nth h (n = 2, 3, 8, 12, and 24), and W is the
DOX amount in the control added to the apical chamber.
To assess the dual-targeting effect of the carriers in vitro,
the BCEC monolayer was inserted into the six-well culture
plate where the C6 cells had been cultured overnight at
a density of 1 × 105 cells/well and they were incubated
together for 24 h to establish the coculture model in vitro
[41]. Then, different DOX formulations were added to
the apical chamber at a final DOX concentration of 100
μg/mL. For the cellular uptake, the C6 cells in the lower
chamber were harvested for flow cytometric analysis
after 8 h co-incubation. For the cell survival evaluation,
the C6 cells were further cultured alone for 48 h and
then measured using a CCK-8 assay. At the end of the
experiment, the TEER was measured again to check the
integrity of the BCEC monolayers.

Cytotoxicity assay of dual-targeted NPs
The C6 cells were seeded into 96-well culture
plates at a density of 5 × 103 cells/well the night before
treatment. Then, free DOX, blank MSN-PDA-NGR,
MSN-DOX-PDA, MSN-DOX-PDA-NGR, or MSN-DOXPDA-NGR + free NGR with different concentrations were
added to the wells of the 96-well plates and incubated
together. At designated time points, 10 μL of the CCK-8
solution was added to each well followed by incubation
for 2 h. The absorbance values (A450nm) were detected
using a microplate reader (BioRad, 680, USA). The cell
viability was calculated as follows: survival (%) = (A450nm
of treated cells/A450nm of control cells) × 100. The halfmaximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) values were
determined from the dose-effect curve and expressed as
the concentration of DOX-equivalency. For the BCEC-C6
cells, the cytotoxicity of the different NPs was also
determined in the BCEC-C6, GL261, and U251 cells using
the same method described above.

Cellular uptake mechanism of dual-targeted NPs
The cellular uptake mechanism of dual-targeted NPs
was performed as previously described [36]. The C6 cells
were seeded at a density of 5×105 cells/well into six-well
plates and incubated overnight. After a 30-min incubation
with Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM),
the cells were further incubated with the following
inhibitors, sodium azide (NaN3, 0.1%), filipin (10 μg/
mL), chlorpromazine hydrochloride (CPZ, 20 μg/L),
cytochalasin B (Cyto-B, 40 μM), monensin (100 nM), and
brefeldin A (BFA, 20 μg/mL) for another 30 min. Then,
the inhibitors were removed from the wells, and MSNDOX-PDA-NGR (0.5 μg/mL) and fresh samples of the
inhibitors at the same concentrations used previously were
added. After 1-h incubation, the cells were harvested by
trypsinization and analyzed using flow cytometer. Cells
that were incubated without any inhibitors served as the
control. A similar method was also used to evaluate the
uptake mechanism in the BCEC-C6 cells.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

73693

Oncotarget

In vivo imaging of dual-targeted NPs in gliomabearing nude mice

In vivo antitumor and antiangiogenesis effects of
dual-targeted NPs

The C6 cell orthotopic glioma nude mouse model
was established by injecting C6 cells (1 × 106 cells in
10 μL PBS, 0.01 M, pH 7.4) into the right brain of male
nude mice (2 mm lateral to the bregma and 5.0 mm deep
from the dura) at a rate of 1.0 μL/min using a stereotaxic
apparatus. The growth of the tumor was monitored
longitudinally using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
On day 10 after the implantation, the different DOX
formulations were injected via the tail vein at a dose of 100
mg/kg body weight. Then, 6 h post-injection, the in vivo
distribution of the associated fluorescence was visualized
using the IVIS animal imaging system (PerkinElmer,
USA). Then, 24 h post-injection, the ex vivo images of the
major organs were also captured after they were harvested
and rinsed with PBS thrice.

The glioma-bearing rats were randomly divided
into four groups of 16 each and injected with 100 μL
of free DOX, DOX-MSN-PDA, MSN-DOX-PDA-NGR
(DOX dose, 5 mg/kg), or saline via the tail vein on day
5, 8, 11, and 14 after the C6 cells implantation. On day
5 and 12 post-treatment, three rats from each group were
euthanized. The brains were harvested, fixed with 10%
neutral formalin at 4°C for 48 h, embedded in paraffin,
and cut into 5-μm sections, which were stained with
hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) using routine protocols
and Tdt-mediated d-uridine triphosphate (UTP) nickend labeling (TUNEL) using a kit, following the
recommended protocol, to identify the histopathological
changes. Simultaneously, CD31-specific staining was
applied to assess the microvessel density (MVD) of
the tumor tissues immunohistochemically. Ten tumorbearing rats from each group were survival-monitored,
and the survival data were analyzed using the log-rank
test.

In vivo glioma distribution of dual-targeted NPs
The glioma-bearing rat model was established using
the method described above. Then, 8 h after treatment with
DOX-MSN-PDA and MSN-DOX-PDA-NGR, the rats
were anesthetized by the intraperitoneal (ip) administration
of 5% chloral hydrate, followed by heart perfusion with
saline and 4% paraformaldehyde. Subsequently, the
brains were removed, fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for
24 h, and sequentially cryoprotected with 15 and 30%
sucrose solutions until subsidence was observed with
each exposure. Then, the brains were frozen in optimal
cutting temperature (OCT) gel (Sakura, Torrance, CA,
USA) at -30°C and cut into 20-μm sections, which were
counterstained with 1 mg/mL DAPI for 5 min at 25°C.
Then, the slides were observed using a fluorescence
microscope (Leica, Germany).

In vivo biological safety study
Healthy adult male Sprague-Dawley rats were
treated with MSN-PDA-NGR by tail vein injection (100
μL, 100 mg/kg) one dose every 3 days for 4 weeks. Rats
treated with saline were used as controls. The body mass
was recorded at day 1, 7, 14, 21, and 28 post-treatment.
The main organs including the brain, heart, lungs, liver,
spleen, and kidneys were harvested after the final treatment
followed by H&E staining to examine the toxicity in vivo.

Statistical analysis
All the experiments were performed in triplicate.
The acquired data are presented as mean ± standard
deviation (SD). The statistical significance was determined
using ANOVA and t-test. p < 0.05 was considered
significant.

In vivo quantification of drug release
The glioma-bearing rats were divided into three
groups and injected with free DOX, MSN-DOX-PDA,
and MSN-DOX-PDA-NGR at a DOX dose of 5 mg/kg
per animal. Then, 2 h post-treatment, the brain tissues
were harvested after anesthetization and perfusion, and
then divided into left (control) and right (tumor tissue
containing) brain hemispheres. These brain samples were
then homogenized and soaked in acidified ethanol (50%
ethanol in 0.3N hydrochloric acid, HCl) for 24 h at 4°C to
extract the DOX completely [42]. After drug extraction, the
samples were centrifuged at 14000 rpm for 10 min using a
freezing centrifuge (Sigma 3-30K, Heraeus Co., Germany).
The concentration of DOX in the clear supernatant was
analyzed using an HPLC method and expressed per gram
of tissue. The DOX deposition in the liver tissues was also
quantified to compare the temporary toxicity among those
groups, using the same procedures above.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

CONCLUSION
In this study, the MSN-PDA-NGR NPs were
successfully established for the effective dualtargeting of BCEC-C6 and C6 cells. The drug carrier
enhanced the cellular uptake of the NPs and the
subsequent cytotoxicity significantly, as well as the
BBB transportation ability in vitro. Furthermore, the
dual-targeting drug delivery system exhibited a superior
antiangiogenesis and antiglioma efficacy and negligible
toxicity in vivo. In summary, these promising results
indicate that the MSN-DOX-PDA-NGR could have
great potential for the treatment of glioma.

73694

Oncotarget

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

9.	 Wang, Xun, Wang, Yiguang, Chen, Xiaomei, Wang,
Jiancheng, Zhang, Xuan. NGR-modified micelles enhance
their interaction with CD13-overexpressing tumor and
endothelial cells. Journal of Controlled Release. 2009;
139:56-62.

The authors thank Bin Tan for his technical
assistance with flowcytometry. We also thank Qiang Xi for
his assistance with the HPLC method and analysis. This
work was supported by Grants from the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (Nos. 81201066, 81371674,
81471676, and 81401505) and the Chongqing Natural
Science Foundation Project (Nos. CSTC2013jcyjA10054
and CSTC2014jcyjA10050).

10.	 Michael D, Jinzi Z, Joshua R, Jaffray DA, Christine A.
APN/CD13-targeting as a strategy to alter the tumor
accumulation of liposomes. Journal of Controlled Release.
2011; 154:298-305.
11.	 Yu C, Hangrong C, Deping Z, Yunbo T, Feng C, Jingwei
F, Jianlin S. Core/Shell Structured Hollow Mesoporous
Nanocapsules: A Potential Platform for Simultaneous Cell
Imaging and Anticancer Drug Delivery. ACS nano. 2010;
4:6001-6013.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare that no competing financial
interests exist.

12.	 Tang F, Li L, Chen D. Mesoporous silica nanoparticles:
synthesis, biocompatibility and drug delivery. Advanced
materials. 2012; 24:1504-1534.

REFERENCES

13.	 Li L, Tang F, Liu H, Liu T, Hao N, Chen D, Teng X, He J.
In vivo delivery of silica nanorattle encapsulated docetaxel
for liver cancer therapy with low toxicity and high efficacy.
ACS nano. 2010; 4:6874-6882.

1.	 Alam MI, Beg S, Samad A, Baboota S, Kohli K, Ali J,
Ahuja A, Akbar M. Strategy for effective brain drug
delivery. European Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences.
2010; 40:385-403.

14.	 Liu T, Li L, Teng X, Huang X, Liu H, Chen D, Ren J, He
J, Tang F. Single and repeated dose toxicity of mesoporous
hollow silica nanoparticles in intravenously exposed mice.
Biomaterials. 2011; 32:1657-1668.

2.	 Ricard D, Idbaih A, Ducray F, Lahutte M, Hoang-Xuan K,
Delattre JY. Primary brain tumours in adults: The Lancet.
Lancet. 2012; 379:1984-1996.
3.	 Pang Z, Feng L, Hua R, Chen J, Gao H, Pan S, Jiang
X, Zhang P. Lactoferrin-conjugated biodegradable
polymersome holding doxorubicin and tetrandrine for
chemotherapy of glioma rats. Molecular pharmaceutics.
2010; 7:1995-2005.

15.	 Qishan Z, Tianran L, Hanyin W, Liangqia G, Peirong Y,
Yanli H, Qingquan G, Jinzhi J, Fengfu F, Guonan C.
Mussel-inspired polydopamine coated mesoporous silica
nanoparticles as pH-sensitive nanocarriers for controlled
release. International journal of pharmaceutics. 2014;
463:22-26.

4.	 Xinyi J, Qiuyue R, Jijin G, Lingjun Z, Fengyi D, Chunlai
F, Yike X, Xianyi S, Xiaoling F. Nanoparticles of 2-deoxyD-glucose functionalized poly(ethylene glycol)-copoly(trimethylene carbonate) for dual-targeted drug delivery
in glioma treatment. Biomaterials. 2014; 35:518-529.

16.	 Jae Hong K, Minah L, Beum PC. Polydopamine as a
biomimetic electron gate for artificial photosynthesis.
Angewandte Chemie. 2014; 126:6482-6486.
17.	 Park J, Brust TF, Hong JL, Sang CL, Watts VJ, Yeo
Y. Polydopamine-Based Simple and Versatile Surface
Modification of Polymeric Nano Drug Carriers. ACS nano.
2014; 8:3347-3356.

5.	 Kim SS, Rait A, Kim E, DeMarco J, Pirollo KF, Chang
EH. Encapsulation of temozolomide in a tumor-targeting
nanocomplex enhances anti-cancer efficacy and reduces
toxicity in a mouse model of glioblastoma. Cancer letters.
2015; 369:250-258.

18.	 Haeshin L, Dellatore SM, Miller WM, Messersmith PB.
Mussel-inspired surface chemistry for multifunctional
coatings. Science. 2007; 318:426-.

6.	 Kaluzova M, Bouras A, Machaidze R, Hadjipanayis CG.
Targeted therapy of glioblastoma stem-like cells and
tumor non-stem cells using cetuximab-conjugated ironoxide nanoparticles. Oncotarget. 2015; 6:8788-8806.
doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.3554

19.	 Qinze L, Bo Y, Weichun Y, Feng Z. Highly selective
uptake and release of charged molecules by pH-responsive
polydopamine microcapsules. Macromolecular Bioscience.
2011; 11:1227-1234.

7.	 Shim JS, Jin HK, Cho HY, Yum YN, Kim SH, Park HJ,
Shim BS, Choi SH, Kwon HJ. Irreversible inhibition of
CD13/aminopeptidase N by the antiangiogenic agent
curcumin. Chemistry & Biology. 2003; 10:695-704.

20.	 Cheng FF, Zhang JJ, Xu F, Hu LH, Abdel-Halim ES, Zhu JJ.
pH-Sensitive Polydopamine Nanocapsules for Cell Imaging
and Drug Delivery Based on Folate Receptor Targeting.
Journal of Biomedical Nanotechnology. 2013; 9:1155-1163.

8.	 Wang RE, Niu Y, Wu H, Hu Y, Cai J. Development of
NGR-based anti-cancer agents for targeted therapeutics and
imaging. Anti-cancer agents in medicinal chemistry. 2012;
12:76-86.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21.	 Petros RA, Desimone JM. Strategies in the design of
nanoparticles for therapeutic applications. Dressnature
Reviews Drug Discovery. 2010; 9:615-627.

73695

Oncotarget

22.	 Fernandez CA, Baumhover NJ, Duskey JT, Khargharia
S, Kizzire K, M D E, Rice KG. Metabolically stabilized
long-circulating PEGylated polyacridine peptide polyplexes
mediate hydrodynamically stimulated gene expression in
liver. Gene Therapy. 2011; 18:23-37.

33.	 Sook Hee K, Beum PC. Human endothelial cell growth
on mussel-inspired nanofiber scaffold for vascular tissue
engineering. Biomaterials. 2010; 31:9431-9437.
34.	 Puduvalli VK, Sawaya R. Antiangiogenesis – Therapeutic
Strategies and Clinical Implications for Brain Tumors.
Journal of Neuro-Oncology. 2000; 50:189-200.

23.	 Yamamoto Y, Nagasaki Y, Kato Y, Sugiyama Y, Kataoka K.
Long-circulating poly(ethylene glycol)-poly(D,L-lactide)
block copolymer micelles with modulated surface charge.
Journal of Controlled Release. 2001; 77:27-38.

35.	 Huang N, Chen S, Deng J, Huang Q, Liao P, Wang F,
Cheng Y. Overexpression of S100A9 in human glioma and
in-vitro inhibition by aspirin. European Journal of Cancer
Prevention. 2013; 22:585-595.

24.	 Mellman I, Fuchs R, Helenius A. Acidification of the
endocytic and exocytic pathways. Annual Review of
Biochemistry. 1986; 55:663-700.
25.	 Tannock IF, Rotin D. Acid pH in tumors and its potential
for therapeutic exploitation. Cancer Research. 1989;
49:4373-4384.

36.	 Jiang X, Xin H, Ren Q, Gu J, Zhu L, Du F, Feng C, Xie
Y, Sha X, Fang X. Nanoparticles of 2-deoxy-D-glucose
functionalized poly(ethylene glycol)-co-poly(trimethylene
carbonate) for dual-targeted drug delivery in glioma
treatment. Biomaterials. 2014; 35:518-529.

26.	 Pasqualini R, Koivunen E, R, Lahdenranta J, Sakamoto
M, Stryhn A, Ashmun R, Shapiro L, Arap W, Ruoslahti E.
Aminopeptidase N is a receptor for tumor-homing peptides
and a target for inhibiting angiogenesis. Cancer Research.
2000; 60:722.

37.	 Calabria AR, Weidenfeller C, Jones AR, Vries HED, Shusta
EV. Puromycin-purified rat brain microvascular endothelial
cell cultures exhibit improved barrier properties in response
to glucocorticoid induction. Journal of Neurochemistry.
2006; 97:922-933.

27.	 Plate KH, Breier G, Millauer B, Ullrich A, Risau W.
Up-regulation of vascular endothelial growth factor
and its cognate receptors in a rat glioma model of tumor
angiogenesis. Cancer Research. 1993; 53:5822-5827.

38.	 Takata F, Dohgu S, Yamauchi A, Matsumoto J, Machida
T, Fujishita K, Shibata K, Shinozaki Y, Sato K, Kataoka
Y. In vitro blood-brain barrier models using brain capillary
endothelial cells isolated from neonatal and adult rats retain
age-related barrier properties. Plos One. 2013; 8: e55166.

28.	 Bhagwat SV, Lahdenranta J, Giordano R, Arap W,
Pasqualini R, Shapiro LH. CD13/APN is activated by
angiogenic signals and is essential for capillary tube
formation. Blood. 2001; 97:652-659.

39.	 Shayan G, Yong SC, Shusta EV, Shuler ML, Lee
KH. Murine in vitro model of the blood–brain barrier
for evaluating drug transport. European Journal of
Pharmaceutical Sciences. 2010; 42:148-155.

29.	 Fabio P, Chiara B, Danilo M, Michele C, Claudio G,
Domenico R, Renato L, Allen TM, Angelo C, Mirco P.
Vascular damage and anti-angiogenic effects of tumor
vessel-targeted liposomal chemotherapy. Cancer Research.
2003; 63:7400-7409.

40.	 Ke W, Shao K, Huang R, Han L, Liu Y, Li J. Gene delivery
targeted to the brain using an Angiopep-conjugated
polyethyleneglycol-modified polyamidoamine dendrimer.
Biomaterials. 2009; 30:6976-6985.

30.	 Di P, Anthony J, Sharma, Krishna K, Shi, Yan-Li, Bonnie
B, Ouellette, Wayne. Cytotoxicity of mesoporous silica
nanomaterials. Journal of Inorganic Biochemistry. 2008;
102:1416-1423.

41.	 Gao H, Qian J, Cao S, Yang Z, Pang Z, Pan S. Precise
glioma targeting of and penetration by aptamer and
peptide dual-functioned nanoparticles. Biomaterials. 2012;
33:5115-5123.

31.	 Lu J, Liong M, Li Z, Zink JI, Tamanoi F. Biocompatibility,
Biodistribution, and Drug-Delivery Efficiency of
Mesoporous Silica Nanoparticles for Cancer Therapy in
Animals. Small. 2010; 6:1794-1805.

42.	 Park J, Zhang Y, Vykhodtseva N, Jolesz FA, Nnold NJ.
The kinetics of blood brain barrier permeability and
targeted doxorubicin delivery into brain induced by
focused ultrasound. Journal of Controlled Release. 2012;
162:134-142.

32.	 Seonki H, Keum Yeon K, Hwang Jin W, Sung Young P, Dae
LK, Yun LD, Haeshin L. Attenuation of the in vivo toxicity
of biomaterials by polydopamine surface modification.
Nanomedicine. 2011; 6:793-801.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

73696

Oncotarget

