Cancer
Research

Review

Anti-VEGF/VEGFR Therapy for Cancer: Reassessing the
Target
Basel Sitohy1,2, Janice A. Nagy1,2, and Harold F. Dvorak1,2

Abstract
Judah Folkman recognized that new blood vessel formation is important for tumor growth and proposed
antiangiogenesis as a novel approach to cancer therapy. Discovery of vascular permeability factor VEGF-A as the
primary tumor angiogenesis factor prompted the development of a number of drugs that targeted it or its
receptors. These agents have often been successful in halting tumor angiogenesis and in regressing rapidly
growing mouse tumors. However, results in human cancer have been less impressive. A number of reasons have
been offered for the lack of greater success, and, here, we call attention to the heterogeneity of the tumor
vasculature as an important issue. Human and mouse tumors are supplied by at least 6 well-deﬁned blood vessel
types that arise by both angiogenesis and arterio-venogenesis. All 6 types can be generated in mouse tissues by an
adenoviral vector expressing VEGF-A164. Once formed, 4 of the 6 types lose their VEGF-A dependency, and so their
responsiveness to anti-VEGF/VEGF receptor therapy. If therapies directed against the vasculature are to have a
greater impact on human cancer, targets other than VEGF and its receptors will need to be identiﬁed on these
resistant tumor vessels. Cancer Res; 72(8); 1909–14. 2012 AACR.

Introduction
It is just 40 years since Judah Folkman published his classic
New England Journal of Medicine article entitled "Tumor angiogenesis: therapeutic implications" (1). In that article, he set
forth 3 bold postulates: (i) angiogenesis is essential for tumor
growth beyond minimal size; (ii) tumors secrete a "tumor
angiogenesis factor" (TAF) that is responsible for inducing
angiogenesis; and (iii) antiangiogenesis is a potential therapeutic strategy for treating cancer. Now, 4 decades later, after
considerable debate and not a little controversy, all 3 of these
postulates are widely accepted. Generally speaking, tumors
do need to induce a new vascular supply if they are to grow,
though some make do, at least for a time, by coopting the
existing host vasculature (2). Folkman's RNA-like TAF candidate proved to be a blind alley, but the discovery of vascular
permeability factor/VEGF (VPF/VEGF or more simply
VEGF-A), and the preparation of antibodies against it, provided
an opportunity for testing Folkman's hypotheses (3, 4). VEGF-A
is widely expressed by nearly all malignant tumors and is
Authors' Afﬁliations: 1The Center for Vascular Biology Research and
2
Department of Pathology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
Current address for B. Sitohy: Division of Surgery and Perioperative


Science, Department of Orthopedics, Umea University, Umea, Sweden.
Phone: 46907850000; Fax: 4690137455; E-mail:
basel.sitohy@orthop.umu.se
Corresponding Author: Harold F. Dvorak, Department of Pathology,
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, 330 Brookline Avenue, RN227C,
Boston, MA 02215. Phone: 617-667-8529; Fax: 617-667-3591; E-mail:
hdvorak@bidmc.harvard.edu
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-3406
2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

generally agreed to be the most important TAF. It acts on
vascular endothelial cells within minutes to induce vascular
permeability and, longer term, reprograms gene expression,
leading to endothelial cell proliferation and migration in vitro,
and generation of new blood vessels in vivo. Moreover, a variety
of drugs that target VEGF-A or its receptors effectively prevent
the growth of many mouse tumors and tumor xenografts (2, 5–
7). Among these drugs are antibodies against VEGF-A or its
receptors, engineered proteins that mimic VEGFRs, and smallmolecule receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) inhibitors that preferentially target VEGFR-2 (VEGFR-2/ﬂk-1/KDR) with high
afﬁnity.
Unfortunately, however, the striking beneﬁts of antiVEGF/VEGF receptor (VEGFR) therapy observed in treating
mouse tumors have not been translated to the clinic. All of
these drugs have had only modest effects on human cancers
and have not lived up to the great expectations that Folkman
and many others anticipated. For example, bevacizumab
(Avastin; Genentech), a humanized antibody against VEGF-A,
prolongs the life of patients with advanced colon cancer by,
on average, 4 to 5 months, and then only when combined
with triple chemotherapy (8). In fact, a recent editorial has
questioned whether bevacizumab was "boon or bust" because
of its limited effectiveness, serious (though uncommon) side
effects, and high cost (9). Other U.S. Food and Drug Administration–approved drugs that bind VEGF-A, or that target
VEGF-A receptors, have fared no better (10). Thus, we are left
with the question, why doesn't anti–VEGF-A/VEGFR therapy
work better against human cancers? But, before tackling that
question, it could be helpful to address some others ﬁrst:
What are tumor blood vessels? How do they form? What does
anti–VEGF-A/VEGFR therapy do to tumor blood vessels?

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

1909

Sitohy et al.

What Are Tumor Blood Vessels, and How Do They
Form?
Despite the great sums of money that companies, the
NIH, and charitable organizations have invested in antiVEGF/VEGFR approaches to cancer therapy, relatively little
attention has been paid to the types of new blood vessels that
these drugs are expected to target. Tumor angiogenesis has
often been regarded as if it were a single entity in which all
tumor blood vessels were identical. However, it has long been
known that tumor blood vessels are heterogeneous and differ
considerably among themselves with respect to organization,
structure, and function (11). Studying several important
human carcinomas, we identiﬁed 6 distinctly different types
of blood vessels (12, 13). Further, to avoid the complexity of
the tumor environment, we developed a means of generating
surrogate forms of tumor blood vessels in the absence of
tumor cells, making use of a nonreplicating adenovirus (engineered by Richard Mulligan) to express the most common
VEGF-A isoform, mouse VEGF-A164 (human VEGF-A165;
ref. 14).
When injected into the tissues of immunodeﬁcient mice,
Ad-VEGF-A164 generates each of the 6 vessel types we had
found in human cancers and does so by 2 distinct but interrelated processes, angiogenesis and arterio-venogenesis. On
the angiogenesis side, preexisting venules transform over the
course of a few days into "mother" vessels, which are greatly
enlarged, pericyte-poor vessels that result from proteolytic

degradation of venule basement membranes and from pericyte
detachment (Fig. 1; refs. 12–15). Freed of these restraints,
normally cuboidal venules undergo dramatic enlargement that
is made possible by extensive endothelial cell thinning; in this
process, endothelial cells discharge the cytoplasmic vesicles
and vacuoles that compose their vesiculo-vacuolar organelles
to the cell surface, providing the greatly expanded plasma
membrane that is needed to line a 4- to 5-fold expanded lumen
(14, 16). Mother vessels are highly permeable to plasma proteins, largely by transcellular routes that involve residual
vesicles and newly formed fenestrae. Over the course of days
to weeks, mother vessels evolve into daughter vessels of 3 types:
(i) glomeruloid microvascular proliferations (GMP), poorly
organized structures that, as their name implies, resemble
renal glomeruli macroscopically. GMP result from intraluminal proliferation of endothelial cells and pericytes and the
accumulation of macrophages; (ii) vascular malformations,
thought to represent mother vessels that have reacquired a
smooth muscle cell coat; and (iii) typical capillaries that form
as mother vessels sprout inwards instead of outwards, projecting cytoplasmic processes into their lumens that form interconnecting intraluminal bridges that subsequently separate
mother vessels into smaller vessels by intussusception. Vascular malformations and capillaries, unlike mother vessels and
GMP, are stable vascular structures that persist indeﬁnitely.
Arterio-venogenesis proceeds in parallel with angiogenesis as
arterioles, arteries, and veins undergo extensive remodeling

164
in mouse tissues, identifying those that are
Figure 1. Diagram of the angiogenic and arterio-venogenic blood vessels that are induced by Ad-VEGF-A
(enclosed within the dash-lined box) or are not, susceptible to anti-VEGF therapy with rapamycin and aﬂibercept (VEGF Trap).

1910

Cancer Res; 72(8) April 15, 2012

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

Why Doesn't Anti-VEGF/VEGFR Therapy Work Better?

and enlargement with proliferation of endothelial cells and
smooth muscle cells (Fig. 1; refs. 13, 14).

What Does Anti-VEGF/VEGFR Therapy Do to
Tumor (and Normal) Blood Vessels?
Folkman conceived of antiangiogenesis primarily as a
means of preventing angiogenesis and, thereby, limiting
further tumor growth. However, it was soon found that
anti-VEGF/VEGFR therapies not only prevented angiogenesis, but additionally caused considerable pruning of preexisting vessels (5, 17). All of the drugs used, whether
targeting VEGF-A or its receptors, had similar effects. Endothelial fenestrations, when present, disappeared, vascular
sprouting and permeability were suppressed, and blood ﬂow
and vessel patency were extensively reduced. Overall vascular density decreased (depending on the tumor type by as
much as 70%). Changes were also noted in the normal
vasculature, particularly a loss of endothelial cells fenestrae
in renal glomeruli and several endocrine organs (5, 17).
These ﬁndings suggested an explanation for at least some
of the side effects that have been found in patients receiving
anti–VEGF-A/VEGFR drugs (9); they also provided strong
evidence that VEGF-A was necessary for the maintenance of
the normal adult vasculature. Some tumor cells, as well as
tumor-inﬁltrating macrophages, express VEGFRs, particularly VEGFR-1, and so anti-VEGF/VEGFR agents may act on
these cells as well (18). This action is more likely to be the
case for small-molecule RTKs, because large molecules such
as antibodies are unlikely to penetrate the vascular barrier
efﬁciently.

Explanations Commonly Offered for the Failure of
Anti-VEGF/VEGFR Therapy to Work Better in
Cancer Patients
A number of explanations have been offered to explain the
modest effectiveness of anti–VEGF-A/VEGFR therapy in
cancer patients vis-a-vis their more potent effects in
tumor-bearing mice (19). All of these explanations are likely
to have some validity. One obvious possibility is that cancer
patients are often elderly and very ill, in contrast with the
young, relatively healthy tumor-bearing mice treated in the
laboratory. Further, higher dosing is possible in mice, who
cannot complain about side effects. A second likely reason
for the limited effectiveness of anti-VEGF/VEGR therapy is
that it does not result in the killing of all tumor cells; residual
tumor cells rendered hypoxic by a compromised blood
supply are stimulated to make increased amounts of
VEGF-A that may overwhelm anti-VEGF/VEGFR therapy,
especially when accompanied by increased expression of
matrix components that bind and sequester VEGF-A, protecting it from anti-VEGF drugs (20). Hypoxic tumor cells
also begin to make a plethora of other growth factors and
cytokines, which have the capacity to replace VEGF and
stimulate new blood vessel growth. Included among these
are FGF, PDGF-B, PDGF-C, HGF, EGF, IL-8, IL-6, Ang-2,
SDF1a, PDGF-C, CXCL6, and others, as well as their receptors. Other possibilities are recruitment from bone marrow

www.aacrjournals.org

of vascular progenitor cells and proangiogenic myelocytes
that can serve as a rich source of growth factors (19, 21).
Another explanation is that of "vascular normalization," a
limited period of time during which tumors treated with antiVEGF/VEGFR therapy exhibit a reduction in tumor vessel
tortuosity, hyperpermeability, interstitial tissue pressure, and
edema (6). The mechanisms responsible for vascular normalization are not yet fully understood and could reﬂect a return
to normality of abnormal tumor blood vessels and/or pruning
of the most abnormal vessels, leaving behind those that are
less abnormal. Whatever the mechanism, vascular normalization persists for only a short time, in both mouse and human
cancers, and could have Janus-like effects on tumor growth.
On the one hand, more normal blood vessels provide improved
blood ﬂow and so might be expected to provide a window of
opportunity for improved drug delivery; however, a better
blood supply could also favor tumor growth (for a review of
this issue, see refs. 6, 10).

Another Possible Explanation for the Limitations
of Anti-VEGF/VEGFR Therapy: Differential
Sensitivity of Tumor Blood Vessel Subtypes to
Anti-VEGF/VEGFR Therapy
Many of the early, highly successful studies targeting VEGF
or its receptors in mice followed protocols in which therapy
was initiated concurrently with or soon after the transplant of
tumor xenografts. Obviously, however, this treatment pattern
does not mimic the clinical situation in which tumors have
been present for months or years prior to discovery and onset
of therapy. Bergers and Hanahan (19, 22) recognized this
distinction, raising an important red ﬂag that called attention
to the limitations of anti-VEGF/VEGFR therapy in treating
established tumors. They found that VEGFR inhibitors were
highly effective in preventing the development of the spontaneous Rip-Tag tumor and in inhibiting its early growth, but
that they were of much less beneﬁt in regressing tumors
with an established vasculature (19, 22). Thus, in mice as in
patients, anti-VEGF/VEGFR therapy was found to be less
effective in advanced disease. Bergers and Hanahan (19) attributed the failure of late therapy to the maturing of the vasculature with increased pericyte coverage and found that
addition of an RTK inhibitor that targeted PDGFR-b (highly
expressed on pericytes) improved anti-VEGFR therapy,
though in other systems this has not been the case. Many
other reports indicate that "immature" vessels, variously
deﬁned, are preferentially susceptible to anti-VEGF/VEGFR
therapy (19, 22–24). However, there are exceptions to this
pattern of differential sensitivity. For example, in some tumors nearly all blood vessels are pericyte or smooth muscle
cell coated and yet undergo extensive pruning in response
to anti-VEGF/VEGFR therapy (5).

Effects of Rapamycin and Aﬂibercept (VEGF
Trap) on Tumor Surrogate Blood Vessels Induced
by Ad-VEGF-A164
In 2 recent articles, we investigated the sensitivity of tumor
surrogate blood vessels to anti–VEGF-A drugs (23, 25). When

Cancer Res; 72(8) April 15, 2012

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

1911

Sitohy et al.

injected into the skin of immunodeﬁcient mice, Ad-VEGF-A164
replicates at successive intervals large numbers of each of
the 6 types of blood vessels that we had identiﬁed in human
cancers. Therefore, by initiating treatment at different intervals before or after Ad-VEGF-A164 injection, we were able to
evaluate the effects of drugs that targeted VEGF-A indirectly
(rapamycin; ref. 25) or directly [aﬂibercept (VEGF Trap);
ref. 23]. Rapamycin, acting on mTOR downstream of the
VEGF-A–VEGFR-2 signaling pathway, prevented both angiogenesis and arterio-venogenesis and regressed early blood
vessels (mother vessels, GMP). VEGF Trap, a human soluble
decoy receptor protein with high afﬁnity for all of the VEGF-A
isoforms, as well as for VEGF-B and placental growth factor
(26), had similar effects (Fig. 1). Up to about 1 month, mother
vessels, GMPs, early vascular malformations, and developing
feeder arteries and draining veins regressed, at least to some
extent, and vascular volume and vascular leakage were strikingly reduced. However, like rapamycin, VEGF Trap became
progressively less effective when administered at later times
after Ad-VEGF-A164 injection, when the great majority of
blood vessels induced by angiogenesis (vascular malformations) and arterio-venogenesis (feeder arteries, draining veins)
had developed fully. Thus, although all 6 types of tumor
surrogate blood vessels were induced by VEGF-A164, not all
remained sensitive to anti–VEGF-A therapy. Results consistent
with ours were recently reported in a model of angiogenesis
induced by HIF-1a–overexpressing keratinocytes; antibodies
against VEGFR-2 were initially successful in preventing new
blood vessel formation but were largely ineffective when
administered 2 weeks later (27).
In an effort to explain our results mechanistically, we
immunostained Ad-VEGF-A164–induced blood vessels for
VEGFR-2. Whereas early susceptible vessels (mother vessels,
GMP) expressed high levels of VEGFR-2, late, rapamycin-, and
VEGF Trap–resistant vessels (vascular malformations, feeder
arteries, draining veins) expressed extremely low and sometimes undetectable levels of this receptor as determined by
immunohistochemistry (23), and by reverse transcriptase–
PCR (H.F. Dvorak, unpublished data). Thus, a possible explanation for the insensitivity of vascular malformations, feeder
arteries, and draining veins to VEGF Trap is that their lining
endothelial cells have lost dependence on exogenous VEGF-A,
and that any remaining requirement for VEGF-A as a survival
factor had been met by the pericytes or smooth muscle cells
that closely enveloped them (28).
Our ﬁndings with rapamycin and VEGF-Trap on Ad-VEGFA164–induced tumor surrogate blood vessels are likely to be
relevant to anti-VEGF/VEGFR therapy for mouse tumors and
human cancer. Personal review of many different tumors and
of the published photomicrographs of others indicate that
vessels with the structure and functional properties of mother
vessels predominate during early stages of the growth of most
transplantable mouse tumors and tumor xenografts and also
in such spontaneously arising tumors as the Rip-Tag2 model.
Additional evidence for this conclusion comes from the ﬁnding
that anti-VEGF/VEGFR drugs potently reverse tumor vascular
hyperpermeability (7, 23, 29, 30). In the pathologic angiogenesis
induced by tumors or Ad-VEGF-A164, mother vessels (and to a

1912

Cancer Res; 72(8) April 15, 2012

lesser extent GMP) are the only hyperpermeable blood vessels
that have thus far been identiﬁed in tumors (13, 14). The same
reasoning suggests that the "vascular normalization" following
anti–VEGF-A/VEGFR treatment results, at least in part, from
the pruning of hyperpermeable mother vessels. Left behind are
relatively unaffected pericyte- and smooth muscle–coated
vascular malformations, feeder arteries, and draining veins,
that is, vessels that by MRI and histology seem relatively
normal in that they are not hyperpermeable and are smooth
muscle cell coated.

Looking Back and Moving Forward
The work reviewed here invites some conclusions but also
raises new questions. On the plus side, Folkman's postulates
have been afﬁrmed. Targeting VEGF and its receptors offers
beneﬁt to patients with at least some types of cancer and
provides proof-of-principle that attacking the vasculature is a
valid approach to cancer therapy. At present, however, these
beneﬁts are limited and may have untoward consequences;
just as inadequately treated bacterial infections can result in
mutations that lead to antibiotic resistance, so residual tumor
cells, rendered hypoxic but not killed by anti-VEGF/VEGFR
therapy, can reprogram their genomes to express increased
amounts of VEGF-A as well as other growth factors that can
overwhelm or bypass the VEGF/VEGFR axis and stimulate
new blood vessel growth. To mix metaphors, wounding a bear
can make him very angry!
A further conclusion is that tumor blood vessels are
heterogeneous and that some are susceptible, whereas
others are highly resistant, to anti-VEGF/VEGFR therapy.
Resistant surrogate vessels such as vascular malformations,
feeder arteries, and draining veins develop gradually over
time after Ad-VEGF-A164 administration; they are relatively
large vessels, coated by 1 or more layers of smooth muscle
cells, and are lined by endothelial cells that express very low
levels of VEGFR-2. Late-appearing vessels of this type are
likely to predominate in human cancers, which are often
present for months to years before they are discovered.
The mechanisms by which tumor blood vessels are actually destroyed by anti-VEGF/VEGFR therapy require further
investigation (18). An obvious possibility is that vessels lined
by endothelial cells expressing high levels of VEGFR-2 and
coated with few pericytes require substantial amounts of
VEGF-A for survival and, therefore, undergo apoptosis when
the VEGF-A/VEGFR axis is disrupted. However, VEGFR-2
expression levels and pericytes may not provide the entire
explanation for resistance to anti-VEGF/VEGFR therapy.
Pericyte-coated capillaries are not always spared by antiVEGF/VEGFR therapy (5), and other mechanisms can be
envisioned for their destruction (18). In some cases, blood
vessel pruning could result from tumor cell killing; for example,
dying tumor cells could release cytokines or toxic products that
damage blood vessels. A possibility that has received little
attention is that anti–VEGF-A/VEGFR therapy could not only
act on angiogenic capillaries but also act upstream on the
larger feeder arteries that supply the tumor microcirculation.
The VEGF-A–VEGFR-2–eNOS–NO pathway has an important

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

Why Doesn't Anti-VEGF/VEGFR Therapy Work Better?

role in maintaining normal arterial tone, and, when interrupted, could cause constriction of the feeder arteries supplying tumors, leading to reduced downstream blood ﬂow and
necrosis of both tumor blood vessels and the tumor cells they
supply. Consistent with this possibility is the ﬁnding that
patients receiving anti–VEGF-A/VEGFR therapy commonly
develop systemic hypertension (18). It would be ironic if
treating this hypertension, as is commonly done, actually
interfered with therapeutic beneﬁt.
Finally, going forward, it is important to think beyond VEGF
and its receptors as the sole vascular targets. We need to
identify new molecular targets on the endothelial cells lining
the large tumor blood vessels that supply and drain the tumor
microvasculature (vascular malformations, feeder arteries,
and draining veins) and that have proved resistant to antiVEGF/VEGFR therapy. Attacking these large vessels would cut
off the blood supply to the entire tumor and, therefore, have a
larger effect than pruning the innumerable VEGF-A–sensitive
microvessels. As any plumber knows, shutting off the water
supply at its source makes more sense than trying to turn off

every faucet in the house. Evidence for the potential of this
concept comes from studies in which photodynamic occlusion
of feeder arteries and draining veins led to eradication of
mouse ear tumors (31) and from ﬁndings that uterine artery
embolization or myolysis can ablate uterine ﬁbroids in patients
(32). Progress is being made in this regard, and a number of
tumor vessel markers worthy of further investigation have
been identiﬁed (33, 34). We anticipate bright days ahead for
targeting the vasculature as a mode of cancer therapy.
Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest
No potential conﬂicts of interest were disclosed.

Grant Support
This work was supported by U.S. Public Health Service grants P01 CA92644,
CA-142262, by a contract from the National Foundation for Cancer Research
(H.F. Dvorak), and by The Swedish Research Council and The Swedish Society
of Medicine (B. Sitohy).
Received October 12, 2011; revised December 5, 2011; accepted December 15,
2011; published OnlineFirst April 11, 2012.

References
1.
2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.
10.

11.

12.

13.

Folkman J. Tumor angiogenesis: therapeutic implications. N Engl J
Med 1971;285:1182–6.
Kim ES, Serur A, Huang J, Manley CA, McCrudden KW, Frischer JS,
et al. Potent VEGF blockade causes regression of coopted vessels in
a model of neuroblastoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2002;99:
11399–404.
Senger DR, Galli SJ, Dvorak AM, Perruzzi CA, Harvey VS, Dvorak HF.
Tumor cells secrete a vascular permeability factor that promotes
accumulation of ascites ﬂuid. Science 1983;219:983–5.
Leung DW, Cachianes G, Kuang WJ, Goeddel DV, Ferrara N. Vascular
endothelial growth factor is a secreted angiogenic mitogen. Science
1989;246:1306–9.
Inai T, Mancuso M, Hashizume H, Baffert F, Haskell A, Baluk P, et al.
Inhibition of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) signaling in
cancer causes loss of endothelial fenestrations, regression of tumor
vessels, and appearance of basement membrane ghosts. Am J Pathol
2004;165:35–52.
Carmeliet P, Jain RK. Principles and mechanisms of vessel normalization for cancer and other angiogenic diseases. Nat Rev Drug Discov
2011;10:417–27.
Zhu AX, Sahani DV, Duda DG, di Tomaso E, Ancukiewicz M, Catalano
OA, et al. Efﬁcacy, safety, and potential biomarkers of sunitinib monotherapy in advanced hepatocellular carcinoma: a phase II study. J Clin
Oncol 2009;27:3027–35.
Hurwitz H, Fehrenbacher L, Novotny W, Cartwright T, Hainsworth J,
Heim W, et al. Bevacizumab plus irinotecan, ﬂuorouracil, and leucovorin for metastatic colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med 2004;350:2335–42.
Hayes DF. Bevacizumab treatment for solid tumors: boon or bust?
JAMA 2011;305:506–8.
Jain RK, Duda DG, Clark JW, Loefﬂer JS. Lessons from phase III clinical
trials on anti-VEGF therapy for cancer. Nat Clin Pract Oncol 2006;3:
24–40.
Warren B. The vascular morphology of tumors. In: Peterson H-I, editor.
Tumor blood circulation: angiogenesis, vascular morphology and
blood ﬂow of experimental and human tumors. Boca Raton: CRC
Press; 1979. p. 1–47.
Fu Y, Nagy JA, Dvorak AM, Dvorak HF. Tumor blood vessels. structure,
function and classiﬁcation. In: Teicher BA, Ellis LM, editors. Cancer
drug discovery and development antiangiogenic agents in cancer
therapy. Totowa, NJ: Humana Press; 2007. p. 205–24.
Nagy JA, Chang SH, Shih SC, Dvorak AM, Dvorak HF. Heterogeneity of
the tumor vasculature. Semin Thromb Hemost 2010;36:321–31.

www.aacrjournals.org

14. Nagy JA, Dvorak AM, Dvorak HF. VEGF-A and the induction of
pathological angiogenesis. Annu Rev Pathol 2007;2:251–75.
15. Chang SH, Kanasaki K, Gocheva V, Blum G, Harper J, Moses MA, et al.
VEGF-A induces angiogenesis by perturbing the cathepsin-cysteine
protease inhibitor balance in venules, causing basement membrane
degradation and mother vessel formation. Cancer Res 2009;69:
4537–44.
16. Dvorak AM, Kohn S, Morgan ES, Fox P, Nagy JA, Dvorak HF. The
vesiculo-vacuolar organelle (VVO): a distinct endothelial cell structure
that provides a transcellular pathway for macromolecular extravasation. J Leukoc Biol 1996;59:100–15.
17. Mancuso MR, Davis R, Norberg SM, O'Brien S, Sennino B, Nakahara T,
et al. Rapid vascular regrowth in tumors after reversal of VEGF
inhibition. J Clin Invest 2006;116:2610–21.
18. Ellis LM, Hicklin DJ. VEGF-targeted therapy: mechanisms of antitumour activity. Nat Rev Cancer 2008;8:579–91.
19. Bergers G, Hanahan D. Modes of resistance to anti-angiogenic therapy. Nat Rev Cancer 2008;8:592–603.
20. Kadenhe-Chiweshe A, Papa J, McCrudden KW, Frischer J, Bae JO,
Huang J, et al. Sustained VEGF blockade results in microenvironmental sequestration of VEGF by tumors and persistent VEGF receptor-2
activation. Mol Cancer Res 2008;6:1–9.
21. Ferrara N. Role of myeloid cells in vascular endothelial growth
factor-independent tumor angiogenesis. Curr Opin Hematol 2010;
17:219–24.
22. Bergers G, Song S, Meyer-Morse N, Bergsland E, Hanahan D. Beneﬁts
of targeting both pericytes and endothelial cells in the tumor vasculature with kinase inhibitors. J Clin Invest 2003;111:1287–95.
23. Sitohy B, Nagy JA, Jaminet SC, Dvorak HF. Tumor-surrogate blood
vessel subtypes exhibit differential susceptibility to anti-VEGF therapy.
Cancer Res 2011;71:7021–8.
24. Helfrich I, Schadendorf D. Blood vessel maturation, vascular phenotype and angiogenic potential in malignant melanoma: one step
forward for overcoming anti-angiogenic drug resistance? Mol Oncol
2011;5:137–49.
25. Xue Q, Nagy JA, Manseau EJ, Phung TL, Dvorak HF, Benjamin LE.
Rapamycin inhibition of the Akt/mTOR pathway blocks select stages
of VEGF-A164-driven angiogenesis, in part by blocking S6Kinase.
Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2009;29:1172–8.
26. Holash J, Davis S, Papadopoulos N, Croll SD, Ho L, Russell M, et al.
VEGF-Trap: a VEGF blocker with potent antitumor effects. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 2002;99:11393–8.

Cancer Res; 72(8) April 15, 2012

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

1913

Sitohy et al.

27. Oladipupo SS, Hu S, Santeford AC, Yao J, Kovalski JR, Shohet RV,
et al. Conditional HIF-1 induction produces multistage neovascularization with stage-speciﬁc sensitivity to VEGFR inhibitors and myeloid
cell independence. Blood 2011;117:4142–53.
28. Evensen L, Micklem DR, Blois A, Berge SV, Aarsaether N, LittlewoodEvans A, et al. Mural cell associated VEGF is required for organotypic
vessel formation. PLoS ONE 2009;4:e5798.
29. Verheul HM, Hammers H, van Erp K, Wei Y, Sanni T, Salumbides
B, et al. Vascular endothelial growth factor trap blocks tumor
growth, metastasis formation, and vascular leakage in an orthotopic murine renal cell cancer model. Clin Cancer Res 2007;13:
4201–8.
30. Yuan F, Chen Y, Dellian M, Safabakhsh N, Ferrara N, Jain RK. Timedependent vascular regression and permeability changes in established human tumor xenografts induced by an anti-vascular endothe-

1914

Cancer Res; 72(8) April 15, 2012

31.

32.
33.

34.

lial growth factor/vascular permeability factor antibody. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 1996;93:14765–70.
Madar-Balakirski N, Tempel-Brami C, Kalchenko V, Brenner O,
Varon D, Scherz A, et al. Permanent occlusion of feeding arteries
and draining veins in solid mouse tumors by vascular targeted
photodynamic therapy (VTP) with Tookad. PLoS ONE 2010;5:
e10282.
Levy BS. Modern management of uterine ﬁbroids. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 2008;87:812–23.
Seaman S, Stevens J, Yang MY, Logsdon D, Graff-Cherry C, St Croix
B. Genes that distinguish physiological and pathological angiogenesis. Cancer Cell 2007;11:539–54.
Shih SC, Zukauskas A, Li D, Liu G, Ang LH, Nagy JA, et al. The L6
protein TM4SF1 is critical for endothelial cell function and tumor
angiogenesis. Cancer Res 2009;69:3272–7.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

Anti-VEGF/VEGFR Therapy for Cancer: Reassessing the Target
Basel Sitohy, Janice A. Nagy and Harold F. Dvorak
Cancer Res 2012;72:1909-1914.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/72/8/1909

This article cites 32 articles, 14 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/72/8/1909.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 24 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/72/8/1909.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

