www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2017, Vol. 8, (No. 7), pp: 10883-10890
Research Paper

The cornucopia of meaningful leads: Applying deep adversarial
autoencoders for new molecule development in oncology
Artur Kadurin1,2,3,4, Alexander Aliper2, Andrey Kazennov2,7, Polina Mamoshina2,5,
Quentin Vanhaelen2, Kuzma Khrabrov1, Alex Zhavoronkov2,6,7
1

Search Department, Mail.Ru Group Ltd., Moscow, Russia

2

Pharmaceutical Artificial Intelligence Department, Insilico Medicine, Inc., Emerging Technology Centers, Johns Hopkins
University at Eastern, Baltimore, Maryland, USA

3

Big Data and Text Analysis Laboratory, Kazan Federal University, Kazan, Republic of Tatarstan, Russia

4

St. Petersburg Department of V.A. Steklov Institute of Mathematics of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Petersburg, Russia

5

Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK

6

The Biogerontology Research Foundation, Trevissome Park, Truro TR4 8UN, UK

7

Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Dolgoprudny, Russia

Correspondence to: Alex Zhavoronkov, email: alex@insilicomedicine.com
Keywords: generative adversarian networks, adversarial autoencoder, deep learning, drug discovery, artificial intelligence
Received: June 14, 2016     Accepted: November 24, 2016     Published: December 22, 2016

ABSTRACT
Recent advances in deep learning and specifically in generative adversarial
networks have demonstrated surprising results in generating new images and videos
upon request even using natural language as input. In this paper we present the
first application of generative adversarial autoencoders (AAE) for generating novel
molecular fingerprints with a defined set of parameters. We developed a 7-layer AAE
architecture with the latent middle layer serving as a discriminator. As an input and
output the AAE uses a vector of binary fingerprints and concentration of the molecule.
In the latent layer we also introduced a neuron responsible for growth inhibition
percentage, which when negative indicates the reduction in the number of tumor cells
after the treatment. To train the AAE we used the NCI-60 cell line assay data for 6252
compounds profiled on MCF-7 cell line. The output of the AAE was used to screen 72
million compounds in PubChem and select candidate molecules with potential anticancer properties. This approach is a proof of concept of an artificially-intelligent drug
discovery engine, where AAEs are used to generate new molecular fingerprints with
the desired molecular properties.

combination of compounds screening libraries in order to
place them in relevant druggable space [5], such screening
remains a blind search.
Despite many prior failures, in silico based
approaches promise an attractive alternative to empower
the industry with more efficient screening methods able
to provide more reliable results at a reduced cost and
timescale [6]. Although, the use of computational methods
within the pharmaceutical industry is now well established,
the development of new mathematical methods coupled
with the availability of more powerful and cheaper
computational resources, contribute to the continuous
improvement and development of new techniques. Among
them, Machine Learning (ML) algorithms and specifically

INTRODUCTION
Despite the many advances in biomedical sciences,
the productivity of research and development programs in
the pharmaceutical industry is on the decline [1, 2]. The
failure rates in clinical trials approach 90% for all disease
categories with oncology among the categories with the
lowest (5.1%) likelihood of approval (LOA) after Phase
I [1, 3, 4]. One of the reasons this high failure rate is an
inefficient early lead discovery process, which mostly
relies on the screening of large compound libraries to
identify potential leads for further preclinical development.
Despite exhaustive efforts, such as modification and

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10883

Oncotarget

Deep Learning (DL) methods offer a great potential for
further significant advances within the industry.
In recent years DL methods demonstrated surprising
results surpassing human accuracy in many tasks including
image and voice recognition [7] and managed to overcome
many limitations of more traditional ML approaches. From a
technical point of view, modern DL techniques are structured
as deep architectures, called Deep Neural Networks (DNNs).
Because of this flexibility and adaptability of DNN for
learning from large range of data, DNNs are now considered
as an increasingly important area in the biomedical field that
shows significant potential in comprehensive -omics analysis
and could be useful for tackling many current issues [1, 8, 9].
Most DL-based methods require a massive amount of data
for their training, optimization and validation and are often
applied in most data-rich fields of biomedical sciences [10].
While the range of DL applications is diverse, two
common uses are classification and prediction. One can
find DL methods involving discriminative models used for
classification tasks [11, 12]. These algorithms are based
on the well-established backpropagation and dropout
algorithms and make use of piecewise linear units [13–15]
as activation functions, as they are known for having a
well-behaved gradient descent.
On the other hand, there is also an increasing
demand and research developed for using DL to directly
generate a model that could be successfully applied, for
example, to compression, denoising, inpainting, texture
synthesis, semi-supervised learning, unsupervised
feature learning and other tasks. However, designing
deep generative models is a bigger challenge than
discriminative models. This is due to the fact that
initial generative models, such as restricted Boltzmann
machines, Denoising autoencoders or deep Boltzmann
machines [16] are probabilistic and based on a parametric
specification of a probability distribution function.
Training of such models requires the maximization of the
log-likelihood, a function that is usually computationally
intractable. As a consequence, many difficulties arise
when trying to approximate the associated probabilistic
computations (strategies involving the use of Markov
chains (MCMC algorithm) or unrolled approximate
inference networks during either training or generation
of samples). Furthermore, supplementary complications
may also appear when trying to leverage the benefits
of piecewise linear units, the most commonly used
activation function, in the generative context. In order to
overcome the limitations of parametric methods, several
alternative generative models have been suggested.
Generative stochastic networks are an example of
models that do not require the explicit representation of
the likelihood while being able to generate samples from
the desired distribution. As a result of the investigations
performed so far, one can identify different classes
of deep generative models: Deep directed graphical
models, deep undirected graphical models and generative
autoencoders. It is important to notice that each of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

these methods have advantages and disadvantages
with respect to different computational and modeling
steps that can be classified into five categories, that is,
training, inference, sampling, likelihood evaluation and
model design. As any in silico based approaches, these
methods must be subject to validation and performance
assessment. Depending on the goals, properties and
specificities of the application, the global evaluation and
interpretation of a generative model can be done using
three independent criteria: average log-likelihood, Parzen
window estimates, and visual fidelity of samples [16, 17].
The latest class of non-parametric approaches for
deep generative models is known as generative adversarial
network (GAN). In this new framework, initially proposed
by Goodfellow et al. [18], generative models are estimated
via an adversarial process. In practice, two models are
simultaneously trained: a generative model G that captures
the data distribution, and a discriminative model D that
estimates the probability that a sample came from the
training data rather than G. The training procedure for G
is to maximize the probability of D making an error [19].
Thus, this framework does not correspond to the standard
optimization problem as it is based on a value function
that one model seeks to maximize and the other seeks to
minimize. The process terminates at a saddle point that
is a minimum with respect to one model’s strategy and a
maximum with respect to the other model’s strategy [18].
Because GANs do not require an explicit representation of
the likelihood, neither approximate inference nor Markov
chains are necessary. Consequently, GANs provide an
attractive alternative to maximum likelihood techniques.
As recently reviewed in [20, 21], the application
in oncology of various types of knowledge-based in
silico methods for predicting drug responses that require
multiple kinds of -omics data for training has lead to the
development and maintenance of large public databases
containing curated data sets of molecular profiles of cell
lines treated with the variety of small molecules. There are
currently three major publicly available databases that can
be used for the training of drug response prediction models.
First among these is the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia
(CCLE) [22] that contains data from more than 1000
cell lines from 36 tumor sites and drug sensitivity data
from more than 11000 experiments obtained altogether
from 24 anticancer drugs tested on overall 500 cell lines.
Second is the Genomics of Drug Sensitivity in Cancer
(GDSC) project [23], which contains data obtained from
different measurements of drug sensitivity in cancer cell
lines. More precisely, the GDSC contains more than 75
000 experiments that tested 138 anticancer drugs on 1000
cell lines from various cancer types. Furthermore, the
GDSC also contains baseline data, that is, data obtained
from untreated samples, which include gene copy number,
expression data and somatic mutations in 75 genes
relevant to cancer. Finally, another resource of interest is
the NCI-60 cancer cell line collection [24], that provides
drug screening data for thousands of drugs with potential
10884

Oncotarget

applications in cancer therapy and 60 cell lines from nine
different cancers.
In this work, we propose a deep adversarial model,
specifically adversarial autoencoder, for identification and
generation of new compounds that make a use of available
biological and chemical data. We demonstrate that this
purely insilico-based approach is capable of providing
biologically relevant predictions and consequently could
contribute to speed up the drug discovery process and
ultimately increase the success rate within the field of
anticancer therapy.

in latent layer with 640 GI values from normal distribution
N (5,1). Based on this data, we used decoder to generate
640 probability vectors with corresponding LCONC
values. Then we extracted the set of probability vectors
with LCONC < -5.0 M. In total, we obtained 32 vectors.
We screened 32 vectors them against a library of 72
million compounds derived from Pubchem [25] (Figure
2). We used the maximum likelihood function to select
top 10 hits for each of the 32 vectors. This amounted
for a set of 69 unique compounds (Supplementary Table
1). In order to assess the biological relevance of the our
results, Pubchem BioAssay database [26] was used to
identify the compounds for which anticancer activities
and other relevant biomedical properties of interest have
been either tested or demonstrated. This also includes
several patented compounds. Although information about
potential mode of action and more precisely anticancer
activity is not available for all compounds, several of them
are already known as anticancer agents of various kinds.
Most of these compounds are related to anthracyclines
(or anthracycline antibiotics). Anthracyclines are used
in cancer chemotherapy to treat many cancers, including
leukemias, lymphomas, stomach, uterine, ovarian, breast
cancer, and lung cancers. The anthracyclines are among the
most effective anticancer treatments currently available.
Daunorubicinol, is an anticancer agent previously tested

RESULTS
The adversarial autoencoder (AAE) architecture
used in this study is depicted on Figure 1. As an input AAE
uses a vector of binary fingerprints and log concentration
(LCONC) of the molecule. AAE outputs concentration and
a vector, consisting of probabilities assigned to each bit
of the fingerprint. In the latent layer we also introduced a
neuron responsible for Growth Inhibition percentage (GI),
where negative values indicate the reduction in the number
of tumor cells after drug treatment.
AAE was trained on fingerprint, LCONC and GI
data for 6252 compounds profiled on MCF-7 cell line.
After that we sampled 640 vectors from prior distribution

Figure 1: Architecture of Adversarial Autoencoder (AAE) used in this study. Encoder consists of two consequent layers L1
and L2 with 128 and 64 neurons, respectively. In turn, decoder consists of layers L’1 and L’2 comprising 64 and 128 neurons. Latent layer
consists of 5 neurons one of which is Growth Inhibition percentage (GI) and the other 4 are discriminated with normal distribution.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10885

Oncotarget

for treating infant with leukemia. CHEMBL519482 is
another potential anticancer agent whose cytotoxicity
against human KB cells has been tested using squamous
cell carcinoma. Epi-daunomycin (CID:153753), also
belongs to the class of anthracyclines and is classified
as an antitumor antibiotic, in the treatment of neoplastic
disease and blood cancers, (leukaemia and lymphoma),
and many types of carcinoma and soft tissue sarcomas.
Another compound, Idarubicin (CID:42890) is often traded
under the denomination idamycin and idamycin PFS. This
compound is classified as an antitumor antibiotic and orally
administered anthracycline antineoplastic used in treatment
against various types of cancers including leukemia,
breast cancer and multiple myeloma. Similar to other
anthracyclines, it induces histone eviction from chromatin
and inhibits the activity of DNA topoisomerase II. It has
been patented for numerous clinical purposes. (7R,9R)Idarubicin (CID:151582) is another anticancer agent tested
for small cell lung cancer therapies. CID:53304462 has
undergone several testing phase and available bioassays
demonstrate its activity for various functions including
inhibitor of protein arginine methyltransferase 1 (PRMT1).
Epi-daunorubicin (CID:125250) has been the subject of
several studies to assess its effects against cancer such as
nasopharyngeal carcinoma. CID:57620448 was patented
in 2009 (patent ID US7893023) as prodrug activated
by plasmin that can be used in cancer chemotherapy.
CID:44398799 was tested regarding cytotoxicity
properties against K562 leukemia cell line and SW620
colon cancer cell line. CID:59835410 is the subject of two
patents (US2010022467and US7452901) for its activity
as anticancer phosphonate analog. CID:21563452 is a
synthetic compound patented (patent ID US3933827) for
its ability to actively inhibit the growth of transplantable
tumors and is therefore useful as cytostatic agent.
CID:15573184 is also patented (patent ID US6838469) as
it exhibits reduced gastrointestinal side-effects comprising

a known active substance having antitumor effects.
CID:59283582 is patented small molecule (patent ID
US2010098691) as a composition for the treatment of
cancer as several benzimidazole based anticancer agents
can be used in combination with a second anti-cancer agent
to obtain positive therapeutic outcomes.
Other compounds identified have been the
subject of test phases and patent applications for other
biomedical purposes. CID:54706490 has been tested as
having antibacterial activity against ofloxacin, oxacillin,
erythromycin resistant Staphylococcus aureus. Both
compounds, CID:44329845 and CID:44329846, were
tested in vitro and demonstrated antibacterial activity
against Staphylococcus aureus. CID:58771432 is
involved in a patent (patent ID US2006286103) for a
stable antibody formulation. CID:58076509 is patented
(patent ID US2012029167) as a drug using the magnetic
properties of a metal salen complex. CID:15573192 is
patented (patent ID US2015093398) as treatment indicates
an inhibitory effect of that small molecule on the Zika virus
induced caspase-3 activity that may correlate with its effect
on reduction of Zika virus induced cell death. Finally,
CID:57077355 has been patented as part of a method for
treating migraine headaches (patent ID WO9506468).

DISCUSSION AND PERSPECTIVES
While the use of DL methods in the biomedical
field is still in its infancy and most of the applications are
restricted to pure classification tasks, these techniques may
transform drug discovery and biomarker development. In
this work, we demonstrated how DNNs can be used not
only for classification tasks but for biologically relevant
generating models. The new conceptual architecture
of AAE was used to develop and validate a complex
DL-based work-flow capable of generating models of
new compounds in cancer and oncology using drug

Figure 2: Mapping generated molecules to chemical space of Pubchem. Pubchem compounds are depicted in green, training
set is shown in blue and mapped predictions in red.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10886

Oncotarget

concentrations and fingerprints as sole inputs. As a
result, we predicted 69 compounds belonging to various
chemical classes. The anticancer activity for our prediction
have already been identified and in some cases these
molecules are already used as anticancer agents for
treating various cancer types including leukemia and
breast cancer. This confirms the ability of this approach
to provide biologically relevant results. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first application of GAN techniques
within the field of cancer drug discovery. Further
experimental validation is in order to assess whether
the remaining predicted compounds show anticancer
activity. One of the ways to evaluate the effects of the
small molecule in multiple human cancers and validate
the predictions could be transcriptional response analysis
using signaling pathway activation analysis algorithms
[27, 28] in PDX models, where human tissue is grafted
into immunodeficient mice [29].
Generative capabilities of deep adversarial network
techniques open the doors to new perspectives as it could
contribute to overcome several limitations of current data
driven computational methods. For example, we can
apply GANs on transcriptomics data for the generation
of new samples for a desired phenotypic groups and in
chemoinformatics for the prediction of the physical,
chemical, or biological properties and structures of
molecules. Quantitative structure–activity relationships
(QSAR) and quantitative structure–property relationships
(QSPR) are still considered as the modern standard for
predicting properties of novel molecules [30]. To that
end, many ML-based approaches have been developed to
tackle such problems, but recent results show that the DLbased methods match or outperform other state-of-the-art
methods and demonstrate better predictive performance,
parsimony and interpretability and web-based predictors
are available on some cases [31]. Furthermore, new
methods based on convolutional neural networks are
able to perform predictions by directly using graphs of
arbitrary size and shape as inputs rather than fixed feature
vectors [32] and one can expect to see the development
of more flexible deep generative architectures that can be
applied directly to other structured data such as sequences,
trees, graphs, and 3D structures [31, 33]. Thus, the deep
adversarial network techniques could be used to improve
accuracy, generative capabilities and predictive power
and address several issues including computational cost,
limited computation at each layer and limited information
propagation across the graph [32].
Finally, target prediction and mapping of bioactive
small compounds and molecules by analyzing binding
affinities and chemical properties is another area of research
that makes extensive use of data-driven computational
methods in order to optimize the use of data available in
existing repositories [34, 35]. Despite promising results and
the availability of web-platforms to computationally identify
new targets for uncharacterized molecules or secondary
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

targets for known molecules such as SwissTargetPrediction
[34], in general, the available methods remain too inaccurate
for systematic binding predictions and physical experiments
remain the state of the art for binding determination.
In this field, DL-based methods, such as the recently
released methods AtomNet based on deep convolutional
neural networks [36] have allowed to circumvent several
limitations and outperform more traditional computational
methods including RFs, SVMs for QSAR and ligandbased virtual screening [37–39]. One can expect that the
development of DL-methods making use of the GAN
framework will also lead to significant improvement with
respect to prediction accuracy and power.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Data set selection
In this work, we used NCI-60 cell line assay
full dose response data (released on September 2014)
available at the Developmental Therapeutics Program
(DTP) website of NCI/NIH (http://dtp.nci.nih.gov/index.
html). The SMILES annotation for compounds generated
using program CACTVS v. 3.2 was also downloaded
from the DTP website. We utilised the Open Babel
chemistry toolbox [40] to convert SMILES string into
166-bit Molecular ACCess System (MACCS) chemical
fingerprints. In total, we generated MACCS fingerprints
for a total of 6252 molecules with known growth
inhibition percentage (GIPRCNT or GI) in NCI-60 assay.
MACCS fingerprints were also generated from 72200431
molecules derived from Pubchem database [25].

Design and training of the GAN
The architecture of the GAN used in this study was
inspired by recent work in this field [18, 41]. According
to original studies, the adversarial network and the
autoencoder are trained jointly with SGD in two phases
– the reconstruction phase and the regularization phase –
executed on each mini-batch. In the reconstruction phase,
the autoencoder updates the encoder and the decoder to
minimize the reconstruction error of the inputs. In the
regularization phase, the adversarial network first updates
its discriminative network to tell apart the true samples
(generated using the prior) from the generated samples
(the hidden codes computed by the autoencoder). The
adversarial network then updates its generator (which
is also the encoder of the autoencoder) to confuse the
discriminative network. Once the training procedure
is done, the decoder of the autoencoder will define a
generative model that maps the imposed prior of p(z) to
the data distribution.
We divided the input layer into a fingerprint part and
a concentration input neuron. So, our AAE was trained to
encode and reconstruct not only molecular fingerprints, but
10887

Oncotarget

also experimental concentrations. The Encoder consists of
two consequent layers L1 and L2 with 128 and 64 neurons,
respectively. The decoder consists of the two layers L’1 and
L’2, comprising 64 and 128 neurons respectively. The latent
layer consists of 5 neurons, one of which is the GI and
the four others are discriminated with normal distribution.
Since we train an encoder net to predict ‘efficiency’ against
‘cancer’ in a single neuron of latent layer, we divided the
latent vector in two parts - ‘GI’ and ‘representation’. So
we added a regression term to the encoder cost function.
Furthermore, we restrict our encoder to map the same
fingerprint to the same latent vector independently from
input concentration by additional ‘manifold’ cost. Here we
compute mean and variance of the concentrations through
all dataset and then use them to sample concentrations
for ‘manifold’ step. On each step we sample fingerprint
from trainset and batch of concentration from normal
distribution with given mean and variance. The training
net with ‘manifold’ loss is performed by maximization
of cosine similarity between ‘representations’ of similar
fingerprints with different concentrations
All these changes resulted in a 5-step train iteration
instead of a 3-step in AAE basic model:
a) Discriminator trained to distinguish between
given latent distribution and encoded ‘representation’; b)
Encoder trained to confuse Discriminator with generated
‘representations’; c) Encoder and Decoder trained jointly
as Autoencoder; d) Encoder trained to fit ‘score’ part of
latent vector; e) Encoder trained with ‘manifold’ cost.
The two first steps (a,b) are trained as usual
adversarial networks. The Autoencoder cost function was
computed as a sum of logloss [42] of fingerprint part and
MSE of concentration parts and MSE was also used as a
regression cost function.
The code for the AAE implemented in this paper is
available at https://github.com/spoilt333/onco-aae.

internal research, providing services to the pharmaceutical
companies and identifying novel geroprotectors. The
authors have vested interest in demonstrating and
popularizing the successful applications of the deep learning
techniques for drug discovery and biomarker development.

FUNDING
The work of Arthur Kadurin was performed
according to the Russian Government Program of
Competitive Growth of Kazan Federal University and
partially supported by the Government of the Russian
Federation (grant 14.Z50.31.0030).
Insilico Medicine’s Pharma.AI project is supported
by a grant from the Life Extension Foundation 2016-LEFAA-INSIL.

REFERENCES
1.	 Munos BH, Chin WW. How to revive breakthrough
innovation in the pharmaceutical industry. Sci Transl Med.
2011; 3:89cm16.
2.	 Mignani S, Huber S, Tomás H, Rodrigues J, Majoral J-P.
Why and how have drug discovery strategies in pharma
changed? What are the new mindsets? Drug Discov Today.
2016; 21:239-49.
3.	 Kola I, Ismail K, John L. Opinion: Can the pharmaceutical
industry reduce attrition rates? Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2004;
3:711-6.
4.	 Thomas DW, Burns J, Audette J, Carrol A, Dow-Hygelund
C, Hay M. Clinical development success rates 2006-2015.
San Diego: Biomedtracker/Washington, DC: BIO/Bend:
Amplion; 2016.
5.	 Yu MJ. Druggable chemical space and enumerative
combinatorics. J Cheminform. Springer; 2013; 5:19.
6.	 Vanhaelen Q, Mamoshina P, Aliper AM, Artemov A,
Lezhnina K, Ozerov I, Labat I, Zhavoronkov A. Design
of efficient computational workflows for in silico drug
repurposing. Drug Discov Today. 2016;. doi: 10.1016/j.
drudis.2016.09.019.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank NVIDIA and Mark Berger
and Andrea de Souza personally for providing samples
of the Tesla K80 and early access to Titan X GPUs. We
would like to thank Franco Cortese of the Biogerontology
Research Foundation for suggestions and edits to the
manuscript, and Michael Palovich of GlaxoSmithKline
for the insightful advice and valuable comments.
Authors would also like to acknowledge the many
valuable biologically relevant and technical comments
from reviewers during all phases of review that
substantially improved the paper.

7.	 Oquab M, Bottou L, Laptev I, Sivic J. Learning and
Transferring Mid-level Image Representations Using
Convolutional Neural Networks. 2014 IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. IEEE; p.
1717-24.
8.	 Putin E, Mamoshina P, Aliper A, Korzinkin M, Moskalev A,
Kolosov A, Ostrovskiy A, Cantor C, Vijg J, Zhavoronkov
A. Deep biomarkers of human aging: Application of deep
neural networks to biomarker development. Aging (Albany,
NY). 2016; 8 :1021-33. doi: 10.18632/aging.100968.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

9.	 Aliper A, Plis S, Artemov A, Ulloa A, Mamoshina P,
Zhavoronkov A. Deep Learning Applications for Predicting
Pharmacological Properties of Drugs and Drug Repurposing
Using Transcriptomic Data. Mol Pharm. 2016; 13:2524-30.

The authors are affiliated with Insilico Medicine,
Inc, which is applying deep learning techniques, including
generative adversarial networks to drug discovery for
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10888

Oncotarget

10.	 Mamoshina P, Polina M, Armando V, Evgeny P, Alex Z.
Applications of Deep Learning in Biomedicine. Mol Pharm.
2016; 13:1445-54.

24.	 Shoemaker RH. The NCI60 human tumour cell line
anticancer drug screen. Nat Rev Cancer. 2006; 6:813-23.
25.	 Kim S, Thiessen PA, Bolton EE, Chen J, Fu G, Gindulyte
A, Han L, He J, He S, Shoemaker BA, Wang J, Yu B, Zhang
J, et al. PubChem Substance and Compound databases.
Nucleic Acids Res. 2016; 44:D1202-13.

11.	 Krizhevsky, A, Sutskever, I, Hinton, G. ImageNet
classification with deep convolutional neural networks.
NIPS’2012.
12.	 Hinton G, Deng L, Yu D, Dahl G, Mohamed A-R, Jaitly N,
Senior A, Vanhoucke V, Nguyen P, Sainath T, Kingsbury B.
Deep Neural Networks for Acoustic Modeling in Speech
Recognition: The Shared Views of Four Research Groups.
IEEE Signal Process Mag. 29:82-97.

26.	 Wang Y, Suzek T, Zhang J, Wang J, He S, Cheng T,
Shoemaker BA, Gindulyte A, Bryant SH. PubChem
BioAssay: 2014 update. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013;
42:D1075-82.
27.	 Lezhnina K, Kovalchuk O, Zhavoronkov AA, Korzinkin
MB, Zabolotneva AA, Shegay PV, Sokov DG, Gaifullin
NM, Rusakov IG, Aliper AM, Roumiantsev SA, Alekseev
BY, Borisov NM, et al. Novel robust biomarkers for human
bladder cancer based on activation of intracellular signaling
pathways. Oncotarget. 2014; 5:9022-32. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.2493.

13.	 Huanhuan M, Yue Z. Classification of Electrocardiogram
Signals with Deep Belief Networks. 2014 IEEE 17th
International Conference on Computational Science and
Engineering. IEEE; p. 7-12.
14.	 Jarrett K, Kavukcuoglu K, Ranzato MA, LeCun Y. What
is the best multi-stage architecture for object recognition?
2009 IEEE 12th International Conference on Computer
Vision. IEEE; p. 2146-53.

28.	 Ozerov IV, Lezhnina KV, Izumchenko E, Artemov AV,
Medintsev S, Vanhaelen Q, Aliper A, Vijg J, Osipov AN,
Labat I, West MD, Buzdin A, Cantor CR, et al. In silico
Pathway Activation Network Decomposition Analysis
(iPANDA) as a method for biomarker development. Nat
Commun. 2016; 7:13427.

15.	 Goodfellow IJ, Warde-Farley D, Mirza M, Courville A,
Bengio Y. Maxout Networks. arXiv:1302.4389v4 [stat.
ML]. 2013.
16.	 Denton, Emily L., Soumith Chintala, Rob Fergus. Deep
Generative Image Models using a￼ Laplacian Pyramid of
Adversarial Networks. Adv Neural Inf Process Syst. 2015;
: 1486-94.

29.	 Zhu Q, Izumchenko E, Aliper AM, Makarev E, Paz K,
Buzdin AA, Zhavoronkov AA, Sidransky D. Pathway
activation strength is a novel independent prognostic
biomarker for cetuximab sensitivity in colorectal cancer
patients. Hum Genome Var. 2015; 2:15009.

17.	 van den Oord Matthias Bethge LTA. A note on the
evaluation of the generative models. arXiv:1511.01844v3
[stat.ML]. 2016.

30.	 Mitchell JBO. Machine learning methods in
chemoinformatics. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Comput Mol Sci.
2014; 4:468-81.

18.	 Goodfellow, Ian, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing
Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville,
Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. Adv Neural
Inf Process Syst. 2014; : 2672-80.

31.	 Lusci A, Pollastri G, Baldi P. Deep architectures and deep
learning in chemoinformatics: the prediction of aqueous
solubility for drug-like molecules. J Chem Inf Model. 2013;
53:1563-75.

19.	 Daniel Jiwoong Im, Chris Dongjoo Kim, Hui Jiang, Roland
Memisevic. Generating images with recurrent adversarial
Networks. arXiv:1602.05110v4 [cs.LG]. 2016.

32.	 David Duvenaud, Dougal Maclaurin, Jorge AguileraIparraguirre Rafael Gomez-Bombarelli, Timothy Hirzel,
Alan Aspuru-Guzik, Ryan P. Adams. Convolutional
Networks on Graphs for Learning Molecular Fingerprints.
arXiv:1509.09292v2 [cs.LG]. 2015.

20.	 Costello JC, Heiser LM, Georgii E, Gönen M, Menden
MP, Wang NJ, Bansal M, Ammad-ud-din M, Hintsanen P,
Khan SA, Mpindi J-P, Kallioniemi O, Honkela A, et al. A
community effort to assess and improve drug sensitivity
prediction algorithms. Nat Biotechnol. 2014; 32: 1202-12.

33.	 Steven Kearnes, Kevin McCloskey, Marc Berndl, Vijay
Pande, Patrick Riley. Molecular Graph Convolutions:
Moving Beyond Fingerprints. arXiv:1603.00856v3 [stat.
ML]. 2016.

21.	 Azuaje F. Computational models for predicting drug
responses in cancer research. Brief Bioinform. 2016; doi:
10.1093/bib/bbw065.

34.	 Gfeller D, Grosdidier A, Wirth M, Daina A, Michielin O,
Zoete V. SwissTargetPrediction: a web server for target
prediction of bioactive small molecules. Nucleic Acids Res.
2014; 42:W32-8.

22.	 Barretina J, Caponigro G, Stransky N, Venkatesan K,
Margolin AA, Kim S, Wilson CJ, Lehár J, Kryukov GV,
Sonkin D, Reddy A, Liu M, Murray L, et al. The Cancer
Cell Line Encyclopedia enables predictive modelling of
anticancer drug sensitivity. Nature. 2012; 483:603-7.

35.	 Mervin LH, Afzal AM, Drakakis G, Lewis R, Engkvist O,
Bender A. Target prediction utilising negative bioactivity
data covering large chemical space. J Cheminform. 2015;
7:51.

23.	 Garnett MJ, Edelman EJ, Heidorn SJ, Greenman CD, Dastur
A, Lau KW, Greninger P, Thompson IR, Luo X, Soares J,
Liu Q, Iorio F, Surdez D, et al. Systematic identification of
genomic markers of drug sensitivity in cancer cells. Nature.
2012; 483:570-5.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36.	 Izharwallach Michael Dzamba. AtomNet: A Deep
Convolutional Neural Network for Bioactivity Prediction
10889

Oncotarget

in Structure-based Drug Discovery. arXiv:1510.02855v1
[cs.LG]. 2015.

40.	 O’Boyle NM, Banck M, James CA, Morley C,
Vandermeersch T, Hutchison GR. Open Babel: An open
chemical toolbox. J Cheminform. 2011; 3:33.

37.	 George E. Dahl, Navdeep Jaitly, Ruslan Salakhutdinov.
Multi-task Neural Networks for QSAR Predictions.
arXiv:1406.1231v1 [stat.ML]. 2014.

41.	 Alireza Makhzani, Jonathon Shlens, Navdeep Jaitly, Ian
Goodfellow, Brendan Frey. Adversarial Autoencoders.
arXiv:1511.05644v2 [cs.LG]. 2016.

38.	 Thomas Unterthiner, Andreas Mayr, Günter Klambauer,
Sepp Hochreiter. Toxicity Prediction using Deep Learning.
arXiv:1503.01445v1 [stat.ML]. 2015.

42.	 Bishop C. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning.
Springer-Verlag New York; 2006.

39.	 Ma J, Sheridan RP, Liaw A, Dahl GE, Svetnik V. Deep
neural nets as a method for quantitative structure-activity
relationships. J Chem Inf Model. 2015; 55:263-74.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10890

Oncotarget

