www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2017, Vol. 8, (No. 12), pp: 18680-18698
Research Paper: Pathology

Quantification of HER2 and estrogen receptor heterogeneity
in breast cancer by single-molecule RNA fluorescence in situ
hybridization
Laura Annaratone1, Michele Simonetti2,*, Erik Wernersson2,*, Caterina Marchiò1,3,
Silvano Garnerone2, Maria Stella Scalzo1, Magda Bienko2, Roberto Chiarle4,5, Anna
Sapino1,6 and Nicola Crosetto2
1

Department of Medical Sciences, University of Turin, Turin, Italy

2

Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Science for Life Laboratory, Division of Translational Medicine and
Chemical Biology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden
3

Department of Laboratory Medicine, Pathology Unit, Azienda Ospedaliera Città della Salute e della Scienza di Torino, Turin,
Italy
4

Department of Pathology, Boston Children’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA

5

Department of Molecular Biotechnology and Health Sciences, University of Turin, Turin, Italy

6

Candiolo Cancer Institute, FPO, IRCCS, Candiolo, Italy

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Nicola Crosetto, email: nicola.crosetto@scilifelab.se
Correspondence to: Roberto Chiarle, email: roberto.chiarle@childrens.harvard.edu
Correspondence to: Anna Sapino, email: anna.sapino@unito.it
Keywords: single-molecule RNA FISH (smFISH); breast cancer; intra-tumor heterogeneity; epidermal growth factor receptor 2
(HER2); estrogen receptor 1 (ER); Pathology Section
Received: July 13, 2016	

Accepted: February 06, 2017	

Published: February 25, 2017

ABSTRACT
Intra-tumor heterogeneity is a pervasive property of human cancers that poses a
major clinical challenge. Here, we describe the characterization, at the transcriptional
level, of the intra-tumor topography of two prominent breast cancer biomarkers and
drug targets, epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) and estrogen receptor 1 (ER)
in 49 archival breast cancer samples. We developed a protocol for single-molecule
RNA FISH in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue sections (FFPE-smFISH), which
enabled us to simultaneously detect and perform absolute quantification of HER2 and
ER mature transcripts in single cells and multiple tumor regions. We benchmarked
our method with standard diagnostic techniques, demonstrating that FFPE-smFISH is
able to correctly classify breast cancers into well-established molecular subgroups.
By counting transcripts in thousands of single cells, we identified different expression
modes and levels of inter-cellular variability. In samples expressing both HER2 and
ER, many cells co-expressed both genes, although expression levels were typically
uncorrelated. Finally, we applied diversity metrics from the field of ecology to
assess the intra-tumor topography of HER2 and ER gene expression, revealing that
the spatial distribution of these key biomarkers can vary substantially even among
breast cancers of the same subtype. Our results demonstrate that FFPE-smFISH is
a reliable diagnostic assay and a powerful method for quantification of intra-tumor
transcriptional heterogeneity of selected biomarkers in clinical samples.

INTRODUCTION

epigenetic, and phenotypic level [1]. From the clinical
standpoint, ITH of actionable mutations and more
generally of any type of molecular biomarker is a major
challenge, as the fraction of tumor cells expressing the

Intra-tumor heterogeneity (ITH) is a hallmark
of human cancers that manifests itself at the genetic,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

18680

Oncotarget

immunoglobulin gene expression in follicular lymphoma
cell lines [14]. However, application of smFISH to
clinical tissue samples, including formalin-fixed, paraffinembedded (FFPE) specimens, has been so far very limited.
Moreover, a direct and rigorous comparison of smFISH
with routine diagnostic methods has not been done yet.
Here, we developed and validated a robust protocol for
smFISH in FFPE breast cancer tissue sections (FFPEsmFISH), and applied it to quantify transcriptional ITH
and to perform spatial analysis, at single-cell level, of the
two most clinically relevant breast cancer biomarkers:
epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) and estrogen
receptor 1 (ER).

Table 1: Patient characteristics.
Age at diagnosis (Years)
Number of cases (%)
<40
0 (0%)
40-50
2 (4.1%)
51-70
30 (61.2%)
>70
17 (34.7%)
Sex
M
0 (0%)
F
49 (100%)
Surgery type
Mastectomy
20 (40.8%)
Conservative
29 (59.2%)
mutation or biomarker of interest and possibly their
geographical distribution within the tumor will influence
therapeutic response. Moreover, the spatial organization of
different subclones - and not only their number - is likely
to affect clinical outcome [2].
In the past few years, multi-region sequencing
[3] and single-cell sequencing [4] technologies have
revealed that ITH is prevalent in many cancer types.
An important limitation of these approaches, however,
is their intrinsic inability to provide information about
the spatial arrangement of different subclones and the
topography of cells expressing selected biomarkers. In
contrast, in spite of the typically much lower throughput
compared to sequencing technologies, in situ methods
such as fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) can
provide more robust quantitative information not only on
the abundance, but also on the location of selected DNA
and RNA targets inside their cellular and tissue context.
For example, combined DNA FISH and immunostaining
were used to study the spatial organization of different
subclones in breast cancer samples obtained before and
after neoadjuvant chemotherapy [5], and to compare
genetic and phenotypic ITH in breast cancer metastases
and matched primary lesions [6]. More recently, a novel
in situ method named STAR-FISH was successfully
applied, together with DNA FISH, to probe the temporal
and spatial heterogeneity of PIK3CA mutations and HER2
amplification in HER2-positive breast cancers treated
with neoadjuvant therapy [7]. On the RNA side, singlemolecule RNA FISH (smFISH) [8] and RNAscope [9]
have emerged as powerful methods enabling visualization,
precise localization, and enumeration of individual RNA
molecules within fixed cells and tissues (for a detailed
review of these two methods, see for example ref. [10]).
Padlock probes and rolling circle amplification have also
been used to visualize RNA molecules in fixed cells and
tissues [11]. Additionally, rolling circle amplification
was recently applied to quantify spatial ITH of clinically
relevant KRAS, EGFR and TP53 mutations in lung
cancer [12]. Recently, we applied smFISH to quantify
the intra-tumor transcriptional heterogeneity of the
oncogenic fusion gene, BCR-ABL, in chronic myeloid
leukemia [13], and to study the cell-to-cell variability of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

RESULTS
Development of a HER2 and ER FFPE-smFISH
assay for nascent and mature transcripts
In smFISH, individual transcripts are targeted by
probes consisting of pools of 20 nucleotides (nt)-long
complementary oligonucleotides, each conjugated to a
single fluorophore, and are detected under a wide-field
epifluorescence microscope as bright diffraction-limited
spots that can be precisely enumerated and localized inside
single cells (Figure 1A). In order to design smFISH probes
targeting all the main isoforms of human HER2 and ER
genes, we took advantage of our recently developed probe
database that covers all the protein-coding transcripts
annotated in Ensembl (see www.fusefish.eu [13]). We
managed to cover each transcript with at least 48 oligos,
which is sufficient to yield a robust smFISH signal, as
previously demonstrated [8]. A full list of oligo sequences
is available in Supplementary Table 1. Initially, we only
applied standard deparaffinization of the FFPE tissue
sections before performing smFISH. However, high
background autofluorescence prevented robust smFISH
signal detection (data not shown). After several trials, we
identified an optimal pre-hybridization sample processing
procedure that includes a post-fixation step in methanolacetic acid, and two RNA retrieval steps to partially
reverse cross-links and ensure target accessibility. In
addition, we included an autofluorescence-quenching step
in sodium borohydride, which was previously applied to
detect nascent mRNAs in prostate cancer FFPE biopsies
[15]. A step-by-step FFPE-smFISH protocol is provided in
Supplementary Information.
We applied our optimized FFPE-smFISH protocol to
49 archival specimens of invasive breast cancer in which
the HER2 and ER status had been thoroughly assessed
by standard methods. Patients were all females, mostly
post-menopausal (95.9% > 50 year-old) and treated with
conservative surgery (59.2%, Table 1). Tumors were
predominantly invasive ductal carcinomas (79.6%) of
18681

Oncotarget

largely absent in stromal regions, as exemplified in Figure
1B, and as it can be appreciated by visualizing all the
images in the freely accessible supporting website, http://
tumorheterogeneity.eu/.
To further confirm that HER2 and ER smFISH
signals overlap with tumor regions, we applied to selected
cases a new pipeline, which we recently developed in
our lab (unpublished data) that enables registration of
smFISH images acquired at high magnification (100X)
onto a large-field (up to 2 x 2 cm) scan of the same tissue
section stained with H&E after smFISH, and imaged at
low magnification (10X) (http://tumorheterogeneity.eu/
and Materials and Methods). We managed to detect HER2
and ER transcripts in FFPE blocks as old as 3 years, and
in FFPE tissue sections mounted on microscope slides and
stored at room temperature up to 4 years, suggesting that
FFPE-smFISH might be a robust method for biomarker
analysis even in old archival samples.

Table 2: Histological and molecular characteristics of
tumors analyzed.
Histologic type
Number of cases (%)
IDC
39 (79.6%)
ILC
7 (14.3%)
Others
3 (6.1%)
Histologic grade
1
11 (22.4%)
2
14 (28.6%)
3
23 (47%)
Undetermined
1 (2%)
ER status
0
12 (24.5%)
>1%
37 (75.5%)
HER2 status
IHC score DNA FISH
Not Amp
10 (20.4%)
0
Amp
0 (0%)
Not Amp
7 (14.3%)
1+
Amp
0 (0%)
Not Amp
10 (20.4%)
2+
Amp
7 (14.3%)
Not Amp
0 (0%)
3+
Amp
15 (30.6%)
Ki67 score
> 14%
35 (71.4%)
< 14%
14 (28.6%)
Molecular Subtype
LumA
10 (20.4%)
LumB/HER2-neg
12 (24.5%)
LumB/HER2-pos
15 (30.6%)
Triple-neg
5 (10.2%)
HER2
7 (14.3%)

FFPE-smFISH scoring
We sought to develop a fast and robust scoring
approach to quantify HER2 and ER smFISH signals,
which would be easy to apply in the diagnostic setting.
For this purpose, we segmented each 1,024 x 1,024 px
image (1 px = 125 nm) with a regular grid of squared
pseudo-cells, and defined as smFISH score the mean
density of each transcript inside all the pseudo-cells of a
given case. To choose the size of the pseudo-cells, we first
segmented individual cells by using the boundary of nuclei
stained with 4’,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) as a
reference. In order to account for transcripts localized in
the cytoplasm, we uniformly dilated the margins of the
segmented nuclei by a constant length (Materials and
Methods).
We first tested the reproducibility of the singlecell segmentation approach by segmenting DAPI-stained
nuclei in three replica samples of three different cell lines
expressing variable levels of HER2 (Supplementary
Figure 1A). We then manually segmented 38,191 cells
(1,060 ± 699 cells per case, mean ± s.d.) in 36 out of the
49 cases. On average, we analyzed 57 images per case
(57 ± 11, mean ± s.d.) and segmented 19 cells per image
(19 ± 10, mean ± s.d., Supplementary Table 2). Next,
we computed the area of the segmented cells at different
nucleus dilation lengths, and selected different pseudo-cell
sizes so that the area of the pseudo-cells overlaps with the
interquartile range of the area of the segmented cells at
different dilation lengths (Supplementary Figure 1B). We
calculated the Spearman correlation between differently
sized pseudo-cells and nucleus dilation lengths using four
different thresholds of the number of smFISH dots per
pseudo- or segmented cell (≥ 0, 1, 2, 3). Both in the case
of HER2 and ER, we observed a very strong correlation
(Spearman ρ > 0.9 for HER2 and ρ > 0.85 for ER, P <
0.001) between the smFISH scores calculated based on

IDC, invasive ductal carcinoma. ILC, invasive
lobular carcinoma. ER, estrogen receptor. IHC,
immunohistochemistry. FISH, fluorescence in situ
hybridization.
high histological grade (47% grade 3) and ER-positive
(75.5%). 44.9% of cases were HER2-positive based on
immunohistochemistry (IHC) and DNA FISH (Table 2).
In each sample, we simultaneously imaged
HER2 and ER mature and nascent transcripts at high
magnification (100X objective) in at least 32 regions
(range: 32-79) inside macroscopic tumor areas that
a pathologist had previously marked in an adjacent
hematoxylin-eosin (H&E) stained section (Figure 1B and
Supplementary Table 2). Individual transcripts appeared
as bright diffraction-limited spots that could be identified
and counted in an automated manner (Figure 1C and 1D,
and Materials and Methods). Importantly, HER2 and
ER transcripts were localized within regions containing
many nuclei displaying morphologic features of cancer
cells (as confirmed by a pathologist), while they were
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

18682

Oncotarget

that the pseudo-cell segmentation approach is a robust
method to score smFISH signals that, while retaining
information about inter-regional differences, is much
faster than single-cell segmentation and is therefore ideal
in the diagnostic setting.

pseudo- vs. segmented cells (Supplementary Figure 1C and
1D). In addition, we developed a segmentation algorithm
that uses the spatial distribution of DAPI intensity to find
cell-containing regions inside each image (Supplementary
Figure 1E and Materials and Methods). As for segmented
cells, we found a very strong correlation (Spearman ρ >
0.95 for HER2 and ρ > 0.84 for ER, P < 0.001) between
the mRNA density per pseudo-cell and the density inside
the regions identified by our algorithm (Supplementary
Figure 1F and 1G). Altogether, these results demonstrate

Assay validation and reproducibility
Next, we aimed to systematically validate our
method and assess its reproducibility. First, we determined

Figure 1: FFPE-smFISH. A. Scheme of smFISH. A pool of usually 30-50 oligos, each of 20 nucleotides (nt) length and labeled with a

single fluorophore (red), is hybridized in situ to a complementary target RNA (gray line). As a rule of thumb, a transcript that can be targeted
with at least 20 oligos can be detected by smFISH. B. Example of HER2 (cyan) and ER (red) mRNA detection in a FFPE breast cancer
tissue section. Each spot corresponds to a diffraction-limited fluorescent signal that is generated upon binding of the fluorescently labeled
oligos forming the smFISH probe to their target. Gray, DAPI-stained nuclei. The white dashed lines mark the boundary between tumor and
stroma. Tumor regions are typically characterized by a high density of large nuclei with peripheral chromatin, whereas the nuclear density
is much lower in stromal areas. (C-D) Magnification of the region encircled by the white square in B. C. HER2 transcripts (cyan dots). D.
ER transcripts (red dots). The yellow circles mark individual mRNA molecules automatically identified by our custom software.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

18683

Oncotarget

which pseudo-cell size and threshold combination gives
the best diagnostic performance, by applying the Receiver
Operating Characteristic (ROC) method [16] to compare
the pseudo-cell based scores with the IHC and DNA FISH
scores determined for the same samples according to the
ASCO/CAP guidelines [17] (Materials and Methods). For
HER2, the highest diagnostic performance values (AUC
> 0.90) were obtained with a threshold of 2-3 dots per

pseudo-cell (Figure 2A). In the case of ER, the diagnostic
performance was slightly lower (this could be explained
by the low ER positivity threshold used to score IHC
results, see Materials and Methods), with the highest AUC
values ( > 0.85) obtained with a threshold of 1 dot per
pseudo-cell (Figure 2B). A grid of 13 x 13 pseudo-cells
and a threshold of 3 dots per pseudo-cell for HER2 and
1 dot per pseudo-cell for ER maximized the following

Figure 2: Diagnostic performance of HER2 and ER FFPE-smFISH. A. Heatmap showing different values of the HER2 area

under the curve (AUC) obtained for different pseudo-cell sizes and thresholds of the number of mRNA dots per cell based on the ROC
curve method (see Materials and Methods). Cyan box, pseudo-cell and threshold combination yielding the HER2 ROC curve shown in C.,
and used in all subsequent pseudo-cell analyses. B. Same as in A., but for ER. Red box, pseudo-cell and threshold combination yielding the
ER ROC curve shown in C., and used in all subsequent pseudo-cell analyses. C. Diagnostic performance of HER2 and ER FFPE-smFISH
obtained with the pseudo-cell size and threshold combinations indicated by the cyan and red boxes in A. and B., respectively. D. Mean
HER2 transcript density in tumors categorized as HER2-positive or negative based on IHC and DNA FISH. E. Mean ER transcript density
in tumors categorized as ER-positive or negative based on IHC. Each dot in D. and E. corresponds to the mean pseudo-cell transcript
density in one of the 49 analyzed cases. Horizontal black bars represent the mean of all cases in the corresponding group. P values were
obtained with the Mann-Whitney test (two-tailed).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

18684

Oncotarget

three parameters: 1) area of pseudo- vs. segmented cells;
2) Spearman correlation coefficient of the mean transcript
density in pseudo- vs. segmented cells; and 3) diagnostic
performance assessed by the ROC method (Figure 2C).
Hence, we used these settings in all subsequent analyses
based on pseudo-cells.
According to current guidelines, patients with
IHC 3+ score and patients with IHC 2+ score and HER2
amplification confirmed by DNA FISH are considered
HER2-positive and thus eligible to anti-HER2 therapy
[17]. We observed that the amount of HER2 smFISH
signals increased with the IHC score, with the highest
expression observed in 3+ samples (Supplementary Figure
2A). Accordingly, the mean HER2 transcript density
per pseudo-cell determined by FFPE-smFISH (HER2
FFPE-smFISH score) was significantly higher in positive
samples (mean = 0.13 vs. 0.04 dots/µm3, Mann-Whitney
test, P < 0.001, Figure 2D). Of note, one case (case 21) in
the positive group had a very low smFISH score (0.024
dots/µm3) confirmed by the three replicate experiments,
while ER was expressed in the same case, ruling our RNA
degradation. Accordingly, repetition of HER2 IHC in the
same sample and re-evaluation of the data by a pathologist
revealed a heterogeneous IHC 2+ score with borderline
DNA FISH positivity, placing this case rather in the
negative group (Supplementary Table 3). We also observed
that the mean HER2 score was significantly higher in
the IHC 3+ group as compared to the IHC 2+ amplified
group (mean HER2 score = 0.15 vs. 0.07 dots/µm3, MannWhitney test, P = 0.0021, Supplementary Figure 2B).
Although patients in these two tumor groups are currently
treated with the same anti-HER2 therapy regimens, it is
possible that tumors with higher HER2 mRNA levels
as detected by smFISH might respond better to HER2targeted therapy. In line with this, a significant association
between the level of HER2 amplification detected by DNA
FISH and overall survival was recently described [18],
suggesting that scoring HER2 on a continuous scale might
be better than categorical scoring. For 6 selected cases for
which additional sections were available, an independent
experimenter, in a different laboratory and using a
different microscope setup (Materials and Methods)
successfully replicated the inter-sample differences
observed in our initial screening, demonstrating the
reproducibility of our assay (Supplementary Figure 2C).
Furthermore, we compared smFISH with an independent
RNA-based method - reverse transcription quantitative
PCR (RT-PCR) - obtaining a good correlation between
the two measurements (Spearman ρ = 0.75, P = 0.06,
Supplementary Figure 2D and Materials and Methods).
Notably, comparison of the clinical samples with the
SKBR3 breast cancer cell line, both by smFISH and RTPCR, demonstrated that, while smFISH has a relatively
broad dynamic range and is capable of detecting high
mRNA levels, the expression of HER2 in breast cancer
cell lines might not reflect the actual transcript abundance
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

in clinical samples, similarly to what we previously
observed for the oncogenic fusion transcript, BCR-ABL1,
in chronic myeloid leukemia clinical samples and cell
lines [13].
In analogy to HER2, the mean ER transcript density
per pseudo-cell determined by FFPE-smFISH (ER FFPEsmFISH score) was on average significantly higher in
tumors scored positive by IHC (mean ER score = 0.04
vs. 0.02 dots/µm3, Mann-Whitney test, P < 0.001, Figure
2E). However, many tumors expressed mRNA levels
comparable to the negative group (Figure 2E), which
might at least in part depend on the criteria used for
scoring samples as positive and/or on the antibody used for
IHC (Materials and Methods). Another possibility is that
some of the cases scored positive by IHC express shorter
ER isoforms [19, 20] so that a smaller number of smFISH
oligos can actually hybridize to the target compared to the
full-length ER mRNA, thus resulting in a weaker signal.
Next, we examined if the HER2 and ER FFPEsmFISH scores correlate with the molecular subtype,
which was surrogated using the results of IHC markers
as described in Materials and Methods. In the case of
HER2, Luminal A, Luminal B/HER2-negative, and triplenegative subtypes had low expression levels (mean HER2
score = 0.047, 0.044, and 0.031 dots/µm3, respectively),
whereas the Luminal B/HER2-positive and HER2 groups
had higher scores. The HER2-positive subtype expressed
significantly higher levels in comparison to the Luminal B/
HER2-positive subtype (mean HER2 score = 0.17 vs. 0.11
dots/µm3, Mann-Whitney test, P = 0.05, Supplementary
Figure 3A). In the case of ER, as expected HER2-positive
and triple-negative subtypes had the lowest ER scores
(mean ER score = 0.02 and 0.01 dots/µm3, respectively),
whereas Luminal A and Luminal B/HER2-positive
samples had the highest scores (mean ER score = 0.042
and 0.044 dots/µm3, respectively). Two tumors in the
latter group had an ER score three times higher than the
mean score of all the cases in the same group (0.12 vs.
0.04 dots/µm3) although the IHC scores were comparable
(Supplementary Figure 3B and Supplementary Table 3).
To further validate our approach, we compared
HER2 FFPE-smFISH with three other methods that can
assess the HER2 status in clinical breast cancer samples:
DNA FISH, Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe
Amplification (MLPA) [21] and Proximity Ligation Assay
(PLA) [22]. In line with our previous observations [23],
we found a positive correlation between the HER2 DNA
copy number assessed by either DNA FISH (Spearman ρ
= 0.79, P < 0.0001, Supplementary Figure 3C) or MLPA
(Spearman ρ = 0.81, P < 0.0001, Supplementary Figure
3D) and HER2 mRNA levels. A weaker, but statistically
significant correlation was also observed between RNA
levels and protein levels determined by PLA (Spearman
ρ = 0.63, P < 0.0001, Supplementary Figure 3E). Overall,
these results demonstrate that pseudo-cell transcript
densities measured by FFPE-smFISH are a robust metric
18685

Oncotarget

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

18686

Oncotarget

Figure 3: HER2 and ER gene expression in single cells. A. Distribution of the HER2 mRNA density per cell in 36 segmented

cases grouped by molecular subtype. The number in each box indicates the case ID (see Supplementary Table 3). B. Same as in A., but
for ER. C. Representative spatial HER2 mRNA patterns in selected cases belonging to the HER2-positive or Luminal B/HER2-positive
molecular subtype. For each case, we randomly selected 36 images and plotted all the cells segmented in each image (nucleus expansion
margin = 20 px; threshold = 0 dots/cell) as polygons filled with a different color depending on the mRNA density in the cell. Finally, we
arranged the plots in a 9 x 4 matrix plot, as shown here. Therefore, adjacent plots in the matrix must not be interpreted as coming from
physically adjacent regions in the tumor. The histogram on top of each matrix shows the distribution of mRNA density among all the
cells in the case, independently of their location (same as in A. and B.). The number above each histogram represents the case ID (see
Supplementary Table 3). The color bar on the right shows the colors encoding for the mRNA density in each cell. D. Same as in C., but for
ER. Similar maps for all the 36 segmented cases can be browsed on the supporting website, http://tumorheterogeneity.eu/.

Single-cell analysis of HER2 and ER expression

of HER2 and ER abundance that may be implemented in
routine clinical breast cancer diagnostics.

We then asked whether FFPE-smFISH is a
valid method to assess the intra-tumor transcriptional
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

18687

Oncotarget

heterogeneity of HER2 and ER. For this purpose, we first
analyzed in detail the data obtained from the single-cell
segmentation approach described above (Supplementary
Figure 1B). The distribution of pairwise distances between
all segmented cells in each image was similar in all the
segmented cases (coefficient of variation of the means
= 4%), indicating that the manual segmentation was
performed homogeneously (Supplementary Figure 4A).
We observed that in triple-negative, HER2-positive, and
Luminal B/HER2-positive tumors the nuclei were on
average slightly, but significantly larger in comparison
to Luminal A and Luminal B/HER2-negative samples
(75.47 vs. 63.84 µm2, Mann-Whitney test, P = 0.019,
Supplementary Figure 4B), possibly reflecting the
difference in biological and clinical aggressiveness
between these subtypes. Next, we again applied ROC
analysis in order to choose the nucleus expansion margin
and threshold of dots per cell to apply in subsequent
analyses. As shown in Supplementary Figure 4C-E, an
expansion margin of 20 px (2.5 μm) and a threshold of
0 dots per cell in the case of HER2 and 1 dot per cell in
the case of ER, gave the highest diagnostic performance.
Thus, we used these settings in all subsequent single-cell
analyses.

Next, we plotted the single-cell distribution of
HER2 and ER expression in all the segmented tumors
grouped according to their molecular subtype (Figure
3A-B). As expected, HER2 was very lowly expressed
in triple-negative, as well as in most Luminal B/HER2negative tumors (HER2 score ≤ 0.05 dots/µm3). However,
two cases in the latter group (case 14 and 37) featured
a small sub-population of highly expressing cells (~5%
of cells with HER2 score ≥ 0.3 dots/µm3) coexisting with
a much larger population of lowly expressing cells ( >
50% of cells with HER2 score ≤ 0.05 dots/µm3) despite
the fact that these tumors were diagnosed as HER2negative by IHC. Indeed, re-evaluation of the IHC data by
a pathologist identified two different populations of tumor
cells (30% of cells with HER2 score 2+ and 70% with
score 1+ in case 14, see Supplementary Table 3). Among
Luminal A tumors, case 5 had a small fraction of highexpressing cells (~5% of cells with HER2 score ≥ 0.3
dots/µm3), while the majority of cells in case 40 expressed
HER2 at levels similar to the HER2-positive cases (~50%
of cells with HER2 score ≥ 0.2 dots/µm3). In some cases
(case 8, 9, and 18) we observed a clear transcriptionally
‘off’ population of cells ( > 30% of cells with HER2 score
≤ 0.05 dots/µm3) together with an ‘on’ population of cells

Figure 4: Single-cell correlation between HER2 and ER mRNA density in all the 36 segmented tumors grouped by
molecular subtype. Each dot in the scatter plots represents a single cell. ρ, Spearman correlation. P values were obtained with the
Student’s t test (two-tailed).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

18688

Oncotarget

expressing higher levels of HER2 mRNA (HER2 score
≥ 0.2 dots/µm3). In the case of ER, ER mRNA was, as
expected, almost undetectable in the triple-negative and
HER2-positive tumors analyzed (ER score ≤ 0.05 dots/
µm3). However, single-cell expression levels were also
markedly low in one Luminal A (case 40, 100% of cells
with ER score ≤ 0.05 dots/µm3), as well as in several
Luminal B tumors (case 2, 18, 29, 33, 38, 42, and 43, >
95% of cells with ER score ≤ 0.05 dots/µm3). In some
cases, cells expressing low ER levels coexisted with cells
expressing moderate-to-high levels (ER score ≥ 0.2 dots/
µm3), while some tumors (case 5, 31, and 44) showed
one transcriptionally ‘off’ population of cells ( > 50% of
cells with ER score ≤ 0.05 dots/µm3) together with an ‘on’

population of cells expressing higher levels of ER mRNA
(ER score ≥ 0.1 dots/µm3), which was also detected at the
protein level by careful re-evaluation of the IHC images
by a pathologist (Supplementary Table 3).
To further investigate our sample cohort at the
single-cell level, we used heatmap plots to visualize
the spatial distribution of the density of HER2 and ER
transcripts in the segmented cells inside each field of view
(Figure 3C and 3D and http://tumorheterogeneity.eu/).
To quantify the inter-regional variability of the spatial
distribution of transcript densities (i.e., the difference
between all the fields of view in a tumor), we computed
the mean transcript density per cell per field of view in
HER2-positive (for HER2) and ER-positive (for ER)

Figure 5: Spatial heterogeneity of HER2 and ER gene expression. A. Coefficient of variation (CV) of HER2 and ER local

diversity scores calculated for each field of view in HER2-positive and ER-positive cases, respectively (in the HER2 group case 21 was
excluded due to the low number of tumor regions that were imaged). Each dot represents the CV of the vector of local diversity index values
obtained for all the fields of view of each case. Horizontal black bars represent the mean of all cases in the corresponding group. The P
value was obtained with the Mann-Whitney test (two-tailed). B. Waterfall plot of the Spearman correlation between the difference in HER2
mRNA density and the Euclidean distance separating two pseudo-cells in the same field of view in HER2-positive cases. D. Same as in C.,
but for ER. The asterisks indicate statistically significant correlations (P < 0.05, Student’s t test, two-tailed).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

18689

Oncotarget

tumors. On average, the inter-regional variability was
higher in the case of ER than HER2 (mean coefficient of
variation = 0.84 vs. 0.44, Mann-Whitney test, P < 0.0001,
Supplementary Figure 5A). Interestingly, even in the
same molecular subtype, we observed different spatial
patterns, with some cases displaying homogeneously high
expression levels in all the fields of view (e.g., HER2
in case 16), other cases with an admixture of lowly and
highly expressing cells in all the images (e.g., HER2 in
case 4), and other cases with local homogeneity (either
low or high expression) and global heterogeneity (‘cold’
and ‘hot’ fields, see for example HER2 and ER in case
7). Notably, in some bimodal cases the ‘on’ and ‘off’
populations were spatially segregated (e.g., HER2 in
case 8 and ER in case 44), whereas in others there was
more promiscuity between ‘on’ and ‘off’ cells within the
same field of view (e.g., HER2 in case 18, and ER in
case 5 and 17) (Figure 3C and 3D). Importantly, careful
re-assessment of all the cases displaying bimodality
by a pathologist confirmed that these transcriptionally
silent cells are indeed localized inside tumor regions and
have a nuclear morphology compatible with tumor cells
(see corresponding images in the supporting website,
http://tumorheterogeneity.eu/), thus excluding that the
‘off’ populations observed come from stroma. We also
wondered whether in tumors with broad or bimodal
HER2 or ER expression we would detect a morphological
difference between cells expressing low versus high
transcript levels, following the recent observation that
tumors carrying a high mutational burden and high levels
of copy number alterations have on average larger nuclei
[24]. In the case of HER2, we found that highly expressing
cells had slightly, but statistically significantly larger
nuclei (68.31 vs. 65 µm2, Mann-Whitney test, P < 0.0001,
Supplementary Figure 5B), whereas we observed the
opposite for ER (62.60 vs. 65.17 µm2, Mann-Whitney test,
P = 0.0007, Supplementary Figure 5C). Altogether, these
results indicate that, although the average expression level
of HER2 and ER may be similar among breast cancers of
the same molecular subtype, the spatial distribution and
expression level of single tumor cells may substantially
vary, which in turn might influence responsiveness to
therapy.

we found no significant correlation between the HER2 and
ER expression levels in single cells (Spearman ρ < 0.1, P
> 0.05), in some cases there was a weak, but statistically
significant positive correlation (0.2 < ρ < 0.4, P < 0.05,
Figure 4). Interestingly, in the two Luminal A cases that
were found to express relatively high levels of HER2
mRNA (case 5 and 10, see Figure 3A), there was a small,
but clearly visible subpopulation of cells with positively
correlated levels of HER2 and ER mRNA (Spearman ρ
= 0.35, P = 10-24 for in case 5, and ρ = 0.21, P = 10-16 in
case 10, Figure 4). These results demonstrate the ability
of FFPE-smFISH to pinpoint differences in the population
structure of a tumor that might have important biological
and clinical consequences, but that would go undetected
with standard diagnostic techniques.

Intra-tumor topography of HER2 and ER
expression
We then sought to characterize the spatial
heterogeneity of HER2 and ER in a more systematic way.
For this purpose, we adapted several diversity metrics
that were previously applied to characterize genetic
ITH in breast cancer [5, 6]. First, we used the Shannon
entropy - a metric originally developed in information
theory and used, for example, to characterize the diversity
of species in an ecosystem - to compare how the HER2
and ER expression levels vary among all the pseudocells in the same field of view (local diversity index) or
in the whole tumor (global diversity index) (Materials
and Methods). The local diversity index indicates how
many different expression levels are detected inside each
imaged tumor region, whereas the global entropy reflects
how many different expression levels are overall present
in all the tumor regions analyzed. For both HER2 and
ER, the mean local and global diversity indexes were
positively correlated, but the local values were typically
higher (Supplementary Figure 6A-D). In the case of ER,
the global diversity was significantly lower than the mean
local diversity and more heterogeneous among different
cases (mean = 0.69 vs. 0.57, Mann-Whitney test, P =
0.0009, Supplementary Figure 6D). On average, the mean
local diversity was higher in the case of HER2 than for
ER (mean = 0.85 vs. 0.69, Supplementary Figure 6C and
6D), but interestingly the ER local diversity index was
significantly more variable from region to region of the
same tumor (mean coefficient of variation = 0.2 for ER vs.
0.08 for HER2, Mann-Whitney test, P < 0.0001, Figure
5A), possibly reflecting differences in the mutational or
dispersal rates of different sub-clones expressing various
levels of HER2 and ER. Molecular subtype HER2positive tumors had on average a significantly higher
local diversity compared to Luminal B/HER2-positive
tumors (mean = 0.87 vs. 0.84, Mann-Whitney test, P =
0.045, Supplementary Figure 6E), whereas there was no

Correlation between HER2 and ER transcript
levels in single cells
Clinical and laboratory evidence indicate that the
cross-talk between HER2 and ER signaling pathways has a
critical role in mediating the response to endocrine therapy
[25, 26]. Since smFISH allows simultaneous visualization
of two transcripts in the same cell, we checked whether
a co-dependency between HER2 and ER mRNA levels
could be detected and serve as a proxy of the crosstalk
between the two pathways. While in the majority of cases
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

18690

Oncotarget

significant difference in the ER local diversity among
different luminal subtypes (Supplementary Figure 6F).
We then analyzed the difference in mRNA levels
between adjacent pseudo-cells (Materials and Methods).
Both for HER2 and ER, the mean mRNA density per
pseudo-cell and the difference in transcript counts between
adjacent pseudo-cells were strongly positively correlated
(Spearman ρ = 0.86 for HER2 and ρ = 0.95 for ER, P <
0.0001, Supplementary Figure 7A-B). In both cases, we
also found a weaker, but statistically significant positive
correlation between the mean difference in transcript
levels among adjacent pseudo-cells and the average local
diversity index (Spearman ρ = 0.6, P = 0.0008 for HER2
and ρ = 0.7, P = 0.015 for ER, Supplementary Figure
7C-D). The HER2-positive subtype had a statistically
significantly higher average HER2 transcript absolute
difference between adjacent tumor pseudo-cells, in
comparison to Luminal B/HER2-positive tumors,
indicating a higher level of spatial heterogeneity (13.3 vs.
8.7, Mann-Whitney test, P = 0.04, Supplementary Figure
7E). In contrast, no significant difference was observed for
ER among different subtypes (Supplementary Figure 7F).
Lastly, we assessed how the difference in mRNA
expression scales with the physical distance separating
two cells, both using pseudo-cell and manually segmented
cell data (Materials and Methods). In the case of HER2,
we found that in most HER2-positive tumors there was
a slight, but statistically significant positive correlation
between local mRNA differences and physical distances
among cells (Figure 5B and Supplementary Figure 8AB). In contrast, ER-positive tumors comprised two
groups: in some tumors, the local inter-cellular difference
in ER transcript levels was positively correlated with the
physical distance separating two cells, whereas in other
tumors there was a weak, but statistically significant
inverse correlation between the two metrics (Figure 5C).
Overall, these data demonstrate that FFPE-smFISH is not
only a robust diagnostic assay for assessing the HER2
and ER status, but that unlike standard HER2 and ER
diagnostic methods, it can also be used to measure the
spatial organization of these two key biomarkers within
the tumor, yielding measures of spatial diversity that could
in turn be correlated with clinical outcome.

fluorophores instead of oligonucleotides with the use
of sodium borohydride to reduce fixative-dependent
autofluorescence, which is usually very high in clinical
FFPE samples. However, this approach was shown to
detect only native transcripts accumulated at the site of
transcription in cells undergoing so-called transcriptional
bursting [28], thus limiting a broader applicability. In
contrast, the FFPE-smFISH protocol described here is able
to detect both nascent as well as mature transcripts, and
features the following improvements: 1) smFISH probes
consist of single fluorescently labeled oligonucleotides
[8] rather that cDNA labeled with multiple fluorophores
(see also the scheme in Figure 1A), which provides more
versatility and specificity and is easier to implement; 2)
in addition to sodium borohydride, two RNA-retrieval
steps are used to minimize autofluorescence (see the
step-by-step FFPE-smFISH protocol in Supplementary
Information), enabling the detection not only of bright
transcription sites in the nucleus, but also of lower
intensity signals corresponding to mature RNA. We note
that although in this study we have produced HER2 and
ER smFISH probes as described in the original smFISH
method [8], more cost-effective and scalable probe
production methods are now available (our unpublished
data and [29, 30]). (These methods are designed to
produce target-specific primary oligos that carry one
or two genome-orthogonal sequence flap(s) to which a
secondary fluorescently labeled oligo is hybridized).
A distinguishing feature of FFPE-smFISH over
the methods that are routinely used for HER2 and ER
diagnostics, such as IHC, DNA FISH, and chromogenic
in situ hybridization (CISH), is that the signal generated
by smFISH (i.e., fluorescent dots) is digital rather
than analog. In IHC and CISH assays, the readout is a
continuous or color spectrum, for which an arbitrary
positivity threshold needs to be applied to discriminate
signal from background. The fact that thresholding is
very subjective challenges inter-laboratory and interoperator reproducibility. In contrast, smFISH generates
discrete, diffraction-limited fluorescence spots that can
be robustly and automatically counted. Moreover, in
contrast to DNA FISH which produces only a few signals
per cell, in smFISH a few up to hundreds of individual
RNA molecules per cell can be resolved, providing high
sensitivity and statistical power (ultimately, the resolution
depends on the number of transcripts and on the cell
volume. For highly expressed genes, such as ribosomal
RNA genes, it is not possible to resolve individual RNA
molecules, but the total fluorescence intensity can be used
as a proxy).
By imaging HER2 and ER transcripts in 49
archival breast cancer samples with HER2 and ER status
previously established by IHC and DNA FISH, and by
applying a simple and computationally efficient approach
to segment the images in a regular grid of pseudo-cells,
we demonstrate that FFPE-smFISH is able to accurately

DISCUSSION
We have developed and validated a robust singlemolecule RNA FISH protocol for the detection of both
mature and nascent RNA in FFPE tissue sections (FFPEsmFISH), and applied it to quantify the expression and
the intra-tumor spatial heterogeneity of two prominent
breast cancer biomarkers, HER2 and ER. Single-molecule
RNA visualization in FFPE tissue sections was previously
achieved in prostate cancer biopsies [15] by combining
the original single-molecule RNA FISH method [27] which uses cDNA-derived probes labeled with multiple
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

18691

Oncotarget

classify tumors belonging to different molecular subtypes,
and has an excellent diagnostic performance (best
AUC = 0.92 and 0.95 for HER2 and 0.86 and 0.90 for
ER using pseudo-cells and manually segmented cells,
respectively). Importantly, while the IHC and DNA
FISH scores currently used in the clinic are categorical
variables that provide limited information about intertumor heterogeneity, the FFPE-smFISH score (mRNA
density per pseudo-cell) is a continuous variable that
enables a more resolved patient stratification. Indeed, we
observed that tumors in each IHC or DNA FISH group had
considerable variability in HER2 and ER transcript levels.
Improved stratification might be very useful in particular
for the IHC 2+/DNA FISH-negative group, which is
currently not eligible for anti-HER2 targeted therapy. We
found that one tumor in this group had HER2 expression
levels similar to tumors in the IHC 2+/DNA FISH-positive
and IHC 3+ groups, suggesting that anti-HER2 therapy
might have been applicable. Conversely, several tumors
from patients in the IHC 2+/DNA FISH-positive group,
who received targeted therapy in agreement with current
guidelines [17], showed HER2 expression levels close to
those in the IHC 2+/DNA FISH-negative group, raising
the question whether some of these patients might have
been overtreated (Supplementary Figure 2B). In the future,
application of HER2 FFPE-smFISH to larger prospective
cohorts of samples will be fundamental to clarify the
clinical relevance of a more resolved IHC 2+ patient
stratification.
Another important advantage of FFPE-smFISH
over IHC or CISH is that, because DAPI-stained nuclei
are imaged together with RNA molecules and their
boundary is easy to segment, single-cell segmentation
can be readily performed for large numbers of cells
within the same tumor sample (in this study, we chose
to manually segment over 38,000 cells in order to
be maximally accurate in selecting only tumor cells.
However, automatic segmentation of DAPI-stained nuclei
is possible and technically less cumbersome and more
accurate compared to cell segmentation in H&E or IHC
images). This opens up a unique opportunity to quantify
transcriptional heterogeneity at the single-cell level and at
the same time explore the spatial organization of different
cell populations in the tumor ecosystem. Indeed, by
counting HER2 and ER transcripts in thousands of singlecells, we discovered that tumors belonging to the same
subtype may harbor different population structures, with
some tumors showing distinct transcriptionally ‘on’ and
‘off’ sub-populations. Notably, while in the case of ER
the observed bimodality was also detected at the protein
level after careful re-evaluation of the IHC images, in the
case of HER2 the coexistence of ‘on’ and ‘off’ populations
could not be detected at the protein level. This discrepancy
might be explained by the fact that the IHC signal is not
quantified on a continuous scale as the smFISH signal, or
alternatively by the fact that, while smFISH quantification
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

is done automatically on a large number of cells, IHC
quantification is performed by eye on a limited number
of cells. Alternatively, HER2 RNA levels might oscillate
due to transcriptional bursting [28], while protein levels
might be more stable. Furthermore, the ability to measure
HER2 and ER transcripts simultaneously in the same cell
gave us a unique opportunity to explore the crosstalk,
at the transcriptional level, between the HER2 and ER
pathways. We found no evidence of correlated HER2
and ER gene expression, except for two interesting cases
which harbored distinct tumor cell sub-populations,
including one with correlated HER2 and ER transcript
levels. In the future, it will be important to extend these
analyses to prospective patient cohorts in order to assess
whether differences in the tumor population structure hold
prognostic and/or predictive information.
Another key advantage of our approach is that,
by performing quantitative measurements at multiple,
distinct spatial locations in the tumor, we were able to
measure various aspects of intra-tumor transcriptional
heterogeneity, which might be very helpful to understand
how the complex ecosystem of tumors influences therapy
response and resistance. We used a mathematical tool
originally developed in information theory - Shannon
entropy - to characterize both the local and the global
heterogeneity of HER2 and ER gene expression in all 49
samples in our cohort. The Shannon entropy metric has
been widely used in ecology and was recently introduced
in cancer research to measure genetic diversity in breast
cancer [5-7] and to characterize the spatial heterogeneity
of immune infiltrates in breast cancer [31]. We found
that the diversity of HER2 and ER expression levels was
higher locally in comparison to the whole tumor, but
also that there was considerable intra- and inter-patient
variability. Importantly, tumors belonging to the same
molecular subtype had different transcriptional ITH
profiles, suggesting that not only the type and average
expression level, but also the spatial distribution of cells
expressing a given biomarker might influence how a
tumor evolves and responds to therapy. Along these lines,
analysis of gene expression differences between adjacent
cells - as demonstrated by our proof-of-principle analysis
- could be very useful to model tumor evolution. We
envision several forces that might be at work to shape the
observed transcriptional variability among adjacent cells:
1) in one scenario, each tumor clone is relatively stable
in its genetic and epigenetic state, however dispersive
migration and physical mixing of different clones creates
local heterogeneity (in this scenario, adjacent cells rarely
originate from the same cell division, but rather come
close to each other by active motion). 2) In the second
scenario, high mutational rates (resulting, for instance,
in rapid copy number changes or promoter mutations) or
short-lasting epigenetic memory (resulting, for example,
in a high frequency of transcriptional bursts) cause
expression levels to rapidly diverge among adjacent
18692

Oncotarget

cells. This in turn would generate diversity among clonal
progenies that might increase the fitness of the tumor in the
face of the constantly changing tumor microenvironment.
In the future, it will be fascinating to test these hypotheses
by combining FFPE-smFISH with other methods such
as DNA FISH (we have previously shown that smFISH
and high-resolution DNA FISH can be effectively
combined in the same sample [23]) and STAR-FISH [7]
to measure simultaneously copy number levels, selected
mutations and gene expression in single cells, followed
by mathematical modeling of the experimental data, for
example by applying tools like the Chaste cell dynamics
simulator (https://www.cs.ox.ac.uk/chaste). In particular,
future applications of FFPE-smFISH and spatial analysis
of gene expression in prospective patient cohorts will
be extremely important to determine whether measuring
transcriptional ITH is clinically useful.
Other methods have been used to detect RNA
molecules in situ in FFPE tissue sections, including
padlock probes and rolling circle amplification [11] and the
branched FISH probes commercialized as RNAscope [9].
However, these methods typically require more steps and
have a lower detection efficiency compared to smFISH. In
contrast, the FFPE-smFISH protocol described here is a
straightforward procedure with a relatively fast turnaround
time (approx. 16-18 man-hours from deparaffinization to
imaging). Importantly, fluorophore coupling of aminomodified oligos is easy to implement in any research
laboratory, and does not require dedicated equipment. In
the diagnostic setting, an important advantage of FFPEsmFISH over IHC is that the assay conditions are very
robust and no de novo optimization is required for new
probes. Moreover, FFPE-smFISH is particularly valuable
for gene targets for which good antibodies are currently
unavailable or when antibody staining is not sufficiently
sensitive. One limitation is that, especially in FFPE tissue
sections with high autofluorescence, a 100X magnification
lens is needed to detect a clear signal, therefore limiting
the portion of the tumor that can be imaged in a relatively
short time. However, our study shows that 30-50 fields
of view sparse throughout a single tumor section (which
can be imaged in a fully automated manner in approx.
2 hours) are completely sufficient to perform a reliable
determination of the HER2 and ER status, and to quantify
transcriptional ITH. In conclusion, FFPE-smFISH is a
versatile, easy-to-implement and robust method, which
can find numerous applications in diagnostics, and paves
the way for studies aimed at assessing the clinical impact
of intra-tumor transcriptional heterogeneity.

the Breast Unit of ‘Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria
Città della Salute e della Scienza di Torino’, University
of Turin, Italy. The study was conducted under ethical
permission granted by the Committee for human
Biospecimen Utilization (DSM-ChBU) of the Department
of Medical Sciences, University of Turin, Italy. Written
informed consent was obtained from all cancer patients
for collection, storage and research use of both fresh
and archival tumor samples. Clinical and pathological
information is summarized in Table 1 and 2 and in
Supplementary Table 3.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Probes targeting HER2 and ER were designed based
on our previously described database covering all human
transcripts (www.fusefish.eu [13]). Probes consisted of
the oligonucleotides listed in Supplementary Table 1.
We purchased oligos with a 3’-TEG amino modification
from Biosearch Technologies, and coupled them to either
Cy™5 (GE Healthcare, cat. Q15108) or Alexa Fluor® 594

Immunohistochemistry and DNA FISH
IHC data for estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone
receptor (PR), and Ki67 were retrieved from the original
pathology reports. The following antibodies were used for
IHC: for HER2, the HercepTestTM Kit (Dako, Cat. K5207);
for ER, the rabbit mAb, clone SP1 (Ventana-Diapath,
Tucson, AZ); for PR the rabbit mAb, clone 1E2 (VentanaDiapath). The proliferation index was assessed using
the Ki67 mouse mAb (clone MIB-1, Dako). Thresholds
for positivity were according to the 2013 ASCO/CAP
guidelines [17]: ≥ 1% for ER, > 20% for PR, score 3+
or score 2+/HER2-amplified for HER2 and > 14% for
Ki67. In all the samples we also performed DNA FISH
using probes for HER2 and CEP17 (Abbott Laboratories,
PathVysion HER-2 DNA Probe Kit II CE, Cat. 06N46035). For analysis, 10 invasive areas on each slide were
selected and automatically acquired at 40X magnification
with the motorized Metafer scanning system (Zeiss) and
the Axio Imager epifluorescence microscope (Zeiss). The
PathVysion V2 software was used to analyze the results.
DNA FISH data were scored according to the 2013 ASCO/
CAP guidelines [17]. HER2 positivity was defined as IHC
score 3+ or IHC score 2+ with HER2 amplification. For
molecular subtypes, we used the IHC-based surrogate
classification proposed by the St. Gallen International
Expert Consensus, which includes five categories:
Luminal A (ER-positive/PR-positive/HER2-negative/
Ki67-low); Luminal B/HER2-negative; Luminal B/HER2positive (ER-positive/HER2-positive); HER2-positive;
and triple-negative (ER-negative/PR-negative/HER2negative) [32]. The Luminal B/HER2-negative category
included ER-positive carcinomas with Ki67 > 14% [33]
and/or PR < 20% [34].

smFISH

Samples
FFPE samples from 49 patients diagnosed with
breast cancer between 2010 and 2013 were retrieved at

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

18693

Oncotarget

(Molecular Probes, cat. A20004). A step-by-step protocol
is available in Supplementary Information. Briefly, 3
μm-thick FFPE tumor block sections were mounted on
coverglasses coated with poly-L-lysine (Sigma). After
deparaffinization in xylene, tissue sections were post-fixed
for 5 min in methanol-acetic acid 3:1 (v/v), rehydrated,
and then heated for 45 min at 80 °C in 0.01 M sodium
citrate pH 6 supplemented with ribonucleoside vanadyl
complex (RVC, NEB, cat. S1402S) diluted 1:20 (v/v).
All deparaffinization steps were performed in special
plastic jars (EMS, cat. 71385) that had been thoroughly
decontaminated with RNaseZap® (Ambion, cat. AM9780).
After dehydration, 22x22 mm “Secure Seal” hybridization
chambers (EMS, cat. 70333-10) were mounted on each
coverglass, covering as much tumor tissue as possible.
Tissues were rehydrated and treated for 15 min with
0.025% pepsin in 10 mM HCl. Auto-fluorescence was
reduced by repeatedly flushing the chamber with freshly
prepared 1% NaBH4 in 1X PBS solution, over a period of
15 min at room temperature. After washing in RNase-free
water, samples were stored in 2X SSC buffer (Ambion,
cat. 9763) at 4 °C until hybridization was performed.
Samples were hybridized as previously described [13].
All solutions were prepared in RNase-free water (Ambion,
cat. AM9939).

using custom-made scripts in MATLAB®, as previously
described [13]. For the analysis based on pseudo-cells,
we split each image into a regular grid of squares (i.e.,
pseudo-cells). We compared seven grids (9 x 9, 10 x 10, 11
x 11, 12 x 12, 13 x 13, 14 x 14, and 16 x 16 pseudo-cells)
for which the pseudo-cell area would fall in the interquartile range of the area of manually segmented cells at
six different expansion margin lengths (see Supplementary
Figure 1B). For each pseudo-cell, we calculated the
mRNA density (dots/µm3) by dividing the total number
of mRNA spots in the pseudo-cell by the number of focal
planes minus one times the distance between each plane
times the pseudo-cell area. In order to account for possible
background dots, we compared four different thresholds
of the number of transcripts per pseudo-cell (≥ 0, 1, 2, or
3 transcripts).
For the analysis based on single-cell segmentation,
we first manually segmented the edge of tumor cell
nuclei stained with DAPI using segmentation polygons
of a variable number of edges. In order to define an
approximate cell boundary, we uniformly dilated the
segmentation polygons by 0, 5, 15, 20, or 25 pixels
(1 pixel = 125 nm). Since the cells were not imaged
throughout their full thickness in the z direction, we
computed mRNA densities by dividing single-cell mRNA
counts by the volume of the prism with base corresponding
to the segmentation polygon, and height equal to 0.4 µm
multiplied by the number of image planes minus one.
All data analyses were performed in MATLAB® using
custom-made scripts.

Image acquisition
We imaged all 49 cases at 100X magnification on
an inverted epifluorescence microscope (Nikon) equipped
with a high-resolution CCD camera (Pixis, Princeton
Instruments) controlled by MetaMorph. Per region of
interest, we acquired an image stack consisting of 5 focal
planes spaced 0.4 µm apart.
For the proof-of-principle visualization of smFISH
dots on top of a scan of the same tissue section stained
with H&E presented in the supporting website http://
tumorheterogeneity.eu/ we used a custom-designed
inverted epifluorescence microscope (Eclipse Ti-E,
Nikon) equipped with an EMCCD camera (iXON Ultra
888, Andor) controlled by NIS Elements software (Nikon).
First, we imaged smFISH signals at 100X magnification
in selected tumor regions. For each region of interest,
we acquired an image stack consisting of 5 focal planes
spaced 0.3 µm apart. Afterwards, we washed the tissue
section, stained it with Hoechst 33342, and scanned it with
a 40X magnification objective. The size of the tissue scan
was 1 x 1 cm. Lastly we stained the same tissue section
with H&E and scanned it using a 10X magnification
objective.

Automatic identification of regions containing
cells
To count smFISH dots only in image regions
containing cells, we first quantified the local structure
variations of the z-projection of each DAPI image,
assuming that the variation is higher inside nuclei in
comparison to the rest of the image. To this end, we
calculated the gradient structure tensor [35] using σ
gradient = 250 nm and σ tensor = 875 nm and manually
set a threshold, common to all images, on the determinant
of the structure tensor. We then computed the density
of smFISH dots within the identified nuclei-containing
regions, and compared the results with the smFISH score
obtained using pseudo-cells.

Registration of smFISH dots on hematoxylineosin tissue scans
First, we used the DAPI channel to register each
100X image onto the large scan of the same tissue section
consisting of multiple 40X images stitched together. In
order to match the resolution of the stitched 40X image,
we first downscaled all the 100X images. We then applied

smFISH signal quantification
In each field of view, we identified smFISH
signals corresponding to individual mRNA molecules
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

18694

Oncotarget

RNA extraction and real-time PCR

normalized cross-correlation to find the best location of
each 100X image within the 40X stitched image, capturing
the scaling and translation in the affine transformation
matrix, A1. Next, we downscaled the 40X stitched DAPI
image to match the size of the 10X stitched H&E image.
By manually selecting a few reference points in each
image, we set up a transformation matrix, A2, mapping
between the images. Lastly, we loaded the smFISH dots,
D from each 100X image and converted their coordinates
into the coordinate system of the H&E image by the
transformation: D’ = A2 A1 D. All these operations
were run in MATLAB® using custom-made scripts. To
interactively visualize the smFISH dots overlaid onto the
H&E images, we created deepzoom images (http://search.
cpan.org/~drrho/Graphics-DZI-0.05/script/deepzoom)
and displayed them using OpenSeadragon (https://
openseadragon.github.io/).

From each of the selected FFPE tumor blocks, we cut
five consecutive 10 µm-thick sections and collected them
in a 1.5 ml RNAse-free Eppendorf tube. We performed
RNA isolation using the MasterPure™ Purification kit
(Epicentre, cat. MC85200). We deparaffinized the sections
by incubations in xylene followed by incubations in 100%
ethanol. After the washes in ethanol, we air-dried the pellet
for several minutes at room temperature before Proteinase
K treatment, according to the ‘‘Method 3’’ for FFPE tissues
described in [36]. We resuspended the RNA pellet in
nuclease-free water, and measured the RNA concentration
with a NanoDrop™ Spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher
Scientific). We performed a DNase treatment step with the
TURBO DNA-freeTM Kit (Ambion, cat. 1907), after which
we reverse transcribed a total of 4 μg of RNA to cDNA
using the High-Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription
Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat. 4368814). As negative
controls for DNA contamination, we repeated the same
procedure skipping the reverse transcriptase. We amplified
the obtained cDNA by real-time PCR using the Power
SYBR® Green PCR Master Mix and the StepOne machine
(Applied Biosystems), according to the manufacturer’s
protocol. The following primers (final concentration 50
nM) were used to perform real-time PCR:
ACTB forward: 5’-CTCACCATGGATGATGATA
TCGC
ACTB reverse: 5’-AGGAATCCTTCTGACCC
ATGC
ERBB2 forward: 5’-GTGTGGACCTGGATGA
CAAGGG
ERBB2 reverse: 5’-GCTCCACCAGCTCCGTTT
CCTG
For each primer pair, we included one no-template
control. We carried out the real-time PCR reaction as
following: 10 min incubation at 95 °C followed by 40
cycles at 95 °C for 15 s and 60 °C for 1 min for annealing
and elongation. To reduce the risk of contamination from
previously amplified products, separate areas were used
for RNA isolation and PCR. We used ACTB as a reference
gene to normalize the gene expression data of ERBB2
between the samples. We applied the 2−ΔΔCt method to
determine and analyze the relative changes in ERBB2
expression between the different samples.

Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis
We set 200 arbitrary cutoff values for calling the
smFISH score positive or negative, by multiplying each
value in the integer interval [1,200] by 0.001. For each
cutoff value, t we calculated the number of true positive
(TP), false positive (FP), true negative (TN) and false
negative (FN) cases as follows:
TP = (smFISH score ≥ t) AND (reference test is
positive)
FP = (smFISH score ≥ t) AND (reference test is
negative)
TN = (smFISH score < t) AND (reference test is
negative)
FN = (smFISH score < t) AND (reference test is
positive)
where the reference test was IHC and DNA FISH
for HER2, and IHC for ER (as described above, HER2
positivity was defined as IHC score 3+ or IHC score 2+
with HER2 amplification, whereas ER positivity was
defined as ≥ 1% of positive tumor cells). For each cutoff
value, we then calculated the sensitivity and the specificity
as follows:
sensitivity = TP / (TP + FN)
specificity = TN / (TN + FP)
Lastly, for each cutoff value we plotted the
corresponding (1 - specificity) value on the x-axis and
the sensitivity on the y-axis (ROC curve). For both
HER2 and ER, we computed the maximum specificity
and sensitivity (i.e., the (x,y) pair closest to the top
left corner of the graph), as well as the area comprised
between the ROC curve and the plot diagonal (AUC).
All the calculations were run using a custom-made script
written in MATLAB®. We separately calculated the AUC
for different pseudo-cell sizes and thresholds of dots per
pseudo-cell (for pseudo-cells) as well as for different
expansion lengths of the segmentation polygons (for
manually segmented cells), and then plotted as heatmap
the resulting vectors or matrices.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification
(MLPA)
We dewaxed two 4 μm-thick paraffin sections and
mesodissected them manually as follows: we scraped
off tumor areas with a pipet tip and collected them into a
DNase-free tube, as previously reported [37] (infiltrating
carcinoma were recognized by comparison with a serial
H&E stained slide, and areas of ductal carcinoma in situ
were discarded). We extracted genomic DNA using the
18695

Oncotarget

PureLink® Genomic DNA kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific,
cat. K182001) following manufacturers’ instructions. We
performed MLPA reactions with 100-200 ng of purified
genomic DNA using the P004-C1 ERBB2 probe mix
(MRC-Holland) and a MJ Thermalcycler (MJ Research).
We separated the PCR products on an ABI 3130 capillary
sequencer (Applied Biosystems) and analyzed gene copy
numbers using GeneMapper 4.0 (Applied Biosystems)
and Coffalyser (version 8.0 MRC-HOLLAND) software.
Because four probes targeting HER2 are included in the
kit (17-035.1 ERBB2 exon 07, 17-035.1 ERBB2 exon 22,
17-035.1 ERBB2 exon 28, 17-035.1 ERBB2 exon 29),
we calculated the mean of each probe-specific normalized
ratio of the HER2 gene. A mean value below 1.3 was
defined as normal, between 1.3 and 2.0 as gain and above
2.0 as high level amplification, as previously reported [38,
39].

In order to compare different images within the
same tumor as well as different tumors, we normalized
Hi as:

This normalized value was defined as our local
diversity index. The global diversity index was obtained
in a similar way, except that expression levels were
calculated by pooling together all pseudo-cells from
different fields of view. Local and global diversity indexes
for either HER2 or ER were only computed for tumors
previously scored as positive by IHC and/or DNA FISH.
To assess the spatial variation of HER2 and ER
transcripts based on pseudo-cells, we first calculated the
difference of mRNA counts between each pseudo-cell
in a field of view and each of its 8 neighbors (for HER2
we considered only pseudo-cells with ≥ 3 dots, whereas
for ER only pseudo-cells with ≥ 1 dot)­­. Additionally, we
computed all the pairwise Euclidean distances as well
as the absolute difference of transcript counts between
all the thresholded pseudo-cells in a given field of view.
As a result, for each tumor we obtained one vector of
inter-pseudo-cell physical distances and one vector
of expression differences. To assess whether the two
vectors were correlated, we calculated the Spearman
correlation coefficient and the P value for its statistical
significance. The same type of analysis was done using
manually segmented cells, with the exception that in this
case we calculated the distance and expression difference
between each segmented cell in a given field of view and
the other segmented cells in the same image. We only
analyzed tumors that had been scored as positive by IHC
and/or DNA FISH. All data analyses were performed in
MATLAB® using custom-made scripts.

In situ proximity ligation assay (PLA)
We performed HER2 PLA using the Duolink
II detection kit (O-Link Bioscience) according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. As primary antibody
directed against HER2 we used the Polyclonal Rabbit
Anti-Human c-erbB-2 (Dako, cat. A0485). We imaged
the samples using the Metafer Scanning System and
AxioImager epifluorescence microscope equipped with a
40X objective. We consistently acquired an image stack
consisting of 9 focal planes spaced 0.3 μm apart per region
of interest (in total, 10 regions of interest per case). We
analyzed the data using the Duolink Image Tool.

Statistical comparisons
For all comparisons, we determined the statistical
significance using the Mann-Whitney test (two-tailed).
For correlation analyses, we calculated the non-parametric
Spearman correlation coefficient and performed linear
regression whenever shown. All statistical analyses were
done either using GraphPad Prism or MATLAB®.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank all the members of the Bienko and
Crosetto labs for useful discussions during the analysis of
the data and manuscript preparation. We are very grateful
to Alexander van Oudenaarden (Hubrecht Institute) for
initial support on the project, and to Shalev Itzkovitz
(Weizmann Institute) for providing the MATLAB® scripts
that were used for counting smFISH dots in the pilot phase
of the project.

Intra-tumor heterogeneity analysis
The local diversity index was calculated using
pseudo-cell data as follows: for each image, i in a given
case, we first computed how many different expression
levels, Li (i.e., the number of smFISH dots per pseudocell) were detected (for HER2 we considered only pseudocells with ≥ 3 dots, whereas for ER only pseudo-cells with
≥ 1 dot). We then calculated the probability, pil defined as
the fraction of pseudo-cells in the image, i with expression
level, li. Lastly, for each image, we calculated the Shannon
diversity index as:

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The Authors do not have any relevant conflict of
interest to disclose.

GRANT SUPPORT
This work was supported by Associazione Italiana
per la Ricerca sul Cancro (AIRC) ‘My First AIRC Grant’
18696

Oncotarget

(MFAG) #13310 to C.M.; Swedish Research Council
Project Research Grant for Junior Researchers #6212014-5503 to M.B.; FP7 ERC-2009-StG grant #242965
“Lunely”, Associazione Italiana per la Ricerca sul Cancro
(AIRC) grant #IG-12023 and International Association for
Cancer Research (AICR) grant #12-0216 to R.C.; 5xMille
Ministero Salute 2010 - FPRC onlus, 5xMille Ministero
Salute 2011 - FPRC onlus, and AIRC 5xMille Molecular
Clinical Oncology Extension program grant #9970 to A.S.;
Swedish Research Council Project Research Grant for
Junior Researchers #521-2014-2866 and Cancer Swedish
Society (Cancerfonden) grant #CAN 2015/585 to N.C.
Both M.B. and N.C. are Ragnar Söderberg Fellows in
Medicine 2016.

quantification of human immunodeficiency virus type 1
RNA in plasma. J Clin Microbiol. 1996; 34: 3196-202.
10.	 Crosetto N, Bienko M, van Oudenaarden A. Spatially
resolved transcriptomics and beyond. Nat Rev Genet. 2015;
16: 57-66.
11.	 Nilsson M, Malmgren H, Samiotaki M, Kwiatkowski M,
Chowdhary BP, Landegren U. Padlock probes: circularizing
oligonucleotides for localized DNA detection. Science.
1994; 265: 2085-8.
12.	 Grundberg I, Kiflemariam S, Mignardi M, Imgenberg-Kreuz
J, Edlund K, Micke P, Sundström M, Sjöblom T, Botling
J, Nilsson M. In situ mutation detection and visualization
of intratumor heterogeneity for cancer research and
diagnostics. Oncotarget. 2013; 4: 2407-18. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.1527.

REFERENCES

13.	 Semrau S, Crosetto N, Bienko M, Boni M, Bernasconi P,
Chiarle R, van Oudenaarden A. FuseFISH: robust detection
of transcribed gene fusions in single cells. Cell Rep. 2014;
6: 18-23.

1.	 McGranahan N, Nicholas M, Charles S. Biological and
Therapeutic Impact of Intratumor Heterogeneity in Cancer
Evolution. Cancer Cell. 2015; 28: 141.
2.	

Tabassum DP, Polyak K. Tumorigenesis: it takes a village.
Nat Rev Cancer. 2015; 15: 473-83.

3.	

Gerlinger M, Rowan AJ, Horswell S, Larkin J, Endesfelder
D, Gronroos E, Martinez P, Matthews N, Stewart A, Tarpey
P, Varela I, Phillimore B, Begum S, et al. Intratumor
heterogeneity and branched evolution revealed by
multiregion sequencing. N Engl J Med. 2012; 366: 883-92.

14.	 Barreca A, Martinengo C, Annaratone L, Righi L,
Chiappella A, Ladetto M, Demurtas A, Chiusa L, Stacchini
A, Crosetto N, van Oudenaarden A, Chiarle R. Inter- and
intratumoral heterogeneity of BCL2 correlates with IgH
expression and prognosis in follicular lymphoma. Blood
Cancer J. 2014; 4: e249.
15.	 Capodieci P, Donovan M, Buchinsky H, Jeffers Y, CordonCardo C, Gerald W, Edelson J, Shenoy SM, Singer RH.
Gene expression profiling in single cells within tissue. Nat
Methods. 2005; 2: 663-5.

4.	 Navin N, Kendall J, Troge J, Andrews P, Rodgers L,
McIndoo J, Cook K, Stepansky A, Levy D, Esposito D,
Muthuswamy L, Krasnitz A, McCombie WR, et al. Tumour
evolution inferred by single-cell sequencing. Nature. 2011;
472: 90-4.

16.	 Metz CE. Basic principles of ROC analysis. Semin Nucl
Med. 1978; 8: 283-98.
17.	 Wolff AC, Hammond MEH, Hicks DG, Dowsett M,
McShane LM, Allison KH, Allred DC, Bartlett JMS,
Bilous M, Fitzgibbons P, Others. Recommendations for
human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 testing in breast
cancer: American Society of Clinical Oncology/College
of American Pathologists clinical practice guideline
update. Arch Pathol Lab Med. the College of American
Pathologists; 2013; 138: 241-56.

5.	 Almendro V, Vanessa A, Yu-Kang C, Amanda R, Shalev
I, Andriy M, Elisabet A, Xavier GF, Montse M, Russnes
HG, Åslaug H, Rye IH, Anne-Lise BD, et al. Inference of
Tumor Evolution during Chemotherapy by Computational
Modeling and In Situ Analysis of Genetic and Phenotypic
Cellular Diversity. Cell Rep. 2014; 6: 514-27.
6.	 Almendro V, Kim HJ, Cheng Y-K, Gönen M, Itzkovitz
S, Argani P, van Oudenaarden A, Sukumar S, Michor F,
Polyak K. Genetic and phenotypic diversity in breast tumor
metastases. Cancer Res. 2014; 74: 1338-48.
7.	

18.	 Xuan Q, Ji H, Tao X, Xu Y, Zhang Q. Quantitative
assessment of HER2 amplification in HER2-positive
breast cancer: its association with clinical outcomes. Breast
Cancer Res Treat. 2015; 150: 581-8.

Janiszewska M, Liu L, Almendro V, Kuang Y, Paweletz C,
Sakr RA, Weigelt B, Hanker AB, Chandarlapaty S, King
TA, Reis-Filho JS, Arteaga CL, Park SY, et al. In situ
single-cell analysis identifies heterogeneity for PIK3CA
mutation and HER2 amplification in HER2-positive breast
cancer. Nat Genet. 2015; 47: 1212-9.

19.	 Chantalat E, Boudou F, Laurell H, Palierne G, Houtman R,
Melchers D, Rochaix P, Filleron T, Stella A, Burlet-Schiltz
O, Brouchet A, Flouriot G, Métivier R, et al. The AF-1deficient estrogen receptor ERα46 isoform is frequently
expressed in human breast tumors. Breast Cancer Res.
2016; 18: 123.

8.	 Raj A, van den Bogaard P, Rifkin SA, van Oudenaarden
A, Sanjay T. Imaging individual mRNA molecules using
multiple singly labeled probes. Nat Methods. 2008; 5: 8779.

20.	 Chaudhri RA, Olivares-Navarrete R, Cuenca N, Hadadi
A, Boyan BD, Schwartz Z. Membrane estrogen signaling
enhances tumorigenesis and metastatic potential of breast
cancer cells via estrogen receptor-α36 (ERα36). J Biol
Chem. 2012; 287: 7169-81.

9.	 Kern D, Collins M, Fultz T, Detmer J, Hamren S, Peterkin
JJ, Sheridan P, Urdea M, White R, Yeghiazarian T, Todd
J. An enhanced-sensitivity branched-DNA assay for
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21.	 Schouten JP, McElgunn CJ, Waaijer R, Zwijnenburg D,
18697

Oncotarget

Diepvens F, Pals G. Relative quantification of 40 nucleic
acid sequences by multiplex ligation-dependent probe
amplification. Nucleic Acids Res. 2002; 30: e57.

32.	 Goldhirsch A, Winer EP, Coates AS. Personalizing the
treatment of women with early breast cancer: highlights
of the St Gallen International Expert Consensus on the
Primary Therapy of Early Breast …. Annals of Eur Soc
Med Oncology; 2013.

22.	 Fredriksson S, Gullberg M, Jarvius J, Olsson C, Pietras
K, Gústafsdóttir SM, Ostman A, Landegren U. Protein
detection using proximity-dependent DNA ligation assays.
Nat Biotechnol. 2002; 20: 473-7.

33.	 Nielsen TO, Cheang MCU, Chia SK, Voduc D, Gao D,
Leung S, Bernard PS, Perou CM, Ellis MJ. Response: Re:
Ki67 Index, HER2 Status, and Prognosis of Patients With
Luminal B Breast Cancer. JNCI Journal of the National
Cancer Institute. 2009; 101: 1730-1.

23.	 Bienko M, Crosetto N, Teytelman L, Klemm S, Itzkovitz S,
van Oudenaarden A. A versatile genome-scale PCR-based
pipeline for high-definition DNA FISH. Nat Methods. 2013;
10: 122-4.

34.	 Prat A, Cheang MCU, Martín M, Parker JS, Carrasco E,
Caballero R, Tyldesley S, Gelmon K, Bernard PS, Nielsen
TO, Perou CM. Prognostic significance of progesterone
receptor-positive tumor cells within immunohistochemically
defined luminal A breast cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2013; 31:
203-9.

24.	 Andor N, Noemi A, Graham TA, Marnix J, Xia LC, Athena
Aktipis C, Claudia P, Ji HP, Maley CC. Pan-cancer analysis
of the extent and consequences of intratumor heterogeneity.
Nat Med. 2015; 22: 105-13.
25.	 Montemurro F, Di Cosimo S, Arpino G. Human epidermal
growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-positive and hormone
receptor-positive breast cancer: new insights into molecular
interactions and clinical implications. Ann Oncol. 2013; 24:
2715-24.

35.	 Lindeberg T. Scale-Space. Wiley Encyclopedia of
Computer Science and Engineering. John Wiley & Sons,
Inc.; 2007.
36.	 Chen J, Byrne GE Jr, Lossos IS. Optimization of RNA
extraction from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded
lymphoid tissues. Diagn Mol Pathol. 2007; 16: 61-72.

26.	 Prat A, Baselga J. The role of hormonal therapy in the
management of hormonal-receptor-positive breast cancer
with co-expression of HER2. Nat Clin Pract Oncol. 2008;
5: 531-42.

37.	 Farshid G, Cheetham G, Davies R, Moore S, Rudzki Z.
Validation of the multiplex ligation-dependent probe
amplification (MLPA) technique for the determination
of HER2 gene amplification in breast cancer. Diagn Mol
Pathol. 2011; 20: 11-7.

27.	 Femino AM, Fay FS, Fogarty K, Singer RH. Visualization
of single RNA transcripts in situ. Science. 1998; 280: 58590.

38.	 Sapino A, Maletta F, Verdun di Cantogno L, Macrì L, Botta
C, Gugliotta P, Scalzo MS, Annaratone L, Balmativola D,
Pietribiasi F, Bernardi P, Arisio R, Viberti L, et al. Gene
status in HER2 equivocal breast carcinomas: impact of
distinct recommendations and contribution of a polymerase
chain reaction-based method. Oncologist. 2014; 19: 111826.

28.	 Raj A, van Oudenaarden A. Nature, nurture, or chance:
stochastic gene expression and its consequences. Cell.
2008; 135: 216-26.
29.	 Moffitt JR, Zhuang X. RNA Imaging with Multiplexed
Error-Robust Fluorescence In situ Hybridization
(MERFISH). Methods Enzymol. 2016; 572: 1-49.
30.	 Tsanov N, Samacoits A, Chouaib R, Traboulsi A-M, Gostan
T, Weber C, Zimmer C, Zibara K, Walter T, Peter M,
Bertrand E, Mueller F. smiFISH and FISH-quant - a flexible
single RNA detection approach with super-resolution
capability. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016; 44: e165.

39.	 Bunyan DJ, Eccles DM, Sillibourne J, Wilkins E, Thomas
NS, Shea-Simonds J, Duncan PJ, Curtis CE, Robinson
DO, Harvey JF, Cross NCP. Dosage analysis of cancer
predisposition genes by multiplex ligation-dependent probe
amplification. Br J Cancer. 2004; 91: 1155-9.

31.	 Maley CC, Koelble K, Natrajan R, Aktipis A, Yuan Y. An
ecological measure of immune-cancer colocalization as
a prognostic factor for breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res.
2015; 17: 1-13.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

18698

Oncotarget

