www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2017, Vol. 8, (No. 1), pp: 915-932
Research Paper

Non-toxic dose of liposomal honokiol suppresses metastasis
of hepatocellular carcinoma through destabilizing EGFR and
inhibiting the downstream pathways
Jianhong Yang1,*, Heying Pei1,*, Hong Luo2,*, Afu Fu1,*, Hansuo Yang1, Jia Hu1,
Chengjian Zhao1, LuLu Chai1, Xiang Chen1, Ximing Shao1, Chunyu Wang1,
Wenshuang Wu1, Li Wan3, Haoyu Ye1, Qiang Qiu1, Aihua Peng1, Yuquan Wei1, Li
Yang1, Lijuan Chen1
1

State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and Cancer Center, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, and Collaborative Innovation
Center for Biotherapy, Chengdu, P.R. China

2

Department of Ultrasonic Medicine, West China Second Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China

3

School of Pharmacy, Chengdu University of TCM, The Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Standardization of Chinese
Herbal Medicine, State Key Laboratory Breeding Base of Systematic Research, Development and Utilization of Chinese
Medicine Resources, Chengdu, China

*

These authors contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Lijuan Chen, email: ljchen@scu.edu.cn
Keywords: liposomal honokiol, EGFR, metastasis, motility, hepatocellular carcinoma
Received: September 22, 2015     Accepted: November 05, 2016     Published: November 29, 2016

ABSTRACT
At present, there is no specific anti-metastasis drug in HCC treatment. Drugs
used for primary HCC tumors and tumor metastasis are very similar, among which
cytotoxic drugs are prevalent, such as cisplatin, doxorubicin and 5-FU. The EGFR
pathway plays an important role in promoting hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
metastasis. Hence, development of non-toxic anti-metastasis drugs, such as EGFR
or downstream pathways inhibitors, is of great importance. In our present study, we
found non-toxic dose of liposomal honokiol (LH) could inhibit the HCC metastasis by
destabilizing EGFR and inhibiting the downstream pathways. Non-toxic dose of LH
significantly inhibited the motility, migration and lamellipodia formation of HepG2
cells in vitro and decreased extravasation of HepG2 cells in a novel metastasis model
of transgenic zebrafish. In two lung metastasis models (HepG2 and B16F10) and a
spontaneous metastasis model of HepG2 cells, LH remarkably inhibited pulmonary
metastasis and regional lymph nodes metastasis without obvious toxicity. Further
study showed that destabilizing EGFR and inhibiting the downstream pathways were
the main mechanisms of non-toxic dose of LH on metastasis inhibition. Our results
provide the preclinical rationale and the underlying mechanisms of LH to suppress HCC
metastasis, implicating LH as a potential therapeutic agent to block HCC metastasis
without severe side effects.

INTRODUCTION

metastasis, most frequently located in the lung and
the regional lymph nodes, is a major cause of the poor
prognosis and HCC-related death [1–5].
The metastasis process normally compromises
migrating and invading of tumor cells into extracellular
matrix of surrounding tissues, entering and circulating
in host vasculatures, extravasating, and establishing
metastatic colonies in second sites [6]. In theory, inhibition
of any of the steps in the metastatic process could offer

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the
most common malignant tumors characterized by rapid
progression, easy metastasis, and frequent recurrence
[1–5]. It is the second leading cause of cancer mortality
in China [4]. HCC frequently shows early invasion into
blood vessels as well as intrahepatic metastasis, and
later demonstrates extrahepatic metastasis. Extrahepatic
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

915

Oncotarget

therapeutic targets [2, 4, 6]. However, there are no specific
drugs used for anti-metastasis treatments in clinical
chemotherapy [7]. The drugs used for primary tumors
and tumor metastasis are very similar in HCC treatment,
among which cytotoxic drugs are prevalent, such as
cisplatin, doxorubicin and 5-FU [8, 9]. Unfortunately,
these drugs also display cytotoxicity to normal cells
resulting in severe side effects to patients such as anaemia,
nausea, vomiting, weight loss, fatigue, and increased
chance of infections. Considering the distinct biological
characteristics between tumor metastasis and primary
tumors [6], we hypothesize that a non-toxic candidate
drug might be effective to suppress the metastasis of
hepatocellular carcinoma without causing severe side
effects.
The EGF-EGFR pathway plays an important role
in cancer metastasis by activating the downstream PI3K/
Akt, ERK and JNK pathway [10], the inhibition of EGFR
or its downstream signal pathway will inhibit cancer
metastasis, which sometimes will not reduce cell viability
[11]. Hence, non-toxic EGFR or downstream pathway
inhibitors may be effective anti-metastasis drugs in HCC
without causing obvious side effects.
Honokiol is an active component isolated from the
root and stem bark of magnolia, a plant used for centuries
in traditional Chinese and Japanese medicine. Honokiol
is known to possess anti-thrombocytic, antibacterial,
anti-inflammatory, antiproliferative and anxiolytic effects
[12–16]. Studies have demonstrated antineoplastic and
anti-angiogenic properties of honokiol for mouse or human
cancer cells, including lung cancer, leukemia, multiple
myeloma, colon cancer, prostate cancer, fibrosarcoma and
ovarian carcinoma [17–27]. Our previous studies have
shown that honokiol possesses significant antitumor effect
as well as an enhancement in tumor growth delay and
improvement of survival by combination with cisplatin
in ovarian carcinoma [27] or with adriamycin in breast
cancer models [28]. The poor water solubility of honokiol
could be improved by encapsulating honokiol with PEG
modified liposome for in vivo i.v administration. Further
studies identified that liposomal honokiol (LH) inhibits
VEGF-D-induced lymphangiogenesis and metastasis in
xenograft tumor model [29], However, it is still unclear
whether non-toxic dose of LH could inhibit the early
invasion and intrahepatic metastasis of HCC and the
underlying mechanism has not been fully investigated.

liposomal honokiol was prepared in our laboratory [29].
There is no difference between liposomal honokiol and
free honokiol in antiproliferative activity in tumor cells
[30]. Rajendran et al showed 25 μM honokiol treatment
for 24 h could reduce HepG2 cell viability [31]. Recently,
Min et al showed higher dose of honokiol (up to 100 μM)
treatment for 24 h showed no obvious effect on cell
viability of HepG2 cells [32]. With these contradictory
results, we first evaluated the cytotoxicity of LH on HCC
cell lines (HepG2, SK-HEP1 and SMCC7721) and normal
liver cells (LO2) in a series of concentration by MTT. We
found that LH showed cytotoxicity on tested cell above
concentration of 60 μM after treatment for 24 h, but no
cytotoxicity under 40 μM concentration (Figure 1A). Then
HepG2 cells treated with indicated concentration of LH
were subjected to PI staining for apoptosis analysis, we
found that 60 μM LH induced obvious apoptosis but 40 μM
or lower concentration induced no apoptosis (Figure 1B).
Furthermore, PI staining of HepG2, SMCC7721 and LO2
cells treated with 40 μM honokiol were subjected to flow
cytometry for cell cycle analysis. Results demonstrated
that LH at 40 μM did not cause obviously cell cycle arrest
on these cells (Figure 1C). Furthermore, PI/AnnexinV
stain for apoptosis analysis further confirmed that 40 μM
LH caused no obvious apoptosis on HepG2 and LO2 cells
(Figure 1D). Hence, we demonstrated that 40 μM LH is a
non-toxic concentration on HCC cells.
Since LH at 40 μM did not cause obvious apoptosis,
we further investigated whether LH could inhibit the cells
migration and invasion at non-cytotoxic concentrations
(≤ 40 μM) by wound-healing migration and transwell
cell invasion assays. Hence, we choose non-toxic
concentrations (≤ 40 μM ) of LH to evaluate the ability
to inhibit the migration and invasion in HepG2. As shown
in Figures 2A and 2B, HepG2 cells obviously migrated to
the wound after 24 h exposure, by contrast, treatment with
LH at non-toxic concentrations inhibited the migration of
HepG2 cells in a concentration-dependent manner. LH at
40 μM resulted in an 86% inhibition of wound closure
compared with control cultures (Figure 2B). Transwell
cell invasion assay exhibited that non-toxic doses of LH
inhibited red fluorescence-labeled HepG2 (RFP-HepG2)
cells invasion in a concentration-dependent manner
(Figure 2C and 2D). RFP-HepG2 treated with empty
liposome can degrade matrigel and invade to the underside
of filter. But LH at 40 μM could obviously inhibit the
invasion of RFP-HepG2 cells. All these results suggested
that non-toxic concentration of LH inhibits HepG2 cells
motility and migration.

RESULTS
Non-cytotoxic LH reduces hepatocellular
carcinoma cells motility and inhibits cells
migration

Non-cytotoxic concentration of LH reduces
the extravasation of HepG2 cells in zebrafish
metastasis model

We firstly intended to identify whether nontoxic
dose of liposomal honokiol could reduce hepatocellular
carcinoma cells motility and inhibit cells migration. The
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Since migration and extravasation is one of the
most important steps during tumor metastasis. To clearly
916

Oncotarget

study the effect of LH on extravasation of HepG2 cells
at non-toxic concentration, we established a novel
metastasis model in Tg (kdr1: EGFP) transgenic zebrafish
by injecting RFP-HepG2 cells into blood circulation
(Figure 3A and 3B). The arrows indicated the position
where RFP-HepG2 cells were injected. This metastasis
model in Tg(kdr1:EGFP) transgenic zebrafish could make
us investigate tumor cells extravasation on a single cell
level. As shown in Figure 3C, fluorescence-labeled HepG2
cells successfully entered the internode small vessels (ISV)
of transgenic zebrafish. After 24 h entering the internode
small vessels, these RFP-HepG2 cells presented different
cell fates (Figure 3D and 3E), some tumor cells remained
quiescence, some developed apoptosis (Figure 3F, Apop)

or fragmented (Figure 3F, Frag), some tumor cells with
strong transfer ability penetrated and extravastated out
of host vascular vessels and entered into adjacent tissues
within 24 h (Figure 3F, Ex). Quantification of the average
number of extravasation, apoptosis and fragmented cells
in pretreated and un-pretreated cells injected zebrafish
(Figure 3G and 3H), about 25% and 40% HepG2 cells
escaped out of host vascular vessels and entered into
adjacent tissues within 24 h and 48 h in untreated group,
respectively, whereas only about 2.5% and 5% LHpretreated HepG2 cells completed the extravasation
process within 24 and 48 hours. At the same time, about
17% HepG2 cells fragmented within 24 h in untreated
group, by contrast, about 72% honokiol-pretreated HepG2

Figure 1: Determination of non-toxic concentration of LH. (A) The inhibitory effect of LH on HepG2, SM7721, SK-HEP1 and

LO2 cell proliferation. The inhibition of cell proliferation was determined using MTT assay. The cells were treated with empty liposome or
the indicated concentrations of LH for 24 h. Data represent the mean ± standard error (SE) from three independent experiments. *P < 0.05,
**P < 0.01,compared with the empty liposome group. (B) HepG2 Cells were treated with empty liposome or different concentrations
of LH for 24 h, then collected, stained with PI, and analyzed by flow cytometry for apoptosis. Data represent the mean ± SE from three
independent experiments. **P < 0.01,compared with the empty liposome group. (C) Cells (HepG2, SMCC7721 and LO2) were treated
with empty liposome or 40 μM LH for 24 h, then collected, stained with PI, and analyzed by flow cytometry for cell cycle. (D) Cells
(HepG2 and LO2) were treated with empty liposome or 40 μM LH for 24 h, then collected, stained with PI and AnnexinV, and analyzed
by flow cytometry for apoptosis.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

917

Oncotarget

cells fragmented. We observed there was a slight increase
in apoptosis cells between untreated and LH-pretreated
groups in 24 h observation. As non-toxic dose of LH did
not induce apoptosis, we speculated that the apoptosis
increasing in 24 h observation was due to the motility and
invasion inhibition by LH and the cells can not get used
to the new environment within 24 h. Hence, some cells
went apoptosis. Further 48 h observation demonstrated
that honokiol-pretreated HepG2 cells did not cause
obvious increases in apoptosis, which implied that 48 h
after injection was a suitable time for observation on this
model. This novel tumor cells extravasation model based
on a single cell level clearly confirmed our hypothesis that
LH significantly inhibits the extravasation and survival of
HepG2 cells at a non-toxic concentration.

observed the directly effect of LH on the morphology
during migration and investigated the actin cytoskeleton
of HepG2 cells using fluorescent phalloidin staining.
HepG2 cells were starved in FCS-free DMEM medium
overnight before cultured in 10% FBS DMEM with or
without 40 μM honokiol. Under the stimulation of FCS,
HepG2 cells extended broad lamellipodia into the open
area in 6 hours (Figure 4A left and Figure 4B left), the
lamellipodia in control cells were well organized. By
contrast, LH-treated cell exhibited minimal lamellipodia
and induced filopodia or microspikes formation of HepG2
cells (Figure 4A middle and Figure 4B middle), which was
in accordance with the serum starved group (Figure 4A
right and Figure 4B right). In 40 μM LH-treated group,
cells with lamellipodia presented amount of 17%
compared with 82% of control (Figure 4C, p < 0.01).
LH at 40 μM also obviously increased the formation
of filopodia and reduced the formation of stress fibers
(Figure 4A–4C). Actin/Hoechst staining exhibited
that the nuclear of honokiol-treated cells did not show
obvious changes (Figure 4B), further confirming that the
capability of LH in inhibiting the migration of HepG2
cells is correlated with the inhibition of the formation of
lamellipodia but not induction of apoptosis.

LH suppresses the lamellipodia formation of
HepG2 cells
Cell motility requires the tight temporal regulation
of actin assembly and disassembly. Disregulated F-actin
formation results in defects of cell motility abilities [33].
To test whether LH could inhibit HCC cells motility
through affecting actin cytoskeleton formation, we

Figure 2: LH inhibited migration and invasion of HCC cells at non-toxic concentrations. (A) The effect of LH at indicated

concentration on HepG2 cells migration in wound-healing assays. Cells were scratched with a pipette tip and then treated with empty
liposome or indicated concentrations of LH for 24 h. Migrating cells were photographed under a phase contrast micoscopy. The data
are representative of 3 independent experiments (B) Migrating cells per fields in wound-healing assays were evaluated after treated with
indicated concentration of LH. Data represent the mean ± standard error (SE) from three independent experiments. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01,
compared with the empty liposome group (C and D) HepG2 cells transfected with red fluorescent genes (pDsRed-N1) were treated with
empty liposome or LH (10, 20, 40 μM) for 24 h, and the invasive ability was assessed by a matrigel-coated transwell assay, the total cell
number on the underside of filter were counted. The data are representative of 3 independent experiments. Data are expressed as mean ± SE.
*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, compared with the empty liposome group.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

918

Oncotarget

LH inhibits HepG2 motility via inhibiting Rac1/
Cdc42 activity

examined the activation of Rac1 and Cdc42 using GST
pull-down assays in HepG2 cells. As shown in Figure 4D
and 4E, control HepG2 cells showed high-levels of Rac1GTP and Cdc42-GTP comparing to serum starved and
GDP control cells. After stimulated with PMA, which
activates Rac1 and thereby promotes cell spreading,
lamellipodia formation, and cell migration, the levels of
Rac1-GTP and Cdc42-GTP increased. However, after
treatment with 40 μM LH, the increase of Rac1 and

It is well known that members of the Rho family of
small GTPases, including RhoA, Rac 1, and Cdc42, are
key regulators of the actin cytoskeleton in diverse cellular
functions including cell migration [34]. To examine
whether the effect of LH on HepG2 cells migration is
mediated through inhibition of Rac 1 and Cdc42, we

Figure 3: The effect of LH on extravasation of RFP-HepG2 cells in a metastasis model in Tg(flk1:EGFP) transgenic
zebrafish. (A and B) Tg(kdr1:EGFP) transgenic zebrafish at 3 days age, the arrows indicated the position where RFP-HepG2 cells were
injected. A: white light; B: GFP labeled vascular system. (C) RFP -HepG2 cell entered the internode small vessels (ISV). RFP-HepG2 cells
pretreated with empty liposome or LH (40 μM) for 6 hours were re-suspended in FCS-free DMEM media (2 × 107/ml) and kept on ice
for injection. RFP HepG2 cells were injected into the blood circulation (50–100 cells per fish) and then imaged at 0 h. Up: Image of RFPHepG2 cells in ISV (200×). Below: Enlarge images showed RFP-HepG2 cells in ISV. (D and E) The extravasation of RFP-HepG2 cell in
Tg (flk1:EGFP) zebrafish were observed and counted under a Zeiss fluorescent microscope (200×) at 4 h (D) and 24 h (E) after cell injection
respectively. More than 20 fishes containing about 160 cells were analyzed for each group. D (up) showed the whole ISV image at 4 h,
D (below) showed enlarged ISV image at 4 h. E (below) showed the whole ISV image at 24 h. E (UP) showed enlarged ISV image at 24 h.
Apop: Apoptosis cells; EX: extravasation cells; Frag: fragmented cells. (F) The identification of extravasation, apoptosis and fragmented
cells at the time point of 24 h. (G and H) Quantification of the average number of extravasation, apoptosis and fragmented cells in control
and LH-pretreated cells injected zebrafish (n =20). Data represent the mean ± SE (*P < 0.05,**P < 0.01, compared with the control group).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

919

Oncotarget

LH inhibits MMP-2/9 expression and enzyme
activities

Cdc42 activities were significantly inhibited. Western
blot showed that LH treatment had no obvious effect on
the expression of Rac1 and Cdc42 (Figure 4F and 4G).
These results further confirmed that inhibition of Rac1 and
Cdc42 activity is the major cause of LH in the inhibition
of HepG2 motility at non-toxic concentration.

Matrix metalloproteinase-2 and -9 are two most
important metastasis-promoting molecules, which
involved several steps during the whole metastatic process

Figure 4: LH suppressed the lamellipodia formation and inhibited Rac1/Cdc42 activity in HepG2 cells. (A) White light

image HepG2 cells treated with empty liposome, 40 μM LH or serum starved for 24 h. lamellipodia were indicated by white arrows,
filopodia were indicated by red arrows. (B)The immunofluorescence staining of FITC-conjugated phalloidin after 24 h treatment of empty
liposome, 40 μM LH or serum starved in HepG2 cells. Then lamellipodia (white arrows), filopodia (red arrows) and stress fibers (yellow
arrows) were counted respectively. The data are representative of 3 independent experiments. (C) Cumulative results of actin cytoskeleton
formation from 3 independent experiments were shown as mean ± SE. (D and E). Immunoprecipitation of Rac1 and Cdc42. HepG2 cells
were starved overnight before subjected to the indicated treatments, and then treated with GDP, PMA, and PMA+40 μM LH respectively.
After 24 h treatment, the cells were lysed and immunoprecipitated with anti-GFP antibody, following by western blot assays of Rac1/
Cdc42. The data are representative of 3 independent experiments and presented as the mean ± SE. **P < 0.01. (F and G) The effect of LH
on the expression of Rac1 and Cdc42 in HepG2 cells using western blot analysis. The data are representative of 3 independent experiments
and presented as the mean ± SE. Densitometric quantification of western blot was performed by Image QuantTL software.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

920

Oncotarget

at least including cell motility, invasion and extravasation
[35, 36]. To explore the effects of LH on MMP-2 and
MMP-9, we detected the activities and expression of
MMP-2/9 using zymography and western-blot assay.
The results revealed that LH not only down-regulated
the expression of MMP-2/9 (Figure 5A and 5B), but
also suppressed activities of PMA-induced MMP-2/9 at
a concentration-dependent manner (Figure 5C and 5D).
Non-toxic concentration at 40 μM LH completely
inhibited the expression and activities of MMP-2/9.

PD98059 (an ERK inhibitor), SP600125 (a JNK inhibitor),
SB203580 (a p38 MAPK inhibitor) and LY294002
(a PI3K inhibitor) were used in wound-healing assay
and zymography assay. Wound-healing assay showed
that the inhibition of PI3K pathway with LY294002
(20 μM) displayed the most potent inhibitory effects to
the migration of HepG2 cells, SP600125 (20 μM) and
PD98059 (20 μM) had little effect, whereas SB203580
(20 μM) had not effect (Figure 6C). Zymography assay
showed that PD98059 (20 μM) significantly inhibited
PMA-induced MMP-2/9 enzyme activities but not
LY294002 and SP600125 (Figure 6D and 6E). In contrast,
SB elevated PMA-induced MMP-2/9 enzyme activities.
These data demonstrated that LH inhibited HepG2 cells
migration predominately via PI3K/AKT pathway, and
inhibited MMP enzymes activities mainly through ERK
pathway.
In our attempt to investigate whether LH could
affect EGFR phosphorylation level by western blot, we
surprisingly found that LH inhibited the expression level
of EGFR (Figure 7A and 7B), which implied that LH
could inhibit the stability of EGFR. Further study showed
that LH incubation accelerated EGFR degradation in the
presence of EGF in HepG2 Cells (Figure 7C and 7D). This
proved that LH could destabilize EGFR in HepG2 cells.

LH inhibits HepG2 cell motility by destabilizing
EGFR and inhibiting the downstream PI3K/Akt,
Erk, JNK pathways
In order to clarify the role of PI3K/Akt and
MAPK pathways in cell motility, the activities of PI3K/
Akt and MAPK pathways were studied by detecting
phosphorylations of AKT, ERK, JNK and P38 using
western blots. We found that LH obviously blocked
the phosphorylations of AKT, ERK and JNK at a dosedependent manner, but not P38 (Figure 6A and 6B). To
explore the molecular mechanisms of LH to the cell
migration and MMP enzymes in HepG2 cells, specific
inhibitors of PI3K/Akt and MAPK pathways including

Figure 5: LH inhibited MMP-9 enzyme activity. (A and B) HepG2 cells were treated with empty liposome or LH (10, 20, 40 μM)

for 24 h, and then cell lysates were subjected to SDS-PAGE followed by western blots with anti-MMP-2, anti-MMP-9 antibodies. The
data are representative of 3 independent experiments and presented as the mean ± SE, *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, compared with the untreated
group. (C, D) HepG2 cells were treated with empty liposome or LH (10, 20 and 40 μM) for 24 h in the presence of 200 nM PMA. MMP-9
and MMP-2 enzyme activities were analyzed by zymography (degradation the gelatin-containing polyacrylamide gel for 48 h). The data
are representative of 3 independent experiments and presented as the mean ± SE, *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, compared with the PMA treatment
only. Densitometric quantification of gels was performed by ImageQuantTL software .
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

921

Oncotarget

As honokiol is reported to inhibit the expression of HSP90
[37] (a molecular chaperone that assists EGFR to fold and
maintain conformation and stability), the degradation
of EGFR reported by us may be the result of HSP90
inhibition by honokiol. With the above data together we

could conclude that LH may inhibit HepG2 cell migration
in a EGFR depend pathway: LH inhibits EGFR, promotes
its degeradation, and inhibits the downstream PI3K/Akt,
Erk, JNK pathways (Figure 7E), but the deeper mechanism
still remains further study.

Figure 6: LH regulated the MAPK and PI3K/AKT pathways. (A and B) HepG2 cells were treated with empty liposome or LH

(10, 20, 40 μM) for 24 h, and then cell lysates were subjected to SDS-PAGE followed by western blots with anti-ERK, anti-P38, antiJNK and anti-AKT (total and phosphorylation) antibodies. The data are representative of 3 independent experiments and presented as the
mean ± SE, **P < 0.01, compared with the untreated group. (C) Cells were pretreated with 20 μM PD, LY, SB and SP followed by the
addition of 200nM PMA for 24 h, and the migration abilities of cells were evaluated by wound-healing assays, the data are representative
of 3 independent experiments. (D and E) Cells were treated with 20 μM PD, LY, SB and SP followed by the addition of 200 nM PMA for
24 h, the MMP-2 and MMP-9 levels were evaluated by gelatin zymography. the data are representative of 3 independent experiments and
presented as the mean ± SE, *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, compared with the PMA treatment only. Densitometric quantification of gels was
performed by ImageQuantTL software.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

922

Oncotarget

LH inhibits hematogeneous metastasis of HepG2
and B16F10 cells in mice model

treated with either normal salines or empty liposome
developed obvious metastatic lesions in lungs, whereas LH
treatment at 20 mg/kg i.v adminstration led to a significant
inhibition of pulmonary metastasis. The average lung
surface metastasis nodes as counted in microscope, in NS
group and empty liposome group were respective 34.4
metastases/mouse and 30.8 metastases/mouse. However,
only 1 of the 5 mice on LH-treated group observed lung
metastasis, and about 36 lung surface metastasis nodes
were all counted in this mouse (Figure 9C). The metastatic
lesions in lungs were further confirmed by H&E staining
(Figure 9D), 4 of 5 mice in NS group and 4 of 5 mice in
empty liposome group comparing to 1 of 5 mice in LHtreated group were definite obvious lung metastases.

In order to confirm the anti-metastasis potency
of LH in vivo at low concentration, we established two
lung metastasis models of HepG2 cells in nude mice and
evaluated the therapeutic effects of LH. In the first lung
metastasis model, nude mice were injected with HepG2
cells (2 × 106/mouse) through the tail vein and treated
with LH i.v injection. As shown in Figure 8A, mice
treated with normal saline or empty liposome developed
obvious pulmonary metastatisis, whereas LH treatment at
20 mg/kg i.v adminstration led to a significant inhibition
of pulmonary metastasis.
Then we intend to investigate the effect of LH on
B16F10 metastasic model in vivo. Mice were injected with
B16F10 melanoma cells and left untreated for 8 days to
allow tumor growth. Mice were then treated for another
15 days with normal saline, empty liposome or 20 mg/kg
LH, respectively. The same results were obtained in
B16F10 mice model. LH significantly inhibited the lung
metastases (Figure 8B).

LH inhibits lymphatic metastasis of HepG2 cells
in mice model
To further examine the capability of LH of
inhibiting lymphatic metastasis, we examined lymph
nodes metastasis of intradermal primary tumor by
intradermal injecting evans blue (5 mg/ml in PBS), a
dye that specifically stains lymphatic vessels and lymph
nodes, by the side of tumor masses as previously described
[26]. Then the lymph nodes of axillary, brachial, inguinal,
popliteal and superficial cervical were stripped out. As
Figure 9F shown, we observed a noticeable inhibition
in the incidence of lymph node metastasis in LHtreated mice. The lymph nodes number of NS group and
liposomal group were average 10.8 and 10 respectively,

LH inhibits pulmonary metastasis of HepG2
cells in mice model
We also established a spontaneous metastasis model
by injecting HepG2 cells subcutaneously into the right
flanks of female nude mice as description in Materials
and Methods. As depicted in Figure 9A and 9B, all mice

Figure 7: LH promotes the degradation of EGFR. (A and B) HepG2 cells were treated with empty liposome or LH(10, 20, 40 μM)

for 24 h, and then cell lysates were subjected to SDS-PAGE followed by western blots with anti-EGFR (total and phosphorylation). the data
are representative of 3 independent experiments and presented as the mean ± SE, **P < 0.01, compared with the untreated group (C and D)
HepG2 cells were deprived of growth factors for 12 hours and then exposed to EGF for the indicated time and the exposed to the indicated
treatment, and then cell lysates were subjected to SDS-PAGE followed by western blots with anti-EGFR. The data are representative of 3
independent experiments and presented as the mean ± SE, **P < 0.01, compared with the untreated group. (E) Brief introduction of LH’s
inhibition on EGFR and downstream pathways. Densitometric quantification of gels was performed by Image QuantTL software.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

923

Oncotarget

but the number of average lymph nodes in LH-treated
group was only 6. A clear enlargement of the draining
lymphatic vessels and lymph nodes were observed when
Evans blue was injected intradermally by the side of tumor
in the control group (Figure 9E). In contrast, there was no
tumor-associated lymphatic vessel in 20 mg/kg LH-treated
animals, which was correlated with a lack of dye-positive
lymphatic vessels and lymph nodes. Furthermore, lymph
node volumes of axillary were calculated. Figure 9G
showed that the representative ipsilateral axillary lymph
node volumes from HepG2-bearing mice. The mean
lymph node volume was 27.9 ± 3.1 mm3 in LH-treated
group (n = 5 lymph nodes total) compared with the mean
volume of 69.1 ± 10.2 mm3 in NS group (n = 5, P < 0.01)
and 49.1 ± 6.0 mm3 in empty liposome group (n = 5,
P < 0.05). Also, the metastatic lesions in lymph nodes
were further confirmed by H&E staining (Figure  9H).
From the harvested lymph nodes, 4 of 5 mice in NS group,
3 of 5 mice in empty liposome group exhibited lymph
node spread, whereas none of the 5 mice from LH-treated
group exhibited lymph nodes metastases.
In addition, LH obviously inhibited tumor growth
in HepG2 tumor-bearing nude mice model (Figure 10).
After 24 days of LH treatment, the mean tumor volume
was 734.437 ± 136.36 mm3 versus 1574.707 ± 194.07 mm3
in liposome-treated mice, and 1568.537 ± 230.49 mm3 in
PBS-treated group, indicating a 50% inhibitory rate of
tumor volume. These data indicated that LH significantly
inhibited tumor growth and lung metastasis of HepG2 cells
bearing mice model.

To determine the effect of LH on the secretion
of MMP-9 by HepG2 cells in primary tumor and
metastatic lesions, tissue sections were assessed by
immunohistochemistry of goat-anti-MMP-9 antibody
(Figure 11). After the LH treatment, the expression of
MMP-9 was obviously suppressed in primary tumor, while
no positive expression of was found in the tissue of lymph
nodes and lungs without metastatic tumor cells.

Observation of potential toxicity
To evaluate the health status of mice treated with LH
and empty liposome, weight of mice was monitored every
3 days throughout the whole experiment and considered a
parameter for evaluation of weight loss, ruffling of fur, life
span, behavior, or feeding and no significant difference in
weights was found among the three groups (Figure 10B).
In addition, no pathologic changes of liver, lung, kidney,
spleen, brain, heart, or bone marrow were found by
microscopic examination. In the long-term toxicity study
of liposome honokiol on SD mouse and beagle dog (3.75,
7.5, 15 mg/kg/d on SD mouse and 4, 12, 40 mg/kg/d on
beagle dog for four weeks), behaviors, blood chemistries
and detailed histopathology of mice and dog were normal,
no deaths occurred (data not shown).

DISCUSSION
In the present study, we for the first time demonstrated
that LH possessed potent anti-metastasis properties for

Figure 8: LH inhibits hematogeneous metastasis in HepG2 model. (A) LH inhibited metastasis to lung by HepG2 cells in nude
mice. 2 × 106 HepG2 cells were i.v. injected into mice. Normal saline, empty liposome or LH (20 mg/kg) was given i.v. every 3 days for
15 d from the day of cells injection. After animals sacrificed, lungs metastasis nodes were imaged and counted. Metastasis nodes were
indicated by dark arrows. Data represent the mean ± SE (**P < 0.01, compared with the NS group). (B) Mice were injected with B16F10
melanoma cells and left untreated for 8 days to allow tumor growth, then treated for another 15 days with normal saline, empty liposome
or LH (20 mg/kg), respectively. After animals sacrificed, lungs metastasis nodes were imaged and counted, metastasis nodes were indicated
by dark arrows. Data represent the mean ± SE (**P < 0.01, compared with the NS group).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

924

Oncotarget

significantly inhibited the motility of HCC cell in vitro,
and decreased the extravasation in zebrafish metastatic
model. Cell migration is considered as a highly integrated
multistep cycle process. The migratory cycle includes
cell polarization, extension of protrusions in the direction
of migration, formation of stable adhesion near the
leading edge of the protrusions, and detachment of the
adhesion and retraction at the rear. All these steps require
tightly regulated changes of the actin cytoskeleton
[38]. Rho family of small GTPases is a key regulator
of the actin cytoskeleton in diverse cellular functions
including cell migration. Rac1 is activated at the leading
edge of motile cells and induces the formation of actinrich lamellipodia protrusions, which serve as a major
driving force of cell movement. Cdc42 were proved to
regulate the organization of filopodia as the sensor of
motile stimuli [33, 34, 38]. We found LH at non-toxic
concentrations significantly affected actin cytoskeleton
of HepG2 cells and interrupted the formation of
filamentous F-actin stress fiber. The GST-Pak1-PBD pull
down assay clearly showed that activities of Rac1 and
CDC42 were inhibited by non-toxic LH. Taken together,
our data indicated that the dysfunction of Rac1 and
CDC42 might be the major cause of the interruption of
actin cytoskeleton in non-toxic LH-treated HepG2 cells,

HCC cells at non-toxic concentrations by destabilizing
EGFR and inhibiting the downstream metastasis related
PI3K/Akt, ERK and JNK pathway, which maybe a nontoxic anti-metastasis drug in a clinical setting.
We firstly identified that 40 μM LH is a nontoxic concentration on HCC cells. Although Rajendran
et al reported that 25 μM honokiol treatment for 24 h
could reduce HepG2 cell viability [31], our results still
demonstrated that 40 μM LH is a non-toxic concentration
on HCC cells. The different results may due to different
generations of HepG 2 cells and culture medium.
Honokiol was also reported to show toxic to many other
cancer cells [17–27], but our results show LH (≤ 40 μM)
showed no toxic to HCC cells, that was because honokiol
may have many molecular targets in cancer cells and
different cancer cells relays on different signal pathways
for survival, so honokiol could show different activities in
different cancers.
During the whole process of metastasis, including
detachment from primary tumors, migration toward
and entering into host vessels, and extravasating from
circulation, the motility ability of tumor cells plays
a fundamentally central role. Inhibiting cell motility
is proposed as a promising strategy to prevent and
suppress tumor metastasis [6]. We found non-toxic LH

Figure 9: Suppression of pulmonary metastasis and regional lymph nodes metastasis by LH treatment in HepG2
bearing mice. Animals (n = 5) were sacrificed on day 34 after cells injection. (A) Identification of lungs metastasis nodes (green arrow).

(B) Three indicated groups of lungs metastasis nodes (arrows) were imaged. (C) Numbers of metastasis nodes on the lung surfaces. Data
represent the mean ± SE (*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, compared with the LH group). (D) The metastatic lesions in lungs were further confirmed
by H&E staining, indicated by green arrows. (E and F) After Evans blue staining, the lymph nodes were sacrificed and imaged. E: Axillary
lymph node with metastasis. Arrows (red: axillary lymph node, LN: lymph node, LV: lymphatic vessel, BV: blood vessel), T (tumor
section). F: Regional lymph node images. (G) Calculation of total volumes of lymph nodes from each mouse. Data represent the mean ± SE.
**P < 0.01, compared with the LH group. (H) Mice with regional lymph node metastasis confirmed by H&E staining. T indicates tumor
section and pointed by blue arrows; TF: Folliculi lymphaticus.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

925

Oncotarget

and finally resulted in defects of motility ability and
ineffectiveness of extravasation of HepG2 cells.
Interactions between tumor cells and extracellular
matrix components (ECM) also existed in the whole
metastatic process. Degradation and remodeling of
extracellular matrix are necessary steps for tumor cells
local migration, invasion and extravasation [35, 39, 40].
The major family of enzymes degrading extracellular
matrix is matrix metalloproteinases (MMP) including
MMP-9 and MMP-2. LH at non-toxic concentration
displayed potent inhibitory ability to MMP-2 and MMP-9
expression and activities. Specific inhibitors of ERK
and JNK also showed inhibitory effects to MMP-2 and
MMP-9, suggesting ERK and JNK pathway might
play an important role for LH activities. The results are
consistent to previous studies about molecular explanation
to honokiol activities. The signal pathway study showed
that LH could destabilize EGFR and inhibit the down
stream PI3K/AKT, ERK, JNK pathway, which resulted in
the inhibition of Rac1/Cdc42, and MMP2/9 activity and
finally cause the inhibition of metastasis with no obvious
toxicity. So, our study also provide a robust evidence for
that non-toxic EGFR or downstream pathway inhibitors

will be effective anti-metastasis drugs in HCC. Besides,
inhibition of EGFR signal pathway by non-toxic dose of
LH results in HCC metastasis inhibition but causes no cell
viability reduction, suggesting HCC cells needs EGFR
for metastasis but their proliferation is not so sensitive
to EGFR inhibition, implying HCC cells do not rely on
EGFR for proliferation.
Given the pivotal functions of cytoskeleton
remolding, cell motility and MMPs during tumors
metastasis, it is easy to well understand the inhibitory
activities of LH to HepG2 metastasis. It was further
confirmed in nude mice model in vivo. The results showed
LH remarkably inhibited pulmonary metastasis of HepG2
cells and resulted in an enhanced survival of the tumor
bearing mice. Furthermore, we interestingly found LH also
exhibited significant inhibition of regional lymph nodes
metastasis. This also can be explained by the inhibition
of actin cytoskeleton, cell motility and MMPs. The other
reason of LH suppressing lymphatic metastasis might be
the inhibition of VEGF-D-induced lymphangiogenesis via
VEGFR-3 pathway [29, 41].
In conclusion, our study proved that non-toxic dose
of LH can significantly suppress HCC metastasis with

Figure 10: Antitumor effects of LH on HepG2 xenograft model. Nude mice (n = 10 per group) were administered i.v. every
3  days with 20 mg/kg LH for 4 weeks starting at day 7 after 2 × 106 HepG2 cells were injected into mice. (A) Indicate a significant
difference in tumor volume between LH-treated groups and control groups. Points, average tumor volume; bars ± SE. Data represent the
mean ± SE (*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, compared with the LH group). (B) Toxicity-dependent weight loss in mice treated with LH compared
with control groups. Points, average body weights; bars ± SE. (C) Tumor images of HepG2 xenograft models (left) and tumor weights of
HepG2 xenograft models(right). Data represent the mean ± SE. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, compared with the LH group.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

926

Oncotarget

less toxicity to host body. Hence, LH may be a promising
candidate agent for anti-metastasis in a clinical setting
without causing severe side effects.

antibody, anti-Phospho-p44/42 MAP Kinase monoclonal
rabbit antibody, anti-AKT monoclonal rabbit antibody,
anti-Phospho-AKT monoclonal mouse antibody, antiPhospho-SAPK/JNK (Thr183/Tyr185) (81E11) Rabbit
mAb, anti-SAPK/JNK rabbit mAb, anti-Phospho-p38
MAPK (Thr180/Tyr182) (12F8) Rabbit mAb and
anti-p38 MAPK rabbit antibody were purchased from
Cell Signaling Laboratories (Beverly, MA). PMA
(Phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate), specific inhibitors of
PI3K [LY294002 (LY)], MAPK family [PD98059 (PD),
mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase (MEK) inhibitor;
SP600125 (SP), c-jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) inhibitor
and SB203580 (SB), P38 MAPK inhibitor], gelatin and
FITC-phalloidin were purchased from Sigma Chemical

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Antibody and reagents
Anti-MMP-9 polyclonal goat antibody, anti-β-actin
monoclonal mouse antibody, goat anti-rabbit IgG/HRP,
goat anti-mouse IgG/HRP, rabbit anti-goat IgG/HRP
were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa
Cruz, CA). Anti-Phospho-EGFR rabbit mAb, anti-EGFR
rabbit mAb, anti-p44/42 MAP Kinase monoclonal rabbit

Figure 11: Assessment of the MMP-9 secretion in tissues of primary tumors, lungs and regional lymph nodes. Paraffinembedded sections were subjected to immunohistochemical analysis with MMP-9 antibody as described in materials and methods.
(A) Expression in tumor sections. (B) Expression in lymph nodes sections. (C) Expression in lung sections. Partial staining-positive cells
were indicated by red arrows.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

927

Oncotarget

Co, (St.Louis, MO). PC, cholesterol and PEG4000 were
purchased from Sigma Chemical Co, (St.Louis, MO);
Honokiol was separated and purified by our laboratory
and its purity and structure were analyzed and identified
by high performance liquid chromatography and nuclear
magnetic resonance [16].

washed with PBS for two times, then fixed with 75%
ethanol for 24 hours. Then cells were washed with PBS
for three times, and stained with PI (50 μg/ml) for 20 min.
The cells were then subjected to flow cytometry for cell
cycle analysis.

Annexin V-FITC/PI apoptosis assay

Cell lines and cell culture

Cells were plated on 6-well culture plates. After
incubation for 24 hours, cells were treated with empty
liposome or 40 μM LH for another 24 hours. Cells were
washed with PBS for two times. Then cells were subjected
to the AnnexinV/PI Apoptosis Detection kit (Invitrogen)
for staining according to the manufacturer’s instructions,
and finally analyzed by flow cytometry.

Human hepatocellular carcinoma HepG2, SK-HEP1,
SMMC-7721 cells, normal liver cells LO2 cells, mice
melanoma B16F10 cells were obtained from the American
Type Culture Collection (ATCC) in 2009. Cells were
cultured in DMEM containing 10% fetal bovine serum
(FBS), 100 U/mL penicillin, and 100 μg/mL streptomycin
at 37°C in an atmosphere of 5% CO2. All the cells were
tested and authenticated every year by an AmpFlSTR
Identifiler PCR Amplification Kit (Applied Biosystems) in
our laboratory, and the cells were last tested in October
2014. For visualizing dynamics of tumor cells metastasis
process in zebrafish model, HepG2 cells were transfected
with red fluorescent genes (pDsRed-N1 expression vectors;
Invitrogen) by using Lipofectamine 2000 reagents. Then
cells were selected via a limiting dilution protocol using
96-well plate. Briefly, transfected HepG2 cells were
cultured in conditioned DMEM medium containing
700 μg/mL G418. After 7 days, G418-resistant cells were
collected by trypsinization and amplified for use.

Cell migration analysis
Wound-healing assay was carried out to examine
the migration potency of tumor cells. Briefly, HepG2
cells were seeded in gelatin-coated 6-well plates and
grown overnight to confluence. The monolayer cells were
scratched with 200 μL pipette tips to create wounds, and
cells were washed twice with serum-free DMEM to remove
the non-adherent cells and then replaced with serum-free
DMEM. Cells were subjected to the indicated treatment
for 24 h, and cells migrating from the leading edge were
photographed immediately after wounding (0 hour) and at
time points 24 hours. Average rates of wound closure were
derived from three randomly selected fields.

Preparation of liposomal honokiol

Immunofluorescence staining

To improve the poor water solubility of honokiol,
liposomal honokiol (LH) was prepared in our laboratory
and the method was described in our previously published
paper [29]. The dose of LH was measured in equivalent
dose of honokiol.

HepG2 HCC cells were allowed to grow on glass
coverslips in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium
supplemented with 10% calf serum (complete growth
medium). Serum was starved overnight, and then subjected
to the indicated medium for 24 h before they were treated
with empty liposome or LH (40 μM). Cells on the
coverslips were washed with ice-cold PBS and fixed with
4% paraformaldehyde solution in PBS for 10 minutes.
After washed with PBS 3 times, cells were permeabilized
with 0.1% Triton X-100 in PBS for 5 minutes. After
additional 3 times PBS washing, cells were incubated
with FITC-conjugated phalloidin in PBS (5 μg/ml) for
30 minutes, stained of nuclear by Hoechst 33258 (10 μg/ml)
for 10 minutes and washed with PBS for 30 minutes.
Coverslips were mounted in 90% glycerol containing
0.1%–0.1% p-phenylenediamine dihydrochloride in PBS.
Images were captured using a Zeiss microscope equipped
with a digital camera.

Cytotoxicity assay
MTT assay was performed to evaluate the drug
cytotoxicity. Cells were treated with empty liposome or
various concentrations of LH in 96-well culture plates for
24 hours in final volumes of 200 μL (5 × 104­­­ cells/mL).
Then 20 μL of MTT (5 mg/mL in PBS) was added to
each well, incubated for an additional 4 h, the plate was
centrifuged at 1000 rpm for 5 min, and then the medium
was removed. MTT formazan precipitate was dissolved
in 150 μL of DMSO, shaken mechanically for 5 min and
then absorbance readings at a wavelength of 570 nm
were taken on a spectrophotometer (Molecular Devices,
Sunnyvale, USA).

Measurement of Rac1/Cdc42 activity by pull
down assay

Cell cycle analysis
Cells were plated on 6-well culture plates. After
incubation for 24 hours, cells were treated with empty
liposome or 40 μM LH for another 24 hours. Cells were
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

In brief, HepG2 cells were starved in serum free
DMEM medium overnight before subjected to the
928

Oncotarget

indicated treatments. PMA were used as an activator of
Rho family small GTP proteins. After ice-cold rinse and
lyses, equal amount of lysate were incubated with GSTPak1-PBD agarose in resins at 4°C for 1 hour. During this
process, GTPγS (100 μM) and GDP (1 mM) protein were
added to untreated lysates as positive and negative control
respectively. The mixtures were centrifuged, washed and
eluted in lyses buffer to pull down only the active form of
Rac1 and Cdc42. The eluted samples were re-suspended in
2× Laemmli reducing sample buffer and boil for 5 minutes
and run on 12% SDS-PAGE and subjected to Western blot
assay using antibodies against Rac1 or Cdc42. Rac1 and
Cdc42 activities were indicated by amounts of Pak1-PBDbound Rac 1(GTP-Rac1) and Cdc42 (GTP-Cdc42). Total
cell lysates were also subjected to immunoblotting for the
levels of total Rac1 and Cdc42.

DMEM media (2 × 107/ml) and kept on ice for injection.
Pretreatment with LH was adapted instead of treatment
after cells injection to avoid the potential interruption of
zebrafish vascular system from LH. Then HepG2-Red
cells were injected into the blood circulation (50–100 cells
per fish) using a micro-injector equipped with a 0.75 mm
glass needles (no filament, L = 50 mm, diameter of the
needle opening = 20 μM). Zebrfish burdened tumor cells
were maintained at 30.5°C. 24 and 48 hours after injection,
the extravasation of HepG2-Red in Tg (flk1:EGFP)
zebrafish embryos were observed and counted under a
Zeiss fluorescent microscope (200×). More than 20 fish
containing about 160 cells were analyzed for each group.

Establishment of pulmonary metastasis models
Two pulmonary metastatic models were established
in female athymic BALB/c nude mice (6–8 weeks
of age) and C57BL6 mice (6–8 weeks of age) for the
investigation of anti-metastatice effect of LH, according to
the guidelines set by the Institute’s Animal Care and Use
Committee. During the experimental period, all animals
were maintained in a dedicated aseptic environment as
approved by institutional protocol and guidelines. In the
first series of experiments, therapeutic effects on the early
phases of metastasis were evaluated. HepG2 cells (2 × 106)
in 100 μL serum-free medium were injected through the
tail vein of nude mice. The treatment initiated from the day
of tumor cells injection. The mice were randomized into
3 groups (n = 6) and treated with 20 mg/kg LH, empty
liposomal or normal saline, respectively. Each mouse
was administered i.v. every three days for 15 days. After
mice were sacrificed, lungs were collected for identify
the number of metastasis nodules on the lung surface.
Lung were excised and fixed in 10% formalin for further
histologic analysis.
To assess therapeutic effects in already established
metastases, C57BL6 mice (n = 6 mice per group) were
injected intravenously with 2.5 × 105 B16F10 cells, and
treatment was started 8 days after transplantation. The
mice were randomized into 3 groups (n = 6) and treated
with 20 mg/kg LH, empty liposomal or normal saline,
respectively. Each mouse was administered i.v. every three
days for 15 days. Metastasis was evaluated 15 days after
initiation of treatment.

Western blotting
This experiment was performed following
previously study [42]. Cells were lysed with protein lysis
buffer [150 mM NaCl, 1.0% Nonidet P-40, 0.5% sodium
deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0),
5mM sodium fluoride, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate and
1mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF)]. Protein
concentration was determined by the bradford protein
assay. The samples were denatured in sample buffer, and
equal amounts of protein were separated according to
molecular weight on a 8% to 12% SDS-PAGE gel and
transferred onto a polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF)
membrane. Membranes were blocked for 1 hour in 5%
dried milk in TBST at room temperature and probed
overnight at 4°C with indicated primary antibodies
diluted in “blocking buffer”. Blots were washed thrice
for about 15 minutes with TBST and incubated with
a horseradish peroxidase–conjugated species-specific
antibody diluted in blocking buffer for 1 hour at room
temperature with rotation. After three additional washes,
blots were developed by a 1-minute incubation with
enhanced chemiluminescent substrate and exposure to
Kodak X-OMAT autoradiographic film (Kodak, Hemel
Hempstead, United Kingdom).

Quantification of HepG2 extravasation in
zebrafish metastasis model

Establishment of lung metastasis and regional
nodal metastasis tumor xenograft

To study the effect of honokiol on extravasation
of HepG2 cells, we established a metastasis model in
Tg(flk1:EGFP) transgenic zebrafish as previously described
[43]. Briefly, 48 hours old Tg(flk1:EGFP) transgenic
zebrafish embryos were obtained and maintained at
28.5°C. Embryos were de-chorionized (if necessary) and
anesthetized with 0.003% tricaine and positioned on their
right side on a wet agarose plate. Red fluorescence-labeled
HepG2 cells (HepG2-Red) pretreated with empty liposome
or LH (40 μM) for 6 hours were resuspended in FCS-free
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

To determine the in vivo anti-tumor activity of LH
on lung metastasis and regional nodal metastasis, HepG2
cells (2 × 106 in 100 μL saline) were injected s.c. into the
right flanks of female nude mice (6 weeks old, BALB/cAnu (nu/nu). When the tumor reached 3 mm × 3 mm, thirty
mice were randomly divided into 3 groups (n = 10) and
treated with 20 mg/kg LH, empty liposome and normal
929

Oncotarget

saline (NS), respectively. The treatment initiated at day 7
after tumor cells injection. Each mouse was administered
i.v. every three days for 4 weeks. Tumor volume were
measured every three days with a caliper (calculated
volume (mm3) = π/6 × length × width × width). As a
general measure of toxicity, body weights were determined
on the same schedule as tumor volume measurements.

Ethics statement

Identification of pulmonary metastases and
metastatic regional lymph nodes

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING

All the methods were carried out in accordance
with the approved guidelines and the entire experimental
protocols were approved by the Institutional Animal Care
and Use Committee of Sichuan University (Chengdu,
China).

The authors greatly appreciate the financial support
from National Natural Science Foundation of China
(81673653) and National Key Programs of China during
the 12th Five-Year PlanPeriod (2012ZX09103101-066).

Mice (n = 5) were sacrificed to identify the
extrahepatic metastasis to the regional lymph nodes and
lungs on day 34 after cells injection in the xenograft
model. The rest of the mice (n = 5) were examined daily
for survival until 60th day or sacrificed and regarded as
dead when the tumor volume reached 4000 mm3. The
presence of metastasis was macroscopically examined
in all abdominal and thoracic internal organs in both two
mice models. Lungs were removed and photographed,
and then the number of surface metastatic nodules on
lung specimens was counted under a micro-dissecting
microscope. All specimens including regional lymph
nodes and internal organs were evaluated by H&E staining
to confirm the metastatic lesions.
To searching the regional lymph nodes, anesthetized
HepG2 tumor-bearing mice were intradermally injected
with 100 μL Evans blue (Sigma, 5 mg/ml in PBS) by the
side of tumor. After 10 minutes, mice were photographed
for observation of the dye going through the draining
lymphatic vessels and Evans blue-stained draining lymph
nodes. Following the lymphatic mapping, the axillary,
brachial, inguinal, popliteal and superficial cervical lymph
nodes were extirpated.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no potential conflicts of interest.

REFERENCES
1.	

Hussain SA, Ferry DR, El-Gazzaz G, Mirza DF, James ND,
McMaster P, Kerr DJ. Hepatocellular carcinoma. Ann
Oncol. 2001; 12:161–172.
2.	 Kensler TW, Qian GS, Chen JG, GroopmaTPAn JD.
Translational strategies for cancer prevention in liver. Nat
Rev Cancer 2003; 3:321–329.
3.	 Trevisani F, Cantarini M, Wands, JM. Recent advances
in the natural history of hepatocellular carcinoma.
Carcinogenesis.2008; 29:1299–1305.
4.	 Katyal S, Oliver JH, Peterson MS, Ferris JV, Carr BS,
Baron, RL. Extrahepatic Metastases of Hepatocellular
Carcinoma. Radiology. 2000; 216:698–703.
5.	 Qin LX, Tang ZY. The prognostic molecular markers in
hepatocellular carcinoma. World J Gastroenterol. 2002;
8:385–392.
6.	 Chambers AF, Groom AC, MacDonald IC. Dissemination
and growth of cancer cells in metastatic sites. Nat Rev
Cancer 2002; 2:563–572.
7.	 Weber GF. Why does cancer therapy lack effective antimetastasis drugs? Cancer Lett. 2013; 328:207–211.
8.	 Ji EL, Si HB, Choi JY, Yoon SK, You YK, Lee MA.
Epirubicin, Cisplatin, 5-FU combination chemotherapy in
sorafenib refractory metastatic hepatocellular carcinoma.
World J Gastroenterol. 2014; 20:235–241.
9.	Wang  Q, Zhong YJ, Yuan JP,  Shao LH, Zhang J, Tang L,
Liu SP, Hong YP, Raymond AF, Li Y. Targeting therapy of
hepatocellular carcinoma with doxorubicin prodrug PDOX
increases anti-metastatic effect and reduces toxicity: a
preclinical study. J Trans Med. 2013; 11:192–204.
10.	 Huang P, Xu X, Wang L, Zhu B, Wang X, Xia J. The
role of EGF-EGFR signalling pathway in hepatocellular
carcinoma inflammatory microenvironment. J Cell Mol
Med. 2014;18:218–230.

Histologic analysis
Specimens of primary tumor with adjacent
tissues, relevant internal organs and lymph nodes were
harvested and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) for
paraffin sectioning of H&E. And followed by staining in
hematoxylin solution 5 minutes; washing in tap water;
rinsed in HCl solution 0.1% for 10 s; washed in tap water;
stained in eosin solution for 2 minutes; washed in tap
water, then mounted sections in neutral gum.

Statistical analysis
Data were assayed by ANOVA and unpaired
student’s t-test. Values are expressed as the mean ± SE.
Survival curves were constructed according to the KaplanMeier method, and the survivals were compared by means
of the log rank test. A P-value of < 0.01 or < 0.05 was
regarded as indicating a significant difference.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

930

Oncotarget

11.	 Steeg PS. Metastasis suppressors alter the signal transduction
of cancer cells. Nat Rev Cancer. 2003; 3:55–63.

24.	 Xianhe B, Francesca C, Masuko UF, Muhammad W,
Campbell PM, Baskaran G, Channing JD, Traci B,
David AF, Ye KQ, Emma M, Wolfgang D, Gerald S, et al.
Honokiol, a small molecular weight natural product,
inhibits angiogenesis in vitro and tumor growth in vivo.
J Biol Chem. 2003; 278:35501–35507.
25.	 Nagase H, Ikeda K, Sakai Y. Inhibitory effect of
magnolol and honokiol from Magnolia obovata on human
fibrosarcoma HT-1080 invasiveness in vitro. Planta Med.
2001; 67:705–708.
26.	 Kwang SA, Gautam S, Shishir S, Bokyung S, Jack LA,
Bharat BA. Honokiol potentiates apoptosis, suppresses
osteoclastogenesis, and inhibits invasion through
modulation of nuclear factor-κB activation pathway. Mol
Cancer Res. 2006; 4:621–633.
27.	 Liu Y, Chen L, He X, Fan L, Yang G, Chen X, Lin X,
Du L, Li Z, Ye H, Mao Y, Zhao X, Wei Y. Enhancement
of therapeutic effectiveness by combining pegylated
liposomal of honokiol and cisplatin in ovarian carcinoma.
Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2008; 18:652–659.
28.	 Hou WL, Chen LJ, Yang GL, Zhou H, Jiang QQ,
Zhong  ZH, Hu J,Chen X, Wang XH, Tang MH, Wen J,
Wei  YQ. Synergistic antitumor effects of liposomal
honokiol combined with adriamycin in breastcancer models.
Phytother Res 2008;22:1125–1132
29.	 Wen J, Fu A, Chen L, Xie X, Yang G, Chen X, Chen XC,
Wang YS, Li J, Chen P, Tang MH, Shao XM, Lu Y,
et al. Liposomal honokiol inhibits VEGF-D-induced
lymphangiogenesis and metastasis in xenograft tumor
model. Int J Cancer. 2009; 124:2709–2718.
30.	 Hu J, Chen LJ, Liu L, Chen X, Chen PL, Yang GL,
Hou WL, Tang MH, Zhang F, Wang XH, Zhao X, Wei YQ.
Liposomal honokiol, a potent anti-angiogenesis agent, in
combination with radiotherapy produces a synergistic
antitumor efficacy without increasing toxicity.  Expl Mol
Med. 2008;40:617–628.

12.	 Teng CM, Chen CC, Ko FN, Lee LG, Huang TF, Chen YP,
Hsu HY. Two antiplatelet agents from Magnolia officinalis.
Thromb Res. 1988; 50:757–765.
13.	 Clark AM, El-Feraly FS, Li WS. Antimicrobial activity of
phenolic constituents of Magnolia grandiflora L. J Pharm
Sci. 1981; 70:951–952.
14.	 Watanabe K, Watanabe H, Goto Y, Yamaguchi M,
Yamamoto N, Hagino K.. Pharmacological properties of
magnolol and honokiol extracted from Magnolia officinalis:
central depressant effects. Planta Med.1983; 49:103–108.
15.	 Liou KT, Shen YC, Chen CF, Tsao CM, Tsai SK. Honokiol
protects rat brain from focal cerebral ischemia-reperfusion
injury by inhibiting neutrophil infiltration and reactive
oxygen species production. Brain Res. 1983; 992:159–166.
16.	 Chen L, Zhang Q, Yang G, Fan L, Tang J, Garrard I, Svetlana I,
Derek F, Sutherland I. Rapid purification and scale-up
of honokiol and magnolol using high-capacity highspeed counter-current chromatography. J Chromatogr A.
2007; 142:115–122.
17.	 Wang T, Chen F, Chen Z, Wu YF, Xu XL, Zheng, S, Hu X.
Honokiol induces apoptosis through p53-independent
pathway in human colorectal cell line RKO. World J
Gastroenterol. 2004; 10:2205–2208.
18.	 Hibasami H, Achiwa Y, Katsuzaki H, Imai K, Yoshioka K,
Nakanishi K, Ishii Y, Hasegawa M,  Komiya T. Honokiol
induces apoptosis in human lymphoid leukemia Molt 4B
cells. Int J Mol Med. 1998; 2:671–673.
19.	 Konoshima T, Kozuka M, Tokuda H, Nishino H,
Iwashima A, Haruna M, Kazuo I, Masahiro T. Studies on
inhibitors of skin tumor promotion, IX: neolignans from
Magnolia officinalis. J Nat Prod 1991; 54:816–822.
20.	 Ishitsuka K, Hideshima T, Hamasaki M, Raje N, Kumar  S,
Hideshima H, Norihiko S, Hiroshi Y, Aldo MR, Paul  R,
Klaus P, Steven LG, Dharminder C, et al. Honokiol
overcomes conventional drug resistance in human
multiple myeloma by induction of caspase-dependent and
-independent apoptosis. Blood 2005; 106:1794–1800.

31.	 Rajendran P, Li F, Shanmugam MK, Vali S, Abbasi T.
Honokiol inhibits signal transducer and activator of
transcription-3 signaling, proliferation, and survival of
hepatocellular carcinoma cells via the protein tyrosine
phosphatase SHP-1. J Cell Physiol. 2012; 227:2184–2195.

21.	 Yang SE, Hsieh MT, Tsai TH, Hsu SL. Down-modulation
of Bcl-xL, release of cytochrome c and sequential activation
of caspases during honokiol-induced apoptosis in human
squamous lung cancer CH27 cells. Biochem Pharmacol.
2002; 63: 641- 651.

32.	 Min SS, Kim JH, Kim HJ, Chang KC, Sang WP. Honokiol
activates the LKB1–AMPK signaling pathway and
attenuates the lipid accumulation in hepatocytes. Toxical
Appl Pharm. 2015; 284:113–124.

22.	 Hahm E, Singh SV. Honokiol causes G0-G1 phase cell cycle
arrest in human prostate cancer cells in association with
suppression of retinoblastoma protein level/phosphorylation
and inhibition of E2F1 transcriptional activity. Mol Cancer
Ther. 2007; 6:2686–2695.

33.	 Maruthamuthu V, Aratyn-Schaus Y, Gardel ML. Conserved
F-actin dynamics and force transmission at cell adhesions.
Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2010; 22:583–588.

23.	 Hahm ER, Arlotti JA, Marynowski SW, Singh SV.
Honokiol, a constituent of oriental medicinal herb magnolia
officinalis, inhibits growth of PC-3 xenografts in vivo in
association with apoptosis induction. Clin Cancer Res.
2008;14:1248–1257.

35.	 Seiki M. The cell surface: the stage for matrix
metalloproteinase regulation of migration. Curr Opin Cell
Biol. 2002; 14:624–632.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

34.	 Parri M, Chiarugi P. Rac and Rho GTPases in cancer cell
motility control. Cell Commun Signal, 2010; 8: 23.

36.	 Liotta LA, Kohn EC. The microenvironment of the tumourhost interface. Nature 2001; 411:375–379.
931

Oncotarget

37.	 Park EJ, Min HY, Chung HJ, Hong JY, Kang YJ, Hung TM,
Ui JY, Yeong SK, Ki HB, Sam SK, Sang KL. Downregulation of c-Src/EGFR-mediated signaling activation
is involved in the honokiol-induced cell cycle arrest and
apoptosis in MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cells
Cancer Lett. 2009; 277:133–140.

41.	 Zhao CJ. Distinct contributions of angiogenesis and vascular
co-option during the initiation of primary microtumors and
micrometastases. Carcinogenesis. 2011; 32:1133–1142.
42.	 Shen W, Du R, Li J, Shen WZ, Du RL, Li J, Luo XH,
Zhao ST, Chang AT, Zhou W, Gao RF, L uo DH, Wang J,
et al. TIFA suppresses hepatocellular carcinoma progression
via MALT1-dependent and-independent signaling
pathways. Signal Transd Target Ther, 2016; 1: 16013.

38.	 Jiménez C, Portela RA, Mellado M, Rodríguez-Frade JM,
Collard J, Serrano A, Carlos MA, Jesus A, Ana CC. Role of
the PI3K regulatory subunit in the control of actin organization
and cell migration. J Cell Biol. 2000; 151:249–262.

43.	 Stacker SA, Caesar C, Baldwin ME, Thornton GE,
Williams RA, Prevo R, David GJ, Nishikawa S, Hajime K,
Marc GA. VEGF-D promotes the metastatic spread of
tumor cells via the lymphatics. Nat Med. 2001; 7:186–191.

39.	 Robert RL, Isaiah JF. Tumor Cell-Organ Microenvironment
Interactions in the Pathogenesis of Cancer Metastasis.
Endocr Rev. 2007; 28:297–321.
40.	Johanna AJ. Therapeutic targeting of the tumor
microenvironment. Cancer Cell. 2005; 7:513–520.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

932

Oncotarget

