Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 25

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Similar but different: distinct roles for KRAS and BRAF oncogenes
in colorectal cancer development and therapy resistance
Markus Morkel1, Pamela Riemer1,2, Hendrik Bläker2,3, Christine Sers1,2
1

 harité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Institute of Pathology, Laboratory of Molecular Tumor Pathology and Systems Biology,
C
Berlin 10117, Germany

2

 KTK, German Consortium for Translational Cancer Research, Partner Site Berlin and DKFZ, German Cancer Research
D
Center, D-63170 Heidelberg, Germany

3

Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Institute of Pathology, Berlin 10117, Germany

Corresponding to:
Christine Sers, e-mail: christine.sers@charite.de
Keywords: KRAS, BRAF, colorectal cancer, signaling, therapy
Received: May 07, 2015	

Accepted: July 17, 2015	

Published: July 30, 2015

ABSTRACT
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is characterized by recurrent mutations deregulating
key cell signaling cascades and providing the cancer cells with novel functional traits.
Among the most frequent mutations in CRC are gain-of-function missense mutations
in KRAS and BRAF. Oncogenic activation of KRAS and BRAF is mutually exclusive and
occurs in approximately 40% and 10% of all CRCs, respectively. Here we summarize
genetic alterations currently described in the literature and databases, indicating
overlapping but also specific co-occurrences with either mutated BRAF or KRAS.
We describe common and potentially specific biological functions of KRAS and BRAF
oncoproteins in the intestinal epithelial cells and during initiation and progression of
CRC. We discuss signal transduction networks, highlighting individual functions of
oncogenic KRAS and BRAF in terms of feedback loops and their impact on treatment
outcome. Finally, we give an update on current strategies of targeted therapeutic
intervention in oncogenic RAS-RAF signaling networks for the treatment of metastatic
CRC and outline future directions.

Receptor tyrosine kinases stimulate KRAS activity via
guanine nucleotide exchange factors, which activate
KRAS by favoring GTP binding. The negative control
is exerted through GTPase-activating proteins, which
promote hydrolysis of GTP and thus KRAS inactivation.
BRAF is a serine-threonine kinase that can be activated
by KRAS and represents the top level element of the
RAF-MEK-ERK (MAPK) kinase cascade [4]. MAPK
signals regulate proliferation, differentiation, cell
motility and further aspects of cellular activity via
phosphorylation of many ERK substrates, such as
cytoskeletal components and transcription factors.
KRAS can also activate other signaling pathways in
addition to the MAPK cascade. One of these is the
PIK3CA-AKT-mTOR axis, which regulates protein
translation and cell survival [5]. Together, the MAPK
cascade and intersecting signaling pathways form a
highly connected oncogenic network in CRC.

INTRODUCTION
KRAS and BRAF as main players in the
MAPK network
Cancer cells rely on signaling networks that are
self-sufficient in providing growth signals and are
refractory to growth inhibitory or apoptosis signals.
This is due to multiple activating mutations in protooncogenes and functional loss of tumor suppressor genes
[1]. KRAS and BRAF are major oncogenic drivers of
colorectal cancer (CRC). They play further important
roles in other cancer entities. Roles of KRAS and
BRAF in other cancers are not discussed here, but have
recently been reviewed elsewhere [2]. KRAS, a small
GTPase, acts as a central relay for signals originating
at receptor tyrosine kinases such as the EGFR family in
the intestinal epithelium and in many other tissues [3].

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20785

Oncotarget

Mutational patterns of KRAS, BRAF and other
MAPK network genes in CRC

outcome have been identified in patients that harbor
different KRAS mutations in the codons 12 and 13 [15,
16], although the data are discussed controversially and
the mechanistic basis for these findings remains unknown.
In addition to mutations, amplification of mutated KRAS
and loss of heterozygosity resulting in elimination of the
wildtype KRAS allele have been reported [11]. Since
non-mutated RAS can limit the effects of oncogenic RAS,
allelic imbalances favoring mutated KRAS could further
supplement oncogenic KRAS signals [17].
BRAF mutations are less frequent in CRC [18]
(COSMIC and TCGA report 11% and 10% of CRCs
with activating mutations in BRAF; Fig. 1) [9–11].
BRAF mutations in CRC are mostly V600E amino acid
substitutions, although various other mutations at codon
600 or neighboring positions within the kinase domain are
documented, too. Structural studies of RAF proteins have
identified the valine at position 600 as a crucial site within
the conserved kinase domain, which is required for BRAF
to maintain an inactive conformation in the absence of
KRAS-BRAF interaction [19]. Mechanistically, mutations
at this site likely render mutated BRAF independent from
dimerization with BRAF or RAF1, which is normally a
prerequisite for activation. Consequently, the V600E

Approximately 40% of CRCs display activating
missense mutations in KRAS [6–8] (the COSMIC database
reports 36% [9], while TCGA reports 42% of KRAS
mutations [10, 11]; Fig. 1). These affect hotspots in
codons 12 and 13 (80% of all KRAS mutations, of these
are G12D > G12V > G13D > G12C > G12A), codon 61
(4% of all KRAS mutations, of these are Q61H > Q61L >
Q61R) and 146 (1–2% of all KRAS mutations, mostly
A146T and A146V). Furthermore, additional mutations
in KRAS at various positions (e.g. 68, 117) are cataloged
in the databases, yet their functional impact on KRAS
protein function is largely unknown.
Structural analyses have presented a rationale for
how the most frequent mutations activate KRAS: the
glycine residues at positions 12 and 13 are important sites
for interaction of KRAS with GAPs, while the glutamine
at position 61 is a crucial site for the hydrolysis of GTP
[12–14]. Therefore, mutations at either site lock KRAS
in an active GTP-bound conformation constitutively
presenting a docking surface for RAF kinases, including
BRAF and CRAF (RAF1). Differences in clinical

Figure 1: Mutational spectra of KRAS, BRAF and the Wnt effector genes APC and FBXW7 in CRC. Inner circle: fractions
of KRAS-mutant (red) and BRAF-mutant (orange) and KRAS/BRAF-wildtype (grey) CRC. The most common mutations are given within
the sections. Outer rings: relative proportions of APC-mutant (blue) or FBXW7-mutant (green) CRC found in KRAS-mutant, BRAFmutant and KRAS/BRAF-wt CRC. APC mutations are significantly underrepresented in BRAF-mut CRC, while FBXW7 mutations are
overrepresented. Mutational frequencies were derived from the TCGA and COSMIC databases.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20786

Oncotarget

mutation is strongly activating, resulting in constitutive
MEK binding, phosphorylation and therefore BRAF
signal transduction. BRAF amplification and BRAF loss
of heterozygosity have infrequently been detected in
CRC  [11]. The significance of these BRAF genomic
imbalances is unclear, however BRAF copy number gains
have been implicated in drug resistance of CRC [20, 21].
KRAS and BRAF mutations occur in a mutually
exclusive manner in CRC [22] [9–11]. This may suggest
that the mutations are functionally redundant during
CRC development, i.e. no further selective advantage is
provided for a cell by the second mutation when the first
is already present. Another explanation for the mutual
exclusivity is that mutations in KRAS and BRAF may
be functionally incompatible; BRAF mutations would
thus have unfavorable effects in KRAS-mutant CRC
and vice versa, consequently leading to elimination of
cells that have acquired both mutations sequentially. As
a further explanation, KRAS or BRAF mutations could
provide specific selective advantages that co-depend on
the presence of other mutations. In support of this latter
scenario, APC and KRAS mutations frequently co-occur,
while APC and BRAF mutations show a significant trend
towards mutual exclusivity [10, 11]. In contrast, mutations
in the ubiquitin ligase FBXW7 often co-occur with BRAF
mutations, but are less frequent in KRAS-mutant or KRAS/
BRAF-wildtype CRC (Fig. 1). This suggests that KRAS,
but not BRAF mutations provide a selective advantage
specifically in APC-mutant CRC precursor cells, whereas
FBXW7 mutations provide the greatest advantage for CRC
cells harboring activated BRAF.
While mutations in KRAS and BRAF are the most
frequent alterations in the MAPK cascade in CRC, further
mutations involving other genes have been found. The
KRAS homologue NRAS (but not the third RAS family
member HRAS) harbors mutations in 2–4% of all CRCs,
clustering at the amino acid residues Q61 and G12
[9, 11, 23]. It has been argued that the distinct mutational
patterns within the RAS family are due to non-redundant
regulatory mechanisms and individual cellular functions
of KRAS, NRAS and HRAS [24, 25]. ARAF and RAF1
do not show mutations in CRC. A probable explanation
for the prevalence of BRAF mutations within the RAF
gene family is the presence of a BRAF-specific domain
that allows binding of additional interaction partners for
RAS interaction [26, 27]. Alternatively, it may be due to
the unique mode of activation of BRAF, which is primed
for MEK phosphorylation [19, 28, 29]. Indeed, BRAF is
a more potent signal transducer from RAS to the MEKERK kinases compared to ARAF or RAF1 [30, 31]. In
addition to RAS and RAF family members also NF1,
coding for the RAS-regulatory GTPase-activating protein
Neurofibromin  1, has been found mutated in some
(approx. 4%) CRCs [32]. Recently, it has been shown
that inactivation of NF1 can synergize with oncogenic
KRAS and also potentially with non-canonical KRAS
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

mutations [33]. Furthermore, another RAS-GAP encoding
gene, DAB2IP, displays mutations in approximately 8%
of all CRCs, as reported by TCGA. While the nature
and consequences of these non-synonymous SNPs is
currently unknown, the observations point towards more
prominent roles of RAS-associated regulatory processes
than previously anticipated. A potential tumor-suppressive
role of DAB2IP has recently been highlighted in a prostate
cancer model, where DAB2IP gene loss activated both
RAS and NFκB [34]. In addition, high DNA methylation
frequencies of the DAB2IP gene have been found in
multiple human cancers [35]. Mutations with functional
impact on MAPK signal transduction in genes encoding
the more downstream MEK and ERK kinases have not
been reported in CRC. However, approximately 6% of
CRCs harbor alterations within the MAP2K4 gene, also
called JNKK, a serine threonine kinase within the stressactivated MAPK pathway [10]. Together, alterations
in KRAS, NRAS, BRAF, NF1, DAB2IP and MAP2K4
comprise 64% of the CRC tumors presented by the
TCGA dataset. Only BRAF and KRAS mutations appear
significantly mutually exclusive, the other mutations can
occur within the same samples.

KRAS and BRAF mutations occur in
distinct sequences and patterns during
CRC development
Activation of the EGFR-RAS-RAF and the WntAPC-β-Catenin signaling axes represent key steps in
initiation and early progression of CRC [36, 37]. Indeed,
EGFR signals, together with Wnt and Notch signals,
form part of a larger signaling network controlling
the maintenance of stem cells and the proliferative
compartment of the normal intestinal epithelium [38–41].
Pathway-activating mutations represent essential
steps during the early phases of CRC development,
because they favor stem cell and proliferative
characteristics independently of ligands provided by the
microenvironment [42–44].
The EGFR-RAS-RAF and the Wnt-APC-βCatenin signaling cascades can be activated by different
mutations and in different order (Fig. 2). There is ample
evidence that different mutational sequences can give
rise to different forms of precancerous (adenomatous)
lesions. A majority (approx. 70–80%) of CRCs develop
via conventional adenomatous polyps that are initiated
by mutations activating the Wnt/β-catenin pathway,
commonly in APC [9, 11, 45]. Analyses of different
stages of human neoplasia and analyses of differentlysized adenomas revealed that KRAS mutations are rare
(10%) in small and early adenomas but frequent (50%) in
larger and more advanced adenomas [8, 46]. These data
imply that KRAS mutations often occur after the initiating
APC mutation in CRC developing from adenomatous
polyps. Indeed, mouse tumor models have shown that
20787

Oncotarget

oncogenic KRAS synergizes with loss of APC in intestinal
tumor progression: while APC inactivation results in
the formation of benign adenoma only, activation of
oncogenic KRAS in combination with APC inactivation
results in the growth of invasive adenocarcinomas [47,
48]. One mechanism contributing to synergistic effects
of the mutations is the convergence of KRAS-RAF1
and APC activities to promote nuclear localization of
β-Catenin and subsequent activation of intestinal cell
proliferation [49]. The sequence of events with APC/Wnt
being the initiating mutation and KRAS a tumor promoting
mutation is probably unique to APC and KRAS. To the
best of our knowledge, it has not been demonstrated that
BRAF mutations can follow APC mutations during the
development of conventional adenoma, suggesting that
BRAF does not perform strictly equivalent functions
as KRAS in the intestinal epithelium to promote
transformation and cancer progression.
A minor proportion (approx. 20–30%) of CRCs
develop via serrated precursors, such as sessile serrated
adenoma or hyperplastic polyps [50–52]. There are
multiple lines of evidence that serrated adenomas are
initiated via activating mutations in the EGFR-RASRAF signaling axis without prior APC inactivation. A
study concentrating on aberrant crypt foci, representing
the earliest precursors of CRC, found 10 out of 16 (63%)
serrated foci to display BRAF mutations, but only 1 of 33
non-serrated crypt focus was BRAF-mutant [53]. Another
study examined intestinal adenoma, and found BRAF
mutations in all (9/9) dysplastic serrated adenomas and
also in 18/50 (36%) hyperplastic polyps characterized
by elongated crypts [54]. In contrast to BRAF mutations,
KRAS mutations were comparatively infrequent in
serrated  crypt foci (3/16), absent in dysplastic serrated
adenoma (0/9), but present in 9/50 hyperplastic polyps
[53, 54]. Recent studies confirmed and extended these
results using genomic profiling [55]. In line with the
data from human precancerous lesions, several mouse
models of activated MAPK signaling display serrated
intestinal hyperplasia or dysplasia: overexpression of
EGF ligand results in serrated polyp formation in the
cecum [56], and inducible knock-in KRAS(G12D) mice
develop serrated hyperplasia of the small and large
intestine [57–59]. Likewise, activation of oncogenic
BRAF in the intestine results in formation of generalized
serrated hyperplasia [60, 61]. Analysis of BRAF-mutant
foci progressing via dysplastic stages to low- and highgrade carcinoma revealed a preferred sequence of events
in mouse serrated tumor progression [61]: following the
initiating BRAF mutation, MAPK activity was only mildly
enhanced. Advanced dysplastic foci contained further
mutations that activated the Wnt/β-catenin pathway, such
as activating mutations in Ctnnb1 (coding for β-Catenin),
or inactivating mutations in the negative Wnt regulators
Apc or Lrp1b. These together with the initiating BRAF

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

mutation and possibly further genomic alterations resulted
in a hyperactivation of both Wnt and MAPK signals. This
progression sequence for murine serrated adenoma is
in line with data from human sessile serrated adenoma,
which also displays both BRAF mutations and nuclear
β-Catenin [62, 63].
Several key lessons can be learned from the
collective studies of human CRC progression and mouse
models. Firstly, oncogenic KRAS is a key factor in the
progression of conventional adenoma by synergizing
with the initiating functional loss of APC. Secondly,
both oncogenic BRAF and KRAS can act as initiators in
the development of CRCs arising via serrated adenoma.
However, since BRAF mutations are strongly associated
with sessile serrated phenotypes, their individual effects
as tumor initiators in the intestinal epithelium are clearly
different. Thirdly, the observation of nuclear β-catenin
in serrated adenomas that arise via BRAF mutations
strongly suggests that high Wnt/β-catenin activity is
favored at an early stage of serrated tumor progression
via mechanisms yet unknown in human CRC. The TCGA
database provides a rich source of such alterations (such
as SNPs, gene fusions and copy number alterations), and
reveals that BRAF-mutated tumors are associated with
multiple mutations in Wnt pathway-associated genes
such as AXIN1, CDX2, SOX9, FBXW7, TCF7L1/2 and
RSPO1/2 [64]. The co-occurrence between mutations
in BRAF and FBXW7 is significant ( p-value < 0.001;
survey TCGA, May 2015), indicating that mutated
BRAF preferentially co-operates with distinct Wnt signal
modulators (Fig. 1). In contrast to conventional adenoma,
mutations in APC are an exception rather than the rule in
the developmental pathway of serrated adenoma driven
by BRAF [65].
A further important observation from mouse models
and human CRC is that mutations activating KRAS and
BRAF do not necessarily result in tumor formation in
the intestinal epithelium, due to the existence of failsafe mechanisms suppressing tumor growth after MAPK
activation. In humans, this is evidenced by the existence
of many serrated aberrant crypt foci, which are dormant
and do not progress [53]. In mice, oncogenic activation
via knock-in KRAS and BRAF alleles has likewise been
associated with the induction of oncogene-induced
senescence in some [59, 60], but not all [48, 58, 61,
66] models, suggesting that the response to oncogenic
MAPK signals is highly context-dependent. In oncogenic
KRAS as well as in BRAF mouse models, cells could
escape senescence following the deletion of p16INK4a
or p53 [59, 60], and these mutations are also frequent in
human CRC. It thus appears that tumor initiation and/
or progression by KRAS or BRAF not only depends on
mutational activation in the tumor-initiating cell, but also
on successful evasion of common tumor suppressing
mechanisms in the mutated clone.

20788

Oncotarget

KRAS and BRAF differentially regulate
cellular hierarchies, stem cell function and
CRC development

entire stem cell pool, which adopts progenitor fate [71].
A reduction of intestinal stem cell markers is also found
in hyperplastic intestinal tissue of BRAF(V637E) knockin mice [61]. It therefore appears that the KRAS and the
BRAF oncogenes modulate signaling networks controlling
homeostasis and stem cell competition in the intestinal
crypt in an opposing manner. Side-by-side studies using
comparable genetically engineered mouse models will
be required to ascertain these effects, which could shed
light on different selective constraints that KRASversus BRAF- mutant cells have for tumor initiation and
progression in the intestinal epithelium.
In agreement with the possibility of differential
functional roles of oncogenic KRAS and BRAF mutations
during early stages of tumor development, significant
correlations with molecular and clinical features have
been identified (Fig. 2). In particular, CRCs with mutant
BRAF are characterized by specific genetic and epigenetic
features [11, 65, 72–75]. On the level of the epigenome,
BRAF-mutant CRCs and their (serrated) precursors often
display genome-wide hypermethylation of CpG islands
(CpG Island Methylator Phenotype: CIMP-high). A
recent study suggests that the association between mutant

Recent studies in mice have unveiled distinct effects
of KRAS and BRAF oncogenes on cellular hierarchies in the
normal intestinal epithelium. For instance, both oncogenic
KRAS and BRAF can direct differentiation towards
secretory Goblet cells in the mouse intestine [58,  61,
67]. Furthermore, both oncogenes were found to affect
stem cell fate: using clonal analyses, two studies have
noted that the progeny of intestinal stem cells expressing
oncogenic KRAS expands within and beyond single crypts
by modulating asymmetric stem cell division [68, 69].
It is of note that the stem cell pool does not necessarily
expand while the KRAS mutation spreads in the tissue, due
to further and poorly defined mechanisms sustaining stem
cell homeostasis at the crypt level [67]. Furthermore, the
formation of ectopic stem cells in the differentiated villus
tissue has been observed after activation of KRAS(G12D)
in the intestine of mice [70]. In contrast to this, we found
that generalized transgenic expression of oncogenic
BRAF in the intestine results in a rapid depletion of the

Figure 2: Roles of KRAS (red) and BRAF (orange) in distinct progression pathways of CRC. A majority (70–80%) of

CRCs initiate via APC mutations (blue) and develop via conventional adenomatous polyps (to the left) that show no or low methylation
of CpG islands (CIMP-negative/low). KRAS, but not BRAF, mutations are frequent in this group. CRC developing via this route are
associated with microsatellite-stability (MSS) and chromosomal instablity (CIN). A minority (20–30%) of CRCs initiates via BRAF or
KRAS mutations and develop via serrated adenoma precursors (to the right). Sessile-serrated adenoma (SSA) is highly associated with
BRAF mutations. The malignant potential of hyperplastic polyps (HP) is not well defined. BRAF-mutant SSA frequently shows nuclear
β-Catenin, but APC mutations are rare. Serrated tumors, in particular these with BRAF mutations, often show strong methylation of CpG
islands (CIMP-high). CRC forming via the BRAF/SSA pathway are microsatellite-stable or microsatellite-instable (MSS/MSI). It is of note
that the diagram summarizes only major correlations between molecular and clinical features. APC, BRAF and KRAS mutations are given
in blue, yellow and red. Further genetic and epigenetic alterations arising during tumor progression are outlined. Dashed boxes indicate
events that are frequent but not mandatory in the progression pathway. Precursor lesions and prevalent methylation phenotypes are given
below the initiating mutations. The most common molecular CRC types are given in bold, below the progression pathways.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20789

Oncotarget

BRAF and CIMP-high is due to the phosphorylation of the
transcriptional co-repressor MAFG via the BRAF-MEKERK axis. Subsequently, complexes of phosphorylated
MAFG, BACH1 and the epigenetic modifiers CHD8
and DNMT3B are recruited to CpG islands, resulting in
focal DNA hypermethylation and transcriptional silencing
of nearby genes [76]. BRAF-mutant CRCs are also
characterized by mismatch-repair deficiency, high levels
of microsatellite instability (MSI-H) and very high overall
mutation rates (>12 mutations per 106 nucleotides) [22].
Clinically, BRAF mutations are associated with infiltration
of lymphocytes, localization in the proximal/right colon,
occurrence in female patients, poor differentiation,
mucinous (i.e. Goblet-cell rich) type. The association
with these features is well explained by the overlap of
BRAF mutations with microsatellite instability (MSI-H),
a common finding in the serrated pathway of colorectal
cancer. BRAF mutations have also been associated
with poor survival, but this phenomenon is restricted to
carcinomas not showing microsatellite instability [75].
In contrast, KRAS mutations are more frequent in CRCs
of the left colon and in male patients. KRAS mutations
are associated with microsatellite-stability (MSS) or low
levels of microsatellite-instability (MSI-L), and lower
rates of gene methylation (CIMP-negative or low).
Frequencies of BRAF and KRAS mutations, as well as
rates of CIMP and MSI form continuous gradients along
the longitudinal axis of the gut [77, 78]. This suggests
that CRC does not emerge as distinct subtypes that occur
strictly in the different parts of the colon and rectum.
Indeed, rectal cancer matches colon cancer regarding most
of its molecular features [11], but has a lower incidence
of BRAF mutations and patients may have individual
clinical requirements [79, 80]. More recently, integrated
unsupervised analyses of genetic and epigenetic traits have
supported the idea that distinct classes of CRCs exist along
borders defined by gene expression, genome stability
(such as MSI/MSS), epigenetic make-up (such as-CIMP
high/low/negative) and BRAF/KRAS mutational status
[11, 81–83]. In these classifications, CRCs with KRAS
or BRAF mutations are regularly enriched in different
classes, highlighting their different evolutionary histories
and distinct wiring of signaling networks.

both oncoproteins have been shown to contribute to
angiogenesis, cell differentiation, epithelial-mesenchymal
transition, adaptations of cellular metabolism and
circadian rhythm networks, and many further traits of
tumor cells. [3, 4, 84–87] . Due to the complex patterns of
interdependent driver mutations, cancer cells frequently
become dependent on certain oncogenic signals such as
for oncogenic KRAS in CRC [88]. This phenomenon—
designated as “oncogene addiction”—opens a therapeutic
window for the specific targeting of cancer [89, 90]. The
essential role of the hyperactivated EGFR-KRAS-BRAF
signaling cascade in CRC has spurred the development of
therapeutic approaches to inhibit the cascade on several
levels, specifically targeting EGFR, KRAS and BRAF
(Fig. 3, Table 1). KRAS itself, being a small GTPase, has
proven to be largely “undruggable” to date, despite recent
promising developments [91].
Inhibition of the transmembrane tyrosine kinase
receptor EGFR has proven to be beneficial for a
considerable subset of patients with metastatic CRC.
Upon treatment with EGFR-inhibiting antibodies such
as Cetuximab or Panitumumab, patients showed an
overall survival benefit of 3–5 months when the cancer
was wildtype for KRAS, but no benefit when the cancer
was KRAS-mutated [92–94]. Therefore, KRAS, and now
also NRAS mutations are considered negative predictive
markers for anti-EGFR therapy. Presently, Cetuximab and
Panitumumab are recommended as first-line therapy in
combination with chemotherapy for patients with wildtype
configurations in KRAS and NRAS according to European
(ESMO) and American (AJCC) standards. Other targeted
therapies currently available in clinical routine, such as the
VEGF inhibitor Bevazicumab, seem to act independently
of both KRAS and BRAF [95].
In contrast to the RAS mutations, mutant BRAF has
not been identified as an independent predictive marker for
first-line anti-EGFR therapy in a dedicated clinical study.
This is most likely due to the fact that BRAF mutations
occur at rather low frequencies and thus no clinical study
harbors enough patients to reach statistical significance.
Furthermore, patients with BRAF mutations, in particular
these with BRAF/MSS, have a poor outcome, which is
independent of the applied therapy [75] [95]. However,
a recent meta-analysis investigating the outcome of more
than 400 RASwt/BRAFmut patients from 10 different trials
clearly showed that patients harboring BRAF mutations do
not benefit from EGFR-directed therapy and thus should
be tested prior to the administration of either Cetuximab
or Panitumumab [96].
It is important to note that even responders to antiEGFR therapy routinely develop secondary resistance
during anti-EGFR therapy, often by selection of KRAS/
NRAS or BRAF-mutant clones arising from a RASwildtype cancer [97–99]. Indeed, mathematical modeling
has suggested that targeted monotherapy will invariably
lead to the selection of resistant cells once a cancer has

Similar and distinct roles of BRAF and KRAS in
signal transduction and therapeutic intervention
During tumor progression, genetic (and epigenetic)
alterations accumulate in an evolutionary manner via
consecutive cycles of mutation and selection. Multiple
mutations ultimately contribute to the formation of an
oncogenic network sustaining the transformed cancer
phenotype. In the oncogenic signal networks of advanced
CRC, mutated KRAS and BRAF have been shown to serve
many functions beyond maintaining cellular proliferation,
stemness and growth factor-independent growth. Indeed,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20790

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Therapeutic targets in CRC. A schematic representation of the EGFR-RAS-MAPK, PI3K and Wnt-APC-β-Catenin

signaling axes is given, along with therapeutics used in clinical studies. Arrows indicate important connections between the signaling
molecules. Drugs are given in blue, next to their targets. Names of proteins frequently refer to a representative member of a multiprotein
family. For further details, see main text. For a list of clinical studies, see Table 1.

phosphorylates EGFR and EGFR signaling adaptor
molecules at inhibitory residues, thus keeping signal
transduction of the ligand-bound receptor to RAS in check
[105–107]. Secondly, ERK activity induces transcription
of SPRY family feedback inhibitors that likewise control
signal transduction from receptors to RAS proteins [108].
These levels of feedback limit growth factor-induced
MAPK activation in the normal tissue. In CRC cells
with constitutive MAPK activity, feedbacks converging
on receptor tyrosine kinases are inactivated once MEK
is inhibited. Thus, receptors including EGFR become
activated under MEK blockade, triggering multiple
downstream pathways such as MAPK and the PIK3CAAKT-mTOR signaling axis (Fig. 4). In addition it has
been found that the EGFR family member gene ERBB3
is upregulated by the transcription factor c-Myc upon
MEK inhibition, suggesting further feedback control
on the transcriptional level [109]. In line with negative
transcriptional and posttranslational control of EGFR
signals via ERK, recent siRNA screens and systems
biology approaches have revealed that EGFR signal
re-activation plays an important role in resistance to
MEK blockade in CRC cells [110, 111]. In addition,

grown beyond a certain size [100]. Interestingly, a recent
CRC progression model suggested that clonal evolution
of CRC is constrained by the organization of the cancer
into distinct glandular crypts, effectively reserving
evolutionary sweeps in the advanced disease to rare events
such as metastasis and the emergence of therapy resistance
[101, 102]. Therefore, anti-EGFR therapy could aid the
expansion of KRAS- or BRAF-mutant clones that would
be contained in a local niche in the absence of therapy.
It appears to be a rational strategy to target mitogenic
signaling downstream of mutated KRAS and BRAF, since
both mutations are prevalent in primary and resistant CRC
and the mutations have a negative predictive and prognostic
value. However, inhibition of oncogenic BRAF(V600E)
using Vemurafenib, or of the MEK kinase using CI1040,
has proven to be ineffective in CRC [103, 104]. The
major reason for this disappointing outcome of kinase
inhibition within the MAPK kinase cascade is the existence
of multiple levels of feedback control, and regulatory
intersections with further pathways such as PI3K-AKT.
Indeed, several levels of feedback exist between
the RAF-MEK-ERK axis and upstream receptor tyrosine
kinases such as EGFR (Fig. 4): firstly, active ERK
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20791

Oncotarget

Table 1: Clinical studies employing targeted combination therapies for the treatment of advanced
CRC with specific mutation patterns
Study Identifier

Condition
(Mutations)

Intervention

Primary Outcome

Phase

NCT01791309

BRAF(V600E) CRC

Vemurafenib
Panitumumab

ORR

Pilot

NCT01719380

BRAF-mut CRC

LGX818
Cetuximab
BYL719

Toxicity, PFS

I/II

NCT01750918

BRAF(V600E) CRC

Dabrafenib
Trametinib
Panitumumab
5-fluorouracil

Safety, RR, PFS

I/II

NCT02278133

BRAF-mut CRC +
WNT974
upstream Wnt pathway LGX818
activation
Cetuximab

Toxicity, ORR

Ib/II

NCT01562899

KRAS-mut CRC

MEK162
Ganitumab

Toxicity, ORR

Ib/II

NCT02039336

KRAS-mut CRC

Dacomitinib
PD0325901

Toxicity, PFS

I/II

NCT02399943

RAS/RAF-wt CRC

Panitumumab
Trametinib

Response

II

For detailed information, refer to http://www.clinicaltrials.gov. For therapeutic targets, see Fig. 3. CRC = colorectal cancer;
ORR = overall response rate; PFS = progression-free survival; RR = response rate.
ERK activity controls MAPK signals via mechanisms
that provide feedback downstream of RAS. This level of
control is exerted directly via inhibitory phosphorylation
of RAF-1 by ERK [112], and also via transcriptional
activation the DUSP family of phosphatases that
dephosphorylate and therefore inactivate ERK [113].
Of the various layers of feedback control, the prevalent
mechanism in CRC cells appears to be strong negative
feedback from ERK1/2 to RAF [114]. Feedback activation
of EGFR and RAF have also been identified as important
mechanisms to mediate drug resistance following RAF or
MEK inhibition [99, 110, 115–117].
The disappointing results achieved using the
BRAF(V600E)-specific inhibitor Vemurafenib in  CRC
patients not only showed the importance of these
feedbacks in vivo, but also demonstrated the different
wiring of oncogenic networks in cancers of either
neuroectodermal or epithelial origin such as melanoma
and CRC, respectively. This led to the development
of preclinical treatment schemes that appear counterintuitive, but take into account the feedback-controlled
organization of oncogenic networks that can only be
controlled by simultaneous treatment with multiple drugs.
Preclinical studies suggested improved antitumor activity
when BRAF inhibition was employed in combinatorial
treatment [118]. Currently, several pilot trials and clinical
studies aim at simultaneously inhibiting EGFR and BRAF
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

or MEK for treatment of BRAF-mutant (or KRAS-mutant)
CRC patients, in order to block both, the oncogenic RAFMEK-ERK signal, as well as the feedback loop via EGFR
family members (Fig. 3, Table 1). First results suggest
that a limited clinical response exists in patients that
have failed in first-line therapies [119–124]. However,
patients who received EGFR-MEK-BRAF combination
therapies can also relapse with novel genetic alterations
conferring resistance through sustained MAPK activity,
such as amplification of KRAS or BRAF or, in one case,
a mutation in the downstream kinase MEK1 [125]. It is
indeed expected that combination therapies converging on
a common (downstream) signaling pathway are prone to
the development of therapy resistance [100].
It is important to note that KRAS- versus BRAFmutant CRCs likely display characteristic differences
in response to therapeutic interference in the MAPK
cascade, due to mechanistic differences in signal
transduction (Fig. 4). For one, BRAF mutations disallow
the critical feedback from ERK to RAF to occur, while
KRAS mutations leave this feedback intact [114]. As
a consequence, higher levels of MEK inhibitor are
required in KRAS mutated CRC cells as compared to
BRAF mutated cells to suppress MEK/ERK activation.
Furthermore, highlighting an important difference
between KRAS- and BRAF-mutant cancer cells,
ATP-competitive RAF inhibitors were found to block
20792

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Major feedback mechanisms controlling MAPK activity in CRC. A schematic representation of the EGFR-RASMAPK, PI3K and Wnt-APC-β-Catenin signaling axes is given, along with signaling connections. Major positive interactions are given as
black arrows, while inhibitory interactions are given as red blocked lines. Solid lines indicate molecular interactions, whereas dotted lines
indicate transcriptional control. Names frequently refer to a representative member of a multiprotein family.

MEK-ERK signal transduction in BRAF-mutant cancer
cells, but unexpectedly activated MEK-ERK signaling
in cancer cells harboring mutant RAS and wildtype
BRAF [126–128]. On a molecular level, this paradoxical
activation could be explained by different propensities
of BRAF and RAF-1 to form homo- versus heterodimers
[4, 129]. It was also found that inhibition of active MEK
has different constraints downstream of oncogenic
KRAS versus BRAF [130]: while KRAS-driven cancer
cells are sensitive towards inhibitors interacting with
MEK-Serine212 (a site critical for feedback between
MEK and wildtype BRAF), BRAF-mutant cancer
cells required another class of MEK inhibitor that
blocks phosphorylated active MEK. Taken together,
the aforementioned studies underline the necessity to
develop specific and effective diagnostics and therapies
for patients with BRAF mutated CRC. An unusual
approach to exploit specific traits of BRAF-mutated cells
was recently presented by exploiting the finding that
synthesis of BRAF is dependent on chaperone action.
Thus, interference with the BRAF chaperone TRAP1
was shown to effectively inhibit proliferation of BRAF
mutated CRC cells [131].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Finally, it is necessary to expand the view beyond
the EGFR-RAS-RAF-MEK-ERK cascade to appreciate
interactions within the larger signaling network and cover
specific signaling properties of the oncogenes. As outlined
above, feedback via EGFR is suited to activate PIK3CAAKT signals upon MAPK blockade. In this regard, it is
important that the PIK3CA-AKT-mTOR axis is frequently
activated either by loss of PTEN or activation of PIK3CA
in CRC, independent of the KRAS or BRAF status
[132]. Furthermore, the RAF-MEK-ERK and PIK3CAAKT-mTOR cascades converge on important common
substrates, such as 4EBP1 and eIF4F, controlling protein
translation, cell survival and ultimately therapy resistance
[133, 134]. Therefore, novel combination therapies
currently in clinical trials seek to inhibit the EGFRRAS-RAF-MEK-ERK and PIK3CA-AKT cascades in
parallel, for instance by combining Cetuximab, LGX818
and the PI3K inhibitor BYL719 in patients with BRAF
mutations [135] (Fig. 3, Table 1). These strategies seem
to be promising, given that both oncogenic pathways have
common targets that only respond to the parallel inhibition
of RAS-RAF-MEK and PIK3CA-AKT [133]. Indeed,
concurrent inhibition of BRAF and PIK3CA/mTOR
20793

Oncotarget

induced tumor regression in a BRAF-mutant CRC mouse
model [136]. Adding another twist to the story, mTOR4EBP1 signals are also controlled via the Wnt-APC-βCatenin axis in the intestinal epithelium [137], providing
yet another important convergence point of key signaling
pathways. Simultaneous inhibition of Wnt and MAPK
signals is currently in clinical testing for the treatment
of a subset of BRAF-mutant CRC patients, employing
Cetuximab, LGX818 and the Wnt ligand maturation
inhibitor WNT974 [138](Fig. 3, Table 1). Recent
preclinical studies suggest a role for the Hippo signal
transducer YAP in resistance to RAF and MEK inhibition
in multiple cancer cell lines, including BRAF-mutant
CRC. These findings may provide another strategy for the
design of combinatorial targeted therapies [139, 140].
Future models of tumor development and therapeutic
intervention may also need to integrate the activities of
soluble factors providing autocrine or paracrine interactions
between different cells types that compose the tumor.
Already in 2001, Schulze et al. described a positive
autocrine feedback loop induced by RAF via the EGFR
ligand HB-EGF [141]. KRAS-mutant CRC cells can also
activate a positive loop via TGF-alpha, one of the strongest
EGFR activators, which in turn results in the activation
of a CXCL1/CXCL8-dependent autocrine signal [142].
Paracrine interactions between tumor and stromal cells have
also been identified. RAF inhibitors were found to elicit
innate resistance via secretion of the growth factor HGF by
stromal cells, resulting in ERK and PI3K-AKT activation
and therapy resistance [143]; these results suggest a
potential for the concurrent application of RAF and HGF/
MET inhibitors in CRC and other cancers. Furthermore, a
major part of the gene expression differences between goodand poor-prognosis CRC were found to arise from TGF-β
signals in cancer-associated fibroblasts [144]. Importantly,
the blockade of TGF-β signals stopped CRC progression
in in-vitro and xenograft models. Further expanding the
idea of cellular and clonal co-operation in cancer, recent
data from breast cancer suggests the existence of tumor
cell subclones that can cooperate with stromal cells to
support cancer growth via secreted factors [145]. While
no comprehensive data on secreted factors determined
by KRAS or BRAF oncogenes are available in CRC, this
might comprise a further molecular level of specificity
determining both the distinct roles of KRAS and BRAF in
tumor progression and therapy response.
A recent study reported improved antitumor response
in a mouse model of melanoma using BRAF and MEK
inhibitors in combination with immunotherapy [146].
Such improved therapeutic applications are currently not
available for KRAS- and BRAF-mutated CRC, however
we have previously described a reversible negative impact
of the KRAS oncogene and activated MAPK signaling
onto MHC-I expression in CRC cells [147]. A recent
publication confirmed a significant association between
MHC-I loss and KRAS mutations, but not BRAF mutations,
in CRC [148]. Consequently, similar to the observations
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

in melanoma, the development of combinatorial treatment
using BRAF and/or MEK inhibitors with immunotherapy
appears to hold promise for CRC patients. However, an
improved knowledge of underlying mechanisms and the
plasticity of the contributing factors upon therapeutic
interference is required.

Outlook
Since the discovery of mutated forms of KRAS
and BRAF as mutually exclusive drivers of colorectal
carcinogenesis, much progress has been made in
understanding their common and individual effects.
Inhibition of oncogenic signals originating from KRAS
and BRAF has a high priority in CRC research. However,
inhibition of single nodes within the intracellular kinase
networks associated with KRAS and BRAF typically
resulted in drug resistance and therapy failure. Studies
of human cancer specimens, cells and mice suggest that
resistance to inhibitors is usually due to feedback and
crosstalk mechanisms that allow transduction of oncogenic
signals in spite of blockade of a single network node. In
addition, inadvertent selection of resistant clones with
novel combinations of oncogenic mutations can occur
under monotherapy or combination therapy that allows
for single mutation to confer drug resistance. Therefore,
a better understanding of the BRAF and KRAS-specific
wiring of the MAPK signaling network is required for the
development of new combinatorial therapeutic options.
Yet the impact that oncogenic KRAS and BRAF
have on CRC development stretches out beyond their
roles as signaling molecules. It can be inferred from their
similar but subtly different roles during tumor initiation
that KRAS and BRAF are also defining factors influencing
cancer development. This probably occurs via modulation
of signaling networks impinging on the epigenome and
mutation-specific constraints of signaling networks that
dictate clonal selection. It will therefore be important to
differentiate CRCs beyond the mutational status of BRAF
and KRAS by further defining selective advantages and
limitations of KRAS- and BRAF-mutant cells in a tissue
context in order to understand their clonal histories and
co-selected vulnerabilities. Thus, analysis of tumor
evolution in combination with a better understanding of
oncogenic signaling networks will provide cues to derive
novel predictive markers and therapy options.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors gratefully acknowledge funding by
German Ministry of Education and Research (e:Bio
OncoPath 0316184A to CS and MM; DKTK to CS) and
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (MO 2783/2–1 to MM).

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
No conflict of interest to be declared.
20794

Oncotarget

REFERENCES

patients with colorectal cancer: the “RASCAL II” study.
Br J Cancer. 2001; 85:692–6.

1.	 Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. Hallmarks of cancer: the next
generation. Cell. 2011; 144:646–74.

16.	 Bazan V, Migliavacca M, Zanna I, Tubiolo C, Grassi N,
Latteri MA, et al. Specific codon K-ras mutations are predictive of clinical outcome in colorectal cancer patients,
whereas codon 12 K-ras mutations are associated with
mucinous histotype. Ann Oncol. 2002; 13:1438–46.

2.	 Oikonomou E, Koustas E, Goulielmaki M, Pintzas A. BRAF
vs RAS oncogenes: Are mutations of the same pathway
equal? Differential signalling and therapeutic implications.
Oncotarget. 2014; 5:11752–77.

17.	 Grabocka E, Pylayeva-Gupta Y, Jones MJK, Lubkov V,
Yemanaberhan E, Taylor L, et al. Wild-type H- and N-Ras
promote mutant K-Ras-driven tumorigenesis by modulating the DNA damage response. Cancer Cell. 2014;
25:243–56.

3.	 Pylayeva-Gupta Y, Grabocka E, Bar-Sagi D. RAS
­oncogenes: weaving a tumorigenic web. Nat Rev Cancer.
2011; 11:761–74.
4.	 Röring M, Brummer T. Aberrant B-Raf Signaling in Human
Cancer—10 Years from Bench to Bedside. Critical Reviews
in Oncogenesis. 2012; 17:97–121.

18.	 Davies H, Bignell GR, Cox C, Stephens P, Edkins S,
Clegg  S, et al. Mutations of the BRAF gene in human
­cancer. Nature. 2002; 417:949–54.

5.	 Castellano E, Downward J. RAS Interaction with PI3K:
More Than Just Another Effector Pathway. Genes Cancer.
2011; 2:261–74.

19.	 Wan P, Garnett MJ, Roe SM, Lee S, Niculescu-Duvaz D,
Good VM, et al. Mechanism of activation of the RAF-ERK
signaling pathway by oncogenic mutations of B-RAF. Cell.
2004; 116:855–67.

6.	 Bos JL, Fearon ER, Hamilton SR, Verlaan-de Vries M,
van Boom JH, van der Eb AJ, et al. Prevalence of ras gene
mutations in human colorectal cancers. Nature. 1987;
327:293–7.

20.	 Corcoran RB, Dias-Santagata D, Bergethon K, Iafrate AJ,
Settleman J, Engelman JA. BRAF gene amplification can
promote acquired resistance to MEK inhibitors in cancer
cells harboring the BRAF V600E mutation. Sci Signal.
2010; 3:ra84.

7.	 Forrester K, Almoguera C, Han K, Grizzle WE, Perucho M.
Detection of high incidence of K-ras ­oncogenes ­during
human colon tumorigenesis. Nature. 1987; 327:298–303.

21.	 Little AS, Balmanno K, Sale MJ, Newman S, Dry JR,
Hampson M, et al. Amplification of the driving oncogene, KRAS or BRAF, underpins acquired resistance to
MEK1/2 inhibitors in colorectal cancer cells. Sci Signal.
2011; 4:ra17.

8.	 Vogelstein B, Fearon ER, Hamilton SR, Kern SE,
Preisinger AC, Leppert M, et al. Genetic alterations during colorectal-tumor development. N Engl J Med. 1988;
319:525–32.
9.	 Forbes SA, Beare D, Gunasekaran P, Leung K, Bindal N,
Boutselakis H, et al. COSMIC: exploring the world’s
knowledge of somatic mutations in human cancer. Nucleic
Acids Res. 2015; 43:D805–11.

22.	 Rajagopalan H, Bardelli A, Lengauer C, Kinzler KW,
Vogelstein B, Velculescu VE. Tumorigenesis: RAF/RAS
oncogenes and mismatch-repair status. Nature. 2002; 418:934.
23.	 Irahara N, Baba Y, Nosho K, Shima K, Yan L, DiasSantagata D, et al. NRAS mutations are rare in colorectal
cancer. Diagn Mol Pathol. 2010; 19:157–63.

10.	 Gao J, Aksoy BA, Dogrusoz U, Dresdner G, Gross B,
Sumer SO, et al. Integrative analysis of complex cancer
genomics and clinical profiles using the cBioPortal. Sci
Signal. 2013; 6:pl1.

24.	 Ahearn IM, Haigis K, Bar-Sagi D, Philips MR. Regulating
the regulator: post-translational modification of RAS. Nat
Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2012; 13:39–51.

11.	 Cancer Genome Atlas Network . Comprehensive molecular
characterization of human colon and rectal cancer. Nature.
2012; 487:330–7.

25.	 Prior IA, Hancock JF. Ras trafficking, localization and
­compartmentalized signalling. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2012;
23:145–53.

12.	 Scheffzek K, Ahmadian MR, Kabsch W, Wiesmüller L,
Lautwein A, Schmitz F, et al. The Ras-RasGAP complex:
structural basis for GTPase activation and its loss in oncogenic Ras mutants. Science. 1997; 277:333–8.

26.	 Terai K, Matsuda M. The amino-terminal B-Raf-specific
region mediates calcium-dependent homo- and heterodimerization of Raf. EMBO J. 2006; 25:3556–64.

13.	 Scheidig AJ, Burmester C, Goody RS. The pre-hydrolysis
state of p21(ras) in complex with GTP: new insights into
the role of water molecules in the GTP hydrolysis reaction of ras-like proteins. Structure. 1999; 7:1311–24.

27.	 Ding J, Tchaicheeyan O, Ambrosio L. Drosophila
Raf’s N terminus contains a novel conserved region and
can ­contribute to torso RTK signaling. Genetics. 2010;
184:717–29.

14.	 Buhrman G, Holzapfel G, Fetics S, Mattos C.
Allosteric modulation of Ras positions Q61 for a
direct role in ­catalysis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2010;
107:4931–6.

28.	 Tran NH, Wu X, Frost JA. B-Raf and Raf-1 are regulated
by distinct autoregulatory mechanisms. J Biol Chem. 2005;
280:16244–53.
29.	 Brummer T, Martin P, Herzog S, Misawa Y, Daly RJ,
Reth M. Functional analysis of the regulatory requirements

15.	 Andreyev HJ, Norman AR, Cunningham D, Oates J,
Dix  BR, Iacopetta BJ, et al. Kirsten ras mutations in

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20795

Oncotarget

of B-Raf and the B-Raf(V600E) oncoprotein. Oncogene.
2006; 25:6262–76.

CRISPR-Cas9-mediated engineering of human intestinal
organoids. Nat Med. 2015; 256–62.

30.	 Marais R, Light Y, Paterson HF, Mason CS, Marshall CJ.
Differential regulation of Raf-1, A-Raf, and B-Raf by
oncogenic ras and tyrosine kinases. J Biol Chem. 1997;
272:4378–83.

45.	 Su LK, Vogelstein B, Kinzler KW. Association of the APC
tumor suppressor protein with catenins. Science. 1993;
262:1734–7.
46.	 Farr CJ, Marshall CJ, Easty DJ, Wright NA, Powell SC,
Paraskeva C. A study of ras gene mutations in colonic
adenomas from familial polyposis coli patients. Oncogene.
1988; 3:673–8.

31.	 Weber CK, Slupsky JR, Kalmes HA, Rapp UR. Active Ras
induces heterodimerization of cRaf and BRaf. Cancer Res.
2001; 61:3595–8.
32.	 Ahlquist T, Bottillo I, Danielsen SA, Meling GI,
Rognum TO, Lind GE, et al. RAS signaling in colorectal
carcinomas through alteration of RAS, RAF, NF1, and/or
RASSF1A. Neoplasia. 2008; 10:680–686.

47.	 Sansom OJ, Meniel V, Wilkins JA, Cole AM, Oien KA,
Marsh V, et al. Loss of Apc allows phenotypic manifestation of the transforming properties of an endogenous
K-ras oncogene in vivo. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2006;
103:14122–7.

33.	 Stites EC, Trampont PC, Haney LB, Walk SF,
Ravichandran KS. Cooperation between Noncanonical Ras
Network Mutations. Cell Rep. 2015.

48.	 Janssen K-P, Alberici P, Fsihi H, Gaspar C, Breukel  C,
Franken P, et al. APC and oncogenic KRAS are
­synergistic in enhancing Wnt signaling in intestinal tumor
­formation  and progression. Gastroenterology. 2006;
131:1096–109.

34.	 Min J, Zaslavsky A, Fedele G, McLaughlin SK,
Reczek EE, De Raedt T, et al. An oncogene-tumor suppressor cascade drives metastatic prostate cancer by coordinately ­activating Ras and nuclear factor-kappaB. Nat
Med. 2010; 286–94.

49.	 Phelps RA, Chidester S, Dehghanizadeh S, Phelps J,
Sandoval IT, Rai K, et al. A Two-Step Model for Colon
Adenoma Initiation and Progression Caused by APC Loss.
Cell. 2009; 137:623–34.

35.	 Zhang Z, Chen Y, Tang J, Xie X. Frequent loss expression
of dab2 and promotor hypermethylation in human cancers:
a meta-analysis and systematic review. Pak J Med Sci.
2014; 30:432–7.

50.	 Leggett B, Whitehall V. Role of the serrated pathway
in colorectal cancer pathogenesis. Gastroenterology.
2010; pp. 2088–2100.

36.	 Fearon ER, Vogelstein B. A genetic model for colorectal
tumorigenesis. Cell. 1990; 61:759–67.

51.	 Snover DC. Update on the serrated pathway to colorectal
carcinoma. Hum Pathol. 2011; 42:1–10.

37.	 Fearon ER. Molecular genetics of colorectal cancer. Annu
Rev Pathol. 2011; 6:479–507.

52.	 Bettington M, Walker N, Clouston A, Brown I, Leggett B,
Whitehall V. The serrated pathway to colorectal carcinoma:
current concepts and challenges. Histopathology. 2013;
62:367–86.

38.	 Sato T, Vries RG, Snippert HJ, van de Wetering M,
Barker N, Stange DE, et al. Single Lgr5 stem cells build
crypt-villus structures in vitro without a mesenchymal
niche. Nature. 2009; 459:262–5.

53.	 Rosenberg DW, Yang S, Pleau DC, Greenspan EJ,
Stevens  RG, Rajan TV, et al. Mutations in BRAF and
KRAS differentially distinguish serrated versus non-­
serrated hyperplastic aberrant crypt foci in humans. Cancer
Res. 2007; 67:3551–4.

39.	 Sato T, van Es JH, Snippert HJ, Stange DE, Vries RG,
van den Born M, et al. Paneth cells constitute the niche
for Lgr5 stem cells in intestinal crypts. Nature. 2010;
469:415.

54.	 Chan TL, Zhao W, Leung SY, Yuen ST. BRAF, and KRAS
mutations in colorectal hyperplastic polyps and serrated
adenomas. Cancer Res. 2003; 63:4878–81.

40.	 Wong VWY, Stange DE, Page ME, Buczacki S, Wabik A,
Itami S, et al. Lrig1 controls intestinal stem-cell ­homeostasis
by negative regulation of ErbB signalling. Nat Cell Biol.
2012; 14:401–8.

55.	 Burnett-Hartman AN, Newcomb PA, Potter JD,
Passarelli MN, Phipps AI, Wurscher MA, et al. Genomic
aberrations occurring in subsets of serrated colorectal
lesions but not conventional adenomas. Cancer Res. 2013;
73:2863–72.

41.	 Barker N. Adult intestinal stem cells: critical drivers of
epithelial homeostasis and regeneration. Nat Rev Mol Cell
Biol. 2013.
42.	 Barker N, Ridgway RA, van Es JH, van de Wetering M,
Begthel H, van den Born M, et al. Crypt stem cells as
the cells-of-origin of intestinal cancer. Nature. 2009;
457:608–11.

56.	 Bongers G, Muniz LR, Pacer ME, Iuga AC,
Thirunarayanan  N, Slinger E, et al. A role for the
­epidermal growth factor receptor signaling in development of ­intestinal serrated polyps in mice and humans.
Gastroenterology. 2012; 143:730–40.

43.	 Zhu L, Gibson P, Currle DS, Tong Y, Richardson RJ,
Bayazitov IT, et al. Prominin 1 marks intestinal stem cells
that are susceptible to neoplastic transformation. Nature.
2009; 457:603–7.

57.	 Tuveson DA, Shaw AT, Willis NA, Silver DP, Jackson EL,
Chang S, et al. Endogenous oncogenic K-ras(G12D) stimulates proliferation and widespread neoplastic and developmental defects. Cancer Cell. 2004; 5:375–87.

44.	 Matano M, Date S, Shimokawa M, Takano A, Fujii  M,
Ohta Y, et al. Modeling colorectal cancer using
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20796

Oncotarget

58.	 Haigis KM, Kendall KR, Wang Y, Cheung A, Haigis MC,
Glickman JN, et al. Differential effects of oncogenic K-Ras
and N-Ras on proliferation, differentiation and tumor
­progression in the colon. Nat Genet. 2008; 40:600–8.

of stem cells in the mouse intestine, which is antagonized by
β-catenin activity. Oncogene. 2015; 34:3164–75.
72.	 Konishi K, Yamochi T, Makino R, Kaneko K, Yamamoto T,
Nozawa H, et al. Molecular differences between sporadic
serrated and conventional colorectal adenomas. Clin Cancer
Res. 2004; 10:3082–90.

59.	 Bennecke M, Kriegl L, Bajbouj M, Retzlaff K, Robine S,
Jung A, et al. Ink4a/Arf and oncogene-induced senescence
prevent tumor progression during alternative colorectal
tumorigenesis. Cancer Cell. 2010 ed. 2010; 18:135–46.

73.	 Li WQ, Kawakami K, Ruszkiewicz A, Bennett G, Moore J,
Iacopetta B. BRAF mutations are associated with distinctive
clinical, pathological and molecular features of colorectal
cancer independently of microsatellite instability status.
Mol Cancer. 2006; 5:2.

60.	 Carragher LAS, Snell KR, Giblett SM, Aldridge VSS,
Patel B, Cook SJ, et al. V600EBraf induces gastrointestinal
crypt senescence and promotes tumour progression through
enhanced CpG methylation of p16INK4a. EMBO Mol Med.
2010; 2:458–71.

74.	 Oliveira C, Velho S, Moutinho C, Ferreira A, Preto A,
Domingo E, et al. KRAS and BRAF oncogenic mutations
in MSS colorectal carcinoma progression. Oncogene. 2007;
26:158–63.

61.	 Rad R, Cadiñanos J, Rad L, Varela I, Strong A, Kriegl L,
et  al. A Genetic Progression Model of Braf(V600E)Induced Intestinal Tumorigenesis Reveals Targets for
Therapeutic Intervention. Cancer Cell. 2013; 24:15–29.

75.	 Phipps AI, Limburg PJ, Baron JA, Burnett-Hartman AN,
Weisenberger DJ, Laird PW, et al. Association between
molecular subtypes of colorectal cancer and patient
­survival. Gastroenterology. 2015; 148:77–87.e2.

62.	 Yachida S, Mudali S, Martin SA, Montgomery EA,
Iacobuzio-Donahue CA. Beta-catenin nuclear labeling is a
common feature of sessile serrated adenomas and correlates
with early neoplastic progression after BRAF activation.
Am J Surg Pathol. 2009; 33:1823–32.

76.	 Fang M, Ou J, Hutchinson L, Green MR. The BRAF
­oncoprotein functions through the transcriptional repressor
MAFG to mediate the CpG Island Methylator phenotype.
Mol Cell. 2014; 55:904–15.

63.	 Wu JM, Montgomery EA, Iacobuzio-Donahue CA.
Frequent beta-catenin nuclear labeling in sessile serrated
polyps of the colorectum with neoplastic potential. Am J
Clin Pathol. 2008; 129:416–23.

77.	 Yamauchi M, Morikawa T, Kuchiba A, Imamura Y,
Qian  ZR, Nishihara R, et al. Assessment of colorectal
­cancer molecular features along bowel subsites challenges
the conception of distinct dichotomy of proximal versus distal colorectum. Gut. 2012; 61:847–54.

64.	 Krausova M, Korinek V. Wnt signaling in adult intestinal
stem cells and cancer. Cell Signal. 2014; 26:570–9.
65.	 Jass JR. Classification of colorectal cancer based on
­correlation of clinical, morphological and molecular features. Histopathology. 2007; 50:113–30.

78.	 Bae JM, Kim JH, Cho N-Y, Kim TY, Kang GH. Prognostic
implication of the CpG island methylator phenotype in
colorectal cancers depends on tumour location. Br J Cancer.
2013; 109:1004–12.

66.	 Janssen K-P, Marjou El F, Pinto D, Sastre X, Rouillard D,
Fouquet C, et al. Targeted expression of oncogenic K-ras in
intestinal epithelium causes spontaneous tumorigenesis in
mice. Gastroenterology. 2002; 123:492–504.

79.	 Kohonen-Corish MRJ, Tseung J, Chan C, Currey N,
Dent OF, Clarke S, et al. KRAS mutations and CDKN2A
promoter methylation show an interactive adverse effect
on survival and predict recurrence of rectal cancer. Int J
Cancer. 2014; 134:2820–8.

67.	 Feng Y, Bommer GT, Zhao J, Green M, Sands E, Zhai Y,
et al. Mutant KRAS promotes hyperplasia and alters differentiation in the colon epithelium but does not expand
the presumptive stem cell pool. Gastroenterology. 2011;
141:1003–1013.e1–10.

80.	 Minsky BD. Unique considerations in the patient with rectal
cancer. Semin Oncol. 2011; 38:542–51.
81.	 Shen L, Toyota M, Kondo Y, Lin E, Zhang L, Guo Y, et al.
Integrated genetic and epigenetic analysis identifies three
different subclasses of colon cancer. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA. 2007; 104:18654–9.

68.	 Vermeulen L, Morrissey E, van der Heijden M,
Nicholson  AM, Sottoriva A, Buczacki S, et al. Defining
stem cell dynamics in models of intestinal tumor initiation.
Science. 2013; 342:995–8.

82.	 De Sousa E Melo F, Wang X, Jansen M, Fessler E, Trinh A,
de Rooij LPMH, et al. Poor-prognosis colon cancer is
defined by a molecularly distinct subtype and develops from
serrated precursor lesions. Nat Med. 2013; 19:614–8.

69.	 Snippert HJ, Schepers AG, van Es JH, Simons BD,
Clevers  H. Biased competition between Lgr5 intestinal
stem cells driven by oncogenic mutation induces clonal
­expansion. EMBO Rep. 2014; 15:62–9.

83.	 Sadanandam A, Lyssiotis CA, Homicsko K, Collisson EA,
Gibb WJ, Wullschleger S, et al. A colorectal cancer classification system that associates cellular phenotype and
responses to therapy. Nat Med. 2013; 19:619–25.

70.	 Schwitalla S, Fingerle AA, Cammareri P, Nebelsiek T,
Göktuna SI, Ziegler PK, et al. Intestinal Tumorigenesis
Initiated by Dedifferentiation and Acquisition of Stem-Celllike Properties. Cell. 2013; 152:25–38.

84.	 Rak J, Filmus J, Finkenzeller G, Grugel S, Marmé D,
Kerbel RS. Oncogenes as inducers of tumor angiogenesis.
Cancer Metastasis Rev. 1995; 14:263–77.

71.	 Riemer P, Sreekumar A, Reinke S, Rad R, Schäfer R, Sers C,
et al. Transgenic expression of oncogenic BRAF induces loss
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20797

Oncotarget

85.	 Huber MA, Kraut N, Beug H. Molecular requirements
for epithelial-mesenchymal transition during tumor
­progression. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2005; 17:548–58.

heterogeneous mechanisms of acquired resistance to
anti-EGFR therapies in colorectal cancer. Sci Transl Med.
2014; 6:224ra26.

86.	 Relógio A, Thomas P, Medina-Pérez P, Reischl S,
Bervoets  S, Gloc E, et al. Ras-mediated deregulation
of the  circadian clock in cancer. PLoS Genet. 2014;
10:e1004338.

100.	 Bozic I, Allen B, Nowak MA. Dynamics of targeted cancer therapy. Trends Mol Med. 2012; 18:311–6.
101.	 Sottoriva A, Kang H, Ma Z, Graham TA, Salomon MP,
Zhao J, et al. A Big Bang model of human colorectal
tumor growth. Nat Genet. 2015; 47:209–16.

87.	 Herr R, Köhler M, Andrlová H, Weinberg F, Möller Y,
Halbach S, et al. B-Raf inhibitors induce epithelial differentiation in BRAF-mutant colorectal cancer cells. Cancer
Res. 2015; 75:216–29.

102.	 Robertson-Tessi M, Anderson ARA. Big Bang and context-driven collapse. Nat Genet. 2015; 47:196–7.
103.	 Kopetz S, Desai J, Chan E, Hecht JR, O'Dwyer PJ, Lee RJ,
et al. PLX4032 in metastatic colorectal cancer patients
with mutant BRAF tumors. J Clin Oncol. 2010; 28:

88.	 Shirasawa S, Furuse M, Yokoyama N, Sasazuki T. Altered
growth of human colon cancer cell lines disrupted at activated Ki-ras. Science. 1993; 260:85–8.

104.	 Rinehart J, Adjei AA, Lorusso PM, Waterhouse D,
Hecht  JR, Natale RB, et al. Multicenter phase II study
of the oral MEK inhibitor, CI-1040, in patients with
advanced non-small-cell lung, breast, colon, and pancreatic cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2004; 22:4456–62.

89.	 Weinstein IB, Joe AK. Mechanisms of disease: Oncogene
addiction—a rationale for molecular targeting in cancer
therapy. Nat Clin Pract Oncol. 2006; 3:448–57.
90.	 Sharma SV, Settleman J. Oncogene addiction: setting the
stage for molecularly targeted cancer therapy. Genes Dev.
2007; 21:3214–31.

105.	 Corbalan-Garcia S, Yang SS, Degenhardt KR, Bar-Sagi D.
Identification of the mitogen-activated protein kinase
phosphorylation sites on human Sos1 that regulate interaction with Grb2. Mol Cell Biol. 1996; 16:5674–82.

91.	 Cox AD, Fesik SW, Kimmelman AC, Luo J, Der CJ.
Drugging the undruggable RAS: Mission Possible? Nat
Rev Drug Discov. 2014; 13:828–51.

106.	 Douville E, Downward J. EGF induced SOS phosphorylation in PC12 cells involves P90 RSK-2. Oncogene. 1997;
15:373–83.

92.	 Karapetis CS, Khambata-Ford S, Jonker DJ,
O’Callaghan CJ, Tu D, Tebbutt NC, et al. K-ras mutations
and benefit from cetuximab in advanced colorectal cancer.
N Engl J Med. 2008; 359:1757–65.

107.	 Li X, Huang Y, Jiang J, Frank SJ. ERK-dependent threonine phosphorylation of EGF receptor modulates receptor downregulation and signaling. Cell Signal. 2008;
20:2145–55.

93.	 Van Cutsem E, Köhne C-H, Hitre E, Zaluski J,
Chang Chien C-R, Makhson A, et al. Cetuximab and
­chemotherapy as initial treatment for metastatic colorectal
cancer. N Engl J Med. 2009; 360:1408–17.

108.	 Hanafusa H, Torii S, Yasunaga T, Nishida E. Sprouty1
and Sprouty2 provide a control mechanism for the
Ras/MAPK  signalling pathway. Nat Cell Biol. 2002;
4:850–8.

94.	 Douillard J-Y, Oliner KS, Siena S, Tabernero J, Burkes R,
Barugel M, et al. Panitumumab-FOLFOX4 treatment and
RAS mutations in colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med. 2013;
369:1023–34.

109.	 Sun C, Hobor S, Bertotti A, Zecchin D, Huang S,
Galimi F, et al. Intrinsic Resistance to MEK Inhibition
in KRAS Mutant Lung and Colon Cancer through
Transcriptional Induction of ERBB3. Cell Rep. 2014;
7:86–93.

95.	 Heinemann V, Douillard JY, Ducreux M, Peeters M.
Targeted therapy in metastatic colorectal cancer - An
example of personalised medicine in action. Cancer Treat
Rev. 2013; 39:592–601.

110.	 Prahallad A, Sun C, Huang S, Di Nicolantonio F,
Salazar R, Zecchin D, et al. Unresponsiveness of colon
cancer to BRAF(V600E) inhibition through feedback activation of EGFR. Nature. 2012; 483:100–3.

96.	 Pietrantonio F, Petrelli F, Coinu A, Di Bartolomeo M,
Borgonovo K, Maggi C, et al. Predictive role of BRAF
mutations in patients with advanced colorectal cancer
receiving cetuximab and panitumumab: A meta-analysis.
Eur J Cancer. 2015; 51:587–94.

111.	 Klinger B, Sieber A, Fritsche-Guenther R, Witzel F,
Berry L, Schumacher D, et al. Network quantification of
EGFR signaling unveils potential for targeted combination
therapy. Mol Syst Biol. 2013; 9:673.

97.	 Misale S, Yaeger R, Hobor S, Scala E, Janakiraman M,
Liska D, et al. Emergence of KRAS mutations and
acquired resistance to anti-EGFR therapy in colorectal
cancer. Nature. 2012; 486:532–6.

112.	 Dougherty MK, Müller J, Ritt DA, Zhou M, Zhou XZ,
Copeland TD, et al. Regulation of Raf-1 by direct feedback phosphorylation. Mol Cell. 2005; 17:215–24.

98.	 Diaz LA, Williams RT, Wu J, Kinde I, Hecht JR, Berlin J,
et al. The molecular evolution of acquired resistance to
­targeted EGFR blockade in colorectal cancers. Nature.
2012; 486:537–40.

113.	 Amit I, Citri A, Shay T, Lu Y, Katz M, Zhang F, et al.
A module of negative feedback regulators defines growth
factor signaling. Nat Genet. 2007; 39:503–12.

99.	 Misale S, Arena S, Lamba S, Siravegna G, Lallo A,
Hobor S, et al. Blockade of EGFR and MEK intercepts
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

114.	 Fritsche-Guenther R, Witzel F, Sieber A, Herr R,
Schmidt N, Braun S, et al. Strong negative feedback from
20798

Oncotarget

Erk to Raf confers robustness to MAPK signalling. Mol
Syst Biol. 2011; 7:489.

125.	 Ahronian LG, Sennott EM, Van Allen EM, Wagle N,
Kwak EL, Faris JE, et al. Clinical Acquired Resistance to
RAF Inhibitor Combinations in BRAF-Mutant Colorectal
Cancer through MAPK Pathway Alterations. Cancer
Discov. 2015; 5:358–67.

115.	 Wee S, Jagani Z, Xiang KX, Loo A, Dorsch M, Yao
Y-M, et al. PI3K pathway activation mediates resistance
to MEK inhibitors in KRAS mutant cancers. Cancer Res.
2009; 69:4286–93.

126.	 Poulikakos PI, Zhang C, Bollag G, Shokat KM, Rosen N.
RAF inhibitors transactivate RAF dimers and ERK
­signalling in cells with wild-type BRAF. Nature. 2010;
464:427–30.

116.	 Lito P, Rosen N, Solit DB. Tumor adaptation and resistance to RAF inhibitors. Nat Med. 2013; 19:1401–9.
117.	 Corcoran RB, Ebi H, Turke AB, Coffee EM, Nishino M,
Cogdill AP, et al. EGFR-mediated re-activation of MAPK
signaling contributes to insensitivity of BRAF mutant
colorectal cancers to RAF inhibition with vemurafenib.
Cancer Discov. 2012; 2:227–35.

127.	 Heidorn SJ, Milagre C, Whittaker S, Nourry A, NiculescuDuvas I, Dhomen N, et al. Kinase-dead BRAF, and
­oncogenic RAS cooperate to drive tumor progression
through CRAF. Cell. 2010; 140:209–21.

118.	 Yang H, Higgins B, Kolinsky K, Packman K, Bradley
WD, Lee RJ, et al. Antitumor activity of BRAF inhibitor vemurafenib in preclinical models of BRAF-mutant
colorectal cancer. Cancer Res. 2012; 72:779–89.

128.	 Hatzivassiliou G, Song K, Yen I, Brandhuber BJ,
Anderson  DJ, Alvarado R, et al. RAF inhibitors prime
wild-type RAF to activate the MAPK pathway and
enhance growth. Nature. 2010; 464:431–5.

119.	 Capalbo C, Marchetti P, Coppa A, Calogero A, Anastasi E,
Buffone A, et al. Vemurafenib and panitumumab combination tailored therapy in BRAF-mutated metastatic
colorectal cancer: a case report. Cancer Biol Ther. 2014;
15:826–31.

129.	 Cox AD, Der CJ. The RAF Inhibitor Paradox Revisited.
Cancer Cell. 2012; 21:147–9.
130.	 Hatzivassiliou G, Haling JR, Chen H, Song K, Price S,
Heald R, et al. Mechanism of MEK inhibition determines
efficacy in mutant KRAS- versus BRAF-driven cancers.
Nature. 2013; 501:232–6.

120.	 Yaeger R, Cercek A, O'Reilly EM, Reidy DL, Kemeny N,
Wolinsky T, et al. Pilot Trial of Combined BRAF,
and EGFR Inhibition in BRAF-Mutant Metastatic
Colorectal  Cancer Patients. Clin Cancer Res. 2015;
21:1313–20.

131.	 Condelli V, Piscazzi A, Sisinni L, Matassa DS,
Maddalena  F, Lettini G, et al. TRAP1 is involved in
BRAF regulation and downstream attenuation of ERK
phosphorylation and cell-cycle progression: a novel target
for BRAF-mutated colorectal tumors. Cancer Res. 2014;
74:6693–704.

121.	 Corcoran RB, Atreya CE, Falchook GS, Infante JR,
Hamid  O, Messersmith WA, et al. Phase 1–2 trial of
the BRAF inhibitor dabrafenib (D) plus MEK inhibitor
trametinib (T) in BRAF V600 mutant colorectal cancer
(CRC): Updated efficacy and biomarker analysis. J Clin
Oncol. 32:5s, 2014.

132.	 Parsons DW, Wang T-L, Samuels Y, Bardelli A,
Cummins JM, DeLong L, et al. Colorectal cancer: mutations in a signalling pathway. Nature. 2005; 436:792.
133.	 She Q-B, Halilovic E, Ye Q, Zhen W, Shirasawa S,
Sasazuki T, et al. 4E-BP1 is a key effector of the oncogenic activation of the AKT and ERK signaling pathways that integrates their function in tumors. Cancer
Cell. 2010; 18:39–51.

122.	 Bendell JC, Atreya CE, André T, Tabernero J,
Gordon MS, Bernards R, et al. Efficacy and tolerability in
an open-label phase I/II study of MEK inhibitor trametinib
(T), BRAF inhibitor dabrafenib (D), and anti-EGFR antibody panitumumab (P) in combination in patients (pts)
with BRAF V600E mutated colorectal cancer (CRC). J
Clin Oncol. 32:5s, 2014.

134.	 Boussemart L, Malka-Mahieu H, Girault I, Allard D,
Hemmingsson O, Tomasic G, et al. eIF4F is a nexus of
resistance to anti-BRAF and anti-MEK cancer therapies.
Nature. 2014; 513:105–9.

123.	 Hong DS, Van Karlyle Morris, Fu S, Overman MJ, PihaPaul SA, Kee BK, et al. Phase 1B study of vemurafenib
in combination with irinotecan and cetuximab in patients
with BRAF-mutated advanced cancers and metastatic
colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol. 32:5s, 2014.

135.	 Van Geel R, Elez E, Bendell JC, Faris JE, Lolkema MPJK,
Eskens F, et al. Phase I study of the selective BRAFV600
inhibitor encorafenib (LGX818) combined with cetuximab
and with or without the α-specific PI3K inhibitor BYL719
in patients with advanced BRAF-mutant colorectal cancer.
J Clin Oncol. 32:5s, 2014. 32(5s, 2014).

124.	 Tabernero J, Chan E, Baselga J, Blay J-Y, Chau I,
Hyman DM, et al. VE-BASKET, a Simon 2-stage adaptive design, phase II, histology-independent study in nonmelanoma solid tumors harboring BRAF V600 mutations
(V600m): Activity of vemurafenib (VEM) with or without cetuximab (CTX) in colorectal cancer (CRC). J Clin
Oncol. 32:5s, 2014.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

136.	 Coffee EM, Faber AC, Roper J, Sinnamon MJ, Goel G,
Keung L, et al. Concomitant BRAF, and PI3K/
mTOR blockade is required for effective treatment of
BRAF(V600E) colorectal cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2013;
19:2688–98.

20799

Oncotarget

innate resistance to RAF inhibitors through HGF secretion. Nature. 2012; 487:500–4.

137.	 Faller WJ, Jackson TJ, Knight JRP, Ridgway RA,
Jamieson T, Karim SA, et al. mTORC1-mediated translational elongation limits intestinal tumour initiation and
growth. Nature. 2015; 517:497–500.

144.	 Calon A, Lonardo E, Berenguer-Llergo A, Espinet E,
Hernando-Momblona X, Iglesias M, et al. Stromal gene
expression defines poor-prognosis subtypes in colorectal
cancer. Nat Genet. 2015; 47:320–9.

138.	 Liu J, Pan S, Hsieh MH, Ng N, Sun F, Wang T, et al:
Targeting Wnt-driven cancer through the inhibition of
Porcupine by LGK974Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2013;110:
20224–9.

145.	 Polyak K, Marusyk A. Cancer: Clonal cooperation.
Nature. 2014; 508:52–3.

139.	 Lin L, Sabnis AJ, Chan E, Olivas V, Cade L,
Pazarentzos E, et al. The Hippo effector YAP promotes
resistance to RAF- and MEK-targeted cancer therapies.
Nat Genet. 2015; 47:250–6.

146.	 Hu-Lieskovan S, Mok S, Homet Moreno B, Tsoi J,
Robert  L, Goedert L, et al. Improved antitumor activity of immunotherapy with BRAF and MEK inhibitors
in BRAF(V600E) melanoma. Sci Transl Med. 2015;
7:29ra41.

140.	 Keren-Paz A, Emmanuel R, Samuels Y. YAP and the drug
resistance highway. Nat Genet. 2015; 47:193–4.

147.	 Sers C, Kuner R, Falk CS, Lund P, Sueltmann H,
Braun  M, et al. Down-regulation of HLA Class, I, and
NKG2D ligands through a concerted action of MAPK and
DNA methyltransferases in colorectal cancer cells. Int J
Cancer. 2009; 125:1626–39.

141.	 Schulze A, Lehmann K, Jefferies HB, McMahon M,
Downward J. Analysis of the transcriptional program
induced by Raf in epithelial cells. Genes Dev. 2001;
15:981–94.
142.	 Kreeger PK, Mandhana R, Alford SK, Haigis KM,
Lauffenburger DA. RAS mutations affect tumor necrosis factor-induced apoptosis in colon carcinoma cells via
ERK-modulatory negative and positive feedback circuits
along with non-ERK pathway effects. Cancer Res. 2009;
69:8191–9.

148.	 Koelzer VH, Dawson H, Andersson E, Karamitopoulou E,
Masucci GV, Luigi A et al. Active immunosurveillance in
the tumor microenvironment of colorectal cancer is associated with low frequency tumor budding and improved
outcome. Transl Res. 2015; pii:S1931–5244(15)00083–3.

143.	 Straussman R, Morikawa T, Shee K, Barzily-Rokni M,
Qian ZR, Du J, et al. Tumour micro-environment elicits

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20800

Oncotarget

