Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 40

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Stromal cell-mediated mitochondrial redox adaptation regulates
drug resistance in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia
Jizhong Liu1, Ashish Masurekar1, Suzanne Johnson1, Sohini Chakraborty2, John
Griffiths3, Duncan Smith3, Seema Alexander1, Clare Dempsey1, Catriona Parker1,
Stephanie Harrison1, Yaoyong Li4, Crispin Miller4, Yujun Di1, Zhumur Ghosh2,
Shekhar Krishnan1,5, Vaskar Saha1,5
1

 hildren’s Cancer Group, Institute of Cancer Science, Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre, University of Manchester,
C
Manchester, United Kingdom

2

Bioinformatics Centre, Bose Institute, P-1/2 CIT Scheme, Kolkata, India

3

 ass Spectrometry Service, Cancer Research UK Manchester Institute, University of Manchester, Manchester, United
M
Kingdom

4

pplied Computational Biology and Bioinformatics Group, Cancer Research UK Manchester Institute, University of
A
Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom

5

Tata Translational Cancer Research Centre, Kolkata, India

Correspondence to:
Vaskar Saha, e-mail: vaskar.saha@manchester.ac.uk
Keywords: tumor microenvironment, oxidative stress, metabolic stress response, drug resistance, ALL
Received: June 08, 2015      Accepted: October 02, 2015      Published: October 13, 2015

ABSTRACT
Despite the high cure rates in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL),
relapsed ALL remains a significant clinical problem. Genetic heterogeneity does not
adequately explain variations in response to therapy. The chemoprotective tumor
microenvironment may additionally contribute to disease recurrence. This study
identifies metabolic reprogramming of leukemic cells by bone marrow stromal cells
(BMSC) as a putative mechanism of drug resistance. In a BMSC-extracellular matrix
culture model, BMSC produced chemoprotective soluble factors and facilitated the
emergence of a reversible multidrug resistant phenotype in ALL cells. BMSC environment
induced a mitochondrial calcium influx leading to increased reactive oxygen species
(ROS) levels in ALL cells. In response to this oxidative stress, drug resistant cells
underwent a redox adaptation process, characterized by a decrease in ROS levels and
mitochondrial membrane potential with an upregulation of antioxidant production and
MCL-1 expression. Similar expanded subpopulations of low ROS expressing and drug
resistant cells were identified in pre-treatment bone marrow samples from ALL patients
with slower response to therapy. This suggests that the bone marrow microenvironment
induces a redox adaptation in ALL subclones that protects against cytotoxic stress
and potentially gives rise to minimal residual disease. Targeting metabolic remodeling
by inhibiting antioxidant production and antiapoptosis was able to overcome drug
resistance. Thus metabolic plasticity in leukemic cell response to environmental factors
contributes to chemoresistance and disease recurrence. Adjunctive strategies targeting
such processes have the potential to overcome therapeutic failure in ALL.

The complex chemotherapy schedules and the underlying
genetic heterogeneity of the disease have made it
difficult to understand the biological mechanisms for the
variations in response to therapy, and relapses occurs in
all cytogenetic subtypes. Within all genetic subtypes of
ALL, the most sensitive predictive factor of outcome

INTRODUCTION
Modern chemotherapeutic regimens use ten or more
different drugs over a 2–3 year period to treat childhood
ALL. Though recurrences are now fewer, relapsed ALL
remains the fifth most common malignancy in children [1].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43048

Oncotarget

is the level of minimal residual disease (MRD) in bone
marrow aspirates at the end of the first month of therapy.
Patients with high MRD levels have an increased risk
of relapse [2]. This suggests that MRD represents drug
resistant subclones selected by specific chemotherapy
schedules; MRD cells survive and proliferate over
time giving rise to recurrence. We recently reported
the superiority of mitoxantrone over idarubicin, in the
context of a randomised clinical trial in patients with
relapsed ALL [3]. Both drugs were administered on the
first two days of therapy but MRD levels after 4 weeks
treatment were comparable in both arms, indicating that
intrinsic drug resistance to idarubicin was not causal to
outcome. However, patients treated with mitoxantrone
experienced a higher degree of myelosupression for up to
12 months after administration, suggesting that therapeutic
benefit was related to an increased toxicity to the bone
marrow, indicating the role of environment mediated drug
resistance (EMDR) in tumor treatment failure [4, 5].
The abnormal tumor microenvironment induces a
collection of cellular stress responses and plays a major roles
in determining the metabolic status and chemosensitivity
in cancer cells [6]. BMSC protect cancer cells from
chemotherapy by activating pro-survival signal pathways
such as PI-3K/AKT [7–9]; or releasing chemoprotective
factors such as asparagine [10], fatty acids [11] or cysteine
[12]. Whether BMSC mediated chemoprotection facilitates
the emergence of drug resistant subpopulations leading
to the development of MRD; and if such cells are able
to persist over the long duration of ALL therapy remains
unknown. The diverse mechanisms identified for BMSC
mediated drug resistance also suggest that targeting specific
signalling molecules may not be sufficient to overcome
BMSC mediated multidrug resistance, and common
downstream survival mechanisms need to be identified.
Oncogenic signalling pathways converge to adaptive
cancer cell metabolisms in order to support survival.
Targeting these unique biochemical alterations in cancer
cells as a potential therapeutic approach is yet to be fully
exploited [6, 13]. Cancer cells have altered redox status
[6, 13–15] and the modifications in the levels of ROS have
been linked to radioresistance of cancer stem cells [15].
In this study we show that BMSC mediated multidrug
resistance may occur through redox adaptation in ALL
cells. By targeting antioxidant and anti-apoptotic capacity
in leukemic cells, we identify a potential strategy to
overcome therapeutic failure in ALL.

are being used to test efficacy of new drugs [18] and
providing insights into the mechanisms of EMDR [19].
BMSC however exist in a complex 3-D milieu along with
various types of extracellular matrix (ECM) [20, 21], and
3-D in vitro BMSC culture systems created on artificial or
natural scaffolds have provided differential insights in the
mechanisms of hematopoiesis and oncogenesis [22, 23].
We selected a BMSC-ECM culture model, by growing
BMSC on a biological and physiologically relevant ECM
scaffold [24] (Supplementary Figure S1A). Briefly, BMSC
were cultured on the plate till confluent, treated with Triton
X-100 and NH4OH, washed with PBS to remove cellular
components, only ECM remained on the plate. The ECM
scaffold was produced by BMSC, contained fibronectin and
collagen I (Figure 1A), and facilitated BMSC differentiation
into osteoblast-like cells (Figure 1B, 1C). The BMSC-ECM
culture model contained key bone marrow components
including ECM, BMSC, osteoblast-like cells, and factors
released by BMSC and osteoblast-like cells.
In vitro BMSC mediated chemoprotection has been
investigated by incubating cancer cells in BMSC derived
conditioned medium (CM), or co-culturing cancer cells
with BMSC, and then treating with drugs for 3 or 4 days
[17, 19]. In the BMSC-ECM culture model, leukemia
cells lines incubated in CM or long term co-cultured with
BMSC (LTCC) showed a multi-drug resistant phenotype
(Supplementary Figure S1B, S1C, S1D), a phenomenon
also demonstrated by primary ALL cells (Figure 1D).
To mimic the effect of chemotherapy within the bone
marrow microenvironment, ALL cell lines SupB15, REH,
MV4:11 and Jurkat; acute myeloid leukemia cell line U937
and acute promyelocytic leukemia cell line NB4 cells were
incubated in human BMSC cell line HS-5 derived CM,
treated with 10 nM of mitoxantrone (Mito) for 6 days and then
maintained in drug-free medium for 3 months. Control cells
were incubated in normal medium and treated identically.
This dose of drug was wholly lethal to cell in normal
medium, but a population of leukemia cells incubated in CM
survived the treatment and gave rise to multidrug resistant
(MR) subpopulation. Similar MR cells were generated
from SupB15 cells treated with doxorubicin (SupB15MR-D)
(Figure 1E, 1F). BMSC releases small molecular weight
chemoprotective molecules such as fatty acids [11] or
cysteine [12]. Our results showed that both the <3kDa and
≥3kDa fraction of the CM are chemoprotective. On heating
or after proteinase K treatment, CM continued to preserve
its chemoprotective effects (Supplementary Figure S1E).
However, neither the <3kDa nor the ≥3kDa fractions could
generate MR clones from ALL cells lines (Supplementary
Figure S1F), suggesting that the MR phenotype occurred as a
result of multiple soluble factors present in CM.
SupB15MR cells show partial restoration of
chemosensitivity after 8 months of continuous culture in
drug free medium (Figure 1G), indicated an epigenetic
mechanism, previously described in drug resistant cell lines
[25]. To further investigate the origin of the MR clones,

RESULTS
Soluble factors produced by BMSC induce a
multidrug resistant phenotype in ALL cells
Co-culture of ALL cells with BMSC promote
survival, growth [16], and modulate the in vitro response
to chemotherapy [17]. Such 2-D co-culture systems
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43049

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Generation of multidrug resistant subpopulations from ALL cell lines in a BMSC-ECM culture model. A. BMSC-

ECM scaffolds were generated from HS5, hTRET-BMSC, and primary BMSC from ALL patients (as BMSC1, 2, and 3); Immunoblots show
the protein extracts from the ECM express fibronectin and collagen 1. β-Actin as loading control. B. Primary BMSC cultured on the BMSCECM scaffold showed filamentous spindle shaped morphology and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) positive staining (after 14 days culture). BMSC
cells cultured in plate were set as control. Microscopy was performed with a Nikon TS100 Inverted Microscope at x20 magnification. C. When
cultured on BMSC-ECM scaffold (ECM), primary BMSC have increased expression of osteopontin (OPN) compared to cells cultured on plate
(BMSC-plate). β-Actin as loading control. D. BMSC derived CM protected primary ALL blasts from chemotherapy. Primary ALL blasts from
4 ALL patients were cultured in normal medium or CM, treated with doxorubicin (Doxo, 50 nM) or mitoxantrone (Mito 10 nM) for 3 days, cell
survival were assessed by MTS assay. E. SupB15 and SupB15MR cells were treated with idarubicin (Ida, 100 nM), Mito (10 nM), clofarabine
(Clo, 300 nM), Doxo (50 nM) for 3 days. Cell survival was assessed by MTS assay. F. JurkatMR, MV4:11MR, SupB15MR-D, U937MR, NB4MR
and their drug sensitive parent cells were treated with Mito (10 nM) for 3 days. Cell viability was assessed by trypan blue exclusion assay. G.
Cell viability of SupB15 or SupB15MR cells after treatment with increasing concentrations of Mito for 3 days. SupB15MR cells which had been
continuously cultured in drug-free medium for 8 or 12 months showed decreased drug resistant capacity. H. Jurkat, MV4:11, REH and SupB15
cells were incubated in normal medium and treated with stepwise dose increases in Mito (starting at 0.5–1 nM concentrations). Drug dose was
increased when cells were observed to grow satisfactorily at a given dose level. At 3 months, only Jurkat cells survived the 10 nM of Mito; the
other cell lines did not survive beyond 3 months at the indicated Mito doses. ‘X’, cell death. Data are mean ± SEM of at least three independent
experiments (E,F). Non-parametric Mann-Whitney test (D) and unpaired 2-tailed Student’s t test (E,F). *p < 0.05, ***p < 0.001.

SupB15, REH, MV4:11, or Jurkat cells were incubated in
normal culture medium in the presence of 0.5 nM of MITO
for 2 weeks and then with gradual increases in the Mito
dose every 2–3 weeks. Cell viability was continuously
monitored for 3 months. As shown in Figure 1H, drug
resistant subclones were only generated from Jurkat cells.
While SupB15, REH and MV4:11 cells survived treatment
with 2 nM or 4 nM of Mito for a short time, they finally died
out within 2–3 months. These results showed that BMSC
protected ALL cells from chemotherapy in a cell type and
drug-independent manner. This chemoprotection facilitated
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

the emergence of reversible multidrug resistant subclones,
which were more likely to be epigenetically derived [25].

BMSC induces adaptation in ALL cells
characterized by decreased pAKT and ROS
levels and upregulation of MCL-1
In this study, BMSC mediated short-term (CM
protected leukemia cells from 3–4 days’ treatment) and
long-term (CM help to generate drug resistant subclones)
drug resistance. To investigate the mechanism underlying
43050

Oncotarget

BMSC induced drug resistance, we first used SILACbased phosphoproteomics to investigating the changing
of signalling pathway activity in short-term (30 minutes
and 2 hours) CM-exposed SupB15 cells (Supplementary
Figure S2A). 1295 differentially phosphorylated peptides,
attributable to 720 known proteins were identified after
2 hours’ exposure to CM (Supplementary Table S1).
Ingenuity pathway analysis (www.qiagen.com/ingenuity)
identified activation of PI3K/AKT, MAPK and ROS
pathways in SupB15 cells among others (Figure  2A
and Supplementary Figure S2B). Chemosensitivity
could be restored on prior exposure to PI3K inhibitors
(Supplementary Figure S2C), suggesting that an alteration
in PI3K signalling was contributory to the short term drug
resistant phenotype.
Comparative gene expression analysis were
performed on normal cultured SupB15; SupB15MR; and
SupB15 cells incubated in CM for different times (from
30 minutes to 6 days) (Figure 2B). Functional annotation
and gene set enrichment analysis of the 6,357 genes
differentially expressed between normal cultured SupB15
and the other treatment groups, revealed significant
association with regulation of ROS, PI3K-AKT, MAPK,
apoptosis and cell cycle checkpoint pathways (Figure 2C
and Supplementary Figure S2D, S2E; Supplementary
Table S2 and S3). Based on this functional information,
a heatmap with the representative gene set (2489 genes)
confirmed the distinct contrast in gene expression
signature between MR clones and their corresponding
wild type control (Supplementary Figure S2F). Principal
component analysis identified two distinct clusters with
similarity between SupB15MR and SupB15 cells exposed
to CM for 3 or 6 days (Supplementary Figure S2G). This
suggested a temporal switch in drug resistant pathways
between 3–6 days of exposure to CM. Verification of the
identified pathways using Western blot showed that drug
resistant cells, including MR cells, SupB15 cells incubated
in CM for 3 days, and SupB15LTCC cells, had increased
expression of antioxidants (MnSOD2, GPX1/2), antiapoptotoic protein MCL-1, and decreased AKT ser473
phosphorylation when compared to cells grown in normal
medium (Figure 2D). Low pAKT was also detected in
JurkatMR and MV4:11MR cells (Figure 2E).
Time course experiments were performed to
investigate the effects of CM on AKT activity in ALL
cells. As shown in Figure 2F, AKT activity in SupB15 cells
fluctuated according to incubation time. After exposure to
CM, AKT ser-473 phosphorylation increased at 2–8 hours
with a subsequent decline from 24 hours to a steady level
at 72 hours. Intracellular ROS level in ALL cells showed
similar fluctuations after exposure to CM. In SupB15 cells,
ROS levels and mitochondrial membrane potential (Δψm)
increased from 0.5 hours, peaked at 4 hours, and decreased
to lower than basal levels at 72 hours (Figure  2G). In
primary ALL blasts, ROS levels increased after 2 hours’
exposure to CM, but decreased after 24 hours (Figure 2H).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

MR cells too have lower intracellular ROS levels and Δψm
when compared with their drug sensitive parent cells
(Supplementary Figure S2H, S2I).

BMSC induced chemoresistance is distinct from
its effect on cellular proliferation
Constitutive activation of the PI3K/AKT pathway
promotes cancer cell proliferation [26–29]. The low AKT
activity mediated by BMSC in ALL cells was associated
with decreased cellular proliferation (Figure 3A) and
cell cycle progression (Figure 3B), and increased p27
expression (Figure 3C) in vitro. Comparing with SupB15
cells, SupB15MR showed delayed engraftment kinetics in
NOD-scid IL2Rgammanull (NSG) mice (Figure 3D). This is
consistent with evidence that BMSC inhibit proliferation
and function of immune cells [30, 31], as ALL cells are
malignant counterparts of immature lymphocytes.
To assess the association between BMSC mediated
growth suppression and chemoprotection, SupB15 cells
were stably transduced with p27shRNA (SupB15p27kd) or
vector control (SupB15vector), incubated in CM or normal
medium and treated with doxorubicin for 3 days. Unlike that
observed from SupB15vector cells, SupB15p27kd cells grew at a
similar rate when cultured in CM or normal medium (Figure
3C, lower panel; and 3E). Nevertheless, CM was equally
protective of SupB15p27kd or SupB15vector cells against
doxorubicin (Supplementary Figure S3A). When incubated
in CM, SupB15 cells have high AKT activity at 2 hours and
low AKT phosphorylation after 24 hours (Figure 2F). The
proportion of cells at G1 phase was increased significantly
after 24 hours incubation (Figure 3B). 10 nM of Mito was
added into culture at these two time points (2 hours and 24
hours after incubation in CM). After 3 days’ treatment, cell
survivals in these two groups were similar (Supplementary
Figure S3B). These results suggested that BMSC-ECM
mediated chemoprotection is not regulated by alterations in
cellular proliferation.

BMSC regulates intracellular ROS level and
induce redox adaptation in ALL cells
Compared with cells in normal medium, medium
containing 25% CM (v/v) also increased ROS levels
(Figure 4A), suggesting that the increased ROS production
in ALL cells was not due to the lack of nutrients in CM.
ROS generating enzymes are activated by increased
mitochondrial calcium (mCa2+) concentrations [32]. To
examine whether BMSC regulation of ROS metabolism
was related to mCa2+ influx, SupB15 cells were incubated
in CM and mCa2+ concentrations were assessed by
Rhod-2 staining followed with flow cytometry analysis.
mCa2+ concentrations increased after 30 minutes, and
gradually decreased from 2 hours returning to basal levels
after 24 hours. Intracellular ROS levels paralleled the
temporal changes in mCa2+ concentrations (Figure 4B).
43051

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Multidrug resistant cells have lower intracellular ROS levels and AKT activity. A. Ingenuity pathway analysis

of phosphoproteomic data show signal pathways activated in SupB15 cells after exposure to HS-5 derived CM for 2 hours. B. Gene
expression profiles of SupB15, SupB15 incubated in CM for different times, and two SupB15MR clones (MR1 and MR2). Data were
analysed by GeneSpring GX software (Agilent Technologies, Inc.). C. GSEA plot showing differential expression of ROS related genes in
SupB15 and SupB15MR cells. GSEA plots of gene expression related to AKT, apoptosis, chromatin remodeling, DNA repair, and ATPase
are shown in Supplementary Figure S2D. D. Compared with SupB15 cells incubated in normal medium (ctr), SupB15 cells cultured in
CM for 3 days, SupB15LTCC and SupB15MR show increased expression of PTEN, Glutathione peroxidase (GPX 1/2), MnSOD2 and MCL-1;
decreased expression of ser473-AKT phosphorylation (pAKT), and relative unchanged expression of BCL-2 and BCL2L1. E. MR cells
have decreased pAKT compared to their drug sensitive parent cells. All cells were maintained in normal medium. F. Immunoblot showing
temporal biphasic expression of pAKT in SupB15 cells incubated in CM. Following an initial increase (2–8 hours incubation), pAKT
expression declines (24–48 hours incubation), then stabilizes to a lowered steady state at 72 hours. G. ROS level (DCF-DA), Superoxide
level (Dihydroethidium, dHE), and Δψm (CMXRos) in SupB15 cells when incubated in CM for 0.5 to 72 hours, cells incubated in normal
medium as time ‘0′. H. ROS levels increased in primary ALL blasts after incubated in medium containing 50% of CM (v/v) for 4 hours
(n = 2, histogram); and decreased after 24 hours’ incubation (n = 6, box plot). Cells incubated in normal medium as control (ctl). Data are
mean ± SEM of at least three independent experiments. Non-parametric Mann-Whitney test (H) **p < 0.01.

The fluctuations of mitochondrial calcium influx were
unrelated to intercellular Ca2+ concentrations as they
were similar in both CM (30.6 ± 2.42mg/L) and normal
medium (30.8 ± 0.8mg/L). RU360, a selective inhibitor
of mitochondrial calcium uptake, suppressed CM induced
ROS generation (Figure 4C). As RU360 is unstable in the
presence of oxygen, the calcium chelator BAPTA-AM
was used to test the role of mCa2+ influx in CM induced
drug resistance. CM failed to stimulate ROS generation
(Figure 4D) or provide chemoprotection in BAPTA-AM
pre-treated ALL cells (Figure 4E).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

We have shown that BMSC-CM dynamically
regulated ROS levels in ALL cells and resulted in a low
intracellular ROS status. The decreased ROS levels in
ALL cells after incubation in CM was not the consequence
of CM mediated growth inhibition, as SupB15p27kd cells
have the same proliferation rate when cultured in normal
or CM, but ROS levels decreased after incubation in
CM for 72 h (Supplementary Figure S4). These findings
suggested that the BMSC microenvironment induced a
redox adaptation in ALL cells. To address this hypothesis,
NSG mice were engrafted intrafemorally with 1 × 105 of
43052

Oncotarget

Figure 3: BMSC induced chemoresistance is distinct from its effect on cellular proliferation. A. SupB15 and SupB15MR

cells were cultured in normal medium; or SupB15 cells were maintained in medium containing 50% of CM (v/v) for 4 days. Cell number
were normalised to day 1. Cell proliferation was assessed with MTS assay. B. Cell cycle progression in SupB15 cells when cultured
in CM. After 24 to 72 hours, cells showed a higher proportion of cells in G1 phase, lower proportion of cells in S and G2/M phase.
C. After incubation in CM for 24 to 72 hours, SupB15 cells showed increased expression of p27, decreased expression of p21, the
expression of p53 did not change (upper panel). CM failed to upregulate p27 expression in SupB15p27KD cells (lower panel) after 24 or
48 hours’ incubation. D. 1 × 105 of SupB15LucGFP or SupB15MRLucGFP cells were injected into NSG mice (n = 6 each group) intravenously.
Representative images of 3 mice from a cohort of 6 animals showing delayed engraftment kinetics of SupB15MR transplanted mice when
comparing with SupB15 cells. Leukemia engraftment was measured with bioluminescence. E. SupB15 cells with p27 wild type (vector)
or knockdown (p27KD) were incubated in normal medium or CM. CM equally protected SupB15vector and SupB15p27kd cells from Doxo
(50 nM, 72 hours) treatment. Data are mean ± SEM of at least three independent experiments (A,B,E). unpaired 2-tailed Student’s t test
(A, E). **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001.

Low ROS levels characterize subpopulations
of primary ALL cells with relative resistance to
chemotherapy

SupB15LucGFP cells and treated with methotrexate (5 mg/kg)
or saline from day 8 (Figure 4F). Compared with in vitro
cultured cells, SupB15LucGFP cells obtained from femoral
flushes of both treated and untreated mice showed higher
expression of GPX1/2, MnSOD2 and MCL-1 (Figure
4G), lower levels of ROS and Δψm, and higher levels of
GSH (Figure 4H). Together, BMSC microenvironment
induces an initial increase in intracellular ROS levels and
Δψm via an influx of calcium ions into mitochondria. As
excess ROS is harmful to cells, ALL cells adapt to this
oxidative stress by increasing antioxidant production and
lowering intracellular ROS levels. This redox-adapted
phenotype is maintained by cells surviving post exposure
to chemotherapy, as illustrated by MR cells.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Both long term CM-exposed ALL cells and MR cells
had low ROS levels. We proposed that ROSlow subpopulations
of CM-exposed ALL cells were likely to be more resistant
to chemotherapy than ROShigh subpopulations. To test this,
SupB15 cells were incubated in CM for 6 days and sorted into
ROSlow and ROShigh populations (<10% of whole population)
using DCF-DA staining. ROSlow cells were relative resistant to
chemotherapy with Mito or Doxo when compared to ROShigh
cells on (Figure 5A). Next we examined the chemosensitivity
of the subpopulations in primary ALL blasts with differential

43053

Oncotarget

Figure 4: BMSC regulates intracellular ROS levels and induce redox adaptation in ALL cells. A. Medium containing

different proportion of CM (25%, 50% or 75%, v/v) increased ROS production in REH cells after 4 hours’ incubation. B. Level of ROS
(DCF-DA) and mitochondrial calcium (Rhod-2) in SupB15 cells after incubation in CM for indicated times. C. SupB15 cells were
treated with RU360 (10 μM) for 1 hour, then incubated in CM for 2 hours. CM failed to increase ROS level. D. and E. Pre-treatment
of SupB15 cells with BAPTA-AM (3 μM, 2 hours) inhibited (D) CM induced ROS generation and (E) CM mediated chemoprotection.
F. and G. Intrafemorally engrafted SupB15LucGFP cells showed increased expression of GPX1/2, MnSOD2, and MCL-1 when compared to
SupB15LucGFP cells cultured in vitro. H. Intrafemorally engrafted SupB15LucGFP cells had lower levels of ROS and Δψm; higher level of GSH
when compared to in vitro cultured cells. n = 6 mice per group. Data are mean ± SEM of at least three independent experiments (C,D,E).
Non-parametric Mann-Whitney test (H) and unpaired 2-tailed Student’s t test (C,D,E). **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001.

intracellular ROS levels. CD19+ primary ALL blast cells,
obtained from diagnostic bone marrow aspirates could be
characterized into 3 subpopulations based on ROS levels,
low, medium and high. After exposure to CM for 24 hours,
there was a moderate expansion in the ROSlow subpopulation
(Figure 5B). We engrafted primary ALL cells intrafemorally
in non-irradiated NSG mice. Femoral flushes were obtained
on evidence of engraftment and purified CD19+ ALL blasts
were sorted into ROSlow and ROShigh populations, treated with
Mito or Doxo for 3 days. ROSlow cells were again shown
to be comparatively more drug resistant than ROShigh cells
(Figure 5C).

Overexpression of MCL-1 has been previously associated
with drug resistance in cancer [33–35]. MCL-1 was
upregulated in LTCC, CM exposed ALL cells, MR cells
(Figure 2D), and bone marrow engrafted primary ALL cells
(Figure 4G). Transient MCL-1 knockdown by siRNA, or
the MCL-1 inhibitor Obatoclax sensitized SupB15 and
SupB15MR cells to H2O2 cytotoxicity (Figures 6A, 6B,
and Supplementary Figure S5), suggesting that MCL-1
contributes to the redox adaptation process in ALL.
Under oxidative stress, cancer cells increase
their antioxidant capacity and develop a drug resistant
phenotype. Targeting this redox adaptation process has
significant therapeutic implications [13]. Piperlongumine
(PL) [36, 37], β-phenethyl isothiocyanate (PEITC) [38]
and Adaphostin (Ada) [39] have dual effects of increasing
ROS production and suppressing BCL-2 family molecules.
10 μM of PEITC, PL, or Ada strongly stimulated ROS
generation (Figure 6C) and were lethal to SupB15MR,
SupB15LTCC and SupB15CM cells (Figure 6D, 6E and 6F).

Inhibiting antioxidants and antiapoptotic capacity
overcomes BMSC mediated drug resistance
As shown earlier, the drug resistant phenotype was
further characterized by upregulation of the antiapoptotic
BCL2 family members BCL-2, BCL2L1 and MCL-1.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43054

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Low ROS levels characterized subpopulations of primary ALL cells with relative resistance to
chemotherapy. A. Roslow SupB15 cells were relatively drug resistant than that of Roshigh cells after treated with Mito (10 nM) or Doxo

(50 nM) for 72 hours. B. Flow cytometry dot plots (side scatter SSC vs DCF-DA staining) indicated presence of distinct ROShigh, ROSintermediate
and ROSlow subpopulations in CD19 positive primary ALL cells (ALL1, ALL2, ALL3). The ROSlow subpopulation expanded on 24-hours
incubation with CM. Lymphoprep™ density gradient centrifugation were used to exclude dead cells. After 24 hours’ incubation in normal
medium or CM, cell viability were more than 90% (Trypan blue exclusive assay), and cells incubated in CM had better viability than
cells incubated in normal medium. Dead cells were further excluded by SSC/FSC gating on Flowjo software. C. ROSlow populations of
primagraft ALL blasts were more drug resistant than that of ROShigh cells (n = 5). CD19 positive primagraft cells were collected from mice
bone marrow flushes, purified with magnetic purification, and dead cells were excluded by Lymphoprep™ density gradient centrifugation.
Cells were sorted into ROSlow and ROShigh cells based on intracellular ROS level (DCF-DA staining). In the process of cell sorting, dead/
dying cells were excluded by SSC/FSC gating and propidium iodid (PI) staining. Cells were then incubated in medium containing 50%
CM (CM), and treated with Mito (15 nM) for 72 hours. Data are mean ± SEM of at least three independent experiments. unpaired 2-tailed
Student’s t test (A) and Non-parametric Mann-Whitney test (C) *p < 0.05, ***p < 0.001.

Targeting antioxidants and MCL-1 effectively
against ASNase resistance in primary ALL blasts

The ROS scavenger N-acetyl-cysteine (NAC) reversed
the effects of PEITC or PL, but was less effective against
Ada. This may due to the fact that Ada inhibits ABL1
kinase activity and SupB15, while highly chemosensitive,
is a BCR-ABL positive cell line. All three drugs strongly
induced γ-H2AX phosphorylation and inhibited MCL-1
(not BCL-2 or BCL2L1) expression (Figure 6G and
6H). Therefore the simultaneous increase of ROS and
inhibition of MCL-1 appeared to inhibit BMSC induced
chemoprotection.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

We next evaluated the role of antioxidant and MCL1 targeting as adjunct strategies in ALL therapy. The
anticancer effects of PEITC are dose-dependent. Compared
to SupB15 cells, SupB15MR were sensitive to 10 μM of
PEITC but more resistant to 2 μM of PEITC (Figure 7A).
Serum concentrations of PEITC reached ~1 μM after oral
intake [40], posing a practical hurdle for its clinical use.
43055

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Inhibiting antioxidants and antiapoptotic capacity overcome BMSC mediated drug resistance. A. and B.

Suppression of MCL-1 expression sensitizes SupB15 cells to H2O2 treatment. SupB15 cells were (A) transfected with MCL-1 siRNA (1 μM)
for 72 hours; or (B) treated with Obatoclax (100 nM) for 24 hours. Cells were then treated with H2O2 (80 μM) for 24 hours. Cell viability
was assessed by trypan blue exclusion assay. C. PEITC (5 μM), PL (10 μM), or Ada (5 μM) stimulated ROS production in SupB15MR cells
after 1 hour treatment. Effects were reversed by NAC (3 mM, 2 hours) pretreatment. D, E. and F. PEITC (D), PL (E) and Ada (F) were
toxic for SupB15 in normal medium (as control); SupB15 incubated in CM; SupB15LTCC; and SupB15MR cells. Note the differential effects
of NAC (3 mM) pre-treatment on the toxicity of PEITC, PL and Ada. G. 2 hours of PEITC (5 μM), PL (10 μM), or Ada (5 μM) treatments
inhibited MCL-1 expression, and induced γ-H2AX expression in SupB15 and SupB15MR cells. Cells were maintained in normal medium.
H. MCL-1 expressions in cells were strongly inhibited after 2 hours of PEITC (5 μM), PL (10 μM), or Ada (5 μM) treatment: SupB15, REH
and SD1 cells were incubated in CM for 3 days; and SupB15LTCC, REHLTCC, and SD1LTCC were cultured in normal medium. Data are mean ±
SEM of at least three independent experiments. unpaired 2-tailed Student’s t test (A,B,C,D,E,F). **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001.

GSH is the main cellular antioxidant. A potential strategy
would be to combine PEITC with reagents that inhibit
GSH synthesis, such as buthionine sulfoximine (BSO)
or the anti-leukemic drug L-Asparaginase (ASNase).
ASNase converts asparagine to aspartate and glutamine to
glutamate. The depletion of both asparagine and glutamine
by ASNase appears to be required for its cytotoxic action
[41], and ASNase has been reported to deplete serum
glutamine and suppresses GSH levels in ALL patients [42].
We speculated that the effect of ASNase could in part be
related to its antioxidant activity and used in combination
with PEITC could potentiate its effect. REH and SupB15MR
cells are highly resistant to ASNase when compared to
SupB15 (Figure 7B). The combinations of PEITC with
BSO or ASNase were more effective in suppressing
MCL-1 activity, stimulating γ-H2AX expression
(Figure 7C), inhibiting GSH expression (Figure 7D) and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

increasing ROS levels (Figure 7E) in SupB15MR and REH
cells, than PEITC or ASNase alone. PEITC potentiates
ASNase cytotoxicity in SupB15MR and REH cells (Figure
7F and 7G).
As shown earlier, in patients with ALL, BMSC
microenvironment mediated redox adaptation has occurred
in a proportion of leukemic cells prior to treatment. We
speculated that these cells persist after initial therapy.
Sufficiently expanded, these cells may give rise to detectable
MRD. Primary diagnostic blasts obtained from MRDlow (<10–
4
) and MRDhigh (≥10–4) patients recruited to the UKALL2003
clinical study [43] were analyzed (Supplementary Figure
S6A). These patients were treated with a 3-drug induction
of dexamethasone, vincristine and ASNase. 28 days after
starting therapy, MRD assessments were performed.
Trough ASNase activity was measured at two time
points during induction (Supplementary Figure S6B).
43056

Oncotarget

Figure 7: Targeting antioxidants and MCL-1 effectively restored sensitivity to ASNase in ALL cells. A. Variations in cell

viability of SupB15 and SupB15MR cells after treatment with PEITC (2 μM or 10 μM) for 24 hours. B. IC50 of ANSase in SupB15, REH,
and SupB15MR cells. C. Combination of PEITC with ASNase strongly inhibited MCL-1 expression and increased γ-H2AX expression in
SupB15MR and REH cells. PEITC (2 μM) for 48 hours; ASNase (ASN) for 72 hours (2 IU/ml for REH, 5 IU/ml for SupB15MR); or ASNase
for 24 hours, then PEITC for further 48 hours (PEITC + ASN). D. and E. Combination of PEITC with ASNase (ASN) or BSO (D) inhibited
GSH expression and (E) increased ROS generation in SupB15MR cells after 20 hours’ treatment. PEITC (2 μM); ASNase (5 IU/ml); BSO
(100 uM). F. and G. Cell viability of SupB15MR (F) or REH (G) following treatment: PEITC (2 μM) 48 hours; ASNase 96 hours (5 IU/ml
for SupB15MR, 2IU/ml for REH); ASNase 48 hours, then PEITC 48 hours (PEITC + ASN). H. The addition of PEITC or PL overcame
ASNase resistance in primary ALL cells. Diagnostic blast cells from MRDhigh or MRDlow patients were incubated in medium containing
50% CM, and treated with ASNase (2 IU/ml) for 72 hours; PEITC or PL (2 uM) for 48 hours; or ASNase for 24 hours, followed by PEITC
or PL for further 48 hours. Data are mean ± SEM. Unpaired 2-tailed Student’s t test (A,D,E,F and G) and nonparametric Mann-Whitney test
(H) *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001.

DISCUSSION

All patients had adequate ASNase activity at both time
points (>100 U/L) [44], indicating adequate drug activity. As
shown in Figure 7H, blast cells from MRDhi (n = 10) patients
displayed proportionately increased resistance to ASNase
when compared to cells from MRDlow patients (n = 15). This
is indicative of an expanded drug resistant population in the
pre-treatment bone marrow sample in the MRDhi group.
The addition of PEITC or PL overcame ASNase resistance.
Immunoblots showed that the combination of PEITC or PL
with ASNase strongly inhibited MCL-1 levels and induced
γ-H2AX expression in primary ALL blasts (Supplementary
Figure S6C). Thus targeting antioxidants production and
inhibiting MCL-1 may be potential adjunctive therapeutic
strategies to overcome MRD in childhood ALL.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Analyses of the effect of the microenvironment
created by the in vitro BMSC-ECM 3-D model offer
possible biological explanations for the clinical variations
in response to therapy in childhood ALL (Figure 8). As
in most cancers, at diagnosis the majority of leukemic
cells though metabolically active are not proliferative
and mainly dying. Only a small populations of slowly
cycling cells survive and give rise subsequently to fast
cycling progenitors [45]. Our study suggests that the
BMSC microenvironment produces an oxidative stress
response in ALL cells. A subpopulation of ALL cells
underwent redox adaptation, tolerated lethal doses of
chemotherapy and gave rise to MR cells; a phenomenon
43057

Oncotarget

Figure 8: Model of bone marrow microenvironment mediated drug resistance in ALL and its clinical correlation. The

bone marrow microenvironment exerts oxidative stress on leukemic cells by promoting mitochondrial calcium influx, increasing intracellular
ROS levels and Δψm, and activating AKT. In response, leukemic cells initiate a mediated redox adaptation process, resulting in an increased
expression of antioxidants (e.g. GSH and MnSOD2) and MCL-1, decreased ROS levels, Δψm and AKT activity. This confers a multiple
drug resistance (MR) phenotype in leukemic cells. MR cells exist at diagnosis and can be detected as MRD post therapy. Cells with
deregulated cell cycle control give rise to early recurrence. Other drug resistant cells gradually regain a degree of chemosensitivity, and
respond to intensification with cytotoxic drugs. Alternatively, inhibiting antioxidants and MCL-1 activity as adjunctive therapy can target
the MR phenotype.

not recapitulated by cells grown in normal medium. MR
cells are characterised by decreased proliferation and
multidrug resistance. This result agrees with the finding
that in childhood ALL patients after 8 days treatment,
persisting blast cells had decreased proliferative activity
[46]. The method of generating MR cells parallels the
clinical setting as cancer cells were cultured in a protective
environment and exposed to toxic drug levels. In patient,
treated with intensive combination chemotherapy MRD of
≥10–4 after 4 weeks of treatment is associated with a poorer
outcome even though treatment lasts over 2-years. Further
intensification with myelosuppressive therapy is associated
with a clearance of MRD and better outcomes [47]. Our
model suggests that EMDR derived, slowly proliferative,
multidrug resistant cells survived initial cytotoxic stress
and if sufficiently expanded were detectable as MRD.
Cytotoxic therapy is non-specific and injurious to both
leukemic and the protective microenvironment. This is
one possible explanation for our observation of the clinical
benefits of the more myelotoxic mitoxantrone when
compared to idarubicin [3].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

When removed from the stressful environment,
MR cells gradually lose their drug resistant phenotype,
a feature also described in other cancers [25] and
provides a model for late relapses. ALL patients with
late relapses occurring many months after stopping
therapy often respond to further intensification by similar
chemotherapeutic agents. If MRD is cleared then many
patients can be cured second time round [47]. On the
contrary recurrences whilst on therapy are often associated
with rapidly progressive disease and poor outcomes even
after allogeneic stem cell transplantation [3]. SupB15
cells with p27 knockdown retained their drug resistant
phenotype but were proliferative when incubated in
BMSC CM. Similarly, mutations and deletion of the cell
cycle control gene TP53 are associated with early highly
aggressive relapse with poor outcomes [48].
Our experiments revealed a distinct biphasic
response in ALL cells upon BMSC-CM stimulation, with
initial upregulation of AKT activity and intracellular
ROS levels, followed by decreased pAKT and ROS level
after 24 to 72 hours, together with increased antioxidants
43058

Oncotarget

expression. Short-term drug resistance, characterised by
increased AKT activity and intracellular ROS levels, was
reversed by pretreating cells with PI-3K/AKT inhibitor,
as previously reported [7, 8]. Similar to the long-term
drug resistant phenotype, leukaemia-initiating cells have
low AKT activity [49], as do ‘stem-cell like’ cancer drug
resistant cells [25]. So the metabolic phenotype of drug
resistant cells observed in this study is common with
other drug resistant cancer cells and cancer stem cells
[15, 50–52]. The association between short- and longterm drug resistances indicates an evolutionary process,
as illustrated in our mechanistic model (Figure 8).
This process also leads to the upregulation of the
mitochondrial anti-apoptotic protein MCL-1. MCL-1 is
one of the most highly amplified genes in a broad range of
human cancers [33, 53] and its expression rapidly changed
in responds to cellular stresses [54]. A recent study suggested
that outer mitochondrial membrane localized MCL-1 possess
antiapoptotic activity, and the mitochondrial matrix localized
MCL-1 isoform supports oxidative phosphorylation,
ATP production, and the maintenance of mitochondrial
membrane potential [55], so it is possible that inhibition of
both the anti-apoptotic and the mitochondrial functions of
MCL-1 may lead to more effective therapies. In line with
these findings, we found that MCL-1 as the most upregulated
anti-apoptotic molecules in cells exposed to CM. In some of
our experiments, MCL-1 protein appeared as a doublets as
detected by Western blot, depending on the conditions of
SDS-PAGE. Suppression of MCL-1 expression by siRNA or
obatoclax sensitized ALL cells to H2O2 induced cell death.
PEITC, PL, or Adaphostin treatments effectively inhibited or
abolished MCL-1 expression, but not that of BCL-2 or BCLxL. Moreover, at certain concentrations, the multiple drug
resistant SupB15MR was more sensitive to PEITC or PL than
its drug sensitive counterpart. Given that low MMP and high
MCL-1 is the feature of BMSC mediated drug resistance,
the extensive metabolic reprogramming in cancer cells may
make them more vulnerable to motochondrial perturbations
than normal cells [56], so it is possible that drug resistant
cells may rely on high antioxidants and MCL-1 to maintain
normal mitochondrial morphology. Inhibiting MCL-1 and
antioxidants activity is able to further decrease MMP and
eventually induce mitochondrial membrane collapse and
cell death.
Our study has a number of limitations, chief of which
is that the mechanisms of bone marrow microenvironment/
BMSC mediated drug resistance were mainly explored in
leukemic cell lines and murine models. Among the multiple
signal pathways regulated by BMSC cells, as shown in our
phosphoproteomics and gene expression analyses, we only
investigated PI3K/AKT, cell proliferation, anti-apoptosis,
and ROS metabolism in ALL cells. The nature of the
subpopulations of cells that undergo redox adaptation remains
unclear. As MRD levels vary with cytogenetic subtypes, it
is possible that primary and secondary genetic subclonal
changes may facilitate the redox adaptation. Murine models
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

suggest that leukemic cells persist within the marrow
after chemotherapy [57]. However the leukemic marrow
environment is different to that of a marrow in remission.
We do not know if the oxidative stress and response is
different, or with time epigenetic transfer decreases leading to
proliferation and increased chemosensitivity in daughter cells.
Given the complexity of EMDR, more detailed investigation
on other signalling pathways and better animal studies are
required. Another limitation of this study is that the role of
the immune system has not been explored in vitro and in vivo
experiments. Genetic and epigenetic alterations happened in
cancer cells may provide a diverse set of antigens that could
be served as targets for immunotherapy. For example, PD1
pathway, an immune-checkpoint pathway that primarily
operates in the tumour microenvironment, has emerged as a
promising target in cancer [58].
Our study adds to the evidence that drug resistance
in cancer cells is determined by both intrinsic and
microenvironmental factors. Further in-depth investigation
of metabolic profiling and epigenetic changes in the
development of cancer drug resistance will provide
insights into clinical treatment failure and relapse.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Human tissue and cell lines
Clinical samples were obtained after informed signed
consent from patients enrolled into the national clinical trial
(ALL 2003) for children with ALL. National and Local
ethical committees approved analyses of samples and
ASNase activity. Primary ALL blast cells from bone marrow
aspiration were separated with Ficoll gradient centrifugation
(Lymphoprep; Axis-Shield). Leukemia cell lines were
maintained in RPMI 1640 (Lonza, Belgium) supplemented
with 10% fetal calf serum (FCS, Biosera). Primary BMSCs
were prepared from ALL patients at diagnosis or have been
received intensive chemotherapy. Only BMSC of three to
six passages were used. Primary BMSC and human BMSC
cell line HS-5 and hTRET-MSC were cultured in DMEM
medium (Lonza) supplemented with 10% FCS, 100 U/ml
penicillin and 100 μg/ml streptomycin. Differentiation
of BMSC into osteoblast-like cells was assessed by alk­
aline phosphatase (ALP) staining (Roche, Germany) and
osteopontin expression.

Animal experiments
All animal procedures were approved by the Cancer
Research UK Manchester Institute’s Animal Ethics Committee
and performed under a project license issued by the United
Kingdom Home Office, in keeping with the Home Office
Animal Scientific Procedures Act, 1986. NOD/SCID/IL2Rγnull (NSG) mice were purchased from Jackson Laboratories
(Bar Harbor, ME, USA) and bred in house. To investigate bone
marrow microenvironment mediated redox adaptation in ALL
43059

Oncotarget

cells, 1 × 105 of ALL cells were transplanted into NOD/shiscid/IL-2Rγnull mice femoral bone marrow. Mice were treated
with methotrexate (5 mg/kg body weight) or PBS after 8 days
transplantation. Bone marrow mononuclear cells were flushed
from bone marrow after three weeks’ transplantation. Cells
were gated with GFP (for SupB15LucGFP cells) or CD45 (for
non-labelled cells) on flow cytometry.

(68 genes), AKT pathway (64 genes), apoptosis (110
genes), ATPase (46 genes), DNA repair (41 genes) and
Chromatin remodelling (76 genes) by selecting genes
from previously published gene list or the gene lists from
SABiosciences website (http://www.sabiosciences.com/
ArrayList.php) with modification based on published
methods, only genes with published evidence of functions
were included in the final gene list. In the GSEA analysis,
we used the default settings except using the ‘gene-set’ as
the permutation type, the Chip file provided by the GSEA
software for the Affymetrix HG133plus2 array, and the
‘Diff_of_Classes’ option as the metric for ranking genes.

Generation of BMSC derived extracellular
matrix (ECM)
BMSC-ECM was generated by growing BMSC
to confluence in normal medium [24]. Briefly, primary
or cell line BMSCs were cultured in normal medium,
just prior to reaching confluent, cells were treated with
50 ug/ml of ascorbic acid (Sigma) and cultured for another
5 days. BMSCs layer were treated with extraction buffer
containing 0.5% (v/v) Triton X-100 and 20 mM NH4OH,
gave rise to cell free ECM that remain attached to the
culture plates. After washed three times with ice-cold PBS,
the resulting extracted ECM can be stored at 4°C in PBS
containing 100 U/ml penicillin and 100 ug/ml streptomycin
with parafilm sealing for up to 3 months.

Triple SILAC based phosphoproteomics
SupB15 and HS-5 cells were grown in heavy
(H) Arginine (13C6 15N4 L-Arginine-HCl)/Lysine (13C6
15
N2 L-Lysine-2HCl), intermediate (I) Arginine (13C6
L-Arginine-HCl)/Lysine (13C6 L-Lysine-2HCl) and light
(L) Arginine (L-Arginine-HCl)/Lysine (L-Lysine-2HCl)
media for a minimum of five passages according to
manufacturer’s instructions. All media was supplemented
with 230 μg/ml L-Proline to prevent conversion of
Arginine to Proline. After serum starved overnight,
SupB15 cells were treated with SILAC conditioned
media (CM) from HS-5 cells for 30 mins or 2 hrs. Then
cells were washed with ice-cold PBS, equal numbers
of H, I and L viable SupB15 cells were mixed together,
lysed with 50 mM Tris, 4% SDS containing protease and
phosphoprotease inhibitor cocktails (Roche) on ice for
30 mins. Protein samples were then digested with trypsin,
desalted and dried down. Seven aliquots (each around
320 ug) were combined. The sample was split equally
into ten portions for TiO2 enrichment and subjected to
a LTQ OrbitrapXL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher,
Hertfordshire, UK) for analysis.

Generation of conditioned medium and
ultrafiltration
BMSCs were cultured in complete medium on the
BMSC-ECM layer until reach about 70% confluence,
then serum free RPMI1640 were added and incubated
for 24–48 hours. Cell culture supernatant were collected,
centrifuged at 3500 rpm for 10 min to clear cells debris,
then passed 0.2 μm filter. CM was snap frozen in dry ice,
and kept in −80 °C. CM was diluted with normal medium
at a ratio of 1:1 just before use. CM fractions (<3kDa
and >3kDa) were ultra-filtrated at 3000 Da (Millipore,
Billerica, MA, USA), 3000 × g, 60 min, at 4°C.

shRNA and siRNA transfection

RNA extraction, microarray, and GSEA analysis

Lentiviruses which express GFP, p27 shRNA or
their empty vector control were produced in 293T cells,
transfected into SupB15 cells and stable transfection
were selected with 10 ug/ml of Puromycin. Accell
MCL-1 siRNA or its control siRNA (Thermo Scientific
Dharmacon) were transduced into ALL cell lines according
to manufacturer’s instruction. 3 days after transfection,
protein knockdown were assessed by Western Blot and
cells were immediately used for experiments.

Total RNA were purified by Qiagen RNeasy Micro
kit, cDNA was amplified and labelled with Nugen Ovation
Biotin labelling system (NuGEN Technologies). Labelled
probes were hybridized to Affymetrix U133A 2.0 PLUS
Array. The probe-level expression values in the data obtained
from the Affymetrix HG133plus2 array were normalised and
summarised as the expression values at the probeset level
using the RMA method implemented in the Affymetrix’s tool
‘apt-probeset-summarize’. Data (.CEL files) were analyzed
using the R statistical package bioconductor and Genespring
7.3.1 software. Gene array data were deposited in NCBI gene
expression database Gene Expression Ominibus (GEO),
accession number GSE48876.
The probe set-level expression data was loaded into
the gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) software. We
created six gene sets, which involved in ROS metabolism
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Cell proliferation and viability
Cell proliferation and viability was analyzed by
using CellTiter96Aqueous One Solution Cell proliferation
Assay kit (Promega, Madision, WI, USA) according to the
manufacturer’s protocol. Cell viability was determined
by recording the absorbance at 490 nM using a 96-well
43060

Oncotarget

GraphPad Prism software. P value < 0.05 was considered
as significant. Data are expressed as means ± SEM.
*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001.

plate reader (FLUOstar Omega). Cell viability was also
be determined by Trypan blue exclusion (Invitrogen) assay
and the cell viability were assessed in a TC10 Automated
cell counter (Bio Rad, Berkeley, CA, USA).

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING

Immunoblots and antibodies

We gratefully acknowledge the review and
comments by Professor Michael Lisanti and Dr. Federica
Sotgia. We thank Professor Dario Campana for providing
the hTRET-MSC cell line, Oscar Fernandez-Capetillo
for the p27 shRNA plasmid, and Jean-Pierre Bourquin
for ALL primagraft samples. This study was supported
by grants from Cancer Research UK and Leukaemia
Lymphoma Research Fund to Vaskar Saha. Vaskar Saha is
an India Alliance Margdarshi Fellow.

Cells were suspended in lysis buffer (20 mM TrisHCl, pH 7.8, 50 mM NaCl, 5 mM EGTA, and 1% v/v
Triton X-100) containing freshly added protease and
phosphatase inhibitors (Roche). Lysates were clarified
by centrifugation at 4°C, and protein concentration was
determined by Bio-Rad protein assay.
To verify the protein contents of the BMSCECM after alkaline detergent extraction, BMSC-ECM
were scratched from culture plate and dissolved in
buffer containing 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 6.8), 200 mM
dithiothreitol and 4% SDS. Samples were homogenized by
pass through 27 g needle for at least 7 times, incubated on
ice for 60 minutes, cleared by centrifugation and subjected
to protein concentration assessment. Then 0.2% glycerol
and 0.2% bromophenol blue (final concentration) were
added and samples were heated at 95°C for 5 minutes.
The following antibodies are used: phosphorAKT Ser 473 and were from Cell Signalling. γ-H2AX,
osteopontin, β-actin, MnSOD2, BCL-2, and BCL-xL were
from Millipore. p27, p21, collagen 1, fibronectin, MCL-1,
Gpx1/2, were from Santa Cruz Biotechnology.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

REFERENCES
1.	 Bhojwani D, Kang HN, Moskowitz NP, Min DJ, Lee H,
Potter JW, Davidson G, Willman CL, Borowitz MJ,
Belitskaya-Levy I, Hunger SP, Raetz EA, Carroll WL.
Biologic pathways associated with relapse in childhood
acute lymphoblastic leukemia: a Children’s Oncology
Group study. Blood. 2006; 108:711–717.

Flow cytometry

2.	 Conter V, Bartram CR, Valsecchi MG, Schrauder A,
Panzer-Grumayer R, Moricke A, Arico M, Zimmermann M,
Mann G, De Rossi G, Stanulla M, Locatelli F, Basso G,
Niggli F, Barisone E, Henze G, et al. Molecular response
to treatment redefines all prognostic factors in children
and adolescents with B-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic
leukemia: results in 3184 patients of the AIEOP-BFM ALL
2000 study. Blood. 2010; 115:3206–3214.

ROS level (CM-H2DCFDA or CellROX™ Deep
Red), Δψm (Mitotracker CMXRos), and Mitochondrial
Ca2+ concentration (Rhod2-AM) were analyzed using a
FACSCalibur flow cytometer (BD Bioscience, Oxford,
UK). Intracellular GSH level were assessed in a LSR
model II flow cytometry (BD Bioscience, Oxford, UK)
with ThiolTracker™ Violet dye staining. The fluorescence
dyes were from Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA, USA), and data
were analyzed using FlowJo software (FlowJo, Oregon,
USA). Cell isolation by flow sorting was performed on a
BD FACS Aria III (BD Bioscience).

Measurement of calcium concentration

3.	 Parker C, Waters R, Leighton C, Hancock J, Sutton R,
Moorman AV, Ancliff P, Morgan M, Masurekar A, Goulden N,
Green N, Revesz T, Darbyshire P, Love S, Saha V.
Effect of mitoxantrone on outcome of children with first
relapse of acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL R3): an
open-label randomised trial. Lancet. 2010; 376:2009–2017.

The concentration of Calcium ions was measured
by using Calcium Colorimetric Assay Kit (BioVision,
Milpitas, CA, USA) and determined by recording the
absorbance at 575 nm using a 96-well plate reader
(FLUOstar Omega, BMG LABTECH, Germany).

5.	 Abdi J, Chen G, Chang H. Drug resistance in multiple
myeloma: latest findings and new concepts on molecular
mechanisms. Oncotarget. 2013; 4:2186–2207.

4.	 Meads MB, Gatenby RA, Dalton WS. Environment-mediated
drug resistance: a major contributor to minimal residual disease. Nature Reviews Cancer. 2009; 9:665–A674.

Statistical analysis

6.	 Cairns RA, Harris IS, Mak TW. Regulation of cancer cell
metabolism. Nature Reviews Cancer. 2011; 11:85–95.

Statistical analyses were performed using unpaired
2-tailed Student’s t test for in vitro cell line data; nonparametric Mann-Whitney test for in vivo and patients
sample data. Statistical calculations were performed with

7.	 Shehata M, Schnabl S, Demirtas D, Hilgarth M, Hubmann R,
Ponath E, Badrnya S, Lehner C, Hoelbl A, Duechler M,
Gaiger A, Zielinski C, Schwarzmeier JD, Jaeger U.
Reconstitution of PTEN activity by CK2 inhibitors and

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43061

Oncotarget

interference with the PI3-K/Akt cascade counteract the
antiapoptotic effect of human stromal cells in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Blood. 2010; 116:2513–2521.

research : an official journal of the American Association
for Cancer Research. 2014; 20:4520–4531.
19.	 Boutter J, Huang Y, Marovca B, Vonderheit A, Grotzer MA,
Eckert C, Cario G, Wollscheid B, Horvath P, Bornhauser BC,
Bourquin JP. Image-based RNA interference screening
reveals an individual dependence of acute lymphoblastic
leukemia on stromal cysteine support. Oncotarget. 2014.

8.	 Tabe Y, Jin LH, Tsutsumi-Ishii Y, Xu YY, McQueen T, Priebe W,
Mills GB, Ohsaka A, Nagaoka I, Andreeff M, Konopleva M.
Activation of integrin-linked kinase is a critical prosurvival pathway induced in leukemic cells by bone marrow-derived stromal
cells. Cancer Research. 2007; 67:684–694.

20.	 Kiel MJ, Morrison SJ. Uncertainty in the niches that
maintain haematopoietic stem cells. Nature Reviews
Immunology. 2008; 8:290–301.

9.	 Yang F, Chen YZ, Shen T, Guo D, Dakhova O, Ittmann MM,
Creighton CJ, Zhang YQ, Dang TD, Rowley DR. Stromal
TGF-beta signaling induces AR activation in prostate cancer.
Oncotarget. 2014; 5:10854–10869.

21.	 Keating A. Mesenchymal Stromal Cells: New Directions.
Cell Stem Cell. 2012; 10:709–716.

10.	 Iwamoto S, Mihara K, Downing JR, Pui CH, Campana D.
Mesenchymal cells regulate the response of acute lymphoblastic leukemia cells to asparaginase. Journal of Clinical
Investigation. 2007; 117:1049–1057.

22.	 Windus LCE, Glover TT, Avery VM. Bone-stromal cells
up-regulate tumourigenic markers in a tumour-stromal 3D
model of prostate cancer. Mol Cancer. 2013; 12.
23.	 Pampaloni F, Reynaud EG, Stelzer EHK. The third dimension bridges the gap between cell culture and live tissue.
Nat Rev Mol Cell Bio. 2007; 8:839–845.

11.	 Roodhart JML, Daenen LGM, Stigter ECA, Prins HJ,
Gerrits J, Houthuijzen JM, Gerritsen MG, Schipper HS,
Backer MJG, van Amersfoort M, Vermaat JSP, Moerer P,
Ishihara K, Kalkhoven E, Beijnen JH, Derksen PWB,
et al. Mesenchymal Stem Cells Induce Resistance to
Chemotherapy through the Release of Platinum-Induced
Fatty Acids. Cancer Cell. 2011; 20:370–383.

24.	 Cukierman E, Pankov R, Stevens DR, Yamada KM. Taking
cell-matrix adhesions to the third dimension. Science. 2001;
294:1708–1712.
25.	 Sharma SV, Lee DY, Li BH, Quinlan MP, Takahashi F,
Maheswaran S, McDermott U, Azizian N, Zou L, Fischbach MA,
Wong KK, Brandstetter K, Wittner B, Ramaswamy S, Classon M,
Settleman J. A Chromatin-Mediated Reversible Drug-Tolerant
State in Cancer Cell Subpopulations. Cell. 2010; 141:69–80.

12.	 Zhang W, Trachootham D, Liu JY, Chen G, Pelicano H,
Garcia-Prieto C, Lu WQ, Burger JA, Croce CM, Plunkett W,
Keating MJ, Huang P. Stromal control of cystine metabolism promotes cancer cell survival in chronic lymphocytic
leukaemia. Nature Cell Biology. 2012; 14:276-+.

26.	 Altomare DA, Testa JR. Perturbations of the AKT signaling
pathway in human cancer. Oncogene. 2005; 24:7455–7464.

13.	 Trachootham D, Alexandre J, Huang P. Targeting cancer
cells by ROS-mediated mechanisms: a radical therapeutic
approach? Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2009; 8:579–591.

27.	 Davies MA. Regulation, Role, and Targeting of Akt in
Cancer. Journal of Clinical Oncology. 2011; 29:4715–4717.
28.	 Wong J, Welschinger R, Hewson J, Bradstock KF, Bendall LJ.
Efficacy of dual PI-3K and mTOR inhibitors in Vitro and
in Vivo in acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Oncotarget. 2014;
5:10460–10472.

14.	 Hsu PP, Sabatini DM. Cancer cell metabolism: Warburg
and beyond. Cell. 2008; 134:703–707.
15.	 Diehn M, Cho RW, Lobo NA, Kalisky T, Dorie MJ, Kulp AN,
Qian DL, Lam JS, Ailles LE, Wong MZ, Joshua B, Kaplan MJ,
Wapnir I, Dirbas FM, Somlo G, Garberoglio C, et al.
Association of reactive oxygen species levels and radioresistance in cancer stem cells. Nature. 2009; 458:780–U123.

29.	 Cani A, Simioni C, Martelli AM, Zauli G, Tabellini G,
Ultimo S, McCubrey JA, Capitani S, Neri LM. Triple Akt
inhibition as a new therapeutic strategy in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Oncotarget. 2015; 6:6597–6610.

16.	 Nishigaki H, Ito C, Manabe A, Kumagai M, CoustanSmith E, Yanishevski Y, Behm FG, Raimondi SC, Pui CH,
Campana D. Prevalence and growth characteristics of
malignant stem cells in B-lineage acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Blood. 1997; 89:3735–3744.

30.	 Glennie S, Soeiro I, Dyson PJ, Lam EWF, Dazzi F. Bone
marrow mesenchymal stem cefls induce division arrest
anergy of activated T cells. Blood. 2005; 105:2821–2827.
31.	 Corcione A, Benvenuto F, Ferretti E, Giunti D, Cappiello V,
Cazzanti F, Risso M, Gualandi F, Mancardi GL, Pistoia V,
Uccelli A. Human mesenchymal stem cells modulate B-cell
functions. Blood. 2006; 107:367–372.

17.	 Ito C, Evans WE, McNinch L, Coustan-Smith E, Mahmoud H,
Pui CH, Campana D. Comparative cytotoxicity of dexamethasone and prednisolone in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Journal of clinical oncology : official journal of the
American Society of Clinical Oncology. 1996; 14:2370–2376.

32.	 Brookes PS, Yoon YS, Robotham JL, Anders MW, Sheu SS.
Calcium, ATP, and ROS: a mitochondrial love-hate triangle. American Journal of Physiology-Cell Physiology.
2004; 287:C817–C833.

18.	 Suryani S, Carol H, Chonghaile TN, Frismantas V, Sarmah C,
High L, Bornhauser B, Cowley MJ, Szymanska B, Evans K,
Boehm I, Tonna E, Jones L, Manesh DM, Kurmasheva RT,
Billups C, et al. Cell and molecular determinants of in vivo
efficacy of the BH3 mimetic ABT-263 against pediatric
acute lymphoblastic leukemia xenografts. Clinical cancer
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33.	 Beroukhim R, Mermel CH, Porter D, Wei G, Raychaudhuri S,
Donovan J, Barretina J, Boehm JS, Dobson J, Urashima M,
Mc Henry KT, Pinchback RM, Ligon AH, Cho YJ,
Haery L, Greulich H, et al. The landscape of somatic

43062

Oncotarget

copy-number alteration across human cancers. Nature.
2010; 463:899–905.

45.	 Clarkson B, Ohkita T, Ota K, Fried J. Studies of Cellular
Proliferation in Human Leukemia. I. Estimation of Growth
Rates of Leukemic and Normal Hematopoietic Cells in 2
Adults with Acute Leukemia Given Single Injections of
Tritiated Thymidine. J Clin Invest. 1967; 46:506–&.

34.	 Kornblau SM, Singh N, Qiu YH, Chen WJ, Zhang NX,
Coombes KR. Highly Phosphorylated FOXO3A Is an
Adverse Prognostic Factor in Acute Myeloid Leukemia.
Clinical Cancer Research. 2010; 16:1865–1874.

46.	 Rhein P, Scheid S, Ratei R, Hagemeier C, Seeger K,
Kirschner-Schwabe R, Moericke A, Schrappe M, Spang R,
Ludwig WD, Karawajew L. Gene expression shift towards
normal B cells, decreased proliferative capacity and distinct
surface receptors characterize leukemic blasts persisting
during induction therapy in childhood acute lymphoblastic
leukemia. Leukemia. 2007; 21:897–905.

35.	 Kuiper RP, Schoenmakers EFPM, van Reijmersdal SV,
Hehir-Kwa JY, van Kessel AG, van Leeuwen FN,
Hoogerbruggey PM. High-resolution genomic profiling
of childhood ALL reveals novel recurrent genetic lesions
affecting pathways involved in lymphocyte differentiation
and cell cycle progression. Leukemia. 2007; 21:1258–1266.

47.	 Eckert C, Henze G, Seeger K, Hagedorn N, Mann G,
Panzer-Grumayer R, Peters C, Klingebiel T, Borkhardt A,
Schrappe M, Schrauder A, Escherich G, Sramkova L,
Niggli F, Hitzler J, von Stackelberg A. Use of allogeneic
hematopoietic stem-cell transplantation based on minimal
residual disease response improves outcomes for children
with relapsed acute lymphoblastic leukemia in the intermediate-risk group. Journal of clinical oncology : official journal of the American Society of Clinical Oncology. 2013;
31:2736–2742.

36.	 Raj L, Ide T, Gurkar AU, Foley M, Schenone M, Li XY,
Tolliday NJ, Golub TR, Carr SA, Shamji AF, Stern AM,
Mandinova A, Schreiber SL, Lee SW. Selective killing
of cancer cells by a small molecule targeting the stress
response to ROS. Nature. 2011; 475:231–234.
37.	 Roh JL, Kim EH, Park JY, Kim JW, Kwon M, Lee BH.
Piperlongumine selectively kills cancer cells and increases
cisplatin antitumor activity in head and neck cancer.
Oncotarget. 2014; 5:9227–9238.
38.	 Trachootham D, Zhou Y, Zhang H, Demizu Y, Chen Z,
Pelicano H, Chiao PJ, Achanta G, Arlinghaus RB, Liu JS,
Huang P. Selective killing of oncogenically transformed
cells through a ROS-mediated mechanism by beta-phenylethyl isothiocyanate. Cancer Cell. 2006; 10:241–252.

48.	 Hof J, Krentz S, van Schewick C, Korner G, Shalapour S,
Rhein P, Karawajew L, Ludwig WD, Seeger K, Henze G,
von Stackelberg A, Hagemeier C, Eckert C, KirschnerSchwabe R. Mutations and Deletions of the TP53 Gene
Predict Nonresponse to Treatment and Poor Outcome in
First Relapse of Childhood Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia.
J Clin Oncol. 2011; 29:3185–3193.

39.	 Le SB, Hailer MK, Buhrow S, Wang Q, Flatten K,
Pediaditakis P, Bible KC, Lewis LD, Sausville EA, Pang YP,
Ames MM, Lemasters JJ, Holmuhamedov EL, Kaufmann SH.
Inhibition of mitochondrial respiration as a source of adaphostin-induced reactive oxygen species and cytotoxicity.
Journal of Biological Chemistry. 2007; 282:8860–8872.

49.	 Sykes SM, Lane SW, Bullinger L, Kalaitzidis D, Yusuf R,
Saez B, Ferraro F, Mercier F, Singh H, Brumme KM,
Acharya SS, Scholl C, Tothova Z, Attar EC, Frohling S,
DePinho RA, et al. AKT/FOXO Signaling Enforces
Reversible Differentiation Blockade in Myeloid Leukemias.
(vol 146, pg 697, 2011). Cell. 2011; 147:247–247.

40.	 Ji Y, Morris ME. Determination of phenethyl isothiocyanate in human plasma and urine by ammonia derivatization and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry.
Analytical Biochemistry. 2003; 323:39–47.

50.	 Harper ME, Antoniou A, Villalobos-Menuey E, Russo A,
Trauger R, Vendemelio M, George A, Bartholomew R,
Carlo D, Shaikh A, Kupperman J, Newell EW, Bespalov IA,
Wallace SS, Liu Y, Rogers JR, et al. Characterization of a
novel metabolic strategy used by drug-resistant tumor cells.
Faseb Journal. 2002; 16:1550–1557.

41.	 Offman MN, Krol M, Patel N, Krishnan S, Liu JZ, Saha V,
Bates PA. Rational engineering of L-asparaginase reveals
importance of dual activity for cancer cell toxicity. Blood.
2011; 117:1614–1621.
42.	 Avramis VI, Panosyan EH. Pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic relationships of asparaginase formulations —
The past, the present and recommendations for the future.
Clinical Pharmacokinetics. 2005; 44:367–393.

51.	 Jang YY, Sharkis SJ. A low level of reactive oxygen species
selects for primitive hematopoietic stem cells that may reside
in the low-oxygenic niche. Blood. 2007; 110:3056–3063.
52.	 Li CP, Thompson MA, Tamayo AT, Zuo Z, Lee J, Vega F,
Ford RJ, Pham LV. Over-expression of Thioredoxin-1
mediates growth, survival, and chemoresistance and is
a druggable target in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.
Oncotarget. 2012; 3:314–326.

43.	 Vora A, Goulden N, Wade R, Mitchell C, Hancock J,
Hough R, Rowntree C, Richards S. Treatment reduction for
children and young adults with low-risk acute lymphoblastic leukaemia defined by minimal residual disease (UKALL
2003): a randomised controlled trial. The lancet oncology.
2013; 14:199–209.

53.	 Jonchere B, Vetillard A, Toutain B, Lam D, Bernard AC, Henry C,
Trecesson SD, Gamelin E, Juin P, Guette C, Coqueret O.
Irinotecan treatment and senescence failure promote the emergence of more transformed and invasive cells that depend on
anti-apoptotic Mcl-1. Oncotarget. 2015; 6:409–426.

44.	 Masurekar A, Fong C, Hussein A, Revesz T, Hoogerbrugge PM,
Love S, Ciria C, Parker C, Krishnan S, Saha V. The optimal
use of PEG-asparaginase in relapsed ALL—lessons from the
ALLR3 Clinical Trial. Blood cancer journal. 2014; 4:e203.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43063

Oncotarget

54.	 Maurer U, Charvet C, Wagman AS, Dejardin E, Green DR.
Glycogen synthase kinase-3 regulates mitochondrial outer
membrane permeabilization and apoptosis by destabilization of MCL-1. Molecular Cell. 2006; 21:749–760.

56.	 Kroemer G, Pouyssegur J. Tumor cell metabolism: Cancer’s
Achilles’ heel. Cancer Cell. 2008; 13:472–482.
57.	 Duan CW, Shi J, Chen J, Wang B, Yu YH, Qin X, Zhou XC,
Cai YJ, Li ZQ, Zhang F, Yin MZ, Tao Y, Mi JQ, Li LH,
Enver T, Chen GQ, et al. Leukemia propagating cells
rebuild an evolving niche in response to therapy. Cancer
cell. 2014; 25:778–793.

55.	 Perciavalle RM, Stewart DP, Koss B, Lynch J, Milasta S,
Bathina M, Temirov J, Cleland MM, Pelletier S, Schuetz JD,
Youle RJ, Green DR, Opferman JT. Anti-apoptotic MCL-1
localizes to the mitochondrial matrix and couples mitochondrial
fusion to respiration. Nature Cell Biology. 2012; 14:575–+.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

58.	 Pardoll DM. The blockade of immune checkpoints in cancer
immunotherapy. Nat Rev Cancer. 2012; 12:252–264.

43064

Oncotarget

