1448

CORRESPONDENCE

The Addition of Induction Chemotherapy to
Preoperative, Concurrent Chemoradiotherapy
Improves Tumor Response in Patients With
Esophageal Adenocarcinoma
recent article by Malaisrie et al1 reports that induction chemotherapy followed by preoperative concurrent chemoradiotherapy
increases tumor response and survival of esophageal adenocarcinoma
patients with respect to standard preoperative concurrent chemoradiotherapy. But this result comes from a retrospective analysis and not
from a phase III comparison of the 2 approaches. I pose the question
here, Is induction chemotherapy necessary in treatment of esophageal
carcinoma? Malaisrie et al. claim that addition of induction chemotherapy to chemoradiotherapy improves local tumor response. However, the complete pathologic response, which is the most validated
prognostic factor in esophageal cancer treatment, does not seem to be
increased with addition of induction chemotherapy. Malaisrie et al
assume that patients who are receiving induction chemotherapy may
beneﬁt from early treatment of micrometastatic disease with potential
decrease of distant recurrence rates. However, the difference in distant
recurrence rates was not statistically signiﬁcant between the 2 groups.
Clinical and tumor response rates to induction chemotherapy are
less effective than chemoradiotherapy. Clinical response obtained
with induction chemotherapy ranges from 19% to 57%, whereas complete pathologic response ranges between only 0% and 13%.2 Contrary
to induction chemotherapy, concomitant chemoradiotherapy provides higher clinical and complete pathologic response rates, between
65% to 86%, and 20% to 30% respectively.3 Induction chemotherapy is
not successful in reducing distant metastases either.2 In a recent trial,
the objective response rate obtained with induction chemotherapy
was only 33.5%.4 There was a 17% progression rate, with a 66% nonresponse rate, among the evaluated patients who underwent induction
chemotherapy. Thus, it can be harmful to start treatment with induction chemotherapy rather than with chemoradiotherapy, because
induction chemotherapy not only results in lower response rates than
chemoradiotherapy, but it also retards the more effective treatment
and may cause a risk for repopulation of resistant clones.

A

REFERENCES
1. Malaisrie SC, Hofstetter WL, Correa AM, et al. The addition of induction chemotherapy to preoperative, concurrent chemoradiotherapy improves tumor response
in patients with esophageal adenocarcinoma. Cancer. 2006;107:967–974.
2. Malthaner R, Fenlon D. Preoperative chemotherapy for resectable thoracic
esophageal cancer (Cochrane Review). In: Cochrane Database Systematic
Reviews, 3, Oxford, England: John Wiley; 2006.
3. Geh JI. The use of chemoradiotherapy in oesophageal cancer. Eur J Cancer.
2002;38:300–313.

ª 2007 American Cancer Society

Correspondence
4. Stahl M, Stuschke M, Lehmann N, et al. Chemoradiation
with and without surgery in patients with locally advanced
squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus. J Clin Oncol.
2005;23:2310–2317.

Cengiz Gemici, MD
Department of Oncology, Dr. Lutﬁ Kirdar Kartal
Education and Research Hospital, Cevizli, Istanbul,
Turkey
DOI 10.1002/cncr.22514
Published online 27 February 2007 in Wiley InterScience
(www.interscience.wiley.com).

Author Reply
e thank Dr. Gemici for his interest in our article.1
We agree that induction chemotherapy alone
achieves pathologic response less often than preoperative chemoradiation. On the other hand, a meaningful
response in patients with signiﬁcant tumor burden
may be difﬁcult to achieve with chemoradiation alone
secondary to the attenuated doses of chemotherapy
necessarily administered with radiation. Our hypothesis has been that the addition of induction chemotherapy prior to (but not excluding) neoadjuvant
chemoradiation would reduce the primary tumor volume and delay the appearance of metastases. Our
intentions, contrary to the interpretation by Dr. Gemici,
have never been to compare induction chemotherapy
alone with preoperative chemoradiation. Our data,
albeit retrospective, suggests that the addition of induction chemotherapy improves overall survival and disease-free survival, and this beneﬁt is most apparent in
patients with advanced disease.
A previous analysis performed on patients who
received neoadjuvant therapy showed a trend toward
achieving complete pathologic response (pathCR)
more often in patients who had received induction
chemotherapy compared with the group that did not.2
However, even though pathCR is associated with the
best results, a partial response may also be associated
with prolonged survival. Another recent publication by
our group established that a pathologic response to
neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy was an independent
predictor of survival and that patients with 50% or less
tumor viability in the resected specimen showed significantly better survival than nonresponders.3 The article
under discussion1 shows that the number of patients
who had a clinically meaningful response (complete or
partial) was signiﬁcantly better with the addition of
induction therapy (64% versus 51%, P ¼ .035), and this
was associated with improved overall survival.

W

1449

We do not expect induction chemotherapy to
reduce the rate of distant metastases simply because
we do not believe that the currently available combinations of drugs are curative. Effective combination
chemotherapy is expected to delay the appearance of
metastases and only rarely eliminate them. Induction
chemotherapy is not harmful as is being proposed; on
the contrary, it has recently been shown to increase
survival of gastroesophageal cancer patients4 and has
not had an adverse impact on surgical outcomes or
resectability.5 Finally, the suggestion that induction
chemotherapy may result in repopulation of tumor
with resistant clone is interesting, but conjectural, and
this hypothesis would require in-depth serial molecular studies to understand the repopulation dynamics
in the depleted tumor. At present, there is no evidence
that induction chemotherapy administered before preoperative chemoradiation is harmful; however, its
potential beneﬁts for gastroesophageal cancer are currently being studied prospectively in Europe and the
United States.

REFERENCES
1. Malaisrie SC, Hofstetter WL, Correa AM, et al. The addition
of induction chemotherapy to preoperative, concurrent
chemoradiotherapy improves tumor response in patients
with esophageal adenocarcinoma. Cancer. 2006;107:967–
974.
2. Rohatgi P, Swisher SG, Correa AM, et al. Characterization of
pathologic complete response after preoperative chemoradiation for carcinoma of the esophagus. Cancer.
2005;104:2365–2372.
3. Swisher SG, Hofstetter W, Wu TT, et al. Proposed revision of
the esophageal cancer staging system to accommodate
pathologic response (pP) following preoperative chemoradiation Ann Surg. 2005;241:810–817; discussion 817–820.
4. Cunningham D, Allum WH, Stenning SP, et al. (MAGIC Trial
Participants). Perioperative chemotherapy versus surgery
alone for resectable gastroesophageal cancer. N Engl J Med.
2006;355:11–20.
5. Steyerberg EW, Neville BA, Koppert LB, et al. Surgical mortality in patients with esophageal cancer: development and
validation of a simple risk score. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24:
4277–4284.

Wayne Hofstetter, MD
Jaffer Ajani, MD
Stephen G. Swisher, MD
Departments of Thoracic and Cardiovascular
Surgery and Gastrointestinal Medical Oncology
The University of Texas M. D. Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston Texas
DOI 10.1002/cncr.22515
Published online 27 February 2007 in Wiley InterScience
(www.interscience.wiley.com).

