Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 1

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Whole-genome duplication increases tumor cell sensitivity to
MPS1 inhibition
Mohamed Jemaà1, Gwenola Manic2, Gwendaline Lledo1, Delphine Lissa3,4,5,6,
Christelle Reynes7, Nathalie Morin1, Frédéric Chibon8,9, Antonella Sistigu2, Maria
Castedo3,4,5,6, Ilio Vitale2,10,*, Guido Kroemer4,5,11,12,13,*, Ariane Abrieu1,*
1

CRBM, CNRS UMR5237, Université de Montpellier, Montpellier, France

2

Regina Elena National Cancer Institute, Rome, Italy

3

Université Paris-Sud/Paris XI, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France

4

INSERM, UMRS1138, Paris, France

5

Equipe 11 Labelisée par la Ligue Nationale Contre le Cancer, Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, Paris, France

6

Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus, Villejuif, France

7

 A 2415, Laboratoire de Biostatistique, d’Epidémiologie et de Recherche Clinique, Université de Montpellier, Montpellier,
E
France

8

Department of Biopathology, Institut Bergonié, Comprehensive Cancer Centre, Bordeaux, France

9

INSERM U916, Bordeaux, France

10

Department of Biology, University of Rome “Tor Vergata”, Rome, Italy

11

Université Pierre et Marie Curie/Paris VI, Paris, France

12

Pôle de Biologie, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, AP-HP, Paris, France

13

Metabolomics and Cell Biology Platforms, Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus, Villejuif, France

*

I.V., G.K., and A.A. share co-senior authorship

Correspondence to: Ilio Vitale, e-mail: iliovit@gmail.com
Guido Kroemer, e-mail: kroemer@orange.fr
Ariane Abrieu, e-mail: ariane.abrieu@crbm.cnrs.fr
Keywords: AZ 3146, mitotic spindle, polyploidy, regulated cell death, reversine
Received: June 25, 2015      Accepted: November 18, 2015      Published: November 30, 2015

ABSTRACT
Several lines of evidence indicate that whole-genome duplication resulting in
tetraploidy facilitates carcinogenesis by providing an intermediate and metastable
state more prone to generate oncogenic aneuploidy. Here, we report a novel strategy
to preferentially kill tetraploid cells based on the abrogation of the spindle assembly
checkpoint (SAC) via the targeting of TTK protein kinase (better known as monopolar
spindle 1, MPS1). The pharmacological inhibition as well as the knockdown of MPS1
kills more efficiently tetraploid cells than their diploid counterparts. By using timelapse videomicroscopy, we show that tetraploid cells do not survive the aborted mitosis
due to SAC abrogation upon MPS1 depletion. On the contrary diploid cells are able
to survive up to at least two more cell cycles upon the same treatment. This effect
might reflect the enhanced difficulty of cells with whole-genome doubling to tolerate
a further increase in ploidy and/or an elevated level of chromosome instability in the
absence of SAC functions. We further show that MPS1-inhibited tetraploid cells promote
mitotic catastrophe executed by the intrinsic pathway of apoptosis, as indicated by
the loss of mitochondrial potential, the release of the pro-apoptotic cytochrome c from
mitochondria, and the activation of caspases. Altogether, our results suggest that MPS1
inhibition could be used as a therapeutic strategy for targeting tetraploid cancer cells.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

885

Oncotarget

INTRODUCTION

these contexts, programmed polyploidy represents a
terminally differentiated, non-cycling state [12, 32].
On the contrary, when occurring in proliferating cells,
tetraploidy is normally sensed as a danger, leading to the
activation of intrinsic, cell-autonomous processes such
as cell cycle arrest [35–37], mitotic catastrophe [38], or
regulated forms of cell death [39–41]. In addition, nonphysiological tetraploidy can be detected and destroyed
by the immunosurveillance system [42, 43]. The high
incidence of aneuploid genomes in human neoplasms
suggests that the barrier limiting the presence of tetraploid
cells is bypassed during tumorigenesis. In line with this
notion, the loss of tumor suppressor genes, including
retinoblastoma 1 (RB1), p53 and adenomatous polyposis
coli (APC), as well as the activation of oncogenes,
including v-myc avian myelocytomatosis viral oncogene
homolog (MYC), results in the generation of tetraploid
cells (reviewed in [11]).
Tetraploidy could thus provide a handle by which to
selectively eradicate the most aggressive cancer cells [44].
Most anti-tetraploid strategies designed so far are targeting
intrinsic characteristics of tetraploid cells, such as their
increased dependency upon accurate mitotic machinery,
their elevated production of reactive oxygen species (ROS)
and their extensive metabolic rewiring. Thus, tetraploids
were proven to preferentially or selectively succumb to
the inhibition of cell cycle or mitotic regulators, including
checkpoint kinase 1 (CHEK1, best known as CHK1)
[20], aurora kinase B (AURKB) [45], and kinesin family
member 11 (KIF11, best known as EG5) [46], but also
to antioxidants [47], and to perturbations of energy
metabolism, as those provoked by overactivation of AMPactivated protein kinase (AMPK) [48], the glycolytic
inhibitor 2-deoxyglucose [49], and mechanistic target of
rapamycin (MTOR) inhibitors in combination with AURKB
inhibitors [50, 51].
Increasing CIN by targeting mitotic regulators,
including MPS1, a mitotic kinase involved in spindle
assembly checkpoint (SAC) [52–55], has emerged as a
valid approach to potently and preferentially kill cancer
cells [56–63]. Here, we investigated the impact of MPS1
perturbation on the proliferation and survival of diploid
versus tetraploid tumor cells, showing that the duplication
of an entire set of chromosomes sensitizes cancer cells to
MPS1 inhibition or depletion.

Aneuploidy, the condition of having an imbalanced
copy number of chromosomes (DNA content ≠ xn,
where n stands for the haploid chromosome set and x ≥
1), and chromosome instability (CIN), a type of genomic
instability in which cells display an elevated rate of
whole-chromosome mis-segregations (~1 per 5 cell
divisions) and thus frequently change their karyotype [1],
are widespread in human tumors [2–5]. Along with this,
variations of chromosome number have been linked to
cancer progression and aggressiveness [4, 5], as well as
therapeutic resistance [6, 7] and poor patient prognosis [8,
9], although their precise impact in tumorigenesis is still
debated (for recent reviews refer to [10]).
One prominent mechanism accounting for the
generation of aneuploidy in cancer involves a preliminary
and unscheduled passage to a tetraploid intermediate
(DNA content = 4n) [11–13]. Tetraploid cells are
generated by a variation of the canonical G1-S-G2-M cell
cycle, such as skipped (i.e., endocycling/endoreplication)
or aborted (e.g., endomitosis or cytokinesis failure)
mitoses, or by cell membrane fusion [14–18]. According
to the current hypotheses, illicitly generated tetraploids
are less likely to stably maintain their karyotype across
consecutive generations due to intrinsic defects in the
machineries involved in DNA replication, DNA repair
and/or chromosome segregation [19–21]. These defects
might increase the level of CIN, in turn resulting in
the generation of aneuploid cells [14, 19, 22]. The
evidence supporting this two-step cascade in tumor
development includes (1) indirect observations, such as
the elevated incidence of tetraploid cells in early stages
of tumors and in pre-neoplastic lesions, where tetraploidy
appearance often precedes the acquisition of CIN and
the subsequent development of aneuploidy [23–26]; (2)
mathematical models, which indicate that the gradual
loss of chromosomes from a tetraploid intermediate
rather than chromosome(s) loss or gain during mitotic
divisions of diploid cells accounts for the near-triploid/
tetraploid content frequently found in solid tumors [2,
27]; (3) computational studies, inferring that around 37%
of all neoplasms have transited through an intermediate
tetraploid phase [26, 28–31]; and (4) the experimental
demonstration that tetraploid (but not diploid) murine
epithelial cells lacking the mouse homologue of tumor
protein p53 (TP53, better known as p53) were able to
generate chromosomically unstable tumors when injected
in the flank of immunodeficient mice [18]. Of note,
aneuploid cells generated from tetraploid cells often
display elevated tumorigenicity [14, 16, 17, 19, 22].
Programmed changes in ploidy are believed
to contribute to the development and homeostasis of
a restricted panel of mammalian tissues or organs,
including blood, liver, muscle, skin and placenta
(reviewed in [12, 32]). In most but not all [33, 34] of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

RESULTS
Effect of the abrogation of MPS1 function on
tetraploid survival
To evaluate the differential impact of MPS1
inhibition on the survival of cancer cells differing in their
ploidy, we took advantage of a panel of diploid and tetraploid
clones derived from parental human colon carcinoma
886

Oncotarget

HCT 116 and RKO cells, which we previously isolated
and characterized [41], or from human malignant fibrous
histiocytoma MFH152 cells, which we generated in this
study by flow cytometry-assisted cloning [41]. These clones
were left untreated or were administered with low doses
(from 0.05 to 0.30 μM) of reversine, a small molecule that
specifically inhibits MPS1 at submicromolar concentrations
[64]. At the end of the treatment period, cell death was
evaluated by flow cytometry-mediated measurement of
well-recognized apoptotic parameters [65, 66], including
dissipation of mitochondrial inner transmembrane potential
(Δψm), phosphatidylserine (PS) surface exposure and
DNA fragmentation (Figure 1 and Supplementary Figure
S1). Δψm loss was measured on live cells (excluding the
vital dyes propidium iodure, PI, or 4′,6-diamidino-2phenylindole, DAPI) with either of the two Δψm-sensitive
dyes, dihexiloxalocarbocyanine iodide (DiOC6(3)) or
tetramethylrhodamine methyl ester (TMRM). PS surface
exposure was evaluated in live cells by staining with
fluorophore-labeled Annexin V. DNA fragmentation was
determined on fixed cells labeled with the DNA intercalating
dye PI. As compared to their diploid counterparts, tetraploid
HCT 116 (Figure 1A-1F and Supplementary Figure
S1), RKO (Supplementary Figure S2A) and MFH152
(Supplementary Figure S2B) clones were particularly
sensitive to reversine, as demonstrated by the elevated
percentage of dying cells [displaying mitochondrial potential
loss (PI−DiOC6(3)low or DAPI−/TMRMlow) or positivity for
Annexin V (PI−Annexin V+)], dead cells [i.e., presenting
plasma membrane permeabilization with a PI+ or DAPI+
phenotype], and cells with a hypodiploid (subG1) DNA
content (Figure 1A–1F and Supplementary Figure S1).
In line with these observations, submicromolar doses of
reversine significantly reduced the clonogenic potential of
tetraploid HCT 116 cells much more than that of diploid
controls (surviving fraction of diploids vs tetraploids at 0.3
μM reversine: ~12% vs ~50%) (Figure 1G and 1H).
A similar preferential anti-tetraploid effect was observed
in the HCT 116, RKO and MFH152 diploid/tetraploid pair
with an alternative pharmacological inhibitor of MPS1 named
AZ 3146 [67] (Figure 2 and Supplementary Figure S2) or in
the HCT 116 diploid/tetraploid pair by depleting MPS1 via
the transfection of small interfering (si) RNAs specifically
directed against this kinase (siMPS1) (Figure 3), thereby
ruling out potential off-target effects of reversine.
Altogether these findings demonstrate that
abolishing MPS1 functions is an efficient strategy to
preferentially and efficiently kill tetraploid cancer cells.

progression, including a moderate accumulation of cells with
a DNA content of 4n (in diploid clones) and 8n (in tetraploid
clones) and a major increase in the fraction of polyploid cells
(DNA content > 4n and > 8n for diploid and tetraploid clones,
respectively) (Figures 1E, 4A and 4B; Supplementary Figure
S1C and 1E). Of note, the extent of polyploidization induced
by MPS1 depletion was higher in diploid than tetraploid
clones (Figure 4B and Supplementary Figure S1B–S1E).
We then evaluated the impact of MPS1 abrogation on the
regulation and timing of tetraploid mitosis. As illustrated in
Figure 4C and 4D, upon MPS1 depletion the percentage of
prometaphases plus metaphases displaying the kinetochore
localization of the SAC component BUB1 mitotic checkpoint
serine/threonine kinase B (BUB1B, better known as BUBR1)
dropped drastically close to zero, thus indicating the complete
abrogation of SAC function. In line with this evidence, the
pharmacological inhibition or RNA interference-mediated
depletion of MPS1 prevented the mitotic block imposed by
antimitotic agents as demonstrated by the reduction of the
fraction of phosphorylated histone H3 (pH3) positive cells
(Supplementary Figure S3). To corroborate these findings, we
performed videomicroscopy analyses on tetraploid HCT 116
cells engineered to stably express a green fluorescent proteintagged variant of histone 2B (GFP-H2B), which allows for
the intravital visualization of chromatin and chromosomes.
The depletion of MPS1 significantly reduced the time spent
by tetraploid cells in mitosis (average of 45.8 ± 2.8 minutes
when transfected with an unrelated siRNA vs 32.8 ± 5.4
minutes when siMPS1-transfected) (Figure 4E–4G, and
Supplementary Movie S1–S4). These results are consistent
with the reduction of mitosis duration upon MPS1 inhibition
in human osteosarcoma U2OS cell lines [68] and demonstrate
that MPS1 contributes to the correct timing and execution of
mitosis regardless of the cell ploidy status.
To further characterize the mechanism of tetraploid
tumor cell killing by MPS1 abrogation, we depleted
MPS1 in GFP-H2B diploid and tetraploid clones and
followed them by videomicroscopy for 72 hours (h). This
analysis confirmed that the knockdown of MPS1 impairs
both diploid and tetraploid mitoses (Figure 5A and 5B;
Supplementary Movie S5 and S6). In particular, the
depletion of MPS1 resulted in aborted cell divisions (1st
event depicted in yellow in the single cell fate profiles)
generating a single daughter cell with a duplicated
genome (Figure 5B). Alternatively, MPS1-depleted cells
underwent a bipolar cell division (1st event depicted in
green in the single cell fate profiles) generating 2 daughter
cells, which either entered an aborted mitosis (2nd event
depicted in yellow in the single cell fate profiles) or died
during the following interphase (2nd event depicted in dark
in the single cell fate profiles) (Figure 5B). By comparing
their transgenerational cell fate profiling, a representation
in which the destiny of a cellular population is monitored
across consecutive generations and events (E1, E2 and E3)
are symbolized by a centripetal sequence of concentric
ring segments [69], we confirmed that the incidence of

Targeting MPS1 perturbs tetraploid cell cycle
divisions
When analyzing cell cycle profiles by flow-cytometry
upon staining of fixed cells with the DNA dye PI, we
observed that the inhibition or depletion of MPS1 provoked
a dramatic perturbation of diploid and tetraploid cell cycle
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

887

Oncotarget

siMPS1 condition) (Figure 5C). These findings confirm
the antitetraploid effect of MPS1 inhibition underscoring
the relative incapability of tetraploid (as compared to
diploid) cells to tolerate any further increase in ploidy in
the absence of SAC.
Altogether these results indicate that targeting MPS1
preferentially kills tetraploid tumor cells by abolishing
SAC function, eventually triggering an uncontrolled and
lethal polyploidization program.

abortive mitoses (i.e., the induction of polyploid cells)
upon MPS1 depletion was lower in tetraploid than in
diploid clones (Figure 5C, see also Figure 4B). Moreover,
in the majority of the cases (75%), polyploids generated
from diploid clones (depicted in yellow in the inner circle;
siMPS1 condition) remained inert or underwent one or
even two additional round(s) of aberrant/abortive mitosis
(depicted in orange and red in the central and external
circle, respectively; siMPS1 condition) with only 25%
undergoing cell death (depicted in dark in the central
circle; siMPS1 condition) (Figure 5C). On the contrary,
a large fraction of polyploids generated from tetraploid
clones (depicted in yellow in the inner circle; siMPS1
condition) died during the interphase that followed the
first aborted mitosis (depicted in dark in the central circle;

Molecular mechanisms underlying the
antitetraploid effect of MPS1 abrogation
We thus investigated the mechanisms involved in
the execution of mitotic catastrophe induced by MPS1

Figure 1: Preferential killing of tetraploid tumor cells by reversine-mediated MPS1 inhibition. A. and B. Diploid and

tetraploid human colorectal carcinoma HCT 116 cells (framed in green and red, respectively) were left untreated or treated for 72 hours (h)
with 0.3 μM reversine and then co-stained with the vital dye propidium iodure (PI) and the mitochondrial membrane potential (Δψm)-sensing
dye DiOC6(3) for the evaluation of cell death–associated parameters by cytofluorometry. Representative plots are showed in panel (A), while
quantitative data are represented in panel (B). In panel (B) white and black columns depict the percentage of dying (PI−DiOC6(3)low) and dead
(PI+) cells, respectively. C. and D. Diploid and tetraploid HCT 116 cells (framed in green and red, respectively) administered or not with
0.3 μM reversine for 72 h were stained for the cytofluorometric detection of phosphatidylserine exposure with Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated
Annexin V. Representative dot plots and quantitative data are reported in panels (C) and (D), respectively. In panel (D) white columns depict
the percentage of dying cells (PI−Annexin V+) while black columns illustrate dead cells (PI+). (Continued )
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

888

Oncotarget

Figure 1: (Continued) Preferential killing of tetraploid tumor cells by reversine-mediated MPS1 inhibition. E. and F. Diploid

and tetraploid HCT 116 cells (framed in green and red, respectively) left untreated or exposed for 72 h with 0.3 μM reversine were fixed with
ethanol and labelled with the DNA dye PI, for the quantification of the hypodiploid, subG1 apoptotic population. Representative plots (E) and
quantitative data (F) are reported. G. and H. Diploid and tetraploid HCT 116 cells (framed in green and red, respectively) seeded at low cell density
were left untreated or exposed to 0.3 μM reversine for 24 h. Upon drug washout, cells were cultivated for 15 days in fresh, drug-free medium
before crystal violet staining and colony counting. Representative images of the plates (scale bar = 1 cm) (G) as well as quantitative data obtained
upon normalization to plating efficiency (H) are shown. In panel (B), (D), (F) and (H) data are reported as means ± SEM (n ≥ 3). *p < 0.001
(Mann–Whitney test), as compared with diploid subjected to the same treatment condition. CTR, control; diploid, D; tetraploid, T; reversine, Rev.

inhibition or depletion in tetraploid cells. As shown by
videomicroscopic analyses, the death of tetraploid tumor
cells succumbing upon MSP1 inhibition was always
preceded by chromatin condensation (pyknosis) and nuclear
fragmentation (karyorrhexis), two morphological hallmarks
of apoptosis [66] (Figures 5A and 6A, and Supplementary
Movie S6). Moreover, tetraploid cell death triggered by
MPS1 inhibition or depletion displayed the classical features
of the intrinsic pathway of apoptosis, including the release
of the pro-apoptotic factor cytochrome c from mitochondria
to the cytosol and the activation of caspase-3 (Figure 6A and
6B). Of note, the percentage of both cytochrome c release
and caspase-3 activation was higher in tetraploid clones than
in their diploid counterparts, a result that is in line with the
preferential sensitivity of tetraploid cells to MPS1 inhibition/
depletion. Further confirming the role of caspases in the
execution of apoptosis, tetraploid cells (but less so their
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

diploid counterparts) responding to reversine or siMPS1
manifested the apoptosis-associated cleavage of poly
(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) (Figure 6C). Moreover,
the pre-administration of the broad-spectrum caspase
inhibitor Z-Val-Ala-Asp-fluoromethylketone (Z-VADfmk) significantly reduced the death of tetraploid cells
responding to the inhibition or depletion of MPS1 (Figure
6D). Recently, we and others reported some cooperations
between polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1) and MPS1 in SAC
initiation [70, 71]. In line with this evidence, not only the
depletion of MPS1 but also that of PLK1 had a preferential
cytotoxic effect on tetraploid as compared to diploid cancer
cells (Supplementary Figure S4). Of note, the co-depletion
of MPS1 and PLK1 did not further increase the level of cell
death, while the knock-down of MPS1 sensitized tumor cells
to sublethal doses of paclitaxel independently of the basal
ploidy level (Supplementary Figure S4). Altogether, these
889

Oncotarget

results indicate that, in tetraploid cells, MPS1 inhibition
triggers mitotic catastrophe that is executed by the intrinsic
pathway of apoptosis.

cells (and to a lesser extent diploid cancer cells) via a
mechanism involving the induction of mitotic catastrophe
following aberrant or aborted cell divisions, and the
activation of a mitochondrion- and caspase-dependent
pathway of regulated cell death.
It is becoming increasingly clear that measures
inducing an exaggerated level of CIN or an unscheduled
hyper-polyploidization program may constitute valid
antineoplastic strategies, potentially sparing non-tumor
cells and/or selectively targeting cancers according to their
genetic background [58–61, 63, 72–74]. The approaches
developed so far are based on the rationale that tumor cells
(1) frequently display defects in cell cycle checkpoints and

DISCUSSION
In this study we developed a novel strategy for
targeting tetraploid tumor cells based on the abrogation of
the mitotic kinase MPS1. By employing different pairs of
tumor clones generated from the same parental cell lines
and displaying distinct levels of ploidy (i.e., diploid vs.
tetraploid) we provided strong evidence that the depletion
or inhibition of MPS1 potently kills tetraploid cancer

Figure 2: Preferential killing of tetraploid tumor cells by AZ 3146-mediated MPS1 inhibition. A. and B. Diploid and tetraploid

human colon carcinoma HCT 116 cells (framed in green and red, respectively) were left untreated or treated with 5 μM AZ 3146 for 72 hours
(h) and then either co-stained with the vital dye propidium iodure (PI) and the mitochondrial membrane potential (Δψm)-sensing dye DiOC6(3)
(A) or stained with the phosphatidylserine binding protein Annexin V conjugated to Alexa Fluor 488 for the evaluation of cell death–associated
parameters by cytofluorometry. In panel (A) white and black columns depict the percentage of dying (PI− DiOC6(3)low) and dead (PI+) cells,
respectively. In panel (B) white and black columns illustrate the percentage of dying (PI−Annexin V+) and dead (PI+) cells, respectively. C. Diploid
and tetraploid HCT 116 cells (framed in green and red, respectively) left untreated or exposed for 72 h with 5 μM AZ 3146 were fixed with ethanol
and labelled with the DNA dye PI, for the quantification of the hypodiploid, subG1 apoptotic population. Quantitative data are reported. D. Diploid
and tetraploid HCT 116 cells (framed in green and red, respectively) seeded at low cell density, were left untreated or exposed to 5 μM AZ 3146
for 24 h. Upon drug washout, cells were cultivated for 15 days in fresh, drug-free medium before crystal violet staining and colony counting.
Quantitative data obtained upon normalization to plating efficiency are shown. In all the panels data are reported as means ± SEM (n ≥ 3). *p <
0.001 (Mann–Whitney test), as compared with diploid cells subjected to the same treatment condition. Diploid, D; tetraploid, T.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

890

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Increased sensitivity of tetraploid tumor cells to MPS1 depletion. A–C. Diploid and tetraploid human colorectal
carcinoma HCT 116 cells (framed in green and red, respectively) were transfected with an unrelated small interfering (si) RNA (siUNR)
or two specific siRNAs directed against MPS1 (siMPS1a and siMPS1b). Upon 72 hours (h), cells were collected and lysed, then cell
lysates were analyzed by western-blot using antibodies directed against MPS1 and α-tubulin (A). Alternatively, cells were subjected to the
determination of the cell death–associated parameters by flow cytometry upon co-staining with the propidium iodure (PI) and DiOC6(3)
dyes (B) or staining with Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated Annexin V (C). In panel (B) white and black columns illustrate the percentage of dying
(PI− DiOC6(3)low) and dead (PI+) cells, respectively. In panel (C) white and black columns illustrate the percentage of dying (PI−Annexin
V+) and dead (PI+) cells, respectively. D. Diploid and tetraploid HCT 116 cells (framed in green and red, respectively) transfected for
72 h with siUNR, siMPS1a or siMPS1b were fixed with ethanol and labelled with PI for the quantification of the hypodiploid, subG1
apoptotic population. Quantitative data are reported. E. Clonogenic assay on diploid and tetraploid HCT 116 cells (framed in green and
red, respectively) upon transfection with siUNR, siMPS1a and siMPS1b for 48 h followed by washout and cultivation in drug-free medium
for further 15 days. Quantitative data obtained upon normalization to plating efficiency are shown. In panel (B), (C), (D) and (E) data
are reported as means ± SEM (n ≥ 3). *p < 0.001 (Mann–Whitney test), as compared with diploid clones subjected to the same treatment
condition. Diploid, D; tetraploid, T.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

891

Oncotarget

Figure 4: MPS1 abrogation shortens mitosis and abolishes SAC in tetraploid tumor cells. A. and B. Diploid and tetraploid human

colorectal carcinoma HCT 116 cells (framed in green and red, respectively) were transfected with an unrelated small interfering (si) RNA (siUNR)
or a specific siRNA directed against MPS1 (siMPS1) for 72 hours (h) and then fixed and stained with propidium iodure for the cytofluorometric
assessment of cell cycle progression. Cell cycle distribution analyzed by flow cytometry for diploid and tetraploid cells is displayed in panel (A).
Quantitative data (means ± SEM; n = 3) of the corresponding flow cytometry profiles are plotted in panel (B). Diploid, D; tetraploid, T. C. and D.
Tetraploid HCT 116 cells were transfected with siUNR or siMPS1 for 24 h, treated with 20 μM MG132 for 4 h (a relatively short time to avoid
increasing the risk of putative side effects unrelated to mitosis) and then processed for the immunofluorescence-assisted detection of spindle
assembly checkpoint (SAC) activation as indicated by the localization of BUBR1 at CREST-labelled kinetochores. In panel (C) representative
microphotographs of a normal prometaphase (SAC on), a normal metaphase (SAC off), and an abnormal metaphase (SAC off) in cells transfected
with the indicated siRNA are reported. Scale bar = 10 μm. In panel (D) representing quantitative data, columns illustrate the percentage of
prometaphases plus metaphases exhibiting SAC activation. Data are reported as means ± SEM (n = 3). *p < 0.01 (two-tailed t test), as compared
with siUNR transfected tetraploid cells. E–G. Tetraploid HCT 116 cells expressing a green fluorescent protein-tagged variant of histone 2B (H2BGFP) chimera were transfected with siUNR or siMPS1 and then monitored by live videomicroscopy for approximately 24 h to determine the time
spent in mitosis. Image were taken every 5 minutes. Representative snapshots of siUNR- and siMPS1-transfected tetraploid mitosis are shown in
panel (E) and (F), respectively, while quantitative data (means ± SEM) are reported in panel (G) (n = 25). p < 0.01 (two-tailed t test), as compared
with siUNR transfected tetraploid cells. Full-length movies are provided as Supplementary Movies 1–4.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

892

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Cell fate profiling of diploid and tetraploid tumor cells depleted of MPS1. A–C. Diploid and tetraploid human

colorectal carcinoma HCT 116 cells stably expressing a green fluorescent protein-tagged variant of histone 2B (H2B-GFP) chimera were
transfected with an unrelated small interfering (si) RNA (siUNR) or a specific siRNA directed against MPS1 (siMPS1) and then monitored by
live videomicroscopy for 72 hours (h). Representative snapshots of tetraploid cells transfected as indicated are shown in panel (A), whereas
single cell fate profiles of siUNR- or siMPS1-transfected diploid (n = 25) and tetraploid (n = 50), and transgenerational cell fate profiles of
siUNR or siMPS1 transfected cells (n >100) are depicted in panel (B) and (C), respectively. In panel (A) alphas (α) indicate individual cells,
whose sequential cell divisions are numbered with “0”, “1”,“2” and “3”. The two daughter cells of a bipolar division are depicted with “a” and
“b”; while the single cell derived by an abortive division is indicated by an increase in the size type. The snapshots showing successful cell
divisions are framed in green, while those showing the first and second abortive cell divisions are framed in yellow and orange, respectively.
The snapshot framed in black highlights the death of one cell following an abortive mitosis. In panel (B) horizontal columns represent single
cells over the time, as indicated in hours. The color code depicting successful (green) or aborted (yellow, orange and red) cell divisions, as
well as cell death (black) is used as in panel (A). The increase in cell ploidy following abortive cell division is represented by grey darkening,
while numbers indicate mitotic events (i.e., successful or abortive cell division). Please note that cell divisions were considered to be successful
only when daughter cells were clearly separated. In panel (C) concentric circles depict three consecutive generational events (E), starting from
E1 (inner circle), using the same color code as used in panel (A) and (B). Full-length movies are provided as Supplementary Movies 5 and 6.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

893

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Mechanisms of cell death induced by MPS1 abrogation. A. and B. Diploid and tetraploid human colorectal carcinoma HCT
116 cells (framed in green and red, respectively) treated or not with 0.3 μM reversine (A and B) or transfected with an unrelated small interfering
(si)RNA (siUNR) or a specific siRNA directed against MPS1 (siMPS1) for 72 hours (h) (B) were stained to visualize cytochrome c (green
fluorescence), activated caspase-3 (caspase-3a+, red fluorescence) and nuclei (Hoechst 33342, blue fluorescence) and analyzed by fluorescence
microscopy. The percentage of cells exhibiting diffuse (as opposed to punctuate) cytochrome c staining or caspase-3 activation was determined
as described in Materials and Methods. Representative fluorescence microphotographs of tetraploid cells (A) and quantitative results (means ±
SEM, n = 3) for both diploid and tetraploid clones (B) are shown. *p < 0.001 (Mann–Whitney test), as compared with diploid cells subjected
to the same treatment or transfection condition. C. Western-blot analysis of protein extracts from diploid and tetraploid HCT 116 cells treated
or not with 0.3 μM reversine or transfected with siUNR or siMPS1 for 72 h using an antibody directed against poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase
(PARP) and recognizing the cleaved (C-PARP, 89 KDa) and uncleaved (PARP, 116 KDa) forms. Alpha-tubulin was used to verify equal loading.
D. Tetraploid HCT 116 cells were treated or not for 72 h with 0.3 μM reversine or transfected with the indicated siRNAs alone or in combination
with 25 μM Z-Val-Ala-Asp-fluoromethylketone (Z-VAD-fmk, abbreviated as Z-VAD), followed by co-staining with DiOC6(3)/propidium iodure
(PI) and cytofluorometric analysis. White and black columns illustrate the percentage of dying (PI−DiOC6(3)low) and dead (PI+) cells, respectively.
Data are reported as means ± SEM (n = 3). *p < 0.001 (Mann–Whitney test), as compared with cells subjected to the same treatment or transfection
condition but not exposed to Z-VAD. CTR, control; diploid, D; tetraploid, T; reversine, Rev.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

894

Oncotarget

thus could progress in their cell cycle even in the presence
of gross alterations as those provoked by mitosis-perturbing
and/or CIN-inducing agents, and (2) may survive only until
a certain threshold level of CIN and/or ploidy. Here we
demonstrated that MPS1 inhibition kills both diploid and
tetraploid cancer cells, though with a preferential action on
tumor cells that have undergone whole-genome duplication.
The tumorigenic potential of tetraploid cells arises from
their intrinsic high level of genomic instability [12, 22],
and/or their capability to tolerate and survive the burden
of continuous karyotype changes [26]. In this context, we
surmise that the peculiar sensitivity of tetraploid tumors to
MPS1 inhibition is not necessarily linked to their basal level
of CIN but rather arises from (1) the elevated dependency of
tetraploids on the activity of the SAC, which is functional
and overactivated in these cells and whose abrogation
affects their survival more potently than the survival of
their diploid counterpart [20], and (2) the incapability of
tetraploids to tolerate a further increase in ploidy in absence
of SAC functions, a condition that de facto exaggerates
CIN to a level incompatible with life. These findings are
in line with the lack of correlation between the pattern
of genomic instability (i.e., microsatellite instability vs.
CIN) and the sensitivity to MPS1 inhibitors, and with
the involvement of an obligatory step of tetraploidization
in cancer killing induced by MPS1 inhibitors [59].
Emerging evidence ascribes non-mitotic functions to SAC
components [75, 76]. Given our results, it is tempting to
speculate that SAC activity may play a role in the increased
tolerance to chromosome aberrations of tetraploids, which
has been recently associated to tumor evolution [26].
Videomicroscopic analyses demonstrated that, in the
absence of SAC, newly-generated octaploid cells died
during the interphase that follows the aborted mitosis of
tetraploid cells. Further studies are required to elucidate
whether higher-order ploidy (i.e., more-than-tetraploidy)
intrinsically triggers a specific apoptotic program and, if
so, whether the absence of SAC function may be the signal
responsible for the activation of this cascade.
MPS1 is considered among the most promising
targets for cancer therapy for multiple reasons,
including: (1) the low frequency of mutations of
MPS1 detected in tumors (reviewed by [52]); (2) the
upregulation of MPS1 found in a variety of human
cancers [55, 57, 77–83] often correlated to CIN/
aneuploidy [4, 9, 84–86] or high tumor grade and
aggressiveness [58, 87, 88]; (3) the pleiotropic roles of
MPS1 in distinct phases of the cell cycle [52, 62, 89–
100]; (4) the potential selectivity of MPS1 inhibitors
toward malignant versus normal or immortalized cells
[56–58, 60–62]; and (5) the synergy between MPS1
inhibitors and conventional anticancer agents, including
antimitotics [59, 61, 87] and radiotherapy [89].
Here, we provide an extra point in support of the
therapeutic utility of MPS1 inhibitors, showing that MPS1
depletion or inhibition kills tetraploid cancer cells more
efficiently than diploid cancer cells. This may be relevant
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

in the context of cancer therapy given that tetraploid cells
are believed to promote tumorigenesis and also display
high resistance to conventional anticancer regimens such
as DNA damaging agents.
Some clinical trials have been launched to assess
the safety and therapeutic profile of specific MPS1
inhibitors in cancer patients (source: https://clinicaltrials.
gov/). It appears thus of interest to confirm the potential
antitetraploid effect of these compounds either in
mouse models of spontaneous tetraploidization-driven
tumorigenesis [48] or in clinical samples, by evaluating
the ploidy status of tumors responding to MPS1 inhibition.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell lines and culture conditions
Diploid and tetraploid clones derived from human
colon carcinoma HCT 116 cells were routinely maintained
in McCoy’s 5A medium supplemented with 10% fetal
calf serum (FCS), 10 mM HEPES buffer, 100 units/mL
penicillin G sodium and 100 μg/mL streptomycin sulfate
(all provided from Thermo Fisher Scientific-Gibco,
Waltham, MA). Human malignant fibrous histiocytomas
MFH152 cells as well as diploid and tetraploid clones
derived from these cell lines were cultured in Dulbecco’s
modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) supplemented with
10% FCS and 100 units/mL penicillin G sodium (Thermo
Fisher Scientific-Gibco). Diploid and tetraploid HCT 116
and RKO clones transfected with a cDNA coding for a
histone 2B-green fluorescent protein (H2B-GFP) (from
BD Biosciences-PharMingen, San Jose, CA) were grown
in McCoy’s 5A medium supplemented as above plus 20
μg/mL blasticidine (Thermo Fisher Scientific-Gibco). Cells
were seeded onto the appropriate supports (6-, 12-, 24- or
96-well plates) 24 h before the beginning of experiments.

Chemicals
MG132, paclitaxel, nocodazole, and reversine were
purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO) and stocked
as a 10 mM solution in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). AZ
3146 was obtained from Tocris (Bristol, United Kingdom)
and stocked as a 10 mM solution in DMSO. The pancaspase inhibitor z-VAD-fmk was obtained from Bachem
Bioscience (Bubendorf, Switzerland) and stocked as a
50 mM solution in N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF). The
appropriate amount of DMSO and/or DMF was always
employed for negative control conditions.

RNA interference
Diploid and tetraploid HCT 116 cells were seeded
at low density in 6-, 12- or 96-well plates and after 24
h transfected with an unrelated siRNA (siUNR), two
specific siRNAs directed against MPS1 mRNAs (siMPS1a
and siMPS1b) (all purchased from Eurogentec, Liege,
895

Oncotarget

Belgium) or a specific siRNA directed against PLK1
mRNAs (siPLK1, ON-TARGETplus SMARTpool,
L-003290–00-0005; GE Dharmacon, Lafayette, CO) by
means of oligofectamine RNAiMAX transfection reagent
(Thermo Fisher Scientific-Invitrogen), according to
the manufacturer’s instructions. The following siRNAs
were used: 5′-GCCGGUAUGCCGGUUAAGUdTdT3′(siUNR), 5′-UGGUUGAGUUUGUUGCUCAUUdTdT3′(siMPS1a), and 5′-CCCAGAGGACUGGUUGAGUd
TdT-3′(siMPS1b).

temperature with the appropriate DyLight 800 conjugate
secondary antibody (Thermo Fisher Scientific-Pierce
antibodies) and revealed with the LI-COR Odyssey®
scanner and software (LI-COR Biosciences, Lincoln, NE).
The following antibodies were used: α-tubulin (mouse
monoclonal IgG1, #T9026; Sigma-Aldrich), MPS1
(mouse monoclonal IgG1 #ab11108; Abcam, Cambridge,
UK) and PARP (mouse monoclonal IgG1 #9542; Cell
Signaling Technology, Billerica, MA).

Immunofluorescence microscopy

Cytofluorometric studies

For detection of apoptotic markers and
SAC activation, cells were fixed with 4% PFA (in
PBS), permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100 (in
PBS), and immunostained with antibodies directed
against cytochrome c (1/100 dilution; #6H2.B4, BD
Biosciences), cleaved caspase-3 (Asp175) (1/200
dilution; #9661, Merck Millipore-Cell Signaling
Technology), BUBR1 (1/200 dilution; mouse
monoclonal IgG1 #612502, BD Biosciences) or human
anti-nuclear-centromere CREST (Europa Bioproducts,
Cambridge, UK). Revelation was performed with
the appropriate Alexa Fluor conjugated secondary
antibodies (Thermo Fisher Scientific-Invitrogen).
Hoechst 33342 (1 μg/mL; BD Biosciences) was used
for nuclear counterstaining. Images were captured with
a Zeiss AxioimagerZ1 motorized microscope (Zeiss,
Oberkochen, Germany) driven by Axiovision software
(Zeiss) and analyzed with the open source software
Image J (freely available from the National Institute of
Health, http://rsb.info.nih.gov/ij/).

For the quantification of apoptotic features, the
assessment of cell cycle distribution, and the simultaneous
measurement of DNA content and phosphorylated
histone H3 (pH3) levels were performed as reported [48,
73]. The following antibodies were used: primary antiphosphorylated histone H3 antibody (rabbit polyclonal IgG1
#06–570; Millipore-Chemicon International, Temecula,
CA) and Alexa Fluor 488 goat anti-rabbit secondary
antibody (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Phosphatidylserine
exposure was quantified using the Alexa Fluor 488 Annexin
V/Dead Cell Apoptosis Kit (Thermo Fisher ScientificInvitrogen). Cytofluorometric acquisitions were performed
by means of a FACSCalibur (BD Biosciences) or a
FACSCanto (BD Biosciences) cytofluorometer, while data
analysis was conducted using the CellQuestTM software
(BD Biosciences). Only the events characterized by normal
forward scatter (FSC) and side scatter (SSC) parameters
were gated for inclusion in the statistical analysis.

Clonogenic survival assay

Videomicroscopy

The clonogenic assay was performed and analyzed
as reported above [73]. Briefly, cells were seeded at
low concentrations and were left untreated, treated with
MPS1 inhibitors or transfected with siUNR or siMPS1 for
further 24 h followed by washout and culture in standard
conditions for up to 15 days. Colonies were then fixed/
stained with aqueous crystal violet and counted.

For videomicroscopy, diploid and tetraploid H2BGFP HCT 116 cells were grown in appropriate plates.
The recording of the images started at the beginning of
the treatment (t = 0) and images were taken every 5 min
(Supplementary Movies S1–S4) for 24 h using a confocal
spinning disk CSU-X1 Andor Nikonor (Andor Technology,
Belfast, UK) coupled with Ti Eclipse microscope (Nikon,
Tokyo, Japan) and driven by iQ3 software (Andor) or every
20 min (Supplementary Movies S5 and S6) for 72 h with
a Leica DMIRE2 automated live cell microscope with a
LMC 20 × 0.4 lens and appropriate filters (Leica, Wetzlar,
Germany). Both transmitted light and fluorescence imaging
were used to detect the cells. Images were analyzed with
the open-source software Image J.

Immunoblotting
For the detection of protein levels, cells were
harvested, washed with PBS and lysed for 30 min
on ice in a buffer prepared in 50 mM Tris (pH 7.4)
and containing 250 mM NaCl, 0.1% NP-40, 0.1 mM
phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF), aprotinine at 10
mg/mL, leupeptine at 10 mg/mL, and 100 mM NaF. Cell
lysates were then centrifuged for 10 min at 13 000 rpm
and the concentration of soluble proteins in supernatant
was measured by the Bradford method. Equal amount of
proteins (30 μg) were resolved by SDS/PAGE and electrotransferred onto nitrocellulose membrane, which was then
incubated overnight with the appropriate primary antibody.
Thereafter, membranes were incubated for 1 h at room
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Statistical procedures
Unless otherwise specified, all experiments were
performed and independently repeated at least three times.
In order to evaluate if the differences observed between
diploid and tetraploid cell lines subjected to a given
tratment were significantly larger than those observed in
896

Oncotarget

the European Research Council (ERC); the LabEx
Immuno-Oncology; the SIRIC Stratified Oncology Cell
DNA Repair and Tumor Immune Elimination (SOCRATE);
the SIRIC Cancer Research and Personalized Medicine
(CARPEM); and the Paris Alliance of Cancer Research
Institutes (PACRI). AA and NM salaries are provided by
INSERM (French Medical Health and Research Institute)
and research in their lab is supported by ANR grant from
the French Research Ministry and from the “Fondation de
France”. We thank V. Baldin and S. Desagher for kindly
providing antibodies, D. Fesquet, J. Espeut, K. Hached and
V. Georget for critical discussions and comments.

control (i.e., untreated) conditions, results from diploid
and tetraploid clones were randomly paired to compute
differences. Thereafter, these differences were compared
between treatment and control conditions using one-tail
Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney test. One hundred random
pairings were performed and the 100 obtained p-values
were corrected for multiple testing using BenjaminiHochberg method. Then, the number of corrected p-values
lower than 5% (N) was computed. The higher this number
the more probable the difference between treatment
and control. The significance of N was then assessed using a
resampling method allowing to estimate its distribution under
the null hypothesis (that is “differences between diploid and
tetraploid were equivalent between treatment and control”)
and to compare the N value to this distribution. Hence, the
computation of an empirical p-value allowed to identify
situations where differences observed between diploid and
tetraploid cell lines are significantly larger when applying a
given treatment than in conditions. A significance threshold
of 5% has been chosen but all significant tests exhibited
p-values lower than 0.1%. Data were analyzed using “R”
software (R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna,
Austria; HYPERLINK “http://www.R-project”http://
www.R-project.org/). Two-tailed t-tests were performed
with GraphPad Prism (GraphPad Software, Inc. La Jolla,
CA) when conditions (treated/untreated) could be compared
within a single cell line (Figure 3). Calculations exhibiting
p-value < 0.01 were considered as statistically significant and
indicated by an asterisk (*). Means ± SEM are represented.

Abbreviations
CIN, chromosome instability; FCS, fetal calf
serum; GFP, green fluorescent protein; H2B, histone
2B; MPS1, monopolar spindle 1; PARP, poly (ADPribose) polymerase 1; pH3, phosphorylated H3; PLK1,
polo-like kinase 1; PS, phosphatidylserine; SAC,
spindle assembly checkpoint; siRNA, small interfering
RNA; UNR, unrelated; Z-VAD-fmk, Z-Val-Ala-Aspfluoromethylketone.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

REFERENCES

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING

1.	 Thompson SL, Bakhoum SF and Compton DA.
Mechanisms of chromosomal instability. Curr Biol. 2010;
20:R285–295.

The experiments reported in this paper were
performed within the France-BioImaging national
research infrastructure, at MRI facility, Montpellier.
France-BioImaging is supported by the French National
Research Agency through the “Investments for the
Future” program (ANR-10-INSB-04). MJ is supported by
the Ligue Nationale contre le Cancer. GM is funded by
Associazione Italiana per la Ricerca sul Cancro (AIRC:
Triennal Fellowship “Antonietta Latronico”, 2014). GL is
supported by the Fondation pour la Recherche Médicale
(FRM “engineer funding” granted for the team of AA).
IV is funded by the Associazione Italiana per la Ricerca
sul Cancro. IV is supported by the Associazione Italiana
per la Ricerca sul Cancro (AIRC: MFAG 2013 #14641),
Ministero Italiano della Salute (RF_GR–2011–02351355),
and the Programma per i Giovani Ricercatori “Rita Levi
Montalcini” 2011. GK is supported by the Ligue contre le
Cancer (équipe labelisée); Agence National de la Recherche
(ANR) – Projets blancs; ANR under the frame of E-Rare-2,
the ERA-Net for Research on Rare Diseases; Association
pour la recherche sur le cancer (ARC); Cancéropôle Ilede-France; Institut National du Cancer (INCa); Institut
Universitaire de France; Fondation pour la Recherche
Médicale (FRM); the European Commission (ArtForce);
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2.	 Mitelman F, Johansson B and Mertens F. Mitelman
Database of Chromosome Aberrations and Gene Fusions
in Cancer (2015). Mitelman F, Johansson B and Mertens F
(Eds.), “http://cgap.nci.nih.gov/Chromosomes/Mitelman”.
3.	 Zasadil LM, Britigan EM and Weaver BA. 2n or not 2n:
Aneuploidy, polyploidy and chromosomal instability in
primary and tumor cells. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2013;
24:370–379.
4.	 Gordon DJ, Resio B and Pellman D. Causes and consequences of aneuploidy in cancer. Nat Rev Genet. 2012;
13:189–203.
5.	 Holland AJ and Cleveland DW. Boveri revisited: chromosomal instability, aneuploidy and tumorigenesis. Nat Rev
Mol Cell Biol. 2009; 10:478–487.
6.	 Lee AJ, Endesfelder D, Rowan AJ, Walther A, Birkbak NJ,
Futreal PA, Downward J, Szallasi Z, Tomlinson IP, Howell
M, Kschischo M and Swanton C. Chromosomal instability
confers intrinsic multidrug resistance. Cancer Res. 2011;
71:1858–1870.
7.	 Swanton C, Nicke B, Schuett M, Eklund AC, Ng C, Li
Q, Hardcastle T, Lee A, Roy R, East P, Kschischo M,
897

Oncotarget

Endesfelder D, Wylie P, Kim SN, Chen JG, Howell M, et
al. Chromosomal instability determines taxane response.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009; 106:8671–8676.

Castedo M, et al. Multipolar mitosis of tetraploid cells:
inhibition by p53 and dependency on Mos. EMBO J. 2010;
29:1272–1284.

8.	 Bakhoum SF, Danilova OV, Kaur P, Levy NB and
Compton DA. Chromosomal instability substantiates poor
prognosis in patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.
Clin Cancer Res. 2011; 17:7704–7711.

23.	 Maley CC, Galipeau PC, Finley JC, Wongsurawat VJ,
Li X, Sanchez CA, Paulson TG, Blount PL, Risques RA,
Rabinovitch PS and Reid BJ. Genetic clonal diversity predicts progression to esophageal adenocarcinoma. Nat Genet.
2006; 38:468–473.

9.	 Carter SL, Eklund AC, Kohane IS, Harris LN and Szallasi
Z. A signature of chromosomal instability inferred from
gene expression profiles predicts clinical outcome in multiple human cancers. Nat Genet. 2006; 38:1043–1048.

24.	 Olaharski AJ, Sotelo R, Solorza-Luna G, Gonsebatt ME,
Guzman P, Mohar A and Eastmond DA. Tetraploidy and
chromosomal instability are early events during cervical
carcinogenesis. Carcinogenesis. 2006; 27:337–343.

10.	 Varetti G, Pellman D and Gordon DJ. Aurea mediocritas:
the importance of a balanced genome. Cold Spring Harb
Perspect Biol. 2014; 6:a015842.

25.	 Galipeau PC, Cowan DS, Sanchez CA, Barrett MT, Emond
MJ, Levine DS, Rabinovitch PS and Reid BJ. 17p (p53)
allelic losses, 4N (G2/tetraploid) populations, and progression to aneuploidy in Barrett’s esophagus. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A. 1996; 93:7081–7084.

11.	 Vitale I, Galluzzi L, Senovilla L, Criollo A, Jemaa M,
Castedo M and Kroemer G. Illicit survival of cancer cells
during polyploidization and depolyploidization. Cell Death
Differ. 2011; 18:1403–1413.

26.	 Dewhurst SM, McGranahan N, Burrell RA, Rowan AJ,
Gronroos E, Endesfelder D, Joshi T, Mouradov D, Gibbs P,
Ward RL, Hawkins NJ, Szallasi Z, Sieber OM and Swanton
C. Tolerance of whole-genome doubling propagates chromosomal instability and accelerates cancer genome evolution. Cancer Discov. 2014; 4:175–185.

12.	 Davoli T and de Lange T. The causes and consequences of
polyploidy in normal development and cancer. Annu Rev
Cell Dev Biol. 2011; 27:585–610.
13.	 Ganem NJ, Storchova Z and Pellman D. Tetraploidy,
aneuploidy and cancer. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2007;
17:157–162.

27.	 Lundberg G, Jin Y, Sehic D, Ora I, Versteeg R and
Gisselsson D. Intratumour diversity of chromosome copy
numbers in neuroblastoma mediated by on-going chromosome loss from a polyploid state. PLoS One. 2013;
8:e59268.

14.	 Davoli T and de Lange T. Telomere-driven tetraploidization
occurs in human cells undergoing crisis and promotes transformation of mouse cells. Cancer Cell. 2012; 21:765–776.
15.	 Davoli T, Denchi EL and de Lange T. Persistent telomere
damage induces bypass of mitosis and tetraploidy. Cell.
2010; 141:81–93.

28.	 Zack TI, Schumacher SE, Carter SL, Cherniack AD,
Saksena G, Tabak B, Lawrence MS, Zhang CZ, Wala
J, Mermel CH, Sougnez C, Gabriel SB, Hernandez B,
Shen H, Laird PW, Getz G, et al. Pan-cancer patterns
of somatic copy number alteration. Nat Genet. 2013;
45:1134–1140.

16.	 Nguyen HG, Makitalo M, Yang D, Chinnappan D, St Hilaire
C and Ravid K. Deregulated Aurora-B induced tetraploidy
promotes tumorigenesis. FASEB J. 2009; 23:2741–2748.
17.	 Duelli DM, Padilla-Nash HM, Berman D, Murphy KM,
Ried T and Lazebnik Y. A virus causes cancer by inducing
massive chromosomal instability through cell fusion. Curr
Biol. 2007; 17:431–437.

29.	 Nik-Zainal S, Van Loo P, Wedge DC, Alexandrov LB,
Greenman CD, Lau KW, Raine K, Jones D, Marshall J,
Ramakrishna M, Shlien A, Cooke SL, Hinton J, Menzies A,
Stebbings LA, Leroy C, et al. The life history of 21 breast
cancers. Cell. 2012; 149:994–1007.

18.	 Fujiwara T, Bandi M, Nitta M, Ivanova EV, Bronson RT and
Pellman D. Cytokinesis failure generating tetraploids promotes
tumorigenesis in p53-null cells. Nature. 2005; 437:1043–1047.

30.	 Carter SL, Cibulskis K, Helman E, McKenna A, Shen H,
Zack T, Laird PW, Onofrio RC, Winckler W, Weir BA,
Beroukhim R, Pellman D, Levine DA, Lander ES, Meyerson
M and Getz G. Absolute quantification of somatic DNA alterations in human cancer. Nat Biotechnol. 2012; 30:413–421.

19.	 Ganem NJ, Godinho SA and Pellman D. A mechanism linking extra centrosomes to chromosomal instability. Nature.
2009; 460:278–282.

31.	 Beroukhim R, Mermel CH, Porter D, Wei G, Raychaudhuri
S, Donovan J, Barretina J, Boehm JS, Dobson J, Urashima
M, Mc Henry KT, Pinchback RM, Ligon AH, Cho YJ,
Haery L, Greulich H, et al. The landscape of somatic copynumber alteration across human cancers. Nature. 2010;
463:899–905.

20.	 Vitale I, Galluzzi L, Vivet S, Nanty L, Dessen P, Senovilla
L, Olaussen KA, Lazar V, Prudhomme M, Golsteyn RM,
Castedo M and Kroemer G. Inhibition of Chk1 kills tetraploid tumor cells through a p53-dependent pathway. PLoS
One. 2007; 2:e1337.
21.	 Storchova Z, Breneman A, Cande J, Dunn J, Burbank K,
O’Toole E and Pellman D. Genome-wide genetic analysis
of polyploidy in yeast. Nature. 2006; 443:541–547.

32.	 Pandit SK, Westendorp B and de Bruin A. Physiological
significance of polyploidization in mammalian cells. Trends
Cell Biol. 2013; 23:556–566.

22.	 Vitale I, Senovilla L, Jemaa M, Michaud M, Galluzzi
L, Kepp O, Nanty L, Criollo A, Rello-Varona S, Manic
G, Metivier D, Vivet S, Tajeddine N, Joza N, Valent A,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33.	 Duncan AW. Aneuploidy, polyploidy and ploidy reversal in
the liver. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2013; 24:347–356.
898

Oncotarget

34.	 Fox DT and Duronio RJ. Endoreplication and polyploidy:
insights into development and disease. Development. 2013;
140:3–12.

of tetraploid tumor cells by targeting the mitotic kinesin
Eg5. Cell Cycle. 2009; 8:1030–1035.
47.	 Roh M, van der Meer R and Abdulkadir SA. Tumorigenic
polyploid cells contain elevated ROS and ARE selectively
targeted by antioxidant treatment. J Cell Physiol. 2012;
227:801–812.

35.	 Ganem NJ, Cornils H, Chiu SY, O’Rourke KP, Arnaud
J, Yimlamai D, Thery M, Camargo FD and Pellman D.
Cytokinesis failure triggers hippo tumor suppressor pathway activation. Cell. 2014; 158:833–848.

48.	 Lissa D, Senovilla L, Rello-Varona S, Vitale I, Michaud M,
Pietrocola F, Boileve A, Obrist F, Bordenave C, Garcia P,
Michels J, Jemaa M, Kepp O, Castedo M and Kroemer G.
Resveratrol and aspirin eliminate tetraploid cells for anticancer chemoprevention. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014;
111:3020–3025.

36.	 Margolis RL, Lohez OD and Andreassen PR. G1 tetraploidy checkpoint and the suppression of tumorigenesis. J
Cell Biochem. 2003; 88:673–683.
37.	 Andreassen PR, Lohez OD, Lacroix FB and Margolis
RL. Tetraploid state induces p53-dependent arrest of nontransformed mammalian cells in G1. Mol Biol Cell. 2001;
12:1315–1328.

49.	 Donovan P, Cato K, Legaie R, Jayalath R, Olsson G,
Hall B, Olson S, Boros S, Reynolds BA and Harding A.
Hyperdiploid tumor cells increase phenotypic heterogeneity
within Glioblastoma tumors. Mol Biosyst. 2014; 10:741–758.

38.	 Vitale I, Galluzzi L, Castedo M and Kroemer G. Mitotic
catastrophe: a mechanism for avoiding genomic instability.
Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2011; 12:385–392.

50.	 Zeng JY, Sharma S, Zhou YQ, Yao HP, Hu X, Zhang R and
Wang MH. Synergistic activities of MET/RON inhibitor
BMS-777607 and mTOR inhibitor AZD8055 to polyploid
cells derived from pancreatic cancer and cancer stem cells.
Mol Cancer Ther. 2014; 13:37–48.

39.	 Galluzzi L, Bravo-San Pedro JM, Vitale I, Aaronson SA,
Abrams JM, Adam D, Alnemri ES, Altucci L, Andrews D,
Annicchiarico-Petruzzelli M, Baehrecke EH, Bazan NG,
Bertrand MJ, Bianchi K, Blagosklonny MV, Blomgren K, et
al. Essential versus accessory aspects of cell death: recommendations of the NCCD 2015. Cell Death Differ. 2015; 22:58–73.

51.	 Liu LL, Long ZJ, Wang LX, Zheng FM, Fang ZG, Yan M,
Xu DF, Chen JJ, Wang SW, Lin DJ and Liu Q. Inhibition of
mTOR pathway sensitizes acute myeloid leukemia cells to
aurora inhibitors by suppression of glycolytic metabolism.
Mol Cancer Res. 2013; 11:1326–1336.

40.	 Kroemer G, Galluzzi L, Vandenabeele P, Abrams J,
Alnemri ES, Baehrecke EH, Blagosklonny MV, El-Deiry
WS, Golstein P, Green DR, Hengartner M, Knight
RA, Kumar S, Lipton SA, Malorni W, Nunez G, et al.
Classification of cell death: recommendations of the
Nomenclature Committee on Cell Death 2009. Cell Death
Differ. 2009; 16:3–11.

52.	 Liu X and Winey M. The MPS1 family of protein kinases.
Annu Rev Biochem. 2012; 81:561–585.
53.	 Musacchio A and Salmon ED. The spindle-assembly checkpoint in space and time. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2007;
8:379–393.

41.	 Castedo M, Coquelle A, Vivet S, Vitale I, Kauffmann A,
Dessen P, Pequignot MO, Casares N, Valent A, Mouhamad
S, Schmitt E, Modjtahedi N, Vainchenker W, Zitvogel L,
Lazar V, Garrido C, et al. Apoptosis regulation in tetraploid
cancer cells. EMBO J. 2006; 25:2584–2595.

54.	 Abrieu A, Magnaghi-Jaulin L, Kahana JA, Peter M, Castro
A, Vigneron S, Lorca T, Cleveland DW and Labbe JC.
Mps1 is a kinetochore-associated kinase essential for the
vertebrate mitotic checkpoint. Cell. 2001; 106:83–93.

42.	 Senovilla L, Vitale I, Martins I, Tailler M, Pailleret C,
Michaud M, Galluzzi L, Adjemian S, Kepp O, NisoSantano M, Shen S, Marino G, Criollo A, Boileve
A, Job B, Ladoire S, et al. An immunosurveillance
mechanism controls cancer cell ploidy. Science. 2012;
337:1678–1684.

55.	 Mills GB, Schmandt R, McGill M, Amendola A, Hill M,
Jacobs K, May C, Rodricks AM, Campbell S and Hogg
D. Expression of TTK, a novel human protein kinase, is
associated with cell proliferation. J Biol Chem. 1992;
267:16000–16006.
56.	 Kusakabe K, Ide N, Daigo Y, Itoh T, Yamamoto T,
Hashizume H, Nozu K, Yoshida H, Tadano G, Tagashira
S, Higashino K, Okano Y, Sato Y, Inoue M, Iguchi M,
Kanazawa T, et al. Discovery of imidazo[1,2-b]pyridazine
derivatives: selective and orally available Mps1 (TTK)
kinase inhibitors exhibiting remarkable antiproliferative
activity. J Med Chem. 2015; 58:1760–1775.

43.	 Boileve A, Senovilla L, Vitale I, Lissa D, Martins I,
Metivier D, van den Brink S, Clevers H, Galluzzi L,
Castedo M and Kroemer G. Immunosurveillance against
tetraploidization-induced colon tumorigenesis. Cell Cycle.
2013; 12:473–479.
44.	 Coward J and Harding A. Size Does Matter: Why Polyploid
Tumor Cells are Critical Drug Targets in the War on
Cancer. Front Oncol. 2014; 4:123.
45.	 Marxer M, Foucar CE, Man WY, Chen Y, Ma HT and
Poon RY. Tetraploidization increases sensitivity to Aurora
B kinase inhibition. Cell Cycle. 2012; 11:2567–2577.

57.	 Kaistha BP, Honstein T, Muller V, Bielak S, Sauer M,
Kreider R, Fassan M, Scarpa A, Schmees C, Volkmer H,
Gress TM and Buchholz M. Key role of dual specificity
kinase TTK in proliferation and survival of pancreatic cancer cells. Br J Cancer. 2014; 111:1780–1787.

46.	 Rello-Varona S, Vitale I, Kepp O, Senovilla L, Jemaa M,
Metivier D, Castedo M and Kroemer G. Preferential killing

58.	 Slee RB, Grimes BR, Bansal R, Gore J, Blackburn C,
Brown L, Gasaway R, Jeong J, Victorino J, March KL,

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

899

Oncotarget

Colombo R, Herbert BS and Korc M. Selective inhibition
of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma cell growth by the
mitotic MPS1 kinase inhibitor NMS-P715. Mol Cancer
Ther. 2014; 13:307–315.

70.	 Espeut J, Lara-Gonzalez P, Sassine M, Shiau AK, Desai A
and Abrieu A. Natural Loss of Mps1 Kinase in Nematodes
Uncovers a Role for Polo-like Kinase 1 in Spindle
Checkpoint Initiation. Cell Rep. 2015; 12:58–65.

59.	 Jemaa M, Galluzzi L, Kepp O, Senovilla L, Brands M,
Boemer U, Koppitz M, Lienau P, Prechtl S, Schulze V,
Siemeister G, Wengner AM, Mumberg D, Ziegelbauer
K, Abrieu A, Castedo M, et al. Characterization of novel
MPS1 inhibitors with preclinical anticancer activity. Cell
Death Differ. 2013; 20:1532–1545.

71.	 von Schubert C, Cubizolles F, Bracher JM, Sliedrecht
T, Kops GJ and Nigg EA. Plk1 and Mps1 Cooperatively
Regulate the Spindle Assembly Checkpoint in Human
Cells. Cell Rep. 2015; 12:66–78.
72.	 Jemaa M, Galluzzi L, Kepp O, Boileve A, Lissa D,
Senovilla L, Harper F, Pierron G, Berardinelli F, Antoccia
A, Castedo M, Vitale I and Kroemer G. Preferential killing
of p53-deficient cancer cells by reversine. Cell Cycle. 2012;
11:2149–2158.

60.	 Colombo R, Caldarelli M, Mennecozzi M, Giorgini ML,
Sola F, Cappella P, Perrera C, Depaolini SR, Rusconi L,
Cucchi U, Avanzi N, Bertrand JA, Bossi RT, Pesenti E,
Galvani A, Isacchi A, et al. Targeting the mitotic checkpoint for cancer therapy with NMS-P715, an inhibitor of
MPS1 kinase. Cancer Res. 2010; 70:10255–10264.

73.	 Jemaa M, Vitale I, Kepp O, Berardinelli F, Galluzzi L,
Senovilla L, Marino G, Malik SA, Rello-Varona S, Lissa
D, Antoccia A, Tailler M, Schlemmer F, Harper F, Pierron
G, Castedo M, et al. Selective killing of p53-deficient cancer cells by SP600125. EMBO Mol Med. 2012; 4:500–514.

61.	 Janssen A, Kops GJ and Medema RH. Elevating the
frequency of chromosome mis-segregation as a strategy to kill tumor cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009;
106:19108–19113.

74.	 Degenhardt Y, Greshock J, Laquerre S, Gilmartin AG, Jing
J, Richter M, Zhang X, Bleam M, Halsey W, Hughes A,
Moy C, Liu-Sullivan N, Powers S, Bachman K, Jackson J,
Weber B, et al. Sensitivity of cancer cells to Plk1 inhibitor GSK461364A is associated with loss of p53 function
and chromosome instability. Mol Cancer Ther. 2010;
9:2079–2089.

62.	 Jelluma N, Brenkman AB, van den Broek NJ, Cruijsen CW,
van Osch MH, Lens SM, Medema RH and Kops GJ. Mps1
phosphorylates Borealin to control Aurora B activity and
chromosome alignment. Cell. 2008; 132:233–246.
63.	 Kops GJ, Foltz DR and Cleveland DW. Lethality to human
cancer cells through massive chromosome loss by inhibition
of the mitotic checkpoint. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004;
101:8699–8704.

75.	 Jeganathan K, Malureanu L, Baker DJ, Abraham SC and
van Deursen JM. Bub1 mediates cell death in response to
chromosome missegregation and acts to suppress spontaneous tumorigenesis. J Cell Biol. 2007; 179:255–267.

64.	 Santaguida S, Tighe A, D’Alise AM, Taylor SS and
Musacchio A. Dissecting the role of MPS1 in chromosome biorientation and the spindle checkpoint through
the small molecule inhibitor reversine. J Cell Biol. 2010;
190:73–87.

76.	 Fang Y, Liu T, Wang X, Yang YM, Deng H, Kunicki J,
Traganos F, Darzynkiewicz Z, Lu L and Dai W. BubR1
is involved in regulation of DNA damage responses.
Oncogene. 2006; 25:3598–3605.
77.	 Kilpinen S, Ojala K and Kallioniemi O. Analysis of kinase
gene expression patterns across 5681 human tissue samples
reveals functional genomic taxonomy of the kinome. PLoS
One. 2010; 5:e15068.

65.	 Kepp O, Galluzzi L, Lipinski M, Yuan J and Kroemer G.
Cell death assays for drug discovery. Nat Rev Drug Discov.
2011; 10:221–237.
66.	 Galluzzi L, Aaronson SA, Abrams J, Alnemri ES, Andrews
DW, Baehrecke EH, Bazan NG, Blagosklonny MV,
Blomgren K, Borner C, Bredesen DE, Brenner C, Castedo
M, Cidlowski JA, Ciechanover A, Cohen GM, et al.
Guidelines for the use and interpretation of assays for monitoring cell death in higher eukaryotes. Cell Death Differ.
2009; 16:1093–1107.

78.	 Mizukami Y, Kono K, Daigo Y, Takano A, Tsunoda T,
Kawaguchi Y, Nakamura Y and Fujii H. Detection of novel
cancer-testis antigen-specific T-cell responses in TIL,
regional lymph nodes, and PBL in patients with esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma. Cancer Sci. 2008; 99:1448–1454.
79.	 Landi MT, Dracheva T, Rotunno M, Figueroa JD, Liu H,
Dasgupta A, Mann FE, Fukuoka J, Hames M, Bergen AW,
Murphy SE, Yang P, Pesatori AC, Consonni D, Bertazzi
PA, Wacholder S, et al. Gene expression signature of cigarette smoking and its role in lung adenocarcinoma development and survival. PLoS One. 2008; 3:e1651.

67.	 Hewitt L, Tighe A, Santaguida S, White AM, Jones
CD, Musacchio A, Green S and Taylor SS. Sustained
Mps1 activity is required in mitosis to recruit O-Mad2
to the Mad1-C-Mad2 core complex. J Cell Biol. 2010;
190:25–34.
68.	 Jelluma N, Dansen TB, Sliedrecht T, Kwiatkowski NP and
Kops GJ. Release of Mps1 from kinetochores is crucial for
timely anaphase onset. J Cell Biol. 2010; 191:281–290.

80.	 Chng WJ, Braggio E, Mulligan G, Bryant B, Remstein E,
Valdez R, Dogan A and Fonseca R. The centrosome index
is a powerful prognostic marker in myeloma and identifies
a cohort of patients that might benefit from aurora kinase
inhibition. Blood. 2008; 111:1603–1609.

69.	 Jemaa M, Galluzzi L, Kepp O, Castedo M, Rello-Varona S,
Vitale I and Kroemer G. Transgenerational cell fate profiling: a method for the graphical presentation of complex cell
cycle alterations. Cell Cycle. 2013; 12:183–190.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

81.	 Salvatore G, Nappi TC, Salerno P, Jiang Y, Garbi C,
Ugolini C, Miccoli P, Basolo F, Castellone MD, Cirafici
900

Oncotarget

AM, Melillo RM, Fusco A, Bittner ML and Santoro M.
A cell proliferation and chromosomal instability signature in anaplastic thyroid carcinoma. Cancer Res. 2007;
67:10148–10158.

Radiosensitization of Human Glioblastoma by Modulating
DNA Repair Proteins. Mol Cancer Res. 2015.
90.	 Kagami Y, Nihira K, Wada S, Ono M, Honda M and
Yoshida K. Mps1 phosphorylation of condensin II controls
chromosome condensation at the onset of mitosis. J Cell
Biol. 2014; 205:781–790.

82.	 Yuan B, Xu Y, Woo JH, Wang Y, Bae YK, Yoon DS, Wersto
RP, Tully E, Wilsbach K and Gabrielson E. Increased expression of mitotic checkpoint genes in breast cancer cells with
chromosomal instability. Clin Cancer Res. 2006; 12:405–410.

91.	 Pradhan A, Singh TR, Ali AM, Wahengbam K and Meetei
AR. Monopolar spindle 1 (MPS1) protein-dependent phosphorylation of RecQ-mediated genome instability protein 2
(RMI2) at serine 112 is essential for BLM-Topo III alphaRMI1-RMI2 (BTR) protein complex function upon spindle
assembly checkpoint (SAC) activation during mitosis. J
Biol Chem. 2013; 288:33500–33508.

83.	 Thykjaer T, Workman C, Kruhoffer M, Demtroder K, Wolf
H, Andersen LD, Frederiksen CM, Knudsen S and Orntoft
TF. Identification of gene expression patterns in superficial
and invasive human bladder cancer. Cancer Res. 2001;
61:2492–2499.

92.	 Mattison CP, Stumpff J, Wordeman L and Winey M. Mip1
associates with both the Mps1 kinase and actin, and is
required for cell cortex stability and anaphase spindle positioning. Cell Cycle. 2011; 10:783–793.

84.	 Ling Y, Zhang X, Bai Y, Li P, Wei C, Song T, Zheng Z,
Guan K, Zhang Y, Zhang B, Liu X, Ma RZ, Cao C, Zhong
H and Xu Q. Overexpression of Mps1 in colon cancer cells
attenuates the spindle assembly checkpoint and increases
aneuploidy. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014;
450:1690–1695.

93.	 Lan W and Cleveland DW. A chemical tool box defines
mitotic and interphase roles for Mps1 kinase. J Cell Biol.
2010; 190:21–24.

85.	 Gyorffy B, Bottai G, Lehmann-Che J, Keri G, Orfi L,
Iwamoto T, Desmedt C, Bianchini G, Turner NC, de The
H, Andre F, Sotiriou C, Hortobagyi GN, Di Leo A, Pusztai
L and Santarpia L. TP53 mutation-correlated genes predict
the risk of tumor relapse and identify MPS1 as a potential
therapeutic kinase in TP53-mutated breast cancers. Mol
Oncol. 2014; 8:508–519.

94.	 Huang YF, Chang MD and Shieh SY. TTK/hMps1 mediates
the p53-dependent postmitotic checkpoint by phosphorylating p53 at Thr18. Mol Cell Biol. 2009; 29:2935–2944.
95.	 Kasbek C, Yang CH and Fisk HA. Mps1 as a link between
centrosomes and genomic instability. Environ Mol
Mutagen. 2009; 50:654–665.

86.	 Brough R, Frankum JR, Sims D, Mackay A, MendesPereira AM, Bajrami I, Costa-Cabral S, Rafiq R, Ahmad
AS, Cerone MA, Natrajan R, Sharpe R, Shiu KK,
Wetterskog D, Dedes KJ, Lambros MB, et al. Functional
viability profiles of breast cancer. Cancer Discov. 2011;
1:260–273.

96.	 Yeh YH, Huang YF, Lin TY and Shieh SY. The cell
cycle checkpoint kinase CHK2 mediates DNA damageinduced stabilization of TTK/hMps1. Oncogene. 2009;
28:1366–1378.
97.	 Leng M, Chan DW, Luo H, Zhu C, Qin J and Wang Y.
MPS1-dependent mitotic BLM phosphorylation is important for chromosome stability. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
2006; 103:11485–11490.

87.	 Tannous BA, Kerami M, Van der Stoop PM, Kwiatkowski N,
Wang J, Zhou W, Kessler AF, Lewandrowski G, Hiddingh
L, Sol N, Lagerweij T, Wedekind L, Niers JM, Barazas M,
Nilsson RJ, Geerts D, et al. Effects of the selective MPS1
inhibitor MPS1-IN-3 on glioblastoma sensitivity to antimitotic drugs. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2013; 105:1322–1331.

98.	 Wei JH, Chou YF, Ou YH, Yeh YH, Tyan SW, Sun TP, Shen
CY and Shieh SY. TTK/hMps1 participates in the regulation
of DNA damage checkpoint response by phosphorylating
CHK2 on threonine 68. J Biol Chem. 2005; 280:7748–7757.

88.	 Daniel J, Coulter J, Woo JH, Wilsbach K and Gabrielson E.
High levels of the Mps1 checkpoint protein are protective
of aneuploidy in breast cancer cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U
S A. 2011; 108:5384–5389.

99.	 Fisk HA, Mattison CP and Winey M. A field guide to the
Mps1 family of protein kinases. Cell Cycle. 2004; 3:439–442.
100.	Fisk HA, Mattison CP and Winey M. Human Mps1 protein kinase is required for centrosome duplication and normal mitotic progression. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003;
100:14875–14880.

89.	 Maachani UB, Kramp T, Hanson R, Zhao S, Celiku O,
Shankavaram U, Colombo R, Caplen NJ, Camphausen
K and Tandle A. Targeting MPS1 Enhances

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

901

Oncotarget

