met Dr. Curley in 2002 after experiencing a recurrence of his
neuroendocrine carcinoid tumor, which had metastasized to his
liver. “We weren’t given a very good prognosis,” he says. “I had
multiple docs tell me I had 5 years.”
After receiving that news, Pfeffer and his wife went to The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center in Houston,
where Dr. Curley was then practicing. “He made a point of
saying, ‘I’ve seen a lot of people with your type of cancer live a

patients, their family members, and other physicians. “The
stories are real and honest and about patients’ journeys and the
courage and strength they’ve shown,” he says. “I try to maintain
a positive, upbeat attitude and infuse my stories with some
humor when appropriate.”
In one of his blog entries, “The Wrestler,” Dr. Curley writes
about a patient who, like so many, had an incredible fighting
spirit:

“In oncology…it’s easy to become a little bit jaded and calculated, but I’ve
always guarded against that. I’ve always made sure I’ve stayed very emotionally connected with my patients, even though it’s a painful thing to do
at times.”—Steven Curley, MD
very long life—15 or 20 years, sometimes longer,” Pfeffer says.
“We didn’t have much hope until we got to see him, and ever
since then we’ve had hope; you can’t put a price tag on that.”
Pfeffer continues to travel to Houston to see Dr. Curley
every 6 to 9 months. “I don’t follow a lot of people on Twitter,
but anything he’s got posted, I always gravitate toward,” he says.

Fighting Spirit
For Dr. Curley’s part, he will continue to share patient stories
on his blog, for which he has received positive feedback from

“Patients diagnosed with cancer and treated with our
multidisciplinary approaches are knocked down physically and
emotionally, but they pick themselves up off the canvas and
struggle on…. Though they sometimes want to, they don’t leave.
They remain. They maintain. I respect the effort, the invincible
spirit, and the patients who don’t give a damn about the odds
or probabilities; they are going out swinging. We are tag-team
partners in oncology, entering the ring to attack a patient’s
cancer with every move and method we know.”
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29997

Pediatric Gliomas With CRAF Fusions May Require Combination
Treatment

P

ediatric low-grade gliomas (PLGGs) that are governed by
a form of RAF fusion protein called CRAF may need to
be treated with differential and combination targeted therapies
versus a single-agent, US FDA-approved investigational RAF
inhibitor, according to preclinical data.
The data were presented by University of Pennsylvania
graduate student Payal Jain at the American Association for
Cancer Research (AACR)-National Cancer Institute (NCI)European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer
(EORTC) International Conference on Molecular Targets and
Cancer Therapeutics, held in Boston, Massachusetts, between
November 5 and 9, 2015. Jain is a researcher in the laboratory
of Adam Resnick, PhD, assistant professor of neurosurgery at
the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia in Pennsylvania.
Unlike PLGGs that are driven by BRAF fusion proteins, those
with CRAF fusions may not respond to a single-agent therapy.
Instead, researchers found that preclinical models of PLGG with
CRAF fusions responded to a combination of therapies targeting
2 different signaling pathways: the mitogen-activated protein
kinases (MAPK) pathway and the phosphatidylinositol-3
kinase (PI3K) pathway. BRAF and CRAF are related signaling
proteins involved in the MAPK pathway, which is often affected
in human cancers. PLGGs display a combination of mutations
that drive this pathway, says Jain.
Jain, Dr. Resnick, and their colleagues generated
heterologous cell model systems harboring CRAF fusions found

1148

in patients. They found that CRAF fusions remained largely
unresponsive to second-generation RAF inhibitors, which
have shown efficacy for BRAF fusions. In addition, they found
that, similar to BRAF fusions, CRAF fusions could activate the
MAPK pathway in their cell model and also drive tumors in
mice injected with the cells.
Researchers then tested the effectiveness of the firstgeneration and second-generation RAF inhibitors PLX4720
and PLX8394, as well as trametinib (GSK1120212), a
MEK inhibitor that is involved with the MAPK pathway in
suppressing cell culture growth and tumor formations driven
by CRAF fusions in mice. Although in mice the tumors were
not responsive to the first 2 inhibitors, they did demonstrate a
partial response to the MEK inhibitor.
The researchers then tested a combination of a MEK inhibitor
with an inhibitor of mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR),
a molecule involved in the PI3K signaling pathway, which
demonstrated a significant decrease in CRAF fusion-driven tumor
growth in mice. The results suggest that dual targeting of the
MAPK and PI3K pathways is essential for effective therapeutic
response in these PLGGs with CRAF fusions.
Jain says that one of the limitations of the study is the lack
of patient-derived PLGG cell lines; nevertheless, she adds that
the model systems researchers used have proven to be predictive
of clinical response.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29999

Cancer

April 15, 2016

