Priority Report

The Role of HuR in Gemcitabine Efficacy in Pancreatic Cancer:
HuR Up-regulates the Expression of the Gemcitabine
Metabolizing Enzyme Deoxycytidine Kinase
1

2

4

1

Christina L. Costantino, Agnieszka K. Witkiewicz, Yuki Kuwano, Joseph A. Cozzitorto,
1
3
5
1
Eugene P. Kennedy, Abhijit Dasgupta, Judith C. Keen, Charles J. Yeo,
4
1
Myriam Gorospe, and Jonathan R. Brody
1
Department of Surgery, Jefferson Center for Pancreatic, Biliary and Related Cancers, Departments of 2Pathology and 3Pharmacology
and Experimental Therapeutics, Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania;
4
LCMB, National Institute on Aging-Intramural Research Program, NIH, Baltimore, Maryland; and 5Robert Wood Johnson Medical
School, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Camden, New Jersey

Abstract
RNA-binding protein HuR binds U- or AU-rich sequences in
the 3¶-untranslated regions of target mRNAs, stabilizing them
and/or modulating their translation. Given the links of HuR
with cancer, we studied the consequences of modulating HuR
levels in pancreatic cancer cells. HuR-overexpressing cancer
cells, in some instances, are roughly up to 30-fold more
sensitive to treatment with gemcitabine, the main chemotherapeutic component of treatment regimens for pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA), compared with control cells.
In pancreatic cancer cells, HuR associates with deoxycytidine
kinase (dCK) mRNA, which encodes the enzyme that metabolizes and thereby activates gemcitabine. Gemcitabine exposure to pancreatic cancer cells enriches the association
between HuR and dCK mRNA and increases cytoplasmic HuR
levels. Accordingly, HuR overexpression elevates, whereas HuR
silencing reduces, dCK protein expression in pancreatic
cancer cells. In a clinical correlate study of gemcitabine treatment, we found a 7-fold increase in risk of mortality in
PDA patients with low cytoplasmic HuR levels compared
with patients with high HuR levels, after adjusting for other
treatments and demographic variables. These data support
the notion that HuR is a key mediator of gemcitabine efficacy
in cancer cells, at least in part through its ability to regulate
dCK levels posttranscriptionally. We propose that HuR levels
in PDA modulate the therapeutic efficacy of gemcitabine, thus
serving as a marker of the clinical utility of this common
chemotherapeutic agent and a potential target for intervention in pancreatic cancer. [Cancer Res 2009;69(11):4567–72]

Introduction
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) is the fourth leading
cause of cancer-related deaths in the United States (1). Currently,
two therapeutic options that provide the best clinical benefit are
surgical resection and chemotherapy regimens that include
gemcitabine (2¶,2¶-difluorodeoxycytidine). For over 10 years, gemci-

tabine has been the reference drug for the treatment of this often
fatal disease (2). Gemcitabine is also used to treat other
malignancies including non–small cell lung, breast, gastric, and
ovarian cancers. Gemcitabine uses the same key metabolic enzyme
for activation within the cell, deoxycytidine kinase (dCK), as does a
previously developed and related nucleoside analogue cytarabine
(Ara-C; ref. 3). dCK phosphorylates the prodrug, gemcitabine,
generating the active metabolites gemcitabine diphosphates and
triphosphates that inhibit DNA chain elongation and cause cellular
death (4). The levels of dCK correlate with overall patient survival
after gemcitabine-based therapy in PDA specimens (P = 0.0425;
ref. 4).
The stress-response protein Hu antigen R (HuR) is an RNAbinding protein that regulates gene expression posttranscriptionally. Like other related Hu/elav proteins, HuR harbors three
conserved RNA recognition motifs through which it binds to target
mRNAs (5) that frequently have AU- or U-rich stretches in their
3¶-untranslated regions (UTR). HuR is predominantly nuclear, but
in response to various stimuli, it is mobilized to the cytoplasm,
prolongs target mRNA half-life, and can modulate target mRNA
translation (5). Many HuR target mRNAs encode stress-response,
immune-response, cell cycle regulatory proteins, oncogenes, and
tumor suppressor genes (5). HuR modulates these transcripts in
response to stimuli such as therapeutic agents (i.e., tamoxifen and
prostaglandins), nutrient depletion (polyamines, amino acid
starvation), heat shock, immune stimuli, short-wavelength UV
irradiation, oxidants, and transcriptional inhibitors (actinomycin D;
refs. 5–7).
Although HuR has never been reported to be mutated in cancer,
it has been proposed to contribute to the tumorigenesis process
(8–10). Elevated cytoplasmic accumulation of HuR both correlates
with high-grade malignancy and serves as a prognostic factor of
poor clinical outcome in some cancers (11–14). Given the extensive
research examining the role of HuR in cancer and stress response
over the past decade (5), we explored the role of HuR in PDA and
the relationship of HuR to chemotherapeutic efficacy.

Materials and Methods
Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research Online
(http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Note: C.L. Costantino and A.K. Witkiewicz contributed equally.
Requests for reprints: Jonathan R. Brody, Department of Surgery, Thomas
Jefferson University, 1015 Walnut Street, Curtis 611A, Philadelphia, PA 19107. Phone:
215-955-2693; E-mail: Jonathan.Brody@jefferson.edu.
I2009 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-0371

www.aacrjournals.org

Transfection of pancreatic cancer cell lines. HuR cDNA sequence
was cloned into the pcDNA 3.1.Zeo vector (Invitrogen) for stable
transfection of pancreatic cancer cell lines MiaPaca2, PL-5, and Hs766t
(15). Pooled cells remained under selection media containing Zeocin
(Invitrogen) for several months after transfection. Mia.HuR, PL5.HuR, and
Hs766t.HuR denote HuR overexpressing lines; Mia.EV, PL5.EV, and Hs766t

4567

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (11). June 1, 2009

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 1. Characterization of HuR-overexpressing pancreatic cancer cell lines. A, immunoblot analysis of HuR expression in lysates from MiaPaCa2 (Mia.HuR
and Mia.EV) and Hs766t (Hs766t. HuR and Hs766t) cells. Fast Green staining confirmed the equality of protein loading. B, immunofluorescence to detect HuR and
nuclei (DAPI ). C, Mia.HuR and Mia.EV cell proliferation rates, as determined by direct cell counts. D, cell survival was measured by PicoGreen after incubation of
cells for 5 to 7 d with the indicated compounds. Points, means from three measurements in a single experiment; bars, SE; each experiment is representative of at least
three individual experiments. E, Mia.HuR cells; n, Mia.EV cells.

denote empty vector or control lines. HuR and control siRNA sequences and
transfection conditions were as described (7).
Immunofluorescence. Cells were plated on LabTek II Chamber slides
(Fisher Scientific) and fixed in 3% paraformaldehyde (20 min, room
temperature). Cells were washed with PBS and permeabilized using 0.5%
Triton X-100/1% normal goat serum (Vector Laboratories) in PBS (15 min).
After washes in 1% goat serum/PBS, cells were incubated (1:50 dilution, 1 h,
room temperature) with mouse anti-HuR (Santa Cruz) or anti-dCK (Abnova)
primary antibodies. After washes in PBS, cells were incubated for 1 h with
goat anti-mouse secondary antibody (1:400; Alexa Fluor 647; Molecular
Probes). Nuclei were stained with 4¶,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) and
cells were evaluated under a Zeiss LSM-510 Confocal Laser Microscope.
Drug sensitivity assay. Mia.HuR, Mia.EV, Hs766t.HuR, Hs766t, and
PL5.HuR, PL5.EV cells were seeded (1,000 cells per well) in 96-well plates and
treated with Etoposide, 5-Fluorouracil, Cis-platin, Staurosporine, Nocodazole,
Colcemid, Ara-C (Sigma), and gemcitabine (Gemzar; Eli-Lilly) for 6 to 7 d.
After treatment, cells were washed with PBS and lysed with 100 AL of water/
well; cell viability was quantified by staining of double-stranded DNA with
Quant-iT PicoGreen (Invitrogen) and analyzed with a TECAN SpectraFluor.
Immunoblot. Whole-cell, cytoplasmic, and nuclear lysates were
prepared as described (7), and protein was size-fractionated by SDS-PAGE

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (11). June 1, 2009

(10% acrylamide). Membranes were blocked for 1 h in 5% Milk/TBS-T and
incubated overnight with monoclonal antibodies (Santa Cruz) recognizing
HuR, dCK, the cytoplasmic marker a-Tubulin, or the nuclear marker
hnRNP. Membranes were washed with TBS-T and incubated with secondary
antibodies; and the resulting signals were visualized by chemiluminescence
(Millipore). Total protein was visualized with Fast Green (USB).
Cell cycle analysis and apoptosis assay. Mia.EV and Mia.HuR cell
lines were either left untreated or treated with 0.03 Amol/L gemcitabine for
48 h. For cell cycle analysis, cells were then fixed in 100% ethanol, and
stained with a propidium iodide solution containing RNase A (Sigma
Aldrich). For apoptosis assays, cells were resuspended at 106 cells/mL and
incubated in Annexin V and Propidium Iodide, following the manufacturers’
protocol (FITC Annexin V; BD Pharmigen). Both assays were analyzed by
flow cytometry.
RNA-binding: biotin pulldown and RNP IP assays. MiaPaCa2
cells were treated with 4 Amol/L gemcitabine and collected 48 h later.
For biotin pulldown analysis (7), cytoplasmic extracts were isolated using
the NE-PER Nuclear and Cytoplasmic Extraction Reagents kit (Pierce
Biotechnology). Probes for biotin pull-down analysis were synthesized as
described (7) using the following PCR primers (sense and antisense,
respectively) containing the T7 RNA polymerase promoter sequence

4568

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

HuR Dictates Gemcitabine Efficacy
CCAAGCTTCTAATACGACTCACTATAGGGAGA (T7):(T7)GATCTTGCTGAAGACTACAGGC and TTATTAGCGTCTTTTCAATTCTACAAA for dCK
3¶UTR; (T7)CTCAACGACCACTTTGTCAAGC and CACAGGGTACTTTATTGATGGTACAT for glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH)
3¶UTR (see Supplementary Figure for depiction of UTR positions; ref. 16).
Biotinylated probes were synthesized using the MAXIscript T7 kit (Ambion)
and Biotinylated dCTP (Enzo Life Sciences).
For immunoprecipitation of endogenous RNA-protein complexes (RNP
IP) from cytoplasmic (450 Ag) extracts, reactions were carried out as
described (7), using protein A-Sepharose beads (Sigma) that were
precoated with 30 Ag of either mouse IgG1 (BD Biosciences), or antiHuR antibodies. After IP, the RNA in the IP materials was isolated and

reverse-transcribed. GAPDH and dCK transcripts were quantified by realtime PCR analysis using each specific primers: AGCAAGGCATTCCTCTTGAA and CTACAGGCAGCCAAATGGTT for dCK, TGCACCACCAACTGCTTAGC and CTCATGACCACAGTCCATGCC for GAPDH. The relative levels
of dCK product were first normalized to GAPDH product in all IP
samples, then fold enrichments in HuR IP were compared with IgG IP, as
described (7).
Case selection and immunohistochemistry. HuR immunostaining
was performed on 40 resected PDA specimens from the Thomas Jefferson
University pathology archives after Institutional Review Board approval. All
patients received gemcitabine, alone or in combination with Xeloda (two
patients), radiation therapy (eight patients) or both (two patients). The

Figure 2. Stable expression of HuR
renders cells hypersensitive to the
nucleoside analogues gemcitabine (GEM )
and Ara-C. A, survival of MiaPaCa2,
Hs766t, and PL5 cell lines was measured
by the PicoGreen assay after 5 to 7 d of
incubation with the indicated gemcitabine
doses. Graphs represent single
experiments (SE); each experiment is
representative of less than three individual
experiments. E, HuR-expressing cells;
n, control cells. B, crystal violet-stained
flasks of Mia.HuR and Mia.EV cultures
after gemcitabine treatment (0.1 Amol/L,
7 d). C, sensitivity of MiaPaCa2 cells
to Ara-C treatment was measured as
explained in A. D, fluorescence-activated
cell sorting analysis of cells treated with
gemcitabine (0.03 Amol/L) for 48 h,
depicting the percentages of cells in G1,
S, and G2-M compartments (left ).
Measurement of apoptotic fractions
(right ) in treated cultures.

www.aacrjournals.org

4569

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (11). June 1, 2009

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 3. HuR associates with dCK
mRNA and promotes dCK protein
expression in MiaPaCa2 cells. A, Western
blot analysis of HuR levels in whole-cell
and cytoplasmic lysates after treatment
of MiaPaCa2 cells with gemcitabine
(Gem ; 1 Amol/L) for the indicated times
(left ). Immunofluorescence analysis of HuR
levels and localization (red) in cells treated
with 4 Amol/L gemcitabine for 24 h; nuclei
were distinguished by staining with DAPI
(blue ; right ). B, biotin pulldown analysis of
HuR RNP complexes. Cytoplasmic
extracts were incubated with biotinylated
transcripts spanning the dCK or GAPDH
3¶UTRs. The association of HuR with
biotinylated RNAs was tested by Western
blot analysis. Positive control, HuR
cytoplasmic lysate. Negative controls,
‘‘probe only’’ lanes contain only biotinylated
RNAs that were not incubated with protein
lysates. Shown is a representative blot
(left ). HuR binding to dCK mRNA was
tested by RNP IP analysis (Materials and
Methods) in MiaPaCa2 cells treated with
gemcitabine for the times indicated;
gemcitabine mRNA levels in HuR and IgG
IP samples were first normalized to
GAPDH mRNA levels in the same IP
reactions, and plotted as fold enrichment in
dCK mRNA in HuR IP compared with IgG
IP. Columns, mean from three independent
experiments (right ); bars, SD. C, dCK
mRNA levels were measured in cells that
were left untransfected (left ) or were
transfected with either a control siRNA or
HuR siRNA(7) and tested 48 h later (right ).
D, Western blot analysis of HuR, dCK,
and a-Tubulin in cells expressing
normal or silenced HuR levels (left ).
Immunofluorescence analysis of dCK
levels (arrow ) and localization (red ) in cells
expressing normal or elevated HuR levels;
nuclei were visualized by staining with
DAPI (blue ; right ).

experienced pancreatic pathologist (A.K.W.) reviewed all cases in a blinded
fashion and classified the tumors as well-differentiated (n = 6), moderately
differentiated (n = 22), or poorly differentiated (n = 12). For each case,
representative sections were selected for immunohistochemical analysis of
HuR cytoplasmic and nuclear staining patterns, which were scored using
the following scale: 0 for no staining, 1 for weak and/or focal (<10% of the
cells) staining, 2 for moderate or strong staining (10–50% of the cells), and 3
for moderate or strong staining (>50% of the cells). Combined scores 0 and 1

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (11). June 1, 2009

represented low expression, whereas combined scores 2 and 3 represented
high expression.

Results and Discussion
HuR overexpression preferentially sensitized pancreatic
cancer cell lines to the nucleoside analogues gemcitabine
and Ara-C. Stable HuR overexpression in the indicated pancreatic

4570

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

HuR Dictates Gemcitabine Efficacy

cancer cell lines was confirmed by immunoblot and immunofluorescence analyses (Fig. 1A and B). Contrary to previous studies in
colon cancer cell lines (9), isogenic, transfected cell lines grew
roughly at the same rates (Fig. 1C). Treatment with the indicated
chemotherapeutic agents (but not gemcitabine) showed no
difference in sensitivity in HuR-overexpressing cells (Fig. 1D).
By contrast, cell lines overexpressing HuR were found to be
strikingly more sensitive to gemcitabine than were control lines, as
assessed both by PicoGreen measurement (Fig. 2A) and by staining
with crystal violet even when cells were treated with low
concentrations of gemcitabine (Fig. 2B). HuR-overexpressing cell
lines were similarly selectively more sensitive to Ara-C, another
anticancer agent that uses dCK (Fig. 2C). After gemcitabine
treatment, HuR-overexpressing cells showed selective enrichment
in the S phase of the cell division cycle and increased apoptosis
(Fig. 2D) compared with the control cells.
HuR localization and association with dCK mRNA upon
gemcitabine treatment. Gemcitabine treatment did not alter
whole-cell HuR levels in parental MiaPaCa2 cells, but significantly
increased the cytoplasmic HuR levels, as determined by immunoblot and immunofluorescence analyses (Fig. 3A). Given that the
dCK 3¶UTR region contained 8 putative hits of an HuR recognition
motif (17), we tested if HuR associates with dCK mRNA using 2
different RNA-binding assays. First, MiaPaCa2 cytoplasmic extracts
were incubated with equimolar amounts of biotinylated transcripts spanning the dCK 3¶UTR and the GAPDH 3¶UTR (a control
RNA, not a target of HuR); the resulting complexes were analyzed
by HuR immunoblot. As shown in Fig. 3B (left), HuR bound
the dCK 3¶UTR much more strongly than the GAPDH 3¶UTR.
Second, we tested the association of HuR with the endogenous
dCK mRNA by using a ribonucleoprotein immunoprecipitation
(RNP IP) assay. As shown, although gemcitabine did not alter
overall dCK protein or mRNA levels (Fig. 3A and C), it significantly increased the association of HuR with dCK mRNA (Fig. 3B,
right).
Inhibition of HuR expression using small interfering (si)RNA (7)
did not alter dCK mRNA levels (Fig. 3C, right) but decreased dCK
protein levels (Fig. 3D, left) regardless of gemcitabine treatment.
Conversely, HuR-overexpressing cells displayed higher dCK signals
(Fig. 3D, right). Together, these data show for the first time that (a)
gemcitabine exposure to cancer cells increases cytoplasmic HuR
levels (Fig. 3A), (b) HuR associates with dCK mRNA (Fig. 3B), and
(c) HuR regulates dCK protein levels (Fig. 3D).
HuR localization and expression in PDA specimens. We
detected primarily weak to moderate nuclear HuR expression in
normal pancreatic ductal and acinar cells (Fig. 4A). Strong nuclear
expression of HuR was found in well-differentiated, moderately,
and poorly differentiated PDAs. Cytoplasmic HuR accumulation
was associated with poorly differentiated PDAs (data not shown;
Fig. 4B). Figure 4C shows the Kaplan-Meier overall survival curves
of patients receiving gemcitabine, stratified by their HuR status.
The median survival time for patients on gemcitabine was 619
days, with 21 deaths. Thirty-two of 40 patients received
gemcitabine and therefore were included in this analysis. A
univariate Cox regression model gives a hazard ratio of low to
high HuR of 4.48, with a 95% confidence interval of (1.49–13.5).
Adjusting for age, sex, Xeloda use, and radiation therapy in this
patient group gives an adjusted hazard ratio of 7.34 (P = 0.0022)
with a 95% confidence interval of (2.05–26.22). These data indicate
a >7-fold increased risk of mortality in patients with low
cytoplasmic HuR levels (compared with high cytoplasmic HuR

www.aacrjournals.org

Figure 4. HuR cytoplasmic expression correlates with gemcitabine response in
pancreatic cancer patients. A, primarily nuclear staining of HuR in normal
pancreas is shown (arrows ; 200). B, high cytoplasmic expression in PDA
specimen is shown (arrows ; 200). C, Kaplan-Meier plot of overall survival
among patients receiving gemcitabine (n = 32), stratified by HuR levels. The
curves are significantly different (P = 0.0036 by log-rank).

levels) among patients receiving gemcitabine, after adjusting for
variables as mentioned above.
Perspective. As elevated cytoplasmic HuR has been widely
correlated with advanced malignancy, the finding that high
cytoplasmic HuR levels were associated with an increased
therapeutic efficacy of gemcitabine in pancreatic cancer was
unexpected. Our results that HuR regulates dCK protein
concentration and that cytoplasmic HuR levels predict gemcitabine response in our patient cohort lead us to hypothesize

4571

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (11). June 1, 2009

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

that HuR could be a key molecule involved in gemcitabine
efficacy in cancer. It is intriguing to postulate that part of the
survival repertoire of HuR may be to increase dCK levels to
process deoxyribonucleosides for survival; however, in the
presence of nucleoside analogues (such as gemcitabine) HuR’s
augmentation of dCK may be deleterious. Further studies are
warranted to investigate if HuR dictates gemcitabine effectiveness
by regulating additional target mRNAs, and to assess if HuR is a
suitable marker for gemcitabine response in larger cancer patient
cohorts for which gemcitabine therapy is used.

References
1. Jemal A, Siegel R, Ward E, et al. Cancer statistics, 2008.
CA Cancer J Clin 2008;58:71–96.
2. Burris HA, III, Moore MJ, Andersen J, et al. Improvements in survival and clinical benefit with gemcitabine
as first-line therapy for patients with advanced
pancreas cancer: a randomized trial. J Clin Oncol
1997;15:2403–13.
3. Li ZR, Campbell J, Rustum YM. Effect of 3-deazauridine on the metabolism, toxicity, and antitumor activity
of azacitidine in mice bearing L1210 leukemia sensitive
and resistant to cytarabine. Cancer Treat Rep 1983;67:
547–54.
4. Sebastiani V, Ricci F, Rubio-Viqueira B, et al.
Immunohistochemical and genetic evaluation of deoxycytidine kinase in pancreatic cancer: relationship to
molecular mechanisms of gemcitabine resistance and
survival. Clin Cancer Res 2006;12:2492–7.
5. Hinman MN, Lou H. Diverse molecular functions of
Hu proteins. Cell Mol Life Sci 2008;65:3168–81.
6. Hostetter C, Licata LA, Witkiewicz A, et al. Cytoplasmic accumulation of the RNA binding protein HuR is

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (11). June 1, 2009

Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest
No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

Acknowledgments
Received 2/2/09; accepted 4/6/09; posted online 6/1/09.
Grant support: National Institute on Aging-Intramural Research Program, NIH
(Y. Kuwano and M. Gorospe).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.

central to tamoxifen resistance in estrogen receptor
positive breast cancer cells. Cancer Biol Ther 2008;7:
1496–506.
7. Kuwano Y, Kim HH, Abdelmohsen K, et al. MKP-1
mRNA stabilization and translational control by RNAbinding proteins HuR and NF90. Mol Cell Biol 2008;28:
4562–75.
8. Lopez de Silanes I, Lal A, Gorospe M. HuR: posttranscriptional paths to malignancy. RNA Biol 2005;2:
11–3.
9. Lopez de Silanes I, Fan J, Yang X, et al. Role of the
RNA-binding protein HuR in colon carcinogenesis.
Oncogene 2003;22:7146–54.
10. Lopez de Silanes I, Fan J, Galban CJ, Spencer RG,
Becker KG, Gorospe M. Global analysis of HuRregulated gene expression in colon cancer systems of
reducing complexity. Gene Expr 2004;12:49–59.
11. Yoo PS, Sullivan CA, Kiang S, et al. Tissue microarray
analysis of 560 patients with colorectal adenocarcinoma: high expression of HuR. Ann Surg Oncol 2008.
12. Heinonen M, Fagerholm R, Aaltonen K, et al.
Prognostic role of HuR in hereditary breast cancer. Clin
Cancer Res 2007;13:6959–63.

4572

13. Denkert C, Weichert W, Winzer KJ, et al. Expression
of the ELAV-like protein HuR is associated with higher
tumor grade and increased cyclooxygenase-2 expression
in human breast carcinoma. Clin Cancer Res 2004;10:
5580–6.
14. Denkert C, Weichert W, Pest S. Overexpression of the
embryonic-lethal abnormal vision-like protein HuR in
ovarian carcinoma is a prognostic factor and is
associated with increased cyclooxygenase 2 expression.
Cancer Res 2004;64:189–95.
15. Brody JR, Witkiewicz A, Williams TK, et al. Reduction
of pp32 expression in poorly differentiated pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinomas and intraductal papillary
mucinous neoplasms with moderate dysplasia. Mod
Pathol 2007;20:1238–44.
16. Casolaro V, Fang X, Tancowny B, et al. Posttranscriptional regulation of IL-13 in T cells: role of the RNAbinding protein HuR. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2008;121:
853–9 e4.
17. Lopez de Silanes I, Zhan M, Lal A, Yang X, Gorospe
M. Identification of a target RNA motif for RNAbinding protein HuR. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2004;
101:2987–92.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

The Role of HuR in Gemcitabine Efficacy in Pancreatic
Cancer: HuR Up-regulates the Expression of the
Gemcitabine Metabolizing Enzyme Deoxycytidine Kinase
Christina L. Costantino, Agnieszka K. Witkiewicz, Yuki Kuwano, et al.
Cancer Res 2009;69:4567-4572.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/69/11/4567
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2009/06/03/69.11.4567.DC1

This article cites 16 articles, 7 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/69/11/4567.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 14 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/69/11/4567.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

