Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 23

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Citrus limon-derived nanovesicles inhibit cancer cell proliferation
and suppress CML xenograft growth by inducing TRAIL-mediated
cell death
Stefania Raimondo1, Flores Naselli1, Simona Fontana1, Francesca Monteleone1,
Alessia Lo Dico1, Laura Saieva1, Giovanni Zito2, Anna Flugy1, Mauro Manno3, Maria
Antonietta Di Bella1, Giacomo De Leo1, Riccardo Alessandro1
1

Dipartimento di Biopatologia e Biotecnologie Mediche, Università degli Studi di Palermo, sezione di Biologia e Genetica,
Palermo, Italy

2

 aboratorio di Ingegneria Tissutale – Piattaforme Innovative per l’Ingegneria Tissutale (PON01–00829), Istituto Ortopedico
L
Rizzoli, Palermo, Italy

3

Istituto di Biofisica, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Palermo, Italy

Correspondence to:
Riccardo Alessandro, e-mail: riccardo.alessandro@unipa.it
Keywords: cancer, exosome-like nanovesicles, Citrus limon L., TRAIL-mediated cell death
Received: April 03, 2015     Accepted: May 08, 2015     Published: May 18, 2015

ABSTRACT
Nanosized vesicles are considered key players in cell to cell communication, thus
influencing physiological and pathological processes, including cancer. Nanovesicles
have also been found in edible-plants and have shown therapeutic activity in
inflammatory bowel diseases; however information on their role in affecting cancer
progression is missing.
Our study identify for the first time a fraction of vesicles from lemon juice (Citrus
limon L.), obtained as a result of different ultracentrifugation, with density ranging
from 1,15 to 1,19 g/ml and specific proteomic profile. By using an in vitro approach,
we show that isolated nanovesicles inhibit cancer cell proliferation in different
tumor cell lines, by activating a TRAIL- mediated apoptotic cell death. Furthermore,
we demonstrate that lemon nanovesicles suppress CML tumor growth in vivo by
specifically reaching tumor site and by activating TRAIL-mediated apoptotic cell
processes. Overall, this study suggests the possible use of plant-edible nanovesicles
as a feasible approach in cancer treatment.

of evidences have demonstrated that exosomes exert
an important role in cell-to-cell communication and
influence both physiological and pathological processes,
such as cancer and neurodegenerative disorders [1–4].
Additionally, molecular constituents in exosomes have
been found to be associated with certain diseases and
treatment responses, indicating that they may also serve
as a diagnostic tool [5].
Previous studies suggested that nanosized particles
from plant cells may be exosome-like [6]. Zhang and
colleagues have reported that nanoparticles derived
from edible plants (grape, grapefruit, ginger and carrots)
show anti-inflammatory properties in inflammatory
bowel diseases [7, 8]. Although it has been shown that
compounds and/or aqueous extracts from different plant
varieties exert anti-proliferative and anticancer activity

INTRODUCTION
Physiological cell to cell communication occurs in
order to maintain tissue homeostasis. Among the different
mechanisms that have been described in the past years,
extracellular vesicle-mediated cell interaction has attracted
recently the interest of researchers because of the ability
of these vesicles to shuttle a variety of molecules from
the producing cell to target cells [1]. Extracellular vesicles
(EVs) are membranous vesicles of different size (30–1000
nm), released by a variety of cell types. Among the EVs
different types, exosomes are nanometer sized vesicles
(30–100 nm) present in biological fluids of different
organisms. They carry various molecular constituents of
the producing cell, including proteins, lipids, mRNAs,
and microRNAs (miRNAs) [1]. An increasing number
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

19514

Oncotarget

[9–12], the specific role of plant-derived nanovesicles to
influence cancer progression is still unknown.
The tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-related apoptosisinducing ligand- receptor (TRAIL-R) family has emerged
as a key mediator of cell fate and survival, by initiating
the extrinsic apoptotic pathway [13]. Importantly, unlike
many chemotherapeutic drugs, TRAIL has the ability to
induce apoptosis in transformed but not in normal cells,
thus being considered of great therapeutic potential [14,
15]. In addition, most cancer cells can be sensitized for
TRAIL-induced apoptosis [16].
Here, we show that the juice of Citrus Limon L. (family
Rutaceae) contains nanoparticles, with morphological,
dimensional and proteomic profile that allowed us to consider
them as exosome-like nanovesicles. We found that isolated
nanovesicles have in vitro antineoplastic activity on a panel of
different solid and hematological cancers cell lines. Strikingly,
we demonstrated that lemon-derived nanovesicles have
also an effect in vivo, by suppressing the growth of a CML
xenograft model. Moreover, we showed that lemon- derived
nanoparticles exert their anticancer activity, by stimulating a
TRAIL-mediated apoptotic mechanism.
All together, these findings highlight an alternative
approach for cancer treatment, focused on using
nanoparticles from natural substances, thus suggesting that
the combination of natural agents and chemotherapy could
be in the next future a feasible approach to eradicate cancer.

characterization and hindering a comprehensive and
reliable protein identification. We therefore performed our
search against a restricted protein database, namely Citrus
database, which comprises 39096 entries (July 2014).
By merging the results of GeLC-MS/MS and LC-MS/
MS analyses, we confidently identified 580 proteins with
a FDR of less than 1%. However, although confidently
identified, many proteins were still uncharacterized from
a functional point of view. In order to attribute a molecular
function also to the “uncharacterized proteins”, we looked
for all of identified proteins in KEGG ORTHOLOGY
(KO) database that collects functionally identical genes
(orthologs). The list of total proteins identified in Citrus
nanoparticles is provided in Supplementary Table S1.
In this table, for each identified protein we reported the
results obtained by searching in both Citrus and KO
databases, and numbers and sequences of corresponding
peptides used for the identification. Finally, by comparing
the Citrus-derived nanovesicles protein dataset with
the exosome protein one reported in ExoCarta database
(4563 entries), we found that 56.7% of proteins of our
dataset overlapped with those previously identified as
exosome proteins in mammalian tissues and cell types and
belonging to functional groups that characterize exosomes
regardless of their cellular origin (Figure 1C) [17].

Citrus limon L.-derived nanovesicles are
internalized and reduce the viability of
cancer cells

RESULTS

In order to determine if Citrus nanovesicles are
internalized by human cancer cells, nanovesicles were
labeled with the lipophilic dye PKH26. The human
lung carcinoma cell line A549 and the chronic myeloid
leukemia cell line LAMA84 cells treated at 37°C with
20 μg/ml of nanovesicles for 3 or 6 h internalized lemon
nanovesicles in a time dependent manner as shown in
Figure 1D (left and right panel); the uptake was impaired
after incubation at 4°C (Supplementary Figure 1A), thus
confirming that nanovesicles uptake was mediated by a
biologically active process.
In order to test the ability of Citrus-derived
nanovesicles to influence the growth of tumor cells,
A549, SW480 (human colorectal adenocarcinoma cell
line) and LAMA84 cells were treated for 24, 48 or 72 h
with 5 or 20 μg/ml of nanovesicles. The MTT viability
assay showed that lemon nanovesicles inhibited tumor cell
viability in a dose and time dependent manner compared
with untreated cells (Figure 2A upper panel). The results
herein showed a 50% growth reduction of the three cell
lines with 20 μg/ml of nanovesicles at 48 h time point.
In order to assess the specificity of lemon nanovesicles
against tumor cell lines, non-cancer cell lines HS5 (Human
bone marrow stromal cells), HUVEC (Human Umbilical
Vein Endothelial Cells) and PBMC (Human peripheral
blood mononuclear cells) were treated according to the

Isolation and characterization of
Citrus limon L.-derived nanovesicles
Citrus limon L. nanovesicles were isolated
from the fruit juice using ultracentrifugation method
and purification on a 30% sucrose gradient. Electron
microscope analysis showed the integrity and size of
isolated vesicles, ranged between 50–70 nm (Figure 1A).
Nanovesicle size distribution was also confirmed by
dynamic light scattering (DLS) experiments as shown
in Figure 1B. Taken together, our data showed that
nanovesicles identified in Citrus limon are exosome-like,
based on their morphology and size.

Proteome profiling of Citrus limon juice L.-derived
nanovesicles
Citrus limon is a nonmodel plant species and due to
the lack of complete genomic sequences and proteomic
data, the availability of protein sequences in commonly
employed databases is limited. Thus, to obtain maximum
proteome coverage, it is usually suggested to perform
a homology search by employing multiple databases.
However, this strategy may determine a large number
of identifications that generally are highly redundant
and need to be checked, greatly affecting proteomic
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

19515

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Nanovesicles characterization and uptake by target cells. A. Citrus nanovesicles were collected after 30% sucrose

gradient ultracentrifugation and analyzed at transmission electron microscope. The scale bar indicates 200 nm. B. Nanovesicles size
distribution was determined by DLS analysis. C. The Venn diagram shows a comparison between the Citrus nanovesicle data set and protein
ExoCarta data set. The overlapping area contains about 60% of proteins identified in Citrus nanovesicles. Most of these common proteins
belong to functional groups highly associated with exosomes. D. Analysis at confocal microscopy of A549 (left panel) or LAMA84 cells
(right panel) treated, for 3 and 6 hours, with 20 μg/ml of Citrus nanovesicles, compared with untreated cells (Ctrl). Cells were stained with
Actin Green 488 (green), nuclear counterstaining was performed using Hoechst (blue), nanovesicles were labeled with PKH26 (red).

same experimental conditions. As shown in the lower
panel of Figure 2A, citrus nanovesicles did not affect the
growth of normal cells. In addition, we found that the
effects observed on cancer cell proliferation depended on
nanovesicles integrity and stability, as their destruction, by
boiling or sonication leads to the disappearance of the antiproliferative effects (Supplementary Figure 1B).
To better evaluate the ability of Citrus nanovesicles
to inhibit in vitro tumor growth, we performed a colony
formation assay in methylcellulose. As shown in Figure 2B,
A549, SW480 and LAMA84 cells treated with different
concentration of nanovesicles formed a lower number of
colonies when compared to untreated control cells.
The results reported herein showed that Citrus
nanovesicles were active against the tumor cell lines
A549, SW480 and LAMA84, while they did not affect
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

the proliferation of normal cells, thus confirming the
specificity of their effect towards cancer cells.

Citrus nanovesicles activate the expression of
pro-apoptotic molecules
To evaluate the mechanism by which Citrus
nanovesicles were able to suppress tumor growth, we
tested the expression of different molecules involved in
the apoptotic pathway. As shown in Figure 3A, A549,
SW480 and LAMA84 cells treated for 24 or 48 hours
with lemon nanovesicles showed an increased expression
of the pro-apoptotic genes, Bad and Bax, and a reduction
of the anti-apoptotic genes Survivin and Bcl-xl, in
particular after 48 h of treatment. The increase of BAX
protein expression (4.5-fold increase in A549, 1.65-fold in
19516

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Citrus nanovesicles inhibit the growth of tumor cell lines. A. Cell growth was measured by MTT assay after 24, 48,

72 h of treatment with 5 or 20 μg/ml of nanovesicles. The values were plotted as absorbance. Each point represents the mean ± SD of
three independent experiments. B. Cancer cell survival was assessed by colony formation assay in methylcellulose. Cells were plated in
methylcellulose in presence or not of 5 and 20 μg/ml of Citrus nanovesicles. The values were plotted as fold change compared to control
cells (untreated cells). Each point in the histogram represents the mean ± SD of three independent experiments. Asterisks indicate statistically
significant values in comparison to control (Ctrl) (*p ≤ 0.05; **p ≤ 0.01; ***p ≤ 0.001). Pictures are representative of observed colonies.

SW480, 3.6-fold in LAMA84) and the decrease of BCLxL (0.7-fold decrease in A549, 0.88-fold in SW480, 0.82fold in LAMA84), were also confirmed by western blot
analysis (Figure 3B).

upper panel) and Dr5 (Figure 4A, lower panel) mRNA
levels, with a significant increase after 48 h. As expected,
no changes in Trail mRNA expression levels in normal
cell line HS5 treated with nanovesicles (Supplementary
Figure 1C) were observed. The increased release of
TRAIL protein was also confirmed by ELISA assays
as shown in Figure 4B. To note, the increase of TRAIL
protein level was higher in the CML cell line, LAMA84.
To further demonstrate that the observed
nanovesicles-induced cell death was activated through
the TRAIL/DR5 pathway, we used human TRAIL
neutralizing antibodies. As shown in Figure 4C the
co-treatment of cancer cells with Citrus juice-derived
nanovesicles and TRAIL neutralizing antibody
significantly reverted the effects of nanovesicles on
tumor cell death. To further investigate if the decrease
in cell growth observed after nanovesicles treatment was
due to the activation of TRAIL-stimulated apoptotic cell
death, Annexin V–FITC fluorescence was measured by
flow cytometry on cancer cell lines treated for 48 h with

Citrus nanovesicles induce TRAIL-mediated
cell death
Several studies showed that many natural products
exhibited antineoplastic activities related to tumor
necrosis factor (TNF)-related apoptosis-inducing ligand
(TRAIL) signaling. TRAIL activation has been shown
to induce apoptosis in tumor cells while has minimal
toxicity against normal tissues [18]. Therefore, to
further explore the apoptotic mechanism induced by
Citrus nanovesicles, we measured the expression of
Trail and its receptor Dr5 that tightly control apoptotic
processes.
We found that nanovesicles treatment of cancer
cell lines induced an upregulation of Trail (Figure 4A,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

19517

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Citrus nanovesicles affect the balance between pro- and anti-apoptotic molecules. A. Real-time PCR analysis

was performed on A549, SW480 and LAMA84 cell lines treated for 24 or 48 hours with 5 or 20 μg/ml of nanovesicles to evaluate mRNA
levels of the pro-apoptotic and anti-apoptotic genes. The values were plotted as fold change compared to control (untreated cells). Each
point represents the mean ± SD of three independent experiments. Asterisks indicate statistically significant values in comparison to control
(Ctrl) (*p ≤ 0.05; **p ≤ 0.01; ***p ≤ 0.001). B. Western blot analysis was performed on cells treated for 48 h with 20 μg/ml of Citrus
nanovesicles. Protein levels of the pro-apoptotic (BAX) and anti-apoptotic (BCL-xL) were evaluated. Blots were stripped and subsequently
re-probed with an antibody against β-actin to ensure equal loading. Histograms represent densitometry analysis of protein levels in treated
cells (Nanoves) versus untreated cells (Ctrl). Each point represents the mean ± SD of three independent experiments.

20 μg/ml of lemon nanovesicles in presence or absence
of TRAIL neutralizing antibodies. Figure 4D showed
an increase of apoptotic cell death in all the cell lines
treated with nanovesicles (up to 15% in A549, 19% in
SW480, 24% in LAMA84), while blocking TRAIL led
to a reversion of these effects. Overall our data confirmed
that lemon-derived nanovesicles stimulated cancer cell
death by activating TRAIL-mediated apoptosis.

model. LAMA84 cells were inoculated subcutaneously in
NOD/SCID mice; one week post cell injection, mice were
treated locally (intra tumor, IT) or intraperitoneally (IP)
three times a week with vehicle (PBS) or lemon- derived
nanovesicles. At the end of treatment regime, mice were
sacrificed and the tumors removed. Strikingly, in Figure 5A
we showed that tumor growth was reduced in mice treated
with Citrus nanovesicles, both locally and intraperitoneally
(left panel), leading to the formation of smaller tumors
compared with control mice (right panel). There are
no statistically significant differences between the two
different groups of mice treated with nanovesicles.
In order to confirm our in vitro data, we tested whether
in vivo tumor size reduction was stimulated by TRAIL

Citrus nanovesicles reduce the growth
of CML xenografts
The ability of Citrus nanovesicles to reduce tumor
growth was also tested in an in vivo tumor xenograft
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

19518

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Citrus nanovesicles induce TRAIL-mediated cell death. A. Real-time PCR analysis was performed on A549, SW480 and

LAMA84 cell lines treated for 24 or 48 hours with 5 or 20 μg/ml of Citrus nanovesicles to evaluate mRNA levels of Trail and Dr5. The values
were plotted as fold change compared to control (untreated cells). Each point represents the mean ± SD of three independent experiments.
B. ELISA was performed to determine TRAIL concentration in the conditioned medium of A549, SW480 and LAMA84 cell lines treated for
24 or 48 hours with 5 or 20 μg/ml of Citrus nanovesicles. The values are expressed in ng/ml. Each point represents the mean ± SD of three
independent experiments. Asterisks indicate statistically significant values in comparison to control (Ctrl). C. Cell growth was measured by MTT
assay after 48 h of treatment with 20 μg/ml of nanovesicles in presence or not of 5 or 20 ng/ml of neutralizing anti TRAIL antibodies. The values
were plotted as % of growth vs control (untreated cells). Each point represents the mean ± SD of three independent experiments. D. Cell death
was detected by Annexin V staining after 48 h of treatment with 20 μg/ml of Citrus nanovesicles in presence or not of 20 ng/ml of neutralizing
anti TRAIL antibodies. Figure shows representative overlay histogram from untreated cells (solid line), cells treated with nanovesicles (dashed
line) or with nanovesicles and neutralizing anti TRAIL antibodies (dotted line). Histogram reported % of Annexin V positive cells in samples
treated compared to untreated (Ctrl). Asterisks indicate statistically significant differences (*p ≤ 0.05; **p ≤ 0.01; ***p ≤ 0.001).

activation. Real-time PCR analysis of the mRNAs isolated
from in vivo xenograft tumors showed an increase of Trail
and Dr5 mRNA. In addition, we found that nanovesicle
administration led to an increase of the pro-apoptotic
gene Bax in nanovesicle-treated mice concomitantly to a
decrease of the anti-apoptotic genes Survivin and Bcl-xl
(Figure 5B); to note, the differences in the expression of
Trail and its receptor were strongest in xenografts from mice
treated locally. Furthermore, our results were confirmed
by immunofluorescence analysis of TRAIL; we found an
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

increased number of TRAIL positive cells in the tumors of
mice treated locally or intraperitoneally with nanovesicles
when compared with control mice (Figure 5C).
To further investigate other mechanisms that might
be involved in nanovesicle-dependent tumor inhibition, we
performed a multiplex cytokine analysis and we found that
the administration of nanovesicles led to the decrease of
the pro-angiogenic factors, such as VEGF-A, IL6 and IL8
in the serum of treated-mice compared with untreated ones
(Figure 5D, upper panel). To note, the reduction of these
19519

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Citrus nanovesicles inhibit in vivo tumor growth. A. LAMA84 cells were injected subcutaneously in NOD/SCID

mice as described. After palpable tumor formation, mice were treated as described in Materials and Methods. Comparison of the median
tumor weight was used as an index of the antitumor efficacy of Citrus nanovesicles. Asterisks indicate statistically significant values in
comparison to control (Ctrl) (***p ≤ 0.001) B. mRNA levels of pro- , anti-apoptotic genes, Trail and Dr5 were evaluated in samples from
mice xenografts. The values were plotted as fold change compared to xenograft control. Each point represents the mean ± SD for three
independent experiments. Asterisks indicate statistically significant values in comparison to control (Ctrl) (**p ≤ 0.01; ***p ≤ 0.001).
C. Representative images of confocal fluorescence microscopy show TRAIL (green) immunolabeling in paraffin sections from xenografts.
Nuclear counterstaining was performed using Hoescht (blue). Arrows indicate TRAIL positive cells. D. Multiplex cytokine evaluation of
VEGF-A, IL6 and IL8 in the serum of mice treated or not with nanovesicles. The values are expressed in pg/ml (upper panel). mRNA levels
of Vegf-A and Vegf-A receptor were evaluated in samples from mice xenografts (lower panel). The values were plotted as fold change
compared to control. Each point represents the mean ± SD for three independent experiments. Asterisks indicate statistically significant
values in comparison to control (Ctrl) (*p ≤ 0.05; **p ≤ 0.01; ***p ≤ 0.001).

In vivo distribution of Citrus nanovesicles

factors is more significant in locally treated mice (IT). The
downregulation of VEGF-A, together with the decrease
of its receptor, was also validated by Real time PCR in
the xenograft tumors, as shown in Figure 5D, lower
panel. Interestingly, we found a comparable decrease
of the same pro-angiogenic factors in the conditioned
medium of LAMA84 cell line treated with nanovesicles
(Supplementary Figure 2).
All together, these data suggested that Citrus limon
nanovesicles are able to reduce in vivo tumor growth
by TRAIL-mediated apoptosis and by inhibition of the
secretion of cytokines involved in angiogenesis.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

In order to test Citrus nanovesicle in vivo
distribution, nanoparticles were labeled with the
lipophilic fluorescent tracer DiR (1, 10-dioctadecyl-3, 3,
30, 30-tetramethylindotricarbocyanine). As reported in
Figure 6A, Nanovesicles- DiR, ranging from 5 to 50 μg
of vesicles, showed a fluorescence signal that correlated
linearly with nanovesicles concentration.
To assess if nanovesicles inhibited tumor growth
by reaching tumor site, NOD/SCID mice were treated
intraperitoneally with Citrus nanovesicles labeled with the
19520

Oncotarget

Figure 6: In vivo Citrus nanovesicles biodistribution. A. Representative in vitro fluorescence images of DiR-labeled Citrus

nanovesicles dilutions from 50 to 5 μg of nanovesicles in 150 μl of PBS; the quantification of fluorescence signal was calculated in the entire
area of each well through the use of ROIs. Data are expressed as average radiance efficiency ([p/s/cm2/steradian]/[μW/cm2]). B. NOD/
SCID mice bearing CML xenograft tumors in the right flank were injected intraperitoneally with PBS, Free-DiR, 50 μg Nanovesicles-DiR
in a volume of 150 μl PBS. Mice were imaged at 15 min, 1 h and 24 h post injection. A scale of the radiance efficiency is presented to the
right of each live mouse image. C. Organs and tumors were excised and imaged after 24 h. A scale of the radiance efficiency is presented
to the right. Histogram represents ex vivo quantification of tumor fluorescence.

lipophilic fluorescent tracer DiR, with Free-DiR, or with
PBS, one week after subcutaneously injection of CML cells.
Mice were imaged using an IVIS Optical Imaging System
at 15 minutes, 1 and 24 h post injection. At the 24-hour time
point, mice were sacrificed and organs excised. As shown in
Figure 6B and Supplementary Figure 3A, labeled nanovesicles
(Nanovesicles-DiR) quickly reached tumor tissue and
accumulated starting at 15 minutes, 1 h and up to 24 hour time
point, while the Free-DiR never reached the tumor site.
Analysis of organs excised 24h post injection
showed that both Free-DiR and Nanovesicles-Dir are
significantly taken up by liver, spleen and partially by
kidneys (Figure 6C and Supplementary Figure 3B). A
similar distribution of both Free-DiR and NanovesiclesDir were observed in organs excised from healthy mice
(Supplementary Figure 3C). Analysis of tumors (from
mice injected with Free-DiR or with Nanovesicles-DiR)
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

indicates that nanovesicles are internalized by tumors and
remain in the tumor mass, while no signal accumulation
was observed in the tumors from mice treated with the
probe alone (Free-DiR) (Figure 6C).
Taken together, these results clearly suggest the
specificity of nanovesicles to reach tumor sites in vivo.

DISCUSSION
Currently, many natural compounds emerged as
alternative strategies for cancer prevention and therapy
[19]. Natural compounds are used in monotherapy or in
association with chemotherapeutic drugs, thus allowing the
use of lower dosage of chemotherapeutic agent in order to
overcome drug resistance and toxicity on normal tissues.
Numerous data in literature showed that Citrus fruit,
commonly used in traditional medicine in China and other
19521

Oncotarget

countries, has an anti-proliferative effect in many types
of cancers [20, 21]; however, it is still unknown how this
occurs and through which molecular mechanisms.
Evidences support the occurrence of multivesicular
bodies-mediated secretion of exosome-like vesicles
in plants [6], but the understanding of their functional
role in cross-kingdom interaction requires further
exploration. Zhang and colleagues have reported that
grape nanoparticles are taken up by mouse intestinal
macrophages, thus inducing the expression of anti-oxidant
genes and suppressing the production of pro-inflammatory
cytokines [7]. However, the role of plant-nanovesicles to
influence cancer progression has never been described.
Our findings showed that we were able to isolate
a homogeneous population of nanovesicles from Citrus
limon-juice, with dimension, morphology and protein
contents attributable to exosome-like nanoparticles
[17]. Furthermore, we showed that these nanovesicles
are stable and with a functional role in cross-kingdom
communication. In particular, for the first time, we
showed that they inhibit cancer cell growth without
affecting normal cells. The mechanism of action of many
anticancer compounds is based on their ability to induce
apoptosis. Many natural products exert their apoptotic
effects by inducing TRAIL-mediated cell death [22, 23].
It has been largely described that TRAIL selectively
induces apoptosis of cancer cells without affecting normal
cells [16, 24, 25]. Furthermore, it has been described that
many types of tumor are TRAIL-resistant due to the low
expression levels of TRAIL receptors [26]. Therefore, the
development of agents that can sensitize cells to TRAILmediated cell death are needed. Here we showed that
the treatment of lung, colon and leukemia cancer cells
with Citrus nanovesicles affects pro-and anti-apoptotic
pathways, leading to the increase in the mRNA levels of
the pro-apoptotic molecules Bad and Bax, together with
the decrease of pro-survival molecules, such as Survivin
and Bcl-xl. Furthermore, we observed an increased
expression of TRAIL-receptor, Dr5, in cancer cell lines
treated with nanovesicles, together with the increase and
release of TRAIL, thus hypothesizing an autocrine loop
induced by lemon vesicles that leads to cancer cell death.
To validate our in vitro findings showing the proapoptotic effects of nanovesicles on tumor cell lines,
we used an in vivo xenograft model of chronic myeloid
leukemia (CML). Data reported here showed that the
administration of Citrus nanovesicles strongly suppressed
tumor growth and we confirmed, in vivo, that this effect was
due not only to TRAIL-mediated apoptosis but also to the
inhibition of angiogenic processes, as shown by the reduced
levels of pro-angiogenic cytokines VEGF-A, IL6 and IL8.
Interestingly, our data are consistent with our previous
results demonstrating the ability of exosomes-induced
IL8 to stimulate CML cell proliferation and survival [27].
Moreover, through in vivo optical imaging analysis we
proved that nanovesicles exert these effects by reaching
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

tumor site. Overall, our data showed that the pro-apoptotic
effects of Citrus limon may be attributed to structural
components and in particular to exosomes-like nanovesicles.
Furthermore, the possible mechanism by which nanovesicles
exert the in vitro and in vivo antineoplastic activity involves
TRAIL-mediated pathways as well as angiogenic inhibition.
In summary, we have identified for the first time
nanovesicles from Citrus limon juice with antineoplastic
potential. Our findings open to the possibility to develop
new anticancer strategies based on the use of plant-edible
nanovesicles.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Ethics statement
All animal experiments were conducted in full
compliance with University of Palermo and Italian
Legislation for Animal Care. The Dipartimento di
Biopatologia e Biotecnologie Mediche (DiBiMed) Review
Board approved this study.

Cell culture and reagents
The human chronic myeloid leukemia cell line,
LAMA84, was obtained by DSMZ (Braunschweig,
Germany). The human colorectal adenocarcinoma cell
line, SW480, the human lung carcinoma cell line, A549,
and the human bone marrow-derived stromal cell line,
HS5, were obtained by ATCC (Manassas, VA, USA).
LAMA84, SW480 and A549 cell lines were cultured in
RPMI 1640 medium (Euroclone, UK), HS5 (Human bone
marrow stromal cells) cell line was cultured in DMEM
high glucose (Euroclone, UK). Human Umbilical Vein
Endothelial Cells (HUVEC) were obtained from Lonza
and grown in Endothelial Growth Medium (EGM,
Clonetics, Verviers, Belgium). Human peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMC) were isolated using Ficoll
Paque (GE Helthcare Bio Science, Uppsala, Sweden).
Anti-TRAIL neutralizing antibody was from AbCam
(Cambridge, UK). All other reagents were purchased
from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA), if not cited
otherwise.

Nanovesicles preparation
Nanovesicles were isolated from Citrus limon L.
juice. Fruits, obtained from a private farmer, were carefully
washed in water and manually squeezed. The juice was
sequentially centrifuged at 3,000 × g for 30 minutes, and
10,000 × g for 1 hour. The supernatant was filtered at
0.8 μm and 0.45 μm pore filter and centrifuged at 16,500 × g
for 3 hours. The supernatant was then centrifuged at
120,000 × g for 90 minutes in a Type 70 Ti, fixed angle rotor,
the pellet was suspended in 1 ml PBS and transferred to a
30% sucrose/D2O cushion. Vesicles contained in the cushion
19522

Oncotarget

were recovered, washed several times, ultracentrifuged
for 90 min in PBS and collected for use. Nanovesicles
quantification was determined with the Bradford assay
(Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA). On average, we recovered 600
micrograms of vesicles from 240 ml of Citrus juice.

vacuum centrifuge and desalted by solid phase extraction
using C18 Macrospin Columns.

Dinamic light scatter (DLS)

The MS analysis was performed using a Triple
TOF 5600 Plus System (AB Sciex, Framingham, U.S.A.)
equipped with an Eksigent Nanoflow binary gradient
HPLC system and a nanospray III ion source. Two
microliters of sample were injected on a reversed-phase
trap column for peptide cleanup and pre-concentration,
employing a mobile phase, from loading pump,
containing 0.1% v/v FA in water at a flow rate of 5 ul/
min. Peptides were then eluted onto the C18 analytical
column, equilibrated at 40°C with a solvent A (0, 1% FA
in water) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min, and separated using
a gradient method according to which solvent B (0, 1% FA
in acetonitrile) was linearly increased from 10% to 28%
within 60 min and then to 60% within 15 min; afterwards,
phase B was further increased to 95% within 1 min. Then,
phase B was maintained at 95% for 5 min to rinse the
column. Finally, B was lowered to 10% over 1 min and the
column reequilibrated for 18 min (100 min total run time).
The eluting peptides were on-line sprayed in
the Triple TOF 5600 Plus mass spectrometer, that it
is controlled by Analysts 1.6.1 software (AB SCIEX,
Toronto, Canada).
Data were acquired using an ion spray voltage of
2.7 kV, curtain gas set at 35, GS1 1 and GS2 0 PSI nitrogen
flow, source temperature 80°C. MS/MS spectra were
collected using Information Dependent Acquisition (IDA);
precursor ions were selected across the mass range of 350
to 1250 m/z in high resolution mode (>30, 000) using 250
ms accumulation time per spectrum. A maximum of 35
precursors per cycle from each MS spectrum, with charge
state from 2 to 5, were selected for fragmentation, if
exceeding a threshold of 70 counts per second (cps), with
100 ms minimum accumulation time for each precursor
and dynamic exclusion for 15 s. Tandem mass spectra were
recorded in high sensitivity mode (resolution > 15,000)
with rolling collision energy.

Liquid chromatography-tandem mass
spectrometry

Nanovesicles size distribution was determined by
dynamic light scattering (DLS) experiments. Collected
nanovesicle samples were diluted to avoid inter-particle
interaction and placed at 20°C in a thermostatic cell
compartment of a Brookhaven Instruments BI200-SM
goniometer, equipped with a solid-state laser tuned at
532 nm. Scattered intensity autocorrelation functions were
measured by using a Brookhaven BI-9000 correlator and
analyzed in order to determine the size distribution [28].
The size at the maximum of the distribution (moda) is
reported as a significant average size.

Transmission electron microscopy (TEM)
Nanovesicles resuspended in PBS (10μg)
were spotted onto carbon-coated grids, fixed in 1%
glutaraldehyde and stained in 2% phosphotungstic acid.
The preparation obtained was examined immediately
using a JEOL JEM-1400 Plus transmission electron
microscope, at 110 kV.

Sample preparation for proteomic analysis
Gel-free and gel-based protein fractionation
procedures were employed and combined with LC-MS/
MS analysis in order to increase the proteome coverage of
Citrus limon nanovesicles.
In gel-free approach nanoparticles isolated from
Citrus limon juice were processed using 50% 2,2,2trifluoroethanol (TFE) in PBS and incubated with constant
shaking for 1 h at 60°C. Reduction was performed with
5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30′ at 60°C and alkylation
with 25 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30′ in the dark
at room temperature. Prior to trypsin addition, sample
was diluted with four-volumes of 100 mM NH4HCO3
pH 8.0. Proteins were digested overnight at 37°C using
sequencing-grade modified porcine trypsin (Pierce). After
overnight incubation, digestion was stopped by adding
20 ul of 90% FA and peptide mixture centrifuged at
14000g for 10′ at 4°C.
In the gel-based approach (GeLC-MS/MS), nano­
vesicle proteins extracted as previously described [29]
were separated by 10% SDS-PAGE and stained with
colloidal Coomassie Blue solution. Gel lane was cut into
eight gel slices of similar size and further cut into about
1 mm3 particles; in-gel digestion protocol was adapted
from Shevcenko et al. [30]. Peptides obtained from the
two procedures were finally dried down with a speed
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Protein identification and data analysis
Raw MS/MS data files from Analysts 1.6 software
were submitted to ProteinPilot™ 4.5 software (AB
SCIEX, Toronto, Canada), using the Paragon Algorithm
and Uniprot’s Citrus database (39096 entries, July
2014); For all analyses, the search was performed with
the following settings: (1) Sample Type: identification;
(2) Cysteine Alkylation: Iodocetamide; (3) Digestion:
Trypsin; (4) Instrument: TripleTOF 5600; (5) Special
factors: /Gel-based ID (for samples from GeLC-MS/
MS analysis) /None (for samples from LC-MS/MS); (6)
Species: None; (7) Search Effort: Thorough ID; (8) FDR
19523

Oncotarget

Analysis: Yes. Moreover, further analysis were performed
with the KEGG Orthology (KO) system (http://www.
genome.jp/kegg/ko.html) and the exosome database
ExoCarta (http://exocarta.org) [31].

cells were washed in PBS twice and apoptosis assays
were performed as follows. Cells were resuspended in
cold 1X Annexin V binding buffer (10x: 0.1 M Hepes
pH 7.4; 1.4 M NaCl; 25 mM CaCl2), transferred in a
FACS tube and mixed with 5 μl of Annexin V-FITC
(BD-Biosciences, San Jose, CA). The cells were then
incubated at room temperature in the dark for 15 min.
After adding 400 μl of annexin V binding buffer, the
samples were subjected to flow cytometry analysis to
detect cell apoptosis levels. Cells positive for Annexin
V-FITC, were considered to represent apoptotic cells.
Stained cells were acquired on FACS Calibur (BD
Biosciences San Jose, CA) and analysed using FlowJo
software (Tree Star, Ashland OR).

Uptake of Citrus nanovesicles by A549 and
LAMA84 cells
Citrus nanovesicles were isolated as described
above and labeled with PKH26 (Sigma-Aldrich, St.
Louis, MO, USA) for 10 min at room temperature.
Labeled nanovesicles were washed twice in PBS and
resuspended in complete medium. A549 and LAMA84
cells were grown on coverslips coated with type I collagen
(Calbiochem, Darmstadt, Germany) and treated with 20
μg/ml of labeled vesicles for 3 or 6 hours at 4°C or 37°C.
Cells were stained with Actin Green 488 (Molecular
probes, Life Technologies, California, USA). Nuclei
were stained with Hoechst 3342 (Molecular probes, Life
Technologies) and analysed by confocal microscopy.

RNA extraction and real-time PCR
LAMA84, A549 and SW480 cells were grown in
12-well plates and treated with 5 or 20 μg/ml of Citrus
vesicles for 24 or 48 hours. Tumor biopsies soon after
removal were stored in RNAlater solution (Applied
Biosystems, Foster City, California, USA). Each sample
was lysed in a tissue homogenizer. RNA was extracted
using the commercially available Illustra RNAspin
Mini Isolation Kit (GE Healthcare, Little Chalfont,
Buckinghamshire, UK), according to manufacturer’s
instructions. Total RNA was reverse-transcribed to cDNA
using the High Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit
(Applied Biosystem). RT-QPCR was performed in 48well plates using the Step-One Real-Time PCR system
(Applied Biosystem). For quantitative SYBR®Green
realtime PCR, the following primers were used:

Viability assay (MTT assay)
Cell viability was assessed with Methyl-thiazoltetrazolium (MTT) assay as previously described [32].
Briefly, cells were seeded at a density of 0.1 × 106 in a
96-well plate and exposed to escalating doses of Citrus
nanovescicles (5–20 μg/ml) for 24, 48 or 72 hours, and in
the presence or not of 5, 20 μg/ml of neutralizing TRAIL
ab. MTT assay was also performed on A549 cell line
treated for 24, 48 or 72 hours with 5 or 20 μg/ml of boiled
or sonicated nanovesicles. The absorbance was measured
at 540 nm. Means and standard deviations generated
from three independent experiments are reported as the
percentage of growth versus control (untreated cells). Cell
proliferation curves were derived from these data with
Microsoft Excel software.

GAPDH (5′ATGGGGAAGGTGAAGGTCG3′, 5′G
GGTCATTGATGGCAACAATAT3′),
Bad (5′CCGAGGAGCAGGAAGACTC’3, 5′GGT
AGGAGCTGTGGCGACT’3),
Bax (5′CCTGTGCACCAAGGTGCCGGAACT3′,
5′CCACCCTGGTCTTGGATCCAGCCC3′),
Survivin (5′CTCAAGGACCACCGCATCTC’3, 5′C
AGCCTTCCAGCTCCTTGAA’3),
Bcl-xl (5′CTGAATCGGAGATGGAGACC’3, 5′TG
GGATGTCAGGTCACTGAA’3),
Trail (5′GCTCTGGGCCGCAAAAT’3, 5′ TGCAAG
TTGCTCAGGAATGAA’3),
Dr5 (5′ GGGCCACAGGGACACCTT ’3, 5′ GCATC
TCGCCCGGTTTT’3),
Vegf-A (5′ CGAGGGCCTGGAGTGTGT’3, 5′CGC
ATAATCTGCATGGTGATG ‘3)
Vegf-A Receptor (5′ CGGTCAACAAAGTCGGGA
GA ’3, 5′CAGTGCACCACAAAGACACG ‘3),

Colony formation assay
A549, SW480 and LAMA84 cells were plated in
6-well (2000 cells/ml/well) in Iscove’s-methylcellulose
medium (Methocult H4230, Stem Cell Technologies,
Vancouver, Canada) containing or not nanovesicles (5, 20
μg/ml). After 14 days of culture, colonies were observed
by phase-contrast microscopy and photographed. The area
of twenty colonies per condition was measured with the
IMAGE-J software (http://rsbweb.nih.gov/ij/).

Annexin V assay

all obtained from Invitrogen (Foster City, CA, USA). Realtime PCR was performed in triplicates for each data point.
Relative changes in gene expression between control and
treated samples were determined with the ΔΔCt method.
Levels of the target transcript were normalized to a
GAPDH endogenous control, constantly expressed in all

To detect tumor cell apoptosis, an Annexin
V-fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) assay was used.
Specifically, LAMA84, SW480 and A549 cells were
seeded into 6-well plates, cultured for 48 h and treated
with 20 μg/ml of Citrus vesicles in the presence or not
of neutralizing TRAIL ab (20 ng/ml). After incubation,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

19524

Oncotarget

samples (ΔCt). For ΔΔCt values, additional subtractions
were made between treated samples and control ΔCt
values. Final values were expressed as fold of induction.

slides were rehydrated and subsequently retrieved for 15
minutes at 95°C in NaCitrate 10 mM pH 6. After antigen
retrieval, tumor sections were permeabilized with 0.2%
TritonX-100 in PBS for 10 minutes at room temperature and
then blocked with Dako protein block serum free (Dako).
Sections were incubated with mouse monoclonal antibody
anti-TRAIL (Abcam, catalog # ab 10516) diluted 1:50 in
blocking solution over night at 4°C. After washes in 0.2%
TritonX-100 in PBS, sections were incubated with Alexafluor 488 donkey anti-mouse (Life technologies) diluted
1:500 in blocking solution for 1 hour at room temperature
in the dark. Slides were subsequently counterstained with
Hoechst 3342 and mounted for confocal analysis.

Western blot
A549, SW480, LAMA84 cells were treated for
48 h with 20 μg/ml of Citrus nanovesicles. Total protein
cell lysates were obtained and analyzed by SDS-PAGE
followed by Western blotting. Antibodies used in the
experiments were anti-BAX, BCL-xL and β-actin (all
from Santa Cruz Biotechnology, CA, USA).

ELISA

Multiplex cytokine analysis

A549, SW480, LAMA84 cells conditioned medium
was collected from cells treated with 5, 20 μg/ml of Citrus
nanovesicles for 24 or 48 h. Conditioned medium aliquots
were centrifuged to remove cellular debris and then
TRAIL protein concentrations were quantified using the
ELISA kit (Uscn life Science Inc., Houston, TX, USA),
according to manufacturer’s protocol.

Levels of VEGF-A, IL-6 and IL8 were determined
in mice serum samples and in the conditioned medium of
LAMA84 cell line using the Bio-Plex Multiple Cytokine
Assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA), according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly 50 μL of samples and
scalar concentrations of the assay standards were added in
duplicates to a 96-well plate containing magnetic beads.
The plate was incubated for 1 hour followed by washing
steps; the plate was subsequently coated with biotinylated
detection antibody solution and incubated for 30 minutes.
After the 30 minutes incubation, the plate was washed and
streptavidin-conjugated phycoerythrin was added to the
96-well plates and incubated for 10 minutes. The plate was
washed after this final incubation step and assay buffer
was added to each well. Data was acquired using the
Bio-Plex® 200 Systems. A standard curve was derived
using the different concentrations of the assay standards.
Data were analyzed using Bio-Plex Manager Software.

CML mouse xenograft
Male NOD/ SCID mice, four-to-five weeks old, were
purchased from Charles River (Charles River Laboratories
International, Inc, MA, USA) and acclimated for a week prior
to experimentation. Mice received filtered water and sterilized
diet ad libitum. Animals were observed daily and clinical
signs were noted. Each mouse was inoculated subcutaneously
in the right flank with viable single human LAMA84 cells
(2 × 107) suspended in 0.2 ml of PBS. The day of injection was
considered as Day 0. On Day 7, when tumors were palpable,
mice were randomly assigned to three groups of four and were
treated with Citrus nanovesicles (50 μg/mouse, three days a
week for two weeks) administered intraperitoneally (IP)
or in the intratumor (IT) site or with vehicle (PBS). Tumor
xenografts were measured and the mice were weighed three
times a week starting on Day 7. Tumor volume was determined
by caliper by using the following formula: L × W2/2 = mm3
where L and W are the longest and shortest perpendicular
measurements in millimeters, respectively. The same formula
was used to calculate tumor weights assuming that 1 mm3 =
1 mg. Animals were euthanized at the end of treatment, the
tumor removed, and the tumor weights measured. Blood
was collected by post-mortem cardiac puncture, centrifuged
at 1500 × g for 15 min and the supernatant (serum) was
collected and stored at –20°C. Xenografts were resuspended
in RNA later for further RNA isolation or in 10% formalin for
immunohistochemical analysis.

In vivo distribution of Citrus nanovesicles
Nanovesicle labeling procedure: DiR was used to
fluorescently label the lipid bilayer of Citrus nanovesicles.
Briefly, nanovesicles were directly labeled with 1 μM
Vybrant Cell Tracers DiR (Life Technologies) then washed
in PBS. To test the efficiency of DiR conjugation, 5, 10
and 50 μg of labeled nanovesicles were in vitro evaluated
by using a cooled charge-coupled device (CCD) camera
imaging (IVIS Lumina; PerkinElmer LifeSciences) using the
appropriate filter (exc = 710 nm; em = 780 nm). The same
region of interest (ROI) was applied in the entire area of each
well on all the fluorescent signal. Data were expressed as
Average Radiant Efficiency [p/s/cm2/sr] / [μW/cm2].
In vivo imaging: healthy mice or mice bearing CML
xenografts were monitored daily. Prior to nanovesicle
injection and optical imaging acquisitions, the ventral
hair of mice was removed. For in vivo imaging studies,
different groups of animals were analyzed: healthy mice or
mice bearing tumors injected with a) 150 μl PBS; b) Free
Dir probe (1 μM in 150 μl PBS); c) 50 μg of Dir-labeled
nanovesicles in 150 μl PBS.

Immunofluorescence
Mice xenografts were harvested and immediately
fixed with 10% formalin. 5-μm-thick paraffin-embedded
tumor sections were used for Immunofluorescence. Briefly,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

19525

Oncotarget

REFERENCES

Briefly, for the detection of fluorescence, mice were
anesthetized and then injected IP with PBS, Free DiR or
DiR labeled-nanovesicles. Mice images were acquired
after 15 minutes, 1 h or 24 h from injection. Following
fluorescent background subtraction, images were analyzed
and scaled after completion of all acquisitions, using
appropriate computer software (Living Image Software;
PerkinElmer LifeSciences). All mice were imaged with
identical instrument settings. Following the last acquisition,
the animals were sacrificed and the organs (spleen, liver,
kidneys and tumor) were collected and acquired with same
imaging system. The scale bar was expressed as Average
Radiant Efficiency [p/s/cm2/sr] / [μW/cm2] which is a
calibrated measurement of photon emission.

1.	 Corrado C, Raimondo S, Chiesi A, Ciccia F, De Leo G,
Alessandro R. Exosomes as intercellular signaling organelles involved in health and disease: basic science and clinical applications. Int J Mol Sci. 2013; 14:5338–5366.
2.	 Lakkaraju A, Rodriguez-Boulan E. Itinerant exosomes:
emerging roles in cell and tissue polarity. Trends Cell Biol.
2008; 18:199–209.
3.	 Peinado H, Aleckovic M, Lavotshkin S, Matei I,
Costa-Silva B, Moreno-Bueno G, Hergueta-Redondo
M, Williams C, Garcia-Santos G, Ghajar C, NitadoriHoshino A, Hoffman C, Badal K, Garcia BA, Callahan MK,
Yuan J, et al. Melanoma exosomes educate bone marrow
progenitor cells toward a pro-metastatic phenotype through
MET. Nat Med. 2012; 18:883–891.

Statistical analysis
Data are expressed as means ± SD of three
independent experiments. Statistical analysis was done
with a paired sample t-test. Differences were considered
significant when p ≤ 0.05.

4.	 Saman S, Kim W, Raya M, Visnick Y, Miro S, Jackson B,
McKee AC, Alvarez VE, Lee NC, Hall GF. Exosomeassociated tau is secreted in tauopathy models and is
selectively phosphorylated in cerebrospinal fluid in early
Alzheimer disease. J Biol Chem. 2012; 287:3842–3849.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDINGS

5.	 Lin J, Li J, Huang B, Liu J, Chen X, Chen XM, Xu YM,
Huang LF, Wang XZ. Exosomes: Novel Biomarkers
for Clinical Diagnosis. ScientificWorldJournal. 2015;
2015:657086.

We would like to acknowledge Davide Caltagirone
at the Ri.MED Foundation for the technical support
during bioinformatics analysis. This work was supported
by a grant from the Associazione Italiana per la Ricerca
sul Cancro (AIRC) to R.A; University of Palermo
(International Cooperation) to R.A and G.D.L; FFR to
R.A., G.D.L. and S.F. This study was also developed with
the contribution of National Operational Programme for
Research and Competitiveness 2007–2013- PON01_01059
“Sviluppo di una piattaforma tecnologica per il trattamento
non invasivo di patologie oncologiche e infettive basate
sull’uso di ultrasuoni focalizzati (FUS)”.

6.	 Regente M, Corti-Monzon G, Maldonado AM, Pinedo M,
Jorrin J, de la Canal L. Vesicular fractions of sunflower apoplastic fluids are associated with potential exosome marker
proteins. FEBS Lett. 2009; 583:3363–3366.
7.	 Wang B, Zhuang X, Deng ZB, Jiang H, Mu J, Wang Q,
Xiang X, Guo H, Zhang L, Dryden G, Yan J, Miller D,
Zhang HG. Targeted drug delivery to intestinal macrophages by bioactive nanovesicles released from grapefruit.
Mol Ther. 2014; 22:522–534.
8.	 Ju S, Mu J, Dokland T, Zhuang X, Wang Q, Jiang H,
Xiang X, Deng ZB, Wang B, Zhang L, Roth M, Welti R,
Mobley J, Jun Y, Miller D, Zhang HG. Grape exosome-like
nanoparticles induce intestinal stem cells and protect mice
from DSS-induced colitis. Mol Ther. 2013; 21:1345–1357.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare that there is no conflicts
of interest that could be perceived as prejudicing the
impartiality of the research reported. A patent on the use
of Citrus limon L.-derived nanovesicles as antineoplastic
agents has been filed (RM2015A000162).

9.	 Wang L, Wang J, Fang L, Zheng Z, Zhi D, Wang S, Li S,
Ho CT, Zhao H. Anticancer activities of citrus peel polymethoxyflavones related to angiogenesis and others. Biomed
Res Int. 2014; 2014:453972.
10.	 Manthey JA, Grohmann K, Guthrie N. Biological properties
of citrus flavonoids pertaining to cancer and inflammation.
Curr Med Chem. 2001; 8:135–153.

Author contributions
S.R, R.A designed the experiments and wrote
the manuscript. S.R., F.N. performed and analyzed the
experiments. S.F., F.M. performed proteomic experiments,
A.L.D., A.F. helped with mice, L.S. helped with FACS
experiments, MA.D.B performed electron microscope
experiments, M.M. performed DLS analysis, G.Z.
performed immunofluorescence staining, G.D.L., G.Z.
provided critical feedback to the manuscript.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11.	 Benavente-Garcia O, Castillo J. Update on uses and properties of citrus flavonoids: new findings in anticancer, cardiovascular, and anti-inflammatory activity. J Agric Food
Chem. 2008; 56:6185–6205.
12.	 Blagosklonny MV. Overcoming limitations of natural anticancer drugs by combining with artificial agents. Trends
Pharmacol Sci. 2005; 26:77–81.

19526

Oncotarget

13.	 Johnstone RW, Frew AJ, Smyth MJ. The TRAIL apoptotic
pathway in cancer onset, progression and therapy. Nat Rev
Cancer. 2008; 8:782–798.

The plant alkaloid and anti-leukemia drug homoharringtonine sensitizes resistant human colorectal carcinoma cells
to TRAIL-induced apoptosis via multiple mechanisms.
Apoptosis. 2013; 18:739–750.

14.	 Ashkenazi A, Pai RC, Fong S, Leung S, Lawrence DA,
Marsters SA, Blackie C, Chang L, McMurtrey AE, Hebert A,
DeForge L, Koumenis IL, Lewis D, Harris L, Bussiere J,
Koeppen H, et al. Safety and antitumor activity of recombinant soluble Apo2 ligand. J Clin Invest. 1999; 104:155–162.

24.	 Pitti RM, Marsters SA, Ruppert S, Donahue CJ, Moore A,
Ashkenazi A. Induction of apoptosis by Apo-2 ligand, a
new member of the tumor necrosis factor cytokine family.
J Biol Chem. 1996; 271:12687–12690.

15.	 Nesterov A, Nikrad M, Johnson T, Kraft AS. Oncogenic
Ras sensitizes normal human cells to tumor necrosis factoralpha-related apoptosis-inducing ligand-induced apoptosis.
Cancer Res. 2004; 64:3922–3927.

25.	 Blagosklonny MV. Prospective strategies to enforce
selectively cell death in cancer cells. Oncogene. 2004;
23:2967–2975.
26.	 Zhang Y, Zhang B. TRAIL resistance of breast cancer cells
is associated with constitutive endocytosis of death receptors 4 and 5. Mol Cancer Res. 2008; 6:1861–1871.

16.	 Falschlehner C, Emmerich CH, Gerlach B, Walczak H.
TRAIL signalling: decisions between life and death. Int J
Biochem Cell Biol. 2007; 39:1462–1475.

27.	 Corrado C, Raimondo S, Saieva L, Flugy AM, De Leo G,
Alessandro R. Exosome-mediated crosstalk between
chronic myelogenous leukemia cells and human bone marrow stromal cells triggers an interleukin 8-dependent survival of leukemia cells. Cancer Lett. 2014; 348:71–76.

17.	 Mathivanan S, Ji H, Simpson RJ. Exosomes: extracellular organelles important in intercellular communication.
J Proteomics. 2010; 73:1907–1920.
18.	 Ishibashi M, Ohtsuki T. Studies on search for bioactive natural products targeting TRAIL signaling leading to tumor
cell apoptosis. Med Res Rev. 2008; 28:688–714.

28.	 Noto R, Santangelo MG, Ricagno S, Mangione MR,
Levantino M, Pezzullo M, Martorana V, Cupane A,
Bolognesi M, Manno M. The tempered polymerization of
human neuroserpin. PLoS One. 2012; 7:e32444.

19.	 Ouyang L, Luo Y, Tian M, Zhang SY, Lu R, Wang JH,
Kasimu R, Li X. Plant natural products: from traditional
compounds to new emerging drugs in cancer therapy. Cell
Prolif. 2014; 47:506–515.

29.	 Raimondo S, Saieva L, Corrado C, Fontana S, Flugy A,
Rizzo A, De Leo G, Alessandro R. Chronic myeloid leukemia-derived exosomes promote tumor growth through
an autocrine mechanism. Cell Commun Signal. 2015;
13:8.

20.	 Alshatwi AA, Shafi G, Hasan TN, Al-Hazzani AA, Alsaif MA,
Alfawaz MA, Lei KY, Munshi A. Apoptosis-mediated inhibition of human breast cancer cell proliferation by lemon citrus
extract. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2011; 12:1555–1559.

30.	 Shevchenko A, Wilm M, Vorm O, Mann M. Mass spectrometric sequencing of proteins silver-stained polyacrylamide
gels. Anal Chem. 1996; 68:850–858.

21.	 Luo G, Guan X, Zhou L. Apoptotic effect of citrus fruit
extract nobiletin on lung cancer cell line A549 in vitro and
in vivo. Cancer Biol Ther. 2008; 7:966–973.

31.	 Simpson RJ, Kalra H, Mathivanan S. ExoCarta as a resource
for exosomal research. J Extracell Vesicles. 2012; 1.

22.	 Tse AK, Chow KY, Cao HH, Cheng CY, Kwan HY, Yu H,
Zhu GY, Wu YC, Fong WF, Yu ZL. The herbal compound
cryptotanshinone restores sensitivity in cancer cells that
are resistant to the tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosisinducing ligand. J Biol Chem. 2013; 288:29923–29933.

32.	 Corrado C, Raimondo S, Flugy AM, Fontana S, Santoro A,
Stassi G, Marfia A, Iovino F, Arlinghaus R, Kohn EC,
Leo GD, Alessandro R. Carboxyamidotriazole inhibits cell
growth of imatinib-resistant chronic myeloid leukaemia
cells including T315I Bcr-Abl mutant by a redox-mediated
mechanism. Cancer Lett. 2011; 300:205–214.

23.	 Beranova L, Pombinho AR, Spegarova J, Koc M,
Klanova M, Molinsky J, Klener P, Bartunek P, Andera L.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

19527

Oncotarget

