Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 34

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Identification of drugs as single agents or in combination
to prevent carcinoma dissemination in a microfluidic 3D
environment
Jing Bai1,2,*, Ting-Yuan Tu1,*, Choong Kim3, Jean Paul Thiery1,4,5, Roger D. Kamm1,2
1

BioSystems and Micromechanics IRG, Singapore-MIT Alliance for Research and Technology, 138602, Singapore

2

Department of Mechanical and Department of Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
MA, 02139, USA

3

School of Mechanical and Automotive Engineering, Kyungil University, Gyeongbuk, 712-701, South Korea

4

Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, A*STAR (Agency for Science, Technology and Research), 138673, Singapore

5

Department of Biochemistry, National University of Singapore, 117597, Singapore

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to:
Roger D. Kamm, e-mail: rdkamm@mit.edu
Keywords: epithelial-mesenchymal transition, microfluidics, drug screening, synergistic effect, bladder cancer
Received: March 26, 2015      Accepted: September 28, 2015      Published: October 08, 2015

ABSTRACT
Experiments were performed in a modified microfluidic platform recapitulating
part of the in vivo tumor microenvironment by co-culturing carcinoma cell aggregates
embedded in a three-dimensional (3D) collagen scaffold with human umbilical vein
endothelial cells (HUVECs). HUVECs were seeded in one channel of the device to
initiate vessel-like structures in vitro prior to introducing the aggregates. The lung
adenocarcinoma cell line A549 and the bladder carcinoma cell line T24 were tested.
Dose-response assays of four drugs known to interfere with Epithelial Mesenchymal
Transition (EMT) signaling pathways were quantified using relative dispersion as
a metric of EMT progression. The presence of HUVECs in one channel induces cell
dispersal in A549 which then can be inhibited by each of the four drugs. Complete
inhibition of T24 aggregate dispersal, however, is not achieved with any single agent,
although partial inhibition was observed with 10 μM of the Src inhibitor, AZD-0530.
Almost complete inhibition of T24 dispersal in monoculture was achieved only when
the four drugs were added in combination, each at 10 μM concentration. Coculture
of T24 with HUVECs forfeits the almost-complete inhibition. The enhanced dispersal
observed in the presence of HUVECs is a consequence of secretion of growth factors,
including HGF and FGF-2, by endothelial cells. This 3D microfluidic co-culture platform
provides an in vivo-like surrogate for anti-invasive and anti-metastatic drug screening.
It will be particularly useful for defining combination therapies for aggressive tumors
such as invasive bladder carcinoma.

of epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) confers
cells with migratory and invasive properties [2, 3]. In this
process, carcinoma cells lose their cell-cell junctions
and gain an invasive, fibroblast-like morphology,
delaminate from the tumor, and intravasate into blood
and lymph vessels. Following decades of research, EMT
is believed to be a focal event involved in the progression
of carcinoma, as well as in generating cancer-initiating
cells and in inducing drug resistance [4, 5]. A new

INTRODUCTION
The death of most cancer patients is attributed to
metastasis [1]. Micro-metastasis often remains after
conventional surgery, radiotherapy and/or chemotherapy,
and attempts to treat metastatic cancers have been
generally unsuccessful thus far leading to only slightly
slowed progression and increased overall survival. Most
cancers originate from epithelial tissues, and the process
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36603

Oncotarget

anti-metastatic strategy based on inhibiting EMT could
impact survival.
Complex networks orchestrate EMT, including
activation of a plethora of surface receptors by growth
factors, cytokines and extracellular matrix (ECM)
components [3, 6–8]. Some of these pathways cooperate to
induce EMT with tumor stromal cells, such as endothelial
cells, fibroblasts, and tumor-associated macrophages
[9]. Existing in vitro EMT models (e.g., Transwell™
technology) are also capable of endothelial–tumor
co-culture experiments and are achieved by placing
endothelial cells on the upper surface of the membrane
in close proximity to a lower layer of tumor cells or
matrix-containing tumor spheroids to form a threedimensional (3D) system. However, this technology
does not adequately address the topology of the tumor
components. In addition, it impairs real-time imaging,
rendering tracking of individual cells difficult. Thus, there
exists an urgent need to develop more suitable in vitro 3D
assays that can recapitulate the tumor microenvironment.
Microfluidic assays have been employed in
various applications to make in vitro assays more
realistic, replicating angiogenesis, some of the aspects
of organ function, and tumor-endothelial interactions;
they have also been used for biopsy studies [10]. By
integrating complex environmental factors with assays
and on-chip co-culture, this technique controls the 3D
microenvironment and enables real-time imaging. Our
previous work has demonstrated an intermediate drug
assay model capable of monitoring the inhibition of
cancer cells migrating away from the primary tumor in
3D culture [11]. This system integrated tumor aggregates
in a 3D hydrogel scaffold in close proximity to an
endothelial monolayer for screening therapeutic EMT
blocking agents. This previous study demonstrated the
potential of the microfluidic concept to identify inhibitors
of lung adenocarcinoma A549 aggregate dispersal, which
is known to be easily reversible from a mesenchymal to an
epithelial phenotype.
The current study, in addition to extending the
analysis on A549 carcinoma aggregates, seeks to identify
drugs that, in combination, could abrogate dispersal of
a highly invasive bladder carcinoma cell line. Bladder
carcinoma, which becomes life-threatening upon
conversion from a superficial to an invasive phase, has
yet to truly benefit from the advancements in therapeutic
interventions, with the exception of the use of attenuated
Bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG) intravesical instillation
for superficial tumors. Unfortunately, the transition to
refractory invasive tumors is almost inevitable. Thus,
here we undertook a microfluidics approach to screen
for large panels of drug in combination. Employing an
improved two-gel system, we performed dose-response
assays of four potential drug candidates using the bladder
carcinoma T24 cell line [12]. We show that the drugs
were less effective in inhibiting T24 cells than A549
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

cells. Specifically, human umbilical vein endothelial
cells (HUVECs) induced cell dispersion in A549 cells,
but this dispersion could be inhibited by each of the four
drugs. However, inhibiting the spontaneous dispersal of
T24 aggregates proved more difficult. Without HUVECs,
higher doses of each drug were required, and only partial
inhibition could be achieved at 10 μM concentrations of a
Src inhibitor, AZD-0530. Even when the four drugs were
used in combination, each at a concentration of 10 μM,
dispersal was not completely blocked. In the presence
of HUVECs, drug resistance was further enhanced.
Combination of the four drugs failed to inhibit T24
aggregate dispersal either alone at 10 μM concentration
or in combination. Growth factor tests, ELISA, and
neutralized antibody blocking experiments revealed
that the enhanced dispersal observed in the presence of
HUVECs was due to the secretion of growth factors,
including HGF and FGF-2, by endothelial cells. The
addition of AZD-0530 did not affect the activities of HGF
or FGF-2 in inducing cell dispersal. A previous report
used integrin-blocking experiments to show that T24
is sensitive to integrin β1-collagen-induced migration
for individual cells [13]. However, in the present study,
dispersal from aggregates was found to be largely integrin
β1-independent.

RESULTS
A549 and T24 cell lines were selected for this study to
investigate EMT and tumor progression, since they exhibit a
reversible EMT phenotype that could potentially be blocked
to achieve EMT reversal. For this study, a microfluidic
system (Figure 1(a-c),Supplementary Figure S1) was used,
similar in design to a previously reported system [11] except
that it incorporated two different 3D collagen compartments
between the two media channels. The second gel region was
added in order to permit the formation of a more uniform
endothelial monolayer. In particular, we have now allowed
endothelial cells to form a blood vessel. The carcinoma
cell aggregates are introduced in the compartment distal to
the channel in which the endothelial cells had assembled
to mimic the vascular wall. The endothelial monolayer
structure exhibited clear cell-cell junctions, as evidenced by
VE-cadherin staining (Figure 1(d)). Integrity of this HUVEC
monolayer was also quantified by testing the permeability
to 70-kDa dextran rhodamine (Figure 1(e)). The significant
drop in fluorescence intensity at the boundary of the first gel
(where the HUVEC monolayer resides and highlighted in
red rectangle) indicated the formation of an intact monolayer
for the drug diffusive microenvironment. Dispersion was
quantified and a positive correlation between EMT marker
expression and a normalized dispersion of aggregates was
observed (see Figure 2(a), 3(a)).
To test the microfluidic drug screening platform
for cancer-type specificity, A549 and T24 aggregates
were formed in non-adhesive, laser-generated microwells
36604

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Microfluidic co-culture platform for drug screening. a. Schematic of device design shows the overall layout of the

media channels and gel regions, where the two regions in the middle are used for introducing collagen gel and the two side channels for
filling culture medium and growing of endothelial cells. b. Photograph of the PDMS device. c. An enlarged isometric view of the device
showing the relative locations of co-culturing tumor aggregates and endothelial cells (HUVECs). d. HUVECs monolayer formed after 4 h
and 36 h, respectively, in the microfluidic channel. Green fluorescence is used for VE-cadherin; blue fluorescence indicates DAPI-stained
nuclei. e. Concentration profiles of fluorescent dextran from which permeability can be quantified. A jump in fluorescence concentration
on the right side (circled in red) is due to the presence of the intact endothelial monolayer, thus small molecules can only diffuse through
the monolayer, resembling drug diffusing out of a blood vessel. f. Drugs used in this study, with the targeting pathways and stage of
development.

and cultured in the devices. Results for the A549 cells
demonstrated that the aggregates do not disperse when
cultured in the absence of HUVECs, consistent with
our previous study [11]. In the presence of HUVECs,
aggregates did disperse, although each of the drugs—
MK-2206, AZD-0530, A83–01 and CI-1033 (Figure 1(f))
—could fully suppress dispersal, each at a particular
dose (Figure 2(b)-dispersion,Supplementary Figure S2.
1-cell number) within the range of concentrations tested.
Thus, we next tested combinations of these same drugs.
Interestingly, the EGFR inhibitor MK-2206, CI-1033,
and an AKT inhibitor showed a significant synergistic
effect, in that the amount of drug required for inhibition of
dispersion was reduced to one-fifth that required for each
drug individually. Inhibition of aggregate dispersion was
reduced from 500 nM to less than 100 nM for each (Figure
2(c)-dispersion, Supplementary Figure 2(d)-cell number).
Isobologram for synergistic effects between CI-1033 and
MK-2206 is shown in Supplementary Figure S2.2.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Compared with A549 cells, the dispersion of
T24 aggregates alone or in the absence of HUVECs
could not be suppressed by any of the four drugs;
albeit, a partial inhibition was observed using the
Src inhibitor, AZD-0530, at 10 μM (Figure 3(b)dispersion,Supplementary Figure S3-cell number). Only
when the four drugs were added in combination, each at
10 μM concentration (Figure 4(a)-morphology (-HUVEC),
(b)-dispersion (-HUVEC)) was almost complete inhibition
obtained, which could be considered an additive, rather
than synergistic effect. The results indicated that, among
the four drugs tested, AZD-0530 is the most effective in
preventing spontaneous dispersion of the T24 aggregates.
In the presence of HUVECs, each drug had some inhibitory
activity on aggregate dissociation; albeit, individually, they
were each unable to reduce the dispersion value to less
than 3 (complete inhibition corresponds to a value of 1).
Even AZD-0530 was unable to inhibit dispersal when
aggregates were co-cultured with HUVECs (Figure 3(c)).
36605

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Screening therapeutic drugs on A549 aggregates over 36 h. a. Staining of EMT markers E-cadherin and vimentin

in A549 aggregates at 0 h and 36 h. Green fluorescence is used for both E-cadherin (left panels) and for vimentin (right panels); blue
fluorescence is DAPI-stained nuclei. b. Normalized dispersion measured for three concentrations with four drugs at 12 h and 36 h (MK2206: Akt inhibitor; AZD-0530: Src inhibitor; A83–01: TGF-βR inhibitor; CI-1033: EGFR inhibitor), for three different concentrations in
the presence of HUVEC. c. Normalized dispersion measured over time (12 h and 36 h) for analysis synergistic effects between CI-1033 and
MK-2206, at four different concentrations (left: dispersion; right: cell number).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36606

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Screening therapeutic drugs on T24 aggregates over 36 h in the presence/absence of HUVECs. a. Staining of

EMT markers E-cadherin and vimentin in T24 aggregates at 0 h and 36 h. Green fluorescence is used for both E-cadherin (left panels) and
for vimentin (right panels); blue fluorescence is DAPI-stained nuclei. b. Normalized dispersion of T24 cells with four drugs, in the absence
of HUVECs, at 12 h and 36 h, for three different concentrations. AZD-0530 is effective at 10,000 nM. c. Normalized dispersion of T24
cells with four drugs, in the presence of HUVECs, at 12 h and 36 h, for three different concentrations. AZD-0530 is not effective at 10,000
nM. d. Summary of normalized dispersion between control and AZD-0530 (10 μM), treated group, in the presence/absence of HUVECs at
36 h. e. Qualitative images of (d).

A summary of the AZD-0530 effect in both absence and
presence of HUVEC is shown in Supplementary Figure
S3(d)-dispersion, S3(e)-morphology.
It is worthwhile noting that the spontaneous
dispersion of T24 aggregates alone, without co-culture, is
about 3, similar to the value observed in co-culture with
HUVECs when maximally inhibited by individual drugs.
Even when used in combination, complete inhibition of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

T24 cancer aggregates dispersal could not be achieved
with a combination of any two drugs (Supplementary
Figure S4), or when all four drugs were used in
combination at 10 μM each (Figure 4(a)-morphology
(+HUVEC), 4(b)-dispersion (+HUVEC)), albeit a slight
improvement (dispersion reduced to < 2) was observed
for all four drugs compared to any single drug or any
combination of two drugs (Supplementary Table S1).
36607

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Drug combination analysis on T24 cell aggregates. a. Qualitative images showing the effect of drug used in combinations
of four, in the presence or absence of HUVECs at various doses, 10 μM and 20 μM at 0 h and 36 h. b. Comparison between AZD-0530 (used
alone at 10 μM) and drugs in combinations of four, in the presence or absence of HUVECs at various doses. Concentrations given are for
each drug individually (e.g. combined 5 μM means each drug used at a concentration of 5 μM)

It is likely that some factor(s) — other than those
targeted by the drugs listed — are secreted by HUVECs
and induce dispersal, bypassing Src signaling. Thus,
we next investigated a group of EMT-inducing growth
factors, including TGF-β1, TGF-β3, EGF, FGF-2,
HGF and PDGF. These factors are possibly secreted by
endothelial cells to mediate EMT. In the presence of
AZD-0530, HGF and FGF-2-induced aggregate dispersal
was reduced to a level comparable with that obtained in
co-culture with HUVECs, whereas TGF-β3 and EGF
exhibited less of an effect, plus TGF-β1 and PDGF had
little effect (Supplementary Figure S5.1). To analyze
whether endothelial cells might be inducing EMT in T24
cells through secretion of HGF/FGF-2, we first measured
HGF/FGF-2 secretion by HUVECs using ELISA.
Concentrations of FGF-2 in co-culture were found to be
three times higher than in cultures with aggregates only
(Figure 5(a)). Similarly, endothelial cell secretion of HGF

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

was 5-fold higher in co-culture conditions as compared
with aggregates alone (Figure 5(b)). The presence of AZD0530 did not affect the concentrations of either growth
factor, and the addition of EGM to the aggregates had
no significant effect. This suggests that endothelial cells
produce HGF and FGF-2 in co-culture conditions, even in
the absence of T24 aggregate co-cultures.
In co-culture with HUVECs, T24 aggregate
dispersal was reduced to 40% of control when treated
with the HGF neutralizing antibody (Figure 5(c)). The
inhibition effect is the same as that achieved by each of the
individual drugs. Interestingly, in T24 aggregates alone,
the antibody against HGF had little effect on inhibiting
dispersal, regardless of the presence or absence of AZD0530. A neutralizing antibody against FGF-2 delivered a
similar degree of inhibition to that observed with anti-HGF
antibodies. To validate the antibody inhibitory effects,
a c-Met inhibitor, JNJ-38877605 (Johnson & Johnson),

36608

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Analysis of endothelial cell secretion of HGF and FGF-2 in co-culture or by T24 cells alone (AZD-0530 was
used alone at 10 μM, EGM-2 is the medium control). a. ELISA measurement of FGF-2 concentration. b. ELISA measurement of
HGF concentration. c. Neutralized antibody blocking experiment (HGF and FGF-2).

Figure 6: Blocking integrin β1 assay in microfluidic device. a. Qualitative image for T24 aggregate dispersion with 20 μg/ml β1 antibody,
in the absence/presence of HUVECs. b. In the presence of HUVECs, qualitative image for T24 aggregate dispersion with 10 μM AZD-0530.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36609

Oncotarget

and an FGFR inhibitor, TKI-258 (Novartis), were applied
each at 10 μM. The results are consistent with the antibody
blocking experiment of anti-HGF and anti-FGF-2, leading
to dispersal values of approximately 3 (Supplementary
Figure S5.2).
Finally, we investigated the role of integrin β1 on
inducing aggregate dispersal via Src signaling. Integrin
β1 was blocked by a neutralizing antibody in T24
aggregates in the absence or presence of AZD-0530, both
in 2D and 3D conditions. T24 aggregate dispersal could
not be inhibited by blocking integrin β1 in 3D, either
with aggregates alone or in co-culture conditions that
induced dispersion (Figure 6(a)). Even in the presence
of 10 μM AZD-0530, blocking of integrin β1 on T24 cocultured with HUVECs could not prevent dispersion from
aggregates (Figure 6(b)). In contrast, it has previously
been shown that blocking of integrin β1 in 2D can
efficiently inhibit the migration of T24 cells [13]; our
results in 2D were consistent with these previous findings
(data not shown).

culture with an endothelial cell monolayer and cancer
aggregates was able to recapitulate some of the crosstalk that promotes EMT by paracrine interactions
between these cell types. A subsequent study from our
laboratory will bring in stromal cells, however this study
is mandatory to semi-quantitate the behavior of carcinoma
cells in 3D collagen in the presence of blood vessels. The
integrated system has the potential to be cost-effective
and importantly, sensitive with minimum sample usage.
Robustness and less likelihood of human error have the
additional benefit of reducing the workload.
Our 3D system also revealed important differences
between 2D and 3D culture in terms of EMT, and allowed
for the real-time visualization and quantification of cell
dissemination from aggregates. The two-gel region
microfluidic system used in this study was motivated
by a need to grow an intact endothelial monolayer prior
to embedding the 3D cancer cell aggregates. We found
from our previous work that a stabilized, low permeability
monolayer was key to reproducing the dynamics of
drug delivery and that it offered a better model for the
process of drug diffusion across blood/lymph vessel
walls into the ECM surrounding the tumor [11]. This
combination of 3D co-culture with drug transport across
an endothelial monolayer into the matrix surrounding the
tumor cell aggregate has the potential for drug screening
in a more physiologically-relevant setting, compared
to our previous system. Moreover, endothelial derived
growth factors are also important constituents in the
tumor microenvironment, and their presence in the
present experiments further contributes to in vivo fidelity.
These morphological metrics were supplemented by
measurements of epithelial (E-cadherin) and mesenchymal
(vimentin) marker expression to assess EMT progression
(Figure 2(a)-A549, 3(a)-T24).
In A549 cells, the rapid dissociation of compact
cancer aggregates by endothelial cells was reversed
by inhibitors of several receptor tyrosine kinases and
intracellular kinases (Figure 4). Our data suggest that
several pathways were activated in A549 cells by
endothelial-secreted growth factors. We also observed a
synergistic effect using an EGFR inhibitor (CI-1033) in
conjunction with an Akt inhibitor (MK-2206). Previous
studies have suggested that this synergistic effect leads
to actin cytoskeletal disorganization and, potentially,
regulation of Rho GTPases [16]. These findings provide
references for the future direction of drug usage in lung
adenocarcinoma.
The T24 bladder carcinoma cell line exhibits a
mesenchymal-like phenotype, with an EMT score of
0.53 [17] and a more aggressive behavior than lung
adenocarcinoma A549, which has an EMT score of 0.28,
indicative of more intermediate epithelial-mesenchymal
phenotype. In T24 cells, spontaneous dispersal was readily
observed in 3D collagen gels. This implies that the two
carcinoma cell lines differ significantly in their ability to

DISCUSSION
Cancer is a systemic disease occurring in a 3D
microenvironment and involves a complex interaction
of stromal cells, vascular cells and the tumor, which
orchestrate a series of cellular events, often leading to
invasion and metastasis. The heterogeneity of various
cancer types further complicates these issues, giving rise
to the altered efficacy of specific compounds under certain
conditions. In this study, we tested drug responses (alone
and in combination) on two different cell lines, with a
special emphasis on invasive bladder cancer.
Cancer patients usually have elevated serum level of
growth factors, namely, epidermal growth factor (EGF),
and transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-b). Moreover,
there are observed over-expression of tyrosine and serine
threonine kinases, e.g. Src, Akt. The kinase oncogenes
play essential roles in growth factor signal transduction
regulation. Dysregulation of them could cause resistance
to cancer cell death and excessive proliferation, in the
meantime, initiating and sustaining EMT program, since
EMT is modulated by similar signaling pathways for
which these molecules have been generated [14]. Small
molecule inhibitors against those kinases were developed
originally as inhibitors of cell proliferation and have been
effective in pre-clinical/clinical trials; these inhibitors
were more recently discovered to interfere with EMT, as
reported in detailed by Chua, et.al in 2012 [14]. Drugs
inhibiting EGFR and Src have also been shown to affect
cell motility and invasiveness [15].
By integrating multiple biochemical and biophysical
factors and multiple cell types, a microfluidic platform
with individual cancer microenvironmental chambers was
used to help facilitate an understanding of the crosstalk
between cancer and stromal cells. Our microfluidic cowww.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36610

Oncotarget

respond to a collagen-containing ECM, thus influencing
their invasive behaviors. Bladder carcinoma cell lines
share remarkable invasive properties with bladder tumors,
which, in vivo, lead to the rapid invasion of the bladder
wall. A critical initial step in the development of these
approaches is to understand the signaling mechanisms
that regulate the tendency for invasion. Changes in
the composition and differentiation status of stromal
cells accompany the development of malignant cells.
Angiogenesis is a critical step at the early stages of tumor
progression, which not only contributes to growth of the
tumors but, together with other stromal cells, can also
promote the dissociation of carcinoma cells. Endothelial
cells are recognized as regulators of cancer progression
with a synergistic effect adding to the tendency for cancer
cells to spontaneously invade the surrounding tissues.
Comprehensive analysis of the secretion protein profiles
of HUVECs has revealed that multiple paracrine factors
could play a role in triggering cancer progression [18].
The presence or absence of endothelial cells also
contributes to the differences of drug efficacy in T24 cells.
This might explain why some drugs seem to be effective
in the earlier screening stage, however, fail in later in
vivo testing. In this experiment, drugs targeting Akt,
EGFR, or TGFβR suppress HUVEC-induced aggregate
dispersion from 6–7-fold to ~3-fold, suggesting that
endothelial cells produce EGF and members of the TGFβ
family. Interestingly, the Src-inhibitor, AZD-0530, was
highly effective in inhibiting dispersion in the absence of
HUVECs, but this effect was almost completely forfeited
when HUVECs were added in co-culture. Both of these
results clearly indicate that other factors secreted by
endothelial cells also mediate T24 EMT progression
whereas Src activation is not essential. Since AZD-0530
is a dual-kinase inhibitor, we also investigated whether
inhibition of c-abl kinase also leads to the partial inhibition
of T24 aggregate dispersion, by treating with 10 μM of
STI-571 (imatinib, data not shown); the results of which
suggested that c-abl has little or no role in dispersion.
To investigate the role of paracrine signaling by
HUVECs to T24 cells, individual growth factors were
examined in the absence of HUVECs and in the presence
of AZD-0530. Growth factor test results revealed that
either HGF or FGF-2 can restore aggregate dispersal. In
this regard, several reports have indicated that HGF/cMet pathway activation correlates with bladder cancer
progression [19–21]. Moreover, muscle invasiveness of
T24 cells is associated with high levels of HGF in the
serum and urine [22] [23]. Our study shows that HUVECs
secrete HGF, which promotes dispersion of T24 cells by
a mechanism independent of the Src pathway. ELISA and
neutralizing antibody experiments further validated these
findings. We also observed that FGF-2 plays a similar
role to HGF in promoting EMT. FGF-2 is secreted by
HUVECs and was shown to trigger T24 cell dispersal.
Previous literature has reported that FGF-2 could lead to
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

EMT through Ras-MAPK pathway activation [24, 25]. In
addition, c-Met and FGFR inhibitor experiments produced
results that are consistent with our blocking antibody
observations. The information in this study is proposed
to be useful to provide a framework to guide the selection
of the best in class drug combination, to treat invasive
bladder carcinoma. It is now envisioned to expand this
study by using tumor biopsies rather cell lines to establish
new therapeutics regimens.
Our findings regarding Src-mediated T24 aggregate
dispersion imply that the inhibition of Src kinase might
partially prevent the collagen-triggered EMT of T24 cell
aggregates (Figure 6). In type I collagen, β1 integrin is
the major cellular receptor [26]. As Src kinase transmits
integrin-dependent signaling, and there is evidence that
Src is activated at focal adhesions via RhoA, leading to
enhanced adhesion disassembly in migrating cells [27, 28],
we suspected that integrin β1 might play a role in Srcmediated T24 aggregate dispersion. However, blocking
β1-integrin could not prevent the 3D dispersion of T24
aggregates. These results differ from those obtained in
a previous study of individual T24 cell migration [29],
and suggest that 3D dispersion might rely on different or
additional mechanisms as compared with migration that
are perhaps associated with membrane metalloproteases
[30–32].

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell maintenance and preparation of carcinoma
aggregates
A549 cells transfected with histone H2B-mCherry
cDNA and T24 urinary bladder carcinoma epithelial
cells were cultured in DMEM (Gibco/Invitrogen 12100)
supplemented with 10% FBS (Gibco/Invitrogen). The
protocol for generating A549-H2B-mCherry stable cells
is described in the Supplemental Data. HUVECs were
maintained in microvascular endothelial growth media
(Lonza EGM-2MV, Basel, Switzerland). The detailed
method for generating cancer cell aggregates is described
in our previous study [33, 34].

Microfluidic device design and fabrication
The microfluidic device for this study was fabricated
from polydimethyl siloxane (PDMS) (Figure 1). The
PDMS replica is a negative image of the positive relief
structure of the patterned wafer made by soft lithography.
A detailed description on fabrication of these tissue culture
devices can be found elsewhere [35]. The device consists
of two gel channels flanked by two media channels that
are formed into closed chambers by bonding a coverslip
to the PDMS substrate.
The collagen gel solution (2.5 mg/ml, pH = 7.4) was
first injected into one of gel channels and polymerized
36611

Oncotarget

at 37°C to form the endothelial cell adhesion channel.
A  HUVEC-containing solution was then injected
into this channel, and the cells were allowed to form a
confluent monolayer on the coverslip bottom substrate
and the gel surface. After 24 h, an aggregate-containing
collagen gel solution was then pipetted into the second
gel region to allow gel polymerization via thermal crosslinking. The average distance between the HUVEC and
tumor aggregates was < 200 μm, facilitating rapid cell–
cell signaling. Aggregate or individual cell behavior
was observed via 3D confocal imaging of the gel region
through the supporting glass coverslip. A detailed
description of reagent preparation can be found in the
Supplemental Data.

Blocking experiments

Characterization of endothelial monolayer

CONCLUSION

Fluorescent dextran 70-kDa Texas Red (Invitrogen)
was mixed with culture medium at a concentration of
12.5 μg/ml. The solution was added to the endothelial
cell channel, after 24 h of endothelial cell seeding without
cancer cell aggregates. Using fluorescence microscopy,
the concentration fields were captured at different time
points, and their raw intensity profiles were analyzed using
MATLAB (Mathworks, Boston, MA, USA).

This study employs a microfluidic-based platform,
integrating quantitative drug screening to interfere with
mechanisms driving invasion and micro-metastasis
induced by the cross-talk between invasive cancer cells
and the microenvironment. We demonstrate the utility of
this assay in assessing tumor-specific therapeutic potential,
by determining the efficacy of drugs as single agents
or in combination; this will be particularly important
when dealing with highly invasive cancers. The newly
uncovered therapeutic regimens could then be considered
for further in vivo investigations. Our laboratory is
currently testing such drug cocktails in bladder preclinical
models. In addition, by reproducing EMT in an in vitro
model using a 3D collagen scaffold with various types of
cancer cells, we are able to investigate the tumorigenicity
and invasiveness of organ-specific cancers, with potential
applications toward the future goal of personalized
medicine.

HGF was blocked with 20 μg/ml anti-HGF (AB294-NA, R&D Systems), FGF-2 was blocked with 5 μg/ml
anti-FGF (AB-233-NA, R&D Systems) and integrin β1
was blocked with 20 μg/ml anti-integrin β1 (MAB17781,
R&D Systems), respectively. The blocking antibody was
added in excess to the experimental setup. In brief, cell
aggregates were collected from microwells and blocked
for 4 h before mixing with collagen solution and injecting
into the microfluidic device. Antibody was continuously
supplied via cell media in microfluidic channel, and media
were changed on a twice-daily basis. Aggregate dispersion
was evaluated at 0 and 36 h.

3D drug screening
Four kinase inhibitors regulating EMT on different
targets (Figure 1(f)) were selected based on our previous
study with an appropriate range of concentrations using
A549 and T24 cells, and introduced via the HUVEC
channel. For each of the two cell lines, mixtures of two of
the four drugs were combined in identical concentrations
and tested for drug synergistic rather than additive effects.
(Every drug stock solution is prepared at 10 mM in
DMSO. The final DMSO concentration in cell culture
is < 0.4%). The combination of all four drugs was tested
on T24 aggregates. 3D image stacks (a range of 100 μm)
of each individual aggregate were acquired by Fluoview
1000 confocal microscopy (Olympus, Japan) with a
20× objective (NA = 0.4). The images were taken at
0, 12 and 36 h. Dispersion was quantified by Imaris 6.0
software (Bitplane). Calculation of aggregate dispersion
is described in Supplemental Data.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING
This work was funded by the Singapore-MIT
Alliance for Research and Technology (SMART - BioSym
IRG), by the Cancer Science Institute at the National
University of Singapore, by IMCB core funding A*STAR,
and by a grant from the National Cancer Institute (R33
CA174550–01).

Immunofluorescent staining and ELISA

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

A detailed description of the immunofluorescence
staining and ELISA can be found in the Supplemental
Data. The antibodies were VE-cadherin (1:100, mouse;
Sigma-Aldrich), E-cadherin (1:100, mouse; SigmaAldrich) and vimentin (1:200, mouse; Invitrogen). The
secondary antibody used was Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated
anti-mouse IgG antibodies (Invitrogen). Fluorescent
images were obtained using confocal microscopy. ELISA
kits were purchased from R&D Systems (HGF: DY294;
FGF-2: DY233).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

The authors have declared no conflict of interest.

REFERENCES
1.	 Talmadge JE, Fidler IJ. AACR centennial series: the biology of cancer metastasis: historical perspective. Cancer
research. 2010; 70:5649–5669.
2.	 Thiery JP. Epithelial-mesenchymal transitions in tumour
progression. Nature reviews Cancer. 2002; 2:442–454.

36612

Oncotarget

3.	 Thiery JP, Acloque H, Huang RY, Nieto MA. Epithelialmesenchymal transitions in development and disease. Cell.
2009; 139:871–890.

17.	 Tan TZ, Miow QH, Miki Y, Noda T, Mori S, Huang RY,
Thiery JP. Epithelial-mesenchymal transition spectrum
quantification and its efficacy in deciphering survival and
drug responses of cancer patients. EMBO Mol Med. 2014;
11:201404208.

4.	 Gupta PB, Onder TT, Jiang G, Tao K, Kuperwasser C,
Weinberg RA, Lander ES. Identification of selective inhibitors of cancer stem cells by high-throughput screening. Cell.
2009; 138:645–659.

18.	 Tunica DG, Yin XK, Sidibe A, Stegemann C, Nissum M,
Zeng LF, Brunet M, Mayr M. Proteomic analysis of the
secretome of human umbilical vein endothelial cells using
a combination of free-flow electrophoresis and nanoflow
LC-MS/MS. Proteomics. 2009; 9:4991–4996.

5.	 Polyak K, Weinberg RA. Transitions between epithelial and
mesenchymal states: acquisition of malignant and stem cell
traits. Nat Rev Cancer. 2009; 9:265–273.

19.	 Wang PF, Nishitani MA, Tanimoto S, Kishimoto T,
Fukumori T, Takahashi M, Kanayama HO. Bladder cancer
cell invasion is enhanced by cross-talk with fibroblasts
through hepatocyte growth factor. Urology. 2007;
69:780–784.

6.	 Page-McCaw A, Ewald AJ, Werb Z. Matrix metalloproteinases and the regulation of tissue remodelling. Nature
reviews Molecular cell biology. 2007; 8:221–233.
7.	 Joyce JA, Pollard JW. Microenvironmental regulation of
metastasis. Nature reviews Cancer. 2009; 9:239–252.

20.	 Laidler P, Gil D, Pituch-Noworolska A, Ciolczyk D,
Ksiazek D, Przybylo M, Litynska A. Expression of beta1integrins and N-cadherin in bladder cancer and melanoma
cell lines. Acta Biochim Pol. 2000; 47:1159–1170.

8.	 Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. Hallmarks of cancer: the next
generation. Cell. 2011; 144:646–674.
9.	 Scheel C, Eaton EN, Li SH, Chaffer CL, Reinhardt F,
Kah KJ, Bell G, Guo W, Rubin J, Richardson AL,
Weinberg RA. Paracrine and autocrine signals induce and
maintain mesenchymal and stem cell states in the breast.
Cell. 2011; 145:926–940.

21.	 Sigurdsson V, Hilmarsdottir B, Sigmundsdottir H,
Fridriksdottir AJ, Ringner M, Villadsen R, Borg A,
Agnarsson BA, Petersen OW, Magnusson MK, Gudjonsson T.
Endothelial induced EMT in breast epithelial cells with stem
cell properties. Plos One. 2011; 6:6.

10.	 Chung S, Sudo R, Vickerman V, Zervantonakis IK,
Kamm  RD. Microfluidic Platforms for Studies of
Angiogenesis, Cell Migration, and Cell-Cell Interactions.
Ann Biomed Eng. 2010; 38:1164–1177.

22.	 Smolen GA, Sordella R, Muir B, Mohapatra G, Barmettler A,
Archibald H, Kim WJ, Okimoto RA, Bell DW, Sgroi DC,
Christensen JG, Settleman J, Haber DA. Amplification of MET
may identify a subset of cancers with extreme sensitivity to the
selective tyrosine kinase inhibitor PHA-665752. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America. 2006; 103:2316–2321.

11.	 Aref AR, Huang RYJ, Yu WM, Chua KN, Sun W, Tu TY,
Bai J, Sim WJ, Zervantonakis IK, Thiery JP, Kamm RD.
Screening therapeutic EMT blocking agents in a threedimensional microenvironment. Integr Biol-Uk. 2013;
5:381–389.

23.	 Gohji K, Nomi M, Niitani Y, Kitazawa S, Fujii A,
Katsuoka Y, Nakajima M. Independent prognostic value of
serum hepatocyte growth factor in bladder cancer. J Clin
Oncol. 2000; 18:2963–2971.

12.	 Sharma SV, Haber DA, Settleman J. Cell line-based platforms to evaluate the therapeutic efficacy of candidate anticancer agents. Nat Rev Cancer. 2010; 10:241–253.
13.	 Heyder C, Gloria-Maercker E, Hatzmann W, Niggemann B,
Zanker KS, Dittmar T. Role of the beta1-integrin subunit in the adhesion, extravasation and migration of T24
human bladder carcinoma cells. Clin Exp Metastasis. 2005;
22:99–106.

24.	 De Medina SGD, Popov Z, Chopin DK, Southgate J,
Tucker GC, Delouvee A, Thiery JP, Radvanyi F. Relationship
between E-cadherin and fibroblast growth factor receptor 2b expression in bladder carcinomas. Oncogene. 1999;
18:5722–5726.

14.	 Chua K, Sim W, Racine V, Lee S, Goh B, Thiery J. A cellbased small molecule screening method for identifying
inhibitors of epithelial-mesenchymal transition in carcinoma PLoS One. 2012; 7:e33183.

25.	 Antoine M, Wirz W, Tag CG, Mavituna M, Emans N,
Korff T, Stoldt V, Gressner AM, Kiefer P. Expression
­pattern of fibroblast growth factors (FGFs), their receptors and antagonists in primary endothelial cells and
vascular smooth muscle cells. Growth Factors. 2005;
23:87–95.

15.	 Huang R, Wong M, Tan T, Kuay K, Ng A, Chung V. An
EMT spectrum defines an anoikis-resistant and spheroidogenic intermediate mesenchymal state that is sensitive to
e-cadherin restoration by a src-kinase inhibitor, saracatinib
(AZD0530). Cell Death Dis. 2013; 4:e915.

26.	 Jokinen J, Dadu E, Nykvist P, Kapyla J, White DJ, Ivaska J,
Vehvilainen P, Reunanen H, Larjava H, Hakkinen L,
Heino J. Integrin-mediated cell adhesion to type I collagen
fibrils. J Biol Chem. 2004; 279:31956–31963.

16.	 Zhao TT, Le Francois BG, Goss G, Ding K, Bradbury
PA, Dimitroulakos J. Lovastatin inhibits EGFR dimerization and AKT activation in squamous cell carcinoma cells:
potential regulation by targeting rho proteins. Oncogene.
2010; 29:4682–4692.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27.	 Yamaguchi H, Pixley F, Condeelis J. Invadopodia and
podosomes in tumor invasion. Eur J Cell Biol. 2006;
85:213–218.

36613

Oncotarget

28.	 Huveneers S, Danen EH. Adhesion signaling - crosstalk between integrins, Src and Rho. J Cell Sci. 2009;
122:1059–1069.

32.	 Li L, Liu C, Amato R, Chang J, Li W, Li W. CDKL2 promotes epithelial-mesenchymal transition and breast cancer
progression. Oncotarget. 2014; 5:10840–10853.

29.	 Fujita S, Suzuki H, Kinoshita M, Hirohashi S. Inhibition
of cell attachment, invasion and metastasis of human carcinoma cells by anti-integrin beta 1 subunit antibody. Jpn J
Cancer Res. 1992; 83:1317–1326.

33.	 Tu TY, Wang Z, Bai J, Sun W, Peng WK, Huang RY,
Thiery JP, Kamm RD. Rapid prototyping of concave microwells for the formation of 3D multicellular cancer aggregates
for drug screening. Adv Healthc Mater. 2014; 3:609–616.

30.	 Sabeh F, Shimizu-Hirota R, Weiss SJ. Protease-dependent
versus -independent cancer cell invasion programs: threedimensional amoeboid movement revisited. J Cell Biol.
2009; 185:11–19.

34.	 Bai J, Adriani G, Dang TM, Tu TY, Penny HL, Wong SC,
Kamm RD, Thiery JP. Contact-dependent carcinoma aggregate dispersion by M2a macrophages via ICAM-1 and β2
integrin interactions. Oncotarget. July 2015; 26231039.

31.	 Cichon M, Radisky D. ROS-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition in mammary epithelial cells is mediated by
NF-κB-dependent activation of Snail. Oncotarget. 2014;
5:2827–2838.

35.	 Shin Y, Han S, Jeon JS, Yamamoto K, Zervantonakis IK,
Sudo R, Kamm RD, Chung S. Microfluidic assay for simultaneous culture of multiple cell types on surfaces or within
hydrogels. Nat Protoc. 2012; 7:1247–1259.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36614

Oncotarget

