Oncotarget, Advance Publications 2015

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

The anti-HER3 antibody patritumab abrogates cetuximab
resistance mediated by heregulin in colorectal cancer cells
Hisato Kawakami1, Isamu Okamoto1,2, Kimio Yonesaka1, Kunio Okamoto1,
Kiyoko Shibata1, Yume Shinkai1, Haruka Sakamoto1, Michiko Kitano1,
Takao Tamura1, Kazuto Nishio3, Kazuhiko Nakagawa1
1

Department of Medical Oncology, Kinki University Faculty of Medicine, Osaka-sayama, Osaka 589-8511, Japan

2

Center for Clinical and Translational Research, Kyushu University Hospital, Higashiku, Fukuoka 812–8582, Japan

3

Department of Genome Biology, Kinki University Faculty of Medicine, Osaka-Sayama, Osaka 589–8511, Japan

Correspondence to:
Isamu Okamoto, e-mail: okamotoi@kokyu.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp
Keywords: colorectal cancer, heregulin, resistance, cetuximab, patritumab
Received: September 21, 2014

Accepted: October 26, 2014	

Published: January 23, 2015

ABSTRACT
We previously showed that tumor-derived heregulin, a ligand for HER3, is
associated with both de novo and acquired resistance to cetuximab. We have now
examined whether patritumab, a novel neutralizing monoclonal antibody to HER3, is
able to overcome such resistance. Human colorectal cancer (DiFi) cells that are highly
sensitive to cetuximab were engineered to stably express heregulin by retroviral
infection, and the effects of cetuximab and patritumab on the resulting DiFi-HRG cells
were examined. DiFi-HRG cells released substantial amounts of heregulin and showed
resistance to cetuximab. Cetuximab alone inhibited EGFR and ERK phosphorylation
in DiFi-HRG cells, but it had no effect on the phosphorylation of HER2, HER3, or AKT,
suggesting that sustained AKT activation by HER2 and HER3 underlies cetuximab
resistance in these cells. In contrast, patritumab in combination with cetuximab
markedly inhibited the phosphorylation of EGFR, HER2, HER3, ERK, and AKT. The
combination therapy also inhibited the growth of DiFi-HRG tumor xenografts in nude
mice to a greater extent than did treatment with either drug alone. Activation of HER2HER3 signaling associated with the operation of a heregulin autocrine loop confers
resistance to cetuximab, and patritumab is able to restore cetuximab sensitivity
through inhibition of heregulin-induced HER3 activation.

for acquired resistance to cetuximab in colorectal
cancer have also been identified [5–7]. We previously
established cetuximab-resistant cancer cells by exposing
parental cells to increasing concentrations of cetuximab
[8]. Analysis of these cells revealed that cell-derived
heregulin confers cetuximab resistance through bypass
signaling via HER2 (also known as ERBB2) and HER3
(also known as ERBB3). Heregulin is a ligand for HER3
and stabilizes the HER2-HER3 heterodimer [9]. We also
found that high initial levels of serum heregulin protein
and tumor heregulin mRNA were significantly associated
with a poor clinical outcome in mCRC patients treated
with cetuximab [8]. Furthermore, in patients who initially

INTRODUCTION
Cetuximab, a chimeric human-mouse monoclonal
antibody to the epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR), has shown clinical efficacy in individuals with
metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC). However, a subset
of mCRC patients fails to show an initial response (de
novo resistance) to this agent, whereas others develop
resistance after an initial response (acquired resistance).
Well-established causes of de novo resistance to cetuximab
include activating mutations in codon 12 or 13 of KRAS
and in BRAF [1–4]. Various mechanisms responsible

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11847

Oncotarget

achieved a partial response to cetuximab-based therapy, the
serum concentration of heregulin after the development of
clinical cetuximab resistance was significantly higher than
that before treatment [8]. These preclinical and clinical data
indicate that increased levels of heregulin are associated
with both de novo and acquired resistance to cetuximab.
Patritumab (U3-1287) is a first-in-class, fully human
monoclonal antibody directed to the extracellular domain
(ECD) of HER3 that is currently in clinical development,
as are other HER3-targeted antibodies such as MM-121
and LJM716 (MM-121 prevents ligand binding, whereas
LJM716 specifically binds to an epitope formed by ECD
domains II and IV in the closed conformation of HER3
[10]). Patritumab has been shown both to inhibit ligandinduced HER3 phosphorylation and to suppress the growth
of pancreatic, non–small cell lung cancer, and colorectal
cancer xenograft tumors [11, 12]. To identify strategies
or agents capable of overcoming resistance to cetuximab
induced by heregulin, we have now established sublines of
the cetuximab-sensitive human colorectal cancer cell line
DiFi that stably express heregulin derived from transfected
cDNA. With the use of these cells, we investigated the
effects of patritumab on cetuximab resistance mediated by
cell-derived heregulin both in vitro and in vivo.

DiFi-Mock1 cells, with median inhibitory concentration
(IC50) values of > 100 μg/mL for the former cell lines and
~0.1 μg/mL for the latter (Fig. 1C). The DiFi-HRG cell lines
also showed resistance to panitumumab, another antibody
to EGFR (data not shown). These data thus suggested that
DiFi-HRG cells are resistant to EGFR-targeted antibodies.

Heregulin maintains HER3 and AKT
phosphorylation and survivin expression in the
presence of cetuximab in DiFi-HRG cell lines
To investigate possible differences in signal
transduction among the DiFi isogenic lines, we
examined the effects of cetuximab (10 μg/mL) on
EGFR, HER2, HER3, AKT, and extracellular signal–
regulated kinase (ERK) phosphorylation (Fig. 2A).
Immunoblot analysis revealed that cetuximab markedly
inhibited the phosphorylation of all of these proteins
in DiFi-Mock1 cells. In contrast, whereas cetuximab
substantially reduced the level of EGFR and ERK
phosphorylation in DiFi-HRG cells, it had little effect on
the phosphorylation of HER2, HER3, or AKT. We next
examined the effects of cetuximab on expression of the
apoptosis-related proteins BIM (a proapoptotic BH3only protein) and survivin (a member of the inhibitor of
apoptosis, or IAP, family). We previously showed that
inhibition of the MEK-ERK signaling pathway induces
BIM expression, and that inhibition of the PI3K-AKT
pathway suppresses survivin expression, with both of
these effects being independently required for tyrosine
kinase inhibitor (TKI)–induced apoptosis in lung cancer
cells positive for EGFR mutation [14], breast cancer cells
positive for HER2 amplification [15], and gastric cancer
cells positive for MET amplification [16]. Consistent with
these observations, we found that cetuximab induced both
up-regulation of BIM and down-regulation of survivin
in DiFi-Mock1 cells, resulting in generation of the
cleaved form of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP),
a characteristic of apoptosis (Fig. 2B). In contrast, in
DiFi-HRG cell lines, whereas cetuximab induced BIM
expression, it had little effect on the abundance of
survivin or PARP cleavage (Fig. 2B), suggesting that
sustained AKT signaling and survivin expression confer
resistance to cetuximab in these cell lines.

RESULTS
DiFi cells stably overexpressing heregulin show
resistance to cetuximab
The human colorectal cancer cell line DiFi, which
harbors wild-type alleles of KRAS, BRAF, and PI3K, is
highly sensitive to cetuximab [13]. To investigate whether
cell-derived heregulin might induce cetuximab resistance
in DiFi cells, we established DiFi sublines that stably
overexpress this protein (DiFi-HRG4, DiFi-HRG5, and
DiFi-HRG6) or that stably harbor the corresponding empty
vector (DiFi- Mock1) as a result of retroviral infection.
Heregulin is a soluble growth factor that is synthesized as a
transmembrane precursor molecule of 105 kDa. Cell surface
proteases catalyze cleavage of the extracellular domain
of this precursor, which is then released and functions
as a ligand for HER3. Immunoblot analysis revealed the
presence of the transmembrane form of heregulin in DiFiHRG cells (with its abundance being greatest in DiFi-HRG4
cells), whereas no such band was detected in DiFi-Mock1
cells or the parental DiFi cells (Fig. 1A). Analysis of
conditioned medium from these cell lines with an enzymelinked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) also revealed the
presence of substantial amounts of heregulin in the medium
from all DiFi-HRG cell lines but not in that from DiFiMock1 or the parental cells (Fig. 1B). To assess the effect of
cetuximab on cell growth, we exposed DiFi-HRG and DiFiMock1 cells to various concentrations of the drug for 5 days
and then measured cell viability. All DiFi-HRG cell lines
showed a reduced sensitivity to cetuximab compared with
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

The HER3 neutralizing antibody patritumab
abrogates cetuximab resistance induced by
heregulin
To investigate further the role of HER3 and
heregulin in the resistance of DiFi-HRG cell lines to
cetuximab, we exposed DiFi-HRG4 cells to cetuximab,
the fully human HER3-targeted monoclonal antibody
patritumab, or the combination of both agents. We found
that neither antibody alone substantially affected cell
proliferation, whereas the combination of both agents
11848

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Characterization of DiFi isogenic cell lines. (A) DiFi isogenic cell lines (DiFi, DiFi-Mock1, DiFi-HRG4, DiFi-HRG5,

and DiFi-HRG6) were cultured overnight in medium containing 10% serum and then incubated for 24 h in serum-free medium, after
which the cells were lysed and subjected to immunoblot analysis with antibodies to heregulin and to β-actin (loading control). (B) Culture
supernatants from cells cultured as described in Materials and Methods were assayed for heregulin with an ELISA. Data are means ± SE
from three independent experiments. *P < 0.05 (Student’s t test) for comparison of each DiFi-HRG line with DiFi-Mock1 or DiFi cells.
(C) Cells were treated with cetuximab at the indicated concentrations for 5 days, after which cell viability was assessed. Data are means ±
SE from three independent experiments.

induced marked inhibition of cell growth (Fig.  3A).
We next examined the effects of these antibodies on
apoptosis in DiFi-Mock1 and DiFi-HRG4 cells. An
annexin V binding assay revealed that cetuximab
alone induced a substantial level of apoptosis in DiFiMock1 cells but not in DiFi-HRG4 cells (Fig. 3B, C),
suggesting that the operation of a heregulin autocrine
loop in these latter cells inhibits cetuximab-induced
apoptosis. However, exposure of DiFi-HRG4 cells to the
combination of patritumab (10 μg/mL) and cetuximab
(10 μg/mL) resulted in a marked increase in the
proportion of apoptotic cells (Fig. 3B, C), suggesting that
patritumab sensitizes DiFi-HRG cells to cetuximab such
that the extent of apoptosis induced by both antibodies in
these cells is similar to that induced by cetuximab alone
in DiFi-Mock1 cells.
We also examined the effects of patritumab alone
or in combination with cetuximab on intracellular
signaling. Immunoblot analysis showed that patritumab
alone had little effect on such signaling in DiFi-Mock1
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

cells. In contrast, patritumab alone markedly inhibited the
phosphorylation of HER3 and AKT, without affecting that
of ERK, in DiFi-HRG4 cells (Fig. 3D). The combination
of patritumab and cetuximab markedly attenuated the
phosphorylation of EGFR, HER2, HER3, AKT, and ERK
in DiFi-HRG4 cells (Fig. 3D). It also induced the cleavage
of PARP in these cells to an extent similar to that observed
in DiFi-Mock1 cells treated with cetuximab alone, and this
effect was accompanied by both up-regulation of BIM and
down-regulation of survivin expression (Fig. 3E). These
results thus indicated that cetuximab resistance induced by
heregulin is abrogated by patritumab through attenuation
of AKT-suvivin signaling in DiFi-HRG4 cells.

Cell-derived heregulin induces cetuximab
resistance and patritumab restores cetuximab
sensitivity in tumor xenografts in vivo
To examine whether cell-derived heregulin induces
cetuximab resistance as well as the efficacy of combined
11849

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Effects of cetuximab on intracellular signaling and the expression of apoptosis-related proteins in DiFi
isogenic cell lines. DiFi-Mock1, DiFi-HRG4, DiFi-HRG5, or DiFi-HRG6 cells were cultured overnight in medium containing

10% serum and then incubated for 6 h (A) or 24 h (B) in serum-free medium with or without cetuximab (10 μg/mL), after which cell
lysates were prepared and subjected to immunoblot analysis with antibodies to phosphorylated (p) or total forms of the indicated
proteins (left panels). A band corresponding to the cleaved (cl) form of PARP is indicated. The intensity of the bands corresponding
to phosphorylated forms of EGFR, HER2, HER3, AKT, and ERK (A) or to BIM and survivin (B) was normalized by that of the
corresponding total proteins or β-actin, respectively, and then expressed relative to the corresponding value for control cells not
exposed to cetuximab (right panels).

DISCUSSION

treatment with patritumab and cetuximab in vivo, we
injected nude mice with DiFi-Mock1 or DiFi-HRG4 cells
to allow the formation of tumor xenografts. Whereas
cetuximab alone markedly inhibited the growth of DiFiMock1 xenografts (Fig. 4A), DiFi-HRG4 xenografts were
resistant to this drug (Fig. 4B). Patritumab alone had little
effect on the growth of tumors formed by either cell line.
However, the combination of cetuximab and patritumab
induced substantial regression of DiFi-HRG4 xenografts
(Fig. 4B). These results thus suggested that heregulin
produced by colorectal cancer tumors harboring wild-type
KRAS induces cetuximab resistance, and that combination
therapy with cetuximab and patritumab overcomes such
resistance in vivo.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Resistance to cetuximab is a major problem in
the treatment of colorectal cancer. Although various
mechanisms of cetuximab resistance have been identified
[1–7, 17–20], the optimal treatment strategies for mCRC
patients who show resistance to this drug remain unclear.
We previously showed that tumor-derived heregulin
mediates cetuximab resistance in preclinical models
[8]. High levels of heregulin were also associated with
a poor clinical outcome in mCRC patients treated with
cetuximab-based regimens [8]. Moreover, increased
heregulin levels were observed in such patients after the
development of clinical resistance to cetuximab-based
11850

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Effect of patritumab on heregulin-mediated cetuximab resistance in DiFi-HRG cells in vitro. (A) DiFi-HRG4

cells were incubated for 5 days with cetuximab alone, patritumab alone, or the combination of both drugs at the indicated concentrations,
after which cell viability was assessed. Data are means ± SE from three independent experiments. (B, C) DiFi-Mock1 or DiFi-HRG4 cells
were cultured overnight in medium containing 10% serum and then incubated for 48 h in the absence or presence of cetuximab alone
(10 μg/mL), patritumab alone (10 μg/mL), or the combination of both drugs in serum-free medium, after which the number of apoptotic
cells was determined by staining with propidium iodide (PI) and fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)–labeled annexin V followed by flow
cytometry. Representative flow cytometric profiles are shown in (B), and quantitative data (means ± SE of three independent experiments)
are shown in (C). (D, E) DiFi-Mock1 or DiFi-HRG4 cells were cultured overnight in medium containing 10% serum and then incubated
for 6 h (D) or 48 h (E) in the absence or presence of cetuximab alone (10 μg/mL), patritumab alone (10 μg/mL), or the combination of both
drugs in serum-free medium, after which cell lysates were prepared and subjected to immunoblot analysis with antibodies to the indicated
proteins (left panels). The intensity of the bands corresponding to phosphorylated forms of EGFR, HER2, HER3, AKT, and ERK (D) or to
BIM and survivin (E) was normalized by that of the corresponding total proteins or β-actin, respectively, and then expressed relative to the
corresponding value for control cells not exposed to drug (right panels).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11851

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Effects of cetuximab, patritumab, and the combination of both drugs on the growth of DiFi-HRG tumor
xenografts in vivo. Nude mice with tumor xenografts established by subcutaneous injection of DiFi-Mock1 (A) or DiFi-HRG4 (B)
cells were treated for 4 weeks with vehicle (control), cetuximab (1.0 mg/body), patritumab (1.0 mg/body), or both drugs, as described in
Materials and Methods. Tumor volume was determined at the indicated times after the onset of treatment. Data are means ± SE from six
mice per group. *P < 0.05 for comparison of the combination of both drugs with cetuximab alone or patritumab alone (Student’s t test).

therapy [8]. Effective treatment options to overcome
cetuximab resistance mediated by heregulin are thus
urgently required.
We have here established heregulin-overexpressing
sublines of DiFi cells (DiFi-HRG cells) and shown that
these cells are resistant to cetuximab both in vitro and in
vivo. Whereas the amount of the transmembrane form of
heregulin was substantially higher in DiFi-HRG4 cells
than in DiFi-HRG5 or DiFi-HRG6 cells (Fig. 1A), these
three cell lines appeared to release similar amounts of
the soluble form of heregulin into the culture medium
(Fig. 1B). This difference in the relative abundance
of the transmembrane and soluble forms of heregulin
among DiFi-HRG cell lines might reflect a difference
in the activity of cell surface proteases among the cell
lines. Alternatively, the production of the transmembrane
form of heregulin in DiFi-HRG4 cells might exceed the
capacity of such proteases. To investigate the mechanism
responsible for cetuximab resistance in DiFi-HRG cells,
we examined differences in signal transduction between
these cells and DiFi-Mock1 cells. In DiFi-Mock1 cells,
cetuximab inhibited the phosphorylation of EGFR,
HER2, HER3, AKT, and ERK as well as up-regulated
BIM expression and down-regulated survivin expression,
resulting in the induction of apoptosis. By contrast, in
DiFi-HRG cell lines, whereas cetuximab inhibited EGFR
and ERK phosphorylation, leading to BIM induction, it
did not affect HER2, HER3, or AKT phosphorylation or
survivin expression. Given that down-regulation both of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

AKT signaling and of the expression of its downstream
target survivin is required for apoptosis induced by
inhibition of receptor tyrosine kinases [14–16], our data
suggest that sustained AKT-survivin signaling in the
presence of cetuximab is responsible for the resistance of
DiFi-HRG cell lines to this drug. To investigate further
the relation between AKT signaling and the operation of
a heregulin autocrine loop, we examined the effects of
patritumab, a neutralizing monoclonal antibody to HER3,
in DiFi-HRG4 cells. We found that exposure of these cells
to patritumab in combination with cetuximab resulted
in inhibition of EGFR, HER2, HER3, AKT, and ERK
phosphorylation as well as in both up-regulation of BIM
expression and down-regulation of survivin expression,
leading to the induction of apoptosis. These results
indicate that AKT signaling is triggered by heregulin
binding to HER3.
Given that HER3 (a kinase-dead receptor) manifests
impaired kinase activity [21], it requires dimerization with
other HER family members to activate signaling after
ligand binding [22, 23]. HER2 has been implicated as a
dimerization partner of HER3, and heregulin stabilizes the
HER2-HER3 heterodimer [9]. In this context, we examined
the effects of lapatinib, a TKI for EGFR and HER2, in DiFiHRG4 cells. Inhibition of EGFR and HER2 by lapatinib
resulted in down-regulation of HER3, AKT, and ERK
phosphorylation as well as in the induction of BIM and
suppression of survivin expression in these cells, thereby
triggering apoptosis (Supplementary Fig. S1A, S1B). These
11852

Oncotarget

findings suggest that, in DiFi-HRG cells, HER3 is transphosphorylated by HER2 as a result of heregulin-induced
HER2-HER3 heterodimerization, which in turn leads to the
activation of AKT signaling [24] (Fig. 5A, 5B, 5C). The
heterodimerization partner of HER3 is thus likely switched
from EGFR to HER2 as a result of the overexpression of
heregulin in DiFi-HRG cells. We also found that patritumab
alone inhibited the phosphorylation of HER3 and AKT
as well as down-regulated survivin expression in DiFiHRG4 cells but not in DiFi-Mock1 cells (Fig. 3D, 3E).
These results suggest that patritumab may prevent liganddependent HER3 phosphorylation by blocking HER2HER3 heterodimerization, whereas it has little effect on
ligand-independent HER3 phosphorylation.
In our DiFi-HRG xenograft model, we showed
that combination therapy with patritumab and cetuximab
inhibited tumor growth to the same extent as did cetuximab
alone in the DiFi-Mock1 xenograft model. Antagonism
of the heregulin-HER3 interaction by patritumab thus
represents an effective strategy to abrogate cetuximab
resistance induced by heregulin derived from tumor
cells. Given that elevated circulating levels of heregulin
are associated with both de novo and acquired cetuximab
resistance in mCRC patients [8], our model systems
based on stable overexpression of heregulin are clinically
relevant and should prove useful for establishing strategies
to overcome cetuximab resistance mediated by the
heregulin autocrine loop. Indeed, a recent phase I/II study
with refractory colorectal cancer patients revealed potential
antitumor activity of the combination of cetuximab and

pertuzumab, a HER2-targeted antibody that blocks liganddependent HER2-HER3 heterodimerization. However,
this drug combination was not tolerable as a result
of overlapping toxicities [25]. Given that the toxicity
profile of patritumab differs from that of pertuzumab
[26], the combination of cetuximab and patritumab
warrants evaluation in the clinical setting. We also found
that the IC50 value for the antiproliferative effect of the
combination of cetuximab and patritumab in DiFi-HRG4
cells was ~10 times as high as that for cetuximab alone
in DiFi-Mock1 cells (Fig. 1C, Fig. 3A). The discrepancy
between these in vitro data and our in vivo findings may
suggest that antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity [27]
involving NK cell activation plays a role in tumor growth
inhibition by the combination of both agents. Moreover,
combination therapy with these two IgG1 antibodies
may result in an enhanced antitumor activity mediated
by cytotoxic T lymphocytes [28] in the clinical setting.
Given the recent evidence implicating the importance
of interactions between therapeutic antibodies and the
immune system in the efficacy of antibody treatment [20],
further investigation of such mechanisms is warranted.
In conclusion, we have shown that consecutive
activation of HER2-HER3 and AKT by heregulin in an
autocrine-dependent manner confers resistance to cetuximab,
and that patritumab restores cetuximab sensitivity in tumors
with heregulin-induced cetuximab resistance. Further studies
of combination therapy with patritumab and cetuximab are
thus warranted in mCRC patients with heregulin-induced
resistance to EGFR-targeted antibodies.

Figure 5: Model for intracellular signaling underlying the induction of apoptosis by cetuximab and patritumab in
colorectal cancer cells. (A) DiFi colorectal cancer cells treated with cetuximab alone. (B) DiFi cells that stably overexpress heregulin

(DiFi-HRG cells) are resistant to cetuximab as a result of HER2-HER3 heterodimerization and AKT activation induced by heregulin.
(C) Patritumab abrogates cetuximab resistance mediated by the heregulin autocrine loop in DiFi-HRG cells.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11853

Oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Immunoblot analysis

Cells and reagents

Cells were washed twice with ice-cold phosphatebuffered saline (PBS) and then lysed with 1 × Cell
Lysis Buffer (Cell Signaling Technology) consisting
of 20 mmol/L Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 150 mmol/L NaCl, 1
mmol/L EDTA (disodium salt), 1 mmol/L EGTA,  1%
Triton X-100, 2.5 mmol/L sodium pyrophosphate,
1 mmol/L β-glycerophosphate, 1 mmol/L Na3VO4,
leupeptin (1 μg/mL), and 1 mmol/L phenylmethylsulfonyl
fluoride. The protein concentration of the lysates was
determined with a bicinchoninic acid assay kit (Thermo
Fisher Scientific), and equal amounts of protein were
subjected to SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
on a 7.5% gel (Bio-Rad). The separated proteins were
transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane, which was
then incubated with Blocking One solution (Nacalai
Tesque) for 20 min at room temperature before incubation
overnight at 4°C with primary antibodies. Antibodies
to heregulin (NRG1-β1), to phosphorylated EGFR
(phospho-Tyr1068), to phosphorylated HER2 (phosphoTyr1248), to phosphorylated HER3 (phospho-Tyr1289), to
phosphorylated or total forms of AKT, to phosphorylated
ERK, to PARP, and to BIM were obtained from Cell
Signaling Technology; those to total HER3, to total ERK,
and to survivin were from Santa Cruz Biotechnology;
those to total EGFR were from Zymed/Invitrogen; those to
total HER2 were from Millipore; and those to β-actin were
from Sigma. The membrane was then washed with PBS
containing 0.05% Tween 20 before incubation for 1 h at
room temperature with horseradish peroxidase–conjugated
secondary antibodies (GE Healthcare). Immune complexes
were finally detected with ECL detection reagents (GE
Healthcare).

The DiFi human colorectal cancer cell line was
kindly provided by P. A. Janne (Dana Farber Cancer
Institute). DiFi cells were maintained under a humidified
atmosphere of 5% CO2 in air at 37°C in Dulbecco’s
modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) containing high
glucose and supplemented with Ham’s F-12 and 10% fetal
bovine serum (FBS). Cetuximab was obtained from Merck
Serono, and patritumab was kindly provided by DaiichiSankyo (Tokyo, Japan). Recombinant human heregulin
(NRG1-β1/HRG1-β1 extracellular domain) was obtained
from R&D Systems.

Establishment of cells stably overexpressing
heregulin
A full-length cDNA encoding human heregulin
(NRG1, GenBank accession no. NM_013956) was
obtained from Origene (Rockville, MD). The amplification
product was verified by sequencing after its cloning into
the pCR-Blunt II-TOPO vector (Invitrogen). The heregulin
cDNA was then excised from pCR-Blunt II-TOPO and
transferred to the pQCXIH retroviral vector (Clontech),
and retroviruses encoding heregulin were produced and
used to infect DiFi cells as described [29]. Cells stably
expressing heregulin were then isolated by selection with
hygromycin (Invivogen) at 500 μg/mL.

Cell growth inhibition assay
Cells were transferred to 96-well flat-bottomed
plates and cultured for 24 h before exposure to various
concentrations of cetuximab or patritumab in medium
containing 1% FBS for 120 h. Cell Counting Kit-8
solution (Dojindo, Kumamoto, Japan) was then added to
each well, and the cells were incubated for 3 h at 37°C
before measurement of absorbance at 490 nm with a
Multiskan Spectrum instrument (Thermo Labsystems).
Absorbance values were expressed as a percentage of
that for nontreated cells, and the IC50 of cetuximab for
inhibition of cell growth was determined.

Annexin V binding assay
The binding of annexin V to cells was measured
with the use of an Annexin-V-FLUOS Staining Kit
(Roche). Cells were harvested by exposure to trypsinEDTA, washed with PBS, and centrifuged at 200 × g for
5 min. The cell pellets were resuspended in 100 μL of
Annexin-V-FLUOS labeling solution, incubated for 10 to
15 min at 15° to 25°C, and then analyzed for fluorescence
with a flow cytometer (FACSCalibur) and Cell Quest
software (Becton Dickinson).

Heregulin ELISA
The concentration of heregulin in cell culture
supernatants was measured with the use of a sandwich
ELISA (NRG1-β1 DuoSet, R&D Systems) as previously
described [30]. Cells were seeded in six-well plates at a
density of 0.5 × 106 cells per well in DMEM supplemented
with 10% FBS. After the cells had achieved confluence,
the medium was replaced with 5 ml of DMEM
supplemented with 0.1% FBS, the cells were incubated
for 48 h, and the culture supernatants were collected for
assay of heregulin.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Tumor growth inhibition assay in vivo
All animal experiments were performed in
accordance with the Recommendations for Handling of
Laboratory Animals for Biomedical Research compiled
by the Committee on Safety and Ethical Handling
Regulations for Laboratory Animal Experiments, Kinki
University. The ethical procedures followed conformed
to the UKCCCR guidelines for the welfare and use of
11854

Oncotarget

animals in cancer research [31]. The study was also
reviewed and approved by the Animal Ethics Committee
of Kinki University (approval no. KAME-22-018). Cells
were injected subcutaneously into the axilla of 5- to
6-week-old female athymic nude mice (BALB/c nu/nu;
CLEA Japan), and treatment was initiated when tumors
in each group of six mice achieved an average volume of
1000 to 1200 mm3. Treatment groups consisted of vehicle
control, cetuximab (1.0 mg/body), patritumab (1.0 mg/
body), and the combination of both agents. Cetuximab and
patritumab were administered by intraperitoneal injection
twice a week for 4 weeks, with control animals receiving
a 0.5% (w/v) aqueous solution of hydroxyl propylmethyl
cellulose as vehicle. Tumor volume was determined from
caliper measurements of tumor length (L) and width (W)
according to the formula LW 2/2. Both tumor size and body
weight were measured twice weekly. For ethical reasons,
animals were removed from the study if the tumor volume
exceeded 2500 mm3.

to panitumumab or cetuximab in metastatic colorectal cancer.
J Clin Oncol. 2008; 26:5705–5712.
5.	 Montagut C, Dalmases A, Bellosillo B, Crespo M, Pairet
S, Iglesias M, Salido M, Gallen M, Marsters S, Tsai SP,
­Minoche A, Seshagiri S, Serrano S, Himmelbauer H,
­Bellmunt J, Rovira A, et al. Identification of a mutation in
the extracellular domain of the Epidermal Growth Factor
Receptor conferring cetuximab resistance in colorectal cancer. Nat Med. 2012; 18:221–223.
6.	 Misale S, Yaeger R, Hobor S, Scala E, Janakiraman M,
Liska D, Valtorta E, Schiavo R, Buscarino M, Siravegna G,
Bencardino K, Cercek A, Chen CT, Veronese S, Zanon C,
Sartore-Bianchi A, et al. Emergence of KRAS mutations
and acquired resistance to anti-EGFR therapy in colorectal
cancer. Nature. 2012; 486:532–536.
7.	 Bardelli A, Corso S, Bertotti A, Hobor S, Valtorta E,
Siravegna G, Sartore-Bianchi A, Scala E, ­Cassingena A,
­Zecchin D, Apicella M, Migliardi G, Galimi F,
­Lauricella C, Zanon C, Perera T, et al. Amplification of
the MET receptor drives resistance to anti-EGFR therapies
in colorectal cancer. Cancer Discov. 2013; 3:658–673.

Statistical analysis

8.	 Yonesaka K, Zejnullahu K, Okamoto I, Satoh T,
­Cappuzzo F, Souglakos J, Ercan D, Rogers A, Roncalli M,
Takeda M, Fujisaka Y, Philips J, Shimizu T, Maenishi O,
Cho Y, Sun J, et al. Activation of ERBB2 signaling causes
resistance to the EGFR-directed therapeutic antibody cetuximab. Sci Transl Med. 2011; 3:99ra86.

Quantitative data are presented as means ± SE
unless indicated otherwise. The significance of differences
was evaluated with the unpaired two-tailed Student’s t test.
A P value of < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

Conflict of interest statement

9.	 Wallasch C, Weiss FU, Niederfellner G, Jallal B, Issing W,
Ullrich A. Heregulin-dependent regulation of HER2/neu
oncogenic signaling by heterodimerization with HER3.
EMBO J. 1995; 14:4267–4275.

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

REFERENCES

10.	Gala K, Chandarlapaty S. Molecular pathways: HER3
­targeted therapy. Clin Cancer Res. 2014; 20:1410–1416.

1.	 Van Cutsem E, Kohne CH, Hitre E, Zaluski J, Chang
Chien CR, Makhson A, D’Haens G, Pinter T, Lim R,
­Bodoky G, Roh JK, Folprecht G, Ruff P, Stroh C, Tejpar S,
­Schlichting M, et al. Cetuximab and chemotherapy as initial
treatment for metastatic colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med.
2009; 360:1408–1417.

11.	Freeman D, Ogbagabreiel S, Rothe M, Radinsky R, ­Treder M.
2008; Fully human Anti-HER3 monoclonal ­antibodies (mAbs)
have unique in vitro and in vivo functional and a­ ntitumor
­activities versus other HER family inhibitors ­(abstract). Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the American Association
for Cancer Research; San Diego, CA: AACR.

2.	 Bokemeyer C, Bondarenko I, Makhson A, Hartmann JT,
Aparicio J, de Braud F, Donea S, Ludwig H, Schuch G,
Stroh C, Loos AH, Zubel A, Koralewski P. Fluorouracil,
leucovorin, and oxaliplatin with and without cetuximab in
the first-line treatment of metastatic colorectal cancer. J Clin
Oncol. 2009; 27:663–671.

12.	Treder M, Hartmann S, Ogbagabrei S, Borges E, Green L,
Kang Jea (2008); Fully human Anti-HER3 monoclonal
­antibodies (mAbs) inhibit oncogenic signaling and tumor cell
growth in vitro and vivo. Proceedings of the Annual Meeting
of the American ­Association for Cancer Research; San Diego,
CA.: AACR.

3.	 Tol J, Koopman M, Cats A, Rodenburg CJ, ­Creemers GJ,
Schrama JG, Erdkamp FL, Vos AH, van ­Groeningen CJ,
Sinnige HA, Richel DJ, Voest EE, Dijkstra JR,
­Vink-Borger ME, Antonini NF, Mol L, et al. ­Chemotherapy,
­bevacizumab, and cetuximab in metastatic colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med. 2009; 360:563–572.

13.	McDermott U, Sharma SV, Dowell L, Greninger P,
Montagut C, Lamb J, Archibald H, Raudales R, Tam A,
Lee D, Rothenberg SM, Supko JG, Sordella R, Ulkus LE,
Iafrate AJ, Maheswaran S, et al. Identification of genotype-­
correlated sensitivity to selective kinase inhibitors by using
high-throughput tumor cell line profiling. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A. 2007; 104:19936–19941.

4.	 Di Nicolantonio F, Martini M, Molinari F, Sartore-­Bianchi A,
Arena S, Saletti P, De Dosso S, Mazzucchelli L, ­Frattini M,
Siena S, Bardelli A. Wild-type BRAF is ­required for ­response

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14.	Okamoto K, Okamoto I, Okamoto W, Tanaka K,
­Takezawa K, Kuwata K, Yamaguchi H, Nishio K,

11855

Oncotarget

Nakagawa K. Role of survivin in EGFR inhibitor-induced
apoptosis in non-small cell lung cancers positive for EGFR
mutations. Cancer Res. 2010; 70:10402–10410.

network of interreceptor interactions determines signal transduction by Neu differentiation factor/neuregulin and epidermal growth factor. Mol Cell Biol. 1996; 16:5276–5287.

15.	Tanizaki J, Okamoto I, Fumita S, Okamoto W, Nishio K,
Nakagawa K. Roles of BIM induction and survivin downregulation in lapatinib-induced apoptosis in breast cancer cells
with HER2 amplification. Oncogene. 2011; 30:4097–4106.

25.	Rubinson DA, Hochster HS, Ryan DP, Wolpin BM,
McCleary NJ, Abrams TA, Chan JA, Iqbal S, Lenz HJ,
Lim D, Rose J, Bekaii-Saab T, Chen HX, Fuchs CS, Ng K.
Multi-drug inhibition of the HER pathway in metastatic
colorectal cancer: results of a phase I study of pertuzumab
plus cetuximab in cetuximab-refractory patients. Invest
New Drugs. 2014; 32:113–122.

16.	Okamoto W, Okamoto I, Arao T, Kuwata K, ­Hatashita  E,
­Yamaguchi H, Sakai K, Yanagihara K, Nishio K, ­Nakagawa K.
Antitumor action of the MET tyrosine ­kinase ­inhibitor crizotinib (PF-02341066) in gastric cancer positive for MET amplification. Mol Cancer Ther. 2012; 11:1557–1564.

26.	LoRusso P, Janne PA, Oliveira M, Rizvi N, Malburg L,
Keedy V, Yee L, Copigneaux C, Hettmann T, Wu CY,
Ang  A, Halim AB, Beckman RA, Beaupre D, Berlin J.
Phase I Study of U3-1287, a Fully Human Anti-HER3
Monoclonal Antibody, in Patients with Advanced Solid
Tumors. Clin Cancer Res. 2013; 19:3078–3087.

17.	Siena S, Sartore-Bianchi A, Di Nicolantonio F, Balfour J,
Bardelli A. Biomarkers predicting clinical outcome of epidermal growth factor receptor-targeted therapy in metastatic
colorectal cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2009; 101:1308–1324.
18.	De Roock W, De Vriendt V, Normanno N, Ciardiello F,
Tejpar S. KRAS, BRAF, PIK3CA, and PTEN mutations:
implications for targeted therapies in metastatic colorectal
cancer. Lancet Oncol. 2011; 12:594–603.

27.	Kimura H, Sakai K, Arao T, Shimoyama T, Tamura T,
Nishio K. Antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity of
­cetuximab against tumor cells with wild-type or m
­ utant
­epidermal growth factor receptor. Cancer Sci. 2007;
98:1275–1280.

19.	Bardelli A, Siena S. Molecular mechanisms of resistance
to cetuximab and panitumumab in colorectal cancer. J Clin
Oncol. 2010; 28:1254–1261.

28.	Correale P, Botta C, Cusi MG, Del Vecchio MT,
De Santi MM, Gori Savellini G, Bestoso E, ­Apollinari S,
­Mannucci  S, Marra M, Abbruzzese A, Aquino A,
­Turriziani  M, ­Bonmassar L, Caraglia M, Tagliaferri P.
­Cetuximab +/– chemotherapy enhances dendritic cellmediated phagocytosis of colon cancer cells and ignites
a highly efficient colon cancer antigen-specific cytotoxic
T-cell response in vitro. Int J Cancer. 2012; 130:1577–1589.

20.	Troiani T, Zappavigna S, Martinelli E, Addeo SR, Stiuso P,
Ciardiello F, Caraglia M. Optimizing treatment of metastatic colorectal cancer patients with anti-EGFR antibodies: overcoming the mechanisms of cancer cell resistance.
Expert Opin Biol Ther. 2013; 13:241–255.
21.	Guy PM, Platko JV, Cantley LC, Cerione RA, ­Carraway KL,
3rd . Insect cell-expressed p180erbB3 possesses an impaired
tyrosine kinase activity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994;
91:8132–8136.

29.	Tanaka K, Arao T, Maegawa M, Matsumoto K, Kaneda H,
Kudo K, Fujita Y, Yokote H, Yanagihara K, Yamada Y,
Okamoto I, Nakagawa K, Nishio K. SRPX2 is overexpressed in gastric cancer and promotes cellular migration
and adhesion. Int J Cancer. 2009; 124:1072–1080.

22.	Holbro T, Beerli RR, Maurer F, Koziczak M, Barbas CF,
3rd, Hynes NE. The ErbB2/ErbB3 heterodimer functions
as an oncogenic unit: ErbB2 requires ErbB3 to drive breast
tumor cell proliferation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003;
100:8933–8938.

30.	Yonesaka K, Zejnullahu K, Lindeman N, Homes AJ,
­Jackman DM, Zhao F, Rogers AM, Johnson BE, Janne PA.
Autocrine production of amphiregulin predicts sensitivity
to both gefitinib and cetuximab in EGFR wild-type cancers.
Clin Cancer Res. 2008; 14:6963–6973.

23.	Knowlden JM, Hutcheson IR, Jones HE, ­Madden T, Gee JM,
Harper ME, Barrow D, Wakeling AE, ­Nicholson  RI.
­Elevated levels of epidermal growth factor receptor/c-erbB2
heterodimers mediate an autocrine growth regulatory pathway in tamoxifen-resistant MCF-7 cells. ­Endocrinology.
2003; 144:1032–1044.

31.	Workman P, Aboagye EO, Balkwill F, Balmain A,
Bruder G, Chaplin DJ, Double JA, Everitt J, Farningham
DA, Glennie MJ, Kelland LR, Robinson V, Stratford IJ,
Tozer GM, Watson S, Wedge SR, et al. Guidelines for the
welfare and use of animals in cancer research. Br J Cancer.
2010; 102:1555–1577.

24.	Tzahar E, Waterman H, Chen X, Levkowitz G,
­Karunagaran D, Lavi S, Ratzkin BJ, Yarden Y. A ­hierarchical

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11856

Oncotarget

