Oncotarget, January, Vol.4, No 1

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Targeting glycogen metabolism: a novel strategy to inhibit
cancer cell growth?
Elena Favaro and Adrian L. Harris
Metabolic reprogramming in cancer cells provides
energy and important metabolites required to sustain
tumor proliferation [1]. In our recent paper in Cell
Metabolism, we demonstrate that glycogen mobilization
is a common feature of cancer cell metabolism, and may
therefore represent a novel anticancer therapeutic target
[2]. Glycogen primarily acts as an intracellular storage
of glucose and fulfills important roles (in both nonmalignant and cancer cells) under conditions of oxygen
and nutrient deprivation. Glycogen phosphorylase is the
main enzyme that catalyzes the release of glucose from
glycogen. Interestingly, we demonstrated that the liver
isoform of glycogen phosphorylase, PYGL, is upregulated
in hypoxia, and is required for glycogen breakdown in
both tumor xenografts and in cancer cell lines. PYGL
depletion leads to glycogen accumulation, impaired redox
balance, and a reduction in proliferation due to p53dependent induction of senescence. Furthermore, all of
these phenotypes are more pronounced in hypoxia [2].
The preferential shuttling of glucose through
glycogen is intriguing because it occurs even in conditions
when extracellular glucose is abundant. Indeed, this
phenomenon (referred to as ‘glycogen shunt’) has been
observed for a number of other (non-cancer) cell types
[3]. This suggests that glycogen performs more complex
roles rather than solely acting as an inert intracellular
glucose store. Consistent with this idea, we demonstrate
that glycogen breakdown is required for the optimal
functioning of the pentose phosphate pathway (PPP).
This channeling of glucose through the PPP generates
nucleotides required for sustained proliferation, as well
as reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate
(NADPH), which is an important reducing agent for
nucleotide, amino acid and lipid synthesis, and also for
ROS scavenging [4]. Our ongoing studies are investigating
which other metabolic and biosynthetic pathways are also
affected by impaired glycogen mobilization.
So how does glycogen exert these effects on cell
metabolism and growth? We envisage two possible
scenarios, with PYGL acting as an intracellular
glycogen ‘sculptor’ in each case. One possibility is that
the precise subcellular localization of glucose release
from glycogen could favor its preferential channeling
into specific metabolic pathways. Indeed, intracellular
compartmentalization and trafficking of glycogen
(through the glycogen-binding protein, genethonin-1) has
previously been demonstrated [5]. Another possibility
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

is that glycogen performs important signaling roles
within cells. For example, AMP-activated protein kinase
(AMPK), which is an important regulator of cellular
energy homeostasis, is directly inhibited by highly
branched glycogen granules [6].
Of clinical significance, our findings implicate
glycogen metabolizing enzymes, and PYGL in particular,
as promising possible targets for cancer treatment. Indeed,
some of these treatments may already exist, as PYGL
inhibitors are already in development for the treatment of
type 2 diabetes. Although there are no data available in
humans, these agents are unlikely to be toxic to most cells
because patients affected by Hers’ disease (an inherited
glycogen storage disorder caused by deficiency of PYGL)
are largely asymptomatic. Furthermore, based on our
observations, a number of combination therapies could
also be considered. Firstly, because of the enrichment
of lysosomes in PYGL-depleted cells, a potentially
lethal, and highly specific, drug combination could be
predicted with PYGL inhibitors combined with lysosome
permeabilizing drugs, such as siramesine [7]. Additionally,
given the increased reliance of cancer cells on glycogen
metabolism in hypoxia, the combination of PYGL
inhibition with antiangiogenic drugs (e.g. bevacizumab)
should also be investigated.
Elena
Favaro:
Molecular
Oncology
Laboratories,
Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of
Oxford, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, UK
Adrian L. Harris: Molecular Oncology Laboratories,
Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of
Oxford, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, UK.
Correspondence: Adrian L. Harris, email aharris.lab@imm.
ox.ac.uk
Received: January 25, 2013;
Published: January 27, 2013;

References
1.	 Schulze A and Harris AL. Nature. 2012; 491(7424):364373.
2.	 Favaro E, Bensaad K, Chong MG, et al. Cell Metab. 2012;
16(6):751-764.
3.	 Obel LF, Muller MS, Walls AB, et al. Front
Neuroenergetics. 2012; 4:3.

3

Oncotarget 2013; 4: 3-4

4.	

Lunt SY and Vander Heiden MG. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol.
2011; 27:441-464.

5.	 Jiang S, Heller B, Tagliabracci VS, et al. J Biol Chem.
2010; 285(45):34960-34971.
6.	 McBride A, Ghilagaber S, Nikolaev A, et al. Cell Metab.
2009; 9(1):23-34.
7.	

Groth-Pedersen L and Jaattela M. Cancer Lett. 2010.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4

Oncotarget 2013; 4: 3-4

