2338

E D I T O R I A L

Neoadjuvant Therapy for Soft
Tissue Sarcomas
Does it Make a Difference?

Charles R. Scoggins,

MD

Division of Surgical Oncology, Department of Surgery, University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky

n this issue of Cancer, Ryan et al.1 present their data regarding
preoperative chemotherapy and radiotherapy for patients with
high-risk soft tissue sarcoma (STS). The authors previously presented interim data at 2 scientiﬁc meetings: the American Society
of Clinical Oncology and the Connective Tissue Oncology Society
meetings. The article presented herein represents a single-arm,
multi-institutional phase 2 effort that studied 25 such patients. The
investigators considered high-risk STS as those measuring >5 cm
and having an intermediate-grade or high-grade designation.
Appropriately so, the authors excluded histologies known to beneﬁt
from multimodal therapy (ie, rhabdomyosarcoma, Ewing sarcoma,
primitive neuroectodermal tumor, osteosarcoma, and gastrointestinal
stromal tumors). There are good data that demonstrate the impact of
large tumor size and grade2 on recurrence and survival. Given these
data, the authors have done an exemplary job of selecting a patient
population at signiﬁcant risk of both local disease recurrence and ultimately, sarcoma-related death. Indeed, the patients studied had large
tumor volumes as well as mostly high-grade cancers.
The preoperative chemotherapy regimen included a doseintense regimen of epirubicin and ifosfamide given for 3 cycles preoperatively and 3 cycles postoperatively. The radiotherapy scheme
included 28 Gray (Gy) given as 8 doses preoperatively, followed by a
12-Gy boost for patients with positive surgical margins (R1 resection). This regimen imparted signiﬁcant toxicities on the patients,
as evidenced by the ﬁnding that only 64% of patients were able to
complete the 6 planned cycles. The overwhelming majority of
patients (84%) required dose reductions, another marker of the signiﬁcant toxicity proﬁle for this regimen. Despite these toxicities, the
majority of patients were able to complete the prescribed 3 cycles
of preoperative therapy, and all patients were able to undergo surgical resection. This is a critically important issue because any
attempt to improve outcome that results in patients who ‘‘lose their
opportunity’’ to receive potentially curative surgery must be met
with skepticism. The impact of the preoperative therapy on surgical
morbidity was quite acceptable, similar to that found by others.3,4 It

I

See referenced original article on pages 2432 9,
this issue.
Address of reprints: Charles R, Scoggins, MD,
Division of Surgical Oncology, Department of Surgery, University of Louisville, 315 East Broadway,
Suite 303, Louisville, KY 40202; Fax: (502) 6293030; E-mail: charles.scoggins@louisville.edu
Received November 20, 2007; accepted December
12, 2007.

ª 2008 American Cancer Society

DOI 10.1002/cncr.23470
Published online 13 March 2008 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

Editorial/Scoggins

is interesting to note that 20 of the 22 patients with
extremity STS were able to undergo limb-salvaging
surgery. The authors note that the 2 patients who
required an amputation after the preoperative treatment regimen were originally believed to be candidates for limb salvage at the time of enrollment. This
raises an important question: did the ‘‘delay’’ in surgery created by the neoadjuvant therapy have a deleterious effect? In other words, would these patients
have been able to keep their extremities if they had
undergone surgical resection ﬁrst? It is quite possible
(and probable) that the tumor biology was so aggressive that the tumors grew despite the preoperative
therapy, and would have resulted in a poor outcome
regardless of the treatment regimen. These data are
not discussed within the article; however, one can
speculate that such aggressive tumor biology would
have resulted in rapid local disease recurrence for
these patients had they been offered surgery upfront.
Another salient piece of data is the ﬁnding that 88%
of surgical resections were margin-negative (R0
resection). The impact of surgical margin status on
outcome has been well established,2,5,6 and is also
important when studying any therapy that is given
preoperatively.
The primary endpoint of the study by Ryan et al.
was determination of the percentage of patients who
had pathologic evidence of a complete response to
neoadjuvant chemoradiation.1 A complete response,
deﬁned as 95% pathologic tumor necrosis, was
observed in 10 patients (40%), whereas radiographic
evidence of response was noted in only a minority of
patients. The presence of a complete response to the
preoperative regimen did not confer absolute protection against local disease recurrence or distant metastasis, further demonstrating that histologic evidence
of tumor necrosis is an imperfect measure of the
effectiveness of therapy. Tumor necrosis has been
used as a method to measure the effectiveness of preoperative chemotherapy and radiotherapy for sarcomas.7,8 The authors correctly recognize the paucity of
data validating this measure as a marker for better
outcomes, and the inherent limitations of a pathologic marker of outcome. In the absence of better
markers, however, tumor necrosis is a reasonable
measure of response. Perhaps future research will
allow for the discovery of circulating factors that may
offer better prognostic information. Patients and clinicians seek the ultimate indicator of response, which
is added life. Anything short of this is just a marker.
Survival analyses demonstrated an estimated
overall survival rate of 84% and an estimated diseasefree survival rate of only 62%.1 Although the follow-up
time was relatively short (median of 24 months),

2339

some interesting conclusions may be extrapolated
and compared with data reported by others. Similar
ﬁndings were reported in an Italian study with a
much longer median follow-up.9 These authors
reported that the combination of surgical resection
and adjuvant radiotherapy resulted in 5-year overall
and disease-free survival rates of 77.5% and 63.3%,
respectively.9 Other studies investigating combination
neoadjuvant therapy for extremity STS have also suggested a clinical beneﬁt,10,11 providing further ‘‘proofof-concept’’ for this approach. Intuitively, patients
with high-risk sarcomas stand to beneﬁt the most
from multimodality therapy. Those with small, lowgrade tumors who are treated early in the course of
their disease might not derive the same beneﬁt as
those patients with more advanced sarcomas. Perhaps
future sarcoma investigators seeking to demonstrate a
survival beneﬁt will limit their studies to the very
patients most likely to gain beneﬁt from the therapy.
Given the relative rarity of STS, multi-institutional
efforts will be needed to provide the deﬁnitive data.
One thing is for certain: despite advances in surgical care and a high rate of negative surgical margins,
patients continue to develop disease recurrence and
die from STS. This heterogeneous group of tumors continues to challenge clinicians and claim lives. The treatments are morbid and often palliative at best. Although
local control is very important, and very good in most
instances, it is the distant disease that is so hard to control. This, coupled with the limited number of agents
that are effective against STS, makes protocols such as
these so attractive. The efforts of investigators such as
Dr Ryan and his colleagues are exactly what are
needed: research, research, research.

REFERENCES
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

Ryan CW, Montag AG, Hosenpud JR, et al. Histologic
response of dose-intense chemotherapy with preoperative
hypofractionated radiotherapy for patients with high-risk
soft tissue sarcomas. Cancer. 2008;112:2432–2439.
Weitz J, Antonescu CR, Brennan MF. Localized extremity
soft tissue sarcoma: improved knowledge with unchanged
survival over time. J Clin Oncol. 2003;21:2719–2725.
Bujko K, Suit HD, Springﬁeld DS, Convery K. Wound healing after preoperative radiation for sarcoma of soft tissues.
Surg Gynecol Obstet. 1993;176:124–134.
Peat BG, Bell RS, Davis A, et al. Wound-healing complications after soft-tissue sarcoma surgery. Plast Reconstr Surg.
1994;93:980–987.
McKee MD, Liu DF, Brooks JJ, Gibbs JF, Driscoll DL, Kraybill WG. The prognostic signiﬁcance of margin width for
extremity and trunk sarcoma. J Surg Oncol. 2004;85:68–76.
Stojadinovic A, Leung DH, Hoos A, Jaques DP, Lewis JJ,
Brennan MF. Analysis of the prognostic signiﬁcance of
microscopic margins in 2,084 localized primary adult soft
tissue sarcomas. Ann Surg. 2002;235:424–434.

2340
7.

8.

9.

CANCER June 1, 2008 / Volume 112 / Number 11

Pisters PW, Patel SR, Prieto VG, et al. Phase I trial of
preoperative doxorubicin-based concurrent chemoradiation and surgical resection for localized extremity and
body wall soft tissue sarcomas. J Clin Oncol. 2004;22:3375–
3380.
Lin PP, Jaffe N, Herzog CE, et al. Chemotherapy response
is an important predictor of local recurrence in Ewing sarcoma. Cancer. 2007;109:603–611.
Beltrami G, Rudiger HA, Mela MM, et al. Limb salvage
surgery in combination with brachytherapy and external

beam radiation for high-grade soft tissue sarcomas. Eur J
Surg Oncol. 2007 Nov 2; [Epub ahead of print].
10. DeLaney TF, Spiro IJ, Suit HD, et al. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy and radiotherapy for large extremity soft-tissue
sarcomas. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2003;56:1117–
1127.
11. Meric F, Hess KR, Varma DG, et al. Radiographic response
to neoadjuvant chemotherapy is a predictor of local control and survival in soft tissue sarcomas. Cancer. 2002;95:
1120–1126.

