www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2017, Vol. 8, (No. 1), pp: 248-267
Research Paper

Quinacrine induces apoptosis in cancer cells by forming a
functional bridge between TRAIL-DR5 complex and modulating
the mitochondrial intrinsic cascade
Sarita Das1, Neha Tripathi2, Ranjan Preet1, Sumit Siddharth1, Anmada Nayak1,
Prasad V. Bharatam2, Chanakya Nath Kundu1
1

Cancer Biology Division, KIIT School of Biotechnology, KIIT University, Patia, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, 751024, India

2

National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research (NIPER), SAS Nagar, Mohali, Punjab, 160062, India

Correspondence to: Chanakya Nath Kundu, email: cnkundu@gmail.com
Keywords: q
 uinacrine (QC), tumor necrosis factor related apoptosis inducing ligand (TRAIL), death receptor (DR5), breast
cancer, apoptosis
Received: March 23, 2016     Accepted: August 09, 2016     Published: August 17, 2016

ABSTRACT
Death Receptor 5 (DR5) is known to be an important anti-cancer drug target.
TRAIL is a natural ligand of DR5, but its drug action is limited because of several
factors. A few agonistic ligands were identified as TRAIL-DR5 axis modulators, which
enhance the cellular apoptosis. Literature suggest that quinacrine (QC) acts as a
DR5 agonistic ligand. However, the detailed mechanism explaining how QC interacts
with TRAIL-DR5 axis has not been established. Also focused in vitro and in vivo
experimental analysis to validate the hypothesis is not yet performed. In this work,
extensive studies have been carried out using in silico analysis (molecular dynamics),
in vitro analysis (cell based assays) and in vivo analysis (based on mice xenograft
model), to delineate the mechanism of QC action in modulating the TRAIL-DR5
signaling. The MD simulations helped in identifying the important residues contributing
to the formation of a QC-TRAIL-DR5 complex, which provide extra stability to it,
consequently leading to the enhanced cellular apoptosis. QC caused a dose dependent
increase of DR5 expression in cancer cells but not in normal breast epithelial cells,
MCF-10A. QC showed a synergistic effect with TRAIL in causing cancer cell apoptosis.
In DR5-KD MCF-10A-Tr (DR5 knocked down) cells, TRAIL+ QC failed to significantly
increase the apoptosis but over expression of full length DR5 in DR5-silence cells
induced apoptosis, further supporting DR5 as a drug target for QC. An increase in
the release of reactive species (ROS and RNS) and activation of enzymes (FADD,
CASPASES 3, 8, 9 and cytochrome-C) indicated the involvement of mitochondrial
intrinsic pathway in TRAIL+QC mediated apoptosis. In vivo study pointed out
that TRAIL+QC co-administration increases the expression of DR5 and reduce the
tumor size in xenograft mice. This combined in silico, in vitro and in vivo analysis
revealed that QC enhances the cellular apoptosis via the modulation of TRAIL-DR5
complexation and the mitochondrial intrinsic pathway.

INTRODUCTION

apoptosis via death receptor (DR) signaling cascade.
Two functional death domain containing receptors
and three decoy receptors have been found to interact
with TRAIL. The cellular apoptosis is a result of the
interaction between TRAIL and functional death domain
containing receptors i.e. DR4 (TRAIL-R1) and DR5
(TRAIL-R2/Killer) [1, 2]. The decoy receptors i.e. DCR1
(TRAIL-R3), DCR2 (TRAIL-R4) and osteoprotegrin
(opg), do not have functional death domain and hence

Tumor Necrosis factor Related Apoptosis
Inducing Ligand (TRAIL), also known as Apo-2L, is a
cytokine of TNF (Tumor Necrosis Factor) group. The
anti-cancer potential of this biopharmaceutical agent
has been highlighted, especially due to its ability to
specifically kill cancer cells without affecting the normal
cells [1]. TRAIL causes cancer cell death by inducing
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

248

Oncotarget

play a key role in inhibiting apoptosis by interacting with
TRAIL.
Cellular apoptosis induced on TRAIL binding
to DR4/DR5 is a multistep process, involving receptor
trimerization, formation of Death Inducing Signaling
Complex (DISC) and subsequent cell death. DISC recruits
Fas-Associated protein with Death Domain (FADD) and
this leads to the activation of pro-caspase 8 to CASPASE 8
via autocatalysis. CASPASE 8 then induces apoptosis
via two different cascades i.e. extrinsic and intrinsic
pathways [1]. Intrinsic pathway involves cleavage of Bcl-2
homology domain 3 (BH3) interacting-domain death
agonist (Bid) to form truncated Bid (tBid), which in turn
interacts with the pro-apoptotic B-cell lymphoma 2 (Bcl2)
family members Bcl-2-associated X protein(BAX) and
BAK (Bcl-2-like protein 4). This interaction stimulates the
release of cytochrome C (Cyt C) from the mitochondria,
formation of apoptosome, recruitment of CASPASE 9
and activation of CASPASE 3 in a sequential manner,
ultimately resulting into cellular apoptosis.
Recent research efforts were focused on DR5 as
a therapeutic target; several antibodies under clinical
studies, were developed to specifically target DR5 but
not DR4. The reasons for such choice can be listed as
given below: i) DR5 is expressed in higher concentration
on the surface of tumor cells than DR4 [3]; ii) DR5 is
more potent than DR4 in causing apoptosis [4]; iii) DR5
is reported to have higher affinity for TRAIL than DR4 at
physiological temperatures [5, 6]; iv) frequent mutations
of DR4 gene are observed in cancer patients [7]; v) DR4
can function by binding to both cross-linked and noncross-linked TRAIL but DR5 signals only via cross-linked
TRAIL [8]; vi) TRAIL-DR5 complex is reported to be the
most organized complex that can serve as an ideal model
for the development of DR5 agonistic antibodies [9]; vii)
mice models are considered as ideal for in vivo studies
because in mice, only DR5 receptor is expressed [10];
viii) the DR4 activity is p53 dependent and p53 mutations
are very frequent in the cancer patients [11]. The p53
independency of DR5 adds another reason for DR5 being
the preferred anti-cancer drug target.
TRAIL is recognized as a potent agent for the
treatment of cancer [12, 13]. The limiting factors for its
usage are development of resistance for TRAIL due to
(i) its repeated exposure [14], (ii) interaction of TRAIL
with its decoy receptors (DCR1, DCR2 and opg), (iii)
mutational deletion of its functional death receptors DR4
and DR5, (iv) over expression of anti-apoptotic markers
( BCL2 family proteins), Inhibitor of apoptosis protein
(IAP) like survivin, cellular inhibitor of apoptosis protein
(CIAP) and cellular FLICE(FADD-like IL-1β- converting
enzyme) like inhibitory protein (C-FLIP) an inhibitor of
the DISC formation [15] and (v) impaired oligomerization
of DR5 on the cell surface [2]. Combination therapy is
often adopted as an alternative treatment policy to enhance

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

the efficacy of TRAIL [16]. There are several reports,
pointing towards the enhanced therapeutic potency of
TRAIL in combination with curcumin [17], mangostinalpha [2], resveratrol [18], cisplatin [19], doxorubicin [20]
and several other drugs. One of the genuine problems in
the existing combination therapy is that most of the agents
work through p53 dependent pathways [21]. Several
DR5 independent pathways such as C-Jun N-terminal
kinase (JNK), mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK),
extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase (ERK),
nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kβ) and Janus Kinase/signal
transducers and activators of transcription (JAK/STAT)
pathways are also capable of transmitting apoptotic signals
[22–24].
Quinacrine (QC) is a well-known, age old, antimalarial drug and is recently re-established as an anticancer drug [25–28]. Reports on the anti-cancer efficacy
of QC on cancer cell lines suggests that it causes apoptosis
by arresting the cell cycle in the S-phase via inhibition
of the topoisomerase activity, induction of p53 and p21
[29, 30] and inhibition of NF-kβ and Wnt-TCF signaling
through adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene [31].
Recently, our group established that the nanoparticles of
QC exhibit anti-cancer and anti-angiogenic effects. It is
specifically significant because these hybrid nanoparticles
of silver and QC showed efficacy on cancer stem cells
(CSCs) [32]. The higher selectivity of QC for cancer
cells further offers advantages in terms of toxicity against
normal cells [29]. Eferl et al. reported that bioactive
QC stabilizes p53 by blocking p53 ubiquitination and
therefore, rescues p53 from proteosomal degradation [21].
In limited experiments, Wang et al. [11] and Jani et al.
[33] observed that the enhanced cellular apoptosis is due
to synergistic effect of QC and TRAIL. In spite of these
clues, the detailed mechanism of action elaborating the
interaction between TRAIL, DR5 and QC at atomic level
is not known.
In this work, synergistic effect of QC and TRAIL
on cellular apoptosis enhancement is demonstrated
in breast and kidney cancer cell lines as well as in
cigarette smoke condensate induced-cancer cell lines.
A systematic evaluation of the mechanism for the cell
death caused by the co-administration of QC and TRAIL
via DR5 regulation is undertaken. Molecular modeling
techniques are adopted to analyze the structural aspects
of TRAIL-DR5 binary complex, Fab-TRAIL-DR5
ternary complex and QC-TRAIL-DR5 ternary complex.
The molecular docking studies were performed to
identify the binding site of QC. The various complexes
used in the study (TRAIL-DR5, Fab-TRAIL-DR5
and QC-TRAIL-DR5) were subjected to molecular
dynamics simulations and binding energy calculations.
The in silico and in vitro DR5 mutational and in vivo
experiments were used to further validate the obtained
data. The combined results helped in postulating the

249

Oncotarget

mechanism underlying the enhanced cellular apoptosis
exhibited by QC.

molecular docking of diprotonated QC was performed at
the centroid of the DR5 and TRAIL residues (ThrA129,
ArgA130, SerA145, MetA260, ArgB65, CysB66, GluB70,
ValB71, GluB72 and GluB87) interacting with the Fab in
the crystal structure. Subsequently, molecular dynamics
simulation was performed for the best docked pose of QC
in TRAIL-DR5 complex.
Molecular dynamics analysis was performed on
the complexes TRAIL-DR5, Fab-TRAIL-DR5 and
QC-TRAIL-DR5. The data for the analysis is presented
in Figure 1. All the systems were stabilized after 10 ns
(Figure S5). There were no major changes noticed
in the secondary structure of the macromolecules,
during molecular dynamics simulation (Table S3 and
Figure S6). The calculated binding energy (Figure 1A)
also confirmed that the systems showed minimal
fluctuations after 10 ns simulation run. The binding
energy between TRAIL and DR5 averages to −53.69
± 10.73 kcal/mol, whereas that between TRAIL,
DR5 and Fab averages to −91.50 ± 10.93 kcal/mol.
This indicates that Fab significantly stabilized the TRAIL
and DR5 complexation.
QC could be comfortably docked near the TRAILDR5 interface and this ternary complex (Figure 1C) was
stable during the course of molecular dynamics simulations.
The analysis of hydrogen bond occupancies between QC
and the macromolecules over the last ns (20th) trajectory
showed stable hydrogen bonding interaction with IleA258,
CysB66 and SerB68 (Figure 1B). Several intermittent
hydrogen bonds such as with ThrA129, ArgA130, SerA145,
ArgA183 and HisA256, were also observed between QC
and TRAIL. The system was stabilized during the period
of MD simulation run, as indicated by the RMSD analysis,
(Figure S5). On an average, around two hydrogen bonds
were observed during the molecular dynamics simulation
(Figure S7B). The other residues contributing to the binding
of QC in TRAIL-DR5 complex were AspA159, ArgB65,
AspB67 and GluB70 (Figure 1D). The ternary complex
between QC-TRAIL-DR5, generated from molecular
docking studies was used to understand the effect of QC
binding on TRAIL-DR5 interactions. The binding energy
between the TRAIL and DR5 in the ternary complex
QC-TRAIL-DR5 for each ns is plotted in Figure 1A. The
average binding energy for QC-TRAIL-DR5 complexation
was calculated to be −137.50 ± 10.75 kcal/mol. This value
is much higher than that in the binary complex, TRAILDR5 as well as the ternary complex Fab-TRAIL-DR5.
These results indicate that QC efficiently binds between
the TRAIL and DR5, increasing the complexation between
these two macromolecules. The increase in the binding
energy is mainly due to an increase in the hydrogen bonding
contacts and the van der Waals contributions between
TRAIL and DR5, as shown in Figure 1E and Figure S7A.
Further, the volume of interfacial cavities was significantly
reduced in QC-TRAIL-DR5 complex (Figure S8), bringing
the TRAIL and DR5 closer. In contrast, when the effect of

RESULTS
Structural origin of the enhanced TRAIL-DR5
binding due to QC
Jani et al. [33] suggested the synergistic effect of
QC and TRAIL in causing cellular apoptosis. This was
further supported from the observations by Wang et al.
[11], who reported that QC sensitizes hepatocellular
carcinoma cells to TRAIL. These observations may be
rationalized in terms of structural factors. Considering
that TRAIL directly binds to DR5, QC may be enhancing
this binding by improving the interactions between these
two. To evaluate this hypothesis, molecular docking and
molecular dynamics studies have been taken up. The
co-ordinates used for the molecular modeling studies
are taken from the PDB ID 4N90 (which is a complex
containing three molecules each of DR5, TRAIL and
Fab fragment of AMG 655). The entire TRAIL-DR5Fab assembly is an A3 arrangement where each A
corresponds to TRAIL-DR5-Fab complex. Fab is the
antigen binding domain of AMG 655 antibody. In order
to understand the structural properties of TRAIL-DR5
complex and identify the representative functional unit of
the TRAIL-DR5 hexameric complex, molecular modeling
studies were undertaken. Three molecules of DR5 binds
to the trimer of TRAIL such that each DR5 (chain R in
4N90) occupies the groove formed between two TRAIL
molecules (chain A and chain C in 4N90), thus interacting
with both the TRAIL molecules. The molecular modeling
studies revealed that Fab (chain E and chain D) affects
the complexation DR5 with TRAIL belonging to chain A
(see supporting information for details). Thus, TRAILDR5 (i.e. chain A and chain R in 4N90) can be considered
as the representative model system for studying the effect
of DR5 agonistic ligands on TRAIL-DR5 assembly.
Therefore, in the molecular modeling work discussed
below, a binary complex of TRAIL and DR5 is considered.
The chains (from 4N90) used for the molecular modeling
studies are chain R (DR5), chain A (TRAIL), chain E (first
chain of Fab) and chain D (second chain of Fab).
Binding pocket identification for the QC in the DR5
is a pre-requisite to proceed. With an assumed mechanistic
analogy with the death receptor agonistic antibody AMG
655 [34], QC is expected to bind at the region where Fab
of AMG 655 binds. Further, the calculation of vertical
ionization energy (Table S1), pKa (Figure S1G) and
analysis of various ionic species concentrations at pH range
0 to 14 (Figure S1 and Table S2) showed that the QC has
a higher propensity to exist in N1,N3-diprotonated form
(Figure S1D). QC2+ is expected to occupy a region around
the negatively charged (acidic) residues, such as Asp and
Glu, at the interface of Fab, TRAIL and DR5. Therefore,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

250

Oncotarget

QC binding on TRAIL-DR4 complexation was analysed,
no significant difference was observed between the TRAILDR4 complex and QC-TRAIL-DR4 complex, indicating the
possible DR5 specificity of QC (Figure S9).
In order to understand the importance of DR5
residues CysB66 and SerB68 in mediating the death
promoting action of QC, in silico mutational studies were
performed. The mutations Cys66Gly and Ser68Ala were
inserted in the DR5 of ternary complex QC-TRAIL-DR5.
The complex was subjected to molecular dynamics
simulation for 20 ns (using the similar conditions as that
of other three complexes). The Figure 1A (cyan) shows
the fluctuations in the binding energy of TRAIL and DR5
in the ternary complex QC-TRAIL-Mutated-DR5 which

is well within the range similar to that of the TRAIL-DR5
binary complex (Figure 1A, red). The mutation of
these two residues led to the failure of QC to cause any
significant increase in the binding energy of TRAIL and
DR5. Thus, the in silico studies strongly suggest that QC
enhances the TRAIL-DR5 interaction. To confirm the
observations made from in silico studies, in vitro studies
were performed.

QC-mediated apoptosis in breast cancer cells is
DR5 dependent
The molecular modeling studies provided a possible
hint for the DR5 mediated apoptosis enhancement by QC.

Figure 1: Analysis of molecular dynamics simulation for various complexes. (A) Binding energy for various systems i.e.

binary complex TRAIL-DR5, ternary complexes Fab-TRAIL-DR5, QC-TRAIL-DR5 and QC-TRAIL-Mutated-DR5. (B) Hydrogen bonds
occupancy for the QC interaction with residues of TRAIL and DR5 over the last ns trajectory in the ternary complex QC-TRAIL-DR5. (C)
QC binds near the TRAIL-DR5 interface. (D) The molecular recognition interactions of QC in TRAIL-DR5 complex. (E) Hydrogen bond
occupancy analysis between DR5 residues and TRAIL residues (x-axis) in the three complexes.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

251

Oncotarget

To further validate these speculations, expressions of the
death receptors (DR4 and DR5) in breast cancer cells
after exposure to QC were evaluated. For this purpose,
the expressions of DR4 and DR5 were measured after
exposure to QC in different breast cancer cells including
cigarette smoke induced breast cancer (MCF-10A-Tr)
cells. Figure 2A demonstrates the dose dependent
increase of DR5, DR4 and adaptor protein FADD
expressions with increasing dose of QC in MCF-10A-Tr
cells. Approximately, 7 fold and 4 fold increase in the
expressions of DR5 and DR4 were noted in comparison
to control. More than 4 fold increase in the expression
of FADD was noted in cells treated with 10 μM QC. In
order to evaluate whether QC can affect the expressions
of death receptors other than DR4 and DR5, we have
taken multiple breast cancer cells (MCF-10A-Tr, MDAMB-231, MCF-7, BT-20, MDA-MB-175, and ZR-75-1),
kidney cancer (HEK-293T), and colon cancer cells
(HCT-116) along with normal breast cells MCF -10A
and treated with different concentrations of QC. As
most of the death receptors are expressed on the cell
surface, the expressions of the proteins was measured
by fluorescence associated cell sorting (FACS) analysis,
after incubating the cells with specific antibody against
the receptors. The expressions of DR4 and DR5 were
significantly increased in tested cell lines (Figure 2B),
with no significant change in the expressions of DCR1
and DCR2. Figure 2C shows the relative expression of
DR5 in different cancer cell lines along with MCF-10A.
It was also noticed that the DR5 expression was much
higher in MCF-10A-Tr (75%) cells than MDA-MB-231
cells (50%) and MCF-7 cells (40%) at 10 μM QC (Figure
2B.i, 2B.ii, 2B.iii and Figure 2C). Interestingly, there was
no significant change in expression (approx. 10%) of any
receptor was noticed in MCF-10A cells (Figure 2B.iv
and Figure 2C) after QC treatment. It was also noticed
that the expression of DR5 was more in comparison
to DR4 in the tested cancer cell lines (Figure 2B).
QC also increased the expression of DR5 in other cancer
cells such as colon (HCT-116) and kidney (HEK-293T)
(Figure 2C). Approximately, 38% expression of DR5 was
noticed at 10 μM of QC in HCT-116 and HEK- 293T cells.
To evaluate the apoptotic effect of QC in MCF10A-Tr cells, two separate assays were performed after
treating the cells with QC. First, QC treated cells were
stained with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI)
nuclear staining dye and measured the shrunken, bubbleshaped and fragmented nuclei under microscope and
secondly, the cells were sorted using flow cytometer
after propidium iodide (PI) staining. It was noticed
that apoptotic (fragmented, bubble shaped, shrunken)
nuclei were increased with increasing concentrations of
QC in DAPI stained cells (Figure 2D). A quantitative
representation of the number of apoptotic and nonapoptotic nuclei is provided in Figure 2E. In agreement
with DAPI staining data the increased number of Sub-G1
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

population (15%) was observed with increase in the dose
of QC, which further proved that QC caused apoptosis in
the transformed breast cancer cells (Figure 2F).We have
also measured the apoptotic effect of QC in other two
breast cancer cells (MCF-7 and MDA-MBA-231) using
FACS analysis of PI stained cells. QC caused maximum
of 14% cell death at 15µM in MCF-7 cells and 16% cell
death at 20 µM in MDA-MB-231 cells (Figure S11).
Taken together this figure indicates that QC
specifically increased the expressions of death receptor
protein DR4 and DR5, resulting in increased apoptosis of
breast cancer cells.

TRAIL enhances the QC mediated apoptosis in
MCF-10A-Tr cells
It is well documented fact that TRAIL increased
the apoptosis in cancer cells by interacting with its death
receptors [2]. From the above experiments, it was noted
that QC also caused apoptosis in breast cancer cells
including our newly generated MCF-10A-Tr cells, by over
expressing the death receptor DR5. It was noticed that
although QC increased the DR5 expression by more than
75% in MCF-10A-Tr cells, but the resulting apoptosis was
not more than 15% (Figure 2E). From in silico studies, it
was speculated that QC strongly binds with TRAIL-DR5
complex and stabilizes the TRAIL-DR5 interaction. To
validate the in silico results and to check whether TRAIL
can potentiate QC and induce cell death in MCF-10A-Tr
cells, a series of experiments were carried out using
various concentrations of QC in TRAIL pre-exposed cells.
Figure 3A demonstrates the dose dependent decrease of cell
survival on treatment with QC in TRAIL-untreated cells
and TRAIL pre-treated cells. QC alone can cause 50% cell
death at 5 µM but similar amount of cell death occurred
at 2.5 µM, when combined with TRAIL (10 ng/mL, 3h)
(Figure 3A.i). Interestingly, no appreciable cell death
was noticed till 10 ng/mL of TRAIL treatment alone
(Figure 3A.i). TRAIL caused 50% cell death at 35 ng/mL
exposure. Figure 3A.ii represents an isobologram drawn
from the IC50 values of TRAIL and QC obtained from
the MTT assay of Figure 3A.i. It depicts the synergistic
activity of QC that is well marked from the point (P)
that falls below the line of additivity. A clonogenic cell
survival assay was also performed to further confirm the
data obtained from the MTT assay and we found similar
results (Figure 3B). To further confirm the role of TRAIL
in QC mediated cell death, the expression of DR5 was
measured after a 48 h treatment with QC, TRAIL and
TRAIL+QC. A relatively higher protein expression of
DR5 (10 fold) was noticed in TRAIL+QC treated cells,
as compared to QC (3 fold) and TRAIL (2 fold) treated
cells (untreated cells used as reference) (Figure 3C). To
correlate the increased DR5 expression with apoptosis, we
have analyzed the cells by FACS after PI staining. The
percent increase in Sub-G1 population was more in cells
252

Oncotarget

treated with TRAIL+QC rather than cells treated either
with QC or TRAIL, individually. 44% Sub-G1 population
cells were noted at 2.5 μM QC when combined with
10 ng/mL TRAIL (Figure 3D). The analysis of various
protein components of DISC showed an increased level of
FADD (8 fold) and CASPASE 8 (7 fold) and a decreased
expression of C-FLIP in TRAIL+QC treated cells in
comparison to untreated cells (Figure 3E).
To further support the induction of apoptosis by
QC in TRAIL pre-exposed cells, an annexin V–FITC/PI
dual staining assay was carried out using FACS analysis.
The percentage of apoptosis (Q3) and necrosis (Q4)
was significantly more in TRAIL+QC treated cells as
compared to their individual treatment. Approximately,
42% apoptotic cells were noted in cells treated with
TRAIL+QC combination (Figure 3F). Thus, taken
together, the data shows that TRAIL increased the
apoptotic effect of QC by modulating DISC complex. QC
and TRAIL binds to the DR5 and caused apoptosis which
is again, in correlation with the in silico data.

was noted after QC treatment. Increased CASPASE 8 is
one of the determinants of cells to undergo apoptosis by
intrinsic pathway. A 5 fold increase in the expression of
BAX and 10 fold decrease of BCL-XL was noted after QC
treatment. Dose dependent increase in cleaved product of
CASPASE 3, 8, 9 indicates the involvement of CASPASE
(s) in causing apoptosis. More than 6 fold increase of
CYTOCHROME C, a marker of intrinsic pathway of
apoptosis and an indicator of mitochondrial damage,
suggests that QC mediated apoptosis in MCF-10A-Tr
cells is through activation of intrinsic cascade. Previously,
Wang et al. reported that QC and TRAIL combination
caused apoptosis in hepatocellular carcinoma cells by
p53 dependent and independent pathways and decreased
the expressions of MCL-1 [11]. We have also measured
the status of tumor suppressor protein p53 and antiapoptotic protein MCL-1 after QC exposure. Dose
dependent increase of p53 and decrease of MCL-1 was
noted in TRAIL pre-exposed QC treated cells (Figure 4A).
Approximately, 3 fold p53 inductions and 10 fold MCL-1
reduction were noted after 10 μM QC exposure. Cell
survival protein SURVIVIN and CIAP2 (an IAP family
member) also decreased dose dependently after QC
treatment (Figure 4A).
To further confirm that the TRAIL and QC
mediated apoptosis in MCF-10A-Tr cells is through
the damage of mitochondria, we have measured the
amount of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and reactive
nitrogenous species (RNS) production after treatment

QC caused apoptosis in MCF-10A-Tr cells by
modulating the mitochondrial intrinsic cascade
To understand the role of QC in regulation of
mitochondrial intrinsic cascade, TRAIL pre-treated
cells were exposed to QC and the expressions of protein
components of the intrinsic signaling pathway was
measured. A dose dependent CASPASE 8 activation

Figure 2: QC caused apoptosis in cancer cells by increasing the expressions of death receptors. (A) Expressions of proteins

in QC treated MCF-10A-Tr cells. (B) Expressions of different receptors in cell surface measured by FACS. i) MCF-10A-Tr, ii) MDAMB-231, iii) MCF-7, and iv) MCF-10A cells. (C) Expression of DR5 in different cells after QC exposure. (D) Apoptosis measured by DAPI
staining. (E) Graph representing the number of apoptotic and non-apoptotic nuclei in Figure 2D. (F) Measurement of apoptosis by FACS
analysis of MCF-10A-Tr cells treated with QC. The images shown are representative of three different experiments. Data are the mean ±
SD of three different experiments.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

253

Oncotarget

with TRAIL, QC and their combination (Figure 4B
and Figure 4C). TRAIL and QC both increased the
ROS production but the amount of ROS production
was more in presence of QC (8 fold in comparison to
control) than TRAIL (4 fold in comparison to control).
Surprisingly, more than 12 fold increased ROS was noted
when 2.5 μM of QC was added to TRAIL (10 ng/mL)

pre-treated cells. To confirm that the ROS production is
due to mitochondrial damage, we have pre-treated the
cells with specific ROS inhibitor, N-acetyl-L-cysteine
(NAC) (30 μM, 3 h) and then performed the combination
treatment as above. Interestingly, no significant alteration
of ROS production was noted in NAC pre-treated cells
on QC treatment (Figure 4B).

Figure 3: TRAIL enhances QC action for causing apoptosis in MCF-10A-Tr cells. Cells were treated as mentioned in methods

material section and experiments were carried out. (A) i) MTT cell viability assay.ii)Isobologram depicting synergistic activity of QC and
TRAIL. The line showed the isobologram of QC and TRAIL and the point ‘P’ represent the 50% cell death in combined drug treatment (B)
Clonogenic cell survival assay (C) Change in expression of DR5 by western blotting. (D) Measurement of apoptosis by FACS analysis.
(E) Change in expression of proteins involved in DISC. (F) Measurement of apoptosis by annexin V-FITC/PI dual staining by using FACS
analysis. Images shown are the representative of three different experiments. Data are the mean ± SD of three independent experiments.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

254

Oncotarget

Silencing of DR5 leads to reduced apoptosis in
MCF-10A-Tr cells

RNS production was also measured after treatment
with TRAIL, QC and their combination. The RNS
production was increased in the presence of TRAIL, QC
and their combination. This increase was highest in the
combination treatment, as compared to the individual
treatment. More than 4 fold induction of Nitric Oxide
(NO) was noted in combination treatment as compared
to untreated cells. Interestingly, pre-exposure to Nitro
L-arginine methyl ester (L-NAME) (50 μM, 3h), a specific
inhibitor of RNS, significantly inhibited the production of
RNS caused by combination treatment (Figure 4C). Taken
together, this data suggests that TRAIL and QC caused
apoptosis by modulating the mitochondrial intrinsic
pathway.

In order to confirm that TRAIL and QC induced
apoptosis in MCF-10A-Tr cells is mediated through DR5;
the DR5 gene was silenced with the help of siRNA (h).
Figure 5A.i shows the change in expressions of DR5, DR4
and FADD on TRAIL+QC treatment in scramble siRNA
(SCR siRNA) transfected MCF-10A-Tr cells. There were
increased expressions of these proteins observed in QC,
TRAIL and their combination treated cells. Interestingly,
it was noted that the increase in the protein levels were
similar to the parental MCF-10A-Tr cells under same
treatment conditions (Figure 2C and 2E). The Figure 5A.ii

Figure 4: TRAIL enhances the QC mediated apoptosis in MCF-10A-Tr cells by modulation of mitochondrial intrinsic
cascade. Different concentrations of QC were treated in TRAIL (10 ng/mL) pre-exposed cells and experiments were carried out according
to protocol motioned in methods and materials. (A) Expressions of proteins involved in the intrinsic cascade of apoptosis. (B) Measurement
of ROS in presence and absence of NAC. (C) Production of NO in presence and absence of L-NAME. The images shown are representative
of three different experiments. Data are the mean ± SD of three different experiments.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

255

Oncotarget

showed a complete abolition of DR5 expression after
siRNA treatment. The change in expression of death
receptor along with FADD was measured after treatment
with TRAIL, QC and their combination in DR5-KD cells.
There was no change in the expression of DR5 observed,
but a little increased expression of DR4 and FADD were
noted in TRAIL, QC and their combination treatment. The
histogram of Figure 5B showed the cell cycle regulation
and apoptosis in DR5-KD cells after the treatment. It was
noted that the percentages of apoptosis and the population
of S-phase arrest of the cells were lower in comparison to
parental (DR5 positive, see Figure 3D) cells (Figure 5B).
Approximately, less than 28% S-phase arrest was noted
in DR5-KD cells in comparison to parental MCF-10A-Tr
cells after exposure to 2.5 μM QC in TRAIL pre-treated
cells (compare Figure 3D vs. 5B).
To confirm the contribution of cell death mediated
by DR5, the apoptosis in DR5-KD cells was determined
by annexin V-FITC/PI dual staining method. There was
no significant increase in apoptosis noticed in DR5-KD
cells after combination treatment (Figure 5C).
Approximately, 40% less cell death was noticed in DR5-KD
cells in comparison to parental MCF-10A-Tr cells
(compare Figure 3F vs. 5C), confirming a significant
DR5 contribution for causing the apoptosis in cells. The
un-alteration of ROS and NO production after treatment
with TRAIL, QC and their combination in DR5-KD cells
further confirmed that DR5 mediates its action through
mitochondrial pathway (Figure 5D and 5E).
To confirm further the involvement of DR5 in QC
mediated apoptosis, we have over-expressed the WT DR5
in DR5-KD cells. These cells were treated with QC, TRAIL
and in combination of TRAIL+QC. The expressions of
DR5, DR4 and FADD were restored to a level similar
to parent cells (Figure S13A). Further, the CASPASE 3
expression was enhanced and apoptotic nuclei were
observed in these cells (Figure S13).

mutated c-DNA (i.e. Cys66-Gly or Ser68-Ala) transfected
cells minor increase in DR5 expression was noted (data
not shown). There was no significant change in the DR5
expression after treatment with any compounds
(Figure 6A) in the double mutant (Cys66-Gly, Ser68-Ala)
transfected cells. To confirm the interactions further, we
have measured the apoptosis in the TRAIL+QC treated
cells by DAPI nuclear staining and CASPASE 3 activation.
There was no significant increase of fragmented, bubble
shaped and shrunken nuclei was noted. There was also no
significant increase of CASPASE 3 activation noted under
similar experimental conditions (Figure 6B and 6D). In
order to evaluate the protein expression profile for the
mutant construct of DR5, the cells were transfected
with the mutant DR5 plasmids. The protein expression
was checked with the help of western blot using antiflag antibody as probe, as our mutant construct was
PCMV-Flag DR5. No significant alteration was noticed
in the DR5 expression, when compared to its wild type
counterpart (Figure S14).

TRAIL+QC increases the expression of DR5 and
reduces the tumor size in xenograft mice
The effect of TRAIL+QC was evaluated in
xenograft mice as per the protocol mentioned in
methods and material. Figure 7A.i and 7A.ii showed
the increase in body weight and decrease in tumor size
upon treatment with QC, TRAIL and their combination.
We observed an increase in body weight and decrease
in tumor volume up to thirty days of treatment with
QC, TRAIL and their combination. Figure 7B showed
decrease in the expression of the proliferation marker
Ki-67 after treatment in comparison to untreated mice.
The protein expressions of the representative apoptosis
markers (PARP cleavage, Cyt-c release) in whole tumor
lysate clearly indicated the TRAIL+QC treated mice
caused apoptosis. Further, the Hematoxylin and Eosin
(H&E) staining results demonstrated small and orderly
arranged nuclei in treated mice in comparison to untreated
one. Untreated mice tissue showed large distorted and
irregular arrangement of nuclei (Figure 7C). To further
check the status of DR5 and Ki-67 expression in treated
xenograft mice tissue, an immunohistochemistry (IHC)
was carried out. An enhanced DR5 expression and reduced
Ki-67 expression in TRAIL+QC treated tissue was noted
in comparison to untreated one (Figure 7D.i and 7D.ii).
Measuring the expression of representative apoptosis
markers in TRAIL+QC treated tumor lysates showed an
increased expression of p53, and CASPASES (3, 8, and 9)
in comparison to phosphate buffered saline (PBS) or
untreated sample (Figure 7E). In agreement with the cell
based data, an enhanced DR5 expression was noted in QC
and TRAIL+QC treated mice, as compared to untreated
sample (Figure 7E and Figure S15). Thus, all together
these data suggests that administration of TRAIL+QC

QC specifically binds to DR5 and activates the
apoptosis cascade
In silico data revealed that QC strongly interacts
with the ectodomain of DR5 at Cys66 and Ser68 with
hydrogen bond and the interaction was abolished after
Cys66-Gly and Ser68-Ala mutations (Figure 1A). The
results were further confirmed by in vitro mutational
studies. At first the single amino acid mutations were
performed i.e. Cys66-Gly and Ser68-Ala and finally a
double mutant i.e. Cys66-Gly Ser 68-Ala was prepared
by side directed mutagenesis. The mutated c-DNA (single
DR5 Cys-Gly or DR5 Ser-Ala or double DR5 Cys66-Gly
Ser68-Ala) were transiently transfected in DR5-KD cells
and then treated with the agents. Cells were harvested
post-treatment and western blot was performed in the
whole cell lysate to check the expression of DR5. It was
noted that after treatment with TRAIL+QC in a single
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

256

Oncotarget

in xenograft mice leads to apoptosis by enhancing the
expression of DR5, CASPASE(S) and p53.

need a thorough exploration. A systematic study on the
role of QC in DR5 mediated apoptosis is presented in
this work, using in silico, in vitro (cell based) and in vivo
(xenograft mice model system) studies.
TRAIL is a natural ligand of DR5 receptor that
binds to the ectodomain of DR5. It is capable of efficiently
inducing the formation of active receptor trimer, but
its ability to promote DR5 clustering is not significant.
Contrary to this, Fab fragment of AMG 655 antibody is
bivalent in nature and can contribute positively to enhance
the TRAIL-DR5 interaction. Graves et al. observed an
enhanced cellular apoptosis upon the co-administration of
TRAIL and AMG 655 [34]. They also observed that TRAIL
and AMG 655 are incapable of significantly promoting the
cellular apoptosis, individually. These observations support
the synergistic action of AMG 655 and TRAIL. Similar
observations were made in case of QC and TRAIL treatment
by Wang et al. [11] and Jani et al. [33], which were reestablished in this study also. From these observations, it
can be hypothesised that QC and AMG 655 are involved
in analogous mode of action. With this assumption, the
molecular modeling studies were performed.
To delineate the underlying mechanism of the TRAIL
and QC mediated apoptosis, the in silico studies were

DISCUSSION
The recombinant human TRAIL and several DR5
agonistic antibodies are being explored for their anticancer efficacy. Their application in anti-cancer therapy
is limited due to their short half-life and development of
resistance in cancer patients [35]. Many studies indicated
that the use of therapeutic agents (such as oxaliplatin,
5-FU, CPT-11, etc.) and phytochemicals (such as
resveratrol, curcumin, etc.) have gained popularity for
chemoprevention and cancer treatment [33, 36]. Till
date, the application of chemotherapeutic agents is not
sufficiently explored for the treatment of TRAIL resistant
patients. Quinacrine is an anti-cancer drug that targets a
number of cellular pathways for exerting its therapeutic
effect. Jani et al. [33] (using colon cancer cell lines) and
Wang et al. [11] (hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines) have
showed that QC and TRAIL combination synergistically
increased the cellular toxicity. The detailed biochemical
mechanism for synergistic action of QC and TRAIL and
more importantly, their effect on other cancer cell lines

Figure 5: TRAIL, QC and their combination treatment reduced the apoptosis in DR5 silenced MCF-10A-Tr cells.
Cells were treated as mentioned in methods material section and carried out the experiments. (A) i) Measurement of expression of DR5,
DR4 and FADD by western blotting in scramble (SCR) siRNA (h) transfected cells .ii) Measurement of expression of DR5,DR4 and
FADD by western blotting in DR5 Si RNA (h) treated cells. (B) Measurement of apoptosis by FACS analysis in DR5 silenced cells after
the drug treatment. (C) Determination of apoptosis by annexin V-FITC/PI dual staining in DR5 silenced cells after the drug treatment. (D)
Production of ROS in presence and absence of NAC in DR5 silenced cells. (E) Production of NO in presence and absence of L-NAME
in DR5 knockout cells. Images shown were representative of three different experiments. Data are the mean ± SD of three independent
experiments.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

257

Oncotarget

performed, and the results obtained from in silico studies
were further validated using cell based model system.
The structure of the ternary complex, QC-TRAIL-DR5
generated from the molecular docking studies was
compared with the binary complex TRAIL-DR5 and
ternary complex Fab-TRAIL-DR5. The TRAIL-DR5
affinity was found to be higher in the presence of Fab or
QC as compared to that in the binary complex. Further,
the hydrogen bonds between TRAIL and DR5 were more
in number with a higher stability (indicated by a higher
occupancy) in the ternary complexes. The analysis of 3D
complexes revealed that the Fab fragment binds mainly to
the DR5, whereas QC acts as glue that holds the TRAIL and
DR5 together. The reduced volume of interfacial cavities
in the presence of Fab and QC further establishes that
TRAIL and DR5 are brought closer (Figure S8), increasing
their interactions. This is probably resulting in enhanced
cellular death signaling and apoptosis, observed in vitro.
A comparison of the binding energies of QC-TRAIL-DR5
complex and Fab-TRAIL-DR5 complex showed that QC

is a better DR5 agonist as compared to the AMG 655 Fab.
The 3D structure analysis shows that QC acts as a bridge
between DR5 and TRAIL, strengthening the TRAIL-DR5
complex and probably, this factor is responsible for the
observed enhancement in cellular apoptosis. An increase in
the binding affinity of TRAIL and DR5 was not observed
when the residues CysB66 and SerB68 were mutated to
Gly and Ala, respectively. This indicates the importance of
these two residues in mediating the cytotoxic potential of
QC. The mutation of these important residues (Mut DR5
Cys66-GlySer68-Ala) by site directed mutagenesis led
to un-alteration of DR5 expression after treatment with
TRAIL+QC. This confirms that TRAIL+QC interact with
DR5 at the site predicted from in silico studies. From the
MD results of QC-TRAIL-DR4 complex, no additional
gain was noticed (neither in the form of energy nor in the
form of proximity between TRAIL and DR4). Absence of
any significant increase in the TRAIL-DR4 interaction in
the presence of QC or Fab (Figure S9) can be inferred to
the specificity of QC for DR5.

Figure 6: QC specifically interacts in the ectodomain of DR5 and enhances its apoptotic activity. Mut DR5 (DR5 Cys66-Gly

Ser68-Ala) was transiently over-expressed in DR5-KD MCF-10A-Tr cells and treated with TRAIL, QC and their combination. (A)
Measurement of DR5 expression by western blotting. (B) Measurement of apoptosis by DAPI staining. (C) Graph representing number of
apoptotic and non-apoptotic nuclei from Figure 6B. (D) Measurement of CASPASE 3 activity by immunofluorescence. Images were taken
at 40× magnification in Olympus microscope. Images shown are representative of three different experiments (10 µm).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

258

Oncotarget

MCF-10A-Tr cells are developed from MCF-10A
by continuous and repeated exposure of low dose of
cigarette smoke extract produced from commercially
available Indian cigarette. This cell line is known
as a good model to study the specific effects of death
receptor agonistic agents, such as QC and TRAIL [37].
The suitability of these cell lines is attributed to their
higher aggressiveness and surface expression [37] of
DR5 than MCF-7 and other breast cancer cells (Figure
2C). Using different cancer cell lines (breast, colon,
and kidney) including newly developed cigarette smoke
induced breast cancer cells (MCF-10A-Tr); it was shown
that QC dose dependently increased the expression of
death receptor DR4 and DR5, with a higher effect on
DR5 expression (Figure 2). This subsequently led to
enhanced apoptosis. Interestingly, this alteration of
DR4/DR5 expression and enhanced apoptosis was not
noticed in normal breast epithelial cells MCF-10A after
treatment with QC (Figure 2). Thus, data suggests that
QC increased the DR5 expression and caused apoptosis
in cancer cells without affecting normal cells. In

agreement with cell based assays, a dramatic increase in
DR5 expression was also noted in QC treated xenograft
mice (Figure 7).
The apoptosis caused by QC is not directly
proportional to DR5 expressions, showing only 15%
apoptosis, in spite of more than 75% over expression
of DR5 in MCF-10A-Tr cells (Figure 2). These results
indicate towards the involvement of some other factors
in mediating the QC and DR5 interaction. To address
this hypothesis, cells were incubated with a very specific
DR5 agonistic ligand TRAIL, with subsequent addition of
QC. Simultaneous treatment of MCF-10A-Tr cells with
TRAIL (10 ng/mL) and QC (2.5 μM) led to an increase
in apoptosis from 15% (QC treatment, Figure 2F) to 44%
(TRAIL+QC treatment, Figure 3D). The exposure of
TRAIL pre-treated cells with QC exhibited a much higher
apoptosis at a comparatively low dose of QC. Thus, it can
be concluded that TRAIL synergized the apoptotic action
of QC in cancer cells.
The evaluation of molecular signaling pathways
involved in QC mediated apoptosis led to some

Figure 7: QC caused apoptosis in MCF-10A-Tr cells implanted xenograft mice by induction of DR5. (A) i) Change in

body weight of mice treated with QC, TRAIL and their combination. ii) Change in tumor volume of QC, TRAIL and TRAIL+QC treated
mice. (B) Expression of Ki-67. (C) H&E staining of the mice breast fat pad tissue section (scale bar 10 μm). (D) IHC i) DR5 ii) Ki-67
(scale bar 10 μm; arrows indicate DR5/ Ki-67 expression). (E) Expression of CASPASE (S), DR5 and p53 in tumor lysate. Images shown
are representative of three different experiments. Data are the mean ± SD of three independent experiments.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

259

Oncotarget

interesting results, which were in agreement with
the literature reports regarding the effect of QC on
mitochondria. Changchien et al. showed that QC
causes apoptosis by damaging the mitochondria in the
K562 leukemic cell line [38]. In agreement with above
observations, our data also showed that TRAIL+QC
treatment led to increased ROS production, BAX
activation, CASPASE activation and changes the
mitochondrial membrane potential (Figure S12). This
suggests the activation of the mitochondrial intrinsic
pathway resulting into apoptosis. Attenuation of
increased ROS and RNS production by their specific
inhibitor NAC and L-NAME further confirmed the
involvement of mitochondrial damage after QC exposure
in TRAIL pre-treated cells.
In conclusion, the molecular modeling studies
together with the in vitro studies performed in this work
showed that the increase in the cellular toxicity due to
QC treatment is mediated through the modulation of DR5
death receptor signaling. TRAIL aggregates into a trimer

and binds to the ectodomain of DR5 leading to cellular
death. The presence of QC significantly enhances the
binding affinity of DR5 with TRAIL by holding the two
macromolecules closer. Based on the current results and
the known molecular biology, the apoptosis process due
to DR5 signaling pathway can be summarised as given
in Figure 8. Exposure of QC to TRAIL pre-treated cells
helps in effective receptor clustering of TRAIL with DR5
ectodomain. This interaction leads to the recruitment
of FADD, an adaptor molecule. FADD then recruits
pro-caspase 8 which undergoes autocatalysis to form
active CASPASE 8. FADD together with CASPASE 8
forms the DISC and leads to mitochondrial intrinsic
pathways. Thus, the co-administration of QC and
TRAIL exhibits higher cytotoxicity as compared to their
individual administration. This work for the first time
reports the atomic level mechanistic details for the DR5
mediated synergistic action of QC and TRAIL in the
various cell lines, including carcinogen induced cancer
cells.

Figure 8: Schematic diagram of TRAIL mediated anti-cancer action of QC by DR5 through mitochondrial intrinsic
cascade.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

260

Oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS

chain B is DR5 ectodomain) was used to create the
Receptor Interaction grid (center: 36.23, -45.17, 19.88).
Finally, molecular docking was performed in Standard
Precision (SP) mode, generating 20 poses. The final
selection of the best pose was based on the ionization
state of QC, molecular docking score and molecular
recognition interactions with DR5. The ternary complex
of QC, TRAIL and DR5 ectodomain (QC-TRAIL-DR5)
was generated from molecular docking and was used
for the further molecular dynamics studies. In order to
demonstrate the importance of identified binding site
residues in mediating the action of QC, in silico mutational
studies were performed. For this purpose, the two
mutations were inserted i.e. Cys66Gly and Ser68Ala in
DR5 ectodomain of the ternary complex QC-TRAIL-DR5,
using Accelrys Discovery Studio 2.5 [43]. The ternary
complex generated after mutation was subjected to
molecular dynamics (MD) simulations.

Small molecular and macromolecular structure
preparation for molecular modeling studies
The small molecule considered in this study is QC.
The 3D structure of QC was prepared using the Ligand
build utility of Maestro9.3 package [39]. The pKa and
vertical ionization energy calculations were carried out
using MarvinView [40] and Gaussian03 [41] software
(see supporting information for details) (Figure S1,
Table S1, Table S2). The LigPrep module of Maestro9.3
was used to prepare the ligand for molecular modeling
studies. The various ionization states possible at
physiological pH were generated using Epik ionizer tool
available in LigPrep of Maestro package.
The crystal structure of DR5 ectodomain in complex
with TRAIL is available in RCSB/PDB [42] as a ternary
complex of TRAIL-DR5 ectodomain with Fab fragment
from a DR5 agonist antibody, AMG 655 (Fab-TRAIL-DR5)
at a resolution of 3.3 Å (PDB ID: 4N90) [34]. For the
molecular modeling studies, the representative system was
identified by evaluating the binding energies associated
with TRAIL-DR5 complexation and finally, one third of
the entire crystal structure was selected for the molecular
modeling studies. The used structure contained DR5
(chain R), TRAIL (chain A) and Fab (chain E and chain D).
The Protein Preparation Wizard of Maestro9.3 software
[39] was used to remove water, add the missing
hydrogens, assign right bond orders and optimize the
orientations of hydroxy group (in Ser, Thr and Tyr),
amino group (in Asn and Gln), etc. to the macromolecular
systems under consideration. The ionization states of
amino acids were optimized with the help of Protassign
utility at pH 7.0. Finally, using the impref utility,
restrained minimization was carried out (cut-off RMSD
of 0.30 Å). Using this, two different macromolecular
structures were prepared—one for the binary complex
TRAIL-DR5 and the other for ternary complex FabTRAIL-DR5. A binary complex of TRAIL-DR5
was created using the prepared Fab-TRAIL-DR5
complex, by removing the coordinates of antibody
fragment from the complex structure. This binary complex
was used for the molecular docking studies.

MD simulations
After analyzing the 3D crystal structures, it was
noted that the trimer of the TRAIL interacts with three
molecules of DR5. Each DR5 molecule binds at the
interface of two TRAIL molecules. Therefore, the binding
energy calculations were performed with the help of
crystal structures (using the PDB IDs 1D4V and 4N90).
For this purpose, 3D structures of two complexes were
prepared i.e. TRAIL-DR5 (chain A-chain R) complex and
TRAIL-DR5 (chain C-chain R) complex. In this process,
the interaction between TRAIL belonging to chain A and
DR5 were found to be altered due to the presence of Fab
in 4N90 (as compared to 1D4V, where Fab is absent)
(explained in the result section). After a systematic
evaluation, the binary system containing TRAIL (from
chain A) and DR5 was concluded to be sufficient for
further molecular modeling studies.
Using the identified representative complex of
TRAIL-DR5, four systems i.e. the TRAIL-DR5 binary
complex, Fab-TRAIL-DR5 ternary complex, QC-TRAILDR5 ternary complex and QC-TRAIL-Mutated-DR5
ternary complex were chosen to perform MD simulations
using AMBER12 package [44]. After generating the
input files for molecular dynamics simulation, (i) an
initial minimization, (ii) heating and (iii) equilibration
were performed (see supporting information for details).
Finally, production run for 20 ns was performed under
NPT ensemble (cut-off distance of 12 Å for calculating the
non-bonded interactions). The relative binding energy for
DR5 and TRAIL were calculated over the 20 ns production
run using Molecular Mechanics-Generalized Born Surface
Area (MM-GBSA) method [45]. Similar studies were
performed for the TRAIL-DR4 interaction analysis, for
which the co-ordinates of TRAIL, Fab and QC were
copied from the corresponding DR5 complexes (Figure
S2 and S3) (see supporting information for details).

Receptor interaction grid generation and
molecular docking
The molecular docking studies of QC in DR5
have been carried out for the first time and there is no
information available for the possible binding site of QC
in DR5. Considering the mechanistic similarity between
AMG 655 (referred as Fab here onwards) and QC, the
centroid of Fab interacting residues (ThrA129, ArgA130,
SerA145, MetA260, ArgB65, CysB66, GluB70, ValB71,
GluB72 and GluB87 where chain A is the TRAIL and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

261

Oncotarget

Cell lines and reagents

, anti-FLAG (cat #F3165) and anti-DCR2 (cat #3188) was
purchased from Sigma and anti-CIAP2 (cat # 51-9000062)
was procured from BD pharmingen, USA. Anti-PARP
(cat # AB6079) was purchased from Abcam, Cambridge,
UK. In combination treatment, cells were pre-treated with
TRAIL (10 ng/mL) for 3 h and then QC (2.5 μM) were
added and incubated for 48 h. In this set the individual QC
concentration used was 5 μM for 48 h.

MCF-7, MCF-10A-Tr, MDA-MB-231, BT-20,
ZR-75-1 (breast cancer), HCT-116 (colon cancer), and
HEK- 293T (kidney), cell lines were maintained in
Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (DMEM) media
supplemented with 1% antibiotic (100 U/mL of penicillin
and 10 mg/mL streptomycin), 1% L-Glutamine and 10%
fetal bovine serum (FBS). MCF-10A, normal breast
epithelial cell line was maintained in DMEM /F-12 media
supplemented with 10% FBS and additional growth
factors like 0.5 µg/mL of hydrocortisone,100 ng/mL of
cholera toxin, 10 µg/mL of insulin, 10 ng/mL of epidermal
growth factor (EGF) and all cultures were maintained at
37°C humidified atmosphere in 5% CO2.. Recently, we
have established a cigarette smoke condensate (CSC)
induced-transformed cell line (MCF-10A-Tr) model that
could offer a suitable system to study the mechanism of
cellular transformation caused by chemical carcinogens
and also could help to investigate the mechanism of
potential anti-cancer molecules against aggressive and
transformed breast cancer cell types [34]. MCF-10A-Tr
cells were developed by repeated and continuous exposure
to a single dose of CSC prepared from commercially
available Indian cigarette to normal breast epithelial cells,
MCF-10A. These cells (MCF-10A-Tr) were capable
of anchorage-independent growth, and their anchorage
dependent growth and colony forming ability were higher
compared to the non-transformed MCF-10A cells. The
study explained a higher anchorage dependent growth and
colony forming ability in MCF-10A-Tr compared to their
parental lines. An increased expression of representative
biomarkers of oncogenic transformation (NRP-1,
Nectin-4), and anti-apoptotic markers (PI3K, AKT, NFκB)
in the MCF-10A-Tr cells were also noticed. Short tandem
repeat (STR) profiling of MCF-10A and MCF-10A-Tr
cells revealed that transformed cells acquired allelic
variation during transformation, and had become genetically
distinct. MCF-10A-Tr cells formed solid tumors when
implanted into the mammary fat pads of BALB/C mice [37].
Cell culture based chemicals were purchased from
Himedia (Mumbai, India) and analytical grade chemicals
including QC were purchased from Sigma Chemical
Ltd. (St. Louis, MO, USA). TRAIL was procured from
PeproTech Inc. DR5 siRNA (h) and scramble siRNA
constructs were obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology
Inc., USA. Anti-DR5 (cat # 3062-3) was procured from
MBL International, USA. Anti-BCL-XL (cat # 2764),
anti-SURVIVIN (cat # 2803), anti-p53 (cat # 9282), anti-FLIP
(cat # 3210), anti-CASPASE 8 (cat # 9746), anti-FADD
(cat # 2782), anti-CASPASE 3 (cat # 9662), anti-CASPASE
9 (cat # 9502), anti-BAX (cat # 2772), anti-Cyt C (cat #
4280) and anti-DCR1 (cat # 4756) were procured from Cell
Signaling Technology, MA, USA. Anti-GAPDH (cat# sc25778) and anti-MCL 1 (cat # sc-819) were purchased from
Santa Cruz Biotechnology, USA.Anti-DR4 (cat # D3813)
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Death receptors expression analysis by FACS
Briefly 1 × 106 cells/well of above mentioned cells were
grown in 6 well tissue culture dishes till 70% confluence.
Then it was treated with increasing concentrations of QC
for 48 h prior to harvest and processed for FACS analysis
by the protocol mentioned earlier [46]. Cells were incubated
with antibodies in 5% FBS and 0.2% Triton X-100, at 4°C
for 2 h. Unbound antibodies were removed by washing
twice with phosphate buffered saline (PBS) prior to addition
of secondary-rabbit conjugated to tetramethylrhodamine
(TRITC) antibody. Finally cells were sorted using flow
cytometry (FACS CANTO II, Becton & Dickinson, CA,
USA) with an event count of 10,000 cells/sample. Data
obtained was analyzed using FACS Diva software.

Measurement of cytotoxicity using
3-(4,5-Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay
An MTT assay was carried out to check the
anchorage dependent growth of cells according to the
protocol referred earlier [29]. Briefly ~8000–10,000 cells
of MCF-10A-Tr were grown to 70–80 % confluence in
triplicates in a 96 well tissue culture plate. Cells were
treated with different concentrations of QC, TRAIL and
combination of TRAIL and QC (different concentrations of
QC were added to cells pre-treated with TRAIL (10 ng/mL
for 3 h) and was incubated further for 48 h. Then 0.05%
MTT was added and incubated at 37°C to allow the
formation of formazan crystals. Then the crystal was
solubilised by the addition of DMSO and finally the color
intensity was measured spectrophotometrically at 570 nm
by using microplate reader (Mithras LB 940, Berthold,
Germany). Data obtained was represented as percent
viability and IC50 was determined.

Analysis of combined drug effect by isobologram
diagram
Synergistic, additive or antagonist drug effects were
determined by isobologram analysis [31]. Isobologram
plots were drawn by plotting the individual IC50 values of
the drugs in their respective X- (TRAIL) and Y-axis (QC).
The IC50 values were obtained from the individual drugs
effect of MTT assays. Then, a line was used to join both
the data points and the IC50 value of the combined drug
262

Oncotarget

was spotted on the same plot. In principle, if the spotted
point (IC50 value of combined drugs) falls on the line then
it is considered as additive, whereas if it falls below or
above the line, then it is considered as a synergistic or
antagonist drug effect, respectively.

protocol mentioned earlier [29]. Briefly, 10,000 cells/well
of MCF-10A-Tr were grown and treated as above. Cells
were washed with PBS fixed with ice chilled acetone :
methanol (1:1) and kept in −20°C for 15 min. Cells were
stained with DAPI incubated for 15 min in dark and
apoptotic nuclei were observed under 40× magnification of
fluorescence microscope (Evos Fluorescence Microscope,
Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA).

Clonogenic cell survival assay
In order to determine the effects of the compounds
on the survivability of the cells clonogenic assay was
performed as per the protocol referred earlier [29].
Briefly 500 cells/well of MCF-10A-Tr were seeded
in a 12 well plate and incubated for 24 h.Cells were
treated with different concentrations of QC, TRAIL and
TRAIL+QC (different concentrations of QC was added
to 10 ng/mL TRAIL pre-treated cells for 3 h). After 48 h
of incubation drug treated media was removed and fresh
media was added and the cells were allowed to grow for
5–6 doublings. After formation of colony, the media was
removed and stained with crystal violet. The crystal violet
stained plate was washed with water and the colonies
were counted. The data was calculated and expressed as
percent survival. Finally the percent survival was plotted
against concentrations of the drug to calculate the LC50
(fifty percent cell death in culture).

Apoptosis measurement by Annexin V-FITC/PI
dual staining
Approximately 1 × 105 cells of MCF-10A-Tr were
grown and treated as above before harvest and experiment
was carried out according to the Annexin V-FITC/PI
detection kit protocol (Sigma). Cells were sorted using
Flow cytometer (Attune NxT Flow Cytometer) at an
event count of 10,000 cells/sample. The data obtained was
analyzed by using FCS express 5 software.

Death inducing signaling complex (DISC)
analysis
Approximately 1 × 106 MCF-10A-Tr cells were
grown and treated as above. The pellet was lysed with RIPA
lysis buffer. The lysate was cleared by centrifuging twice at
16,000 g for 10 min at 4°C.The soluble fraction was precleared with 20 µl sepharose-4B bead for 2 h at 4°C and
immunoprecipitated with anti-DR5 antibody at 4°C for
overnight. Beads were then recovered by centrifugation and
washed twice with lysis buffer. Then protein was separated
by SDS-PAGE and western blot was carried out to check
the expression profile of the specific proteins [47].

Western blot analysis
Briefly 1 × 106 cells were grown and treated as
above. Cells were harvested and the whole cell lysates
were processed for western blotting as per the protocol
mentioned earlier [29]. Each blot is a representative of
three independent experiments. The number above the blot
represent relative fold change in comparison to control
analyzed by densitometer by using Image J software.

Intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) and
reactive nitrogen species (RNS) measurement

Cell cycle analysis

Briefly, 1 × 106 MCF-10A-Tr cells and MCF-10A-Tr DR5 –KD cells were grown and treated as above.
Then the cells were stained with dichloro-dihydrofluorescein diacetate (DCFH-DA) (10 mM/mL) in fresh
media and incubated for 4 h. The cells were then harvested
by centrifugation followed by a wash with 1X PBS.
The pellet obtained was re-suspended in PBS and ROS
production was studied using FACS with an event count
of 10,000 cells/sample. The data obtained was analyzed by
using FACS Diva Software [48].
For measurement of RNS the drug treated media
was taken in a 96 well plate and Griess reagent I (1%
sulfonamide in 5% phosphoric acid) and Griess reagent
II (0.1% napthylenediamine dichloride) were added [49].
It was incubated for 15 min in dark to allow formation
of a pink colour which was then spectrophotometrically
analyzed at 560 nm. The values obtained were plotted on
graph to determine the nitric oxide (NO) production.

Briefly 1 × 106 cells were treated as above and
processed for FACS analysis as per the protocol referred
earlier [29]. Cells were fixed with 70% ethanol and stored
in −20°C for overnight. The DNA content was evaluated
in a FACS scan flow cytometer after staining the cells with
PI (50 µg/mL) containing RNase (0.5 µg/mL) and kept for
15 min at room temperature in dark. DNA content of the
cells at different phases of cell cycle was analyzed with
an event count of 10,000 cells per sample by using FACS
(FACS CANTO II, Becton & Dickinson, CA, USA).
Result obtained was analyzed using FACS Diva software.

4′,6-Diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) nuclear
staining
Nuclear fragmentation and cellular apoptosis was
observed by staining the cells with DAPI as per the

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

263

Oncotarget

Silencing of DR5 in MCF-10A-Tr cells

DR5 WT plasmid. Immunofluorescence of CASPASE 3
was carried out as per the protocol mentioned earlier [51].
Approximately, 20,000 – 30,000 cells were grown on
sterile cover slips in a 12 well tissue culture plate. Cells
were transiently transfected with mutant DR5 construct
by lipofectamine 2000 reagent. The treatment of cells was
done as mentioned above. After treatment cells were fixed
with acetone: methanol (1:1) and incubated for 20 min in
−20°C followed by blocking in 2% BSA with 0.02% triton
X-100 in 1X PBS and incubated for 30 min in 37°C. Cells
were stained with anti-CASPASE 3 primary antibody and
incubated for 2 h in 37°C. Cells were washed with 1× PBS
stained with secondary antibody conjugated with TRITC
and further incubated for 1 h in 37°C. Nuclei of the cells
were counterstained with DAPI and observed under 40×
magnification of the fluorescence microscope (Olympus
BX61, USA).

DR5 gene was silenced by using DR5siRNA (h)
construct as per the protocol mentioned earlier [31,
36, 50]. Briefly, MCF-10A-Tr (1 × 105 cells/well) cells
were grown and transfected with 0.25 µg DR5siRNA
(h) and scramble siRNA by lipofectamine 2000 as per
the protocol mentioned in the user’s manual. After 8
h of transfection cells were supplemented with media
containing serum and treated with QC, TRAIL and
TRAIL+QC for 48 h. After completion of treatment
cells were harvested and processed for different
experiments.

Mutational study
Specific forward primer and reverse primer with
a Cys66 mutated to Gly66 and Ser68 mutated to Ala68
of DR5 was synthesized and site directed mutagenesis
was performed by using site directed mutagenesis kit
as per the user’s manual (Invitrogen, CA, USA). Target
oligonucleotide sequence required for synthesis of primer
was obtained from the cDNA sequence of wild type DR5
(accession # CR541898.1). Wild type DR5 was used as
template. Forward and reverse primer for Cys66-Gly
mutated sequence is:
5′CATATTTGCAGGAGATGCCATCTCTACCG
TCTTCTG 3′ (Reverse primer).
The forward and reverse primer for Ser68-Ala
mutated sequence is:
5′GTAGAGATTGCATCGCCTGCAAATATGG
AC3′ (Forward primer).
5′GTCCATATTTGCAGGCGATGCAATCTCTAC
3′ (Reverse primer).
The forward and reverse primer for double mutant
i.e. Cys66-Gly and Ser68-Ala sequence is:
5′CAGAAGACGGTAGAGATGGCATCTCC
TGCAAATATG 3′ (Forward primer).
5′CATATTTGCAGGAGATGCCATCTCTA
CCGTCTTCTG 3′ (Reverse primer).
Using the above primers and WT DR5 a PCR was
run and c-DNA of the mutant DR5 was amplified. It was
then transformed into E. coli system and purified DNA
was isolated. The mutant DR5 (DR5 Cys66-Gly Ser68Ala) c-DNA (3 µg) was then transiently transfected in
DR5 silenced MCF-10A-Tr cells as per the protocol
mentioned earlier [50]. Cells were treated as mentioned
above and processed for different experiments. Primers
were purchased from Integrated DNA Technologies (IDT),
Coralville, USA.

Development of mice xenograft model
In vivo experiment with animal model was carried
out as per the protocol described earlier [37]. 6 week old
female BALB/C mice were maintained in proper light
and dark cycle of 12/12 h at School of Biotechnology,
KIIT University, Patia, Bhubaneswar, India. Animal
ethical Committee (IAEC, School of Biotechnology, KIIT
University) has approved all the experimental protocols
for animal work. Approximately, 1 × 107 MCF-10A-Tr
cells were mixed in 200µl of freshly prepared sterile PBS
and injected into the left mammary fat pad of 3 different
groups of mice where each group consisted of 6–8 mice.
These mice were monitored every day for tumor formation.
When a measurable amount of tumor was marked
then 40 mg/kg/day QC, 50 ng TRAIL and 20 mg/kg
QC + 50 ng TRAIL was administered orally. PBS was
taken as control that was administered likewise. Tumor
dimension was measured by means of caliper and volume
was calculated by equation ½ (L × W2) where Width
(W) ≤ Length (L).It was observed that the tumor volume
decreased with the increase in days of QC treatment. Body
weights of the mice were also measured using weighing
balance. After 30 days of treatment the animal was
sacrificed and the breast fat tissue was collected. Half of
the tissue was used for hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) and
immunohistochemistry (IHC). The other half of the tissue
sample was homogenized to get the tissue lysate that was
further processed and used for western blotting.

Enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)
Expression of the proliferation marker Ki-67 was
assayed using ELISA. The experiment was performed as
per the protocol mentioned earlier [52]. The pre-coated
(Ki-67) plates were incubated with biotin conjugated
antibody specific to the Ki-67 protein. Avidin conjugated
Horseradish peroxidase (HRP) was added to each well.

Immunocytochemistry of CASPASE 3
This assay was done to check the expression of
CASPASE 3 in DR5-KD MCF-10A-Tr cells after over
expressing the cells with DR5-C66G-S68A construct and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

264

Oncotarget

REFERENCES

3,3′,5,5′-Tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) substrate was
added to each well and the enzyme substrate reaction
was terminated by adding 0.2 M sulphuric acid. The
absorbance was measured at 450 nm.

  1.	 Yang F, Tay KH, Dong L, Thorne RF, Jiang CC, Yang E,
Tseng HY, Liu H ,Christopherson R, Hersey P, Zhang XD.
Cystatin B inhibition of TRAIL-induced apoptosis is
associated with the protection of FLIP (L) from degradation
by the E3 ligase itch in human melanoma cells. Cell Death
Differ. 2010; 17:1354–67.

H&E staining and immunohistochemistry of
xenograft tissue section
H&E and IHC was performed as per the protocol
mentioned earlier [37, 52].The frozen tissues were cut
into 5 µm section using Shandon cryotome FSE (Thermo
scientific) mounted on SuperFrost® plus slides (Thermo
Scientific) at −30°C. For H&E staining slides were
rehydrated by immersing in different percentages (100% to
50%) of alcohol. Dried slides were dipped into hematoxylin
followed by eosin (H&E) stain. Slides were then dehydrated
by immersing in different percentages of alcohol (50% to
100%). Finally slides were incubated in xylene for 2 min
and images were captured in bright field microscope using
40× magnification (Leica DM200, USA).
For IHC, fixed slides were blocked in 100 µl
blocking solution (5% FBS). It was then immunostained
with anti-DR5 and anti-Ki-67 antibody and incubated
overnight at 4°C. Slides were then washed with 1×
TBST followed by incubation with a HRP conjugated
secondary antibody for 30–60 min at room temperature
and then developed using 3,3′-Diaminobenzidine (DAB)
peroxidase substrate kit (SK-4100, Vector Laboratories,
CA,USA) . Images were captured at 40× magnification
using brightfield microscope (Leica DM2000, USA).

  2.	 Kumazaki M, Shinohara H, Taniguchi K, Ueda H, Nishi M,
Ryo A, Akao Y. Understanding of tolerance in TRAILinduced apoptosis and cancelation of its machinery by
α-mangostin, a xanthone derivative. Oncotarget. 2015;
6:25828–42. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.4558.
  3.	 Johnstone RW, Frew AJ, Smyth MJ. The TRAIL apoptotic
pathway in cancer onset, progression and therapy. Nature
Reviews Cancer. 2008; 8:782–98.
  4.	 Kelley RF, Totpal K, Lindstrom SH, Mathieu M, Billeci K,
Deforge L, Pai R, Hymowitz SG, Ashkenazi A. Receptorselective mutants of apoptosis-inducing ligand2/tumor
necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand reveal a
greater contribution of death receptor (DR) 5 than DR4 to
apoptosis signaling. J Biol Chem. 2005; 280:2205–12.
  5.	 Green DR, Oberst A, Dillon CP, Weinlich R, Salvesen GS.
RIPK-dependent necrosis and its regulation by caspases: A
mystery in five acts. Mol Cell. 2011; 44:9–16.
  6.	 Geng P, Li J, Wang N, Liao Y, Ou J, Sa R, Xie G, Liu C,
Li H, Xiang L, Liang H. Genetic association between
TRAIL-R1 Thr209Arg and cancer susceptibility. Sci Rep.
2015; 28:10382.
 7.	 Muhlenbeck F, Schneider P, Bodmer JL, Schwenzer R,
Hauser A, Schubert G, Scheurich P, Moosmayer D,
Tschopp  J, Wajant H. The tumor necrosis factor-related
apoptosis-inducing ligand receptors TRAIL-R1 and
TRAIL-R2 have distinctcross-linking requirements for
initiation of apoptosis and are non-redundant inJNK
activation. J Biol Chem. 2000; 275:32208–13.
  8.	 Truneh A, Sharma S, Silverman C, Khandekar S, Reddy MP,
Deen KC, McLaughlin MM, Srinivasula SM, Livi GP,
Marshall LA, Alnemri ES, Williams WV, Doyle  ML.
Temperature-sensitive differential affinity of TRAIL for its
receptors. DR5 is the highest affinity receptor. J Biol Chem.
2000; 275:23319–25.
  9.	 Lemke J, von Karstedt S, Zinngrebe J, Walczak H. Getting
TRAIL back on track for cancer therapy. Cell Death Differ.
2014; 21:1350–64.

Statistical significance
Statistical analysis for the comparison of each set
of experimental means was performed using GraphPad
Prism 5. A two-tailed Student’s t-test was used where
*P < 0.05; **P < 0.001; ***p < 0.0001 was considered to
be statistically significant.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to acknowledge Dr. S. Senapati –
Institute of Life Science (ILS), Bhubaneswar for doing
tissue sectioning for IHC.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

10.	 Valley CC, Lewis AK, Mudaliar DJ, Perlmutter JD,
Braun AR, Karim CB, Thomas DD, Brody JR, Sachs JN.
Tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand
(TRAIL) induces death receptor 5 networks that are highly
organized. J Biol Chem. 2012; 287:21265–78.
11.	 Wang W, Gallant JN, Katz SI, Dolloff NG, Smith CD,
Abdulghani J, Allen JE, Dicker DT, Hong B, Navaraj A, ElDeiry WS. Quinacrine sensitizes hepatocellular carcinoma
cells to TRAIL and chemotherapeutic agents. Cancer Biol
Ther. 2011; 12:229–38.

Authors declare no conflicts of interest in this study.

GRANT SUPPORT
The study was supported partially by the grants from
Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), Government
of India. SD, SS, AN and NT thanks DST–INSPIRE,
ICMR and CSIR, respectively, for their fellowships.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

265

Oncotarget

12.	Baritak, S, Katsman A, Chatterjee D, Yeung KC,
Spandidos DA, Bonavida B. Regulation of tumor cell
sensitivity to TRAIL-induced apoptosis by the metastatic
suppressor Raf kinase inhibitor protein via Yin Yang 1
inhibition and death receptor 5 up-regulation. J Immunol.
2007; 179:5441–53.

Fairchild RL, Gudkov AV. Anti-malaria drug blocks
proteotoxic stress response: anti-cancer implications .Cell
Cycle. 2009; 8:3960–70.
27.	 Guo C, Gasparian AV, Zhuang Z, Bosykh DA, Komar AA,
Gudkov AV, Gurova KV. 9-Aminoacridine-based anticancer
drugs target the PI3K/AKT/mTOR, NF-kappaB and p53
pathways. Oncogene. 2009; 28:1151–61.

13.	 Trivedi R, Mishra DP. Trailing TRAIL resistance: Novel
targets for TRAIL sensitization in cancer cells. Front Oncol.
2015; 2:69.
14.	 Jin Z, Dicker DT, El-Deiry WS. Enhanced sensitivity of G1
arrested human cancer cells suggests a novel therapeutic
strategy using a combination of simvastatin and TRAIL.
Cell Cycle. 2002; 1:82–9.

28.	 Gurova KV, Hill JE, Guo C, Prokvolit A, Burdelya LG,
Samoylova E, Khodyakova AV, Ganapathi R, Ganapathi M,
Tararova ND, Bosykh D, Lvovskiy D, Webb TR, et al. Small
molecules that reactivate p53 in renal cell carcinoma reveal
a NF-kappaB-dependent mechanism of p53 suppression in
tumors. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2005; 102:17448–53.

15.	 Van Dijk M, Halpin-McCormick A, Sessler T, Samali A,
Szegezdi E. Resistance to TRAIL in non-transformed cells
is due to multiple redundant pathways. Cell Death Dis.
2013; 4:e702.

29.	 Preet R, Mohapatra P, Mohanty S, Sahu SK, Choudhuri T,
Wyatt MD, Kundu CN. Quinacrine has anticancer activity
in breast cancer cells through inhibition of topoisomerase
activity. Int J Cancer. 2012; 130:1660–70.

16.	 Dai X, Zhang J, Arfuso F, Chinnathambi A, Zayed ME,
Alharbi SA, Kumar AP, Ahn KS, Sethi, G. Targeting TNFrelated apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) receptor by
natural products as a potential therapeutic approach for cancer
therapy. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2015; 240:760–73.
17.	 Park W, Amin AR, Chen ZG, Shin DM .New perspectives
of curcumin in cancer prevention. Cancer Prev Res (Phila).
2013; 6:387–400.
18.	 Tameda M, Sugimoto K, Shiraki K, Inagaki Y, Ogura S,
Kasai C, Yoneda M, Okamoto R, Yamamoto N, Takei Y,
Ito M, Nobori T. Resveratrol sensitizes HepG2 cells to
TRAIL-induced apoptosis. Anticancer Drugs. 2014;
25:1028–34.

30.	 Mohapatra P, Preet R, Das D, Satapathy SR, Choudhuri T,
Wyatt MD, Kundu CN. Quinacrine-mediated autophagy and
apoptosis in colon cancer cells is through a p53- and p21dependent mechanism. Oncol Res. 2012; 20:81–91.

19.	 Xu L, Yin S, Banerjee S, Sarkar F, Reddy KB .Enhanced
anticancer effect of the combination of cisplatin and TRAIL
in triple-negative breast tumor cells. Mol Cancer Ther.
2011; 10:550–7.
20.	 Thao le Q, Byeon HJ, Lee C, Lee S, Lee ES, Choi YW,
Choi HG, Park ES, Lee KC, Youn YS. Doxorubicin-Bound
Albumin Nanoparticles Containing a TRAIL Protein
forTargeted Treatment of Colon Cancer. Pharm Res. 2016;
33:615–26.

33.	Jani TS, DeVecchio J, Mazumdar T, Agyeman A,
Houghton JA. Inhibition of NF-kappaB signaling by
quinacrine is cytotoxic to human colon carcinoma cell
lines and is synergistic in combination with tumor necrosis
factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) or
oxaliplatin. J Biol Chem. 2010; 285:19162–72.

31.	 Preet R, Mohapatra P, Das D, Satapathy SR, Choudhuri T,
Wyatt MD, Kundu CN. Lycopene synergistically enhances
quinacrine action to inhibit Wnt-TCF signaling in breast
cancer cells through APC.Carcinogenesis. 2013; 34:277–86.
32.	 Satapathy SR, Siddharth S, Das D, Nayak A, Kundu CN.
Enhancement of cytotoxicity and inhibition of angiogenesis
in oral cancer stem cells by a hybrid nanoparticle of
bioactive quinacrine and silver: Implication of base excision
repair cascade. Mol Pharm. 2015; 12:4011–25.

34.	 Graves JD, Kordich JJ, Huang TH, Piasecki J, Bush TL,
Sullivan T, Foltz IN, Chang W, Douangpanya H, Dang T.
Apo2L/TRAIL and the death receptor 5 agonist antibody
AMG 655 cooperate to promote receptor clustering and
antitumor activity. Cancer Cell. 2014; 26:177–89.

21.	 Eferl R, Wagner EF. AP-1: a double-edged sword in
tumorigenesis. Nat Rev Cancer. 2003; 3: 859–68.
22.	 Davis RJ. Signal transduction by the JNK group of MAP
kinases. Cell. 2000; 103:239–52.

35.	 Guo L, Fan L, Ren J, Pang Z, Ren Y, Li J, Wen Z, Jiang X.
A novel combination of TRAIL and doxorubicin enhances
antitumor effect based on passive tumor-targeting of
liposomes. Nanotechnology. 2011; 22:265105.

23.	 Karin M, Cao Y, Greten FR, Li ZW. NF-kappaB in cancer:
from innocent bystander to major culprit. Nat Rev Cancer.
2002; 2:301–10.
24.	 Fulda S, Debatin KM. Extrinsic versus intrinsic apoptosis
pathways in anticancer chemotherapy. Oncogene. 2006;
25:4798–811.

36.	Mohapatra P, Satapathy SR, Das D, Siddharth S,
Choudhuri T, Kundu CN. Resveratrol mediated cell death
in cigarette smoke transformed breast epithelial cells is
through induction of p21Waf1/Cip1 and inhibition of
long patch base excision repair pathway. Toxicol Appl
Pharmacol. 2014; 275:221–31.

25.	 Gurova K. New hopes from old drug: Revisiting DNA
binding small molecule as anti-cancer agents. Future Oncol.
2009; 5:1685–704.

37.	 Mohapatra P, Preet R, Das D, Satapathy SR, Siddharth S,
Choudhuri T, Wyatt MD, Kundu CN. The contribution of
heavy metals in cigarette smoke condensate to malignant

26.	 Neznanov N, Gorbachev AV, Neznanova L, Komarov AP,
Gurova KV, Gasparian AV, Banerjee AK, Almasan A,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

266

Oncotarget

transformation of breast epithelial cells and in vivo initiation
of neoplasia through induction of a PI3K-AKT-NFκB
cascade. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol.2014; 274:168–79.

47.	 Kischkel FC, Lawrence DA, Chuntharapai A, Schow P,
Kim KJ, Ashkenazi A. Apo2L/TRAIL-dependent
recruitment of endogenous FADD and caspase-8 to death
receptors 4 and 5. Immunity. 2000; 12:611–20.

38.	 Changchien JJ, Chen YJ, Huang CH, Cheng TL, Lin SR,
Chang LS. Quinacrine induces apoptosis in human leukemia
K562 cells via p38 MAPK-elicited BCL2 down-regulation
and suppression of ERK/c-Jun-mediated BCL2L1
expression. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2015; 284:33–41.

48.	 Satapathy SR, Mohapatra P, Das D, Siddharth S, Kundu CN.
The Apoptotic Effect of Plant Based Nanosilver in Colon
Cancer Cells is a p53 Dependent Process Involving ROS
and JNK Cascade. Pathol Oncol Res. 2015; 21:405–11.
49.	 Giustarini D, Rossi R, Milzani A, Dalle-Donne I. Nitrite and
nitrate measurement by Griess reagent in human plasma:
evaluation of interferences and standardization. Methods
Enzymol. 2008; 440:361–80.

39.	 Maestro, version 9.3; Schrödinger, LLC: New York, 2012.
40.	 Csizmadia, P. In MarvinSketch and MarvinView: Molecule
applets for the World Wide Web, http://www.chemaxon.
com/marvin, 1999.

50.	 Siddharth S, Mohapatra P, Preet R, Das D, Satapathy SR,
Choudhuri T, Kundu CN. Induction of apoptosis by
4-(3-(tert-butylamino)imidazo[1,2-α]pyridine-2-yl)benzoic
acid in breast cancer cells via upregulation of PTEN. Oncol
Res. 2013; 21:1–13.

41.	 Frisch MJ, Trucks GW, Schlegel HB, Scuseria GE,
Robb MA, Cheeseman JR, Jr. Montgomery JA, Vreven T,
Kudin KN, Burant JC, Millam JM, Iyengar SS, Tomasi J,
et al. Gaussian 03, Revision C.02.2004.
42.	 Deshpande N, Addess KJ, Bluhm WF, Merino-Ott JC,
Townsend-Merino W, Zhang Q, Knezevich C, Xie L, Chen L,
Feng Z, Green R K, Flippen-Anderson JL, Westbrook J,
et al. The RCSB Protein Data Bank: A redesigned query
system and relational database based on the mmCIF
schema. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005; 33:D233–D237.

51.	Sanghai N, Jain V, Preet R, Kandekar S, Das S,
Trivedi N, Mohapatra P, Priyadarshani G, Kashyap M,
Das D, Satapathy SR, Siddharth S, Guchhait SK,
et
al.
Combretastatin
A-4
inspired
novel
2-aryl3arylaminoimidazo-pyridines/pyrazines as tubulin
polymerization inhibitors, antimitotic and anticancer agents.
Med chem. Commun. 2014; 5:766–82.

43.	 Discovery Studio 2.5.5. Accelrys: San Diego, CA. 2009.
44.	 Case DA, Darden TA, Cheatham TE, Simmerling CL, Wang J,
Duke RE, Luo R, Walker RC, Zhang W, Merz  KM,
Roberts B, Wang B, Hayik S, et al. AMBER 12, University
of California, San Francisco. 2012.

52.	 Nayak A, Satapathy SR, Das D, Siddharth S, Tripathi N,
Bharatam PV, Kundu C. Nanoquinacrine induced apoptosis
in cervical cancer stem cells through the inhibition of
hedgehog-GLI1 cascade: Role of GLI-1. Sci Rep. 2016;
5:20600.

45.	 Kollman PA, Massova I, Reyes C, Kuhn B, Huo S, Chong L,
Lee M, Lee T, Duan Y, Wang W. Calculating structures and
free energies of complex molecules: Combining molecular
mechanics and continuum models. Acc. Chem. Res. 2000;
33:889–897.
46.	 Das D, Satapathy SR, Siddharth S, Nayak, A, Kundu CN.
NECTIN-4 increased the 5-FU resistance in colon
cancer cells by inducing the PI3K-AKT cascade. Cancer
Chemother Pharmacol. 2015; 76:889–97.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

267

Oncotarget

