Original Article

Current Patient Management of Chronic
Myeloid Leukemia in Latin America
A Study by the Latin American Leukemia Net (LALNET)
Jorge Cortes, MD1; Carmino De Souza, MD2; Manuel Ayala-Sanchez, MD3; Israel Bendit, MD4; Carlos Best-Aguilera, MD5;
Alicia Enrico, MD6; Nelson Hamerschlak, MD7; Katia Pagnano, MD8; Ricardo Pasquini, MD9; and Luis Meillon, MD10

BACKGROUND: Treatment recommendations have been developed for management of patients with chronic myeloid
leukemia (CML). METHODS: A 30-item multiple-choice questionnaire was administered to 435 hematologists and
oncohematologists in 16 Latin American countries. Physicians self-reported their diagnostic, therapeutic, and disease
management strategies. RESULTS: Imatinib is available as initial therapy to 92% of physicians, and 42% of physicians
have access to both second-generation tyrosine kinase inhibitors. Standard-dose imatinib is the preferred initial therapy for most patients, but 20% would manage a young patient initially with an allogeneic stem cell transplant from a
sibling donor, and 10% would only offer hydroxyurea to an elderly patient. Seventy-two percent of responders perform routine cytogenetic analysis for monitoring patients on therapy, and 59% routinely use quantitative polymerase
chain reaction. For patients who fail imatinib therapy, 61% would increase the dose of imatinib before considering
change to a second-generation tyrosine kinase inhibitor, except for patients aged 60 years, for whom a switch to a
second-generation tyrosine kinase inhibitor was the preferred choice. CONCLUSIONS: The answers to this survey
provide insight into the management of patients with CML in Latin America. Some deviations from current recommendations were identified. Understanding the treatment patterns of patients with CML in broad population studies
C 2010 American Cancer
is important to identify needs and improve patient care. Cancer 2010;116:4991–5000. V
Society.
KEYWORDS: chronic myeloid leukemia, imatinib, dasatinib, nilotinib, tyrosine kinase inhibitors, guidelines, Latin
America, survey.

Imatinib is the established standard of care for initial treatment of chronic phase chronic myeloid leukemia (CML).1

Although most patients have a favorable outcome, some patients are initially refractory or develop acquired resistance.2
Second-generation tyrosine kinase inhibitors provide alternative therapeutic options for CML patients who fail imatinib.
With the availability of more effective therapeutic options, adequate use of therapies and proper monitoring have become
increasingly important to optimize patient outcomes. The European Leukemia Net has summarized the current understanding of the management of CML and provided recommendations to guide physicians on how best to treat and monitor their patients to help accomplish the best possible outcome for patients with CML.1 These recommendations consider
the optimal management of patients under ideal circumstances that may include wide availability of all therapeutic and
monitoring tools. Recent studies have analyzed how patients in Europe and the United States are treated.3 However, other
areas of the world may have different approaches affected by regional factors such as availability of drugs and tests, cultural
elements, and financial considerations. The goal of this study was to ascertain how physicians throughout Latin America
perceive and use the available CML therapies, and to identify strategies used to diagnose and manage the disease.

Corresponding author: Jorge Cortes, MD, Department of Leukemia, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, 1500 Holcombe Boulevard, Unit 428,
Houston, TX 77030; Fax: (713) 794-4297; jcortes@mdanderson.org
1
Department of Leukemia, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas; 2Hematology and Hemotherapy Center, University of Campinas, Campinas, Sao Paulo, Brazil; 3Department of Hematology, Hospital of Specialties National Medical Center ‘‘La Raza’’, Mexico City, Mexico; 4Department of Hematology and Hemotherapy, Medical School at University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil; 5Department of Hematology, Western General Hospital, Office of Health
of Jalisco, Guadalajara, Jalisco, Mexico; 6Division of Bone Marrow Transplantation, Italian Hospital La Plata, La Plata, Argentina; 7Department of Hematology and
Bone Marrow Transplantation, Albert Einstein Hospital, Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil; 8Hematology and Hemotherapy Center, University of Campinas, Campinas,
Sao Paulo, Brazil; 9Department of Internal Medicine, Federal University of Parana, Curitiba, Parana, Brazil; 10Department of Hematology, Hospital of Specialties,
National Medical Center ‘‘Siglo XXI’’, Mexico City, Mexico

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.25273, Received: October 14, 2009; Revised: December 1, 2009; Accepted: January 12, 2010, Published online July 21, 2010 in Wiley Online
Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Cancer

November 1, 2010

4991

Original Article

MATERIALS AND METHODS
A questionnaire was developed to assess Latin American
physicians’ self-reported CML diagnostic, treatment, and
monitoring strategies. Hematologists and oncohematologists were recruited from a large database and invited, by
either phone or e-mail, to participate in the study. The
anonymous and confidential questionnaire was created by
the Latin American Leukemia Net, and applied by an
independent agency through Internet or telephone interviews. Before beginning, participants were informed that
the questionnaire would take 20 to 25 minutes to
complete. The 30-item multiple-choice questionnaire is
shown in Figure 1. Before beginning the questionnaire,
physicians were surveyed to determine their study eligibility. Participants were considered eligible if they had prescribed imatinib for any condition, had treated 5 CML
patients outside the context of a clinical trial in the past 2
years, and were treating at least 2 CML patients at the
time of the survey.
Six-hundred fifty physicians from 16 Latin American countries were contacted between May and August
2008, and 435 (67%) completed the survey. Responding
physicians were distributed among countries as follows:
Brazil (n ¼ 100), Mexico (n ¼ 75), Argentina (n ¼ 50),
Colombia (n ¼ 50), Venezuela (n ¼ 40), Peru (n ¼ 30),
Chile (n ¼ 20), Panama (n ¼ 9), Nicaragua (n ¼ 9), El
Salvador (n ¼ 8), Costa Rica (n ¼ 8), Guatemala (n ¼ 8),
Honduras (n ¼ 8), Bolivia (n ¼ 7), Ecuador (n ¼ 7), and
Uruguay (n ¼ 6).
RESULTS
Physician and Practice Characteristics
The first section of the questionnaire was aimed at defining the characteristics of the participating physicians and
their practices. Most respondents characterized their medical practice as nonacademic (85%), including combined
medical settings (35%), state hospitals (25%), private hospitals (23%), or other settings (2%). Ninety-three percent
of the survey participants described their specialty as hematology, with the reminder classified as onco-hematology. This correlates with 82% of respondents describing
their clinical practice as primarily composed of hematologic patients (including patients with both benign and
malignant disease), whereas 10% of the respondents’ clinical practice was comprised of patients with solid tumors
and hematologic malignancies, 7% mentioned only treating patients with hematologic malignancies, and the
remaining 1% of respondents described their practice as

4992

primarily comprised of patients with solid tumors. At the
time of the survey, most physicians were directly involved
in the management of 2 to 5 CML patients (31%) or 6 to
10 CML patients (30%), whereas another 18% of participants managed >20 CML patients. Forty-two percent of
participants had >20 years of clinical experience since
completing their specialty training, and 56% had 10
years.
Availability of Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors
Among all responders, 85% reported that imatinib was
available to them only as front-line therapy for CML in
their specific country, whereas 8% reported it was
approved only in the setting of interferon (IFN)-a failure,
and 7% reported it available both as front-line therapy
and after IFN-a failure. At the time of the survey, 79%
and 45% of physicians reported approval of the secondgeneration tyrosine kinase inhibitors dasatinib and nilotinib in their country, respectively, with 42% reporting
approval of both agents. At least 1 of these second-generation tyrosine kinase inhibitors had received approval in all
of the countries represented in this analysis. Overall, 66%
of the participants answered that the majority of their
CML patients received state coverage for imatinib therapy. Private insurance, organizations or charity, and selfpay accounted for the remaining 18%, 10%, and 5% of
imatinib coverage, respectively.
General Disease Management
Participants were then asked several questions regarding
their current management of CML. For initial workup of
a patient with suspected CML, physicians reported most
commonly performing cytogenetic analysis (78%), bone
marrow aspiration (68%), and bone marrow biopsy
(53%) as initial diagnostic tests. Quantitative polymerase
chain reaction (QPCR) (41%), BCR-ABL mutation analysis (39%), and fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH)
(26%) were performed less frequently (Fig. 2). In most
instances, conventional cytogenetic or FISH analyses were
performed at a nearby institution or hospital within their
country (40%), whereas commercial laboratories and inhouse hospital laboratories were used in 26% and 25% of
cases, respectively. A smaller proportion (8%) sent cytogenetic or FISH samples to a hospital or institution in
another country. Similar results were obtained when the
respondents were queried on where they obtained a
QPCR or BCR-ABL mutation test.
Physicians were also asked what features they considered representative of advanced phase CML. The

Cancer

November 1, 2010

Figure 1. Questions and answers in the Internet and phone interviews are shown. CML indicates chronic myeloid leukemia; CP,
chronic phase; FISH, fluorescence in situ hybridization; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; qRT-PCR, quantitative reverse transcriptase PCR; CyR, cytogenetic response; SCT, stem cell transplantation; WBC, white blood cell count; Ph, Philadelphia chromosome;
CHR, complete hematologic response; CCyR, complete CyR; MCyR, major CyR; MMR, major molecular response; QPCR, quantitative PCR; IFN, interferon; TKI, tyrosine kinase inhibitor.

Original Article

Figure 2. Initial diagnostic evaluation for patients with a clinical picture compatible with chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is
shown (N ¼ 435). Question 3: When evaluating a patient with a white cell count (eg, 65,000) and a morphologic picture compatible with CML, which of the following initial diagnostic tests would you typically perform? PCR indicates polymerase chain reaction; FISH, fluorescent in situ hybridization.

criteria most frequently used to define accelerated phase
was ‘‘blasts 10% in peripheral blood and/or bone marrow,’’ identified by 61% of respondents. Other commonly identified criteria for accelerated phase were ‘‘blasts
15% in peripheral blood and/or bone marrow’’ (49%)
and ‘‘clonal evolution during the course of therapy’’
(48%). Blasts 20% in peripheral blood and/or bone
marrow were considered to represent blast phase by 66%
of responders, whereas 44% considered 30% blasts to
define this stage. Only 33% identified extramedullary disease as a representative feature of blast phase CML.
Initial Therapeutic Strategy
The next sets of questions in the survey were aimed at
gathering information on the preferred diagnostic and
treatment options. For this purpose, several hypothetical
clinical scenarios were presented to the participants.
Regardless of the patient’s age or donor status, imatinib
400 mg/d was found to be the preferred front-line therapy
among Latin American physicians for newly diagnosed,
chronic phase CML patients (Fig. 3). For example, 67%
and 75% of respondents scored imatinib (400 mg/d)
as their primary choice of therapy for a newly diagnosed

4994

20-year-old patient with either a related or a matched
unrelated donor (MUD) available, respectively. Allogeneic stem cell transplantation was the second most favored
option (20%) for the patient with a sibling donor, whereas
high-dose imatinib was the second choice in the patient
with an available MUD. Although 80% of physicians
listed imatinib 400 mg/d as their first choice of therapy
for an 80-year-old patient with newly diagnosed CML,
10% would only use hydroxyurea.
Respondents were also presented with a case of a
patient with chronic phase CML with a white blood cell
(WBC) count of 225  109/L. In this case, 63% of
respondents would use hydroxyurea until the WBC count
decreased significantly, and then start imatinib. Only
17% would initiate therapy with imatinib, and 3% would
use imatinib and hydroxyurea simultaneously.
Monitoring During Treatment
To monitor patients with CML treated with imatinib,
besides complete blood counts, 72% reported routinely
using cytogenetic analysis, 59% QPCR, 30% mutation
analysis, and 19% FISH (Fig. 4). Cytogenetic analyses are
repeated every 6 months by 54% of participants, whereas

Cancer

November 1, 2010

CML Survey in Latin America/Cortes et al

Figure 3. Preferred front-line treatment in different hypothetical case scenarios (N ¼ 435). SCT, stem cell transplantation; CML,
chronic myeloid leukemia.

31% repeat it every 3 months and 9% only annually.
Reverse transcriptase QPCR was reported to be performed every 6 months by 41% and every 3 months by
31%. Thirteen percent of participants reported never

using QPCR. Mutation analysis was used by 33% of
physicians when a patient lost or failed to achieve a hematological response, whereas 26% identified loss or failure
to achieve a complete cytogenetic response as the reason

Figure 4. Tests routinely performed to monitor response to imatinib therapy are shown (N ¼ 435). Question 4: In addition to
peripheral blood counts, which of the following do you routinely use in monitoring response to imatinib therapy? PCR indicates
polymerase chain reaction; FISH, fluorescent in situ hybridization.

Cancer

November 1, 2010

4995

Original Article

Figure 5. Timing for treatment change is shown (N ¼ 435). CML indicates chronic myeloid leukemia.

for performing this test. A 2-fold rise in BCR-ABL transcript levels was identified as a reason to perform mutation
analysis by 19% of participants. Study participants were
also given 2 specific case scenarios being managed with
imatinib to investigate any differences in monitoring
approach: a 50-year-old patient with a sibling donor and a
70-year-old patient. No differences in monitoring strategies were identified, with cytogenetic analysis being used
routinely by 64% and 65%, respectively, and QPCR by
55% and 47%.

Management of Suboptimal Response
Physicians were then presented with different clinical scenarios to determine whether they take into consideration
a difference between failure to respond to therapy and
suboptimal response, and the criteria used to classify these
states. Two thirds (67%) of participants considered the
distinction between failure and suboptimal response to be
clinically relevant. Among the physicians who did
acknowledge a difference, 37% identified no major cytogenetic response at 6 months as a criterion to define
suboptimal response. Other criteria frequently chosen to
describe a suboptimal response include no cytogenetic
response (ie, 100% Philadelphia chromosome positive
[Phþ]) at 6 months, no complete cytogenetic response at
6 months, and no complete hematologic response (CHR)
at 3 months. When presented with a patient having a sub-

4996

optimal response, 55% of participants would assess for a
BCR-ABL mutation.
We then assessed the timing that physicians consider
relevant for treatment decisions. Failure to achieve a CHR
at 3 months was considered a criterion to change therapy
by 45% of respondents, whereas 29% would consider this
only after 6 months (Fig. 5). Similarly, for patients still
100% Phþ at different times, 42% and 24% stated they
would consider changing treatment at 3 and 6 months,
respectively. However, for a patient achieving only a partial cytogenetic response, 34% would consider changing if
this was the best response at 6 months, compared with
22% if this was at 12 months, and 20% at 3 months.
When asked about the preferred course of action for
managing a 50-year-old patient with a matched sibling
donor and a suboptimal response to imatinib, 72% of participants would increase the imatinib dose (46% to 600
mg/d and 26% to 800 mg/d), whereas 16% would change
therapy to dasatinib and 3% to nilotinib. Among those
opting for a dose increase, 54% would try this strategy for
a minimum of 3 months, 38% for 6 months, and 4% for
12 months.
Management of Imatinib Failure
When asked to identify clinical scenarios that defined
imatinib treatment failure, loss of complete cytogenetic
response (39%), no CHR at 3 months (39%), loss of
CHR (39%), no cytogenetic response at 6 months (38%),

Cancer

November 1, 2010

CML Survey in Latin America/Cortes et al

Table 1. Considering Suboptimal Response or Failure to Imatinib Treatment (N ¼ 435)

Criteria

Suboptimal
Response to
Treatment

Failure to
Treatment

At 6 months, no major cytogenetic response (ie, Phþ >35%)
At 6 months, no cytogenetic response (ie, Ph 100%)
At 6 months, no complete cytogenetic response (ie, Phþ >0%)
At 3 months, no CHR
At 3 months, no cytogenetic response (ie, Ph 100%)
Loss of CHR
Loss of CCyR
At 12 months, no complete cytogenetic response (ie, Phþ >0%)
At 12 months, no major cytogenetic response (ie, Phþ >35%)
Loss of MCyR
At 18 months, no major molecular response (ie, <3 log reduction
in BCR-ABL transcript levels)
At 12 months, no cytogenetic response (ie, Ph 100%)
At 12 months, no major molecular response (ie, <3 log reduction
in BCR-ABL transcript levels)
At 18 months, no complete cytogenetic response (ie, Phþ >0%)
1 log rise in QPCR while in CCyR
2-fold rise in QPCR while in CCyR

37%
29%
26%
26%
19%
17%
17%
17%
16%
16%
15%

34%
38%
26%
39%
17%
39%
39%
25%
29%
36%
26%

14%
12%

33%
23%

10%
10%
9%

23%
17%
21%

Ph indicates Philadelphia chromosome; CHR, complete hematologic response; CCyR, complete cytogenetic response;
MCyR, major cytogenetic response; QPCR, quantitative polymerase chain reaction.
Question 17: In a patient with CML receiving therapy with imatinib, which of the following would cause you to decide that
the patient had experienced failure to therapy and should receive an alternative treatment?

loss of a major molecular response (36%), and no major
cytogenetic response at 6 months (34%) were most frequently reported (Table 1). Presented with hypothetical
cases of imatinib failure, age of the patients influenced the
choice of therapy. When evaluating the options for a 50year-old and a 35-year-old patient, increasing the dose of
imatinib was preferred by 61% (37% to 600 mg/d, 24%
to 800 mg/d) for the older patient and 48% for the
younger patient (30% to 600 mg/d and 18% to 800 mg/
d). In both cases, second-generation tyrosine kinase inhibitors would be the preferred option for only 24% and
22%, respectively, whereas autologous stem cell transplantation would be offered more frequently to the
younger (12%) than the older (7%) patient. However, in
the case of a patient of more advanced age (60 years old),
the preferred course of action was reported to be a switch
of the treatment to a second-generation tyrosine kinase
inhibitor, regardless of donor status (82% in an older
patient with a matched sibling donor, 85% in an older
patient with an MUD).
Participants were also presented with a hypothetical
35-year-old patient with a matched sibling who lost
major molecular response but remained in complete
cytogenetic response while on imatinib 400 mg/d. In this
setting, 54% of physicians would perform a mutation
analysis. Of these, 40% would select a new tyrosine kinase inhibitor based on mutations detected, and 19%

Cancer

November 1, 2010

would increase the dose of imatinib if no mutation was
identified. Interestingly, in the case of a 50-year-old
patient failing imatinib treatment, only 27% of respondents who would preferably switch treatment to a secondgeneration tyrosine kinase inhibitor would perform
BCR-ABL mutations.
Imatinib Toxicity
Imatinib was perceived to be overall well tolerated. Over
half (58%) of the study participants reported that only
1% to 2% of their patients were intolerant to imatinib
and would need to change therapy because of intolerance.
Conversely, 4% of physicians felt that >10% of their
patients would be intolerant to imatinib. Nonetheless,
imatinib is occasionally associated with significant toxicity. The most frequently observed imatinib toxicities
encountered in the participants’ patients included neutropenia (75% of responders), thrombocytopenia (74%),
fluid retention (67%), nausea/vomiting (66%), anemia
(64%), periorbital edema (61%), muscle cramps (57%),
fatigue (57%), and weight gain (56%) (Table 2). The
most common cause of treatment interruptions were neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, and anemia (in 33%, 30%,
and 11%, respectively). Physicians reported permanent
treatment discontinuation for toxicity in 5% to 12% of
participants. Physicians ranked the 3 most common toxicities that have caused them to permanently discontinue

4997

Original Article
Table 2. Most Frequently Observed Imatinib Toxicities (N ¼ 435)

Toxicity

No. of
Respondents

Toxicities
Encountered

Caused
Interruption
of Imatinib

Caused
Discontinuation
of Imatinib

Neutropenia
Thrombocytopenia
Fluid retention
Nausea and vomiting
Anemia
Periorbital edema
Muscle cramps
Fatigue
Weight gain
Diarrhea
Bone aches
Rash
Liver dysfunction
Pleural effusion
Pericardial effusion
or pericarditis
Congestive heart failure

328
320
293
288
280
266
247
246
245
205
199
183
140
47
36

75%
74%
67%
66%
64%
61%
57%
57%
56%
47%
46%
42%
32%
11%
8%

33%
30%
5%
8%
11%
7%
7%
6%
4%
6%
5%
12%
21%
15%
17%

12%
11%
1%
6%
7%
2%
3%
1%
—
4%
3%
9%
14%
13%
6%

33

8%

27%

6%

Question 30: Which, of the following imatinib toxicities have you encountered in your patients with chronic myeloid leukemia? Which of these toxicities that you have encountered have caused you to interrupt, dose reduce, or discontinue imatinib therapy?

imatinib therapy in their patients (Table 2). Neutropenia
and thrombocytopenia were most commonly ranked as
the first and second most frequent toxicities. Other toxicities that physicians identified as leading to treatment discontinuation included fluid retention (67%), nausea and
vomiting (66%), and anemia (64%).
Patient case studies were then presented to assess
physicians’ approach to imatinib-associated hematological toxicity. For a 45-year-old patient who developed a
neutrophil count of 1.2  109/L while receiving imatinib
(400 mg/d), participants were roughly equally divided
among those who would stop therapy until neutrophil
count recovered to 1.5  109/L and then would restart
at a reduced dose (32%), those who would discontinue
therapy until neutrophil count recovered to 1.5  109/
L and then would restart imatinib at the same dose
(21%), and those who would decrease the imatinib dosage
to 300 mg/d without treatment interruptions (20%). Furthermore, most participants reported considering a treatment interruption in patients when the neutrophil count
reached either <0.5  109/L (33%) or <1.0  109/L
(43%). The therapeutic management of imatinib-related
thrombocytopenia was also evaluated, and most physicians reported discontinuing imatinib therapy when
platelet count reached either <20  109/L (26%) or
<50  109/L (49%); 22% of them would discontinue
treatment with platelet counts <75  109/L (8%) and
<100  109/L (14%).

4998

DISCUSSION
Imatinib and other second-generation tyrosine kinase
inhibitors for the treatment of CML have greatly
improved patient outcomes, and have served as important
examples of the clinical benefit of targeted therapies. Recommendations have been developed for the optimal management of patients with CML. The extent to which these
recommendations are followed in practice is not known.
Elements such as economic limitations, educational differences, and availability of drugs and laboratory tests may
affect the extent to which these recommendations are followed. Recently, Kantarjian and colleagues3 surveyed 956
eligible physicians from the United States and Europe to
assess patterns of practice. In that study, the investigators
concluded that although the practice patterns among
those physicians in general were aligned with current
guidelines and recommendations, important differences
do exist. Because there are considerable differences in
healthcare access and practice between developing countries and the United States and European countries, we
investigated the practice patterns of physicians throughout 16 Latin American countries.
Availability of diagnostic and monitoring tools varied depending on the type of institution. For example,
nonacademic physicians were more likely to send FISH
and cytogenetic samples to another institution or hospital
within their country, whereas academic physicians were
more likely to use an in-house hospital or institution
Cancer

November 1, 2010

CML Survey in Latin America/Cortes et al

laboratory. These practices are very similar with those
observed in the US/Europe study.3 However, an important difference revealed in the current study is that nearly
10% of Latin American physicians are required to rely on
institutions based in other countries to perform these
basic disease management tests.
Some monitoring practices were notable. Among
them, 39% of responders indicated they would use mutational analysis at the time of diagnosis, and 55% would
test for BCR-ABL kinase domain mutations when managing a patient with a suboptimal response to imatinib treatment. These rates may reflect the intent more than actual
practice, because most physicians indicated that they do
not have direct access to mutational analysis at their institution. Interestingly, the US/European study by Kantarjian and colleagues reported that US respondents in
general were not familiar with BCR-ABL mutation tests.3
That survey was done >3 years ago, when the availability
and understanding of the clinical significance of such tests
were at an early stage. With the broader use of secondgeneration tyrosine kinase inhibitor this has clearly
changed.
Regarding the management of patients, the survey
reflects the change in practice that resulted from the introduction of tyrosine kinase inhibitors, with imatinib widely
favored as initial therapy. Interestingly, 20% of responders would select a stem cell transplant to manage a 20year-old patient with a matched related sibling. The use of
transplant has decreased significantly in recent years, and
nearly all patients throughout the world are offered imatinib as initial therapy. However, investigators in Mexico
have published on the favorable results with their stem cell
transplant approach and have emphasized the potential
cost advantages of a transplant over the long-term use of
imatinib.4 The cost of a standard dose of imatinib in Latin
America is similar to that in the United States, although
there is great variability based on the variability in access
programs available in different countries (eg, state coverage, the Gleevec International Patient Assistance Program
[GIPAP]). The study by Ruiz-Arguelles et al reported that
the median cost of a nonmyeloablative transplant (first
100 days) in Mexico was US$18,000, and US$30,000 for
a conventional allograft. Subsequent costs are highly variable, depending on complications. In contrast, the median cost of standard-dose imatinib in that country was
reported as US$100.4 Thus, the cost of the first 100 days
of transplant would cover 180 days of imatinib. Longterm comparisons of the costs would depend on the complications associated with transplant, but it was suggested

Cancer

November 1, 2010

that a successful transplant with no or minimal long-term
complications could have an economical edge. Despite
this potential advantage, there are several reasons why
transplant may not have been considered as initial therapy
in more patients. These include the availability of donors
as well as the local availability of transplantation or the experience with this procedure, which may not be as favorable as those reported in other places. Wide availability
and coverage of imatinib for all patients in need such as
occurs for most patients in Brazil, Costa Rica, Panama,
Uruguay, and Venezuela according to the responders
from these countries would likely influence the selection
of this therapy, particularly if it is perceived to be effective
and nontoxic. Interestingly, 10% of participants would
treat an 80-year-old patient only with hydroxyurea.
The approach at changing therapy for patients
receiving imatinib suggested some impatience in waiting
for an adequate response. Forty-two percent of responders
stated they would consider a change of therapy if there was
no cytogenetic response after 3 months of therapy or
no complete cytogenetic response at 6 months. These
approaches would be more aggressive than what is recommended by the European Leukemia Net.1 Regarding
patients meeting definitions for failure, 48% and 61% of
responders indicated that their preferred course of action
would be imatinib dose escalation for patients aged 35
years and 50 years, respectively, with <25% deciding to
switch to a second-generation tyrosine kinase inhibitor.
The recommendations from the European Leukemia Net
published in 2006 listed this approach as 1 of the possible
alternatives to consider. However, soon after that the
results with dasatinib and nilotinib after imatinib failure
have established these agents as the treatment of choice for
such patients, with evidence from a randomized trial suggesting that the probabilities of a favorable outcome after
change to second-generation tyrosine kinase inhibitor
would be superior to that with dose escalation of imatinib.5 However, second-generation tyrosine kinase inhibitors were not yet widely available throughout Latin
America at the time of this survey. Among responders,
14% reported not having dasatinib, and 44% did not have
nilotinib available for their patients. In this case, dose escalation is an adequate option, and recent reports suggest
that with this approach complete cytogenetic response can
be achieved in approximately 40% of patients, particularly
those who lost a cytogenetic response to imatinib.6,7 Despite initial concerns about the durability of response,
some of the responses are indeed durable, with event-free
survival at 2 years of 85%.7 Interestingly, change to a

4999

Original Article

second-generation tyrosine kinase inhibitor was greatly
favored (80% of responders) for an older patient (aged 60
years) over dose escalation. One possible explanation for
this difference could be a concern about tolerability of
higher-dose imatinib among older patients. Of note, stem
cell transplant was selected as second-line therapy by very
few physicians, even for the younger patients.
In this study, a high rate of Latin American physicians (93%) reported that they preferred to conduct frequent visits with their patients to monitor for imatinibassociated toxicities. This rate was similar to the 90% of
US physicians and 97% of European physicians who
reported a similar practice.3 In this study, neutropenia
and thrombocytopenia were some of the most common
toxicities triggering treatment discontinuation for Latin
American physicians. Comparatively, a smaller proportion of US/European physicians rated neutropenia (6%
and 11% of US and European respondents) or thrombocytopenia (8% and 10% of US and European respondents) as leading to treatment discontinuation. In contrast,
congestive heart failure, pericardial effusion or pericarditis, pleural effusions, and liver dysfunction were the most
frequently cited toxicities leading to treatment discontinuation for US/European physicians.
We conclude that the management of patients with
CML frequently deviates from the recommendations
published in the literature. The causes of these deviations
are variable and should be investigated. Regional economical, cultural, and other factors should be considered and
integrated into guidelines that may be applicable to
different areas of the world, with the aim of improving the
outcome of all patients with CML.

5000

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
This work was supported in part by an unrestricted grant from
Novartis Pharmaceuticals. J.C. received research support from
Novartis, BMS, and Wyeth; M.A. received research support
from BMS; C.B. received research support from Novartis; K.P.
received research support from Novartis; R.P. received honoraria
from Novartis, Bristol Myers, and Schering.

REFERENCES
1. Baccarani M, Saglio G, Goldman J, et al. Evolving concepts
in the management of chronic myeloid leukemia: recommendations from an expert panel on behalf of the European LeukemiaNet. Blood. 2006;108:1809-1820.
2. Deininger M, Buchdunger E, Druker BJ.The development of
imatinib as a therapeutic agent for chronic myeloid leukemia.
Blood. 2005;105:2640-2653.
3. Kantarjian HM, Cortes J, Guilhot F, Hochhaus A, Baccarani
M, Lokey L.Diagnosis and management of chronic myeloid
leukemia: a survey of American and European practice patterns. Cancer. 2007;109:1365-1375.
4. Ruiz-Arguelles GJ, Tarin-Arzaga LC, Gonzalez-Carrillo ML,
et al. Therapeutic choices in patients with Ph1 (þ) chronic
myelogenous leukemia living in Mexico in the tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKI) era: stem cell transplantation or TKI’s? Bone
Marrow Transplant. 2008;42:23-28.
5. Kantarjian H, Pasquini R, Levy V, et al. Dasatinib or highdose imatinib for chronic-phase chronic myeloid leukemia resistant to imatinib at a dose of 400 to 600 milligrams daily:
two-year follow-up of a randomized phase 2 study (STARTR). Cancer. 2009;115:4136-4147.
6. Kantarjian HM, O’Brien S, Cortes JE, et al. Complete cytogenetic and molecular responses to interferon-alpha-based
therapy for chronic myelogenous leukemia are associated with
excellent long-term prognosis. Cancer. 2003;97:1033-1041.
7. Jabbour E, Kantarjian HM, Jones D, et al. Imatinib mesylate
dose escalation is associated with durable responses in patients
with chronic myeloid leukemia after cytogenetic failure
on standard-dose imatinib therapy. Blood. 2009;113:21542160.

Cancer

November 1, 2010

