Regulating E-Cigarettes
A rule proposed by the FDA aims to
extend authority to E-cigarettes, other
tobacco products

I

n April, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
proposed a new rule to extend its authority to regulate a wider
variety of tobacco products, including electronic cigarettes
(E-cigarettes). Many in the tobacco control community applaud
the rule and call it an important “first step” in addressing
concerns about these products.
“We have to know a great deal more about what’s in these
products and how they affect people,” says Ellen Gritz, PhD,
chair of the department of behavioral science at The University
of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center in Houston. “We don’t
know what harms they may cause, or whether they will be a
good substitute for combustible cigarettes.”
Currently, the FDA regulates cigarettes, rolling tobacco, and
smokeless tobacco products such as snuff. E-cigarettes, which
have been sold in the United States since 2007, are batteryoperated devices in which heat is applied to a liquid solution
filled with nicotine, flavors, and other chemicals. Users inhale
the resulting vapor. The liquid consists primarily of glycerin and
propylene glycol. The devices are sold by major multinational
tobacco and other companies, and are aggressively marketed.
They are presented as alternatives to conventional cigarettes that
can help smokers quit.
Through the Family Smoking Prevention and Tobacco
Control Act, the FDA was given the authority to regulate
additional products that it deems to fall under the definition

Cancer
CANCER

July 15, 2014
JULY 15, 2014

of being made or derived from tobacco. Under the proposed
rule, these products include not only E-cigarettes, but cigars,
pipe tobacco, nicotine gels, water pipe (hookah) tobacco, and
dissolvables not already under the FDA’s authority.
“The good news is that cigarette consumption is down,
but, unfortunately consumption of products in these other
categories—like cigars and E-cigarettes—is increasing,” says
Mitch Zeller, JD, director for FDA’s Center for Tobacco Products.
Particularly concerning to officials is the fact that E-cigarette
consumption is growing among youth. Findings from the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) National
Youth Tobacco Survey found that the percentage of US middle
and high school students who use them had more than doubled
from 2011 to 2012, rising to 4.7%. Altogether, in 2012 more
than 1.7 million middle and high school students nationwide
had tried E-cigarettes. “The increased use of E-cigarettes by teens
is deeply troubling,” says Tom Frieden, MD, MPH, director of
the CDC. “Nicotine is a highly addictive drug. Many teens that
start with E-cigarettes may be condemned to struggling with a
lifelong addiction to nicotine and conventional cigarettes.”
The survey also found that 1 in 5 middle school students
who reported having used E-cigarettes said they have never tried
conventional cigarettes, prompting concerns that E-cigarettes
could serve as a gateway to regular cigarettes. Adds Tim
McAfee, MD, MPH, director of the CDC Office on Smoking
and Health, “These dramatic increases suggest that developing
strategies to prevent marketing, sales, and use of E-cigarettes
among youth is critical.”

The Impact of the Rule
Under the proposed rule, the FDA would require the newly
deemed products to:
• Register with the FDA and report product and ingredient
listings;
• Only market new tobacco products after FDA review;
• Only make direct and implied claims of reduced risk if
the FDA confirms that scientific evidence supports the
claim that marketing the product will benefit the public
as a whole; and
• Not distribute free samples.
In addition, the rule requires minimum age and
identification restrictions to prevent sales to underage youth
and prohibits vending machine sales, unless a facility never
admits youth. The rule includes different compliance dates for
various provisions so that entities such as small businesses will
have time to comply.
The full impact of the final rule could take several years
because the FDA has requested a compliance date of 24 months
2069
1

© GOODLUZ | SHUTTERSTOCK.COM

Oncology Issues in Focus | BY CARRIE PRINTZ

after its adoption. Nevertheless, tobacco control leaders are
applauding the agency’s action. “Manufacturers are claiming
that E-cigarettes are not harmful, but the primary ingredient—
nicotine—is a chemical, and it can be poisonous,” Dr. Gritz says.
“Right now we have no regulatory control over how E-cigarette
liquids are mixed or what the nicotine concentration is. We also
don’t know the long-term impact of inhaling these chemicals,
particularly for people with lung conditions like asthma, lung
cancer, or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.”

Safety Concerns
Indeed, recent studies have raised concerns about just how
safe E-cigarettes are (see “Recent Studies Question E-Cigarette
Safety,” below). Another concern, says Dr. Gritz, is how the
products are marketed to youth, making them appear cool and

sexy (similar to how cigarettes were promoted in the 1950s and
1960s), through the Internet and unregulated television and
other advertising. Additionally, some flavors are clearly designed
to appeal to young people, Dr. Gritz says.
However, E-cigarettes may well have their place in
certain circumstances, says tobacco control expert K. Michael
Cummings, PhD, MPH, of the Medical University of South
Carolina. “E-cigarettes are made up of 5 chemicals that may not
be so bad, while cigarettes have 7000 chemicals in every puff,
about 60 of which are known or suspected carcinogens,” he says.
“E-cigarettes are not even in the same ballpark as cigarettes.”
Although E-cigarettes have not been proven through a
clinical study to help individuals quit smoking, Mr. Zeller
notes that the FDA has received many anecdotal reports of
smokers saying that nothing else helped them quit until these

Recent Studies Question E-Cigarette Safety
Industry claims may be unsupported. Scientists at the
University of California at San Francisco conducted a major
scientiﬁc analysis of peer-reviewed published research
on E-cigarettes, and concluded that industry claims
about the devices are unsupported by current evidence.1
Their review found that E-cigarette use is associated with
signiﬁcantly lower odds of quitting cigarettes. They also
found that although data are not extensive, E-cigarettes are
not merely “harmless water vapor,” as is often claimed by
manufacturers, and can be a source of indoor air pollution.
They concluded that E-cigarettes should be prohibited in
the same areas in which conventional cigarettes are and
should be subject to the same marketing restrictions.
Although most youth using E-cigarettes also smoke
conventional cigarettes, up to one-third have never smoked
a regular cigarette, the report adds. The report also found
that bystanders are exposed to aerosol exhaled by users.
Toxins in that aerosol include formaldehyde, acetaldehyde,
acetic acid, and others. In addition, short-term exposure
studies show a negative impact on lung function.
Contribution to nicotine addiction. Meanwhile,
a September 2013 Canadian survey of a random sample of
3253 adults found that approximately one-half of current
E-cigarette users are nonsmokers, suggesting that, unlike
tobacco harm-reduction products, “E-cigarettes contribute
to primary nicotine addiction and renormalization of
smoking behaviors,” according to lead author Robert
McMillen, PhD, professor in the Social Science Research
Center at Mississippi State University.2
Risk of toxins. Another recent study found that highvoltage E-cigarettes may expose users to increased levels of
toxic chemicals, including formaldehyde and acetaldehyde.3
Some of the devices allow users to change the voltage
to increase vapor production and nicotine delivery.
Researchers found that when the voltage was increased,
the levels of toxicants also signiﬁcantly increased.

2070

Lead author Maciej Goniewicz, PhD, PharmD, says that
users of high-voltage E-cigarettes should be warned about
this increased risk and that further research is needed
on other product characteristics that may affect toxicity,
including types of heating elements, ﬂavorings, additives,
and product storage conditions.
E-cigarettes may assist efforts to quit smoking.
Another recent study appears to contradict some of these
ﬁndings. A large University College London survey of
smokers in the United Kingdom found that people trying to
quit smoking without professional help were approximately
60% more likely to report succeeding with E-cigarettes
compared with willpower alone or over-the-counter
therapies such as patches or gum.4 The study surveyed
5863 smokers between 2009 and 2014 who had attempted to
quit without prescribed medication or professional support.
Approximately 20% of those trying to quit with the help of
E-cigarettes reported having stopped smoking conventional
cigarettes at the time of the survey. The researchers add
that, as they continue tracking smoking behavior in England,
“E-cigarette use among never-smokers is negligible”
and they do not see widespread use of E-cigarettes as
“renormalizing smoking.”

References
1. Grana R, Benowitz N, Glantz SA. E-cigarettes: a scientiﬁc review.
Circulation. 2014:129;1972-1986.
2. McMillen RC, Shaefer R, Wilson K. Use of electronic cigarettes among
parents. Poster presented at: Pediatric Academic Societies Annual
Meeting; May 4, 2014, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
3. Kosmider L, Sobczak A, Fik M, et al. Carbonyl compounds in electronic
cigarette vapors-effects of ni cotine solvent and battery output voltage
[published online ahead of print on May 15, 2014]. Nicotine Tob Res. doi:
10.1093/ntr/ntu078.
4. Brown J, Beard E, Kotz D, Michie S, West R. Real-world effectiveness
of e-cigarettes when used to aid smoking cessation: a cross-sectional
population study [published online ahead of print on May 20, 2014].
Addiction. doi: 10.1111/add.12623.

Cancer

July 15, 2014

products came along. “But we can’t make regulatory policy
based on anecdotal evidence,” he says. “There are cessation
trials underway, and if there is a cessation claim, that means
these products would be regulated for safety and efficacy under
medical devices.”

Right now we have no regulatory control over how Ecigarette liquids are mixed or
what the nicotine concentration is. We also don’t know the
long-term impact of inhaling
these chemicals, particularly for people
with lung conditions like asthma, lung
cancer, or chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease.—Ellen Gritz, PhD
Responding to the issue, Drs. Cummings and Griggs
were among the coauthors of a recent commentary advising
clinicians against using E-cigarettes as a tobacco cessation tool
and instead recommending evidence-based cessation strategies.1
The latter include counseling along with one of the forms of
approved pharmacological therapy: over-the-counter skin
patches, lozenges, and chewing gum, as well as prescriptiononly Nicotrol, which is available as a nasal spray or oral inhaler.

Nevertheless, Dr. Cummings says that the most important
point is for clinicians to encourage their patients to quit
smoking. “If your patients insist on using E-cigarettes to quit,
work with them,” he says. “The current approved medications
are not great, and next year there may be a different set of data
available on E-cigarettes.”
Mr. Zeller notes that there may be a subset of heavy smokers
who would reduce their long-term risk of dying prematurely
by replacing some of their conventional cigarettes with
E-cigarettes. Nevertheless, he says, there is a much larger group
of smokers who want to quit and who may continue using both
products, which could result in them being less motivated to
quit. “E-cigarettes could possibly increase harm, rather than
reduce harm,” he says. “It’s a complicated road of behaviors,
and in the absence of regulation, we can’t protect consumers or
control the marketplace or manufacturing.”
The FDA is funding parts of 37 studies on E-cigarettes and
product safety, toxicity, and patterns of use, which will help
answer many of the unknown questions, Zeller says.

Reference
1. Cummings KM, Dresler CM, Field JK, et al. E-cigarettes and cancer patients.
J Thorac Oncol. 2014;9:438-441.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.28872

Women With BRCA Mutation Have Better Survival Rates
After Double Mastectomy
omen who are diagnosed with early-stage breast cancer
and carry a mutation on the BRCA breast cancer gene
have a significantly lower chance of dying if they undergo
a double mastectomy versus having only 1 breast removed,
according to research published in the British Medical Journal.1
Researchers from both the United States and Canada
reviewed the 20-year survival of 390 women (from 290 families)
with early-stage breast cancer, diagnosed between 1975 and
2009. They were either known carriers of the BRCA1 or BRCA2
mutations or were likely to be carriers and initially were treated
with either a single (346 women) or double (44 women)
mastectomy.
Among the group treated with a single (unilateral)
mastectomy, 137 patients went on to have the other breast
removed at a later date. The average time from diagnosis to
second (contralateral) mastectomy was 2 years. During the
20-year span, 79 women died of breast cancer: 18 women in
the double-mastectomy group and 61 women in the singlemastectomy group. The findings indicated that double
mastectomy was associated with a 48% reduction in breast
cancer death compared with having only 1 breast removed over
a 20-year period.
As a result, researchers predict that of 100 women treated
with double mastectomy, 87 will be alive at 20 years compared
with 66 women who have been treated with a single mastectomy.

© BIKERIDERLONDON | SHUTTERSTOCK.COM

W

The authors of the study note that double mastectomy
should be discussed as an option for young women with a BRCA
mutation and early-onset breast cancer; however, they add that
further research is needed to confirm their results because of the
small number of women in this group. They also suggest that
women with newly diagnosed breast cancer may benefit from
knowing if they carry a BRCA mutation.

Reference
1. Metcalfe K, Gershman S, Ghadirian P, et al. Contralateral mastectomy and
survival after breast cancer in carriers of BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations:
retrospective analysis. BMJ. 2014;348:g226.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.28873

Content in this section does not reﬂect any ofﬁcial policy or medical opinion of the American Cancer Society or of the publisher unless otherwise noted. © American Cancer Society, 2014.

Cancer

July 15, 2014

2071

