Published OnlineFirst May 19, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-1959

Research Article

Combination Therapies against Chronic Myeloid Leukemia:
Short-term versus Long-term Strategies
1

1,2

Natalia L. Komarova and Dominik Wodarz

Departments of 1Mathematics and 2Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of California, Irvine, California

Abstract
During therapy for chronic myeloid leukemia (CML), decline
of the number of BCR-ABL transcripts has been shown to
follow a biphasic pattern, with a fast phase followed by a
slower phase. Hence, sustained remission requires a long
phase of therapy. Data indicate that a combination of
different available targeted drugs might prevent treatment
failure due to drug resistance, especially at advanced stages of
the disease. However, for long-term multiple-drug treatments,
complications can arise from side effects. We investigate
whether and how the number of drugs could be reduced
during long-term therapy. Using computational models, we
show that one or more drugs can be removed once the number
of tumor cells is reduced significantly, without compromising
the chances of sustained tumor suppression. Which drug to
remove first depends on the number of mutations in the BCRABL gene that confer resistance to the drugs, as well as on how
effectively the drugs inhibit Bcr-Abl protein tyrosine kinase
activity and inhibit tumor growth. We further show that the
number of CML cells at which the number of drugs can be
reduced does not correlate with the two phases of decline of
the BCR-ABL transcript numbers. Neither does it depend
much on kinetic parameters of CML growth, except for the
mutation rates at which resistance is generated. This is a
significant finding because even without any information on
most parameters, and using only the data on the number of
cancer cells and the rate at which resistant mutants are
generated, it is possible to predict at which stage of treatment the number of drugs can be reduced. [Cancer Res 2009;
69(11):4904–10]

Introduction
Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is a cancer of the hematopoietic system (1–4). It proceeds in three stages. During the chronic
phase, the tumor cell population grows relatively slowly and the
cells show a relatively high degree of differentiation. During the
accelerated phase, the tumor grows faster and the percentage of
undifferentiated blast cells increases. Blast crisis is the end stage of
the disease, characterized by explosive growth and a relatively high
proportion of undifferentiated blast cells. It is thought that the
product of the BCR-ABL fusion gene is responsible for initiating
and maintaining the disease (1). Consequently, small-molecule
inhibitors of the Bcr-Abl oncoprotein have shown great promise in

Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research Online
(http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Requests for reprints: Dominik Wodarz, Department of Ecology and Evolutionary
Biology, University of California, 321 Steinhaus Hall, Irvine, CA 92697. Phone: 949-8242531; Fax: 949-824-2181; E-mail: dwodarz@uci.edu.
I2009 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-1959

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (11). June 1, 2009

treating this disease (5). The best known such drug is imatinib
mesylate, which has shown significant treatment responses that
can lead to molecular remission (defined by undetectable BCR-ABL
mRNA transcripts using real-time quantitative PCR), especially
when applied during the early phases of the disease (4, 6–12). The
cancer cells, however, can evolve resistance to the drug, mainly
through point mutations, and this is an important obstacle to
sustained tumor suppression (6, 7, 9, 11–19). Recently, alternative
small-molecule inhibitors have been developed that also target the
Bcr-Abl oncoprotein (e.g., dasatinib and nilotinib), which could be
used in combination with imatinib and each other (5) to prevent
drug resistance. In vitro experiments have shown that ‘‘compared
with single agents, each of the three combinations (imatinib
mesylate + nilotinib, imatinib mesylate + dasatinib, and nilotinib +
dasatinib) was more effective at reducing the outgrowth of
resistant cell clones’’ (20).
During therapy, the decline of the BCR-ABL transcript numbers
has been shown to follow a biphasic pattern in many patients, with
a first and fast phase of decline followed by a second and slower
phase of decline (21–24). Although debated, a reason for the slow
phase of decline could be the presence of quiescent primitive CML
cells (cancer stem cells) that do not respond to treatment and only
get attacked by the drug when they exit the quiescent state and
enter the cell cycle again (21–23). This in turn means that
eradication of the cancer would require a long phase of treatment
if this outcome is at all possible to achieve. If drug therapy has to
be applied in the long term, complications can arise from side
effects, especially when multiple drugs are given in combination. In
this article, we investigate whether and how the number of drugs
could be reduced during long-term therapy regimens. As cells die
during treatment, mutant cells that are resistant to a subset of
drugs can go extinct. For example, if three drugs are necessary to
achieve a significant response to treatment, mutants that are
resistant to two drugs might have gone extinct once the number of
cancer cells has been reduced by several orders of magnitude.
Hence, two drugs might be sufficient to continue therapy in the
long term. We build on our existing mathematical framework to
provide a quantitative analysis of such scenarios.

Materials and Methods
We use three different methods of calculating the number of tumor cells
where it becomes possible to decrease the number of drugs by one without
compromising the ability to suppress the tumor. These are the full
stochastic method (see Supplementary Materials Sections 1–3), the ordinary
differential equations for the expected values (see Supplementary Materials
Section 4), and the ‘‘number of drugs’’ diagram that is explained in the next
section (see Fig. 1).
Our stochastic model describes the dynamics of the cancer cell
population during growth and during treatment (see refs. 21, 22, 25). We
distinguish between active, cycling, and quiescent cells. These correspond
to the primitive CML cell populations that are thought to drive and
maintain the disease. Active cells divide with a rate l and die with a rate D.

4904

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst May 19, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-1959
CML Long-term Treatment Strategies
primitive cells to cells characterized by a relatively high degree of
differentiation. Not all of these cells might contribute to maintenance and
progression of the disease. Likely, the cancer stem cells and progenitor
cells are most important in this regard, whereas the role of the more
differentiated cells is less clear at the moment. Our model only considers
the cells that drive the disease and that need to be attacked by drug
therapy, and therefore, it is possible that this does not include the total
number of CML cells found in a patient. Clearly identifying the role of
the different cell populations for disease progression and correlating their
numbers with BCR-ABL transcript numbers will be a very important step
that will allow us to relate model predictions to clinical data in more
precise way.

Results
The Number of Drugs Needed for Treatment

Figure 1. The number of drugs needed for the probability of treatment success
1  d with d = 0.01, as a function of u and N. Other parameters are the following:
l = 1, d = 0, h = 2, a = 0.01, b = 0.05, M 0 = 100. The jagged appearance
of the boundaries between the domains with different values of m is due to a
discrete method used to calculate it and can be smoothed by using a simulation
with a higher resolution.

They can enter quiescence with a rate a. Quiescent cells reactivate with a
rate b. The model describes treatment with m drugs, which affects the
model coefficients. That is, the overall cell death rate is given by D = d + h,
where d is the natural and h is the drug-induced death rate. All the
parameters are summarized in Table 1.
All cells are subdivided into resistance classes, ranging from fully
susceptible to fully resistant. A cell can acquire resistance to a given drug
through a mutation with a rate u. We assume that the cancer grows in the
absence of treatment (l > D) until it has reached N cells. Then, treatment is
started with m drugs (to prevent resistance), leading to an exponential
decline (D > l). Further, we consider two-stage treatment strategies, where,
during stage I, m drugs are applied in combination and then, during stage II
treatment, the number of drugs is reduced.
The stochastic analysis described in detail in Supplementary Materials
allows us to calculate the probability of treatment success (related to the
extinction probability for cells), given the model parameters. We use these
methods to calculate the number of tumor cells at which the number of
drugs in a combination treatment can be reduced without compromising
continued tumor suppression.
A simpler, approximate method of estimating the number of cells at
which the number of drugs can be reduced without compromising tumor
suppression is provided by deterministic modeling. There, we track the
dynamics of the average population sizes for different resistance classes
under stage I therapy and specifically calculate the expected number of
mutants resistant to m  1 drugs. We determine the time when the
expected size of this population is reduced to below 1 cell and then declare
that at this stage it is possible to remove one of the drugs without
compromising the ability of treatment to suppress the tumor.
It is important to clarify the concept of treatment success used
throughout the article. Using our models, we calculate the probability of
treatment success based on the probability that the cancer cell population
will be eventually driven extinct in the model. It therefore has a clear
mathematical meaning. Although in the model the tumor cell population
can indeed go extinct, it is unclear whether this is possible in vivo ( factors
not accounted for in the model could prevent tumor cell eradication) or
whether this is possible to occur within a realistic period of time. In
biological terms, the mathematical concept of treatment success translates
into sustained remission without the resurgence of the disease as a result of
drug resistance.
Finally, a note about the number of CML cells considered in the
model. CML is made up of a heterogeneity of cells, ranging from

www.aacrjournals.org

We start our discussion by determining the number of drugs, m,
that we need for treatment under the assumption that treatment
with m drugs continues indefinitely. We will fix parameters l, d, h,
a, and b (see Table 1) and vary the mutation rate u (with which
resistant mutants are generated) and the number of tumor cells at
which treatment is started, N. For each pair (u,N), we will find the
minimum number of drugs that gives a probability of treatment
success greater than 1  d. The result for a particular choice of
parameters is presented in Fig. 1. We can see that for smaller
mutation rates and smaller tumor cell numbers, two drugs are
enough to treat successfully. For larger tumors or mutation rates,
the number of drugs grows significantly.
The value of the rate at which resistant mutants are generated
plays an important role in this analysis, and it strongly influences
the number of drugs needed for treatment. In one of our previous
articles (25) where we first introduced our method, we argued that
most of the time, resistance preexists treatment, that is, several
resistant mutants are already present at the start of therapy. The
same holds in the present investigation; the mutation rates are of
utmost importance because it is by the way of mutations the
resistant clones come about. In our mathematical approach, we
consider several stages of tumor evolution, the first one being
‘‘before treatment.’’ According to the model, it is during that first
stage that resistance is mostly generated by mutations and may
cause treatment failure at later stages.

The Number of Tumor Cells at Which the Number of
Drugs Can Be Reduced
Next, we assume that at some point during the treatment, the
number of drugs is reduced. We will examine whether fewer drugs

4905

Table 1. Variables and parameters of the model
Notation

Definition

x(t), y(t)
l
d, h
D
u
a, b
m
N
N off
d

Populations of cycling and quiescent cancer cells
Cell division rate
Natural and drug-induced cell death rates
Total cell death rate
Mutation rate (per cell division)
Cell quiescence and awakening rates
The number of drugs used
The colony size at start of treatment
The colony size at time of drug removal
The allowed loss in probability of treatment success

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (11). June 1, 2009

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst May 19, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-1959
Cancer Research

The Role of the Number of Tumor Cells and the
Kinetic Rates

Figure 2. Probability of treatment success as a function of N off, the number of
tumor cells at which the number of drugs is reduced by one. Different curves
correspond to different number of tumor cells on start of treatment, N . The initial
number of drugs is m = 3, and u = 106. The rest of the parameters are as in
det
, equation
Fig. 1. The thick dashed vertical line corresponds to the quantity N off
8 of Supplementary Materials.

are sufficient to treat the cancer in the long term once the number of
cells has shrunk. Let us calculate the number of tumor cells at which
one drug can be taken away such that the probability of treatment
success does not decrease by more than d (see Supplementary
Materials Sections 4 and 5 for details). Figure 2 presents the
probability of treatment success as a function of the quantity N off,
the number of tumor cells at which treatment with three drugs is
replaced by treatment with only two of those three drugs. This is
plotted for different values of N, the number of tumor cells at
which treatment is started. We observe the following interesting
trends.
The probability of treatment success is flat for small values of
N off, and it is equal to the probability of treatment success for m =
3 drugs. In other words, if we remove one of the drugs when the
number of cancerous cells is very low, it does not change the
probability of treatment success. Note that in the particular
example of Fig. 2, the probability of treatment success for low N off
is very close (closer than d) to 1 for all curves except for the one
with N = 1013. If N = 1013 and u = 106, we can see from Fig. 1 that
the number of drugs necessary for a success rate greater than 1  d
is m = 4, that is, if m = 3, the probability of success is smaller than
1  d. This can be seen in the limiting value of the probability of
success rate as N off ! 0 for N = 1013 in Fig. 2.
On the other hand, if we take away one drug too early (N off
near N), then the probability of treatment success is lower than
that with m drugs throughout the course of therapy. There is a
relatively sharp transition between maximum possible probability
of treatment success and a low probability of treatment success.
The main finding is that if we wait sufficiently long, the number
of drugs used in combination treatment can be safely removed by
one. Using similar methods, we can show that for some parameter
combinations, there are conditions when more than one drug can
be removed from treatment without compromising the ability of
treatment to suppress the tumor. The number of tumor cells at
which this can be done is calculated in similar ways (see
Supplementary Materials Section 6 for details).

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (11). June 1, 2009

To implement a strategy when the number of drugs is reduced in
the course of treatment, we need to be able to calculate when it is
safe to remove a drug. Given parameter values, our methods allow
us to perform corresponding calculations. However, reliable
parameter estimation is usually problematic. Let us examine how
strongly the number of tumor cells at which a drug can be removed
from treatment depends on system parameters.
From Fig. 2, we observe that the probability of treatment
success corresponding to different starting tumor cell numbers,
N, are very similar for different starting cell numbers, N
(see Supplementary Materials Section 5 for a quantification of
this statement). One consequence of that is that for any tumor cell
numbers at the beginning of treatment, one has to wait until the
tumor reaches a defined number of cells, and then it becomes
possible to remove one drug without compromising tumor
suppression. To understand this result, we return to Fig. 1 and
consider the case where u = 106 (one of the dashed vertical lines
in the figure). We can see that for N = 1013, three drugs are not
enough to treat with success rate of 1  d. For tumor cell numbers
log10N between about 9 and 12, three drugs are needed for the
desired degree of success. For smaller tumor cell numbers, two
drugs are enough. This simple reasoning explains intuitively why
for any starting number of tumor cells within this range, a drug
can be removed from treatment at about N offd for u = 106. One
needs to wait until the number of tumor cells is reduced enough
such that m  1 drugs can accomplish the job successfully and
then take one drug off.
The above argument is not very precise because Fig. 1 has been
created assuming that for each pair (N,u), the tumor grows to N
number of cells and is subsequently treated with m drugs. The
composition of a tumor that grew to N 1 number of cells before
start of treatment may be quite different from the composition of a
tumor that was treated starting from N 2 > N 1 with m drugs and
thus reduced to N 1. However, we can use the chart in Fig. 1 for a
rough estimate of reasonable population sizes.
We have seen that the number of tumor cells at which the
number of drugs can be reduced without compromising tumor
suppression strongly depends on the resistance mutation rate, u,
and is not sensitive to changes in N. In Supplementary Materials

Figure 3. Mutation diagram for a two-drug case where drug 1 has a narrower
specificity (a larger mutation rate u 1). Cell types are denoted by circles:
fully-susceptible cells (combinatorial type 00 ) are denoted by an empty circle,
partially resistant cells (10 and 01) are denoted by half-shaded circles, and fully
resistant mutants (11 ) are black circles. The mutation rates and drug-induced
death rates are marked. We have u 1 > u 2 (thicker arrow ).

4906

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst May 19, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-1959
CML Long-term Treatment Strategies

Figure 4. Drugs of different activity spectrum profiles: the probability of treatment success as a function of N , the number of tumor cells, for different treatment
schedules. Drug 1 always has a narrower activity spectrum than drug 2. Top, the two drugs have equal potency (h/l = 5). The dashed thick line corresponds to
the combination treatment of two drugs. The other lines correspond to treatment schedules where one of the drugs is removed once the number of tumor cells is
reduced by a factor R, indicated in the figure. A, drug 1 (the more active drug) is removed. B, drug 2 (the less active drug) is removed. Bottom, the two drugs have
different potency. The dotted red lines correspond to strategy 1, where after a combination treatment only drug 1 remains. Solid green lines correspond to strategy 2,
where only drug 2 remains. C, drug 1 has a larger potency than drug 2; different lines correspond to values of h 2/12{5, 10, . . ., 50}, such that h 2 V h 1 = 50l.
Note that for strategy 2, the green line, which appears thick, is made up of several lines that have very similar probabilities of treatment success and are hence
close together. D, drug 1 has a smaller potency than drug 2; different lines correspond to values of h 1/12{5, 10, . . ., 50}, such that h 1 V h 2 = 50l. The parameters are
d/l = 0.2, u 1 = 107, u 2 = 106, M 0 = 102.

Section 5, we present a detailed study of how this quantity depends
on other parameters. Here, we outline the main findings:
.

For systems with higher rate quiescence, a, one has to wait
longer before it is possible to reduce the number of drugs
without compromising treatment success. However, the tumor
cell number at which the drug reduction can take place remains
virtually unchanged with a.
. The smaller values of b are (more quiescence in the system), the
longer one needs to wait until a drug can be removed. But at the
same time, the number of tumor cells corresponding to taking
off a drug is largely independent from b.
. The time lapse before it is possible to remove a drug without
compromising treatment success grows with d, but the tumor
cell number is only weakly dependent on the death rate.
We conclude that although the time of drug removal is sensitive
to exact parameter estimations, the number of cells at which the
number of drugs can be reduced is only weakly dependent on
parameter values.

www.aacrjournals.org

Finally, we investigated how the number of tumor cells at which
a drug can be removed depends on the location of the ‘‘transition’’
of the biphasic tumor decline (23, 24). It turned out that the point
of transition is not indicative of when a drug can be removed. For
some parameters, a drug can be taken away while still in the first,
fast, phase of the decline, and for others one has to wait for a long
time, well into the second phase, until a drug can be taken off.

Drugs with Different Specificity and Potency
In this section, we discuss some applications of our method to
scenarios where the drugs have different characteristics. In
particular, we will concentrate on the activity spectrum and
potency of the drugs, which are defined as follows.
We will say that a drug is characterized by a broad activity
spectrum if it is able to bind to a large variety of mutant Bcr-Abl
proteins, with a subsequent successful destruction of the cell. On
the other hand, a drug with a narrow activity spectrum is a more
specific agent, which is active against a relatively small number of
Bcr-Abl protein variants. In terms of our modeling approach, the

4907

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (11). June 1, 2009

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst May 19, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-1959
Cancer Research

drug with a broader activity spectrum will be characterized by a
smaller mutation rate, u, with which mutants resistant to the drug
are generated. The more specific, or narrow, drug is characterized
by a larger mutation rate associated with the generation of mutants
resistant to the drug.
By potency, we mean how effectively a drug inhibits the Bcr-Abl
protein tyrosine kinase activity and kills cells that are susceptible to
the drug; this is reflected in the drug-induced cell death rate
characteristic of each drug, where higher potency is correlated with
higher values of h.
Consider a two-drug treatment with drugs 1 and 2. Suppose that
drug 2 is characterized by a broader activity compared with drug 1.
This setup is illustrated in Fig. 3, where a mutation diagram for all
the resistance types is shown. Let us envisage a schedule whereby
the tumor is first treated with a combination of drugs 1 and 2, and
then the number of drugs is reduced by one. Which drug should
remain and which one should be taken off?
First, we assume that the potency of both drugs is the same, that
is, h 1 = h 2. To identify the more effective treatment strategy in the
presence of two drugs with different activity spectra, consider
Fig. 4. The graphs show the probability of treatment success as a
function of N, the number of tumor cells, for different treatment
schedules. In Fig. 4A, the drug with a broader activity spectrum
(drug 2) is removed, and in Fig. 4B, the drug with a narrower
activity spectrum (drug 1) is removed. The rightmost dashed thick
line in both graphs corresponds to a combination therapy. The
other lines show the probability of treatment success when a drug
is discontinued; the drug is removed once the number of tumor
cells is reduced by a factor R , which appears above each line. The
goal is to keep the probability of treatment success as high as
possible (the thick dashed line). We can see that in both cases, if
the reduction happens sufficiently late in treatment (low values of
R), the probability of treatment success will be unchanged. This is
consistent with the results of the previous subsections.
We can see, however, that if the drug with a broader activity
spectrum is removed (Fig. 4A), then we need to wait until the
number of tumor cells is reduced by a factor of R = 108; otherwise,
the probability of treatment success is significantly lower
compared with that of continuous combination therapy. On the
other hand, if the drug with a narrower activity spectrum is
removed (Fig. 4B), then we can withdraw the drug earlier in
treatment (more precisely, when the number of tumor cells is
reduced by a factor of R = 107). This suggests that a more effective
strategy is the one when the drug with a narrower activity
spectrum is removed (Fig. 4B).
This result can be explained in the following way (see Table 2).
Because of the differential activity spectra of the two drugs, the
resistant mutants are accumulated at different rates before
treatment. Mutants resistant to drug 1 are generated at a higher
rate: u 1 > u 2. Consequently, by the time treatment starts, there

tends to be more mutants resistant to drug 1. During treatment
stage I, both types of partially resistant mutants are killed at rate
h 1 = h 2, such that by the time one of the drugs is removed
(beginning of stage II treatment), there will be more mutants
resistant to drug 1. To maximize treatment success, these mutants
have to be removed; they are only susceptible to drug 2 (and
resistant to drug 1). Therefore, it is more effective to continue
treating with drug 2 to which these mutants are susceptible.
Next, let us add a layer of complexity and assume that the two
drugs can differ not just in their activity spectra but also in their
potency. In terms of our analysis, this means that the drug-induced
cell death rates, h 1 and h 2, are different. Below, we consider the two
cases, h 1 > h 2 and h 2 > h 1 (see Fig. 4C and D).
The drug with a narrower activity is more potent, that is, h 1
> h 2. As before, u 1 > u 2. In words, drug 1 has a narrower activity
spectrum, but it is also more potent than drug 2. This case is
similar to the case h 1 = h 2: the more effective treatment schedule
involves continuing with the broader drug (drug 2) while removing
the narrower drug (drug 1). The argument is as follows. By the time
treatment starts, there are more mutants resistant to drug 1 than
there are mutants resistant to drug 2 (see Table 2; as before, they
are produced at a higher rate). During stage I treatment, the more
abundant mutants are killed at a lower rate, h 2, such that at the
beginning of stage II treatment, mutants resistant to drug 1 are still
more prevalent and they pose the biggest risk. Therefore, the drug
applied in stage II treatment should be able to effectively kill these
mutants. This is drug 2, as the more prevalent mutants are
resistant to drug 1. The above ideas are illustrated in Fig. 4C, where
we plot the probability of treatment success as a function of the
number of tumor cells, for two strategies: ‘‘strategy 1’’ when drug 1
continues (dotted red lines) and ‘‘strategy 2’’ when drug 2 continues
(solid green lines). We keep all the parameters fixed except varying
the drug 1–induced cell death rate, h 1 (although it always remains
below h 2). First, we can see that it is always advantageous to keep
drug 2 and remove drug 1 (the corresponding probabilities of
success are always higher). Another interesting observation is the
following. As we vary the strength of drug 2, the probability of
treatment success of strategy 1 changes dramatically, whereas this
has almost no effect on strategy 2. This is because for strategy 1,
the mutants resistant to drug 1 are only killed during stage I
treatment by drug 2; thus, its strength is of a crucial importance.
Under strategy 2, these mutants are continued to be exponentially
killed throughout treatment.
The drug with a narrower activity is less potent, that is,
h 1 < h 2. We can say that in this case, drug 1 is inferior to drug 2
because it has a narrower activity spectrum and it is also less
potent. Under this scenario, interestingly, the choice of strategy will
depend on the extent to which drug 2 is more potent than drug 1.
During treatment stage I, the more abundant mutants (the ones
resistant to drug 1) will be killed at a higher rate (h 2) than the less

Table 2. A summary of the dynamics of different resistant types during the pretreatment stage and two stages of treatment
Stage
Pretreatment
Treatment stage I
Treatment stage II (drug 1 only)
Treatment stage II (drug 2 only)

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (11). June 1, 2009

Mutants resistant to drug 1

Mutants resistant to drug 2

Generated at rate u 1 ( faster, because u 1 > u 2)
Killed with rate h 2
Not killed
Killed with rate h 2

Generated at rate u 2 (slower, because u 1 > u 2)
Killed with rate h 1
Killed with rate h 1
Not killed

4908

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst May 19, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-1959
CML Long-term Treatment Strategies

abundant mutants resistant to drug 2. Therefore, if by the time
stage II treatment starts there are still more mutants resistant to
drug 1, then drug 2 should be given. Otherwise, it is drug 1 that
should be continued, and drug 2 removed. Figure 4D illustrates
these scenarios. Again, strategy 1 corresponds to continuing drug 1,
and strategy 2 leaves drug 2. Now, it is the potency of drug 1 that is
varied (while remaining below the potency of drug 2). By analogy
with the previous case, only strategy 2 is sensitive to changes in h 1
because in this case mutants resistant to drug 2 are only killed in
stage I treatment by drug 1, and this has to be done as efficiently as
possible. A more interesting observation that confirms the above
verbal argument is that strategy 1 may or may not be the most
efficient. In particular, it is the preferable strategy when drug 2 is
significantly more potent than drug 1.3 In this case, during stage I
treatment, the ‘‘better’’ (more specific and more potent) drug
(which is drug 2 in our notations) effectively gets rid of the mutants
resistant to drug 1. Then, the only problem is the mutants resistant
to drug 2, which are subsequently killed by a long-term application
of drug 1.
We conclude that if drugs with differential activity spectra are
used, then the drugs with the broader activity should be continued,
and the drug(s) with the narrowest activity can be removed. On the
other hand, if the broader activity drug is also considerably more
potent, the less potent and narrower drug should remain and the
more potent and broader one can be removed.

Discussion
In this article, we built on an existing mathematical framework
that describes the evolution of drug-resistant cancer cells in CML
treated with small-molecule inhibitors (21, 22, 25, 26). This
framework suggests that a combination of three or four different
small-molecule inhibitors needs to be administered to avoid
treatment failure as a result of drug resistance. It further suggests
that this treatment might have to be applied in the long term. Here,
we investigated the effect of withdrawing one or more drugs from
the combination therapy regimen once the number of cancer cells
has declined to lower levels. On the most basic level, the modeling
tells us that the number of drugs can be reduced for long-term
therapy without significantly reducing the chances of tumor
suppression. This is important in the face of side effects that are
likely to become problematic if treatment is continued in the long
term. Using a variety of computational approaches, we calculated
the threshold number of cancer cells at which the number of drugs
can be reduced without significantly altering the chances of tumor
suppression. We can generate charts (such as that presented in
Fig. 1) that map the number of drugs needed for various numbers
of tumor cells and mutation rates. It turns out that the number of
tumor cells at which the number of drugs can be reduced does not
correlate with the two phases of CML decline during treatment
observed in clinical data. In addition, the number of tumor cells at
which the number of drugs can be reduced does not depend
strongly on model parameters, except the rate at which resistance
mutations are generated. This is a significant finding because even
without any information on most parameters, and using only the

3
The latter result is reminiscent of the ‘‘worst drug rule’’ (33) which suggests that in
cyclical treatments, the first drug to be applied is the worst drug. In contrast, our
treatment schedules start with a drug combination and then followed by a single-drug
treatment.

www.aacrjournals.org

data on the amount of cancer cells in the patient’s blood and the
rate at which resistance mutations are generated, it is possible to
predict at which stage of treatment the number of drugs can be
reduced.
Our method also helps determine which drugs should be
removed and which ones continued. For example, in two-drug
treatments, if one of the drugs has a narrower activity spectrum,
and it is equally potent or more potent than the second drug,
then it is the drug with the narrower activity that should be discontinued. On the other hand, if the narrower drug is significantly
less potent than the broader activity drug, then it is the broader
drug that should be removed from treatment. Experimental and
clinical studies performing measurements of the rate at which
resistance mutations are generated and the drug-induced death
rates will be vital to make clinically relevant predictions. Cancer
kinetic parameters (such as the division and death rate of the
cancer cells, and the rates at which primitive CML cells enter and
exit quiescence) are essential to predict the time course of treatment, such as treatment length and the duration of time until the
number of drugs can be reduced without compromising continued
tumor suppression.
For the purposes of this article, we considered combination
therapies as a starting point and investigated whether the number
of drugs in the combination can be reduced in the course of the
treatment. The reasons that we chose combination therapies as our
focus are the following. (a) There are in vitro data for CML
suggesting that combining drugs results in a better treatment
outcome (20). (b) Large research literature together with a longterm clinical experience in the field of viral disease treatment
suggest that drug combination is the best strategy to suppress
resistance (27, 28). One ready example is the case of HIV infection
(27–30). In the early days of HIV treatment, drug combination
treatments were considered controversial, whereas nowadays
combination therapies have become the standard based on
mathematical modeling and clinical trials (27, 28). (c) It is possible
to show mathematically that combining cancer (small-molecule
inhibitor) drugs will lead to a higher probability of treatment
success compared with other therapeutic strategies where the
drugs are given sequentially, which includes cycling of drugs, or
treating to maximal benefit and then switching. In other words,
drug combinations provide the strongest theoretically possible
protection against resistant mutant generation; this is a subject of
our manuscript in preparation. (d) When dealing with conventional chemotherapies, drug combinations can greatly amplify
toxic side effects; however, with small-molecule inhibitors, side
effects, although still present, are less of an issue, allowing for
more freedom in combining two or more agents and treating
continuously without breaks. All of the reasons listed above lead us
to consider the combination therapy as a starting point. In future
work, we plan to investigate optimization of other CML treatment
strategies.
Our modeling assumed an optimal scenario where there is no
cross-resistance between the different drugs used. That is,
resistance against one drug does not affect the treatment with
another drug. Although this is true for many mutations that confer
resistance against small-molecule inhibitors, there is one mutation
that confers resistance to all drugs used thus far (20). We are
currently incorporating cross-resistance into our mathematical
framework. This basically reduces the number of tumor cells at
which resistance against an m-drug therapy becomes a problem. In
other words, more drugs will have to be used in combination to

4909

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (11). June 1, 2009

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst May 19, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-1959
Cancer Research

achieve successful treatment compared with a scenario where no
cross-resistance is assumed. The extent of this complication
depends on parameters. The basic insights described in this study
and recapitulated above, however, remain robust. Development of
alternative drugs that show no cross-resistance with the current
array of small-molecule inhibitors of the Bcr-Abl oncoprotein
(31, 32) would be very desirable because this would make
combination therapy a more effective and feasible tool in the
treatment of CML.
In a previous study, we have made the first step toward
validating the mathematical model that is the basis for the
computations in this article (22). There, we have used two sets of
clinical data on the number of BCR-ABL transcripts in the blood of
CML patients treated with the drug imatinib. The model does not
only predict the correct mean behavior (the phenomenon of the
biphasic decline of BCR-ABL transcript numbers) but also helps
explain individual variation in patients. In the present article, the
mathematical model is a modification of the same approach, which
includes multiple drugs and a flexibility to change/switch drugs.

References
1. Melo JV, Hughes TP, Apperley JF. Chronic myeloid
leukemia. Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program
2003;132–52.
2. Calabretta B, Perrotti D. The biology of CML blast
crisis. Blood 2004;103:4010–22.
3. Shet AS, Jahagirdar BN, Verfaillie CM. Chronic
myelogenous leukemia: mechanisms underlying disease
progression. Leukemia 2002;16:1402–11.
4. Yoshida C, Melo JV. Biology of chronic myeloid
leukemia and possible therapeutic approaches to
imatinib-resistant disease. Int J Hematol 2004;79:420–33.
5. Jabbour E, Cortes J, O’Brien S, Giles F, Kantarjian H.
New targeted therapies for chronic myelogenous
leukemia: opportunities to overcome imatinib resistance. Semin Hematol 2007;44:25–31.
6. Gorre ME, Mohammed M, Ellwood K, et al. Clinical
resistance to STI-571 cancer therapy caused by BCR-ABL
gene mutation or amplification. Science 2001;293:876–80.
7. Shah NP, Tran C, Lee FY, Chen P, Norris D, Sawyers CL.
Overriding imatinib resistance with a novel ABL kinase
inhibitor. Science 2004;305:399–401.
8. Daley GQ. Towards combination target-directed chemotherapy for chronic myeloid leukemia: role of farnesyl
transferase inhibitors. Semin Hematol 2003;40:11–4.
9. Deininger MW, Druker BJ. Specific targeted therapy of
chronic myelogenous leukemia with imatinib. Pharmacol Rev 2003;55:401–23.
10. John AM, Thomas NS, Mufti GJ, Padua RA. Targeted
therapies in myeloid leukemia. Semin Cancer Biol 2004;
14:41–62.
11. O’Dwyer ME, Mauro MJ, Druker BJ. Recent advancements in the treatment of chronic myelogenous leukemia.
Annu Rev Med 2002;53:369–81.

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (11). June 1, 2009

There are several types of potential data that can be used to
improve the method. One is in vitro data where different treatment
schedules are investigated (in the spirit of ref. 20). Another is actual
clinical data similar to those in refs. 23, 24, where patients are
treated with several drugs and then some drugs are discontinued. It
is our hope that this article could encourage experimentalists and
clinicians to consider pursuing some of these ideas.

Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest
No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

Acknowledgments
Received 5/30/08; revised 9/25/08; accepted 10/19/08; published OnlineFirst 5/19/09.
Grant support: NIH grant 1R01CA129286. N.L Komarova is supported by the Sloan
fellowship.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank Tiong Ong for very helpful discussion that contributed to the design of
this study.

12. Tauchi T, Ohyashiki K. Molecular mechanisms of
resistance of leukemia to imatinib mesylate. Leuk Res
2004;28 Suppl 1:S39–45.
13. Daub H, Specht K, Ullrich A. Strategies to overcome
resistance to targeted protein kinase inhibitors. Nat Rev
Drug Discov 2004;3:1001–10.
14. Druker BJ. Overcoming resistance to imatinib by
combining targeted agents. Mol Cancer Ther 2003;2:
225–6.
15. Druker BJ. Imatinib as a paradigm of targeted
therapies. Adv Cancer Res 2004;91:1–30.
16. Gambacorti-Passerini CB, Gunby RH, Piazza R,
Galietta A, Rostagno R, Scapozza L. Molecular
mechanisms of resistance to imatinib in Philadelphia-chromosome-positive leukaemias. Lancet Oncol
2003;4:75–85.
17. Nardi V, Azam M, Daley GQ. Mechanisms and
implications of imatinib resistance mutations in BCRABL. Curr Opin Hematol 2004;11:35–43.
18. Shannon KM. Resistance in the land of molecular
cancer therapeutics. Cancer Cell 2002;2:99–102.
19. Yee KW, Keating A. Advances in targeted therapy for
chronic myeloid leukemia. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther
2003;3:295–310.
20. Bradeen HA, Eide CA, O’Hare T, et al. Comparison of
imatinib mesylate, dasatinib (BMS-354825), and nilotinib (AMN107) in an N -ethyl-N -nitrosourea (ENU)-based
mutagenesis screen: high efficacy of drug combinations.
Blood 2006;108:2332–8.
21. Komarova NL, Wodarz D. Stochastic modeling of
cellular colonies with quiescence: an application to drug
resistance in cancer. Theor Popul Biol 2007;72:523–38.
22. Komarova NL, Wodarz D. Effect of cellular quiescence on the success of targeted CML therapy. PLoS
ONE 2007;2:e990.

4910

23. Roeder I, Horn M, Glauche I, Hochhaus A, Mueller
MC, Loeffler M. Dynamic modeling of imatinib-treated
chronic myeloid leukemia: functional insights and
clinical implications. Nat Med 2006;12:1181–4.
24. Michor F, Hughes TP, Iwasa Y, et al. Dynamics of
chronic myeloid leukaemia. Nature 2005;435:1267–70.
25. Komarova NL, Wodarz D. Drug resistance in cancer:
principles of emergence and prevention. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 2005;102:9714–9.
26. Wodarz D, Komarova NL. Emergence and prevention
of resistance against small molecule inhibitors. Semin
Cancer Biol 2005;15:506–14.
27. Gulick RM, Mellors JW, Havlir D, et al. Simultaneous
vs sequential initiation of therapy with indinavir,
zidovudine, and lamivudine for HIV-1 infection: 100week follow-up. JAMA 1998;280:35–41.
28. Bonhoeffer S, May RM, Shaw GM, Nowak MA. Virus
dynamics and drug therapy. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1997;94:6971–76.
29. Ribeiro RM, Bonhoeffer S. Production of resistant
HIV mutants during antiretroviral therapy [see comments]. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2000;97:7681–6.
30. Ribeiro RM, Bonhoeffer S, Nowak MA. The frequency
of resistant mutant virus before antiviral therapy. Aids
1998;12:461–5.
31. Carter TA, Wodicka LM, Shah NP, et al. Inhibition
of drug-resistant mutants of ABL, KIT, and EGF
receptor kinases. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2005;102:
11011–6.
32. Quintas-Cardama A, Kantarjian H, Cortes J. Flying
under the radar: the new wave of BCR-ABL inhibitors.
Nat Rev Drug Discov 2007;6:834–48.
33. Goldie JH, Coldman AJ. Drug resistance in cancer:
mechanisms and models. Cambridge (UK): Cambridge
University Press; 1998.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst May 19, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-1959

Combination Therapies against Chronic Myeloid Leukemia:
Short-term versus Long-term Strategies
Natalia L. Komarova and Dominik Wodarz
Cancer Res 2009;69:4904-4910. Published OnlineFirst May 19, 2009.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-1959
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2009/04/20/0008-5472.CAN-08-1959.DC5

This article cites 31 articles, 10 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/69/11/4904.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 1 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/69/11/4904.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

