Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 4

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Emodin potentiates the antiproliferative effect of interferon `/β
by activation of JAK/STAT pathway signaling through inhibition
of the 26S proteasome
Yujiao He1, Junmei Huang1,2, Ping Wang2, Xiaofei Shen1, Sheng Li1, Lijuan Yang1,
Wanli Liu4, Apichart Suksamrarn3, Guolin Zhang1,5, Fei Wang1,5
1

Key Laboratory of Natural Medicine and Clinical Translation, Chengdu Institute of Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Chengdu, China

2

School of Chinese Pharmacy, Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Chengdu, China

3

 epartment of Chemistry and Center for Innovation in Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Ramkhamhaeng University, Bangkok,
D
Thailand

4

MOE Key Laboratory of Protein Science, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China

5

Sichuan Translational Medicine Research Hospital, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chengdu, China

Correspondence to: Guolin Zhang, e-mail: zhanggl@cib.ac.cn
Fei Wang, e-mail: wangfei@cib.ac.cn
Keywords: emodin, interferon, JAK/STAT, 26S proteasome
Received: May 18, 2015     Accepted: November 29, 2015     Published: December 14, 2015

ABSTRACT
The 26S proteasome is a negative regulator of type I interferon (IFN-`/β)
signaling. Inhibition of the 26S proteasome by small molecules may be a new strategy
to enhance the efficacy of type I IFNs and reduce their side effects. Using cellbased screening assay for new 26S proteasome inhibitors, we found that emodin, a
natural anthraquinone, was a potent inhibitor of the human 26S proteasome. Emodin
preferably inhibited the caspase-like and chymotrypsin-like activities of the human
26S proteasome and increased the ubiquitination of endogenous proteins in cells.
Computational modeling showed that emodin exhibited an orientation/conformation
favorable to nucleophilic attack in the active pocket of the β1, β2, and β5 subunits
of the 26S proteasome. Emodin increased phosphorylation of STAT1, decreased
phosphorylation of STAT3 and increased endogenous gene expression stimulated
by IFN-`. Emodin inhibited IFN-`-stimulated ubiquitination and degradation of
type I interferon receptor 1 (IFNAR1). Emodin also sensitized the antiproliferative
effect of IFN-α in HeLa cervical carcinoma cells and reduced tumor growth in Huh7
hepatocellular carcinoma-bearing mice. These results suggest that emodin potentiates
the antiproliferative effect of IFN-` by activation of JAK/STAT pathway signaling
through inhibition of 26S proteasome-stimulated IFNAR1 degradation. Therefore,
emodin warrants further investigation as a new means to enhance the efficacy of
IFN-`/β.

of viral diseases such as hepatitis B and hepatitis C, as
well as tumors such as hepatocellular carcinoma and
leukemia. However, the efficacy and side effects of type
I IFNs are correlated with their dosage and duration of
use [2]. Therefore, small-molecule activators of JAK/
STAT signaling, which could amplify the effects of type
I IFNs, are high-priority targets of drug development
efforts. Intriguingly, several small-molecular activators

INTRODUCTION
Type I interferons (IFN-α and IFN-β) play central
roles in the innate immune response and exhibit antiviral,
antiproliferative, and immunomodulatory effects by
activation of Janus kinase/signal transducer and activator
of transcription (JAK/STAT) pathway signaling [1].
Clinically, type I IFNs are widely used in the treatment

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4664

Oncotarget

of type I IFNs have been identified through cell-based
screening and exhibit antiviral or anti-cancerous effects
through various mechanisms, including suppression of
cAMP-PKA-SHP2 signaling, inhibition of pyrimidine
biosynthesis, and activation of type I IFN receptors [3–5].
JAK/STAT signaling pathway stimulated by type I IFNs
is regulated in a complex and tissue-specific manner;
therefore, new activators of JAK/STAT pathway will
facilitate the development of new strategies for IFN
therapy [6].
The 26S proteasome, a molecular complex that
catalyzes the degradation of ubiquitinated proteins,
participates in negative regulation of JAK/STAT pathway
signaling. Binding of type I IFNs with IFNAR1/2 induces
ubiquitination, endocytosis, and lysosomal degradation of
the IFNAR1 and is an important pathway through which
IFN signaling is attenuated [7]. In addition, IFNAR1 is
stabilized by its binding to Tyk2 kinase [8]. Activated
STAT1 is degraded in the 26S proteasome by a mechanism
involving the F-box E3 ligase SCFβTrcp [9]. Simian virus
5 inhibits IFN signaling by specifically targeting STAT1
for proteasomal degradation [10]. The negative regulatory
effects of IFN-β on osteoclastogenesis are correlated
with the expression level of Jak1, which is regulated by
receptor activator of nuclear factor κB ligand (RANKL) by
inducing it for ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation
[11]. Therefore, inhibition of the 26S proteasome
activity is a strategy that could be utilized to suppress its
attenuating effect on IFN signaling and thus enhance the
efficacy of IFN, and methods of producing such inhibition
merit further study.
Emodin (1,3,8-trihydroxy-6-methylanthraquinone)
is a naturally occurring anthraquinone derivative isolated
from the roots and bark of numerous plants, as well as
molds and lichens. Emodin is an active constituent of
several herbs used in traditional Chinese medicine,
including Rheum palmatum and Polygonam multiflorum,
and has diuretic, vasorelaxant, anti-bacterial, anti-viral,
anti-ulcerogenic, anti-inflammatory, and anti-cancer
effects [12]. Because of the promising chemopreventive
and chemotherapeutic potential of emodin, extensive
efforts have been aimed at exploiting its mechanism and
many reports suggest that emodin efficiently suppresses
multiple cell signaling pathways, including p53, NFκB, and AKT/mTOR signaling [13]. Despite evidence
that emodin directly interacts with several molecular
targets involved in inflammation and cancer, including
casein kinase II, Her2/neu, topoisomerase II, and heat
shock protein 90 (Hsp90) [13], it is unclear whether
other proteins are involved in the mechanism by which
emodin exerts its pharmacological effects; however, a
comprehensive understanding of its mechanism of action
is important for the development of emodin as a new
therapeutic agent.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Emodin exhibits anticancer effects partly through
regulation of JAK/STAT pathway signaling. Emodin
suppresses activation of JAK/STAT signaling in leukemia
cells by inhibiting the kinase CK2, inhibits interleukin6-induced JAK2/STAT3 signaling in myeloma cells,
and suppresses STAT3 activation through upregulation
of SHP-1 in hepatocellular carcinoma cells [14–16].
Previously, we showed that emodin is an activator of type
I IFN-induced JAK/STAT signaling and could increase
expression of endogenous antiviral genes induced by type
I IFNs [17]. However, the mechanism by which emodin
acts on type I IFN-induced JAK/STAT signaling is unclear.
In this study, we determined whether emodin is a potent
inhibitor of 26S proteasome that activates type I IFNinduced JAK/STAT signaling through inhibition of 26S
proteasome-stimulated IFNAR1 degradation.

RESULTS
Establishment of an ubiquitin-independent cellbased assay for 26S proteasome inhibitors
Native ornithine decarboxylase (ODC) is recognized
for degradation by the 26S proteasome without ubiquitin
modification [18]. Vertebrate forms of ODC have a
small conserved degradation tag (37 amino acids in mice
and humans) at the C terminus (cODC), where strictly
unidirectional proteasomal degradation begins [19]. Fusing
this degradation tag to other proteins, including those of
mammals, plants, and fungi, promotes their rapid turnover
by the eukaryotic proteasome [20]. To monitor inhibition
of the 26S proteasome, the pCIneo-luciferase-cODC
plasmid was constructed. As illustrated in Figure 1A, the
mouse cODC was fused to the C terminus of the luciferase
reporter to promote proteasomal degradation of luciferase.
The pCIneo-luciferase plasmid lacking the cODC tag was
used as a negative control plasmid to exclude the effect
of non-specific luciferase reporter activity inhibited
by the test compounds. To examine whether the cODC
tag promotes proteasomal degradation of luciferase,
HEK293A cells were transiently transfected with equal
amounts of the pCIneo-luciferase and pCIneo-luciferasecODC plasmids. The activity of luciferase fused with the
cODC tag was significantly lower than that of luciferase
without the cODC tag. The activity of luciferase-cODC
was increased when the cells were treated with the 26S
proteasome inhibitor bortezomib (Figure 1B), indicating
that luciferase-cODC was specifically degraded by the
26S proteasome. A HEK293A cell line stably transfected
with the pCIneo-luciferase-cODC plasmid (HEK293Aluciferase-cODC) was generated and treated with
bortezomib. Treatment with bortezomib (at 0.02–10 μM)
increased luciferase activity in the HEK293A-luciferasecODC cells in a concentration-dependent manner (Figure

4665

Oncotarget

Inhibitory effect of emodin on 26S proteasome
activity

1C). These results suggest that degradation of the
luciferase reporter in HEK293A-luciferase-cODC cells is
26S proteasome-specific, indicating that they can be used
to screen new proteasome inhibitors.

Purified human 26S proteasome was used to
examine whether emodin directly inhibited the 26S
proteasome. As shown in Figure 3A, emodin inhibited
the chymotrypsin-like activity of the 26S proteasome,
with an IC50 value of 1.22 μM. Emodin also inhibited
the trypsin-like and caspase-like activities of the 26S
proteasome, with IC50 values of 20.85 μM and 0.24 μM,
respectively (Figure 3B and 3C). To examine the effect of
emodin on endogenous protein ubiquitination, HEK293A
cells were treated with emodin and the cell lysates were
probed with anti-ubiquitin antibodies. As shown in Figure
3D, proteasome inhibitor MG132 significantly increased
ubiquitinated protein accumulation in comparison
with that of the untreated cells. In addition, emodin
also increased endogenous protein ubiquitination in a
concentration-dependent manner. Furthermore, emodin
treatment also significantly increased endogenous protein
ubiquitination in a time-dependent manner (Figure 3E).
These results indicate that emodin is a potent inhibitor of
the 26S proteasome.

Identification of emodin as an inhibitor of the
26S proteasome
Using the HEK293A-luciferase-cODC cell line,
we screened a chemical library containing 1431 natural
products and synthesized analogues [14]. After hit
reconfirmation, emodin was identified to potently increase
luciferase reporter expression. The chemical structure of
emodin is illustrated in Figure 2A. Emodin at concentrations
of 1–20 μM inhibited luciferase-cODC degradation in
a concentration-dependent manner (Figure 2B). The
EC50 value of emodin for inhibition of luciferase-cODC
degradation was 6.33 μM (Figure 2C). Emodin did not
show cytotoxicity in the HEK293A-luciferase-cODC cells
at concentrations of 1–20 μM (data not shown). Promotion
of luciferase-cODC expression by 10 μM emodin was first
evident after 3 h of exposure and was sustained until the
12 h time point, when luciferase-cODC expression was
increased by approximately 1.5-fold in comparison with
that of the control cells (Figure 2D). Compared with that,
the proteasome inhibitor MG132 at 10 μM more potently
promoted luciferase-cODC expression from 2 h until to 24
h (Figure S1). We also examined the effect of emodin on
GFP-CL1, a reporter for the proteasome activity in vivo.
The result showed that emodin significantly promoted the
accumulation of GFP-CL1 in cells, similar as MG132 did
(Figure S2). These results indicate that emodin inhibits the
26S proteasome.

Molecular docking of emodin with proteasome
subunits
The proteolytic activities of the proteasome are
dependent on the N-terminal threonine (Thr1) residue
hydroxyl group of the β subunits, which are responsible
for catalyzing the cleavage of peptides through
nucleophilic attack. An in silico docking study was
performed to aid the understanding of possible binding

Figure 1. Establishment of an ubiquitin-independent cell-based assay for 26S proteasome inhibitors. A. Schematic

diagram of the luciferase reporter with or without the cODC motif. cODC is an ubiquitin-independent domain of ornithine decarboxylase
that is required for 26S proteasome degradation. B. HEK293A cells were co-transfected in a 24-well plate with 0.1 μg of the pCIneoluciferase or pCIneo-luciferase-cODC plasmids with 0.3 μg pSV-β-galactosidase expression plasmid. After 24 h of incubation, the cells
were lysed and luciferase activity was measured and normalized to β-galactosidase activity. The results are expressed as relative-fold
induction, referring to the ratio of normalized luciferase activity measured in the cells relative to the activity observed in the pCIneoluciferase-cODC-transfected cells. C. HEK293A-luciferase-cODC cells were seeded in a 96-well plate and treated with various
concentrations of bortezomib for 6 h. The cells were lysed and luciferase activity was measured. The results are expressed as relative-fold
induction, referring to the ratio of normalized luciferase activity measured in bortezomib-treated cells relative to the activity observed in
DMSO-treated cells.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4666

Oncotarget

Figure 2. Emodin inhibits the activity of the 26S proteasome in vitro and in vivo. A. The chemical structure of emodin. B.

HEK293A-luciferase-cODC cells were seeded in 96-well plates and treated in the presence of the indicated concentrations of emodin and
1 μM bortezomib for 3 h. C. The concentration-response curve of emodin. The calculated EC50 of emodin was 6.33 µM. D. HEK293Aluciferase-cODC cells were seeded in 96-well plates and treated with 10 µM emodin for the indicated period or treated with 10 µM MG132
for 2 h. The results are representative of 3 separate experiments. The error bars represent the standard deviation of the measurements. (*) p
< 0.05, (**) p < 0.01, (***) p < 0.001 in comparison with the DMSO control.

Figure 3. Inhibitory effect of emodin on 26S proteasome activity. The purified human 26S proteasome (0.1 µg) was treated

with or without different concentrations of emodin and A. 40 µM Suc-Leu-Leu-Val-Tyr-AMC (for measurement of chymotrypsin-like
activity), B. 40 µM Ac-Arg-Leu-Arg-AMC (for measurement of trypsin-like activity), or C. 40 µM Z-Nle-Pro-Nle-Asp-aminoluciferin
(for measurement of caspase-like activity) for 2 h at 37 °C. HeLa cells were treated with the indicated concentrations of emodin or 10 µM
MG132 for 3 h D., or with 20 μM emodin or 10 µM MG132 for the indicated durations E., and the cell lysates were probed with antiubiquitin antibodies. GAPDH was used as an internal control.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4667

Oncotarget

modes of emodin with the active pocket of proteasome
subunits and subsequent proteasome inhibition. Emodin
was docked to the active site of the proteasome β1, β2,
and β5 subunits, which are responsible for caspaselike, trypsin-like, and chymotrypsin-like activities
of the proteasome, respectively. As shown in Figure
4A, emodin adopted a conformation favorable
for nucleophilic attack at the active site of the β1
subunit with energy of -6.22 kcal/mol. To identify
favorable binding modes of emodin to the proteasomal

chymotrypsin-like active site, we analyzed hydrogenbond (H-bond) formation and hydrophobic interactions
between emodin and the β1 subunit. There are 3 polar
hydrogens and 1 carbonyl-oxygen in emodin that are
available for H-bonding and participate in H-bonding
with the Thr1, Thr21, and Ser129 residues of the β1 subunit
(Figure 4B). Emodin was also favorably inserted within
the S1 hydrophobic pocket of the β1 subunit through
hydrophobic interactions (Figure 4C). Similarly, emodin
adopted a conformation favorable for nucleophilic attack

Figure 4. Molecular docking of emodin on the proteasome subunits. A–C. Emodin was docked to the β5 subunit of the

proteasome. The energy of the inhibitory conformation and the number of runs (out of 100) that adopted the inhibitory conformation are
shown below A. The threonine catalytic residue and all amino acids in the S1 pocket of the β5 subunit involved in the formation of H-bonds
B. and hydrophobic interactions C. with emodin are highlighted. D–F. Emodin was docked to the β2 subunit of the proteasome. The energy
of the inhibitory conformation and the number of runs (out of 100) that adopted the inhibitory conformation are shown below D. The
threonine catalytic residue and all amino acids in the S1 pocket of the β2 subunit involved in the formation of H-bonds E. and hydrophobic
interactions F. with emodin are highlighted. G–I. Emodin was docked to the β1 subunit of the proteasome. The energy of the inhibitory
conformation and the number of runs (out of 100) that adopted the inhibitory conformation are shown below G. The threonine catalytic
residue and all amino acids in the S1 pocket of the β1 subunit involved in the formation of H-bonds H. and hydrophobic interactions I. with
emodin are highlighted.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4668

Oncotarget

Emodin inhibits ubiquitination and degradation
of IFNAR1

at the active site of the β2 subunit with energy of -6.95
kcal/mol (Figure 4D). There are 2 polar hydrogens and
1 carbonyl-oxygen on emodin that are available for
H-bonding and which participate in H-bonding with the
Thr21, His35, Gly45, and Gly47 residues of the β2 subunit
(Figure 4E). Emodin was favorably inserted within
the S1 hydrophobic pocket of the β2 subunit through
hydrophobic interactions (Figure 4F). Emodin adopted
a conformation favorable for nuleophilic attack at the
active site of the β5 subunit with energy of -6.22 kcal/
mol (Figure 4G). There is 1 polar hydrogen on emodin
that is available for H-bonding, which participates
in H-bonding with the Gly47 residue of the β5 subunit
(Figure 4H). Emodin was favorably inserted within
the S1 hydrophobic pocket of the β2 subunit through
hydrophobic interactions (Figure 4I). These results
suggest that emodin can exhibit an orientation/
conformation in proximity to the N-terminal Thr1
of the β1, β2, and β5 subunits and is thus subject to
nucleophilic attack.

IFN-α-induced ubiquitination and lysosomal
degradation of IFNAR1 are key steps in the negative
regulation of IFN signaling. Thus, inhibition of the activity
of the 26S proteasome by emodin may suppress IFN-αinduced ubiquitination and degradation of IFNAR1. To
test this hypothesis, we examined the effect of emodin
on IFNAR1 degradation. As shown in Figure 6A, in the
presence of cycloheximide (CHX) (a blocker of de novo
protein synthesis), IFN-α treatment stimulated IFNAR1
degradation, as demonstrated in a previous report [8].
The addition of emodin significantly inhibited IFNAR1
degradation stimulated by IFN-α. Immunofluorescence
staining of IFNAR1 also showed that emodin inhibited
IFN-α-stimulated IFNAR1 degradation (Figure 6B).
IFNAR1 is ubiquitinated prior to lysosomal degradation,
which can be inhibited by 26S proteasome inhibitors [8].
Therefore, we examined the effect of emodin on IFNAR1
ubiquitination. As shown in Figure 6C, the stimulatory
effect of IFN-α treatment on IFNAR1 ubiquitination was
inhibited by 26S proteasome inhibitor MG132 or emodin.
Tyk2 enhances surface IFNAR1 expression and STAT1
activation [8]. We then examined the effect of emodin on
Tyk2. Emodin significantly increased the phosphorylation
and expression of Tyk2 in the presence of IFN-α in a
concentration-dependent manner (Figure 6D). These results
indicate that emodin protects IFNAR1 from degradation.

Emodin promotes IFN-α/β-induced activation of
JAK/STAT signaling
We showed that emodin alone can promote
endogenous IFN-α-stimulated genes expression, but
its effect on JAK/STAT signaling is unknown. The
26S proteasome participates in negative regulation of
JAK/STAT signaling, so it is possible that emodin may
promote the activation of type I IFN-induced JAK/
STAT signaling by inhibiting the activity of the 26S
proteasome. To test this hypothesis, we first examined
the effect of emodin on IFNα/β-induced JAK/STAT
signaling. As shown in Figure 5A, emodin potently
increased ISRE luciferase reporter expression induced
by IFN-α or IFN-β in a concentration-dependent
manner. Next, we examined the effect of emodin on
phosphorylation of STAT1, STAT2 and STAT3 in
combination with IFN-α. In comparison with IFN-α
alone, emodin increased tyrosine phosphorylation of
STAT1 and decreased tyrosine phosphorylation of
STAT3 in a concentration-dependent manner, but had
no effect on STAT2 phosphorylation (Figure 5B). PKR
and 2′, 5′-OAS1 are IFN-α-responsive genes that contain
ISRE consensus sequences in their promoter regions.
We examined the effect of emodin in combination with
IFN-α on mRNA expression of PKR and 2′, 5′-OAS1.
As shown in Figure 5C, mRNA expression levels of
both IFN-stimulated genes significantly increased after
treatment with a combination of emodin and IFN-α
in comparison with levels measured after treatment
with IFN-α alone. These results indicate that emodin
enhances activation of type I IFN-induced JAK/STAT
pathway signaling.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Emodin promotes the antiproliferative effect
of IFN-α
To examine whether emodin enhanced the antiproliferative effect of IFN-α, human cervical cancer
HeLa cells were treated with emodin in combination with
IFN-α. As shown in Figure 7A, IFN-α treatment inhibited
the proliferation of HeLa cells. The addition of emodin
significantly enhanced antiproliferative effect of IFN-α in a
dose-dependent manner, whereas emodin at concentrations
of 1–20 μM had no effect on HeLa cell proliferation (data
not shown). Furthermore, treatment with IFN-α resulted
in decreased colony formation in HeLa cells compared
with the untreated control cells. The addition of emodin
significantly decreased the number of colonies, compared
with cells treated by IFN-α alone (Figure 7B). To examine
whether activation of JAK/STAT pathway is required for the
antiproliferative effect of emodin, we treated the cells with
JAK inhibitor and found that it completely abolished the
antiproliferative effect of emodin in combination of IFN-α
(Figure S3). To test whether the antiproliferative effect of
emodin depends on the presence of STAT1, we knocked
down the expression of STAT1 by siRNA transfection. The
result showed that knockdown of STAT1 partially abolished
the antiproliferative effect of emodin in combination of

4669

Oncotarget

IFN-α (Figure S4). These results suggest that emodin
enhances the antiproliferative effect of IFN-α in vitro.

antiproliferative effect of emodin in combination with
IFN-α in nude mice bearing Huh7 human hepatocellular
carcinoma cells. As shown in Figure 8A, treatment with
IFN-α caused a moderate suppression of tumor volume,
with reduction of about 22 %. Notably, treatment with
IFN-α plus emodin resulted in a synergistic inhibition on
tumor growth, with reduction of about 39 %. Meanwhile,
the body weights of IFN-α plus emodin treated mice

Emodin promotes the antiproliferative effect of
IFN-α in vivo
To examine whether emodin promotes the
antiproliferative effect of IFN-α in vivo, we assessed the

Figure 5. Emodin enhances IFN-α/β-induced JAK/STAT pathway activation. A. The HepG2-ISRE-Luc2 cells were seeded

in 96-well plates (1 × 104/well) and treated with various concentrations of emodin for 2 h, followed by the addition of 200 U/mL IFN-α or
IFN-β for 24 h. B. HEK293A cells were incubated with the indicated concentrations of emodin for 2 h, after which 200 U/mL IFN-α was
added for 1 h. The cell lysates were immunoblotted with antibodies against phospho-STAT1 (Tyr701), STAT1, phospho-STAT2 (Tyr690),
STAT2, phosphor-STAT3 (Tyr705) and STAT3 respectively. Quantitative results are depicted. C. HEK293A cells were treated 200 U/mL
IFN-α with or without 10 μM bortezomib or with the indicated concentrations of emodin for 24 h. Real-time PCR was used to determine the
mRNA expression of PKR and 2′5′-OAS1. The results are presented as induction (n-fold) relative to basal levels in untreated cells. GAPDH
was used as an internal control. (*) p < 0.05, (**) p < 0.01, (***) p < 0.001 vs. control (n = 3). CK, DMSO control.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4670

Oncotarget

Figure 6. Emodin inhibits IFN-α-induced degradation of IFNAR1. A. HEK293A cells were treated with 20 μM cycloheximide
(CHX) for 2 h, followed by the addition of emodin (1 μM, 10 μM, or 25 μM) for 12 h and treatment with IFN-α (1 × 104 U/mL) for 2 h.
The cell lysates were immunoblotted with anti-IFNAR1 antibodies. GAPDH staining is shown as a loading control. Quantitative results
are depicted. B. HeLa cells were treated with emodin (10μM) for 12 h and IFN-α (1 × 104 U/mL) for 2 h in the presence of CHX (20 μM)
for 2 h. The cells were processed for immunofluorescence using IFNAR1 antibody. C. HeLa cells were incubated with MG132 (20 μM) or
emodin (20 μM) for 12 h, followed by treatment with IFN-α (1 × 104 U/mL) for 2 h, and the cell lysates were immunoprecipitated with the
anti-IFNAR1 antibodies. Immunoblotting was performed using anti-ubiquitin antibodies. Anti-GAPDH antibody staining represents 5% of
the total cell lysates used in immunoprecipitation. D. HeLa cells grown in 6-well plates were treated with emodin (1 μM, 10 μM, or 25 μM)
for 12 h, followed by the addition of 2000 U/mL IFN-α for 30 min. The cells were harvested and processed for western blotting. GAPDH
was used as internal control. Quantitative results are depicted. (*) p < 0.05, (**) p < 0.01, (***) p < 0.001 vs. control (n = 3).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4671

Oncotarget

were slightly heavier than the body weights of IFN-α
treated mice (Figure 8B), which suggested that emodin
may decrease the adverse effects of IFN-α on animal.
Subsequently, the effects of emodin on IFN-α-mediated
JAK/STAT signaling were evaluated in tumor tissues
using immunohistochemistry method. As shown in Figure
8C, IFN-α treatment alone upregulated the tyrosine
phosphorylation of STAT1 in tumor tissues compared
with the control group, and the combination treatment of
IFN-α plus emodin further promoted the phosphorylation
of STAT1 compared with that of IFN-α treatment alone.
Furthermore, high expression of phosphorylated STAT3
was observed in tumor tissues. However, IFN-α treatment

increased the phosphorylation level of STAT3, which
could be decreased by emodin. In addition, emodin also
significantly inhibited the IFN-α-stimulated degradation of
IFNAR1. These results suggest that emodin can promote
the antiproliferative effect of IFN-α in vivo.

DISCUSSION
Inhibition of proteasome activity has emerged as
a new treatment strategy for cancer [21]. This approach
was validated by the FDA through its approval of the
proteasome inhibitor bortezomib (Velcade, PS314) for the
treatment of multiple myeloma and mantle cell lymphoma

Figure 7. Emodin potentiates the antiproliferative effect of IFN-α. (A) The HeLa cells (5 × 103 cells/well) were seeded in 96-

well plates and treated with the indicated concentrations of emodin and IFN-α for 72 h. Cell viability was measured using an Alamar Blue
assay. The values are expressed as the percentage cell viability relative to the DMSO-treated control cells. (B) The HeLa cells growing
in 6-well plates were treated with the indicated concentrations of emodin and IFN-α (1 × 104 U/mL ) for 12 days, and then colonies were
visualized by staining with crystal violet and counted manually. The bar graph was obtained by calculating the percentages of colony
numbers from each well relative to the DMSO-treated control. (*) p < 0.05, (**) p < 0.01, (***) p < 0.001 vs. control (n = 3).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4672

Oncotarget

[22, 23]. However, there are restrictions on the use of
bortezomib, including dose limiting toxicity (particularly
peripheral neuropathy), limited activity in solid tumors,
drug resistance, and the requirement for intravenous
administration [24]. These limitations of bortezomib
promoted the development of a new generation of
structurally distinct proteasome inhibitors [25]. In this
work, we conducted an ubiquitin-independent, luciferasebased screening to identify novel proteasome-inhibiting
compounds based on the ODC degron, which has been
used for green fluorescent protein-based screening
of proteasome inhibitors [26]. We found that emodin
significantly increased the activity of luciferase-cODC

in a manner similar to bortezomib. This result indicates
that emodin is a proteasome inhibitor and was further
supported by the finding that emodin potently inhibited
the 3 peptidase activities of the purified 26S proteasome
and increased accumulation of ubiquitinated proteins
in cells. Emodin most potently inhibited caspase-like
activity (IC50 0.24 μM), followed by chymotrypsinlike activity (IC50 1.22 μM), and finally trypsin-like
activity (IC50 20.85 μM). These results are similar to
the reported finding that flavones had much stronger
inhibitory effects on chymotrypsin-like and caspase-like
activities in comparison with their effects on trypsinlike activity [27]. Molecular docking of emodin to the

Figure 8. Emodin promotes the antiproliferative effect of IFN-α in vivo. Huh-7 cells (5 × 106 cells/mice) were injected

subcutaneously into the right flank of the mice. The animals were randomly divided into three groups based on tumor volume (about 100
mm3). Group I was treated with vehicle, group II was treated with IFN-α and group III was treated with a combination of IFN-α and emodin.
Tumor volume (A) and body weight (B) were measured at 3-day intervals. (*) p < 0.05, (**) p < 0.01, (***) p < 0.001 vs. control or IFN-α
(n = 6). (C) The expressions of p-STAT1, p-STAT3, and IFNAR1 in tumor tissues were measured by immunohistochemistry. Typical images
were obtained by Nikon Ti-E microscope (× 400). The relative integral optical density was normalized to control. (**) p < 0.01, (***) p <
0.001 vs. control or IFN-α (n = 6).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4673

Oncotarget

3 β subunits responsible for the peptidase activities of
the proteasome showed that emodin may suppress the
caspase-like activity of the β1 subunit mainly through
H-bonding and hydrophobic interaction, whereas it may
suppress the trypsin-like activity of the β2 subunit and
the chymotrypsin-like activity of the β5 subunit mainly
through hydrophobic interaction. The amino acids
predicted to be affected by emodin are also different from
those affected by flavonoids [28]. The chymotrypsin-like
sites of the proteasome have long been considered as the
only suitable targets for drug development. Bortezomib
and all drugs presently undergoing trials (carfilzomib,
NPI-0052, CEP-18770, MLN-9708 and ONX-0912)
were developed to inhibit chymotrypsin-like activity of
26S proteasome [21]. However, bortezomib, CEP-18770,
and MLN-9708 also inhibit the caspase-like activity [29–
31], whereas NPI-0052 also inhibits the trypsin-like and
caspase-like activities [32]. Therefore, emodin may inhibit
the 26S proteasome in a manner similar to bortezomib and
represents a new tool that can be used to understand the
mechanisms of the 26S proteasome.
Most marketed antiviral drugs directly inhibit viral
replication by targeting viral proteins, but such drugs
gradually lose their efficacy due to rapid viral mutation
[33]. Therefore, the JAK/STAT pathway, a major antiviral
defense system in the human body, is an appropriate target
for new antiviral and anticancer lead compounds. Despite
the discovery of natural inhibitors of the JAK/STAT
pathway, activators of this pathway are rarely reported
[34]. In this study, we found that emodin activated JAK/
STAT signaling and enhanced the antiproliferative effect
of IFN-α. Inhibition of IFN-α-stimulated STAT3 activation
by emodin is consistent with previous observations that
emodin inhibits Jak2 to suppress activation of STAT3
in tumor cells [15, 16]. Activation of STAT1 is also
negatively regulated by STAT3 [35]. Therefore, this
inhibitory effect of emodin on STAT3 may also explain
the promoting effect of emodin on JAK/STAT signaling.
Type I IFNs induce IFNAR1 endocytosis and lysosomal
degradation, which is regulated by the 26S proteasome
[7, 8]. In this study, we found that emodin significantly
increased IFNAR1 accumulation, indicating that it may
stabilize IFN-bound IFNAR1 via proteasome inhibition.
Ubiquitination of IFNAR1 is required for IFNAR1
endocytosis and degradation [7]. Here, we found that
IFN-α treatment could increase IFNAR1 ubiquitination,
which was significantly inhibited by MG132 or emodin.
This result indicated that emodin suppressed IFNAR1
degradation by inhibition of the 26S proteasome, similar
to a previous finding that MG132 and lysosomal inhibitors
promoted IFNAR1 accumulation [8]. The manner in
which inhibition of 26S proteasome activity decreases
IFNAR1 ubiquitination is unknown. It is possible that
inhibition of the 26S proteasome suppresses the activity
of E3 ubiquitin ligases SCFβTrcp and/or SCFHOB, which
are responsible for IFNAR1 ubiquitination [7, 36], or
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

promotes the activity of an unknown deubiquitinase
responsible for decreasing IFNAR1 ubiquitination. After
several decades of intense clinical research, the great
promise of type I IFNs as anticancer “wonder drugs” has,
regrettably, not been fulfilled. The severe side effects and
low efficacy of type I IFN-based pharmaceuticals greatly
limits use of these drugs and has reduced the enthusiasm
of clinical oncologists for type I IFN-based therapeutic
modalities. The inefficacy of IFN is postulated to be
correlated to activation of numerous signaling pathways
that leads to elimination of IFNAR in cancer cells and
benign cells that contribute to tumor tissue. Activation of
these eliminative pathways enables mitigation of type I
IFN-driven suppression of tumorigenesis and elicits the
primary refractoriness of tumors to type I IFN-based
pharmaceuticals [37]. In this study, we found for the first
time that emodin can promote IFNAR1 accumulation by
inhibiting the activity of the 26S proteasome and thus
potentiate the antiproliferative effect of IFN-α in cancer
cells, suggesting that emodin is a potential adjuvant
therapeutic that could be used to potentiate the efficacy of
type I IFNs in the clinic.
Emodin is capable of inhibiting several
inflammatory biomarkers that play crucial roles in the
development of inflammatory diseases and cancers
[13]. Inhibition of nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-κB),
a transcription factor with a central role in the onset
of inflammation and tumorigenesis, contributes to the
antitumor and anti-inflammatory effects of emodin, but
the mechanism underlying this inhibition is unclear [38,
39]. In this study, emodin was identified as an inhibitor
of the 26S proteasome, which may explain its inhibitory
effects on NF-κB activation and pro-inflammatory
cytokine production. NF-κB activation is inhibited by
the inhibitor protein I kappa B (IκB), which is degraded
through the ubiquitin/26S proteasome pathway [40].
Thus, emodin may also suppress the NF-κB activation by
inhibition of 26S proteasome-stimulated IκB degradation,
as has been shown for other proteasome inhibitors [40].
The anti-cancer effects of emodin have been studied in
tumor cell lines and pre-clinical animal models. Emodin is
strong apoptotic agent that induces apoptosis in cancer cell
lines by increasing the protein level of p53, a key tumor
suppressor involved in inhibition of cellular proliferation
[41]. p53 is ubiquitinated by E3 ubiquitin ligase MDM2,
which leads to its degradation by the 26S proteasome [42].
Therefore, inhibition of the 26S proteasome by emodin
may increase the stability of p53 and thus increase its
pro-apoptotic effect, as observed for other proteasome
inhibitors [43]. Anthraquinones represent a large family of
compounds with diverse biological properties [44]. It will
be of interest to examine whether other anthraquinones
may exert their biological effects partly through inhibition
of the 26S proteasome, as emodin does. Low levels of
IFN-α/β are produced even in the absence of viral infection
to keep the constitutive weak IFN-α/β and elicit rapid
4674

Oncotarget

Establishment of the HEK293A-luciferase-cODC
cell line and screening

strong cellular responses against infection [45]. Therefore,
chemical compounds that promote the effects of type I
IFNs may be a new means to enhance their efficacy and
reduce side effects. We previously found that luteolin, a
natural flavonoid, enhances the antiproliferative effect
of IFN-α/β on cancer cells by augmenting the activation
of JAK/STAT signaling. Such potentiation is achieved
via decreases in intracellular cAMP levels through
activation of IFNAR2-bound phosphodiesterase activity
and subsequent PKA-stimualted tyrosine phosphatase
SHP-2 inhibition [3], which is quite different from the
mechanism of emodin reported here. The proteasome
also participates in the internalization and degradation of
other cell membrane-bound cytokine receptors such as
the growth hormone receptor, interleukin-2 receptor, or
epidermal growth factor receptor [46–48]. It will be of
interest to further investigate whether emodin can stabilize
these proteasome-regulated cytokine receptors to exert its
anticancer and anti-inflammatory effects.
Taken together, we found that emodin, a natural
anthraquinone, is a potent inhibitor of the 26S proteasome.
Emodin enhances the antiproliferative effect of IFN-α
on cancer cells by promoting the activation of JAK/
STAT signaling, which is achieved via inhibition of 26S
proteasome-stimulated IFNAR1 degradation. It is of
interest to investigate the potential of emodin and other
proteasome inhibitors to enhance the efficacy of type I
IFNs in the treatment of viral or cancerous diseases.

To obtain the pCIneo-luciferase-cODC plasmid,
the C-terminus (37 amino acids) of mouse ornithine
decarboxylase (cODC) was amplified through a plasmid
containing full-length mouse ODC (kindly provided
by Prof. Philip Coffino, University of California, San
Francisco). The cODC fragment was subcloned into the
pCIneo-luciferase plasmid, in which luciferase amplified
from the pGL4.26 vector (Promega) was cloned into the
pCI-neo mammalian expression vector (Promega). The
HEK293A-luciferase-cODC stable cell line was generated
by transfecting HEK293A cells with the pCIneoluciferase-cODC plasmid using the Trans-EZ transfection
reagent (Sunbio Medical Biotechnology, Shanghai,
China) in DMEM medium without antibiotics. After 48
h of transfection, the cells were trypsinized and replated
in DMEM with 10% calf serum and 500 μg/mL antibiotic
G-418. G-418-resistant clones were selected and expanded
in several rounds for 1 month. Cells showing sensitive
induction of luciferase activity by proteasome inhibitors
bortezomib or MG132 were frozen for further use. On the
day of the assay, HEK293A-luciferase-cODC cells were
seeded at 1 × 104 cells/well in 96-well plates and incubated
overnight in a cell incubator. The cells were treated with
the test compounds for 3 h. The luciferase activity of the
total cell lysate was measured by a Luciferase Reporter
Assay System (Promega).

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Measurement of peptidase activity
Purified human 26S proteasome (0.1 μg) (Enzo,
Farmingdale, NY, USA) was incubated with or without
different concentrations of emodin in 100 μL assay
buffer (50mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5) and 40 µM fluorogenic
peptide substrate Suc-Leu-Leu-Val-Tyr-AMC (Enzo),
Ac-Arg-Leu-Arg-AMC (Enzo), or Z-Nle-Pro-Nle-Aspaminoluciferin (Promega) for 2 hours at 37 °C. After the
incubation, fluorescence was measured using a Thermo
Scientific Varioskan Flash multimode reader.

Reagents
Emodin (purity ≥99%, HPLC-grade) was
purchased from Must Biotechnology Co., Ltd. (Chengdu,
China). IFN-α (recombinant human IFN-α2a) and
IFN-β (recombinant human IFN-β1b) were purchased
from ProSpec-Tany Techno Gene Ltd. (Shanghai,
China). Bortezomib was purchased from Santa Cruz
Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA, USA). MG132 was
purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Shanghai, China). The
pSV-β-galactosidase expression plasmid was purchased
from Promega (Beijing, China).

Western blotting
Cells were lysed with RIPA buffer supplemented
with a protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma, Shanghai,
China). The protein concentration was determined using
a BCA protein assay kit (Bestbio, Shanghai, China).
Aliquots of total cell lysates (40 μg protein) were mixed
with loading buffer, boiled for 5 min, and subjected to
10% SDS-PAGE. Proteins were blotted onto nitrocellulose
membranes. The membranes were blocked with 5% bovine
serum albumin and then incubated at 4 °C overnight with
anti-phospho-STAT1 (Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA),
anti-STAT1 (Abcam), anti-phospho-STAT2 (Abcam), antiSTAT2 (Abcam), anti-phospho-STAT3 (SAB Signalway
Antibody, College Park, MD), anti-STAT3 (SAB), anti-

Cell culture
Human embryonic kidney 293A (HEK293A)
cells (Qbiogene, Carlsbad, CA, USA) and HeLa human
cervical cancer cells (American Type Culture Collection,
Manassas, VA, USA) were maintained in Dulbecco’s
modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM; Invitrogen, Carlsbad,
CA, USA) containing 10% fetal calf serum (Invitrogen)
and 1% penicillin/streptomycin at 37 °C in a 5% CO2
atmosphere. The HepG2-ISRE-Luc2 cell line was
established and maintained as previously reported [17].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4675

Oncotarget

GAPDH (Abcam), anti-IFNAR1 (Proteintech, Chicago,
IL, USA), and anti-ubiquitin (Santa Cruz Biotech)
antibodies. Next, the membranes were incubated with a
horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody
(Santa Cruz Biotech) and developed using an enhanced
chemiluminescence detection system (Amersham
Bioscience, Piscataway, NJ, USA). The intensity of each
signal was determined by a computer imaging analysis
system (Quantity One, Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA).

distances, as measured between the hydrogen and its
assumed binding partner [52].

Real-time PCR
Total RNA was extracted with TRIzol reagents
(Invitrogen) and cDNA was generated using SuperScript
III Reverse Transcriptase (Invitrogen) with oligo dT18
primer. PKR and 2′5′-OAS1 mRNA was quantified
as previously described [3]. The samples were run in
triplicate and the relative expression levels of PKR and
2′5′-OAS1 were determined by normalizing the expression
of each target to that of GAPDH using the 2-ΔΔCt method.

Computational binding simulation
Molecular docking was simulated as previously
reported with minor modifications [49]. The crystal
structure of the eukaryotic yeast 20S proteasome
was obtained from the Protein Database (ref. number
1JD2) and used for all docking studies. The yeast 20S
proteasome is structurally very similar to the mammalian
20S proteasome and the active sites are highly conserved
between the 2 species [50]. The molecular docking
simulation was performed and analyzed using AutoDock
4.2 and AutoDock Vina [51]. AutoDock 4.2, a Lamarkian
genetic algorithm method implemented in the program
suite, was employed to identify appropriate binding
modes and conformation of the ligand molecules. Default
parameters (including a distance-dependent dielectric
constant) were used as described in the AutoDock
manual except as noted below. The docking simulations
were performed on a Dell Precision T7600 workstation
computer running the Windows 7 Professional operating
system. The crystal structure of the 20S proteasome and
emodin were prepared for docking by following the
default protocols except where noted. The energy-scoring
grid was prepared by defining a 20Å × 20Å × 20Å box
centered on the N-terminal threonine with a space of 0.2Å
between grid points. In the search protocols, the number
of genetic runs used was 100 and the number of energy
evaluations was set to 5 million. AutoDock reports a
docked energy that we have referred to in this article as
“docked free energy” because it includes a salvation free
energy term. The docked energy also includes the ligand
internal energy or the intramolecular interaction energy of
the ligand. Docking was chosen by fulfilling the following
criteria: proximity to the N-terminal threonine should
be 3Å–4Å (a distance suitable for nucleophilic attack)
and placement of the A-C ring system of the molecule
should be within the S1 hydrophobic pocket. The docked
structure of lowest docked free energy was chosen from
the orientations/conformations that fit the docking criteria.
The probability of adopting the inhibitory conformation
was the number of genetic runs (out of 100) in which
the molecule docked into the active site and fulfilled
the docking criteria. The output from AutoDock and all
modeling studies, as well as images, were rendered with
PyMOL, which was used to calculate the hydrogen bond

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Immunoprecipitation
Cell lysates were prepared in ice-cold
immunoprecipitation buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, 200 mM
NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5% Nonidet P-40, pH 8.0) with
PMSF and protease cocktail inhibitors. The mixture was
centrifuged at 13,000 × g for 15 min, cleared with normal
immunoglobulin G coupled to agarose beads (protein A/G)
for 1 h, incubated overnight at 4 °C with anti-IFNAR1
antibodies, and coupled to protein A/G agarose beads for
4 h. The precipitates were washed thrice in PBS buffer,
centrifuged at 3,000 × g for 3 min, resuspended in 5×
loading buffer, and boiled for 5 min. The supernatants
were subjected to SDS-PAGE and immunoblotted with
anti-ubiquitin antibodies.

Immunofluorescence staining
HeLa cells were grown in 35mm confocal dish and
incubated with cycloheximide (CHX) for 2 h, followed
by the addition of emodin for 12 h and treatment with
IFN-α (1 × 104 U/mL) for 2 h. Cells were washed
with PBS buffer for three times and fixed with 4%
paraformaldehyde for 20 min. Then cells were washed
with PBS buffer for three times and permeabilized
for 5 min with 0.2 % Triton X-100 in PBS. Cells were
continued to wash with PBS buffer for three times. After
blocking with 5 % Bovine serum albumin, incubation with
antibody IFNAR1 overnight was followed by incubation
with secondary antibody with Alexa Fluor 555-Labeled
Donkey Anti-Rabbit IgG (Beyotime, shanghai, China)
for 1 h. Cells were counterstained with DAPI for 5 min.
Cells were imaged by laser scanning confocal microscopy
(LeicaMicrosystems TCS-SP8, Wetzlar, Germany).

Cell viability assay
HeLa cells were seeded in 96-well plates at a density
of 5 × 103 cells/well with 100 μL medium. Cultured cells
were treated with emodin or a combination of emodin IFN-α
at the indicated concentrations. After 72 h, 10 μL Alamar

4676

Oncotarget

Blue reagent was added to the medium and the cells were
incubated for 2–4 h until the color turned from blue to pink.
The relative fluorescence intensity was measured using a
Thermo Scientific Varioskan Flash multimode reader.

The HeLa cells, at the logarithmic phase, were
plated in 6-well plates at the density of 600 cells / well.
Cells were treated with emodin in combination with
IFN-α and allowed to grow for 12 days to form colonies.
A colony was defined as a cluster of more than 50 cells.
Then cells were fixed with methanol and stained with 0.1
% crystal violet solution for 20 min, and the colonies (>
50 cells) were counted under microscope.

anti-pSTAT1 (1:100, SAB), anti-pSTAT3 (1:100, SAB),
and anti-IFNAR1 (1:100, Zen Bioscience, Chengdu,
China) polyclonal rabbit antibodies at 4°C overnight.
Sections were then washed with TBST, and endogenous
peroxidase was inactivated using 3 % hydrogen peroxide
for 15 min. Next, sections were incubated with the
horseradish peroxidase-labeled secondary antibody
(1:1000, Zen Bioscience) for 1 h at room temperature,
and antibody-binding sites were visualized by DAB kit
(Zhongshan Golden Bridge Biotechnology, Beijing,
China). Thereafter, sections were stained with haematine
for 10 min, dehydrated and clear by gradient ethanol and
xylene, respectively. Finally, the samples were observed
under light microscope after sealed with neutral balsam
on slides.

Animal study

Statistical analysis

Female 6-week-old athymic nude mice were
purchased from Taconic (Oxnard, CA), housed in the
Institute of Laboratory Animals, Sichuan Academy of
Medical Sciences (Chengdu, China), and fed a normal diet
and water ad libitum. All mouse studies were performed
according to a protocol approved by the Institute of
Laboratory Animals, Sichuan Academy of Medical
Sciences, and in line with Guidelines for the welfare and
use of animals in cancer research [53]. Briefly, Huh-7
cells (5×106 cells in 200 μl) were suspended in DMEM
high glucose medium and injected subcutaneously into
the flank of each nude mouse. The length and width of
the resulting tumors (in millimeters) were measured every
three days with calipers, and then the tumor volume (0.5 ×
length × width2) was calculated. When the tumor volume
reached around 100 mm3, the mice were randomly divided
into the following three groups: one group received
intraperitoneal injections of vehicle (olive oil, 0.2 ml/10g,
every day), the second group received intraperitoneal
injections of interferon α2a (5×106 U/kg, every 3 days)
and the third group were intraperitoneal injected with both
interferon α2a and emodin (25 mg/kg, every day). Animals
were sacrificed by cervical dislocation at day 28 after first
therapeutic dose injection and the tumors were resected
and fixed with 10 % neutral-buffered formalin. They were
cut into 5-μm sections after embedding in paraffin. Tumor
sections were determined by immunohistochemistry.

Statistical analyses were performed with GraphPad
Prism 5.0 software (GraphPad, La Jolla, CA, USA).
All experiments were repeated at least thrice and
representative results are presented. The data were
compared by one-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett’s
post-hoc test. The differences were considered statistically
significant when p < 0.05.

Colony formation assay

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (No. 91213304, 91413108,
2151101054, 21372214), the West Light Foundation of
the Chinese Academy of Sciences, the Sichuan Youth
Science & Technology Foundation (No. 2014JQ0028),
Pillar Program of Science and Technology Department of
Sichuan Province (No. 2012SZ0219).

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

REFERENCES
1.	 Borden EC, Sen GC, Uze G, Silverman RH, Ransohoff RM,
Foster GR and Stark GR. Interferons at age 50: past, current
and future impact on biomedicine. Nat Rev Drug Discov.
2007; 6:975–990.

Immunohistochemistry

2.	 Jonasch E and Haluska FG. Interferon in oncological practice: review of interferon biology, clinical applications, and
toxicities. Oncologist. 2001; 6:34–55.

Tumor tissues were fixed in 10 % formalin and
embedded in paraffin wax. Five-micrometer sections were
cut from the paraffin blocks for immunohistochemical
analysis. The paraffin sections were dewaxed with
xylene, and hydrated with gradient ethanol. Then,
sections were treated in a microwave oven at low power
for 10 min in 0.01 M sodium citrate buffer (pH = 6.0)
and blocked with 10 % Goat serum at room temperature
for 2 h. Subsequently, the sections were stained with
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3.	 Tai Z, Lin Y, He Y, Huang J, Guo J, Yang L, Zhang G
and Wang F. Luteolin sensitizes the antiproliferative effect
of interferon α/β by activation of Janus kinase/signal transducer and activator of transcription pathway signaling
through protein kinase A-mediated inhibition of protein
tyrosine phosphatase SHP-2 in cancer cells. Cell Signal.
2014; 26:619–628.
4677

Oncotarget

4.	 Lucas-Hourani M, Dauzonne D, Jorda P, Cousin G, Lupan
A, Helynck O, Caignard G, Janvier G, André-Leroux G,
Khiar S, Escriou N, Desprès P, Jacob Y, et al. Inhibition of
pyrimidine biosynthesis pathway suppresses viral growth
through innate immunity. PLoS Pathog. 2013; 9:e1003678.

induces apoptosis in an orthotopic hepatocellular carcinoma
model by blocking activation of STAT3. Br J Pharmacol.
2013; 170:807–821.
17.	 Tai ZF, Zhang GL and Wang F. Identification of small molecule activators of the janus kinase/signal transducer and
activator of transcription pathway using a cell-based screen.
Biol Pharm Bull. 2012; 35:65–71.

5.	 Konishi H, Okamoto K, Ohmori Y, Yoshino H, Ohmori
H, Ashihara M, Hirata Y, Ohta A, Sakamoto H, Hada N,
Katsume A, Kohara M, Morikawa K, et al. An orally available, small-molecule interferon inhibits viral replication. Sci
Rep. 2012; 2: 259.

18.	 Zhang M, Pickart CM and Coffino P. Determinants of proteasome recognition of ornithine decarboxylase, a ubiquitinindependent substrate. EMBO J. 2003; 22:1488–1496.

6.	 van Boxel-Dezaire AH, Rani MR and Stark GR. Complex
modulation of cell type-specific signaling in response to
type I interferons. Immunity. 2006; 25:361–372.

19.	 Erales J and Coffino P. Ubiquitin-independent proteasomal
degradation. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014; 1843:216–221.
20.	 Hoyt MA, Zhang M and Coffino P. Probing the ubiquitin/
proteasome system with ornithine decarboxylase, a ubiquitin-independent substrate. Methods Enzymol. 2005; 398:
399-413.

7.	 Kumar KG, Krolewski JJ and Fuchs SY. Phosphorylation
and specific ubiquitin acceptor sites are required for ubiquitination and degradation of the IFNAR1 subunit of type I
interferon receptor. J Biol Chem. 2004; 279:46614–46620.

21.	 Adams, J. The proteasome: a suitable antineoplastic target.
Nat Rev Cancer. 2004; 4:349–360.

8.	 Ragimbeau J, Dondi E, Alcover A, Eid P, Uzé G and
Pellegrini S. The tyrosine kinase Tyk2 controls IFNAR1
cell surface expression. EMBO J. 2003; 22:537–547.

22.	 Richardson PG, Sonneveld P, Schuster MW, Irwin D,
Stadtmauer EA, Facon T, Harousseau J, Ben-Yehuda D,
Lonial S, Goldschmidt H, Reece D, San-Miguel JF, et al.
Bortezomib or high-dose dexamethasone for relapsed multiple myeloma. N Engl J Med. 2005; 352:2487–2498.

9.	 Soond SM, Townsend PA, Barry SP, Knight RA, Latchman
DS and Stephanou A. ERK and the F-box protein βTRCP
target STAT1 for degradation. J Biol Chem. 2008;
283:16077–16083.

23.	 Kane RC, Dagher R, Farrell A, Ko CW, Sridhara R, Justice
R and Pazdur R. Bortezomib for the treatment of mantle cell
lymphoma. Clin Cancer Res. 2007; 13:5291–5294.

10.	 Didcock L, Young DF, Goodbourn S and Randall RE. The
V protein of simian virus 5 inhibits interferon signalling by
targeting STAT1 for proteasome-mediated degradation. J
Virol. 1999; 73:9928–9933.

24.	 Richardson PG, Hideshima T and Anderson KC.
Bortezomib (PS-341): a novel, first-in-class proteasome
inhibitor for the treatment of multiple myeloma and other
cancers. Cancer Control. 2003; 10:361–369.

11.	 Lee Y, Hyung SW, Jung HJ, Kim HJ, Staerk J,
Constantinescu SN, Chang EJ, Lee ZH, Lee SW and Kim
HH. The ubiquitin-mediated degradation of Jak1 modulates
osteoclastogenesis by limiting interferon-β-induced inhibitory signaling. Blood. 2008; 111:885–893.

25.	 Kisselev AF, van der Linden WA and Overkleeft HS.
Proteasome inhibitors: an expanding army attacking a
unique target. Chem Biol. 2012; 19:99–115.

12.	 Srinivas G, Babykutty S, Sathiadevan PP and Srinivas P.
Molecular mechanism of emodin action: transition from
laxative ingredient to an antitumor agent. Med Res Rev.
2007; 27:591–608.

26.	 Rickardson L1, Wickström M, Larsson R and Lövborg H.
Image-based screening for the identification of novel proteasome inhibitors. J Biomol Screen. 2007; 12:203–210.
27.	 Chang TL. Inhibitory effect of flavonoids on 26S proteasome activity. J Agric Food Chem. 2009; 57:9706–9715.

13.	 Shrimali D, Shanmugam MK, Kumar AP, Zhang J, Tan
BK, Ahn KS and Sethi G.. Targeted abrogation of diverse
signal transduction cascades by emodin for the treatment
of inflammatory disorders and cancer. Cancer Lett. 2013;
341:139–149.

28.	 Mozzicafreddo M, Cuccioloni M, Cecarini V, Eleuteri AM
and Angeletti M. Homology modeling and docking analysis
of the interaction between polyphenols and mammalian 20S
proteasomes. J Chem Inf Model. 2009; 49:401–409.

14.	 Zheng Y, Qin H, Frank SJ, Deng L, Litchfield DW, Tefferi
A, Pardanani A, Lin FT, Li J, Sha B and Benveniste EN.
A CK2-dependent mechanism for activation of the JAKSTAT signaling pathway. Blood. 2011; 118:156–166.

29.	 Altun M, Galardy PJ, Shringarpure R, Hideshima T,
LeBlanc R, Anderson KC, Ploegh HL and Kessler BM.
Effects of PS-341 on the activity and composition of proteasomes in multiple myeloma cells. Cancer Res 2005;
65:7896–7901.

15.	 Muto A, Hori M, Sasaki Y, Saitoh A, Yasuda I, Maekawa
T, Uchida T, Asakura K, Nakazato T, Kaneda T, Kizaki
M, Ikeda Y and Yoshida T. Emodin has a cytotoxic activity against human multiple myeloma as a Janus-activated
kinase 2 inhibitor. Mol Cancer Ther. 2007; 6:987–994.

30.	 Kupperman E, Lee EC, Cao Y, Bannerman B, Fitzgerald M,
Berger A, Yu J, Yang Y, Hales P, Bruzzese F, Liu J, Blank
J, Garcia K, et al. Evaluation of the proteasome inhibitor
MLN9708 in preclinical models of human cancer. Cancer
Res. 2010; 70:1970–1980.

16.	 Subramaniam A, Shanmugam MK, Ong TH, Li F, Perumal
E, Chen L, Vali S, Abbasi T, Kapoor S, Ahn KS, Kumar
AP, Hui KM and Sethi G. Emodin inhibits growth and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31.	 Piva R, Ruggeri B, Williams M, Costa G, Tamagno I,
Ferrero D, Giai V, Coscia M, Peola S, Massaia M, Pezzoni
4678

Oncotarget

G, Allievi C, Pescalli N, et al. CEP-18770: A novel, orally
active proteasome inhibitor with a tumor-selective pharmacologic profile competitive with bortezomib. Blood. 2008;
111:2765–2775.

42.	 Haupt Y, Maya R, Kazaz A and Oren M. Mdm2 promotes
the rapid degradation of p53. Nature. 1997; 387:296–299.
43.	 Li M1, Brooks CL, Wu-Baer F, Chen D, Baer R and Gu W.
Mono-versus polyubiquitination: differential control of p53
fate by Mdm2. Science. 2003; 302:1972–1975.

32.	 Chauhan D, Catley L, Li G, Podar K, Hideshima T,
Velankar M, Mitsiades C, Mitsiades N, Yasui H, Letai
A, Ovaa H, Berkers C, Nicholson B, et al. A novel orally
active proteasome inhibitor induces apoptosis in multiple
myeloma cells with mechanisms distinct from bortezomib.
Cancer Cell. 2005; 8:407–419.

44.	 Huang Q, Lu G, Shen HM, Chung MC and Ong CN. Anticancer properties of anthraquinones from rhubarb. Med Res
Rev. 2007; 27:609–630.
45.	 Taniguchi T and Takaoka A. A weak signal for strong
responses: Interferon-α/β revisited. Nat Rev Mol Cell Bio.
2001; 2:378–386.

33.	 Richman DD. Antiviral drug resistance. Antiviral Res.
2006; 71:117–21.
34.	 Lin Y, Wang F and Zhang GL. Natural products and their
derivatives regulating the janus kinase/signal transducer and
activator of transcription pathway. J Asian Nat Prod Res.
2014; 16:800–812.

46.	 Longva KE, Blystad FD, Stang E, Larsen AM, Johannessen
LE and Madshus IH. Ubiquitination and proteasomal activity is required for transport of the EGF receptor to inner
membranes of multivesicular bodies. J Cell Biol. 2002;
156:843–854.

35.	 Regis G, Pensa S, Boselli D, Novelli F and Poli V. Ups
and downs: the STAT1:STAT3 seesaw of Interferon and
gp130 receptor signalling. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2008;
19:351–359.

47.	 Yu A and Malek TR. The proteasome regulates receptormediated endocytosis of interleukin-2. J Biol Chem. 2001;
276:381–385.
48.	 van Kerkhof P, Govers R, Alves dos Santos CM and Strous
GJ. Endocytosis and degradation of the growth hormone
receptor are proteasome-dependent. J Biol Chem. 2000;
275:1575–1580.

36.	 Kumar KG, Tang W, Ravindranath AK, Clark WA, Croze
E and Fuchs SY. SCFHOS ubiquitin ligase mediates the
ligand-induced down-regulation of the interferon-α receptor. EMBO J. 2003; 22:5480–5490.
37.	 Fuchs SY. Hope and fear for interferon: the receptor-centric outlook on the future of interferon therapy. J Interferon
Cytokine Res. 2013; 33:211–225.

49.	 Chen D, Daniel KG, Chen MS, Kuhn DJ, Landis-Piwowar
KR and Dou QP. Dietary flavonoids as proteasome inhibitors and apoptosis inducers in human leukemia cells.
Biochem Pharmacol. 2005; 69:1421–1432.

38.	 Huang Q, Shen HM and Ong CN. Inhibitory effect of emodin on tumor invasion through suppression of activator protein-1 and nuclear factor-κB. Biochem Pharmacol. 2004;
68:361–371.

50.	 Groll M, Ditzel L, Löwe J, Stock D, Bochtler M, Bartunik
HD and Huber R. Structure of 20S proteasome from yeast
at 2.4Ǻ resolution. Nature. 1997; 386:463–471.
51.	 Trott O and Olson AJ. AutoDock Vina: Improving the
speed and accuracy of docking with a new scoring function, efficient optimization, and multithreading. J Comput
Chem. 2010; 31:455–461.

39.	 Li HL, Chen HL, Li H, Zhang KL, Chen XY, Wang XW,
Kong QY and Liu J. Regulatory effects of emodin on
NF-κB activation and inflammatory cytokine expression in
RAW 264.7 macrophages. Int J Mol Med. 2005; 16:41–47.

52.	 Vetrivel U and Pilla K. Open discovery: An integrated live
Linux platform of Bioinformatics tools. Bioinformation
2008; 3:144–146.

40.	 Alkalay I, Yaron A, Hatzubai A, Orian A, Ciechanover A
and Ben-Neriah Y. Stimulation-dependent IκBα phosphorylation marks the NF-κB inhibitor for degradation via the
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA.
1995; 92:10599–10603.

53.	 Workman P, Aboagye EO, Balkwill F, Balmain A, Bruder
G, Chaplin DJ, Double JA, Everitt J, Farningham DAH,
Glennie MJ, Kelland LR, Robinson V, Stratford IJ, Tozer
GM, Watson S, Wedge SR, Eccles SA. Guidelines for the
welfare and use of animals in cancer research. Br J Cancer.
2010; 102:1555–1577.

41.	 Shieh DE, Chen YY, Yen MH, Chiang LC and Lin CC.
Emodin-induced apoptosis through p53-dependent pathway
in human hepatoma cells. Life Sci. 2004; 74:2279–2290.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4679

Oncotarget

