Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 2

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Mitoguardin-1 and -2 promote maturation and the developmental
potential of mouse oocytes by maintaining mitochondrial
dynamics and functions
Xiao-Man Liu1, Yong-Ping Zhang1, Shu-Yan Ji1, Bo-Tai Li1, Xuejun Tian1, Dali Li2,
Chao Tong1 and Heng-Yu Fan1
1

Life Sciences Institute and Innovation Center for Cell Signaling Network, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China

2

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Regulatory Biology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences and School of Life Sciences, East China
Normal University, Shanghai, China

Correspondence to: Heng-Yu Fan, email: hyfan@zju.edu.cn
Correspondence to: Chao Tong, email: ctong@zju.edu.cn
Keywords: mitochondrion, ROS, mtDNA copy number, oocyte meiosis, female infertility, Pathology Section
Received: October 02, 2015	

Accepted: December 09, 2015	

Published: December 21, 2015

Abstract
Mitochondrial dynamics change mitochondrial morphological features and
numbers as a part of adaptive cellular metabolism, which is vital for most eukaryotic
cells and organisms. A disease or even death of an animal can occur if these dynamics
are disrupted. Using large-scale genetic screening in fruit flies, we previously found
the gene mitoguardin (Miga), which encodes a mitochondrial outer-membrane protein
and promotes mitochondrial fusion. Knockout mouse strains were generated for
the mammalian Miga homologs Miga1 and Miga2. Miga1/2-/- females show greatly
reduced quality of oocytes and early embryos and are subfertile. Mitochondria became
clustered in the cytoplasm of oocytes from the germinal-vesicle stage to meiosis II;
production of reactive oxygen species increased in mitochondria and caused damage
to mitochondrial ultrastructures. Additionally, reduced ATP production, a decreased
mitochondrial-DNA copy number, and lower mitochondrial membrane potential were
detected in Miga1/2-/- oocytes during meiotic maturation. These changes resulted in
low rates of polar-body extrusion during oocyte maturation, reduced developmental
potential of the resulting early embryos, and consequently female subfertility. We
provide direct evidence that MIGA1/2-regulated mitochondrial dynamics is crucial for
mitochondrial functions, ensure oocyte maturation, and maintain the developmental
potential.

Introduction

embryonic development and implantation are also energyconsuming processes. Thus, numerous mitochondria
develop and are stored in an oocyte’s cytoplasm. They
provide energy by producing ATP and by assisting
with spindle assembly and orientation during meiotic
maturation and early embryo cleavages [3, 4].
Normal mitochondrial function is crucial for
successful oocyte maturation and early embryonic
development [5-7]. Mitochondrial dysfunction has been
implicated in increased formation of abnormal spindles
and chromosome aneuploidy in oocytes of mice fed a
high-fat diet; these changes may account for the infertility
observed in obese women [8, 9]. Maternal diabetes results
in defective oocyte meiosis by disrupting mitochondrial
structures and metabolic functions [10]. Insulin

In mammalian females, oocytes are arrested at the
germinal vesicle (GV) stage of meiosis I and are stored
in ovarian follicles for years or even decades. These
GV stage-arrested oocytes have a low metabolic rate
in order to maintain the stability of their inheritance
materials (including genomic DNA and mitochondrial
DNA [mtDNA] as well as other cellular organelles)
and to accurately transmit them to the offspring [1].
During meiotic maturation, however, oocyte energy
metabolism increases due to the requirements of multiple
physiological events, such as GV breakdown (GVBD),
spindle formation, chromosome alignment and separation,
and polar-body extrusion (PBE) [2]. In addition, early
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1155

Oncotarget

resistance was found to disrupt mitochondrial function
by reducing mtDNA copy numbers and ATP levels in
mouse MII oocytes. This mechanism may contribute to
the low fertility rate in diabetic women [11]. Mitochondria
aggregate in aged-oocyte cytoplasm and synthesize a
reduced amount of ATP, and these defects can prevent
oocyte maturation and ovulation and ultimately may
result in female reproductive failure [5, 12, 13]. To date,
however, there have been few studies on the regulation
of mitochondrial dynamics during oocyte meiosis and
embryonic development.
We recently identified a gene that encodes for
a mitochondrial protein in Drosophila designated
mitoguardin (Miga; Zhang and Liu et al., Molecular Cell,
2016 Jan, in press). It has two poorly studied homologs
(family with sequence similarity 73, members A and B,
Fam73a and Fam73b) in vertebrates, which we renamed
Miga1 and Miga2. MIGA1 and MIGA2 are nucleusencoded proteins that are localized to the outer membrane
of mitochondria. MIGA1/2 promote mitochondrial fusion
by interacting with the mitochondrial outer-membrane
protein Mito-PLD [14]. The latter is a signaling molecule
involved in cardiolipin hydrolysis (in the synthesis of
phosphatidic acid) and promotes mitochondrial fusion
[14].
To identify the in vivo function of the Miga1/2, we
generated Miga1 and Miga2 single- and double-knockout
(KO) mouse strains and found that these KO females are
subfertile. MIGA1/2 regulate mitochondrial dynamics
and functions during oocyte meiosis and embryonic
development. These results provide new insights into
the mechanisms of mitochondrial fusion and may help
to identify new therapeutic targets in female sterility of
unknown etiology.

and 1C).
Staining with fluorescent probes showed that
mitochondria in the oocytes became clustered after CCCP
treatment (10 μM, 3 h), and reactive oxygen species (ROS)
levels increased (1 μM, 16 h. Figure 1D and 1E). Meiotic
spindle formation was also compromised by CCCP
treatment (Figure 1F-1G). CCCP reduced ATP content of
oocytes after incubation for 3 h (Figure 1H). Collectively,
these results indicated that oocyte meiosis requires active
ATP production by mitochondria.

Miga1 and Miga2 knockout females showed
decreased quality of oocytes
The ovulated oocytes from Miga1-/-, Miga2-/-, and
Miga1/2-/- mice had significantly lower-than-normal PBE
rates (Figure 2A and 2E). Approximately 10% of the
oocytes that were ovulated by the KO mice degenerated
already at 16 h after human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG)
injection (Figure 2B and 2E).
To confirm the low quality of the oocytes from the
KO mice and to rule out the effects of other factors in vivo,
fully grown GV stage oocytes were collected from antral
follicles and cultured in vitro. Oocytes from the KO mice
showed slightly decreased GVBD rates, after 3 h of culture
(Figure 2C and 2E). In line with the in vivo results, PB1
extrusion rates were significantly lower in KO oocytes
than in WT oocytes after 16 h of culture (Figure 2D and
2E). The oocytes from Miga1/2 KO mice had a phenotype
(low PBE rate and high degeneration rate) similar to that
of the oocytes treated with CCCP in vitro, suggesting that
the Miga1/2 KO mice have low quality of oocytes because
of mitochondrial defects.

Results

Mitochondrial functions were impaired in
Miga1/2-deleted oocytes

Inhibition of mitochondrial function blocked
oocyte maturation

Because Miga1 and Miga2 are important for
mitochondrial functions in somatic cells, we assessed
mitochondrial functions in the oocytes of Miga1/2-/- mice.
Mitotracker staining showed that mitochondria in WT
oocytes were evenly distributed throughout the oocyte
cytoplasm but partially gathered around spindles (Figure
3A). In contrast, in the cytoplasm of Miga1-/-, Miga2-/-, and
Miga1/2-/- oocytes, mitochondria were aggregated. These
morphological changes resulted in increased ROS levels
(Figure 3A and 3B). ROS signals were colocalized with
mitochondria, suggesting that ROS that were generated
in the mitochondria accumulated and were caged in
the mitochondria, thereby possibly adversely affected
mitochondrial functions or ultrastructures.
Then, we tested the mitochondrial membrane
potential (MMP, Δψ) using 5,5,6,6-tetrachloro-1,1,3,3tetraethyl-β-benzimidazolylcarbocyanine iodide (JC-1)
staining. JC-1 is a compound that selectively enters the

To assess mitochondrial function during
oocyte meiosis, we incubated oocytes with the
mitochondria-targeted compound carbonylcyanidem-chlorophenylhydrazone (CCCP), which is a proton
gradient uncoupler, i.e., it disrupts mitochondrial ATP
production. After CCCP treatment, oocytes meiotic
maturation was arrested. More than 80% of the control
oocytes resumed meiosis within 3 h of in vitro culture,
and this process was characterized by GVBD, whereas
oocytes treated with CCCP showed reduced GVBD rates,
in a dose-dependent manner (in the range 1-10 μM CCCP;
Figure 1A and 1B). In addition, CCCP-treated oocytes
failed to release polar body 1 (PB1; Figure 1A and 1B)
and degenerated in a dose-dependent manner (Figure 1A
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1156

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Inhibition of mitochondrial function by carbonylcyanide-m-chlorophenylhydrazone (CCCP) blocks oocyte
maturation. A. Representative images of CCCP-treated oocytes. Scale bar = 100 μm. B. Effects of CCCP on germinal-vesicle breakdown

(GVBD) and polar-body extrusion (PBE) rates of cultured oocytes. C. Effects of CCCP on degeneration rates of cultured oocytes. D.
Fluorescent staining showing increased reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels (green) and clustered mitochondria (red) in CCCP-treated
oocytes. Scale bar = 50 μm. E. Quantification of ROS signals in oocytes. F. Fluorescent staining showing disrupted spindles (green) and
clustered mitochondria (red) in CCCP-treated oocytes. Scale bar = 50 μm. G. The proportion of normal spindles in control and CCCPtreated oocytes, after 16 h of culture. H. ATP contents in control and CCCP-treated oocytes.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1157

Oncotarget

mitochondria and reversibly changes from monomers
(green fluorescence) to aggregates (orange fluorescence)
when the MMP is high on the inner mitochondrial
membrane. The ratio of orange to green fluorescence
reflects the MMP level in cells. In this assay, the MMP of
Miga1/2-/- oocytes was significantly reduced as compared
to that of WT oocytes, indicating that in the Miga1/2-/oocytes, mitochondrial activity decreased (Figure 3C and
3D).
High levels of ROS can cause damage to the

mitochondria [15, 16], and the decreased MMP usually
correlates with alteration of the mitochondrial cristae
structure [17]. Electron-microscopic images showed
that in WT oocytes, mitochondria were generally evenly
distributed with normal aligned cristae. In Miga1/2-/oocytes, however, mitochondria were tethered closely
to each other (Figure 3E). More mitochondria lost their
cristae and contained large vacuoles than did mitochondria
in WT oocytes (43.3% in Miga1/2-/- oocytes versus 25% in
WT oocytes, Figure 3F).

Figure 2: Miga1/2-/- mice show reduced fertility and defects in oocyte development. A. Polar body 1 (PB1) extrusion (PBE)
rates of the oocytes ovulated in mice with the indicated genotypes. Total numbers (n) of observed oocytes are indicated. B. Degeneration
rates of oocytes ovulated in mice with the indicated genotypes. Total numbers (n) of oocytes observed are indicated. C.-D. GVBD and
PBE rates of cultured oocytes isolated from the mice of the indicated genotypes. Total numbers (n)of cultured oocytes are indicated. E.
Representative images of ovulated (the upper row) and cultured oocytes (the middle and lower rows) of the indicated genotypes. Scale bar
= 100 μm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1158

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Mitochondria in oocytes of Miga1/2 knockout mice show an altered distribution and impaired functions. A.

Mitochondria distributions and reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels in oocytes isolated from mice of the indicated genotypes, and fixed at
3 h after GVBD. Scale bar = 50 μm. B. Quantification of ROS levels in oocytes of the indicated genotypes. C. The mitochondrial membrane
potential (MMP) in oocytes isolated from mice of the indicated genotypes, according to JC-1 staining. Scale bar = 50 μm. D. Quantitative
results on the relative MMP levels in oocytes of the indicated genotypes. E. Electron microscopy results showing that mitochondria had lost
cristae and formed vacuoles in Miga1/2-/- oocytes. F. Quantitative results on the numbers of mitochondria with vacuoles in wild-type (WT)
and Miga1/2-/- oocytes. G. Relative mtDNA copy numbers in WT oocytes at indicated stages. H.-I. Relative mtDNA copy numbers (H) and
ATP levels (I) in WT and Miga1/2-/- oocytes at the MII stage.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1159

Oncotarget

ATP and vitamin C (Vc) partially reversed the
defects of Miga1/2-deleted oocytes

The mtDNA copy number is also an indicator
of mitochondrial activity. We quantified mtDNA copy
numbers in WT oocytes and embryos at the GV, MII,
1-cell, and 2-cell stages and found that mtDNA copy
numbers increased nearly 2-fold from the GV to MII stage
(Figure 3G). The mtDNA copy numbers in MII-arrested
Miga1/2-/- oocytes were approximately half of those in
WT oocytes (Figure 3H). In addition, ATP production in
Miga1/2-/- oocytes was correspondingly reduced (Figure
3I).

Precision of chromosome separation
disrupted in Miga1/2-deleted oocytes

Vc is an antioxidant that can reduce ROS levels
in plant cells [18-20] and mouse embryonic fibroblasts
[21]. Because deletion of MIGA1/2 in oocytes caused
mitochondrial damage and disrupted mitochondrial
dynamics, thus resulting in lower ATP levels and ROS
accumulation in oocytes, we tested whether these defects
could be reversed by Vc, at least partially. Vc treatment
(25 μg/mL) increased PBE rates in both WT oocytes and
Miga1/2-/- oocytes, but more significantly in the latter
(Figure 6A and 6B). In addition, Vc treatment remarkably
reduced ROS levels and partially rescued the normal
mitochondrial distribution in Miga1/2-/- oocytes (Figure 6C
and 6D). Meanwhile, ATP supplementation also partially
reversed the PBE defects and reduced ROS levels in
Miga1/2-/- oocytes (Figure 6A-6C).

was

Miga1/2-/- oocytes showed decreased PBE rates
(Figure 2C and 2F-2G) during meiotic maturation.
Unexpectedly, most Miga1/2-/- oocytes could form spindles
although they appeared thicker than those of WT oocytes
(Figure 4A and 4B). However, 63.6% of oocytes ovulated
by Miga1/2-/- mice had abnormalities in the chromosome
number or configuration, whereas only ~12.5% of
chromosomes were abnormal in WT oocytes (Figure
4C and 4D). Normal chromosomes in MII stage oocytes
can be defined as 20 pairs of sister chromatids that were
attached at centromeres; in contrast, in Miga1/2-/- oocytes,
chromosome numbers ranged from 14 to 18 pairs. Some
Miga1/2-/- oocytes were arrested at the MI stage with 20
pairs of homologous chromosomes (i.e., 80 chromatids;
Figure 4C).

Oocyte meiosis was arrested in conditional
knockout mice
To determine whether the fertility in Miga1/2-/- mice
was reduced by oocyte-related factors, we generated
oocyte-specific Miga2 KO mice (Miga2flox/floxGdf9-Cre
mice) and analyzed the oocyte meiosis in vitro. Oocytes
from the Miga2flox/floxGdf9-Cre mice also contained
aggregated mitochondria (Figure 7A) and had defects in
GVBD and PBE that were similar to those in the Miga2-/oocytes (Figure 7B and 7C). In addition, superovulation in
Miga2flox/floxGdf9-Cre mice still produced a reduced number
of ovulated oocytes (Figure 7D), suggesting that it was the
oocyte degeneration that contributed to the lower number
of superovulated oocytes in Miga2flox/floxGdf9-Cre mice.

Miga1/2-deleted oocytes have a poor development
potential after fertilization
The zygotes derived from Miga1-/-, Miga2-/-, and
Miga1/2-/- oocytes all had a poor developmental potential
as compared to embryos from WT females (Figure
5A-5C). Although 72.8% of zygotes of WT females
developed to blastocysts on day 4 after coitus, this rate
was only 30.4% in Miga1/2-/- females (Figure 5C). Most
of the abnormal embryos degenerated, particularly during
the development from the 1-cell to 4-cell stage (Figure
5A). Mitochondria were clustered in the cytoplasm of
the embryos from Miga1-/-, Miga2-/-, and Miga1/2-/- mice,
especially in the embryos arrested at the morula stage,
according to immunostaining for the mitochondrial protein
HSP60 (Figure 5D). These results indicated that the
abnormal mitochondrial distribution in blastomeres that is
caused by maternal deletion of MIGA1/2 may contribute
to the failure of subsequent embryonic development.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Discussion
Mitochondria undergo frequent morphological
changes because of fission and fusion. Malfunctioning
of the mitochondrial fusion and fission causes various
human developmental disorders, including reduced
fertility. Mitochondrial functions strongly correlate with
mitochondrial structure and morphology [22, 23]. When
metabolism requires that mitochondria produce large
amounts of ATP, mitochondria form wide long cristae,
and mitochondria become elongated and connected in
a persistent rapidly dynamic manner. In contrast, when
mitochondrial functions are disrupted or slowed down
(lowered metabolic rate), mitochondria form narrow short
cristae and become fragmented or clustered depending on
the cell type [24, 25].
In a recent study (Zhang et al., manuscript
submitted), we uncovered an evolutionarily conserved
new family of outer-membrane mitochondrial proteins:
MIGA, which promotes mitochondrial fusion in both
1160

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Spindle assembly and chromosome separation in wild-type (WT) and Miga1/2-/- oocytes. A. Confocal microscopy

images showing spindles in WT and Miga1/2-/- oocytes after 16 h of culture. The arrow indicates polar body 1 (PB1). Scale bar = 50
μm. B. and C. The percentage of oocytes with normal spindles (B) and normal chromosome numbers (C) after 16 h of culture. Total
numbers (n) of the examined oocytes are indicated. D. Representative chromosome spreads from WT and Miga1/2-/- oocytes after 16 h of
culture. Chromosome configurations are shown by immunofluorescent staining for TOP2 (red) and CREST (green). DNA was labeled by
4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI, blue). Scale bar = 50 μm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1161

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Early embryos derived from Miga1/2-/- oocytes have a low developmental potential. A. Early embryos derived
from oocytes of the indicated genotypes. Scale bar = 100 μm. B. Proportions of the indicated embryos from female mice of the indicated
genotypes at day 0.5, 1.5, 2.0 after mating with wild-type (WT) males. C. Proportions of 6- to 16-cell embryos, morulae, blastocysts, and
degenerated embryos from female mice of the indicated genotypes on day 4 after mating with WT males. D. The distribution of mitochondria
in embryos from female mice of the indicated genotypes on day 4 after mating with WT males, as indicated by immunofluorescent staining
for HSP60. Scale bar = 50 μm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1162

Oncotarget

Drosophila and mice (Zhang et al., manuscript submitted).
MIGA interacts with MitoPLD, thus stabilizing MitoPLD
and promoting its self-association affinity and driving
mitochondrial fusion. Loss of Miga in flies caused
neurodegeneration. MIGA proteins are also linked to the
fat metabolism in mammals (Zhang et al., submitted to
Molecular Cell, under revision). In the present study, we
further demonstrate that MIGA1 and MIGA2 are involved
in oocyte meiosis, maturation, and developmental potency.
The mitochondria-targeted compound CCCP
uncouples the MMP, disrupts ATP production, and results
in mitochondrial fragmentation; these effects are similar
to the phenotypes observed after deletion of Miga1/2 in
mouse embryonic fibroblasts [16, 26]. In the present study,
CCCP arrested oocyte meiosis at the MI stage by inducing

oocyte degeneration after oocyte GVBD. CCCP treatment
strongly reduced ATP synthesis; in addition, elevated
amounts of ROS were detected in clustered mitochondria,
and this change contributed to abnormal spindle formation
in the oocytes incubated with CCCP. The phenotype of
Miga1/2-/- oocytes was similar to that of CCCP-treated
oocytes in vitro, indicating that MIGA1/2 may regulate
mitochondrial activities by controlling mitochondrial
morphological remodeling.
The Miga1/2-/- oocytes showed defective
mitochondrial dynamics and clustered mitochondria in
the cytoplasm; these changes were probably linked to
the high ROS levels inside these mitochondria. This high
concentration of ROS may have reduced the mitochondrial
membrane potential, reduced mtDNA copy numbers, and

Figure 6: Vitamin C partially reverses mitochondrial defects in Miga1/2-/- oocytes. A.-B. Images (A) and polar-body extrusion

(PBE) rates (B) of oocytes after 12 h of culture, with or without addition of vitamin C or ATP to the media. Scale bar = 100 μm. C. Relative
reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels of oocytes after 12 h of culture, with or without addition of vitamin C or ATP to the media. D.
Confocal microscopy results showing ROS signals and mitochondrial distributions in oocytes after 12 h of culture, with or without addition
of vitamin C or ATP to the media. Scale bar = 50 μm.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1163

Oncotarget

Figure 7: Phenotype analyses of mice with an oocyte-specific Miga2 knockout. A. Mitochondrial distributions in germinal

vesicle (GV) stage oocytes of wild-type (WT) and Miga2 flox/floxGdf9-Cre mice (oocyte-specific Miga2 KO), as indicated by immunofluorescent
staining for HSP60. Scale bar = 50 μm. B. Oocytes of WT and Miga2flox/floxGdf9-Cre mice after 4 and 16 h of culture. Scale bar = 100 μm.
C. In vitro germinal-vesicle breakdown (GVBD) and polar-body extrusion (PBE) rates of oocytes from mice of the indicated genotypes.
D. Average numbers of oocytes being ovulated by mice of the indicated genotypes. E. Summary: Deletion of Miga1/2 or CCCP treatment
results in mitochondrial clustering, reduces ATP levels and mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) copy numbers, and increases reactive oxygen
species (ROS) levels in oocytes; these changes cause meiotic and developmental defects. Addition of vitamin C or ATP to the oocyte culture
medium partially reverses these problems.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1164

Oncotarget

experiments had a mixed background of FVB/N and
C57BL/6J strains.

disrupted mitochondrial metabolism (ATP production).
Furthermore, the lack of ATP may have contributed to
the severe damage to the ultrastructures of mitochondrial
cristae because most mitochondria lost their cristae and
contained large vacuoles.
PBE requires energy for separation of chromosomes
and for division of the cytoplasm into 2 parts. The lack
of ATP and an environment with a high ROS level may
contribute to the failure of oocyte PBE. In addition, strong
oxidative stress, such as that caused by H2O2, has been
implicated in disruption of spindle formation, particularly
during the MII stage of oocytes, by reducing the amount
of mitochondria-derived ATP [27]. Once spindle formation
or movement is disrupted, this change is very likely to
cause abnormal chromosome separation and to increase
the chances of aneuploidy. Additionally, ROS stress can
reduce mtDNA copy numbers, thereby decreasing the ATP
level and producing mutations in mtDNA [28, 29].
Vc is an efficient antioxidant and can reduce high
ROS concentrations [20, 21]. We demonstrated that
Vc treatment of oocytes reduced their ROS levels and
partially reversed the defects in oocyte meiosis. Although
Vc rescued mitochondrial morphology, it only partially
reversed the defect in oocyte PBE in Miga1/2-/- mouse
oocytes (Figure 7E). These results suggest that the
disordered mitochondrial dynamics that resulted in the
defective PBE cannot be completely reversed simply by
reducing ROS levels.
In summary, we demonstrated that the nucleusencoded mitochondrial proteins MIGA1 and MIGA2
are required for mitochondrial dynamics and functions
in oocytes, and promote their developmental potential.
Therefore, this study not only provides evidence of the
physiological importance of mammalian MIGA proteins
but also provides new insights into female infertility.

Oocyte culture
Twenty-one-day-old females were injected with 5
IU pregnant mare serum gonadotropin (Ningbo Sansheng
Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., China), and after 44 h, the mice
were euthanized and the ovaries were chopped in a culture
dish. Oocytes at the GV stage were cultured in drops of
the M16 medium (M7292; Sigma-Aldrich) covered
with mineral oil (M5310; Sigma-Aldrich) at 37°C in a
humidified atmosphere containing 5% of CO2.

ROS detection
ROS were detected by means of the ROS detection
assay kit (Beyotime) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. In short, oocytes were stained in
2’,7’-dichlorofluorescin diacetate (DCFH-DA) in the M2
medium for 20 min at room temperature, washed, mounted
on a glass slide, and examined under a confocal laser
scanning microscope (Zeiss LSM 710, Carl Zeiss AG,
Germany).

An immunofluorescence assay of the mouse
oocytes
Oocytes were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA)
in PBS and incubated with 0.2% Triton X-100 in PBS
for 30 min. After blocking the cells with 1% BSA in
washing buffer (PBST: PBS with 0.1 % Triton X-100),
we incubated oocytes with primary antibodies buffered in
the blocking solution. After three washes, oocytes were
incubated with secondary antibodies and counterstained
with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI). The oocytes
were mounted on glass slides using SlowFade® Gold Antifade Reagent (Life Technologies) and examined under a
confocal microscope.

Materials and Methods
Mice
Miga1 KO mice were produced by TALEN from the
FVB/N strain as described previously [30]. Miga2 KOfirst mice were purchased from the Jackson Laboratory.
Miga2flox/flox mice were generated by crossing Miga2
KO-first mice with FLPase mice. Miga2flox/floxGdf9-Cre
female mice were created by crossing Miga2flox/floxGdf9Cre male mice with Miga2flox/flox females. Mice were
raised in an environment with stable temperature (2022 °C), 12/12 h light/dark cycle, 50-70% humidity, and
food and water provided manually regularly. Animal
care and experimental procedures were in accordance
with the Animal Research Committee guidelines of
Zhejiang University. The Miga2flox/floxGdf9-Cre mice
have a C57BL/6J background. And all the mice in the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Superovulation and fertilization
For superovulation, female mice (21-23 days) were
injected intraperitoneally with 5 IU pregnant mare serum
gonadotropin and 44 h later with 5 IU hCG (Ningbo
Sansheng Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., China). After 16
h, cumulus cell-oocyte complexes were excised from
the ampullar region of oviducts and the numbers of
oocytes were counted. The oocytes were examined and
photographed by means of a Nikon SMZ1500 stereoscope.
To obtain early embryos, female mice were mated
with 10- to 12-week-old WT males overnight. Successful
mating was confirmed by the presence of vaginal plugs.
Zygotes and 2-cell and 4-cell embryos were harvested
1165

Oncotarget

from oviducts at indicated time points after the hCG
injection. The blastocysts were collected from the uterus
in the evening of day 4 after mating.

antibody, bands on the membranes were detected by the
Enhanced Chemiluminescence Detection Kit (Amersham)
and an X-ray film.

Quantification of mtDNA copy number

Statistical analysis

A single oocyte was lysed in 5 μL of lysis buffer (50
mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5% Tween-20, 100
mg/mL protease K) in a PCR tube and incubated in 55 °C
for 2 h, then at 95 °C for 10 min, after which the sample
was directly used in RT-PCR with the mtDNA-specific
primers (Forward: 5′-TACCTCACCATCTCTTGCTA-3′;
Reverse: 5′-CCACATAGACGAGTTGATTC-3′). The data
on the mtDNA were normalized to β-globin.

The results are presented as mean ± SD; each
experiment included at least three replicates and was
repeated at least three times. Group comparisons were
conducted by two-tailed unpaired Student’s t tests.
Differences with P values <0.05 were considered
significant.

Luminescence testing for ATP quantification

This work was supported by National Natural
Science Foundation of China (31271432, 31371449),
National Basic Research Program of China
(2014CB943100, 2012CB966600, 2012CB944403), and
Specialized Research Fund for the Doctoral Program of
Higher Education (20130101110116).

Acknowledgments

ATP content of oocytes was determined with the
ATP Testing Assay Kit (Beyotime) according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, 50 oocytes were
lysed in ATP lysis buffer (from the kit) and centrifuged
at 12,000 ×g for 10 min. Supernatants were mixed with
testing buffer, and ATP concentrations were measured on
a luminescence detector.

Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Transmission electron microscopy

References

Ovaries were fixed in 2.5 % glutaraldehyde and
1% osmic acid. After that, the ovaries were dehydrated
and incubated in the embedding medium overnight. The
next day, they were embedded in the embedding medium
and heated at 65 °C for 2-3 days. The samples were cut
into sections of 70-90 nm on an ultramicrotome (Leica).
The sections were stained by a lead citrate solution and
analyzed under an electron transmission microscope
(HT7700, Hitachi).

1.	 Kogo N, Tazaki A, Kashino Y, Morichika K, Orii H,
Mochii M and Watanabe K. Germ-line mitochondria exhibit
suppressed respiratory activity to support their accurate
transmission to the next generation. Developmental
Biology. 2011; 349:462-469.
2.	 Ge H, Tollner TL, Hu Z, Dai M, Li X, Guan H, Shan D,
Zhang X, Lv J, Huang C and Dong Q. The importance of
mitochondrial metabolic activity and mitochondrial DNA
replication during oocyte maturation in vitro on oocyte
quality and subsequent embryo developmental competence.
Molecular Reproduction and Development. 2012; 79:392401.

Preparation of chromosome spreads
Oocytes were harvested at the MII stage, and the
zona pellucida was removed by the acidic M2 medium (pH
2.0). Then, the oocytes were fixed in the CS solution (1%
PFA, 0.15% Triton X-100, and 3 mM dithiothreitol) on
glass slides. Slides were air dried and immunofluorescence
was performed as described above for oocytes.

3.	 Cardone L, de Cristofaro T, Affaitati A, Garbi C, Ginsberg
MD, Saviano M, Varrone S, Rubin CS, Gottesman ME,
Avvedimento EV and Feliciello A. A-kinase anchor protein
84/121 are targeted to mitochondria and mitotic spindles by
overlapping amino-terminal motifs. Journal of Molecular
Biology. 2002; 320:663-675.
4.	 Donthamsetty S, Brahmbhatt M, Pannu V, Rida PCG,
Ramarathinam S, Ogden A, Cheng A, Singh KK and Aneja
R. Mitochondrial genome regulates mitotic fidelity by
maintaining centrosomal homeostasis. Cell Cycle. 2014;
13:2056-2063.

Western blotting
Protein samples were harvested in 1×SDS
loading buffer and separated by SDS-PAGE and
electrophoretically transferred to polyvinylidene fluoride
membranes (Millipore). After incubation with primary
antibodies and a horseradish peroxidase-linked secondary
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5.	 Bartmann AK, Romao GS, Ramos ED and Ferriani RA.
Why do older women have poor implantation rates? A
possible role of the mitochondria. Journal of Assisted
1166

Oncotarget

Reproduction and Genetics. 2004; 21:79-83.

19.	 Mehlhorn H LM, Korth HG, and . FC. Ascorbate is the
natural substrate for plant peroxidases. Febs Letters. 1996;
378:203-206.

6.	 Eichenlaub-Ritter U, Vogt E, Yin H and Gosden R.
Spindles, mitochondria and redox potential in ageing
oocytes. Reproductive Biomedicine Online. 2004; 8:45-58.

20.	 Smirnoff N. Ascorbic acid: metabolism and functions of a
multi-facetted molecule. Current Opinion in Plant Biology.
2000; 3:229-235.

7.	 Sun QY, Wu GM, Lai L, Park KW, Cabot R, Cheong HT,
Day BN, Prather RS and Schatten H. Translocation of active
mitochondria during pig oocyte maturation, fertilization and
early embryo development in vitro. Reproduction. 2001;
122:155-163.

21.	 Arrigoni O and De Tullio MC. Ascorbic acid: much more
than just an antioxidant. Biochimica Et Biophysica ActaGeneral Subjects. 2002; 1569:1-9.

8.	 Grindler NM and Moley KH. Maternal obesity, infertility
and mitochondrial dysfunction: potential mechanisms
emerging from mouse model systems. Molecular human
reproduction. 2013; 19:486-494.

22.	 Scalettar BA, Abney JR and Hackenbrock CR. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America. 1991; 88:8057-8061.
23.	 McBride HM, Neuspiel M and Wasiak S. Mitochondria:
More than just a powerhouse. Current Biology. 2006;
16:R551-R560.

9.	 Igosheva N, Abramov AY, Poston L, Eckert JJ, Fleming
TP, Duchen MR and McConnell J. Maternal Diet-Induced
Obesity Alters Mitochondrial Activity and Redox Status in
Mouse Oocytes and Zygotes. PloS one. 2010; 5.

24.	 Paumard P, Vaillier J, Coulary B, Schaeffer J, Soubannier
V, Mueller DM, Brethes D, di Rago JP and Velours J. The
ATP synthase is involved in generating mitochondrial
cristae morphology. Embo Journal. 2002; 21:221-230.

10.	 Wang Q, Ratchford AM, Chi MMY, Schoeller E, Frolova
A, Schedl T and Moley KH. Maternal Diabetes Causes
Mitochondrial Dysfunction and Meiotic Defects in Murine
Oocytes. Molecular Endocrinology. 2009; 23:1603-1612.

25.	 Hackenbrock CR. Ultrastructural bases for metabolically
linked mechanical activity in mitochondria. I. Reversible
ultrastructural changes with change in metabolic steady
state in isolated liver mitochondria. J Cell Biol. 1966;
30:269-297.

11.	 Ou X-H, Li S, Wang Z-B, Li M, Quan S, Xing F, Guo L,
Chao S-B, Chen Z, Liang X-W, Hou Y, Schatten H and
Sun Q-Y. Maternal insulin resistance causes oxidative stress
and mitochondrial dysfunction in mouse oocytes. Human
Reproduction. 2012; 27:2130-2145.

26.	 Ishihara N, Jofuku A, Eura Y and Mihara K. Regulation
of mitochondrial morphology by membrane potential, and
DRP1-dependent division and FZO1-dependent fusion
reaction in mammalian cells. Biochemical and Biophysical
Research Communications. 2003; 301:891-898.

12.	 Group ECW. Fertility and ageing. Human Reproduction
Update. 2005; 11:261-276.
13.	Udagawa O, Ishihara T, Maeda M, Matsunaga Y,
Tsukamoto S, Kawano N, Miyado K, Shitara H, Yokota
S, Nomura M, Mihara K, Mizushima N and Ishihara N.
Mitochondrial Fission Factor Drp1 Maintains Oocyte
Quality via Dynamic Rearrangement of Multiple
Organelles. Current Biology. 2014; 24:2451-2458.

27.	 Zhang X, Wu XQ, Lu S, Guo YL and Ma X. Deficit of
mitochondria-derived ATP during oxidative stress impairs
mouse MII oocyte spindles. Cell Research. 2006; 16:841850.
28.	 Vives-Bauza C, Gonzalo R, Manfredi G, Garcia-Arumi E
and Andreu AL. Enhanced ROS production and antioxidant
defenses in cybrids harbouring mutations in mtDNA.
Neuroscience Letters. 2006; 391:136-141.

14.	 Choi S-Y, Huang P, Jenkins GM, Chan DC, Schiller J
and Frohman MA. A common lipid links Mfn-mediated
mitochondrial fusion and SNARE-regulated exocytosis.
Nature Cell Biology. 2006; 8:1255-U1229.

29.	 Lagouge M and Larsson NG. The role of mitochondrial
DNA mutations and free radicals in disease and ageing.
Journal of Internal Medicine. 2013; 273:529-543.

15.	 Ishikawa K, Koshikawa N, Takenaga K, Nakada K and
Hayashi J-I. Reversible regulation of metastasis by ROSgenerating mtDNA mutations. Mitochondrion. 2008; 8:339344.

30.	 Qiu Z LM, Chen Z, Shao Y, Pan H, Wei G, Yu C, Zhang
L, Li X, Wang P, Fan HY, Du B, Liu B, Liu M, Li D.
High-efficiency and heritable gene targeting in mouse by
transcription activator-like effector nucleases. Nucleic
Acids Res. 2013; 41:e120.

16.	 Wang Y, Nartiss Y, Steipe B, McQuibban GA and Kim
PK. ROS-induced mitochondrial depolarization initiates
PARK2/PARKIN-dependent mitochondrial degradation by
autophagy. Autophagy. 2012; 8:1462-1476.
17.	 Olichon A, Baricault L, Gas N, Guillou E, Valette A,
Belenguer P and Lenaers G. Loss of OPA1 perturbates
the mitochondrial inner membrane structure and integrity,
leading to cytochrome c release and apoptosis. J Biol Chem.
2003; 278:7743-7746.
18.	 Noctor G and Foyer CH. Ascorbate and glutathione:
Keeping active oxygen under control. Annu Rev Plant
Physiol Plant Molec Biol. 1998; 49:249-279.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1167

Oncotarget

