Research Article

Interstitial Doppler Optical Coherence Tomography as a Local
Tumor Necrosis Predictor in Photodynamic Therapy of
Prostatic Carcinoma: An In vivo Study
1

2

3

1

1

Beau A. Standish, Kenneth K.C. Lee, Xiao Jin, Adrian Mariampillai, Nigel R. Munce,
1
1,3
1,2,3
3,4,5
Michael F.G. Wood, Brian C. Wilson, I. Alex Vitkin, and Victor X.D. Yang
1
Department of Medical Biophysics and 2Radiation Oncology, University of Toronto, 3Ontario Cancer Institute/University Health
Network, 4Department Electrical and Computer Engineering, Ryerson University, and 5Imaging Research,
Sunnybrook Health Sciences Center, Toronto, Canada

Abstract
We have tested the feasibility of real-time localized blood flow
measurements, obtained with interstitial (IS) Doppler optical
coherence tomography (DOCT), to predict photodynamic
therapy (PDT)-induced tumor necrosis deep within solid
Dunning rat prostate tumors. IS-DOCT was used to quantify
the PDT-induced microvascular shutdown rate in s.c. Dunning
prostate tumors (n = 28). Photofrin (12.5 mg/kg) was
administered 20 to 24 hours before tumor irradiation, with
635 nm surface irradiance of 8 to 133 mWcm 2 for 25 minutes.
High frequency ultrasound and calipers were used to measure
the thickness of the skin covering the tumor and the location
of the echogenic IS probe within it. A two-layer Monte Carlo
model was used to calculate subsurface fluence rates within
the IS-DOCT region of interest (ROI). Treatment efficacy was
estimated by percent tumor necrosis within the ROI, as
quantified by H&E staining, and correlated to the measured
microvascular shutdown rate during PDT treatment. IS-DOCT
measured significant PDT-induced vascular shutdown within
the ROI in all tumors. A strong relationship (R2 = 0.723) exists
between the percent tumor necrosis at 24 hours posttreatment
and the vascular shutdown rate: slower shutdown corresponded to higher treatment efficacy, i.e., more necrosis.
Controls (needle + light, no drug, n = 3) showed minimal
microvascular changes or necrosis (4% F 1%). This study has
correlated a biological end point with a direct and localized
measurement of PDT-induced microvascular changes, suggesting a potential clinical role of on-line, real-time microvascular monitoring for optimizing treatment efficacy in
individual patients. [Cancer Res 2008;68(23):9987–95]

Introduction
Photodynamic therapy (PDT) is an approved treatment for a
variety of malignant diseases and has been used in clinical studies
including brain, prostate, breast, pancreas, rectum, head and neck
cancer, and Barrett’s esophagus with dysplasia (1–6). Preclinical
interstitial (IS) PDT studies have also been performed in parallel
and include brain tumors (7), vertebral metastases (8), and prostate
cancer (9).

Requests for reprints: Brian C. Wilson, Ontario Cancer Institute/University Health
Network, Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, 610 University
Avenue, Toronto, ON, Canada M5G 2M9. Phone: 416-946-4501, ext. 2952; Fax: 416-9466529; E-mail: wilson@uhnres.utoronto.ca.
I2008 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-1128

www.aacrjournals.org

Prostatic carcinoma remains a serious threat to men in the
Western world, accounting for almost one quarter of all reported
male cancers (10–12). Although incidence remains high, mortality
rates have dropped over the last few decades due to improvements
in screening and targeted treatment such as radiation therapy,
radical prostatectomy, and hormonal therapies. Recent clinical
trials have shown that IS PDT is a promising treatment modality
for primary (13) and recurrent (14) prostate cancer. Some
advantages of PDT include tumor selectivity, minimal invasiveness,
and the ability to retreat safely and effectively.
PDT involves excitation of a photosensitizer in the presence of
oxygen to produce highly reactive singlet oxygen, which is thought
to be the main cytotoxic agent leading to cell death with most
clinical and investigational photosensitizers (15). A requirement of
prostate PDT in particular is to achieve adequate drug-light dose
delivery to the entire prostate gland, while maintaining the
integrity of surrounding tissues such as the urethra, bladder,
rectum, and neurovascular bundle (16). Prostate cancer treatment
techniques, including PDT, can lead to damage of these tissues,
resulting in incontinence, proctitis, and/or sexual dysfunction.
Real-time feedback based on the treatment-induced biological
response would be ideal for monitoring and ensuring safety of
these sensitive locations.
Optical technologies have been used to image and/or monitor
blood flow in tumorous tissues (17, 18). Specifically, near-IR diffuse
correlation spectroscopy (DCS), previously reported by Yu and
colleagues (19), has been used to monitor tumor relative blood flow
in bulk tumor tissue during PDT in an effort to predict treatment
efficacy (tumor growth delay to 400 mm3). The authors observed
that a decrease in the tumor (radiation-induced fibrosarcoma)
vascular shutdown rate with Photofrin-PDT correlated with
treatment efficacy (R2 = 0.79). Although this global vascular
measurement system is suitable to monitor the average tumor
response over an effective sampling volume of f90 mm3, the
ability to provide real-time localized measurements of the vascular
response with a spatial resolution suitable for monitoring both the
prostate target boundary (to maximize efficacy) and/or sensitive
tissues surrounding the prostate gland (to maximize safety) would
be highly desirable. Our approach to achieve this is to use the realtime imaging by Doppler optical coherence tomography (DOCT),
implemented with a minimally invasive sub-mm IS needle probe.
DOCT (20, 21) is an imaging modality that provides the
functional extension of blood flow detection using an optical
coherence tomography OCT (22) system. OCT is often considered
as the optical analogue of high-frequency ultrasound imaging. Its
advantages include the ability to image tissue structures at near
histologic levels (<10 Am), while imaging blood flow within

9987

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (23). December 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

individual microvessels with velocities as low as 10 to 100 Am/s
(23–25). These real-time, noninvasive capabilities have been
confirmed in subsurface blood flow detection in human skin (26),
gastrointestinal tract (27), and retina (23, 28). Feasibility studies
conducted by our and other groups showed the ability of DOCT to
image the microvascular environment after exposure to vascular
disrupting agents (29) and during single and two-photon PDT (9,
30–33).
In this study, a minimally invasive IS probe (0.7-mm diameter)
was used in conjunction with a DOCT imaging system to overcome
the imaging depth limitation of DOCT, which is typically 1 to 3 mm
in nontransparent tissues, to gain access deep within prostate
tumors (34). IS-DOCT continuously monitored and quantified the
vascular response induced by Photofrin-mediated PDT in a
Dunning rat prostate model. Images were acquired continuously
pre-PDT, during, and post-PDT in real-time and analyzed to yield
quantitative microvascular metrics. Individual tumors exhibited
varying degrees of vascular shutdown, corresponding to different
local light-fluence rates, as calculated by Monte Carlo simulations,
within the imaging field of view of the probe. Potential relationships between the DOCT imaging metrics and the biological end
point of percent tumor necrosis were investigated to test whether
DOCT may be used as a predictor of tumor necrosis within the
treated tissue.

Materials and Methods
Tumor model and PDT. This study used 28 male Copenhagen rats
(Charles River Laboratories) housed in standard conditions under a
protocol approved by the Animal Care Committee of University Health
Network, Toronto. Dunning prostate cells (Mat-Ly-Lu; American Type
Culture Collection) were implanted intradermally in the right hind leg of all
animals. The tumors were grown for 7 to 10 d to a diameter of 0.5 to 1 cm.
Twenty-five rats were injected via the tail vein with 12.5 mg/kg of Photofrin
(Axcan Pharma) 24 h before PDT treatment. Three control animals were
used to measure the effects on the microvascular blood flow of the probe
insertion and of the light irradiation [maximum fluence rate at IS probe
depth (84 mWcm 2) within the region of interest (ROI) of the IS needle: see
below]. The tumor surface was irradiated superficially through the intact
skin, for 25 min, with a 635 nm broad beam diode laser (Laboratory of
Applied Biophotonics, University Health Network) collimated to a 1-cm
diameter spot size. The optical power was measured before each treatment
with a calibrated optical power meter (840-C; Newport Instruments,
Canada) to achieve different surface irradiance (mWcm 2). The animals
were chosen at random to populate 5 different irradiance groups (8, 16, 33,
66, and 133 mWcm 2). Before PDT, the animals were anaesthetized with
oxygen and 2% isofluorine through a nose cone. The tumor surface was
prepared by depilation by shaving and application of Nair (Church &
Dwight Canada Corp.). The rats were kept at body temperature (37jC)
during all procedures using a heating pad. At 24 h post-PDT, the animals
were euthanized by intracardiac injection of euthanyl (0.5 mL) and the
tumors were excised intact for histology.
DOCT system, IS probe, and high frequency ultrasound imaging. A
detailed description of the time-domain DOCT system and IS needle probe
has been given previously (9, 35). Briefly, the 8 kHz system uses a near-IR
source at 1.3 Am center wavelength, with a coherence length of f10 Am in
tissue, and Doppler flow sensitivity of f20 Am/s. The IS-DOCT needle
probe is composed of a single-mode optical fiber fusion spliced to a lens
that focuses the light into the tissue. These components are encased in a
transparent catheter (outer diameter, 0.4 mm) and threaded into a 22G
echogenic needle (outer diameter, 0.7 mm), and actuated by a linear
scanner. The probe is driven over 1 mm along the length of the enclosing
catheter and combined with the coherence depth scanning to generate a
two-dimensional DOCT image (1 mm lateral by 1 mm depth).

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (23). December 1, 2008

Structural and color Doppler images were continuously acquired at a
rate of 1 frame per second ( fps) and subdivided into 3 imaging time
points: before (t = 0–10 min), during (t = 10–35 min), and post (t = 35–45
min) PDT treatment. Regions of flow were color coded in the Doppler
images. Detected Doppler signals represent regions of flow within the
vasculature. The Doppler background artifact due to bulk tissue motion
was minimized by first processing the color-Doppler images with a
histogram rejection algorithm (36). A Doppler threshold based on the
mean Doppler signal from a region of stationary tissue was used to
further separate blood flow detection from background noise. Blood flow
velocities were not calculated, as the geometry of the Doppler angles with
various vessels was not known a priori. The Doppler signals were used as
a binary metric to measure flow versus no-flow regions. Cross-sectional
areas were then quantified by summing Doppler-positive pixel counts. The
results were averaged into 1-min interval bins and defined as the vascular
index (VI; ref. 32).
High frequency ultrasound (HFUS) images (Vevo770; Ultrasonics) were
taken with a 40 MHz transducer at 17 fps to determine the location of
the IS probe and the global tissue architecture, as seen in Fig. 1A. The IS
probe was inserted toward the bottom margin of the tumor with the
imaging direction upwards towards the tumor bulk (Fig. 1A). The HFUS
images were used (Fig. 1B to C) to measure the depth of the IS-DOCT
probe and the thickness of the overlying skin for use in Monte Carlo
simulations.
Tissue properties and Monte Carlo modeling. The optical absorption
(Aa) and reduced scattering (As’) coefficients of rat prostate tumor were
calculated by measuring the diffuse reflectance and transmittance using an
integrating sphere setup and Monte Carlo modeling of light transport (37).
A white light broadband (300–800 nm) mercury/xenon lamp (Spectral
Energy) and collimating optics were used to illuminate the sample. The
transmitted and reflected spectra were recorded as a function of
wavelength (333–1,111 nm) with 2 15-cm diameter integrating spheres
(SphereOptics) coupled to a portable spectrometer (SD2000; Ocean Optics).
Although a wide range of spectral data were acquired, only pertinent Aa
and As’ values were calculated that corresponded to the central wavelength
of the PDT laser (635 nm). Upon excision, f5 min after euthanasia, the rat
prostate tissue was directly placed into the reflectance/transmittance (R/T)
integrating setup. The sample was inserted between two coverslips, where
the tumor sample was f1 mm thick (1 cm diameter). The R/T
interrogation region was f4 mm (diameter). Three different measurement
locations in freshly excised rat tissue were averaged and used to determine
Aa and As’, applying an inverse calculation based on Monte Carlo–
generated look-up tables (38). These tissue coefficients were used in
conjunction with published optical properties for the rat dermis (39) in a
two-layer Monte Carlo simulation with a collimated surface irradiance for
a 1-cm beam diameter (40). The two-layer Monte Carlo simulation
modeled the shape of an ellipse to account for the curvature of the tumor
surface, and used 108 photons to provide a statistically significant number
of interactions yielding an accurate fluence rate estimate as a function of
depth. These values were then scaled to the experimentally measured
surface irradiance, resulting in the fluence rate (at depth) of the IS probe.
The dermis thickness (Dx2 in Fig. 1B) was measured to be 0.6 F 0.1 mm
from the HFUS images, and the IS probe placement (Dx1 in Fig. 1B) ranged
from 2 to 8 mm.
Histology. The intradermal prostate tumors were excised 24 h post-PDT
and stored in 10% formalin solution. H&E staining was used to identify
treatment-induced tumor necrosis. Four-micrometer-thick tissue sections
were digitized with a bright-field whole-slide scanner (Scanscope CS; Aperio
Technologies), and the resulting images were analyzed with Aperio
ImageScope v.8.0 software. The localization of the IS-DOCT ROI within
the histologic sections was accomplished as follows. HFUS images were
obtained with the IS needle in place, providing the location of the upper
edge of the IS needle within the tumor (Fig. 2A, black dotted line). The exact
lateral position of the DOCT ROI within the tumor was not determined
during imaging, as we did not tattoo or physically mark the position to
avoid affecting histologic results. Therefore, the percent necrosis was an
average value of the whole lateral region at depth (Fig. 2A, white box). The

9988

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Doppler OCT Monitoring of PDT-Induced Vascular Damage

Figure 1. A, the experimental set up showing the external HFUS probe and IS-DOCT probe inserted near the base of the tumor. Magnified box, geometry of IS-DOCT
measurements: the skin thickness (Dx2 , 0.6 F 0.1mm) and depth of IS probe (Dx1 , 2–8mm), as measured by HFUS were used in Monte Carlo simulations of
fluence rates in the IS-DOCT ROI. B, HFUS side view location of the IS probe in tumor mass. C, corresponding end-on view. D, 3-D visualization. The major vertical and
horizontal scales are in 1-mm increments. White outlines represent tumor borders (B and C ).

H&E tumor regions were analyzed by counting the total number of positive
pixels in the H&E-stained sections (pink). In the H&E sections, a positive
pixel count represented a loss of nuclear integrity when compared with a
negative count (purple), where the nucleus was still intact. Using these

markers, a mask was created highlighting the respective positive pixel
counts, and defined the percent necrosis (Fig. 2B) in the ROI as a ratio of
the mask area (positive pixel counts) to the remaining area (negative pixel
counts) within the ROI.

Figure 2. Example of necrosis assessment in H&E histology. A, H&E-stained slide with IS-DOCT ROI (black box ) at an IS needle depth of 3 mm. Dashed black line,
upper edge of needle probe. B, imaging mask based on necrotic or nonnecrotic tissue. Orange sections of the mask outline necrotic tissue areas (positive pixel counts),
whereas blue sections represent the nonnecrotic tissue (negative pixel counts). Percent necrosis was defined as a ratio of the orange to the total areas. Scale bar,
1 mm.

www.aacrjournals.org

9989

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (23). December 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Results
Xenograft tumors were successfully grown in all 28 rats, with
average dimensions of 1.0 F 0.2 cm  0.8 F 0.2 cm  0.5 F 0.1 cm
(L  W  H) as measured by calipers and HFUS. Immediately after
treatment, PDT responses, including erythema and edema, were
observed in all 25 rats undergoing PDT treatment. These responses
were not observed in the three control animals. No treatmentinduced deaths occurred.
The Aa and As’ values, at the PDT treatment wavelength of 635 nm,
derived from RT (R/T) spectral measurements are shown in Fig. 3,
yielded values of 0.77 and 7.55 cm 1, respectively. As an example,
Fig. 3C shows the resulting fluence rate-depth distribution from
the two-layer Monte Carlo simulation for an incident (84 mWcm 2)
1-cm diameter beam. In highly scattering medium, the fluence
within the first 2 mm may be 3 to 4 times higher than the incident
beam irradiance (41). This build-up was observed (Fig. 3D) in our
model and is due to multiple scattering and the optical property
mismatches at the air/skin and skin/tumor boundaries.
The IS-DOCT system continuously acquired, processed and
displayed structural and blood flow data before (0–10 min), during
(10–35 min), and post-PDT (35–45 min) treatment in all animals.
Figure 4A shows an imaging sequence representing every 5th
minute of imaging for a PDT treatment of 32 mWcm 2. The colorDoppler functional information was overlaid onto the structural
OCT images with the measured Doppler frequency shift being
proportional to the velocity of the moving blood (These and all
subsequent light variables correspond to the IS probe location).
When the velocity of the blood is greater than F Fa/2, where Fa is
the scan rate of the OCT system (8 kHz), aliasing of the detected
signal occurs. This is shown by the insert of the 0 min time point in

Fig. 4A, where the Doppler signal wraps from the negative (red) to
positive frequencies (blue), representing high velocity blood.
Counter-propagating blood flow occurs when the IS-DOCT image
plane intersects both arteries and veins. This was observed in
Fig. 4A at the 10-minute time point, where the insert shows an
artery/vein pair represented by the solid blue and red color–coded
regions. Note that these subtleties have a minimal influence on the
VI metric, as it depends on cross-sectional area of detected
vasculature and not the absolute blood flow velocities.
The number of vessels detected in the DOCT field-of-view varied
between animals from 2 to 11 in the 1  1 mm field of view, with
minimum and maximum detected diameters of the vessels of f30
and f270 Am, respectively. Minor lateral drifting (<150 Am)
occurred in the OCT structural images during parts of the 45minute imaging sessions and was probably due to tissue motion
caused by the animal breathing. The structural OCT images in the
tumors typically showed few distinct features, whereas normal
tissue structures, such as boundaries between skin and muscle and
between muscle layers, were clearly visualized.
In each tumor the VI was calculated by pixel summing the colorDoppler sequences during the imaging session, where minimum
and maximum interanimal VI counts were 151 and 2,045,
respectively (total number of pixels, 90 000 per frame). An
illustrative vascular response curve is presented in Fig. 4B. All
PDT animals exhibited a slight increase in the VI value upon
insertion of the IS probe and at the beginning of treatment,
followed by varying degrees of the PDT-induced vascular shutdown
(40–100%). It was common to observe small fluctuations in the VI
throughout the PDT treatment. The PDT-induced vascular
shutdown rate during light exposure was then characterized by
the ratio of the total decrease in VI (VImax
VImin) to the time

Figure 3. A, reduced scattering spectra for
prostate tumor tissue. B, corresponding absorption
spectra. Dashed lines, SEs in the measurement
(A and B ). C, fluence rate as a function of depth
(84 mWcm 2 surface irradiance) produced by a
10e8 photon, two-layer (ellipse ) Monte Carlo model
with a 1-cm-diameter incident beam. Dashed
vertical line, region used in D , for fluence rates as a
function of depth through center of tumor.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (23). December 1, 2008

9990

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Doppler OCT Monitoring of PDT-Induced Vascular Damage

Figure 4. A, IS-DOCT imaging sequence of color-Doppler blood flow detection overlaid onto structural OCT images before, during, and post-PDT treatment. The
inserts are 2 magnifications showing aliasing (0 min ) and counter-propagating flows (10 min ). B, vascular index as a function of time in a single animal showing the
vascular shutdown during PDT light exposure and the definitions of V max and V min. C, control animal (light, no photosensitizer). Fluence rates and fluence listed in
B and C are values at the depth of the IS-DOCT probe.

(Tmax Tmin) taken to achieve this: VImax and VImin were defined
as the maximum and minimum values during treatment. The
controls also experienced a minor increase in the VI upon probe
insertion, but there were no significant systematic changes
throughout exposure to light in the absence of photosensitizer
(Fig. 4C).
Twenty-four hours post-PDT, tumors were excised, stained with
H&E, and the percent necrosis was quantified within the IS-DOCT
ROI. Necrosis in the dermis and tumor core was observed in one
of the control animals (Fig. 5). In that particular case, there was
evidence of a small surface lesion in the region of the tumor, which
may have been caused by scratching and/or biting of the irritated
xenograft region. For the PDT group, as the subsurface fluence rate
was increased from f6 to f36 mWcm 2, the percent necrosis
within the IS-DOCT ROI reached a maximum. At higher fluence
rates, up to the maximum of 84 mWcm 2, the percent necrosis
then decreased (Fig. 5).

www.aacrjournals.org

Figure 6A summarizes the percent tumor necrosis, determined
from the H&E-stained sections, as a function of the subsurface
fluence rate (mWcm 2). The biological response at higher
fluence rates (>60 mWcm 2) resulted in <11% necrosis within
the ROI. Busch and colleagues (42) reported that higher fluence
rates (>75 mWcm 2) in Photofrin-mediated PDT resulted in the
development of significant gradients in tumor hypoxia as one
moves away from a perfused blood vessel. This lack of oxygen
will limit the photochemical reaction, resulting in a poor
biological response. Our data also suggests that lower fluence
rates (<18 mWcm 2) resulted in a reduced biological response,
where <21% tumor necrosis was observed. The intermediate
fluence rates (21–60 mWcm 2) produced the highest level of
necrosis (34–41%), with the maximum occurring at 36 mWcm 2.
The control animals (IS probe, light, no drug) showed an average
tumor necrosis of 4% F 1% at the control irradiance of 133
mWcm 2.

9991

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (23). December 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 5. H&E histology in different PDT-treated and control tumors. Horizontal dashed line, the upper edge of the IS-DOCT probe. Scale bar , 1 mm.

The VI data were split into four groups, as shown in Table 1. Two
groups were based on the IS probe location of inside or outside the
PDT-induced necrotic region, and two groups were based on the %
change in the measured VI. A cutoff value of 20% change in the VI
was chosen for each tumor, as this corresponded to the maximum
observed VI change (control group) due to insertion of the probe
and exposure to light. This organization of the data was enabled by
the HFUS and histologic correlation.
The relationship between the percent tumor necrosis and the
flow reduction rate is displayed in Fig. 6B for all subgroups and the

controls. Here, the flow reduction rate is defined as the percent
decrease per minute in the VI value in each tumor during the PDT
treatment interval. For regression analysis, the groups were
separated into two sets. Those animals in which the IS-DOCT
probe was located within the necrotic region (subgroup A, n = 9)
were the most relevant to assessing the ability of DOCT to predict
the biological end point and were, therefore, separated from the
remaining subgroups B to D.
Within subgroup A, a marked and statistically significant
decrease in PDT treatment efficacy was observed when there was

Figure 6. A, PDT-induced tumor necrosis as a function of the light fluence rate (4–84 mWcm 2) for individual tumors. B, correlation between percent tumor necrosis
and flow reduction rate of all subgroups. Within subgroup A, a marked and statistically significant (R2 = 0.723) decrease in PDT treatment efficacy was observed
when there was an increased rate of vascular shutdown.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (23). December 1, 2008

9992

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Doppler OCT Monitoring of PDT-Induced Vascular Damage

Table 1. Number of tumors in each subgroup
DOCT response

>20% shutdown in VI
<20% shutdown in VI

Probe within
necrotic region

Probe outside
necrotic region

A. n = 9
B. n = 1

C. n = 10
D. n = 5

an increased rate of vascular shutdown. The highest percent
necrosis (32–41%) occurred when the VI decreased at a rate of 5%
to 10% per minute. The relationship between the percent necrosis
and vascular shutdown rate was not known a priori, so a simple
linear fit was applied, yielding R2 = 0.723.
Subgroups B to D showed significant changes in the vascularity
(up to f11% per minute) but did not strongly correlate with the
percent necrosis (<20%). Hence, even outside the necrotic region,
significant changes in the vascular response were observed. This
can be interpreted two ways. If the probe was inserted outside a
region of necrosis (as predicted a priori, for example by Monte
Carlo modeling), the VI may be indicative of potential downstream
PDT effects, such as a feeder vessel thrombosis. The thrombosis
may temporarily cut off blood supply to a region, then dislodge,
causing significant changes in the VI, which are not directly related
to the local PDT treatment. Alternatively, if the probe is placed
within a region of expected necrosis (again, as potentially
estimated by Monte Carlo modeling), the VI is indeed a predictor
of the local tumor response. Future work is required to include
further posttreatment monitoring to determine if these vascular
effects, as measured by DOCT, are temporary or permanent.

Discussion
Given the complex interplay of contributing factors in PDT, a
real-time feedback method that can be used during PDT treatment
delivery and that can predict the likely tissue response is critical to
‘‘individualize’’ treatments for maximum efficacy. Current
approaches to this include fiber optic detectors to monitor the
changes in light transmission (43), photosensitizer pharmacokinetics (44), tissue optical properties (45), tumor oxygenation
(46–48), and blood flow monitoring (9, 49, 50). All such studies have
illustrated the heterogeneity of PDT responses. In the present
study, we have shown the integration of several different
technologies (HFUS, Monte Carlo modeling, and IS-DOCT) to
monitor PDT-induced vascular changes in real-time in a minimally
invasive fashion. A strong relationship between the IS-DOCT
vascular imaging metric of blood flow reduction rate and the
biological end point of tumor necrosis was determined. Although
this is a relatively early-stage response metric (24 hours
posttreatment), it is likely that this would relate to other clinically
relevant metrics such as tumor growth delay and/or cure rates (51).
We characterized the change in the cross-sectional vascular area
as a function of PDT treatment time to yield the imaging metric of
vascular shutdown rate. The vascular shutdown rate varied in the
animal population according to the fluence rate in the IS-DOCT
imaging ROI. Deeper IS probe placements resulted in lower fluence
rates as calculated by Monte Carlo simulations. After the insertion
of the IS probe into the tumor, the VI continued to increase (<20%)
for the first few minutes before leveling off. This was observed in all
animals, including controls, and may be a result of reperfusion after

www.aacrjournals.org

transient pressure and/or vasodilation in the detected vessels due
to local trauma from the needle insertion. Further miniaturization
of the IS probe should minimize this effect. Upon light exposure,
a small (<10%) increase in the VI was observed, followed by a rapid
decrease in the PDT-treated tumors. Yu and colleagues (19)
reported similar trends in the PDT-induced vascular response of
radiation-induced fibrosarcoma tumors with DCS, although the
initial increase in blood flow was much higher (>50%). This
difference may be due to the fact that IS-DOCT monitors individual
(micro)vessel changes, whereas DCS measures a global, tissueaverage vascular response. These authors also suggested that the
initial increase in the tumors is due to arterial vasodilatation of
normal tissue, in response to initial tumor hypoxia due to
photochemical consumption of oxygen. We observed small
(F10% of total VI) fluctuations, which seems to be random, in
the VI values throughout the DOCT imaging sessions, likely due in
part to the changing tumor environment during PDT; small
fluctuations (F10% of total VI) were also seen in the controls
animals, probably due to the presence of the IS probe. One animal
showed <20% change in the VI, yet the IS probe was within a tumor
region that became necrotic (subgroup B). In this apparent
‘‘outlier,’’ it is possible that the IS needle injured a tumor feeder
vessel, resulting in local necrosis. Further work is required to
determine if this is a serious source of measurement artifact.
The observed vascular response (within and outside necrotic
region) is of particular relevance to the potential of DOCT as a realtime feedback technique during PDT. For example, if the probe is in
a region of tissue where a marked PDT effect is achievable, then the
extent of this effect may be related to the rate of vascular shutdown
as monitored by DOCT. However, at the present time, it is not clear
why a vascular response was also observed outside the necrotic
region; the thrombosis/hemorrhage scenario affecting out-oftreatment downstream regions need further corroboration.
It is possible that these effects may be due to measurement
artifacts, such as a change in the IS pressure or direct mechanical
disruption of a feeder vessel. However, this situation is not likely
because the control animals exhibited minimal changes in the VI
upon probe insertion and exposure to light (no photosensitizer).
This leaves the possibility of a transient vascular response
occurring through the creation and dislodging of vascular thrombi
(52) and/or a subnecrotic PDT-induced vascular response, as
alluded to above. We plan to use the mouse window chamber
model (53) to limit possible vascular artifacts from the IS probe,
while obtaining direct visualization of the PDT-induced vascular
response via DOCT. In addition to suggesting further scientific
investigations of the underlying vascular mechanisms in PDT, it
thus remains to be seen if IS-DOCT can be used as a stand-alone
treatment monitoring/predictive outcome. In this regard, the
technique seems to display a high sensitivity for eventual necrosis,
but relatively poor specificity, at least in this tumor model, which
could lead to overestimation of the extent of tissue damage
induced by PDT.
An attractive feature of IS-DOCT is the ability to monitor the
localized vascular response to treatment in deeply situated tissues
such as, for example, the boundary between the prostate and rectal
wall. Despite the changes in the vascular response measured in
regions that did not become necrotic, clinical value remains in the
observation that a minimal change in the vascular shutdown
(controls or treatment animals) corresponded to a negligible tumor
necrosis. Hence, even if the specificity remains low in the clinical
setting, IS-DOCT could be used to monitor sensitive normal tissue

9993

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (23). December 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

regions (e.g., the rectum in the case of prostate treatments), based
on observing continuous blood flow to ensure no damage.
The relationship between the vascular shutdown rate and
tumor necrosis (R2 = 0.723) in the PDT-treated animals suggests
that DOCT may be used to predict localized necrosis. A study in
canine sarcoma, treated by radiation therapy, indicates that 70%
to 80% necrosis is required for successful local control (no
evidence of tumor recurrence in canines living with leg for at
least 6 months; ref. 50). Such levels were achieved only in the
superficial regions of tumor in the present model. For example,
the top 1.7 mm of tumor in Fig. 5D showed 71% necrosis,
whereas there was only 41% necrosis within the corresponding
IS-DOCT ROI (at 5 mm depth). Hence, we were likely
undertreating the tumors at the IS-DOCT depth. At the same
time, this also shows the potential value of the IS-DOCT
technique because, if the predictive relationship between the
DOCT metric(s) and the probability of local necrosis can be
determined, then treatment could have been continued to
achieve higher response at the depth of interest (e.g., the tumor
base). In addition, considerable variability was observed in the
tumor responses (% necrosis) with similar PDT treatments,
highlighting the intrinsic heterogeneity of the biological response
to PDT, and emphasizing the need for individualized treatment
monitoring and optimization.
A generic drawback of OCT is the limited imaging depth in most
biological tissues (f1–3 mm). Previously, this restricted OCT
imaging to luminal surfaces, epithelial layers, transparent organs,
skin, and surgically exposed surfaces. With the advent of the IS
probe technology (diameter, 0.7 mm), deeply seated tissues can be
imaged, providing localized measurements. However, with our
current imaging technique, the exact lateral position of the DOCT
ROI within the tumor is not known. To improve the localization of
the DOCT ROI in future studies, a marked thread may be inserted
alongside the IS probe, via a two-channel catheter. Upon removal of
the probe, the thread will remain in place and be included in the
sectioning of histology, allowing for a more accurate localization of
the IS probe during imaging.
The IS-DOCT system may provide local monitoring of treatment
responses in deeply situated tissues, such as at tumor boundaries
and critical normal tissues. In many cases, this will require
simultaneous (continuous) monitoring by several probes, for which
a multichannel instrument is required. Such a system is under
development and a similar system has been recently reported by
Yuan and colleagues (54) Furthermore, a larger tissue region may
be monitored using a three-dimensional rotary pullback probe (55),
increasing the interrogation region from f1 mm2 to >300 mm3
(1.5 mm radius; 50 mm pull back). This will be of particular value in

References
1. Overholt BF, Wang KK, Burdick JS, et al. Five-year
efficacy and safety of photodynamic therapy with
Photofrin in Barrett’s high-grade dysplasia. Gastrointest
Endosc 2007;66:460–8.
2. Lou PJ, Jones L, Hopper C. Clinical outcomes of
photodynamic therapy for head-and-neck cancer.
Technol Cancer Res Treat 2003;2:311–7.
3. Huang Z. A review of progress in clinical
photodynamic therapy. Technol Cancer Res Treat
2005;4:283–93.
4. Wolfsen HC. Uses of photodynamic therapy in
premalignant and malignant lesions of the gastrointes-

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (23). December 1, 2008

monitoring the PDT responses in endoscopic sites such as Barrett’s
esophagus (56).
In conclusion, we have shown the ability of DOCT to monitor
and quantify in real-time the PDT-induced vascular changes at
locations deep within solid tumors via a minimally invasive IS
imaging probe. Measurements (HFUS) of the probe depth and
overlying skin thickness allowed calculation of the fluence rate
delivered within the IS-DOCT ROI. This provided a direct
correlation of the local PDT biological response (histologically
derived necrosis) with an objective measure of the corresponding
local microvascular response. This technique may prove useful in
monitoring critical boundary regions within and surrounding
target tumor tissue, such as in the prostate, during PDT treatments.
We envision combining this approach with previously reported
PDT dosimetric measurements, such as tissue optical properties
and/or tumor oxygenation, to provide optimized and individualized treatment that takes into account the intrinsic heterogeneity
of tissues and their complex PDT response. Thus, for example,
ongoing clinical trials at this institution indicate that PDT salvage
therapy in locally recurrent prostate cancer after radical radiotherapy is safe and well-tolerated, but that the interpatient and
intrapatient extent and completeness of PDT-induced necrosis are
highly variable (5). The current technique incorporates preplanning
of IS cylindrical diffusing fiber source placement, transrectal
ultrasound guidance for IS fiber placement, and posttreatment
(7 days) assessment of the zones of PDT-induced avascularity using
contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging. Addition of ISDOCT to this platform will allow on-line adjustment of treatment,
and this will be a primary focus of continuing studies and
translation to the clinic. This work will be accomplished in parallel
with the use of DOCT for monitoring responses during endoscopic
PDT (32).

Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest
No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

Acknowledgments
Received 3/26/2008; revised 8/28/2008; accepted 9/24/2008.
Grant support: Canadian Cancer Society through a grant from the National
Cancer Institute of Canada. The Canadian Institutes of Health Research, the OCE
Centre for Photonics, the Premier’s Research Excellence Award, the Gordon Lang and
the Samuel B. McLaughlin Foundations supported the development of the IS-DOCT
system.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank Mathieu Roy and Dr. Robert Weersink for the assistance with the Monte
Carlo and tissue property modeling, and Dr. Allison Brown for providing expertise in
HFUS.

tinal tract beyond the esophagus. J Clin Gastroenterol
2005;39:653–64.
5. Trachtenberg J, Bogaards A, Weersink RA, et al.
Vascular targeted photodynamic therapy with palladium-bacteriopheophorbide photosensitizer for recurrent
prostate cancer following definitive radiation therapy:
assessment of safety and treatment response. J Urol
2007;178:1974–9.
6. Szeimies RM, Morton CA, Sidoroff A, Braathen LR.
Photodynamic therapy for non-melanoma skin cancer.
Acta Dermatol Venereologica 2005;85:483–90.
7. Muller PJ, Wilson BC. Photodynamic therapy of brain
tumors - a work in progress. Lasers Surg Med 2006;38:
384–9.

9994

8. Akens MK, Yee AJM, Wilson BC, et al. Photodynamic
therapy of vertebral metastases: evaluating tumor-toneural tissue uptake of BPD-MA and ALA-PpIX in a
murine model of metastatic human breast carcinoma.
Photochem Photobiol 2007;83:1034–9.
9. Standish BA, Jin X, Smolen J, et al. Interstitial Doppler
optical coherence tomography monitors microvascular
changes during photodynamic therapy in a Dunning
prostate model under varying treatment conditions. J
Biomed Opt 2007;12:034022.
10. Jemal A, Siegel R, Ward E, Murray T, Xu J, Thun
MJ. Cancer statistics, 2007. CA Cancer J Clin 2007;57:
43–66.
11. Canadian Cancer Society/National Cancer Institute

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Doppler OCT Monitoring of PDT-Induced Vascular Damage

of Canada: Canadian Cancer Statistics 2007. Toronto:
Canadian Cancer Society/National Cancer Institute of
Canada; 2007. p. 4.
12. CancerStats Incidence - UK. London: Cancer Research UK; 2006. p. 2.
13. Du KL, Mick R, Busch TM, et al. Preliminary results
of interstitial motexafin lutetium-mediated PDT for
prostate cancer. Lasers Surg Med 2006;38:427–34.
14. Nathan TR, Whitelaw DE, Chang SC, et al. Photodynamic therapy for prostate cancer recurrence after
radiotherapy: a phase I study. J Urol 2002;168:1427–32.
15. Weishaupt KR, Gomer CJ, Dougherty TJ. Identification of singlet oxygen as the cytotoxic agent in
photo inactivation of a murine tumor. Cancer Res
1976;36:2326–9.
16. Huang Z, Chen Q, Dole KC, et al. The effect of
Tookad-mediated photodynamic ablation of the prostate gland on adjacent tissues - in vivo study in a canine
model. Photochem Photobiol Sci 2007;6:1318–24.
17. Sunar U, Makonnen S, Zhou C, et al. Hemodynamic
responses to antivascular therapy and ionizing radiation
assessed by diffuse optical spectroscopies. Optics Exp
2007;15:15507–16.
18. Zhou C, Choe R, Shah N, et al. Diffuse optical
monitoring of blood flow and oxygenation in human
breast cancer during early stages of neoadjuvant
chemotherapy. J Biomed Opt 2007;12:3543–52.
19. Yu G, Durduran T, Zhou C, et al. Noninvasive
monitoring of murine tumor blood flow during and
after photodynamic therapy provides early assessment
of therapeutic efficacy. Clin Cancer Res 2005;11:3543–52.
20. Yazdanfar S, Kulkarni MD, Izatt JA. High resolution
imaging of in vivo cardiac dynamics using color
Doppler optical coherence tomography. Optics Exp
1997;1:424–31.
21. Chen Z, Milner TE, Dave D, Nelson JS. Optical
Doppler tomographic imaging of fluid flow velocity in
highly scattering media. Optics Lett 1997;22:64–6.
22. Huang D, Swanson EA, Lin CP, et al. Optical
coherence tomography. Science 1991;254:1178–81.
23. Yazdanfar S, Rollins AM, Izatt JA. Imaging and
velocimetry of the human retinal circulation with color
Doppler optical coherence tomography. Optics Lett
2000;25:1448–50.
24. Vakoc BJ, Yun SH, De Boer JF, Tearney GJ, Bouma BE.
Phase-resolved optical frequency domain imaging. Opt
Exp 2005;13:5483–93.
25. Schaefer AW, Reynolds JJ, Marks DL, Boppart SA.
Real-time digital signal processing-based optical
coherence tomography and doppler optical coherence tomography. IEEE Transact Biomed Eng 2004;
51:186–90.
26. Zhao Y, Chen Z, Saxer C, Xiang S, De Boer JF, Nelson
JS. Phase-resolved optical coherence tomography and
optical Doppler tomography for imaging blood flow in
human skin with fast scanning speed and high velocity
sensitivity. Opt Lett 2000;25:114–6.
27. Yang VXD, Tang SJ, Gordon ML, et al. Endoscopic
Doppler optical coherence tomography in the human GI
tract: initial experience. Gastrointest Endosc 2005;61:
879–90.

www.aacrjournals.org

28. Cense B, Chen TC, Nassif N, et al. Ultra-high speed
and ultra-high resolution spectral-domain optical coherence tomography and optical Doppler tomography
in ophthalmology. Bull Société Belge d’Ophtalmologie
2006;302:123–32.
29. Skliarenko JV, Lunt SJ, Gordon ML, Vitkin A,
Milosevic M, Hill RP. Effects of the vascular disrupting
agent ZD6126 on interstitial fluid pressure and cell
survival in tumors. Cancer Res 2006;66:2074–80.
30. Chen Z, Milner TE, Wang X, Srinivas S, Nelson JS.
Optical Doppler tomography: imaging in vivo blood flow
dynamics following pharmacological intervention and
photodynamic therapy. Photochem Photobiol 1998;67:
56–60.
31. Aalders MCG, Triesscheijn M, Ruevekamp M, et al.
Doppler optical coherence tomography to monitor the
effect of photodynamic therapy on tissue morphology
and perfusion. J Biomed Opt 2006;11:044011.
32. Standish BA, Yang VXD, Munce NR, et al. Doppler
optical coherence tomography monitoring of microvascular tissue response during photodynamic therapy in
an animal model of Barrett’s esophagus. Gastrointest
Endosc 2007;66:326–33.
33. Collins HAKM, Moriyama ED, Mariampillai A,
Dahlstedt E, Balaz M, Kuimova MK. Blood-vessel closure
using photosensitizers engineered for two-photon
excitation. Nat Photon 2008;2:420–4.
34. Li H, Standish BA, Mariampillai A, et al.
Feasibility of interstitial doppler optical coherence
tomography for in vivo detection of microvascular
changes during photodynamic therapy. Lasers Surg
Med 2006;38:754–61.
35. Yang VXD, Gordon ML, Qi B, et al. High speed, wide
velocity dynamic range Doppler optical coherence
tomography (Part I): system design, signal processing,
and performance. Opt Exp 2003;11:794–809.
36. Yang VXD, Gordon ML, Mok A, et al. Improved
phase-resolved optical Doppler tomography using the
Kasai velocity estimator and histogram segmentation.
Opt Commun 2002;208:209–14.
37. Roy M, DaCosta RS, Weersink R, et al. Quantum dots
as contrast agents for endoscopy: Mathematical modeling and experimental validation of the optimal
excitation wavelength. SPIE 2007;8:644812.
38. Dam JS, Dalgaard T, Fabricius PE, AnderssonEngels S. Multiple polynomial regression method for
determination of biomedical optical properties from
integrating sphere measurements. Appl Opt 2000;39:
1202–9.
39. Wilson B. Measurements of tissue optical properties:
Methods and theories. In: AJ Welch MvG, editor.
Optical-Thermal Response of Laser-Irradiated Tissue.
New York: Plenum Press; 1995. p. 233–305.
40. Jacques SLWL. Monte Carlo Modeling of Light
Transport in Tissues. In: Welch AJMvG, editor. OpticalThermal Response of Laser-Irradiated Tissue. New York:
Plenum Press; 1995. p. 73–99.
41. Jacques SL. Simple optical theory for light dosimetry
during PDT. SPIE 1992;1645:155–65.
42. Busch TM, Wileyto EP, Emanuele MJ, et al. Photodynamic therapy creates fluence rate-dependent gradients

9995

in the intratumoral spatial distribution of oxygen.
Cancer Res 2002;62:7273–9.
43. Johansson A, Axelsson J, Andersson-Engels S,
Swartling J. Realtime light dosimetry software tools for
interstitial photodynamic therapy of the human prostate. Med Phys 2007;34:4309–21.
44. Huang Z, Chen Q, Luck D, et al. Studies of a vascularacting photosensitizer, Pd-bacteriopheophorbide (Tookad), in normal canine prostate and spontaneous canine
prostate cancer. Lasers Surg Med 2005;36:390–7.
45. Svensson T, Andersson-Engels S, Einarsdóttı́r M,
Svanberg K. In vivo optical characterization of human
prostate tissue using near-infrared time-resolved spectroscopy. J Biomed Opt 2007;12:014022.
46. Zhu TC, Finlay JC, Hahn SM. Determination of the
distribution of light, optical properties, drug concentration, and tissue oxygenation in-vivo in human prostate
during motexafin lutetium-mediated photodynamic
therapy. J Photochem Photobiol B 2005;79:231–41.
47. Solonenko M, Cheung R, Busch TM, et al. In vivo
reflectance measurement of optical properties, blood
oxygenation and motexafin lutetium uptake in canine
large bowels, kidneys and prostates. Phys Med Biol 2002;
47:857–73.
48. Wang HW, Putt ME, Emanuele MJ, et al. Treatmentinduced changes in tumor oxygenation predict photodynamic therapy outcome. Cancer Res 2004;64:7553–61.
49. Kruijt B, De Bruijn HS, Van Der Ploeg - Van Den
Heuvel A, Sterenborg HJCM, Robinson DJ. Laser speckle
imaging of dynamic changes in flow during photodynamic therapy. Lasers Med Sci 2006;21:208–12.
50. Ohlerth S, Laluhova D, Buchholz J, Roos M, Walt H,
Kaser-Hotz B. Changes in vascularity and blood volume
as a result of photodynamic therapy can be assessed
with power Doppler ultrasonography. Lasers Surg Med
2006;38:229–34.
51. Powers BE, Withrow SJ, Thrall DE, et al. Percent
tumor necrosis as a predictor of treatment response in
canine osteosarcoma. Cancer 1991;67:126–34.
52. Leach RM, Hill HS, Snetkov VA, Ward JPT. Hypoxia,
energy state and pulmonary vasomotor tone. Respir
Physiol Neurobiol 2002;132:55–67.
53. Khurana M, Moriyama EH, Mariampillai A, Wilson
BC. Intravital high resolution optical imaging of
individual vessel response to photodynamic treatment.
J Biomed Opt 2008;13:040502.
54. Mariampillai A, Standish BA, Moriyama EH, et al.
Speckle Variance Detection of Microvasculature using
Swept Source Optical Coherence Tomography. Opt
Lett 2008;33:1530–2.
55. Luo Y, Arauz LJ, Castillo JE, Barton JK, Kostuk RK.
Parallel optical coherence tomography system. Applied
Opt 2007;46:8291–7.
56. Vakoc BJ, Shishko M, Yun SH, et al. Comprehensive
esophageal microscopy by using optical frequencydomain imaging (with video). Gastrointest Endosc
2007;65:898–905.
57. Wilson BC. Detection and treatment of dysplasia in
Barrett’s esophagus: A pivotal challenge in translating
biophotonics from bench to bedside. J Biomed Opt 2007;
12:051401.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (23). December 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Interstitial Doppler Optical Coherence Tomography as a
Local Tumor Necrosis Predictor in Photodynamic Therapy of
Prostatic Carcinoma: An In vivo Study
Beau A. Standish, Kenneth K.C. Lee, Xiao Jin, et al.
Cancer Res 2008;68:9987-9995.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/23/9987

This article cites 53 articles, 6 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/23/9987.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 4 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/23/9987.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

