Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 30

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

FOXA1 regulates androgen receptor variant activity in models
of castrate-resistant prostate cancer
Dominic Jones1,*, Mark Wade1,*, Sirintra Nakjang1, Lewis Chaytor1, James Grey1,
Craig N. Robson1, Luke Gaughan1
1

Northern Institute for Cancer Research, Newcastle University, Newcastle Upon Tyne, NE2 4HH, UK

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to:
Luke Gaughan, e-mail: luke.gaughan@ncl.ac.uk
Keywords: prostate cancer, androgen receptor variants, FOXA1, transcriptional regulation
Received: April 14, 2015 	Accepted: August 03, 2015 	Published: August 13, 2015

ABSTRACT
Retention of androgen receptor (AR) signalling in castrate-resistant prostate cancer
(CRPC) highlights the requirement for the development of more effective AR targeting
therapies. A key mechanism of resistance to anti-androgens is through expression
of constitutively active AR variants (AR-Vs) that are refractory to next-generation
therapies, including Enzalutamide and Abiraterone. By maintaining an androgenic gene
signature, AR-Vs drive tumour survival and progression in castrate conditions. Critically,
however, our understanding of the mechanics of AR-V-driven transcription is limited,
particularly with respect to dependency on pioneer factor function. Here we show that
depletion of FOXA1 in the CWR22Rv1 CRPC cell line abrogates the oncogenic potential
of AR-Vs. Gene expression profiling reveals that approximately 41% of the AR-V
transcriptome requires FOXA1 and that depletion of FOXA1 attenuates AR-V binding at
a sub-set of analysed co-regulated genes. Interestingly, AR-V levels are elevated in cells
depleted of FOXA1 as a consequence of attenuated negative feedback on the AR gene,
but is insufficient to maintain cell growth as evidenced by marked anti-proliferative
effects in FOXA1 knockdown cells. In all, our data suggests that AR-Vs are dependent
on FOXA1 for sustaining a pro-proliferative gene signature and agents targeting FOXA1
may represent novel therapeutic options for CRPC patients.

that transmits androgenic signals to drive prostate growth
and cellular transformation. Like other nuclear receptors,
the process of AR-mediated transcription is complex and is
tightly orchestrated within the nucleus by a plethora of coregulatory proteins, a number of which directly acetylate and
methylate the receptor to control the strength and duration
of androgenic signalling [10–13]. Our understanding
of the global functionality of the AR as a DNA-binding
transcription regulator has been re-defined over the past
number of years with the demonstration that additional
transcription factors, such as FOXA1, control AR-chromatin
deposition and are instrumental in controlling receptordriven tissue-specific transcriptional programmes [14, 15].
Several independent studies have shown considerable
overlap between ligand-inducible AR and FOXA1 DNAbinding sites within both proximal promoter and distal
enhancer elements of target genes suggesting a pioneering
role for FOXA1 in facilitating receptor-mediated gene
expression [16–18]. Intriguingly, however, depletion of

INTRODUCTION
Prostate cancer (PC) is the most prevalent male
cancer in the Western world and represents the fourth
most common cancer worldwide. PC growth is initially
androgen-dependent hence the mainstay for treatment is
hormone-ablation therapy using anti-androgens and/or
androgen-deprivation therapies (ADT) [1, 2]. Unfortunately,
in most patients, efficacy of these treatments is short-lived
and the cancer typically recurs in a more aggressive form,
termed castrate-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC), that
remains challenging to treat and is largely fatal [3]. The
development of second generation anti-androgen therapies,
such as Enzalutamide [4, 5] and abiraterone [6, 7], have
shown promise in the treatment of CRPC, but are not
effective in all patients and the development of resistance
has limited their success in the clinic [8, 9].
The androgen receptor (AR) is a member of the
nuclear hormone receptor family of transcription factors
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29782

Oncotarget

FOXA1 in several PC cell lines is not deleterious to all AR
binding events at shared androgen response element (ARE)
and FOXA1-binding sites, and a concurrent stimulation of
receptor binding to new AREs within the genome suggest
that FOXA1 may function to both facilitate and repress AR
signalling at discriminate genomic loci [16, 19].
Several aberrations in the AR signalling cascade
have been identified in CRPC, including AR mutation and
non-androgenic activation of the receptor, that facilitate
AR activity in castrate conditions and contribute to
conventional and next-generation anti-androgen treatment
failure [20, 21]. More recently, the identification of novel
AR variants in CRPC that are refractory to hormonal
therapies has provided an additional avenue for treatment
evasion and progression to advanced disease [22, 23]. AR
variants (termed AR-Vs), such as the clinically-relevant
AR-V7 protein, lack the conventional C-terminal ligandbinding domain (LBD), but retain the potent N-terminal
transactivation domain and DNA-binding domain, and
are thus capable of driving the androgenic signalling
programme in castrate conditions and remain unchallenged
by the current repertoire of receptor-targeting agents [24,
25]. Moreover, although splicing aberrations have been
shown to be responsible for the generation of several
AR-Vs in PC cell-line models, such as CWR22Rv1 and
VCaP, and patient samples of CRPC [26, 27], there is
clear evidence that genomic deletion of exons coding the
LBD is an additional mechanism of AR-V production in
advanced disease [28]. Importantly, both experimental and
translational analyses indicates overexpression of AR-Vs
in approximately 50%–60% of CRPC patients with the
figure rising further in metastatic disease [29].
Our understanding of how AR-Vs are regulated
remains limited, particularly with respect to their
dependency on pioneer factors for transcriptional activity.
To this end, we assessed the role of FOXA1 in regulation
of AR-Vs in CWR22Rv1 cells and show that 41% of the
AR-V transcriptome overlaps with a FOXA1-dependent
gene signature. Consistent with previous findings in
LNCaP cells [19], depletion of FOXA1 in CWR22Rv1
cells up-regulates several genes, including PSA and
KLK2, that is a direct consequence of elevated AR-V
levels. Irrespective of this, however, FOXA1 knockdown
markedly reduces cell growth and is shown to be an
important regulator of the pro-proliferative function of
AR-Vs in CRPC. In all, our data supports the notion that
AR-V activity is regulated by pioneer factors akin to the
full-length AR (FL-AR), and FOXA1 may represent a
suitable target for therapy in advanced disease.

RESULTS

established and is likely a result of constitutive activation
of an androgenic signalling programme refractory to ARtargeted agents [27]. However, our understanding of the
chromatin-binding kinetics and transcriptional requirements
of AR-Vs in CRPC is very limited. To this end, we firstly
assessed the recruitment of AR-Vs to several known AR
target genes in CWR22Rv1 cells, that express very high
levels of receptor variants, and compared binding profiles
to that of the FL-AR in both CWR22Rv1 and VCaP cells.
Consistent with the effect of Enzalutamide as a LBDtargeting agent [30], chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
experiments, using a C-terminal-targeting AR antibody
(C-19), demonstrate that FL-AR is depleted from the PSA
enhancer in both VCaP and CWR22Rv1 cells (Figure 1A).
Importantly, however, an antibody targeting an N-terminal
receptor epitope (AR N-20) shows that chromatin binding
of the AR is retained upon both Enzalutamide treatment
and specific depletion of FL-AR in CWR22Rv1 cells
suggesting AR-variants are constitutively bound to
chromatin (Figure 1B and Supplementary Figure S1). In
contrast, although VCaP cells express a population of ARVs, the levels are considerably lower than CWR22Rv1 cells
and this is reflected in the marked reduction in AR binding
at the PSA enhancer in response to anti-androgen treatment.
To confirm constitutive AR-V-DNA binding
interaction, chromatin extractions were performed in
CWR22Rv1 cells grown in the presence and absence
of 10 nM DHT with and without 1 μM Bicalutamide or
Enzalutamide. As shown in Figure 1C, levels of chromatinbound FL-AR are elevated upon DHT stimulation and
reduced upon treatment with anti-androgens. In keeping
with the ChIP data, however, AR-Vs were found to be
constitutively chromatin bound irrespective of hormonal
or anti-androgen status suggesting that AR-Vs have the
potential to retain androgenic signalling by mediating
robust DNA-binding activity in cells. This finding was
supported further using formaldehyde-assisted isolation
of response elements (FAIRE) in both FL-AR-expressing
LNCaP cells and CWR22Rv1 cells. As shown in
Figure 1D, unlike LNCaP cells which displayed increased
chromatin relaxation at cis-regulatory elements within the
PSA enhancer and TMPRSS2 promoter in response to DHT
treatment that reflects recruitment of FL-AR to these loci,
AR-V expressing CWR22Rv1 displayed a consistently
open chromatin conformation in the absence of androgen
indicating the presence of a constitutively-bound AR-V
population (Figure 1E). Intriguingly, in response to DHT
treatment, cis-regulatory elements of PSA and TMPRSS2
genes was compacted by hormone treatment suggesting that
activation of FL-AR may counteract chromatin opening by
AR-Vs although this needs to be fully evaluated.

AR-Vs are constitutively chromatin bound and
refractory to enzalutamide

FOXA1 depletion elevates PSA, KLK2 and
AR-V mRNA in CWR22Rv1 cells

The ability for AR-Vs to confer resistance to current
and next-generation ADT and anti-androgens is well

Given that FOXA1 is instrumental in regulating
FL-AR chromatin deposition at discriminate androgenic

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29783

Oncotarget

Figure 1: AR-Vs are constitutively chromatin bound. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) was performed using AR (C-19)

A. or AR (N-20) B. antibodies in VCaP and CWR22Rv1 cells treated with 10 nM DHT or 1 μM Enzalutamide for 4 hours and AR recruitment
to the PSA enhancer element was analysed by quantitative PCR. C. Chromatin fractionation was performed in CWR22Rv1 cells treated as
above and resultant samples were subject to anti-AR, PARP1 (chromatin) and α-tubulin (cytoplasmic) antibodies. Formaldehyde-assisted
isolation of response elements (FAIRE) was performed in LNCaP D. and CWR22Rv1 E. cells after 4 hours 10 nM DHT treatment and
resultant DNA was analysed by quantitative PCR using primers specific to the indicated genes. All data represents the mean of at least three
independent experiments +/− SE (*denotes p-value < 0.05)

cistromes [16, 19, 31], it is conceivable that FOXA1
may co-operate with AR-Vs to facilitate their role as
oncogenic drivers in advanced PC. Our demonstration
that AR-Vs are constitutively chromatin bound in
CWR22Rv1 cells provided an indication that interplay
between FOXA1 and receptor variants may exist. We
therefore firstly assessed the impact of FOXA1 depletion
on the AR-target genes PSA and KLK2 in CWR22Rv1
cells as both have been shown to be regulated by the
pioneer factor in PC cells [19] As expected, PSA
and KLK2 expression was refractory to 10 nM DHT
stimulation due to their transcription being largely
driven by AR-Vs (Figure 2A and Supplementary Figure
S2). Importantly, FOXA1 knockdown markedly elevated
expression of both PSA and KLK2 in the presence and
absence of 1 nM and 10 nM DHT, a finding that is
consistent with reports describing FOXA1 as a regulator
of FL-AR activity [19]. Furthermore, Enzalutamide
treatment failed to reduce PSA and KLK2 expression
suggesting that this phenomenon was driven by AR-Vs;
a finding supported by receptor knockdown ( Figure 2B).
Given that both AR target genes were
overexpressed in conditions where only AR variants are
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

likely to be functional, we hypothesised that FOXA1
regulated expression of these receptor isoforms.
As shown in Figure 3, FOXA1 depletion increased
mRNA expression of both AR-V7 and AR-1/2/3/2b
in CWR22Rv1 cells (Figure 3A), but not the FLAR (Figure 3B) and this was confirmed at the protein
level using anti-AR-V7 and AR (N-20) antibodies
(Figure 3C). Importantly, increased AR variant
levels persisted in the presence of Enzalutamide
(Figure 2C  and Figure 3D) and is consistent with
a role for the AR-Vs in driving up-regulation of PSA
and KLK2 in FOXA1 knockdown cells. This data was
confirmed using additional FOXA1-targeting siRNAs
(Supplementary Figures S3 and S4).

FOXA1 regulates AR-V expression through an
AR gene repressor element
The existence of an androgenic downstream
repressor element (DRE) in intron 2 of the AR gene has
been shown to control receptor expression in VCaP cells
[32]. By recruiting the histone methyltransferase LSD1 to
this loci in response to DHT, the receptor down-regulates
29784

Oncotarget

Figure 2: FOXA1 depletion up-regulates PSA and KLK2 expression in CWR22Rv1 cells. A. FOXA1 levels were reduced by

siRNA knockdown for 48 hours in CWR22Rv1 cells and expression of PSA and KLK2 was measured after 24 hours 10 nM DHT stimulation
by quantitative PCR. Representative FOXA1 protein levels are shown on the right. B. As in (A), but with the inclusion of a 1 μM Enzalutamide
treatment arm for 24 hours prior to quantitative analysis. C. AR and FOXA1 knockdown is confirmed by immunoblotting  using antiAR and –FOXA1 antibodies. All data represents the mean of at least three independent experiments +/− SE (*denotes p-value < 0.05)

AR gene transcription through demethylating histone H3
lysine 4 at upstream cis-regulatory elements. As shown
in Supplementary Figure S5A, we have confirmed that
active FL-AR is recruited to two regions of the DRE
(Intron 2A and 2B) in VCaP cells that is attenuated in
the presence of Enzalutamide. Moreover, exposure of
VCaP cells to 10 nM DHT markedly reduced AR-V7
levels (Supplementary Figure S5B), indicating that
AR variant expression is also under the control of this
phenomenon and is consistent with recently published
data [33]. Although not as robust as VCaP cells, reduced
AR-V7 and AR-1/2/3/2b expression in response to DHT
was also demonstrated in CWR22Rv1 cells depleted of
FOXA1 (Figure 3A), suggesting the same auto-regulatory
loop exists for AR-V regulation in an additional model of
advanced CRPC. From these indications, we reasoned that
AR-V expression in CWR22Rv1 cells is self-limiting and
FOXA1 may function to facilitate AR deposition at this
DRE and down-regulate total AR mRNA levels. Therefore,
we first sought to establish if the DRE bound both AR and
FOXA1 in CWR22Rv1 cells. ChIP experiments using the
AR (N-20) antibody demonstrated enrichment of receptor
species above IgG control even in the absence of DHT
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

(Figure 4A) suggesting that AR-Vs are constitutively
bound to this site, but not to a control intron 2 region
(Supplementary Figure S6A). Consistent with AR binding,
FOXA1 was enriched at the DRE (Figure 4B) albeit
to lower levels than the PSA promoter (Supplementary
Figure S6B) and was not affected by Enzalutamide
(Figure 4C). To assess the role of FOXA1 in regulating
AR-V recruitment to the AR gene DRE, we depleted
FOXA1 in CWR22Rv1 cells and demonstrated that this
markedly reduced both FOXA1 and AR-V enrichment at
the repressive cis-regulatory element (Figures 4C and 4D),
and the PSA promoter (Supplementary Figure S7A), but not
at a control DRE element (Supplementary Figure S7B). Our
findings demonstrate pertinent interplay between FOXA1
and AR-Vs for controlling receptor variant expression and
provide a mechanistic insight into the observed elevation of
AR-Vs in response to pioneer factor knockdown in CRPC.

FOXA1 regulates AR-V activity
In order to establish a role for FOXA1 in regulating
global AR-V transcriptional activity, we individually
depleted AR and FOXA1 in CWR22Rv1 cells grown in
29785

Oncotarget

Figure 3: FOXA1 knockdown elevates AR-V expression in CWR22Rv1 cells. A. FOXA1 was depleted by siRNA for 48 hours

in CWR22Rv1 cells and levels of AR-V7, AR-1/2/3/2b were measured after 24 hours 10 nM DHT stimulation by quantitative PCR. B. As
in (A), but cells were additionally depleted of AR by siRNA and treated for 24 hours with Enzalutamide prior to analysis of FL-AR mRNA.
C. Western analysis of FOXA1 knockdown samples using AR (N-20), AR-V7, FOXA1 and α-Tubulin antibodies. D. As in (A) but with the
inclusion of a 1 μM Enzalutamide treatment arm. All data represents the mean of at least three independent experiments +/− SE (*denotes
p-value < 0.05)

the presence of Enzalutamide and assessed differential
gene expression signatures in both experimental arms. To
confirm that the effect of AR knockdown was a specific
read-out for AR-V function, we firstly conducted analysis
on CWR22Rv1 cells grown in steroid-depleted conditions
with and without Enzalutamide to assess the activation
status of FL-AR in these conditions. Importantly, we
found that maintaining cells in the absence of DHT for
72 hours was sufficient to completely abrogate FL-AR
activity as treatment with Enzalutamide failed to impact
on global gene expression (data not shown). We therefore
reasoned that all genes found to be de-regulated upon AR
knockdown can be attributed to AR-V activity. In support
of this, Figure 1C demonstrates low levels of FL-AR
bound to chromatin in androgen-depleted conditions
suggesting compromised FL-AR signalling.
Depletion of AR and FOXA1 resulted in
differential expression of respective 3085 and 2224
probes (Supplementary Tables S1 and S2), equating
to 2366 and 1722 annotated genes (Supplementary
Figure S8) with 41% of AR-V target genes demonstrating
overlap with FOXA1; and 56% of the FOXA1
transcriptome being dually controlled by AR-Vs.
Of those genes demonstrating a significant 1.5-fold
up- (382 genes) and down-regulation (440 genes) in
response to AR-V depletion, 30% and 39% respectively,
were also found to be similarly up- and down-regulated
by FOXA1 (Figures 5A), suggesting a considerable
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

overlap in functionality of the two proteins in AR-Vmediated signalling.
Several studies have suggested AR-Vs regulate
a distinct gene-set to that of FL-AR; including a 25
gene signature, including UBE2C, that was defined as
being specifically up-regulated by ectopically-expressed
AR-V7 in LNCaP cells (termed AR-V7 UP, [34]).
Integrating our AR-V-activated transcriptome data
(siAR DOWN) with this LNCaP-derived AR-V7 UP
signature identified an overlap of 20 out of 25 genes
(80%) (Supplementary Figures S9A and S9C) suggesting
concordant activity of variants in distinct cellular
backgrounds. Additionally, we identified 13 out of 25
(52%) AR-V7 UP genes to be regulated by AR-V and
FOXA1 in CWR22Rv1 cells (Supplementary Figures S9B
and S9C) supporting the concept that pioneer activity is
important for variant-mediated transcription.
A recent and more physiological study identified
a total of 285 non-duplicated probes to be up-regulated
by AR-Vs in CWR22Rv1 cells [35]. Comparison with
our AR-V signature demonstrated an overlap of 20%
(Supplementary Table S3), and importantly, 49% of these
genes were co-regulated by FOXA1 indicating a robust
overlap in functionality of the pioneer factor and receptor
variants (Supplementary Table S4).
To further validate FOXA1 as a regulator of AR-V
activity, we focussed on the genes UBE2C, NKx3.1 and
ATAD2 that were identified from the micro-array as
29786

Oncotarget

Figure 4: A downstream repressive element in the AR gene controls AR-V expression. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) experiments in CWR22Rv1 cells using AR (N-20) A. and FOXA1 B. antibodies to assess recruitment at intron 2 of the AR gene in
response to 4 hour 10 nM DHT treatment. CWR22Rv1 cells depleted of FOXA1 were treated with Enzalutamide for 4 hours and subject
to ChIP using FOXA1 C. and AR D. antibodies to assess recruitment to intron 2 of the AR gene. Fold enrichment is calculated in (D) to
demonstrate loss of AR recruitment upon FOXA1 depletion (*denotes p = < 0.05 significance between siScr control and FOXA1 depletion).
All data represents the mean of at least three independent experiments +/− SE (*denotes p-value < 0.05)

being down-regulated in response to FOXA1 and AR
knockdown. As shown in Figure 5B and Supplementary
Figure S10, each gene was robustly down-regulated
in response to FOXA1, AR and AR-V depletion using
specific siRNA oligonucleotides and this occurred
irrespective of DHT dose (Supplementary Figure S11).
Interestingly, UBE2C and ATAD2 expression was
modestly elevated in response to Enzalutamide,
suggesting that FL-AR may act to repress the function
of AR-Vs at these genes (Figure 5B). ChIP experiments
in CWR22Rv1 cells depleted of FOXA1 showed robust
reduction in AR-V recruitment to a cis-regulatory
element of the UBE2C gene indicating dependency of
FOXA1 for receptor variant target gene recruitment
and transcriptional output (Figure 5C). To confirm
that the predominant AR species at the these promoter
elements are AR-Vs, we specifically depleted FL-AR
using an exon 4-targeting siRNA and demonstrated no
loss of receptor retention (Supplementary Figure S12).
Intriguingly, the effect of attenuated AR-V promoter
association is not recapitulated globally; chromatin
extractions from CWR22Rv1 cells depleted of FOXA1
demonstrate increased chromatin association of AR-Vs,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

and specifically AR-V7, that is likely a consequence
of elevated protein levels in FOXA1 knockdown cells
(Supplementary Figure S13).

FOXA1 regulates pro-proliferative activity of
AR-Vs
Applying gene set enrichment (GSE) analysis
(using Database for Annotation, Visualization and
Integrated Discovery (DAVID)) to our AR-V and
FOXA1-co-regulated genes identified cell cycle
control as the highest-ranked pathways dually
controlled by AR-V and FOXA1 (Figure 6A). Cyclin
A2 (CCNA2), Cyclin B1 (CCNB1), Cyclin E2 (CCNE2)
and Cyclin-dependent Kinase 1 (CDK1) were all
found to be significantly down-regulated in response
to individual depletion of AR and FOXA1, indicating
a role for FOXA1 in controlling the activity of AR-Vs
at pro-proliferative genes in CRPC. To confirm this,
CCNA2 expression was assessed in CWR22Rv1 cells
depleted of either FOXA1, AR or AR-Vs in the presence
and absence of Enzalutamide. As shown in Figure 6B,
CCNA2 mRNA levels were unaffected by Enzalutamide
29787

Oncotarget

Figure 5: AR-V- and FOXA1-target genes show considerable overlap. A. Venn diagrams of genes demonstrating 1.5-fold

up- and down-regulation in response to AR and FOXA1 depletion in CWR22Rv1 cells grown in steroid-depleted conditions + 1 μM
Enzalutamide. B. Validation of UBE2C, NKx3.1 and ATAD2 as AR-V- and FOXA1-co-regulated genes using quantitative PCR analysis
of CWR22Rv1 cells depleted of AR or FOXA1 treated with and without Enzalutamide for 24 hours. C. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) in CWR22Rv1 cells depleted of FOXA1 using an AR (N-20) antibody to assess AR-V binding to the UBE2C promoter (*denotes
p = < 0.05 significance between siScr control and FOXA1 depletion). All data represents the mean of at least three independent experiments
+/− SE (*denotes p-value < 0.05)

treatment, indicating a dependency on AR-V-mediated
transcription for CCNA2 expression, that was confirmed
by AR-V knockdown (Supplementary Figure S14).
Importantly, FOXA1 depletion attenuated CCNA2
expression to levels equivalent to AR knockdown
confirming our micro-array data. Moreover, using
ChIP, we found that FOXA1 depletion diminished
AR-V association at the CCNA2 promoter (Figure 6C)
indicating the importance of FOXA1 as a pioneer factor
for AR-V function at this loci.
Based on the results of our GSEA of shared AR-V/
FOXA1 genes, we next assessed the effect of AR-V and
FOXA1 depletion on proliferation of CWR22Rv1
cells grown in the presence and absence of DHT and
Enzalutamide. Consistent with the role of AR-Vs
in driving CWR22Rv1 cell growth [24], DHT and antiandrogen treatment failed to effect proliferation of
control transfected cells (siScr), while AR knockdown
resulted in approximately 50% reduction in cell
proliferation (Figure 6D). In keeping with the role of
FOXA1 as a pioneer factor for AR-Vs, depletion of
the FOXA1 protein down-regulated cell proliferation
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

by over 60% suggesting that in addition to regulating
the pro-proliferative activity of AR-Vs, FOXA1 may
also control genes outside of the AR signalling cascade
that are drivers of cell turnover. Using cell-cycle
analysis, we found that FOXA1 depletion caused a
cytostatic effect in CWR22Rv1 cells in which G1 phase
is markedly elevated at the expense of S-, G2/M- and
sub-G1- phases of the cell cycle (Figure 6E). In all, our
data demonstrates that FOXA1 is a key regulator of
AR-Vs in CRPC and supports the concept of targeting
pioneer factor function as a treatment for advanced
PC (see Figure 6F for diagrammatic representation of
FOXA1-mediated regulation of AR-Vs in CRPC).

DISCUSSION
The development of new strategies to inactivate the
AR signalling cascade in advanced CRPC is essential.
The selection of cells displaying aberrant AR activity
during first-line hormonal therapy that enable receptor
function in castrate-like conditions is a hallmark of
treatment failure and disease progression [1]. For
29788

Oncotarget

Figure 6: AR-Vs and FOXA1 co-regulate pro-proliferative genes. A. Gene ontology analysis of co-regulated AR- and

FOXA1-target genes shows significant enrichment of cell cycle and cell division associated genes. B. Impact of FOXA1 and AR
knockdown on Cyclin A2 (CCNA2) expression in CWR22Rv1 cells grown in steroid-depleted media treated with 10 nM DHT or 1 μM
Enzalutamide as measured by quantitative PCR. C. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) was performed in CWR22Rv1 cells depleted
of FOXA1 to assess AR-V recruitment to the CCNA2 promoter (*denotes p = < 0.05 significance between siScr control and FOXA1
depletion). D. Proliferation assays to assess effect of AR or FOXA1 knockdown in CWR22Rv1 cells treated with 10 nM DHT or 1 μM
Enzalutamide for 96 hours (* denotes p = < 0.05; ** denotes p = < 0.01 significance between siScr control and AR or FOXA1 knockdown,
respectively). Representative western blots indicate AR and FOXA1 levels in response to protein knockdown. E. Cell cycle analysis using
propidium iodide (PI) flow cytometry in CWR22Rv1 cells depleted of FOXA1 grown in the presence and absence of 1 μM Enzalutamide
for 72 hours. All data represents the mean of at least three independent experiments +/− SE (*denotes p–value < 0.05). F. Diagrammatic
representation of FOXA1-AR-V interplay in CRPC. Expression of AR-Vs are regulated by FOXA1 at the downstream repressive element
(DRE) of the AR gene. FOXA1 also facilitates respective androgen-independent activation and repression of genes, such as CCNA2 and
SRSF2 by AR-Vs.

example, mutation and non-androgenic stimulation of
the AR enable persistence of receptor function in the
presence of targeted therapy, such as the anti-androgen
bicalutamide [21]. The development of the second
generation anti-androgen Enzalutamide has had success in
the clinic for treatment of CRPC, but efficacy is limited,
in part, by the of appearance of an ARF876L mutation in
the LBD that converts Enzalutamide to an agonist [9, 36].
Importantly, the complexity of first- and second-generation
therapy resistance has increased with the key finding that
alternative, constitutively active forms of the AR that lack
the LBD, termed AR-Vs, are over-expressed in CRPC
and hence are refractory to current anti-androgens [8, 29].
Indeed, detection of AR-Vs in circulating CRPC tumour
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

cells has been used as a predictive biomarker for response
to next-generation AR-targeting agents with patients
demonstrating a positive correlation between AR-V
expression and compromised drug efficacy [8].
The mechanisms that regulate AR-V generation in
cells are well characterised with splicing aberrations and
genomic deletion of exons 4–8, that encode the LBD,
being largely responsible for the production of receptor
variants in CRPC [27]. However, our understanding of
regulatory processes that govern the functionality of
AR-Vs in disease is limited, particularly with respect to
transcriptional requirements of the variants for driving
the androgenic signalling cascade in advanced PC. Using
FL-AR as a paradigm of multimodal transcriptional
29789

Oncotarget

control, in which pioneer factors regulate chromatin
deposition and activity of the receptor [14, 15], we
focussed our study on the requirement of FOXA1 for
AR-V activity in models of CRPC. Given that all reported
AR-Vs contain the DNA-binding domain (DBD), that
has been shown to be the site of FOXA1 interaction
[37], combined with our initial findings that AR-Vs were
constitutively chromatin-bound irrespective of hormonal/
anti-androgen status (Figure 1), suggested that FOXA1
may co-operate with receptor variants to control their
transcriptional output. Using FOXA1 siRNAs, we found
that depletion of the pioneer factor elevated expression of
PSA and KLK2 in CWR22Rv1 cells in both the presence
and absence of DHT and Enzalutamide, and this was
driven by up-regulated AR-V expression, specifically ARV7 and AR-1/2/3/2b. Using a combination of ChIP and
quantitative mRNA analyses, we identified the existence
of a negative feedback loop in CWR22Rv1 cells that is
controlled by FOXA1 and acts to limit expression of ARVs. Depletion of FOXA1 attenuates binding of receptor
variants to a downstream repressor element in intron
2 of the AR gene and hence selectively up-regulates
expression of AR-Vs and, as a consequence, PSA and
KLK2. Up-regulation of these genes has been recently
reported in FOXA1-depleted LNCaP cells grown in the
absence of androgens that occurs, in part, as a result of upregulated FL-AR expression and chromatin association at
these genomic loci [19]. Moreover, global AR chromatin
association was found to be reconfigured in the absence
of FOXA1 to new AR binding sites (ARBSs), suggesting
the pioneer factor may be repressive to FL-AR binding at
discriminate cis-regulatory elements [19]. Our analyses of
FOXA1 knockdown in LNCaP cells has confirmed some
of these findings, but intriguingly, we have demonstrated
that up-regulated PSA and KLK2 expression is insensitive
to Enzalutamide and could be a result of elevated AR-V7,
as well as FL-AR, expression (Supplementary Figure S15).
It will be interesting to extrapolate these initial findings to
include ChIP-Seq studies to interrogate the contribution, if
any, of AR-Vs to the new FOXA1-independent ARBSs in
LNCaP cells identified in Jin et al., (2014) [19].
A key observation from our CWR22Rv1 experiments
was of selective up-regulation of AR-V7 and AR-1/2/3/2b,
but not FL-AR, in response to FOXA1 knockdown
(Figure 3), suggesting potential interplay between the
splicing machinery and pioneer factor activity. A recent
report has demonstrated that the binding of ASF2 and
U2AF65 to splicing enhancer elements adjacent to exon
3b of the AR gene regulates the generation of AR-V7 in
both VCaP cells, and the androgen-independent LNCaP
cell derivative LN95, in ADT conditions [33]. Importantly,
depletion of these splicing factors down-regulated AR-V7
levels without impacting on FL-AR mRNA indicating
that discriminate spliceosomal function can be attributed
to the processing of AR-Vs in models of CRPC. We
speculate that flux to splicing factor expression and/or
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

activity in response to FOXA1 knockdown could account
for elevation of AR-Vs in CWR22Rv1 cells. Intriguingly
ASF2 and U2AF65 mRNA was reduced upon pioneer
FOXA1 depletion in our experiments (data not shown)
suggesting that other splicing factors may contribute
to AR-V production in these cells and this is being
interrogated in our on-going studies.
Expression analysis demonstrated that 41% of
AR-V target genes were also co-regulated by FOXA1
indicating a considerable overlap and potential
dependency of the receptor variants on pioneer
factor activity for both AR-activated and—repressed
transcriptomes. This was confirmed at several target
genes, including UBE2C, NKX3.1, ATAD2 and CCNA2,
in which depletion of either AR, AR-Vs or FOXA1 in
Enzalutamide-treated CWR22Rv1 cells down-regulated
their expression. Critically, knockdown of FOXA1
attenuated enrichment of AR-Vs to cis-regulatory
elements of UBE2C and CCNA2, indicating that the
pioneer factor is required to facilitate constitutive
receptor variant deposition at distinct genomic loci akin
to the control of DHT-stimulated FL-AR recruitment
to target genes in PC cells [16, 19]. We identified an
80% overlap between our AR-V transcriptome and a 25
gene signature reported by Hu et al., (2012) [34] to be
regulated specifically by ectopically-expressed AR-V7
in LNCaP cells, including UBE2C that is an established
AR-V target gene [34]. Moreover, approximately
52% of these overlapping genes were also regulated
by FOXA1 in our data-set, suggesting considerable
interplay between the receptor variants and FOXA1
for transcriptional output. To further assess FOXA1
function in CRPC, we compared our AR-V-target
gene signature with that from a recent study in which
an AR-V transcriptome was identified by subtractive
analysis of total AR- and FL-AR-dependent gene-sets
in CWR22Rv1 cells [35]. Consistent with the role of
FOXA1 as a regulator of AR-Vs, we found that almost
50% of the overlapping AR variant-target genes from
our study and the one performed by Lu et al., (2015)
[35] were also controlled by FOXA1. Importantly,
however, we found only 20% concordance between
the two independent AR-V target gene signatures
that is likely to be a reflection of distinct, but valid
experimental procedures that have been applied to
delineate a specific AR-V transcriptional programme
in the complex background of FL-AR expression. In
contrast to selective FL-AR knockdown [35], we used
steroid-depleted media supplemented with Enzalutamide
to down-regulate FL-AR signalling and applied total AR
knockdown to identify AR-V-driven genes. Differences
in siRNA oligonucleotides as well as duration and
efficacy of knockdown (48 hours in this study versus
72 hours in [35]) is an important distinction that could
promote significant variation in the two experimental
outputs.
29790

Oncotarget

Quantitative PCR, western analyses,
immunoprecipitation and chromatin extraction

There remains a paucity of agents/drugs available
to attenuate receptor variant activity in the clinical
setting hence components of the AR-V signalling
network could represent novel therapeutic targets.
The recent identification of the anti-helminthic drug
Niclosamide as a selective destabiliser of AR-Vs in
CWR22Rv1 cells and an AR-V7 expressing C4–2B cell
line derivative suggests that selective targeting of these
aberrantly functioning receptors is achievable at least in
pre-clinical studies [38]. Consistent with this notion of
blocking AR-V function, EPI-001 covalently binds to the
AR N-terminus and has been shown to down-regulate
both FL-AR- and AR-V-mediated signalling in vitro and
in vivo [39]. Although a recent report has defined offtarget effects of EPI-001 outside of the AR signalling
cascade in cell line models of disease [40], there remains
major scope to utilise more refined agents targeting the
unstructured transactivation domain of the receptor as a
strategy for abrogating global AR function in advanced
disease. We have shown that FOXA1 is a key regulator of
CWR22Rv1 proliferation, in part, by controlling AR-Vdriven expression of cell cycle regulated genes, including
CCNA2, CCNB1, CCNE2 and CDK1 suggesting that
the pioneer factor represents an additional tractable
therapeutic target in AR-V-expressing CRPC. In support
of this, several studies have demonstrated up-regulated
FOXA1 protein in advanced disease and knockdown
attenuates growth of additional PC cell lines [16, 41].
Outside of PC, FOXA1 has been demonstrated to be
a vital regulator of ER signalling in breast cancer and
therefore is a bona fide therapeutic target in this disease
setting [15, 42]. Targeting FOXA1 will be challenging,
but inhibitors of an additional AR pioneer factor GATA2
are available and have been successfully applied to
several cell-line-based disease models, including PC
[43]. In all, our data supports the concept that AR-V
function is controlled by FOXA1 and provides additional
justification for targeting pioneer factor activity in
advanced CRPC.

Quantitative PCR was used to assess expression of
AR-target genes (see Supplementary Table S3 for primer
sequences) using cDNA generated from Trizol-mediated
RNA extractions as described in [12]. Data represents the
average of three independent experiments performed in
triplicate. Western blotting was performed as described
in [44] using the following antibodies; AR (N-20), AR
(C-19), FOXA1, PARP-1 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology),
AR-V7 (Precision Antibodies) and α-Tubulin (Sigma).
Immunoprecipitation was conducted as described in [12]
using the AR-V7 antibody. For chromatin preparation,
CWR22Rv1 cells grown in the presence and absence of
10 nM DHT, 1 μM Bicalutamide/1 μM Enzalutamide or
transiently transfected with FOXA1 siRNAs, were subject
to the extraction protocol described in [44].

Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and
FAIRE analyses
ChIP assays were performed as described in [44]
utilising AR (N-20), AR (C-19) and FOXA1 antibodies
(Santa Cruz Biotechnology). Quantitative PCR of resultant
ChIP’d DNA was performed using primers to AR intron
2 and AR-target genes (see Supplementary Table S3
for sequences). For ChIP experiments investigating
recruitment of AR and FOXA1 to target genes in response
to FOXA1 depletion, CWR22Rv1 cells grown in steroiddepleted media were transfected with either siFOXA1
or siScr oligonucleotides for 48 hours prior to 24 hour
stimulation with 1 μM Enzalutamide or vehicle control
prior to chromatin preparation. Data is presented as the
mean of at least 2 independent experiments. FAIRE was
performed in both LNCaP and CWR22Rv1 cells grown in
steroid-depleted media for 48 hours prior to 10 nM DHT
treatment for 4 hours and formaldehyde cross-linking
for 7 minutes. Cells were lysed and chromatin sonicated
using the same ChIP protocol as above. Post-sonication,
2 × phenol/chloroform extractions were performed before
a final chloroform-isoamyl alcohol (24:1) vortex and spin
at 12,000 g for 5 minutes. 1/10th volume of a 3 M sodium
acetate (pH 5.2)/20 mg/ml glycogen mixture was added to
supernatants together with 2 × volume of 100% ethanol to
precipitate DNA at –20°C overnight. DNA was pelleted by
centrifugation at 12,000 g for 30 minutes at 4°C, washed
in 70% ethanol and air dried prior to resuspension in
ChIP elution buffer (see [12]) and DNA clean-up using
GeneElute mammalian genomic DNA miniprep kits
(Sigma). Resultant DNA was analysed by quantitative
PCR using primers listed in Supplementary Table S3. All
statistical testing was performed using a student T-test in
Microsoft Excel with * denoting p < 0.05.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Transient siRNA transfection and cell treatments
CWR22Rv1, LNCaP and VCaP cells were
maintained in RPMI1640 media (Sigma) supplemented
with 10% foetal calf serum (FCS) and 5% L-glutamine at
37°C. Transient transfection of FOXA1 and AR siRNAs
(listed in Supplementary Table S5) was performed using
Lipofectamine RNAiMax (Life Sciences). For 10 nM DHT,
1 μM Bicalutamide and 1 μM Enzalutamide treatments,
cells were grown in phenol red-free RPMI1640 (Life
Sciences) containing 10% steroid-depleted FCS (Hyclone)
for at least 24 hours prior to addition of compounds.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29791

Oncotarget

Cell proliferation and flow cytometry

3.	 Mukherji D, Omlin A, Pezaro C, Shamseddine A,
de Bono J. Metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer
(CRPC): preclinical and clinical evidence for the sequential use of novel therapeutics. Cancer Metastasis Reviews.
2014; 33:555–566.

CWR22Rv1 cells grown in steroid-depleted
conditions +/− 10 nM DHT and 1 μM Enzalutamide
post siFOXA1 and siAR transfection were trypsinised
and counted individually using a haemocytometer. Data
represents three independent experiments performed in
quadruplicate. Cell cycle analysis using propidium iodide
flow cytometry was performed as described in [45]. All
statistical testing was performed using a student T-test in
Microsoft Excel with * denoting p < 0.05.

4.	 Scher HI, Fizazi K, Saad F, Taplin ME, Sternberg CN,
Miller K, de Wit R, Mulders P, Chi KN, Shore ND,
Armstrong AJ, Flaig TW, Flechon A, Mainwaring P,
Fleming M, Hainsworth JD, et al. Increased survival
with enzalutamide in prostate cancer after chemotherapy.
N Engl J Med. 2012; 367:1187–1197.
5.	 Brasso K, Thomsen FB, Schrader AJ, Schmid SC,
Lorente D, Retz M, Merseburger AS, von Klot CA,
Boegemann M, de Bono J. Enzalutamide Antitumour
Activity Against Metastatic Castration-resistant Prostate
Cancer Previously Treated with Docetaxel and Abiraterone:
A Multicentre Analysis. Eur Urol. 2014.

Micro-array analysis
RNA was extracted from CWR22Rv1 cells grown
in steroid-depleted media subjected to control, AR or
FOXA1 knockdown for 24 hours prior to vehicle or
1 μM Enzalutamide treatment for 24 hours. Samples
were hybridised onto an Illumina HT12 v4 BeadChip
Array (performed by The Wellcome Trust Centre for
Human Genetics, Oxford University. Array processing,
normalisation and quality control checks were performed
using the R package ‘Lumi’. Probes intensity values
were converted to VSD (variance stabilised data) using
variance stabilizing transformation. The robust spline
normalisation (RSN) was used as the array normalisation
method. Outlier samples, poor quality probes (detection
threshold < 0.01), and probes that are not detected
at all in the remaining arrays were removed prior
downstream analysis. The remaining probe (22,551)
normalised intensity, VSD was used in the differential
expression analysis. Differential expression analysis was
performed using the R package ‘Limma’, and P values
were adjusted to control the false discovery rate (FDR)
using the Benjamini–Hochberg method. Gene ontology
analysis was performed as described in [45].

6.	 Ryan CJ, Smith MR, de Bono JS, Molina A, Logothetis CJ,
de  Souza P, Fizazi K, Mainwaring P, Piulats JM, Ng  S,
Carles  J, Mulders PF, Basch E, Small EJ, Saad F,
Schrijvers D, et al. Abiraterone in metastatic prostate cancer
without previous chemotherapy. N Engl J Med. 2013;
368:138–148.
7.	 de Bono JS, Logothetis CJ, Molina A, Fizazi K, North S,
Chu  L, Chi KN, Jones RJ, Goodman OB Jr, Saad F,
Staffurth  JN, Mainwaring P, Harland S, Flaig TW,
Hutson TE, Cheng T, et al. Abiraterone and increased
survival in metastatic prostate cancer. N Engl J Med. 2011;
364:1995–2005.
8.	 Antonarakis ES, Lu C, Wang H, Luber B, Nakazawa M,
Roeser JC, Chen Y, Mohammad TA, Fedor HL, Lotan TL,
Zheng Q, De Marzo AM, Isaacs JT, Isaacs WB, Nadal R,
Paller CJ, et al. AR-V7 and resistance to enzalutamide
and abiraterone in prostate cancer. N Engl J Med. 2014;
371:1028–1038.
9.	 Korpal M, Korn JM, Gao X, Rakiec DP, Ruddy DA,
Doshi  S, Yuan J, Kovats SG, Kim S, Cooke VG,
Monahan  JE, Stegmeier F, Roberts TM, Sellers WR,
Zhou W, Zhu P. An F876L mutation in androgen receptor
confers genetic and phenotypic resistance to MDV100
(enzalutamide). Cancer discovery. 2013; 3:1030–1043.

FUNDING
I would like to acknowledge the following for their
support: Medical Research Council (DJ), Worldwide
Cancer Research (MW), Cancer Research UK and Prostate
Cancer UK.

10.	 Culig Z, Santer FR. Androgen receptor signaling in prostate
cancer. Cancer Metastasis Reviews. 2014; 33:413–427.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

11.	 Culig Z, Santer FR. Androgen receptor co-activators in
the regulation of cellular events in prostate cancer. World
Journal of Urology. 2012; 30:297–302.

None.

12.	 Gaughan L, Stockley J, Wang N, McCracken SR,
Treumann A, Armstrong K, Shaheen F, Watt K,
McEwan IJ, Wang C, Pestell RG, Robson CN. Regulation
of the androgen receptor by SET9-mediated methylation.
Nucleic Acids Res. 2011; 39:1266–1279.

REFERENCES
1.	 Wong YN, Ferraldeschi R, Attard G, de Bono J. Evolution
of androgen receptor targeted therapy for advanced prostate
cancer. Nature Reviews. 2014; 11:365–376.

13.	 Fu M, Wang C, Reutens AT, Wang J, Angeletti RH,
Siconolfi-Baez L, Ogryzko V, Avantaggiati ML, Pestell RG.
p300 and p300/cAMP-response element-­binding proteinassociated factor acetylate the androgen receptor at

2.	 Chen Y, Sawyers CL, Scher HI. Targeting the androgen
receptor pathway in prostate cancer. Current Opinion in
Pharmacology. 2008; 8:440–448.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29792

Oncotarget

sites governing hormone-dependent
J Biol Chem. 2000; 275:20853–20860.

t­
ransactivation.

27.	 Ware KE, Garcia-Blanco MA, Armstrong AJ, Dehm SM.
Biologic and clinical significance of androgen receptor
variants in castration resistant prostate cancer. Endocr Relat
Cancer. 2014; 21:T87–T103.

14.	 Zhao Y, Tindall DJ, Huang H. Modulation of androgen
receptor by FOXA1 and FOXO1 factors in prostate
cancer. International Journal of Biological Sciences. 2014;
10:614–619.

28.	 Li Y, Hwang TH, Oseth LA, Hauge A, Vessella RL,
Schmechel SC, Hirsch B, Beckman KB, Silverstein KA,
Dehm SM. AR intragenic deletions linked to androgen
receptor splice variant expression and activity in models of
prostate cancer progression. Oncogene. 2012; 31:4759–4767.

15.	 Robinson JL, Carroll JS. FoxA1 is a key mediator of
hormonal response in breast and prostate cancer. Frontiers
in Endocrinology. 2012; 3:68.
16.	 Sahu B, Laakso M, Ovaska K, Mirtti T, Lundin J,
Rannikko A, Sankila A, Turunen JP, Lundin M, Konsti J,
Vesterinen T, Nordling S, Kallioniemi O, Hautaniemi S,
Janne OA. Dual role of FoxA1 in androgen receptor binding
to chromatin, androgen signalling and prostate cancer.
EMBO J. 2011; 30:3962–3976.

29.	 Zhang X, Morrissey C, Sun S, Ketchandji M, Nelson PS,
True LD, Vakar-Lopez F, Vessella RL, Plymate SR.
Androgen receptor variants occur frequently in castration
resistant prostate cancer metastases. PLoS One. 2011;
6:e27970.
30.	 Tran C, Ouk S, Clegg NJ, Chen Y, Watson PA, Arora V,
Wongvipat J, Smith-Jones PM, Yoo D, Kwon  A,
Wasielewska T, Welsbie D, Chen CD, Higano CS,
Beer TM, Hung DT, et al. Development of a second-­
generation antiandrogen for treatment of advanced prostate
cancer. Science. 2009; 324:787–790.

17.	 Wang Q, Li W, Liu XS, Carroll JS, Janne OA, Keeton EK,
Chinnaiyan AM, Pienta KJ, Brown M. A hierarchical
network of transcription factors governs androgen receptordependent prostate cancer growth. Mol Cell. 2007;
27:380–392.
18.	 Robinson JL, Hickey TE, Warren AY, Vowler SL,
Carroll T, Lamb AD, Papoutsoglou N, Neal DE, Tilley WD,
Carroll JS. Elevated levels of FOXA1 facilitate androgen
receptor chromatin binding resulting in a CRPC-like
­phenotype. Oncogene. 2014; 33:5666–5674.

31.	 Sahu B, Laakso M, Pihlajamaa P, Ovaska K, Sinielnikov I,
Hautaniemi S, Janne OA. FoxA1 specifies unique androgen
and glucocorticoid receptor binding events in prostate
cancer cells. Cancer Res. 2013; 73:1570–1580.
32.	 Cai C, He HH, Chen S, Coleman I, Wang H, Fang Z,
Nelson PS, Liu XS, Brown M, Balk SP. Androgen
receptor gene expression in prostate cancer is directly
suppressed by the androgen receptor through recruitment
of lysine-specific demethylase 1. Cancer Cell. 2011;
20:457–471.

19.	 Jin HJ, Zhao JC, Wu L, Kim J, Yu J. Cooperativity and
equilibrium with FOXA1 define the androgen receptor
transcriptional program. Nature Communications. 2014;
5:3972.
20.	 Karantanos T, Evans CP, Tombal B, Thompson TC,
Montironi R, Isaacs WB. Understanding the Mechanisms
of Androgen Deprivation Resistance in Prostate Cancer at
the Molecular Level. Eur Urol. 2014; 67:470–479.

33.	 Liu LL, Xie N, Sun S, Plymate S, Mostaghel E, Dong X.
Mechanisms of the androgen receptor splicing in prostate
cancer cells. Oncogene. 2014; 33:3140–3150.

21.	 Brooke GN, Bevan CL. The role of androgen receptor
mutations in prostate cancer progression. Current
Genomics. 2009; 10:18–25.

34.	 Hu R, Lu C, Mostaghel EA, Yegnasubramanian S, Gurel M,
Tannahill C, Edwards J, Isaacs WB, Nelson PS, Bluemn E,
Plymate SR, Luo J. Distinct transcriptional programs mediated by the ligand-dependent full-length androgen receptor
and its splice variants in castration-resistant prostate cancer.
Cancer Res. 2012; 72:3457–3462.

22.	 Brand LJ, Dehm SM. Androgen receptor gene
­rearrangements: new perspectives on prostate cancer
progression. Curr Drug Targets. 2013; 14:441–449.

35.	 Lu J, Lonergan PE, Nacusi LP, Wang L, Schmidt LJ, Sun Z,
Van der Steen T, Boorjian SA, Kosari F, Vasmatzis G,
Klee  GG, Balk SP, Huang H, Wang C, Tindall DJ. The
cistrome and gene signature of androgen receptor splice
variants in castration resistant prostate cancer cells. J Urol.
2015; 193:690–698.

23.	 Dehm SM, Tindall DJ. Alternatively spliced androgen
receptor variants. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2011; 18:R183–196.
24.	 Dehm SM, Schmidt LJ, Heemers HV, Vessella RL,
Tindall  DJ. Splicing of a novel androgen receptor exon
generates a constitutively active androgen receptor that
mediates prostate cancer therapy resistance. Cancer Res.
2008; 68:5469–5477.

36.	 Joseph JD, Lu N, Qian J, Sensintaffar J, Shao G, Brigham D,
Moon M, Maneval EC, Chen I, Darimont  B, Hager JH.
A Clinically Relevant Androgen Receptor Mutation
Confers Resistance to Second-Generation Antiandrogens
Enzalutamide and ARN-509. Cancer Discovery. 2013;
3:1020–1029.

25.	 Li Y, Chan SC, Brand LJ, Hwang TH, Silverstein KA,
Dehm SM. Androgen receptor splice variants mediate
enzalutamide resistance in castration-resistant prostate
cancer cell lines. Cancer Res. 2013; 73:483–489.
26.	 Li Y, Alsagabi M, Fan D, Bova GS, Tewfik AH, Dehm SM.
Intragenic rearrangement and altered RNA splicing of the
androgen receptor in a cell-based model of prostate cancer
progression. Cancer Res. 2011; 71:2108–2117.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

37.	 Yu X, Gupta A, Wang Y, Suzuki K, Mirosevich J,
Orgebin-Crist MC, Matusik RJ. Foxa1 and Foxa2 interact with the androgen receptor to regulate prostate and

29793

Oncotarget

epididymal genes differentially. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2005;
1061:77–93.

42.	 Hurtado A, Holmes KA, Ross-Innes CS, Schmidt D,
Carroll  JS. FOXA1 is a key determinant of estrogen
­receptor function and endocrine response. Nat Genet. 2011;
43:27–33.

38.	 Liu C, Lou W, Zhu Y, Nadiminty N, Schwartz CT,
Evans CP, Gao AC. Niclosamide inhibits androgen receptor
variants expression and overcomes enzalutamide resistance
in castration-resistant prostate cancer. Clin Cancer Res.
2014; 20:3198–3210.

43.	 He B, Lanz RB, Fiskus W, Geng C, Yi P, Hartig SM,
Rajapakshe K, Shou J, Wei L, Shah SS, Foley C, Chew SA,
Eedunuri VK, Bedoya DJ, Feng Q, Minami T, et al. GATA2
facilitates steroid receptor coactivator recruitment to the
androgen receptor complex. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
2014; 111:18261–18266.

39.	 Myung JK, Banuelos CA, Fernandez JG, Mawji NR,
Wang J, Tien AH, Yang YC, Tavakoli I, Haile S, Watt K,
McEwan IJ, Plymate S, Andersen RJ, Sadar MD. An androgen receptor N-terminal domain antagonist for t­reating
prostate cancer. J Clin Invest. 2013; 123:2948–2960.

44.	 Gaughan L, Stockley J, Coffey K, O'Neill D, Jones DL,
Wade M, Wright J, Moore M, Tse S, Rogerson L,
Robson CN. KDM4B is a Master Regulator of the Estrogen
Receptor Signalling Cascade. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013;
41:6892–6904.

40.	 Brand LJ, Olson ME, Ravindranathan P, Guo H, Kempema
AM, Andrews TE, Chen X, Raj GV, Harki DA, Dehm SM.
EPI-001 is a selective peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor-gamma modulator with inhibitory effects on androgen receptor expression and activity in prostate c­ancer.
Oncotarget. 2015; 6:3811–3824.

45.	 Wade MA, Jones D, Wilson L, Stockley J, Coffey K,
Robson CN, Gaughan L. The histone demethylase enzyme
KDM3A is a key estrogen receptor regulator in breast
­cancer. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015; 43:196–207.

41.	 Jin HJ, Zhao JC, Ogden I, Bergan RC, Yu J. Androgen
receptor-independent function of FoxA1 in prostate cancer
metastasis. Cancer Res. 2013; 73:3725–3736.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29794

Oncotarget

