Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 46

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

Anti-hepatocellular carcinoma properties of the anti-alcoholism
drug disulfiram discovered to enzymatically inhibit the AMPKrelated kinase SNARK in vitro
Kaku Goto1, Naoya Kato1, Raymond T. Chung2
1

The Advanced Clinical Research Center, The Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan

2

Liver Center and Gastrointestinal Division, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02114, USA

Correspondence to: Raymond T. Chung, email: Chung.Raymond@mgh.harvard.edu
Naoya Kato, email: kato-2im@ims.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Keywords: disulfiram, Antabuse, SNARK, NUAK2, HCC
Received: April 19, 2016     Accepted: August 24, 2016     Published: September 02, 2016

ABSTRACT
We recently described that the anti-apoptotic AMPK-related kinase, SNARK,
promotes transforming growth factor (TGF)-β signaling in hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) cells, as a potentially new therapeutic target. Here we explored FDA-approved
drugs inhibiting the enzymatic activity of SNARK, using an in vitro luminescence
kinase assay system. Interestingly, the long-used anti-alcoholism drug disulfiram
(DSF), also known as Antabuse, emerged as the top hit. Enzymatic kinetics analyses
revealed that DSF inhibited SNARK kinase activity in a noncompetitive manner to ATP
or phosphosubstrates. Comparative in vitro analyses of DSF analogs indicated the
significance of the disulfide bond-based molecular integrity for the kinase inhibition.
DSF suppressed SNARK-promoted TGF-β signaling and demonstrated anti-HCC
effects. The chemical and enzymatic findings herein reveal novel pharmacological
effects of and use for DSF and its derivatives, and could be conducive to prevention and
inhibition of liver fibrosis and HCC.

(SNARK), the fourth member of 14 ARKs [7], supported
replication of hepatitis C virus (HCV), a causative agent
of HCC, in genome-wide RNAi screen [8], and enhanced
profibrogenic transforming growth factor (TGF)-β
signaling in HCC cells [9], suggesting SNARK as an
attractive pharmacological target. Hence we here sought to
find repositionable approved drugs [10] inhibiting SNARK
kinase activity implementing an in vitro luminescence
kinase assay system. Interestingly, the top hit in an
FDA-approved drug library was disulfiram (DSF), the
long-used anti-alcoholism drug also known as Antabuse.
Enzymatic kinetics analyses revealed that DSF inhibited
SNARK kinase activity in a noncompetitive manner to
ATP or phosphosubstrates. While a close DSF analog
tetramethylthiuram disulfide (TR) exerted inhibition,
its monosulfide analog tetramethylthiuram monosulfide
(TMTM) did not, indicating the significance of the
disulfide bond-based molecular integrity of DSF for the
kinase inhibition. DSF was indeed proved in cell culture
to suppress SNARK-enhanced TGF-β signaling monitored
through plasminogen activator inhibitor (PAI)-1 activity.
DSF also exhibited anti-HCC effects, to which HCC cells

INTRODUCTION
Protein kinases are critically involved in nearly
all cellular functions encompassing metabolism, gene
expression, proliferation, motility, and death. Their
dysregulation, contributes to serious diseases such
as cancer, hypertension, Parkinson’s disease, and
autoimmune diseases [1], which are attractive therapeutic
targets [2]. In particular, AMP-activated protein kinase
(AMPK) has been recognized as a key regulator of
energy balance, related to type 2 diabetes and cancer
[3], and AMPK-related kinases (ARKs) are also being
increasingly recognized as modulators of cell dynamics
and metabolism and observed to be tumor promoters
though their physiological properties are not yet well
understood [4].
Liver diseases including fibrosis and consequential
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) remain an important
health menace [5], in urgent need of improved methods
for prophylactic and therapeutic management [6].
We recently reported that sucrose-non-fermenting
protein kinase 1 (SNF1)/AMPK-related protein kinase
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74987

Oncotarget

were conferred resistance by excessive supply of SNARK.
The successful discovery of a SNARK inhibitor here
discloses a novel mode to explain the recently recognized
anti-cancer effects and anti-fibrogenic potential of DSF
[11, 12]. These chemical and enzymatic findings will be
conducive to prevention and inhibition of liver fibrosis
and HCC.

close DSF analogs TR and TMTM (Figure 3A), on the
kinase reaction were tested; in actuality TR inhibited the
kinase activity with the IC50 42.0 μM (Figure 3B), and the
Michaelis-Menten (Figure 3C), Lineweaver-Burk (Figure
3D), and Dixon (Figure 3E) plots (Km = 21.8 ± 1.54 μM,
and Ki = 79.0 ± 5.25 μM) suggested ATP-noncompetitive
inhibition. Again kinase assays at various CHKtide
concentrations produced the Michaelis-Menten (Figure
3F), Lineweaver-Burk (Figure 3G), and Dixon (Figure
3H) plots (Km = 51.2 ± 5.00 μM, Ki = 138.0 ± 21.3 μM),
indicating phosphosubstrate-noncompetitive inhibition.
Meanwhile TMTM exhibited almost no inhibitory
activities (Figure 3I) up to 1000 μM (Supplementary
Figure S3A) and hence the disulfide bond was exhibited
in vitro to be important for DSF to inhibit the SNARK
kinase activity. With respect to the DSF metabolite
diethyldithiocarbamate (DDC) (Figure 3A) [15], no
inhibitory effects were displayed (Figure 3J) while only
slight inhibition was observed at higher concentrations
than 100 μM (Supplementary Figure S3B), and neither did
S-Methyl-N, N-diethylthiocarbamoyl sulfoxide (DETCMeSO) (Figure 3K), a further metabolite downstream of
DDC and the known inhibitor of aldehyde dehydrogenase
[15], inhibit the kinase activity in vitro up to 100 μM
(Figure 3L) with mild inhibition at higher concentrations
(Supplementary Figure S3C), wherefore biochemical
significance of the DSF structure was confirmed. Thus
enzymatic kinetics and chemical structure analyses
uncovered the ATP- and phosphosubstrate-noncompetitive
modes of SNARK inhibition by DSF via disulfide bondbased molecular integrity (Supplementary Table S1).

RESULTS
Screen for SNARK kinase inhibitors in vitro
To confirm the validity of the in vitro SNARK
kinase assay system, which reports the amount of ATP
consumed for phosphorylation as luminescent signals, we
first tested the effects of staurosporine (STS), a known
multi-protein kinase inhibitor [13], and consequently
observed significantly decreased luminescence by STS
(Figure 1A), authenticating the monitoring method. Next
we implemented the kinase assay for 636 compounds in
the FDA-Approved Drug Screen-well Library (Figure
1B); only three compounds demonstrated inhibition more
than 90% in the primary screen and the top hit with around
97% inhibition was DSF, the long-used anti-alcoholism
drug also known as Antabuse (Figure 1C). DSF was
structurally independent from other hits with inhibition
more than 50% (Supplementary Figure S1A and S1B).
The robust inhibition by DSF more potent than other highranking candidates was validated separately, with the dosedependent effects giving 50% inhibitory concentration
(IC50) of 43.7 μM in vitro (Figure 1D), while luciferase
activity itself was not suppressed by DSF (Supplementary
Figure S1C) in agreement with the previous counterscreen [14].

Inhibition of SNARK-promoted TGF-β signaling
by DSF
As we recently reported that SNARK enhanced
TGF-β signaling in HCC cells and the pharmacological
inhibition of SNARK resulted in the suppression of
profibrogenic signaling [9], the effects of DSF were next
assessed in cell culture. The activity of a plasmid PAI/L
encoding a luciferase reporter gene driven by promoter
sequences of PAI-1, a transcriptional target of TGF-β
[16], was enhanced by SNARK overexpression and the
effects were further highlighted by TGF-β in HepG2 cells
(Figure 4A, white bars) in accordance with our previous
data [9]. DSF suppressed the SNARK-promoted luciferase
activities in the absence and particularly presence of
TGF-β (Figure 4A, black bars), endorsing the inhibitory
efficacy in vitro, while no inhibition of luciferase activity
itself by DSF was confirmed in HepG2 cells with the
overexpression of luciferase protein (Supplementary
Figure S4A). In turn, RNAi-mediated knockdown of
SNARK expression decreased PAI/L activity whether
treated with TGF-β or not (Figure 4B, white bars)
consistent with past report [9], and the suppressive effects
by DSF on PAI/L were relatively blunted (Figure 4B, black
bars), indicating the dependence of the DSF-mediated

Kinetics and modes of SNARK kinase inhibition
by DSF
In order to clarify the mode of SNARK inhibition
by DSF, enzymatic kinetics in the presence of DSF
were investigated. The Michaelis-Menten plots of the
kinase reaction with various concentrations of ATP
(Figure 2A) implied non-competitive inhibition against
ATP, which was confirmed by the Lineweaver-Burk
and Dixon plots (Figure 2B and 2C, Km = 19.3 ± 2.18
μM, Ki = 65.7 ± 6.09 μM). In addition, the reaction
was also examined with various concentrations of the
phosphosubstrate peptide CHKtide, whose kinetics
are shown in the Michaelis-Menten plots (Figure 2D),
with Km = 48.9 ± 4.23 μM. The Lineweaver-Burk and
Dixon plots revealed non-competitive inhibition against
the phosphosubstrates (Figure 2E and 2F, Ki = 64.3 ±
5.17 μM), confirmed by no observation of competitive
inhibition after the preincubation of the kinase with DSF
either (Supplementary Figure S2).
Next, to address the question of the functional
groups responsible for the inhibition, the effects of the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74988

Oncotarget

TGF-β signaling inhibition on SNARK. Subsequently, the
DSF analogs TR and TMTM with and without SNARK
kinase inhibitory activity in vitro, respectively, were
tested in the same setting. TR inhibited the SNARKenhanced PAI/L activity, demonstrating all the more
pronounced effects in the presence of TGF-β (Figure
4C), while TMTM did not affect PAI/L significantly

(Figure 4D). Intriguingly, DDC, a key metabolite of
DSF, decreased the PAI/L activity as well in the presence
of TGF-β (Figure 4E) unlike DETC-MeSO (Figure 4F)
though the both lacked the kinase inhibitory properties in
vitro (Figure 3J and 3L). Therefore, possibly responsible
factors such as other DDC metabolites than DETCMeSO and/or intracellular biological effects of DDC

Figure 1: The SNARK kinase inhibitor screen in vitro. A. The in vitro SNARK kinase assay system was validated using the known

multi-kinase inhibitor STS as the control. B. The kinase assay was performed for 636 compounds in the FDA-Approved Drug Screen-well
Library. Z scores of relative kinase activities in the presence of individual drugs compared with DMSO controls are indicated. C. The
chemical structure of DSF retrieved from the database ChemSpider. D. The kinase inhibitory effects of DSF were examined at 0.001, 0.01,
0.1, 0.2, 1, 2, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90, and 100 μM in vitro.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74989

Oncotarget

without excluding SNARK-independent mechanisms
are implied. Noteworthily observed, on the other hand,
was the suppression of SNARK mRNA levels in HepG2
cells treated by DDC (Figure 4G), which could affect
SNARK-stimulated cell biological phenotypes as TGF-β
was found to upregulate SNARK expression levels (Figure
4H), though such pronounced effects were not directly
evoked by the treatment with DSF and TR (Supplementary
Figure S4B and S4C). Additionally, the replication of
the profibrogenic virus HCV, dependent on SNARK
[9], was also abrogated by DSF (Supplementary Figure

S4D), which was supported by a recent report using HCV
replicon cells [17]. Overall, DSF’s inhibition of the in
vitro kinase activity results in its suppression of SNARKdependent profibrogenic signaling in HCC cells.

Inhibition of SNARK-promoted HCC cell
proliferation by DSF
SNARK has been found to operate against
apoptosis, functioning as a tumor promoter [18, 19].
Meanwhile, the anti-cancer effects of DSF have been

Figure 2: Enzymatic kinetics of SNARK kinase inhibition by DSF. The in vitro SNARK kinase assay was performed with 25,

50, 100, and 250 μM ATP or 14.8, 37.0, 74.0, and 148 μM CHKtide in the presence of 0, 20, and 40 μM DSF. Subsequently effects of DSF
on enzymatic kinetics of SNARK were calculated, yielding Michaelis-Menten plots A. and D. Lineweaver-Burk plots B. and E. and Dixon
plots C. and F.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74990

Oncotarget

Figure 3: DSF analogs and enzymatic kinetics of SNARK kinase inhibition by TR. A. Chemical structures of TR, TMTM,

and DDC were retrieved from ChemSpider. B. Similarly to Figure 1D, the kinase inhibitory effects of TR were examined at 0.001, 0.01,
0.1, 1, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90, and 100 μM in vitro. Similarly to Figure 2, the in vitro SNARK kinase assay was performed with
25, 50, 100, and 250 μM ATP or 14.8, 37.0, 74.0, and 148 μM CHKtide in the presence of 0, 20, and 40 μM TR. Subsequently effects of TR
on enzymatic kinetics of SNARK were calculated, yielding Michaelis-Menten plots.

(Continued )
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74991

Oncotarget

Figure 3 (Continued ): C. and F. Lineweaver-Burk plots D. and G. and Dixon plots E. and H. Similarly to (B), effects of TMTM and

DDC, and DETC-MeSO K. on SNARK kinase activity were examined at 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90, and 100 μM I. and J. and 100
μM L. respectively.

described recently [12]. Hence we examined anti-HCC
effects of DSF and presumed participation of SNARK
in this mode of action. In HepG2 cells treated for 48h
(Figure 5A), DSF markedly inhibited HCC cell growth
at 20 μM as did TR relatively moderately, in contrast to
TMTM exerting no effects at even higher concentrations,
in proportion to its in vitro kinase inhibitory activity. DDC
exerted pronounced anti-proliferative effects similarly to
DSF though DDC itself was known to possess anti-cancer
activities [20] independently. Correspondingly, remarkable
cytotoxicities were caused by DSF and DDC while TR and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

TMTM exerted milder and no cytotoxicities, respectively
(Supplementary Figure S5A). In the other liver cancer cell
line PLC/PRF/5, generally the effects of DSF and TR were
stronger than those of TMTM, though DDC exhibited a
unique profile (Figure 5B). These data suggest that DSF
and TR demonstrate stronger cytotoxicity, particularly at
higher doses (Supplementary Figure S5B), while Huh7
cells are highly susceptible to DSF (Supplementary Figure
S5C), being inhibited by about 90% even at 10 μM, below
the concentrations used for the cell-based assays in HepG2
and PLC/PRF/5 cells. Meanwhile, the levels of cell
74992

Oncotarget

proliferation (Supplementary Figure S5D) and cytotoxicity
(Supplementary Figure S5E) of PXB cells, normal human
hepatocytes isolated from chimeric mice with a humanized
liver (PXB mice) [21], were minimally altered, supporting
the liver cancer cell-specific toxicity of DSF.
To determine whether SNARK was involved in
the anti-HCC effects by DSF, we next conducted the
assay in the presence of SNARK overexpression. Both
HepG2 and PLC/PRF/5 cells were conferred resistance

to DSF at lower concentrations (Figure 5C and 5D) by
the excessive supply of SNARK (Supplementary Figure
S5F), which was not observed with the kinase-dead K81M
and unphosphorylated T208A mutants [9] in HepG2
cells (Supplementary Figure S5G) and PLC/PRF/5 cells
(Supplementary Figure S5H), confirming SNARK as
a tumor promoter and a pharmacological target. Taken
together, DSF exhibited anti-cancer effects against HCC
as well, through its actions on SNARK.

Figure 4: Inhibition of SNARK-promoted TGF-β signaling by DSF. A. HepG2 cells were transfected with PAI/L and pRL-TK in

combination with pEBMulti-Puro (Vehicle) or pEBMP-SNARK-3×FL (SNARK), followed by the treatment with DSF at 15 μM and TGF-β
at 10 ng/mL 24 h later. On the next day the cells were lysed and the firefly and Renilla luciferase activities were measured. B. HepG2 cells
were transfected with non-targeting siRNAs (siNT3) or siRNAs to SNARK (siSNARK), followed by transfection with PAI/L and pRL-TK
24h later. On the next day DSF at 10 μM and TGF-β at 10 ng/mL were added and 24h later the cells were lysed and the firefly and Renilla
luciferase activities were measured. Similarly to (A), the assays were performed using TR C. TMTM D. DDC.

(Continued )
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74993

Oncotarget

Figure 4 (Continued ): E. and DETC-MeSO F. in place of DSF. Total RNA was extracted from HepG2 cells treated with DDC at

indicated concentrations G. or 10 ng/mL TGF-β H. for 48h and SNARK mRNA levels were quantified by qRT-PCR with normalization to
GAPDH. n ≥ 3. Error bars = SD.

DISCUSSION

The enzymatic kinetics analyses suggested that
DSF is an ATP-noncompetitive inhibitor (Figure 2),
implying that DSF could target a regulatory site(s) for
ATP hydrolysis rather than compete at the ATP-binding
site. Also noncompetitively inhibited was CHKtide,
connoting that a modulatory domain distinct from the
catalytic center is the DSF target. It is very interesting
to speculate that an identical regulatory site could affect
both ATP and CHKtide reactions, though behaviors of
actual proteins catalyzed in cells may not be entirely
reflected by CHKtides. The identification of potential
DSF-binding targets of SNARK is of great interest; the

Growing evidence has demonstrated that SNARK
possesses anti-apoptotic properties [18, 19] and is involved
in cancer [22–24]. We recently reported the novel feature
of SNARK as a profibrogenic factor in HCC cells through
the promotion of TGF-β signaling [9]. Therefore the
successful identification of DSF to inhibit SNARK kinase
offers real opportunity to exploit the drug and dissect the
mechanisms for further pharmacological development.
An understanding of the basic enzymatic and biochemical
properties of the SNARK-DSF interaction is important.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74994

Oncotarget

kinase inhibition in vitro, suppressive effects on PAI/L
when treated with TGF-β were still detected, potentially
indicating intracellular circumstance-specific suppression
of TGF-β signaling. Of interest, DDC, but not DSF
(Supplementary Figure S4B), was found to decrease
the SNARK expression levels (Figure 4G), which was
in actuality elevated by TGF-β (Figure 4H). This could
at least partly explain the retained suppressive effects
of DDC particularly in the presence of TGF-β, and
denoted the effectiveness of breaking the vicious circle of
reciprocal upregulation between SNARK and TGF-β. The
enzymatic and expression inhibition of SNARK by DSF
and its metabolite DDC, respectively, are thus postulated
to accentuate the potency of DSF coordinately, and further
detailed mechanistic studies are underway to decipher
these findings.
The noted function of SNARK as a tumor promoter
with anti-apoptotic properties was indeed verified in
HCC cells through observation of their resistance to
the cytotoxic effects of DSF conferred by the excessive
supply of SNARK. In recent years, mounting evidence
suggests anti-cancer properties of DSF across cancer
types [12], and HCC cells are no exception; DSF exerted
anti-HCC effects through inhibition of hypoxia-induced

close DSF analog TR shared a similar 3D structure with
and retained the in vitro kinase inhibitory activity in the
same manner as DSF. However, TMTM, the monosulfide
analog of TR, was conformationally distinct from DSF
and TR and devoid of the kinase inhibition. The disulfide
bond-based structure is assumed to be fit for DSF docking
with the kinase, and accordingly further structural analyses
including crystallography of SNARK and its complex with
DSF are warranted based on the insights from DSF and its
analogs as chemical probes. This could stimulate rational
drug development through the well-known characteristic
of DSF.
In our assays, SNARK was shown to promote
TGF-β signaling in HCC cells, which was suppressed by
the SNARK inhibitor DSF as expected. Intriguingly, a
recent study reported that DSF inhibited TGF-β-induced
epithelial-mesenchymal transition in breast cancer cells
[11] in conformity with the downregulation of TGF-β
signaling by DSF in zebra fish cells [25]. Furthermore,
fibrosis-attenuating properties of DSF were observed
in a mouse model of non-alcoholic steatohepatitis [26].
Therefore SNARK has been projected as the target of
anti-fibrogenic effects through TGF-β signaling by DSF.
As for DDC, a DSF metabolite, though it lacks SNARK

Figure 5: Inhibition of SNARK-promoted HCC cell proliferation by DSF. HepG2 A. and PLC/PRF/5 B. cells were treated
with DSF, TR, TMTM, and DDC at the indicated doses for 24 hours and the relative cell viabilities to untreated control cells were measured
by CCK-8 assay. pEBMulti-Puro (Vehicle) or pEBMP-SNARK-3×FL (SNARK) was transfected into HepG2 C. or PLC/PRF/5 D. cells,
followed by DSF treatment at the indicated concentrations 48h later. On the next day the relative cell viabilities to the control samples
untreated and transfected with pEBMulti-Puro were measured similarly to (A) and (B). *P < 0.05 by Student’s t-test. n = 4. Error bars = SD.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74995

Oncotarget

gene expression and hypoxia-inducible factor activity for
tumor adaptation to hypoxia [27]. Also tumorigenicity
of tumor-initiating HCC cells was impaired via reactive
oxygen spieces-p38 pathway and Glypican 3 by DSF
[28]. Another recent study showed DSF, in Hep3B
cells, triggered apoptosis intrinsically and extrinsically,
including activation of the pathway through death
receptor CD95 [29], through which SNARK reportedly
rendered breast cancer cells apoptosis-resistant and
invasive [18]. Such modes of anti-cancer actions by DSF
as above allude to critical molecules associated with and
potentially phosphorylated as substrates by SNARK,
whose unknown functions attract much attention for
reciprocal elucidation between physiological roles and
therapeutic implications. Again DDC, with anti-cancer
effects via chelating into metal ions [20] and reported
to significantly improve the overall survival in breast
cancer patients [30], demonstrated unique profiles of
cytotoxicity to HCC cells, and indicated the effects by
DSF are to be kept even after being metabolized at least
reducing SNARK expression (Figure 4G); lately further
improvement in stable delivery and anti-cancer effects of
DDC was reported in vivo [31]. Utilization of intact DSF,
simultaneously, is being investigated for its anti-cancer
properties, and such a method was recently developed by
nanocapsule-protected medicine [32], achieving favorable
anti-cancer effects. Still the cytotoxic efficacy could
fluctuate depending on individual cell types with various
genetic and pathoetiological backgrounds as was the
case with PLC/PRF/5 cells positive for hepatitis B virus
proteins (Figure 4B) and anti-cancer agents [33]. Thus,
together with the observation of suppressive effects on
TGF-β signaling, leading to the inhibition of cancer cell
metastasis and tumor growth in vivo [11], DSF is thought
to be an effective therapeutic agent for solid tumors
including HCC.
In practice, therapeutic effects of DSF have
been observed in metastatic non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) patients with an increase in survival
[34] and solid tumors [35], and also is under clinical
trials for glioblastoma [12, 36] and advanced HCC
(UMIN000008529, http://www.umin.ac.jp/) in expectation
of exploitation as a chemotherapeutic agent. Another
attractive feature of DSF is the tolerability and safety
demonstrated over years of clinical experience with a
large number of patients, and also in the NSCLC patients
[34]. Plasma concentrations of DSF in several reports [37,
38], reaching even above 100 μM, routinely exceeded
the IC50 of the in vitro kinase assay described here, so
SNARK inhibitory concentrations are expected to be
achieved safely in patients. It should be cautioned that the
possible novel clinical use of DSF would be in persons
with chronic liver disease at risk for cirrhosis and HCC,
and understandably toxicity would need to be carefully
monitored especially in persons with advanced cirrhosis,
as summarized in disease guidelines [39]. However, DSF
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

has long been used safely in patients who often harbor
significant alcoholic liver disease.
Here the enzymatic inhibition of SNARK and
resultant anti-TGF-β/HCC effects by DSF provide us with
new biochemical and pragmatic insights. The utility and
a newly revealed property of DSF were mechanistically
suggested and in turn the significance of regulatory
sites for SNARK kinase activity as validated drug
target can now be comprehensively assessed using DSF
as a chemical probe. Also DSF derivatives with better
potencies could be examined [40] in addition to devising
improved methods of delivery [32, 41]. Further chemical
and biological analyses would accelerate understanding
of SNARK functions and at the same time the chemical
search for and development of potent SNARK inhibitors
continue. Finally well-tolerated and more effective
regimens for HCC management can be expected to be
developed using DSF and its analogs/derivatives, inspired
and reinforced by the discovery in this study.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Compounds and cells
DSF, and STS, TR, TMTM and Sodium
diethyldithiocarbamate trihydrate were purchased from
Selleckchem (Houston, TX) and Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis,
MO), respectively. DETC-MeSO was purchased from
Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA). TGF-β was
purchased from R&D (Minneapolis, MN). Antibodies to
luciferase, HCV NS3, and FLAG and β-actin (ACTB) were
purchased from MBL (Aichi, Japan), Abcam (Cambridge,
United Kingdom), and Sigma-Aldrich, respectively.
The FDA-Approved Drug Screen-well Library and Cell
Counting Kit (CCK)-8 were obtained from Enzo Life
Sciences (Farmingdale, NY) and Dojindo (Kumamoto,
Japan), respectively. Cytotoxicities of compounds were
determined with the LDH cytotoxicity detection kit
(Takara Bio, Shiga, Japan). HepG2, PLC/PRF/5, and
Huh7 cells were cultured according to the protocols of
American Type Culture Collection (Manassas, VA) and
Japanese Collection of Research Bioresources Cell Bank
(Osaka, Japan). The cell lines were authenticated by short
tandem repeat method (Bex, Tokyo, Japan) in Jan 2016.
PXB cells were purchased from Phoenix Bio (Hiroshima,
Japan). JFH1 virus infection was performed as described
previously [9].

Plasmid
pCMV14-SNARK_NCBI-3×FL was constructed
by primers EcoRI-SNARK-F 5′-TTGAATTCGGCCA
CCATGGAGTCGCTGGTTTTC-3′, XbaI-SNARK-ΔT
GA-R 5′-AATTCTAGAGGTGAGCTTTGAGCAGAC
-3′, SNARK-1323-G-F 5′-GGCAGGCTGCCCCGCTG
CTC-3′, and SNARK-1323-G-R 5′-GAGCAGCGGGGCA
74996

Oncotarget

GCCTGCC-3′, using pCMV14-SNARK-3×FL as a template
[9]. Sequences containing SNARK open reading frame
were amplified by the primers XhoI- SNARK-F 5′-ATTC
TCGAGGGCCACCATGGAGTCGCTGGTTTTC-3′ and
NotI-SNARK-3×FL-R 5′-AATGCGGCCGCCTACTTGT
CATCGTCATCCTTG-3′ from pCMV14- SNARK_NCBI3×FL, and subcloned into pEBMulti-Puro (Wako, Osaka,
Japan), producing the expression plasmid pEBMP-SNARK3×FL. Similarly, pCMV14-SNARK(K81M)_NCBI3×FL and pCMV14-SNARK(T208A)_NCBI-3×FL were
generated by primers EcoRI-SNARK-F, XbaI-SNARKΔTGA-R, SNARK-1323-G-F and SNARK-1323-G-R
using pCMV14-SNARK(K81M)-3×FL and pCMV14SNARK(T208A)-3×FL as templates, respectively [9];
subsequently using these constructs as templates, pEBMPSNARK(K81M)-3×FL and pEBMP-SNARK(T208A)3×FL were produced by primers EcoRI-SNARK-F and
NotI-SNARK-3×FL-R. pEBMP-Luc was constructed by
primers XhoI-Luc-F 5′-ATTCTCGAGGGCCACCATGG
AAGACGCCAAAAACATAAAGAAAGGC-3′ and NotILuc-R AATGCGGCCGCTTACAATTTGGACTTTCCGC
CCTTCTTGGC using PAI/L as a template.

SNARK-F 5′-GATGCACATACGGAGGGAGAT-3′ and
SNARK-R 5′-GCTGGCATACTCCATGACGAT-3′ for
SNARK, JFH1-F 5′-CTGTCTTCACGCAGAAAGCG-3′
and JFH1-R 5′- TCGCAACCCAACGCTACTCG-3′ and
GAPDH-F2 5′-AAGGTGAAGGTCGGAGTCAAC-3′ and
GAPDH-R2 5′-GGGGTCATTGATGGCAACAATA-3′ for
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH),
with the value of SNARK and JFH1 normalized to that of
GAPDH.

In vitro kinase assay

GRANT SUPPORT

NUAK2 Kinase Enzyme System was purchased
from Promega (Madison, WI). Kinase assay was
performed according to the manufacturer’s protocol and
the luminescence was monitored (n = 4). Briefly, 12.5 ng of
recombinant SNARK was incubated with CHKtide and ATP,
in the presence or absence of DMSO or compounds, for 60
min at room temperature, followed by ATP depletion and
subsequent detection of converted ADP via luminescence.

N.K. is supported by Grants-in-Aid for Scientific
Research from the Ministry of Education, Culture,
Sports, Science and Technology in Japan (24390184) and
Japan Agency for Medical Research and Development
(15fk0310009h0004). K.G. is supported by a Grant-in-Aid
for Young Scientist (15K19106) from the Japan Society
for the Promotion of Science.

Western blotting
Total protein was resolved by SDS-PAGE and
subjected to western blotting as described previously [9].

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Dr. Soichi Kojima for PAI/L reporter.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors disclose no conflicts of interest.

REFERENCES

Enzyme kinetic analysis

1.	 Cohen P, Alessi DR. Kinase drug discovery--what's next in
the field? ACS Chem Biol. 2013; 8:96-104.

The mode of enzymatic inhibition was calculated
bySigmaplot (Systat Software, San Jose, CA), with the
best fit models determined by the Akaike Information
Criterion.

2.	 Roskoski R, Jr. A historical overview of protein kinases and
their targeted small molecule inhibitors. Pharmacol Res.
2015; 100:1-23.
3.	 Novikova DS, Garabadzhiu AV, Melino G, Barlev NA,
Tribulovich VG. AMP- activated protein kinase: structure,
function, and role in pathological processes. Biochemistry
(Mosc). 2015; 80:127-144.

Luciferase assay
Firefly luciferase activity was monitored by a dualluciferase reporter assay system (Promega) and normalized
to Renilla luciferase activities from pRL-TK as described
previously [9]. SiNT3 (#D-001210-03) and siSNARK
(SI02660224) were purchased from GE Healthcare BioSciences (Pittsburgh, PA) and QIAGEN (Valencia, CA),
respectively, and the assay was performed as described
previously [9], with 3 pmol siRNAs at 5 nM.

4.	 Monteverde T, Muthalagu N, Port J, Murphy DJ. Evidence
of cancer-promoting roles for AMPK and related kinases.
FEBS J. 2015; 282:4658-4671.
5.	 Goto K, Kato N. MICA SNPs and the NKG2D system in
virus-induced HCC. J Gastroenterol. 2015; 50:261-272.
6.	 Giannelli G, Mikulits W, Dooley S, Fabregat I, Moustakas
A, Ten Dijke P, Portincasa P, Winter P, Janssen R, Leporatti
S, Herrera B, Sanchez A. The Rationale for Targeting TGFbeta in Chronic Liver Diseases. Eur J Clin Invest. 2016.

Quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase
chain reaction

7.	 Sun X, Gao L, Chien HY, Li WC, Zhao J. The regulation
and function of the NUAK family. J Mol Endocrinol. 2013;
51:R15-22.

Relative mRNA and viral RNA levels were quantified
as previously described [9] using the following primer sets:
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74997

Oncotarget

8.	 Tai AW, Benita Y, Peng LF, Kim SS, Sakamoto N, Xavier
RJ, Chung RT. A functional genomic screen identifies
cellular cofactors of hepatitis C virus replication. Cell Host
Microbe. 2009; 5:298-307.

20.	 Cen D, Brayton D, Shahandeh B, Meyskens FL, Jr., Farmer
PJ. Disulfiram facilitates intracellular Cu uptake and
induces apoptosis in human melanoma cells. J Med Chem.
2004; 47:6914-6920.

9.	 Goto K, Lin W, Zhang L, Jilg N, Shao RX, Schaefer EA,
Zhao H, Fusco DN, Peng LF, Kato N, Chung RT. The
AMPK-related kinase SNARK regulates hepatitis C virus
replication and pathogenesis through enhancement of TGFbeta signaling. J Hepatol. 2013; 59:942-948.

21.	 Kakuni M, Yamasaki C, Tachibana A, Yoshizane Y, Ishida
Y, Tateno C. Chimeric mice with humanized livers: a unique
tool for in vivo and in vitro enzyme induction studies. Int J
Mol Sci. 2014; 15:58-74.
22.	 Kim JH, Kim WS, Park C. SNARK, a novel downstream
molecule of EBV latent membrane protein 1, is associated
with resistance to cancer cell death. Leuk Lymphoma. 2008;
49:1392-1398.

10.	 Ashburn TT, Thor KB. Drug repositioning: identifying
and developing new uses for existing drugs. Nat Rev Drug
Discov. 2004; 3:673-683.
11.	 Han D, Wu G, Chang C, Zhu F, Xiao Y, Li Q, Zhang T,
Zhang L. Disulfiram inhibits TGF-beta-induced epithelialmesenchymal transition and stem-like features in breast
cancer via ERK/NF-kappaB/Snail pathway. Oncotarget.
2015; 6:40907-40919. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5723.

23.	 Namiki T, Tanemura A, Valencia JC, Coelho SG, Passeron
T, Kawaguchi M, Vieira WD, Ishikawa M, Nishijima W,
Izumo T, Kaneko Y, Katayama I, Yamaguchi Y, Yin L,
Polley EC, Liu H, et al. AMP kinase-related kinase NUAK2
affects tumor growth, migration, and clinical outcome
of human melanoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011;
108:6597-6602.

12.	 Triscott J, Rose Pambid M, Dunn SE. Concise review:
bullseye: targeting cancer stem cells to improve the
treatment of gliomas by repurposing disulfiram. Stem Cells.
2015; 33:1042-1046.

24.	 Namiki T, Yaguchi T, Nakamura K, Valencia JC, Coelho
SG, Yin L, Kawaguchi M, Vieira WD, Kaneko Y, Tanemura
A, Katayama I, Yokozeki H, Kawakami Y, Hearing VJ.
NUAK2 Amplification Coupled with PTEN Deficiency
Promotes Melanoma Development via CDK Activation.
Cancer Res. 2015; 75:2708-2715.

13.	 Akbar M, Kim HY. Protective effects of docosahexaenoic
acid in staurosporine- induced apoptosis: involvement of
phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase pathway. J Neurochem. 2002;
82:655-665.

25.	 van Boxtel AL, Pieterse B, Cenijn P, Kamstra JH, Brouwer
A, van Wieringen W, de Boer J, Legler J. Dithiocarbamates
induce craniofacial abnormalities and downregulate
sox9a during zebrafish development. Toxicol Sci. 2010;
117:209-217.

14.	 Auld DS, Southall NT, Jadhav A, Johnson RL, Diller DJ,
Simeonov A, Austin CP, Inglese J. Characterization of
chemical libraries for luciferase inhibitory activity. J Med
Chem. 2008; 51:2372-2386.
15.	 Koppaka V, Thompson DC, Chen Y, Ellermann M,
Nicolaou KC, Juvonen RO, Petersen D, Deitrich RA,
Hurley TD, Vasiliou V. Aldehyde dehydrogenase inhibitors:
a comprehensive review of the pharmacology, mechanism
of action, substrate specificity, and clinical application.
Pharmacol Rev. 2012; 64:520-539.

26.	 Schwartz JJ, Emerson L, Hillas E, Phan A, Thiesset H,
Firpo M, Sorensen J, Kennedy T, Rinella M. Amelioration
of hepatic inflammation in a mouse model of NASH using
a dithiocarbamate derivative. Hepatol Int. 2013; 7:600-609.
27.	 Park HJ, Kim MS, Cho K, Yun JH, Choi YJ, Cho CH.
Disulfiram deregulates HIF- alpha subunits and blunts
tumor adaptation to hypoxia in hepatoma cells. Acta
Pharmacol Sin. 2013; 34:1208-1216.

16.	 Abe M, Harpel JG, Metz CN, Nunes I, Loskutoff DJ, Rifkin
DB. An assay for transforming growth factor-beta using
cells transfected with a plasminogen activator inhibitor-1
promoter-luciferase construct. Anal Biochem. 1994;
216:276-284.
17.	 Lee YM, Duh Y, Wang ST, Lai MM, Yuan HS, Lim C.
Using an Old Drug to Target a New Drug Site: Application
of Disulfiram to Target the Zn-Site in HCV NS5A Protein.
J Am Chem Soc. 2016; 138:3856-3862.

28.	 Chiba T, Suzuki E, Yuki K, Zen Y, Oshima M, Miyagi S,
Saraya A, Koide S, Motoyama T, Ogasawara S, Ooka Y,
Tawada A, Nakatsura T, Hayashi T, Yamashita T, Kaneko S,
et al. Disulfiram eradicates tumor-initiating hepatocellular
carcinoma cells in ROS-p38 MAPK pathway-dependent
and -independent manners. PLoS One. 2014; 9:e84807.

18.	 Legembre P, Schickel R, Barnhart BC, Peter ME.
Identification of SNF1/AMP kinase-related kinase as an
NF-kappaB-regulated anti-apoptotic kinase involved in
CD95-induced motility and invasiveness. J Biol Chem.
2004; 279:46742-46747.

29.	 Hoda M, Pajaniradje S, Shakya G, Mohankumar K,
Rajagopalan R. Anti-proliferative and apoptosis-triggering
potential of disulfiram and disulfiram-loaded polysorbate
80- stabilized PLGA nanoparticles on hepatocellular
carcinoma Hep3B cell line. Nanomedicine. 2016.

19.	 Lessard SJ, Rivas DA, So K, Koh HJ, Queiroz AL,
Hirshman MF, Fielding RA, Goodyear LJ. The AMPKrelated kinase SNARK regulates muscle mass and myocyte
survival. J Clin Invest. 2016.

30.	 Dufour P, Lang JM, Giron C, Duclos B, Haehnel P, Jaeck
D, Jung JM, Oberling F. Sodium dithiocarb as adjuvant
immunotherapy for high risk breast cancer: a randomized
study. Biotherapy. 1993; 6:9-12.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74998

Oncotarget

31.	 Wehbe M, Anantha M, Backstrom I, Leung A, Chen K,
Malhotra A, Edwards K, Bally MB. Nanoscale Reaction
Vessels Designed for Synthesis of Copper-Drug Complexes
Suitable for Preclinical Development. PLoS One. 2016;
11:e0153416.

newly diagnosed glioblastoma after chemoradiotherapy. J
Neurooncol. 2016.
37.	 Malcolm MT. Disulfiram blood levels. Br Med J. 1977;
2:457.
38.	 Cid E, Cid E, Jr., Feuerhake O, Boisier I, Chandia R.
Plasma concentrations of disulfiram after injection of
suspended micropellets into alcoholic subjects. Biopharm
Drug Dispos. 1991; 12:163-169.

32.	 Zhang L, Tian B, Li Y, Lei T, Meng J, Yang L, Zhang Y,
Chen F, Zhang H, Xu H, Tang X. A Copper-Mediated
Disulfiram-Loaded pH-Triggered PEG-Shedding TAT
Peptide-Modified Lipid Nanocapsules for Use in Tumor
Therapy. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces. 2015; 7:25147-25161.

39.	 Center for Substance Abuse Treatment. Incorporating
Alcohol Pharmacotherapies Into Medical Practice: A
Review of the Literature. Rockville (MD): Substance Abuse
and Mental Health Services Administration (US); 2009.
(Treatment Improvement Protocol (TIP) Series, No. 49s.).

33.	 Pinyol R, Nault JC, Quetglas IM, Zucman-Rossi J, Llovet
JM. Molecular profiling of liver tumors: classification and
clinical translation for decision making. Semin Liver Dis.
2014; 34:363-375.

40.	 Sharma V, Verma V, Lal N, Yadav SK, Sarkar S, Mandalapu
D, Porwal K, Rawat T, Maikhuri JP, Rajender S, Sharma
VL, Gupta G. Disulfiram and its novel derivative sensitize
prostate cancer cells to the growth regulatory mechanisms
of the cell by re- expressing the epigenetically repressed
tumor suppressor-estrogen receptor beta. Mol Carcinog.
2015.

34.	 Nechushtan H, Hamamreh Y, Nidal S, Gotfried M, Baron A,
Shalev YI, Nisman B, Peretz T, Peylan-Ramu N. A phase IIb
trial assessing the addition of disulfiram to chemotherapy
for the treatment of metastatic non-small cell lung cancer.
Oncologist. 2015; 20:366-367.
35.	 Cvek B. Nonprofit drugs as the salvation of the world's
healthcare systems: the case of Antabuse (disulfiram). Drug
Discov Today. 2011; 17:409-412.

41.	 Fasehee H, Zarrinrad G, Tavangar SM, Ghaffari SH, Faghihi
S. The inhibitory effect of disulfiram encapsulated PLGA
NPs on tumor growth: Different administration routes.
Mater Sci Eng C Mater Biol Appl. 2016; 63:587-595.

36.	 Huang J, Campian JL, Gujar AD, Tran DD, Lockhart AC,
DeWees TA, Tsien CI, Kim AH. A phase I study to repurpose
disulfiram in combination with temozolomide to treat

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74999

Oncotarget

