NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 November 15.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Published in final edited form as:
Cancer Cell. 2011 November 15; 20(5): 674–688. doi:10.1016/j.ccr.2011.10.015.

INHIBITION OF MITOCHONDRIAL TRANSLATION AS A
THERAPEUTIC STRATEGY FOR HUMAN ACUTE MYELOID
LEUKEMIA
Marko Škrtić1, Shrivani Sriskanthadevan1, Bozhena Jhas1, Marinella Gebbia2, Xiaoming
Wang1, Zezhou Wang1, Rose Hurren1, Yulia Jitkova1, Marcela Gronda1, Neil Maclean1,
Courteney K. Lai3, Yanina Eberhard1, Justyna Bartoszko1, Paul Spagnuolo1, Angela C.
Rutledge1, Alessandro Datti4, Troy Ketela2, Jason Moffat2, Brian H. Robinson5, Jessie H.
Cameron5, Jeffery Wrana4, Connie J. Eaves3, Mark D. Minden1, Jean C.Y. Wang1,6, John E.
Dick6, Keith Humphries3, Corey Nislow2, Guri Giaever2, and Aaron D. Schimmer1,*
1The Campbell Family Cancer Research Institute, The Princess Margaret Hospital, The Ontario
Cancer Institute, Toronto, ON, M5G 2M9 Canada

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

2Department

of Molecular Genetics, Donnelly Centre for Cellular and Biomolecular Research,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, M5S 3E1 Canada
3Terry

Fox Laboratory, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, British Columbia, V5Z 1L3
Canada
4Samuel

Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, ON, M5G 1X5 Canada

5Genetics

and Genome Biology, The Research Institute, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto,
ON, M5G 1X8 Canada
6Division

of Stem Cell and Developmental Biology, Campbell Family Institute for Cancer
Research/Ontario Cancer Institute, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1L7, Canada

SUMMARY

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

To identify FDA-approved agents targeting leukemic cells, we performed a chemical screen on
two human leukemic cell lines and identified the antimicrobial tigecycline. A genome-wide screen
in yeast identified mitochondrial translation inhibition as the mechanism of tigecycline-mediated
lethality. Tigecycline selectively killed leukemia stem and progenitor cells compared to their
normal counterparts and also showed anti-leukemic activity in mouse models of human leukemia.
ShRNA-mediated knockdown of EF-Tu mitochondrial translation factor in leukemic cells
reproduced the anti-leukemia activity of tigecycline. These effects were derivative of
mitochondrial biogenesis which, together with an increased basal oxygen consumption, proved to
be enhanced in AML versus normal hematopoietic cells and were also important for their
difference in tigecycline sensitivity.

© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
*
To whom correspondence should be addressed: Aaron D. Schimmer, Princess Margaret Hospital, Rm 9-516, 610 University Ave,
Toronto, ON, Canada M5G 2M9, Tel: 416-946-2838, Fax: 416-946-6546, aaron.schimmer@utoronto.ca.
Accession Number
Yeast genomic screen microarray data are deposited at Array Express Archive (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress/) with accession
number E-MTAB-814.
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

Škrtić et al.

Page 2

INTRODUCTION
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML) comprises a genetically and clinically heterogeneous
group of aggressive hematological neoplasms characterized by clonal proliferation of
malignant precursors with a reduced capacity to differentiate into mature cellular
components (Löwenberg et al., 1999). While there have been recent advances in the
treatment of some hematological malignancies, the therapy of AML has remained
essentially unchanged for over 20 years. For patients diagnosed when older than 60, the
prognosis is particularly poor, with a 2-year survival probability of less than 10 percent
(Löwenberg et al., 1998). Thus, further research is warranted into developing therapeutic
strategies for the treatment of this disease.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The anti-cancer effects of inhibiting cytoplasmic translation have been previously reported,
but the impact of inhibiting mitochondrial translation is less well understood. Mitochondrial
DNA (mt-DNA) is composed of a double-stranded circular genome 16.6 kb in length
without introns (Lang et al., 1999). It encodes two rRNAs, 22 t-RNAs and 13 of the 90
proteins in the mitochondrial respiratory chain. The 13 mt-DNA encoded proteins are
translated by mitochondrial ribosomes within the mitochondrial matrix. (Gaur et al., 2008;
Hunter and Spremulli, 2004; Zhang and Spremulli, 1998). Mitochondrial ribosomes differ
from eukaryotic cytosolic ribosomes in their structure and chemical properties (O’Brien,
2003). In addition they use unique protein translation machinery including distinct initiation
and elongation factors.
To identify therapeutic strategies that target both leukemia stem cells (LSCs) and bulk AML
cells, we compiled a library of on and off-patent drugs, and screened these for their ability to
reduce the viability of leukemia cell lines that display the stem cell properties of
differentiation self-renewal, and marrow engraftment. Based on the results of this screen, we
investigated the critical dependence of early as well as late stage primary human AML cells
on mitochondrial protein translation.

RESULTS
Chemical screen for compounds targeting leukemic cells identifies the antimicrobial
tigecycline

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Because of their known toxicology and pharmacology, off- and even on-patent drugs can be
rapidly repurposed for new indications. To search among such compounds for those with
potential anti-human AML activity, we compiled a library of 312 such drugs focused mainly
on anti-microbials and metabolic regulators with well-characterized pharmacokinetics and
toxicology, and wide therapeutic windows. We then screened this library to identify agents
that reduced the viability of cells from two human AML cell lines, TEX and M9-ENL1, that
display features of leukemia stem cells (see Figure S1). These two lines were chosen for our
first screen because of their stem cell properties including hierarchal differentiation and selfrenewal(Barabé et al., 2007; Warner et al., 2005). Figure 1A shows dose-response curves for
5 compounds that did not have any previously recognized anti-cancer activity but displayed
some anti-leukemic activity against at least one of these 2 cell lines after a 72 hour period of
exposure. Interestingly, salinomycin was recently shown to have specific activity against
breast cancer stem cells (Gupta et al., 2009). The second most active drug was tigecycline,
which we then chose to analyze further.
To determine the effect of tigecycline on a broader spectrum of leukemia cell lines, a panel
of human and murine leukemia cells was similarly treated with increasing concentrations of
tigecycline. IC50s ranging from 3 to 8 μM were obtained for the various leukemia cell lines
(Figure 1B). Tigecycline-induced cell death was confirmed by Annexin V/PI staining (Fig

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 November 15.

Škrtić et al.

Page 3

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

1C). Of note, although tigecycline is a structural analogue of minocycline and tetracycline,
TEX cells were not sensitive to either minocycline or tetracycline at concentrations up to 25
μM (Figure 1B).
Tigecycline kills primary AML bulk and progenitor cells more effectively than normal
hematopoietic cells
We next compared the ability of tigecycline to kill cells from 20 primary AML samples (18
from newly diagnosed patients and 2 from patients with relapsed, treatment-refractory
disease, see Table S1) and normal human hematopoietic cells within 48 hours of exposure in
vitro. Bulk low-density normal human hematopoietic cells showed an LD50 of at least 10
μM, including the CD34+ cells isolated from 2 of these samples (Figure 1D). Cells from 7 of
the 20 AML patients studied displayed a similar sensitivity to tigecycline (LD50 >10 μM)
but, in the other 13 cases, a much greater sensitivity to tigecycline was observed (LD50 <5
μM). The CD34+38− subset of AML progenitor cells was also similarly sensitive to
tigecycline (see Figure S1). Notably, no differences in cytogenetic risk or disease status
were evident between the sensitive and insensitive groups and both of the samples from
relapsed, treatment-refractory patients were sensitive to tigecycline.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

To compare the effect of tigecycline on functionally defined subsets of primitive human
AML and normal hematopoietic cell populations, additional experiments were performed.
Incorporation of 5 μM tigecycline into the assay medium reduced the clonogenic growth of
primary AML patient samples (n=7) by 93±4% (Figure 1E). In contrast, tigecycline had only
a minimal effect on the clonogenic growth of normal hematopoietic cells assayed using the
same protocol, including erythroid progenitors (BFU-E) (n=5). To assess the effects of
tigecycline on AML and normal hematopoietic stem cells, we treated primary AML or
normal Lin− CD34+-enriched normal human hematopoietic cord blood cells with 5 μM
tigecycline or DMSO (as a control) for 48 hours in vitro and then compared the number of
human cells produced after 6 weeks after transplantation into NOD/SCID mice (8 mice per
group). This tigecycline treatment protocol reduced the repopulating ability of the primary
AML cells tested (p<0.0001, student’s t test), but had no effect on the repopulating activity
of normal hematopoietic cells (Figure 1F).
Thus for a majority of AML patients, including some with treatment refractory disease,
tigecycline effectively targets all compartments of leukemic cells including the leukemia
stem cells and does so at concentrations that appear pharmacologically achievable and that
do not have a similar negative effect on normal hematopoietic cells.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Haplo-Insufficiency Profiling in S. Cerevisiae identifies mitochondrial translation as target
of tigecycline in eukaryotic cells
Tigecycline is currently used clinically as a broad-spectrum antibiotic due to its high affinity
and potent inhibition of the bacterial ribosome (Olson et al., 2006; Stein and Craig, 2006).
To determine the mechanism of tigecycline’s activity in eukaryotic cells, we used HaploInsufficiency Profiling (HIP), a well-validated chemical genomics platform developed in the
yeast S. Cerevisiae. The HIP assay allows an unbiased in vivo quantitative measure of the
relative drug sensitivity of all ~6,000 yeast proteins in a single assay, and results in a list of
candidate protein targets (Giaever et al., 1999; Hoon et al., 2008). Under standard
fermentation conditions in rich media (YP), where the primary mode of metabolism is
glycolysis, yeast growth was relatively insensitive to tigecycline. In contrast, yeast grown in
respiratory conditions that depend on oxidative phosphorylation exhibited increased
sensitivity and dose-dependent inhibition by tigecycline (Figure S2). Because growth
inhibition is a necessary criterion for the HIP assay, all subsequent experiments were
performed in respiratory media (YPGE).

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 November 15.

Škrtić et al.

Page 4

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The rank-ordered gene list of drug sensitive strains generated from the HIP assays was
analyzed using Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) to identify Gene Ontology (GO)
biological processes that were enriched in the tigecycline screens. The most significantly
enriched GO process was the mitochondrial ribosome (p-value <0.0001, FDR q-value <
0.005) (Figure 2A). No other significant GO processes were enriched in the tigecycline
screen. In the HIP assay, when the target is a large complex, no single gene in the complex
stands out from the rest. For comparison, we also screened the known mammalian
mitochondrial translation inhibitors chlorampheniciol (McKee et al., 2006) and linezolid
(Nagiec et al., 2005), and the anthracycline family-member doxorubicin, which displays
broad mechanisms of anti-cancer activity (Swift et al., 2006; Tewey et al., 1984; Wallin et
al., 2010). As expected, chloramphenicol and linezolid yielded similar results to tigecylcine,
while the doxorubucin GO enrichment analysis revealed a mechanism distinct from
tigecycline (Figure 2B, C) (none of the doxorubicin GO terms passed our significance filter
p-value <0.001, FDR q-value 0.1). Taken together, the yeast genomic screens suggest that
tigecycline acts to inhibit growth and viability of eukaryotic cells through interference with
mitochondrial protein translation. This finding is consistent with tigecycline’s known ability
to inhibit bacterial protein synthesis by reversibly binding bacterial ribosomal RNA thereby
preventing docking of the tRNA with its codon into the A site of the ribosome
complex(Olson et al., 2006).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Tigecycline inhibits mitochondrial translation in established and primary leukemia cells

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

To determine whether the specific toxicity of tigecycline on leukemic cells is mediated by a
similar mechanism, we next asked whether their exposure to tigecycline alters expression of
proteins whose translation is known to be dependent on cytosolic and mitochondrial
ribosomes. In a first set of experiments, TEX, OCI-AML2, primary AML cells were
incubated for 48 hours in increasing concentrations of tigecycline and effects on
Cytochrome C Oxidase-1, 2 and 4 (Cox-1, 2 and 4) levels measured at the end of that time.
Cox-1 and Cox-2 are subunits of respiratory complex IV in the electron transport chain in
mitochondria and are translated by mitochondrial ribosomes (Tam et al., 2008). Cox-4 is a
component of the same respiratory complex, but is encoded by the nuclear genome and
translated by nuclear ribosomes. Tigecycline treatment caused a preferential decrease of
Cox-1 and Cox-2 as compared to Cox-4 (Figure 3A). Tigecycline also did not alter the
expression of other proteins translated by cytosolic ribosomes including grp78 and the short
half-life protein XIAP. The reductions in Cox-1 and Cox-2 protein levels were associated
with increases in their mRNA expression with less change in Cox-4 mRNA levels in the
same cells. (Figure 3B) This result is consistent with a previous report (ChrzanowskaLightowlers et al., 1994) in which inhibition of mitochondrial translation was found to be
accompanied by an increase in the expression of mitochondrially encoded mRNA. Finally,
we demonstrated that tigecycline directly inhibits mitochondrial translation using cell-free
assays with mitochondria isolated from leukemia cells (Figure 3C). Thus, taken together, our
findings support a tigecycline-mediated inhibition of mitochondrial translation as its antileukemic cell mechanism of action.
We next asked whether a similar exposure to tigecycline would affect the enzymatic activity
of respiratory complexes I and IV, both of which contain proteins translated on
mitochondrial ribosomes, and by comparison to the respiratory chain complex II, which
does not contain mitochondrially-encoded subunits in its sub-structure (Ott and Herrmann,
2009). Tigecycline significantly decreased the enzyme activity of respiratory complexes I
and IV, but had less effect on the enzymatic activity of the complex II (Figure 3D). These
findings were mirrored by treatment with chloramphenicol, a known mitochondrial protein
synthesis inhibitor. Consistent with its effects on the mitochondrial respiratory chain,
tigecycline decreased oxygen consumption in TEX and primary AML but not normal

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 November 15.

Škrtić et al.

Page 5

hematopoietic cells at concentrations associated with, but at times preceding cell death
(Figure 3E).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The mitochondrial respiratory chain generates an electrochemical proton gradient that
establishes the mitochondrial membrane potential (Ramzan et al., 2010) used to drive ATP
generation by complex V (ATP synthase). Therefore, we examined the effect of tigecycline
treatment on the mitochondrial membrane potential as determined by staining with the
carbocyanine dye JC-1 (Smiley et al., 1991). TEX cells and 3 different primary AML
samples showed a decreased mitochondrial membrane potential after tigecycline treatment
(5 μM), at times preceding the onset of cell death (Figure 3F). In contrast, loss of
mitochondrial membrane potential was not seen in normal hematopoietic cells from after a
similar in vitro incubation with tigecycline. The preferential effect of tigecycline on
collapsing the membrane potential of leukemia cells may help explain the preferential
cytotoxicity of tigecycline for AML cells over normal cells.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

A byproduct of the mitochondrial electron transport chain is the generation of reactive
oxygen species (ROS). Respiratory chain inhibitors such as rotenone and Na azide have
been previously shown to induce rapid increases in ROS generation leading to cell death (Li
et al., 2003; Park et al., 2007; Turrens and Boveris, 1980). Therefore, we explored the role
of tigecycline on ROS generation in leukemia cells. Tigecycline did not increase ROS
generation in TEX cells at time-points up to 24 hours (Figure S3). In contrast, various
mitochondrial complex enzyme inhibitors produced rapid increases in ROS levels (Figure
S3). Therefore, we postulate that the kinetics of tigecycline-induced inhibition of
mitochondrial translation and respiratory complex activity produce functional effects distinct
from agents that inhibit or uncouple the respiratory chain.
Inhibition of mitochondrial translation is functionally important for the selective toxicity of
tigecycline on leukemia cells

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

To determine whether tigecycline’s effects on the viability of leukemia cells are dependent
on inhibition of mitochondrial function, we evaluated its anti-leukemic activity under
different conditions of hypoxia (20% – 0.2% O2) and anoxia (0% O2) (Figure 4A).
Incubation of both TEX and primary AML cells under anoxic conditions alone was toxic
and in parallel reduced the mitochondrial membrane potential in these cells (Figure 4A, B).
However, co-exposure to tigecycline under anoxic conditions caused no further cell loss and
changes in mitochondrially-translated COX subunits I, II determined by immunoblotting 48
hours after tigecycline treatment, were no longer evident (Figure 4C). Nevertheless, these
experiments demonstrated that tigecycline remained active against leukemia cells and
primary patient AML samples under oxygen concentrations of 1–5% that are present in the
bone marrow of patients with AML (Fiegl et al., 2009). Taken together, these results
demonstrate that the ability of tigecycline to kill leukemia cells is dependent on oxygen
availability and an intact mitochondrial respiratory chain.
We next assessed tigecycline sensitivity of leukemic cells with genetically altered
mitochondrial biogenesis. Previous studies have shown that Myc plays an important role in
promoting mitochondrial biogenesis in a Burkitt’s lymphoma model (Li et al., 2005).
Consistent with previous reports, inducible repression of Myc in p493 Burkitt’s cells
resulted in decreased mitochondrial mass (p<0.05, t test) (Figure 4D, E), mitochondrial
DNA copy number (p<0.005, t test) (Figure 4F) and oxygen consumption rate (p<0.005, t
test) (Figure 4G). Furthermore, Myc-repressed p493 cells with decreased mitochondrial
mass were sensitive to hypoxia conditions, highlighting their dependence on oxidative
metabolism (Figure 4H). We used these cells to evaluate the effects of reduced
mitochondrial biogenesis on the cytotoxicity of tigecycline. Tigecycline treatment reduced
the growth and viability of control p493 cells with functional Myc. In contrast, p493 cells
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 November 15.

Škrtić et al.

Page 6

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

with decreased mitochondrial mass following Myc repression were resistant to tigecycline
(Figure 4I). These results further support the notion that tigecycline’s anti-leukemic
mechanism of action is dependent on inhibition of mitochondrial function. However, we
recognize that Myc repression can affect processes beyond mitochondrial biogenesis
including cell cycle and non-mitochondrial translation that may also impact sensitivity to
tigecycline.
Genetic and chemical inhibition of mitochondrial translation displays anti-leukemia
properties

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

To further explore the anti-leukemic activity of mitochondrial translation inhibition, we
asked whether genetic strategies would produce similar anti-leukemic effects as seen with
tigecycline. Protein translation in mitochondria is regulated by a series of initiation and
elongation factors specific to this organelle (Spremulli et al., 2004). Mitochondrial Initiation
Factor 3 (IF-3) plays an active role in the initiation of mitochondrial translation (Christian
and Spremulli, 2009). Mitochondrial elongation factor Tu (EF-Tu) is responsible for
bringing aminoacyl-tRNAs in complex with GTP to the decoding site on the mitochondrial
ribosome (Spremulli et al., 2004). We evaluated the effects of lentiviral vector-mediated
shRNA knock-down of IF-3 or EF-Tu in TEX cells. Target knockdown was confirmed by
QRT-PCR and immunoblotting using 2 independent shRNA for each gene (Figure 5A, B).
Compared to control shRNA, knockdown of EF-Tu increased mRNA expression and
decreased protein expression of Cox-1 and Cox-2 (Figure 5C, D), but did not change Cox-4
protein or mRNA levels. Similar to tigecycline, EF-Tu knockdown reduced the growth and
viability of TEX cells (Figure 5E), and was associated with decreased mitochondrial
membrane potential and oxygen consumption (Figures 5F, G), with no change in ROS
production (Figure S4). In contrast to the effects of EF-Tu knockdown, IF-3 knockdown did
not alter levels of Cox-1 and Cox-2 protein and mRNA (Figure 5C, D), did not reduce
mitochondrial membrane potential or oxygen consumption (Figure 5F, G), and did not alter
the cell growth and viability of TEX cells (Figure 5E). These results support inhibition of
mitochondrial translation as a therapeutic strategy against human leukemic cells. These
results also demonstrate that some but not all components of the mitochondrial protein
translation machinery are necessary to maintain mitochondrial translation.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

To further assess the possibility that other strategies of inhibiting mitochondrial translation
might also have anti-leukemic potential, we treated TEX leukemia cells with increasing
concentrations of chloramphenicol and linezolid, compounds known to inhibit mitochondrial
translation in mammalian cells at high concentrations in vitro (McKee et al., 2006; Nagiec et
al., 2005). A 4-day incubation with either agent decreased the viability and proliferation of
TEX cells, but at higher drug concentrations than required for tigecycline-induced killing
(Figure S4). Both drugs also reduced expression of mitochondrially-translated Cox-1 and
Cox-2 subunits but did not affect levels of Cox-4. Furthermore, chloramphenicol (50 μM)
reduced the clonogenic growth of cells from 2 primary AML patient samples to a greater
degree than that of normal hematopoietic progenitors. These results suggest that tigecycline
is a more potent inhibitor of mammalian mitochondrial ribosomes compared to
chloramphenicol or linezolid, consistent with its more potent inhibition of bacterial protein
synthesis (Contreras and Vázquez, 1977; Olson et al., 2006; Shinabarger et al., 1997), and
provide an explanation for tigecycline’s selective anti-leukemic effects at pharmacologically
achievable concentrations. Overall, our findings in these chemical and genetic experiments
validate inhibition of mitochondrial translation as a plausible therapeutic strategy for AML.

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 November 15.

Škrtić et al.

Page 7

AML cells have increased mitochondrial biogenesis and basal oxygen consumption
compared to normal hematopoietic cells

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

To investigate the basis of leukemic cell hypersensitivity to mitochondrial translation
inhibition, we assessed baseline mitochondrial characteristics of primary normal
hematopoietic and AML cells. There was no difference in resting mitochondrial membrane
potential between leukemic and normal hematopoietic progenitor cells that could account for
their differential sensitivity to tigecycline (Figure 6A). We then evaluated mitochondrial
DNA copy number, which has previously been used as an estimate of mitochondrial mass
(Xing et al., 2008) and the energy demand of a cell (Capps et al., 2003). Cells from 7 AML
patients, including both CD34+/CD38+ and CD34+/CD38− subsets had higher mitochondrial
DNA copy number compared to normal hematopoietic cells (Figure 6B). Determination of
mitochondrial mass using Mitotracker green FM, which stains mitochondria regardless of
resting mitochondrial membrane potential (Pendergrass et al., 2004), again showed higher
values for the AML cells (n=5) than for normal CD34+ hematopoietic cells (n=6) (Figure
6C), including both the CD34+/CD38+ and CD34+/CD38− subsets of leukemic cells (Figure
6D). Consistent with these findings, rates of oxygen consumption were higher in primary
AML cells (n=4) compared to normal hematopoietic cells (n=5) (Figure 6E).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

To investigate whether baseline mitochondrial mass differences in AML patient samples are
related to their in vitro hypersensitivity to tigecycline, baseline mitochondrial mass
measurements were performed on the leukemic cells from 9 AML patients and compared to
their individual sensitivities to 5 and 10 μM tigecycline (Figure 6F). Mitochondrial mass
was significantly negatively correlated with in vitro sensitivity to tigecycline after 48 hours
(5 μM dose, r = −0.71, p <0.05, 10 μM dose, r = −0.69, p <0.05 pearson correlation). Thus,
samples with the greatest mitochondrial mass were most sensitive to tigecycline treatment in
vitro. Taken together, these results suggest that AML progenitors and stem cells are more
metabolically active and dependent on mitochondrial function than are normal
hematopoietic cells, and provide a mechanism to explain the observed differential activity of
mitochondrial translation inhibition in leukemic and normal hematopoietic cells at all levels
of differentiation (Figure 1D).
Tigecycline shows anti-AML activity in xenograft models of human leukemia

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

To assess the in vivo anti-leukemia efficacy of mitochondrial translation inhibition using
xenograft models, we first evaluated the pharmacokinetics of tigecycline in mice (Figure
S5). Based on these studies, we chose a treatment schedule of twice daily intraperitoneal
(i.p.) injections. In a first experimental design, OCI-AML2 cells were transplanted
subcutaneously into severe combined immune deficiency (SCID) mice and treatment was
started 7 days later when tumors were already palpable (8 mice per group). Compared to the
vehicle control, tigecycline significantly delayed tumor growth and showed equivalent or
greater potency than daunorubicin or bortezomib at their maximally tolerated doses (Figure
7A) (p<0.005, Tukey’s t test after one-way ANOVA). Treatment with tigecycline did not
alter the appearance or behavior of the mice. Moreover, at the conclusion of the experiment
3 weeks post transplant, there were no gross changes to the organs at necropsy. Tumors
excised from mice treated for 5 days with tigecycline (50 mg/kg b.i.d.) showed a greater
reduction of expression of mitochondrially-translated Cox-1 and Cox-2 relative to nucleartranslated Cox-4, compared to vehicle-treated controls (Figure 7B). Thus, tigecycline
inhibits growth and mitochondrial function of this AML cell line in vivo.
Xenotransplantation in NOD/SCID mice is a robust model system to assay stem cells and
test the efficacy of anti-leukemia therapies in vivo(Bonnet and Dick, 1997; Jin et al., 2006;
Lapidot et al., 1994). We transplanted pre-conditioned NOD/SCID mice intra-femorally
with primary AML cells from 3 patients and Lin− CD34+ enriched human cord blood cells,

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 November 15.

Škrtić et al.

Page 8

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

and then evaluated the effects of a 3-week course of tigecycline started 3 weeks posttransplant (10 mice per group). Tigecycline-treated mice had significantly lower levels of
leukemic engraftment compared to control-treated mice without evidence of toxicity (Figure
7C) (p<0.005, student’s t test). Treatment with tigecycline did not alter the appearance or
behavior of the mice nor produce gross changes to the organs at necropsy. There were also
no alterations in serum levels of liver or muscle/cardiac enzmes (see Figure S5).
Importantly, leukemic cells harvested from the bone marrow of tigecycline-treated primary
mice generated smaller leukemic grafts in untreated secondary mice, compared to cells
harvested from control-treated primary mice (Figure 7D) (p<0.05, student’s t test) indicating
that tigecycline was active against AML stem cells. In contrast, tigecycline treatment in vivo
did not reduce engraftment of normal myeloid cells, indicating preferential activity against
LSCs over normal hematopoietic cells (Figure 7E).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

We also evaluated the efficacy of tigecycline in combination with daunorubicin or
cytarabine, 2 standard chemotherapeutic agents used for the treatment of AML. TEX and
OCI-AML2 leukemia cells were treated in vitro with increasing concentrations of
tigecycline alone or in combination with daunorubicin or cytarabine, and growth and
viability were assessed (Figure 8A). Data were analyzed using the Calcusyn median effect
model, where the combination index (CI) indicates synergism (CI<0.9), additivity (CI=0.9–
1.1) or antagonism (CI>1.1). Tigecycline and daunorubicin added together showed an
additive or synergistic effect (CI=0.75 – 1.0). However, when tigecycline was added either
before or after daunorubicin, the combination was clearly synergistic (CI values at ED50 <
0.8). Treatment with tigecycline in combination with cytarabine was additive or synergistic
(CI=0.75 – 1.3) regardless of drug sequence. We then tested the efficacy of the tigecycline/
daunorubicin and tigecycline/cytarabine combinations in the OCI-AML2 xenograft model (8
mice per group). Mice treated with the 2 drug combinations showed reduced tumor growth
by comparison to those receiving single agents (Figure 8B) (p<0.005, Tukey’s t test after
one-way ANOVA). Combination treatments did not alter the gross histology of heart,
muscle, brain, spleen and kidney (Figure S6). There were also no alterations in serum levels
of liver or muscle/cardiac enzmes. These results suggest that combination therapy with
tigecycline may enhance the anti-leukemic efficacy of standard chemotherapeutic agents in
patients.

DISCUSSION

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

One approach to develop therapies for AML is to target both the LSCs and bulk AML cells.
Here we report that the antimicrobial tigecycline has toxicity for human AML cells at all
stages of development in both in vitro and in vivo preclinical models, while sparing normal
hematopoietic cells. In addition, we provide detailed evidence that this drug acts by
inhibiting mitochondrial translation because of a dependence of leukemic cells on this aspect
of cell behavior.
Tigecycline is an anti-microbial agent of the glycylcycline class and is active against a range
of gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria, particularly drug-resistant pathogens (Stein
and Craig, 2006). From a screen of the effects of tigecycline on yeast mutants that cover
most of the yeast genome, we correctly identified the inhibition of mitochondrial-based
translation as the mechanism used by tigecycline to inhibit eukaryotic cells. This finding, in
turn, led to our discovery that leukemic cells owe their heightened sensitivity to tigecycline
due to an increased dependence on mitochondrial function. These results underscore the
incredible power of yeast screens to reveal critical pathways that underlie effects seen in
drug screens.

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 November 15.

Škrtić et al.

Page 9

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

To interrogate the role of mitochondrial functions in leukemic cells and their potential for
specific anti-leukemic targeting strategies, we used a combination of genetic, chemical,
biochemical and biologic approaches. Knockdown of initiation (IF-3) and elongation (EFTu) factors in leukemia cells provided genetic confirmation of the prediction that specific
inhibition of mitochondrial translation in leukemic cells would mimic the effects of
tigecycline, although IF-3 knockdown did not. Currently, it is not fully understood why IF-3
knockdown does not inhibit mitochondrial translation. IF-3 stimulates mitochondrial
translation by altering the ribosomal subunit dissociation equilibrium, and doesn’t directly
stimulate the binding of tRNA molecules (Koc and Spremulli, 2002).We speculate that in
the absence of IF-3, functional translation still occurs due to compensation by other
members of the translation machinery. Thus, some factors involved in mitochondrial
translation appear more critical than others for the integrity of this process. Accordingly,
future investigations exploring the possible role of mitochondrial translation in other cancers
will also likely need to assess the functional importance of various initiation and elongation
factors.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The impact of inhibiting mitochondrial protein synthesis and the oxidative phosphorylation
pathway in leukemia has not been fully assessed. Interestingly, the 13 mtDNA-encoded
subunits of the electron transport chain are important for functional regulation of oxidative
phosphorylation (Fukuda et al., 2007). The Warburg hypothesis proposes that malignant
cells rely on glycolysis and are significantly less dependent on oxidative phosphorylation for
survival (Warburg, 1956). Yet, more recent studies indicate that some tumors are highly
dependent on oxidative phosphorylation for survival (Funes et al., 2007; Moreno-Sánchez et
al., 2007; Rodriguez-Enriquez et al., 2006). Our data suggest that LSCs are unique in their
mitochondrial characteristics, sensitivity to inhibition of mitochondrial protein synthesis,
and their reliance on oxidative phosphorylation. Recently it was demonstrated that leukemia
cells have increased rates of fatty acid oxidation (Samudio et al., 2010) and inhibition of
fatty acid oxidation targeted both leukemia stem cells and their “mature” blast progeny.
These findings complement those we now report. Electrons generated from the oxidation of
fatty acids ultimately flow through the mitochondrial respiratory chain. As such, reducing
the components of the mitochondrial respiratory chain via mitochondrial translation
inhibition would limit the ability of leukemia cells to derive energy from fatty acid oxidation
thus offering an explanation of how inhibition of either of these processes might specifically
constrain the survival or growth of leukemic cells.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The differences in the mitochondrial characteristics of primary AML cells and their normal
counterparts are also noteworthy. AML bulk, stem cells and their progeny had a greater
mitochondrial mass and higher rates of oxygen consumption compared to normal
hematopoietic progenitor cells as shown by multiple endpoints. Notably, AML CD34+/
CD38+ and bulk subsets had higher mitochondrial mass than CD34+/CD38− cells, reflecting
the metabolic differences in rapidly diving AML blasts. However, all AML subsets had
notably higher mitochondrial mass than normal hematopoietic cells. Moreover, AML cells
with the highest mitochondrial mass were the most sensitive to tigecycline suggesting a
biological correlation between these two parameters. The fact that normal hematopoietic
cells have a low mitochondrial mass is consistent with this finding and may explain the
general preferential sensitivity of AML cells to inhibition of mitochondrial protein synthesis.
While this correlation does not imply a cause and effect relationship, mitochondrial mass
may serve to identify potential subgroups of AML patients most likely to respond to a
therapeutic strategy that targets their functions. The robust preclinical anti-leukemia activity
documented with tigecycline using a variety of in vitro and in vivo models and its known
toxicology and pharmacology in humans and animals, support rapidly advancing this drug
into clinical trial for leukemia to evaluate proof-of-mechanism and proof-of-concept. In
conclusion, a combination of small-molecule screens and yeast mutant screens, coupled with
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 November 15.

Škrtić et al.

Page 10

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

follow-up studies of primary AML cell responses in vitro and in vivo has enabled
mitochondrial translation inhibition to be identified as a therapeutic target for human AML
with the antimicrobial tigecycline as a lead candidate. Investigation of the mechanistic basis
of the selective sensitivity of AML cells to agents that inhibit this process has revealed an
elevated state of mitochondrial biogenesis in AML cells upon which AML cells at all stages
of differentiation apparently depend. Thus, in spite of the genetic and biological diversity of
spontaneously arising human AML clones, some common biochemical pathways accessible
to selective targeting appear to still exist and await therapeutic exploitation.

EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Detailed experimental procedures are available in the supplemental experimental
procedures.
Primary AML and normal hematopoietic cells

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Primary human AML samples were isolated from peripheral blood samples from consenting
patients with AML, who had at least 80% malignant cells among the low –density cells
isolated by Ficoll density centrifugation. Primary low-density normal hematopoietic cells
were similarly obtained from healthy consenting volunteers donating peripheral blood stem
cells for allogeneic stem cell transplantation after G-CSF mobilization. Primary cells were
cultured at 37°C in IMDM, supplemented with 20% fetal bovine serum (FBS), and
appropriate antibiotics. The collection and use of human tissue for this study were approved
by the University Health Network institutional review board and Review Ethics Board of the
University of British Columbia.
Yeast genomic screen

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

To identify the primary mechanism of drug action, HIP in yeast was used to profile the
fitness of ~6000 heterozygous deletion strains (Giaever et al., 2004; Smith et al., 2010) in
the presence of our compounds. Because wild-type yeast growth was more sensitive in
respiratory media, the yeast heterozygous deletion pools were grown in YP media
supplemented with 2% glycerol and 1% ethanol. The fitness assay on the deletion strains
was performed as described (Pierce et al., 2006) with the following modifications: 1) for
barcode amplification, 0.2 μg of genomic DNA was used in a 50 μl PCR reaction containing
1uM mix of up- or down-tag primers and 82% (v/v) of High Fidelity Platinum PCR
Supermix (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, California); 2) 34 amplification cycles were used for the
PCR using an extension temperature of 68° C for 2 minutes except for a final 10 minutes in
the last cycle 3) after 10–16 hours of hybridization the arrays were washed in a GeneChip
Fluidic Station 450 (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA) using the GeneFlex_Sv3_450 protocol
with one additional wash cycle before the staining. The Affymetrix GeneChip Command
Console Software was used to extract the intensity values from the arrays and the fitness
defects were calculated for each deletion strains as log2 ratios (mean signal intensity of
control/mean signal intensity of drug).
Yeast growth rate measurements
The growth rate of wild-type yeast(Giaever et al., 2002) was determined by measuring the
ratio of the area under the curve (AUC) after 20 generations of growth plus drug to AUC in
vehicle alone (2% DMSO).
Assessment of tigecycline’s anti-leukemia activity in mouse models of human leukemia
All animal studies were carried out according to the regulations of the Canadian Council on
Animal Care and with the approval of the Ontario Cancer Institute Animal Ethics Review

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 November 15.

Škrtić et al.

Page 11

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

board. Tumor xenograft (OCI-AML2) experiments were performed using SCID mice.
Primary AML and normal cord blood engraftment in the mouse bone marrow was
performed using irradiated NOD-SCID mice. Details on mouse models and subsequent
analysis can be found in Supplemental Experimental Procedures.
Statistical Analysis
All data are expressed as mean and standard deviation (SD) to indicate data variability.
Statistical analyses were performed by unpaired student’s t test, one-way ANOVA and posthoc Tukey’s test, as indicated. Differences were considered statistically significant at p
<0.05.

Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.

Acknowledgments

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

This work was supported by the Canadian Stem Cell Network, the Canadian Institutes for Health Research, the
Leukemia and Lymphoma Society, the National Institutes of Health (NCI 1R01CA157456), the Terry Fox
Foundation, MaRS Innovation, the Ontario Institute of Cancer Research with funding provided by the Ontario
Ministry of Research and Innovation, the Princess Margaret Hospital Foundation, and the Ministry of Long Term
Health and Planning in the Province of Ontario. MS holds a Canada Graduate Scholarship from the Canadian
Institutes of Health Research. ADS is a Leukemia and Lymphoma Society Scholar in Clinical Research.

References

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Barabé F, Kennedy JA, Hope KJ, Dick JE. Modeling the initiation and progression of human acute
leukemia in mice. Science. 2007:600–604.
Bonnet D, Dick JE. Human acute myeloid leukemia is organized as a hierarchy that originates from a
primitive hematopoietic cell. Nat Med. 1997:730–737. [PubMed: 9212098]
Capps GJ, Samuels DC, Chinnery PF. A model of the nuclear control of mitochondrial DNA
replication. J Theor Biol. 2003:565–583. [PubMed: 12713941]
Christian BE, Spremulli LL. Evidence for an active role of IF3mt in the initiation of translation in
mammalian mitochondria. Biochemistry. 2009:3269–3278. [PubMed: 19239245]
Chrzanowska-Lightowlers ZM, Preiss T, Lightowlers RN. Inhibition of mitochondrial protein
synthesis promotes increased stability of nuclear-encoded respiratory gene transcripts. J Biol Chem.
1994:27322–27328. [PubMed: 7525553]
Contreras A, Vázquez D. Cooperative and antagonistic interactions of peptidyl-tRNA and antibiotics
with bacterial ribosomes. Eur J Biochem. 1977:539–547. [PubMed: 323015]
Crandon JL, Kim A, Nicolau DP. Comparison of tigecycline penetration into the epithelial lining fluid
of infected and uninfected murine lungs. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2009; 64:837–839. [PubMed:
19696049]
Fiegl M, Samudio I, Clise-Dwyer K, Burks JK, Mnjoyan Z, Andreeff M. CXCR4 expression and
biologic activity in acute myeloid leukemia are dependent on oxygen partial pressure. Blood. 2009;
113:1504–1512. [PubMed: 18957686]
Fukuda R, Zhang H, Kim J-w, Shimoda L, Dang CV, Semenza GL. HIF-1 regulates cytochrome
oxidase subunits to optimize efficiency of respiration in hypoxic cells. Cell. 2007:111–122.
[PubMed: 17418790]
Funes JM, Quintero M, Henderson S, Martinez D, Qureshi U, Westwood C, Clements MO, Bourboulia
D, Pedley RB, Moncada S, Boshoff C. Transformation of human mesenchymal stem cells
increases their dependency on oxidative phosphorylation for energy production. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A. 2007; 104:6223–6228. [PubMed: 17384149]
Gaur R, Grasso D, Datta PP, Krishna PDV, Das G, Spencer A, Agrawal RK, Spremulli L, Varshney U.
A single mammalian mitochondrial translation initiation factor functionally replaces two bacterial
factors. Mol Cell. 2008:180–190. [PubMed: 18243113]
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 November 15.

Škrtić et al.

Page 12

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Giaever G, Chu AM, Ni L, Connelly C, Riles L, Veronneau S, Dow S, Lucau-Danila A, Anderson K,
Andre B, et al. Functional profiling of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae genome. Nature. 2002;
418:387–391. [PubMed: 12140549]
Giaever G, Flaherty P, Kumm J, Proctor M, Nislow C, Jaramillo DF, Chu AM, Jordan MI, Arkin AP,
Davis RW. Chemogenomic profiling: identifying the functional interactions of small molecules in
yeast. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004; 101:793–798. [PubMed: 14718668]
Giaever G, Shoemaker DD, Jones TW, Liang H, Winzeler EA, Astromoff A, Davis RW. Genomic
profiling of drug sensitivities via induced haploinsufficiency. Nat Genet. 1999:278–283. [PubMed:
10080179]
Gupta PB, Onder TT, Jiang G, Tao K, Kuperwasser C, Weinberg RA, Lander ES. Identification of
selective inhibitors of cancer stem cells by high-throughput screening. Cell. 2009:645–659.
[PubMed: 19682730]
Hoon S, Smith AM, Wallace IM, Suresh S, Miranda M, Fung E, Proctor M, Shokat KM, Zhang C,
Davis RW, et al. An integrated platform of genomic assays reveals small-molecule bioactivities.
Nat Chem Biol. 2008:498–506. [PubMed: 18622389]
Hunter SE, Spremulli LL. Mutagenesis of glutamine 290 in Escherichia coli and mitochondrial
elongation factor Tu affects interactions with mitochondrial aminoacyl-tRNAs and GTPase
activity. Biochemistry. 2004:6917–6927. [PubMed: 15170329]
Jin L, Hope KJ, Zhai Q, Smadja-Joffe F, Dick JE. Targeting of CD44 eradicates human acute myeloid
leukemic stem cells. Nat Med. 2006:1167–1174. [PubMed: 16998484]
Koc EC, Spremulli LL. Identification of mammalian mitochondrial translational initiation factor 3 and
examination of its role in initiation complex formation with natural mRNAs. J Biol Chem. 2002;
277:35541–35549. [PubMed: 12095986]
Lang BF, Gray MW, Burger G. Mitochondrial genome evolution and the origin of eukaryotes. Annu
Rev Genet. 1999:351–397. [PubMed: 10690412]
Lapidot T, Sirard C, Vormoor J, Murdoch B, Hoang T, Caceres-Cortes J, Minden M, Paterson B,
Caligiuri MA, Dick JE. A cell initiating human acute myeloid leukaemia after transplantation into
SCID mice. Nature. 1994:645–648. [PubMed: 7509044]
Li F, Wang Y, Zeller KI, Potter JJ, Wonsey DR, O’Donnell KA, Kim J-w, Yustein JT, Lee LA, Dang
CV. Myc stimulates nuclearly encoded mitochondrial genes and mitochondrial biogenesis. Mol
Cell Biol. 2005:6225–6234. [PubMed: 15988031]
Li N, Ragheb K, Lawler G, Sturgis J, Rajwa B, Melendez JA, Robinson JP. Mitochondrial complex I
inhibitor rotenone induces apoptosis through enhancing mitochondrial reactive oxygen species
production. J Biol Chem. 2003:8516–8525. [PubMed: 12496265]
Löwenberg B, Downing JR, Burnett A. Acute myeloid leukemia. N Engl J Med. 1999:1051–1062.
[PubMed: 10502596]
Löwenberg B, Suciu S, Archimbaud E, Haak H, Stryckmans P, de Cataldo R, Dekker AW, Berneman
ZN, Thyss A, van der Lelie J, et al. Mitoxantrone versus daunorubicin in induction-consolidation
chemotherapy--the value of low-dose cytarabine for maintenance of remission, and an assessment
of prognostic factors in acute myeloid leukemia in the elderly: final report. European Organization
for the Research and Treatment of Cancer and the Dutch-Belgian Hemato-Oncology Cooperative
Hovon Group. J Clin Oncol. 1998:872–881. [PubMed: 9508168]
McKee EE, Ferguson M, Bentley AT, Marks TA. Inhibition of mammalian mitochondrial protein
synthesis by oxazolidinones. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2006:2042–2049. [PubMed:
16723564]
Moreno-Sánchez R, Rodríguez-Enríquez S, Marín-Hernández A, Saavedra E. Energy metabolism in
tumor cells. FEBS J. 2007:1393–1418. [PubMed: 17302740]
Muralidharan G, Micalizzi M, Speth J, Raible D, Troy S. Pharmacokinetics of tigecycline after single
and multiple doses in healthy subjects. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2005:220–229. [PubMed:
15616299]
Nagiec EE, Wu L, Swaney SM, Chosay JG, Ross DE, Brieland JK, Leach KL. Oxazolidinones inhibit
cellular proliferation via inhibition of mitochondrial protein synthesis. Antimicrob Agents
Chemother. 2005:3896–3902. [PubMed: 16127068]

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 November 15.

Škrtić et al.

Page 13

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

O’Brien TW. Properties of human mitochondrial ribosomes. IUBMB Life. 2003:505–513. [PubMed:
14658756]
Olson MW, Ruzin A, Feyfant E, Rush TS, O’Connell J, Bradford PA. Functional, biophysical, and
structural bases for antibacterial activity of tigecycline. Antimicrob Agents Chemother.
2006:2156–2166. [PubMed: 16723578]
Ott M, Herrmann JM. Co-translational membrane insertion of mitochondrially encoded proteins.
Biochim Biophys Acta. 2009
Park WH, Han YW, Kim SH, Kim SZ. An ROS generator, antimycin A, inhibits the growth of HeLa
cells via apoptosis. J Cell Biochem. 2007:98–109. [PubMed: 17372917]
Pendergrass W, Wolf N, Poot M. Efficacy of MitoTracker Green and CMXrosamine to measure
changes in mitochondrial membrane potentials in living cells and tissues. Cytometry A. 2004:162–
169. [PubMed: 15382028]
Pierce SE, Fung EL, Jaramillo DF, Chu AM, Davis RW, Nislow C, Giaever G. A unique and universal
molecular barcode array. Nat Methods. 2006; 3:601–603. [PubMed: 16862133]
Ramzan R, Staniek K, Kadenbach B, Vogt S. Mitochondrial respiration and membrane potential are
regulated by the allosteric ATP-inhibition of cytochrome c oxidase. Biochim Biophys Acta.
2010:1672–1680. [PubMed: 20599681]
Rodriguez-Enriquez S, Vital-Gonzalez PA, Flores-Rodriguez FL, Marin-Hernandez A, Ruiz-Azuara L,
Moreno-Sanchez R. Control of cellular proliferation by modulation of oxidative phosphorylation
in human and rodent fast-growing tumor cells. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2006; 215:208–217.
[PubMed: 16580038]
Samudio I, Harmancey R, Fiegl M, Kantarjian H, Konopleva M, Korchin B, Kaluarachchi K,
Bornmann W, Duvvuri S, Taegtmeyer H, Andreeff M. Pharmacologic inhibition of fatty acid
oxidation sensitizes human leukemia cells to apoptosis induction. J Clin Invest. 2010:142–156.
[PubMed: 20038799]
Shinabarger DL, Marotti KR, Murray RW, Lin AH, Melchior EP, Swaney SM, Dunyak DS, Demyan
WF, Buysse JM. Mechanism of action of oxazolidinones: effects of linezolid and eperezolid on
translation reactions. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 1997:2132–2136. [PubMed: 9333037]
Smiley ST, Reers M, Mottola-Hartshorn C, Lin M, Chen A, Smith TW, Steele GD, Chen LB.
Intracellular heterogeneity in mitochondrial membrane potentials revealed by a J-aggregateforming lipophilic cation JC-1. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1991:3671–3675. [PubMed: 2023917]
Smith AM, Ammar R, Nislow C, Giaever G. A survey of yeast genomic assays for drug and target
discovery. Pharmacol Ther. 2010:156–164. [PubMed: 20546776]
Spremulli LL, Coursey A, Navratil T, Hunter SE. Initiation and elongation factors in mammalian
mitochondrial protein biosynthesis. Prog Nucleic Acid Res Mol Biol. 2004:211–261. [PubMed:
15196894]
Stein GE, Craig WA. Tigecycline: a critical analysis. Clin Infect Dis. 2006:518–524. [PubMed:
16838243]
Swift LP, Rephaeli A, Nudelman A, Phillips DR, Cutts SM. Doxorubicin-DNA adducts induce a nontopoisomerase II-mediated form of cell death. Cancer Res. 2006:4863–4871. [PubMed: 16651442]
Tam EWY, Feigenbaum A, Addis JBL, Blaser S, Mackay N, Al-Dosary M, Taylor RW, Ackerley C,
Cameron JM, Robinson BH. A novel mitochondrial DNA mutation in COX1 leads to strokes,
seizures, and lactic acidosis. Neuropediatrics. 2008:328–334. [PubMed: 19568996]
Tewey KM, Rowe TC, Yang L, Halligan BD, Liu LF. Adriamycin-induced DNA damage mediated by
mammalian DNA topoisomerase II. Science. 1984:466–468. [PubMed: 6093249]
Turrens JF, Boveris A. Generation of superoxide anion by the NADH dehydrogenase of bovine heart
mitochondria. Biochem J. 1980:421–427. [PubMed: 6263247]
Wallin JJ, Guan J, Prior WW, Edgar KA, Kassees R, Sampath D, Belvin M, Friedman LS. Nuclear
phospho-Akt increase predicts synergy of PI3K inhibition and doxorubicin in breast and ovarian
cancer. Sci Transl Med. 2010:48ra66.
WARBURG O. On the origin of cancer cells. Science. 1956:309–314. [PubMed: 13298683]
Warner JK, Wang JCY, Takenaka K, Doulatov S, McKenzie JL, Harrington L, Dick JE. Direct
evidence for cooperating genetic events in the leukemic transformation of normal human
hematopoietic cells. Leukemia. 2005:1794–1805. [PubMed: 16094415]

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 November 15.

Škrtić et al.

Page 14

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Xing J, Chen M, Wood CG, Lin J, Spitz MR, Ma J, Amos CI, Shields PG, Benowitz NL, Gu J, et al.
Mitochondrial DNA content: its genetic heritability and association with renal cell carcinoma. J
Natl Cancer Inst. 2008:1104–1112. [PubMed: 18664653]
Zhang Y, Spremulli LL. Roles of residues in mammalian mitochondrial elongation factor Ts in the
interaction with mitochondrial and bacterial elongation factor Tu. J Biol Chem. 1998:28142–
28148. [PubMed: 9774433]

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 November 15.

Škrtić et al.

Page 15

HIGHLIGHTS

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

•

Inhibition of mitochondrial translation has anti-leukemia activity

•

AML cells have higher mitochondrial biogenesis than normal hematopoietic
cells

•

Mitochondrial translation inhibition is a novel therapeutic strategy for AML

•

Tigecycline is a potential therapeutic agent for AML therapy

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 November 15.

Škrtić et al.

Page 16

SIGNIFICANCE

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

An important role of cytosolic translation has been well documented in the context of
cancer, but the functional importance of mitochondrial translation in leukemia has not
been well studied. Here, we used chemical and genetic approaches to show that
mitochondrial translation inhibition selectively kills leukemic vs normal cells, including
those defined functionally as progenitors and stem cells. This may be attributable to the
higher rate of mitochondrial biogenesis found in leukemic cells. Given these results and
the known pharmacology and toxicology of tigecycline in humans, targeting
mitochondrial translation inhibition as a therapeutic strategy in human leukemia is
attractive.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 November 15.

Škrtić et al.

Page 17

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 1. Chemical screen for compounds targeting leukemic cells identifies antimicrobial
tigecycline

(A) Drugs were added to TEX and ENL-1 cells (3 experiments each). Viability of cells after
72 hrs was determined by MTS staining and the results expressed as a percent of matching
DMSO-treated controls (B) TEX, human and murine leukemia cells were incubated in
triplicate experiments with drugs at concentrations shown for 72 hrs and viability was
determined by MTS (human cells) or ViaCount (murine cells) staining and results expressed
as a percent of results for untreated cells. (C) TEX cells were exposed to 5 or 10 μM of
tigecycline (TIG) and Annexin V staining by flow cytometry was used to discriminate viable
cells. Data represent the mean of Annexin V positive cells from a representative experiment
(n=3). (D) Primary AML (1° AML) (n=20) and normal hematopoietic cells (n=5) were
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 November 15.

Škrtić et al.

Page 18

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

treated with increasing concentrations of tigecycline for 48 hrs. The proportion of viable
cells was measured by Annexin-PI flow cytometry to calculate the yield of viable cells
shown as a percent viable DMSO-treated cells in the same experiment. (E) Primary AML
(n=7) and normal hematopoietic cells (n=5) were treated with 5 μM tigecycline and plated in
clonogenic growth assays. Values shown are the percent of colonies obtained compared to
DMSO-treated cells. (F) Cells from an AML patient and Lin− CD34+ enriched human cord
blood cells were treated with 5 μM tigecycline or DMSO for 48 hrs in vitro and then
injected into femurs of irradiated NOD/SCID mice preconditioned with anti-CD122. Six
weeks later, the percent of human CD45+CD33+CD19− cells in femurs was measured by
FACS. ***P < 0.0001, N.S. not significant P > 0.05 as determined by the unpaired student’s
t test. Error bars represent mean +/− S.D. See also Table S1 and Figure S1.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 November 15.

Škrtić et al.

Page 19

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 2. Haplo-Insufficiency Profiling in S. Cerevisiae identifies mitochondrial translation as
target of tigecycline in eukaryotic cells

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

(A) A pool of ~6000 S. Cerevisiae heterozygote mutant strains were cultured in the presence
or absence of tigecycline, chloramphenicol (CAP), linezolid (LIN) or doxorubicin (DOX) in
YPGE media and those showing altered growth responses relative to control cells identified.
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) processes are shown. (B) Commonly enriched genes
involved in mitochondrial translation identified from this GSEA analysis are shown in the
Venn diagram (B) and the heat map (C). Red color denotes higher gene enrichment in the
presence of drug relative to control cells. See also Figure S2.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 November 15.

Škrtić et al.

Page 20

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 3. Tigecycline inhibits mitochondrial protein translation

(A) Effects of increasing concentrations of tigecycline on protein levels of Cox-1, Cox-2,
Cox-4, Grp78, XIAP, Actin and Tubulin in TEX, OCI-AML2 and 2 AML patients’ cells
treated for 48 hrs. (B) Effects of increasing concentrations of tigecycline on Cox-1, Cox-2,
and Cox-4 mRNA expression in TEX and AML patient cells treated for 48 hrs. Transcript
levels were determined by quantitative RT-PCR and normalized relative to 18S. Data is
shown as mean fold change compared to untreated controls (n=3). (C) Mitochondrial
isolates from OCI-AML2 cells were treated with buffer control, tigecycline or
chloramphenicol for 5 min at 30°C, followed by the addition of [3H]-leucine. Incorporation
of [3H]-leucine was measured after 60 min. (D) Effect of increasing concentrations of
tigecycline and chloramphenicol on Complex I, II and IV enzyme activities relative to
citrate synthase activity in TEX cells treated for 72 hrs. Values shown are average of 3
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 November 15.

Škrtić et al.

Page 21

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

independent experiments. *P < 0.05, ** P < 0.005, as determined by Tukey’s test after Oneway ANOVA analysis. (E) Oxygen consumption was measured in TEX, AML patient and
normal hematopoietic cells treated for 12 or 24 hrs with tigecycline. The arrow denotes
addition of 1.2 μM oligomycin. Values shown are average of 3 independent experiments. (F)
Effect of increasing concentrations of tigecycline on mitochondrial membrane potential (Δψ)
in TEX, AML patients’ and normal hematopoietic cells treated for 12 or 24 hrs and then
stained with JC-1 dye for flow cytometry. Shown are the average Red/Green ratios derived
for tigecycline-treated cells expressed as a percent of that in DMSO-treated control cells
from the same experiments (n=3 per cell type). Error bars represent mean +/− S.D. See also
Figure S3.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 November 15.

Škrtić et al.

Page 22

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 4. Inhibition of mitochondrial translation is functionally important for tigecyclineinduced death of leukemia cells

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

(A) TEX and primary AML cells were treated under different oxygen concentrations for 48
hrs. Viability (Annexin-PI) and mitochondrial membrane potential (B) (Δψ, Red/Green ratio
of JC-1) were assessed by flow cytometry. Results are shown relative to DMSO treated
control. (C) Total proteins were extracted from TEX cells and analyzed by immunoblotting
for Cox1, Cox2, Cox4, and Tubulin. (D) P493 lymphoma cells carrying a tetracyclinerepressible human Myc construct were cultured in the presence and absence of 0.1 μg/ml
(0.22 μM) of tetracycline for 96 hrs. Total proteins were extracted and analyzed by
immunoblotting for Myc and actin. (E) Mitochondrial mass was measured by incubating
cells with mitotracker Green FM dye, and subsequent flow cytometry. Median fluorescence
intensity is shown relative to wild-type p493 cells. (F) DNA was extracted from cells and
qPCR was used to measure levels of mitochondrial ND1 relative to human globulin (HGB).
ND1/HGB ratio is shown relative to wild-type p493 cells. (G) Oxygen consumption was
measured and is shown after 15 min incubation in cell chambers. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.005 as
determined by unpaired student’s t test. (H) P493 cells with or without repressed Myc were
plated in different oxygen concentrations (20%, 0.2%, and 0%) for 72 hrs. The proportion of
viable cells was measured by Annexin-PI flow cytometry and calculated as the percent of
viable cells compared to 20% oxygen control condition. (I) P493 cells with or without
repressed MYC were washed and then treated with increasing concentrations of tigecycline
for 48 hrs. After treatment, the number of viable cells was determined by trypan blue
staining. Data represent the mean number of viable cells from 1 of 3 independent
experiments. Error bars represent mean +/− S.D.

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 November 15.

Škrtić et al.

Page 23

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 5. Alternative genetic and chemical strategies to inhibit mitochondrial translation have
anti-leukemia effects

(A) TEX cells were infected with EF-Tu or IF-3 targeting shRNAs or control sequences in
lentiviral vectors. Six days post-transduction, EF-Tu and IF-3 mRNA expression relative to
18S (A) and protein expression determinations (B) were made by qRT-PCR and
immunoblotting, respectively. (C) Effects on mRNA expression of Cox-1, Cox-2, Cox-4 and
Tubulin were determined by q-RT-PCR using 18S RNA as an internal standard (1 of 3
representative experiments shown). (D) Effects on expression of Cox-1, Cox-2, Cox-4 and
Tubulin protein were determined by immunoblotting (a representative experiment is shown).
(E) Viable cells were measured by trypan blue staining and cell death by Annexin-V
staining. Data from 1 of 3 independent experiments are shown. Additional cells treated in
the same way were used to measure effects on other parameters. (F) Effects on
mitochondrial membrane potential (Δψ) were determined by staining cells with the JC-1 dye
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 November 15.

Škrtić et al.

Page 24

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

and then determining Red/Green ratios by flow cytometric analysis. (G) Effects on oxygen
consumption were determined as described in the supplemental experimental procedures.
Arrow denotes addition of 1.2 μM oligomycin. Results for 1 of 2 experiments with similar
outcomes are shown. Error bars represent mean +/− S.D. See also Figure S4.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 November 15.

Škrtić et al.

Page 25

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 6. Mitochondrial characteristics of AML and normal hematopoietic cells

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

(A) Baseline mitochondrial membrane potential values for AML and normal CD34+ cells
before and after uncoupling the potential with CCCP, as determined by staining the cells
with DilC1 (5). (B) Left panel shows mitochondrial DNA copy number determined in 7
AML patients and 6 normal hematopoietic samples. Right panel shows mitochondrial DNA
copy number determined in a primary AML sample after CD34+ and CD38+ fluorescenceactivated cell sorting and 2 normal hematopoietic samples. DNA was extracted from cells
and qPCR was performed for mitochondrial ND1 relative to human globulin (HGB). The
ND1/HGB ratio is shown relative to cells from one normal sample. (C) Mitochondrial mass
values for AML blasts (C), CD34+/CD38+ cells and CD34+/CD38− cells (D) and normal
CD34+ cells were determined by flow cytometric analysis of cells stained with Mitotracker
Green FM. Median fluorescence intensity (MFI) values are shown by comparison to the
MFI measured for one of the normal samples. (E) Comparison of resting oxygen
consumption rates of primary AML cells (n=4) and normal hematopoietic cells (n=5). (F)
Correlation analysis of mitochondrial mass (Mitotracker Green FM staining) and in vitro
toxicity to tigecycline (Annexin-V/PI staining) of primary AML cells (n=11) based on
results obtained at doses of 5 and 10 μM. *P < 0.05, as determined by Pearson correlation
coefficient. Error bars represent mean +/− S.D.

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 November 15.

Škrtić et al.

Page 26

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Figure 7. Tigecycline has in vivo activity in models of human leukemia in mice

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

(A) Human leukemia (OCI-AML2) cells were injected subcutaneously into the flank of
SCID mice. Seven days later, when tumors were palpable, mice were treated with
tigecycline (50 mg/kg or 100 mg/kg twice daily by i.p. injection), bortezomib (1 mg/kg
t.i.w.), daunorubicin (0.65 mg/kg t.i.w.) or vehicle control (n = 10 per group). Three weeks
after injection of cells, mice were sacrificed, tumors excised and the volume and mass of the
tumors were measured. The tumor mass and the mean volume are shown. **P < 0.005, as
determined by Tukey’s test after one-way ANOVA analysis. (B) Tumors from two control
mice, and three tigecycline-treated mice were excised after 5 days of treatment and total
proteins were extracted and analyzed by immunoblotting for Cox-1, Cox-2, Cox-4, and
tubulin. (C) Primary cells from 3 AML patients and Lin− CD34+ enriched human cord blood
cells (E) (Normal) were injected intra-femorally into irradiated female NOD/SCID mice.
Three weeks after injection, the mice were treated with tigecycline (100 mg/kg by i.p.
injection daily) or vehicle control (n = 10 per group) for three weeks. Following treatment,
human leukemia cell engraftment in the femur was measured by flow cytometric analysis of
human CD45+CD19−CD33+ cells. **P < 0.005 as determined by student’s t test. (D) Cells
from mice transplanted with one AML patient experiment were used to assess secondary
engraftment in a second generation of NOD/SCID mice. Equal numbers of viable leukemia
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 November 15.

Škrtić et al.

Page 27

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

cells from the bone marrow of control and tigecycline-treated mice were pooled and aliquots
injected into irradiated NOD/SCID mice, which were not treated with tigecycline. Six weeks
later, human leukemia cell engraftment in the femur was measured by flow cytometric
analysis for human CD45+CD19−CD33+ cells. Line represents median of engrafted human
cells. *P < 0.05, N.S. not significant P > 0.05 as determined by student’s t test. Error bars
represent mean +/− S.D. See also Figure S5.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 November 15.

Škrtić et al.

Page 28

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 8. Tigecycline has in vivo anti-leukemia activity in combination with AML agents
daunorubicin and cytarabine

(A) The effect of a 72 hour exposure of TEX and OCI-AML2 cells to different
concentrations of tigecycline in combination with daunorubicin or cytarabine on the viability
of the cells was measured by MTS assay after 72 hours of incubation. Data were analyzed
with Calcusyn software to generate a Combination index versus Fractional effect (cell death)
plot showing the effect of the combination of tigecycline with daunorubicin or cytarabine.
CI < 1 indicates synergism. (B) Human leukemia (OCI-AML2) cells were injected
subcutaneously into the flank of SCID mice. Six days after injection, when tumors were
palpable, mice were treated with tigecycline (50 mg/kg daily by i.p. injection) and/or
daunorubicin (0.65 mg/kg t.i.w. by i.p. injection) and/or cytarabine (10 mg/kg daily by i.p.
injection) or vehicle control (7 mice per treatment group). Another 2 weeks later, mice were
sacrificed, tumors excised and the volume and mass of the tumors were measured and mean
values determined. The tumor mass and the mean volume are shown. *P < 0.05, ** P <

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 November 15.

Škrtić et al.

Page 29

0.005, as determined by Tukey’s test after One-way ANOVA analysis. Error bars represent
mean +/− S.D. See also Figure S6.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 November 15.

