Determining Recommendations
TAILORx began recruiting patients in 2006 and completed
enrollment in 2010. Researchers will continue following
patients for 20 years. Analysis is ongoing, and full results about
whether chemotherapy improves outcomes for women with
higher recurrence scores are not expected for several years.
The trial included women aged 18 to 75 years at 1000 sites
in the United States, Australia, Canada, Ireland, New Zealand,
and Peru. In addition to following participants, researchers
have created a biospecimen bank that will enable them to ask
other research questions in the future and test additional gene
signatures.

I think we did a good job of
picking a recurrence score
below which patients would be
extremely unlikely to beneﬁt
from chemotherapy.
—Joseph Sparano, MD
Women with the lowest 21-gene recurrence score
(approximately 16% of the participants) were assigned to
receive hormone therapy alone, whereas women with a score
of 11 to 25 were randomly assigned to either hormone therapy
alone or hormone therapy plus chemotherapy. Women in the
higher score range (higher than 25) received both. These ranges
are lower than those traditionally used in other studies, which
define low risk as less than 18, intermediate risk as 18 to 30,
and high risk as 31 or higher. These lower score ranges were
established to minimize undertreatment in the trial according
to the National Cancer Institute.
“We felt there was high enough evidence to recommend
chemotherapy above these numbers because there is a 7% chance
of distant recurrence within 10 years,” Dr. Sparano says. “I think we

did a good job of picking a recurrence score below which patients
would be extremely unlikely to benefit from chemotherapy.”
In the trial, more than 1600 women had tumors with a 21-gene
recurrence score in the lowest range. They received an aromatase
inhibitor (60% of patients), tamoxifen (one-third of patients),
tamoxifen followed by an aromatase inhibitor (1% of patients),
treatments to suppress ovarian function (3% of patients), or other
unknown treatments (3% of patients). “The study provides the
highest evidence of clinical utility of a biomarker in patients with
early-stage breast cancer,” Dr. Sparano says.

Further Study
Dr. O’Regan notes that although the findings are reassuring, the
follow-up of 5 years was short, and she will be interested in the
results after women are followed for a longer period. In addition,
she states, “I’m not convinced we’ll find a magic cutoff point where
patients will benefit from chemotherapy through this study.”
Additional research questions that need to be answered
beyond this study are which genes are driving the cancers in
patients with higher recurrence scores and how endocrine
therapy can be improved for patients, she says.
Another study, the Rx for Positive Node, Endocrine
Responsive Breast Cancer (RxPONDER) trial, is investigating
whether chemotherapy benefits patients with node-positive
breast cancer who have low to intermediate Oncotype DX
scores. The study is being led by the Southwest Oncology
Group and will enroll 4000 women with recurrence scores of 25
or lower with early-stage, hormone receptor–positive, HER2negative breast cancer that involves 1 to 3 lymph nodes.

References
1. Sparano JA, Gray RJ, Makower DF, et al. Prospective validation of a 21-gene
expression assay in breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2015;373:2005-2014.
2. Swain SM. A step in the right direction. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24:3717-3718.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29879

Prenatal Exposure to Maternal Cancer With or Without Treatment
Does Not Impair Child Development

P

regnant women who are diagnosed with cancer can start
treatment immediately and do not need to terminate their
pregnancies according to results from a study presented at a
special session on cancer and pregnancy at the 2015 European
Cancer Congress, which took place September 25 to 29, 2015,
in Vienna, Austria. The study was simultaneously published in
The New England Journal of Medicine.1
The study assessed 129 children between the ages of 1 and 3
years who were born after prenatal exposure to cancer treatment
and who showed normal development of their mental processes
and heart function in comparison with a matching group of
children from the general population. The findings showed
that children suffer more from prematurity than chemotherapy
according to Frédéric Amant, MD, PhD, a gynecological
338

oncologist at the University Hospitals Leuven in Belgium and
the lead author of the study.
The children were from Belgium, the Netherlands, Italy,
and the Czech Republic and were matched with a similar
number of children of the same gestational age who were born
to mothers unaffected by cancer. Their general health and
mental development were examined when they were 18 months
old and again at the age of 3 years. At the age of 3 years, 47
of the children also had their heart function checked with
electrocardiograms and echocardiography.
The most common cancers among the mothers were breast
and hematological cancers. Of the children, 69% were exposed to
chemotherapy before birth, 3.1% were exposed to radiotherapy,
5.4% were exposed to chemotherapy and radiotherapy, 0.8%

Cancer

February 1, 2016

© SKYLINES / SHUTTERSTOCK.COM

were exposed to trastuzumab, 0.8% were exposed to interferon
B, and 10.1% were exposed to surgery alone. An additional
10.9% of the mothers received no treatment during pregnancy.
The investigators did not find significant differences in
mental development between those exposed to these therapies
and the control group, nor was the number of chemotherapy
cycles during pregnancy (ranging from 1 to 10) related to the
children’s outcome.
Among the key findings were the following:
• On the Bayley Scales of Infant Development, both groups
of children had a median average score of 101 for mental
development. The scores ranged from 56 to 145 for the
children exposed to cancer treatment and from 50 to
145 for the unexposed children (the higher the score, the
better).
• Premature birth had a larger effect on mental development
than chemotherapy. It also was more frequent among
children born to mothers with cancer, regardless of
whether or not they had received prenatal treatment,
in comparison with the general population. In most
cases, these children were born prematurely because of
a medical decision to induce preterm labor to continue
cancer treatment after the delivery, Dr. Amant says.
• Of the 47 patients who at the age of 3 years had their
cardiac function checked, 29 had been exposed to
chemotherapy, but in comparison with the control group
of children, there were no differences or abnormalities.
Dr. Amant cautions that although the data include many
types of chemotherapy, the findings cannot guarantee that all
types of chemotherapy are safe, nor can they determine the

effects of newer drugs, including targeted drugs. He notes that
researchers must look at larger numbers of children and larger
numbers exposed to each drug to document the potential effects
of individual drugs.
There is also a need for longer follow-up, and Professor
Amant and his colleagues will continue to follow these children
until the age of 18 years and enlarge the group. Furthermore,
they will investigate to what extent anticancer drugs are diluted
in the body during pregnancy as well as the psycho-emotional
needs of mothers and their partners.

Reference
1. Amant F, Vandenbroucke T, Verheecke M, et al. Pediatric outcome after maternal
cancer diagnosed during pregnancy. N Engl J Med. 2015;373:1824-1834.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29880

Breast Cancer Incidence and Death Increasing in Less-Developed
Countries

A

lthough breast cancer death rates are declining in most
high-income countries, they are on the rise, along
with incidence rates, in several low-income and middleincome countries, according to a study published in Cancer
Epidemiology, Biomarkers and Prevention.1
The findings come from a new report on global patterns
and trends in breast cancer led by Carol DeSantis, MPH, a
senior epidemiologist for the American Cancer Society. She
and her colleagues used data from the International Agency
for Research on Cancer and the World Health Organization to
examine international trends in incidence and death rates from
39 countries and 57 countries, respectively.
The researchers learned that breast cancer incidence rates
are increasing in the majority of countries, including those
with historically higher rates of the disease. The rates also are
increasing in regions with historically lower incidence rates,
including Latin America, Asia, and Africa. Rates are stable in
North America and Oceania and have declined in 4 European
countries and Israel.
In contrast, breast cancer death rates have declined in most
countries. The most rapid declines occurred in high-income

countries as a result of improved breast cancer treatment and
early detection through mammography. Nevertheless, the study
found that death rates have increased in 10 countries, primarily
economically transitioning nations in Central and South
America; these include Colombia, Ecuador, Japan, Brazil,
Egypt, Guatemala, Kuwait, Mauritius, Mexico, and Moldova.
The authors say the rise may be related to an increase
in risk factors associated with economic development and
urbanization: obesity, adaptation of a Western-type diet,
physical inactivity, delayed childbearing, having fewer children,
earlier age at menarche, and shorter duration of breastfeeding.
The authors note the need for greater awareness concerning
the disease and the benefits of early detection, along with
improved access to treatment, particularly in economically
transitioning countries.

Reference
1. DeSantis CE, Bray F, Ferlay J, Lortet-Tieulent J, Anderson BO, Jemal A.
International variation in female breast cancer incidence and mortality rates.
Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2015;24:1495-1506.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29881

Content in this section does not reﬂect any ofﬁcial policy or medical opinion of the American Cancer Society or of the publisher unless otherwise noted. © American Cancer Society, 2016.

Cancer

February 1, 2016

339

