Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 9

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Editorial

Ghrelin receptor controls obesity by fat burning
Yuxiang Sun
activating thermogenesis might be a powerful means of
combating age-associated obesity. However, currently
little is known about thermogenic regulation during aging.
WAT and BAT have distinct characteristics and
functions. WAT stores energy as triglycerides in large
unilocular lipid droplets; WAT supplies energy to the body
via lipolysis. In contrast, BAT contains adipocytes with
multi-locular lipid droplets and high-density mitochondria;
BAT consumes energy to produce heat [1]. Upon cold or
diet challenge, nerve endings of the sympathetic nervous
system (SNS) release norepinephrine (NE) to activate β3adrenergic receptors (β3-AR) in brown adipocytes. The
β3-AR signaling activates protein kinase A (PKA), which
then phosphorylates hormone-sensitive lipase (HSL) to
increase lipolysis of lipid droplets; this results in release
of glycerol and free fatty acids (FFA). Uncoupling protein
1 (UCP1) is the hallmark regulator of thermogenesis. FFA
activates UCP1 in mitochondria to pump protons into the
mitochondrial matrix to dissipate heat [1].
Ghrelin is the only known circulating orexigenic
hormone; it promotes meal initiation, adiposity, and insulin
resistance. The dogmatic view is that ghrelin regulates

Obesity has reached epidemic proportions in all age
groups, and is more pronounced in the elderly. Obesity
is the most prominent risk factor for insulin resistance,
type 2 diabetes, and cardiovascular disease. Obesity is
centered in adipose tissues, which are designated as either
energy-storing white adipose tissue (WAT) or energyburning brown adipose tissue (BAT). Emerging evidences
show that non-shivering thermogenesis plays a crucial
role in regulation of energy homeostasis in both rodents
and humans [1-3]. Thermogenesis positively correlates
with energy expenditure, but negatively correlates with
body fat. Dysfunction of thermogenesis decreases energy
expenditure, promoting obesity. Aging is associated with
severe thermogenic impairment. PET/CT scans show that
BAT declines 95% in mass and 75% in activity in old men
compared to young men [2]. Beside the classical brown
adipocytes present in BAT, brown-adipocyte-like “beige”
cells residing in WAT also have thermogenic properties
[3]. Aging is associated with programmed loss of “beige”
cells [4]. Animal studies reveal that thermogenic activation
in brown and beige adipocytes protects against obesity.
These discoveries suggest that pharmacologically

Figure 1: Schematic diagram of GHS-R mediated thermogenic regulation in brown adipocytes. GHS-R may regulate
thermogenesis in BAT via the following signaling pathways: 1) Ablation of GHS-R stimulates SNS-mediated NE release, which in turn
induces β3-AR expression, subsequently activating thermogenic signaling cascades in BAT. This involves activation of thermogenic
signaling pathway PKA-CREB-UCP1 and lipolytic pathway PKA-HSL-UCP1. 2) Ablation of GHS-R enhances increases DNA and protein
synthesis of mitochondria, thus increasing mitochondrial biogenesis. 3) Ablation of GHS-R augments mitochondrial dynamics, enhancing
both mitochondrial fission and fusion; this restores mitochondrial architecture and improves mitochondrial homeostasis. Collectively,
GHS-R ablation increases thermogenesis in BAT by activating thermogenic signaling, increasing mitochondrial biogenesis, and enhancing
mitochondrial dynamics. (Modified from Aging 6:1019).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6470

Oncotarget

metabolism primarily by affecting food intake. Growth
Hormone Secretagogue Receptor (GHS-R) is the receptor
for ghrelin. We and others have shown that GHS-R is
highly expressed in hypothalamus, but its expression in
peripheral tissues is very low in young mice. Intriguingly,
circulating ghrelin and GHS-R expression in the brain
and adipose tissues increase during aging [4, 5]. We have
reported in Aging Cell that old Ghsr-null mice are lean and
insulin-sensitive, exhibiting a healthier metabolic profile
similar to that of young animals [6]. Metabolic profiling
analysis indicates that the reduced adiposity observed in
old Ghsr-null mice is due to increased energy expenditure,
but not due to reduced food intake or increased physical
activity [6]. Old Ghsr-null mice have higher core body
temperature and show better resistance to cold, consistent
with increased thermogenic activity in BAT [6]. Our
findings indicate for the first time that ghrelin signaling
plays an important role in thermogenesis during aging;
GHS-R regulates energy homeostasis by burning fat to
generate heat, not by reducing long term energy intake.
This challenges the dogmatic view of ghrelin’s regulation
of lipid metabolism via its orexigenic property, and reveals
an exciting possibility that suppressing ghrelin signaling
may protect against age-associated obesity by enhancing
thermogenesis.
Mitochondria are the powerhouses of cells;
mitochondrial energetics is determined by biogenesis and
dynamics (consisting of fission and fusion). Dysfunctions
of mitochondrial energetics is linked to dysfunction of
aging neuronal and muscular systems [7], but the roles of
mitochondria in thermogenic regulation during aging are
not clear. Our recent studies recently published in Aging
have revealed that GHS-R ablation activates thermogenic
signaling in BAT by enhancing mitochondrial biogenesis,
and improving both mitochondrial fission and fusion in
brown fat (Figure 1) [8]. In addition, we have detected
increased norepinephrine in the circulation and higher
β3-AR expression in BAT of old Ghsr-null mice; and
that GHS-R knockdown in brown adipocytes directly
stimulates thermogenic activity. These results suggest that
GHS-R may, via both central and peripheral mechanisms,
regulate the thermogenic signaling cascade in BAT.
Collectively, our studies demonstrate that GHS-R is
a novel thermogenic regulator which plays an important
role in lipid metabolism during aging. Increased circulating
ghrelin and up-regulation of GHS-R during aging may
contribute to age-associated thermogenic impairment, thus
increasing incidences of obesity in aging. GHS-R ablation
prevents the age-associated decline of thermogenesis,
thus reducing obesity and improving insulin sensitivity.
The healthy phenotype of Ghsr-null mice remarkably
resembles the effects of the most recognized anti-aging
intervention, calorie restriction. Collectively, these “proofof-concept” studies suggest that GHS-R antagonists may
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

serve as unique anti-obesity agents, combating obesity by
enhancing thermogenesis and shifting metabolic state from
obesogenic to thermogenic. Further studies are needed
to identify the sites of action and cellular/molecular
mechanisms, and to determine the role of GHS-R in
thermogenic dysfunction in humans.
Yuxiang Sun: USDA/ARS Children’s Nutrition Research
Center, Huffington Center on Aging, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX, USA
Correspondence: Yuxiang Sun, email yuxiangs@bcm.edu
Received: March 13, 2015
Published: March 27, 2015

References
1.	 Cannon B and Nedergaard J. Physiol Rev. 2004; 84:277359.

6471

2.	

Pfannenberg C et al. Diabetes. 2010; 59:1789-1793.

3.	

Seale P et al. J Clin Invest. 2011; 121:96-105.

4.	

Rogers NH et al Aging Cell. 2012; 11:1074-1083.

5.	

Sun Y et al. Endocrinology. 2007; 148:1323-1329.

6.	

Lin L et al. Aging Cell. 2011; 10:996-1010.

7.	

Lopez-Lluch G et al. Exp Gerontol. 2008; 43: 813-819.

8.	

Lin L et al Aging (Albany NY). 2014; 6:1019-1032.

Oncotarget

