Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 48

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper: Gerotarget (Focus on Aging)

Azadiradione ameliorates polyglutamine expansion disease in
Drosophila by potentiating DNA binding activity of heat shock
factor 1
Vinod K. Nelson1,7,*, Asif Ali1,*, Naibedya Dutta1, Suvranil Ghosh1, Manas Jana1,
Arnab Ganguli2, Andrei Komarov3, Soumyadip Paul1, Vibha Dwivedi4, Subhrangsu
Chatterjee5, Nihar R. Jana6, Subhash C. Lakhotia4, Gopal Chakrabarti2, Anup K.
Misra1, Subhash C. Mandal7 and Mahadeb Pal1
1

Division of Molecular Medicine, Bose Institute, Kolkata, West Bengal, India

2

Dr. B. C. Guha Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, University of Calcutta, Kolkata, West Bengal, India

3

Cellecta Inc, Mountain View, California, United States of America

4

Department of Zoology, Cytogenetics Laboratory, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, India

5

Department of Biophysics, Bose Institute, Kolkata, West Bengal, India

6

Cellular and Molecular Neuroscience Laboratory, National Brain Research Institute, Manesar, Gurgaon, Haryana, India

7

Department of Pharmaceutical Technology, Pharmacognosy and Phytotherapy Laboratory, Jadavpur University, Jadavpur,
West Bengal, India
*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Mahadeb Pal, email: mahadeb@jcbose.ac.in
Keywords: heat shock factor 1, HSF1, neurodegenerative diseases, small molecule, azadiradione, Gerotarget
Received: June 27, 2016	

Accepted: August 21, 2016	

Published: October 26, 2016

ABSTRACT
Aggregation of proteins with the expansion of polyglutamine tracts in the brain
underlies progressive genetic neurodegenerative diseases (NDs) like Huntington’s
disease and spinocerebellar ataxias (SCA). An insensitive cellular proteotoxic stress
response to non-native protein oligomers is common in such conditions. Indeed,
upregulation of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) function and its target protein chaperone
expression has shown promising results in animal models of NDs. Using an HSF1
sensitive cell based reporter screening, we have isolated azadiradione (AZD)
from the methanolic extract of seeds of Azadirachta indica, a plant known for its
multifarious medicinal properties. We show that AZD ameliorates toxicity due to
protein aggregation in cell and fly models of polyglutamine expansion diseases to
a great extent. All these effects are correlated with activation of HSF1 function and
expression of its target protein chaperone genes. Notably, HSF1 activation by AZD is
independent of cellular HSP90 or proteasome function. Furthermore, we show that
AZD directly interacts with purified human HSF1 with high specificity, and facilitates
binding of HSF1 to its recognition sequence with higher affinity. These unique findings
qualify AZD as an ideal lead molecule for consideration for drug development against
NDs that affect millions worldwide.

INTRODUCTION

Joseph disease MJD/SCA3), several spinocerebellar
ataxias (SCA), and Huntington’s, Parkinson’s- and
Alzheimer’s diseases affect millions of people worldwide
[1, 2]. People affected with these diseases survive in a
debilitated condition, which imposes a heavy financial and
psychological burden on the society. Till date, there is no

Neurodegenerative
diseases
(NDs)
like
polyglutamine (polyQ) based diseases which include
spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy (SBMA), dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy (DRPLA), Machadowww.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

78281

Oncotarget

RESULTS

definitive cure as the current treatment options offer only
disease-specific management strategies such as neuroleptic
and antipsychotic drugs for temporary relief of disease
symptoms [3, 4].
Accumulation of non-native protein aggregates,
defective cellular heat shock response (HSR) and
compromised protein quality control pathways are
common hallmarks of various NDs [5-8]. In normal cells
heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), the central regulator of HSR,
is sequestered in the cytoplasm in a repressive complex
assembled with HSP90, p23, immunophilin, HSP70,
and HSP40 [9-12]. Exposure to elevated temperature
or a proteotoxic stress results in the disassembly of this
repressive complex so that the released monomeric
HSF1 molecules assemble into DNA binding competent
homotrimer form. HSF1 as a homotrimer binds to the
recognition element HSE (repetitive 5’-nGAAn-3’) on its
target chaperone genes to activate their expression which
helps in refolding of mis- or unfolded proteins or removal
of the non-native protein aggregates [13]. Involvement
of ribonucleoprotein complexes in the trimerization
and activation of HSF1 has been demonstrated [14, 15].
Chemical inhibition of HSP90 and proteasome also results
in HSF1 activation [12, 16].
Forced upregulation of HSF1 and or its target genes
such as HSP70 was shown to reduce protein aggregate
accumulation, associated toxicity, and diseases symptoms
in C. elegans and mouse models of Huntington’s disease
[5, 6, 17]. As expected HSF1 downregulation was
also associated with enhanced polyglutamine-induced
toxicity [18]. Several small molecule activators of HSF1
obtained through screening of small molecule libraries
and natural products, have been reported and are in
various developmental stages of drug development [3,
19]. Nevertheless, given the severity of disease burden on
the patients and the society, compounds with novel and
unique functional mechanisms are desired in the repertoire
to explore better treatment options. A small molecule with
a unique mode of action is also desired to obtain deeper
insights into the molecular mechanisms of function of
HSF1.
We report here azadiradione (AZD) as an inducer
of HSF1 activity. We obtained AZD through screening
of methanolic extract of Azadirachta indica seeds by
cell-based reporter activity assay coupled purification
approach. Azadirachta indica, locally known as Neem,
has been in use in the traditional medicine for treatment
of many diseases because of its anti-inflammatory, antianxiety activities, and for enhancement of cognitive
ability [20, 21]. We show here that treatment with AZD
efficiently ameliorates polyglutamine (polyQ) protein
induced toxicity in the cellular and fruit fly models. The
ameliorating effects were correlated with AZD induced
upregulation of heat shock protein chaperone (HSP)
expression mediated by direct interaction with HSF1
protein.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Identification and purification of azadiradione
from neem seeds as an activator of HSF1 by cell
based reporter assays
Screening for activator of HSF1 was carried
out using cell-based reporter system harboring renilla
luciferase (Rluc) and GFP independently under the
control of six tandem copies of HSE (6xHSE). The
reporter constructs were stably integrated into the genome
of HCT116 cells by lentiviral transduction [22, 23].
Incubation of the reporter cells with the methanolic extract
of neem seeds resulted in the activation of both GFP and
Rluc reporters in a dose-dependent manner (Figure. 1A).
To understand the nature of the compound, the activity was
purified by several rounds of silica gel chromatography
using solvents of various polarities to collect the most
active fraction. The purification was verified by an increase
in the specific activity by Rluc assay at each purification
step (Figure 1A). Finally, an active molecule was purified,
and the obtained compound was found to be more than
95% pure by thin layer chromatography (TLC) and highperformance liquid chromatography (HPLC) techniques.
Electrospray ionization (ESI) mass spectrometer analysis
indicated the mass of the compound to be 450.7953 Dalton
(Figure S1A). The molecular structure of the compound
as azadiradione (AZD) was confirmed by analyzing
the data obtained from ESI mass- and 1H and 13C NMR
spectroscopy as well as by analytical HPLC analyses
(Figure 1B, S1A-C).

Azadiradione induces HSF1 activity in cells
Hyperphosphorylation, ability to bind the HSE,
and activation of transcription of chaperone genes are
signatures of HSF1 activation process [24]. To test the
activity of HSF1, whole cell extract (WCE) of HEK293
cells pre-treated with AZD or DMSO or heat shock (HS,
as positive control), were prepared. The HEK293 cells
used here carried a stably expressed FLAG-tagged HSF1
protein to monitor HSF1 through anti-FLAG antibody
(Figure S3G). We did not see any change in the HSF1
sensitivity to heat shock or AZD due to its overexpression
(data not shown). As revealed by electrophoretic mobility
shift assay (EMSA), WCE prepared from AZD or HS
treated cells showed enhancement of HSE binding
to similar level (Figure 1C, compare lanes 1-3 & 7).
Formation of a supershifted complex by addition of antiFLAG antibody indicated the presence of FLAG-HSF1 in
the complex (Figure 1C, compare lanes 3 & 5, and 7 &
9). (The band moving faster than the HSE-HSF1 complex
as shown by an asterisk may be indicative of a complex
formed on the HSE by Ku70/80 in the absence of heat
78282

Oncotarget

shock as reported earlier [25]). Activation of HSF1 by
AZD in the cell was indicated by hyperphosphorylation
of HSF1 compared to vehicle treated sample as estimated
by relative retardation in mobility during electrophoresis
in a denaturing polyacrylamide gel detected by
immunoblotting. A phosphatase (CIP) treatment led to
collapse of slower moving HSF1 species to a relatively
faster moving species like that in vehicle treated samples
(Figure 1D). A transcriptional activation of HSF1 by
AZD treatment was indicated by dose-dependent increase
in the expression of its targets HSP70A1A (denoted as
HSP70 in all subsequent experiments) and HSP27. Like
the conventional heat shock [19, 26-28], AZD treatment
provided cytoprotection against lethal heat shock stress
(45ºC for 1 h) in a dose-dependent manner (Figure S2A).
Results of two indepentdent experiments support that AZD
mediates its function through HSF1: a) shRNA-mediated

downregulation of HSF1 reduced expression of HSPs by
AZD treatment compared to scrambled shRNA treated
cells (Figure 1E-1F) and b) AZD failed to induce HSP70
in mouse embryonic fibroblast (MEF) cells where HSF1
was completely deleted (MEFHSF1-/-) while MEF cells
carrying normal HSF1 gene (MEFWT) induced HSP70 as
usual (Figure 1G).

Azadiradione reduces protein aggregate
formation in cell model of polyglutamine disorder
Classical heat shock response (HSR) upregulates
expression of HSPs that are capable of refolding of
unfolded or misfolded to their native state in the cell [29].
HSR can also activate ubiquitin-dependent proteasome
pathway that helps clear accumulation of protein aggregate
in cells [5, 16].

Figure 1: Azadiradione (AZD) activates HSF1 and its target heat shock chaperone genes. A. Flowchart of stepwise

purification of AZD accompanied by an increase in specific activity measured by GFP expression (next to phase contrast images of cells)
and luciferase assays as indicated. H, n-hexane; values are mean±SEM, n ≥ 3. B. Chemical structure of AZD. C. AZD induces DNA-binding
ability of HSF1 in cells determined by EMSA using γ-32pATP-labeled HSE (~1 ng/reaction) as described in the materials and methods.
Whole cell extract (WCE) (50 µg) prepared from HEK293 cells expressing FLAG-HSF1 pre-treated with AZD or DMSO or HS (at 42°C/1
h) were used as indicated. The reactions were resolved on a 4% acrylamide and bis-acrylamide (29:1) gel and autoradiographed. D. AZD
treatment induces HSF1 hyperphosphorylation like HS in WCE used in (C) which was erased upon phosphatase treatment determined by
immunoblot with α-FLAG antibody. E. AZD treatment induces HSP70 and HSP27 transcription by HS in HEK293 cells that is sensitive to
shRNA-mediated HSF1 downregulation (shHSF1) as determined by RT-PCR assay. Representative agarose gels of PCR products obtained
using equivalent amounts of cDNAs as templates prepared from transcripts isolated from cells treated as indicated. F. Densitometric
quantitation of HSP70 and HSP27 bands in agarose gels as shown in panel E from three independent experiments. **p < 0.01;***p <
0.001. G. AZD activates HSP70 only in MEF cells carrying wild type HSF1 MEFWT gene but not in MEF cells that have been deleted both
copies of HSF1 gene (MEFHSF1-/-). Expression of HSP70 mRNA was measured by semiquantitative RT-PCR assay. The PCR products were
resolved in agarose gels visualized by ethidium bromide staining.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

78283

Oncotarget

AZD was tested for its ability to reduce levels
of aggregation of an aggregation-prone ataxin130QGFP fusion protein transiently expressed in mouse
neuroblastoma (Neuro-2a) cells compared to vehicle
treated samples. Cells grown to ~50% confluency were
treated with DMSO (vehicle control), three different
concentrations of AZD or celastrol (positive control) for
48 h. To correlate the results with chaperone function,
cells are treated identically in duplicate for estimating
the HSP70 transcript levels under the different treatment
conditions. Results showed that with increasing
concentration of AZD there was a gradual decrease of
ataxin130Q-GFP aggregate levels in cells as measured by

GFP fluorescence. Interestingly, AZD action in reducing
the ataxin130Q-GFP aggregate levels was better than
that of celastrol (positive control). In agreement with
the reduction in aggregation, HSP70 transcript levels
were also increased in AZD treated samples in a dosedependent manner, indicating a correlation between the
AZD mediated protein aggregation resolving activity
and elevation of HSP70 expression (Figure. 2A-2C) [30].
To compare the relative toxicity of AZD with celastrol,
Neuro-2a cells were treated with increasing doses of
these two compounds for 24 h followed by measuring the
fraction of surviving cells using the MTT assay. The AZD
was found to be relatively less toxic than celastrol (Figure

Figure 2: AZD reduces protein aggregation and associated toxicity in the cell. A. Effect on ataxin130Q-GFP aggregation by

AZD, or celastrol, (Cel) or DMSO as indicated in Neuro-2a cells. Scale bar 10 µm. B. The aggregates were counted and plotted after 48
h treatment, 450 cells were counted for each treatment, ***p < 0.001. C. Ethidium bromide stained agarose gel showing relative levels
of HSP70 (mHSP70) transcripts isolated from cells subjected to identical treatments in duplicate as represented in panel (A) estimated by
semiquantitative RT-PCR assays. D. Comparison of sensitivity of Neuro-2a cells to AZD or celastrol after 24 h treatment estimated by MTT
assay. Data are mean±SEM, n ≥ 3
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

78284

Oncotarget

2D). Sensitivity slightly increased in 72 h assay condition;
about 20% cell died in 10 µM AZD compared to 80%
by celastrol (Figure S2B). Celastrol has been shown to
work through inhibition of HSP90 as well as proteasome
function [26, 31].

DMSO fed 127Q expressing larvae were immunostained
for HSP70 and polyQ inclusion bodies. As shown, AZD
treatment resulted in a robust induction of HSP70 protein
and suppression of 127Q aggregates when compared with
those from DMSO-treated larvae (Figure 3D). HSP70
overexpression and associated effect appeared to be due
to activation of HSF by AZD treatment rather than due
to transcriptional induction of HSF gene [6] since qPCR
analysis of cDNA samples used in panel C did not show
any increase in levels of of HSF transcripts in AZD treated
samples (not shown). Thus, we believe that AZD treatment
restrained polyQ induced damage in fly eye through
activation of HSF and the consequent elevated expression
of HSP70 protein.

Effect of azadiradione on fruit fly model of poly-Q
disease
A polypeptide carrying expanded polyglutamine
repeats (127Q residues/127Q) under UAS promoter was
over-expressed predominantly in the larval eye imaginal
discs of fruit flies using the eye-specific GMR-GAL4
driver [32]. An overexpression of the protein resulted in
the retinal degeneration and defective eye development
in the adult fly (Figure 3A). GMR-GAL4 > UAS-127Q
and wild type OregonR+ larvae were grown on food
supplemented with AZD or DMSO (vehicle control) from
1st instar larval stage to adult stage to examine if AZD has
any effect on retinal development in the 127Q expressing
flies. We examined adult fly eye morphology as well as
the organization of the ommatidial arrays through the
nail polish imprints. 127Q overexpression in the vehicle
control (DMSO-fed) flies resulted in severe degeneration
of retina including near complete disorganization
of ommatidial arrays [33]. Interestingly, AZD
supplementation suppressed the damage to these structures
significantly so that some indications of ommatidial arrays
were distinctly noticeable (Figure 3A: c vs d and c’ vs
d’). The wild type Oregon R+ larvae continuously fed
on either AZD or DMSO alone till adult stage developed
normal eye morphology with the characteristic ommatidial
array architecture. These results indicate that AZD is not
toxic to the flies (Figure 3A, a vs. b, and a’ vs. b’).
We next examined the functionality of eyes through
phototaxis-assay which provides a good estimate of vision
of flies as they are provided a choice between illuminated
and dark chambers. The GMR-GAL4 > UAS-127Q
expressing 1 day, 5 days or 10 days old adult flies, fed
as larvae on AZD or DMSO supplemented food, were
subjected to phototaxis assay. As shown in Figure 3B,
DMSO-treated 127Q expressing flies were almost blind
by day 10 while those reared on AZD supplemented food
retained fairly good vision as a majority of them (~75% of
age-matched wild type flies) perceived light and moved
to the illuminated chamber during the assay period [33].
To examine if the recovery in the retinal damage and
vision following AZD treatment was related to elevated
HSP70 expression, qPCR was carried out using the cDNA
prepared from the total RNA isolated from fly heads.
Expression of HSP70 transcripts was significantly elevated
in AZD treated samples compared to DMSO, in wild type
as well as in 127Q expressing samples. A good correlation
between HSP70 and the suppression of polyQ damage
(Figure 3C-3D) suggests that AZD reduced polyQ toxicity
through induction of chaperones. Eye discs from AZD or
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Azadiradione does not interfere with proteasome
or HSP90 activity
Inhibition of ubiquitin-proteasome and HSP90
activities also results in HSF1 activation [13]. Both of
these activities that are involved in either refolding,
or degradation and clearance of unfolded proteins are
essential in a healthy cell [16]. Small molecule activators
of HSF1 identified so far were shown to function either by
inhibition of HSP90, proteasome or TRiC/CCT [3].
To test effect of AZD on proteasome function,
HEK293 cells were treated with three concentrations
of AZD, or DMSO or a known proteasome inhibitor
bortezomib (as a positive control) for 16 h and levels of
poly-ubiquitinated proteins (P-Ub) were estimated by
immunoblotting. Relative inductions of HSP70 protein
levels were also measured in these samples to correlate
proteasome inhibition with the HSF1 activation (Figure
4A). Comparison of relative proteasome activity versus
HSP70 expression between AZD and bortezomib treated
samples revealed that proteasome activity after AZD
treatment increased slightly though gradually while
HSP70 protein levels were enhanced in dose-dependent
manner. Bortezomib treatment did not show a significant
induction of HSP70 while showed a huge increase in
P-Ub signals (Figures 4A-4B). Low sensitivity of HSP70
transcription in response to bortezomib was also observed
by others in HEK293 [23, 34]. Therefore, it appears that
the elevated HSP70 expression following AZD treatment
is independent of proteasome function.
To test the effect on HSP90 activity HEK293 cells
were treated with three concentrations of AZD or DMSO,
or geldanamycin which is a known HSP90 inhibitor (as
the positive control) (Figure 4C). Relative stabilities of
HSP90 client proteins, such as Akt and Raf1 in whole cell
extracts were estimated by western blotting. As the data
in Figure 4C-4D show, levels of both the Akt and Raf1
client proteins were significantly reduced in geldanamycin
treated WCEs. However, the WCE from AZD treated cells
showed little change in the levels of these two proteins,
even with increasing concentrations of AZD. The levels
78285

Oncotarget

Figure 3: AZD feeding ameliorates 127Q (polyQ) induced eye defect and vision in the fruit fly. A. Dietary supplementation

of AZD improved eye morphology and structure of ommatidial arrays (a-c’ vs. b-d’) damaged by polyQ expression. B. AZD supplementation
significantly improved the vision defect caused by polyQ expression in the fly eyes as determined by phototaxis assay. Shown are the
proportion (% on Y-axis; N = 75 flies in each case) of wild type and polyQ expressing flies (as indicated on the top) moving to the
illuminated chamber on different days (X-axis; ** and *** indicate P < 0.01 and < 0.001), respectively, for comparison between DMSO
and AZD treated polyQ flies. C. Dietary supplementation of AZD induces levels of HSP70 transcripts (Y-axis) in the head of the flies not
expressing or expressing polyQ (X-axis). Data are mean±SEM, n ≥ 3. D. Compared to DMSO (upper row) dietary supplementation of
AZD induces expression of HSP70 and reduces the level of polyQ in retinal cells as detected by immunostaining as indicated. Individual or
merged staining in the confocal projection images are indicated on top of each column. Scale bar 20 micrometer.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

78286

Oncotarget

of HSP70 and HSP90 proteins in geldanamycin and AZD
treated samples increased in dose dependent manner
(Figure 4C-4D). These results indicate that the elevated

level of HSP70 in AZD cells do not involve HSP90
activity.

Figure 4: AZD induces HSP70 protein expression without interfering with the functions of HSP90 or proteasome. WCE

(20 µg) of HEK293 cells pretreated for 16 h with bortezomib (BTZ) or geldanamycin (Gel) or various concentrations of AZD, or DMSO
were subjected to immunoblot A. using the antibodies against anti-ubiquitin (P-Ub). The levels of HSP70 protein in the same samples were
also determined as indicated using anti-HSP70 antibody. B. The bands in the blot were estimated and plotted as bar graph considering
ß-actin levels as an internal loading control. C. Immunoblot with antibodies against two HSP90 client proteins Akt or Raf1 and HSP70 and
HSP90 itself to compare their relative expression levels in those samples. D. Band intensities in the blot were estimated by densitometric
scanning and plotted to compare their expression levels. ß-actin levels were used as internal loading control.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

78287

Oncotarget

Azadiradione facilitates DNA binding by direct
physical interaction with HSF1

μM. These results, therefore, show that AZD indeed
facilitates binding of HSF1 to HSE (Figures 5B-5C,
S3C-D).
We then examined the alteration in HSF1
fluorescence in the presence of AZD alone to test if AZD
can bind by itself with HSF1. To our surprise, addition
of AZD enhanced fluorescence intensity of HSF1 as the
concentration of AZD was increased (0-10 µM) (Figure
5D). No significant amount of fluorescence was observed
when only AZD (0-10 µM) was excited at 280 nm and
very small background fluorescence of AZD in buffer was
subtracted from that of respective HSF1-AZD complex.
Analysis of the emission maxima of HSF1 with the dose
of AZD revealed a blue shift i.e., shift of spectra towards
the lower wave length (Figures 5D, S4A). Blue shift in
emission spectra is a signature of trypophan residues
responsible for fluorescence, being embedded in the local
environment in the protein under the reaction condition.
The observed blue shift can be indicative of formation of
an oligomeric structure by HSF1 molecules as well [38].
Taken together these results suggested a conformational
change in the HSF1 protein in the presence of AZD.
The change was HSF1 specific since AZD, unlike
geldanamycin at the same concentration range, did not alter
fluorescence of HSP90 (Figures 5E-5F). Geldanamycin,
however, changed the fluorescence intensity of HSP90 in
the same concentration range in dose dependent manner
as expected because of its interaction with the substrate
binding pocket of HSP90 chaperone [39]. AZD also
did not alter fluorescence intensity of another unrelated
protein lysozyme in the same concentration range (Figure
S5). Next, the stoichiometry and the dissociation constant
(Kd) of the HSF1-AZD interaction were estimated by
measuring HSF1 fluorescence enhancement. The titration
curve of a fixed amount of HSF1 (2 μM) and various
concentrations of ligand (0-10 μM) was analyzed by
Scatchard plot as described in Experimental Procedures.
This analysis yielded a linear plot with a dissociation
constant of 1.35 μM and a stoichiometry of 1 (Figure 5D,
inset).
HSF1 has been reported to form homotrimer as an
intermediate in its activation pathway [36]. Fluorescence
intensity of HSF1 increases almost linearly in dose
dependent manner as the AZD concentration increased
in the reaction (Figure 5D). We tested whether AZD
interacts with homotrimeric or monomeric HSF1 with its
disulphide bonds reduced. Interestingly, HSF1 pretreated
with heat shock (42ºC/5 min) that induces homotrimer
formation was insensitive to incubation with increasing
concentration of AZD (0-10 μM) suggesting that AZD
does not interact with trimerized HSF1 (Figure S6B).
DTT was reported to disrupt the disulfide bonds and
was shown to neutralize HSF1 activation by heat shock
[40]. Incubation with increasing concentration of AZD
(0-10 μM) did not reveal any change in the fluorescence
intensity of HSF1 (2 μM) when it is pretreated with DTT

Conversion of monomeric HSF1 present in the
cytoplasm into a DNA-binding competent homotrimeric
state is believed to be an important step in its activation
pathway [24]. Purified HSF1 in vitro has also been shown
to intrinsically form homotrimer, which is competent
to bind to its recognition (HSE) sequence in response
to heat shock or other stressful conditions [35-37]. The
importance of two cysteine residues in the DNA-binding
domain of HSF1 was shown by mutational analysis [36].
As noted above, AZD did not interfere with the
function of proteasome or HSP90 in cells. Therefore,
we examined if AZD influences DNA binding efficacy
of HSF1 (Figure 5). Human HSF1 purified from
overexpressing bacterial strain (Figure S3E) was incubated
with radio-labeled HSE (ds DNA oligonucleotide) either
in the presence of DMSO or increasing concentrations
of AZD. Most interestingly, the gel mobility shift assay
(EMSA) clearly revealed increased binding of HSF1 in
the presence of AZD in a concentration dependent manner
(Figure 5A, lanes 1-3 and 6). AZD increased the HSF1
binding affinity to HSE by more than two-fold (also
see Figure S3F). The specificity of the interaction was
confirmed by the elimination of the binding by addition
of an excess unlabeled double stranded HSE (Figure
5A, lanes 3-4, and 6-7) but not by an unrelated dsDNA
oligonucleotide of similar molecular weight (Figure 5A
lanes 3-5 and 6-8). These results strongly suggest that
AZD specifically facilitates DNA binding of HSF1 in
vitro.
This property of AZD was re-evaluated by
fluorometric assay. Binding of HSE quenched fluorescence
intensity of HSF1 (tryptophan fluorescence) with
an increase in the concentration of DNA (0-10 µM).
The dissociation constant (Kd) of the HSE and HSF1
interaction was estimated by measuring the quenching
of HSF1 fluorescence. The titration curve of a constant
amount of HSF1 (2 μM) and various concentrations of
HSE (0-10μM) was analyzed by the double reciprocal plot
as described in Experimental Procedures. This analysis
yielded a linear plot with a dissociation constant of 0.8
μM. The binding was very specific as little change in
tryptophan fluorescence of HSF1 was observed when it
was incubated with an unrelated dsDNA oligonucleotide
(HSF1+Ns oligo) (Figure 5B-5C, S3A-B). We next
examined the effect of AZD on the binding of purified
HSF1 on HSE. HSF1 (2 μM) was preincubated with AZD
(5 μM) and was titrated with increasing concentration
HSE (0-10μM) at room temperature. This showed that the
quenching of HSF1 fluorescence was 15% greater in the
presence of AZD than in its absence. These binding data
were analyzed by the double reciprocal plot as described
in Experimental Procedures, and the analysis of the data
yielded a linear plot with a dissociation constant of 0.35
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

78288

Oncotarget

Figure 5: AZD directly interacts with the purified HSF1 protein tested by EMSA as well as fluorometric assay. A.

Autoradiogram of an EMSA showing concentration-dependent enhancement of radiolabeled HSE binding of HSF1 (0.5 μM) by AZD. The
binding is competed out by excess unlabeled HSE (SpCold) but not by an unrelated double-stranded (ds) DNA oligonucleotide (NSpCold)
as described in the method. B. Effect of AZD (5 μM) on the binding of increasing concentration HSE by HSF1 (2 μM) measured by
fluorometric assay as indicated. C. Bar diagram representing the Kd values of HSF1 binding to HSE without or with AZD. D. Concentration
dependent effect of AZD as indicated on HSF1 (2 μM) fluorescence (inset: Scatchard plot of AZD binding to HSF1) and E. on HSP90 (2
µM) fluorescence. F. Effect of geldanamycin (Gel) on the indicated concentration on HSP90 fluorescence. G. Concentration dependent
effect of AZD (as indicated) or heat shock (HS) on HSF1 (2 µM) multimerization in the cell-free system determined by monitoring the
kinetics of polymerization by using light scattering at 350 nm. The presence of DTT in the reaction abolished the polymerization induced
by AZD or HS. H. Cartoon proposing AZD targeting the free pool of monomeric HSF1, an intermediate between repressed (i) and active
HSF1 (homotrimeric state) (ii) in the cell that translocates to the nucleus to execute its transcription function (iii). HSF1 is kept in inactive
monomeric state by a repression complex composed of proteins including HSP90, HSP70, p23 and immunophilin (i); AZD does not
disturb (indicated by a cross symbol) HSP90 chaperone function of refolding of unfolded/misfolded client proteins (iv), or proteasome that
degrades irreversibly unfolded protein (v).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

78289

Oncotarget

(Figures S6A). Therefore, similar to heat shock, DTT also
prevents interaction of AZD with HSF1. Concentrationdependent effect of AZD (as indicated) and heat shock
induced multimerization of HSF1in a cell-free system was
revealed by monitoring the kinetics of polymerization by
using light scattering at 350 nm. As expected, the presence
of DTT in the reaction abolished the polymerization
induced by AZD or heat shock (Figure 5G). Formation of
oligomeric structure was also tested by analysis of HSF1
interaction with AZD by dynamic light scattering (DLS)
studies. As shown an addition of AZD shifted majority
of population corresponding to higher molecular weight
species indicating formation of oligomeric structure of
HSF1 by the compound (Figure S7).
Structural change in HSF1 with the addition of the
compound was also tested by recording the far-UV CD
spectra. A plot of negative ellipticity versus wavelength
showed a net decrease in α-helical content in the structure
by more than 6 % compared to 4% by heat shock. Random
coil content in the protein was found to be increased by
more than 5% following AZD treatment compared to 2%
by heat shock (Figure S4B and Table S1).

[44, 45]. DPPH and DCFH-DA assay performed showed
little free radical scavenging by AZD (Figures S9, panels
A-B). Furthermore, AZD has little anti-inflammatory
activity as revealed in studies earlier [20, 46].
Our results support the idea that AZD activates
DNA-binding competence of HSF1 through stabilizing
its homodimeric or higher oligomeric state and that
this interaction with HSF1 is specific since AZD, a
triterpenoid, did not interact with HSP90ß, or lysozyme
(Figures 5A-5F, S5) in the same concentration range
and under identical conditions. Further, this interaction
with HSF1 is AZD specific since other triterpenoids like
celastrol or gedunin, which were previously shown to
induce HSP70 transcription, did not physically interact
with HSF1 [47]. Our finding of a blue shift in the
fluorescence emission spectra and CD analysis (Figure
S4A-B, Table S1) also suggest that interaction with AZD
induces ordered structural changes in HSF1. While these
observations suggest that interaction of HSF1 with AZD
is highly specific, they do not seem to involve the cellular
activities of proteasome or HSP90 in the HSF1 induction
process.
Thus, while AZD protects cellular protein quality
control mechanisms by enhancing levels of molecular
chaperones like HSP70, it ensures protein chaperone
functions since the proteasome and HSP90 functions
remain undisturbed. HSP70 induction under these
conditions is expected to efficiently drive clearance
of protein aggregates in cells through CHIP-mediated
ubiquitination and degradation by the proteasome [48].
Our results suggest that one molecule of AZD binds
with one molecule of purified full length HSF1. However,
this interaction mode apparently changes when interaction
of the compound was tested with only the DNA binding
domain (DBD) of HSF1. Scatchard plot analysis (Figure
S8A) revealed that one molecule of AZD binds with
three molecules of DBD of HSF1 (HSF1DBD homotrimer
complex). This result is consistent with molecular
modeling of DBD of HSF1, a winged helix protein, with
its recognition sequence HSE where three molecules of
the protein assembled on the HSE [49]. In our model,
consistent with our biophysical data, one molecule of AZD
interacts with the asparagine residues on two adjacent
HSF1 molecules and the phosphate backbones on the
DNA (Figure S8C). Alteration of net solvation energy, as
well as electrostatic charge distribution in the complex
with the addition of AZD, supports its role in the stability
of the HSE-HSF1 complex (Table S2) [50].
Finally, AZD identified by this study is unique in
its interaction with HSF1 with high specificity resulting
in enhanced binding of HSF1 with HSE. Since it does
not interfere with HSP90 or proteasome activity, AZD is
expected, and indeed found, to show less general toxicity.
Our results support a model in which AZD sequesters the
free pool of HSF1 that is normally in dynamic equilibrium
with different repressive complexes and converts it

DISCUSSION
Medicinal plants have been used widely to treat
various diseases in traditional medicine systems, although
the underlying principles of their actions largely remain
unknown. Here we reported our isolation of AZD from
Azadirachta indica (Neem) as an activator of cellular
HSR as measured by upregulation of HSF1 activity.
Notably, treatment with AZD led to a significant reduction
of protein aggregation and toxicity or symptoms in a
mammalian cell and fly models of neurodegenerative
diseases. More significantly, AZD showed little toxicity
to cells of the organism in the effective concentration
range. Neem has been in use in traditional medicine for
more than 2000 years for its diverse medicinal properties
including its role in neuroprotection and amelioration
of Alzheimer’s disease [21, 41]. Our present analyses
establish the neuroprotective activity of AZD extracted
from this plant’s seeds. Recently, AZD was shown to
inhibit pancreatic α-amylase in vitro as well as in a cell
based assay exhibiting its potential in anti-diabetic therapy
[42].
We showed that the amelioration of
neurodegeneration in a fly model of polyQ disorders [33,
43, 54] following AZD treatment (Figure 3) is largely
mediated through HSF activation resulting in enhanced
expression of HSP70 at transcript as well as protein levels.
The results obtained support the idea that AZD exerts its
effect through induction of heat shock response. Because
antioxidant activity has been reported to reduce protein
aggregation induced disorder in fly and mouse models,
experiments were carried out to explore if AZD has any
antioxidant property or free radical scavenging activity
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

78290

Oncotarget

to an active conformation (Figure 5H). The long term
consequences of interruption of this dynamic equilibrium
remain unknown. Future study should address this and
the global effects on a cell exposed to AZD. Overall,
our results show a great potential of AZD as a lead
molecule that can be developed as a long desired small
molecule therapeutic for NDs, which take a heavy toll on
our society. AZD is also should be valuable for a better
understanding of the mechanism of HSF1 function.

celastrol or DMSO (vehicle) as required. After desired
period of treatment cell viability was determined by
MTT method (BD bioscience, India). Net survival values
(after subtracting the values obtained with DMSO) were
calculated for plotting in a graph.

DPPH radical scavenging activity
DPPH radical scavenger assay was done by mixing
in triplicate vehicle, AZD or ascorbic acid (a reference
compound) at different concentrations (1 µM to 10
µM) added with water or ethanol to a fixed volume.
The solutions were then incubated with 50 µl of DPPH
solution to 1 mM in a total volume of 2 ml for 5 min at
room temperature in the dark followed by measuring
absorbance at 517 nm.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Extraction purification and identification of
Azadiradione
Air dried 1 kg neem seeds were extracted with
methanol (1.5 L) by maceration method for one week.
The extracts collected by filtering through Whatman
filter paper was dried using rotary vacuum evaporator
and stored in the refrigerator until further processing.
Fractionation was guided by enhancement of specific
activity in a collected fraction by silica gel column
chromatography (mesh size 230-400, bed volume ~130
ml, L = 25 cm, D = 4 cm) where mobile phase was chosen
by checking movement of the compounds on a thin layer
chromatography (TLC) plate. For 50 g of crude extract,
400 ml each of the following solvents mixture was
applied: hexane: ethyl acetate (H:EtOAc) 1:0, 8:1, 4:1,
3:1, 2:1, 1:1, and 0:1. Collected fractions were dried in
a vacuum evaporator and tested for the 6xHSE GFP Rluc
reporter activity. Fractions corresponding to H:EtOAc =
4:1 solvent carried the most activity where TLC showed
three spots. The active fraction (20 g) was then applied
to fresh silica column of same dimension. Analyses of
eluents (400 ml each of H:EtOAc in the ratio 6:1, 5:1,
4:1, 3:1, 2:1, 1:1, and 0:1) located activity in fraction
corresponding to H:EtOAc::2:1 (180 mg) with a single
major spot determined by TLC and HPLC [C18 column,
(Dimension 4.6 X 250 mm) ran with acetonitrile: water
(60:40) as the mobile phase with flow rate of 1 ml/min
(sample injection volume of 20 µl)]. Analysis of 1H, 13C,
NMR and HRMS (ESI mass) spectral data identified the
compound as azadiradione.

Measurement of intracellular ROS
HCT116 cells grown in 12 well plates to ~75%
confluence were treated in triplicate with 10 µM arsenic,
various concentrations of AZD or vehicle for 12 h. After
PBS wash cells were incubated with 20 µM DCFH-DA
30 mins at 37°C in the dark. Cells were washed, and
analyzed by flow cytometer. The fluorescence intensity
was calculated using the FACSuite software.

Reverse transcription PCR
Reverse transcription (RT) reaction were performed
from 1 µg of total RNA isolated by Trizol reagent
(Invitrogen) using the I script Bio-Rad cDNA synthesis
kit. Semi-quantitative PCR were performed using various
gene-specific primers listed in supplementary material
(Table S3). PCR products were resolved in 2% agarose
gels and were visualized by ethidium bromide staining.

Expression and
HSF1protein

of

human

The pET15b based construct encodes a codon
optimized HSF1 protein epitope tagged with his6-at the
N-terminus. Expression of the protein was induced in
Escherichia coli strain BL21 (λ-DE3) transformed with
this construct by 1 mM IPTG induction at 15˚C for 16 h as
described [51]. All subsequent steps were conducted on ice
or at 4°C. Briefly, after induction, PBS washed cell pellet
was lyzed in lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 300 mM
sodium chloride, 20 mM imidazole, 0.5 mM PMSF, 1 µg/
ml of leupeptine, aprotinine, and pepstatin) by sonication.
Clear lysate collected by centrifugation (at 20000xg for 30
min) was bound on the nickel-nitrilotriacetic acid (NTA)
agarose beads (Qiagen) prewashed with lysis buffer by
incubation for 4 h. As a standard approach 1 ml bead was

Cell culture and cell viability assay
HCT116, HEK293, and Neuro-2a cells were
obtained from ATCC. Cells were grown in DMEM
supplemented with 10% FBS (Invitrogen), 1%
L-Glutamine, 0.1 mM nonessential amino acid, and 100
U/ml penicillin/streptomycin and maintained at 37ºC and
under 5% CO2.
Cells grown to 70% confluence were added
in triplicate with different concentrations of AZD or
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

purification

78291

Oncotarget

w1118; GMR-GAL4

used for cell lysate obtained from 1 liter culture. After
Unbound components were washed off the beads with
wash buffer (lysis buffer plus 40 mM imidazole), bead
bound his6-HSF1 protein was eluted in elution buffer
(lysis buffer plus 250 mM imidazole) in 0.25 ml fractions
until all proteins were collected. Fractions with relatively
large amount of the HSF1 proteins tested by SDS-PAGE
analysis were pooled together, dialyzed against the lysis
buffer, quick freezed in liquid nitrogen in small aliquots,
and stored in -80°C for future use.

This is a homozygous viable transgenic line in which
the yeast Gal4 gene is downstream of a multimerized copy
of the binding site of the Drosophila Glass transcription
factor (inserted is present on chromosome 2). Glass
multimer reporter, is predominantly expressed in all
differentiating cells posterior to the morphogenetic furrow
in the developing eye discs [53].
w1118; UAS-127Q [43]
In this stock a transgene carrying 127 tandem
repeats of trinucleotide CAG flanked by HA tag placed
downstream of the UAS promoter on chromosome 2.
Homozygous of this transgenic fly is viable without any
apparent phenotype. The stock was obtained from Dr.
Parsa Kazemi-Esfarjani (University at Buffalo, New
York). External morphology of adult eyes following the
desired treatment and desired genotype was examined in
etherized flies under a Zeiss Stemi SV6 stereo binocular
microscope and the eye images were recorded using a
Sony Digital Camera (DSC-75) .

Western blot
Whole cell extracts (WCE) were prepared in RIPA
lysis buffer (25 mM Tris-HCL pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl,
1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 1% NP-40, 1% sodium
deoxycholate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophoshphate 1 µg/
ml leupeptin, 1 µg/ml aprotonin, 1 µg/ml pepstatin A).
WCE (20 µg) was resolved in 10% SDS-PAGE gels and
transferred to PVDF membrane. The membrane after
blocking with 5% BSA for 30 min at room temperature
was probed with a primary antibody as appropriate at
dilution of 1:5000 (HSP70; Enzo life science, C92F3A),
1:1000 (Raf1; Cell signaling, 9422), 1:1000 (Akt; Cell
signaling C67E7), 1:5000 (HSP90α; Biobharti Life
Science), 1:10000 (Ubiquitin, Cell signaling; 3933),
1:1000 (FLAG-M2; Sigma aldrich, F3040), or 1:50,000
(β-actin; Abcam, ab8227) for overnight at 4ºC. The
membrane was then incubated with the secondary
antibody as appropriate at dilution of 1:5,000 (Goat anti
mouse IgG-HRP, Santa Cruiz, sc-2005), or 1:5,000 (Goat
anti rabbit IgG-HRP, Santa Cruiz, sc-2030) for 1 h at
room temperature. After several washes the signals were
developed by enhanced chemiluminiscence (ECL, Biorad)
method.

Nail polish imprints
A transparent nail polish used to create a replica of
the external surface of the eye and subsequent examination
by DIC microscopy as described [54]. The eye imprints
were examined microscopically using 20X DIC optics in
Nikon E800, with an attached Nikon DXM 1200 digital
camera.

Phototaxis assay
This assay was performed with a Y maze comprising
of a Y shaped glass tube of 12 mm diameter with each
arm of Y being 30 cm long. One arm of the Y maze was
covered with black paper to make dark while the arm
was left uncovered to serve as lighted chamber. The 1
day, 5 days and 10 days old flies of the desired genotype
were subjected to the phototaxis assay for 1 min and the
total numbers of flies in each arm were counted [55]. At
least three trials were performed for each assay, and the
experiment was done in multiple replicates of 75 flies per
assay.

Electrophoretic mobility shift assay
EMSA was done using 32p-γ-ATP labeled probe (1
ng/reaction) containing the proximal heat shock element
(HSE) taken from the human hsp70A1A promoter.
Binding reaction were performed essentially under
condition as described earlier except that 50 µg of WCE
of HEK293 cells stably expressing FLAG-tagged HSF1
or purified recombinant his6-tagged protein (0.5 µM) as
described [52]. The recombinant protein was purified by
using the method described earlier [51]. The reactions
were resolved on a 4% polyacrylamide gels (acrylamide
and bis-acrylamide 29:1) , dried and autoradiographed.

Microscopy and image analysis
For recoding the external morphology of adult
eyes, flies of the desired genotype were etherized, and
their eyes photographed using a Sony Digital Camera
(DSC-75) attached to a Zeiss Stemi SV6 stereo binocular
microscope for examining the external morphology. For
light microscopy, a Nikon E800 microscope was used
with appropriate filter combinations. The images obtained

Fruit fly stocks
Oregon R+
Wild-type strain of Drosophila melanogaster
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

78292

Oncotarget

were recorded with a Nikon DXM 1200 digital camera.
The different objectives used were 10X (0.3NA, Plan
Fluor), 20X (0.5NA, Plan, Fluor) or 60X oil (1.4NA, Plan,
Apo). Eye discs from GMR-GAL4 > 127Q late third instar
larvae reared on DMSO or AZD supplemented food were
co-immunostained with 7Fb and anti-haemagglutinin ab
for Hsp70 and polyQ IBs, respectively, and examined by
confocal microscopy as described earlier [54].

by titration with ligand (0-10 μM) at room temperature.
In another condition, we pretreated HSF1(2 μM) with
1 mM DTT at room temperature and then measure the
fluorescence of protein by titrated with ligand (0-10 μM)
at room temperature.

HSF1 multi-merization assay

Absorbance measurements were performed
in a JASCO (Tokyo, Japan) V-530 UV-visible
spectrophotometer equipped with a Peltier temperature
control system, using a cuvette of 1cm path length.
All fluorescence measurements were performed using
a fluorescence spectrophotometer (PhotoTechnology
Inc. USA, Model QM-4CW) equipped with a Peltier
temperature control system. Fluorescence data were
corrected for the inner filter effect
F = Fobs X antilog [(Aex +Aem) /2]
Where Aex is the absorbance at the excitation
wavelength andAem is the absorbance at the emission
wavelength

The binding of the DNA to the protein was
monitored by quenching of protein fluorescence in
the presence of DNA. HSF1 (2 μM) was titrated with
increasing concentration (0-10 μM) of DNA at room
temperature and intrinsic fluoresecence spectrum of
mixture was recorded at each concentration of DNA. To
understand the effect of AZD on HSF1-DNA interaction,
we first pre-incubated 5 μM AZD and 2 μM HSF1for
5 min at room temperature and after that increasing
concentration of DNA (0-10 μM) was titrated with that
HSF1-AZD complex at room temperature. The apparent
decrease in the fluorescence values in the presence
of varying concentrations of DNA were corrected for
the inner filter effect. The fraction of binding sites (X)
occupied by DNA was determined using an equation X =
(F0-F)/Fmax [56], where F0 is the fluorescence intensity
of HSF1 in the absence of DNA, F is the corrected
fluorescence intensity of tubulin in the presence of DNA,
and Fmax is calculated from the plot of 1/(F0-F) versus1/
[DNA] graph and extrapolating 1/[DNA] to zero. The
dissociation constant (Kd) was determined using the
relationship, (1/X) = 1 + Kd/Lf, where Lf represents free
DNA concentration, and Lf = C -X[Y], where C is total
concentration of DNA and [Y] is the molar concentration
of DNA-binding sites, assuming a single binding site per
HSF1.

AZD and HSF1 interaction study

Molecular modeling and docking

The binding of the ligand to the protein was
monitored by enhancement or quencing of protein intrinsic
fluorescence in the presence of AZD. Protein (2 μM)
(HSF1/Lysozyme/HSP90) was titrated with ligand (0-10
μM) of at room temperature. The excitation wavelength
was 280 nm and emission wavelength range was set to
310 nm to 400 nm. The maximum intensity was recorded
from each wavelength spectrum for calculation of binding
parameters. The dissociation constant Kd was calculated
from the Scatchard plot according to
r / Lfree = (r /Kd)-(n/Kd)
Where, r is the ratio of the concentration of bound
ligand to the total protein concentration and n: represents
the maximumnumber of binding sites [56]
The binding of the ligand to the protein was also
studied under different condition. We first pre-incubated
HSF1 (2 μM) at 42ºC for 30 minutes to allow trimerization
and then measure the fluorescence of that trimerize HSF1

The DNA binding domain of HSF1 is docked with
another two similar domains to form protein-protein
docked trimeric structures. The trimeric HSF1 form was
then docked with the double helical DNA with nucleotide
sequence 5’-GGCGAAACCCCTGGAATATTCCCGA
CCTGGCAGC-3’-using Z-Dock server. DNA protein
complex then was docked with Azadiradione in Glide
module using standard precision (SP) mode (Glide,
version 5.5, Schrodinger, Inc., New York, NY, 2009). The
grid was prepared to cover the entire structure of DNA
with dimensions of 80×80×80 Å.

Effect of AZD on HSF1-DNA interaction

HSF1 (2 µM) was mixed with different
concentrations of AZD (4- and 8 µM), with or without 1
mM DTT and incubated under heat shock condition. The
rate and the extent of the multimerization reaction were
monitored by light scattering at 350 nm using a Jasco
V-630 (Japan) spectrophotometer.

Fluorescence study

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Adaptive poisson-boltzmann solver calculations
The electrostatic charge distributions of the protein
were calculated using Electrostatic potential surface tools
in Schrodinger. Atomic charge distribution, dielectric
78293

Oncotarget

properties and electrostatic properties of protein can be
well correlated using this model. The solute and solvent
dielectric constant used for Poisson-Boltzmann settings
were 1 and 80 respectively.

Genet. 2005; 6:743-755.
3.	 Neef DW, Jaeger AM and Thiele DJ. Heat shock
transcription factor 1 as a therapeutic target in
neurodegenerative diseases. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2011;
10:930-944.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

4.	 Cookson MR. The role of leucine-rich repeat kinase 2
(LRRK2) in Parkinson’s disease. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2010;
11:791-797.

We thank Katerina Gurova for providing generous
help with reagents, and constructive criticisms. Help from
Evgeny Nudler, Uday Bandyopadhaya and Eugene Kandel
is also appreciated. Thank is due to Dennis Thiele for
providing HSF1 expression construct, Sanghamitra Raha,
Nilkanta Chakraborty, Siddhartha Dutta, Atin Mandal and
Kaushik Biswas for their constant supports. This work
is funded by DST, DBT and Bose Institute. VKN is the
recipient of a UGC fellowship; AA and SG are recipients
of CSIR fellowships.

CONFLICT OF INTERESTS

Labbadia J and Morimoto RI. The biology of proteostasis in
aging and disease. Annu Rev Biochem. 2015; 84:435-464.

6.	

Maheshwari M, Bhutani S, Das A, Mukherjee R, Sharma A,
Kino Y, Nukina N and Jana NR. Dexamethasone induces
heat shock response and slows down disease progression in
mouse and fly models of Huntington’s disease. Hum Mol
Genet. 2014; 23:2737-2751.

7.	

Auluck PK and Bonini NM. Pharmacological prevention of
Parkinson disease in Drosophila. Nat Med. 2002; 8:11851186.

8.	 Neef DW, Turski ML and Thiele DJ. Modulation of heat
shock transcription factor 1 as a therapeutic target for small
molecule intervention in neurodegenerative disease. PLoS
Biol. 2010; 8:e1000291.

Authors declare no conflict of interests

Authors’ contributions

9.	 Ali A, Bharadwaj S, O’Carroll R and Ovsenek N. HSP90
interacts with and regulates the activity of heat shock factor
1 in Xenopus oocytes. Mol Cell Biol. 1998; 18:4949-4960.

AA, VKN, MP, SCM, AKM, SCL designed the
work; AKM, MJ, VKN, MP designed the compound
purification protocol; VKN isolated the compound by cell
based reporter activity; AA performed the cell and tissue
based biochemical studies such as transcription, ataxin
130Q aggregation, proteasome, and HSP90 cell survival
assays. AA and ND performed EMSA, SG made his6HSF1 protein; SP made FLAG-HSF1 tagged cell line;
AA and AG performed biophysical experiments, AG, and
GCC designed the biophysical experiments; VD, VKN
performed the fly experiments; SCL guided and analyzed
fly work; SC performed the modeling work. AK designed
the reporter system; NRJ commented on the work; AA,
VKN, SCM, MP analysed the data; AA made the figures;
MP envisioned the project, planned and monitored the
experiments, analysed the data and wrote the paper.

10.	 Bharadwaj S, Ali A and Ovsenek N. Multiple components
of the HSP90 chaperone complex function in regulation of
heat shock factor 1 In vivo. Mol Cell Biol. 1999; 19:80338041.
11.	 Shi Y, Mosser DD and Morimoto RI. Molecular chaperones
as HSF1-specific transcriptional repressors. Genes Dev.
1998; 12:654-666.
12.	 Zou J, Guo Y, Guettouche T, Smith DF and Voellmy
R. Repression of heat shock transcription factor HSF1
activation by HSP90 (HSP90 complex) that forms a stresssensitive complex with HSF1. Cell. 1998; 94:471-480.
13.	Shamovsky I and Nudler E. New insights into the
mechanism of heat shock response activation. Cell Mol Life
Sci. 2008; 65:855-861.
14.	Shamovsky I and Nudler E. Gene control by large
noncoding RNAs. Sci STKE. 2006; 2006:pe40.

Editorial note

15.	 Vera M, Pani B, Griffiths LA, Muchardt C, Abbott CM,
Singer RH and Nudler E. The translation elongation factor
eEF1A1 couples transcription to translation during heat
shock response. Elife. 2014; 3:e03164.

This paper has been accepted based in part on peerreview conducted by another journal and the authors’
response and revisions as well as expedited peer-review
in Oncotarget.

16.	 McDonough H and Patterson C. CHIP: a link between the
chaperone and proteasome systems. Cell Stress Chaperones.
2003; 8:303-308.

REFERENCES

17.	 Brandvold KR and Morimoto RI. The Chemical Biology
of Molecular Chaperones—Implications for Modulation of
Proteostasis. J Mol Biol. 2015; 427:2931-2947.

1.	 Orr HT and Zoghbi HY. Trinucleotide repeat disorders.
Annu Rev Neurosci. 2007; 30:575-621.

18.	 Hsu AL, Murphy CT and Kenyon C. Regulation of aging
and age-related disease by DAF-16 and heat-shock factor.
Science. 2003; 300:1142-1145.

2.	 Gatchel JR and Zoghbi HY. Diseases of unstable repeat
expansion: mechanisms and common principles. Nat Rev
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5.	

78294

Oncotarget

19.	 Calamini B, Silva MC, Madoux F, Hutt DM, Khanna S,
Chalfant MA, Saldanha SA, Hodder P, Tait BD, Garza D,
Balch WE and Morimoto RI. Small-molecule proteostasis
regulators for protein conformational diseases. Nat Chem
Biol. 2012; 8:185-196.

a triterpene extracted from the Chinese “Thunder of God
Vine,” is a potent proteasome inhibitor and suppresses
human prostate cancer growth in nude mice. Cancer Res.
2006; 66:4758-4765.
32.	 Ray M and Lakhotia SC. The commonly used eyespecific sev-GAL4 and GMR-GAL4 drivers in Drosophila
melanogaster are expressed in tissues other than eyes also.
J Genet. 2015; 94:407-416.

20.	 Alam A, Haldar S, Thulasiram HV, Kumar R, Goyal M,
Iqbal MS, Pal C, Dey S, Bindu S, Sarkar S, Pal U, Maiti NC
and Bandyopadhyay U. Novel anti-inflammatory activity of
epoxyazadiradione against macrophage migration inhibitory
factor: inhibition of tautomerase and proinflammatory
activities of macrophage migration inhibitory factor. J Biol
Chem. 2012; 287:24844-24861.

33.	 Mallik M and Lakhotia SC. Modifiers and mechanisms of
multi-system polyglutamine neurodegenerative disorders:
lessons from fly models. J Genet. 2010; 89:497-526.
34.	 Woodford MR, Dunn DM, Blanden AR, Capriotti D,
Loiselle D, Prodromou C, Panaretou B, Hughes PF, Smith
A, Ackerman W, Haystead TA, Loh SN, Bourboulia
D, et al. The FNIP co-chaperones decelerate the Hsp90
chaperone cycle and enhance drug binding. Nat Commun.
2015; 7:12037.

21.	 Raghavendra M, Maiti R, Kumar S and Acharya S.
Role of aqueous extract of Azadirachta indica leaves in
an experimental model of Alzheimer’s disease in rats.
International journal of applied & basic medical research.
2013; 3:37-47.
22.	 Mosser DD, Theodorakis NG and Morimoto RI. Coordinate
changes in heat shock element-binding activity and HSP70
gene transcription rates in human cells. Mol Cell Biol.
1988; 8:4736-4744.

35.	 Mosser DD, Kotzbauer PT, Sarge KD and Morimoto RI.
In vitro activation of heat shock transcription factor DNAbinding by calcium and biochemical conditions that affect
protein conformation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1990;
87:3748-3752.

23.	 Neznanov N, Gorbachev AV, Neznanova L, Komarov AP,
Gurova KV, Gasparian AV, Banerjee AK, Almasan A,
Fairchild RL and Gudkov AV. Anti-malaria drug blocks
proteotoxic stress response: anti-cancer implications. Cell
Cycle. 2009; 8:3960-3970.

36.	 Ahn SG and Thiele DJ. Redox regulation of mammalian
heat shock factor 1 is essential for Hsp gene activation and
protection from stress. Genes Dev. 2003; 17:516-528.
37.	 Rabindran SK, Haroun RI, Clos J, Wisniewski J and Wu C.
Regulation of heat shock factor trimer formation: role of a
conserved leucine zipper. Science. 1993; 259:230-234.

24.	 Anckar J and Sistonen L. Regulation of HSF1 function in
the heat stress response: implications in aging and disease.
Annu Rev Biochem. 2011; 80:1089-1115.

38.	 Caputo GA and London E. Cumulative effects of amino
acid substitutions and hydrophobic mismatch upon the
transmembrane stability and conformation of hydrophobic
alpha-helices. Biochemistry. 2003; 42:3275-3285.

25.	 Kim D, Ouyang H, Yang SH, Nussenzweig A, Burgman
P and Li GC. A constitutive heat shock element-binding
factor is immunologically identical to the Ku autoantigen. J
Biol Chem. 1995; 270:15277-15284.

39.	 Stebbins CE, Russo AA, Schneider C, Rosen N, Hartl
FU and Pavletich NP. Crystal structure of an Hsp90geldanamycin complex: targeting of a protein chaperone by
an antitumor agent. Cell. 1997; 89:239-250.

26.	 Westerheide SD, Bosman JD, Mbadugha BN, Kawahara
TL, Matsumoto G, Kim S, Gu W, Devlin JP, Silverman
RB and Morimoto RI. Celastrols as inducers of the heat
shock response and cytoprotection. J Biol Chem. 2004;
279:56053-56060.

40.	 Ahn SG, Liu PC, Klyachko K, Morimoto RI and Thiele
DJ. The loop domain of heat shock transcription factor 1
dictates DNA-binding specificity and responses to heat
stress. Genes Dev. 2001; 15:2134-2145.

27.	 Solomon JM, Rossi JM, Golic K, McGarry T and Lindquist
S. Changes in hsp70 alter thermotolerance and heat-shock
regulation in Drosophila. New Biol. 1991; 3:1106-1120.

41.	 Yanpallewar S, Rai S, Kumar M, Chauhan S and Acharya
SB. Neuroprotective effect of Azadirachta indica on
cerebral post-ischemic reperfusion and hypoperfusion in
rats. Life Sci. 2005; 76:1325-1338.

28.	 Mosser DD, Caron AW, Bourget L, Denis-Larose C and
Massie B. Role of the human heat shock protein hsp70 in
protection against stress-induced apoptosis. Mol Cell Biol.
1997; 17:5317-5327.

42.	 Ponnusamy S, Haldar S, Mulani F, Zinjarde S, Thulasiram
H and RaviKumar A. Gedunin and Azadiradione: Human
Pancreatic Alpha-Amylase Inhibiting Limonoids from
Neem (Azadirachta indica) as Anti-Diabetic Agents. PLoS
One. 2015; 10:e0140113.

29.	 Akerfelt M, Morimoto RI and Sistonen L. Heat shock
factors: integrators of cell stress, development and lifespan.
Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2010; 11:545-555.
30.	 Wang G, Sawai N, Kotliarova S, Kanazawa I and Nukina
N. Ataxin-3, the MJD1 gene product, interacts with the two
human homologs of yeast DNA repair protein RAD23,
HHR23A and HHR23B. Hum Mol Genet. 2000; 9:17951803.

43.	 Kazemi-Esfarjani P and Benzer S. Genetic suppression
of polyglutamine toxicity in Drosophila. Science. 2000;
287:1837-1840.
44.	 Ehrnhoefer DE, Duennwald M, Markovic P, Wacker JL,
Engemann S, Roark M, Legleiter J, Marsh JL, Thompson

31.	 Yang H, Chen D, Cui QC, Yuan X and Dou QP. Celastrol,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

78295

Oncotarget

LM, Lindquist S, Muchowski PJ and Wanker EE. Green
tea (-)-epigallocatechin-gallate modulates early events in
huntingtin misfolding and reduces toxicity in Huntington’s
disease models. Hum Mol Genet. 2006; 15:2743-2751.

51.	 Jaeger AM, Makley LN, Gestwicki JE and Thiele DJ.
Genomic heat shock element sequences drive cooperative
human heat shock factor 1 DNA binding and selectivity. J
Biol Chem. 2014; 289:30459-30469.

45.	 Melkani GC, Trujillo AS, Ramos R, Bodmer R, Bernstein
SI and Ocorr K. Huntington’s disease induced cardiac
amyloidosis is reversed by modulating protein folding and
oxidative stress pathways in the Drosophila heart. PLoS
Genet. 2013; 9:e1004024.

52.	 Leonova KI, Brodsky L, Lipchick B, Pal M, Novototskaya
L, Chenchik AA, Sen GC, Komarova EA and Gudkov
AV. p53 cooperates with DNA methylation and a suicidal
interferon response to maintain epigenetic silencing of
repeats and noncoding RNAs. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
2013; 110:E89-98.

46.	 Ilango K, Maharajan G and Narasimhan S. Anti-nociceptive
and anti-inflammatory activities of Azadirachta indica fruit
skin extract and its isolated constituent azadiradione. Nat
Prod Res. 2013; 27:1463-1467.

53.	 Ellis MC, O’Neill EM and Rubin GM. Expression of
Drosophila glass protein and evidence for negative
regulation of its activity in non-neuronal cells by another
DNA-binding protein. Development. 1993; 119:855-865.

47.	 Patwardhan CA, Fauq A, Peterson LB, Miller C, Blagg BS
and Chadli A. Gedunin inactivates the co-chaperone p23
protein causing cancer cell death by apoptosis. J Biol Chem.
2013; 288:7313-7325.

54.	 Arya R, Mallik M and Lakhotia SC. Heat shock genes integrating cell survival and death. J Biosci. 2007; 32:595610.

48.	 Pratt WB, Gestwicki JE, Osawa Y and Lieberman AP.
Targeting Hsp90/Hsp70-based protein quality control for
treatment of adult onset neurodegenerative diseases. Annu
Rev Pharmacol Toxicol. 2015; 55:353-371.

55.	 Dwivedi V, Anandan EM, Mony RS, Muraleedharan TS,
Valiathan MS, Mutsuddi M and Lakhotia SC. In vivo
effects of traditional Ayurvedic formulations in Drosophila
melanogaster model relate with therapeutic applications.
PLoS One. 2012; 7:e37113.

49.	 Neudegger T, Verghese J, Hayer-Hartl M, Hartl FU and
Bracher A. Structure of human heat-shock transcription
factor 1 in complex with DNA. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2016;
23:140-146.

56.	 Bhattacharya S, Kumar NM, Ganguli A, Tantak MP, Kumar
D and Chakrabarti G. NMK-TD-100, a novel microtubule
modulating agent, blocks mitosis and induces apoptosis
in HeLa cells by binding to tubulin. PLoS One. 2013;
8:e76286.

50.	 Littlefield O and Nelson HC. A new use for the ‘wing’
of the ‘winged’ helix-turn-helix motif in the HSF-DNA
cocrystal. Nat Struct Biol. 1999; 6:464-470.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

78296

Oncotarget

