Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 13

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

AMPK-mediated energy homeostasis and associated metabolic
effects on cancer cell response and resistance to cetuximab
Xinqun Li1, Yang Lu1, Haiquan Lu1, Jingtao Luo1,2, Yun Hong1,3, Zhen Fan1
1

Department of Experimental Therapeutics, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA

2

Department of Head and Neck Oncology, Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute & Hospital, Tianjin, China

3

Department of Oral Medicine, Guanghua School of Stomatology, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China

Correspondence to:
Zhen Fan, e-mail: zfan@mdanderson.org
Keywords: EGFR, cetuximab, HIF-1, AMPK, cancer metabolism
Received: January 21, 2015    Accepted: February 23, 2015    Published: March 20, 2015

ABSTRACT
We previously reported that cetuximab, an EGFR-blocking antibody, inhibits
cancer metabolism via downregulation of HIF-1α and reverses the Warburg effect
in cancer cells. Here, we report that inhibition of HIF-1 transcriptional activity by
cetuximab does not necessarily lead to successful inhibition of cell proliferation. In
several head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) cell lines, we observed a
pattern of oscillating decrease and increase of intracellular ATP level after cetuximab
treatment, and the magnitude and kinetics of which varied by cell line and appeared
to be linked to the extent of cellular response to cetuximab. In HNSCC cells with
low basal level of AMPK activity and that responded to cetuximab-induced growth
inhibition, there was a transient, LKB1-dependent activation of AMPK. In contrast,
HNSCC cells that had a high basal level of AMPK activity were less sensitive to
cetuximab-induced growth inhibition despite effective inhibition of EGFR downstream
signaling by cetuximab. Knockdown or inhibition of AMPK markedly enhanced
response to cetuximab via induction of apoptosis. These findings indicate that a
transient activation of AMPK is an early metabolic marker of cellular response to
cetuximab and that high and sustained AMPK activity is an important mechanism by
which cancer cells survive cetuximab treatment.

molecules downstream of EGFR, such as Ras, that render
the pathways downstream of EGFR constitutively active;
the presence of overlapping mechanisms that can activate
pathways downstream of EGFR; and involvement of
alternative pathways that drive survival and proliferation
of cancer cells [5–7].
Until recently, few studies have linked response
and resistance to EGFR-targeted therapy to the status of
cancer cell metabolism. We believe deep understanding of
this link will provide valuable insights for design of new
strategies that will ultimately improve clinical impact of
this promising targeted cancer therapy. It is well known
that metabolism in cancer cells is reprogrammed compared
with metabolism in normal cells [8–12]. To adapt to
the stressful tumor microenvironment, which includes
low levels of oxygen and nutrients and a high level of
acidosis, cancer cells acquire many genetic and nongenetic
changes that confer selective advantages in terms of not

INTRODUCTION
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-mediated
cell signaling is aberrantly regulated in many types of
human malignancy of epithelial origin [1]. Targeting
EGFR with antibodies that block binding of natural
ligands to the receptor or with small-molecule compounds
that specifically inhibit activation of the receptor tyrosine
kinase has shown clinical activity, which led to regulatory
approval of EGFR-targeted therapy for patients with
metastatic cancers of the colon, head and neck, or lungs [2,
3]. However, as is true for all currently approved targeted
cancer therapies, suboptimal response and even complete
resistance to EGFR-targeted therapy is not uncommon
in patients whose tumors have aberrant EGFR signaling
[4]. The mechanisms of resistance, which includes both
intrinsic and acquired resistance, are complex. The
mechanisms recognized so far include mutations of key
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11507

Oncotarget

only survival but also proliferation [13]. Accumulating
evidence indicates that almost every known oncogene
directly or indirectly regulates targets that are connected
to cancer metabolism [13]. Hypoxia-inducible factor-1
(HIF-1), a key transcription factor regulating glycolysis,
plays a critical role in reprogramming cancer metabolism
in favor of aerobic glycolysis (i.e., the Warburg effect),
through which large amounts of biomass and reducing
equivalents in the form of NADPH are generated to
support unlimited proliferation of cancer cells [14, 15].
Our laboratory previously reported that cetuximab, a
US Food and Drug Administration–approved EGFRblocking antibody, downregulates the regulatory alpha
subunit of HIF-1, HIF-1α [16], and that downregulation
of HIF-1α is required, although may not be sufficient,
for cetuximab-induced anti-proliferative effects [17].
More recently, we reported that cetuximab reverses
the Warburg effect in cancer cells via inhibiting HIF-1regulated lactate dehydrogenase A [18]. We demonstrated
that cetuximab inhibits glucose consumption and lactate
production and lowers intracellular ATP levels in a HIF1α downregulation–dependent manner. Overexpression
of a degradation-resistant HIF-1α mutant counteracted
cetuximab-induced decline in intracellular ATP level and
conferred resistance to cetuximab-induced G1-phase cellcycle arrest [18]. These findings provide an important
mechanistic link between cetuximab-induced inhibition
of cell proliferation and cetuximab-induced inhibition of
metabolism in targeted cancer cells.
In the current study, we expanded our study of
the link between cancer cell metabolism and cancer
cell response and resistance to cetuximab. Specifically,
we addressed the role of AMPK [5′-adenosine
monophosphate (AMP)-activated protein kinase] in cell
response and resistance to cetuximab-induced inhibition
of cell proliferation. AMPK is a serine/threonine kinase
that is activated by upstream kinases, such as the liver
kinase B1 (LKB1) tumor suppressor that integrates
growth factor receptor signaling with cell energy status
[19]. In response to a decline in intracellular ATP level
and simultaneous increase in AMP level, the LKB1AMPK axis is activated and quickly reprograms glucose
and lipid metabolism by switching cells from active
ATP consumption to active ATP production to restore
cell energy balance and thereby promote cell survival
[20, 21]. Thus, we hypothesized that transient activation
of AMPK may serve as an early marker of cetuximabinduced inhibition of glycolysis. We further hypothesized
that cancer cells with a high basal level of AMPK activity
can survive cetuximab-induced inhibition of glycolysis
by sustaining AMPK activation and that inhibition of
AMPK can decrease cell proliferation and viability. In
this study, we report findings from our studies testing
these hypotheses. Our data provide novel mechanistic
insights into the response and resistance of cancer cells
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

to EGFR-targeted therapy from an energy homeostasis
point of view.

RESULTS
Effective inhibition of the cell signaling pathways
downstream of EGFR and inhibition of HIF-1
transcriptional activity by cetuximab do not
necessarily lead to successful inhibition of cell
proliferation
We tested our hypotheses in three human head
and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) cell lines,
HN5, FaDu, and UMSCC1, which express different
levels of EGFR and respond to cetuximab differentially.
We first examined the changes in the levels of activationspecific phosphorylation of Akt and Erk after cetuximab
by Western blot analysis (Figure 1A). Akt and Erk are
well-characterized signaling molecules downstream of
EGFR but can also be activated by upstream regulators
other than EGFR. The basal phosphorylation levels of Akt
and Erk were higher in untreated UMSCC1 cells than in
untreated HN5 or FaDu cells. Consistent with the higher
basal level of cell signaling in UMSCC1 cells, the basal
level of HIF-1α was higher in UMSCC1 cells than in HN5
and FaDu cells (Figure 1A). The phosphorylation levels
of Akt and Erk and the level of HIF-1α were all strongly
inhibited upon cetuximab treatment in all three cell lines
(Figure 1A). Moreover, the level of HIF-1α in these cell
lines was quantitatively linked to the transcriptional
activity of HIF-1 in these cells measured by a HIF1 luciferase reporter assay, and the decline in HIF-1α
level upon cetuximab treatment was accompanied by a
corresponding decline in HIF-1 transcriptional activity
(Figure 1B). Interestingly, however, a cell proliferation
assay showed that whereas proliferation of HN5 and FaDu
cells was substantially inhibited after a 5-day culture in the
presence of cetuximab, proliferation of UMSCC1 cells was
only minimally inhibited by cetuximab treatment; the rate
of inhibition of cell proliferation was only approximately
25% in UMSCC1 cells compared to approximately 50%
in FaDu cells and greater than 80% in HN5 cells (Figure
1C). These interesting findings indicate that successful
inhibition of cell signaling pathways downstream of
EGFR and inhibition of HIF-1 transcriptional activity by
cetuximab do not always lead to successful inhibition of
cell proliferation.

Oscillation in intracellular ATP levels after
cetuximab treatment in different HNSCC cell lines
We recently reported that cetuximab inhibits
glycolysis and lowers intracellular ATP level via
downregulating HIF-1α [18]. To follow up on this work,
we compared the changes in intracellular ATP levels in
11508

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Effective inhibition of the cell signaling pathways downstream of EGFR and inhibition of HIF-1
transcriptional activity by cetuximab do not necessarily lead to successful inhibition of cell proliferation. (A) HN5,

FaDu, and UMSCC1 cells were cultured in 0.5% FBS medium in the absence or presence of 10 nM or 20 nM cetuximab for 24 h. Cell
lysates were then prepared and subjected to Western blot analysis with the indicated primary antibodies. EXP, exposure. (B) HN5, FaDu,
and UMSCC1 cells were transfected with the pBI-GL-V6L construct for 24 h. The cells were then cultured in 0.5% FBS medium in the
absence or presence of 10 nM or 20 nM cetuximab in 6-well plates for 16 h. After the treatment, cell lysates were prepared for HIF-1
luciferase reporter assay. Arbitrary luciferase activity units were normalized to the amount of protein in each sample. Data shown are means
and SDs (n = 3). P values for the comparisons were determined by Student’s t-test. **p < 0.01. (C) HN5, FaDu, and UMSCC1 cells were
cultured in 0.5% FBS medium in the absence or presence of 10 nM or 20 nM cetuximab for 5 days. The relative number of surviving cells
was determined by MTT assay. The OD values of the treated groups were normalized to the OD value of untreated cells, which was set as
100%. Data shown are means and SDs (n = 3). **p < 0.01.

HN5, FaDu, and UMSCC1 cells after cetuximab treatment.
During the first 8 h after addition of cetuximab in cell
culture, during which time there was no detectable change
in cell number (data not shown), we observed the following
interesting findings with respect to intracellular ATP level
(Figure 2). First, upon exposure to cetuximab, the level of
intracellular ATP declined in all three cell lines. However,
the ATP level did not keep declining as one would expect;
rather, in all three cell lines, after an initial decline, the
level of intracellular ATP reverted to a level close to the
baseline level. Then, the level of intracellular ATP dropped
again and then reverted again, in an oscillating pattern.
Second, the kinetics of the oscillation in intracellular ATP
level after cetuximab treatment differed by cell line. The
period of oscillation was longer in FaDu cells (4 h) than
in HN5 and UMSCC1 cells (2 h). Third, the magnitude
of decline in ATP level in each oscillation cycle differed
by cell line, with FaDu cells showing the sharpest decline
(40% decline within 1 h) and UMSCC1 cells showing only
modest decline (15% decline within 1 h).
The findings that all three cell lines displayed
oscillating cycles of decline and increase in ATP level and
that the decline in intracellular ATP level in UMSCC1 cells
was modest compared with the decline in ATP level in
the other two cell lines, which were much more sensitive
to cetuximab, suggest that the magnitude of decline in
intracellular ATP level and the kinetics of intracellular
ATP-level oscillation may be related to cellular response
to cetuximab-induced growth inhibition. Our findings
further suggest that the minimal response of UMSCC1
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

cells to cetuximab-induced growth inhibition, compared
to the response of HN5 and FaDu cells, might be due to
ability of UMSCC1 cells to limit the extent of decline in
ATP level after cetuximab treatment.

Transient activation of AMPK after cetuximab
treatment in different HNSCC cell lines
AMPK is a key metabolic sensor that helps maintain
cellular energy homeostasis in response to a declining
level of intracellular ATP and a simultaneously rising AMP
level [20, 21]. We thus first examined whether AMPK was
activated after cetuximab treatment in HN5, FaDu, and
UMSCC1 cells.
By using Western blot analysis to detect changes in
the level of AMPK activation-specific phosphorylation on
threonine 172 (AMPK-T172), we observed an increase
in AMPK activity in HN5 cells after 4-h exposure to
cetuximab (Figure 3A). The increase in AMPK activity
after cetuximab treatment was abolished when the
expression of LKB1 was silenced by any one of three
LKB1 siRNAs, indicating that cetuximab activated AMPK
via LKB1, i.e., cetuximab exerted this effect through the
canonical LKB1-AMPK axis.
We next compared the changes in AMPK activity
over an extended period after cetuximab treatment in
all three HNSCC cell lines. We found that the level
of AMPK-T172 relative to the level in untreated cells
was increased in all three cell lines as early as 2 h after
cetuximab treatment (Figure 3B). It is noteworthy that
11509

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Oscillation in intracellular ATP levels after cetuximab treatment in different HNSCC cell lines. HN5, FaDu,

and UMSCC1 cells were cultured in medium containing 0.5% FBS and low glucose (1 g/L) with 20 nM cetuximab in triplicate wells
for 1, 2, 4, 6, and 8 h. The levels of intracellular ATP were determined using the ATP Bioluminescent Assay Kit (Sigma-Aldrich). The ATP
levels at each time point were normalized to the ATP levels of the untreated cells at the corresponding time points.

Figure 3: Transient activation of AMPK after cetuximab treatment in different HNSCC cell lines. (A) HN5 cells were
transfected with a control siRNA or one of three different LKB1-targeting siRNAs (designated as #1, #2, and #3, respectively). Forty-eight
hours after transfection, the cells were treated with 20 nM cetuximab or not for 1 h. Cell lysates were then prepared and subjected to Western
blot analysis with the indicated primary antibodies. The densitometric value of T172-phosphorylated AMPK in each lane was normalized
to the densitometric value of total AMPK in the corresponding lane and plotted in arbitrary units. (B) HN5, FaDu, and UMSCC1 cells were
cultured in 0.5% FBS medium in the absence or presence of 10 nM or 20 nM cetuximab for 2, 6, and 16 h. Cell samples were subjected
to Western blot analysis for levels of T172-phosphorylated AMPK and total AMPK, and the densitometric value of T172-phosphorylated
AMPK in each sample was analyzed as described in (A).
when the cells were cultured in serum-starved medium
overnight (16 h), the level of AMPK-T172 also increased
in untreated cells, which reflects the consumption and
gradual depletion of nutrients in the medium. In HN5
and FaDu cells, after 2 h, there was no further increase
(and there was even a decrease in FaDu cells) in the
AMPK-T172 level in cetuximab-treated cells compared to
the level in the corresponding untreated cells. In contrast,
in UMSCC1 cells, up to 16 h, the level of AMPK-T172
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

remained higher in cetuximab-treated cells than in the
corresponding untreated cells.
These findings suggest two conclusions: first,
following cetuximab treatment, there is initially a
transient activation of AMPK to counteract and allow
cells to recover from the cetuximab-induced decline in
ATP; this transient activation of AMPK may explain the
oscillation in the level of intracellular ATP after cetuximab
treatment and may also serve as a marker of positive
11510

Oncotarget

on serine 79 (ACC-S79), a site known to be specifically
phosphorylated by AMPK [23]. In both HN5 and
UMSCC1 cells, the decline in intracellular ATP level after
cetuximab treatment was greater in the cells pre-exposed
to dorsomorphin than in the cells pre-exposed to vehicle
control. We found that the impact of AMPK knockdown
(Figure 4A) or kinase inhibition (Figure 4B) on cetuximabinduced decline in intracellular ATP level was greater in
HN5 cells, which are very sensitive to cetuximab, than
in UMSCC1 cells, which are only minimally responsive
to cetuximab-induced growth inhibition (Figure 1C).
UMSCC1 cells are hereinafter referred to as “cetuximabresistant cells” to distinguish them from cetuximabsensitive HN5 cells.
These findings, taken together with the knowledge
that AMPK is a metabolic sensor that responds to energy
deficiency by switching cells from active ATP consumption
to active ATP production, confirm that transient activation
of AMPK after cetuximab treatment counterbalanced
cetuximab-induced decline in intracellular ATP level and
thereby restored the ATP level in the targeted cells.

response to cetuximab treatment. Second, the high basal
level of activated AMPK (AMPK-T172) in UMSCC1
cells and the persistent high level of AMPK-T172 after
extended cetuximab treatment may account for the
minimal inhibitory effect of cetuximab on proliferation of
UMSCC1 cells, compared to the inhibitory effect on HN5
and FaDu cells.

Transient activation of AMPK counteracts
cetuximab-induced decline in intracellular ATP
level
To confirm the role of AMPK activity in maintaining
intracellular ATP level after cetuximab treatment, we
examined the effect of cetuximab on intracellular ATP
level in HN5 and UMSCC1 cells with and without AMPK
silencing.
As shown by Western blotting, two of three AMPK
siRNAs that we tested successfully silenced AMPK in
HN5 cells (Figure 4A, left panel, inset). These AMPKsilenced HN5 cells were used to assess the impact of
AMPK silencing on cetuximab-induced decline in
intracellular ATP level. In HN5 cells, a 1-h exposure to
cetuximab led to a modest 20% decline in intracellular ATP
level. Knockdown of AMPK alone also modestly lowered
the intracellular ATP level, which was expected because
of the role of AMPK in maintaining total intracellular
ATP level. Importantly, knockdown of AMPK led to
greater declines in intracellular ATP level after cetuximab
treatment. Consistent with the differences in their
efficiency in silencing AMPK, siRNA#1 weakly enhanced
the decline in intracellular ATP level after cetuximab
treatment (enhanced by 17%), but siRNA#2 and siRNA#3
substantially enhanced the decline in intracellular ATP
level after cetuximab treatment (enhanced by 35% and
58%, respectively) (Figure 4A, left panel). Similar findings
were seen in UMSCC1 cells, which had a higher basal level
of AMPK as shown by Western blotting (Figure 4A, right
panel, inset). In UMSCC1 cells, each of the three AMPK
siRNAs successfully silenced AMPK. We found that the
modest decline in intracellular ATP level in UMSCC1
cells after cetuximab was significantly enhanced when the
expression of AMPK was knocked down; the decline in
ATP level after cetuximab treatment was 17% in control
siRNA-treated cells but 37%, 39%, and 30%, respectively,
in the three different AMPK siRNA-treated cells.
To further confirm that our findings were a direct
effect of inhibition of AMPK activity, we treated HN5
and UMSCC1 cells with dorsomorphin (also known as
compound C or C.C.), a well-characterized and widely
used small-molecule kinase inhibitor of AMPK [22].
Figure 4B shows that pre-exposure of HN5 and UMSCC1
cells to dorsomorphin led to a lower AMPK activity than
was observed in vehicle-treated control cells, indicated
by Western blotting findings (insets) of decreased level
of phosphorylation of acetyl CoA carboxylase (ACC)
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Inhibition of AMPK activation enhances
responses of cetuximab-resistant cells to
cetuximab
To determine whether inhibition of AMPK activation
enhances the response of cetuximab-resistant UMSCC1
cells to cetuximab, we treated the cells with cetuximab
with and without knockdown of AMPK by siRNA or
inhibition of AMPK with dorsomorphin. Figure 5A shows
that knockdown of AMPK led to induction of apoptosis,
shown by cleavage of the nuclear protein poly(adenosine
diphosphate ribose) polymerase (PARP), a marker of
apoptosis, after cetuximab treatment. The induction of
apoptosis was further confirmed by cell LIVE/DEAD
assay showing only 1.3% of cells dead upon cetuximab
treatment and 9.3% of cells dead upon AMPK knockdown
but 24.7% of cells dead with the combination (Figure
5B). Similar findings were observed with dorsomorphin
treatment (Figure 5C). An MTT assay showed that the
combination of cetuximab and dorsomorphin resulted in
significantly greater growth inhibition or cell killing than
either treatment alone (Figure 5D).
To further confirm a role of AMPK in development
of acquired resistance to cetuximab, we exposed parental
HN5 cells to cetuximab continuously for over 6 months
with stepwise increases in cetuximab concentration in
culture medium from 0.2 nM to 20 nM [18], which led
to development of a cetuximab-resistant HN5 subline
(HN5-R). The response of HN5-R cells to cetuximab
treatment was similar to the response of UMSCC1 cells
(Figure 1C): HN5-R cells exhibited only a modest, 20–
25% inhibition by cetuximab at 50 nM, compared to an
over 75% inhibition by cetuximab at 2.5 nM in parental
HN5 cells (Figure 6A). Compared with parental HN5
11511

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Transient activation of AMPK counteracts cetuximab-induced decline in intracellular ATP level. (A) HN5 and
UMSCC1 cells were transfected with a control siRNA or one of three different AMPK-targeting siRNAs (designated as #1, #2, and #3,
respectively). Forty-eight hours after transfection, the cells were treated with 20 nM cetuximab or not for 1 h. Intracellular levels of ATP
in each sample were measured using the ATP Bioluminescent Assay Kit (Sigma-Aldrich). The negative percentages indicate the extent of
inhibition of intracellular ATP level by cetuximab compared with the ATP level in the control group under each of the indicated conditions.
**p < 0.01. Insets, Western blots showing knockdown of AMPK expression in cells transfected with AMPK-targeting siRNAs or control
siRNA. (B) HN5 and UMSCC1 cells were cultured in 0.5% FBS medium in the presence of 10 μM dorsomorphin (C.C. for “compound
C”) for 16 h and then treated with 20 nM cetuximab or not for 1 h. Cell samples were prepared for measurement of intracellular ATP level,
and the data were expressed as described in (A). Insets, Western blots showing inhibition of S79 phosphorylation of ACC by dorsomorphin.
cells, HN5-R cells had higher basal AMPK activity, shown
by higher levels of T172-phosphorylated AMPK and S79phosphorylated ACC (Figure 6B). Similar to findings
in UMSCC1 cells (Figure 5), treatment of HN5-R cells
with cetuximab plus dorsomorphin resulted in apoptosis
as indicated by Western blotting showing increased
cleavage of PARP (Figure 6C), as well as quantitative
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) showing
increased DNA fragmentation (Figure 6D). In contrast,
treatment with cetuximab or dorsomorphin alone had no
obvious effects (Figure 6C and 6D). We also conducted
additional assays to ascertain the cell-killing effect of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

the combination treatment at the cell level. Both the
LIVE/DEAD cell viability assay and MTT assay showed
significantly greater cell death with combination treatment
than with either treatment alone (Figure 6E and 6F).
To confirm the reproducibility of these findings
in cancer types other than head and neck cancer, we
examined the effect of the combination of cetuximab
and dorsomorphin in a comparable cell line derived
from colorectal cancer, the other cancer type for which
cetuximab is approved [24–26]. DiFi5 is a subline with
acquired resistance to cetuximab generated from DiFi
colorectal cancer cells [27]. We found that treatment
11512

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Knockdown or inhibition of AMPK sensitizes UMSCC1 cells to cetuximab treatment via induction of
apoptosis. (A) and (B) UMSCC1 cells were subjected to knockdown of AMPK with siRNA #2. Forty-eight hours after transfection, the

cells were treated with 20 nM cetuximab or not for 24 h. In (A), cell lysates were prepared and subjected to Western blot analysis with
the indicated primary antibodies. In (B), the cells were subjected to a LIVE/DEAD assay (Invitrogen) and observed under a fluorescent
microscope. The ratio of dead cells to total cells in each group was calculated as described in Materials and Methods. **p < 0.01. (C)
UMSCC1 cells were cultured in 0.5% FBS medium in the presence of 20 nM cetuximab, 10 μM dorsomorphin (C.C. for “compound C”),
or both for 24 h. Cell lysates were then prepared and subjected to Western blot analysis with the indicated primary antibodies. (D) UMSCC1
cells were treated with 20 nM cetuximab alone or in combination with 2.5 μM dorsomorphin for 72 h. Cell viability was determined with
MTT assay. The OD values of the treated cells were normalized to the OD value of the untreated cells, which was set as 100%. Data shown
are means and SDs (n = 3). **p < 0.01.

of DiFi5 cells with the combination of cetuximab and
dorsomorphin produced effects on PARP cleavage and
cell death similar to the effects observed in HN5-R cells
(Supplementary Figure S1).

induced antitumor activities [16, 17]. Our findings from
both biochemical and cell-based assays support the
conclusions that a transient activation of AMPK is an
early metabolic marker of response to cetuximab-induced
inhibition of glycolysis, and high and sustained AMPK
activity helps cancer cells survive under the stress of
cetuximab-induced inhibition of cancer metabolism.
Successful inhibition of the signaling pathways
downstream of EGFR is sometimes equated with the antiproliferative and anti-survival effects of EGFR-targeted
therapy because it is required for successful inhibition
of cell proliferation and, under certain circumstance,
induction of cell death by EGFR-targeted therapy. Our
current data indicate, however, that while successful
inhibition of the downstream pathways is required, it
may not necessarily lead to successful inhibition of cell

DISCUSSION
In this study, we gained new mechanistic perspective
on the response and resistance of cancer cells to cetuximab
treatment from a standpoint of AMPK-mediated energy
homeostasis and associated metabolic effects. This study
is a follow-up to our recent work reporting that cetuximab
exerts its antitumor activity in part via reversing the
Warburg effect in cancer cells [18] and our earlier work
reporting that cetuximab can downregulate HIF-1α and
that downregulation of HIF-1α is required for cetuximabwww.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11513

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Inhibition of AMPK overcomes acquired resistance to cetuximab via induction of apoptosis. (A) HN5 cells and
HN5-R cells were cultured in 0.5% FBS medium containing the indicated concentrations of cetuximab for 5 days and then subjected to MTT
assay. (B) HN5 and HN5-R cells were cultured in 0.5% FBS medium in the absence or presence of 10 or 20 nM cetuximab for 24 h. Cell
lysates were then prepared and subjected to Western blot analysis with the indicated primary antibodies. (C) HN5-R cells were cultured in
0.5% FBS medium in the presence of 20 nM cetuximab, 10 μM dorsomorphin (C.C. for “compound C”), or both for 24 h. Cell lysates were
then prepared and subjected to Western blot analysis with the indicated primary antibodies. (D) HN5-R cells were treated as described in (C).
Cell lysates were subjected to a quantitative apoptosis ELISA (Roche Diagnostics). (E) HN5-R cells were treated as described in (C). The
cells were subjected to a LIVE/DEAD assay (Life Technologies) and observed under a fluorescent microscope. The ratio of dead cells to total
cells in each group was calculated as described in Materials and Methods. **p < 0.01. (F) HN5-R cells were treated with 20 nM cetuximab
alone or in combination with 2.5 or 5 μM dorsomorphin for 72 h. Cell viability was determined by MTT assay. The OD values of the treated
cells were normalized to the OD value of the untreated cells, which was set as 100%. Data shown are means and SDs (n = 3). **p < 0.01.
proliferation or induction of cell death. This concept
shift is based on our novel findings from the current
study that 1) there was an oscillating pattern of decline
and increase in the level of intracellular ATP in targeted
cancer cells after exposure to cetuximab, 2) the magnitude
of response to cetuximab-induced decline of intracellular
ATP level was linked to response to cetuximab-induced
growth inhibition, 3) knockdown or inhibition of AMPK
enhanced cetuximab-induced decline of intracellular ATP
level, and 4) knockdown or inhibition of AMPK enhanced
cetuximab-mediated effects by inducing apoptosis.
AMPK is typically activated in response to reduced
cell bioenergetic metabolism in order to maintain energy
homeostasis by stimulating fatty acid oxidation [28, 29]
and suppressing cell biosynthesis through inhibition
of the mTOR pathway and lipogenic pathway [30, 31].
Activation of AMPK occurs when the glucose supply is
reduced or when glucose metabolism is inhibited. In that
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

regard, a transient activation of AMPK in cetuximabtargeted cancer cells can be interpreted as a metabolic
marker of cetuximab-induced inhibition of glycolysis. By
demonstrating that knockdown or inhibition of AMPK
resulted in a greater decline of intracellular ATP after
cetuximab treatment, we confirmed that AMPK-mediated
energy homeostasis can act as a cushion to counterbalance
cetuximab-induced decline in intracellular ATP level.
The heterogeneity of cancer metabolism has been
increasingly recognized in recent years [32, 33]. We
found that cancer cells with a high basal level of AMPK
activity (e.g., UMSCC1 cells) were resistant or minimally
responsive to cetuximab-induced growth inhibition
despite effective inhibition of cell signaling pathways
downstream of EGFR. Furthermore, compared to parental
cetuximab-sensitive cells (e.g., HN5 cells), cells that
acquired resistance to cetuximab (e.g., HN5-R) exhibited
an increased basal level of AMPK. By demonstrating that
11514

Oncotarget

knockdown or inhibition of AMPK enhanced cetuximabmediated effects by inducing apoptosis, we confirmed
that a high level of AMPK protects cells from cetuximabinduced effects on cancer metabolism.
However, the role of AMPK observed in our study
may not be limited to maintaining energy homeostasis
after cetuximab treatment. In the current study, we did
not explore in depth the mechanisms by which AMPK
influences cancer cell response to cetuximab. We
speculate that cancer cells that are naturally resistant
to cetuximab or have acquired resistance to cetuximab
may use parallel or alternative metabolic pathways, such
as via increased glutaminolysis, to various degrees, to
obtain needed energy and biomass. Glutaminolysis may
provide alternative energy and biomass to support cell
survival and proliferation when glycolysis is inhibited
by cetuximab. Because glutaminolysis takes place partly
in the mitochondria, excess glutaminolysis could lead to
overproduction of reactive oxygen species (ROS). While
normally the level of ROS is limited by cellular antioxidant
systems and thereby cells are protected from ROS-induced
damage, excessive production of ROS as a result of
reprogrammed cancer metabolism could damage cells.
AMPK may help maintain homeostasis of intracellular
redox after cetuximab treatment. AMPK is well known
to jump-start autophagy directly via phosphorylation of
Ulk1/ATG1 [34–36] and indirectly via inactivation of
mTOR through phosphorylation of TSC2 [30] or Raptor
[31]. It is interesting that the level of activated AMPK
was clearly increased in cetuximab-resistant cells (such
as HN5-R and DiFi5). We found the activity of Src was
significantly higher in HN5-R cells than in HN5 cells
(data not shown) and significantly higher in DiFi5 cells
than in DiFi cells [27]. AMPK thus could also be activated
by Src activity through LKB1 independently of the AMP/
ATP ratio [37–40]. Through regulating autophagy, AMPK
maintains mitochondrial integrity in cancer cells. We
previously reported that autophagy occurs after cetuximab
treatment and that knockdown of autophagy regulatory
genes, such as Beclin 1 or Atg7, or treatment with the
lysosome inhibitor chloroquine sensitized cancer cells to
cetuximab-induced apoptosis [41, 42]. We thus speculate
that AMPK may also regulate autophagy to maintain
mitochondria integrity when the cancer metabolism is
pushed partially or completely away from glycolysis to
alternative metabolic pathways in mitochondria. Under
such a scenario, inhibition or knockdown of AMPK would
disable the cell’s ability to maintain redox homeostasis,
leading to a catastrophic outcome through apoptosis. We
are currently testing this hypothesis.
Separately, it is noteworthy that the transient
or sustained activation of AMPK to maintain energy
hemostasis after cetuximab-induced inhibition of
glycolysis is mechanistically different from activation of
AMPK following inhibition of the respiratory chain in
mitochondria by complex I inhibitors, such as phenformin
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

and metformin, which results in depletion of intracellular
ATP and energy crisis in the treated cells and which has
been reported to cause cancer cell death rather than help
cancer cells survive [43–46].
In summary, our data suggest that cetuximab
inhibits cancer cell proliferation through inhibition of
glycolysis and that cancer cells respond to the inhibition
of glycolysis by reprogramming of cell metabolism and
activation of AMPK. Sustained high AMPK activity
helps cancer cells survive cetuximab-induced inhibition
of cancer metabolism. The remarkable variation among
cancer patients in response to EGFR-targeted therapy
remains a daunting challenge. Improved understanding
of the ability of cancer cells to sense energy deficiency
and restore energy homeostasis will help us meet that
challenge by designing new strategies for improved
clinical outcomes.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Reagents
Cetuximab (ImClone Systems, an Eli Lilly company,
New York, NY) was purchased from the pharmacy of
MD Anderson Cancer Center. All other reagents were
purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO) unless
otherwise specified.

Cell lines and cell cultures
HN5, FaDu, and UMSCC1 HNSCC cells and DiFi
colorectal cancer cells were maintained in Dulbecco’s
modified Eagle’s medium/F12 medium supplemented
with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 2 mM glutamine,
100 U/mL penicillin, and 100 μg/mL streptomycin in a
5% CO2 atmosphere at 37°C as described previously [47,
48]. Cetuximab-resistant HN5-R and DiFi5 cells were
generated by exposing parental HN5 and DiFi cells to
stepwise increasing doses of cetuximab (up to 20 nM) over
6 months or more [18, 27].

Cell proliferation assay
Cells were cultured in 24-well plates in a 5% CO2
atmosphere at 37°C. Following the indicated treatments,
10 mg/mL methylthiazolyldiphenyl-tetrazolium bromide
(MTT) was added (50 μL/well), and the cells were
incubated for an additional 2 h. The cells were then
lysed with a lysis buffer (500 μL/well) containing 20%
sodium dodecyl sulfate in dimethyl formamide/H2O
(1:1, v/v; pH 4.7) at 37°C for at least 6 h. The relative
number of surviving cells in each group was determined
by measuring the optical density (OD) of the cell lysates
at an absorbance wavelength of 570 nm. The OD value of
each treatment group was expressed as a percentage of the
OD value of the untreated control cells [18].
11515

Oncotarget

Knockdown of LKB1 or AMPK gene expression
by siRNA

for an additional 16 h in 0.5% FBS medium in the
presence or absence of 20 nM cetuximab. The cells were
then harvested and lysed in a lysis buffer (0.2 M Tris HCl
[pH 8.0] and 0.1% Triton X-100). The luciferase assay
was performed by adding luciferase substrate solution
(0.5 mM D-luciferin, 0.25 mM coenzyme A, 20 mM Tris
HCl, 4 mM MgSO4, 0.1 mM EDTA, 30 mM DTT, and 0.5
mM ATP) to the samples and immediately measuring for
luciferase activity using a FLUOstar Omega luminometer.
Arbitrary luciferase activity units were normalized
to the amount of protein in each sample. The protein
concentration was determined using the Pierce BCA
protein assay kit.

LKB1–targeted siRNAs (siRNA sequence #1,
GUACUUCUGUCAGCUGAUU; #2, CGGAGAAGCG
UUUCCCAGU;
#3,
GCUCUUACGGCAAGGU
GAA), AMPK–targeted siRNAs (siRNA sequence
#1, CCCAUAUUAUUUGCGUGUA; #2, CAAAUG
CUUCCAUUUGUAA;
#3
CAAAGUCGACC
AAAUGAUA), and control siRNA were purchased from
Sigma-Aldrich. The siRNA (200 pmol) and Lipofectamine
2000 (5 μL; Life Technologies) were mixed in 100 μL of
minimal essential medium (Opti-MEM, Life Technologies)
for 15 min, and the siRNA/Lipofectamine 2000 mixture
was added into the culture medium. Six hours later, the
medium was replaced with regular medium, and the cells
were cultured for an additional 48 h prior to the detection
of knockdown of LKB1 or AMPK expression by Western
blotting.

Intracellular ATP assay
Intracellular ATP levels were determined using
the ATP Bioluminescent Assay Kit (Sigma-Aldrich) as
we previously described [18]. Briefly, cells were seeded
in 6-well plates at 5 × 105 cells/well and treated with
20 nM cetuximab or left untreated in low-glucose, lowserum medium for 4 h. The cells were then harvested and
resuspended in 1 mL of phosphate-buffered saline. An
aliquot of 50 μL of the cell suspension was mixed with
100 μL of ATP-releasing reagent and 50 μL of distilled
water in each well of a 96-well plate. The samples (100 μL)
in each well were then transferred to a white opaque
96-well plate whose wells were each pre-filled with
100 μL of ATP assay mix. The amount of light emitted in
each well was immediately measured using a FLUOstar
Omega luminometer.

Western blot analysis
After the indicated treatments, cells were lysed in
a lysis buffer containing 50 mM TrisHCl (pH 7.4), 150
mM NaCl, 0.5% Igepal CA-630, 50 mM NaF, 1 mM
Na3VO4, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, 25 μg/
mL aprotinin, and 25 μg/mL leupeptin and kept on ice
for 15 min. The lysates were cleared by centrifugation,
and the supernatants were collected. Equal amounts
of protein lysate, as determined using the Pierce
Coomassie Plus colorimetric protein assay (Thermo
Fisher Scientific), were separated by sodium dodecyl
sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, blotted
onto nitrocellulose, and probed with various primary
antibodies, which were all commercially available
from the following vendors: Cell Signaling Technology
(for antibodies against Akt, S473-phosphorylated Akt,
T202/Y204-phosphorylated Erk, LKB1, AMPK, T172phosphorylated AMPK, S79-phosphorylated ACC, and
PARP), Santa Cruz Biotechnology (for antibodies against
Erk and ACC), BD Biosciences (for antibody against HIF1α), and Sigma-Aldrich (for antibodies against EGFR and
β-actin). The signals were visualized using the enhanced
chemiluminescence detection kit (GE Healthcare).
Western blotting results were quantified using the ImageJ
v1.46 image processing program (National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD).

Apoptosis assays
Apoptosis was measured using a colorimetric ELISA
kit (Cell Death Detection ELISA, Roche Diagnostics
Corp.) that quantitatively measures cytoplasmic histoneassociated DNA fragments (mononucleosomes and
oligonucleosomes). The procedure was performed exactly
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Apoptosis
was also detected by Western blotting with an antibody
that recognizes both cleaved and uncleaved PARP (Cell
Signaling Technology) as described previously [17, 50].

LIVE/DEAD cell viability assay
The fluorescence-based LIVE/DEAD cell viability
assay kit was purchased from Life Technologies.
Following treatments, cells were incubated with 4 μM
calcein acetoxymethyl ester (calcein AM) and 2 μM
ethidium homodimer-1 (EthD) together in a 37°C, 5% CO2
incubator for 45 min. The cells were then rinsed gently
with phosphate-buffered saline and then observed for cell
viability under a fluorescence microscope. Live cells were
identified by a green fluorescence that was produced when
the non-fluorescent calcein AM was converted to calcein,
which fluoresces when excited at 485 nm; dead cells were

HIF-1 luciferase reporter assay
The HIF-1-luciferase reporter gene construct pBIGL-V6L contains six tandem repeats of the hypoxia
response element from the human VEGF gene [49]. HN5,
FaDu, and UMSCC1 cells were transiently transfected
with the pBI-GL-V6L construct using Lipofectamine
2000. After a 24-h transfection period, the cells were
washed twice with phosphate-buffered saline and cultured
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11516

Oncotarget

identified by a bright red fluorescence that was produced
by EthD excited at 544 nm.
For quantification of the ratio of live to dead cells,
cells were seeded in a clear-bottom, opaque-wall 96-well
plate. After indicated treatments, cells stained with calcein
AM and EthD as described above were analyzed with a
fluorescence microplate reader with emission wavelength
at 610 nm for EthD and at 520 nm for calcein. The relative
values of live and dead cells in the treated groups were
expressed as a percentage of the fluorescence reading of
the corresponding group of untreated cells.

10.	 Tennant DA, Duran RV, Gottlieb E. Targeting metabolic
transformation for cancer therapy. Nat. Rev. Cancer. 2010;
10:267–277.

Statistical analysis

14.	 Vander Heiden MG, Cantley LC, Thompson CB.
Understanding the Warburg effect: the metabolic requirements of cell proliferation. Science. 2009; 324:1029–1033.

11.	 Vander Heiden MG. Targeting cancer metabolism: a
therapeutic window opens. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 2011;
10:671–684.
12.	 Mullen AR, DeBerardinis RJ. Genetically-defined metabolic reprogramming in cancer. Trends Endocrinol. Metab.
2012; 23:552–559.
13.	 Cairns RA, Harris IS, Mak TW. Regulation of cancer cell
metabolism. Nat. Rev. Cancer. 2011; 11:85–95.

Student’s t-test was used for all statistical analyses.
The data are presented as means and standard deviations
(SDs). All experiments were repeated at least once with
reproducible findings.

15.	 Vander Heiden MG, Locasale JW, Swanson KD, Sharfi H,
Heffron GJ, Amador-Noguez D, Christofk HR, Wagner G,
Rabinowitz JD, Asara JM, Cantley LC. Evidence for an
alternative glycolytic pathway in rapidly proliferating cells.
Science. 2010; 329:1492–1499.

Acknowledgments

16.	 Luwor RB, Lu Y, Li X, Mendelsohn J, Fan Z. The antiepidermal growth factor receptor monoclonal antibody
cetuximab/C225 reduces hypoxia-inducible factor-1 alpha,
leading to transcriptional inhibition of vascular endothelial
growth factor expression. Oncogene. 2005; 24:4433–4441.

This work was supported in part by US National
Institutes of Health (NIH) R01 awards CA179015 and
CA129036 and R21 award DE021883 to Z. Fan. The
work was also supported in part by the NIH through MD
Anderson’s Cancer Center Support Grant, CA016672. We
thank Stephanie Deming in the Department of Scientific
Publications at MD Anderson Cancer Center for editing
this manuscript.

17.	 Li X, Lu Y, Liang K, Pan T, Mendelsohn J, Fan Z.
Requirement of hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha downregulation in mediating the antitumor activity of the antiepidermal growth factor receptor monoclonal antibody
cetuximab. Mol. Cancer Ther. 2008; 7:1207–1217.

References

18.	 Lu H, Li X, Luo Z, Liu J, Fan Z. Cetuximab reverses the
Warburg effect by inhibiting HIF-1-regulated LDH-A. Mol.
Cancer Ther. 2013; 12:2187–2199.

1.	 Citri A, Yarden Y. EGF-ERBB signalling: towards the systems level. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2006; 7:505–516.
2.	 Ciardiello F, Tortora G. EGFR antagonists in cancer treatment. N. Engl. J. Med. 2008; 358:1160–1174.

19.	 Shackelford DB, Shaw RJ. The LKB1-AMPK pathway:
metabolism and growth control in tumour suppression. Nat.
Rev. Cancer. 2009; 9:563–575.

3.	 Dhomen NS, Mariadason J, Tebbutt N, Scott AM.
Therapeutic targeting of the epidermal growth factor receptor in human cancer. Crit Rev. Oncog. 2012; 17:31–50.

20.	 Hardie DG. AMP-activated protein kinase: an energy sensor
that regulates all aspects of cell function. Genes Dev. 2011;
25:1895–1908.

4.	 Chong CR, Janne PA. The quest to overcome resistance
to EGFR-targeted therapies in cancer. Nat. Med. 2013;
19:1389–1400.

21.	 Hardie DG, Ross FA, Hawley SA. AMPK: a nutrient and
energy sensor that maintains energy homeostasis. Nat. Rev.
Mol. Cell Biol. 2012; 13:251–262.

5.	 Wheeler DL, Dunn EF, Harari PM. Understanding resistance to EGFR inhibitors-impact on future treatment strategies. Nat. Rev. Clin. Oncol. 2010; 7:493–507.

22.	 Zhou G, et al. Role of AMP-activated protein kinase in mechanism of metformin action. J. Clin. Invest. 2001; 108:1167–1174.
23.	 Ha J, Daniel S, Broyles SS, Kim KH. Critical phosphorylation sites for acetyl-CoA carboxylase activity. J. Biol.
Chem. 1994; 269:22162–22168.

6.	 Diaz LA Jr., et al. The molecular evolution of acquired
resistance to targeted EGFR blockade in colorectal cancers.
Nature. 2012; 486:537–540.

24.	 Cunningham D, Humblet Y, Siena S, Khayat D, Bleiberg H,
Santoro A, Bets D, Mueser M, Harstrick A, Verslype C,
Chau I, Van Cutsem E. Cetuximab monotherapy and cetuximab plus irinotecan in irinotecan-refractory metastatic
colorectal cancer. N. Engl. J Med. 2004; 351:337–345.

7.	 Misale S, et al. Emergence of KRAS mutations and
acquired resistance to anti-EGFR therapy in colorectal cancer. Nature. 2012; 486:532–536.
8.	 Kroemer G, Pouyssegur J. Tumor cell metabolism: cancer’s
Achilles’ heel. Cancer Cell. 2008; 13:472–482.

25.	 Lievre A, et al. KRAS mutation status is predictive of
response to cetuximab therapy in colorectal cancer. Cancer
Res. 2006; 66:3992–3995.

9.	 Pan JG, Mak TW. Metabolic targeting as an anticancer
strategy: dawn of a new era? Sci. STKE. 2007; 2007:e14.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11517

Oncotarget

26.	 Khambata-Ford S, et al. Expression of epiregulin and
amphiregulin and K-ras mutation status predict disease
control in metastatic colorectal cancer patients treated with
cetuximab. J. Clin. Oncol. 2007; 25:3230–3237.

Goldman MH. Activation of the AMP-activated protein
kinase by the anti-diabetic drug metformin in vivo. Role
of mitochondrial reactive nitrogen species. J Biol. Chem.
2004; 279:43940–43951.

27.	 Lu Y, Li X, Liang K, Luwor R, Siddik ZH, Mills GB,
Mendelsohn J, Fan Z. Epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) ubiquitination as a mechanism of acquired resistance escaping treatment by the anti-EGFR monoclonal
antibody cetuximab. Cancer Res. 2007; 67:8240–8247.

40.	 Yamada E, Pessin JE, Kurland IJ, Schwartz GJ, Bastie CC.
Fyn-dependent regulation of energy expenditure and body
weight is mediated by tyrosine phosphorylation of LKB1.
Cell Metab. 2010; 11:113–124.
41.	 Li X, Fan Z. The epidermal growth factor receptor antibody
cetuximab induces autophagy in cancer cells by downregulating HIF-1α and Bcl-2 and activating the Beclin 1/hVps34
complex. Cancer Res. 2010; 70:5942–5952.

28.	 Carling D, Zammit VA, Hardie DG. A common bicyclic
protein kinase cascade inactivates the regulatory enzymes
of fatty acid and cholesterol biosynthesis. FEBS Lett. 1987;
223:217–222.

42.	 Li X, Lu Y, Pan T, Fan Z. Roles of autophagy in cetuximabmediated cancer therapy against EGFR. Autophagy. 2010;
6:1066–1077.

29.	 Li Y, et al. AMPK phosphorylates and inhibits SREBP
activity to attenuate hepatic steatosis and atherosclerosis
in diet-induced insulin-resistant mice. Cell Metab. 2011;
13:376–388.

43.	 Shaw RJ, Lamia KA, Vasquez D, Koo SH, Bardeesy N,
Depinho RA, Montminy M, Cantley LC. The kinase LKB1
mediates glucose homeostasis in liver and therapeutic
effects of metformin. Science. 2005; 310:1642–1646.

30.	 Inoki K, Zhu T, Guan KL. TSC2 mediates cellular energy
response to control cell growth and survival. Cell. 2003;
115:577–590.

44.	 Shackelford DB, Abt E, Gerken L, Vasquez DS, Seki A,
Leblanc M, Wei L, Fishbein MC, Czernin J, Mischel PS,
Shaw RJ. LKB1 inactivation dictates therapeutic response
of non-small cell lung cancer to the metabolism drug phenformin. Cancer Cell. 2013; 23:143–158.

31.	 Gwinn DM, Shackelford DB, Egan DF, Mihaylova MM,
Mery A, Vasquez DS, Turk BE, Shaw RJ. AMPK phosphorylation of raptor mediates a metabolic checkpoint. Mol.
Cell. 2008; 30:214–226.
32.	 DeBerardinis RJ, Thompson CB. Cellular metabolism and
disease: what do metabolic outliers teach us? Cell. 2012;
148:1132–1144.

45.	 Morgillo F, Sasso FC, Della Corte CM, Vitagliano D,
D’Aiuto E, Troiani T, Martinelli E, De VF, Orditura M,
De PR, Ciardiello F. Synergistic effects of metformin treatment in combination with gefitinib, a selective EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor, in LKB1 wild-type NSCLC cell lines.
Clin. Cancer Res. 2013; 19:3508–3519.

33.	 Jiang L, DeBerardinis RJ. Cancer metabolism: When more
is less. Nature. 2012; 489:511–512.
34.	 Egan DF, et al. Phosphorylation of ULK1 (hATG1) by
AMP-activated protein kinase connects energy sensing to
mitophagy. Science. 2011; 331:456–461.

46.	 Pernicova I, Korbonits M. Metformin—mode of action
and clinical implications for diabetes and cancer. Nat. Rev.
Endocrinol. 2014; 10:143–156.

35.	 Kim J, Kundu M, Viollet B, Guan KL. AMPK, and mTOR
regulate autophagy through direct phosphorylation of Ulk1.
Nat. Cell Biol. 2011; 13:132–141.

47.	 Lu H, Liang K, Lu Y, Fan Z. The anti-EGFR antibody
cetuximab sensitizes human head and neck squamous
cell carcinoma cells to radiation in part through inhibiting
radiation-induced upregulation of HIF-1alpha. Cancer Lett.
2012; 322:78–85.

36.	 Hardie DG. AMPK and autophagy get connected. EMBO J.
2011; 30:634–635.
37.	 Mizrachy-Schwartz S, Cohen N, Klein S, KravchenkoBalasha N, Levitzki A. Up-regulation of AMP-activated
protein kinase in cancer cell lines is mediated through c-Src
activation. J Biol. Chem. 2011; 286:15268–15277.

48.	 Zhao M, et al. Assembly and initial characterization of a
panel of 85 genomically validated cell lines from diverse
head and neck tumor sites. Clin. Cancer Res. 2011;
17:7248–7264.

38.	 Zou MH, Hou XY, Shi CM, Kirkpatick S, Liu F,
Goldman MH, Cohen RA. Activation of 5′-AMP-activated
kinase is mediated through c-Src and phosphoinositide
3-kinase activity during hypoxia-reoxygenation of bovine
aortic endothelial cells. Role of peroxynitrite. J Biol. Chem.
2003; 278:34003–34010.

49.	 Post DE, Van Meir EG. Generation of bidirectional
hypoxia/HIF-responsive expression vectors to target
gene expression to hypoxic cells. Gene Ther. 2001;
8:1801–1807.
50.	 Lu Y, Li X, Lu H, Fan Z. 1, 9-Pyrazoloanthrones downregulate HIF-1alpha and sensitize cancer cells to cetuximabmediated anti-EGFR therapy. PLoS One. 2010; 5:e58231.

39.	 Zou MH, Kirkpatrick SS, Davis BJ, Nelson JS, Wiles WG,
Schlattner U, Neumann D, Brownlee M, Freeman MB,

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11518

Oncotarget

