Commentary

Tackling the Cancer Signal Transduction “Labyrinth”
A Combinatorial Use of Biochemical Tools with Mathematical Models Will Enhance the Identification of
Optimal Targets for Each Molecular Defect
Michalis V. Karamouzis, MD, PhD; and Athanasios G. Papavassiliou, MD, PhD

Unraveling cancer-associated molecular defects is crucial for further pharmacological targeting. Although novel techniques are being
developed to elucidate genomic, proteomic, and transcriptomic alterations, the map of protein interactions and aberrations in normal
but also in malignant cells is still obscure. It has been recently shown that many of the events in signaling cascades might be revealed
using mathematical models. Transcriptional regulation still represents the main obstacle for the design of truly molecularly-targeted
agents, mainly due to its enormous plasticity and heterogeneity in cells and tissues. Systematic mapping of signaling networks and
application of new computational algorithms will reinforce the use of novel research tools in this venue. The case of epidermal growth
factor receptor family proteins and their intracellular cross-talk interactions and downstream molecules is used as a representative
C 2013 American Cancer Society.
paradigm. Cancer 2014;120:316–22. V
KEYWORDS: biochemistry, cancer treatment, computational oncology, epidermal growth factor receptor, mathematical modeling,
signal transduction, targeted agents.

INTRODUCTION
Despite many technological and therapeutic advances, cancer death rates are still considered high, mainly due to limitations of early diagnosis of many tumor types and low efficacy of available treatment options.1 Carcinogenesis is a stepwise
process characterized by the accumulation of genetic and epigenetic aberrations that favor the initial formation of premalignant lesions that gradually progress to invasive carcinomas. Signaling molecules and network perturbations are the
mediators of these events leading to carcinogenic features, such as uncontrolled proliferation, apoptosis escape, neoangiogenesis, migration, and metastasis. In the last decade, it has been shown that a wide gamut of signal transduction molecules
and oncogenic transcription factors are implicated in human tumorigenesis.2 Most of these proteins contribute both to
initiation and progression of carcinogenesis and to the development of resistance to currently used therapeutic strategies
(eg, chemotherapy, hormonal therapy, molecularly-targeted agents, and radiotherapy). One major characteristic of cancer
signaling cascades is the complex intracellular and extracellular cross-talk among different proteins and their interactions
throughout space and time. Additional cellular events, such as posttranslational modifications (eg, phosphorylation,
methylation, acetylation), single-nucleotide polymorphisms, and microRNA signatures profoundly augment the levels of
complexity in the carcinogenesis-related networking “labyrinth.”3-5
The “chaotic” nature of signaling cascades implicated in various stages of carcinogenesis has necessitated the development of new techniques that will provide concrete clues to identify crucial molecules in each network, as well as the
construction of mathematical models based on experimental results to achieve a quantification of the accumulated data
regarding cellular changes and defects that characterize cancer cells.6-8 Theoretically, such a combinatorial approach could
facilitate effective and reliable diagnostic algorithms, identification of patient groups with increased cancer risk, categorization of molecularly-driven tumor subtypes, prediction of the clinical outcome after treatment with specific molecularlytargeted agents, and early detection of disease progression.
At present, the shortage of independent cancer research funding and typically high cancer treatment health care costs
are emerging as major problems. The scientific cooperation of disciplines such as biochemistry, mathematics, bioinformatics, genetics, molecular biology, and pharmacology seems to be a promising venue in better understanding the cellular

Corresponding author : Athanasios G. Papavassiliou, MD, PhD, Department of Biological Chemistry, Medical School, University of Athens, 75, M. Asias Street, GR11527 Athens, Greece; Fax: (011) 30-210-779-1207; papavas@med.uoa.gr
Molecular Oncology Unit, Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Athens Medical School, Athens, Greece
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.28424, Received: August 16, 2013; Accepted: September 16, 2013, Published online October 21, 2013 in Wiley Online Library
(wileyonlinelibrary.com)

316

Cancer

February 1, 2014

Tackling Signal Transduction in Cancer/Karamouzis and Papavassiliou

circuitry alterations that govern carcinogenesis as well as
in identifying optimal molecular targets in a cost-effective
way. The majority of defects in complex biological
systems, such as malignant tumors, result not only from
interactions within a specific level (eg, DNA) but also
from crosslinking interconnections among different levels
(eg, epigenetic defects, protein expression levels, transcriptional control). Therefore, the data collected by the highly
sophisticated techniques of genomics, proteomics, and
cellomics combined with biostatistics and bioinformatics
analyses could create computational models that will
enable the identification of novel therapeutic anticancer
opportunities.
The Evolution of Proteomics in the Research of
Signaling Cascades

Cellular signaling networks comprise proteins, substrates,
and ligands that cooperate in a complex and wellorchestrated way. Accumulated aberrations in these molecules are being reported in many tumors and represent the
most attractive candidates for novel anticancer regimens.
To date, the available molecularly targeted agents in
cancer therapeutics still lack the desired activity and selectivity, because the understanding of cellular events is limited. A major drawback is the lack of experimental
techniques that can analyze these complex networks in
real time. The development of antibodies that can target a
large fraction of the proteome and detect posttranslational
modifications has allowed the identification of a broad
variety of signaling spots.9 Medium- and highthroughput screening methods specify many parallel
signaling events, such as analyses based on phospho-flow
cytometry and mass spectrometry, which have contributed to the assessment of whole signaling networks.10
The recent advances in chemical biology and chemical
proteomics also provide a plethora of small-molecule
compounds that can be used to study signaling pathway
perturbations and further explore the changes that characterize a single cell as well as a cellular system level.11
Among various posttranslational modifications
engaged in cellular signaling, phosphorylation and
dephosphorylation are likely the most prevalent and are
vital in healthy and cancer cells; it has been estimated that
approximately 30% to 40% of all human proteins are
phosphorylated or dephosphorylated in a balanced way at
any given time. Up to now, available biochemical methods have failed to provide adaptable and reliable measurements of these enzymatic activities throughout the
evolution of signaling events. New-generation techniques
are being developed to further illuminate in real time
Cancer

February 1, 2014

these dynamic processes.9,12,13 For example, the incorporation of synthetic phospho-amino-acid mimics in predefined phosphorylation sites of target proteins allows the
evaluation of certain molecules in crucial cellular networks. The design of novel, activity-based chemical
probes can help to analyze the kinase/phosphatase activity
equilibrium in complex biological systems. A major challenge is the elucidation of phosphorylation-driven signaling cascades in a continuous manner. Synthetic peptidebased biosensors as well as allele-specific kinase mutants
are being generated and will provide a powerful tool in
reporting phosphorylation status during signal transduction, after the application of a ligand and/or a potential inhibitor of molecular pathways in vitro and in vivo.
New-generation microarray platforms using lowmolecular-mass compounds have been developed, which
allow the assessment of many enzymatic activities at one
time and identify signaling and/or docking proteins that
control the enhancement of the signal from cellular membrane to the nucleus.14,15 All these new techniques may
offer powerful tools to better understand interactions in
parallel signaling cascades as well as feedback loops that
are built over time in the cellular proteome.
Protein functions in a cell or tissue can be affected
by many factors, such as expression, localization, affinity,
stability, interactions, catalytic activity, and posttranslational modifications. Therefore, proteomics represents a
scientific challenge, because the available experimental
tools are considered inadequate to tackle signaling molecule alterations in normal and abnormal (eg, cancer) situations. The enormous data acquired from novel techniques
are entered into chemical bioinformatics databases and
are used for the identification of novel targets and
synthetic “targeted” compounds.16,17 However, the
spatial and temporal plasticity of signaling cascades seems
an inevitable obstacle, necessitating the creation of mathematical models as a prerequisite for better understanding
and therefore real targeting of cellular networks.
The Additive Value of Signaling Cascade
Computational Modeling

Mathematical modeling can have a pivotal role in cancer
research by providing an independent evaluation of the
compatibility of a generated hypothesis, and improving
experimental design by depicting the steps and additional
data that are needed. Computational models are governed
by the simple notion that in living cells, not all combinations of molecular alterations are equal through time and
space.18 Thus, computational techniques attempt to elucidate complex molecular interplays and also to
317

Commentary

comprehend their interactions in a structural and functional manner.19 Tumorigenesis is considered a multilevel
dynamic process during which the accumulation of
genetic and epigenetic defects results in changes of signaling cascades. Multiscale models of carcinogenesis include
many biological parameters, such as signaling aberrations
in tumor cells, protein–protein interactions, cell-to-cell
interactions, changes in tumor microenvironment, and
neoangiogenesis.20-22 A wide variety of techniques have
been developed for the accurate identification of molecular aberrations.23 Microarrays represent a major advance
in cancer research, but the analysis of the obtained data is
only feasible with computational techniques. Mathematical models are increasingly used to evaluate massive quantities of data and to study signaling cascades in cancer cells
before and after the application of promising “targeted”
agents.24,25 The major perspective of computational models seems to be their potential contribution to the personalized cancer treatment approach. Each patient could
receive individualized treatment based on a specific profile
of genetic/epigenetic changes and accompanied protein
perturbations in signaling cascades.12,26
Statistical models are usually divided into analytical
and stochastic ones. Analytical models use different
assumptions and experimental data in order to better
identify tumor-cell kinetics. The building of such a mathematical model facilitates the analysis of a molecular pathway’s response to various kinds of ligands and/or potential
inhibitors. By contrast, stochastic models exploit random
parameters and probability distributions to study the evolution of a complex biological system based on a set of initial conditions. The in silico simulation of the effect of
various molecules on cellular signaling dynamics mainly
depends on the applied affecting conditions.27 Statistical
tools are usually employed in large biomolecular databases
in order to create models that will further elucidate the
complex relationships between molecules and signaling
networks in healthy versus cancerous cells and/or tissues
before and after the application of various agents.28 Mechanistic modeling is a different computational approach
that enables the study of the physical interaction among
molecules, change of their concentrations, biochemical
nature and rate of their interaction, parameters that control this interaction, and how their concentrations change
over time in a predefined cellular scenery. At the signaling
network level, the number of states in mechanistic models
is typically smaller than in statistical ones. This is because
it can be difficult to measure certain states and/or reaction
rates experimentally, therefore it is necessary to make
assumptions about which biological processes and com318

ponents should be included in the mechanistic models.
Cancer is deemed a multiscale disease, and mechanistic
models taking into account most of these scales are being
developed and applied to predict tumor-cell behavior.29
Results generated from microarray and other highthroughput technologies have been inserted in large databases and used to identify network-based signatures.
Nonetheless, proceeding from a number of implicated
molecules to a certain cancer-related pivotal signature
requires further annotation and simulation tools. Proteins
that have been captured as possibly important are searched
in pathway databases, and a signaling network is then constructed and analyzed. Computational modeling allows
the quantitative assessment of the qualitative process, the
interpretation of the results from in vivo experiments and
early-phase clinical trials, and the reduction of the cost of
setting up very sophisticated, and therefore expensive,
techniques. However, at least for the moment, these models can evaluate a limited number of biological parameters,
and their results should be validated in the laboratory
before they can be considered valuable for clinical testing.
Malignant tumors are characterized by a variety of defects
in signaling pathways that can be detected and quantified
through next-generation technologies.30-33 Novel
“targeted” agents have been produced and used in everyday clinical practice, on the basis of rather simple, albeit
quite sensitive, predictive assumptions with improved
clinical outcomes compared to the sole use of traditional
treatment options. Although simplicity does not necessarily limit performance, the clinical use of “targeted” agents
revealed the complex questions that need to be addressed
in order to optimize the cost-effectiveness of the currently
used, as well as upcoming “targeted” anticancer compounds.34 The best example to date is epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) protein targeting in cancer
therapeutics.
EGFR Protein Signaling Cascades as a Model

The EGFR family represents a transmembrane receptor
protein group with cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase (TK)
activity. It consists of 4 structurally related members
(ERBB1 through ERBB4) and, with the exception of
ERBB2 and/or truncated receptors, ligands must be
attached to their extracellular domain in order to be functional. Upon ligand binding, conformational changes
lead to dimerization and potentiation of their TK activity.
ERBB receptors trigger downstream intracellular pathways, including phosphatidylinositide-3 kinase (PI3K)/
Akt, Ras/mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK),
phospholipase C (PLC)g1/protein kinase C (PKC), signal
Cancer

February 1, 2014

Tackling Signal Transduction in Cancer/Karamouzis and Papavassiliou

Figure 1. Workflow showing the combinatorial use of biochemical techniques and computational tools in cancer drug development. The clinical application of “targeted” agents will be evaluated based on experimental data and mathematical predictions,
and not on primary tumor diagnosis. The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) protein family is used as an example.

transducer and activator of transcription (STAT), and
Par6-atypical PKC pathways.35 These pathways are
involved in cellular functions such as inhibition of apoptosis, progression of proliferation, differentiation, angiogenesis, metastasis, epithelial–mesenchymal transition,
and cell motility. Proper regulation of these signaling networks is a prerequisite for cell homeostasis. Deregulation
and subsequent aberrant signaling due to mutation,
amplification, and/or presence of autocrine loops contributes to the development of carcinomas. Several strategies
are being developed to disrupt EGFR-initiated signal
transduction pathways. Among them, anti-EGFR monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) as well as EGFR tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKIs) have already been used in cancer therapeutics.35-37 Somatic mutations and other molecular
parameters are being evaluated for treatment individualization and optimal patient selection for anti-EGFR therapy (eg, K-Ras mutations in colorectal carcinomas, EGFR
mutations in non–small cell lung carcinomas).38,39 In
addition, many of the downstream elements in EGFR
Cancer

February 1, 2014

protein family networks are commonly mutated in solid
tumors. These genetic alterations are thought to be
responsible for eliciting aberrant, constitutive growth
signals and are currently “targeted” with various inhibitors. For example, Raf and MAPK kinase (MEK) inhibitors represent one of the latest advances in the treatment
of patients with metastatic melanoma.40 Moreover,
several inherent or acquired mechanisms of resistance to
EGFR protein family receptor inhibitors have been identified based on the concept of signal transduction crosstalk and feedback loop development, either at the cellular
membrane or at downstream levels.41-43 However, the
activation of a protein is more complicated than the predicted alterations in standard network diagrams, because
it develops many intracellular interactions through space
and time. For instance, targeting Raf kinases has been
shown to potentiate upstream K-Ras signaling, possibly
through the activation of autocrine loops.44-46
It is becoming increasingly clear that the response
assessment of current “targeted” therapies in cancer
319

Commentary

patients and the identification of novel optimal targets
should always consider signal transduction networks as
multiscale systems. Therefore, mathematical and computational approaches in combination with advances in biochemical techniques could offer new opportunities for the
mechanistic understanding of signaling cascades that are
important in certain carcinomas as well as the alterations
of the participating molecules under different conditions
(Fig. 1). These tools can simulate and track changes in
concentrations and functional state of many proteins concurrently in response to various stimuli of EGFR protein
family pathways (Fig. 1). In silico modeling of cell signaling and transcriptional control has been already applied to
the EGFR protein family and represents a rational
approach for next-generation cancer therapeutics.14,47
Based on ERBB2 overexpression, patients with
breast cancer currently follow treatment with anti-ERBB2
agents, such as trastuzumab (a mAb against the extracellular domain), pertuzumab (a mAb that binds to the dimerization domain of ERBB2 with ERBB3), or lapatinib,
which is a TKI.48 Many patients with breast cancer
develop resistance to ERBB2-directed therapies, and
growing evidence supports the participation of ERBB3
and its ligand heregulin (HRG) in this process.49 Dimerization of ERBB2 with ERBB3 and/or ERBB4 can activate
the TK domain of ERBB2 and downstream signaling
cascades that promote proliferation and inhibit apoptosis,
such as PI3K/AKT and MAPK pathways. Thus, the dimerization pattern rather than the expression of each member of EGFR protein family seems to be of greater
importance in further revealing the downstream events in
breast carcinomas.50,51 This is also a critical point in
cross-talk interactions among EGFR protein family members and other membrane-initiated signaling cascades
(eg, insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor, Met) that represent well-recognized resistance mechanisms to ERBBdirected agents.52,53
Recently, a kinetic model of the entire ERBB signaling network has been developed, and sensitivity analysis was used to identify optimal targeting molecules for
ERBB3. Using this information, a novel, fully human
mAb (MM-121) was found to inhibit with high affinity
this EGFR protein family member.54 Preclinical and
early clinical activity of this computationally designed
compound is promising in ERBB2-dependent breast
carcinomas, but also in other carcinomas.55,56 Computational modeling in conjunction with next-generation
proteomics can also be used to identify the dose–
response activity of the combination of EGFR protein
family receptor inhibitors and radiotherapy,57 as well as
320

to better delineate the defects that characterize or impair
the downstream kinome after the application of certain
TKIs.58-60
CONCLUSIONS
Outlook

In order to make progress in oncology, more investigators
and more money have been employed, but this has not yet
translated to more effective treatment options. Cancer
should be viewed as an evolutionary multiscale process in
order to allow the development of new diagnostic and
treatment approaches. Computational models in combination with novel biochemical techniques may represent a
paradigm shift in cancer research. The real power and
challenge of mathematical modeling is to relate the multiple components of a complex system and further clarify
the behavior of the whole system. Computational oncology has evolved, in using analytic tools to appraise vast
quantities of data and in creating in silico models of carcinogenesis to shed light on tumor growth and define optimal therapeutic strategies.
Several challenges still exist, such as the creation of a
digitized database that will enable the gathering of information over multiple time points as well as diagnostic and
therapeutic algorithms that could be applied on a perpatient basis. There is also the need for more sophisticated
and rapid modeling to simulate different clinical scenarios
from the initial diagnosis of a tumor type to the optimal
treatment choice, as well as to envisage inherent and/or
acquired resistance to the applied treatment. The time has
come for basic researchers, clinical investigators, and
mathematicians to join forces toward achieving the actual
personalized cancer treatment.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURE
The authors made no disclosure.

REFERENCES
1. Siegel R, Naishadham D, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2013. CA Cancer J Clin. 2013;63:11-30.
2. Karamouzis MV, Papavassiliou AG. Transcription factor networks as
targets for therapeutic intervention of cancer: the breast cancer paradigm. Mol Med. 2011;17:1133-1136.
3. Nguyen LV, Vanner R, Dirks P, Eaves CJ. Cancer stem cells: an
evolving concept. Nat Rev Cancer. 2012;12:133-143.
4. Konstantinopoulos PA, Karamouzis MV, Papavassiliou AG. Targeting post-translational modifications and functional regulation of the
Ras superfamily of small G-proteins for anticancer drug development. Nat Rev Drugs Discov. 2007;6:541-555.
5. Baer C, Claus R, Plass C. Genome-wide epigenetic regulation of
miRNAs in cancer. Cancer Res. 2013;73:473-477.
6. Neuert G, Munsky B, Tan RZ, Teytelman L, Khammash M, van
Oudenaarden A. Systematic identification of signal-activated stochastic gene regulation. Science. 2013;339:584-587.

Cancer

February 1, 2014

Tackling Signal Transduction in Cancer/Karamouzis and Papavassiliou

7. Morrissey JP, Hassmiller L, Price RA, Mandelblatt J. Computational
modeling and multilevel cancer control interventions. J Natl Cancer
Inst Monogr. 2012;44:56-66.
8. Byrne HM. Dissecting cancer through mathematics: from the cell to
the animal model. Nat Rev Cancer. 2010;10:221-230.
9. Ovaa H, van Leeuwen F. Chemical biology approaches to probe the
proteome. Chembiochem. 2008;9:2913-2919.
10. Rogne M, Tasken K. Cell signaling analyses in the functional
genomics era. N Biotechnol. 2013;30:333-338.
11. Folger O, Jerby L, Frezza C, Gottlieb E, Ruppin E, Shlomi T. Predicting selective drug targets in cancer through metabolic networks.
Mol Syst Biol. 2011;7:501.
12. Eglen RM, Reisine T. Screening for compounds that modulate epigenetic regulation of the transcriptome: an overview. J Biomol Screen.
2011;16:1137-1152.
13. Scatena R, Bottoni P, Pontoglio A, Giardina B. The proteomics of cancer stem cells: potential clinical applications for
innovative research in oncology. Proteomics Clin Appl. 2011;5:
590-602.
14. Sun X, Zhang L, Tan H, Bao J, Strouthos C, Zhou X. Multi-scale
agent-based brain cancer modelling and prediction of TKI treatment
response: incorporating EGFR signalling pathway and angiogenesis.
BMC Bioinformatics. 2012;13:218.
15. Tang J, Aittokallio T. Network pharmacology strategies toward
multi-target anticancer therapies: from computational models to experimental design principles. Curr Pharm Des. 2013;doi:10.2174/
13816128113199990470.
16. Morris MK, Melas I, Saez-Rodriguez J. Construction of cell typespecific logic models of signaling networks using CellNOpt. Methods
Mol Biol. 2013;930:179-214.
17. Liu J, Lee W, Jiang Z, Chen Z, Jhunjhunwala S, Haverty PM,
et al. Genome and transcriptome sequencing of lung cancers reveal
diverse mutational and splicing events. Genome Res. 2012;22:23152327.
18. Lefor AT. Computational oncology. Jpn J Clin Oncol. 2011;41:937947.
19. Winslow RL, Trayanova N, Geman D, Miller MI. Computational
medicine: translating models to clinical care. Sci Transl Med. 2012;4:
158rv11.
20. Brodland GW, Veldhuis JH. The mechanics of metastasis: insights
from a computational model. PLoS One. 2012;7:e44281.
21. Schl€
uter DK, Ramis-Conde I, Chaplain MA. Computational modelling of single-cell migration: the leading role of extracellular matrix
fibers. Biophys J. 2012;103:1141-1151.
22. Bajikar SS, Janes KA. Multiscale models of cell signalling. Ann
Biomed Eng. 2012;40:2319-2327.
23. MacConaill LE. Existing and emerging technologies for tumor
genomic profiling. J Clin Oncol. 2013;31:1815-1824.
24. Peifer M, Fernandez-Cuesta L, Sos ML, et al. Integrative genome
analyses identify key somatic driver mutations of small-cell lung cancer. Nat Genet. 2012;44:1104-1110.
25. Vignot S, Frampton GM, Soria JC, et al. Next-generation sequencing reveals high concordance of recurrent somatic alterations between
primary tumor and metastases from patients with non-small-cell
lung cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2013;31:2167-2172.
26. Van Allen EM, Wagle N, Levy MA. Clinical analysis and interpretation of cancer genome data. J Clin Oncol. 2013;31:18251833.
27. Chaudhary SU, Shin SY, Lee D, Song JH, Cho KH. ELECANS--an
integrated model development environment for multiscale cancer systems biology. Bioinformatics. 2013;29:957-959.
28. Bentley K, Jones M, Cruys B. Predicting the future: towards symbiotic computational and experimental angiogenesis research, Exp Cell
Res. 2013;319:1240-1246.
29. Stites EC. Chemical kinetic mechanistic models to investigate cancer biology and impact cancer medicine. Phys Biol. 2013;10:
026004.
30. Bedard PL, Oza AM, Tsao MS, et al. Princess Margaret Cancer
Centre (PMCC) Integrated Molecular Profiling in Advanced Cancers
Trial (IMPACT) using genotyping and targeted next-generation
sequencing (NGS) [abstract]. J Clin Oncol. 2013;31(suppl): abstract
11002.

Cancer

February 1, 2014

31. Liang S, Chandra P, Ma Z, et al. A community-based program for personalized cancer care using next-generation
sequencing (NGS) [abstract]. J Clin Oncol. 2013;31(suppl):
abstract 11102.
32. Hollebecque A, Massard C, De Baere T, et al. Molecular screening
for cancer treatment optimization (MOSCATO 01): A prospective
molecular triage trial—Interim results [abstract]. J Clin Oncol. 2013;
13(suppl): abstract 2512.
33. Meric-Bernstam F, Farhangfar C, Mendelsohn J, Mills GB. Building
a personalized medicine infrastructure at a major cancer center.
J Clin Oncol. 2013;31:1849-1857.
34. Dienstmann R, Rodon J, Barretina, Tabernero J. Genomic medicine
frontier in human solid tumors: prospects and challenges. J Clin
Oncol. 2013;13:1874-1884.
35. Karamouzis MV, Grandis JR, Argiris A. Therapies against epidermal
growth factor receptor in aerodigestive carcinomas. JAMA. 2007;
298:70-82.
36. Hudis CA. Trastuzumab--mechanism of action and use in clinical
practice. N Engl J Med. 2007;357:39-51.
37. Gargalionis AN, Karamouzis MV, Papavassiliou AG. The molecular
rationale of Src inhibition in colorectal carcinomas. Int J Cancer.
2013;doi:10.1002/ijc.28299.
38. Barlesi F, Blons H, Beau-Faller M, et al. Biomarkers (BM) France:
Results of routine EGFR, HER2, KRAS, BRAF, PI3KCA mutations
detection and EML4-ALK gene fusion assessment on the first
10,000 non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients (pts) [abstract].
J Clin Oncol. 2013;13(suppl): abstract 8000.
39. Oliner KS, Douillard JY, Siena S, et al. Analysis of KRAS/NRAS and
BRAF mutations in the phase III PRIME study of panitumumab
(pmab) plus FOLFOX versus FOLFOX as first-line treatment (tx)
for metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC) [abstract]. J Clin Oncol.
2013;31(suppl): abstract 3511.
40. Sosman JA, Daud A, Weber JS, et al. BRAF inhibitor (BRAFi) dabrafenib in combination with the MEK1/2 inhibitor (MEKi) trametinib in BRAFi-naive and BRAFi-resistant patients (pts) with BRAF
mutation-positive metastatic melanoma (MM) [abstract]. J Clin
Oncol. 2013;31(suppl): abstract 9005.
41. Karamouzis MV, Konstantinopoulos PA, Papavassiliou AG. Targeting c-Met as a strategy to overcome cross-talk related resistance to
EGFR protein-targeting agents in cancer therapeutics. Lancet Oncol.
2009;10:709-717.
42. Karamouzis MV, Konstantinopoulos PA, Papavassiliou AG. Trastuzumab--mechanism of action and use. N Engl J Med. 2007;357:
1664-1666.
43. Bardelli A, Corso S, Bertotti A, et al. Amplification of the MET receptor to drive resistance to anti-EGFR therapies in colorectal cancer
[abstract]. J Clin Oncol. 2013;31(suppl): abstract 11005.
44. Poulikakos PI, Zhang C, Bollag G, Shokat KM, Rosen N. RAF
inhibitors transactivate RAF dimers and ERK signalling in cells with
wild-type BRAF. Nature. 2010;464:427-430.
45. Hatzivassiliou G, Song K, Yen I, et al. RAF inhibitors prime
wild-type RAF to activate the MAPK pathway and enhance growth.
Nature. 2010;464:431-435.
46. Heidorn SJ, Milagre C, Whittaker S, et al. Kinase-dead BRAF and
oncogenic RAS cooperate to drive tumor progression through
CRAF. Cell. 2010;140:209-221.
47. Birtwistle MR, Hatakeyama M, Yumoto N, Ogunnaike BA, Hoek
JB, Kholodenko BN. Ligand-dependent responses of the ERBB signaling network: experimental and modeling analyses. Mol Syst Biol.
2007;3:144.
48. Riley L, Zhou H, Lange K, Sinsheimer JS, Sehl ME. Determining
duration of HER2-targeted therapy using stem cell extinction
models. PLoS One. 2012;7:e46613.
49. Park YH, Jung HA, Chang WJ, et al. Role of HER3 expression
and PTEN loss in patients with HER2-overexpressing metastatic
breast cancer (MBC) patients who received taxane plus trastuzumab treatment [abstract]. J Clin Oncol. 2013;31(suppl): abstract
637.
50. Karamouzis MV, Dalagiorgou G, Perez SA. Georgopoulou U,
Papavassiliou AG. Targeting low-expressing ERBB-2 and acquired
resistant high-expressing ERBB-2 breast carcinomas [abstract]. J Clin
Oncol. 2013;31(suppl): abstract e11513.

321

Commentary
51. Bartsch R, Berghoff AS, Bago-Horvath Z, et al. Coexpression of
HER3 as a predictor of survival in HER2-positive breast cancer
patients [abstract]. J Clin Oncol. 2013;31(suppl): abstract 611.
52. Bianconi F, Baldelli E, Ludovini V, Crin
o L, Flacco A, Valigi P.
Computational model of EGFR and IGFR1 pathways in lung cancer: a systems biology approach for translational oncology. Biotechnol
Adv. 2012;30:142-153.
53. Chia SKL, Ellard S, Mates M, et al. A phase Ib study of an antiHER2 inhibitor, lapatinib, in combination with a c-MET and
VEGFR inhibitor, foretinib, in HER2-positive metastatic breast cancer (MBC): Results from NCIC CTG IND.198 [abstract]. J Clin
Oncol. 2013;31(suppl): abstract 518.
54. Schoeberl B, Pace EA, Fitzgerald JB, Harms BD, Xu L, Nie L, et al.
Therapeutically targeting ErbB3: a key node in ligand-induced activation of the ErbB receptor-PI3K axis. Sci Signal. 2009;2:1-14.
55. Schoeberl B, Faber AC, Li D, et al. An ErbB3 antibody, MM-121,
is active in cancers with ligand-dependent activation. Cancer Res.
2010;70:2485-2494.
56. Arnedos M, Denlinger CS, Harb WA, et al. A phase I study of
MM-121 in combination with multiple anticancer therapies in

322

57.

58.

59.

60.

patients with advanced solid tumors [abstract]. J Clin Oncol. 2013;
31(suppl): abstract 2609.
Pedicini P, Caivano R, Jereczek-Fossa BA, et al. Modelling the correlation between EGFR expression and tumour cell radiosensitivity,
and combined treatments of radiation and monoclonal antibody
EGFR inhibitors. Theor Biol Med Model. 2012;9:23.
Dixit A, Verkhivker GM. Computational modeling of allosteric
communication reveals organizing principles of mutation-induced
signalling in ABL and EGFR kinases. PLoS Comput Biol. 2011;7:
1002179.
Weissman JS, Giannikopoulos P, John JS, et al. Integrated genomic
analysis by whole exome and transcriptome sequencing of tumor
samples from EGFR-mutant non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
patients (p) with acquired resistance to erlotinib [abstract]. J Clin
Oncol. 2013;31(suppl): abstract 11010.
Lazzari C, Novello S, Barni S, et al. Randomized proteomic stratified phase III study of second-line erlotinib (E) versus chemotherapy
(CT) in patients with inoperable non-small cell lung cancer
(PROSE) [abstract]. J Clin Oncol. 2013;31(suppl): abstract
LBA8005.

Cancer

February 1, 2014

