Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 37

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

A multi-stage process including transient polyploidization
and EMT precedes the emergence of chemoresistent ovarian
carcinoma cells with a dedifferentiated and pro-inflammatory
secretory phenotype
Verena Rohnalter1, Katrin Roth2, Florian Finkernagel1, Till Adhikary1, Julia Obert1,
Kristina Dorzweiler1, Maike Bensberg1, Sabine Müller-Brüsselbach1, Rolf Müller1
1

Institute of Molecular Biology and Tumor Research (IMT), Center for Tumor Biology and Immunology, Philipps University,
Marburg 35043, Germany

2

Cell Imaging Core Facility, Center for Tumor Biology and Immunology, Philipps University, Marburg 35043, Germany

Correspondence to:
Rolf Müller, e-mail: rmueller@imt.uni-marburg.de
Keywords:

chemoresistance,

giant

cancer

cells,

polyploidy,

senescence-associated

secretory

phenotype

(SASP),

epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)
Received: July 28, 2015     Accepted: October 06, 2015     Published: October 19, 2015

ABSTRACT
DNA-damaging drugs induce a plethora of molecular and cellular alterations
in tumor cells, but their interrelationship is largely obscure. Here, we show that
carboplatin treatment of human ovarian carcinoma SKOV3 cells triggers an ordered
sequence of events, which precedes the emergence of mitotic chemoresistant cells.
The initial phase of cell death after initiation of carboplatin treatment is followed
around day 14 by the emergence of a mixed cell population consisting of cycling, cell
cycle-arrested and senescent cells. At this stage, giant cells make up >80% of the
cell population, p21 (CDKN1A) in strongly induced, and cell numbers remain nearly
static. Subsequently, cell death decreases, p21 expression drops to a low level and
cell divisions increase, including regular mitoses of giant cells and depolyploidization
by multi-daughter divisions. These events are accompanied by the upregulation
of stemness markers and a pro-inflammatory secretory phenotype, peaking after
approximately 14 days of treatment. At the same time the cells initiate epithelial to
mesenchymal transition, which over the subsequent weeks continuously increases,
concomitantly with the emergence of highly proliferative, migratory, dedifferentiated,
pro-inflammatory and chemoresistant cells (SKOV3-R). These cells are anchorageindependent and grow in a 3D collagen matrix, while cells on day 14 do not survive
under these conditions, indicating that SKOV3-R cells were generated thereafter by
the multi-stage process described above. This process was essentially recapitulated
with the ovarian carcinoma cell line IGROV-1. Our observations suggest that transitory
cells characterized by polyploidy, features of stemness and a pro-inflammatory
secretory phenotype contribute to the acquisition of chemoresistance.

malignant ovarian tumors are carcinomas, presumably
originating from the Müllerian epithelium of the ovarian
surface and the Fallopian tube, the latter especially
in the context of hereditary ovarian cancer [2]. The
WHO classification distinguishes serous, mucinous,
endometrioid, clear cell, transitional cell and squamous
carcinoma [1]. Of these, serous ovarian carcinoma is the
most common ovarian cancer, but tumors of other subtypes

INTRODUCTION
Ovarian cancer ranks fifth as the cause of death
from cancer in women with >20,000 new cases annually
in the United States, >40,000 in the European Union and
>50% of new cases diagnosed worldwide in developing
countries [1]. Ovarian cancer has a dire prognosis with
an overall 5-year survival rate of <25%. At least 90% of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40005

Oncotarget

carry a similarly poor prognosis. For example, the survival
of advanced clear cell carcinoma is extremely low due
to its insensitivity to platinum-based chemotherapy
compared to non-clear cell ovarian cancers [3].
Distinct mutation patterns and expression
profiles indicate that high-grade and low-grade serous
ovarian cancers are two distinct disease entities, with
the latter bearing considerable molecular resemblance
with low-grade endometrioid, mucinous and clearcell carcinomas [1, 2, 4]. These tumor subtypes
are collectively referred to as type 1 cancers and
typically  harbor mutations in components of receptor
tyrosine kinase signaling pathways (ERBB2, KRAS,
BRAF), phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate 3-kinase
(PIK3CA), the phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate
phosphatase PTEN, β-catenin (CTNNB1) and the SNI/
SNF-related chromatin remodeler ARID1A, they are
relatively genetically stable and may arise from benign
precursor lesions. In contrast, the aggressive type
2 cancers, including high-grade serous adenocarcinoma,
are characterized by frequent TP53 mutations (up to 97%),
the occurrence of BRCA1/2 alterations (~20%) and the
lack of a clear precursor lesion.
Several features contribute to the fatal nature of
ovarian cancer. Tumor cells are usually shed at a very
early stage of the disease, and their spread to other pelvic
and peritoneal organs is facilitated by the peritoneal
fluid serving as a carrier [4]. This passive transcoelemic
dissemination represents a primary route to the formation
of metastatic lesions. The peritoneal environment, which
is formed by a malignant effusion building up in the
peritoneal cavity, may be an essential determinant of
disease progression. This malignancy-associated ascites
is rich in tumor-promoting soluble factors [5], highly
tumorigenic cancer cells [6] and different types of
immune cells, including large numbers of pro-tumorigenic
macrophages (TAMs) [7, 8], supporting tumor cell
proliferation, angiogenesis and immune evasion.
Ovarian carcinoma growth and progression are
thought to be fueled by cells expressing stem cell markers
[9–11] and are therefore referred to as cancer stem cells or
cancer propagating cells (CPCs). These are characterized
by a low proliferation rate, a high apoptotic threshold and
a high capacity for drug elimination, rendering these cells
highly chemoresistant. CPCs also have a high tumorigenic
potential, which facilitates the formation of metastases.
Surface marker expression has been used extensively to
identify ovarian CPCs by flow cytometry as cells with
high levels of CD44, CD117 (KIT), CD133 (PROM1)
and aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 (ALDH1) expression, high
intracellular ALDH activity and/or enhanced Hoechst
dye extrusion by ABC transporters (side population cells)
[12,  13]. However, ovarian cancer cell subpopulations
have been isolated that express stemness markers at highly
variable levels, in different combinations and with none of
these markers being obligatory [9–11, 14, 15], suggesting
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

that a common ovarian CPCs may not exist or has not
been identified. Expression of several of these markers
has also been associated with a poor clinical outcome,
supporting a role for these cells in tumor progression and
drug resistance. Thus, even though the cancer stem cell
hypothesis is a matter of debate, it is likely that the aberrant
expression of stemness-associated genes is an important
determinant of tumor progression and recurrence.
CPCs have been proposed to reactivate
developmental programs that are used by embryonal
stem cells to maintain pluripotency [16], notably the core
transcriptional circuitry governed by OCT4, NANOG
and SOX2 (core module) [17]. Consistent with this idea
OCT4, NANOG and SOX2 are expressed in ovarian CPCs
[6, 10, 18–22], and the enforced expression of OCT4 or
NANOG enhances the malignancy of ovarian carcinoma
cell lines [21]. The expression of pluripotency factors has
also been linked to chemoresistance of ovarian cancer
cells [18, 23–25], but the underlying mechanisms are
poorly understood.
The acquisition of stemness is closely linked
to epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) [26–30],
a developmental program that transiently disrupts
homotypic epithelial cell-cell adhesion and converts
epithelial cells to migratory, invasive mesenchymal cells
[31]. Cancer EMT, which recapitulates developmental
EMT, is the driving force of metastasis. CPC-like cells
from ovarian carcinoma patients have a mesenchymal
phenotype [32], supporting the view that these cells
initiate metastasis. EMT has also been associated with
chemoresistance [33–38], emphasizing its relevance with
respect to recurrence of the disease.
DNA and spindle damaging agents, such as
carboplatin (CPT) and paclitaxel used for the treatment of
ovarian cancer, induce polyploidy [39], in particular in the
absence of functional p53 [40]. A fraction of these polyploid
cells shows the hallmarks of replicative senescence,
including cell cycle arrest and high acidic β-galactosidase
activity [41]. Surprisingly, these cells are endowed with the
potential to regain a para-diploid, highly proliferative state
[40, 42]. This reversible polyploidy is associated with the
induction of pluripotency markers in lymphoma cell lines,
thus linking apparently opposing processes, i.e. stemness
and senescence [41]. A similar phenomenon has recently
been described for different carcinoma cell lines treated
with CoCl2 as a hypoxia-mimetic [43].
Chemotherapeutic drugs and radiation are known
to trigger processes associated with malignancy and
tumor progression, including senescence [44, 45], a proinflammatory senescence-associated secretory phenotype
(SASP) [46], polyploidization and giant cell formation
[40, 42, 47, 48], expression of stemness-related markers
[49] and EMT [50, 51]. Collectively, these observations
suggest that the acquisition of a chemoresistant, mitotic
phenotype is a multi-stage process, but this hypothesis has
not been systematically addressed as of yet.
40006

Oncotarget

However, the relationship of polyploidization/
depolyploidization, cell cycle arrest, stemness, SASP and
EMT is not fully understood. Thus, it is not clear, whether
these processes occur in the same cell, and if so, whether
they occur simultaneously or as a sequence of events. It is
also not known whether giant cells are the central players
in the formation of replicating, chemoresistant cells after
application of DNA-damaging drugs or whether other
cells play a major role.
In the present study, we have used the human ovarian
carcinoma cell line SKOV3 [52], the most frequently
used model for in vitro studies of ovarian cancer [53], to
systematically address these questions. SKOV3 cells were
originally described as being derived from an ovarian
adenocarcinoma without specification of the histological
subtype [52], but the subsequent analysis of xenotransplants
in mice indicated a clear cell carcinoma origin [54]. This
classification of SKOV3 cells is compatible with the
presence of PIK3CA and ARID1A mutations, which are
typical of human ovarian clear cell carcinoma, and the
deletion rather than mutation of TP53 found in >97% of
high grade serous adenocarcinomas [53, 55]. SKOV3
cells are moderately sensitive to CPT, but highly resistant
cells can be selected for after drug exposure. Using this
experimental system we found an ordered sequence of
events that preceded the emergence of chemoresistance,
which could essentially be recapitulated with TP53mutated IGROV-1 cells, an ovarian cancer cell line most
likely of low-grade serous adenocarcinoma origin [53, 56].

the fraction of giant cells progressively decreased, while
medium-sized cells first increased and then decreased and
small cells continuously increased (Figure 1D). Since cell
size not only depends on cell cycle phase and ploidy, we
also determined the size of nuclei. As shown in Figure 1E,
the changes in cell size were paralleled by similar changes
in nuclear size (small : medium : giant cells = 2% : 4%:
94%; ), pointing to a dynamic changes in ploidy during the
observation period.
Giant cells are clearly the morphological hallmark
of the cascade of events leading to chemoresistance
and as such were subsequently used as a morphological
marker for this process. Importantly, giant cells also
emerged when cells were treated periodically with CPT,
i.e., when short periods of treatment were followed by
drug-free recovery phases, thus mimicking the clinical
administration of chemotherapy. As illustrated in Figure
1F, substantial number of giant cells were observed after
different time schedules, including 3 cycles of a 1-day
treatment/7-day recovery regimen and 4 cycles of a 1-day
treatment/21-day recovery schedule. These findings
demonstrate that the continuous presence of CPT is not
required to cause the formation of giant cells.
Giant SKOV3 cells have also been reported to be
induced by hypoxia mimetics [43]. We were therefore
interested to investigate whether hypoxia might have
an impact on giant cell formation in response to CPT
treatment. Figure 1G shows that hypoxia induced giant
cell formation to a slightly lesser extent than CPT, thus
confirming the results of the mimetics study quoted above.
Intriguingly, the combination of both treatments showed a
statistically highly significant cooperative effect.
Next, we compared the anchorage-independent
growth potential in a collagen matrix of untreated
SKOV3 cells, cells treated with CPT for 14 days and
SKOV3-R cells. While untreated cells and SKOV3-R cells
proliferated and formed colonies under these conditions,
no surviving cells were detectable in cultures with SKOV3
cells treated with CPT for 14 days (Figure 1H). This
indicates that (i) cell surviving a 14-day CPT treatment
in “monolayer” cultures (as in Figure 1A) do not survive
under anchorage-independent condition and (ii) SKOV3-R
cells, on the other hand, have a similar capacity as the
parental SKOV3 cells to survive in a collagen matrix,
suggesting that this property is gained after day 14.

RESULTS
Proliferative CPT-resistant SKOV3 cells emerge
after the transient occurrence of enlarged cells,
polyploidy and accelerated senescence
After an initial phase of cell death mainly resulting
from mitotic catastrophe, as indicated by the interphase
cells with multiple micronuclei, CPT-treated SKOV3 cells
showed typical temporal alterations of cell morphology
associated with profound changes in size, resulting in
highly resistant cells after 21  weeks (Figure 1A, 1B;
subsequently referred to as SKOV3-R cells). Median cell
size of attached cells peaked at day 14 (16,000 μm2), and
then progressively decreased to a size (2,000 μm2) only
slightly larger than untreated cells (1.700 μm2). On day 14,
the population consisted of a mixture of cell types which we
defined as small (<3,000 μm2), medium (3,000–6,000 μm2)
or giant cells (>6,000 μm2), with a distribution of 8%,
16% and 76%, respectively, the latter composed of
mono- and polynucleated cells at a ration 2:1 (Figure 1C,
1D). The transient increase in cell size was also visible
when detached cells were analyzed by flow cytometry
(forward scatter; Figure S1). Another conspicuous feature
of many of the larger cells appearing around day 14 was
their flattened, senescent-like morphology. After day 14,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Polyploidy and senescence in CPT-treated
SKOV3 cells
In view of the profound changes in cell size under
CPT treatment and previous reported induction of DNA
endoreduplication and polyploidy by chemotherapy
we analyzed the DNA content in relation to the size
at different times of exposure to the drug. The flow
cytometry analysis in Figures 2A and S2 show that CPT
treatment clearly increased the fraction of SKOV3 cells
40007

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Morphology, size and growth properties of SKOV3 cells after CPT treatment. A. Cells were treated with CPT for

10 days, 14 days, 28 days or 21 weeks, stained with Giemsa dye and evaluated by bright field microscopy. Representative photomicrographs
are shown. B. Viability of SKOV3 and SKOV3-R cells after 14 days of CPT exposure (MTT assay). C. Size (area) of attached cells
(n = 285) at the indicated times. Dotted lines define three populations distinguished by size; small (S), maximum the size of untreated
SKOV3 cells; medium (M), maximum twice the size of small cells; giant (G), >4-times the size of small cells. The horizontal line shows
the median. D. Time course of size distributions under CPT treatment. E. Nuclear area of cells (n = 204) at the indicated times. The stacked
bar graph shows the distribution of giant, medium and small nuclei on day 14. F. Effect of cyclic CPT treatment. Cells were treated with
CPT (days preceded by a “+” in the Figure) followed by a CPT-free recovery phase (days preceded by a “−”), and the respective cycle was
repeated as indicated in parentheses (sample size: n = 3). G. Effect of hypoxia. Cells were treated with hypoxia, CPT or both for 14 days
and the fraction of giant cells was determined by flow cytometry analysis. H. Anchorage-independent growth of untreated SKOV3 cells
(0d) and cells treated with CPT for 14 days or 21 weeks. Cells were embedded in a collagen matrix after this treatment and observed under
a phase-contrast microscope after another 12 days (sample size: n = 3). The cell count for “14d” was 0 in each experiment.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40008

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Cell cycle parameters after CPT treatment of SKOV3 cells. A. Fraction of cells with a para-diploid (≤4C) or polyploid

(>4C) DNA content at different times of CPT treatment determined by flow cytometry analysis after propidium iodide staining (sample size:
n = 3). A corresponding histogram is shown in Figure S2. B. Quantitation of CDKN1A mRNA expression by RT-qPCR. C, D. Fractions of
cells expressing p21 protein or incorporating BrdU visualized by immunofluorescence at the indicated times and microscopically quantified
(sample size: n = 3). E. Fraction of small, medium and giant cells negative or positive for p21 expression and BrdU incorporation on
day 14 (microscopic quantification; sample size: n = 3). F. Fraction of cells positive for β-galactosidase activity (X-Gal; left panel) or
BrdU-negative and p21-positive (right panel; microscopic quantification; sample size: n = 3). G. SKOV3 cells on day 14 of CPT treatment
infected with a baculovirus-derived vector expressing FUCCI cell cycle sensors. The Figure shows images of the same cell from a video
obtained by life cell imaging at intervals of 11.5 (S) and 14.5 hours (G2) relative to the first image (G1).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40009

Oncotarget

with a > 4C or > 8C DNA content on day 14 (from 7%
to 33% and from 0.3% to 6.5%, respectively), which
decreased by approximately 50% after 21 weeks. An
increased DNA content was also seen in smaller cells,
indicating polyploidization after CPT treatment is not
restricted to giant cells (Figure S2, middle panel).
CPT strongly induced expression of CDKN1A
mRNA (Figure 2B) and its encoded protein p21
(Figure 2C) on day 8 with a peak on day 14. Thereafter,
CDKN1A expression and the fraction of p21+ cells
sharply declined, the latter from 22% on day 14 to
1% on day 30. The early increase in p21 expression
on day 8 was paralleled by a decrease in 5-bromo-2′deoxyuridine (BrdU) incorporation into the cellular
DNA, which thereafter continuously increased until
reaching approximately the level seen in untreated
cells (Figure  2D). The increase in BrdU incorporation
concomitantly with an augmented p21 expression on day
14 relative to day7/8 (Figure 2C, 2D) clearly suggests that
the former is an indicator not only of S-phase progression
but also of DNA repair.
Immunostaining of individual cells on day 14 clearly
showed that p21-BrdU+, p21+BrdU-, double-positive and
double-negative cells were found in cell populations of
all three sizes at similar proportions (Figures 2E and S3).
Previous studies have linked p21 to the butyrate-induced
senescence of SKOV3 cells [57] and the ectopic expression
of p21 induced a cell cycle arrest in SKOV3 cells [58]. It is
therefore likely that the four cell populations identifies in
Figure 2E represent cycling cells (p21-BrdU+), senescent
cells (p21+BrdU-) and cell cycle arrested cells undergoing
DNA repair (p21+BrdU+). The nature of p21-BrdUcells representing a major fraction in each size group is
unclear. These cells are apparently cell cycle-arrested in
the absence of high p21 levels, and may have entered a
senescence-related state that mechanistically differs from
the p21-dependent pathway. The data in Figure 1E (blue
bars) also demonstrate that cycling cells are at readily
detectable in each size group (27–47%).
On day 14, cells with increased lysosome
β-galactosidase activity (β-gal+) were also detectable
(Figure 2F), confirming the morphological observation
of a substantial fraction of senescent cells at this time.
In SKOV3-R cells, the fraction of p21+BrdU− cells was
decreased to 1.5% (Figure 2F). However, β-galactosidase
activity was strongly increased in the mitotically active
SKOV3-R4 cells, and there was no obvious morphological
difference between β-galactosidase positive and negative
cells. This suggests that the latter on is own in not an
indicator of cellular senescence, as previously also
suggested by others [59].
The senescence markers γH2AX and lack of Ki67
were not informative due to their induction by DNA
damage [60] or cell cycle arrest [61], resulting in 100%
positive cells in our experimental system. Another

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

established marker of replicative senescence, p16ink4A,
could not be analyzed due to a homozygous deletion of the
CDKN2A gene in SKOV3 cells [62].
BrdU incorporation is not necessarily linked to cell
cycle progression, but can also result from unscheduled
DNA synthesis following DNA damage. We therefore
infected SKOV3 cells with mammalian baculovirus
vectors (BacMam) expressing the ubiquitination-based
FUCCI cell cycle sensors, which label late S/G2 cells
green (Geminin-GFP), G1 cells red (CTD1-REF) and early
S-phase cells yellow [63]. Video S1 and Figure 2G shows
the transition of the same giant cells from G1 through S
into G2, indicating that giant SKOV3 cells emerging under
CPT treatment are capable to progress normally through
the cell cycle.

Time-lapse life cell imaging of CPT-treated
SKOV3 cells
To analyze the fate of individual cells with regard to
the induction of cell death, division and depolyploidization
we performed time-lapse microscopy of SKOV3 cells for
70 hours at three time points of CPT exposure (14 days,
30 days and 7–8 weeks). These studies identified three
outcomes of treatment irrespective of cell size: death,
division and no visible change ("resting"). Cell death was
the main fate on giant cells on day 14 (60%), but clearly
decreased on day 30 and thereafter, concomitantly with
an increase in cell divisions exceeding that of cell death
(Figure 3A). In small and medium size cells, differences
in fate and time-related changes were less pronounced,
suggesting an initial status quo, followed by an increase
in cell number. Mitosis of mononuclear giant cells was
usually followed by cytokinesis, and only rarely (<2%)
resulted in the formation of multinuclear cells. However,
~17% of daughter cell underwent cell fusion immediately
after cytokinesis, thereby creating new polyploid cells.
Cell division of giant cells either resulted in two daughter
cells or, less frequently, in ≥ 3 daughter cells (Figure 3B;
Video S2) with a ratio of approximately 25:1 on day 14
and 10:1 after 49 days (Figure 3A). Furthermore, giant
cells were able to generate daughter cells by budding
(Figure 3B; Video S2). Importantly, cells generated by
multi-daughter division were able to undergo subsequent
bipolar divisions (Figure 3C; Video S3).
These observations suggest that initiation of CPT
treatment is followed by an unstable, transient period
that is characterized by the simultaneous occurrence
of dividing, depolyploidizing, dying and resting cells.
Between day 14 and 30 the balance is clearly shifted
to survival and proliferation, consistent with the
disappearance of p21+ cells (Figure 2C). The drop in p21+
cells is followed by a clear increase in depolyploidizing
cells (Figure 3A), suggesting that p21-BrdU+ cells rather
than senescent cells are undergoing depolyploidization.

40010

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Time-lapse life cell imaging of CPT-treated SKOV3 cells. A. Quantitation of cell fate on day 14, on day 30 and on day

≥49 of CPT treatment for small, medium and giant cells. Cells were observed for 70 hours by life cell imaging and grouped as indicated.
Statistical analysis was performed by Chi-squared test. B. Images from Video S2 showing the budding of two cells (yellow arrows) from
a giant cell (white arrow) followed by multi-daughter division of the giant cell into four daughter cells (white arrows). C. Images from
Video S3 showing division of a giant cell into three daughter cells (white, yellow and pink arrows) followed by regular mitosis of one of the
daughter cells (pink arrows). H2B-GFP expressing giant cells on day 14 of CPT treatment were enriched by filtering and plated on a layer
of CPT-treated unlabeled feeder cells. D. Clonal out growth of small cells from giant cells. The images show an area initially occupied by
giants cells (left-most image) and the same area 3 days and 5 days later.

Obviously, cells of all sizes can divide and thus have
the potential to contribute to the subsequent development
of chemoresistant, stably proliferating cells. However, in
view of the low fraction of small cells present on day 14,
a prominent role for the giant cells in the later emergence
of SKOV3-R cells is very likely. This is supported by
the microscopic observation in Figure 3D, showing
rapid clonal growth of small cells in regions previously
occupied by giant cells.
To assess the validity of the hypothesis that
giant cells substantially contribute to the generation of
SKOV3-R cells we modeled a mathematical simulation,
which estimates the relative contribution of giant cells
to the subsequent generation of small cells (Figure S4).
The most crucial parameters of this simulation are the
relative fractions of different size groups at different
time points and the fractions of dividing and dying

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

cells. These  parameters can be extracted from the data
in Figure  3A. Another important, albeit less decisive
parameter is the average number of progeny per
depolyploidizing cell. Evaluation of the video recordings
showed that approximately 1/3 of these cells yielded
4 daughter cells and 2/3 gave rise to 3 daughter cells.
Taking into account that additional cells were also
generated by budding, we estimated the average total
number of daughter cells generated per observation
period (70 hours) as 3.7. A simulation performed on the
basis of these parameters clearly shows the expected (see
above) initial decline of giant cell numbers between day
14 and 29 and a more or less static situation for small
cell numbers (Figure S4A). Furthermore, simulating the
generation of small cells during the subsequent 30 days
(Figure S4B) suggests that SKOV3-R cells originate to
a considerable extent from giant cells, but also predicts a

40011

Oncotarget

Characterization of CPT-resistant SKOV3 cells
by transcriptome analysis

major contribution by small cells. However, it is likely that
the latter are, at least in part, descendants of giant cells,
pointing to an even greater contribution by the latter.
Taken together with the flow cytometric analyses
of PI-stained cells described above, our observations
reveal a ploidy conveyer, where the para-diploid cells
undergo a G2 arrest, accumulate there, enter aberrant
mitosis, by-pass mitotic catastrophe and then re-enter
the cell cycle.  This  state of “cycling tetraploidy” has
previously been proposed as a crucial step from diploidy
to aneuploidy and from senescence to malignant
transformation [40, 64, 65].

As a first step to characterize the cells produced by
long-term CPT treatment we compared the transcriptome of
untreated SKOV3 and SKOV3-R cultured in the absence of
CPT for 12 days. RNA-Seq analyses identified 314 genes
upregulated in the latter (fold change > 10; Dataset S1).
Diseases and functions annotation of these genes by
Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (Figure 4A) showed a strong
positive association (z-score > 2) with: (i) migration, cell
movement and chemotaxis; (ii) inflammatory response;

Figure 4: Transcriptome of SKOV3-R cells. A. IPA Diseases and Functions Annotation of genes upregulated >10-fold in SKOV3-R

cells versus normal SKOV3 cells. SKOV3-R cells were cultured in growth medium without CPT for 12 days prior to harvesting. The graph
shows functionally different clusters with p-values < 0.001 and activation z-scores > 2 or <−2. Numbers to the right of the y-axis indicate the
number of molecules in each category. B. IPA Upstream Regulator Analysis of genes upregulated in SKOV3-R cells. The graph shows the
top regulators (by activation z-score) representing signaling molecules. Numbers on the right show the respective p-values. C. IPA network
analysis of genes upregulated > 10-fold in SKOV3-R cells for the two top upstream regulators, TGFβ and IL-1β. Red arrows, induction
consistent with prediction; yellow arrows, induction inconsistent with prediction; grey arrows, no prediction. The color intensity of the
symbols indicates the strength of the observed induction (red highest). D. RT-qPCR validation of regulated genes in SKOV3 cells treated
with CPT for 14 days versus untreated SKOV3 cells (sample size: n ≥ 3). FC, fold change. E. RT-qPCR analysis of gene expression in
SKOV3-R versus SKOV3 cells (sample size: n ≥ 3). F. Anchorage-independent growth of untreated SKOV3 cells embedded in a collagen
matrix in the presence or absence of conditioned medium from SKOV3-R cells (conditions as in Figure 1H).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40012

Oncotarget

(iii) cell proliferation and (iv) cell viability, while an
inverse association was seen for apoptosis (z-score <−2).
Analysis of the known upstream regulators of these genes
(signaling molecules and transcription factors) identified
three main groups, i.e. TGFβ, pro-inflammatory mediators,
such as IL-1B and TNF, and p53 (Figure 4B). As SKOV3
cells are TP53-deficient (homozygous deletion), the
overlap of the latter group of genes with a subgroup of
p53 target genes probably results from the induction
of target genes by the DNA damage response through a
p53-independent pathway. The genes of the IL1B and
TNF networks partially overlap (Figure 4C) and indicate
the upregulation of pro-inflammatory (e.g., IL6, IL11,
CXCL2) and EMT markers (e.g., SNAI2, TGFB2, RUNX3).
Furthermore, a dedifferentiated phenotype is suggested
by the down-regulation of the cytokeratin genes KRT5,
KRT17 and KRT81, the epithelial markers EPCAM and
MUC16 (Dataset S1). These observations were confirmed
by RT-qPCR for SKOV3-R cells cultured without drug in
four independent experiments (Figure 4D). A very similar
pattern was observed with RNA from SKOV3 cells treated
with CPT for 2 weeks (Figure 4E), indicating that the
observed changes represent relatively early events. Finally,
the anchorage-independent growth of SKOV3 cells in a
collagen matrix was stimulated by conditioned medium
from SKOV3-R cells (Figure 4F), confirming the RNASeq-based prediction of a pro-tumorigenic secretome.

SOX2 being expressed at high level already prior to
treatment (Figure 5E).
The pro-inflammatory phenotype of SKOV3-R
cells and the emergence of senescent cells following drug
treatment pointed to the induction of a SASP. We therefore
analyzed the expression of several SASP marker genes
and proteins after treatment of SKOV3 cells with CPT.
The IL1B, IL8 and CCL20 genes are strongly induced
on day 14 (up to 1000-fold; Figure 6A–6C). Expression
declined thereafter, but was still clearly elevated in
SKOV3-R cells. Two other SASP marker genes, CXCL1
and SERPINE1, were induced moderately (2- to 10-fold),
and remained at these levels throughout the observation
period (Figure 6D-6E). Consistent with the RNA
expression data, flow cytometry showed an increase in
the fraction of intracellular IL-1β+ cells on day 14 and a
decline thereafter (Figure 6F). Gating of cells according to
forward and sideward scatters showed that small and large
cells only slightly differed in the levels of intracellular
IL-1β, indicating that the expression of pro-inflammatory
marker genes in SKOV3-R cells do not result from a
small subpopulation of giant cells. The induction of a proinflammatory secretory phenotype was also functionally
confirmed by demonstrating an increased phosphorylated
STAT3 in a human macrophage cell line (differentiated
THP-1 cells) by supernatant from SKOV3 cells treated
with CPT for 14 days or 21 weeks (Figure 6G).

Expression of stemness and pro-inflammatory
markers in CPT-treated SKOV3 cells

Progressive EMT of CPT-treated SKOV3 cells
The induction of a signaling network characteristic
of TGFβ, the induction of SNAI2 and the decreased
expression of epithelial marker genes in SKOV3-R cells
strongly suggested a phenotypic conversion of CPT-treated
cells by EMT. RT-qPCR expression analysis of several
EMT marker genes confirmed this conclusion (Figure 7A).
While CDH1 (E-cadherin) showed a strong progressive
decrease beginning between day 8 and 14, ACTA2 (smooth
muscle α-actin) and SNAI2 (SLUG) mRNA expression
strongly and progressively increased until week 21.
Analysis of intracellular SMA by flow cytometry showed
a progressive rise until 21 weeks in both small and large
cells (Figure 7B) and thus is consistent with the RNA
data. Furthermore, as demonstrated by the flow cytometry
analysis in Figure 7C, most cells expressing SMA above
the detection limit (isotype control) co-expressed IL-1β
in SKOV3-R cells (Figure 7C). Conversely, a substantial
fraction of IL-1β expressing cells co-expressed SMA,
although the overlap was lower in this case, presumably
due to differences in the detection limits of the antibodies
used. These observations indicate that induction of a proinflammatory secretory phenotype and EMT occurred
simultaneously in a large fraction of the SKOV3-R cells.
The induction of EMT was also confirmed by staining
actin filaments with fluorescently labeled phalloidin, which
showed the formation of actin stress fibers around day 30

Drug-induced senescence has been associated
with stemness properties [40, 42, 66]. We therefore
investigated the expression of stem cell markers in
SKOV3 cells after different times of CPT treatment. Flow
cytometry analysis showed a clear rise in OCT4+ cells on
day 14 from 12% to 55%, which subsequently increased
to 84% after 21 weeks (Figure 5A, 5B). Likewise, the
transcriptional activity of OCT4 started to increase
after 14 days of CPT treatment, reaching a plateau after
21 days, as determined with SKOV3 cells harboring an
OCT4-responsive luciferase reporter plasmid (Figure 5C).
Consistent with these findings, OCT4 has previously been
reported to upregulated during reversible polyploidy
following DNA damage of cells lacking wild-type p53
[41, 67, 68]. Intriguingly, the increase in OCT4 protein
level and activity was not paralleled by an increased level
of POU5F1 (OCT4) mRNA (Figure 5D), pointing to a
regulatory mechanism operating at the level of translation.
We also determined expression of several other
stem cell markers (Figure 5E). CD44, CD117 and CD133
also showed significantly increased median fluorescence
intensities (MFI) on day 14 of CPT treatment. CD44 levels
remained elevated after 21 weeks, whereas expression of
the two other markers dropped. No significant changes
in NANOG and SOX2 expression were detectable with
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40013

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Expression of stemness markers after CPT treatment of SKOV3 cells. A. Flow cytometry dot plot and B. histogram

of nuclear OCT4 in untreated SKOV3 cells, SKOV3 cells treated for 14 days 21 weeks. The x-axis in panel A shows the forward scatter
as an indication of cell size. A validation of the OCT4 antibody is shown in Figure S5. C. Quantitation of the transcriptional activity of
OCT4 in SKOV3 cells harboring a stably integrated luciferase reporter construct driven by OCT4 binding sites after different times of CPT
treatment. D. RT-qPCR analysis of POU5F1 mRNA levels (sample size: n ≥ 3). E. Median fluorescence intensity (MFI) determined by
flow cytometry for stem cell markers (CD24, CD44, CD117 and CD133 surface expression and nuclear OCT4, SOX2 and NANOG) after
different times of CPT treatment (sample size: n ≥ 3).

and increasing thereafter (Figure 7D). Consistent with
this observation, staining of the zonula occludens protein
constituent ZO-1 by indirect immunofluorescence revealed
a loss of tight junctions in SKOV3-R cells (Figure 7E).
Increased cell motility and migration have been
associated with EMT in several model systems [69]. We
therefore analyzed these parameters for SKOV3-R versus
the parental SKOV3 cells. Life cell video microscopy
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

revealed a strikingly increase in the motility of SKOV3-R
cells, as shown in Video S4 (SKOV3) and Video S5
(SKOV3-R). Likewise, real-time electrical impedance
measurements showed a clearly accelerated directional
migration of SKOV3-R cells towards a chemoattractant
(FCS; Figure S6). These findings strongly suggest that
EMT is linked to increased cell motility and migration in
our experimental model.
40014

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Induction of a pro-inflammatory secretory phenotype after CPT treatment of SKOV3 cells. A–E. RT-qPCR

expression analysis of the indicated pro-inflammatory marker genes at the indicated times of CPT treatment (sample size: n ≥ 3). FC = 1
(day 0) corresponds to the following Ct values: IL1B: 31.5; IL8: 32; CCL20: 32; CXCL1: 22; SERPINE1: 26. F. Flow cytometry analysis
of intracellular IL-1β expression after 0, 2 or 21 weeks of CPT treatment (sample size: n = 3). Values represent the fold change (FC)
in the number of positive cells relative to small cells on day 0 (normalized to 1). Cells gated for small cells (forward and sideward
scatter as untreated SKOV3 cells) and larger cells (forward and sideward scatter larger than for SKOV3 cells). G. Immunoblot analysis of
phosphorylated STAT3 in untreated human macrophage cells (negative control), after LPS treatment (positive control), or after an exposure
to supernatant from SKOV3 cells treated with CPT for 0, 5 days, 14 days or 21 weeks.

DISCUSSION

Importantly, RT-qPCR analysis of SKOV3-R cells
grown in the absence of CPT for 7 days only showed a
marginal effect of the drug withdrawal on the expression
of the EMT maker gene VIM (vimentin; Figure 7F).
Furthermore, SKOV3 cells after cyclic CPT treatment
(4 cycles of 1 day CPT and 21 days recovery) also resulted
in an up-regulation of IL1B, IL8 and SNAI1 and downregulation of CDH1 (Figure 7G). These findings indicate
that induction of a pro-inflammatory secretory phenotype
and EMT are not merely a consequence of chronic drug
exposure.

Besides different forms of programmed cell death
multiple other mechanisms have been identified to mediate
the cytotoxic effect of chemotherapy or radiation on cancer
cells in solid tumors, including mitotic catastrophe and
permanent cell cycle arrest resembling cellular senescence
[70]. In contrast to replicative senescence responsible
for the limited lifespan of normal cells, drug-induced
senescence occurs in replication-competent cells and
induces a prolonged, but not necessarily permanent cell
cycle block. This response, also referred to as accelerated
senescence, is associated with the formation of polyploid
giant cells that are endowed with the potential to form
para-diploid progeny. Several studies have shown the
upregulation of stemness markers in giant cells, pointing
to cancer-initiating properties of these cells or their
descendants. Giant cells thus might provide a mechanism
by which cancer cells can escape therapy-induced
cell death and contribute to relapse of the disease by
converting to proliferating cells after depolyploidization.
DNA-damaging chemotherapeutic drugs can also
trigger other processes linked to senescence, such as
SASP and EMT. However, prior to the present study
it was unclear how these events are temporally and
spatially linked to each other and to the development of
CPT resistance, and to what extent giant and non-giant

IGROV-1 ovarian carcinoma cells follow
a similar multi-stage process to acquire
chemoresistance
Finally, we were able to demonstrate that a similar
CPT-induced multi-stage process also occurs in another
ovarian cancer cell line, IGROV-1. As depicted In
Figure 8A, IGROV-1 cultures also contained substantial
numbers of giant (Figure 8A) and polyploid cells
(Figure 8B) on day 14 of drug treatment. Moreover, as
observed with SKOV3 cells, CDKN1A and the proinflammatory marker genes IL8, CCL20 and CXCL1
were induced with a peak around day 14 (Figure 8C
and 8D), which was followed by the up regulation of SMA
(Figure 8E).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40015

Oncotarget

Figure 7: Induction of EMT after CPT treatment of SKOV3 cells. A. RT-qPCR expression analysis of the indicated EMT
marker genes after the indicated times of CPT treatment (sample size: n ≥ 3). B. Flow cytometry analysis of intracellular SMA after 0, 2
or 21 weeks of CPT treatment (sample size: n = 3). Values represent the fold change (FC) in the number of positive cells relative to small
cells on day 0 (normalized to 1). Cells gated for small cells (forward and sideward scatter as untreated SKOV3 cells) and larger cells
(forward and sideward scatter larger than for SKOV3 cells). C. Flow cytometry analysis of IL-1β expression in SMA-expressing SKOV3-R
cells gated as in panel B. D. Labeling of actin filaments with California Red-conjugated phalloidin (red) after different periods of CPT
exposure. E. Additional staining of the tight junction (zonula occludens) protein constituent ZO-1 by indirect immunofluorescence (green)
in untreated SKOV3 and SKOV3-R cells. Nuclei were stained with DAPI in panels D and E. F. RT-qPCR analysis of VIM expression in
SKOV3-R cells (21w) and the same cells grown in the absence of CPT for 7 days. G. Pro-inflammatory and EMT marker gene expression
after cyclic CPT treatment (1 day CPT, 21 days recovery, 4 cycles) compared to untreated cells (sample size: n = 3).

cells contribute to this process. We have addressed these
question using ovarian cancer cells as a model. Our data
(summarized in Figure S7) show that after the acute
induction of cell death by mitotic catastrophe in the
majority of the cell population, cells of different sizes and
ploidy, including giant and para-diploid cells, survive.
These cells show cell cycle perturbations resembling
accelerated senescence, which is accompanied by the
persistent expression of the stemness marker OCT4 and
the acquisition of a pro-inflammatory status. At the same
time cells begin to undergo EMT, which progressively
increases thereafter and is maintained in the cells finally
emerging from this multi-stage process. CPT thus triggers
a sequence of partially reversible events, including the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

transient formation of polyploid giant cells. This integrated
picture of events leading to the emergence of proliferative
chemoresistant cells is summarized in the scheme depicted
in Figure 9. Several key issues in the context with this
model are discussed in detail below.
A key question is the question whether resistant cells
result from conversion rather than selection of preexisting
cells. At least two observations argue in favor of the first
possibility. In day 14 cultures the number of small cells
is very low and the rates of cell division and death are
similar (Figure 3A), making an expansion of these cells
in the following days unlikely. Giant cells are present at
much larger numbers at the same time, but their death rate
exceeds the rate of division. This results in a scenario on
40016

Oncotarget

Figure 8: Multi-stage process of chemoresistance acquisition by IGROV-1 cells. A. Morphology of cells that were treated

with CPT for 5 days, 14 days and 28 days. Representative photomicrographs of cells stained with Giemsa dye are shown. B. DNA content
of individual cells after CPT treatment for 14 days. Cells were stained with propidium iodide and analyzed by flow cytometry (sample size:
n = 3). C, D. RT-qPCR analysis of CDKN1A (panel C) and pro-inflammatory marker genes (panel D) after different times of CPT treatment
(sample size: n = 3). E. Expression of SMA protein determined by flow cytometry after the indicated periods of CPT exposure (sample
size: n = 3).

day 28 where small and giant cells are present at similar
numbers, as suggested by the microscopic evaluation in
Figure 1C and 1D. On day 30 and thereafter, the death
rate of giant cells is strongly decreased and falls below
the rate of division, while the fate of small cells remains
largely unchanged (Figure 3A). Between day 14 and
30, giant cells already undergo multi-daughter divisions
into more than two daughter cells (Figure 3A), which
presumably results in their depolyploidization. Thus, small
cells present on day 30 but generated from giant cells
before day 30 will contribute to the expansion of the pool
of small cells. This is consistent with the simulation in
Figure S4B, which suggests that giant cells present on day
30 contribute to the subsequent generation of small cells,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

making it very unlikely that the selection of preexisting
small cells in the original SKOV3 population are the
origin of the small SKOV3-R cells eventually emerging
at later stages. The possibility that preexisting giant cells
are selected is similarly unlikely in view of their dramatic
increase between day 10 and 14 (Figure 1C), in spite of
their low rate of division and a high rate of cell death
(Figure 3A), which strongly suggests that these cells arise
from smaller cells by endoreduplication and/or cell fusion.
Another finding arguing against the selection hypothesis
is the fact that cells surviving a 14-day drug treatment
are unable to seed in a collagen matrix, indicating that
cells with the properties of SKOV3-R are not present at
this stage.
40017

Oncotarget

Figure 9: Summary scheme. After the acute induction of cell death in most of the cells, CPT triggers a sequence of partially reversible

events, including polyploidization and accelerated senescence. This is accompanied by a more stable expression of stemness markers and
the acquisition of a pro-inflammatory secretory phenotype, followed by EMT and the emergence of proliferative, anchorage-independent,
dedifferentiated and pro-inflammatory chemoresistant cells.

While these observations assign an essential
role to giant cells in the formation of SKOV3-R cells,
a significant contribution by medium-size cells is less
likely. This is suggested by the absence of any detectable
depolyploidizing events in day 14 and day 30 cultures,
indicating that multi-daughter divisions occur less
frequently in these cells than in giant cells. At later
stages, divisions of medium-size cells into more than two
daughter cells are observed (Figure 3A). Although these
still occur at a lower frequency than in giant cells, it is
likely that medium-size cells contribute to the emergence
of SKOV3-R cells at later stages. Taken together, these
observations point a key role of polyploid cells, in
particular giant cells, in the generation of proliferating,
chemoresistant SKOV3 cells.
Another critical issue concerns the role of
senescence. Previous studies have provided evidence
that DNA damaging chemotherapeutic drugs induce
polyploidy, which is reversible in a small subpopulation
of these cells, resulting in the emergence of resistant,
clonogenic malignant cells (reviewed in [40]). The
same studies also suggested that polyploidization and
depolyploidization are linked to the induction and
reversion of accelerated senescence. Our own data
suggest that senescence and polyploidy are not necessarily
linked in a large fraction of the cells. Thus, p21+BrdU−
cells occur to a similar extent in large, medium-size
and giant cells (Figure 2E), indicating that senescence
occurs irrespective of ploidy, including small paradiploid cells. Furthermore, we identified a large fraction
of giant cells that undergo regular cell division into two
daughter cells (Figure 3A), presumably representing the
p21-BrdU+ cells in Figure 2E. In addition, only about 5%
of the cells on day 14 are positive for β-galactosidase
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

(Figure 2F), although giant cells prevail at this time. These
observations suggest that: (i) the induction of polyploidy
in SKOV3 cells by CPT is not strictly dependent on the
induction of senescence; and (ii) Small para-diploid cells
can originate from replication-competent polyploid giant
cells. This certainly does not exclude the possibility that
rejuvenating senescent giant cells also generate paradiploid, cycling cells, as previously described in other
experimental systems [40], perhaps through a replicating
giant cell as an intermediate. This matter is very complex
and needs more research to be able to draw definitive
conclusions as to the role of senescent cells in reversible
polyploidization.
Our data also show that the combination of CPT
treatment with hypoxia produces a cooperative effect
with respect to the generation of giant cells. A recent
publication described the induction of giant SKOV3
by hypoxia mimetics [43], but the observed cooperative
effect with a chemotherapeutic agent has not been
reported to date. Several previous studies have addressed
the link between hypoxia and senescence, which is also
relevant for the present study. While an inhibitory effect
of hypoxia on senescence has been observed with most
experimental models, there are also opposing findings
with other systems, making this a highly controversial issue
[71–78]. The situation is further complicated by the fact
that the linkage of senescence and hypoxia is dependent
on p53, at least in some experimental systems [77],
making it difficult to extrapolate the published findings to
SKOV3 cells lacking TP53 genes. However, if hypoxia
indeed suppresses senescence of SKOV3 cells as in the
majority of experimental systems, this would support the
conclusion that senescence is not a prerequisite for giant
cell formation.
40018

Oncotarget

Our data also show the upregulation of
pro-inflammatory markers on day 14 of CPT treatment
(Figure  6). However, at least in the case of IL-1β this
occurs in the majority of cells (Figure 6F) and therefore
does not appear to be restricted to senescent cells. It
thus seems appropriate to refer to this status as proinflammatory secretory phenotype rather than SASP.
Intriguingly, these markers remain upregulated in
SKOV3-R cells, both with and without ongoing CPT
treatment (Figures 6 and 8D), indicating that the proinflammatory secretory status triggered around day 14
is maintained in the cycling resistant cells emerging at
later stages. It is likely that the secretion of inflammatory
cytokines has no direct impact on the multi-stage process
described, but rather contributes to drug resistance and
an increased malignancy of the resulting cells. A striking
feature of the finally emerging SKOV3-R cells is their
high β-galactosidase activity (Figure 2F), a hallmark
of senescent cells in other systems. It thus appears that
SKOV3-R combine features of senescence, including a
pro-inflammatory phenotype and β-galactosidase activity,
with low p21 expression and a high mitotic activity.
EMT is another process previously linked to
chemoresistance, but its relationship to other events has
not been systematically addressed. In the model system
investigated in the present study, EMT temporally differs
from all processed analyzed and discussed above, since it
progressively increases after day 14. EMT thus appears
to parallel the emergence of SKOV3-R cells. This is
suggested by an up-regulation of EMT marker genes
concomitantly with the repression of the E-cadherin
encoding gene CDH1 in SKOV3-R cells (Figure 7A), a
dramatic increase of SMA-positive cells (Figure 7B), the
occurrence of actin stress fibers (Figure 7D) and the loss
of tight junctions (Figure 7F). The data in Figure 4 also
show that multiple epithelial marker genes are strongly
repressed in SKOV3-R cells, indicating that these cells are
dedifferentiated, which is consistent with the occurrence
of EMT. Flow cytometry of SMA expression also showed
that EMT was not restricted to a small subpopulation of the
heterogeneous SKOV3-R cell population, but occurred in
the vast majority of these cells (Figure 7B). Furthermore,
increased SMA and IL-1β expression were found in the
same cells (Figure 7C), indicating that EMT occurred in
cells with a pro-inflammatory secretory phenotype.
Finally, our data show that four stemness markers
were up-regulated during the observed multi-stage process
(Figure 5E). OCT-4, CD44, CD117 and CD133 showed a
clear increase on day 14. While expression of the latter two
was elevated transiently and coincided with the maximal
occurrence of polyploid and giant cells, OCT-4 and CD44
remained elevated at later stages, including SKOV3-R
cells. It is thus possible that CD117 and CD133 play a
role in polyploidization, which would be in line with the
previously proposed link of stemness to the transient

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

formation of polyploid giant cells [40]. In contrast to
OCT-4, expression of the functionally related transcription
factors NANOG and SOX2 did not change, consistent
with a previous report on etoposide-treated PA-1 cells
[79]. This suggests that OCT-4 fulfills a function unrelated
to self-renewal in drug-treated cancer cells. In the PA-1
model alluded to above, OCT-4 was associated with the
up-regulation of p21 expression. It appears that this does
not apply to our experimental system, since CDKN1A and
p21 expression (Figure 2B, 2C) is inversely correlated with
OCT-4 levels (Figure 5). Nevertheless, OCT-4 appears to
be of particular interest, since its expression and activity
are elevated in SKOV3-R cells, raising the possibility that
it plays a role in conferring CPT resistance, as reported for
drug-treated hepatoma cells [80]. We therefore attempted
to analyze the function of OCT-4 in CPT-treated SKOV3
cells by silencing of POU5F1 mRNA, but were unable
to obtain SKOV3 cells with substantially reduced level
of OCT-4 protein after lentiviral shRNA transduction (not
shown), suggesting that OCT-4 plays an essential role in
these cells.
Collectively, these findings led to the model in
Figure 9, depicting the time course of events eventually
leading to cycling, chemoresistant SKOV3 cells that are
capable of growing in an anchorage-independent manner
and display a dedifferentiated and pro-inflammatory
secretory phenotype. Importantly, key events of these
hallmarks of malignancy were also seen in IGROV-1
cells and in SKOV3 cells exposed to cyclic CPT
treatment, including a regimen of 1 day exposure and
21 days recovery, mimicking the clinical application of
chemotherapy. It is thus possible that the multi-stage
process described here also occurs in a clinical setting
and contributes to the emergence of chemoresistant cells
and perhaps the generation of dormant cells that escaped
drug-induced death by polyploidization and subsequently
rejuvenate to cause relapse of the disease long after the
initial therapy.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell culture
SKOV3 cells were obtained from the ATCC. H2BGFP-SKOV3 cells were generated by stable transfection
of SKOV3 cells with pBABE-H2GFP (Addgene).
IGROV-1 cells were a kind gift of T. Hagemann
(London). SKOV3 cells were cultured in McCoy’s 5a
(Life Technologies), complemented with 10% fetal calf
serum (PAA, Sigma), 100 U/ml penicillin, and 100 mg/ml
streptomycin (Sigma). IGROV-1 cells were cultured in
RPMI 1640 (Life Technologies), complemented with
10% fetal calf serum (PAA, Sigma), 100 U/ml penicillin,
100  mg/ml streptomycin (Sigma) and 2 g/l NaHCO3.
THP1 cells (ATCC, TIB-202) were cultured in RPMI 1640

40019

Oncotarget

Flow cytometry

(Life Technologies), complemented with 10% fetal calf
serum (PAA, Sigma) and 0,05 mM β-mercaptoethanol.
Cells were maintained in a humidified incubator at 37°C
and 5% CO2. To monitor cell cycle progression 5 × 104
cells were transduced two hours after plating with FUCCI
Cell Cycle Sensor [63] expressed by the mammalian
baculovirus vector BacMam 2.0 (Premo FUCCI; Life
Technologies) at an infection multiplicity of 50 particles
per cell and subsequently cultured for 24 h. For some
experiments giant SKOV3 cells were enriched by filtering
though 30 μm filters (Miltenyi Biotech).

After harvesting by trypsinization cells were washed
with phosphate buffered saline (PBS). Intracellular
staining was performed after permeabilization for 60 min
at 4°C using Foxp3/ Transcription Factor Staining Buffer
Set (eBioscience). Staining was performed at 4°C 30 min
for PerCPT-Vio700-labeled CD24 (Miltenyi Biotec, 130–
097-914), VioBlue-labeled anti-CD44 (Miltenyi Biotec,
130–099-268), APC-labeled anti-CD133 (Miltenyi Biotec,
130–090-826), PE-labeled anti-CD117 (BD Biosciences,
555714), PE-labeled anti-NANOG (BD Biosciences,
560873), anti-SOX2 (Millipore, AB5603), anti-OCT4
(Santa Cruz, sc9081), PE-labeled IL1β (eBioscience, 12–
7018-41), FITC-labeled anti-SMA (Sigma, F3777) and
FITC-labeled anti-rabbit IgG (eBioscience, 11–4839) and
PE-labeled anti-rabbit IgG (eBioscience, 12–4739) were
used as secondary antibodies, if required. Isotype control
antibodies were obtained from BD Biosciences, Biozol
and eBioscience. Cells were analyzed using a FACS
Canto flow cytometer and FACS Diva or FlowJo software
(BD Biosciences). Results were calculated as percentage
of live cells and mean fluorescence intensity (MFI). For
propidium iodide (PI) staining cells were harvested and
resuspended in 300 μl PBS. 700 μl ice-cold 100% ethanol
was added slowly under gentle mixing. After incubation
of at least 1 h at 4°C cells were pelleted and incubated for
30 min with 10 μg/ml RNase A and 20 μg/ml PI (Sigma)
at room temperature in the dark. Cells were analyzed by
flow cytometry as above.

Cell viability assay
Equal cell numbers were seeded into 96-well plates
and treated as indicated. 3-[4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl]-2,5diphenyl tetrazolium bromide (MTT; Sigma) was added
at a final concentration of 0.5 mg/ml and the plates were
incubated for 4 hours at 37°C. MTT formazan crystals
were dissolved with 5% sodium dodecyl sulphate + 0.005
M HCl for another 4 hours at 37°C. Color development
was measured at 570 nm.

Time-lapse life cell video microscopy
Live cell imaging movies were recorded for 70 h
with a resolution of 1388 × 1040 pixels, one picture per
hour and on average 14 regions / time period using a
Axiovert microscope equipped with a CO2 incubator and a
10x DIC objective (Zeiss). H2B-labeled cells were tracked
with an Axio Observer spinning disk microscope with 10×
objective (Zeiss) at a resolution of 512 × 512 pixels, one
picture per 30 minutes and a recording time of 67 hours.
Movies of cells transfected with FUCCI cell cycle sensors
were recorded for 64 hours by spinning disc microscopy
with a 25× objective, one picture / 15 minutes and a 512 ×
512 pixel resolution.

BrdU incorporation
Cells were labeled with 4 μg/ml BrdU for
approximately 18 hours. After washing with PBS
cells were fixed with 75% ethanol (−20°C) for 15 min.
Subsequently, cells were treated with 1 M HCl for 1 h at
37°C. They were then treated twice with sodium borate
for 5 min. After incubation with 10% BSA in PBS for
20 minutes at room temperature they were incubated with
a mouse anti-BrdU antibody (1:20; BD Biosciences) at
room temperature for 1 h. PBS washes were performed
between each step. Cells were incubated with anti-mouse
conjugated to Alexa 488 (1:400, Invitrogen) for 1 h. The
nuclei were counterstained with DAPI. For combination
with p21 staining, cells were incubated after sodium borate
treatment with mouse anti-BrdU antibody (as above)
plus rabbit anti-p21 antibody (1:100; Cell Signaling,
#2947) at room temperature for 1 h, followed by Alexa
488-conjugated anti-mouse IgG (1:400, Invitrogen) and
Alexa 594-conjugated anti-rabbit IgG (1:400, Invitrogen)
for 1 h.

Anchorage-independent growth of spheres in a
collagen matrix
A mixture of 2 mg/ml collagen type I (rat tail, Life)
and 8 mM NaOH in medium was prepared on ice and
adjusted to pH 6.5–7. Fifty microliters of the neutralized
solution were pipetted into a 96 well plate and allowed
to polymerize for 5 minutes. Then, 5,000 cells per well
were mixed with 75 μl of the neutralized collagen solution
and added to the coated wells. After 1 h at 37°C, 100 μl
medium were added and changed once a week. The assay
was evaluated under a phase-contrast microscope after
two weeks.

CPT treatment and hypoxia

Immunostaining

CPT (Santa Cruz) was used at a final concentration
of 6 μM. For hypoxia experiments cells were kept at 1%
O2 for 2 weeks.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Cells were fixed with formaldehyde (4%),
permeabilized by 0,1% Triton X-100 (5 min) and stained
40020

Oncotarget

RT-qPCR

by using a FITC labeled-ZO-1 antibody (Invitrogen,
339188) and Phalloidin (California Red Conjugate,
Biomol). Cells  were counterstained with Vecatshield
including  DAPI  (Biozol). Slides were evaluated with a
Leica RMB 3 microscope equipped with fluorescence
optics.

cDNA was synthesized from 0,1–1 μg of RNA using
the iScript kit (Biorad, Germany). qPCR was performed
in a Mx3000P Real-Time PCR system (Stratagene, La
Jolla, CA) for 40 cycles at an annealing temperature of
60°C. PCR reactions were carried out using the Absolute
QPCR SYBR Green Mix (Thermo Fisher) and a primer
concentration of 0,2 μM following the manufacturer’s
instructions. L27 was used as normalizer. PCR primer
sequences are listed in Table S1.

a-galactosidase and giemsa staining
Cells were fixed with formaldehyde (4%) for 5 min
at room temperature and washed with PBS. Staining
solution containing 0,1% X-gal, 5 mM potassium
ferrocyanide, 5 mM potassium ferricyanide, 150 mM
sodium chloride, 2 mM magnesium chloride in 40 mM
citric acid/sodium phosphate solution (pH 6) was added
to the cells and an incubation period of 24 h at 37°C
followed. To terminate the reaction staining solution
was replaced with distilled water. Blue-stained SA-β-gal
positive cells were counted as a percentage of the total
cell number. For Giemsa staining cells were fixed with
methanol at room temperature for 5 min, incubated with
10% Giemsa staining solution for 10 min and washed
several times with distilled water.

RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq) and data analysis
RNA extraction, sample preparation for RNASeq and sequencing on an Illumina HiSeq 1500 were
performed and have been published in detail elsewhere
[81]. RNA-Seq data were aligned to Ensembl v74 using
STAR (version STAR_2.3.1z13_r470) [82]. Determination
of gene read counts, normalization and calculation of
FPKM (fragments per kb per million) were carried out as
described [81]. Genes were considered for further analysis
if they had a minimum FPKM of 1 in any condition and
at least 50 raw reads. Data were analyzed using Ingenuity
Pathway Analysis (IPA; Qiagen Redwood City, CA, USA).
The functions Upstream Regulators and Diseases and Bio
Functions were applied using the default settings. RNASeq datasets were deposited at EBI ArrayExpress under
accession number E-MTAB-3770.

Luciferase assay
SKOV3 cells were transduced with a lentivectorbased reporter construct that is responsive to OCT4
activity via OCT4 response elements and expresses
destabilized green fluorescent protein and firefly luciferase
from the mCMV promoter (pGF1-mCMV; System
Biosciences). For determination of luciferase activity, cells
were lysed with a lysis buffer containing 77 mM K2HPO4,
23 mM KH2PO4 and 0,2% Triton X-1000. Measurement
was done according to the instructions of Beetle-Juice
Big-Kit (PJK). Light units of firefly luciferase were
normalized to protein concentration, using a commercial
protein assay kit (BioRad).

Statistical analyses
All experiments were carried out as independent
biological replicates (n ≥3); the exact sample sizes are
indicated in the Figure legends. Bar plots show the standard
deviation (error bars) and the statistical significance
determined by Student’s t-test (unpaired, two-sided, equal
variance) using GraphPad Prism 6.0 as follows: *p < 0.05;
**p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001; ****p < 0.0001. Dot plots show
the results of biological replicates, the median (horizontal
lines) and the statistical significance (t-test).

Analysis of phospo-STAT3 induction

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

THP1 cells were differentiated to macrophages by
an overnight treatment with 5 ng/ml of TPA (Sigma).
Two days later cells were treated with 100 ng/ml
lipopolysaccharide (Sigma) as a positive control, or with
supernatant from untreated SKOV3 cells or SKOV3
cells exposed to carboplatin. After 24 h cells were
lysed in 50 mM Tris pH 6.8, 2% SDS, 6% glycerin and
1% β-mercaptoethanol. Cell lysates were subjected
to SDS-PAGE on 12% gels and immunoblotting was
performed using the following antibodies: anti-STAT3
(124H6, Cell Signaling, #9139), anti-phospho-STAT3
(Tyr-705, Cell Signaling, #9145), horse reddish
peroxidase-linked anti-rabbit IgG (Cell Signaling, #7074)
and horse reddish  peroxidase-linked anti-mouse IgG
(eBioscience, 18–8817-33).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

We are grateful to Dr. Silke Reinartz (Gynecological
Oncology group, Marburg) for help with flow cytometry
experiments and to Dr. Andrea Nist (Genomics Core
Facility, Marburg) for RNA sequencing.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
All authors have nothing to disclose.

GRANT SUPPORT
This work was supported by a grant from UKGM
to V.R.
40021

Oncotarget

Abbreviations

Several Putative Cancer Stem Cell Markers by Primary
Ovarian Carcinoma. J Cancer Ther. 2010; 1:165–173.

BrdU, 5-bromo-2′-deoxyuridine; CPT, carboplatin;
CPC, cancer propagating cell; EMT, epithelial-mesenchymal
transition; FC, fold change; FPKM; fragments per kb
per million; IPA: Ingenuity Pathway Analysis; MTT,
3-[4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl]-2, 5-diphenyl tetrazolium
bromide; PBS, phosphate-buffered saline; RNA-Seq, RNA
sequencing; RT-qPCR, reverse transcriptase quantitative
PCR; SASP, senescence-associated secretory phenotype.

10.	 Zhang S, Balch C, Chan MW, Lai HC, Matei D,
Schilder JM, Yan PS, Huang TH, Nephew KP. Identification
and characterization of ovarian cancer-initiating cells from
primary human tumors. Cancer Res. 2008; 68:4311–4320.
11.	 Meng E, Long B, Sullivan P, McClellan S, Finan MA,
Reed  E, Shevde L, Rocconi RP. CD44+/CD24− ­ovarian
­cancer cells demonstrate cancer stem cell properties and correlate to survival. Clin Exp Metastasis. 2012; 29:939–948.
12.	 Foster R, Buckanovich RJ, Rueda BR. Ovarian cancer stem
cells: working towards the root of stemness. Cancer Lett.
2013; 338:147–157.

REFERENCES

13.	 Burgos-Ojeda D, Rueda BR, Buckanovich RJ. Ovarian
­cancer stem cell markers: prognostic and therapeutic
­implications. Cancer Lett. 2012; 322:1–7.

1.	 Colombo N, Peiretti M, Parma G, Lapresa M, Mancari R,
Carinelli S, Sessa C, Castiglione M, Group EGW. Newly
diagnosed and relapsed epithelial ovarian carcinoma:
ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment
and follow-up. Ann Oncol. 2010; 21Suppl 5:v23–30.

14.	 Kryczek I, Liu S, Roh M, Vatan L, Szeliga W, Wei S,
Banerjee M, Mao Y, Kotarski J, Wicha MS, Liu R, Zou W.
Expression of aldehyde dehydrogenase and CD133 defines
ovarian cancer stem cells. Int J Cancer. 2012; 130:29–39.

2.	 Kurman RJ ShihIe M. The origin and pathogenesis of
­epithelial ovarian cancer: a proposed unifying theory. Am
J Surg Pathol. 2010; 34:433–443.

15.	 Jaggupilli A, Elkord E. Significance of CD44 and CD24 as
cancer stem cell markers: an enduring ambiguity. Clin Dev
Immunol. 2012; 2012:708036.

3.	 Tan DS, Kaye S. Ovarian clear cell adenocarcinoma: a
­continuing enigma. J Clin Pathol. 2007; 60:355–360.

16.	 Young RA. Control of the embryonic stem cell state. Cell.
2011; 144:940–954.

4.	 Lengyel E. Ovarian cancer development and metastasis.
Am J Pathol. 2010; 177:1053–1064.

17.	 Boyer LA, Lee TI, Cole MF, Johnstone SE, Levine  SS,
Zucker JP, Guenther MG, Kumar RM, Murray HL,
Jenner  RG, Gifford DK, Melton DA, Jaenisch R,
Young  RA. Core transcriptional regulatory circuitry in
human embryonic stem cells. Cell. 2005; 122:947–956.

5.	 Kulbe H, Chakravarty P, Leinster DA, Charles KA, Kwong J,
Thompson RG, Coward JI, Schioppa T, Robinson  SC,
Gallagher WM, Galletta L, Salako MA, Smyth  JF,
Hagemann T, Brennan DJ, Bowtell DD, et al. A dynamic
inflammatory cytokine network in the human ovarian cancer
microenvironment. Cancer Res. 2012; 72:66–75.

18.	 Hu L, McArthur C, Jaffe RB. Ovarian cancer stem-like
side-population cells are tumourigenic and chemoresistant.
Br J Cancer. 2010; 102:1276–1283.

6.	 Latifi A, Luwor RB, Bilandzic M, Nazaretian S, Stenvers K,
Pyman J, Zhu H, Thompson EW, Quinn MA, Findlay JK,
Ahmed N. Isolation and characterization of tumor cells
from the ascites of ovarian cancer patients: molecular phenotype of chemoresistant ovarian tumors. PLoS One. 2012;
7:e46858.

19.	 Peng S, Maihle NJ, Huang Y. Pluripotency factors Lin28
and Oct4 identify a sub-population of stem cell-like cells in
ovarian cancer. Oncogene. 2010; 29:2153–2159.
20.	 Wintzell M, Hjerpe E, Avall Lundqvist E, Shoshan M.
Protein markers of cancer-associated fibroblasts and tumorinitiating cells reveal subpopulations in freshly isolated
ovarian cancer ascites. BMC Cancer. 2012; 12:359.

7.	 Reinartz S, Schumann T, Finkernagel F, Wortmann  A,
Jansen JM, Meissner W, Krause M, Schworer AM,
Wagner  U, Muller-Brusselbach S, Muller R. Mixedpolarization phenotype of ascites-associated macrophages
in human ovarian carcinoma: Correlation of CD163 expression, cytokine levels and early relapse. Int J Cancer. 2014;
134:32–42.

21.	 Siu MK, Wong ES, Kong DS, Chan HY, Jiang L, Wong OG,
Lam EW, Chan KK, Ngan HY, Le XF, Cheung AN. Stem
cell transcription factor NANOG controls cell migration
and invasion via dysregulation of E-cadherin and FoxJ1 and
contributes to adverse clinical outcome in ovarian cancers.
Oncogene. 2013; 32:3500–3509.

8.	 Takaishi K, Komohara Y, Tashiro H, Ohtake H,
Nakagawa  T, Katabuchi H, Takeya M. Involvement of
M2-polarized macrophages in the ascites from advanced
epithelial ovarian carcinoma in tumor progression via Stat3
activation. Cancer Sci. 2010; 101:2128–2136.

22.	 He QZ, Luo XZ, Wang K, Zhou Q, Ao H, Yang Y, Li SX,
Li Y, Zhu HT, Duan T. Isolation and ­characterization
of cancer stem cells from high-grade serous ovarian
­carcinomas. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2014; 33:173–184.

9.	 Di J, Yigit R, Figdor CG. Duiveman-de Boer, T
Massuger  L,Torensma R. Expression Compilation of

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23.	 Ma L, Lai D, Liu T, Cheng W, Guo L. Cancer stemlike cells can be isolated with drug selection in human

40022

Oncotarget

ovarian cancer cell line SKOV3. Acta Biochim Biophys
Sin (Shanghai). 2010; 42:593–602.

38.	 Vega S, Morales AV, Ocana OH, Valdes F, Fabregat I,
Nieto MA. Snail blocks the cell cycle and confers resistance
to cell death. Genes Dev. 2004; 18:1131–1143.

24.	 Park JT, Chen X, Trope CG, Davidson B, Shih Ie M,
Wang TL. Notch3 overexpression is related to the recurrence of ovarian cancer and confers resistance to carboplatin. Am J Pathol. 2010; 177:1087–1094.

39.	 Vitale I, Galluzzi L, Senovilla L, Criollo A, Jemaa M,
Castedo M, Kroemer G. Illicit survival of cancer cells
­during polyploidization and depolyploidization. Cell Death
Differ. 2011; 18:1403–1413.

25.	 Samardzija C, Quinn M, Findlay JK, Ahmed N. Attributes
of Oct4 in stem cell biology: perspectives on cancer stem
cells of the ovary. J Ovarian Res. 2012; 5:37.

40.	 Erenpreisa J, Cragg MS. Three steps to the immortality
of cancer cells: senescence, polyploidy and self-renewal.
Cancer Cell Int. 2013; 13:92.

26.	 Mani SA, Guo W, Liao MJ, Eaton EN, Ayyanan A,
Zhou AY, Brooks M, Reinhard F, Zhang CC, Shipitsin M,
Campbell LL, Polyak K, Brisken C, Yang J, Weinberg RA.
The epithelial-mesenchymal transition generates cells with
properties of stem cells. Cell. 2008; 133:704–715.

41.	 Erenpreisa J, Salmina K, Huna A, Kosmacek EA,
Cragg MS, Ianzini F, Anisimov AP. Polyploid tumour cells
elicit paradiploid progeny through depolyploidizing divisions and regulated autophagic degradation. Cell Biol Int.
2011; 35:687–695.

27.	 Polyak K, Weinberg RA. Transitions between epithelial and
mesenchymal states: acquisition of malignant and stem cell
traits. Nat Rev Cancer. 2009; 9:265–273.

42.	 Rajaraman R, Guernsey DL, Rajaraman MM,
Rajaraman  SR. Stem cells, senescence, neosis and
­self-renewal in c­ ancer. Cancer Cell Int. 2006; 6:25.

28.	 Martin A, Cano A. Tumorigenesis: Twist1 links EMT to
self-renewal. Nat Cell Biol. 2010; 12:924–925.
29.	 Scheel C, Weinberg RA. Cancer stem cells and epithelialmesenchymal transition: concepts and molecular links.
Semin Cancer Biol. 2012; 22:396–403.

43.	 Zhang S, Mercado-Uribe I, Xing Z, Sun B, Kuang J, Liu J.
Generation of cancer stem-like cells through the formation of polyploid giant cancer cells. Oncogene. 2014;
33:116–128.

30.	 Yao D, Dai C, Peng S. Mechanism of the mesenchymal-­
epithelial transition and its relationship with metastatic
tumor formation. Mol Cancer Res. 2011; 9:1608–1620.

44.	 Ewald JA, Desotelle JA, Wilding G, Jarrard DF. Therapyinduced senescence in cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2010;
102:1536–1546.

31.	 Kalluri R, Weinberg RA. The basics of epithelial-­
mesenchymal transition. J Clin Invest. 2009; 119:1420–1428.

45.	 Gewirtz DA, Holt SE, Elmore LW. Accelerated senescence:
an emerging role in tumor cell response to chemotherapy
and radiation. Biochem Pharmacol. 2008; 76:947–957.

32.	 Ricci F, Bernasconi S, Perego P, Ganzinelli M, Russo G,
Bono F, Mangioni C, Fruscio R, Signorelli M, Broggini M,
Damia G. Ovarian carcinoma tumor-initiating cells have a
mesenchymal phenotype. Cell Cycle. 2012; 11:1966–1976.

46.	 Jackson JG, Pant V, Li Q, Chang LL, QuintasCardama A, Garza D, Tavana O, Yang P, Manshouri T,
Li Y, El-Naggar AK, Lozano G. p53-mediated senescence
impairs the apoptotic response to chemotherapy and clinical
outcome in breast cancer. Cancer Cell. 2012; 21:793–806.

33.	 Wintzell M, Lofstedt L, Johansson J, Pedersen AB, Fuxe J,
Shoshan M. Repeated cisplatin treatment can lead to a
­multiresistant tumor cell population with stem cell features
and sensitivity to 3-bromopyruvate. Cancer Biol Ther.
2012; 13:1454–1462.

47.	 Illidge TM, Cragg MS, Fringes B, Olive P, Erenpreisa JA.
Polyploid giant cells provide a survival mechanism for
p53 mutant cells after DNA damage. Cell Biol Int. 2000;
24:621–633.

34.	 Haslehurst AM, Koti M, Dharsee M, Nuin P, Evans K,
Geraci J, Childs T, Chen J, Li J, Weberpals J, Davey S,
Squire J, Park PC, Feilotter H. EMT transcription factors
snail and slug directly contribute to cisplatin resistance in
ovarian cancer. BMC Cancer. 2012; 12:91.

48.	 Puig PE, Guilly MN, Bouchot A, Droin N, Cathelin D,
Bouyer F, Favier L, Ghiringhelli F, Kroemer G, Solary E,
Martin F, Chauffert B. Tumor cells can escape DNAdamaging cisplatin through DNA endoreduplication and
reversible polyploidy. Cell Biol Int. 2008; 32:1031–1043.

35.	 Davidson B, Trope CG, Reich R. Epithelial-mesenchymal
transition in ovarian carcinoma. Front Oncol. 2012; 2:33.

49.	 Hu X, Ghisolfi L, Keates AC, Zhang J, Xiang S, Lee DK,
Li CJ. Induction of cancer cell stemness by chemotherapy.
Cell Cycle. 2012; 11:2691–2698.

36.	 Singh A, Settleman J. EMT, cancer stem cells and drug
resistance: an emerging axis of evil in the war on cancer.
Oncogene. 2010; 29:4741–4751.

50.	 Tiwari N, Gheldof A, Tatari M, Christofori G. EMT as the
ultimate survival mechanism of cancer cells. Semin Cancer
Biol. 2012; 22:194–207.

37.	 Kurrey NK, Jalgaonkar SP, Joglekar AV, Ghanate AD,
Chaskar PD, Doiphode RY, Bapat SA. Snail and slug
mediate radioresistance and chemoresistance by antagonizing p53-mediated apoptosis and acquiring a stem-like
phenotype in ovarian cancer cells. Stem Cells. 2009;
27:2059–2068.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

51.	 Marchini S, Fruscio R, Clivio L, Beltrame L, Porcu  L,
Fuso  Nerini I, Cavalieri D, Chiorino G, Cattoretti  G,
Mangioni C, Milani R, Torri V, Romualdi C, Zambelli A,
Romano  M, Signorelli M, et al. Resistance to

40023

Oncotarget

platinum-based ­chemotherapy is associated with epithelial
to mesenchymal transition in epithelial ovarian cancer. Eur
J Cancer. 2013; 49:520–530.

65.	 Huna A, Salmina K, Jascenko E, Duburs G, Inashkina I,
Erenpreisa J. Self-Renewal Signalling in Presenescent
Tetraploid IMR90 Cells. J Aging Res. 2011; 2011:103253.

52.	 Fogh J, Trempe G. 1975; New human tumor cell lines.
Fogh  J. Human Tumor Cells in Vitro. Plenum Press
New York:115–159.

66.	 Achuthan S, Santhoshkumar TR, Prabhakar J, Nair  SA,
Pillai MR. Drug-induced senescence generates chemoresistant stemlike cells with low reactive oxygen ­species. J Biol
Chem. 2011; 286:37813–37829.

53.	 Domcke S, Sinha R, Levine DA, Sander C, Schultz N.
Evaluating cell lines as tumour models by comparison of
genomic profiles. Nat Commun. 2013; 4:2126.
54.	 Shaw TJ, Senterman MK, Dawson K, Crane CA,
Verhyden  BC. Characterization of intraperitoneal,
­orthotopic, and metastatic xenograft models of human
­ovarian cancer. Mol Ther. 2004; 10:1032–1042.

67.	 Salmina K, Jankevics E, Huna A, Perminov D, Radovica I,
Klymenko T, Ivanov A, Jascenko E, Scherthan H, Cragg M,
Erenpreisa J. Up-regulation of the embryonic self-renewal
network through reversible polyploidy in irradiated
p53-mutant tumour cells. Exp Cell Res. 2010;
316:2099–2112.

55.	 Anglesio MS, Wiegand KC, Melnyk N, Chow C,
Salamanca C, Prentice LM, Senz J, Yang W, Spillman MA,
Cochrane DR, Shumansky K, Shah SP, Kalloger SE,
Huntsman DG. Type-specific cell line models for type-­
specific ovarian cancer research. PLoS One. 2013;
8:e72162.

68.	 Jackson TR, Salmina K, Huna A, Inashkina I, Jankevics E,
Riekstina U, Kalnina Z, Ivanov A, Townsend PA,
Cragg  MS, Erenpreisa J. DNA damage causes TP53dependent coupling of self-renewal and senescence pathways in embryonal carcinoma cells. Cell Cycle. 2013;
12:430–441.

56.	 Benard J, Da Silva J, De Blois MC, Boyer P, Duvillard P,
Chiric E, Riou G. Characterization of a human ovarian adenocarcinoma line, IGROV1, in tissue culture and in nude
mice. Cancer Res. 1985; 45:4970–4979.

69.	 Lamouille S, Xu J, Derynck R. Molecular mechanisms of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol.
2014; 15:178–196.
70.	 Singh R, George J, Shukla Y. Role of senescence and
mitotic catastrophe in cancer therapy. Cell Div. 2010; 5:4.

57.	 Terao Y, Nishida J, Horiuchi S, Rong F, Ueoka Y,
Matsuda  T, Kato H, Furugen Y, Yoshida K, Kato K,
Wake  N. Sodium butyrate induces growth arrest and
senescence-like phenotypes in gynecologic cancer cells. Int
J Cancer. 2001; 94:257–267.

71.	 Leontieva OV, Natarajan V, Demidenko ZN, Burdelya LG,
Gudkov AV, Blagosklonny MV. Hypoxia suppresses
­conversion from proliferative arrest to cellular senescence.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012; 109:13314–13318.

58.	 Ramirez PT, Gershenson DM, Tortolero-Luna G,
Ramondetta LM, Fightmaster D, Wharton JT, Wolf JK.
Expression of cell-cycle mediators in ovarian cancer cells
after transfection with p16(INK4a), p21(WAF1/Cip-1), and
p53. Gynecol Oncol. 2001; 83:543–548.

72.	 Mo J, Sun B, Zhao X, Gu Q, Dong X, Liu Z, Ma Y, Zhao N,
Tang R, Liu Y, Chi J, Sun R. Hypoxia-induced ­senescence
contributes to the regulation of microenvironment in
­melanomas. Pathol Res Pract. 2013; 209:640–647.
73.	 Tsai CC, Chen YJ, Yew TL, Chen LL, Wang JY, Chiu CH,
Hung SC. Hypoxia inhibits senescence and maintains
­mesenchymal stem cell properties through down-regulation
of E2A-p21 by HIF-TWIST. Blood. 2011; 117:459–469.

59.	 Rodier F, Campisi J. Four faces of cellular senescence.
J Cell Biol. 2011; 192:547–556.
60.	 Sharma A, Singh K, Almasan A. Histone H2AX phosphorylation: a marker for DNA damage. Methods Mol Biol. 2012;
920:613–626.

74.	 Welford SM, Bedogni B, Gradin K, Poellinger L, Broome
Powell M, Giaccia AJ. HIF1alpha delays premature
­senescence through the activation of MIF. Genes Dev.
2006; 20:3366–3371.

61.	 van Oijen MG, Medema RH, Slootweg PJ, Rijksen G.
Positivity of the proliferation marker Ki-67 in noncycling
cells. Am J Clin Pathol. 1998; 110:24–31.

75.	 Welford SM, Giaccia AJ. Hypoxia and senescence: the
impact of oxygenation on tumor suppression. Mol Cancer
Res. 2011; 9:538–544.

62.	 Schultz DC, Vanderveer L, Buetow KH, Boente MP,
Ozols RF, Hamilton TC, Godwin AK. Characterization of
chromosome 9 in human ovarian neoplasia identifies frequent genetic imbalance on 9q and rare alterations involving
9p, including CDKN2. Cancer Res. 1995; 55:2150–2157.

76.	 Poulios E, Trougakos IP, Chondrogianni N, Gonos ES.
Exposure of human diploid fibroblasts to hypoxia extends
proliferative life span. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2007; 1119:9–19.

63.	 Sakaue-Sawano A, Kurokawa H, Morimura T, Hanyu A,
Hama H, Osawa H, Kashiwagi S, Fukami K, Miyata T,
Miyoshi H, Imamura T, Ogawa M, Masai H, Miyawaki A.
Visualizing spatiotemporal dynamics of multicellular cellcycle progression. Cell. 2008; 132:487–498.

77.	 Kilic Eren M, Tabor V. The role of hypoxia inducible
­factor-1 alpha in bypassing oncogene-induced senescence.
PLoS One. 2014; 9:e101064.
78.	 Lee SH, Lee JH, Yoo SY, Hur J, Kim HS, Kwon SM.
Hypoxia inhibits cellular senescence to restore the
­therapeutic potential of old human endothelial progenitor
cells via the hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha-TWIST-p21
axis. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2013; 33:2407–2414.

64.	 Walen KH. Genetic stability of senescence reverted cells:
genome reduction division of polyploidy cells, aneuploidy
and neoplasia. Cell Cycle. 2008; 7:1623–1629.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40024

Oncotarget

79.	 Huna A, Salmina K, Erenpreisa J, Vazquez-Martin A,
Krigerts J, Inashkina I, Gerashchenko BI, Townsend PA,
Cragg MS, Jackson TR. Role of stress-activated OCT4A in
the cell fate decisions of embryonal carcinoma cells treated
with etoposide. Cell Cycle. 2015:1–16.

81.	 Adhikary T, Wortmann A, Schumann T, Finkernagel  F,
Lieber S, Roth K, Toth PM, Diederich WE, Nist  A,
Stiewe T, Kleinesudeik L, Reinartz S, Müller-Brüsselbach S,
Müller R. The transcriptional PPARβ/δ network in human
macrophages defines a unique ­agonist-induced activation
state. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015; 43:5033–5051.

80.	 Wang XQ, Ongkeko WM, Chen L, Yang ZF, Lu P,
Chen KK, Lopez JP, Poon RT, Fan ST. Octamer 4 (Oct4)
mediates chemotherapeutic drug resistance in liver cancer
cells through a potential Oct4-AKT-ATP-binding cassette
G2 pathway. Hepatology. 2010; 52:528–539.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

82.	 Dobin A, Davis CA, Schlesinger F, Drenkow J, Zaleski C,
Jha S, Batut P, Chaisson M, Gingeras TR. STAR: ­ultrafast
universal RNA-seq aligner. Bioinformatics. 2013;
29:15–21.

40025

Oncotarget

