Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 40

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Potent efficacy of metronomic topotecan and pazopanib
combination therapy in preclinical models of primary or late
stage metastatic triple-negative breast cancer
Teresa Di Desidero1,2,*, Ping Xu1,*, Shan Man1, Guido Bocci2 and Robert S. Kerbel1,3
1

Biologic Sciences Platform, Sunnybrook Research Institute, Toronto, Canada

2

Divisione di Farmacologia, Dipartimento di Medicina Clinica e Sperimentale, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy

3

Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Guido Bocci, email: guido.bocci@med.unipi.it
Correspondence to: Robert S. Kerbel, email: robert.kerbel@sri.utoronto.ca
Keywords: metronomic chemotherapy, topotecan, pazopanib, metastatic triple negative breast cancer
Received: August 13, 2015	

Accepted: November 16, 2015	

Published: November 24, 2015

ABSTRACT
Metronomic chemotherapy has shown promising activity in numerous preclinical
studies and also some phase II clinical studies involving various tumor types, and
is currently undergoing phase III trial evaluation. Triple-negative breast cancer
(TNBC) is an aggressive histological subtype with limited treatment options and very
poor prognosis following progression after standard chemotherapeutic regimens.
Herein, we evaluated the potential therapeutic impact and molecular mechanisms of
topotecan administered in a continuous low-dose metronomic (LDM) manner, alone
or in concurrent combination with pazopanib, an antiangiogenic tyrosine kinase
inhibitor (TKI), in a triple-negative, primary and metastatic breast cancer orthotopic
model; potential molecular mechanisms of efficacy were also studied, especially
the impact of hypoxic conditions. The combination of metronomic topotecan and
pazopanib significantly enhanced antitumor activity compared to monotherapy with
either drug and prolonged survival, even in the advanced metastatic survival setting,
with a marked decrease in tumor vascularity, proliferative index, and the induction
of apoptosis. Significant changes in tumor angiogenesis, cancer cell proliferation,
apoptosis, HIF1α levels, HIF-1 target genes and ABCG2 were found both in vitro
and in tumor tissue. Notably, the pazopanib and metronomic topotecan combination
treatment inhibited expression of HIF1α and ABCG2 genes in cells grown under hypoxic
conditions, and this was associated with an increased intracellular concentration of
the active form of topotecan. Our results suggest a potential novel therapeutic option
for the treatment of metastatic triple-negative breast cancer patients.

INTRODUCTION

has shown encouraging results in a number of phase II
clinical trials, including in metastatic breast cancer [3-6],
and is currently undergoing phase III trial evaluation [7-9].
One completed randomized phase III trial, called CAIRO3,
evaluating metronomic capecitabine plus bevacizumab as
a long-term maintenance therapy in first line metastatic
colorectal cancer patients, reported significantly improved
progression free survival (PFS) rate, the primary endpoint
of the study [10]. Topotecan, a topoisomerase I inhibitor,
appears to be highly efficacious both in animal models

Metronomic chemotherapy refers to the close,
regular administration of conventional chemotherapy
drugs at low, minimally toxic doses, with no prolonged
break periods [1]. Integration with an antiangiogenic
agent such as TKIs (e.g. sunitinib and pazopanib) or
anti-VEGFR-2 monoclonal antibodies (i.e. DC101) with
metronomic chemotherapy can greatly enhance antitumor
efficacy, with low toxicity [2]. Metronomic chemotherapy
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

42396

Oncotarget

and in human patients when administered for prolonged
periods using metronomic dosing [11-15]. Moreover,
metronomic oral topotecan showed an enhanced antitumor
activity as a result of combination with concurrent
administration of pazopanib, in preclinical models of
advanced human ovarian cancer [16, 17], aggressive
pediatric solid tumors [18], pediatric sarcomas [19], and
renal cell carcinoma [20]. Indeed, a phase I trial of this
combination schedule has been conducted in persistent
gynecologic tumors, without major toxic effects [21].
Pazopanib, approved in 2009 for the treatment of patients
with advanced renal cell carcinoma (RCC) [22], is
currently being evaluated alone or in combination with
capecitabine in breast cancer patients [23, 24]. Several
phase I trials were performed to assess the safety and
tolerability of pazopanib in patients with advanced solid
tumors [25-27], but the activity of pazopanib alone in
metastatic breast cancer has been established only in a
single arm open-label multicenter phase II trial, where
pazopanib provided disease stability in advanced breast
cancer and the authors suggested its use in breast cancer
in combination with chemotherapeutic drugs and/or other
targeted agents [28]. Few preclinical and clinical data are
currently available concerning the impact of topotecan
in metastatic breast cancer and its metronomic dosing
and scheduling concept has not yet been explored in
this indication either alone or in combination with TKIs
[29]. Among breast cancer subtypes, “triple-negative”
is particularly aggressive with limited treatment options
available, and associated with a very poor prognosis [30].
The purpose of our study was to investigate metronomic
topotecan alone or in combination with pazopanib in a
model of a primary established triple-negative or advanced
metastatic breast cancer elucidating possible molecular
mechanisms accounting for efficacy of this treatment
combination.

respectively). Moreover, a greater antiproliferative effect
of pazopanib, sunitinib or topotecan, in the metronomic
144-h exposure, on HUVECs was found, as demonstrated
by the IC50 values (1±0.22 µM, 3±0.95 nM and 1±0.13
nM respectively). The cytotoxic activity on proliferating
HMVEC-d was similar to that observed for HUVECs (IC50
values are reported in Supplementary Table 1).

Protracted low-dose treatment with topotecan
and TKIs modulates expression of HIF1α in
endothelial and cancer cells
After exposure to pazopanib, sunitinib or topotecan
and various concurrent combinations of these drugs
at concentration corresponding to the experimental
IC50 of cell proliferation, HIF1α gene expression and
protein levels were evaluated in cells treated in hypoxic
conditions. Low dose topotecan significantly inhibited
HIF1α gene expression in 231/LM2-4 in hypoxic
conditions (54±1.41 % vs. 100% of control expression. P
< 0.001; Figure 1A). As shown in Supplementary Figure
1, a single standard 72h-exposure of topotecan did not
decrease hypoxia-induced HIF1α gene expression as
much as protracted low-dose topotecan, corroborating
that the effects of topotecan on HIF1α were even more
marked when cells were treated with daily administration
of low metronomic doses of drug (72h standard exposure
69±0.64% and 144h metronomic daily exposure
54±1.41% vs. 100% of control expression. P < 0.001;
Supplementary Figure 1). In hypoxic conditions both TKIs
and low dose topotecan inhibit HIF1α gene expression,
but the combination significantly reduces this gene
expression more than the metronomic topotecan and TKIs
alone as follows: pazopanib daily exposure 68±0.14%
vs. topotecan + pazopanib daily exposure 16±1.37%,
and sunitinib daily exposure 80±0.32% vs. topotecan +
sunitinib daily exposure 14±1.87% if compared to 100%
control expression (Figure 1A). Also the HIF1α protein
level (Figure 1B) confirmed this marked inhibition when
compared to LDM topotecan or TKIs alone.

RESULTS
In vitro studies

Pazopanib or sunitinib enhances the effect of
protracted low-dose treatment with topotecan in
an hypoxic environment

Pazopanib, sunitinib or topotecan inhibit
endothelial and cancer cell proliferation in vitro

The combination of topotecan with pazopanib
enhances the anti-proliferative effect on 231/LM2-4 cells
of the individual drugs used alone, as shown in Figure 1C.
To investigate in more detail the basis of this enhanced
effect, we measured the intracellular concentration of
topotecan lactone in treated cells. Higher topotecan lactone
concentrations were found in 231/LM2-4, MDA-MB-231
and endothelial cells exposed to the drugs in combination
with either pazopanib or sunitinib, when compared
with treatment using topotecan alone. Our results show

In vitro pazopanib, sunitinib and topotecan inhibited
the cell proliferation of HUVEC, HMVEC-d and of 231/
LM2-4 in a time- and concentration-dependent manner
(see Supplementary Table 1); the 72-h pazopanib,
sunitinib and topotecan standard exposures inhibited the
proliferation of 231/LM2-4 with an IC50 of 11±0.67 µM,
8±0.73 µM and 24±2.07 nM, respectively, being different
from those observed in the 144-h metronomic exposure
(2.18±0.53 µM, 2.63±0.33 µM and 3.01±0.58 nM,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

42397

Oncotarget

Figure 1: A. HIF1α gene expression in 231/LM2-4 cells exposed to metronomic topotecan (TPT), pazopanib (PZ), sunitinib (SU) and

combinations thereof or with vehicle alone, for 144h in hypoxic conditions. Columns and bars, mean values ±S.E., respectively. *P < 0.001
vs. vehicle-treated controls. B. HIF1α protein expression in 231/LM2-4 cells exposed to metronomic topotecan (LDM TPT), pazopanib,
sunitinib or combinations thereof or with vehicle alone, for 144h in hypoxic conditions. C. Sigmoid concentration-effect curve of 231/
LM2-4 cells exposed to metronomic TPT, PZ or combinations thereof [1:10], or with vehicle alone for 144h. D. Accumulation of topotecan
in 231/LM2-4 cell line after exposure to 1 µM topotecan alone and in combination with pazopanib or sunitinib. Columns and bars indicate
mean values±S.D., respectively. Small S.D. bars are not visible in the graph. E. ABCG2 gene expression in 231/LM2-4 cells exposed to
metronomic topotecan, pazopanib, sunitinib or combinations thereof, or with vehicle alone, for 144 h in hypoxic conditions. Columns
and bars, mean values±S.E., respectively. *P < 0.001 vs. vehicle-treated controls. F. ABCG2 protein level in 231/LM2-4 cells exposed to
metronomic topotecan, pazopanib, sunitinib or combinations thereof, or with vehicle alone for 144 h in hypoxic conditions.

Figure 2: Proapoptotic effects of topotecan (TPT) and pazopanib (PZ) on proliferating 231/LM2-4 cells treated for
144h in hypoxic conditions. Apoptosis measurements using the Cell Death Detection ELISA Plus kit (Roche Diagnostics). Percentage
Absorbance values are representative of 231/LM2-4 cytosolic nucleosomes. The experiment was repeated 3 times with a least 2 replicates
per sample. Columns and bars, Mean values±S.E., respectively. *, P < 0.001 vs. vehicle-treated controls. Small error bars are not visible
in the graph.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

42398

Oncotarget

that at extracellular topotecan concentrations of 1 µM,
intracellular accumulation of topotecan is significantly
higher (approximately 50%) if the chemotherapeutic
drug is co-administered with pazopanib or sunitinib
in 231/LM2-4 (Figure 1D; 0.024±0.008 (100%) vs.
0.035±0.022 (141%) and 0.036±0.014 (146%) ng/µg
protein, respectively; P < 0.001), in MDA-MB-231
(Supplementary Figure 2A) and in endothelial cells
(Supplementary Figure 2B and 2C).
Based on these findings, we investigated the
variation of ABCG2 expression; the gene expression and
the protein levels of this transporter were quantified in
cancer and endothelial cell lines exposed to the different
drugs at the experimental IC50 in hypoxic conditions.
Similar to HIF1α, Figure 1E shows a significant decrease
of ABCG2 gene expression in 231/LM2-4 hypoxictreated cells, by the concurrent combination of either
TKI and metronomic topotecan (topotecan + pazopanib
daily exposure 23±2.57% and topotecan + sunitinib daily
exposure 16±1.43% vs. 100% of control expression; P
< 0.001). Moreover, the combination of the two drugs
showed a decrease of ABCG2 protein level (Figure 1F)
when compared to the single drugs alone, as demonstrated
by Western blot analysis.
Moreover, the significantly decreased levels of
HIF1α was associated with the decrease of its target genes
CA9 (data not shown), VEGF (Supplementary Figure 3)
by the treatment combination of metronomic topotecan
and pazopanib in 231/LM2-4 and endothelial cells grown
under hypoxic conditions.

LM2-4 BrdUrd-unlabeled cells, compared to controls
(data not shown).

In vivo therapy: effects of single agent topotecan
administered as MTD (maximum tolerated dose)
or low-dose metronomic schedule (LDM) in
combination with pazopanib on localized primary
breast tumors
We first tested topotecan and pazopanib on primary
orthotopic implanted 231/LM2-4 tumors. We assessed
tumor growth in six different treatment groups: vehicle
control, LDM topotecan, MTD topotecan, and the doublet
combination of LDM/MTD topotecan and pazopanib. As
shown in Figure 3A and 3B, single-agent LDM and MTD
topotecan did not have any significant antitumor effect. In
contrast, the LDM topotecan and pazopanib combination
caused a significant tumor growth delay (e.g. at day 35,
384.01 mm3 vs. 1488.5 mm3 of controls, P < 0.05), greater
than that observed with the MTD combination (619.59
mm3). The toxicity profile showed that mice treated with
the LDM combination schedule maintained stable body
weight throughout the course of the experiment, whereas
in the MTD combination treatment group a tumor growth
delay was detected in parallel with fluctuating weight loss
(e.g. at day 35, 17.82±1.04 g vs. 20.46±0.31 g of controls,
P < 0.05) (Figure 3C). Mice treated with 0.1% HPMC
(vehicle control) and 1 mg/kg/day LDM topotecan had to
be sacrificed at day 39 and 32, respectively, due to tumor
size reaching 1.7 cm3.
Staining for Ki67, a marker of cell-cycle progression
and proliferation, showed a remarkable decrease in
231/LM2-4 tumors after MTD and LDM combination
treatments (Figure 3D). Basal levels of caspase-3 activity
detected in tumor samples from control mice were not
modified by pazopanib treatment but, conversely, they
were increased in the group treated with LDM and MTD
topotecan alone. Moreover, the highest significant increase
of caspase-3 activity was observed when mice were treated
daily with oral topotecan plus concurrent pazopanib
(Figure 3E). Thus, the in vivo prolonged exposure of
tumor cells to MTD/metronomic doublet translates into a
significant increase in tumor cell apoptosis. Furthermore,
CD31 staining in tumor sections from control, LDM and
MTD topotecan treated animals showed a similar presence
of number of vessels, which instead were statistically
decreased in mice treated with pazopanib alone and in
combination with both LDM and MTD topotecan (Figure
3F).
To evaluate the in vivo relationship between HIF1α
and ABCG2 and their potential roles in the mechanisms
involved in the activity of the treatment combination
of topotecan with pazopanib, a different experiment
on primary tumors was carried out. The 231/LM2-4
variant was injected into MFPs of female SCID mice (n

The combination of topotecan and pazopanib or
sunitinib enhances tumor cell apoptosis
The possible impact of the enhanced intracellular
topotecan retention caused by pazopanib co-treatment
on tumor cell apoptosis was investigated by assessing
the mono- and oligonucleosomes in the cytoplasmic
fraction of cell lysates and by bromodeoxyuridine
(BrdU) incorporation. The extent of DNA fragmentation
was increased by the combination of both drugs. In
particular, the presence of chromatin fragments was
clearly detectable after 144 h for pazopanib and topotecan,
alone and in combination at their IC50 concentrations. As
shown in Figure 2, after 144 h treatment with pazopanib
and topotecan (in hypoxic conditions) a significantly
higher percentage of apoptotic cells in the treated samples
was found when compared to vehicle-treated cells.
Furthermore, the same pro-apoptotic effects of pazopanib
and topotecan, alone and in combination, were observed
also in endothelial cells (HUVECs) at lower concentrations
(Supplementary Figure 4). The increase of apoptotic
cells was observed also after bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU)
incorporation. The addition of pazopanib to metronomic
topotecan induced an increase in the percentage of 231/
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

42399

Oncotarget

Figure 3: In vivo antitumor effects of the single drugs and simultaneous combination of maximum tolerated dose
(MTD) or low-dose metronomic (LDM) topotecan (TPT) and pazopanib (PZ) schedules on 231/LM2-4 tumours
xenotransplanted in mice: tumor growth curve A. % T/C value B. and body weights of mice C. P < 0.05 vs. control. Quantification
of Ki67 D. Capase-3 E. and CD31 F. in 231/LM2-4 tumour xenografts administered with vehicle, oral topotecan (LDM) at 1 mg/kg daily
by gavage, MTD topotecan 1.5 mg/kg 5 days consecutively every 3 weeks through i.p. injection, pazopanib 150 mg/kg by gavage daily
without interruption and their combinations. Symbols/columns and bars, mean values±S.D., respectively.

Figure 4: A. Tumor growth curve of the single drugs and simultaneous combination of topotecan (TPT) and pazopanib (PZ) schedules
in 231/LM2-4 tumour xenografts administered for 14 days with vehicle, oral low-dose metronomic (LDM) topotecan at 1 mg/kg daily by
gavage, maximum tolerated dose (MTD) topotecan 1.5 mg/kg 5 days consecutively every 3 weeks through i.p. injection, pazopanib 150 mg/
kg by gavage daily without interruption, and their combinations. P < 0.05 vs. vehicle-treated controls. B. and C. HIF1α and ABCG2 gene
expression in tumor samples, respectively. Columns and bars, mean values±S.E., respectively.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

42400

Oncotarget

prolonging survival. In marked contrast, the chronic
metronomic combination treatment (1 mg/kg/d topotecan
+ 150 mg/kg/d pazopanib) greatly prolonged survival
of the mice. Median survival values were as follows: 66
days for control, 56 days for LDM topotecan, 84 days
for MTD topotecan, 66 days for Pazopanib, 63 days for
MTD topotecan and Pazopanib, and 145 days (P = 0.0057
vs. control) for LDM topotecan + pazopanib. Notably,
our data in the two different models demonstrated that
the treatment efficacies in the primary tumours did not
necessarily predict for analogous effects in the metastatic
setting. Indeed, primary tumor growth reduction was
observed (Figure 3A) following LDM or MTD topotecan
and pazopanib therapy, but in the advanced metastatic
model, only LDM topotecan and pazopanib treated mice
had a significant improved overall survival (Figure 5).

= 5 animals per group). When primary tumors reached
a size of 150 mm3, treatment with topotecan LDM 1
mg/kg/day and MTD 1.5 mg/Kg, pazopanib 150 mg/
Kg/day was initiated. After three weeks animals were
sacrificed and tumors were excised (Figure 4A). Figure
4B and 4C showed gene expression inhibition of HIF1α
and ABCG2, respectively, in tumors induced by both the
MTD and LDM topotecan plus pazopanib concurrent
drug combination. The outcomes observed using the two
different types of combined treatment protocols were
statistically significant when compared with the single
administration of topotecan both in MTD and LDM (P <
0.001 vs. control).

Survival of mice with advanced metastatic disease
In the experiment involving treatment of advanced
metastases the MDA-MB-231/LM2-4 variant was injected
orthotopically (n = 5 mice per group) and impact on
survival was assessed. When tumors reached 400 mm3
primary tumors were surgically resected. Treatment was
initiated at day 39, nineteen days post primary tumor
resection. A Kaplan-Meier survival curve was plotted
accordingly for all treated groups is shown in Figure 5.
Using survival as the end point, 1 mg/kg/d LDM topotecan
therapy alone, pazopanib 150 mg/kg/d monotherapy and
MTD topotecan plus 150 mg/kg/d pazopanib group did
not have any significant effect on survival of the mice;
the MTD topotecan group showed a small effect in

Effects of single agent topotecan administered
as MTD versus metronomic compared to
combination with sunitinib on growth of localized
breast primary tumors
In an experiment involving primary tumors in
mice treated with sunitinib we assessed tumor growth
using six different regimen groups, as described above.
As shown in Figure 6A and 6B, single-agent LDM and
MTD topotecan did not have any antitumor effect. In
contrast, LDM topotecan plus sunitinib caused a greater
tumor growth delay (e.g. at day 28, 200.17 mm3 vs. 1372.6

Figure 5: Effect on survival caused by low-dose metronomic (LDM) oral topotecan (TPT) alone or in combination
with pazopanib (PZ). The drug treatments and doses tested were: vehicle control, maximum tolerated dose (MTD) topotecan (1.5 mg/
kg i.p. 5 consecutive days every 3 wk), LDM oral topotecan (1 mg/kg by gavage, daily), pazopanib once a day (150 mg/kg by gavage
daily), pazopanib once a day + LDM topotecan or MTD topotecan. Mice were euthanized when more than 20% body weight loss occurred
or when moribund and then assessed; n = 5 mice for all groups. Kaplan-Meier P < 0.05 was taken as statistical indication of difference vs.
vehicle-treated controls.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

42401

Oncotarget

mm3 of controls; P < 0.001), greater than that obtained
using the MTD drug combination (400 mm3). The
combination of LDM topotecan and sunitinib showed,
although not significant, a slight decrease of Ki67 (+)
cells (Figure 6C). Moreover, samples from treated and
control mice were analyzed by immunohistochemistry
for cleaved caspase-3 expression. Comparisons of
stained cells normalized to mm2 of tumor area revealed
significant increase of cleaved caspase-3 expression in the
metronomic combination (Figure 6D; P < 0.05). Changes
in the gene expression profile of HIF1α and ABCG2 were
noted within each group of treated mice. The combination
schedule, both LDM and MTD, significantly decreased
HIF1α and ABCG2 gene expression (Figure 6E and 6F; P
< 0.001 vs. control and vs. the single drug administration,
respectively).

phase III clinical trial results with respect to progression
free survival (PFS) have been reported with bevacizumab
in combination with various chemotherapy regimens as
first line (upfront) therapies in the metastatic setting [3133] and as a maintenance therapy in a phase III trial where
a benefit in overall survival (OS) was also reported in a
trial called IMELDA [34]. Neoadjuvant bevacizumab plus
chemotherapy also caused increases in pathologic response
rates (pCR) in triple negative breast cancer patients [35,
36]. On the other hand the disease free survival results
of several adjuvant therapy trials evaluating bevacizumab
plus chemotherapy followed by bevacizumab maintenance
in early stage breast cancer patients have been
disappointing despite a clear initial benefit while patients
receive treatment, and for a period after the maintenance
treatment is stopped [31, 37]. However, a recent phase III
trial of neoadjuvant bevacizumab followed by adjuvant
bevacizumab plus chemotherapy (NSABP-B40) reported
benefits in PFS and OS in hormone positive-receptor
breast cancer patients in secondary analyses [38]. Finally,
all phase III trials evaluating an oral antiangiogenic TKI
plus standard chemotherapy in metastatic breast cancer

DISCUSSION
Perception of the impact and benefits of
antiangiogenic drugs for the treatment of breast cancer
remains controversial [31, 32]. On the one hand positive

Figure 6: A. Effect of low-dose metronomic (LDM) oral topotecan (TPT) alone or in combination with sunitinib (SU). 231/LM2-4 human
breast cancer cells were injected i.p. into SCID mice. Treatments were initiated 14 day after tumor injection. The drug treatments and
doses tested were: vehicle control, maximum tolerated dose (MTD) topotecan (1.5 mg/kg i.p. 5 consecutive days every 3 wk), LDM oral
topotecan (1 mg/kg by gavage, daily), sunitinib once a day (60 mg/kg by gavage daily), sunitinib once a day + LDM topotecan or MTD
topotecan. B. % T/C value. Quantification of Ki67 C. and Capase-3 D. levels. Symbols/columns and bars, mean values±S.D., respectively.
E. and F. HIF1α and ABCG2 gene expression in tumor samples, respectively. Columns and bars, mean values±S.E., respectively. *P <
0.001 vs. vehicle-treated controls.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

42402

Oncotarget

patients have been negative [32, 33, 37].
With this background in mind, it would seem that
VEGF pathway targeting drugs have anti-tumor activity,
albeit limited, against breast cancer in many circumstances,
and as such, provides a rationale for devising strategies
to improve their impact. Such strategies include reducing
toxicity using new treatment combinations (especially
incorporating less toxic chemotherapy ‘backbone’
regimens), uncovering promising predictive markers to
help select patients more likely to benefit from receiving
an antiangiogenic therapy, and developing improved
preclinical models to evaluate new treatment possibilities.
One such preclinical model involves treatment of mice
with advanced metastatic breast cancer, not just primary
tumors [39, 40]. As an example, we previously reported
that antiangiogenic drugs, including pazopanib or sunitinib
were ineffective in treating mice with advanced metastatic
human triple-negative breast cancer, even when combined
with conventional cytotoxic MTD chemotherapy, whereas
the antiangiogenic drugs could cause inhibition of primary
tumor growth [41]. However, it has been also described
that the antiangiogenic therapy, while blocking tumor
volume growth, was found to increase local invasion
in multiple primary tumor models, but this effect was
blocked by concurrent chemotherapy [42, 43]. These
data suggest that the therapeutic impact of antiangiogenic
drugs may vary in different tumor models, and that
anti-VEGF-A therapy can block the invasion properties
of tumor cells in response to chemotherapy [44]. Our
metastatic model therapy results recapitulated prior
phase III clinical trial outcomes using sunitinib-based
regimens to treat metastatic breast cancer patients [41].
We therefore decided to evaluate sunitinib or pazopanib
in such metastatic versus conventional primary models
in combination with chemotherapy using a low-dose
metronomic chemotherapy (topotecan) protocol which
has previously shown excellent therapeutic results
in other preclinical models including ovarian cancer
[16, 17], sarcomas [18] and renal cell carcinoma [20],
and investigate mechanisms of action involved in the
antitumor activity of this treatment combination.
Triple negative breast cancer has a highly aggressive
nature with very limited treatment options and carries a
very poor prognosis [30]. A single accepted standard
chemotherapy regimen for patients with TNBC is not
currently available, and thus treatment is selected from
recommended agents approved for metastatic disease (i.e.
chemotherapeutic regimens containing anthracyclines,
and taxanes alone or in combination with bevacizumab)
[30, 45]. Therefore new and more effective therapies for
patients affected by this breast cancer subtype are urgently
needed [30]. The impact of pazopanib in the treatment
of breast cancer will be better known in the near future
because of ongoing trials which involve the combination
of this TKI with various chemotherapy regimens [23,
24]. However, one important issue concerning such
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

combination treatments will likely be the tolerability of
administering a TKI such as pazopanib with standard-ofcare cytotoxic chemotherapy agents. Although pazopanib
at 800 mg was shown to be safely combined with weekly
paclitaxel at 80 mg/m2, other chemotherapy regimens
resulted in dose reductions of pazopanib [46]. In this
regard, low dose, less toxic metronomic chemotherapy,
which has shown efficacy in patients with metastatic breast
cancer in limited phase II clinical studies [47], could be
a feasible combination approach to limit the toxicity of
pazopanib or other TKIs and enhance efficacy.
In our study we report, for the first time to our
knowledge, the remarkable efficacy of the metronomic
topotecan and pazopanib treatment combination,
especially in the metastatic triple negative breast cancer
model, which caused a significantly prolonged survival
times. Although a possible limitation of our study
concerns the employment of a metastatic model using a
single cell line (i.e. LM2-4), the choice of this metastatic
variant subline derived from the human triple negative
breast cancer cell line MDA-MB-231, was based on its
capability to give rise to extensive systemic spontaneous
metastases in multiple sites such as the lungs, liver
and lymph nodes within one month after resection of
the primary orthotopic tumour in SCID mice [40]. As
previously reported, responses of primary tumours are
not necessarily indicative of the effects of the same
treatment strategies when use to treat metastatic disease
[41, 48]. Indeed, our results showed that both the LDM or
MTD combinations of topotecan and pazopanib improve
primary tumour response compared to the single drugs
alone. However, only the metronomic combination was
highly efficacious against metastatic disease, highlighting
the potential benefit of using metronomic chemotherapy in
combination with an antiangiogenic drug during late stage
disease settings.
What are the possible underlying mechanisms
responsible for these encouraging effects? Topotecan
when administered in a metronomic-like fashion was
previously reported to potently inhibit HIF1α translation
by a DNA damage-independent mechanism [49]. When
administered in a low-dose, continuous schedule it blocks
the expression of tumor cell HIF1α, as first described
by Melillo’s group [50]. HIF1α has a central role in
regulating a broad spectrum of genes involved in tumor
angiogenesis, invasion, and metastasis [51, 52]. Thus,
exposure of tumor cells to metronomic topotecan causes a
decreased expression of VEGF, likely as a result of HIF1α
downregulation [5]. As previously reported, the addition
of a low dose daily topotecan protocol with bevacizumab
significantly inhibited tumor growth in glioblastoma
xenografts, when compared to mice treated with topotecan
or bevacizumab alone [49]. In our in vitro experiments we
showed the ability of low-dose metronomic oral topotecan
alone to suppress HIF1α in cells under hypoxic conditions.
However, in our breast cancer model no significant
42403

Oncotarget

antitumor effect on primary tumors was observed and
neither prolonged survival was noted. Indeed, even
though LDM topotecan could have its therapeutic effects
increased in a hypoxic-stressed tumor microenvironment,
in our study, the administration of this drug alone in either
primary or metastatic breast cancer therapy models did
not translate into a therapeutic advantage. One possible
explanation for these findings may be the level of ABCG2
expression, a known and effective resistance mechanism
of mammary tumors enabling them to evade topotecaninduced DNA damage [53]. Indeed, in our study the
metronomic topotecan treatment regimen decreased
ABCG2 expression, as shown in Figure 2, but the level
of this inhibition was likely not enough to neutralize the
effects of the transporter on the drug in vivo, and thus
lowering the intracellular concentrations of topotecan.
Studies on ABCG2 transporter have revealed three
hypoxia-response elements in the ABCG2 promoter,
suggesting that its expression is likely regulated by the
hypoxia - HIF1α pathway -, that results in modulation
of its expression [54], enhancing cell survival [55].
Considering the possibility that HIF1α activation
may strongly influence ABCG2 upregulation and that
the level of HIF1α expression is not the same in all
tumors, we evaluated whether sunitinib or pazopanib
could enhance the action of an HIF1α inhibitor such as
topotecan. The results of our experiments showed the
significantly decreased levels of HIF1α and its target
genes - CA9 (data not shown), VEGF and ABCG2 - by
the treatment combination of metronomic topotecan and
pazopanib in 231/LM2-4 or endothelial cells grown under
hypoxic conditions. Moreover, this treatment protocol
caused significant tumor growth delays and greatly
prolonged survival times of the mice together with a
significant decreased HIF1α/ABCG2 gene expression in
tumors, when compared with the single drug treatments,
suggesting the use of the combination schedule treatment.
Similar changes in the expression of HIF1α and ABCG2
were also noted in 231/LM2-4 hypoxic-treated cells and
tumors treated with topotecan and sunitinib. Simultaneous
treatment of these drugs markedly reduced expression of
these genes relative to either agent alone, explaining the
high degree of efficacy of the combination compared to
the weak or no-effects of LDM topotecan alone.
Interestingly, various TKIs have also been
described as competitive inhibitors of ABCG2 [56].
Imatinib mesylate - a substrate for ABCG2 - can reverse
resistance to irinotecan acting as such a competitive
ABCG2 inhibitor [57]. Our group (T.D.D. and G. B.)
previously suggested that the combination of axitinib
and SN38, the active metabolite of irinotecan, increased
intracellular accumulation of SN38, by axitinib-mediated
inhibition of ABCG2 [58]. Sunitinib was found to inhibit
transport mediated by ABC drug transporters, which
may affect the bioavailability of drugs which are coadministered [56]. Pazopanib, instead, seems to be a high
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

affinity substrate for this carrier, as previously described
[25]. Pazopanib could itself be a substrate of ABCG2
and thus mediates a pharmacodynamic interaction with
LDM topotecan, resulting in a competitive inhibitory
mechanism at the level of topotecan extrusion from the
cancer cell mediated by ABCG2. Thus, the results of our
study suggest that combining low dose topotecan with
TKIs that are substrates of common ABC transporters
might downregulate, saturate or inhibit the transporter
and increase anticancer activity. Indeed, our in vitro data
clearly show that the combination of low dose topotecan
with pazopanib significantly increase intracellular levels of
active topotecan in cancer cells, enhancing the antitumor
effects of the combination [20].
Since ABC transporters are also involved in the
disposition of most drugs, pharmacokinetic interactions
may considerably complicate successful application
of combination therapies in the clinic [53]. The
pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic changes that
can occur when chemotherapeutic drugs at standard
doses are combined with TKIs may allow to exploit
the aforementioned advantage of LDM topotecan
therapy in a hypoxic-stressed tumor microenvironment.
In this regard, our data showed no changes in mouse
body weight associated with metronomic topotecan
combination regimens, in contrast with the MTD-based
regimens. Moreover, in a clinical study in patients with
gynecological cancers treated with this combination drug
schedule, no dose adjustment was necessary for low
dose topotecan, suggesting a good toxicity profile of the
combination of metronomic topotecan and pazopanib [21].
Although at first glance it could appear that there
is only a small difference in topotecan dose between the
two administered schedules (LDM 1.0 mg/kg p.o. daily vs.
MTD 1.5 mg/kg i.p. for 5 days every 3 weeks), the route of
administration is fundamental to understand the different
active plasma concentrations reached by the LDM and
MTD protocols. Indeed, as previously demonstrated in a
topotecan pharmacokinetic study, after oral administration
the maximal plasma concentration (Cmax) of the active
lactone was 10-fold less than that reached after i.p. drug
administration [59]. Therefore the oral administration
and the dose fractionation of the metronomic protocol
determines low concentrations of the active drug, and thus
an improved toxicity profile, suggesting its possible use
for future clinical trials.
Another interesting finding of our study is that
pazopanib, sunitinib and topotecan all cause a direct
cytotoxic effect on cancer and endothelial cells, as shown
by the combined IC50. In vivo, cancer cell proliferation has
been measured by immunohistochemical analyses of Ki67,
a nuclear marker expressed in all phases of the cell cycle
except G0 [60]. The expression of Ki-67 is one of the most
reliable indicators of the proliferative status of cancer cells
and is closely associated with the growth and invasion of
breast cancer [61]. In our experiments the number of Ki42404

Oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS

67-positive cells in tumors obtained from LDM topotecan
plus pazopanib-treated mice was 48% lower than found in
the control group. Although these data were obtained from
tumor tissue samples taken at different time points, in our
in vivo study on primary tumors - treated with topotecan
and pazopanib (Figure 3) - the Ki67 staining was
performed approximately two weeks after the beginning
of the second cycle of MTD administration. Rapid tumor
cell repopulation can take place between successive
MTD chemotherapy treatments, but in this experiment
Ki67+ cells were not increased in MTD chemotherapytreated tumors, suggesting that probably tumor regrowth/
repopulation during the chemotherapy break period might
be more evident after 3 weeks from the beginning of the
MTD therapy.
Moreover, in our in vitro experiments, we were
able to show that pazopanib triggers apoptosis in 231/
LM2-4 cells, which was much more pronounced by
this orally available drug under hypoxic conditions. In
agreement with these findings, low-dose combination
treatments were able to significantly increase the activity
of caspase-3 expression compared to controls, as noted in
in vivo models. Caspase-3-like protease is involved in the
apoptotic death of MDA-MB-231 and 231/LM2-4 cells
[62]. The combinations of LDM topotecan and pazopanib
were associated with marked and significantly higher
rates of cancer cell apoptosis and resulted in significant
decreased levels of vessel density, assessed by CD31
staining.
In conclusion, the combination pazopanib/
metronomic topotecan regimen was particularly effective
in the metastatic triple-negative breast cancer model
including causing a significanting prolonged survival with
a favourable toxicity profile. Also noted were marked
decreases in tumor volume, vascularity and proliferative
index, associated with the downregulation of HIF1α
and ABCG2, and increased intracellular concentrations
of active topotecan. Furthermore, these changes were
highly dependent on growth of the cells under hypoxic
conditions when assessed in vitro. Also noteworthy were
the differences in therapeutic outcomes in the various
mice treatment groups when therapy was undertaken in
mice with primary tumors versus advanced metastatic
disease, as also previously discussed by Francia and
colleagues [39]. These findings suggest the possibility of
the use of low dose metronomic topotecan in combination
with pazopanib, or similar drug combinations involving
a topoisomerase-I poison with an antiangiogenic drug
(e.g. antibodies such as bevacizumab or ramucirumab), as
novel and potential therapeutic options for the treatment of
triple-negative metastatic breast cancer.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Materials, drugs and cell lines
The details of materials, drugs and cell lines used
in the experiments are reported in the Supplementary
Materials and Methods.

In vitro studies
In vitro assessment of cell proliferation inhibition
by topotecan, pazopanib and their combination on triple
negative breast cancer cell line MDA-MB 231 cell line
[63, 64] and its highly metastatic variant called MDAMB 231/LM2-4 [40] and on endothelial cells for 72h [65]
and 144h [58] was performed by CellTiter 96® AQueous
One Solution Cell Proliferation Assay (MTS; Promega)
[66]; apoptosis measurements were made by Cell Death
Detection ELISA Plus kit (Roche Diagnostics, Laval, QC,
Canada) and bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) incorporation
analysis; HIF1α and ABCG2 gene expression was
obtained with Real-time PCR analysis and their protein
levels evaluation was performed by Western Blot assay;
intracellular accumulation of topotecan was measured
by HPLC analysis as previously described [67, 68].
The details of these experiments are reported in the
Supplementary Materials and Methods.

In vivo studies

Animals and treatments
Six-week-old in house bred female YFP SCID mice
were housed in microisolator cages on vented racks and
manipulated using aseptic techniques. MDA-MB 231/
LM2-4 is a variant cell line of MDA-MB 231 selected in
vivo for aggressive spontaneous metastatic spread from
established but resected primary tumors and was grown
in cell culture as previously described [40]. Mammary
fat pad (MFP) orthotopic injection (2×106 cells) was
carried out as previously described [40]. Weekly caliper
measurements were carried out to determine tumor growth
and tumor volume. Tumor volume (mm3) was defined
as follows: [(w1 x w1x w2) x (π/6)], where w1 and w2
were the smallest and the largest tumor diameter (mm),
respectively. Treatment of primary tumors (n = 5 mice per
group) was initiated when the average volume was in the
range of 100 - 150 mm3. All mice were randomized just
before initiation of treatment. In the survival experiments
(n = 5 mice per group), surgical resection of the primary
tumors was carried out when the average tumor size was
around 400 mm3. Control mice received either vehicle
42405

Oncotarget

Real-time PCR and western blot analysis of
HIF1α and ABCG2 on tumor tissue samples

and/or normal saline as appropriate. Pazopanib, sunitinib
and topotecan or their simultaneous combinations
using conventional and metronomic schedules were
administered as follows: LDM topotecan LDM was
given at 1 mg/kg daily by gavage [20]; MTD topotecan
was given at 1.5 mg/kg 5 days consecutively every 3
weeks via i.p. injection [16]; pazopanib 150 mg/kg was
administered by gavage daily without interruption;
sunitinib was administered by gavage at 60 mg/kg dose
daily. Each experiment employed the minimum number of
mice needed to obtain statistically meaningful results. At
termination tumors were excised, measured and sampled
for gene expression and immunohistochemistry. Drug
efficacy was based on percentage of the average treatedtumour-volume divided by the average vehicle-controltumour-volume (% T/C) [69].

Tumor tissues (from primary tumors) were
homogenized using the gentleMACS™ Dissociator
(Miltenyi Biotec, San Diego, CA, USA). Total RNA was
extracted from tumor tissue samples by using the RNEasy
kit mini (Qiagen, Mississauga, ON, Canada) following
manufacturer’s instructions. Human HIF1α and ABCG2
gene expression and protein levels evaluation in tumor
samples was performed as described in Supplemental
materials and methods.

Statistical analysis
The results of all in vitro experiments were subjected
to analysis of variance among groups (ANOVA), followed
by the Student-Newman-Keuls test. Tumor therapy results
are reported as mean±S.D. Survival curves were plotted
by the method of Kaplan and Meier and were tested for
survival differences using the log-rank test. The level of
significance was set at P < 0.05. Statistical analyses were
performed using the GraphPad Prism software package
version 5.0 (GraphPad Software, Inc, San Diego, CA).

Immunohistochemistry
Tumor tissue samples in the primary tumor
experiments with topotecan and pazopanib were taken
at different time points, when tumors in mice of each
group reached their respective volume endpoints. The
end of the experiment for each group was as follows: i)
control group, day 39; ii) LDM topotecan, day 32; iii)
MTD topotecan, day 53; iv) pazopanib, day 59; v) LDM
topotecan + pazopanib, day 59; vi) MTD topotecan +
pazopanib, day 59. Instead, in the case of topotecan and
sunitinib, all samples were taken at day 28, at the end of
the experiment. Briefly, tumor tissue samples from all
the different treatment groups were fixed in 10% neutralbuffered formalin for 24 h, processed and embedded
in paraffin for histology and immunohistochemistry.
Formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded samples were
firstly cut into 5-μm-thick sections. The antigen retrieval
was accomplished by deparaffinization, rehydration, and
heating in a microwavable pressure cooker with citrated
buffer; 3% hydrogen peroxide diluted in water was used
to block the endogenous peroxidase activity and BSA
was used to block nonspecific staining. Sections were
incubated with rabbit PECAM-1 antibody (M-20) (1:200,
#sc1506, Santa Cruz Biotechnology), rabbit anti-Ki67
antibody (1:1000, #VPK451, VECTOR Lab) and rabbit
anti-cleaved Caspase-3 (Asp175) (1:300, #9664, Cell
Signaling) at 4°C overnight. Negative controls were
carried out by omitting the primary antibodies. The LSAB
+ System HRP Kit (DAKO, Mississauga, ON, Canada)
was used to detect primary antibody followed by staining
with DAB reagent and counterstaining with hematoxylin.
Sections were visualized under a Carl Zeiss Axioplan 2
microscope (Carl Zeiss Canada Inc) and images captured
with a Zeiss Axiocam digital camera controlled by
AxioVision 3.0 software.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Ms. Cassandra Cheng for the excellent
secretarial assistance.

FUNDING
This work was supported by grants from the
Canadian Breast Cancer Foundation (CBCF) and the
Canadian Institutes for Health Research (CIHR) and the
International Association for Cancer Research (IACR)/
Worldwide Cancer Research to RSK; and a grant for the
Italian Association for Cancer Research (AIRC) to GB.
TDD is the recipient of a Research Fellowship for abroad
2011 FIRC (Italian Foundation for Cancer Research) and
the 2013 SIF (Italian Society of Pharmacology) Award.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
R. S. Kerbel is a consultant of Cerulean Pharma
(Boston), Scientific Advisory Board member of
Angiocrine Biosciences (New York) and consultant of
Triphase Accelerator (Toronto/San Diego). All the other
authors declare that they have no competing interests.

REFERENCES
1.	 Kerbel RS. (2014). Development and Evolution of the
Concept of Metronomic Chemotherapy: A Personal

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

42406

Oncotarget

Perspective. In: Bocci G and Francia G, ed. Metronomic
Chemotherapy Pharmacology and Clinical Applications:
Springer, pp. 3-21.
2.	

topotecan in ovarian carcinoma. Cancer Biol Ther. 2009;
8:1596-1603.
12.	 Hackl C, Man S, Francia G, Milsom C, Xu P and Kerbel
RS. Metronomic oral topotecan prolongs survival and
reduces liver metastasis in improved preclinical orthotopic
and adjuvant therapy colon cancer models. Gut. 2013;
62:259-271.

Kerbel RS. Improving conventional or low dose metronomic
chemotherapy with targeted antiangiogenic drugs. Cancer
Res Treat. 2007; 39:150-159.

3.	 Montagna E, Cancello G, Bagnardi V, Pastrello D,
Dellapasqua S, Perri G, Viale G, Veronesi P, Luini A,
Intra M, Calleri A, Rampinelli C, Goldhirsch A, Bertolini
F and Colleoni M. Metronomic chemotherapy combined
with bevacizumab and erlotinib in patients with metastatic
HER2-negative breast cancer: clinical and biological
activity. Clin Breast Cancer. 2012; 12:207-214.

13.	 Aljuffali IA, Mock JN, Costyn LJ, Nguyen H, Nagy T,
Cummings BS and Arnold RD. Enhanced antitumor
activity of low-dose continuous administration schedules
of topotecan in prostate cancer. Cancer Biol Ther. 2011;
12:407-420.
14.	 Minturn JE, Janss AJ, Fisher PG, Allen JC, Patti R, Phillips
PC and Belasco JB. A phase II study of metronomic oral
topotecan for recurrent childhood brain tumors. Pediatr
Blood Cancer. 2011; 56:39-44.

4.	 Young SD, Lafrenie RM and Clemons MJ. Phase ii trial of
a metronomic schedule of docetaxel and capecitabine with
concurrent celecoxib in patients with prior anthracycline
exposure for metastatic breast cancer. Curr Oncol. 2012;
19:e75-83.

15.	 Tillmanns TD, Stewart CF, MacEachern J, Schaiquevich
P, Walker MS and Stepanski EJ. Daily oral topotecan:
Utilization of a metronomic dosing schedule to treat
recurrent or persistent solid tumors. J Clin Oncol, 2008
ASCO Annual Meeting Proceedings (Post-Meeting
Edition). 2008; 26:suppl 2571.

5.	 Fedele P, Marino A, Orlando L, Schiavone P, Nacci A,
Sponziello F, Rizzo P, Calvani N, Mazzoni E, Cinefra M
and Cinieri S. Efficacy and safety of low-dose metronomic
chemotherapy with capecitabine in heavily pretreated
patients with metastatic breast cancer. Eur J Cancer. 2012;
48:24-29.

16.	 Hashimoto K, Man S, Xu P, Cruz-Munoz W, Tang T,
Kumar R and Kerbel RS. Potent preclinical impact of
metronomic low-dose oral topotecan combined with the
antiangiogenic drug pazopanib for the treatment of ovarian
cancer. Mol Cancer Ther. 2010; 9:996-1006.

6.	 Dellapasqua S, Bertolini F, Bagnardi V, Campagnoli E,
Scarano E, Torrisi R, Shaked Y, Mancuso P, Goldhirsch
A, Rocca A, Pietri E and Colleoni M. Metronomic
cyclophosphamide and capecitabine combined with
bevacizumab in advanced breast cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2008;
26:4899-4905.

17.	 Merritt WM, Nick AM, Carroll AR, Lu C, Matsuo K,
Dumble M, Jennings N, Zhang S, Lin YG, Spannuth WA,
Kamat AA, Stone RL, Shahzad MM, Coleman RL, Kumar
R and Sood AK. Bridging the gap between cytotoxic and
biologic therapy with metronomic topotecan and pazopanib
in ovarian cancer. Mol Cancer Ther. 2010; 9:985-995.

7.	 Efficacy of Capecitabine Metronomic Chemotherapy
to Triple-negative Breast Cancer (SYSUCC-001).
NCT01112826.
http://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT01112826?term = metronomic+phase+III&rank = 2.
8.	

18.	 Kumar S, Mokhtari RB, Sheikh R, Wu B, Zhang L, Xu
P, Man S, Oliveira ID, Yeger H, Kerbel RS and Baruchel
S. Metronomic oral topotecan with pazopanib is an active
antiangiogenic regimen in mouse models of aggressive
pediatric solid tumor. Clin Cancer Res. 2011; 17:56565667.

Capecitabine Maintenance Therapy Following Capecitabine
Combined With Docetaxel in Treatment of mBC
(CAMELLIA). NCT01917279. http://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/
show/NCT01917279?term = metronomic+phase+III&rank
= 1.

9.	 Montagna E, Cancello G, Dellapasqua S, Munzone E and
Colleoni M. Metronomic therapy and breast cancer: a
systematic review. Cancer Treat Rev. 2014; 40:942-950.

19.	 Kumar S, Mokhtari RB, Oliveira ID, Islam S, Toledo SR,
Yeger H and Baruchel S. Tumor dynamics in response to
antiangiogenic therapy with oral metronomic topotecan
and pazopanib in neuroblastoma xenografts. Transl Oncol.
2013; 6:493-503.

10.	 Simkens LH, van Tinteren H, May A, ten Tije AJ, Creemers
GJ, Loosveld OJ, de Jongh FE, Erdkamp FL, Erjavec Z,
van der Torren AM, Tol J, Braun HJ, Nieboer P, van der
Hoeven JJ, Haasjes JG, Jansen RL, Wals J, Cats A, Derleyn
VA, Honkoop AH, Mol L, Punt CJ and Koopman M.
Maintenance treatment with capecitabine and bevacizumab
in metastatic colorectal cancer (CAIRO3): a phase 3
randomised controlled trial of the Dutch Colorectal Cancer
Group. Lancet. 2015; 385: 1843-52.

20.	 Jedeszko C, Paez-Ribes M, Di Desidero T, Man S, Lee CR,
Xu P, Bjarnason GA, Bocci G and Kerbel RS. Postsurgical
adjuvant or metastatic renal cell carcinoma therapy
models reveal potent antitumor activity of metronomic
oral topotecan with pazopanib. Sci Transl Med. 2015 Apr
8;7:282ra50.
21.	 Turner DC, Tillmanns TD, Harstead KE, Throm SL and
Stewart CF. Combination metronomic oral topotecan
and pazopanib: a pharmacokinetic study in patients with
gynecological cancer. Anticancer Res. 2013; 33:3823-3829.

11.	 Merritt WM, Danes CG, Shahzad MM, Lin YG, Kamat AA,
Han LY, Spannuth WA, Nick AM, Mangala LS, Stone RL,
Kim HS, Gershenson DM, Jaffe RB, Coleman RL, Chandra
J and Sood AK. Anti-angiogenic properties of metronomic
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

42407

Oncotarget

22.	 Sternberg CN, Davis ID, Mardiak J, Szczylik C, Lee E,
Wagstaff J, Barrios CH, Salman P, Gladkov OA, Kavina A,
Zarba JJ, Chen M, McCann L, Pandite L, Roychowdhury
DF and Hawkins RE. Pazopanib in locally advanced or
metastatic renal cell carcinoma: results of a randomized
phase III trial. J Clin Oncol. 2010; 28:1061-1068.

bevacizumab versus bevacizumab alone after initial firstline bevacizumab and docetaxel for patients with HER2negative metastatic breast cancer (IMELDA): a randomised,
open-label, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2014; 15:13511360.
35.	 Bear HD, Tang G, Rastogi P, Geyer CE, Jr., Robidoux
A, Atkins JN, Baez-Diaz L, Brufsky AM, Mehta RS,
Fehrenbacher L, Young JA, Senecal FM, Gaur R,
Margolese RG, Adams PT, Gross HM, et al. Bevacizumab
added to neoadjuvant chemotherapy for breast cancer. N
Engl J Med. 2012; 366:310-320.

23.	 Pazopanib in Combination With Capecitabine in Patients
With Metastatic Breast Cancer (PazoX). NCT01498458.
http://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/study/NCT01498458?term
= pazopanib+breast&rank = 2.
24.	Treatment With Pazopanib for Neoadjuvant Breast
Cancer. NCT00849472. http://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT00849472?term = pazopanib+breast&rank = 1.

36.	 von Minckwitz G, Eidtmann H, Rezai M, Fasching PA,
Tesch H, Eggemann H, Schrader I, Kittel K, Hanusch C,
Kreienberg R, Solbach C, Gerber B, Jackisch C, Kunz G,
Blohmer JU, Huober J, et al. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy
and bevacizumab for HER2-negative breast cancer. N Engl
J Med. 2012; 366:299-309.

25.	 Amiri-Kordestani L, Tan AR and Swain SM. Pazopanib for
the treatment of breast cancer. Expert Opin Investig Drugs.
2012; 21:217-225.
26.	 Hurwitz HI, Dowlati A, Saini S, Savage S, Suttle AB,
Gibson DM, Hodge JP, Merkle EM and Pandite L. Phase
I trial of pazopanib in patients with advanced cancer. Clin
Cancer Res. 2009; 15:4220-4227.

37.	 Cameron D, Brown J, Dent R, Jackisch C, Mackey J, Pivot
X, Steger GG, Suter TM, Toi M, Parmar M, Laeufle R,
Im YH, Romieu G, Harvey V, Lipatov O, Pienkowski T,
et al. Adjuvant bevacizumab-containing therapy in triplenegative breast cancer (BEATRICE): primary results of a
randomised, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2013; 14:933-942.

27.	 Tan AR, Dowlati A, Jones SF, Infante JR, Nishioka J,
Fang L, Hodge JP, Gainer SD, Arumugham T, Suttle AB,
Dar MM, Lager JJ and Burris HA, 3rd. Phase I study of
pazopanib in combination with weekly paclitaxel in patients
with advanced solid tumors. Oncologist. 2010; 15:12531261.

38.	 Bear HD, Tang G, Rastogi P, Geyer CE, Jr., Liu Q,
Robidoux A, Baez-Diaz L, Brufsky AM, Mehta RS,
Fehrenbacher L, Young JA, Senecal FM, Gaur R,
Margolese RG, Adams PT, Gross HM, et al. Neoadjuvant
plus adjuvant bevacizumab in early breast cancer (NSABP
B-40 [NRG Oncology]): secondary outcomes of a phase 3,
randomised controlled trial. Lancet Oncol. 2015; 16:10371048.

28.	 Taylor SK, Chia S, Dent S, Clemons M, Agulnik M, Grenci
P, Wang L, Oza AM, Ivy P, Pritchard KI and Leighl NB.
A phase II study of pazopanib in patients with recurrent or
metastatic invasive breast carcinoma: a trial of the Princess
Margaret Hospital phase II consortium. Oncologist. 2010;
15:810-818.

39.	 Francia G, Cruz-Munoz W, Man S, Xu P and Kerbel RS.
Mouse models of advanced spontaneous metastasis for
experimental therapeutics. Nat Rev Cancer. 2011; 11:135141.

29.	 Kumler I, Brunner N, Stenvang J, Balslev E and Nielsen
DL. A systematic review on topoisomerase 1 inhibition in
the treatment of metastatic breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res
Treat. 2013; 138:347-358.

40.	 Munoz R, Man S, Shaked Y, Lee CR, Wong J, Francia
G and Kerbel RS. Highly efficacious nontoxic preclinical
treatment for advanced metastatic breast cancer using
combination oral UFT-cyclophosphamide metronomic
chemotherapy. Cancer Res. 2006; 66:3386-3391.

30.	 Andre F and Zielinski CC. Optimal strategies for the
treatment of metastatic triple-negative breast cancer with
currently approved agents. Ann Oncol. 2012; 23 Suppl
6:vi46-51.

41.	 Guerin E, Man S, Xu P and Kerbel RS. A model of
postsurgical advanced metastatic breast cancer more
accurately replicates the clinical efficacy of antiangiogenic
drugs. Cancer Res. 2013; 73:2743-2748.

31.	 Sledge GW. Anti-vascular endothelial growth factor therapy
in breast cancer: game over? J Clin Oncol. 2015; 33:133135.
32.	 Rugo HS. Inhibiting angiogenesis in breast cancer: the
beginning of the end or the end of the beginning? J Clin
Oncol. 2012; 30:898-901.

42.	 Paez-Ribes M, Man S, Xu P and Kerbel RS. Potential
Proinvasive or Metastatic Effects of Preclinical
Antiangiogenic Therapy Are Prevented by Concurrent
Chemotherapy. Clin Cancer Res. 2015, doi: 10.1158/10780432.CCR-15-0915.

33.	 Mackey JR, Kerbel RS, Gelmon KA, McLeod DM,
Chia SK, Rayson D, Verma S, Collins LL, Paterson AH,
Robidoux A and Pritchard KI. Controlling angiogenesis in
breast cancer: a systematic review of anti-angiogenic trials.
Cancer Treat Rev. 2012; 38:673-688.

43.	 Rovida A, Castiglioni V, Decio A, Scarlato V, Scanziani
E, Giavazzi R and Cesca M. Chemotherapy counteracts
metastatic dissemination induced by antiangiogenic
treatment in mice. Mol Cancer Ther. 2013; 12:2237-2247.

34.	 Gligorov J, Doval D, Bines J, Alba E, Cortes P, Pierga JY,
Gupta V, Costa R, Srock S, de Ducla S, Freudensprung
U and Mustacchi G. Maintenance capecitabine and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44.	 Alishekevitz D, Bril R, Loven D, Miller V, Voloshin T,
Gingis-Velistki S, Fremder E, Scherer SJ and Shaked Y.
42408

Oncotarget

Differential therapeutic effects of anti-VEGF-A antibody
in different tumor models: implications for choosing
appropriate tumor models for drug testing. Mol Cancer
Ther. 2014; 13:202-213.

2004; 279:24218-24225.
56.	 Shukla S, Robey RW, Bates SE and Ambudkar SV.
Sunitinib (Sutent, SU11248), a small-molecule receptor
tyrosine kinase inhibitor, blocks function of the ATPbinding cassette (ABC) transporters P-glycoprotein
(ABCB1) and ABCG2. Drug Metab Dispos. 2009; 37:359365.

45.	 Miller K, Wang M, Gralow J, Dickler M, Cobleigh M, Perez
EA, Shenkier T, Cella D and Davidson NE. Paclitaxel plus
bevacizumab versus paclitaxel alone for metastatic breast
cancer. N Engl J Med. 2007; 357:2666-2676.

57.	 Pommier Y. Topoisomerase I inhibitors: camptothecins and
beyond. Nat Rev Cancer. 2006; 6:789-802.

46.	 Burris H, Dowlati A, Gainer S, Park J, Stutts M, Dar M,
Suttle B, Mitrica I and Tan AR. Pazopanib combination
with paclitaxel and carboplatin in patients with advanced
solid tumors and gynecological cancers: results of two
phase I studies. Molr Cancer Ther. 2009; 8:Supplement
1(abstract A6).

58.	 Canu B, Fioravanti A, Orlandi P, Di Desidero T, Ali G,
Fontanini G, Di Paolo A, Del Tacca M, Danesi R and Bocci
G. Irinotecan synergistically enhances the antiproliferative
and proapoptotic effects of axitinib in vitro and improves its
anticancer activity in vivo. Neoplasia. 2011; 13:217-229.

47.	 Orlando L, Cardillo A, Rocca A, Balduzzi A, Ghisini R,
Peruzzotti G, Goldhirsch A, D’Alessandro C, Cinieri S,
Preda L and Colleoni M. Prolonged clinical benefit with
metronomic chemotherapy in patients with metastatic breast
cancer. Anticancer Drugs. 2006; 17:961-967.

59.	Houghton PJ, Cheshire PJ, Myers L, Stewart
CF, Synold TW and Houghton JA. Evaluation of
9-dimethylaminomethyl-10-hydroxycamptothecin against
xenografts derived from adult and childhood solid tumors.
Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 1992; 31:229-239.

48.	 Ebos JM, Mastri M, Lee CR, Tracz A, Hudson JM, Attwood
K, Cruz-Munoz WR, Jedeszko C, Burns P and Kerbel RS.
Neoadjuvant antiangiogenic therapy reveals contrasts in
primary and metastatic tumor efficacy. EMBO Mol Med.
2014; 6:1561-1576.

60.	 Dowsett M, Nielsen TO, A’Hern R, Bartlett J, Coombes
RC, Cuzick J, Ellis M, Henry NL, Hugh JC, Lively T,
McShane L, Paik S, Penault-Llorca F, Prudkin L, Regan
M, Salter J, et al. Assessment of Ki67 in breast cancer:
recommendations from the International Ki67 in Breast
Cancer working group. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2011; 103:16561664.

49.	 Rapisarda A, Hollingshead M, Uranchimeg B, Bonomi CA,
Borgel SD, Carter JP, Gehrs B, Raffeld M, Kinders RJ,
Parchment R, Anver MR, Shoemaker RH and Melillo G.
Increased antitumor activity of bevacizumab in combination
with hypoxia inducible factor-1 inhibition. Mol Cancer
Ther. 2009; 8:1867-1877.

61.	 Zhang FL, Wang P, Liu YH, Liu LB, Liu XB, Li Z and Xue
YX. Topoisomerase I inhibitors, shikonin and topotecan,
inhibit growth and induce apoptosis of glioma cells and
glioma stem cells. PLoS One. 2013; 8:e81815.

50.	 Rapisarda A, Zalek J, Hollingshead M, Braunschweig T,
Uranchimeg B, Bonomi CA, Borgel SD, Carter JP, Hewitt
SM, Shoemaker RH and Melillo G. Schedule-dependent
inhibition of hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha protein
accumulation, angiogenesis, and tumor growth by topotecan
in U251-HRE glioblastoma xenografts. Cancer Res. 2004;
64:6845-6848.

62.	 Lou Y, McDonald PC, Oloumi A, Chia S, Ostlund C,
Ahmadi A, Kyle A, Auf dem Keller U, Leung S, Huntsman
D, Clarke B, Sutherland BW, Waterhouse D, Bally M,
Roskelley C, Overall CM, et al. Targeting tumor hypoxia:
suppression of breast tumor growth and metastasis by
novel carbonic anhydrase IX inhibitors. Cancer Res. 2011;
71:3364-3376.

51.	 Semenza GL. Targeting HIF-1 for cancer therapy. Nat Rev
Cancer. 2003; 3:721-732.

63.	 Holliday DL and Speirs V. Choosing the right cell line for
breast cancer research. Breast Cancer Res. 2011; 13:215.

52.	 Rapisarda A and Melillo G. Overcoming disappointing
results with antiangiogenic therapy by targeting hypoxia.
Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2012; 9:378-390.

64.	 Francia G, Man S, Lee CJ, Lee CR, Xu P, Mossoba ME,
Emmenegger U, Medin JA and Kerbel RS. Comparative
impact of trastuzumab and cyclophosphamide on HER-2positive human breast cancer xenografts. Clin Cancer Res.
2009; 15:6358-6366.

53.	 Zander SA, Sol W, Greenberger L, Zhang Y, van Tellingen
O, Jonkers J, Borst P and Rottenberg S. EZN-2208 (PEGSN38) overcomes ABCG2-mediated topotecan resistance
in BRCA1-deficient mouse mammary tumors. PLoS One.
2012; 7:e45248.

65.	 Fioravanti A, Canu B, Ali G, Orlandi P, Allegrini G,
Di Desidero T, Emmenegger U, Fontanini G, Danesi
R, Del Tacca M, Falcone A and Bocci G. Metronomic
5-fluorouracil, oxaliplatin and irinotecan in colorectal
cancer. Eur J Pharmacol. 2009; 619:8-14.

54.	 Krishnamurthy P and Schuetz JD. The ABC transporter
Abcg2/Bcrp: role in hypoxia mediated survival. Biometals.
2005; 18:349-358.

66.	 Cruz-Munoz W, Di Desidero T, Man S, Xu P, Jaramillo
ML, Hashimoto K, Collins C, Banville M, O’ConnorMcCourt MD and Kerbel RS. Analysis of acquired
resistance to metronomic oral topotecan chemotherapy plus
pazopanib after prolonged preclinical potent responsiveness

55.	 Krishnamurthy P, Ross DD, Nakanishi T, Bailey-Dell K,
Zhou S, Mercer KE, Sarkadi B, Sorrentino BP and Schuetz
JD. The stem cell marker Bcrp/ABCG2 enhances hypoxic
cell survival through interactions with heme. J Biol Chem.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

42409

Oncotarget

in advanced ovarian cancer. Angiogenesis. 2014; 17:661673.
67.	 Shen J, Carcaboso AM, Hubbard KE, Tagen M, Wynn
HG, Panetta JC, Waters CM, Elmeliegy MA and Stewart
CF. Compartment-specific roles of ATP-binding cassette
transporters define differential topotecan distribution in
brain parenchyma and cerebrospinal fluid. Cancer Res.
2009; 69:5885-5892.
68.	 Hubbard KE, Schaiquevich P, Bai F, Fraga CH, Miller L,
Panetta JC and Stewart CF. Application of a highly specific
and sensitive fluorescent HPLC method for topotecan
lactone in whole blood. Biomed Chromatogr. 2009; 23:707713.
69.	 Bocci G, Falcone A, Fioravanti A, Orlandi P, Di Paolo A,
Fanelli G, Viacava P, Naccarato AG, Kerbel RS, Danesi
R, Del Tacca M and Allegrini G. Antiangiogenic and
anticolorectal cancer effects of metronomic irinotecan
chemotherapy alone and in combination with semaxinib.
Br J Cancer. 2008; 98:1619-1629.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

42410

Oncotarget

