Research Article

Betulinic Acid, a Catalytic Inhibitor of Topoisomerase I, Inhibits
Reactive Oxygen Species–Mediated Apoptotic Topoisomerase
I–DNA Cleavable Complex Formation in Prostate Cancer Cells
but Does Not Affect the Process of Cell Death
1

3

1

4

Agneyo Ganguly, Benubrata Das, Amit Roy, Nilkantha Sen, Somdeb Bose Dasgupta,
2
1
Sibabrata Mukhopadhayay, and Hemanta K. Majumder

1

1
Molecular Parasitology Laboratory, 2Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Indian Institute of Chemical Biology, Kolkata, India; 3Laboratory
of Molecular Pharmaology, National Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland; and 4Department of Neuroscience,
Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland

Abstract
The ubiquitious enzyme topoisomerase I can be targeted by
drugs which turn these enzymes into cellular poisons and subsequently induce cell death. Drugs like staurosporine, which
do not target topoisomerase I directly, can also lead to
stabilization of topoisomerase I–DNA cleavable complexes by
an indirect process of reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation and subsequent oxidative DNA damage. In this study,
we show that betulinic acid, a catalytic inhibitor of topoisomerases, inhibits the formation of apoptotic topoisomerase
I–DNA cleavable complexes in prostate cancer cells induced
by drugs like camptothecin, staurosporine, and etoposide.
Although events like ROS generation, oxidative DNA damage,
and DNA fragmentation were observed after betulinic acid
treatment, there is no topoisomerase I–DNA cleavable complex formation, which is a key step in ROS-induced apoptotic
processes. We have shown that betulinic acid interacts with
cellular topoisomerase I and prohibits its interaction with
the oxidatively damaged DNA. Using oligonucleotide containing 8-oxoguanosine modification, we have shown that betulinic acid inhibits its cleavage by topoisomerase I in vitro.
Whereas silencing of topoisomerase I gene by small interfering RNA reduces cell death in the case of staurosporine and
camptothecin, it cannot substantially reduce betulinic acid–
induced cell death. Thus, our study provides evidence that
betulinic acid inhibits formation of apoptotic topoisomerase
I–DNA complexes and prevents the cellular topoisomerase I
from directly participating in the apoptotic process. [Cancer
Res 2007;67(24):11848–58]

Introduction
DNA topoisomerase I is an ubiquitious and essential enzyme
that relaxes DNA supercoiling inside cells during progress of
several vital cellular processes, like replication, recombination, and
transcription. The mechanism by which this enzyme alters the
DNA topology involves three major steps: (a) nucleophilic attack
by the hydroxyl group of the active site tyrosine on the scissile
phosphate resulting in covalent attachment of enzyme to the 3¶ end
of the broken strand, (b) a topoisomerization step involving strand

Requests for reprints: Hemanta K. Majumder, Indian Institute of Chemical
Biology, 4, Raja S.C. Mullick Road, Jadavpur, Kolkata, West Bengal, 700 032, India.
Phone: 91-33-2412-3207; Fax: 91-33-2473-5197; E-mail: hkmajumder@iicb.res.in.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-1615

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (24). December 15, 2007

passage or free rotation, and (c) religation of the DNA strand and
release of the enzyme (1, 2).
Under normal conditions, the topoisomerase I–DNA covalent
complexes are transient and are found in very low levels because
the religation rate is faster than the cleavage step. Stabilization of
this complex (called cleavable complex) generates DNA lesions,
thereby initiating cellular responses that induce cell cycle arrest
and apoptosis (3).
Stabilization of topoisomerase I–DNA cleavable complexes can
occur by two distinct mechanisms (4). First, these transient complexes can be trapped by specific inhibitors, like camptothecin, and
its derivatives, which can bind specifically with the topoisomerase
I–DNA intermediate complexes and prevent the religation step
(5–7). The second mechanism does not involve any inhibitor
directly, rather it is related to the oxidative DNA lesions and
frequent DNA modifications. These modifications include oxidized
bases (e.g., 8-oxoguanosine), abasic sites, mismatches, and strand
breaks (8). Whereas the first mechanism is highly specific for the
inhibitors like camptothecin, the second process involves different
cellular events induced by agents which causes ROS generation and
thereby subsequent DNA damage.
Recently, stabilization of topoisomerase I–DNA cleavable complexes was observed in various human cells, including leukemia
and carcinoma cells undergoing apoptosis. Pommier and coworkers have established that topoisomerase I–DNA cleavable
complexes are formed in cells exposed to staurosporine (9), arsenic
trioxide (10), etoposide (11), and vinblastin (11), which are mechanistically different inducers of apoptosis. All these compounds are
inactive on purified topoisomerase I in vitro. Whereas staurosporine is a protein kinase C inhibitor, vinblastin is an inhibitor
of tubulin. Etoposide specifically inhibits topoisomerase II and has
no direct effects on topoisomerase I. All these compounds results
in generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) inside cells that
induce oxidative DNA damages, which in turn favors topoisomerase I–DNA cleavable complex stabilization. Thus, formation of
cellular topoisomerase I–DNA cleavable complexes by these compounds do not result from their direct interaction with the topoisomerase I–DNA intermediates. Recently, Sen et al. also reported
conservation of the apoptotic topoisomerase I–DNA cleavable
complex formation by a protein kinase inhibitor, withaferin A,
in parasite Leishmania donovani (12). Thus, topoisomerase I–DNA
cleavable complexes are implicated directly or indirectly in
apoptosis, irrespective of the initiating mechanism or the agent.
Betulinic acid, a pentacyclic triterpenoid (Fig. 1A) from Bacopa
monniera has been shown to be a potent inhibitor of eukaryotic
topoisomerase I and topoisomerase II (13). The compound is a

11848

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Betulinic Acid Inhibits Topoisomerase I–DNA Complex

Figure 1. Betulinic acid inhibits camptothecin-mediated topoisomerase I–DNA cleavable complex formation in vitro and in vivo. A, structure of betulinic acid.
B, 5¶ 32P labeled 25 mer duplex oligonucleotide was treated with human topoisomerase I and varying concentrations of drugs as described in Materials and
Methods. The extent of cleavage product was visualized by autoradiography. Lane 1, control DNA; lanes 2–12, same as lane 1 but in presence of 20 ng of human
topoisomerase I and different concentrations of camptothecin (CPT ), betulinic acid (BA ), and staurosporine (STP ); lanes 3–4, control DNA treated with 10 and
20 Amol/L camptothecin; lanes 5–6, treated with 20 and 50 Amol/L betulinic acid; lanes 7–8, preincubated with 20 and 50 Amol/L betulinic acid before treatment
with 10 Amol/L camptothecin; lanes 9–10, treated with 10 and 20 Amol/L staurosporine alone; lanes 11–12, treated with 20 and 50 Amol/L camptothecin before
treatment with 20 Amol/L betulinic acid. Positions of the uncleaved and cleaved oligonucleotides are indicated. C, DU145 cells were labeled with [3H]thymidine and
treated with camptothecin and betulinic acid for varying time points. SDS-K+ precipitable complexes were measured as described in Materials and Methods and
were plotted as function of time. Cells were treated with 0.2% DMSO (y), 10 Amol/L camptothecin (n), and 20 Amol/L betulinic acid (E). Cells were pretreated with
betulinic acid for 2 h and then treated with 10 Amol/L camptothecin ( ). D, immunoband depletion assay with camptothecin (first ), pretreatment with betulinic acid before
treatment with camptothecin (second ), cells pretreated with camptothecin before treatment with betulinic acid (third), loading control tubulin (fourth ). E, relative
percentage of DNA fragmentation after treatment with varying camptothecin concentrations for 6 h. F, relative percentage of DNA fragmentation after treatment with
varying betulinic acid concentrations for 6 h.

catalytic inhibitor of the enzymes. Betulinic acid was reported to
inhibit human topoisomerase I and rat liver topoisomerase I by
interacting with the enzyme directly (14). The drug is shown to
bind with the enzyme and thereby preclude the interaction with
substrate DNA. Being a catalytic inhibitor, betulinic acid does not
induce topoisomerase I–DNA cleavable complexes in vitro and
in vivo. Most interestingly, the drug was found to abrogate
camptothecin-mediated cleavable complex formation in mouse
splenocytes. Dihydrobetulinic acid, a derivative of betulinic acid,

www.aacrjournals.org

was found to have similar effects on the enzyme from parasite
L. donovani (15).
In the present study, we have analyzed the effects of betulinic
acid on various types of topoisomerase I–DNA cleavable complexes
that are formed inside cells during apoptosis induced by different
agents. Betulinic acid is found to inhibit topoisomerase I–DNA
cleavable complex formation both in vitro and in vivo. In this paper,
we show that this inhibition is extendable for any type of topoisomerase I–DNA cleavable complex, either induced by camptothecin

11849

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (24). December 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

or by ROS-mediated DNA damage induced by agents like
staurosporine. Betulinic acid has no effect on preformed cleavable
complexes as evidenced by DNA cleavage assays. But pretreatment
with betulinic acid abolishes all types of topoisomerase I–DNA
cleavable complex formation. Interestingly, betulinic acid treatment in DU145 prostate cancer cells induces ROS formation and
subsequent DNA damages but precludes formation of topoisomerase I–DNA cleavable complex. Cleavage reactions with oligonucleotide containing 8-oxoguanosine modifications provide evidence
that betulinic acid precludes topoisomerase I from interacting with
oxidatively damaged DNA. Moreover, down-regulation of topoisomerse I in DU145 cancer cells cannot substantially reduce
betulinic acid–induced apoptotic process. Thus, our study
proposes that, betulinic acid, although it targets topoisomerase I,
sequesters the enzyme in the nucleoplasm so that the enzyme
cannot be recruited for the formation of apoptotic topoisomerase
I–DNA cleavable complexes.

Materials and Methods
Cell culture and drugs. DU145 prostate cancer cells were cultured in
RPMI medium (Sigma) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Life
Technologies) in 37jC CO2 incubator. The cells were received as gift from
Prof. Yves Pommier (National Cancer Institute, NIH).
Betulinic acid was isolated from leaves of B. monniera after the
procedure described (14), characterized by spectral data (UV, 1H nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR), 13C NMR, mass spectrometry), and compared
with authentic samples.
Cell survival assay. DU145 cells were seeded in 96-well plates and
treated with respective drugs. After 48-h treatment, cell survival was
assessed by 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide
(MTT) assay. Briefly, cells were washed and treated with MTT for 4 h at
37jC, and reactions were stopped with stop solution containing isopropanol
and HCl. Plates were analyzed on Thermo MULTISKAN EX plate reader
at 575 nm.
Purification of recombinant human topoisomerase I. The wild-type
human topoisomerase I (91 kDa) was purified from Sf-9 insect cells infected
with the recombinant baculovirus (a kind gift from Prof. J.J. Champoux).
Approximately, 1  109 Sf-9 cells were infected with the recombinant virus,
and cells were harvested after 48-h infection. The cells were lysed and
enzyme was purified as described (16).
DNA cleavage activity. Approximately 0.5 pmol of 5¶ end labeled 25-mer
or the 22-mer (containing 8-oxoguanosine) duplex oligonucleotides were
incubated with f20 ng of recombinant human topoisomerase I or nuclear
extracts in presence or absence of camptothecin, staurosporine, or betulinic
acid as mentioned. The 22 mer oligonucleotide containing 8-oxoguanosine
was received as a gift from Prof. Y. Pommier (NIH). Nuclear extracts from
DU145 cells were prepared as described (17). The reactions containing
10 mmol/L Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 50 mmol/L KCl, 5 mmol/L MgCl2, 0.1 mmol/L
EDTA, and 15 Ag/mL bovine serum albumin were incubated at 30jC for
30 min. Reactions were stopped with 0.5% SDS and loading buffer [80%
formamide, 1 nmol/L sodium EDTA, 10 mmol/L sodium hydroxide, and
0.1% bromophenol blue (pH 8.0)]. Samples were denatured by heat-chill and
separated by 20% denaturing PAGE (containing 7 mol/L urea) in 1 Trisborate EDTA buffer and visualized by autoradiography.
In vivo cleavage activity. The in vivo formation of topoisomerase I–
DNA cleavable complex was quantitated using the SDS precipitation assay
as described (14, 18). Briefly, DNA in DU145 cells (2  107 cells per milliliter)
was labeled by adding [methyl-3H]thymidine (specific activity, 83 Ci/mmol)
into the medium to a final concentration of 5 ACi/mL for 18 h. Cells were
pelleted and washed twice with PBS (137 mmol/L NaCl, 2.6 mmol/L KCl,
8.0 mmol/L Na2HPO4, 1.4 mmol/L KH2PO4), resuspended in complete
medium, and distributed into 96-well plates. After incubation at 37jC for
2 h, cells were treated with betulinic acid and/or staurosporine, etoposide,
or camptothecin for varying time points. Cells were pelleted and lysed by

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (24). December 15, 2007

the addition of 200 AL of a prewarmed (65jC) lysis solution [1.25% SDS,
5 mmol/L EDTA (pH 8), calf-thymus DNA (0.4 mg/mL)]. Samples were
cooled in ice for 10 min and centrifuged. The pellets were resuspended in
500 AL wash solution [10 mmol/L Tris-HCl (pH 8), 100 mmol/L KCl,
1 mmol/L EDTA, calf-thymus DNA (0.1 mg/mL)] and warmed at 65jC for
10 min with occasional shaking. The suspensions were cooled in ice for
10 min and recentrifuged. The pellets were washed again before resuspending in 200 AL H2O prewarmed at 65jC. The suspensions were then
mixed with 4 mL scintillation liquifluor, and radioactivity was determined in
liquid scintillation counter.
Immunoband depletion assay. DU145 cells were cultured in six-well
plates with or without appropriate drugs. Nuclear extracts were prepared
as described (12, 19). Briefly, cells were suspended in hypotonic buffer
[10 mmol/L Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 0.1 mmol/L EDTA, 1 mmol/L phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, 1 mmol/L benzamidine hydrochloride, and 5 mmol/L
DTT] and homogenized. The homogenate was centrifuged at 10,000g for
10 min. The pellets were washed and were used as the source of nuclei.
It was then lysed by 1% SDS, samples were subjected to SDS-PAGE (8%), and
proteins that entered the gel were transferred to nitrocellulose membranes
and immunoblotted with polyclonal antibody against topoisomerase I or
topoisomerase II (Santa Cruz Biotech).
DNA fragmentation assay for detection of apoptosis. Cells were
cultured in 24-well plates and treated with drugs for different times at
different drug concentrations. Samples were collected at requisite time
points and subjected to measurement of DNA fragmentations by detecting
the cytoplasmic histone-associated DNA fragments (mononucleosome and
oligonucleosomes) formed during apoptosis using a cell death detection
ELISA kit (Roche Biochemicals) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.
DNA fragmentation was detected by spectrophotometric measurement of
microtiter plates in a Thermo MULTISKAN EX plate reader at 405 nm, and
relative percentages (with respect to samples treated with micrococcal
nuclease and normalized to percentage values) were plotted as functions of
time or drug concentrations.
Caspase activity assay. DU145 cells were treated with drugs for different
time points, and caspase-3 activity was quantitated using ApoAlert
colorimetric assay kit according to manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, cells
were centrifuged at 400g for 5 min, resuspended in lysis buffer, and
incubated on ice for another 10 min. Cells were recentrifuged at 15,000g
for 10 min at 4jC, and supernatants were used to test caspase-3 cleavage
activity. DEVD-pNA was used as a substrate, and pNA release was measured
on a Thermo MULTISKAN EX plate reader at 405 nm.
Detection of ROS. Intracellular ROS was measured in drug-treated and
untreated cells as described (20). Briefly, cells were washed and resuspended
in 500 AL of 1 PBS and were loaded with 2 Ag/mL of H2DCFDA (Molecular
Probes) for 30 min, and green fluorescence of 2,7-dichlorofluorescein was
measured at 515 nm by spectroflorimeter.
Detection of oxidative DNA damage. After drug treatment, DU145 cells
were permeabilized in hypotonic buffer [10 mmol/L Tris-HCl (pH 7.8),
70 mmol/L NaCl, 1 mmol/L EDTA, 1 mmol/L DTT] containing 0.05% Triton
X-100 at 4jC for 15 min by gentle mixing. formamidopyridine DNA
glycosylase (Fpg; 1 mg/mL) was added and further incubated for 30 min at
25jC. DNA breaks were analyzed by alkaline comet assay with some
modifications (12, 21). Briefly 5,000 to 10,000 cells were mixed with 100 mL
of 0.75% low-melting agarose and kept at 37jC. The agarose cell suspension
was spread on polylysine-coated coverslips.
The preparations were left on a chilled plate for 5 min before lysis
(0.03 mol/L NaOH, 1 mol/L NaCl, 2 mmol/L EDTA, 0.5% N-lauryl sarkosyl)
for 1.5 h and thereafter equilibrated (0.03 mol/L NaOH, 2 mmol/L EDTA) for
1 h. Electrophoresis of the agarose-imbedded cells was run at 0.67 V/cm for
20 min in the same solution. The agarose gel was neutralized in 0.4 mol/L
Tris-HCl (pH 7.5). Cells were then stained with EtBr. Analysis of the DNA
that migrated from the nuclei, the tail moment, was carried out using an
Olympus fluorescence microscope, and data was analyzed using comet IV
software.
TUNEL assay. To assess the extent of apoptotic DNA damage, treated
and untreated DU145 cells were fixed with 2% paraformaldehyde and
incubated with 0.2% Triton X-100 for 5 min for permeabilization and

11850

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Betulinic Acid Inhibits Topoisomerase I–DNA Complex
layered with TdT reaction mixture containing FITC-labeled dUTP for 1 h at
37jC according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Apo Alert DNA fragmentation assay kit). Cells were stained with propidium iodide and visualized
with Leica DMI 4000 B fluorescence microscope.
Small interfering RNA transfection. Gene silencing was achieved by
transfecting small interfering RNA (siRNA) into DU145 cells. Control siRNA
and siRNA for topoisomerase I were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotech.
Transfections were carried out using Lipofectamine 2000 following
manufacturer’s protocol. Gene silencing was confirmed by Western blot
analysis.

Results
Betulinic acid inhibits camptothecin-induced topoisomerase I–DNA cleavable complex formation in vitro and in vivo.
Betulinic acid, which is a catalytic inhibitor of topoisomerase I,
has been shown to inhibit the formation of topoisomerase I–DNA
cleavable complex in cleavage reactions with plasmid DNA in vitro.
To confirm that betulinic acid directly inhibits the cleavage step of
topoisomerase reaction, we have performed cleavage reactions
with 25 mer duplex oligonucleotide in presence of betulinic acid
and/or camptothecin. Each reaction contained 0.5 pmol of 5¶ end–
labeled substrate DNA, 20 ng of recombinant human topoisomerase I, and varying concentrations of drugs. In presence of
camptothecin, there is substantial amount of cleavage product,
which is inhibited to the extent of 90% in presence of betulinic
acid. Moreover, pretreatment with betulinic acid before addition of
camptothecin markedly reduced camptothecin-mediated cleavage
(Fig. 1B, lanes 7 and 8). Thus, betulinic acid can interact with the
enzyme and preclude the trapping of cleavable complex by
camptothecin. But when camptothecin is added before betulinic
acid in the reaction, betulinic acid cannot inhibit the formation of
cleavable complex in vitro. This finding allows us to speculate that
betulinic acid has no effect on preformed topoisomerase I–DNA
cleavable complexes.
Camptothecin-mediated apoptosis invariably involves trapping
of topoisomerase I–DNA cleavable complexes inside cells. The
amount of this trapped cleavable complex can be measured by
incorporation of [3H]thymidine and subsequent SDS-K+ precipitation of the trapped complex. This experiment provides direct
and quantitative measurements of the cleavable complex formed
in vitro. To understand whether the precipitated count is actually
due to topoisomerase I–linked complexes, we performed immunoband depletion assay (12, 18). Nuclear extracts were prepared from
untreated and treated cells and subjected to SDS-PAGE. If
topoisomerase I can form a covalent complex with the genomic
DNA inside the cells, the complex cannot enter the gel. On the
other hand, if there is no complex formation, the free protein will
enter the gel. The proteins were transferred to nitrocellulose membranes, and free topoisomerase in gel was detected by Western
blotting with polyclonal topoisomerase I antibody as described in
Materials and Methods. The IC50 values for camptothecin and
betulinic acid were 0.4 and 6 Amol/L, respectively, for 48 h of drug
treatment as determined by MTT assay (Table 1). Respectively,
10 Amol/L and 20 Amol/L of camptothecin and betulinic acid were
used to ensure accumulation of detectable amounts of topoisomerase I–DNA cleavable complexes and subsequent DNA fragmentation within 4 to 6 h of drug treatment. As shown in Fig. 1E
and F, there is 74% DNA fragmentation for camptothecin at
10 Amol/L and 66.5% fragmentation for 20 Amol/L betulinic acid
within 6 h of drug treatment. When DU145 prostate cancer cells
were treated with betulinic acid, very little cleavable complex was

www.aacrjournals.org

Table 1. IC50 values of the drugs on DU145 cells as
determined over a period of 48 h
Drug
Camptothecin
Etoposide
Staurosporine
Betulinic acid

IC50 (Amol/L)
0.4
2.6
1.5
6.0

F
F
F
F

0.1
0.6
0.4
0.8

detected. Camptothecin on the other hand exhibits extensive
stabilization of the cleavable complex with increased time points
(Fig. 1C), which is evident from the depleted band of topoisomerase I in Fig. 1D. But when cells were pretreated with betulinic
acid for 2 h and subsequently treated with camptothecin, there
was substantial decrease in the amount of cleavable complex formation, which is evident by the appearance of the immunoband of
topoisomerase I (Fig. 1D). As evident from Fig. 1C, with increasing
time, there is no concomitant increase in the amount of cleavable
complex formed. Thus, the results indicate that betulinic acid precludes formation of camptothecin-mediated topoisomerase I–DNA
cleavable complexes in vivo. In contrast, there is no inhibition of
cleavable complex if camptothecin is added before addition of
betulinic acid (Fig. 1D). This result support the notion that
betulinic acid associates with topoisomerase I inside cells and
precludes its further association with the substrate to form
camptothecin-mediated cleavable complexes.
Betulinic acid inhibits formation of ROS-mediated topoisomerase I–DNA cleavable complex inside cells induced by
protein kinase C inhibitor staurosporine and topoisomerase II
inhibitor etoposide. Topoisomerase I–DNA cleavable complexes
inside cells are trapped by two distinct mechanisms: (a) by the
drugs that interact directly with the transient covalent complex
and (b) by the formation of oxidative DNA lesions, allowing
topoisomerase I to link covalently with the damaged DNA.
Betulinic acid has been shown to inhibit the first type of cleavable
complex formation induced by topoisomerase poisons like
camptothecin. We therefore tested the effect of betulinic acid on
the second type of cleavable complexes inside cells. Staurosporine,
a protein kinase inhibitor, has been reported to induce ROS
generation inside cells and, in turn, oxidative base damages, which
subsequently leads to trapping of topoisomerase I–DNA cleavable
complexes (9). Etoposide, although an inhibitor of topoisomerase
II, is also found to induce stabilization of topoisomerase I–DNA
cleavable complexes as a part of the apoptotic process. Both these
drugs therefore lead to trapping of topoisomerase I–DNA cleavable
complex (11) by an indirect mechanism distinct from that of
camptothecin. Thus, we chose to see the effect of betulinic acid on
the ability of these two drugs (staurosporine and etoposide) to
induce topoisomerase I–DNA cleavable complexes.
Our results indicate that betulinic acid substantially inhibits
the topoisomerase I–DNA cleavable complex formation induced
by staurosporine and etoposide. As shown in Fig. 2A, the amount
of cleavable complex formation with time decreases in cells
pretreated with betulinic acid. This is also evident from the
immunoband depletion experiment, wherein reappearance of
topoisomerase I band is observed when cells were pretreated
with betulinic acid before addition of staurosporine or etoposide.
The IC50 values for staurosporine and etoposide were 1.5 and
2.6 Amol/L for 48 h of drug treatment as determined by MTT assay

11851

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (24). December 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 2. Betulinic acid inhibits topoisomerase I–DNA cleavable complex formation by staurosporine and etoposide in vivo. A, DU145 cells were labeled with
[3H]thymidine and treated with staurosporine, etoposide, and betulinic acid for varying time points. SDS-K+ precipitable complex were measured as described in
Materials and Methods and were plotted as function of time. Cells were treated with 10 Amol/L etoposide (y), 10 Amol/L staurosporine (E), pretreated with
20 Amol/L betulinic acid for 2 h and then treated with 10 Amol/L etoposide (n), and pretreated with 20 Amol/L betulinic acid for 2 h and then treated with 10 Amol/L
staurosporine ( ). B, immunoband depletion assay for topoisomerase I with nuclear extracts from DU145 cells treated as above. C, immunoband depletion assay
for topoisomerase II with nuclear extracts from DU145 cells treated as above. D, relative percentage of DNA fragmentation with varying concentrations of
staurosporine and etoposide measured over a time period of 6 h.

(Table 1). The drug concentrations (10 Amol/L) for etoposide and
staurosporine used have been optimized on the basis of percentage
of DNA fragmentation induced at 6 h of drug treatment. As shown
in Fig. 2D, there is 70% DNA fragmentation for staurosporine and
64% for etoposide within 6 h of drug treatment.
Etoposide, which is a topoisomerase II inhibitor, stabilizes
topoisomerase II–DNA covalent complexes in vitro and in vivo.
Moreover, betulinic acid is a catalytic inhibitor of topoisomerases
I and II. Hence, we checked for topoisomerase II–DNA cleavable
complexes after etoposide treatment and its subsequent inhibition
by betulinic acid. Results indicate that, along with topoisomerase
I–DNA cleavable complexes, topoisomerase II covalent complexes
are also formed after etoposide treatment. These topoisomerase

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (24). December 15, 2007

II–DNA covalent complexes leads to ROS generation, which
subsequently leads to apoptotic topoisomerase I–DNA cleavable
complexes (11). Pretreatment with betulinic acid can reduce topoisomerase II–DNA covalent complexes as evidenced in immunoband depletion assay (Fig. 2C). Although the effect of betulinic acid
on topoisomerase I–DNA complexes are partly due to the
inhibition of topoisomerase II–DNA complexes, it, however, does
not affect our conclusion significantly. It has been shown that it is
the topoisomerase I cleavable complexes and not the topoisomerase II complexes which are responsible for mediating apoptotic
cell death by etoposide (11). To check whether staurosporine also
have any effect on topoisomerase II–DNA cleavable complexes,
we performed immunoband depletion assays after staurosporine

11852

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Betulinic Acid Inhibits Topoisomerase I–DNA Complex

treatment (Fig. 2C). There was no depletion of topoisomerase II
observed after staurosporine treatment. Hence, the cleavable
complexes observed in case of staurosporine are solely due to
topoisomerase I. Thus, from the above results, we can conclude
that betulinic acid inhibits apoptotic topoisomerase I–DNA
cleavable complexes irrespective of the mechanism of formation
of such complexes.
Betulinic acid induces ROS generation, caspase cleavage,
and subsequent DNA damage inside cells. The indirect
mechanism of trapping of topoisomerase I–DNA cleavable complex
involves generation of ROS inside cells due to mitochondrial
dysfunction and cleavage of caspases. Both staurosporine and
etoposide induce ROS formation and subsequent oxidative base
damages which in turn is responsible for trapping of the complex.
Therefore, the most obvious question that needs to be addressed is,
whether betulinic acid, like staurosporine and etoposide, also
induce generation of ROS and subsequent DNA base damage inside
cells.
DU145 prostate cancer cells were treated with betulinic acid, and
ROS were measured by conversion of H2DCFDA to 2,7-dichloroflurescein. Betulinic acid treatment leads to 4-fold increase of ROS
formation inside cells compared with control cells (Fig. 3A).
Treatment with staurosporine also exhibits high level of ROS as
expected (9). When cells were treated with NAC before the
treatment with betulinic acid, the level of ROS generation was
reduced by 2-fold to 3-fold, both in betulinic acid–treated and
staurosporine-treated cells (Fig. 3A). Because mitochondrial factors
and cleavage of caspases also contribute to generation of ROS
inside the cells, we checked for the extent of caspase cleavage in
betulinic acid–treated cells. As evident from Fig. 3B, there is
substantial amount of caspase cleavage at 6 and 12 h of betulinic
acid treatment.
With these evidences in hand, we next proceeded to check for
the extent of oxidative DNA damage and modification, which is
responsible for trapping of topoisomerase I–DNA cleavable
complexes during the apoptotic process. For the detection of
oxidative DNA lesions, we performed alkaline comet assay.
Generation of ROS inside cells causes oxidative DNA lesions,
such as formation of oxidized bases, abasic sites, and strand breaks.
Here, we investigated the generation of such lesions by betulinic
acid. DU145 cells treated with betulinic acid or staurosporine were
permeabilized and exposed to Fpg, an enzyme that converts
oxidized purines (e.g., 8-oxoguanosine) into DNA single-strand
breaks. Cells were visualized by fluorescence microscope and the
comet tail moments were measured from the images using the
software Comet IV.
By using the alkaline comet assay, we observed that Fpg-induced
single-strand breaks increased substantially in betulinic acid–
treated cells (Fig. 3C) compared with the control cells. The comet
moments were calculated and plotted to get a comparative picture
of DNA damage. Betulinic acid exhibits substantial DNA damage
similar to staurosporine. When cells were treated with NAC before
betulinic acid treatment, there was substantial reduction in DNA
damage, indicating that the base damages in DNA were due to
betulinic-induced ROS generation inside cells. Treatment with
caspase inhibitor z-VAD-fmk reduced the ROS generation and also
inhibited betulinic acid–induced apoptotic DNA fragmentation
(Fig. 3D), indicating the role of mitochondrial ROS in betulinic
acid–induced cell death.
To visualize the extent of apoptotic DNA damage in the betulinic
acid–treated DU145 cells, we performed TUNEL assay. As evident

www.aacrjournals.org

from Fig. 3E, there is substantial number of TUNEL-positive cells
after treatment with betulinic acid for 6 h. But pretreatment with
NAC reduces the number of TUNEL-positive cells, indicating the
involvement of ROS in betulinic acid–induced apoptosis.
Thus, from these experiments, we conclude that betulinic acid
does not affect the events upstream to the apoptotic topoisomerase
I–DNA cleavable complex formation. Most importantly, betulinic
acid induces events like ROS and oxidative base damage favorable
for trapping of topoisomerase I–DNA cleavable complex and yet
inhibits the complex formation.
Betulinic acid renders cellular topoisomerase I less sensitive
to cleavable complex formation and inhibits its interaction
with DNA containing oxidative base modification. The fact that
betulinic acid induces oxidative DNA damage and yet cannot
induce the formation of topoisomerase I–DNA cleavable complexes
prompted us to investigate whether the drug interacts with the
cellular pool of topoisomerase I and precludes its interaction with
the damaged DNA inside cells.
To check this possibility, we treated DU145 cells with betulinic
acid for different time periods (0, 2, and 6 h), prepared nuclear
extracts form these betulinic acid treated, and examined their
ability to cleave the 25 mer duplex oligonucleotide in assays in
presence and absence of camptothecin. In absence of camptothecin, no cleavage was observed with nuclear extracts from cells
treated with betulinic acid for 0, 2, and 6 h (Fig. 4, lanes 2–7). In
presence of camptothecin, cleavage was observed only with nuclear
extracts from cells treated with betulinic acid for 0 h. Cleavage was
found to diminish and finally abolished with extracts from cells
treated with betulinic acid for 2 and 6 h (Fig. 4, lanes 6 and 7). This
result strengthens our hypothesis that betulinic acid interacts with
the cellular topoisomerase I and sequesters the enzyme in the
nucleoplasm, thereby inhibiting its interaction with damaged DNA.
To confirm that betulinic acid interacts with topoisomerase I
and prohibits its interaction with oxidatively damaged DNA, we
performed in vitro cleavage reactions with DNA substrate
containing 8-oxoguanosine, a frequently observed oxidative base
modification. Cleavage reactions were performed under standard
assay conditions with recombinant human topoisomerase I, as well
as with nuclear extracts from betulinic acid–treated cells. Results of
this experiment are shown in Fig. 4B. Presence of 8-oxoguanosine
at +1 position of the siscile strand of DNA enhances cleavage by
topoisomerase I by 5-fold (22). As evident from the figure, huge
amounts of cleavage products accumulate when the DNA was
incubated with topoisomerase I in absence and presence of
camptothecin. But in samples pretreated with betulinic acid, there
is substantial reduction of cleavage products indicating that
betulinic acid interferes with the cleavage reaction by interacting
with the enzyme. Similar reduction in cleavage was observed when
DNA substrate was incubated with nuclear extracts from betulinic
acid–treated DU145 cells (Fig. 4B, lanes 8 and 9). Thus the results
of this experiment strongly support our hypothesis that betulinic
acid prohibits topoisomerase I from interacting with oxidatively
damaged DNA.
Down-regulation of topoisomerase I reduces but cannot
abrogate betulinic acid–induced apoptosis. Topoisomerase I
have been depicted to act as a general apoptotic nuclease in death
processes induced by various agents in different cell types (3).
Topoisomerase I–DNA cleavable complex formation has been
shown to be a general event in many apoptotic processes. All the
above experiments argue in favor of the fact that topoisomerase
I–DNA cleavable complex formation is not a requisite event in

11853

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (24). December 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 3. Betulinic acid induces ROS generation and oxidative DNA lesions. A, generation of ROS was measured using H2DCFDA in DU145 cells. B, determination
of caspase cleavage analyzed by spectrophotometric measurement of pNA released. Cells were treated with 0.2% DMSO (y), 10 Amol/L staurosporine (n),
20 Amol/L betulinic acid (E), and NAC before treatment with betulinic acid ( ). C, DU145 cells were exposed to Fpg for 30 min, and DNA single-strand breaks were
analyzed by determining tail percentage using alkaline comet assay. DU145 cells were treated with 0.2% DMSO (y), 20 Amol/L betulinic acid (n), 10 Amol/L
staurosporine (E), and NAC before treatment with betulinic acid ( ). D, relative percentage of DNA fragmentation measured by cell death detection ELISA kit in DU145
cells treated with betulinic acid (y), z-VAD-fmk before betulinic acid treatment (n), and NAC before betulinic acid treatment (E). E, TUNEL assay for visualization
of apoptotic DNA damages in DU145 cells. Left, staining with PI (red); right, TUNEL of the same field. The cells were treated as indicated beside each panel.

apoptotic process induced by betulinic acid. This catalytic inhibitor
is also found to intervene the process of topoisomerase I–DNA
complex formation induced by other agents like camptothecin,
staurosporine, or etoposide.
To establish this argument and also to delineate the role of
topoisomerase I in betulinic acid–induced cell death, we chose to
see the effect of down-regulation of topoisomerase I on betulinic
acid–induced apoptosis. Topoisomerase I was transiently downregulated by transfecting topoisomerase I siRNA in DU145 cells,
and the effect of different drugs were examined. As expected,
down-regulation of topoisomerase I led to marked difference in

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (24). December 15, 2007

apoptotic DNA fragmentation in camptothecin-treated and staurosporine-treated cells. There were almost 66% and 50% reduction in apoptotic DNA fragmentation in camptothecin and
staurosporine treated cells, respectively. On the contrary, there
was only 27% reduction of DNA fragmentation in topoisomerase I
depleted cells treated with betulinic acid compared with cells
transfected with a control siRNA. PARP cleavage was also examined
in control and siRNA-transfected cells after betulinic acid treatment. PARP cleavage was found to be unaffected in topoisomerase I depleted cells treated with betulinic acid (Fig. 5D). Thus, it
can be concluded from this experiment that, unlike camptothecin

11854

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Betulinic Acid Inhibits Topoisomerase I–DNA Complex

and staurosporine, topoisomerase I–DNA cleavable complex formation is not a requisite event for apoptosis induced by betulinic
acid.

Discussion
Involvement of topoisomerase I–DNA cleavable complexes in the
apoptotic process is not only restricted to topoisomerase inhibitors
like camptothecin but can be extended to many other agents that
have different cellular targets.
Recently, Pommier and coworkers have shown that several
agents, like staurosporine, arsenic trioxide, etoposide, and tubulin
inhibitors, induce formation of topoisomerase I–DNA complexes
inside cells in spite of having different cellular targets (4). Most
drugs that induce apoptosis generate ROS inside cells, which in
turn leads to oxidative DNA damages. These oxidized bases are
preferred sites for the formation of topoisomerase I–DNA cleavable
complexes. Thus, topoisomerase I seems to play a pivotal role in
the process of apoptosis.

In this study, we show that betulinic acid, which is a catalytic
inhibitor of topoisomerases, inhibits the process of apoptotic
topoisomerase I–DNA complex formation by interacting with the
enzyme directly inside cells. This work establishes the effects of
betulinic acid on the formation of topoisomerase I–DNA cleavable
complexes inside cells induced by both direct and indirect
mechanisms. We have reported earlier that betulinic acid inhibits
camptothecin-mediated cleavage in vitro and in vivo in blasted
mouse splenocytes (14). Recently, formation of topoisomerase
I–DNA cleavable complexes has been depicted to be a general
event in many programmed cell death processes (4). Therefore, we
chose to investigate the effect of betulinic acid on this apoptotic
process and its involvement in cell death.
As evidenced by 25 mer duplex oligo cleavage, betulinic acid
inhibits camptothecin-mediated formation of cleavable complexes
in vitro. In cells pretreated with betulinic acid, there was
substantial reduction of camptothecin-mediated cleavable complex
formation. Thus, betulinic acid can inhibit the direct trapping of
cleavable complex induced by camptothecin. We then chose to see

Figure 4. Betulinic acid interacts with cellular
topoisomerase I. A, 5¶ 32P labeled 25 mer duplex
oligonucleotide was incubated with nuclear extracts
from DU145 cells treated with betulinic acid for
0, 2, and 6 h, separated on 20% PAGE containing
7 mol/L urea, and visualized by autoradiography.
Lane 1, 5¶ 32P labeled 25 mer duplex DNA;
lanes 2–4, same as lane 1 but containing nuclear
extracts from cells treated with betulinic acid for
different time points as indicated; lanes 5–7, same
as lanes 2 to 4, but with 50 Amol/L camptothecin
added in each reaction. B, 5¶ 32P labeled 22 mer
duplex oligonucleotide containing 8-oxoguanosine
modification was incubated with recombinant
human topoisomerase I or nuclear extracts from
DU145 cells as indicated, separated on 20% PAGE
containing 7 mol/L urea, and visualized by
autoradiography. Lane 1, 5¶ 32P labeled 22 mer
duplex DNA; lanes 2–5, same as lane 1 containing
20 ng of human topoisomerase I; lane 3, treated
with camptothecin, lane 4, treated with betulinic
acid; lane 5, preincubated with betulinic acid
before treatment with camptothecin; lanes 6–7,
5¶ 32P labeled 22 mer duplex DNA incubated with
nuclear extracts from control DU145 cells with or
without addition of camptothecin into the cleavage
reaction; lanes 8–9, 5¶ 32P labeled 22 mr
duplex DNA incubated with nuclear extracts
from betulinic acid–treated cells with or without
addition of camptothecin in the cleavage reaction
treated with incubated with camptothecin.

www.aacrjournals.org

11855

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (24). December 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

the effects of betulinic acid on the indirect mechanism of topoisomerase I–DNA cleavable complex formation by agents like
staurosporine and etoposide. Although staurosporine and etoposide have different cellular targets and have no direct effect on
topoisomerase I, both these compounds induce oxidative DNA
damage through generation of ROS inside cells. Therefore, we
chose to see the effect of betulinic acid on the ROS-mediated
indirect mechanism of topoisomerase I–DNA cleavable complex
formation. As evidenced by in vivo cleavage assay and immunoband depletion assay, topoisomerase I–DNA cleavable complexes
induced by both staurosporine and etoposide were inhibited in
cells pretreated with betulinic acid for 2 h. This clearly suggests
that betulinic acid also inhibits the indirect mechanism of topoisomerase I–DNA cleavable complex formation.

Generation of ROS and subsequent DNA damage facilitate the
process of topoisomerase I–DNA cleavable complex trapping in
cells. This phenomenon is common to many apoptotic processes,
which are initiated by generation of ROS or cleavage of caspases.
Therefore, agents which induce generation of ROS inside cells are
expected to form topoisomerase I–DNA complex as an indispensable event in the process of apoptosis. Because betulinic acid was
found to intervene the cleavable complex formation by staurosporine and etoposide, we tested whether betulinic acid can induce
generation of ROS and subsequent oxidative DNA lesions. Betulinic
acid was found to generate ROS inside cells within 4 to 6 h of
treatment. NAC inhibited this ROS generation and also inhibited
apoptotic DNA fragmentation in betulinic acid–treated cells,
indicating that ROS plays a vital role in betulinic acid–induced

Figure 5. Down-regulation of topoisomerase I in DU145 cells cannot abrogate betulinic acid–induced apoptosis. A, relative percentage of DNA fragmentation due
to betulinic acid treatment in topoisomerase I depleted cells plotted as function of time. Cells were transfected with a control siRNA (y) and with topoisomerase I
siRNA (n). B, Western blot analysis of topoisomerase I (Topo I ) in whole cell extracts treated with control siRNA and topoisomerase I siRNA. Bottom, tubulin loading
control. C, relative percentage of DNA fragmentation due to camptothecin and staurosporine treatment in topoisomerase I depleted cells plotted as function of
time. Relative percentage of DNA fragmentation in control cells treated with camptothecin (y), topoisomerase I depleted cells treated with camptothecin (n), control
cells treated with staurosporine (E), and topoisomerase I depleted cells treated with staurosporine ( ). D, Western blot analysis of PARP cleavage in control and
topoisomerase I depleted cells due to treatment with betulinic acid.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (24). December 15, 2007

11856

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Betulinic Acid Inhibits Topoisomerase I–DNA Complex

Figure 6. Schematic diagram showing the possible mechanism by which betulinic acid inhibits topoisomerase I–DNA cleavable complex formation inside cells: dark
circle, betulinic acid; shaded square, camptothecin.

cell death. Caspase 3 is known to generate ROS inside cells by
feedback mechanism. Recently, caspase-3 was shown to feed back
on permeabilized mitochondria and cleave the 75 kDa subunit of
complex I. This event leads to the disruption of mitochondrial
membrane potential and subsequent production of ROS inside cells
(23, 24). We therefore tested the extent of betulinic acid–induced
caspase cleavage and effect of caspase inhibitor z-VAD-fmk on
betulinic acid–induced ROS generation. Caspase-3 cleavage was
observed in betulinic acid–treated cells as evidenced by the pNA
release. Treatment with caspase inhibitor z-VAD-fmk reduced the
ROS generation and also inhibited betulinic acid–induced apoptotic
DNA fragmentation, indicating the role of mitochondrial ROS in
betulinic acid–induced cell death. In case of staurosporine, arsenic
trioxide, and other compounds, ROS mediate cell death through
oxidative DNA lesions and subsequent trapping of topoisomerase
I–DNA cleavable complexes. We therefore checked for oxidative
DNA damages due to betulinic acid–induced ROS formation in
DU145 cells. Alkaline comet assay results suggest that oxidative
DNA lesions are formed in betulinic acid–treated cells, similar to
that in staurosporine-treated cells. However, in spite of this ROSinduced DNA damage inside cells, there is no trapping of
topoisomerase I–DNA cleavable complex in betulinic acid–treated
cells. Thus, it can be concluded that although similar initiation
events occur both in case of betulinic acid and staurosporine
treatment, the death processes do not converge at the point of
topoisomerase I–DNA cleavable complex formation.
It is clear from the above experimental evidences that betulinic
acid cannot promote the formation of topoisomerase I–DNA
cleavable complexes in spite of formation of oxidatively damaged
DNA inside cells. One possible explanation for this can be that the

www.aacrjournals.org

drug interacts directly with the cellular topoisomerase I and
prevents its interaction with the damaged DNA. In vitro cleavage
assays with nuclear extracts from betulinic acid–treated cells
strongly support this notion. Even in presence of camptothecin,
nuclear extracts from betulinic acid–treated cells exhibit severely
reduced trapping of topoisomerase I–DNA cleavable complexes.
Thus, interaction of betulinic acid with the cellular topoisomerase I
prevents the enzyme from binding with the DNA and refrains it
from participating in the apoptotic process. Similar experiments
using oligonucleotide substrate containing 8-oxoguanosine modification further strengthen this hypothesis. Cleavage was inhibited
in the presence of betulinic acid. Thus, our results argue in favor
of the notion that betulinic acid precludes the interaction between
topoisomerase I and oxidatively damaged DNA inside cells.
Because topoisomerase I plays the role of an apoptotic nuclease
in death processes initiated by staurosporine, etoposide, arsenic
trioxide, or camptothecin, silencing of the topoisomerase I gene
severely affects the apoptotic process in case of these drugs. On the
contrary, similar role of topoisomerase I is not apparent in case of
betulinic acid–induced cell death, although topoisomerase I is a
major target for the drug. To address this issue, we silenced the
topoisomerase I gene in DU145 cells and looked for its effect on the
apoptotic process induced by betulinic acid. DNA fragmentation
was reduced by 27% but still continued to be substantial at 6 h of
treatment. PARP cleavage was observed to be almost similar as that
of wild-type cells indicating that apoptotic process, although
reduced, is not abrogated due to silencing of topoisomerase I. On
the other hand, there was substantial reduction of apoptotic DNA
fragmentation in apoptosis induced by staurosporine when topoisomerase I gene is silenced. Thus, it is evident that topoisomerase I,

11857

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (24). December 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

although it is an initial target for betulinic acid, is not the actual
mediator of cell death process.
The formation of topoisomerase I–DNA cleavable complexes
depends on caspase activation and generation of ROS inside cells.
It is also well established that caspases activate endonucleases during apoptosis. The DNA breaks produced by apoptotic nucleases,
such as CAD/DFF40 and endonuclease G, may also contribute to
the trapping of topoisomerase I–DNA cleavable complexes. Moreover, there are reports of occurrence of topoisomerase I–DNA
cleavable complexes during apoptosis induced by tumor necrosis
factor–related apoptosis ligand, Fas ligand, and BH3 mimetics
antimycin A (25, 26). Thus, apoptotic topoisomerase I–DNA
cleavable complex formation has been shown to be involved in
many of the cell death processes. We have summarized the effect
of betulinic acid on topoisomerase I–DNA cleavable complex
formation in Fig. 6. We have shown that betulinic acid interacts
with the enzyme and inhibits all types of topoisomerase I–DNA
cleavable complex formation irrespective of the process of
initiation. Although, betulinic acid itself induce caspase cleavage,
ROS generation, and oxidative DNA damage, the cell death process induced by the drug does not involve formation of topoisomerase I–DNA cleavable complex. Our study provides evidence for

References
1. Champoux JJ. DNA topoisomerases: structure, function,
and mechanism. Annu Rev Biochem 2001;70:369–413.
2. Wang JC. DNA topoisomerases. Annu Rev Biochem
1996;65:635–92.
3. Sordet O, Khan QA, Kohn KW, Pommier Y. Apoptosis
induced by topoisomerase inhibitors. Curr Med Chem
Anti-Canc Agents 2003;3:271–90.
4. Sordet O, Khan QA, Pommier Y. Apoptotic topoisomerase I–DNA complexes induced by oxygen radicals and
mitochondrial dysfunction. Cell Cycle 2004;3:1095–7.
5. Meng LH, Liao ZY, Pommier Y. Non-camptothecin
DNA topoisomerase I inhibitors in cancer therapy. Curr
Top Med Chem 2003;3:305–20.
6. Li TK, Liu LF. Tumor cell death induced by topoisomerase-targeting drugs. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 2001;41:53–77.
7. Lesher DT, Pommier Y, Stewart L, Redinbo MR. 8Oxoguanine rearranges the active site of human topoisomerase I. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2002;99:12102–7.
8. Pommier Y. Camptothecins and topoisomerase I: a
foot in the door. Targeting the genome beyond topoisomerase I with camptothecins and novel anticancer
drugs: importance of DNA replication, repair and cell
cycle checkpoints. Curr Med Chem Anti-Canc Agents
2004;4:429–34.
9. Sordet O, Khan QA, Plo I, et al. Apoptotic topoisomerase I–DNA complexes induced by staurosporine-mediated oxygen radicals. J Biol Chem 2004;279:
50499–504.
10. Sordet O, Liao Z, Liu H, et al. Topoisomerase I–DNA
complexes contribute to arsenic trioxide-induced apoptosis. J Biol Chem 2004;279:33968–75.

the first time that betulinic acid can inhibit topoisomerase I–DNA
cleavable complexes inside cells, and this inference can be extrapolated for all the apoptotic processes discussed above. Because
these cleavable complexes are common mediators of cell death,
betulinic acid cannot be used to potentiate cell death in combination with most anticancer drugs which induce apoptosis through
formation of topoisomerase I–DNA cleavable complexes. Taken
together, this study will help in understanding the mechanism of
synergistic drug action and development of newer strategies for
combinatorial drug treatment in cancer chemotherapy.

Acknowledgments
Received 5/2/2007; revised 9/10/2007; accepted 10/17/2007.
Grant support: Network Project SMM 003 of Council of Scientific and Industrial
Research (H.K. Majumder) and Senior Research Fellowship from Council of Scientific
and Industrial Research, Government of India (A. Ganguly).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank Prof. Yves Pommier (National Cancer Institute, NIH) for sending us
DU145 cells and DNA substrate containing 8-oxoguanosine modification, Prof. J.J.
Champoux (University of Washington) for providing us with the recombinant
baculovirus containing wild-type human topoisomerase I, and Dr. S. Roy (Indian
Institute of Chemical Biology) for his interest in this work.

11. Sordet O, Goldman A, Pommier Y. Topoisomerase II
and tubulin inhibitors both induce the formation of
apoptotic topoisomerase I cleavage complexes. Mol
Cancer Ther 2006;5:3139–44.
12. Sen N, Banerjee B, Das BB, et al. Apoptosis is induced
in leishmanial cells by a novel protein kinase inhibitor
withaferin A and is facilitated by apoptotic topoisomerase I–DNA complex. Cell Death Differ 2007;14:358–67.
13. Syrovets T, Buchele B, Gedig E, Slupsky JR, Simmet T.
Acetyl-boswellic acids are novel catalytic inhibitors of
human topoisomerases I and IIa. Mol Pharmacol 2000;
58:71–81.
14. Chowdhury AR, Mandal S, Mittra B, Sharma S,
Mukhopadhyay S, Majumder HK. Betulinic acid, a
potent inhibitor of eukaryotic topoisomerase I: identification of the inhibitory step, the major functional
group responsible and development of more potent
derivatives. Med Sci Monit 2002;87:BR254–65.
15. Chowdhury AR, Mandal S, Goswami A, et al.
Dihydrobetulinic acid induces apoptosis in Leishmania
donovani by targeting DNA topoisomerase I and II:
implications in antileishmanial therapy. Mol Med 2003;
9:26–36.
16. Stewart L, Ireton GC, Parker LH, Madden KR,
Champoux JJ. Biochemical and biophysical analyses of
recombinant forms of human topoisomerase I. J Biol
Chem 1996;271:7593–601.
17. Czubaty A, Girstun A, Kowalska-Loth B, et al.
Proteomic analysis of complexes formed by human
topoisomerase I. Biochim Biophys Acta 2005;1749:
133–41.
18. Rowe TC, Chen GL, Hsiang YH, Liu LF. DNA damage
by antitumor acridines mediated by mammalian DNA
topoisomerase II. Cancer Res 1986;46:2021–6.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (24). December 15, 2007

11858

19. Boege F, Straub T, Keh A, et al. Selected novel
flavones inhibit the DNA binding or the DNA religation
step of eukaryotic topoisomerase I. J Biol Chem 1996;
271:2262–70.
20. Sen N, Das BB, Ganguly A, et al. Camptothecin
induced mitochondrial dysfunction leading to
programmed cell death in unicellular hemoflagellate
Leishmania donovani . Cell Death Differ 2004;11:924–36.
21. Ismail IH, Nystrom S, Nygren J, Hammarsten O.
Activation of ataxia telangiectasia mutated by DNA
strand break-inducing agents correlates closely with the
number of DNA double strand breaks. J Biol Chem 2005;
280:4649–55.
22. Pourquier P, Ueng LM, Fertala J, et al. Induction of
reversible complexes between eukaryotic DNA topoisomerase I and DNA-containing oxidative base
damages. 7, 8-dihydro-8-oxoguanine and 5-hydroxycytosine. J Biol Chem 1999;274:8516–23.
23. Ricci JE, Gottlieb RA, Green DR. Caspase-mediated
loss of mitochondrial function and generation of
reactive oxygen species during apoptosis. J Cell Biol
2003;160:65–75.
24. Ricci JE, Munoz-Pinedo C, Fitzgerald P, et al.
Disruption of mitochondrial function during apoptosis
is mediated by caspase cleavage of the p75 subunit of
complex I of the electron transport chain. Cell 2004;117:
773–86.
25. Rockstroh A, Kleinert A, Kramer M, Grosse F, Soe K.
Cellular stress triggers the human topoisomerase I
damage response independently of DNA damage in a
p53 controlled manner. Oncogene 2007;26:123–31.
26. Samejima K, Earnshaw WC. Trashing the genome:
the role of nucleases during apoptosis. Nat Rev Mol Cell
Biol 2005;6:677–88.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Betulinic Acid, a Catalytic Inhibitor of Topoisomerase I,
Inhibits Reactive Oxygen Species−Mediated Apoptotic
Topoisomerase I−DNA Cleavable Complex Formation in
Prostate Cancer Cells but Does Not Affect the Process of
Cell Death
Agneyo Ganguly, Benubrata Das, Amit Roy, et al.
Cancer Res 2007;67:11848-11858.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/24/11848

This article cites 26 articles, 11 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/24/11848.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 4 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/24/11848.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

