www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2017, Vol. 8, (No. 3), pp: 5247-5255
Research Paper

Antitumor effect of an adeno-associated virus expressing
apolipoprotein A-1 fused to interferon alpha in an interferon
alpha-resistant murine tumor model
Marcos Vasquez1, Vladimir Paredes-Cervantes1,2, Fernando Aranda1, Nuria Ardaiz1,
Celia Gomar1, Pedro Berraondo1
1

Program of Immunology and Immunotherapy, Center for Applied Medical Research (CIMA), Navarra Institute for Health
Research (IdiSNA), Pamplona, Navarra, Spain

2

Centro Médico Nacional La Raza, IMSS, México DF, Mexico

Correspondence to: Pedro Berraondo, email: pberraondol@unav.es
Keywords: colorectal cancer, liver metastasis, cancer immunotherapy, T regulatory cells, PD-1
Received: June 09, 2016     Accepted: November 22, 2016     Published: December 23, 2016

ABSTRACT
Interferon alpha (IFNα) is a cytokine approved for the treatment of several
types of cancer. However, the modest effect on overall survival and the high toxicity
associated with the treatment has reduced the clinical use of this cytokine. In this
study, we have developed a tumor model that reproduces this clinical setting. A high
dose of an adeno-associated virus encoding IFNα (AAV-IFNα) was able to eradicate a
liver metastases model of colon cancer but induced lethal pancytopenia. On the other
hand, a safe dose of AAV-IFNα was not able to eliminate the liver metastases of colon
cancer. In this IFNα-resistant tumor model, administration of an adeno-associated
vector encoding apolipoprotein A-1 fused to IFNα was able to fully eradicate the tumor
in 43% of mice without toxicity. This antitumor effect was limited by suboptimal
long-term CD8+ T cell activation and the expansion of T regulatory cells. In contrast,
IFNα upregulated suppressor molecules such as PD-1 and interleukin 10 on CD8+ T
lymphocytes. In conclusion, we show that apolipoprotein A-1 fused to IFNα is a novel
antitumor drug that differs from IFNα in the modulation of suppressor mechanisms
of the immune response. These differential properties pave the way for rational
combinations with other immunomodulatory drugs.

IFNα monotherapy was approved for a number of
indications [6]. However, the low efficacy and systemic
side effects have limited its clinical utility. During
high-dose or long-term IFNα therapy, patients suffer
high-grade side effects that include fatigue, fever,
headache, muscle aches, nausea, dizziness, anorexia,
depression, and leucopenia. In a significant number
of cases, such side effects lead to the discontinuation
of the treatment [7]. An alternative dosing schedule of
continuous, low-level delivery, rather than intermittent,
high concentration pulsed-dosing, could be achieved
by gene therapy. Ideally, IFNα gene therapy might
avoid the toxicity of interferon while maintaining its
antitumor efficacy. The adeno-associated virus (AAV)
is a natural replication-defective single-stranded DNA
parvovirus. The lack of pathogenicity of the virus, its
persistence, long-term expression and relative lack of

INTRODUCTION
Several pattern-recognition receptors expressed
on tumor and stromal cells trigger the release of
interferon alpha (IFNα) upon binding of dangerassociated molecular patterns. Initially, the production
of IFNα was attributed to several toll-like receptors
such as TLR-3, TLR-9, TLR-7 and TLR-8 [1]. Recently,
research has highlighted the role of cytoplasmatic RNA
(RIG-1 and MDA-5) and DNA receptors (the STING
pathway) in the release of IFNα in tumor cells [2, 3].
IFNα can be produced by endogenous stimuli [4] but
can also be induced by several conventional tumor
treatments such as chemotherapy and immunological
therapy [1, 2, 5]. The potent antineoplastic activities
observed in vitro and in a variety of animal models
led to the initiation of clinical trials. As a result,

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5247

Oncotarget

Lethal doses of AAV-IFNα are required to
eradicate liver metastases of MC38 colon
carcinoma

immune response make this vector an appropriate tool
for our goal. Several clinical trials have demonstrated
the safety, efficiency, and efficacy of these vectors [8].
To further improve the pharmacokinetic properties of
IFNα, we have developed a strategy based on its fusion
to apolipoprotein A-1 (ApoA1). ApoA1 is produced in
the liver and incorporated into high density lipoprotein.
Then, the high-density lipoproteins circulate interacting
with all the cells of the organism through SR-B1,
picking up the cholesterol from them. Finally, the highdensity lipoproteins are internalized and catabolized
in the liver. Therefore, ApoA-1 fusion proteins take
advantage of the interesting pharmacokinetic properties
of high-density lipoproteins. The fusion protein of IFNα
and ApoA-1 has a longer half-life in the circulation and
the hematological toxicity is reduced, likely through a
reduction of the cytotoxic effect of the IFNα fused to
ApoA-1 [9].
Metastatic liver cancer is a life-threatening condition
frequently observed in colorectal cancer patients. Hepatic
lesions are found in 10% to 25% of cases at the time
of diagnosis, and 30% of patients have no evidence of
dissemination to any other organ. In addition, recurrence
after surgical resection of the colorectal tumor occurs
mainly in the liver, with a 20-25% rate of metachronous
liver metastases. Current therapeutic strategies are far
from satisfactory and it is clear that new therapeutic
options are needed to improve the clinical management of
hepatic metastases from colon cancer [10].
In this study, we tested the antitumor activity of
long-term expression of IFNα alone or fused to ApoA1
using an AAV vector in a murine model of hepatic
colorectal metastasis after liver implantation.

We established a liver metastasis model of colon
cancer by direct implantation of 5x105 MC38 cells.
Four days after cell implantation, mice were treated
intravenously with two different doses of AAV-IFNα:
1x1010 vg and 5x1011 vg or AAV-Luciferase. At day 21
after virus injection, tumor volume was analyzed by
abdominal echography. All the animals from the control
group and from the low dose AAV-IFNα group developed
tumors while none of the animals receiving the highest
dose of AAV-IFNα developed tumors (data not shown).
Survival was checked daily and mice were euthanized
if their general status deteriorated. Fifty days after cell
implantation, all the animals from the control group and
the low dose AAV-IFNα group died as a consequence of
tumor progression. The animals receiving AAV-IFNα at a
high dose died without any tumors in the liver, presumably
due to profound pancytopenia (Figure 1C and Figure 2C).

Safety and antitumor effect of an AAV encoding
apolipoprotein A-1 fused IFNα
Next, we analyzed whether the expression of
apolipoprotein A-1 fused to IFNα could attain an
antitumor effect in this IFNα-resistant tumor model. An
AAV8 expressing apolipoprotein A-1 fused to IFNα (AAVApoA1-IFNα) under the transcriptional control of the
constitutive and ubiquitous elongation factor-1α promoter
was constructed. The high dose of 5x1011 vg also induced
high levels of the cytokine in serum. The levels of IFNα
in serum were higher seven days after administration of
AAV-ApoA1-IFNα than AAV-IFNα with the same dose
(Figure 2A). Furthermore, we compared the induction of
MC38-specific CD8+ T cells. We inoculated the MC38
cells in the liver, and four days later, mice were treated
with the AAV-Luc, AAV-IFNα or AAV-ApoA1-IFNα.
One week after AAV injection, MC38-specific CD8+ T
cells were analyzed in peripheral blood lymphocytes. This
tumor-specific population was expanded in mice treated
with a vector encoding IFNα or ApoA1-IFNα, indicating
that both vectors could enhance T cell-mediated antitumor
effector immune responses (Figure 2B).
Consequently, we analyzed the blood cell counts at
day 30 after tumor challenge. The group treated with the
AAV-IFNα developed profound pancytopenia. In sharp
contrast, blood cell counts in mice treated with the same
dose of AAV-ApoA1-IFNα remained at baseline levels
(Figure 2C).
Next, we compared the antitumor effect in the
MC38 tumor model. A significant delay in mice death was
observed in those animals treated with AAV-ApoA1-IFNα.
Fifty seven percent of mice developed tumor in the liver
and had be sacrificed. Remarkably, 43% of mice fully

RESULTS
Therapeutic window of AAV-IFNα
In order to find a safe dose of an AAV encoding
IFNα, C57BL/6 male mice were intravenously injected
with different doses of an AAV8 expressing IFNα
under the transcriptional control of the constitutive and
ubiquitous elongation factor-1α promoter (EF1α) AAVIFNα, 5 x 1011, 1 x 1011 and 1 x 1010 viral genomes (vg).
A control group was injected with 5 x 1011 vg of an
AAV8 expressing luciferase under the control of the same
promoter. Seven days after vector administration, IFNα
expression in serum was analyzed by ELISA. The IFNα
levels in plasma were vector dose-dependent (Figure 1A).
Next, we analyzed the survival of the mice treated with the
different vector doses. All mice receiving the high dose
of AAV-IFNα had to be sacrificed by day 60 due to clear
signs of ill health as evidenced by significant weight loss.
The medium dose was also lethal in 77% mice while all
the mice treated with the low dose survived without any
signs of toxicity (Figure 1B).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5248

Oncotarget

eradicated the tumor and remained alive without any sign
of physical deterioration. In mice treated with AAV-IFNα,
survival increased but finally, all mice succumbed due
to the toxic effect of the high doses of IFNα required to
eradicate the tumors (Figure 2D). In order to analyze the
main immune effector cells implicated in the antitumor
activity of AAV-ApoA1-IFNα, we depleted the CD4+,
CD8+ T lymphocytes or NK cells with appropriate
antibodies. Depletion of CD8+ T lymphocytes or NK
cells completely abrogated the antitumor efficacy while
depletion of CD4+ T lymphocytes had a partial effect
(Figure 2D).

tumor bearing mice two weeks after virus administration,
when the tumor-specific T lymphocytes normally decline.
We found that while granzyme B (GrzB) was activated
to a similar extent in NK cells by both viruses (Figure
3A), CD8+ T lymphocytes treated with AAV-ApoA1IFNα barely upregulated this effector molecule which is
critically involved in the effector function of cytotoxic T
lymphocytes [11] (Figure 3B). Thus, our findings suggest
that a partial defect in the long-term activation of the CD8+
T cell compartment limited the antitumor efficacy of AAVApoA1-IFNα.
To further analyze this effect, we purified CD8+
T cells from mice treated with AAV-Luc, AAV-IFNα or
AAV-ApoA1-IFNα for 2 weeks and performed a gene
expression analysis of immune-related genes by real-time
PCR. Among the genes analyzed, some were modulated
by the two vectors expressing IFNα. This was the case
for TGFβ, that was upregulated, and for CD40L and
perforin 1, that were downregulated. However, differential
effects were observed in IFNγ, granzyme A and B and Fas
ligand expression, crucial effector molecules for tumor

Immune-related differences between AAV-IFN
and AAV-ApoA1-IFNα
Having established that AAV-ApoA1-IFNα is able
to achieve an immune-mediated antitumor effect in a
difficult to treat animal model, we then sought to better
understand the differences between both viruses. To this
end, we analyzed the immune response induced in non-

Figure 1: Lethal doses of IFNα are able to eradicate a liver metastases model of colon cancer. A. IFNα serum levels in mice
were determined by ELISA one week after being treated by different doses of AAV-IFNα (n = 3, mice per group). B. Kaplan-Meier plot
representing the survival of mice treated by different doses of AAV-IFNα (n = 3, mice per group). C. Schematic representation of a mouse
model for liver metastases from colon cancer (left panel). Colon cancer cells (MC38) were injected into the liver of mice and, four days
later, different doses of AAV-IFNα were intravenously administrated (n = 6, mice per group). Survival of mice is represented in a KaplanMeier plot (right panel).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5249

Oncotarget

Figure 2: AAV-ApoA1-IFNα is able to eradicate tumors without lethal toxicity. IFNα levels A. and MC38 tetramer-specific

CD8+ T cells B. were determined in peripheral blood one week after intrahepatic injection of 5x105 MC38 cells followed by intravenous
administration of AAV-Luc, AAV-IFNα or AAV-ApoA1-IFNα (5x1011 vg) four days later (n = 5, mice per group). C. Peripheral blood
platelets (PLT), leukocytes (WBC) and red blood cell (RBC) counts were analysed at 30 days after AAV-Luc, AAV-IFNα or AAV-ApoA1IFNα administration to tumor-free mice (n = 3, mice per group). Kaplan-Meier plot representing the survival in a liver metastases model
from colon cancer treated at four weeks with AAV-Luc, AAV-IFNα and AAV-ApoA1-IFNα (AAV-Luc n = 18; AAV-IFNα, n = 9; AAVApoA1-IFNα, n = 17) D. or treated with AAV-ApoA1-IFNα and NK or T cell depleting antibodies at day 4, 6, 11 and 13 after MC38
injection (Mock n = 6; anti-CD4, anti-CD8 and anti-asialo GM1 n = 8) E. Data were analysed by one way ANOVA, followed by the
Bonferroni multiple comparison test (A, B and C) **P < 0.01 and weighted log-rank test with the Fleming–Harrington class of weights (D)
**P < 0.01.

Figure 3: Defect in long-term CD8+ T cell activation after AAV-ApoA1-IFNα in mice. The percentages of granzyme B in NK
cells A. or CD8+ T cells B. were determined by flow cytometry analysis in spleens of mice two weeks after intravenous administration of
AAV-Luc, AAV-IFNα or AAV-ApoA1-IFNα (n = 4, mice per group). Data were analysed by one way ANOVA, followed by the Bonferroni
multiple comparison test ***P < 0.001.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5250

Oncotarget

immunosurveillance [12]. The expression of these genes
were upregulated by AAV-IFNα but not by AAV-ApoA1IFNα. As expected for activated CD8+ T lymphocytes,
several immune-regulatory genes such as PD-1, PD-L1
and IL10 were upregulated in the AAV-IFNα but these
genes were not upregulated by the fusion protein (Figure
4). A similar pattern was observed in CD8+ T lymphocytes
after 1 week of treatment (data not shown).

expanded by the AAV-ApoA1-IFNα but not by the AAVIFNα, providing a specific regulatory mechanism of
the antitumor effect exerted by the AAV-ApoA1-IFNα
(Figure 5A).
Finally, we confirmed these results in tumor-bearing
mice. The treatment with AAV-ApoA1-IFNα increased the
percentage of FoxP3+ cells in the CD4+ T lymphocytes in
the spleen (Figure 5B). In the tumor, AAV-IFNα reduced
the percentage of T regulatory cells with a concomitant
enhancement of the effect or CD4+ T lymphocytes. In
contrast, AAV-ApoA1-IFNα retained the percentage of T
regulatory cells observed in the tumor (Figure 5C).

Expansion of T regulatory cells
by AAV-ApoA1-IFNα
From the above experiment, we excluded the
possibility that AAV-ApoA1-IFNα induced CD8+ T
cell intrinsic regulatory mechanisms. Thus, we focused
our attention on another important immunosuppressive
population that may dampen the long-term activation of
T lymphocytes. T regulatory cells are naturally produced
to maintain peripheral tolerance and can be induced by
stressful conditions such as viral infections and tumors.
These CD4+ T cells are characterized by the expression
of the transcription factor Foxp3 [13]. Thus, we analyzed
the percentage of FoxP3+ cells in the CD4+ T cells
from the spleens of the different treatment groups in
non-tumor bearing mice. Interestingly, these cells were

DISCUSSION
IFNα is a potent antitumor agent with direct effects
on tumor cells inducing cell cycle arrest, apoptosis or
senescence [7]. High doses of IFNα can also alter the
angiogenesis required to sustain tumor growth [14].
However, the high doses required to achieve these
direct antitumor effects are associated with high-grade
side effects [7]. The indirect antitumor effects of IFNα
can also be mediated by the activation of an antitumor
effector immune response [6]. IFNα is a key cytokine that
acts as a signal-3 cytokine in the immunological synapse

Figure 4: Differences in gene expression induced by AAV-IFNα and AAV-ApoA1-IFNα in CD8+ T cells. Gene expression

was determined by quantitative real time PCR in CD8+ T cells isolated from spleens of mice two weeks after intravenous administration of
AAV-Luc, AAV-IFNα or AAV-ApoA1-IFNα (n = 4, mice per group). Data were analysed by one way ANOVA, followed by the Bonferroni
multiple comparison test ***P < 0.001, **P< 0.01, *P< 0.05.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5251

Oncotarget

formed by professional presenting cells, dendritic cells,
and T lymphocytes. This signal-3 cytokine modulates
signal-1 transmitted by the interaction of the class I MHC
molecules and the TCR and signal-2 provided by the costimulus receptors [15]. In order to potentiate the immune
mediated effect of IFNα, several strategies are currently
being tested in clinical trials to achieve a physiologic
release of IFNα using molecules that activate toll-like
receptors or cytoplasmatic receptors of RNA or DNA
[7, 16]. In the present study, we used a gene transfer
strategy to achieve local expression of the cytokine.
As a transfer vector, we used an adeno-associated viral
vector that due to its low immunogenicity allows longterm transgene expression. AAV-IFNα showed levels of
the cytokine in serum that were dose-dependent. Mice

treated with AAV-IFNα showed a significant expansion
of tumor-specific CD8+ T cells and the acquisition of
effector functions by NK cells and CD8+ T lymphocytes.
These activation mechanisms were counter regulated by
the induction of suppressive molecules in CD8+ cells such
as PD-1 and IL10. Indeed, blockade of these molecules
has been used to potentiate the antitumor effects of IFNα
[17, 18]. However, the viral dose required to eradicate
tumors led to profound pancytopenia. Tumor growth
inhibition after injection of short short-term expression
vectors carrying IFNα has been obtained in different
animal tumor models [19-21] but we have established an
aggressive tumor model that could not be subverted by
IFNα reflecting the clinical response in most of the cancer
patients treated with IFNα.

Figure 5: AAV-ApoA1-IFNα increases the FoxP3+ percentage in CD4+ T cells. Flow cytometry analysis for the intracellular
expression of FoxP3 in CD4+ T cells was performed in spleens of mice treated with AAV-Luc, AAV-IFNα and AAV-ApoA1-IFNα for two
weeks A. Mice received an intrahepatic injection of MC38 and 5 days later were treated with the viruses. One week later, to analyse the
FoxP3 in CD4+ T cells, flow cytometry was performed in spleen and intrahepatic tumors B. (n = 3, mice per group). Data were analysed by
one way ANOVA, followed by the Bonferroni multiple comparison test **P< 0.01.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5252

Oncotarget

We have previously reported that the fusion of
interferon alpha and apolipoprotein A-1 limited the
cytotoxic effects of IFNα and this effect translates
into reduced hematological toxicity in vivo [9]. We,
therefore, hypothesized that the AAV encoding the
fusion protein could eradicate liver tumors without the
lethal adverse effects. Indeed, a remarkable antitumor
efficacy was achieved with the eradication of the tumor
in a high percentage of the tumor-bearing mice in
this IFNα-resistant model. We detected an expansion
of tumor-specific T lymphocytes 7 days after virus
administration and a strong induction of granzyme B
on NK cells 14 days after virus administration. It is
likely that these immune effector cells contribute to the
antitumor effect in cooperation with other mechanisms
of action such as the blockade of angiogenesis [14].
In spite of the potential interest of the fusion protein
as monotherapy, the lack of tumor eradication in
57% of the tumor-bearing animals points to the need
for combination with other immunotherapies. Thus,
we explored the differences in the activation of the
immune response between IFNα and ApoA1-IFNα. NK
cell activation was similar with both compounds and
thus, ApoA1-IFNα may be combined with therapies
that rely on NK cell activity such as antibodies that
induce antibody-dependent cell cytotoxicity. Regarding
the CD8-mediated immune response, we have
previously reported an enhancement of the cytotoxic
activity of T lymphocytes after short-term expression
of the fusion protein [9], but we detected a dampened
activation of CD8+ T lymphocytes with the ApoA1IFNα two weeks after virus administration. In line with
these results, PD-1 was not activated thus precluding
the combination with antibodies that block this
pathway. The likely explanation for these observations
is that the expansion of T regulatory cells observed at
day 14 may limit the long-term activation of effector
CD8+ T cells. Thus, the fusion of apolipoprotein A-1
and IFNα is a safe IFNα derivative with antitumor
activities but it must be combined with strategies to
keep T regulatory cells in check. In this regard, coexpression of FoxP3 inhibitory peptides [22] or low
dose cyclophosphamide [23, 24] could be interesting
therapeutic strategies that will be explored in future
experiments.

Recombinant AAV8 vectors were inoculated via
retro-orbital injection. Previously, mice were anesthetized
by intraperitoneal injection of a mixture of xylazine
(Rompun 2%, Bayer) and ketamine (Imalgene 500,
Merial) 1:9 v/v.
The murine model of hepatic metastasis from colon
cancer involved direct implantation of 5×105 MC38 cells
into the left lobe of the liver under isoflurane anesthesia.
Survival was checked daily and mice were euthanized if
their general status deteriorated.

Depletion of lymphocyte populations
Mice received four intraperitoneal injection of
15µl of anti-asialo GM1 antiserum (Wako Pure Chemical
Industries, Osaka, Japan; Cat. No. 986-10001), 300µg of
anti-CD8 (clone 53.6.72) and 200µg of anti-CD4 (clone
GK1.5) at day 4, 6, 11 and 13 after intrahepatic injection
of MC38. Anti-CD4 and anti-CD8 were provided by Dr.
I. Melero (Center for Applied Medical Research, Navarra,
Spain).

AAV vectors
Experiments were performed with AAV serotype
8 expressing mouse IFNα1 or the fusion of ApoA1 and
IFNα1 under the transcriptional control of the elongation
factor 1α promoter (EF). The AAV were produced by cotransfection of pDP8.ape (PlasmidFactory GmbH & Co.
KG, Bielefeld Germany) and pAAV IFNα, pAAV-ApoA1IFNα or pAAV-Luc plasmids into HEK-293T cells. For
each production, a mixture of plasmids, 20 μg of pAAV
plasmid and 55 μg pDP8.ape, was transfected into 293 T
cells using linear PEI 25 kDa (Polysciences, Warrington,
PA, USA). Two days later, AAV was purified from the
cell lysates by ultracentrifugation in Optiprep Density
Gradient Medium (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis MO). To
titer the AAV productions, viral DNA was isolated using
“The High Pure Viral Nucleic Acid” kit (Roche Applied
Science. Mannheim, Germany). The concentration of
viral particles was subsequently determined by realtime quantitative PCR using primers specific to the EF
promoter: Fw: 5’-ggtgagtcacccacacaaagg-3’ and Rv:
5’-cgtggagtcacatgaagcga-3’.

Determination of murine IFNα

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Serum IFNα levels were measured using a
VeriKine™ Mouse Interferon Alpha ELISA Kit (PBL, NJ,
USA) following the manufacturer’s recommendations.

Animal handling
Experiments were performed with 6-8 week-old
male C57BL/6 purchased from Harlan Laboratories
(Barcelona, Spain). Mice were maintained under
pathogen-free conditions and the experimental design was
approved by the Ethics Committee for Animal Testing of
the University of Navarra.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Hemogram
Thirty days after the AAV injection, blood
samples were collected in tubes with 0.5% heparin
(Mayne Pharma, Mulgrave, Australia) as the final
5253

Oncotarget

factor beta (TGF-β), Fw: 5’-cggcagctgtacattgac-3’
and Rv: 5’-tcagctgcacttgcaggagc-3’. CD40 Ligand
(CD40L), interferon gamma (IFNγ), Fw: 5’- tcaag
tggcatagatgtggaa-3’ and Rv: 5’-tggctctgcaggattttcatg-3’.
Programmed cell death protein 1 (PD1), Fw: 5’-ac
tggtcggaggatcttatg-3’ and Rv: 5’- atcttgttgaggtctccagg-3’.
Interleukin 10 (IL-10), Fw: 5’- ggacaacatactgctaaccg-3’
and Rv: 5’-aatcactcttcacctgctcc-3’. Programmed deathligand 1 (PD-L1), Fw: 5’-gatcatcccagaactgcctg-3’ and
Rv: 5’-gcttacgtctcctcgaattg-3’.Perforin 1 (Prf1) Fw: 5’-ag
cacaagttcgtgccagg-3’ and Rv: 5’- gcgtctctcattagggagt
tttt-3’. Fas ligand (Fasl). Granzyme A (Gzma) Fw: 5’-tg
ctgcccactgtaacgtg-3’ and Rv: 5’- ggtaggtgaaggatagccac
at-3’. Granzyme B (Gzmb) Fw: 5’-ccactctcgaccctacatgg-3’
and Rv: 5’-ggcccccaaagtgacatttatt-3’. Ribosomal Protein,
Large, P0 (RPLP0), Fw: 5’-aacatctcccccttctcctt-3’ and Rv:
5’-gaaggccttgaccttttcag-3’. As RPLP0 levels remained
constant across different experimental conditions, this
parameter was used to standardize gene expression. The
amount of each transcript was expressed by the formula
2ΔCt (2ct(RPLP0) – ct(gene)), ct being the point at which
the fluorescence rises significantly above the background
fluorescence.

concentration. Hemograms were analysed using the
Drew Scientific HemaVet Hematology Analyzer (CDC
Technologies, Oxford, CT) following the manufacturer’s
recommendations.

Cell isolation
Cell suspensions of the spleen were obtained by
mechanically disrupting the tissue with a syringe plunger
in cold RPMI 1640. Red blood cells were removed using
ACK buffer. Splenocytes were washed in cell culture
medium (RPMI 1640) and filtered through a 70 μm nylon
cell strainer. Cell concentrations were determined with
an automatic animal cell counter and splenocytes were
adjusted to a desired final concentration.
CD8+ T cells were enriched from pooled spleen by
anti-CD8 (Ly-2) mAbs (Miltenyi Biotec, Auburn, CA)
and separated using the AutoMACS magnetic separation
system (Miltenyi Biotec, Auburn, CA).

Flow cytometry
Cells were incubated for 10 minutes with Fc Block
and stained with an optimal dilution of each antibody
for 15 minutes at 4ºC. For NK cells analyses, cells were
stained with anti-NKp46-PE antibody. CD8+ T cells
were stained with anti-CD8-FITC antibody. Then, cells
were fixed, permeabilized, and stained with specific
intracellular anti-GrzB-APC antibody. To identify MC38
tetramer-specific CD8+ T cells, cells were stained with the
iTAg MHC class I tetramer loaded with the KSPWFTTL
synthetic peptide and conjugated with PE (Beckmann
Coulter, Madrid, Spain).
All antibodies were purchased from BD-Biosciences
(San Jose, CA, USA). Analyses were performed with
FACS Calibur platform (BD Biosciences) and data were
analyzed using FlowJo software (Tree Star Inc., San
Carlos, CA, USA).

Statistical analysis
Statistical analyses were performed using Prism
5 computer program (GraphPad Software Inc, San
Diego, CA, USA). The survival data were represented
in Kaplan-Meier graphs and the crossing curves
were analyzed using the Renyi family of statistics.
The SurvMisc package (https://cran.r-project.org/
web/packages/survMisc/survMisc.pdf) was used to
analyze the crossing curves with the weighted log-rank
tests with the Fleming–Harrington class of weights.
The remaining parameters were analyzed by twoway ANOVA, followed by the Bonferroni multiple
comparison test. P<0.05 values were considered
significant.

RNA isolation and quantitative PCR analysis
Total RNA extraction from isolated CD8+ T cells
was performed using the Maxwell® 16 Total RNA
Purification Kit (Promega, Madison, Wisconsin, USA).
The concentration and purity of samples were determined
in a NanoDrop spectrophotometer with absorbance set
at 260 and 280 nm (Thermo scientific, Wilminfton,
USA). One microgram of RNA was retrotranscribed to
cDNA with Moloney murine leukemia virus (M-MLV)
reverse transcriptase from Promega, according to the
manufacturer’s instructions.
Real-time PCR was performed using Biorad
reagents and to the manufacturer’s specified protocol was
followed.
Quantitative real-time PCR was performed by using
specific primers for each gene. Transforming growth

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflicts of interest

GRANT SUPPORT
This work was supported by the grant PI13/00207
and PI16/00668 from Instituto de Salud Carlos III,
financed by the FEDER program of the European Union,
by a grant from the FAECC and by the EC’s H2020
PROCROP project, under grant agreement 635122. Pedro
Berraondo was supported by a Miguel Servet and Miguel
Servet II (CPII15/00004) contract from Instituto de Salud
Carlos III.

5254

Oncotarget

REFERENCES

14.	 Spaapen RM, Leung MY, Fuertes MB, Kline JP, Zhang
L, Zheng Y, Fu YX, Luo X, Cohen KS and Gajewski TF.
Therapeutic activity of high-dose intratumoral IFN-beta
requires direct effect on the tumor vasculature. Journal of
immunology. 2014; 193:4254-4260.

1.	 Akira S, Uematsu S and Takeuchi O. Pathogen recognition
and innate immunity. Cell. 2006; 124:783-801.
2.	 Roulois D, Loo Yau H, Singhania R, Wang Y, Danesh A,
Shen SY, Han H, Liang G, Jones PA, Pugh TJ, O’Brien C
and De Carvalho DD. DNA-Demethylating Agents Target
Colorectal Cancer Cells by Inducing Viral Mimicry by
Endogenous Transcripts. Cell. 2015; 162:961-973.

15.	 Curtsinger JM, Valenzuela JO, Agarwal P, Lins D and
Mescher MF. Type I IFNs provide a third signal to CD8
T cells to stimulate clonal expansion and differentiation.
Journal of immunology. 2005; 174:4465-4469.
16.	 Corrales L, Glickman LH, McWhirter SM, Kanne
DB, Sivick KE, Katibah GE, Woo SR, Lemmens E,
Banda T, Leong JJ, Metchette K, Dubensky TW, Jr.
and Gajewski TF. Direct Activation of STING in the
Tumor Microenvironment Leads to Potent and Systemic
Tumor Regression and Immunity. Cell reports. 2015;
11:1018-1030.

3.	 Woo SR, Fuertes MB, Corrales L, Spranger S, Furdyna MJ,
Leung MY, Duggan R, Wang Y, Barber GN, Fitzgerald KA,
Alegre ML and Gajewski TF. STING-dependent cytosolic
DNA sensing mediates innate immune recognition of
immunogenic tumors. Immunity. 2014; 41:830-842.
4.	 Ho SS, Zhang WY, Tan NY, Khatoo M, Suter MA, Tripathi
S, Cheung FS, Lim WK, Tan PH, Ngeow J and Gasser
S. The DNA Structure-Specific Endonuclease MUS81
Mediates DNA Sensor STING-Dependent Host Rejection
of Prostate Cancer Cells. Immunity. 2016; 44:1177-1189.

17.	 Bald T, Landsberg J, Lopez-Ramos D, Renn M, Glodde N,
Jansen P, Gaffal E, Steitz J, Tolba R, Kalinke U, Limmer
A, Jonsson G, Holzel M and Tuting T. Immune cell-poor
melanomas benefit from PD-1 blockade after targeted type
I IFN activation. Cancer discovery. 2014; 4:674-687.

5.	 Chiappinelli KB, Strissel PL, Desrichard A, Li H, Henke
C, Akman B, Hein A, Rote NS, Cope LM, Snyder A,
Makarov V, Buhu S, Slamon DJ, Wolchok JD, Pardoll DM,
Beckmann MW, et al. Inhibiting DNA Methylation Causes
an Interferon Response in Cancer via dsRNA Including
Endogenous Retroviruses. Cell. 2015; 162:974-986.

18.	 Ito S, Ansari P, Sakatsume M, Dickensheets H, Vazquez N,
Donnelly RP, Larner AC and Finbloom DS. Interleukin-10
inhibits expression of both interferon alpha- and
interferon gamma- induced genes by suppressing tyrosine
phosphorylation of STAT1. Blood. 1999; 93:1456-1463.

6.	 Zitvogel L, Galluzzi L, Kepp O, Smyth MJ and Kroemer G.
Type I interferons in anticancer immunity. Nature reviews
Immunology. 2015; 15:405-414.

19.	 Horton HM, Anderson D, Hernandez P, Barnhart KM,
Norman JA and Parker SE. A gene therapy for cancer using
intramuscular injection of plasmid DNA encoding interferon
alpha. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America. 1999; 96:1553-1558.

7.	 Parker BS, Rautela J and Hertzog PJ. Antitumour actions of
interferons: implications for cancer therapy. Nature reviews
Cancer. 2016; 16:131-144.

20.	 Li S, Zhang X, Xia X, Zhou L, Breau R, Suen J and Hanna
E. Intramuscular electroporation delivery of IFN-alpha gene
therapy for inhibition of tumor growth located at a distant
site. Gene therapy. 2001; 8:400-407.

8.	 Mingozzi F and High KA. Therapeutic in vivo gene transfer
for genetic disease using AAV: progress and challenges.
Nature reviews Genetics. 2011; 12:341-355.
9.	 Fioravanti J, Gonzalez I, Medina-Echeverz J, Larrea E,
Ardaiz N, Gonzalez-Aseguinolaza G, Prieto J and Berraondo
P. Anchoring interferon alpha to apolipoprotein A-I reduces
hematological toxicity while enhancing immunostimulatory
properties. Hepatology. 2011; 53:1864-1873.

21.	 Coleman M, Muller S, Quezada A, Mendiratta SK, Wang
J, Thull NM, Bishop J, Matar M, Mester J and Pericle F.
Nonviral interferon alpha gene therapy inhibits growth
of established tumors by eliciting a systemic immune
response. Human gene therapy. 1998; 9:2223-2230.

10.	 Manfredi S, Lepage C, Hatem C, Coatmeur O, Faivre J
and Bouvier AM. Epidemiology and management of liver
metastases from colorectal cancer. Annals of surgery. 2006;
244:254-259.

22.	 Casares N, Rudilla F, Arribillaga L, Llopiz D, Riezu-Boj JI,
Lozano T, Lopez-Sagaseta J, Guembe L, Sarobe P, Prieto
J, Borras-Cuesta F and Lasarte JJ. A peptide inhibitor of
FOXP3 impairs regulatory T cell activity and improves
vaccine efficacy in mice. Journal of immunology. 2010;
185:5150-5159.

11.	 Heusel JW, Wesselschmidt RL, Shresta S, Russell JH and
Ley TJ. Cytotoxic lymphocytes require granzyme B for the
rapid induction of DNA fragmentation and apoptosis in
allogeneic target cells. Cell. 1994; 76:977-987.

23.	 Medina-Echeverz J, Fioravanti J, Zabala M, Ardaiz
N, Prieto J and Berraondo P. Successful colon cancer
eradication after chemoimmunotherapy is associated with
profound phenotypic change of intratumoral myeloid cells.
Journal of immunology. 2011; 186:807-815.

12.	 Shankaran V, Ikeda H, Bruce AT, White JM, Swanson PE,
Old LJ and Schreiber RD. IFNgamma and lymphocytes
prevent primary tumour development and shape tumour
immunogenicity. Nature. 2001; 410:1107-1111.

24.	 Berraondo P, Nouze C, Preville X, Ladant D and Leclerc C.
Eradication of large tumors in mice by a tritherapy targeting
the innate, adaptive, and regulatory components of the
immune system. Cancer research. 2007; 67:8847-8855.

13.	 Hori S, Nomura T and Sakaguchi S. Control of regulatory T
cell development by the transcription factor Foxp3. Science.
2003; 299:1057-1061.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5255

Oncotarget

