Oncotarget, September, Vol.4, No 9

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Editorial Material

Kinase Inhibitor Therapy in CML: It’s What’s Inside That Counts
Christopher A. Eide, Brian J. Druker, and Thomas O’Hare
inhibitors, which coincided with protracted partial inhibition
of BCR-ABL1 signaling and the fraction of intracellular
drug removed with a given washout protocol. Most notably,
ponatinib demonstrated extremely tight binding to ABL1 kinase
reminiscent of irreversible inhibitors. Low amounts of residual
ponatinib in CML cells following extensive washout were
capable of inducing substantial apoptosis and sustaining partial
inhibition of BCR-ABL1 signaling.
Our findings reveal that even slightly attenuated
restoration of BCR-ABL1 signaling correlates with apoptosis
commitment and that intracellular retention of ABL1 tyrosine
kinase inhibitors above a quantifiable threshold is important
in mediating this effect (Figure 1A,B). Other groups have
reported corroborating results for imatinib and dasatinib [7,
8]. However, the complete details underlying how the residual
intracellular inhibitor pool exerts its apoptotic effects despite
only partial to minimal sustained inhibition of BCR-ABL1
kinase remains unknown. The situation is not so black and
white as to indicate that oncogenic shock is a fallacy and that
cryptic intracellular drug retention explains all. Rather, there
may be a nuanced collaboration between these explanations.
One possibility is that auxiliary targets may be also inhibited by
low levels of retained inhibitor (Figure 1C, left panel). In highthroughput qPCR assays using a panel of >600 apoptosis-related
genes, we observe that CML cells under apoptosis-triggering
treatment conditions feature highly similar expression profiles
irrespective of whether resulting from acute or continuous
drug exposure. This would suggest that if an auxiliary target is
important and inhibited, it does not activate unique additional
apoptotic machinery under acute drug exposure conditions
(unpublished data). Since the LC-MS/MS method measured the
total amount of inhibitor retained within the entire volume of the
cell, it is also possible and perhaps likely that the distribution
of residual inhibitor within the cell is non-uniform [9], leading
to compartmental sequestration and gradual leaching out of
inhibitor over time (Figure 1C, right panel).
Addressing these and similar questions will further
inform design requirements for ABL1 tyrosine kinase inhibitors
in CML. It appears clear that metabolic half-life must continue
to be taken into account when designing kinase inhibitors,
dampening the promise of the oncogenic shock concept. By
extension, monitoring intracellular drug levels by LC-MS/MS
may be informative, especially for short serum half-life kinase
inhibitors such as dasatinib. The cumulative effort to distill the
essential properties of effective small-molecule kinase inhibitors
will accelerate identification and development of targeted
therapies with improved efficacy and tolerability for CML and
other malignancies.

The paradigm-shifting clinical success of imatinib in
the treatment of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) established
continuous inhibition of the BCR-ABL1 oncoprotein as a
design principle for ABL1 tyrosine kinase inhibitors. However,
once-daily dosing with the second-generation ABL1 inhibitor
dasatinib, which features a short serum half-life of only 3-5 h,
was found to be clinically effective despite apparent transient
BCR-ABL1 inhibition [1]. This suggests involvement of
previously unrecognized factors among the mechanistic
requirements for ABL1 tyrosine kinase inhibitor-induced CML
cell death.
Previous work by our group and others demonstrated that
apoptosis commitment after potent, transient target inhibition
can be recapitulated using in vitro inhibitor washout protocols
[2-4]. One hypothesis that has been proposed to explain
these findings – oncogenic shock – holds as its central tenet
that temporary, potent disruption of BCR-ABL1-mediated
prosurvival and proapoptotic signaling sets up an irreversible
kinetic imbalance in favor of apoptosis [5]. This situation can
be likened to a tightrope walker who is swept from his perch
by a sudden crosswind, sealing his plight. Such a model implies
that programmed cell death is guaranteed following brief shutoff of oncogenic kinase activity despite reactivation of kinase
signaling and removal of inhibitor from the system.
In the June 1, 2013 issue of Cancer Research [6], we
provide a comprehensive mechanistic exploration of the effects
of transient inhibitor exposure. We treated CML cells transiently
with a panel of five clinically-relevant ABL1 tyrosine kinase
inhibitors – imatinib, nilotinib, dasatinib, ponatinib (AP24534),
DCC-2036 – and investigated pathways critical to drug efficacy
and intracellular residence time, focusing on clinically-relevant
concentrations of each drug. Dasatinib, nilotinib, and ponatinib
were capable of triggering apoptosis following transient
exposure; neither imatinib nor DCC-2036 induced significant
apoptosis following washout of concentrations up to 5 µM. In
contrast to potent, transient inhibition of BCR-ABL1 being the
only requirement for commitment of CML cells to apoptosis,
we found that apoptosis could be reversed under conditions
involving extensive additional inhibitor washout. Multiparameter intracellular FACS and immunoblot analysis revealed
that commitment to apoptosis following washout tracked with
incomplete restoration of BCR-ABL1 signaling relative to
pretreatment levels, particularly with respect to phosphorylation
of STAT5. In all cases for which apoptosis commitment was
observed, we identified by liquid chromatography-tandem mass
spectrometry (LC-MS/MS)-based assay a small, functionally
important pool of intracellular inhibitor retained after washout
of drug. Conditions under which apoptosis commitment
could be mitigated or completely rescued by more extensive
drug washout were associated with decreased intracellular
levels of inhibitor post-washout and full restoration of BCRABL1 signaling. ABL1 kinase:inhibitor dissociation studies
revealed differences in binding off-rates among the tested
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1332

Oncotarget 2013; 4: 1332-1333

Editorial Material

Figure 1: Model of dynamics, distribution, and mechanisms of ABL1 tyrosine kinase inhibitor-mediated apoptosis
commitment in CML cells following transient drug exposure. A. For tyrosine kinase inhibitors which feature short plasma half-

lives (blue lines), screening for and explanation of potential efficacy may require determination of levels of drug retained in cells (orange
lines). Inhibitors capable of inducing subsequent apoptotic cell death demonstrate protracted intracellular retention above threshold levels
(orange shaded area) along with incomplete restoration of BCR-ABL1 kinase signaling activity (green lines). B. In contrast, inhibitors
that are rapidly cleared from both the plasma and cells show complete restoration of BCR-ABL1 activity relative to pretreatment levels
and do not commit cells to apoptosis. C. Potential mechanisms by which threshold-exceeding levels of retained ABL1 tyrosine kinase
inhibitors trigger apoptosis despite only partial inhibition of BCR-ABL1 activity may include inhibition of auxiliary targets that reinforce
pro-apoptotic signaling (left panel) and/or significant accumulation of inhibitor within select compartment(s) of the cell from which drug
is gradually released (right panel).

Christopher A. Eide: Howard Hughes Medical Institute;
Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Oregon
Health & Science University, Knight Cancer Institute,
Portland, OR
Brian J. Druker: Howard Hughes Medical Institute;
Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Oregon
Health & Science University, Knight Cancer Institute,
Portland, OR
Thomas O’Hare: Huntsman Cancer Institute; Division
of Hematology and Hematologic Malignancies, The
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT
Correspondence: Thomas O’Hare, email Thomas.OHare@
hci.utah.edu

REFERENCES
1.	

Shah NP et al. J Clin Oncol. 2008; 26:3204-3212.

2.	

Hiwase DK et al. Leukemia. 2009; 23:1205-1206.

3.	

Shah NP et al. Cancer Cell. 2008; 14:485-493.

4.	

Snead JL et al. Blood. 2009; 114:3459-3463.

5.	

Sharma SV et al. Clin Cancer Res. 2006; 12:4392s-4395s.

6.	

O’Hare T et al. Cancer Res. 2013; 73:3356-3370.

7.	

Lipka DB et al. PLoS One. 2012; 7:e40853.

8.	

Schafranek L et al. Blood. 2012; 120:abstract 3736.

9.	

Chapuy B et al. Haematologica. 2009; 94:1528-1536.

Received: May 23, 2013;
Published: August 9, 2013;

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1333

Oncotarget 2013; 4: 1332-1333

