Oncotarget, October, Vol.4, No 10

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Insights into therapeutic resistance from whole-genome
analyses of circulating tumor DNA
Luis A. Diaz, Jr., Mark Sausen, George A. Fisher, and Victor E. Velculescu
alterations. These and other analyses revealed emergence of a
Q61H mutation in KRAS as well as focal high-level (>9 fold)
amplification and rearrangement of the MET locus that were not
detected in pre-treatment tumor samples (Figure 1). Alterations
in these genes have been reported in tumors with secondary
resistance to EGFR-directed therapy and are consistent with
clinical progression [2-5]. In addition to its role in resistance to
targeted therapy, MET amplification has been shown to confer
sensitivity to the tyrosine kinase inhibitor crizotinib and other
inhibitors [6, 7], and may provide a new therapeutic target
in patients with resistance to EGFR blockade. These results
describe the first whole-genome analysis of ctDNA to identify
genetic alterations associated with mechanisms of resistance
to a targeted therapy. Our analyses suggest that genome-wide
analyses of ctDNA can be used for discovery of tumor-specific
alterations in the in the context of disease monitoring, detection
of molecular resistance, and identification of new therapeutic
targets.

The selection and expansion of tumor cells with de novo
genetic alterations in specific genes has been described as a
mechanism of resistance to targeted therapy. Unfortunately,
in the metastatic setting it is often not possible to examine
the multiple lesions present in an individual to determine the
presence and mechanism of acquired resistance during therapy.
Circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) can be used to analyze the
genomic characteristics of tumors in a non-invasive manner [1].
We have previously reported that tumor-specific chromosomal
changes can be detected in plasma from patients through
integrated whole-genome analyses of cell-free DNA [1].
We have now applied whole-genome sequencing to analyze
plasma ctDNA from a patient with chemotherapy-refractory
colorectal cancer that had become resistant to EGFR-blockade
with cetuximab. A total of 630 Gb of sequence data were
obtained, corresponding to 145x sequence coverage of cell-free
genomic DNA, and analyzed to identify sequence and structural

Figure 1: Identification of MET amplification through analyses of plasma DNA. The amplification of each gene is indicated as

fold copy gain, along with the genomic rearrangements detected through whole-genome analyses of cell-free DNA obtained from plasma.
Rearrangements associated with focal copy number alterations, including amplification of MET, are highlighted in red.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1856

Oncotarget 2013; 4:

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported by NIH grants CA121113,
FasterCures Research Acceleration Award, The European
Community’s Seventh Framework Programme, the American
Association for Cancer Research Stand Up To Cancer–Dream
Team Translational Cancer Research Grant, and Swim Across
America. L.A.D. and V.E.V. are co-founders of Personal
Genome Diagnostics and are members of its Scientific
Advisory Board and Board of Directors. L.A.D., and V.E.V.
own Personal Genome Diagnostics stock, which is subject to
certain restrictions under University policy. The terms of these
arrangements are managed by the Johns Hopkins University in
accordance with its conflict-of-interest policies.
Luis A. Diaz, Jr.: Johns Hopkins Kimmel Cancer Center,
Baltimore, MD, USA
Mark Sausen: Personal
Baltimore, MD, USA

Genome

Diagnostics,

Inc.,

George A. Fisher: Stanford University Medical Center,
Stanford, CA, USA
Victor E. Velculescu: Johns Hopkins Kimmel Cancer
Center, Baltimore, MD, USA
Correspondence: Victor E. Velculescu, email velculescu@
jhmi.edu
Correspondence: Luis A. Diaz, Jr, email ldiaz1@jhmi.edu
Received: August 23, 2013;
Published: October 8, 2013;

REFERENCES
1.	 Leary RJ et al.
2012;4:162ra54.

Science

translational

medicine

2.	

Bardelli A et al. Cancer Discovery 2013;3(6):658-73.

3.	

Diaz LA Jr. et al. Nature 2012;486:537-40.

4.	

Engelman JA et al. Science 2007;316:1039-43.

5.	

Misale S et al. Nature 2012;486:532-6.

6.	

Ou SH et al. Journal of Thoracic Oncology 2011;6:942-6.

7.	 Comoglio PM et al. Nature Review Drug Discovery
2008;7(6):504-16.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1857

Oncotarget 2013; 4:

