Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 3

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Quinomycin A targets Notch signaling pathway in pancreatic
cancer stem cells
Sivapriya Ponnurangam1,2, Prasad R. Dandawate1,2, Animesh Dhar3,7, Ossama
W. Tawfik4,7, Rajashri R. Parab8, Prabhu Dutt Mishra8, Prafull Ranadive8, Rajiv
Sharma8, Girish Mahajan8, Shahid Umar1,2,7, Scott J. Weir5,7, Aravind Sugumar6,7,
Roy A. Jensen4,7, Subhash B. Padhye3,9, Arun Balakrishnan8, Shrikant Anant1,2,7,
Dharmalingam Subramaniam1,2,7
1

Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, The University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA

2

Department of Surgery, The University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA

3

Department of Cancer Biology, The University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA

4

Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA

5

 epartment of Pharmacology, Toxicology and Therapeutics, The University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS
D
66160, USA

6

Department of Internal Medicine, The University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA

7

The University of Kansas Cancer Center, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA

8

Piramal Life Sciences Inc, Goregaon East, Mumbai 400063, India

9

I nterdisciplinary Science and Technology Research Academy, Abeda Inamdar Senior College, Azam Campus, Pune, 411001,
India

Correspondence to: Dharmalingam Subramaniam, e-mail: dsubramaniam@kumc.edu
	
Shrikant Anant, e-mail: sanant@kumc.edu
Keywords: DCLK1, apoptosis, tumor xenograft, Hes1, NICD
Received: August 21, 2015	

Accepted: November 21, 2015	

Published: December 11, 2015

ABSTRACT
Cancer stem cells (CSCs) appear to explain many aspects of the neoplastic
evolution of tumors and likely account for enhanced therapeutic resistance following
treatment. Dysregulated Notch signaling, which affects CSCs plays an important role in
pancreatic cancer progression. We have determined the ability of Quinomycin to inhibit
CSCs and the Notch signaling pathway. Quinomycin treatment resulted in significant
inhibition of proliferation and colony formation in pancreatic cancer cell lines, but not
in normal pancreatic epithelial cells. Moreover, Quinomycin affected pancreatosphere
formation. The compound also decreased the expression of CSC marker proteins
DCLK1, CD44, CD24 and EPCAM. In addition, flow cytometry studies demonstrated
that Quinomycin reduced the number of DCLK1+ cells. Furthermore, levels of Notch
1–4 receptors, their ligands Jagged1, Jagged2, DLL1, DLL3, DLL4 and the downstream
target protein Hes-1 were reduced. The γ-secretase complex proteins, Presenilin 1,
Nicastrin, Pen2, and APH-1, required for Notch activation also exhibited decreased
expression. Ectopic expression of the Notch Intracellular Domain (NICD) partially
rescued the cells from Quinomycin mediated growth suppression. To determine the
effect of Quinomycin on tumor growth in vivo, nude mice carrying tumor xenografts
were administered Quinomycin intraperitoneally every day for 21 days. Treatment with
the compound significantly inhibited tumor xenograft growth, coupled with significant
reduction in the expression of CSC markers and Notch signaling proteins. Together,
these data suggest that Quinomycin is a potent inhibitor of pancreatic cancer that
targets the stem cells by inhibiting Notch signaling proteins.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3217

Oncotarget

administration of γ-secretase inhibitor in mice blocks
the progression of PanIN to ductal adenocarcinoma [27].
γ-secretase is a multiprotein intramembrane-cleaving
protease with a growing list of protein substrates,
including the Notch receptors. The four components of
γ-secretase complex, Presenilin, Nicastrin, Pen2, and
Aph1 are all thought to be essential for activity [24]. The
catalytic domain resides within presenilin; nicastrin has
been suggested to be critical for substrate recognition.
CSCs are the cells within a tumor that exclusively
have self-renewal capacities, can give rise to all cancer cell
lineages within a tumor, and are exclusively tumorigenic
in vivo. They are able of undergoing asymmetric/symmetric
cell division, can maintain and expand themselves and
also have a distinct profile of surface marker expression
that has been linked to poor prognosis [28]. Intriguingly,
it has been shown that CSCs are highly resistant to
standard therapy [29, 30]. CD44+CD24+EpCAM+[31],
CD133+[32], ALDH+ are markers for prospectively
identifying pancreatic cancer stem cells [33]. We have
demonstrated that doublecortin and CaM kinase-like-1
(DCLK1) is an intestinal stem cell marker that is expressed
in colon adenocarcinoma [34] and also in pancreatic
adenocarcinoma [35]. Recent studies also demonstrated
that DCLK1 distinguishes between tumor and normal
stem cells in the intestine and could be a therapeutic target
for colon cancer [36, 37]. Most recently, DCLK1 has been
shown to mark a morphologically distinct subpopulation
of cells with stem cell properties in pre-invasive pancreatic
cancer [38]. In addition, DCLK1 expression was observed
to be occur in early stage pancreatic cancer and in both
early and late pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PanIN)
and that it increases as disease progresses in genetically
engineered mouse models and also in human pancreatic
cancer [26]. In this article, we have determined the effect
of Quinomycin on pancreatic cancer stem cells and the
Notch signaling pathway.

INTRODUCTION
Pancreatic cancer is the fourth leading cause of adult
cancer related death in USA with five-year survival rates
at < 6%. In 2015, an estimated 40,560 Americans (20,710
men and 19,850 women) will die of the disease coupled
with an additional 48,960 new cases (24,840 men and
24,120 women) [1]. By 2030, the disease is predicted to
be the second leading cause of cancer related deaths [2].
Despite advances in molecular pathogenesis, pancreatic
cancer remains a major unsolved health problem [3]. It
is a rapidly invasive, metastatic tumor which is resistant
to standard therapies [4]. At present, single agent based
chemotherapy (e.g. Gemcitabine) is the mainstay treatment
for metastatic adenocarcinoma of pancreas, but the tumor
response rate is below 10%. Similarly none of the other
current chemotherapeutic agents have an objective
response rate of over 10% [3, 4]. The magnitude of this
problem mandates the need for novel therapeutic agents.
Quinomycin (also called Echinomycin, Figure 1)
is a quinoxaline antibiotic that was originally isolated
from Streptomyces echinatus [5]. Several studies have
shown that it has antitumor activity with the ability to
bifunctionally intercalate with double stranded DNA [5].
Quinomycin-induced apoptosis in HT-29 cells occurs
via NF-κB activation by modulating IL-8 chemokine
expression [6, 7]. In a mouse model of relapsed AML, low
dose Quinomycin selectively targets leukemia-initiating
cells and spares normal hematopoiesis [8]. Likewise,
Quinomycin can be used to treat relapsed AML without
affecting host normal hematopoietic stem cells. Moreover,
National Cancer Institute sponsored phase II clinical trials
has demonstrated anti-tumor efficacy of Quinomycin
using various treatment schedules for various cancer types
[9–19]. In addition, Quinomycin was shown to suppress
leukemia cell growth in association with reduced Notch1
expression [20]. However, none of these studies were
performed in pancreatic cancer patients.
Notch signaling plays a fundamental role in the
differentiation and maintenance of stem cells. Aberrant
activation of the Notch signaling has been associated with
the development of many cancers, including pancreatic
cancers [21, 22]. In fact, Notch signaling has been
shown to play a contributing role in the development of
pancreatic cancer [23, 24]. Furthermore, the pathway is
deemed to be important in maintaining the cancer stem
cell population in pancreatic cancer [25]. Interaction of
Jagged-1 or Jagged-2 with the Notch-1 receptor promotes
a γ-secretase-dependent cleavage of the receptor and
release of the Notch intracellular domain (NICD), which
translocates to the nucleus and activates transcription
of Notch target genes such as Hes-1 and Hey1 [24].
Increased expression of Notch genes and their ligands has
been detected in human pancreatic cancer tissues [24].
Overexpression of NICD accelerates the formation of
oncogenic K-Ras-induced PanIN lesions [26]. Oral
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

RESULTS
Quinomycin inhibits pancreatic cancer cell
proliferation
Previous studies have shown that Quinomycin
has antitumor activity with an ability to bifunctionally
intercalate with double stranded DNA [5]. We first
determined the effect of Quinomycin on proliferation of
three pancreatic cancer cell lines, MiaPaCa-2, BxPC-3 and
PanC-1 (Figure 1C). Quinomycin significantly suppressed
the proliferation of these pancreatic cancer cells in a
dose and time dependent manner. This anti-proliferation
effect on tumor cells was seen within 24 h at a dose of
5 nM, which continued to significantly increase over
the next 72 h (Figure 1C). In contrast, Quinomycin did
not affect the proliferation of normal human pancreatic
ductal epithelial cells (HPNE) even when treated at 50 nM
3218

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Quinomycin inhibits pancreatic cancer cell proliferation. (A) Chemical structure of Quinomycin. (B) Proliferation

of pancreatic ductal epithelial cells is not affected by 50 nM Quinomycin treatment for 48 h. (C) Quinomycin inhibits proliferation
of pancreatic cancer cells. Cells were incubated with increasing doses of Quinomycin (0–1 μM) for up to 72 h and analyzed for cell
proliferation. Quinomycin treatment resulted in a significant dose and time-dependent decrease in cell proliferation in all three cell lines
when compared with untreated controls. (D) Quinomycin inhibits colony formation. Pancreatic cancer cells were incubated with 5 nM
Quinomycin for 48  h and allowed to grow into colonies for 10 d. Incubation with Quinomycin inhibits colony formation. Results are
representative of three independent experiments.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3219

Oncotarget

(Figure 1B). As a positive control for cell death, we used
hydrogen peroxide. These data suggest that Quinomycin
is not toxic to normal cells. To determine the long-term
effect of Quinomycin treatment, cells were treated with
5 nM Quinomycin for 48 h, following which the cells
were allowed to grow in normal medium. Quinomycin
treatment suppressed colony formation in all pancreatic
cancer cell lines (Figure 1D), suggesting that Quinomycinmediated effects on the tumor cells were irreversible.

cancer cell lines. All four Notch receptors (Notch-1 to -4
were downregulated following Quinomycin treatment
(Figure  4A). In addition, Notch ligands Jagged-1, 2
and Delta like ligand 1, 3 and 4 were downregulated
following Quinomycin treatment (Figure 4B). Further
confirmation was obtained when reduced expression of
Hes-1 expression was observed (Figure 4C). We next
determined whether the γ-secretase complex comprising
of Presenilin, Nicastrin, APH1 and PEN2 was affected.
Treatment with Quinomycin resulted in downregulation in
the expression of all four proteins (Figure 4D). In addition,
the co- treatment of Quinomycin in combination with
γ-secretase complex inhibitor DAPT further reduced Hes- 1
expression (Figure 5A), and proliferation (left panel) while
inducing apoptosis (right panel) (Figure 5B). These data
suggest that Quinomycin-mediated downregulation of the
Notch signaling pathway occurs at least in part through the
inhibition of the γ-secretase complex.
Cyclin D1 overexpression has been linked to the
development and progression of cancer [42]. In addition,
a recent study demonstrated that cyclin D1 is a direct
downstream target of the Notch signaling pathway [43].
Furthermore, c-Myc is upregulated in cancers and
also a direct downstream target of the Notch signaling
pathway [44, 45]. In both MiaPaCa-2 and PanC-1 cells,
Quinomycin treatment resulted in reduced cyclin D1
and c-Myc expression (Figure 2C), suggesting that
Quinomycin mediated downregulation of cyclin D1 and
c-Myc occurs in part through the inhibition of the Notch
signaling pathway.

Quinomycin treatment induces PreG0/G1 arrest
and apoptosis
Given that Quinomycin inhibits proliferation
and colony formation, we next determined whether
Quinomycin affects cell cycle progression. Treatment with
Quinomycin significantly induced Pre-G0/G1 arrest in
both MiaPaCa-2 and PanC-1 cells (Figure 2A). Caspase-3
is key effector proteins in the apoptosis pathway [40].
Western blot analyses of MiaPaCa-2 and PanC-1 cell
lysates showed a significant increase in activated caspase-3
in cells treated with 5 nM Quinomycin (Figure 2C). In
addition, 5 nM Quinomycin inhibited the expression of
cyclin D1 and c-Myc (Figure 2C). These data suggest that
even at a dose of 5 nM, Quinomycin is a potent inducer of
apoptosis of pancreatic cancer cells.

Quinomycin inhibits pancosphere formation and
expression of cancer stem cell marker proteins
Defining the mechanisms that regulate stem cell
fate is critical to increasing our understanding of the
neoplastic process. Cancer stem cells are capable of selfrenewal and generating tumors resembling the primary
tumor [41]. Accordingly, we next determined the effect
of Quinomycin on this population of cells. First, we
determined the effect of Quinomycin on the ability to form
pancreatosphere, a multicellular spheroid that is dependent
on presence of stem cells to develop. Quinomycin treatment
significantly inhibited PanC-1 pancreatosphere formation
(Figure  3A  and 3B). In addition, Quinomycin treatment
further reduced secondary pancreatosphere (Figure 3B
right panel). Flow cytometric analyses showed a significant
decrease in DCLK1+ in both MiaPaCa-2 and PanC-1 cells
following Quinomycin treatment (Figure 3C). Furthermore,
Quinomycin treatment significantly inhibited expression of
CSC markers DCLK1, CD44, CD24 and EPCAM in both
MiaPaCa-2 and PanC-1 cells (Figure 3D). These data suggest
that Quinomycin treatment affects pancreatosphere formation
and CSC marker expression and especially DCLK1+ cells.

Quinomycin inhibits cell growth through
inactivation of the γ-secretase complex
We next determined whether lack of Notch-1
activation is the reason for reduced growth of pancreatic
cancer cells. For this, we expressed the intracellular
domain NICD in MiaPaCa-2 and PanC-1 cells. Western
blot analyses demonstrated increased expression of Hes-1
following ectopic expression of NICD in both cell lines
(Figure 5C). More importantly, even in the presence of
Quinomycin Hes-1 expression remained high in response
to ectopic NICD overexpression. In addition, ectopic
NICD overexpression reversed Quinomycin mediated
inhibition of cell proliferation (Figure 5D). Futhermore,
ectopic NICD overexpression resulted in significantly
increased PanC-1 pancreatosphere formation, even in the
presence of Quinomycin (Figure 5E left and right panel).
Together, these data suggest that Quinomycin inhibits the
γ-secretase complex thereby affecting Notch signaling.

Quinomycin inhibits Notch signaling by
downregulating the γ-secretase complex

Quinomycin inhibits pancreatic tumor xenograft
growth

We next determined the effect of Quinomycin
on Notch signaling-related proteins in the pancreatic

To evaluate the role of Quinomycin on tumor
growth in vivo, we next examined its effects on growth of

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3220

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Quinomycin induces cancer cell apoptosis. (A) Cell cycle analysis of Quinomycin treated cells. MiaPaCa-2 or PanC-1

cells were treated with up to 5 nM Quinomycin for 24 h and examined by flow cytometry following propidium iodide staining for DNA
content. Quinomycin treatment leads to increased number of cells in the PreG0/G1 arrest. Graphs are representative of data collected from
three experiments. (B) Quinomycin induces caspase 3, an apoptosis mediator. Lysates from MiaPaCa-2 or PanC-1 cells incubated with
5 nM Quinomycin were analyzed by western blotting for caspase 3 protein levels using rabbit anti-caspase 3 antibody. Quinomycin treated
cells shows cleaved (activated) caspase 3 while untreated cells have no cleaved caspase-3. (C) Lysates from MiaPaCa-2 or PanC-1 cells
incubated with 5 nM Quinomycin were analyzed by western blotting for cyclin D1 and c-Myc proteins. Both cyclin D1 and c-myc were
reduced following Quinomycin treatment.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3221

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Quinomycin affects cancer stem cell marker expression. (A and B) PanC-1 cells were grown in specific spheroid media

in low adherent plates and treated with increasing concentrations of Quinomycin. After 5 days, the pancreatosphere were photographed and
counted. The primary spheroids were collected and separated into single cells and replated. The Quinomycin treatment significantly was
inhibited in both primary and secondary pancreatospheres formation (right and left panel)(*p < 0.05). (C) Sorting of anti-DCLK1 antibody
-tagged phycoerythrin untreated MiaPaCa-2 and PanC-1 cells by flow cytometry. After 24 h, Quinomycin treatment caused significant
reduction in the number of DCLK1 expressing cells. (D) Western blot analyses of lysates from Quinomycin treatment showed significant
reduction in cancer stem cell marker DCLK1, CD44, CD24 and EPCAM protein levels in both MiaPaCa-2 and PanC-1 cells.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3222

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Quinomycin affects Notch signaling. (A) Lysates from cells treated with Quinomycin caused significant reduction in the
expression of Notch receptors Notch-1, 2, 3 and 4 in both MiaPaCa-2 and PanC-1 cells. (B) Lysates from cells treated with Quinomycin
caused significant reduction in the expression of Notch ligands Jagged-1, 2 and Delta like ligand 1, 3 and 4 in both MiaPaCa-2 and PanC-1
cells. (C) Lysates from cells treated with Quinomycin caused significant reduction in the expression of Notch downstream target gene Hes-1
in both MiaPaCa-2 and PanC-1 cells. (D) Quinomycin also significantly reduced expression of γ-secretase complex proteins Presenilin-1,
Nicastrin, APH1 and PEN2 in both MiaPaCa-2 and PanC-1 cells.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3223

Oncotarget

pancreatic cancer cell xenografts. MiaPaCa-2 pancreatic
cancer xenograft tumors were allowed to develop
and grow for one week following which Quinomycin
(20 µg/kg bw) mixed with 5% sodium bicarbonate was
administered intraperitoneally daily for three weeks.
Quinomycin inhibited the growth of the tumor xenografts
(Figure 6A and 6B). The excised tumors from control
animals weighed ~2000 mg, while those treated with
Quinomycin weighed ~300 mg (Figure 6C). In addition,
tumor volume was significantly decreased (Figure 6C).
There was no apparent change in liver, spleen, or body
weight in the animals (data not shown). These data imply
that Quinomycin is a potential therapeutic agent for
treating pancreatic cancers but is relatively non-toxic to
the animals.

with most patients dying within one year of diagnosis. The
significant morbidity, toxicity and poor response rates of
current chemotherapy regimens have led to searches for
less toxic alternative therapies. The data presented in the
article show that Quinomycin inhibits the proliferation
of pancreatic cancer cells, induces cell cycle arrest and
apoptosis, resulting in reduced colony formation. These
results were also replicated in vivo, where Quinomycin
decreased tumor growth.
Recent studies have suggested that CSCs have
the capacity to drive tumor recurrence and resistance
to chemotherapeutic agents and radiation [46]. Natural
compounds such as curcumin, sulforaphane and honokiol
have been suggested to target CSCs [43, 47]. Our results
suggest that the Quinomycin is a potent inhibitor CSCs.
Markers for prospectively identifying pancreatic cancer
stem cells are CD44+CD24+EpCAM+ [31], CD133+ [32],
and ALDH+ [33]. We have demonstrated that DCLK1
is stem cell marker whose expression is upregulated in
both colon and pancreatic adenocarcinomas [34, 35].
Recent studies demonstrated that DCLK1 distinguishes
between tumor and normal stem cells in the intestine and
could be a therapeutic target for colon cancer [36, 37].
Similarly, DCLK1 was shown to mark a morphologically
distinct subpopulation of cells with stem cell properties
in pre-invasive pancreatic cancer [38]. Here, we
have demonstrated that Quinomycin inhibits DCLK1
expression. Moreover, we have demonstrated that
Quinomycin also inhibits the expression of other stem
cell marker proteins such as CD44, CD24 and EPCAM.
This was also confirmed in vivo where the Quinomycin
significantly reduced the expression of these markers and
also the growth of the xenografts. Another method that
is commonly used to demonstrate stemness is the growth
of spheroids or pancreatospheres. Quinomycin inhibited
pancreatosphere formation further suggesting that they
target the CSCs.
The Notch pathway plays a critical role in pancreatic
cancer. Notch also has been shown to be important
in stem cell renewal and vascular development [48].
Notch 2-positive progenitors have the intrinsic ability
to give rise to pancreatic ductal cells [49]. Notch3 and
HEY-1 have been shown to be prognostic biomarkers
in pancreatic adenocarcinoma [50]. Finally, Notch 4 is
elevated in pancreatic adenocarcinoma [50]. A recent
study demonstrated that this pathway is important in
maintaining CSC population in pancreatic cancer [25]. In
our studies, we have determined that Quinomycin resulted
in downregulation of the Notch ligand Jagged1, 2 and
DLL1, 3 and 4 as well as all four essential members of
the γ-secretase complex, the critical enzyme that cleaves
and releases the NICD from the membrane. Therefore,
Quinomycin mediated inhibition of pancreatic cancer
growth is partly mediated by inactivating Notch-1. This
was further confirmed by the combination of a γ-secretase
inhibitor with Quinomycin, which further inhibited

Quinomycin inhibits the expression of cancer
stem cell markers and notch signaling proteins
in tumor xenograft tissues
To further investigate whether the Quinomycin
affects CSCs, we determined specific marker expression
in the tumor tissues. Western blot analyses demonstrated
that Quinomycin treatment significantly reduced the
expression of CSC proteins DCLK1, CD44, CD24 and
EPCAM when compared to controls (Figure 7A). This was
confirmed by immunohistochemistry (Figure 7B). These
data suggest that Quinomycin targets pancreatic CSCs
with high potency. Furthermore, we also examined the
effects on Notch signaling in the tumor tissues obtained
from control and Quinomycin treated mice. Quinomycin
treatment resulted in significantly lower levels of activated
Notch-1, its ligand Jagged 1 and the downstream target
gene Hes-1 (Figure 7C). In addition, Quinomycin
treatment resulted in significantly lower levels of
Notch-2, 3, and 4 (Figure 8A) and its ligand Jagged 2,
DLL-1, 3 and DLL4 (Figure 8C). This was confirmed by
immunohistochemistry (Figure 8B and 8D). There was
also a significant reduction in the expression of γ-secretase
complex proteins, Presenilin 1 and Nicastrin (Figure 7C).
Again, further confirmation of the downregulation was
obtained by immunohistochemistry for the proteins in
the xenograft tissue (Figure 7D). These data suggest that
Quinomycin significantly affects the expression of Notch
signaling-related proteins, which might contribute to the
inhibitory effects of this treatment.

DISCUSSION
We are the first to study and demonstrate that
Quinomycin inhibits pancreatic cancer stem cells and the
mechanism involves Notch signaling. Our results indicate
that Quinomycin possesses great potential as a promising
anti-pancreatic cancer therapeutic agent. Pancreatic cancer
is one of the most lethal cancers and has emerged as a
leading cause of cancer-related death in the western world,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3224

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Quinomycin inhibits cell growth through inactivation of the γ-secretase complex. (A) Cells were cotreated

with Quinomycin in combination with γ- secretase complex inhibitor DAPT for 24 h. Lysates were analyzed by western blotting. The
cotreatment of the Quinomycin in combination with γ- secretase complex inhibitor DAPT further reduced Hes-1 expression, (B) Cells were
cotreated with Quinomycin in combination with γ-secretase complex inhibitor DAPT and subsequently measured for proliferation (left
panel) and apoptosis (right panel). The cotreatment of the Quinomycin in combination with γ- secretase complex inhibitor DAPT further
reduced proliferation (left panel) and further increased apoptosis (right panel). (C) Ectopic expression of NICD overcomes Quinomycinmediated suppression of Hes-1 expression. Cells transiently expressing NICD was treated with Quinomycin for 24 h. Lysates were analyzed
by western blotting. Hes-1 was increased in the NICD expressing cells when compared to vector transfected controls. (D) Cells expressing
NICD were treated with Quinomycin and subsequently measured for proliferation (left panel) and apoptosis (right panel). Ectopic expression
of NICD rescued Quinomycin mediated inhibition of cell proliferation and apoptosis (*P < 0.05). (E) Cells expressing NICD were treated
with Quinomycin and subsequently performed for pancreatosphere formation (left and right panel). Ectopic expression of NICD rescued
Quinomycin mediated inhibition of pancreatosphere formation (*P < 0.05).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3225

Oncotarget

proliferation and induced apoptosis. However, ectopic
expression of NICD reversed the effects of Quinomycin
and partially restored cell growth. It would also be
interesting to determine whether there are other clients
for the γ-secretase complex and the role of these client
proteins in CSC biogenesis.
We believe there is a lot of promise for use of
Quinomycin as a therapeutic and preventive agent
for pancreatic cancer. It should be noted that the dose
of Quinomycin demonstrating efficacy was quite
low, because a dose of 20 μg/kg bw corresponds to a

calculated human equivalent dose of 57 μg/m2. More
importantly, at this dose, while there was significant
efficacy against the xenograft tissue, there was no effect
on normal tissues in the animals. This is really important
an observation because previous human clinical trials
have suggested that Quinomycin is toxic. However, the
studies showing toxicity utilized doses from 1200 to
2128  μg/m2 administered IV [48]. At lower doses (60
and 120  μg/ m2), there was no observed toxicity, with
only grade I toxicity encountered at 180 μg/m2 [48]. Our
IP dose equivalent of 57 μg/m2 is approximately 1/30th

Figure 6: Quinomycin inhibits pancreatic cancer xenografts. (A) MiaPaCa-2 cells were injected in to the flanks of nude mice
and palpable tumors were allowed to develop for 7 days. Subsequently, Quinomycin (20 µg/kg bw) was injected daily intraperitoneally
every day for 21 days. On day 22, tumors were excised and subject to further analyses. (B) Quinomycin treatment resulted in significantly
lower tumor weight when compared to control. Tumor size was measured every week. There was a significant reduction in tumor size from
Quinomycin treated animals when compared control (*P < 0.05). (C) Tumor volumes in Quinomycin treated mice were smaller when
compared to control (*P < 0.05).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3226

Oncotarget

Figure 7: Quinomycin inhibit cancer stem cell marker proteins and Notch signaling in tumor xenografts. (A) Western
blot analysis showed that tissue lysates from Quinomycin treated animals have significantly lower levels of cancer stem cell markers.
(B) Immunohistochemistry shows that treatment with Quinomycin significantly reduced the expression of cancer stem cell markers.
(C)Western blot analysis showed that tissue lysates from Quinomycin treated animals have significantly lower levels of Notch-1, Jagged-1,
Hes-1, and γ-secretase complex proteins. (D) Immunohistochemistry shows that Quinomycin treated animals have significantly lower
levels of Notch-1, Jagged-1, Hes-1, and γ-secretase complex proteins Presenilin 1 and Nicastrin in the tumor xenograft tissues. (C1-C4:
Controls, Q1-Q4: Quinomycin treated).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3227

Oncotarget

Figure 8: Quinomycin inhibit Notch receptor-2, 3 and 4 and its ligands Jagged 2, DLL-1, 3 and 4 in tumor xenografts.
(A) Western blot analysis showed that tissue lysates from Quinomycin treated animals have significantly lower levels of Notch-2, 3 and 4
receptor expression. (B) Immunohistochemistry shows that treatment with Quinomycin significantly reduced the expression of Notch-2,
3 and 4 receptors. (C) Western blot analyses showed that tissue lysates from Quinomycin treated animals have significantly lower levels
of Notch ligand Jagged-2, DLL-1, 3 and 4 expressions. (D) Immunohistochemistry shows that treatment with Quinomycin significantly
reduced the Notch ligand Jagged-2, DLL-1, 3 and 4 expressions. (C1–C4: Controls, Q1–Q4: Quinomycin treated).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3228

Oncotarget

the lowest IV dose studies in solid tumor patients. Tumor
growth inhibition at this dose level is also quite consistent
with recent reports describing that IP doses of Quinomycin
at a Human Equivalent IP Dose of 28.5 μg/m2 eliminated
AML leukemia-initiating cells without a significant effect
on the hematopoietic stem cells [8]. These studies provide
a foundation for further clinical development of the drug
for treatment of pancreatic cancers.
In conclusion, our current study provides evidence
that treatment with Quinomycin results in growth
inhibition in vitro and in vivo. We did not observe any
significant toxicity in mice xenografts treated with
Quinomycin. Furthermore, Quinomycin treatment was
potent against pancreatic CSCs especially DCLK1+
cells. In addition, Quinomycin significantly suppressed
Notch-receptor 1–4 activation through γ-secretase
complex proteins. Taken together, these data suggest
that Quinomycin targets pancreatic CSCs and is an
attractive and potentially novel agent for the treatment
and prevention of pancreatic cancer. However, it should
be noted that while the compound is effective in inhibiting
pancreatic cancers, this might not be universal. Hence,
additional studies are essential to determine efficacy for
different cancers.

described previously [39]. For apoptosis, caspase 3/7
activity was measured using the Apo-one Homogeneous
Caspase-3/7 Assay kit (Promega, Madison, WI).

Clonogenicity assay
Briefly, 6 well dishes were seeded with 500 viable
cells per well, treated with Quinomycin in 10% FBS
containing RPMI1640 for 48 h, then medium containing
compound was removed, and the cells were incubated for
an additional 10 d in complete medium to allow colonies
to form. The colonies were fixed in formalin, followed
by staining with crystal violet. Experiments were done in
triplicate.

Cell cycle analyses
Cells were treated with Quinomycin for 24 h, and
subsequently trypsinized and suspended in phosphate
buffered saline (PBS). Single-cell suspensions were
fixed using 70% ethanol for 2 h, and subsequently
permeabilized with PBS containing 1 mg/ml propidium
iodide (Sigma-Aldrich), 0.1% Triton X-100 (SigmaAldrich) and 2 µg DNase-free RNase (Sigma-Aldrich)
at room temperature. Flow cytometry was done with a
FACS Calibur analyzer (Becton Dickinson, Mountain,
View, CA), capturing 10,000 events for each sample.
Results were analyzed with ModFit LT™ software
(Verity Software House, Topsham, ME).

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cells and reagents
Human pancreatic cancer cells PanC-1, MiaPaCa-2,
and BxPC-3 (all cell lines obtained from American Type
Culture Collection, at passage 4) were grown in RPMI
1640 containing 10% heat inactivated fetal bovine
serum (Sigma-Alrich, St. Louis, MO) and 1% antibioticantimycotic solution (Corning, Tewksbury, MA) at 37oC
in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2. HPNE cells
were kindly provided by Dr. Anirban Maitra, Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine and grown in
DMEM with 4.5 g/L glucose, L-glutamine and Sodium
Pyruvate (Corning, Tewksbury, MA) with 5% FBS, 1X
N2, 10 ng/ ml bFGF and 50 µg/ml Gentamycin. All the
cell lines used in this study were within 20 passages after
receipt or resuscitation (~3 months of non-continuous
culturing). The cell lines were not authenticated as
they came from national repositories. Quinomycin was
purchased from (AG Scientific, San Diego, CA) and our
collaborator. N-[N-(3,5-Difluorophenacetyl)-L-alanyl]-Sphenylglycine t-butyl ester (DAPT) was purchased from
(Sigma-Alrich, St. Louis, MO).

Western blot analysis
Cell lysates were subjected to polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis and blotted onto Immobilion polyvinylidene
difluoride membranes (Millipore, Bedford,  MA).
Antibodies were purchased from Cell Signaling
Technology (Beverly, MA), Abcam Inc. (Cambridge, MA),
Sigma Aldrich, GenScript (Piscataway, NJ) and Santa Cruz
Biotechnology Inc. (Santa Cruz, CA) and specific proteins
were detected by the enhanced chemiluminescence system
(GE Health Care, Piscataway, NJ).

Flow cytometric analyses for CSC marker
24 h following Quinomycin treatment, cells
were subjected to direct immunofluorescence staining
followed by flow cytometric analyses. Briefly, the cells
were harvested and suspended in PBS containing 0.5%
BSA for 10 minutes at room temperature followed
by the addition of 10 μl phycoerythrin conjugated
DCLK1 antibody (Abcam Inc, Cambridge, MA). The
samples were analyzed using a FACS Calibur analyzer
(Becton Dickinson, Mountain, View, CA), capturing
10,000 events for each sample. Results were analyzed
with ModFit LTTM software (Verity Software House,
Topsham, ME).

Proliferation and apoptosis assays
To assess proliferation, cells were seeded on to 96
well plates and grown overnight before treatment with
increasing doses of Quinomycin. Cell proliferation was
determined by enzymatic hexoseaminidase assay as
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3229

Oncotarget

Pancreatosphere assay

Author contributions

Cells were cultured in RPMI 1640 supplemented with
20 ng/ml bFGF 10 mL per 500 mL of 50X B27 supplement,
EGF 20 ng/ml (all from Life Technologies) at low densities
(3000 cells/mL) in 6 well low adhesion plates. Cells were
treated with Quinomycin. After 5 days, the number and size of
pancreatospheres were determined using Celigo (Cyntellect
Inc., San Diego, CA). For second and third passages, cells
were grown in the absence of these compounds.

Conception and design: D. Subramaniam. Acquisition
of data (provided animals, acquired and managed patients,
provided facilities, etc.): S. Ponnurangam, D. Subramaniam.
Analysis and interpretation of data (e.g., statistical analysis,
biostatistics, computational analysis): S. Ponnurangam, P.
Dandawate, S. Anant, D. Subramaniam. Writing, review, and/
or revision of the manuscript: S. Anant, A. Dhar, OW. Tawfik,
S. Umar, SJ. Weir, A. Sugumar, RA. Jensen, SB. Padhye, A.
Balakrishnan, D. Subramaniam. Administrative, technical,
or material support (i.e., reporting or organizing data,
constructing databases): S.  Anant, RR. Parab, PD. Mishra, P.
Ranadive, R. Sharma, G. Mahajan, A. Balakrishnan. Study
supervision: S. Anant, D. Subramaniam. Other (performed
experiments): S. Ponnurangam, D. Subramaniam.

Plasmids and transfections
MiaPaCa-2 and PanC-1 cells were transfected with
plasmid EF.hICN1.CMV.GFP encoding the Notch-1
intracellular domain (NICD) or the empty vector
EF.v-CMV.GFP (Addgene Inc, Cambridge, MA), and
subsequently treated with 5 nM Quinomycin for 24 h and
harvested for western blot analysis. Cell proliferation and
apoptosis were detected using hexoaminadase assay and
Apo-one Homogeneous Caspase-3/7 Assay kit, respectively.
In addition, pancreatospheres assays were also performed.

GRANT SUPPORT
This work was supported by Thomas O’Sullivan
Foundation, a pilot grant from the NCI-designated
University of Kansas Cancer Center (P30CA168524–01;
DS), and NIH Grants CA182872 and CA190291 SA). S.
Anant is an Eminent Scientist of the Kansas Biosciences
Authority. The Flow Cytometry Core Laboratory is
sponsored, in part, by the NIH COBRE program of the
NCRR P20 RR016443 and The University of Kansas
Cancer Center P30CA168524–01 grants.

MiaPaCa-2 xenograft tumors in mice
Five-week-old male athymic nude mice, purchased
from Charles River Laboratory were utilized for in vivo
experiments. They were maintained with water and
standard mouse chow ad libidum and used in protocols
approved by the University’s Animal Studies Committee.
Animals were injected with 1 × 106 MiaPaCa-2 cells in
the left and right flank and allowed to form a xenograft.
One week following implantation, and after observing the
presence of a palpable tumor, Quinomycin (20 μg/kg body
weight) was administered intraperitoneally daily for 21 d.
Tumors were measured weekly. At the end of treatment the
animals were euthanized, and the tumors were removed,
weighed and use for histology (hematoxylin & eosin),
immunohistochemistry, and gene expression studies.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Ms. Dannita R. Youngblood for her
secretarial help. We also thank members of the Anant
laboratory for their discussion during the course of this study.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
No potential conflicts of interest are disclosed.

Immunohistochemistry

REFERENCES

Paraffin embedded tissues were cut to 4 µm sections,
deparaffinized and blocked with Avidin/Biotin for
20 min. The slides were incubated with primary antibodies
for overnight at 4°C. Next the slides were treated with a
broad spectrum secondary antibody (Invitrogen) and HRPconjugate for one hour and then developed with DAB
(Invitrogen). Finally, the slides were counterstained with
hematoxylin. The slides were examined in Nikon Eclipse
Ti microscope under a 40X objective.

  1.	 Siegel RL, Miller KD, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2015. CA:
a cancer journal for clinicians. 2015; 65:5–29.
  2.	 Rahib L, Smith BD, Aizenberg R, Rosenzweig AB,
Fleshman JM, Matrisian LM. Projecting cancer incidence
and deaths to 2030: the unexpected burden of thyroid, liver,
and pancreas cancers in the United States. Cancer research.
2014; 74:2913–2921.
  3.	 Burris HA, Moore MJ, Andersen J, Green MR, Rothenberg
ML, Modiano MR, Cripps MC, Portenoy  RK, Storniolo
AM, Tarassoff P, Nelson R, Dorr FA, Stephens  CD,
et al. Improvements in survival and clinical benefit with
gemcitabine as first-line therapy for patients with advanced
pancreas cancer: a randomized trial. Journal of clinical
oncology. 1997; 15:2403–2413.

Statistical analysis
All values are expressed as the mean ± SEM. Data
was analyzed using an unpaired 2-tailed t test. A P value
of less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3230

Oncotarget

  4.	 Burris H, Storniolo AM. Assessing clinical benefit in the
treatment of pancreas cancer: gemcitabine compared to
5-fluorouracil. Eur J Cancer. 1997; 33:S18–22.

15.	 Schilsky RL, Faraggi D, Korzun A, Vogelzang N, Ellerton
J, Wood W, Henderson IC. Phase II study of echinomycin
in patients with advanced breast cancer: a report of Cancer
and Leukemia Group B protocol 8641. Investigational new
drugs. 1991; 9:269–272.

  5.	 Foster BJ, Clagett-Carr K, Shoemaker DD, Suffness M,
Plowman J, Trissel LA, Grieshaber CK, Leyland-Jones B.
Echinomycin: the first bifunctional intercalating agent in
clinical trials. Investigational new drugs. 1985; 3:403–410.

16.	 Hakes T, Markman M, Phillips M. A phase II trial of
echinomycin in metastatic cervix carcinoma. Investigational
new drugs. 1990; 8:311–312.

  6.	 Park JY, Ryang YS, Shim KY, Lee JI, Kim HS,
Kim YH, Kim SK. Molecular signaling cascade in DNA
bisintercalator, echinomycin-induced apoptosis of HT-29
cells: evidence of the apoptotic process via activation of the
cytochrome c-ERK-caspase-3 pathway. The international
journal of biochemistry & cell biology. 2006; 38:244–254.

17.	 Muss HB, Blessing JA, Baker VV, Barnhill DR, Adelson MD.
Echinomycin (NSC 526417) in advanced ovarian cancer. A
phase II trial of the Gynecologic Oncology Group. American
journal of clinical oncology. 1990; 13:299–301.
18.	 Gradishar WJ, Vogelzang NJ, Kilton LJ, Leibach SJ,
Rademaker AW, French S, Benson AB. A phase II clinical
trial of echinomycin in metastatic soft tissue sarcoma. An
Illinois Cancer Center Study. Investigational new drugs.
1995; 13:171–174.

  7.	 Park JY, Chang JH, Bae KS, Lee KH, Choi SJ, Park JY,
Ryang YS, Kim SK. NF-kappaB-dependency and
consequent regulation of IL-8 in echinomycin-induced
apoptosis of HT-29 colon cancer cells. Cell biology
international. 2008; 32:1207–1214.

19.	 Taylor SA, Metch B, Balcerzak SP, Hanson KH. Phase II
trial of echinomycin in advanced soft tissue sarcomas. A
Southwest Oncology Group study. Investigational new
drugs. 1990; 8:381–383.

  8.	 Wang Y, Liu Y, Tang F, Bernot KM, Schore R, Marcucci G,
Caligiuri MA, Zheng P, Liu Y. Echinomycin protects mice
against relapsed acute myeloid leukemia without adverse effect
on hematopoietic stem cells. Blood. 2014; 124:1127–1135.

20.	 Yonekura S, Itoh M, Okuhashi Y, Takahashi Y, Ono A,
Nara  N, Tohda S. Effects of the HIF1 inhibitor,
echinomycin, on growth and NOTCH signalling in
leukaemia cells. Anticancer research. 2013; 33:3099–3103.

  9.	 Chang AY, Kim K, Boucher H, Bonomi P, Stewart JA,
Karp  DD, Blum RH. A randomized phase II trial of
echinomycin, trimetrexate, and cisplatin plus etoposide
in patients with metastatic nonsmall cell lung carcinoma:
an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group Study (E1587).
Cancer. 1998; 82:292–300.

21.	 Koch U, Radtke F. Notch and cancer: a double-edged sword.
Cellular and molecular life sciences. 2007; 64:2746–2762.
22.	 Miele L, Golde T, Osborne B. Notch signaling in cancer.
Current molecular medicine. 2006; 6:905–918.

10.	 Wadler S, Tenteromano L, Cazenave L, Sparano JA,
Greenwald ES, Rozenblit A, Kaleya R, Wiernik PH.
Phase II trial of echinomycin in patients with advanced
or recurrent colorectal cancer. Cancer chemotherapy and
pharmacology. 1994; 34:266–269.

23.	 Ma J, Xia J, Miele L, Sarkar FH, Wang Z. Notch Signaling
Pathway in Pancreatic Cancer Progression. Pancreatic
disorders & therapy. 2013; 3:1000114.
24.	 Arumugam TV, Chan SL, Jo DG, Yilmaz G, Tang SC,
Cheng A, Gleichmann M, Okun E, Dixit VD, Chigurupati S,
Mughal MR, Ouyang X, Miele L, et al. Gamma secretasemediated Notch signaling worsens brain damage and
functional outcome in ischemic stroke. Nature medicine.
2006; 12:621–623.

11.	 Brown TD, Goodman PJ, Fleming TR, Taylor SA,
Macdonald JS. Phase II trial of echinomycin in advanced
colorectal cancer. A Southwest Oncology Group study.
Investigational new drugs. 1991; 9:113–114.
12.	 Shevrin DH, Lad TE, Guinan P, Kilton LJ, Greenburg A,
Johnson P, Blough RR, Hoyer H. Phase II trial of
echinomycin in advanced hormone-resistant prostate
cancer. An Illinois Cancer Council study. Investigational
new drugs. 1994; 12:65–66.

25.	 Abel EV, Kim EJ, Wu J, Hynes M, Bednar F, Proctor E,
Wang L, Dziubinski ML, Simeone DM. The Notch pathway
is important in maintaining the cancer stem cell population
in pancreatic cancer. PloS one. 2014; 9:e91983.

13.	 Marshall ME, Wolf MK, Crawford ED, Taylor S,
Blumenstein B, Flanigan R, Meyers FJ, Hynes HE,
Barlogie B, Eisenberger M. Phase II trial of echinomycin
for the treatment of advanced renal cell carcinoma. A
Southwest Oncology Group study. Investigational new
drugs. 1993; 11:207–209.

26.	 Mohammed A, Janakiram NB, Madka V, Brewer M,
Ritchie RL, Lightfoot S, Kumar G, Sadeghi M, Patlolla JM,
Yamada HY, Cruz-Monserrate Z, May R, Houchen CW,
et al. Targeting pancreatitis blocks tumor-initiating stem
cells and pancreatic cancer progression. Oncotarget. 2015;
6:15524–15539. doi:10.18632/oncotarget.3499.

14.	 Muss HB, Blessing JA, DuBeshter B. Echinomycin in
recurrent and metastatic endometrial carcinoma. A phase II
trial of the Gynecologic Oncology Group. American journal
of clinical oncology. 1993; 16:492–493.

27.	 Plentz R, Park JS, Rhim AD, Abravanel D, Hezel AF,
Sharma  SV, Gurumurthy S, Deshpande V, Kenific C,
Settleman J, Majumder PK, Stanger BZ, Bardeesy N. Inhibition
of gamma-secretase activity inhibits tumor progression

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3231

Oncotarget

in a mouse model of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.
Gastroenterology. 2009; 136:1741–1749 e1746.

40.	 Boatright KM, Salvesen GS. Mechanisms of caspase
activation. Current opinion in cell biology. 2003; 15:725–731.

28.	 Wicha MS, Liu S, Dontu G. Cancer stem cells: an old
idea—a paradigm shift. Cancer research. 2006; 66:1883–
1890; discussion 1895–1886.

41.	 Weiss GR, Hersh M, Kuhn JG, Ludden TM, von Hoff
DD, Kisner DL, Pirtle TE. A phase I and pharmacokinetic
comparison of hepatic arterial and peripheral vein infusions
of bisantrene for liver cancer. Cancer chemotherapy and
pharmacology. 1985; 15:144–148.

29.	 Simeone DM. Pancreatic cancer stem cells: implications for
the treatment of pancreatic cancer. Clinical cancer research.
2008; 14:5646–5648.

42.	 Alao JP. The regulation of cyclin D1 degradation: roles
in cancer development and the potential for therapeutic
invention. Molecular cancer. 2007; 6:24.

30.	 Long J, Zhang Y, Yu X, Yang J, LeBrun DG, Chen C, Yao Q,
Li M. Overcoming drug resistance in pancreatic cancer.
Expert opinion on therapeutic targets. 2011; 15:817–828.

43.	 Cohen B, Shimizu M, Izrailit J, Ng NF, Buchman Y, Pan JG,
Dering J, Reedijk M. Cyclin D1 is a direct target of JAG1mediated Notch signaling in breast cancer. Breast cancer
research and treatment. 2010; 123:113–124.

31.	 Ohara Y, Oda T, Sugano M, Hashimoto S, Enomoto  T,
Yamada K, Akashi Y, Miyamoto R, Kobayashi A,
Fukunaga K, Morishita Y, Ohkohchi N. Histological and
prognostic importance of CD44(+) /CD24(+) /EpCAM(+)
expression in clinical pancreatic cancer. Cancer science.
2013; 104:1127–1134.

44.	 Weng AP, Millholland JM, Yashiro-Ohtani Y, Arcangeli ML,
Lau A, Wai C, Del Bianco C, Rodriguez  CG, Sai  H,
Tobias  J, Li Y, Wolfe MS, Shachaf C, et al. c-Myc is
an important direct target of Notch1 in T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma. Genes & development.
2006; 20:2096–2109.

32.	 Rasheed Z, Wang Q and Matsui W. Isolation of stem cells
from human pancreatic cancer xenografts. Journal of
visualized experiments. 2010:2169.

45.	 Palomero T, Lim WK, Odom DT, Sulis ML, Real PJ,
Margolin A, Barnes KC, O’Neil J, Neuberg D, Weng AP,
Aster JC, Sigaux F, Soulier J, et al. NOTCH1 directly regulates
c-MYC and activates a feed-forward-loop transcriptional
network promoting leukemic cell growth. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America. 2006; 103:18261–18266.

33.	 Kim MP, Fleming JB, Wang H, Abbruzzese JL, Choi W,
Kopetz S, McConkey DJ, Evans DB, Gallick GE. ALDH
activity selectively defines an enhanced tumor-initiating
cell population relative to CD133 expression in human
pancreatic adenocarcinoma. PloS one. 2011; 6:e20636.
34.	 Sureban SM, May R, Ramalingam S, Subramaniam D,
Natarajan G, Anant S, Houchen CW. Selective blockade
of DCAMKL-1 results in tumor growth arrest by a Let-7a
MicroRNA-dependent mechanism. Gastroenterology. 2009;
137:649–659, 659 e641–642.

46.	 Saez R, Craig JB, Kuhn JG, Weiss GR, Koeller J, Phillips
J, Havlin K, Harman G, Hardy J, Melink TJ, et al. Phase
I clinical investigation of amonafide. Journal of clinical
oncology. 1989; 7:1351–1358.

35.	 Sureban SM, May R, Lightfoot SA, Hoskins AB, Lerner M,
Brackett DJ, Postier RG, Ramanujam R, Mohammed A,
Rao CV, Wyche JH, Anant S, Houchen CW. DCAMKL-1
regulates epithelial-mesenchymal transition in human
pancreatic cells through a miR-200a-dependent mechanism.
Cancer research. 2011; 71:2328–2338.

47.	 Lai KW, Koh KX, Loh M, Tada K, Subramaniam MM,
Lim XY, Vaithilingam A, Salto-Tellez M, Iacopetta B, Ito Y,
Soong R. MicroRNA-130b regulates the tumour suppressor
RUNX3 in gastric cancer. Eur J Cancer. 2010; 46:1456–1463.
48.	 Kuhn JG, Von Hoff DD, Hersh M, Melink T, Clark GM,
Weiss GR, Coltman CA. Phase I trial of echinomycin (NSC
526417), a bifunctional intercalating agent, administered by
24-hour continuous infusion. European journal of cancer &
clinical oncology. 1989; 25:797–803.

36.	 Nakanishi Y, Seno H, Fukuoka A, Ueo T, Yamaga  Y,
Maruno  T, Nakanishi N, Kanda K, Komekado H,
Kawada M, Isomura A, Kawada K, Sakai Y, et al. Dclk1
distinguishes between tumor and normal stem cells in the
intestine. Nature genetics. 2013; 45:98–103.

49.	 Lee KM, Yasuda H, Hollingsworth MA, Ouellette MM. Notch
2-positive progenitors with the intrinsic ability to give rise to
pancreatic ductal cells. Laboratory investigation; a journal of
technical methods and pathology. 2005; 85:1003–1012.

37.	 Metcalfe C, de Sauvage FJ. A tumor-specific stem cell.
Nature genetics. 2013; 45:7–9.
38.	 Bailey JM, Alsina J, Rasheed ZA, McAllister FM, Fu YY,
Plentz R, Zhang H, Pasricha PJ, Bardeesy N, Matsui W,
Maitra A, Leach SD. DCLK1 Marks a Morphologically Distinct
Subpopulation of Cells with Stem Cell Properties in Pre-invasive
Pancreatic Cancer. Gastroenterology. 2014; 146:245–56.

50.	 Mann CD, Bastianpillai C, Neal CP, Masood MM, Jones DJ,
Teichert F, Singh R, Karpova E, Berry DP, Manson MM.
Notch3 and HEY-1 as prognostic biomarkers in pancreatic
adenocarcinoma. PloS one. 2012; 7:e51119.

39.	 Subramaniam D, Nicholes ND, Dhar A, Umar S,
Awasthi V, Welch DR, Jensen RA, Anant S. 3,5-bis(2,4difluorobenzylidene)-4-piperidone, a novel compound
that affects pancreatic cancer growth and angiogenesis.
Molecular cancer therapeutics. 2011; 10:2146–2156.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3232

Oncotarget

