Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 23

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Repurposing cephalosporin
radiosensitizers

antibiotics

as

pro-senescent

Edwardine Labay1,*, Helena J. Mauceri1,*, Elena V. Efimova2,*, Amy C. Flor2, Harold
G. Sutton1, Stephen J. Kron2,3 and Ralph R. Weichselbaum1,3
1

Department of Radiation and Cellular Oncology, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA

2

Department of Molecular Genetics and Cell Biology, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA

3

Ludwig Center for Metastasis Research, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Stephen J. Kron, email: skron@uchicago.edu
Correspondence to: Ralph R. Weichselbaum, email: RRW@radonc.uchicago.edu
Keywords: radiosensitizer, cephalosporin, drug repurposing, senescence, reactive oxygen species
Received: April 07, 2016	

Accepted: April 13, 2016	

Published: April 25, 2016

Abstract
Radiation therapy remains a significant therapeutic modality in the treatment of
cancer. An attractive strategy would be to enhance the benefits of ionizing radiation
(IR) with radiosensitizers. A high-content drug repurposing screen of approved and
investigational agents, natural products and other small molecules has identified
multiple candidates that blocked repair of IR damage in vitro. Here, we validated a
subset of these hits in vitro and then examined effects on tumor growth after IR in a
murine tumor model. Based on robust radiosensitization in vivo and other favorable
properties of cephalexin, we conducted additional studies with other beta-lactam
antibiotics. When combined with IR, each cephalosporin tested increased DNA damage
and slowed tumor growth without affecting normal tissue toxicity. Our data implicate
reactive oxygen species in the mechanism by which cephalosporins augment the
effects of IR. This work provides a rationale for using commonly prescribed betalactam antibiotics as non-toxic radiosensitizers to enhance the therapeutic ratio of
radiotherapy.

INTRODUCTION

doses employed during chemoradiation may compromise
these benefits. Emerging data have established a role
for radiotherapy in stimulating anti-tumor immunity
to promote both local and systemic control [3-5] but
chemoradiation may work at cross purposes to enhanced
tumor immunity. Towards identifying alternative agents,
a surprisingly diverse range of drugs, nutrients and
natural products have been reported to modulate the
radiation response of normal tissue and/or tumor cells
[6, 7]. While there have been no FDA approvals of nontoxic radiosensitizers to date, among investigational
drugs, the poly-ADP-ribose polymerase (PARP)
inhibitors are particularly promising candidates [8]. One
agent, veliparib, is well-tolerated and has demonstrated
radiosensitization in preclinical models [9-11], leading to
evaluation in clinical trials [12].

Cancer patients with locally advanced tumors who
receive radiation therapy frequently receive concurrent
chemotherapy to enhance local and distant tumor control
[1]. Commonly used cytotoxic drugs including cisplatin,
5-fluorouracil, hydroxyurea, and etoposide are proposed
to serve as radiosensitizers, leading to increased local
tumor control and improved overall survival in subsets of
patients with cervical, anal, head and neck, lung, rectal and
breast cancers [2]. However, chemoradiation is commonly
associated with significant toxic side effects that are not
only dose-limiting but may lead to excess morbidity and
mortality. While chemotherapy has the potential to control
tumor growth outside the radiation field, the reduced

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33919

Oncotarget

Based on the failure of irradiated cells to resolve
ionizing radiation-induced foci (IRIF) when treated with
veliparib (ABT-888) [10], we pursued a high-throughput,
high-content screen for novel radiosensitizers that would
promote IRIF persistence [13]. IRIF are comprised of
proteins that assemble within seconds around sites of DNA
damage to mediate detection and repair of double strand
breaks (DSBs). We tagged IRIF in the human breast cancer
cell line MCF7 by expressing green fluorescent protein
(GFP) fused to the IRIF binding domain (IBD) of 53BP1
(MCF7GFP-IBD) [10] and screened for increased persistence
of GFP-IBD foci at 24 hours after IR. We exploited
existing collections of approved and investigational
drugs, natural products, enzyme inhibitors and other small
molecules, hoping to identify non-toxic drugs that might
be repurposed as radiosensitizers. The IRIF persistence
screen yielded over 100 drugs and other well-studied
compounds for further analysis.
Here, toward stratifying drugs identified
in the primary screen, we evaluated toxicity and
radiosensitization in secondary screens. These analyses
reduced the list to 19 drugs which were examined for
sensitization of the radioresistant melanoma model B16.
SIY [14] yielding cephalexin (Keflex) as a promising
hit. Given the significant effectiveness of cephalexin in
a preclinical model and the attractive safety profile of the
cephalosporin antibiotics, these results support evaluating
cephalexin as a clinical radiosensitizer.

clotrimazole, fluoxetine, pitavastatin, resveratrol,
synephrine, and trazodone. Based on their broad use in
clinical practice and attractive safety profiles, we selected
cephalexin (beta-lactam antibiotic), nisoldipine (calcium
channel blocker), and trazodone (antidepressant) for
further evaluation.

Cephalexin, nisoldipine, and trazodone alter DNA
damage response in vitro and in vivo
As initial validation, we reexamined IRIF formation
using MCF7GFP-IBD human breast cancer cells. Each drug
combined with 6 Gy increased persistence of GFP-IBD
foci compared to IR alone at 24 hours (Figure 1A and 1B).
Clonogenic assays take into account all modes of death,
including but not limited to, apoptosis, necrosis, mitotic
catastrophe and senescence. Each drug combined with IR
suppressed colony formation at day 9 compared to drug
alone (Figure 1C). In apoptosis-resistant MCF7GFP-IBD cells,
enhanced cellular senescence was observed following
treatment with each drug + 6 Gy compared to IR alone.
Cells that display persistent IRIF, suggesting irreparable
DNA damage, may withdraw from the cell cycle and
develop a senescent phenotype [15]. Senescent cells
become enlarged with a flat morphology, permanently
lose the ability to proliferate, and exhibit increased
senescence associated beta-galactosidase (SA-β-Gal)
staining [16]. Senescence induction was verified in vivo
by treating athymic nude mice bearing GFP-MCF7GFP-IBD
xenografts with nisoldipine, trazodone or cephalexin plus
IR. Enhanced cellular senescence was observed following
treatment with drug + 6 Gy compared to 6 Gy alone
(Figure 1D).

RESULTS
Stratifying candidate radiosensitizers with an in
vivo tumor growth delay screen

Cephalexin, nisoldipine, and trazodone enhance
IR sensitivity in vivo

Our prior repurposing screen [13] identified a wide
range of drugs, natural products and neutraceuticals that
delayed resolution of IRIF when cells were treated for
1 hour prior to irradiation. We stratified hits based on
drug toxicity profiles, ease of administration, chemical
diversity, and range of bioactivity, yielding 19 candidates
for in vivo testing (Table 1). As a tumor model, we
used B16.SIY, a radioresistant murine melanoma cell
line, injected subcutaneously into the right hind limb
of isogenic C57BL/6 mice. Toward identifying hits that
display activity at non-toxic doses, the 19 agents were
administered to tumor-bearing mice for 2 days before,
the day of, and 2 days after a single dose of 15 Gy. As
anticipated, tumor growth was delayed compared to IR
alone in mice treated with either of the poly(ADP-ribose)
polymerase (PARP) inhibitors, rucaparib or veliparib,
investigational agents that have been evaluated as
radiosensitizers in preclinical models and clinical trials.
However, several unanticipated hits similarly slowed
tumor regrowth, including cephalexin, CGS15943,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

To extend the results obtained with MCF7GFP-IBD
human breast cancer models, we examined induction of
accelerated senescence in B16.SIY murine melanoma cells
and tumors. When cephalexin, nisoldipine, or trazodone
were combined with 7 Gy, B16.SIY cells displayed
accelerated senescence compared to IR alone, much like
the positive controls etoposide and veliparib (Figure
2A). Repeating the in vivo screen above, C57BL/6 mice
bearing B16.SIY tumors were treated with cephalexin,
nisoldipine, trazodone, or veliparib 2 days before, the day
of and 2 days after a single dose of 15 Gy. Positive SAβ-Gal staining was observed at day 7 post IR in tumors
harvested from animals treated with nisoldipine, trazodone
or cephalexin (Figure 2B). At day 15, each drug plus 15
Gy delayed tumor growth compared to 15 Gy alone, and
to a degree comparable to that observed with veliparib
(Figure 2C and 2D).

33920

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Candidate radiosensitizers induce IRIF persistence, cellular senescence and reduced colony formation in
MCF7GFP-IBD cells. A. Nisoldipine, trazodone and cephalexin block IRIF resolution in MCF7GFP-IBD cells. Cells were treated with 10

μM drug or vehicle for 1 hour prior to IR with 6 Gy. Shown are representative images of non-irradiated cells and 24 hours post IR (GFPIBD green stain; Hoescht 33342 blue nuclear stain). Foci number per nucleus is reported as mean ± SEM. Scale bar, 10 μm. B. Cells were
treated as in Figure 1A. Plots of IRIF per nucleus in individual cells are shown, the red bar indicates mean ± SEM. ***, p ≤ 0.001 (MannWhitney test relative to 6 Gy). C. Nisoldipine, trazodone and cephalexin suppress colony formation in MCF7GFP-IBD cells. Representative
data from 3 experiments is shown. Solid symbols represent drug alone, open symbols represent drug + 2 Gy. The percent of treatment
control ± SEM is reported. D. Nisoldipine, trazodone and cephalexin induce cellular senescence in irradiated MCF7GFP-IBD cells and in tumor
xenografts. Cells were treated with drug + 6 Gy. Senescence induction was evaluated by SA-β-Gal (blue) staining 5 days post treatment.
Percent of SA-β-Gal positive cells are shown and expressed as mean ± SEM (upper panel). Enhanced senescence was also observed in
MCF7GFP-IBD tumor tissue sections harvested 5 days post treatment with drug + 6 Gy (lower panel). Scale bar 50 μm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33921

Oncotarget

Table 1: Radiosensitization of B16.SIY tumors by small molecule inhibitors of IRIF resolution
Compound or
Brand
Growth Bioactivity
Drug dosing
Source of drug
generic name
name
delay
Cephalexin
Keflex
+++
cephalosporin antibiotic 30 mg/kg twice daily MP Biomedicals
by gavage
adenosine
receptor 3 mg/kg by gavage Tocris Bioscience
CGS15943
+++
antagonist
100
mg/kg
by Alexis Biochemicals
Clotrimazole
Lotrimin
+++
azole antifungal
gavage
Doxepin
Sinequan
++
tricyclic antidepressant
5 mg/kg, IP
NIH Clinical Collection
serotonin
reuptake
Fluoxetine
Prozac
+++
10 mg/kg by gavage Tocris Bioscience
inhibitor
serotonin
reuptake 30 mg/kg by gavage NIH Clinical Collection
Fluvoxamine
Luvox
+
inhibitor
Ketotifen
Alaway
++
antihistamine
30 mg/kg, SQ
Enzo Life Sciences
angiotensin
2
receptor
Losartan
Cozaar
++
90 mg/kg by gavage Santa Cruz Biotechnology
blocker
Research
Nisoldipine
Sular
++
calcium channel blocker 60 mg/kg by gavage Toronto
Chemicals
dopamine
receptor
Pergolide
Permax
+
40 mg/kg by gavage Tocris Bioscience
agonist
Pitavastatin
Livalo
+++
statin
30 mg/kg by gavage Atamole
Quercetin
++
antioxidant flavonol
30 mg/kg by gavage Calbiochem
Resveratrol
+++
antioxidant stilbenoid
20 mg/kg by gavage Santa Cruz Biotechnology
25
mg/kg twice daily AxonMedChem
Rucaparib
+++
PARP inhibitor
by gavage
adrenergic
receptor 3 mg/kg by gavage LKT Laboratories.
Synephrine
Oxedrine
+++
agonist
100
mg/kg
by LKT Laboratories
Terbinafine
Lamisil
++
allylamine antifungal
gavage
serotonin
reuptake 25 mg/kg, IP
Toronto
Research
Trazodone
Depyrel
+++
inhibitor
Chemicals
antidopaminergic
Trifluoperazine
Stelazine
++
0.5 mg/kg, IP
Alexis Biochemicals
antipsychotic
25 mg/kg twice daily ChemiTek
Veliparib
+++
PARP inhibitor
by gavage

Cephalosporin antibiotics delay repair of IRinduced DNA damage and suppress tumor growth

at 12 Gy.
Toward mechanism, we examined other
cephalosporins for radiosensitization. When cefaclor,
cephradine, cefixime, or cefepime were combined with
6 Gy, each drug similarly increased persistent DNA
damage by comet assay (p ≤ 0.001, Figure 4A and 4B) and
produced greater senescence than 6 Gy alone (Figure 4C).
Like cephalexin, all four antibiotics slowed tumor growth
when combined with 15 Gy compared to radiation alone
(Figure 4D and 4E). Neither normal tissue nor systemic
toxicity was detected in mice treated with cephalosporin
antibiotics alone or in combination with IR.

Based on in vitro and in vivo results, we selected
cephalexin, a first generation of cephalosporin antibiotic,
for further characterization. Confirming broad activity,
we observed dose-dependent radiosensitizing effects of
cephalexin in MDA-MB-435 breast cancer and SCC61
head and neck cancer cell lines by clonogenic assay
(Supplementary Figure 1S). To test if cephalexin affects
persistence of IR-mediated DNA double strand breaks
(DSB), we performed neutral comet assays on B16.SIY
cells. A dose-dependent signal was observed at 24 hours,
with greater unrepaired DNA damage detected after 12
Gy compared to 6 Gy (p ≤ 0.001, Figure 3A, 3B and
3C). Veliparib significantly increased unrepaired damage
after 6 Gy (p ≤ 0.001). Like veliparib, cephalexin also
significantly increased persistent damage after 6 Gy (p ≤
0.001, Figure 3C), to a level comparable to that observed
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Cephalosporin antibiotics increase tumor cell
reactive oxygen species
Cephalosporins and other beta-lactam antibiotics
have been reported to induce mitochondrial dysfunction,
resulting in oxidative damage [17, 18]. Collins and
33922

Oncotarget

colleagues [19] showed that this effect can be suppressed
with the antioxidant NAC. To test the potential role for
ROS, B16.SIY cells were treated with 3 mM NAC 1 hour
prior to cephalexin or amoxicillin as a positive control
[20, 21] ± 6 Gy and examined by comet assay after 24
hours (Figure 5A and 5B). Amoxicillin displayed a similar
radiosensitizing effect to cephalexin. NAC decreased

persistent DNA damage after treatment with amoxicillin
+ 12 Gy and cephalexin + 12 Gy (p ≤ 0.001).
A potential role for ROS in mediating cephalexin
anti-tumor effects was confirmed by flow cytometry. B16.
SIY cells were treated with 6 Gy or 12 Gy, cephalexin,
or cephalexin + 6 Gy. Using a fluorescent reporter, we
observed that 6 Gy, 12 Gy or cephalexin alone increased

Figure 2: Candidate radiosensitizers induce cellular senescence in B16.SIY murine melanoma cells and tumors and
slow tumor growth. A. Nisoldipine, trazodone and cephalexin induce cellular senescence in irradiated B16.SIY melanoma cells. Cells

were treated with 10 μM drug for 1 hour prior to IR with 7 Gy. Senescence induction was evaluated by SA-β-Gal (blue) staining 5 days
post IR. Etoposide and veliparib were used as positive controls. Percent SA-β-Gal (+) cells are shown and indicated as mean ± SEM. Scale
bar 50 μm. B. Nisoldipine, trazodone and cephalexin induce cellular senescence in irradiated B16.SIY tumors. SA-β-Gal activity was
determined in tumors sections 7 days after 15 Gy. Veliparib was used as a positive control for senescence. Scale bar 50 μm. C. Treatment
with nisoldipine, trazodone and cephalexin slowed B16.SIY tumor growth compared to 15 Gy alone. Treatment groups include control (n =
7), IR alone (n = 6), veliparib + IR (n = 8), nisoldipine + IR (n = 8), trazodone + IR (n = 8), and cephalexin + IR (n = 8). D. Scatter plot of
individual B16.SIY tumors in corresponding treatment groups at day 15 are presented showing the distribution of tumor volumes and the
presence of experimental outliers. Mean ± SEM are shown.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33923

Oncotarget

the percentage of cells with high ROS (ROS-HI) compared
to control. Combining cephalexin and 6 Gy increased
ROS-HI cells compared to cephalexin alone or IR alone.
Pretreatment for 2 hours with 5mM NAC significantly
reduced the percentage of ROS-HI cells (Figure 5C, p ≤
0.0001). Finally, we performed clonogenic assays on B16.
SIY cells. Cells were treated with cephalexin (10 or 20
µM) ± NAC (3 mM) as single agents or in combination
with 3 or 6 Gy (Figure 5D, 5E and 5F). Consistent with
other results, NAC reduced the cytotoxic effects of both
cephalexin and IR.

the proliferation marker Ki-67 and senescence marker
SA-β-Gal. Treatment with cephalexin or IR increased
the number of γ-H2AX positive cells and decreased the
number of Ki-67 positive cells compared to control.
Combined treatment further increased γ-H2AX positive
cells, decreased Ki-67 positive cells and enhanced SA-βGal staining compared to either treatment alone.
To survey oxidative damage, tissue sections
were also examined by immunohistochemistry for
nitrotyrosine (nY), a marker of oxidative protein damage
by peroxynitrite, 8-hydroxy-2’-deoxyguanosine (8OHdG), a marker of oxidative DNA damage due to
hydroxyl radicals, and 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal (4-HNE),
a marker of lipid peroxidation (Figure 6D). Cephalexin
and IR treatment increased immunoreactivity for each
marker compared to control while staining following
combined treatment was clearly enhanced, suggesting a
combinatorial effect between cephalexin and IR.

Continuous treatment with cephalexin slows B16.
SIY tumor growth with or without IR
To evaluate the potential to translate
radiosensitization by cephalexin to the clinic, we
examined the effect of multiple IR fractions and prolonged
cephalexin treatment. Mice bearing B16.SIY tumors were
treated with 30 mg/kg cephalexin twice daily by gavage
and/or two 20 Gy fractions 3 days apart. While treatment
with cephalexin or radiation alone reduced tumor volume
compared to control at 12 days, combined treatment with
cephalexin and IR exhibited a combinatorial effect (Figure
6A and 6B).
Histology of treated tumors revealed marked
tissue destruction and loss of cellularity after cephalexin
alone or IR alone with more pronounced destruction
following combined treatment (Figure 6C). Sections
were also probed for the DNA-damage marker γ-H2AX,

Extended treatment with cephalexin is not
required for radiosensitization
Toward identifying the minimal dose of cephalexin
that induces radiosensitization, mice were treated with
30 mg/kg cephalexin twice daily for 5 days as a single
agent or combined with 2 x 20 Gy (interval of 3 days).
Combined treatment with cephalexin + IR suppressed
tumor growth compared to either treatment alone (Figure
7A and 7B). Combined therapy with cephalexin + IR
increased γ-H2AX, decreased Ki-67, and increased SA-

Figure 3: Cephalexin increases persistent DNA damage in irradiated B16.SIY cells. A. Representative images from neutral

comet assay of irradiated B16.SIY cells. Cells were treated with 25 μM veliparib and 50 μM cephalexin. Drugs were administered 1 hour
prior to IR. Comet assays were performed 24 hours post IR. B. Plots of comet tail moment and C. Percent tail DNA with ± SEM are shown.
***, p ≤ 0.001, Mann-Whitney test relative to 6 Gy.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33924

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Beta-lactam antibiotics increase DNA damage and senescence in irradiated B16.SIY cells. A. B16.SIY tumor
cells were treated with cephalosporin antibiotics (50 μM) for 1 hour prior to IR with 6 Gy. Comet assays were performed 24 hours later.
Plots of comet tail moment and B. Percent tail DNA with mean ± SEM are shown. ***, p ≤ 0.001, Mann-Whitney test relative to 6 Gy.
C. B16.SIY tumor cells were treated with drug + 6 Gy and senescence induction was evaluated by SA-β-Gal (blue) staining 5 days later.
Cephalosporin antibiotics + 6 Gy produced an increase in cellular senescence compared to drug alone or 6 Gy alone. The percent of SA-βGal (+) cells are shown and indicated as mean ± SEM. Scale bar 50 μm. D. Cephalosporin antibiotics slowed tumor growth compared to 15
Gy. Groups were Control (n = 5), IR alone (n = 6), cephalexin + IR (n = 5), cefaclor + IR (n = 4), cephradine + IR (n = 5), cefixime + IR (n
= 5), and cefepime + IR (n = 5). E. Scatter plot of individual tumors in corresponding treatment groups at day 9 are presented showing the
distribution of tumor volumes and the presence of experimental outliers. Means ± SEM are shown.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33925

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Cephalexin induces ROS production which contributes to radiosensitization. A. The antioxidant NAC suppresses

the effect of beta-lactam antibiotics on DNA damage in irradiated B16.SIY cells. Cells were treated with 50 μM cephalexin or amoxicillin
with or without 3 mM NAC 1 hour prior to IR. Comet assay analysis was performed after 24 hours. Plots of tail moment and B. Percent
tail DNA are presented, with mean ± SEM indicated. ***, p ≤ 0.001, Mann-Whitney test. C. Cephalexin contributes to increased ROS
levels. B16.SIY cells were treated with cephalexin (50 µM), 6 Gy or 12 Gy. Cells were stained with CellROX probe to detect hydroxyl and
superoxide radicals, and analyzed by flow cytometry 24 hours later. Approximately 10,000 viable cells are shown per plot. Percent ROS-HI
cells were gated as shown. ROS induced by cephalexin + 6 Gy was greater than that induced by cephalexin or 6 Gy alone and was reduced
by NAC. D. NAC suppresses the effect of increasing doses of cephalexin on colony formation of B16.SIY cells. Cells were untreated
(white) or treated with cephalexin at 10 μM (grey) or 20 μM (black), with or without 3 mM NAC, 1 hour prior to 3 Gy. Cell survival was
evaluated 10 days post treatment. Mean ± SEM are shown. E. Clonogenic survival of B16.SIY cells following treatment with cephalexin ±
NAC and F. with cephalexin ± NAC ± IR, 3 Gy. Representative images of clonogenic assay plates are shown.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33926

Oncotarget

β-Gal staining compared to either treatment alone (Figure
7C).
Despite the shorter course of treatment, 5 days
of cephalexin was still sufficient to slow tumor growth
as a single agent. Toward minimizing direct effects of
cephalexin, mice were treated with 30 mg/kg cephalexin
twice daily for only 3 days, with or without 15 Gy. After
4 days, animals were treated again, up to a total of three
weekly cycles. Tumors treated with cephalexin alone for 1,
2 or 3 cycles and those treated with 15 Gy for 1 or 2 cycles
demonstrated a growth pattern similar to untreated controls
(Figure 7D). Treatment with 3 x 15 Gy was sufficient to
slow tumor growth. Consistent with a combinatorial
effect, even a single cycle of combined treatment with
cephalexin and 15 Gy produced a significant reduction in
tumor growth (p ≤ 0.05, unpaired, one-tailed t-tests, Figure
7D and 7E). Additional treatment cycles further inhibited
tumor growth. We did not detect any local or systemic
toxicity in treated animals. Although all tumors eventually
regrew, individual mice survived for more than 30 days
before requiring euthanasia due to tumor burden.

radiosensitizers including hits from repurposing libraries
that lack prior use as cancer therapeutics.
Here, we have built on our prior work that identified
over 100 candidate radiosensitizers from repurposing
libraries of drugs, natural products, neutraceuticals and
other small molecules [13]. These agents were selected by
high content screening of tumor cells treated with a single
large dose of radiation for ability to block resolution of
53BP1 foci formed at sites of DNA damage and thereby
promote onset of accelerated senescence. This focus
reflects the increasing recognition that senescence may be
a desirable outcome of cancer therapy [30-32]. Though
still controversial, the paracrine and/or immunostimulatory
effects of senescent cancer and stromal cells have been
proposed to contribute to the benefits of genotoxic therapy.
For this study, we stratified the candidate prosenescent radiosensitizers via secondary screens including
literature review, cheminformatic analysis, clonogenic
survival assays, and comet assays for DNA repair.
Thereby, we selected nineteen agents which, along with
the positive control veliparib [10], represented a broad
range of chemical properties, structures, and reported
modes of action. Evaluating these agents in mouse tumor
models led us to focus on cephalexin, a cephalosporin
beta-lactam antibiotic. As one of the most commonly
prescribed generic drugs in the U.S., cephalexin is a
particularly promising candidate. Experiments aimed
at maximizing therapeutic ratio led us to a treatment
schedule of 3 days of 30 mg/kg cephalexin, twice per day
by gavage, combined with one 15 Gy dose of radiation
on the second day. While neither three days of cephalexin
nor a single dose of radiation could slow tumor growth on
their own, a single cycle of combined treatment yielded
a significant inhibition of tumor outgrowth. In turn,
repeating cycles of combined treatment with cephalexin
and IR for three weeks slowed tumor growth without
toxicity. The evidence for radiosensitization without
increased toxicity in a preclinical model argues for
evaluating cephalosporins in combination with ablative
radiotherapy in the clinic.
We investigated how cephalexin might suppress
cancer cell growth and/or enhance the effects of radiation.
Collins et al. [19] showed that beta-lactam antibiotics
target mitochondria, increasing release of reactive oxygen
species (ROS) and resulting in oxidative damage to
cellular DNA, protein and lipids. In our work, tumors
treated with cephalexin and/or irradiation displayed
increased markers of oxidative DNA, protein, and lipid
damage, with the greatest effects observed following
combined treatment. Collins et al. also observed that
pretreatment with NAC, a cell-permeable anti-oxidant,
rescued cells from oxidative damage after antibiotics.
Similarly, NAC has been shown to block elevated ROS
and persistent oxidative stress after radiation. In our study,
NAC suppressed the cellular ROS and chromosomal

DISCUSSION
The development of new cancer therapeutics has
become remarkably inefficient, costly, complex and time
consuming. Drug repurposing, where new indications are
identified for existing drugs, has gained attention in recent
years as a practical means to bypass the slow and costly
process of introducing new drugs [22-26]. The rationale
for repurposing need not be based on implicating the
known drug target or a related activity in a new disease.
Many drugs exhibit “off target” activities that may
be leveraged for beneficial effects [27]. Because drug
formulation and safety are already established and efficacy
for the new indication may already be documented, a
repurposed drug can be moved rapidly into clinical trials
or even directly into practice.
Our interest in pursuing a repurposing strategy
reflects recent trends in cancer medicine and radiotherapy.
In particular, the broader use of hypofractionated ablative
radiotherapy modalities such as SABR or SBRT places
new constraints on radiosensitizers. Here, patients visit
the hospital at weekly intervals to receive image-guided
doses of 5 to 20 Gy. Though highly effective and generally
well tolerated, local recurrence after hypofractionated
therapy is particularly challenging as risks to normal tissue
may prevent further irradiation. Thus, radiosensitizers
that are highly effective, orally available and offer a
high safety margin would be particularly valuable.
Suggesting feasibility, multiple prior studies have noted
radiosensitization by neutraceuticals or natural products
that display little or no genotoxicity on their own [6, 7]. A
recent high throughput screen for inhibitors of DSB repair
[28, 29] reported identifying a wide range of candidate
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33927

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Cephalexin combined with radiation suppresses tumor growth and induces oxidative stress in B16.SIY
tumors. A. Tumor bearing mice were treated for 12 days with cephalexin (30 mg/kg twice daily by gavage) alone or in combination with

two doses of 20 Gy. Groups were control (n = 10), 20 + 20 Gy (n = 10), cephalexin (n = 10), and cephalexin + 20 Gy + 20 Gy (n = 6).
Combined treatment suppressed tumor growth compared to either treatment alone. B. Scatter plot of individual tumors in corresponding
treatment groups at day 12 showing the distribution of tumor volumes and the presence of experimental outliers. Means ± SEM are
shown. C. Cephalexin combined with IR produced marked tissue destruction and loss of cellularity. Combined treatment increases DNA
damage, suppresses proliferation and induces senescence in B16.SIY tumors. H&E staining revealed extensive tissue destruction 7 days
post combined treatment. Treatment with cephalexin + IR further increased the number of γ-H2AX positive cells, decreased the number
of Ki-67 positive cells and enhanced SA-β-Gal staining compared to either treatment alone. Representative images are shown. Scale bar
100 μm. D. Cephalexin plus IR induce oxidative damage in vivo. Tissue sections were examined by immunohistochemistry for oxidative
damage to proteins (protein damage marker nitrotyrosine, nY), DNA (DNA damage marker 8-hydroxy-2’-deoxyguanosine, 8-OHdG), or
lipids (lipid damage marker 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal, 4-HNE). Compared to control, both cephalexin and radiation increased staining for each
oxidative stress marker while the combination produced an increase in each marker suggesting interactive effects. Representative images
are shown. Scale bar 100 μm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33928

Oncotarget

Figure 7: Prolonged treatment with cephalexin is not required to enhance radiosensitizarion and suppress the growth
of B16.SIY tumors. A. Five day treatment of cephalexin (30 mg/kg twice daily) combined with 20 or 40 Gy (20 Gy + 20 Gy) suppressed

tumor growth (n = 5 per group). B. Scatter plot of individual tumors in corresponding treatment groups at day 12 showing the distribution of
tumor volumes and the presence of experimental outliers. Mean ± SEM are shown. C. Combined treatment with cephalexin + IR increased
DNA damage, decreased tumor cell proliferation and enhanced senescence compared to treatment with 20 Gy or 20 Gy + 20 Gy in B16.
SIY tumors. Representative images of γ-H2AX, Ki-67 and SA-β-Gal staining are shown. Scale bar 100 μm. D. Modeling the integration
of cephalexin treatment with hypofractionated therapy indicates feasibility and potential efficacy. One to three cycles of a 3 day course of
cephalexin (30 mg/kg twice daily) combined with 15 Gy suppressed tumor growth (10 groups, n = 6-7 per group, control, n = 5). Mean
± SEM are shown. E. Scatter plot of individual tumors in corresponding treatment groups at day 15 showing the distribution of tumor
volumes and the presence of experimental outliers. Cycles of cephalexin alone had no significant effect on tumor growth. Significant tumor
growth suppression (p < 0.05) was observed for IR treatment alone and all combined treatments, except for one outlier in the two cycle
group (2 x cephalexin + 15 Gy, p = 0.06). Of note for each treatment cycle of cephalexin + IR the number of animals bearing tumor volumes
smaller than 1000 mm3 was increased compare to all cycles of IR alone.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33929

Oncotarget

Table 2: Radiosensitization of B16.SIY tumors by cephalosporin antibiotics
Compound or
Brand name
Growth delay
Drug doses
generic name
Cephalexin
Keflex
+++
30 mg/kg twice daily by gavage
Cefaclor
Ceclor
++
64 mg/kg twice daily by gavage
Cefepime
Maxipime
+
50 mg/kg twice daily by gavage
Cefixime
Suprax
+
10 mg/kg twice daily by gavage
Cephradine
Velosef
++
100 mg/kg twice daily by gavage

MP Biomedicals
Alfa Aesar
Alfa Aesar
Alfa Aesar
R&D Systems

Animals and tumor models

double strand breaks induced by cephalexin, radiation or
their combination. These data support a model in which
cephalexin increases ROS both as a single agent and when
combined with radiation.
A simple model is that increased oxidative damage
to chromosomal DNA mediates the apparent synergy
between cephalexin and radiation. However, ROS also
depletes glutathione and other radioprotective antioxidants, and damages nucleotides, other metabolites,
RNA, proteins, membranes and organelles. Exposure to
ROS also activates oxidative stress signaling pathways,
modulates DNA repair, induces unfolded protein response
and proteostatic stress, lowers the threshold for apoptosis,
and depresses cell survival pathways, all potentially
sensitizing cells to subsequent radiation. Multiple such
mechanisms may be at work in our experiments.
Taken together, our studies establish cephalosporin
antibiotics as promising candidates for repurposing
as radiosensitizers. Compared to chemoradiation,
cephalosporins offer not only minimal systemic toxicity
but may also lower local toxicity at no cost to efficacy.
Interestingly, lacking contraindications, cancer patients
undergoing ablative radiotherapy may often be prescribed
cephalosporins and other beta lactam antibiotics to treat
intercurrent infections or as prophylaxis. This raises the
possibility that any impacts on the benefits or adverse
effects of radiotherapy might be detectable in existing
patient data.

Mice were maintained according to guidelines of
the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee and
irradiated using a RadSource RS-2000 X-Ray generator
operating at 160 kv and 25 mA. Mice were treated with
candidate radiosensitizers, described in Table 1 and Table
2, 2 days before, the day of and 2 days after ionizing
radiation (IR) unless otherwise indicated. MCF7GFP-IBD
tumors established in female athymic nude mice (Harlan)
as previously [10] were treated once they grew to 300 mm.
Female C57BL/6 female mice (Harlan) were injected in
the hind limb with 1 x 106 B16.SIY tumor cells suspended
in 100 µl PBS. After 8 to 12 days, mice were placed into
treatment groups: control, 15 Gy, 2 x 15 Gy, 3 x 15 Gy, 20
Gy, or 2 x 20 Gy, drug alone or drug + IR.

Clonogenic assays
MCF7GFP-IBD and B16.SIY cells were plated at 100
cells per well in 6 well plates in triplicate in corresponding
medium. 24 hours later, drugs were added at a range of
concentrations 1 hour prior to IR. Radiation was delivered
using a GammaCell 60Co source (MDS Nordion). Cells
remained in culture for 9-14 days and colonies of at least
50 cells were counted.

Histology and immunohistochemistry

materials and METHODS

Formaldehyde-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE)
tumor sections were stained with hematoxylin and
eosin (H&E). Immunohistochemistry for Ki-67 was
performed with clone SP6 (Lab Vision), ImmPRESSAP (Vector Laboratories), Warp Red Chromogen Kit
(Biocare Medical) and hematoxylin for counterstaining.
Immunofluorescence for γ-H2AX was performed using
clone JBW301 (EMD Millipore). Slides were imaged
using a Pannoramic slide scanner (Perkin Elmer) equipped
with a 40x objective. A representative tumor sample from
each group was selected for analysis.

Cell lines and cell culture
The MCF7 Tet-On Advanced cell line was obtained
from Clontech. The generation and characterization of
MCF7GFP-IBD cell line has been previously described [10].
Cells were cultivated less than 20 passages before use.
Authenticity was confirmed by short tandem repeat (STR)
profile (IDEXX BioResearch) within the last 6 months.
Mouse melanoma cell line B16.SIY, a gift of Thomas
Gajewski (University of Chicago), was maintained
in complete RPMI medium containing 1% penicillin/
streptomycin supplemented with 10% FBS.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Source of drug

33930

Oncotarget

Detection of DNA damage

positive staining, indicated on each SA-β-Gal image as
mean ± SEM. Two or more replicates were performed.
To evaluate senescence in vivo, 10-12 µm
cryosections of OCT-embedded tumors were fixed in
2% paraformaldehyde, stained for SA-β-Gal activity,
counterstained with nuclear fast red, dehydrated, mounted
and imaged. A representative tumor sample from each
group was selected for analysis.

For IRIF imaging, MCF7GFP-IBD cells were seeded on
cover glass at 2.5 x 104 per well in 24 well plates. GFPIBD expression was induced with 1 μg/ml doxycycline for
48 hours. Drugs were added for 1 hour prior to irradiation.
After 24 hours, cells were fixed, stained with 5 μg/ml
Hoechst 33342, mounted using ProLong Gold (Invitrogen)
and imaged on an Axiovert 200M microscope with 40X
Plan-NeoFluar objective and AxioCam digital camera
(Zeiss). Two or more replicates were performed.
For neutral comet assays, B16.SIY cells were
seeded at 2 x 105 per well in 6-well plates and treated as
above. After 24 hours, cells were mixed with Comet LM
agarose and single cell electrophoresis was performed on
CometSlides (Trevigen). Slides were fixed, dried, stained
with SYBR green and imaged on an Axiovert 40 with
a 20X Plan-NeoFluar objective and AxioCam camera.
Images were analyzed using an ImageJ comet assay macro
(http://www.med.unc.edu/microscopy/resources/imagejplugins-and-macros/comet-assay). Two or more replicates
were performed.

Statistical analysis
Statistical significance for IRIF counting and comet
assays was determined using the non-parametric MannWhitney test. Flow cytometric data were analyzed with
unpaired, one-tailed t-tests. Calculations were performed
using Prism (GraphPad) and/or Excel (Microsoft).

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING
We thank Hua Liang, Ashly Haraf, Marija Pejovic
and Rolando Torres for their contributions to the
development and completion of this project and to Shirley
Bond in the Integrated Light Microscopy Core for her
advice and assistance.
This work was supported by a drug repurposing
grant from Cures Within Reach to R.R.W., by NCI
grants R01CA164492 and R01CA176843 to S.J.K. and
P30CA014599 to the UCCCC and with funds from the
Ludwig Center for Metastasis Research.
We acknowledge the generous support of these
studies by Peter Kupferberg and his family, Grant Achatz
and the Alinea team, and Mr. and Mrs. Vincent Foglia.

ROS assays
To examine ROS in tissue culture, B16.SIY
cells were seeded in 100 mm culture dishes, incubated
overnight and treated with cephalexin (50 µM) for 1
hour prior to 6 or 12 Gy. N-acetyl-cysteine (NAC, 3 mM)
was added 1 hour prior to cephalexin as indicated. After
24 hours, cells were washed with PBS and trypsinized.
CellROX Deep Red reagent (0.75 µM,Thermo) was added
to suspended cells for 60 minutes at 37°C in the dark.
Viability stain Sytox Blue (1 µM, Thermo) was added for
the last 15 minutes. Stained cells were analyzed with a BD
Fortessa flow cytometer and FlowJo software. Dead cells
and debris were excluded.
To evaluate ROS in tumors, 5 µm sections from
FFPE were blocked in 1% BSA + 5% normal horse serum,
probed overnight at 4°C with anti-nitrotyrosine (5 µg/
ml, Millipore), anti-8-OHdG (1/200, Abcam) or anti-4HNE (1/200, Abcam), and detected with secondary-HRP
conjugates and DAB (Vector Laboratories). Sections were
mounted under PolyMount (Polysciences) and brightfield
images were collected using an Axiovert 40 microscope.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Editorial note
This paper has been accepted based in part on peerreview conducted by another journal and the authors’
response and revisions as well as expedited peer-review
in Oncotarget.

REFERENCES

SA-β-Gal assay

1.	 Seiwert TY, Salama JK and Vokes EE. The concurrent
chemoradiation paradigm - general principles. Nat Clin
Pract Oncol. 2007; 4:86-100.

Cells were seeded at 3 x 104 per 35 mm Fluorodish
(World Precision Instruments). 18 hours later, cells were
treated with drug for 1 hour prior to irradiation. Cells were
fixed after 5 days and assayed for SA-β-Gal as described
[10]. SA-β-Ga positive and negative cells were counted
in multiple fields, yielding an average percent SA-β-Gal
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2.	 Mamon HJ and Tepper JE. Combination chemoradiation
therapy: the whole is more than the sum of the parts. Journal
of clinical oncology. 2014; 32:367-369.
3.	

33931

Frey B, Rubner Y, Wunderlich R, Weiss EM, Pockley AG,
Fietkau R and Gaipl US. Induction of abscopal anti-tumor
Oncotarget

immunity and immunogenic tumor cell death by ionizing
irradiation - implications for cancer therapies. Current
medicinal chemistry. 2012; 19:1751-1764.
4.	

17.	 Tune BM, Sibley RK and Hsu CY. The mitochondrial
respiratory toxicity of cephalosporin antibiotics. An
inhibitory effect on substrate uptake. The Journal of
pharmacology and experimental therapeutics. 1988;
245:1054-1059.

Burnette B and Weichselbaum RR. Radiation as an immune
modulator. Seminars in radiation oncology. 2013; 23:273280.

18.	Tune BM. Nephrotoxicity of beta-lactam antibiotics:
mechanisms ans stratages for prevention. Pediatric
nephrology (Berlin, Germany). 1997; 11:768-772.

5.	 Demaria S and Formenti SC. Radiotherapy effects on
anti-tumor immunity: implications for cancer treatment.
Frontiers in oncology. 2013; 3:128.

19.	 Kalghatgi S, Spina CS, Costello JC, Liesa M, MoronesRamirez JR, Slomovic S, Molina A, Shirihai OS and
Collins JJ. Bactericidal antibiotics induce mitochondrial
dysfunction and oxidative damage in Mammalian cells. Sci
Transl Med. 2013; 5:192ra185.

6.	 Hosseinimehr SJ. Beneficial effects of natural products on
cells during ionizing radiation. Reviews on environmental
health. 2014; 29:341-353.
7.	 Hazra B, Ghosh S, Kumar A and Pandey BN. The
prospective role of plant products in radiotherapy of cancer:
a current overview. Frontiers in pharmacology. 2011; 2:94.
8.	 Curtin NJ and Szabo C. Therapeutic applications of PARP
inhibitors: anticancer therapy and beyond. Molecular
aspects of medicine. 2013; 34:1217-1256.

20.	 Li P-Y, Chang Y-C, Tzang B-S, Chen C-C and Liu Y-C.
Antibiotic amoxicillin induces DNA lesions in mammalian
cells possibly via the reactive oxygen species. Mutation
Research/Genetic Toxicology and Environmental
Mutagenesis. 2007; 629:133-139.

9.	 Donawho CK, Luo Y, Luo YP, Penning TD, Bauch JL,
Bouska JJ, Bontcheva-Diaz VD, Cox BF, DeWeese TL,
Dillehay LE, Ferguson DC, Ghoreishi-Haack NS, Grimm
DR, Guan R, Han EK, Holley-Shanks RR, et al. ABT-888,
an orallyactive poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitor that
potentiates DNA-damaging agents in preclinical tumor
models. Clin Cancer Res. 2007; 13:2728-2737.

21.	 Kohanski MA, Dwyer DJ, Hayete B, Lawrence CA and
Collins JJ. A common mechanism of cellular death induced
by bactericidal antibiotics. Cell. 2007; 130:797-810.
22.	 Atkinson AJ, Finkel MJ, Burns JJ, Hitchings GH, Kemp BA
and Dennis SRKD. Panel on Public-Service Drugs and New
Uses for Old Drugs. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 1975; 18:659662.

10.	 Efimova EV, Mauceri HJ, Golden DW, Labay E, Bindokas
VP, Darga TE, Chakraborty C, Barreto-Andrade JC,
Crawley C and Sutton HG. Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase
inhibitor induces accelerated senescence in irradiated breast
cancer cells and tumors. Cancer research. 2010; 70:62776282.

23.	 Ashburn TT and Thor KB. Drug repositioning: identifying
and developing new uses for existing drugs. Nature reviews
Drug discovery. 2004; 3:673-683.

11.	 Barreto-Andrade JC, Efimova EV, Mauceri HJ, Beckett
MA, Sutton HG, Darga TE, Vokes EE, Posner MC, Kron
SJ and Weichselbaum RR. Response of human prostate
cancer cells and tumors to combining PARP inhibition with
ionizing radiation. Molecular cancer therapeutics. 2011;
10:1185-1193.

25.	 Naditz A. New FDA online database designed to find new
uses for old drugs. Telemed J E-Health. 2010; 16:760-760.

24.	 O’connor KA and Roth BL. Finding new tricks for old
drugs: An efficient route for public-sector drug discovery.
Nature Reviews Drug Discovery. 2005; 4:1005-1014.

26.	 Pantziarka P, Bouche G, Meheus L, Sukhatme V, Sukhatme
VP and Vikas P. The Repurposing Drugs in Oncology
(ReDO) Project. Ecancermedicalscience. 2014; 8:442.
27.	 Woodcock J and Woosley R. The FDA Critical Path
Initiative and Its Influence on New Drug Development*.
Annu Rev Med. 2008; 59:1-12.

12.	 Carruthers R and Chalmers AJ. (2015). Combination
of PARP Inhibitors with Clinical Radiotherapy. PARP
Inhibitors for Cancer Therapy: Springer), pp. 533-551.

28.	 Goglia AG, Delsite R, Luz AN, Shahbazian D, Salem AF,
Sundaram RK, Chiaravalli J, Hendrikx PJ, Wilshire JA,
Jasin M, Kluger HM, Glickman JF, Powell SN and Bindra
RS. Identification of novel radiosensitizers in a highthroughput, cell-based screen for DSB repair inhibitors.
Molecular cancer therapeutics. 2015; 14:326-342.

13.	 Labay E, Efimova E, Quarshie B, Golden D, Weichselbaum
R and Kron S. Ionizing radiation-induced foci persistence
screen to discover enhancers of accelerated senescence. Int
J High Throughput Screen. 2011; 2:1-13.
14.	 Meng Y, Efimova EV, Hamzeh KW, Darga TE, Mauceri
HJ, Fu YX, Kron SJ and Weichselbaum RR. Radiationinducible immunotherapy for cancer: senescent tumor cells
as a cancer vaccine. Molecular therapy. 2012; 20:10461055.
15.	 di Fagagna FD. Living on a break: cellular senescence as a
DNA-damage response. Nat Rev Cancer. 2008; 8:512-522.

29.	 Surovtseva YV, Jairam V, Salem AF, Sundaram RK,
Bindra RS and Herzon SB. Characterization of Cardiac
Glycoside Natural Products as Potent Inhibitors of DNA
Double-Strand Break Repair by a Whole-Cell Double
Immunofluorescence Assay. J Am Chem Soc. 2016;
138:3844-3855.

16.	 Campisi J and di Fagagna FD. Cellular senescence: when
bad things happen to good cells. Nat Rev Mol Cell Bio.
2007; 8:729-740.

30.	 Nardella C, Clohessy JG, Alimonti A and Pandolfi PP. Prosenescence therapy for cancer treatment. Nat Rev Cancer.
2011; 11:503-511.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33932

Oncotarget

31.	 Acosta JC and Gil J. Senescence: a new weapon for cancer
therapy. Trends Cell Biol. 2012; 22:211-219.
32.	 Perez-Mancera PA, Young AR and Narita M. Inside and
out: the activities of senescence in cancer. Nat Rev Cancer.
2014; 14:547-558.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33933

Oncotarget

