Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 25

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

Aptamer-guided DNA tetrahedron as a novel targeted drug
delivery system for MUC1-expressing breast cancer cells in vitro
Bindong Dai1, Yan Hu1, JinHong Duan1, Xian-Da Yang1
1

Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China

Correspondence to: Xian-Da Yang, e-mail: ayangmd@gmail.com
Keywords: MUC1, aptamer, DNA tetrahedron, targeted drug delivery, cancer
Received: January 26, 2016     Accepted: May 01, 2016     Published: May 18, 2016

ABSTRACT
Mucin 1 (MUC1) is an important molecular target for cancer treatment because
it is overexpressed in most adenocarcinomas. In this study, a new MUC1-targeted
drug delivery system was assembled using an aptamer (Apt) that could recognize
MUC1 and a DNA tetrahedron (Td) that could carry doxorubicin (Dox) within its DNA
structure. The complex thus formed (Apt-Td) had an average size of 12.38 nm and
was negatively charged. Similar to the MUC1 aptamer, the Apt-Td could preferentially
bind with MUC1-positive MCF-7 breast cancer cells. A drug loading experiment
revealed that each Apt-Td complex could carry approximately 25 Dox molecules.
Moreover, Apt-Td selectively delivered Dox into the MUC1-positive breast cancer cells
but reduced Dox uptake by the MUC1-negative control cells. Dox-loaded Apt-Td also
induced a significantly higher cytotoxicity to the MUC1-positive cancer cells versus
the MUC1-negative control cells in vitro (p<0.01). These results suggest that Apt-Td
may potentially serve as a drug carrier in the targeted treatment of MUC1-expressing
breast cancers.

normal tissue. Thus, treatment-related side effects
are significantly reduced compared to conventional
chemotherapy [9]. Park et al. demonstrated that HER2
antibody-guided liposomes loaded with doxorubicin
markedly improved the therapeutic index with animal
tumor models, both by increasing antitumor efficacy
and by reducing systemic toxicity [10]. MacDiarmid et
al. showed that EGFR-targeted minicells loaded with
chemotherapeutics achieved efficacious tumor inhibition
in vivo with decreased systemic toxicity [11]. Moreover,
the FDA has approved two antibody–drug conjugates
(ADCs) for cancer treatment (brentuximab vedotin and
trastuzumab emtansine) [12, 13], and there are more
than 30 clinical trials testing new ADCs for oncological
applications [14]. Therefore, targeted tumor treatment
not only enhances antitumor efficacy but is also a pivotal
strategy for reducing the adverse reactions associated with
conventional chemotherapy [15]..
MUC1 has been recognized as an important
molecular target for cancer treatment. It is a cell surface
glycoprotein that is widely overexpressed in many types
of adenocarcinomas, including cancers of the lung, colon,
pancreas, stomach, ovary, and breast, the latter being the
most common malignancy in women with millions of

INTRODUCTION
Chemotherapy is the primary treatment for
advanced metastatic breast cancer. However, conventional
chemotherapy faces the major obstacle of systematic
toxicity [1, 2]. Because most conventional anticancer
agents cannot distinguish between normal and tumor
cells, they produce side effects, such as nausea, hair
loss, neutropenia, peripheral neuropathies, renal failure,
encephalopathy, and cardiac toxicity [3–8]. These adverse
reactions seriously limit the efficacy of chemotherapy
to eliminate metastatic cancer cells because the drug
dosage and treatment frequency are often curbed by
patients’ intolerance to treatment-associated side effects.
As a result, it is often impossible for chemotherapy to
eradicate all tumor cells within the body, leading to tumor
recurrence and poor prognosis. Therefore, exploring new
therapeutic strategies for advanced cancer is a matter of
medical importance.
One strategy for overcoming the systemic toxicity
of chemotherapy is targeted tumor therapy. Because
a targeted drug delivery system can selectively guide
therapeutics into tumor cells, the effective accumulation
of anticancer agents occurs in the tumor, but not in
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

38257

Oncotarget

RESULTS

cases worldwide [16]. Prior studies have demonstrated
that MUC1 in cancer cells is under glycosylated, exposing
the protein backbone and increasing the proteinogeneic
accessibility by ligands such as antibodies or aptamers
[17–19]. This feature, together with the fact that MUC1
is overexpressed in most carcinoma cells, makes MUC1
an attractive therapeutic target. Several MUC1-binding
ligands have been developed and utilized for targeted
delivery of chemotherapeutics or phototoxin to MUC1positive cancer cells in vitro [17, 20–22]. Owing to the
technical difficulties, however, no MUC1-targeted drug
delivery system has been developed to a stage ready for
preclinical evaluation. Due to the potential of MUC1 to
serve as a broad-spectrum target for cancer treatment,
it is necessary to explore new MUC1-targeted drugdelivery system designs, to facilitate the development of
pharmaceutically implementable targeted chemotherapy
against MUC1-expressing tumors.
In this study, we designed a new MUC1-targeted
drug delivery system using a MUC1 aptamer and a DNA
Td. Aptamers are short, single-stranded oligonucleotides
(DNA and RNA) that can form complicated three
dimensional structures and bind with a target molecule
with high specificity and affinity [23]. As tumor-targeting
ligands, aptamers have certain advantages compared with
antibodies, including a high capacity for penetrating solid
tumors, low immunogenicity, high binding specificity, low
production cost, and consistent quality among production
batches [24, 25]. DNA Td holds some advantages as a
potential drug carrier of the anticancer agent doxorubicin
[26]. It can be conveniently self-assembled from four
DNA single strands into a stable structure with a precisely
controlled size and high production yield. Moreover, a
DNA Td can load doxorubicin within its DNA strands
and carry significantly more drug molecules than a free
aptamer per se [26–28]. Furthermore, it is theoretically
possible to link a tumor-targeting aptamer with a DNA
tetrahedron using the principle of DNA complementary
base pairing in a self-assembled manner, avoiding
the catalyst-mediated chemical reactions that usually
require complicated purification protocols with increased
production cost. Thus far, however, there have been no
reports in the literature on using an aptamer-guided DNA
tetrahedron for targeted drug delivery to cancer cells.
It is unclear whether a tumor-targeting aptamer can be
assembled onto a tetrahedron via DNA complementary
base pairing, and whether the complex thus formed can
serve as a targeted drug delivery system. In this study,
we attempted to construct the first aptamer-tetrahedron
complex (Apt-Td) for the targeted delivery of doxorubicin
to MUC1-positive cancer cells. The basic properties of
the Apt-Td complex and its efficacy as a targeted drug
delivery system were evaluated in vitro, using the MUC1expressing MCF-7 breast cancer cell line as the model
system. We here report that Apt-Td delivers doxorubicin
to MUC1-positive breast cancer cells in a targeted manner.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Preparation of Apt-Td
Apt-Td was assembled as illustrated in Figure 1.
Previous work by Wang et al. has clearly demonstrated
that the four DNA strands involved in this study can selfassemble into a DNA tetrahedron [29]. Here in this study,
the original MUC1 aptamer was extended with an extra
tail (Apt-tail) to serve as a sticky end. A complementary
strand to the sticky end of the aptamer was extended from
one of the four strands that composed the DNA Td. Thus,
the Apt should be able to couple with the Td according
to the principle of DNA complementary base pairing.
Doxorubicin was later intercalated into the Apt-Td to
complete the targeted drug carrier system. To evaluate
whether these DNA strands could be assembled into one
complex, electrophoresis was conducted. As shown in
Figure 2A, the four single strands could indeed assemble
into the structure of DNA Td as previously described [29].
Moreover, the Apt-tail coupled with the Td and formed
a larger DNA structure, indicating that Apt-Td could be
constructed following our method. To characterize the size
and zeta-potential of these DNA nanostructures, a dynamic
light scattering study was performed. The results showed
that the average size of Td was 10.40 nm before coupling
with the aptamers. The average Apt-Td size slightly
increased to 12.38 nm, presumably because of the added
structure of the aptamer. All of the above nanostructures
were negatively charged. The average zeta-potentials of
the Apt-Td and Td were -10.6 mV and -1.22 mV (Figure
2B), respectively.

Affinity of MUC1 aptamer and Apt-Tail to
MUC1-positive and MUC1-negative cell lines
The aptamer adopted in this study (S2.2) has been
reported to bind to MUC1 with high affinity [20]. To test
whether the aptamer could indeed differentiate between
the MUC1-positive and the MUC1-negative cells, its
binding with these two types of cells was evaluated by
flow cytometry, using a random DNA pool as the control.
Previous research has well established that the cell lines
of MCF-7, A549 and HT-29 overexpress MUC1, and that
the MDA-MB-231, HepG2 and L02 cells are MUC1negative [17, 30–32]. The flow cytometric results (Figure
3A) revealed that random DNA generated some lowlevel binding to MUC1-positive cell lines and MUC1negative cell lines, presumably because of the non-specific
binding of DNA to these cells. Compared with random
DNA, however, the Apt bound much more strongly to
MUC1-positive cells, but not to MUC1-negative cells,
suggesting that the Apt could indeed differentiate between
the MUC1-positive and the MUC1-negative cells. To
evaluate whether the Apt-tail, modified from the original
Apt, could still differentiate between the MUC1-positive
38258

Oncotarget

and the MUC1-negative cells, the Apt-tail was also
incubated with the cells and evaluated by flow cytometry.
The results showed that the Apt-tail also bound strongly to
the MUC1-positive cells versus the MUC1-negative cells
(Figure 3A), indicating that the Apt-tail largely retained
the binding properties of the aptamer S2.2 and could be
used as a ligand for targeting the MUC1 proteins.

the MUC1-negative cells. To address this issue, FAMlabeled Apt-Td was incubated with the cells and evaluated
by flow cytometry. The results showed that Apt-Td also
demonstrated significantly higher binding to MUC1positive cells versus MUC1-negative control cells (Figure
3B), indicating that Apt-Td retained the capacity to
preferentially bind with the MUC1-positive cancer cells
and thus may serve as a potential MUC1-targeting drug
carrier.

Apt-Td selectively bound to MUC1-positive cells
Although the above data demonstrated that both
Apt and Apt-tail could recognize MUC1-positive cells,
it was still unknown whether the assembled Apt-Td
could also distinguish between the MUC1-positive and

Drug-loading capacity of Apt-Td
For any drug delivery system, it is important to
evaluate its drug loading capacity. Previous studies

Figure 1: Schematic illustration of the design of the aptamer-modified DNA tetrahedron for selective delivery of
doxorubicin to MUC1-positive breast cancer cells. Four DNA single strands assembled into a DNA tetrahedron (Td) via DNA
complementary base pairing. One of the four DNA strands was extended with a sticky end, which was exposed outside the Td. The MUC1
aptamer was also extended with a tail (Apt-tail), which could pair with the sticky end of the Td. The aptamer-Td complex thus formed (AptTd) was mixed with doxorubicin (Dox) to form the Apt-Td-Dox, which would bind with MCF-7 cancer cells for targeted drug delivery.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

38259

Oncotarget

have demonstrated that doxorubicin can intercalate into
DNA structures. Moreover, free doxorubicin has a red
fluorescence that is quenched when the drug is inserted
into DNA [27]. This phenomenon can be employed to
estimate the amount of doxorubicin that has been absorbed
by a given DNA structure [28]. In this study, Apt, Td, or
Apt-Td were mixed with doxorubicin separately to from
drug-loaded DNA structures of Apt-Dox, Td-Dox, and
Apt-Td-Dox, respectively. To estimate the drug loading
capacity of the DNA structures, Apt, Td, or Apt-Td were
mixed with doxorubicin at increasing molar ratios, and
analyzed by fluorescence spectroscopy. As shown in
Figure 4, the fluorescence of doxorubicin was completely
quenched when the molar ratio of DNA structure to
doxorubicin increased to 1, 0.05, and 0.04, for Apt, Td,
and Apt-Td, respectively. The results indicated that
the Dox-loading capacity of Apt, Td, and Apt-Td was
approximately 1, 20, and 25, respectively. In other words,
each Td or Apt-Td could carry 20 times more doxorubicin
than a free aptamer, making them superior drug carrier
candidates. Therefore, in subsequent studies, Td and AptTd were further evaluated as doxorubicin carriers.

issue, free Dox, Td-Dox, or Apt-Td-Dox were incubated
with MUC1-positive and the MUC1-negative cells
separately. Confocal microscopy was utilized to evaluate
the red fluorescence emitted by the doxorubicin within the
cells. Multiple scans through various levels of the cells
were obtained. The central level scan went through the
center of the cells allowing the nuclei to be displayed
(Figure 5A), clearly indicating that doxorubicin could
be internalized into the cells, and mainly accumulated
within the nuclei. When treated with free Dox, the drug
accumulated in both the MUC1-positive and the MUC1negative cells (Figure 5A, the upper panel), suggesting
that doxorubicin per se could readily diffuse across the
cell membrane and enter both types of cells. When treated
with Td-Dox, however, the amounts of doxorubicin in both
cell types were similar but significantly reduced (Figure
5A, the middle panel), presumably because there was a
repulsive force between the negatively charged DNA Td
and the cells that were also negatively charged [33]. When
treated with Apt-Td-Dox, significantly more doxorubicin
was observed in the MUC1-positive cancer cells compared
with the MUC1-negative control cells (Figure 5A lower
panel), indicating that a targeted-delivery of doxorubicin
occurred in vitro.
To further evaluate whether Apt-Td-Dox could
be selectively taken up by MUC1 positive cells, flow
cytometry was also conducted to monitor the fluorescence
generated by doxorubicin after incubating the two
cell lines with free Dox, Td-Dox, or Apt-Td-Dox. For
MUC1-positive cells, the fluorescent signals generated
by free Dox or Apt-Td-Dox were similar (Figure 5B &
5C), whereas for MUC1-negative cells, the fluorescent

Apt-Td selectively delivered Dox to MUC1positive MCF-7 cells
The above studies on drug-loading capacity revealed
that both Td and Apt-Td could carry a certain amount of
doxorubicin. For targeted therapy, the key question was
which drug carrier could increase the doxorubicin amount
in MUC1-positive cells while simultaneously reducing
the drug amount in MUC1-negative cells. To address this

Figure 2: Formation and characterization of Td and Apt-Td. A. Agarose gel electrophoresis was utilized to verify the assembling

of the Td and Apt-Td. The four single strand DNA chains for Td were named A, B, C, and D, respectively. They were mixed into various
combinations of A, AB, ABC, and ABCD (Td), respectively. The last lane showed the result of Td mixed with Apt-tail, for formation of
Apt-Td. The result of strand A was not well visualized, presumably because the fluorescent dye could not stain single strand DNA well. B.
Evaluation of particle size and zeta-potential of Td and Apt-Td with dynamic light scattering (DLS). Td had an average size of 10.4 nm and
an average zeta-potential of -1.22 mV. Apt-Td had an average size of 12.38 nm and an average zeta-potential of -10.6 mV.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

38260

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Evaluation of the binding of Apt, Apt-tail, or Apt-Td to MUC1-positive and MUC1-negative cells. FAMlabeled random DNA, Apt, Apt-tail or Apt-Td were incubated with the cells for 30 minutes and washed. Flow cytometry was performed to
evaluate the binding of Apt, Apt-tail A., or Apt-Td B. to both MUC1-positive cells and MUC1-negative cells. The black curves represent
the results of random DNA, the blue curves represent the results of the Apt-tail, and the red curves represent the results of Apt or Apt-Td.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

38261

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Estimation of the drug-loading capacities of Apt, Td and Apt-Td. The fluorescence emitted by doxorubicin was
quenched after the drug was intercalated into DNA. This phenomenon was used here to evaluate the drug loading capacity of the DNA
structures. A. Fluorescence spectra of Dox solution mixed with increasing molar ratios of the MUC1 Apt (from top to bottom: 0, 0.0001,
0.005, 0.01, 0.05, 0.5, and 1), the fluorescence was quenched at the molar ratio 1:1. B. Fluorescence spectra of Dox solution mixed with
increasing molar ratios of the Td (from top to bottom: 0, 0.0001, 0.005, 0.001, 0.01, 0.05, and 1), the fluorescence was quenched at the
molar ratio 1:20. C. Fluorescence spectra of the doxorubicin solution mixed with increasing molar ratios of the Apt-Td (from top to bottom:
0, 0.0001, 0.005, 0.001, 0.01, 0.04, and 1), the fluorescence was quenched at the molar ratio 1:25.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

38262

Oncotarget

A

Figure 5: Evaluation of the cellular uptake of doxorubicin by MUC1-positive cells and MUC1-negative cells treated
with Dox, Td-Dox, or Apt-Td-Dox. A. Confocal scanning microscopic images of cells. Doxorubicin was loaded into Td and Apt-Td to

form Td-Dox and Apt-Td-Dox. The MUC1-positvie cells and MUC1-negative cells were treated separately with free Dox, Td-Dox or AptTd-Dox for 1.5 h in PBS. Multiple scans through various levels of the cells were obtained. The central level scan went through the center
of the cells and the nuclei were displayed. The Dox emitted a red fluorescence, which was largely observed in the nuclear region of the
cells. The cytoplasm staining was relatively weak compared to that of the nuclear region. The nuclei were also stained blue with DAPI. B.
Flow cytometric analysis of the cells treated with free Dox, Td-Dox, or Apt-Td-Dox for 1.5 hours. The black curves represent the untreated
control cells, and the red curves indicate the cells treated with Dox, Td-Dox or Apt-Td-Dox. C. The value of mean fluorescent intensity
obtained from the cytometic analysis of MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells incubated with free Dox, Td-Dox, or Apt-Td-Dox. The mean
fluorescence intensity was the average value of the fluorescence of the cells analyzed by flow cytometry, and calculated by the software
associated with the FACS machine. D. Co-culture experiments for further evaluation of the targeting capability of Apt-Td-Dox. The bright
light image contained both MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells. A portion of these cells were MDA-MB-231 cells, which were stained by
CFSE that emitted green fluorescence, while the MUC1-positive MCF-7 cells were not stained with CFSE. The cells were co-cultured in
the same dish, treated with free Dox (with red fluorescence), Td-Dox, or Apt-Td-Dox, and evaluated by confocal microscopy.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

38263

Oncotarget

Internalization time course and IC50 of Apt-TdDox

signals generated by Apt-Td-Dox were remarkably lower
than those generated by free Dox (Figure 5B & 5C).
These results again indicated that Apt-Td-Dox could be
selectively taken up by MUC1-positive cancer cells.
Co-culture experiment was also performed to
evaluate the targeting specificity of Apt-Td-Dox. To
distinguish different cell types, MUC1-negative cells
(MDA-MB-231) were stained with CFSE that emitted a
green fluorescence, while MUC1-positive cells (MCF7) were not stained. The cells were co-cultured together,
treated with free Dox (with red fluorescence) or Apt-TdDox, and evaluated with confocal microscope. As shown
in Figure 5D, when treated with free Dox, red fluorescence
from doxorubicin was strong in both cell types, indicating
that free Dox could enter both the MUC1-positive and
the MUC1-negative cells. When treated with Apt-TdDox, however, red fluorescence in MCF-7 cells was
significantly stronger than that in MDA-MB-231 cells,
indicating that Apt-Td-Dox primarily delivered Dox into
the MUC1-positive cells, with limited cross-delivery to the
MUC1-negative cells. Taken together, the microscopy and
flow cytometry data indicated that the Apt-Td may serve
as a carrier for targeted delivery of Dox to MUC1-positive
cancer cells in vitro.

To further explore the internalization speed of
the Apt-Td-Dox, the time course of intracellular drug
accumulation was evaluated. Free Dox or Apt-Td-Dox
was incubated with the MCF-7 cells and MDA-MB-231
cells separately for various time durations. The cells were
washed and evaluated by flow cytometry to monitor the
mean fluorescence generated by doxorubicin. The results
showed that free Dox entered both types of cells at similar
speed (Figure 7A). However, Apt-Td-Dox entered the
MUC1-positive MCF-7 cells at a higher speed vs. the
MUC1-negative MDA-MB-231 cells (Figure 7B).
To further characterize the pharmacological property
of Apt-Td-Dox, the IC50 was also evaluated. Free Dox
and Apt-Td-Dox of increasing concentrations were
incubated with MCF-7 or MDA-MB-231 cells, which
were evaluated for cellular viability. The results showed
that free Dox had a similar IC50 for both MCF-7 and
MDA-MB-231 cells (Figure 7C), whereas Apt-Td-Dox
had a significantly higher IC50 for the MUC1-negative
cells vs. the MUC1-positive cells (16.72 μM vs. 1.381 μM,
Figure 7D). The results again indicated that the Apt-TdDox selectively targeted the MUC1-positive cells in vitro.

Apt-Td-Dox induced targeted cytotoxicity
against MUC1-positive cancer cells in vitro

DISCUSSION

Although the above data demonstrated that AptTd could carry more doxorubicin into MUC1-positive
cancer cells versus MUC1-negative control cells, it was
still unknown whether Apt-Td-Dox would generate a
MUC1-targeted cytotoxicity against the tumor cells. To
investigate whether Apt-Td-Dox could indeed enhance
the cytotoxicity against MUC1-positive cells and reduce
toxicity to MUC1-negative control cells, the cells
were incubated with free Dox, Td-Dox, or Apt-Td-Dox
separately. Drug-induced cytotoxicity was subsequently
evaluated with a standard MTS cell viability assay. As
shown in Figure 6, free Dox yielded similar degrees
of cytotoxicity to both MUC1-positive and MUC1negative cells. Td-Dox also generated similar degrees of
cytotoxicity in both types of cells, but at a reduced level
compared to that induced by free Dox (Figure 6). Apt-TdDox, however, generated significantly greater cytotoxicity
against the MUC1-positive cancer cells versus MUC1negative control cells (Figure 6). Specifically, compared to
free Dox, Apt-Td-Dox induced comparable cytotoxicity in
MUC1-positive cells (P<0.05, Figure 6A) but significantly
reduced the cytotoxicity to MUC1-negative control cells
(P<0.01, Figure 6B). These data demonstrated that AptTd-Dox could generate MUC1-targeted cytotoxicity in
vitro and that aptamer-modification markedly improved
the performance of the DNA tetrahedron as a drug carrier
for targeted therapy.

The primary goal of this study was to evaluate
whether aptamer-guided DNA tetrahedrons could
selectively deliver doxorubicin to MUC1-expressing
breast cancer cells. The aptamer was coupled to the
tetrahedron via DNA complementary base pairing in a
self-assembled manner (Figure 1). The structure thus
formed (Apt-Td) had an average size of 12.38 nm and
was negatively charged (Figure 2). Similar to the free
MUC1 aptamer, Apt-Td could differentiate between the
MUC1-positive and the MUC1-negative cells (Figures
3). The drug-loading capacity of Apt-Td (25 per Apt-Td)
was significantly higher than that of free aptamer (one
per aptamer, Figure 4). Confocal microscopy and flow
cytometry demonstrated that Apt-Td selectively delivered
Dox into the MUC1-positive cancer cells (Figure 5).
Moreover, Dox-loaded Apt-Td induced a significantly
higher cytotoxicity to MUC1-positive cancer cells versus
MUC1-negative control cells (Figure 6 & 7), indicating
that Apt-Td achieved targeted drug delivery to MUC1positive tumor cells in vitro.
The mechanism by which Apt-Td enters the
MUC1-positive cancer cells is currently unknown. Many
studies have shown that tumor cells tend to endocytose
nanostructures of appropriate size [34] through
mechanisms such as macropinocytosis, clathrin-mediated
endocytosis, and caveolae-mediated endocytosis [35–37].
However, because Apt-Td was negatively charged due

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

38264

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Apt-Td-Dox induced a targeted cytotoxicity against MUC1-positive cancer cells in vitro. Free Dox, Td-Dox, or
Apt-Td-Dox were incubated with MUC1-positive and MUC1-negative cells separately for two hours in PBS and washed. An MTS assay
was used to evaluate the cell viability after further cultivation for 48 hours. The average cell viabilities for MUC1-positive cells (MCF-7,
A549 and HT-29) A. and MUC1-negative cells (MDA-MB-231, HepG2 and L02) B. were presented (mean ± SD, n = 6). The cell viability
of Dox, Td-Dox, and Apt-Td-Dox treated MCF-7 cells were 44.8%, 54.9%, and 35.4%, respectively. The cell viability of Dox, Td-Dox, and
Apt-Td-Dox treated MDA-MB-231 cells were 47%, 65.1%, and 86.3%, respectively.

Figure 7: Internalization speed and IC50 of Apt-Td-Dox. Free Dox A. or Apt-Td-Dox B. were incubated with MUC1-positive
and MUC1-negative cells separately in PBS for 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1, 1.5, 2, 4, 6, and 8 hours, washed, and evaluated by flow cytometry to
monitor the internalization of free Dox that emitted a red fluorescence. IC50 was evaluated by incubating various concentration of free Dox
or Apt-Td-Dox with MUC1-positive and MUC1-negative cells in PBS for 2 hours. The cells were washed, and after cultivation for another
48 hours, analyzed by MTS assay for cell viability. The IC50 curves of free Dox C. or Apt-Td-Dox D. were generated by the software
GraphPad Prism 5 (mean ± SD, n = 6).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

38265

Oncotarget

to its DNA scaffold, there should be a repulsive force
between Apt-Td and the cells, which were also negatively
charged. This repulsive force may partially explain why
limited Apt-Td entered the MUC1-negative control cells
(Figure 5). For MUC1-positive cancer cells, however, the
binding between the aptamer and the cell may overcome
the repulsive force and pull together the nanostructure
and the cell. As a result, the process of endocytosis was
facilitated, and more drugs were delivered into the cell
(Figure 5). Although this hypothesis may partially explain
the MUC1-targeting behavior of Apt-Td, extensive future
studies are needed to reveal the detailed mechanisms of
Apt-Td cellular uptake.
Previous studies have shown that MUC1 aptamer
can serve as an effective tumor-targeting ligand for
selective delivery of anticancer drugs to tumor cells.
Ferreira et al. used a MUC1 aptamer for targeted
photodynamic therapy and demonstrated a 500-fold
increase of light-induced toxicity to cancer cells [17]. Hu
et al. showed that free MUC1 aptamers could be loaded
with doxorubicin for selective drug delivery to MUC1positive cancer cells in vitro [21]. In another study, Yu et
al. showed that a MUC1 aptamer promoted the targeted
delivery of paclitaxel encapsulated in a PLGA nanoparticle
to MUC1-positive cancer cells [22]. In agreement with
these studies, here we also observed that MUC1 aptamer
could significantly enhance the tumor-targeted delivery of
doxorubicin carried by DNA tetrahedron.
Compared to the aforementioned MUC1-targeted
therapeutic systems, the present study design has some
unique features. Although free MUC1 aptamer may carry
doxorubicin for targeted delivery [21], an aptamer per se
usually has a very small Dox-loading capacity. Moreover,
an aptamer has an extremely small size and is prone to
renal clearance in vivo, resulting in a very short half-life
that significantly limits its value as a practical drug carrier.
Prior study by Kim et al showed that DNA Td could
carry a higher load of doxorubicin (26 per Td) for drug
delivery [26]. In this study, a tumor-targeting aptamer was
coupled to a DNA Td to form the Apt-Td, which not only
had a significantly higher drug-loading capacity (25-fold)
compared to a free MUC1 aptamer (Figure 4), but also
selectively delivered the drug to MUC1-positive cancer
cells. Additionally, Apt-Td had an average size of 12 nm,
which would markedly decrease the chance for being
cleared through the kidneys [38]. Moreover, our results
showed for the first time that a MUC1 aptamer could
be coupled with a DNA tetrahedron in a self-assembled
way and that doxorubicin could be easily loaded into
Apt-Td in a one-step reaction with high efficiency. This
self-assembled approach significantly simplified the
procedure for preparation of the MUC1-targeted drug
carrier, compared with that for encapsulating the drug with
polymer-based nanoparticles [22]. These features of AptTd may facilitate its preclinical and clinical development
as a MUC1-targeted drug delivery system.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

MUC1 is considered a high-value molecular target
for cancer treatment because it is widely expressed in
most adenocarcinomas, including cancers of breast, lung,
colon, prostate, stomach, pancreas, and ovary. Moreover,
the expression of MUC1 in tumors is overexpressed than
that in normal tissue. This discrepancy in expression
makes it possible for MUC1-targeted therapeutic systems
to enrich anticancer drugs in tumors. To date, there is a
paucity of research on the development of MUC1-targeted
carrier systems for the delivery of cytotoxic drugs. In this
study, we designed a new MUC1-targeted carrier system
that can be easily constructed in a self-assembled manner.
With further development, this simple system of Apt-Td
may potentially be used to treat many types of tumors
that overexpress MUC1, reducing systemic toxicity, and
enhancing the efficacy of doxorubicin. Nevertheless,
the current study is merely a proof-of-concept study.
Extensive future research work is still required to develop
Apt-Td into a practical MUC1-targeted drug carrier for
clinical applications. Although Apt-Td showed MUC1targeting capability in vitro, future studies are still
warranted to demonstrate its functionality in vivo. To
achieve this goal, extensive chemical modifications of
Apt-Td is necessary to improve the nuclease-resistance
of the nanostructure in blood. Moreover, in-depth
evaluations of the pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics,
and toxicological features of Apt-Td will also need to be
addressed in future research.
In conclusion, a novel complex of MUC1 aptamer
and DNA tetrahedron was constructed in a self-assembled
way. The Apt-Td could selectively deliver doxorubicin
into the MUC1-positive breast cancer cells in vitro. Such
a system, with future development, may have application
potentials for targeted treatment of MUC1-expressing
tumors.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials
The MUC1 aptamer (Apt), which was selected by
Ferreira et al. (5′-GCAGTTGATCCTTTGGATACCCT
GG-3′) was utilized for this study [25]. A modified MUC1
aptamer (Apt-tail) (5′-TTCCCTTCCTTCTCTCTTCCTC
TCTCGCAGTTGATCCTTTGGATACCCTG-3′) was also
synthesized. Some aptamers were labeled with 5′-FAM as
needed. The DNA tetrahedron was comprised of four DNA
single strands, strand A (5′-ACATTCCTAAGTCTGAAA
CATTACAGCTTGCTACACGAGAAGAGCCGCCAT
AGTA-3′), strand B (5′-TATCACCAGGCAGTTGACA
GTGTAGCAAGCTGTAATAGATGCGAGGGTCCAAT
AC-3′), strand C (5′-TCAACTGCCTGGTGATAAAACG
ACACTACGTGGGAATCTACTATGGCGGCTCTTC3′),
and strand D (5′-TTCAGACTTAGGAATGTGCTTCCC
ACGTAGTGTCGTTTGTATTGGACCCTCGCAT-3′). A
sticky end was extended from strand A to be hybridized
38266

Oncotarget

with the Apt-tail (5′-AGGAAGAGAGAAGGAAGGGA
ATTTTTACATTCCTAAGTCTGAAACATTACAGCTTG
CTACACGAGAAGAGCCGCCATAGTA-3′). All DNAs
were synthesized by Invitrogen (Shanghai, China).

The FCM analysis was performed to examine the binding
of random DNA, Apt, Apt-tail, or Apt-Td to both cell lines.

Cell culture

The fixed concentration of Dox (3 nM) was
incubated with Apt, Td, or Apt-Td for one hour in a 96well black plate at various carrier/Dox molar ratios. The
fluorescence spectrum of doxorubicin was examined by a
Synergy4 analyzer (λEx = 488 nm, λEm = 520–720 nm).

Drug-loading capacities of Td and Apt-Td

The MUC1-positive cell lines (MCF-7, A549 and
HT-29) and MUC1-negative cell lines (MDA-MB-231,
HepG2 and L02) were obtained from the Cell Center of
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences (Beijing, China).
MCF-7, A549, HT-29, HepG2 and L02 cells were cultured
in DMEM medium and MDA-MB-231 cells were cultured
in RPMI 1640 medium. The cell culture medium was
purchased from Gibco. Both media were supplemented
with 100 units/ml aqueous penicillin G, 100 mg/mL
streptomycin, and 10% FBS at concentrations to allow
70% confluence in 24 hours.

Cellular uptake studies

Agarose gel electrophoresis was applied to monitor
the formation of the Td and Apt-Td. The gel was measured
under UV light with the assistance of a DNA fluorescent
dye DNA Green, which can outline double-stand DNA.
The size and zeta-potential of the Td and Apt-Td were
determined by dynamic light scattering (Malvern Zetasizer
Nano ZS, UK). Ten pmol Td or Apt-Td were dissolved
in 1.0 ml double-distilled water, and the particle size
distributions were measured at a scattering angle of 90°.
The intensity-weighted and zeta-potential mean value was
recorded as the average of three measurements.

The cellular uptake of Dox was studied by confocal
microscopy (Perkin Elmer Ultraview, US). Cells were
allowed to adhere to a glass coverslip for 24 hours. The
cells were incubated with free Dox, Dox-loaded Td
(Td-Dox), and Dox-loaded Apt-Td (Apt-Td-Dox) at an
equivalent dose of Dox at 2 μM for 1.5 hours at 37°C
and washed twice with Hanks buffer. The cells were
then fixed with 4% formaldehyde for 10 minutes at 4
°C, washed twice with Hanks buffer. Ten microliters of
DAPI was added to the slide, and then a glass coverslip
with cells was sealed and stained for 5 minutes. Confocal
fluorescence scanning microscopy was used to evaluate
cell fluorescence.
For flow cytometric analysis, cells were scraped
off from the culture bottle and washed twice with Hanks
buffer. The cells were incubated with free Dox, Td-Dox,
or Apt-Td-Dox at an equivalent dose of Dox at 2 μM for
1.5 hours at 37°C, and washed twice with Hanks buffer.
The cells were then fixed with 4% formaldehyde for 10
minutes and analyzed by flow cytometry.
Co-culture experiments were performed to evaluate
the targeting specificity of Apt-Td-Dox. MDA-MB-231
cells were incubated with the fluorescent dye CFSE for
10 minutes at 37 °C, washed by Hanks buffer thrice, and
suspended in DMEM medium. The MDA-MB-231 cells
were co-cultured on a cover glass together with MCF-7
cells that were not stained with CFSE. After 24 hours,
the cells were washed twice with Hanks buffer, incubated
with free Dox, Td-Dox, or Apt-Td-Dox at an equivalent
dose of Dox of 2 μM for 1.5 hours at 37°C, washed twice,
and fixed with 4% formaldehyde for 10 minutes at 4°C.
The cover glass with cells was sealed and evaluated by
confocal fluorescence scanning microscopy.

Cellular binding of aptamers and Apt-Td

In vitro cytotoxicity

The cellular binding experiment was performed
by flow cytometric (FCM) analysis. MCF-7, A549, HT29, MDA-MB-231, HepG2, and L02 cells were gently
scraped and washed with Hanks buffer twice. The cells
were suspended in 200 μl of PBS, incubated with FAMlabeled random DNA, Apt, Apt-tail or Apt-Td separately
at a concentration of 300 nM for 30 minutes, washed twice
with Hanks buffer, and then resuspended in 200 μl PBS.

To evaluate the cytotoxic effects of Apt-Td-Dox
against MUC1-positve and MUC1-negative cells, both cell
lines were grown in 96-well plates. The cells were treated
with free Dox, Td-Dox, or Apt-Td-Dox. MCF-7 and
MDA-MB-231 cells were co-cultured with the respective
substances for each treatment group at an equivalent dose
of Dox at 2 μM for two hours at 37 °C. The cells were
washed with Hanks buffer three times and cultured for an

DNA Tetrahedron (Td) and Apt-Td preparation
Four single strand DNAs (A, B, C, D) were
separately dissolved in TE buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, 1
mM EDTA, pH 8.0), then mixed in TM buffer (20 mM
Tris-HCl, 50 mM MgCl2, pH 8.0) at an equal molar ratio.
The mixture was incubated at 90 °C for two minutes,
placed on ice for 5 minutes to rapidly cool the mixture,
and then maintained at room temperature for 10 minutes
to yield the DNA tetrahedron (Td). To form the aptamerDNA tetrahedron (Apt-Td), the Apt-tail was added at an
equal molar ratio with the Td and incubated at 37 °C for
90 minutes.

Characterization of nanoparticles

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

38267

Oncotarget

X-DY BDD. Contributed reagents/materials/analysis
tools: X-DY JD YH. Wrote the paper: X-DY BDD.

additional 48 hours. After these procedures, an MTS assay
(Promega, US) was used to determine the cell viability per
standard protocol outlined by the manufacture.

REFERENCES

Internalization time course of Apt-Td-Dox

1.	 Bozic I, Reiter JG, Allen B, Antal T, Chatterjee K, Shah
P, Moon YS, Yaqubie A, Kelly N, Le DT, Lipson EJ,
Chapman PB, Diaz LA, Jr., Vogelstein B, Nowak MA.
Evolutionary dynamics of cancer in response to targeted
combination therapy. Elife. 2013; 2:e00747.

To investigate the internalization speed of AptTd-Dox into the cells, MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells
were grown in 6-well plates, and incubated at 37°C
with free Dox or Apt-Td-Dox for 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1, 1.5,
2, 4, 6, and 8 hours, respectively. The cells were gently
scraped and washed with Hanks buffer twice, fixed with
4% formaldehyde for 10 minutes, and analyzed by flow
cytometry. The internalization time course was plotted by
the GraphPad Prism 5 software.

2.	 Reddy LH, Couvreur P. Novel approaches to deliver
gemcitabine to cancers. Curr Pharm Des. 2008;
14:1124-1137.
3.	 Huitink JM, Teoh WH. Current cancer therapies - a
guide for perioperative physicians. Best Pract Res Clin
Anaesthesiol. 2013; 27:481-492.

Evaluation of IC50

4.	 Pabla N, Dong Z. Curtailing side effects in chemotherapy:
a tale of PKCdelta in cisplatin treatment. Oncotarget. 2012;
3:107-111. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.439.

To evaluate the IC50 of Apt-Td-Dox against
MUC1-positve and MUC1-negative cells, MCF-7 and
MDA-MB-231 cells were grown in 96-well plates and
treated with either free Dox or Apt-Td-Dox for two hours
at 37 °C. MCF-7 cells were incubated with treatments
equivalent to Dox of 0.01, 0.02, 0.2, 1, 2, 5, 10, and 20
μM, respectively. MDA-MB-231 cells were incubated
with treatments equivalent to Dox of 0.01, 1, 2, 10, 20, 25,
30, and 35 μM, respectively. The cells were washed with
Hanks buffer for three times and cultured for additional 48
hours. MTS assay was used to determine the cell viability
according to the protocol as outlined by the manufacture
(Promega). The data were collected, and the IC50 curves
were created by GraphPad Prism 5 software.

5.	 Monje M, Dietrich J. Cognitive side effects of cancer
therapy demonstrate a functional role for adult
neurogenesis. Behav Brain Res. 2012; 227:376-379.
6.	 Urruticoechea A, Alemany R, Balart J, Villanueva A,
Vinals F, Capella G. Recent advances in cancer therapy: an
overview. Curr Pharm Des. 2010; 16:3-10.
7.	 Monsuez JJ, Charniot JC, Vignat N, Artigou JY. Cardiac sideeffects of cancer chemotherapy. Int J Cardiol. 2010; 144:3-15.
8.	 Jansen CE, Dodd MJ, Miaskowski CA, Dowling GA,
Kramer J. Preliminary results of a longitudinal study of
changes in cognitive function in breast cancer patients
undergoing chemotherapy with doxorubicin and
cyclophosphamide. Psychooncology. 2008; 17:1189-1195.

Statistical analysis

9.	 Holgado MA, Martin-Banderas L, Alvarez-Fuentes J,
Fernandez-Arevalo M, Arias JL. Drug targeting to cancer
by nanoparticles surface functionalized with special
biomolecules. Curr Med Chem. 2012; 19:3188-3195.

Statistical analysis was performed using Statistical
Analysis System (SAS, Version 9.2). One-way ANOVA
with Fisher’s least significant difference (LSD) post hoc
comparisons at 99% confidence interval was used for
statistical comparisons. All data are presented as a mean
value with its standard deviation indicated (mean ± SD).

10.	 Park JW, Hong K, Kirpotin DB, Colbern G, Shalaby
R, Baselga J, Shao Y, Nielsen UB, Marks JD,
Moore D, Papahadjopoulos D, Benz CC. Anti-HER2
immunoliposomes: enhanced efficacy attributable to
targeted delivery. Clin Cancer Res. 2002; 8:1172-1181.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

11.	 MacDiarmid JA, Mugridge NB, Weiss JC, Phillips
L, Burn AL, Paulin RP, Haasdyk JE, Dickson KA,
Brahmbhatt VN, Pattison ST, James AC, Al Bakri G,
Straw RC, Stillman B, Graham RM, Brahmbhatt H.
Bacterially derived 400 nm particles for encapsulation and
cancer cell targeting of chemotherapeutics. Cancer Cell.
2007; 11:431-445.

The authors acknowledge the funding support from
the Natural Science Foundation of China (81572997) and
the Public Scientific Institution Project from the Chinese
Academy of Medical Science.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

12.	 (2015). Brentuximab Vedotin (SGN35) Drug Description.
http://adcreview.com/brentuximab-vedotin-sgn35/.

The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

13.	 (2013). FDA Approves Genentech's Kadcyla (AdoTrastuzumab Emtansine), the First Antibody-Drug
Conjugate for Treating Her2-Positive Metastatic Breast Cancer.
http://www.gene.com/media/press-releases/14347/2013-02-22/
fda-approves-genentechs-kadcyla-ado-tras.

Author contributions
Conceived and designed the experiments: X-DY.
Performed the experiments: BDD. Analyzed the data:
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

38268

Oncotarget

14.	 Sohayla Rostami IQ, PharmD, Robert Sikorski, Robert
Sikorski. (2014). The Clinical Landscape of Antibody-drug
Conjugates. http://adcreview.com/articles/doi-10-14229jadc2014-8-1-001/.

for overcoming drug resistance in breast cancer cells. Chem
Commun (Camb). 2013; 49:2010-2012.
27.	 Goodman RP, Schaap IA, Tardin CF, Erben CM, Berry
RM, Schmidt CF, Turberfield AJ. Rapid chiral assembly of
rigid DNA building blocks for molecular nanofabrication.
Science. 2005; 310:1661-1665.

15.	 Karmali PP, Kotamraju VR, Kastantin M, Black
M, Missirlis D, Tirrell M, Ruoslahti E. Targeting of
albumin-embedded paclitaxel nanoparticles to tumors.
Nanomedicine. 2009; 5:73-82.

28.	 Bagalkot V, Farokhzad OC, Langer R, Jon S. An aptamerdoxorubicin physical conjugate as a novel targeted drugdelivery platform. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2006;
45:8149-8152.

16.	 Brayman M, Thathiah A, Carson DD. MUC1: a
multifunctional cell surface component of reproductive
tissue epithelia. Reprod Biol Endocrinol. 2004; 2:4.

29.	 Wang Z, Xue Q, Tian W, Wang L, Jiang W. Quantitative
detection of single DNA molecules on DNA tetrahedron
decorated substrates. Chem Commun (Camb). 2012;
48:9661-9663.

17.	 Ferreira CS, Cheung MC, Missailidis S, Bisland S, Gariepy
J. Phototoxic aptamers selectively enter and kill epithelial
cancer cells. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009; 37:866-876.
18.	 Beatson RE, Taylor-Papadimitriou J, Burchell JM. MUC1
immunotherapy. Immunotherapy. 2010; 2:305-327.

30.	 Kurihara T, Brough DE, Kovesdi I, Kufe DW. Selectivity
of a replication-competent adenovirus for human breast
carcinoma cells expressing the MUC1 antigen. J Clin
Invest. 2000; 106:763-771.

19.	 Nath S, Mukherjee P. MUC1: a multifaceted oncoprotein
with a key role in cancer progression. Trends Mol Med.
2014; 20:332-342.

31.	 Cao Y, Karsten U, Otto G, Bannasch P. Expression of
MUC1, Thomsen-Friedenreich antigen, Tn, sialosyl-Tn, and
alpha2,6-linked sialic acid in hepatocellular carcinomas and
preneoplastic hepatocellular lesions. Virchows Arch. 1999;
434:503-509.

20.	 Ferreira CS, Matthews CS, Missailidis S. DNA
aptamers that bind to MUC1 tumour marker: design and
characterization of MUC1-binding single-stranded DNA
aptamers. Tumour Biol. 2006; 27:289-301.

32.	 Croce MV, Rabassa ME, Price MR, Segal-Eiras A. MUC1
mucin and carbohydrate associated antigens as tumor
markers in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. Pathol
Oncol Res. 2001; 7:284-291.

21.	 Hu Y, Duan J, Zhan Q, Wang F, Lu X, Yang XD. Novel
MUC1 aptamer selectively delivers cytotoxic agent to
cancer cells in vitro. PLoS One. 2012; 7:e31970.
22.	 Yu C, Hu Y, Duan J, Yuan W, Wang C, Xu H, Yang
XD. Novel aptamer-nanoparticle bioconjugates enhances
delivery of anticancer drug to MUC1-positive cancer cells
in vitro. PLoS One. 2011; 6:e24077.

33.	 Ediriwickrema A, Saltzman WM. Nanotherapy for Cancer:
Targeting and Multifunctionality in the Future of Cancer
Therapies. ACS Biomater Sci Eng. 2015; 1:64-78.
34.	 Hillaireau H, Couvreur P. Nanocarriers' entry into the
cell: relevance to drug delivery. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2009;
66:2873-2896.

23.	 Levy-Nissenbaum E, Radovic-Moreno AF, Wang AZ,
Langer R, Farokhzad OC. Nanotechnology and aptamers:
applications in drug delivery. Trends Biotechnol. 2008;
26:442-449.

35.	 Mayor S, Pagano RE. Pathways of clathrin-independent
endocytosis. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2007; 8:603-612.

24.	 Pei X, Zhang J, Liu J. Clinical applications of nucleic acid
aptamers in cancer. Mol Clin Oncol. 2014; 2:341-348.

36.	 Bareford LM, Swaan PW. Endocytic mechanisms for
targeted drug delivery. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2007;
59:748-758.

25.	 Xiang D, Zheng C, Zhou SF, Qiao S, Tran PH, Pu C, Li Y,
Kong L, Kouzani AZ, Lin J, Liu K, Li L, Shigdar S, Duan
W. Superior Performance of Aptamer in Tumor Penetration
over Antibody: Implication of Aptamer-Based Theranostics
in Solid Tumors. Theranostics. 2015; 5:1083-1097.

37.	 Mukherjee S, Ghosh RN, Maxfield FR. Endocytosis.
Physiol Rev. 1997; 77:759-803.
38.	 Thi Huyen La TTTN, Van Phuc Pham,Thi Minh Huyen
Nguyen, Quang Huan Le. Using DNA nanotechnology to
produce a drug delivery system. Adv Nat Sci. 2012; 4.

26.	 Kim KR, Kim DR, Lee T, Yhee JY, Kim BS, Kwon IC, Ahn
DR. Drug delivery by a self-assembled DNA tetrahedron

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

38269

Oncotarget

