Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 29

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Perspective

Rapamycin in aging and disease: maximizing efficacy while
minimizing side effects
Simon C. Johnson1 and Matt Kaeberlein2
1

Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein Medical College, New York, NY, USA

2

Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA

Correspondence to: Matt Kaeberlein, email: kaeber@uw.edu
Keywords: mTOR, target of rapamycin, healthspan, mitochondria, mitochondria disease
Received: April 22, 2016	

Accepted: June 16, 2016	

Published: July 01, 2016

Abstract
Experimental geroscience has identified rapamycin as a top candidate for
promoting healthy aging and longevity in mammals. As multiple independent studies
have successfully reproduced the lifespan and healthspan promoting effects of
rapamycin, the focus has shifted to possible translational use. While a promising
compound, clinical use of rapamycin is limited by concerns of side effects associated
with the drug. Studies aimed at defining optimal dosage regimen, delivery route, and
formulation will allow for benefits to be maximized while reducing side effects.

Rapamycin is a leading candidate compound for
promoting healthy longevity by targeting aging. Since
2009, more than a dozen independent studies have
reported both lifespan and healthspan benefits from
rapamycin treatment in mice [1]. Given these impressive
results, attention has naturally shifted to potential
translational applications. These include clinical trials
assessing the impact of rapamycin in enhancing vaccine
response in geriatric patients and on cardiac function in
domestic dogs [2, 3].

Despite the promise of rapamycin (sirolimus)
and related compounds (referred to as rapamycins
or rapalogs), side effects are a major concern that
could limit their application in clinical geroscience.
Patients taking rapamycins to prevent organ transplant
rejection have presented with adverse effects including
stomatitis, thrombocytopenia, high serum triglycerides
and cholesterol, and impaired wound healing [4]. Doses
used to extend lifespan in mice are generally free from
these side effects; however, lifespan-prolonging doses of

Figure 1: Maximizing the benefits of rapamycin. Rapamycin is associated with positive outcomes and side effects which both
increase with dose. Optimization of dosage regimen, drug delivery route, and formulation may provide maximum benefits while reducing
off-target effects. In the setting of diseases, such as mitochondrial disease, the benefits of rapamycin may outweigh the side effects even at
high dose.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44876

Oncotarget

rapamycin may result in a different set of adverse effects
in mice, including altered glucose homeostasis (by glucose
tolerance test), gonadal atrophy, and increased incidence
of cataracts [5].
Moving forward, we believe an emphasis should be
placed on understanding how to achieve maximal efficacy
from rapamycin treatment while minimizing side effects.
In this context, limited evidence based consideration
of dosing and duration of treatment represents a major
limitation in most preclinical studies. The vast majority of
aging studies, in particular, have utilized an encapsulated
form of rapamycin (eRAPA) provided in murine chow
at 14 parts per million (ppm). Only one published study
has provided even a partial dose response, finding that
when treatment was initiated at 9 months of age, 42
ppm eRAPA resulted in a greater magnitude of lifespan
extension compared to 14 ppm, while 4.6 ppm resulted in
a smaller effect [6]. Other regimens, such as administering
rapamycin for two weeks each month [7] or once every
five days [8], have also extended lifespan, but the relative
effects among studies are difficult to interpret due to
differences in strain, treatment duration, mode of delivery,
and an absence of pharmacokinetic or biochemical
analyses. Likewise, although short-term treatment with
rapamycin can improve at least some age-associated
functional measures [1], it remains unclear whether
transient treatment is sufficient to recapitulate a majority
of rapamycin’s benefits, including longevity.
We recently set out to begin addressing the
relationship between the dose of rapamycin, mode of
delivery, and functional efficacy in a mouse model of
severe mitochondrial disease. The Ndufs4 knockout (KO)
mouse model of Leigh syndrome is deficient in complex I
of the electron transport chain and presents many features
of the human disease including progressive necrotizing
encephalopathy, retarded growth, lactic acidosis, and
greatly reduced life expectancy. We had previously shown
that daily intraperitoneal (IP) injection of rapamycin at 8
mg/kg/day dramatically attenuates disease progression and
enhances survival by more than 100% [9]. More recently,
we tested a range of dietary eRAPA concentrations in
this mouse model, finding that lower amounts of the drug
comparable to those tested for effects on lifespan in wild
type mice had no effect in the KO mice [10]. Instead, much
higher levels of eRAPA or IP rapamycin were needed to
attenuate disease and increase survival. Based on relative
phenotypic outcomes in both the KO and wild type mice,
as well as serum concentrations of the drug, we conclude
that dietary eRAPA must be provided at approximately
27-fold higher levels than has been commonly used (378
ppm) in order to achieve similar biological activity to daily
injection of 8 mg/kg. In addition, 14 ppm eRAPA had
little impact on developmental growth rate in control or
diseased mice, a phenotypic readout of rapamycin activity,
while higher doses robustly reduced growth. While eRAPA

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

and injected rapamycin are not directly comparable, as
the delivery methods will have different pharmacokinetic
parameters and may result in dramatically different tissue
distributions, these results provide an initial foray into
examination of dosing and delivery of rapamycin in a
preclinical model of a medically relevant class of disease.
In ongoing unpublished studies we have begun
examining of the effects of transient rapamycin treatment
on lifespan, healthspan, and side effects in wild type mice.
These studies are being performed using both IP injection
and dietary eRAPA in two different strain backgrounds.
Due to resource constraints we are, by necessity, limited to
a small number of potential conditions, but our hope is that
these experiments will provide insight into effects of shortterm rapamycin treatment, including post-treatment life
expectancy and health parameters. If transient treatment
recapitulates some or all of the benefits of continuous
treatment, it may provide a strategy for reducing side
effects while maintaining efficacy.
An additional consideration for ongoing studies are
the important sex-dependent differences in the magnitude
of effect of rapamycin on biological outcomes, including
lifespan, with female mice generally showing a larger
effect than males at lower doses of the drug. Our doseresponse studies suggest that the differential impact of
rapamycin on male and female mice is primarily a result
of greater sensitivity of females to rapamycin, with higher
doses attenuating gender differences in the phenotypic
outcomes we have examined so far. Further studies,
particularly at higher doses of the drug, will be required to
definitively answer this question.
In summary, while remarkable beneficial impact of
rapamycin on longevity and disease have now been firmly
established in mice, additional studies are needed to define
the relative importance of dose, delivery method, and
treatment regimen. These studies are critically important
for successful translation to human biology, both for
understanding how to optimize beneficial effects, but
equally importantly, for reducing adverse outcomes.

Acknowledgments
SCJ is supported by NIH grant F32AG050444.
MK is supported by an award from the Glenn Foundation
and by the University of Washington Nathan Shock
Center of Excellence in the Basic Biology of Aging
(P30AG013280) and Alzheimer’s Disease Research
Center (P50AG005136).

ConflictS of Interest
There is no conflict of interest.

44877

Oncotarget

References

7.	 Anisimov VN, Zabezhinski MA, Popovich IG, Piskunova
TS, Semenchenko AV, Tyndyk ML, Yurova MN, Rosenfeld
SV and Blagosklonny MV. Rapamycin increases lifespan
and inhibits spontaneous tumorigenesis in inbred female
mice. Cell Cycle. 2011; 10:4230-4236.

1.	 Johnson SC, Rabinovitch PS and Kaeberlein M. mTOR is
a key modulator of ageing and age-related disease. Nature.
2013; 493:338-345.

8.	 Arriola Apelo SI, Pumper CP, Baar EL, Cummings
NE and Lamming DW. Intermittent Administration of
Rapamycin Extends the Life Span of Female C57BL/6J
Mice. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2016; 71:876-81. doi:
10.1093/gerona/glw064.

2.	 Blagosklonny MV. Rejuvenating immunity: “anti-aging
drug today” eight years later. Oncotarget. 2015; 6:1940519412. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.3740.
3.	 Kaeberlein M. The Biology of Aging: Citizen Scientists
and Their Pets as a Bridge Between Research on Model
Organisms and Human Subjects. Vet Pathol. 2016; 53:291298.

9.	 Johnson SC, Yanos ME, Kayser EB, Quintana A,
Sangesland M, Castanza A, Uhde L, Hui J, Wall VZ,
Gagnidze A, Oh K, Wasko BM, Ramos FJ, Palmiter RD,
Rabinovitch PS, Morgan PG, et al. mTOR inhibition
alleviates mitochondrial disease in a mouse model of Leigh
syndrome. Science. 2013; 342:1524-1528.

4.	 Kaeberlein M. mTOR Inhibition: From Aging to Autism
and Beyond. Scientifica (Cairo). 2013; 2013:849186.
5.	 Wilkinson JE, Burmeister L, Brooks SV, Chan CC,
Friedline S, Harrison DE, Hejtmancik JF, Nadon N, Strong
R, Wood LK, Woodward MA and Miller RA. Rapamycin
slows aging in mice. Aging Cell. 2012; 11:675-682.

10.	 Johnson SC, Yanos ME, Bitto A, Castanza A, Gagnidze
A, Gonzalez B, Gupta K, Hui J, Jarvie C, Johnson BM,
Letexier N, McCanta L, Sangesland M, Tamis O, Uhde L,
Van Den Ende A, et al. Dose-dependent effects of mTOR
inhibition on weight and mitochondrial disease in mice.
Frontiers in genetics. 2015; 6:247.

6.	 Miller RA, Harrison DE, Astle CM, Fernandez E, Flurkey
K, Han M, Javors MA, Li X, Nadon NL, Nelson JF, Pletcher
S, Salmon AB, Sharp ZD, Van Roekel S, Winkleman L and
Strong R. Rapamycin-mediated lifespan increase in mice
is dose and sex dependent and metabolically distinct from
dietary restriction. Aging Cell. 2014; 13:468-477.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44878

Oncotarget

