Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 24

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

Combining 2-deoxy-D-glucose with fenofibrate leads to tumor
cell death mediated by simultaneous induction of energy and ER
stress
Huaping Liu1, Metin Kurtoglu2, Clara Lucia León-Annicchiarico3, Cristina MunozPinedo3, Julio Barredo4, Guy Leclerc4, Jaime Merchan5, Xiongfei Liu1, Theodore
J. Lampidis1
1

Department of Cell Biology, University of Miami, Miller School of Medicine and Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, Miami,
FL, USA

2

National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA

3

Cell Death Regulation Group, Bellvitage Biomedical Research Institute (IDIBELL), L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain

4

Department of Pediatrics, University of Miami, Miller School of Medicine and Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, Miami,
FL, USA

5

Department of Medicine, University of Miami, Miller School of Medicine and Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, Miami,
FL, USA

Correspondence to: Theodore J. Lampidis, email: tlampidi@miami.edu
Keywords: 2-deoxy-D-glucose, fenofibrate, energy stress, mTOR, eIF2α
Received: February 24, 2016     Accepted: April 16, 2016     Published: May 10, 2016

ABSTRACT
Unregulated growth and replication as well as an abnormal microenvironment,
leads to elevated levels of stress which is a common trait of cancer. By inducing both
energy and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, 2-Deoxy-glucose (2-DG) is particularly
well-suited to take advantage of the therapeutic window that heightened stress in
tumors provides. Under hypoxia, blocking glycolysis with 2-DG leads to significant
lowering of ATP resulting in energy stress and cell death in numerous carcinoma
cell types. In contrast, under normoxia, 2-DG at a low-concentration is not toxic
in most carcinomas tested, but induces growth inhibition, which is primarily due to
ER stress. Here we find a synergistic toxic effect in several tumor cell lines in vitro
combining 2-DG with fenofibrate (FF), a drug that has been safely used for over 40
years to lower cholesterol in patients. This combination induces much greater energy
stress than either agent alone, as measured by ATP reduction, increased p-AMPK
and downregulation of mTOR. Inhibition of mTOR results in blockage of GRP78 a
critical component of the unfolded protein response which we speculate leads to
greater ER stress as observed by increased p-eIF2α. Moreover, to avoid an insulin
response and adsorption by the liver, 2-DG is delivered by slow-release pump yielding
significant anti-tumor control when combined with FF. Our results provide promise
for developing this combination clinically and others that combine 2-DG with agents
that act synergistically to selectively increase energy and ER stress to a level that is
toxic to numerous tumor cell types.

INTRODUCTION

exploit since it can simultaneously induce different forms
of metabolic stress. 2-DG is primarily known as an analog
of glucose that causes energy stress through its action as
a glycolytic inhibitor. However, as an analog of mannose,
2-DG interferes with n-linked glycosylation resulting in
ER stress [2, 3]. Under normoxia these forms and levels of
stress induced by a low concentration of 2-DG (< 2 mM)

Cancer cells by nature of their uncontrolled growth,
proliferation and abnormal micro-environment, are under
more stress than normal cells [1]. This inherent trait of
tumors presents a therapeutic window that the sugar analog
2-deoxy-D-glucose (2-DG) is particularly well-suited to
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36461

Oncotarget

RESULTS

are not enough to be toxic to most carcinoma cell types
tested [3, 4]. However, in a number of rhabdomyosarcoma
[5] and acute lymphoblastic cell lines [6] grown at normal
oxygen levels, 2-DG was reported to induce ER stressmediated apoptosis. Thus, even under normal oxygen
conditions, it appears that a number of non-carcinoma
tumor cell types are sensitive to the toxic effects of this
dual energy and ER stress inducing sugar analog.
Previously, we reported that multiple myeloma
(MM) cells known to be under heightened ER stress,
due to the over abundance of antibodies they produce,
are selectively sensitive to the toxic effects of various
mitochondrial inhibitors at doses that are non-toxic to nonantibody producing B cell leukemias [7]. The rationale
for these experiments was based on the understanding
that as a function of ER activity or stress, Ca++ is released
from the ER into the cytoplasm and is attracted to, and
re-adsorbed by, the high negatively-charged potential
established between the mitochondrial matrix and the
outer mitochondrial membrane [8]. Thus, by perturbing
mitochondrial function and interfering with Ca++ re-entry
to the ER , MM cells due to their inherent ER stress
would be further stressed and die. Among the many
mitochondrial agents that we found to selectively kill MM
cell lines was the PPARα agonist, fenofibrate (FF) [7].
This drug has been used safely to lower triglycerides and
cholesterol in patients for greater than forty years [9] but
in addition to its agonist activity on PPARα, was reported
to have inhibitory effects on mitochondrial function [10].
These results led us to the present study in which we
speculated whether by inducing ER stress endogenously
with 2-DG, carcinoma cells could be made to become
“MM-like” in their sensitivity to FF. Moreover, by
nature of 2-DG’s other activity as a glycolytic inhibitor,
combining it with FF would further lower ATP levels
adding energy stress. In this report we demonstrate that
2-DG, at a non-toxic low concentration , is synergistic in
killing a variety of carcinoma cell types when combined
with FF, and that cell death appears to be a result of both
energy and ER stress induced by this combination as
cells undergo necrosis as well as apoptosis. Our results
reveal a heretofore undetected negative regulatory control
by the energy responsive AMPK/mTOR pathway on the
unfolded protein response (UPR) which is geared toward
responding to ER stress by selectively allowing reparative
proteins such as GRP 78 to be synthesized via initiation
of translation thru eIF2α. Our findings suggest that due to
the energy stress induced by this combinative treatment,
mTOR is inhibited which results in blockage of GRP 78,
a protein normally synthesized in response to ER stress.
The significance of these findings are discussed in terms
of an overall treatment strategy that takes advantage of
windows of selectivity that naturally exist in most cancer
cells due to their overall condition of increased stress as
well as increased glucose uptake and metabolism.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Low concentration of 2-DG combined with FF induces
necrotic and apoptotic cell death in different tumor cell
lines under normoxia
In order to test our hypothesis that exogenous ER
stress could render tumor cells sensitive to FF, human
breast carcinoma, melanoma and osteosarcoma cell lines
were co-treated with a clinically achievable, non-toxic low
concentration of 2-DG [11]. In Figure 1A it can be seen that
40 µM of FF (also at a non-toxic and clinically achievable
dose) when combined with 2 mM of 2-DG leads to cell
death in all three tumor cell lines. Using morphological
analyses we find that 40 µM of FF + 2 mM of 2-DG
induces cell death in the form of both necrosis (i.e. faintly
stained nuclear “ghosts,” indistinct vacuolated cytoplasm
which appear light due to ruptured plasma membranes)
and apoptosis (i.e. cells in early stage of apoptosis show
aggregated chromatin abutting the nuclear membrane,
and condensed, basophilic cytoplasm) (Figure 1B).
As illustrated in the morphological studies, the absence of
toxicity with either 2 mM of 2-DG or 40 µMof FF alone,
and synergistic increases in overall cell death at 24 h when
the two are combined, confirm the toxicity results using
the vi-cell viability assay as presented in Figure 1A.

Metabolic effects of FF and 2-DG in tumor cells
The effects of FF on respiration in isolated
mitochondria were previously reported to be rapid
and due to direct inhibition of the mitochondrial
NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase (complex I) whereas in
intact skeletal  (soleus) muscle strips decreased respiration
was delayed and recorded only after 24 h of treatment
[10]. In the intact melanoma cell line NM2C5 tested, the
effects of 40 µM of FF on respiration as measured by
oxygen consumption could not be detected at early
time points (5 min) but at later times (5 h) and (24 h)
modest reductive effects were observed (Figure 2A).
This result led us to investigate the ability of FF to
convert NM2C5 metabolism from aerobic to anaerobic.
It is well established that when mitochondrial function is
inhibited, cells increase glycolysis and are forced to rely
on this energy producing pathway for survival. Under
these conditions pyruvate can no longer be efficiently
oxidized by mitochondria, which results in a significant
increase in lactate. Figure 2B illustrates that at an early
time point (5 h), 40 µM of FF induces a 50% increase in
lactate which increases further at 24 h (100%). Moreover,
as expected, 2 mM of 2-DG alone lowers lactate about
50% at both time points, and when combined with 40 µM
of FF, lactate levels stimulated by 40 µM of FF alone are
similarly decreased. These results indicate that the low
concentration of 2-DG (2 mM) used in these experiments
is sufficient to inhibit glycolysis, at least in part, and that

36462

Oncotarget

the clinically used concentration of 40 µM of FF-induced
increase in lactate at 5 h is either due to FF’s modest
effects on mitochondrial oxygen consumption, or by
another unknown mechanism.

various tumor cell lines as shown in Figure 1 are treated
with 2 mM of 2-DG + 40 µM of FF.
In response to 2-DG induced ER stress, under aerobic
conditions, activation of autophagy acts as a protective
mechanism against cell death [13]. However, when 2-DG
(at higher concentrations than that used here) was combined
with the mitochondrial inhibitor, oligomycin, in a pancreatic
cell line (1420), ATP levels dropped severely > 80% and
autophagy was observed to be blocked leading to cell death
[13]. Similarly, here we find that 2 mM of 2-DG induced
activation of autophagy as indicated by increased levels of
LC3BII, is lowered when cells are co-treated with 40 µM
of FF (Figure 3A). These data suggest that the lowering of
ATP leading to a reduced protective effect of autophagy
when 2 mM of 2-DG is combined with 40 µM of FF, may
also, at least in part, be contributing to cell death.

FF when combined with 2-DG lowers ATP levels
and inhibits autophagy
Previously, it was shown that under anaerobiosis,
cells treated with 2-DG or other glycolytic inhibitors at
concentrations high enough to severely lower ATP, leads
to cell death [12]. At 5 h, when 40 µM of FF is combined
with 2-DG, ATP is lowered by 64% of control which is
even more reduced at 24 h (71% ) (Figure 2C). This severe
drop in ATP leading to significant energy stress correlates
with the necrotic form of cell death we observe when the

Figure 1: Synergistic cytotoxicity and different forms of cell death when combining FF and 2-DG at clinically
achievable concentrations in tumor cell lines. (A) Human breast carcinoma (SKBR 3), melanoma (NM2C5) and osteosarcoma

(143B) cells were treated with FF (40 µM) and 2-DG (2 mM) either alone or in combination for 48 h followed by cell death analysis
(**p < 0.01 values were determined compared to controls); (B) NM2C5 cells were treated for 24 h cells at 40 µM FF, 2 mM 2-DG or a
combination of both. Morphological analysis of dead cells in the form of necrosis (i.e. faintly stained nuclear “ghosts,” indistinct vacuolated
cytoplasm which appear light due to ruptured plasma membranes) and apoptosis, (i.e. cells in early stage of apoptosis show aggregated
chromatin abutting the nuclear membrane, and condensed, basophilic cytoplasm) the latter indicated by arrows, was performed using DAPI
and fluorescent microscopy

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36463

Oncotarget

Combining FF with 2-DG increases p-eIF2α,
p-AMPK and caspase 3 cleavage, but attenuates
GRP 78 and CHOP

protein up-regulated by the ER stress/UPR pathway, is
also reduced by the combination of 2 mM of 2-DG and
40 µM of FF. However, phosphorylation of eIF2α,
indicative of ER stress, as well as the energy stress sensor
pAMPK, are both found to be increased (Figure 3B). The
latter data led us to question whether down-regulation of
GRP 78 by the combination of 40 µM of FF + 2 mM of
2-DG could result from the markedly lowered levels of ATP
detected (Figure 2C), leading to increased levels of p-AMPK
and resulting in attenuation of mTOR (as measured by
reduced phosphorylation of its downstream targets (P70S6K
and 4EBP1) (Figure 3C).
To directly test the role of mTOR in lowering
GRP 78, melanoma cells were co-treated with 2-DG and
rapamycin. Figure 3D illustrates that the GRP 78 induced
by 2 mM of 2-DG alone is completely inhibited when
cells are co-treated with rapamycin although there is no
apparent cell toxicity. This result suggests that under
conditions of energy stress (lowered ATP), components of
the UPR required to respond to ER stress i.e. GRP 78 and

It has been repeatedly shown, that as an inhibitor
of N-linked glycosylation, 2-DG increases ER stress and
the subsequent unfolded protein response (UPR) markers
GRP 78, and CHOP [3, 5, 6]. Moreover, when this type
of stress is too severe, prolonged, and not alleviated by
the UPR mechanism and/or autophagy, the cell undergoes
UPR-mediated apoptosis. Recently, we reported that the
UPR marker, GRP 78 induced by low concentration of
2-DG in human pancreatic tumor cells treated under aerobic
conditions, was inhibited under anaerobic conditions
(co-treated with oligomycin) [13]. Similarly, here we find
that when melanoma cells as well as human osteosarcoma
cells are co-treated with 2 mM of 2-DG and 40 µM of FF,
GRP78 is attenuated (Figure 3B, 3D), further confirming
that 40 µM of FF is converting cells from aerobic to
anaerobic metabolism. Additionally, CHOP, another

Figure 2: Oxygen consumption, lactate and ATP levels in cells treated with FF or 2-DG alone or in combination.

(A) Human melanoma NM2C5 cells were treated with FF (40 µM) and oxygen consumption was measured after 5 min, 5 h and 24 h of
drug exposure (***p < 0.001, compared to controls); (B) FF (40 uM) or 2-DG (2 mM) or in combination were used to treat NM2C5 cells.
Lactate levels in the medium were measured after 5 and 24 h of drug exposure and p values were *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01 and ***p < 0.001
as compared to controls: (C) FF (40 uM) or 2-DG (2 mM) alone or in combination were used to treat NM2C5 cells. Intracellular ATP levels
were measured after 5 and 24 h of drug exposure and p values were ***p < 0.001 as compared to controls.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36464

Oncotarget

CHOP are compromised. As noted above, the increased
levels of p-eIF2α detected under these conditions could
be indicative of greater ER stress, which may result from
the blockage of mTOR-mediated protein translation of
GRP 78, required for protein folding.
In order to test the contribution of 2 mM of 2-DG
induced ER stress to cell death when combined with 40 µM
of FF, we co-treated NM2C5 cells with 1 mM of mannose.
It had previously been reported that 2-DG, as an analog of
mannose, interferes with the synthesis of oligosaccharides
required for N-linked glycosylation [2, 3] which leads
to ER stress [3, 4]. On the other hand, as an analog of
glucose, 2-DG inhibits glycolysis which can result in
energy stress especially when cells are treated under
anaerobic conditions [4]. By adding low concentration of
mannose to 2-DG treated cells, we developed a means of

determining whether 2-DG toxicity is due to either ER or
energy stress. Depending on the percent of 2-DG induced
toxicity that is reversible by mannose, the contribution
of ER stress to cell death can be assessed. In two select
carcinoma cell lines that we reported to be unusually
sensitive to low concentration of 2-DG under aerobic
conditions, mannose was able to rescue 100% of cell
death which was accompanied by marked lowering of ER
stress markers [3]. Here we find that although 1 mM of
exogenous mannose rescues cell death and concomitantly
lowers ER stress in cells treated with 2 mM of 2-DG +
40 µM of FF, the reversal effects are only partial, indicating
that in addition to ER stress other mechanisms must be
contributing to its toxicity (Figure 4A and 4B). Moreover,
our results with the pan-caspase inhibitor (Z-VAD-FMK),
used in combination with 2 mM of 2-DG and 40 µM of FF

Figure 3: Autophagy activation, energy and ER stress induction in cells treated with FF or 2-DG alone or in
combination. FF (40 uM), 2-DG (2 mM), Rapamycin (Rap) (0.1 ug/ml) alone or combination were used to treat NM2C5 cells for 24 h
and western blot analysis was performed to detect protein levels of: (A) LC3B II (as an indicator of autophagy activation); (B) Grp78 and
CHOP (indicating activation of UPR) and p-eIF2α ( indicating ER stress as well as other possibilities, please see text), p-AMPK ( energy
stress) and cleaved caspase 3 (apoptosis); (C) p-P70s6k and p-4EBP1 (indicative of mTOR activity); (D) Grp78 and CHOP. β-Actin was
used as a loading control in each; (E) Human osteosarcoma 143b cell line treated with either 2-DG, FF, or both, for 24 h and western blot
analysis was performed to detect protein levels of Grp78, CHOP, p-AMPK and cleaved caspase 3. Representative blots of one of at least
two independent experiments are shown.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36465

Oncotarget

The combination of 2-DG+ FF increases Noxa
and downregulates Mcl-1 expression

show approximately the same amount (30%) of protection
that adding 1mM of exogenous mannose (Figure 4A).
Furthermore, we find the following which supports our
contention that energy stress which leads to necrosis,
significantly contributes to the mechanism of cell death:
(a) adding 1 mM of glucose partially rescues the toxic
effects of this combination with consequent AMPK
reduction and increased phosphorylation of 4EPB1
(indicative of increased mTOR function) (Figure 4C);
(b) 2- fluorodeoxy-D-glucose (2-FDG) which we
previously demonstrated to be a more potent inhibitor of
glycolysis but less potent inducer of ER stress than 2-DG
[14] was more effective in combination with 40 µM of
FF in killing the tumor cell lines tested in this study (data
not shown). Overall, these results support a mechanism
of tumor cell death by 40 µM of FF + 2 mM of 2-DG
involving attenuation of the UPR by mTOR adding to
the burden of both energy and ER stress induced by this
combination of drugs.

As noted above, Ramírez-Peinado et al. [5] reported
that 2-DG is toxic to a number of rhabdomyosarcoma
cell lines when treated under normoxia which correlated
with up-regulation of the pro-apoptotic BH3-only protein
Noxa and consequent down-regulation of its anti-apoptotic
protein target, Mcl-1. This result prompted us to examine
the effects of combining FF + 2-DG on this pair of
pro and anti -apoptotic proteins. Figure 5A illustrates
that the combination of 40 µM of FF + 2 mM of 2-DG
results in increased Noxa and decreased levels of Mcl1, as well as increased caspase 3 cleavage, indicative
of apoptotic-mediated cell death. In order to determine
whether changes in levels of these apoptotic proteins
were involved with the toxicity induced, cells treated
with 2 mM of 2-DG + 40 µM of FF were co-treated
with siRNA specific to Noxa. In Figure 6A it can be seen

Figure 4: Effects of exogenous mannose or glucose on cell death induced by the combination of FF and 2-DG.

(A) Human melanoma NM2C5 cells were treated with 1 mM of mannose (Mann), 20 uM of Z-VAD-FMK (zVAD) or 1 mM of glucose
(Gluc) in the presence of 40 µM FF, 2 mM 2-DG or combined, for 48 h followed by cell death analysis and p values were *p < 0.05 as
compared to controls; (B) NM2C5 cells were treated with 1 mM of Mann in the presence of 40 µM of FF and 2 mM of 2-DG for 24 h.
Western blot was performed to detect the level of p-eIF2a protein; (C) NM2C5 cells were treated with 1 mM of Gluc in the presence of
40 µM of FF and 2 mM of 2-DG for 24 h. Western blot was performed to detect levels of p-AMPK and p-4EBP1 proteins. β-Actin was used
as a loading control. Representative blots of one of at least two independent experiments are shown.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36466

Oncotarget

that significant but not complete protection from cell
death was achieved with this treatment although levels
of Mcl-1 did not appear to recover (Figure 6B). Thus,
the 2 mM of 2-DG + 40 µM of FF-induced reduction
in Mcl-1 levels is more likely mediated by translational
inhibition (mTOR and or eIF2α) due to metabolic and/
or ER stress, and not by upregulation of Noxa. In support
of this interpretation, are data which demonstrate that
when the toxicity induced by 40 µM of FF + 2 mM of
2-DG was rescued by either 1 mM of mannose or glucose
(Figure 4A), the functionality of eIF2α and mTOR
(4EBP1) were found to be recovered (Figure 4B and 4C),
corresponding with increases in Mcl-1. These results
indicate that the levels of Mcl-1 are regulated by
both ER and energy stress since glucose as well as
mannose partially recovered the amounts of this antiapoptotic protein decreased by 2-DG + FF (Figure 5B)
which agrees with the partial cell death rescue shown in
Figure 4A. Overall, these data demonstrate that although
we cannot detect lowering of Mcl-1 by 2 mM of 2-DG
or 40 µM of FF alone in the melanoma cell line studied,
combining the two, results in marked reduction of this
critical anti-apoptotic protein which leads, at least in part,
to cell death.

be redirected to muscle and fat tissue and away from the
tumor. Additionally, at a high enough level, 2-DG like
glucose could be adsorbed by the liver thereby reducing
its tumor concentration. Based on these considerations we
performed experiments in a human melanoma xenograft
mouse model. Mice received either FF only (100 mg/kg/
day, oral gavage daily), 2-DG (41 ug/ml/hr, ALZET pumps
subcutaneously implanted) only, or a combination of FF
(100 mg/kg/day) and 2-DG (41 ug/ml/hr). Mice in control
group had saline oral gavage and ALZET pump delivery.
Our results indicate that the combination of FF (100 mg/
kg/day) +2-DG (41 µg/ml/hr) is safe and effective in
lowering tumor burden and that slow-release pumping
of 2-DG (41 µg/ml/hr) appears to give the best antitumor results when combined with 100 mg/kg/day of FF
(Figure 7A). Moreover, the total dose per week, 462 mg/
kg, delivered by this method is more than 3 times lower
than the total dose previously shown to have activity when
animals were treated by IP injection 3 times per week [15].
Additionally, the increased caspase III in the samples of
tumor tissue recovered from 2-DG (41 µg/ml/hr) + FF
(100 mg/kg/day) treated animals (Figure 7B), correlates
with our in vitro findings. To our knowledge this is the first
report showing that 2-DG can be effectively delivered in
this manner, as well as safely combined with FF in vivo,
warranting further consideration as 2-DG continues to be
developed for patient use.

Combining FF with 2-DG decreases tumor
volume and increases caspase 3 in a human
melanoma xenograft model

DISCUSSION

The results from our Phase I clinical trial showed
that although 2-DG was well-tolerated in patients, by
drinking it once per day an insulin response was induced
[11]. Although it was not measured, it can be assumed that
2-DG, similar to glucose, under these conditions would

Although the discovery of oncogenic pathways has
led to improvements in cancer treatment, due to inherent
heterogeneity in cancer evolution, redundancy in signaling
pathways and mechanisms of resistance, limited success

Figure 5: Effects of 2-DG + FF on apoptotic proteins Noxa and Mcl-1. (A) FF (40 uM), 2-DG (2 mM) alone or in combination
were used to treat NM2C5 cells for 24 h. Western blot analysis was performed to detect levels of Noxa, Mcl-1 and cleaved caspase 3
proteins; (B) NM2C5 cells were treated with 1 mM of Man or Glu in the presence of FF (40 µM) combined with 2-DG (2 mM) for 24 h.
Western blot was performed to detect levels of Mcl-1 and cleaved caspase 3 proteins. β-Actin was used as a loading control. Representative
blots of one of at least two independent experiments are shown.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36467

Oncotarget

has been achieved [16]. Thus, a more comprehensive
approach where a universal vulnerability of cancers can be
exploited is needed. Increased glucose metabolism offers
such a target since glucose is not only a vital energy source
but also supplies the carbons required for cell replication
and growth [17, 18]. 2-DG seems to be well-suited to take
advantage of this natural window of selectivity as it has
been shown to be selectively taken up by tumor vs normal
cells. Additionally, by simultaneously inducing energy and
ER stress and thereby further adding to increased stress
that malignant cells are already under, 2-DG is able to
exploit another natural window of selectivity that exists
between cancer and normal cells.
When tumor cells are treated under aerobic
conditions at high enough concentrations of 2-DG that
completely block glycolysis, they are able to survive by
using other energy sources i.e. fats and proteins to generate
ATP via oxidative phosphorylation pathway. However,
under hypoxia or anaerobiosis, cells are forced to rely on

glycolysis for survival and when it is shut down by 2-DG,
precipitous drops in ATP levels, lead to energy stress great
enough to induce cell death [12]. It should be noted that
although high concentration of 2-DG also lowers ATP
under normoxic conditions, the levels of reduction are in
a range of 30 to 40%, whereas under hypoxia they are
reduced by 70 to 90% lower than controls [12]. Thus,
under aerobic conditions the amount of energy stress
induced by 2-DG’s inhibitory effects on glycolysis even at
high dose does not appear to be sufficient to cause toxicity
in most carcinoma cell types tested [19]. Moreover,
since 2-DG as an analog of mannose interferes with the
growing oligosaccharide chain required for proper folding
of N-linked glycosylated proteins, it also induces ER
stress [2, 3]. We as well as others have shown that under
normoxic conditions a variety of different cancer cell
types i.e. a few select carcinomas, rhabdomyosarcomas,
acute lymphoblastic leukemias and others, treated with
2-DG at low concentration undergo cell death mainly due

Figure 6: Effects of Knock-down of Noxa by SiRNA on cell death induced by the combination of FF and 2-DG.
(A) NM2C5 cells were incubated with siRNA against either luciferase (siLuc, as negative control) or Noxa (siNoxa) for 24 h before addition
of 40 µM of FF, 2 mM of 2-DG or a combination of both as indicated. Following 72 h of treatment, cell death analysis was performed and
P values **p < 0.01, were compared to FF combined with 2-DG treatment in the control (Siluc) group; (B) Western blot analysis of Noxa
protein levels in NM2C5 cells treated as described in (A); (C) Quantification (ratio of Noxa/β-Actin) of Noxa levels presented in Figure 6
(B). β-Actin was used as a loading control. Representative blots of one of at least two independent experiments are shown.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36468

Oncotarget

to ER stress/UPR mediated apoptosis [3, 5, 6]. Thus, the
fortuitous nature of 2-DG in inducing both kinds of stress
simultaneously, coupled with its selective uptake driven
by oncogene-directed increased glucose metabolism, make
this glucose/mannose analog unique as an anti-tumor
agent in its widespread application.
Based on our findings that multiple myeloma
cells which are already under a heightened state of ER
stress, are particularly vulnerable to agents that inhibit
mitochondrial function, led us to question whether cancer
cells in general could be made to be “multiple myeloma
like” in their sensitivity to FF by inducing ER stress
exogenously using 2-DG. As determined in dose response
experiments (Supplementary Figure 1) and as shown in
Figure 1, at concentrations of 2-DG or FF that are nontoxic when applied alone, combining them induces cell
death in the form of both necrosis and apoptosis in three
different tumor cell types. This result led us to determine
whether the effects of FF on mitochondrial function are
responsible for rendering cells vulnerable to 2-DG’s
activity as a glycolytic inhibitor. In this regard, at an early
time point (5 h) we could only detect a modest effect

on oxygen consumption by FF (Figure 2A) and yet we
did observe a statistically significant increase in lactate
production (Figure 2B) indicating that glycolysis is also
increased. This result suggests that FF induces lactate
production via a mechanism independent of inhibiting
oxygen consumption which may still be mediated via
mitochondrial effects.
Most importantly, the combination of FF and 2-DG
is found to lower ATP significantly (Figure 2C) suggesting
that energy stress due to the glycolytic inhibitory activity of
2-DG combined with effects of FF on mitochondria at least
in part contributes to the cytotoxicity of this combination
of drugs. Additionally, when 1 mM of glucose is added
to the medium, energy stress is reduced as reflected in
lowered pAMPK signal and increased phosphorylated
4EBP1 indicative of mTOR function which also results in
partial recovery from toxicity and interestingly increases
in Mcl-1 levels, further reinforcing the idea that both
forms of stress are contributing to the different types of
cell death. Moreover, our data which show that mannose
or the pan-caspase inhibitor Z-VAD only reverses 30
to 35% of the cell death further supports the contention

Figure 7: Effect of 2-DG and FF, alone and in combination, on growth of human melanoma xenografts in nude mice.

(A) Mice (n = 8/group) were treated either FF only (100 mg/kg/day, oral gavage daily), 2-DG (41 ug/ml/hr, ALZET pumps subcutaneously
implanted) only, or a combination of FF (100 mg/kg/day) and 2-DG (41 ug/ml/hr). Mice in the control group had saline oral gavage and
ALZET pump delivery. Tumor volumes were measured weekly after treatment. Representative tumor volumes of one of two independent
experiments are shown. P values *p < 0.05 and ***p < 0.001 are as compared to saline control and p = 0.116 is FF + 2-DG as compared
to 2-DG alone. (B) Western blot was performed to detect level of cleaved caspase 3 in the samples of tumor tissue. β-Actin was used as a
loading control.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36469

Oncotarget

that energy as well as ER stress are combining to induce
cell death. Additionally, our morphological results of the
types of cell death induced by this combination support
our interpretation that at least two different forms of stress
are involved in inducing cell death. Furthermore the
partial reversal of toxicity that is observed when mannose
is added to 2-DG and FF, which correlates with less ER
stress as measured by decreased eIF2α phosphorylation,
as well as with increased Mcl-1 levels, further supports
the interpretation that ER stress-mediated apoptosis
contributes to cell death. It should be noted that our data
do not exclude the possibility that other forms of stress
such as oxidative may also be involved with 2-DG + FF
–induced cell death as has been shown for 2-DG alone
at higher concentrations than those used here [20, 21].
Further investigation assaying ROS as well as blocking
it will be required to assess the role that oxidative stress
plays, if any in the cytotoxicity induced by 2-DG+ FF.
An increase in the level of GRP 78, the folding protein
central to signaling the UPR to respond to, and correct
unfolded proteins, is routinely used as a marker of ER
stress. As we reported previously, 2-DG-induced increase
in GRP 78 is attenuated under anaerobic conditions [13].
We observed a similar result when cells were treated with FF
+ 2-DG which led us to question whether the energy stress
(lowered ATP > 70%) generated by this combination, leading
to increased pAMPK and resulting in down-regulation of
mTOR (as measured by reduction in phosphorylation of its
downstream targets P70S6K and 4EPB1) was responsible for
lowering GRP 78. In order to directly address this question,
cells were co-treated with 2-DG and the mTOR, inhibitor,
rapamycin. As shown in Figure 4C, the robust increase in
GRP 78 in response to 2-DG was significantly reduced by
the addition of rapamycin. Thus, a possible mechanism to
explain the similar result observed when cells are treated
with FF + 2-DG is that under conditions where energy
stress is high enough to block protein synthesis directed by
mTOR, the translation of components of the UPR required
to respond to ER stress is attenuated. Moreover, under these
conditions increased phosphorylation of eIF2α is detected
indicating additional ER stress. We speculate that this could
be due to insufficient GRP 78 required for an appropriate
response to the initial amount of mis-folded proteins induced
by 2-DG. This possibility remains speculative since it is well
known that mechanisms other than ER stress regulate eIF2α
phosphorylation i.e. viral infection, nutrient and hemedeprivation, [23]. In addition to these other mechanisms
it has recently been reported that RHEB GTPase which
stimulates mTOR activity also phosphorylates eIF2α
attenuating protein translation [24]. Thus, when mTOR is
shut down either by FF + 2-DG or rapamycin, RHEB may
be playing a role in the increased phosphorylation we detect
in eIF2α which may not necessarily reflect increased ER
stress. Interestingly, CHOP is also found to be reduced by
2-DG + FF treatment which would be expected to reduce
ER-stress mediated cell death. The fact that apoptosis does
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

occur, indicates that either there is enough CHOP signal to
initiate cell death and/or other pathways are responsible.
Overall, these experiments reveal that mTOR, a translation
regulator that has evolved to respond to energy and nutrient
stress, can interfere with mechanisms designed to respond
to ER stress. The fact that under ER stress p-eIF2α does not
inhibit the translation of GRP 78 and several other proteins
required for reparative and survival responses, but under
energy stress mTOR does, may at least in part explain the
cell death observed in cells treated with the combination of
2-DG and FF.
Among the apoptotic proteins required to respond
to ER stress, Mcl-1 appears to be particularly important
for cell survival [25]. Thus, our findings that FF + 2-DG
significantly lower Mcl-1 levels suggest that this protein
is involved with the mechanism of survival to this
treatment. The reduction in Mcl-1 levels can be mediated
by either direct translational (mTOR and or Eif2 alpha)
attenuation of the protein or by binding to Noxa, which
then is degraded by the ubiquitin system. Although knockdown of Noxa was able to reverse 30% of the 2DG+FF
induced toxicity (6a) surprisingly Mcl-1 levels did not
appear to change (6b). This result suggests that Noxa may
be mediating 2DG + FF -induced toxicity independently
of its effects on Mcl-1. Overall, treatment with 2DG and
FF is found to result in Noxa up-regulation and Mcl-1
down-regulation which appears to occur through distinct
pathways culminating in induction of apoptosis.
In summary, the results presented here indicate that
by increasing energy as well as ER stress in tumor cells
that are already under more stress than normal cells, the
combination of FF and 2-DG may provide a universal
means by which different cancer types in general may
be targeted. Moreover, 2-DG as a dual energy and ER
stress inducing agent, seems particularly well-suited to
take advantage of this natural window of selectivity that
heightened tumor stress provides. In addition, increased
glucose metabolism, which has been demonstrated by
numerous PET scans to be a feature of most tumors and
more recently shown to be driven by major oncogenes
[26], presents a universal target that can be naturally
exploited by 2-DG. The fact that slow-release pump seems
to be an effective way to deliver 2-DG and that combined
with oral FF shows significant anti-tumor activity in
vivo provides promise for developing this combination
clinically and others that combine 2-DG with agents that
act synergistically to selectively increase energy and ER
stress to a level that is toxic to numerous tumor cell types.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell culture
Human cell lines i.e. melanoma, NM2C5,
osteosarcoma, 143B and breast adenocarcinoma, SKBR3
were purchased from American Type Culture Collection
36470

Oncotarget

(Manassas, VA), and maintained in DMEM, 1 g/L of
glucose supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and
penicillin/streptomycin (Invitrogen, NY). Cells were
grown under 5% CO2 at 37°C.

previously [27]. Data were the averages of samples ±
SE from three (5 min and 5 h) or six (24 h) independent
experiments.

Lactate assay

Drugs and antibodies

At 24 hr after seeding and grown cells were rinsed
twice with PBS, fresh medium was added to the control
and test cultures, at the indicated drug concentrations,
and the cells were re-incubated in 5% CO2 for 5 or 24 h.
Then, 0.5 ml of medium was removed from each culture
and deproteinated by adding 1 ml of perchloric acid at 8%
w/v, vortexing for 30 s, then placing this mixture in 4_
C for 5 min, and centrifuging at 1,500 g for 10 min. The
supernate was centrifuged three times more. To determine
lactic acid, 0.025 ml of this supernate was added to a
reaction mixture containing 0.1 ml of lactic dehydrogenase
(1,000 units/ml), 2 ml of glycine buffer (glycine, 0.6 mol/l,
and hydrazine, pH 9.2), and 1.66 mg/ml NAD. Formation
of NADH was measured with a Beckman DU 520 UV/VIS
spectrophotometer at 340 nm, which directly corresponded
to lactic acid levels as determined by a lactate standard
curve. Readouts from control samples, normalized to
cell number, were set at 100% and those from all the
other samples were presented as percentages of controls.
Samples were analyzed in triplicate.

2-Deoxy-glucose,
mannose,
D-(+)-Glucose,
rapamycin, and fenofibrate (were purchased from SigmaAldrich (St. Louis, MO). General Caspase Inhibitor
Z-VAD-FMK (FMK001) was from R&D Systems (MN).
The following rabbit primary antibodies used were from
Cell Signaling Technology (Danvers, MA): LC3B (2775
which preferentially detects LC3B-II), Grp78 (3177),
CHOP (2895), pAMPKa (Thr172, 2535), p-p70S6K
(Thr389, 9234), p-eIF2a (Ser51, 3597), p-4EBP1
(Thr37/46 , 9459), Cleaved Caspase-3 (9664) and Mcl1 (4572). Mouse anti-b-actin (A5441) primary antibody
was from Sigma-Aldrich. Mouse anti-Noxa was from
Calbiochem (OP180). Horseradish peroxidase-conjugated
anti-rabbit (W4011) and anti-mouse (W4021) secondary
antibody were purchased from Promega (Madison, WI).

Cytotoxicity assay
Cells were seeded onto 24-well plates and cultured
for 18–22 h. After drug exposure for 48 or 72 h, attached
cells were removed by trypsinization and their respective
culture media were collected and centrifuged as described
previously (3). The pellets were then re-suspended in
Hanks Balanced Salt Solution (HBSS) (Mediatech) and
analyzed with Vi-Cell cell viability analyzer (Beckman
Coulter) based on trypan blue exclusion. Results were
shown as the percent dead cells out of the total counted.
Data were the averages of triplicate samples +SD from one
representative experiment out of at least three independent
ones unless otherwise indicated.

ATP quantification
Intracellular ATP levels were measured with the
CellTiter-Glo Luminescent Cell Viability Assay (Promega,
WI) according to the manufacturer’s directions. Results
were the averages of triplicate samples +/– SD from one
representative experiment out of at least three independent
ones. Short-time (5 h or 24 h) treatment was employed to
minimize the toxicity and cell number loss caused by drug
exposure.

Fluorescent microscopy

Western blot

Cells were seeded onto 24-well plates and cultured
for 18–22 h to approximately 60% confluence. After 24 h
of drug exposure, cells were stained with DAPI (0.5 µg/ml,
a gift from Dr. Xiang-Xi Xu) and visualized immediately
with the Nikon Eclipse TE2000 microscope (Nikon,
Melville, NY) to analyze changes in nuclear condensation
and fragmentation. Microphotographs of the center of
each well were taken at 60X magnification with the aid
of imaging-capture software (NIS-Elements from Nikon,
Melville, NY). Cells shown were from one representative
experiment out of at least three independent analyses.

Cells were seeded onto six-well plates and cultured
for 18–22 h to reach approximately 70% confluence.
Following drug exposure for the indicated times, cells
were harvested and lysed with the lysis buffer (100 mM
Tris–HCl at pH 7.4, 1% SDS, phosphatase inhibitor
cocktail 2 and protease inhibitor cocktail from Sigma–
Aldrich). Protein concentrations of each sample were
determined using a Micro BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo
Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s directions,
and equal amounts of proteins were loaded onto 4–15%
Tris–HCl gradient gels (Bio-Rad). SDS–PAGE proteins
were transferred onto a polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF)
membrane (Millipore), blocked with 5% milk and probed
with corresponding primary antibodies overnight (except
1 h for actin). The membrane was washed and probed
with secondary antibodies for 1 h and was then incubated
with SuperSignal West Pico or Femto Chemiluminescent

Oxygen consumption
Oxygen consumption was measured by placing
2 × 106 cells into a closed chamber equipped with a Clark
electrode (Hansatech, Cambridge, UK) as described
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36471

Oncotarget

Substrate (Thermo Scientific) and signals were visualized
on Blue Lite Autorad Films (ISCBio- Express). All
primary antibodies were used at 1:1000 dilution except
for actin (1:10000), and the secondary antibodies were
used at 1:10000.

CONFLICTS OF INTERSET

siRNA transfection

  1.	 Chevet E, Hetz C, Samali A. Endoplasmic reticulum stressactivated cell reprogramming in oncogenesis [Review].
Cancer Discov. 2015; 5:586–97.

The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

REFERENCES

Cells were seeded into 12 welled plates and cultured
for 24 h to reach approximately 30% confluence using
antibiotic-free media. Then, cells were transfected with
either anti-Luc siRNA-1 (targeting luciferase) or Noxa
siRNA purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology, INC
(sc-37305). Twenty-four hours after transfection, cells
were treated for the indicated times and collected for
immunoblotting or cytotoxicity analyses. The lowest
concentrations of siRNAs were determined by dose
response experiments which produced the most efficient
knockdown with minimal toxicity.

  2.	 Datema R, Schwarz RT. Interference with glycosylation of
glycoproteins. Biochem J. 1979; 184:113–23.
  3.	 Kurtoglu M, Gao N, Shang J, Maher JC, Lehrman MA,
Wangpaichitr M, Savaraj N, Lane AN, Lampidis TJ.
Under normoxia, 2-deoxy-D-glucose elicits cell death in
select tumor types not by inhibition of glycolysis but by
interfering with N-linked glycosylation. Mol Cancer Ther.
2007; 6:3049–58.
 4.	 Kurtoglu M, Maher JC, Lampidis TJ. Differential toxic
mechanisms of 2-deoxy-D-glucose versus 2-fluorodeoxyD-glucose in hypoxic and normoxic tumor cells [Review].
Antioxid Redox Signal. 2007; 9:1383–90.

Statistics

  5.	 Ramírez-Peinado S, Alcázar-Limones F, Lagares-Tena L, El
Mjiyad N, Caro-Maldonado A, Tirado OM, Muñoz-Pinedo C.
2-deoxyglucose induces Noxa-dependent apoptosis in
alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma. Cancer Res. 2011; 71:6796–
806.

Statistical analyses were performed by two-tailed
unpaired Student’s t-test, and a P value less than 0.05 was
considered significant.

Mouse xenograft studies

  6.	 DeSalvo J, Kuznetsov JN, Du J, Leclerc GM, Leclerc GJ,
Lampidis TJ, Barredo JC. Inhibition of Akt potentiates
2-DG-induced apoptosis via downregulation of UPR in
acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Mol Cancer Res. 2012;
10:969–78.

All animal experiments were carried out in strict
accordance with to the guidelines of the Association for
Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal
Care (AAALAC) International and the recommendations
in the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals of the
National Institute of Health. Eight-week-old female
immunodeficient CD-1 nude mice (Charles River
Laboratories, USA) were inoculated subcutaneously
with 0.1 ml of tumor cells (2 × 107 cells/ml in Hank’s).
Fourteen days later tumor-bearing mice were randomized
into four groups of 8 mice each, each with comparable
tumor size. FF was formulated in 1% methylcellulose and
1% Tween-80. 2-DG was in PBS. Mice received either FF
only (100 mg/kg/day, oral gavage daily), 2-DG (41 ug/
ml/hr, ALZET pumps subcutaneously implanted) only,
or a combination of FF and 2-DG. Mice in control group
had saline oral gavage and ALZET pump delivery. Tumor
size was measured once weekly by electronic calipers and
calculated tumor volume based on ellipsoid dimensions
(width 2 × length × 0.5). All mice were maintained under
specific pathogen-free conditions in accordance with
guidelines set forth by AAALAC International. Implanting
ALZET pumps: Mice were anesthetized by 62 mg of
ketamine hydrochloride and 5 mg of Xylazine/kg i.p. The
ALZET pumps were filled with 2-DG or saline following
the manufacture’s instruction of making a skin incision in
the back of mouse. Inserting the pump filled with saline
or 2-DG and close the incision with 2 or 3 wound clips.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

 7.	 Metin MM, Kurtoglu M, Philips K, Liu H, Boise LH,
Lampidis TJ. High endoplasmic reticulum activity renders
multiple myeloma cells hypersensitive to mitochondrial
inhibitors. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2010; 66:129–40.
  8.	 Giunti R, Gamberucci A, Fulceri R, Banhegyi G,
Benedetti A. Both translocon and a cation channel are
involved in the passive Ca2+ leak from the endoplasmic
reticulum: a mechanistic study on rat liver microsomes.
Arch Biochem Biophys. 2007; 462:115–121.
  9.	 Najib J. Fenofibrate in the treatment of dyslipidemia: a
review of the data athey relate to the new suprabioavailable
tablet formulation [Review]. Clin Ther. 2002; 24:2022–50.
10.	 Brunmair B, Lest A, Staniek K, Gras F, Scharf N, Roden M,
Nohl H, Waldhäusl W, Fürnsinn C. Fenofibrate impairs rat
mitochondrial function by inhibition of respiratory complex
I. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2004; 311:109–14.
11.	 Raez LE, Papadopoulos K, Ricart AD, Chiorean EG,
Dipaola RS, Stein MN, Rocha Lima CM, Schlesselman JJ,
Tolba K, Langmuir VK, Kroll S, Jung DT, Kurtoglu M,
et al. A phase I dose-escalation trial of 2-deoxy-D-glucose
alone or combined with docetaxel in patients with advanced
solid tumors. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2013; 71:
523–30.
36472

Oncotarget

12.	 Maher JC, Wangpaichitr M, Savaraj N, Kurtoglu M,
Lampidis TJ. Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 confers resistance
to the glycolytic inhibitor 2-deoxy-D-glucose. Mol Cancer
Ther. 2007; 6:732–41.

20.	 Li L, Fath MA, Scarbrough PM, Watson WH, Spitz DR.
Combined inhibition of glycolysis, the pentose cycle, and
thioredoxin metabolism selectively increases cytotoxicity
and oxidative stress in human breast and prostate cancer.
Redox Biol. 2015; 4:127–35.

13.	 Xi H, Kurtoglu M, Liu H, Wangpaichitr M, You M, Liu
X, Savaraj N, Lampidis TJ. 2-Deoxy-D-glucose activates
autophagy via endoplasmic reticulum stress rather than
ATP depletion. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2011; 67:
899–910.

21.	 Vibhuti A, Muralidhar K, Dwarakanath BS. Differential
cytotoxicity of the glycolytic inhibitor 2-deoxy-D-glucose
in isogenic cell lines varying in their p53 status. J Cancer
Res Ther. 2013; 9:686–92

14.	 Lampidis TJ, Kurtoglu M, Maher JC, Liu H, Krishan A,
Sheft V, Szymanski S, Fokt I, Rudnicki WR, Ginalski K,
Lesyng B, Priebe W. Efficacy of 2-halogen substituted
D-glucose analogs in blocking glycolysis and killing
“hypoxic tumor cells”. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2006;
58:725–34.

22.	 Varshney R1, Adhikari JS, Dwarakanath BS. Contribution
of oxidative stress to radiosensitization by a combination
of 2-DG and 6-AN in human cancer cell line. Indian J Exp
Biol. 2003; 41:1384–91.

15.	 Maschek G1, Savaraj N, Priebe W, Braunschweiger P,
Hamilton K, Tidmarsh GF, De Young LR, Lampidis TJ.
2-deoxy-D-glucose increases the efficacy of adriamycin and
paclitaxel in human osteosarcoma and non-small cell lung
cancers in vivo. Cancer Res. 2004; 64:31–4.

24.	 Tyagi R, Shahani N, Gorgen L, Ferretti M, Pryor W,
Chen PY, Swarnkar S, Worley PF, Karbstein K, Snyder
SH, Subramaniam S. Rheb Inhibits Protein Synthesis by
Activating the PERK-eIF2α Signaling Cascade. Cell Rep.
2015; 10:684–693.

16.	 Watson, J.D. To Fight cancer, know the enemy. NY Times
Op-Ed contributer; 2009.

25.	 Zhang L, Lopez H, George NM, Liu X, Pang X, Luo X.
Selective involvement of BH3-only proteins and differential
targets of Noxa in diverse apoptotic pathways. Cell Death
Differ. 2011; 18:864–73.

23.	 Kimball SR, Eukaryotic initiation factor eIF2 Int J Biochem
& Cell Biol. 1999; 31:25–29.

17.	 Deberardinis RJ, Sayed N, Ditsworth D, Thompson CB.
Brick by brick: metabolism and tumor cell growth. Curr
Opin Genet Dev. 2008; 18:54–61.

26.	 Dang CV. Links between metabolism and cancer. Genes
Dev. 201226:87790.

18.	 Gillies RJ, Robey I, Gatenby RA. Causes and consequences
of increased glucose metabolism of cancers. J Nucl Med.
2008; 49:24S–42S.

27.	 Liss P, Nygren A, Revsbech NP, Ulfendahl HR. Intrarenal
oxygen tension measured by a modified clark electrode at
normal and low blood pressure and after injection of x-ray
contrast media. Pflugers Arch. 1997; 434:705–11.

19.	 Xi H1, Kurtoglu M, Lampidis TJ. The wonders of 2-deoxyD-glucose. IUBMB Life. 2014; 66:110–21.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36473

Oncotarget

