Published OnlineFirst February 10, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-3786

Point-Counterpoint Review

Is Anticancer Drug Development Heading in the Right Direction?
Trevor W. Hambley
School of Chemistry, The University of Sydney, New South Wales, Australia

Abstract

Molecular Targeting

The success of molecularly targeted agents, such as imatinib,
has led to expectations of a new era in anticancer drug
development, and to a greatly increased focus on targeting as
a strategy. However, the number of successes to date is small,
and recent results suggest that the success of imatinib, for
instance, in treating chronic myelogenous leukemia and
gastrointestinal stromal tumor may be the exception rather
than the rule. Here, we argue that the search for new
anticancer agents needs to continue on as many fronts as
possible, and not be focused on one strategy alone. [Cancer Res
2009;69(4):1259–62]

Molecular targeting in the treatment of cancer is based on the
premise that the molecular basis of cancer is associated with one
or more genetic abnormalities that give rise to increased
production or activation of some molecules and/or decreased
production or activation of others (2). Determination of the
structure of the target enzyme allows for the design of often
exquisitely selective and effective inhibitors, enabling the selective
inhibition of the up-regulated group of enzymes or activation of the
down-regulated. This is expected to lead to inhibition of the
pathways that typify cancer and to the death of the cancer cells,
with low effect on normal cells and, therefore, low toxicity.
However, there are a number of problems with this strategy.
Progression of a normal cell to cancer cell has recently been
shown to involve dozens of genetic mutations, and therefore,
targeting even a few gene products may be ineffective (5–7).
Inhibition of pathways that are the hallmark of cancer may be an
effective strategy, but these recent results show that up to 12
different pathways can be involved in a single cancer type. In
addition, most biological processes have alternate pathways,
developed as a result of evolutionary pressures, which can be upregulated should one pathway be blocked, giving rise to a
redundancy that is unlikely to be bypassed by a single, highly
targeted agent or, perhaps, even by groups of targeted agents.
Selective inhibition of an enzymic target can have unexpected
consequences, as the experience with the cyclooxygenase-2
inhibitors has revealed, when the protein or its subtypes being
inhibited have multiple roles—and it now seems that this is the
case for many enzymes. The range of problems that can result from
high selectivity has been well covered in a recent review by Fairlie
and colleagues (8). These include the rapid development of
resistance, which is more likely if a single molecular target is
being inhibited with high selectivity. As mentioned, imatinib has
been one of the outstanding successes of the molecular targeting
approach, but in many cases it becomes ineffective after prolonged
use. Genetic analysis at this point reveals that the targeted tyrosine
kinase has often mutated and is no longer sensitive to imatinib (9).
Whereas this confirms the ability of imatinib to target a specific
molecule, it reflects an important weakness in therapy based on the
inhibition of a single enzyme. It may be possible to develop a bank
of kinase inhibitors, some of which are not cross-resistant with
molecularly targeted compounds, and a range of second and third
generation kinase inhibitors are already in use for treating cancers
that have developed imatinib resistance (9). However, this is a
highly costly strategy, and it may not always be effective.
Two of the most widely pursued molecular targeting strategies
relate to the inhibition of matrix metalloproteinases and angiogenesis-promoting enzymes, such as vascular endothelial growth,
factor and epidermal growth factor receptor. The logic behind
these strategies is sound—matrix metalloproteinases are highly

Background
The rate of approval of new agents for the treatment of cancer
has decreased steadily over the past decade (Fig. 1), and to date,
only one new compound has been approved in 2008.1 In addition,
many of the agents approved over the past few years are either
antibodies or do not represent entirely new directions in drug
development (1), suggesting a slowing in the development of new
classes of compounds for treating cancer. In these circumstances, it
is important to ask whether the optimal mix of strategies is being
pursued in the development of new anticancer agents. Up until the
1990s, anticancer drug development was largely based on the
testing of compounds derived from a variety of sources including,
substrate analogues, natural products, combinatorial syntheses,
and large libraries, typically using in vitro cytotoxicity assays
followed by in vivo assessment of toxicity and efficacy. Since then,
and particularly following the determination of the human genome
and the emergence of increasing insights into the genetic changes
associated with cancer, drug development has moved into the
‘‘molecular target’’ era (1, 2). There have been some successes as a
result of this strategy, but they are small in number and are not
without significant limitations. Gleevec (Glivec, imatinib mesylate),
in particular, has rapidly become the treatment of choice for
chronic myelogenous leukemia and gastrointestinal stromal
tumors, and has greatly improved the prospects of patients with
these cancers (3), leading to the expectation of a new ‘‘golden era’’
for cancer drug development (2). However, recent results showing,
yet again, the genetic complexity of cancers have led to the
suggestion that imatinib may be the exception and not the rule (4),
and therefore, it might represent a ‘‘false dawn’’ or be pointing us in
the wrong direction. In this article, I address the issues surrounding
molecular targeting that may be contributing to the slow output of
new anticancer agents and suggest strategies for the future.

Requests for reprints: Trevor W. Hambley, School of Chemistry, The University of
Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia. Phone: 61-2-9351-2830; Fax: 61-2-9351-3329;
E-mail: t.hambley@chem.usyd.edu.au.
I2009 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-3786

www.aacrjournals.org

1259

1

http://www.centerwatch.com/drug-information/fda-approvals

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (4). February 15, 2009

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst February 10, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-3786
Cancer Research

Figure 1. The number of new agents for the treatment for cancer approved by the Food and Drug Administration between 1996 and 2007, plotted as 2-year averages
[i.e., 1997 = (1996 + 1997)/2]. Taken from http://www.centerwatch.com/patient/drugs/druglist.html.

overexpressed in many tumors and are almost certainly involved in
metastasis, and angiogenesis is required for tumors to continue to
grow—and the preclinical data for many compounds targeting
these enzymes has been promising. However, the clinical outcomes
have been less promising, particularly when such agents are used
alone, and there may be flaws with both examples. Preventing the
remodeling of the extracellular matrix is likely to result in tumors
becoming more dense, which can be expected to result in increased
hypoxia, decreased responsiveness to anticancer treatments, and
increased development of aggressive phenotypes, including metastasis (10). Inhibition of angiogenesis could have similar effects and
will also result in reduced delivery of anticancer agents to all
regions of the tumor.
It is notable that the most significant successes of molecularly
targeted agents have been against leukemias and lymphomas with
relatively little effect being made against most adult epithelial
cancers. Solid tumors are highly heterogeneous, typically being
made up of multiple cell types and having multiple environments.
These environments range from almost normal—for those cells in
the vicinity of the vasculature—to nonviable, resulting in necrosis
in the regions most distant from the vasculature. In between are
environments that are highly stressed as a result of hypoxia, acidity,
and high interstitial pressure. As a consequence, cells can exist in a
variety of states, which may make them more or less responsive to

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (4). February 15, 2009

most drugs including molecularly targeted agents. It is unlikely that
all will be equally responsive to any one class of highly targeted
anticancer agents, and some may be completely resistant on a time
scale that corresponds to the pharmacologic half-life of the agent.

Alternative Strategies
If molecularly targeted agents alone are unlikely to be effective in
treating all classes of cancer, what other directions should be
considered? It is arguable that the development of new cytotoxics
has plateaued, and the chances of major advances in this area are
diminishing. Combinatorial approaches have not yielded the
successes expected and, although variations on current drugs
continue to have an impact at least similar in magnitude to that of
molecularly targeted agents, as the emergence of oxaliplatin shows
(11), developments in this area alone cannot be relied on to lead to
the type of advances needed for the treatment of currently
unresponsive cancers. There exists an arsenal of highly effective
cytotoxic agents, but their toxicity limits their use and, ultimately,
their effectiveness. Finding means to target cytotoxic agents to
tumors has only been addressed to a relatively small extent and
is almost certainly amenable to further development and exploitation. The physiologic differences between tumors and normal
tissues, such as lower pH, hypoxia, and a leaky vasculature can

1260

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst February 10, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-3786
Anticancer Drug Development

almost certainly be exploited to achieve increased tumor selectivity
(12) as can their increased needs for nutrients, such as iron and
glucose. There have been some advances on this front with hypoxia
selective agents undergoing clinical trials (13). The toxicities that
have emerged during the use of molecularly targeted agents suggest
that they too could benefit from physiologic targeting.
Another issue that has received remarkably little attention until
relatively recently is the extent of uptake of anticancer agents in
solid tumors (i.e., macroscopic uptake versus cellular uptake;
ref. 14). Recent imaging studies have shown that agents such as
doxorubicin, which is a key component of many treatment
regimens, is not able to migrate more than 40 to 50 Am (3–5
cells in diameter) from the vasculature (15, 16), leaving many cells
exposed to negligible doses and, perhaps worse still, a population
of cells to sublethal doses that can be expected to contribute to the
development of resistance. Macroscopic uptake will be an issue for
molecularly targeted agents as much as cytotoxics and other
classes of anticancer drugs. An overemphasis on cellular studies
and on achieving good cellular uptake in the earlier stages of drug
development may be resulting in the exclusion of compounds that
would be more effective in treating the whole tumor. It is likely
that to effectively attack cells in all parts of the tumor, it will be
necessary to treat with a combination of compounds, some of
which are able to diffuse throughout the tumor and others which
target the rapidly dividing cells close to the vasculature. This is a
challenge for all classes of compounds, but is a particular challenge
for molecularly targeted agents because modification to improve
macroscopic uptake is likely to affect the selectivity and
effectiveness of the targeting unless modifying groups can be
added that are lost at the appropriate point in the tumor.
Selection of anticancer agents with better macroscopic uptake
properties will require the use of more appropriate models than
two-dimensional cell cultures. Cytotoxic agents have been developed by assessment of their cytotoxicity against panels of cell lines.
However, it is not at all clear that these cell lines provide a good
model for tumors, or that activity in the cells correlates with
activity in the clinic (17). It has been shown that activity in threedimensional models, especially those that include an extracellular
matrix, provide a much better indicator of the likely in vivo activity
(17). Prodrugs, and in particular those that are activated in the
abnormal environment of solid tumors, are unlikely to show
activity in two-dimensional cell culture that reflects their activity in
humans or animals. This is known to be the case for platinum (IV)
complexes (18) and for hypoxia selective drugs, although

References
1. Collins I, Workman P. New approaches to molecular
cancer therapeutics. Nat Chem Biol 2006;2:689–700.
2. Workman P. Genomics and the second golden era of
cancer drug development. Mol Biosyst 2005;1:17–26.
3. Hutchinson E. Stressed out hearts. Nat Rev Drug Disc
2006;5:720.
4. Hayden EC. Cancer complexity slows quest for cure.
Nature 2008;455:148.
5. Jones S, Zhang X, Parsons DW, et al. Core signaling
pathways in human pancreatic cancers revealed by
global genomic analyses. Science 2008;321:1801–6.
6. Network TCGAR. Comprehensive genomic characterization defines human glioblastoma genes and core
pathways. Nature 2008;455:1061–8.
7. Parsons DW, Jones S, Zhang X, et al. An integrated
genomic analysis of human glioblastoma multiforme.
Science 2008;321:1807–12.

www.aacrjournals.org

modification of the conditions can result in mimicking of the
solid tumor environment to some degree (13). In addition,
compounds that are selectively active against metastases are
unlikely to be identified in cell culture studies.

Conclusions
The underlying principles of molecular targeting are clearly
sound, and the problems discussed here are not reasons for
abandoning this approach. Rather, molecularly targeted agents
should be seen as one part of a broad approach to the treatment of
cancer and used in conjunction with other treatments. For instance,
the combination of a compound designed to activate p53 and,
thereby, increase susceptibility to cytotoxic, apoptosis-inducing
agents could have an enormous effect on the treatment of currently
resistant cancer with cytotoxic agents. Already, some, if not most,
molecularly targeted agents have been found to be more effective
and to exhibit synergy when used in conjunction with one or more
cytotoxic agents. For instance, bevacizumab, a vascular endothelial
growth factor targeting antibody, generated a significant increase in
median survival when used in combination with carboplatin and
paclitaxel for the treatment of small-cell lung cancer, although at
the cost of an increased number of treatment-related deaths (19).
Molecular targeting, being based on a knowledge of the genetic
changes that have led to the formation of a cancer, must continue to
make a contribution to drug development over the coming decades.
However, it is probable that such agents alone will not be able to
effectively treat most cancer and, therefore, there is a need to
reassess the almost overwhelming current emphasis on molecular
targeting and find ways to make better use of new and existing
cytotoxic agents. At present, it is too soon to predict whether
imatinib will turn out to be the exception rather than the rule. However, some signs suggest it may be, and, therefore, an overemphasis
on molecular targeting has the potential to result in a further
slowing in the development of new anticancer drug treatments.

Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest
The author is a named coinventor on a number of patents relating to anticancer
agents. He may benefit from this financially through The University of Sydney’s
intellectual property rule. The author has worked as a consultant for a number of
companies involved in anticancer drug commercialization.

Acknowledgments
Received 9/29/2008; accepted 11/21/2008.

8. Abbenante G, Reid RC, Fairlie DP. ‘‘Clean’’ or ‘‘dirty’’—
just how selective do drugs need to be? Aust J Chem
2008;61:654–60.
9. Jones D, Thomas D, Yin CC, et al. Kinase domain
point mutations in Philadelphia chromosome-positive
acute lymphoblastic leukemia emerge after therapy
with BCR-ABL kinase inhibitors. Cancer 2008;113:
985–94.
10. Failes TW, Cullinane C, Diakos CI, Yamamoto N,
Lyons JG, Hambley TW. Studies of a Co(III) complex of
the MMP inhibitor marimastat: a potential hypoxia
activated prodrug. Chem Eur J 2007;13:2974–82.
11. Kelland LR. The resurgence of platinum-based cancer
chemotherapy. Nat Rev Cancer 2007;7:573–84.
12. Hambley TW. Physiological targeting to improve
anticancer drug selectivity. Aust J Chem 2008;61:647–53.
13. Denny WA. The design of drugs that target tumour
hypoxia. Aust J Chem 2004;57:821–8.
14. Tannock IF, Lee CM, Tunggal JK, Cowan DSM,

Egorin MJ. Limited penetration of anticancer drugs
through tumor tissue: a potential cause of resistance of
solid tumors to chemotherapy. Clin Cancer Res 2002;8:
878–84.
15. Primeau AJ, Rendon A, Hedley D, Lilge L, Tannock IF.
The distribution of the anticancer drug doxorubicin in
relation to blood vessels in solid tumors. Clin Cancer
Res 2005;11:8782–8.
16. Minchinton AI, Tannock IF. Drug penetration in solid
tumours. Nat Rev Cancer 2006;6:583–92.
17. Fischbach C, Chen R, Matsumoto T, et al.
Engineering tumors with 3D scaffolds. Nat Methods
2007;4:855–60.
18. Hall MD, Mellor HR, Callaghan R, Hambley TW. Basis
for design and development of platinum(IV) anticancer
complexes. J Med Chem 2007;50:3403–11.
19. Sandler A, Gray R, Perry MC, et al. Paclitaxelcarboplatin alone or with bevacizumab for non-smallcell lung cancer. N Engl J Med 2006;355:2542–50.

1261

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (4). February 15, 2009

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst February 10, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-3786
Cancer Research

Response

Professor Hambley made important points regarding the
potential problems with targeted therapies. I will highlight the areas
where we agree, because I believe that these will most likely result in
near-term advances for the treatment of patients with cancer.
1. The pace of new drug approvals is too slow.
2. Human cancers are characterized by numerous genetic mutations.
3. Solid tumors are more difficult to treat than malignancies of
hematopoietic origin.
4. Monotherapy will be less effective than combinations.
5. Cells grown on plastic are not ideal models for complex human
cancers.
6. Drug selectivity is a relative term.
7. Both the targeted and unsupervised approaches should be
pursued.
8. Drug distribution, metabolism, and uptake are critically
important to the success of any therapy.

The Pace of New Drug Approvals Is Too Slow
This is especially true from the perspective of patients and their
families. However, the slowing rate of return on investment does
not indict the targeted approach. In fact, recent evidence suggests
that inhibitors of protein kinases have a higher probability of
technical and regulatory success than most other types of oncology
drugs (Walker, I. EJC suppl; 6:abs35, 2008). Finally, as I argue in my
accompanying article, the massive accumulation of knowledge
should not be ignored in favor of returning to empirical discovery.

Human Cancers Are Characterized by Numerous
Genetic Mutations
I have lectured in the past that trying to treat a metastatic
carcinoma was like trying to untie the Gordian knot, and I urged my
colleagues to focus on preventing the knot from being tied in the
first place. It does appear, at least at first glance, that the wiring of
complex human malignancies is so complex and the pathways so
redundant that finding the right target or combination of targets
might be a fool’s errand. However, I disagree with this line of
thought for many reasons, and would paraphrase the formulation of
Dr. William Kaelin of the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute on the
subject. Kaelin has argued persuasively that the mere presence or
detection of multiple genetic abnormalities in individual tumors
does not mean that each and every one of these must be corrected
for a treatment to be effective. In his model, there is a hierarchy of
mutations, and that correcting one or two may suffice. He has
drawn an analogy to a combination tumbler style lock that must
have three tumblers each showing the correct number to be
opened, but by changing only one tumbler, the lock is impenetrable.

ment, whether in the laboratory or in the clinic, should be designed
to provide as much information as why the experiment did not
work as why it succeeded. One must never forget that one of the
earliest targeted therapies, tamoxifen for breast cancer, is reason to
suspect that malignancies of epithelial origin will also be amenable
to a targeted, personalized approach.

Monotherapy Will Be Less Effective than
Combinations
This will undoubtedly be true for targeted as well as empirically derived
therapies. As we learned from the treatment of tuberculosis, targeted
therapies used in combination will be the most effective approach.

Cells Grown on Plastic Are Not Ideal Models for
Complex Human Cancers
True, and in fact more complex models will be needed to optimally
identify new targets and predict their efficacy. It is tempting to
speculate that fresh human tumors grown in short-term culture or
in immunocompromised mice might be more predictive.

Drug Selectivity Is a Relative Term
Several pharmacologic principles need to be followed when
thinking about drug development, including potency, efficacy, and
selectivity. Potency, the concentration at which a defined effect is
achieved, must be clearly distinguished from the independent
variable of efficacy, the amplitude of the effect. Selectivity, the
ability of a drug to hit a single target, is likely related to potency, but
not necessarily related to efficacy. Although we now can routinely
assay the potency of a compound against a panel of more than 200
protein kinases to determine selectivity, we should be cautious in
interpreting these results. First, the assays are done using purified
or partially purified enzymes, with artificial substrates, under
nonstoichiometric conditions. Second, merely because a compound
shows selectivity against a protein kinase, this is no guarantee that
it does not inhibit (or, for that matter, activate) other proteins with
similar binding sites (e.g., ATP binding folds). The maxim that all
drugs are selective until they are not is a good one.

Both the Targeted and Unsupervised Approaches
Should Be Pursued
I agree, but each ‘‘pursuer’’ should prioritize the one that they are
most excited about and have the most expertise.

Drug Distribution, Metabolism, and Uptake Are
Critically Important

Solid Tumors Are More Difficult to Treat than Liquid
Tumors

Professor Hambley raises a key issue that is as important for
targeted drug developers as it is for nontargeted drug developers.
In summary, we have much to learn, and we should use all of the
knowledge at our disposal to achieve our goal: the eradication of
suffering from malignant diseases.

I also can provide a perspective of someone who ran a
pharmacology laboratory for more than 20 years. When the
hypothesis is sound, but the first few experiments fail, one should
not abandon the hypothesis too soon, especially when no other
equally compelling hypothesis has emerged. Rather, each experi-

William N. Hait
Hematology and Oncology
Ortho Biotech Oncology Research and Development,
a Division of Johnson & Johnson

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (4). February 15, 2009

1262

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst February 10, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-3786

Is Anticancer Drug Development Heading in the Right
Direction?
Trevor W. Hambley
Cancer Res 2009;69:1259-1262. Published OnlineFirst February 10, 2009.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-3786

This article cites 19 articles, 4 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/69/4/1259.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 10 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/69/4/1259.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

