Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 17

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Multilevel induction of apoptosis by microtubule-interfering
inhibitors 4β-S-aromatic heterocyclic podophyllum derivatives
causing multi-fold mitochondrial depolarization and PKA
signaling pathways in HeLa cells
Ya-Xuan Zhang1,*, Wei Zhao1,*, Ya-Jie Tang1
1

 ey Laboratory of Fermentation Engineering (Ministry of Education), Hubei Key Laboratory of Industrial Microbiology, Hubei
K
Provincial Cooperative Innovation Center of Industrial Fermentation, Hubei University of Technology, Wuhan 430068, China

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Ya-Jie Tang, e-mail: yajietang@QQ.com
Keywords: podophyllum derivatives, carbon-sulfur and carbon-amine bonds, mitochondrial depolarization, antitumor mechanism
Received: December 06, 2015     Accepted: February 28, 2016     Published: March 17, 2016

ABSTRACT
Herein is a first effort to study effect of carbon-sulfur (C-S) and carbon-nitrogen
(C-N) bonds modification on the antitumor activity of the podophyllum derivatives
in HeLa cells. Compared with the derivative modified by the C-N bond, the C-S bond
modification exhibited superior antitumor activity by further causing significant
mitochondria depolarization from three signaling pathway. First, a large number
of microtubules were depolymerized by 4β-S-heterocyclic substituted podophyllum
derivatives. The increasing free tubulin bond with voltage-dependent anion-selective
channel (VDAC). Second, cAMP-dependent protein kinase A (PKA) was activated by
4β-S-heterocyclic substituted podophyllum derivatives. And then the activated PKA
further caused significantly mitochondria depolarization. Third, the activated PKA also
activated c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) and further deceased MMP by improving the
level of reactive oxygen species. Understanding the molecular events that contribute
to drug-induced tumors apoptosis should provide a paradigm for a more rational
approach to antitumor drug design.

Tubulin was recently found to be a uniquely potent
regulator of the voltage-dependent anion channel (VDAC)
[4-6], the most abundant channel of the mitochondrial
outer membrane, which constitutes a major pathway for
ATP/ADP and other metabolites across this membrane
[7]. Dimeric tubulin induces reversible blockage of
VDAC reconstituted into a planar lipid membrane and
dramatically reduces respiration of isolated mitochondria
[5]. As tubulin promotes single-channel closure of VDAC,
we hypothesized that tubulin is a dynamic regulator of
ΔΨ, which in cultured cancer cells was assessed by flow
cytometry (FCM) of the potential-indicating fluorophore
tetramethylrhodamine methylester (TMRM) [8]. VDAC
shows both ion selectivity and voltage dependence. In
the open state, selectivity favoring anions over cations is
weak [9]. VDAC shows both ion selectivity and voltage
dependence. In the open state, selectivity favoring
anions over cations is weak. Both positive and negative
membrane potentials (50 mV) close VDAC [10]. It
remains controversial if membrane potential activates

INTRODUCTION
Chemotherapy for the treatment of cancer was
introduced into the clinic more than fifty years ago.
Although this form of therapy has been successful for the
treatment of some tumors, a causal relationship between
tumor apoptosis and most of drug molecular structure has
not been addressed. As the representative of the bioactive
natural lead compound, podophyllotoxin (PTOX) and its
analogue 4′-demethylepipodophyllotoxin (DMEP) is still a
comparatively effective drug choice in the treatment of caner
[1]. Numerous reviews emphasized the occurrence, synthesis
and applications of PTOX, the recent progress towards
development of structurally modified podophyllotoxin
possessing apoptosis inducing ability [2]. With increasing
the information about its structure-activity relationship
(SAR) wide investigations have generated exciting
chemotherapeutic candidates and successful applications of
drug development from podophyllotoxin-related lead [3].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24303

Oncotarget

VDAC conductance in intact cells. Nonetheless, VDAC
closure effectively blocks movement of most organic
anions, including respiratory substrates and creatine
phosphate, and prevents exchange of ADP and Pi for
ATP during oxidative phosphorylation[10]. Microtubule
destabilizers colchicine, and nocodazole, and the
microtubule stabilizer paclitaxel increased and decreased
cellular free tubulin, respectively, and in parallel decreased
and increased ΔΨ [11-14]. Protein kinase A (PKA)
activation by cAMP analogues, whereas PKA inhibition
hyperpolarized, consistent with reports that PKA decrease
VDAC conductance, respectively [15-23].
In our previous work, compared with the derivative
modified by carbon-nitrogen (C-N) bond, the derivative
modified by carbon-sulfur (C-S) bond exhibited superior
antitumor activity, the inhibition activity of target proteins
tubulin or Topo II, cell cycle arrest, and apoptosis induction
[24]. However, the antitumor mechanistic was unknown.
In the present work, by taking podophyllum compound as
an excellent research model for the natural lead compound,
the research is to systematically study the precise apoptosis
mechanism of the C-S and C-N bonds modification on the
antitumor activity of podophyllum derivatives. The results
can provide valuable information for other natural lead
compounds and pave the way for rational drug design.

1S were significantly higher than Compound 1N, and
Compound 1′S showed higher potent than Compound 1′N
to induce the cell death through apoptosis (Figure 1B). The
above results demonstrated that the C-S bond modification
aromatic heterocyclic podophyllum derivatives might induce
apoptosis via an extraordinary mechanism.

RESULTS
Apoptosis studies

PKA activation detection Effects on VDAC
phosphorylation of PKA inhibition and MMP of
PKA inhibition

Apoptosis induced by the C-S bond modification
podophyllum derivatives (S series compounds) and the
C-N bond modification podophyllum derivatives (N
series compounds) (Figure 1A) through depolymerizing
microtubule in HeLa cells. S series compounds induce
remarkable amounts of apoptosis of HeLa cells at 24 h, while
N series not. However, when it comes to 48 h treatments
of compounds, the differences of apoptosis between S and
N series become inconspicuous. Compared to HepG2 and
A549 cells, tumor cell HeLa exhibited the strong drug
sensitivity to the 4β-S and 4β-NH-aromatic heterocyclic
podophyllum derivative in the above in vitro cytotoxicity
experiment. As a cell type in an immortal cell line, HeLa
cells were often also used in the mechanism of antitumor
drug scientific research. So, HeLa cells were used as a cell
model for the following study. Notably, the cell cycle arrest
ratio induced by Compound 1S was higher than Compound
1N throughout the 12-48 h.The primarily G2/M arrest noted
at 24 and 48 h might be not consistent with the apoptosis.
Following the treatment of Compounds 1S, 1N, 1′S and 1′N
at the concentration of 0-5 μM for 6-48 h, the highest ratio
up to 60% and 50% of cells were detected to be undergoing
apoptosis, respectively. Interestingly, the C-S and C-N
bonds modification aromatic heterocyclic podophyllum
derivatives exhibited the similar effect on the G2/M phase
arrest, but the apoptosis cells induced by Compound

PKA cα subunit has been significantly activated by
12 compounds, especially S series, which effects better
than N series in HeLa cells at 6 h. As previously reported,
PTOX derivatives induce the apoptosis of cancer cells by
damaging the spindle assemble in mitosis (Figure 3A).
With the inhibitory effect against PKA activation of H89,
S series compounds lose the ability of phosphorylating
VDAC protein after 12 hours treatments. This shows
that VDAC phosphorylation result from PKA activation
induced by S series compounds (Figure 3B). Furthermore,
after pre-treatment of H89 against HeLa cells, effects
on MMP of S and N series compounds have been
detected respectively after their 12 and 24 treatments.
It turns out, the relative depolarization activated by
these microtubule-damage agents at 12 hours remain
unchanged basically before or after pre-treatment of PKA
inhibitor. However, when the exposal time extends into
24 hours, the mitochondria depolarization induced by
nocodazole and S series compounds have been inhibited
obviously. Therefore, the slight MMP decrease caused by
6 hours treatments of microtubule-damage agents is PKAindependent which means that it may just results from
the free tubulin and unphosphorylated VADC. Relatively,
PKA activation induced by S series compounds more
contributes to the effects on MMP of 12 hours treatments
through VDAC phosphorylation (Figure 3C).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Mitochondrial membrane depolarisation and
VDAC phosphorylation
Comparing with normal cells, Microtubule of
treated cells depolymerized by colchine and polymerized
by paclitaxel. S series compounds have higher microtubule
depolymerizing ability against HeLa cells remarkably
than N series. The expression of total VDAC remains
substantially unchanged, after 12 h treatments of S and
N series compounds. While only the S series compounds
up-regulate the phosphated VDAC protein. S series
compounds may induce MMP decreased by enhancing
combinations of free tubulin and VDAC phosphorylation
(Figure 2A). MMP decreased remarkably after treaments
of S series compounds at 24 h. Compared with N series, S
series compounds have higher ability of depolarzing HeLa
cells remarkably (Figure 2B). N series compounds may
not induce mitochondrial depolarizing for apoptosis.

24304

Oncotarget

ROS production detection and effects on MMP
of ROS inhibition

Effects on ROS production and apoptosis of
PKA inhibition

ROS production caused by S series compounds is
more and earlier than that of N series. ROS significantly
induced by S series at 12 h in HeLa cells. Timedependent detection shows that ROS production increase
significantly after 14 h treatments of S series compounds,
while that of N series start to rise at 18 h (Figure 4A).
ROS inhibitor blocks depolarization induced by S
series compounds. Mitochondria depolarization results
from increased ROS caused by S series compounds in
HeLa cells at 24 h. ROS production induced by S series
compounds results in mitochondria depolarization for
apoptosis (Figure 4B).

Mitochondria depolarization results from PKA
activation caused by S series compounds in HeLa cells at
24 h. The increasing ROS production at 18 h results from
PKA activation caused by S series compounds in HeLa
cells. The increasing ROS production at 18 h results
from PKA activation caused by S series compounds in
HeLa cells. N series compounds may induce another
apoptosic signal pathway different from S series (their
lack of ability of depolymerizing MT and depolarzating
cells). ROS are formed as a natural byproduct of the
normal metabolism of oxygen and have important roles
in cell signaling and homeostasis. However, excessive

Figure 1: A. four couples respectively podophyllotoxin derivatives substituted by carbon-sulfur- and carbon-nitrogen-bond; B. Apoptosis
detection in HeLa cells using annexin V and propidium iodide (PI) double staining after 24 and 48 h treatments of nocodazole, podophyllotoxin,
and S series and N series compounds. Each value represents the mean ± SE of three independent experiments. *p <0.05. **p <0.01.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24305

Oncotarget

ROS can induce apoptosis through both the extrinsic
and intrinsic pathways. In this study, a significant early
increase of ROS in cells were induced by Compound 1S
and Compound 1N compared to the control (the cells
incubated with no drug) after 6 and 12 h. After 24 h
of induction with Compound 1S and Compound 1N, a
rapid increase of the fluorescence intensity of ROS was
observed. The fluorescence intensity of ROS further
increased from 105–106 to 106–107.2 for a half of cells
after 48 h induction with Compound 1S. While, the
fluorescence intensity of ROS decreased from 105-106
to 104–105 for the most part cells after 48 h induction

with Compound 1N (Figure 4C). Compared with the
Compound 1N, the amount of ROS (calculated as:
the fluorescence intensity of ROS × the count of cells
containing ROS) induction with Compound 1S were
improved by 4.8 times after 48 h. The above results
demonstrated that the C-S bond modification aromatic
heterocyclic podophyllum derivatives showed the higher
potency for generating ROS than those of the C-N
bond in HeLa cells (Figure 4C). And this is consistent
with Compound 1N being less efficient and weaker
than Compound 1S on the activated caspase-9 in the
mitochondrial apoptotic pathways.

Figure 2: A. Total VDAC detected by Western blot and VDAC phosphorylation detected with phospho-stain after 12 h teartments of
nocodazole, podophyllotoxin, and S series and N series compounds; B. Mitochondrial depolarization detection in HeLa cells using TMRM
staining after 0-36 h treatment of nocodazole, podophyllotoxin, and S series and N series compounds. Each value represents the mean ± SE
of three independent experiments. *p <0.05. **p <0.01.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24306

Oncotarget

Figure 3: A. PKA catalytic subunits alpha and beta detected by Western blot after 6 h teartments of nocodazole, podophyllotoxin, and S
series and N series compounds; B. VDAC phosphorylation detected with phospho-stain after 1 h per-teatments of PKA inhibitor H89 and
then 12 h teartments of nocodazole, podophyllotoxin, and S series and N series compounds. C. Mitochondrial depolarization detection in
HeLa cells using TMRM staining after 1 h per-teatments of PKA inhibitor H89 and then 24 h teartments of nocodazole, podophyllotoxin,
and S series and N series compounds. Each value represents the mean ± SE of three independent experiments. *p <0.05. **p <0.01.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24307

Oncotarget

Figure 4: A. ROS production detection in HeLa cells using DCFH-DA staining after 8-18 h treatments of nocodazole, podophyllotoxin, and

S series and N series compounds; B. Time-dependent manners of ROS production after 6-48 h treatments of nocodazole, podophyllotoxin,
and S series and N series compounds; C. Mitochondrial depolarization detection in HeLa cells using TMRM staining after 1 h per-teatments
of ROS inhibitor NAC and then 24 h teartments of nocodazole, podophyllotoxin, and S series and N series compounds. Each value
represents the mean ± SE of three independent experiments. *p <0.05. **p <0.01.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24308

Oncotarget

DISCUSSION

The first round of signal regulation in HeLa cells is
induced by the activation of PKA. Meanwhile, the direct
effector of second messenger cAMP, PKA is activated
by S-series compounds after 6 hours treatment. On
the one hand, VDAC is phosphorylated to enhance its
combination with free tubulin leading to mitochondria
depolarization. On the other hand, JNK signaling pathway
is activated to promote apoptosis in MAPK (mitogenactivated protein kinases) cascade reaction (Figure 5).
Phosphorylated JNK results in MMP critical decreasing
and further mitochondrial dysfunction by inducing a
mass of increasing ROS production. Massive ROS from
mitochondria released into cytoplasm begin to switch
second round of signal regulation through activating
p38 MAPK-mediated apoptosis signaling and inhibiting
ERK-mediated in growth and survival signaling at

Sulfur and nitrogen atom exist in natural products
and clinical drugs widely, they made a significant
contribution for the balance of heteroatom substituent
in drugs molecules. This bioisosteric replacement may
dramatically change the biological activity of the natural
lead compound. Based on four couples respectively
podophyllotoxin derivatives substituted by C-S and
C-N bond as object, we explore the specific molecular
mechanism of difference between their effects on
anticancer activity against human cervical carcinoma
HeLa cells. It turns out S-series compounds substituted
by C-S bond have higher depolymerization ability on
their target microtubule, which is superior to N-series
compounds substituted by C-N bond.

Figure 5: Effect of nocodazole, podophyllotoxin, and S series and N series compounds on the levels of the MAPKs,
JNK; ERK; p38 and their phosphorylated forms using Western blot analysis after 6 and 24 h treatments.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24309

Oncotarget

the same time, leading to HeLa cells apoptotic death.
However, comparing with S series compounds, N
series compounds just activate the first round of signal
regulation after 12-hours treatments, which is much later
(Figure 6). As a result of their lower cellular uptake, N
series compounds are impeded getting into HeLa cells to
play their antitumour roles [24, 25]. The electronegativity
of sulfur atom is lower than that of nitrogen atom, the
hydrophobic thioether bond (-S-) is better than imino
bond (-NH-) to improve the cellular uptake of the
compounds which may enhance the biological activity. N
series compouds with slight microtubule depolymerizing

ability induce mitochondrial apoptosis in HeLa cells
by acvtivating PKA signaling after treatments delay
(Figure 7). Most of the currently available antitumor
drugs have been discovered empirically by screening of
large numbers of compounds for efficacy against tumor
models[26-28]. The rational design of a drug is usually
based on biochemical and physiological differences
in tumor. Herein, the difference between the carbonsulfur (C-S) and carbon-amine (C-N) bond modification
on the antitumor activity of natural lead compound
podophyllum derivatives and their precise mechanism
were systematically studied for the first time.

Figure 6: A. ROS production detection in HeLa cells using DCFH-DA staining after 1 h per-teatments of PKA inhibitor H89 and then 24 h
teartments of nocodazole, podophyllotoxin, and S series and N series compounds; B. Apoptosis detection in HeLa cells using annexin V and
propidium iodide (PI) double staining after 1 h per-teatments of PKA inhibitor H89 and then 24 h teartments of nocodazole, podophyllotoxin,
and S series and N series compounds. Each value represents the mean ± SE of three independent experiments. *p <0.05. **p <0.01.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24310

Oncotarget

Figure 7: The integrated apoptotic pathways, a schematic diagram showing some of the known components of the
intrinsic and the death receptor apoptotic programs and the mitochondrial apoptotic pathways. Symbols: the pathways
were activated by S series compounds (→); the pathways were activated N series compounds (→).

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Cell apoptosis analysis

Inmunofluorescence

The HeLa cell line was used for cell apoptosis. Cells
(20000 per mL) were incubated with several concentrations of
the compounds or drugs for 6-48 h, and incubated in DMEM
medium supplemented with 12% fetal calf serum (FCS), 2
mM L -glutamine, and 100 U/mL penicillin and streptomycin
at 37°C and 5% CO2. The cells were washed with PBS twice,
centrifuged at 1500 rpm for 5 min, and 5-105 cells were
collected. Binding buffer suspension (500 μL) was added to the
cells, and then 5 μL of the FITC-Annexin V mix was added.
Next, 5 μL of the PI mix was added, and the suspension was
mixed and kept at room temperature for 30 min in the dark.
Analysis was with a BD accur C6 flow cytometer.

HeLa cells were continuously maintained in
DMEM medium supplemented with 12% fetal calf
serum (FCS), 2 mM/L -glutamine, and 100 U/mL
penicillin and streptomycin at 37°C and 5% CO2.
HeLa cells (200000 per mL) were plated a onto
6-well tissue culture plates containing 12 mm round
coverslips, cultured overnight, and then treated with
drugs at different concentrations or drug vehicle (0.1%
DMSO) for 24 h. Attached cells were permeabilized.
Cytoskeletons were incubated with α-tubulin, washed
twice, and incubated with FITC goat anti-mouse
immunoglobulins. The coverslips were washed, and
1 μg/mL DAPI to stain chromatin was added. The
mixture was incubated for 30 min. After the samples
were washed, they were examined and photographed
using an Olympus epifluorescence microscope. The
images were recorded with a Hamamatsu 4742-95
cooled CCD camera.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Western blot analysis
For electrophoresis, the proteins were separated
by sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS–PAGE). The proteins were then transferred
to a nitrocellulose membrane, which was blocked with
5% skimmed milk in phosphate buffered saline Tween-20

24311

Oncotarget

(PBST). A speciffc primary antibody was added to bind
the target proteins for either 1 h at room temperature or
overnight at 4°C. A horseradish peroxidase (HRP) conjugated
secondary antibody was added to the membrane after the
primary antibody was washed off. All signals were detected
after the HRP was activated by enhanced chemiluminescence.

21376066, 81503112, 21506049, and 31570054),
and Hubei Provincial Natural Science Foundation for
Innovative Research Team (2015CFA013) are gratefully
acknowledged. Prof. Ya-Jie Tang also thanks the National
High Level Talents Special Support Plan (“Million People
Plan”) by the Organization Department of the CPC Central
Committee (2014), Training Program for Top Talents
in Hubei Province (2013), and Training Program for
Huanghe Talents in Wuhan Municipality (2014).

ROS production analysis
Changes in intracellular ROS levels were
determined by measuring the oxidative conversion of cell
permeable 2′,7′-dichlorofluorescein diacetate (DCFHDA) to fluorescent di-chlorofluorescein (DCF) in flow
cytometry (BD Accuri™ C6). Cells in 6-well culture
dishes were incubated with DMEM for 6, 12, 24 and 48
h in the absence or presence of test compounds. The cells
were washed with DMEM and incubated with DCFH-DA
(10 μM) at 37°C for 30 min. Then DCF fluorescence of
10000 cells was detected by flow cytometry.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST
None declared.

REFERENCES
1.	 Liu YQ, Yang L, Tian X. Podophyllotoxin: Current
Perspectives. Curr Bioact Compd. 2007; 3:37-66.
2.	 Kamal A, Ali Hussaini SM, Shaheer Malik M. Recent
Developments towards podophyllotoxin congeners as
potential apoptosis inducers. Anticancer Agents Med Chem.
2014; 10:565-574.

Mitochondrial membrane depolarisation assay
Add 100 nM Tetramethylrhodamine, methyl ester
(TMRM) directly to cells (5×105/ml) in DMEM. Incubate
the cells for 5 min at 37°C and measure the level of
fluorescence in cells by flow cytometry using appropriate
excitation and emission filters. TMRE is optimally excited
at 549 nm and emits at 574 nm but can also be excited
using a 488 nm laser available on most flow cytometers.

3.	 Gordaliza M, Castro MA, Miguel del Corral JM, San
Feliciano A. Antitumor properties of podophyllotoxin and
related compounds. Curr Pharm Design. 2000; 6:1811-1839.
4.	 Maldonado EN, Patnaik J, Mullins MR, Lemasters JJ. Free
tubulin modulates mitochondrial membrane potential in
cancer cells. Cancer Res. 2010; 70:10192-10201.
5.	 Maldonado EN, Sheldon KL, DeHart DN, Patnaik J,
Manevich Y, Townsend DM, Bezrukov SM, Rostovtseva
TK, Lemasters JJ. Voltage-dependent anion channels
modulate mitochondrial metabolism in cancer cells:
regulation by free tubulin and erastin. J Biol Chem. 2013;
288:11920-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.433847.

Phosphorylation detection
Phosphorylation of VDAC was detected using
Pro-Q Diamond phospho-protein stain (Invitrogen). The
bands were imaged at 532–560 nm excitation on a Fuji gel
scanner, and the difference in staining between control and
phosphorylated VDAC was quantified using “Multi Gauge
V3.0” software. The VDAC band intensities with gel
background subtracted were normalized versus intensity
of the untreated samples in each corresponding gel. All
gels were analyzed in raw, unmodified state.

6.	 Sheldon KL, Maldonado EN, Lemasters JJ, Rostovtseva
TK, Bezrukov SM. Phosphorylation of voltagedependent anion channel by serine/threonine kinases
governs its interaction with tubulin. PLoS ONE. 2011;
6:25539-35548.
7.	 Insel PA, Zhang L, Murray F, Yokouchi H, Zambon AC.
Cyclic AMP is both a pro-apoptotic and anti-apoptotic
second messenger. Acta Physiol. 2012; 204:277-287

Statistical analysis

8.	 McCommis KS, Baines CP. The role of VDAC in
cell death: Friend or foe. BBA-Biomembranes. 2012;
1818:1444-1450.

Results are expressed as mean standard error (±SE)
of means (SE) for separate groups. Group means SE were
compared by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA)
followed by Turkey’s post hoc test. Probability, p < 0.05,
0.01 was considered statistically significant.

9.	 Rostovtseva TK, Bezrukov SM. VDAC inhibition
by tubulin and its physiological implications. BBABiomembranes. 2012; 1818:1526-1535.
10.	 Rostovtseva TK, Sheldon KL, Hassanzadeh E, Monge
C, Saks V, Bezrukov SM, Sackett DL. Tubulin binding
blocks mitochondrial voltage-dependent anion channel
and regulates respiration. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2008;
105:18746-18751.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Financial supports from the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (NSFC, Project Nos.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24312

Oncotarget

11.	 Jordan MA. Mechanism of action of antitumor drugs that
interact with microtubules and tubulin. Curr Med Chem.
2002; 2:1-17.

and cellular migration. Int. J. Biochem. Cell B. 2010;
42:346-58.
21.	 Tortora G, Ciardiellom F. Protein kinase A as target for
novel integrated strategies of cancer therapy. Ann. NY
Acad Sci. 2002; 968:139-147.

12.	 Perez EA. Microtubule inhibitors: Differentiating
tubulin-inhibiting agents based on mechanisms of action,
clinical activity, and resistance. Mol Cancer Ther. 2009;
8:2086-2095.

22.	 Enns LC, Ladiges W. Protein kinase A signaling as an antiaging target. Ageing Res. Rev. 2010; 9:269-272.

13.	 Kavallaris M. Microtubules and resistance to tubulinbinding agents. Nat Rev Cancer 2010; 10:194-204.

23.	 Taylor SS, Kim C, Cheng CY, Brown SH, Wu J, Kannan
N. Signaling through cAMP and cAMP-dependent protein
kinase: Diverse strategies for drug design. BBA- Proteins
Proteom. 2008; 1784:16-26.

14.	 Kavallaris M, Verrills NM, Hill BT. Anticancer therapy
with novel tubulin-interacting drugs. Drug Resistance
Updates. 2001; 4:392-401.

24.	 Li JL, Zhao W, Zhou C, Zhang YX, Li HM, Tang YL,
Liang XH, Chen T, Tang YJ. Comparison of carbon-sulfur
and carbon-amine bond in therapeutic drug: 4β-S-aromatic
heterocyclic podophyllum derivatives display antitumor
activity. Scientific Reports. 2015; 5:14814.

15.	 Kurosu T, Hernández AI, Wolk J, Liu J, Schwartz JH.
α/β-tubulin are A kinase anchor proteins for type I PKA in
neurons. Brain Res. 2009; 1251:3-64.
16.	 Chen YQ, Xie X. Podophyllotoxin induces CREB
phosphorylation and CRE-driven gene expression via PKA
but not MAPKs. Mol Cells. 2010; 29:41-50.

25.	 McKeage MJ, Berners-Price SJ, Galettis P, Bowen RJ,
Brouwer W, Ding L, Zhuang L, Baguley BC. Role of
lipophylicity in determining cellular uptake and antitumor
activity of gold phosphine complexes. Cancer Chemother
Pharmacol. 2000; 46:343-350.

17.	 Lee D, Lee HW, Hong S, Choi BI, Kim HW, Han SB.
Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate 3-kinase a is a novel microtubuleassociated protein: PKA-dependent phosphoregulation
of microtubule binding affinity. J Biol Chem. 2012;
287:15981-15995.

26.	 L. G. Wang, X. M. Liu, W. Kreis, D. R. Budman, The effect
of antimicrotubule agents on signal transduction pathways
of apoptosis: a review. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 1999;
44:355-361.

18.	 Srivastava RK, Srivastava AR, Korsmeyer SJ, Nesterova M,
Cho-Chung YS, Longo DL. Involvement of microtubules
in the regulation of Bcl2 phosphorylation and apoptosis
through cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase. Mol Cell
Biol 1998; 18:3509-3517.
19.	 Tasken K, Aandahl EM. Localized effects of cAMP
mediated by distinct routes of protein kinase A. Physiol
Rev. 2004; 84:137-167.

27.	 T. H. Wang, H. S. Wang, H. Ichijo, P. Giannakakou,
J. S. Foster, T. Fojo, J. Wimalasena, Microtubuleinterfering agents activate c-Jun N-termina kinase/stressactovated protein kinase through both Ras and ppoptosis
signal-regulating kinase pathways. J Biol Chem. 1998;
273:4928-4936.

20.	 Chioni A, Shao D, Grose R, Djamgoz MBA. Protein kinase
A and regulation of neonatal Nav1.5 expression in human
breast cancer cells: Activity-dependent positive feedback

28.	 Feng R, Li S, Lu C, Andreas C, Stolz DB, Mapara MY,
Lentzsch S. Targeting the microtubular network as a new
antimyeloma strategy. Mol Cancer Ther. 2011; 10:1886-1896.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24313

Oncotarget

