NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 September 21.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Published in final edited form as:
Oncogene. 2013 March 21; 32(12): 1530–1538. doi:10.1038/onc.2012.173.

Context-dependent differences in miR-10b breast oncogenesis
can be targeted for the prevention and arrest of lymph node
metastasis
MV Yigit1, SK Ghosh1, M Kumar1, V Petkova2, A Kavishwar1, A Moore1, and Z Medarova1
1Department of Radiology, Molecular Imaging Laboratory, Athinoula A Martinos Center for
Biomedical Imaging, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Charlestown,
MA, USA
2Beth

Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA

Abstract
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Metastases, and not the primary tumor from which they originate, are the main reason for
mortality from carcinoma. Although the molecular mechanisms behind metastasis are poorly
understood, it is clear that epigenetic dysregulation at the level of microRNA expression is a key
characteristic of the metastatic process that can be exploited for therapy. Here, we describe an
miRNA-targeted therapeutic approach for the prevention and arrest of lymph node metastasis.
Therapy relies on the inhibition of the pro-metastatic microRNA-10b. It is delivered to primary
and lymph node metastatic tumor cells using an imaging-capable nanodrug that is designed to
specifically home to these tissues. Treatment of invasive human breast tumor cells (MDAMB-231) with the nanodrug in vitro downregulates miR-10b and abolishes the invasion and
migration of the tumor cells. After intravenous delivery to mice bearing orthotopic MDAMB-231-luc-D3H2LN tumors, the nanodrug accumulates in the primary tumor and lymph nodes.
When treatment is initiated before metastasis to lymph nodes, metastasis is prevented. Treatment
after the formation of lymph node metastases arrests the metastatic process without a concomitant
effect on primary tumor growth raising the possibility of a context-dependent variation in miR-10b
breast oncogenesis.

Keywords

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

imaging; miRNA; metastasis; miR-10b; nanoparticle; therapy

INTRODUCTION
The process of metastasis occurs in two major phases: (i) physical translocation of cancer
cells from the primary tumor to a distant organ and (ii) colonization of that organ by tumor
cells. Invariably, the first step in the metastatic cascade is the acquisition of an invasive
phenotype by the tumor cells that permits local colonization of the surrounding tissue and
entry into the microvasculature of the lymph and/or blood systems.1

© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited All rights reserved
Correspondence: Dr A Moore or Dr Z Medarova, Department of Radiology, Molecular Imaging Laboratory, MGH/MIT/HMS
Athinoula A Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Massachusetts General Hospital/Harvard Medical School, Building 75, 13th
Street, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA. amoore@helix.mgh.harvard.edu or zmedarova@partners.org.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Supplementary Information accompanies the paper on the Oncogene website (http://www.nature.com/onc)

Yigit et al.

Page 2

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Recently, several microRNAs have been identified that mediate the process of tumor cell
migration and tissue invasion.2–6 One of these microRNAs, miR-10b, is involved in the
metastasis of a number of adenocarcinomas, including breast,2,6 lung, colon and bladder
cancers.7
In the present study, we focused on targeting miR-10b, with the goal of alleviating breast
cancer metastasis. We reasoned that using an miR-10b-inhibiting nanodrug (MN-antimiR10b) capable of homing to primary and lymph node metastatic tumor cells, we would be
able to significantly decrease the ability of primary tumor cells to metastasize to
locoregional lymph nodes.
The physicochemical properties of the synthesized nanodrug promote mechanical targeting
to the tissues of interest, while the molecular design facilitates specific delivery to the tumor
cells within these tissues. In particular, the design of the nanodrug (MN-anti-miR10b)
features ultrasmall magnetic nanoparticles (MN)8,9 with RGD (tripeptide arginine-glycineaspartic acid)-targeting capabilities10–12 decorated with locked nucleic acid (LNA)
oligonucleotides as a therapeutic moiety.13–15

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The inherent capacity of MN-anti-miR10b for noninvasive imaging allowed for obtaining
semi-quantitative information about nanodrug bioavailability in target tissues by magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) and the whole-body distribution by near infrared fluorescence
optical imaging. This information could be invaluable in a clinical setting for determining
the need for re-treatment on a patient-by-patient basis, opening up the possibility for
designing individualized therapeutic regimens.
The size and composition of the MN used in this study promote their extended persistence in
the circulation (blood half-life >12 h) and transcytosis into the tumoral and lymph node
interstitium, thereby enabling a mechanical targeting of therapy to the tumoral and lymph
node compartments.16 As a result of miR-10b inhibition with the nanodrug, we observed
virtually complete prevention of metastatic dissemination from the primary tumor and
growth arrest of already formed lymph node metastases in an animal model of breast cancer.
This suggested a context-dependent role of miR-10b in metastasis. Whereas in the primary
tumor, miR-10b appeared to control metastasis but not tumor growth, in the lymph node
metastases, it influenced macroscopic tumor formation. We believe that the approach
described here is highly relevant not only to metastatic breast cancer but also to a number of
adenocarcinomas, in which miR-10b plays a role.17 On a broader scale, the delivery strategy
illustrated by our studies could provide a useful research tool for the elucidation of contextdependent differences in miRNA function and the translation of this knowledge to a clinical
setting.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

RESULTS
MN-anti-miR10b inhibits human miR-10b and reduces the invasion and migration potential
of MDA-MB-231 human breast adenocarcinoma cells
To develop an miR-10b-inhibiting nanodrug detectable by noninvasive imaging, we
employed a strategy previously described by us8,9 to synthesize small amine terminated
dextran-coated MN. These nanoparticles were labeled with the near infrared fluorescent dye
Cy5.5 and conjugated to the tumor-targeting peptide cRGD that has a high affinity for αvβ3
integrin. We functionalized the nanoparticles with LNA antisense oligonucleotides targeting
human miR-10b (anti-miR-10b), known to promote tumor cell metastasis (MN-antimiR10b; Figure 1a).2

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 September 21.

Yigit et al.

Page 3

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The nanodrug was taken up by nearly 100% of the cells, as revealed by flow cytometry
(Figure 1b). In addition, all of its components were present intracellularly, as shown by
confocal microscopy (Figure 1c). The nanodrug mediated an 87.8±6.2% inhibition of
miR-10b (Figure 1d), indicating that our delivery method is highly efficient.
Nanodrug uptake was also studied in the highly metastatic breast cancer cell line 4T1 to
demonstrate a broader application of the design. The uptake was confirmed by flow
cytometry. The nanodrug mediated a significant downregulation of miR-10b levels in this
cell line, which expresses very high levels of miR-10b, attesting to the robustness of our
delivery approach (Supplementary Figure 1).
To study the phenotypic effects of miR-10b knockdown by the nanodrug, we evaluated the
invasion and migration potential of MDA-MB-231-GFP cells treated with MN-anti-miR10b.
Remarkably, MN-anti-miR10b treatment abrogated the migration (Figure 2a) and invasion
(Figure 2b) capabilities of the cells.
In-vivo imaging can provide information about the time course of nanodrug accumulation
and bioavailability in target organs

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Having established in vitro that targeting of miR-10b with MN-anti-miR10b results in
efficient cellular delivery, miRNA knockdown and inhibition of the invasion and migration
of the tumor cells, we set out to determine if therapy could be delivered to primary and
metastatic tumor cells in vivo. We treated mice bearing orthotopic human breast
adenocarcinoma tumors with MN-anti-miR10b or an inactive nanodrug (MN-scr-miR). To
assess the in vivo bioavailability of the nanodrug, we relied on its image-guidance
properties. In-vivo MRI was used to obtain information about the time course of nanodrug
delivery to tumor cells.9,18 MRI revealed that the nanodrug was successfully delivered to the
tumors, as shown by the decrease in transverse relaxation time (Figure 3a). Quantitative
analysis suggested a tendency towards MN-anti-miR10b build-up in the tissue after the
second treatment session (Figure 3b).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

We also employed near infrared fluorescence optical imaging to study the whole-body
bioavailability of the MN-anti-miR10b. The probe displayed uptake by the primary tumor as
well as by the superficial brachial, inguinal and cervical lymph nodes, confirming that this is
a suitable approach for combined tumor and lymph node delivery of the therapeutic agent
(Figure 4a). The accumulation of the nanodrug in the primary tumor and lymph nodes was
also confirmed by ex-vivo imaging (Figure 4b). Quantitative analysis indicated a
significantly higher uptake of the nanodrug by the primary tumor and lymph nodes relative
to muscle tissue (Figure 4c). We also evaluated the cellular distribution of the nanodrug
histologically in frozen tumor and lymph node sections. Near infrared fluorescence
represented the Cy5.5-labeled agent. It revealed extensive uptake of MN-anti-miR10b by the
primary tumor cells (Figure 4d). As shown below, treatment with MN-anti-miR10b led to
the inhibition of metastatic growth. Therefore, to show the nanodrug uptake in lymph nodes
we used an inactive drug (MN-scr-miR). As expected, the nanodrug accumulated in both
macrophages and lymph node metastases (Figure 4e). In the absence of metastatic tumor
cells, the nanodrug distributed principally to macrophages (Supplementary Figure 2).
MN-anti-miR10b can prevent metastasis
The feasibility of preventing tumor cell dissemination from the primary tumor was assessed
by treating tumor-bearing animals with MN-anti-miR10b or MN-scr-miR beginning before
the formation of detectable lymph node metastases. The expectation was that
downregulation of the pro-metastatic miR-10b would elicit a therapeutic effect manifested
as a reduction in metastatic burden.2,6 Nude mice were orthotopically implanted with the

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 September 21.

Yigit et al.

Page 4

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

luciferase-expressing MDA-MB-231-luc-D3H2LN cell line, which metastasizes to the
lymph nodes by 4 weeks after tumor implantation. Treatment with the nanodrug was
initiated at 2 weeks after tumor implantation, before the formation of detectable lymph node
metastases, and involved tail vein injections (10 mg/kg of iron) delivered once a week for 4
weeks. In-vivo bioluminescence imaging was performed during each treatment and was
used to visualize and quantify the metastatic burden from the luciferase-expressing cell line.
It revealed that by the end of the treatment course, the signal in the experimental animals
treated with MN-anti-miR10b was at pre-metastatic levels, indicating a prevention of tumor
cell metastasis from the primary tumor to lymph nodes (Figure 5a). In contrast, there was
visible dissemination of tumor cells to the lymph nodes of control animals treated with the
MN-scr-miR. This therapeutic effect was highly reproducible (Figure 5b).
Histopathological analysis of the lymph nodes confirmed the absence of detectable
metastases in animals treated with the nanodrug. Conversely, there was extensive invasion
of the lymph nodes by tumor cells in control animals (injected with MN-scr-miR)
accompanied by a disruption of lymph node architecture and the formation of reverse
follicles (Figure 5c). These findings established that our nano-delivery method could
successfully access the primary tumor and engage the tumor cell miRNA machinery in a
sequence-specific way. The result is the effective prevention of metastasis.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

MN-anti-miR10b can arrest the growth of lymph node metastasis
In order to see if the nanotherapeutic method could alleviate metastatic disease once it had
spread beyond the primary tumor and into the lymph nodes, we initiated treatment with MNanti-miR10b 4 weeks after tumor cell implantation, subsequent to the formation of lymph
node metastases. As before, treatment with the nanodrug involved weekly intravenous
injections (10 mg/kg of iron) for 4 weeks. As seen in Figures 6a and b, there was a 20-fold
increase in lymph node metastatic burden in control animals treated with MN-scr-miR. By
contrast, there was a relative arrest of metastastatic growth in the experimental animals
treated with the active nanodrug, MN-anti-miR10b, without a concomitant effect on primary
tumor growth (Figure 6c; Supplementary Figure 3). This effect was accompanied by
induction of the known miR-10b target HOXD106 at both sites (Supplementary Figure 4),
indicating that the function of miR-10b in tumor cell migration is conserved between the
primary and lymph node metastatic tumor cells.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Consequently, the relative arrest of metastasis by miR-10b inhibition was surprising.
Metastatic burden is a result of both repopulation of the distant organ by cells from the
primary tumor and proliferation of already metastasized tumor cells. In our studies, the
absence of an effect on primary tumor growth suggested that miR-10b did not influence
tumor cell proliferation or apoptosis. The latter observation is also supported by the prior
literature.6 Therefore, the observed arrest of metastatic growth in the lymph nodes pointed to
a context-dependent variation in miR-10b function. It implied that whereas in the primary
tumors miR-10b only appeared to control metastatic dissemination, at the lymph node
metastatic site it played a role in macroscopic tumor formation.
To investigate this possibility, we first surgically removed the primary tumor after the
establishment of lymph node metastases and then initiated treatment with the nanodrug. This
experiment would allow us to see whether the arrest of metastatic growth in lymph nodes in
the MN-anti-miR10b-treated mice was partly due to reduced tumor cell proliferation in the
lymph nodes, independently of continued migration and invasion of cells from the primary
tumor. After the completion of the treatment, we observed metastatic growth in the lymph
nodes of MN-scr-miR-treated mice, but not in MN-anti-miR10b-treated mice
(Supplementary Figure 5).

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 September 21.

Yigit et al.

Page 5

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

To further investigate the possibility of a context-dependent miR-10b role in metastasis, we
performed microRNA microarray analysis of the MN-anti-miR10b-treated MDA-MB-231luc-D3H2LN cells. Of the identified differentially expressed miRNAs (Supplementary
Figure 6), miR-200c and miR-155 were notable for their coordinate downregulation with
miR-10b, because both miRNAs have previously been validated as context-dependent
players in metastasis. Namely, while in the primary tumors they serve as inhibitors of
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and metastasis, at the distant site, they promote
macroscopic tumor formation.19,20 Consequently, their coordinate downregulation with
miR-10b is in line with the hypothesis that miR-10b can participate not only in the
regulation of tumor cell dissemination but also macroscopic tumor formation, depending on
the specific tumor cell microenvironment.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Evidence about the specific mechanisms behind this context-dependent miR-10b role was
derived from histological analysis of apoptosis and proliferation in the primary tumors vs
lymph nodes of experimental and control animals. We observed no differences in the
apoptotic rates of the primary tumor cells or lymph node metastases between experimental
and control animals (Figure 7a; Supplementary Figure 7). However, in the presence of
miR-10b inhibition, tumor cell proliferation was significantly reduced in the lymph node
metastases but not in the primary tumor cells (Figure 7b; Supplementary Figure 7). This
effect could account for the observed arrest of metastatic growth in the lymph nodes while
growth of the primary tumor was still maintained.
Finally, as an important step towards establishing the feasibility of applying our nanodrug in
a true therapeutic context, we assessed the liver toxicity of the agent. We measured aspartate
aminotransferase and alanine aminotransferase levels in mice following treatment with the
nanodrug and using phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) treatment, as control. The aspartate
aminotransferase levels were 78.5±1.8 and 77.6±12.7 (IU/l), in nanodrug and PBS-treated
animals, respectively. The corresponding alanine aminotransferase levels were 17.9±0.4 and
15.3±0.6 (IU/l). These data indicate the absence of acute liver toxicity associated with the
nanodrug.

DISCUSSION

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The relevance of miRNA to human cancer became apparent just within the last decade.21
Since then, there has been a growing list of reports demonstrating the critical role played by
miRNA in cancer initiation and progression. miRNAs represent a promising therapeutic
target because their expression is uniquely altered in tumor cells and represents a `hub' of
carcinogenesis such that a single miRNA can coordinately affect the expression of multiple
genes. In this sense, miRNAs represent molecular switches that can be `turned on or off' to
elicit a comprehensive therapeutic response.
The present study describes the application of nanotherapy targeting miRNA-10b for the
prevention of metastatic breast cancer. Our findings also identify an unexpected effect
manifested as arrest of metastatic growth in the lymph nodes, suggesting a contextdependent role for miR-10b in breast cancer metastasis that can be utilized to inhibit
metastatic progression at the lymph node stage of the disease. In particular, inhibition of
miR-10b mediated not only the prevention of metastatic spread from the primary tumor to
lymph nodes but also the arrest of metastatic growth in the already formed lymph node
metastases. A deeper investigation into the mechanisms behind this effect suggested
context-dependent differences in miR-10b oncogenesis. Whereas in the primary tumor,
miR-10b appeared to control metastasis but not tumor growth, in the lymph nodes, the role
of the miRNA also extended to inhibition of tumor proliferation, which could be in part due
to coordinate changes in the expression of miR-200c and miR-155.

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 September 21.

Yigit et al.

Page 6

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Such context-dependent differences in miRNA function have only begun to emerge. It is
now known that a single miRNA can regulate the expression of multiple principal targets in
a specific microenvironment. In different cellular contexts, the same miRNA may exhibit
diverse functions, depending on the repertoire and stoichiometry of its direct mRNA
targets.22 Specifically, whereas in breast cancer cells, miR-10b promotes invasion and
metastasis through post-transcriptional regulation of HOXD10, in glioblastoma, miR-10b
promotes proliferation and prevents death of cancer cells by targeting cell-cycle inhibitors
and pro-apoptotic genes.23

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

While differences in miRNA function between different tumor types have been established
for some time now, it is not until recently that context-dependent distinctions between
primary and metastatic cells of the same tumor were identified. Notable examples include
miR-200c and miR-155. Both microRNAs have a well-documented role as inhibitors of
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and metastasis. However, whereas in mammary fat
pads the two miRNAs prevent tumor dissemination, at the metastatic site apparently they
maintain the epithelial phenotype of tumor cells that is critical for macroscopic tumor
formation.19,20 Our studies now add miR-10b to the list of microRNAs that seemingly have
different functions in different microenvironments and suggest a pleiotropic effect for the
miRNA that involves both prevention of tumor cell dissemination and reduction of
macroscopic tumor formation. This role of miR-10b may be specific to the lymph node
metastatic site considering recent studies, which suggest that miR-10b does not influence the
progression of already established lung metastasis, following intravenous injection of
aggressive breast adenocarcinoma cells.6
Based on our findings and the recent literature,19,20,22 we expect that this context
dependence reflects a fundamental property of the miRNA epigenome and extends to a
variety of biological scenarios. Consequently, the tools described here could have a broad
relevance for the study of microRNA function and its targeting for therapy.
Namely, the nanodrug utilizes a versatile platform suitable for conjugation to multiple
moieties. Consequently, the nanodrug's modular design can be tailored for the establishment
of a wide variety of `therapeutic' molecular phenotypes in different organs and cell types. In
addition, the nanodrug can be detected in a semi-quantitative manner by noninvasive
imaging. This is advantageous because it can lead to the development of optimized drug
delivery strategies and, importantly, guide the implementation of individualized treatment
protocols.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The overall significance of the work extends from the fact that metastases, and not the
primary tumors from which they derive, are the key reason for mortality from carcinoma
(>90%). Even in the case of successful removal of the primary tumor, a complete cure is
uncertain. Many patients already harbor disseminated tumor cells when they initially present
with cancer. In most instances, cancer therapy does not eradicate these cells and cancer can
recur. Therefore, it becomes imperative to design not only methods for detecting these tumor
cells but also to develop effective anti-metastatic therapies.1 This is especially true for breast
cancer, which can reappear even if the cancer was confined to the breast at the time of
detection. Once metastatic breast cancer has been diagnosed, treatments generally do not
lead to long-term survival.
In this context, our studies hold clinical potential, because they would establish the
feasibility of a new method for image-guided delivery of miRNA therapy. Considering that
related MN are already in clinical use, including for detection and staging of breast cancer in
patients,24,25 the technology developed in this report may ultimately become applicable in a

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 September 21.

Yigit et al.

Page 7

clinical setting, advancing our ability to treat cancer at later stages of the pathology and
impacting overall patient survival.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Locked nucleic acids
The short LNA oligonucleotide sequence (anti-miR-10b), 5′-ThioMC6-D/
GTGTAACACGTCTATACGCCCA-3′, directed against miRNA-10b and a mismatch
scrambled sequence (scr-miR), 5′-ThioMC6-D/CACAAATTCGGTTCTACAGGGTA-3′,
were synthesized by Exiqon Inc. A 5′-Thiol modification was inserted into both sequences
for conjugation to MN and a 3′-Cy3 modification was inserted in the sequences for in-vitro
studies. The thiol modifications on the oligonucleotides were activated with treatment of 3%
TCEP (Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride), followed by purification with
ammonium acetate/ethanol precipitation treatment before conjugation to the nanoparticles as
described previously.8,9
Synthesis of cRGD peptide

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The synthesis of Cyclic RGDfK-PEG-Cys-(Boc) was carried out as follows. To a solution of
Boc-Cys(Tris)-Osu (11.2 mg, 0.02 mmol) in dimethylformamide (DMF) (1 ml) was added
cyclo [Arg-Gly-Asp-D-Phe-Lys(PEG-PEG) (where PEG=8-Amino-3,6-dioxaoctanoic acid)
(13.41 mg, 0.015 mmol, Peptide International Inc., Louisville, KY, USA). The reaction
mixture pH (8.5–9) was maintained using DIEA (diisopropyl ethylmine) and the resulting
reaction mixture was allowed to stir at room temperature overnight. The product of the
reaction was confirmed by TLC (thin layer chromatography) and isolated using the HPLC
(high pressure liquid chromatography) gradient method. Collected fractions were
lyophilized and obtained as a white powder. The final product was analyzed by MALDITOF (matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization-time of flight) mass spectrometry.
Cyclic RGDfK-PEG-Cys-(Boc) was treated with 2–3 ml of anhydrous trifluoroacetic acid at
room temperature for 30 min. The resulting volatile mixture was completely removed under
vacuum. Afterwards, the residue was dissolved in 100 mM NH4OAc buffer (3 ml). The
resulting solution was filtered, and the filtrate was purified by HPLC. The final product was
analyzed by MALDI-TOF Mass spectrometry.
Synthesis of dextran-coated MN

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The MN synthesis was modified from a protocol published previously.26 Briefly, 9 g of
Dextan-T10 (Pharmacosmos, Holbaek, Denmark) was dissolved in 30 ml of double-distilled
water and stirred in a round bottom flask on ice. FeCl3.6H2O (0.65 g) was added while
flushing Argon gas into the reaction mixture for an hour. FeCl2.4H2O (0.4 g) was added into
the mixture and then 15 ml of concentrated cold NH4OH (~28%) was added dropwise to the
stirring mixture. The temperature increased to 85 °C for an hour to induce the formation of a
nanoparticulate colloidal mixture, cooled to room temperature and concentrated to 20 ml
using Amicon Ultra centrifugal units (MWCO 30 kDa; Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). The
resulting 20 ml dextran-coated MN were cross-linked and aminated with subsequent
addition of 35 ml of 5 M NaOH, 14 ml of concentrated epichlorohydrin (8 h) and 60 ml of
concentrated NH4OH. The nanoparticle solution was purified using a dialysis bag (MWCO
14 kDa) against water and 20 mM citrate buffer (pH 8.0) and then concentrated to 20 ml by
Amicon Ultra centrifugal units. The nanoparticle concentration was determined based on
iron concentration (10.8 mg/ml Fe) and measured spectrophotometrically, as described.9 The
size of the nanoparticles was determined by dynamic light scattering using Zetasizer Nano
ZS (Malvern Instruments Ltd, Malvern, Worcestershire, UK) and nanoparticles of

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 September 21.

Yigit et al.

Page 8

23.5±3.5nm were selected as suitable for accumulation in tumors and lymph nodes. The
number of amine groups was found to be 73 per nanoparticle.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Nanodrug synthesis and characterization

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Briefly, 1 mg of NIR dye Cy5.5 mono-reactive NHS ester (GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ,
USA) was dissolved in 100 μl of anhydrous DMSO and incubated with MN (10 mg Fe) in
20 mM citrate buffer (pH 8.0) overnight. The nanoparticles were purified using Sephadex
PD-10 column (GE Healthcare) against PBS. The number of Cy5.5 molecules per
nanoparticle was quantified spectrophotometrically and found to be four Cy5.5 molecules
per MN. The nanoparticles were further conjugated to heterofunctional linker SPDP (Nsuccinimidyl 3-[2-pyridyldithio]-propionate; Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford, IL, USA) in
order to provide a thiol reactive terminus for LNA and cRGD conjugation. Briefly, 10 mg
SPDP was dissolved in 500 μl anhydrous DMSO and incubated with Cy5.5-labeled MN.
The MN were further conjugated to cRGD peptide through its cysteine terminus in PBS and
purified with a Sephadex PD-10 column. The LNA oligos were then conjugated to MN.
Briefly, the thiolated 5′ terminus of the oligo was activated via 3% TCEP treatment in
nuclease free PBS. The LNA oligos were purified using ammonium acetate/ethanol
precipitation method. After TCEP-activation and purification, the oligos were resuspended
in PBS and 50 mM EDTA and incubated with the nanoparticles overnight. The resulting
probe was purified using a G-50 Sephadex disposable quick spin columns (Roche Applied
Science, Indianapolis, IN, USA). The quantification of cRGD and LNA per MN was
described previously9 and determined as 15 cRGD per MN and 10 LNA per MN.
Cell lines
We maintained MDA-MB-231–GFP (kindly provided by Dr Danny R Welch, University of
Alabama at Birmingham), 4T1 (American Type Culture Collection (ATCC), Manassas, VA,
USA) and MDA-MB-231-luc-D3H2LN (Caliper Life Sciences, Hopkinton, MA, USA)
metastatic breast cancer cell lines as recommended by the supplier.
Fluorescence confocal microscopy

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Fluorescence confocal microscopy was performed on MDA-MB-231–GFP breast cancer
cells. Cells (2×106) were incubated with MN-anti-miR10b or MN-scr-miR (45 μg Fe, 4
nmol LNA) for 48 h at 37 °C on a cover slip in an eight-well plate. The cells were then
washed three times with Hank's buffered salt solution (HBSS) buffer and fixed with 2%
formaldehyde for 10 min. The cells were then washed three times with DPBS buffer and the
cover slip was placed on a glass slide with Vectashield mounting medium (Vector
Laboratories, Burlingame, CA, USA). The slides were dried in the hood for 30 min in a dark
room. The cells were imaged by confocal microscopy in the FITC channel (GFP detection),
the Cy3 channel (LNA detection) and the Cy5.5 channel (MN detection) using a Zeiss LSM
5 Pascal laser confocal microscope (Carl Zeiss Microscopy, Thornwood, NY, USA). The
Zeiss RGB vario laser module consists of an argon laser (458/488/514 nm) and two helium–
neon lasers (543 and 633 nm). Image acquisition and analyses were performed using Zeiss
LSM 5 Pascal Confocal Microscopy Software (Release 3.2). The final images were colorcoded green for GFP (cells), red for Cy3 (LNA oligos) and blue for Cy5.5 (MN).
Flow cytometry
MN-anti-miR10b and MN-scr-miR nanodrug uptake by MDA-MB-231–GFP and 4T1 cells
was analyzed by flow cytometry. MDA-MB-231–GFP cells were incubated with the probes
(45 μg Fe, 4 nmol LNA) for 48 h and 4T1 cells were incubated with the probes (45 μg Fe, 4
nmol LNA) for 24 h at 37 °C in an eight-well plate, washed twice with HBBS buffer and
removed from the plate using Hank's-based enzyme free cell dissociation buffer. The cells

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 September 21.

Yigit et al.

Page 9

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

were then fixed in 2% paraformaldehyde for 1 h at 4 °C and diluted in sheath solution for
flow cytometry measurements. Nanodrug uptake was analyzed in the FL4 channel (Cy5.5,
MN) and FL2 channel (Cy3, LNA oligos) using FACSCalibur (Becton Dickinson, Franklin
Lakes, NJ, USA) equipped with the CellQuest software package (Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA).
Real-time quantitative reverse transcription–PCR
To measure the extent of miR-10b knockdown by the nanodrug, MDA-MB-231 and 4T1
cells were incubated with MN-anti-miR10b and MN-scr-miR (45 μg, 4 nmol LNA) for 48 h
at 37 °C. The miRNA-enriched fraction from total extracted RNA was harvested using the
miRNeasy mini kit, according to the manufacturer's protocol (Qiagen Inc, Valencia, CA,
USA). Relative levels of miR-10b were determined by real-time quantitative reverse
transcription–PCR (qRT–PCR; Taqman protocol) and compared with the internal
housekeeping gene SNORD44. Taqman analysis was carried out using an ABI Prism 7700
sequence detection system (PE Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). The primers
were provided by the manufacturer (RT2 miRNA First Strand Kit, miRNA qPCR assay for
hsa-miR-10b and SNORD44 as endogenous control; SABiosciences).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

MicroRNA microarray analysis was performed using the human cancer microRNA PCR
array according to the manufacturer's instructions (MAH-102A, SABiosciences, Valencia,
CA, USA). Data were analyzed using the WEB-based PCR array data analysis software
provided by the manufacturer.
Western blot

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Frozen tumor sections were thawed and homogenized in tissue protein extraction lysis
buffer (Tissue-PE LB from G-Biosciences, St Louis, MO, USA) along with 1 mM PMSF and
proteinase inhibitor cocktails (Sigma, St Louis, MO, USA). Protein content was determined
with the Bio-Rad protein assay kit (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). Lysates (50 μg) were
separated by electrophoresis through 4–20% sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis and transferred to nitrocellulose membranes (Bio-Rad). Membranes were
blocked in 5% nonfat milk in Tris-buffered saline/Tween 20 for 1 h at room temperature.
After blocking, the membrane was incubated overnight at 4 °C in 1% milk/TBS containing
HOXD10 (H-80) rabbit polyclonal Antibody (1:200, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz,
CA, USA) and mouse monoclonal β-actin (1 μg/ml; Applied Biosystems, Carlsbad, CA,
USA). The membrane was then washed three times with 0.05% Tween TBS (TBST) for 5
min each and incubated with horseradish peroxidase-conjugated goat anti-rabbit or antimouse antibodies (Invitrogen, Camarillo, CA, USA) (1:2000 dilution) for 60 min at room
temperature, followed by washing three times with TBST and one time with TBS for 5 min
each. Membranes were finally developed using ECL plus western blotting detection reagents
kit (GE Healthcare), according to the manufacturer's specifications.
In-vitro migration and invasion assays
Assays were performed according to the supplier's instructions (Cell Biolabs, San Diego,
CA, USA). Briefly, MDA-MB-231 (0.1 × 106) cells were plated in each insert containing
membrane (pore size 8 μm) and corresponding nanodrug (60 μg, 5.0 nmol LNA) was added
with/without 10% FCS (fetal calf serum) and incubated for 24 h for migration and 48h for
invasion assay. The inserts were stained with the supplier's kit and membranes are imaged
by light microscopy to score migration and invasion.
Animal models
Six-week-old female nude mice (nu/nu or NIH III nude) were implanted orthotopically with
the human breast adenocarcinoma MDA-MB-231-luc-D3H2LN cell line (Caliper Life

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 September 21.

Yigit et al.

Page 10

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Sciences). In this model, orthotopically implanted tumors progress from localized disease to
lymph node metastasis by 4 weeks after tumor inoculation. The tumor cells express
luciferase and can be detected by noninvasive bioluminescence imaging for correlative
analysis of tumor burden. All animal experiments were performed in compliance with
institutional guidelines and approved by the Subcommittee on Research Animal Care
(SRAC) at Massachusetts General Hospital.
Prevention of metastasis
Six week-old nu/nu mice (n = 12; Massachusetts General Hospital Radiation Oncology
breeding facilities) were injected in the upper right mammary fat pad with 2 × 106 MDAMB-231-luc-D3H2LN cells (Caliper). Animals were used in experiments 14 days after
tumor implantation.
Arrest of metastasis
Six-week-old NIH III nude mice (n 6; Massachusetts General Hospital Radiation Oncology
breeding facilities) were injected in the lower left mammary fat pad with 2 × 106 MDAMB-231-luc-D3H2LN cells (Caliper). Animals were used in experiments 28 days after
tumor implantation.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Treatment with MN-anti-miR10b and MN-scr-miR involved systematic administration
through the tail vein at a dose of 10 mg Fe/kg once a week over 4 weeks.
Arrest of metastasis in mice with surgically removed primary tumor
Six-week-old nu/nu mice (n = 6; Massachusetts General Hospital Radiation Oncology
breeding facilities) were injected in the lower left mammary fat pad with 2 × 106 MDAMB-231-luc-D3H2LN cells (Caliper). Tumors were surgically removed 28 days after tumor
implantation.
Treatment with MN-anti-miR10b and MN-scr-miR involved systematic administration
through the tail vein at a dose of 10 mg Fe/kg once a week over 4 weeks.
In-vivo MRI

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

MRI was performed before and 24 h after intravenous administration of the nanodrug using
a 9.4 T Bruker horizontal bore scanner with ParaVision 5.1 software (Bruker Biospin,
Billerica, MA, USA). The imaging protocol consisted of coronal T2-weighted spin echo
pulse sequences with the following parameters: spin echo repetition time/echo time = 2000/
[8,16,24,32,40,48, 56,64]; field of view (FOV) = 32 × 34 μm2; matrix size = 128 × 128
pixels; slice thickness = 0.5 mm; in plane resolution = 250 × 250 μm2. Images were
reconstructed and analyzed by Marevisi 3.5 software (Institute for Biodiagnostics, National
Research Council, Canada). T2 maps were constructed according to established protocol by
fitting T2 readings for each of the eight echo times to a standard exponential decay curve.
T2 relaxation times were calculated by manually segmenting out the tumor on MR images
from each slice for every animal before and after nanodrug injection. Longitudinal
relaxation rate (R2 = 1/T2) was determined for each slice and ΔR2 was calculated by
subtracting the R2 readings before from those after nanodrug administration.
In-vivo and ex-vivo optical imaging

In-vivo fluorescence optical imaging was performed immediately after each in-vivo MR
imaging session. Anesthetized animals were placed supine into a whole-body imaging
system (IVIS Spectrum, Caliper Life Sciences) equipped with 10 narrow band excitation

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 September 21.

Yigit et al.

Page 11

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

filters (30 nm bandwith) and 18 narrow band emission filters (20 nm bandwith) that assist in
significantly reducing autofluorescence through spectral scanning of filters and the use of
spectral unmixing algorithms (Caliper Life Sciences). The abdominal region of the animal
was shielded in order to avoid interfering signal from internal organs. Imaging was
performed using 675-nm excitation and 720-nm emission filters. The epifluorescent images
and the grayscale photographs were acquired and superimposed.

Ex-vivo fluorescent images were acquired by placing the excised tissues in the imaging
system immediately after the animals were killed. The average radiance from each
fluorescent reading was used to estimate nanodrug uptake. The images were reconstructed
using Living Image software version 4.0 (Caliper Life Sciences).
In-vivo optical bioluminescence imaging
Mice were injected in the lower left abdominal quadrant with D-Luciferin potassium salt
firefly in DPBS (150 mg Luciferin/kg body weight, 200 μl of 15 mg/ml; Caliper Life
Sciences) 10 min before image acquisition. The primary tumor was shielded to prevent
signal leakage into the right brachial lymph node. Identical imaging settings (time, 30–60 s;
F-stop, 2; binning, medium) and same-size regions of interest were used to obtain total
radiance flux of the metastatic signals from right brachial lymph nodes. The total radiance
(photons/s) from the bioluminescent readings was used for signal quantification.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

For the study on metastatic arrest, the lower abdominal primary tumor in the mammary fat
pad was shielded and the total bioluminescence flux reading (photons/s) was taken from the
right brachial lymph node with a fixed region of interest (F-stop, 8; binning large). Relative
tumor and metastatic burdens were calculated as fold change in bioluminescence flux
(photons/s) from the tumor or lymph node regions of interest relative to the first week of
treatment.
Histology and fluorescence microscopy of tissue sections

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

To detect the metastatic lesions and/or the accumulation of the nanodrug in the primary
tumor and lymph nodes, the excised tissues were embedded in Tissue-Tek OCT compound
(Sakura Finetek) and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. The frozen primary tumor and lymph
nodes were cut into 7 μm sections. The sections were fixed in 2% paraformaldehyde,
washed and counterstained with Vectashield mounting medium containing 4',6-diamidino-2phenylindole (DAPI; Vector Laboratories) and analyzed by fluorescence microscopy using a
Nikon Eclipse 50i fluorescence microscope equipped with the necessary filter sets. Images
were acquired using a charge coupled device camera with near-IR sensitivity (SPOT 7.4
Slider RTKE; Diagnostic Instruments, Sterling Heights, MI, USA). The images were
analyzed using SPOT 4.0 Advance version software (Diagnostic Instruments). The observed
Cy5.5 signal within tumor sections was the result of accumulation of the intravenously
injected nanodrug.
For macrophage staining, frozen lymph node sections were incubated with a rat anti-mouse
CD68 (FA-11) antibody (AbD Serotec, Raleigh, NC, USA) followed by a rhodaminelabeled goat secondary antibody (Abcam, Cambridge, UK). Final images were color-coded
blue for DAPI (nuclei), red for Cy5.5 (nanodrug) and green for rhodamine (macrophages).
Consecutive tissue sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) and analyzed
by light microscopy to determine metastatic burden or to compare fluorescent images with
H&E-defined tissue architecture.
Apoptosis in tumor tissues was evaluated by performing a terminal deoxynucleotidyl
transferase-mediated dUTP nick end labeling assay (ApopTag Fluorescein In situ Apoptosis

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 September 21.

Yigit et al.

Page 12

Detection kit, Chemicon International, Billerica, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer's
protocol.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

For determining proliferation, frozen tumor and lymph node sections were incubated with a
rabbit anti-Ki67 antibody (Abcam) followed by a DyLight-488-labeled goat secondary
antibody (Abcam).
Liver toxicity
Liver toxicity following the treatment with the nanodrug was determined by monitoring
aspartate aminotransferase and alanine aminotransferase levels, using commercially
available kits (Pointe Scientific, Canton, MI, USA), according to the manufacturer's
protocol.
Statistical analysis
Data were expressed as mean±s.d. or s.e.m., where indicated. Statistical differences between
experimental and control groups were analyzed by a two-tailed t-test (SigmaStat 3.0; Systat
Software, Richmond, CA, USA). Time-course data were analyzed by analysis of variance. A
value of P<0.05 was taken as statistically significant.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.

Acknowledgments
We thank Pamela Pantazopoulos and Alana Ross for help with the in-vitro, in-vivo and ex-vivo studies and
Marytheresa Ifediba for proofreading the manuscript. Confocal microscopy was performed at the Confocal
Microscopy Core at MGH with technical assistance from Igor A Bagayev, MS Work at the Martinos Center for
Biomedical Imaging was supported in part under Grant R00CA129070 from the National Cancer Institute and a
Research Grant from the Breast Cancer Alliance.

References

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

1. Chaffer CL, Weinberg RA. A perspective on cancer cell metastasis. Science. 2011; 331:1559–1564.
[PubMed: 21436443]
2. Ma L, Teruya-Feldstein J, Weinberg RA. Tumour invasion and metastasis initiated by
microRNA-10b in breast cancer. Nature. 2007; 449:682–688. [PubMed: 17898713]
3. Ma L, Weinberg RA. Micromanagers of malignancy: role of microRNAs in regulating metastasis.
Trends Genet. 2008; 24:448–456. [PubMed: 18674843]
4. Ma L, Weinberg RA. MicroRNAs in malignant progression. Cell Cycle. 2008; 7:570–572.
[PubMed: 18256538]
5. Ma L, Young J, Prabhala H, Pan E, Mestdagh P, Muth D, et al. miR-9, a MYC/MYCN-activated
microRNA, regulates E-cadherin and cancer metastasis. Nat Cell Biol. 2010; 12:247–256.
[PubMed: 20173740]
6. Ma L, Reinhardt F, Pan E, Soutschek J, Bhat B, Marcusson EG. Therapeutic silencing of miR-10b
inhibits metastasis in a mouse mammary tumor model. Nat Biotech. 2010; 28:341–347.
7. Baffa R, Fassan M, Volinia S, O'Hara B, Liu CG, Palazzo JP. MicroRNA expression profiling of
human metastatic cancers identifies cancer gene targets. J Pathol. 2009; 219:214–221. [PubMed:
19593777]
8. Medarova Z, Pham W, Farrar C, Petkova V, Moore A. In-vivo imaging of siRNA delivery and
silencing in tumors. Nat Med. 2007; 13:372–377. [PubMed: 17322898]
9. Kumar M, Yigit M, Dai G, Moore A, Medarova Z. Image-guided breast tumor therapy using a small
interfering RNA nanodrug. Cancer Res. 2010; 70:7553–7561. [PubMed: 20702603]

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 September 21.

Yigit et al.

Page 13

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

10. Zhao Y, Bachelier R, Treilleux I, Pujuguet P, Peyruchaud O, Baron R, et al. Tumor alphavbeta3
integrin is a therapeutic target for breast cancer bone metastases. Cancer Res. 2007; 67:5821–
5830. [PubMed: 17575150]
11. Beer AJ, Niemeyer M, Carlsen J, Sarbia M, Nahrig J, Watzlowik P, et al. Patterns of alphavbeta3
expression in primary and metastatic human breast cancer as shown by 18F-Galacto-RGD PET. J
Nucl Med. 2008; 49:255–259. [PubMed: 18199623]
12. Kenny LM, Coombes RC, Oulie I, Contractor KB, Miller M, Spinks TJ, et al. Phase I trial of the
positron-emitting Arg-Gly-Asp (RGD) peptide radioligand 18F-AH111585 in breast cancer
patients. J Nucl Med. 2008; 49:879–886. [PubMed: 18483090]
13. Petersen M, Wengel J. LNA: a versatile tool for therapeutics and genomics. Trends Biotechnol.
2003; 21:74–81. [PubMed: 12573856]
14. Jepsen JS, Sorensen MD, Wengel J. Locked nucleic acid: a potent nucleic acid analog in
therapeutics and biotechnology. Oligonucleotides. 2004; 14:130–146. [PubMed: 15294076]
15. Elmen J, Lindow M, Schutz S, Lawrence M, Petri A, Obad S, et al. LNA-mediated microRNA
silencing in non-human primates. Nature. 2008; 452:896–899. [PubMed: 18368051]
16. Weissleder R, Elizondo G, Wittenberg J, Lee AS, Josephson L, Brady TJ. Ultrasmall
superparamagnetic iron oxide: an intravenous contrast agent for assessing lymph nodes with MR
imaging. Radiology. 1990; 175:494–498. [PubMed: 2326475]
17. Nathanson SD, Kwon D, Kapke A, Alford SH, Chitale D. The role of lymph node metastasis in the
systemic dissemination of breast cancer. Ann Surg Oncol. 2009; 16:3396–3405. [PubMed:
19657697]
18. Medarova Z, Rashkovetsky L, Pantazopoulos P, Moore A. Multiparametric monitoring of tumor
response to chemotherapy by noninvasive imaging. Cancer Res. 2009; 69:1182–1189. [PubMed:
19141648]
19. Xiang X, Zhuang X, Ju S, Zhang S, Jiang H, Mu J, et al. miR-155 promotes macroscopic tumor
formation yet inhibits tumor dissemination from mammary fat pads to the lung by preventing
EMT. Oncogene. 2011; 30:3440–3453. [PubMed: 21460854]
20. Dykxhoorn DM, Wu Y, Xie H, Yu F, Lal A, Petrocca F, et al. miR-200 enhances mouse breast
cancer cell colonization to form distant metastases. PLoS One. 2009; 4:e7181. [PubMed:
19787069]
21. Calin GA, Dumitru CD, Shimizu M, Bichi R, Zupo S, Noch E, et al. Frequent deletions and downregulation of micro- RNA genes miR15 and miR16 at 13q14 in chronic lymphocytic leukemia.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2002; 99:15524–15529. [PubMed: 12434020]
22. Gabriely G, Teplyuk NM, Krichevsky AM. Context effect: microRNA-10b in cancer cell
proliferation, spread and death. Autophagy. 2011; 7:1–3.
23. Gabriely G, Yi M, Narayan RS, Niers JM, Wurdinger T, Imitola J, et al. Human glioma growth is
controlled by microRNA-10b. Cancer Res. 2011; 71:3563–3572. [PubMed: 21471404]
24. Michel SC, Keller TM, Frohlich JM, Fink D, Caduff R, Seifert B, et al. Preoperative breast cancer
staging: MR imaging of the axilla with ultrasmall superparamagnetic iron oxide enhancement.
Radiology. 2002; 225:527–536. [PubMed: 12409591]
25. Harisinghani MG, Barentsz J, Hahn PF, Deserno WM, Tabatabaei S, van de Kaa CH, et al.
Noninvasive detection of clinically occult lymph-node metastases in prostate cancer. N Engl J
Med. 2003; 348:2491–2499. [PubMed: 12815134]
26. Medarova Z, Evgenov NV, Dai G, Bonner-Weir S, Moore A. In vivo multimodal imaging of
transplanted pancreatic islets. Nat Protocols. 2006; 1:429–435.

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 September 21.

Yigit et al.

Page 14

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 1.

In-vitro testing of nanodrug uptake, silencing efficacy and cytotoxicity in MDA-MB-231–
GFP human breast adenocarcinoma cells. (a) A schematic of the active nanodrug (MN-antimiR10b). The nanodrug consists of dextran-coated MN conjugated to Cy5.5 dye, a tumortargeting peptide (cRGD) and a knockdown LNA oligonucleotide targeting human
miRNA-10b. (b) Flow cytometry, following a 48-h incubation with the nanodrug,
demonstrating that nearly 100% of cells took up the probe. (c) Confocal microscopy of
MDA-MB-231–GFP cells (green), following a 48-h incubation with the nanodrug, showing
the distribution of the MN (Cy5.5, blue) and the LNA oligonucleotide (Cy3, red)
components of the nanodrug. (d) qRT–PCR showing that the nanodrug mediated a
significant 87.8±6.2% (P<0.0001, n=3) knockdown of the target miR-10b. Data are
represented as mean±s.d.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 September 21.

Yigit et al.

Page 15

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 2.

Migration and invasion of MDA-MB-231–GFP cells treated with the active nanodrug, MNanti-miR10b or control probes. (a) Cell migration was significantly reduced by treatment
with the nanodrug. The fraction of migrating cells (purple) in the presence of 10% FBS was
comparable to that in the absence of the migration stimulus (no FBS). This effect was not
observed in the control groups (n=3). (b) Cell invasion was significantly reduced by
treatment with the nanodrug. The fraction of invasive cells (purple) in the presence of 10%
FBS was comparable to that in the absence of the invasion stimulus (no FBS). This effect
was not seen in the control groups (n=3).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 September 21.

Yigit et al.

Page 16

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 3.

T2-weighted MRI of MN-anti-miR10b accumulation in orthotopic MDA-MB-231-lucD3H2LN tumors. (a) Representative color-coded T2 maps before (left) and 24 h after (right)
MN-anti-miR10b injection, demonstrating a shortening of the T2 relaxation times of the
tumors (outlined) consistent with nanodrug accumulation. (b) Quantitative analysis of ΔR2
relaxation rates (1/T2 pre–1/T2 post, ms) of the tumors, suggesting a tendency towards
build-up of the MN-anti-miR10b (P≤0.01, n=12). Data are represented as mean±s.d.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 September 21.

Yigit et al.

Page 17

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 4.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIR optical imaging of MN-anti-miR10b accumulation in orthotopic MDA-MB-231-lucD3H2LN tumors (a) In-vivo imaging of mice before (left) and 24 h after (right) MN-antimiR10b administration showing accumulation of the nanodrug in the primary tumor and
lymph nodes. Arrows point to lymph nodes. (b) Ex-vivo images of excised tissues,
demonstrating MN-anti-miR10b accumulation in the tumor tissues and lymph nodes (PT,
primary tumor; BLNs, brachial lymph nodes; ILN, inguinal lymph nodes; CLNs, cervical
lymph nodes). (c) Quantitative analysis of the ex-vivo optical images showing preferential
uptake of the MN-anti-miR10b by the primary tumor and lymph nodes relative to muscle
tissue, which is traditionally used as a reference (P≤0.0001, n=6). Data are represented as
mean±s.d. (d) Histology of frozen tumor sections. There was extensive uptake of the MNanti-miR10b by tumor cells. Red (Cy5.5, nanodrug), blue (DAPI, nuclei). (e) Histology of
frozen lymph node sections from mice injected with MN-scr-miR (inactive drug that permits
the formation of lymph node metastases). There was extensive uptake of the nanodrug not
only by macrophages but also by tumor cells. Red (Cy5.5, nanodrug), blue (DAPI, nuclei),
green (CD68, macrophages). H&E: hematoxylin and eosin staining.

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 September 21.

Yigit et al.

Page 18

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Figure 5.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Prevention of lymph node metastasis by MN-anti-miR10b. (a) Representative
bioluminescence images of tumor-bearing mice treated with the nanodrug for 4 weeks
beginning before lymph node metastasis. The mice were treated either with the active MNanti-miR10b or with inactive control MN-scr-miR. Whereas bioluminescence signal was
visible in the brachial lymph nodes of control animals, bioluminescence in the experimental
animals was at pre-metastatic levels, indicating prevention of metastasis by MN-antimiR10b. (b) Quantitative analysis of bioluminescence images. Radiance (photons/s) in the
brachial lymph nodes of control mice treated with MN-scr-miR was significantly higher
than in experimental animals treated with MN-anti-miR10b. In the experimental animals,
radiance was at premetastatic levels indicating prevention of metastasis by MN-anti-miR10b
(P≤0.01, n=6). Data are represented as mean±s.e.m. (c) H&E staining of frozen lymph node
sections from animals treated with MN-anti-miR10b (right) or MN-scr-miR (left). In the
control animals, there was extensive tumor cell infiltration (arrowheads) outside of reverse
follicles (arrows). In animals treated with MN-anti-miR10b, lymph nodes had normal tissue
architecture.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 September 21.

Yigit et al.

Page 19

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 6.

Arrest of lymph node metastasis by MN-anti-miR10b. (a) Representative bioluminescence
images of tumor-bearing mice treated with the nanodrug for 4 weeks beginning subsequent
to lymph node metastasis. The mice were treated either with MN-anti-miR10b or with
inactive control MN-scr-miR. By the end of the study, there was a dramatic increase in
bioluminescence signal from the brachial lymph nodes of control mice, whereas in the
experimental mice the images suggested relative metastatic arrest. (b) Quantitative analysis.
In the control animals, there was a 20-fold increase in bioluminescence signal from the
brachial lymph nodes. By contrast, bioluminescence in the experimental animals remained
near pre-treatment levels, indicating that MN-anti-miR10b could arrest metastasis in vivo
(P≤0.001, n=6). (c) Quantitative analysis of bioluminescence flux (photons/s) from the
tumor regions of interest. There was no significant difference between experimental and
control animals, indicating a lack of miR-10b influence on primary tumor growth (n=6).
Data are represented as mean±s.e.m.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 September 21.

Yigit et al.

Page 20

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 7.

Histological analysis of apoptosis and proliferation in the primary tumors vs lymph nodes of
experimental and control animals. (a) Apoptotic rates in the primary tumors and lymph node
metastases. The mice were treated either with MN-anti-miR10b or with the inactive control,
MN-scr-miR. No difference in apoptotic rates was observed between experimental and
control animals. (b) Tumor cell proliferation in the primary tumors and lymph node
metastases. In the presence of miR-10b inhibition, tumor cell proliferation was significantly
reduced in the lymph node metastases but not in the primary tumors (P<0.0026, n=3). Data
are represented as mean±s.d.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 September 21.

