Original Article

Toxicity-Reducing Potential of Extracorporeal
Affinity Adsorption Treatment in
Combination With the Auristatin-Conjugated
Monoclonal Antibody BR96 in a Syngeneic
Rat Tumor Model*
Rune Nilsson, PhD1; Linda Mårtensson, PhD1; Sophie E. Eriksson, MSc1; Hans-Olov Sjögren, PhD2;
and Jan Tennvall, MD, PhD1

BACKGROUND: Antibody-drug conjugates, comprising monoclonal antibodies (MoAbs) that bind to tumor-associated antigens, display different toxicity profiles compared with radiolabeled MoAbs. Dose-limiting toxicities may
include damage to the liver and myelotoxicity. The drug component is the antimitotic agent auristatin, which is 1001000 times more potent than doxorubicin. Consequently, auristatin antibody-drug conjugates require a high selectivity in tumor targeting to display pronounced activity at well-tolerated doses. We have evaluated the possibility of
increasing the therapeutic index of BR96-auristatin by combining the administration of conjugates with subsequent
extracorporeal affinity adsorption treatment. METHODS: Rats were injected with biotinylated, monomethyl auristatin
F (MMAF)-conjugated monoclonal antibody BR96. The conjugate was then removed from the circulation by extracorporeal affinity adsorption treatment, 24 hours postinjection using an avidin affinity column. By analyzing blood parameters for 100 days, myelotoxicity, hepatotoxicity, and nephrotoxicity were assessed. Body weight, general status,
and tumor size were also recorded. The toxicity-reducing effect of extracorporeal affinity adsorption treatment was
evaluated. RESULTS: Extracorporeal affinity adsorption treatment removed 85%-90% of BR96-MMAF from the circulation. Early toxicity-related death was seen in nontumor-bearing animals that were given MMAF-conjugated BR96, in
contrast to animals that were given a higher amount of BR96-MMAF with subsequent extracorporeal affinity adsorption treatment, in which all survived 100 days postinjection. Extracorporeal affinity adsorption treatment reduced the
loss of body weight, myelotoxicity, and hepatotoxicity. CONCLUSIONS: Extracorporeal affinity adsorption treatment
can be used to reduce the toxicity associated with administration of BR96-MMAF conjugates, making it possible to
increase the amount of conjugates administered. The combined treatment will be further optimized in future studies.
C 2010 American Cancer Society.
Cancer 2010;116(4 suppl):1033–42. V
KEYWORDS: extracorporeal, rat, colon carcinoma, toxicity, auristatin, immunoconjugate.

One of many approaches being evaluated in experimental models and in the clinic for the treatment of cancer is the use
of antibody-drug conjugates. The strategy is to target a tumor-associated marker with a highly specific antibody that can
deliver a toxic payload to the cancer cell. The specific targeting of cancer cells means that the toxic payload has much
greater potency than conventional chemotherapeutics, while reducing the risk of toxic side effects.
The auristatins are synthetic antimitotic agents that destabilize microtubules and are structurally related to the
potent marine cyclic pentapeptide dolastatin-101. These drugs are much more potent than conventional chemotherapeutic drugs. A dipeptide (valine-citrulline) linker, cleavable by lysosomal proteases (eg, cathepsin B), has recently been used
to link auristatins to different monoclonal antibodies.2 Monomethylauristatin F (MMAF; Fig. 1) is an auristatin that

Corresponding author: Rune Nilsson, PhD, Department of Oncology, Lund University, SE-221 85 Lund, Sweden; Fax: (011) 46 46 14 73 27; rune.nilsson@med.lu.se
1

Department of Oncology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden; 2Department of Immunology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden

The articles in this supplement were presented at the ‘‘12th Conference on Cancer Therapy with Antibodies and Immunoconjugates,’’ in Parsippany, New Jersey,
October 16-18, 2008.
*Cancer Therapy With Antibodies and Immunoconjugates, Supplement to Cancer.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.24790, Received: July 9, 2009; Accepted: October 21, 2009, Published online February 2, 2010 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com)

Cancer

February 15, 2010

1033

Original Article

Figure 1. Chemical structure of monomethyl auristatin F and monomethyl auristatin E.

possesses a negatively charged C-terminal phenylalanine
residue that limits cell permeability, in contrast to monomethylauristatin E (Fig. 1), which is uncharged and freely
cell permeable. Intracellular linker proteolysis of monomethylauristatin E conjugates may, therefore, expose surrounding normal tissues to free drug that may induce
toxicity. The risk of toxicity is reduced when MMAF is
used. However, the ‘‘bystander effect’’ of monomethylauristatin E, ie, the exposure of nonconjugate-binding tumor
cells to extracellular free drug, will also be lost. MMAF is
of great interest for targeted delivery because the free drug
has higher cell cytotoxicity, lower toxicity, and much
higher aqueous solubility than monomethylauristatin E.2
Conjugated antibodies can remain in the circulation for several days after administration, resulting in a
low target-to-normal tissue ratio. As a consequence,
dose-limiting toxicity often prevents administration of
the doses needed to eradicate solid tumors. Removal of
the antibody conjugates from the circulation has been
applied for radioimmunoconjugates as a strategy to overcome the problem of insufficient targeting and to reduce
the toxicity to normal organs. One technique developed
for the removal of circulating conjugates is extracorporeal affinity adsorption treatment, which removes the
conjugate from the blood in a very selective way.3-5 In
the case of drug-conjugated antibodies, it may be of
advantage to reduce the amount of conjugates in the

1034

body to reduce the catabolic breakdown, as metabolites
often result in toxic effects. Other means of clearance,
such as the use of anti-IgG or anti-idiotypes, result in
complexes that are trapped in the liver, which may result
in toxicity to this organ.
The primary aim of the present study was to evaluate
the possibility of reducing the toxicity of an auristatinconjugated monoclonal antibody, BR96, when used in
combination with subsequent extracorporeal affinity
adsorption treatment in a syngeneic immunocompetent
rat tumor model. This syngeneic tumor model in immunocompetent rats is relevant to the clinical situation in
humans because the Lewis Y antigen recognized by BR96
is also expressed in sensitive normal tissues, such as the
gastrointestinal epithelium. In addition, Lewis Y-positive
tumors in rats develop distant metastases, as is the case in
humans. By using a subperitoneal tumor model, the
tumors mimic the clinical situation by growing invasively
in the surrounding tissue. Furthermore, the tumor size
can be easily assessed by palpation. Radiolabeled MoAbs
(eg, 90Y- and 177Lu-conjugated BR96) have previously
been evaluated with subsequent extracorporeal affinity
adsorption treatment in humans6,7 and in animal models
by us and others.8,9 To the best of the our knowledge, this
is the first study to evaluate the feasibility of combining an
antibody-drug conjugate with subsequent extracorporeal
affinity adsorption treatment.

Cancer

February 15, 2010

Extracorporeal Affinity Adsorption Treatment Reduces Toxicity of Auristatin-BR96/Nilsson et al

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Monoclonal Antibody and
Drug-Immunoconjugate
The chimeric (mouse/human) monoclonal IgG1 antibody BR96 (Seattle Genetics Inc., Seattle, Wash), binding
the tumor-associated Lewis Y glycoprotein, was used.
Lewis Y is expressed on the majority of human epithelial
tumors, including breast, gastrointestinal tract, nonsmallcell lung, cervical, and ovarian, cancers, as well as some
melanomas. As with the majority of tumor-associated
MoAbs, BR96 also reacts with some normal tissues, primarily the epithelial cells of the GI tract.
To 500 mg BR96 at a concentration of 10 mg/mL
in phosphate buffered saline, was added 50 mL of a solution of 500 mM sodium borate/500 mM NaCl, pH 8.0,
and 110 lL 0.5 M diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid
(Aldrich, Steinheim, Germany). The mixture was heated
to 37 C, and 85.1 lL 100 mM tris-carboxyethyl phosphine (Aldrich, Steinheim, Germany), 2.5 equivalents)
was added. The mixture was maintained at 37 C for 2
hours. To the reduced antibody, 5.3 mL dimethylsulfoxide and 897 lL of a dimethylsulfoxide solution of maleimidocaproyl-valine-citrulline-p-aminobenzyl carbamoylmonomethyl auristatin F (20.5 mM) were added. When a
test using Ellman’s reagent (5,50 -dithio-bis(2 nitrobenzoic
acid) showed that antibody thiols had been consumed, the
maleimido reagent was quenched by the addition of 817
lL of a neutralized aqueous solution of N-acetylcysteine.
The conjugate was diluted 1:10 using 25 mM NaOAc
buffer, pH 5.0 (loading buffer), and then it was applied to
a sulfopropyl cation-exchange column, washed with loading buffer, and eluted with 3 times standard concentration
of phosphate buffered saline. Late eluting fractions were
analyzed separately and then pooled. The collected product was diluted 3 times with water and concentrated. A
total of 385 mg of antibody-drug conjugate was obtained
in a volume of 37 mL.
To the isolated conjugate, 4 mL of 500 mM sodium
borate/500 mM NaCl solution, pH 8.0, was added, followed by 100 lL of a 100 mM dimethylsulfoxide solution
of NHS-LC-biotin (Pierce; 3.8 equivalents). The reaction
mixture was left at room temperature for 3 hours and then
purified using cation-exchange chromatography, in the
same manner as the original conjugate. The eluate collected was diluted 3 times in water, concentrated, and filtered through a 0.2 lm membrane, yielding 21.5 mL of
biotinylated conjugate at a concentration of 14.9 mg/mL
in phosphate buffered saline. Analysis indicated that the
conjugate, designated b-BR96-MMAF (biotin-BR96-

Cancer

February 15, 2010

monomethyl auristatin F), contained 4.4 MMAF/MoAb
and 3.2 biotin/MoAb.
Syngeneic Rat Tumor Model
Immunocompetent rats of the Brown Norway strain
(Harlan, Horst, the Netherlands) were used. As demonstrated by immunohistochemistry, Brown Norway rats
express the BR96-binding epitope in sensitive normal tissues, such as the gastrointestinal tract (esophagus, stomach, intestines, pancreas), hence mimicking the human
situation.10 BN7005-H1D2 is a single-cell clone of a rat
colon carcinoma originally induced by 1,2-dimethyl-hydrazine in a Brown Norway rat. BN7005-H1D2 cells
were cultured in RPMI 1640 medium (Euroclone,
Devon, UK) supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum, 1
mM sodium pyruvate, 10 mM HEPES buffer solution,
and 29.3 lM gentamicin at 37 C in a humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2. Cells were washed in saline,
trypsinized and washed in medium plus 10% fetal calf
serum. Animals were inoculated subperitoneally with
3  105 cells (in 50 lL medium). Experiments were initiated 12-14 days after inoculation (tumor size 10  15
mm). The animals were kept under standard conditions
and fed with standard pellets and fresh water. Studies were
conducted in compliance with Swedish legislation on animal rights and protection and were approved by the Animal Ethics Committee of Lund University.
Extracorporeal Affinity Adsorption Treatment
The extracorporeal system included a 403U/C12 pump
(W-Marlow Alitea AB, Stockholm, Sweden) with a 15 cm
silicone tube (1.6 of 6.35 mm inner/outer diameter). The
column housing comprised a modified 2 mL polypropylene syringe (9  30 mm) with a 72 lm filter at the bottom. The syringe was packed with 1.5 mL avidin-agarose5
with about 0.5 mL NaCl above it as an extra air trap. PVC
tubing (1 mm inner diameter) was used as medical lines.
An air trap that comprised PVC tubing (9.5 mm inner diameter) was connected to trap any air bubbles before the
blood was returned to the animals. The extracorporeal circuit had a volume of about 3.5 mL (corresponding to
approximately 20% of the animal’s blood volume). Before
starting extracorporeal affinity adsorption treatment, the
system was flushed with a heparin solution (20 IU/mL
heparin in 9 mg/mL NaCl) as an anticoagulant. The system is illustrated in Figure 2.
Thirty minutes before insertion of the cannulas
(Neoflon 0.7  19 mm, Becton Dickinson, Helsingborg, Sweden) a 2% glyceryl nitrate salve (The

1035

Original Article

Figure 2. Illustration of the extracorporeal affinity adsorption
treatment. A cannula is inserted into one of the lateral tail
veins (1) for the return of blood, and this is connected to the
extracorporeal system (regulated by the pump [2]). Another
cannula is inserted into the ventral tail artery for blood
access (3). When the cannulas have been correctly inserted,
the extracorporeal circulation is started in bypass mode (4)
without the column connected. Once the circuit is filled with
blood and any air bubbles in the circuit have been collected
in the air trap (5), the column (6) is connected to the circuit
and affinity adsorption is started.

National Cooperation of Swedish Pharmacies) was
applied to the entire tail of each rat to dilate the blood
vessels. The animals were anesthetized with Isofluran
using a U-400 anesthesia unit (AgnTho’s, Stockholm,
Sweden). The rats were first anesthetized in a 1.4 l
induction chamber (3.3% Isofluran, 575 mL/min air
flow) and then placed on a heating pad (30 C). Anesthesia was sustained through anesthesia masks connected to the same anesthesia unit as the induction
chamber. A cannula was carefully inserted into 1 of the
lateral tail veins (1-2 cm from the tip of the tail) for
the return of blood. The cannula was secured to the
tail with adhesive tape and connected to the extracorporeal system. To prevent coagulation and to confirm
that the cannula was correctly inserted, heparin solution
from the extracorporeal circuit was infused for a few
seconds and then stopped (regulated by the pump).
Another cannula was inserted into the ventral tail
artery, approximately 5 cm from the tip of the tail, for

1036

blood access. This cannula is accurately inserted when
there is a continuous flow of blood through the cannula. Before connecting the cannula to the extracorporeal circuit, a blood sample was collected. As soon as the
artery cannula was connected to the system, extracorporeal circulation was started in bypass mode (column
not connected). The heparin solution present in the
system was infused to prevent clotting, and the whole
circuit was filled with blood, bypassing the column.
When the circuit was filled with blood and any air bubbles in the circuit had been collected in the air trap, the
adsorption column was connected to the circuit and affinity adsorption started. Blood was pumped through
the column at a rate of 0.4 mL/min. During extracorporeal affinity adsorption treatment, the rats were anesthetized at a lower level of anesthesia (2.0% Isofluran,
575 mL/min air flow) and kept on electric heating pads
(30 C) to keep them warm. After about 2 hours of
affinity adsorption (approximately 3 blood volumes;
blood volume estimated to be 65 mL/kg body weight),
the procedure was stopped, the tubing connected to the
arterial cannula was placed in a bottle containing saline
solution, and the blood in the circuit was returned to
the rat. A blood sample was collected from the arterial
cannula before withdrawal of the cannula. The tail was
compressed to stop bleeding.

Experimental Design
Immunocompetent rats, with and without subperitoneal
tumors, were injected intravenously with 20 mg/kg (4.8
mg MMAF/m2) of b-BR96-MMAF (Groups 1 & 2) or
15 mg/kg body weight (3.6 mg MMAF/m2) b-BR96MMAF (Groups 3 & 4), as specified in Table 1. The 8
rats injected with 20 mg/kg were subjected to extracorporeal affinity adsorption treatment 24 hours postinjection.
Fifteen mg/kg of b-BR96-MMAF was chosen based on
recommendations from the manufacturer of the auristatin-conjugate (Seattle Genetics Inc., Seattle, Wash). For
rats treated with extracorporeal affinity adsorption treatment, we have chosen a higher dose with the intention of
having the possibility of demonstrating a reduced toxicity
but also an increased efficacy. Twenty mg/kg was chosen
based on data from Junutula et al,14 which showed that a
50% increase of dose above maximal tolerable dose
(MTD) resulted in severe toxicity with 50% survival at
Day 12 postadministration. A control group with tumors
(Group 5) was injected with 15 mg/kg unconjugated
BR96.

Cancer

February 15, 2010

Extracorporeal Affinity Adsorption Treatment Reduces Toxicity of Auristatin-BR96/Nilsson et al

Table 1. Experimental Design

Group

Tumor

Drug Conjugate

1
2
3
4
5

Subperitoneal
None
Subperitoneal
None
Subperitoneal

20
20
15
15
15

(n¼5)
(n¼3)
(n¼6)
(n¼3)
(n¼6)

Extracorporeal Affinity
Adsorption Treatment

mg/kga b-BR96-MMAF
mg/kga b-BR96-MMAF
mg/kgb b-BR96-MMAF
mg/kgb b-BR96-MMAF
mg/kg BR96

24 h postinjection
24 h postinjection
—
—
—

a

Corresponds to 4.8 mg MMAF/m2.
Corresponds to 3.6 mg MMAF/m2.

b

Table 2. Toxicitya

Adverse Event

Weight

Alanine aminotransferase

Aspartate aminotransferase

Bilirubin

Creatinine

Gamma-glutamyltransferase

a

Treatment

BR96
15 mg/kg b-BR96-MMAF
20 mg/kg b-BR96-MMAF þ
extracorporeal affinity adsorption
BR96
15 mg/kg b-BR96-MMAF
20 mg/kg b-BR96-MMAF þ
extracorporeal affinity adsorption
BR96
15 mg/kg b-BR96-MMAF
20 mg/kg b-BR96-MMAF þ
extracorporeal affinity adsorption
BR96
15 mg/kg b-BR96-MMAF
20 mg/kg b-BR96-MMAF þ
extracorporeal affinity adsorption
BR96
15 mg/kg b-BR96-MMAF
20 mg/kg b-BR96-MMAF þ
extracorporeal affinity adsorption
BR96
15 mg/kg b-BR96-MMAF
20 mg/kg b-BR96-MMAF þ
extracorporeal affinity adsorption

No. of Rats With
Grade 1
Mild

Grade 2
Moderate

Grade 3
Severe

0
0
0

0
1
5

0
5
0

1
0
2

0
5
3

0
1
0

0
0
0

1
0
0

0
6
5

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

5
6
6

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
1

0
2
3

0
4
1

treatment

treatment

treatment

treatment

treatment

treatment

Grading according to the National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events version 3.0.

The body surface area of the rats was calculated as
9.1  (body weight in grams)0.6611 to make it possible to
compare our results with those of other studies, where the
administered dose is given in terms of mg/m2 body
surface.

Evaluation of Toxicity
To evaluate myelotoxicity, blood samples were collected
from the tail artery twice a week during the first 28 days
postinjection and then once weekly up to Day 100 postinjection. White blood cell counts (WBC), red blood cell
counts (RBC), and platelet counts (PLT) were analyzed in

Cancer

February 15, 2010

a Medonic Cell Analyzer–Vet CA530 (Boule Medical,
Stockholm, Sweden).
In addition, plasma was collected, and the levels of
aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase,
gamma-glutamyl transferase, alkaline phosphatase, bilirubin, and creatinine were measured to determine liver and
kidney toxicity.
The body weight, tumor size, and general status of
the animals were recorded at the time of blood sampling.
The toxicity was graded according to the National
Cancer Institute Common Terminology for Adverse
Events (version 3.0) to compare the severity of the toxicity
with the various regimens used (Table 2).

1037

Original Article

Figure 3. Survival of animals (A) without tumor cell inoculations (Groups 2 and 4) and (B) with tumor cell inoculations (Groups 1,
3, and 5). Deaths before Day 21 were attributed to toxicity. Four of 6 animals treated with unconjugated BR96 (Group 5) died
because of local tumor recurrence, and the other 2 because of distant metastases. All the late deaths (after Day 45) were attributed to metastatic disease.

Therapeutic Efficacy and Endpoints
of the Study
The size of the primary tumor (ie, at the site of inoculation) was measured in 2 perpendicular directions using a
caliper, twice a week up to Day 28 postinjection and then
once weekly. The tumor volume was calculated using the
formula: 0.4  (L  W2), where L ¼ the measurement of
the longest axis and W ¼ the measurement of the axis perpendicular to L. Complete remission is used to describe a
tumor that regressed completely and was not palpable for
at least a week.
Body weight, general status, toxicity based on
plasma analyses, effects on the primary tumor, and outcome were monitored during a total of 100 days postinjection. The animals were sacrificed when the tumor
burden became too large (>25  25 mm), a marked
decrease in general status, or at the end of the study (100
days postinjection).

RESULTS
Preparation of Drug-Immunoconjugate
Antibody-drug conjugates were formed through controlled reduction of interchain disulfide bonds within the
BR96 MoAb using tris-carboxyethyl phosphine as a reducing agent.12 The drug linker derivative was then added, and
the antibody-drug conjugate was purified before biotinylation. The final antibody-drug conjugate had an average of
4.4 MMAF (21 lg MMAF/mg BR96) and 3.2 biotin molecules per MoAb. No aggregation or fragmentation was
observed by size-exclusion high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), and no free drug was detected. The

1038

avidin-binding fraction of the drug-immunoconjugate
exceeded 90% at the time of injection.
Extracorporeal Affinity Adsorption Treatment
The extracorporeal affinity adsorption procedure was conducted on 8 rats, 24 hours postinjection (Groups 1 and
2). Blood was pumped through the system at a rate of 0.4
mL/min for 2 hours (corresponding to 3 blood volumes).
Blood samples taken just before and after the extracorporeal affinity adsorption treatment was analyzed to obtain
levels of human IgG, using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, to calculate the efficiency of removal. A
mean of 87% (range, 85%-90%) of the drug-immunoconjugate in the blood was eliminated during extracorporeal affinity adsorption treatment.
Evaluation of Toxicity
Survival

All 3 rats without subperitoneal inoculated tumor
cells injected with 20 mg/kg b-BR96-MMAF followed by
extracorporeal affinity adsorption treatment at 24 hours
postinjection (Group 2) survived for 100 days, whereas 2
of 3 rats without subperitoneal inoculated tumor cells
injected with 15 mg/kg b-BR96-MMAF without subsequent extracorporeal affinity adsorption treatment
(Group 4) died within 3 weeks (Fig. 3). No toxicityrelated deaths were seen after Day 21. Thus, the abnormal
results of plasma analyses seen before Day 21 were considered to be mainly attributable to toxic effects, and after
Day 21, mainly because of disease progression. Tumorbearing animals injected with 20 mg/kg b-BR96-MMAF
and treated with extracorporeal affinity adsorption

Cancer

February 15, 2010

Extracorporeal Affinity Adsorption Treatment Reduces Toxicity of Auristatin-BR96/Nilsson et al

Figure 4. Body weights of animals with tumor cell inoculations (Groups 1, 3, and 5), normalized to their initial weight.

Figure 5. White blood count (A) and platelet counts (B) in animals with tumor cell inoculations (Groups 1, 3, and 5).

treatment 24 hours postinjection survived slightly longer
than tumor-bearing animals injected with 15 mg/kg bBR96-MMAF without extracorporeal affinity adsorption
treatment (Groups 1 vs 3; mean 67 days compared with
62 days; not significant by Mantel-Haenszel test) (Fig. 3).

injected with unconjugated BR96 (Group 5) was unaffected by the injections (Fig. 4). The body weight loss in
rats not inoculated with tumor cells (Groups 2 and 4) was
comparable to rats inoculated with tumor cells (data not
shown).

Body Weight Loss

All animals injected with b-BR96-MMAF (Groups
1-4) lost weight, reaching a nadir on Days 4-7. In rats
injected with 15 mg/kg b-BR96-MMAF, not subjected to
extracorporeal affinity adsorption treatment (Group 3),
the mean peak weight loss was 22%. The rats injected
with 20 mg/kg b-BR96-MMAF subjected to extracorporeal affinity adsorption treatment after 24 hours (Group 1)
had a mean peak weight loss of 16%. This difference was
statistically significant when analyzed with an unpaired
t test (p < .05). After Day 7, the animals started to gain
weight. The weight of tumor-bearing control animals

Cancer

February 15, 2010

Blood Parameters

Myelotoxicity was monitored by quantification of
blood cell counts. Both tumor-bearing groups injected
with b-BR96-MMAF (Groups 1 and 3) showed a decrease
in platelets, reaching a nadir on Day 10, but the values
had recovered in all animals 21 days postinjection
(Fig. 5). The WBC increased temporarily after injection
of b-BR96-MMAF. No major change was seen in RBC
(data not shown). The control animals (Group 5) were
sacrificed 42 days postinjection because of large tumor
burden. Animals without inoculated tumor cells (Groups

1039

Original Article

Figure 6. Serum levels of aspartate aminotransferase and alanine aminotransferase in animals with tumor cell inoculations
(Groups 1, 3, and 5).

2 and 4) showed comparable changes in blood cell counts
(data not shown).
Hepatotoxicity

All rats injected with b-BR96-MMAF showed an
increase in aspartate aminotransferase and alanine aminotransferase levels during the first 3 weeks postinjection
(Fig. 6). The increase was similar to the group treated
with 20 mg/kg b-BR96-MMAF and extracorporeal affinity adsorption treatment (Group 1) and the group treated
with 15 mg/kg b-BR96-MMAF without extracorporeal
affinity adsorption treatment (Group 3). The peak serum
levels of gamma-glutamyl transferase and alkaline phosphatase in the group treated with 15 mg/kg b-BR96MMAF without extracorporeal affinity adsorption treatment (Group 3) were almost double those in the group
treated with 20 mg/kg b-BR96-MMAF and extracorporeal affinity adsorption treatment (Group 1). No bone metastases were detected at subsequent autopsies, indicating
that alkaline phosphatase reflects liver toxicity. Serum bilirubin was not influenced by any of the treatments. Comparable increases were also observed during the first 3
weeks in rats not inoculated with tumor cells (Groups 2
and 4); after this period, the levels were normal for all animals in these 2 groups.
Nephrotoxicity

Any of the treatments did not influence the serum
creatinine levels.
Therapeutic Effect
At the time of treatment, the size of the primary tumor
was approximately 10  15 mm. All 11 animals injected

1040

with b-BR96-MMAF (Groups 1 - 4) showed persistent,
local complete response within 10 days postinjection.
Four of 6 rats injected with unconjugated BR96 (Group
5) showed a transient local complete response, but 3 were
sacrificed because of local recurrence before Day 45 postinjection, and the fourth died because of distant metastases on Day 77 postinjection.
Two animals treated with b-BR96-MMAF (15 mg/
kg) without subsequent extracorporeal affinity adsorption
treatment (Group 3) died because of toxicity within 10
days postinjection (Fig. 3).
All late deaths (ie, after Day 50) were attributed to
metastatic disease (Fig. 3). Five of 9 rats (4 in Group 1
and 1 in Group 3) treated with b-BR96-MMAF developed metastases. Metastases were often observed at multiple locations in the liver, kidneys, lungs, abdominal
lymph nodes, and peritoneum. Only 2 of 6 rats in the
control group (treated with unconjugated BR96) developed metastases, probably because of local tumor growth
and the associated short survival time.

DISCUSSION
The results presented indicate that the extracorporeal removal of b-BR96-MMAF conjugates from the circulation
of rats given 20 mg/kg, reduced the body weight loss, and
prolonged the survival of rats, compared with a group of
rats given 15 mg/kg without subsequent extracorporeal affinity adsorption treatment. Although the administered
dose was 5 mg/kg higher, the decrease in the number of
platelets was lower in the group treated with 20 mg/kg in
combination with extracorporeal affinity adsorption treatment, than in the group given 15 mg/kg without
Cancer

February 15, 2010

Extracorporeal Affinity Adsorption Treatment Reduces Toxicity of Auristatin-BR96/Nilsson et al

extracorporeal affinity adsorption treatment. The hepatotoxicity in terms of aspartate aminotransferase and alanine
aminotransferase was similar.
Liver toxicity seems to be the dose-limiting toxicity
of the b-BR96-MMAF conjugates. On the basis of experience gained during radioimmunotherapy studies with
90
yttrium- and 177lutetium-labeled BR96 in the same syngeneic tumor model, the degree of myelotoxicity or loss of
body weight in the present study should not be regarded
as dose limiting or result in reduced survival.13 The catabolic breakdown of the auristatin conjugates in the liver
resulted in severe hepatotoxicity of grade 3, according to
the NCI toxicity criteria, in all rats treated with the conjugate. Bilirubin was not affected, but this toxicity is usually
seen only when almost the whole liver parenchyma is
involved.
A previous study of b-BR96-monomethylauristatin
E (data not shown), in the same syngeneic rat tumor
model, was terminated because of the finding by HPLC
that a large proportion of the injected conjugate formed
aggregates in the circulation, making the therapy less
effective. We, therefore, changed to the newly developed
MMAF drug, which is less hydrophobic and more selective in its action.
The toxicity of monomethylauristatin E conjugates
in rats has also been reported by Junutula and
coworkers.14 After a single dose corresponding to 1.5 mg/
m2 monomethylauristatin E, these authors recorded a
marked depletion of circulating neutrophils and other
white blood cells on Day 5, followed by a compensatory
rebound on Day 12. Also, a slight increase in serum aspartate aminotransferase (mean, 2.5 times) and a transient
weight loss was observed. A 50% increase in dose (2.25
mg/m2) resulted in a more profound effect on aspartate
aminotransferase levels, and only half of the rats survived
until the end of the study (Day 12). They also stated that
safety studies with a related cytotoxic compound, dolastatin-10, showed that mice, compared with rats, were relatively insensitive to this class of drugs. Therefore, rat
models appear to be more suitable for safety assessments
of drug conjugates based on this class of cytotoxic compounds. Our model is also relevant to the clinical situation, as the BR96-binding epitope is also expressed in
sensitive normal tissues, such as the gastrointestinal epithelium, reflecting the toxicity seen in humans.
An initial transient increase in leukocyte counts in
rats treated with MMAF-conjugates has also been demonstrated for conjugates with other monoclonal antibodies
(Peter Senter, personal communication, 2006). The rea-

Cancer

February 15, 2010

son for this increase is not known, but it may be because
of the redistribution of leukocytes from bone marrow
because of exposure to a toxic antibody conjugate.
This is the first investigation of the therapeutic
effects of BR96–auristatin conjugates in our immunocompetent syngeneic rat model. The primary aim of the
study was to evaluate the toxicity-reducing effect of the
extracorporeal affinity adsorption treatment procedure.
To further assess the efficacy of the combined treatment,
the model will be further optimized because all primary
tumors showed complete regression after auristatin-BR96
at the MTD, and it is not possible to detect an improvement. Once extracorporeal affinity adsorption treatment
has been used to remove the conjugate from the blood, no
further uptake of the conjugate by the tumor can take
place. The interval between injection and extracorporeal
affinity adsorption treatment was based on previous investigations with various radiolabeled BR96 conjugates in
the same animal model.8
Distant metastases are developed in this tumor
model. Five of 9 evaluable rats administered b-BR96MMAF developed metastases after complete remission of
the transplanted tumor. The distant metastases occurred
in the animals after Day 45 postinjection. If the distant
metastases still express the Lewis Y epitope, repeated treatment after normalization of blood status (namely, approximately 3 weeks postinjection) with subsequent
extracorporeal affinity adsorption treatment might
increase the disease-free survival rate. Another therapeutic
alternative would be a combined therapy including an
agent with a different toxicity profile and/or target, such
as radiolabeled MoAbs or tyrosine kinase inhibitors.
From the results presented in this study, it can be
concluded that extracorporeal affinity adsorption treatment can be used to reduce side effects arising from the
administration of monomethyl auristatin F-conjugated
antibodies, making it possible to increase the amount of
drug conjugates administered above the maximal tolerable
dose.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
The articles in this supplement represent proceedings of the
‘‘12th Conference on Cancer Therapy with Antibodies and
Immunoconjugates,’’ in Parsippany, New Jersey, October 16-18,
2008. Unrestricted grant support for the conference was provided by Actinium Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Bayer Schering
Pharma, Center for Molecular Medicine and Immunology,
ImClone Systems Corporation, MDS Nordion, National Cancer
Institute, NIH, New Jersey Commission on Cancer Research,
and PerkinElmer Life & Analytical Sciences. The supplement
was supported by an unrestricted educational grant from

1041

Original Article
ImClone Systems Corporation, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Eli
Lilly and Company, and by page charges to the authors. Supported by grants from the Swedish Cancer Society; Mrs. Berta
Kamprad’s Foundation; Gunnar Nilsson’s Foundation; Lund
University Medical Faculty Foundation and The Lund University Hospital Funds.

REFERENCES
1. Vaishampayan U, Glode M, Du W, et al. Phase II study of
dolastatin-10 in patients with hormone-refractory metastatic
prostate adenocarcinoma. Clin Cancer Res. 2000;6:42054208.
2. Doronina SO, Mendelsohn BA, Bovee TD, et al. Enhanced
activity of monomethylauristatin F through monoclonal
antibody delivery: effects of linker technology on efficacy
and toxicity. Bioconjug Chem. 2006;17:114-124.
3. Nilsson R, Lindgren L, Lilliehorn P. Extracorporeal immunoadsorption therapy on rats. In vivo depletion of specific
antibodies. Clin Exp Immunol. 1990;82:440-444.
4. Garkavij M, Tennvall J, Strand SE, et al. Extracorporeal
immunoadsorption from whole blood based on the avidinbiotin concept. Evaluation of a new method. Acta Oncol.
1996;35:309-312.
5. Martensson L, Nilsson R, Sjogren HO, Strand SE, Tennvall
J. A nonsurgical technique for blood access in extracorporeal
affinity adsorption of antibodies in rats. Artif Organs.
2007;31:312-316.
6. Kurkus J, Nilsson R, Linden O, Schonstrom N, Sandberg BE,
Tennvall J. Biocompatibility of a novel avidin-agarose adsorbent for extracorporeal removal of redundant radiopharmaceutical from the blood. Artif Organs. 2007;31:208-214.

1042

7. Linden O, Kurkus J, Garkavij M, et al. A novel platform
for radioimmunotherapy: extracorporeal depletion of biotinylated and 90Y-labeled rituximab in patients with refractory
B-cell lymphoma. Cancer Biother Radiopharm. 2005;20:
457-466.
8. Martensson L, Nilsson R, Ohlsson T, Sjogren HO, Strand
SE, Tennvall J. Reduced myelotoxicity with sustained tumor
concentration of radioimmunoconjugates in rats after extracorporeal depletion. J Nucl Med. 2007;48:269-276.
9. Nemecek ER, Green DJ, Fisher DR, et al. Extracorporeal
adsorption therapy: a method to improve targeted radiation
delivered by radiometal-labeled monoclonal antibodies. Cancer Biother Radiopharm. 2008;23:181-191.
10. Sjogren HO, Isaksson M, Willner D, Hellstrom I, Hellstrom KE, Trail PA. Antitumor activity of carcinomareactive BR96-doxorubicin conjugate against human carcinomas in athymic mice and rats and syngeneic rat carcinomas in immunocompetent rats. Cancer Res. 1997;57:
4530-4536.
11. Pass D, Freeth G. The rat. ANZCCART News. 1993;6:1-4.
12. Sun MM, Beam KS, Cerveny CG, et al. Reduction-alkylation strategies for the modification of specific monoclonal
antibody disulfides. Bioconjug Chem. 2005;16:1282-1290.
13. Martensson L, Wang Z, Nilsson R, et al. Determining maximal tolerable dose of the monoclonal antibody BR96 labeled with 90Y or 177Lu in rats: establishment of a
syngeneic tumor model to evaluate means to improve radioimmunotherapy. Clin Cancer Res. 2005;11(pt 2): 7104s7108s.
14. Junutula JR, Raab H, Clark S, et al. Site-specific conjugation of a cytotoxic drug to an antibody improves the therapeutic index. Nat Biotechnol. 2008;26:925-932.

Cancer

February 15, 2010

