HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Author Manuscript

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 11.
Published in final edited form as:
Cancer Cell. 2016 July 11; 30(1): 108–119. doi:10.1016/j.ccell.2016.05.012.

Oncolytic virus-mediated targeting of PGE2 in the tumor alters
the immune status and sensitizes established and resistant
tumors to immunotherapy
Weizhou Hou1, Padma Sampath1, Juan J Rojas1, and Steve H Thorne1,2,3
1Department

Author Manuscript

of Surgery, University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, USA, 15213
2Department

of Immunology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, USA, 15213

SUMMARY

Author Manuscript

Immunotherapies are highly promising cancer treatments, but understanding the factors mediating
their resistance remains critical. Successes in randomized clinical testing have supported the
growing appreciation that oncolytic virotherapies primarily act as immunotherapies. Here we
identified prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) in the tumor as a key mediator of resistance to
immunotherapies, including oncolytic vaccinia virotherapy. Elevated levels of PGE2 coupled to
suppressive chemokine profiles and high levels of granulocytic myeloid derived suppressor cells
(MDSC) resulted in loss of immunotherapeutic potential. Viral vectors engineered to target PGE2
were capable of overcoming localized immunosuppression leading to profound changes in the
tumor’s immune status. This allowed the viral vectors to raise robust anti-tumor adaptive immune
responses and sensitized established and previously resistant tumors to immunotherapies.

Graphical abstract

Author Manuscript

3

Corresponding Author: 1.46e, Hillman Cancer Center, 5117 Centre Avenue, Pittsburgh PA-15213, USA; thornesh@upmc.edu; Tel
No. 412 623 4896.
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

Author Contributions;
WH ran the majority of the experiments described in this work. PS ran in vitro viral replication and cell killing assays. JJR constructed
novel viral vectors, including VV-HPGD. SHT oversaw the work and wrote the manuscript.
Dr. Thorne has a financial interest in Western Oncolytics that has licensed this technology.
Hou et al. identify the prostaglandin PGE2 in the tumor as a key mediator of resistance to immunotherapies, including oncolytic
virotherapy. Viral vectors engineered to target PGE2 are capable of overcoming localized immunosuppression to allow for robust antitumor adaptive immune responses.

Hou et al.

Page 2

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Keywords
PGE2; MDSC; oncolytic virus; immune suppression; COX2

INTRODUCTION

Author Manuscript

Recent clinical successes have focused interest on the potential of cancer immunotherapies.
However, solid tumors often display the capacity to limit immune induction or to mediate
early immune shut-off both locally and systemically. Identifying the key mediators of
resistance to immunotherapy will allow the development of more robust treatments with
more predictable responses.

Author Manuscript

Oncolytic viruses (OV) are vectors designed to selectively replicate in and destroy cancer
cells, and multiple OVs based on many different viral strains are currently undergoing
clinical testing. However, notable among the current clinical generation of oncolytic viral
vectors is that those that have succeeded in randomized trials have expressed an immune
activating cytokine (GM-CSF)(Andtbacka et al., 2013; Heo et al., 2013). This reinforces a
plethora of preclinical data indicating that the immune response can be a key mediator of
OV activity (Lichty et al., 2014) and has led to the development of several ingenious
strategies to enhance the immune activating potential of OVs (Kottke et al., 2013; Tysome et
al., 2012; Zhang et al., 2014). The situation is complex however, as enhanced immune
activation frequently reduces oncolytic activity and other reports have demonstrated that
certain immune-suppression strategies can also enhance OV activity (Alvarez-Breckenridge
et al., 2012; Chen et al., 2013; Lun et al., 2009). A better understanding of the importance of
OV-mediated immunotherapeutic activity, how this interacts with oncolytic activity and how
OVs can be most beneficially engineered to interact with the host immune response is
therefore needed.

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 11.

Hou et al.

Page 3

Author Manuscript

Multiple OV strains based on vaccinia have been reported (Kirn et al., 2007; Mastrangelo et
al., 1999; Thorne et al., 2007; Zhang et al., 2007), and one of these expressing GM-CSF,
Pexa-Vec (JX-594), has produced encouraging responses in randomized clinical testing (Heo
et al., 2013; Park et al., 2008). However it is apparent that even in these successful clinical
trials, some patients appear resistant to the therapy. It will therefore be critical for the future
development of the platform to discover how and why some patient’s tumors do not respond,
and to develop approaches to overcome this.
Treating different immunocompetent mouse tumor models with oncolytic vaccinia results in
a range of in vivo sensitivities, creating an opportunity to interrogate the causes of resistance
and to determine the relative importance of immunotherapeutic and oncolytic mechanisms
of tumor killing under different conditions. Strategies to overcome the causes of resistance
might then be developed.

Author Manuscript

RESULTS
Immunocompetent mouse tumor models display differing sensitivities and patterns of
response to oncolytic vaccinia therapy

Author Manuscript

We initially examined a panel of syngeneic immunocompetent mouse tumor models in order
to delineate the mediators of resistance or susceptibility to oncolytic vaccinia therapies. The
in vitro sensitivities of 14 different mouse tumor cell lines to viral replication and cell killing
were compared to in vivo responses with syngeneic tumors formed from a subset of seven of
the same cell lines (Figures 1A and 1B). Mice were treated via direct intratumoral injection
of a low dose of viral therapy to remove any variability due to differences in systemic
delivery. No correlation was seen between viral replication or viral-mediated cell killing in
vitro and in vivo anti-tumor effects, indicating factors in addition to direct oncolytic activity
may be primarily responsible for optimal therapeutic benefit.

Author Manuscript

Oncolytic vaccinia strain WR.TK-.Luc+ was used during these initial experiments. This
virus bears the same thymidine kinase deletion as all three oncolytic vaccinia strains
currently in the clinic (Kim et al., 2006; McCart et al., 2001; Worschech et al., 2009; Zeh et
al., 2014) and expresses luciferase so that viral gene expression levels could be quantified
over time in individual mice (as a surrogate for viral replication and persistence), and
compared to subsequent response. It was noted that two distinct kinetic patterns of viral gene
expression emerged in vivo (Figure 1C). In the more resistant tumor models (defined as
those in which viral therapy increased overall survival by less than 2 weeks, as seen with
PANC02, RENCA, 4T1 & B16 (Figure 1A)), the level of viral gene expression measured
from within the tumor at 24 hr after delivery correlated closely with subsequent response
(Figure 1C). Therefore, within any one of these resistant tumor models greater initial
infection and early replication in the tumor (early viral gene expression) results in improved
subsequent response. This pattern would be predicted if viral replication was the key
mediator of therapeutic effect and suggests that the limited response seen in the more
resistant tumor models is primarily due to oncolytic activity.
However, a different pattern was noted in the tumor models that were more susceptible to
viral therapy (LLC, MC38 & AB12)(Figures 1A and 1C). In these models, there was no

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 11.

Hou et al.

Page 4

Author Manuscript

correlation between early viral gene expression in the tumor (at 24 hr post treatment) and
subsequent response. Instead, the best responders within each of the sensitive tumor models
demonstrated a trend towards a more rapid and robust clearance of the virus, as seen with
reduced levels of viral gene expression in the tumor at 4 or 5 days after treatment (Figure
S1). This robust viral clearance might indicate that a strong immune response is being
induced within the tumor that reinforces any direct oncolytic effects in the more sensitive
tumor models.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Several lines of evidence supported the above hypothesis. Firstly, when LLC tumors were
implanted into immunodeficient mice, the viral gene expression pattern changed to match
that of the poor responders (oncolytic activity only), with viral bioluminescence within the
tumor at 24 hr correlating with subsequent response (Figure 2A). Of note, when LLC tumors
implanted into immunodeficient mice were treated, most of the tumors displayed a pattern of
short-term stable disease (for 10–15 days) followed by progression (Figure 2A), this is
despite evidence of ongoing viral replication (luciferase gene expression) in the tumor
(Figure S2). However, when the same tumor model was implanted and treated in
immunocompetent mice (Figure 1C) 50% of the animals (6 of 12) displayed longer-term
(>21 days) stabilization of tumor growth despite the fact that the viral therapy was cleared
within 10 days of treatment (Figure S2). Secondly, anti-CD8 antibody was used to deplete
CD8+ cells from both sensitive (MC38) and resistant (Renca) tumor models (Figure 2B).
Depletion of CD8+ T-cells significantly reduced the vector’s therapeutic activity in the
sensitive MC38 tumor model, but had no effect in Renca, further supporting the hypothesis
that the resistant tumor models were unable to mount a robust immunotherapeutic response.
Of note, the reduced therapeutic activity in MC38 tumors after CD8+ depletion occurred
despite increased viral replication (Figure 2C), again highlighting the increased importance
of immunotherapeutic over oncolytic activity in these vectors.
Resistance to viral therapy correlated with MDSC in the tumor environment
It appears therefore that in order to produce a significant therapeutic effect, the viral vector
needs to be able to mediate both an oncolytic and immunotherapeutic response, while
resistant tumors were able to limit this to an oncolytic-mediated response only. The immune
response to viral therapy was therefore examined in more detail in order to define
differences between susceptible and resistant tumors.

Author Manuscript

It was determined that pS6 levels were reduced systemically in myeloid DCs in tumor
bearing animals, and that this reduction was more pronounced in the resistant tumor-bearing
mouse models (Figure S3A), indicating that a defect in or suppression of the DC response
may be important for resistance to immunotherapy in these tumors. However, seeing as
oncolytic viral immune activation is likely to primarily occur subsequent to replication in the
tumor, the condition of the more localized immune environment within the tumor was
examined. Different immune cells are associated with a suppressive phenotype, including
MDSC and T-regs, and so the overall level of these different cell types in both the spleen and
the tumor of the same seven mouse tumor models were determined prior to therapy. It was
observed that the overall level of MDSC found in the tumor for different tumor models
correlated very closely with the resistance or sensitivity of that model to subsequent viral

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 11.

Hou et al.

Page 5

Author Manuscript

therapy (Figure 3A and S3B). No similar correlation was seen with T-reg levels or with
either cell type in the spleen (Figure 3A and S3C).

Author Manuscript

We further examined what changes occurred in the tumor after viral therapy and saw that for
different tumor models (4T1, MC38 and Renca, Figure 3B), the addition of vaccinia therapy
resulted in a rapid loss of T-reg, but that MDSC levels were unaffected (and actually
continued to increase over time, as they also did in control groups). It therefore appears that
MDSC are unaffected by the presence of oncolytic vaccinia and high levels of MDSC can
block the immunotherapeutic activity of these vectors. Of note, in the sensitive MC38 tumor
model (with lower background levels of MDSC), the viral therapy was actually found to
significantly increase the number of CD8+ T-cells present in the tumor, an indication of
immunotherapeutic activity, whereas the more resistant 4T1 tumor model (with higher
baseline MDSC levels) did not display any significant increase in CD8+ T-cells in the tumor
after treatment (Figure 3C).

Author Manuscript

We have recently described an oncolytic vaccinia strain, WR.B18R-.IFNβ+, with enhanced
immunotherapeutic effects(Kirn et al., 2007; Wang et al., 2011), while oncolytic viral strains
expressing GM-CSF (including vaccinia and HSV based strains(Andtbacka et al., 2013; Heo
et al., 2013)) have produced the most dramatic clinical responses to date despite GM-CSF
being associated with MDSC proliferation(Kohanbash et al., 2013). The effects of these
immune-enhanced vectors were therefore also examined to see if they were able to
overcome MDSC-mediated immunosuppression in the tumor. It was found that the more
immunogenic vaccinia strains (WR.TK-mGMCSF and WR.B18R-mIFNβ+) provided no
additional benefit over WR.TK- in a sensitive tumor model (MC38, Figure S4), with
WR.TK-mGMCSF even increasing MDSC in the tumor. In the resistant tumor model (4T1,
Figure S4) all viral treatments resulted in significant increases in MDSC levels in the tumor.
This was less dramatic for the immune-enhanced vectors, and this correlated with a small
but not significant increase in CD8+ T-cell infiltration. It therefore appears that the inability
of the virus to induce a robust immunotherapeutic effect in tumors with high levels of
MDSC is a critical determinant of resistance and cannot be overcome by increasing viralmediated immune activation.
Targeting of PGE2 can reduce MDSC and re-sensitize resistant tumors to viral therapy

Author Manuscript

Recent reports have identified COX2-mediated production of the prostaglandin PGE2 as a
key determinant of MDSC tumor-infiltration and maintenance of the suppressive phenotype
in these cells (Donkor et al., 2009; Fujita et al., 2011; Kalinski, 2012; Obermajer et al.,
2011a; Obermajer et al., 2011b; Rodriguez et al., 2005). It was noted that viral therapy did
not significantly alter the overall levels of COX2 expression in the tumor (Figure S5A).
We therefore looked to develop approaches to reduce PGE2 levels, including addition of the
COX2 inhibitor celecoxib or viral expression of the prostaglandin-inactivating enzyme
HPGD (hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase 15-(NAD), 15-PGDH) (Figure S5B, S5C).
Initial in vitro experiments determined that even when used at levels known to be toxic in
vivo, celecoxib was unable to reduce PGE2 levels by the amounts achieved with HPGD
expression (Figure S5D). Oncolytic vaccinia expressing HPGD (WR.TK-HPGD+) was
therefore tested in several different mouse tumor models.
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 11.

Hou et al.

Page 6

Author Manuscript

It was found that WR.TK-HPGD+ was non-toxic and that the numbers of MDSC cells in
Renca (resistant) tumors were rapidly and significantly reduced after treatment with
WR.TK-.HPGD+ (Figure 4A). Interestingly, WR.TK-.HPGD+ also induced a more rapid
and robust reduction in T-reg numbers in the tumor. Because several sub-sets of MDSC have
been defined in mice, we further looked to determine if the monocytic
(CD11b+Ly6G−Ly6Chi) and granulocytic (CD11bLy6G+Ly6CLo) MDSC were equally
targeted. It was found that HPGD expression selectively depleted the granulocytic MDSC
population (Figures 4B and S5E) that is typically found in greater numbers and thought to be
terminally differentiated.

Author Manuscript

The identification of the COX2-PGE2 pathway as a key mediator of immunosuppression has
led to a variety of inhibitory approaches being proposed. We therefore compared the in vivo
effects of different COX2 or PGE2 inhibitors on the levels of G-MDSC in the tumor,
including PGE2 depleting antibody, celecoxib and agonists of the PGE2 receptors EP2 and
EP4. The only approach capable of reducing G-MDSC levels was WR.TK-HPGD+ (Figure
4C), indicating that high level HPGD expression from within the tumor is uniquely able to
break this immunosuppressive cycle.
These alterations in the tumor microenvironment further correlated with an enhanced
therapeutic effect in different mouse tumor models (Figure 5A). Of note, the Renca tumor
model that was previously resistant to viral therapy (displaying an ‘oncolytic only’
phenotype and high baseline levels of MDSC) displayed the greatest increase in therapeutic
benefit after HPGD transgene expression (Figures 5AB). However MC38 tumors, that had
low-level baseline MDSC and already displayed sensitivity to therapy also showed a
significant further therapeutic advantage after treatment with WR.TK-.HPGD+.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

The patterns of viral luciferase transgene expression were also compared for WR.TK- and
WR.TK-HPGD+) in the previously resistant Renca tumor model (Figures 1B and 5CD).
Interestingly, it was initially noted that, unlike many immune enhancing transgenes, HPGD
expression did not reduce the initial replicative capability of the virus (Figures 5C and S6).
However, the virus was cleared from the tumor slightly faster with HPGD expression than
for WR.TK- alone, again indicative of the raising of a robust immune response. It was also
seen that whereas WR.TK- treatment displayed the ‘oncolytic only’ phenotype (with higher
gene expression at day 1, correlating with greatest subsequent therapeutic benefit)(Figure
1B), WR.TK-.HPGD+ treatment of the same tumor model displayed the ‘oncolytic plus
immunotherapeutic’ phenotype, with the best responders displaying a robust and rapid
clearance of the virus at day 5 after treatment (Figure 5D). This was further explored
through depletion of different immune subsets from the mice prior to treatment with
WR.TK-HPGD+ (Figure 5E). It was noted that depletion of CD8+ cells had the most
profound effect, resulting in a loss of significance in the therapeutic benefit after treatment.
However both CD4+ and NK cells also appear to be important, as their depletion resulted in
a significant reduction in therapeutic effect (even though WR.TK-HPGD+ treatment
maintained a significant therapeutic benefit). It therefore appears that HPGD expression, in
addition to depleting granulocytic MDSC is capable of inducing further immunotherapeutic
benefits.

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 11.

Hou et al.

Page 7

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

We looked to define in more detail the mechanisms underlying the therapeutic advantage
seen with WR.TK-HPGD+. It was noted that at 3 days after treatment, WR.TK- alone was
able to modestly increase the levels of several Th1-associated chemokines both systemically
and in the tumor (Figures 6AB). The expression of HPGD however produced significant
further increases and was also capable of significantly reducing the level of the suppressive
chemokine CXCL12 (SDF-1), which is associated with MDSC attraction into the tumor,
tumor metastasis and a poor prognosis(Chatterjee et al., 2014; Obermajer et al., 2011b)
(Figure 6B). Further analyses looked at the levels of selected cytokines and inflammatory
pathways within the tumor. As expected, WR.TK- infection resulted in an increase in the
type I IFN response, seen with increased lift-1 and lift-2 expression (Figure 6C). However,
this was not increased further with HPGD expression, indicating HPGD does not enhance
the innate immune response that might be expected to reduce viral oncolytic effects and
mediate premature viral clearance from the tumor. Instead, HPGD expression did
significantly increase the level of IFNγ produced within the tumor (Figure 6D). Oncolytic
viral infection alone therefore appears capable of inducing an inflammatory response and
initial immune activation, whereas HPGD expression may be required to prevent premature
shutdown of the immune response prior to full induction of adaptive immunity. This is
supported by the observation that at 7 days after treatment WR.TK-HPGD+ had induced a
fourfold increase in the number of anti-tumor CTLs in the spleen relative to WR.TKtreatment (Figure 6E).
WR.TK-HPGD+ can enhance sensitivity of resistant tumors to other immunotherapies

Author Manuscript

The observed changes in the tumor’s chemokine profile may be responsible for enhancing
the CTL response through mediating changes in the immune cell repertoire within the tumor.
This might further provide benefits for attracting therapeutic T-cells into the tumor after
adoptive T-cell transfer or application of a therapeutic vaccine. This was examined using a
bilateral Renca tumor model, whereby one tumor was injected with WR.TK- while the
tumor on the opposite flank was injected with WR.TK-HPGD+. It was seen that activated
NK T-cells (Cytokine Induced Killer, CIK cells) delivered intravenously, trafficked
significantly more efficiently to the HPGD expressing tumor (Figure 7A). This indicates that
the expression of HPGD not only limits the suppressive environment within the tumor, but is
also capable of enhancing systemic attraction of T-cells.
It was seen that Cytokine Induced Killer (CIK) cells, used as a model of adoptive T-cell
transfer (Figure 7B), only had a small therapeutic effect in Renca tumor models, but
combined with WR.TK-HPGD+ to increase survival relative to either treatment used alone.

Author Manuscript

Perhaps more dramatic was the observed effects of combining WR.TK-HPGD+ with
blockade of immune checkpoint inhibitor using anti-PD-1 (Figure 8A). This antibody is
known to have no effect in the Renca tumor model (Masters et al., 2014), as was confirmed
here, yet combination with WR.TK-HPGD+ produced a large therapeutic advantage, again
indicating that WR.TK-HPGD+ has the potential to sensitize otherwise resistant tumors to
different immunotherapies. Of particular note, it has recently been reported that aspirin
could be used to block Cyclooxygenase activity and sensitize tumors to anti-PD-1 therapy
(Zelenay et al., 2015), however this was only possible when the drugs were added prior to

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 11.

Hou et al.

Page 8

Author Manuscript

formation of established tumors. In the Renca model used here a similar result is seen
(Figure 8A), with anti-PD-1 and aspirin added 3 days after tumor implantation producing a
small but significant therapeutic benefit, whereas either used alone had no effect, even at this
early time. However, if this same combination is added at later time points, after tumor
formation (10 days after tumor implantation), there is no therapeutic benefit. However
addition of anti-PD-1 in combination with WR.TK-HPGD+ produces highly significant
therapeutic effects, even when these are added at late times to established tumors. Also, of
note is the observation that adding aspirin to WR.TK- produced no therapeutic benefit,
indicating aspirin could not substitute for HPGD expression.

Author Manuscript

The effects of aspirin on sensitizing tumors to anti-PD-1 treatment when added prior to
tumor formation were further examined in (Zelenay et al., 2015) using cyclooxygenase
deficient Ptgs1−/−Ptgs2−/− mice, and a role for IL-12p40+CD103+ DC was identified in
mediating anti-tumor immunity. These cells were depleted when PGE2 was present in wild
type mice. Here we found that expression of HPGD from an oncolytic vaccinia could disrupt
PGE2 activity sufficiently, even in established tumors, to induce significant numbers of
IL12p40+CD103+ DC in the draining lymph nodes of treated tumors (Figure 8B). A small,
but significant increase was seen even with WR.TK- treatment alone, but the effects were
increased significantly when HPGD was also expressed.

DISCUSSION

Author Manuscript

A variety of approaches have been proposed to overcome the immunosuppressive
microenvironment in large solid tumors, with the COX2-PGE2 pathway as a key mediator of
this suppressive activity. This pathway is an attractive target as it has been associated with
attracting and maintaining the suppressive phenotype of MDSC. Breaking this cycle might
even allow these suppressive cells to differentiate into an immune activating phenotype.
Here we demonstrated that an oncolytic vaccinia virus expressing the PGE2 inactivating
enzyme HPGD is able to significantly reduce levels of G-MDSC within the tumor. Of
several approaches known to target COX2-PGE2, WR.TK-HPGD+ was the only one able to
actually reduce MDSC levels.

Author Manuscript

This appears to be especially important in the context of oncolytic viral therapy as the level
of MDSC in the tumor at baseline was inversely related to the sensitivity of the tumor to
oncolytic vaccinia therapy. Higher levels of MDSC in the tumor suppressed the
immunotherapeutic activity of the virus, limiting its activity to oncolytic-mediated cell
killing. Although vaccinia has a known capacity to produce a fast spreading and highly lytic
infection in humans or non-human primates (Naik et al., 2006), it is apparent that the
immune response plays a more critical role for therapeutic activity, as confirmed here. The
determination that local rather than systemic immune suppressive activity is key in
preventing viral immunotherapeutic action allows the creation of vectors such as WR.TKHPGD+ that express transgenes to overcome this suppression locally within the tumor.
Recent clinical success using antibodies that block immune checkpoint inhibitors, such as
anti-CTLA-4, anti-PD-1 and anti-PD-L1(Leach et al., 1996; Topalian et al., 2012; Yuan et
al., 2008), have revealed the importance of overcoming the tumor’s capacity to prematurely

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 11.

Hou et al.

Page 9

Author Manuscript

shut down or curtail an immune response. It is apparent that a successful therapeutic strategy
would require both activation of the immune response and prevention of its early shut down.
As such, it is interesting that the standard oncolytic vaccinia strain (WR.TK-) and several
immune-enhanced strains (including WR.TK-mGM-CSF) are capable of inducing
inflammation at early times, even in resistant tumor models, but were unable to subsequently
prime high level anti-tumor adaptive immunity (in tumors with high baseline G-MDSC).

Author Manuscript

The expression of HPGD from oncolytic vaccinia however produces a vector that is capable
of both immune activation and limiting premature immune shutdown in the tumor. The
primary mediator of early immune shut down and suppression after viral therapy appeared to
be the granulocytic MDSC lineage within the tumor and that targeting of the prostaglandin
PGE2 was shown to be a potent strategy to reduce the levels of these cells. This combination
of immune activation after local viral replication in the tumor and overcoming of immune
suppressive effects though G-MDSC depletion resulted in greatly increased anti-tumor CTL
and significantly enhanced therapeutic effects. The greatest therapeutic advantage occurs in
the previously resistant tumors, where the viral gene expression pattern switches to that of
an ‘immunotherapeutic’ response. This confirms that previously resistant tumors can be
sensitized to viral therapy through HPGD transgene expression. It would be predicted that
expression of HPGD from immune-enhanced vectors (such as WR.TK-GMCSF) could
further increase their immunotherapeutic potential.
It is also of note that HPGD expression was able to significantly enhance therapeutic activity
in already sensitive tumor models (with low baseline G-MDSC levels). In this respect,
altered chemokine production patterns and enhanced trafficking of activated T-cells to
tumors treated with virus expressing HPGD may play an important therapeutic role.

Author Manuscript

This multi-faceted targeting of the immunosuppressive microenvironment within the tumor
through treatment with WR.TK-HPGD+ was further found to sensitize resistant tumors to
other immunotherapies, including adoptive immune cell transfer and immune checkpoint
modulation. In particular, it was observed that Renca tumors that are naturally resistant to
anti-PD-1 therapy, displayed enhanced sensitivity to anti-PD-1 when anti-PD-1 was applied
after the WR.TK-HPGD+. Other approaches that target cyclooxygenase activity (such as
with aspirin) have also been shown to sensitize mouse tumors to anti-PD-1 therapy, however
this was only possible if both therapies were administered prior to tumor formation. The
WR.TK-HPGD+ virus was the only approach found to be effective against pre-established,
large solid tumors.

Author Manuscript

Finally, the description of distinct tumor response phenotypes to oncolytic viral therapy is
also a finding that has direct clinical relevance for the application of OVs and potentially
other immunotherapies. Recent clinical demonstrations of the ability to image OV expressed
reporter transgenes in the clinic, such as the Sodium-Iodide symporter expressed from
oncolytic measles virus using SPECT imaging(Penheiter et al., 2011; Russell et al., 2014),
opens up the possibility of looking for similar patterns of gene expression and robust early
OV clearance in a clinical setting. This might be used to predict clinical responses to
oncolytic viral therapies at early time points after treatment, a particular problem for
immunotherapies, where tumor swelling often precedes therapeutic response. However other

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 11.

Hou et al.

Page 10

Author Manuscript

mechanisms of tumor destruction may also play a role, such as viral-mediated vascular
collapse in the tumor, which has been implicated in anti-tumor activity of several OVs,
including those based on vaccinia (Breitbach et al., 2013; Breitbach et al., 2007). Further,
the use of subcutaneous tumor xenografts minimizes the involvement of stromal cells and
matrix in the response and tumor-associated fibroblasts have recently been implicated in
anti-tumor activity of several OVs, including vaccinia (Ilkow et al., 2015).

Author Manuscript

This original approach to targeting tumor-induced local defects in the immune system
therefore appears to be uniquely capable of targeting the highly suppressive MDSC
population in the tumor itself. As a result resistant tumors can be sensitized to the
immunotherapeutic effects of the viral therapy itself and to other commonly used
immunotherapies, such as immune checkpoint blockade. The broad applicability of this
approach would be especially exciting in the development of combination immunotherapies
that produce more reliable and robust responses in a variety of solid tumors.

Experimental Procedures
Cell lines, viruses
A variety of mouse tumor cell lines, including AB12, MOSEC, MC38, CMT93, PAN02, JC,
4T1, B16, CMT TK, RENCA and LLC were used in this research, all were obtained from
the American Type Culture Collection (Manassas, VA), except for MC38 (gift from Dr.
David Bartlett, University of Pittsburgh), and JC, CMT93 and CMT TK (Cancer Research
UK tissue culture collection). All were cultured according to vendors’ recommendations.
Mouse NK T (CIK) cells were expanded from mouse splenocytes and cultured as previously
described (Baker et al., 2001).

Author Manuscript

The wild-type vaccinia virus WR (Western Reserve) strain was obtained from ATCC (BEI
Resources). WR.TK-.Luc+ and WR.B18R-.IFNβ+ were described previously (Kirn et al.,
2007). WR.TK-.HPGD+ and WR.TK-.GMCSF+ were constructed for this work, with the
pSC65 plasmid (gift from Prof. Bernie Moss, NIH) cloned to express firefly luciferase from
the viral pSE/L promoter and mouse HPGD (or mouse GM-CSF) from the p7.5 promoter.
This was recombined into the viral thymidine kinase gene (See Figure S5. In addition,
vvDD.Luc+ and GFP (WR with deletions in TK and the viral growth factor genes, as
described previously) was used as a second model of oncolytic vaccinia.
In vitro cell killing was determined by MTS assay of cell survival relative to uninfected
controls and plaque assay on lysed cell samples was performed on BSC-1 cell layers.

Author Manuscript

Animal models
NOD SCID, C57/BL6 and BALB/c mice (female 6–8 weeks old) were purchased from The
Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME). Tumor cells were implanted subcutaneously with 5 ×
105 cells injected per mouse. IT (intratumoral) injection treatments began when tumors
reached 50–100 mm3 (unless otherwise stated). Treatment doses and timings were as
indicated. Tumor size was monitored by caliper measurement unless otherwise indicated and
mice sacrificed when tumors reached 1500 mm3.

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 11.

Hou et al.

Page 11

Author Manuscript

Other treatments included; Anti-PD-1 blocking antibody (BioXCell, RMP1-4) were diluted
in PBS and given IP at 200 mg/mouse twice weekly; mouse CIK cells were given
intravenously at 5×106 cell/mouse; anti-PGE2 antibody was given at 20ug/mouse IP daily;
Celecoxib (Sigma) was given IP at 25 mg/kg daily; EP2 (AH6809) and EP4 (AH23848)
agonsists (both Sigma) were given at 10 mg/kg each daily. Aspirin was given in drinking
water ad libitum at doses of 600 μg/ml.
In immune cell depeltion experiments, anti-mouse CD8+ (2.43), anti-mouse CD4+ (GK1.5)
or anti-mouse NK1.1 (PK136)(all from BioXCell) were injected intraperitoneally (500mg)
on days 1 and 2 after tumor implantaion, with follow up injections of 150 mg every 5 days
thereafter.

Author Manuscript

In some experiments tumor homogenates were collected for cytokine and chemokine
quatification (by qRT-PCR). Neutralizing antibody titers in serum were determined as
described previously(Sampath et al., 2013).
All experiments were performed according to the University of Pittsburgh Institutional
Animal Care and Use Committee approved protocols.
Whole animal imaging

Author Manuscript

In some experiments whole animal bioluminescence imaging was used to image viral
luciferase gene expression. Imaging was on an IVIS 200 (Xenogen, part of PerkinElmer,
Waltham, MA) after intraperitoneal injection of luciferin substrate. Bioluminescence signal
was quantified and images analyzed using the Living Image software (Xenogen, part of
PerkinElmer). In some other experiments, NK-T (CIK)cells were covalently labeled with
Cy5.5 NHS Ester (GE Healthcare, Waukesha, WI) and fluorescence signal was imaged in
vivo using the FMT2500 fluorescence whole animal imaging system (PerkinElmer,
Waltham, MA). In addition, XenoLight RediJect COX2 Probe (PerkinElmer, Waltham, MA)
was imaged on the IVIS 200 in vivo.
ELISPOT assay

Author Manuscript

IFN-γ–producing splenocytes were quantified by ELISPOT assay. Splenocytes were
separated from mice after different treatments. Splenocytes were stimulated by lysed tumor
cells at 10:1 ratio or UV-inactivated Vaccinia virus at 5:1 ratio and seeded on plates (EMD
Millipore, Billerica, MA), coated overnight with 15 ng/mg mIFN-γ antibody AN18
(Mabtech, Inc., Cincinnati, OH). These were incubated for 48 hr before the plates were
washed and incubated with a biotinylated secondary antibody R4-6A2-biotin (Mabtech) for
2 hr at room temperature. The plates were then washed, incubated for 1 hr with avidinperoxidase complex (Vectastatin kit; Vector laboratories, Burlingame, CA), and developed
by the addition of AEC (3-amino-9-ethylcarbazole) substrate (Vector Laboratories, Inc.,
Burlingame, CA) according to manufacturer’s protocol. The spots were counted on a CTLImmunospot analyzer (Cellular Technologies, Shaker Heights, OH). Spots from
unstimulated splenocytes from each group were used to subtract the background.

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 11.

Hou et al.

Page 12

Elisa and Western blot assay

Author Manuscript

Tumor homogenates were harvested from mice treated as indicated, and mechanically
disaggregated and digested with triple enzyme mixture (Collagenase type IV, DNase type IV,
and Hyaluronidase type V (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO)). Serum was collected through
sub-mandibular bleed. In vitro cells infected with virus at MOI=1 for 24 hr or pretreated for
24 hr with 20 nm Celecoxib (BioVision, San Francisco, CA) were pretreated with 20 μm
arachidonic acid (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) 4 hr prior to harvest. All experiments were
performed in triplicate. Mouse SDF-1(CXCL12), RANTES (CCL5) and I-TAC(CXCL11)
ELISA were performed according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Abcam, Cambridge, MA)
and PGE2 ELISA were performed according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Cayman, Ann
Arbor, Michigan) and optical density was detected with the 3,3,5,5-tetramethylbenzidine
(TMB) peroxidase substrate kit (Vector Labs, Burlingame, CA).

Author Manuscript

For western blot assay, in vitro lysed cell protein was prepared. Mouse HPGD antibody
(Abcam,Cambridge, MA), COX2 antibody (BD, Franklin Lakes, New Jersey) and beta-actin
antibody (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) were used for Western Blot according to the
manufacturer’s protocol.
Flow cytometry
Acquisition was performed on Gallios or Cyan flow cytometers. Data were analyzed using
the Cyanor Gallios software. Antibodies included those to CD3, CD4, CD8, CD25, FoxP3,
CD11b, Ly6g(Gr-1), Ly6c, CD11b(M1/70), MHC II (M5/114.15.2), CD103(2E7),
IL12p40(C17.8) (all BD Bioscience or eBioscience) or CD11c(N418) (BioLegend).
Intracellular staining for Foxp3 was done according to protocols in the respective kits.
Gating strategies are shown (Figure S3)

Author Manuscript

In some studies splenocytes were collected and rapidly fixed and permeabilized in order to
examine surface markers as well as intracellular stains by Phosflow (including pS6, BD
BioSciences).
qRT-PCR
Total RNA was isolated and purified using RNeasy Mini Kit (QIAGEN) from whole-tumor
homogenates. cDNA was synthesized using cDNA Synthesis Kit (Quanta BioScience Inc.).
An array of gene expression assays were performed using a TaqMan Gene Expression Assay
following the manufacturer’s instructions (reference gene: Mouse HPRT) and included
IFNγ, CXCL10, CXCL11, lift-1, lift-2.

Author Manuscript

Statistical Analysis
Standard Student’s t-test (two-tailed) were used, with significance considered to be P < 0.05.

Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 11.

Hou et al.

Page 13

Author Manuscript

Acknowledgments
Thanks to Doug Marvel and Rachel Sikorski for help with preparation and running of flow cytometry samples and
David Bartlett and Bernie Moss for providing cell lines and plasmids as indicated.
This work was funded by grant support from NIH (R01 CA178766 & R01 CA140215), The Lustgarten Foundation
and through use of CCSG supported core facilities (P30 CA047904), including animal facilities, In Vivo Imaging
Facilities, Flow Cytometry Facility and Luminex Core.

References

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Alvarez-Breckenridge CA, Yu J, Price R, Wojton J, Pradarelli J, Mao H, Wei M, Wang Y, He S,
Hardcastle J, et al. NK cells impede glioblastoma virotherapy through NKp30 and NKp46 natural
cytotoxicity receptors. Nature medicine. 2012; 18:1827–1834.
Andtbacka RHI, Collichio FA, Amatruda T, Senzer N, Chesney J, Delman KA, Spitler LE, Puzanov I,
Doleman S, Ye Y, et al. OPTiM: A randomized phase III trial of talimogene laherparepvec (T-VEC)
versus subcutaneous (SC) granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) for the
treatment (tx) of unresected stage IIIB/C and IV melanoma. J Clin Oncol. 2013; 31:LBA9008.
Baker J, Verneris MR, Ito M, Shizuru JA, Negrin RS. Expansion of cytolytic CD8(+) natural killer T
cells with limited capacity for graft-versus-host disease induction due to interferon gamma
production. Blood. 2001; 97:2923–2931. [PubMed: 11342413]
Breitbach CJ, Arulanandam R, De Silva N, Thorne SH, Patt R, Daneshmand M, Moon A, Ilkow C,
Burke J, Hwang TH, et al. Oncolytic Vaccinia Virus Disrupts Tumor-Associated Vasculature in
Humans. Cancer Research. 2013; 73:1265–1275. [PubMed: 23393196]
Breitbach CJ, Paterson JM, Lemay CG, Falls TJ, McGuire A, Parato KA, Stojdl DF, Daneshmand M,
Speth K, Kirn D, et al. Targeted inflammation during oncolytic virus therapy severely compromises
tumor blood flow. Mol Ther. 2007; 15:1686–1693. [PubMed: 17579581]
Chatterjee S, Behnam Azad B, Nimmagadda S. The intricate role of CXCR4 in cancer. Advances in
cancer research. 2014; 124:31–82. [PubMed: 25287686]
Chen H, Sampath P, Hou W, Thorne SH. Regulating cytokine function enhances safety and activity of
genetic cancer therapies. Mol Ther. 2013; 21:167–174. [PubMed: 23281444]
Donkor MK, Lahue E, Hoke TA, Shafer LR, Coskun U, Solheim JC, Gulen D, Bishay J, Talmadge JE.
Mammary tumor heterogeneity in the expansion of myeloid-derived suppressor cells. International
immunopharmacology. 2009; 9:937–948. [PubMed: 19362167]
Fujita M, Kohanbash G, Fellows-Mayle W, Hamilton RL, Komohara Y, Decker SA, Ohlfest JR, Okada
H. COX-2 blockade suppresses gliomagenesis by inhibiting myeloid-derived suppressor cells.
Cancer Res. 2011; 71:2664–2674. [PubMed: 21324923]
Heo J, Reid T, Ruo L, Breitbach CJ, Rose S, Bloomston M, Cho M, Lim HY, Chung HC, Kim CW, et
al. Randomized dose-finding clinical trial of oncolytic immunotherapeutic vaccinia JX-594 in liver
cancer. Nature Medicine. 2013; 19:329–336.
Ilkow CS, Marguerie M, Batenchuk C, Mayer J, Ben Neriah D, Cousineau S, Falls T, Jennings VA,
Boileau M, Bellamy D, et al. Reciprocal cellular cross-talk within the tumor microenvironment
promotes oncolytic virus activity. Nat Med. 2015; 21:530–536. [PubMed: 25894825]
Kalinski P. Regulation of immune responses by prostaglandin E2. Journal of Immunology. 2012;
188:21–28.
Kim JH, Oh JY, Park BH, Lee DE, Kim JS, Park HE, Roh MS, Je JE, Yoon JH, Thorne SH, et al.
Systemic Armed Oncolytic and Immunologic Therapy for Cancer with JX-594, a Targeted
Poxvirus Expressing GM-CSF. Mol Ther. 2006; 14:361–370. [PubMed: 16905462]
Kirn DH, Wang Y, Le Boeuf F, Bell J, Thorne SH. Targeting of interferon-beta to produce a specific,
multi-mechanistic oncolytic vaccinia virus. PLoS Med. 2007; 4:e353. [PubMed: 18162040]
Kohanbash G, McKaveney K, Sakaki M, Ueda R, Mintz AH, Amankulor N, Fujita M, Ohlfest JR,
Okada H. GM-CSF promotes the immunosuppressive activity of glioma-infiltrating myeloid cells
through interleukin-4 receptor-alpha. Cancer Res. 2013; 73:6413–6423. [PubMed: 24030977]
Kottke T, Boisgerault N, Diaz RM, Donnelly O, Rommelfanger-Konkol D, Pulido J, Thompson J,
Mukhopadhyay D, Kaspar R, Coffey M, et al. Detecting and targeting tumor relapse by its
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 11.

Hou et al.

Page 14

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

resistance to innate effectors at early recurrence. Nat Med. 2013; 19:1625–1631. [PubMed:
24240185]
Leach DR, Krummel MF, Allison JP. Enhancement of antitumor immunity by CTLA-4 blockade.
Science. 1996; 271:1734–1736. [PubMed: 8596936]
Lichty BD, Breitbach CJ, Stojdl DF, Bell JC. Going viral with cancer immunotherapy. Nat Rev Cancer.
2014; 14:559–567. [PubMed: 24990523]
Lun XQ, Jang JH, Tang N, Deng H, Head R, Bell JC, Stojdl DF, Nutt CL, Senger DL, Forsyth PA,
McCart JA. Efficacy of systemically administered oncolytic vaccinia virotherapy for malignant
gliomas is enhanced by combination therapy with rapamycin or cyclophosphamide. Clin Cancer
Res. 2009; 15:2777–2788. [PubMed: 19351762]
Masters G, Dito G, Penhallow B, Lewin A, Kao H, Jure-Kunkel M. Antitumor activity of anti-PD-1 in
combination with tyrosine kinase inhibitors in a preclinical renal cell carcinoma model. AACR,
(San Diego, CA). 2014:5016.
Mastrangelo MJ, Maguire HC Jr, Eisenlohr LC, Laughlin CE, Monken CE, McCue PA, Kovatich AJ,
Lattime EC. Intratumoral recombinant GM-CSF-encoding virus as gene therapy in patients with
cutaneous melanoma. Cancer Gene Ther. 1999; 6:409–422. [PubMed: 10505851]
McCart JA, Ward JM, Lee J, Hu Y, Alexander HR, Libutti SK, Moss B, Bartlett DL. Systemic cancer
therapy with a tumor-selective vaccinia virus mutant lacking thymidine kinase and vaccinia growth
factor genes. Cancer Res. 2001; 61:8751–8757. [PubMed: 11751395]
Naik AM, Chalikonda S, McCart JA, Xu H, Guo ZS, Langham G, Gardner D, Mocellin S, Lokshin
AE, Moss B, et al. Intravenous and isolated limb perfusion delivery of wild type and a tumorselective replicating mutant vaccinia virus in nonhuman primates. Hum Gene Ther. 2006; 17:31–
45. [PubMed: 16409123]
Obermajer N, Muthuswamy R, Lesnock J, Edwards RP, Kalinski P. Positive feedback between PGE2
and COX2 redirects the differentiation of human dendritic cells toward stable myeloid-derived
suppressor cells. Blood. 2011a; 118:5498–5505. [PubMed: 21972293]
Obermajer N, Muthuswamy R, Odunsi K, Edwards RP, Kalinski P. PGE(2)-induced CXCL12
production and CXCR4 expression controls the accumulation of human MDSCs in ovarian cancer
environment. Cancer Research. 2011b; 71:7463–7470. [PubMed: 22025564]
Park BH, Hwang T, Liu TC, Sze DY, Kim JS, Kwon HC, Oh SY, Han SY, Yoon JH, Hong SH, et al.
Use of a targeted oncolytic poxvirus, JX-594, in patients with refractory primary or metastatic liver
cancer: a phase I trial. Lancet Oncol. 2008; 9:533–542. [PubMed: 18495536]
Penheiter AR, Griesmann GE, Federspiel MJ, Dingli D, Russell SJ, Carlson SK. Pinhole microSPECT/CT for noninvasive monitoring and quantitation of oncolytic virus dispersion and percent
infection in solid tumors. Gene Therapy. 2011
Rodriguez PC, Hernandez CP, Quiceno D, Dubinett SM, Zabaleta J, Ochoa JB, Gilbert J, Ochoa AC.
Arginase I in myeloid suppressor cells is induced by COX-2 in lung carcinoma. J Exp Med. 2005;
202:931–939. [PubMed: 16186186]
Russell SJ, Federspiel MJ, Peng KW, Tong C, Dingli D, Morice WG, Lowe V, O’Connor MK, Kyle
RA, Leung N, et al. Remission of disseminated cancer after systemic oncolytic virotherapy. Mayo
Clinic proceedings. 2014; 89:926–933. [PubMed: 24835528]
Sampath P, Li J, Hou W, Chen H, Bartlett DL, Thorne SH. Crosstalk between immune cell and
oncolytic vaccinia therapy enhances tumor trafficking and antitumor effects. Mol Ther. 2013;
21:620–628. [PubMed: 23229093]
Thorne SH, Hwang TH, O’Gorman WE, Bartlett DL, Sei S, Kanji F, Brown C, Werier J, Cho JH, Lee
DE, et al. Rational strain selection and engineering creates a broad-spectrum, systemically
effective oncolytic poxvirus, JX-963. J Clin Invest. 2007; 117:3350–3358. [PubMed: 17965776]
Topalian SL, Hodi FS, Brahmer JR, Gettinger SN, Smith DC, McDermott DF, Powderly JD, Carvajal
RD, Sosman JA, Atkins MB, et al. Safety, activity, and immune correlates of anti-PD-1 antibody in
cancer. N Engl J Med. 2012; 366:2443–2454. [PubMed: 22658127]
Tysome JR, Li X, Wang S, Wang P, Gao D, Du P, Chen D, Gangeswaran R, Chard LS, Yuan M, et al.
A novel therapeutic regimen to eradicate established solid tumors with an effective induction of
tumor-specific immunity. Clin Cancer Res. 2012; 18:6679–6689. [PubMed: 23091113]

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 11.

Hou et al.

Page 15

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Wang LC, Lynn RC, Cheng G, Alexander E, Kapoor V, Moon EK, Sun J, Fridlender ZG, Isaacs SN,
Thorne SH, Albelda SM. Treating Tumors With a Vaccinia Virus Expressing IFNbeta Illustrates
the Complex Relationships Between Oncolytic Ability and Immunogenicity. Molecular therapy:
the journal of the American Society of Gene Therapy. 2011
Worschech A, Chen N, Yu YA, Zhang Q, Pos Z, Weibel S, Raab V, Sabatino M, Monaco A, Liu H, et
al. Systemic treatment of xenografts with vaccinia virus GLV-1h68 reveals the immunologic facet
of oncolytic therapy. BMC Genomics. 2009; 10:301. [PubMed: 19583830]
Yuan J, Gnjatic S, Li H, Powel S, Gallardo HF, Ritter E, Ku GY, Jungbluth AA, Segal NH, Rasalan TS,
et al. CTLA-4 blockade enhances polyfunctional NY-ESO-1 specific T cell responses in metastatic
melanoma patients with clinical benefit. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008; 105:20410–20415.
[PubMed: 19074257]
Zeh HJ, Downs-Canner S, McCart JA, Guo ZS, Rao UN, Ramalingam L, Thorne SH, Jones HL,
Kalinski P, Wieckowski E, et al. First-in-man Study of Western Reserve Strain Oncolytic Vaccinia
Virus: Safety, Systemic Spread, and Antitumor Activity. Mol Ther. 2014
Zelenay S, van der Veen AG, Bottcher JP, Snelgrove KJ, Rogers N, Acton SE, Chakravarty P, Girotti
MR, Marais R, Quezada SA, et al. Cyclooxygenase-Dependent Tumor Growth through Evasion of
Immunity. Cell. 2015; 162:1257–1270. [PubMed: 26343581]
Zhang J, Tai LH, Ilkow CS, Alkayyal AA, Ananth AA, de Souza CT, Wang J, Sahi S, Ly L, Lefebvre
C, et al. Maraba MG1 virus enhances natural killer cell function via conventional dendritic cells to
reduce postoperative metastatic disease. Mol Ther. 2014; 22:1320–1332. [PubMed: 24695102]
Zhang Q, Yu YA, Wang E, Chen N, Danner RL, Munson PJ, Marincola FM, Szalay AA. Eradication of
solid human breast tumors in nude mice with an intravenously injected light-emitting oncolytic
vaccinia virus. Cancer Res. 2007; 67:10038–10046. [PubMed: 17942938]

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 11.

Hou et al.

Page 16

Author Manuscript

SIGNIFICANCE
Cancer immunotherapies, including oncolytic viruses, offer the potential for curative
cancer treatments. However patients often present with a combination of systemic
immune defects and localized immunosuppression within the tumor that limit immune
activation or mediate premature immune shut-off, leading to resistance. Through
identification of critical pathways and immunosuppressive cell lineages mediating
resistance to oncolytic viral therapies it was possible to develop viral vectors to overcome
them. As a result, previously resistant cancer models became sensitive to oncolytic viral
therapy and other immunotherapies. These findings have the potential to significantly
enhance the effectiveness of oncolytic viral and other immunotherapies in the clinic and
to delineate approaches to overcome resistance to other cancer therapies.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 11.

Hou et al.

Page 17

Author Manuscript

HIGHLIGHTS
•

Identification of Granulocytic MDSC as key mediators of resistance to
immunotherapy.

•

Oncolytic virus expressed HPGD targets PGE2 and depletes G-MDSC
in the tumor.

•

Reduction in PGE2 in the tumor alters chemokine profiles and immune
cell infiltrate.

•

Targeting of PGE2 sensitizes established and resistant tumors to
imnmunotherapies.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 11.

Hou et al.

Page 18

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 1.

Author Manuscript

Response to oncolytic vaccinia therapy in different immunocompetent mouse models. (A)
Syngeneic tumors were implanted subcutaneously into BALB/c or C57/BL6 mice and
treated with a single intratumoral injection of low dose (1×107 PFU) WR.TK- when tumors
reached 50–100 mm3. Survival benefit (increased survival compared to PBS treated control
mice) was plotted for each tumor model. (B) Cell viability (left), as determined by MTS
assay 72 hr after infection with WR.TK- at an MOI of 1.0 was plotted as percentage
viability relative to uninfected cells for indicated mouse tumor cell lines and viral replication
(right) was followed in the same cell lines after the same treatment by plaque assay on
BSC-1 cells. (C) Tumor growth for individual mice treated as in (A) are shown for 6 of the 7
tumor models (PAN02 displayed no survival benefit) and compared to PBS controls (Grey
lines). For each tumor model, individual mice are divided into good responders (dashed
lines) or poor responders (solid lines) depending on assigned survival benefits.
Bioluminescence imaging (BLI) was performed at 24 hr post-treatment to measure viral
gene expression from within the tumors and BLI signal for poor and good responders was

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 11.

Hou et al.

Page 19

Author Manuscript

normalized to tumor volume and plotted (right hand graph for each cell line). Error bars
±SEM. See also Figure S1

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 11.

Hou et al.

Page 20

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Fig 2.

Author Manuscript

Role of Immune Response in Theraeputic Effect of Oncolytic Vaccinia. (A) LLC tumors
were implanted into NOD SCID mice and tumor growth for individual mice is shown over
time after treatment with 1×107 PFU WR.TK- (left). These were divided into good (dashed
lines) and poor (solid lines) responders and bioluminescence imaging used to determine
viral luciferase transgene expression from the tumor at different times after treatment (right).
(B) MC38 and Renca cells were implanted subcutaneously into syngeneic mice and treated
with WR.TK- (1×107 PFU IT) after antibody depletion of CD8+ cells from the mice. *
p<0.05. (C) The viral gene expression from the tumor in the same mice as in (B) was
followed by bioluminescence imaging at day 3 after treatment. * p<0.05. Error bars ±SEM.
See also Figure S2.

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 11.

Hou et al.

Page 21

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Fig 3.

Author Manuscript

Resistance of different tumor models to oncolytic viral therapy is mediated by localized
immune suppression within the tumor. (A) Baseline levels of regulatory T-cells (T-reg) and
Monocyte Derived Suppressor Cells (MDSC) in tumors prior to therapy. Syngeneic
subcutaneous tumors were formed from different cell lines and mice sacrificed when tumors
reached 100 to 200 mm3 and disaggregated. Flow cytometry was used to quantify the
relative levels of T-reg (CD3+CD25+FoxP3+CD8−) and MDSC (CD11b+Gr-1+) in the
tumors. (B) Effect of viral therapy on suppressive immune cell profile within the tumor.
Tumor-bearing mice were treated with a single low dose (1×107 PFU) intratumoral injection
of WR.TK- and the levels of T-reg and MDSC in the tumors at different times after
treatment were analyzed as in (A). (C) CD3+CD8+CD4− T-cells were also quantified in the
tumor as in (A) (*p<0.05). Error bars ±SEM. See also Figure S3 and S4.

Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 11.

Hou et al.

Page 22

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Fig 4.

Author Manuscript

HPGD expression from oncolytic vaccinia reduces MDSC in the tumor. (A) Mice bearing
Renca tumors were treated with intratumoral, low dose (1×107 PFU) injection of
WR.TK-.HPGD+ and mice sacrificed at indicated times, tumors recovered, disaggregated
and analyzed by flow cytometry as in Fig 3. *p<0.05 compared to control. (B) Cells as in
(A) were additionally stained for Ly6G and Ly6C to distinguish effects on monocytic MDSC
(CD11b+Ly6C+Ly6G−) and granulocytic MDSC (CD11b+Ly6G+) in the tumor. (C) GMDSC levels in the tumors for mice treated as in (A) and sacrificed after 3 days were
compared to mice treated with PBS, anti-PGE2 antibody, celecoxib or EP2/4 agonists. All
non-viral treatments were administered daily for 3 days. Error bars ±SEM. See also Figure
S5.

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 11.

Hou et al.

Page 23

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Fig 5.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Enhanced therapeutic activity of WR.TK-.HPGD+. (A) Mice bearing subcutaneous RENCA
or MC38 tumors were treated with a single intratumoral injection of PBS or 1×107 PFU of
WR.TK- or WR.TK-HPGD+ and subsequent tumor growth followed by caliper
measurement (n=15 per group). (B) Renca tumor growth in individual mice treated with
WR.TK-HPGD+ are plotted, compared to PBS control (grey bar) and divided into good
(solid line) and best (dashed line) responders. (C) The viral gene expression
(bioluminescence) from the tumor at 24 hr after therapy was compared for mice treated with
WR.TK- and WR.TK-HPGD+. (D) The bioluminescence signal (viral gene expression) from
the tumor of mice treated with WR.TK-HPGD+ at day 1 and 5 were normalized to tumor
volume and shown for both good and best responders. (E) The role of different immune
subsets in the increased therapeutic activity of WR.TK-HPGD+ in Renca tumors was
examined through depletion of CD4+, CD8+ and NK cells. (*p<0.05 v PBS; #p<0.05 v
WR.TK-HPGD+). (F) Viral gene expression from the tumor (bioluminescence imaging) at
day 3 after treatment of immune cell depleted mice. Error bars ±SEM. See also Figure S6

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 11.

Hou et al.

Page 24

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Fig 6.

HPGD expression enhances the immune response within and against the tumor. (A) Mice
bearing Renca tumors were treated as indicated with 1×107 PFU of different viral strains IT
and sacrificed after 3 days. qRT-PCR was used to detect the expression of CXCL10 and
CXCL11 in the tumor. (B) ELISA was used to detect the levels of CCL5 and CXCL12 in the
serum of mice in (A) at the same times (BLD=Below Limits of Detection). (C) Innate (type
I IFN) immune response of mice as in (A) was determined by qRT-PCR of lift-1 and lift-2.
(D) Adaptive immune response, as measured by qRT-PCR of IFNγ was determined for mice

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 11.

Hou et al.

Page 25

Author Manuscript

as in (A). (E) Anti-tumor CTL response was determined in splenocytes collected form
RENCA tumor bearing mice 7 days after the indicated treatments. Anti-tumor CTL response
was determined by ELISPOT (*p<0.05, **p<0.001). Error bars ±SEM.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 11.

Hou et al.

Page 26

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Fig 7.

Author Manuscript

Enhanced Therapeutic Effects of Combination with adoptive T-cell Transfer (A) Mice were
implanted bilaterally with Renca tumors. When tumors reached 50–100 mm3, the tumor on
one flank was injected with 1×107 PFU of WR.TK- and the tumor on the opposite flank was
injected with WR.TK-HPGD+. After 24 hr 1×107 activated and Cy5.5 labeled NK T (CIK)
cells were delivered via tail vein injection. 24 hr later mice were imaged for
bioluminescence to measure viral gene expression and fluorescence to determine NK T cell
trafficking to tumors (*p<0.05). A representative example of fluorescence imaging is shown.
(B) BALB/c mice with subcutaneous Renca tumors were treated with PBS, 1×107 PFU of
WR.TK-HPGD+ (Intratumoral), 5×106 CIK cells (intravenous) or both therapies on the
same day. Animal survival, taken as time to tumor burden reaching 1000 mm3, was
determined by caliper measurement. Error bars ±SEM.

Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 11.

Hou et al.

Page 27

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Fig 8.

Author Manuscript

WR.TK-HPGD+ also sensitizes tumors to anti-PD-1 Therapy. (A) Combination of different
viruses with anti-PD-1 antibody is compared to combinations with aspirin, and with aspirin
+ anti-PD-1 after treatment in BALB/c mice bearing subcutaneous Renca tumors (N.B. the
indicated days of treatment are days after tumor implantation). Viruses (WR.TK- or
WR.TK-HPGD) were given as single IT doses of 1×107 PFU; anti-PD-1 antibody (applied
twice weekly for 21 days after start of treatment); and aspirin (600 μg/ml provided
continuously in drinking water). (B) Draining lymph nodes were collected 5 days after
treatment of mice as in (A) and dissociated for determination of total number of
lymphocytes (left), number of CD103+CD11c+MHCII+IL-12+ cells (center), and number of
CD11b+CD11c+MHCII+ cells (right) per 5000 events. Error bars ±SEM

Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 11.

