Developments in
Precision Medicine
Studies highlight new applications for
cancer chemoprevention, treatment

T

he results of 2 studies have demonstrated how precision
medicine has the potential to both prevent and treat cancer.

Genetic Biomarker for Predicting Oral Cancers
In the first study, scientists from The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center in Houston and the University of
California at San Diego Moores Cancer Center determined that
a genetic biomarker called loss of heterozygosity (LOH) can
predict which patients with premalignant mouth lesions are at
highest risk of developing oral cancer.1
“This is the first study in any cancer where we’re personalizing
chemoprevention care based on a molecular biomarker,”
says William N. William Jr., MD, associate professor at The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, which led the
enrollment and design of the study.
Not all patients with oral premalignant lesions will develop
cancer, and for that reason identifying LOH as a high-risk
biomarker is important for future clinical applications, he notes.
For this study, scientists also sought to determine whether the

Cancer
CANCER

March 1, 2016
MARCH 1, 2016

pharmaceutical erlotinib (Tarceva; Genentech, South San
Francisco, Calif ) could help to prevent the development of oral
cancer in this high-risk group. It was found not to prevent these
patients from developing oral cancers, except in a small subset
of individuals who developed a rash while receiving the drug,
Dr. William says.
Erlotinib is an inhibitor of the epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR), a protein responsible for the development
of many cancers, including those of the head and neck. It is
approved for the treatment of certain lung and pancreatic
cancers and has demonstrated promise in preventing oral cancer
in animal models.
“Up until recently, the only drugs we had to treat patients
with advanced cancers were chemotherapy, and you would not
want to expose patients without cancer to potentially toxic drugs,”
Dr. William says. “But EGFR inhibitors have such a reasonable
toxicity profile that we can apply them in a prevention setting.”
In the Erlotinib Prevention of Oral Cancer trial, which
included 5 sites across the United States, a total of 379 patients
who had premalignant mouth lesions were randomized to receive
either erlotinib or a placebo for 1 year. The study demonstrated
that LOH predicted a higher risk of oral cancer. Patients who
were negative for LOH had a 3-year cancer-free survival rate
of 87% compared with 74% for patients who were positive for
LOH. However, patients who received erlotinib demonstrated
no statistical difference with regard to cancer-free survival after
3 years (74% for erlotinib versus 70% for placebo.)
The results were more promising among patients who
received erlotinib and developed a rash. Among this group, only
approximately 16% of patients developed cancer versus 45%
of patients with no rash. The researchers are hoping to design a
clinical trial based on these findings.
At the same time, the team recently received a grant of nearly $1
million from the Cancer Prevention Research Institute of Texas to
continue to search for new biomarkers and new chemoprevention
methods in oral cancers, Dr. William adds. Furthermore, he and
his colleagues are working with a laboratory in Texas to enable
LOH testing to be more easily ordered and available. Although
such testing is commercially available, clinicians still need to
know how to interpret the results, he says.
One reason the team chose to focus on oral cancers is
because they are very common worldwide, particularly in Asia,
in which there is a high frequency of chewing both tobacco and
betel nuts, Dr. William says. “At the same time, the mouth is
very accessible for biopsies and exams, so you can do molecular
testing on biopsies very easily,” he adds.
Robert Ferris, MD, PhD, chief of the division of head
and neck surgery and an immunologist at the University of
661
1

© WATCHARA / SHUTTERSTOCK.COM

Oncology Issues in Focus | BY CARRIE PRINTZ

Pittsburgh Cancer Institute in Pennsylvania, says the study
has several important applications. The first is that it clearly
annotated a cohort of patients and compiled biological samples
that will be very valuable for future research. The second is
that it demonstrated the effectiveness of LOH as a biomarker
that could be useful for future prevention trials. “The study
shows that blocking the EGFR pathway with erlotinib doesn’t
accommodate the high heterogeneity that LOH implies,” he
says. “The more heterogeneous the tumor, the more types of
different pathways that are knocked out.”
As an immunologist, Dr. Ferris believes that some of the
intravenous immunotherapies being introduced in the setting of
locally advanced disease may be useful approaches to prevention
therapies. “Because checkpoint antibodies are fairly tolerable, it
wouldn’t be unreasonable to try them in a high-risk group in a
phase 1 setting,” he says.

Researchers learned that the stage during which the cancer
was treated had a major influence on how the disease developed
resistance to aromatase inhibitors, which are the standard
treatment after surgery for postmenopausal women. Mutations
in ESR1 occurred in 6% of patients who first were treated with
hormone therapy when their cancers had not spread, whereas it
occurred in 36% of patients whose disease had already spread.
Thus, the more advanced the cancer, the more rapidly it develops
resistance, the authors say.

Determining Resistance to Hormone Treatments

Ruth O’Regan, MD, chief of the division of hematology
and oncology at the University of Wisconsin at Madison, calls
the study “exciting,” noting that she and her colleagues have
been waiting for validation of this technique to analyze blood
samples. “The one thing we struggle with in metastatic patients
is that we know the disease changes over time, but you just can’t
keep biopsying lesions,” she says. “This technique allows you
to detect and analyze the changes in real time, which is pretty
groundbreaking to be able to do.”
She adds that the results are not practice-changing because
scientists still do not know how to best treat women who develop
resistance to aromatase inhibitors. “[The technique] could tell you
if another round of endocrine therapy will work or not,” she says.
“This is clearly the way forward, and I think a lot of trials will use
this technology to look at biomarkers of benefit.”

In the second study, scientists from The Institute of Cancer
Research, London, and The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation
Trust developed a highly sensitive blood test that can help
to determine when breast cancers have become resistant to
standard hormone treatment. Their findings also indicate that
the test could guide further treatment.2
The research indicates that the test gives an early warning of
resistance to aromatase inhibitors, which are used to treat women
with estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer. Specifically, it
detects mutations in the estrogen receptor 1 gene (ESR1), which
indicates resistance to aromatase inhibitors.
The method of detecting ESR1 mutations is known as
multiplexed digital polymerase chain reaction analysis, which can
read the genetic code of tiny amounts of DNA released by tumors.
It is as sensitive in detecting DNA errors as tumor biopsies.
In the study, investigators took blood samples from 171
women with estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer and then
validated their findings in 3 independent groups of patients. They
found that once ESR1 mutations were discovered, mutated cells
multiplied and became the dominant type in the body, causing the
disease to progress rapidly. The women with these mutations were
found to be 3 times more likely to develop disease progression
compared with women without the mutations.

This technique allows you to
detect and analyze the changes
in real time, which is pretty
groundbreaking to be able to
do.—Ruth O’Regan, MD

References
1. William WN Jr, Papadimitrakopoulou V, Lee JJ, et al. Erlotinib and the risk
of oral cancer: the Erlotinib Prevention of Oral Cancer (EPOC) randomized
clinical trial [published online ahead of print November 5, 2015]. JAMA Oncol.
doi:10.1001/jamaoncol.2015.4364.
2. Schiavon G, Hrebien S, Garcia-Murillas I, et al. Analysis of ESR1 mutation in
circulating tumor DNA demonstrates evolution during therapy for metastatic
breast cancer. Sci Transl Med. 2015;7:313ra182.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29909

Older Tobacco Users Pay More Under the Affordable Care Act

T

obacco users would pay up to 40% more than non-tobacco
users for a health insurance plan from the Patient Protection
and Affordable Care Act (ACA) exchanges in nearly every county
of the 32 states that used the healthcare.gov Web site to sell their
plans in 2015, according to a new study.1 The authors say future
research may determine how many of these enrollees who face
these surcharges will decide either not to be truthful regarding
their smoking habits or not buy health insurance at all.
The ACA allows age-dependent surcharges of up to 50%.
Although few health insurance plans sold in the ACA’s Federally
Facilitated Marketplaces imposed tobacco surcharges in 2014

662

(possibly due to a system glitch), in 2015 more plans began
implementing surcharges that increase with age.
The study, led by Alex Liber, MSPH, a data analyst in the
economic and health policy research program of the American
Cancer Society (ACS), measured tobacco surcharges around the
country in 2015 and found wide variation, particularly with regard
to the least expensive “bronze” health insurance exchange plans.
In Oregon, for example, a 55-year-old tobacco user would
pay approximately 2% more for the least expensive plan (before
subsidies) than would a nonuser, whereas in Nevada the same
tobacco user would pay approximately 46% more for the least

Cancer

March 1, 2016

