Oncotarget, February, Vol.4, No 2

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Unexpected Outcomes of CDK4/6 Inhibition
Yoon Jong Choi and Piotr Sicinski
Commentary on: The Requirement for Cyclin D Function in Tumor Maintenance

The response of cells to extracellular mitogenic
signals and commitment to enter G1 phase, are regulated
by the D-type cyclins (D1, D2 and D3). Once induced
they heterodimerize with and activate either cyclin
dependent kinase 4 or 6 (CDK4 or CDK6). Cyclin
D-CDK4 and D-CDK6 kinases phosphorylate and
inactivate the retinoblastoma family of proteins, leading
to release and derepression of E2F transcription factors.
E2Fs, in turn, activate a transcriptional program required
for G1-S transition. Cyclin D-associated kinase also
affects other pathways by phosphorylating SMADs and
FOXM1 transcriptional regulators. In addition, cyclin
D-CDK4/6 complexes play an important non-catalytic
function by sequestering cell cycle inhibitors p21Cip1 and
p27Kip1 from CDK2 [1].
Dysregulated expression of D-cyclins and resulting
CDK4/6 hyperactivation are thought to represent a driving
force in tumorigenesis. Indeed, cyclin D1 and CDK4 are
among the most commonly amplified genes across all
human cancer types [2]. Cyclin D1 gene is amplified in
up to 20% of invasive breast cancers, while the protein is
overexpressed in over 50% of mammary carcinomas [1].
Cyclin D3 is highly expressed in several hematopoietic
malignancies, such as T-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemias (T-ALL). These observations suggest that
cyclin D-CDK4 and D-CDK6 kinases might represent
attractive therapeutic targets in cancer treatment. Recent
analyses using mouse cancer models revealed unexpected
outcomes of cyclin D-CDK kinase inhibition in vivo, in
tumor bearing mice.
Cyclin D germline knockout animals provided
some of the first evidence that the D-type cyclins are
required for tumor initiation. Thus, several groups have
shown that mice lacking cyclin D1, or lacking CDK4, or
expressing kinase-inactive cyclin D1-CDK complexes
are either completely resistant, or show significantly
reduced susceptibility to HER2-driven breast cancers,
depending on the genetic background used (see references
in [3]). Likewise, cyclin D3-deficient mice, or animals
lacking CDK6 are resistant to T-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemias (T-ALL) driven by the NOTCH1 oncogene, or
by its downstream effector AKT (see references in [3]).
It could have been argued that tumor resistance
observed in cyclin- or CDK-deficient animals was due
to the developmental defects caused by germline cyclin/
CDK ablation. Indeed, cyclin D1-knockout mice show
defects in mammary epithelial lobuloalveolar development
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

[4]. Likewise hematopoietic abnormalities were noted in
cyclin D3- or CDK6-null mice [4]. Collectively, these
observations raised a possibility that progenitor cells
targeted for transformation might have been missing in
knockout animals.
To circumvent the developmental effects of
germline cyclin ablation, we generated conditional
cyclin D-knockout mouse strains. These strains enabled
us to ubiquitously turn off cyclin expression after
normal development had been completed. We allowed
conditional cyclin D1 knockout animals to undergo
normal development in the presence of cyclin D1, and
then switched off cyclin D1 expression once mammary
development had been completed, and after the animals
had developed breast tumors. We found that an acute
and ubiquitous shutdown of cyclin D1 in animals bearing
HER2-driven breast cancers blocked tumor progression,
without having any obvious impact on the animals’ health.
Likewise, we observed that shutdown of cyclin D3 halted
progression of NOTCH1-overexpressing T-ALL [3].
Collectively, these observations established that tumors
with specific genetic lesions are dependent on particular
cyclin proteins. Moreover, this dependence is not caused
by developmental defects observed in knockout animals,
but it reflects a rate-limiting function of cyclin proteins in
cancer cells.
Inhibition of a critical cell cycle protein would be
expected to reversibly arrest tumor cell proliferation.
Contrary to this expectation, the Barbacid group
demonstrated that an acute ablation of CDK4 in a
mouse model of K-RAS driven lung adenocarcinomas
resulted in cancer cell senescence [5]. We observed that
shutdown of cyclin D1 triggered senescence of HER2driven breast cancers [3]. Unexpectedly, inhibition of
cyclin D3 in a mouse model of NOTCH1-overexpressing
T-ALL had a different outcome, namely it caused tumor
cell apoptosis [3]. Moreover, administration of a highly
specific CDK4/6 inhibitor, PD0332991 to tumor bearing
mice essentially phenocopied cyclin D ablation, namely
it caused senescence of HER2-positive breast cancer cells
and it selectively killed NOTCH1-overexpressing T-ALL
cells [3, 6].
Activating mutations in the NOTCH1 pathway are
observed in over 50% of T-ALL cases [7]. Our analyses
of human cancer cell lines revealed that only NOTCH1positive cells responded to cyclin D-CDK4/6 inhibition
by undergoing apoptosis. In contrast, only cytostatic
176

Oncotarget 2013; 4: 176-177

effects of PD0332991 treatment were observed in other
hematological malignancies analyzed (NOTCH1-negative
T-ALL, B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia, multiple
myeloma, mantle cell lymphoma) [3]. Hence, these
analyses revealed a synthetic-lethal interaction between
NOTCH1 activation and cyclin D-CDK4/6 inhibition.
When the mammalian cell cycle machinery was
discovered, it was assumed that its components operate
in the same way in all cell types. However, evidence
accumulated in the past few years indicates that this is
not the case. Germline knockout experiments revealed
that individual cell cycle proteins are dispensable for
proliferation of the overwhelming majority of cell types
[4]. Importantly, these proteins are essential for initiation
and maintenance of specific cancer types, depending on
the genetic lesions they carry. The observed interactions
between CDK4/6 inhibition and mutations within wellcharacterized oncogenes, reported recently by Puyol et al.
[5], Choi et al. [3] and Sawai et al. [6], add to a growing
list of cases when inhibition of a cell cycle regulator
selectively targets cancer cells. For example, in normal
non-transformed cells cyclin dependent kinases CDK1
and CDK2 play a role in S and G2/M phase progression
by partnering with cyclins E, A and B. Surprisingly,
inhibition of CDK1 was shown to trigger cell death
of Myc-overexpressing cancer cells [8]. In contrast,
inhibition of a related kinase, CDK2, was demonstrated to
cause senescence of Myc-driven tumor cells [9]. Inhibition
of CDC7 kinase, which together with its regulatory
partners DBF4 and DRF1 is responsible for firing origins
of DNA replication, was shown to selectively kill p53deficient cancer cells [10]. These observations underscore
a notion that specific genetic lesions render cancer cells
dependent on particular cell cycle proteins not only for
proliferation, but also for survival or for protection against
senescence. While considerable effort should be invested
in elucidating the molecular basis of these dependencies,
from the clinical standpoint the most important task is to
delineate cancer subtypes in which inhibiting particular
cell cycle proteins would selectively target cancer cells.
With the introduction of highly specific CDK inhibitors,
there is growing hope that targeting selective cell cycle
components may offer a very powerful way to specifically
eliminate cancer cells.

Correspondence: Piotr Sicinski, email peter_sicinski@dfci.

harvard.edu
Received: February 9, 2013;
Published: February 27, 2013;

References
1.	 Musgrove EA, Caldon CE, Barraclough J, et al. Nature
Reviews Cancer. 2011; 11(8):558-572.
2. 	 Beroukhim R, Mermel CH, Porter D, Wei G, et al. Nature.
2010; 463(7283):899-905.
3.	 Choi YJ, Li X, Hydbring P, et al. Cancer Cell. 2012;
22(4):438-451.
4.	 Sherr CJ and Roberts JM. Genes & Development. 2004;
18(22):2699-2711.
5.	 Puyol M, Martin A, Dubus P, et al. Cancer Cell. 2010;
18(1):63-73.
6.	 Sawai CM, Freund J, Oh P, et al. Cancer Cell. 2012;
22(4):452-465.
7.	 Aster JC, Blacklow SC and Pear WS. The Journal of
Pathology. 2011; 223(2):263-274.
8.	 Goga A, Yang D, Tward AD, Morgan DO et al. Nature
Medicine. 2007; 13(7):820-7.
9.	 Campaner S, Doni M, Hydbring P, Verrecchia A. et al.
Nature Cell Biology. 2010; 12(1):54-59.
10.	 Montagnoli A, Moll J, Colotta F. Clinical Cancer Research.
2010;16(18):4503-8

Acknowledgements
We apologize to those colleagues whose work was
not cited, or cited indirectly due to the limitation to 10
references.
Yoon Jong Choi: Department of Cancer Biology, DanaFarber Cancer Institute and Department of Genetics,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA
Piotr Sicinski: Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber
Cancer Institute and Department of Genetics, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

177

Oncotarget 2013; 4: 176-177

