Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 28

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

The BIM deletion polymorphism is a prognostic biomarker
of EGFR-TKIs response in NSCLC: A systematic review and
meta-analysis
Wei Nie1, Xia Tao2, Hua Wei2, Wan-sheng Chen2, Bing Li1
1

 epartment of Respiratory Medicine, Shanghai Changzheng Hospital, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai
D
200003, China

2

Department of Pharmacy, Changzheng Hospital, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai 200003, China

Correspondence to:
Wan-sheng Chen, e-mail: chenws126@126.com
Bing Li, e-mail: bing_li1962@163.com
Keywords: Bcl-2-like protein 11, non-small cell lung cancer, epidermal growth factor receptor, tyrosine kinase inhibitor
Received: May 21, 2015 	Accepted: July 15, 2015 	

Published: July 27, 2015

ABSTRACT
The prognostic value of Bcl-2-like protein 11 (BIM) deletion polymorphism for
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) treatment
in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) were reported. However, the results remained
controversial. Thus, we did this systematic review and meta-analysis to address this
issue. Databases including PubMed, Embase, and the Cochrane Register of Controlled
Trials were searched to find relevant studies. The primary outcome was progressionfree survival (PFS). Five retrospective cohort studies were included. All of the studies
were conducted in Asian population (n = 951). The methodological quality of all
included studies was high. Compared with BIM wild type, BIM deletion polymorphism
was predictive of shorter PFS in NSCLC patients who were treated with EGFR-TKIs
(adjusted HR = 2.38, 95% CI 1.66–2.41, P < 0.001). In conclusion, the BIM deletion
polymorphism was associated with poor response in NSCLC patients who received
EGFR-TKIs treatment.

Furthermore, high level of BIM expression was a marker
of longer progression-free survival (PFS) in EGFR-mutant
NSCLC treated with erlotinib [7]. Therefore, BIM might
be a biomarker of survival in EGFR-mutant NSCLC.
Recently, King Pan Ng and colleagues
identified a common intronic deletion polymorphism
in BIM  [8]. This BIM deletion polymorphism was
absent in individuals from African and European
populations, but was found in about 12% of Asian
population [8]. They  demonstrated that patients
with EGFR-mutant NSCLC harboring BIM deletion
polymorphism showed significant inferior responses
to TKIs than patients without this polymorphism  [9].
This finding was confirmed by several studies
[9–11]. However, Lee et al. suggested that BIM deletion
polymorphism was not predictive of PFS for EGFRTKIs [12]. The aim of this meta-analysis was to summarize
all the available evidence and determine the predictive
role of BIM deletion polymorphism for EGFR-TKIs in
NSCLC.

INTRODUCTION
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (TKIs) became the first-line treatment
for patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
harboring mutant EGFR gene [1]. Most of these patients
are highly responsive to treatment with EGFR-TKIs.
However, about 20–30% patients with EGFR activating
mutations show primary resistance to EGFR-TKIs [2].
Therefore, identifying the prognostic biomarkers of
primary resistance to EGFR-TKIs in these patients is
urgently needed.
Bcl-2-like protein 11 (BIM) is a BH3-only
proapoptotic member of the Bcl-2 protein family [3].
Up-regulation of BIM correlated with gefitinib-induced
apoptosis in gefitinib-sensitive EGFR-mutant lung cancer
cells [4]. In addition, knockdown of BIM expression by
RNA interference eliminated erlotinib-induced cell killing
in vitro [5]. Addition of a BH3 mimetic significantly
enhanced killing of NSCLC cells by gefitinib [6].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25696

Oncotarget

RESULTS

(adjusted HR = 2.38, 95% CI 1.66–3.41, P < 0.001; Figure 2).
No significant heterogeneity was observed (I 2 = 11%).

Literature search

DISCUSSION

The process of identifying studies is shown in
Figure  1. A total of 95 publications were identified in
the initial search, and 1 publication was identified from
other source. Based on screening of titles or abstracts,
78 records were excluded. Full text articles were retrieved
only for 18 publications and assessed for eligibility. Of
these 18 publications, 13 publications were excluded.
Finally, 5 studies were included in this meta-analysis.

This systematic review and meta-analysis found that
BIM deletion polymorphism was associated with a poor
response to EGFR-TKIs in NSCLC patients. NSCLC
patients with BIM deletion polymorphism exhibited
shorter PFS when they received EGFR-TKIs.
As for overall survival (OS), two studies provided
the median OS in BIM deletion polymorphism group
and BIM wild type group. One studies indicated
that patients with BIM deletion polymorphism had
shorter OS than did those without BIM deletion
polymorphism, while another study did not confirm
this result. All the two studies did not provided
statistical results, thus we did not do meta-analysis of OS.
The BIM deletion polymorphism contained a
deletion of a 2903 bp fragment in intron 2. This deletion
resulted in the preferential splicing of exon 3 over exon
4, which generated a BIM isoform that lacked the BH3
[8], thereby causing EGFR-TKIs resistant. They also
reported that the addition of BH3-mimetic drugs could
restore TKIs sensitivity [8]. Recently, Nakagawa et al.
suggested the histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor
vorinostat could circumvent EGFR-TKI resistance in
EGFR-mutant NSCLC cell lines and in xenograft models
[13]. The combination of EGFR-TKIs plus a BH3mimetic drug or vorinostat should be considered for the
NSCLC patients with BIM deletion polymorphism in the
future.
This meta-analysis had some advantages. First, this
was the first meta-analysis which assessed the association
between BIM deletion polymorphism and efficacy of

Study characteristics
Five retrospective cohort studies were included.
All of the studies were conducted in Asian population
(n = 951). Four studies included advanced NSCLC
patients, and one study included NSCLC from early stage
to advanced stage. Five studies reported the status of
EGFR mutations, while two studies did not provide this
information. All  studies were assessed by Newcastle–
Ottawa Scale (NOS). The quality scores ranged from
8  to  9, suggesting that the methodological quality was
high. The characteristics of each study are presented
in Table 1.

Quantitative data synthesis
All the studies reported the data of PFS. Except the
study by Lee JK, all the studies suggested that BIM deletion
polymorphism was associated with reduced PFS. Three
studies reported adjusted hazard ratios (HRs) and 95%
confidence intervals (Cis). Compared with BIM wild type,
BIM deletion polymorphism was predictive of shorter PFS
in NSCLC patients who were treated with EGFR-TKIs

Figure 1: Flow of study identification, inclusion, and exclusion.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25697

Oncotarget

Figure 2: The prognostic role of BIM deletion polymorphism on PFS.
prognostic marker of OS. Second, all of the studies were
retrospective design, which were prone to bias (e.g., recall
and selection bias). Therefore, prospective studies should
be designed to validate the results of this meta-analysis.
Third, we could not perform subgroup analyses by age,
gender, smoking status, and EGFR mutations due to the
insufficient data.

EGFR-TKIs. Second, no significant heterogeneity was
found in this meta-analysis. Third, the quality of the
included studies was high. However, the limitations should
also be acknowledged. First, there were only five studies
included in this meta-analysis. Although all the studies
reported PFS, only two studies provided OS. Thus, it was
still unclear whether BIM deletion polymorphism was a
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25698

Oncotarget

In conclusion, the BIM deletion polymorphism was
significantly associated with poor response in NSCLC
patients who received EGFR-TKIs treatment. The BIM
deletion polymorphism could be a prognostic biomarker
of EGFR-TKIs resistance in NSCLC.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

CIs were pooled in our analysis. We used a random
effects  model. Statistical heterogeneity among studies
was evaluated using the Q and I2 statistics. Publication
bias  was investigated by funnel plot if more than
10  studies were included. All statistical analyses were
performed with Revman 5.1software (Nordic Cochrane
Center, Copenhagen, Denmark).

Literature search

GRANT SUPPORT

PubMed, Embase, and the Cochrane Register of
Controlled Trials were searched for relevant studies
published up to 20 Apr. 2015. The following terms were
used: (“NSCLC” or “lung cancer” or “non-small cell lung
cancer”) and (“Bcl-2-like protein 11” or “Bcl-2-like 11”
or BIM or BCL2L11”. No language restrictions were
imposed. References from relevant articles, including
review papers, were also reviewed.

This study was supported by grant No. 13DZ1930601
from Industry-Academia-Research projection of Shanghai
and International scientific and technological cooperation
projection (No. 2015DFA31810).

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors have no conflicts of interest to report.

Study selection

REFERENCES

Studies were included in the meta-analysis if they
fulfilled the following inclusion criteria: 1) study design:
cohort studies; 2) population: NSCLC patients with
EGFR activating mutations; 3) intervention: EGFRTKIs; 4)  primary outcome: the effect of BIM deletion
polymorphism on PFS. Abstract, case reports, review
articles, experimental studies and commentary articles
were excluded.

1.	 Maemondo M, Inoue A, Kobayashi K, Sugawara S,
Oizumi S, Isobe H, Gemma A, Harada M, Yoshizawa H,
Kinoshita I, Fujita Y, Okinaga S, Hirano H, et al. Gefitinib
or chemotherapy for non-small-cell lung cancer with
mutated EGFR. N Engl J Med. 2010; 362:2380–8.
2.	 Mok TS, Wu YL, Thongprasert S, Yang CH, Chu  DT,
Saijo N, Sunpaweravong P, Han B, Margono B, Ichinose Y,
Nishiwaki Y, Ohe Y, Yang JJ, et al. Gefitinib or carboplatin-paclitaxel in pulmonary adenocarcinoma. N Engl J Med.
2009; 361:947–57.

Data collection and methodological quality
assessment

3.	 Youle RJ, Strasser A. The BCL-2 protein family: opposing
activities that mediate cell death. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol.
2008; 9:47–59.

The following data were extracted from each
study: the first author, publication year, study design,
ethnicity, included patients, number of patients, the
percent of BIM deletion, sex, age, smoking status, the
percent of adenocarcinoma, EGFR mutations, clinical
stage of patients, reported PFS, and covariates controlled
for multivariable analysis. Two reviewers independently
extracted the relevant data. Any disagreement was
resolved by consensus in meetings with all investigators.
Two reviewers completed the quality assessment
independently. The NOS was used to evaluate the
methodological quality, which scored studies by the
selection of the study groups, the comparability of
the groups, and the ascertainment of the outcome of
interest [14]. We considered a study awarded 0–3, 4–6,
or 7–9 as a low-, moderate-, or high-quality study,
respectively. Discrepancies were resolved by consensus
and discussion.

4.	 Costa DB, Halmos B, Kumar A, Schumer ST,
Huberman  MS, Boggon TJ, Tenen DG, Kobayashi S.
BIM  mediates EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor-induced
apoptosis in lung cancers with oncogenic EGFR mutations.
PLoS Med. 2007; 4:1669–79; discussion 1680.
5.	 Gong Y, Somwar R, Politi K, Balak M, Chmielecki J,
Jiang X, Pao W. Induction of BIM is essential for apoptosis triggered by EGFR kinase inhibitors in mutant EGFRdependent lung adenocarcinomas. PLoS Med. 2007; 4:e294.
6.	 Cragg MS, Kuroda J, Puthalakath H, Huang DC, Strasser A.
Gefitinib-induced killing of NSCLC cell lines expressing
mutant EGFR requires BIM and can be enhanced by BH3
mimetics. PLoS Med. 2007; 4:1681–89; discussion 1690.
7.	 Costa C, Molina MA, Drozdowskyj A, Giménez-Capitán A,
Bertran-Alamillo J, Karachaliou N, Gervais R, Massuti B,
Wei J, Moran T, Majem M, Felip E, Carcereny E, et al. The
impact of EGFR T790M mutations and BIM mRNA expression on outcome in patients with EGFR-mutant NSCLC
treated with erlotinib or chemotherapy in the randomized
phase III EURTAC trial. Clin Cancer Res. 2014; 20:2001–10.

Statistical analysis
We estimated the HR with 95% CI for primary
outcome. The multivariable-adjusted HRs with 95%
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25699

Oncotarget

8.	 Ng KP, Hillmer AM, Chuah CT, Juan WC, Ko TK,
Teo AS, Ariyaratne PN, Takahashi N, Sawada K, Fei Y,
Soh S, Lee WH, Huang JW, et al. A common BIM ­deletion
polymorphism mediates intrinsic resistance and inferior
responses to tyrosine kinase inhibitors in cancer. Nat Med.
2012; 18:521–8.

deletion polymorphismin Chinese non-small cell lung cancer patients. Thoracic Cancer. 2014; 5:509–516.
12.	 Lee JK, Shin JY, Kim S, Lee S, Park C, Kim JY,
Koh Y, Keam B, Min HS, Kim TM, Jeon YK, Kim DW,
Chung DH, et al. Primary resistance to epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs)
in patients with non-small-cell lung cancer harboring
TKI-sensitive EGFR mutations: an exploratory study. Ann
Oncol. 2013; 24:2080–7.

9.	 Isobe K, Hata Y, Tochigi N, Kaburaki K, Kobayashi H,
Makino T, Otsuka H, Sato F, Ishida F, Kikuchi N, Hirota N,
Sato K, Sano G, et al. Clinical significance of BIM deletion
polymorphism in non-small-cell lung cancer with epidermal
growth factor receptor mutation. J Thorac Oncol. 2014;
9:483–7.

13.	 Nakagawa T, Takeuchi S, Yamada T, Ebi H, Sano T,
Nanjo  S, Ishikawa D, Sato M, Hasegawa Y, Sekido Y,
Yano S. EGFR-TKI resistance due to BIM polymorphism
can be circumvented in combination with HDAC inhibition.
Cancer Res. 2013; 73:2428–34.

10.	 Zhao M, Zhang Y, Cai W, Li J, Zhou F, Cheng N, Ren R,
Zhao C, Li X, Ren S, Zhou C, Hirsch FR. The Bim
deletion polymorphism clinical profile and its relation with
tyrosine kinase inhibitor resistance in Chinese patients with
non-small cell lung cancer. Cancer. 2014; 120:2299–307.

14.	 Wells GA, Shea B, O’Connell D, Peterson J, Welch V,
Losos M, Tugwell P. The Newcastle-Ottawa Scale
(NOS) for assessing the quality of nonrandomised studies
in  meta-analyses. URL: http://www.ohri.ca/programs/
clinical_epidemiology/oxford.asp.

11.	 Zhong J, Li ZX, Zhao J, Duan JC, Bai H, An TT, Yang
XD, Wang J. Analysis of BIM 11 (BCL-2 like 11 gene)

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25700

Oncotarget

