Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 14

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

C-phycocyanin protects against low fertility by inhibiting
reactive oxygen species in aging mice
Yan-Jiao Li1, Zhe Han1, Lei Ge1, Cheng-Jie Zhou1, Yue-Fang Zhao1, Dong-Hui
Wang1, Jing Ren1, Xin-Xin Niu1 and Cheng-Guang Liang1
1

The Key Laboratory of National Education Ministry for Mammalian Reproductive Biology and Biotechnology, The Research
Center for Laboratory Animal Science, College of Life Science, Inner Mongolia University, Hohhot, Inner Mongolia, People’s
Republic of China
Correspondence to: Cheng-Guang Liang, email: liangchengguang@gmail.com
Keywords: ovarian aging, oocyte, oxidative stress, C-phycocyanin, D-galactose, Gerotarget
Received: January 15, 2016	

Accepted: March 04, 2016	

Published: March 17, 2016

ABSTRACT
Women over 35 have higher rates of infertility, largely due to deterioration of
oocyte quality characterized by fragmentation, abnormal meiotic spindle-chromosome
complexes, and oxidative stress. C-phycocyanin (PC) is a biliprotein enriched in
Spirulina platensis that is known to possess antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, and
radical-scavenging properties. D-galactose-induced aging acceleration in mice has
been extensively used to study aging mechanisms and for pharmaceutical screening.
In this study, adult female B6D2F/1 mice injected with D-galactose were used as a
model to test the age-reversing effects of PC on degenerated reproductive ability. Our
results show that PC can prevent oocyte fragmentation and aneuploidy by maintaining
cytoskeletal integrity. Moreover, PC can reverse the expression of antioxidant genes,
increase superoxide dismutase (SOD) activity and decrease methane dicarboxylic
aldehyde (MDA) content, and normalize mitochondria distribution. PC exerts its benefit
by inhibiting reactive oxygen species (ROS) production, which decreases apoptosis.
Finally, we observe a significant increase in litter size after PC administration to
D-galactose-induced aging mice. Our study demonstrates for the first time that
D-galactose-induced impaired female reproductive capability can be partially rescued
by the antioxidant effects of PC.

INTRODUCTION

for weeks to months in mice and 10-50 years in humans
[9]. During this prolonged interval, reactive oxygen
species (ROS) accumulate and decrease oocyte quality
and quantity [10]. ROS negatively affect processes from
oocyte maturation to fertilization, embryo development,
and pregnancy, and they are associated with the agerelated decline in reproduction [3, 11, 12]. Previous
reports demonstrated that ROS accumulation in cells can
lead to cytoskeletal derangement [13], shortened telomeres
[14], impaired telomerase activity [15], antioxidant system
dysfunction [16, 17], disturbances of ATP levels [18] and
mitochondrial distribution [19], and cell apoptosis [20].
D-galactose (D-gal) is a reducing sugar that
can form advanced glycation end products (AGEs) in
vivo. Aging is accelerated after mice receive oral or
subcutaneous D-gal [21-23]. Some studies focused on
the effect of D-gal on oxidative stress, and one found that
AGEs can cause the accumulation of ROS, especially
superoxide radicals and hydrogen peroxide [21].

The human female reproductive system ages more
rapidly than most other body systems, and reproductive
capacity is negatively correlated with age [1, 2]. For a
variety of reasons, many women postpone childbearing,
and a considerable proportion of aged female become
infertile [3]. A reduction in quantity and deterioration in
oocyte quality is universal in women over 40. Poor oocyte
quality is characterized by meiotic spindle anomalies,
chromosome misalignment, oxidative stress, gene
expression changes, shortened telomeres, and loss of
cohesion [1, 4-6].
Oxidative stress occurs due to gradual accumulation
of damage by free radicals that are generated during
normal metabolism, and it is considered one of the major
mechanisms underlying aging [7, 8]. Germ cells initiate
meiosis and arrest at the dictyate stage of prophase I in
the fetal ovary; these postnatal germ cells remain arrested
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17393

Oncotarget

RESULTS

Reducing oxidative stress by antioxidant
supplementation could potentially reduce ROS-induced
damage, thus maintaining oocyte and follicle number
and quality [24-27]. C-phycocyanin (C-Pc, PC) is a
major biliprotein in Spirulina platensis that possesses
antioxidant, neuroprotective, anti-inflammatory, and
radical-scavenging properties [28-30], suggesting PC as
a potential agent for preventing ROS-induced aging or
ROS damage [31, 32]. However, little is known about
whether PC can prevent D-gal-induced aging and impaired
reproductive ability. In the present study, we treated
mice with PC to investigate whether it could preserve
reproductive performance in a D-gal-induced aging model.

PC reversed some organ coefficients in D-galinduced aging mice
We first examined macroscopic views of mouse
organs in the control, D-gal, and D-gal+PC groups and
found no obvious morphologic changes (Figure 1A). We
then compared organ weight and organ coefficients (organ
weight/body weight) among the three groups. There were
no statistical differences in the weights of the ovary, liver,
spleen, or kidney. Similarly, there was no significant
difference in the liver organ coefficient (Figure 1B, Table
S1-1 and Table S1-2).

Figure 1: PC reversed the organ coefficients of the ovary, spleen, and kidney in D-gal-induced aging mice. A. Organ

views. No obvious abnormal morphology was observed after D-gal or PC administration. Scale bar = 1 cm. L: left, R: right. B. Body weight
and organ coefficients. No statistical difference was observed for ovary, liver, spleen, or kidney weight. However, the organ coefficients of
the ovary, spleen, and kidney from the control and D-gal+PC groups were higher than those in the D-gal group. Data are presented as means
± SEMs and were processed by one-way ANOVA and Newman-Keuls post hoc tests. Significant differences between groups, *P < 0.05. n
indicates the number of mice for each treatment.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17394

Oncotarget

Surprisingly, the organ coefficients of ovary, spleen,
and kidney from control and D-gal+PC groups were
higher than those of the D-gal group (P < 0.05, Figure
1B and Table S1-2). These data indicate that D-gal may
impair the ovary, spleen, and kidney, and that this damage
can be reversed partially by PC. We next examined the
age-reversing effect of PC in the reproductive system of
D-gal-induced aging mice.

As age-related infertility is associated with
chromosome aneuploidy [34], we checked if D-galinduced aging could increase oocyte aneuploidy. For both
the in vivo and in vitro maturation models, we found that
the aneuploidy rate of sister chromatids was higher in
the D-gal group compared to control (P < 0.001). After
PC administration, decreased percentages of aneuploidy
oocytes were observed both in vivo and in vitro (P <
0.001). However, PC administration could not normalize
aneuploidy to the level of the control group (P < 0.001)
(Figure 2E and Table S2-4). These results indicate that
PC could reverse the deterioration of oocyte maturation in
D-gal-induced aging mice.

PC rescued oocyte morphology and developmental
competence in D-gal-induced aging mice
We assessed oocytes at the germinal vesicle (GV)
and metaphase II (MII) stages generated from in vivo
or in vitro maturation by examining their morphology
with bright-field microscopy. We found that increased
percentages of abnormal oocytes from the D-gal group
matured both in vivo and in vitro. These oocytes were
characterized by enlarged perivitelline spaces, fragmented
or dark cytoplasm, or giant polar bodies, all of which are
considered morphological abnormalities [33]. Conversely,
after PC administration most D-gal-induced oocytes
showed normal morphology, similar to the control group
(Figure 2A).
In superovulated mice, the number of GV-stage
oocytes retrieved from ovaries in the control, D-gal,
and D-gal+PC groups were not statistically different.
Similarly, the numbers of MII -stage oocytes collected
from oviduct ampullae were comparable among the three
groups (Figure 2B and Table S2-1).
In terms of first polar body (PB1) extrusion from in
vivo and in vitro matured oocytes, we observed significant
differences. During in vivo maturation, D-gal severely
decreased PB1 extrusion, resulting in a much lower
frequency compared to that of the control (P < 0.001).
Interestingly, PC could apparently reverse impaired PB1
extrusion to rates comparable to the control group (control
vs D-gal+PC, P > 0.05; D-gal vs D-gal+PC, P < 0.001).
Similarly, the percentage of PB1 extrusion from oocytes
matured in vitro was decreased by D-gal compared to
control (P < 0.001), and administration of PC improved
PB1 extrusion (D-gal vs D-gal+PC, P < 0.01). However,
treatment did not rescue to the level of the control (control
vs D-gal+PC, P < 0.05) (Figure 2C and Table S2-2).
We also calculated the percentages of fragmented
oocytes matured in vivo. We calculated that 13.08% of
fragmented oocytes matured in the D-gal group, which
was much higher than the control group (P < 0.001). The
rate of fragmentation was decreased in the D-gal+PC
group to the control group (control vs D-gal+PC, P > 0.05;
D-gal vs D-gal+PC, P < 0.001). For oocytes matured in
vitro, 36.57% were fragmented in the D-gal group, which
was much higher than that of the control group (P <
0.001). This impairment was partially reversed by PC (P
< 0.01), but not to the level of control (P < 0.001) (Figure
2D and Table S2-3).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

PC rescued spindle-chromosome complex (SCC)
malformation in D-gal-induced aging mice
PB1 extrusion failure and oocyte fragmentation
in D-gal-induced aging mice may be associated with
disordered spindle assembly and chromosome alignment.
We observed defective spindles in the D-gal group.
α-Tubulin labeling revealed that some oocytes had no
spindle pole, while others had multiple spindle poles.
Chromosome alignment in the D-gal group was also
defective. The mid-plate, which appeared in control
MII oocytes, was absent in the D-gal group, replaced by
dispersed chromosomes in the mid-plate area. Notably, PC
reversed all these malfunctions (Figure 3A).
We also examined SCC integrity by analyzing the
distribution of γ-tubulin, which should be localized at the
spindle pole area. In D-gal-treated mice, most oocytes
lacked specific γ-tubulin localization at the spindle pole,
but this was normalized by PC (Figure 3B).
We compared the frequency of abnormal SCC
formation among the three groups. Almost half (43.32%)
of oocytes generated from D-gal-treated mice had
abnormal SCC (P < 0.001). This was halved by PC
administration (P < 0.001), which was comparable to the
control group (Figure 3C and Table S3).
Aging is associated with oocyte fragmentation and
impaired PB1 extrusion. Abnormal SCC formation and
translocation is the main reason for oocyte maturation
failure and aneuploidy. These data suggest that PC may
improve oocyte quality by correcting SCC formation and
translocation, leading to the production of high-quality
mature oocyte with a lower rate of aneuploidy.

D-gal and PC do not influence telomere length or
telomerase activity
Since short telomeres are considered a biomarker
of chronic oxidative stress and biological aging [35, 36],
we measured telomere length and telomerase activity
prior to and after D-gal and PC treatment. Telomere
length (indicated by T/S ratio) were not significantly
17395

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Impaired oocyte quality and developmental competence in D-gal-induced aging mice could be rescued by
PC. A. Morphology of oocytes at the GV stage, 14 hours after in vivo maturation and 14 hours after in vitro maturation. Arrows and

triangles indicate morphologically abnormal oocytes after in vivo and in vitro maturation, respectively. Scale bar = 100 μm. B. There were
no significant differences in terms of oocyte numbers per mouse before or 14 hours after hCG injection in the control, D-gal, and D-gal+PC
groups. C. The percent of oocyte polar body extrusion was decreased in D-gal-induced aging mice. This inhibition was reversed by PC.
D. D-gal-induced aging increased the percentage of oocyte fragmentation. This was decreased by PC administration after in vivo or in
vitro maturation. E. D-gal-induced aging induced oocyte aneuploidy, which was decreased by PC after in vivo or in vitro maturation. Data
are presented as the means ± SEMs and were processed by one-way ANOVA and Newman-Keuls post hoc tests. Significant differences
between groups, *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001. n indicates the number of mice for each treatment.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17396

Oncotarget

different among the three groups (Figure 4A and Table
S4). Similarly, no significant difference was observed in
terms of telomerase activity in the whole ovary (Figure
4B and Table S4). Telomere length is considered a useful
biomarker in determining biological and chronological
aging [37, 38]. Our results showed that neither telomere
length nor the telomerase activity was altered, indicating
that telomeres were not disturbed in D-gal-induced aging
mice.

levels of the antioxidant genes Gclm, Gclc, Gpx1, Gpx3,
Gsr, Gsta4, Gstm1, Gstm2, Gstt1, Mgst1, Sod1, Sod2, Cat,
Glrx1, Glrx2, Prdx3, Txn2, Txnrd1, Txnrd2, and copper
chaperone for SOD (Ccs). D-gal significantly changed
expression of some genes such as Gclc, Gpx3, and
Cat, and PC reversed these alterations. However, D-gal
changed the expression of some other genes such as Gclm,
Glrx2, and Txn2, but these changes were not normalized
by PC. Expression levels of most of the genes (Gpx1,
Gsr, Gsta4, Gstm1, Gstm2, Gstt1, Sod1, Glrx1, Prdx3,
Txnrd1, Txnrd2, and Ccs) were not affected by D-gal
or PC treatments. Interestingly, the expression levels of
Mgst1 and Sod2 were not changed after D-gal treatment
but increased after PC administration (Figure 5A and
Table S5-1).
We also measured antioxidant enzyme levels
and activities. Superoxide dismutase (SOD) content
was decreased after D-gal treatment (P < 0.001), and

PC rescued antioxidant gene expression and
antioxidant enzyme activity
As aging is highly correlated with the expression
and activity of antioxidant genes and enzymes, we used
quantitative real-time reverse transcription polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR) to measure the ovarian mRNA

Figure 3: PC rescued SCC malformation and cytoskeletal abnormalities in D-gal-induced aging mice. A. D-gal could

induce various abnormal SCCs including no or multipolar spindle poles and chromosome misalignment in MII oocytes. These abnormalities
were reversed by PC. Blue, DNA; red, α-tubulin; scale bar = 20 μm. B. Abnormal distribution of γ-tubulin in MII oocytes in D-gal-induced
mice could be reversed by the administration of PC. Blue, DNA; red, γ-tubulin; scale bar = 20 μm. C. Malformed oocyte SCCs in D-galinduced aging mice were rescued by PC. Data are presented as the means ± SEMs and were processed by one-way ANOVA and NewmanKeuls post hoc tests. Significant differences between groups, ***P < 0.001. n indicates the number of mice for each treatment.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17397

Oncotarget

in the D-gal group compared to control (P < 0.01), and
this increase was inhibited by PC (P < 0.01) (Figure 5E
and Table S5-5).
Consistent with the generally accepted view that
antioxidant gene expression and antioxidant enzyme
activity are involved in the aging process [39, 40],
we found alterations in some genes and enzymes.
Moreover, MDA was increased in the D-gal group and
could be inhibited by PC. This led us to explore whether
mitochondria and ROS are downstream of PC’s effects.

PC partially reversed this decrease (control vs D-gal, P
< 0.001; control vs D-gal+PC, P < 0.001) (Figure 5B
and Table S5-2). There was no significant difference
in glutathione peroxidase (GSH-Px) activity among
the three groups (Figure 5C and Table S5-3). Catalase
(CAT) content was higher in the D-gal group than in the
control group (P < 0.05), and this increase could not be
reversed by PC administration (control vs D-gal+PC, P <
0.01) (Figure 5D and Table S5-4). Methane dicarboxylic
aldehyde (MDA) content was also measured as a
biomarker for oxidative stress and aging. MDA was higher

Figure 4: D-gal and PC did not affect telomere length or telomerase activity in mouse ovaries. A. Relative telomere length
shown as the T/S ratio determined by qPCR analysis. Administration of D-gal or PC had no effect. B. Telomerase activity of ovaries
assessed with by ELISA. Administration of D-gal or PC had no effect. Data are presented as the means ± SEMs and were processed by
one-way ANOVA and Newman-Keuls post hoc tests. n indicates the number of mice for each treatment.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17398

Oncotarget

Aggregated mitochondrial distribution in D-galinduced oocytes was normalized by PC

6A and Table S6-1). A similar result was observed in
oocytes (Figure 6B and Table S6-1). However, we
observed a significant difference when we assessed
mitochondrial distribution in MII oocytes. The distribution
of mitochondria was classified as “aggregated” or
“even.” Only 5.76% of MII oocytes exhibited aggregated
distribution in the control group. However, after D-gal
administration, this proportion increased to 37.97%, which

Next, we examined ATP levels and mitochondrial
distribution in MII oocytes. Relative ATP levels in
cumulus cells were not significantly different in the
D-gal or D-gal+PC groups compared to control (Figure

Figure 5: PC rescued antioxidant genes expression and enzymes activity. A. Relative expression levels of antioxidant genes in
ovaries by qPCR. D-gal significantly increased Gclc and Gpx3 expression and decreased Cat expression, and PC reversed these alterations.
B. SOD activity in ovaries was decreased by D-gal and partially increased after PC administration. C. GSH-Px activity in ovaries was not
changed by D-gal or PC administration. D. CAT activity in ovaries was increased by D-gal and PC administration. E. MDA content in
ovaries increased after D-gal treatment and decreased after PC administration. Data are presented as the means ± SEMs and were processed
by one-way ANOVA and Newman-Keuls post hoc tests. Significant differences between groups, *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001. n
indicates the number of mice for each treatment.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17399

Oncotarget

PC reduced high ROS levels induced by D-gal in
MII oocytes

was significantly higher than control (P < 0.001). After PC
administration, 88.95% of oocytes were evenly distributed
around mitochondria, which was similar to the oocytes in
control (Figure 6C and 6D, Table S6-2). Mitochondrial
distribution is a cytoskeleton-dependent intracellular
traffic behavior [41]. The distribution of mitochondria in
oocytes determines spindle translocation [42]. Although
ATP levels in the whole oocytes were not changed,
abnormal distribution of mitochondria induced by D-gal
and later recovered by PC may be associated with oocyte
maturation. Furthermore, ROS accumulation can damage
the cytoskeleton and affect mitochondrial distribution [13,
19], which led us to evaluate the ROS level in D-gal- or
PC-treated oocytes.

ROS levels can indicate oxidative stress. In oocytes,
we measured intracellular ROS levels in in vivo matured
MII oocytes. Dichlorofluorescein diacetate (DCFH-DA)
fluorescence intensity was significantly higher in the MII
oocytes of the D-gal-treated group than in the control or
D-gal+PC groups, indicating enhanced ROS production
after D-gal administration (Figure 7A). We quantified
the relative fluorescence intensities and confirmed that
ROS levels were much higher in the D-gal group (P <
0.001). Interestingly, when PC was administered, ROS
levels decreased to a value comparable to the control
group (Figure 7B and Table S7). These results suggest that
D-gal significantly increases ROS generation in oocytes.

Figure 6: Mitochondrial distribution but not ATP level was altered by D-gal and reversed by PC. A. Relative ATP levels

in cumulus cells and B. relative ATP levels in MII oocytes were not affected by D-gal or PC administration. Data are presented as means
± SEMs. C. Percentages of MII oocytes with altered mitochondrial distribution after D-gal injection and PC administration. Column with
large square, aggregated mitochondria distribution; column with small square, even mitochondria distribution. Data are presented as means.
D. Representative images of mitochondria with aggregated or even distribution. Data were processed by one-way ANOVA and NewmanKeuls post hoc tests. Significant differences between groups, ***P < 0.001. Scale bar = 20 μm. n indicates the number of mice for each
treatment.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17400

Oncotarget

Significantly, PC reduced ROS levels in the MII oocytes
of D-gal-induced aging mice (P < 0.01).

Oocyte apoptosis is always accompanied by abnormal
morphology changes, which was verified by our previous
results. These indicate that D-gal triggers apoptosis in MII
oocytes, which is inhibited by PC.

PC inhibited D-gal-induced early apoptosis in MII
oocytes

PC rescued litter size in D-gal-treated mice

High levels of ROS can induce apoptosis. We
therefore performed annexin-V staining to determine
whether the frequency of early stage apoptosis in
oocytes was altered by D-gal and PC treatment. Oocytes
undergoing early apoptosis were characterized by a clear
green signal in the membrane and zona pellucida (Figure
8A). We quantified the fluorescence signals and found
that 19.89% of oocytes in the D-gal group were apoptotic
(P < 0.001). After PC administration, the percentage of
apoptotic cells decreased (control vs D-gal+PC, P > 0.05;
D-gal vs D-gal+PC, P < 0.001) (Figure 8B and Table S8).

Finally, the numbers of offspring in the three groups
were evaluated. Each normal female in the control group
delivered an average of 8.69 pups. The D-gal-induced
aging female exhibited low reproductive ability compared
with the control group (P < 0.05). Significantly, PC
treatment increased the litter size in D-gal-induced aging
mice to the level of the controls (control vs D-gal+PC,
P > 0.05; D-gal vs D-gal+PC, P < 0.01) (Figure 9A and
Table S9-1). Offspring birth weight was not significantly
different among the three groups (Figure 9B and Table S9-

Figure 7: PC inhibited ROS level in MII oocytes in D-gal-induced aging mice. A. Representative images of ROS generation

determined by DCFH-DA fluorescence (green). Scale bar = 50 μm. B. ROS relative fluorescence intensity. ROS generation in oocytes was
obviously increased after D-gal treatment; this was suppressed to the control group level after PC administration. Data are presented as the
means ± SEMs and were processed by one-way ANOVA and Newman-Keuls post hoc tests. Significant differences between groups, **P <
0.01; ***P < 0.001. n indicates the number of mice for each treatment.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17401

Oncotarget

DISCUSSION

2). Considering that aging mice have a high proportion
of birth defects correlated with aneuploidy, we assessed
the growth state of offspring in both female (Figure 9C
and Table S9-3) and male (Figure 9D and Table S9-4)
and detected no significant differences among the three
groups. These results indicate that PC has no detectable
side effects on the offspring of D-gal-induced aging mice.

In this study, we investigated the ability of PC to
reverse D-gal-induced reproduction impairments in mice.
Our results indicate that consecutive subcutaneous D-gal
injections had toxic effects on the female reproductive
system. Notably, PC protects against the D-gal-induced
reduction of fertility in mice.

Figure 8: PC inhibited early stage apoptosis in MII oocytes in D-gal-induced aging mice. A. Representative images of early

stage apoptosis in MII oocytes. Oocytes without green fluorescence signals at the zona pellucida and oocyte membrane were non-apoptotic,
and oocytes undergoing early apoptosis were characterized by a clear green signal in the zona pellucida and membrane. Scale bar = 20 μm.
B. Percent oocytes undergoing early stage apoptosis. D-gal induced early stage apoptosis in oocytes, and this was inhibited by PC. Data
are presented as the means ± SEMs and were processed by one-way ANOVA and Newman-Keuls post hoc tests. Significant differences
between groups, ***P < 0.001. n indicates the number of mice for each treatment.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17402

Oncotarget

D-gal-induced aging is associated with oxidative
stress and AGE generation [43]. ROS play key roles in this
process as their accumulation leads to the induction and
maintenance of cellular senescence [44]. In humans, aging
is associated with increased ROS levels and decreased
antioxidant levels in oocytes, cumulus cells, and follicular
fluid [45-47], which impair multiple physiological
processes from oocyte maturation to fertilization, embryo
development, and pregnancy [48].
We observed that D-gal treatment reduced ovary
and oocyte quality. These data concur with previous
reports that D-gal can damage ovarian function in mice
[49] and that oocyte quality decreases with age [50].
Failure of polar body extrusion is often correlated with
abnormal spindle formation and chromosome congression.
We observed disrupted oocyte SCC integrity and an

increased percentage of aneuploidy after D-gal treatment.
This is probably a consequence of increased ROS levels.
In natural ovulation, aging decrease oocyte number
by altering hormone levels [51]. Unexpectedly, D-gal
or PC administration did not influence oocyte number
after gonadotropin stimulation. We propose that in
gonadotropin-treated mice, age-related immature follicles
will respond to this stimulation, inducing more oocyte to
ovulate [52]. Interestingly, ROS levels were decreased
after PC treatment, and this was accompanied by improved
ovarian function and oocyte quality. Therefore, PC appears
to protect against D-gal-induced ovarian aging by reducing
ROS levels.
Telomere dysfunction may contribute to
reproductive
aging-associated
meiotic
defects,
miscarriage, and infertility [53-55]. Unexpectedly, we

Figure 9: PC treatment led to increase in the litter size of D-gal-induced aging mice but did not influence offspring
birth weight or growth rate. A. Litter sizes in the control, D-gal, and D-gal+PC groups. B. Birth weights in the control, D-gal and
D-gal+PC groups. C. Postnatal growth of female from weeks 1 to 8 in the control, D-gal, and D-gal+PC groups. D. Postnatal growth of
male from weeks 1 to 8 in the control, D-gal, and D-gal+PC groups. Data are presented as the means ± SEMs for A. and B. and means for
C. and D.. Data were processed by one-way ANOVA and Newman-Keuls post hoc tests. Significant differences between groups, *P < 0.05;
**P < 0.01. N indicates the number of female mice with plugs and that gave birth for each treatment; n shows the total number of offspring
for each treatment.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17403

Oncotarget

did not observe any D-gal- or PC-induced changes in
telomerase activity or the T/S ratio in ovaries. We propose
that telomere dysfunction is mainly correlated with natural
aging and might be observed over a longer term. There
may not have been enough time for telomeres to shorten
after only 40 days of D-gal treatment in our protocol.
Mammalian ovaries possess antioxidant defenses
including the antioxidant tripeptide glutathione (GSH),
and ROS-scavenging enzymes such as SOD, GSH-Px,
CAT, glutathione S-transferase (GST), and peroxiredoxin
(PRDX) [4, 56, 57]. We hypothesized that ovarian aging
is associated with decreased expression of ovarian
antioxidant genes and lower antioxidant enzyme levels,
resulting in oxidative damage to ovarian function. This
was confirmed by the observed variation of SOD activity
and oxidative stress marker MDA content after D-gal
treatment. Consistently, D-gal increased the expressions
of Gclc and Gpx3 and decreased that of Cat. PC was able
to reverse these changes, indicating that its likely rescue
mechanism is related to the inhibition of ROS production.
To date, there is no evidence that PC directly
affects mitochondrial distribution. We speculate that
PC improved mitochondrial distribution mainly via
its inhibition of ROS. A previous study reported that
mitochondrial distribution is a cytoskeleton-dependent
intracellular traffic behavior that relies on microtubule
organization [41]. The disruption of mitochondrial
distribution is therefore a consequence of malfunctioned

cytoskeleton. ROS deteriorate microtubule dynamics
and lead to their instability [58], which further deranges
mitochondrial distribution and function. Galactitol is a
secondary metabolite of D-gal formed by the reduction
of D-gal after cellular metabolism. Gradual intracellular
accumulation of galactitol can increase osmotic stress and
elevate ROS levels [59]. Binding between PC and ROS
can form non-radical products, thus preventing ROSmediated damage of organelles including microtubules
[60]. Therefore, PC treatment can prevent ROS from
decreasing microtubule stability and help maintain proper
mitochondrial distribution.
ROS serve as both key signaling molecules in
physiological processes such as meiotic resumption and as
indicators of cell apoptosis [48]. Apoptotic pathways are
also activated by ROS production [20]. Our results indicate
that D-gal treatment in mice triggers early stage apoptosis
in MII oocytes, possibly due to ROS accumulation. Any
treatment that inhibits ROS production, including PC, may
decrease apoptosis.
Although no significant differences were found in
birth weight, the results of our oocyte and ovary analyses
suggest that PC can rescue D-gal-induced impairment of
reproduction, especially small litter size. In conclusion,
our results show that PC can help maintain reproductive
performance in a D-gal-induced aging model. It is
important to note that data obtained from a mouse model
may not extrapolate directly to human reproduction and

Figure 10: Experimental design. B6D2F/1 mice at 8 weeks of age were used. (1) The control group was subcutaneously injected with
0.9% saline (green) and intragastrically administered ultrapure water daily (blue). (2) The D-gal group was subcutaneously injected with
250 mg/kg/day D-gal solution (orange) and intragastrically administered ultrapure water daily. (3) The D-gal+PC group was subcutaneously
injected with 250 mg/kg/day D-gal solution and intragastrically administered 500mg/kg/day of PC daily (yellow).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17404

Oncotarget

natural aging, and more extensive research is needed in
a natural aging model before any clinic trials are to be
attempted.

Ovary, liver, spleen, and kidney weight and oocyte
collection

MATERIALS AND METHODS

GV-stage oocytes were collected by puncturing the
follicles of ovaries 48 hours after injection of pregnant
mare serum gonadotropin (PMSG, SanSheng, Ningbo,
China). Cumulus cells were removed by gentle pipetting.
Oocytes were washed thoroughly and cultured in ChatotZiomet-Bavister (CZB) under liquid paraffin oil at 37°C
in an atmosphere of 5% CO2 in air for 14 hours until they
reached the MII stage.
For in vivo MII-stage oocyte collection, mice were
superovulated with 10 IU PMSG followed 48 h later by 10
IU human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG, SanSheng). MII
oocytes with cumulus mass were released from the oviduct
ampullae 14 h after hCG injection. Cumulus cells were
dispersed by 0.3 mg/mL hyaluronidase in HEPES-M2
medium. Oocytes were cultured in CZB medium for
30 min of recovery. All oocytes from in vivo or in
vitro maturation were examined for PB1 extrusion and
fragmentation. The criteria for fragmentation evaluation
were based on previous reports [61, 62]. Body weight and
organ (ovary, liver, and spleen) wet weight were measured
and recorded at the end of treatment, and ovaries were
kept frozen at -80°C for further experiments.

Ethics statement
All experiments adhered with the National Research
Council Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory
Animals and were approved by the Institutional Animal
Care and Use Committee at Inner Mongolia University.

Experimental design, mouse feeding, mating, and
offspring assessment
Female B6D2F1 mice were purchased from the
Research Center for Laboratory Animal Science of Inner
Mongolia University and housed under 12:12-h light:dark
cycles in a specific pathogen-free animal facility at the
Research Center for Laboratory Animal Science of Inner
Mongolia University. During the whole experiment, mice
had free access to food and water. At the age of 8 weeks,
adult female mice were randomly divided into three groups
and treated as follows. In the control group, mice were
subcutaneously injected daily with 0.1 mL 0.9% saline for
up to 40 days. During the last 30 days, 0.4 mL ultrapure
water was intragastrically administered each day. For the
D-gal group, mice were subcutaneously injected with 250
mg/kg/day D-gal (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA)
solution for up to 40 days. During the last 30 days, 0.4
mL ultrapure water was administered intragastrically each
day. For the D-gal+PC group, mice were subcutaneously
injected with 250 mg/kg/day D-gal solution for up to 40
days. During the last 30 days, 500 mg/kg/day PC (Binmei
Biotechnology, Zhoushan, China) was intragastrically
administered each day. A schematic of the experimental
design is shown in Figure 10. Unless otherwise stated, all
chemicals and media were purchased from Sigma Aldrich.
Male mice at 12 weeks of age with proven fertility
were used for mating. Late in the afternoon, a single
female mouse was placed in the cage of one male for
mating. On the following morning, successfully mated
female mice with a plug were returned to their cages for
pup delivery. Female without mating plugs were not used
for breeding experiments. The number and weight of
offspring were recorded immediately after delivery. Body
weight was measured and recorded once a week through
the eighth week.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Immunofluorescence
chromosome spreading

microscopy

and

Oocytes were exposed to acidic tyrode solution
(pH 2.5) for a few seconds to remove the zona pellucida
followed by three washes in M2 medium. Oocytes were
then fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (Electron Microscopy
Sciences, Hatfield, PA, USA) in phosphate-buffered
saline (PBS) at room temperature for 30 min, followed by
permeabilization in PBS containing 0.5% Triton X-100 for
2 h at room temperature. Sample blocking was conducted
with 1% bovine serum albumin (BSA, Amresco, Solon,
OH, USA) in PBS containing 1/1000 Tween-20 (Amresco)
and 1/10,000 Triton X-100. After blocking, samples were
incubated with primary antibodies overnight at 4°C. For
primary antibodies, we used mouse anti-alpha tubulin
(1:2000, Abcam, Cambridge, UK) and anti-gamma
tubulin (1:500, Abcam). For secondary antibodies, we
used DyLight 549-conjugated donkey anti-mouse (1:100,
Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories, West Grove,
PA, USA). DNA was stained with 4’,6-diamidino-2phenylindole (DAPI, 5 µg/mL, Roche, Mannheim,
Germany) for 10 min. After staining and washing,
samples were mounted on glass slides using Vectashield
mounting medium (Vector Labs, Burlingame, CA, USA)
and examined with a confocal laser-scanning microscope
(Nikon, A1R, Tokyo, Japan). Images were analyzed with
NIS-Element AR 3.0 software. Chromosome spreading
analysis was performed as we described previously [63].
17405

Oncotarget

Telomere length measurement and telomerase
activity assay

ATP measurement
ATP levels in oocytes and cumulus cells were
measured using a kit (FL-ASC from Sigma Aldrich) as
previously described with a minor change [65]. Briefly,
30 denuded oocytes or cumulus cells collected from 30
cumulus-oocyte complexes in each mouse were snapfrozen in a microfuge tube containing 50 μL water and
stored at -80°C. For ATP assays, 50 μL of each thawed
sample solution was added to 100 μL ice-cold Cell
ATP-Releasing Reagent and incubated on ice for 5 min,
followed by the addition of 100 μL ice-cold ATP Assay
Mix (1:25 diluted in assay mix buffer). The reaction
mixture was then incubated for 10 min in the dark at room
temperature for the initial chemiluminescence flash period.
The bioluminescence of each sample was measured with a
high-sensitivity luminometer (Thermo Scientific).

The average telomere length was measured from
total genomic DNA of ovaries using a real-time PCR
assay. The reactions were performed with telomeric
primers for a reference control gene (the mouse 36B4
single-copy gene) using PCR settings as previously
described [64]. For each PCR reaction, a standard curve
was made by serial dilutions of known amounts of DNA
from the same tissues. The telomere signal was normalized
to the signal from the single-copy gene to generate a T/S
ratio indicative of relative telomere length.
The telomerase activity of ovaries was measured
with a telomerase enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA) kit (Cusabio, Wuhan, China). The experiments
were performed according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. In brief, a telomerase-specific antibody was
pre-coated onto a microplate. Standards and samples were
pipetted into the wells, and any telomerase present was
bound by the immobilized antibody. After removing any
unbound substances, a biotin-conjugated antibody specific
for telomerase was added to the wells. After washing,
avidin-conjugated horseradish peroxidase was added to the
wells. Following a wash to remove any unbound avidinenzyme reagent, a substrate solution was added, and color
developed in proportion to the amount of telomerase
bound in the initial step. After color development was
terminated, color intensity was measured with a highsensitivity luminometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham,
MA, USA).

Evaluation of mitochondrial distribution
Denuded
oocytes
were
fixed
in
4%
paraformaldehyde in PBS for 30 min in a humidified
chamber, washed, and incubated in 25 nM Mitotracker
Green-Fluorescence Mitochondria (Mitotracker Green
FM; Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR, USA) in PBS-BSA
for 30 min in the dark. After several washes, the oocytes
were transferred into a drop of medium containing DAPI
for 10 min. After staining, the samples were mounted on
glass slides using Vectashield (Vector Labs) mounting
medium and examined with a confocal laser-scanning
microscope (Nikon). Images were analyzed with NISElement AR3.0 software.

Quantitative real-time 	RT-PCR and enzyme assay

Determination of ROS generation

For quantitative real-time RT-PCR, total RNA was
extracted from ovaries using the TaKaRa MiniBEST
Universal RNA Extraction Kit (TaKaRa, Dalian, China)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. cDNA
was synthesized using the PrimeScript RT reagent Kit
(TaKaRa) following the manufacturer’s instructions.
The primer sequences were obtained from a previous
publication [4]. RT-PCR was performed with the SYBR
Green kit (TaKaRa). The comparative Ct method was
used for data analysis, and Gapdh was used as an internal
control.
For ovarian enzyme activity assays and MDA
measurement, all procedures were performed according to
the manufacturer’s instructions with kits purchased from
the Nanjing Jiancheng Bioengineering Institute (Nanjing,
China) unless noted otherwise.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

To assess ROS production, cumulus-denuded
oocytes were incubated with an oxidation-sensitive
fluorescent probe (dichlorofluorescein, DCFH) for 30 min
at 37°C in CZB containing 10 μM DCFH-DA (Nanjing
Jiancheng Bioengineering Institute). Then the oocytes
were washed three times with D-PBS with 0.1% BSA and
mounted on glass slides. Florescence intensity in each
oocyte was measured with a confocal system (Nikon) with
the same scan settings for each sample.

Apoptosis detection
Apoptosis detection was performed with an
annexin-V staining kit (Vazyme, Nanjing, China)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly,
oocytes were washed twice in PBS and stained for 10 min
in the dark with 100 mL binding buffer that contained
10 mL annexin-V-FITC. The samples were observed
immediately after staining. Fluorescent signals were
17406

Oncotarget

measured using a fluorescent microscope (Nikon) with
450-490 nm (excitation) and 520 nm (emission) filters.

2010; 48:642-655.
9.	 Nagaoka SI, Hassold TJ and Hunt PA. Human aneuploidy:
mechanisms and new insights into an age-old problem. Nat
Rev Genet. 2012; 13:493-504.

Statistical analysis

10.	 Behrman HR, Kodaman PH, Preston SL and Gao SP.
Oxidative stress and the ovary. J Soc Gynecol Invest. 2001;
8:S40-S42.

At least six replicates were conducted for each
treatment. Results are shown as means ± SEMs. Statistical
comparisons were made using analysis of variance
(ANOVA), and differences between treatment groups were
assessed with Newman-Keul’s multiple comparison post
hoc tests. All analyses were performed using GraphPad
Prism 5.0 statistical software (GraphPad Software Inc., La
Jolla, CA, USA). P < 0.05 was considered significant.

11.	 Agarwal A and Gupta S. Role of reactive oxygen species
in female reproduction. Part I. Oxidative stress: a general
overview. Agro Food Ind Hi Tec. 2005; 16:21-25.
12.	 Agarwal A, Gupta S and Sharma RK. Role of oxidative
stress in female reproduction. Reproductive biology and
endocrinology. 2005; 3:28.
13.	 Yancey DM, Guichard JL, Ahmed MI, Zhou L, Murphy
MP, Johnson MS, Benavides GA, Collawn J, DarleyUsmar V and Dell’Italia LJ. Cardiomyocyte mitochondrial
oxidative stress and cytoskeletal breakdown in the heart
with a primary volume overload. American journal of
physiology Heart and circulatory physiology. 2015;
308:H651-663.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Dr. Qing-Yuan Sun and Dr. Morigen for
valuable suggestions and Angeleem Lu, Hong-Xia Zhou,
and Xiang-Wei Kong for their kind assistance with oocyte
collection.

14.	 Yamada-Fukunaga T, Yamada M, Hamatani T, Chikazawa
N, Ogawa S, Akutsu H, Miura T, Miyado K, Tarin JJ, Kuji
N, Umezawa A and Yoshimura Y. Age-associated telomere
shortening in mouse oocytes. Reproductive biology and
endocrinology. 2013; 11:108.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors have no competing interests to declare.

GRANT SUPPORT

15.	 Mendelsohn AR and Larrick JW. Telomerase Reverse
Transcriptase and Peroxisome Proliferator-Activated
Receptor gamma Co-Activator-1alpha Cooperate to Protect
Cells from DNA Damage and Mitochondrial Dysfunction in
Vascular Senescence. Rejuvenation research. 2015; 18:479483.

This study was supported by the NSF of China
(31160243, 31371454); Program of Science and
Technology Supporting for Homecoming People in Inner
Mongolia; Natural Science Foundation of Inner Mongolia
(2015JQ02).

16.	 Janda J, Nfonsam V, Calienes F, Sligh JE and Jandova
J. Modulation of ROS levels in fibroblasts by altering
mitochondria regulates the process of wound healing.
Archives of dermatological research. 2016.

REFERENCES
1.	 Li Qea. Current understanding of ovarian aging. Science
China Life Sciences. 2012; 55:659-669.

17.	 Waiz SA, Raies-Ul-Haq M, Dhanda S, Kumar A, Goud
TS, Chauhan MS and Upadhyay RC. Heat stress and
antioxidant enzyme activity in bubaline (Bubalus bubalis)
oocytes during in vitro maturation. International journal of
biometeorology. 2016 Jan 19. PMID: 26781547.

2.	 Mol BW and Zoll M. Fertility preservation for age-related
fertility decline. Lancet. 2015; 385:507.
3.	 Cabry RM, P. Hazout, A. Belloc, S. Dalleac, A.Copin, H.
Benkhalifa, M. Management of infertility in women over
40. Maturitas. 2014; 78:17-21.

18.	 Gibb Z and Aitken RJ. The Impact of Sperm Metabolism
during In Vitro Storage: The Stallion as a Model. Biomed
Res Int. 2016; 2016:9380609.

4.	 Lim J and Luderer U. Oxidative damage increases and
antioxidant gene expression decreases with aging in the
mouse ovary. Biology of reproduction. 2011; 84:775-782.

19.	 Yu W, Zhang X, Liu J, Wang X, Li S, Liu R, Liao N, Zhang
T and Hai C. Cyclosporine A Suppressed Glucose Oxidase
Induced P53 Mitochondrial Translocation and Hepatic Cell
Apoptosis through Blocking Mitochondrial Permeability
Transition. International journal of biological sciences.
2016; 12:198-209.

5.	 Jessberger R. Age-related aneuploidy through cohesion
exhaustion. EMBO reports. 2012; 13:539-546.
6.	

Tilly ea. Germline Energetics, Aging, and Female Infertility.
Cell Metabolism. 2013; 17:838-850.

20.	 Liu GY, Sun YZ, Zhou N, Du XM, Yang J and Guo SJ.
3,3’-OH curcumin causes apoptosis in HepG2 cells through
ROS-mediated pathway. European journal of medicinal
chemistry. 2016; 112:157-163.

7.	 Beckman KB and Ames BN. The free radical theory of
aging matures. Physiological reviews. 1998; 78:547-581.
8.	 Salmon AB, Richardson A and Perez VI. Update on the
oxidative stress theory of aging: Does oxidative stress play
a role in aging or healthy aging? Free Radical Bio Med.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21.	 Song X, Bao MM, Li DD and Li YM. Advanced glycation
17407

Oncotarget

in D-galactose induced mouse aging model. Mech Ageing
Dev. 1999; 108:239-251.

GJ. Telomere length assessment: biomarker of chronic
oxidative stress? Free radical biology & medicine. 2008;
44:235-246.

22.	 Ho SC, Liu JH and Wu RYY. Establishment of the mimetic
aging effect in mice caused by D-galactose. Biogerontology.
2003; 4:15-18.

36.	 Balasubramanyam
M,
Adaikalakoteswari
A,
Sameermahmood Z and Mohan V. Biomarkers of oxidative
stress: methods and measures of oxidative DNA damage
(COMET assay) and telomere shortening. Methods in
molecular biology. 2010; 610:245-261.

23.	 Wei HF, Li L, Song QJ, Ai HX, Chu J and Li W.
Behavioural study of the D-galactose induced aging model
in C57BL/6J mice. Behav Brain Res. 2005; 157:245-251.

37.	 Rizvi S, Raza ST and Mahdi F. Telomere length variations
in aging and age-related diseases. Current aging science.
2014; 7:161-167.

24.	 Huang J, Okuka M, McLean M, Keefe DL and Liu L.
Telomere susceptibility to cigarette smoke-induced
oxidative damage and chromosomal instability of mouse
embryos in vitro. Free Radical Bio Med. 2010; 48:16631676.

38.	 Zhang J, Rane G, Dai X, Shanmugam MK, Arfuso F, Samy
RP, Lai MK, Kappei D, Kumar AP and Sethi G. Ageing
and the telomere connection: An intimate relationship with
inflammation. Ageing research reviews. 2016; 25:55-69.

25.	 Liu JM, Liu MY, Ye XY, Liu K, Huang JJ, Wang LL,
Ji GZ, Liu N, Tang XD, Baltz JM, Keefe DL and Liu L.
Delay in oocyte aging in mice by the antioxidant N-acetyll-cysteine (NAC). Hum Reprod. 2012; 27:1411-1420.

39.	 Hamatani T, Falco G, Carter MG, Akutsu H, Stagg CA,
Sharov AA, Dudekula DB, VanBuren V and Ko MS. Ageassociated alteration of gene expression patterns in mouse
oocytes. Human molecular genetics. 2004; 13:2263-2278.

26.	 Liu MY, Yin Y, Ye XY, Zeng M, Zhao Q, Keefe DL and
Liu L. Resveratrol protects against age-associated infertility
in mice. Hum Reprod. 2013; 28:707-717.

40.	 Ferguson G and Bridge W. Glutamate cysteine ligase
and the age-related decline in cellular glutathione: The
therapeutic potential of gamma-glutamylcysteine. Archives
of biochemistry and biophysics. 2016; 593:12-23.

27.	 Sadowska-Bartosz I and Bartosz G. Effect of Antioxidants
Supplementation on Aging and Longevity. Biomed Res Int.
2014.

41.	 Yamochi T, Hashimoto S, Amo A, Goto H, Yamanaka
M, Inoue M, Nakaoka Y and Morimoto Y. Mitochondrial
dynamics and their intracellular traffic in porcine oocytes.
Zygote. 2015:1-12.

28.	 Benedetti S, Benvenuti F, Pagliarani S, Francogli S,
Scoglio S and Canestrari F. Antioxidant properties of
a novel phycocyanin extract from the blue-green alga
Aphanizomenon flos-aquae. Life Sciences. 2004; 75:23532362.

42.	 Tatone C, Heizenrieder T, Di Emidio G, Treffon P,
Amicarelli F, Seidel T and Eichenlaub-Ritter U. Evidence
that carbonyl stress by methylglyoxal exposure induces
DNA damage and spindle aberrations, affects mitochondrial
integrity in mammalian oocytes and contributes to oocyte
ageing. Hum Reprod. 2011; 26:1843-1859.

29.	 Gupta M, Dwivedi UN and Khandelwal S. C-Phycocyanin:
An effective protective agent against thymic atrophy by
tributyltin. Toxicol Lett. 2011; 204:2-11.
30.	 Fernández-Rojas B, Medina-Campos ON, HernándezPando R, Negrette-Guzmán M, Huerta-Yepez S and
Pedraza-Chaverri J. C-Phycocyanin prevents cisplatininduced nephrotoxicity through inhibition of oxidative
stress. Food & function. 2014; 5:480.

43.	 Hadzi-Petrushev N, Stojkovski V, Mitrov D and Mladenov
M. D-galactose induced changes in enzymatic antioxidant
status in rats of different ages. Physiological research. 2015;
64:61-70.

31.	 Romay C, Gonzalez R, Ledon N, Remirez D and Rimbau
V. C-phycocyanin: a biliprotein with antioxidant, antiinflammatory and neuroprotective effects. Current protein
& peptide science. 2003; 4:207-216.

44.	 Indo HP, Yen HC, Nakanishi I, Matsumoto K, Tamura
M, Nagano Y, Matsui H, Gusev O, Cornette R, Okuda
T, Minamiyama Y, Ichikawa H, Suenaga S, Oki M, Sato
T, Ozawa T, et al. A mitochondrial superoxide theory for
oxidative stress diseases and aging. Journal of clinical
biochemistry and nutrition. 2015; 56:1-7.

32.	Kuddus M, Singh P, Thomas G and Al-Hazimi A.
Recent developments in production and biotechnological
applications of C-phycocyanin. Biomed Res Int. 2013;
2013:742859.

45.	 Tatone C, Carbone MC, Falone S, Aimola P, Giardinelli
A, Caserta D, Marci R, Pandolfi A, Ragnelli AM and
Amicarelli F. Age-dependent changes in the expression
of superoxide dismutases and catalase are associated with
ultrastructural modifications in human granulosa cells.
Molecular human reproduction. 2006; 12:655-660.

33.	 Duan X, Dai XX, Wang T, Liu HL and Sun SC. Melamine
negatively affects oocyte architecture, oocyte development
and fertility in mice. Hum Reprod. 2015; 30:1643-1652.
34.	 Schatten H and Sun QY. Centrosome and microtubule
functions and dysfunctions in meiosis: implications
for age-related infertility and developmental disorders.
Reproduction, fertility, and development. 2015; 27:934943.

46.	 Devine PJ, Perreault SD and Luderer U. Roles of reactive
oxygen species and antioxidants in ovarian toxicity. Biology
of reproduction. 2012; 86:27.
47.	 Luderer U. Ovarian toxicity from reactive oxygen species.

35.	 Houben JM, Moonen HJ, van Schooten FJ and Hageman
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17408

Oncotarget

Vitamins and hormones. 2014; 94:99-127.

58.	 Islam MS, Kabir AM, Inoue D, Sada K and Kakugo A.
Enhanced dynamic instability of microtubules in a ROS free
inert environment. Biophysical chemistry. 2015; 211:1-8.

48.	 Agarwal A, Gupta S and Sharma R. Oxidative stress and its
implications in female infertility - a clinician’s perspective.
Reproductive biomedicine online. 2005; 11:641-650.

59.	 Zhe AW and Beij. Physiologic and Biochemical Changes of
Mimetic Aging Induced by D-galactose in Rats. Laboratory
Animalence & Administration. 1999.

49.	Park JH and Choi TS. Polycystic ovary syndrome
(PCOS)-like phenotypes in the d-galactose-induced aging
mouse model. Biochemical and biophysical research
communications. 2012; 427:701-704.

60.	 Patel A, Mishra S and Ghosh PK. Antioxidant potential
of C-phycocyanin isolated from cyanobacterial species
Lyngbya, Phormidium and Spirulina spp. Indian journal of
biochemistry & biophysics. 2006; 43:25-31.

50.	 Crawford NM and Steiner AZ. Age-related infertility.
Obstetrics and gynecology clinics of North America. 2015;
42:15-25.

61.	 Choi T. Dimethyl sulfoxide inhibits spontaneous oocyte
fragmentation and delays inactivation of maturation
promoting factor (MPF) during the prolonged culture of
ovulated murine oocytes in vitro. Cytotechnology. 2011;
63:279-284.

51.	 Broekmans FJ, Soules MR and Fauser BC. Ovarian aging:
mechanisms and clinical consequences. Endocrine reviews.
2009; 30:465-493.
52.	 Berlinguer F, Gonzalez-Bulnes A, Spezzigu A, ContrerasSolis I, Succu S, McNeilly AS, Naitana S and Leoni GG.
Effect of aging on follicular function may be relieved by
exogenous gonadotropin treatment in a sheep model.
Reproduction. 2012; 144:245-255.

62.	 Arnault E, Tosca L, Courtot AM, Doussau M, Pesty
A, Finaz C, Allemand I and Lefevre B. Caspase-2(L),
caspase-9, and caspase-3 during in vitro maturation
and fragmentation of the mouse oocyte. Developmental
dynamics. 2008; 237:3892-3903.

53.	 Keefe DL and Liu L. Telomeres and reproductive aging.
Reproduction, fertility, and development. 2009; 21:10-14.

63.	 Zhao J, Wang L, Zhou HX, Liu L, Lu A, Li GP, Schatten
H and Liang CG. Clathrin Heavy Chain 1 is Required for
Spindle Assembly and Chromosome Congression in Mouse
Oocytes. Microscopy And Microanalysis. 2013; 19:13641373.

54.	 Liu JP and Li H. Telomerase in the ovary. Reproduction.
2010; 140:215-222.
55.	 Giardini MA, Segatto M, da Silva MS, Nunes VS and
Cano MI. Telomere and telomerase biology. Progress in
molecular biology and translational science. 2014; 125:140.

64.	 Liu L, Bailey SM, Okuka M, Munoz P, Li C, Zhou L, Wu
C, Czerwiec E, Sandler L, Seyfang A, Blasco MA and
Keefe DL. Telomere lengthening early in development.
Nature cell biology. 2007; 9:1436-1441.

56.	 Sato EF, Kobuchi H, Edashige K, Takahashi M, Yoshioka
T, Utsumi K and Inoue M. Dynamic aspects of ovarian
superoxide dismutase isozymes during the ovulatory
process in the rat. FEBS letters. 1992; 303(2-3):121-125.

65.	 Xu BZ, Noohi S, Shin JS, Tan SL and Taketo T. Bidirectional communication with the cumulus cells is
involved in the deficiency of XY oocytes in the components
essential for proper second meiotic spindle assembly. Dev
Biol. 2014; 385:242-252.

57.	 Hsieh CH, Tsai SP, Yeh HI, Sheu TC and Tam MF. Mass
spectrometric analysis of rat ovary and testis cytosolic
glutathione S-transferases (GSTs): identification of a novel
class-alpha GST, rGSTA6*, in rat testis. The Biochemical
journal. 1997; 323 ( Pt 2):503-510.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17409

Oncotarget

