1279

Honokiol, a Natural Plant Product, Inhibits the Bone
Metastatic Growth of Human Prostate Cancer Cells
Katsumi Shigemura, MD, PhD1
Jack L. Arbiser, MD, PhD3
Shi-Yong Sun, PhD4
Majd Zayzafoon, MD, PhD5
Peter A.S. Johnstone, MD6
Masato Fujisawa, MD, PhD2
Akinobu Gotoh, MD, PhD7
Babette Weksler, MD8
Haiyen E. Zhau, PhD1
Leland W.K. Chung, PhD1

BACKGROUND. Honokiol, a soluble nontoxic natural product derived from Magnolia spp., has been shown to induce apoptosis in malignant cells. The effect of
honokiol and the combined therapy with docetaxel on prostate cancer (PCa)
growth and bone metastasis was investigated in experimental models.

METHODS. The in vitro proapoptotic effects of honokiol on human androgendependent and -independent PCa, bone marrow, bone marrow-derived endothelial,
and prostate stroma cells were investigated. Honokiol-induced activation of caspases was evaluated by Western blot and FACS analysis. To confirm the cytotoxicity of honokiol, mice bone was inoculated in vivo with androgen-independent
PCa, C4-2 cells and the effects of honokiol and/or docetaxel on PCa growth in
bone were evaluated. Daily honokiol (100 mg/kg) and/or weekly docetaxel

1

Molecular Urology and Therapeutics Program,
Department of Urology, Winship Cancer Institute,
Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia.
2

Division of Urology, Department of Organ Therapeutics, Faculty of Medicine, Kobe University
Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe, Japan.
3

(5 mg/kg) were injected intraperitoneally for 6 weeks. PCa growth in mouse bone
was evaluated by radiography, serum prostate-specific antigen (PSA) and tissue
immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS. Honokiol induced apoptosis in all cell lines tested. In PCa cells honokiol induced apoptosis via the activation of caspases 3, 8, and 9 and the cleavage
of poly-adenosine diphosphate ribose polymerase in a dose- and time-dependent

Department of Dermatology, Emory University
School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia.

manner. Honokiol was shown to inhibit the growth and depress serum PSA in

4

taxel showed additive effects that inhibited further growth without evidence of

Department of Hematology and Oncology, and
Winship Cancer Institute, Emory University School
of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia.
5

Department of Pathology, University of Alabama
at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama.

mice harboring C4-2 xenografts in the skeleton and the combination with docesystemic toxicity. Immunohistochemical staining confirmed honokiol exhibited
growth-inhibitory, apoptotic, and antiangiogenic effects on PCa xenografts.
CONCLUSIONS. The combination of honokiol and low-dose docetaxel may be
used to improve patient outcome in androgen-independent prostate cancer with

6

Department of Radiation Oncology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia.

bone metastasis. Cancer 2007;109:127989.  2007 American Cancer Society.

7
Laboratory of Cell and Gene Therapy, Institute
for Advanced Medical Sciences, Hyogo College of
Medicine, Nishinomiya, Japan.

KEYWORDS: Honokiol, prostate cancer, bone metastasis, apoptosis.

8

Division of Hematology/Oncology, Weill Medical
College of Cornell University, New York, New York
Supported by National Institute for Health/National
Cancer Institute grant CA098912.
We thank Gary Mawyer for providing editorial support, and Zhihui Xie for the animal experiments.
Address for reprints: Dr. Leland W. K. Chung,
Molecular Urology and Therapeutics Program,
Department of Urology, Winship Cancer Institute,
Emory University School of Medicine, 1365B Clifton Road Room B5101, Atlanta GA 30322; Fax:
(404) 778-3965; E-mail: lwchung@emory.edu
Received September 27, 2006; revision received
December 16, 2006; accepted December 20, 2006.

ª 2007 American Cancer Society

H

onokiol is a plant lignan isolated from the bark and seed cones
of the magnolia tree.1 Previous studies demonstrated that honokiol markedly inhibited endothelial cell growth in culture,2 angiosarcoma formation in mice,2 cultured B cell chronic lymphocytic
leukemia cells isolated from patients,3 and a human colorectal carcinoma cell line in vitro.4 The antineoplastic effects of honokiol have
been extended to many other forms of malignancies including lung
cancer and multiple myeloma.2,46 Park et al.7 showed that honokiol
induces apoptosis via cytochrome c release and caspase activation in
rat hepatic satellite cells. Honokiol was shown to inhibit Akt/phosphoinositide-3 kinase (PI3K) and mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) signaling in a cultured angiosarcoma cell line.2 In addition to
its antitumor properties, honokiol also blocks phosphorylation of vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 (VEGFR2) in human endo-

DOI 10.1002/cncr.22551
Published online 26 February 2007 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

1280

CANCER

April 1, 2007 / Volume 109 / Number 7

thelial cells and honokiol treatment results in blockade
of VEGF-induced Rac activation.2,8
Bone is a common site of prostate cancer metastasis and therapeutic options are limited. The attractive features of honokiol as an antiangiogenic drug
are that it not only induces apoptosis in a variety of
cancer cells26 but also inhibits nuclear factor kappa
B (NF-jB) activation,9 which promotes cancer cell
survival, and reverts p-glycoprotein activation, associated with decreased cancer cell sensitivity to chemotherapeutic drugs.10,11 Honokiol also inhibits
osteoclastogenesis, a process often associated with
increased bone turnover and cancer cell bone colonization through enhanced lytic and blastic reactions
when cancer cells are residing in bone.9 Despite
much study of honokiol’s effect on the growth of
cancer cells and cancer-associated vascular endothelial cells, there is no report on whether honokiol has
cytotoxic effects on the cells in the tumor microenvironment. Cells such as marrow stromal and prostate stromal cells are known to be closely associated
with tumor cells in the primary and their subsequent
metastasis to bone in patients.
Current therapy for metastatic prostate cancer
includes docetaxel, a semisynthetic member of the taxane family. It has shown clinical activity in a wide spectrum of solid tumors including breast, lung, ovarian, and
prostate cancers.1214 Docetaxel is a second-generation
taxane with improved pharmacokinetic, pharmacodynamic, and cytotoxicity profiles, and due to differences
in drug efflux is retained intracellularly for a longer period.15,16 Early in vitro studies revealed that docetaxel
has a number of unique preclinical characteristics compared with other chemotherapeutic agents, including
the taxane paclitaxel. We evaluated the combined effects
of honokiol plus low-dose docetaxel to avoid host systemic toxicity and determined their combined effects on
the growth of hormone-refractory human prostate cancer cells in the mouse skeleton. We demonstrated that
honokiol inhibits growth and induces apoptosis of prostate cancer and associated stromal cells, human bone
marrow cells, and human bone marrow-derived endothelial cells via caspase-dependent pathways, and
showed additive effects with low-dose docetaxel in vivo
without inducing systemic toxicity in mice. Our study
provides a rationale for the use of honokiol in aggressive
hormone-refractory prostate cancer.

metastatic C4-2 subline, and AI and AR-negative
human prostate cancer PC-3 were used for this study
as previously described.17 Immortalized paired
human prostate-associated stromal cells from normal/benign lesions, NPF (normal/benign prostate
fibroblasts) cells, and cancer-associated lesions, CPF
(cancer-associated prostate fibroblast) cells, were
established from the same patient using Emory University-approved Institutional Review Board (IRB)
protocols. Attaching stromal cells were cultured in Tmedium (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) supplemented
with 5% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS)
(Sigma, St. Louis, MO). Cell cultures were routinely
used at less than 6 passages. Immortalized normal
human bone marrow stromal cells (HS27A) were
obtained from the American Type Culture Collection
(ATCC; CRL-2496; Manassas, VA), whereas transformed human bone marrow endothelial cells
(TrHBMEC) were obtained as a gift from Dr. Weksler.18 Unless otherwise stated, these cell lines were
cultured in T-medium supplemented with 5% FBS,
100 IU/L penicillin G, and 100 lg/L streptomycin at
378C under 5% CO2. Honokiol (Wako Chemical, Tokyo, Japan) was dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide
(DMSO) at 20 mg/mL stock solution and its purity
was determined to be a minimum of 99% by highperformance liquid chromatography.3,19 This reagent
was stored at 208C and diluted by media just before
use. Docetaxel (Sanofi-Aventis, Bridgewater, NJ) was
dissolved in ethanol at 100 lM and stored at 48C.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Cell Apoptosis
Cells plated at 3 3 105 cells/well in 6-well plates
with T media plus 5% FBS were cultured for 24 hours
and added with various concentrations of honokiol.
Cells were cultured for an additional 24 hours. Apo-

Cell Lines, Cell Culture, and Chemical Reagents
The androgen-dependent (AD) AR-positive parental
LNCaP human prostate cancer cell line, its lineagederived androgen-independent (AI), AR-positive, and

Cell Proliferation
Cell proliferation was measured using the CellTiter
96 AQ nonradioactive cell proliferation assay (MTS
assay; Promega, San Luis Obispo, CA). Briefly, cells
suspended in T media plus 5% FBS were added to
the 96-well plate at 5000 cells/well in triplicate. After
24 hours of culture, honokiol and/or docetaxel were
added in various concentrations. Cells were cultured
for 24 or 48 hours, then added to 20 lL/well of combined MTS/PMS solution (Promega). After incubation
for 1 hour at 378C in a humidified incubator with 5%
CO2 atmosphere, the OD 490 nm was recorded using
an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) plate
reader. Data represent mean  standard deviation
(SD) of triplicate cultures from 2 independent experiments. The survival fractions of cells were expressed
as relative survival with controls recorded as 1.0.

Honokiol Inhibits Bone Metastatic Growth/Shigemura et al.

ptosis was assessed by flow cytometry using annexin
V, Alexa Fluor 350 conjugate (Molecular Probes,
Eugene, OR) following the manufacturer’s protocol.
These assays were repeated twice. Data were expressed as the average of these determinations.

Western Blot
Cultured cells that reached 70% to 80% confluence
were harvested in a lysis buffer (50 mM Tris, pH 8.0,
150 mM NaCl, 0.02% NaN3, 0.1% SDS, 1% NP-40,
0.5% sodium deoxycholate) containing 1.5 mM phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride (PMSF) and Protease
Inhibitor Cocktail Complete (Roche Diagnostics,
Mannheim, Germany). Protein concentrations in the
supernatants were measured with the BCA Protein
Assay Kit (Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford, IL). Fifty
lg of total protein was loaded to each lane and
resolved on a 12% NUPAGE Bis-Tris-buffered (pH
7.0) polyacrylamide gel (Invitrogen) and transferred
onto a nitrocellulose membrane. The membrane was
incubated with anticaspase 3 antibody (Santa Cruz
Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA), anticaspase 8 antibody (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA), anticaspase 9
antibody (Santa Cruz), and Poly-ADP Ribose Polymerase (PARP) antibody (Cell Signaling Technology,
Danvers, MA) mixed with anti-EF1-a antibody serving as the loading control. The reactive bands were
visualized by ECL (Amersham Biosciences, Buckinghamshire, UK). In some studies, Western blot membranes were stripped by submerging the membranes
in restored Western blotting stripping buffer (Pierce),
incubated at 378C for 30 minutes with occasional
agitation, and washed with washing buffer (13 PBS,
0.1% Tween 20) before the secondary blotting.
Assessment of In Vivo Therapeutic Effects of Honokiol,
Docetaxel, and the Combination of Honokiol and
Docetaxel on Human Prostate Tumor Xenografts in
Mouse Bone
A total of 1.0 3 106 C4-2 cells were inoculated in
mouse bilateral tibia using a previously established
procedure.17,20 Blood specimens (70 lL) were obtained
from the retroorbital sinus vein every 2 weeks for serum prostate-specific antigen (PSA) determination. Serum PSA was determined by microparticle ELISA using
an Abbott IMx instrument (Abbott Laboratories,
Abbott Park, IL). A total of 16 athymic male nude mice
(BALB/c nu/nu; National Cancer Institute, Bethesda,
MD) were divided into 4 groups: vehicle control group
(n ¼ 4); honokiol-alone treatment group (n ¼ 4); docetaxel-alone treatment group; and the combination of
honokiol and docetaxel treatment group (n ¼ 4). The
treatments were initiated at 3 weeks after tumor cell
inoculation with confirmed tumors in bone by x-ray

1281

and positive serum PSA.17 Honokiol was dissolved in
100% ethanol containing 20% Intralipid (Baxter
Healthcare, Deerfield, IL) as previously described.2
Mice were administered daily with honokiol at 2.5 mg
per mouse (approximately 100 mg/kg) via the intraperitoneal route for a 6-week period. Docetaxel was administered similarly to mice at a dose of 5 mg/kg once a
week. Control mice received vehicle injections for the
same duration. Mice were weighed every week and tumor growths in bilateral tibia were followed by serum
PSA and x-ray every 2 weeks. Mice were sacrificed 6
weeks after the initiation of treatment. The bilateral
tibia were removed, kept in 10% formalin for 48 hours,
and then decalcified in EDTA (pH 7.2) for 15 days.
Tibia specimens were dehydrated and paraffin-embedded for histopathologic (hematoxylin and eosin [H&E]
staining) and immunohistochemical analyses.

Immunohistochemical Analysis
Histopathology of the tumor specimens in mouse
tibia was assessed in H&E-stained slides. Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining was performed as follows: cell proliferation, vascular endothelial, and cell
death profiles in tumor-bearing bone specimens
were assessed by IHC using a Dako Autostainer Plus
system (Dako, Carpinteria, CA). The respective antibodies used in IHC analyses were mouse monoclonal
antibody against Ki67 (used at 1:1000, Santa Cruz),
rabbit polyclonal antibody against PECAM-1 (CD-31)
(H-300; 1:200, Santa Cruz), and mouse monoclonal
antibody against M30 CytoDeath (1:600, DiaPharma
Group, West Chester, OH). Tissues were deparaffinized, rehydrated, and subjected to 5-minute pressure-cooking antigen retrieval, 10-minute double
endogenous enzyme block, and 30-minute primary
antibody reaction followed by 30-minute EnVision
plus Dual Link System (peroxidase) incubation at
room temperature. Antigenic signals were detected
by adding diaminobenzidine as a chromogen of
horseradish peroxidase and slides were counterstained by hematoxylin. All reagents were obtained
from Dako unless otherwise indicated. For quantification, 200 cells at 3 randomly selected areas at
3100 magnification were assessed and the positively
Ki67- and M30-stained cells were recorded; positive
CD31 stains were recorded by counting the number
of positively stained microvessels in the definite area.
Data are presented as microvessel density with a
control value of 1.0.21
Statistical Analysis
Statistical analysis was conducted using Student t-test
and Welch t-test with JSTAT (Java Virtual Machine

1282

CANCER

April 1, 2007 / Volume 109 / Number 7

Statistics Monitoring Tool; Sun Microsystems, Santa Clara,
CA). Statistical significance was established at P < .05.

RESULTS
Honokiol Inhibits the Growth of Human Prostate Cancer,
Prostate Stromal, Marrow Stromal, and Bone MarrowDerived Endothelial Cells In Vitro
Previous studies have established honokiol as a nontoxic antitumor drug for several human blood-borne
and solid tumors.610 To explore the potential use of
honokiol as a treatment option for hormone-refractory human prostate cancer bone metastasis, we
evaluated the cytotoxic effects of honokiol on androgen-dependent (LNCaP), androgen-independent (C42, PC-3) human prostate cancer cells and those cells
known to closely interact with human prostate cancer either at the primary or bone metastatic sites,
specifically human prostate stromal fibroblasts (NPF
and CPF), marrow stromal cells (HS27A), and transformed human bone marrow endothelial cells
(TrHBMEC). These cells were exposed to the indicated concentrations of honokiol for 24 hours and
cell growth was determined by MTS assay. Honokiol
was found to inhibit the growth of prostate cancer
cells, LNCaP, C4-2, and PC-3, with 50% inhibition
(IC50) observed at 5 to 10 lg/mL, which is equivalent
to 18.75 to 37.5 lM. Honokiol also inhibited the
growth of both normal/benign and cancer-associated
prostate stromal cells established from patients (NPF
and CPF). Typically, we observed that honokiol was
more effective in inhibiting the growth of cancerassociated than normal/benign-associated stromal
fibroblasts with 10 or 20 lg/mL honokiol treatment.
At 10 or 20 lg/mL honokiol the growth inhibitions
observed in CPF were 91.0  0.11% and 89.4  1.10%
as opposed to NPF, which were 85.2  0.16% and
83.3  0.400% (P < .002). Honokiol also inhibited the
growth of normal immortalized human marrow stromal cells (HS27A) and transformed human bone marrow endothelial cells (TrHBMEC), with IC50s of 5 and
10 lg/mL, respectively (Fig. 1). These results, taken
together, suggest that honokiol is cytotoxic to prostate
cancer cells and to supporting cells in the cancer
microenvironment at a concentration achievable in
vivo (see below).

sence of 0, 5, 10, and 20 lg/mL honokiol for 24
hours. Honokiol treatment significantly induced apoptosis in all cell types studied in a dose-dependent
manner. Greater than 50% cell death can be achieved
with 10 lg/mL honokiol (Fig. 2). We next focused our
investigation on the apoptotic cell death mechanism
induced by honokiol treatment. C4-2 cells were treated with 5, 10, and 15 lg/mL honokiol for 24 and 48
hours. Activation of caspases 3, 8, and 9 and cleavage

FIGURE 1. Honokiol induces cytotoxicity in androgen-dependent, LNCaP,
and androgen-independent, C4-2 and PC-3 prostate cancer cell lines, human
bone marrow stromal (HS27A), human bone marrow-associated endothelial
cells (TrHBMEC), and paired human prostate associated stromal fibroblasts
from normal/benign lesions, NPF (normal/benign prostate fibroblasts) and
cells established from cancer-associated lesions, CPF (cancer associated
prostate fibroblasts). Growth inhibition by honokiol in these cell lines was

Honokiol Induced Caspase-Dependent Apoptosis in
Human Prostate Cancer Cells
To elucidate how honokiol inhibits cell viability, particularly in a condition that mimics human prostate
cancer bone metastasis, we analyzed annexin V
expression, an indicator of apoptosis, in LNCaP, C42, HS27A, and TrHBMEC cells cultured in the pre-

assessed by cell proliferation assay after 24-hour culture. Data represent
mean  the standard deviation (SD) of triplicate cultures from 2 independent
experiments. Horizontal axis shows honokiol concentration up to 20 lg/mL
(75 lM). The vertical axis shows the comparative cell proliferation ratio indicated as cell viability (percent control) with vehicle control. *Significant inhibition of cell proliferation observed after honokiol treatment compared with
vehicle controls (P < .05).

Honokiol Inhibits Bone Metastatic Growth/Shigemura et al.

1283

FIGURE 2. Honokiol induces apoptosis in prostate cancer cells, human
bone marrow cells, and human bone marrow-associated endothelial cells.
Apoptosis was assessed in the tested cells after honokiol treatment: Annexin
V FACS analysis after honokiol treatment. Horizontal axis shows honokiol
concentration. Vertical axis shows percent of apoptotic cells. Cells were subjected to honokiol treatment for 24 hours and percent of apoptotic cells
induced by honokiol correlated with honokiol concentrations in the culture
media (520 lg/mL).

FIGURE 4. (A) Docetaxel inhibits the proliferation of prostate cancer cells,
human bone marrow cells, and human bone marrow-associated endothelial cells
in a dose-dependent manner with an IC10 of 110 nM and IC50 of 110 nM
and shows additive inhibiting effects on androgen-independent prostate cancer
cell line (C4-2) with honokiol in vitro. (B) The combined therapy of IC10 docetaxel
(1 nM) plus 10 lg/mL honokiol indicated significantly more inhibiting effects on
the growth of C4-2 cells than 10 lg/mL honokiol alone (P < .05). Cells were
treated with (A) 0.120 nM docetaxel and (B) 020 lg/mL honokiol in the presence or absence of IC10 docetaxel (1 nM) for 48 hours. Cell proliferation was
determined by MTS assay. The vertical axis shows comparative cell proliferation
ratio indicated as cell viability (percent control) with vehicle control. *Significant
inhibition of cell proliferation observed with the combined treatment of IC10 docetaxel with honokiol compared with honokiol alone in (B) (P < .05).

caused apoptotic death in human tumor and endothelial cells.16,22

FIGURE 3. Honokiol induced apoptosis through the activation of caspase
3, 8, 9, and PARP pathways. C4-2 cells were exposed to 5 to 15 lg/mL of
honokiol for 24 and 48 hours. Activated caspases 3, 8, and 9 as detected
by the increased bandings of proteins at 17, 40, and 35 kDa, respectively,
and increased cleavage of PARP are dose- and time-dependent.

of PARP were analyzed by Western blot. After honokiol treatment, we observed activated caspases 3, 8,
and 9, as exhibited by increased intensity of protein
bands at 17, 40, and 35 kDa, respectively, and
increased cleavage of PARP (Fig. 3) in a dose- and
time-dependent manner. These results are consistent
with the published reports showing that honokiol

Combined Honokiol and Docetaxel Treatments
Augment Growth Inhibition of C4-2 Cells In Vitro
and Tumors in Mouse Skeleton
We evaluated the effects of docetaxel and the combined effects of honokiol and docetaxel on the
growth of LNCaP, C4-2, HS27A, and TrHBMEC cells
in vitro. As shown in Figure 1, honokiol alone inhibited the growth of prostate cancer cells and those
cells in the cancer microenvironment like HS27A and
TrHBMEC, with IC50s that ranged from 5 to 10 lg/
mL. Docetaxel exposure alone for 48 hours was also
shown to inhibit the growth of these cells, with IC50s
from 1 to 10 nM approximately (Fig. 4). A combina-

1284

CANCER

April 1, 2007 / Volume 109 / Number 7

FIGURE 5. Honokiol and/or docetaxel significantly decreased serum prostate-specific antigen (PSA) levels in mice bearing C4-2 prostate tumor bone
xenografts. (A) Honokiol, when injected intraperitoneally, reduced serum PSA
in mice bearing C4-2 tumors in mouse skeleton: honokiol alone, docetaxel
alone, and honokiol and docetaxel combined therapy showed a significant
decrease of serum PSA in comparison with control group after 6 weeks

leton. These results were confirmed by histopathologic, IHC, and histomorphometric analyses of the
harvested tumor specimens at the termination of the
experiments.
Serum PSA significantly decreased in all treated
groups compared with control for 6 weeks treatment
(P < .05). The combined treatment group had lower
serum PSA values than the docetaxel treatment alone
but the difference was not statistically significant. In
these studies we did not observe any obvious toxicities induced by honokiol treatment as reflected by
the lack of body weight loss or infections in mice.
We evaluated bone lesions induced by prostate cancer cells in the skeleton and the effects of various
treatments. We correlated these results with histomorphometric analyses of the skeleton. The results
revealed that 6 weeks after combined treatment with
honokiol plus docetaxel the ratios of tumor areas
were significantly decreased, and the ratios of cortical bone and bone marrow were significantly
increased to the values found in normal bone. In
addition, the tumor specimens were composed predominantly of granulation tissue or marrow with less
significantly demarcated tumor areas. The vehicle
controls, in contrast, had greatly increased tumor
mass, areas of extensive osteolytic bone destruction,
osteoblastic areas, and much less granulation tissue
or marrow space. We observed that the honokiol- or
docetaxel-alone treatment groups had intermediate
ratios of tumor and cortical bone and marrow space,
with intermediate areas of granulation tissue within
each histopathologic specimen (Figs. 5A,B, 6A).

treatments (P < .05). (B) Representative chromatograms of the bone-bearing
tumors in each group as detected by x-ray, showing that honokiol plus docetaxel further improves the tumor x-ray appearances in comparison to honokiol or docetaxel treatment alone. These x-ray results correspond with the
finding that the combination treatment was more effective than honokiol or
docetaxel treatment alone in lowering serum PSA in mice bearing C4-2
tumors in tibia.

tion of low doses of honokiol (0.3125-1.25 lg/mL)
plus docetaxel at defined concentrations (IC10 and
IC50) resulted in an additive interaction between
these 2 drugs as calculated by the combined index
(Calcusyn software, Biosoft, Ferguson, MO) (data not
shown). Figure 4B shows that the combination therapy of IC10 docetaxel (1 nM) with honokiol had significantly more inhibiting effects on C4-2 cell growth
than honokiol alone at 10 lg/mL.
The antitumor effects of honokiol and/or docetaxel were evaluated in vivo in mice harboring C4-2
tumors. Tumor growth and responsiveness to therapy
were determined by serum PSA and x-ray of the ske-

IHC Analysis of Human Prostate Cancer Xenografts
Subjected to Honokiol and/or Docetaxel Treatment
IHC staining of mouse tibia at the end of the treatment revealed: 1) compared with vehicle controls,
markedly decreased cell proliferation (Ki67) was
observed in the combined treatment group; 2) similar observations were noted in the combined treatment group with respect to decreased vascular
density (CD31) and increased apoptosis (M30) compared with vehicle controls; and 3) docetaxel treatment alone generally yields an intermediate level of
inhibition of cell proliferation (P ¼ .0060), decreased
vascular density (P ¼ .0027), and increased apoptosis
(P ¼ .0074) when compared with the combined treatment group. These differences are statistically significant (Fig. 6B).

DISCUSSION
Honokiol, a component of traditional tea extracts, is
known for its low toxicity, favorable oral absorption

Honokiol Inhibits Bone Metastatic Growth/Shigemura et al.

1285

FIGURE 6. Honokiol and/or docetaxel exhibited growth inhibitory, proapoptotic, and antiangiogenic activities against C4-2 tumor xenografts in mice. (A) Honokiol and/or docetaxel inhibited tumor growth and provoked reparative granulation in tumor tissues when subjected to histopathologic analysis. The combined
therapy induced more reparative granulation tissues in the bone marrow areas harbored with C4-2 tumors than that of the control or the honokiol- or docetaxel-alone groups (3100). (B) Honokiol and/or docetaxel induced anticell-proliferation, proapoptosis, and antiangiogenesis in vivo as analyzed by immunohistochemical analysis. The combined therapy induced greater anticell-proliferation (Ki-67), proapoptosis (M-30), and antiangiogenesis (CD-31) effects than control,
honokiol, or docetaxel treatment alone groups (3200). (C) Detailed comparative quantification of the combined therapy as opposed to controls or individual
therapies on the expression of markers indicative of cell proliferation, apoptosis, and angiogenesis are shown (P < .05). C indicates control; D, docetaxel treatment; H, honokiol treatment; H þ D, combination of honokiol plus docetaxel.

1286

CANCER

April 1, 2007 / Volume 109 / Number 7

and tissue distribution, and multiple pharmacologic
actions including antioxidative, antiangiogenic, and
antitumor effects and other less well-defined effects
on behavior and the central nervous system.13,23
Because of its reported antiangiogenic and antitumor
effects through the induction of apoptosis, we sought
to define if honokiol can be used alone or in combination with docetaxel to treat hormone-refractory
human prostate cancer. Our results showed that: 1)
honokiol has broad growth inhibitory effects on both
androgen-dependent and -independent human prostate cancer cells; 2) honokiol also inhibits the growth
of cells in the tumor microenvironment commonly
associated with tumor metastasis and modulates the
growth of localized and disseminated prostate cancers, such as prostate stromal cells, marrow stromal
cells, and bone marrow-associated vascular endothelial cells; 3) honokiol induces apoptotic death in
androgen-independent and bone metastatic human
prostate cancer C4-2 cells; 4) honokiol exerts additive
growth inhibitory effects with docetaxel on prostate
cancer cells and cells in the cancer microenvironment, both in culture and in immune-compromised
mice; and 5) the additive antitumor effects of honokiol and docetaxel were demonstrated in androgenindependent human prostate cancer xenografts in
mouse tibia. In this study, we noted the growth inhibitory concentrations (510 lg/mL) of honokiol in
cell culture, which can be achieved in vivo based on
the dose of 100 mg/kg. Our results collectively suggest that honokiol is an effective agent that can be
considered for use in combination with docetaxel as
a new treatment protocol for hormone-refractory human prostate cancer bone metastasis.
Honokiol, a hydroxylated biphenyl compound, is
also known to have antioxidant activity and is capable of scavenging hydroxyl free radicals.24 Therefore,
honokiol can antagonize H2O2-induced membrane
damage and mitochondrial dysfunction.22 By effectively antagonizing TNF-a-induced NF-jB activation
in various cell types, honokiol inhibited cell survival
mediated by Akt activation.25 By interrupting NF-jB
activation, honokiol also blocked NF-jB downstream
activation and assembly of reactive oxygen species
(ROS). Because NF-jB and ROS activation correlate
with the initiation of carcinogenesis, the antioxidative effects of honokiol could justify its use to prevent cancer development.26
Exposure of B-cell chronic lymphatic leukemia
(B-CLL) cells to honokiol caused apoptosis by upregulating Bcl-2-associated death protein (Bax) and
down-regulating the expression of the key survival
protein, myeloid-cell leukemia sequence 1 (Mcl-1).
Honokiol overcame interleukin-4-mediated B-CLL

cell survival.3 However, honokiol induced B-CLL apoptotic cell death through up-regulation of Bad and
Bcl-XL, whereas it had no effect on the levels of Bcl-2,
Bcl-Xs, Bag-1, Bax, and Bak proteins.3 In human
CH27 squamous lung cancer cells, honokiol activated
apoptosis by induction of caspase-3 and cleavage of
PARP.6 Although activation of caspases 3, 7, 8, and 9
was triggered by honokiol, the pan-caspase inhibitor
z-VAD-fmk failed to abrogate honokiol-induced apoptosis in human multiple myeloma cells. Honokiol
also induced the release of apoptosis-inducing factor
(AIF) from the mitochondria of myeloma cells. This
suggests that honokiol promotes both caspase-dependent and -independent apoptosis.21 A number of
possible mechanisms have been suggested in the
enhancement of TNF-a-induced cell death by honokiol: 1) suppression of NF-jB-regulated antiapoptotic
signaling27; 2) activation of caspase-8, the triggering
caspase in the TNF-a apoptotic pathway28; 3) promotion of c-Jun N-terminal kinase signaling (JNK)29;
4) accumulation of ROS30; 5) inhibition of p38 MAPK
activation31; and 6) inhibition of protein synthesis,32
specifically the expression of NF-jB-regulated antiapoptotic proteins.33 In this study, we showed honokiol-induced apoptosis in androgen-independent
prostate cancer cells through activation of caspase 3,
8, and 9, and PARP and implicated the involvement
of mitochondrial and death receptor signaling pathways.
The application of honokiol together with chemotherapy has added advantages. Honokiol has
been shown to down-regulate the expression of Pglycoprotein, a multiple drug resistance (MDR)
gene, at mRNA and protein levels in a human breast
cancer MCF-7 cell line. The antiangiogenic properties of honokiol also deserve emphasis when considering the treatment of prostate cancer bone
metastasis because, histomorphologically, neovascularization has been shown to support cancer skeletal
metastases.34,35
In addition, the antiangiogenic activity of honokiol could have general importance in eradicating
cancer growth locally. For example, during prostate
cancer progression, markers of angiogenesis such as
VEGF, platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), or
transforming growth factor (TGF) are more highly
expressed in prostate carcinoma than in nonmalignant prostate. One measure of angiogenic activity,
microvessel density, is higher in primary prostate
cancer tissue than in adjacent benign hyperplastic
tissue. When measured in patients with concomitant
metastases, microvessel density in primary tumors is
higher in patients with metastatic disease compared
with those with localized disease without concomi-

Honokiol Inhibits Bone Metastatic Growth/Shigemura et al.

tant metastases. Expression of angiogenic markers
has also been correlated with high-grade primary
tumors.36 Considering these facts collectively, the
next therapeutic approach for hormone-refractory
prostate cancer should be antiangiogenesis plus
chemotherapy. A clinical trial with docetaxel and
bevacizumab, a humanized monoclonal antibody
that targets VEGF, has been initiated.37 As demonstrated in the present study, honokiol, an effective
antiangiogenic and proapoptotic drug with minimal
systemic toxicity, could be considered as an effective
adjuvant therapy for the treatment of both localized
and disseminated prostate cancers.
Chen et al.38 used a pharmacokinetics study with
250 mg/kg honokiol administered via the intraperitoneal route in nude mice and demonstrated 80 mg/kg
honokiol as the therapeutic dose for the mice bearing colorectal cells RKO-incubated tumor. They
showed that 250 mg/kg honokiol administered via
the intraperitoneal route in nude mice yielded a
maximal plasma honokiol concentration of approximately 1100 lg/mL at 27.179  6.252 minutes after
honokiol administration. The plasma pharmacokinetic curve indicated an absorption half-life of
10.121  2.761 minutes and an elimination half-life
of 5.218  0.461 hours, with duration of more than
12 hours where the serum concentrations were found
above the therapeutic concentrations of 5 to 10 lg/
mL. In addition, Bai et al.2 demonstrated that 100
mg/kg honokiol administered via the intraperitoneal
route in nude mice revealed significant inhibition of
tumor growth in vivo without any systemic toxicities.
Based on these publications, we selected 100 mg/kg
as the appropriate dose for the current study.
Whereas honokiol also inhibited the growth of
immortalized normal human marrow stromal cells
(HS27A), immortalized human prostate-associated
stromal cells from normal/benign lesions (NPF), and
transformed human bone marrow endothelial cells
(TrHBMEC), with an IC50 of 5 and 10 lg/mL, respectively (Fig. 1), when administered to mice honokiol
did not cause any systemic toxicity. These results,
taken together, suggest that honokiol can be administered safely in mice but with cytotoxic effects on
prostate cancer cells and their supporting cells in the
cancer microenvironment at a concentration achievable in vivo (see above). This interpretation is supported also by our previous work2 and our present
study, where we observed that mice treated with
honokiol increased their body weight like their paired
controls, and the histopathology of animal tissues
revealed no systemic toxicity. Instead, we observed
that honokiol inhibited the growth of prostate
tumors in bone and restored in part the normal his-

1287

tomorphology of the bone in mice harboring prostate
tumor xenografts in bone, as evidenced by histomorphometric analysis of the bone in mice treated with
honokiol either with or without docetaxel (Figs. 5, 6).
These findings are supported by previous work on BCLL where honokiol induced caspase-dependent cell
death in all kinds of the B-CLL cells examined and
was more toxic to B-CLL cells than normal mononuclear cells, suggesting greater susceptibility of the
malignant cells.3 Because of the exhibited growth inhibitory effects not only on tumor cells but also on
supporting cells in the tumor microenvironment, we
propose that honokiol is promising for the treatment
of localized and metastatic prostate cancer.
Docetaxel binds to tubulin and deranges the
equilibrium between microtubule assembly and disassembly during mitosis.39 In metastatic breast, lung,
and ovarian cancers, randomized trials have shown
that docetaxel-containing therapies are superior to or
as effective as established standard chemotherapeutic regimens and are often associated with an
improved safety profile.13 Clinical trials have also
found that weekly docetaxel treatment in patients
with metastatic hormone-refractory prostate cancer
is associated with improvements in clinical outcome.40,41 Docetaxel is comparatively active in heavily pretreated patients with paclitaxel-resistant
hormone-refractory prostate cancer despite significant toxicity found in a small subject population.42
Docetaxel is currently considered to be among the
most important and effective anticancer drugs.
Because of its toxicity, a lower dose of docetaxel, in
combination with other effective agents such as honokiol, could be a viable option. In addition to interfering with microtubular functions, docetaxel also
induces apoptosis with down-regulation of bclXL and
bcl-2 and up-regulation of p21WAF1 and p53.43,44 For
these reasons, we chose to test low-dose docetaxel,
5 mg/kg, in combination with honokiol. We report
here that honokiol in combination with docetaxel
had significant inhibitory effects on human prostate
tumor xenografts grown in mouse skeleton as evaluated by mouse serum PSA, x-ray of mouse bone, and
the histomorphometric analysis of the mouse skeleton (Figs. 5, 6). The cytotoxic effects of the combined
action of honokiol and docetaxel were confirmed by
histopathology and IHC analyses of the specimens
harvested at the end of the experiments (Fig. 6).45
In conclusion, we have shown that prostate cancer cells that failed to respond to hormone withdrawal responded to honokiol-induced apoptosis.
Honokiol also significantly induced death in cells
surrounding primary and metastatic prostate cancers, the prostate stromal fibroblasts, marrow stromal

1288

CANCER

April 1, 2007 / Volume 109 / Number 7

cells, and bone marrow-associated endothelial cells.
Honokiol is a promising nontoxic agent that could be
used as an adjuvant with low-dose docetaxel for the
treatment of hormone-refractory prostate cancer and
its distant bone metastases.

16.

17.

REFERENCES
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.
15.

Ishitsuka K, Hideshima T, Hamasaki M, et al. Honokiol
overcomes conventional drug resistance in human multiple
myeloma by induction of caspase-dependent and -independent apoptosis. Blood. 2005;106:17941800.
Bai X, Cerimele F, Ushio-Fukai M, et al. Honokiol, a small
molecular weight natural product, inhibits angiogenesis in
vitro and tumor growth in vivo. J Biol Chem. 2003;278:
3550135507.
Battle TE, Arbiser J, Frank DA. The natural product honokiol induces caspase-dependent apoptosis in B-cell chronic
lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL) cells. Blood. 2005;106:690
697.
Wang T, Chen F, Chen Z, et al. Honokiol induces apoptosis
through p53-independent pathway in human colorectal
cell line RKO. World J Gastroenterol. 2004;10:22052208.
Hibasami H, Achiwa Y, Katsuzaki H, et al. Honokiol
induces apoptosis in human lymphoid leukemia Molt 4B
cells. Int J Mol Med. 1998;2:671673.
Yang SE, Hsieh MT, Tsai TH, Hsu SL. Down-modulation of
Bcl-XL, release of cytochrome c and sequential activation
of caspases during honokiol-induced apoptosis in human
squamous lung cancer CH27 cells. Biochem Pharmacol.
2002;63:16411651.
Park EJ, Zhao YZ, Kim YH, Lee BH, Sohn DH. Honokiol
induces apoptosis via cytochrome c release and caspase
activation in activated rat hepatic stellate cells in vitro.
Planta Med. 2005;71:8284.
Zeng H, Dvorak HF, Mukhopadhyay D. Vascular permeability factor (VPF)/vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)
peceptor-1 down-modulates VPF/VEGF receptor-2-mediated endothelial cell proliferation, but not migration,
through phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-dependent pathways. J Biol Chem. 2001;276:2696926979.
Ahn KS, Sethi G, Shishodia S, Sung B, Arbiser JL, Aggarwal
BB. Honokiol potentiates apoposis, suppresses osteoclastogenesis, and inhibits invasion through modulation of
nuclear factor-jB activation pathway. Mol Cancer Res.
2006;4:621633.
Tse AK, Wan CK, Shen XL, Yang M, Fong WF. Honokiol
inhibits TNF-alpha-stimulated NF-kappaB activation and
NF-kappaB-regulated gene expression through suppression of IKK activation. Biochem Pharmacol. 2005;70:1443
1457.
Xu D, Lu Q, Hu X. Down-regulation of P-glycoprotein
expression in MDR breast cancer cell MCF-7/ADR by honokiol. Cancer Lett. 2006;243:274280.
Beer TM, El Geneidi M, Eilers KM. Docetaxel (Taxotere) in
the treatment of prostate cancer. Expert Rev Anticancer
Ther. 2003,3:261268.
Hong WK. The current status of docetaxel in solid tumors.
An M. D. Anderson Cancer Center Review. Oncology (Huntingt). 2002;16:915.
Bissery MC. Preclinical pharmacology of docetaxel. Eur J
Cancer. 1995;31:S16.
Bissery MC, Nohynek G, Sanderink GJ, Lavelle F. Docetaxel
(Taxotere1): a review of preclinical and clinical experi-

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

ence. Part I. Preclinical experience. Anticancer Drugs.
1995;6:339368.
Michaud LB, Valero V, Hortobagyi G. Risks and benefits of
taxanes in breast and ovarian cancer. Drug Saf. 2000;
23:401428.
Matsubara S, Wada Y, Gardner TA, et al. A conditional
replication-competent adenoviral vector, Ad-OC-E1a, to
cotarget prostate cancer and bone stroma in an experimental model of androgen-independent prostate cancer
bone metastasis. Cancer Res. 2001;61:60126019.
Schweitzer KM, Vicart P, Delouis C, Paulin D, Drager AM,
Langenhuijsen MM. Characterization of a newly established human bone marrow endothelial cell line: distinct
adhesive properties for hematopoietic progenitors compared with human umbilical vein endothelial cells. Lab
Invest. 1997;76:2536.
Amblard F, Delinsky D, Arbiser JL, Schinazi RF. Facile purification of honokiol and its antiviral and cytotoxic properties. J Med Chem. 2006;49:34263427.
Wu TT, Sikes RA, Cui Q, et al. Establishing human prostate cancer cell xenografts in bone: induction of osteoblastic reaction by prostate-specific antigen-producing
tumors in athymic and SCID/bg mice using LNCaP and
lineage-derived metastatic sublines. Int J Cancer. 1998;77:
z887894.
Chen L, Li T, Li R, Wei B, Peng Z. Alphastatin downregulates vascular endothelial cells sphingosine kinase activity
and suppresses tumor growth in nude mice bearing human
gastric cancer xenografts. World J Gastroenterol. 2006;
12:41304136.
Ou HC, Chou FP, Lin TM, Yang CH, Sheu WH. Protective
effects of honokiol against oxidized LDL-induced cytotoxicity and adhesion molecule expression in endothelial cells.
Chem Biol Interact. 2006;161:113.
Kuribara H, Stavinoha WB, Maruyama Y. Behavioural pharmacological characteristics of honokiol, an anxiolytic agent
present in extracts of Magnolia bark, evaluated by an elevated plus-maze test in mice. J Pharm Pharmacol. 1998;50:
819826.
Liou KT, Shen YC, Chen CF, Tsao CM, Tsai SK. Honokiol
protects rat brain from focal cerebral ischemia-reperfusion
injury by inhibiting neutrophil infiltration and reactive oxygen species production. Brain Res. 2003;992:159166.
Gustin JA, Ozes ON, Akca H, et al. Cell type-specific
expression of the IkappaB kinases determines the significance of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt signaling to
NF-kappa B activation. J Biol Chem. 2004;279:16151620.
Valko M, Rhodes CJ, Moncol J, Izakovic M, Mazur M. Free
radicals, metals and antioxidants in oxidative stressinduced cancer. Chem Biol Interact. 2006;160:140.
Van Antwerp DJ, Martin SJ, Kafri T, Green DR, Verma IM.
Suppression of TNF-alpha-induced apoptosis by NFkappaB. Science. 1996;274:787789.
Hsu H, Shu HB, Pan MG, Goeddel DV. TRADD-TRAF2 and
TRADD-FADD interactions define two distinct TNF receptor 1 signal transduction pathways. Cell. 1996;84:299308.
Deng Y, Ren X, Yang L, Lin Y, Wu X. A JNK-dependent
pathway is required for TNFalpha-induced apoptosis. Cell.
2003;115:6170.
Weitsman GE, Ravid A, Liberman UA, Koren R. Vitamin D
enhances caspase-dependent and -independent TNFalphainduced breast cancer cell death: the role of reactive oxygen species and mitochondria. Int J Cancer. 2003;106:
17886.

Honokiol Inhibits Bone Metastatic Growth/Shigemura et al.
31. Luschen S, Scherer G, Ussat S, Ungefroren H, Adam-Klages
S. Inhibition of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase
reduces TNF-induced activation of NF-kappaB, elicits caspase activity, and enhances cytotoxicity. Exp Cell Res.
2004;293:196206.
32. Nio Y, Zighelboim J, Berek J, Bonavida B. Cycloheximideinduced modulation of TNF-mediated cytotoxicity in sensitive and resistant ovarian tumor cells. Cancer Chemother
Pharmacol. 1990;26:18.
33. Li L, Thomas RM, Suzuki H, De Brabander JK, Wang X,
Harran PG. A small molecule Smac mimic potentiates
TRAIL- and TNFalpha-mediated cell death. Science. 2004;
305:14711474.
34. Folkman J. The role of angiogenesis in tumor growth.
Semin Cancer Biol. 1992;3:6571.
35. Polverini PJ, Leiboviach SJ. Induction of neovascularization
in vivo and endothelial proliferation in vitro by tumorassociated macrophages. Lab Invest. 1984;51:635642.
36. Weidner N, Carroll PR, Flax J, Blumenheld W, Folkman J.
Tumor angiogenesis correlates with metastasis in invasive
prostate carcinoma. Am J Pathol. 1993;143:401408.
37. Ryan CJ, Lin AM, Small EJ. Angiogenesis inhibition plus
chemotherapy for metastatic hormone refractory prostate
cancer: history and rationale. Urol Oncol. 2006;24:250253.
38. Chen F, Wang T, Wu YF, et al. Honokiol: a potent chemotherapy candidate for human colorectal carcinoma. World J
Gastroenterol. 2004;10:34593463.

1289

39. Fulton B, Spencer CM. Docetaxel. A review of its pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic properties and therapeutic efficacy in the management of metastatic breast cancer.
Drugs. 1996;51:10751092.
40. Petrioli R, Pozzessere D, Messinese S, et al. Weekly lowdose docetaxel in advanced hormone-resistant prostate
cancer patients previously exposed to chemotherapy.
Oncology. 2003;64:300305.
41. Gravis G, Bladou F, Salem N, et al. Weekly administration of docetaxel for symptomatic metastatic hormonerefractory prostate carcinoma. Cancer. 2003;98:1627
1634.
42. Urakami S, Yoshino T, Kikuno N, et al. Docetaxel-based
chemotherapy as second-line treatment for paclitaxelbased chemotherapy-resistant hormone-refractory prostate
cancer: a pilot study. Urology. 2005;65:543548.
43. Avramis VI, Nandy P, Kwock R, et al. Increased p21/WAF-1
and p53 protein levels following sequential three drug
combination regimen of Fludarabine, cytarabine and docetaxel induces apoptosis in human leukemia cells. Anticancer Res. 1998;18:23272338.
44. Stein CA. Mechanisms of action of taxanes in prostate cancer. Semin Oncol. 1999;26:37.
45. Caulin C, Salnesen GS, Oshima G. Caspase cleavage of
keratin 18 and reorganization of intermediate filaments
during epithelial cell apoptosis. J Cell Biol. 1997;138:
13791394.

