Review

Cannabinoids for Cancer Treatment: Progress and Promise
Sami Sarfaraz, Vaqar M. Adhami, Deeba N. Syed, Farrukh Afaq, and Hasan Mukhtar
Chemoprevention Program, Paul P. Carbone Comprehensive Cancer Center and Department of Dermatology, School of Medicine and
Public Health, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin

Abstract

Cannabinoids in the Treatment of Cancer: Progress

Cannabinoids are a class of pharmacologic compounds that
offer potential applications as antitumor drugs, based on the
ability of some members of this class to limit inflammation,
cell proliferation, and cell survival. In particular, emerging
evidence suggests that agonists of cannabinoid receptors
expressed by tumor cells may offer a novel strategy to treat
cancer. Here, we review recent work that raises interest in the
development and exploration of potent, nontoxic, and
nonhabit forming cannabinoids for cancer therapy. [Cancer
Res 2008;68(2):339–42]

Cancer is a disease characterized by uncontrolled division of
cells and their ability to spread. This unregulated growth is caused
by damage to DNA, resulting in mutations, defects in cell cycle, and
apoptotic machinery. Thus, agents that can modulate apoptosis to
maintain steady-state cell population by affecting one or more
signaling intermediates leading to induction of apoptosis can be
useful for targeted therapy of cancer. Hence, there is a need to
develop novel targets and mechanism-based agents for the
management of cancer. A significant advancement in cannabinoid
use in cancer treatment came through the discovery of a potential
utility of these compounds for targeting and killing tumors. In the
early 1970s, cannabinoids were shown to inhibit tumor growth and
prolong the life of mice bearing Lewis lung adenocarcinoma (ref. 1
and references therein). In subsequent studies, molecular mechanisms for these effects were analyzed, and it was found that
cannabinoids inhibited tumor cell growth and induced apoptosis
by modulating different cell signaling pathways in gliomas and
lymphomas, prostate, breast, lung, skin, and pancreatic cancer cells
(2–7). Encouraging data about the inhibition of tumor growth by
cannabinoid receptor agonists in some animal tumor models, such
as wistar rats inoculated with C6 gliomas (ref. 1 and references
therein) and xenografts in athymic nude mice implanted with
KiMol or MBA-MD-231 breast cancer cells, are beginning to emerge
(5). The diversified effects of cannabinoids in modulating cell
signaling pathways are depicted in Fig. 1. One puzzling caveat is
that in contrast to the tumor-killing properties, some cannabinoids
at low doses have also been shown to stimulate the growth of
cancer cells in vitro (ref. 8 and references therein). Although the
observed effects of cannabinoids are complex and sometimes
contradictory, there is overwhelming evidence to suggest that
cannabinoids can be explored as chemotherapeutic agents for the
treatment of cancer (2–7).

Cannabinoid Receptors: A Brief Overview
Cannabinoid refers to a group of chemicals naturally found in
the marijuana plant Cannabis sativa L. and includes compounds
that are either structurally or pharmacologically similar to D(9)tetrahydrocannabinol or those that bind to the cannabinoid
receptors. It was earlier thought that cannabinoids exert their
physiologic and behavioral effects via nonspecific interaction with
cell membranes. Although anticancer effects of cannabinoids were
shown as early as 1975 in Lewis lung carcinoma (ref. 1 and
references therein), renewed interest was generated little after the
discovery of the cannabinoid system and cloning of the specific
cannabinoid receptors (1). The diversified effects of cannabinoids
are now known to be mediated through the activation of Gprotein–coupled receptors that are normally bound by a family of
endogenous ligands, the endocannabinoids (1). Two cannabinoid
receptors have been characterized and cloned from mammalian
tissues: the ‘‘central’’ CB1 receptor and the ‘‘peripheral’’ CB2
receptor. CB1 receptors are found primarily in the brain, specifically
in the basal ganglia and in the limbic system, including the
hippocampus. They are also found in the cerebellum and in both
male and female reproductive systems. CB2 receptors are almost
exclusively found in the immune system, with the greatest density
in the spleen (1).

Cannabinoids and Gliomas
Glioblastoma multiforme is one of the most dreadful forms of
cancer and the most frequent class of malignant primary brain
tumors. Antitumor action of two cannabinoid receptor agonists,
D(9)-tetrahydrocannabinol and WIN-55,212-2 (a mixed CB1/CB2
agonist), was shown to be mediated through accumulation of
ceramide, which resulted in sustained activation of extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (ERK1/2; ref. 2 and references therein). It
was also reported that cannabinoids down-regulated phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K), protein kinase B (Akt), and ERK signaling
pathways, and activated proapoptotic function of Bad protein,
leading to the induction of apoptosis (9). It has also been shown that
that selective activation of the CB2 receptor by JWH-133 mediates
apoptosis in glioma cells via enhanced ceramide synthesis de novo
(ref. 4 and references therein). In addition, a role for stress-regulated
protein p8 (also designated as candidate of metastasis-1) and its
downstream targets such as activating transcription factor-4
(ATF-4), CAAT/enhancer binding protein homologous protein,

Classification of Cannabinoids
There are three types of cannabinoids. Plant-derived cannabinoids such as D(9)-tetrahydrocannabinol and cannabidiol occur
uniquely in the cannabis plant; endogenous cannabinoids also
known as endocannabinoids such as anandamide and 2-arachidonoylglycerol are produced in the bodies of humans and animals;
and synthetic cannabinoids, such as WIN-55, 212-2, JWH-133, and
(R)-methanandamide (MET), which are developed in a laboratory,
bear structural similarities to either natural or the endogenous
cannabinoids.
Requests for reprints: Hasan Mukhtar, Department of Dermatology, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, 1300, University Avenue, Medical Sciences Center, B-25, Madison,
WI 53706. Phone: 608-263-3927; Fax: 608-263-5223; E-mail: hmukhtar@wisc.edu.
I2008 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-2785

www.aacrjournals.org

339

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (2). January 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 1. Schematic representation of signaling pathways associated with cannabinoid receptor activation induced by its agonists. Upon receptor binding,
cannabinoid receptor agonists inhibit cell proliferation through inhibition of cAMP-dependent protein kinase, which activates mitogen-activated protein kinases
(MAPK). Stimulation of ceramide synthesis via activation of serine pamitoyltranferase (SPT ) up-regulates p8, leading to the subsequent induction of apoptosis.
Cannabinoid receptor agonists also activates MAPKs and PI3K/Akt pathways; sustained activation of ERK1/2 leads to the induction of cyclin kinase inhibitor
p27/KIP1with modulation of cell cycle regulatory molecules, resulting in G1 arrest and apoptosis. The proposed mechanisms are based on the available literature
and are cell specific, and not all pathways are triggered simultaneously. Further studies are needed to unravel the detailed mechanism of action of cannabinoid
receptor activation by their agonists. CHOP, CAAT/enhancer binding protein homologous protein; PARP, poly(ADP)ribose polymerase; cdk, cyclin-dependent kinase.
PKA, cAMP-dependent kinase.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (2). January 15, 2008

340

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cannabinoids for Cancer Treatment: Progress and Promise

and cell death–inducible kinase (TRB3) was shown as a mechanism
of the antitumor action of cannabinoids (2). A phase I clinical trial
in nine patients with recurrent glioblastoma multiforme reported a
fair safety profile of D(9)-tetrahydrocannabinol together with
antiproliferative action on tumor cells (10). Contrary to these
findings, Massi et al. (11) showed that cannabidiol treatment
induces apoptosis in glioma cells in vitro and tumor regression
in vivo through activation of caspases and reactive oxygen species
via receptor-independent manner. Although there are few contradictory studies on the mechanism of action of cannabinoids, they all
underline the importance of cannabinoids for the treatment of
cancer. Hence, further studies are needed to elucidate the
mechanism of action of cannabinoids in cancer treatment.

was reversed by CB1 receptor antagonist SR141716A. (R)-methanandamide–treated cells also showed decreased phosphorylation
of focal adhesion–associated protein kinase and Src, and tyrosine
kinases involved in migration and adhesion, suggesting that CB1
receptor activation might represent a novel therapeutic strategy to
slow down the growth of breast carcinoma and to inhibit its
metastatic diffusion in vivo (17). Contrary to these findings,
McKallip et al. (18) have earlier shown that D(9)-tetrahydrocannabinol enhanced breast cancer growth and metastasis specifically
in cells expressing low levels of cannabinoid receptors by suppressing the antitumor immune response, suggesting that cannabinoid exposure may increase the incidence of breast cancer as well
as other cancers that do not express cannabinoid receptors.

Cannabinoids and Prostate Cancer

Cannabinoid and Lung Cancer

The presence of cannabinoid receptors was shown in the
prostate tissue and in prostate cancer PC-3 cells. However, it was
shown that treatment of PC-3 cells with D(9)-tetrahydrocannabinol
induced apoptosis via a receptor-independent manner (12).
Interestingly, another study from the same group reported that
activation of cannabinoid receptors in PC-3 cells stimulated the
PI3K/Akt pathway with sequential involvement of Raf-1/ERK1/2
and nerve growth factor induction (ref. 13 and references therein).
We have recently shown that the expression levels of both
cannabinoid receptors CB1 and CB2 are significantly higher in
human prostate cancer cells compared with normal prostate
epithelial cells. Based on this observation, LNCaP cells were treated
with WIN-55,212-2, which resulted in inhibition of cell growth and
induction of apoptosis (ref. 4 and references therein) with an arrest
of the cells in the G0-G1 phase of the cell cycle. This WIN-55,212-2–
induced cell cycle arrest was associated with a sustained activation
of ERK1/2 (4). To establish in vivo relevance of our in vitro findings,
we showed that in CWR22Rr1 xenograft model, WIN-55,212–
treated mice exhibited significant inhibition in the tumor growth
with remarkable reduction of prostate-specific antigen secretion in
the serum (14). Nithipatikom et al. (13) showed that increasing
endogenous 2-arachidonoylgl and its stable analogue noladin ether
inhibited invasion of androgen-independent prostate cancer PC-3
and DU-145 cells. Antiproliferative and apoptotic effects of
endogenous cannabinoids anandamide in human prostate cancer
cell lines LNCaP, DU145, and PC3 were found to be mediated
through down-regulation of epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) and accumulation of ceramide (15). Interestingly, anandamide analogue (R)-methanandamide was shown to have a
mitogenic effect on LNCaP cells at very low doses (16).

Lung cancer survival figures argue powerfully for new approaches
to control this disease by agents that could reverse, suppress, or
completely halt tumor development. Guzman (ref. 1 and references
therein) reported for the first time that Lewis lung adenocarcinoma
growth was retarded by the p.o. administration of D(9)-tetrahydrocannabinol, and based in vitro studies, inhibition of DNA synthesis
was identified as a mechanism for these effects. Another study
showed that concentrations of D(9)-tetrahydrocannabinol comparable with those detected in the serum of patients after D(9)tetrahydrocannabinol administration accelerate proliferation of
lung cancer cells (ref. 8 and references therein). Treatment of lung
carcinoma cell line NCI-H292 with nanomolar concentrations of
D(9)-tetrahydrocannabinol led to accelerated cell proliferation that
was dependent on EGFR-mediated activation of ERK1/2 as well as
PKB/Akt signaling (ref. 8 and references therein). Recently, it has
been shown that D(9)-tetrahydrocannabinol treatment inhibited
epidermal growth factor–induced phosphorylation of ERK1/2,
c-Jun-NH2-kinase1/2, and Akt in A549 human lung cancer cell line
as well as suppression of metastasis and s.c. tumor growth in severe
combined immunodeficient mice (8).

Cannabinoid and Skin Cancer
Melanoma is responsible for the greatest number of skin cancer–
related deaths worldwide. It was reported that CB1 and the CB2
receptors are expressed in normal skin and skin tumors of mice and
humans. In vitro studies showed that activation of cannabinoid
receptors induced the apoptotic death of tumorigenic epidermal
cells, without affecting the nontransformed epidermal cells.
Administration of WIN-55,212-2 or the selective CB2 agonist JWH133 was shown to result in growth inhibition of malignant tumors in
nude mice (ref. 6 and references therein). Another study showed
that activation of these receptors decreased tumor growth,
angiogenesis and metastasis of melanomas in mice, and inhibited
proliferation via inhibition of Akt pathway and hypophosphorylation of retinoblastoma in melanoma cells (6). These two studies
offer an exciting opportunity to further explore the use of cannabinoids for the treatment and management of melanoma.

Cannabinoids and Breast Cancer
It has been shown that anandamide, potently and selectively,
inhibited proliferation of human breast cancer cells. This
antiproliferative activity of anandamide was accompanied by a
reduction of cells in the S phase of the cell cycle and suppression of
prolactin receptor (ref. 5 and references therein). Ligresti, Moriello,
and colleagues (5) have shown antitumor activities of five natural
cannabinoids, cannabidiol, cannabigerol, cannabichromene, cannabidiol acid, and D(9)-tetrahydrocannabinol, and suggested that
cannabidiol was the most potent inhibitor of breast cancer cell
growth. Both cannabidiol and the cannabidiol-rich extract also
inhibited the growth of MDA-MB-231 breast carcinoma cells in
athymic nude mice. In another study, (R)-methanandamide
reduced the number and size of metastatic nodes, and this effect

www.aacrjournals.org

Cannabinoid and Pancreatic Cancer
Pancreatic cancer ranks as one of the most fatal forms of cancer,
and therefore, new strategies aimed at improving the prognosis of
this deadly disease are warranted. Recently, it was shown that
cannabinoid administration leads to apoptosis of pancreatic tumor
cells via CB2 receptor and ceramide-dependent up-regulation of p8

341

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (2). January 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

and ATF-4 and TRB3 stress–related genes (7). Another study
showed that CB1 receptor antagonist AM251–induced cell death in
pancreatic MIAPaCa-2 cells occurred via receptor-independent
manner (19). Although the two studies describe contrasting
mechanism of action of cannabinoids, both underline the
importance of cannabinoids for the treatment of pancreatic
cancer. In depth studies are therefore warranted to identify the
mechanism of action of cell death induced by cannabinoids in
pancreatic cancer.

Before the discovery of specific cannabinoid systems and
receptors, it was speculated that cannabinoids produced their
effects via nonspecific interaction with cell membranes. Cannabinoids are proving to be unique based on their targeted action
on cancer cells and their ability to spare normal cells. Variation
in the effects of cannabinoids in different cell lines and tumor
model could be due to the differential expression of CB1 and
CB2 receptors. Thus, overexpression of cannabinoid receptors
may be effective in killing tumors, whereas low or no expression
of these receptors could lead to cell proliferation and metastasis
because of the suppression of the antitumor immune response.
It is also reported that low doses of cannabinoid administration
accelerate proliferation of cancer cells instead of inducing
apoptosis and, thereby, contribute to cancer progression. Till
date, very little is known about the mechanism of action of
cannabinoids. There is need for further in-depth studies to
elucidate the precise mechanism of cannabinoid action in cancer
cells. Safety of D(9)-tetrahydrocannabinol administration has
been determined, and a dose escalation regimen showed that
cannabinoid delivery was safe and could be achieved without
overt psychoactive effects. In view of the fair safety profile of
most cannabinoids together with their antiproliferative action on
tumor cells, clinical trials are required to determine whether
cannabinoids could be used for the inhibition of tumor growth
in a clinical setting. If this could be established, then one can
hope that nontoxic, nonhabit forming cannabinoids could be
developed as novel therapeutic agents for the treatment of
cancer.

Cannabinoid and Lymphoma
Studies show that exposure of murine lymphoma tumors EL-4,
LSA, and P815 to D(9)-tetrahydrocannabinol in vitro led to a
significant reduction in cell viability and an increase in apoptosis,
and EL-4 tumor–bearing mice led to a significant reduction in
tumor load, increase in tumor-cell apoptosis, and increase
in survival of tumor-bearing mice (ref. 20 and references
therein). Similar observations were made by Flygare et al.
(20) who treated mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) cells with
cannabinoid receptor ligands and found a decrease in cell viability,
whereas control cells lacking CB1 were not affected. Recently,
Gustafsson et al. (3) reported that cannabinoid receptor–mediated
apoptosis induced by (R)-methanandamide and WIN-55,212-2
in MCL was associated with ceramide accumulation and p38.
These data suggest that targeting CB1 and CB2 receptors by their
agonists may have therapeutic potential for the treatment of
lymphoma.

Conclusions and Future Prospects: Promise

Acknowledgments

Cannabinoids, the active components of marijuana and their
other natural and synthetic analogues have been reported as
useful adjuvants to conventional chemotherapeutic regimens for
preventing nausea, vomiting, pain, and for stimulating appetite.

Received 7/20/2007; revised 10/19/2007; accepted 10/29/2007.
Grant support: The original work from author’s laboratory on cannabinoids and
prostate cancer was supported by Department of Defense Idea Development Award
W81XWH-04-1-0217.

1. Guzman M. Cannabinoids: potential anticancer
agents. Nat Rev Cancer 2003;3:745–55.
2. Carracedo A, Lorente M, Egia A, et al. The stressregulated protein p8 mediates cannabinoid-induced
apoptosis of tumor cells. Cancer Cell 2006;9:301–12.
3. Gustafsson K, Christensson B, Sander B, Flygare J.
Cannabinoid receptor-mediated apoptosis induced by
R(+)-methanandamide and Win55,212–2 is associated
with ceramide accumulation and p38 activation in
mantle cell lymphoma. Mol Pharmacol 2006;70:1612–20.
4. Sarfaraz S, Afaq F, Adhami VM, Malik A, Mukhtar H.
Cannabinoid receptor agonist-induced apoptosis of
human prostate cancer cells LNCaP proceeds through
sustained activation of ERK1/2 leading to G1 cell cycle
arrest. J Biol Chem 2006;281:39480–91.
5. Ligresti A, Moriello AS, Starowicz K, et al. Antitumor
activity of plant cannabinoids with emphasis on the
effect of cannabidiol on human breast carcinoma.
J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2006;318:1375–87.
6. Blazquez C, Carracedo A, Barrado L, et al. Cannabinoid receptors as novel targets for the treatment of
melanoma. FASEB J 2006;20:2633–5.
7. Carracedo A, Gironella M, Lorente M, et al.
Cannabinoids induce apoptosis of pancreatic tumor
cells via endoplasmic reticulum stress-related genes.
Cancer Res 2006;66:6748–55.

8. Preet A, Ganju RK, Groopman JE. D(9)-Tetrahydrocannabinol inhibits epithelial growth factorinduced lung cancer cell migration in vitro as well
as its growth and metastasis in vivo . Oncogene. Epub
2007.
9. Ellert-Miklaszewska A, Kaminska B, Konarska L.
Cannabinoids down-regulate PI3K/Akt and Erk signalling pathways and activate proapoptotic function of
Bad protein. Cell Signal 2005;17:25–37.
10. Guzman M, Duarte MJ, Blazquez C, et al. A pilot
clinical study of D9-tetrahydrocannabinol in patients
with recurrent glioblastoma multiforme. Br J Cancer
2006;95:197–203.
11. Massi P, Vaccani A, Bianchessi S, et al. The
non-psychoactive cannabidiol triggers caspase activation and oxidative stress in human glioma cells. Cell
Mol Life Sci 2006;63:2057–66.
12. Ruiz L, Miguel A, Diaz-Laviada I. D9-tetrahydrocannabinol induces apoptosis in human prostate PC-3
cells via a receptor-independent mechanism. FEBS Lett
1999;458:400–4.
13. Nithipatikom K, Endsley MP, Isbell MA, et al.
2-arachidonoylglycerol: a novel inhibitor of androgenindependent prostate cancer cell invasion. Cancer Res
2004;64:8826–30.
14. Sarfaraz S, Afaq F, Adhami VM, et al. Cannabinoid receptors agonist WIN-55,212–2 inhibits angiogenesis, metastasis and tumor growth of androgen-

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (2). January 15, 2008

342

References

sensitive prostate cancer cells CWR22Rv1 xenograft
in athymic nude mice. Proc Am Assoc Cancer Res
2007;48:521.
15. Mimeault M, Pommery N, Wattez N, Bailly C,
Henichart JP. Anti-proliferative and apoptotic effects
of anandamide in human prostatic cancer cell lines:
implication of epidermal growth factor receptor downregulation and ceramide production. Prostate 2003;56:
1–12.
16. Sanchez MG, Sanchez AM, Ruiz-Llorente L, DiazLaviada I. Enhancement of androgen receptor expression induced by (R )-methanandamide in prostate
LNCaP cells. FEBS Lett 2003;555:561–6.
17. Grimaldi C, Pisanti S, Laezza C, et al. Anandamide
inhibits adhesion and migration of breast cancer cells.
Exp Cell Res 2006;312:363–73.
18. McKallip RJ, Nagarkatti M, Nagarkatti PS. D-9tetrahydrocannabinol enhances breast cancer growth
and metastasis by suppression of the antitumor
immune response. J Immunol 2005;174:3281–9.
19. Fogli S, Nieri P, Chicca A, et al. Cannabinoid
derivatives induce cell death in pancreatic MIA PaCa2 cells via a receptor-independent mechanism. FEBS
Lett 2006;580:1733–9.
20. Flygare J, Gustafsson K, Kimby E, Christensson B,
Sander B. Cannabinoid receptor ligands mediate growth
inhibition and cell death in mantle cell lymphoma. FEBS
Lett 2005;579:6885–9.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cannabinoids for Cancer Treatment: Progress and Promise
Sami Sarfaraz, Vaqar M. Adhami, Deeba N. Syed, et al.
Cancer Res 2008;68:339-342.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/2/339

This article cites 19 articles, 7 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/2/339.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 14 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/2/339.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

