Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 4

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Metformin increases antitumor activity of MEK inhibitors
through GLI1 downregulation in LKB1 positive human NSCLC
cancer cells
Carminia Maria Della Corte1, Vincenza Ciaramella1, Concetta Di Mauro2, Maria
Domenica Castellone3, Federica Papaccio1, Morena Fasano1, Ferdinando Carlo
Sasso4, Erika Martinelli1, Teresa Troiani1, Ferdinando De Vita1, Michele Orditura1,
Roberto Bianco2, Fortunato Ciardiello1, Floriana Morgillo1
1

 ncologia Medica, Dipartimento Medico-Chirurgico di Internistica Clinica e Sperimentale “F. Magrassi e A. Lanzara”, Seconda
O
Università degli Studi di Napoli, Naples, Italy

2

Oncologia Medica, Dipartimento di Medicina Clinica e Chirurgia, Università degli studi di Napoli “Federico II”, Naples, Italy

3

 ipartimento di Medicina Molecolare e Biotecnologie Mediche, Istituto di Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale
D
“G. Salvatore” (IEOS), University of Naples “Federico II”, Naples, Italy

4

 edicina Interna, Dipartimento Medico-Chirurgico di Internistica Clinica e Sperimentale “F. Magrassi e A. Lanzara”, Seconda
M
Università degli Studi di Napoli, Naples, Italy

Correspondence to: Floriana Morgillo, e-mail: florianamorgillo@yahoo.com
Keywords: metformin, MEK, selumetinib, pimasertib, NSCLC
Received: August 13, 2015       Accepted: November 25, 2015       Published: December 11, 2015

ABSTRACT
Purpose: Metformin, widely used as antidiabetic drug, showed antitumoral effects
expecially in combination with chemotherapy. Our group recently has demonstrated
that metformin and gefitinib are synergistic in LKB1-wild-type NSCLC cells. In these
models, metformin as single agent induced an activation and phosphorylation of
mitogen-activated-protein-kinase (MAPK) through an increased C-RAF/B-RAF
heterodimerization.
Experimental design: Since single agent metformin enhances proliferating
signals through the RAS/RAF/MAPK pathway, and several MEK inhibitors (MEK-I)
demonstrated clinical efficacy in combination with other agents in NSCLC, we tested
the effects of metformin plus MEK-I (selumetinib or pimasertib) on proliferation,
invasiveness, migration abilities in vitro and in vivo in LKB1 positive NSCLC models
harboring KRAS wild type and mutated gene.
Results: The combination of metformin with MEK-I showed a strong antiproliferative and proapoptotic effect in Calu-3, H1299, H358 and H1975 human NSCLC
cell lines, independently from the KRAS mutational status. The combination reduced
the metastatic behaviour of NSCLC cells, via a downregulation of GLI1 trascritional
activity, thus affecting the transition from an epithelial to a mesenchymal phenotype.
Metformin and MEK-Is combinations also decreased the production and activity
of MMP-2 and MMP-9 by reducing the NF-kB (p65) binding to MMP-2 and MMP-9
promoters.
Conclusions: Metformin potentiates the antitumor activity of MEK-Is in human
LKB1-wild-type NSCLC cell lines, independently from the KRAS mutational status,
through GLI1 downregulation and by reducing the NF-kB (p65)-mediated transcription
of MMP-2 and MMP-9.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4265

Oncotarget

INTRODUCTION

pathway, that could in turn induce cell proliferation
in those cell lines with constitutively activating Ras
mutations. This consideration opens new possibilities for
combination of metformin with MEK inhibitors.
Currently a number of highly specific and highly
potent MEK1/2 inhibitors (MEK-I) have been developed
and evaluated in clinical studies. Most of these agents
have shown moderate single agent activity in various
tumors and in lung cancer in particular [14–17]. Among
the factors contributing to the observed lack of clinical
efficacy of MEK inhibitors, the activation of alternative
pathways downstream of RAS and/or RAF, such as PI3K–
AKT, could potentially compensate for the effects of MEK
inhibition and eliminate the antitumour activity of MEK
inhibitors in RAS–RAF-driven malignancies [18, 19].
Recently, Jänne and colleagues showed that the
combination of the MEK inhibitor, selumetinib, and
docetaxel have a synergistic effect in advanced KRASmutated NSCLC [20, 21].
The aim of this work was to examine the effects
of metformin, in the presence of MEK inhibition, on a
panel of NSCLC cell lines harboring KRAS wild type and
mutated gene.

Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the major
cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide [1].
Platinum-based combination regimens offer a
significant although modest survival advantage to patients
with stage IV NSCLCs [2]. Advances in the understanding
of the molecular biology of cancer have enabled the
discovery of several potential molecular targets with
the development of novel targeted therapies and new
combinatorial strategies.
Metformin (N0, N0-dimethylbiguanide) belongs
to the biguanide class of oral hypoglycemic agents and
is a widely used antidiabetic drug, now prescribed to
almost 120 million people in the world for the treatment
of type II diabetes [3]. Metformin also displays significant
growth-inhibitory and proapoptotic effects in several
cancer models, alone [4–7] or in combination with
chemotherapeutic drugs [8, 9]. A recent study showed
that metformin prevents tobacco-induced carcinogenesis
in mice with 72% decrease in tumor burden [10]. The
effects of metformin on cancer cell proliferation have
been associated with AMPK activation, reduced mTOR
signaling, and protein synthesis [11, 12]. Our group
recently demonstrated the evidence of a significant
synergism of metformin with gefitinib, a selective EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitor (EGFR-TKI) on NSCLC cell
lines [13]. For this purpose, a panel of human NSCLC cell
lines with a defined spectrum of sensitivity to gefitinib was
used [14].
The combination of metformin with gefitinib
strongly reduced the anchorage-independent colonyforming ability and proliferation of NSCLC cell lines
harboring wild type LKB1 gene. Such effects were also
shown in those NSCLC cell lines resistant to the EGFRTKI, suggesting that metformin can revert resistance to
gefitinib in some cancer cell lines. The combined treatment
also demonstrated a strong proapoptotic effect and a
pronounced decrease in the activation of key intracellular
mediators of cell survival and proliferation signals such
as MAPK and Akt. The combined treatment also affected
the mTOR signaling as suggested by the sustained
inhibition of the phosphorylation of S6 and of p70S6K
[13]. Of interest, single-agent metformin treatment
caused an unexpected increase in the levels of activated
phosphorylated MAPK as a result of an increased B- RAF
and C-RAF association [13] mediated by the inactivation
of Rheb. Indeed, coimmunoprecipitation experiments
revealed an increased B-RAF and C-RAF association,
which could be responsible for the activation of MAPK
after metformin treatment.
This is therapeutically relevant, since it has
been shown that, while exerting antiproliferative and
proapoptotic effects in combination with EGFR-inhibitors,
single agent metformin treatment could enhance
proliferating signals through the RAS/RAF/MAPK
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

RESULTS
Synergistic effect of metformin and MEK
inhibitor on NSCLC cell lines
To evaluate the antiproliferative effects of metformin
in combination with a MEK-inhibitor, we measured
the inhibition of cell proliferation by using the BrdUrd
incorporation of cells treated with single treatments with
metformin or selumetinib, a selective MEK- inhibitor
(MEK-I), and their combination (Figure 1A). To this
end we used two KRAS-mutant NSCLC cell lines, H358
(KRAS G12C) and Calu-3 (K-RAS G13D), and two KRASwild type cell lines, H1299 (NRAS Q61K mutated) and
H1975 (EGFR T790M, L835R mutated), as indicated
in Table 1. In particular, NSCLC cell lines harbouring
NRAS mutation correlate with major sensitivity to MEKinhibitors, whereas cells with KRAS mutations show
variable response [22].
In addition, the cell line panel used in this work
does not harbor any mutation in the LKB1 gene. We chose
these cell lines harbouring LKB1 wild-type gene since we
previously demonstrated that metformin interferes and
leads to activation of AMPK by LKB1 in the absence of
LKB1 mutation [13].
Different doses of metformin, alone and in
combination with selumetinib, were studied; the cell lines,
their mutations and IC50 values for each single drug are
reported in Table 1. The IC50 values presented an average
value of 2mmol/L for metformin and ranged from 0,01 to
>10 μM for selumetinib and pimasertib.
4266

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Effect of metformin alone and in combination with selumetinib on cell proliferation, on the induction of
apoptosis and activation of GLI1 in CALU-3, H1299, H358 and H1975 cell lines. A. Effect of metformin alone and in

combination with selumetinib on cell proliferation in CALU-3, H1299, H358 and H1975 cell lines. Cells were treated with metformin,
selumetinib and combination of both. Cell proliferation was measured by BrdUrd incorporation assay. BrdUrd was added for 1 hour, and
cells were processed for immunofluorescence with anti-BrdUrd. Cell nuclei were counterstained with Hoechst. The average results ± SD of
3 independent experiments in which at least 500 cells were counted are shown. B. Combination index (CI) values from CALU-3, H1299,
H358 and H1975 cell lines treated with metformin alone and in combination with selumetinib obtained with CompuSyn Program for
different doses. ED50, ED75 ED90 represent the doses effecting 50, 75, and 90%, respectively of growth inhibition compared to control.
C. Apoptosis was evaluated as described in Materials and Methods with Annexin V staining in CALU-3, H1299, H358 and H1975 cancer
cells, which were treated, in the absence or presence of recombinant Sonic Hedgehog, with metformin, selumetinib or both. Columns mean
of 3 identical wells of a single representative experiment. Western Blot analysis for PARP, (89)-cleaved-PARP fragment were performed on
protein lysates from cell after the indicated treatment.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4267

Oncotarget

Table 1: Mutational status and IC50 of metformin, selumetinib and pimasertib in our panel of NSCLC cell lines
Cell line

Mutation

Metformin IC50
(mmol/L)

Selumetinib IC50
(μM)

Pimasertib IC50
(μM)

H358

KRAS G12C

1.5

>1

>1

Calu-3

K-RAS G13D
TP53
CDKN2A

1

0.5

0.5

H1299

NRAS Q61K

1.5

0.01

0.01

H1975

EGFR (T790M,
L835R)

2.5

>5

>5

Combined treatement of metformin and selumetinib
exerted a strong antiproliferative effect as compared
to single treatment alone (Figure 1A). To quantify the
effect of the combined therapy, we used CompuSyn
software to calculate the CI in all NSCLC cell lines. All
cell lines had a CI index between 0.08 and 0.7 indicating
synergism according to the method of Chou-Talalay [23]
(Figure 1B). No cell line showed an antagonistic effect
to the combination therapy. Of interest, also proliferation
of those cell lines with relatively low sensitivity to
selumetinib, H358 and H1975, resulted strongly decreased
when combined treatment with metformin was performed.
Similar results were obtained with another MEK-I
inhibitor, pimasertib (data not shown).
We further asked whether the increased
antiproliferative effect induced by the combined therapy
of metformin and selumetinib would be the result of
an increased apoptosis. Therefore, we analyzed the
induction of apoptosis in Calu-3, H1299, H1975 and
H358 human NSCLC cell lines after 72-hour treatment
with metformin and selumetinib. As shown in Figure
1C, flow cytometric analysis revealed that combined
treatment with the MEK-I and metformin significantly
increased of several folds the percentage of apoptotic
cells in all cell lines tested. For instance, Calu-3 cells
presented respectively a 19% and 21% apoptotic rate
in metformin- and selumetinib-treated cells, while
the combination reached an apoptotic rate of 65%
dying cells (P < 0.001; Figure 1C). These results were
confirmed by Western blot analysis for PARP protein
(Figure 1C): the combined treatment was able to induce
the cleavage of the 113-kDa PARP to the 89-kDa
fragments in all tested cell lines. These findings suggest
that the treatment with metformin, concomitantly to the
MEK inhibition, blocks proliferation and/or survival
mechanisms in NSCLC cancer cells independently of
the KRAS mutational status. To investigate if the apoptic
effect depend on reduced GLI1 activation, we repeated
the analysis in the presence of recombinant Sonic Hh
and we found that reactivation of GLI1 in treated cells
attenuates apoptosis induction (Figure 1C).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

One important characteristic of malignant cells is
their ability to growth in semisolid medium, to invade
and migrate. NSCLC cells display different behaviour:
for instance, among the panel of NSCLC cells of this
study, only H1299 and H1975 were able to migrate and
invade. These cell lines were used to test the abilities of
metformin and selumetinib to inhibit these characteristics.
As shown in Figure 2A, and 2B, a significant dosedependent inhibition of anchorage-independent colony
forming ability and invasive aptitudes of H1299 and
H1975 cell lines were observed following treatment of
metformin combined with either selumetinib (Figure
2A and 2B) or pimasertib (data not shown). Similary
data were obtained also for migratory abilities (data not
shown). Considering the recent demonstrated role of GLI1
acivation as mediator of the epithelia-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) and chemoresistance [24–28], and as
previous studies demonstrated the effects of metformin on
GLI1 activation in breast and pancreatic cancer models
[29,30], we analyzed the GLI1 trascription activity before
and after treatment with metformin, MEK-I or both, in
our model of NSCLC using a GLI1-responsive promoter
within a luciferase reporter expression vector (Figure 2C).
Analysis of luciferase acitivity following transfection
of H1299 cells revealed a 6- to 7-fold decrease in GLIresponsive promoter activity by treatment with metformin
and even further decrease by the combination of
metformin and MEK-I, as compared to untreated H1299
cells (P < 0.001), suggesting that transcriptional activity
of GLI1 is significantly inhibited by metformin alone and
in combination. To investigate if the inhibition of GLI1
activity mediates the anti-metastatic effects of metformin,
we analyzed the ability of the recombinant Sonic Hh to
revert the metformin and MEK-I-mediated inhibition of
invasion and migration abilities. Interestingly, activation
of GLI1 reinduced, at least in part, cancer cells to invade
and migrate in the presence of metformin or MEK-I alone
and in combination (Figure 2A and 2B).
As mentioned above [29,30], combined treatment
decresed levels of GLI1 expression in NSCLC cell lines
(Figure 2C). To investigate if EMT process, which has

4268

Oncotarget

been recently associated to GLI1 activation in NSCLC
cells with innate resistance to TKIs [28], is implicated
in the sensitivity to the experimental combination we
performed Western blot analysis for SNAIL and vimentin
protein. These protein markers are known to induce EMT,

which is strictly linked to a gain in migratory and invasive
properties. Interestingly, the combination of metformin
and selulmetinib was also able to increase SNAIL, that
represses E-cadherin expression, and to decrease vimentin
(Figure 2C).

Figure 2: GLI1-mediated effects of metformin, selumetinib or both in NSCLC cell lines. A. anchorage-independent colony

formation in soft-agar; B. Invasion assay; in the absence or presence of recombinant Sonic Hedgehog; The results are the average ± SD of
three independent experiments, each done in triplicate. C. GLI1-driven luciferase expression in H1299 cells before and after treatment with
metformin, selumetinib or both. Western Blot analysis for EMT-related protein Vimentin and Snail and GLI1 were performed on protein
lysates from cell after the indicated treatment.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4269

Oncotarget

Effects of metformin and MEK inhibitor on
intracellular pathways and MMP-9, MMP-2 and
uPA expression and activity in NSCLC cells

metformin and selumetinib. Treatment was conducted for
72 hours.
We selected H1299 and H1975 cells to better
investigate the synergism of experimental drugs in terms
of invasive and migratory behavior. Figure 3A illustrates
that metformin treatment, as single agent, although causing
a decrease on the levels of activated phosphorylated AKT
and S6 in both cell models, it mediates a paradoxical
activation/phshorylation of MAPK already described in

To study the synergism obtained by the combination
of metformin and selumetinib, western blot analyses were
done on protein extracts from H1299 and H1975 NSCLC
cells that were treated with 3mmol/L of metformin,
the IC50 of selumetinib, or with combinations of both

Figure 3: Effects of metformin, selumetinib or both on the downstream pathway in NSCLC. A. Western blotting analysis of

intracellular proteins MEK, MAPK, AMPK, Akt, S6, and their phosphorylated forms following treatment with the indicated concentration
of metformin, selumetinib or both in H1299 and H1975 NSCLC cell line. β-Actin was included as a loading control. B. Western blotting
analysis of Vimentin, GLI1, MAPK and its activated form on protein extracts from H1975 tumors harvested by mice treated with the
indicated concentrations of metformin, selumetinib or their combination. β-Actin was included as a loading control.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4270

Oncotarget

our previous work as a consequence of Rheb-dependent
enhanced BRAF and C-RAF association [13]. Treatment
with selumetinib as single agent decreased the level of
activated MAPK without affecting the activation status of
AKT and S6. Treatment with metformin in combination
with selumetinib resulted in a concomitant decrease in
the levels of protein phosphorylation (p-MAPK, p-AKT)
(Figure 3A). The same results were obtained by Western
blot analysis on tumoral sections derived from H1299 and
H1975 xenografts (Figure 3B).
In the context of EMT process, MMP-2, MMP-9
and uPA are thought to play a critical role in NSCLC cell
migration and invasion by stimulating the degradation of
extracellular matrix (ECM), and their increased expression

is associated with disease progression. H1299 and H1975
cells displayed significant reduction in MMP-2, MMP-9
but not uPA protein production after combined treatment
with metformin and selumetinib, as demonstrated by
ELISA analysis in Figure 4A. The reduction in protein
production corresponded to a reduced activity of MMP2 and MMP-9, as determined by analysis of gelatin
zymography (Figure 4B) while casein zymography did
not evidenced any change in uPA activity. It is known that
metformin significantly affects the nuclear localization
of NF-κB (p65) [31] which is also a downstream target
of MAPK. Therefore, we analyzed the binding capability
of NF- κB (p65) on the promoters of MMP-2 and MMP-9
genes in the presence of metformin, selumetinib or both.

Figure 4: Effects of metformin and MEK inhibitor on intracellular pathways and MMP-9, MMP2 and uPA expression
and activity in NSCLC cells. A. Secretion of MMP-2, MMP-9 and uPA into the conditioned medium of H1299 and H1975 NSCLC
cells, as measured in cell culture media by specific ELISAs. B. MMP-2 and MMP-9 activities determined by gelatin zymography in the
conditioned media of H1299 and H1975 NSCLC cells. C. ChIP Assay evaluating the binding of NF- κB (p65) to the MMP9 and MMP2
promoters in H1299 cells.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4271

Oncotarget

ChIP analysis showed that when metformin is combined
with the MEK-I, NF-κB (p65) binding to MMP-2 and
MMP-9 promoter regions is significantly decreased in
H1299 (Figure 4C) and H1975 (data not shown) cell lines.

Treatment with metformin or selumetinib, as single agents,
caused a slight decrease in tumor size as compared with
control untreated mice. Treatment with the combination of
metformin and selumetinib induced a significant reduction
in tumor growth (Figure 5A and 5B). In this respect, at day
35 from the starting of treatment, the mean tumor volumes
in the combination treatment group ranged between
60% and 20% in mice bearing H1299 tumor xenografts
and between 50% and 12,5% in H1975 xenografts, as
compared with their control untreated mice. During our

In vivo effects of the combined treatment with
metformin and selumetinib
We finally investigated the in vivo antitumor activity
of metformin in nude mice bearing H1299 or H1975 cells
that were grown subcutaneously as tumor xenografts.

Figure 5: In vivo effects of the combined treatment with metformin and selumetinib. A, B. Athymic nude mice were injected
subcutaneously into the dorsal flank with 107 NSCLC cancer cells. When the average tumor size was 75 mm3 in H1299 xenografts (A)
and 150 mm3 in H1975 xenografts (B), mice were treated as indicated in Materials and Methods. Xenografted mice received only vehicle
(control group), metformin (200 mg/mL metformin diluted in drinking water and present throughout the treatment period), selumetinib
(25 mg/kg p.o.), or their combination. Data represent the average ± SD. Student t test was used to compare tumor sizes among different
treatment groups at day 35 following the start of treatment. C. Percentage of human Alu sequences in the lungs of mice after tail vein
injection with H1299 and H1975 cells and the indicated treatments.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4272

Oncotarget

MEK-Is, also in those cells with KRAS mutation, such as
H358 cell line. The mechanism of anti-tumoral effects of
experimental combination include the inhibition of GLI1
transcriptional activity and synthesis, as showed in Figure
2C and as demonstrated by the attenuation of anti-apoptic
effect with GLI1 reactivation (Figure 1C). Based on the
results from previous studies [13] we are currently running
a phase I-II study of combination of metformin and
erlotinib in second-third line therapy of NSCLC patients
[33] unselected for EGFR activating mutations. With the
introduction of MEK-Is in the management of NSCLC
patients and if this study will provide positive results, the
combination of metformin and MEK-I will represents a
new challenge of therapy in this setting of patients.
Furthermore, the efficacy of the combination had
also a resonance in terms of invasion and migration
inhibition: indeed, metformin alone exerted a potent
anti-metastatic effect that was strongly enhanced by the
addition of the MEK-inhibitor. The invasive and migratory
abilities of cancer cells are particularly pronounced in
poorly differentiated cancers or when drug-resistance
occurs, and may represent an aspect of the EMT [34–
36]. In our model of NSCLC cells, the experimental
combination strongly reverted the expression of vimentin
and SNAIL, which represent classical markers of EMT
and correlate to a more aggressive behavior. Recently,
we have reported a crucial role od Hedgehog pathway in
mediating drug-resistance in a model of NSCLC harboring
an activating mutation of EGFR gene and with acquired
resistance to the first/second generation EGFR-TKIs
[28]. In this model the aberrant activation of Hedgehog
signaling, through an amplification of its main receptor
SMO, lead to an over-activation of the main transcription
factor GLI1, mediating the shift through a mesenchymal
phenotype. For this reason we investigated if the antimetastatic activity of metformin and its combination with
MEK-Is was mediated by a decrease in the Hedgehog
pathway activation [34,35]. Of interest, metformin and
MEK-I, as single agents, affected the GLI1 activation
status, as evidenced by luciferase assay, and their
combination resulted in an even stronger decrease in its
transcriptional activity (Figure 2C). Additionaly, treatment
with the recombinant Sonic Hedgehog partially reverted
the drugs efficacy indicating that the combination’s
anti-metastatic activity is, at least in part, mediated by a
secondary inhibition of GLI1.
In addition, as MMPs and uPA play a key role in
degrading the extracellular matrix allowing metastatic cells
to have access to the vasculature, and as their expression
can be modulated by various intracellular upstream
signaling cascades, particularly the MAPK pathway,
we asked if metformin alone and in combination with
MEK-Is further affected the secretion of such enzymes
[31]. Consistent with this hypothesis, in this study, the
secretion and expression levels of MMP-9 and MMP-2
of NSCLC cells, but not uPA, were found decreased after

experiments, no obvious side effects were observed in
mice treated with metformin.
As our in vitro studies revealed expression
changes of mesenchymal proteins, SNAIL and vimentin
(Figure 2C), and of MMP-2 and MMP-9 on cancer cells
treated with the combination of metformin and selumetinib
(Figure 4), we also investigated whether the combination
therapy blocks tumour metastatic behavior in vivo.
Therefore, we performed an artificial metastasis assay by
injecting H1299 or H1975 cells into the tail vein of Balb/c
nude mice (six mice per group), and treating them with
metformin or selumetinib alone, or in combination. To
measure lung micrometastasis formation, we quantified
the portion of human DNA in mouse lungs using realtime PCR for human Alu sequences, as previously
described [32]. Untreated mice showed a detectable
amount of human DNA in their lungs. No other site of
distant metastases was observed in other organs (liver,
spleen, brain, and bone). As expected, the combination of
metformin with selumetinib was much more effective than
single drugs in reducing levels of human DNA in mouse
lungs (Figure 5C).

DISCUSSION
As we prevoiusly demonstrated, the combination of
metformin and gefitinib, a selective EGFR-TKI, showed
a significant potentiation of the antiproliferative and
proapoptotic activity both in vitro and in vivo in NSCLC
cell lines [13]. However, in the same study, an increase
in the level of activated phosphorylated MAPK after
metformin treatment was observed.
Indeed, the metformin-induced activation of AMPK
enhanced the C-RAF/B-RAF dimerization through a
downregulation of Rheb, thus potentiating the signaling
from RAS to MAPK. This could be therapeutically
relevant, as we have shown that, while exerting
antiproliferative and proapoptotic effects, single-agent
metformin treatment could enhance pro-proliferating
signals through the RAS/RAF/MAPK pathway, that could
in turn induce cell proliferation in those cell lines with
constitutively activating RAS mutations. The activation
of MAPK by metformin treatment is the new scenario
that we have to consider when testing metformin as
anticancer agent. This consideration leads us to analyze
new possibilities of treatment combination, in particular,
metformin and MEK inhibitors.
We tested the antiproliferative and pro-apoptotic
effects of the metformin and MEK-I (pimasertib or
selumetinib) combination in a panel of NSCLC cell lines
harbouring wild type LKB1, which has been defined as a
predictor of response to metformin activity [13] and, in
this study, we demonstrated not only that the synergism
is evident in all the cell lines tested irrespective of the
mutational status of KRAS gene, but the addition of
metformin is able to overcome the innate resistance to
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4273

Oncotarget

being treated with single agents and to a higher extent
by the combination. Previous studies demonstrated the
ability of metformin to decrease the nuclear translocation
of NF-κB, which is a transcription factor usually activated
in malignant tumor progression and altering gene
expression patterns, leading to cancer metastasis [31, 37].
The synergistic combination of metformin and MEK-Is
strongly inhibited the binding of NF- κB to the MMP9 and
MMP2 promoters, thereby suppressing their expression
and the metastatic potential of cancer cells. Consistently,
our data suggest that the combined treatment of metformin
and MEK-Is interferes with the EMT process and distant
metastatis spread. Indeed, combined treatments not only
significantly modulated EMT markers but also reduced the
formation of lung micrometastasis in nude mice.

(Roche Diagnostics). Briefly, cells were seeded onto
glass coverslips and treated for 72 hours. Then, cells
were incubated for 1 hour with BrdUrd (10 mmol/L)
and fixed. Coverslips were incubated with anti-BrdUrd
and secondary fluorescein-conjugated antibody. The
fluorescent signal was visualized with an epifluorescent
microscope (Axiovert 2, Zeiss) interfaced with the image
analyzer software KS300. Cell nuclei were counterstained
with Hoechst. IC50 were determined by interpolation
from the dose-response curves. Results represent the
median of three separate experiments, each performed in
quadruplicate. Synergism was calculated with ComboSyn
software, ComboSyn Inc., Paramus, NK. 07652 USA.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Following treatment, cancer cells were lysed
with Tween-20 lysis buffer (50 mmol/L HEPES, pH
7.4, 150 mmol/L NaCl, 0.1% Tween-20, 10% glycerol,
2.5 mmol/L EGTA, 1 mmol/L EDTA, 1 mmol/L DTT,
1 mmol/L phenylmethylsulfonylfluoride, and 10 μg/
mL of leupeptin and aprotinin) and protein lysates
containing comparable amounts of proteins, estimated
by a modified Bradford assay (Bio-Rad), were subjected
to western blot. Immunocomplexes were detected
with the enhanced chemiluminescence kit ECL plus,
by Thermo Fisher Scientific (Rockford, IL). Tumor
samples harvested from mice were cut into 25 mm3
pieces and stored in RNA later until protein extraction
for western blot analysis. Protein lysates were obtained
by homogenization in RIPA lyses buffer (0.1% sodium
dodecylsulfate (SDS), 0,5% deoxycholate, 1%Nonidet,
100mmol/L NaCl, 10 mmol/L Tris–HCl (pH 7.4), 0.5
mmol/L dithiotritol, and 0.5% phenylmethyl sulfonyl
fluoride, protease inhibitor cocktail (Hoffmann-La
Roche)) and clarification by centrifugation at 14,000
rpm for 10 minutes a 4°C.

Protein expression analysis

Cell lines, drugs, and chemicals
The human NSCLC H1299, H358, H1975 and Calu3 cell lines were provided by American Type Culture
Collection (ATCC, Manassas, VA, USA) and maintained
in RPMI 1640 (Sigma-Aldrich) medium supplemented
with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS; Life Technologies,
Gaithersburg, MD) in a humidified atmosphere with
5% CO2. The identity of all cell lines was confirmed
by STR profiling (Promega) on an ad hoc basis prior to
performing experiments, and repeated after the majority
of the experiments were performed.
Metformin was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich;
Selumetinib (AZD6244) and Pimasertib (AS-703026)
from Selleck Chemicals (Selleckchem, Houston, TX,
USA). They were dissolved in sterile dimethylsulfoxide
(DMSO) and a 10 mM stock solution was prepared and
stored in aliquots at −20°C. Working concentrations were
diluted in culture medium just before each experiment.
Recombinant Sonic Hedgehog was provided by
Sigma-Aldrich.
Primary antibodies for western blot analysis against
p-EGFR (Tyr1068), EGFR, p-MEK1/2 (Ser217/221),
MEK1/2, p-MAPK44/42 (Thr202/Tyr204), MAPK44/42,
p-AKT (Ser473), AKT, AMPK, p-AMPK (thr172), S6,
p-S6 (Ser235-236), Vimentin, Snail, GLI1 and β-Actin
were obtained from Cell Signaling Technology. The
following secondary antibodies from Bio-Rad were used:
goat anti-rabbit IgG and rabbit anti-mouse IgG.

Luciferase assay
Luciferase assay was performed by using the
Dual-Luciferase Assay system (Promega) following the
manufacturer’s protocol. The GLI-Luc reporter plasmid
was kindly provided by Maria Domenica Castellone [38].
A total of 5×105 cells were plated 24h before transfection
in a 24 multiwell plate. The GLI-Luc reporter was
transfected together with pRL-TK, encoding the Renilla
luciferase (Promega), in triplicate, using FuGENE (Roche,
Cat. No. 1815091) with the luciferase reporter. Luciferase
activity was determined 48 h after transfection by using
an Autolumat LB 953 (EG&G, Berthold, Bad Wildbad,
Germany). Activity was reported as fold change with
respect to control cells and cells transfected with the empty
vector; results were the average of three independent
experiments.

Cell proliferation assays
Cancer cells were seeded in 96-well plates and were
treated with different doses of metformin, selumetinib or
pimasertib or both for 72 hours.
DNA synthesis was measured by 5-bromo-20deoxyuridine (BrdUrd) labeling and detection kit

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4274

Oncotarget

Growth in soft agar

Assessment of apoptosis

Cells (104 cells/well) were suspended in 0.5 mL
0.3% Noble agar (Sigma-Aldrich) dissolved in complete
culture medium. This suspension was layered over 0.5 mL
0.8% agar-medium base layer in 12 multiwell plate and
daily treated with different concentrations of each drug
alone or in combination. When tumor cell colonies were
at least 80 μm, they were counted by using a dissection
microscope. Assays were performed in triplicate.

Apoptosis was detected by flow cytometry via the
examination of altered plasma membrane phospholipid
packing by lipophilic dye Annexin V as described
elsewhere [13]. Briefly, treated cells were harvested
by trypsin, washed twice with PBS, and were then
resuspended in binding buffer at a concentration of 1 ×
106 cells/mL according to the manufacturer’s instruction.
Thereafter, 5 μL of Annexin V-FITC and 5 μL of propidium
iodide were added into 100 μL of cell suspension and
incubated for 30 min at room temperature in the dark.
After adding 400 μL of binding buffer, labeled cells
were counted by flow cytometry within 30 min. All early
apoptotic cells (Annexin V–positive, propidium iodide–
negative), necrotic/late apoptotic cells (double positive),
as well as living cells (double negative) were detected by
FACSCalibur flow cytometer and subsequently analyzed
by Cell Quest software (Becton Dickinson). Argon laser
excitation wavelength was 488 nm, whereas emission data
were acquired at wavelength 530 nm (FL-1 channel) for
FITC and 670 nm (FL-3 c3 channel) for propidium iodide.

Invasion assay
The in vitro invasive ability of cells was measured
by using transwell chambers (Corning Life Sciences,
MA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.
Briefly, cells were seeded onto the membrane of the
upper chamber of the transwell at a concentration of
5×104/ml in 500 μl of RPMI medium and were treated
with the indicated concentrations of each drug alone and
in combination for 24 hours. The medium in the upper
chamber was serum-free. The medium at the lower
chamber contained 10% FBS as a source of chemoattractants. Cells that passed through the Matrigel
coated membrane were stained with Cell Stain Solution
containing crystal violet (Chemicon, Millipore, CA,
USA) and photographed after 24 hours. Absorbance
was measured at 562 nm by an ELISA reader after
dissolving of stained cells in 10% acetic acid. Assays
were performed in triplicate.

Elisa
The levels of MMP-9, 2 and uPA (ng/ml) into cell
culture media were determined using a ‘sandwich’ ELISA
kit (R&D Systems Inc, Minneapolis, MN, USA) according
to the manufacturer’s guidelines. The minimum detectable
levels were less than 1.2 ng/ml.

Migration assay

Zymography assay

Cell migration was assessed using a commercially
available chemotaxis assay. Briefly, cells were incubated in
RPMI serum-free medium for 24 hours were left untreated
or treated with the indicated treatments, following which
they were detached from flasks, suspended in quenching
medium (serum-free medium containing 5% bovine serum
albumin) and EDTA, and seeded into Boyden migration
chamber inserts placed in a 24-well plate (Cell Biolabs,
CA, USA), containing a microporous membrane with an
8-μm pore size. Inserts were placed over wells containing
serum-free media plus chemo-attractant (10% FBS).
After a 48-h treatment period, cells/media were discarded
from the topside of the migration chamber insert and
the chamber was placed in the wells of a new 24-well
plate containing cell detachment solution. Following
incubation for 30 min at 37°C, the insert was discarded,
and a solution of lysis buffer and CyQuant GR dye was
added to each well (Invitrogen, OR, USA). CyQuant is a
green fluorescent dye that exhibits strong enhancement of
fluorescence when bound to cellular nucleic acids released
by the lysis buffer, enabling assessment of the relative
number of migrated cells. Fluorescence was determined
with a fluorimeter at 480/520 nm. Assays were performed
in triplicate.

Analysis of MMP-2, MMP-9 and uPA activities
was assayed by gelatin (for MMP-2 and MMP-9) or
casein plasminogen (for uPA) zymography, as described
previously [31, 39]. Briefly, conditioned media from
cells cultured in the absence of serum for 48 hours, with
the indicated treatments, were collected. Samples were
mixed with loading buffer and electrophoresed on 8 %
SDS-polyacrylamide gel containing 0.1 % gelatin or
casein. Electrophoresis was performed at 100 V for 3 h.
Then the gels were washed twice for 10 min at room
temperature in zymography washing buffer (2.5% Triton
X-100 in double-distilled H2O) to remove SDS. Gels were
incubated in substrate buffer (40 mmol/L of Tris-HCl, 10
mmol/L CaCl2, 0.02% NaN3 and 1% Triton X-100, pH
8.0) at 37°C for 18 h, stained with Coomassie blue R-250
(0.125 % Coomassie blue R-250, 0.1 % amino black,
50 % methanol, and 10 % acetic acid) for one hour and
destained with destaining solution (20 % methanol, 10 %
acetic acid, and 70 % double-distilled H2O).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

ChIP assay
Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay was
performed as described previously [40,41]. The major
4275

Oncotarget

steps in the ChIP assay include the crosslinking of target
protein to the chromatin DNA with formaldehyde, the
breaking of the chromatin DNA into fragments (400–
1200 bp), the immunoprecipitation (IP) of the proteinDNA complex with an antibody that recognizes the
target protein. The DNA in IP product was amplified
in PCR with the ChIP assay primers that are specific
to the NF-kB binding site at -316/-15. The sequences
of the primers specific to the promoter of uPA gene are
5′- AGCATGACAGCCTCCAGCCAAGTA-3′(forward),
and
5′-ACGTGACCAGAACATAAACAGAGA-3′
(reverse), and the promoter of MMP-9 gene are
5′-GAGGCTGCTACTGTCCCCT-3′ (forward), and
5′-GCTAGGCAAGGCTGGGGA-3′ (reverse). PCR
products were analyzed on 2 % agarose gels and images
were analyzed with Storm 860 Molecular Imager
scanner.

Statistical analysis

Experimental metastasis assay

This work has been supported by Associazione
Italiana Per La Ricerca Sul Cancro (AIRC)-Project MFAG
2013-N.14392.

The Student t test was used to evaluate the statistical
significance of the results. All P values represent 2-sided
tests of statistical significance.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Authors thank Dr Maria DomenicaCastellone for
providing the GLI-Luc reporter plasmid and Salvatore
Sequino for technical assistance.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflicts of interests.

FINANCIAL SUPPORT

One day before inoculation with H1299 or H1975
cells, mice (six mice per group) started treated with
metformin (200 mg/mL metformin diluted in drinking
water and present throughout the treatment period),
selumetinib (25 mg/kg p.o.), or their combinations. Mice
were inoculated with 20 × 105 cells via tail vein injection,
and treatment with metformin, selumetinib or their
combination was continued for 7 consecutive days. All
mice were killed on day 21 [42]. Human DNA in mouse
lungs was measured by quantifying Alu sequences through
PCR, as previously described [32]

STATEMENT OF TRANSLATIONAL
RELEVANCE
Metformin, widely used as antidiabetic drug,
is known to have anti-proliferative and pro-apoptotic
effects in cancer, expecially in combination with
other chemotherapic agents. Our group recently has
demonstrated that metformin and gefitinib are synergistic
in LKB1-wild-type NSCLC cells, even if single agent
metformin enhances proliferative stimulus through an
activation and phosphorylation of mitogen-activatedprotein-kinase (MAPK) induced by an increased
C-RAF/B-RAF heterodimerization. Since MEK-I are
under clinical investigation in NSCLC and there are data
of their clinical efficacy, also in combination with other
antitumoral drugs, the rationale of this study was to test the
activity of metformin combined with a MEK-I on NSCLC
models, with or without KRAS activating mutation. The
combination showed strong anti-metastatic activity in vitro
and in vivo, revealing a new potential strategy for NSCLC
treatment.

Tumor xenografts in nude mice
Four- to 6-week old female balb/c athymic
(nuþ/nuþ) mice were purchased from Charles River
Laboratories. The research protocol was approved
and mice were maintained in accordance with the
Institutional Guidelines of the Second University of
Naples Animal Care and Use Committee. Mice were
acclimatized for 1 week before being injected with
cancer cells and injected subcutaneously with 107
H1299 or H1975 cells that had been diluted in 200 µL
of Matrigel (Corning Life Sciences, MA, USA) 1:1
in culture medium. When established tumors reached
the volume of approximately 75 mm3 for H1299
xenografts and 150 mm3 for H1975 xenografts, mice
were randomized in different groups (8 mice/group)
of treatments: only vehicle (control group), metformin
200 mg/mL metformin diluted in drinking water and
present throughout the treatment period), selumetinib
(25 mg/kg p.o.), or their combination. Body weight and
tumor volume were monitored on alternate days. Tumor
volume was measured using the formula π/6 larger
diameter × (smaller diameter)2.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

REFERENCES
1.	 Siegel RL, Miller KD, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2015. CA
Cancer J Clin. 2015; 65: 5-29.
2.	 Besse B, Adjei A, Baas P, Meldgaard P, Nicolson M,
­Paz-Ares L Reck M, Smit EF, Syrigos K, Stahel R, Felip E,
Peters S, Panel Members. 2nd ESMO Consensus Conference
on Lung Cancer: non-small-cell lung cancer first-line/second
and further lines of treatment in advanced disease. Ann Oncol.
2014; 9: 1-10.

4276

Oncotarget

3.	 Evans JM, Donnelly LA, Emslie-Smith AM, Alessi DR,
Morris AD. Metformin and reduced risk of cancer in diabetic patients. BMJ. 2005; 330: 1304–5.

16.	 Zhao Y, Adjei AA. The clinical development of MEK
inhibitors. Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2014; 11: 385-400.
17.	 Paolo M, Assunta S, Antonio R, Claudia SP, Anna BM,
Clorinda S Francesca C, Fortunato C, Cesare G. Selumetinib
in advanced non small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) harbouring KRAS mutation: endless clinical challenge to KRASmutant NSCLC. Rev Recent Clin Trials. 2013; 8: 93-100.

4.	 Gotlieb WH, Saumet J, Beauchamp MC, Gu J, Lau S,
Pollak MN, Bruchim I. In vitro metformin antineoplastic
activity in epithelial ovarian cancer. GynecolOncol. 2008;
110: 246–50.
5.	 Alimova IN, Liu B, Fan Z, Edgerton SM, Dillon T, Lind
SE, Thor AD. Metformin inhibits breast cancer cell growth,
colony formation and induces cell cycle arrest in vitro. Cell
Cycle. 2009; 8: 909–15.

18.	 Martinelli E, Troiani T, D’Aiuto E, Morgillo F, Vitagliano
D, Capasso A, Costantino S, Ciuffreda LP, Merolla F,
Vecchione L, De Vriendt V, Tejpar S, Nappi A, et al.
Antitumor activity of pimasertib, a selective MEK 1/2
inhibitor, in combination with PI3K/mTOR inhibitors or
with multi-targeted kinase inhibitors in pimasertib-resistant
human lung and colorectal cancer cells. Int J Cancer. 2013;
133: 2089-101.

6.	 Liu B, Fan Z, Edgerton SM, Deng XS, Alimova IN, Lind
SE, Thor AD. Metformin induces unique biological and
molecular responses in triple negative breast cancer cells.
Cell Cycle. 2009; 8: 2031–40.

19.	 Troiani T, Vecchione L, Martinelli E, Capasso A,
Costantino S, Ciuffreda LP, Morgillo F, Vitagliano D,
D’Aiuto E, De Palma R, Tejpar S, Van Cutsem E, De
Lorenzi M, et al. Intrinsic resistance to selumetinib, a selective inhibitor of MEK1/2, by cAMP-dependent protein
kinase A activation in human lung and colorectal cancer
cells. Br J Cancer. 2012; 106: 1648-59.

7.	 Wang LW, Li ZS, Zou DW, Jin ZD, Gao J, Xu GM.
Metformin induces apoptosis of pancreatic cancer cells.
World J Gastroenterol. 2008; 14: 7192–8.
8.	 Iliopoulos D, Hirsch HA, Struhl K. Metformin decreases
the dose of chemotherapy for prolonging tumor remission
in mouse xenografts involving multiple cancer cell types.
Cancer Res. 2011; 71: 3196–201.

20.	 Jänne PA, Shaw AT, Pereira JR, Jeannin G, Vansteenkiste
J, Barrios C, Franke FA, Grinsted L, Zazulina V, Smith P,
Smith I, Crinò L. Selumetinib plus docetaxel for KRASmutant advanced non-small-cell lung cancer: a randomised,
multicentre, placebo-controlled, phase 2 study. Lancet
Oncol. 2013; 14: 38-47.

9.	 Rocha GZ, Dias MM, Ropelle ER, Osorio-Costa F, Rossato
FA, Vercesi AE, Saad MJ, Carvalheira JB. Metformin
amplifies chemotherapy-induced AMPK activation and
antitumoral growth. Clin Cancer Res. 2011; 17: 3993–4005.
10.	 Memmott RM, Mercado JR, Maier CR, Kawabata S, Fox
SD, Dennis PA. Metformin prevents tobacco carcinogeninduced lung tumorigenesis. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2010;
3: 1066–76.

21.	 Jänne PA, Smith I, McWalter G, Mann H, Dougherty B,
Walker J, Orr MC, Hodgson DR, Shaw AT, Pereira JR,
Jeannin G, Vansteenkiste J, Barrios CH, et al. Impact of
KRAS codon subtypes from a randomised phase II trial of
selumetinib plus docetaxel in KRAS mutant advanced nonsmall-cell lung cancer. Br J Cancer. 2015; 113: 199-203.

11.	 Zhou G, Myers R, Li Y, Chen Y, Shen X, Fenyk-Melody
J, Wu M, Ventre J, Doebber T, Fujii N, Musi N, Hirshman
MF, Goodyear LJ, et al. Role of AMP-activated protein
kinase in mechanism of metformin action. J Clin Invest.
2001; 108: 1167–74.

22.	 Ohashi K, Sequist LV, Arcila ME, Lovly CM, Chen
X, Rudin CM, Moran T, Camidge DR, Vnencak-Jones
CL, Berry L, Pan Y, Sasaki H, Engelman JA, et al.
Characteristics of lung cancers harboring NRAS mutations.
Clin Cancer Res. 2013; 19: 2584-91.

12.	 Dowling RJ, Zakikhani M, Fantus IG, Pollak M, Sonenberg
N. Metformin inhibits mammalian target of rapamycindependent translation initiation in breast cancer cells.
Cancer Res. 2007; 67: 10804–12.

23.	 Chou TC, Talalay P. Quantitative analysis of dose effect
relationships: the combined effects of multiple drugs or
enzyme inhibitors. Adv Enzyme Regul. 1984; 22: 27–55.

13.	 Morgillo F, Sasso FC, Della Corte CM, Vitagliano D,
D’Aiuto E, Troiani T, Martinelli E, De Vita F, Orditura M,
De Palma R, Ciardiello F. Synergistic effects of metformin
treatment in combination with gefitinib, a selective EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitor, in LKB1 wild-type NSCLC cell
lines. Clin Cancer Res. 2013; 19: 3508-19.

24.	 Yue D, Li H, Che J, Zhang Y, Tseng HH, Jin JQ, Luh TM,
Giroux-Leprieur E, Mo M, Zheng Q, Shi H, Zhang H, Hao
X, et al. Hedgehog/Gli promotes epithelial-mesenchymal
transition in lung squamous cell carcinomas. J Exp Clin
Cancer Res. 2014; 24: 33-4.

14.	 Morgillo F, Cascone T, D’Aiuto E, Martinelli E, Troiani T,
Saintigny P, De Palma R, Heymach JV, Berrino L, Tuccillo
C, Ciardiello F. Antitumour efficacy of MEK inhibitors in
human lung cancer cells and their derivatives with acquired
resistance to different tyrosine kinase inhibitors. Br J
Cancer. 2011; 105: 382–92.

25.	 Yoo YA, Kang MH, Lee HJ, Kim BH, Park JK, Kim HK,
Kim JS, Oh SC. Sonic hedgehog pathway promotes metastasis and lymphangiogenesis via activation of Akt, EMT,
and MMP-9 pathway in gastric cancer. Cancer Res. 2011;
71: 7061-70.

15.	 Fremin C, Meloche S. From basic research to clinical
development of MEK1/2 inhibitors for cancer therapy. J
HematolOncol. 2010; 3: 8–14.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

26.	 Maitah MY, Ali S, Ahmad A, Gadgeel S, Sarkar
FH. Up-regulation of sonic hedgehog contributes to

4277

Oncotarget

TGFβ1-induced epithelial to mesenchymal transition in
NSCLC cells. PLoS One. 2011; 6: e16068.

epidermal growth factor receptor pathway involved in
­cancer progression and targeted therapies. Pharmacol Rev.
2010; 62: 497-524.

27.	 D’Amato C, Rosa R, Marciano R, D’Amato V, Formisano
L, Nappi L, Raimondo L, Di Mauro C, Servetto A, Fulciniti
F, Cipolletta A, Bianco C, Ciardiello F, et al. Inhibition of
Hedgehog signalling by NVP-LDE225 (Erismodegib) interferes with growth and invasion of human renal cell carcinoma cells. Br J Cancer. 2014; 111: 1168-79.

35.	 Chen X, Lingala S, Khoobyari S, Nolta J, Zern MA, Wu J.
Epithelial mesenchymal transition and hedgehog signaling
activation are associated with chemoresistance and invasion
of hepatoma subpopulations. J Hepatol. 2011; 55: 838-45.
36.	 Mimeault M, Batra SK. Altered gene products involved in
the malignant reprogramming of cancer stem/progenitor
cells and multitargeted therapies. Mol Aspects Med. 2014;
39: 3-32.

28.	 Della Corte CM, Bellevicine C, Vicidomini G, Vitagliano
D, Malapelle U, Accardo M, Fabozzi A, Fiorelli A, Fasano
M, Papaccio F, Martinelli E, Troiani T, Troncone G, et al.
SMO gene amplification and activation of the hedgehog pathway as novel mechanisms of resistance to anti-­
epidermal growth factor receptor drugs in human lung
­cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2015; 21: 4686-97.

37.	 Tan BK, Adya R, Chen J, Lehnert H, Sant Cassia LJ,
Randeva HS. Metformin treatment exerts antiinvasive and
antimetastatic effects in human endometrial carcinoma
cells. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011; 96: 808-16.

29.	 Fan C, Wang Y, Liu Z, Sun Y, Wang X, Wei G, Wei J.
Metformin exerts anticancer effects through the inhibition
of the Sonic hedgehog signaling pathway in breast cancer.
Int J Mol Med. 2015; 36: 204-14.

38.	 Castellone MD, Laukkanen MO, Teramoto H, Bellelli
R, Alì G, Fontanini G, Santoro M, Gutkind JS. Cross
talk between the bombesin neuropeptide receptor and
Sonic hedgehog pathways in small cell lung carcinoma.
Oncogene. 2015; 34: 1679-87.

30.	 Nakamura M, Ogo A, Yamura M, Yamaguchi Y,
Nakashima H. Metformin suppresses sonic hedgehog
expression in pancreatic cancer cells. Anticancer Res. 2014;
34: 1765-9.

39.	 Tung MC, Hsieh SC, Yang SF, Cheng CW, Tsai RT, Wang
SC, Huang MH, Hsieh YH. Knockdown of lipocalin-2 suppresses the growth and invasion of prostate cancer cells.
Prostate. 2013; 73: 1281-90.

31.	 Hsieh SC, Tsai JP, Yang SF, Tang MJ, Hsieh YH.
Metformin inhibits the invasion of human hepatocellular carcinoma cells and enhances the chemosensitivity
to sorafenib through a downregulation of the ERK/JNKmediated NF-κB-dependent pathway that reduces uPA and
MMP-9 expression. Amino Acids. 2014; 46: 2809-22.

40.	 Tsai SJ, Hwang JM, Hsieh SC, Ying TH, Hsieh YH.
Overexpression of myeloid zinc finger 1 suppresses matrix
metalloproteinase-2 expression and reduces invasiveness of
SiHa human cervical cancer cells. Biochem Biophys Res
Commun. 2012; 425: 462–7.

32.	 Schneider T, Osl F, Friess T, Stockinger H, Scheuer WV.
Quantification of human Alu sequences by real-time PCR–
an improved method to measure therapeutic efficacy of
anti-metastatic drugs in human xenotransplants. Clin Exp
Metastasis. 2002; 19: 571–82.

41.	 Tsai JP, Hsiao PC, Yang SF, Hsieh SC, Bau DT, Ling CL,
Pai CL, Hsieh YH. Licochalcone a suppresses migration
and invasion of human hepatocellular carcinoma cells
through downregulation of MKK4/JNK via NF-kappaB
mediated urokinase plasminogen activator expression.
PLoS One. 2014: e86537.

33.	 Fasano M, Della Corte CM, Capuano A, Sasso FC,
Papaccio F, Berrino L, Ciardiello F, Morgillo F. A multicenter, open-label phase II study of metformin with erlotinib in second-line therapy of stage IV non-small-cell lung
cancer patients: treatment rationale and protocol dynamics
of the METAL trial. Clin Lung Cancer. 2015; 16: 57-9.

42.	 Liu Z, Zhang B, Liu K, Ding Z, Hu X. Schisandrin B
attenuates cancer invasion and metastasis via inhibiting
­epithelial-mesenchymal transition. PLoS One. 2012; 7:
e40480.

34.	 Mimeault M, Batra SK. Frequent deregulations in the
hedgehog signaling network and cross-talks with the

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4278

Oncotarget

