Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 28

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Detection of soluble EpCAM (sEpCAM) in malignant ascites
predicts poor overall survival in patients treated with
catumaxomab
Andreas Seeber1,2,3, Ioana Braicu4, Gerold Untergasser1,2,3, Mani Nassir4, Dominic
Fong1,2,3,5, Laura Botta6, Guenther Gastl1, Heidi Fiegl7, Alain Zeimet7, Jalid Sehouli4,
Gilbert Spizzo1,2,3,5
1

Department of Haematology and Oncology, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria

2

Tyrolean Cancer Research Institute, Innsbruck, Austria

3

Oncotyrol – Center for Personalized Cancer Medicine, Innsbruck, Austria

4

European Competence Center for Ovarian Cancer, Charité Berlin, Berlin, Germany

5

Haemato-Oncological Day Hospital, Hospital of Merano, Merano, Italy

6

Evaluative Epidemiology Unit, Fondazione IRCSS “Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori”, Milan, Italy

7

Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria

Correspondence to:
Andreas Seeber, e-mail: andreas.seeber@uki.at
Keywords: EpCAM, soluble EpCAM, catumaxomab, ascites, ovarian cancer
Received: May 10, 2015 	

Accepted: June 29, 2015 	

Published: July 10, 2015

ABSTRACT
EpCAM is an attractive target for cancer therapy and the EpCAM-specific antibody
catumaxomab has been used for intraperitoneal treatment of EpCAM-positive cancer
patients with malignant ascites. New prognostic markers are necessary to select
patients that mostly benefit from catumaxomab. Recent data showed that soluble
EpCAM (sEpCAM) is capable to block the effect of catumaxomab in vitro. This
exploratory retrospective analysis was performed on archived ascites samples
to evaluate the predictive role of sEpCAM in catumaxomab-treated patients.
Sixty-six catumaxomab-treated patients with an available archived ascites sample
were included in this study and tested for sEpCAM by sandwich ELISA. All probes were
sampled before treatment start and all patients received at least one catumaxomab
infusion. Overall survival, puncture-free survival and time to next puncture were
compared between sEpCAM-positive and -negative patients. We detected sEpCAM in
ascites samples of 9 patients (13.6%). These patients showed a significantly shorter
overall survival. The prognostic significance of sEpCAM in ascites was particularly
strong in patients with ovarian cancer. Puncture-free survival and time to next
puncture were not significantly different between sEpCAM-positive and -negative
patients. We propose sEpCAM in malignant ascites as a potential predictive marker
in cancer patients treated with catumaxomab. Prospective studies with larger
patients samples are urgently needed to confirm these findings and studies testing
dose-intensified catumaxomab in patients with sEpCAM-positive ascites should
be envisaged.

immunologic approaches and the first monoclonal antibody
that was ever used in patients with gastrointestinal tumours
three decades ago was the EpCAM-directed monoclonal
antibody 17-1A [1]. In adult humans, EpCAM is
frequently expressed in normal epithelia [2]. In patients
with carcinomas, an overexpression of this antigen is

INTRODUCTION
The Epithelial cell adhesion antigen EpCAM
(gene name TACSTD1) has been identified as tumour
associated antigen on carcinomas of various origins.
It rapidly emerged as an attractive target for specific
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25017

Oncotarget

frequently observed. In primary and metastatic breast
cancer, for example, it has been shown that EpCAM
gene expression is increased up to 1,000-fold [3]. We
have recently summarized the EpCAM expression rates
in most human tumour entities [4] and we have shown
that the expression in metastases usually reflects that of
the primary tumour tissue. Soft-tissue tumours and all
haematological neoplasms are usually EpCAM negative.
Of note, EpCAM appears to display oncologic
features in certain in vitro cell line models. Hence,
overexpression of EpCAM was associated with enhanced
transcription of the proto-oncogene c-myc and the
cell cycle proteins cyclin A and E [5]. Moreover, the
proteolytic cleavage of the EpCAM molecule was shown
to confer a mitogenic signal to the cell nucleus by shuttling
the intracellular domain called EpICD to the nucleus and
shedding the extracellular domain named EpEX to the
extracellular space [6].
Paradoxically, despite the broad expression of
EpCAM in different tumour tissues, most EpCAM-based
targeting strategies has shown only limited efficacy [7].
In the last decades, monoclonal, bi-/tri-specific antibodies,
vaccination strategies and toxin-conjugated antibodies
have been used to target the EpCAM antigen. Currently,
clinical trials are testing different immunotherapeutic
approaches [8].
In 2009 the European Commission approved the
first anti-EpCAM antibody named catumaxomab [9]
for the treatment of malignant ascites in cancer patients
with EpCAM-positive tumours. A phase II/III study [10]
was conducted and data showed a significant clinical
benefit in catumaxomab-treated patients. Catumaxomab
is administered as an intraperitoneal infusion on days
0, 3, 7 and 10 at increasing doses of 10, 20, 50 and
150 μg, respectively. As the antibody is diluted in
remnant ascites and concomitantly administered saline
infusions with an expected total volume of ~1,000 mL,
final concentration of the antibody in the peritoneal cavity
probably ranges from ~10 to 150 ng/mL. Importantly,
quality of life was improved as puncture-free survival,
time to next puncture and symptoms of ascites were
significantly better in the treated than in the control cohort.
Moreover, in gastric cancer patients, overall survival was
significantly prolonged. However, the selection of patients
that are candidates for catumaxomab treatment in daily
clinical practice is difficult. Malignant ascites is often
an end-stage situation and survival of these patients is
usually very short [11]. In Italy for example, the regulatory
agency for medical drugs (AIFA) reimburses treatment for
patients with a life expectancy of more than 3 months.
For this reason, it is mandatory to search for prognostic
and predictive markers to better select patients that mostly
benefit from this treatment.
Recently, we developed an EpCAM-specific ELISA
system to detect soluble EpCAM (sEpCAM) in ascites
[12]. We could show that detection of sEpCAM correlates
with peritoneal carcinomatosis. Moreover, within a
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

catumaxomab (antibody)-dependent cellular cytotoxicity
(ADCC) assay we could show that sEpCAM is neutralizing
the effect of catumaxomab already in a concentration of
1 ng/mL [12]. In this study we investigated the effect of
sEpCAM amount in malignant-ascites in patients treated
we catumaxomab to corroborate our findings in an in vivo
approach.

RESULTS
Patients` characteristics and levels of sEpCAM
in ascites
At the time of last clinical follow-up (January
2014), 47 (71.2%) patients out of the total group had
died. The median overall survival time for the entire
cohort was 143 days (range, 8–1, 884). Most patients
(n = 43) were diagnosed with epithelial ovarian cancer
(65.2%). All other patients had non-ovarian cancer, which
included gastric cancer (n = 9), breast cancer (n = 4),
pancreatic cancer (n = 3), carcinoma of unknown primary
(CUP; n = 2), duodenal cancer (n = 1), gallbladder cancer
(n = 1), endometrium cancer (n = 1), non-small cell lung
cancer (n = 1) and renal cell cancer (n = 1). As expected,
the survival of ovarian cancer patients was significantly
longer than that of patients with non-ovarian cancer
(p < 0.001) with a median survival time of 61 days and
362 days, respectively. The mean patients’ age at time of
first catumaxomab infusion was 59.6 years.
Nine patients showed significant levels of sEpCAM
in ascitic fluid before catumaxomab treatment. The
mean value was 4.5 ng/mL (range 1.0–11.7 ng/mL).
The mean number of catumaxomab administrations in
sEpCAM-positive and sEpCAM-negative patients was 3.6
infusions for both groups (Table 1). By Chi Square test
we compared sEpCAM levels to age and sex (Table 1).
No correlation between these clinical features and EpICD
expression was found.

Correlation of sEpCAM with survival data
To evaluate a potential correlation of sEpCAM
in ascites with the survival of catumaxomab-treated
patients, Kaplan-Meier analysis and the Log-Rank test for
censored survival data was applied. Of note, patients with
sEpCAM-positive ascites showed a significantly poorer
overall survival (p = 0.028; Figure 1) but no significant
differences in puncture-free interval (p = 0.18; Figure 2).
Subgroup analysis revealed even higher significance in the
subgroup of ovarian cancer patients (n = 43, p = 0.016,
Figure 3).
Median overall survival time for patients with
sEpCAM-positive ascites was 76 days compared to
214 days in patients with sEpCAM-negative ascites.
Regarding time-to-next puncture, the median
survival for patients with sEpCAM-negative ascites was
not reached. For this reason, mean time to next puncture
25018

Oncotarget

Table 1: Clinicopathological data of the study cohort
sEpCAM ELISA in Ascites
Total Patients
(n)

Negative
(n)

%

Positive
(n)

%

66

57

86.4

9

13.6

p-value

Male

6

4

66.7

2

33.7

0.14*

Female

60

53

88.3

7

11.7

≤60 years

34

31

91.2

3

8.8

>60 years

32

26

81.3

6

18.7

Epithelial Ovarian Cancer

43

37

86

6

14

Non-Ovarian Cancer

23

20

87

3

13

Mean number of Catumaxomab infusions

66

3.6

3.6

0.99**

Mean days to next puncture

66

215

359

0.47**

Sex

Age at diagnosis
0.24*

Type of Cancer
0.92*

χ test
Students t Test

* 2
**

Figure 1: Overall survival of 66 patients treated with catumaxomab. The presence of sEpCAM leads to a shorter overall
survival due to neutralization effect of sEpCAM on catumaxomab.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25019

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Puncture-free survival of 66 patients with malignant ascites treated with catumaxomab.

Figure 3: Overall survival analysis of a subgroup of 43 ovarian cancer patients.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25020

Oncotarget

values were calculated and were 215 days and 359 days
for patients with sEpCAM-positive and sEpCAM-negative
ascites, respectively (p = 0.47).

ascitic fluid reflecting probably a particularly aggressive
disease course that is no more revertible by catumaxomab.
On the other hand, soluble EpCAM might also compete
with the effector mechanisms mediated by catumaxomab.
As observed by our recent in vitro data, recombinant
EpCAM-enriched cell culture medium, with similar
concentrations than those reached in ascites, counteracts
the ADCC effects of catumaxomab on HEK transfected
EpCAM cancer cells showing that high amounts of
sEpCAM in ascites impede the full effect of catumaxomab
by saturating its EpCAM-binding Fab fragment [12].
So far, to best of our knowledge, no approved antibody
was described to be blocked by a soluble variant of the
targeted protein.
It is tempting to suggest, that sEpCAM-positive
patients could benefit from higher catumaxomab doses
or more frequent applications to clear sEpCAM from the
ascites to fully develop the anti-cancer mode of action of
the drug.
The rate of sEpCAM-positive patients of 13.6%
in this study was rather low. As observed in a previous
analysis on archived ascites samples of untreated patients
sEpCAM rates in patients with positive cytology are much
higher (39%) [12]. Differences might be attributable to
different stages of diseases. For this reason, much greater
patient cohorts with fresh ascites samples have to be tested
prospectively to corroborate this finding and to better
define the patient population that might be excludable with
this screening test.
In serum of cancer patients, sEpCAM has been
described by different groups. Petsch and coworkers
showed variable amounts of EpEX in the serum of
cancer patients and supposed that these quantities may
not interact with systemically administered therapeutic
EpCAM antibodies [24]. Much higher concentrations
have been described by Schmetzer et al. ranging to a
maximum of 36  μg/mL in cancer patients [25]. These
discrepant data might be attributable to different storage
times of probes and consequent protein degradation,
different quantification of recombinant protein controls
and different binding sites of the diagnostic antibodies
(full-length EpCAM vs. EpEX). Nevertheless, it is
conceivable that these different amounts of serum
sEpCAM might pass through the peritoneal barrier
and accumulate in the peritoneal cavity to even higher
concentrations in patients with malignant ascites driven
by the high oncotic pressure. Similar concentrations as for
sEpCAM were described for the soluble VEGF protein in
ascites [26] but, in contrast to the observations made with
catumaxomab, binding of VEGF by bevacizumab seems to
positively impact the course of the disesase [27].
Taken together, soluble EpCAM in ascites appears
to be a predictor of poor survival in cancer patients with
malignant ascites possibly due to the neutralization effect
on catumaxomab. We propose to perform prospective

DISCUSSION
This is the first report describing a target-based
prognostic biomarker for patients treated with the
EpCAM-specific antibody catumaxomab. Up to now,
there are different potential predictive markers that
might be useful to select patients for catumaxomab
treatment. Ott et al. described that patients that develop
humoral response to catumaxomab mostly benefit
from catumaxomab treatment [13]. However, this
information is available only after treatment and as
such may not be useful for treatment selection. In line
with these observations, immunology-based biomarkers
are being increasingly investigated and especially T-cell
activation markers are being proposed to be tested for
this purpose [14]. Data on prognostic clinical markers in
catumaxomab patients were presented at ASCO meeting
2013, showing performance status, distant metastases and
total serum protein being predictors of overall survival
(ASCO 2013 Abstract #3078).
This study was designed to explore the predictive
value of sEpCAM in ascites of catumaxomab-treated
patients. A significant difference between patients with
sEpCAM-positive and sEpCAM-negative ascites was
observed for overall survival but not for time-to-next
puncture and puncture-free survival. These observations
might be explainable by a mere prognostic impact of
EpCAM expression in human malignancies, which we
have already observed in different previous studies. In fact,
the prognostic value of EpCAM expression is still a matter
of debate. We and others could observe that EpCAM
overexpression is associated with poor clinical outcome in
the vast majority of epithelial cancers [15–18], while few
additional reports correlated EpCAM expression to good
prognosis [19–21]. In breast cancer, the prognostic impact
of EpCAM expression depends on breast cancer subtype
[22]. In line with these somewhat conflicting clinical data,
the in vitro effects of EpCAM on the behaviour of cancer
cells seem to depend on the cancer phenotype [23] and
subtypes, suggesting that the molecular role of EpCAM
is context-dependent. But taken together, there remains
convincing evidence that targeting the EpCAM structure
might have therapeutic benefits and not disadvantages
in most patients with epithelial cancers. Hence, the
observation that sEpCAM-positive patients do apparently
not benefit so much from EpCAM-directed catumaxomab
treatment is somewhat unexpected. Most patients that
participated in catumaxomab studies were tested for
membrane-bound EpCAM-positive cancer cells in ascitic
fluid [10]. The cancer cells of a part of these patients
might shed soluble EpEX or full-length EpCAM in the

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25021

Oncotarget

evaluate our results. P-values under 0.05 were defined as
statistically significant. Time to next puncture was defined
as the time span between the last day of catumaxomab
infusion (day 11) and the day of next puncture. If the
patient did not perform any paracentesis after treatment,
the day of last visit or death was used and patients were
censored at this time point. For puncture-free survival,
the same time spans were evaluated as for time to next
puncture but death and paracentesis after catumaxomab
treatment were calculated as events. The team that
performed EpCAM ELISA was unaware of clinical
outcome of the patients.

studies with large patient cohorts and control groups
measuring sEpCAM in ascites samples to screen for
catumaxomab treatment to confirm our findings.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Patients and specimens
This retrospective analysis was approved by
the local ethic comities of Merano (I) and Berlin (G).
Written informed consent from the patients to perform
analysis on ascites samples were obtained at the time of
treatment start. Archived malignant ascites specimens
from 66 cancer patients treated with catumaxomab during
the period between December 2007 and September 2012
were acquired retrospectively. All the ascites samples
were sampled before treatment start. Samples were
centrifugated at 2,000 × g for 10 minutes to separate
cellular components from the fluid. Supernatants were
then stored at −35°C.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING
This work was supported by the COMET
Center ONCOTYROL and funded by the Federal
Ministry for Transport Innovation and Technology
(BMVIT) and the Federal Ministry of Economics and
Labour/the Federal Ministry of Economy, Family and
Youth (BMWA/BMWFJ), the Tiroler Zukunftsstiftung
(TZS) and the State of Styria represented by the Styrian
Business Promotion Agency (SFG) and supported by
the Innsbruck Medical University, Fresenius Biotech
GmbH and TILAK- Tiroler Landeskrankenanstalten
GmbH (TILAK-Hospital Holding Company).

EpCAM-specific Enzyme-Linked
Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA)
For the detection of EpCAM in ascites we used
a human EpCAM sandwich ELISA system which we
had validated on its specificity and validity elsewhere
[12]. Briefly, a 96-well plate was coated with a mouse
anti-EpCAM monoclonal antibody overnight at room
temperature in PBS pH 7.2 – 7.4. After wash steps with
0.05% Tween® 20 in PBS the plate was blocked with
Reagent Diluent (1% BSA in PBS, pH 7.2 – 7.4, catalog
number: DY995) for 1 hour at room temperature. As
positive control recombinant human EpCAM was used.
Standard and supernatants were diluted in reagent diluent
and incubated for 2 hours at room temperature. After
washing steps, a goat polyclonal anti-EpCAM antibody
was diludet in Reagent Diluent and added to each well and
incubated for another 2 hours at room temperature. After
repeated washing steps, streptavidin-HRP was added to the
96-well plate and incubated in the dark for 20 minutes at
room temperature. After a further washing step, Substrate
Solution (1:1 mixture of H2O2 and tetramethylbenzidine,
catalog number: DY999) was added to each well and
incubated in the dark for another 20 minutes at room
temperature. A stop solution consisting in 2 N H2SO4 was
used. Colour development was detected at a wavelength of
450 and 570nm using microplate reader (TECAN, Infinite
F50). A seven point standard curve was used to calculate
the amount of EpCAM (pg/ml) in ascites samples.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
Gilbert Spizzo and Jalid Sehouli has served as
consultant and advisory board member for Fresenius
Biotech and received research funding for Oncotyrol
Project 3.5 and 2.3.

REFERENCES
1.	 Sears HF, Atkinson B, Mattis J, Ernst C, Herlyn D,
Steplewski Z, Hayry P, Koprowski H. Phase-I clinical trial
of monoclonal antibody in treatment of gastrointestinal
tumours. Lancet. 1982; 1:762–5.
2.	 Schmelzer E, Reid LM. EpCAM expression in normal,
non-pathological tissues. Front Biosci. 2008; 13:3096–100.
3.	 Osta WA, Chen Y, Mikhitarian K, Mitas M,
Salem M, Hannun YA, Cole DJ, Gillanders WE. EpCAM
is ­overexpressed in breast cancer and is a potential target for
breast cancer gene therapy. Cancer Res. 2004; 64:5818–24.
4.	 Spizzo G, Fong D, Wurm M, Ensinger C, Obrist P,
Hofer  C, Mazzoleni G, Gastl G, Went P. EpCAM
expression in ­primary tumour tissues and metastases:
an ­immunohistochemical analysis. J Clin Pathol. 2011;
64:415–20.

Statistics
Statistical analysis was performed by L.B. For this
purpose Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS,
Chicago, IL, USA) version 11.5 was used. Chi-square
and log-rank test for censored survival data was used to
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5.	 Munz M, Kieu C, Mack B, Schmitt B, Zeidler R, Gires O.
The carcinoma-associated antigen EpCAM upregulates
c-myc and induces cell proliferation. Oncogene. 2004;
23:5748–58.
25022

Oncotarget

6.	 Maetzel D, Denzel S, Mack B, Canis M, Went P, Benk M,
Kieu C, Papior P, Baeuerle PA, Munz M, Gires O. Nuclear
signalling by tumour-associated antigen EpCAM. Nat Cell
Biol. 2009; 11:162–71.

18.	 Stoecklein NH, Siegmund A, Scheunemann P, Luebke AM,
Erbersdobler A, Verde PE, Eisenberger CF, Peiper M,
Rehders A, Esch JS, Knoefel WT, Hosch SB. Ep-CAM
expression in squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus:
a potential therapeutic target and prognostic marker. BMC
Cancer. 2006; 6:165.

7.	 Punt CJ, Nagy A, Douillard JY, Figer A, Skovsgaard T,
Monson J, Barone C, Fountzilas G, Riess H, Moylan E,
Jones D, Dethling J, et al. Edrecolomab alone or in combination with fluorouracil and folinic acid in the adjuvant
treatment of stage III colon cancer: a randomised study.
Lancet. 2002; 360:671–7.
8.	 Baeuerle PA, Gires O. EpCAM (CD326) finding its role in
cancer. Br J Cancer. 2007; 96:417–23.

19.	 Seligson DB, Pantuck AJ, Liu X, Huang Y,
Horvath S, Bui MH, Han KR, Correa AJ, Eeva M, Tze S,
Belldegrun AS, Figlin RA. Epithelial cell adhesion molecule (KSA) expression: pathobiology and its role as an
independent predictor of survival in renal cell carcinoma.
Clin Cancer Res. 2004; 10:2659–69.

9.	 Chelius D, Ruf P, Gruber P, Ploscher M, Liedtke R,
Gansberger E, Hess J, Wasiliu M, Lindhofer H. Structural
and functional characterization of the trifunctional antibody
catumaxomab. MAbs. 2010; 2:309–19.

20.	 Songun I, Litvinov SV, van de Velde CJ, Pals ST,
Hermans J, van Krieken JH. Loss of Ep-CAM (CO17–1A)
expression predicts survival in patients with gastric cancer.
Br J Cancer. 2005; 92:1767–72.

10.	 Heiss MM, Murawa P, Koralewski P, Kutarska E,
Kolesnik OO, Ivanchenko VV, Dudnichenko AS,
Aleknaviciene B, Razbadauskas A, Gore M, Ganea-Motan E,
Ciuleanu T, et al. The trifunctional ­antibody catumaxomab
for the treatment of malignant ­ascites due to epithelial cancer:
Results of a prospective randomized phase II/III trial. Int J
Cancer. 2010; 127:2209–21.

21.	 Kimura H, Kato H, Faried A, Sohda M, Nakajima M,
Fukai Y, Miyazaki T, Masuda N, Fukuchi M, Kuwano H.
Prognostic significance of EpCAM expression in human
esophageal cancer. Int J Oncol. 2007; 30:171–9.

11.	 Garrison RN, Kaelin LD, Galloway RH, Heuser LS.
Malignant ascites. Clinical and experimental observations.
Ann Surg. 1986; 203:644–51.

22.	 Soysal SD, Muenst S, Barbie T, Fleming T, Gao F,
Spizzo G, Oertli D, Viehl CT, Obermann EC, Gillanders
WE. EpCAM expression varies significantly and is differentially associated with prognosis in the luminal B HER2,
basal-like, and HER2 intrinsic subtypes of breast cancer.
Br J Cancer. 2013.

12.	 Seeber A, Spizzo G, Martowicz A, Buratti T, Obrist P,
Fong D, Gastl G, Untergasser G. Soluble EpCAM levels in
ascites correlate with positive cytology and inhibit catumaxomab activity in vitro. BMC Cancer. 2015; 15:372.

23.	 Martowicz A, Spizzo G, Gastl G, Untergasser G.
Phenotype-dependent effects of EpCAM expression on
growth and invasion of human breast cancer cell lines.
BMC Cancer. 2012; 12:501.

13.	 Ott MG, Marme F, Moldenhauer G, Lindhofer H,
Hennig M, Spannagl R, Essing MM, Linke R, Seimetz D.
Humoral response to catumaxomab correlates with clinical
outcome: results of the pivotal phase II/III study in patients
with malignant ascites. Int J Cancer. 2012; 130:2195–203.

24.	 Petsch S, Gires O, Ruttinger D, Denzel S,
Lippold S, Baeuerle PA, Wolf A. Concentrations of
EpCAM ­ectodomain as found in sera of cancer patients
do not significantly impact redirected lysis and T-cell
­activation by EpCAM/CD3-bispecific BiTE antibody
MT110. MAbs. 2011; 3:31–7.

14.	 Goere D, Flament C, Rusakiewicz S, Poirier-Colame V,
Kepp O, Martins I, Pesquet J, Eggermont AM, Elias D,
Chaput N, Zitvogel L. Potent immunomodulatory effects of
the trifunctional antibody catumaxomab. Cancer Res 2013.

25.	 Schmetzer O, Moldenhauer G, Nicolaou A,
Schlag P, Riesenberg R, Pezzutto A. Detection of
­circulating ­tumor-associated antigen depends on the
domains recognized by the monoclonal antibodies used:
N-terminal trimmed EpCAM-levels are much higher than
untrimmed forms. Immunol Lett. 2012; 143:184–92.

15.	 Varga M, Obrist P, Schneeberger S, Muhlmann G,
Felgel-Farnholz C, Fong D, Zitt M, Brunhuber T,
Schafer G, Gastl G, Spizzo G. Overexpression of epithelial
cell adhesion molecule antigen in gallbladder carcinoma is
an independent marker for poor survival. Clin Cancer Res.
2004; 10:3131–6.

26.	 Kraft A, Weindel K, Ochs A, Marth C, Zmija J,
Schumacher P, Unger C, Marme D, Gastl G. Vascular
endothelial growth factor in the sera and effusions of
patients with malignant and nonmalignant disease. Cancer.
1999; 85:178–87.

16.	 Schmidt M, Hasenclever D, Schaeffer M, Boehm D,
Cotarelo C, Steiner E, Lebrecht A, Siggelkow W,
Weikel W, Schiffer-Petry I, Gebhard S, Pilch H, et al.
Prognostic effect of epithelial cell adhesion molecule
­overexpression in untreated node-negative breast cancer.
Clin Cancer Res. 2008; 14:5849–55.

27.	 Rein DT, Volkmer AK, Volkmer J, Beyer IM, Janni W,
Fleisch MC, Welter AK, Bauerschlag D, Schondorf T,
Breidenbach M. Systemic administration of bevacizumab
prolongs survival in an in vivo model of platinum pretreated ovarian cancer. Oncol Lett. 2012; 3:530–4.

17.	 Benko G, Spajic B, Kruslin B, Tomas D. Impact of the
EpCAM expression on biochemical recurrence-free survival
in clinically localized prostate cancer. Urol Oncol 2011.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25023

Oncotarget

