Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 27

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

Characterization and use of HapT1-derived homologous tumors
as a preclinical model to evaluate therapeutic efficacy of drugs
against pancreatic tumor desmoplasia
Sujit Suklabaidya1,2, Biswajit Das1,2, Syed Azmal Ali3, Sumeet Jain1,2, Sharada
Swaminathan4, Ashok K. Mohanty3, Susen K. Panda5, Pujarini Dash1, Subhankar
Chakraborty6, Surinder K. Batra7, Shantibhusan Senapati1
1

Tumor Microenvironment and Animal Models Laboratory, Department of Translational Research, Institute of Life Sciences,
Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India

2

Manipal University, Manipal, Karnataka, India

3

Proteomics and Structural Biology Laboratory, Animal Biotechnology Department, National Diary Research Institute,
Haryana, India

4

Department of Bioengineering, School of Chemical and Biotechnology, SASTRA University, Thanjavur, Tamil Nadu, India

5

Department of Veterinary Pathology, Odisha University of Agriculture and Technology, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India

6

Mayo Clinic, Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Rochester, Minnesota, MN, USA

7

Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Buffett Cancer Center, Eppley Institute for Cancer Research, University
of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA

Correspondence to: Shantibhusan Senapati, email: drsantibhusan@yahoo.com, senapati@ils.res.in
Keywords: pancreatic cancer, desmoplasia, HapT1, pancreatic stellate cells, hamster homologous orthotopic model
Received: March 04, 2016     Accepted: May 17, 2016     Published: May 31, 2016

ABSTRACT
Desmoplasia in human pancreatic cancer (PC) promotes cancer progression and
hinders effective drug delivery. The objectives of this study were to characterize a
homologous orthotopic model of PC in Syrian golden hamster and investigate the
effect of anti-fibrotic (pirfenidone), antioxidant (N-acetyl cysteine, NAC) and antiaddiction (disulfiram, DSF) drugs on desmoplasia and tumor growth in this model.
The HapT1 PC cells when implanted orthotopically into hamsters formed tumors with
morphological, cellular and molecular similarities to human PC. Protein profiling of
activated hamster pancreatic stellate cells (ha-PSCs) revealed expression of proteins
involved in fibrosis, cancer cells growth and metastasis. Pirfenidone, suppressed
growth of HapT1 cells and the desmoplastic response in vivo; these effects were
enhanced by co-administration of NAC. Disulfiram alone or in combination with
copper (Cu) was toxic to HapT1 cells and PSCs in vitro; but co-administration of DSF
and Cu accelerated growth of HapT1 cells in vivo. Moreover, DSF had no effect on
tumor-associated desmoplasia. Overall, this study identifies HapT1-derived orthotopic
tumors as a useful model to study desmoplasia and tumor-directed therapeutics in
PC. Pirfenidone in combination with NAC could be a novel combination therapy for
PC and warrants investigation in human subjects.

INTRODUCTION

exhibits desmoplasia which manifests as overproduction
of extracellular matrix and extensive proliferation of
myofibroblast like cells. Desmoplasia arises from the
activation of pancreatic stellate cells (PSCs) that constitute
4–7% of the total cell population of normal pancreas [3, 4].
Although PSCs remain quiescent normally, it has been
shown that pancreatic cancer cells (PCCs) activate PSCs

Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is the
fourth common cause of cancer related deaths [1]. It
has a 5 year survival rate of 6% and it is predicted to be
the second leading cause of cancer deaths by 2030 [2].
PDAC stands out from other epithelial neoplasms as it

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41825

Oncotarget

in a paracrine fashion and as a result PSCs differentiate
into α-SMA positive myofibroblast-like cells that produce
high amounts of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins,
particularly collgen-I and fibronectin [5]. The crosstalk
between PCCs and PSCs has been associated with tumor
progression and metastasis [6]. Desmoplasia in PDAC
contributes to chemoresistance which in turn results in
poor prognosis [3]. Studying the role of PSCs in PDAC
is indispensable and so it is necessary to develop suitable
in vitro and in vivo models that closely resemble the tumor
associated desmoplasia seen in humans.
While previous studies have employed PSCs cocultured with PC cells or in vivo models of genetically
modified mice or xenografts, these models have several
limitations that make them unsuitable to study novel
therapeutics against PC. For example, xenograft models
lack all the cellular components of a fibrotic tumor
because of the absence of an effective immune system.
Genetically modified mouse models have long periods of
tumor latency that limits their usefulness in testing new
therapeutics. Therefore, there is a need for new animal
models that overcome the shortcomings of existing
models, particularly to test new treatment strategies.
The chemically induced model for PDAC in Syrian
golden hamsters (Mesocricetus auratus) was shown to
be similar in morphologic appearance and biological
behaviour to that seen in humans [7]. Moreover, the
chemically induced hamster models using N-nitrosobis(2-oxopropyl)amine (BOP) have also shown to harbour
point mutations in the K-ras gene [8]. Different labs have
established and characterized multiple PC cell lines from
carcinogen induced pancreatic tumor in hamsters [9, 10].
Some of these cell lines have been frequently used to
generate allograft tumors in Syrian hamsters. Particularly,
the commercially available HapT1 hamster PC cell line
derived from DIPN-induced pancreatic tumor has been
widely used as an in vitro model in PC related studies
[10]. Carcinogen induced hamster PC shows desmoplastic
reactions; however, till date no studies have reported the
characterization and/or use of hamster PC model as a preclinical model for cancer-associated desmoplasia.
As discussed above, cross talk between PSCs and
PCCs provides significant contribution to the malignant
behaviours of cancer cells and resistance to established
therapy for PC. Therefore, it is a common belief that
pharmaceutically reducing the activated PSCs number
in the tumor tissue either by killing (stromal ablation) or
by inactivating (stromal normalisation) would enhance
the clinical efficacy of conventional chemotherapy.
Pirfenidone (5-methyl-1-phenyl-2-[1H]-pyridone), a drug
approved for idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) has shown
encouraging anti-fibrotic effects in a mouse model of PC
[11]. Pirfenidone decreases PSCs proliferation, invasion
and migration in vitro and inhibits subcutaneous tumor
formation in mice co-transplanted with PCCs and PSCs
[11]. A recent study has shown a better patient outcome
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

with combined therapy of pirfenidone and N-acetylcystein
(NAC) in advanced idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis patients
[12]. Moreover, NAC sensitizes human PCCs to gemcitabine
by inhibiting NFκB pathway [13]; and cultivation of
PSCs on extracellular matrix proteins and treatment with
NAC induced deactivation of PSCs and reduced their
proliferation and fibrogenic property [14]. However, till
date no study has been reported that evaluate the effect of
pirfenidone and NAC co-administration on desmoplastic
PC. At the same time, like pirfenidone there are multiple
other drugs which are approved for certain diseases other
than cancer, but could have significant use in cancer therapy.
Disulfiram
(1-[diethylthiocarbamoyldisulfanyl]-N,Ndiethyl-methanethioamide) a FDA approved drug has been
reported to have cytotoxic effect against variety of cancer
cells including PC, while sparing normal cells [15, 16]. In
preclinical studies, Disulfiram (DSF) in combination with
copper ions has been shown to inhibit or suppress NFκB
signalling, proteasome activity, aldehyde dehydrogenase
activity, and antioxidant levels in cancer cells [15–18]. To
date, however, no studies have analysed the effects of DSF
on PSCs. Therefore, the major goals of this study were to
establish and characterise a hamster PC model that shows
the desmoplastic reactions similar to human PDAC, and
to evaluate whether pirfenidone (in presence or absence of
NAC) and DSF (in presence or absence of Cu) could reduce
activated PSCs growth and supress desmoplasia in vitro and
in vivo.

RESULTS
Morphology and composition of HapT1 primary
and metastatic tumors
Necropsy of all the animals in this study showed
100% tumor uptake. All the tumors were firm, round,
and slightly reddish in colour (Figure 1A). Further, all
animals had incurred metastasis to one or multiple sites/
organs (Figure 1B). Microscopically, the primary tumors
were found to consist of multiple duct-like structures
(pseudo ducts; Figure 1C), and the proportion of duct-like
structures was greater in 24-day-old tumors compared
with the 14-day-old tumors (data not shown). The tumors
had centrally located necrotic zones and peripheral
proliferative zones. Necrotic regions were laden with
infiltrated immune cells (data not shown). Some immune
cells were also visible in the non-necrotic regions of all
the tumors. Spindle-shaped myofibroblast-like cells and
the deposited extracellular matrix were clearly visible
around all the individual duct-like structures (Figure 1C).
At multiple places, the stromal structures surrounding the
cancer cells acted as a barrier between infiltrated immune
cells and cancer cells (Figure 1C). As reported for human
PC, the secondary or metastatic tumors harvested from
multiple hamsters clearly showed the presence of fibrotic
stroma (Figure 1D; [19]). Irrespective of the site of
41826

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Gross morphology and histopathology of HapT1 orthotopic tumor. (A) Diagram of the orthotopic implantation of

HapT1 cancer cells in hamster pancreases. Representative macroscopic view of a HapT1 orthotopic tumor present inside the splenic lobe
of a hamster pancreas (dotted circle). The splenic lobe of the pancreas (pa) and spleen (sp) are also shown in the image. (B) Representative
gross images of various organs that showed metastatic tumor growth are shown (arrowhead). (C) Representative images of H&E stained
sections of HapT1 orthotopic primary tumors from three different tumor sections (a, b, and c). An image from primary pancreatic tumor
sections shows the presence of pseudo-duct-like structures (arrow) and deposition of dense extracellular matrix proteins/desmoplstic
reaction around them (star). At some places, extracellular matrix proteins act as a barrier between tumor-infiltrated immune cells and cancer
cells (c). (D) H&E stained sections of HapT1 metastatic tumors clearly show the presence of a desmoplastic reaction within the tumor
stroma of metastatic tumors (arrowhead). (N) normal tissue area; (Ca) cancerous regions; (I) immune cells (scale bar= 50 µm).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41827

Oncotarget

metastasis, all the metastatic tumors were desmoplastic;
activated myofibroblast-like cells and immune cells were
also present.
For further molecular and cellular characterization
of the desmoplastic reactions present in HapT1 tumors,
this study examined the expression of two major
extracellular matrix proteins (i.e., collagen and fibronectin)
and two important cell types known to promote PCassociated fibrosis (i.e., myofibroblast-like and mast cells).
Staining with aniline blue (one component of MS trichome
stain) showed dense collagen deposition in all the primary
and metastatic tumors (Figure 2A; data not shown).
However, the normal pancreatic tissue present in closer
proximity to the primary tumors had markedly low levels
of collagen (Supplementary Figure S1). Figure 2A shows
immunohistochemical (IHC) staining of tumors derived
from HapT1 cell lines and confirms the area that stained
positive for collagen also stained positive for fibronectin.
Moreover, fibronectin was also present in the metastatic
tumors (Figure 2A; data not shown). IHC analysis of
tumor sections also revealed that HapT1tumors contained
myofibroblast-like cells, which is based on the fact that
they stained positive for α-SMA and vimentin. The
myofibroblast-like cells were identified in the areas with
desmoplastic reactions (Figure 2B). A similar observation
was made in all the secondary/metastatic tumor tissues
(Figure 2B; data not shown). Additionally, the toluidine
blue staining revealed the presence of mast cells (MCs)
in different zones of the primary tumors (Figure 2C), as
reported in human PC tissues [20]). Multiple MCs were
present close to the blood vessels; their number was
increased in areas with a greater number of blood vessels.
These observations also corroborate a previous report [20].

identification of proteins. A total number of 1,878 proteins
were identified (Supplementary Table S3). Further, gene
ontology protein classification (GOPC) analysis of the
identified proteins showed the expression of different
molecules involved in multiple cellular and molecular
processes (Figure 3B, Supplementary Table S3). A selective
search of the identified protein list showed expression of
multiple activated-PSCs markers (i.e., α-SMA, vimentin,
desmin and nestin), extracellular matrix proteins (i.e.,
collagen, fibronectin and laminin), and extracellular
matrix remodelling proteins (i.e., matrix metalloproteases
and secreted protein acidic and rich in cysteine) [22, 23].
The expression of proteins transgelin and galectin-1 was
also found; these proteins are reported to be expressed by
activated PSCs and to regulate the function of PSCs and/or
the progression of PC [24, 25]. In addition to the proteins
that are known to be expressed by PSCs, results showed
the expression of certain other proteins such as macrophage
migration inhibitory factors (MIFs) and galectin-3
(Supplementary Table S3; Figure 3D), which are known to
promote the progression of PC but have not been reported
to be expressed by PSCs [26, 27]. The present study
also validated expression of certain selected molecules
(Figure 3C and 3D) using immunoblot analysis and PCR,
followed by sequencing. Given that this study identified
1,878 proteins in triplicate runs of unfractionated protein
lysate, some of the previously reported proteins known to
be expressed by activated human/rodent PSCs were absent
in our dataset. This may be due to low abundance of these
proteins in the lysate. To ascertain the expression of missing
proteins by ha-PSCs, namely Endothelin, Plau, Postn,
Ptch1, Timp1, and Pdgfa, PCR was performed, followed
by sequencing of amplified products to determine their
expression status (Figure 3D) . Together, this expression
analysis showed similarities between ha-PSCs and human
PSCs [22, 28–30].

Isolation, culture, and characterisation of
hamster normal PSCs

Pirfenidone inhibits HapT1 tumor growth and
desmoplastic reactions, and NAC enhances these
inhibitory effects of pirfenidone

After the second passage of the isolated ha-PSCs, the
culture plates had a homogeneous population of cells with
a clear morphology of activated PSCs, as reported in other
species (Figure 3A) [21]. Further, immunocytochemistry
of these cells for α-SMA expression confirmed their
purity and activated state (Figure 3A). Activated PSCs
are known to express various proteins that directly and/
or indirectly contribute to cancer-associated fibrosis and
growth or metastasis of cancer cells [4]. In turn, this study
investigated the global protein expression pattern of the
isolated, in-culture activated hamster PSCs (ha-PSCs)
and inspected them for the expression of different fibrosis
and pro-tumorigenic proteins using mass spectrometry.
Because the Syrian hamster (Mesocricetus auratus)
genome is not yet fully sequenced, this study used an inhouse modified UniProt for human, mouse, and hamster
proteins and the National Center for Biotechnology
Information (NCBI) hamster database, along with
the common contaminant protein sequences for the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

To investigate the effects of pirfenidone and/or NAC
in an immunocompetent desmoplastic PC model, HapT1
tumor-bearing hamsters were treated with pirfenidone and/
or NAC. Throughout the experiment, there were no visible
stress signs or significant changes in the body weight of
the individual animals (data not shown). Interestingly,
after 21 days of drug treatment, the animals treated
with both the drugs in combination had significantly
decreased tumor weights than those of animals treated
with pirfenidone alone (p = 0.0426; Figure 4A, 4B) or
only NAC (p = 0.0002; Figure 4A, 4B) or only vehicle/
control (p = 0.0005; Figure 4A, 4B). Only pirfenidonetreated animals had significantly smaller tumors compared
with controls (p = 0.0233 Figure 4A, 4B); however, only
NAC treatment alone did not significantly alter the tumor
41828

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Non-cellular and cellular components of HapT1 orthotopic tumor. (A) Representative images of primary and

metastatic tumor tissue sections (liver) showing the presence of collagen and fibronectin, as detected by aniline blue staining and IHC
analysis, respectively (scale bar = 50 µm). Morphometric analysis of images obtained from aniline blue stained sections shows the extent
of collagen deposition in primary (pancreas) and corresponding metastatic tumors (liver). The percentage of aniline blue stained area
estimation was done in tissues obtained from two different animals (with liver metastasis). Presented data obtained from one animal
(n = 5; five different fields/tissue) shows the representative pattern of collagen deposition in corresponding primary and metastatic tumors.
Data presented as mean ± SE. (B) IHC analysis for α-SMA and vimentin as markers of activated myofibroblast-like cells followed by
quantification of α-SMA positive cells shows the presence of a similar number of activated myofibroblast-like cells in both primary and
corresponding metastatic tumors. Presented data obtained from one animal (n = 5; five different fields/tissue) show the representative
pattern of the abundance of α-SMA positive cells in corresponding primary and metastatic tumors (scale bar = 50 µm). Data presented as
mean ± SE. (C) Representative images of toluidine blue-stained primary tumor sections showing the presence of mast cells (violet color;
arrows) in peri-tumor, intra-tumor border and intra-tumor center regions of HapT1 orthotopic tumors (scale bar = 50 µm). Most of the mast
cells were present closer to the blood vessels (bv).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41829

Oncotarget

weight compared to control groups (Figure 4B). Further,
histopathological and biochemical analysis showed
that pirfenidone in combination with NAC significantly
reduced the number of α-SMA-positive cells and collagen
deposition compared to controls or only pirfenidone or
only NAC-treated animals (Figure 4C–4E). Quantification
of Ki67-positive cells showed a significant reduction in
number of proliferating cells in animals treated with
both the drugs together compared to pirfenidone alone
(p = 0.0457) or only NAC treated individuals (p = 0.0153;
Figure 4C, 4D).

however, in other conditions there was no significant
change (data not shown). Together, the results suggest that
the DSF/DSF-Cu-induced reduction in the number of PSCs
and/or change in their secretory properties is responsible
for reducing the growth promoting effects conferred by
PSCs to PCCs. DSF is known to induce cell death in
multiple cancer cells by enhancing reactive oxygen species
(ROS) [32]. Therefore, to determine whether the effect
of DSF-mediated cell death is through ROS, this study
examined the viability of ha-PSCs and HapT1 cancer
cells that were pre-treated with n-acetylcysteine (NAC)
at a 1 mM concentration. Analyses of the data presented
in Figure 5D and 5E and Supplementary Figure S2C
clearly show the suppression of DSF or DSF-Cu-mediated
cytotoxicity in rat and hamster PSCs by NAC; however,
NAC pre-treatment failed to supress cytotoxic effect of
DSF on HapT1 cancer cells.

DSF and DSF-Cu have direct cytotoxic effects
on PSCs and HapT1 cells; their cytotoxic effect
on hamster PSCs and HapT-1 cells is ROSdependent and -independent, respectively
In an effort to identify novel drug candidates for
PC desmoplasia, a FDA-approved drug library screening
was performed against the survival of activated ratPSCs in culture (Supplementary Figure S2A). Out of
the 18 drugs selected (data not shown), initially one
candidate, DSF, was chosen and validated against PSCs
of different origins (Figure 5A; Supplementary Figure
S2B and Supplementary Figure S3A). After 24 hours
of drug treatment, followed by five days of culture,
a significant reduction in cell viability of PSCs was
observed when using 120 nM DSF (except human) and
50 nM DSF with 10 µM CuCl2 combination for all types
of PSCs. The cells treated with only dimethyl sulfoxide
(DMSO) or DMSO with 10 µM CuCl2 showed no
significant effect on the viability of PSCs (Figure 5A and
Supplementary Figure S3A).
Both MTT and colony formation assay showed
cytotoxic effects for DSF or DSF-Cu in HapT1 cancer
cells (Figure 5B and Supplementary Figure S3B). In
co-culture models, PSCs are known to promote growth,
chemo-resistance, and radiation resistance in PCCs [31].
Based on the above data, we hypothesized that cytotoxic
effect of DSF on PSCs will suppress the growth advantage
provided by these cells to cancer cells in vitro. To check
this hypothesis, we established a co-culture system of
ha-PSCs and ha-PCCs (HapT1) in which the HapT1cells
are labelled with a luciferase gene. The data shown in
Figure 5C clearly suggest that ha-PSCs indeed promote
growth of HapT1 PCCs. Importantly, pre-treatment of
PSCs with 50 nM DSF and 10 µM CuCl2 for 12 hours
only significantly reduced the growth promoting effect of
PSCs on HapT1 cells (p = 0.0484). However, within this
time frame, 50 nM DSF alone was not sufficient to reduce
the growth advantage provided by PSCs to HapT1 cells. In
a parallel experiment, only PSCs were cultured and treated
with 50 nM DSF or 50 nM DSF with 10 µM CuCl2 for
12 hours and processed for crystal violet staining. The data
obtained from this experiment showed reduced numbers
of PSCs after 12 hours of treatment with DSF and Cu;
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

DSF alone partially suppressed the growth of
HapT1 orthotopic tumors in a syngeneic host but
did not suppress desmoplastic reactions
Although the anticancer activity of DSF or DSF-Cu
against PCC lines has been established previously [15– 18],
its effect on cancer-associated PSCs and/or on cancerassociated fibrosis has remained unclear. Importantly,
the effect of DSF on the growth of desmoplastic tumors
has not yet been addressed. Therefore, the present
study aimed to determine the effect of DSF on a HapT1
desmoplastic tumor model. At the end-point evaluation,
we were confounded to see that animals injected with
DSF-Cu demonstrated a greater tumor burden (both
primary and metastatic) compared with any other group
(Figure 6A; data not shown). Animals injected with only
DSF showed, on average, a 16% reduction in primary
tumor weight and decreased metastasis (data not shown)
compared with the corresponding animals treated with
the vehicle (Figure 6A and 6B). Between the two vehicle
treatment groups, there was no significant difference in
the primary tumor weights. Further, the H&E stained
sections showed desmoplastic reactions in all the groups
(Figure 6C). Moreover, estimation of collagen deposition
(through aniline blue staining) and the number of α-SMA
positive cells showed no significant difference among
animals of various groups (Figure 6C and 6D). Finally,
quantification of Ki-67 positive cells showed a significant
decrease and increase in the number of proliferative cells
in DSF and DSF+Cu treated groups compared with their
corresponding controls, respectively (Figure 6C, 6D).

DISCUSSION
Currently, a significant proportion of studies in
human PC employ the orthotopic implantation of PCCs in
athymic mice. However, there is experimental evidence that
syngeneic tumors are clearly more reliable compared with
41830

Oncotarget

those developed in athymic mice [33]. In our current study,
the presence of extracellular matrix proteins (e.g., collagen
and fibronectin) and stromal cells (e.g., myofibroblast-like
and mast cells) in HapT1 tumors mimics the desmoplastic
reactions seen in human PDAC (Figure 2). Moreover, the
presence of similar types of extracellular matrix proteins
and their extent of deposition in metastatic tumors
corroborates findings in human PDAC patients [19]. In
syngeneic experimental tumors like the HapT1 orthotopic
tumor, due to the functional immune system of the host,
the inflammatory milieu in tumor microenvironment is
more robust compared with tumors grown in immunecompromised hosts. Moreover, this could be the major cause
behind enrichment of a large number of myofibroblastlike cells and immune cells in HapT1 tumors. In HapT1
tumor tissues, the presence of Ki67-positive stromal
or myofibroblast-like cells indicates a certain level of
proliferative activity of these cells (Supplementary Figure
S4). Hence, recruitment of myofibroblast-like cells and/or
their further proliferation in tumor microenvironment might
have contributed to the overall population of these cells.
Accumulating evidence suggests that mast cells
promote the progression of PC [20, 34, 35]. In a 2015
study, Masso-Valles D et al. showed that Ibrutinib, a mast
cell inhibitor, restricted fibrosis associated with PDAC
and extended the survival time of animals bearing these
tumors [36]. Tumor tissue derived from the HapT1 cells
contained numerous mast cells (Figure 2C). Whether this
could be employed in the future to investigate the effect of
mast cell inhibitors on PC fibrosis and growth remains an
unanswered question.
This study also describes the process of isolation
and characterization of ha-PSCs (Figure 3A–3D). The
protein expression profile of ha-PSCs was similar to
that of rat and human suggesting that similarities exist
between PSCs from different species. A robust expression
of Sonic hedgehog (Shh) was noted in HapT1 cells
(Supplementary Figure S5A and S5C) and that of Ptch1
in hamster PSCs (Figure 3D). This finding is important
as binding of SHH produced by PCCs with its receptor
PTCH1 expressed by PSCs activates PSCs proliferation,
desmoplasia, and growth of PCCs [37]. N-terminal SHH
is known to promote desmoplasia in human PC. We
found that human and hamster N-SHH are 99% identical
(Supplementary Figure S5B). This supports the usefulness
of this hamster model to test novel therapeutics against
human PC. Identification of MIF expression in activated
ha-PSCs, r-PSCs, and hu-PSCs (Supplementary Table S3;
Figure 3D; data not sown) has opened a novel aspect in
PSCs-mediated PC progression. A 2015 study found that
MIF is highly expressed in PDAC-derived exosomes, and
primes the liver for metastasis [27]. Ongoing studies are
attempting to understand the effect of PSCs-derived MIF
on the properties of PSCs and PCCs.
Pirfinidone treatment significantly decreased growth
of orthotopically implanted HapT1 tumors compared to
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

controls. It also decreased intra-tumor collagen deposition,
and the number of α-SMA positive cells (Figure 4). These
findings corroborate previous reports of the anticancer and
antifibrotic property of pirfenidone [11]. A combination
of pirfenidone and NAC decreased tumor growth more
than pirfenidone or NAC alone suggesting a possible
therapeutic use of this combination in treating human PC.
Pirfenidone and NAC are known to reduce fibrosis by
inhibiting TGF-β and ROS in fibrogenic cells, respectively
[38, 39]; however, the exact mechanism behind their
combinatorial effect against PSCs and PCCs is yet to be
investigated.
In the current study, we observed a significant
cytotoxic effect of DSF or DSF+Cu against in-culture
activated ha-PSCs and HapT1 cancer cells (Figure 5A
and 5B); however, the failure of DSF to perform in a
physiologically relevant HapT1 orthotopic tumor animal
model (Figure 6) strongly suggests the importance of
using appropriate animal models in preclinical drug
validation. The in vitro cytotoxic effects of DSF on haPSCs and HapT1 cancer cells were ROS-dependent
and -independent, respectively (Figures 5D and 5E).
The origin of cancer-associated fibroblast cells (CAFs)
is potentially from different sources and constitutes a
heterogeneous population [6]. Therefore, to rule out the
possibility that DSF is ineffective against cancerassociated fibroblast cells, we isolated these cells from
HapT1 orthotopic tumor tissues and treated them with
DSF or DSF+Cu (Supplementary Figure S6). Like PSCs,
the cancer-associated fibroblast cells were susceptible to
DSF or DSF+Cu treatment, and the cytotoxic effect of
DSF was ROS-dependent in vitro. Studies by others have
shown that the initial level of ROS in cells is critical for
DSF-induced cell death [32, 40]. By the same token, it is a
well-established fact that many cells isolated from normal
tissues and maintained in culture have increased levels
of culture-induced ROS [41]. However, such increased
basal levels of ROS are rarely or never been seen in any
normal cells of humans or animals in vivo [41]. Hence,
agents like DSF that induce cell death through enhancing
ROS beyond a tolerable level potentially do not show
their cytotoxic effect in vivo. A moderate cytotoxic
effect of DSF on cancer cells, as evidenced by a 16%
reduction in tumor weight, is potentially due to the ROSindependent cytotoxic effect of DSF on HapT1 cancer
cells (Figure 6B). It is possible that the failure of DSF
alone to induce a highly significant antitumor effect in vivo
is due to decreased bioavailability. The failure of DSF+Cu
to reduce both desmoplastic reactions and overall tumor
burden can be viewed as a harbinger for the unwanted protumorigenic events that could occur due to the Cu-induced
hyperactivity of DSF. In past decade, a Cu and DSF
combinatorial approach has shown encouraging results in
immune-compromised tumor models [15–18]. However,
based on the known protumorigenic effect of Cu alone
[42] and our current observation, we expect exogenous Cu
41831

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Isolation and molecular characterization of hamster PSCs (ha-PSCs). (A) Bright field image of ha-PSCs after 2nd

passage showing star-shaped cells with clear cytoskeletal structures (typical morphology of activated PSCs). Immunofluorescence staining
for α-SMA showed a homogenous population of activated PSCs (scale bar = 100 µm). (B) Mass spectrometric analysis of proteins obtained
from in-culture activated ha-PSCs and their further GOPC analysis via the PANTHER classification system shows presence of various
types/classes of proteins, including multiple extracellular matrix proteins. (C) Immunoblot analysis for certain PSCs-associated proteins
(α-SMA, vimentin, collagen I and fibronectin) shows cross-reactivity of different commercially available antibodies against hamster
proteins and confirms expression of these proteins by ha-PSCs. Protein lysates obtained from rat PSCs (r-PSCs) and recombinant humanfibronectin were used as positive controls. β-actin was used as loading control. Exp-1min and Exp-5min indicates exposure of the same
membrane to two different films for 1 minute and 5 minutes, respectively. (D) PCR analysis products for some of the selective molecules
confirms expression of these genes in ha-PSCs. β-actin was used as an internal control. Asterisk indicates galectin-3 specific band.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41832

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Effects of pirfenidone and/or N-acetylcysteine (NAC) on the HapT1 orthotopic tumor. (A) Hamsters orthotopically

injected with 8 × 104 HapT1 PCCs were orally administered with pirfenidone (Pirf) and/or N-acetylcysteine (NAC) daily for 21 days.
The schematic diagram shows the drug treatment schedule for different groups (n = 5 animals/group). Representative images of tumors
harvested from different groups show smaller tumors in all the drug-treated animals compared with control animals. (B) Quantification
of tumor weights shows reduction in the tumor weight of all the drug-treated animals compared with the control animals. Pirfenidone and
NAC co-administration showed a maximum reduction in tumor weight compared with the individual treatments. (C) Histopathological
analyses through H&E staining, aniline blue staining, and IHC for α-SMA show a decrease in the extent of desmoplastic reaction in all
the drug-treated animals. IHC for Ki67 shows the proliferative cells present in different tumor tissues. (D) Quantification of aniline blue,
α-SMA, and Ki67 stained sections shows the relative reduction in collagen deposition, the number of activated PSCs/myofibroblast-like
cells, and the number of proliferative cells in all the drug-treated tumors compared with control groups, respectively (n = 5; each value
presents the average of two stained sections per tumor). (E) Level of hydroxyproline reflecting collagen content in tumor tissues obtained
from different groups of animals (n = 5/group). Data presented as mean ± SE; *p < 0.05; **p < 0.005; ***p < 0.0005.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41833

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Effect of DSF and/or CuCl2 on the viability of hamster-PSCs and HapT1 cancer cells. (A) After 24 hours of

treatment with DSF or DSF+Cu or vehicle control, the ha-PSCs were cultured with normal culture medium. On fifth day of culture, the
plates were processed for crystal violate staining and quantification. The data clearly show the significant cytotoxic effect of 120  nM
DSF (with and without 10 µM CuCl2) and 50 nM DSF + 10 µM CuCl2 on ha-PSCs. The figure shows representative images of the
crystal violate stained plates (one out of three independent experiments in duplicates) and its corresponding quantified values (n = 3).
(B) The colony forming assay using HapT1 cancer cells shows the cytotoxic effect of DSF alone and in combination with Cu (24 hours of
treatment followed by 5 days of culture). Representative image of a crystal violet-stained plate (one out of three independent experiments in
duplicates) is shown. Data obtained from the crystal violate quantification corresponds to the number of viable cells (n = 3). (C) Co-culture
of ha-PSCs and HapT1-Luc cancer cells (H1-L) shows the role of PSCs in the growth of cancer cells. However, pre-treatment of PSCs
with DSF+Cu significantly reduced the growth advantage conferred by PSCs to H1-L cells. D & E) Cell viability checked through MTT
assay showed the rescue of ha-PSCs form DSF-mediated cell death after pre-incubation with 1 mM NAC; however, HapT1 cells did not get
benefit from NAC pre-incubation. Data presented as mean ± SE; *p < 0.05; **p < 0.005; ***p < 0.0005.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41834

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Effect of DSF, with or without Cu, on HapT1 orthotopic tumors. (A) Hamsters orthotopically injected with 8 × 104

HapT1 PCCs were injected (i.p.) with DSF, or DSF+Cu, or the respective vehicle control. The schematic diagram shows the treatment
schedule for different groups (n = 5). Representative images of tumors harvested from different groups and quantification of tumor weights
show smaller tumors in only DSF-treated animals compared with vehicle controls. However, animals treated with DSF+Cu have larger
tumors compared with control animals. (B) Quantification of tumor weights shows a significant reduction in the tumor weight only in DSFtreated tumors compared with corresponding control tumors. (C) Histopathological analysis through H&E staining, aniline blue staining,
and IHC for α-SMA shows similar levels of desmoplastic reaction in all the primary tumors, irrespective of the type of treatment. IHC for
Ki67 shows the proliferative cells present in different tumor tissues. (D) Quantification of aniline blue and α-SMA stained sections shows
similar levels of collagen deposition and abundance of activated-PSCs/myofibroblast-like cells in all groups. Quantification of Ki67-stained
sections shows the relative number of proliferative cells in all the drug-treated tumors compared with their corresponding control groups
(n = 5; each value presents the average of two stained sections per tumor). Data presented as mean ± SE; *p < 0.05; **p < 0.005.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41835

Oncotarget

would induce toxicity in DSF-treated animals. Together,
our investigation reinforces the importance of using a
physiologically relevant animal model, like the HapT1
hamster tumor model, for validating the efficacies of drugs
that are more likely to be effective in humans.

were measured, and gross necropsy was completed to
determine the extent of metastasis.
To evaluate the effect of DSF and DSF+Cu, HapT1
(8 × 104) cells were orthotopically implanted into the
pancreases of hamsters. Three days after injecting cancer
cells, all the tumor-bearing animals were randomly
divided into four groups (n = 5 per group). Before
the injection into animals, DSF (MP Biomedical) was
dissolved in a solution of DMSO, olive oil, cremophor,
and PBS (0.5:3:1.5:5). Each group received 200 µl
i.p injection of the following treatments for six days:
(i) vehicle1 group (Vec 1): DMSO-olive oil-cremophorPBS, (ii) DSF group: DSF 50 mg/kg, (iii) vehicle2 group
(Vec 2): 0.5 mg/kg CuSO4 in DMSO-olive oil-cremophorPBS, and (iv) DSF+Cu group: DSF 50 mg/ kg and
0.5 mg/ kg CuSO4. At day 14, all animals were sacrificed,
tumor weights measured, and gross necropsy was
performed to determine the extent of metastasis.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Orthotopic injection of HapT1 PCCs and drug
administration
Prior to conducting any animal studies, all protocols
were approved by the Institutional Animal Ethical
Committee (Institute of Life Sciences, Bhubaneswar,
India). To develop the desmoplastic pancreatic tumor,
HapT1 PCCs (8 × 104) were orthotopically injected
into the pancreases of Syrian golden hamsters. For this
purpose, inbred Syrian golden hamsters were procured
from the National Institute of Nutrition in Hyderabad,
India. HapT1 cells were harvested from sub-confluent
culture by a brief exposure to 0.25% trypsin and 0.02%
ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA). After neutralising
trypsin with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), the cells were
washed and re-suspended in phosphate-buffered saline
(PBS) at a concentration of 8 × 104 cells/50 µl. Single-cell
suspensions of greater than 90% viability were used for
injection. Animals were anesthetized with intraperitoneal
(i.p.) administration of a cocktail mixture of ketamine
(150 mg/kg) and xylazine (10 mg/kg). After sterilizing
the incision site, an approximately 1cm long incision was
made near the position of spleen. Gently, the splenic lobe
of the pancreas (Figure 1A) along with the spleen was
pulled up to the incision site, and around 8 × 104 HapT1
cells in 50 µl volume were injected into the splenic lobe
of the pancreas using a 30-guage needle. After resetting
all the pre-moved organs, the abdomen was closed with
absorbable catgut sutures. The skin incision was closed
with interrupted sutures of non-absorbable material.
The skin suture material was removed at approximately
five days after the surgical procedure. The animals were
monitored daily.
To analyse the effects of pirfenidone or NAC alone
or the combination of pirfenidone + NAC, HapT1 (8 × 104)
cells were orthotopically implanted into the splenic lobe
of the hamster pancreas (Figure 1A). Pirfenidone was
purchased as Pirfenex tablets (Cipla Ltd), crushed using
a mortar and pestle, and dissolved in sterile water to a
pirfenidone concentration of 200 mg/ml. NAC (Sigma)
was dissolved in sterile drinking water at a concentration
of 1 g/L. Three days after the injection of cancer cells,
all the tumor-bearing animals were randomly divided into
four groups (n = 5 per group) and orally administered
either 500 mg/kg pirfenidone (once daily) and/or 1 g/L
NAC in drinking water for 21 continuous days. Control
animals were provided with only sterile drinking water.
At day 24, all the animals were sacrificed, tumor weights
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Tissue processing and haematoxylin and eosin
staining
Tissue samples were collected and preserved in
10% formalin buffer solution at room temperature. For
histopathological analysis, tissues were processed for
paraffin embedding, and multiple 5-micron sections
were prepared. For haematoxylin and eosin staining,
slides were deparaffinized and hydrated with deionized
water followed by haematoxylin (Sigma) staining for
three minutes and eosin for two minutes. Next, slides
were thoroughly washed in H2O and dehydrated through
sequential alcohol grading then cleared in xylene and
mounted with permanent mounting media (Vector Lab).
Stained slides were observed under a Leica DM500 light
microscope, and representative images were taken at 10×
and 40× magnifications.

Aniline blue staining
For aniline blue staining, we modified the
conventional trichrome staining protocol. Briefly, slides
were deparaffinized and hydrated with deionized H2O
followed by incubation in pre-heated Bouin’s solution
(Sigma) for 15 minutes. Next, slides were cooled at room
temperature and washed under running tap water. Tissue
sections were then incubated in working phosphotungsticphosphomolybdic acid solution (Sigma) for five minutes
followed by aniline blue (Sigma) for 10 minutes and rinsed
in 1% acetic acid (SRL) for 2 minutes. Finally, slides were
thoroughly washed with deionized H2O and dehydrated
through sequential alcohol grading. They were then
cleared in xylene and mounted with permanent mounting
media (Vector Lab). Stained slides were observed under
a Leica DM500 light microscope, and images were
taken at 10× and 40× magnifications. The percentage of
collagen stained area (aniline blue) was quantified using
41836

Oncotarget

the automated ImageJ program in conjunction with the
threshold plug-in [43].

50 µl of supernatant were aliquoted to 96-well plate
in duplicate and allowed to dry in a 60°C oven. Next,
100 µl of chloramine T/oxidation buffer mixture was
added to each well and incubated at room temperature
for 5 minutes followed by addition of 100 µl of diluted
4-(Dimethylamino)benzaldehyde (DMAB) reagent
and incubated for 90 minutes at 60°C. Absorbance was
measured at 560 nm on VarioskanTM Flash Multimode
Reader (Thermo Scientific). Collagen was quantified as µg
of hydroxyproline per mg dry weight of starting material.

Toluidine blue staining
For toluidine blue staining, briefly, the slides were
deparaffinized and hydrated with deionized H2O, followed
by staining with toluidine blue solution pH 2.3 (Merck)
for three minutes. They were subsequently washed with
deionized H2O three times. Slides were dehydrated quickly
using 95% and 100% ethanol and then cleared in xylene
and mounted with permanent mounting media (Vector
Lab). Stained slides were observed under a Leica DM500
light microscope, and images were taken at 10× and 40×
magnifications.

Isolation of rat and hamster pancreatic stellate
cells
Immediately after sacrificing the animal, the
pancreas was collected in pre-chilled PBS containing 1×
penicillin/streptomycin (Sigma) under a BSL2 laminar
hood and processed as described by MV Apte et al.
[21]. Harvested cells were washed in 0.3% BSA and
resuspended in IMDM medium (Pan-Biotech) containing
10% FBS or 5% hamster serum, and grown in a humidified
incubator at 37°C.

Immunohistochemistry
For immunohistochemistry (IHC), mouse
monoclonal anti-αSMA, rabbit monoclonal anti-vimentin,
and rabbit polyclonal anti-fibronectin primary antibodies
were used to detect the cellular and extracellular
proteins (Supplementary Table S1). Briefly, slides were
deparaffinized and hydrated with deionized water. Antigen
retrieval was perfomed in acidic pH citrate buffer (Vector
Lab) by incubating slides in a steam cooker for 20 minutes.
Slides were then washed twice with PBS for five minutes,
followed by endogenous peroxidase quenching in 3%
H2O2 (SRL) for 15 minutes. Nonspecific binding was
blocked by incubating the slides with horse serum for 30
minutes, followed by overnight incubation with primary
antibody α-SMA, vimentin, and fibronectin at 4ºC in
a humidified chamber. Details of antibody dilutions are
provided in Supplementary Table S1. Slides were then
washed twice with PBS for five minutes and incubated
with biotinylated anti-rabbit/mouse IgG secondary
antibody for 45 minutes. Diaminobenzidine (Vector Lab)
was used to detect the immunoreactivity. Slides were
subsequently counterstained with haematoxylin (Sigma),
dehydrated through sequential alcohol grading, cleared
in xylene, and mounted with permanent mounting media
(Vector Lab). Stained slides were observed under a Leica
DM500 light microscope, and images were taken at 10×
and 40× magnifications. For all type of histopathological
evaluations, the stained slides were assessed by a qualified
veterinary pathologist (SKP).

Isolation of cancer-associated fibroblasts from
HapT1 tumors
Immediately after sacrificing the tumor-bearing
animals, the tumor was collected in pre-chilled PBS
containing 1× penicillin/streptomycin (Sigma) under a
BSL2 laminar hood. For isolation of cancer-associated
fibroblasts, tissues were taken only from peripheral region
of the tumor avoiding the necrotic tissues. Tissue samples
were disaggregated using a fine scalpel and digested with
an enzyme cocktail (collagenaseP 1.3 mg/ml and DNase1
0.01 mg/ml) at 37°C in shaking water bath (180 rpm) for
60 minutes, followed by mechanical dissociation. Digested
tissue samples were then filtered through a 70 µm cell
strainer (BD Falcon), washed with PBS, resuspended in
5% FBS/hamster serum containing Dulbecco’s Modified
Eagle Medium (DMEM; Pan-Biotech), and grown in a
humidified incubator at 37°C. After 30 minutes of cell
attachment, the remaining unattached cells were washed
off, and fresh medium was added.

Immunocytochemistry
Hamster-PSCs of P2 passage, cancer-associated
fibroblasts of P3 passage, and rat-PSCs of P3 passage
were seeded on poly L-lysine-coated glass coverslips
(Sigma) in six-well plates. After achieving the minimum
required confluence, cells were washed with PBS twice
for five minutes per wash, followed by fixation with an
ice-cold mixture of methanol and acetone (1:1 ratio) for
10 minutes at –20°C; nonspecific binding was blocked
with 2% BSA (MP Biomedical) in PBS for 30 minutes.
Cells were then incubated with an anti-α-SMA primary

Hydroxyproline assay
Frozen HapT1 tumor tissues were homogenized
using mortar pestle and lyophilized. Further, collagen
estimation was carried out as per the instructions
provided with the hydroxyproline assay kit (Sigma;
MAK008). Briefly, 5 mg of dry tumor samples in 250 µl
of 12 M HCl was hydrolyzed at 120°C for 3 hours. The
hydrolyzed samples were then briefly centrifuged and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41837

Oncotarget

antibody (1:100) overnight in a humidified chamber at
4°C, followed by anti-mouse IgG-ALEXA FLOUR 594
(1:500) for 45 minutes at room temperature. Finally,
cells were washed with PBS and mounted with mounting
medium containing DAPI (Life Technologies) to stain the
nuclei. Stained slides were examined under a Leica DMIL
LED microscope, and images were captured at 10× and
20× magnifications.

viable HapT1-Luc cells. The bioluminescence intensity
were measured by IVIS Lumina XR imaging system
(Caliper Life Sciences) and VarioskanTM Flash Multimode
Reader (Thermo Scientific). The values obtained through
the multimode reader were plotted as a bar graph.

Western blot analysis
For isolation of proteins, cells were harvested
using a radio-immuno precipitation assay (RIPA) cell
lysis buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl,
1 mM Na2EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 1% NP-40, 1% sodium
de-oxy-cholate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM
β-glycerophosphate, 1 mM Na3VO4) supplemented with
a protease inhibitor cocktail (MP Biomedicals). Protein
samples were passed through an insulin syringe to
facilitate the disruption of cell membranes and centrifuged
at 14,000 rpm for 30 minutes at 4°C. Supernatants were
collected, and protein concentrations were determined
by using the Bradford assay (Sigma). Protein lysates
were electrophoresed through 6% (for fibronectin), 8%
(for collagen) and 10% SDS-polyacrylamide gels (for
α-SMA, vimentin and SHH). The resolved proteins were
transferred onto poly-vinylidene difluoride membrane
(Milipore) and subjected to a standard immunedetection procedure using specific primary antibodies
(Supplementary Table S1) and horseradish peroxidaseconjugated secondary antibodies. Protein expression was
visualized by electrochemiluminescence (ECL; Bio-Rad).

Cell culture and viability assay
The HapT1 cancer cell line was commercially
procured from Sigma, and human PSCs (hu-PSCs) were
procured from Sciencell Research Laboratories. Both
the cell lines were propagated and frozen immediately
after receipt. The frozen stocks were revived and used
within three months. HapT1 cells were maintained in
10% FBS that contained MEM medium (Pan-Biotech)
supplemented with 1x NEAA (Life Technologies). Human
PSCs were maintained in 2% FBS containing Stellate Cell
Medium (SteCM; Sciencell) supplemented with growth
factors. With the approval of Institutional Animal Ethics
Committee (Institute of Life Sciences, Bhubaneswar,
India), rat and hamster PSCs were isolated from normal
pancreas. The PSCs were confirmed to have the typical
stellate cell morphology and were positive for α-SMA
(a marker for activated PSCs). All of the established cell
lines were used between 3-6 passages. Rat PSCs were
maintained in 10% FBS containing Iscove’s Modified
Dulbecco’s Medium (IMDM; Pan-Biotech), and hamster
PSCs were maintained in 5% hamster serum containing
IMDM medium (Pan-Biotech). To check cell viability
in vitro for HapT1 and PSCs, the MTT assay, crystal violet
staining, and colony formation assay were performed as
reported earlier [44, 45]. To determine the role of ROSinduced cell death, cells were pre-treated with 1 mM NAC
for 12 hours before adding DSF or DSF+Cu.

RNA Isolation, cDNA synthesis, RT-PCR, and
sequencing
Total RNA was isolated from hamster PSCs and
HapT1 cancer cells by using an RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen)
according to manufacturer instructions. First-strand cDNA
synthesis was completed using 2 µg of total RNA and a
high-capacity cDNA synthesis kit (Applied Biosystems)
according to manufacturer instructions. Expression of
different genes were determined using RT-PCR. Notably,
β-actin served as an internal control. Details of the primer
sequences are given in Supplementary Table S2. A total
of 2 µl of each cDNA sample was used as a template for
performing RT-PCR using Taq Polymerase (Invitrogen).
The annealing temperature for each primer set is
mentioned in Supplementary Table S2. The PCR products
were resolved in 2% agarose gel at 60 V, and presence
of amplicons were documented using gel documentation
system (BioRad). PCR-amplified products for all the
genes were sequenced using Sanger sequencing method
(Applied Biosystem).

Co-culture of ha-PSCs with HapT1-Luc cells
For direct co-culture assays, HapT1 cells were
stably transfected with luciferase-expressing plasmid
luc2 (pGL4.50 [luc2/CMV/hygro]; Promega) using
lipofectamine 3000 (Invitrogen). After 24 hours of
transfection, cells were cultured in MEM medium
containing selective antibiotic of 750 µg/ml Hygromycin
B (MP Biomedicals) to obtain hygromycin-resistant
HapT1-Luc clones. ha-PSCs were grown as monolayer
and treated with DSF (50 nM) with/without CuCl2
(10  µM) for 12 hours. After completion of treatment,
drug-containing medium was removed. Next, HapT1Luc cells were seeded on top of the PSCs and grown for
48 hours. To quantify viable HapT1-Luc cells, cell lysis
was performed and checked for luciferase activity with
Luciferase Assay System (Promega). In this method the
intensity of bioluminescence is proportional to number of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Protein isolation for massspectrometry analysis
For isolation of protein samples from hamster
PSCs, cells were harvested in protein lysis buffer
41838

Oncotarget

(0.025  M Tris, 0.15 M NaCl, 0.001 M EDTA, 1%
NP- 40, 5% glycerol, pH  7.4) then supplemented with
a protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (MP
Biomedicals) and stored at –80ºC until further analysis.
The homogenate was centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 30
min at 4ºC and the supernatant was collected. Protein
concentrations were determined by Bradford assay
(Sigma). Five hundred micrograms of protein sample
was precipitated with 30% TCA at 4ºC for 16 hr. The
sample was subsequently centrifuged at 14,000 g at 4ºC
for 30 minutes; the supernatant was discarded, and pellet
was air dried. Next, the protein pellet was suspended
in 50 µl of re-suspension buffer (6 M urea). Protein
(30 µg) was denatured by incubating at 60ºC for 1 hour
with 2 µl triflouroethanol (TFE) and then reduced by
adding a 20  mM final concentration of diothiothretol
(DTT); cysteines were alkylated by adding 20 mM final
concentration of iodoacetamide (IAA). Next, the samples
were digested overnight at 37°C in a final concentration
of 2 M urea with 100 mM Tris- HCl, pH 8.5, containing
trypsin at an enzyme/substrate ratio of 1:20 (Promega).
The reaction was quenched by addition of 90% formic
acid to a final concentration of 4%. Digested samples were
stored at –80°C until mass spectrometry analysis.

by adding common contaminant protein sequences. A
database search was performed in Andromeda [48] that
was integrated in a MaxQuant environment. A list of
280 common laboratory protein contaminants included
in MaxQuant was also added to the database, as well
as reversed target decoy search, which was used for all
sequences. For searching, the enzyme specificity was
set to trypsin with the maximum number of missed
cleavages set to 2. The precursor mass tolerance was
set to 0.07 Da for the first search and then to 0.006 Da
for the main search. Mass tolerance for fragment ions in
collision-induced dissociation (CID) spectra was set to
0.5 Da. The search included variable modifications of
protein N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, and
carbamidomethylation of cysteines, and was searched as a
fixed modification. The maximal number of modifications
per peptide was set to 5. The false discovery rate (FDR)
for PSM, proteins, and the site decoy fraction was set
to 1%. Additionally, time-of-flight mass spectrometry
(TOFMS)/MS mass tolerance was set to be 40 ppm. A
minimum peptide length of 6 was set, and the ‘peptide
requantification’ function was enabled. To validate and
transfer identifications across different runs, the ‘match
between runs’ option in MaxQuant was enabled with a
retention time window of 0.7 minutes and an alignment
time window of 20 minutes. Subsequent bioinformatics
analysis were performed using Protein Analysis through
Evolutionary Relationships (PANTHER) to compare
the gene ontology protein class (GOPC). The obtained
PANTHER [49] data was further analyzed, and graphs
were prepared using Microsoft Excel 2007. The mass
spectrometry data has been deposited to the Proteome
X- change consortium with the PRIDE partner repository
with the database identifier PXD003385 [50].

LC-MS/MS analysis
Nanoflow electrospray ionization tandem mass
spectrometry (Nano ESI-MS) analysis was carried
out using a Bruker nanoLC system (Nano Advance,
BrukerDaltonics) along with a captive spray- Maxis-HDqTOF mass spectrometer (BrukerDaltonics) with high
accuracy and sensitivity. Digested peptides were desalted,
concentrated on C18 reverse phase ZipTips, and eluted
twice with 20 μL 60% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid
before vacuum drying at room temperature. Peptides were
resuspended in 10 μL 0.1% formic acid, and subjected to
nLC-MS/MS. Peptides were separated using 15 cm long
analytical columns (Bruker Magic C18AQ, 0.1 × 150 mm,
3 μm particle size and 200 Å pore size) of 135 minute
gradient from 5% to 90% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic
acid and a flow rate of 400 nL per minute. The mass
spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition
mode with 3 intense precursor ions. Exclusion of all
charges less than 2 and greater than 6 were used, and all
unknown charges were kept in rejection mode. A dynamic
exclusion of 20 seconds was used. Full mass spectrometry
spectra scans were acquired with a scan range from 350
to 2200 m/z.

Statistical analysis
Comparisons between groups were evaluated using
an unpaired t test. Differences were considered significant
when the p-value was < 0.05. Analyses were conducted by
using Microsoft Excel 2007 or GraphPad Prism software.
Experimental results are expressed as mean ± SE.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Mr. Sujit Suklabaidya is a recipient of senior
research fellowship from the DBT, government of India.
Mrs. Pujarini Dash is a recipient of SERB national
post-doctoral fellowship, government of India. We
are grateful to Dr. B Ravindran, director, ILS for his
support. We express our sincere thanks to Dr. Amol
Ratnakar Suryawanshi, ILS, Bhubaneswar and Dr. Kiran
Ambatipudi, Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee for
their scientific suggestions. The authors are also thankful
to Dr. Sarita Jena and other staffs of animal facility at ILS
for their help in conducting the animal experiments. We

Data processing and bioinformatics analysis
Mass spectrometry data were analyzed by using
MaxQuant [46, 47] software version 1.5.2.8 and searched
through an in-house modified UniProt human, mouse, and
hamster database, along with the NCBI hamster database
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41839

Oncotarget

acknowledge the technical supports given by Mr. Madan
Mohan Mallick and Mr. Sushanta Swain.

amine-induced transplantable hamster pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma. Int J Pancreatol. 1994; 16:171–177.
10.	 Saito S, Nishimura N, Kubota Y, Yamazaki K, Shibuya T,
Sasaki H. Establishment and characterization of a cultured
cell line derived from nitrosamine-induced pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma in Syrian golden hamsters. Gastroenterol
Jpn. 1988; 23:183–194.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
No potential conflicts of interest declared.

FUNDING

11.	 Kozono S, Ohuchida K, Eguchi D, Ikenaga N, Fujiwara K,
Cui L, Mizumoto K, Tanaka M. Pirfenidone inhibits
pancreatic cancer desmoplasia by regulating stellate cells.
Cancer Res. 2013; 73:2345–2356.

This work was financially supported by the core
grant of Institute of Life Sciences (ILS), Bhubaneswar
and Ramalingaswami Fellowship from the Department of
Biotechnology (DBT), Government of India.

12.	 Sakamoto S, Muramatsu Y, Satoh K, Ishida F, Kikuchi N,
Sano G, Sugino K, Isobe K, Takai Y, Homma S.
Effectiveness of combined therapy with pirfenidone
and inhaled N-acetylcysteine for advanced idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis: a case-control study. Respirology. 2015;
20:445–452.

REFERENCES
1.	

Yadav D, Lowenfels AB. The epidemiology of pancreatitis and
pancreatic cancer. Gastroenterology. 2013; 144:1252–1261.

13.	 Qanungo S, Uys JD, Manevich Y, Distler AM, Shaner B,
Hill EG, Mieyal JJ, Lemasters JJ, Townsend DM, Nieminen
AL. N-acetyl-L-cysteine sensitizes pancreatic cancers to
gemcitabine by targeting the NFkappaB pathway. Biomed
Pharmacother. 2014; 68:855–864.

2.	 Rahib L, Smith BD, Aizenberg R, Rosenzweig AB,
Fleshman JM, Matrisian LM. Projecting cancer incidence
and deaths to 2030: the unexpected burden of thyroid, liver,
and pancreas cancers in the United States. Cancer Res.
2014; 74:2913–2921.

14.	 Jesnowski R, Furst D, Ringel J, Chen Y, Schrodel A,
Kleeff J, Kolb A, Schareck WD, Lohr M. Immortalization
of pancreatic stellate cells as an in vitro model of
pancreatic fibrosis: deactivation is induced by matrigel and
N-acetylcysteine. Lab Invest. 2005; 85:1276–1291.

3.	 Schober M, Jesenofsky R, Faissner R, Weidenauer C,
Hagmann W, Michl P, Heuchel RL, Haas SL, Lohr JM.
Desmoplasia and chemoresistance in pancreatic cancer.
Cancers. 2014; 6:2137–2154.

15.	 Chen D, Cui QC, Yang H, Dou QP. Disulfiram, a clinically
used anti-alcoholism drug and copper-binding agent,
induces apoptotic cell death in breast cancer cultures and
xenografts via inhibition of the proteasome activity. Cancer
Res. 2006; 66:10425–10433.

4.	 Apte MV, Park S, Phillips PA, Santucci N, Goldstein D,
Kumar RK, Ramm GA, Buchler M, Friess H, McCarroll JA,
Keogh G, Merrett N, Pirola R, et al. Desmoplastic reaction
in pancreatic cancer: role of pancreatic stellate cells.
Pancreas. 2004; 29:179–187.

16.	 Dastjerdi MN, Babazadeh Z, Rabbani M, Gharagozloo M,
Esmaeili A, Narimani M. Effects of disulfiram on apoptosis
in PANC-1 human pancreatic cancer cell line. Res Pharm
Sci. 2014; 9:287–294.

5.	 Armstrong T, Packham G, Murphy LB, Bateman AC,
Conti  JA, Fine DR, Johnson CD, Benyon RC, Iredale
JP. Type I collagen promotes the malignant phenotype of
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. Clin Cancer Res. 2004;
10:7427–7437.
6.	

17.	 Allensworth JL, Evans MK, Bertucci F, Aldrich AJ,
Festa  RA, Finetti P, Ueno NT, Safi R, McDonnell DP,
Thiele DJ, Van Laere S, Devi GR. Disulfiram (DSF) acts as
a copper ionophore to induce copper-dependent oxidative
stress and mediate anti-tumor efficacy in inflammatory
breast cancer. Mol Oncol. 2015; 9:1155–1168.

Kong X, Li L, Li Z, Xie K. Targeted destruction of the
orchestration of the pancreatic stroma and tumor cells in
pancreatic cancer cases: molecular basis for therapeutic
implications. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 2012; 23:343–356.

7.	 Pour P, Kruger FW, Althoff J, Cardesa A, Mohr U. Cancer
of the pancreas induced in the Syrian golden hamster. The
Am J Pathol. 1974; 76:349–358.

18.	 Han J, Liu L, Yue X, Chang J, Shi W, Hua Y. A binuclear
complex constituted by diethyldithiocarbamate and
copper(I) functions as a proteasome activity inhibitor in
pancreatic cancer cultures and xenografts.Toxicol Appl
Pharmacol. 2013; 273:477–483.

8.	 Tsutsumi M, Kondoh S, Noguchi O, Horiguchi K,
Kobayashi E, Okita S, Ohashi K, Honoki K, Tsujiuchi T,
Konishi Y. K-ras gene mutation in early ductal lesions
induced in a rapid production model for pancreatic
carcinomas in Syrian hamsters. Jpn J Cancer Res. 1993;
84:1101–1105.
9.	

19.	 Whatcott CJ, Diep CH, Jiang P, Watanabe A, LoBello
J, Sima C, Hostetter G, Shepard HM, Von Hoff DD,
Han H. Desmoplasia in Primary Tumors and Metastatic
Lesions of Pancreatic Cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2015;
21:3561–3568.

Mori T, Tsutsumi M, Noguchi O, Horiguchi K, Hohnoki K,
Okita S, Suzuki F, Konishi Y. Characterization of three
cloned cell lines from a N-nitrosobis(2-hydroxypropyl)

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20.	 Cai SW, Yang SZ, Gao J, Pan K, Chen JY, Wang YL,
Wei LX, Dong JH. Prognostic significance of mast cell
41840

Oncotarget

21.	

22.	

23.	

24.	

25.	

26.	

27.	

28.	

29.	

30.	

31.	

32.	

count following curative resection for pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma. Surgery. 2011; 149:576–584.
Apte MV, Haber PS, Applegate TL, Norton ID, McCaughan
GW, Korsten MA, Pirola RC, Wilson JS. Periacinar stellate
shaped cells in rat pancreas: identification, isolation, and
culture. Gut. 1998; 43:128–133.
Omary MB, Lugea A, Lowe AW, Pandol SJ. The pancreatic
stellate cell: a star on the rise in pancreatic diseases. J Clin
Invest. 2007; 117:50–59.
Mantoni TS, Schendel RR, Rodel F, Niedobitek G, AlAssar  O, Masamune A, Brunner TB. Stromal SPARC
expression and patient survival after chemoradiation for
non-resectable pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Cancer Biol
Ther. 2008; 7:1806–1815.
Apte MV, Yang L, Phillips PA, Xu Z, Kaplan W, Cowley
M, Pirola RC, Wilson JS. Extracellular matrix composition
significantly influences pancreatic stellate cell gene
expression pattern: role of transgelin in PSC function. Am J
Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2013; 305:G408–417.
Tang D, Yuan Z, Xue X, Lu Z, Zhang Y, Wang H, Chen
M, An Y, Wei J, Zhu Y, Miao Y, Jiang K. High expression
of Galectin-1 in pancreatic stellate cells plays a role in the
development and maintenance of an immunosuppressive
microenvironment in pancreatic cancer. Int J Cancer. 2012;
130:2337–2348.
Senapati S, Chaturvedi P, Chaney WG, Chakraborty  S,
Gnanapragassam VS, Sasson AR, Batra SK. Novel
INTeraction of MUC4 and galectin: potential
pathobiological implications for metastasis in lethal
pancreatic cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2011; 17:267–274.
Costa-Silva B, Aiello NM, Ocean AJ, Singh S, Zhang H,
Thakur BK, Becker A, Hoshino A, Mark MT, Molina H,
Xiang J, Zhang T, Theilen TM, et al. Pancreatic cancer
exosomes initiate pre-metastatic niche formation in the
liver. Nat Cell Biol. 2015; 17:816–826.
Rosendahl AH, Gundewar C, Said Hilmersson K, Ni L,
Saleem MA, Andersson R. Conditionally immortalized
human pancreatic stellate cell lines demonstrate enhanced
proliferation and migration in response to IGF-I. Exp Cell
Res. 2015; 330:300–310.
Liu Y, Du L. Role of pancreatic stellate cells and periostin
in pancreatic cancer progression. Tumour Biol. 2015;
36:3171–3177.
Han L, Ma J, Duan W, Zhang L, Yu S, Xu Q, Lei J, Li X,
Wang Z, Wu Z, Huang JH, Wu E, Ma Q, et al. Pancreatic
stellate cells contribute pancreatic cancer pain via activation
of sHH signaling pathway. Oncotarget. 2016; doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.7776.
Mantoni TS, Lunardi S, Al-Assar O, Masamune A, Brunner
TB. Pancreatic stellate cells radioprotect pancreatic cancer
cells through beta1-integrin signaling. Cancer Res. 2011;
71:3453–3458.
Dinnen RD, Mao Y, Qiu W, Cassai N, Slavkovich VN,
Nichols G, Su GH, Brandt-Rauf P, Fine RL. Redirecting
apoptosis to aponecrosis induces selective cytotoxicity to

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

pancreatic cancer cells through increased ROS, decline
in ATP levels, and VDAC. Mol Cancer Ther. 2013;
12:2792–2803.
33.	 Schmied BM, Ulrich AB, Matsuzaki H, El-Metwally TH,
Ding X, Fernandes ME, Adrian TE, Chaney WG, Batra
SK, Pour PM. Biologic instability of pancreatic cancer
xenografts in the nude mouse. Carcinogenesis. 2000;
21:1121–1127.
34.	 Strouch MJ, Cheon EC, Salabat MR, Krantz SB,
Gounaris E, Melstrom LG, Dangi-Garimella S, Wang E,
Munshi HG, Khazaie K, Bentrem DJ. Crosstalk between
mast cells and pancreatic cancer cells contributes to
pancreatic tumor progression. Clin Cancer Res. 2010;
16:2257–2265.
35.	 Ma Y, Hwang RF, Logsdon CD, Ullrich SE. Dynamic mast
cell-stromal cell interactions promote growth of pancreatic
cancer. Cancer Res. 2013; 73:3927–3937.
36.	 Masso-Valles D, Jauset T, Serrano E, Sodir NM, Pedersen K,
Affara NI, Whitfield JR, Beaulieu ME, Evan GI, Elias L,
Arribas J, Soucek L. Ibrutinib exerts potent antifibrotic
and antitumor activities in mouse models of pancreatic
adenocarcinoma. Cancer Res. 2015; 75:1675–1681.
37.	 Bailey JM, Swanson BJ, Hamada T, Eggers JP, Singh PK,
Caffery T, Ouellette MM, Hollingsworth MA. Sonic
hedgehog promotes desmoplasia in pancreatic cancer. Clin
Cancer Res. 2008; 14:5995–6004.
38.	 Zhou H, Latham CW, Zander DS, Margolin SB, Visner GA.
Pirfenidone inhibits obliterative airway disease in mouse
tracheal allografts. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2005;
24:1577–1585.
39.	 Zhang L, He YL, Li QZ, Hao XH, Zhang ZF, Yuan  JX,
Bai YP, Jin YL, Liu N, Chen G, Yun X, Yao SQ.
N-acetylcysteine alleviated silica-induced lung fibrosis in
rats by down-regulation of ROS and mitochondrial apoptosis
signaling. Toxicol Mech Methods. 2014; 24:212–219.
40.	 Grosicka-Maciag E, Kurpios-Piec D, Grzela T, Czeczot H,
Skrzycki M, Szumilo M, Rahden-Staron I. Protective effect
of N-acetyl-L-cysteine against disulfiram-induced oxidative
stress and apoptosis in V79 cells. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol.
2010; 248:210–216.
41.	 Halliwell B. Oxidative stress in cell culture: an underappreciated problem? FEBS Lett. 2003; 540:3–6.
42.	 Ishida S, Andreux P, Poitry-Yamate C, Auwerx J,
Hanahan D. Bioavailable copper modulates oxidative
phosphorylation and growth of tumors. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A. 2013; 110:19507–19512.
43.	 Ding J, Yannam GR, Roy-Chowdhury N, Hidvegi T,
Basma  H, Rennard SI, Wong RJ, Avsar Y, Guha C,
Perlmutter DH, Fox IJ, Roy-Chowdhury J. Spontaneous
hepatic repopulation in transgenic mice expressing mutant
human alpha1-antitrypsin by wild-type donor hepatocytes.
J Clin Invest. 2011; 121:1930–1934.
44.	 Khursheed M, Kolla JN, Kotapalli V, Gupta N,
Gowrishankar S, Uppin SG, Sastry RA, Koganti S,
41841

Oncotarget

Sundaram C, Pollack JR, Bashyam MD. ARID1B, a
member of the human SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling
complex, exhibits tumour-suppressor activities in pancreatic
cancer cell lines. Br J Cancer. 2013; 108:2056–2062.

48.	 Cox J, Neuhauser N, Michalski A, Scheltema RA, Olsen JV,
Mann M. Andromeda: a peptide search engine integrated
into the MaxQuant environment. J Proteome Res. 2011;
10:1794–1805.

45.	 Franken NA, Rodermond HM, Stap J, Haveman J, van
Bree C. Clonogenic assay of cells in vitro. Nat Protoc. 2006;
1:2315–2319.

49.	 Thomas PD, Campbell MJ, Kejariwal A, Mi H, Karlak B,
Daverman R, Diemer K, Muruganujan A, Narechania A.
PANTHER: a library of protein families and subfamilies
indexed by function. Genome Res. 2003; 13:2129–2141.

46.	 Cox J, Mann M. MaxQuant enables high peptide
identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass
accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat
Biotechnol. 2008; 26:1367–1372.

50.	 Vizcaino JA, Deutsch EW, Wang R, Csordas A, Reisinger
F, Rios D, Dianes JA, Sun Z, Farrah T, Bandeira N, Binz
PA, Xenarios I, Eisenacher M, et al. ProteomeXchange
provides globally coordinated proteomics data submission
and dissemination. Nat Biotechnol. 2014; 32:223–226.

47.	 Cox J, Matic I, Hilger M, Nagaraj N, Selbach M, Olsen JV,
Mann M. A practical guide to the MaxQuant computational
platform for SILAC-based quantitative proteomics. Nat
Protoc. 2009; 4:698–705.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41842

Oncotarget

