Editorial

Ramucirumab in Metastatic Renal Cell Carcinoma
The Beginning or the End?
Sumanta K. Pal, MD1 and Robert A. Figlin, MD2

In this issue of Cancer, Garcia et al report results from a phase 2 trial of ramucirumab in patients with metastatic renal cell
carcinoma (mRCC).1 Ramucirumab, an immunoglobulin G1 (IgG1) monoclonal antibody with affinity for the extracellular domain of vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2 (VEGFR2), was recently granted priority review by the US
Food and Drug Administration on the basis of the phase 3 REGARD trial (ramucirumab monotherapy for previously
treated advanced gastric or gastroesophageal junction adenocarcinoma).2 In that study, patients with advanced gastric cancer who had failed prior platinum-based or fluoropyrimidine-based therapy and received ramucirumab with best supportive care (BSC) had a prolongation in both progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS) compared with
patients who received ramucirumab alone. Even more recently, the phase 3 RAINBOW trial (ramucirumab plus paclitaxel
vs placebo plus paclitaxel in the treatment of metastatic gastroesophageal junction and gastric adenocarcinoma after disease progression on first-line platinum-containing and fluoropyrimidine-containing combination therapy) suggested a
benefit of OS with the combination of paclitaxel and ramucirumab (vs paclitaxel with placebo) in a similar setting.3 These
data come on the heels of results from a separate, negative phase 3 trial of ramucirumab in metastatic breast cancer.4 With
the mixed pool of results amassed thus far, what will be the ultimate fate of ramucirumab in mRCC?
The results reported by Garcia et al provide several key insights but may be insufficient to fully address this question.
The trial evaluated 40 patients with mRCC who had received prior therapy with sorafenib and/or sunitinib. The study
failed to meet its primary endpoint, reporting an objective response rate (ORR) of just 5.1%. The selection of ORR as a
primary endpoint in phase 2 trials has been the subject of much debate, especially given that all phase 3 trials in mRCC to
date that have led to drug approvals have used PFS. The PFS data from this phase 2 experience (7.1 months) is perhaps
more encouraging than the observed ORR. Acknowledging the caveats of any cross-trial comparison, these data compare
favorably to the PFS associated with everolimus in a phase 3 trial of daily oral everolimus for RCC (the RECORD-1 trial)
(4.0 months) and with axitinib in a phase 3 trial of axitinib versus sorafenib in advanced RCC (the AXIS trial) (6.7
months).5,6 Although the eligibility criteria of the current study closely mirror those in RECORD-1, it is worth noting
that AXIS only permitted 1 prior line of therapy (either cytokine or targeted therapy)—in the subset of patients receiving
axitinib after prior sunitinib, a more modest PFS of 4.8 months was observed. Of course, results from the phase 2 ramucirumab experience are tempered by the absence of an independent radiographic review, which would have a bearing on
both ORR and PFS.
Garcia et al posit several paths forward for ramucirumab, suggesting further development as a single agent or possibly
in combination with mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitors, MET inhibitors, or immunomodulatory therapy.1 All of these paths, however, are fraught with challenges. A stronger signal of activity in a randomized trial would be
necessary to justify the further use of ramucirumab as monotherapy. A juxtaposition of ramucirumab against other
second-line options (eg, axitinib or everolimus) in a randomized, phase 2 study would be ideal. With respect to

Corresponding author: Sumanta K. Pal, MD, Department of Medical Oncology and Experimental Therapeutics, City of Hope Comprehensive Cancer Center, 1500
East Duarte Road, Duarte, CA 91010; Fax: (626) 301-8233; spal@coh.org
The current editorial focuses on a phase 2 study evaluating ramucirumab in patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma (mRCC) who have received prior sunitinib and/or sorafenib therapy. The potential for further development is discussed in the context of the rapidly changing landscape of therapy for mRCC.
See referenced original article on pages 1647-1655, this issue.
1
Department of Medical Oncology and Experimental Therapeutics, City of Hope Comprehensive Cancer Center, Duarte, California; 2Samuel Oschin Comprehensive
Cancer Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, California

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.28636, Received: January 27, 2014; Accepted: January 29, 2014, Published online February 27, 2014 in Wiley Online Library
(wileyonlinelibrary.com)

1604

Cancer

June 1, 2014

Editorial/Pal and Figlin

Figure 1. Maximum progression-free survival is illustrated in months for selected vascular endothelial growth factor-directed
therapies observed in phase 3 studies (for first-line therapy). TIVO-1 indicates “A Phase 3, Randomized, Controlled, Multi-Center,
Open-Label Study to Compare Tivozanib (AV-951) to Sorafenib in Subjects with Advanced Renal Cell Carcinoma”; IFN, interferon;
CALGB, Cancer and Leukemia Group B.

combinations, the data for pairing VEGF-directed and
mTOR-directed therapies have been sobering to date.
The randomized, phase 3 INTORACT trial (bevacizumab plus temsirolimus vs bevacizumab plus interferon-a
[IFN-a] in advanced RCC) failed to demonstrate an
advantage with bevacizumab/temsirolimus compared
with bevacizumab/IFN-a.7 Similarly, no benefit was
observed with the combination of bevacizumab/everolimus (vs bevacizumab/IFN-a) in the phase 2 RECORD-2
study.8 There is little rationale to suggest that the combination of ramucirumab with either available mTOR inhibitor would yield superior results. Garcia et al also
suggest the combination of ramucirumab with a MET inhibitor, citing compelling phase 1 data for the dual
VEGFR2/MET inhibitor cabozantinib in mRCC.9 However, because both ramucirumab and cabozantinib have
anit-VEGFR2 properties, such a combination seems
redundant.
Finally, the authors posit a combination of ramucirumab with immune-based therapies—presumably, they
are referring to agents like programmed death-1 (PD-1)
inhibitors, which augment the antitumor immune
response. There are trials already underway to assess the
combinations of sunitinib and pazopanib with the PD-1
inhibitor nivolumab.10 If these combinations prove to be
feasible, then the pairing of ramucirumab with a PD-1
inhibitor must offer superior safety or efficacy to move
forward. Before such combinations are entertained in
the clinic, it might be worthwhile to explore the
Cancer

June 1, 2014

immunomodulatory properties of ramucirumab. Increasingly, it is being observed that VEGF-directed therapies
have complex effects on the immune milieu. Agents such
as sorafenib may actually reduce the production of
antigen-specific T-cells, thereby stifling the antitumor
immune response.11 In contrast, sunitinib appears to
increase tumor immunity by decreasing regulatory T-cell
(Treg) populations and negatively modulating myeloidderived suppressor cell (MDSC) infiltration in tumor tissue.12 Although the rationale may hinge on other factors
as well, it is worth noting that 2 phase 3 trials of novel vaccines for mRCC (AGS-003 and IMA-901) explore combination therapy with sunitinib.13,14 Thus, assays to assess
the effects of ramucirumab on Tregs and MDSCs may
inform the decision to move forward with combinations
with immunotherapy.
Given the rather modest outlook for ramucirumab
in an unselected population of patients with mRCC, 1
informed approach might be to identify biomarker-based
subsets of patients who could derive greater benefit from
the drug. The most obvious candidate biomarker is
VEGFR2—proteomic analyses have suggested fluxes in
VEGFR2 expression before and after VEGF-tyrosine kinase inhibitor (VEGF-TKI) therapy, and polymorphisms
have been detected in VEGFR2 that predict both VEGFTKI efficacy and toxicity.15,16 It is noteworthy that Garcia
et al report no correlation between levels of soluble
VEGFR2 (sVEGFR2) and clinical outcome.1 If adequate
specimens are available, then assessment of VEGFR2
1605

Editorial

polymorphisms and VEGFR2 expression (the latter
requiring tissue) would be of interest. Besides VEGFR2,
multiple other moieties exist that potentially predict outcome with VEGF-directed therapy. In a subset of patients
derived from a pivotal phase 3 trial comparing sunitinib
and IFN-a, it was observed that baseline levels of
VEGFR3 were predictive of PFS and OS with sunitinib
therapy.17 It is noteworthy that VEGFR3 (in contrast to
other members of the VEGF receptor family) appears to
function primarily in lymphangiogenesis.18 Several
reports also suggest an association between clinical
outcome with VEGF-TKIs and aberrations in VEGFR1
(either the presence of polymorphisms or altered expression).19,20 In addition to its angiogenic properties,
VEGFR1 may be a marker of the premetastatic niche—a
component of the normal tissue microenvironment that
fosters the growth and invasion of metastases.21 Garcia
et al did observe modest associations between elevated
sVEGFR1 and shorter PFS and OS. Furthermore, elevated sVEGFR1 was associated with a poorer 12-week
disease control rate. If a biomarker-based strategy were
contemplated for further development of ramucirumab,
then the results from the current study would most
strongly support selection based on VEGFR1 expression.
Ultimately, most acknowledge that the future of
mRCC therapy lies in the identification of novel targets
and salient pathways outside of the VEGF-signaling axis.
Figure 1 offers a perspective of PFS across several first-line
trials that have evaluated VEGF-directed therapies and
suggests a plateau in efficacy across those studies. There is
hope that several of the therapeutic classes noted previously (eg, PD-1 inhibitors, MET inhibitors, and vaccines)
may break through this plateau. Furthermore, through
the use of massively parallel sequencing technologies, previously unrecognized mutations in several genes have been
identified—presumably, these alterations could drive further therapeutic development in mRCC. These genes are
located on chromosome 3p in a region that houses the
VHL gene and is deleted in 90% of patients with clear
cell RCC. Three genes in particular, BAP1, PBRM1, and
SETD2, appear to have substantial prognostic value in
RCC. Each of the associated proteins plays a role in chromatin remodeling and DNA damage repair—presumably, agents that modulate these activities could have
therapeutic value.
In summary, the data presented by Garcia et al suggest a complicated road ahead for ramucirumab in
mRCC. From a single-arm, phase 2 study powered to
assess ORR, it is challenging to ascertain whether sufficient information is present to offer a green light to
1606

further development. The study offers several lessons for
investigators developing therapeutics in this space. First,
given the pattern of regulatory approvals to date in
mRCC, a primary endpoint of PFS may offer greater
value. Second, a single-arm design (although certainly not
as resource-intensive) offers far less information than a
randomized comparison. With 5 other VEGF-directed
therapies competing in the same domain, understanding
the relative benefit of each agent is key. Finally, in a
related lesson, the investigators must acknowledge the
crowded treatment landscape and think of innovative
ways in which to incorporate novel therapies. Biomarkerbased trial designs are often discussed in a theoretical fashion under the umbrella of “personalized medicine”: for
the field to move ahead, these designs must become a
reality.
FUNDING SUPPORT
No specific funding was disclosed.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
Dr. Pal reports honoraria for consulting from Novartis and Medivation, has acted as a consultant to Pfizer and Aveo, and has received
grants from GlaxcoSmithKline.

REFERENCES
1. Garcia JA, Hudes GR, Choueiri TK, et al. A phase 2, single-arm
study of ramucirumab in patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma with disease progression on or intolerance to tyrosine kinase
inhibitor therapy. Cancer. 2014;120:1647-1655.
2. Fuchs CS, Tomasek J, Yong CJ, et al. Ramucirumab monotherapy
for previously treated advanced gastric or gastro-oesophageal junction
adenocarcinoma (REGARD): an international, randomised,
multicentre, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet. 2014;383:
31-39.
3. Wilke H, Cutsem EV, Oh SC, et al. RAINBOW: a global, phase
III, randomized, double-blind study of ramucirumab plus paclitaxel
versus placebo plus paclitaxel in the treatment of metastatic gastroesophageal junction (GEJ) and gastric adenocarcinoma following disease progression on first-line platinum- and fluoropyrimidinecontaining combination therapy rainbow IMCL CP12-0922 (I4TIE-JVBE) [abstract]. J Clin Oncol. 2014;32(Jan 20 suppl). Abstract
LBA7.
4. Mackeyl JR, Ramos-Vazquez M, Lipatov O, et al. Primary results of
ROSE/TRIO-12, a randomized placebo controlled phase III trial
evaluating the addition of ramucirumab to first-line docetaxel chemotherapy in metastatic breast cancer [Abstract S5-04]. Paper presented at: 36th Annual San Antonio Breast Cancer Symposium;
December 10-14, 2013; San Antonio, Texas.
5. Rini BI, Escudier B, Tomczak P, et al. Comparative effectiveness of
axitinib versus sorafenib in advanced renal cell carcinoma (AXIS): a
randomised phase 3 trial. Lancet. 2011;378:1931-1939.
6. Motzer RJ, Escudier B, Oudard S, et al. Efficacy of everolimus in
advanced renal cell carcinoma: a double-blind, randomised, placebocontrolled phase III trial. Lancet. 2008;372:449-456.
7. Rini BI, Bellmunt J, Clancy J, et al. Randomized phase III trial of
temsirolimus and bevacizumab versus interferon alfa and bevacizumab in metastatic renal cell carcinoma: INTORACT trial [published
online ahead of print December 2, 2013]. J Clin Oncol. 2013.
8. Ravaud A, Barrios C, Anak O, et al. Randomized phase II study of
first-line everolimus (EVE) 1 bevacizumab (BEV) versus interferon

Cancer

June 1, 2014

Editorial/Pal and Figlin

9.

10.

11.
12.

13.

14.

alfa-2a (IFN) 1 BEV in patients (pts) with metastatic renal cell carcinoma (mRCC): RECORD-2 [abstract]. Ann Oncol. 2012;23(suppl).
Abstract 7830.
Choueiri TK, Pal SK, McDermott DF, et al. Efficacy of cabozantinib (XL184) in patients (pts) with metastatic, refractory renal cell
carcinoma (RCC) [abstract]. J Clin Oncol. 2012;30(suppl). Abstract
4504.
.Bristol-Myers Squibb. NCT01472081: A Phase 1 Study of BMS936558 Plus Sunitinib or Pazopanib in Subjects With Metastatic
Renal Cell Carcinoma. Available at: http://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT01472081?term5BMS-936558&rank52. Accessed October 22,
2012.
Hipp MM, Hilf N, Walter S, et al. Sorafenib, but not sunitinib,
affects function of dendritic cells and induction of primary immune
responses. Blood. 2008;111:5610-5620.
Xin H, Zhang C, Herrmann A, Du Y, Figlin R, Yu H. Sunitinib
inhibition of Stat3 induces renal cell carcinoma tumor cell apoptosis
and reduces immunosuppressive cells. Cancer Res. 2009;69:25062513.
.Immatics Biotechnologies GmbH. NCT01265901: A Randomized,
Controlled Phase III Study Investigating IMA901 Multipeptide
Cancer Vaccine in Patients Receiving Sunitinib as First-line Therapy
for Advanced/Metastatic Renal Cell Carcinoma. Available at: http://
clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01265901?term5IMA-901&rank52.
Accessed October 22, 2012.
.Argos Therapeutics. NCT01582672: Phase 3 Trial of Autologous
Dendritic Cell Immunotherapy (AGS-003) Plus Standard Treatment

Cancer

June 1, 2014

15.

16.

17.

18.
19.

20.

21.

of Advanced Renal Cell Carcinoma (RCC) (ADAPT) Available at:
http://www.clinicaltrials.gov. Accessed December 15, 2013.
Kim JJ, Vaziri SA, Rini BI, et al. Association of VEGF and
VEGFR2 single nucleotide polymorphisms with hypertension and
clinical outcome in metastatic clear cell renal cell carcinoma patients
treated with sunitinib. Cancer. 2012;118:1946-1954.
Stewart GD, O’Mahony F, Eory L, et al. Proteomic analysis of preand post-sunitinib treated renal cancer tissue to assess tumor heterogeneity and differential protein expression [abstract]. J Clin Oncol.
2012;30(suppl). Abstract 388.
Harmon CS, Deprimo SE, Figlin RA, et al. Circulating proteins as
potential biomarkers of sunitinib and interferon-alpha efficacy in
treatment-naive patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma. Cancer
Chemother Pharmacol. 2014;73:151-161.
Bierer S, Herrmann E, Kopke T, et al. Lymphangiogenesis in kidney
cancer: expression of VEGF-C, VEGF-D and VEGFR-3 in clear cell
and papillary renal cell carcinoma. Oncol Rep. 2008;20:721-725.
Beuselinck B, Karadimou A, Lambrechts D, et al. VEGFR1 single
nucleotide polymorphisms associated with outcome in patients with
metastatic renal cell carcinoma treated with sunitinib—a multicentric
retrospective analysis. Acta Oncol. 2014;53:103-112.
Dornbusch J, Zacharis A, Meinhardt M, et al. Analyses of potential
predictive markers and survival data for a response to sunitinib in
patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma [serial online]. PLoS
One. 2013;8:e76386.
Kaplan RN. VEGFR1-positive haematopoietic bone marrow progenitors initiate the pre-metastatic niche. Nature. 2005;438:820-827.

1607

