Oncotarget, February, Vol.3, No 2

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Modulating Mesothelin Shedding to Improve Therapy
Yujian Zhang and Ira Pastan
Many tumor-specific or tumor-associated antigens
have been discovered, but only a few of them have been
successfully used for cancer therapy. Not only are the
pharmacological properties of therapeutic drug molecules
critical to the clinical success, the biological nature of
the target antigens has a big influence on the therapeutic
outcome.
In searching for good drug targets for cancer, our
lab discovered a cell surface protein called mesothelin in
the 1990s. It is highly expressed in many tumors such as
mesothelioma, ovarian cancer, pancreatic cancer and lung
cancer. However, it only has minor expression in normal
mesothelial cells lining the pleura, pericardium and
peritoneum. This expression pattern makes it an attractive
target. We designed a mesothelin targeted immunotoxin
called SS1P in which the Fv portion of an anti-mesothelin
antibody is fused to a truncated portion of Pseudomonas
exotoxin A (PE38).
The cell-killing mechanism of immunotoxin involves
three general steps. i) The SS1P immunotoxin molecule
binds to mesothelin on the cell surface; ii) SS1P enters the
cell through a mesothelin-mediated internalization process
and its PE portion is translocated to the cytosol; and iii)
the PE molecule causes ADP-ribosylation of EF-2, leading
to arrest of protein synthesis and apoptosis. SS1P turns out
to be very toxic to mesothelioma cells, yet is well tolerated
by patients in spite of low level mesothelin expression in
normal tissue. We observed several minor responses in our
phase I clinical trials [1].
Depending on the cell-killing mechanism, the
cytotoxicity of an immunotoxin can be significantly
affected by the target properties, such as the signaling
pathway involved, the cell surface target density, target
internalization rate, target-mediated membrane traffic
pathway, etc. Mesothelin is a GPI-anchored protein
without an intracellular tail. Its physiological ligand has
not been identified and it is not known if mesothelin is
involved in any signaling pathway. Mesothelin has been
shown to bind to another cell surface protein, MUC16.
Mesothelin has several features, which make it
useful for cancer therapy. Mesothelin is well-internalized,
making it a good target for immunotoxins. Mesothelin is
actively shed from the cell surface, generating an antigen
pool in the circulation and in the tumor interstitial space.
The measurement of serum levels of shed mesothelin
is used as a criterion in the diagnosis of mesothelioma
and ovarian cancer in patients. Mesothelin in the tumor
interstitial space will inevitably interact with its targeting
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

agents during the process of tumor penetration. To better
understand the biological and pharmacological significance
of mesothelin shedding, we studied the mechanism of
shedding in the A431/H9 cell line, which highly expresses
mesothelin on its cell surface [2]. Although mesothelin is
attached to the cell membrane through its GPI anchor and
phospholipase (PL) can release the protein, PL does not
seem to play a significant role in the shedding because
several PL inhibitors failed to reduce the shedding, and
sequencing of shed mesothelin did not reveal the amino
acid sequence expected from PL C action [2, 3]. Instead,
we found that broad-spectrum MMP/ADAM inhibitors
significantly inhibit mesothelin shedding. We narrowed
down the candidate MMP/ADAM genes by testing the
inhibitory effect of several endogenous MMP/ADAM
inhibitors. These studies led us to ADAM17/TACE, the
first ‘sheddase’ to be identified, which has been implicated
in the release of a diverse variety of membrane-anchored
cytokines, cell adhesion molecules, receptors, ligands
and enzymes. TACE knockdown by siRNA significantly
reduced mesothelin shedding.
TACE is a transmembrane glycoprotein, most noted
in cancer for its role in releasing EGFR ligands from the
cell surface, by which it can regulate the activation of the
EGFR pathway. There is evidence that chemotherapy can
activate TACE, contributing to drug resistance, whereas
inhibiting TACE can sensitize tumor cells to chemotherapy
[4, 5]. We observed that cytotoxicity of SS1P was
increased in cultured cells when TACE was knocked down
by siRNA or inhibited by small inhibitor molecules. We
do not know whether the EGFR pathway plays a role in
this finding but we saw increased cell surface mesothelin
levels and an increased internalization rate of SS1P. These
are favorable characteristics for SS1P therapy. Considering
the possibility of translating our research finding to the
clinic, we examined other mesothelin-expressing cell lines
and primary mesothelioma cells from several patients.
TACE inhibition was shown to sensitize these cells to
SS1P. We attribute this effect to the reduced dissociation
of targeting molecules bound to mesothelin from the
cell surface after binding. Currently there is no effective
ADAM17 inhibitor available for clinical studies. Several
broad-spectrum MMP/ADAM inhibitors failed in clinical
trials, so it would probably be difficult to get a protocol
approved to directly evaluate this approach in patients.
There is a new small molecule called INCB7839 which is
showing some promising results [6].
We want to emphasize that tumor targeting is a
114

Oncotarget 2012; 3: 114-115

complicated process. The modulation of mesothelin
shedding could have a systemic influence on drug kinetics
in both circulation and tumor tissue. Our in vitro assay did
not take this into consideration, which could be essential
when developing a therapeutic strategy. Besides shedding,
mesothelin levels could be modulated like other antigens
by trogocytosis [7] or antigen masking [8]. Whether they
play a role in mesothelin targeted therapy remains to
be evaluated. An understanding of possible mesothelin
modulation will be instrumental to new targeting
strategies.
Yujian Zhang and Ira Pastan: The Laboratory of Molecular
Biology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland, USA
Email: Yujian Zhang, Zhang@otsuka-us.com
Received: February 7, 2012
Published: February 9, 2012

REFERENCES
1.	

Hassan R, Ho M. Eur J Cancer, 2008; 44:46-53.

2.	

Zhang Y, Chertov O, Zhang J, et al. Cancer Res, 2011; 71:
5915-5922.

3.	 Hellstrom I, Raycraft J, Kanan S, et al. Cancer Epidemiol
Biomarkers Prev, 2006; 15: 1014-1020.
4.	 Van Schaeybroeck S, Kyula JN, Fenton A, et al. Cancer
Res, 2011; 71: 1071-1080.
5.	 Kyula JN, Van Schaeybroeck S, Doherty J, et al. Clin
Cancer Res, 2010; 16: 3378-3389.
6.	 Witters L, Scherle P, Friedman S, et al. Cancer Res, 2008;
68: 7083-7089.
7.	

Pham T, Mero P, Booth JW. PLoS One, 2011; 6: e14498.

8.	 Nagy P, Friedländer E, Tanner M, et al. Cancer Res, 2005;
65: 473-482.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

115

Oncotarget 2012; 3: 114-115

