Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 12

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Monoamine oxidase A (MAO A) inhibitors decrease glioma
progression
Swati Kushal1,5,*, Weijun Wang2,5,*, Vijaya Pooja Vaikari1,5, Rajesh Kota1,5,
Kevin Chen1,5, Tzu-Shao Yeh1,5,6, Niyati Jhaveri3, Susan L. Groshen7, Bogdan Z.
Olenyuk1, Thomas C. Chen2,5, Florence M. Hofman2,3,5, Jean C. Shih1,4,5,6
1

 epartment of Pharmacology and Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of Southern California,
D
Los Angeles, California, USA

2

Department of Neurosurgery, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, USA

3

Department of Pathology, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, USA

4

 epartment of Cell and Neurobiology, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California,
D
USA

5

USC-Taiwan Center for Translational Research, Los Angeles, California, USA

6

Program for Cancer Biology and Drug Discovery, College of Pharmacy, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan

7

Preventive Medicine, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, USA

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Jean C. Shih, e-mail: jcshih@usc.edu
Florence M. Hofman, e-mail: hofman@usc.edu
Keywords: MAO A, MAO A inhibitors, glioma, TMZ-resistant, near-infrared dye conjugate
Received: November 20, 2015     Accepted: January 29, 2016     Published: February 09, 2016

ABSTRACT
Glioblastoma (GBM) is an aggressive brain tumor which is currently treated with
temozolomide (TMZ). Tumors usually become resistant to TMZ and recur; no effective
therapy is then available. Monoamine Oxidase A (MAO A) oxidizes monoamine
neurotransmitters resulting in reactive oxygen species which cause cancer. This
study shows that MAO A expression is increased in human glioma tissues and cell
lines. MAO A inhibitors, clorgyline or the near-infrared-dye MHI-148 conjugated to
clorgyline (NMI), were cytotoxic for glioma and decreased invasion in vitro. Using the
intracranial TMZ-resistant glioma model, clorgyline or NMI alone or in combination
with low-dose TMZ reduced tumor growth and increased animal survival. NMI was
localized specifically to the tumor. Immunocytochemistry studies showed that
the MAO A inhibitor reduced proliferation, microvessel density and invasion, and
increased macrophage infiltration. In conclusion, we have identified MAO A inhibitors
as potential novel stand-alone drugs or as combination therapy with low dose TMZ
for drug-resistant gliomas. NMI can also be used as a non-invasive imaging tool. Thus
has a dual function for both therapy and diagnosis.

doses is not an option because this DNA alkylating agent
is highly toxic to the bone marrow [3]. At this point,
therapy choices are very limited. Therefore, identifying
drugs that can cross the blood-brain- barrier (BBB), and
are effective in decreasing the tumor progression of TMZresistant gliomas is critical.
MAO A and MAO B are two isoenzymes encoded
by two different genes [4]. They have 70 % amino acid
identity with different substrates and inhibitor specificity
[5]. MAO A inhibitors have been shown to cross the

INTRODUCTION
Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most aggressive form
of primary brain tumors, with a median survival time of
14 months from the time of diagnosis [1]. Temozolomide
(TMZ) is the current therapeutic agent for treating newly
diagnosed GBM either in combination with surgery
and radiation or as stand-alone chemotherapy [2].
Unfortu­nately, following TMZ treatment, tumors recur;
and these tumors are TMZ-resistant. Increasing TMZ
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13842

Oncotarget

RESULTS

BBB, as noted by their use in the treatment of various
neuropsychiatric disorders [6]. The preferred substrates
for MAO A are serotonin, norepinephrine and dopamine.
MAO A can be inhibited by low concentrations of
clorgyline. By contrast, MAO B preferred substrates are
phenylethylamine and benzylamine, and MAO B can
be inhibited by low dose deprenyl [7]. This is the first
study to show that MAO A inhibitors may be used alone
or in combination with low dose TMZ to reduce tumor
progression and increase survival, a potential treatment for
TMZ-resitant, recurrent gliomas.

MAO A is expressed in human glioma tissues
and cells
Fresh frozen human glioma tissues were analyzed
for MAO A expression; as a control, non-malignant
brain tissues were examined in parallel. Our results
show significant expression of MAO A in GBM tissues
but no detectable staining in non-malignant brain tissue
(Figure 1A). Based on morphology, the staining in GBM is

Figure 1: MAO A expression and activity are increased in mouse and human glioma cell lines and glioma tissues.

A. Non-malignant brain and glioma (GBM) tissue specimens, B. U251S (TMZ-sensitive) and U251R (TMZ-resistant) human glioma
cells, and C. GL26 mouse glioma cells were stained for MAO A. The red precipitate denotes positive staining. Scale bars represent
100 μm. D. MAO A catalytic activity in U251S, U251R, GL26, and normal astrocytes was determined.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13843

Oncotarget

NMI decreases the viability of TMZ-sensitive
and -resistant glioma cells in vitro

associated with tumor cells. Both TMZ-sensitive (U251S)
and TMZ-resistant (U251R) (Figure 1B) human glioma
cells and mouse glioma GL26 cells (Figure 1C) expressed
MAO A. MAO A catalytic activity was determined in
human and mouse glioma cell lines using serotonin as
the substrate (Figure 1D). We found that both human and
mouse glioma cells expressed MAO A catalytic activity.
By contrast, normal human astrocytes exhibited no
detectable MAO A activity (Figure 1D) consistent with
the immunostaining results of non-malignant brain tissue
(Figure 1A).

Glioma recurrence is associated with acquiring
TMZ resistance; therefore, we investigated whether NMI
is cytotoxic to TMZ-resistant (U251R) glioma cells.
Glioma cells were treated with NMI at doses ranging
from 1-10 μM. The results show that treatment of U251S
cells with NMI alone at 5 μM and 10 μM significantly
reduced colony formation by 60% and 90%, respectively
(Figure 4A) The addition of TMZ (15 uM) to NMI
significantly increased cytotoxicity, especially at 5uM of
NMI (Figure 4A). These results indicate that NMI can
enhance the cytotoxicity of TMZ.
We then evaluated the effects of NMI on TMZresistant human glioma cells (Figure 4B). TMZ alone
(15  μM) had no effect as expected. In contrast, NMI
exhibited a dose-dependent increase in cytotoxicity at 1, 5
and 10 μM by 20%, 40% and 80%, respectively compared
to the vehicle (Figure 4B). NMI at 10 μM in combination
with TMZ caused a further significant increase in cell
death. These results showed that in TMZ-resistant cells,
NMI is effective as a monotherapy or in combination with
TMZ. Combining NMI with TMZ was more effective for
therapy than either drug alone.
The cytotoxic effects of clorgyline and NMI on
glioma cells were studied using the MTS assay (Figure 4C
and 4D). Treatment with clorgyline yielded dose response
curves with 50% inhibitory concentrations (IC50) of
approximately 175 μM and 136 μM in U251S and U251R
cells, respectively. In contrast, NMI was cytotoxic at an
IC50 of 5 μM in both cell lines, indicative of 30 to 35-fold
higher efficacy as compared to clorgyline. The cytotoxic
effect of NMI was also examined using patient-derived
glioma cells. NMI (10μM) exhibited approximately 70%
cytotoxicity (*p<0.05) (Figure 4E). Clorgyline at these low
concentrations had no effect on these cells (data not shown).
These data demonstrate that in both TMZ-sensitive and
resistant glioma cells, and patient-derived cells, NMI is a
significantly more effective cytotoxic agent than clorgyline.

The MAO A inhibitor, clorgyline, alone or
with low dose TMZ induced cytotoxicity in
TMZ-sensitive glioma cells in vitro
To study the effects of clorgyline on TMZ-sensitive
human glioma cells, TMZ-sensitive glioma cells, U251S,
were treated with the MAO A inhibitor clorgyline alone
or in combination with TMZ. Treatment of cells with
clorgyline (10 μM) alone increased cytotoxicity in U251S
cells by 20% (*p<0.05) (Figure 2). TMZ (15 μM) alone
increased cytotoxicity to 60% (*p<0.05). Combined
treatment of clorgyline with TMZ increased cytotoxicity
to 70% (*p<0.05) (Figure 2). These results demonstrate
that clorgyline can significantly increase the efficacy of
TMZ (*p<0.05). Thus, the MAO A inhibitor enhances the
effect of TMZ on TMZ-sensitive glioma cells. Clorgyline
alone or in combination with TMZ did not have an effect
on cytotoxicity of TMZ-resistant GBM cells (data not
shown).

Near–infrared dye conjugated MAO A inhibitor
clorgyline (NMI) localizes to the mitochondria
of cancer cells
In order to deliver MAO A specifically to GBM
cells, we conjugated tumor-specific near-infrared dye
(NIR), MHI-148, to the MAO A inhibitor, clorgyline, to
generate a novel chemical compound, NMI. This drug
(Figure 3A) preferentially accumulates in cancer lesions
[8]. Synthesis of NMI is detailed in Supplementary
Figure S1.
To evaluate the cellular uptake of NMI in human
glioma cells, laser-scanning confocal microscopy was
utilized. The confocal-microscopic images of tumor cells
treated with NMI (1μM or 5μM) are shown (Figure 3B).
This compound rapidly accumulated in U251 S or R
glioma cells and co-localized with the mitochondriaspecific dye, MitoTracker Green (Figure 3B). This
suggests that NMI is localized in the mitochondria
as expected. The inhibitory effects of NMI on MAO
A activity were determined in GL26 mouse glioma cells.
We found that NMI inhibited MAO A activity at low doses
with an IC50 of 5 × 10-6. These results indicate that NMI
is specifically targeted to glioma cells mitochondria and
inhibit MAO A activity in vitro.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

NMI inhibits invasion of patient-derived
glioma cells
The effects of NMI on the invasion of patient-derived
glioma cells were tested in a Boyden chamber invasion
assay. The results showed that NMI (5 μM) significantly
reduce glioma cell invasion (*p<0.05) (Figure 5A).
Clorgyline at 5μM was also effective at decreasing invasion.
Representative images of invasion assay showing a decrease
in cell number following the treatment with NMI (5 μM) or
clorgyline (5μM) are shown (Figure 5B).

NMI specifically targets cancer cells in vivo
Near infrared (NIR) fluorescence imaging of tumorbearing animals treated with NMI showed specific uptake and
13844

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Clorgyline enhances the cytotoxic efficacy of TMZ-sensitive glioma cells in vitro. A. U251S cells were treated with
clorgyline (10 μM) alone or combination with TMZ (15 μM) for 48 hours, then incubated for another 10 days for the colony forming assay
(CFA). Colonies were stained and quantified. Vehicle-treated cells were considered to be 100%. Clorgyline increased cytotoxicity (10 μM)
(*p<0.05). The addition of clorgyline significantly increased the efficacy of TMZ (*p<0.05).

Figure 3: Near–infrared dye conjugated to MAO A Inhibitor clorgyline (NMI) is localized to the mitochondria of
cancer cells. A. The structure of NMI is composed of clorgyline conjugated to MHI-148 dye. B. NMI (red color) is localized in the
mitochondria. Glioma cells U251 S or R were treated with NMI (1, 5 μM) for 3 hours; MitoTracker reagent stained the mitochondria green.
Merged images demonstrated red dye localized to green mitochondria.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13845

Oncotarget

accumulation of NMI in glioma cells. The bioluminescence
of luciferase- labeled cells as well as the fluorescence of NMI
was recorded after 10 days of daily subcutaneous injection

of NMI. Overlaying the NIR image with bioluminescence
showed that NMI localized to the tumor site with no
detectable distribution to other organs (Figure 6).

Figure 4: Cytotoxic effects of NMI on human glioma cells. A. Cytotoxicity was evaluated for U251S and B. U251R glioma cells

treated with vehicle, TMZ (15 μM) and NMI alone (1, 5, 10 μM), or in combination with TMZ for 48 hours; colonies were counted and
normalized to vehicle (100%). C. Effects of clorgyline and NMI on cell viability in U251S and D. U251R human glioma cells as measured
by the MTS assay. E. Patient-derived glioma cells were treated with NMI at 1, 3, 10 and 30 μM for 96 hours, then incubated for another
7 days for colony forming assay (CFA). Colonies in experimental groups were normalized to control (no treatment) and set at 100%. Error
bars = standard error of the mean (SEM); experiments were performed in triplicate. Significance was determined using the Student’s t-test:
*** p < 0.0001, ** p < 0.005, * p <0.05.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13846

Oncotarget

Clorgyline or NMI alone or in combination
with TMZ increases survival in vivo

post tumor implantation. After 28 days (i.e. 7 days after
implantation and 21 days post treatment), treatment
was stopped; tumor growth (Figure 7B) and survival
(Figure 7C) were documented. Median survival data
(Figure 7D) of the vehicle group and TMZ-treated group
were not significantly different (p=0.47). However, tumor
progression was delayed in the clorgyline treated group
compared to the vehicle (*p< 0.05), (Figures 7C and 7D).
Furthermore, addition of clorgyline to the low dose TMZ
enhanced the effects of TMZ (Clorgyline + TMZ versus
TMZ alone) (*p< 0.05).
Studies utilizing NMI showed that treatment with
NMI alone increased median survival as compared to
vehicle (*p=0.017) (Figure 7E and 7F). The addition of

To determine the in vivo efficacy of MAO
A inhibitors on TMZ-resistant tumors U251R cells were
implanted intracranially into nude mice. Animals were
imaged 7 days post implantation and grouped. Mice (n=4)
were treated with: clorgyline (10 mg/kg), NMI (5 mg/
kg), TMZ (1 mg/kg) alone or in combination with TMZ.
Clorgyline or NMI were administered subcutaneously
daily for 21 days; TMZ was administered orally for the
first 10 days (1 mg/kg). This low dose of TMZ was used to
identify any additive effects of TMZ to clorgyline or NMI.
Animals were imaged on days 7, 14, 21, 24 (Figure 7A)

Figure 5: The effects of clorgyline and NMI on the invasive capacity of glioma cells. A. Patient -derived glioma cells were

seeded in invasion chambers, treated with clorgyline (1, 3, 5 μM) and NMI (1, 3, 5 μM) for 22 hours, and then analyzed for the number of
cells that invaded to the underside of the filter. B. Representative images (200X) of vehicle, clorgyline (5 μM) and NMI (5 μM). Scale bar
represents 100 μm for all figures.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13847

Oncotarget

invasiveness. Angiogenesis was assessed by staining for
CD31, an endothelial cell marker. The results (Figure 8A,
row 3) showed that clorgyline (p< 0.01) and NMI (p<
0.05)-treated animals had significantly reduced MVD
compared to the vehicle group. These data demonstrated
that clorgyline and NMI reduced proliferation, invasion
and angiogenesis in tumors, thereby contributing to the
enhanced survival.
The innate immune response is an important
modulator of tumor growth [10]. We therefore analyzed
inflammatory cells in tumor tissues using the macrophage
marker F4/80 (Figure 8B, row 1). The results show a
significant increase in the number of macrophages in MAO
A inhibitor-treated animals as compared to vehicle-treated
animals (p< 0.01). Inflammatory cytokines are responsible
for much of the activity attributed to macrophages. To
determine whether the macrophages detected in tumor
tissues were proinflammatory, tissue specimens were
examined for tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α, a powerful
proinflammatory growth factor [11]. Results demonstrated
an increased TNF-α positive population in tumors from
animals treated with the MAO A inhibitor (Figure 8B,
row 2), suggesting that MAO A inhibitors upregulate
the proinflammatory response and decreased tumor
progression. The expression of transforming growth factor
(TGF β), an immune regulatory growth factor [12], was
not affected by MAO A inhibitors (Figure 8B, row 3).
Quantitation of Ki67, CD31and F4/80 staining results is
presented (Figure 8C). These data provide compelling

NMI to TMZ further increased the median survival (*p
< 0.001). Furthermore, NMI enhanced the effects of low
dose TMZ. No significant changes in body weight were
observed with drug treatment.These data indicate that
clorgyline and NMI delay tumor progression, and NMI
or clorgyline in combination with TMZ further increases
survival time. Thus, combining MAO A inhibitors with
low dose TMZ can enhance the therapeutic efficacy of
TMZ.

Clorgyline and NMI reduce proliferation
and angiogenesis of glioma, and increase
macrophage infiltration in tumors in situ
To identify potential mechanisms for increased
survival, tumor tissues were analyzed for proliferation,
microvessel density (MVD), inflammatory cell
infiltration, and secretion of growth factors using
immunostaining techniques. Cell proliferation was
identified using, Ki67. The results show that the number
of Ki67 positive cells decreased in clorgyline and NMItreated animals (p< 0.05), as compared to the vehicle
(Figure 8A, row 1). Tissues were analyzed for matrix
metalloproteinase 9 (MMP9), an enzyme responsible
for the breakdown of extracellular matrix and increase
in tumor invasion [9] . The results (Figure 8A, row 2)
indicate increased MMP9 in vehicle treated tumor tissues
as compared to clorgyline or NMI-treated animals. These
data suggest that MAO A inhibitors reduced tumor cell

Figure 6: NMI specifically targets cancer cells. Animals were implanted with luciferase-labeled glioma cells. After 10 days, NMI
was administered by subcutaneous injection and imaged for A. bioluminescence and B. fluorescence. Bioluminescence images identified
brain tumor sites with luciferase; fluorescence identified the sites of NMI localization.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13848

Oncotarget

Figure 7: Clorgyline, NMI or the combination with TMZ reduces tumor progression and increases the survival of
TMZ-resistant tumors. Athymic/nude mice were implanted intracranially with TMZ-resistant human glioma cells (U251R). Animals

were then treated daily with: vehicle, TMZ (1 mg/kg), clorgyline (10 mg/kg), TMZ (1 mg/kg) + clorgyline (10 mg/kg), NMI (5 mg/kg), or
TMZ (1 mg/kg) +NMI (5 mg/kg). MAO A inhibitors were administered subcutaneously daily for 21 days; TMZ treatment was given for the
first 10 days only. A. Animals were imaged on days 7, 14, 21, 24 post-implantation. B. Graphic representation of bioluminescence imaging
conducted at successive time points. C. The Kaplan-Meier survival curve shows that clorgyline significantly prolonged survival. E. The
Kaplan-Meier survival curve for NMI and NMI+TMZ shows that NMI was effective alone, as compared to the vehicle, and the combination
of NMI and TMZ was significantly more effective (*p< 0.001).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13849

Oncotarget

evidence that MAO A inhibitors reduce glioma growth
in vivo by increasing tumor cell death, and decreasing
tumor invasiveness.

the conjugate of clorgyline with near-infrared-dye MHI148. These agents cross the BBB; and NMI specifically
targets mitochondria in human glioma cells. Our data
shows that NMI have better efficacy than clorgyline in
both in vitro and in vivo studies. This may be due to the
fact that NMI binds specifically to the cancer cells. In
vitro studies showed that NMI was cytotoxic to TMZsensitive and -resistant glioma cells, and to patient–
derived tumor cells. These cells were determined to be
MGMT-positive, a common cause of TMZ resistance
[15]. The dose of TMZ used in vivo was 1 mg/kg,
which is approximately 25 times less than the doses
administered to patients [2]. Thus MAO A inhibitors
can enhance the efficacy of relatively non-toxic doses
of TMZ, thereby diminishing the secondary effects of
TMZ, such as myelosuppresion.

DISCUSSION
The data presented here demonstrate that the
MAO A inhibitors, clorgyline and its conjugate NMI, are
effective in reducing TMZ-resistant tumor growth and
increasing survival in glioma. This is consistent with our
previous report that knock-down (KD) or pharmacological
inhibition of MAO A in prostate cancer reduced or
eliminated cancer progression [13, 14].
MAO A expression is increased in human glioma
tissue specimens and cells. Therefore we studied the
effects of the MAO A inhibitor, clorgyline, and NMI,

Figure 8: Clorgyline and NMI reduce proliferation, invasion of glioma and microvessel density, as well as enhance
macrophage accumulation in vivo. A. Tumor tissues from the different groups were immunostained for: proliferation (Ki67), invasion
(matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP)) and microvessel density (CD31). B. Tumor tissue sections were immunostained for macrophages
(F4/80), tumor necrosis factor (TNF) -α and transforming growth factor (TGF)-β. C. Immunostaining was analyzed using the ImageJ
software; p values were calculated compared to the vehicle. Tissues from clorgyline-treated and NMI-treated mice exhibited reduced
microvessel density (**p< 0.01, *p< 0.05) respectively, and increased macrophages (**p< 0.01), as well as reduced proliferation (*p< 0.05)
in NMI only. Scale bar represent 100 μm for all figures. The red color indicates positive staining (mag. 400x).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13850

Oncotarget

MAO A catalytic activity assay

The potential mechanisms underlying the in vivo
effects of MAO A inhibitors were studied using tumor
tissues from clorgyline and NMI treated mice. The data
indicated that both clorgyline and NMI decreased blood
vessel growth (Figure 8). Clorgyline and NMI do not
appear to affect normal blood vessels since the blood
vessel density in the adjacent brain parenchyma showed no
abnormal density or vascular structure (data not shown).
Thus, MAO A inhibitors specifically affect the tumor
vasculature and not normal brain endothelial cells. The
microenvironment of the tumor vasculature also expresses
high levels of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF),
and basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF), as well as
low levels of thrombospondin-1 (TSP-1), compared to
normal brain [16, 17] . We are currently investigating
whether MAO A inhibitors regulate the secretion of these
growth factors.
Tumor tissues from mice treated with clorgyline
or NMI exhibited high numbers of macrophages and a
significant increase in TNF-α expression, indicating that
the macrophages present were likely to be proinflammatory
cells, thus invovled in reduced tumor progression.
In conclusion, we have shown that MAO A
inhibitors reduce TMZ-resistant glioma progression,
thereby increasing survival time. The effects of MAO A
inhibitors may be the result of increased cytotoxicity, and/
or decreased invasion of tumor cells. MAO inhibitors in
combination with low dose TMZ increase the efficacy of
TMZ without the toxic effects of high dose TMZ. Thus
inhibiting MAO A may be an effective approach to the
treatment of recurrent brain tumors. In addition to the
therapeutic effects of NMI, this agent can also be used
for non-invasive diagnosis and monitoring of tumor
progression.

MAO A catalytic activity was determined by
radioassay as described previously [19]. Briefly cells were
incubated with 1 mM 14C-5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT), in
the assay buffer. The reaction products were extracted and
the radioactivity was determined by liquid scintillation
spectroscopy.
For inhibition activity assay, cells were preincubated with various compounds at increasing con­
centrations for 20 minutes at 37°C followed by the
addition of 14C labelled 5-HT at 37°C for 20 minutes.

Laser-scanning confocal microscopy
Human glioma cells (U251S or U251R) were plated
in glass bottom microscopy dishes (MatTek) (30,000 cells/
400 μl), in standard medium, for 24 hours and treated with
NMI (1 and 5 μM), Mitotracker Green (200 nM) (Life
Technologies, Carlsbad, CA) and DAPI (1x); and incubated
for 3 hours. DAPI and Mitotracker agent were used to stain
the nucleus and mitochondria respectively. Imaging was
performed on a Zeiss LSM 510 inverted laser-scanning
confocal microscope. Excitation wavelengths were set at
λmax =790 nm Chameleon (DAPI, blue excitation), 488 nm
(Mitotracker Green, green-yellow excitation) and 633 nm
(NMI, red excitation). The data were acquired in a multi-track
mode. Images were taken using pinholes of 130-200 μM.

Colony forming assay
U251S and U251R glioma cells were seeded
in 6-well plates in triplicates at 300 and 400 cells per
well respectively and allowed to adhere overnight.
Subsequently, cells were treated with clorgyline, NMI and
TMZ at various concentrations for 48 hours; the medium
was then removed and fresh medium (without drugs) was
added. Cells were incubated for an additional 8 to 10 days;
colonies were visualized by staining with 1% methylene
blue in methanol for 4 hours and quantified.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Tissues and cell cultures
Human glioma cell line U251 was obtained from
American Type Culture Collection (ATCC); TMZresistant human glioma cells, U251R, were derived as
previously described [18]. The patient- derived glioma
cells were obtained from our laboratory (FMH, TCC).
Glioma cell lines were cultured in 10% fetal calf serum in
Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Media (Life technologies,
Carlsbad, CA) supplemented with 100 U/mL penicillin
and 0.1 mg/mL streptomycin in a humidified incubator
at 37°C and 5% CO2. Patient-derived cells were cultured
in serum-free media. Human glioma cell lines were
authenticated, and tested negative for mycoplasm.
Freshly resected brain tissues were obtained and
processed in accordance with the USC Institutional
Review Board guidelines. Non-malignant brain tissue
was obtained following epilepsy surgery. These tissues
were snap- frozen and stored at -80 °C.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

MTS assay
Glioma cells were seeded in quadruplicates;
clorgyline and NMI were added for 48 hours. Viability was
determined as per manufacturer’s instructions (Promega,
Madison, WI); and calculated relative to untreated control
cells. Data was plotted using SigmaPlot 12.0.

Invasion assay
Cells were seeded in 8 μM matrigel coated invasion
chambers (Corning, Corning, NY) with NMI or clorgyline,
for 22 hours. Subsequently invaded cells were stained
using the hemacolor kit (EMD Millipore, Massachusetts)
and imaged. Stained cells were counted manually for
analysis.
13851

Oncotarget

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

In vivo studies
All animal protocols were approved by the
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC)
of USC. For the xenograft model, 4- to 6-week-old male
athymic nude mice were purchased from Harlan (Indiana,
IN USA). 2 × 105 luciferase-positive TMZ-resistant
human glioma cells (U251R) were injected intracranially.
Mice were imaged 7 days after implantation. Once tumors
appeared in all mice, the animals were grouped into
different treatment groups. Clorgyline was dissolved in
water, NMI was diluted in vehicle (10% DMSO+ 45%
ethanol + 45% glycerol) and administered by subcutaneous
injection in a volume of 30 μl, TMZ (1 mg/kg) was diluted
in water and administered as gavage. Combination of
TMZ and clorgyline or NMI was given at the same dose.
NMI, clorgyline and vehicle were administered daily for
21 days; TMZ was administered for the first 10 days only.

Patent pending.

REFERENCES
1.	 Weis SM and Cheresh DA. Tumor angiogenesis: molecular pathways and therapeutic targets. Nat Med. 2011;
17:1359-1370.
2.	 Stupp R, Mason WP, van den Bent MJ, Weller M, Fisher
B, Taphoorn MJ, Belanger K, Brandes AA, Marosi C,
Bogdahn U, Curschmann J, Janzer RC, Ludwin SK, et al.
Radiotherapy plus concomitant and adjuvant temozolomide
for glioblastoma. N Engl J Med. 2005; 352:987-996.
3.	 Sorrentino BP. Gene therapy to protect haematopoietic
cells from cytotoxic cancer drugs. Nat Rev Cancer. 2002;
2:431-441.
4.	 Bach AW, Lan NC, Johnson DL, Abell CW, Bembenek
ME, Kwan SW, Seeburg PH and Shih JC. cDNA cloning of
human liver monoamine oxidase A and B: molecular basis
of differences in enzymatic properties. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A. 1988; 85:4934-4938.

Immunohistochemistry (IHC)
Frozen tissues or cells were fixed in acetone. IHC
was performed as described previously [20]. The following
antibodies were used: F4/80, TGF-β, TNF-α (Abcam,
Cambridge, MA), Ki67 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc.,
Santa Cruz, CA), CD31 (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA),
MMP 9, MAO A (Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc., Santa
Cruz) as well as biotinylated secondary antibodies (Vector
Laboratories, Burlingame, CA). Images were analyzed
using ImageJ software.

5.	 Grimsby J, Chen K, Wang LJ, Lan NC and Shih JC. Human
monoamine oxidase A and B genes exhibit identical exonintron organization. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1991;
88:3637-3641.
6.	 Youdim MB, Edmondson D and Tipton KF. The therapeutic potential of monoamine oxidase inhibitors. Nat Rev
Neurosci. 2006; 7:295-309.
7.	 Shih JC, Chen K and Ridd MJ. Monoamine oxidase: from
genes to behavior. Annu Rev Neurosci. 1999; 22:197-217.

Statistical analysis

8.	 Yang X, Shi C, Tong R, Qian W, Zhau HE, Wang R, Zhu
G, Cheng J, Yang VW, Cheng T, Henary M, Strekowski L
and Chung LW. Near IR heptamethine cyanine dye-mediated cancer imaging. Clin Cancer Res. 2010; 16:2833-2844.

For in vivo experiments, all mice were followed
until death; therefore the Kruskal-Wallis test was used to
compare all treatment groups. For Figure 7, with more
than 2 groups of mice, the overall p-value (comparing all
groups) was less than 0.05 therefore pairwise comparisons
were made comparing each of the active treatments to
the control. All p-values were reported as two-sided; no
adjustments were made for multiple comparisons

9.	 Duffy MJ, Maguire TM, Hill A, McDermott E and
O’Higgins N. Metalloproteinases: role in breast carcinogenesis, invasion and metastasis. Breast Cancer Res. 2000;
2:252-257.
10.	 Hanahan D and Weinberg RA. The hallmarks of cancer.
Cell. 2000; 100:57-70.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

11.	 Gordon S. Alternative activation of macrophages. Nat Rev
Immunol. 2003; 3:23-35.

We thank Bin Qian and Myung Soo Ko (Department
of Pharmacology and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University
of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA) for providing
technical assistance. We would also like to thank the
Molecular Imagining Center of USC (USC MIC) for their
assistance in mouse optical imaging.

12.	 Gong D, Shi W, Yi SJ, Chen H, Groffen J and Heisterkamp
N. TGFbeta signaling plays a critical role in promoting
alternative macrophage activation. BMC Immunol. 2012;
13:31.
13.	 Wu JB, Shao C, Li X, Li Q, Hu P, Shi C, Li Y, Chen
YT, Yin F, Liao CP, Stiles BL, Zhau HE, Shih JC and
Chung LW. Monoamine oxidase A mediates prostate
tumorigenesis and cancer metastasis. J Clin Invest. 2014;
124:2891-2908.

FUNDING
This work was supported by the Tsai Family Fund,
Boyd and Elsie Welin Professorship and NIH RO1
MH39085 (to J.C. Shih).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14.	 Wu JB, Lin TP, Gallagher JD, Kushal S, Chung LW,
Zhau HE, Olenyuk BZ and Shih JC. Monoamine oxidase
13852

Oncotarget

A inhibitor-near-infrared dye conjugate reduces prostate
tumor growth. J Am Chem Soc. 2015; 137:2366-2374.

alpha-granule content and primary activation. Int J Biol
Markers. 2004; 19:221-228.

15.	 Kaina B, Christmann M, Naumann S and Roos WP.
MGMT: key node in the battle against genotoxicity, carcinogenicity and apoptosis induced by alkylating agents.
DNA Repair (Amst). 2007; 6:1079-1099.

18.	 Jhaveri N, Cho H, Torres S, Wang W, Schonthal AH,
Petasis NA, Louie SG, Hofman FM and Chen TC.
Noscapine inhibits tumor growth in TMZ-resistant gliomas.
Cancer Lett. 2011; 312:245-252.

16.	 Salgado R, Benoy I, Bogers J, Weytjens R, Vermeulen P,
Dirix L and Van Marck E. Platelets and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF): a morphological and functional
study. Angiogenesis. 2001; 4:37-43.

19.	 Chen K, Ou XM, Chen G, Choi SH and Shih JC. R1, a
novel repressor of the human monoamine oxidase A. J Biol
Chem. 2005; 280:11552-11559.
20.	 Cho HY, Wang W, Jhaveri N, Torres S, Tseng J, Leong
MN, Lee DJ, Goldkorn A, Xu T, Petasis NA, Louie SG,
Schonthal AH, Hofman FM and Chen TC. Perillyl alcohol
for the treatment of temozolomide-resistant gliomas. Mol
Cancer Ther. 2012; 11:2462-2472.

17.	 Gonzalez FJ, Rueda A, Sevilla I, Alonso L, Villarreal
V, Torres E and Alba E. Shift in the balance between
circulating thrombospondin-1 and vascular endothelial
growth factor in cancer patients: relationship to platelet

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13853

Oncotarget

