Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 43

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

Identification of Bisindolylmaleimide IX as a potential agent to
treat drug-resistant BCR-ABL positive leukemia
Xin Zhang1,*, Deyong Jia1,*, Junping Ao2,*, Huijuan Liu1, Yi Zang3, Mohammad
Azam4, Samy L. Habib5, Jia Li3, Xinsen Ruan1, Hao Jia1, Xueying Wang6, Baojie Li1,7
1

Bio-X Institutes, Key Laboratory for the Genetics of Developmental and Neuropsychiatric Disorders, Ministry of Education,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China

2

State Key Laboratory of Oncogenes and Related Genes, Shanghai Cancer Institute, Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, School of Medicine, Shanghai, China

3

National Center for Drug Screening, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China

4

Divisions of Pathology, Hematology and Cancer Biology, Cancer and Blood Disease Institute, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital
and Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA

5

South Texas Veterans Health Care System and Department of Cellular and Structural Biology, University of Texas Health
Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX, USA

6

Department of Biochemistry, National University of Singapore, Singapore

7

Translational Medical Center for Stem Cell Therapy, Shanghai East Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai,
China

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Baojie Li, email: libj@sjtu.edu.cn
Keywords: Bisindolylmaleimide IX, BCR-ABL, chronic myeloid leukemia (CML)
Received: June 08, 2015     Accepted: August 08, 2016     Published: August 24, 2016

ABSTRACT
Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) treatment with BCR-ABL inhibitors is often
hampered by development of drug resistance. In a screen for novel chemotherapeutic
drug candidates with genotoxic activity, we identified a bisindolylmaleimide derivative,
IX, as a small molecule compound with therapeutic potential against CML including
drug-resistant CML. We show that Bisindolylmaleimide IX inhibits DNA topoisomerase,
generates DNA breaks, activates the Atm-p53 and Atm-Chk2 pathways, and induces
cell cycle arrest and cell death. Interestingly, Bisindolylmaleimide IX is highly effective
in targeting cells positive for BCR-ABL. BCR-ABL positive cells display enhanced DNA
damage and increased cell cycle arrest in response to Bisindolylmaleimide IX due to
decreased expression of topoisomerases. Cells positive for BCR-ABL or drug-resistant
T315I BCR-ABL also display increased cytotoxicity since Bisindolylmaleimide IX
inhibits B-Raf and the downstream oncogene addiction pathway. Mouse cancer model
experiments showed that Bisindolylmaleimide IX, at doses that show little side effect,
was effective in treating leukemia-like disorders induced by BCR-ABL or T315I BCRABL, and prolonged the lifespan of these model mice. Thus, Bisindolylmaleimide IX
presents a novel drug candidate to treat drug-resistant CML via activating BCR-ABLdependent genotoxic stress response and inhibiting the oncogene addiction pathway
activated by BCR-ABL.

efficacy and/or side effects of the available drugs [2].
For example, CML is mainly caused by BCR-ABL,
a constitutively active tyrosine kinase generated by
chromosome translocation [3, 4]. CML is also an
oncogene addiction model, which provides the rationale
to target BCR-ABL or its downstream oncogene addiction

INTRODUCTION
Cancer is a leading cause of mortality worldwide
and can be treated with radiotherapy and/or chemotherapy
[1]. Great efforts have been taken to develop new
chemotherapy agents due to resistance, insufficient
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

69945

Oncotarget

RESULTS

pathways [5, 6]. Imatinib, an ABL kinase inhibitor,
is effective for initial treatment of CML, yet a large
percentile of CML patients gradually develop resistance
[7], due to mutations in BCR-ABL, e.g., T315I, which
disrupt imatinib-BCR-ABL interaction [8]. The occurrence
of these mutations is driven by BCR-ABL itself, as BCRABL promotes DNA damage via reactive oxygen species
(ROS)-dependent and -independent mechanisms [9–11],
and affects multiple DNA repair processes [12, 13]. Most
of the imatinib-resistant BCR-ABL mutants are sensitive
to the next-generation drugs nilotinib and dasatinib [14],
with the exception of T315I BCR-ABL mutant. As a
result, new drugs that can overcome the resistance are
needed to combat CML [15–17].
Many of the chemotherapeutic agents are genotoxic
and can cause genome instability in tumor cells as well
as normal cells [2]. Cells respond to DNA damage by
activating the PI-3 kinase-like kinases (PIKKs), including
Atm and Atr, at the DNA break sites, where they
phosphorylate substrates including H2AX, Chk1, Chk2,
and p53. Activation of Chk1 and Chk2 via phosphorylation
induces G2/M arrest and S phase delay, while activation of
p53 causes G1 and G2/M arrest and/or programmed cell
death [18, 19]. Thus DNA damage response (DDR) leads to
cease of cell propagation in p53-dependent and -independent
manners [20], which is also the main mechanism by which
genotoxic agents restrain cancer growth [2], even in tumors
that express mutant p53 molecules with loss-of-function or
dominant negative effects [21–23].
Here
we
report
the
identification
of
Bisindolylmaleimide IX as a genotoxic agent with potential
to treat CML. Bisindolylmaleimide IX is a member of
the bisindolylmaleimide compounds that were initially
synthesized as PKC inhibitors and later were shown to
have inhibitory effects on a spectrum of kinases [24, 25].
One derivative, Enzastaurin (LY317615), has been tested
alone or in combination with other chemotherapeutic drugs
in multiple clinical trials to treat various types of cancer
[26, 27]. This study reveals that Bisindolylmaleimide
IX is a DNA topoisomerase inhibitor and an inhibitor of
B-Raf. While it generates DNA damage and activates
the DNA damage response in all cells tested, it induces
enhanced DNA damage in BCR-ABL positive cells,
likely due to reduced levels of topoisomerase II isoforms,
and causes increased cell cycle arrest in these cells.
Furthermore, Bisindolylmaleimide IX also shows increased
cytotoxicity to BCR-ABL positive cells by inhibiting the
oncogene addiction Raf-Erk pathway [6, 28]. Importantly,
Bisindolylmaleimide IX is effective in treating CML-like
leukemia caused by BCR-ABL or T315I mutant BCRABL. These findings suggest that Bisindolylmaleimide IX
has the potential to treat multi-drug resistant CML. The
effective doses of Bisindolylmaleimide IX are similar to
those of topoisomerase inhibitors such as doxorubicin and
show little side effect in vivo. The study thus identified a
prototype for new anti-CML drug design.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Identification of Bisindolylmaleimide IX as a
genotoxic drug
To search for novel anti-cancer agents with
genotoxic activities, we screened a panel of kinase
inhibitors and a panel of phosphatase inhibitors using
p53 protein as an initial indicator of DNA damage.
Primary mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) were
chosen for the screen since many cancer cell lines have
altered DNA damage response, in particular the loss-offunction mutations of p53 [29, 30]. Among the 113 small
molecule compounds, two were found to up-regulate
p53 at the protein levels. One is 5-Iodotubercidin (Itu)
and the other is Bisindolylmaleimide IX (Figure 1A
and 1B). We have reported that 5-Iodotubercidin, as a
nucleoside analog that can be incorporated into DNA
and cause DNA damage, is effective in treating MEF
or HCT116-induced tumors in mouse models [31].
Bisindolylmaleimide IX (3-[1-[3-(Amidinothio)propyl]3-indolyl]-4-(1-methyl-3-indolyl)-1H-pyrrole-2,5- dione
methanesulfonate, Ro-31-8220) is a member of the
bisindolylmaleimide derivatives and a cell permeable
inhibitor for PKC isoforms including PKC-α, PKCβI, PKC-βII, PKC-γ, and PKC-ε (Supplementary
Figure S1). One previous study reported that
Bisindolylmaleimide IX could up-regulate p53 via PKC
[32]. However, we found that all the other PKC inhibitors
in the kinase inhibitor panel including GF109203X
(Bisindolylmaleimide I), H-7, H-9, staurosporine,
Hypericin, Rottlerin, Sphingosine, Palmitoyl-DLcarnitine Cl, HBDDE (2,2′,3,3′,4,4′-Hexahydroxy-1,1biphenyl-6,6′-dimethanol Dimethyl Ether) failed to upregulate p53 in MEFs, suggesting that PKC kinases may
not be the main reason behind p53 induction elicited
by Bisindolylmaleimide IX. In addition to MEFs,
Bisindolylmaleimide IX was able to induce p53 expression
in a human colon cancer line HCT116 in a time-dependent
manner (Figure 1B).

Bisindolylmaleimide IX inhibits DNA
topoisomerases
Genotoxic stress is a major activator of p53. To
confirm that Bisindolylmaleimide IX is a genotoxic agent,
we first looked at γH2AX, an indication of DNA breaks
[22], and found that Bisindolylmaleimide IX induced
formation of numerous foci positive for γH2AX in MEFs,
whereas two other bisindolylmaleimide derivatives
Enzastaurin and Bisindolylmaleimide I only induced
minimal numbers of foci (Figure 1C). γH2AX is a product
of Atm/Atr [33]. Inhibition of Atm and Atr with caffeine
could diminish γH2AX foci formation (Figure 1C). These
results, taken together, suggest that Bisindolylmaleimide
IX is a genotoxic agent.
69946

Oncotarget

A previous study reported that Bisindolylmaleimide
I, when conjugated to lexitropsins but not by itself, showed
inhibitory activity against DNA topoisomerase I [34].

We then tested whether Bisindolylmaleimide IX had
any effect on DNA topoisomerases using supercoiled
pBluescript plasmid DNA as a template and found that

Figure 1: Identification of Bisindolylmaleimide IX as a genotoxic agent and a topoisomerase inhibitor. A. The structures

of Bisindolylmaleimide IX. B. Bisindolylmaleimide IX induced p53 expression in MEFs and HCT116 cells. Upper panel: primary MEFs
were treated with 2.5 μM Bisindolylmaleimide IX for different periods of time and the cells were collected. The levels of p53 were
determined by western blot. Bottom panel: HCT116 cells were treated with 2.5 μM Bisindolylmaleimide IX for different periods of time
and the cells were collected. The levels of p53 were determined by western blot. C. Bisindolylmaleimide IX induced formation of DNA
damage foci for γH2AX and p-Atm in MEFs. Primary MEFs were pretreated with caffeine or solvent for 2 hrs and then with 2.5 μM of
Bisindolylmaleimide IX, Bisindolylmaleimide I, or Enzastaurin for 4 more hrs. γH2AX and p-Atm were detected with immunofluorescent
staining using specific antibodies. D. Bisindolylmaleimide IX inhibited the topoisomerase activity assayed with pBluescript. DNA samples
of pBluescript were incubated with cell lysates of MEFs, which were treated with 0, 4 or 8 μM Bisindolylmaleimide IX before being
harvested. DNA samples were analyzed on agarose gels. E. Bisindolylmaleimide IX directly inhibited the topoisomerase activity in vitro
assays. DNA samples of pBluescript were incubated with cell lysates of BaF3 in the presence of 0, 2, 4 or 8 μM Bisindolylmaleimide IX.
DNA samples were analyzed on agarose gels.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

69947

Oncotarget

while the untreated cell extract showed DNA relaxation
activity, cell extract from Bisindolylmaleimide IXtreated MEFs partially lost this activity (Figure 1D).
This was confirmed using a topoisomerase relaxation
assay kit (Supplementary Figure S2A). However,
Bisindolylmaleimide I, XI, Go6976, and Enzastaurin
did not show such an effect (Supplementary Figure
S2B). Moreover, addition of Bisindolylmaleimide IX to
the in vitro DNA relaxation reaction could also inhibit
the topoisomerase activity (Figure 1E), suggesting that
Bisindolylmaleimide IX may directly, rather than via
its metabolites, inhibit DNA topoisomerases and thus
cause DNA damage. Topoisomerases are important
targets for cancer chemotherapy [35]. Some of the
inhibitors including doxorubicin induce DNA damage
in cell cultures at doses that are similar to the effective
doses of Bisindolylmaleimide IX [35, 36]. Moreover,
the expression levels of topoisomerases in tumors also
determine chemo-sensitivity to these drugs [36].

indicating that Bisindolylmaleimide IX causes cell cycle
arrest in p53-dependent and -independent manners, with
the latter likely attributable to the Atm-Chk2 pathway,
which can be activated by Bisindolylmaleimide IX
(Figure 2B).

Bisindolylmaleimide IX shows strong cytotoxic
effects on BCR-ABL positive K562 cells
We
then
tested
the
cytotoxicity
of
Bisindolylmaleimide IX in a number of cancer cell lines
with different origins, hoping to identify the type of cancer
that could be effectively targeted by Bisindolylmaleimide
IX. It was found that K562, a BCR-ABL positive CML
line, was highly sensitive to Bisindolylmaleimide IX
(Figure 3A), compared to HL-60 (BCR-ABL negative
leukemic line), breast cancer cell line MCF7, glioma cell
line U251, gastric cancer cell lines AGS and MGC-803,
osteosarcoma cell lines U2OS and Saos-2 (Figure 3B-3G).
We also tested staurosporine and imatinib mesylate
in these cells and found staurosporine showed strong
cytotoxic effects in almost all these cell lines, whereas
imatinib, like Bisindolylmaleimide IX, showed specificity
to BCR-ABL positive cells (Supplementary Figure S3).
Bisindolylmaleimide IX-induced cell death in K562 cells
occurred by both necrosis and apoptosis, with necrosis
the main form of cell death (Supplementary Figure S4).
Since most of these cancer lines including K562 carry p53
mutations, these results suggest that Bisindolylmaleimide
IX has p53-independent cytotoxic activity.

Bisindolylmaleimide IX induces modest cell
death and activates cell cycle checkpoints
Genotoxic stress usually induces apoptosis
via p53 and cell cycle arrest via p53 and Chk1/2,
which are downstream of Atm/Atr. We found that
Bisindolylmaleimide IX, in a dose dependent manner,
activated Atm and Chk2 in MEFs and HCT116 cells,
justified by specific phosphorylation of these proteins
and formation of foci positive for p-Atm (Figure 1C,
2A, and 2B). As low as 1.0 μM Bisindolylmaleimide IX
was able to activate the DNA damage response. We then
evaluated the cytotoxic effect of Bisindolylmaleimide
IX in MEFs and HCT116 cells. Different doses of
Bisindolylmaleimide IX were applied to the cell cultures
and cell survival rates and IC50 were determined with Wst1 assay. We found that Bisindolylmaleimide IX seemed
to precipitate in cell cultures at concentrations greater
than 10 μM. For cells that could not be killed to 50%
by Bisindolylmaleimide IX at 8 μM, we took the IC50 to
be greater than 8 μM. Bisindolylmaleimide IX showed
a modest cytotoxicity in these two cell types compared
to other genotoxic drugs such as Itu (Figure 2C and 2D)
[31]. Moreover, comparison of p53+/+ and p53-/- HCT116
cells revealed that p53 deficiency rendered modest
resistance to the cytotoxicity of Bisindolylmaleimide IX
(Figure 2D), suggesting that Bisindolylmaleimide IX has
p53-dependent and -independent cytotoxic activities.
To test whether Bisindolylmaleimide IX has any
effects on cell cycle checkpoints, we treated MEFs and
HCT116 cells with Bisindolylmaleimide IX and found
that the drug led to an increase in G2/M phase cells and a
decrease in S phase cells (Figure 2E and 2F), suggesting
that Bisindolylmaleimide IX activated G2/M and G1/S
checkpoints. p53-/- HCT116 cells showed modestly
decreased G2/M and G1 cell cycle arrest (Figure 2F),
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

BCR-ABL sensitizes cells to Bisindolylmaleimide
IX-induced cell death and cell cycle arrest
The above findings suggest that Bisindolylmaleimide
IX might have the potential to treat CML, a disease with
95% of the cases caused by BCR-ABL [3]. To validate
these findings, we made use of BaF3 cells [37], a p53
defective cell line that has been widely used to study
BCR-ABL function and to test the effects of anti-CML
drugs [38]. We expressed BCR-ABL in BaF3 cells using
a retrovirus vector and introduced an empty retroviral
vector as a control (Figure 4A). We treated these cells with
different doses of Bisindolylmaleimide IX for 24 hrs and
cell survival rates were determined by Wst-1 assay. The
results clearly showed that BCR-ABL expression sensitized
the cells to the cytotoxic effect of Bisindolylmaleimide
IX (Figure 4B). Ectopic expression of BCR-ABL in MEF
cells also sensitized the cells to Bisindolylmaleimide
IX-induced cell death (Figure 4C). We also tested the
Imatinib-resistant T315I mutant BCR-ABL and found
that this mutant rendered BaF3 cells similar sensitivity to
Bisindolylmaleimide IX as BCR-ABL (Figure 4D). These
results support the concept that Bisindolylmaleimide IX may
be useful to treat BCR-ABL positive leukemia, including
CML that is resistant to Imatinib, nilotinib, and dasatinib.
69948

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Bisindolylmaleimide IX activated the DNA damage response pathway and induced cell death and cell cycle
arrest. A. Bisindolylmaleimide IX activated the Atm-Chk2 pathway in MEFs in a dose-dependent manner. Primary MEFs were treated

with different doses of Bisindolylmaleimide IX for 4 hrs and the cells were collected. The levels of p53, p-p53 (S15), Atm, p-Atm (S1981),
Chk2, p-Chk2 (T68) and β-actin were determined by western blot. B. Bisindolylmaleimide IX activated the Atm-Chk2 pathway in HCT116
cells in a dose-dependent manner. HCT116 cells were treated with different doses of Bisindolylmaleimide IX for 4 hrs and the cells
were collected. The levels of p53, p-p53 (S15), Atm, p-Atm (S1981), Chk2, p-Chk2 (T68), and β-actin were determined by western blot.
C. Bisindolylmaleimide IX induced cell death in a dose-dependent manner in MEFs. Primary MEFs were treated with different doses of
Bisindolylmaleimide IX for 24 hrs and the cell survival rates were determined by Wst-1 assay. N=3. *p<0.05 when the values of treated cells
were compared to that of untreated cells. D. Bisindolylmaleimide IX induced cell death in HCT116 cells in a p53-dependent manner. p53+/+
or p53-/- HCT116 cells were treated with different doses of Bisindolylmaleimide IX for 24 hrs and the cell survival rates were determined
by Wst-1 assay. N=3. *p<0.05 when the values of p53-/- cells were compared to those of p53+/+ cells. E. Bisindolylmaleimide IX induced
cell cycle arrest in a dose-dependent manner in MEFs. Primary MEFs were treated with different doses of Bisindolylmaleimide IX for 24
hrs and the cell cycle profiles were analyzed with FACS. The values are average of three repeated experiments. F. Bisindolylmaleimide
IX induced cell cycle arrest in HCT116 cells in a p53-dependent manner. p53+/+ or p53-/- HCT116 cells were treated with different
doses of Bisindolylmaleimide IX for 24 hrs and the cell cycle profiles were analyzed with FACS. The values are average of three repeated
experiments.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

69949

Oncotarget

BCR-ABL enhances Bisindolylmaleimide IXinduced DNA damage and down-regulates DNA
topoisomerase II

We also compared the cytotoxic effects of
Bisindolylmaleimide IX to two other DNA topoisomerase
inhibitors, doxorubicin and teniposide, and found that
BCR-ABL positive BaF3 cells showed similar survival rate
as control cells in response to doxorubicin, but increased
survival in response to teniposide (Supplementary Figure
S5), suggesting that Bisindolylmaleimide IX’s selective
cytotoxicity to BCR-ABL positive cells is not shared by
other DNA topoisomerase inhibitors. We then compared
the cytotoxic effects of various bisindolylmaleimide
derivatives on BCR-ABL expressing cells, hoping to
identify the most potent one(s). We treated BaF3 cells
expressing BCR-ABL with different doses of each of the
eleven available compounds (bisindolylmaleimide I to XI
(Supplementary Figure S1)) for 24 hrs and determined the
cell survival rates. It was found that Bisindolylmaleimide
IX was the most potent one among these derivatives
(Supplementary Figure S6). In addition, Enzastaurin
(Supplementary Figure S1), a distant derivative, only
showed a modest cytotoxic effect on BCR-ABL positive
BaF3 and K562 cells (Supplementary Figure S7).
We then analyzed Bisindolylmaleimide IXinduced cell cycle arrest in BaF3 cells carrying an
empty vector or expressing BCR-ABL and found
that BCR-ABL-expressing BaF3 needed lower
concentrations of Bisindolylmaleimide IX to activate
G1/S checkpoint (compare the fold decrease/increase of
different phases between the treated and untreated cells)
(Figure 4E). Similarly, K562 cells were more sensitive to
Bisindolylmaleimide IX-induced cell cycle arrest than HL60 cells (Supplementary Figure S8). These results suggest
that BCR-ABL sensitizes cells to Bisindolylmaleimide IXinduced cell cycle arrest.

CML cells are known to be genetically unstable
due to BCR-ABL. This is the reason behind increased
mutagenesis of BCR-ABL in these cells [9, 10]. We found
that Bisindolylmaleimide IX induced increased numbers of
γH2AX foci in BaF3 cells expressing BCR-ABL compared
to control BaF3 cells (Figure 5A), suggesting that BCR-ABL
promoted Bisindolylmaleimide IX-induced DNA damage.
We then analyzed the expression of DNA topoisomerases,
the targets of Bisindolylmaleimide IX, in BaF3 cells carrying
the vector or BCR-ABL. Quantitative PCR analysis revealed
that Topo I was expressed at similar levels in BaF3 cells
carrying BCR-ABL or the vector, which was not significantly
altered by Bisindolylmaleimide IX treatment (Figure 5B).
On the other hand, BCR-ABL positive BaF3 cells expressed
decreased levels of Topo IIa, which were further repressed
by Bisindolylmaleimide IX treatment (Figure 5C), and
decreased levels of Topo IIb, which was not affected by
Bisindolylmaleimide IX treatment (Figure 5D). These
results indicate that BCR-ABL suppresses the expression
of Topo IIa and IIb and that Bisindolylmaleimide IX may
directly target Topo IIa. Decreased levels of topoisomerases
are likely to sensitize the cells to Bisindolylmaleimide IX by
increasing the drug-target ratio in these cells. These results,
together with our finding that Bisindolylmaleimide IX is an
inhibitor of DNA topoisomerase (Figure 1D), suggest that
Topo IIa may be a target of Bisindolylmaleimide IX. Indeed,
we found that knockdown of Topo IIa with siRNA rendered
BCR-ABL positive cells resistance to Bisindolylmaleimide
IX-induced cell cycle arrest (Figure 5E).

Figure 3: K562 cells were more sensitive to Bisindolylmaleimide IX-induced cell death compared to other cell lines
tested. These cell lines were treated with different doses of Bisindolylmaleimide IX for 24 or 48 hrs and the cell survival rates were
determined by Wst-1 assays. A. Myeloid cell line K562. B. Myeloid cell line HL-60. C. Breast cancer cell line MCF7. D. Glioma cell line
U251. E. Gastric cancer cell line AGS. F. Gastric cancer cell line MGC-803. G. Osteosarcoma cell lines U2OS and Saos-2.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

69950

Oncotarget

One important cause of genome instability in
CML cells is accumulation of ROS [9, 39–41], which
are produced via mechanisms including superoxide
dismutase and NADPH oxidase [9, 42]. We treated BCRABL expressing BaF3 cells with Bisindolylmaleimide
IX and found that ROS levels were not significantly
altered (Supplementary Figure S9A). On the other
hand, BaF3 cells carrying the empty vector showed
lower levels of ROS (Supplementary Figure S9A),

confirming that BCR-ABL promoted ROS production.
However, depletion of ROS with N-Acetyl Cysteine
(NAC), a ROS scavenger, showed an insignificant
rescuing effect on Bisindolylmaleimide IX-induced
cell cycle arrest or cell death rate in BCR-ABL
positive BaF3 cells (Supplementary Figure S9B and
data not shown), suggesting that ROS do not play an
role in Bisindolylmaleimide IX-induced DNA damage
response.

Figure 4: BCR-ABL sensitized cells to Bisindolylmaleimide IX-induced cell death and cell cycle arrest. A. Western blot results

showed that BCR-ABL was expressed but its activity was not inhibited by Bisindolylmaleimide IX. BaF3 cells infected with empty retrovirus
or retrovirus expressing BCR-ABL were treated with different doses of Bisindolylmaleimide IX for 4 hrs. Activation and expression of BCRABL were determined by western blot. Activation of BCR-ABL was determined by anti-phospho-Tyr antibodies. B. BCR-ABL expressing BaF3
cells showed increased cell death rates in response to Bisindolylmaleimide IX. BaF3 cells carrying the vector or BCR-ABL were treated with
different doses of Bisindolylmaleimide IX for 24 hrs and cell survival rates were determined by Wst-1 assays. N=3. *p<0.05 when the values of
BCR-ABL positive BaF3 cells were compared to those of control cells. C. BCR-ABL expressing MEF cells showed increased cell death rates in
response to Bisindolylmaleimide IX. MEF cells infected with the vector or BCR-ABL-expressing retrovirus were treated with different doses of
Bisindolylmaleimide IX for 24 hrs and cell survival rates were determined by Wst-1 assays. N=3. *p<0.05 when the values of BCR-ABL positive
MEFs were compared to those of control MEFs. D. T315I mutant BCR-ABL also sensitized BaF3 cells to the cytotoxicity of Bisindolylmaleimide
IX. BaF3 cells expressing BCR-ABL or T315I BCR-ABL were treated with different doses of Bisindolylmaleimide IX for 24 hrs and cell survival
rates were determined by Wst-1 assays. E. BCR-ABL expressing BaF3 cells showed increased cell cycle arrest compared to vector-infected BaF3
cells in response to Bisindolylmaleimide IX. BaF3 cells carrying the vector or BCR-ABL were treated with different doses of Bisindolylmaleimide
IX for 24 hrs and cell cycle profiles were determined by FACS analysis. The values are average of three repeated experiments. Right panels:
quantitative data for S and G2/M phases.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

69951

Oncotarget

BCR-ABL sensitizes cells to Bisindolylmaleimide
IX-induced cell death via the oncogene addiction
pathway

sensitizes the cells to Bisindolylmaleimide IX, as BaF3
and K562 cells express mutant p53. We found that
Bisindolylmaleimide IX showed negligible inhibitory
effect on BCR-ABL activity in vivo and it needed 45 μM
to inhibit BCR-ABL in in vitro kinase assays (Figure
4A and Table 1), suggesting that Bisindolylmaleimide

The above findings suggest that there exist
p53-independent mechanisms by which BCR-ABL

Figure 5: Bisindolylmaleimide IX induced increased DNA damage in BCR-ABL positive cells by suppressing
the expression of topoisomerase II. A. Bisindolylmaleimide IX induced an increase in DNA damage foci for γH2AX in BCR-

ABL-expressing BaF3 cells. BaF3 cells infected with the vector or BCR-ABL-expressing retrovirus were treated with 1.0 or 4.0 μM
Bisindolylmaleimide IX for 8 hrs and the foci formation was determined by immunofluorescent staining. B. BCR-ABL positive BaF3 cells
showed similar levels of topoisomerase I mRNA as control cells. BaF3 cells carrying the vector or expressing BCR-ABL were treated with
different doses of Bisindolylmaleimide IX for 8 hrs. The levels of topoisomerase I mRNA were determined by quantitative PCR. N=3.
C. BCR-ABL positive BaF3 cells showed decreased levels of topoisomerase IIa mRNA, which were further suppressed by Bisindolylmaleimide
IX treatment. BaF3 cells carrying the vector or expressing BCR-ABL were treated with different doses of Bisindolylmaleimide IX for 8 hrs. The
levels of topoisomerase IIa mRNA were determined by quantitative PCR. N=3. *p<0.05 when the values of BCR-ABL positive BaF3 cells were
compared to those of control cells at each dose. D. BCR-ABL positive BaF3 cells showed decreased levels of topoisomerase IIb mRNA. BaF3 cells
carrying the vector or expressing BCR-ABL were treated with different doses of Bisindolylmaleimide IX for 8 hrs. The levels of topoisomerase IIb
mRNA were determined by quantitative PCR. N=3. *p<0.05 when the values of BCR-ABL positive BaF3 cells were compared to those of control
cells at each dose. E. BCR-ABL positive BaF3 cells with Topo IIa knockdown were refractory to Bisindolylmaleimide IX-induced cell cycle arrest
at G2/M and S phases. Top panel: western blot results showed that Topo IIa was knocked down in BCR-ABL positive BaF3 cells. Bottom panel:
the cell cycle profiles of BCR-ABL positive BaF3 cells with Topo IIa knockdown in response to Bisindolylmaleimide IX.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

69952

Oncotarget

Table 1: Inhibitory effects of Bisindolylmaleimide IX on a variety of kinases
enzyme
compounds

IC50
Aurora A

Bis-IX (μM)

>45

Stauprorine (nM) 13.71±2.71
Imatinib (μg/ml)

N.D.

B-Raf

IKKβ

Jak2

1.14±0.11 0.48±0.005 9.68±0.79
3.37±0.17

1.54±0.12

N.D.

N.D.

SYK

BCR-ABL

ERK1

MEK1

> 45

> 45

> 45

> 45

N.D.

N.D.

N.D.

0.023±0.003

N.D.

N.D.

0.76±0.04 1.16±0.08
N.D.

N.D.

N.D. : not determined
IX is not a strong inhibitor of BCR-ABL per se.
Bisindolylmaleimide IX may target the downstream
molecules of BCR-ABL, especially the one (s) that
renders the cells addiction to BCR-ABL, e.g., Erks
[5, 6] [43]. We found that Bisindolylmaleimide IX
inhibited Erk activation in BCR-ABL-expressing BaF3
cells but not in control cells (Figure 6A). Functionally,
we found that inhibition of Erk with U0126 induced
increased cell death rates in BCR-ABL expressing
BaF3 cells than control cells (Figure 6B), confirming
that Erk1/2 play an important pro-survival role in
these cells [44, 45]. Since inhibition of Erk activation
by Bisindolylmaleimide IX is not complete, we tested
combination of Bisindolylmaleimide IX and U0126
and found that this further increased cell death rates
in BCR-ABL-expressing BaF3 cells (Figure 6C). These
results suggest that Erk activity may play a role in
mediating the cytotoxic effect of Bisindolylmaleimide
IX in BCR-ABL-expressing BaF3 cells [46, 47].
We then attempted to identify the target of
Bisindolylmaleimide IX in the BCR-ABL-Erk1/2
pathway, which include Raf, Mek, and Erk [43].
We found that Bisindolylmaleimide IX inhibited
phosphorylation of B-Raf, as well as activation of
Mek1, in a more sensitive manner in BCR-ABL
positive BaF3 cells than control cells (Figure 6A).
A previous study reported that Raf molecules could
be activated by PKC, which could be inhibited by
Bisindolylmaleimide IX [48]. In addition, in vitro
kinase assays showed that Bisindolylmaleimide IX
was a potent inhibitor of B-Raf, the main regulator
of Mek1-Erk1/2 among the Raf homologs [49], with
an IC50 of 1.14 μM (Table 1), without inhibiting
Mek1 or Erk1 activity, with IC50 values greater than
45 μM (Table 1). We found that DNA topoisomerase
inhibitor doxorubicin and teniposide did not affect the
phosphorylation of B-Raf in BCR-ABL positive BaF3
cells (Supplementary Figure S10), which may explain
why cytotoxicity of these two drugs is not affected by
BCR-ABL (Supplementary Figure S5).
To test the role of B-Raf in Bisindolylmaleimide
IX-induced cytotoxicity in BCR-ABL positive BaF3
cells. We knocked down B-Raf and found this greatly
sensitized the cells to Bisindolylmaleimide IX-induced
cell death (both apoptosis and necrosis) (Figure 6D),
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

whereas ectopic expression of constitutive active B-Raf
(E600) rendered resistance to the drug (Supplementary
Figure S11). Note that Bisindolylmaleimide IX–
induced cell death is mainly necrosis (Figure 6D).
These results indicate that B-Raf play an important
role in Bisindolylmaleimide IX-induced cell death in
BaF3 cells. However, Bisindolylmaleimide IX–induced
DNA damage response is not caused by its inhibition
on B-Raf, as B-Raf knockdown did not induce foci
formation for γH2AX or p-ATM or induction of
p53 (Supplementary Figure S12). Moreover, B-Raf
knockdown compromised Bisindolylmaleimide IX–
induced DNA damage response, manifested by a
decrease in foci formation for γH2AX and p-ATM and
p53 induction (Supplementary Figure S12).

Bisindolylmaleimide IX is effective in treating
CML-like disorders caused by BCR-ABL or
T315I BCR-ABL
We then tested the anti-cancer potential of
Bisindolylmaleimide IX in vivo. We first treated nude
mice carrying tumors derived from HCT116 with
Bisindolylmaleimide IX at the dose of 10 mg/kg or ITU
(2.5mg/kg) for 7 days. We found that the tumor size on
Bisindolylmaleimide IX-treated mice did not go down
and the body weights of the mice were not affected either,
whereas Itu greatly inhibited tumor growth (Figure 7A
and data not shown), suggesting that Bisindolylmaleimide
IX is not effective in fighting HCT116-induced colorectal
tumors. More importantly, these results suggest that
Bisindolylmaleimide IX has little side effect even at high
doses. We then tested whether Bisindolylmaleimide IX
might be effective in treating BCR-ABL positive CML.
We used BCR-ABL expressing BaF3 cells, which were
able to form a tumor when implanted subcutaneously in
nude mice, whereas BaF3 cells carrying a vector did not.
In this solid tumor model, 4 mg/kg of Bisindolylmaleimide
IX significantly inhibited growth of the tumors
(Figure 7B). Moreover, 4 mg/kg of Bisindolylmaleimide
IX also significantly inhibited growth of tumors derived
from BaF3 cells expressing T315I BCR-ABL (Figure 7C).
Intravenous injection of BCR-ABL-expressing
BaF3 cells, but not the cells carrying the empty vector,
could kill nude mice 3 weeks after injection due to
69953

Oncotarget

DISCUSSION

development of CML-like disorder. Bisindolylmaleimide
IX was able to extend the lifespan of the nude mice
carrying intravenously injected BCR-ABL positive BaF3
cells (Figure 7D), as well as the nude mice carrying
intravenously injected T315I BCR-ABL positive BaF3
cells (Figure 7E). In the settings, knockdown B-Raf in
BCR-ABL positive BaF3 cells significantly extended
the lifespan of the nude mice compared to the control
mice, in response to treatment with Bisindolylmaleimide
IX (Figure 7F), confirming that B-Raf determines the
sensitivity to Bisindolylmaleimide IX in vivo. These
results show that Bisindolylmaleimide IX is effective in
treating leukemia-like disorders induced by BCR-ABL or
drug resistant BCR-ABL mutant in mouse models.

Chemotherapy faces many obstacles including drug
resistance and side effects. For example, many of the CML
patients develop overt resistance to imatinib due to mutations
in BCR-ABL, and T315I mutation appears to be resistant to
Imatinib and the next generation drugs nilotinib and dasatinib
[7, 8, 14]. Here by searching for novel genotoxic drugs,
we identified Bisindolylmaleimide IX, which was shown
to be a DNA topoisomerase inhibitor, as a drug candidate
against BCR-ABL or T315I BCR-ABL positive cells
and cancer (solid or leukemia), while it was less effective
in other cell types tested. This specificity to BCR-ABL
positive cells is attributable to two unrelated properties of

Figure 6: Bisindolylmaleimide IX shows increased cytotoxicity to BCR-ABL positive cells by inhibiting Raf-Erk
signaling. A. Bisindolylmaleimide IX inhibited Raf-Erk activation in BCR-ABL positive BaF3 cells. BaF3 cells infected with empty

retrovirus or retrovirus expressing BCR-ABL were treated with different doses of Bisindolylmaleimide IX for 4 hrs. Activation and
expression of Erk, Mek1, and Raf were determined by western blot. B. Inhibition of Erk decreased the cell survival rates in BaF3 cells
expressing BCR-ABL compared to control cells. N=3. *p<0.05 when the values of BCR-ABL positive BaF3 cells were compared to those
of control cells at each dose. C. Inhibition of Erk also enhanced Bisindolylmaleimide IX-induced cell death in BCR-ABL expressing BaF3
cells. N=3. *p<0.05 when the values of BCR-ABL positive BaF3 cells were compared to those of control cells at each dose. D. Knockdown
of B-Raf lowered the survival of BCR-ABL expressing BaF3 cells in response to Bisindolylmaleimide IX. N=3. Right panel: Western blot
results showing that B-Raf was knocked down in these cells.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

69954

Oncotarget

Bisindolylmaleimide IX (Figure 7G). Firstly, as an inhibitor
for topoisomerase especially Topo IIa, Bisindolylmaleimide
IX induces increased DNA damage and increased cell
cycle arrest, which are likely due to decreased expression
of topoisomerase II isoforms in BCR-ABL positive cells.
Secondly, as an inhibitor of B-Raf, Bisindolylmaleimide

IX disrupts the oncogene addiction pathway of BCR-ABL
and induces increased cell death (Figure 7G). The second
property is not shared by DNA topoisomerase inhibitors
doxorubicin and teniposide. Thus, this study identified
Bisindolylmaleimide IX as a potential chemotherapeutic
agent for CML, including drug-resistant CML.

Figure 7: Bisindolylmaleimide IX was effective in treatment of leukemia-like disorders induced by BCR-ABL or T315I BCRABL. A. Bisindolylmaleimide IX showed little effect on the size of tumors derived from HCT116 cells. The nude mice with tumor were treated

with Bisindolylmaleimide IX, Itu, or solvent for different periods of time and the tumor size was measured every day. N=6. *p<0.05 when the tumor
sizes with drug treatment were compared to those of untreated. B. Bisindolylmaleimide IX inhibited the growth of tumors derived from BCR-ABLexpressing BaF3 cells. The nude mice with tumor were treated with 4 mg/kg Bisindolylmaleimide IX or solvent for different periods of time and the
tumor size was measured every day. The mean tumor volumes of treatment group were calculated at the final measurement, which were compared to
that of vehicle-treated mice for statistical significance using Dunnett’s test. N=8. *p<0.05 when the tumor sizes with drug treatment were compared
to those of untreated. C. Bisindolylmaleimide IX inhibited the growth of tumors derived from T315I BCR-ABL-expressing BaF3 cells. The nude
mice with tumor were treated with 4 mg/kg Bisindolylmaleimide IX or solvent for different periods of time and the tumor size was measured every
day. The mean tumor volumes of treatment group were calculated at the final measurement, which were compared to that of vehicle-treated mice
for statistical significance using Dunnett’s test. N=8. *p<0.05 when the tumor sizes with drug treatment were compared to those of untreated at the
same dose. D. Bisindolylmaleimide IX extended the lifespan of mice receiving BCR-ABL-expressing BaF3 cells. The nude mice were injected with
BCR-ABL-expressing BaF3 cells. Three days later, these mice were treated with 2 or 4 mg/kg Bisindolylmaleimide IX or solvent every day and
the lifespan of these mice were monitored. Each group contains 5 mice. E. Bisindolylmaleimide IX extended the lifespan of mice receiving T315I
BCR-ABL-expressing BaF3 cells. The nude mice were injected with T315I BCR-ABL-expressing BaF3 cells. Three days later, these mice were
treated with 2 or 4 mg/kg Bisindolylmaleimide IX or solvent every day and the lifespan of these mice were monitored. Each group contains 5 mice.
F. Knockdown of B-Raf in BCR-ABL-expressing BaF3 cells with shRNA extended the lifespan of mice compared to control shRNA in response to
Bisindolylmaleimide IX treatment. The nude mice were injected with BCR-ABL positive BaF3 cells that expressed control or B-Raf shRNA. Three
days later, these mice were treated with 2 mg/kg Bisindolylmaleimide IX or solvent every day and the lifespan of these mice were monitored. Each
group contains 7 mice. For B-Raf knockdown, see Supplementary results Figure S12. G. A diagram shows how Bisindolylmaleimide IX may treat
CML. Bisindolylmaleimide IX inhibits DNA topoisomerases, which are down-regulated in BCR-ABL positive cells, to activate DDR and AtmChk2 to induce cell cycle arrest; and inhibits the Raf-Erk pathway, the BCR-ABL oncogene addiction pathway, to induce cell death.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

69955

Oncotarget

Bisindolylmaleimide IX is one of many
bisindolylmaleimide derivatives, which were initially
developed as inhibitors for the PKC family [25].
Recently, efforts have been made in developing
Bisindolylmaleimide derivatives into anti-cancer drugs
[27, 50]. The best-studied is PKCβ inhibitor Enzastaurin,
which has been tested alone or in combination with other
chemotherapeutic drugs to treat glioma, lung cancer, ovary
cancer, T and B cell lymphomas, colorectal cancer and
other types of cancer [26, 50]. Enzastaurin is believed to
execute its anti-cancer activity by inhibiting synthesis of
VEGF and/or inhibiting the Akt1 signaling pathway [26,
50]. Our present study reveals that Bisindolylmaleimide
IX is more effective than Enzastaurin and other
bisindolylmaleimide derivatives in killing BCR-ABL
positive cells.
We show for the first time that Bisindolylmaleimide
IX is a DNA topoisomerase inhibitor that can cause
cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. Previous studies have
shown that Bisindolylmaleimide IX could induce
apoptosis by cleaving anti-apoptotic protein Mcl-1 in
chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) cells, a disease
not caused BCR-ABL, and induce apoptosis in HL60 [51–53]. However, there are studies showing that
Bisindolylmaleimide IX inhibits apoptosis in cells
including thymocytes [54, 55]. We tested many cancer cell
lines and found Bisindolylmaleimide IX in general showed
a modest cytotoxic activity, with the exception of BCRABL positive cell lines. One possible explanation why
genotoxic drug Bisindolylmaleimide IX fails to efficiently
kill these cancer cells is that Bisindolylmaleimide IX, as
a small molecule compound, may activate pro-survival
genes or pathways [25, 56].
One reason why BCR-ABL-induced CML-like
disorders are more susceptible to Bisindolylmaleimide IX
is that this agent causes increased cells cycle arrest due
to increased DNA damage. BCR-ABL down-regulates
the expression of topoisomerase IIa and IIb, the levels
of which are known to determine cell sensitivity to
topoisomerase inhibitors such as Bisindolylmaleimide IX.
Thus, this study identified another mechanism by which
BCR-ABL affects genome stability [57]. Another reason is
that Bisindolylmaleimide IX inhibits the Raf-Erk pathway,
the oncogene addictive pathway in BCR-ABL positive
cells [28, 45]. Bisindolylmaleimide IX targets the RafErk pathway by directly inhibiting B-Raf, thus inducing
greater cell death of BCR-ABL expressing cells, a
mechanism that does not exist in other cancer lines tested.
In summary, this study suggests that
Bisindolylmaleimide IX has the potential to treat BCRABL positive leukemia including CML that is refractory
to imatinib, nilotinib, and dasatinib. Unlike BCR-ABL
kinase inhibitor drugs like imatinib, Bisindolylmaleimide
IX targets topoisomerase and B-Raf and takes advantage
of pro-DNA damage activity of BCR-ABL and the
oncogene addiction Raf-Erk pathway in BCR-ABL
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

positive CML cells. Moreover, the effective doses of
Bisindolylmaleimide IX show little side effect in vivo.
Lastly, Bisindolylmaleimide IX may be worth testing
against other cancer types that have common features as
CML.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Ethics statement
Animal experiments in this study, including
BALB/cASlac nude mice and normal C57B/6 mice were
carried out in accordance with recommendations from
the National Research Council Guide for Care and Use
of Laboratory Animals, with the protocols approved by
the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of
Shanghai, China [SYXK (SH) 2011–0112].

Cell culture, retrovirus infection, and siRNA
knockdown
The primary mouse embryo fibroblast (MEF) cells
(from C57B/6 mice) were generated in the laboratory as
described previously [29]. The human colon cancer cell
lines HCT116 (p53+/+) and HCT116 (p53−/−) were a gift
from B. Vogelstein’s lab. These cells as well as human
breast cancer cell line MCF7, human gastric cancer cell
line AGS, human gastric cancer cell line MGC-803, human
astrocytoma cell line U251, osteosarcoma cell line U2OS
and HEK293T were cultured in DMEM. The human
osteosarcoma cell line Saos-2 was cultured in McCoy’s 5A.
All these cells were cultured in the presence of 10% fetal
bovine serum (Hyclone, Logan, UT, USA), 1% penicillin/
streptomycin at a humidified atmosphere with 5% CO2.
BaF3 cells (murine Pro-B cells) were purchased
from the Peking Union Cell Bank of Chinese Academy
of Medical Sciences. BaF3 cells were infected with
retroviruses expressing BCR-ABL, T315I BCR-ABL
or empty vector. K562, HL60 cells and stable BaF3
cells expressing BCR-ABL or T315I BCR-ABL were
maintained in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with
10% fetal bovine serum, 2 mM glutamine, and 50 u/ml
penicillin/streptomycin in a humidified incubator with 5%
CO2. All BaF3 cells were cultured in the presence of 2
ng/ml murine IL-3. Ectopic expression of B-Raf (E600)
was mediated by pMSCV-based retroviruses. pMSCVpuro
retroviruses were used as a negative control.
To knock down TopIIa or B-Raf, BaF3 cells (3 x 106
cells per sample) were pelleted and resuspended in 100 μl
room temperature Nucleofector Solution (LONZA, Swiss),
which were then mixed with 100 nM siRNA (Origene, USA).
The cell and siRNA mixture was transferred into certified
cuvettes and electroporation was performed using Amaxa
Nucleofector (LONZA, Swiss). The cells were then mixed
with 500 μl of pre-equilibrated culture medium and then
transferred into the 12-well plate to culture for 48 hrs. For
69956

Oncotarget

shRNA-mediated B-Raf knockdown, shRNA was expressed
by a lentivirus vector. Three short hairpin RNA (shRNA)
interference sequences targeting B-Raf gene and a negative
control sequence were synthesized and cloned into the
pAVL4.3-shRNA-GFP vector. The negative control shRNA
sequence is TTCTCCGAACGTGTCACGT, while the B-Raf
shRNA sequences are GGAACTGTCTACAAGGGAA,
GCCACAACTGGCAATTGTT, and CTCCCAATGTTC
ATATAA. Lentiviruses were produced using a plasmidbased lentiviral packaging system (vector plasmid-psPAX2pMD2.G (Addgene, Cambridge, MA, USA)) to transfect
HEK293T cells.

30 minutes at room temperature. The primary antibodies
were diluted in PBS with 1% BSA (1:200). The slides
were blocked (1% BSA in PBS) for 60 minutes at room
temperature, incubated with primary antibodies overnight
at 4°C, and followed by secondary antibody incubation for
60 min at RT. The slides were then mounted and observed
under confocal microscope (Leica, Germany). Antibodies
against γH2AX were from Bethyl Corporation.

Cell cycle analysis
Cells were seeded on 35-mm dishes and cultured for
24 hrs, reaching 60–70% confluency. The cells were treated
with different concentrations of Bisindolylmaleimide IX for
24 or 48 hrs, harvested by trypsinization, resuspended in
200 μl PBS, and fixed in 100% ethanol overnight at 4°C.
The fixed cells were pelleted by centrifugation, resuspended
in 800 μl PBS containing ribonuclease A (100 μg/ml) and
incubated for 30 min at 37°C. Then 10 μl propidium iodide
(PI, 4 mg/ml PBS) were added to the samples, which were
assessed on a FACSCalibur ﬂow cytometer using Cell
Quest software (BD Bioscience).

Quantitative PCR
Total RNA was isolated with Trizol reagent
(Invitrogen) from BaF3 cells carrying the vector
or expressing BCR-ABL, which were treated with
Bisindolylmaleimide IX or solvent. The RNA was used to
carry out reverse transcription using Roche Transcriptor
First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit. Quantitative PCR was
carried out using the following primers. Topo I: forward,
GAGGGAACCACCCCAAGATG, reverse, TCCAGG
AGACCAGCCAAGTA; Topo IIa: forward, GGAGT
CCGATGACGATGACG, reverse, TGCATCACGTC
AGAGGTTGAG; Topo IIb: forward, ATGTAGGGAT
GAACTGCAGGG, reverse, TTCTTGTCCCTCTGCTT
GTTGT.

Cell death assay
To
measure
cell
survival
rates
after
Bisindolylmaleimide IX treatment, cells were plated at
1×104 in 96 well plates and cultured for overnight, which
were then treated with Bisindolylmaleimide IX for 48
hrs. Cell proliferation reagent WST-1 (Roche) was added
to each well and was further incubated for 4 hrs at 37°C.
The absorbance was measured against a control using
microplate reader at 440 nm. The reference wavelength was
630 nm. To analyze the nature of cell death, an Annexin
V-PI Apoptosis Detection Kit (BD Pharmingen, USA) was
used. Cells were seeded into six wells and cultured for 24
hours after treatment with Bisindolylmaleimide IX. The
cells were collected, washed twice and then resuspended in
100 μL of binding buffer, after which 5 μl of FITC Annexin
V and 10 μl PI were added. Cells were gently vortexed
and incubated for 15 minutes in the dark. Finally, cells
were added 400 μl binding buffer and analyzed by flow
cytometry (BD Biosciences, USA) within 1 hour.

Western blot analysis
Cells were lysed in TNEN buffer (50 mM Tris,
150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 0.5% NP-40, and 0.1%
Triton X-100) supplemented with 1 mM NaF, Na2VO3,
1 mM PMSF, and 1 μg/ml of aprotonin, leupeptin, and
pepstatin A. Protein concentrations were determined using
a Bio-Rad assay. Proteins were resolved by SDS-PAGE
and transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride membranes
(Millipore). Antibodies against p-Atm were from Abcam
Corporation. Antibodies against p-Chk2 (Thr68), Chk2,
p-p53 (Ser15), p53, Cleaved Caspase-3, phospho-p44/42
MAPK (Erk1/2) (Thr202/Tyr204), p44/42 MAPK
(Erk1/2), Phospho-MEK1/2 (Ser221), MEK1/2 and
p-B-Raf (Ser445) were purchased from Cell Signaling.
Antibodies against Caspase 3, B-Raf and Atm were from
Genetex. Antibodies against c-Abl, GAPDH, and β-actin
were from Santa Cruz Biotechnology. Antibodies against
p-Tyr were from Merck Millipore Corporation.

Kinase assay
The recombinant Auror, B-Raf, IKKβ, SYK,
BCR-Abl, MEK1 and Erk1 proteins were expressed in
Escherichia coli strain BL21-Codon Plus (DE3), purified
by Ni-NTA Agarose (QIAGEN). The kinase assays were
carried out with the Z´-LYTETM Kinase Assay kit using
Ser/Thr3 Peptide substrate (Invitrogen). The reactions
were carried out according to the Z-LYTE protocol
and the results were read on an EnVision plate reader.
All reactions were carried out in triplicate. Data were
expressed as mean ±SEM.

Immunofluorescence histochemistry
MEFs or HCT116 cells were cultured on cover slips
while Baf3 cells were cultured on slides coated by 0.1mg/
ml poly-L-lysine, washed with phosphate-buffered saline
(PBS) twice, and then fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA),
which were permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X in PBS for
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

69957

Oncotarget

Carcinoma xenograft mouse models

GRANT SUPPORT

Male BALB/cASlac-nude mice (4-week-old) were
purchased from Shanghai Slac Laboratory Animal C. LTD.
The mice were kept in the SPF mouse facility for 1 week
before being inoculated with HCT116 cells. HCT116 cells
were harvested by trypsinization, counted and resuspended
in PBS at the concentration of 5×107/ml. We injected
subcutaneously 3×106 cells to BALB/cASlac nude mice’s
back. After 2 weeks, the mice were divided into 3 groups (6
mice per group) and were treated with 5-Iodotubercidin (Itu),
Bisindolylmaleimide IX or solvent (PBS). The mice were
weighed and the size of tumor measured. The length (L) and
width (W) of the tumor were measured with a digital caliper
and expressed as tumor volume (0.5L×W2, mm3).
For BaF3 cells-induced tumor models, 1 x 106 BaF3
cells expressing BCR-ABL, T315I BCR-ABL or empty
vector were inoculated subcutaneously in the left thigh
back or intravenously injected via the tail vein. For solid
tumor models, the mice were injected with 4 mg / kg of
Bisindolylmaleimide IX or solvent. The length (L) and
width (W) of the tumor were measured by a digital caliper
and expressed as tumor volume (0.5 L×W2, mm3). The
body weight and the lifespan of the mice with intravenous
injection of BaF3 cells were monitored every day. For
B-Raf knockdown, lentivirus-mediated expressing shRNA
against B-Raf was used.

The work was supported by grants from Natural
Science Foundation of China (81130039 and 81121001),
the Ministry of Science and Technology of China (The
National Key Scientific Program (2012CB966901 and
2014CB942900), and Shanghai Zhangjiang Stem Cell
Research Project (ZJ2014-ZD-002). The funders had no
role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision
to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.

REFERENCES
1.	 Jemal A, Bray F, Center MM, Ferlay J, Ward E, Forman D.
Global cancer statistics. CA Cancer J Clin. 2011; 1: 69-90.
2.	 Pavet V, Portal MM, Moulin JC, Herbrecht R, Gronemeyer
H. Towards novel paradigms for cancer therapy. Oncogene.
2011; 30: 1-20.
3.	 Wong S, Witte ON. The BCR-ABL story: bench to bedside
and back. Annu Rev Immunol. 2004; 22: 247-306.
4.	 Jabbour E, Kantarjian H. Chronic myeloid leukemia: 2014
update on diagnosis, monitoring, and management. Am J
Hematol. 2014; 89: 547-556.
5.	 Luo J, Solimini NL, Elledge SJ. Principles of cancer
therapy: oncogene and non-oncogene addiction. Cell. 2009;
136: 823-837.
6.	 Sawyers CL. Shifting paradigms: the seeds of oncogene
addiction. Nat Med. 2009; 10: 1158-1161.

DNA topoisomerase I assay

7.	 Deininger M, Buchdunger E, Druker BJ. The development
of imatinib as a therapeutic agent for chronic myeloid
leukemia. Blood. 2005; 105: 2640-2653.

Bisindolylmaleimide IX and other derivatives were
added to MEF cultures and 24 hrs later, the cells were
washed with PBS and harvested in TNE buffer. The
control and Bisindolylmaleimide IX-treated cell extracts
were directly used to test the topoisomerase activity
using a kit from Topogen (Port Orange, USA) following
the manufacturer’s protocol, or pBluescript DNA as a
template. The in vitro incubation lasted 30 min at room
temperature. A 2% agarose gel was run to analyze DNA
unwinding (Topogen) or 0.8% gel for pBluescript DNA.

8.	 Quintas-Cardama A, Kantarjian H, Cortes J. Imatinib and
beyond--exploring the full potential of targeted therapy for
CML. Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2009; 6: 535-543.
9.	 Koptyra M, Cramer K, Slupianek A, Richardson C, Skorski
T. BCR/ABL promotes accumulation of chromosomal
aberrations induced by oxidative and genotoxic stress.
Leukemia. 2008; 22: 1969-1972.
10.	 Burke BA, Carroll M. BCR-ABL: a multi-faceted promoter
of DNA mutation in chronic myelogeneous leukemia.
Leukemia. 2010; 24: 1105-1112.

Data analysis
Statistical comparisons were performed using
unpaired Student’s two-tailed t-test, with p-values <0.05
considered statistically significant.

11.	 Carroll M. BCR/ABL and chromosomal instability: debate
resolved. Blood. 2012; 119: 6180-6181.
12.	 Koptyra M, Falinski R, Nowicki MO, Stoklosa T,
Majsterek I, Nieborowska-Skorska M, Blasiak J, Skorski
T. BCR/ABL kinase induces self-mutagenesis via reactive
oxygen species to encode imatinib resistance. Blood.
2006; 108: 319-327.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Lina Gao, Lei Xu, Mingbo
Su and Dr. Yingde Zhang for technical assistance and Drs.
Ruibao Ren and Yuan Wang for providing DNA constructs.

13.	 Dierov J, Dierova R, Carroll M. BCR/ABL translocates to
the nucleus and disrupts an ATR-dependent intra-S phase
checkpoint. Cancer Cell. 2004; 5: 275-285.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

14.	 Kantarjian HM, Baccarani M, Jabbour E, Saglio G, Cortes
JE. Second-generation tyrosine kinase inhibitors: the future

The authors declare no competing financial interests.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

69958

Oncotarget

of frontline CML therapy. Clin Cancer Res. 2011; 17:
1674-1683.

30.	 Bartek J, Bartkova J, Lukas J. DNA damage signalling
guards against activated oncogenes and tumour progression.
Oncogene. 2007; 26: 7773-7779.

15.	 Cortes JE, Kantarjian H, Shah NP, Bixby D, Mauro MJ,
Flinn I, O’Hare T, Hu S, Narasimhan NI, Rivera VM,
Clackson T, Turner CD, Haluska FG, Druker BJ, Deininger
MW, Talpaz M. Ponatinib in refractory Philadelphia
chromosome-positive leukemias. New Engl J Med. 2012;
367: 2075-2088.

31.	 Zhang X, Jia D, Liu H, Zhu N, Zhang W, Feng J, Yin J,
Hao B, Cui D, Deng Y, Xie D, He L, Li B. Identification
of 5-Iodotubercidin as a genotoxic drug with anti-cancer
potential. PloS One.2013; 8: e62527.
32.	 Shen L, Glazer RI. Induction of apoptosis in glioblastoma
cells by inhibition of protein kinase C and its association
with the rapid accumulation of p53 and induction of the
insulin-like growth factor-1-binding protein-3. Biochem
Pharmacol. 1998; 55: 1711-1719.

16.	 Frankfurt O, Licht JD. Ponatinib--a step forward in
overcoming resistance in chronic myeloid leukemia. Clin
Cancer Res. 2013; 19: 5828-5834.
17.	 Kim SJ, Jung KH, Yan HH, Son MK, Fang Z, Ryu Y-L, Lee
H, Lim JH, Suh J-K and Kim J. HS-543 induces apoptosis
of Imatinib-resistant chronic myelogenous leukemia with
T315I mutation. Oncotarget. 2015; 6: 1507-1518. doi:
10.18632/oncotarget.2837.

33.	 Fernandez-Capetillo O, Celeste A, Nussenzweig A.
Focusing on foci: H2AX and the recruitment of DNAdamage response factors. Cell Cycle. 2003; 2: 426-427.
34.	 Xie G, Gupta R, Atchison K, Lown JW.
Bisindolylmaleimides linked to DNA minor groove
binding lexitropsins: synthesis, inhibitory activity against
topoisomerase I, and biological evaluation. J Med Chem.
1996; 39: 1049-1055.

18.	 Boutros R, Lobjois V, Ducommun B. CDC25 phosphatases
in cancer cells: key players? Good targets? Nat Rev Cancer.
2007; 7: 495-507.
19.	 Shiloh Y, Kastan MB. ATM: genome stability, neuronal
development, and cancer cross paths. Adv Cancer Res.
2001; 83: 209-254.

35.	 Gilbert DC, Chalmers AJ, El-Khamisy SF. Topoisomerase I
inhibition in colorectal cancer: biomarkers and therapeutic
targets. Brit J Cancer. 2011; 106: 18-24.

20.	 Rudolph J. Cdc25 phosphatases: structure, specificity, and
mechanism. Biochemistry. 2007; 46: 3595-3604.

36.	 Pogorelcnik B, Perdih A, Solmajer T. Recent developments
of DNA poisons--human DNA topoisomerase IIalpha
inhibitors--as anticancer agents. Curr Pharm Design. 2013;
19: 2474-2488.

21.	 Vogelstein B, Lane D, Levine AJ. Surfing the p53 network.
Nature. 2000; 408: 307-310.
22.	 Vousden KH, Lane DP. p53 in health and disease. Nat Rev
Mol Cell Biol. 2007; 8: 275-283.

37.	 Wendel HG, de Stanchina E, Cepero E, Ray S, Emig
M, Fridman JS, Veach DR, Bornmann WG, Clarkson
B, McCombie WR, Kogan SC, Hochhaus A, Lowe
SW. Loss of p53 impedes the antileukemic response to
BCR-ABL inhibition. P Natl Acad Sci USA. 2006; 103:
7444-7449.

23.	 Lane DP, Brown CJ, Verma C, Cheok CF. New insights into
p53 based therapy. Discov Med. 2011; 12: 107-117.
24.	 Toullec D, Pianetti P, Coste H, Bellevergue P, Grand-Perret
T, Ajakane M, Baudet V, Boissin P, Boursier E, Loriolle F,
et al. The bisindolylmaleimide GF 109203X is a potent and
selective inhibitor of protein kinase C. J Biol Chem. 1991;
266: 15771-15781.

38.	 Tiedt R, Degenkolbe E, Furet P, Appleton BA, Wagner S,
Schoepfer J, Buck E, Ruddy DA, Monahan JE, Jones MD,
Blank J, Haasen D, Drueckes P, Wartmann M, et al. A drug
resistance screen using a selective MET inhibitor reveals a
spectrum of mutations that partially overlap with activating
mutations found in cancer patients. Cancer Res. 2011; 71:
5255-5264.

25.	 Pajak B, Orzechowska S, Gajkowska B, Orzechowski A.
Bisindolylmaleimides in anti-cancer therapy - more than
PKC inhibitors. Adv Med Sci. 2008; 53: 21-31.
26.	 Ma S, Rosen ST. Enzastaurin. Curr Opin Oncol. 2007; 19:
590-595.

39.	 Sallmyr A, Tomkinson AE, Rassool FV. Up-regulation
of WRN and DNA ligase IIIalpha in chronic myeloid
leukemia: consequences for the repair of DNA doublestrand breaks. Blood. 2008; 112: 1413-1423.

27.	 Herbst RS, Oh Y, Wagle A, Lahn M. Enzastaurin, a
protein kinase Cbeta- selective inhibitor, and its potential
application as an anticancer agent in lung cancer. Clin
Cancer Res. 2007; 13: s4641-4646.

40.	 Nowicki MO, Falinski R, Koptyra M, Slupianek A, Stoklosa
T, Gloc E, Nieborowska-Skorska M, Blasiak J, Skorski T.
BCR/ABL oncogenic kinase promotes unfaithful repair of
the reactive oxygen species-dependent DNA double-strand
breaks. Blood. 2004; 104: 3746-3753.

28.	 Sharma SV, Gajowniczek P, Way IP, Lee DY, Jiang J, Yuza
Y, Classon M, Haber DA, Settleman J. A common signaling
cascade may underlie “addiction” to the Src, BCR-ABL,
and EGF receptor oncogenes. Cancer Cell. 2006; 10:
425-435.

41.	 Chandra J, Tracy J, Loegering D, Flatten K, Verstovsek
S, Beran M, Gorre M, Estrov Z, Donato N, Talpaz M,
Sawyers C, Bhalla K, Karp J, Sausville E, Kaufmann SH.
Adaphostin-induced oxidative stress overcomes BCR/ABL
mutation-dependent and -independent imatinib resistance.
Blood. 2006; 107: 2501-2506.

29.	 Bartkova J, Horejsi Z, Koed K, Kramer A, Tort F, Zieger
K, Guldberg P, Sehested M, Nesland JM, Lukas C, Orntoft
T, Lukas J, Bartek J. DNA damage response as a candidate
anti-cancer barrier in early human tumorigenesis. Nature.
2005; 434: 864-870.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

69959

Oncotarget

42.	 Sattler M, Verma S, Shrikhande G, Byrne CH, Pride YB,
Winkler T, Greenfield EA, Salgia R, Griffin JD. The BCR/
ABL tyrosine kinase induces production of reactive oxygen
species in hematopoietic cells. J Biol Chem. 2000; 275:
24273-24278.

50.	 Chen YB, LaCasce AS. Enzastaurin. Expert Opin Inv Drug.
2008; 17:939-944.
51.	 Rokhlin OW, Glover RA, Taghiyev AF, Guseva NV,
Seftor RE, Shyshynova I, Gudkov AV, Cohen MB.
Bisindolylmaleimide IX facilitates tumor necrosis factor
receptor family-mediated cell death and acts as an inhibitor
of transcription. J Biol Chem. 2002;277:33213-33219.

43.	 Cilloni D, Saglio G. Molecular pathways: BCR-ABL. Clin
Cancer Res. 2012;18: 930-937.
44.	 McCubrey JA, Steelman LS, Abrams SL, Bertrand FE,
Ludwig DE, Basecke J, Libra M, Stivala F, Milella M,
Tafuri A, Lunghi P, Bonati A, Martelli AM. Targeting
survival cascades induced by activation of Ras/Raf/MEK/
ERK, PI3K/PTEN/Akt/mTOR and Jak/STAT pathways for
effective leukemia therapy. Leukemia. 2008; 22: 708-722.

52.	 Rokhlin OW, Cohen MB. Bisindolylmaleimide IX Induces
Reversible and Time-Dependent Tumor Necrosis Factor
Receptor Family-Mediated Caspase Activation and Cell
Death. Cancer Biol Ther. 2003; 2:266-270.
53.	 Snowden RT, Sun XM, Dyer MJ, Cohen GM.
Bisindolylmaleimide IX is a potent inducer of apoptosis in
chronic lymphocytic leukaemic cells and activates cleavage
of Mcl-1. Leukemia. 2003; 17:1981-1989.

45.	 Pellicano F, Simara P, Sinclair A, Helgason GV, Copland
M, Grant S, Holyoake TL. The MEK inhibitor PD184352
enhances BMS-214662-induced apoptosis in CD34+ CML
stem/progenitor cells. Leukemia. 2011; 25: 1159-1167.

54.	 Willems F, Amraoui Z, Vanderheyde N, Verhasselt V,
Aksoy E, Scaffidi C, Peter ME, Krammer PH, Goldman M.
Expression of c-FLIP(L) and resistance to CD95-mediated
apoptosis of monocyte-derived dendritic cells: inhibition
by bisindolylmaleimide. Blood. 2000; 95:3478-3482.

46.	 Okabe S, Tauchi T, Tanaka Y, Sakuta J and Ohyashiki K.
Efficacy of the polo-like kinase inhibitor rigosertib, alone or
in combination with abelson tyrosine kinase inhibitors, against
break point cluster region-c-abelson-positive leukemia cells.
Oncotarget. 2015; 6:20231-40. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.4047.

55.	 Katoh M, Dodo K, Fujita M, Sodeoka M. Structure-activity
relationship of N-methyl-bisindolylmaleimide derivatives
as cell death inhibitors. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2005;
15:3109-3113.

47.	 Lin H, Chen M, Rothe K, Lorenzi MV, Woolfson A and
Jiang X. Selective JAK2/ABL dual inhibition therapy
effectively eliminates TKI-insensitive CML stem/progenitor
cells. Oncotarget. 2014; 5:8637-8650. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.2353.

56.	 Zhang HC, Bonaga LV, Ye H, Derian CK, Damiano BP,
Maryanoff BE. Novel bis(indolyl)maleimide pyridinophanes
that are potent, selective inhibitors of glycogen synthase
kinase-3. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2007; 17:2863-2868.

48.	 Marais R, Light Y, Mason C, Paterson H, Olson MF, Marshall
CJ. Requirement of Ras-GTP-Raf complexes for activation of
Raf-1 by protein kinase C. Science 1998; 280:109-112.

57.	 Yu D, Khan E, Khaleque MA, Lee J, Laco G, Kohlhagen
G, Kharbanda S, Cheng YC, Pommier Y, Bharti A.
Phosphorylation of DNA topoisomerase I by the c-Abl
tyrosine kinase confers camptothecin sensitivity. J Biol
Chem. 2004; 279:51851-51861.

49.	 Wimmer R, Baccarini M. Partner exchange: protein-protein
interactions in the Raf pathway. Trends Biochem Sci. 2010;
35:660-668.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

69960

Oncotarget

