Published OnlineFirst August 23, 2011; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-0817

Cancer
Research

Meeting Report

Nano in Cancer: Linking Chemistry, Biology, and Clinical
Applications In Vivo
Robin S. Dothager and David Piwnica-Worms

Abstract
Development of nanoparticle agents for cancer therapeutics and diagnostics is steadily progressing and was
the subject of the inaugural conference entitled, "Nano in Cancer," held during January 12–15, 2011, in Miami, FL.
The meeting program was developed by co-chairs David Piwnica-Worms (Washington University in St. Louis),
Jan Schnitzer (Proteogenomics Research Institute for Systems Medicine, San Diego), and Karen Wooley (Texas
A&M University). Topics discussed for nanoparticle platforms under development included: nanotechnologies
for cancer diagnostics and imaging, overcoming in vivo barriers, therapeutic nanoparticles and clinical
prospects, and safety issues for nanotechnologies. Two important concepts emerged from this meeting. The
first was the urgent need for uniform standards and protocols for nanoparticle characterization in vitro and in
vivo, and the second was the continued need for discovery of definitive targets for tumor-directed nanoparticles
across various cancers. Cancer Res; 71(17); 5611–5. ’2011 AACR.

Introduction
Cancer is a highly personalized disease as evidenced by the
patient-to-patient heterogeneity that exists for a given cancer
type (1). Furthermore, nontargeted cytotoxic agents commonly used to treat cancers give rise to dose-limiting toxicities
and side effects that are themselves a challenge to manage
individually. Therefore, there is a consensus that cancer
requires highly effective treatments that are tailored to specific needs of each patient. Progress toward personalization of
cancer diagnosis and treatment is being made by the highly
interdisciplinary group of scientists who study nanomedicine
and was the subject of this AACR special conference on
nanotechnology.
In general, the term nanoparticle refers to a synthetic
molecular assembly that is 1 to 100 nm in at least one
dimension (2). It is envisioned that nanoparticles would be
of similar size as biological molecules and interactions
between them would offer a means to directly impact physiology, or more often, nanoparticles could serve as carriers to
deliver compounds to the tumor microenvironment, or to
cross biological barriers, such as vascular endothelial cells or
the tumor cell membrane. Nanoparticles can be used to
deliver imaging agents or cytotoxic payloads, or both. Perhaps

Authors' Affiliation: BRIGHT Institute, Molecular Imaging Center, Mallinckrodt Institute of Radiology, and Departments of Cell Biology and
Physiology, and Developmental Biology, Washington University School
of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri
Corresponding Author: David Piwnica-Worms, BRIGHT Institute,
Washington University School of Medicine, 510 S. Kingshighway Blvd.,
Box 8225, St. Louis, MO 63110. Phone: 314-362-9359; Fax: 314-3620152; E-mail: piwnica-wormsd@mir.wustl.edu
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-0817
’2011 American Association for Cancer Research.

just as important as the scale is their synthetic nature, which
provides the ability to manipulate their physical and chemical
properties to achieve the necessary targeting to biological
surfaces or molecules therein and facilitate highly specific
biological interactions. Nanoparticles can comprise a variety
of formulations for various applications, perhaps conferring
some advantage over traditional small molecule agents in vivo.
For instance, nanomaterials can be synthesized from various
core materials (e.g., iron oxides, lipids, gold, silica, etc.) that
provide tractable platforms for physical and chemical modification, in different shapes (e.g., nanospheres, nanorods,
nanotubes, etc.) that can effect surface interactions, and
various outer coatings [e.g., polyethylene glycol (PEG), peptides or proteins, nucleic acid polymers, etc.] that effect
bioavailability, targeting, and in vivo stability.
The main goals of this inaugural conference were to provide
an opportunity for researchers in the field to exchange information and ideas, and to assess where the field stands with
respect to the intended goal of safely and effectively personalizing cancer medicine by using nanotechnology. The conference opened with a compelling presentation by Nobel
laureate Roger Tsien (University of California, San Diego),
who began by pointing out many of the issues one faces in
developing an effective and clinically useful diagnostic agent.
As the keynote speaker, Dr. Tsien spoke about his current
research involving the creation of activatable multimodal
nanoprobes for use as NMR diagnostic tools and in fluorescence-guided resection of tumors and preservation of peripheral nerves. He aptly ended his talk by encouraging and
reminding the audience that the ultimate goal of translational
research is to work in vivo and shepherd that work to the
clinic. This was followed with sessions discussing diagnostic
platforms, overcoming in vivo barriers, therapeutic and clinical prospects, and toxicity issues. The following is a summary
of the main topics discussed and examples from the work

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2011 American Association for Cancer Research.

5611

Published OnlineFirst August 23, 2011; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-0817

Dothager and Piwnica-Worms

presented at this meeting. The intent of this summary is to not
overwhelm the reader with details of various nanoparticle
formulations and assemblies being explored, but rather to
focus on overarching themes under discussion within the field.

Findings Presented
Nanotechnology for cancer diagnostics and imaging
One primary means for diagnosing cancers of tissues and
organs not easily biopsied is to use molecular imaging techniques such as positron emission tomography (PET), SPECT,
optical, or MRI (3). Because of the limits of resolution for these
techniques, the smallest tumors identified are several cubic
millimeters in size and thus, are composed of millions of
cancer cells that likely utilize an established blood supply.
Even at this small size, the tumor has nearly everything needed
for dissemination and metastasis formation. It is for these
reasons and others (e.g., high cost) that there is great need for
the development of improved means for the early detection of
cancers, a niche that may be fulfilled by using nanotechnology.
Besides the various core compositions and coatings
required to increase circulation time and to enhance targeting,
nanoparticle diagnostic probes require a signal-generating
moiety such as a magnetic probe, radioisotope, or fluorophore.
For example, MRI contrast agents hold significant promise as
imaging agents because they are not hindered by tissue depth
as with optical imaging or limitations associated with radiation from radioisotopes. However, conventional MR relaxivity
agents are often limited by the mass required to measurably
impact water relaxation times within a target tissue. To
address these sensitivity challenges, Thomas Meade (Northwestern University) reported the creation of gadolinium(III)chelated nanodiamonds that possess T1-relaxivities that are
among the highest reported on a per gadolinium basis (4). The
creation of these gadolinium-conjugated nanodiamonds has
added MRI capabilities to nanoparticles that had previously
only been studied by using optical techniques. Importantly,
early in the conference, Dr. Meade also raised the issue of
standards for characterization of nanoparticles, a theme
which remained throughout the conference. He mentioned
that his lab had directly tested 30 different literature methods
for creating nanoparticles and found that after characterizing
the size and composition of each, they could only reproduce
the assembly and characterization of 3 formulations. He
provided a take-home message encouraging scientists to
validate their systems and highlighted the need when reporting nanoparticles for standards that are similar to those for
small molecules.
The facile methods for conjugating a variety of molecules to
nanoparticles enable pathways to the creation of multifunctional probes. Karen Wooley reported the use of polymer
chemistry strategies to develop multifunctional nanoparticles
that enable controlled release of either chemotherapeutic
drugs or fluorescent molecules. For instance, acrylic acid or
styrene cores, which have well defined and low-temperature
glass and molten transitions, allowed for tuned release of
diagnostic or therapeutic agents simply by changing temperature. David Piwnica-Worms reported a novel imaging mod-

5612

Cancer Res; 71(17) September 1, 2011

ality for improving the optical imaging of Cerenkov radiation
generated by radiopharmaceutical tracers which may promote the creation of multimodal probes for both PET and
optical imaging (5). Cerenkov radiation occurs upon b or a
decay, wherein the initial velocity of sufficiently high-energy
particles can momentarily exceed the speed of light in tissue.
Optical imaging of Cerenkov radiation in vivo is challenging
because the ultraviolet/blue spectral output is highly absorbed
in living organisms. Thus, to improve optical imaging,
Cerenkov radiation is spectrally coupled by energy transfer
to high Stokes-shift semiconductor nanoparticles (quantum
dots) to produce highly red-shifted photonic emissions. In this
context, quantum dot nanoparticles act as sensors of highenergy radiation and thus may expedite studies of PET radiopharmaceuticals and radiobiology in biomaterials, tissues, and
live animals.
The ideal diagnostic technique would allow a physician to
reliably detect, for primary and metastatic tumors, low-abundance targets that exist on just a few cells after noninvasively
collecting a small sample from an ambulatory patient. Work
presented by Ralph Weissleder (Massachusetts General Hospital) on clinical use of a point-of-care hand-held NMR device
for the detection of cancer may provide an advance for
diagnostics. The diagnostic magnetic resonance device,
termed mNMR, uses cross-linked iron oxide nanoparticles
conjugated to targeting antibodies to detect in less than 1
hour the presence of protein markers associated with scarce
cancer cells in fine-needle aspirates. The mNMR device consists of a chip-sized sensor coupled to fluidic channels handling microliter volumes, a portable 0.5 T permanent magnet,
and custom NMR hardware. Dr. Weissleder reported the
ability to accurately and quantitatively profile markers of
cancer; however, he also reported high patient-to-patient
and within-tumor variability for a group of 10 markers
when assessing fine-needle tumor aspirates (6). Thus, the
need to identify definitive markers for the various cancers
is ever pressing and was discussed heavily throughout the
conference.
Overcoming in vivo barriers
Diagnostic and therapeutic agents both require similar
properties for passing safely through the body to arrive at a
tumor. Most nanoparticles, by virtue of their size, primarily
make use of the enhanced permeability and retention (EPR)
effect to gain access to the interstitial space of tumors. The
EPR effect reflects a tendency for any large molecular weight
particle to accumulate in tumors because of the impact of
leaky tumor-associated blood vessels without corresponding
lymphatic vessels for clearance (7). It has been estimated that
accumulation of nontargeted nanoparticles in tumors is
greater than 10-fold in small molecule drugs as a result of
the EPR effect per se (7, 8). However, such a strategy is not
enough to increase the resolution or specificity of diagnostic
and therapeutic agents to the levels that are needed. Intracellular-targeted nanoparticles must cross at least 2 barriers
once injected: extravasating between endothelial cells lining
blood vessels and then traversing the plasma membrane of
tumor cells. However, nanoparticles must do so without

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2011 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst August 23, 2011; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-0817

Nano in Cancer

triggering an immune response that would prematurely clear
them from the blood. This is a challenging situation because
one promising strategy for gaining active targeting to tumor
cells is conjugation to an antibody, but this can also trigger an
immune response. For this reason, small peptides perhaps
offer a promising solution to the problem because of the
ability to synthesize them as d-isomers that are resistant to
proteolytic cleavage and processing, and thus, often unrecognizable by the immune system (9). Toward this end, several
researchers, including the groups of Roger Tsien and Ranata
Pasqualini (MD Anderson Cancer Center), have turned to
using in vivo phage-display libraries to discover useful targeting peptides. Other researchers like Sangeeta Bhatia (Massachusetts Institute of Technology) are solving the delivery
problem by developing novel strategies to mask targeting
agents until needed and activate cell killing when appropriate.
For instance, Dr. Bhatia reported the development of a
protease-triggered unveiling of a targeting peptide that was
found by using phage display. Breakthroughs in the Joseph
DeSimone laboratory (University of North Carolina) by using
specifically-designed materials for imprint lithography have
enabled a versatile and high-throughput method for the direct
fabrication of monodisperse nanoparticles. Cancer cell targeting can be accomplished by attaching cell-specific ligands to
the surface of the particles in shape and size-specific manners.
It has become standard in the field to mask the surface of
nanoparticles with PEG to prevent opsinization by the
immune system and reduce liver clearance, thereby increasing
circulation time and providing particles a chance to passively
accumulate in tumors. However, work presented by the Ishida
Tatsuhiro group (University of Tokushima) found that PEGylated liposomes, when administered repeatedly at specific
intervals, trigger a T cell-independent immune response. A
first dose of PEGylated liposomes triggers secretion of an antiPEG IgM antibody from the marginal zone B cells of the spleen
in a response that is similar to the response mounted against
TNP-Ficoll and bacterial polysaccharides. This serves to
increase liver clearance of the particles by activation of the
complement system when a second dose is administered
within certain intervals. Therefore, it might be of interest
for those using nontargeted nanoparticles to explore other
coatings as a means of increasing circulation time and passive
tumor uptake.
The group of Jan Schnitzer is using novel isolation techniques coupled with mass spectrometry to identify cancerinduced protein expression changes on the endothelial surfaces of lung and solid tumors in which caveolae are present.
Caveolae are markers of clatharin-independent endocytosis
from the luminal side of the vasculature and can be exploited
as a means of transport of exogenous materials from the blood
stream to the interstitial spaces of the lung. To identify
caveolae-associated proteins, the vascular surface is coated
with silicon nanoparticles and then cross-linked by using
polyacrylate. The cells are removed and subjected to gradient
centrifugation to isolate the caveolae–nanoparticle containing
fraction. After analysis of known markers of caveolae to
confirm the isolation of caveolar vesicles, mass spectrometry
is used to identify proteins that are needed in caveolae-

www.aacrjournals.org

dependent transcytosis across the cell. This group identified
the protein aminopeptidase P that is present on the endothelial surface and regulates caveolae-mediated transport. An
antibody to the protein was generated and tested successfully
in lung tissue to move across the endothelium.
Debbie Liao (Scripps Research Institute) presented a strategy for gaining selective entry into tumor cells which involved
appending an aza-peptide inhibitor of legumain to liposomal
nanoparticles. Legumain is a protein found to be overexpressed in solid breast, colon, and prostate tumors and is
absent from normal tissue. Overexpression of legumain was
found to occur when cells undergo hypoxic stress and may
provide a strategy for targeting nanoparticles to the cancer
cell surface. Her nanoparticle formulation also included doxorubicin, which she found was efficacious at decreasing tumor
burden and showed reduced nonspecific toxicity compared
with doxorubicin alone in mice as evidenced by an increase in
body weight posttreatment.
Therapeutic nanoparticles and clinical prospects
There exists great potential for using nanoparticles as
therapeutics if investigators can couple the innate ability of
nanoparticles to passively home to tumors with active targeting of tumor-specific markers and a molecule to facilitate cell
death. In general, presenters at the conference discussed 1 of 3
types of molecules to facilitate a therapeutic effect for their
nanoparticle formulations: cytotoxic small molecules, protein
or peptide signaling ligands, and siRNAs. In the case of small
molecule cytotoxic agents, many presenters at the conference
chose to append DNA targeting or microtubule damaging
agents to their nanoparticles because these agents are already
approved for use. For example, nanoparticle-cytotoxic drug
formulations that have been approved by the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) for the treatment of cancer include
Doxil and Abraxane. Doxil is a liposomal formulation of
doxorubicin and Abraxane is an albumin formulation of
paclitaxel, both of which have greatly improved the pharmacokinetics of these conventional chemotherapeutics. The
successes observed with these 2 nanoparticle formulations
may lead to the revival of molecules that were previously set
aside because of poor pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties. However, there are still improvements
needed for Doxil and Abraxane because of side effects associated with poor selectivity.
The use of siRNAs would offer the greatest selectivity for
treatment if one had sufficient genetic information about a
given tumor, but use of siRNA is complicated given the low
stability of the molecule and the changes that can occur
when manipulating the expression of one gene that is part of
an intricate network of cellular processes and pathways.
Chad Mirkin (Northwestern University) reported the use of
nanogold particles with oligonucleotides on the surface as
opposed to the more traditional liposomal formulations. He
reported that highly dense arrays of oligos bind complimentary DNA tightly and that increasing local salt concentration
increases the stability of the particles. The nanoparticles
were found to enter by endocytosis mediated by scavenger
proteins and that 17% of endosomes are sufficiently leaky to

Cancer Res; 71(17) September 1, 2011

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2011 American Association for Cancer Research.

5613

Published OnlineFirst August 23, 2011; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-0817

Dothager and Piwnica-Worms

facilitate endosomal escape and gene knockdown. A mouse
flank breast tumor model was used in which the nanoparticles facilitated the knockdown of survivin, a caspase-3
inhibitor protein. Deep penetration of the particles into
organs and throughout most cells was shown.
Rather than use of siRNA or cytotoxic drugs to kill tumors,
Steven Curley (MD Anderson Cancer Center) makes use of the
rapid heating that can be induced in quantum dots and gold,
silver, and carbon nanoparticles upon induction with a nonionizing radiofrequency generator. In one set of data, he
presented selective treatment of tumors mediated by passive
accumulation of highly polar carbon nanotubes and the ability
to aim the RF generator at a specified location in the animal's
body. The inclusion of cetuximab conjugated to gold nanoparticles afforded active cell targeting. By using tumors placed
in rabbit livers, he has been exploring what properties of
various nanoparticles result in the best tumor ablation. He
reported that nanoparticles with small size, increased charge,
and increased surface area will heat faster. In addition, he
mentioned that silver heats faster than gold. He pointed out
that there is no need to achieve near boiling temperatures;
heating to 60 *C is sufficient to treat tumor cells and tends to
reduce apoptotic induction in normal cells. He also mentioned
that multiple rounds of heating increases efficacy of treatment
with continued low amounts of off-target cell death.
Lastly, Piotr Grodzinski of the Alliance for Nanotechnology
in Cancer [National Cancer Institute (NCI)] highlighted what
are the clinical prospects for nanoparticles in medicine. He
outlined the Alliance's view of the innovations that have
occurred, key questions relating to cancer research that
remain, NCI initiatives, and what phase 2 of the program will
be. He mentioned that there have been more than a 1,000
papers published, 50 companies started, and 10 clinical trials
initiated under the nanotechnology initiatives of NCI. He
mentioned that with the obvious goal of moving nanoparticles
to the clinic, there are several things to consider: let biology
lead the discovery and do not overengineer, choose targets
and disease applications wisely, and he encouraged incremental improvement as opposed to solving unsolved problems. He also pointed out the need to develop diagnostic
agents for cancers other than the big 4 cancers (lung, colon,
breast, and prostate). Lastly, he listed several goals to be
achieved, including: develop early diagnostics, successfully
deliver siRNA, and develop therapeutics with low toxicity
and high efficacy.
Safety and characterization of nanotechnologies
All of this work is helping to define what attributes and
characteristics need to be included in nanoparticle formulations, especially if they are to be successfully translated into
the clinic. However, this work will not be completed until we
have a thorough understanding of the associated toxicities
and biodistribution of these molecular assemblies. Accordingly, the organizers of this conference devoted a session to
discussing these issues. Laura Braydich-Stole (Wright-Patterson Air Force Base) presented her work for the United States
Air Force about toxicity of silver nanoparticle fuel additives
that are coated either with a hydrocarbon chain or polysac-

5614

Cancer Res; 71(17) September 1, 2011

charide. She reported that silver nanoparticles are toxic in a
size-dependent manner and that germline cells are more
sensitive than somatic cell types. The silver nanoparticles
she used were endocytosed and moved eventually into lysosomes. She suspended her nanoparticles in various artificial
biological fluids and found that the coatings would degrade,
expose the silver and thereby induce toxicity in cells. At the
end of her talk, she summarized nanotoxicity considerations,
including thorough physical and chemical characterization in
vitro and in vivo, a definition of acceptable exposure levels,
acceptable dosing, and biodistribution.
Scott McNeil (NCI-Frederick) spoke about many of the
trends that he has observed as he leads the group that
characterizes the various particles for researchers around
the world. His talk was very useful for understanding toxicities
and how the body will deal with certain types of particles. He
mentioned several trends for any core having various surface
chemistry: cationic particles have increased cytotoxicity, large
hydrophobic particles are recognized by the reticuloendothelial system, small anionic particles are retained in the liver and
kidneys, and cationic dendrimers cause platelet aggregation.
He reported that optimization of PEG length will reduce
immune recognition, and over time, PEG will be released
from the nanoparticle and increase the number of granulomas
in vivo. Nearly all particles induce interleukin-8 secretion that
is often greater than what is observed for endotoxin and will
concomitantly recruit other immune cells.
As mentioned previously, a major topic of discussion concerned the characterization and reproducibility of nanoparticle formulations available from the literature. As such, the
conference ended with a panel discussion about this topic.
The panel consisted of Laura Braydich-Stole and Scott McNeil
as well as the meeting co-chairs, who addressed questions
from the audience and moderated the discussion. It was
mentioned that physical and chemical characterization is
the only thing that allows researchers to accurately compare
biological outcome and that the chemical entity in vivo may
not be the same as what one characterizes in vitro. Queries
were made as to the status of future approval criteria for
nanoparticle formulations at the FDA and Scott McNeil stated
that, although he does not know exactly what will be decided,
there must be boundaries set (e.g., plus or minus X number of
ligands per particle, etc.), and he encouraged pre-IND talks
with the FDA. The panel went so far as to make a list of
parameters needed as a standard set for full characterization,
including composition, size (by using multiple techniques,
DLS, TEM, and AFM), flexibility (glass or melting temperature), serum stability with regard to aggregation, and in vivo
bioavailability. Karen Wooley pointed out that changes to
nanoparticles occur from in vitro to in vivo and thus, a
different strategy may have to be sought for generating
nanoparticles with known structure in vivo. For instance, a
strategy might be to attach ligands of a given number on a
scaffold and then attach that construct to a core. Lastly, it was
suggested that a team be put together to synthesize formulation/toxicity data in the form of a book or review article to
standardize what everyone should be doing to address these
concerns.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2011 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst August 23, 2011; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-0817

Nano in Cancer

Conclusion
There are 2 major themes that became apparent during the
course of this conference: the need for standardized procedures for nanoparticle characterization in vitro and in vivo,
and the need for identification of definitive biological markers
for use in targeting nanoparticles to various cancers. The field
has come a long way in a short while. Notable highlights are
the discovery of appropriately useful sizes and shapes of
particles. We know more about which compositions are stable
and can handle specific accessory functions. The field has
advanced with regard to specifically targeting various cancers.
There is a promising future for using nanotechnologies for
selective diagnosis and treatment of cancer.

Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest
No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

Acknowledgments
We thank colleagues of the Molecular Imaging Center for helpful discussions.

Grant Support
This educational project was supported in part by the U.S. NIH grant P50
CA94056 and an American Cancer Society Post-doctoral Fellowship Award (R.S.
Dothager).
Received March 9, 2011; revised May 31, 2011; accepted June 8, 2011;
published OnlineFirst August 23, 2011.

References
1. Shackleton M, Quintana E, Fearon E, Morrison S. Heterogeneity
in cancer: cancer stem cells versus clonal evolution. Cell 2009;138:
822–9.
2. Seigneuric R, Markey L, Nuyten DS, Dubernet C, Evelo CT, Finot E,
et al. From nanotechnology to nanomedicine: applications to cancer
research. Curr Mol Med 2010;10:640–52.
3. Weissleder R, Pittet MJ. Imaging in the era of molecular oncology.
Nature 2008;452:580–9.
4. Manus L, Mastarone D, Waters E, Zhang X-Q, Schultz-Sikma E,
MacRenaris K, et al. Gd(III)-nanodiamond conjugates for MRI contrast
enhancement. Nano Lett 2010;10:484–9.
5. Dothager RS, Goiffon RJ, Jackson E, Harpstrite S, Piwnica-Worms D.
Cerenkov radiation energy transfer (CRET) imaging: a novel method

www.aacrjournals.org

6.

7.

8.
9.

for optical imaging of PET isotopes in biological systems. PLoS One
2010;5:e13300.
Haun JB, Castro CM, Wang R, Peterson VM, Marinelli BS, Lee H, et al.
Micro-NMR for rapid molecular analysis of human tumor samples.
Science Transl Med 2011;3:71ra16.
Matsumura Y, Maeda H. A new concept for macromolecular therapeutics in cancer chemotherapy: mechanism of tumoritropic accumulation
of proteins and the antitumor agent smancs. Cancer Res 1986;46:
6387–92.
Torchilin V. Tumor delivery of macromolecular drugs based on the EPR
effect. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2011;63:131–5.
Sela M, Zisman E. Different roles of D-amino acids in immune phenomena. FASEB J 1997;11:449–56.

Cancer Res; 71(17) September 1, 2011

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2011 American Association for Cancer Research.

5615

Published OnlineFirst August 23, 2011; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-0817

Nano in Cancer: Linking Chemistry, Biology, and Clinical
Applications In Vivo
Robin S Dothager and David Piwnica-Worms
Cancer Res 2011;71:5611-5615. Published OnlineFirst August 23, 2011.

Updated version

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-0817

Cited articles

This article cites 8 articles, 2 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/71/17/5611.full#ref-list-1

E-mail alerts

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.

Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2011 American Association for Cancer Research.

