© SYDA PRODUCTIONS | SHUTTERSTOCK.COM

Oncology Issues in Focus | BY CARRIE PRINTZ

CVS, FDA Aim to Reduce
Tobacco Use
The drugstore chain and the FDA step up
antismoking efforts

F

ifty years after the first US Surgeon General’s Report on
Smoking and Health, tobacco prevention and control
experts agree that although significant progress has been made
in reducing tobacco use, much more work remains.
The most recent Surgeon General’s Report, released earlier
this year, notes that smoking rates among adults and teens are
less than one-half of what they were in 1964. Nevertheless, 42
million American adults and approximately 3 million middle
and high school students continue to smoke.1
However, public health advocates see reason for hope
in several recent actions, including a landmark decision in
February 2014 by the drugstore chain CVS Caremark to
phase out tobacco sales in its US stores over the next year. In
a commentary published in the March 19th issue of JAMA,
Troyen A. Brennan, MD, MPH, executive vice president and
chief medical officer of CVS Caremark, notes that although
sales of the stores’ tobacco products account for $1.5 billion
in annual revenues, “the financial gain is outweighed by the
paradox inherent in promoting health while contributing to
tobacco-related deaths.”2
“It’s more symbolic than anything else,” says K. Michael
Cummings, PhD, MPH, an expert on tobacco control, public
policy, and smoking cessation and a professor in the department
of psychiatry and behavioral science at the Medical University

Cancer
CANCER

June 1, 2014
JUNE 1, 2014

of South Carolina in Charleston. “Everyone applauds CVS for
being the first of the big chain US pharmacies to stop selling
tobacco products.”
After the announcement by CVS, a spokesperson for
Walgreens, the nation’s largest pharmacy chain, said the
company was continuing to evaluate its tobacco product
policy. Meanwhile, in March, attorneys general from 24 states;
Washington, DC; and 3 US territories sent letters to Walmart
and Walgreens asking them to stop selling tobacco products.
The fact that many of these large chains are now operating retail
health clinics designed to assist in treating conditions exacerbated
by smoking is particularly paradoxical, said Dr. Brennan and his
coauthor, Steven Schroeder, MD, of the University of California
at San Francisco, in their JAMA commentary.
“CVS’ decision sends a powerful message of corporate
leadership,” says Jamie Ostroff, PhD, director of the tobacco
cessation program at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center
in New York City. “I hope that this is a nice trend of a major
health and wellness retailer joining a broad-stroke community
effort to reduce tobacco morbidity and mortality.” She adds
that the action “denormalizes” smoking and that as more public
health organizations and professionals applaud the decision
made by CVS, the more other retailers will be encouraged to
do the same.

I hope that this is a nice trend
of a major health and wellness
retailer joining a broad-stroke
community effort to reduce
tobacco morbidity and mortality.
— Jamie Ostroff, PhD
The Tobacco Control Act
At the same time, the US Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) has taken steps in its mission to protect the public from
the harmful effects of smoking, through its new authority under
the Family Smoking Prevention and Tobacco Control Act. In
February, the agency issued its first orders to stop the further
sale and distribution of 4 tobacco products currently on the
market. The products are 4 specific brands of bidis—thin, handrolled, Indian cigarettes filled with tobacco.
Under the legislation, the FDA now has the authority to
review applications and determine which new tobacco products
may be sold. Regulated products were allowed to stay on the
market if companies submitted an application to the FDA
by March 22, 2011. The FDA is in the process of reviewing
product applications to determine whether the products are
“substantially equivalent” to a product that was already on the
1597
1

market as of a date chosen by Congress: February 15, 2007. For
a new product to be substantially equivalent, the company has
to demonstrate that it is not more harmful than the “predicate”
product.
“We’ve been making decisions since last June on products
that are not currently on the market,” says Mitch Zeller, JD,
director of the FDA’s Center for Tobacco Products. “But this
is the first time we’ve addressed the much larger universe of
products that are on the market.”
In the case of the bidis, manufactured by Jash International,
the company did not provide the necessary information for
the FDA to make a ruling on whether they were substantially
equivalent, says Zeller. Therefore, the agency could not even
begin a scientific review of the products. “We will continue to
make these decisions on a regular basis,” he says, explaining that
the substantially equivalent determination is “complicated and
technical.” The FDA must determine whether the new product
has “different characteristics” than the predicate product and,
if so, whether those characteristics raise different questions
of public health. Zeller expects many more decisions to be
announced this year and in 2015 regarding tobacco products
both currently on the market and those attempting to be
introduced.
“I’m still waiting for the FDA to be a little more aggressive
with all the new cigarette brands coming out every year,” Dr.
Cummings says. “Hopefully, this ban will preview some bigger
things to come.”
Adds Dr. Ostroff, “There is obviously no such thing as a safe
cigarette, but what’s promising is that this order is an example of
the FDA exercising its legal right to regulate the sale of tobacco
products on the market.”

FDA Targets Teens
Another way in which the FDA is using its new authority is
by launching a national public education campaign to prevent
youth tobacco use and reduce the number of smokers among
those aged 12 to 17 years. The “Real Cost” campaign targets
10 million individuals in that age group who have either never

smoked a cigarette or are experimenting and at risk of becoming
regular smokers.
The ads are airing in a wide variety of media that target
this age group, including television, radio, print, social media,
mall kiosks, and movie theaters. They address topics such as
how smoking affects appearance, including premature skin
wrinkling, gum disease, and tooth loss. Other ads highlight the
addiction component by framing it in terms of “loss of control”
rather than actually using the word addiction, says Zeller.
The ads will be refreshed later in the year to communicate
new messages. In addition, the FDA will conduct a longitudinal
study of 8000 young people over a period of 3 years to determine
whether the campaign has built awareness, changed attitudes
and beliefs, and, eventually, changed behavior and reduced the
number of young smokers. The campaign has a budget of $115
million for its first year, which is the equivalent of how much
money the tobacco industry spends on advertising, marketing,
and promotion in 5 days, adds Zeller.
The first “Real Cost” campaign will be aimed at a general
market, but the FDA also plans to develop campaigns targeted
to specific vulnerable populations, including boys at risk for
smokeless tobacco use and multicultural; rural; and lesbian, gay,
bisexual, and transgender youth.
Dr. Ostroff is encouraged by all the latest developments in
this arena. “It’s a very hopeful time, and there is tremendous
momentum happening in the field,” she says. “The breadth
of cooperation is why we’re seeing tobacco use reduction in
unprecedented numbers, particularly in states with strong
tobacco control policies.”

References
1. US Department of Health and Human Services. The Health Consequences of
Smoking–50 Years of Progress: A Report of the Surgeon General. Atlanta,
GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and
Health Promotion, Ofﬁce on Smoking and Health; 2014.
2. Brennan TA, Schroeder SA. Ending sales of tobacco products in pharmacies.
JAMA. 2014;311:1105-1106.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.28775

New Discoveries in Lung Cancer Highlighted at Conference

© SEBASTIAN KAULITZKI | SHUTTERSTOCK.COM

P

1598

romising therapies in lung cancer were featured at the
American Association for Cancer Research-International
Association for the Study of Lung Cancer Joint Conference on
the Molecular Origins of Lung Cancer, held January 6 through
9, 2014, in San Diego, California. Below are a few highlights
from among the studies presented.

Targeting PD-1 in NSCLC
A phase 1 study found that the programmed cell death 1 (PD1) immune checkpoint inhibitor MK-3475 was well tolerated
and demonstrated durable responses in patients whose nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC) had worsened during or after
multiple prior chemotherapies. The researchers, from the
University of California at Los Angeles, found that when the

Cancer

June 1, 2014

