HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Author Manuscript

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 03.
Published in final edited form as:
Cell. 2013 July 3; 154(1): 47–60. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2013.06.007.

Catastrophic nuclear envelope collapse in cancer cell
micronuclei
Emily M. Hatch1, Andrew H. Fischer2, Thomas J. Deerinck3, and Martin W. Hetzer1,*
1Molecular

and Cell Biology Laboratory, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 10010 N. Torrey
Pines Road, La Jolla, 92037 CA, USA

Author Manuscript

2Department

of Pathology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 55 Lake Avenue,
Worcester, Massachusetts 01655, USA
3Department

of Neurosciences, National Center for Microscopy and Imaging Research, and
Center for Research in Biological Systems, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla,
California, 92093-0608, USA

Summary

Author Manuscript

During mitotic exit missegregated chromosomes can recruit their own nuclear envelope (NE) to
form micronuclei (MN). MN have reduced functioning compared to primary nuclei in the same
cell, although the two compartments appear to be structurally comparable. Here we show that over
60% of MN undergo an irreversible loss of compartmentalization during interphase due to NE
collapse. This disruption of the MN, which is induced by defects in nuclear lamina assembly,
drastically reduces nuclear functions and can trigger massive DNA damage. MN disruption is
associated with chromatin compaction and invasion of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) tubules into
the chromatin. We identified disrupted MN in both major subtypes of human non-small cell lung
cancer, suggesting that disrupted MN could be a useful objective biomarker for genomic
instability in solid tumors. Our study shows that NE collapse is a key event underlying MN
dysfunction and establishes a link between aberrant NE organization and aneuploidy.

Introduction

Author Manuscript

The nuclear envelope (NE) is comprised of two membranes whose integrity is required for
compartmentalization and regulated access of proteins and other macromolecules to the
nuclear genome. The NE forms during late anaphase and telophase from association of ER
membranes with the chromatin and subsequent fusion of ER sheets (Anderson and Hetzer,
2008a; Lu et al., 2011). NE formation involves sequential recruitment of proteins that
establish the major structures of the NE to the decondensing chromatin (Burke and
Ellenberg, 2002). These structures include the nuclear pore complexes (NPCs), the nuclear
lamina, which is a network of intermediate filament proteins that stabilizes the NE, and
*

To whom correspondence should be addressed: hetzer@salk.edu.
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

Hatch et al.

Page 2

Author Manuscript

inner nuclear membrane (INM)-localized proteins, which target the ER to the chromatin and
later link the lamina to the membrane (Gant and Wilson, 1997).
Micronuclei (MN) form when a whole or broken chromosome segregates improperly during
mitosis and becomes separated from the main chromatin mass. In this study we will focus
conceptually on lagging chromosomes, which give rise to MN containing a whole
chromosome. During telophase the lagging chromosome recruits its own NE to form a
separate compartment from the primary nucleus (PN). During the subsequent mitosis the
sequestered DNA can segregate normally or reform a MN (Crasta et al., 2012). Because they
are strongly correlated with mitotic errors, MN are regarded as an accurate indicator of
genomic instability and aneuploidy (Fenech, 2007).

Author Manuscript

Previous work on MN in cultured cells identified functional defects in DNA replication,
transcription, DNA damage repair, and nuclear protein localization (Hoffelder et al., 2004;
Terradas et al., 2009, 2012; Xu et al., 2011; Crasta et al., 2012). Making a MN does not
necessarily decrease functionality as DNA replication occurs normally in karyomeres (i.e.
MN that form during normal development) during embryogenesis in several species
(Lemaitre, 1998). In addition, somatic cells MN appear structurally normal (PaulinLevasseur et al., 1996; Hoffelder et al., 2004), although nuclear pore protein levels appear to
be partially decreased (Hoffelder et al., 2004; Crasta et al., 2012; Terradas et al., 2012).

Author Manuscript

It is currently unclear whether this broad group of functional defects occurs concurrently or
has distinct origins and why it is specific to somatic cell MN. To address these questions, we
analyzed the NE in MN in cultured cells and found that the majority of MN irreversibly lose
compartmentalization during interphase in both non-transformed and cancer cells, which
globally arrests nuclear functioning. We show that MN disruption is the result of changes in
lamina organization, but not increased DNA damage, and is followed by invasion of ER
membranes into the MN chromatin. We also show that non-small cell lung cancer tumor
sections contain disrupted MN, indicating that disrupted MN are a general feature of cancer
cells, which could be a useful marker of genomic instability in solid tumors.

Results
Irreversible loss of MN compartmentalization during interphase

Author Manuscript

To determine why MN have broad dysfunction compared to PN in the same cell, we first
examined nuclear compartmentalization of two reporters: 2×RFP fused to a nuclear
localization signal (RFP-NLS) and 4×GFP fused to a nuclear export signal (GFP-NES). We
performed time-lapse microscopy of U2OS cells and found that, as expected, RFP-NLS
accumulated in both the PN and MN compartments in U2OS cells after NE formation
whereas GFP-NES was excluded (Figure 1A). However, although the PN maintained proper
localization of the reporter proteins throughout interphase, a significant population of MN
showed rapid and irreversible loss of RFP-NLS concomitant with a failure to exclude GFPNES from the chromatin (Figure 1A and Movie S1). Mislocalization of both nuclear and
cytoplasmic reporters is indicative of a disrupted nuclear permeability barrier. Thus, we will
refer to this event as MN disruption.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 03.

Hatch et al.

Page 3

Author Manuscript

To determine what proportion of MN undergo disruption, we quantified MN fate by timelapse imaging of U2OS cells expressing 3×GFP fused to the NLS-containing importin-β
binding domain (IBB) and H2B-mCherry. We found that during a single interphase over
65% of the total MN observed became disrupted and only a small percentage were able to
repair the NE and re-accumulate GFP-IBB prior to mitosis (Figure 1B). From these
experiments we were also able to determine the fate of the MN chromatin after mitosis. We
found that disruption had no significant effect on the frequency with which a MN was
generated after the second mitosis and that disrupted MN rejoined the PN chromatin at least
50% of the time (Figure 1C).

Author Manuscript

To confirm that MN disruption involves a complete loss of compartmentalization we first
asked whether the endogenous nuclear proteins retinoblastoma (Rb), a cell cycle regulator,
and LSD-1, a histone demethylase, were also lost from disrupted MN. We found that LSD-1
and Rb labeling of MN was strongly correlated with the presence of the NLS-reporter and
that these proteins were rarely present in disrupted MN (Figure 1D). Thus, the
mislocalization of these proteins is a reliable indicator of MN disruption.
Second, we asked whether disrupted MN can actively accumulate nuclear proteins by
expressing a shuttling construct containing both an NLS and an NES fused to tdTomato
(NES-tdTom-NLS) in U2OS cells and blocking nuclear export. NES-tdTom-NLS
accumulated in both the PN and intact MN, but not in the disrupted MN (Figure S1A and
S1B), verifying that accumulation of nuclear proteins is abrogated. These data confirm that
disrupted MN have completely lost compartmentalization.

Author Manuscript

We next analyzed MN disruption in cancer lines from different tissues and found a similar
proportion of intact and disrupted MN as in U2OS cells (Figure 1E). We then assessed MN
disruption in two non-transformed cell lines – the immortalized epithelial cell line RPE-1
stably expressing GFP-NLS (Figure S1C) and the primary fibroblast cell line IMR90. MN
integrity in IMR90 cells was determined by LSD-1 labeling. Because these cells normally
produce very few MN, we treated cells with nocodazole to induce missegregation of whole
chromosomes (Cimini et al., 2001). This treatment also causes a p53 dependent G1 arrest (Li
et al., 2010; Thompson and Compton, 2011; Crasta et al., 2012). In both cell lines we found
that around 50% of the MN were disrupted 24 h after mitosis (Figure 1F), indicating that
MN disruption occurs frequently in both normal and transformed cells.

Author Manuscript

Next, we asked whether MN disruption was cell cycle specific. First, cells were
synchronized by mitotic shake-off after a brief incubation in nocodazole and pulse labeled
with EdU to identify S-phase cells prior to fixation at the indicated time points. After mitotic
exit almost all MN were intact by time-lapse imaging, however the proportion of intact MN
decreased steadily throughout interphase (Figure 1G). Consistent with stochastic MN
disruption, time-lapse imaging experiments revealed that MN disruption occurred
throughout interphase such that over 50% of MN were disrupted for over half the duration of
interphase (Figure S1D).
To determine whether there are cell cycle specific differences in MN disruption frequency,
we first synchronized U2OS cells by mitotic shake-off and incubated them up to 48 h in

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 03.

Hatch et al.

Page 4

Author Manuscript

either hydroxyurea (HU) or the Cdk1 inhibitor RO-3306 to arrest them in S or G2 phase,
respectively. The concentration of drug used was sufficient to induce arrest, as assessed by
FACS analysis (data not shown). Examination of cells fixed over the course of the arrest
showed a gradual decrease in the proportion of intact MN in both S and G2 phase arrests
(Figure S1E). We also analyzed MN in G1 arrested RPE-1 GFP-NLS cells and found that
the proportion of intact MN also decreases during G1 arrest (Figure S1F). These data
confirm that MN disruption frequency is cell cycle independent and that the proportion of
disrupted MN increases as interphase is extended.

Author Manuscript

Finally, we asked whether general characteristics of the chromatin in the MN impacted its
fate. Using the initial size of the MN as a proxy for chromatin amount, we observed no
correlation between MN disruption and chromatin amount (Figure S1G). We also found no
difference in disruption frequency in MN that had a centromere (whole-chromosome origin)
or in MN that lacked a centromere (broken chromosome origin) (Figure S1H and S1I).
These data indicate that the amount of chromatin and presence of a centromere are not
significant factors in MN fate.
MN disruption is caused by NE collapse

Author Manuscript

Because most MN are intact at mitotic exit, we wanted to investigate why they lose
compartmentalization as they proceed through interphase. We first asked whether the loss of
compartmentalization in disrupted MN was the result of NPC loss. We examined the levels
of NPC components in intact and disrupted MN by immunofluorescence and found that the
core nucleoporins recognized by mAb414 are present at similar levels in both disrupted and
intact MN (Figure S2A and S2B), suggesting that a loss of NPC proteins is not driving
compartmentalization loss. The mAB414 labeling did appear to be disorganized in some
disrupted MN, however. In contrast, we found that levels of the basket nucleoporins Nup153
and TPR were reduced in disrupted MN (Figure S2C and S2D). However, the loss of TPR
and Nup153 is not sufficient to explain the observed defects in nuclear trafficking (Frosst et
al., 2002; Mackay et al., 2009).

Author Manuscript

Second, we asked whether MN disruption is the result of non-mitotic breakdown of the
nuclear membrane. We monitored the dynamics of MN disruption by time-lapse imaging of
U2OS cells and compared them to the dynamics of interphase NE rupturing in PN, which
have been previously characterized (Vargas et al., 2012). We found that the half-time of
GFP-IBB loss during MN disruption was similar to that of PN NE rupturing (Figure 2A and
2B and Movies S2 and S3), suggesting that MN lose compartmentalization via disruption of
the NE. To distinguish the two processes we will refer to them as “NE rupturing” in the PN
and “NE collapse” in the MN.
NE ruptures in the PN are repaired in minutes, yet NE collapse in the MN is almost always
irreversible. To investigate alterations in NE structure during MN disruption, we performed
time-lapse imaging of cells expressing Sec61B fused to GFP (Sec61B-GFP), which localizes
to both the ER and outer nuclear membranes, identified by calreticulin labeling (Figure 2C).
We observed that the majority of MN (27/29) underwent an irreversible collapse of both the
NE and the chromatin after disruption (Figure S2E and Movie S4). Analysis of fixed cells
indicated that loss of Sec61B-GFP from the nuclear rim strongly correlated with MN
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 03.

Hatch et al.

Page 5

Author Manuscript

disruption (Figure 2C and 2D). Unexpectedly, we noticed that Sec61B-GFP was enriched on
the exposed MN chromatin. This is unlikely to mark aggregation of ER membranes, as
calreticulin does not show a similar aggregation (Figure 2C). Similar results were observed
with Sec61B-V5 (Figure S2F) and the INM proteins LBR and Lap2β (data not shown).
These results indicate a significant change in the protein composition of chromatinassociated NE/ER membranes after disruption in MN.

Author Manuscript

We also observed that ER membranes failed to be properly excluded from the chromatin in
disrupted MN. To determine if these membranes represented ER tubules, we observed the
localization of a tubular ER marker, reticulon 3 (Rtn3) (Voeltz et al., 2006), which is
normally excluded from the NE and ER sheets (Anderson and Hetzer, 2007). V5-tagged
Rtn3 is depleted from both PN and intact MN NEs, which are labeled by calreticulin (Figure
2E top). However, V5-Rtn3, as well as calreticulin, was present throughout the chromatin in
disrupted MN (Figure 2E bottom), indicating an aberrant association of tubular ER with the
exposed chromatin. To confirm the invasion of ER into disrupted MN chromatin, we
examined MN ultrastructure by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) in U2OS cells
fixed either 8 h or 18 h post mitosis. In the 8 h sample, the PN and the MN were both
surrounded by an intact NE (Figure 2F, left). However, at 18 h we observed disrupted MN
where convoluted, ribosome-studded ER membranes were associated with cytoplasmic
chromatin (Figure 2F, right), consistent with ER tubule invasion into disrupted MN
chromatin.

Author Manuscript

To further characterize the change in chromatin structure associated with NE collapse, we
analyzed the size and intensity of DAPI staining in disrupted MN. We observed that
disrupted MN were frequently smaller and more condensed than intact MN (Figure S2G and
S2F). Consistent with an increase in chromatin compaction, we also observed a strong
correlation between MN disruption and the loss of acetyl-histone3-K9, a mark of open
chromatin (Figure S2I). Taken together, these data indicate that MN disruption is caused by
NE collapse, which is characterized by chromatin compaction and a failure to exclude ER
tubules from the chromatin mass.
NE collapse is triggered by lamin disorganization

Author Manuscript

Research from our lab showed that NE rupturing in PN was closely associated with defects
in the nuclear lamina (Vargas et al., 2012). To determine if the lamina was similarly
compromised in MN prior to NE collapse, we examined the localization of lamin B1
(LmnB1) in intact MN. Two morphologies were observed: 1) a continuous nuclear rim of
LmnB1, similar to the PN, and 2) discontinuous LmnB1 labeling characterized by one or
more large holes in the lamina (Figure 3A). To determine if MN disruption is linked to
lamina discontinuities, we monitored RFP-tagged LmnB1 in MN by time-lapse imaging. In
19/19 MN we observed large lamin discontinuities developing prior to NE collapse (Movie
S5). In several cases these holes were apparent soon after NE re-formation at the end of
mitosis (Movie S6). We did not observe contraction of the lamin holes in intact MN during
interphase, indicating that the holes are stable and resistant to repair. These data suggest that
lamina disorganization, which can occur at different stages in interphase by mechanisms that
remain to be determined, triggers MN disruption.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 03.

Hatch et al.

Page 6

Author Manuscript

After disruption, LmnB1 often loses peripheral localization and appears collapsed (Figure
3A, Movie S5, S6), similar what we previously observed for the NE. Analysis of fixed cells
indicated that the collapsed lamin morphology was strongly correlated with disrupted MN
(Figure 3B).

Author Manuscript

Previous work has shown that loss of LmnB1 causes holes to form in the lamina (Vergnes et
al., 2004) and significantly increases the frequency of NE rupturing (Vargas et al., 2012). To
determine if LmnB1 levels similarly affected MN disruption, we depleted LmnB1 in U2OS
cells and observed MN integrity. We observed a significant increase in the proportion of
disrupted MN in LmnB1 depleted cells compared to controls (Figure 3C and S3A). This
effect was not seen upon depletion of either LmnB2 or LmnA/C (Figure S3A-S3C) and was
enhanced by further reducing LmnB1 levels through transfection of a LmnB1 siRNA
(Figure S3D and S3E). Expression of non-degradable LmnB1 reduced MN disruption to
control levels (Figure 3C, S3D, and S3E), indicating that MN disruption is a specific to
LmnB1 depletion. We also analyzed LmnB1 organization in intact MN by super-resolution
microscopy and found that it was characterized by large holes in the lamina similar to
LmnB1-depleted PN (Figure 3D). We did not detect phosphorylated lamins in MN,
indicating that lamina disruption is independent of mitotic kinase activity (data not shown).
These data suggest that NE collapse in MN is linked to LmnB1 depletion specifically.

Author Manuscript

To determine whether lamin overexpression is sufficient to inhibit MN disruption, we
expressed Lmn B2 in U2OS cells (Figure S3H and S3I). LmnB2 was used because it has
overlapping functions with LmnB1 in maintaining nuclear structure (Coffinier et al., 2010),
but, unlike LmnB1, does not cause large-scale structural alterations upon overexpression
(Schumacher et al., 2006). We observed a significant increase in intact MN in cells
expressing LmnB2 compared to control cells (Figure 3F). Thus, our data suggest that MN
disruption results from lamina disorganization, specifically decreased LmnB1 levels, and
that increasing lamin B levels can prevent disruption.
MN disruption causes broad micronuclear dysfunction

Author Manuscript

Compartmentalization is a prerequisite for proper localization and concentration of proteins
in the nucleus that is the basis of regulated genome functioning. Therefore, we assessed the
impact of MN disruption on nuclear functions and asked whether it could explain the defects
that had been previously identified in MN. We first assessed transcription by labeling cells
with an antibody to active RNAPolII, RNAPolII-phospho-S2, which is specific for
elongating RNAPolII (Ni et al., 2004). We observed that RNAPolIIpS2 was present in the
majority of intact MN but absent from almost all disrupted MN (Figure 4A and 4B). We also
examined nuclear mRNA content by oligo-dT fluorescence in situ hybridization and found
that mature mRNAs were present in both intact MN and PN, but absent in disrupted MN
(Figure S4A). These data indicate that disruption is strongly correlated with a complete loss
of transcription.
To determine the impact of MN disruption on DNA replication, we synchronized cells by
mitotic shake-off and released them into interphase in the presence of EdU. After 24 h we
found that in cells with EdU positive PN almost all disrupted MN completely lacked EdU
labeling (Figure 4C and 4D). In contrast, the majority of intact MN incorporated EdU,
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 03.

Hatch et al.

Page 7

Author Manuscript

although about 20% lacked EdU labeling. This defect in replication in intact MN is
consistent with previous work demonstrating delays in early replication factor recruitment to
MN (Crasta et al., 2012). However, our data indicate that MN disruption is strongly
correlated with a complete arrest of DNA replication.

Author Manuscript

Finally, we asked whether DNA damage repair was impaired specifically in disrupted MN.
To assess levels of DNA damage, we looked for foci of γ-H2AX, a modified histone found
at sites of double-stranded DNA breaks (DSBs) (Ciccia and Elledge, 2010). We found
multiple foci or a single large focus of accumulated γ-H2AX in around 60% of disrupted
MN yet rarely in intact MN (Figure 4E and 4F). The appearance of γ-H2AX foci could be
prevented by overexpression of lamin B2 (Figure S4B), confirming a strong correlation
between MN disruption and DNA damage accumulation. We also analyzed when in the cell
cycle disrupted MN accumulated DNA damage and found that the proportion of disrupted
MN with γ-H2AX labeling was significantly higher in S and G2 phase compared to G1
(Figure S4C). No change was observed in intact MN (data not shown). Labeling of cells
with cleaved-caspase 3 indicated that γ-H2AX positive MN were not associated with
apoptotic cells (Figure S4D). Together these data indicate that DNA damage accumulation is
strongly correlated with MN disruption.

Author Manuscript

The γ-H2AX signal in disrupted MN could represent either new DNA damage occurring
after disruption or a failure to repair DNA damage occurring in intact MN. To discriminate
between these possibilities, we treated G1 cells with doxorubicin, a DSB inducer, and
quantified γ-H2AX foci. Doxorubicin caused multiple γ-H2AX foci to appear in 100% of
the PN and the majority of intact MN, but foci were largely absent from disrupted MN
(Figure 4G and 4H), indicating that disrupted MN can neither sense new DNA damage, nor
repair existing damage.
DNA damage does not cause MN disruption

Author Manuscript

The lack of intact MN with accumulated γ-H2AX and the inability of disrupted MN to
acquire DNA damage marks suggests that DNA damage and MN disruption likely occur
concurrently. Previous work has shown that DNA damage can affect nuclear organization
(Misteli and Soutoglou, 2009), thus we wanted to know if DNA damage could cause MN
disruption. We first examined the effect of inducing DSBs on MN disruption. G1 cells,
which largely contain intact MN, were treated with either DMSO or doxorubicin for 1 h.
The drug was then washed out and cells were allowed to recover for 20 h. We found that,
although DNA damage persisted in the doxorubicin treated nuclei for at least 20 h after
release (Figure 5A), the proportion of disrupted MN was the same in cells treated with
DMSO or doxorubicin (Figure 5B), indicating that DSB formation and recruitment of DNA
damage repair proteins do not increase MN disruption frequency.
To confirm this finding we examined the effect of replication stress on MN disruption by
incubating G1 cells with varying concentrations of HU. HU arrests cells in S-phase by
causing replication fork stalling and collapse, which develop into one-sided DSBs
(Petermann et al., 2010). We examined the proportion of disrupted MN after a 24 h
incubation and found that, although γ-H2AX foci numbers increased in PN (Figure 5C) and
intact MN (Figure 5D) with increasing concentrations of HU, there was no significant
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 03.

Hatch et al.

Page 8

Author Manuscript

difference in the proportion of disrupted MN (Figure 5E). Thus, disruption appears to be the
cause, not the consequence, of DNA damage accumulation in MN.
MN disruption in non-small cell lung cancer

Author Manuscript

To determine if MN disruption was limited to cultured cells, or if it occurred in solid tumors
as well, we observed the localization of LSD-1, a direct marker of nuclear integrity (Figure
1D), and γ-H2AX, a marker of the loss of functionality in disrupted MN, in paraffin sections
of human non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) tumors. NSCLC tumors are characterized by
a high level of chromosomal instability (Nakamura et al., 2003; Birkbak et al., 2011), and
are thus likely to have a high frequency of MN. MN were identified using two criteria: first,
the chromatin mass had to be completely contained within in the paraffin section z-plane,
and second the chromatin mass had to be present in the same cell as a larger PN. The latter
was determined using antibodies to E-cadherin to label cell junctions. Using LSD-1 and γH2AX labeling, we identified two populations of MN in NSCLC tumors. The first had high
levels of LSD-1 and no γ-H2AX labeling, indicative of an intact MN (Figure 6A, top). The
second had no LSD-1 labeling and high levels of γ-H2AX, indicative of disrupted MN that
had accumulated DNA damage (Figure 6A, bottom). Further examination of the γ-H2AX
positive MN showed that they also lacked TPR and acetyl-histone3K9 (Figure S5A and
S5B), and were present in non-apoptotic cells (Figure S5C), indicating that they represent
true disrupted MN.

Author Manuscript

Disrupted MN were identified in 2/3 pulmonary adenocarcinomas and 1/1 squamous cell
carcinomas. The presence of disrupted MN in tumor cells of both types was confirmed by
pseudo-coloring DAPI and Sypro Ruby staining to resemble hematoxylin and eosin staining,
respectively (Figure 6B and 6C). Taken together, these data indicate that MN disruption
occurs in vivo in solid tumors.

Discussion

Author Manuscript

Historically MN have been considered passive indicators of chromosomal instability. A
growing body of evidence has shown, however, that being segregated into an MN has
important negative consequences for the chromatin that could drive chromosomal instability
(Hoffelder et al., 2004; Terradas et al., 2009, 2012; Xu et al., 2011; Crasta et al., 2012). In
the present study we demonstrate that synchronized broad MN dysfunction and massive
DNA damage result from irreversible NE collapse in MN in both cultured cells and solid
tumors. We found that during interphase most MN in a population of cells lose
compartmentalization after irreversible NE collapse. Loss of NE integrity arrests basic
nuclear functions including replication, transcription, and DNA damage recognition and
repair. NE collapse in MN is preceded by defects in lamin organization specifically linked to
decreased levels of lamin B1. Disrupted MN are characterized by large conformation
changes in the chromatin and associated ER membranes and INM proteins, which likely
inhibit NE repair (Figure 6D). Importantly, disrupted MN were identified not only in
cultured cancer cells, but also in human tumors, immortalized epithelial cells, and primary
fibroblasts. Thus, NE collapse and subsequent disruption of MN functioning appears to be a
general consequence of MN formation.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 03.

Hatch et al.

Page 9

Mechanism of MN disruption

Author Manuscript

Our data reveal a previously undetected structural defect in the lamina of MN that
destabilizes the NE. However, it is unclear what causes discontinuities to form specifically
in the MN lamina. Our imaging of LmnB1 in MN after mitosis provides evidence that holes
can be present almost concurrently with NE formation. This timing is consistent with a
defect in NE formation, rather than a failure to maintain or import lamin-associated proteins
in interphase, although the latter could contribute to hole growth. NE formation is a highly
orchestrated multi-step process and lamina assembly is one of the last steps (Burke and
Ellenberg, 2002). Thus, any problems early in NE assembly could have downstream effects
on lamina disorganization. Identifying the mechanism underlying lamina disorganization in
MN could thus provide important information about how NE formation is regulated.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

NE collapse in MN differs from that in PN in that it is usually irreparable. At this time
almost nothing is known about how the NE repairs itself in PN, but the mechanism would
have to result in re-spreading of the ER/NE membrane over the chromatin. There are two
possible sources of this membrane, one is the existing NE, and the second is ER tubules or
sheets interacting with the chromatin and subsequently forming an NE, similar to what
occurs during NE formation (Anderson and Hetzer, 2008b). Our data indicate that ER
tubules do contact the exposed chromatin, but fail to reform an intact NE. Concurrent with
NE collapse we also observed significant chromatin compaction. Although our data does not
indicate which event occurs first or if NE collapse and chromatin compaction are
mechanistically linked, one possibility is that chromatin condensation prevents either NE
repair or new NE formation. This model is consistent with the idea that NE formation during
mitotic exit, in addition to the orchestrated action of cell cycle-specific phosphatase
(Ramadan et al., 2007), requires chromosome decondensation to recruit INM protein to the
chromatin surface (Hetzer, 2010). Thus, understanding why disrupted MN have aberrant
connections with ER tubules in interphase could provide important insights into both NE
formation and interphase NE repair.
Consequences of MN disruption

Author Manuscript

Our data demonstrate that MN disruption results in a global cessation of nuclear functions.
However, our data and that of previous studies demonstrate that there are defects in intact
MN functioning as well, specifically in recruitment of DNA repair and replication proteins
(Crasta et al., 2012; Terradas et al., 2012). Previously, MN were thought to be structurally
similar to PN, but our study identifies a severe problem with lamina organization in MN.
This disorganization may not only prime MN for NE collapse but also impair functioning in
intact MN as disrupting the lamin B1 network in PN has been shown to impair both
transcription (Spann et al., 2002; Tang et al., 2008) and DNA replication (Spann et al.,
1997).
Our work indicates that the time of DNA damage accumulation, specifically γ-H2AX
accumulation, is restricted to when disruption occurs. However, our data are consistent with
a model where the accumulation of DNA damage is context dependent. Previous work has
suggested that DNA damage in MN is the result of incomplete DNA replication (Xu et al.,
2011; Crasta et al., 2012). In our study we observed a significant increase in γ-H2AX

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 03.

Hatch et al.

Page 10

Author Manuscript

positive MN specifically in S and G2 phases as well as intact MN with impaired DNA
replication (see Figure 4D). These data are consistent with a model where DNA replication
sensitizes intact MN to DNA damage, which is triggered by MN disruption. Although we
did not observe a significant impairment of NPC assembly or active accumulation of nuclear
proteins in intact MN, in contrast to previous reports (Hoffelder et al., 2004; Terradas et al.,
2009; Crasta et al., 2012), this does not rule out defective transport of specific proteins
important for processes like DNA replication into intact MN. It will be of great interest to
determine the mechanism of DNA damage in MN and how disruption can induce a massive
accumulation of fragmented DNA that could drive chromothripsis (Crasta et al., 2012).

Author Manuscript

In principle, the arrest of transcription and DNA replication and the induction of DNA
damage can all promote aneuploidy. Loss of transcription can generate a temporary
aneuploidy in interphase cells and if the segregated chromatin contains important regulators
for processes like genomic stability, this could be sufficient to induce more permanent
genomic alterations. The loss of DNA replication causes the cell to enter mitosis as 2n-1,
guaranteeing that one daughter cell will be aneuploid. Finally, previous work has shown that
DNA damage in MN results in extensive DNA fragmentation in both interphase and mitosis
(Terradas et al., 2009; Crasta et al., 2012). These chromatin pieces are hypothesized to be
source material for the massive single-chromosome rearrangement process termed
chromothripsis (Crasta et al., 2012), which occurs in a wide variety of cancers (Stephens et
al., 2011). Our work refines this model by demonstrating a strong correlation between NE
collapse in MN and the accumulation of DNA damage.
MN disruption and cancer

Author Manuscript

Chromothripsis strongly correlates with poor prognosis in cancer patients (Rausch et al.,
2012) and is postulated to occur early in carcinogenesis (Forment et al., 2012). For disrupted
MN to play a significant role early in carcinogenesis, they should occur in healthy cells.
Although MN frequency is low in normal cells, estimates suggest 0.5 to 2.5 MN occur per
1000 human buccal cells (Holland et al., 2008), we did observe MN disruption occurring in
non-transformed cell lines, consistent with previous reports of γ-H2AX positive MN in these
types of cells (Terradas et al., 2009; Xu et al., 2011; Crasta et al., 2012). Thus MN
disruption could be an important early event in cancer development.

Author Manuscript

At this time there are few objective markers for genomic instability in solid tumors, although
diagnosis of several cancers relies on the identification of aneuploidy. MN have been used
extensively to identify genomic instability in peripheral blood cells or epithelial cell
scrapings (Holland et al., 2008), but are hard to positively identify in tumor sections. Our
ability to identify disrupted MN in solid tumors suggests a new way to evaluate aneuploidy
in these tissues. Disrupted MN are readily identifiable in 5 μm thick NSCLC sections by
fluorescent microscopy even at low magnification due to their characteristic accumulation of
γ-H2AX (see Figure 6C). This is in contrast to intact MN, which require analysis of the
entire z projection and can be difficult to distinguish from cut-off PN. Our analysis in tissue
culture cells suggests that disrupted MN represent a high and regular percentage of the total
population of MN in an asynchronous fixed sample. It will be of great interest to examine

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 03.

Hatch et al.

Page 11

Author Manuscript

how MN disruption frequency compares to standard and more time-consuming assays for
aneuploidy in solid tumors and whether it represents a new diagnostic structural trait.
Our findings suggest that NE collapse in MN is the result of decreased lamin B1 and
subsequent disruption of the lamina. This collapse results in lasting MN damage that can
affect genomic stability. It remains unclear why this event is specific to MN and why similar
events do not seem to occur during developmental karyomere formation. Further analysis
promises to be informative about both the mechanism of NE repair in interphase and NE
formation after mitosis. In addition, our data indicate a new connection between aberrant NE
dynamics and carcinogenesis that may prove to be a valuable tool for cancer diagnosis.

Experimental Procedures
Author Manuscript

Cell culture and transfection
U2OS, DU145, HeLa, and MDA-MB-231 cells were grown in DMEM + 10% FBS at 10%
CO2. hTERT-RPE-1 cells were grown in DMEM/F12 + 10% FBS + 0.01 mg/mL
hygromycin at 5% CO2. IMR90 cells were grown in DMEM with Glutamax (Gibco) + 15%
FBS + non-essential amino acids (Gibco) at 7.5% CO2, 3% O2. Plasmids were transfected
using Lipofectamine 2000 and siRNAs were transfected using RNAimax according to
manufacturer’s instructions (both Life Technologies). Cells were analyzed at least 2 d post
transfection. Details on the stable cell lines, plasmids, and siRNAs used in this study are in
the extended experimental procedures.

Author Manuscript

For mitotic shake-off experiments, cells were incubated in 100 ng/mL nocodazole for up to
6 h prior to synchronization by shake-off onto coverslips in fresh medium. EdU was added
to the medium at 10 μm for pulse-labeling and 5 μm for long-term labeling experiments.
Hydroxyurea was used at 2 mM and RO-3306 (Enzo) was used at 10 μm. Doxorubicin was
used at 5 μm to assess DNA damage in disrupted MN and at 0.5 μm to asses MN disruption
after DNA damage. Leptomycin B was used at 0.1 mg/mL. For time-lapse imaging, cells
were incubated in 0.1 μg/mL Hoechst for 15 m at 37°C and fresh medium added prior to
imaging.
Immunofluorescence and FISH

Author Manuscript

Antibodies used for immunofluorescence are listed in the extended experimental procedures.
For indirect immunofluorescence cells were grown on coverslips and fixed in 4% PFA in 1×
PBS for 10 min at RT. Coverslips were blocked in 3% BSA in PBS + 0.1% TritonX-100
prior to incubation in primary and secondary antibodies diluted in blocking buffer.
Coverslips were briefly incubated with DAPI (1 μg/mL in PBS; Roche) and mounted in
Vectashield (Vector Labs). For structured illumination microscopy (SIM) analysis, cells
were grown on Zeiss high-performance coverslips and mounted in ProLong Gold (Life
Technologies).
Human non-small cell carcinoma resection specimens were fixed in normal buffered
formalin for 12-72 h before standard histologic paraffinization (Fischer et al., 2008). Five
μm sections were cut from the paraffinized blocks of tissue and mounted on Fisher Plus
microscope slides. Paraffin sections were rehydrated in xylene and a graduated ethanol

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 03.

Hatch et al.

Page 12

Author Manuscript

series. Antigen retrieval was performed by boiling in 0.01 M citric acid pH 6 for 15 m.
Slides were blocked in 3% BSA and 4% goat serum in 1×PBS + 0.1% TritonX-100 prior to
incubation in antibody dilutions and DAPI. If necessary, slides were incubated in Sypro
Ruby (Life Technologies) overnight at 4°C prior to DAPI staining. Sections were mounted
in ProLong Gold.
For fluorescent in situ hybridization, cells grown on coverslips were fixed for 10 m RT in
4% PFA, and processed for in situ hybridization using a previously described protocol
(http://www.singerlab.org/protocols). Cells were incubated in 0.3 ng/μL Alexa-568polydT(50) probe (custom ordered; Life Technologies) overnight at 37°C. Indirect
immunofluorescence was then performed as described above.

Author Manuscript

Fixed samples were imaged on a Zeiss LSM 710 scanning confocal microscope with a 63×
1.4NA oil immersion or a 20× 0.8NA air objective with Zen software (Zeiss). Images are
single confocal sections except where noted. Images were adjusted for brightness and
contrast using ImageJ (Abràmoff et al., 2004) or Photoshop CS3 (Adobe). All Z-stacks were
taken at 0.5 μm intervals. SIM was performed using a Zeiss Elyra PS.1 Super-Resolution
microscope with a 63× 1.4NA oil immersion objective. Images were acquired and processed
with Zen 2012 software (Zeiss).
TEM

Author Manuscript

Cells were grown on MatTek 35 mm petri dishes with a 14 mm microwell, fixed in 2%
glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M Na cacodylate buffer, pH 7.3, washed, and incubated in 1% osmium
tetroxide followed by 2% uranyl acetate. After embedding in Durcupan (Electron
Microscopy Sciences) thin sections (70 nm) were cut on an ultramicrotome (Leica) and poststained with 2% uranyl acetate and Sato’s Lead stain. Sections were examined on a JEOL
1200ex TEM, and images were captured on film.
Time-lapse imaging
Cells were plated into 8-well μ-slide chambers (iBidi) and imaged on a Zeiss Axioscope/
Yokagawa spinning disk confocal microscope with a 63× 1.4NA oil objective or a 20× 0.8
NA air objective at 37°C and 10% CO2. Images were captured with an EM CCD camera
(Hamamatsu) using AxioVision software (Zeiss). Videos were cropped and adjusted for
brightness and contrast using ImageJ and Photoshop.
Quantification of images and western blots

Author Manuscript

Western blot bands were quantified using a fluorescent imager (Odyssey; Li-Cor) and
ImageJ. The integrated density of the bands was background subtracted and normalized to
GAPDH prior to comparison. Prism5 (GraphPad) was used to generate all graphs and
perform statistical analyses. Detailed explanation of fluorescence intensity quantification
and statistics are in the extended experimental procedures.

Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 03.

Hatch et al.

Page 13

Author Manuscript

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Jamie Kasuboski in the Waitt Advanced Biophotonics Core at the Salk Institute for
performing structured illumination microscopy and members of the Hetzer lab for critical comments. M.W.H, is
supported by the National Institutes of Health grant R01GM098497 and a scholar award from the American Cancer
Society. E.H. is supported by a Postdoctoral Fellowship, PF-12-137-01-CSM, from the American Cancer Society.
The project described was supported by Award Number P30CA014195 from the National Cancer Institute.

References

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Abràmoff MD, Hospitals I, Magalhães PJ, Abràmoff M. Image Processing with ImageJ. Biophotonics
International. 2004; 11:36–42.
Anderson DJ, Hetzer MW. Nuclear envelope formation by chromatin-mediated reorganization of the
endoplasmic reticulum. Nat Cell Biol. 2007; 9:1160–1166. [PubMed: 17828249]
Anderson DJ, Hetzer MW. Reshaping of the endoplasmic reticulum limits the rate for nuclear
envelope formation. J Cell Biol. 2008a; 182:911–924. [PubMed: 18779370]
Anderson DJ, Hetzer MW. Shaping the endoplasmic reticulum into the nuclear envelope. J Cell Sci.
2008b; 121:137–142. [PubMed: 18187447]
Birkbak NJ, Eklund AC, Li Q, McClelland SE, Endesfelder D, Tan P, Tan IB, Richardson AL, Szallasi
Z, Swanton C. Paradoxical relationship between chromosomal instability and survival outcome in
cancer. Cancer Research. 2011; 71:3447–3452. [PubMed: 21270108]
Burke B, Ellenberg J. Remodelling the walls of the nucleus. Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology.
2002; 3:487–497.
Ciccia A, Elledge SJ. The DNA damage response: making it safe to play with knives. Molecular Cell.
2010; 40:179–204. [PubMed: 20965415]
Cimini D, Howell B, Maddox P, Khodjakov A, Degrassi F, Salmon ED. Merotelic kinetochore
orientation is a major mechanism of aneuploidy in mitotic mammalian tissue cells. The Journal of
Cell Biology. 2001; 153:517–527. [PubMed: 11331303]
Coffinier C, Chang SY, Nobumori C, Tu Y, Farber EA, Toth JI, Fong LG, Young SG. Abnormal
development of the cerebral cortex and cerebellum in the setting of lamin B2 deficiency. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A. 2010; 107:5076–5081. [PubMed: 20145110]
Crasta K, Ganem NJ, Dagher R, Lantermann AB, Ivanova EV, Pan Y, Nezi L, Protopopov A,
Chowdhury D, Pellman D. DNA breaks and chromosome pulverization from errors in mitosis.
Nature. 2012; 482:53–58. [PubMed: 22258507]
Fenech M. Cytokinesis-block micronucleus cytome assay. Nat Protoc. 2007; 2:1084–1104. [PubMed:
17546000]
Fischer AH, Jacobson KA, Rose J, Zeller R. Paraffin Embedding Tissue Samples for Sectioning. Cold
Spring Harbor Protocols. 2008; 2008 pdb.prot4989-pdb.prot4989.
Forment JV, Kaidi A, Jackson SP. Chromothripsis and cancer: causes and consequences of
chromosome shattering. Nature Reviews. Cancer. 2012; 12:663–670.
Frosst P, Guan T, Subauste C, Hahn K, Gerace L. Tpr is localized within the nuclear basket of the pore
complex and has a role in nuclear protein export. The Journal of Cell Biology. 2002; 156:617–630.
[PubMed: 11839768]
Gant TM, Wilson KL. Nuclear assembly. Annual Review of Cell and Developmental Biology. 1997;
13:669–695.
Hetzer MW. The nuclear envelope. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2010; 2:a000539. [PubMed:
20300205]
Hoffelder DR, Luo L, Burke NA, Watkins SC, Gollin SM, Saunders WS. Resolution of anaphase
bridges in cancer cells. Chromosoma. 2004; 112:389–397. [PubMed: 15156327]
Holland N, Bolognesi C, Kirsch-Volders M, Bonassi S, Zeiger E, Knasmueller S, Fenech M. The
micronucleus assay in human buccal cells as a tool for biomonitoring DNA damage: the HUMN
project perspective on current status and knowledge gaps. Mutation Research. 2008; 659:93–108.
[PubMed: 18514568]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 03.

Hatch et al.

Page 14

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Kim Y, Sharov AA, McDole K, Cheng M, Hao H, Fan C-M, Gaiano N, Ko MSH, Zheng Y. Mouse Btype lamins are required for proper organogenesis but not by embryonic stem cells. Science (New
York, N.Y.). 2011; 334:1706–1710.
Lemaitre J-M. Dynamics of the Genome during Early Xenopus laevis Development: Karyomeres As
Independent Units of Replication. The Journal of Cell Biology. 1998; 142:1159–1166. [PubMed:
9732278]
Li M, Fang X, Baker DJ, Guo L, Gao X, Wei Z, Han S, Van Deursen JM, Zhang P. The ATM-p53
pathway suppresses aneuploidy-induced tumorigenesis. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America. 2010; 107:14188–14193. [PubMed: 20663956]
Lu L, Ladinsky MS, Kirchhausen T. Formation of the postmitotic nuclear envelope from extended ER
cisternae precedes nuclear pore assembly. The Journal of Cell Biology. 2011; 194:425–440.
[PubMed: 21825076]
Mackay DR, Elgort SW, Ullman KS. The nucleoporin Nup153 has separable roles in both early
mitotic progression and the resolution of mitosis. Molecular Biology of the Cell. 2009; 20:1652–
1660. [PubMed: 19158386]
Misteli T, Soutoglou E. The emerging role of nuclear architecture in DNA repair and genome
maintenance. Nature Reviews. Molecular Cell Biology. 2009; 10:243–254.
Nakamura H, Saji H, Idiris A, Kawasaki N, Hosaka M, Ogata A, Saijo T, Kato H. Chromosomal
Instability Detected by Fluorescence in Situ Hybridization in Surgical Specimens of Non-Small
Cell Lung Cancer Is Associated with Poor Survival. Clin. Cancer Res. 2003; 9:2294–2299.
[PubMed: 12796398]
Ni Z, Schwartz BE, Werner J, Suarez J-R, Lis JT. Coordination of Transcription, RNA Processing, and
Surveillance by P-TEFb Kinase on Heat Shock Genes. Molecular Cell. 2004; 13:55–65. [PubMed:
14731394]
Paulin-Levasseur M, Blake DL, Julien M, Rouleau L. The MAN antigens are non-lamin constituents
of the nuclear lamina in vertebrate cells. Chromosoma. 1996; 104:367–379. [PubMed: 8575249]
Petermann E, Orta ML, Issaeva N, Schultz N, Helleday T. Hydroxyurea-stalled replication forks
become progressively inactivated and require two different RAD51-mediated pathways for restart
and repair. Molecular Cell. 2010; 37:492–502. [PubMed: 20188668]
Ramadan K, Bruderer R, Spiga FM, Popp O, Baur T, Gotta M, Meyer HH. Cdc48/p97 promotes
reformation of the nucleus by extracting the kinase Aurora B from chromatin. Nature. 2007;
450:1258–U13. [PubMed: 18097415]
Rausch T, Jones DTW, Zapatka M, Stütz AM, Zichner T, Weischenfeldt J, Jäger N, Remke M, Shih D,
Northcott PA, et al. Genome sequencing of pediatric medulloblastoma links catastrophic DNA
rearrangements with TP53 mutations. Cell. 2012; 148:59–71. [PubMed: 22265402]
Schumacher J, Reichenzeller M, Kempf T, Schnolzer M, Herrmann H. Identification of a novel, highly
variable amino-terminal amino acid sequence element in the nuclear intermediate filament protein
lamin B(2) from higher vertebrates. FEBS Lett. 2006; 580:6211–6216. [PubMed: 17070523]
Spann TP, Goldman AE, Wang C, Huang S, Goldman RD. Alteration of nuclear lamin organization
inhibits RNA polymerase II-dependent transcription. J Cell Biol. 2002; 156:603–608. [PubMed:
11854306]
Spann TP, Moir RD, Goldman AE, Stick R, Goldman RD. Disruption of nuclear lamin organization
alters the distribution of replication factors and inhibits DNA synthesis. The Journal of Cell
Biology. 1997; 136:1201–1212. [PubMed: 9087437]
Stephens PJ, Greenman CD, Fu B, Yang F, Bignell GR, Mudie LJ, Pleasance ED, Lau KW, Beare D,
Stebbings LA, et al. Massive genomic rearrangement acquired in a single catastrophic event
during cancer development. Cell. 2011; 144:27–40. [PubMed: 21215367]
Tang CW, Maya-Mendoza A, Martin C, Zeng K, Chen S, Feret D, Wilson SA, Jackson DA. The
integrity of a lamin-B1-dependent nucleoskeleton is a fundamental determinant of RNA synthesis
in human cells. J Cell Sci. 2008; 121:1014–1024. [PubMed: 18334554]
Terradas M, Martín M, Hernández L, Tusell L, Genescà A. Nuclear envelope defects impede a proper
response to micronuclear DNA lesions. Mutation Research. 2012; 729:35–40. [PubMed:
21945242]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 03.

Hatch et al.

Page 15

Author Manuscript

Terradas M, Martín M, Tusell L, Genescà A. DNA lesions sequestered in micronuclei induce a local
defective-damage response. DNA Repair. 2009; 8:1225–1234. [PubMed: 19683478]
Thompson SL, Compton DA. Chromosome missegregation in human cells arises through specific
types of kinetochore-microtubule attachment errors. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America. 2011; 108:17974–17978. [PubMed: 21997207]
Vargas JD, Hatch EM, Anderson DJ, Hetzer MW. Transient nuclear envelope rupturing during
interphase in human cancer cells. Nucleus. 2012; 3:88–100. [PubMed: 22567193]
Vergnes L, Peterfy M, Bergo MO, Young SG, Reue K. Lamin B1 is required for mouse development
and nuclear integrity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004; 101:10428–10433. [PubMed: 15232008]
Voeltz GK, Prinz WA, Shibata Y, Rist JM, Rapoport TA. A class of membrane proteins shaping the
tubular endoplasmic reticulum. Cell. 2006; 124:573–586. [PubMed: 16469703]
Xu B, Sun Z, Liu Z, Guo H, Liu Q, Jiang H, Zou Y, Gong Y, Tischfield JA, Shao C. Replication stress
induces micronuclei comprising of aggregated DNA double-strand breaks. PloS One. 2011;
6:e18618. [PubMed: 21525980]

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 03.

Hatch et al.

Page 16

Author Manuscript

Highlights
•

Micronuclei frequently undergo irreversible nuclear envelope collapse

•

Lamin B1 levels influence the likelihood of nuclear envelope collapse

•

Massive DNA damage accumulation in micronuclei occurs upon collapse

•

Micronuclei disruption occurs in solid tumors as well as normal and cancer cells

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 03.

Hatch et al.

Page 17

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 1. Micronuclei frequently and irreversibly lose compartmentalization in interphase cells

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

(A) Stills from time-lapse imaging of U2OS 2×RFP-NLS (RFP-NLS) cells expressing
4×GFP-NES (GFP-NES) and labeled with Hoechst. NEF = NE formation. Time is h:m.
Scale bar = 10 μm. (B) Quantification of MN fate during interphase from time-lapse
imaging. N = 122 MN from 3 experiments. (C) Quantification of MN fate after mitosis from
time-lapse imaging of U2OS GFP-IBB mCherry-H2B cells. N = 44 intact MN and 165
disrupted MN from 3 experiments. P > 0.05 by Fisher’s exact test, used for all data in figure.
(D) Images of intact (arrows) and disrupted (arrowheads) MN in fixed U2OS cells labeled
with antibodies to LSD-1 and lamin B1 (LmnB1) (top) or retinoblastoma (Rb) and lamin A
(LmnA) (bottom). Scale bars = 10 μm. (E) Quantification of MN integrity and soluble
nuclear protein labeling. N = 300 MN/label from 3 experiments. φ = Phi correlation coefficient. (F) Quantification of MN integrity in asynchronous cancer cell lines stably
expressing GFP-NLS. N = 250 MN/cell line from 3 experiments. (G) Experiment schematic
and quantification of MN integrity in non-transformed cell lines 24 h post mitosis. N = 300
MN/cell line from 3 experiments. (H) Experiment schematic (top) and proportion intact MN
in U2OS GFP-NLS cells fixed at indicated cell cycle phase. Telophase (telo.) data are from
time-lapse imaging analysis. N = 125 MN for telo. and 300 MN/time point from 3
experiments. See also Figure S1 and Movie S1.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 03.

Hatch et al.

Page 18

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 2. MN disruption occurs by NE collapse and is characterized by ER tubule invasion of the
chromatin

Author Manuscript

(A) Stills from time-lapse imaging of U2OS GFP-IBB, H2B-mCherry cells undergoing PN
rupturing and repair (top) and MN disruption (bottom). An asterisk indicates the site of PN
NE rupturing (top) and an arrow indicates the MN (bottom). Time is m:s. All scale bars in
figure = 10 μm. (B) Analysis of GFP-IBB fractional fluorescence intensity in nucleus during
PN NE rupturing and MN disruption. The rupturing half-time, mean, and s.e.m are shown on
graph. N = 5. (C) Images of intact and disrupted MN in U2OS RFP-NLS cells expressing
Sec61B-GFP and labeled for the luminal ER protein calreticulin. (D) Quantification of
Sec61B-GFP presence at the nuclear rim in intact and disrupted MN, as defined by DAPI
staining. N = 300 MN/category from 3 experiments. φ = Phi correlation co-efficient. (E)
Images of intact and disrupted MN in U2OS GFP-NLS cells expressing V5-tagged reticulon
3 (V5-Rtn3) and labeled for calreticulin. X-z and y-z projections of boxed regions cover
5.48 μm (top) and 5.97 μm (bottom) stacks, respectively. In top (intact MN) projections,
GFP-NLS is omitted for clarity. (F) TEM images of intact (left) and disrupted (right) MN in
U2OS GFP-NLS cells 8 h and 18 h post-mitotic shake-off, respectively. In the intact MN
membranes (arrows) are excluded from the chromatin and in the disrupted MN ER
membranes are visible inside the chromatin. See also Figure S2, Movie S2, Movie S3, and
Movie S4.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 03.

Hatch et al.

Page 19

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 3. Depletion of lamin B1 in intact MN triggers MN disruption

Author Manuscript

(A) Images of lamin B1 (LmnB1) morphologies in intact (arrows) and disrupted
(arrowheads) MN in fixed U2OS GFP-NLS cells. All scale bars in figure = 10 μm. (B)
Quantification of LmnB1 morphology in asynchronous cells. N = 300 MN/category from 3
experiments. All p-values are from Fisher’s exact test. (C) Quantification of MN integrity in
asynchronous cell lines expressing indicated lamin B1 constructs. mCh = mCherry. ND =
non-degradable. Numbers over graph represent p-values for indicated samples. N = 300
MN/cell line from 3 experiments. (D) Structured illumination images of an intact MN with a
discontinuous lamina in a non-LmnB1 depleted U2OS cell (top) and the PN of a U2OS cell
expressing LmnB1 shRNA (bottom) labeled with indicated antibodies. (E) Quantification of
MN integrity in cell lines expressing mCherry or mCherry-LmnB2. N = 300 MN/cell line
from 3 experiments. See also Figure S3, Movie S5, and Movie S6.

Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 03.

Hatch et al.

Page 20

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 4. MN disruption causes loss of mRNA transcription, DNA replication, and DNA damage
repair and sensing

Author Manuscript

(A) Images of asynchronous U2OS GFP-NLS cells fixed and labeled with the active RNA
polymerase mark anti-RNAPolIIpS2. Intact and disrupted MN are indicated by arrows and
arrowheads, respectively, throughout this figure. All scale bars = 10 μm. (B) Quantification
of MN integrity and RNAPolIIpS2 labeling. For all quantifications in this figure, n = 300
MN/category from 3 experiments. P-value is from Fisher’s exact test and φ = correlation coefficient for all graphs in figure. (C) Experiment schematic and images of MN labeled with
EdU for 24 h post-mitosis. (D) Quantification of MN integrity and EdU labeling in cells
with EdU positive PN. (E) Image of MN labeled with anti-γ-H2AX antibody, which marks
DSBs, in asynchronous cells. (F) Quantification of MN integrity and γ-H2AX labeling. (G)
Experiment schematic and image of G1 cells treated with doxorubicin (doxo) for 1 h and
labeled with anti-γ-H2AX. (H) Proportion of PN and intact and disrupted MN that contain
more than one γ-H2AX focus or an enlarged γ-H2AX focus after 1 h doxo incubation. P and
φ values compare only the intact and disrupted MN. See also Figure S4.

Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 03.

Hatch et al.

Page 21

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 5. DNA damage does not induce MN disruption

Author Manuscript

(A) Experiment schematic and images of U2OS cells labeled with anti-γ-H2AX 20 h after 1
h incubation in DMSO or doxorubicin (doxo). All scale bars = 10 μm. Arrows and
arrowheads indicate intact and disrupted MN, respectively. (B) Quantification of MN
integrity in cells treated as in (A). P-value > 0.05, determined by Fisher’s exact test. N = 300
MN/condition from 3 experiments. (C) Experiment schematic and images of synchronized
cells treated with HU at the indicated concentrations for 20 h, fixed, and labeled with
antibodies to γ-H2AX. (D) Quantification of intact MN with multiple γ-H2AX foci 20 h
after HU incubation. P-values above graph refer to indicated samples determined by Fisher’s
exact test. N = 250 MN/concentration from 3 experiments. (E) Quantification of MN
integrity in cells incubated in HU for 20 h. N = 250 MN/concentration from 3 experiments.
P-value > 0.05 by χ2 analysis.

Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 03.

Hatch et al.

Page 22

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 6. Disrupted MN are present in non-small cell lung cancer tumors

Author Manuscript

(A) Immunofluorescence of thin paraffin sections of a non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
tumor showing intact (arrow) and disrupted (arrowhead) MN. Sections were labeled with
antibodies to E-cadherin, γ-H2AX, and LSD-1. Scale bars = 10 μm. Images are maximum
intensity projections of 4 μm (top) and 5.5 μm (bottom) z-stacks. (B and C)
Immunofluorescence of adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma tumors. Sections
were labeled with antibodies to E-cadherin and γ-H2AX and stained with DAPI and Sypro
Ruby. Lower panels are enlarged images of boxed area. Pseduo-hematoxylin and eosin
staining (H&E) images were generated by pseudo-coloring merged DAPI/Sypro Ruby
images. Arrows in (C) indicate additional disrupted MN. Scale bars = 50 μm. (D) Model of
MN disruption. A lagging chromosome forms a MN upon mitotic exit. The NE of the MN
may already be abnormal at this time. At some point during interphase, lamina
disorganization triggers NE collapse and loss of proteins from the MN. After NE collapse,
the MN chromatin becomes compacted and permeated by tubular ER. This chromatin either
segregates normally or becomes a MN again in the next mitosis. See also Figure S5.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 03.

