www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2017, Vol. 8, (No. 8), pp: 13632-13651
Research Paper

The pentapeptide Gly-Thr-Gly-Lys-Thr confers sensitivity to
anti-cancer drugs by inhibition of CAGE binding to GSK3β and
decreasing the expression of cyclinD1
Youngmi Kim1,*, Hyuna Kim1,*, Deokbum Park1, Hansoo Lee2, Yun Sil Lee3, Jongseon
Choe4, Young Myeong Kim4, Doyong Jeon5, Dooil Jeoung1
1

Department of Biochemistry, College of Natural Sciences, Kangwon National University, Chunchon 24341, Korea

2

Department of Biological Sciences, College of Natural Sciences, Kangwon National University, Chunchon 24341, Korea

3

College of Pharmacy, Ewha Womans University, Seoul 03760, Korea

4

Graduate School of Medicine, Kangwon National University, Chunchon 24341, Korea

5

L-Base Company, Seoul 01062, Korea

*

These authors contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Dooil Jeoung, email: jeoungd@kangwon.ac.kr
Keywords: anti-cancer drug-resistance, CAGE, cyclinD1, GSK3β, peptides
Received: February 12, 2016     Accepted: January 03, 2017     Published: January 13, 2017

ABSTRACT
We previously reported the role of cancer/testis antigen CAGE in the response
to anti-cancer drugs. CAGE increased the expression of cyclinD1, and pGSK3βSer9, an
inactive GSK3β, while decreasing the expression of phospho-cyclinD1Thr286. CAGE
showed binding to GSK3β and the domain of CAGE (amino acids 231–300) necessary
for binding to GSK3β and for the expression regulation of cyclinD1 was determined.
269
GTGKT273 peptide, corresponding to the DEAD box helicase domain of CAGE, decreased
the expression of cyclinD1 and pGSK3βSer9 while increasing the expression of phosphocyclinD1Thr286. GTGKT peptide showed the binding to CAGE and prevented CAGE from
binding to GSK3β. GTGKT peptide changed the localization of CAGE and inhibited the
binding of CAGE to the promoter sequences of cyclin D1. GTGKT peptide enhanced
the apoptotic effects of anti-cancer drugs and decreased the migration, invasion,
angiogenic, tumorigenic and metastatic potential of anti-cancer drug-resistant cancer
cells. We found that Lys272 of GTGKT peptide was necessary for conferring anti-cancer
activity. Peptides corresponding to the DEAD box helicase domain of CAGE, such as
AQTGTGKT, QTGTGKT and TGTGKT, also showed anti-cancer activity by preventing CAGE
from binding to GSK3β. GTGKT peptide showed ex vivo tumor homing potential. Thus,
peptides corresponding to the DEAD box helicase domain of CAGE can be developed
as anti-cancer drugs in cancer patients expressing CAGE.

INTRODUCTION

positive endometrial cancers. The methylation of CAGE
promoter sequences in premalignant lesions suggests that
the expression status of CAGE can be a useful diagnostic
marker for early detection of cancer [3]. CAGE promotes
cell motility by activating extracellular signal-regulated
kinase (ERK) and p38 MAPK [4].
CAGE displays oncogenic potential and enhances
cellular proliferation by increasing the expression of
cyclinD1 via AP-1 [5]. CAGE, through binding to HDAC2,
represses the expression of P53 to confer resistance to anti-

CAGE, a cancer/testis gene, was isolated by the
screening of recombinant cDNA expression libraries using
the sera of patients with gastric cancers [1]. A positive rate
of anti-CAGE antibody in 7 of 13 (53.8%) patients with
microsatellite instability-positive endometrial cancer and
in 1 of 3 patients with atypical endometrial hyperplasia
[2] suggests that CAGE can be useful for prognosis or
early diagnosis of patients with microsatellite instability-

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13632

Oncotarget

RESULTS

cancer drugs [6]. miR-200b decreases the expression of
cyclinD1 and myosin heavy chain (MHC) [7]. miR-200b
confers sensitivity to anti-cancer drugs by decreasing the
expression of CAGE [8].
The inhibition of GSK3β ameliorates cisplatininduced cytotoxicity [9]. The activation of GSK3β
increases the phosphorylation of RNPC1 and the
expression of p53 [10]. The inactivation of GSK3β leads
to the accumulation of mutant p53 [11]. GSK3β suppresses
breast carcinogenesis in a manner associated with its effect
on the phosphorylation, ubiquitination and the stability of
progesterone receptor A [12]. Over-expression of inactive
GSK3β inhibits JNK activation, resulting in a suppression
of apoptosis by quercetin [13]. GSK3β enhances growth
suppression by directly phosphorylating KLF-6 [14].
The mechanisms of radioprotection by GSK3β inhibitors
in hippocampal neurons involve the regulation of p53
accumulation [15].
DIF-1 inhibits the growth of HCT-116- and HeLaxenograft tumors together with decreasing phosphorylation
level of GSK3βSer9 and also suppresses the expressions
of cyclinD1 [16]. mTORC2 blockade is responsible for
reduction of cyclinD1 by GSK3β [17]. Inactive GSK3β
attenuates proteasomal degradation of cyclinD1 by
reducing phospho-cyclinD1Thr286 levels [18]. Inactive
GSK3β increases cyclinD1 gene transcription by increasing
its transcription factor β-catenin in the nucleus [18].
NF-κB-activating selectable peptides (NASPs),
when co-expressed with oncogenic Ras (H-Ras (V12)),
allows rodent fibroblasts to overcome senescence and
acquire a transformed tumorigenic phenotype [19].
Tumor homing and penetrating peptide iRGD enhances
the effect of paclitaxel-loaded PEG-PLA nanoparticles
(MT1-NP-PTX) on glioblastoma [20]. Angiotensin-(1-7)
[Ang-(1-7)], an endogenous heptapeptide hormone of
the renin-angiotensin system displays anti-tumor activity
[21]. VEGFR-3 inhibiting peptides display anti-oncogenic
activity [22]. The heptapeptide of the PKC delta-V5
region sensitizes human cancer cells through its binding
to HSP27 [23]. Inherbin3, a peptide antagonist of ErbB1
receptor, inhibits EGF-induced ErbB1 phosphorylation,
cell growth, and migration in two human tumor cell lines
[24]. These reports suggest that peptides originating from
proteins can be employed as anti-cancer drugs.
We were interested to examine the mechanism
of anti-cancer drug-resistance conferred by CAGE.We
present evidence that CAGE confers anti-cancer drugresistance by binding to GSK3β and increasing the
expression of cyclin D1 and pGSK3βSer9. We show anticancer activity of peptides corresponding to the DEAD
box helicase domain of CAGE and the mechanisms of
anti-cancer drug sensitivity conferred by these peptides.
Thus, peptides corresponding to the DEAD box helicase
domain of CAGE can be developed as anti-cancer drugs
for the treatment of cancer patients expressing CAGE.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

CAGE increases the expression of cyclin D1 and
pGSK3βSer9 while decreasing the expression of
phospho-cyclinD1Thr286
CAGE increases the expression of cyclinD1 via
AP-1 and E2F [5]. We first investigated the mechanisms
involved in the expression regulation of cyclinD1 by
CAGE. Anti-cancer drug-resistant cancer cell lines, such
as SNU387R and Malme3MR cell lines, showed higher
expression level of CAGE than their sensitive counterparts
(Supplementary Figure 1A). Meljuso and Hep3B cell lines
that do not express CAGE did not show the expression
of cyclinD1 (Supplementary Figure 1A). The expression
level of CAGE showed an inverse relationship with the
expression level of phospho-cyclinD1Thr286 and pGSK3βTyr216,
an active form of GSK3β (Supplementary Figure 1A).
Immunofluorescence staining showed mostly nuclear
localization of phospho-cyclinD1Thr286 in Malme3M cells,
but not in Malme3MR cells (Supplementary Figure 1B).
Phosphorylation of GSK3β at Ser9 leads to the increased
expression of cyclinD1 [18]. Because the expression
level of CAGE showed correlation with that of cyclinD1
(Supplementary Figure 1A), we examined the effect
of CAGE on the expression of pGSK3βSer9, an inactive
GSK3β. The down-regulation of CAGE decreased the
expression of cyclinD1 and pGSK3βSer9 while increasing
the expression of phospho-cyclinD1Thr286 (Supplementary
Figure 1C). Immunofluorescence staining confirmed the
effect of the down-regulation of CAGE on the expression
of pGSK3βSer9 and phospho-cyclinD1Thr286 (Supplementary
Figure 1D). CAGE showed the localization in both nucleus
and cytoplasm in Malme3MR cells (Supplementary
Figure 1D). These results suggest that CAGE increases the
expression cyclinD1 in association with its effect on the
phosphorylation of GSK3β.

GSK3β-cyclinD1 axis functions downstream of
CAGE
We next examined the relationship between GSK3β
and the expression of cyclinD1. The inactivation of
GSK3β by LiCl increased the expression of pGSK3βSer9
and cyclinD1 while decreasing the expression of
phospho-cyclinD1Thr286 in SNU387 and Malme3M cells
(Supplementary Figure 2A). However, LiCl did not
change the expression level of CAGE (Supplementary
Figure 2A). The down-regulation of cyclinD1 did not
change the expression of CAGE, phospho-cyclinD1Thr286
or pGSK3βSer9 in SNU387R or Malme3MR cells
(Supplementary Figure 2B). This suggests that cyclinD1
functions downstream of GSK3β. The down-regulation
of cyclinD1 enhanced cleavage of PARP and FAK in
response to taxol in Malme3MR cells (Supplementary

13633

Oncotarget

Figure 2C). The down-regulation of cyclinD1 enhanced
sensitivity to taxol in Malme3MR cells (Supplementary
Figure 2D). Because CAGE the expression of pGSK3βSer9
(Supplementary Figure 1C), we examined the possibility
of the binding of CAGE to GSK3β. The expression
of pGSK3βTyr216, active form of GSK3β, was lower in
Malme3MR cells than in Malme3M cells (Supplementary
Figure 2E). CAGE showed binding to GSK3β in SNU387R
(data now shown) and Malme3MR cells (Supplementary
Figure 2E). CAGE showed a co-localization with GSK3β
in SNU387R (Supplementary Figure 2F) and Malme3MR
cells (data not shown). It remains to be seen whether
CAGE exerts a direct regulation on GSK3β activity. These
results suggest that CAGE confers resistance to anticancer drugs through GSK3β-cyclinD1 axis.

Figure 3A). Because cyclinD1 promoter sequences contain
binding site for HDAC2, we hypothesized that CAGE would
bind to the promoter sequences of cyclinD1 to increase
the expression of cyclinD1. Malme3M cells transfected
with full-length wild type CAGE or CAGE deletion
construct (pFLAG-CAGE∆HELIc, pFLAG-CAGE∆DEADc-1
or FLAG-CAGE∆DEADc-2) showed the binding of CAGE
to the promoter sequences of cyclinD1 (Supplementary
Figure 3B). However, Malme3M cells transfected with
CAGEKH-1 deletion construct did not show the binding
of CAGE to the promoter sequences of cyclinD1
(Supplementary Figure 3B). Malme3M cells transfected
with full-length wild type CAGE (G-T-G-K-T) or fulllength point mutant CAGE (G-A-G-K-T) showed the
binding of CAGE to the promoter sequences of cyclinD1
(Supplementary Figure 3C). However, Malme3M
cells transfected with full-length point mutant CAGEs,
such as G-T-G-A-T and G-T-G-K-A, did not show the
binding of CAGE to the promoter sequences of cyclinD1
(Supplementary Figure 3C). These results suggest that
the increased expression of cyclinD1 by CAGE involves
the direct binding of CAGE to the promoter sequences of
cyclinD1. Full-length mutant CAGEs, such as G-T-G-A-T
and G-T-G-K-A, did not confer resistance to anti-cancer
drugs in Malme3M cells (Supplementary Figure 4A).
Unlike wild type full-length CAGE and mutant CAGE
mutant (G-A-G-K-T), full-length mutant CAGEs, such as
G-T-G-A-T and G-T-G-K-A, increased caspase-3 activity
in response to taxol in Malme3M cells (Supplementary
Figure 4B). G-T-G-A-T and G-T-G-K-A mutants induced
cleavage of PARP in response to taxol in Malme3M cells
(Supplementary Figure 4C). Unlike wild type full-length
CAGE and mutant CAGE mutant (G-A-G-K-T), fulllength mutants G-T-G-A-T and G-T-G-K-A did not enhance
the migration or invasion potential of Malme3M cells
(Supplementary Figure 4D). Malme3M cells transfected
with wild type full-length CAGE or mutant CAGE
mutant (G-A-G-K-T) showed a higher growth potential
than Malme3M cells transfected with full-length mutant
G-T-G-A-T or G-T-G-K-A based on colony formation
assay (Supplementary Figure 4E). These results suggest
that CAGE domain encompassing amino acids 231-300
is necessary for binding to GSK3β and for the increased
expression of cyclinD1. These results provide the basis for
designing anti-cancer peptides corresponding to the DEAD
box helicase domain of CAGE.

CAGE domain encompassing amino acids 231300 is necessary for binding of CAGE to GSK3β
and for increasing the expression of cyclinD1
Because CAGE showed binding to GSK3β
(Supplementary Figure 2E), we wanted to determine the
domain of CAGE that is necessary for binding to GSK3β.
We hypothesized that this domain would be critical for
conferring resistance to anti-cancer drugs. For this, various
CAGE deletion constructs were made (Figure 1A). We
found that the CAGE domain corresponding to amino acids
231-300 was necessary for increasing the expression of
cyclinD1 and binding to GSK3β (Figure 1B). CAGE domain
corresponding to amino acids 231-300 was also necessary
for conferring resistance to taxol (Figure 1C). CAGE
domain (amino acids 231-300) contains ATP-binding site
(269GTGKT273), and database (TumorHOPe) search predicts
that GTGKT, SQAWP and RNGPG peptides display tumor
homing potential (Figure 1D). TumorHOPe database shows
that GTG-containing peptides, such as, CWGTGLC and
WGTGLC peptides, display homing potential to mouse
melanoma based on phage display. We hypothesized that
ATP-binding site of CAGE would be necessary for binding
to GSK3β and for increasing the expression of cyclinD1. We
introduced point mutation into ATP-binding site of CAGE to
examine the importance of ATP-binding site for increasing
the expression of cyclinD1 and the binding of CAGE to
GSK3β. Full-length wild type CAGE (G-T-G-K-T) and
mutant CAGE (G-A-G-K-T) increased the expression of
cyclinD1 and showed binding to GSK3β in Malme3M cells
(Figure 1E). However, full-length point mutant CAGEs,
such as G-T-G-A-T and G-T-G-K-A, did not increase the
expression of cyclinD1 or binding to GSK3β in Malme3M
cells (Figure 1E). This suggests the importance of ATPbinding site of CAGE (K272, T273) in the expression of
cyclinD1 and the binding of CAGE to GSK3β. We wanted
to examine the mechanism of the increased expression
of cyclinD1 by CAGE. CyclinD1 promoter contains
the binding sites for various transcriptional factors such
as HDAC2, SNAIL, AP1 and SP1 (Supplementary
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

GTGKT peptide decreases the expression of
cyclinD1, pGSK3βSer9 and inhibits the binding of
CAGE to GSK3β
GTGKT273 amino acids within the DEAD box
domain correspond to the ATP-binding site of CAGE
and are predicted to display tumor homing potential. We
therefore examined the potential of GTGKT peptide as
anti-cancer peptide in association with its potential effect
269

13634

Oncotarget

on the expression of cyclinD1 and the binding of CAGE to
GSK3β. FITC-labeled GTGKT peptide showed expression
in Malme3MR cells (Figure 2A). GTGKT and biotinGTGKT peptide decreased the expression of cyclinD1 and
pGSK3βSer9, but not the expression of CAGE (Figure 2B).
GTGKT and biotin-GTGKT peptide inhibited the binding
of CAGE to GSK3β in SNU387R and Malme3MR cells
(Figure 2B). GTGKT or biotin-labeled GTGKT peptide
did not change the expression of CAGE in Malme3MRTaxol
cell line, an anti-cancer drug-resistant cancer cell
line made resistant to taxol (Figure 2C). GTGKT and
biotin-labeled GTGKT peptide decreased the expression
of cyclinD1 and pGSK3βSer9, and inhibited the binding of
CAGE to GSK3β in Malme3MR-Taxol cell line (Figure 2C).
Biotin-labeled GTGKT peptide showed binding to CAGE,
but not to GSK3β in Malme3MR-Taxol cells (Figure 2C) and
Malme3MR cells (data shown). GTGKT, but not SQAWP

or RNGPG peptide, decreased the expression of cyclinD1
in Malme3MR cells (Figure 2D). GTGKT, but not SQAWP
or RNGPG peptide within DEAD box domain of CAGE
(amino acids 231-300), inhibited the binding of CAGE
to GSK3β in Malme3MR cells (Figure 2D). We therefore
focused on GTGKT peptide throughout this study. These
results suggest that GTGKT peptide displays anti-cancer
activity by inhibiting the binding of CAGE to GSK3β in
anti-cancer drug-resistant cancer cells.

GTGKT peptide binding to CAGE is necessary
for conferring sensitivity to anti-cancer drugs
Because GTGKT peptide inhibited the binding
of CAGE to GSK3β (Figure 2B and 2C), we examined
the importance of GTGKT peptide binding to CAGE or
GSK3β. For this, full-length CAGE or each CAGE deletion

Figure 1: CAGE domain encompassing amino acids 231-300 is necessary for binding of CAGE to GSK3β and for
increasing the expression of cyclinD1. (A) Shows a series of CAGE deletion constructs. FL denotes full-length. (B) Malme3M cells
were transiently transfected with each CAGE construct (1 μg). At 48 h after transfection, cell lysates were subjected to Western blot analysis
(left panel). Cell lysates were immunoprecipitated with the indicated antibody (2 μg/ml), followed by Western blot analysis (right panel).
A representative of at least two reproducible results is shown. (C) Malme3M cells were transiently transfected with each CAGE construct
(1 μg). At 24 h after transfection, cells were treated with various concentrations of taxol for 24 h, followed by MTT assays. The
mean ± S.E. of three independent experiments is shown. *p < 0.05; #p < 0.05. *; comparison was made between Malme3M cells transfected
with CAGEKH-1 deletion construct and the same cells transfected with CAGE Full. #; comparison was made between Malme3M cells
transfected with the indicated construct and the same cells transfected with pFLAG. (D) Shows putative binding sites within the DEAD box
domain of CAGE. The bold underlined peptides denote peptides with potential tumor homing activity. (E) Malme3M cells were transiently
transfected with the indicated construct (1 μg). At 48 h after transfection, cell lysates were subjected to immunoprecipitation and Western
blot analysis. A representative of at least two reproducible results is shown.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13635

Oncotarget

construct was transfected into Malme3M Cells. Cells were
then treated with GTGKT peptide. GTGKT peptide showed
binding to full-length CAGE (Supplementary Figure 5A).
However, GTGKT peptide did not show binding to any
other CAGE deletion constructs (Supplementary Figure 5A).
This suggests that the binding domain of GTGKT resides in
helicase domain of CAGE (amino acids 441-631). GTGKT
peptide did not show binding to GSK3β (Supplementary
Figure 5A). We next examined whether GTGKT binding
to CAGE would be necessary for enhancing the response to
anti-cancer drugs. GTGKT peptide conferred sensitivity to
taxol in Malme3M cells transfected with full-length CAGE
(Supplementary Figure 5B). CAGE deletion constructs, such
as pFLAG-CAGE∆HELIc, pFLAG-CAGE∆DEADc-1 and pFLAGCAGE∆DEADc-2, conferred resistance to taxol in Malme3M
cells (Supplementary Figure 5B). GTGKT peptide did not
enhance caspase-3 activity in Malme3M cells transfected
with pFLAG-CAGE∆HELIc, pFLAG-CAGE∆DEADc-1 or

pFLAG-CAGE∆DEADc-2 construct in response to celastrol or
taxol (Supplementary Figure 5C). GTGKT peptide did not
induce cleavage of PARP in Malme3M cells transfected
with pFLAG-CAGE∆HELIc, pFLAG-CAGE∆DEADc-1 or pFLAGCAGE∆DEADc-2 construct in response to taxol (Supplementary
Figure 5D). Because GTGKT peptide showed binding to
CAGE (Supplementary Figure 5A), we examined whether
GTGKT peptide showed a co-localization with CAGE.
CAGE and FITC-GTGKT peptide showed localization in the
nucleus and cytoplasm in Malme3MR cells (Supplementary
Figure 6). CAGE showed mostly cytoplasmic localization
in Malme3MR cells treated with FITC-GTGKT peptide
(Supplementary Figure 6). CAGE showed co-localization
with GTGKT peptide in the cytoplasm in Malme3MR
cells (Supplementary Figure 6). This implies that GTGKT
peptide prevents nuclear localization of CAGE. These
results suggest that GTGKT peptide binding to CAGE is
necessary for conferring sensitivity to anti-cancer drugs.

Figure 2: GTGKT peptide decreases the expression of cyclinD1, pGSK3βSer9 and inhibits the binding of CAGE to
GSK3β. (A) Malme3MR cells were treated with FITC-labeled GTGKT peptide (5, 10 μM) or unlabeled GTGKT peptide (10 μM). At

48 h after treatment, the expression of GTGKT peptide was determined. (B) Malme3MR or SNU387R cells were treated with the indicated
peptide (10 μM). At 48 h after treatment, cell lysates were subjected to Western blot analysis Cell lysates prepared were subjected to
immunoprecipitation, followed by Western blot analysis (lower panel). A representative of at least two reproducible results is shown.
(C) Malme3MR-taxol cells were treated with the indicated peptide (10 μM). At 48 h after treatment, cell lysates prepared were subjected to
Western blot analysis. Cell lysates prepared were subjected to immunoprecipitation, followed by Western blot analysis (lower panel). A
representative of at least two reproducible results is shown. (D) The indicated cancer cells were treated with the indicated peptide (10 μM).
At 48 h after treatment, cell lysates prepared were subjected to immunoprecipitation and Western blot analysis. A representative of at least
two reproducible results is shown.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13636

Oncotarget

GTGKT peptide changes localization of CAGE
to inhibit the binding of CAGE to the promoter
sequences of cyclinD1

sense CAGE showed lower tumorigenic potential than
Malme3MR cells and showed higher sensitivity to taxol
than Malme3MR cells (Supplementary Figure 8A). The
xenograft of Malme3MR-As-CAGE cells showed lower
expression level of CAGE, cyclinD1 and pGSK3βSer9
while showing higher expression level of phosphocyclinD1Thr286 than the xenograft of Malme3MR-vector
cells (Supplementary Figure 8B). The in vivo downregulation of CAGE by CAGE siRNA also decreased
the tumorigenic potential of Malme3MR cells (data not
shown). We next examined the effect of GTGKT peptide
on the tumorigenic potential of anti-cancer drug-resistant
cancer cells. GTGKT peptide decreased the tumorigenic
potential of SNU387R and Malme3MR cells (Figure 4A).
Western blot of tumor tissue lysates show that GTGKT
peptide decreased the expression of cyclinD1, pGSK3βSer9
and MDR1 while increasing the expression of phosphocyclinD1Thr286 (Figure 4B). Immunoprecipitation of tumor
lysates showed that GTGKT peptide inhibited the binding
of CAGE to GSK3β (Figure 4B). Unlike GTGKT peptide,
GTGK peptide did not decrease the tumorigenic potential
of Malme3MR cells (Figure 4C), the expression of
cyclinD1, pGSK3βSer9 or the binding of CAGE to GSK3β
(Figure 4D). These results suggest that GTGKT peptide
decreases the tumorigenic potential of cancer cells by
decreasing the expression of cyclinD1, pGSK3βSer9 and
inhibiting the binding of CAGE to GSK3β.

Because GTGKT peptide inhibited the binding of
CAGE to GSK3β (Figure 2A) and also showed binding
to CAGE (Figure 2B), we examined whether GTGKT
peptide would inhibit the function of CAGE. CAGE
showed the binding to the promoter sequences of cyclinD1
(Supplementary Figure 3B). We hypothesized that GTGKT
peptide would inhibit the binding of CAGE to the promoter
sequences of cyclinD1. We hypothesized that SP1, through
binding to CAGE, might increase the expression of cyclinD1.
In Malme3MR cells, SP1 showed nuclear localization
while CAGE was present in both nucleus and cytoplasm
(Figure 3A). CAGE showed a co-localization with SP1
in Malme3MR cells (Figure 3A). Immunofluorescence
staining revealed that GTGKT peptide did not change the
expression of CAGE or SP1 in (Figure 3A). However,
GTGKT peptide changed the localization of CAGE into
cytoplasmic, which inhibited co-localization of CAGE with
SP1 (Figure 3A). Immunofluorescence staining revealed
that Malme3MR cells that stably express anti-sense CAGE
(Malme3MR-As-CAGE) did not express SP1 (Figure 3A). The
expression level of SP1 was higher in Malme3MR cells
(Figure 3B). GTGKT peptide did not change the expression
of CAGE in Malme3MR cells (Figure 3B). The fact that
GTGKT peptide changes the localization of CAGE and
decreases the expression of cyclinD1 without changing the
expression level of SP1 implies that GTGKT peptide exerts a
transcriptional regulation on the expression of cyclinD1. The
down-regulation of SP1 decreased the expression of CAGE
and cyclin D1 (Figure 3C). The down-regulation of SP1
enhanced the sensitivity to anti-cancer drugs (Supplementary
Figure 7A), the cleavage of FAK (Supplementary Figure
7B) and the caspase-3 activity (Supplementary Figure 7C)
in response to anti-cancer drugs in Malme3MR cells. The
down-regulation of SP1 decreased the invasion and migration
potential of Malme3MR cells (Supplementary Figure 7D).
Just like CAGE, SP1 showed the binding to the promoter
sequences of cyclinD1 in Malme3MR cells (Figure 3D),
suggesting the direct expression regulation of cyclinD1 by
SP1. GTGKT peptide, but not GTGK peptide, prevented
CAGE and HDAC2 from binding to the promoter sequences
of cyclinD1 in Malme3MR cells (Figure 3E). CAGE showed
the binding to SP1 (data not shown). GTGKT peptide, but not
GTGK peptide, inhibited the binding of CAGE to SP1 (data
not shown). These results suggest that GTGKT peptide may
cause structural changes to CAGE, which in turn inhibits the
binding of CAGE to the promoter sequences of cyclinD1.

GTGKT peptide decreases the metastatic
potential of anti-cancer drug-resistant cancer cells
GTGKT peptide, but not GTGRT peptide, decreased
the metastatic potential of Malme3MR cells (Figure 5A).
GTGKT peptide decreased the metastatic potential of
Malme3MR cells in a manner associated with its effect on
the binding of CAGE to GSK3β (Figure 5B). Western blot
analysis of tumor lysates showed that GTGKT peptide, but
not GTGRT peptide, decreased the expression of cyclinD1,
pGSK3βSer9 and MDR1 (Figure 5B). These results suggest
that GTGKT peptide decreases the metastatic potential of
Malme3MR cells by decreasing the expression of cyclinD1
and inhibiting the binding of CAGE to GSK3β.

Lys272 residue of 269GTGKT273 peptide is
necessary for conferring anti-cancer activity
We wanted to determine residues of GTGKT
peptide necessary for conferring sensitivity to anti-cancer
drugs. GTGK peptide did not change the expression of
cyclinD1, phospho-cyclinD1Thr286 or the binding of CAGE
to GSK3β (Figure 6A). This suggests that the length of
peptide corresponding to the DEAD box helicase domain
of CAGE is necessary for conferring anti-cancer activity.
GTGRT peptide did not change the expression level of
cyclinD1, phospho-cyclinD1Thr286 or the binding of CAGE
to GSK3β (Figure 6A). GTGKT and GTGKA peptides
decreased the expression of cyclinD1 while increasing

GTGKT peptide decreases the tumorigenic
potential of anti-cancer drug-resistant cancer cells
We first examined the effect of CAGE on the
tumorigenic potential and the in vivo response to
taxol. Malme3MR-As-CAGE cells that stably express antiwww.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13637

Oncotarget

the expression of phospho-cyclinD1Thr286 and inhibiting
the binding of CAGE to GSK3β (Figure 6A). GTGKA
peptide, but not GTGRT or GTGAT peptide, induced
cleavage of PARP and FAK in response to celastrol and
taxol in Malme3MR cells (Figure 6B). GTGKT peptide,
but not GTGRT or GTGAT peptide, decreased the
expression of cyclinD1, and pGSK3βSer9 while increasing
the expression of phospho-cyclinD1Thr286 and inhibited
the binding of CAGE to GSK3β (Figure 6C). GAGKT
peptide did not change the expression level of cyclinD1 in
Malme3MR cells (data not shown). These results suggest
that Lys272 residue of GTGKT peptide is necessary for
conferring anti-cancer activity.

TGTGKT273, 267QTGTGKT273 and 266AQTGTGKT273
peptides decreased the expression of cyclin D1 and
pGSK3βSer9 and inhibited the binding of CAGE to GSK3β
(Figure 7A). 266AQTGTGKT273 peptide prevented the
binding of CAGE to the promoter sequences of cyclinD1
based on ChIP assays (data not shown). D-GTGKT and
D-AQTGTGKT peptides inhibited the binding of CAGE to
GSK3β (Figure 7B). GTGKT, TGTGKT, QTGTGKT and
AQTGTGKT peptides, but not GTGRT peptide, increased
caspase-3 activity in response to celastrol and taxol in
Malme3MR cells (Figure 7C). TGTGKT, QTGTGKT and
AQTGTGKT peptides induced the cleavage of PARP
and FAK in response to celastrol and taxol (Figure 7D).
AQTGTGKT and FITC-labeled AQTGTGKT peptides
decreased the expression of cyclinD1 and pGSK3βSer9 in
Malme3MR cells (Figure 7E). FITC-labeled AQTGTGKT
peptide showed expression in Malme3MR cells (Figure 7F).
These results indicate that peptides within DEAD box domain
of CAGE enhance apoptotic effects of anti-cancer drugs by
268

TGTGKT, QTGTGKT and AQTGTGKT peptides
enhance apoptotic effects of anti-cancer drugs
We examined the anti-cancer activity of other peptides
corresponding to the DEAD box helicase domain of CAGE.

Figure 3: GTGKT peptide changes localization of CAGE to inhibit the binding of CAGE to the promoter sequences of
cyclinD1. (A) Immunofluorescence staining employing the indicated antibody was performed. Malme3MR-AS-CAGE cells denote Malme3MR

cells that stably express anti-sense CAGE. Malme3MR cells were treated with the indicated peptide (10 μM). At 48 h after treatment,
cells were then subjected to immunofluorescence staining. (B) Cell lysates from the indicated cancer cells were subjected to Western blot
analysis (upper panel). Malme3MR cells were treated with the indicated peptide (10 μM). At 48 h after treatment, cell lysates were subjected
to Western blot analysis (lower panel). Cell lysates isolated from Malme3M, Malme3MR or Malme3MR-AS-CAGE cells were subjected to
Western blot analysis (lower panel). (C) Malme3MR cells were transiently transfected with the indicated siRNA (each at 10 nM). At
48 h after transfection, cell lysates were subjected to Western blot analysis. (D) Cell lysates isolated from the indicated cancer cells were
subjected to ChIP assays. (E) Malme3MR cells were treated with the indicated peptide (10 μM). At 48 h after treatment, cell lysates prepared
were subjected to ChIP assays.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13638

Oncotarget

decreasing the expression of cyclinD1, pGSK3βSer9 and the
binding of CAGE to GSK3β.

angiogenic potential [8]. We examined the effect of
peptides corresponding to the DEAD box helicase domain
of CAGE on the angiogenic potential of anti-cancer drugresistant cancer cells. The conditioned medium obtained
from Malme3MR cells treated with GTGKT, D-GTGKT
or AQTGTGKT, but not treated with GTGK, inhibited
the angiogenic potential of Malme3MR cells based on
intravital microscopy (Figure 8C). The conditioned
medium of Malme3MR cells treated with GTGKT,
D-GTGKT or AQTGTGKT, when added to HUVECs,
inhibited endothelial cell tube formation (Figure 8C).
These results suggest that peptides corresponding to
the DEAD box helicase domain of CAGE decrease the
migration, invasion and angiogenic potential of cancer
cells by binding to CAGE.

Peptides corresponding to the DEAD box
helicase domain of CAGE decrease the
migration, invasion and angiogenic potential of
anti-cancer drug-resistant cancer cells
Various peptides corresponding to the DEAD box
helicase domain of CAGE, but not GTGRT peptide,
decreased the migration potential (Figure 8A) and the
invasion potential of Malme3MR cells (Figure 8B). GSK3β
decreases the angiogenesis by decreasing the expression of
HIF-1α via phosphorylation and recruitment of ubiquitin
ligase [25]. Recombinant CAGE protein displays

Figure 4: GTGKT peptide decreases the tumorigenic potential of anti-cancer drug-resistant cancer cells. (A) Malme3MR
(1 × 106) or SNU387R (1 × 106) cells were injected into the dorsal flanks of athymic nude mice. Following the establishment of sizeable
tumor, GTGKT peptide (10 μg/mouse or 50 μg/mouse) was injected into the tail vein. Each experimental group consisted of five mice.
Each value represents an average obtained from the five athymic nude mice of each group. Data are expressed as a mean ± S.D. Each figure
shows a representative image of the mice in each group at the time of sacrifice. Comparison was made between group of mice injected
with GTGKT peptide (10 μg/mouse or 50 μg/mouse) and group of mice injected with PBS. *p < 0.05. (B) Tumor lysates were subjected
to Western blot analysis (left panel). Tumor lysates were also immunoprecipitated with the indicated antibody (2 μg/ml), followed by
Western blot analysis (right panel). (C) Malme3MR (1 × 106) cells were injected into the dorsal flanks of athymic nude mice. Following the
establishment of sizeable tumor, GTGKT or GTGK peptide (each at 50 μg/mouse) was injected into the tail vein. Each experimental group
consisted of five mice. Comparison was made between group of mice injected with GTGKT peptide (50 μg/mouse) and group of mice
injected with GTGK peptide. **p < 0.005. (D) Tumor lysates were subjected to Western blot analysis (left panel). Tumor lysates were also
immunoprecipitated with the indicated antibody (2 μg/ml), followed by Western blot analysis (right panel).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13639

Oncotarget

AQTGTGKT peptide decreases the tumorigenic
and metastatic potential of anti-cancer drugresistant cancer cells

Peptides corresponding to the DEAD box
helicase domain of CAGE enhance sensitivity to
anti-cancer drugs in Malme3M cells transfected
with miR-200b inhibitor

Because AQTGTGKT peptide exerted an anti-cancer
activity in vitro, we examined the in vivo anti-cancer activity
of AQTGTGKT peptide. AQTGTGKT peptide decreased
the tumorigenic potential of Malme3MR cells (Figure 9A).
AQTGTGKT peptide enhanced the in vivo sensitivity
of Malme3MR cells to anti-cancer drugs (Figure 9A).
AQTGTGKT peptide decreased the expression of cyclinD1,
pGSK3βSer9 and MDR1 (Figure 9B). AQTGTGKT peptide
inhibited the binding of CAGE to GSK3β (Figure 9B).
AQTGTGKT peptide decreased the metastatic potential of
Malme3MR cells in a manner associated with the inhibition
of the binding of CAGE to GSK3β (Figure 9C). Western
blot analysis of tumor lysates showed that AQTGTGKT
peptide decreased the expression of cyclinD1, pGSK3βSer9
and MDR1 (Figure 9C). Therefore the in vivo anti-cancer
activity of AQTGTGKT peptide results from its effect on
the expression of and cyclinD1 and the binding of CAGE
to GSK3β.

miR-200b confers sensitivity to anti-cancer drugs
by decreasing the expression of CAGE [8]. Peptides
corresponding to the DEAD box helicase domain of
CAGE, but not GTGRT peptide, prevented miR-200b
inhibitor from conferring resistance to celastrol and taxol
(Figure 10A). miR-200b inhibitor increased the expression
of CAGE, cyclinD1 and induced the binding of CAGE to
GSK3β (Figure 10A). Malme3MR-miR-200b cells that stably
express miR-200b did not show the binding of CAGE to
GSK3β (Figure 10A). GTGKT, D-GTGKT, AQTGTGKT
and D-AQTGTGKT peptides, but not GTGRT peptide,
prevented miR-200b inhibitor from increasing the
expression of cyclinD1 in Malme3M cells (Figure 10B).
miR-200b inhibitor prevented cleavage of PARP and
FAK in response to celastrol and taxol in Malme3M
cells (Figure 10C). GTGKT and AQTGTGKT peptides,
but not GTGRT peptide, enhanced the caspse-3 activity,

Figure 5: GTGKT peptide decreases the metastatic potential of Malme3MR cells. (A) Each experimental group consists of

five athymic nude mice. Each figure shows a representative image of the mice in each experimental group. Malme3MR Cells (1 × 106) were
injected intravenously into the tail vein of 4-week-old athymic nude mice, and the extent of lung metastasis was evaluated. GTGRT peptide
or GTGKT peptide (each at 50 μg/mouse) was intravenously injected five times over a total of 4 weeks. (B) Lysates were subjected to
Western blot analysis (left panel). Tumor lysates were also immunoprecipitated with the indicated antibody (2 μg/ml), followed by Western
blot analysis (right panel).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13640

Oncotarget

in response to celastrol and taxol, in Malme3M cells
transfected with miR-200b inhibitor (Figure 10D). These
results confirm that GTGKT and AQTGTGKT peptides
confer sensitivity to anti-cancer drugs by inactivation of
CAGE.

for 6 and 12 hours before tumors and control organs were
excised. Strong and specific fluorescence was detected in
tumor xenografts (Malme3MR cells) after 12 hrs injection
with FITC-conjugated GTGKT peptide, while little
labeling was seen in control organs (Figure 11B). These
results show ex vivo tumor homing potential of GTGKT
peptide.

GTGKT peptide shows ex vivo tumor homing
potential

DISCUSSION

Because GTGKT peptide decreased the tumorigenic
potential (Figure 4A) and the metastatic potential
(Figure 5A) of Malme3MR cells, we examined whether
GTGKT peptide would display tumor homing potential.
BALB/C mice injected with unlabeled GTGKT peptide
or FITC-GTGKT peptide showed little fluorescence in
any organs examined (Figure 11A). To determine the
distribution of the FITC-conjugated GTGKT peptide
in tumor bearing animals and examine whether FITCconjugated GTGKT peptide localizes to tumor in vivo,
tumor xenografts (Malme3MR cells) were injected
intravenously with FITC-conjugated GTGKT peptide. The
peptide was then allowed to circulate in the blood stream

CyclinD1 promotes tumor growth and confers
resistance to cisplatin in pancreatic cancer cell lines [26].
The expression level of cyclinD1 is higher in anticancer drug-resistant Malme3MR and SNU387R cells
than in Malme3M and SUN387 cells, respectively
(Supplementary Figure 1A). The expression level of
phospho-cyclinD1Thr286 is lower in Malme3MR and
SNU387R cells than in Malme3M and SUN387 cells,
respectively (Supplementary Figure 1A). Based on the fact
that the expression level of CAGE is higher in Malme3MR
and SNU387R cells than in Malme3M and SUN387 cells,
these results suggest the role of cyclinD1 in anti-cancer

Figure 6: Lys272 residue of 269GTGKT273 peptide is necessary for anti-cancer activity. (A) Malme3MR or SNU387R cells were

treated with the indicated peptide (each at 10 μM). At 48 h after transfection, cell lysates were subjected to Western blot analysis. Cell
lysates were also immunoprecipitated with the indicated antibody (2 μg/ml), followed by Western blot analysis. (B) Malme3MR cells were
treated with the indicated peptide (each at 10 μM). At 24 h after treatment, cells were treated with celastrol (1 μM) or taxol (1 μM) for
24 h. Cell lysates were then subjected to Western blot analysis. (C) Malme3MR cells were treated with the indicated peptide (each at 10 μM).
At 48 h after treatment, cell lysates were subjected to Western blot analysis. Cell lysates were also immunoprecipitated with the indicated
antibody (2 μg/ml), followed by Western blot analysis.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13641

Oncotarget

drug-resistance conferred by CAGE. It would be necessary
to identify molecules functioning downstream of cyclinD1
for better understanding of anti-cancer drug-resistance
conferred by CAGE. It would be also interesting to further
identify miRNAs that decrease the expression of cyclinD1
and CAGE.
GSK3β accumulates in the nucleus and induces
phosphorylation, nuclear export and subsequent degradation
of cyclinD1 in the cytoplasm [27]. The phosphorylation of
cyclinD1 at threonine 286 by glycogen synthase kinase
3 (GSK3) is required for the ubiquitination and nuclear
export of cyclinD1 and its subsequent degradation in the
proteasome [27, 28]. We show the nuclear localization
of phospho-cyclinD1Thr286 in Malme3M cells, but not
in Malme3MR cells (Supplementary Figure 1B). This
suggests that the phosphorylation of cyclinD1 at Thr 286
in Malme3M cells may be responsible for the lack of
expression of cyclinD1 in Malme3M cells. We reported

that SIAH2, an ubiquitin ligase, binds to and decreases the
expression of HDAC3 in Malme3MR cells [29]. It would
be interesting to examine whether SIAH2 decreases the
expression of cyclinD1 in Malme3M cells.
miR-145, miR-133a and miR-133b decrease the
expression of the transcription factor SP1, knockdown
of which reduces the expression of cyclinD1 [30]. It is
therefore reasonable that these miRNAs decrease the
expression of CAGE. NGF induces the expression of
cyclinD1 via SP1 and NF-kB [31]. CAGE shows colocalization with SP1 (Figure 3A). SP1 shows the binding
to the promoter sequences of cyclin D1 (Figure 3D).
GTGKT peptide does not change the expression of CAGE.
However, GTGKT peptide inhibits nuclear localization of
CAGE and prevents CAGE from binding to the promoter
sequences of cyclinD1 (Figure 3E). The disruption
of HDAC2 suppresses the expression of cyclinD1,
CDK4 and CDK2 [32]. Promoter analysis of cyclinD1

Figure 7: TGTGKT, QTGTGKT and AQTGTGKT peptides enhance apoptotic effects of anti-cancer drugs.

(A) Malme3MR cells were treated with the indicated peptide (each at 10 μM). At 48 h after treatment, cell lysates were subjected to Western
blot analysis. Cell lysates were also immunoprecipitated with the indicated antibody (2 μg/ml), followed by Western blot analysis. A
representative of at least two reproducible results is shown. (B) Malme3MR cells were treated with the indicated peptide (each at 10 μM).
At 48 h after treatment, immunoprecipitation employing the indicated antibody (2 μg/ml) was performed. (C) Malme3MR cells were treated
with the indicated peptide (each at 10 μM). At 24 h after treatment, cells were then treated with celastrol (1 μM) or taxol (1 μM) for 24 h,
followed by caspase-3 activity assays. **p < 0.005. (D) Malme3MR cells were treated with TGTGKT, QTGTGKT or AQTGTGKT peptide
(each at 10 μM). At 24 h after treatment, cells were then treated with celastrol (1 μM) or taxol (1 μM) for 24 h, followed by caspase-3 activity
assays. (E) Malme3MR cells were treated with the indicated peptide (each at 10 μM). At 48 h after treatment, cell lysates were subjected to
Western blot analysis. (F) FITC-labeled AQTGTGKT peptide (10 μM) or AQTGTGKT peptide (10 μM) was added to Malme3MR cells. At
48 h after transfection, the expression of FITC-labeled AQTGTGKT peptide was determined.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13642

Oncotarget

shows the binding site for HDAC2 (Supplementary
Figure 3A). GTGKT peptide prevents HDAC2 from
binding to the promoter sequences of cyclinD1
(Figure 3E). It is therefore probable that CAGE, through
binding to HDAC2, may regulate the expression of
cyclinD1.
miR-200b suppresses cell migration by inhibiting
PKCα-Wnt 5 positive feedback loop [33]. Thus, CAGE
may regulate PKCα-Wnt 5 positive feedback loop. It
will be interesting to examine the effect of CAGE-miR200b feedback loop on PKCα. In this study, we found an
activation of PKCα in SNU387R cells and an activation
of PKCδ in Malme3MR cells (personal observations).
It would be interesting to examine the effect of PKCα
and PKCδ on GSK3β activity and the expression and
phosphorylation of cyclinD1. It would be also interesting
to examine the effect of CAGE-derived peptides on PKC
activity.
EGFR (epidermal growth factor receptor)
activation leads to the up-regulation of PI3K/Akt
signaling and cyclinD1 [34]. EGFR activation increases

the phosphorylation of β-catenin and the expression
of pGSK3βSer9, resulting in a loss of β-catenin [35].
Malme3MR cells show higher expression of pEGFRY845
than Malme3M cells (personal observations). It is
probable that CAGE activates EGFR signaling, which in
turn increases the expression of pGSK3βSer9 and cyclinD1.
CAGE confers resistance to various EGFR inhibitors
(personal observations). This implies that EGFR signaling
is involved in anti-cancer drug-resistance conferred by
CAGE. It would be necessary to examine the effect of
peptides corresponding to the DEAD box helicase domain
of CAGE on EGFR signaling in Malme3MR cells. It
will also be interesting to examine the possibility of the
binding of CAGE to EGFR.
SBPs (self-binding peptides) are short peptides
within monomeric proteins and bind to target domains to
perform biological functions. SBPs are generally found in
disordered or unstructured regions of monomeric proteins.
Many of those protein-protein interactions are regulated by
short peptides such as SBPs [36, 37]. Peptide drugs disrupt
protein-protein interfaces to regulate biological processes

Figure 8: Peptides corresponding to the DEAD box helicase domain of CAGE decrease the migration, invasion and
angiogenic potential of anti-cancer drug-resistant cancer cells. (A) A scratch was made on the cell layer with a micropipette tip

and cultures were washed twice with serum-free medium. Cells were then treated with peptide of interest (each at 10 μM). Wound migration
assays were performed as described. **p < 0.005. N.S. denotes not significant. (B) Malme3MR cells were treated with the indicated peptide
(each at 10 μM). At 48 h after treatment, transwell invasion assays were performed as described. **p < 0.005. (C) Conditioned medium
(C.M.) obtained from the Malme3MR cells treated with the indicated peptide (each at 10 μM) was added to HUVECs. Eight hours after
the addition of conditioned medium, intravital microscopy was performed as described (upper panel). The conditioned medium was also
subjected to endothelial cell tube formation assays (lower panel). *p < 0.05; ***p < 0.0005.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13643

Oncotarget

[38)]. 100RRNQYWV106 of c-Src serves as SBP and binds
to PDZ5 domain of c-Src [39]. Given the fact that GTGKT
peptide binds to CAGE, it is probable that GTGKT
peptide can be considered as self-binding peptide (SBP).
Given the fact that CAGE binds to GSK3β (Figure 1B), it
is therefore reasonable that GTGKT peptide inhibits the
binding of CAGE to GSK3β. GTGKT peptide binds to
c-terminal domain of CAGE (Supplementary Figure 5A).
It would be necessary to identify critical amino acids of
CAGE that are necessary for binding to GTGKT peptide.
Anti-tumor peptides inhibit oncogenesis by binding
to and inhibiting oncogenes with aberrant expression in
cancer cells. For example, WT1 (Wilms tumor protein
1)-derived peptide binds to p53 and inhibits the binding
of WT1 to p53 and enhances cellular senescence and

decreases the metastatic potential of human melanoma
cells [40]. Anti-tumor peptides induce apoptosis, block
signaling mediators and receptors, and inhibit angiogenesis
and the metastasis [41, 42]. GTGKT peptide displays
tumor homing potential (Figure 11). PHSCNK peptide,
a novel tumor homing peptide, acts as an antagonist of
integrin α5β1 and suppresses melanoma [43]. CREKA
peptide binds to fibrin and displays tumor homing potential
[44]. It would be necessary to further identify receptor(s) of
GTGKT peptide for better understanding of the mechanism
of anti-cancer drug-resistance conferred by CAGE.
In this study, we show that peptides corresponding
to the DEAD box helicase domain of CAGE can be
developed as anti-cancer drugs for the treatment of cancer
patients expressing CAGE.

Figure 9: AQTGTGKT peptide decreases the tumorigenic and metastatic potential of anti-cancer drug-resistant
cancer cells. (A) Malme3MR (1 × 106) cells were injected into the dorsal flanks of athymic nude mice. Following the establishment of

sizeable tumor, peptide (50 μg/mouse) was injected into the tail vein along with celastrol (1 mg /kg) or taxol (1 mg/kg) six times in a total
of 35 days. Each experimental group consisted of five mice. Each value represents an average obtained from the five athymic nude mice of
each group. Data are expressed as a mean ± S .D. Each figure shows a representative image of the mice in each group at the time of sacrifice.
Statistically significant differences with PBS group are marked as *p < 0.05 and **p < 0.005, respectively. (B) Lysates from the indicated
tumor tissues were subjected to Western blot analysis (left panel). Lysates were also immunoprecipitated with the indicated antibody
(2 μg/ml), followed by Western blot analysis (right panel). (C) Each experimental group consists of five athymic nude mice. Each figure
shows a representative image of the mice in each experimental group. AQTGTGKT peptide (50 μg/mouse) was intravenously injected five
times over a total of 4 weeks. Tumor lysate from each mouse of the experimental group was immunoprecipitated with the indicated antibody
(2 μg/ml), followed by Western blot analysis.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13644

Oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Oligonucleotides used in this study were commercially
synthesized by Bioneer Company (Daejon, Korea).

Chemicals and reagents

Cell lines and cell culture

Chemicals used in this study were purchased
from Sigma Chemical Company. Anti- mouse and antirabbit IgG-horse radish peroxidase conjugate antibody
were purchased from Pierce Company (Rockford, IL).
All other antibodies used in this study were purchased
from Santa Cruz Company. Lipofectamine and PlusTM
reagent for transfection were purchased from Invitrogen
(San Diego, CA). Peptides used in this study were
commercially synthesized by Peptron Company (Daejon,
Koea). SiRNA kit was purchased from Ambion Company.

Cancer cell lines used in this study were cultured
in Dulbecco’s modified minimal essential medium
(Invitrogen) supplemented with heat-inactivated 10%
fetal bovine serum (Invitrogen) and antibiotics at 37°C
in a humidified incubator with a mixture of 95% air and
5% CO2. Anti-cancer drug-resistant cancer cell lines
(SNU387R and Malme3MR) were established as described
[6]. Malme3MR and SNU387R cell lines were established
by stepwise addition of celastrol. Cells surviving drug

Figure 10: Peptides corresponding to the DEAD box helicase domain of CAGE enhance sensitivity to anti-cancer
drugs in Malme3M cells transfected with miR-200b inhibitor. (A) Malme3M cells were transiently transfected with control
inhibitor or miR-200b inhibitor (each at 50 nM). At 24 h after transfection, cells were treated with various concentrations of celastrol or
taxol for 24 h along with the indicated peptide (10 μM), followed by MTT assays (left panel). Statistically significant differences with
mock control are marked as *p < 0.05, **p < 0.005 and n.s., not significant, respectively. Malme3M cells were transiently transfected
with the indicated inhibitor (50 nM). At 48 h after transfection, cell lysates were subjected to Western blot analysis (middle panel). Cell
lysates from Malme3M cells transfected with the indicated inhibitor (each at 50 nM) were immunoprecipitated with the indicated antibody
(2 μg/ml), followed by Western blot analysis (right panel). Cell lysates from Malme3MR or Malme3MR-miR-200b were also immunoprecipitated
with the indicated antibody (2 μg/ml), followed by Western blot analysis (right panel). (B) Malme3M cells were transiently transfected with
the indicated inhibitor (each at 50 nM). At 24 h after transfection, cells were treated with the indicated peptide (10 μM) for 24 h, followed
by Western blot analysis. (C) Malme3M cells were transiently transfected with control inhibitor or miR-200b inhibitor (each at 50 nM). At
24 h after transfection, cells were then transfected with celastrol (1 μM) or taxol (1 μM) along with each peptide (each at 10 μM) for 24 h,
followed by Western blot analysis. (D) Same as C except that caspase-3 activity assays were performed. **p < 0.005.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13645

Oncotarget

Preparation of siRNA duplexes and transfection

treatment (attached fraction) were obtained and used
throughout this study. Malme3MR-taxol and SNU387R-Taxol
cell lines were established by stepwise addition of taxol.
Human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) were
isolated from human umbilical cord veins by collagenase
treatment and used in passages 3–6. The cells were grown
in M199 medium supplemented with 20% fetal bovine
serum, 100 units/ml penicillin G, 100 μg/ml streptomycin,
3 ng/ml bFGF (Upstate Biotechnology, Waltham, MA),
and 5 units/ml heparin at 37 °C under 5% CO2, 95% air.

The siRNA duplexes were constructed with
the following target sequences: CAGE, sense
(5′-AACTCTGTCAACCTAAGAAGCCCTGTCTC-3′),
and antisense (5′-AAGCTTCTTAGGTTGACAGAGCCT
GTCTC-3ʹ); CyclinD1, sense (5′-AACAGGTTCCACTT
GAGCTTGCCTGTCTC 3′), and antisense (5′-AACAA
GCTCAAGTGGAACCTGCCTGTCTC -3′); Scrambled
CAGE, sense (5′-AA TTAATGATCGCCCAGAACC
CCTGTCTC- 3′), and anti-sense (5′- AA GGTTCTGGG
CGATCATTAA CCTGTCTC-3′); SP1, sense (5′-AAGAC
TCAATTCTGCTGCAAGCCTGTCTC- 3′ ), and antisense
(5ʹ- AACTTGCAGCAGAATTGAGTCCCTGTCTC3ʹ );
scrambled SP1, sense ((5′-AAAGTAAGGCCTACGAT
TCCTCCTGTCTC- 3′ ), and anti-sense (5′-AAGCGTAC
TATCGGCAATTGACCTGTCTC- 3′); Control, sense
(5′-AATTCTCCGAACGTGTCACGTCCTGTCTC-3′),
and antisense (5′-AAACGTGACACGTTCGGAGAAC
CTGTCTC-3′). Control siRNA sequences were derived
from green fluorescent protein sequences. The construction
of siRNAs was performed according to the instruction
manual provided by the manufacturer (Ambion, Austin,
TX). Transfections were performed according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. Lipofectamine and Plus
reagents (Invitrogen) were used. The construction of
siRNA was carried out according to the instruction

Mice
All animal experiments were approved by
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC)
of Kangwon National University (KIACUC-14-0007).

Peptides
CAGE-derived peptides were synthesized by Peptron
Company, with the sequences GTGK, AQTGTGKT,
QTGTGKT, TGTGKT, GTGKT, GTGRT, GTGKA, GTGAT,
D-GTGKT, D-AQTGTGKT, SQWAP, RNGPG and a
purity level > 95%. The FITC-conjugated GTGKT, FITCconjugated AQTGTGKT, and Biotin-GTGKT peptide were
purified by high performance liquid chromatography and their
sequence and structure were confirmed by mass spectrometry.

Figure 11: GTGKT peptide shows ex vivo tumor homing potential. Tumor-bearing nude mice (xenograft of Malme3MR cells)

were given intravenous injection of 50 μg FITC-conjugated GTGKT peptide 4 weeks after Malme3MR transplantation. Experimental and
control mice were anesthetized and sacrificed 6 and 12 hrs later and the abdominal wall was opened and tumor and normal organs analyzed
by confocal microscopy. The representative distribution of FITC-conjugated GTGKT peptide at 12 hrs after injection in dissected tumor and
normal organs including kidney, liver, spleen, and lung is shown. Note the strong fluorescence accumulation in the tumor when compared
to the control organs.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13646

Oncotarget

Colony formation

manual provided by the manufacturer (Ambion,
Austin, TX). For miR-200b knockdown, cells were
transfected with 50 nM of oligonucleotide (inhibitor)
with Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen), according to
the manufacturer’s protocol. The sequences used were
5′-UCAUCAUUACCCAGUAUUA-3′ (miR-200b inhibitor)
and
5′-GCAUAUAUCUAUUCCACUA-3′
(control
inhibitor).

Cells were cultured at low density under treatment,
and then colonies were stained with 0.01% crystal violet
and counted.

Caspase-3 activity assays

Various CAGE deletion constructs were made
by PCR amplification and cloning into Flag-tagged
pcDNA3.1 vector. The full-length CAGE point mutant
constructs were made by site-directed mutagenesis kit
(Stratagene).

Caspase-3 activity was measured according to the
manufacturer’s instructions (BioVision, Palo Alto, CA).
Cells were lysed in 0.1 M HEPES buffer, pH 7.4, containing
2 mM dithiothreitol, 0.1% CHAPS, and 1% sucrose. Cell
lysates were incubated with a colorimetric substrate,
200 μM Ac-DEVD-p-nitroanilide, for 30 min at 30°C. The
fluorescence was measured at 405 nm using a microtiter
plate reader.

Immunoprecipitation

Wound migration

Cells (1 × 107) were lysed in immunoprecipitation
buffer (50 mmol/liter HEPES, pH 7.6, 150 mmol/liter
NaCl, 5 mmol/liter EDTA, 0.1% Nonidet P-40). After
centrifugation (10 min at 15,000 × g) to remove particulate
material, the supernatant was incubated with each antibody
(2 µg/ml) with constant agitation at 4°C. The immune
complexes were precipitated with protein A/G-Sepharose
(Sigma) and analyzed by Western blot. To examine the
effect of GTGKT peptide on the binding of CAGE to
GSK3β, biotin-GTGKT peptide (Peptron, Daejeon,
Korea) was transfected with Lipofectamin and PlusTM
reagent (Invitrogen, San Diego, CA). After incubation for
48 h, whole-cell extracts were incubated with anti-biotin
antibody (2 μg/ml) for 12 h at 4°C and immune complexes
were precipitated with streptavidin-linked agarose beads for
30 min at 4°C. After five washes with lysis buffer, the bound
proteins were eluted by boiling in 2X Laemli SDS loading
buffer and were then subjected to SDS-PAGE followed by
Western blotting analysis with anti-CAGE antibody.

Cells were plated overnight to achieve a confluent
layer in 24-well plates. A scratch was made on the cell
layer with a micropipette tip and cultures were washed
twice with serum-free medium. Cells were then transfected
with peptide of interest. Wound healing was visualized by
comparing photographs taken at the time of transfection
and 48 h later. 

CAGE constructs

Chemo invasion assays
The invasive potential was determined by using a
transwell chamber system with 8-μm pore polycarbonate
filter inserts (CoSTAR, Acton, MA). The lower and
upper sides of the filter were coated with gelatin and
Matrigel, respectively. Trypsinized cells (5 × 103) in the
serum-free RPMI 1640 medium containing 0.1% bovine
serum albumin were added to each upper chamber of the
transwell. RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 10%
fetal bovine serum was placed in the lower chamber and
cells were incubated at 37°C for 16 h. The cells were fixed
with methanol and the invaded cells were stained and
counted. Results were analyzed for statistical significance
using the Student’s t test. Differences were considered
significant when p < 0.05.

Western blot analysis
Western blot analysis was performed according
to the standard procedures [8]. For analysis of proteins
from tumor tissues, frozen samples were grounded to a
fine powder using a mortar and pestle over liquid nitrogen.
Proteins were solubilized in RIPA buffer containing
protease inhibitors and insoluble material removed by
centrifugation.

Immunofluorescence staining
Cells were seeded on 10-mm coverslips at a
density of 2 × 105 cells/35-mm plate. Twenty-four hours
after plating, cells were washed and fixed with 4%
paraformaldehyde for 15 min at room temperature, and
rinsed with cold PBS (pH 7.4). After blocking with goat
serum (10%) in 0.1 % BSA/ PBS, primary antibodies to
CAGE (Santa Cruz, 1:100), GSK3β (Santa Cruz, 1:100),
pGSK3βSer9 (Santa Cruz, 1:100), SP1 (Santa Cruz, 1:100),
and phospho-cyclinD1Thr286 (Cell signaling Technology,
1:200) were added and cells were incubated at 4°C for

Cell viability determination
The cells were assayed for their growth activity using
the 3-(4, 5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2, 5-diphenyltetrazolium
bromide (MTT; Sigma). Viable cell number counting was
carried out by trypan blue exclusion assays. At least two
separate experiments were performed in triplicate.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13647

Oncotarget

24 hour. After washing with PBS, slides were incubated
with anti-rabbit Alexa Fluor 488 (for pcyclin DThr286),
anti-mouse Alexa Fluor 488 (for CAGE), or anti-goat
Alexa Fluor 568 (pGSK3βSer9, GSK3β, SP1) secondary
antibodies for 1.5 hours at RT. After removal of antibodies,
cells were washed with PBS and stained with DAPI and
mounted with mounting medium. Fluorescence staining
was visualized using confocal microscopy.

wall. Growth factor-reduced matrigel containing the
conditioned medium was applied to the space between
the windows, and a circular glass cover slip was placed
on top and fixed with a snap ring. After four days, the
animals were anesthetized and injected intravenously
with 50 μl of 25 ng/ml fluorescein isothiocyanate-labeled
dextran (molecular weight, Mr ~2,000,000) via the tail
vein. The mice were then placed on a Zeiss Axiovert
200 M microscope. The epi-illumination microscopy
setup included a 100-W mercury lamp and filter set for
blue light. Fluorescence images were recorded at random
locations of each window using an electron-multiplying
charge coupled device camera (Photo Max 512, Princeton
Instruments, USA) and digitalized for subsequent analysis
using the Metamorph program (Universal Imaging,
USA). The assay was scored from 0 (negative) to 5 (most
positive) in a double-blinded manner.

Internalization experiments
We used confocal microscopy to evaluate whether
the FITC-conjugated-GTGKT and FITC-AQTGTGKT
peptides were able to internalize. Briefly, Malme3MR
cells (3 × 105) cells were seeded in 35mm culture dishes.
After 24 hours of incubation, medium was replaced by
fresh medium and FITC-conjugated GTGKT peptide
(10 μM) or FITC-conjugated AQTGTGKT peptide
(10 μM) was added to the cells. The FITC- GTGKT or
FITC-AQTGTGKT peptide was incubated with the
tumor cells for various time intervals. The medium was
then removed and the cells were washed with 1 ml PBS
before being analyzed by confocal imaging on an inverted
microscope with a confocal laser scanning unit. Unlabeled
GTGKT peptide or AQTGTGKT peptide was employed as
negative control to determine auto fluorescence of tumor
cells. Processed serial sections were constructed into
three-dimensional images using VoxelView (Vital Images
Ltd., Fairfield, IA) on a Silicon Graphics Indy workstation
(Mountain View, CA).

Endothelial cell tube formation assays
Growth factor–reduced matrigel was pipetted into
pre-chilled 24-well plates (200 µl matrigel per well)
and polymerized for 30 min at 37°C. The HUVECs
were placed onto the layer of matrigel in 1 ml of M199
containing 1% FBS. After 6 to 8 h of incubation at 37°C
in a 95%:5% (v/v) mixture of air and CO2, the endothelial
cells were photographed using an inverted microscope
(magnification, X100; Olympus). Tube formation was
observed using an inverted phase contrast microscope.
Images were captured with a video graphic system. The
degree of tube formation was quantified by measuring the
length of tubes in five randomly chosen low-power fields
(×100) from each well using the Image-Pro plus v4.5
(Media Cybernetics, San Diego, CA, USA).

Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays (ChIP)
Assays were performed according to manufacturer’s
instruction (Upstate). For detection of the binding of
protein of interest to cyclinD1 promoter sequences,
specific primers of cyclinD1 promoter-1 sequences
[5′-CCCAACTGCACCCCCTCCCT -3′ (sense) and
5′-AGCCCCCTCACGCTCACGAA -3′ (antisense)],
cyclinD1 promoter-2 sequences [5′-  GACCGGGCACAC
AACCCCTG -3′ (sense) and 5′- CAGTTGGGGACCCC
CGCAAG -3′ (antisense)] and cyclinD1 promoter-3
sequences [5′- TTGCAGCTCGCCGTGCTCTC-3′ (sense)
and 5′-GTGCCAGGGGCACCCCAATG -3′ (antisense)]
were used.

In vivo tumorigenic potential
Athymic nude mice (BALB/c nu/nu, 5–6-weekold females) were obtained from Orient Bio Inc. (Seoul,
Korea) and were maintained in a laminar air-flow cabinet
under aseptic conditions. Cancer cells (1 × 106) of interest
were injected subcutaneously into the dorsal flank area
of the mice. Tumor volume was determined by direct
measurement with calipers and calculated by the following
formula: length × width × height × 0.5. To determine
the effect of peptides corresponding to the DEAD box
helicase domain of CAGE on the tumorigenic potential,
each peptide (10 μg/mouse, 50 μg/mouse, or 0.6 mg/kg,
3 mg/kg) was injected via tail vein five times in a total of
35 days or four times in a total of 35 days. To determine the
effect of CAGE on the tumorigenic potential and in vivo
anti-cancer drug-resistance, taxol (1 mg/kg) was injected,
following the establishment of sizable tumor by injection
of Malme3MR-As-CAGE cells (1 × 106) or Malme3MR-Vector
cells, via tail vein four times in a total of 30 days.

Intravital microscopy
Male BALB/c mice (6–8 week old) were obtained
from Daehan Biolink (Korea). In vivo angiogenesis was
assessed as follows. The mice were anesthetized with
2.5% avertin (v/v) via intraperitoneal injection (Surgivet,
USA), and abdominal wall windows were implanted.
Next, a titanium circular mount with eight holes on the
edge was inserted between the skin and the abdominal

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13648

Oncotarget

In vivo metastasis assay

a novel cancer/testis antigen gene CAGE. Biochem Biophys
Res Commun. 2002; 292:715–726.

Female athymic nude mice were used for the
studies. Malme3MR cells (1 × 106 cells in PBS) were
injected intravenously into the tail vein of 4-week-old
athymic nude mice, and the extent of lung metastasis was
evaluated. Peptide (50 μg/mouse) of interests was injected
intravenously into the tail vein of athymic nude mice five
times. Four weeks after injection of cancer cells, surface
metastatic nodules per lung were determined.

 2.	 Iwata T, Fujita T, Hirao N, Matsuzaki Y, Okada T,
Mochimaru H, Susumu N, Matsumoto E, Sugano K,
Yamashita N, Nozawa S, Kawakami Y. Frequent immune
responses to a cancer/testis antigen, CAGE, in patients with
microsatellite instability-positive endometrial cancer. Clin
Cancer Res. 2005; 11:3949–3957.
  3.	 Cho B, Lee H, Jeong S, Bang YJ, Lee HJ, Hwang KS,
Kim  HY, Lee YS, Kang GH, Jeoung DI. Promoter
hypomethylation of a novel cancer/testis antigen gene CAGE
is correlated with its aberrant expression and is seen in
premalignant stage of gastric carcinoma. Biochem Biophys
Res Commun. 2003; 307:52–63.

Ex vivo homing assays
Athymic nude mice (BALB/c nu/nu, 5–6-weekold females) were obtained from Orient Bio Inc.
(Seoul, Korea) and were maintained in a laminar airflow cabinet under aseptic conditions. Malme3MR cells
(1 × 106) were injected subcutaneously into the dorsal
flank area of the mice. Four-weeks after the injection
of Malme3MR cells, tumor bearing mice were given
intravenous injection of 50 μg FITC-GTGKT peptide.
FITC-GTGKT peptide was allowed to circulate for
6 and 12 hours. In some experiments mice were perfused
at the time of sacrifice with PBS through the left ventricle
to remove blood and unbound peptide. Tumors and control
organs were excised after the injection of the fluorescent
peptide and examined for fluorescence using a versatile
bio-imaging system (Davinch-In vivo Imaging System;
Davinch-K, Seoul, Korea). Images were acquired using
Davinch in vivo imaging system with excitation at 490 nm
and the emitted fluorescence was collected through a longpass filter (520 nm). Data were analyzed by Davinch In
vivo software (Davinch-K, Seoul, Korea).

  4.	 Shim H, Shim E, Lee H, Hahn J, Kang D, Lee YS, Jeoung D.
CAGE, a novel cancer/testis antigen gene, promotes
cell motility by activation ERK and p38 MAPK and
downmedoiat ROS. Mol Cells. 2006; 21:367–375.
  5.	 Por E, Byun HJ, Lee EJ, Lim JH, Jung SY, Park I, Kim YM,
Jeoung DI, Lee H. The cancer/testis antigen CAGE with
oncogenic potential stimulates cell proliferation by upregulating cyclins D1 and E in an AP-1- and E2F-dependent
manner. J Biol Chem .2010; 285:14475–14485.
  6.	 Kim Y, Park H, Park D, Lee YS, Choe J, Hahn JH, Lee H,
Kim YM, Jeoung D. Cancer/testis antigen CAGE exerts
negative regulation on p53 expression through HDAC2 and
confers resistance to anti-cancer drugs. J Biol Chem. 2010;
285:25957–25968.
  7.	 Yao CX, Wei QX, Zhang YY, Wang WP, Xue LX, Yang F,
Zhang SF, Xiong CJ, Li WY, Wei ZR, Zou Y, Zang MX.
miR-200b targets GATA-4 during cell growth and
differentiation. RNA Biol. 2013; 10:465–480.

Statistical analysis

  8.	 Kim Y, Park D, Kim H, Choi M, Lee H, Lee YS, Choe J,
Kim YM, Jeoung D. miR-200b and cancer/testis antigen
CAGE form a feedback loop to regulate the invasion and
tumorigenic and angiogenic responses of a cancer cell line
to microtubule-targeting drugs. J Biol Chem. 2013; 288:
36502–36518.

Statistical differences in this were determined
by using the Student’s t test. P ≤ 0.05 was considered
statistically significant.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING

  9.	 Kim SJ, Lim JY, Lee JN, Choe SK, Kim YI, Song SR,
Cho M, So HS, Park R. Activation of β-catenin by inhibitors
of glycogen synthase kinase-3 ameliorates cisplatin-induced
cytotoxicity and pro-inflammatory cytokine expression in
HEI-OC1 cells. Toxicology. 2014; 320:74–82.

This work was supported by National Research
Foundation Grants (2014R1A2A2A01002448, 2015R1A
1A3A04001339, 2015R1A2A1A15051678 and 2016R1
A6A3A01006416), a grant from the BK21 plus Program,
and grants from Kangwon National University (120150086
and 520160302).

10.	 Zhang M, Zhang J, Chen X, Cho SJ, Chen X. Glycogen
synthase kinase 3 promotes p53 mRNA translation via
phosphorylation of RNPC1. Genes Dev. 2013; 27:2246–2258.
11.	 Takahashi RU, Takeshita F, Honma K, Ono M, Kato K,
Ochiya T. Ribophorin II regulates breast tumor initiation
and metastasis through the functional suppression of
GSK3β. Sci Rep. 2013; 3:2474.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

REFERENCES

12.	 Wang S, Li Y, Hsu PH, Lee SY, Kim Y, Lee EY. Progesterone
receptor A stability is mediated by glycogen synthase kinase3β in the Brca1-deficient mammary gland. J Biol Chem.
2013; 288:26265–26274.

  1.	 Cho B, Lim Y, Lee DY, Park SY, Lee H, Kim WH, Yang H,
Bang YJ, Jeoung DI. Identification and characterization of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13649

Oncotarget

13.	 Lee KH, Yoo CG. Simultaneous inactivation of GSK-3β
suppresses quercetin-induced apoptosis by inhibiting the
JNK pathway. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2013;
304:782–789.

25.	 Flügel D, Görlach A, Kietzmann T. GSK-3β regulates cell
growth, migration, and angiogenesis via Fbw7 and USP28dependent degradation of HIF-1α. Blood. 2012; 119:
1292–1301.

14.	 Lang UE, Kocabayoglu P, Cheng GZ, Ghiassi-Nejad Z,
Muñoz U, Vetter D, Eckstein DA, Hannivoort RA,
Walsh MJ, Friedman SL. GSK3β phosphorylation of the
KLF6 tumor suppressor promotes its transactivation of p21.
Oncogene. 2013; 32:4557–4564.

26.	 Biliran H Jr, Wang Y, Banerjee S, Xu H, Heng H, Thakur A,
Bollig A, Sarkar FH, Liao JD. Overexpression of cyclin
D1 promotes tumor cell growth and confers resistance to
cisplatin-mediated apoptosis in an elastase-myc transgeneexpressing pancreatic tumor cell line. Clin Cancer Res.
2005; 11:6075–6086.

15.	 Thotala DK, Hallahan DE, Yazlovitskaya EM. Glycogen
synthase kinase 3β inhibitors protect hippocampal neurons
from radiation-induced apoptosis by regulating MDM2-p53
pathway. Cell Death Differ. 2012; 19:387–396.

27.	 Diehl JA, Cheng M. Roussel MF, Sherr CJ. Glycogen
synthetase kinase-3b regulates cyclin D1proteolysis and
subcellular localization. Genes Dev. 1998; 12:3499–3511.

16.	 Takahashi-Yanaga F, Yoshihara T, Jingushi K, Igawa  K,
Tomooka K, Watanabe Y, Morimoto S, Nakatsu Y,
Tsuzuki T, Nakabeppu Y, Sasaguri T. DIF-1 inhibits tumor
growth in vivo reducing phosphorylation of GSK-3β and
expressions of cyclin D1 and TCF7L2 in cancer model
mice. Biochem Pharmacol. 2014; 89:340–348.

28.	 Zou Y, Ewton DZ, Deng X, Mercer SE, Friedman E. Mirk/
dyrk1B Kinase Destabilizes Cyclin D1 by Phosphorylation
at Threonine 288. J Biol Chem. 2004; 279:27790–27798.

17.	 Koo J, Yue P, Gal AA, Khuri FR, Sun SY. Maintaining
glycogen synthase kinase-3 activity is critical for mTOR
kinase inhibitors to inhibit cancer cell growth. Cancer Res.
2014; 74:2555–2568.

30.	 Qiu T, Zhou X, Wang J, Du Y, Xu J, Huang Z, Zhu W,
Shu Y, Liu P. MiR-145, miR-133a and miR-133b inhibit
proliferation, migration, invasion and cell cycle progression
via targeting transcription factor Sp1 in gastric cancer.
FEBS Lett. 2014; 588:168–177.

29.	 Kim Y, Kim H, Park D, Jeoung D. miR-335 Targets SIAH2
and Confers Sensitivity to Anti-Cancer Drugs by Increasing
the Expression of HDAC3. Mol Cells. 2015; 38:562–572.

18.	 Xu G, Li Y, Yoshimoto K, Wu Q, Chen G, Iwata T,
Mizusawa N, Wan C, Nie X. 2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzop-dioxin stimulates proliferation of HAPI microglia by
affecting the Akt/GSK-3β/cyclin D1 signaling pathway.
Toxicol Lett. 2014; 224:362–370.

31.	 Marampon F, Casimiro MC, Fu M, Powell MJ, Popov VM,
Lindsay J, Zani BM, Ciccarelli C, Watanabe G, Lee  RJ,
Pestell RG. Nerve Growth factor regulation of cyclin D1 in
PC12 cells through a p21RAS extracellular signal-regulated
kinase pathway requires cooperative interactions between
Sp1 and nuclear factor-kappaB. Mol Biol Cell. 2008;
19:2566–2578.

19.	 Natarajan V, Komarov AP, Ippolito T, Bonneau K,
Chenchik AA, Gudkov AV. Peptides genetically selected
for NF-κB activation cooperate with oncogene Ras and
model carcinogenic role of inflammation. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA. 2014; 111:474–483.

32.	 Noh JH, Jung KH, Kim JK, Eun JW, Bae HJ, Xie HJ,
Chang YG, Kim MG, Park WS, Lee JY, Nam SW.
Aberrant regulaton of HDAC2 mediates proliferation of
hepatocellular carcinoma cells by deregulating expression
of G1/S cell cycle proteins. PLoS One. 2011; 6:e28103.

20.	 Gu G, Gao X, Hu Q, Kang T, Liu Z, Jiang M, Miao D,
Song Q, Yao L, Tu Y, Pang Z, Chen H, Jiang X, et al. The
influence of the penetrating peptide iRGD on the effect of
paclitaxel-loaded MT1-AF7p-conjugated nanoparticles on
glioma cells. Biomaterials. 2013; 34:5138–5148.

33.	 Wang Z, Humphries B, Xiao H, Jiang Y, Yang C.
MicroRNA-200b Suppresses Arsenic-transformed Cell
Migration by Targeting Protein Kinase Cα and Wnt5bProtein Kinase Cα Positive Feedback Loop and Inhibiting
Rac1 Activation. J Biol Chem. 2014; 289:18373–18386.

21.	 Gallagher PE, Arter AL, Deng G, Tallant EA. Angiotensin-(1–7):
a peptide hormone with anti-cancer activity. Curr Med Chem.
2014; 21:2417–2423.

34.	 Himaya SW, Dewapriya P, Kim SK. EGFR tyrosine kinase
inhibitory peptide attenuates Helicobacter pylori-mediated
hyper-proliferation in AGS enteric epithelial cells. Toxicol
Appl Pharmacol. 2013; 269:205–214.

22.	 Chang YW, Su CM, Su YH, Ho YS, Lai HH, Chen HA,
Kuo ML, Hung WC, Chen YW, Wu CH, Chen PS, Su JL.
Novel peptides suppress VEGFR-3 activity and antagonize
VEGFR-3-mediated oncogenic effects. Oncotarget. 2014;
5:3823–3835. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.1709.

35.	 Lee CH, Hung HW, Hung PH, Shieh YS. Epidermal growth
factor receptor regulates beta-catenin location, stability, and
transcriptional activity in oral cancer. Mol Cancer. 2010; 9:64.

23.	 Kim EH, Lee HJ, Lee DH, Bae S, Soh JW, Jeoung D, Kim J,
Cho CK, Lee YJ, Lee YS. Inhibition of heat shock protein
27-mediated resistance to DNA damaging agents by a novel
PKC delta-V5 heptapeptide. Cancer Res. 2007; 67:6333–6341.
24.	 Xu R, Povlsen GK, Soroka V, Bock E, Berezin V. A peptide
antagonist of the ErbB1 receptor inhibits receptor activation,
tumor cell growth and migration in vitro and xenograft
tumor growth in vivo. Cell Oncol. 2010; 32:259–274.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36.	 Petsalaki E, Stark A, García-Urdiales E, Russell RB.
Accurate Prediction of Peptide Binding Sites on Protein
Surfaces. PLoS Comput Biol. 2009; 5:e1000335.
37.	 Akiva E, Friedlander G, Itzhaki Z, Margalit HA. Dynamic
View of Domain-Motif Interactions. PLoS Comput Biol.
2012; 8:e1002341.
13650

Oncotarget

38.	 Verschueren E, Vanhee P, Rousseau F, Schymkowitz J,
Serrano L. Protein-Peptide Complex Prediction through
Fragment Interaction Patterns. Structure. 2013; 21:789−797.

42.	 Rosca EV, Koskimaki JE, Rivera CG, Pandey NB,
Tamiz AP, Popel AS. Anti-angiogenic peptides for cancer
therapeutics. Curr Pharm Biotechnol. 2011; 12:1101–1116.

39.	 Yang C, Zhang S, He P, Wang C, Huang J, Zhou P. Selfbinding peptides: folding or binding? J Chem Inf Model.
2015; 55:329–342.

43.	 Dai W, Yang T, Wang Y, Wang X, Wang J, Zhang X,
Zhang Q. Peptide PHSCNK as an integrin α5β1 antagonist
targets stealth liposomes to integrin-overexpressing
melanoma. Nanomedicine. 2012; 8:1152–1161.

40.	 Massaoka MH, Matsuo AL, Figueiredo CR, Girola N,
Faria CF, Azevedo RA, Travassos LR. A novel cellpenetrating peptide derived from WT1 enhances p53
activity, induces cell senescence and displays antimelanoma
activity in xeno- and syngeneic systems. FEBS Open Bio.
2014; 4:153–161.

44.	 Chung EJ, Cheng Y, Morshed R, Nord K, Han Y,
Wegscheid ML, Auffinger B, Wainwright DA, Lesniak MS,
Tirrell MV. Fibrin-binding, peptide amphiphile micelles for
targeting glioblastoma. Biomaterials. 2014; 35:1249–1256.

41.	 Koskimaki JE, Lee E, Chen W, Rivera CG, Rosca EV,
Pandey NB, Popel AS. Synergy between a collagen IV
mimetic peptide and a somatotropin-domain derived
peptide as angiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis inhibitors.
Angiogenesis. 2013; 16:159–170.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13651

Oncotarget

