NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 October 19.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Published in final edited form as:
Cancer Cell. 2010 October 19; 18(4): 382–395. doi:10.1016/j.ccr.2010.08.010.

Pharmacologic Inhibition of the Anaphase-Promoting Complex
Induces A Spindle Checkpoint-Dependent Mitotic Arrest in the
Absence of Spindle Damage
Xing Zeng1, Frederic Sigoillot1, Shantanu Gaur1, Sungwoon Choi3, Kathleen L. Pfaff1,
Dong-Chan Oh2,4, Nathaniel Hathaway1, Nevena Dimova1, Gregory D. Cuny3, and Randall
W. King1,*
1Department of Cell Biology, 240 Longwood Ave, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
2Department

of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, 240 Longwood Ave, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA
3Laboratory

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

for Drug Discovery in Neurodegeneration, Brigham & Women's Hospital and Harvard
Medical School, 65 Landsdowne St, Cambridge, MA
4Natural

Products Research Institute, College of Pharmacy, 599 Gwanak-ro, Gwanak-gu, Seoul
151-742, Republic of Korea

Summary
Microtubule inhibitors are important cancer drugs that induce mitotic arrest by activating the
spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC), which in turn inhibits the ubiquitin ligase activity of the
Anaphase-Promoting Complex (APC). Here we report a small molecule, Tosyl-L-Arginine Methyl
Ester (TAME), which binds to the APC and prevents its activation by Cdc20 and Cdh1. A prodrug
of TAME arrests cells in metaphase without perturbing the spindle, but nonetheless the arrest is
dependent on the SAC. Metaphase arrest induced by a proteasome inhibitor is also SACdependent, suggesting that APC-dependent proteolysis is required to inactivate the SAC. We
propose that mutual antagonism between the APC and the SAC yields a positive feedback loop
that amplifies the ability of TAME to induce mitotic arrest.

Introduction
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Microtubule inhibitors such as taxanes and the vinca alkaloids represent one of the most
important classes of cancer drugs, used in the treatment of breast, ovarian, and lung cancer
(Montero et al., 2005). However, the response of cells to microtubule inhibitors is highly
variable (Brito et al., 2008; Gascoigne and Taylor, 2008; Orth et al., 2008; Shi et al., 2008),
potentially compromising clinical efficacy. How these drugs cause cell death remains
unclear, but induction of mitotic arrest appears to be a key aspect of the mechanism (Bekier
et al., 2009; Huang et al., 2009). By perturbing the mitotic spindle, these drugs activate the
Spindle Assembly Checkpoint (SAC), which delays mitotic exit by inhibiting the ubiquitin

© 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
*
Correspondence: randy_king@hms.harvard.edu.
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
The authors declare no financial conflict of interest.

Zeng et al.

Page 2

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

ligase activity of the Anaphase-Promoting Complex/Cyclosome (APC). In principle, a
compound that directly inhibits APC-dependent proteolysis should arrest cells in mitosis
without causing side effects that result from microtubule inhibition such as peripheral
neuropathy.
The APC is the most complex ubiquitin ligase known, consisting of more than 11 subunits.
The activator proteins Cdh1 and Cdc20 bind to the APC at different cell cycle stages to
stimulate APC-dependent ubiquitination of substrates and their subsequent destruction by
the 26S proteasome (Peters, 2006). The activators assist in recruitment of APC substrates
and may also stimulate ligase activity (Yu, 2007). Cdh1 binds to the APC during G1 to
promote degradation of APC substrates during interphase. In contrast, the initiation of
anaphase and exit from mitosis require Cdc20-dependent ubiquitination of APC substrates
such as securin and mitotic cyclins. Prior to anaphase, the ability of APC-Cdc20 to
ubiquitinate certain substrates is inhibited by the SAC (Musacchio and Salmon, 2007).
Unattached kinetochores catalyze the formation of an inhibitory protein complex, containing
the proteins Mad2, BubR1 and Bub3, that sequesters Cdc20 or interferes with its ability to
activate the APC. Attachment of kinetochores to the mitotic spindle diminishes their ability
to generate an inhibitory signal. Subsequently, the SAC-inhibited APC-Cdc20 complex is
activated, by a mechanism that remains incompletely understood.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Because the APC regulates multiple cell cycle events, it is not clear whether
pharmacological inhibition of its activity will lead to selective or prolonged arrest in mitosis
as is the case with microtubule inhibitors. Proteasome inhibitors can block APC-dependent
proteolysis without perturbing the mitotic spindle (Famulski and Chan, 2007), but they also
inhibit the degradation of many other substrates of the ubiquitin-proteasome system, and
therefore also cause cell cycle arrest during interphase (Wojcik et al., 1996). It may be
difficult to achieve mitotic arrest by pharmacologic APC inhibition, as RNAi approaches
indicate that Cdc20 expression must be severely reduced to induce mitotic arrest (Huang et
al., 2009; Wolthuis et al., 2008). Even when the SAC is maximally activated by complete
microtubule depolymerization, some cells escape mitotic arrest due to residual APC activity
(Brito and Rieder, 2006), suggesting that the SAC cannot fully inhibit the APC during
mitosis. For this reason, microtubule inhibitors may suffer from limited effectiveness
because some cells escape mitotic arrest before dying (Bekier et al., 2009; Huang et al.,
2009). Whether an APC inhibitor can better extinguish APC activity and induce a more
persistent mitotic arrest is therefore an important question in contemplating development of
APC inhibitors as a therapeutic strategy for cancer.

Results
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

TAME Inhibits APC Activation by Perturbing Activator Protein Binding
We identified TAME (Figure 1A) in an earlier study (Verma et al., 2004) as an inhibitor of
cyclin proteolysis in mitotic Xenopus egg extract (IC50 of 12 µM; Figure S1A), but its
mechanism of action has remained unknown. TAME also inhibited cyclin degradation in
interphase extract activated by exogenous Cdh1, but had no effect on SCF-dependent
proteolysis of β-catenin-luciferase (Verma et al., 2004), indicating that it is not a general
inhibitor of the ubiquitin-proteasome system. Testing of TAME derivatives indicated that
the tosyl group, arginine, and the methyl ester are each important for activity (Figures S1B
and S1C). Acetyl-L-Arginine Methyl Ester (AAME; Figure 1A) showed only low activity,
and was therefore used as a negative control in subsequent experiments. When added to
interphase extract treated with recombinant cyclin B1/Cdc2 complex, TAME, but not
AAME, arrested the extract in mitosis, with stable cyclin B1 and phosphorylated Cdc27
(Figure 1B). Another APC substrate, cyclin A2, was also stabilized by TAME in Xenopus
extract (data not shown). TAME had no effect on the ability of Xenopus extract to degrade
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 October 19.

Zeng et al.

Page 3

cyclin B1 that had been preubiquitinated in vitro (Figure S1D), indicating that TAME does
not inhibit the proteasome or its ability to recognize ubiquitinated substrates.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Because the SAC is not active in Xenopus extracts (Minshull et al., 1994), we reasoned that
TAME might inhibit cyclin proteolysis by perturbing the APC. Indeed, when TAME was
added to mitotic Xenopus extract during APC isolation, the APC showed a dramatic loss of
activity in a reconstituted ubiquitination reaction (Figure 1C). Consistent with this finding,
TAME addition to extract reduced Cdc20 association with the APC in a dose-dependent
manner (Figure 1D), but did not otherwise affect APC composition (Figure S1E). TAME
also inhibited the binding of Cdh1 to APC when Cdh1 and TAME were added together to
interphase extract (Figure 1E). The reduction in Cdh1 binding was accompanied by a
reduction in APC activation (Figure 1F). These findings suggested that TAME might block
APC activation by perturbing the interaction between APC and its activator proteins Cdc20
or Cdh1.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

To understand how TAME disrupts the interaction between the activator proteins and the
APC, we first tested whether TAME binds to the APC. We added 3H-TAME to interphase
Xenopus extract, or to extract immunodepleted of APC, and then isolated residual APC with
Cdc27 antibodies and measured the amount of radioactivity associated with the beads. We
found that binding of 3H-TAME correlated with the amount of immunoprecipitated Cdc27
(Figure 2A). Unlabeled TAME competitively inhibited the binding of 3H-TAME, whereas
AAME did not (Figure 2B). Other TAME derivatives competed with 3H-TAME for APC
binding in a manner that correlated with their ability to inhibit cyclin-luciferase proteolysis
in Xenopus extract (Figure S2A). A similar approach demonstrated that TAME binds to
human APC isolated from HeLa cells (Figure 2C). Together these findings indicate that
TAME binds to the APC, potentially explaining its ability to perturb activator protein
association.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

To understand how TAME disrupts activator binding to the APC, we determined whether
TAME could inhibit the interaction between APC and motifs of the activator proteins that
have been implicated in APC binding, including the C-box (Schwab et al., 2001) and the Cterminal isoleucine-arginine (IR) tail (Figure 2D)(Burton et al., 2005; Vodermaier et al.,
2003). Because TAME structurally resembles the IR tail of Cdc20 and Cdh1 (Figure 2D),
we hypothesized that TAME might bind to the APC in the same site normally occupied by
the IR tail. Previous work has demonstrated that a C-terminal 20 amino acid peptide derived
from Cdh1 (“IR peptide”) is sufficient to isolate Xenopus APC from interphase extract
(Vodermaier et al., 2003). We confirmed this finding and found that TAME, but not AAME,
was sufficient to block APC recruitment by the IR peptide (Figure 2E). In contrast, TAME
had no effect on recruitment of APC from mitotic extract by an N-terminal fragment of
Cdc20 containing only the C-box interaction motif (Figure 2F), indicating that TAME
specifically inhibits the IR-tail-dependent interaction.
The APC subunits Cdc27 and APC7 have been implicated in binding of the IR tail of Cdh1
to the APC (Matyskiela and Morgan, 2009; Vodermaier et al., 2003). To determine whether
TAME could competitively inhibit the binding of the IR-tail to these proteins, we
conjugated the IR peptide to a photo-affinity reagent and performed crosslinking studies
with APC immunopurified from interphase Xenopus extract. Four proteins known to exist in
an APC subcomplex, namely Cdc27, Cdc16, Cdc23 and Apc7, were crosslinked in an IRdependent manner that could be competed by excess unlabeled IR peptide (Figure S2B and
S2C). At low concentration (20 µM), TAME efficiently inhibited crosslinking of the IR
peptide to Cdc27 and Cdc16 but only slightly reduced crosslinking to Cdc23 and Apc7
(Figure 2G). At high concentration (200 µM), TAME strongly inhibited crosslinking to all
APC subunits (Figure 2G). Together these findings support the hypothesis that TAME binds

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 October 19.

Zeng et al.

Page 4

to APC subunits that recruit the IR tail, thereby preventing activator proteins from
associating with the APC.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

To confirm that TAME specifically antagonizes IR-tail dependent interactions between
Cdc20 and the APC, we tested the ability of TAME to inhibit the binding of Cdc20 to the
APC in a reconstituted system. APC was purified from mitotic Xenopus extracts and washed
with high salt to remove most Cdc20. Purified mitotic APC was then incubated in
reticulocyte lysate expressing wild-type or mutant Cdc20, and Cdc20 binding to APC was
measured by co-immunoprecipitation. We found that efficient binding of Cdc20 to the APC
under these conditions indeed requires the IR-tail, as a mutant lacking these two residues
(Cdc20ΔIR) did not bind as efficiently to the APC (Figure 3). TAME also strongly reduced
Cdc20 binding to the APC under these conditions (Figure 3). Importantly, addition of
TAME had no further effect on binding of the Cdc20ΔIR mutant, confirming that TAME
does not perturb other interactions between Cdc20 and the APC.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

We found that TAME addition or IR-tail deletion was not sufficient to fully inhibit Cdc20
association under these conditions. We suspected that other interactions, such as C-boxdependent binding, might promote Cdc20 association with the APC, thereby masking the
effect of TAME addition or IR-tail deletion. Consistent with this hypothesis, we found that
addition of a C-box-containing N-terminal fragment of Cdc20 could competitively inhibit
binding of full-length Cdc20 to the APC (Figure 3). In the presence of the C-box fragment,
addition of TAME or deletion of the IR-tail was sufficient to completely suppress Cdc20
association with the APC. These results indicate that both C-box-dependent and IR-taildependent interactions are important for Cdc20 binding in these conditions, and that TAME
specifically disrupts the IR-dependent interaction. We conclude that the target of TAME is
the APC, and that it inhibits APC activation by interfering specifically with IR-tail
dependent interactions between Cdc20 or Cdh1 and the APC.
A TAME Prodrug Inhibits APC-Cdh1 Activation in Cells
Having established the mechanism by which TAME inhibits APC activation in Xenopus
extract, we next wanted to determine whether TAME inhibits APC activation in human
cells. Because TAME is not cell permeable, we synthesized a TAME prodrug (proTAME),
and its control compound proAAME, by modifying the guanidino group to produce an
N,N’-bis(acyloxymethyl carbamate) derivative (Figure 4A). Such prodrugs can be processed
by intracellular esterases to yield the parent compound. In Xenopus extract, proTAME was
indeed rapidly converted to TAME (Figure S3A), which efficiently inhibited cyclin Bluciferase proteolysis (Figure 4B). ProTAME was also activated efficiently in HeLa cells,
but not in MCF10A cells (Figure S3B).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

We first examined whether proTAME could inhibit association of Cdh1 with the APC in
cells. We released HeLa cells expressing H2B-GFP from a nocodazole block and added 12
µM proTAME after cells had entered G1, when the APC is activated by Cdh1. We found
that addition of proTAME inhibited Cdh1 association with the APC (Figure 4C) but
proAAME did not. However, proTAME was not sufficient to cause premature accumulation
of endogenous APC substrates in G1 or S phase (Figure S3C). During S phase, when APC
substrates are known to be expressed, the effect of proTAME may be masked by Emi1dependent inhibition of APC-Cdh1 (Hsu et al., 2002). To test this idea, we depleted cells of
Emi1, which leads to degradation of APC substrates and prevents mitotic entry (Hsu et al.,
2002). We confirmed that Emi1 depletion prevents mitotic entry, and found that addition of
12 µM proTAME substantially rescued the mitotic entry defect caused by depletion of Emi1
(Figure 4D). Therefore, we conclude that proTAME is capable of inhibiting APC-Cdh1
function in cells.

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 October 19.

Zeng et al.

Page 5

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Previous studies have shown that knockdown of Cdh1 induces prolonged S-phase and
mitotic entry delay in human cells (Engelbert et al., 2008; Sigl et al., 2009). Consistent with
these findings, proTAME caused a 2 h delay in mitotic entry when added during release
from a double thymidine block (Figure 4E). However, adding proTAME 6 h or later after
release did not delay mitotic entry (Figure 4E), suggesting the delay may be a consequence
of inhibiting APC-Cdh1 in S-phase. These findings indicate that although proTAME can
inhibit APC-Cdh1 activation, it has only modest effects on cell cycle progression during
interphase.
ProTAME Induces Mitotic Arrest in the Absence of Spindle Damage

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

To examine effects of proTAME treatment on mitosis, we released HeLa H2B-GFP cells
from a double thymidine block and added proTAME 8 h after release, a time when
proTAME addition does not delay mitotic entry (Figure 4E). Mitotic duration was then
measured by time-lapse imaging. Cells treated with low doses of proTAME (780 nM or 3
µM) remained in metaphase for as long as five hours, but then proceeded through a normal
anaphase, whereas cells treated with 12 µM proTAME arrested in metaphase and
subsequently died (Figure 5A). In contrast, treatment of cells with 12 µM proAAME had no
effect. ProTAME greatly increased mitotic duration in asynchronous hTERT-RPE1 cells as
well, as 6 µM proTAME increased median mitotic duration to over 8 h, compared to 24 min
in proAAME-treated cells (Figure S4A). ProTAME had no effect at similar doses in
MCF10a cells (data not shown), because the prodrug was not efficiently activated (Figure
S3B).
If proTAME blocks mitotic progression by disrupting the APC-Cdc20 interaction, then
reducing Cdc20 expression should enhance the mitotic exit delay induced by proTAME
treatment. In control-transfected cells, 4 µM proTAME increased mitotic duration from 1.0
h to 4.8 h (Figure 5B). However, when Cdc20 levels were reduced by 50% using siRNAmediated knockdown (Figure S4B), proTAME prolonged mitotic duration to 19.4 h (Figure
5B). This effect was synergistic, because Cdc20 knockdown by itself only increased mitotic
duration to 1.6 h. These results show that reducing the expression of Cdc20 strongly
sensitizes cells to the effect of proTAME, consistent with the APC-Cdc20 interaction as the
relevant target of the compound.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

We next investigated the effect of proTAME treatment on degradation of APC substrates.
Because the SAC does not stabilize all APC substrates during mitosis, some substrates such
as cyclin A2, Cdc20, and Nek2A are degraded in cells treated with microtubule inhibitors
(den Elzen and Pines, 2001; Hayes et al., 2006; Nilsson et al., 2008). In contrast, substrates
such as cyclin B1 and securin are stabilized by SAC activation. If proTAME directly inhibits
APC activation, we predicted it would stabilize all APC substrates during mitosis, not just
those whose stability depends on the SAC. Consistent with this hypothesis, cells treated with
proTAME accumulated cyclin A2, Cdc20 and Nek2A in addition to cyclin B1 and securin
(Figure 5C). These results were confirmed in live cell imaging experiments, where
proTAME stabilized cyclinA2-GFP but the microtubule depolymerizer nocodazole did not
(Figure 5D). Interestingly, proTAME treatment caused greater accumulation of cyclin B1GFP than nocodazole treatment, consistent with proTAME’s ability to directly inhibit APC
activation.
We next assessed the effects of proTAME treatment on mitotic spindle morphology and
chromosome congression, and compared this to the effects of treatment of cells with
microtubule inhibitors. Compared to DMSO-treated cells, treatment of asynchronous HeLa
cells with 12 µM proTAME for 2 h yielded no measurable differences in mitotic spindle
morphology or inter-kinetochore distance, indicating that proTAME did not perturb
establishment of proper kinetochore tension (Figure 5E). In contrast, treatment of cells with
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 October 19.

Zeng et al.

Page 6

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

nocodazole or taxol for 2 h strongly perturbed spindle organization (Figure 5E). In live cell
imaging experiments, treatment of cells with 3 µM proTAME or 10 µM MG132 caused no
delay in chromosome congression (Figure S4C). Treatment of cells with 10 nM nocodazole
or 12 µM proTAME caused a similar mild congression delay of 6 min (Figure S4C), but
these treatments produced contrasting effects on the metaphase plate. In cells treated with 10
nM nocodazole, the metaphase plate appeared loose and was prone to bending (Movies S1–
3), whereas in cells treated with 12 µM proTAME the metaphase plate appeared tight and
did not bend (Movie S4). Importantly, 10 nM nocodazole prolonged mitosis by only 20 min
(data not shown), whereas 12 µM proTAME induced a mitotic arrest of over 28 h (Figure
5A). Thus, the mild delay in congression is not sufficient to explain the ability of proTAME
to arrest cells in mitosis. We conclude that proTAME induces arrest in metaphase without
perturbing the morphology or function of the mitotic spindle.
ProTAME-induced Mitotic Arrest is SAC-Dependent

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Because TAME directly inhibits the APC, and causes arrest in metaphase with kinetochores
that develop tension, we predicted that the proTAME-induced mitotic arrest in human cells
would be independent of the SAC. We were therefore surprised to find that the SAC is in
fact essential for the prolonged mitotic arrest of cells treated with proTAME. In doublethymidine synchronized cells, Mad2 knockdown greatly shortened the duration of
proTAME-induced arrest, from 24.6 h to 1.4 h (Figures 6A and S5A). As expected, Mad2
knockdown abrogated nocodazole-induced arrest, shortening the average mitotic duration
from 30 h to 0.6 h. The Mad2-dependence of the proTAME-induced arrest was confirmed
by measurement of APC substrate levels in synchronized cells (Figure S5B).
These experiments also revealed the ability of proTAME to delay mitotic exit independent
of Mad2, as expected based on TAME’s ability to directly inhibit APC activation. In Mad2
knockdown cells, proTAME treatment increased median mitotic duration from 12 min to 84
min (Figures 6A and S5A). Strikingly, this mitotic exit delay was sufficient to give Mad2
knockdown cells enough time to build a normal metaphase plate before initiating anaphase,
rescuing the chromosome segregation defect caused by Mad2 knockdown (Figures 6B and
S5C, Movies S5 and S6). The ability of proTAME to restore normal mitotic division in cells
depleted of Mad2 demonstrates that proTAME is unlikely to perturb microtubules or
interfere with kinetochore function. The fact that 12 µM proTAME delays mitotic exit by
only 72 minutes in the absence of the SAC indicates that this dose of proTAME does not
fully inhibit APC activation. The ability of this dose of proTAME to cause mitotic arrest in
SAC-proficient cells must therefore arise from significant amplification of APC inhibition
by the SAC.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Whereas TAME reduced Cdc20 binding to the APC when added to Xenopus extracts,
proTAME treatment did not decrease Cdc20 binding to the APC during mitotic arrest in
HeLa cells (data not shown). We suspected that persistent Cdc20 association might result
from the ability of the SAC to promote IR-tail independent binding of Cdc20 to the APC.
We therefore examined the effect of depleting SAC proteins on the ability of proTAME to
disrupt the APC-Cdc20 interaction. Indeed, when we arrested HeLa cells in mitosis by
expression of nondegradable cyclin B, proTAME induced significant dissociation of Cdc20
from the APC, but only if SAC proteins were depleted by RNAi (Figure S5D). These results
show that a proTAME-induced mitotic arrest occurs without substantial dissociation of
Cdc20 from the APC, as a consequence of persistent activity of the SAC.
To further understand the SAC-dependence of the proTAME arrest, we pharmacologically
inactivated SAC signaling by treating cells with hesperadin (Hauf et al., 2003), an inhibitor
of Aurora B kinase. This kinase phosphorylates proteins at kinetochores that are not under
tension, leading to destabilization of microtubule-kinetochore interactions and activation of
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 October 19.

Zeng et al.

Page 7

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

the SAC (Biggins and Murray, 2001; Cheeseman et al., 2006; DeLuca et al., 2006). Recent
work using phosphospecific antibodies that recognize Aurora B substrates indicates that
kinetochore proteins remain phosphorylated at a basal rate during metaphase (Welburn et
al., 2010). We hypothesized that this basal rate of Aurora B-dependent phosphorylation may
produce a persistent SAC signal during metaphase that contributes to the proTAME-induced
arrest. Three observations are consistent with this hypothesis. First, hesperadin treatment
dramatically shortened proTAME-induced mitotic arrest (Figure 6C), and led to dissociation
of Mad2 and BubR1 from the APC in proTAME-arrested cells (Figure S5E). As expected,
hesperadin also substantially shortened taxol-induced mitotic arrest, with a less pronounced
effect on nocodazole-induced arrest (Figure 6C). Second, hesperadin treatment caused
deformation of the metaphase plate in proTAME-arrested cells (Figure S5F), suggesting that
Aurora B-dependent phosphorylation is required to maintain proper kinetochoremicrotubule attachments in metaphase. Third, knockdown of the APC component Cdc27 or
the APC-specific E2 UbcH10 caused a mitotic exit delay that could be completely
suppressed by hesperadin treatment (Figure 6D). Together, these experiments are consistent
with the idea that the SAC remains active at a basal rate during metaphase, despite the
presence of properly attached chromosomes, and that kinetochore-dependent SAC signaling
is important for the prolonged mitotic arrest induced by APC inhibition.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

One possible explanation for the SAC-dependence of the proTAME arrest is that proTAME
stabilizes APC substrates such as Nek2A or cyclin A that are normally degraded in early
mitosis. For example, overexpression of cyclin A has been reported to delay chromosome
congression (den Elzen and Pines, 2001). To test whether stabilization of these substrates is
important for the proTAME-induced arrest, we released HeLa cells from double thymidine
block into nocodazole for 15 h to allow degradation of cyclin A and other APC substrates
that are not efficiently stabilized by the SAC. We then washed cells out of nocodazole into
proTAME. Under this condition, proTAME remained capable of inducing a prolonged
mitotic arrest that was highly hesperadin-sensitive (Figure S5G). This result indicates that
the SAC-dependence of proTAME-induced mitotic arrest is unlikely to be caused by
stabilization of APC substrates that are normally degraded in a SAC-independent fashion.
Metaphase Arrest Induced by a Proteasome Inhibitor is SAC-Dependent

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Previous work has shown that APC-dependent ubiquitination promotes SAC inactivation in
cell lysates (Reddy et al., 2007). In this system, APC-dependent ubiquitination of Cdc20, but
not APC-dependent proteolysis, was suggested to be important for release of Cdc20 from
SAC proteins (Reddy et al., 2007). However, a recent study found that proteasome activity
is required for dissociation of the Mad2-Cdc20 complex in cells (Visconti et al., 2010).
Together with our findings, these studies suggested that APC-dependent proteolysis could
be important for SAC inactivation. A prediction of this model is that mitotic arrest induced
by treatment with a low dose of proteasome inhibitor should be SAC-dependent. To test this
idea, we treated cells with a dose of MG132 (3 µM) that was just sufficient to arrest cells in
mitosis (median duration of 15 h). At this concentration, the duration of arrest was limited
by cell death rather than mitotic exit, as only 10% of cells exited mitosis over 30h (Figure
7A). In MG132-treated cells depleted of Mad2 by RNAi, we observed that 50% of the cells
exited mitosis (Figure 7A), indicating that the SAC is indeed required for efficient induction
of mitotic arrest by proteasome inhibition.
Like proTAME-treated cells, MG132-treated cells arrest in metaphase with kinetochores
that develop normal tension (Famulski and Chan, 2007). If metaphase chromosomes are
indeed competent to generate a checkpoint signal, we predicted that the MG132-induced
arrest should be hesperadin-sensitive. To test this idea, ten hours following thymidine
release, HeLa H2B-GFP cells were treated with 3 µM MG132 in the presence or absence of
hesperadin. Strikingly, hesperadin induced rapid mitotic exit in half of the cells, with the
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 October 19.

Zeng et al.

Page 8

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

remainder exiting mitosis more slowly (Figure 7B). These distinct behaviors correlated with
the timing of drug administration: cells that encountered drug while in mitosis exited mitosis
quickly, whereas cells that encountered drug before mitosis exited slowly (Figure S6A).
Hesperadin treatment induced dephosphorylation of Cdc27 and reduced levels of Mad2 and
BubR1 bound to the APC compared to cells treated with MG132 alone (Figure S6B). Coaddition of proTAME to MG132 abrogated the ability of hesperadin to drive mitotic exit
(Figure 7B), indicating that mitotic exit remains dependent on APC-dependent
ubiquitination. In contrast, co-addition of taxol to MG132 did not efficiently suppress
hesperadin-induced mitotic exit (Figure 7C), underscoring the distinct mechanisms
underlying taxol and proTAME-induced mitotic arrests. Similar results were obtained when
the proteasome was more fully inhibited by increasing the MG132 concentration to 10 µM
(Figure 7D), indicating that the SAC continues to be important for complete inhibition of
APC-dependent proteolysis even when the proteasome is more completely inhibited by
drug.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The hesperadin sensitivity of the MG132-induced arrest suggested that Aurora B activity
could be important for maintaining the metaphase plate, as we observed in proTAME treated
cells. We found that treatment of MG132-arrested cells with hesperadin induced
deformation of the metaphase plate within 30 min, whereas cells arrested with MG132 alone
maintained a normal-appearing metaphase plate for over 5 h (Figure S6C). These findings
provide further support for the idea that Aurora B-dependent pathways remain active in
metaphase. Together our findings indicate that mitotic arrest induced by a low concentration
of proteasome inhibitor is not a simple consequence of direct inhibition of the proteasome
by the drug, but also depends on continued inhibition of APC-dependent ubiquitination by
the SAC.
Protein Synthesis is Required for Mitotic Arrest Induced by Microtubule Inhibitors but not
for APC or Proteasome Inhibitors

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Our data support a model in which APC-dependent proteolysis is required to inactivate the
SAC. However, this model yields a paradox: How could the APC initiate SAC inactivation
if it is fully inhibited by the SAC? One possibility is that SAC inhibition of APC is never
complete, with residual APC remaining active to initiate SAC inactivation. Indeed, it has
been shown that cyclin B1 and securin are slowly degraded even in the presence of a fully
active SAC (Brito and Rieder, 2006; Nilsson et al., 2008). Prolonged arrest in mitosis might
therefore require the continued synthesis of APC substrates during mitosis. Consistent with
this hypothesis, we found that cycloheximide promoted mitotic exit of nocodazole- or taxolarrested cells (Figure 8A). In striking contrast, cycloheximide did not accelerate mitotic exit
in proTAME-treated cells, but rather extended mitotic arrest by delaying cell death (Figure
8A). Cycloheximide addition produced similar effects in MG132-treated cells, suppressing
cell death without promoting mitotic exit (Figure 8B). Consistent with these findings,
labeling experiments demonstrated that known APC substrates such as cyclin B1 and BubR1
are translated during mitotic arrest (Figure S7). Together these findings indicate that
ongoing mitotic protein synthesis is essential to maintain a SAC-dependent mitotic arrest,
perhaps by replenishing components that are degraded by residual APC-dependent
proteolysis.
We next wanted to understand why the MG132-induced arrest is resistant to cycloheximide.
We hypothesized that persistent SAC activity cooperates with direct pharmacologic
inhibition of the proteasome to slow the rate of APC-dependent proteolysis to such a great
extent that mitotic arrest no longer depends upon protein synthesis. If this hypothesis is
correct, then inactivating the SAC should make the MG132-induced arrest sensitive to
cycloheximide, as protein synthesis would now be required to balance the increased rate of
APC-dependent degradation. This was indeed the case, as depletion of Mad2 (Figure 8B) or
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 October 19.

Zeng et al.

Page 9

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

inactivation of the SAC with hesperadin (Figure 8C) led to mitotic exit in cells treated with
cycloheximide and 10 µM MG132. Addition of proTAME suppressed the effect of
hesperadin (Figure 8C), indicating that mitotic exit remains dependent on APC-mediated
ubiquitination. Together these results indicate that the ability of proTAME or MG132 to
induce mitotic arrest independent of protein synthesis requires persistent inhibition of the
APC by the SAC.

Discussion

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Here we identify the mechanism of action of a small molecule inhibitor of cyclin proteolysis
discovered in a phenotypic screen in Xenopus extract (Verma et al., 2004). TAME binds to
the APC and displaces the IR tail of Cdc20 or Cdh1, preventing efficient APC activation. In
human cells, proTAME treatment causes arrest in metaphase without perturbing the mitotic
spindle. Despite development of normal kinetochore tension that should silence the SAC,
the SAC is required for proTAME to induce mitotic arrest. Similar results were obtained
using a proteasome inhibitor. We propose that kinetochore-dependent SAC signaling
persists at a low rate in metaphase, and is inactivated by residual APC-dependent
proteolysis, creating a positive feedback loop between the APC and the SAC (Figure 8D).
The ability of low doses of proTAME or MG132 to induce metaphase arrest is strongly
enhanced by this feedback loop, enabling mitotic arrest to be achieved at drug
concentrations below those necessary to fully inhibit the APC or the proteasome.
TAME interferes with IR-tail dependent APC activation
Our findings indicate that TAME prevents APC activation by perturbing the binding of the
IR-tail of Cdc20 and Cdh1 to the APC. The importance of the IR motif in promoting Cdh1
association with yeast and human APC is well-established (Burton et al., 2005; Kraft et al.,
2005; Matyskiela and Morgan, 2009; Vodermaier et al., 2003). However, the role of the
Cdc20 IR motif is less clear, because the Cdc20 IR tail is not essential in budding yeast
(Thornton et al., 2006) and a Cdc20ΔIR mutant can support APC-dependent degradation of
Nek2A in Xenopus extract (Kimata et al., 2008). Our data show that the IR motif of Cdc20
indeed contributes significantly to APC-association in vitro, as Cdc20ΔIR binds the APC
with lower affinity than the wild type protein, and TAME competes with wild type Cdc20
for APC association. Moreover, TAME induces significant dissociation of Cdc20 from the
APC in Xenopus extract, and proTAME can antagonize Cdc20 binding in human cells if the
SAC is inactivated. Functionally, TAME stabilizes APC substrates in Xenopus extract and
proTAME inhibits both Cdc20 and Cdh1-dependent degradation in HeLa cells. Taken
together, these data show that proper engagement of the IR motif of Cdc20 or Cdh1 is
critical for APC activation.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

TAME Exploits A Positive Feedback Loop Between the SAC and the APC
We found that proTAME-induced mitotic arrest requires sustained SAC activity. This
finding was unexpected, because proTAME-treated cells arrest in metaphase with
kinetochores that develop normal tension, a condition that should inactivate the SAC. In
principle, the requirement for the SAC in the proTAME arrest could be explained in one of
two ways. First, proTAME treatment could produce defects in microtubule-kinetochore
interactions that generate an abnormally high degree of checkpoint signal compared to
normal metaphase kinetochores. Alternatively, proTAME may hamper SAC inactivation,
despite normal microtubule-kinetochore interactions. We favor the latter model because the
degree of checkpoint dependence far exceeds the degree of kinetochore-microtubule
perturbation that we observe.

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 October 19.

Zeng et al.

Page 10

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Defects in microtubule-kinetochore attachment could arise from an off-target effect of
TAME on microtubules, or be a consequence of specific APC inhibition. We found that
knockdown of Cdc27 or UbcH10 each produced a mitotic exit delay that was SACdependent. Furthermore, treatment of cells with a proteasome inhibitor yielded a SACdependent mitotic arrest, consistent with a recent study showing that MG132-treated mitotic
cells show persistent Mad2-Cdc20 interaction (Visconti et al., 2010), and work in S. pombe
showing that Mad2 and Mad3 remain APC-bound in proteasome mutants (Ohi et al., 2007).
Together these findings suggest that if defective microtubule-kinetochore interactions are
indeed present in proTAME-treated cells, they are likely to result from specific inhibition of
APC-dependent proteolysis rather than from nonspecific effects of proTAME on
microtubules.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

If defective microtubule-kinetochore interactions exist in proTAME-treated cells, they must
be subtle. Cells treated with 12 µM proTAME arrest in mitosis until they die, yet form a
normal-appearing metaphase plate and develop normal kinetochore tension. Furthermore,
cells treated with 12 µM proTAME undergo a normal-appearing anaphase when the SAC is
inactivated, indicating that the mitotic spindle functions properly in the presence of
proTAME. The only change in chromosome behavior caused by this dose of proTAME is a
slight delay in chromosome congression. A lower dose of proTAME (3 µM) causes no delay
in chromosome congression, yet still extends mitotic duration to 5 hours. Although we
cannot completely rule out subtle defects in microtubule-kinetochore interactions in
proTAME-treated cells, we believe such defects are not of sufficient magnitude to explain
the strong dependence of the proTAME arrest on the SAC.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The alternative explanation for the SAC-dependence of the proTAME arrest is that APCdependent ubiquitination or proteolysis is required to inactivate the SAC. Such mutual
antagonism between the APC and the SAC is predicted to create a positive feedback loop
that would amplify the inhibitory effects of proTAME or a proteasome inhibitor in a SACdependent manner. This is what we observed. If the SAC is inactivated by Mad2 depletion,
12 µM proTAME extends mitotic duration by only 72 minutes, indicating that this dose only
partially inhibits APC activation (consistent with the measured IC50 of 12 µM in Xenopus
extract). However, when the same dose of proTAME is used in cells with an intact SAC,
proTAME extends mitotic duration by 23 hours, indicating that the effect of proTAME is
greatly amplified by the SAC. This degree of amplification cannot be explained by the mild
effect of proTAME on chromosome congression, because a dose of nocodazole (10 nM) that
causes a similar delay in chromosome congression extends mitotic duration by only 20
minutes in SAC-proficient cells. Because we obtained similar results with a proteasome
inhibitor, we believe this amplification is best explained by a requirement for APCdependent proteolysis to inactivate the SAC.
It is unclear which APC substrates play the most important role in mediating the mutual
antagonism between the APC and the SAC. APC-dependent ubiquitination of Cdc20 has
been proposed to release the APC from the inhibitory effects of the SAC (Reddy et al.,
2007; Stegmeier et al., 2007). However, this process does not require proteasome activity in
cell lysates (Reddy et al., 2007), and others argue that Cdc20 ubiquitination targets Cdc20
for proteasomal degradation in a manner that sustains the SAC (Ge et al., 2009; Nilsson et
al., 2008). Alternatively, many SAC proteins are APC substrates, and may need to be
degraded to inactivate the SAC. Consistent with this possibility, expression of a stable
BubR1 mutant induces a mitotic arrest (Choi et al., 2009). Another candidate is cyclin B1,
because it is degraded prior to anaphase (Clute and Pines, 1999) and cyclin-dependent
kinase activity is required to maintain the SAC (Chung and Chen, 2003; D'Angiolella et al.,
2003). Other SAC proteins, including Mps1, Bub1, and Aurora B are also APC substrates,
but their bulk population is not degraded until after anaphase (Palframan et al., 2006; Qi and

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 October 19.

Zeng et al.

Page 11

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Yu, 2007; Stewart and Fang, 2005). It is possible that degradation of these proteins prior to
anaphase is masked by their resynthesis. The mutual antagonism between the APC and the
SAC may reflect a system-level behavior that is regulated by small changes in the
abundance of multiple SAC proteins prior to anaphase. If so, confirmation of our model will
require quantitative measurements of the relative rates of synthesis and degradation of APC
substrates that regulate SAC activity.
Our results indicate that it is possible to induce mitotic arrest without fully inhibiting the
APC or the proteasome pharmacologically. This result was unexpected, because RNAibased experiments indicated that Cdc20 must be reduced to very low levels to induce mitotic
arrest (Wolthuis et al., 2008). Unlike the proTAME-induced arrest, the mitotic arrest
induced by Cdc20 knockdown does not depend on the SAC (Huang et al., 2009). One
possible explanation for the lack of SAC-dependence in the context of Cdc20 depletion is
that Cdc20 is the target of the SAC (Yu, 2007). Therefore, when Cdc20 levels are reduced,
the SAC is no longer required to inhibit Cdc20 function. In contrast, other methods of
perturbing APC function, including knockdown of core APC subunits or the E2 enzyme
UbcH10, or proTAME treatment, all produce an arrest that is SAC-dependent. This is likely
a consequence of the fact that Cdc20 remains present under each of these conditions.
A Model for Regulation of Mitotic Exit

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Based on our findings, we propose the following model (Figure 8D). A positive feedback
loop between the SAC and the APC has the potential to adopt one of two stable states: high
SAC activity (mitotic arrest) or high APC activity (mitotic exit). During normal division, it
is important that cells do not become permanently arrested in mitosis. We propose that the
SAC does not fully inhibit the APC during mitosis because residual APC activity must be
preserved to prevent cells from becoming locked in mitosis. This residual APC activity may
explain why cyclin B1 is degraded prior to the initiation of anaphase (Clute and Pines, 1999)
and during prolonged SAC-dependent mitotic arrest (Brito and Rieder, 2006; Gascoigne and
Taylor, 2008; Huang et al., 2009; Nilsson et al., 2008). To remain in mitosis for a prolonged
period, a cell may need to continue to resynthesize APC substrates that are degraded by
residual APC-dependent proteolysis.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

During normal mitosis, the development of kinetochore tension reduces the rate of SAC
activation, but SAC activation is unlikely to be completely suppressed during metaphase.
Anaphase is triggered when the rate of SAC activation falls below the rate at which APCdependent proteolysis inactivates the SAC, tipping the feedback loop toward rapid APC
activation and mitotic exit. The timing of anaphase initiation therefore depends not only on
how kinetochore attachment controls SAC activation, but also on the level of residual APC
activity.
During nocodazole or taxol treatment, the rate of SAC activation remains above the rate at
which the APC inactivates the SAC, tipping the loop in the direction of APC inhibition
thereby preventing mitotic exit. Because APC-dependent proteolysis is not fully inhibited by
the SAC, mitotic arrest is dependent on protein synthesis to resupply APC substrates. If the
rate of protein synthesis is not sufficient, the rate of SAC signal production will fall below
the rate at which it is inactivated by the APC, leading to rapid APC activation and mitotic
slippage. Therefore, the rate of protein synthesis in mitosis may be an important determinant
of the duration of mitotic arrest in cells treated with microtubule inhibitors.
In contrast to microtubule inhibitors, proTAME and MG132 induce mitotic arrest by
inhibiting residual APC-dependent proteolysis rather than by stimulating SAC activation.
The rate of SAC signal production by kinetochores may decline normally in proTAME- or
MG132-treated cells because kinetochores develop proper tension. However, because the
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 October 19.

Zeng et al.

Page 12

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

rate of residual APC-dependent proteolysis is lowered by proTAME or MG132, the rate of
SAC signal production cannot fall below the rate at which it is inactivated by APCdependent proteolysis, leading to mitotic arrest. The strong hesperadin sensitivity of both
proTAME and MG132-induced arrests indicates the importance of metaphase kinetochores
in generating a SAC signal to sustain mitotic arrest. Compared to microtubule inhibitors, this
mechanism of mitotic arrest shows reduced dependence on protein synthesis because the
rate of residual APC activity is lower in proTAME and MG132-treated cells, yielding a
lower requirement for protein synthesis to replenish APC substrates.
An Opportunity for Antimitotic Cancer Therapy
Our study has identified a potential explanation for the variability in cellular responses to
microtubule inhibitors that could limit their therapeutic effectiveness. Because the SAC does
not completely inhibit the APC, mitotic arrest induced by microtubule inhibition depends on
protein synthesis. As a result, variation in the rates of protein synthesis among cells may be
one factor that explains the highly variable response of cells to microtubule inhibitors. In
contrast, cells treated with an APC inhibitor may be less prone to mitotic slippage because
residual APC activity is inhibited. APC inhibitors may therefore be more effective in
promoting mitotic arrest, inducing a greater pro-apoptotic effect. Furthermore, low doses of
an APC inhibitor may be useful in combination with microtubule inhibitors to sustain
mitotic arrest and enhance cell death.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Experimental Procedures
A list of reagents, methods of synthesis of proTAME and additional experimental
procedures are provided in the Supplemental Information.
3H-TAME

binding assay
3H-TAME

(200 nM; 15 Ci/mmol) was added to 100 µl interphase Xenopus extract or HeLa
cell lysate. APC was immunoprecipitated with Cdc27 antibody (Santa Cruz, AF3.1) coupled
to affiprep beads (Bio-Rad) as previously described (Kirkpatrick et al., 2006).
The beads were washed with XB and radioactivity measured by scintillation counting.
Alternatively, 3H-TAME was added and Cdc27 immunoprecipitation was performed after
one or two rounds of APC immunodepletion. Specific binding was calculated as the
difference between counts associated with Cdc27 antibody beads compared to beads lacking
antibody (mock IP).

APC isolation by IR peptide or C-box fragment and crosslinking

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

A cysteine-containing 20 amino acid peptide derived from the C-terminus of Cdh1, or a
control peptide lacking the C-terminal isoleucine and arginine residues, was reduced with
TCEP at RT for 15 min and coupled to Ultralink iodoacetyl resin (Pierce). Ten µl of resin
was mixed with 100 µl interphase Xenopus egg extract and incubated on a rotator for 30 min
at 4 °C. The resin was then washed with XB (100 mM KCl, 0.1 mM CaCl2, 1 mM MgCl2
and 10 mM HEPES, pH 7.7) and bound Cdc27 was analyzed by immunoblot. To investigate
the effect of TAME on C-box interactions, a GST fusion protein containing the N-terminal
159 residues of Xenopus Cdc20, or the same protein lacking the C-box, were expressed and
purified as described previously (Kimata et al., 2008). The proteins (10 µg) were preloaded
on 5 µl Glutathione-Sepharose 4B resin (GE Healthcare) and incubated with cyclin B1Δ90arrested mitotic Xenopus extract at RT for 30 min in the presence of 1% DMSO, 200 µM
TAME or 200 µM AAME. The resin was then washed with XB and bound Cdc27 was
analyzed by immunoblot. For crosslinking studies, the Cdh1-derived C-terminal peptide was

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 October 19.

Zeng et al.

Page 13

conjugated to Profound Mts-Atf-Biotin label transfer reagent (Pierce) and crosslinked as
described in the supplemental experimental procedures.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

APC-Cdc20/Cdh1 association assay
APC was immunoprecipitated from cyclin B1Δ90-arrested mitotic Xenopus extract or
interphase extract supplemented with 0.5 µg/ml recombinant Cdh1 as previously described
(Kirkpatrick et al., 2006). Compounds were added to mitotic extract immediately before
immunoprecipitating the APC. Interphase extracts were pre-incubated with compounds for
30 min before adding recombinant Cdh1 and immunoprecipitating the APC. The beads were
washed with XB high salt (XB with 500 mM KCl) and then XB, and bound Cdc27 and
Cdc20/Cdh1 were analyzed by immunoblot. Alternatively, Cdc20 was expressed using an in
vitro coupled transcription/translation reticulocyte lysate system following the
manufacturer’s instruction (Promega L1170). The lysate was diluted with XB so that the
concentration of Cdc20 was approximately equal to that of the endogenous Cdc20 in
Xenopus extract. APC was immunoprecipitated from mitotic extract as described above and
the beads were washed with XB high salt and XB. For each binding assay, 5 µl beads were
mixed with 50 µl diluted lysate plus 1 µM okadaic acid, 0.05% IPEGAL CA-630 and
various competitors as indicated for 30 min with constant shaking. The beads were then
washed with XB + 0.05% IPEGAL CA-630 and bound Cdc27 and Cdc20 were analyzed by
immunoblot.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Significance
The Anaphase-Promoting Complex (APC) is required for mitotic exit, making the APC a
potential target for antimitotic chemotherapy. Here we identify TAME as a small molecule
inhibitor of the APC and develop a cell-permeable derivative, proTAME. Treatment of cells
with proTAME causes a surprisingly robust mitotic arrest because APC-dependent
proteolysis is required for inactivation of the spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC). In
contrast, SAC-activating compounds such as microtubule inhibitors do not suppress APC
activity as completely. As a result, cells rely on continued protein synthesis to maintain
mitotic arrest, providing an explanation for the known variability in cellular response to
microtubule inhibitors. Direct APC inhibitors may therefore provide a more uniform and
specific method for inducing mitotic arrest.

Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Acknowledgments
We thank Mike Aguiar and Steve Gygi for assistance with mass spectrometry and Jonathan Iaconelli for technical
assistance. We thank Daniel Finley, David Pellman and Tom Rapoport for comments on the manuscript. This work
was supported by NIH Grant GM66492 to RWK and a grant from the Stewart Trust. RWK is a member of the Dana
Farber-Harvard Cancer Center Breast Cancer SPORE, supported by NIH grant CA089393. KLP was supported by
fellowship GM085923. Immunofluorescence microscopy data for this study were acquired in the Nikon Imaging
Center at Harvard Medical School.

References
Bekier ME, Fischbach R, Lee J, Taylor WR. Length of mitotic arrest induced by microtubulestabilizing drugs determines cell death after mitotic exit. Mol Cancer Ther. 2009; 8:1646–1654.
[PubMed: 19509263]
Biggins S, Murray AW. The budding yeast protein kinase Ipl1/Aurora allows the absence of tension to
activate the spindle checkpoint. Genes Dev. 2001; 15:3118–3129. [PubMed: 11731476]

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 October 19.

Zeng et al.

Page 14

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Brito DA, Rieder CL. Mitotic checkpoint slippage in humans occurs via cyclin B destruction in the
presence of an active checkpoint. Curr Biol. 2006; 16:1194–1200. [PubMed: 16782009]
Brito DA, Yang Z, Rieder CL. Microtubules do not promote mitotic slippage when the spindle
assembly checkpoint cannot be satisfied. J Cell Biol. 2008; 182:623–629. [PubMed: 18710927]
Burton JL, Tsakraklides V, Solomon MJ. Assembly of an APC-Cdh1-substrate complex is stimulated
by engagement of a destruction box. Mol Cell. 2005; 18:533–542. [PubMed: 15916960]
Cheeseman IM, Chappie JS, Wilson-Kubalek EM, Desai A. The conserved KMN network constitutes
the core microtubule-binding site of the kinetochore. Cell. 2006; 127:983–997. [PubMed:
17129783]
Choi E, Choe H, Min J, Choi JY, Kim J, Lee H. BubR1 acetylation at prometaphase is required for
modulating APC/C activity and timing of mitosis. EMBO J. 2009; 28:2077–2089. [PubMed:
19407811]
Chung E, Chen RH. Phosphorylation of Cdc20 is required for its inhibition by the spindle checkpoint.
Nat Cell Biol. 2003; 5:748–753. [PubMed: 12855955]
Clute P, Pines J. Temporal and spatial control of cyclin B1 destruction in metaphase. Nat Cell Biol.
1999; 1:82–87. [PubMed: 10559878]
D'Angiolella V, Mari C, Nocera D, Rametti L, Grieco D. The spindle checkpoint requires cyclindependent kinase activity. Genes Dev. 2003; 17:2520–2525. [PubMed: 14561775]
DeLuca JG, Gall WE, Ciferri C, Cimini D, Musacchio A, Salmon ED. Kinetochore microtubule
dynamics and attachment stability are regulated by Hec1. Cell. 2006; 127:969–982. [PubMed:
17129782]
den Elzen N, Pines J. Cyclin A is destroyed in prometaphase and can delay chromosome alignment
and anaphase. J Cell Biol. 2001; 153:121–136. [PubMed: 11285279]
Engelbert D, Schnerch D, Baumgarten A, Wasch R. The ubiquitin ligase APC(Cdh1) is required to
maintain genome integrity in primary human cells. Oncogene. 2008; 27:907–917. [PubMed:
17700535]
Famulski JK, Chan GK. Aurora B kinase-dependent recruitment of hZW10 and hROD to tensionless
kinetochores. Curr Biol. 2007; 17:2143–2149. [PubMed: 18065224]
Gascoigne KE, Taylor SS. Cancer cells display profound intra- and interline variation following
prolonged exposure to antimitotic drugs. Cancer Cell. 2008; 14:111–122. [PubMed: 18656424]
Ge S, Skaar JR, Pagano M. APC/C- and Mad2-mediated degradation of Cdc20 during spindle
checkpoint activation. Cell Cycle. 2009; 8:167–171. [PubMed: 19098431]
Hauf S, Cole RW, LaTerra S, Zimmer C, Schnapp G, Walter R, Heckel A, van Meel J, Rieder CL,
Peters JM. The small molecule Hesperadin reveals a role for Aurora B in correcting kinetochoremicrotubule attachment and in maintaining the spindle assembly checkpoint. J Cell Biol. 2003;
161:281–294. [PubMed: 12707311]
Hayes MJ, Kimata Y, Wattam SL, Lindon C, Mao G, Yamano H, Fry AM. Early mitotic degradation
of Nek2A depends on Cdc20-independent interaction with the APC/C. Nat Cell Biol. 2006; 8:607–
614. [PubMed: 16648845]
Hsu JY, Reimann JD, Sorensen CS, Lukas J, Jackson PK. E2F-dependent accumulation of hEmi1
regulates S phase entry by inhibiting APC(Cdh1). Nat Cell Biol. 2002; 4:358–366. [PubMed:
11988738]
Huang HC, Shi J, Orth JD, Mitchison TJ. Evidence that mitotic exit is a better cancer therapeutic target
than spindle assembly. Cancer Cell. 2009; 16:347–358. [PubMed: 19800579]
Kimata Y, Baxter JE, Fry AM, Yamano H. A role for the Fizzy/Cdc20 family of proteins in activation
of the APC/C distinct from substrate recruitment. Mol Cell. 2008; 32:576–583. [PubMed:
19026787]
Kirkpatrick DS, Hathaway NA, Hanna J, Elsasser S, Rush J, Finley D, King RW, Gygi SP.
Quantitative analysis of in vitro ubiquitinated cyclin B1 reveals complex chain topology. Nat Cell
Biol. 2006; 8:700–710. [PubMed: 16799550]
Kraft C, Vodermaier HC, Maurer-Stroh S, Eisenhaber F, Peters JM. The WD40 propeller domain of
Cdh1 functions as a destruction box receptor for APC/C substrates. Mol Cell. 2005; 18:543–553.
[PubMed: 15916961]

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 October 19.

Zeng et al.

Page 15

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Matyskiela ME, Morgan DO. Analysis of activator-binding sites on the APC/C supports a cooperative
substrate-binding mechanism. Mol Cell. 2009; 34:68–80. [PubMed: 19362536]
Minshull J, Sun H, Tonks NK, Murray AW. A MAP kinase-dependent spindle assembly checkpoint in
Xenopus egg extracts. Cell. 1994; 79:475–486. [PubMed: 7954813]
Montero A, Fossella F, Hortobagyi G, Valero V. Docetaxel for treatment of solid tumours: a
systematic review of clinical data. Lancet Oncol. 2005; 6:229–239. [PubMed: 15811618]
Musacchio A, Salmon ED. The spindle-assembly checkpoint in space and time. Nat Rev Mol Cell
Biol. 2007; 8:379–393. [PubMed: 17426725]
Nilsson J, Yekezare M, Minshull J, Pines J. The APC/C maintains the spindle assembly checkpoint by
targeting Cdc20 for destruction. Nat Cell Biol. 2008; 10:1411–1420. [PubMed: 18997788]
Ohi MD, Feoktistova A, Ren L, Yip C, Cheng Y, Chen JS, Yoon HJ, Wall JS, Huang Z, Penczek PA,
et al. Structural organization of the anaphase-promoting complex bound to the mitotic activator
Slp1. Mol Cell. 2007; 28:871–885. [PubMed: 18082611]
Orth JD, Tang Y, Shi J, Loy CT, Amendt C, Wilm C, Zenke FT, Mitchison TJ. Quantitative live
imaging of cancer and normal cells treated with Kinesin-5 inhibitors indicates significant
differences in phenotypic responses and cell fate. Mol Cancer Ther. 2008; 7:3480–3489. [PubMed:
18974392]
Palframan WJ, Meehl JB, Jaspersen SL, Winey M, Murray AW. Anaphase inactivation of the spindle
checkpoint. Science. 2006; 313:680–684. [PubMed: 16825537]
Peters JM. The anaphase promoting complex/cyclosome: a machine designed to destroy. Nat Rev Mol
Cell Biol. 2006; 7:644–656. [PubMed: 16896351]
Qi W, Yu H. KEN-box-dependent degradation of the Bub1 spindle checkpoint kinase by the anaphasepromoting complex/cyclosome. J Biol Chem. 2007; 282:3672–3679. [PubMed: 17158872]
Reddy SK, Rape M, Margansky WA, Kirschner MW. Ubiquitination by the anaphase-promoting
complex drives spindle checkpoint inactivation. Nature. 2007; 446:921–925. [PubMed: 17443186]
Schwab M, Neutzner M, Mocker D, Seufert W. Yeast Hct1 recognizes the mitotic cyclin Clb2 and
other substrates of the ubiquitin ligase APC. EMBO J. 2001; 20:5165–5175. [PubMed: 11566880]
Shi J, Orth JD, Mitchison T. Cell type variation in responses to antimitotic drugs that target
microtubules and kinesin-5. Cancer Res. 2008; 68:3269–3276. [PubMed: 18451153]
Sigl R, Wandke C, Rauch V, Kirk J, Hunt T, Geley S. Loss of the mammalian APC/C activator FZR1
shortens G1 and lengthens S phase but has little effect on exit from mitosis. J Cell Sci. 2009;
122:4208–4217. [PubMed: 19861496]
Stegmeier F, Rape M, Draviam VM, Nalepa G, Sowa ME, Ang XL, McDonald ER 3rd, Li MZ,
Hannon GJ, Sorger PK, et al. Anaphase initiation is regulated by antagonistic ubiquitination and
deubiquitination activities. Nature. 2007; 446:876–881. [PubMed: 17443180]
Stewart S, Fang G. Destruction box-dependent degradation of aurora B is mediated by the anaphasepromoting complex/cyclosome and Cdh1. Cancer Res. 2005; 65:8730–8735. [PubMed: 16204042]
Thornton BR, Ng TM, Matyskiela ME, Carroll CW, Morgan DO, Toczyski DP. An architectural map
of the anaphase-promoting complex. Genes Dev. 2006; 20:449–460. [PubMed: 16481473]
Verma R, Peters NR, D'Onofrio M, Tochtrop GP, Sakamoto KM, Varadan R, Zhang M, Coffino P,
Fushman D, Deshaies RJ, King RW. Ubistatins inhibit proteasome-dependent degradation by
binding the ubiquitin chain. Science. 2004; 306:117–120. [PubMed: 15459393]
Visconti R, Palazzo L, Grieco D. Requirement for proteolysis in spindle assembly checkpoint
silencing. Cell Cycle. 2010; 9:564–569. [PubMed: 20081372]
Vodermaier HC, Gieffers C, Maurer-Stroh S, Eisenhaber F, Peters JM. TPR subunits of the anaphasepromoting complex mediate binding to the activator protein CDH1. Curr Biol. 2003; 13:1459–
1468. [PubMed: 12956947]
Welburn JP, Vleugel M, Liu D, Yates JR 3rd, Lampson MA, Fukagawa T, Cheeseman IM. Aurora B
phosphorylates spatially distinct targets to differentially regulate the kinetochore-microtubule
interface. Mol Cell. 2010; 38:383–392. [PubMed: 20471944]
Wojcik C, Schroeter D, Stoehr M, Wilk S, Paweletz N. An inhibitor of the chymotrypsin-like activity
of the multicatalytic proteinase complex (20S proteasome) induces arrest in G2-phase and
metaphase in HeLa cells. Eur J Cell Biol. 1996; 70:172–178. [PubMed: 8793390]

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 October 19.

Zeng et al.

Page 16

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Wolthuis R, Clay-Farrace L, van Zon W, Yekezare M, Koop L, Ogink J, Medema R, Pines J. Cdc20
and Cks direct the spindle checkpoint-independent destruction of cyclin A. Mol Cell. 2008;
30:290–302. [PubMed: 18471975]
Yu H. Cdc20: a WD40 activator for a cell cycle degradation machine. Mol Cell. 2007; 27:3–16.
[PubMed: 17612486]

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 October 19.

Zeng et al.

Page 17

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 1. TAME inhibits APC activation by perturbing binding of Cdc20 or Cdh1

(A) Structures of TAME and AAME. (B) TAME induces mitotic arrest in Xenopus extract.
Recombinant cyclin B1/Cdk1 was added to interphase extract in the presence of compounds.
Cdc27 phosphorylation and cyclin B1 levels were examined by immunoblot. (C) TAME
inhibits APC activation. Compounds were added to mitotic Xenopus extract immediately
before APC immunoprecipitation. The activity of the isolated APC was measured in a
reconstituted assay. (D) TAME inhibits Cdc20 association with mitotic APC. Compounds
were added to mitotic Xenopus extract prior to APC immunoprecipitation. Numbers
represent CCD-imaging based-intensity quantitation of the immunoblot, and show the
relative amount of Cdc20 normalized to Cdc27. (E) TAME inhibits Cdh1 association with
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 October 19.

Zeng et al.

Page 18

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

interphase APC. Interphase Xenopus extract was pre-incubated with compounds for 30 min
prior to adding recombinant Cdh1 and APC immunoprecipitation. (F) TAME inhibits APC
activation by Cdh1. Interphase Xenopus extract was pre-incubated with compound for 30
min prior to adding recombinant Cdh1 and APC immunoprecipitation. The activity of the
isolated APC was measured in a reconstituted assay. See also Figure S1.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 October 19.

Zeng et al.

Page 19

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 2. TAME binds to the APC and inhibits binding of the IR tail of activator proteins

(A) TAME binds Xenopus APC. 3H-TAME was added to interphase extract or to extract that
had been partially or completely immunodepleted of APC. Remaining APC was then
immunoprecipitated and the associated radioactivity was measured by scintillation counting.
Residual APC levels were measured by immunoblot with Cdc27 antibody. Specific binding
was calculated as described in the methods. (B) Unlabeled TAME competes with 3H-TAME
for binding to Xenopus APC. 3H-TAME was added to interphase extract with unlabeled
TAME or AAME prior to APC immunoprecipitation. (C) 3H-TAME binds to human APC.
The experiment in 2A was repeated with lysate from asynchronous HeLa cells. (D)
Schematic of Cdc20, the C-box containing fragment, and structures of the IR tail and
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 October 19.

Zeng et al.

Page 20

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

TAME. (E) TAME inhibits the interaction between the Cdh1 C-terminal IR peptide and the
APC. Left: Resin coupled with cysteine (Ctrl resin), Cdh1 C-terminal peptide (WT), or the
peptide lacking the C-terminal isoleucine and arginine (ΔIR) was incubated with interphase
Xenopus extract, washed, and the amount of bound Cdc27 was analyzed by immunoblot.
Right: Cdh1 C-terminal resin was incubated with interphase extract in the presence of
compounds and the amount of Cdc27 was analyzed as above. (F) TAME does not inhibit the
interaction between the C-box and the APC. A 159-amino acid N-terminal fragment of
Cdc20 containing the C-box fused to GST (GST-CDC20 N159 WT) or the same fragment
lacking the C-box (GST-CDC20 N159 ΔC-box) were bound to glutathione resin and
incubated with mitotic Xenopus extract in the presence of compounds. Bound Cdc27 was
analyzed by immunoblot. (G) TAME inhibits IR-peptide crosslinking to APC subunits.
Purified interphase Xenopus APC was incubated with an IR peptide coupled to a biotincontaining label-transfer reagent, in the presence or absence of compounds, prior to
photocrosslinking. Reaction products were detected by streptavidin-HRP. See also Figure
S2.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 October 19.

Zeng et al.

Page 21

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 3. TAME inhibits binding of wild type Cdc20 to the APC, but not binding of a ΔIR
mutant

Mitotic APC immunoprecipitated from Xenopus extract was washed with XB high salt (500
mM KCl) and XB to remove endogenous Cdc20 prior to incubation with in vitro translated
wild type Xenopus Cdc20 or the ΔIR mutant. Various competitors were added during
incubation as indicated. Unbound proteins were washed away and bound Cdc20 was
analyzed by immunoblot. Numbers represent the amount of Cdc20 normalized to Cdc27.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 October 19.

Zeng et al.

Page 22

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 4. ProTAME inhibits APC activity in Xenopus extract and inhibits Cdh1-dependent APC
activity during interphase in HeLa cells

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

(A) Structures of proTAME and proAAME. (B) ProTAME inhibits cyclin B-luciferase
degradation in mitotic Xenopus extract. Different concentrations of proTAME or proAAME
were added to mitotic Xenopus extract containing cyclin B-luciferase reporter. Samples were
collected at 60 min and the remaining reporter level was measured by luminescence. (C)
ProTAME blocks Cdh1 association with the APC. HeLa cells were released from
nocodazole and treated with proTAME in G1. APC was immunoprecipitated from cell
lysates and the amount of Cdc27 and Cdh1 was analyzed by immunoblot. (D) ProTAME
restores mitotic entry in Emi1-depleted cells. HeLa cells were transfected with control
siRNA or Emi1 siRNA and treated with DMSO or proTAME 24 h after transfection and
then imaged for 48 h. About 400 cells were analyzed in each experiment, and the proportion
that failed to enter mitosis during the 48 h of imaging was calculated. Results of 3
independent experiments are shown. Statistical significance was calculated using an
unpaired t-test. (E) ProTAME causes a mitotic entry delay if added during S-phase. HeLa
H2B-GFP cells were released from a double thymidine block and proTAME (12 µM) was
added at different time points as indicated. Mitotic entry was monitored by time-lapse
imaging. Cumulative frequency curves of the time of mitotic entry are shown. Statistical
analysis, including mean, median, statistical significance and number of cells analyzed per
condition for all experiments is included in Table S1. See also Figure S3.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 October 19.

Zeng et al.

Page 23

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 5. ProTAME induces mitotic arrest without disrupting the mitotic spindle

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

(A) ProTAME induces mitotic arrest in HeLa cells. Double thymidine synchronized HeLa
H2B-GFP cells were treated with compounds and analyzed by time-lapse imaging.
Cumulative frequency curves of mitotic duration and cell fate distributions are shown. (B)
Partial Cdc20 knockdown sensitizes cells to proTAME treatment. Asynchronous HeLa
H2B-GFP cells were transfected with control or Cdc20 siRNA 24 h prior to treatment with
compounds. (C) ProTAME stabilizes endogenous APC substrates. Double thymidine
synchronized HeLa cells were treated with compounds. (D) ProTAME stabilizes exogenous
cyclin B1-GFP and cyclin A2-GFP in HeLa cells. HeLa H2B-RFP cells transduced with
cyclin-GFP adenoviruses were treated with 20 µM proTAME or proAAME, or 150 nM
nocodazole. Bar: 12 µm. Representative cells are shown. For quantitation, the fraction of
GFP intensity remaining at 60 min as compared to the onset of mitosis was determined (n≥
30 individual cells per treatment). Error bars represent standard error of the mean. (E)
ProTAME does not disrupt mitotic spindles or alter interkinetochore distance. Asynchronous
HeLa cells were treated with compounds for 2 h, and then stained with anti-tubulin (green)
and CREST (red) antibody. Representative images are shown. Bar: 3 µm. Representative
images of kinetochore pairs are shown. Bar: 1.2 µm. Inter-kinetochore distance was
measured in DMSO or proTAME treated cells (n=55, p=0.23). Error bars represent standard
deviation. See also Figure S4 and Movies S1–4.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 October 19.

Zeng et al.

Page 24

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 6. ProTAME-induced mitotic arrest is SAC-dependent

(A) ProTAME-induced mitotic arrest is Mad2-dependent. HeLa H2B-GFP cells were
transfected with indicated siRNAs between rounds of thymidine treatment. Following
release, cells were treated with compounds and analyzed by time-lapse imaging. A graph of
the same data with an expanded x-axis is shown in Figure S5A. (B) ProTAME rescues the
mitotic defect induced by Mad2 knockdown. Asynchronous HeLa H2B-GFP cells were
treated with Mad2 siRNA 24 h prior to addition of compound. Bar: 10 µm. (C) ProTAMEinduced mitotic arrest is hesperadin-sensitive. Double thymidine synchronized HeLa H2BGFP cells were treated with compounds 8 h following release. (D) UbcH10 or Cdc27
knockdown induces a hesperadin-sensitive mitotic delay. HeLa H2B-GFP cells were
transfected with indicated siRNA between rounds of thymidine synchronization and treated
with hesperadin 8 h following release. See also Figure S5 and Movies S5–6.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 October 19.

Zeng et al.

Page 25

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 7. MG132-induced mitotic arrest is SAC-dependent

(A) MG132-induced arrest is Mad2-dependent. HeLa H2B-GFP cells were transfected with
indicated siRNAs between rounds of thymidine synchronization, treated with compounds,
and followed by time-lapse imaging. (B) MG132-induced arrest is hesperadin-sensitive, but
mitotic exit can be suppressed by proTAME. Double thymidine synchronized HeLa cells
were treated with compounds. (C) Taxol cannot restore mitotic arrest in the presence of
MG132 and hesperadin. Double thymidine synchronized HeLa cells were treated with
compounds. (D) Mitotic arrest induced by a higher concentration of MG132 remains
hesperadin-sensitive. Double thymidine synchronized HeLa cells were treated with
compounds. M: MG132; pT: proTAME; H: hesperadin. See also Figure S6.
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 October 19.

Zeng et al.

Page 26

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 8. Microtubule inhibitors require protein synthesis for mitotic arrest whereas proTAME
and MG132 do not

(A) Mitotic arrest induced by microtubule inhibitors requires protein synthesis but
proTAME-induced arrest does not. Double thymidine synchronized HeLa-H2B-GFP cells
were treated with compounds and followed by time-lapse imaging. CHX: cycloheximide.
(B) MG132 (10 µM)-induced arrest is cycloheximide-resistant but Mad2-dependent. HeLa
cells were transfected with indicated siRNAs between rounds of thymidine synchronization.
(C) MG132 (10 µM)-induced arrest is cycloheximide-resistant but hesperadin-sensitive.
Double thymidine synchronized HeLa cells were treated with compounds. (D) Model. In the
bottom panels, the x-axis indicates time from mitotic entry. See also Figure S7.
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 October 19.

