Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 30

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Metformin represses cancer cells via alternate pathways in
N-cadherin expressing vs. N-cadherin deficient cells
Rongbin Ge1,*, Zongwei Wang1,*, Shulin Wu2, Yangjia Zhuo2,3, Aleksandar G. Otsetov1,
Chao Cai2,3, Weide Zhong2,3, Chin-Lee Wu2, Aria F. Olumi1
1

Department of Urology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA

2

Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA

3

 epartment of Urology, Guangdong Key Laboratory of Clinical Molecular Medicine and Diagnostics, Guangzhou First People’s
D
Hospital, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to:
Aria F. Olumi, e-mail: Olumi.Aria@mgh.harvard.edu
Keywords: prostate cancer, metformin, TWIST, N-cadherin
Received: May 13, 2015 	Accepted: August 13, 2015 	Published: August 24, 2015

ABSTRACT
Metformin has emerged as a potential anticancer agent. Here, we demonstrate
that metformin plays an anti-tumor role via repressing N-cadherin, independent of
AMPK, in wild-type N-cadherin cancer cells. Ectopic-expression of N-cadherin develops
metformin-resistant cancer cells, while suppression of N-cadherin sensitizes cancer
to metformin. Manipulation of AMPK expression does not alter sensitivity of cancer
to metformin. We show that NF-kappaB is a downstream molecule of N-cadherin and
metformin regulates NF-kappaB signaling via suppressing N-cadherin. Moreover, we
also suggest that TWIST1 is an upstream molecule of N-cadherin/NF-kappaB signaling
and manipulation of TWIST1 expression changes the sensitivity of cancer cells to
metformin. In contrast to the cells that express N-cadherin, in N-cadherin deficient
cells, metformin plays an anti-tumor role via activation of AMPK. Ectopic expression
of N-cadherin makes cancer more resistant to metformin. Therefore, we suggest that
metformin’s anti-cancer therapeutic effect is mediated through different molecular
mechanism in wild-type vs. deficient N-cadherin cancer cells. At last, we selected
49 out of 984 patients’ samples with prostatic cancer after radical prostatectomy
(selection criteria: Gleason score ≥ 7 and all patients taking metformin) and showed
levels of N-cadherin, p65 and AMPK could predict post-surgical recurrence in prostate
cancer after treatment of metformin.

survival, including prostate cancer in diabetic men [3–5].
For instance, our recent study showed that metformin, but
not other oral hypoglycemics, is associated with decreased
risk of prostate cancer diagnosis [6]. Although it has been
reported that the cancer-prevention function of metformin
is associated with LKB1/AMPK [7, 8], mTOR [9],
p53/REDD1 [9], pEGFR and IGF-1R [10], p27 and p21
[11], the more accurate underlying molecular mechanisms
still need further evaluation.
In this study, we demonstrate, for the first time,
that in wild-type N-cadherin cancer models, metformin
plays an anti-tumor role through repressing TWIST1/Ncadherin/NF-kappaB signaling, independent of activation

INTRODUCTION
Prostate cancer is the most common cancer and
second most common cause of cancer death in American
men [1]. Diabetes is highly prevalent in the world and the
latest report demonstrates that there are 29.1 million people
(9.3%) of the population in the United States are affected
by diabetes [2]. Commonly, patients with type II diabetes
are treated with metformin, the first line insulin sensitizer.
Interestingly, many recent epidemiological studies have
shown that metformin, a biguanide hypoglycemic, not
only lowers the glucose level, but also significantly
reduces cancer incidence and improves cancer patients’

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

28973

Oncotarget

of AMPK. Up-regulation of TWIST1/N-cadherin/
NF-kappaB pathway makes cancer more resistant to
metformin. However, in N-cadherin deficient cancer cells,
the anti-tumor’s effects of metformin mainly depend
on activation of AMPK. Down-regulation of AMPK
makes cancer more resistant to metformin and overexpression of N-cadherin compromises AMPK-mediated
pro-apoptotic activities. Finally, from our cohort of 984
patients who had undergone radical prostatectomy for
management of prostate cancer, we identified 49 who were
using Metformin for management of diabetes and were
diagnosed to have Gleason 7 or greater prostate cancer on
the final surgical pathology evaluation. We evaluated the
prostate cancer samples for N-cadherin, p65 and AMPK
expression and assessed whether these biomarkers may
have any clinical utility.

N-cadherin expression. In Figure 1E, we observed LNCaP
cells did not express N-cadherin, so we compared the
sensitivity of PC3 (N-cadherin expressing) and LNCaP
(N-cadherin decificient) cancer cells to metformin and
found that LNCaP cells were sensitive to metformin,
but resistant to N-cadherin neutralizing antibody GC-4
(Fig. 1D). These results suggest that metformin plays an
antitumor role through different signaling pathways in
N-cadherin expressing and N-cadherin deficient cells.

N-cadherin regulates sensitivity of metforminmediated apoptosis in N-cadherin expressing
cancer cells, independent of AMPK
To evaluate the importance of N-cadherin in
regulating sensitivity to metformin, we stably overexpressed N-cadherin in PC3 cells and evaluated
metformin-mediated antitumor activities. Downregulation of N-cadherin and p-AKT, accompanied by
a concomitant increase in c-Fos, was observed in PC3
cells after metformin treatment, consistent with signs of
pro-apoptotic activity [12]. In contrast, over-expression
of N-cadherin in PC3 cells compromised reactivation
of c-Fos and significantly protected PC3 cells from
metformin-mediated antitumor activities (Fig. 2A, 2C and
2H). We found that metformin readily inhibited N-cadherin
expression in PC3/control cells, but not in the ectopically
expressed N-cahderin in PC3/N-cad cells (Fig. 2B). In
order to investigate if activation of AMPK plays a role
in regulating sensitivity of metformin-mediated antitumor
activities in cancer cells with N-cadherin expression,
shAMPK was transfected into PC3 to generate a stable
AMPK-knock-out PC3 cancer cells (PC3/shAMPK), and
pAMPK expression was adequately suppressed (relative
ratio of 1:0.48 in shcontrol vs. shAMPK – Fig. 2D).
We found that metformin-mediated antitumor activities
were not affected significantly after supressing AMPK
(Fig. 2E and 2H). Next we over-expressed AMPK in
PC3/N-cadherin stable cells (Fig. 2F) and found that overexpression of AMPK alone did not affect cell viability and
apoptotic activities in metformin treated cells. Therefore,
down-regulation of N-cadherin appeared to be necessary in
metformin-mediated antitumor activity of cells expressing
N-cadherin (Fig. 2G, 2I)
Moreover, PC3 cells were treated and selected
with 5 mM of metformin for 10 weeks to generate a
stable metformin-resistant PC3 cells (PC3/met cells).
Down-regulated N-cadherin, p-AKT and concomitant
upregulated c-Fos and p-AMPK were observed in wild
type PC3 cells after long term metformin exposure. In
contrast, protein expression of N-cadherin, p-AKT, c-Fos
or p-AMPK was not affected by metformin in the resistant
population of PC3/met cells (Fig. 2J), and they became
more resistant to metformin (Fig. 2K-2L). We found
that metformin readily inhibited N-cadherin expression
in PC3/control cells, but not in the metformin-resistant

RESULTS
Metformin inhibited proliferation of cancer cells
via repressing N-cadherin
To evaluate the anti-tumor effects of metformin, PC3
prostatic cancer cells, T24 bladder cancer cells and 786-O
kidney cancer cells were treated with two different doses
of metformin (1 mM, 5 mM), for 48 hours respectively.
We found that 1 mM of metformin inhibited only 20% of
cell viability and 5 mM of metformin inhibited 60–70% of
cell viability in PC3 prostatic cancer cells. Similar results
were observed in T24 bladder cancer cells and 786-O
kidney cancer cells (Fig. 1A). To evaluate the optimal
treatment duration, PC3 cells were treated with 1 mM
or 5 mM of metformin for 24, 48, 72 hours respectively.
The combination of 5 mM and 48 hours was considered
an optimal experimental condition (Fig. 1B). Apoptotic
activity, as measured by TUNEL assay and fluorescent
activated cell sorting (FACS) showed increased cell death
after treatment with metformin (5 mM, 48 hours) in PC3
and T24 cells (Fig. 1C). We also drew a comparison
between metformin and N-cadherin neutralizing antibody
GC-4 and found the effects of metformin-mediated
apoptosis were comparable to effects of GC-4-mediated
apoptosis in both cells (Fig. 1D).
Next, protein expression of N-cadherin and
E-cadherin were measured in four types of prostate (PC3,
LNCAP), bladder (T24), kidney cancer cells (786-O), we
found that treatment of metformin (5 mM) dramatically
repressed N-cadherin expression, but without altering
E-cadherin expression levels. We also noted that there was
no detectable N-cadherin level in LNCaP prostatic cancer
cells (Fig. 1E). The expression of N-cadherin was reduced
in GC-4 treated PC3 and T24 cancer cells (Fig. 1F). PC3
prostatic cancer cells treated with metformin showed a
dose and time-dependent down-regulation of N-cadherin
protein level (Fig. 1G–1H). These results suggest
that metformin plays an anti-tumor role and represses
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

28974

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Metformin inhibited proliferation of cancer cells via repressing N-cadherin. Prostate cancer cells (PC3), bladder
cancer cells (T24) and renal cancer cells (786-0) were treated with metformin for 48 hours. A. MTS assay was performed to evaluate the
cell viability. M1- 1 mM of metformin, M5- 5 mM of metformin. B. Metformin inhibited proliferation of PC3 cells in a time-dependent
manner. C. Apoptotic TUNNEL assay was performed to detect cell death. D. Cells were treated as indicated, harvested, and apoptosis
versus necrosis was quantified using AnnexinV-FITC and PI staining in FACS. Representative dot plots are displayed. (LNCaP: prostatic
LNCaP cancer cells. GC-4: neutralizing N-cadherin antibody). E. Expression of N-cadherin, E-cadherin was detected by immunoblot.
F. PC3 and T24 cells were treated with GC-4 (1:50) and N-cadherin was detected by immunoblot. Metformin-mediated inhibition of
N-cadherin was dose-dependent. G. and time-dependent H. All experiments were repeated independently at least three times with similar
results. (Scale bar, 100 μm)

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

28975

Oncotarget

Figure 2: N-cadherin regulates sensitivity of metformin-mediated apoptosis in wild-type N-cadherin cancer cells,
independently of AMPK. A. PC3 cells were stably transfected with N-cadherin or control vectors, respectively and then the re-constructed

stable PC3/N-cad cells were treated with 5 mM of metformin for 48 hours. N-cadherin, p-AKT, AKT, c-Fos, AMPK and p-AMPK were
detected by immunoblot. B. Expression of N-cadherin was detected by immunofluoresence microscopy. C. Cell viability was evaluated by
MTS assay. D. PC3 cells were stably transfected with shAMPK or control shRNA, and then the re-constructed stable PC3/shAMPK and
PC3/control-shRNA cells were treated with 5 mM of metformin for 48 hours, respectively. Expression of N-cadherin, p-AKT, AKT, c-Fos
and p-AMPK were detected by immunoblot. E. Cell viability was evaluated by MTS assay. F. AMPK or control vector was transiently
transfected into PC3/N-cad stable cells. Expression of N-cadherin, p-AKT, AKT, c-Fos and p-AMPK were detected by immunoblot. G. Cell
viability was evaluated by MTS assay. H–I. Apoptosis was detected by Annexin V assays. J. PC3/met stable cells were constructed as
described in the methods section. PC3/met and PC3 cells were treated with 5 mM of metformin for 48 hours. Expression of N-cadherin,
p-AKT, AKT, c-Fos and p-AMPK were detected by immunoblot. K. Cell viability was evaluated by MTS assay. L. Apoptosis was detected
by Annexin V assays. M. Expression of N-cadherin was detected by immunofluoresence microscopy. N. N-cadherin siRNA was transfected
into PC3/met. Expression of N-cadherin, AKT, p-AKT, p-AMPK and c-Fos was detected by immunoblot. O. Cell viability was evaluated by
MTS assay. The data represent means of average determinants ± SEM. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01. All experiments were repeated independently
at least three times with similar results. (Scale bar, 100 μm)
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

28976

Oncotarget

PC3/met cells (Fig. 2M). Next, we suppressed N-cadherin
in PC3/met cells using siN-cadherin and found that
repression of N-cadherin sensitizes PC3/met to
metformin-mediated antitumor activities (Fig. 2N–2O).
In our previous study, we demonstrated that c-Fos, in
addition to its proto-oncogenic activity, also possesses
a pro-apoptotic function [12, 13]. The current study
shows again that c-Fos might also play a pro-apoptotic
role in metformin-mediated apoptosis. Moreover, these
results show that N-cadherin, but not AMPK, mediates
the antitumor effects of metformin in cancer cells that
express N-cadherin.

that p65 is down-stream of N-cadherin, as has been shown
previously [16] and suppression of p65 can overcome the
effects of N-cadherin mediated resistance to metformin’s
anti-tumor activity.

Metformin-mediated repression of N-cadherin is
TWIST dependent
We have demonstrated that metformin induces
apoptosis through N-cadherin/NF-kappaB signaling
pathway. It has been reported that TWIST is a key regulator
of N-cadherin [17, 18]. In order to further explore the
mechanisms about how metformin regulates N-cadherin,
we evaluated protein expression of TWIST1 in PC3
and T24 cancer cells after treatment with metformin and
found that expression of TWIST1 was closely correlated
with expression of N-cadherin (Fig. 3J–3K). TWIST
was stably transfected into PC3 cells, and we found that
treatment with metformin did not significantly change
protein expression of TWIST1, N-cadherin and p65
(Fig. 3L) and ectopic expression of TWIST1 compromised
the metformin-mediated antitumor activities (Fig. 3M).
In PC3/met resistant cells, siTWIST1 inhibited TWIST1,
N-cadherin and p65, accompanied by increased c-Fos.
In contrast, siN-cadherin inhibited N-cadherin and p65,
but did not affect TWIST1 expression, while inhibition
of p65 by sip65 only inhibited p65 but not TWIST1
or N-cadherin (Fig. 3N). These results suggest that
TWIST1 is upstream of N-cadherin and p65 while p65 is
downstream of N-cadherin and TWIST1 (i.e.: TWIST1
—> N-cadherin —> p65 signaling pathway in metformin
induced cell death). Silencing of TWIST1, N-cadherin or
p65 significantly inhibited cell viability after treatment with
metformin (Fig. 3O). Finally, we suppressed TWIST1 with
siRNA in different stable cells and found that silencing
of TWIST1 did not affect expression of N-cadherin and
p65 in PC3/N-cad cells, silencing of TWIST1 did not
affect expression of p65 in PC3/p65 cells, but silencing
of TWIST1 downregulated TWIST1/N-cadherin/p65
signaling in PC3/met cells, and promoted apoptotic factors
like c-Fos (Fig. 3P). These results showed that metforminmediated antitumor activities may be dependent on a series
of molecular signaling involving TWIST1 as an upstream
mediator followed by N-cadherin and finally p65 as the
most downstream mediator.

Pro-apoptotic effect of metformin is N-cadherin
& NF-kappaB dependent
NF-kappaB is a target of AKT in various tissues
[14, 15], and Reiter et al have shown that increases in
N-cadherin leads to up-regulation of NF-kappaB [16].
Therefore, we investigated whether the pro-apoptotic effect
of metformin that is N-cadherin dependent may also be
linked to NF-kappaB activity. PC3 and T24 cancer cells
were treated with metformin (5 mM) for 48 hours, and then
protein expression of the nuclear extract was measured by
immunoblot. We found that metformin significantly downregulated N-cadherin, p65 and its downstream molecules
(c-FLIP and FBXL10 [13]), accompanied by up-regulation
of c-Fos in both prostate and bladder cancer cells (Fig. 3A).
Silencing of N-cadherin using siRNA and the neutralizing
antibody GC-4 both downregulated expression of p65
(Fig. 3B). On the other hand, over-expression of N-cadherin
concurrently upregulated p65 and its downstream molecules
(c-FLIP, FBXL10) in PC3/N-cad stably transfected cells
(Fig. 3C). These results suggest that metformin inhibits
NF-kappaB signaling via N-cadherin, rather than directly
regulating p65. We found that metformin inhibited both
N-cadherin and p65 and induced apoptosis in PC3 cells
(Fig. 3A–3C), but in PC3 cells with stable over-expression
of p65 (PC3/p65), metformin only suppressed N-cadherin
expression, but did not significantly affect expression of p65
and its downstream signaling (Fig. 3D). In addition, overexpression of p65 also compromised metformin-mediated
apoptotic activities (Fig. 3E). Moreover, silencing of p65
in PC3/N-cadherin stable cells reversed the N-cadherin
over-expression-mediated resistance (Fig. 3F-3G). Finally,
we treated PC3 metformin-resistant cells (PC3/met) with
metformin or metformin+GC-4 (N-cadherin neutralizing
antibody) and metformin+ Bay11-7085 (p65 neutralizing
antibody), and found that neutralizing antibody GC-4
concurrently inhibited N-cadherin and p65 and sensitized
PC3/met to metformin. While, Bay 11-7085 also sensitized
PC3/met to metformin, it only inhibited p65, but not
N-cadherin (Fig. 3H-3I). These results demonstrate that
N-cadherin/NF-kappaB signaling plays an important role in
metformin-mediated pro-apoptotic activities in cancer cells
that contain wild-type N-cadherin. In addition, we show
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Metformin inhibits tumor growth in vivo
PC3 cells were injected subcutaneously into both
flanks of nude mice. The PC3 xenografts that were treated
with metformin resulted in decreased tumor size and higher
apoptotic activities (Fig. 4A-4C) as compared to untreated
group. In parallel, we found the metformin-mediated
antitumor and pro-apoptotic activities were comparable to
Doxorubicin-mediated antitumor activities (Fig. 4A-4C).
Moreover, expression of TWIST1, N-cadehrin, p65 and
28977

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Pro-apoptotic effect of metformin is TWIST1/N-cadherin/NF-kappaB signaling dependent. A. PC3 and T24

cells were treated with 5 mM of metformin as indicated for 48 hours and immunoblot was performed. B. PC3 cells were treated with
N-cadherin siRNA or GC-4 (1:50) for 48 hours and N-cadherin and p65 were detected by immunoblot. C. Immunoblot was performed
to detect protein expression in PC3/N-cad and control cells. D. p65 and control vector were stably transfected into PC3 cells and then
immunoblot was performed to detect protein expression in the re-constructed stable cells. E. Cell viability was evaluated by MTS assay.
F. p65 siRNA was transfected into PC3/N-cad stable cells and immunoblot was performed. G. Cell viability was evaluated by MTS assay.
H. PC3/met cells were treated with 5 mM of metformin, combination of metformin and GC-4, combination of metformin and Bay11-7085
and vehicle. Immunoblot was performed. I. Cell viability was evaluated by MTS. The data represent means of average determinants ± SEM.
*P < 0.05; **P < 0.01. All experiments were repeated independently at least three times with similar results. J. PC3 and T24 cells were
treated with 5 mM of metfomin for 48 hours. Expression of N–cadherin and TWIST1 were evaluated by confocal microscopy. K. Expression
of TWIST1, N-cadherin and p65 were detected by immunoblot. L. TWIST1 was stably transfected into PC3 cells and immunoblot was
performed. M. Cell viability was evaluated by MTS assay. N. TWIST1, N-cadherin, p65 and control siRNA were transfected into PC3/met
cells, respectively and then immunoblot was performed. O. Cell viability was evaluated by MTS assay. P. TWIST1 and control siRNA were
transfected into PC3/N-cad cells, PC3/p65 cells or PC3/met, respectively and then immunoblot was performed. The data represent means of
average determinants ± SEM. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01. All experiments were repeated independently at least three times with similar results.
(Scale bar, 100 μm)
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

28978

Oncotarget

c-FLIP were reduced, accompanied by increased c-Fos in
metformin-treated PC3 xenografts (Fig. 4D), suggesting
increased cell death activity. In contrast, over-expression
of N-cadherin in PC3/N-cad xenografts demonstrated
more resistance to metformin (Fig. E-G). Next, we
transfected N-cadherin shRNA into PC3/met resistant
cells and created stable PC3/met/shN-cad xenografts.
We found that suppression of N-cadherin in resistant PC/
met subline made xenografts more sensitive to metformin
(Fig. 4H-4I). In addition, we found that protein expression
of N-cadherin and p65 were reduced, accompanied by
increased c-Fos in PC3/met/shN-cad xenografts after
treatment with metformin (Fig. 4J), suggesting a more
pro-apoptotic response to metformin when N-cadherin is
suppressed in resistant PC3/met cells. These data further
demonstrate that metformin inhibits tumor growth through
TWIST1/N-cadherin/p65 pathway in in-vivo studies.

In addition to the prostate cancer cell lines, we also
evaluated MCF-7 breast cancer cells, since it has been
shown that TWIST1/N-cadherin signaling is deficient in
MCF-7 cancer cells [19, 20]. As in LNCaP cells, metformin
activated p-AMPK and reduced p65 and promoted cell
death in MCF-7 cells. However, suppression of AMPK
prevented metformin-mediated down-regulation of
p65 and compromised metformin-mediated cell death
(Fig. 5K–5L). Similarly, over-expression of N-cadherin in
MCF-7 cells prevented metformin-mediated inhibition of
p65 and led to resistance to metformin mediated cell death
in MCF-7 cells (Fig. 5M–5N). We further confirmed our
findings by xenograft experiments where AMPK was stably
suppressed in LNCaP and found that inhibition of AMPK
rendered the tumors more resistant to metformin. Next,
we subcutaneously injected stable LNCaP/shAMPK cells
into mice and generated LNCaP/shAMPK xenografts. The
metformin-treated LNCaP/shAMPK xenografts resulted
in decreased tumor size as compared to untreated group
(Fig. O-P). Here, we have shown that in the setting of
TWIST1 and N-cadherin deficiency, metformin-mediated
anti-tumor activity is AMPK dependent in different cancer
tissues. This finding is in contrast to cells that contain
a functional TWIST and N-cadherin where metforminmediated cell death is AMPK-independent.

Metformin-mediated antitumor activity in
TWIST/N-cadherin deficient cells is AMPKdependent
We have demonstrated that metformin-mediated
antitumor activities in wild-type TWIST/N-cadherin
cancer cells require TWIST1/N-cadherin/p65 signaling and
are AMPK independent. Here we wished to evaluate the
metformin-induced signalling pathway in cells with absent
TWIST1 and N-Cadherin expression. We used LNCaP
prostate cancer cells as a model and found that there
was no detectable expression of TWIST1 or N-cadherin
(Fig. 5A). After exposure to metformin, expression of
p-AMPK and c-Fos were increased, accompanied by
reduced levels of p65. The AMPK activator, AICAR,
led to similar findings (Fig. 5A). Conversely, compound
C, a specific AMPK inhibitor, reversed metforminmediated AMPK activation and down-regulation of p65,
and compromised metformin-mediated inhibition of cell
viability (Fig. 5B–5C). Suppression of AMPK in LNCaP
cells, prevented metformin-mediated inhibition of p65
and activation of c-Fos, thus compromised metforminmediated apoptosis (Fig. 5D–5F). Similarly, stable ectopic
expression of N-cadherin in LNCaP cells (LNCaP/N-cad
cells) led to persistent expression of N-cadherin and
p65 despite treatment with metformin, while p-AMPK
levels were elevated with metformin exposure (Fig.
5G). Over-expression of N-cadherin in LNCaP cells
also compromised metformin-mediated inhibition of cell
viability (Fig. 5H). In addition, we developed a LNCaP
subline that is resistant to metformin (LNCaP/met) and
found that protein level of p-AMPK, p65 and c-Fos were
not affected after treatment with metformin, compared
with parental LNCaP cells (Fig. 5I–5J), suggesting
resistance to metformin and lack of metformin-induced
cell death. Therefore, AMPK regulates metformin
sensitivity only when TWIST1/N-cadherin signaling is
deficient.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Levels of N-cadherin, NF-kB and AMPK predict
post-surgical recurrence in prostate cancer after
treatment of metformin
In our in-vitro and animal studies we have
demonstrated that metformin inhibits tumor growth and
apoptosis via two alternative pathways. Whether metformin
inhibits TWSIT1/N-cadherin or metformin activates AMPK
signaling depends on the presence of TWIST1/N-cadherin
signaling. Therefore, we next asked whether these molecules
could be useful clinical biomarkers of recurrence in cancer
patients who are concurrently being treated with metformin
for management of diabetes. To answer this question, we
utilized our cohort of 984 prostate cancer patients who
were surgically treated with radical prostatectomy between
1993 to 1999 and have a median follow-up of 7.9 years. To
focus our attentions on individuals at risk of recurrence, we
identified 49 surgically treated patients with Gleason score
7 or higher who were being treated with metformin. Among
these, 26 had recurrence of prostate cancer in the form of
detectable PSA or metastatic disease, while 23 patients did
not have recurrence. Next, to determine whether biomarkers
in the setting of metformin treatment may be predictive
of prostate cancer recurrence, we evaluated the radical
prostatectomy specimens from the 49 patients who were
treated with metformin for TWIST1, N-cadherin, p-p65
and p-AMPK immunoreactivity (Fig. S1). We found that
16/26 patients who recurred and only 7/23 patient who did
not recur with prostate cancer showed immunoreactivity
to N-cadherin (p  <0.05, Table 1). Similar findings were
28979

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Metformin inhibited tumor growth in vivo. PC3 cells (2 × 106) were injected into both flanks of nude mice. When tumors

developed to a size of approximately 0.15 cm3, the mice were randomly distributed into 3 groups (5 mice/group) and untreated and treated
with i.p. doxorubicin (every 5 days X 4 cycles with 4 mg/kg) or p.o. metformin (200 ug/ml, diluted in the drinking water). Tumor volume
was measured every 5 days. A. Tumor growth rates. B. Representative images of PC3 tumor xenografts without (-) or with (+) Metformin
or Dox. C. Tumors were harvested at day 75 and apoptosis in the tumor was detected by measuring cleaved Caspase 3. D. immunoblot was
performed to detect protein expression in xenografts. PC3/N-cad and PC3/control xenografts were generated and treated as described above.
E. Tumor growth rates were measured. F. Representative images of tumor xenografts without (-) or with (+) Metformin. G. Tumors were
harvested at day 75 and apoptosis in the tumor was detected by measuring cleaved Caspase 3. N-cadherin shRNA was stably transfected
into PC3/met cells, and then the re-constructed cells were injected into nude mice subcutaneously to generate PC3/met/shN-cad xenografts.
H. Representative images of tumor xenografts without (-) or with (+) Metformin. I. Tumor growth rates were measured. J. Tumors were
harvested at day 75 and immunoblot was performed. The data represent means of average determinants ± SEM. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01. All
experiments were repeated independently at least three times with similar results. (Scale bar, 50 μm)

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

28980

Oncotarget

Figure 5: A Metformin-mediated antitumor activity in TWIST/N-cadherin deficient cells is AMPK-dependent. A. PC3

cells were treated with metformin and LNCaP cells were treated with 5 mM of metformin, 500 μM of AICAR, respectively. Immunoblot
was performed. B. LNCaP cells were treated with 5 mM of metformin or combination of metformin and compound C (20 μM), and
immunoblot was performed. C. Cell viability was evaluated by MTS assay. D. AMPK shRNA was stably transfected into LNCaP cells and
then the re-constructed LNCaP/shAMPK and control cells were treated with metformin, and immnoblot was performed. E. Cell viability
was evaluated by MTS assay. F. Apoptosis was detected by Annexin V assays. G. N-cadherin and control vector were stably transfected
into LNCaP cells and then the re-constructed LNCaP/N-cad and control stable cells were treated with 5 mM of metformin, and immunoblot
was performed. H. Cell viability was evaluated by MTS assay. I. LNCaP/met cells were treated with 5 mM of metformin, and immunoblot
was performed. J. Cell viability was evaluated by MTS assay. K. AMPK shRNA was stably transfected into MCF-7 breast cancer cells
and then the re-constructed MCF-7/shAMPK and control cells were treated with 5 mM of metformin followed by immunoblot analysis.
L. Cell viability was evaluated by MTS assay. M. N-cadherin and control vectors were stably transfected into MCF-7 cancer cells and
then the re-constructed MCF-7/N-cad cells were treated with 5 mM of metformin followed by immunoblot analysis. N. Cell viability was
evaluated by MTS assay. LNCaP/shAMPK xenografts were generated and treated as described in Figure 4. O. Representative images of
tumor xenografts without (-) or with (+) Metformin treatment. P. Tumor growth rates were measured. The data represent means of average
determinants ± SEM. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01. All experiments were repeated independently at least three times with similar results.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

28981

Oncotarget

obtained for p-p65 (19/26 patients with immunoreactivity
recurred vs. 8/23 without immunoreactivity who recurred;
p < 0.05). To further confirm our biomarker findings, we
observed the protective effect of p-AMPK expression in
metformin treated prostate cancer patients where 14/23
patients with p-AMPK did not recur, whereas only 8/26 with
p-AMPK expression recurred (p <0.05). While N-cadherin,
p-p65 and p-AMPK immunoreactivity were predictive of
recurrence in surgically treated prostate cancer patients who
have Gleason 7 or higher disease, expression TWIST1 was
not predictive of recurrence (Table 1), as a likely result of
our low sample number in this select group of patients.
The patient cohort findings further support our
in-vitro and in-vivo studies and might explain why
some patients may benefit from the anti-tumor effect
of metformin. Potentially, these biomarkers may
prove fruitful in predicting likelihood of sensitivity to
metformin’s anti tumor effects.

and glucose uptake into muscle and adipose tissue. Recently,
the antitumor effect of metformin has been evaluated for
treatment efficacy of different types of cancer [22]. Clinical
and epidemiological studies have shown that metformin
lowers cancer incidence and increased cumulative
duration of metformin exposure in patients with cancer
is associated with decreased mortality [5, 23]. Metformin
may influence cancer cells indirectly by decreasing insulin
levels or directly by influencing cancer cells’ viability via
activation of AMPK signaling pathway [5, 7], but many
other molecular mechanisms of metformin’s action in
cancer have also been demonstrated such as regulation of
p53/REDD1 [9], modulation of DICER and c-MYC [24],
and stimulation of inflammatory pathways [25]. Therefore,
the molecular mechanisms of metformin’s antitumor effect
need further investigation. In this manuscript we have
shown that molecular mechanism of metformin’s antitumor
activity may be largely dependent on presence or absence
of N-cadherin signaling.
In cells harboring wild-type N-cadherin such as
PC3 prostate cancer cells or T24 bladder cancer cells,
metformin suppressed N-cadherin, and leading to
decreased cellular viability. Suppression of N-cadherin by
GC-4 (Fig. 1), a neutralizing antibody, or siRNA (Fig. 3O)
achieved similar results. Over-expression of N-cadherin
led to resistance to metformin mediated cell death
(Fig. 2A–2C). In metformin-resistant PC3/met cancer

DISCUSSION
Metformin is the most commonly prescribed oral
anti-diabetic drug worldwide. It is used in diabetes due
to excellent efficacy in reducing insulin resistance and
mortality as well as fewer side effects, compared to
other anti-diabetic medications [21]. In diabetic patients,
metformin inhibits gluconeogenesis, stimulates glycolysis

Table 1: Protein expression of N-cadherin, TWIST, p-p65 and p-AMPK by recurrence/
non-recurrence group
Recurrence (n = 26)

Non-recurrence (n = 23)

N-cad (+)

16

7

N-cad (-)

10

16

Recurrence (n = 26)

Non-recurrence (n = 23)

TWIST1 (+)

16

8

TWIST1 (-)

10

15

Recurrence (n = 26)

Non-recurrence (n = 23)

p-p65 (+)

19

8

p-p65 (-)

7

15

Recurrence (n = 26)

Non-recurrence (n = 23)

p-AMPK (+)

8

14

p-AMPK (-)

18

9

P value =0.04

P value =0.08

P value = 0.01

P value= 0.04

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

28982

Oncotarget

cells, N-cadherin levels remained near baseline after
metformin treatment in contrast to the N-cadherin levels
which were reduced in the parental cell population
after metformin treatment (Fig. 2J–2K), suggesting the
important role that N-cadherin may have in metformin
mediated cancer cell death. In in-vivo studies, we observe
similar findings and show that high level of N-cadherin
makes tumors more resistant to metformin and suppression
of N-cadherin sensitizes tumors to metformin (Fig.  4).
Ironically, in cells with wild-type N-cadherin levels,
we found that AMPK expression levels did not affect
sensitivity to metformin (Fig. 2D–2G). These results
indicate that down-regulation of N-cadherin, rather than
activation of AMPK plays a major role in metforminmediated antitumor activities when N-cadherin is
expressed. Clinical trials using N-cadherin antagonists,
such as ADH-1, are currently underway and may have
significant antitumor activity in different malignancies
[26, 27]. Here, we have shown that N-cadherin is likely
involved in mediating metformin’s antitumor activity.
In order to further explore the molecular mechanisms
of metformin-mediated antitumor activities, we measured
NF-kappaB subunit levels, p65, a downstream molecule of
N-cadherin and found that metformin regulates NF-kappaB
signaling via inhibiting N-cadherin, rather than directly
regulating NF-kappaB (Fig. 3A–3C). Over-expression of p65
made cancer cells more resistant to metformin (Fig. 3D–
3E), while silencing of NF-kappaB sensitized cancer cells
to metformin (Fig. 3F–3G). In metformin-resistant PC3/
met cells, treatment with GC-4 (N-cadherin neutralizing
antibody) or Bay 11–7085 (a specific NF-kappaB inhibitor)
sensitized PC3/met to metformin (Fig.  3H–3I). These
results suggest that metformin plays an antitumor role
through N-cadherin/NF-kappaB pathway. Previously, we
have shown that c-Fos [12], c-FLIP [28] and FBXL10
[13] play important roles in apoptotic mediated pathways.
Therefore, we evaluated these established downstream
molecules of NF-kappaB and found that treatment with
metformin concurrently affects expression of c-Fos, c-FLIP
and FBXL10 via NF-kappaB (Fig. 3A). Based on this result,
it is very likely that c-Fos, c-FLIP and FBXL10 signaling
is involved in metformin-mediated antitumor activities.
Moreover, NF-kappaB plays a significant role not only
in cancer, but also in inflammation, so anti-cancer effects
of metformin may be also involve NF-kappaB-mediated
inflammatory pathways [29].
TWIST1 and SNAIL are two important transcriptional
activators of N-cadherin [18, 30, 31]. Therefore, we wished
to further explore whether or not metformin could regulate
N-cadherin via affecting its upstream molecules. We
detected both expression of TWIST1 and SNAIL and found
that metformin down-regulated N-cadherin and TWIST1
concurrently and level of N-cadherin closely correlated
with level of TWIST1 (Fig. 3J–3K). However, we did
not observe alterations in SNAIL levels after metformin
treatment (data not shown). Ectopic expression of TWIST1
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

up-regulated N-cadherin/NF-kappaB signaling and led to
more resistant cancer cells (Fig. 3L-3M). Suppression of
TWIST1 sensitized PC3/met resistant cells to metformin
(Fig. 3N–3O). In other studies, it has been demonstrated
that TWIST1 also plays an essential role in metastatic
cancer. Over-expression of TWIST1 is very common in
malignancies. Therefore, antagonists against TWIST1 may
hold further promise for cancer therapeutics [32, 33].
Because some cancer cells do not have TWIST1/Ncadherin signaling, such as prostatic cancer LNCaP cells
or breast cancer MCF-7 cells, we wished to determine
whether molecular mechanism of metformin’s action in
these N-cadherin deficiency cancer cells. We treated LNCaP
cells with metformin and found that metformin activates
AMPK, accompanied by reduced level of NF-kappaB
signaling (Fig. 5A). Inhibition of AMPK, using a specific
AMPK inhibitor, compound C or AMPK shRNA, reverses
metformin-mediated inhibition of NF-kappaB and cell
proliferation (Fig. 5B–5E). Over-expression of N-cadherin
in deficient cells prevents metformin-mediated inhibition of
NF-kappaB, and makes cells more resistant to metformin
(Fig. 5G–5H). We observed similar findings in breast cancer
MCF-7 cells (Fig. 5K–5N). In LNCaP/met resistant cells,
treatment with metformin does not affect expression of
AMPK or NF-kappaB signaling (Fig. 5I–5J). Xenograft
studies showed that silencing of AMPK makes tumors more
resistant to metformin (Fig. 5O–5P). Based on these results,
we demonstrate that anti-cancer effects of metformin may
be through activation of AMPK signaling in N-cadherin
deficient cancer cells.
At last, we evaluated a cohort of 984 surgically treated
prostate cancer patients with long term follow-up (median
follow-up of 7.9 years). We focused on patients with Gleason
grade 7 or higher cancer, since this group of patients is at
highest risk of prostate cancer recurrence. We identified
49 patients who were treated with metformin during the
course of their care, and found that increased expression of
N-cadherin and p-p65 and reduced expression of AMPK
were each associated with higher likelihood of prostate
cancer recurrence (Table 1 and Fig. S1 P < 0.05). While
additional clinical studies are required to determine the role
that metformin may have in malignant processes, our initial
findings suggest that biomarkers may be able to predict those
individuals who may benefit the most from metformin as a
drug that controls hyperglycemia and insulin resistance and
as an anti-cancer agent.
In conclusion, we demonstrate, for the first time,
that two separate pathways, AMPK-independent and
AMPK-dependent pathways, may account for metformin’s
anti-cancer effects. We show that in the presence of
N-cadherin expressing cancer cells metformin inhibits
TWIST1/N-Cadherin/NF-kappaB signaling independent
of AMPK (Fig. 6). In contrast, in N-cadherin deficient
cells, metformin plays an antitumor role via AMPKdependent pathways leading to subsequent inhibition of
NF-kappaB (Fig. 6). These biomarkers may be useful for
28983

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Schematic diagram of molecular mechanisms of metformin-mediated antitumor activity in N-cadherin
expressing cancer cells vs. N-cadherin deficient cancer cells. In N-cadherin expressing cancer cells, following metformin

treatment, TWIST1 was reduced. Reduction of TWIST1 leads to down-regulation of N-cadherin, thus inhibiting NF-kappaB signaling.
However, in N-cadherin deficient cancer cells, following metformin treatment, AMPK was first activated. Subsequently, activated
AMPK inhibits NF-kappaB signaling.

identification of patients who would benefit from the antineoplastic effects of metformin.

cleaved Caspase 3 (9661) were purchased from Abcam,
Cell Signaling and Santa Cruz. Metformin (D150959)
and Doxorubicin hydrochloride (D1515), Bay11-7085
(B5681), AICAR (A9978) and Monoclonal Anti-NCadherin, clone GC-4 (C3865) were purchased from
Sigma. shRNA AMPKα1 (TRCN0000000858), shRNA
N-cadherin (TRCN0000053978), siRNA AMPK α1 (M005027-02-0005), siRNA N-cadherin (M-011605-010005), Non-Targeting siRNA #1 (D-001210-01-05) and
siRNA TWIST1 (M-006434-02-0005) were purchased
from Dharmacon. siRNA II NF-κB p65 (6534) was
from Cell Signaling. Nuclear extraction was prepared
according to the manufacturer’s instruction (Pierce
Biotechnology).

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Tissue culture, transfection
PC3, T24, 786-O, LNCaP and MCF-7 cell lines
were maintained in RPMI 1640 containing 10% FCS at
37°C with 5% CO2. Stable PC3/N-cad, PC3/TWIST1,
PC3/p65 and LNCaP/N-cad cells were established using
1 mg/ml G418 (Invitrogen) after transfection of wild-type
N-cadherin, TWIST1, AMPKα1 or p65 expression vector,
respectively. Transfection of plasmid and siRNA were
performed using Fugene 6 or XtremeGENE according to
manufacturer’s instructions (Roche). PC3/met and LNCaP/
met cells were metformin-resistant sublines established
from parental PC3 cells or LNCaP cells by metformin
treatment selection. Briefly, PC3 cells and LNCaP cells
were treated with 5 mM of metformin. After 48 hours,
by removing metformin and replenishing the cells with
full medium, viable cells were rescued. When the plates
reached 80% confluence, the cells again were treated with
5 mM of metformin for 48 hours. The cycle was repeated
and PC3/met and LNCaP/met cells were generated after
10 weeks and maintained in medium with metformin.

Cell viability and apoptosis assay
Cell viability was determined by 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT)
method according to the manufacturer’s instruction (Roche
Diagnostics), as previously described [28]. TUNEL assay
was performed according to the manufacturer’s instruction (Roche Diagnostics). The percentage of apoptotic
cells was determined by analysis of Annexin V-positive
cells according to manufacturer’s instruction (Invitrogen).
Apoptotic cells were quantified by flow cytometry (BD
FACSAria I cell sorter, BD bioscience; FACSDiva™ 6.0
Software).

Reagents

Nuclear extraction, Western Blotting and
immunofluorescence staining

Antibodies to TBP (ab51841), c-Fos (4384),
GAPDH (2118), p65 (4764), N-cadherin (4061),
E-cadherin (3195), AKT (4685), p-AKT (4058), PhosphoAMPKα (Thr172) (2535), AMPKα (2603), TWIST (SC15393), FBXL10 (ab5199, ab64920), c-FLIPL (06-864),
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Nuclear extraction was prepared according to
the manufacturer’s instruction (Pierce Biotechnology).
28984

Oncotarget

Immunoblot was performed as previously described
[28]. Metformin-treated cells were fixed in 4%
paraformaldehyde, permeabilized with 0.2% Triton
X-100/PBS and incubated with anti-N-cadherin,
TWIST1 antibodies (1:1000), respectively, followed
by incubation with Cy3-conjugated Affinipure goat anti
rabbit IgG (111-167-003, Jackson Immunoresearch Lab).
The sections were counterstained with DAPI and mounted
with mounting medium (Vector Lab).

Animal Studies Ethics Permission

Tumor Xenograft Studies

After obtaining institutional review board approval,
a total of 984 patients with prostatic cancer (Gleason
score ≥ 7) after radical prostatectomy (1993–1999) were
included in this study. Medical records pertaining to the
initial cancer diagnosis were collected, and information
on cancer characteristics and treatment was extracted
including tumor stage, Gleason score, type of surgery,
radiation, chemotherapy and hormone therapy. Patients’
age and date of initiation of metformin therapy were
collected. From our cohort of 984 patients who had
undergone radical prostatectomy for management
of prostate cancer, we identified 49 who were using
metformin for management of diabetes and were
diagnosed to have Gleason 7 or greater prostate cancer
on the final surgical pathology evaluation. We evaluated
the prostate cancer samples for N-cadherin, p65 and
AMPK expression and assessed whether these biomarkers
may have any clinical utility. Among the 49 patients, 26
patients were found to have recurrence and 23 patients had
no recurrence during the followup period. Biochemical
recurrence was defined as a postoperative serum PSA
above the minimally detectable value. Paraffin embedded
samples were used for immunohistochemical analysis.

The mice were housed and maintained in laminar
flow cabinets under specific pathogen-free conditions. All
animal experiments were approved by the Institutional
Animal Care and Use Committee at Massachusetts
General Hospital, and performed in accordance with
ethical guidelines.

Patients

PC3 cells (2 × 106) were injected into both
flanks of nude mice. When tumors developed to a size
of approximately 0.15 cm3, the mice were randomly
distributed into 3 groups (5 mice/group) and untreated
or treated i.p. with doxorubicin (every 5 days × 4 cycles
with 4 mg/kg) or p.o. metformin (200 ug/ml, diluted in
the drinking water). Tumor volume was measured every 5
days. Apoptosis in the tumor was detected by measuring
cleavage of cleaved Caspase 3.

PC3/N-cad, PC3/met/shN-cad and LNCAP/
shAMPK xenografts
The stable PC3/N-cadherin and PC3/control
cells were established as described previously [13].
The 1 × 107 PC3/N-cad and PC3/control cells were
suspended in 50% Matrigel (BD Biosciences) and
injected subcutaneously into two sites per mouse
(Female NCr homozygous nude mice, Taconic Farms,
Germantown, NY), respectively. Tumor growth was
monitored by palpation, and the onset when tumors
were detectable was noted. Ten mice harboring PC3/Ncad cells and 10 mice harboring PC3/Control cells
were randomly divided into two groups, respectively
(each subgroup contained five mice): control groups
were injected with PBS and treatment groups were
treated with p.o. metformin (200 ug/ml, diluted in the
drinking water). Murine body weight and tumor size
were measured every five days. Tumor volume was
quantified (volume = width2 × length × 0.52). Seventy
five days after treatment, all animals were euthanized,
and xenografts were harvested and assessed for
immunohistochemistry and apoptosis. Tumor tissues
were fixed in 10% formalin and embedded in paraffin
routinely. Immunohistochemistry was carried out as
previously described [34]. Tissue samples for Western
blot analysis were preserved in liquid nitrogen and then
prepared in radioimmunoprecipitation assay buffer with
2% SDS. The stable PC3/met/shN-cad and LNCAP/
shAMPK cells were established as described previously
[13]. Experimental protocol is described in “PC3/N-cad
xenografts”.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Statistical Analysis
Descriptive statistics were presented as mean and
standard deviation. Patients with prostatic cancers were
divided into 2 groups based on biochemical recurrence
and non- biochemical recurrence, and descriptive analyses
comparing clinical information were performed. Statistical
analyses were performed with JMP Pro version 11 (SAS
Institute Inc., Cary, NC). Chi-squared or Fisher’s exact
tests were performed for categorical variables. All tests
were two-tailed, and P < 0.05 was considered statistically
significant.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Grant support: NIH/R01 DK091353

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

28985

Oncotarget

REFERENCES

14.	 Dan HC, Cooper MJ, Cogswell PC, Duncan JA, Ting JP,
Baldwin AS. Akt-dependent regulation of NF-{kappa}B is
controlled by mTOR and Raptor in association with IKK.
Genes Dev. 2008; 22:1490–1500.

1.	 Siegel R, Ward E, Brawley O, Jemal A. Cancer statistics,
2011 the impact of eliminating socioeconomic and racial
disparities on premature cancer deaths. CA Cancer J Clin.
61:212–236.

15.	 Romashkova JA, Makarov SS. NF-kappaB is a target of
AKT in anti-apoptotic PDGF signalling. Nature. 1999;
401:86–90.

2.	 CDC: National Diabetes Statistics Report. 2014;

16.	 Tatsuya Shimomura EK, Tran Chao P., Yamashiro Joyce,
Wainberg Zev A., Reiter Robert E.. N-cadherin monoclonal antibody as a therapeutic agent against chemoresistance
in prostate cancer. Cancer Research. 2011; 71. Abstract
nr 5052.

3.	 Evans JM, Donnelly LA, Emslie-Smith AM, Alessi DR,
Morris AD. Metformin and reduced risk of cancer in diabetic patients. Bmj. 2005; 330:1304–1305.
4.	 Jiralerspong S, Palla SL, Giordano SH, Meric-Bernstam F,
Liedtke C, Barnett CM, Hsu L, Hung MC, Hortobagyi GN,
Gonzalez-Angulo AM. Metformin and pathologic complete
responses to neoadjuvant chemotherapy in diabetic patients
with breast cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2009; 27:3297–3302.

17.	 Hui L, Zhang S, Dong X, Tian D, Cui Z, Qiu X. Prognostic
significance of twist and N-cadherin expression in NSCLC.
PLoS One. 8:e62171.
18.	 Alexander NR, Tran NL, Rekapally H, Summers CE,
Glackin C, Heimark RL. N-cadherin gene expression
in prostate carcinoma is modulated by integrin-dependent nuclear translocation of Twist1. Cancer Res. 2006;
66:3365–3369.

5.	 Margel D, Urbach DR, Lipscombe LL, Bell CM,
Kulkarni G, Austin PC, Fleshner N. Metformin Use and
All-Cause and Prostate Cancer-Specific Mortality Among
Men With Diabetes. J Clin Oncol. 31:3069–3075.
6.	 Preston MA, Riis AH, Ehrenstein V, Breau RH, Batista JL,
Olumi AF, Mucci LA, Adami HO, Sorensen HT. Metformin
Use and Prostate Cancer Risk. Eur Urol.

19.	 Chung S, Yao J, Suyama K, Bajaj S, Qian X, Loudig OD,
Eugenin EA, Phillips GR, Hazan RB. N-cadherin regulates
mammary tumor cell migration through Akt3 suppression.
Oncogene. 32:422–430.

7.	 Zakikhani M, Dowling R, Fantus IG, Sonenberg N,
Pollak M. Metformin is an AMP kinase-dependent
growth inhibitor for breast cancer cells. Cancer Res. 2006;
66:10269–10273.

20.	 Vesuna F, Lisok A, Kimble B, Domek J, Kato Y, van der
Groep P, Artemov D, Kowalski J, Carraway H, van Diest P,
Raman V. Twist contributes to hormone resistance in
breast cancer by downregulating estrogen receptor-alpha.
Oncogene. 31:3223–3234.

8.	 Ben Sahra I, Le Marchand-Brustel Y, Tanti JF, Bost F.
Metformin in cancer therapy: a new perspective for an old
antidiabetic drug? Mol Cancer Ther. 9:1092–1099.

21.	 Johnson JA, Majumdar SR, Simpson SH, Toth EL.
Decreased mortality associated with the use of metformin
compared with sulfonylurea monotherapy in type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2002; 25:2244–2248.

9.	 Ben Sahra I, Regazzetti C, Robert G, Laurent K,
Le Marchand-Brustel Y, Auberger P, Tanti JF,
Giorgetti-Peraldi S, Bost F. Metformin, independent of
AMPK, induces mTOR inhibition and cell-cycle arrest
through REDD1. Cancer Res. 71:4366–4372.

22.	 Dowling RJ, Goodwin PJ, Stambolic V. Understanding
the benefit of metformin use in cancer treatment. BMC
Med. 9:33.

10.	 Kato K, Gong J, Iwama H, Kitanaka A, Tani J, Miyoshi H,
Nomura K, Mimura S, Kobayashi M, Aritomo Y, Kobara H,
Mori H, Himoto T, Okano K, Suzuki Y, Murao K, et al.
The antidiabetic drug metformin inhibits gastric cancer
cell proliferation in vitro and in vivo. Mol Cancer Ther.
11:549–560.

23.	 Penney KL, Stampfer MJ. The time is ripe for a randomized
trial of metformin in clinically localized prostate cancer. J
Clin Oncol. 31:3054–3055.

11.	 Zhuang Y, Miskimins WK. Cell cycle arrest in Metformin
treated breast cancer cells involves activation of AMPK,
downregulation of cyclin D1, and requires p27Kip1 or
p21Cip1. J Mol Signal. 2008; 3:18.

24.	 Blandino G, Valerio M, Cioce M, Mori F, Casadei L,
Pulito C, Sacconi A, Biagioni F, Cortese G, Galanti S,
Manetti C, Citro G, Muti P, Strano S. Metformin elicits
anticancer effects through the sequential modulation of
DICER and c-MYC. Nat Commun. 3:865.

12.	 Zhang X, Zhang L, Yang H, Huang X, Otu H,
Libermann TA, DeWolf WC, Khosravi-Far R, Olumi AF.
c-Fos as a proapoptotic agent in TRAIL-induced apoptosis
in prostate cancer cells. Cancer Res. 2007; 67:9425–9434.

25.	 Hirsch HA, Iliopoulos D, Struhl K. Metformin inhibits the
inflammatory response associated with cellular transformation and cancer stem cell growth. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
110:972–977.

13.	 Ge R, Wang Z, Zeng Q, Xu X, Olumi AF. F-box protein 10, an NF-kappaB-dependent anti-apoptotic protein,
regulates TRAIL-induced apoptosis through modulating
c-Fos/c-FLIP pathway. Cell Death Differ. 18:1184–1195.

26.	 Shintani Y, Fukumoto Y, Chaika N, Grandgenett PM,
Hollingsworth MA, Wheelock MJ, Johnson KR. ADH-1
suppresses N-cadherin-dependent pancreatic cancer progression. Int J Cancer. 2008; 122:71–77.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

28986

Oncotarget

27.	 Augustine CK, Yoshimoto Y, Gupta M, Zipfel PA,
Selim MA, Febbo P, Pendergast AM, Peters WP, Tyler DS.
Targeting N-cadherin enhances antitumor activity of cytotoxic therapies in melanoma treatment. Cancer Res. 2008;
68:3777–3784.

31.	 Oda H, Tsukita S, Takeichi M. Dynamic behavior of the
cadherin-based cell-cell adhesion system during Drosophila
gastrulation. Dev Biol. 1998; 203:435–450.

28.	 Zhang X, Jin TG, Yang H, DeWolf WC, Khosravi-Far R,
Olumi AF. Persistent c-FLIP(L) expression is necessary and
sufficient to maintain resistance to tumor necrosis factorrelated apoptosis-inducing ligand-mediated apoptosis in
prostate cancer. Cancer Res. 2004; 64:7086–7091.

33.	 Hsien-Ming Wu AVS, Leung Peter C.K.. Growth hormonereleasing hormone (GHRH) antagonist attenuates cell motility of human endometrial cancer by down-regulating Twist
and N-Cadherin expression. Cancer Research. 2013; 73.

32.	 Khan MA, Chen HC, Zhang D, Fu J. Twist: a molecular
target in cancer therapeutics. Tumour Biol. 34:2497–2506.

34.	 Olumi AF, Grossfeld GD, Hayward SW, Carroll PR,
Tlsty  TD, Cunha GR. Carcinoma-associated fibroblasts
direct tumor progression of initiated human prostatic epithelium. Cancer Res. 1999; 59:5002–5011.

29.	 Lawrence T. The nuclear factor NF-kappaB pathway in
inflammation. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2009;
1:a001651.
30.	 Hao L, Ha JR, Kuzel P, Garcia E, Persad S. Cadherin switch
from E- to N-cadherin in melanoma progression is regulated by the PI3K/PTEN pathway through Twist and Snail.
Br J Dermatol. 166:1184–1197.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

28987

Oncotarget

