Original Article

Epidermal Growth Factor Down-Regulates the
Expression of Neutrophil Gelatinase-Associated
Lipocalin (NGAL) Through E-Cadherin in
Pancreatic Cancer Cells
Zhimin Tong, MD, PhD1; Subhankar Chakraborty, MD2; Bokyung Sung, PhD3; Pooja Koolwal, MD1;
Sukhwinder Kaur, PhD2; Bharat B. Aggarwal, PhD3; Sendurai A. Mani, PhD4; Robert S. Bresalier, MD1;
Surinder K. Batra, PhD2; and Sushovan Guha, MD, PhD1

BACKGROUND: The authors previously reported that neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL) overexpression significantly blocked invasion and angiogenesis of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). They also demonstrated a loss of NGAL expression in the advanced stages of PDAC. However, little is known regarding the
mechanisms of NGAL regulation in PDAC. Because the epidermal growth factor (EGF)-EGF receptor (EGFR) axis is
up-regulated significantly in PDAC, they examined EGF-mediated NGAL regulation in these cells. METHODS: The
NGAL-positive cell lines AsPC-1 and BxPC-3 were used as a model system. Quantitative real-time polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR), Western blot analysis, and immunofluorescence studies were used to investigate EGF-mediated
effects on NGAL expression. E-cadherin expression was manipulated using lentiviral overexpression or small hairpin
RNA constructs. NGAL promoter activity was assessed by luciferase-reporter assay and electrophoretic mobility shift
assay. RESULTS: NGAL expression was positively associated with tumor differentiation and was down-regulated significantly after EGF treatment along with a concomitant reduction of E-cadherin expression in PDAC cells. E-cadherin
down-regulation was partly through the EGFR-dependent mitogen-activated protein kinase (MEK)/extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) (MEK-ERK) signaling pathway. In addition, E-cadherin down-regulation reduced NGAL
expression in PDAC cells, whereas overexpression of E-cadherin led to increased NGAL expression and partly rescued
the inhibition of NGAL expression by EGF. Furthermore, EGF, in part through E-cadherin, reduced NGAL promoter
activity by blocking nuclear factor jB (NF-jB) activation. CONCLUSIONS: The current study demonstrated for the
first time that EGF potently blocked NGAL expression in PDAC cells. This effect was mediated in part through activation of the EGFR-MEK-ERK signaling pathway, which, in turn, down-regulated E-cadherin with a subsequent reduction
in NF-jB activation. These findings illustrate a novel mechanism by which EGF regulates NGAL expression in PDAC.
C 2010 American Cancer Society.
Cancer 2011;117:2408–18. V
KEYWORDS: neutrophil gelatinase associated lipocalin, epidermal growth factor, E-cadherin, nuclear factor jB,
pancreatic cancer.

Neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL), also referred as lipocalin 2, is a 25-kD, secreted protein that

belongs to the lipocalin family.1 NGAL binds to and transports a variety of lipophilic substances through a 3-dimensional
b-barrel structure that is common to lipocalins.1 It also is considered an antimicrobial factor because of its ability to
deplete iron, which is required for bacterial growth.2 In addition, increased NGAL expression has been observed in a variety of pathologic conditions, including inflammation,3,4 acute ischemic renal injury,5 and various human cancers.3,6,7
There are substantial data to support a key role for NGAL in cancer progression. For instance, NGAL expression is
up-regulated and associated with enhanced tumor growth and invasiveness in breast cancer8 and in esophageal squamous
Corresponding author: Sushovan Guha, MD, PhD, Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition, Unit 436, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston,
TX 77030; Fax: (713) 563-4398; sguha@mdanderson.org
1
Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas; 2Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Eppley Cancer Institute, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska; 3Department of Experimental Therapeutics, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas; 4Department of Molecular Pathology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas

We thank Ann M. Sutton in the Department of Scientific Publications at The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center for reviewing this article.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.25803, Received: August 18, 2010; Revised: October 5, 2010; Accepted: October 25, 2010, Published online December 29, 2010 in Wiley
Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

2408

Cancer

June 1, 2011

EGF Inhibits NGAL in Pancreatic Cancer/Tong et al

cell carcinoma.9 In contrast, NGAL acts as an antitumor
and antimetastatic factor in ovarian,10 colon,11 and
pancreatic cancers.12 Moreover, NGAL has emerged as a
biomarker for detecting early stage cancer and monitoring
the progression of established cancers, including ovarian10
and pancreatic cancers.12,13 NGAL is not expressed by
normal pancreatic ducts but is expressed aberrantly in the
early preneoplastic stages of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), termed pancreatic intraepithelial
neoplasias (PanINs).13 Furthermore, NGAL expression in
established PDAC correlates inversely with the grade of
differentiation.13 However, the mechanism by which
NGAL expression is regulated in PDAC cells remains
unknown.
It is well documented that growth factors, especially
epidermal growth factor (EGF) and EGF receptor
(EGFR)-driven signaling pathways, play an important
role in cancer progression.14 The overexpression of EGF
and EGFR has been reported in various cancer types,
including PDAC.15,16 It has been demonstrated that EGF
treatment in vitro enhances the invasiveness and metastatic properties of several different cancer cells, including
ovarian,17 cervical,18 epidermoid,19 and breast cancers.20
In PDAC, both EGF and EGFR are overexpressed and
associated with increased tumor size, advanced clinical
stage, and decreased patient survival.21,22 In addition,
it has been demonstrated that EGF promotes the invasiveness of PDAC cells by activating matrix metalloproteinase-2 and nuclear factor-jB (NF-jB).23,24 However,
the downstream signaling that mediates EGF-induced
PDAC aggressiveness remains poorly understood.
In the current study, we investigated the possible
role of EGF in regulating NGAL expression. We observed
that EGF down-regulates NGAL and E-cadherin expression in PDAC cells in vitro, and this down-regulation
was blocked by EGFR or extracellular signal-regulated
kinase (ERK) pathway inhibitors. Down-regulation and
up-regulation of E-cadherin resulted in decreased and
increased NGAL expression in PDAC cells, respectively.
EGF treatment also was associated with a significant
decrease in NF-jB–mediated transcription of NGAL
messenger RNA (mRNA), whereas mutation of the NFjB binding site (in the NGAL promoter) blocked EGFinduced down-regulation of NGAL expression. Thus, our
findings reveal that EGF inhibits NGAL expression
through an EGFR-driven ERK pathway and involves
the inhibition of NF-jB–mediated transactivation of
NGAL. Furthermore, we demonstrated that E-cadherin
modulates NGAL expression in PDAC cells, suggesting a

Cancer

June 1, 2011

possible mechanism for EGF-induced aggressiveness of
PDAC cells.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cells Lines and Culture Condition
PANC-1, MIA PaCa-2, AsPC-1, and BxPC-3 cells were
purchased from the American Type Culture Collection
(Rockville, Md) and cultured as described previously.12
293FT cells were obtained from Invitrogen (Carlsbad,
Calif) and maintained in Dulbecco modified Eagle
medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and
500 lg/mL G418 antibiotic solution.
Reagents and Treatments
EGF was purchased from Sigma Chemical Company (St.
Louis, Mo); PD98059, U0126, E-cadherin, and phosphorylated ERK antibodies were from purchased from
Cell Signaling Technology (Danvers, Mass); AG1478 was
purchased from Calbiochem (Gibbstown, NJ); and
mouse monoclonal NGAL antibodies were purchased
from Antibody Shop (Gentofte, Demark). A vector
encoding E-cadherin short hairpin RNA (pLKO-shE-cadherin) and its control vectors were gifts from Dr. Sendurai
Mani (The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Tex). pCMV-SPORT6-E-cadherin
was purchased from OPEN Biosystems (Huntsville, Ala).
pGL3-luc/NGAL ( 900) and pGL3-luc/NGAL (NF-jB
mutant [mut]) were gifts from Dr. Tatsushi Muta
(Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan). pGL3-luc/NF-jB
was obtained from Dr. Bharat B. Aggarwal (The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
Tex).
Plasmid Construction, Lentivirus
Production, and Transduction
Human E-cadherin combinational DNA (cDNA) was
released from pCMV-SPORT6 with EcoRV and NotI
and was subcloned into the lentiviral vector pCDHVMV-MCS-EF1-Puro between EcoRI and NotI to create
phE-cadherin. The identity and orientation of this construct were confirmed by DNA sequencing. To produce
lentivirus that overexpressed shE-cadherin or E-cadherin,
we cotransfected pLKO-shE-cadherin, or phE-cadherin
and control vectors with their packaging and envelope
plasmids into 293FT cells using lipofectamine 2000
reagent according to the manufacturer’s instructions
(Invitrogen). Forty-eight hours later, the viral supernatant
was collected and centrifuged at 3000 revolutions per

2409

Original Article

minute for 15 minutes. For transduction with lentivirus,
cells were infected with 2 times diluted virus media
containing 6 lg/mL polybrene for 16 hours. The expression of target proteins was confirmed by quantitative
real-time polymerase chain reaction (Q-PCR) and/or
Western blot analysis.
Q-PCR
RNA isolation and cDNA synthesis were performed as
described before.12 Q-PCR was performed using SYBR
Green on a Bio-Rad thermocycler (Bio-Rad, Hercules,
Calif). PCR primers were designed using Primer3
software. The expression level of a gene was measured
using the 2 DDCt method. Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate
dehydrogenase was used as the internal control.

Western Blot Analysis
Twenty micrograms of cell lysate were separated on a
10% to 12% sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide electrophoresis gels. The separated proteins were transferred
electrophoretically to Immobilon membranes (Millipore,
Bedford, Mass) and incubated with 5% dry milk in Trisbuffered saline with Tween-20 (25 mM Tris-HCl, pH
7.6; 200 mM NaCl; and 0.15% Tween-20) for 1 hour at
room temperature. Target protein levels were measured
by immunoblotting with corresponding antibodies at
1:1000 dilutions for 2 hours at room temperature as
previously described.12

Immunohistochemical Analysis
Tissue microarrays made from formalin-fixed, paraffinembedded tissues were purchased from US Biomax
(Rockville, Md) and comprised normal sections and
PDAC tissue sections (catalog number PA1001). Immunohistochemistry was performed as described previously13
with a 1 in 1,000 concentration of primary antibody
(NGAL rabbit polyclonal) in phosphate-buffered saline.
NGAL expression in the tissues was expressed as either
positive or negative.

Immunofluorescence Staining
Immunofluorescence staining was done as described previously.25 The NGAL antibody was used at a dilution of
1:100 in phosphate-buffered saline. Fluorescent images
were viewed under an IX81 confocal microscope (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan).

2410

Luciferase Assay
To assess the activity of the NGAL promoter, AsPC-1
cells were transfected with a promoter reporter construct
that contained either an intact NF-jB binding site
(pGL3-luc/NGAL [ 900]) or a mutation that prevented
NF-jB binding (pGL3-luc/NGAL [NF-jB mut]). After
16 hours of serum starvation, these cells were treated
with 25 ng/mL EGF. For the NF-jB binding activity
assay, cells were transfected with pGL3-luc/NF-jB after
16 hours of infection with lentivirus carrying either shEcadherin or control lentivirus. pGL4.74 (hRluc/TK;
Promega, Madison, Wis) was cotransfected as a control
for transfection efficiency. Twenty-four hours after transfection, the cells were lysed, and luciferase activity was
measured using the Dual-luciferase Reporter Assay System (Promega) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Firefly luciferase activity was normalized to that of
Renilla luciferase.
Electrophoretic Mobility Shift Assay
To determine NF-jB activation, an electrophoretic
mobility shift assay (EMSA) was performed as described
previously.26 The DNA-protein complex that formed was
separated from the free oligonucleotide on 6.6% native
polyacrylamide gels. The gels were dried and observed,
and the radioactive bands were quantified using a
PhosphorImager (GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ) loaded
with an ImageQuant software (GE Healthcare).
Statistical Analysis
To analyze of the immunohistochemical results, each spot
was considered as an individual sample. NGAL expression, the type of tissue, and the PDAC grade were considered as categorical variables and were compared using a
chi-square test. Continuous variables were compared
using a 2-tailed Student t test. A P value <.05 was considered as significant.

RESULTS
NGAL Expression Correlates With
Tumor Differentiation
In our previous study,12 we demonstrated that NGAL
expression is associated with a well differentiated phenotype in PDAC cell lines. In the current study, we used a
larger pool of primary PDAC samples to analyze NGAL
expression. In total, 73 tissue cores were available for immunohistochemical analysis. Figure 1A,B illustrates that
NGAL was not expressed in any of the normal ducts (0 of

Cancer

June 1, 2011

EGF Inhibits NGAL in Pancreatic Cancer/Tong et al

Figure 1. Neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL) expression is associated with cell differentiation. (A) Immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis revealed NGAL staining at different tumor stages in pancreatic cancer tissues. (B) Variation of NGAL
expression in pancreatic cancer is listed by tumor grade. This summary of the IHC results indicates a correlation between NGAL
expression and cell differentiation.

10) but was expressed in 2 of 10 (20%) normal tissues adjacent to cancer. Furthermore, NGAL was expressed in 50
of 73 PDAC tissue sections (68%), and its expression was
associated with tumor differentiation (P < .0001). Of the
63 PDAC sections that had a defined tumor grade, 16 of
20 (80%) well differentiated, 20 of 26 (77%) moderately
differentiated, and 5 of 21 (24%) poorly differentiated
PDAC tissue sections expressed NGAL. These results suggest that NGAL promotes differentiation in PDAC cells.

EGF is a well known ligand of EGFR. The binding
of EGF to EGFR activates downstream signals that stimulate cancer cell invasion and metastasis. To determine
whether the EGF-mediated inhibition of NGAL is
EGFR-dependent, we treated AsPC-1 and BxPC-3 cells
with 10 lM of AG1478, an EGFR inhibitor, before stimulating them with EGF. AG1478, as expected, abolished
the EGF-mediated down-regulation of NGAL expression
(Fig. 2D).

EGF Treatment Inhibits NGAL Expression
in PDAC Cells
Studies have demonstrated that EGF and EGFR expression is associated with a loss of PDAC cell differentiation,
whereas NGAL expression correlates with a well differentiated phenotype.27,28 To investigate whether EGF is
involved in the down-regulation of NGAL in advanced
PDAC, we analyzed the effect of EGF on 2 NGALexpressing PDAC cell lines: AsPC-1 and BxPC-3. Exposure to EGF in vitro significantly reduced the expression
of NGAL mRNA (by 48.4% in AsPC-1 cells and by
44.7% in BxPC-3 cells) compared with the expression in
untreated cells as determined by Q-PCR (Fig. 2A).
Furthermore, the production of NGAL protein also was
reduced significantly by EGF treatment as determined
by both Western blot analysis (Fig. 2B) and immunofluorescence (Fig. 2C).

EGF Exposure Leads to Down-Regulation
of E-Cadherin
Accumulating evidence demonstrates a positive correlation between high EGF and EGFR expression and
increased cancer invasion and metastasis in PDAC cells. It
also has been demonstrated that loss of E-cadherin is a
causal factor that promotes tumor progression. To determine whether E-cadherin contributes to EGF-mediated
inhibition of NGAL expression, we examined the alteration in E-cadherin by Western blot analysis after exposing
cells to EGF. EGF treatment led to remarkably reduced
E-cadherin protein levels concurrent with a reduction in
NGAL protein levels (Fig. 3A). Furthermore, E-cadherin
expression was positively correlated with NGAL expression in all 4 cell lines (Fig. 3B), suggesting that E-cadherin
may be involved in the down-regulation of NGAL
by EGF.

Cancer

June 1, 2011

2411

Original Article
EGF-Mediated Inhibition of NGAL
Expression Involves E-Cadherin
To further confirm the role of E-cadherin in the EGFmediated inhibition of NGAL expression, we generated a
lentivirus designed to knock down or over express human
E-cadherin. Knock down of E-cadherin by infection with
shE-cadherin significantly reduced NGAL mRNA expression in AsPC-1 and BxPC-3 cells (by 36.4% and 44.8%,
respectively, compared with vector control-transected
cells) as measured by Q-PCR (Fig. 3C). Western blot
analysis also demonstrated a reduction in NGAL protein
expression in cells that were infected with shE-cadherin
(Fig. 3D). Conversely, E-cadherin overexpression led to
an increase in NGAL expression (Fig. 4A) and abolished
the inhibition of NGAL expression by EGF (Fig. 4B).
Taken together, these observations suggest that E-cadherin positively regulates NGAL expression in PDAC cells
and that loss of E-cadherin expression by EGF stimulation
may contribute to EGF-mediated inhibition of NGAL
expression in PDAC cells.

Figure 2. Epidermal growth factor (EGF) reduces neutrophil
gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL) expression and its
effect through the EGF receptor (EGFR). (A) Quantitative
real-time polymerase chain reaction analysis was used to
detect NGAL expression using total RNA extracted from cells
that were treated with 25 ng/mL EGF for 24 hours. NGAL
expression was determined using the 2 DDCt method, and the
results are expressed as the mean  standard error of 3 independent experiments. An asterisks indicates P < .05. (B)
Western blot analysis revealed NGAL expression in AsPC-1
and BxPC-3 cells that were treated for 24 hours with the indicated concentrations of EGF. (C) Immunofluorescent staining
of NGAL is shown. Cells were treated with 25 ng/mL of EGF
in serum-free media. Twenty-four hours later, the cells were
stained for NGAL (green) and nuclei (4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole [DAPI], blue) and were photographed using a confocal microscope (original magnification, 60). (D) Cells
were treated with or without the EGFR antagonist AG1478
(AG) for 1 hour followed by EGF treatment at the indicated
doses for 24 hours. NGAL protein levels were determined by
Western blot analysis.

2412

EGF-Mediated Inhibition of NGAL
and E-Cadherin Expression Involves
the ERK Pathway
The binding of EGF to EGFR can activate a number of
downstream signaling pathways (including the mitogenactivated protein kinase [MEK]-ERK pathway) that, in
turn, regulate the expression of several genes. It was
reported previously that the ERK pathway is involved in
regulating E-cadherin expression.29,30 To determine the
possible role of the ERK pathway in EGF-mediated inhibition of E-cadherin and NGAL expression, we treated cells
with either PD98059 or U0126 (inhibitors of ERK) for 24
hours, and evaluated NGAL expression by Western blot
analysis. Both PD98059 treatment and U0126 treatment
led to a significant dose-dependent increase in NGAL protein levels (Fig. 5A,B). In addition, PD98059 and U0126
pretreatment completely abolished the effect of EGF on Ecadherin and NGAL expression (Fig. 5C).
Several transcription factors, including Twist, Snail,
Slug, and zinc finger E-box-binding homeobox 1 (Zeb1),
are known to be involved in regulating E-cadherin
expression. To determine whether EGF inhibits E-cadherin expression through these transcription factors, we
evaluated the effect of EGF treatment on Zeb1 expression.
Cells that were exposed to 25 ng/mL of EGF for 24 hours
had higher Zeb1 protein levels than control cells
(Fig. 5D), and this was accompanied by a concomitant
reduction in E-cadherin and NGAL expression.

Cancer

June 1, 2011

EGF Inhibits NGAL in Pancreatic Cancer/Tong et al

Figure 3. Down-regulation of E-cadherin reduces gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL) expression. (A) Western blot analysis
shows NGAL and E-cadherin expression using protein lysate from cells that were treated with epidermal growth factor (EGF) at
the indicated doses for 24 hours. (B) Western blot analysis shows the relation between NGAL and E-cadherin expression using
protein lysates from selected pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma cell lines (AsPC-1, BxPC-3, Mia-2, and Panc-1). (C) RNA was
extracted from cells that were infected for 48 hours with lentivirus carrying E-cadherin–specific small hairpin RNA (shE-Cad) or
its controls and was used for quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction analysis. Gene expression was calculated using the
2 DDCt method, and the results are expressed as the mean  standard error of 3 independent experiments. An asterisk indicates
P < .05. (D) NGAL protein levels were determined by Western blot analysis using protein lysates from cells that were infected for
72 hours with lentivirus carrying shE-Cad or its controls.

EGF Inhibits NGAL Expression by Repressing
NF-jB–Mediated Transcription
NF-jB is one of the most important transcription factors
that regulates NGAL expression. To determine whether it
plays a role in EGF-mediated inhibition of NGAL expression, we transfected AsPC-1 cells with a luciferase reporter

Cancer

June 1, 2011

construct driven by either 900 base pairs of wild-type NGAL
promoter or a mutant NGAL promoter that carried an inactivating mutation in its NF-jB binding site. Simulation of
the transfected cells with 25 ng/mL of EGF for 24 hours led
to a significant decrease in the activity of the wild-type
NGAL promoter-driven luciferase reporter gene compared

2413

Original Article

Figure 4. E-cadherin overexpression leads to increased gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL) expression. (A) For Western blot analysis of NGAL protein levels, protein lysates were
used from cells that were infected for 72 hours with lentivirus
carrying human E-cadherin or its controls. (B) Cells were
treated with epidermal growth factor (EGF) at the indicated
doses for 24 hours after they were infected with lentivirus
carrying human E-cadherin or its controls. NGAL protein levels were then evaluated by Western blot analysis.

with untreated controls. In cells that were transfected with
mutant NGAL promoter, basal transcription at the NGAL
promoter was significantly decreased (compared with that in
wild-type promoter-transfected cells), and the transcriptional
activity did not change with EGF treatment (Fig. 6A). In
addition, down-regulating E-cadherin by infecting AsPC-1
cells with lentivirus that carried shE-cadherin led to a significant reduction in luciferase activity in cells that were cotransfected with the wild-type NF-jB promoter reporter
construct (Fig. 6B). Similar results were observed in cells that
were treated with EGF in an EMSA analysis (Fig. 6C). Together; these data suggest that EGF down-regulates NGAL
expression at the transcriptional level by inhibiting the binding of NF-jB to the NGAL promoter.

DISCUSSION
NGAL plays an important role in PDAC cell biology by inhibiting PDAC cell invasion and metastasis. EGF is a critical
mitogen involved in PDAC cell invasion and metastasis, but
nothing is known about how it regulates NGAL expression
to mediate this key biologic event in neoplastic progression.

Figure 5. These blots reveal effects of the extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) pathway on gelatinase-associated lipocalin
(NGAL) expression. (A,B) For Western blot analysis of NGAL expression, cell lysates were used from cells that were treated for
24 hours with the ERK pathway inhibitor PD98059 (PD) or U0126 at the indicated doses. P-ERK indicates phosphorylated ERK;
T-ERK, total ERK. (C) Cells were treated with 25 lM of PD or with 10 lM of U0126 for 1 hour followed by treatment for 24 hours
with 25 ng/mL of EGF. The cell lysates then were used for Western blot analyses of E-cadherin and NGAL expression. (D) Western blot analysis shows expression of zinc finger E-box-binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1) after treatment for 24 hours with 25 ng/mL
EGF.

2414

Cancer

June 1, 2011

Figure 6. Epidermal growth factor (EGF) down-regulates gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL) expression by inhibiting nuclear
factor jB (NF-jB) binding activity. (A) AsPC-1 cells were cotransfected with the vector pGL3-luc/NGAL ( 900) or pGL3-luc/
NGAL (NF-jB-mutant [mut]) and pGL4.74 (hRluc/TK) (a control for transfection efficiency) for 24 hours after treatment with 25
ng/mL EGF. Cell lysates then were used for the luciferase (Luc) activity assay. An asterisk indicates P < .05. AP-1 indicates activator protein 1; C/EBP, CCAAT/enhancer binding protein; TATA, DNA core promoter sequence involved in transcription. (B) AsPC-1
cells were infected for 16 hours with lentivirus carrying E-cadherin–specific small hairpin RNA (shE-cadherin) or its controls followed by cotransfection with pGL3-luc/NF-jB and pGL4.74 (hRluc/TK) for 24 hours. Thereafter, the cell lysates were used for luciferase activity assays. An asterisk indicates P < .05. (C) Nuclear extracts from AsPC-1 cells that were treated for 24 hours with
EGF at the doses indicated and a positive control (p.c.) (nuclear extracts from KBM-5 cells that were stimulated with tumor necrosis factor-a) were analyzed by electrophoretic mobility shift assay as described in the text (see Materials and Methods). (D)
This model illustrates the EGF-mediated down-regulation of NGAL. EGF activates extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) signaling by activating the EGF receptor (EGFR), leading to increased zinc finger E-box-binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1) expression and
reduced E-cadherin expression, which results in decreased NGAL expression by blocking NF-jB binding to the NGAL promoter.
PM indicates plasma membrane.

Original Article

In the current study, we demonstrated that EGF down-regulates E-cadherin and NGAL by activating EGFR and the
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)-ERK intracellular
signaling pathway in PDAC cells.
Previous studies have demonstrated that the function of EGF depends on its binding to and activation of
the EGFR. EGFR activation, in turn, regulates the expression of its target genes, which promote cell growth, invasion, and metastasis through downstream signaling.31,32
NGAL appears to play a role opposite to that of EGF and
EGFR in modulating PDAC cell invasion and metastasis.12 Given the opposing roles of NGAL and EGF in
PDAC, we hypothesize that NGAL is an EGF-regulated
gene in PDAC cells. Li et al33 reported that ErbB2
(EGFR type 2) overexpression resulted in increased
NGAL expression in breast cancer cells. In contrast, studies in ovarian cancer cells indicated that EGF treatment
led to reduce NGAL protein expression.10 These
seemingly opposite results are consistent with the different
biologic functions of NGAL in these 2 cancer types. In
breast cancer, NGAL promotes malignant cell proliferation, invasion, and metastasis8; whereas it is an antitumorigenic and antimetastatic factor in ovarian cancer
cells.10 In PDAC cells, exposure to EGF significantly
decreased both mRNA and protein levels of NGAL.
Blocking EGFR activation with an EGFR antagonist
(AG1478) abolished EGF-mediated NGAL down-regulation. These findings suggest that EGF is a negative regulator of NGAL expression in PDAC cells and plays a role in
EGF-mediated invasion and metastasis of these cells. In
addition, the observed positive association between
NGAL expression and differentiation in PDAC tissues
may be caused at least in part by the negative association
between EGF and EGFR expression and PDAC cell
differentiation.27
It is widely accepted that E-cadherin plays a critical
role in the epithelial-mesenchymal transition, an early
event in cancer cell invasion and metastasis.34 E-cadherin
expression frequently is lost in metastatic human cancers,
including PDAC.35,36 Loss of E-cadherin expression has
been associated with activation of the EGF/EGFR cascade
in several cancer types, including breast,19,37 cervical,18
and pancreatic cancers.38 Our data confirmed those earlier
reports, which described the EGF-mediated and EGFRmediated down-regulation of E-cadherin expression in
PDAC cells. In addition, we observed that the down-regulation of E-cadherin expression by EGF was paralleled by
a down-regulation of NGAL expression in PDAC cells,
suggesting that E-cadherin is a novel regulator of EGF-

2416

mediated NGAL down-regulation. Indeed, E-cadherin
expression was correlated with NGAL expression in
PDAC cells. Furthermore, the manipulation of E-cadherin expression by either up-regulation or down-regulation led to an up-regulation or down-regulation of NGAL
expression, respectively. Moreover, E-cadherin overexpression blocked the EGF-mediated inhibition of NGAL
expression, further supporting the role of E-cadherin as
a positive regulator of NGAL expression in PDAC
cells. Lim et al10 reported that EGF down-regulated both
E-cadherin and NGAL expression in ovarian cancer cells.
In immortalized human breast epithelial cells, E-cadherin
down-regulation by RNA interference or dominant-negative E-cadherin resulted in reduced NGAL expression.39
It is noteworthy that NGAL overexpression in colon
cancer cells resulted in altered subcellular localization
of E-cadherin, thus suggesting a downstream effect of
NGAL on E-cadherin.25 But the detailed mechanism of
NGAL-mediated E-cadherin regulation remains unclear.
However, in PDAC cells, we did not observe any downstream effects of NGAL overexpression or under expression on E-cadherin expression.12 Furthermore, we
demonstrated that NGAL overexpression significantly
reduced the invasion/metastasis of PDAC cells both in
vitro and in vivo.12 Thus, the downstream effects of
NGAL may be cell context-dependent. Together, our
findings demonstrate that E-cadherin regulates NGAL
expression in PDAC cells and contributes to EGF-mediated NGAL down-regulation in PDAC cells.
The transcriptional factors Snail, Slug, and Zeb1 are
key factors that repress E-cadherin expression.34,40 It also
has been reported that Zeb1 expression is correlated inversely with E-cadherin expression in primary tumor samples
from patients with PDAC and in PDAC cell lines.41 In
the same studies, Zeb1 gene silencing by small interfering
RNA led to increased E-cadherin expression. These
data suggest that Zeb1 is an important negative regulator
of E-cadherin expression in PDAC. We observed EGFassociated, reciprocal changes in Zeb1 and E-cadherin
expression, further supporting the role of Zeb1 in EGFinduced E-cadherin down-regulation in PDAC cells.
Several of signaling pathways can be triggered by
EGF/EGFR activation, including the MEK/ERK pathways. These pathways, in turn, modulate downstream
gene expression.31,42 It has been suggested that E-cadherin
expression is regulated by the MEK/ERK signaling
cascade in PDAC cells.29 In the current study, we
observed that treatment with the ERK pathway inhibitors
PD98059 or U0126 resulted in increased NGAL

Cancer

June 1, 2011

EGF Inhibits NGAL in Pancreatic Cancer/Tong et al

expression. Furthermore, pretreatment with PD98059
and U0126 abolished the inhibition of both NGAL and
E-cadherin expression by EGF. It was reported previously
that exposure of H1435 lung cancer cells to U0125
increased Zeb1 expression.43 Together with our results,
these data suggest that ERK pathway activation is required
for EGF-mediated inhibition of E-cadherin (through
Zeb1) and NGAL expression in PDAC cells.
NF-jB is 1 of the most important transcription
factors.33,44,45 Its activity may be linked to EGF/EGFR
activation. For instance, EGF treatment prevents H2O2induced NF-jB activity in intestinal Caco-2 cells.46 In contrast, Biswas et al47 reported that EGF activates NF-jB activity in estrogen receptor-negative breast cancer cells.
Moreover, it was observed that EGF-induced cyclooxygennase-2 expression was NF-jB–independent in human oral
squamous carcinoma cells.48 Thus, the relation between
EGF/EGFR activation and NF-jB activity may depend on
the cell types and conditions used. Our data suggest that
the NF-jB binding site is 1 of the key cis-elements that regulate NGAL expression in response to EGF stimulation in
PDAC cells. This is supported by the observation that a
mutation of the NF-jB binding site in the NGAL promoter blocked the inhibition of NGAL promoter activity
by EGF. Furthermore, E-cadherin down-regulation by an
E-cadherin–specific small hairpin RNA (shRNA) resulted
in decreased binding of NF-jB to its cis-cognate element.
Moreover, EMSA analysis revealed that EGF stimulation
reduces the binding of NF-jB to the corresponding cis-element in a dose-dependent manner. Thus, our data strongly
suggest that EGF-mediated NGAL down-regulation occurs
at the transcriptional level and through the interruption of
NF-jB binding to the NGAL promoter in PDAC cells.
However, how EGF and E-cadherin interrupt the binding
of NF-jB to the NGAL promoter needs further study.
On the basis of the results from this study, we
propose a model of the EGF-mediated NGAL expression inhibition in PDAC cells (Fig. 6D). EGFR activation by EGF binding triggered the MEK/ERK signaling
pathway, which, in turn, up-regulated Zeb1 expression.
The up-regulated Zeb1, in turn, reduced E-cadherin
expression. The loss of E-cadherin led to reduced
NGAL expression by inhibiting the binding of NF-jB
to the NGAL promoter. MEK/ERK pathways activation also can inhibit this binding by pathways other
than E-cadherin. Furthermore, because it is a secreted
protein, NGAL can be detected in body fluids, including urine, blood, pancreatic juice, and saliva. Thus,
NGAL may be a potential biomarker for the loss of
E-cadherin expression in PDAC.

Cancer

June 1, 2011

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
This work was supported in part by an M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center (MDACC) Physician Scientist Program Award (to S.G.),
an Institutional Research Grant, a Cyrus Scholar Award (to
S.G.), a McNair Foundation Scholar Award (to S.G.), National
Institutes of Health (NIH) Grant R01 CA69480 (to R.S.B.),
NIH Grant R01 CA78590 (to S.K.B.), and NIH Grant
5P30CA16672 (a Cancer Center Support Grant to MDACC).

REFERENCES
1. Flower DR. The lipocalin protein family: structure and
function. Biochem J. 1996;318(pt 1):1-14.
2. Goetz DH, Holmes MA, Borregaard N, Bluhm ME, Raymond KN, Strong RK. The neutrophil lipocalin NGAL is a
bacteriostatic agent that interferes with siderophore-mediated
iron acquisition. Mol Cell. 2002;10:1033-1043.
3. Nielsen BS, Borregaard N, Bundgaard JR, Timshel S,
Sehested M, Kjeldsen L. Induction of NGAL synthesis in
epithelial cells of human colorectal neoplasia and inflammatory bowel diseases. Gut. 1996;38:414-420.
4. Saiga H, Nishimura J, Kuwata H, et al. Lipocalin 2-dependent inhibition of mycobacterial growth in alveolar epithelium. J Immunol. 2008;181:8521-8527.
5. Mishra J, Mori K, Ma Q, et al. Amelioration of ischemic
acute renal injury by neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2004;15:3073-3082.
6. Stoesz SP, Friedl A, Haag JD, Lindstrom MJ, Clark GM,
Gould MN. Heterogeneous expression of the lipocalin
NGAL in primary breast cancers. Int J Cancer. 1998;79:
565-572.
7. Bartsch S, Tschesche H. Cloning and expression of human
neutrophil lipocalin cDNA derived from bone marrow and
ovarian cancer cells. FEBS Lett. 1995;357:255-259.
8. Bauer M, Eickhoff JC, Gould MN, Mundhenke C, Maass N,
Friedl A. Neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL) is
a predictor of poor prognosis in human primary breast cancer.
Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2008;108:389-397.
9. Zhang H, Xu L, Xiao D, et al. Upregulation of neutrophil
gelatinase-associated lipocalin in oesophageal squamous cell
carcinoma: significant correlation with cell differentiation
and tumour invasion. J Clin Pathol. 2007;60:555-561.
10. Lim R, Ahmed N, Borregaard N, et al. Neutrophil gelatinaseassociated lipocalin (NGAL) an early screening biomarker for
ovarian cancer: NGAL is associated with epidermal growth
factor-induced epithelio-mesenchymal transition. Int J Cancer.
2007;120:2426-2434.
11. Lee H-J, Lee E-K, Lee K-J, Hong S-W, Yoon Y, Kim J-S.
Ectopic expression of neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin suppresses the invasion and liver metastasis of colon
cancer cells. Int J Cancer. 2006;118:2490-2497.
12. Tong Z, Kunnumakkara AB, Wang H, et al. Neutrophil
gelatinase-associated lipocalin: a novel suppressor of invasion
and angiogenesis in pancreatic cancer. Cancer Res. 2008;68:
6100-6108.
13. Moniaux N, Chakraborty S, Yalniz M, et al. Early diagnosis
of pancreatic cancer: neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin as a marker of pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia. Br J
Cancer. 2008;98:1540-1547.
14. Normanno N, De Luca A, Bianco C, et al. Epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling in cancer. Gene.
2006;366:2-16.

2417

Original Article
15. Salomon DS, Brandt R, Ciardiello F, Normanno N. Epidermal
growth factor-related peptides and their receptors in human
malignancies. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 1995;19:183-232.
16. Korc M, Chandrasekar B, Yamanaka Y, Friess H, Buchier M,
Beger HG. Overexpression of the epidermal growth factor receptor in human pancreatic cancer is associated with concomitant
increases in the levels of epidermal growth factor and transforming growth factor alpha. J Clin Invest. 1992;90:1352-1360.
17. Poon SL, Hammond GT, Leung PCK. Epidermal growth
factor-induced GnRH-II synthesis contributes to ovarian
cancer cell invasion. Mol Endocrinol. 2009;23:1646-1656.
18. Lee M-Y, Chou C-Y, Tang M-J, Shen M-R. Epithelial-mesenchymal transition in cervical cancer: correlation with tumor
progression, epidermal growth factor receptor overexpression,
and snail up-regulation. Clin Cancer Res. 2008;14:4743-4750.
19. Lu Z, Ghosh S, Wang Z, Hunter T. Downregulation of
caveolin-1 function by EGF leads to the loss of E-cadherin,
increased transcriptional activity of beta-catenin, and
enhanced tumor cell invasion. Cancer Cell. 2003;4:499-515.
20. Kimura F Iwaya K, Kawaguchi T, et al. Epidermal growth
factor-dependent enhancement of invasiveness of squamous
cell carcinoma of the breast. Cancer Sci. 2010;101:1133-1140.
21. Yamanaka Y, Friess H, Kobrin MS, Buchler M, Beger HG,
Korc M. Coexpression of epidermal growth factor receptor and
ligands in human pancreatic cancer is associated with enhanced
tumor aggressiveness. Anticancer Res. 1993;13:565-569.
22. Pryczynicz A, Guzinska-Ustymowicz K, Kemona A, Czyzewska J. Expression of EGF and EGFR strongly correlates with
metastasis of pancreatic ductal carcinoma. Anticancer Res.
2008;28:1399-1404.
23. Binker MG, Binker-Cosen AA, Richards D, Oliver B,
Cosen-Binker LI. EGF promotes invasion by PANC-1 cells
through Rac1/ROS-dependent secretion and activation of
MMP-2. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009;379:445-450.
24. Zhang H, Ma G, Dong M, et al. Epidermal growth factor promotes invasiveness of pancreatic cancer cells through NF-kappaB-mediated proteinase productions. Pancreas. 2006;32:101109.
25. Hu L, Hittelman W, Lu T, et al. NGAL decreases E-cadherin-mediated cell-cell adhesion and increases cell motility
and invasion through Rac1 in colon carcinoma cells. Lab
Invest. 2009;89:531-548.
26. Chaturvedi MM, Mukhopadhyay A, Aggarwal BB. Assay for
redox-sensitive transcription factor. Methods Enzymol. 2000;
319:585-602.
27. Ueda S, Ogata S, Tsuda H, et al. The correlation between
cytoplasmic overexpression of epidermal growth factor receptor and tumor aggressiveness: poor prognosis in patients
with pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma [serial online]. Pancreas. 2004;29:e1-e8.
28. Tobita K, Kijima H, Dowaki S, et al. Epidermal growth factor
receptor expression in human pancreatic cancer: significance
for liver metastasis. Int J Mol Med. 2003;11:305-309.
29. Kumei S, Motomura W, Yoshizaki T, Takakusaki K, Okumura T. Troglitazone increases expression of E-cadherin and
claudin 4 in human pancreatic cancer cells. Biochem Biophys
Res Commun. 2009;380:614-619.
30. Honma N, Genda T, Matsuda Y, et al. MEK/ERK signaling is a critical mediator for integrin-induced cell scattering
in highly metastatic hepatocellular carcinoma cells. Lab
Invest. 2006;86:687-696.
31. Furuse J. Growth factors as therapeutic targets in HCC.
Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2008;67:8-15.

2418

32. Gibbs JB. Anticancer drug targets: growth factors and
growth factor signaling. J Clin Invest. 2000;105:9-13.
33. Li S-H, Hawthorne VS, Neal CL, et al. Upregulation of neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin by ErbB2 through nuclear
factor-kappaB activation. Cancer Res. 2009;69:9163-9168.
34. Yilmaz M, Christofori G. EMT, the cytoskeleton, and cancer cell invasion. Cancer Metastasis Rev. 2009;28:15-33.
35. von Burstin J, Eser S, Paul MC, et al. E-cadherin regulates
metastasis of pancreatic cancer in vivo and is suppressed by
a SNAIL/HDAC1/HDAC2 repressor complex [serial online].
Gastroenterology. 2009;137:361-371.
36. Joo Y-E, Rew J-S, Park C-S, Kim S-J. Expression of E-cadherin, alpha- and beta-catenins in patients with pancreatic
adenocarcinoma. Pancreatology. 2002;2:129-137.
37. Lo H-W, Hsu S-C, Xia W, etal. Epidermal growth factor
receptor cooperates with signal transducer and activator of
transcription 3 to induce epithelial-mesenchymal transition
in cancer cells via up-regulation of TWIST gene expression.
Cancer Res. 2007;67:9066-9076.
38. Wang F, Sloss C, Zhang X, Lee SW, Cusack JC. Membrane-bound heparin-binding epidermal growth factor like
growth factor regulates E-cadherin expression in pancreatic
carcinoma cells. Cancer Res. 2007;67:8486-8493.
39. Onder TT, Gupta PB, Mani SA, Yang J, Lander ES, Weinberg RA. Loss of E-cadherin promotes metastasis via multiple downstream transcriptional pathways. Cancer Res. 2008;68:
3645-3654.
40. Hollier BG, Evans K, Mani SA. The epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and cancer stem cells: a coalition against cancer
therapies. J Mammary Gland Biol Neoplasia. 2009;14:29-43.
41. Arumugam T, Ramachandran V, Fournier KF, et al. Epithelial to mesenchymal transition contributes to drug resistance
in pancreatic cancer. Cancer Res. 2009;69:5820-5828.
42. Frolov A, Schuller K, Tzeng C-WD, et al. ErbB3 expression
and dimerization with EGFR influence pancreatic cancer cell
sensitivity to erlotinib. Cancer Biol Ther. 2007;6:548-554.
43. Yang L, Amann JM, Kikuchi T, et al. Inhibition of epidermal growth factor receptor signaling elevates 15-hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase in non-small-cell lung cancer.
Cancer Res. 2007;67:5587-5593.
44. Iannetti A, Pacifico F, Acquaviva R, et al. The neutrophil
gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL), a NF-kappaB-regulated gene, is a survival factor for thyroid neoplastic cells.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008;105:14058-14063.
45. Bolignano D, Donato V, Lacquaniti A, et al. Neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL) in human neoplasias: a
new protein enters the scene. Cancer Lett. 2010;288:10-16.
46. Banan A, Zhang LJ, Farhadi A, Fields JZ, Shaikh M,
Keshavarzian A. PKC-beta1 isoform activation is required
for EGF-induced NF-kappaB inactivation and IkappaBalpha
stabilization and protection of F-actin assembly and barrier
function in enterocyte monolayers. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol.
2004;286:C723-38.
47. Biswas DK, Cruz AP, Gansberger E, Pardee AB. Epidermal
growth factor-induced nuclear factor kappa B activation: a
major pathway of cell-cycle progression in estrogen-receptor
negative breast cancer cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
2000;97:8542-8547.
48. Husvik C, Bryne M, Halstensen TS. Epidermal growth factorinduced cyclooxygenase-2 expression in oral squamous cell
carcinoma cell lines is mediated through extracellular signalregulated kinase 1/2 and p38 but is Src and nuclear factorkappa B independent. Eur J Oral Sci. 2009;117:528-535.

Cancer

June 1, 2011

