Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 22

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Real-time monitoring of tumor progression and drug responses
in a preclinical mouse model of prostate cancer
Peng Xu1,2,*, Naijin Xu2,*, Kai Guo1,2,*, Abai Xu1, Fumiaki Takenaka3, Eiji Matsuura3,
Chunxiao Liu1, Hiromi Kumon4, Peng Huang1,2,3
1

Department of Urology, Zhujiang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, People’s Republic of China

2

 epartment of Urology, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama,
D
Japan

3

Okayama Medical Innovation Center, Okayama University, Okayama, Japan

4

I nnovation Center Okayama for Nanobio-Targeted Therapy, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama, Japan

*

These authors contributed to the work equally and should be regarded as co-first authors

Correspondence to: Peng Huang, email: huangpeng509@gmail.com
Keywords: prostate cancer, bioluminescence imaging, prostate specific antigen, immunotherapy, preclinical model
Received: January 09, 2016     Accepted: March 31, 2016     Published: April 20, 2016

ABSTRACT
Monitoring disease progression through imaging is playing an increasingly
important role in the treatment of prostate cancer. Here, we report that primary
mouse prostate cancer cell lines stably expressing luciferase and tumor biomarkers
can be monitored through bioluminescence imaging along with assays of serum
biomarkers and immune function. Tumorigenesis in immunocompetent C57BL/6 mice
can be monitored in by collecting samples from the dorsal flank, dorsolateral prostate,
and tail vein to obtain real-time subcutaneous, orthotopic, and metastasis indicators,
respectively. We used this technique to confirm the therapeutic effect of immune
checkpoint blockade. Our findings suggest the presented indicators are ideally suited
for real-time tracking of drug responses, tumor progression and immune function.

challenging, particularly in the setting of immunotherapy
for early neoplasia.
Animal models provide the essential link
between in vitro experiments and the development of
novel therapeutic strategies by clinical studies [7]. In
these models, the relationship between the host and
tumor, processes of tumor invasion and metastasis, and
effectiveness of different treatment measures can be
evaluated. Xenografts are the most widely used model
to help predict antitumor efficacy for specific disease
types in a preclinical setting [7, 8]. However, existing
models have not been able to simulate the entire process
of tumorigenesis in humans, including development and
metastasis [9].
A number of preclinical models in immunocompetent
animals are currently used to study cancer growth
and metastasis. Moreover, bioluminescent imaging in
orthotopic and lung metastasis models has been reported
for other cancers. However, in these immunocompetent
animal models, never tumor biomarkers could be detected
by laboratory examination. Therefore, there is a need for
cancer models that combine imaging, tumor biomarker,

INTRODUCTION
Cancer is a major public health problem in the
world. Prostate cancer is a major cause of death and the
second leading cause of cancer-related death in men. In
2014, an estimated 233,000 new cases of prostate cancer,
with 29,480 cancer-related deaths, were reported in the
United States [1, 2]. Although surgery can effectively
control prostate cancer in the early stages, many newly
diagnosed patients already have distant metastasis. Despite
surgical treatment, androgen deprivation, radiation therapy,
and chemotherapy, disease progression and metastases still
occur in most cases [3, 4]. Therefore, there is an urgent
need to understand the mechanisms underlying metastatic
prostate cancer and to develop new and effective therapies.
In recent years, the increasing interest in the field
of tumor immunotherapy is being driven by several
remarkable breakthroughs. In particular, immune
checkpoint blockade initiated a new paradigm shift in
immunotherapy for cancer [5, 6]. However, monitoring
and intravital imaging of cancer and its immune function is
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33025

Oncotarget

and immune function measurement to allow instant tumor
tracking and evaluation of new drug therapies. This model
must be reliable, sensitive, and should take into account
tumor progression, bioluminescence, and immune function
[8–10]. In comparison with traditional methodologies, this
biomarker/imaging-based approach could lead to improved,
early, and sensitive assessment of the tumor status.

significantly higher in the RM9-Luc-pIRES-KLK3 cell
line (2858.09 ± 300.27) than in the blank control group
(1 ± 0.24, p = 0.000) and in the negative group (1.39 ±
0.07, p = 0.000). This indicated a remarkable transfection
efficiency of KLK3 (Figure 1B).
The measurement of PSA expression in RM9-LucpIRES-KLK3 cells by Western blot analysis is shown in
Figure 1C and was confirmed by immunofluorescence
(IF) (Figure 1D). The Cell Proliferation assay showed
that potential proliferation was the same between the
RM9-Luc-pIRES-KLK3 and normal RM9 subsets (data
not shown). In vivo imaging system (IVIS)-200 detection
of luciferase expression showed a positive correlation
between the intensity of bioluminescence and cell count
(Figure 1E).

RESULTS
Generation and characterization of RM9-LucpIRES-KLK3 cells
Using quantitative polymerase chain reaction
(qRT–PCR), we confirmed that KLK3 mRNA level was

Figure 1: Construction and verification of the new recombinant cell line RM9-luc-pIRES-KLK3 A. Schematic
representation of the construction of plasmid Luc-pIRES-KLK3. Luc was obtained by enzyme digestion of plasmid pGL3-basic. KLK3
were obtained through RT-PCR. The IRES element was chosen to connect upstream Luc and downstream KLK3. Restriction enzyme cutting
sites included Xho I, Mlu I, Sal I, and Xba I. RT-PCR, reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction; IRES, internal ribosome entry site;
pCMV, cytomegalovirus promoter B. KLK3 mRNA expression level in RM9-Luc-pIRES-KLK3 cell line * vs. control, p < 0.001 C. Western
blotting analysis for prostate specific antigen expression Normal RM9 cells served as negative control (left) and LNCaP cells served as
positive control (right) for RM9-Luc-pIRES-KLK3 cells (middle). Beta-actin levels served as loading control. D. Immunofluorescence
(IF) staining using PSA on RM9-Luc-pIRES-KLK3 cell line. PSA (green), cell nuclear (pseudo-colored blue). RM9 cells are stained as a
negative control which shown on the left. Images were captured using a 40× oil objective. E. In vitro bioluminescence imaging of RM9Luc-pIRES-KLK3 cells In a 96-well plate, cells were serially diluted from 200,000 to 12,500 cells. Luciferin 100 µl (150 µg/ml) was added
to all wells, except for blank controls, and the plate was subjected to imaging for 1 min. Bioluminescence per well was quantified in photons
per second. Expression was positively correlated with cell counts.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33026

Oncotarget

Monitoring of tumorigenicity by RM9-LucpIRES-KLK3 cells

Therapeutic efficacy of immune checkpoint
CTLA-4 blockade in a prostate cancer model
using RM9-Luc-pIRES-KLK3 cells

Subsequently, we developed subcutaneous, prostate
orthotopic xenograft, and lung metastasis models based
on mouse prostate cancer RM9-Luc-pIRES-KLK3 cells.
A pre-experiment, real-time IVIS imaging analysis
of tumor growth revealed that RM9-Luc-pIRES-KLK3
cells readily grew in mice 3 days after injection. Figure
2A shows representative images of mice subcutaneous
model in which the intensity of bioluminescence visibly
increased over time. Measurement and analysis of serum
PSA (Figures 2B i), tumor volume (Figures 2B ii), and
bioluminescent imaging (Figures 2B iii) showed that
bioluminescent imaging was proportional to serum
PSA level (R2 coefficient = 0.896) (Figures 2C i) and
tumor volume (R2 coefficient = 0.899) (Figures 2C ii),
R2 coefficient: 0.799 was proportional between serum
PSA (ng/ml) and tumor volume (mm3) (Figures 2C
iii). After implantation and inoculation of RM9-LucpIRES-KLK3 cells in the prostate only (Figure 3A)
for mice orthotopic prostate cancer model and after
the inoculation of cells into prostate and tail vein for
mice orthotopic prostate cancer with metastatic model,
micrometastatic deposits were detected by real-time
bioluminescent imaging 7 days after transplantation; lung
metastases spread exponentially on dynamic observation
in the metastatic model (Figure 4A). Moreover, weekly
monitoring showed increased serum PSA levels (i) and
bioluminescent imaging (ii) over time in the orthotopic
prostate cancer model (Figure 3B) and lung metastasis
model (Figure 4B). In the orthotopic prostate cancer
model, there was a positive correlation between
bioluminescent imaging and the serum PSA level (R2
coefficient = 0.945) (Figure 3C).

The therapeutic potential of immune checkpoint
CTLA-4 blockade was validated in vivo using orthotopic
and lung metastatic models. RM9-Luc-pIRES-KLK3
cells were transplanted into the prostate and tail vein
of C57BL/6 mice; thereafter, CTLA-4 blockade was
administered intraperitoneally at a dose of 100 µg per
mice on days 0, 2, 6, 8 and 12 (Figure 5A). Figure 5B
shows the BLI of the groups of mice with CTLA-4
blockade compared with the negative control after 2 weeks
treatment.
As shown in Figure 5C, tumor volume (Figure 5C
i), as analyzed by the IVIS instrument, was significantly
smaller after mice CTLA-4 blockade, compared with
the control groups (p = 0.001). Serum PSA (Figure 5C
ii) significantly inhibited tumor infiltration 14 days after
treatment (p = 0.017).
After 2 weeks of treatment, the proportion of CD4+
Foxp3+ Treg cells (Figure 5D i) and Gr-1+CD11b+MDSC
cells (Figure 5D ii) were significantly downregulated
in the CTLA-4 blockade group of mice compared with
the phosphate-buffered saline (PBS)-treated group.
Meanwhile, the proportion of CD44+CD62− effector T
cells (Figure 5E i) and memory T cells (Figure 5E ii) on
CD3+CD8+ cells were significantly increased by >2–3
times after CTLA-4 blockade compared with the control
treatment. Production of IFN-γ (Figure 5E iii) and TNFα
(Figure 5E iv) by CD3+CD8+ cells was elevated in the
CTLA-4 blockade group of mice compared with the
control, suggesting prolonged survival in former treatment
group. In addition, the analysis of liver and other body
tissue specimens indicated no histopathological damage in
any of the treatment groups (data not shown).

Biodistribution analysis by PET-CT and
autoradiography

DISCUSSION

After transplantation of RM9-Luc-pIRES-KLK3
cells in mice for 3 and 14 days, positron emission
tomography–computed tomography (PET–CT) scan
showed increased real-time uptake of the radiotracer
(Figure 3D and 4C). The abnormal areas detected on PET
molecular imaging corresponded with those detected
by bioluminescence imaging (BLI) and were finally
confirmed by histopathology.
Anatomical autoradiography images of the prostate
and lungs in the orthotopic prostate cancer and lung
metastasis models on days 3 and 14 after PET-CT scan
are shown in Figure 3E and Figure 4D, respectively. At
each time point, high tracer uptake was detected in the
tumor. In particular, the area of micrometastasis was
sensitively detected on day 3 in the lung metastasis model
(Figure 4D).

PSA is recognized as a sensitive biomarker and is
one of the most important indices for clinical diagnosis
and prognosis of prostate cancer. When the blood–
epithelium barrier is destroyed, PSA secreted by cancer
cells increases and enters the blood directly to cause
metastatic prostate cancer [11, 12].
Within an organism, luciferase catalyzes luciferin to
cause a luminous oxidation reaction that may be detected
as signals on the noninvasive IVIS living imaging system.
At present, this system is favored by many scholars for
its high efficiency, sensitivity, rapidity, and minimal
invasiveness [12–15]. In this study, the internal ribosome
entry site (IRES) element, which is the functional site
of the internal ribosome [16], was chosen to connect the
upstream luciferase genes and the downstream KLK3
genes by transcribing luciferase and KLK3 into a singlechain mRNA. Although transcription is simultaneous,

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33027

Oncotarget

KLK3 and luciferase can be independently translated and
expressed. Therefore, genetic engineering was combined
with bioluminescence to construct a new cell line that was
detectable by intravital imaging using a strongly expressed
tumor biomarker. Using these cells, different types of
mouse models were established to simultaneously monitor
tumor volume, intensity of fluorescence, and PSA level.
BLI and PET are the two main methods that can
determine the growth and progression of carcinomatous
tumors in mouse models by real-time imaging [14, 15].
Micrometastatic deposits in the lung were detected
using real-time bioluminescence imaging 7 days after
cell-transplantation in mice orthotopic prostate cancer
with metastatic model. PET scan is a versatile and noninvasive tool that not only provides a three-dimensional
(3D) image of tissue function but also obtains better
imaging of lymph node and distant metastases; therefore,
PET could identify tumor tissue necrosis even before the

lesion extruded the organ surface [14, 15]. The usual tracer
of PET is 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG), an analogue of
glucose whose uptake is regulated by glucose transporters
and hexokinase activity; this is the most common and
standard tracer used to detect cancer metastasis by PET
scan. Therefore, 18F-FDG PET has been recently indicated
as a possible means to assess the biological activity of
advanced cancers and to evaluate a specific subgroup of
patients carrying lesions with aggressive phenotypes [14,
17]. However, 18F-FDG PET has poor sensitivity for soft
tissue tumors. In contrast, bioluminescence is limited by
its poor spatial resolution.
Considering these advantages and limitations
of PET and BLI, we combined these two methods in
an animal model to detect beginning tumor lesions by
optical imaging and then increasing their resolution by
PET scan.In the present study, we found that although
BLI could detect lesions earlier than PET scan, its

Figure 2: Preclinical subcutaneous mouse models using RM9-Luc-pIRES-KLK3 cells (n = 7) A. Bioluminescence images

in a representative subcutaneous mouse model. Animals were imaged weekly for 3 weeks from the third day after injection. B. Tumor
progression was monitored by serum PSA (ng/ml) (i), tumor volume (mm3) (ii) and bioluminescent imaging (photos/s) (iii) on days 3,
7, 14, and 21 after RM9-Luc-pIRES-KLK3 injection. Mean values were analyzed among groups. * p < 0.05 C. Comparison between
bioluminescence intensity and the current methods of monitoring tumor size and serum PSA levels. The observed bioluminescent imaging
(photos/s) was proportional to the serum PSA (ng/ml) (R2 coefficient: 0.896) (i) and tumor volume (mm3) (R2 coefficient: 0.899) (ii), R2
coefficient: 0.799 was proportional between serum PSA (ng/ml) and tumor volume (mm3) (iii).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33028

Oncotarget

spatial conformation of lesions was not as much as PET,
especially, in the identification of lung metastases. PET
scan could provide a series view of sagittal, coronal,
and transverse sections on the lung lesion, which could
be reconstructed as a three-dimensional image to help
understand the size and extent of the metastasis. On
the other hand, it excluded necrotic regions of the
tumor, scar tissue, calcification, and other metabolically
inactive tissues via measure and contrast the background
metabolism in normal muscle and in normal parenchyma;
therefore, both BLI and PET are needed to obtain
sufficient information on tumors. Since the emergence
of immunotherapies, such as therapeutic cancer vaccines
and immune checkpoint inhibitors, cancer treatment has
stepped into a new era [5, 6]. The first in class approved
immune checkpoint inhibitor is ipilimumab, an antiCTLA-4 (cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigen-4) mAb. In
2011, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA)

approved ipilimumab for metastatic melanoma. Till now,
it was the most mature checkpoint blockade. Recently,
immune-based combination therapy of prostate cancer is
being developed in full swing by preclinical and clinical
studies [18, 19]. It is extremely important to examine the
safety, efficacy, and side effects of combination therapy by
analyzing the immune status.
CD11b+ Gr-1+ MDSC cells are a heterogeneous
population comprising immature myeloid cells and
myeloid progenitor cells that suppress immune responses
by a variety of mechanisms. CD4+ Foxp3+ Treg cells
play an important role in immune evasion and inhibit
the efficacy of vaccine therapy [18–21]. Therefore, it
is obvious that successful cancer immunotherapy will
require the inhibition of the immunosuppressive effects
of these cell populations. Furthermore, the proportion
of CD44+CD62− effector and memory T cells on
CD3+CD8+ cells were also evaluated in both groups, as

Figure 3: Preclinical orthotopic mouse models using RM9-Luc-pIRES-KLK3 cells (n = 7) A. Bioluminescence images

in a representative orthotopic mouse model. B. Tumor progression was monitored by evaluating serum PSA levels (ng/mL) (i) and
bioluminescence intensity (photos/s) (ii) on days 3, 7, 14, and 21 after RM9-Luc-pIRES-KLK3 was injected into the prostate. Error bars
represent standard error of mean. Mean values were analyzed among groups. *p < 0.05 C. Comparison between bioluminescence intensity
and current methods of monitoring tumor size and serum PSA levels. The observed bioluminescent imaging (photos/sec) was proportional
to the serum PSA (ng/ml) (R2 coefficient: 0.945). D. 18FFDG-PET images of orthotopic tumor-bearing mice on day 3 and day 14 after RM9Luc-pIRES-KLK3 was injected into the prostate. E. Anatomical autoradiography images of the prostate and lung in the orthotopic prostate
cancer model on days 3 and 14 after RM9-Luc-pIRES-KLK3 injection.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33029

Oncotarget

well as the production of IFN-γ and TNFα by CD3+CD8+
cells. In contrast, the CTLA-4 blockade treatment group
continued showing a high proportion of effector and
memory T cells, and in terms of cytokines, early detection
showed the same trend, but after one period of increase, we
found that cytokines gradually reduced (data not shown);
the specific reasons and mechanisms are not yet clear.
Whether this is one of the reasons for immunotherapy
failure still needs further research. However, our results
on CTLA-4 blockade provided potential reasons for the
failure of immunotherapy for cancer and suggested the
need for future studies on immunomodulators against
cancer [6, 22].
However, there are still some drawbacks in the
present study. First, we did not describe the model with
bone metastasis, which is common in human prostate

cancer. Second, we assessed limited parameters to assess
the immune status in mice. In future, we will try to
construct the bone metastasis model with this new cell line
and expand the assessment methodology on the immune
status.
In summary, the use of combined bioluminescence
and tumor biomarker system on animal model cancer cell
lines substantially advances the preclinical researches
on immunotherapy and imaging for antitumor drug
development. Our study confirmed by real-time imaging
that changes in immune function and tumor biomarkers
can be analyzed by immune checkpoint blockade in
prostate cancer orthotopic and lung metastasis models in
immunocompetent mice. The results may pave the way for
establishing the basic knowledge on immune checkpoint
blockade and new drugs to clinical trial application.

Figure 4: Preclinical orthotopic and lung metastasis mouse models using RM9-Luc-pIRES-KLK3 cells (n = 7) A.
Bioluminescence images in a representative orthotopic and lung metastasis mouse model. B. Tumor progression was monitored by
evaluating serum PSA level (ng/mL) (i) and bioluminescence intensity (photos/s) (ii) on days 3, 7, 14, and 21 after RM9-Luc-pIRES-KLK3
was injected into the prostate. Error bars represent standard error of mean. Mean values were analyzed among groups. *p < 0.05 C. 18F-FDG
PET images of orthotopic tumor-bearing mice at day 3 and day 14 after RM9-Luc-pIRES-KLK3 was injected into the prostate and tail vein
D. Anatomical autoradiography images of the prostate and lung in the orthotopic prostate cancer model at days 3 and 14 after RM9-LucpIRES-KLK3 injection. In the metastasis model, micrometastatic points were sensitively detected on day 3 after RM9-Luc-pIRES-KLK3
injection.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33030

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Evaluation of the effect of immunotherapy by immune checkpoint CTLA-4 blockade A.The plan for therapeutic

effect on mice CTLA-4 blockade. B. Bioluminescence images of mice from each treatment group are shown 14 days after treatment. RM9Luc-pIRES-KLK3 cells in tumors were imaged after luciferin injection using the IVIS instrument. Left panel shows the control group,
whereas the right panel displays the mice CTLA-4 blockade group. C. Tumor volume (i) was determined by region-of-interest analysis of
total photons per second. Serum PSA levels (ng/mL) (ii) were determined by ELISA from the groups of CTLA-4 blockade and control.
Mean values were analyzed among groups. * CTLA-4 blockade vs. control (p < 0.05). D. The percentage of peripheral CD4+Foxp3+ Treg
cells (i) and Gr-1+CD11b+ MDSC cells (ii) among the total number of lymphocytes, as quantified by FACS analysis, are shown for the
indicated groups and times. Mean values were analyzed among groups. * CTLA-4 blockade vs. control group (p < 0.05). E. The percentage
of peripheral CD44+CD62− Effector T cells (i), CD44+CD62+ Memory T cells (ii), IFN-γ (iii), and TNFα (iv) in population of CD3+CD8+
cells were quantified by FACS analysis and are shown for the indicated groups and times. Mean values were analyzed among groups.
*CTLA-4 blockade vs. control group (p < 0.05).

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Plasmid construction and transfection and cell
proliferation assay

Tumor cell lines

Eukaryotic expression vector pIRES and pGL3basic vector were purchased from Clontech Laboratories,
Inc. (Mountain View, USA). PCR primers were designed
according to the GenBank expression of human PSA
protein (KLK3) sequences (GI:22208990). Luciferase
gene sequences (GI:13195703) were obtained from
pGL3-basic vector by endonuclease digestion.
Using reverse transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR) and PCR
amplification technologies, a Luc-pIRES-KLK3 plasmid
was constructed (Figure 1A) for transfectioninto RM9

The human prostate cancer cell line LNCaP was
purchased from American Type Culture Collection
(Rockvile, MD). The C57BL/6 mouse prostate cancer cell
line RM-9 was kindly provided by Dr. T.C. Thompson
of The University of Texas, Houston, TX. The cell lines
were cultured in RPMI-1640 with 10% fetal bovine serum
(Gibco, Invitrogen, Carlsbad, USA) and maintained at
37°C in a humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33031

Oncotarget

In vitro bioluminescence detection

cells for stable expression in monoclonal strains; G418
was successfully used to filter out the RM9-Luc-pIRESKLK3 monoclonal cell line. The Cell Proliferation assay
showed that potential proliferation was the same between
the RM9-Luc-pIRES-KLK3 and normal RM9 subsets
by The Cell Proliferation Kit II (XTT, Roche, Basel,
Switzerland).

For in vitro BLI, RM9-Luc-pIRES-KLK3 cell
concentrations, ranging from 2 × 105 to 1.25 × 104 cells,
were serially diluted in 96-well plates (Costar, Corning,
USA); images were obtained after the addition of
D-luciferin (Biosynth, Naperville, USA) to the media.
Wells containing medium only and RM9 cells served
as blank control and negative control, respectively.
D-luciferin 100 µl (150 µg/ml) was added to all wells.
Prior to imaging, cells were incubated at 37°C in a
humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2 for 10
min. Images were captured using IVIS-200 (Xenogen,
Alameda, USA) and analyzed with Living Image software
(Xenogen Corporation). Luciferase activity was monitored
by the measurement of bioluminescence intensity. Results
were reported as the average of three independent
experiments.

Expression of prostate-specific antigen
The cell line was characterized in vitro to test for
the expression of human PSA by Western blotting and IF.
For Western blotting, the total protein from the cloned
cells was extracted and its concentration was determined
using a bicinchoninic acid assay (Thermo Scientific).
Protein samples were run on 12% SDS-PAGE gels and
were transferred to polyvinyldene difluoride membranes
(Bio-Rad Laboratories, Inc.). The membranes were
incubated overnight using rabbit anti-human PSA
antibody (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, USA)
as a primary antibody at 1000× dilution. Next, the
membranes were washed and immediately incubated
with anti-rabbit horseradish peroxidase-conjugated
secondary antibodies.
For IF, pre-blocking clone cells were incubated
with the primary antibodies overnight in a humidified
chamber at 4°C. All specimens were then washed with
PBS and immediately incubated with fluorochromeconjugated secondary antibody [Alexa Fluor 488 goat
anti-rabbit IgG (green), Life Technologies] diluted in
antibody dilution buffer for 1 h at room temperature in
a dark environment. Slides were covered with mounting
medium with DAPI (blue, Vector Laboratories, Inc.,
Burlingame, CA, USA). Negative controls were
performed on RM9 cell lines. Confocal laser scanning
microscopy was performed with Zeiss LSM 780 (Carl
Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany) using 40× oil objective
lens, as indicated.

Mouse model
Male C57BL/6 mice (6–8 weeks old) were
purchased from SLC Inc. (Hamamatsu, Japan) and were
maintained in a specific pathogen-free environment at
the laboratory animal center of Okayama University.
They were allowed to adapt to their environment for 2
weeks before the experiments. The animals were housed
and handled in accordance with the Okayama University
Animal Research Committee Guidelines. For all surgical
procedures, mice were anesthetized with an intraperitoneal
injection of 10% chloral hydrate at a dose of 300 mg/kg.
Anesthetized animals received subcutaneous injection of
RM9-Luc-pIRES-KLK3 cells as follows: 2.0 × 105 cells
in a 100-µl re-suspension below the dorsal flank; 1.0 ×
104 cells in 10-µl re-suspension into the dorsolateral
prostate for the orthotopic model; and 0.5 × 104 cells
in a 100-µl re-suspension into the tail vein for the lung
metastasis model. Mice were observed twice weekly after
inoculation. Tumor volumes in the subcutaneous tissue
were calculated from two perpendicular tumor diameters
(d), according to the following formula for the volume of
an ellipse: V = π/6(d1 × d2)3/2.

Quantitative real-time PCR
Total RNA was isolated by TRIzol reagent
(Invitrogen, Grand Island, NY, USA) and cDNA was
obtained by RT-PCR. Approximately 1 µl (1µg) of total
RNA was added to 12 µL of moloney murine leukemia
virus reverse transcriptase (Promega, Madison, WI,
USA). The reaction mixture was prepared following the
manufacturer’s instructions. All primers were synthesized
by Invitrogen and were checked for specificity before use.
Quantitative RT-PCR was performed under the following
reaction conditions: stage 1, 50°C for 2 min (Rep 1); stage
2, 95°C for 2 min; stage 3, 95°C for 15 s and then 60°C
for 32 s (Reps 40). Thereafter, comparative CT method
(2−△△CT) was adopted to evaluate the relative quantitation.
18srRNA was used as internal reference.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Bioluminescence imaging
The animals underwent imaging at a peak time of 2
min after intraperitoneal injection of D-luciferin (150 mg/
kg) via IVIS-200 (Xenogen, Alameda, USA); appropriate
exposure times and sensitivity settings were used to avoid
saturation. Image processing was performed using the
Living Image software (Xenogen) by counting the total
number of photons per second for each region of interest
in a tumor, with appropriate background subtraction.
33032

Oncotarget

Serum PSA analysis using ELISA

Statistical analyses

For the PSA assay, 50 µl of serum was analyzed
using a human PSA enzyme-linked immune sorbent
assay kit (ELISA, ANOGEN-YES BIOTECH, Ontario,
Canada). The optical density was read at 450 nm using
a microtiter plate; data were collected and assayed
using Microplate Manager 5.0 PC software (BIO-RAD,
California, USA).

The data were reported as mean ± standard
deviation. Correlation analysis was used to describe the
relationship among bioluminescence intensity, tumor
volume, and serum PSA levels. One-way analysis of
variance followed by Bonferroni’s post hoc comparison
tests was performed to compare the different models.
Paired Student’s t-test was performed for dependent
variables. Statistical significance was set at p < 0.05.

18

F-FDG PET and autoradiography imaging

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

A small-animal PET–CT system (Clairvivo PET,
SHIMADZU, Kyoto, Japan) was used with the tracer
18
F-FDGthat was injected at a dose of 4.2 ± 0.4 MBq
in the tail vein of mice. Animals were anesthetized 10
mins before radioligand administration. PET scanning
started at 60 min after tracer injection and lasted for 30
min. After the last time of in vivo PET scanning, tumor
tissues were removed en bloc and underwent ex vivo PET
scanning. All PET imaging data were acquired in list
mode; PET scan images were reconstructed using filtered
back projection and an iterative 3D reconstruction
algorithm (maximum a posteriori). CT images were
reconstructed using a Feldkamp convolution–back
projection algorithm. 18F-FDG PET and CT data were
then analyzed and quantified by AMIDE software,
version 0.7.154 [12]. The mice underwent euthanasia
after PET measurements. The entire prostate and lung
were immediately removed and contacted with an
imaging plate, which was scanned using a biomolecular
imager (Typhoon™ FLA 7000; GE Healthcare Life
Science, Co., Ltd.).

We thank Dr. Haruki Kaku, Dr. Shunai Li and Mr.
Hideo Ueki, Okayama University, for their valuable technical
assistance and contribution during the animal surgeries.
This study was supported by scientific research grants
from the Pearl River Nova Program of Guangzhou (No.
2013J2200044), the Project Supported by Guangdong Natural
Science Foundation (No. 2015A030313291), and the Ministry
of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology of
Japan (No. KAKENHI 25861425, 15K20093).

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare that they have no conflicts of
interest in regard to this report.

REFERENCES
1.	 Siegel RL, Miller KD, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2015. CA
Cancer J Clin. 2015; 65: 5-29.
2.	 Siegel RL, Miller KD, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2014. CA
Cancer J Clin. 2014; 64: 9-29.

Immune checkpoint blockade treatment and flow
cytometry analysis in vivo

3.	 Asangani IA, Dommeti VL, Wang X, Malik R, Cieslik M,
Yang R, Escara-Wilke J, Wilder-Romans K, Dhanireddy
S, Engelke C, Iyer MK, Jing X, Wu YM, et al. Therapeutic
targeting of BET bromodomain proteins in castrationresistant prostate cancer. Nature. 2014; 510: 278-282.

Mice from the metastasis models were
randomly divided into two groups and were injected
intraperitoneally with 100 µg of anti-CTLA-4 (clone
9H10, BioXCell) or isometric PBS on days 0, 2, 6, 8
and 12, as previously reported [13–14]. Peripheral blood
(200 µl) from each mouse was collected in a centrifuge
tube with ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid and were
treated with FACS lysing solution before incubating for
1 h at 4°C with fluorescein isothiocyanate-labeled antimouse CD11b, Foxp3, and CD8 antibody; phycoerythrin
(PE)-labeled anti-mouse Gr-1, CD4, and CD3 antibody;
allophycocyanin-labeled
anti-mouse-CD44;
PECyanine7-labeled anti-mouse CD62; PerCP-Cyanine5.5labeled anti-mouse IFN-γ; and PE-eFluor 610-labeled
anti-mouse-TNFα (eBioscience, San Diego, USA).
Labeled samples were washed twice with cold PBS and
then re-suspended in 200 µl of cold PBS before analyzing
on fluorescence-activated cell sorter flow cytometer
(Calibur; BD Biosciences, San Jose, USA) by gating on
lymphocytes.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4.	 Nanus, D.M., Giannakakou, P. CANCER. Cancer therapies
that are gone with the Wnt. Science. 2015; 349: 1283-1284.
5.	 Jensen, M.C. IMMUNOLOGY. Synthetic immunobiology
boosts the IQ of T cells. Science. 2015; 350: 514-515.
6.	 Gubin MM, Zhang X, Schuster H, Caron E, Ward JP,
Noguchi T, Ivanova Y, Hundal J, Arthur CD, Krebber
WJ, Mulder GE, Toebes M, Vesely MD, et al. Checkpoint
blockade cancer immunotherapy targets tumour-specific
mutant antigens. Nature. 2014; 515: 577-581.
7.	 Mitsunaga M, Ogawa M, Kosaka N, Rosenblum LT,
Choyke PL, Kobayashi H. Cancer cell-selective in vivo near
infrared photoimmunotherapy targeting specific membrane
molecules. Nature Medicine. 2011; 17: 1685-1691.
8.	 Singh, M., Ferrara, N. Modeling and predicting clinical
efficacy for drugs targeting the tumor milieu. Nature
Biotechnoogy. 2012; 30: 648-657.
33033

Oncotarget

9.	 Zhang B, Kracker S, Yasuda T, Casola S, Vanneman M,
Hömig-Hölzel C, Wang Z, Derudder E, Li S, Chakraborty T,
Cotter SE, Koyama S, Currie T, et al. Immune surveillance
and therapy of lymphomas driven by Epstein-Barr virus
protein LMP1 in a mouse model. Cell. 2012; 148: 739-751.

17.	 Walker-Samuel S, Ramasawmy R, Torrealdea F, Rega M,
Rajkumar V, Johnson SP, Richardson S, Gonçalves M,
Parkes HG, Arstad E, Thomas DL, Pedley RB, Lythgoe MF,
et al. In vivo imaging of glucose uptake and metabolism in
tumors. Nature Medicine. 2013 ;19:1067-1072.

10.	 Liu X, Pu Y, Cron K, Deng L, Kline J, Frazier WA, Xu
H, Peng H, Fu YX, Xu MM. CD47 blockade triggers T
cell-mediated destruction of immunogenic tumors. Nature
Medicine. 2015; 21:1209-1215.

18.	 Garcia, J.A., Rini, B.I. Castration-resistant prostate cancer:
many treatments, many options, many challenges ahead.
Cancer. 2012; 118: 2583-2593.
19.	 Xu P, Li PJ, Guo K, He Y, Ma C, Jin Z, Zhang Y, Ge
Y, Xu A, Zheng S, Li Y, Liu C, Huang P. Remarkable
Pathologic Change in Advanced Prostate Cancer Patient
Using Dendritic Cell-Cytokine-Induced Killer Combined
Therapy: A Case Report. Clinical Genitourinary Cancer.
2015; 13: e379-83.

11.	 Oh P, Testa JE, Borgstrom P, Witkiewicz H, Li Y, Schnitzer
JE. In vivo proteomic imaging analysis of caveolae
reveals pumping system to penetrate solid tumors. Nature
Medicine. 2014; 20:1062-1068.
12.	 Isaacs, J.T. Cancer. Prostate cancer takes nerve. Science.
2013; 341:134-135.

20.	 Guo K, Huang P, Xu N, Xu P, Kaku H, Zheng S, Xu
A, Matsuura E, Liu C, Kumon H. A combination of
YM-155, a small molecule survivin inhibitor, and IL-2
potently suppresses renal cell carcinoma in murine
model. Oncotarget. 2015; 6: 21137-21147. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.4121.

13.	 Burd CE, Sorrentino JA, Clark KS, Darr DB,
Krishnamurthy J, Deal AM, Bardeesy N, Castrillon DH,
Beach DH, Sharpless NE. Monitoring tumorigenesis and
senescence in vivo with a p16(INK4a)-luciferase model.
Cell. 2013; 152: 340-351.
14.	 Luker KE, Mihalko LA, Schmidt BT, Lewin SA, Ray P,
Shcherbo D, Chudakov DM, Luker GD. In vivo imaging
of ligand receptor binding with Gaussia luciferase
complementation. Nature Medicine. 2011; 18:172-177.

21.	 Qin H, Lerman B, Sakamaki I, Wei G, Cha SC, Rao SS,
Qian J, Hailemichael Y, Nurieva R, Dwyer KC, Roth J, Yi
Q, Overwijk WW, et al. Generation of a new therapeutic
peptide that depletes myeloid-derived suppressor cells in
tumor-bearing mice. Nature Medicine. 2014; 20: 676-681.

15.	 Santos EB, Yeh R, Lee J, Nikhamin Y, Punzalan B, Punzalan
B, La Perle K, Larson SM, Sadelain M, Brentjens RJ. Sensitive
in vivo imaging of T cells using a membrane-bound Gaussia
princeps luciferase. Nature Medicine. 2009; 15: 338-344.

22.	 Hannani D, Vétizou M, Enot D, Rusakiewicz S, Chaput
N, Klatzmann D, Desbois M, Jacquelot N, Vimond N,
Chouaib S, Mateus C, Allison JP, Ribas A, et al. Anticancer
immunotherapy by CTLA-4 blockade: obligatory
contribution of IL-2 receptors and negative prognostic
impact of soluble CD25. Cell Research. 2015; 25: 208-224.

16.	 Bouabe, H., Fässler, R., Heesemann, J. Improvement of
reporter activity by IRES-mediated polycistronic reporter
system. Nucleic Acids Research. 2008 ; 36:e28.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33034

Oncotarget

