362

Colorectal Liver Metastases Contract Centripetally
With a Response to Chemotherapy
A Histomorphologic Study

Jennica K.S. Ng, MD1
Stefan J. Urbanski, MD2
Naurang Mangat, PhD3
Andrew McKay, MD1
Francis R. Sutherland, MD1
Elijah Dixon, MD1
Scot Dowden, MD3
Scott Ernst, MD4
Oliver F. Bathe, MD1,3

BACKGROUND. Recently, there has been considerable interest in neoadjuvant
chemotherapy for colorectal liver metastases. However, there is little information
that defines how much liver should be removed after a favorable response.
METHODS. Liver metastases from 2 groups of patients were analyzed: 25 metastases were evaluated from a group that did not receive chemotherapy and 26
lesions were studied from patients who had received systemic chemotherapy
before resection. All patients except for 1 had 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), leucovorin
(LV), and irinotecan (CPT-11); 1 had 5-FU and LV alone. The average duration of
chemotherapy was 2.9  0.7 months. Separate assessments of the histopathologic
features of the central and peripheral portions of each tumor were made. The pa-

1

Department of Surgery, University of Calgary,
Calgary, Alberta, Canada.

thologist was blinded to all clinical information.
RESULTS. All of the untreated metastases had well-circumscribed borders. Irregu-

2

lar borders were seen in 6 of the postchemotherapy lesions (26%), which was

Department of Pathology, University of Calgary,
Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
3

Department of Oncology, University of Calgary,
Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
4

Department of Oncology, London Regional Cancer Centre, London, Ontario, Canada.

particularly prominent in lesions that had significantly contracted. After chemotherapy, discrete islands of viable tumor cells outside of the main tumor mass
were seen in 4 patients, but all were close to the peripheral margin of the tumor
mass. Viable tumor cells were more frequent in the periphery of metastases,
regardless of chemotherapy exposure. Central necrosis was prominent in
untreated metastases, but disappeared after chemotherapy. In lesions treated
with chemotherapy, central fibrosis was greater compared with untreated lesions.

CONCLUSIONS. After a partial response to chemotherapy, liver metastases shrank
in a generally concentric fashion. These findings support the practice of removing less liver after downsizing with chemotherapy. Cancer 2008;112:362–71.
 2007 American Cancer Society.

KEYWORDS: colorectal cancer, neoadjuvant chemotherapy, response, liver metastases, resection.

This study was funded by Pfizer Canada Inc.
The study was reviewed and approved by the
Conjoint Health Research Ethics Board of the
University of Calgary.
Address for reprints: Oliver F. Bathe, MD, Tom
Baker Cancer Centre, Division of Surgical Oncology, 1331-29th St. NW, Calgary, Alberta, Canada
T2N 4N2; Fax: (403) 283-1651; E-mail: bathe@
ucalgary.ca
Received May 9, 2007; revision received August
15, 2007; accepted August 21, 2007.

ª 2007 American Cancer Society

I

n recent years a number of potentially useful systemic agents for
colorectal adenocarcinoma have been developed.1–5 Before this
surge of development the options for patients with liver metastases
from colorectal adenocarcinoma consisted of best supportive care, a
much more limited armamentarium of chemotherapeutic agents,
and resection in a minority of cases. If resection was feasible, then
this represented the only real opportunity for long-term survival.6–9
With the advent of new chemotherapeutic agents, reports
emerged in which some patients with unresectable liver metastases
had reductions in their disease burden that were sufficient to enable
complete resection of their remaining tumor.10–16 That is, tumor
shrank sufficiently to enable complete removal of all gross disease,
while preserving sufficient functional hepatic parenchyma. In such

DOI 10.1002/cncr.23184
Published online 26 November 2007 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

Chemoresponse in Colorectal Liver Metastases/Ng et al.

FIGURE 1. The clinical problem: After a response to chemotherapy, it is
unknown whether (A) it is necessary to remove all segments initially involved
with tumor or whether (B) it is safe to remove less liver (ie, the segments
containing residual tumor).

patients median survivals of 37 to 42 months10–12,16
and 5-year survival rates of 35% to 40% have been
reported.13,14 This compares favorably with patients
who obtained partial responses to chemotherapy, but
were still considered to have unresectable disease
(median survivals 21–22.2 months).10,12
Recently, some investigators have administered
preoperative chemotherapy to patients who have resectable liver metastases.17–19 The rationale for this
approach is that preoperative chemotherapy enables
better selection of patients for resection and subsequent courses of chemotherapy. That is, responsiveness to preoperative chemotherapy may identify
individuals who are more likely to benefit from postoperative chemotherapy. Similarly, appearance of extrahepatic disease during preoperative chemotherapy
identifies individuals who would not benefit from
resection. Whereas there is a good theoretical rationale to administer neoadjuvant chemotherapy to
patients with resectable liver metastases, this
approach is investigational.20
One issue relevant to the utility of neoadjuvant
chemotherapy for liver metastases is that it is unclear
whether a favorable response to preoperative chemotherapy implies that it is possible to resect less hepatic parenchyma to completely eliminate remaining
intrahepatic disease. That is, after a reduction in the
size of a metastasis, is it possible to completely
remove any residual tumor with a more limited liver
resection? The answer to this question depends on
the pattern of the response. We postulated that a
concentric pattern of shrinkage occurs because cells
at the tumor periphery are killed with great prejudice, resulting in a smaller tumor with no viable tumor cells distant from the main residual tumor mass.
If that pattern were evident, then it would be justifiable to remove more limited amounts of liver parenchyma after involution of tumor (Fig. 1). The
alternative pattern of response to chemotherapy is 1
in which cell death occurs randomly throughout the
peripheral and inner portions of the tumor. If that
response pattern occurred, then a partial response

363

may result in multiple islands or nests of residual
viable tumor throughout the entire area where the
original (prechemotherapy) tumor had been. If this
occurred, then it would be important to resect all
segments of liver that were involved before chemotherapy.
The main objective of the study was to delineate
the pattern of tumor regression, as this might help
to define the optimal surgical approach after chemotherapy for liver metastases. For this reason, we
evaluated the histomorphologic features of liver
metastases after a response to chemotherapy, comparing those lesions to metastases that had not
responded to chemotherapy and to metastases that
had not been exposed to chemotherapy. Our findings
that viable tumor tissue is rarely present farther than
a few millimeters away from the main residual tumor
mass supports the postulate that tumor shrinks in a
concentric fashion and that a more limited hepatic
resection can be safely performed.
Regional differences in the rate of chemotherapy-induced apoptosis or fibrosis may be a function
of regional differences in vascularity, as antineoplastic agents may be delivered preferentially to areas
that are better vascularized. Moreover, the fibrosis
and the centripetal pattern of shrinkage that were
apparent in the initial histomorphologic studies may
be partly a vascular phenomenon. These regional differences may also be a function of the rate of proliferation of tumor cells, as rapidly proliferating cells
are typically more vulnerable to chemotherapy. To
evaluate these possibilities the secondary objectives
of this study were to evaluate the patterns of the vasculature of the metastases and to evaluate the proliferative indices of tumor cells in each metastasis.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Patients
The study was reviewed and approved by the Conjoint Health Research Ethics Board of the University
of Calgary. A description of the patients is summarized in Table 1. All patients underwent a hepatic
resection for colorectal liver metastases between July
2001 and July 2004. One group of patients consisted
of 20 patients who had not received chemotherapy
before resection of their liver metastases. A total of
25 lesions were evaluated in this group.
Systemic chemotherapy was administered before
resection in 21 patients; 16 of these patients were
participants in a phase 2 clinical trial of neoadjuvant
chemotherapy for resectable liver metastases.20 All
patients except for 1 had 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), leucovorin (LV), and irinotecan (CPT-11); 1 had 5-FU

364

CANCER

January 15, 2008 / Volume 112 / Number 2

TABLE 1
Clinical Features of the Study Groups

No. of patients
Age, y
Sex
Men
Women
No. of metastases
Total
No. of metastases
per patient
Size of metastases, cm
Initial size prechemotherapy
Size immediately before OR

No chemotherapy

Chemotherapy

P

20
66  11

21
57  9

.006

8
12

11
10

25

26

1.3  0.55 (1–3)

1.2  0.51 (1–3)

NS

N/A
6.3  3.4*

7.3  4.3y
4.4  3.8*,y

.061*
<.0005y

NS

NS indicates not significant; N/A, not available; OR, operation.
* Indicates size immediately prior to OR in chemotherapy vs no chemotherapy groups.
y
Indicates size change prechemotherapy and postchemotherapy in the chemotherapy group.

and LV alone. The average duration of chemotherapy
was 2.9  0.7 months (range, 0.5–5 months). Computed tomography (CT) scans were performed before
and after chemotherapy, which enabled assessment
of chemoresponsiveness. Eighteen patients (86%)
had a response by RECIST criteria.21 This cohort was
deliberately biased to include a large proportion of
tumors that had responded to chemotherapy, and
this response rate did not represent a consecutive
group. A total of 26 lesions were evaluated in the
chemotherapy group: 3 lesions that disappeared
radiographically after chemotherapy; 19 lesions
underwent a partial response; and 4 lesions were
stable or progressed on chemotherapy. Surgery was
typically performed within 4 to 6 weeks of completion of chemotherapy. In patients who had a
response to chemotherapy, it was routine to remove
all of the hepatic segments that were involved before
initiation of chemotherapy, with at least 1–2 cm of
gross tumor-free margin. Patients with positive margins were not included in the analysis.

Specimen Preparation
The gross appearance of each resected liver specimen was described by the receiving pathologist. The
resection line was painted with India ink and the
specimen was serially sectioned into slices measuring 1–2 cm. The number, distribution, and morphology of metastases in the specimen were
recorded. Tumors were initially sampled based on 1
section per 1 cm of tumor mass, including adjacent
normal liver parenchyma. One slide of tumor-free
liver parenchyma was examined as well. These
sections were embedded in paraffin and routinely

processed. Subsequently, after reexamination appropriate sections from each tumor were selected for
more detailed histologic analysis. Care was taken to
ensure that the entire span of each tumor was evaluated at its maximal diameter, sampling the entire tumor if it was 4 cm in diameter or smaller. The larger
lesions were examined by sampling 1 section per cm
of tumor. Non-neoplastic liver was also sampled in
each case, with sections taken away from the tumor.
Representative areas from other sections were also
examined.
Four slides of 4-lm serial sections were obtained
from selected formalin-fixed paraffin blocks from
each metastasis. Each section was mounted onto
slides coated with polylysine-l. Immunohistochemical staining for CD31, CD34, and Ki67 was done in
serial sections.
The pathologist examining the slides was completely blinded to each patient’s treatment history.
The parameters assessed for each tumor included a
description of the tumor margin (sharply circumscribed or irregular), presence of calcifications, and
presence of mucin pools. Other features (eg, fibrosis,
necrosis, tumor cell viability, proliferative index, and
vascular density) were assessed separately at the tumor periphery and at the tumor center. To accomplish this the diameter of a tumor was quartered; the
outer quarters were evaluated separately from the
inner (central) 2 quarters.
The degree of fibrosis was graded as follows:
grade 1 (<30% of the area examined), grade 2 (31%–
60%), and grade 3 (>60%). Necrosis was graded as
follows: grade 1 (<25%), grade 2 (26%–50%), grade 3
(51%–75%), and grade 4 (>76%). Finally, the area
occupied by viable tumor cells was estimated and
graded as follows: grade 1 (<25%), grade 2 (26%–
50%), grade 3 (51%–75%), and grade 4 (>76%).
The degree of vascularity was estimated by
counting the number of CD341 and CD311 vessels
per high power field (hpf; approximately 3 200 magnification). An attempt was made to count 50 hpf in
each case. However, it was not always possible, as
some of the tumors were small and isolated metastases responded by subtotal necrosis. Subsequently,
vascularity was graded. The grading for vessels staining for CD34 was as follows: grade 0 (0 vessels seen);
grade 1 (1–20 vessels/hpf); grade 2 (21–40 vessels/
hpf); grade 3 (>40 vessels/hpf). The grading for vessels staining for CD31 was as follows: grade 0 (0 vessels seen); grade 1 (1–40 vessels/hpf); grade 2 (41–80
vessels/hpf); grade 3 (>80 vessels/hpf). The grading
system differed because there were generally more
CD311 vessels in liver metastases, although this was
not a constant finding.

Chemoresponse in Colorectal Liver Metastases/Ng et al.

A proliferative index was derived by estimating
the proportion of viable tumor cells that stained for
Ki67. The index was assigned as follows: grade 0 (no
cells staining positive for Ki67); grade 1 (1%–32%
positive); grade 2 (33%–65% positive); grade 3 (66%–
100% positive).

Statistical Analysis
All values are expressed as mean  standard deviation unless otherwise specified. Statistical significance of differences between 2 means was tested by
2-tailed t-test for 2 independent samples. For comparison of grades (eg, fibrosis, necrosis, proliferative
index), nonparametric tests were utilized; the MannWhitney test was employed to compare differences
in medians of 2 independent groups; and the Wilcoxon Signed Rank test was used to compare differences in medians of paired variables. For categorical
data the Pearson chi-square test was used to test the
association of a factor with treatment (ie, chemotherapy or no chemotherapy). A P-value <.05 was considered significant a priori, but P-values less than .10
were reported.

RESULTS
Histomorphologic Features Associated With a Response
to Chemotherapy
In patients treated with chemotherapy there was a
significant reduction in size of tumors after chemotherapy (Table 1; P < .0005). Therefore, as one might
expect, the average size of the lesions analyzed
pathologically was larger in the group of patients
who had not received chemotherapy, although this
did not reach statistical significance (Table 1). Three
lesions disappeared radiographically. In one, despite
examination of 1-cm sections, there was no histopathologic evidence of residual tumor, including residual scarring. In 2 specimens evidence of residual
tumor was seen. One of these consisted of hyalinized
scar and the other consisted of some viable tumor
cells surrounding a fibrotic center. The borders of
each lesion were evaluated as sharply circumscribed
or irregular (Fig. 2). All of the untreated metastases
had well-circumscribed borders. Six of the postchemotherapy lesions (26%) had irregular borders, and
all of these were reported in lesions that had undergone a significant size reduction.
After chemotherapy, discrete islands of viable tumor cells outside of the main tumor mass were only
seen in 4 patients, and none of these nests was more
than 4 mm away from the peripheral margin of the
main tumor mass. In addition, in 1 metastasis that
had diminished in size after chemotherapy, the resid-

365

ual tumor consisted of 2 regions with distinct
morphologies (Fig. 3). One region consisted of a large
proportion of viable cells, and the other region was
largely replaced by fibrosis and, to a lesser degree,
necrosis.
Viable tumor cells were more frequent in the periphery of metastases, whether they were treated
with chemotherapy or not (Table 2). Chemotherapytreated lesions that diminished in size did not differ
in this respect compared with those that did not
respond.
Central necrosis was prominent in untreated metastases, but became less prominent after treatment
with chemotherapy (Table 2). After chemotherapy
there was no significant difference in the degree of
central or peripheral necrosis in lesions that
responded and those that did not.
The degree of fibrosis was greatest in the central
portion of lesions treated with chemotherapy. In
lesions treated with chemotherapy the fibrosis was
greater in the center than in the periphery, although
this did not quite reach our predetermined level of
significance (P 5 .051). Moreover, the degree of central fibrosis was greater in lesions treated with chemotherapy when compared with untreated lesions
(P 5 .035). The mean central fibrosis grade was particularly high in metastases that shrank in response to
chemotherapy (1.95  0.78) versus those that did not
respond (1.50  0.58).

Vascularity of Metastases
Metastases were stained for the panendothelial cell
markers CD31 and CD34. The number of vessels did
not differ according to whether chemotherapy was
administered, and vascularity did not appear to be
related to the degree of response. There was little
heterogeneity detected in the degree of vascularity in
any given zone of each tumor. Moreover, in none of
the groups could a difference in vascularity be seen
between the central and peripheral components of
each lesion. Therefore, it is unlikely that the pattern
of vascularity markedly affects chemoresponsiveness
of individual lesions or to particular regions in each
metastasis.
The typical pattern of vascularity in metastases
consisted of multiple small vessels distributed in a
random fashion throughout the lesion (Fig. 4B); this
is not unlike the angiogenic vascular pattern seen in
most solid tumors at other sites. A sinusoidal pattern
of vascularity (Fig. 4A) was observed in many lesions,
where the tumor grew along hepatic sinuses with no
significant neovascularization. These 2 vascular patterns have been described previously by others,22,23
and the latter pattern is thought to represent parasi-

366

CANCER

January 15, 2008 / Volume 112 / Number 2

FIGURE 2. Comparison of some of the typical features of untreated liver metastases (A) and metastases that have contracted after chemotherapy (B-D). (A)
Untreated metastases typically have a sharply defined border and central necrosis. (B) After a response to chemotherapy metastases often lose their sharply circumscribed peripheral border, which becomes irregular. Tentacles of viable tumor are occasionally visible, which appear separate from the main tumor mass.
(C, D) The typically necrotic center of an untreated metastasis is replaced by fibrosis.

Chemoresponse in Colorectal Liver Metastases/Ng et al.

367

FIGURE 3. Regional differences in chemosensitivity. This postchemotherapy metastasis has 2 areas with distinctly different morphologies. Area A consists of
a large focus of viable cells, whereas Area B consists of necrosed tumor that is largely replaced by fibrosis. As a result of regional differences in chemosensitivity, the boundaries of the lesion have become irregular. Note the viable tumor within the bile duct, which may represent a sanctuary from antineoplastic
agents in Area C.

tization of preexisting hepatic sinusoids. The sinusoidal pattern was seen in 61% of lesions exposed to
chemotherapy and 72% of untreated lesions. This
was not significantly different, suggesting that the
appearance of a sinusoidal pattern of vascularity was
not a treatment effect or association.

Proliferative Index of Tumor Cells Distributed Throughout
the Tumor
In metastases treated with chemotherapy, there was
a significantly lower proportion of tumor cells that
were proliferating at the center of the tumor when
compared with the peripheral aspects of the tumor.
This regional difference was not seen in untreated
lesions, nor was it seen in lesions that did not
respond to chemotherapy. When the proliferative
indices of the inner portion of lesions treated with
chemotherapy were compared with untreated
lesions, no significant difference was observed
(P 5 .12). When only lesions that responded were
compared with untreated lesions, the proliferative
indices in the inner region were less in the treated,

responding lesions, although this was not statistically
significant (1.53  1.12 vs 2.04  0.98, P 5 .12).

DISCUSSION
Neoadjuvant chemotherapy is becoming an increasingly more popular strategy for the treatment of liver
metastases from colorectal cancer. This may be
partly attributed to the higher response rates seen
with contemporary antineoplastic regimens. However, with success a new conundrum has emerged:
how much liver should be removed after a favorable
response to chemotherapy? The answer to this question depends on the mechanism and pattern of tumor response. An apparent reduction in tumor size
with a random pattern of cell death and persistence
of viable tumor cells throughout the extent of where
the original tumor had been would suggest that the
entire segment involved with the prechemotherapy
tumor should be removed. In practice, the resection
strategy after neoadjuvant chemotherapy is based on
the reduced dimensions of the metastases. Our data

368

CANCER

January 15, 2008 / Volume 112 / Number 2

TABLE 2
Histomorphologic Features of Untreated Liver Metastases
and Metastases After Chemotherapy
No chemotherapy
Central
Viability, grade
Necrosis, grade
Fibrosis, grade

Peripheral

Chemotherapy
Central

Peripheral P

1.64  0.57y 2.48  1.01y 1.71  0.81* 2.67  1.13* <.001*
.001*
2.28  1.06y,{ 1.36  0.76y 1.54  0.88{ 1.33  0.70 .003{
<.0005*
1.44  0.51{ 1.48  0.65 1.87  0.74*,{ 1.46  0.66* .035{
.051*

Proliferative
index
2.04  0.98
CD31, grade
0.55  0.67
CD34, grade
1.16  0.99
Borders
Well
circumscribed 25
Irregular
0
Sinusoidal vascular pattern
Yes
18
No
6
Mucin
Yes
7
No
18
Calcifications
Yes
2
No
23

2.25  0.68
0.73  0.83
1.32  0.90

1.54  1.06* 2.00  0.78* .028*
0.63  1.01 0.58  0.77 NS
1.44  0.99 1.44  1.08 NS

17
6

.008

14
9

NS

5
19

NS

5
19

NS

NS indicates not significant.
* Central vs peripheral (chemotherapy group).
y
Central vs peripheral (no chemotherapy group).
{
Chemotherapy vs no chemotherapy.

lend support to this practice. Because tumor shrinks
in a concentric fashion, although there are occasional islands of viable tumor outside of the confines
of the main tumor mass, it may be possible to
remove less liver after a response to chemotherapy.
Before this study we speculated that tumor
shrank in 1 of 2 ways: it either contracted in a piecemeal, random fashion, leaving viable cells throughout its original area, or it shrank in a concentric
manner due to cell death that predominantly
affected the periphery.24 Our data suggest an alternative, combined mechanism of response. Typically, in
the absence of chemotherapy viable cells predominate in the periphery and central necrosis is prominent in metastases, presumably because of impaired
perfusion to the core of the tumor. After a response
to chemotherapy the distribution of viable cells
remains unchanged, suggesting that the probability
of cell death is the same in the peripheral and central portions of the tumor. Rather, with a clinical
response to chemotherapy viable cells (and necrotic
areas) are replaced by fibrosis, particularly toward

FIGURE 4. Two angiogenic patterns in liver metastases; stained for CD34,
3 20 magnification. (A) A ‘sinusoidal’ pattern of vascularity was seen in
some metastases. (B) In others, a ‘portal’ pattern of vascularity is seen,
which consists of multiple smaller blood vessels in a more random pattern
and orientation.

the central portion of the tumor. Because responding
lesions often lose their sharply circumscribed peripheral border and because discrete islands of residual
viable tumor are not typically far from the main residual tumor, we believe that the chemotherapyinduced size reduction occurs primarily because the
periphery is drawn toward the fibrosing center of the
tumor (Fig. 5).
Little information is available concerning fibrosis
within metastatic foci, but the appearance of fibrosis
in other models of cell death may provide some
insight into the role of fibrosis on the evolution of
metastases. After myocardial infarction, hypocellular
scars are seen at approximately 8 to 10 weeks.25 In

Chemoresponse in Colorectal Liver Metastases/Ng et al.

FIGURE 5. (A) Two models of chemoresponse conceived a priori by the
investigators. In the first model peripheral cells are preferentially killed by
chemotherapy, leaving a central core of viable tumor. In the second model,
residual disease is randomly distributed throughout the original tumor volume. (B) Model of chemoresponse derived from experimental data. Cell
death is randomly distributed, due to regional variations in chemosensitivity.
Elements of the center of the tumor are replaced by fibrosis, which draws
remaining viable cells toward the center, effectively reducing tumor volume.

the case of wound healing, dense hypocellular scars
appear even sooner.25 In our series, fibrosis appeared
to occur within 3 to 4 months of the initiation of
chemotherapy. Given the delayed appearance of fibrosis after a myocardial infarction or after wound
healing, we speculate that the majority of tumor
death developed soon after the first few doses of chemotherapy, and fibrosis was initiated shortly after that.
If the replacement of dead tumor cells by fibrosis
was the main mechanism responsible for reduction
in tumor size, it remains unclear why no microscopically visible scar was detected in 1 of the lesions that
completely responded to neoadjuvant chemotherapy.
One explanation is that additional processes such as
immune-mediated clearance or tissue remodeling
may rid the region of any remaining scar tissue after
tumor cells are completely eliminated. Given the
appearance of a sinusoidal pattern of tumor vascularization, which may represent parasitization from
hepatic sinusoids, tumor may have been replaced by
regrowth of hepatocytes along the sinusoidal frame-

369

work. Despite the considerable regenerative capacity
of the liver, we consider this less likely. It is more
likely that the residual scar was so small that it was
missed by routine pathologic evaluation of the specimen, which consisted of examination of 1-cm liver
slices. The observation by Benoist et al.26 that 80% of
resected hepatic segments in which metastases had
completely disappeared on CT contained viable tumor cells on careful pathologic examination supports
this possibility. This is further supported by their
finding that metastases that completely disappeared
after chemotherapy have a recurrence rate of 74% if
they were not resected.26
Whereas the centripetal implosion is a predominant process, one must be cognizant that there are
regional differences in chemosensitivity within a single metastasis (Fig. 3). It is perhaps this phenomenon
that resulted in the appearance of discrete nests of
viable tumor cells outside of the main tumor mass.
In this series, none of these viable tumor islands was
ever found greater than 4 mm from the peripheral
edge of the main tumor. In another series of liver
resections for colorectal liver metastases, the size of
the margin was not related to local recurrence rate
or survival, although this was not assessed in the
context of neoadjuvant chemotherapy.27 That is, as
long as a histologically negative margin was
achieved, an acceptably low rate of local recurrences
was observed. Our findings of nests of residual viable
tumor outside the main tumor mass suggests that a
more conservative approach is required after neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Specifically, it would be prudent to attempt to achieve a 1-cm margin from the
grossly visible residual metastasis, as this would result
in histologically negative margins most of the time. Of
course, more detailed studies, including outcomes
studies, will be required to better evaluate this.
A lack of change in tumor cell viability in the
central and peripheral aspects of metastases suggests
that the rate of cell death is the same in both zones
of tumor. On the other hand, the cells remaining in
the center of residual tumor do change in their proliferative activity, as estimated by Ki67 staining. This
may reflect the selection of nonproliferating clones
after chemotherapy. If that is the case, because tumor cells residing in the peripheral aspects of the tumor did not have changes in proliferative index, it is
possible that there is preferential cytotoxicity to centrally located tumor cells that could not be detected
by the sensitivity afforded by counting viable cells.
Our findings are also analogous to observations
seen in other tumor types. In breast cancer, for
example, it is often possible to perform breast-conserving therapy after a favorable response to neoad-

370

CANCER

January 15, 2008 / Volume 112 / Number 2

juvant chemotherapy, and this is associated with a
low rate of locoregional recurrence.28,29 Similarly, in
the setting of rectal cancer, it is feasible to avoid an
abdominoperineal resection in a greater proportion
of patients after neoadjuvant chemotherapy, with
survivals comparable to patients who did not receive
neoadjuvant chemotherapy who underwent abdominoperineal resection.30 Therefore, as with other tumor models, with appropriate margins liver-sparing
resections are possible, and these are unlikely to
adversely affect outcomes.
The data should be interpreted with some
caveats. This represents a relatively small series in
which a detailed histomorphologic analysis was
done. Larger series of chemotherapy-treated metastases should similarly be evaluated to define with
greater certainty what constitutes a safe resection
margin. All but 1 of the patients was treated with a
combination of 5-FU, LV, and irinotecan. One patient
was treated with 5-FU and LV, but was included
because the patient was treated neoadjuvantly within
the same time period and the histomorphologic
characteristics of the resected metastasis were within
the range exhibited in the other specimens. Although
the decision to treat with neoadjuvant chemotherapy
was not randomized, we are not aware of any major
differences in patient or tumor characteristics
between groups. The patients that did not receive
neoadjuvant chemotherapy and those who were not
in the trial were treated in the same institution by
the same surgeons during the same time period.
Patients receiving chemotherapy were younger, but
there were no differences in sex, number, and size of
metastases. Data from other chemotherapy regimens
(eg, oxaliplatin-based regimens) should be evaluated
to ensure that similar patterns of response are
observed. With the advent of novel targeted therapies, particularly those targeting the tumor stroma
(as opposed to the tumor cells themselves), further
research on the pattern of shrinkage will be especially important. Future studies might also allow
analyses comparing the dose and duration of chemotherapy to pathologic response. Another area for
investigation would be to evaluate the relation
between initial tumor size and response. The small
sample of the present study precludes such analyses.
Finally, whereas these data provide guidance for
resection of metastases that have partially responded,
the optimal management of metastases that have
completely disappeared after chemotherapy is still
poorly defined. Data from Elias et al.31 suggest that,
in some instances of complete response, resection of
the hepatic segments that had been involved may
not be required, but such an expectant approach

must be taken with considerable vigilance. Thus, further investigations on this line will be essential.
In summary, we have described a new mechanism of chemotherapy-induced tumor involution
consisting of random cell death and replacement
with fibrosis. Residual tumor is drawn in a centripetal direction, enabling resection of less liver in some
instances. These findings lend support to the practice
of not necessarily removing the entire segment of
liver that was involved with prechemotherapy tumor.10–16 Because of the presence of occasional
islands of viable tumor outside the confines of the
main tumor mass, one should obtain generous resection margins if possible (preferably >1 cm). These
data should be confirmed with larger series and with
different systemic therapy regimens.

REFERENCES
1.

Goldberg RM, Gill S. Recent phase III trials of fluorouracil,
irinotecan, and oxaliplatin as chemotherapy for metastatic
colorectal cancer. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2004;
54(Suppl 1):S57–64.
2. Twelves C, Wong A, Nowacki MP, et al. Capecitabine as adjuvant treatment for stage III colon cancer. N Engl J Med.
2005;352:2696–2704.
3. Andre T, Boni C, Mounedji-Boudiaf L, et al. Oxaliplatin,
fluorouracil, and leucovorin as adjuvant treatment for colon cancer. N Engl J Med. 2004;350:2343–2351.
4. Hurwitz H, Fehrenbacher L, Novotny W, et al. Bevacizumab
plus irinotecan, fluorouracil, and leucovorin for metastatic
colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med. 2004;350:2335–2342.
5. Colucci G, Gebbia V, Paoletti G, et al. Phase III randomized
trial of FOLFIRI versus FOLFOX4 in the treatment of
advanced colorectal cancer: a multicenter study of the
Gruppo Oncologico Dell’Italia Meridionale. J Clin Oncol.
2005;23:4866–4875.
6. Fong Y, Kemeny N, Paty P, Blumgart LH, Cohen AM. Treatment of colorectal cancer: hepatic metastasis. Semin Surg
Oncol. 1996;12:219–252.
7. Ballantyne GH, Quin J. Surgical treatment of liver metastases in patients with colorectal cancer. Cancer. 1993;71:
4252–4266.
8. Simmonds PC, Primrose JN, Colquitt JL, Garden OJ, Poston
GJ, Rees M. Surgical resection of hepatic metastases from
colorectal cancer: a systematic review of published studies.
Br J Cancer. 2006;94:982–999.
9. Van CE, Nordlinger B, Adam R, et al. Towards a pan-European consensus on the treatment of patients with colorectal liver metastases. Eur J Cancer. 2006;42:2212–2221.
10. Masi G, Cupini S, Marcucci L, et al. Treatment with 5fluorouracil/folinic acid, oxaliplatin, and irinotecan enables
surgical resection of metastases in patients with initially
unresectable metastatic colorectal cancer. Ann Surg Oncol.
2006;13:58–65.
11. Capussotti L, Muratore A, Mulas MM, Massucco P, Aglietta
M. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy and resection for initially
irresectable colorectal liver metastases. Br J Surg. 2006;93:
1001–106.
12. Delaunoit T, Alberts SR, Sargent DJ, et al. Chemotherapy
permits resection of metastatic colorectal cancer: experience from Intergroup N9741. Ann Oncol. 2005;16:425–429.

Chemoresponse in Colorectal Liver Metastases/Ng et al.
13. Bismuth H, Adam R, Levi F, et al. Resection of nonresectable liver metastases from colorectal cancer after neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Ann Surg. 1996;224:509–520.
14. Adam R, Avisar E, Ariche A, et al. Five-year survival after
hepatic resection following neoadjuvant therapy for nonresectable colorectal. Ann Surg Oncol. 2001;8:347–353.
15. Pozzo C, Basso M, Cassano A, et al. Neoadjuvant treatment
of unresectable liver disease with irinotecan and 5-fluorouracil plus folinic acid in colorectal cancer patients. Ann
Oncol. 2004;15:933–939.
16. Rivoire M, De CF, Meeus P, Gignoux B, Frering B, Kaemmerlen P. Cryosurgery as a means to improve surgical
treatment of patients with multiple unresectable liver metastases. Anticancer Res. 2000;20:3785–3790.
17. Lorenz M, Staib-Sebler E, Gog C, et al. Prospective pilot
study of neoadjuvant chemotherapy with 5-fluorouracil, folinic acid and oxaliplatin in resectable liver metastases of
colorectal cancer. Analysis of 42 neoadjuvant chemotherapies. Zentralbl Chir. 2003;128:87–94.
18. Allen PJ, Kemeny N, Jarnagin W, DeMatteo R, Blumgart L,
Fong Y. Importance of response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy in patients undergoing resection of synchronous
colorectal liver metastases. J Gastrointest Surg. 2003;7:109–
115.
19. Wein A, Riedel C, Bruckl W, et al. Neoadjuvant treatment
with weekly high-dose 5-Fluorouracil as 24-hour infusion,
folinic acid and oxaliplatin in patients with primary resectable liver metastases of colorectal cancer. Oncology.
2003;64:131–138.
20. Bathe OF, Dowden S, Sutherland F, et al. Phase II study of
neoadjuvant 5-FU 1 leucovorin 1 CPT-11 in patients with
resectable liver metastases from colorectal adenocarcinoma. BMC Cancer. 2004;4:32.
21. Therasse P, Arbuck SG, Eisenhauer EA, et al. New guidelines to evaluate the response to treatment in solid tumors.

22.

23.

24.

25.
26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

371

European Organization for Research and Treatment of
Cancer, National Cancer Institute of the United States,
National Cancer Institute of Canada. J Natl Cancer Inst.
2000;92:205–216.
Solaun MS, Mendoza L, De LM, et al. Endostatin inhibits
murine colon carcinoma sinusoidal-type metastases by
preferential targeting of hepatic sinusoidal endothelium.
Hepatology. 2002;35:1104–1116.
Paku S, Lapis K. Morphological aspects of angiogenesis in
experimental liver metastases. Am J Pathol. 1993;143:926–
936.
Bathe OF. Preoperative chemotherapy for liver metastases:
a contemporary approach giving rise to new questions.
J Surg Oncol. 2004;86:1–3.
Kumar V, Fausto N, Abas A. Robbins and Cotran Pathologic
Basis of Disease, 7th ed. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders; 2004.
Benoist S, Brouquet A, Penna C, et al. Complete response
of colorectal liver metastases after chemotherapy: does it
mean cure? J Clin Oncol. 2006;24:3939–3945.
Pawlik TM, Scoggins CR, Zorzi D, et al. Effect of surgical
margin status on survival and site of recurrence after hepatic resection for colorectal metastases. Ann Surg. 2005;
241:715–722; discussion, 722–724.
Chen AM, Meric-Bernstam F, Hunt KK, et al. Breast conservation after neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Cancer. 2005;103:
689–695.
Rouzier R, Mathieu MC, Sideris L, et al. Breast-conserving
surgery after neoadjuvant anthracycline-based chemotherapy for large breast tumors. Cancer. 2004;101:918–925.
Sauer R, Becker H, Hohenberger W, et al. Preoperative versus postoperative chemoradiotherapy for rectal cancer.
N Engl J Med. 2004;351:1731–1740.
Elias D, Youssef O, Sideris L, et al. Evolution of missing colorectal liver metastases following inductive chemotherapy
and hepatectomy. J Surg Oncol. 2004;86:4–9.

