Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 46

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

Hyperosmotic treatment synergistically boost efficiency of
cell-permeable peptides
Hu Wang1,2,4, Ming Zhang1,2, Fanhui Zeng3, Changbai Liu1,2,4
1

The Institute of Cell Therapy, China Three Gorges University, Yichang, China

2

Medical School, Department of Pathology, Biology and Immunology, China Three Gorges University, Yichang, China

3

The Central Hospital of Enshi Tujia and Miao Autonomous Prefecture, Enshi, China

4

Hubei Key Laboratory of Tumor Microenvironment and Immunotherapy, China Three Gorges University, Yichang, China

Correspondence to: Hu Wang, email: biomed_wang@yahoo.com
Changbai Liu, email: cbliu@ctgu.edu.cn
Keywords: cell penetrating peptide, hypertonic molecules, penetration, osmoprotectant
Received: February 25, 2016     Accepted: April 11, 2016     Published: May 18, 2016

ABSTRACT
Therapeutics delivery into cells has been hurdled due to the barrier of cytoplasmic
membrane. Although cell penetrating peptide (CPP) can potentially serve as an
intracellular drug delivery vehicle, the application of CPP-based delivery is limited
because the unsatisfactory delivery efficiency of CPP conjugated potent cargos is
challenging their applications in present. Thus, the development of strategies for
enhancing the penetrating efficiency of CPP would therefore urgent need to be
explored to increase the scope of potential applications. We report here the effects
of glucose, sucrose and manntiol (abbreviated as GSM) combination facilitating the
penetration efficiency of CPP peptide alone or CPP-GFP (green fluorescence protein)
conjugation in cultured cell lines or primary cells. Moreover, osmoprotectants
glycerol and glycine supplementation help cells cope with the stress from GSM
combination. Thus, our present study suggests that GSM combination in the presence
of osmoprotectant can work as a new strategy for CPP penetration enhancement.

INTRODUCTION

the past few decades, such as the TAT (human HIV-1
transactivator of transcription protein, residues 48–60),
which have successfully delivered small molecules,
peptides or proteins, nucleic acids, quantum dots (QDs),
polysaccharides, liposomes and nanoparticles in vitro
or in vivo [4]. Although TAT-mediated cargo delivery
appears to work with almost all mammalian cells (from
stem cells [5–8] to somatic cells [9, 10]) independent of
tissue or organism types, insects and even plant cells,
the unsatisfactory delivery efficiency of TAT or CPP
conjugated potent cargos is challenging their applications at
the clinical trial stage. Thus, the development of strategies
for enhancing the penetrating efficiency of CPP would
therefore urgent need to be explored to increase the scope
of potential applications. Our group has discovered and
successfully employed small molecule DMSO (dimethyl
sulfoxide) [11] and BIT (1,2-benzisothiazolin-3-one) [12]
to facilitate the penetrating efficiency of TAT or TAT fused
conjugates for a range of cell types, however, the unknown
mechanism of enhancement and their potential side effects
in high concentration may affect their application in clinic.

Macromolecules including nucleic acids (e.g.
mRNA, siRNA, microRNA and lncRNA) and proteins
(e.g. enzymes, cytokines and antibodies) have demonstrated
great value as research tools and achieved widespread
success as human therapeutics among the fastest growing
classes of drugs [1, 2]. However, many powerful and
potentially therapeutic proteins are typically not able to
spontaneously enter into mammalian cells owing to the
selectively permeable barrier of cellular membrane. To
address this challenge, variety of macromolecule delivery
approaches or reagents have been developed. Perhaps cellpenetrating peptide (CPP)-based delivery system is the most
common and safe method for the introduction of exogenous
macromolecule to transiently manipulate cell behavior
without possibility of permanent genomic changes [3].
Examples of CPP also called protein transduction
domains (PTD), because it can mediate the uptake of
cargos that are covalently or non-covalently linked to
them. Many CPPs have been discovered or applied during
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74648

Oncotarget

Reports have shown that hypertonic molecules
(e.g. sucrose and NaCl) treatment drives the highly
efficient intracellular uptake of native proteins and other
macromolecules into cells [13], and lysosomotrophic
agents, such as chloroquine and sucrose have been used
in CPP penetration to improve the efficiency of cargo
delivery [11, 14], however, whether other agents such as
glucose and manntiol as hypertonic molecules can enhance
the penetration efficiency of CPP remain unknown. Here,
we describe glucose and manntiol both enhance the
penetrating efficiency of CPP, and we also found that
glucose, sucrose and manntiol (abbreviated as GSM) can
synergistically accelerate CPP entering into a wide variety
of cell lines and primary cells. And osmoprotectants
glycine and glycerol supplementation resulted in minimal
effect on cell proliferation of different cell lines. Thus, we
demonstrate that the system of CPP in hypertonic medium
combined with osmoprotecants allows the highly efficient
delivery of protein cargos.

penetration enhancement in Caski cells was dependent
on the concentration of glucose, sucrose and manntiol.
Moreover, we explored the effect of different cell lines on
TAT penetration in the presence of glucose and manntiol
(Figure 2C), indicating that glucose and manntiol also can
enhance the penetration of TAT uptake by different cell
lines. In addition, galactose treatment also can partially
enhance the penetration efficiency of TAT (Supplementary
Figure S2A); however, the enhancement effect resulting
from galactose treatment is lower than induction by
manntiol (Supplementary Figure S2B).

The combined effect of GSM on TAT penetration
The above experiments suggest that TAT
penetration efficiency was enhanced after glucose,
sucrose and manntiol treatment. Next, we examined
the TAT penetration efficiency in Caski cells incubated
with glucose, sucrose and manntiol (abbreviated as
GSM) combination. As shown in Figure 3A, TAT-FITC
uptake by Caski cells was improved by glucose and
sucrose combination, glucose and manntiol combination
(Figure 3B) and sucrose and manntiol combination
(Figure 3C). We also evaluated the combination effect
of GSM. As expected, Figure 3D showed that GSM
combination treatment lead to TAT-FITC uptake increasing
as the concentration gradient, and Figure 3E shows
an image of TAT penetration in Caski cells treated by
GSM combination, and there was no difference between
PBS washing and 0.025% trypsin washing method
(Supplementary Figure S3). Thus, these data indicated coincubation with GSM have combination effect.

RESULTS
The enhancement effect of GSM on TAT
penetration
A series of previous studies suggested that the
suitable concentration of agents (chloroquine and sucrose)
can promote the endosome-entrapped material release
[15–17], thus, in-vitro-cultured cells incubated with
sucrose can serve as an alternative strategy to enhance
the drug delivery. To further examine the enhancement
effect of sucrose on the penetration of TAT, we detected
the intracellular distribution of TAT using fluorescence
microscope, as shown in Figure 1A, TAT-FITC was
well-distributed in the cytosol of HeLa cells incubated
with sucrose (500 mM), it seems like that enhancement
effect of chloroquine with different concentration is
limited (Supplementary Figure S1), and we also detected
intracellular distribution of TAT-FITC in different cells
(Caski, A549, HepG2 and Siha) incubated with sucrose
(500 mM) at 37°C for 1 h, as well as in Siha cells at
4°C (Figure 1B). These results suggest that suitable
concentration of sucrose can be used to increase the
penetration of TAT in different cell lines. Previous studies
have shown that hypertonicity-inducing molecules (NaCl,
RbCl, KCl and LiCl) could mediate protein delivery
[13], and sucrose can enhance the DNA transfection as
well [15], however, it is still unknown whether other
hypertonicity-inducing agent including manntiol have
similar effects. Therefore, we also examined the effect of
glucose and manntiol on TAT penetration. In Figure 2A,
the markedly TAT penetration enhancement was observed
in Caski cells incubated with glucose and manntiol at
500 mM, and the dose ranging (from 200 to 600 mM) of
glucose and manntiol experiments were also performed for
quantitative analysis (Figure 2B), we discovered that TAT
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Protective of glycerol and glycine cotreatment
Although GSM combination promoted TATFITC penetration, cell survival may be affected by high
concentration of sucrose and manntiol because they can
act as afn osmotic [18]. However, recent report suggested
that osmoprotectants such as glycerol and glycine can be
used to help cells survive by balancing the osmotic effect
[13]. Thus, we examined whether glycerol (30 mM) and
glycine (15 mM) addition in media could prevent the
hypertonicity induced the cell proliferation inhibition,
without glycerol and glycine supplementation, Caski cells
incubated with GSM separately or combination reduced
the cell proliferation compared with control, however,
glycerol and glycine addition during the GSM treatment
can rescue the cell viability at 24 h (Figure 4A), 48 h
(Figure 4B) as well as 72 h (Figure 4C), and still allowing
the TAT penetration. We next investigated whether
glycerol and glycine could potentially affect the TATFITC penetration ability as well, as shown in Figure 4D,
TAT-FITC penetration efficiency was not observed in the
presence of glycerol and glycine. These data demonstrate
that glycerol and glycine only act as osmoprotectans but
74649

Oncotarget

no significant penetration enhancing activity. Therefore,
in the subsequent experiments, glycerol and glycine were
added in the media for further analysis.

CPP), Caski and HepG2 cells with TAT-FITC co-incubated
with GSM were evaluated. As shown, GSM combination
resulted in increased intracellular fluorescence intensity
of TAT-FITC of Caski cells (Figure 6A) and HepG2 cells
(Figure 6B). Altogether, these data demonstrate that GSM
combination can facilitate the penetration efficiency of
different kinds of CPPs.

Enhancement of TAT penetration by GSM
combination in multiple cell types
To determine GSM combination efficiency in
different cell types, we investigated GSM combination
treatment in cultured cell lines as well as primary cultured
cells. In Figure 5A, such combination treatment could
potentially increase the FITC-labeled TAT uptake in
different cancer cell lines in vitro. Figure 5B shows an
image of TAT-FITC uptake in primary cultured Sertoli
cells, and the fluorescence quantitative evaluation
provide similar results to the microscopy (Figure 5C),
demonstrating that GSM combination is still effective in
both cell lines and primary cells.

GSM combination does not affect TAT
internalization pathway
Although the exact intracellular delivery mechanism
of TAT remains elusive, we know that serum, temperature
and endocytic inhibitors (such as sodium azide and
ammonium chloride) affect the transduction level of
TAT. To determine whether GSM combination affect the
internalization pathway, we initially examined the TAT
penetration efficiency in Caski cells cultured with or
without 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS). TAT penetration
efficiency remains decreased in FBS supplement group
(Figure 7A) even in GSM combination. Next, we analyzed
TAT penetration efficiency at different temperatures,
the efficiency of TAT penetration decreased at lower
temperatures (Figure 7B). In addition, we explored the
effect of two inhibitors, including metabolic inhibitor NaN3

Enhancement of different CPPs penetration by
GSM combination
To explore whether GSM combination could enhance
different kinds of CPPs including dTAT (tandem repeats
of TAT), NLS and hPP10 (newly found human-derived

Figure 1: The penetrating efficiency of TAT can be enhanced by suitable concentration of sucrose, glucose as well as
manntioll. (A) Intracellular distribution of TAT-FITC detected by fluorescence microscopy. Chloroquine and DMSO treatment were used
as control. (B) The subcellular distribution of TAT-FITC in different cell lines incubated with sucrose (500 μM) at 37°C or at 4°C.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74650

Oncotarget

TAT-GFP fusion protein uptake enhanced by
GSM combination

(Figure 7C) and lysosomotrophic neutralizing agent NH4Cl
(Figure 7D) on TAT penetration efficiency. The intracellular
delivery efficiency of TAT-FITC was significantly
decreased in the presence of GSM combination
treatment. Collectively, our results demonstrate that GSM
combination does not affect TAT internalization pathway.

The above data demonstrate that GSM combination
can be utilized to enhance the penetration efficiency of
CPPs, however, it is extensively recognized that the

Figure 2: TAT-FITC uptaken by different cells treated with sucrose, glucose and manntiol. (A) Caski cells were incubated

with glucose, sucrose and manntiol (500 mM) for 1 h, and then treated with TAT-FITC for 1 h at 37°C. Fluorescence images were observed
using fluorescence microscope. (B) Quantitative analysis of FITC-labeled TAT uptaken by Caski cells incubated with different concentration
of glucose, sucrose and manntiol. (C) Fluorescence images of TAT-FITC uptaken by A549 and Siha cells incubated with glucose and
manntiol.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74651

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Quantitative analysis of Caski cells showing TAT-FITC penetration enhanced by co-incubation with glucose,
sucrose and manntiol. (A) Caski cells were co-incubated with glucose and sucrose (from 100 to 300 mM) for 1 h, and then treated with
TAT-FITC for 1 h at 37°C. NCO-FITC group were used as negative control. (B) Caski cells were co-incubated with glucose and manntiol
(from 100 to 300 mM) for 1 h, and then treated with TAT-FITC for 1 h at 37°C. (C) Caski cells were co-incubated with sucrose and manntiol
(from 100 to 300 mM) for 1 h, and then treated with TAT-FITC for 1 h at 37°C. (D) Caski cells were co-incubated with glucose, sucrose and
manntiol (from 50 to 300 mM) for 1 h, and then treated with TAT-FITC for 1 h at 37°C. TAT-FITC group incubated with glucose, sucrose
and manntiol (600 mM) separately were used as control.

Figure 4: Cell viability of Caski cells rescued by glycerol and glycine combination. (A) Caski cells were incubated glucose,

sucrose and manntiol combination or separately as well as supplement with glycerol and glycine for 1 h at 37°C, discarding the supernatant
of culture, washed with PBS 3 times, and then cultured for 24 h, cell viability was detected following the MTT protocol. (B) Cell viability
was detected after 48 h culture with fresh medium; (C) Cell viability was detected after 72 h culture in fresh medium; (D) Quantitative
analysis of FITC-labeled TAT uptaken by Caski cells incubated with glycerol and glycine combination or separately.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74652

Oncotarget

Figure 5: TAT-FITC uptaken by cultured cells and primary cells treated with glucose, sucrose and manntiol
combination. (A) Different cell lines were co-incubated with glucose, sucrose and manntiol (200 mM) for 1 h, and then treated with TAT-

FITC for 1 h at 37°C. Quantitative analysis of FITC-labeled TAT uptaken was measured. (B) Fluorescence images of TAT-FITC uptaken
by Sertoli cell incubated with glucose, sucrose and manntiol separately as well as combination. (C) Quantitative analysis of FITC-labeled
TAT uptaken by Sertoli cell incubated with the combination of glucose, sucrose and manntiol.

Figure 6: Different FITC-labeled peptides penetration in Caski and HepG2 cells. (A) Quantitative analysis of dTAT-FITC,
NLS-FITC and hPP10-FITC in Caski cells co-incubated with glucose, sucrose and manntiol. (B) Quantitative analysis of dTAT-FITC, NLSFITC and hPP10-FITC in HepG2 cells co-incubated with glucose, sucrose and manntiol.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74653

Oncotarget

uptake levels are related to the cargo sizes, and poor
efficiency of CPPs fused to cargoes such as TAT-GFP
crossing cells membrane were observed in different cell
types (Supplementary Figure S4A), even in the presence
of chloroquine (Supplementary Figure S4B) with
different conditions. To further determine whether GSM
combination treatment allows the penetration efficiency
enhancement of TAT conjugated with fusion protein as
well, we use TAT-GFP fusion protein as a direct detection
system to quantify penetration efficiency. Following
the incubation of GSM alone or combination for 1 h,
fluorescence microscopy revealed that the enhancement
of TAT-GFP penetration efficiency in GSM combination
was more significant than the GSM alone in L929 and
B16 cells (Figure 8A), similar result from fluorescence
quantification of TAT-GFP uptake was measured in L929,
B16 and Caski cells (Figure 8B). Thus, GSM combination
treatment not only can enhance the penetration efficiency
of TAT peptide, but also could potentially enhance the
penetration of TAT-GFP fusion protein.

protein-based delivery [19]. Although CPP-based protein
transduction appears to have enormous potential in the
clinic, challenges for CPP-based delivery poses problems
to the application due to the low effective cellular uptake
efficiency. To our knowledge, osmotic gradient across the
cell membrane could be caused by sucrose treatment, and
hypertonic treatment using sucrose was used to promote
endosome release of endosome-entrapped material
[15, 16]. Here, we have introduced that other hypertonic
molecules including manntiol as well as sucrose could be
used to enhance the penetration efficiency of CPP, and
GSM combination in certain concentration (200 mM)
facilitate the CPP alone or CPP conjugated cargo
penetration highly in cultured cell lines and primary cells
compared with GSM treatment separately. Moreover,
glycerol and glycine co-treatment could alleviate the
proliferation inhibition of GSM combination. Indeed,
hypertonic solutions containing sucrose, glucose and
manntiol were used in the treatment of cerebral edema for
osmotic therapy [18].
Although the previous study suggested that
hypertonic shock can be used to enhance the cargo
delivery, from the present study, hypertonic treatment
without recovery period still can facilitate the CPPbased cargo delivery. Next, glucose, sucrose as well
as manntiol can be modified by some groups so as to

DISCUSSION
Cell-penetrating peptides (CPP) are capable
of delivering therapeutic cargo into live cells under
physiological conditions and have been widely used for

Figure 7: The mechanism of TAT-FITC penetration in Caski cell is not affected by glucose, sucrose and manntiol
combination. (A) Compared with none serum medium, serum contained medium incubation inhibit the combination effect of glucose,
sucrose and manntiol. (B) Quantitative analysis of TAT-FITC in Caski cells co-incubated with glucose, sucrose and manntiol at 4 and 37°C.
(C) Quantitative analysis of TAT-FITC in Caski cells co-incubated with glucose, sucrose and manntiol with or without the presence of
sodium azide. (D) Quantitative analysis of TAT-FITC in Caski cells co-incubated with glucose, sucrose and manntiol with or without the
presence of ammonium chloride.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74654

Oncotarget

improve the stability of these molecules which will be
very helpful for in vivo usage. Previous studies have
reported that sucrose can be used to help the CPP-cargo
release from the endosome, thus, we conclude that
glucose, sucrose and manntiol may also through the
endosome release promotion to enhance the penetration
of CPP. Secondly, ion channels are very important for
cell survival as well as for small molecules delivery,
more important, different ion channels’ activity may vary
in different cells, whether the different enhancement
effect of GSM combination due to different cells is still
unknown, and whether the ion channels play a role in

the enhancement by GSM combination treatment is
still unknown. However, the non-CPP conjugated cargo
releasing are much lower than CPP, thus leading to the
GSM combination enhance the CPP-cargo delivery
higher than non-CPP based delivery.
GSM combination can significantly improve
the penetration efficiency of CPP in the presence of
glycerol and glycine, although the exact mechanism of
enhancement still needs to be investigated in the further
research. Our present research may lay a foundation to
CPP-based bio-therapy for brain tumor patient with
symptoms of intracranial hypertension.

Figure 8: TAT-GFP fusion protein penetration enhanced by glucose, sucrose and manntiol combination. (A) Fluorescence
images of TAT-GFP uptaken by B16 and L929 cell incubated with glucose, sucrose and manntiol separately as well as combination. The
top layer of image of transduced cells was L929 cell. (B) Quantitative analysis of TAT-GFP uptaken by Caski, B16 and L929 cell incubated
with glucose, sucrose and manntiol separately as well as combination.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74655

Oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS

FITC-labeled peptides synthesis and fusion
protein expression

Reagents and drugs

Peptides TAT (sequence: YGRKKRRQRRRK),
NCO (a nonsense peptide, sequence: KALGISYGRKK),
NLS
(sequence:
RKDRRGGEMMKQKRQRE),
dTAT (tandem repeat of TAT) and hPP10 (sequence:
KIPLPRFKLKCIFCKKRRKR) labeled with FITC were
synthesized from SBS Genetech (Beijing, China). These
peptides were purified using reversed phase analytical
HPLC (more than 99 % purity), diluted to 500 mM and
stored at −20°C for further use. TAT-GFP and GFP protein
were prepared following the protocol described [11, 12],
fusion proteins were expressed in the BL21 (DE3) strain
of E. coli, and 6-His-tagged target proteins were purified
by affinity chromatography using Ni-NTA resins.

NaN3, heparin and NH4Cl were purchased from
Shandong Wanbang Biochem Co. Ltd (Shandong, China).
Chloroquine diphosphate salt was provided by HongJing
Chem Co. Ltd (Hubei, China). Trypsin was supplied by
Sigma-Aldrich (USA) and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)
was obtained from Sigma.

Cell lines and cell culture
HeLa, Siha and Caski (human cervical cancer
cell line), A549 (human nonsmall cell lung cancer cell
line), B16 (mouse melanoma cell line), HepG2 (human
hepatocellular carcinoma cell line) were maintained in
our laboratory. All cells were maintained in RPMI 1640
medium supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin/
streptomycin, and were cultured at 37°C in a humidified
atmosphere containing 5% CO2.

Peptide internalization
Fluorescent microscopy
TAT-FITC treated cells were observed under a
fluorescence microscope. HeLa, Siha, Caski, HepG2, A549
or B16 cells (density: 5 × 105 cells per well) were seeded
into 24-well-plates (Greiner, Germany) and cultivated
in RPMI-1640 medium for 24 h. Before the 10 μM
FITC-labeled peptides addition, cells were washed with
phosphate-buffered saline (0.1 M PBS, pH 7.4) for 3 times.
After internalization for 1 h at 37°C, cells were washed
3 times with PBS, and then observed under fluorescence
microscope (Nikon, Japan) using a bandpass filter (detects
FITC). In some experiments, cell was pretreated with 5%
(v/v %) of DMSO in serum-free medium.

Sertoli cell isolation, purification and culture
All mice were got from government approved
animal facility at China Three Gorges University. All
experimental protocols were reviewed and approved
by the China Three Gorges University Institutional
Animal Care and Use Committee. All efforts were done
to minimise animal suffering, the mice were deeply
anesthetized with ether and then sacrificed by cervical
dislocation to collect the testes. Sertoli cells were isolated
from CD1 mice following the protocol previously
described [20–22]. As Sertoli cells from mature male
mouse cannot be cultured very well, 4 testes from
10 days postnatal males were collected and placed in
PBS, decapsulated with scissors, cut into small fragments
and digested in 0.05% trypsin for 10 min shaking at 37°C
in water bath to remove the interstitium. The resultant
seminiferous tubule fragments were collected and then
washed with PBS followed by further 0.05% trypsin
digestion under the same conditions for 10 min. The
disaggregated samples were filtered using a 70 μm filter
and then centrifuged at 800 g for 10 min. The mixed
population of testes cells obtained were resuspended in
culture medium (DMEM supplement with 10% FBS plus
100 U/ml penicillin and 100 μg/ml streptomycin), then
plated on gelatin coated dishes and incubated for 1 h at
37°C in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2. After the
incubation, non-adhering cells were removed by washing
twice with culture medium. The attached cells are mainly
Sertoli cells which will be cultured for 7–10 days and then
used for penetration experiment following the protocol
described below.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Fluorescent quantitation
Intracellular fluorescence intensity of cells can
be quantified using quantitative analysis by Multimode
Spectrophotometry (Tecan 2000, Mannedorf, Switzerland).
Briefly, after peptide incubation procedure shown above,
cells were washed 3 times with PBS, lysed by 0.1 M NaOH
at room temperature, and then centrifuged at 14000 g for
5 min. The fluorescence intensity of the supernatant was
measured at the wavelength of 494/518 nm in a Multimode
Microplate Reader. The fluorescence of cellular uptake is
expressed as fluorescence intensity per mg of total cellular
protein (protein concentration were determined using
Bradford protein assay). All experiments were repeated at
least three times and always performed in triplicate.

Cell viability analysis
MTT assay was used to assess cell viability. Briefly,
cells (4 × 104 cells) were seeded in one well of 96-well
plates and cultivated in an RPMI-1640 medium for 24 h.
Cells were washed with PBS and then adding different

74656

Oncotarget

concentrations of supplements with a serum-free medium,
incubated for 2 h at 37°C and washed with PBS twice,
then incubated with fresh medium containing serum for
24 h. Then, 20 μl of MTT (5.5 mg/ml) in serum-free media
was added directly to each well and incubated for 4 h at
37°C. Removing the supernatant and then adding 100 μl of
DMSO, and incubated at 37°C for another 30 min before
quantifying the absorbance at 550 nm.

  8.	 Peitz M, Munst B, Thummer RP, Helfen M, Edenhofer F.
Cell-permeant recombinant Nanog protein promotes
pluripotency by inhibiting endodermal specification. Stem
Cell Res. 2014; 12:680–689.
 9.	Mirakhori F, Zeynali B, Rassouli H, Salekdeh GH,
Baharvand H. Direct conversion of human fibroblasts
into dopaminergic neural progenitor-like cells using TATmediated protein transduction of recombinant factors.
Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015; 459:655–661.

Statistical analysis

10.	 Pan C, Jia W, Lu B, Bishop CE. Expression of TAT recombinant
Oct4, Sox2, Lin28, and Nanog proteins from baculovirusinfected Sf9 insect cells. Gene. 2015; 556:245–248.

All experiments were performed at least three
times and all results are expressed as means ± standard
deviation (SD). Statistical significance between groups
was calculated using SPSS software. A student’s t-test was
used for data analysis and p value < 0.05 was taken as the
level of statistically significant.

11.	Wang H, Zhong CY, Wu JF, Huang YB, Liu CB.
Enhancement of TAT cell membrane penetration efficiency
by dimethyl sulphoxide. J Control Release. 2010; 143:64–70.
12.	 Ma JL, Wang H, Wang YL, Luo YH, Liu CB. Enhanced
Peptide delivery into cells by using the synergistic effects of
a cell-penetrating Peptide and a chemical drug to alter cell
permeability. Mol Pharm. 2015; 12:2040–2048.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING
We are thankful for the National Nature Science
Foundation of China grant (NO. 81501330), and Science
Foundation of CTGU grant (KJ2014B066).

13.	D’Astolfo DS, Pagliero RJ, Pras A, Karthaus WR,
Clevers H, Prasad V, Lebbink RJ, Rehmann H, Geijsen N.
Efficient intracellular delivery of native proteins. Cell.
2015; 161:674–690.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

14.	 Vives E, Schmidt J, Pelegrin A. Cell-penetrating and celltargeting peptides in drug delivery. Biochim Biophys Acta.
2008; 1786:126–138.

The authors indicate no potential conflicts of interest.

15.	 Abes S, Williams D, Prevot P, Thierry A, Gait MJ,
Lebleu  B. Endosome trapping limits the efficiency of
splicing correction by PNA-oligolysine conjugates.
J Control Release. 2006; 110:595–604.

REFERENCES
1.	 Shi NQ, Qi XR, Xiang B, Zhang Y. A survey on “Trojan
Horse” peptides: opportunities, issues and controlled entry
to “Troy”. J Control Release. 2014; 194:53–70.

16.	 Ciftci K, Levy RJ. Enhanced plasmid DNA transfection
with lysosomotropic agents in cultured fibroblasts. Int J
Pharm. 2001; 218:81–92.

2.	 Liu H, Zeng F, Zhang M, Huang F, Wang J, Guo J, Liu C,
Wang H. Emerging landscape of cell penetrating peptide in
reprogramming and gene editing. J Control Release. 2016;
226:124–137.

17.	 Bobick BE, Alexander PG, Tuan RS. High efficiency
transfection of embryonic limb mesenchyme with plasmid
DNA using square wave pulse electroporation and sucrose
buffer. Biotechniques. 2014; 56:85–89.

3.	 Peluffo H, Unzueta U, Negro-Demontel ML, Xu Z,
Vaquez E, Ferrer-Miralles N, Villaverde A. BBB-targeting,
protein-based nanomedicines for drug and nucleic acid
delivery to the CNS. Biotechnol Adv. 2015; 33:277–287.

18.	 Diringer MN. The Evolution of the Clinical Use of
Osmotic Therapy in the Treatment of Cerebral Edema. Acta
Neurochir Suppl. 2016; 121:3–6.

4.	 Milletti F. Cell-penetrating peptides: classes, origin, and
current landscape. Drug Discov Today. 2012; 17:850–860.
5.	

19.	 Raucher D, Ryu JS. Cell-penetrating peptides: strategies for
anticancer treatment. Trends Mol Med. 2015; 21:560–570.

Kim HJ, Kim MH, Kim JT, Lee WJ, Kim E, Lim KS, Kim JK,
Yang YI, Park KD, Kim YH. Intracellular transduction
of TAT-Hsp27 fusion protein enhancing cell survival
and regeneration capacity of cardiac stem cells in acute
myocardial infarction. J Control Release. 2015; 215:55–72.

20.	 Xiong J, Wang H, Guo G, Wang S, He L, Chen H,
Wu J. Male germ cell apoptosis and epigenetic histone
modification induced by Tripterygium wilfordii Hook F.
PLoS One. 2011; 6:e20751.
21.	 Wang H, Jiang M, Bi H, Chen X, He L, Li X, Wu J.
Conversion of female germline stem cells from neonatal
and prepubertal mice into pluripotent stem cells. J Mol Cell
Biol. 2014; 6:164–171.

6.	 Huang X, Hu Q, Braun GB, Pallaoro A, Morales DP,
Zasadzinski J, Clegg DO, Reich NO. Light-activated RNA
interference in human embryonic stem cells. Biomaterials.
2015; 63:70–79.
7.	

22.	 Wang H, Shi L, Xiang J, Ding X, Luo H, Wang S, Wu J.
Isolation, culture and transplantation of female germline
stem cells from neonatal and prepubertal mice. Protoco
Exch. 2013; doi: 10.1038/protex.2013.004.

Peng LH, Niu J, Zhang CZ, Yu W, Wu JH, Shan YH, Wang XR,
Shen YQ, Mao ZW, Liang WQ, et al. TAT conjugated cationic
noble metal nanoparticles for gene delivery to epidermal stem
cells. Biomaterials. 2014; 35:5605–5618.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74657

Oncotarget

