www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2016, Vol. 7, (No. 51), pp: 84688-84694
Research Paper

MTOR inhibition reversed drug resistance after combination
radiation with erlotinib in lung adenocarcinoma
Hongqing Zhuang1,*, Jing Bai2,*, Joe Y. Chang3, Zhiyong Yuan1, Ping Wang1
1

Department of Radiotherapy, Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute and Hospital, National Clinical Research Center for
Cancer, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Cancer Prevention and Therapy, and Tianjin Lung Cancer Center, Tianjin, China

2
3

Department of Radiotherapy, Baotou Cancer Hospital, Neimenggu, China
Department of Radiation Oncology, Division of Radiation Oncology, the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX, USA

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Hongqing Zhuang, email: hongqingzhuang@163.com
Keywords: erlotinib, radiation, drug resistance, everolimus, mTOR
Received: April 19, 2016     Accepted: September 20, 2016     Published: October 04, 2016

ABSTRACT
Objective: To investigate the effects of mTOR inhibition on drug resistance in
lung adenocarcinoma after combined radiation and erlotinib therapy.
Results: Combined radiation and erlotinib therapy produced clear
radiosensitization effects both in vitro and in vivo; however, tumor cells remained
drug resistant. Additionally, combined radiation and erlotinib therapy significantly
increased p-AKT and p-P70 levels. After mTOR inhibition, the number of surviving cells
significantly decreased compared with that before inhibition, and the in vivo growth
curve was significantly reduced.
Methods: The effects of combined radiation and erlotinib therapy on tumor
inhibition and drug resistance were evaluated by in vitro survival curves in PC9
lung adenocarcinoma cell line and in vivo growth curves in nude mouse xenograft
tumor model respectively. The association between tumor drug resistance and the
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/protein kinase B/mechanistic target of rapamycin
(PI3K-AKT-mTOR) pathway was measured by western blot, assessing the changes
in protein kinase B (AKT), phosphor-AKT (p-AKT), P70, and p-P70 protein levels.
MTOR was inhibited using everolimus, and changes in AKT, p-AKT, P70, and p-P70
levels were observed. Furthermore, changes in in vitro survival curves, and in vivo
growth curves before and after mTOR inhibition were evaluated to confirm its effects
on drug resistance in lung adenocarcinoma after combined radiation and TKI therapy.
Conclusion: mTOR was associated with drug resistance in lung adenocarcinoma
after radiation combined with TKI, and MTOR inhibition reversed drug resistance in
lung adenocarcinoma after combined radiation and TKI therapy.

combined radiation and TKI therapy remains unknown.
This study investigated the expression changes in
the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/protein kinase B/
mechanistic target of rapamycin (PI3K-AKT-MTOR)
pathway after combined radiation and TKI therapy and
this pathway’s inhibition to reverse drug resistance, which
could provide potential targets and ideas for resolving
clinical drug resistance after combined radiotherapy and
TKI.

INTRODUCTION
Increasing applications for radiotherapy combined
with tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) are evident in
clinical practice [1–5], but drug resistance after this
combination therapy is common in patients [5–10].
However, current treatment of this drug resistance
mostly involves treatment of simple TKI drug resistance
[6–10]; the mechanism of this drug resistance after the

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

84688

Oncotarget

RESULTS

and radiation both increased PI3K-AKT-mTOR pathway
activity. This pathway activity also increased significantly
after combined erlotinib and radiation therapy.

Tumor inhibition and drug resistance after
combined erlotinib and radiation treatment

Changes in PI3K-AKT-mTOR pathway activity
after mTOR inhibition with everolimus

By measuring surviving fraction in vitro and
tumor volumes in vivo, erlotinib and radiation both had
inhibitory effects on tumor cells. However, after longterm treatment, colony formation survival curves revealed
that the final surviving fraction was 0.019±0.008, even
after combination therapy. Additional tumor cells were
drug-resistant and formed colonies after combined
erlotinib and radiation therapy. For xenograft tumors,
the combined action of erlotinib and radiation produced
a greater inhibitory effect than that of each individual
agent. However, tumor volumes still slowly increased
after 6 weeks of treatment (SF, and growth curve results
are shown in Figure 1). Thus, these results showed that
erlotinib combined with radiation had synergistically
inhibited tumor growth; however, some cells remained
drug resistant.

The drug resistance induced by radiation combined
with erlotinib was inhibited by everolimus in tumor cells
and xenograft tumors in nude mice. Western blot showed
that protein expression of total AKT and P70 was not
significantly altered; however, p-AKT expression slightly
increased, and p-P70 expression, both in vivo and in
vitro, significantly decreased compared with that in the
combined radiation and erlotinib group. These results
further confirmed that the PI3K-AKT-mTOR pathway is
an important route for the development of drug resistance
(Figure 3).

The effect of everolimus on drug resistance in
adenocarcinoma after combined radiation and
TKI therapy

Association between drug resistance and PI3KAKT-mTOR pathway activity

After p-P70S6K expression was reduced by
everolimus, further treatment showed that the number
of surviving cells significantly decreased compared with
that in the combined erlotinib and radiation group. In
addition, everolimus treatment at week 6 (when tumor
xenograft began to progress) significantly inhibited tumor
growth, and the growth curve turned downward (Figure
4). Thus, these results showed that after drug resistance
induced by combined radiation and erlotinib treatment
occurred in tumors, everolimus was able to reverse this
drug resistance.

By western blot, changes in total AKT and P70
protein expression between single-agent erlotinib or
radiation treatment and combined treatment were not
significantly different. However, p-AKT and p-P70
expression significantly increased compared with that in
control group; in addition, p-AKT and p-P70 expression
in the combined erlotinib and radiation treatment group
was higher than that in the single-agent treatment groups
(western blot and densitometry measurements are shown
in Figure 2). Thus, these results showed that erlotinib

Figure 1: Tumor inhibition and drug resistance after combined erlotinib and radiation treatment. A. The survival

fractions of radiation alone group, and combined radiation and erlotinib group in vitro. SER=2.18. P value less than 0.05 of comparison
of two curves. But the final surviving fraction was 0.019±0.008, even after combination therapy. B. The growth curves of radiation alone
group, and combined radiation and erlotinib group in vivo. When the curve of combination treatment compared with the other curves, all
the P values were less than 0.05. However, after 6 weeks, the tumor volumes increased again even under combination treatment.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

84689

Oncotarget

DISCUSSION

activity significantly increases, thus producing resistance
to radiation and TKI treatment [20–24]. Therefore, the
PI3K-AKT-mTOR pathway becomes the interaction point
of their action and an important pathway to regulate drug
resistance. As an important drug that inhibits mTOR,
everolimus decreases mTOR pathway activity, thus
reverses drug resistance in tumors.
TKI drug resistance is a longstanding issue;
however, drug resistance after radiation combined with
TKI should have some similarities and differences from
single-agent TKI drug resistance, but no current studies
have addressed this question. This study suggested that the
PI3K-AKT-mTOR pathway is an important mechanism
underlying drug resistance after radiotherapy combined
with TKI. Everolimus could reverse this drug resistance
induced by combined radiation and TKI therapy in lung
adenocarcinoma, which provides an important potential
target to treat drug resistance in patients after combination
therapy. Indeed, other pathways besides the PI3K-AKTmTOR pathway could also contribute to drug resistance
in tumor cells after combined TKI and radiation. We are
currently performing further studies on other possible
underlying mechanisms, such as changes in T790M,

The PI3K-AKT-mTOR pathway is an important
pathway underlying drug resistance induced by combined
radiation and TKI therapy, and inhibiting mTOR can
reverse this drug resistance in lung adenocarcinoma.
The cross-talk between the EGFR-KRAS-MAPKERK and PI3K-AKT-mTOR pathways, the activation
of the PI3K-AKT-mTOR pathway by TKI and radiation
produce conditions favorable for using everolimus to
reverse drug resistance in tumors after combination
therapy. First, the EGFR-KRAS-MAPK-ERK pathway
can communicate with PI3K through alternative
pathways. With the long-term inhibition of EGFR, PI3KAKT-mTOR pathway activity can be activated through
alternative pathways to maintain cell survival, escape TKI
attack, and generate secondary drug resistance [16, 17].
In addition, many studies have shown that radiation can
increase the activity of the downstream PI3K-AKT-mTOR
pathway members through c-MET, which is an important
mechanism underlying drug resistance to TKI [18, 19].
With combined TKI and radiation therapy, the PI3KAKT-mTOR pathway receives double stimulation, and its

Figure 2: Association between drug resistance and PI3K-AKT-mTOR pathway activity. A. The AKT, p-AKT, P70, p-P70
expression of PC9 cell line in vitro. A1. The Western blot electrophoresis of the different treatment groups. A2. The Gray value histogram of
the AKT, p-AKT, P70, p-P70 expression in vitro. B. The AKT, p-AKT, P70, p-P70 expression in vivo. B1. The western blot electrophoresis
of the different treatment groups. B2. The Gray value histogram of the AKT, p-AKT, P70, p-P70 expression. P-AKT and p-P70 expression
significantly increased compared with that of the control group; in addition, p-AKT and p-P70 expression in the combined erlotinib and
radiation treatment group was higher than that in the single-agent treatment groups. These results showed that erlotinib and radiation both
increased PI3K-AKT-mTOR pathway activity in vitro and in vivo.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

84690

Oncotarget

Figure 3: The drug resistance induced by radiation combined with erlotinib was inhibited by everolimus. A. The AKT,

p-AKT, P70, p-P70 expression of PC9 cell line in vitro. A1. The Western blot electrophoresis of the different treatment groups. A2. The
Gray value histogram of the AKT, p-AKT, P70, p-P70 expression in vitro. B. The AKT, p-AKT, P70, p-P70 expression in vivo. B1. The
western blot electrophoresis of the different treatment groups. B2. The Gray value histogram of the AKT, p-AKT, P70, p-P70 expression.
Western blot showed that protein expression of total AKT and P70 was not significantly altered; however, p-AKT expression slightly
increased, and p-P70 expression, both in vivo and in vitro, significantly decreased in combined radiation, erlotinib and everolimus group
compared with those in the combined radiation and erlotinib group.

Figure 4: The effect of everolimus on drug resistance in adenocarcinoma after combined radiation and TKI therapy.

A. The survival fraction of different treatment groups in vitro. SERE+R vs R=1.95, SER E+R+Ev vs E+R=2.27. The final surviving fraction of 10Gy
dose was 0.008±0.003 at E+R+Ev group. P value less than 0.05 of comparison of each groups. B. The growth curve of different treatment
groups in vivo. Everolimus treatment at week 6 (when tumor xenograft began to progress) significantly inhibited tumor growth, and the
growth curve turned downward.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

84691

Oncotarget

the effect of radiation on common genes in TKI drug
resistance, and the effect of TKI on common genes in
radiation resistance.
In summary, radiation is an important mechanism
that induces changes in gene expression. Radiotherapy
combined with TKI has been extensively applied in
clinical practice. Drug resistance in lung adenocarcinoma
after combined radiotherapy and TKI should be largely
different from that induced by single-agent TKI therapy.
This study suggests that the PI3K-AKT-mTOR pathway
is an important mechanism underlying drug resistance
after combined radiation and TKI therapy and provides
ideas and potential targets to reverse this drug resistance.
Although additional mechanisms still requiring further
study exist, we believe that with continuous in-depth,
basic studies and continuous accumulation of clinical
practice data, the drug resistance induced by radiotherapy
combined with TKI will eventually be resolved.

Cells in the exponential growth phase were trypsinized,
counted, diluted, and seeded onto 35-ml flasks. The
number of cells seeded onto the flasks was adjusted
according to the radiation dose (500, 1000, 2000, 4000,
6000, 8000, and 10000 cells were seeded in 0, 1, 2, 4, 6,
8, and 10Gy groups, respectively). The concentrations of
erlotinib and everolimus used were 20 nM. and 10 nM
in vitro, respectively. A radiation dose of 2Gy/min was
selected, and cells were exposed to 0, 1, 2, 4, 6, 8, or 10Gy
of radiation after the attachment of cells on the plastic.
After 14 days of cell seeding, the culture dishes were
collected, and the culture medium was discarded. Cells
were fixed and subjected to Giemsa staining. The number
of colonies containing more than 50 cells was counted, and
the cell survival fraction (SF) was calculated. The singlehit, multi-target model was used to fit the cell survival
curves [13]. The experiments were confirmed three times,
and each treatment group contained three parallel samples.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Xenograft analysis

Agents, cell line and nude mice

PC9 cells were digested with exponential growth
phase, counted and centrifuged at 1 000r/min for 5 min.
Cells were suspended and about 1×106 cells was injected
into the thigh root of the nude mice. The tumors were
observed 3 times a week after inoculation. When the
tumor grew to about 1cm of the diameter, the experimental
treatment started. The groups were same as the vitro
experiment, and the radiation doses were same to those
in vitro. In vivo experiment, both erlotinib and everolimus
were used in 2mg/kg body weight. Animals’ care was in
accordance with institution guidelines.

RPMI-1640 culture medium was obtained from
Gibco (USA, Grand Island), and fetal bovine serum
was obtained from Sijiqing Biological Engineering
Materials Co., Ltd(Hangzhou, China). Monoclonal
antibodies targeting AKT, phosphorylated AKT(p-AKT),
P70, phosphorylated P70(p-P70) were purchased from
Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc. (USA, Dallas, Texas).
The CO2 incubator used for cell culture was purchased
from Heraeus (Germany, Frankfurt), and the high-speed
refrigerated centrifuge was also obtained from Heraeus.
The flow cytometer was from Beckman Coulter, Inc.
(USA, California). The PC9 lung adenocarcinoma cell
line with high levels of epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) and phospho-EGFR, as reported previously [11,
12] was used in this study. Cells were cultured in RPMI1640 medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum,
100 IU/ml penicillin, and 100 IU/ml streptomycin in a
37°C incubator with an atmosphere of 5% CO2. Cells in
the exponential growth phase were irradiated. BALB/c-nu
/nu female nude mice of 5-6 weeks were used in in vivo
experiments. The experiments and feeding were carried
out in the SPF condition of the ultra clean laminar flow
frame.

Western blotting
The expressions of AKT, p-AKT, P70, and p-P70 in
the control group, radiation alone group, erlotinib alone
group, everolimus alone group, combined erlotinib and
radiation group, and combined erlotinib and radiation with
everolimus group were examined using Western blotting.
The treatments of erlotinib and the everolimus were the
same as those described above. Cells were irradiated
at a dose of 6Gy. The experimental procedures were
performed as follows: 14 days after treatment, the cells
were trypsinized and collected. In in vivo experiments,
the tumors were observed for eight weeks, and then the
mice were killed, and the tumors were removed. The
total protein was extracted, and the protein concentration
was determined by Coomassie brilliant blue staining.
The proteins were separated by polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis and transferred onto polyvinylidene
difluoride membranes. The membranes were then
probed with primary antibodies, washed, incubated with
horseradish peroxidase–conjugated secondary antibodies,
and washed again. Finally, protein signals were visualized
[14, 15].

Colony-forming analysis
Colony-forming rates of the tumor cells were
determined using the colony formation assay. The
experiments on erlotinib-induced radiosensitization
included the following treatment groups: control group,
radiation alone group, erlotinib alone group, everolimus
alone group, combined erlotinib and radiation group, and
combined erlotinib and radiation with everolimus group.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

84692

Oncotarget

Statistical analysis

6.	 Zhuang HQ, Zhuang H, Bo Q3, Guo Y, Wang J, Zhao LJ,
Yuan ZY, Wang P. Experimental study on the regulation of
erlotinib-induced radiosensitization with an anti-c-MET
monoclonal antibody. Cancer Cell Int. 2014 Nov 30;14:109.

Origin7.5 software (OriginLab Corporation)
was used to fit the cell survival curves. The line charts
were drawled with Excel. Data were presented as the
mean ± standard deviation and were analyzed using
SPSS17.0 software (IBM Corporation). The analysis of
student’s t test was used to perform comparisons among
multiple groups. P values less than 0.05 were considered
statistically significant.

7.	 Zhuang HQ, Yuan ZY, Wang J, Wang P, Zhao LJ, Zhang
BL. Research progress on criteria for discontinuation of
EGFR inhibitor therapy. Onco Targets Ther. 2012. 5:263-70.
8.	 Tan CS, Gilligan D, Pacey S. Treatment approaches for
EGFR-inhibitor-resistant patients with non-small-cell lung
cancer. Lancet Oncol. 2015. 16:e447-59.
9.	 Wu SG, Liu YN, Tsai MF, Chang YL, Yu CJ, Yang PC,
Yang JC, Wen YF, Shih JY. The mechanism of acquired
resistance to irreversible EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitorafatinib in lung adenocarcinoma patients. Oncotarget. 2016;
7:12404-13. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7189.

Abbreviations
C:control group; R: radiation group; E+R: combined
radiation and erlotinib group; E+R+Ev: combined
radiation, erlotinib and everolimus group.

10.	 Zheng D, Ye X, Zhang MZ, Sun Y, Wang JY, Ni J, Zhang
HP, Zhang L, Luo J, Zhang J, Tang L, Su B, Chen G,
et  al. Plasma EGFR T790M ctDNA status is associated
with clinical outcome in advanced NSCLC patients with
acquired EGFR-TKI resistance. Sci Rep. 2016. 6:20913.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported by National Natural
Science Foundation of China (81301925).

11.	 Li XQ, Liu JT, Fan LL, Liu Y, Cheng L, Wang F,
Yu HQ, Gao J, Wei W, Wang H, Sun GP. Exosomes
derived from gefitinib-treated EGFR-mutant lung
cancer cells alter cisplatin sensitivity via up-regulating
autophagy. Oncotarget. 2016; 7:24585-95. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.8358.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
We declared that there were no any financial and
personal relationships with other people or organizations
that could inappropriately influence the work.

12.	 La Monica S, Madeddu D, Tiseo M, Vivo V, Galetti M,
Cretella D, Bonelli M, Fumarola C, Cavazzoni A, Falco
A, Gervasi A, Lagrasta CA, Naldi N, et al. Combination
of Gefitinib and Pemetrexed Prevents the Acquisition of
TKI Resistance in NSCLC Cell Lines Carrying EGFRActivating Mutation. J Thorac Oncol. 2016. 11:1051-63.

REFERENCES
1.	 Zhuang H, Zhao X, Zhao L, Chang JY, Wang P. Progress
of clinical research on targeted therapy combined with
thoracic radiotherapy for non-small-cell lung cancer. Drug
Des Devel Ther. 2014. 8:667-75.

13.	 Chu PM, Chiou SH, Su TL, Lee YJ, Chen LH, Chen YW,
Yen SH, Chen MT, Chen MH, Shih YH, Tu PH, Ma HI.:
Enhancement of radiosensitivity in human glioblastoma
cells by the DNA N-mustard alkylating agent BO-1051
through augmented and sustained DNA damage response.
Radiat Oncol. 2011. 19;6:7.

2.	 Chang CC, Chi KH, Kao SJ, Hsu PS, Tsang YW, Chang
HJ, Yeh YW, Hsieh YS, Jiang JS. Upfront gefitinib/
erlotinib treatment followed by concomitant radiotherapy
for advanced lung cancer: a mono-institutional experience.
Lung Cancer. 2011. 73:189-194.

14.	 Quanz M, Berthault N, Roulin C, Roy M, Herbette A,
Agrario C, Alberti C, Josserand V, Coll JL, Sastre-Garau
X, Cosset JM, Larue L, Sun JS, et al. Small-molecule
drugs mimicking DNA damage: a new strategy for
sensitizing tumors to radiotherapy. Clin Cancer Res. 2009.
15:1308–1316.

3.	 Zhuang H, Yuan Z, Wang J, Zhao L, Pang Q, Wang P. The
theoretical foundation and research progress for WBRT
combined with erlotinib for the treatment of multiple brain
metastases in patients with lung adenocarcinoma. Int J
Cancer. 2013. 133:2277-83.
4.	 Zhuang H, Wang J, Zhao L, Yuan Z, Wang P. Phase II
study of whole brain radiotherapy with or without erlotinib
in patients with multiple brain metastases from lung
adenocarcinoma. Drug Des Devel Ther. 2013. 7:1179-86.

15.	 Hong-Qing Zhuang, Jian Sun, Zhi-Yong Yuan, Chang-Li
Wang. Radiosensitizing effects of gefitinib at different
administration times in vitro. Cancer Sci. 2009. 100:
1520-1525.

5.	 Welsh JW, Komaki R, Amini A, Munsell MF, Unger W,
Allen PK, Chang JY, Wefel JS, McGovern SL, Garland LL,
Chen SS, Holt J, Liao Z, et al. Phase II trial of erlotinib plus
concurrent whole-brain radiation therapy for patients with
brain metastases from non-small-cell lung cancer. J Clin
Oncol. 2013. 31:895-902.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

16.	 Kang XH, Xu ZY, Gong YB, Wang LF, Wang ZQ, Xu L,
Cao F, Liao MJ: Bufalin Reverses HGF-Induced Resistance
to EGFR-TKIs in EGFR Mutant Lung Cancer Cells via
Blockage of Met/PI3k/Akt Pathway and Induction of
Apoptosis. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2013.
2013:243859.

84693

Oncotarget

17.	 Kuger S, Graus D, Brendtke R, Günther N, Katzer A,
Lutyj P, Polat B, Chatterjee M, Sukhorukov VL, Flentje
M, Djuzenova CS. Radiosensitization of glioblastoma cell
lines by the dual PI3K and mTOR inhibitor NVP-BEZ235
depends on drug-irradiation schedule. Transl Oncol. 2013.
6:169–179.

21.	 Aksamitiene E, Kiyatkin A, Kholodenko BN.Crosstalk between mitogenic Ras/MAPK and survival PI3K/
Akt pathways: a fine balance. Biochem Soc Trans. 2012.
40:139–146.
22.	 Menges CW, McCance DJ. Constitutive activation of the
Raf-MAPK pathway causes negative feedback inhibition
of Ras-PI3K-AKT and cellular arrest through the EphA2
receptor. Oncogene. 2008. 27:2934–2940.

18.	 De Bacco F, Luraghi P, Medico E, Reato G, Girolami F,
Perera T, Gabriele P, Comoglio PM, Boccaccio C. Induction
of MET by ionizing radiation and its role in radioresistance
and invasive growth of cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2011.
103:645–661.

23.	 Jung KH, Park BH, Hong SS. Progress in cancer therapy
targeting c-Met signaling pathway. Arch Pharm Res. 2012.
35:595–604.

19.	 Liu X, Yao W, Newton RC, Scherle PA. Targeting the
c-MET signaling pathway for cancer therapy. Expert Opin
Investig Drugs. 2008. 17:997–1011.

24.	 Burris HA. Overcoming acquired resistance to anticancer
therapy: focus on the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway. Cancer
Chemother Pharmacol. 2013. 71:829–842.

20.	 Maines MD, Biliverdin R. PKC interaction at the cross-talk
of MAPK and PI3K signaling pathways. Antioxid Redox
Signal. 2007. 9:2187–2195.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

84694

Oncotarget

