www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2017, Vol. 8, (No. 4), pp: 6433-6445
Research Paper

Resistance to glucose starvation as metabolic trait of platinumresistant human epithelial ovarian cancer cells
Anna Pastò1, Anna Pagotto1, Giorgia Pilotto1, Angela De Paoli2, Gian Luca De
Salvo2, Alessandra Baldoni2, Maria Ornella Nicoletto2, Francesca Ricci3, Giovanna
Damia3, Chiara Bellio1, Stefano Indraccolo2,*, Alberto Amadori1,2,*
1

Department of Surgery, Oncology and Gastroenterology, University of Padova, Padova, Italy

2

Istituto Oncologico Veneto IRCCS, Padova, Italy

3

Laboratory of Molecular Pharmacology, Oncology Department, IRCCS-Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche Mario Negri,
Milan, Italy

*

These authors contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Stefano Indraccolo, email: stefano.indraccolo@unipd.it
Anna Pastò, email: annapasto.phd@gmail.com
Keywords: glucose addiction, platinum resistance, ovarian cancer, metabolism, autophagy
Received: August 31, 2016     Accepted: December 15, 2016     Published: December 23, 2016

ABSTRACT
Deregulated glucose metabolism is observed in cancer but whether this metabolic
trait influences response to or is modulated by cytotoxic drugs is unknown. We
show here that tumor cells from epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) patients can be
categorized, according to their in vitro viability under glucose starvation, into glucose
deprivation-sensitive (glucose-addicted, GA) and glucose deprivation-resistant
(glucose non-addicted, GNA). When EOC cells were cultured in the absence of
glucose, all samples from platinum (PLT)-sensitive patients felt into the GA group;
they disclosed higher expression of glucose metabolism enzymes, higher proliferation
rates and in vitro sensitivity to PLT. Moreover, GA patients showed reduced multi-drug
resistance pump expression and autophagy, compared to GNA samples. The close
association between PLT sensitivity and glucose metabolic profile was confirmed in
a xenograft model, where a stringent parallelism between PLT sensitivity/resistance
and glucose metabolism was identified. Finally, in a cohort of naïve EOC patients
categorized as GA or GNA at diagnosis, Kaplan Meier curves showed that the GA
phenotype was associated with significantly better progression-free survival,
compared to GNA patients.

INTRODUCTION

first-line therapy are classified as PLT-sensitive, whereas
patients who progress within 6 months are categorized
as PLT-resistant. Recurrence is usually accompanied
by formation of ascites, a pathologic accumulation of
peritoneal fluid containing inflammatory and disseminated
tumor cells [5].
The metabolic properties of tumors differ
remarkably from those of the tissues of origin. In fact,
tumor cells exhibit altered pathways of biomass and
energy production which allow them to sustain higher
proliferative rates and resist cell death signals, such as
those induced by chemotherapeutic agents [6]. Among the
major metabolic alterations of cancer cells is the so-called
Warburg effect, consisting in enhanced glycolysis under
aerobic conditions and increased glucose uptake via

Epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) is the most
common cause of death in women with gynecologic
malignancies [1]. To date, EOC is mostly treated via
surgical resection, followed by adjuvant platinum
(PLT)- and taxane-based chemotherapy [2]. Nonetheless,
about 80% of the patients diagnosed with EOC will
relapse after first-line chemotherapy due to drug resistance
development [3]. According to the definition of the
International Federation of Gynecology & Obstetrics
(FIGO), based on the time elapsed between ﬁrst-line
PLT treatment completion and recurrence, EOC patients
can be subdivided into different categories [4]. Patients
whose disease recurs later than 6 months after cessation of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6433

Oncotarget

over-expression of glucose transporters [7]. Cancer cells
preferentially use glycolysis for energy production rather
than oxidative phosphorylation; however, whether tumor
cell metabolism could be affected by cytotoxic therapy
has not been carefully investigated so far. Here we
demonstrate that EOC cells exhibit heterogeneous glucose
addiction and metabolic profiles; these features strictly
correlate with patients’ response to carboplatin and can
in some instances be affected by platinum-based therapy.

cleavage, a well-known marker of apoptosis [8]. As shown
in Figure 1E, while in GA samples the fraction of cleaved
PARP increased in a dose-dependent manner, in cells from
GNA patients an increase in cleaved PARP was evident
only when the maximal dose of carboplatin was used.
Finally, we addressed the apparent in vitro
correlation between PLT sensitivity and glucose addiction
also by in vivo experiments in a xenotransplantation
model. We have previously shown that EOC ascitic
effusion cells can be successfully transplanted into
immunodeficient hosts [9]. Interestingly, EOC
xenotransplants generated from ascitic effusions of GA
patients maintained a high in vitro sensitivity to glucose
deprivation with a high mortality in the absence of this
nutrient, whereas viability of xenotransplants from
GNA samples was not affected by glucose starvation
(Supplementary Table S1). Furthermore, when RAG-2γ-/mice subcutaneously injected with xenotransplants
from GA patients were treated with a glucose analogue
(2-DG) which prevents glucose utilization, we observed a
significant delay in tumor growth after a short treatment of
only four doses of 2-DG (Supplementary Figure S1A). On
the contrary, in mice injected with xenotransplants from
a GNA patient, up to eight doses of 2-DG were needed
to spot a significant difference in tumor volume between
treated and control animals (Supplementary Figure S1B).
Similarly, we observed a significant control of tumor
growth by carboplatin administration in RAG-2γ-/- mice
s.c. injected with tumor cells isolated from GA donors,
whereas up to 3 weeks were needed to significantly reduce
tumor development in mice injected with tumor cells from
GNA patients (Supplementary Figure S1C, S1D).
On the whole, these data indicate that in vitro and
in vivo PLT sensitivity is closely associated in most
patients with a metabolic profile oriented towards strict
glucose addiction.

RESULTS
In vitro glucose starvation discloses two distinct
metabolic phenotypes of EOC cells
To investigate a possible association between
response to chemotherapy and metabolic features of
tumor cells, we collected EOC ascitic effusions from
47 carboplatin-treated patients (Table 1) who were
categorized as clinically PLT-sensitive or -resistant
according to FIGO classification. Tumor cells isolated
from patients’ ascitic fluids were cultured in vitro either in
the presence or in the absence of glucose for two weeks.
Interestingly, while under normal culture conditions the
viability of tumor cells from PLT-sensitive and resistant
patients was comparable (Figure 1A), in PLT-sensitive
samples cell viability dropped dramatically upon glucose
deprivation, and it was in all cases below the median
value calculated for all samples. Instead, PLT-resistant
samples collectively displayed lower sensitivity to
glucose starvation, although heterogeneous responses
were recorded (Figure 1A). Thus, we arbitrarily chose
median viability under glucose starvation (13.0%) as
a cut-off value to discern two groups, which possibly
reflected different states of glucose addiction: glucose
deprivation-sensitive (glucose addicted, GA) patients (14d viability < 13.0%), and glucose deprivation-resistant
(glucose non-addicted, GNA) patients (14-d viability
≥ 13.0%) (Figure 1B and Table 1).
To experimentally validate the apparent correlation
between in vitro glucose addiction of EOC cells and
clinical response to platinum salts we compared in vitro
cell viability, after 72 h of carboplatin treatment, of tumor
cells isolated from EOC samples defined as GA (n = 6)
or GNA (n = 6) according to their cell viability under
glucose starvation. As shown in Figure 1C, mean lethal
dose 50 (LD50) was 5.77 ± 1.03 µg/ml for GA patients
and 8.9 ± 1.4 µg/ml for GNA samples. These results
correlated with AnnexinV/PI staining of GA and GNA
samples after treatment with three different concentrations
of carboplatin. In fact, in tumor cells from GA patients
apoptosis was detected at the lowest carboplatin
concentration used (2.5 µg/ml), whereas in GNA samples
as much as 10 µg/ml were needed to induce a sizable
increase in apoptosis (Figure 1D). To confirm these data,
we evaluated by WB the effects of carboplatin on PARP
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Tumor cells from GA patients show higher
glycolytic activity compared to GNA subjects
Since these results could underlie differences in the
machinery controlling glycolytic activity between GA and
GNA patients, we investigated markers associated with
glucose metabolism. First, we evaluated the expression of
GLUT1, one of the major glucose transporters [10]. By flow
cytometry, we found significantly higher surface expression
of GLUT1 in tumor cells from GA (21.13 ± 4.07%)
compared to GNA samples (8.44 ± 5.60%, Figure 2A). We
next compared mRNA expression levels of several genes
encoding for key components involved in glycolysis, such
as hexokinase II (HKII), phosphofructokinase (PFK),
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) and
lactate dehydrogenase (LDH). As depicted in Figure 2B,
tumor cells isolated from GA patients showed significantly
higher expression of all transcripts analysed, compared to
GNA samples. These results were supported by Seahorse
6434

Oncotarget

Table 1: Clinical characteristics of EOC-bearing patients and association between in vitro glucose
addiction of tumor cells and clinical PLT response
Platinumsensitivea
N = 19(%)

Platinumresistant
N = 28(%)

Histotype
Endometrioid
Serous
Other (mucinous/clear cells)

1 (5.2)
16 (84.2)
2 (10.5)

5 (17.8)
21 (75)
2 (7.1)

6 (12.71)
37 (78.7)
4 (8.5)

Stage
3A
3B
3C
4

4 (21.0)
0 (0.0)
12 (63.1)
3 (15.78)

3 (10.7)
1 (3.6)
19 (67.8)
5 (17.8)

7 (13.85)
1 (4.62)
31 (67.69)
8 (17.02)

Total
N = 47 (%)

p valueb
NS

NS

NS

Grading
G1
G2
G3

3 (15.7)
2 (10.5)
14 (73.7)

2 (7.1)
6 (21.4)
20 (71.4)

5 (10.6)
8 (17.02)
34 (72.3)

Age (years)
Mean ± SD

64.1 ± 11

64.2 ± 9.40

64.15 ± 10.02
P < 0.001

GA/GNA statusc
GA < 13.0%

19

3

22

GNA ≥ 13.0%

0

25

25

a) EOC patients were categorized as PLT-sensitive or PLT-resistant based on time to disease recurrence after platinum therapy
completion (FIGO classification): patients who relapsed within 6 months were classified as PLT-resistant, whereas patients
relapsing after 6 months were classified as PLT-sensitive.
b) χ2 test, NS not significant.
c) EOC patients were categorized as GA or GNA at diagnosis, based on the percent viability of their tumor cells under 14-day
in vitro glucose starvation.
analysis of extra-cellular acidification rate (ECAR, a
surrogate marker of lactic acid production) in short-term
ex vivo cultures. Tumor cells from GA patients presented
significantly higher basal ECAR values compared to
GNA samples (Figure 2C, left panel), suggesting higher
rate of lactate production. Moreover, when the analysis
was performed by adding back glucose to cells initially
incubated under glucose starvation, a stronger increase
in ECAR was measured in GA compared to GNA
samples, and this modulation was completely abrogated
by 2-DG (Figure 2C, right panel), indicating that it was
due to glycolysis. Accordingly, WB analysis showed a
significantly higher expression of MCT4, the major lactate
transporter, in tumor cells from GA patients (Figure 2D).
On the other hand, oxygen consumption rate (OCR) did
not show any significant difference between the two groups
(Supplementary Figure S2A). Moreover, treatment with
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

oligomycin dramatically reduced OCR, as expected, but
did not increase ECAR in GA and GNA cells, indicating
that the two cell subsets have a limited glycolytic reserve
(Figure 2C). Similarly, we did not measure significant
variation in mRNA expression levels of several key genes
involved in mitochondrial activity regulation, including
ATP5B, NDUFS2, PKM and PDH, in GA compared to
GNA samples (Supplementary Figure S2B).
Altogether, these observations indicate that tumor
cells from glucose-addicted EOC patients show higher
glycolytic activity, compared to GNA subjects.

Tumor cells from GNA patients rely more on
autophagy compared to GA patients
It has been recently demonstrated that autophagy,
a multistep process of intracellular self-digestion [11],
6435

Oncotarget

is activated in response to cytotoxic drugs [12] and
could mediate the acquisition of a chemo-resistant
phenotype in some tumor cells. We thus compared the
ex vivo autophagic activity in GA and GNA patients
by Western blotting. Strikingly, tumor cells from
GNA patients displayed significantly higher levels of
LC3-II, the autophagosome-associated form of the
LC3 protein [13], than GA samples, indicating a more

active basal autophagy (Figure 2E). In contrast, protein
levels of Beclin1, a master regulator of autophagy,
were comparable between GA and GNA cells, thus
excluding a correlation between GA/GNA phenotype
and Beclin1 expression (Figure 2E). The levels of LC3-II
were also determined after clamping autophagosome
consumption with bafilomycin A1 (BafA1), an
inhibitor of autophagy. This allowed us to measure the

Figure 1: Glucose addiction discriminates two EOC patient categories and correlates with sensitivity to in vitro PLTtreatment. (A) Flow cytometry analysis of cell viability in ascitic effusion cells isolated from 47 EOC patients categorized as PLT-sensitive/

resistant on the basis of their clinical response to PLT treatment. Cell viability of CD45neg/CD44pos tumor cells was recorded after 14-day in
vitro culture in the presence (glucose) and in the absence (no glucose) of glucose by Live/Dead staining. Each circle represents an individual
patient, and the dotted line indicates the median value (13.0%), chosen as cut-off value. (B) The bar graph summarizes mean values (± SD)
of tumor cells from EOC patients categorized as glucose addicted (GA) or glucose non-addicted (GNA) according to their cell viability
after 14 d under glucose starvation. *P < 0.05. (C) Cell viability analysis of AnnexinV/PI staining in CD45neg/CD44pos tumor cells from GA
(n = 6) and GNA (n = 6) patients treated in vitro for 72 h with different doses of carboplatin (2.5, 5 and 10 μg/ml). Data were expressed as
mean percent viability (± SD) compared to control. The LD50 value for GA and GNA samples is indicated on the abscissa axis. (D) Flow
cytometry analysis of cell morphology and viability by AnnexinV/PI staining in CD45neg/CD44pos tumor cells from two representative GA
and GNA patients, treated in vitro for 72 h with different carboplatin concentrations. (E) WB analysis of total and cleaved PARP in FACSsorted CD45neg/CD44pos tumor cells of GA and GNA patients, treated in vitro for 72 h with different doses of carboplatin. One representative
blot is shown on the left panel; the right histogram depicts mean values (± SD) of 6 GA vs 6 GNA patients. Signal intensities of the PARP
bands were normalized against the α-tubulin signal. Expression ratios were calculated by dividing normalized signal intensity values
obtained for untreated GA or GNA cells. *P < 0.05.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6436

Oncotarget

autophagic flux as the difference in LC3-II protein levels
between BafA1-treated and untreated cells. As shown
in Supplementary Figure S3A, GA and GNA samples
presented a comparable autophagic flux. Similar results
were obtained treating the cells with chloroquine (CQ),
another inhibitor of autophagy, and labelling them with
a fluorescent dye that specifically binds autophagosomes
(Supplementary Figure S3B). Finally, to investigate
whether autophagy contributed to survival of GNA
cells, we treated cells with CQ or BafA1 for 72 h and

compared their viability via AnnexinV/PI co-staining. As
shown in Figure 2F, GNA samples were more sensitive
to this treatment, as they displayed a significantly lower
viability than GA samples in the presence of both
autophagy inhibitors.
These results indicate that, despite autophagy is
equally efficient in terms of flux in GA and GNA samples,
the latter have a markedly increased basal activation,
which could contribute to their resistance to both platinum
treatment and glucose deprivation.

Figure 2: GA and GNA cells exhibit different metabolic profiles. (A) Flow cytometry evaluation of membrane GLUT1. Data

expressed as mean percent values in tumor cells from GA and GNA patients (± SD). *P < 0.05. (B) qRT-PCR analysis of key enzymes
of the glucose metabolic chain in FACS sorted CD45neg/CD44pos tumor cells from GA (n = 6) and GNA (n = 6) patients. *P < 0.01.
(C) ECAR analysis in CD45neg/CD44pos tumor cells from GA and GNA patients. The left histogram shows the mean values of the basal
ECAR in 6 GA vs 6 GNA patients (± SD). *P < 0.05. One representative experiment is shown on the right; the first three points of the graph
indicate the basal ECAR ratio in glucose starvation. At different time points (arrows) the indicated inhibitors of OXPHOS (oligomycin)
or glycolysis (2DG) were added. (D) WB analysis of MCT4 lactate transporter in pooled CD45neg/CD44pos tumor cells from GA or GNA
patients (pools #1) and xenotransplants (pools #2). Each pool consisted of 3 GA or 3 GNA samples. After normalization against actin,
expression ratios were calculated by dividing GNA signal intensity values by those of GA cells. On the left a representative blot, on the
right graph depicts mean expression ratios in 8 different pools (± SD). *P < 0.05. (E) WB analysis of Beclin1and LC3-II proteins in
CD45neg/CD44pos tumor cell pools of GA or GNA patients. One representative blot is shown on the left, while the right histogram shows the
mean values of 4 different experiments (three samples/pool; ± SD). *P < 0.05. (F) Left panel: flow cytometry analysis of cell morphology
and viability by AnnexinV/PI staining in two representative GA and GNA samples, treated in vitro for 72 h with 20 µM CQ or 100 nM
BafA1. Right panel: histogram displaying the mean fold change (± SD) in cell viability, calculated by dividing the percentage of live cells
after treatment by untreated values of 4 GA and 5 GNA samples. *P < 0.05.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6437

Oncotarget

GNA samples are characterized by low
proliferation and high MDR pump expression

model, where the platinum-naïve sample was available.
To this end, we analyzed parental PLT-sensitive (#S)
and their PLT-resistant (#R) derivatives, made resistant
by prolonged in vivo PLT treatment and selection, as
detailed in Materials and Methods. Tumor cells isolated
from #S and #R xenotransplants were preliminary
treated in vitro for 72 h with 20 μg/ml of carboplatin;
as expected, a strong reduction of cell viability was
measured in #S samples, whereas almost 90% of the
cells survived treatment in #R samples (Figure 4A). In
addition, when we evaluated ALDH activity at tumor
harvest, a three-fold higher expression of this detoxifying
enzyme was found in #R samples (mean 65% ± 6.6%),
compared to the PLT-sensitive counterpart (#S, mean
21.2 ± 4.8%, Figure 4B). Moreover, when these cells
were maintained in vitro under glucose deprivation, cell
viability was significantly higher in #R compared to #S
samples (Figure 4C). In contrast, negligible differences
in cell viability of #R and #S cells were detected under
glutamine deprivation (data not shown). To better evaluate
the metabolic alterations induced by PLT treatment, we
also analyzed mRNA expression levels of several genes
involved in glucose metabolism, including GLUT1, HKII,
PFK, GAPDH, LDHA, LDHB and MCT4. As shown in
Figure 4D, genes encoding for enzymes that transform
pyruvate into lactate and regulate its extrusion outside the
cells were substantially downregulated in #R samples.
On the whole, these data confirm the strict
parallelism between glucose addiction and PLT sensitivity,
and demonstrate that PLT resistance may be associated
with a change in glucose metabolic profile.

These observations prompted us to explore the
mechanisms that could explain why platinum-based
therapy was more efficient in GA compared to GNA
patients. Previous studies indicate that PLT sensitivity
relies on two critical parameters: the proliferation rate
(which renders tumor cells a more suitable target for
the DNA-damaging effects of the drug) and the ability
of malignant cells to extrude toxic compounds through
multidrug-resistant (MDR) pumps and detoxifying
enzymes [14]. We first monitored cell proliferation in EOC
primary samples after staining with CFSE, a membrane
dye that enables the evaluation of cell division rate by
flow cytometry [15]. Three gates were identified at the
beginning of the experiment (T0) according to the dye
intensity (Figure 3A, left panel); after 72 h in vitro culture,
the cell percentage in each gate was recorded. As shown in
Figure 3A (right panel), cells from GNA patients persisted
longer in gate #1 compared to GA cells, indicating a
slower proliferation rate. We also addressed expression of
Cyclins, whose levels are increased in cycling cells. As
shown in Figure 3B, mRNA levels of CYCLIN A, B, D and
E were significantly higher in tumor cells from GA patients
compared to GNA samples. For Cyclin D1, WB analysis
fully confirmed these results (Figure 3C). Moreover, we
quantified ex vivo mRNA expression levels of several
MDR pump genes and detoxifying enzyme in tumor cells
from GA and GNA patients. As shown in Figure 3D,
GNA samples displayed significantly higher expression of
three out of four of the genes analyzed. ALDH1A mRNA
levels did not significantly differ between the two patient
categories, mainly due to its heterogeneous expression
in GNA samples (Figure 3D); however, when enzymatic
activity of ALDH was measured by the ALDEFLUOR®
assay, GNA samples showed a 3-fold higher expression of
this detoxifying enzyme (Figure 3E).
It has been demonstrated [16] that higher MDR
expression and resistance to platinum treatment are key
hallmarks of cancer stem cells (CSC). We and others have
demonstrated that in ovarian cancer [17] and glioblastoma
[18, 19], CSC are characterized by OXPHOS metabolism
and resistance to glucose starvation. Hence, we evaluated
in GA and GNA samples the percentage of cells
co-expressing CD44 and CD117, a recognized marker
of EOC CSC [17, 20]. We did not found any difference
between GA and GNA patients (data not shown), thus
implying that the different phenotype of GA and GNA
samples was likely not attributable to their CSC content.

The GA/GNA phenotype predicts clinical
responsiveness in untreated patients
Besides being selected by chemotherapy, it is possible
that the GA/GNA phenotype and glucose addiction could
be an intrinsic metabolic feature that some EOC patients
display before chemotherapy. To investigate this possibility,
we evaluated in a prospective cohort of 23 patients, who did
not receive any treatment before sampling, the 14-d viability
of their tumor cells in the absence of glucose (Figure 4E).
At diagnosis, 13 patients (56.5%) were categorized as GA,
and 10 (43.5%) as GNA; all underwent first-line PLT-based
chemotherapy, and the time to tumor relapse was recorded
over 18 months of follow-up. As shown in Table 2, in
this prospective cohort no correlation emerged between
PLT-sensitive/resistant phenotypes and tumor stage, grading
or histotype. On the other hand, a significant association
between the GA/GNA phenotype and clinical sensitivity/
resistance to first-line PLT chemotherapy was evidenced
(Table 2). In addition, as shown by the Kaplan-Meier curves
(Figure 4F), GA patients showed better median progressionfree survival (PFS) (9.1 months, 95% CI: 7.0–12.0),
compared to GNA patients (2.7 months, 95% CI: 1.0–3.0;
P < 0.001) over the follow-up period.

PLT may favor the GNA phenotype in an EOCderived xenograft model
The close association between glucose metabolism
and PLT sensitivity was further strengthened in a mouse
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6438

Oncotarget

Table 2: Clinical characteristics of untreated EOC-bearing patients and association between
in vitro glucose addiction of tumor cells and clinical PLT response
PLT-sensitivea
N = 11 (%)

PLT-resistant
N = 12 (%)

Total
N = 23 (%)

Histotype
Endometrioid
Serous
Other (mucinous/clear cells)

2 (18.2)
9 (81.8)
–

0 (0)
7 (58.3)
5 (41.6)

2 (8)
16 (69)
5 (21)

Stage
3A–3B
3C–4

2 (18.2)
9 (81.8)

2 (16.6)
10 (83.4)

4 (17.3)
19 (82.6)

 

Grading
G1–G2
G3
Age (years)
Mean ± SD

NS

NS

NS
2 (18.2)
9 (81.8)

3 (25)
9 (75)

63.3 ± 9.53

74.7 ± 7.1

5 (21)
18 (78)

NS

Surgery
Yes

7 (63.6)

5 (41.6)

10 (43.5)

No

4 (36.4)

7 (58.3)

13 (56.5)
P < 0.001

GA/GNA statusc
GA < 13.0%
GNA ≥ 13.0%

p
valueb

11 (100)

2 (16.6)

13 (56.5)

0 (0)

10 (83.4)

10 (43.5)

a) EOC patients were categorized as PLT-sensitive or PLT-resistant based on time to disease recurrence after first-line
platinum therapy; patients who relapsed within 6 months were classified as PLT-resistant, whereas patients relapsing after
6 months were classified as PLT-sensitive (according to FIGO classification).
b) χ2 test, NS not significant.
c) EOC patients were categorized as GA or GNA at diagnosis, based on the percent viability of their tumor cells under 14-day
in vitro glucose starvation (< 13.0% or ≥ 13.0%, respectively).
Altogether, although limited by the low number of
patients analyzed, our results seem to indicate that GNA
status could predict refractoriness to PLT treatment in
naïve EOC patients.

(GNA). Our data showed a more pronounced Warburg
effect in GA samples, which were significantly enriched in
PLT-sensitive patients. GA cells presented higher in vitro
sensitivity to PLT, which could be in part explained by a
higher proliferation rate as well as a more active glycolytic
machinery, in line with the well-established connections
between proliferation and Warburg effect [7]. Nonetheless,
the possible contribution to PLT sensitivity of lower MDR
pump expression in GA patients (Figure 3D–3E) should
also be considered.
These results are partially at odds with previous
findings obtained by metabolic characterization of tumor
cells selected for platinum-resistance in vitro. Indeed, while
Jin et al. reported that platinum-resistance is associated
with down-modulation of glycolysis in ovarian cancer cell
lines [22], Catanzaro et al. showed that cisplatin-resistant
ovarian cancer cells were characterized by reduced
mitochondrial activity and higher glucose-dependency,

DISCUSSION
Although platinum resistance is a well-established
phenomenon and several mechanisms of resistance have
been advanced [21], whether the metabolic properties
of tumor cells influence response to or are modulated
by cytotoxic drugs is unknown. We investigated these
issues in primary samples from ovarian cancer patients
and in a xenotransplantation model. Our results clearly
identify two distinct metabolic profiles within EOC
patients. Based on in vitro sensitivity to glucose starvation
of tumor cells, patients’ samples could be discriminated
into glucose addicted (GA) and glucose non-addicted
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6439

Oncotarget

when compared to the cisplatin-sensitive counterpart.
These features were associated with increased glucoseuptake and consumption as well as increased expression
and enzymatic activity of the pentose phosphate pathway
enzyme glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase [23]. These
contrasting results may depend on the marked differences
in the experimental models used in these studies. Our
findings have been obtained by analyzing metabolic traits
of tumors treated in vivo - either in the patients or in
xenotranplants - with platinum, whereas Catanzaro et al.

investigated the adaptive metabolic changes of tumor
cells exposed in vitro to this drug. This difference could
be important, in light of recent publications remarking the
impact of the environment on the metabolic phenotype of
tumor cells [24]. Along this line, Matassa et al. recently
observed that oxidative metabolism drives inflammationinduced platinum resistance in ovarian cancer [25].
These results, together with ours, challenge the current
assumption that increased glycolysis correlates with poor
prognosis, at least in ovarian cancer.

Figure 3: GNA cells present lower proliferation rate and higher MDR pump expression. (A) The proliferation rate of GA vs.

GNA ascitic effusion cells was evaluated by CFSE staining in CD45neg/CD44pos tumor cells. Three gates were set according to dye intensity
(time 0; left panel). For each gate, the mean percentage of CFSE+ cells was quantified 72 h after staining. One representative experiment
is shown on the left; mean values (± SD) in 5 GA and 4 GNA patients are plotted on the right. *P < 0.05. (B) qRT-PCR analysis of cyclin
expression in FACS sorted CD45neg/CD44pos tumor cells from EOC ascitic effusions. Data were expressed as mean relative expression
values in tumor cells from GA (n = 6) compared to GNA (n = 6) patients (± SD). *P < 0.001. (C) Left panel: Representative WB analysis
of Cyclin D expression in pools of CD45neg/CD44pos tumor cells from GA and GNA patients (pools #1) and patient-derived xenotransplants
(pools #2). Each pool consisted of 3 GA or GNA samples. Right panel: The signal intensity of the Cyclin D bands was normalized against
the actin signal; expression ratios were calculated by dividing normalized signal intensity values obtained for GNA cells by those obtained
for GA cells. The graph shows mean expression ratios (± SD) in 8 different pools. *P < 0.05. (D) qRT-PCR analysis of multidrug resistance
(MDR) pump expression in FACS sorted CD45neg/CD44pos ascitic effusion cells from GA (n = 6) and GNA (n = 6) patients. Data were
expressed as mean relative expression values (± SD). *P < 0.05. (E) Ex vivo flow cytometry analysis of ALDH activity in CD45neg/CD44pos
EOC ascitic effusion cells from GA (n = 20) and GNA (n = 15) patients. Gates were set on the isotype control, and values indicate the
percentage of ALDH+pos cells. One representative experiment is shown on the left; the right histogram shows mean percent values (± SD).
*P < 0.05.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6440

Oncotarget

Intriguingly, the low glycolytic metabolism of
GNA samples was counterbalanced by their higher
basal autophagic activity and response to autophagy
inhibitors than GA cells. Aberrant autophagy represents
an emerging hallmark of cancer [26]. This catabolic
pathway, mediated by the lysosome compartment,
enables cells to degrade damaged cellular organelles in
order to recycle their components; therefore, autophagy
represents a way for tumor cells to survive the energetic
stress they experience in the tumor microenvironment
[27]. We speculate that autophagy could be exploited
by GNA samples to support their energy needs, since
glucose utilization is apparently more dispensable for
these cells (Figure 5). Moreover, increased autophagy
could also mediate resistance to platinum, as observed
in other models [28]. We investigated whether inhibition
of autophagy could affect the response to platinum
treatment. However, the prominent pro-apoptotic effects
of CQ did not enable us to conclude that autophagy

blockade could restore platinum sensitivity in GNA cells
(data not shown).
Another key finding of our work is that certain
metabolic features of tumor cells could be modulated by
carboplatin. Although we could not perform metabolic
characterization of EOC samples at diagnosis in a large
number of patients, serial sampling before and after
PLT-treatment revealed a switch from GA to GNA
status after platinum treatment in about 1/4 of the cases
analyzed (data not shown); in contrast, we never observed
a conversion from the GNA to the GA phenotype. The
surprising parallelism between PLT - resistance and
resistance to glucose starvation was also confirmed in a
xenotransplantation model, where we demonstrated that
acquisition of a PLT-resistant phenotype and resistance to
in vitro glucose starvation is accompanied by a dramatic
change in the expression of the glucose metabolismassociated machinery (Figure 4D–4E). Currently, it is
not clear whether PLT-treatment could in some instances

Figure 4: Prolonged PLT-treatment influences the response to glucose starvation in a xenotransplantation model.

(A) Cell viability analysis performed with AnnexinV/PI staining in PLT-sensitive EOC xenografts (#S) and their resistant counterpart (#R)
after 72 h of carboplatin treatment. Data are expressed as ratio between treated and untreated counterpart. (B) ALDH activity analysis in
PLT-sensitive EOC xenografts (#S) and their resistant counterpart (#R) obtained as described in Materials and Methods. On the left one
representative sample is shown; the right histogram shows mean values (± SD) of three biological replicates for two different samples.
(C) Cell viability analysis of PLT-sensitive EOC xenografts (#S) and their resistant counterpart (#R) recorded after 7-day in vitro culture in
the presence (glucose) and in the absence (no glucose) of glucose by Live/Dead staining. (D) qRT-PCR analysis of key enzymes involved
in the glucose metabolic chain in PLT-sensitive EOC xenografts (#S) and their resistant counterpart (#R). Data are expressed as mean
relative expression values (± SD). *P < 0.05. (E) Flow cytometry analysis of cell viability after 14 d in the presence or absence of glucose.
The graph summarizes mean values (± SD) of tumor cells isolated from 23 EOC samples of untreated patients categorized as GA or GNA
according to their cell viability under glucose starvation. *P < 0.05. (F) Kaplan-Meier curve showing the association between the GA/GNA
phenotype and progression-free survival in a cohort of untreated EOC patients.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6441

Oncotarget

modulate the metabolic profile of tumor cells or rather
select a naïve population of less glycolytic cells (GNA
phenotype). In the latter scenario, GNA samples would
contain a more prominent population of poorly glycolytic
cells endowed with primary resistance to PLT compared
to GA samples, in which the GNA population could still
be present but as a minority. Further studies are warranted
to explore more in depth the mechanistic aspects of
this issue. In any case, our results are consistent with
a previously proposed concept of oncogenic-type of
resistance to anti-cancer drugs [29, 30]. In fact, it could
well be that oncogenic alterations that render cells
resistant to anti-cancer drug are positively selected by
chemotherapy and simultaneously make the cells capable
of tolerating low glucose conditions.
Finally, we observed that the in vitro glucose
addiction of primary tumor cells could anticipate the
response to first-line PLT-based schedules of the patients
from which they were isolated. In fact, the different
PLT sensitivity of GA and GNA patients was confirmed
in vivo in a limited cohort of EOC patients whose samples
were collected before any chemotherapic treatment. As
shown by Kaplan-Meier analysis, patients categorized
at diagnosis as GA according to their glucose addiction
and prospectively followed for over 18 months, appeared
PLT-sensitive according to the FIGO definition [4], and
showed better PFS compared to GNA patients.
In conclusion our study demonstrates that EOC
samples can be stratified according to their glucose
addiction. In particular, by analyzing tumor cell sensitivity
to in vitro glucose deprivation we can identify glucose
addicted (GA) samples and glucose non-addicted (GNA)
ones. Importantly, the GA/GNA status correlates with
response to PLT treatment both in vitro and in vivo and can
be affected by prolonged PLT therapy. Even though we are

aware of the limited dimension of our patient cohort, our
observations suggest that this in vitro glucose addiction
assay may represent a reliable and novel parameter to
predict clinical sensitivity to PLT in ovarian cancer.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
EOC primary samples and xenografts
This study was approved by the Institutional
Ethics Committee for patient studies. After obtaining
written informed consent, 70 patients diagnosed with
EOC entered this study: 47 had received chemotherapy
prior to sampling, whereas 23 were sampled at diagnosis
before any surgery/chemotherapy. Patient’s clinical
and pathologic features are summarized in Table 1.
EOC cells were isolated from ascitic effusion fluids
as reported elsewhere [31] and from ascitic effusions
generated after the orthotopic injection of EOC cells into
immunocompromised mice. All the experiments were
performed on gated or FACS-sorted CD45-negative and
CD44-positive (CD45neg/CD44pos) tumor cells to exclude
myeloid and lymphoid contamination.

Glucose deprivation assay and in vitro cell
treatments
EOC ascitic effusion cells were cultured at
6 × 104 cells/ml in complete or glucose-deprived RPMI
medium (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). After 14 days,
cell viability of CD45neg/CD44pos tumor cells was evaluated
by flow cytometry with Live/Dead (Life Technologies,
Monza, Italy) staining as described [17].
Carboplatin (2.5, 5 and 10 μg/ml), chloroquine (CQ,
20 μM, Sigma-Aldrich) and bafilomycin A1 (BafA1, 100

Figure 5: Working hypothesis: dominant metabolic pathways in glucose addicted and glucose non-addicted EOC
cells. GA samples mostly rely on the Warburg effect with high levels of glucose utilization through glycolysis (orange box). GNA samples,
instead, are less dependent on glycolysis, thus implying the utilization of alternative energetic/catabolic pathways such as autophagy
(blue box), which degrades damaged cellular organelles in order to recycle their components and produce metabolic intermediates such as
carbohydrates or amino acids (AA) that fuel the Krebs cycle.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6442

Oncotarget

nM, Sigma-Aldrich) were added to the complete medium,
and cell viability evaluated 72 h later by AnnexinV/PI
staining as described [17]. For autophagic flux analysis
cells were treated with BafA1 (100 nM) for 2 h or CQ
(50 μM) overnight.

diethylaminobenzaldehyde (DEAB) was used as a control.
To evaluate the proliferation rate, EOC effusion
cells were stained with carboxyfluorescein-diacetatesuccinimidylester (CFSE; Life Technologies) as described
elsewhere [15], and seeded at 6 × 104 cells/well in RPMI
medium. Flow cytometry analysis was performed 72 h
later. For autophagic flux analysis, CYTO-ID® Autophagy
detection kit (Enzo, New York, NY) was used according
to the manufacturer’s instructions. All the analyses were
performed with FACS LSRII (BD); data were analyzed
with Flow Jo (TreeStar, Ashland, OR).

Animal studies
Severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID)
and RAG-2γ-/- mice were obtained from internal
breeding. Procedures involving animals and their care
were performed according to institutional guidelines
that comply with national and international laws and
policies (EEC Council Directive 86/609, OJ L358, 12
December 1987). Patient derived xenografts (PDX) were
generated by injecting intraperitoneally (i.p.) into SCID
mice 106 tumor cells from ascitic effusions of EOC
patients as reported elsewhere [32]. For carboplatin
treatment, 5 × 105 CD45neg/CD44pos tumor cells isolated
from high-grade serous ovarian cancer xenotransplants
(classified as GA or GNA at baseline) were injected
subcutaneously (s.c.) in 200 µl of Matrigel in both
dorsolateral flanks of RAG-2γ-/- mice. When tumors
reached 100 mm3 volume, mice were randomized in two
groups, and either treated with 4 doses of carboplatin
(50 mg/Kg weekly) or with equal saline amounts as
a control. Tumor growth was evaluated by caliper
measurements. Mice were sacrificed when the tumors of
the control group reached 600 mm3 volume.
To investigate the possible correlation between
PLT response and glucose metabolism, we selected two
EOC xenotransplants sensitive to cisplatin treatment
(#S), which were injected s.c. into nude mice (Envigo
RMS, Corezzana, Italy). Mice were treated with multiple
cycles of cisplatin (5 mg/Kg once every 3 weeks/cycle)
in order to obtain the cisplatin-resistant counterpart (#R);
meanwhile the sensitive counterpart was maintained by
serial passage in mice receiving PBS. Experiments were
performed after a total of 5–8 cisplatin cycles.

Seahorse analysis
FACS-sorted CD45neg/CD44pos tumor cells
were seeded at 2 × 104/well in XF24 V7 Extracellular
Flux Analyzer microplates (Seahorse Biosciences,
Copenhagen, Denmark) in complete RPMI medium
or RPMI without glucose (according to experimental
design), and incubated for 4 h at 37°C, 5% CO2. The
assay was initiated by medium replacing, followed by
the addition over a 2 h-analysis of the following reagents:
Oligomycin (0.8 μM), FCCP (900 nM), Rotenone (1 μM),
Antimycin (1 μM), 2-DG (100 mM) or glucose (10 mM)
all from Sigma-Aldrich. Three measurements were done
in triplicate for each reagent addition.

Western blotting (WB)
FACS-sorted CD45neg/CD44pos tumor cells were
subjected to SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
and WB as reported [17]. The membranes were
hybridized using antibodies against GLUT1 (1:2000,
Novus Biological, Abingdon, U.K.), PARP (1:1000, Cell
Signaling, Danvers, MA), MCT4 (1:1000, Santa Cruz,
Dallas, TX), LC3 (1:1000, Cell Signaling), actin (1:500,
Sigma-Aldrich), Cyclin D1 (1:1000, Cell Signaling),
Beclin1 (1:1000, Abcam) and α-tubulin (1:4000, SigmaAldrich) followed by the appropriate secondary HRPconjugated antibody (Amersham-Pharmacia, Amersham,
U.K.). The signal was detected by chemiluminescence
with SuperSignal kit (Life Technologies).

Flow cytometry (FACS) analysis
FACS sorting was performed with a MoFlo Astrios
cell sorter (Coulter Electronics, Brea, CA) after gating
CD45neg/CD44pos tumor cells with anti-CD45 (1:10,
Miltenyi Biotec, Bergisch Gladbach, Germany) and
anti-CD44 (1:1000, Abcam , Cambridge, UK) antibodies.
For flow cytometry analysis, cells were stained with Live/
Dead and anti-CD44 (Abcam), CD45 (Miltenyi), CD117
(1:100, Miltenyi Biotec) and GLUT1 (1:1000, Abcam)
antibodies.
Aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) activity was
determined by a fluorogenic dye (ALDEFLUOR®
assay; Stem Cell Technologies, Vancouver, Canada), as
described elsewhere [33]. The specific ALDH inhibitor

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

RNA extraction, reverse transcription and qRTPCR
Total RNA was extracted following the TRIzol
protocol [17]. cDNA was synthesized from 0.5–1 μg of
total RNA using the Superscript II reverse transcriptase
(Life Technologies). Each sample was run in triplicate
on ABI PRISM® 7900HT Sequence Detection System
(PE Biosystems, Foster City, CA). Results were analyzed
using the comparative ΔΔCt method normalized to the
housekeeping β2-microglobulin gene. Primer sequences
are listed in Supplementary Table S2.

6443

Oncotarget

Statistical analysis

cancer: dose dense chemotherapy and the reversal of clinical
platinum resistance. Cancer Treat Rev. 2013; 39:153–160.

Continuous variables were summarized with mean,
standard deviation and median; categorical variables were
reported as counts and percentages. Comparisons between
mean values were performed by two-tail Student’s
t test. The χ2 test was used for the association between
in vitro glucose addiction and clinical platinum response.
Correlations between variables were evaluated by the
Rho of Pearson. Progression Free Survival (PFS) was
calculated from the completion of first-line chemotherapy
to the time of last follow-up visit or event. The survival
probability was estimated by means of the Kaplan-Meier
method and heterogeneity in survival among strata was
assessed through the log-rank test. The median PFS was
reported along with 95% confidence intervals (CI). A
P-value < 0.05 was considered as statistically significant.
All data analyses were performed using the SAS statistical
package (SAS, release 9.2; SAS Institute).

  4.	 Stuart GC, Kitchener H, Bacon M, duBois A, Friedlander M,
Ledermann J, Marth C, Thigpen T, Trimble E, (OCCC),
participants of 4th Ovarian Cancer Consensus Conference,
Intergroup GC. 2010 Gynecologic Cancer InterGroup
(GCIG) consensus statement on clinical trials in ovarian
cancer: report from the Fourth Ovarian Cancer Consensus
Conference. Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2011; 21:750–755.
  5.	 Kipps E, Tan DS, Kaye SB. Meeting the challenge of ascites
in ovarian cancer: new avenues for therapy and research.
Nature reviews Cancer. 2013; 13:273–282.
  6.	 Vander Heiden MG. Targeting cancer metabolism: a
therapeutic window opens. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2011;
10:671–684.
  7.	 Vander Heiden MG, Cantley LC, Thompson CB.
Understanding the Warburg effect: the metabolic requirements
of cell proliferation. Science. 2009; 324:1029–1033.
  8.	 Boulares AH, Yakovlev AG, Ivanova V, Stoica BA, Wang G,
Iyer S, Smulson M. Role of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase
(PARP) cleavage in apoptosis. Caspase 3-resistant PARP
mutant increases rates of apoptosis in transfected cells.
J Biol Chem. 1999; 274:22932–22940.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are grateful to Dr Giorgia Nardo (Istituto
Oncologico Veneto-IRCSS) for help in generation and
maintenance of xenotransplants, and to Ugo Sorrentino
for collaborating in collecting clinical data. We also thank
Dr Andrea Rasola (University of Padova) for help in
SeaHorse analysis.

  9.	 Nardo G, Favaro E, Curtarello M, Moserle L, Zulato E,
Persano L, Rossi E, Esposito G, Crescenzi M, Casanovas O,
Sattler U, Mueller-Klieser W, Biesalski B, et al. Glycolytic
phenotype and AMP kinase modify the pathologic response
of tumor xenografts to VEGF neutralization. Cancer Res.
2011; 71:4214–4225.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

10.	 Wieman HL, Horn SR, Jacobs SR, Altman BJ, Kornbluth S,
Rathmell JC. An essential role for the Glut1 PDZ-binding
motif in growth factor regulation of Glut1 degradation and
trafficking. Biochem J. 2009; 418:345–367.

The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

GRANT SUPPORT

11.	 Kimmelman AC. The dynamic nature of autophagy in
cancer. Genes & development. 2011; 25:1999–2010.

This work was supported in part by grants from the
Italian Association for Cancer Research (AIRC) (grants
#N14032, #N18803 and #IG14536); Italian Ministry of
University and Research; University of Padova (grant
#CPDA1325178); IOV 5 x1000 Intramural Grant.
A. Pastò is a recipient of a fellowship from AIRC;
A. Pagotto is a recipient of a Piscopia-Marie Curie
fellowship; G. Pilotto is a recipient of an IOV-sponsored
Ph.D. fellowship. C. Bellio is presently a fellow at the
Massachusetts General Hospital & Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA.

12.	 Sui X, Chen R, Wang Z, Huang Z, Kong N, Zhang M,
Han W, Lou F, Yang J, Zhang Q, Wang X, He C, Pan H.
Autophagy and chemotherapy resistance: a promising
therapeutic target for cancer treatment. Cell Death Dis.
2013; 4:e838.
13.	 Mizushima N, Yoshimori T, Levine B. Methods in
mammalian autophagy research. Cell. 2010; 140:313–326.
14.	 Huang Y, Sadée W. Membrane transporters and channels
in chemoresistance and -sensitivity of tumor cells. Cancer
Lett. 2006; 239:168–182.
15.	 Lyons AB. Analysing cell division in vivo and in vitro using
flow cytometric measurement of CFSE dye dilution. J
Immunol Methods. 2000; 243:147–154.

REFERENCES
1.	 Siegel R, Naishadham D, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2013.
CA Cancer J Clin. 2013; 63:11–30.

16.	 Abdullah LN, Chow EK. Mechanisms of chemoresistance
in cancer stem cells. Clinical and translational medicine.
2013; 2:3-1326-2-3.

2.	 Cannistra SA. Cancer of the ovary. N Engl J Med. 2004;
351:2519–2529.

17.	 Pastò A, Bellio C, Pilotto G, Ciminale V,
Silic-Benussi M, Guzzo G, Rasola A, Frasson C, Nardo G,
Zulato E, Nicoletto MO, Manicone M, Indraccolo S, et al.

3.	 Pinato DJ, Graham J, Gabra H, Sharma R. Evolving
concepts in the management of drug resistant ovarian
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6444

Oncotarget

Cancer stem cells from epithelial ovarian cancer patients
privilege oxidative phosphorylation, and resist glucose
deprivation. Oncotarget. 2014; 5:4305–4319. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.2010.

25.	 Matassa DS, Amoroso MR, Lu H, Avolio R, Arzeni D,
Procaccini C, Faicchia D, Maddalena F, Simeon V, Agliarulo I,
Zanini E, Mazzoccoli C, Recchi C, et al. Oxidative
metabolism drives inflammation-induced platinum resistance
in human ovarian cancer. Cell death and differentiation. 2016.

18.	Vlashi E, Lagadec C, Vergnes L, Matsutani T,
Masui K, Poulou M, Popescu R, Della Donna L,
Evers P, Dekmezian C, Reue K, Christofk H, Mischel PS,
et al. Metabolic state of glioma stem cells and nontumorigenic
cells. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America. 2011; 108:16062–16067.

26.	 Yang Z, Klionsky DJ. Eaten alive: a history of
macroautophagy. Nat Cell Biol. 2010; 12:814–822.
27.	 Rebecca VW, Amaravadi RK. Emerging strategies to
effectively target autophagy in cancer. Oncogene. 2015.
28.	 Ge R, Liu L, Dai W, Zhang W, Yang Y, Wang H, Shi Q,
Guo S, Yi X, Wang G, Gao T, Luan Q, Li C. Xeroderma
Pigmentosum Group A Promotes Autophagy to Facilitate
Cisplatin Resistance in Melanoma Cells through the
Activation of PARP1. The Journal of investigative
dermatology. 2016; 136:1219–1228.

19.	 Flavahan WA, Wu Q, Hitomi M, Rahim N, Kim Y,
Sloan AE, Weil RJ, Nakano I, Sarkaria JN, Stringer BW,
Day BW, Li M, Lathia JD, et al. Brain tumor initiating cells
adapt to restricted nutrition through preferential glucose
uptake. Nature neuroscience. 2013; 16:1373–1382.
20.	 Zhang S, Balch C, Chan MW, Lai HC, Matei D,
Schilder JM, Yan PS, Huang TH, Nephew KP. Identification
and characterization of ovarian cancer-initiating cells from
primary human tumors. Cancer Res. 2008; 68:4311–4320.

29.	 Blagosklonny MV. Oncogenic resistance to growth-limiting
conditions. Nature reviews Cancer. 2002; 2:221–225.
30.	 Blagosklonny MV. Why therapeutic response may not prolong
the life of a cancer patient: selection for oncogenic resistance.
Cell cycle (Georgetown, Tex.). 2005; 4:1693–1698.

21.	 Galluzzi L, Senovilla L, Vitale I, Michels J, Martins I,
Kepp O, Castedo M, Kroemer G. Molecular mechanisms of
cisplatin resistance. Oncogene. 2012; 31:1869–1883.

31.	 Moserle L, Indraccolo S, Ghisi M, Frasson C, Fortunato E,
Canevari S, Miotti S, Tosello V, Zamarchi R, Corradin A,
Minuzzo S, Rossi E, Basso G, et al. The side population
of ovarian cancer cells is a primary target of IFN-alpha
antitumor effects. Cancer Res. 2008; 68: 5658–5668.

22.	 Jin L, Huo Y, Zheng Z, Jiang X, Deng H, Chen Y, Lian Q,
Ge R, Deng H. Down-regulation of Ras-related protein
Rab 5C-dependent endocytosis and glycolysis in cisplatinresistant ovarian cancer cell lines. Molecular & cellular
proteomics. 2014; 13:3138–3151.

32.	 Indraccolo S, Tisato V, Agata S, Moserle L, Ferrari S,
Callegaro M, Persano L, Palma MD, Scaini MC, Esposito G,
Fassina A, Nicoletto O, Plebani M, et al. Establishment
and characterization of xenografts and cancer cell cultures
derived from BRCA1–/– epithelial ovarian cancers. Eur J
Cancer. 2006; 42:1475–1483.

23.	 Catanzaro D, Gaude E, Orso G, Giordano C, Guzzo G,
Rasola A, Ragazzi E, Caparrotta L, Frezza C, Montopoli M.
Inhibition of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase sensitizes
cisplatin-resistant cells to death. Oncotarget. 2015;
6:30102–30114. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.4945.

33.	 Pastò A, Serafin V, Pilotto G, Lago C, Bellio C, Trusolino L,
Bertotti A, Hoey T, Plateroti M, Esposito G, Pinazza M,
Agostini M, Nitti D, et al. NOTCH3 signaling regulates
MUSASHI-1 expression in metastatic colorectal cancer
cells. Cancer Res. 2014; 74:2106–2118.

24.	 Davidson SM, Papagiannakopoulos T, Olenchock BA,
Heyman JE, Keibler MA, Luengo A, Bauer MR, Jha AK,
O’Brien JP, Pierce KA, Gui DY, Sullivan LB, Wasylenko TM,
et al. Environment Impacts the Metabolic Dependencies of
Ras-Driven Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer. Cell metabolism.
2016; 23:517–528.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6445

Oncotarget

