Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 31

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Integrated gene and miRNA expression analysis of prostate
cancer associated fibroblasts supports a prominent role for
interleukin-6 in fibroblast activation
Valentina Doldi1,*, Maurizio Callari1,*, Elisa Giannoni2, Francesca D’Aiuto1, Massimo
Maffezzini3, Riccardo Valdagni4,5, Paola Chiarugi2, Paolo Gandellini1,**, Nadia Zaffaroni1,**
1

Department of Experimental Oncology, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, 20133, Milan, Italy

2

Department of Experimental and Clinical Biomedical Sciences, University of Florence, 50134, Florence, Italy

3

Department of Urology, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, 20133, Milan, Italy

4

Department of Radiation Oncology 1, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, 20133, Milan, Italy

5

Prostate Program, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, 20133, Milan, Italy

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

**

These authors share senior authorship

Correspondence to:
Paolo Gandellini, e-mail: paolo.gandellini@istitutotumori.mi.it
Nadia Zaffaroni, e-mail: nadia.zaffaroni@istitutotumori.mi.it
Keywords: prostate cancer, cancer associated fibroblasts, interleukin-6, microRNA, gene expression
Received: April 16, 2015      Accepted: August 28, 2015      Published: September 08, 2015

ABSTRACT
Tumor microenvironment coevolves with and simultaneously sustains cancer
progression. In prostate carcinoma (PCa), cancer associated fibroblasts (CAF) have
been shown to fuel tumor development and metastasis by mutually interacting with
tumor cells. Molecular mechanisms leading to activation of CAFs from tissue-resident
fibroblasts, circulating bone marrow-derived fibroblast progenitors or mesenchymal
stem cells are largely unknown. Through integrated gene and microRNA expression
profiling, we showed that PCa-derived CAF transcriptome strictly resembles that of
normal fibroblasts stimulated in vitro with interleukin-6 (IL6), thus proving evidence,
for the first time, that the cytokine is able per se to induce most of the transcriptional
changes characteristic of patient-derived CAFs. Comparison with publicly available
datasets, however, suggested that prostate CAFs may be alternatively characterized by
IL6 and TGFβ-related signatures, indicating that either signal, depending on the context,
may concur to fibroblast activation. Our analyses also highlighted novel pathways
potentially relevant for induction of a reactive stroma. In addition, we revealed a role
for muscle-specific miR-133b as a soluble factor secreted by activated fibroblasts to
support paracrine activation of non-activated fibroblasts or promote tumor progression.
Overall, we provided insights into the molecular mechanisms driving fibroblast
activation in PCa, thus contributing to identify novel hits for the development of therapeutic
strategies targeting the crucial interplay between tumor cells and their microenvironment.

within the extra-cellular matrix (ECM). In normal epithelia,
fibroblasts are responsible for tissue architecture, function
and homeostasis by maintaining epithelial-mesenchymal cell
interactions [2]. In the cancer context, in contrast, fibroblasts
may favor the development of age-related proliferative
disorders by altering the tissue microenvironment, enhancing
several extrinsic tumor-promoting processes and becoming
the so-called cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) [3].

INTRODUCTION
Tumor microenvironment is a dynamic and
heterogeneous system of untransformed cells, growth factors,
cytokines and pro-angiogenic molecules that coevolves with
cancer progression [1]. The most representative nonmalignant
stromal cells in the cancer microenvironment are fibroblasts,
mesenchymal cells of the connective tissue that are embedded
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31441

Oncotarget

Little is known about the molecular mechanisms that
lead to activation of CAFs from tissue-resident fibroblasts,
circulating marrow-derived fibroblast progenitors or
mesenchymal stem cells [2]. Phenotypically, CAFs resemble
myofibroblasts, as they are characterized by the expression
of α–smooth muscle actin (α-SMA), contractile stress fibers,
up-regulated synthesis of ECM and ECM remodeling
proteases, resulting in deposition of a reactive stroma.
For this reason TGFβ, which is known to be involved in
myofibroblast differentiation during wound repair [4], has
been long considered the most prominent cancer cell-derived
factor able to transform resident fibroblasts into CAFs.
A reactive stroma exhibiting ECM alterations typical
of wound healing has been observed in prostate cancer (PCa)
and even in precancerous lesions (e.g. PIN), suggesting a role
for TGFβ [5]. Accordingly, in vitro studies have shown that
tumor-derived TGFβ is able to induce activation of human
prostate stroma through heavy deregulation of key signalling
pathways crucially involved in maintaining tumor-promoting
features, including FGF2, CTGF, SDF1, WNT3A and IGF
axes [6, 7]. However, mounting evidence demonstrates that
CAFs may be a heterogeneous cell population within a single
tumor or adopt different phenotypes depending on the tumor
type [8]. For example, Planche [9] showed that invasive
breast and prostate reactive stromas display incomplete
overlap of global gene expression profiles. Moreover,
they found a correlation between patient clinical outcome
and breast or prostate deregulated stromal genes, but not
a common survival predictive gene signature of activated
stroma for both tumor types [9].
Different CAF transcriptomic phenotypes may be
reflective of activation by different tumor-derived stimuli.
In this regard, we have recently showed, in the PCa setting,
that tumor-derived interleukin-6 (IL6), via the secretion of
soluble factors including metalloproteases, may itself activate
normal fibroblasts and subsequently (i) induce epithelialmesenchymal transition (EMT) in PCa cells, thus increasing
their invasive capability, (ii) favor the expression of stemness
markers, and (iii) support PCa growth and metastasis in vivo,
as also observed for patient-derived CAFs [10]. Altogether,
such preliminary evidence would suggest a role for IL6 in
activating human prostate fibroblasts (HPFs) to CAFs.
In the present study, patient-derived CAFs and
HPFs activated in vitro with either TGFβ or IL6 were
comparatively analyzed for gene and microRNA (miRNA)
expression profiles, with the aim to define transcriptional
pathways responsible for fibroblast activation and establish
whether different subpopulations of CAFs may exist in PCa.

features, gene expression profiles were comparatively
evaluated in fibroblasts derived either from the tumor
(Cancer Associated Fibroblasts, CAFs) or from the adjacent
non-neoplastic areas (Human Prostate Fibroblasts, HPFs)
of three radical prostatectomies (Gleason score 4+5, pT3a,
N0). HPFs activated in vitro with TGFβ or IL6 have been
included in the analysis to understand whether either
signals may be able to induce part of the transcriptomic
changes occurring in patient-derived CAFs. Unsupervised
hierarchical clustering of the specimens revealed that
TGFβ-stimulated HPFs were characterized by a markedly
different gene expression profile compared to the other
fibroblast types (Figure 1). On the contrary, IL6-stimulated
HPFs showed transcriptional profiles highly similar to
CAFs, driving a “per patient” clustering (Figure 1).
To obtain further information about the molecular
events occurring in activated fibroblasts, each type of
activated fibroblasts was compared to HPFs using a gene
set enrichment analysis (GSEA). Initially, we attempted
to characterize the transcriptomic phenotype of patientderived CAFs (Figure 2A). We found positive enrichment
of terms related to the actin cytoskeleton remodeling and
muscle contractility, thus supporting the well-known
similarity between CAFs and myofibroblasts. Intersection
of leading edge genes from the enriched gene sets of
the cytoskeleton-muscle contraction network revealed
major up-regulation of myosin light chain subunits
and regulatory proteins, as well as regulators of actin
cytoskeleton assembly (Supplementary Table S1). In
addition, and in trend with our previous observations
[11], CAFs also exhibited enrichment of genes involved
in carbohydrate metabolism (Figure 2A). Interestingly,
among positively enriched gene sets there were also
the “voltage gated cation channel activity” gene set
(Supplementary Figure S1), containing genes that code for
calcium and potassium channels probably involved in the
acquisition of a contractile phenotype, and the “interferonalpha-beta signalling” gene set, which contains genes that
are likely modulated upon cytokine stimulation (including
IL6, i.e. Interferon-β) in vivo (Figure 2A).
Among down-regulated genes, enrichment was
found for terms related to growth hormone/FGF signaling
and, surprisingly, TGFβ signaling (including genes coding
for SMAD and BMP proteins) (Figure 2A, Supplementary
Figure S1). In addition, a “pregnancy–related” gene
set was found, mainly consisting of PSG (pregnancy
specific beta-1-glycoprotein) glycoproteins, the role of
which in cancer stroma is still to be explored (Figure 2A,
Supplementary Figure S1).
GSEA analysis was then extended to in vitro
activated fibroblasts for comparative purposes. The
positively and negatively enriched terms (P-value < 0.05)
in at least two comparisons are shown in (Figure 2B). Only
few gene sets were commonly enriched in all comparisons:
glycolysis/gluconeogenesis and cardiomyopathy–the latter
including genes involved in muscle contraction–among
positively enriched gene sets, and growth hormone/

RESULTS
Comparative gene expression profiling reveals major
transcriptome similarities between IL6-activated
fibroblasts and patient-derived prostate CAFs
To analyze the transcriptomic changes associated with
fibroblast activation and acquisition of tumor-promoting
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31442

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Unsupervised analysis of prostate fibroblast gene expression profiles. Gene expression profiles of CAFs, adjacent
normal fibroblasts (HPF) and either TGFβ- or IL6-activated fibroblasts were subjected to hierarchical clustering using Euclidean distance
and average linkage. Resulting dendrogram was reported and patient ID was color-coded according to the legend.

FGF signaling among negatively enriched terms (Figure
2B, Supplementary Figure S2). In contrast, the gene set
“interferon-alpha-beta signalling” was coherently enriched
in genes up-regulated in either CAFs or IL6-activated
fibroblasts whereas showed an opposite trend in TGFβHPFs (Figure 3). Also terms related to extracellular region
part showed differential enrichment in CAFs or IL6-HPFs
compared to TGFβ-HPFs (Figure 3), corroborating the
hypothesis that, despite phenotypic similarities, gene
expression of myofibroblasts diverges from that of patientderived CAFs. Major overlap was indeed observed in gene
sets enriched in IL6-stimulated HPFs and CAFs compared
with HPFs, including pathways related to contractile
fibers, muscle contraction, voltage gated channels
(positive enrichment), reproductive process and pregnancy
(negative enrichment) (Figure 2B).
Interesting observations emerged by looking at
single gene differential expression as well. For example,
all activated fibroblasts showed up-modulation of ACTA2
(i.e., α-SMA), which is consistent with their activated state
(Supplementary Table S2). Accordingly, IL6-stimulated
HPFs exhibited a more elongated cell morphology when
compared to HPFs and were characterized by increased
expression of α-SMA (green), which was organized
into contractile fibers (Figure 4A), similarly to TGFβHPFs. Enhanced staining for collagen 1A1 (Figure
4A) and increased fibroblast activation protein (FAP)
levels (Figure 4B) were also observed, as assessed by
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

immunofluorescence and immunoblotting, respectively. It
is worth mentioning, however, that the most evident upregulation of α-SMA was observed upon TGFβ stimulation
(Figure 4B). TGFβ-stimulated fibroblasts were actually
characterized by an enlarged, flatted morphology with
dense contractile fibers, whereas IL6-HPFs maintained
the fibroblast characteristic fusiform shape with extended
cellular processes (Figure 4A). IL6-activated fibroblasts
also showed increased levels of p16 and p21 cell cycle
inhibitors, which may account for a senescent-like
phenotype (Figure 4B). Consistent with this, increased
trimethylation of H3 histone on lysine 9 (3meH3K9)
and number of γ-H2AX foci (Figure 4C) were detected
in HPFs upon IL6 stimulation, confirming our previous
evidence showing that activated fibroblasts share features
of senescent fibroblasts and viceversa [12].
Differential analysis also highlighted that whilst
TGFβ-HPFs were characterized by higher TGFβ1/2
expression levels than normal fibroblasts, CAFs and
IL6-stimulated HPFs shared increased expression of the
alternative ligand TGFβ3 (Supplementary Table S2).
Notably, TGFB3 mRNA was markedly down-regulated in
TGFβ-HPFs, thus suggesting a differential involvement of
TGFβ family members and downstream signalling in the
different types of activated fibroblasts. Involvement of
TGFβ3 pathway in prostatic CAFs has been already reported
by van der Heul-Nieuwenhuijsen [13], who also showed
opposite regulatory effects of TGFB3 compared to FOXF2
31443

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Gene set enrichment analysis. A. Graphical representation of positively (red) or negatively (blue) enriched gene sets in

CAFs (n = 3) compared with HPFs (n = 3). Node size is proportional to the number of genes included in the gene set, whereas link thickness
is proportional to the number of common genes. B. Heatmap summarizing significantly enriched gene sets in at least two of the evaluated
comparisons (CAF vs HPF, IL6-HPF vs HPF, TGFβ-HPF vs HPF, n = 3 for each group).

transcription factor [13]. Curiously, PSG genes, found to
be down-regulated only in CAFs and IL6-stimulated HPFs
(Supplementary Table S2), are regulated by FOXF2 [13].
Up-modulation of distinct sets of metalloproteases was also
observed in IL6- vs TGFβ-stimulated fibroblasts, namely
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

MMP11 in the former and MMP1-2-10-14-23A in the latter
(Supplementary Table S2).
As next step, gene expression profiles emerging
from our analyses have been challenged on publicly
available gene expression profiles of prostate
31444

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Selected gene set enrichment plots. Example of gene sets having divergent enrichment between CAF/IL6-HPFs and

TGFβ-HPFs (vs HPF). The analysis was performed using GSEA that calculate an Enrichment Score (ES) by walking down the list of genes
ranked according with the t-statistics value of the reported comparison, increasing a running-sum statistic when a gene is in the gene set and
decreasing it when it is not (green line). A positive ES indicates gene set enrichment at the top of the ranked list (red part of the horizontal
bar); a negative ES indicates gene set enrichment at the bottom of the ranked list (blue part of the horizontal bar). The middle portion of
the plot shows where the members of the gene set appear in the ranked list of genes. The bottom portion of the plot shows the value of the
ranking metric as you move down the list of ranked genes.

Comparative miRNA expression profiling
identifies miRNAs involved in fibroblast
activation induced by different stimuli

microdissected stroma [9] or CAFs [14]. Results showed
that, in general, gene expression of tumor stroma was
positively correlated with all signatures of activated
fibroblasts (CAF, IL6 or TGFβ) (Figure 5). Specifically,
though some tumor stroma samples were characterized
by a clear TGFβ signature, others rather showed an IL6
profile (Figure 5), thus validating our findings concerning
a possible role of IL6 in activating prostate fibroblasts
in vivo. These findings may suggest the possible coexistence of TGFβ- and IL6-activated fibroblasts within
prostate tumor stroma; further investigation will be
carried out to understand when and where activation
of resident fibroblasts by cancer cells is preferentially
driven by TGFβ or IL6. Surprisingly, fibroblasts obtained
from a benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) specimen in
Zhao dataset (marked with an asterisk in Figure 5) were
characterized by IL6 and CAF signatures, suggesting that
gene expression characteristic of an activated stroma may
be found even in lesions that still appear as non-malignant
from a histological point of view.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

MiRNA expression profiling was carried out on
the same samples used for gene expression analyses.
After quality control, CAF_1 sample, classified as outlier
because highly divergent from all the other samples in an
unsupervised analysis, was removed and the remaining
samples were used to perform a paired class comparison
between activated and normal HPFs, as previously
described for gene expression analyses. The different
sample size would have made a direct comparison between
the number of differentially expressed miRNAs biased.
As an alternative, the differentially expressed miRNAs
(P-value < 0.05) in either IL-6 or TGFβ-stimulated
fibroblasts vs HPFs were evaluated as a “miRNA set”
on the miRNA list ranked according to t-statistic values
obtained by comparing CAFs vs HPFs. Again we found
that both up- and down-regulated miRNAs in IL631445

Oncotarget

Figure 4: IL6-induced phenoconversion of normal prostate fibroblasts into activated fibroblasts. A. Representative

immunofluorescence images of primary normal prostate fibroblasts (HPFs) treated with IL6 or TGFβ, the latter used as positive control for
myofibroblast-like differentiation (Magnification: 40×). α-SMA and Collagen1A1 were stained in green and red respectively. IL6-activated
fibroblasts showed increased staining for both markers, suggesting an activated phenotype, though maintaining a characteristic spindle-like
shape with extended cellular processes compared to TGFβ-HPFs. B. Representative immunoblotting for activation and senescence markers.
Fibroblast activation of both IL6- and TGFβ-stimulated HPFs was confirmed by increased α-SMA and FAP protein amounts. IL6-HPFs also
showed enhanced expression of senescence-related p21 and p16 proteins. C. Representative images of 3meH3K9 (magnification: 40×) and
γH2AX (magnification: 60×) staining confirmed senescent-like phenotype of IL6-activated fibroblasts.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31446

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Correlation between activated fibroblast signatures and prostate stroma expression profiles. Three distinct centroids

were derived from differentially expressed genes between CAF vs HPF, IL6-HPF vs HPF or TGFβ-HPF vs HPF (n = 3 for each group), and
correlated with expression profiles from microdissected tumor/normal stroma (Planche dataset, upper panel) or tumor/normal fibroblasts (Zhao
dataset, lower panel). Results were summarized as a heatmap, positive correlations are in red and negative correlations in blue.

HPFs showed the same trend in CAFs (Figure 6A, 6B).
Conversely, miRNAs up-regulated in TGFβ-HPFs were
not significantly enriched (FDR = 0.123) in CAFs (Figure
6C), whereas miRNAs repressed in TGFβ–HPFs were also
down-regulated in CAFs (Figure 6D). Notably, miRNAs
down-regulated in either IL6- or TGFβ-HPFs and
commonly repressed in CAFs were specific for each of
the two stimuli. For example, CAFs and IL6-HPFs shared
the down-modulation of miR-762 (Figure 6B), which is
predicted to target α-SMA in its 3′UTR (predictions made
by RNA22 tool, [15]). MiRNAs commonly repressed
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

in CAFs and TGFβ-HPFs were instead miR-26a, miR221/222, miR-490-5p/3p and others (Figure 6D).
MiRNAs up-regulated in all activated fibroblasts
were miR-210, miR-143 and miR-590-5p (Figure 6A,
6C), a result that was validated by qRT-PCR (Figure 6E).
In this regard, we already showed that miR-210 is indeed
able to activate HPFs, when ectopically overexpressed
[12]. Analysis of genes correlated with each of these
miRNAs revealed major commonalities between miR-210
and miR-590-5p, thus suggesting that these two miRNAs
may govern the same pathways, such as the regulation
31447

Oncotarget

Figure 6: miRNA expression analysis. A–D. Significantly up- (A) and down-regulated (B) miRNAs in IL6-HPFs (n = 3) or up-

(C) and down-regulated (D) in TGFβ-HPFs (n = 3) compared with HPFs (n = 3) were used as miRNA sets tested for enrichment in the
comparison between CAF and HPF miRNA expression profiles. Coherent or divergent expression of miRNAs within miRNA sets with
respect to CAF/HPF trend is reported. MiRNAs coherently modulated in all types of activated fibroblasts are highlighted in red. In green
are miRNAs belonging to miR-17~92 cluster, in bold muscle-specific miRNAs, both groups being coherently modulated in IL6-activated
fibroblasts and patient-derived CAFs. E. qRT-PCR validation of miRNAs found to be up-regulated in patient-derived CAFs, IL6-HPFs and
TGFβ-HPFs. Date were reported as -∆∆Ct with respect to serum-starved HPFs of three independent experiments. **P < 0.01.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31448

Oncotarget

of translation (as evidenced by various gene sets among
the positively correlated genes) or insulin receptor
recycling (among negatively correlated genes) (Figure
7A). Curiously, a negative correlation was found with the
term “female pregnancy”, which includes genes that we
actually observed to be down-regulated in CAFs. Genes
correlated with miR-143 were instead mostly related to
ECM organization (positive correlation) or oxidative
phosphorylation (negative correlation), both aspects being
consistent with the phenotype of all activated fibroblasts
(Figure 7A).
IL6-activated fibroblasts additionally shared with
patient-derived CAFs up-regulation of miR-17~92 family
members, as well as that of muscle- and heart-specific
miR-1 and miR-133b (Figure 6A). When tested by qRTPCR, a marked up-regulation of miR-1 and miR-133b
was actually found in IL6-HPFs and CAFs, but even
to a lesser extent, up-modulation of the miRNAs was
also detected in TGFβ-HPFs (Figure 6E). These two
miRNAs are well known as essential rulers of muscle cell
function and cardiomyocyte differentiation [16], which is
consistent with the enrichment of terms related to muscle
contractility and heart morphogenesis found in CAFs
(Figure 2A).

fraction preliminarily suggested that miR-133b may be
only in part released through exosomes (Figure 8B).
To investigate miR-133b ability to induce fibroblast
activation, primary normal fibroblasts were directly
transfected with miR-133b. Overexpression of the
miRNA (as assessed by qRT-PCR, Figure 8C, left bar)
resulted in marked morphological changes, with increase
in the number of elongated cells reminiscent of IL6stimulated fibroblasts (Figure 8D). Accordingly, qRTPCR revealed up-modulation of a number of fibroblast
activation markers, such as ACTA2, FAP, S100A4 and
COL4A2 (Figure 8E). In addition, immunofluorescence
analysis confirmed changes in morphology together
with increased staining for α-SMA and FAP (Figure 8D).
Overexpression of miR-133b resulted in an enhanced
secretion of the miRNA, as assessed by qRT-PCR on
the media of transfected cells (Figure 8C, middle bar),
thus confirming miR-133b as one of the mediators of the
secretory phenotype of activated fibroblasts. Strikingly,
endogenous miR-133b expression levels also increased
in PC3 cells stimulated with the conditioned medium of
miR-133b-activated fibroblasts (Figure 8C, right bar).
Even to a lesser extent, miR-133b levels also increased
in PC3 cells stimulated with media from IL6- or TGFβactivated fibroblasts, or CAFs (Figure 8F). As the levels
of miR-133b primary transcript were even down-regulated
in stimulated PC3 cells (Figure 8F), it is conceivable that
tumor cells may uptake mature miR-133b directly from
the medium of activated fibroblasts and, as a consequence,
repress the endogenous transcription of the miRNA.
A different scenario emerged for miR-210, upregulated in all types of activated fibroblasts (Figure 6A,
6C) and able per se to activate HPFs when ectopically
overexpressed [12]. In fact, the expression levels of
both the mature and the primary transcript of miR-210
increased in PC3 cells upon stimulation with activated
fibroblasts, thus suggesting a direct transcriptional
activation rather than a transfer from the fibroblast media,
as instead observed for miR-133b (Figure 8F). In this
regard, we have previously shown that CAFs elicit in
PCa cells a pro-oxidant response, which culminates in
the overexpression of hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF1), which in turn regulates transcription of its targets,
including miR-210 [10, 17, 18].
To confirm the capability of PC3 cells to directly
internalize miRNAs present in fibroblast media (i.e.
miR-133b), we performed a couple of experiments
where a spike-in miRNA was added to the medium prior
stimulation of PC3 cells. In the first setting, a Cy3-labeled
miRNA mimic was used and miRNA internalization was
assessed by fuorescence microscopy. In the latter, we
used a non human miRNA (ath-miR-159a), and miRNA
uptake by tumor cells was evaluated by qRT-PCR for athmiR-159a. In both settings, after a 24 h-stimulation, PC3
cells were washed thrice to remove any residual miRNA
remaining on cell surface. Results showed that PC3 cells

Prototypic IL6-related miR-133b is released by
CAFs and induces per se fibroblast activation
MiR-133b was chosen as a prototype of miRNAs
up-regulated in IL6-stimulated fibroblasts, as it was also
the top ranking in CAF vs HPF comparison (Figure 6A).
Analysis of genes correlated with miR-133b revealed
negative correlation with mitochondrion-related genes,
including those involved in oxidative phosphorylation
and respiratory chain (Figure 7B), with this finding being
in trend with the glycolytic metabolism of CAFs. Among
positively correlated genes, enrichment for terms related
to cytokines and interferon signalling was found (Figure
7B). This may be related both to miR-133b up-regulation
found in CAFs as a consequence of IL6 (and possibly
other cytokines) stimulation, as well as to a role for the
miRNA in regulating the secretion of soluble factors. In
this regard, it was striking to find that the levels of miR133b were also increased in the conditioned media of
primary normal fibroblasts activated in vitro with IL6 or
TGFβ as well as those of patient-derived CAFs compared
to the media obtained from non-activated HPFs, with a
major release found upon IL6 stimulation (Figure 8A).
Possibly, miR-133b may itself represent a soluble factor
secreted by activated fibroblasts to support paracrine
activation of non-activated fibroblasts or promote tumor
progression. When exosomes were isolated from the
fibroblast media, again we found increased abundance
of miR-133b in exosomes from CAFs compared to those
from HPFs (Figure 8B). However, comparison of miR133b threshold cycles between whole media and exosomal
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31449

Oncotarget

Figure 7: Integration of gene and miRNA expression data. A. Gene expression data were correlated with expression levels of

miR-590-5p, miR-210 or miR-143 respectively. Genes were then ranked according with the correlation value and subjected to gene set
enrichment analysis. Enriched gene sets are summarized as a heatmap. Red indicates positive enrichment and blue negative enrichment;
darker colors indicate higher statistical significance according to the legend. B. The same analysis in (A) was repeated for miR-133b and
here represented as a graph. Node size is proportional to the number of genes included in the gene set, whereas link thickness is proportional
to the number of common genes. Positive enrichment is in red and negative enrichment in blue.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31450

Oncotarget

can readily internalize the miRNA present in the medium,
as evidenced by fuorescent signal within the cytoplasm
of cells stimulated with labeled miRNA (Figure 9A). In
addition, PCR signal for non human ath-miR-159a became
detectable in cells grown in the presence of synthetic athmiR-159a (Figure 9B), suggesting direct uptake from the

medium. To ultimately confirm that miR-133b expression
levels in PC3 cells stimulated by CAFs reflect the amount
of miR-133b present in the fibroblast media, we attempted
to modulate miR-133b expression in such media and
then analyzed miRNA levels in stimulated tumor cells.
To this purpose, we silenced DROSHA, one of the major

Figure 8: miR-133b induces fibroblast activation and acts as soluble factor for paracrine stimulation of fibroblast and
tumor cells. A. miR-133b expression levels were evaluated in conditioned medium (CM) from CAFs, IL6- or TGFβ-activated fibroblasts

by qRT-PCR. miR-133b release in CM increased upon stimulation of HPFs with IL6 and, to a lesser extent, with TGFβ. Enhanced secretion
of miR-133b was also found in CAFs. Data were analyzed using spike-in non-human synthetic miRNA as normalization control and
were reported as −∆∆Ct with respect to CM from serum-starved HPFs of three independent experiments. B. miR-133b expression levels
were evaluated in CM and extracellular exosomes from CAFs and HPFs by qRT-PCR. CAFs showed enhanced release of both total and
exosome-associated miR-133b compared to HPFs. However, starting from equal RNA amounts, Cts were higher in exosomes (hence miR133b expression lower) with respect to total media, suggesting that miR-133b may be secreted in forms other than exosomes. C. qRT-PCR
measurement of endogenous miR-133b levels in HPFs transfected with miR-133b mimics (vs cells transfected with miR-Neg), of miR-133b
in the media of HPFs transfected with miR-133b mimics (vs media form cells transfected with miR-Neg), and of endogenous miR-133b in
PC3 cells stimulated with CM from miR-133b-transfected cells (vs cells stimulated with CM from miR-Neg-transfected HPFs). Data were
reported as –∆∆Ct respect to specific control of three independent experiments. D. Representative bright field and immunofluorescence
(α-SMA and FAP staining) images of HPFs transfected with miR-133b mimics or miR-Neg (Magnification: 10×). Ectopic expression of
miR-133b induced morphological changes and increase of activation markers reminiscent to those observed in IL6-activated fibroblasts.
E. qRT-PCR assessment of ACTA2, FAP, S100A4 and COL4A2 to confirm fibroblast activation upon miR-133b overexpression in HPFs.
qRT-PCR data were reported as −∆∆Ct respect to miR-Neg-transfected HPFs of three independent experiments. (Continued)
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31451

Oncotarget

Figure 8: (Continued) miR-133b induces fibroblast activation and acts as soluble factor for paracrine stimulation of
fibroblast and tumor cells. F. pri-miR-133b, miR-133b, pri-miR-210 and miR-210 expression levels were assessed in PC3 cells upon
stimulation with CM from HPF-IL6, HPF-TGFβ or from CAFs by qRT-PCR. Results showed direct uptake of miR-133b in PC3 cells from
fibroblast media, as shown by paradoxical down-regulation of endogenous pri-miR-133. In contrast, fibroblast stimulation increased miR210 expression in PC3 cells by enhancing transcription of pri-miR-210, suggesting a different mechanism. Data were reported as −∆∆Ct
with respect to PC3 cells stimulated with CM from HPFs. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001; ****P < 0.0001.

components of miRNA processing machinery, in CAFs
to reduce miRNA production. We tested two different
siRNA molecules and found that siDROSHA-1 was
more efficient in repressing DROSHA mRNA expression
(Supplementary Figure S3). Accordingly, miR-133b
endogenous levels decreased in CAFs upon DROSHA
silencing by siDROSHA-1 (Figure 9C), lowering to levels
found in HPFs (Figure 9C). Coherently, miR-133b levels
decreased in the media from siDROSHA-1-transfected
CAFs (Figure 9D), which were then used to stimulate PC3
cells. Again, we found that endogenous miR-133b levels
in PC3 cells increased upon stimulation with CM from
siCTR-transfected CAFs compared to CM from HPFs
(Figure 9E). However, DROSHA silencing and consequent
reduced secretion of miR-133b by siDROSHA-1transfected CAFs resulted in less efficient uptake of miR133b by PC3 cells (Figure 9E).
Overall these experiments showed that PC3 cells
directly internalize miR-133b from fibroblast media and
that endogenous miRNA levels in tumor cells depend on
the amount of miR-133b released by fibroblasts.

step of tumor development, growth and metastasis, mainly
through the release of soluble growth factors [19]. In the
context of PCa, we have previously shown that CAFs,
through secretion of MMPs, elicit EMT and achievement of
stem cell traits in cancer cells, as well as enhancement of
tumor growth and development of spontaneous metastases
[10]. We also reported that CAFs induce a Rac1b/
cycloxygenase-2-mediated release of reactive oxygen
species in carcinoma cells, which activates nuclear factorκB and HIF-1 [17], and ultimately results in repression of
miR-205 transcription. Inhibition of miR-205 function
relieves a brake on its target genes, including E-cadherin
transcriptional repressors, thus leading to establishment of
EMT and enhancement of metastasis [18]. The other way
around, tumor cells per se contribute to the formation of a
reactive stroma. In this regard, we showed that PCa cells can
activate normal fibroblasts to a phenotype reminiscent to
that of patient-derived CAFs through the secretion of soluble
factors, including IL6. In fact, stimulation of HPFs with
the medium of castration-resistant PCa cells was sufficient
to increase α-SMA and FAP expression and to promote the
acquisition of tumor-promoting properties, a phenotype
abrogated by the administration of an anti-IL6 antibody [10].
In the present study, we comparatively analyzed
gene expression profiles of CAFs and HPFs obtained from
radical prostatectomies to contribute to the understanding
of the biology and signaling mechanisms involved in
reactive stroma formation. Previous studies suggest
that, compared to normal fibroblasts, CAFs found in
tumors are characterized by enhanced collagen synthesis,
secretion of growth factors and ECM modulators, and
the activation of unique expression programs [20, 21].
Consistently, we found that CAFs are phenotypically

DISCUSSION
It is widely accepted that solid tumors are
heterogeneous and complex systems consisting of neoplastic
cells and untransformed stroma components. Such reactivestroma is a mixture of immune cells, endothelial cells
and CAFs exhibiting activated phenotypes. CAFs are the
predominant cell population in PCa microenvironment and
are characterized by a phenotype reminiscent to that of
fibroblasts involved in wound repair events [5]. Reciprocal
interaction between cancer cells and CAFs influences each
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31452

Oncotarget

Figure 9: PC3 cells directly internalize miR-133b from fibroblast media. A. Merged bright field and fluorescence images

of PC3 cells grown in a medium supplied with Cy3-labeled spike-in miRNA (Cy3™ Dye-Labeled Pre-miR Negative Control #1, Life
Technologies) or miR-Neg as a control (Magnification: 20×, insert 40×). B. qRT-PCR showing ath-miR-159a expression levels in PC3 cells
were grown in a medium supplied with ath-miR-159a spike-in miRNA or miR-Neg as a control. Data are presented as ∆Ct compared to
RNU48. Notably, signal for ath-miR-159a in miR-Neg sample was undetermined and Ct set to 40. C. Expression levels of endogenous miR133b in CAFs transfected with siCTR or siDROSHA-1. Data are presented as relative quantity vs HPFs. D. Expression levels of miR-133b
in the media from CAFs transfected with siCTR or siDROSHA-1. Data are presented as relative quantity vs CM from HPFs. E. Expression
levels of miR-133b in PC3 cells stimulated with the media from CAFs transfected with siCTR or siDROSHA-1. Data are presented as
relative quantity vs PC3 cells stimulated with CM from HPFs. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001; ****P < 0.0001.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31453

Oncotarget

similar to myofibroblasts, with elevated expression
levels of α-SMA and positive enrichment of genes that
regulate actin cytoskeleton remodeling and muscle
contractility. Moreover, activated fibroblasts showed
positive enrichment for gene sets related to glycolysis/
gluconeogenesis pathway, in accord to our previous
evidence that CAFs undergo a metabolic reprogramming
from a respiratory to a glycolytic metabolism to support
cancer progression [11]. CAFs also exhibited positive
enrichment of gene sets related to “voltage gated cation
channel activity”, as already observed in microdissected
reactive stroma of grade 3 PCa [22]. Among downregulated gene sets, a “pregnancy-related” signature,
mainly composed of PGS glycoproteins, was also
found. However, the role of either signaling pathway in
supporting the activation or function of PCa stroma is still
to be explored.
Very scanty information is currently available on
which is the cell population committed to generate CAFs.
Lineage-tracing experiments showed that CAFs might
evolve from tissue-resident mesenchymal stem cells or, by
endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition, from endothelial
cells, from vimentin-positive periacinar cells or from
vessel-associated pericytes [21, 23, 7]. In addition to
these local sources, circulating bone marrow-derived cells
known as fibrocytes can be recruited and differentiated
into myofibroblasts to support cancer progression. A
further possible origin of CAFs is represented by smooth
muscle cells. Normal prostate stroma is enriched of this
particular cell population, which, during PCa progression,
is actually replaced by CAFs [21, 23]. Moreover, several
pieces of evidence suggest that CAFs might also derive
from fibroblasts resident in the tissue affected by tumor,
through direct activation by cancer-derived stimuli [7, 24].
Several boosts, such as cytokines, growth factors,
TGFβ and HGF have been shown to regulate reactive
stroma formation, by affecting directly or indirectly
stroma cells [25]. Among these, TGFβ is the most
important and well-studied candidate in maintaining the
features of tumor-associated stroma, due to its pivotal
role in wound repair and fibroproliferative diseases [4].
In vitro studies reported that TGFβ is able to induce
normal prostate fibroblasts to acquire a myofibroblast-like
reactive phenotype with overexpression of α-SMA protein,
components of ECM and enhanced synthesis of collagen
type 1– all features well documented in CAFs derived
from patients [26, 27]. Paradoxically, however, ablation
of TGFβ receptor 2 (TGFBR2) in prostatic fibroblasts
resulted in spontaneous neoplasia, illustrating a tumorsuppressive function of TGFβ signaling in early tumor
development [28]. It can be hypothesized that, in the PCa
context, TGFβ may be more relevant for maintaining
CAF phenotype rather that providing stroma with
tumor-initiating features. Accordingly, in vivo evidence
suggests that TGFβ signaling activation in stroma cells
has little impact on tumor initiation phase but is critical
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

for all subsequent steps of tumor progression, where
maintenance of wound healing-like niche may support
tumor aggressiveness [29]. In general, accumulating
evidence demonstrates that CAFs may be a heterogeneous
cell population within a single tumor or adopt different
phenotypes depending on the tumor type, suggesting both
inter and intra-tumor stromal heterogeneity [8].
To better understand the signaling mechanisms
involved in the formation of PCa-associated stroma and
which tumor derived-stimuli are able to induce the reactive
phenotype seen in vivo, we extended gene expression
analysis on fibroblasts activated in vitro with TGFβ or IL6.
We found that only few gene sets were coherently enriched
in both types of activated fibroblasts and superimposable
on those found in patient-derived CAFs. In contrast, the
“interferon-alpha and beta signaling” and genes related to
ECM regulation were positively enriched in both CAFs
and IL6-activated fibroblasts but showed an opposite trend
in TGFβ-HPFs. Globally, in our hands, a major overlap
was found between transcriptomes of IL6-activated HPFs
and CAFs compared to TGFβ-HPFs, though both in vitro
activated fibroblasts showed phenotypic similarities
with CAFs. The comparison with publicly available
gene expression profiles revealed that, in general, all the
three signatures of activated fibroblasts from our study
positively correlated with those of PCa microdissected
stroma or CAFs, and negatively correlated with normal
counterparts. This finding supports the robustness of
our data and again confirms the existence of IL6-driven
activation patterns in PCa reactive stroma. However,
these data also account for the existence of more classical
TGFβ-activated myofibroblasts in PCa. It is likely that
depending on tumor stage, patient age, cancer etiology
(e.g. history of inflammatory diseases, such as prostatitis)
or even tumor genetic background, different stimuli
may be predominant in inducing activation of a reactive
stroma. In this regard, it is worth mentioning that, for
example, IL6-activated fibroblasts showed evidence of a
senescent-like phenotype (induction of p16, p21, γ-H2AX
foci and 3meH3K9), which may account for an agerelated activation process. Banerjee [30] already reported
that tumor-derived IL6 is able to mediate an epigenetic
silencing of DNA damage repair and reactive oxygenmetabolism genes in prostate fibroblasts, ultimately
resulting in DNA-damage associated secretory phenotype,
characterized by H3 lysine 9 trimethylation and TGFBR2
down-regulation. Notably, reduced TGFBR2 expression
levels were also found in our IL6-activated fibroblasts and
CAFs (not shown). In contrast, TGFβ-dependent activation
may be prevalent in conditions that mimic wound healing,
such as chronic inflammation.
Gene expression profiling studies of CAFs derived
from large cohorts of PCa patients covering all possible
sources of stromal heterogeneity are hence warranted
to understand the prevalence of IL6- rather than TGFβdriven CAFs in prostate reactive stroma. In addition, it
31454

Oncotarget

must be noted that, at present, molecular markers of
stroma subpopulations are still poorly defined. Activated
fibroblasts are usually identified by their characteristic
fusiform-shape, dense cytoskeletal fibres and increased
expression of various mesenchymal proteins, such as
vimentin, α-SMA and FSP1. However, other markers -not
expressed in all fibroblasts- still need to be characterized
to identify the multiple populations of fibroblasts and more
properly define the tumor-derived stimuli able to trigger
activation of specific reactive stroma subtypes.
MiRNA expression profiling confirmed the evidence
arisen from gene expression analyses, namely that
modulations in the miRnome mediated by IL6 stimulation
are the same found in patient-derived CAFs compared
to their non-activated counterparts and that only minor
overlap exists between these two types of fibroblasts
and TGFβ-HPFs. Nevertheless, a small set of miRNAs,
including miR-210, miR-143 and miR-590-5p, was found
to be coherently up-modulated upon activation induced
by either stimulus, suggesting that fundamental processes
sustaining reactive stroma formation may be regulated
by such miRNAs. In this regard, we already showed that
miR-210 is indeed able to convert HPFs into CAF-like
cells, promote EMT in PCa cells, support angiogenesis
and recruit endothelial precursor cells and monocytes/
macrophages [12].
Among miRNAs more specifically (even not
exclusively) modulated in IL6-activated stroma was miR133b. The miRNA belongs to the cluster miR-206/133b,
which has been shown to be highly expressed, together
with miR-1/133a cluster, in the musculatures of flies,
mice and humans and has been largely characterized as
involved in regulating muscle cell function [16]. miR-133
is also the first most abundant miRNA in the heart, where
it has been shown to regulate genes involved in cardiac
contractility, hypertrophy and electric conductance [31].
When administered together with a combination of cardiac
transcription factors, miR-1 and miR-133 have been
shown to foster conversion of human adult fibroblasts into
cardiomyocytes [32].
Here we showed that ectopic overexpression of
miR-133b is able per se to promote fibroblast activation
by inducing phenotypic changes similar to those found
in prostate CAFs in vivo. An intriguing scenario is hence
emerging concerning a possible similarity between
prostate CAFs and myocardiocytes, both cell types
characterized by enhanced contractility. If properly
validated by additional experimental data, this finding may
open new opportunities for the translation of drugs already
used in the cardiovascular field into anticancer regimens,
with the ultimate goal of interrupting the tumor-supportive
spur provided by reactive stroma. Potentially, to interfere
with myocardiocyte-like phenotype of prostate CAFs,
we may envision using antiarrhythmic drugs, which all
function by reducing myocardiocyte contractility, though
through different mechanisms. Actually, antiarrhythmic
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

drugs have been classified into 4 classes (VaughanWilliams classification) based on their mechanism of
action. For translation into regimens aimed to impair with
the functions of tumor reactive stroma, class I (sodiumchannel blockers, such as procainamide, mexiletine or
flecainide), class III (potassium-channel blockers, such
as amiodarone) or class IV (calcium-channel blockers,
verapamil) drugs may be tested, based on our evidence
that sodium, potassium and calcium voltage-gated channel
are highly up-regulated in CAF vs HPFs (Supplementary
Figure S1). By mining the literature we found that some
of the aforementioned drugs have been used in anticancer
schedules to potentiate efficacy of chemotherapy, as is
the case of verapamil (a clinical trial described in [33]) or
amiodarone (in vitro studies [34]) which inhibit the activity
of the efflux pumps responsible of multidrug resistance, or
as analgesics (mexiletine, flecainide) [35]. Procainamide
has been also shown to act as nonnnucleoside inhibitor of
DNA methyltransferases in human cancer cells [36].
Our findings further showed that miR-133b is also
released into the media of activated fibroblasts and is
possibly taken up by PCa cells, where it may contribute to
establish a mesenchymal phenotype. This may represent
an additional mechanism by which CAFs induce EMT
in tumor cells, through the direct transfer of miRNAs
typically expressed in cells of the mesenchymal lineage.
Moreover, it is likely that released miR-133b may act as a
paracrine stimulus able to expand the reactive phenotype
to adjacent fibroblasts, thus contributing to extend the
stromal niche able to support cancer progression.
miR-133b has been consistently found as downregulated in prostate carcinomas compared to normal
tissues in different studies [37; reviewed also by Gandellini
(38)]. In our hands however, expression of the miRNA
seems to be prevalent in fibroblasts compared to epithelial
cells, even if tumor cells up-regulate the miRNA when
in contact with CAFs. As a consequence, it is possible
that most of miR-133b expression found in normal tissue
samples could come from cells of mesenchymal origin,
and that down-regulation in tumor specimens found by
different authors could mostly reflect a higher epithelial
(tumor) vs stromal cell ratio in the sample rather than a
direct down-modulation of the miRNA in tumor cells.
Actually, no proof has been provided on miR-133b
silencing in epithelial cells along tumorigenesis. In
addition, miR-133b down-regulation seems to be common
to different tumor types [39], a scenario reminding that of
miR-143/145 (notably our data suggest that also miR-143
is up-regulated in CAFs). Indeed, down-regulation of such
miRNA cluster has been repeatedly reported in different
epithelial tumor types (including PCa). However, based
on available data on the literature, a possible role for miR143/145 as cell-autonomous epithelial tumor suppressors is
still controversial [40]. Similarly, contrasting results have
been obtained regarding the oncogenic or oncosuppressive
role of miR-133b in PCa models [37, 41–43]. Such
31455

Oncotarget

discrepancies may rely on the fact that overexpression of
miR-133b in PCa cells generates artificial findings, as the
miRNA mainly acts as a master regulator of mesenchymal
features in cells of mesenchymal origin (e.g. fibroblasts)
or in tumor cells that undergo EMT.
Overall, we provided evidence on how an integrated
gene and miRNA profiling may supply interesting hints on
pathways relevant for fibroblast activation and maintenance
of a reactive stroma, with important implications for the
understanding of the mechanisms of cancer progression. In
addition, the study allowed us to generate useful working
hypotheses for the formulation of novel therapeutic agents
based on the targeting of tumor stroma.

One to 4 different probes can target each miRNA and
each probe is spotted 10 to 40 times on the array. The total
gene signal for each miRNA was obtained by summing the
probe signals derived with the Agilent Feature Extraction
software. Each probe was defined as detected if its value
is greater than 3 times its standard error, and each miRNA
was defined as detected if at least one of the probes was
detected. Data were log2 transformed and normalized using
the Robust Spline Normalization algorithm. Only human
(“has”) miRNAs detected in at least two samples were
selected for downstream analyses. Both gene and miRNA
expression data were deposited to the Gene Expression
Omnibus data repository (GSE68166) [47].

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Unsupervised and supervised analyses
Hierarchical clustering using Euclidean distance and
average linkage was applied for an unsupervised analysis of
the data. Class comparison analyses were performed using
a linear modeling approach and empirical Bayes methods
as implemented in the limma Bioconductor package [48].
Gene set enrichment analysis was performed using GSEA
v4.0 [49] on the gene list ranked according with the modified
t-statistics from the class comparison analysis. A gene set
collection including canonical pathways and signatures from
the literature (C2), as well as gene ontology terms (C5) from
the MSigDB database (http://www.broadinstitute.org/gsea/
msigdb) were tested for enrichment. The gene sets with P <
0.01 were considered significantly enriched and represented as
functional enrichment network using a Cytoscape plugin [50].

Microarray experiments and data processing
Microarray experiments were run by the Functional
Genomics Unit/Service from the Fondazione IRCCS
Istituto Nazionale Tumori, Milan, Italy. Extracted
RNA was processed for gene expression analysis using
the Illumina HumanHT-12 v4 chips (47,324 probes)
as previously described [44]; Briefly, 800 ng of total
RNA were reverse transcribed, labeled with biotin and
amplified overnight using the Illumina RNA TotalPrep
Amplification kit according to manufacturer’s protocol.
One μg of the biotinylated cRNA was mixed with the
Hyb E1 hybridization buffer and then hybridized at 58°C
overnight. Array chips were washed with manufacturer’s
E1BC solution, stained with 1 μg/mL Cy3-streptavidine
and scanned with the Illumina BeadArray Reader. Raw
data were generated using the Illumina BeadStudio 3.8
software and processed using the lumi package [45]
of Bioconductor. After quality control, data were log2
transformed and normalized using the Robust Spline
Normalization algorithm. Probes with a detection of P >
0.01 in all samples were filtered out and, for each gene, the
probe with the highest detection rate or higher interquartile
range was retained for downstream analyses.
For miRNA expression analysis, SurePrint G3
Human miRNA 8x60K microarrays from Agilent
Technologies (custom design based on miRBase 17.0)
were used as previously described [46]. Two μg of
RNA were labeled and processed according to the
manufacturer’s recommended protocol. Samples were
dephosphorylated with calf intestinal alkaline phosphatase,
followed by denaturation in the presence of dimethyl
sulfoxide. A dye, cyanine 3-pCp, was then coupled to
the dephosphorylated single-stranded RNA by T4 RNA
ligase. After hybridization for 20 h at 55°C, the arrays
were washed in Agilent GE Wash Buffers, following the
manufacturer’s instructions. All slides were immediately
scanned at 2 mm resolution using an Agilent DNA
microarray scanner. The resulting images were analyzed
using Agilent’s Feature Extraction software v10.7.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Centroid based signature evaluation in publicly
available datasets
Differentially expressed genes [p-val < 0.01 for CAF
or IL6-HPF vs HPF comparison; adj-p-val < 0.0001 for
TGFβ-HPF vs HPF (in order to have a similar number of
genes)] identified by class comparison analysis for each
of our comparisons were used to define three different
centroids representative of activated fibroblasts. The
expression level of genes included in each centroid
was calculated as the average expression in activated
fibroblasts (CAF, IL6 and TGFβ). The three centroids
were evaluated in two publicly available datasets of
prostate microdissected stroma (GSE26910, [9]) and CAFs
(GSE6250, [14]). Other potentially interesting datasets
were excluded due to unsuitable sample size or failure of
quality control. For both suitable datasets, the processed
data downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus data
repository [47] were used. Similarity between our centroids
and tumor-stroma/CAFs expression profile for the same
genes was evaluated and results plotted in a heatmap.

Experimental models
Human PCa cells (PC3) were purchased from
the European Collection of Cell Cultures (ECACC) and
31456

Oncotarget

maintained at 37°C/5% CO2 in DMEM medium supplemented
with 10% fetal bovine serum. Human prostate fibroblasts,
HPFs and CAFs, were isolated from healthy and intratumoral
regions, respectively, of the prostate of PCa-bearing patients
(Gleason score 4+5). Tissue samples were obtained aseptically
from patients undergoing radical prostatectomy, upon
informed consent in accord with the Ethics Committee of
Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori di Milano.
Tissues were digested overnight in DMEM supplemented with
5% fetal bovine serum and 1× Collagenase-Hyaluronidase
Solution (STEMCELLTM Technologies Inc.). Cell suspension
was centrifuged at 1,500 g for 5 minutes. The resulting
fibroblast-rich pellet was suspended and plated in DMEM
containing 10% fetal bovine serum and 4 mM L-Glutamine.
Expression of E-cadherin and cytokeratin was assessed to
exclude epithelial contamination of either HPFs or CAFs.
HPFs and CAFs were maintained in culture for 6 passages
after tissue isolation and then used for the analysis.

pmol of spike-in non-human synthetic miRNA (mirVana
miRNA mimic ath-miR-159a), providing an internal
reference for normalization of technical variations between
samples. Then, RNA was extracted using miRNeasy Kit,
according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

miRNA and gene expression analysis
Quantification of miR-1, miR-133b, miR-143,
miR-590-5p, miR-210, pri-miR-133b and pri-miR-210
expression levels was assessed by qRT-PCR using the
following TaqMan® microRNA expression assays (Life
Technologies): miR-1, 002222; miR-133b, 002447; miR143, 002249; miR-590–5p, 001984; miR-210, 000512;
primary miR-133b, Hs03303651_pri; primary miR-210,
Hs03302948_pri. mRNA expression was measured by qRTPCR using the following Taqman® gene expression assays:
ACTA2, Hs00426835_g1; DROSHA, Hs00203008_m1;
FAP, Hs00990806_m1; S100A4 Hs00243202_m1; COL4A2,
Hs00266237_m1. Amplifications were run on the 7900HT
Fast Real-Time PCR System. Data were analyzed by SDS
2.2.2 software (Life Technologies) and reported as relative
quantity with respect to a calibrator sample using the 2-∆∆Ct
method. RNU48 (PN4427975) and GAPDH (PN4326317E)
were used as normalizers for miRNAs and pri-miRNAs/
mRNA expression, respectively. Spike-in miRNA ats-miR159a (000338) was used as normalizer for miRNAs from CM.

Preparation of conditioned media
CM from HPFs, activated-HPFs, 133b-HPFs and
CAFs were obtained from cells grown to sub-confluence,
then serum starved for 48 h. CM were then harvested,
clarified by centrifugation, and used freshly. Exosomes were
isolated from 10 ml of culture media of either 48 h-serum
starved HPFs or CAFs by ExoQuick-TCTM (System
Biosciences, SBI), according to manufacturer’s instruction.

Immunofluorescence analysis

Fibroblast activation

Cells were seeded on μ-Slide 8 well chamber (IBIDI
GmbH, München, Germany), fixed in 4% formaldehyde/PBS
for 15 min and incubated in methanol/acetone or 70% cold
ethanol for 15 min at room temperature. Cell were probed
with anti alpha-SMA (A2547; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO,
USA), anti-FAP (sc-65398; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa
Cruz, CA, USA), anti-S100A4 (ab27957; Abcam, Cambridge,
UK), anti-collagen I (ab34710; Abcam), anti- 3meH3K9
(ab8898; Abcam) or anti-gamma H2A.X (ab11174; Abcam)
primary antibodies for 1 h and Alexa fluor488-labeled or Alexa
Fluor594-labeled (Life Technologies) secondary antibodies
for 1 h at room temperature. Nuclei were counterstained with
0.1 ug/ml of 4′, 6-diamindino-2-phenylindole (DAPI, Life
Technologies). Images were acquired using a Nikon Eclipse
E600 microscope by ACT-1 software (Nikon corporations,
Tokyo, Japan) and processed by ImageJ.

HPFs were grown to sub-confluence and treated for
48 h with 10 ng/ml rTGFβ1 or 50 ng/ml IL6. Fresh serumfree medium was added for an additional 24 h before
collection of CM.

Transfection
miR-133b mimic and negative control (miR-Neg)
were purchased as mirVana® miRNA mimic molecules
(Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Two siRNAs
targeting DROSHA mRNA were designed: siDROSHA-1
(5′-AACGAGUAGGCUUCGUGACUU-3′) and siDROS
HA-2 (5′-AAGGACCAAGUAUUCAGCAAG-3′). A nontargeting siRNA (siCTR, 5′-GCAUACAAUGGAGUUGU
UA-3′) was used as control. Cells seeded at the appropriate
density were transfected for 4 h at 37°C with 20 nM
miRNA mimic or siRNA using Lipofectamine-2000 (Life
Technologies), according to the manufacturer’s instruction,
and processed at different time intervals.

Immunoblotting analysis
Cells were lysed for 30 min on ice in lysis buffer
(10 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100,
1 mM phenylmethanesulphonyl-fluoride, 5 μg/ml aprotinin,
20 μg/ml leupeptin). Lysates were clarified by centrifugation,
and twenty μg of protein extracts were fractionated by SDSPAGE and transferred onto nitrocellulose using standard
protocols. Equal protein loading was verified by Ponceau
staining. Filters were blocked in PBS 1X Tween-20 with 5%
of skim milk and incubated overnight with primary specific
antibodies for α-SMA (A2547; Sigma-Aldrich), FAP (sc65398; Santa Cruz Biotechnology), p21 (ab7960; Abcam),

RNA extraction
Total RNA from cells was extracted using TRIzol®
reagent (Life Technologies), according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. miRNA from CM was isolated using miRNeasy
Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). Briefly, before miRNA
extraction, CM was collected and sequential centrifugation
was performed. Clarified-CM was first centrifuged at 14,000 g
for 10 minutes, and then centrifuged at 1,000 g for 5 minutes.
350 μl of clarified and centrifuged CM was mixed with 1.6
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31457

Oncotarget

p16 (ab7962; Abcam) and Vinculin (V9131; Sigma-Aldrich).
The filters were then incubated with the secondary peroxidase
linked whole antibodies. Bound antibody was detected using
the Novex ECL, HRP Chemiluminescent substrate Reagent
Kit (Life Thecnologies).

7.	 Barron DA, Rowley DR. The reactive stroma microenvironment and prostate cancer progression. Endocr Relat Cancer.
2012; 19:187–204.
8.	 He K, Lv W, Zheng D, Cheng F, Zhou T, Ye S, Ban Q, Ying Q,
Huang B, Chen L, Wu G, Liu D. The stromal genome heterogeneity between breast and prostate tumors revealed by
a comparative transcriptomic analysis. Oncotarget. 2015.
PubMed PMID: 25826086.

Statistical analysis
Data are presented as mean values ± SD from at least
three independent experiments. Statistical analysis of the data
was performed by two-tailed Student’s t test. P-values < 0.05
were considered statistically significant. Statistics applied to
microarray analyses is described in the relative sections.

9.	 Planche A, Bacac M, Provero P, Fusco C, Delorenzi M,
Stehle JC, Stamenkovic I. Identification of prognostic
molecular features in the reactive stroma of human breast
and prostate cancer. PLoS One. 2011; 6:e18640.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

10.	 Giannoni E, Bianchini F, Masieri L, Serni S, Torre E,
Calorini L, Chiarugi P. Reciprocal activation of prostate
cancer cells and cancer-associated fibroblasts stimulates
epithelial mesenchymal transition and cancer stemness.
Cancer Res. 2010; 70:6945–6956.

We thank Institutional Functional Genomics Core
facility for microarray analyses and Pathology unit for
technical support in dissecting tissue material for fibroblast
isolation.

11.	 Fiaschi T, Marini A, Giannoni E, Taddei ML, Gandellini P,
De Donatis A, Lanciotti M, Serni S, Cirri P, Chiarugi P.
Reciprocal metabolic reprogramming through lactate shuttle
coordinately influences tumor-stroma interplay. Cancer Res.
2012; 72:5130–5140.

GRANT SUPPORT
The work was supported by the Italian Association
for Cancer Research (AIRC), Special Program “Innovative
Tools for Cancer Risk Assessment and Early Diagnosis”,
5X1000, (project #12162; NZ, RV); AIRC grants (#11542,
PG; #8797, PC), by I. Monzino Foundation (NZ, RV), and
by Istituto Toscano Tumori (grant #0203607, PC).

12.	 Taddei ML, Cavallini L, Comito G, Giannoni E, Folini M,
Marini A, Gandellini P, Morandi A, Pintus G, Raspollini MR,
Zaffaroni N, Chiarugi P. Senescent stroma promotes prostate cancer progression: the role of miR-210. Mol Oncol.
2014; 8:1729–1746.
13.	 van der Heul-Nieuwenhuijsen L, Dits N, Van Ijcken W,
de Lange D, Jenster G. The FOXF2 pathway in the human
prostate stroma. Prostate. 2009; 69:1538–1547.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors of this manuscript have no conflict of
interest to declare.

14.	 Zhao H, Ramos CF, Brooks JD, Peehl DM. Distinctive gene
expression of prostatic stromal cells cultured from diseased
versus normal tissues. J Cell Physiol. 2007; 210:111–121.

REFERENCES
1.	 Swartz MA, Iida N, Roberts EW, Sangaletti S, Wong MH,
Yull FE, Coussens LM, DeClerck YA. Tumor microenvironment complexity: emerging roles in cancer therapy.
Cancer Res. 2012; 72:2473–2480.

15.	 Miranda KC, Huynh T, Tay Y, Ang YS, Tam WL,
Thomson AM, Lim B, Rigoutsos I. A pattern-based
method for the identification of MicroRNA binding sites
and their corresponding heteroduplexes. Cell. 2006;
126:1203–1217.

2.	 Kalluri R, Zeisberg M. Fibroblasts in cancer. Nat Rev
Cancer. 2006; 6:392–401.

16.	 Callis TE, Wang DZ. Taking microRNAs to heart. Trends
Mol Med. 2008; 14:254–260.

3.	 DePinho RA. The age of cancer. Nature. 2000; 408:248–254.

17.	 Giannoni E, Bianchini F, Calorini L, Chiarugi P. Cancer
associated fibroblasts exploit reactive oxygen species
through a proinflammatory signature leading to epithelial
mesenchymal transition and stemness. Antioxid Redox
Signal. 2011; 14:2361–2371.

4.	 Li X, Placencio V, Iturregui JM, Uwamariya C, SharifAfshar AR, Koyama T, Hayward SW, Bhowmick NA.
Prostate tumor progression is mediated by a paracrine TGFbeta/Wnt3a signaling axis. Oncogene. 2008; 27:7118–7130.

18.	 Gandellini P, Giannoni E, Casamichele A, Taddei ML,
Callari M, Piovan C, Valdagni R, Pierotti MA, Zaffaroni N,
Chiarugi P. miR-205 hinders the malignant interplay
between prostate cancer cells and associated fibroblasts.
Antioxid Redox Signal. 2014; 20:1045–1059.

5.	 Tuxhorn JA, Ayala GE, Smith MJ, Smith VC, Dang TD,
Rowley DR. Reactive stroma in human prostate cancer:
induction of myofibroblast phenotype and extracellular
matrix remodeling. Clin Cancer Res. 2002; 8:2912–2923.
6.	 Gregg JL, Brown KE, Mintz EM, Piontkivska H, Fraizer GC.
Analysis of gene expression in prostate cancer epithelial
and interstitial stromal cells using laser capture microdissection. BMC Cancer. 2010; 10:165.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

19.	 Quail DF, Joyce JA. Microenvironmental regulation
of tumor progression and metastasis. Nat Med. 2013;
19:1423–1437.

31458

Oncotarget

20.	 Tomasek JJ, Gabbiani G, Hinz B, Chaponnier C, Brown RA.
Myofibroblasts and mechano-regulation of connective tissue remodelling. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2002; 3:349–363.

interventional therapy of advanced lung cancer. Cancer
Chemother Pharmacol. 2013; 72:889–896.

21.	 Madar S, Goldstein I, Rotter V. ‘Cancer associated fibroblasts’—more than meets the eye. Trends Mol Med. 2013;
19:447–453.

34.	 Theodossiou TA, Galanou MC, Paleos CM. Novel amiodarone-doxorubicin cocktail liposomes enhance doxorubicin
retention and cytotoxicity in DU145 human prostate carcinoma cells. J Med Chem. 2008; 51:6067–6074.

22.	 Dakhova O, Ozen M, Creighton CJ, Li R, Ayala G, Rowley D,
Ittmann M. Global gene expression analysis of reactive stroma in prostate cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2009;
15:3979–3989.

35.	 von Gunten CF, Eappen S, Cleary JF, Taylor SG 4th, Moots P,
Regevik N, Cleeland C, Cella D. Flecainide for the treatment of chronic neuropathic pain: a Phase II trial. Palliat
Med. 2007; 21:667–672.

23.	 Öhlund D, Elyada E, Tuveson D. Fibroblast heterogeneity
in the cancer wound. J Exp Med. 2014; 211:1503–1523.

36.	 Lee BH, Yegnasubramanian S, Lin X, Nelson WG.
Procainamide is a specific inhibitor of DNA methyltransferase 1. J Biol Chem. 2005; 280:40749–40756.

24.	 Kalluri R. EMT: when epithelial cells decide to
become mesenchymal-like cells. J Clin Invest. 2009;
119:1417–1419.

37.	 Patron JP, Fendler A, Bild M, Jung U, Müller H, Arntzen MØ,
Piso C, Stephan C, Thiede B, Mollenkopf HJ, Jung K,
Kaufmann SH, Schreiber J. MiR-133b targets antiapoptotic
genes and enhances death receptor-induced apoptosis. PLoS
One. 2012; 7:e35345.

25.	 Barron DA, Strand DW, Ressler SJ, Dang TD, Hayward
SW, Yang F, Ayala GE, Ittmann M, Rowley DR. TGF-β1
induces an age-dependent inflammation of nerve ganglia
and fibroplasia in the prostate gland stroma of a novel transgenic mouse. PLoS One. 2010; 5:e13751.

38.	 Gandellini P, Folini M, Zaffaroni N. Towards the definition
of prostate cancer-related microRNAs: where are we now?.
Trends Mol Med. 2009; 15:381–390.

26.	 Basanta D, Strand DW, Lukner RB, Franco OE, Cliffel DE,
Ayala GE, Hayward SW, Anderson AR. The role of
transforming growth factor-beta-mediated tumor-stroma
interactions in prostate cancer progression: an integrative
approach. Cancer Res. 2009; 69:7111–7120.

39.	 Navon R, Wang H, Steinfeld I, Tsalenko A, Ben-Dor A,
Yakhini Z. Novel rank-based statistical methods reveal
microRNAs with differential expression in multiple cancer
types. PLoS One. 2009; 4:e8003.

27.	 Tuxhorn JA, McAlhany SJ, Dang TD, Ayala GE, Rowley DR.
Stromal cells promote angiogenesis and growth of human
prostate tumors in a differential reactive stroma (DRS)
xenograft model. Cancer Res. 2002; 62:3298–3307.

40.	 Chivukula RR, Shi G, Acharya A, Mills EW, Zeitels LR,
Anandam JL, Abdelnaby AA, Balch GC, Mansour JC,
Yopp AC, Maitra A, Mendell JT. An essential mesenchymal function for miR-143/145 in intestinal epithelial regeneration. Cell. 2014; 157:1104–1116.

28.	 Bhowmick NA, Chytil A, Plieth D, Gorska AE, Dumont N,
Shappell S, Washington MK, Neilson EG, Moses HL. TGFbeta signaling in fibroblasts modulates the oncogenic potential of adjacent epithelia. Science. 2004; 303:848–851.

41.	 Tao J, Wu D, Xu B, Qian W, Li P, Lu Q, Yin C, Zhang W.
microRNA-133 inhibits cell proliferation, migration and
invasion in prostate cancer cells by targeting the epidermal
growth factor receptor. Oncol Rep. 2012; 27:1967–1975.

29.	 Verona EV, Elkahloun AG, Yang J, Bandyopadhyay A,
Yeh IT, Sun LZ. Transforming growth factor-beta signaling
in prostate stromal cells supports prostate carcinoma growth
by up-regulating stromal genes related to tissue remodeling.
Cancer Res. 2007; 67:5737–5746.

42.	 Mo W, Zhang J, Li X, Meng D, Gao Y, Yang S, Wan X, Zhou C,
Guo F, Huang Y, Amente S, Avvedimento EV, Xie Y,
Li Y. Identification of novel AR-targeted microRNAs mediating androgen signalling through critical pathways to regulate
cell viability in prostate cancer. PLoS One. 2013; 8:e56592.

30.	 Banerjee J, Mishra R, Li X, Jackson RS 2nd Sharma, A
Bhowmick. A reciprocal role of prostate cancer on stromal
DNA damage. Oncogene. 2014; 33:4924–4931.

43.	 Li X, Wan X, Chen H, Yang S, Liu Y, Mo W, Meng D,
Du W, Huang Y, Wu H, Wang J, Li T, Li Y. Identification
of miR-133b and RB1CC1 as independent predictors for
biochemical recurrence and potential therapeutic targets for
prostate cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2014; 20:2312–2325.

31.	 Carè A, Catalucci D, Felicetti F, Bonci D, Addario A,
Gallo P, Bang ML, Segnalini P, Gu Y, Dalton ND, Elia L,
Latronico MV, Høydal M, Autore C, Russo MA, Dorn GW
2nd, Ellingsen O, Ruiz-Lozano P, Peterson KL, Croce CM,
Peschle C, Condorelli G. MicroRNA-133 controls cardiac
hypertrophy. Nat Med. 2007; 13:613–618.

44.	 Callari M, Musella V, Di Buduo E, Sensi M, Miodini P,
Dugo M, Orlandi R, Agresti R, Paolini B, Carcangiu ML,
Cappelletti V, Daidone MG. Subtype-dependent prognostic relevance of an interferon-induced pathway metagene in node-negative breast cancer. Mol Oncol. 2014;
8:1278–1289.

32.	 Nam YJ, Song K, Luo X, Daniel E, Lambeth K, West K,
Hill JA, DiMaio JM, Baker LA, Bassel-Duby R, Olson EN.
Reprogramming of human fibroblasts toward a cardiac fate.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013; 110:5588–5593.

45.	 Du P, Kibbe WA, Lin SM. lumi: a pipeline for processing
Illumina microarray. Bioinformatics. 2008; 24:1547–1548.

33.	 Huang J, Zhang T, Ma K, Fan P, Liu Y, Weng C, Fan G,
Duan Q, Zhu X. Clinical evaluation of targeted arterial
perfusion of verapamil and chemotherapeutic drugs in
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

46.	 Callari M, Tiberio P, De Cecco L, Cavadini E, Dugo M,
Ghimenti C, Daidone MG, Canevari S, Appierto V.
31459

Oncotarget

Feasibility of circulating miRNA microarray analysis from
archival plasma samples. Anal Biochem. 2013; 437:123–125.

49.	 Subramanian A, Tamayo P, Mootha VK, Mukherjee S, Ebert BL,
Gillette MA, Paulovich A, Pomeroy SL, Golub TR,
Lander ES, Mesirov JP. Gene set enrichment analysis:
a knowledge-based approach for interpreting genomewide expression profiles. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005;
102:15545–1550.

47.	 Barrett T, Troup DB, Wilhite SE, Ledoux P, Evangelista C,
Kim IF, Tomashevsky M, Marshall KA, Phillippy KH,
Sherman PM, Muertter RN, Holko M, Ayanbule O,
Yefanov A, Soboleva A. NCBI, GEO.archive for functional
genomics data sets—10 years on. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011;
39:D1005–D1010.

50.	 Merico D, Isserlin R, Stueker O, Emili A, Bader GD.
Enrichment map: a network-based method for gene-set
enrichment visualization and interpretation. PLoS One.
2010; 5:e13984.

48.	 Wettenhall JM, Smyth GK. limmaGUI: a graphical
user interface for linear modeling of microarray data.
Bioinformatics. 2004; 20:3705–3706.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31460

Oncotarget

