Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 30

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

All-trans retinoic acid and rapamycin normalize Hutchinson
Gilford progeria fibroblast phenotype
Camilla Pellegrini1,2, Marta Columbaro2,3, Cristina Capanni1,2, Maria Rosaria D’Apice4,
Carola Cavallo3, Michela Murdocca5, Giovanna Lattanzi1,2, Stefano Squarzoni1,2
1

National Research Council of Italy, Institute of Molecular Genetics, IGM-CNR, 40136 Bologna, Italy

2

Rizzoli Orthopaedic Institute, SC Laboratory of Musculoskeletal Cell Biology, 40136 Bologna, Italy

3

Rizzoli Orthopaedic Institute, Laboratory RAMSES, 40136 Bologna, Italy

4

Fondazione Policlinico Tor Vergata, U.O.C. Laboratory of Medical Genetics, 00133 Rome, Italy

5

Tor Vergata University, Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, 00133 Rome, Italy

Correspondence to:
Stefano Squarzoni, e-mail: squarzoni@area.bo.cnr.it
Keywords: Hutchinson Gilford progeria syndrome, premature aging, all-trans retinoic acid, rapamycin, DNA damage and repair
Received: May 13, 2015 	Accepted: July 31, 2015 	Published: August 13, 2015

ABSTRACT
Hutchinson Gilford progeria syndrome is a fatal disorder characterized by
accelerated aging, bone resorption and atherosclerosis, caused by a LMNA mutation
which produces progerin, a mutant lamin A precursor. Progeria cells display
progerin and prelamin A nuclear accumulation, altered histone methylation pattern,
heterochromatin loss, increased DNA damage and cell cycle alterations. Since the
LMNA promoter contains a retinoic acid responsive element, we investigated if alltrans retinoic acid administration could lower progerin levels in cultured fibroblasts.
We also evaluated the effect of associating rapamycin, which induces autophagic
degradation of progerin and prelamin A.
We demonstrate that all-trans retinoic acid acts synergistically with low-dosage
rapamycin reducing progerin and prelamin A, via transcriptional downregulation
associated with protein degradation, and increasing the lamin A to progerin ratio.
These effects rescue cell dynamics and cellular proliferation through recovery of DNA
damage response factor PARP1 and chromatin-associated nuclear envelope proteins
LAP2α and BAF.
The combined all-trans retinoic acid-rapamycin treatment is dramatically
efficient, highly reproducible, represents a promising new approach in HutchinsonGilford Progeria therapy and deserves investigation in ageing-associated disorders.

as a precursor (prelamin A) and then processed further by
multiple proteolytic events at the carboxy-terminal end.
Prelamin A is farnesylated at the C-terminus, a step that
can be blocked by farnesyltransferase inhibitors (FTIs)
and statins [4, 5], inhibiting all subsequent processing
reactions. Then, a cleavage of the three C-terminal amino
acids is operated by the specific zinc metalloprotease
Ste24 (ZMPSTE24) [6, 7] and the C-terminal cysteine
is methylated by the isoprenyl-cysteine carboxyl
methyltransferase (ICMT). Subsequently, the maturing
prelamin A undergoes a second cleavage, also mediated
by ZMPSTE24, that removes the 15 C-terminal residues.
This process results in mature lamin A.

INTRODUCTION
Lamin A/C, encoded by the LMNA gene, is a major
component of the nuclear lamina, a three-dimensional
matrix mostly layered at the internal surface of the inner
nuclear membrane but present also in the nuclear interior.
Lamin A/C is important for nuclear structure maintenance
[1] and, in addition to its structural role, it is implicated
in many key nuclear functions including chromatin
organization, DNA replication, transcription, DNA repair
and cell-cycle progression [2, 3]. Lamin A and C are
alternative splicing products of the LMNA gene. While
lamin C is synthesized directly, lamin A is first synthesized
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29914

Oncotarget

Mutations in the LMNA gene give rise to a broad
range of diseases collectively called laminopathies. Some
of them, such as Hutchinson-Gilford Progeria Syndrome
(HGPS), Mandibuloacral Dysplasia type A (MADA) and
Familial Partial Lipodystrophy, Dunnigan type (FPLD2),
are characterized by failure to process prelamin A, which
accumulates within the nucleus thus producing aberrant
chromatin structure [8].
HGPS (OMIM 176670) is a rare, dominant
genetic disorder characterized by phenotypic features
of accelerated aging, bone resorption (particularly at
phalanges, clavicles and mandible), skin atrophy and
atherosclerosis [9]. The disease appears in the first year
of life and the children affected die at an average age
of 13.5 years, predominantly from atherosclerosis and
myocardial infarction or stroke [10, 11]. Most HGPS
patients carry a de-novo point mutation (c.1824C > T;
p.G608G) in heterozygosis [12–14]. This mutation creates
a cryptic splice site within exon 11, which produces a
mutant prelamin A form with an internal deletion of a 50
amino acids-long stretch containing the site for the last
cleavage step. This shorter prelamin A, named progerin,
is permanently farnesylated and carboxymethylated at
its C-terminal domain and displays altered structure and
biochemical properties with respect to prelamin A [4,
13, 15]. The most prominent HGPS cellular phenotypes
include nuclear dysmorphism, heterochromatin alterations,
chromosomal and telomere aberrations. Altered nuclear
functions include compromised cell-cycle regulation,
impaired DNA repair, increased apoptosis and senescence
[11, 16, 17].
Currently, HGPS is an incurable disease. In the
recent years, experimental studies were performed, in vitro
and in animal models, with the goal of identifying novel
targets for treating laminopathies and associated diseases
[18, 19]. Different strategies were evaluated such as
genetic approaches [20] and pharmacological treatments
focused on modulation of prelamin A maturation process,
in order to reduce the final amount of farnesylated progerin
[21]. To date, two clinical trials have been performed, both
relying on blocking the prelamin A maturation pathway
[21, 22] through inhibition of the farnesylation step.
Moreover, promising results have been obtained in vitro
[23–25] by the use of rapamycin acting as an mTOR
inhibitor which contributes to progerin degradation by
activating autophagy [26].
Interestingly, a retinoic acid responsive element
(L-RARE) has been identified within the LMNA
promoter, and several studies suggest that all-trans
retinoic acid (ATRA) may either enhance or reduce,
depending on the cellular model, the promoter activity
of different genes [27–31]. Retinoic acid was reported
to enhance the LMNA promoter activity in murine
P19 embryonal carcinoma cells [32, 33]; on the other
hand, LMNA downregulation has been also described

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

following ATRA treatment in human alveolar carcinoma
and in HL-60 cells [28, 29].
Retinoic acid is enzymatically derived from vitamin
A, it regulates cell development and regeneration, and is
a component of serum [30]. In addition, all-trans-retinoic
acid has been found to induce autophagy [34, 35], a
mechanism already proved to be involved in farnesylated
prelamin A removal [23, 25, 36].
Aiming to reduce the intranuclear progerin
accumulation, we investigated the effect of ATRA
prolonged administration to HGPS skin fibroblasts.
Moreover, in order to maximize the efficacy of
treatment, we evaluated the cellular response upon
combined administration of ATRA and rapamycin at low
dosage.

RESULTS
Reduction of progerin amount in HGPS
fibroblasts
ATRA treatment was able to reduce the amount of
progerin in HGPS cells and resulted more effective than
rapamycin treatment (Fig. 1A–1B). It should be noted
that the rapamycin dosage used in this study is much
lower than the one tested in previous studies [25, 36],
which is expected to reduce any possible toxicity [24].
However, combined treatment with ATRA (10 nM) and
rapamycin (100 nM) elicited the most significant reduction
of progerin levels (Fig. 1A–1B). In a preliminary timecourse experiment we monitored the effect of treatments
up to four weeks. Using ATRA and rapamycin at the
concentrations mentioned above, we observed a strong
progerin decrease in comparison with untreated HGPS
cells starting from day 14 (Fig. S1A, Fig. S2B) and optimal
results were obtained at day 28. Thus, a comprehensive
evaluation of different parameters was carried out at this
time point and reported hereafter, except when differently
specified.
Western blot analysis showed a decreased amount
of both lamin A and progerin in all treated cells, while
no appreciable variation of lamin C was visible (Fig. 1A);
interestingly a significant increase of the relative amount
of lamin A versus progerin was detected in ATRA plus
rapamycin-treated cells, since the ratio between the two
proteins raised from about 0.75 to about 1.3 (Fig. 1A). The
western blot data were confirmed by immunofluorecence
analysis with anti-progerin antibody and by quantitating
the progerin positive cells (Fig. 1B, low magnification is
shown in Fig. S1B).
We further evaluated the expression of wild-type
prelamin A in HGPS cells by double immunofluorescence
labeling in parallel with progerin. As expected, control
nuclei were devoid of prelamin A, while untreated HGPS
nuclei were strongly positive. The combined treatment

29915

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Progerin and prelamin A protein amount after 28 days of treatment. A. Western blotting analysis of LaminA/C
and progerin after 28 days of treatment. Actin was used as loading control. Relative densitometric analysis of lamin A, progerin and the
ratio between themselves (Lamin A/Progerin) are reported on the right. ATRA, rapamycin and combined ATRA + rapamycin treatments
are indicated as A, R and A+R respectively. B. Immunofluorescence evaluation of progerin (green) with nuclear staining (DAPI, blue).
Histogram reports the progerin positive cells number. Ctrl: Healthy fibroblasts; NT: not treated HGPS fibroblasts; A, R and A+R: HGPS
fibroblasts treated with ATRA, rapamycin and combined ATRA + rapamycin respectively. C. Double labelling of Prelamin A (red) and
progerin (green); DAPI nuclear staining (blue). Ctrl: Healthy fibroblasts; NT: not treated HGPS fibroblasts; A, R and A+R: HGPS fibroblasts
treated with ATRA, rapamycin and combined ATRA + rapamycin respectively. Data are presented as means ± SD (n = 3); P = 0.01(**);
P = 0.05 (*). Scale bar, 10 μM.

with ATRA and rapamycin led to a remarkable drop in
prelamin A positivity (Fig. 1C).

at the nuclear periphery, adherent to the nuclear lamina
and spread in the nucleoplasm as small clusters. However,
the best effect on nuclear organization was obtained by
the combined (ATRA + rapamycin) treatment, which
elicited both shape improvement and heterochromatin
recovery (Fig. 2A). In order to better define the effects
of treatments on chromatin arrangement we evaluated
histone modifications. Histone 3 trimethylated on the
lysine 9 residue (H3K9me3) is a marker of constitutive
heterochromatin, reported to show an altered distribution
pattern in HGPS nuclei [5, 37, 38]. Consistently, we found
an abnormally uniform fluorescence over the nucleoplasm
in untreated nuclei. The distribution pattern of H3K9me3
labeling was increasingly recovered by ATRA, rapamycin
and combined ATRA plus rapamycin treatment in an
increasing number of nuclei, which showed intranuclear
fluorescent foci resembling those observed in controls
(Fig. 2B).

Recovery of nuclear shape and chromatin
organization in HGPS fibroblasts
Both ATRA and rapamycin had a positive effect on
the recovery of nuclear shape and chromatin structure in
HGPS fibroblasts. The number of cells with severe nuclear
alterations appeared dramatically reduced by the single
treatments, as demonstrated by transmission electron
microscopy analysis (Fig. 2A). It is interesting to note
that ATRA mainly contributed to restoring the roundish
nuclear shape, while rapamycin was more effective in
rescuing chromatin organization. In fact, as displayed in
the high magnification details (Fig. 2A, lower panel) large
scale chromatin organization was restored by rapamycin
treatment and heterochromatin areas were clearly visible
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29916

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Analysis of nuclear shape and chromatin organization following 28 day of treatment. A. Transmission electron

microscopy analysis (TEM) of control and HGPS fibroblasts nuclei. High magnification details correspond to white gated area in the low
magnification image of each sample. Lateral histogram displays the percentage of morphologically altered (grey) and normal (white) nuclei.
The number of counted nuclei is indicated under the histogram (n). Ctrl: Healthy fibroblasts; NT: not treated HGPS fibroblasts; A, R and
A+R: HGPS fibroblasts treated with ATRA, rapamycin and combined ATRA + rapamycin respectively. Scale bar, 1 μM. B. Co-labeling of
tri-methylated histone H3 at Lysine 9 (H3K9me3) used to identify the heterochromatin arrangement (red), and progerin amount (green).
Each single figure is a combination of three images onto a single figure. Dot-plot indentifies the mean intensity fluorescence of H3K9me3
calculated on nucleus area. The number of considered nuclei is indicated under the histogram (n). Ctrl: Healthy fibroblasts; NT: not treated
HGPS fibroblasts; A, R and A+R: HGPS fibroblasts treated with ATRA, rapamycin and combined ATRA + rapamycin respectively. Scale
bar, 10 μM.

Effects of treatments on Lamin A/C functional
platforms

Mean fluorescence intensity of H3K9me3 was lower
than control values in untreated HGPS samples, but it was
comparable to controls in samples subjected to rapamycin
or combined ATRA plus rapamycin treatments (Fig. 2B,
dot plot). We also assessed the amount of total H3 and the
relative amounts of the monomethylated (H3K9me) and
trimethylated (H3K9me3) fractions. In untreated HGPS
cells, total H3 was decreased but the H3K9me3 fraction
was proportionally elevated. The treatment restored an
higher level of total H3 whose H3K9me3 fraction was
proportionally reduced (Fig. S2A).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Distribution of Barrier to Autointegration Factor
(BAF), a bridging protein representing a key component
of the lamin-DNA complex, was studied because of
its known involvement in chromatin organization and
its specific alteration in the presence of prelamin A or
progerin [39]. For these reasons, BAF can be used
as a marker for monitoring the nuclear functional
integrity. In normal conditions, BAF is distributed

29917

Oncotarget

in the cytoplasm and nucleus. Upon accumulation of
any lamin A precursor, BAF is recruited to the nuclear
lamina, regardless of the normal or mutated sequence
of accumulated prelamin A. In untreated HGPS cells,
BAF exhibited perfect co-localization with progerin
at the nuclear rim (Fig. 3A). Normal BAF localization
in nucleus and cytoplasm was restored upon drug
treatments and the best distribution pattern was
obtained in HGPS cells subjected to combined ATRA
plus rapamycin administration (Fig. 3A). The analysis
of the fluorescence intensity profiles confirmed an
even nuclear and cytoplasmic distribution of BAF,
the absence of BAF fluorescence peaks at the nuclear
envelope and an extremely low progerin signal (Fig. 3A,
lower panels).
Analogous results were obtained by analyzing the
distribution pattern of Lamina-Associated Polypeptide
2α (LAP2α). LAP2α is known to associate with HMGN5
nucleosomal protein in the context of a protein platform

regulating chromatin mobility and heterochromatin
condensation [37]. In control human fibroblasts,
LAP2α is localized in the nucleoplasm and interacts
with nucleoplasmic lamin A [40]. In the presence of
progerin, LAP2α is mislocalized to the nuclear periphery
or redistributed in irregular foci in the nuclear interior
(Fig. 3B). The treatments progressively restored a
normal,  evenly distributed fluorescence pattern in the
nucleoplasm, again bearing the maximum efficacy when
using both ATRA and rapamycin (Fig. 3B). Fluorescence
intensity profile analysis (Fig. 3B, lower panels) further
supported this data.

Combined ATRA plus rapamycin treatment
lowers DNA damage
We also investigated levels and distribution of
DNA damage response markers γH2AX and 53BP1. Both
proteins were highly positive in HGPS nuclei, appearing

Figure 3: Analysis of chromatin and lamin-associated functional platforms after 28 days of treatment. Immunofluorescence

analysis of BAF A. or LAP2α B. (red) in co-labeling with progerin (green). The distribution pattern is described through the intensity profile
histograms reported under panels A and B. White arrows indicate the X-axis of the histograms. The blue, red and green lines correspond
to signals of DNA, BAF or LAP2α and progerin respectively. The percentages indicated in panel B report the relative amount of the
different cell subpopulation present in each sample and displaying analogous labeling pattern. Intensity profiles were performed only for
the nucleus corresponding to most represented subpopulation. Ctrl: Healthy fibroblasts; NT: not treated HGPS fibroblasts; A, R and A+R:
HGPS fibroblasts treated with ATRA, rapamycin and combined ATRA + rapamycin respectively. Scale bars, 10 μM (A) and 5 μM (B),
respectively.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29918

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Analysis of DNA damage and repair markers after 28 days of treatment. A. Double labeling with γH2AX (red)

and progerin (green) with relative quantification of foci number per nucleus. B. Double labeling with 53BP1 (red) and progerin (green)
with relative quantification of foci number per nucleus. Ctrl: Healthy fibroblasts; NT: not treated HGPS fibroblasts; A, R and A+R: HGPS
fibroblasts treated with ATRA, rapamycin and combined ATRA + rapamycin respectively. Data are presented as means ± SD (n = 3);
P = 0.01(**); P = 0.05 (*). Scale bar, 5 μM.

as clusters within the nucleoplasm, indicating DNA
damage in untreated cells (Fig. 4A and 4B). Treatment
with ATRA or rapamycin considerably reduced the number
of cells with high number of foci (>20 γH2AX  foci/
cell, > 5 53BP1 foci/cell) (Fig. 4A and 4B). Again, the
highest efficiency was reached when the drugs were used
in combination (Fig. 4A and 4B).
In addition, we investigated the expression of
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 (PARP1), a chromatinassociated enzyme involved in the regulation of various
important cellular processes and also in the choice
between activation of homologous recombination
(HR) or non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) DNA
repair mechanism. It is reported that the accumulation
of progerin causes PARP1 down-regulation and,
by interfering with PARP1 nuclear import, leads to
proliferation defects (prolonged mitosis) and errorprone DNA repair via NHEJ [41]. Accordingly,
immunofluorescence analysis showed a low amount of
PARP1 in HGPS nuclei in comparison with controls
(Fig. 5A). Treatment with ATRA or rapamycin caused
an increase in fluorescence positivity, which reached
the highest level using both drugs in combination
(Fig. 5A). Evaluation of mean fluorescence intensity
confirmed this data, showing a progressive amelioration
with ATRA, rapamycin and ATRA plus rapamycin,

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

respectively, finally showing a PARP1 staining pattern
comparable to control fibroblasts (Fig. 5B). We further
evaluated PARP1 protein expression by western blot
analysis. We could clearly observe an increasing trend
of the PARP1 amount caused, respectively, by treatment
with ATRA, rapamycin and both drugs, confirming the
immunofluorescence analysis results.

Improvement of cell proliferation and reduction
of G2/M cell population
The cell proliferation ability was monitored with
Alamar Blue assay for 48 hrs in the presence or absence
of treatments and in comparison to control fibroblasts.
We performed the study in two conditions: short-time
(after 48 hrs of treatment) and long-time (after 28 days of
treatment) (Fig. 6A)
When compared to control cells, untreated HGPS
cells showed a proliferation defect that was more evident
after several population doublings, as shown in Fig. 6A
(both left and right panels).
HGPS fibroblasts treated for 48 hrs (Fig. 6A,
short-time treatment) with rapamycin and ATRA plus
rapamycin demonstrated a slight improvement of cellular
proliferation, while the most significant improvement was
obtained by ATRA administration. Otherwise, treatment

29919

Oncotarget

Figure 5: PARP-1 recovery following 28 days treatments administration. A. Immunoflurescence analysis of PARP-1 (red)

co-labeled with progerin (green) and DAPI staining (blue). Each single figure is a combination of three images onto a single figure.
B. Analysis of fluorescence intensity mean of PARP-1 for each experimental conditions calculated on nucleus area. C. Western blotting of
PARP-1 and relative quantification. Actin was used as loading control. Ctrl: Healthy fibroblasts; NT: not treated HGPS fibroblasts; A, R and
A+R: HGPS fibroblasts treated with ATRA, rapamycin and combined ATRA + rapamycin respectively. Data are presented as means ± SD,
n indicates the number of analyzed nuclei. P = 0.01(**); P = 0.05 (*). Scale bar, 10 μM.

Figure 6: Evaluation of treatment effects on cellular proliferation ability and cell cycle. A. Alamar Blue proliferation assay

performed at short-time treatment (48 hrs) and at long-time treatment (48 hrs of monitoring, carried out after 28 days of treatment). After the
first 12 hrs of adhesion the cells were monitored for colorant reduction at 24 and 48 hrs maintaining the samples under treatment. B. FACS
analysis of cell cycle after 28 days of treatments. Data are presented as means ± SD (n = 3) and treated samples (A, R, A+R) are compared
with not treated sample (NT). P = 0.01(**); P = 0.05 (*). Ctrl: Healthy fibroblasts; NT: not treated HGPS fibroblasts; A, R and A+R: HGPS
fibroblasts treated with ATRA, rapamycin and combined ATRA + rapamycin respectively.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29920

Oncotarget

of HGPS cells for 28 days (Fig. 6A, long-time treatment),
elicited a significant enhancement of growth rate in all
experimental conditions.
Potential effects on the cell cycle were evaluated by
cytofluorimetric analysis (Fig. 6B). In comparison with
control cells, untreated HGPS cells showed an increased
number of cells in G2/M phase, while S phase was
slightly more populated. The treatment, specifically when
combining ATRA with rapamycin, lowered the G2/M
population and the frequency of S phase was more similar
to controls (Fig. 6B).

In contrast, progerin mRNA expression was increased by
rapamycin treatment, compared to untreated fibroblasts,
demonstrating a strong positive feedback response,
yet inefficient at the protein level due to the high
autophagic degradation rate. The ATRA effect of mRNA
downregulation was confirmed by observing progerin
transcript in HGPS cells treated with a combination of both
drugs: ATRA presence in rapamycin-treated fibroblasts
brought back mRNA expression levels to values lower
than those of untreated fibroblasts. An overlapping trend
was observed for lamin A mRNA expression, indicating
that progerin and lamin A transcript amounts were downregulated by ATRA administration. (Fig. 7A).

ATRA effects on LMNA gene expression

Involvement of protein degradation pathways in
progerin decrease

RT-PCR analysis of progerin and LMNA
mRNAs was performed in HGPS before and after
ATRA, rapamycin and drug combination treatments.
After treatment with ATRA, progerin transcript was
dowregulated in comparison with untreated HGPS cells.

In order to define the possible synergy of ATRA
and rapamycin on progerin degradation, we evaluated

Figure 7: Effect of treatments on LMNA gene expression and on involvement of protein degradation pathways as
the putative mechanisms of progerin reduction. A. On the left: real-time qPCR of progerin in HGPS fibroblasts untreated (NT)

and treated with ATRA (A), Rapamycin (R) and ATRA + Rapamycin (A+R), using CTRL sample as reference. The data were normalized
to internal control GAPDH mRNA and are representative of three independent biological replicates. Values represent mean ± SEM.
**p < 0.01,***p < 0.001. On the right: real-time qPCR of lamin A in HGPS fibroblasts untreated (NT) and treated with ATRA (A), Rapamycin
(R) and ATRA + Rapamycin (A+R), using CTRL sample as reference. The data were normalized to internal control GAPDH mRNA and are
representative of three independent biological replicates. Values represent mean ± SEM. ***p < 0.001. B. Experiment of blocking either
proteasome and autophagy protein degradation pathways. Samples, treated for 3 days with ATRA + Rapamycin (left panel) and ATRA or
Rapamycin (right panel), were subject to MG132 and Chloroquine for 12 hrs before raising the cells. Analysis of progerin protein levels
and evaluation of autophagy markers, P62 and LC3. GAPDH was used as loading control. Data are presented as means ± SD; P = 0.01(**);
P = 0.05 (*).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29921

Oncotarget

the effect of these drugs on both autophagy, known to
be involved in farnesylated prelamin A degradation, and
ubiquitin (Ub)–proteasome pathway (UPP) (Fig. 7B).
We treated HGPS fibroblasts with rapamycin and
ATRA, in combination (Fig. 7B, left panel) and singularly
(Fig. 7B, right panel), for 72 hours, refreshing the treatments
every day. The two pathways were blocked by the use of
chloroquine (CQ) and MG132, respectively, added 12 hours
before stopping the experiment. CQ impairs autophagy as
it inhibits both fusion of autophagosomes with lysosomes
and lysosomal protein degradation, while MG132 is a
proteasome inhibitor, which reduces the degradation of
ubiquitin-conjugated proteins. P62 and LC3 were labeled
in these experiments to trace block of autophagic activity
(Fig. 7B).
In HGPS cells co-treated with ATRA and
rapamycin (Fig. 7B, left panel) we could observe
progerin variations after both CQ and MG132
administration: after autophagy block, the progerin
levels were raised to the same levels of untreated HGPS
samples; a partial increase was observed also with UPP
chemical blocking.
HGPS cells not treated with ATRA or rapamycin,
but subjected to MG132 or CQ treatments, presented a
decrease in progerin levels (Fig. 7B).
In HGPS cells treated with ATRA (Fig. 7B, right
panel), CQ addition induced a restoration of progerin level
which was comparable with the untreated HGPS samples.
On the contrary, when MG132 was added to ATRA-treated
samples, progerin was decreased because in this condition
progerin removal via autophagy is enhanced [42].
In HGPS cells treated with rapamycin (Fig. 7B, right
panel) the progerin level was unchanged with respect to
untreated samples. This effect is due to the rapamycin
concentration applied here (100 nM) which is lower
with respect to concentrations reported to be effective
in reducing progerin amount in previous studies [36].
Here, addition of either MG132 or CQ induced decrease
or increase of progerin level, respectively, confirming
involvement of rapamycin-dependent autophagic
mechanism in progerin degradation [25].
These results demonstrated that the combined action
of ATRA and rapamycin leads not only to downregulation
of progerin expression, as stated in the previous paragraph,
but also to protein degradation through the lysosomal and
proteasomal pathways.

chromatin organization, methylated histone distribution,
DNA damage repair, cell cycling and proliferation.
In order to maximize progerin reduction, in view of a
possible therapeutic application, we associated to ATRA a
low dose of rapamycin because of its demonstrated efficacy
in promoting progerin clearance by means of autophagic
mechanism. Noteworthy, despite both lamin A and progerin
amount decreased during ATRA and ATRA-rapamycin
administration, the ratio between lamin A and progerin
was shifted toward higher values by combining the two
drugs. Also, decrease in prelamin A level was always
detected in association with progerin decrease. This result
represents an important issue because of the known toxicity
of this lamin A precursor, e.g. in prelamin-accumulating
laminopathies such as MADA and Restrictive Dermopathy.
Importantly, the combined use of ATRA and rapamycin
allowed us to employ rapamycin at much lower dosage
with respect to those previously reported, which reduces
drug toxicity and is particularly relevant in view of the
design of therapeutic applications.
As a first conclusion we can remark the view that
HGPS patients suffer from a double trouble consisting
in accumulation of progerin first, and then of prelamin
A [39, 43] and the treatment we describe here is efficient
in recovering from both alterations.

Cellular phenotype recovery
Together with the reduction in progerin amount we
describe the recovery of the general nuclear morphology
following treatment, including normal heterochromatin
pattern restoration.
The ultrastructural morphology analysis of ATRA
and rapamycin treated samples reveals regular nuclear
profiles and a normal distribution of euchromatin and
heterochromatin areas. In particular, ATRA contributes
to restore the regular nuclear shape in HGPS cells,
while rapamycin appears effective in the recovery of
an organization based on distinguished heterochromatin
and euchromatin domains. The combined treatment we
tested improves both aspects of the nuclear structure.
This effect is related to the reversal of the lamin A to
progerin ratio we observe following the combined
treatment.
Using immunofluorescence, we could detect an
abnormal distribution pattern of H3K9me3, a marker
of constitutive heterochromatin, in most HGPS nuclei,
namely in those with higher progerin expression,
featuring a diffuse H3K9me3 labelling; following
treatment, a normalization of the organization was clearly
detectable in an increasing number of nuclei, where
H3K9me3 distributed as aggregates on the nuclear rim
and at intranuclear clusters, according to published data
[5, 37, 40].
In this regard, it has been reported that progerin as
well as prelamin A sustain H3K9me3 anomalous increase

DISCUSSION
Lowering progerin levels
The results we show clearly indicate that ATRA is
effective in lowering the amount of progerin in cultured
skin fibroblasts derived from HGPS patients. Reduction of
progerin amount was accompanied by recovery of many
important nuclear markers referred to nuclear shape,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29922

Oncotarget

by way of enhanced SUV39H1 binding to the lamin
precursors, which prolongs the methylating activity of
this enzyme. This causes defective DNA accessibility for
the repair enzymes, early senescence and premature aging
in Zmpste24-/- mice, as well as chromatin repression
[44]. On the other hand, H3K9me3 has also been
reported to be quantitatively decreased in HGPS [45]
and other reports in the literature describe a decrease in
the amount of trimethylated H3K9 on the basis of
immunofluorescence data. The fluorescence reorganization
we show for the H3K9me3 from a uniform, low-intensity,
broadly distributed signal in abnormally large nuclei to
condensed, high-intensity signal, localized in foci within
smaller nuclei, may mimic an increase in amount. The
western blot analysis, however, confirmed that total H3
is decreased in HGPS nuclei but the H3K9me3 fraction
it contains is proportionally elevated. Treating the cells
with the drugs restores an higher level of total H3 whose
H3K9me3 fraction is proportionally reduced (Fig. S2A).
It appears therefore that the normalization of H3K9me3
distribution we obtain is related to the decrease in progerin
amount and/or to higher values of the lamin A/progerin
ratio. Beside this, ATRA has been also reported to regulate
chromatin acetylation by inhibiting HDACs and enhancing
acetyltransferase (HAT) activity [46].
Thus it appears that in progeric nuclei there is a
general chromatin functional impairment, maintained
by the high amounts of progerin and farnesylated
prelamin A, but following treatments a chromatin
reorganization is attainable, which is more similar
to the normal distribution into heterochromatin and
euchromatin domains. In this regard it is worth to note
that trichostatin A, an HDACs inhibitor, is also able to
reduce progerin level to some extent [5]. Moreover, we
previously demonstrated that the dispersed chromatin
commonly observed in progeric nucleoplasm by
transmission electron microscopy is not transcriptionally
active as euchromatin normally is [5], but it remains in a
particular “silenced but not compact” state that does not
imply an higher affinity for the electron-dense staining
media used for routine electron microscopy analysis,
thus appearing electron-transparent, like euchromatin is
reported to be.
PARP1 is involved in triggering DNA repair
mechanism, cooperating in the choice between
homologous recombination and non homologous end
joining (NHEJ). In the absence or reduction of PARP1,
DNA repair is shifted to NHEJ, which is a rapid errorprone DNA repair mechanism. In HGPS vascular
smooth muscle cells, this imbalance leads to alteration
of cell cycle with a prolonged G2/M phase due to an
impairment of mitosis [47]. It has been demonstrated
that PARP1 decreases with increasing level of progerin,
a common event in cultured progeria cells, associated
with increasing passage number [47]. Here we show that

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

PARP1 is considerably reduced in HGPS fibroblasts, but
treatment with ATRA and rapamycin is able to increase
and restore PARP1 level, thus improving the DNA
repair ability of these cells. Accordingly, we detect both
improvement of γH2Ax and 53BP1 labeling pattern and
a recovery of cytofluorimetric profiles showing decrease
of G2/M phase in comparison with untreated HGPS
cells.
Interestingly, PARP1 is also reported to associate
with BAF and lamin A to modulate transcription and
nucleosome organization [48]. Thus, recovery of BAF
distribution [49] in ATRA plus rapamycin-treated cells
may act synergistically with PARP1 recovery, leading
to functional improvement of chromatin in HGPS cells.
Moreover, combined ATRA plus rapamycin treatment is
also able to restore a normal distribution of the bridging
protein LAP2α throughout the nuclear interior, which
further contributes to recovery of the BAF-containing
protein platform, where LAP2α is a major partner [37].

Effects on cell cycle
HGPS fibroblasts are characterized by senescence
and, especially at high culture passages, display a
duplication slowdown. The data we obtained through the
cell population doubling assay demonstrate that ATRA and
rapamycin are able to improve the cell proliferation rate.
In comparison with controls, untreated HGPS fibroblasts
displayed an increased population in G2/M phase probably
related to accumulation of unrepaired DNA damage [50]
and prolonged mitosis, a decreased G1 phase, while
S phase was only slightly more populated. This result
was expected, as already described in the literature [47]
and reported in other progeroid laminopathies [37]. The
treatment with ATRA and particularly when combining
ATRA with rapamycin, reduced the G2/M population.
Both ATRA and rapamycin, as well as their combination,
contributed to slightly increase the frequency of cells
in G1 phase, while the S phase population was only
minimally affected by the treatment.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell cultures
All cell samples were obtained following an
informed consent by patients or families. The protocol was
approved by the local ethical committee.
HGPS skin fibroblasts were obtained from two
patients carrying the G608G LMNA mutation. Control
skin fibroblast cultures were obtained from skin biopsies
of two healthy patients (mean age 12) undergoing
orthopaedic surgery. Cell cultures were established
and  grown in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium
(DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum (Gibco)

29923

Oncotarget

and 1% penicillin/streptomycin. The experiments were
performed between passages 13 and 20.

with a Nikon E 600 epifluorescence microscope. The
images captured with NIS-Elements program 4.3, were
subsequently modified with Photoshop CS program.

Drug treatments

Western blotting

All experiments were carried out on proliferating
cells and drug administration was performed as reported
below. Rapamycin (0,1 μM, Sigma, Milano,  Italy)
and ATRA (10 nM, Sigma, Milano, Italy) were
given to cultured fibroblasts for 7–28 days changing the
drug-containing medium two times a week.
To block lysosomal activity (autophagy),
chloroquine (Sigma, 25 μM) was applied for 12 hrs either
in the presence or in the absence of rapamycin or ATRA.
To check the ubiquitin (Ub)–proteasome pathway (UPP),
proteasome inhibitor MG132 (Sigma, 1 μM) was applied
for 12 hrs.

Cells were lysed in a buffer containing 20 mM
Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 1% SDS, 1 mM Na3VO4, 1 mM
PMSF, 5% β-mercaptoethanol and protease inhibitors.
Total lysates were diluted in Laemmli buffer, subjected
to SDS-PAGE (8% or 4–20% gradient gel) and
transferred to nitrocellulose membranes (BioRad)
o/n at 4°C. Membranes were saturated with 4% BSA
and incubated with primary antibodies for 1 h or o/n.
Secondary antibodies were used at 1:15000 dilution
for 20 min. Immunoblotted bands were revealed by the
Amersham ECL detection system. Intensity measurement
was performed using a BioRad densitometer (GS 800)
equipped with Quantity One Software.

Antibodies

Gene Expression Analyses

Antibodies employed for Western blot analysis
or immunofluorescence labeling were: Anti-Progerin,
mouse monoclonal (ALX-804-662, Enzo Life Sciences);
anti-lamin A/C, goat polyclonal (SC-6215, Santa Cruz
Biotechnology); anti-prelamin A, goat polyclonal
(SC-6214 Santa Cruz Biotechnology); anti-prelamin A,
rabbit polyclonal (1188-2, Diatheva), raised against the last
15 aminoacids of the prelamin A sequence including the
farnesylated cysteine residue but not the SIM sequence;
anti-H3K9me3, mouse monoclonal (AB6001, Abcam) and
rabbit polyclonal (07-442, Millipore); anti-monomethylH3K9, rabbit polyclonal (Abcam); anti-Histone H3, goat
polyclonal (Santa Cruz Biotechnology C-16); anti-BAF,
rabbit polyclonal (FL-89, Santa Cruz Biotechnology); antiLAP2α, rabbit polyclonal (kind gift of Roland Foisner);
anti-γH2AX, rabbit polyclonal 4937 Cell Signalling); anti53BP1, rabbit polyclonal AB2893 Abcam); anti-PARP-1,
rabbit polyclonal SC-7150 Santa Cruz Biotechnology);
anti-LC3 rabbit polyclonal antibody (NB100-2220, Novus
Biological); anti-p62/SQSTM1, guinea pig polyclonal
(GP62-C, Progen Biotechnik); anti-actin, goat polyclonal
(A1616, Santa Cruz Biotechnology); anti-GAPDH, mouse
monoclonal (MAB374, Millipore).

All samples at the end of the 28 days of treatment
were harvested and washed in PBS twice while maintained
in ice. Cell pellets were lysed by the addition of 0.5 ml
of TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen). RNA was recovered by
precipitation with isopropyl alcohol and then treated with
DNase I (DNAfree Kit, Ambion). Total RNA was reverse
transcribed using the High Capacity RNA-to-cDNA Kit
(Applied Biosystems), according to the manufacturer’s
protocol. Complementary DNA was synthesized from
1 μg of total RNA per sample and analyzed by RT-qPCR.
mRNAs of interest were quantified with specific primers:
(progerin Fw: 5′-ACTGCAGCAGCTCGGGG-3′, progerin
Rev: 5′-TCTGGGGGCTCTGGGC-3′, prelamin A Fw:
5′-ACTGGGGAAGAAGTGGCCAT-3′, prelamin A Rev:
5′- GCTGCAGTGGGAGCCGT-3′, and housekeeping
gene
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase
(GAPDH): Fw: 5′-TTGCCCTCAACGACCACTTTG-3′,
Rev: 5-CACCCTGTTGCTGTAGCCAAATTC-3. ∆∆Ct
method was used to quantify relative gene expression
levels. Data are representative of three independent
biological replicates.

Electron microscopy

Immunofluorescence

Cell pellets from control and HGPS fibroblasts were
fixed with 2.5% glutaraldehyde-0.1 M cacodylate buffer
pH 7.3 for 1 h at room temperature. After post-fixation
with 1% osmium tetroxide (OsO4) in sodium cacodylate
buffer 0.1M for 1 h, the pellets were dehydrated in an
ethanol series, infiltrated with propylene oxide and
embedded in Epon resin. Ultrathin sections (60 nm thick)
were stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate (10 min
each) and were observed at 0° tilt angle with a JEOL
JEM-1011 transmission electron microscope, operated at
100 kV. At least 300 nuclei per sample were observed.

Human fibroblasts grown on glass coverslips were
fixed with absolute methanol at −20°C for 7 min or
with 4% paraformaldehyde in 1% PBS at RT for 10 min
followed by 0.15% TRITON-X permeabilization. After
saturation of non-specific binding with PBS containing
4% BSA, the coverlips were incubated with primary
antibodies overnight at 4°C, and revealed with FITC or
TRIC-conjugated secondary antibodies (1 hr at RT).
Samples were mounted with an anti-fading reagent
(Molecular Probes Life Technologies) and observed
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29924

Oncotarget

Cytofluorimetry

model of progeria expressing both progerin and wild-type
lamin A.
Some hypotheses may be suggested about the
mechanism by which ATRA and rapamycin, either
singularly or in combination, influence the HGPS cellular
phenotype. Upon ATRA treatment, we detect a decrease in
mRNA level of both lamin A and progerin with respect to
untreated cells suggesting that ATRA is effective on LMNA
gene at the transcriptional level in HGPS fibroblasts. In
addition we demonstrate a definite activation of autophagy
which contributes to protein downregulation following
ATRA administration. Accordingly, ATRA is known
to promote autophagy [34], a mechanism involved in
progerin degradation, and also triggered by rapamycin
in a selective manner against progerin [24, 25, 36]. So
we deduce that both transcriptional and autophagic
mechanisms are activated upon treating HGPS cells
with ATRA and rapamycin, resulting in the decrease of
lamin A, prelamin A and progerin.
In addition, during combined ATRA-rapamycin
treatment, further effects may be elicited, resulting from
multiple interactions, influencing each other and forming
feedbacks. As a final result, a restored chromatin status is
reached in HGPS nuclei, with distinct euchromatin and
heterochromatin domains. In this status chromatin appears
functionally active and more accessible to the nuclear
enzymatic machinery, therefore a more efficient DNA
repair is made possible [51].
We hypothesize a series of potential advantages
in using ATRA-rapamycin treatment in comparison
with drugs which target the farnesylation step in the
maturation of prelamin/progerin. Farnesylation inhibition
causes effectively a reduction of farnesylated progerin
(and farnesylated prelamin A), but as major drawbacks,
it causes an increase in the amount of non-farnesylated
prelamin A and a decrease in the availability of mature
lamin A [52].
Furthermore, the decrease in prelamin A we obtain,
would suggest testing ATRA efficacy also in prelamin
A -accumulating laminopathies other than HGPS,
where major nuclear alterations are caused by prelamin
A forms [53].
Considering the wide availability of both drugs,
which have been in use for years and have been
thoroughly tested with regard to dosage, tolerance, side
effects and toxicity, their low cost and, most importantly,
the severity of HGPS, it appears reasonable to promote
ATRA and ATRA-rapamycin clinical testing.

We performed cell cycle analysis by Muse® Cell
Analyzer (Millipore). The cells were removed from the
flask with trypsin 1% - PBS 1X, washed 3 times with
PBS and resuspended in cold methanol vortexing to avoid
cell aggregates. Cell suspension was maintained at 4°C
over night up to the analysis. The staining protocol used
is conforming to The Muse™ Cell Cycle Assay Kit datasheet (MCH100106, Millipore).

Population doubling
Cell proliferation was evaluated using AlamarBlue
Assay (BUF012B, AbD Serotec). HGPS cells were seeded
at a density of 3 × 104 cells per well in a 24-well plate
in minimum essential medium in the presence or absence
of treatments. After 12, 24 and 48 hrs the plate was
incubated at 37°C and 5% CO2 in humidified atmosphere
with completed DMEM containing 10% Alamar Blue
solution. After 4 hrs, 200 μl aliquots of cell supernatant
were transferred in a 96-well plate and measured. Treated
samples, controls and blanks were scanned at 600nm and
570 nm wavelength using a TECAN Infinite® 200 PRO
series spectrophotometer.
The percentage of Alamar Blue reduction were
calculated according to manufacturer’s instructions.

Statistical analysis
Data are expressed as means ± standard deviation
(SD). Statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad
Prism 6 program. Comparison between groups was made
by one-way ANOVA test. Differences were considered
significant at P ≤ 0.05 and highly significant at P ≤ 0.01.
A single symbol (such as *) indicates P ≤ 0.05 and a double
symbol (**) indicates P ≤ 0.01. Statistical significance for
RT-qPCR was measured by Student’s t-test. Differences
were considered significant when p values were less
than 0.05 (indicated by ** for p < 0.01 and by *** for
p-value < 0.001).

CONCLUSIONS
We deduce that the higher lamin A to progerin
ratio we obtain by ATRA plus rapamycin treatment of
HGPS fibroblasts is sufficient to repair a series of nuclear
parameters resulting in an almost complete nuclear
normalization. This result also suggests that the lower
level of lamin A resulting from the ATRA treatment is still
fully compatible with cellular life and that the decrease
in progerin amount is sufficient to prevent general toxic
effects, suggesting that there might be a threshold level
for progerin toxicity. These observations imply that in vivo
confirmation of the efficacy of combined ATRA and
rapamycin treatment will require a heterozygous animal
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Professor Roland Foisner, Medical
University of Vienna, for providing us with the LAP2α
antibody.

29925

Oncotarget

FUNDING

12.	 Pollex RL, Hegele RA. Hutchinson-Gilford progeria
­syndrome. Clin Genet. 2004; 66:375–381.

This work was funded by grants “Italian FIRB MIUR
2010” and “AIProSaB 2014” to IGM, and grant “5 per mille”
Project 2011 to Rizzoli Orthopaedic Institute.

13.	 Eriksson M, Brown WT, Gordon LB, Glynn MW, Singer J,
Scott L, Erdos MR, Robbins CM, Moses TY, Berglund P,
Dutra A, Pak E, Durkin S, Csoka AB, Boehnke M,
Glover TW, et al. Recurrent de novo point mutations in
lamin A cause Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome.
Nature. 2003; 423:293–298.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The Authors declare no conflict of interest

14.	 Capell BC, Collins FS. Human laminopathies: nuclei gone
genetically awry. Nat Rev Genet. 2006; 7:940–952.
15.	 De Sandre-Giovannoli A, Bernard R, Cau P, Navarro C,
Amiel J, Boccaccio I, Lyonnet S, Stewart CL, Munnich A,
Le Merrer M, Lévy N. Lamin a truncation in HutchinsonGilford progeria. Science. 2003; 300:2055.

REFERENCES
1.	 Moir RD, Spann TP. The structure and function of nuclear
lamins: implications for disease. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2001;
58:1748–1757.

16.	 Panigrahi RG, Panigrahi A, Vijayakumar P, Choudhury P,
Bhuyan SK, Bhuyan R, Maragathavalli G, Pati AR.
Hutchinson-gilford progeria syndrome: a rare genetic
­disorder. Case Rep Dent. 2013; 2013:631378.

2.	 Prokocimer M, Barkan R, Gruenbaum Y. HutchinsonGilford progeria syndrome through the lens of transcription.
Aging Cell. 2013; 12:533–543.

17.	 Mehta IS, Eskiw CH, Arican HD, Kill IR, Bridger JM.
Farnesyltransferase inhibitor treatment restores chromosome territory positions and active chromosome dynamics
in Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome cells. Genome
Biol. 2011; 12:R74.

3.	 Lopez-Soler RI, Moir RD, Spann TP, Stick R, Goldman RD.
A role for nuclear lamins in nuclear envelope assembly.
J Cell Biol. 2001; 154:61–70.
4.	 Meta M, Yang S, Bergo M, Fong L, Young S. Protein farnesyltransferase inhibitors and progeria. Trends Mol Med.
2006; 12:480–487.

18.	 Zhavoronkov A, Smit-McBride Z, Guinan KJ,
Litovchenko M, Moskalev A. Potential therapeutic
approaches for modulating expression and accumulation
of defective lamin A in laminopathies and age-related diseases. J Mol Med (Berl). 2012; 90:1361–1389.

5.	 Columbaro M, Capanni C, Mattioli E, Novelli G,
Parnaik V, Squarzoni S, Maraldi N, Lattanzi G. Rescue
of ­
heterochromatin organization in Hutchinson-Gilford
progeria by drug treatment. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2005;
62:2669–2678.

19.	 Cau P, Navarro C, Harhouri K, Roll P, Sigaudy S,
Kaspi E, Perrin S, De Sandre-Giovannoli A, Lévy N.
Nuclear matrix, nuclear envelope and premature aging
syndromes in a translational research perspective. Semin
Cell Dev Biol. 2014.

6.	 Corrigan DP, Kuszczak D, Rusinol AE, Thewke DP,
Hrycyna CA, Michaelis S, Sinensky MS. Prelamin A endoproteolytic processing in vitro by recombinant Zmpste24.
Biochem J. 2005; 387:129–138.

20.	 Osorio FG, Navarro CL, Cadiñanos J, López-Mejía IC,
Quirós PM, Bartoli C, Rivera J, Tazi J, Guzmán G,
Varela I, Depetris D, de Carlos F, Cobo J, Andrés V,
De Sandre-Giovannoli A, Freije JM, et al. Splicing-directed
therapy in a new mouse model of human accelerated aging.
Sci Transl Med. 2011; 3:106ra107.

7.	 Young S, Fong L, Michaelis S. Prelamin, A, Zmpste24,
misshapen cell nuclei, and progeria—new evidence suggesting that protein farnesylation could be important for
disease pathogenesis. J Lipid Res. 2005; 46:2531–2558.
8.	 Lattanzi G. Prelamin A-mediated nuclear envelope
­dynamics in normal and laminopathic cells. Biochem Soc
Trans. England. 2011; 1698–1704.

21.	 Gordon LB, Kleinman ME, Miller DT, Neuberg DS,
Giobbie-Hurder A, Gerhard-Herman M, Smoot LB,
Gordon CM, Cleveland R, Snyder BD, Fligor B,
Bishop WR, Statkevich P, Regen A, Sonis A, Riley S,
et al. Clinical trial of a farnesyltransferase inhibitor in
children with Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America. 2012; 109:16666–16671.

9.	 Mounkes LC, Stewart CL. Aging and nuclear organization: lamins and progeria. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2004;
16:322–327.
10.	 González JM, Andrés V. Synthesis, transport and incorporation into the nuclear envelope of A-type lamins and inner
nuclear membrane proteins. Biochem Soc Trans. 2011;
39:1758–1763.

22.	 Varela I, Pereira S, Ugalde AP, Navarro CL, Suárez MF,
Cau P, Cadiñanos J, Osorio FG, Foray N, Cobo J,
de Carlos F, Lévy N, Freije JM, López-Otín C. Combined
treatment with statins and aminobisphosphonates extends
longevity in a mouse model of human premature aging. Nat
Med. 2008; 14:767–772.

11.	 Merideth M, Gordon L, Clauss S, Sachdev V, Smith A,
Perry M, Brewer C, Zalewski C, Kim H, Solomon B,
Brooks B, Gerber L, Turner M, Domingo D, Hart T, Graf J,
et al. Phenotype and course of Hutchinson-Gilford progeria
syndrome. N Engl J Med. 2008; 358:592–604.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29926

Oncotarget

23.	 Cenni V, Capanni C, Columbaro M, Ortolani M,
D’Apice MR, Novelli G, Fini M, Marmiroli S, Scarano E,
Maraldi NM, Squarzoni S, Prencipe S, Lattanzi G.
Autophagic degradation of farnesylated prelamin A as a
therapeutic approach to lamin-linked progeria. European
journal of histochemistry: EJH. 2011; 55:e36.

35.	 Rajawat Y, Hilioti Z, Bossis I. Retinoic acid induces
autophagosome maturation through redistribution of the cation-independent mannose-6-phosphate receptor. Antioxid
Redox Signal. 2011; 14:2165–2177.
36.	 Cenni V, Capanni C, Columbaro M, Ortolani M,
D’Apice MR, Novelli G, Fini M, Marmiroli S, Scarano E,
Maraldi NM, Squarzoni S, Prencipe S, Lattanzi G.
Autophagic degradation of farnesylated prelamin A as
a therapeutic approach to lamin-linked progeria. Eur J
Histochem. Italy. 2011; e36.

24.	 Mendelsohn AR, Larrick JW. Rapamycin as an antiaging
therapeutic?: targeting mammalian target of rapamycin to
treat Hutchinson-Gilford progeria and neurodegenerative
diseases. Rejuvenation Res. 2011; 14:437–441.
25.	 Cao K, Graziotto JJ, Blair CD, Mazzulli JR, Erdos MR,
Krainc D, Collins FS. Rapamycin reverses cellular phenotypes and enhances mutant protein clearance in HutchinsonGilford progeria syndrome cells. Sci Transl Med. 2011;
3:89ra58.

37.	 Camozzi D, Capanni C, Cenni V, Mattioli E, Columbaro M,
Squarzoni S, Lattanzi G. Diverse lamin-dependent mechanisms interact to control chromatin dynamics: Focus on
laminopathies. Nucleus. 2014; 5.
38.	 Shumaker D, Dechat T, Kohlmaier A, Adam S, Bozovsky M,
Erdos M, Eriksson M, Goldman A, Khuon S, Collins F,
Jenuwein T, Goldman R. Mutant nuclear lamin A leads to
progressive alterations of epigenetic control in premature
aging. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006; 103:8703–8708.

26.	 Bjedov I, Partridge L. A longer and healthier life with TOR
down-regulation: genetics and drugs. Biochem Soc Trans.
2011; 39:460–465.
27.	 Arancio W. A bioinformatics analysis of Lamin-A regulatory network: a perspective on epigenetic involvement
in Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome. Rejuvenation
Res. 2012; 15:123–127.

39.	 Capanni C, Cenni V, Haraguchi T, Squarzoni S,
Schuchner S, Ogris E, Novelli G, Maraldi N, Lattanzi G.
Lamin A precursor induces barrier-to-autointegration factor
nuclear localization. Cell Cycle. United States: 2010 Landes
Bioscience2010; 2600–2610.

28.	 Olins AL, Herrmann H, Lichter P, Kratzmeier M,
Doenecke D, Olins DE. Nuclear envelope and chromatin
compositional differences comparing undifferentiated and
retinoic acid- and phorbol ester-treated HL-60 cells. Exp
Cell Res. 2001; 268:115–127.

40.	 Lattanzi G, Columbaro M, Mattioli E, Cenni V, Camozzi D,
Wehnert M, Santi S, Riccio M, Del Coco R, Maraldi N,
Squarzoni S, Foisner R, Capanni C. Pre-Lamin A processing is linked to heterochromatin organization. J Cell
Biochem. 2007; 102:1149–1159.

29.	 Saito A, Sugawara A, Uruno A, Kudo M, Kagechika H,
Sato Y, Owada Y, Kondo H, Sato M, Kurabayashi M,
Imaizumi M, Tsuchiya S, Ito S. All-trans retinoic acid
induces in vitro angiogenesis via retinoic acid receptor: possible involvement of paracrine effects of endogenous vascular endothelial growth factor signaling. Endocrinology.
2007; 148:1412–1423.

41.	 Zhang H, Xiong ZM, Cao K. Mechanisms controlling the
smooth muscle cell death in progeria via down-regulation
of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America. 2014; 111:E2261–2270.

30.	 Swift J, Ivanovska IL, Buxboim A, Harada T, Dingal PC,
Pinter J, Pajerowski JD, Spinler KR, Shin JW, Tewari M,
Rehfeldt F, Speicher DW, Discher DE. Nuclear lamin-A
scales with tissue stiffness and enhances matrix-directed
differentiation. Science. 2013; 341:1240104.

42.	 Korolchuk VI, Menzies FM, Rubinsztein DC. Mechanisms
of cross-talk between the ubiquitin-proteasome and autophagy-lysosome systems. FEBS Lett. (Netherlands: 2009
Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published
by Elsevier B.V). 2010; 1393–1398.

31.	 Tee MK, Vigne JL, Taylor RN. All-trans retinoic acid
inhibits vascular endothelial growth factor expression in a
cell model of neutrophil activation. Endocrinology. 2006;
147:1264–1270.

43.	 Liu Y, Wang Y, Rusinol A, Sinensky M, Liu J, Shell S,
Zou Y. Involvement of xeroderma pigmentosum
group A (XPA) in progeria arising from defective maturation of prelamin A. FASEB J. 2008; 22:603–611.

32.	 Okumura K, Nakamachi K, Hosoe Y, Nakajima N.
Identification of a novel retinoic acid-responsive element
within the lamin A/C promoter. Biochem Biophys Res
Commun. 2000; 269:197–202.

44.	 Liu B, Wang Z, Zhang L, Ghosh S, Zheng H, Zhou Z.
Depleting the methyltransferase Suv39 h1 improves DNA
repair and extends lifespan in a progeria mouse model. Nat
Commun. 2013; 4:1868.

33.	 Okumura K, Hosoe Y, Nakajima N. c-Jun and Sp1 family are critical for retinoic acid induction of the lamin A/C
retinoic acid-responsive element. Biochem Biophys Res
Commun. 2004; 320:487–492.

45.	 Scaffidi P, Misteli T. Lamin A-dependent nuclear defects in
human aging. Science. 2006; 312:1059–1063.
46.	 Rahim R, Strobl JS. Hydroxychloroquine, chloroquine, and
all-trans retinoic acid regulate growth, survival, and histone
acetylation in breast cancer cells. Anticancer Drugs. 2009;
20:736–745.

34.	 Rajawat Y, Hilioti Z, Bossis I. Autophagy: a target for retinoic acids. Autophagy. 2010; 6:1224–1226.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29927

Oncotarget

47.	 Zhang H, Xiong ZM, Cao K. Mechanisms controlling the
smooth muscle cell death in progeria via down-regulation
of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A. 2014.

51.	 Zuchegna C, Aceto F, Bertoni A, Romano A, Perillo B,
Laccetti P, Gottesman ME, Avvedimento EV, Porcellini A.
Mechanism of retinoic acid-induced transcription: histone
code, DNA oxidation and formation of chromatin loops.
Nucleic acids research. 2014; 42:11040–11055.

48.	 Montes de Oca R, Shoemaker CJ, Gucek M, Cole RN,
Wilson KL. Barrier-to-autointegration factor proteome
reveals chromatin-regulatory partners. PloS one. 2009;
4:e7050.

52.	 Verstraeten VL, Peckham LA, Olive M, Capell BC,
Collins FS, Nabel EG, Young SG, Fong LG, Lammerding J.
Protein farnesylation inhibitors cause donut-shaped cell
nuclei attributable to a centrosome separation defect. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011; 108:4997–5002.

49.	 Capanni C, Squarzoni S, Cenni V, D’Apice MR,
Gambineri A, Novelli G, Wehnert M, Pasquali R,
Maraldi NM, Lattanzi G. Familial partial lipodystrophy,
mandibuloacral dysplasia and restrictive dermopathy feature barrier-to-autointegration factor (BAF) nuclear redistribution. Cell Cycle. 2012.

53.	 Cenni V, Capanni C, Mattioli E, Columbaro M, Wehnert M,
Ortolani M, Fini M, Novelli G, Bertacchini J, Maraldi NM,
Marmiroli S, D’Apice MR, Prencipe S, Squarzoni S,
Lattanzi G. Rapamycin treatment of Mandibuloacral
Dysplasia cells rescues localization of chromatin-associated
proteins and cell cycle dynamics. Aging. 2014; 6:755–770.

50.	 Richards SA, Muter J, Ritchie P, Lattanzi G, Hutchison CJ.
The accumulation of un-repairable DNA damage in laminopathy progeria fibroblasts is caused by ROS generation and is prevented by treatment with N-acetyl cysteine.
Human molecular genetics. 2011; 20:3997–4004.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29928

Oncotarget

