2790

Parallels Between the Development of Therapeutic
Drugs and Cancer Health Disparity Programs
Implications for Disparities Reduction

Kenneth C. Chu, PhD1
Moon S. Chen Jr, PhD, MPH2
Mark B. Dignan, PhD, MPH3
Emmanuel Taylor, DrPH1
Edward Partridge, MD4
Community Network Program
Principal Investigators

BACKGROUND. There are analogies between the development of therapeutic drugs
for cancer and the development of interventions for reducing cancer health disparities. In both cases, it can take between 12 and 15 years for the benefits to
become apparent.

METHODS. The initial preclinical phase of drug development is analogous to the
development of community partnerships and helping the community learn about
cancer. The preclinical phase of in vitro and in vivo testing is analogous to identifying the disparities in the community. Then clinical testing begins with phase 1,

1

Disparities Research Branch, Center to Reduce
Cancer Health Disparities, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland.

toxicity, and dose-establishing studies. Analogously, community-based participa-

2

RESULTS. The phase 2 clinical studies to determine whether the drug has activity

Department of Internal Medicine, Population
Research and Cancer Disparities, University of
California, Davis Cancer Center, Sacramento,
California.
3

Department of Internal Medicine, Prevention
Research Center, Markey Cancer Center, Lexington, Kentucky.
4

Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama.
Supported by the Center to Reduce Cancer Health
Disparities of the National Cancer Institute.

tory research is used to develop disparities–reducing interventions (DRIs) within
the community.
are analogous to the DRI being implemented in the community to determine
whether it can cause behavioral changes that will reduce cancer health disparities. If a drug passes phase 1 and 2 studies, phase 3 clinical trials are initiated.
These are controlled studies to examine the efficacy of the drug. The similar activity for disparities research is to determine whether the DRI is better than the
current standard/usual practice in controlled trials. If the drug is beneficial, the
final phase is the dissemination and adoption of the drug. Analogously in disparities, if the DRI is beneficial, it is disseminated and is culturally adapted to other
racial/ethnic groups and finally adopted as standard practice.

CONCLUSIONS. The process of creating an effective DRI can be envisioned to
have 4 stages, which can be used to aid in measuring the progress being made in
reducing cancer health disparities. Cancer 2008;113:2790–6. Published 2008 by

The Community Network Program Principal Investigators are: Terrance Albrecht, PhD (Barbara Ann
Karmanos Cancer Institute); Claudia Baquet, MD,
MPH (University of Maryland School of Medicine);
Laura Beebe, PhD (University of Oklahoma Health
Sciences Center); Dedra Buchwald, MD (University
of Washington); Moon S. Chen Jr, PhD, MPH (University of California at Davis Cancer Center); Clayton Chong, MD (Papa Ola Lokahi, HI); Kathryn
Coe, PhD (Inter-Tribal Council of Arizona); Graham
Colditz, MD, DrPH (Washington University); Mark
Dignan, PhD, MPH (University of Kentucky
Research Foundation); Paula A. Espinoza, PhD
(University of Colorado Health Sciences Center);
Paul A. Godley, MD, PhD, MPP (University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill); Margaret K. Hargreaves,
PhD (Meharry Medical College); James R. Hebert,
ScD, MSPH (University of South Carolina Research
Foundation); Ronda Henry-Tillman, MD (University
of Arkansas for Medical Sciences); Elmer Huerta,
MD, MPH (MedStar Research Institute, Washing-

the American Cancer Society.*

KEYWORDS: therapeutic drugs, cancer health disparity, disparities-reducing intervention, information dissemination, community-based participatory research.
ton DC); Judith Kaur, MD, MA (Mayo Clinic College
of Medicine); Howard Koh, MD, MPH (Harvard University School of Public Health); Grace X. Ma, PhD
(Temple University); Cathy D. Meade, PhD, RN (H.
Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute);
Edward Partridge, MD (University of Alabama at
Birmingham Comprehensive Cancer Center); Amelie Ramirez, DrPH, MPH (University of Texas Health
Science Center at San Antonio); David Satcher,
MD, PhD (Morehouse School of Medicine); Sora
Park Tanjasiri, DrPH (California State University);
Beti Thompson, PhD (Fred Hutchinson Cancer
Research Center); and Victor Williams Tofaeono,
MD (Lyndon Baines Johnson Tropical Medical Center, American Samoa).

Published 2008 by the American Cancer Society*
DOI 10.1002/cncr.23879
Published online 8 September 2008 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

Address for reprints: Kenneth C. Chu, PhD,
Disparities Research Branch, Center to Reduce
Cancer Health Disparities, National Cancer Institute, 6116 Executive Blvd., Room 602, 9000
Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20892-8341; Fax:
(302) 435-9225; E-mail: kc10d@nih.gov
Received March 28, 2008; revision received May
9, 2008; accepted May 15, 2008.
*This article is a US government work and, as
such, is in the public domain in the United States
of America.

Therapeutic Drugs and Cancer Health Disparity/Chu et al

2791

I

n 2000, the national goal of eliminating health disparities by 2010 was proclaimed1; however, as we
draw closer to that target year, it is becoming apparent that, similar to curing cancer, eliminating cancer
health disparities is likely to be much more complicated and involved than initially envisioned.2 Our
premise in this article is that the goal of eliminating
cancer health disparities or the differences that exist
among specific population groups in the US3 is laudatory and inspiring, but the complexity of disparities
makes reduction a much longer process than first
expected. In examining the progress made to date,
we observed that, similar to the development of
drugs for cancer, the elimination of cancer health
disparities represents a series of progressive steps
that leads to the ultimate goal. Each step in the drug
development process builds on prior foundations, all
of which require various amounts of time, resources,
and persistence. In this article, we developed a
model for the reduction of cancer health disparities based on analogies with therapeutic drug
development.

Networks Program (CNP) in 2006. A total of 25 such
CNPs have been funded to date, with 13 of them
being former SPNs.
As stated in the requests for applications (RFA),
the goal of the CNP (RFA-CA-05-012) is to reduce
cancer health disparities using 5-year cooperative
agreement grants.9 Cancer health disparities occur
when beneficial medical interventions (eg, smoking
cessation, mammography, Papanicolaou smears, colorectal cancer screening, and beneficial cancer treatments) are not shared by all. The goal of the CNP is
to increase access to and utilization of these beneficial medical interventions. This goal was conceived
to occur in 3 phases:1) phase 1: capacity building
and community education; 2) phase 2: communitybased research and training programs; and 3) phase
3: credibility and sustainability of the CNP. An examination of the progress and achievements of these
programs over the course of 8 years (5 years of SPN
and 3 years of CNP) provides insight into the steps
needed to reduce cancer healthcare disparities.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

RESULTS

Beginning in 2000, the National Cancer Institute
(NCI) furthered its commitment to address the
unequal cancer burden4 experienced by racial/ethnic
minorities by funding the Special Populations Networks (SPNs) for 5 years.5 Eighteen such networks
were funded and included national networks that
focused on Appalachian residents and on each of the
major racial/ethnic groups (African Americans, Hispanics, American Indians/Alaska Natives, and Asians
and Pacific Islanders), as well as local and regional
networks.6-8 Being funded as cooperative agreements
(U01 grants) rather than R01 grants fostered collaboration with these communities; they became partners in cancer awareness, research, and training,
rather than being the objects of research. Over a 5year period, these SPNs catalyzed or conducted
greater than 1000 cancer awareness activities; trained
greater than 2000 community lay health workers; formulated greater than 300 formal community partnerships through signed Memoranda of Understanding;
trained greater than 150 minority researchers; produced greater than 290 peer-reviewed scientific publications; and leveraged the NCI’s Center to Reduce
Cancer Health Disparities funding by obtaining in
excess of $20.5 million from additional sources for
training, cancer awareness, and research activities.6
In recognition of the need to focus even further on
the community-based reduction of cancer health disparities, the SPNs were succeeded by the Community

Parallels between Therapeutic Drug Development and
Reducing Cancer Health Disparities
Developing a drug to market or distribute is a complex process that typically requires between 12 and
15 years.10 Reducing cancer mortality rates in the
general population has taken approximately the
same number of years. The advent of large-scale cancer screening, such as the use of mammography,
initially caused cancer incidence rates to rise beginning in 1982,11 and it was not until 1993 that a consistent pattern of decline in breast cancer mortality
occurred. Importantly, the decline in mortality was
found to occur at different times in different racial/
ethnic groups. Twelve years (1982-1993) were needed
to demonstrate the declines for whites.12,13 For
blacks, it took until 2000-19 years-to observe these
changes in mortality rates, a total of 7 years longer.12,13 Thus, it takes many years to reduce cancer
mortality rates because of beneficial cancer interventions and even more to reduce cancer health disparities. Furthermore, the issue of cancer health
disparities and their reduction is extremely complex,
involving the individual with the disparity, their primary care provider, their community, and the healthcare system that serves them. For progress to be
measured during a relatively short period of 5 years
requires evaluating the procedures or interventions
that attempt to reduce the disparities, rather than
changes in the incidence or mortality rates.

2792

CANCER

November 15, 2008 / Volume 113 / Number 10

In drug discovery,10 molecular target identification begins with an understanding of the basic pathways involved in the carcinogenic processes. In
cancer health disparities research, the first stage is
capacity building and understanding the community’s disparities and their determinants. This
involves multiple steps. The first is to identify the
cancer health disparities in the racial/ethnic populations within a geographic area. These include differences in cancer incidence and/or mortality rates or
differences in the use of recommended cancer procedures, such as screening guidelines. The next preclinical stage is the development of the drug affecting
the molecular target. Once the target for the drug is
identified, the development or identification of a
drug to impact the target is the next challenge. The
development of community and clinical partnerships
in the racial/ethnic populations within the geographic areas is the analogous step in disparities
research. The partnerships are the link between the
disparities and groups that can affect changes. The
process of forming partnerships also helps in understanding the community power structure and functioning. The next step for drug development is in
vitro studies, the use of cell lines to determine
whether the drug can affect the target site. The scientific question is ‘‘does the drug affect the target
site?’’ For community-based programs, educating the
partners about cancer and the principles of community-based participatory research are essential. The
key element of trust grows through the transparent
sharing of data with the community, and open
engagement in the community-based participatory
research process.14 The next step in drug design are
animal in vivo studies: ‘‘Does the drug work in an in
vivo system? Is it likely to work in humans? Is it too
toxic for human use? What is the likely dose for
humans?’’ The in vivo studies use a small number of
animals to determine the answers to these questions.
In health disparities, the analogous activity is needs
assessments, key informant surveys, and focus
groups to confirm the disparities and determinants
that should be addressed, with priority assignments
of these disparities. This process is likely to include
the development of a community action plan (via a
community-based participatory process) to address
the targeted disparity.
In drug development, the completion of the preclinical phase initiates the study of the drug in
humans, which is the clinical phase. It begins with
phase 1 clinical trial studies. These studies are performed in a small number of patients. There is a
determination of the safe dose, any toxicity is identified, and modifications are implemented if necessary.

The analogous activity in cancer health disparities is
the development of the intervention with community
participation. This may involve an evaluation of the
acceptability and ease of administration of the intervention within the community and the intervention
may undergo modifications as necessary. This phase
ends when the community approves the intervention
to be implemented within the community. For drug
development, phase 2 clinical trial studies are begun
to determine whether the drug has any efficacy (eg,
assessing partial and complete response rates,
disease-free survival, and overall survival). In health
disparities, the analogous activities are the implementation of the intervention in targeted racial/
ethnic geographic populations with the measurement
of behavioral change. The metrics may be pretests
and post-tests, comparison with historical controls,
changes in behavioral surveys, and other measures
that can determine whether the intervention
can affect behavior changes within the targeted
disparities.
If phase 1 and 2 drug development studies are
successful, phase 3 clinical trials are then initiated.
These are controlled studies to determine whether
the drug is better than the current standard of care.
These can be large studies that involve cooperative
groups, cancer centers, and community cancer oncology programs. They are characterized as requiring
additional funding, apart from the funding for the
phase 1 and 2 studies already performed. In cancer
health disparities, the controlled testing of the intervention in communities also may require additional
funding, such as from investigator-initiated sources
(eg, R01 and P01 grant mechanisms).
The final stage is the dissemination, adaptation,
and adoption of the intervention so that communities can use the intervention to reduce healthcare
disparities. In drug development, if the intervention
is successful, providers are educated about the drug
to make the distribution of the drug more readily
available. This can allow for the adoption of the drug
as the standard care. In cancer health disparities, the
successful intervention is made available to others so
that they can disseminate the intervention to other
communities, and adapt it to the cultural issues of
other racial/ethnic groups, leading to its adoption as
standard/usual practice. See Table 1 for the comparison of drug discovery and development and reducing
cancer health disparities.
A simple metaphor for these stages is the example of diagnosing and treating a patient. The development of partnerships is similar to the patients
telling the physician about their illness and the physician performing a clinical examination of the

CNP indicates Community Networks Program.

Stage IV Disseminate results to
community and their adoption

Delivery/dissemination of new drug/
product, adoption in practice

Dissemination, adaptation, and adoption of intervention in practice by organizations/policy makers/
providers

Controlled randomized trials comparing different interventions or intervention vs standard practice. Establish
efficacy of the intervention then its effectiveness. May need to assess cost-effectiveness.

Implement intervention in community
Phase 3: Sustainability and credibility – informing
about disparities reducing interventions

Phase 2: Research and training
Developing disparities reducing interventions

Stage III Evaluate intervention Test in controlled studies

Development of intervention, work with
community to develop intervention with
feedback and changes and then approval (is the
‘‘dose" appropriate and/or is it too ‘‘toxic’’?)
(6-12 mo)

Assessing the needs of community partners

Educating partners to build trust

Create partnerships

Phase 1: Capacity building and identifying
disparities

CNP Phases

Phase 3
Randomized controlled trials

Stage II
Developing interventions

Identification of cancer health disparities to be
targeted, racial/ethnic population, geographic
area (3-6 mo)
Development of community and clinical
partnerships in targeted racial/ethnic and
geographic population (12 mo)
Partnership education about cancer and principles
of community-based participatory research (6-12
mo)
Needs/assets evaluation, key informant interviews,
focus groups (6 mo)
May develop Community Action Plan (via
community-based participatory process)

Community-based Activities to Develop
Disparities-reducing Interventions

Phase 2 clinical trial
Efficacy (partial and complete response rate,
disease-free survival, overall survival)

Phase 1 clinical trial
Safe dose
Toxicity
Modification as necessary

Clinical studies

Stage I Capacity building and
identifying disparities

Stages in Community-based
Cancer Health Disparities
Research

Field testing of intervention with initial evaluation
of acceptability and ease of administration and
modifications of plan as necessary (3-6 mo).
Approval of intervention by community
Full implementation of plan in targeted racial/
ethnic geographic population with measurement
of behavior change (24-36 mo)

Molecular target identification
Development of drug/molecule affecting
molecular target
In vitro studies
 Does the drug/molecule affect the target?
In vivo studies
 Does it work in an animal model?
 Is it likely to work in humans?
 Is it too toxic for human use?
 What is the likely dose for humans?

Drug Discovery and Development

Preclinical

Drug Development
Phases

TABLE 1
Comparison of Drug Discovery and Development with Community-based Cancer Health Disparities Research

Therapeutic Drugs and Cancer Health Disparity/Chu et al
2793

2794

CANCER

November 15, 2008 / Volume 113 / Number 10

patient and taking the vital signs (blood pressure,
temperature, and pulse) and assessing the anatomy
of the patient. This dialogue, similar to the formation
of community partnerships, is a critical first step.
Conducting needs assessments and assets mapping
of the community to determine their priorities,
resources, and disparities are similar to clinical tests
of blood and tissue samples collected from the
patient to assess physiology. Developing the disparities-reducing interventions (DRIs) with the community is analogous to diagnosing the patient using all
the information collected and proposing a treatment
based on a determination of the pathology of the
patient’s symptoms. The evaluation of the DRI is
similar to examining whether the treatment proposed
works to help the patient by assessing the pharmacology to treat the problem. The dissemination of
the results to the community is similar to the provider informing/educating the patient’s family and
friends about the illness and its successful treatment.
In the mid-1980s, a 5-phase cancer control process was created for the development of cancer interventions.15 Those phases include 1) hypothesis
development; 2) methods development; 3) controlled
intervention trials; 4) defined population studies; and
5) demonstration and implementation.15 The scheme
we propose herein varies in several ways from the
model developed in the 1980s. The first step is not
hypothesis development; rather, it is capacity building (the development of community partnerships)
and identifying and prioritizing the disparities within
the community. Methods development can be viewed
as similar to the development of the DRI. Our controlled studies include both efficacy studies (phase 3
controlled studies) and effectiveness studies (phase 4
defined populations studies). The need for the
individual trial phases becomes less clear given the
effects of the intervention on cancer statistics and
the costs of individual trials. The final phases are
similar, with the dissemination, adaptation, and
adoption of the intervention for standard use. Thus,
the 5 stages developed in the 1980s can become the
4 stages we propose in the current study.

DISCUSSION
The process of therapeutic drug development and
the development and implementation of strategies to
reduce cancer health disparities are complex, painstaking, and time-consuming. Both require careful development, evaluation, and substantial time for
completion. The CNP is a 5-year grant, which is certainly too brief to allow for the measurable reduction
of cancer mortality rates. However, that timeframe

may allow a CNP program to affect the determinants
of cancer health disparities (ie, factors such as lack
of knowledge, limited access, noncompliance with
treatment, and lack of follow-up that potentially lead
to disparities). The goal of the CNP is to increase
access and use of the beneficial cancer interventions
at the community level. It starts by identifying the
determinants and then creating solutions to overcoming those factors so that beneficial medical interventions are accessible and used at the community
level. The CNP develops community-based DRIs in
progressive steps analogous to drug development.
The CNPs are directly involved in 2 of the 4
stages of DRI development. The first stage, capacity
building with the CNP and the community, begins
with developing partnerships with the community
organizations and leaders. It is enhanced by partnerships with organizations that have resources that can
help to reduce the disparities, such as the American
Cancer Society. The CNP develops and administers
cancer education programs to the community partnerships to impact their knowledge, attitudes, and
behaviors about cancer. These activities help to establish trust between the CNP and the community.
Trust begins with engaging the community through
education, power sharing, and open dialogue. Needs
assessments and key informant surveys are then performed to allow for the identification and priority
assignment of community disparities and the assessment of existing programs that may be helpful in
reducing the disparity.
The second stage in the development of the DRI
is when the CNP works with the community to develop a plan to reduce and eliminate the determinants of disparities. For example, after the
determinants have been identified, the CNP, working
with the community, can develop culturally appropriate educational curriculum and educational materials so individuals from the community will gain
knowledge regarding the use of beneficial medical
interventions. The final step in this stage is to have
the community support and approve plans to evaluate the efficacy of the DRI by assessing its impact on
behavioral changes that can reduce disparities. This
initial evaluation, generally performed with small
numbers of individuals from the community, can be
measured in several ways. If the determinants affect
knowledge and attitudes, pretests and post-tests of
an educational curriculum can be used. If 1 determinant is affecting screening rates, historical controls
may be useful. After the DRI has been tested, the
CNP can inform decisionmakers and others of the
results of the DRI via publications, presentations,
media events, and feedback to the community

Therapeutic Drugs and Cancer Health Disparity/Chu et al

involved, thereby creating the third phase of the
CNP: creditability and sustainability.
Two further stages in evaluating a DRI are
beyond the scope of the current CNP grants. The
next stage is testing the efficacy (does the intervention work in the study population?) and effectiveness
(does it work in multiple populations?) of the DRI in
controlled studies (analogous to phase 3 drug development trials). The DRI is compared with a control
group (usually individuals receiving usual/standard
practice) to determine whether it can reduce disparities compared with usual practice. Cost-effectiveness
studies also may be needed. Investigator-initiated
grants (such as R01s and P01s) or special initiatives
(such asRFAs) are the general funding mechanisms
for this stage.
The final stage is the dissemination of the results
and adaptation and adoption of the DRI to those
populations that are affected by the disparities. The
DRI may need to be culturally adapted to other
racial/ethnic groups, leading to the general adoption
of the DRI as usual practice. These stages and CNP
phases are shown in Table 1.
We have identified 4 stages in creating effective
DRIs, similar to the stages in drug development.
These stages mark the progressive steps toward the
development of the DRI, each building on the foundation laid by the previous step. Without these progressive steps, the adaptability, effectiveness, and
relevance to the community may be weak. The development of partnerships with the community is
time-consuming, but is a necessary and critical factor in the success of the intervention. The development of educational programs for the community
without engaging the community in the development
certainly jeopardizes a successful community-based
intervention. The joint development of the educational programs creates a level of trust between the
community and researcher that is needed to demonstrate to the community that the researchers are genuinely concerned about its members. Finally, the
community-based research participatory research
principles14 should serve as a guide for all aspects of
the development of the DRI. The community is
engaged as a full partner in reducing their own
healthcare disparities.
In Table 2, we report the activities of the CNP in
the area of community partnerships, clinical partnerships, educational activities, needs assessments, and
interventions to be developed as a result of the first
2 years of activites.16
These stages may be useful in assessing programs to reduce cancer health disparities. Because it
takes more than 10 years to observe actual declines

TABLE 2
Types of Community Network Program Activities
Types
Community partnerships
Total
Faith-based
Specific racial/ethnic group
Underserved populations
Clinical partnerships (services offered)
Primary prevention
Smoking cessation
Hepatitis B vaccination
Diet management
Exercise management
Secondary prevention
Breast cancer screening
Colorectal cancer screening
Cervical cancer screening
Prostate cancer screening
Treatment
Educational activities (topics)
General cancer education/awareness
Breast cancer
Cervical cancer
Colorectal cancer
Prostate cancer
Tobacco cessation/education
Cancer screening
Nutrition/obesity education
Cancer research/clinical trials
Survivorship
Patient navigation
Needs assessment
Need for information/education
Need language-specific information/services
Need culturally specific information/services
Need financial support
Overcoming physical barriers
System access assistance
Geographic access assistance
Logistical assistance (appointments)
Interventions under development*
Primary prevention
Smoking cessation
Diet/nutrition
Physical activity
Hepatitis B vaccination
Secondary prevention
Mammography
Clinical breast examination
Papanicolaou smear
Human papillomavirus DNA
Prostate-specific antigen testing
Digital rectal examination
Fecal occult blood test
Sigmoidoscopy
Colonoscopy
*Number of community networks program grantees.

No.

949
188
246
371

84
70
82
71
191
148
165
139
106
5377
1489
1264
782
664
369
434
1048
369
138
226
227
27
14
17
15
16
14
14
15

3
2
1
1
3
4
4
2
5
4
6
2
5

2795

2796

CANCER

November 15, 2008 / Volume 113 / Number 10

in mortality rates, intermediate endpoints, such as
developing interventions to affect determinants of
health disparity, are needed to assess programs such
as the CNP, which is a 5-year grant. The more than
900 partnerships with communities noted with the
CNP require time to develop. The nearly 5400 educational activities performed with these partnerships
allow these partnerships to grow into trusted relationships. The subsequent needs assessments of the
communities demonstrate that community-based
participatory research is community driven. The development of DRIs within the community in primary
prevention (201) and more in secondary prevention
(1501) within 2 years are important metrics for
assessing how CNPs are moving toward reducing
cancer health disparities. The processes in the development of DRIs can be important ways with which
to evaluate progress in reducing cancer health disparities for programs of 5 years.
The parallels between drug discovery and population-based strategies to reduce cancer health disparities resulted from our cumulative experiences in
working with at-risk populations. We encourage
others to elaborate on the emerging discipline of
cancer health disparities to develop metrics for documenting and evaluating the determinants and, more
importantly, developing solutions to these determinants, thereby leading to the elimination of these
disparities.

5.

6.

7.

8.
9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

REFERENCES
1.

2.

3.

4.

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Healthy
People 2010. With Understanding and Improving Health
and Objectives for Improving Health. 2nd ed. Washington
DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services; 2000.
Harper S, Lynch J. Methods for Measuring Cancer Disparities: A Review Using Data Relevant to Healthy People 2010
Cancer-related Objectives. Washington, DC: National Cancer Institute; 2006. Available at:http://seer.cancer.gov/publications/disparities/ Accessed September 20, 2007.
Center to Reduce Cancer Health Disparities, National Cancer Institute. Definition of Cancer Health Disparities.
Washington, DC: Center to Reduce Cancer Health Disparities, National Cancer Institute; 2006. Available at:http://
crchd.cancer.gov/definitions/defined.html Accessed September
20, 2007.
Haynes MA, Smedley BD, eds. The Unequal Burden of
Cancer: An Assessment of NIH Research and Programs for

14.

15.
16.

Ethnic Minorities and the Medically Underserved.
Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 1999.
National Cancer Institute. U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services. Special Populations Network for Cancer
Awareness, Research and Training NIH Guide. RFA CA-99003. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute, National
Institutes of Health; 1999. Available at:http://grants.nih.
gov/grants/guide/rfa-files/RFA-CA-99-003.html
Accessed
September 20, 2007.
Jackson FE, Chu KC, Garcia R. Special populations networks-how this innovative community-based initiative
affected minority and underserved research programs.
Cancer. 2006;107(8 suppl):1939-1944.
Freeman HP, Vydelingum NA. The role of the special populations networks program in eliminating cancer health disparities. Cancer. 2006;107(8 suppl):1933-1935.
Haynes MA. Reflections on programs designed to reduce
cancer disparities. Cancer. 2006;107(8 suppl):1936-1938.
National Cancer Institute, U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services. Community Networks to Reduce Cancer
Health Disparities. NIH Guide April 26, 2004. RFA CA-05012. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute, National
Institutes of Health; 2005. Available at:http://grants.nih.
gov/grants/guide/rfa-files/RFA-CA-05-012.html
Accessed
September 20, 2007.
National Cancer Institute. Drug Discovery at the National
Cancer Institute: Fact Sheet. Available at:http://www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/factsheet/NCIdrugdiscovery Accessed
September 24, 2007.
Chu KC, Tarone RE, Kessler LG, et al. Recent trends in U.S.
breast cancer incidence, survival and mortality rates. J Natl
Cancer Inst. 1996;88:1571-1579.
Chu KC, Tarone RE, Brawley OW. Breast cancer trends of
black women compared to white women. Arch Fam Med.
1999;8:521-528.
Ries LAG, Melbert D, Krapcho M, et al, eds. SEER Cancer
Statistics Review, 1975-2004. Based on November 2006
SEER data submission. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer
Institute; 2007. Available at:http://seer.cancer.gov/csr/1975_
2004/results_merged/sect_04_breast.pdf Accessed September
20, 2007.
Israel BA, Schulz AJ, Parker EA, Becker AB, Allen AJ, Guzman JR. Critical issues in developing and following community based participatory research principles. In: Minkler
M, Wallerstein N, eds. Community Based Participatory
Research for Health. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass; 2003:5376.
Greenwald P, Cullen JW. The new emphasis in cancer control. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1985;74:543-551.
National Cancer Institute. National Evaluation of the Community Networks Program to Reduce Cancer Health Disparities through Education, Research, and Training. Annual
Report for Year 2. Contract No. GS-10F-0114L, Order 263FQ-514864. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute; 2007.

