NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 17.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Published in final edited form as:
Cancer Cell. 2014 March 17; 25(3): 261–263. doi:10.1016/j.ccr.2014.03.001.

A Jagged road to lymphoma aggressiveness
Vedran Radojcic1,2 and Ivan Maillard1,2,3,*
1Life

Sciences Institute, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

2Division

of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,

MI, USA
3Department

of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

Abstract
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In this issue of Cancer Cell, Cao and colleagues identifyanFGF4/Jagged1-driven crosstalk
between tumor cells and their vascular niche that activates Notch signaling, sustaining the
aggressiveness of certain mouse and human B cell lymphomas. These findings identify new
therapeutic opportunities to target pathogenic angiocrine functions in cancer.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The Notch signaling pathway plays important roles in development, tissue homeostasis and
cancer. In mammals, Notch signaling is mediated by four Notch receptors (Notch1-4)
interacting with ligands of the Delta-like (Dll1, Dll3, and Dll4) or Jagged (Jagged1
andJagged2) families. During physiological signaling, ligand binding leads to
intramembrane receptor proteolysis and release of intracellular Notch, which translocates to
the nucleus and initiates target gene transcription. In cancer, activating NOTCH1 mutations
were initially identified in a majority of T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemias (Fig. 1A)
(Weng et al., 2004). A first class of point mutations in the extracellular heterodimerization
domain disrupts stability of a negative regulatory region, leading to constitutive Notch
activation even in the absence of ligand. A second type of mutations truncates the Cterminal PEST domain, leading to decreased proteasomal degradation and increased half-life
of activated Notch. Although first associated with transformation of the T cell lineage,
activating NOTCH mutations were subsequently identified in several subtypes of B cell
malignancies, including Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia, Mantle Cell Lymphoma, Splenic
Marginal Zone Lymphoma and Diffuse Large B Cell Lymphoma (Fig. 1A) (Kiel et al.,
2012; Kridel et al., 2012; Lee et al., 2009; Martinez-Trillos et al., 2013; Rossi et al., 2013).
In almost all these cases, point mutations were identified only within the region encoding the
PEST degron domain of either NOTCH1 or NOTCH2, suggesting sensitization to ligandmediated receptor activation rather than true constitutive signaling. Moreover, systematic
immunohistochemical scoring demonstrates Notch1activation at a frequency that markedly

© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
*
Corresponding author: Ivan Maillard, MD-PhD, Life Sciences Institute, 210 Washtenaw Avenue, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
MI 48109, USA; imaillar@umich.edu.
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

Radojcic and Maillard

Page 2

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

exceeds the reported prevalence of NOTCH1 mutations in specific lymphoid malignancies,
suggesting that other mechanisms must exist to activate Notch signaling in these
diseases(Kluk et al., 2013).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Results presented by Cao at al. in this issue of Cancer Cell identify the capacity of
endothelial cells within the tumor microenvironment to induce ligand-mediated Notch
activation in adjacent lymphoma cells, leading to enhanced tumor growth and aggressive in
vivo behavior (Fig. 1B)(Cao et al., 2014). Using complementary in vitro and in vivo models
of mouse and human Myc-driven lymphoma interacting with a vascular niche, the authors
describe reciprocal interactions involving FGF4-dependent induction of the expression of
the Notch ligand Jagged1 in endothelial cells, leading in turn to Notch2-mediated signaling
in tumor cells with lymphoma initiating characteristics. As a first step, Cao et al. built on
past work from their laboratory using E4ORF1-transduced endothelial cells, which can be
maintained in culture without serum or recombinant angiogenic factors and allow for
detailed analysis of their angiocrine functions(Butler et al., 2010). Co-culture of these
endothelial cells with Eµ-Myc-driven mouse B lymphoma cells selected for cells with
increased in vitro growth, chemoresistance, in vivo repopulation potential and invasiveness.
Using a combination of genetic and pharmacological methods, the authors demonstrated that
this phenomenon requiredJagged1 expression by the endothelial cells and Notch2 but
notNotch1 expression in lymphoma cells. FGF4 release by the lymphoma cells induced
Jagged1 expression, suggesting that specific lymphomas capable of FGF4 production might
be uniquely sensitive to this mechanism (although alternative pathways might exist to
induce Jagged1). The effects of Notch2 appeared entirely dependent on the Notch target
gene Hey1, while mechanisms operating downstream of this transcriptional repressor remain
to be investigated. To gain insight about the potential human relevance of these findings,
Cao et al. analyzed a panel of primary human Burkitt’s lymphomas, demonstrating the
existence of Hey1-positive tumor cells in proximity of Jagged1-expressing endothelial cells
in these tumors. Moreover, knockdown of Notch2 in these primary human tumor cells
followed by transfer into immunodeficient mouse recipients recapitulated observations made
with Eµ- Mycmouse tumors, suggesting the existence of shared pathogenic mechanisms at
least in these Myc-driven lymphoid malignancies.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

It remains to be determined how broadly applicable the specific observations presented in
this paper will be. Of note, tumor-vasculature interactions involving Notch signaling were
reported recently in other contexts, such as glioblastoma multi for me and colorectal cancer.
An interesting implication of these findings is that Notch activation might be at play in
malignant tissues even in the absence of activating NOTCH mutations, provided the tumor
microenvironment constitutes a good source of Notch ligands. In lymphoid malignancies,
PEST domain mutations are predicted to matter only upon exposure of the tumor cells to
Notch ligands, as these genetic events lead to stabilization of cleaved active Notch only after
ligand-receptor interaction. Thus, PEST domain mutations may function as a sensitizer for
the exposure of malignant cells to Notch ligands in their immediate environment. In other
words, the type of ligand-dependent mechanisms identified by Cao and colleagues could
synergize with PEST domain Notch mutants to potently activate the pathway. In terms of the
overall importance of Notch as an oncogenic pathway in B cell neoplasms, another word of

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 17.

Radojcic and Maillard

Page 3

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

caution is that Notch signaling can have versatile functions. Tumor suppressive effects of
the pathway have been reported, for example in myeloid neoplasms, squamous cell
carcinomas and certain B cell malignancies(Zweidler-McKay et al., 2005). It is possible that
Notch activation could have different effects in lymphomas originating from cells arrested at
specific stages of differentiation, such as before, during, or after the germinal center
reaction. To fully investigate the spectrum of Notch effects in lymphoma, future work
should ideally focus on in vivo models and on the combined use of loss-of-function and
gain-of-function experimental approaches.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The vascular niche represents an attractive potential source of Notch ligands in the tumor
microenvironment. In lymphoma, past observations revealed increased Notch activity in a
high proportion of aggressive and highly vascularized angioimmunoblastic T cell
lymphomas (Kluk et al., 2013). However, other cellular sources of Notch ligands must be
considered as well. Using standardized immunohistochemistry to specifically detect the
cleaved and active form of Notch1 in tumor tissues, Aster and colleagues reported evidence
of high Notch activity within secondary lymphoid organs, but with rapid loss of the signal in
tumor areas that extend beyond the lymph node capsule(Kluk et al., 2013). Although
anecdotal, these findings suggest that cellular elements specific to the lymph node
microenvironment might represent an important source of Notch ligands in vivo. Moving
forward, additional work may reveal specific mechanisms for Notch ligand induction in this
context and cooperativity with genetic Notch activation, perhaps leading to the maintenance
of lymphoma-initiating cells in vivo. As a practical implication, future investigations are
predicted to underestimate or to altogether miss the importance of Notch signaling in
lymphoid malignancies if tumor cells are not adequately exposed to Notch ligands in culture
(e.g. in the absence of cocultured cells expressing relevant Notch ligands) or in vivo (e.g. in
conventional subcutaneous xenografts).
The translational impact of the findings reported by Cao et al. is significant, as they implya
larger array of potential tumor targets for the use of therapeutic Notch inhibition than
predicted only by NOTCH mutational analysis. In any case, emerging data implicating a
central role for Notch legends derived from the tumor vasculature or other sources suggest
that our current understanding of Notch in lymphomagenesis has only exposed the tip of the
iceberg. It is time to dive deeper.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

References
Butler JM, Nolan DJ, Vertes EL, Varnum-Finney B, Kobayashi H, Hooper AT, Seandel M, Shido K,
White IA, Kobayashi M, et al. Endothelial cells are essential for the self-renewal and repopulation
of Notch-dependent hematopoietic stem cells. Cell Stem Cell. 2010; 6:251–264. [PubMed:
20207228]
Cao Z, Ding B-S, Guo P, Lee SB, Butler JM, Casey SC, Simons M, Tam W, Felsher DW, Shido K, et
al. Angiocrine Factors Deployed by Tumor Vascular Niche Induce B-Cell Lymphoma Invasiveness
and Chemoresistance. Cancer Cell. 2014 XXX, YYY-ZZZ.
Kiel MJ, Velusamy T, Betz BL, Zhao L, Weigelin HG, Chiang MY, Huebner-Chan DR, Bailey NG,
Yang DT, Bhagat G, et al. Whole-genome sequencing identifies recurrent somatic NOTCH2
mutations in splenic marginal zone lymphoma. The Journal of experimental medicine. 2012;
209:1553–1565. [PubMed: 22891276]

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 17.

Radojcic and Maillard

Page 4

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Kluk MJ, Ashworth T, Wang H, Knoechel B, Mason EF, Morgan EA, Dorfman D, Pinkus G, Weigert
O, Hornick JL, et al. Gauging NOTCH1 Activation in Cancer Using Immunohistochemistry. PloS
one. 2013; 8:e67306. [PubMed: 23825651]
Kridel R, Meissner B, Rogic S, Boyle M, Telenius A, Woolcock B, Gunawardana J, Jenkins C,
Cochrane C, Ben-Neriah S, et al. Whole transcriptome sequencing reveals recurrent NOTCH1
mutations in mantle cell lymphoma. Blood. 2012; 119:1963–1971. [PubMed: 22210878]
Lee SY, Kumano K, Nakazaki K, Sanada M, Matsumoto A, Yamamoto G, Nannya Y, Suzuki R, Ota
S, Ota Y, et al. Gain-of-function mutations and copy number increases of Notch2 in diffuse large Bcell lymphoma. Cancer science. 2009; 100:920–926. [PubMed: 19445024]
Martinez-Trillos A, Quesada V, Villamor N, Puente XS, Lopez-Otin C, Campo E. Recurrent gene
mutations in CLL. Advances in experimental medicine and biology. 2013; 792:87–107. [PubMed:
24014293]
Rossi D, Ciardullo C, Gaidano G. Genetic aberrations of signaling pathways in lymphomagenesis:
revelations from next generation sequencing studies. Seminars in cancer biology. 2013; 23:422–
430. [PubMed: 23665546]
Weng AP, Ferrando AA, Lee W, Morris JPt, Silverman LB, Sanchez-Irizarry C, Blacklow SC, Look
AT, Aster JC. Activating mutations of NOTCH1 in human T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.
Science. 2004; 306:269–271. [PubMed: 15472075]
Zweidler-McKay PA, He Y, Xu L, Rodriguez CG, Karnell FG, Carpenter AC, Aster JC, Allman D,
Pear WS. Notch signaling is a potent inducer of growth arrest and apoptosis in a wide range of Bcell malignancies. Blood. 2005; 106:3898–3906. [PubMed: 16118316]

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 17.

Radojcic and Maillard

Page 5

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 1. Emerging roles of Notch in lymphoma pathogenesis

a. Structure of Notch1 and Notch2 receptors with sites of activating mutations previously
reported in lymphoid malignancies. T-ALL - T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia/
lymphoma; CLL - chronic lymphocytic leukemia; MCL- mantle cell lymphoma; SMZL splenic marginal zone lymphoma; ICN - intracellular Notch; HD - heterodimerization
domain; TMD - transmembrane domain.
b. Proposed model for crosstalk between lymphoma cells (LC) and endothelial cells (EC),
with Jagged1/Notch2-driven effects on lymphoma aggressiveness(Cao et al., 2014). FGFR1

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 17.

Radojcic and Maillard

Page 6

- fibroblast growth factor receptor 1; FGF4 - fibroblast growth factor 4; ICN - intracellular
Notch.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 17.

