Oncotarget, Vol. 5, No. 20

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Functional modification of adipocytes by grape seed extract
impairs their pro-tumorigenic signaling on colon cancer stem
cells and the daughter cancer cells
Sushil Kumar1,*, Dileep Kumar1,*, Komal Raina1,2, Rajesh Agarwal1,2, Chapla Agarwal1,2
1

 epartment of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Colorado
D
Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO 80045, USA

2

University of Colorado Cancer Center, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO 80045, USA

*

Contributed equally and share first authorship

Correspondence to:
Chapla Agarwal, e-mail: Chapla.Agarwal@UCDenver.edu
Keywords: colorectal cancer, obesity, chemoprevention, phytochemicals, adipocytes
Received: August 01, 2014 	

Accepted: September 07, 2014 	

Published: October 10, 2014

ABSTRACT
With global rise in obesity, it is imperative that we identify obesity-driven factors
that increase growth and progression of colorectal cancer (CRC), and also discover
and develop agents with anti-CRC efficacy under obese conditions. Here in, we
investigated grape seed extract (GSE), a well-defined agent with both preventive and
anti-CRC efficacy, for its potential to impair pro-tumorigenic signaling of adipocytes
on CRC/colon cancer stem cells (CSCs) and associated molecular mechanisms, to
control CRC under obese conditions. GSE treatment significantly decreased the
growth and invasion promoting effects of both mouse and human adipocytes on
CRC cells. Moreover, GSE exerted a direct inhibitory effect, as well as it strongly
reduced the growth promoting signals of adipocytes, on colon CSCs. These GSE effects
were associated with a decrease in both mRNA and protein levels of various CSCassociated molecules. Notably, GSE effects on adipocytes were not due to changes
in lipid content, but by inducing the ‘browning’ of adipocytes as evidenced by an
increase in UCP-1 mRNA level and mitochondriogenesis. Together, these findings,
for the first time, suggest the ability of GSE to induce ‘brown remodeling’ of white
adipocytes, which causes functional modification of adipocytes thus impairing their
pro-tumorigenic signals on colon CSCs/CRC cells.

Clearly, worldwide obesity epidemic poses a major
challenge to CRC [8], and thus underscores the need
for new approaches to identify and define the critical
factors which drive the interactions between adipocytes
signaling (systemic and peritoneal) and CRC cell as
well as colon cancer stem cells (CSCs); importantly,
CSCs are now recognized as the main cause for the
growth and progression of most epithelial cancers,
including CRC [12–18]. Also notably, compared to
lean condition, obesity is manifested by an increase
in white adipose tissue (WAT) mass; a hypoxic WAT
condition where hypertrophied adipocytes fail to store
excess triglycerides leading to ectopic lipid deposition
and metabolic disorders [9–11]. This WAT dysfunction
and hypoxic environment are associated with increased
infiltration of immune cells into the adipose tissue

INTRODUCTION
Colorectal cancer (CRC), the third leading cause of
cancer incidence in US (both genders) [1], has additional
increased risks combined with obesity, type II diabetes
and/or inflammatory bowel disease [2–7]. Furthermore,
obesity is associated with increased CRC incidence and
mortality [8]. The systemic obesity-associated metabolic
aberrations, such as dyslipidemia, hyperglycemia, insulin
resistance and increased inflammatory signals, have the
potential to affect CRC growth [3–7]. Since colon lies
in close anatomical vicinity of fat depots, peritoneal
secretions from obese dysfunctional adipose tissue may
serve as the most significant source of pro-tumorigenic
and inflammatory factors to drive an enhanced growth
and progression of CRC under obese conditions [9–11].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10151

Oncotarget

RESULTS

causing a low grade inflammation [4, 9–11]. This
obesity-induced inflammation, with increased secretion
of pro-inflammatory factors from the adipocytes and
inflammatory cells [9–11], can promote the expansion
of colon cancer stem cells (CSCs) pool resulting in an
enhanced CRC growth and progression under obese
condition. Thus, an agent with both anti-obesogenic and
anti-CRC activities would be ideal to impair different
facets of adipocyte-CRC interaction resulting in CRC
prevention and control under obese conditions. Notably,
significant efforts have been made in last two decades
evaluating the chemopreventive potential of a wide
range of agents against CRC, but mostly in non-obese
conditions [19–21].
Certainly, a critical gap exists in our knowledge
regarding the efficacy of these agents against CRC
under obese conditions. Accordingly, in this study, we
investigated the potential of grape seed extract (GSE) to
inhibit adipocytes-driven pro-tumorigenic signaling on
both human CRC and colon CSCs in the context of CRC
prevention and control under obese conditions. GSE,
a well-defined chemical entity containing procyanidins
[20, 22, 23], has shown strong preventive and therapeutic
efficacy in various CRC in vitro and rodent models [19,
20, 23–32] including azoxymethane (AOM)-induced
aberrant crypt foci in Fisher 344 rats [31], AOM-induced
colon tumorigenesis in A/J mice [26], spontaneous
intestinal tumors in APCmin/+ mice [32] and CRC cell
xenografts in nude mice [29], together with a decrease
in proliferative and an increase in apoptotic indices [26,
29, 31, 32]. Also importantly, a series of animal studies
have shown that GSE partially alleviates the high fat
diet-induced obesity, decreases the weight of fat pads,
and suppresses the body weight increase together with an
improvement in associated metabolic abnormalities [33–
36]. Several of these effects of GSE were attributed to
interference in dietary fat absorption/accumulation due to
its inhibitory effect on fat metabolizing enzymes (lipases),
an increase in lipolytic genes, and a decrease in lipogenic
genes [33–38]. Furthermore, during high fat diet-induced
hyperlipidemia, GSE has been shown to normalize
triglyceride and total cholesterol levels in serum and liver
with a concomitant increase in high density cholesterol
[38, 39]. GSE is also reported to prevent ectopic fat
deposition and associated lipotoxicity in rodents [38, 40].
Taken together, these published studies clearly suggest
that GSE possesses both anti-CRC and anti-obesogenic
activities, and thus it is a novel agent to be studied in
detail for its efficacy against CRC under obese conditions.
Thus, herein, for the first time, we studied the impact of
adipocyte secretions from mouse, non-diseased human,
and diabetic human variants, on the CRC/CSC cell
populations, specifically defining the role of adipocytes
on growth and invasive potential of human CRC and then
determining whether GSE intervention could impair these
cancer promoting signals of adipocytes.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

GSE does not interfere with adipocyte
differentiation and lipid accumulation in mature
adipocytes
First, we carried out chronic and late-acute treatment
protocols (Supplementary Figure 1) with different doses of
GSE to determine its effect on: i) adipocyte differentiation
and ii) lipid accumulation in mature adipocytes, in a panel
of mouse/human adipocytes [mouse 3T3-L1 differentiated
adipocytes, human type II diabetic visceral adipocytes,
and human adipocytes from adipose tissue-derived
mesenchymal stem cells; hereafter, these adipocytes
have been abbreviated as 3T3-L1-AC, HDP-AC, and
MSC-AC, respectively, in all the Figures]. For chronic
GSE treatment, post-confluent mouse 3T3-L1 fibroblasts,
human type II diabetic visceral pre-adipocytes, and
human adipose tissue-derived mesenchymal stem cells
were exposed to GSE doses (2.5–25 µg/mL in DMSO) for
short and long intervals during the process of adipogenesis
to identify non-toxic GSE doses that cause adipocyte
functional modulation without affecting their maturation
(Supplementary Figure 1). For late-acute GSE treatment,
mature adipocytes were treated with GSE for 48  h
(Supplementary Figure 1). In both protocols, GSE effect
on adipocyte maturation was determined by Oil Red-O
(ORO) or BODIPY-493/503 staining of lipids (Figure 1).
As shown in Figure 1A, mouse 3T3-L1 fibroblasts
(pre-adipocytes) treated chronically with 5–25 µg/mL
GSE for variable durations (0–3 days, 0–6 days, and
0–8 days) or mouse 3T3-L1 differentiated adipocytes
exposed to late-acute GSE treatment (day 8 for 48h) did
not show any effect on lipid content as determined by
phase contrast images depicting confluent mouse 3T3-L1
differentiated adipocytes with abundant translucent oily
droplets within the cells (Figure 1A-left panel), ORO
staining of lipids (red droplets in Figure 1A-right panel),
and percent ORO staining intensity (O.D.500) relative to
respective untreated controls (Figure 1A-bottom panel).
Similarly, human type II diabetic visceral pre-adipocytes
treated chronically with 5–25 µg/mL GSE for 0–12 days
(Figure  1B-right panel) or matured human type II
diabetic visceral adipocytes exposed to late acute GSE
treatment (day 12 for 48 h, Figure 1B-right panel) did not
show any significant changes in ORO staining intensity.
Representative ORO staining of lipids in these cells is
shown in Figure 1B-left panel. Chronic GSE treatment
(0–14 days) of human adipose tissue-derived mesenchymal
stem cells (Figure 1C-right panel) or late-acute GSE
treatment (day 14 for 48h) of mature human adipocytes
from adipose tissue-derived mesenchymal stem cells
(Figure 1C-right panel) also did not affect their percent
ORO staining intensity. Representative BODIPY-493/503
staining of lipids depicting abundant lipid content in control
and GSE-treated cells is shown in Figure 1C-left panel.
10152

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Effect of GSE on adipocyte differentiation and lipid accumulation in mature mouse and human adipocytes. (A)

GSE (selected optimum concentration) does not have any effect on adipocytes maturation (chronic treatment) or mature adipocytes (acute
treatment) in 3T3-L1 adipocytes. Representative photomicrographs of, A-left panel) phase contrast microscopy; and A-right panel) Oil
Red-O (ORO, X 100 magnification) staining of lipids in the absence and presence of GSE treatment are shown. A-bottom panel) Percent
ORO staining intensity (O.D.500) relative to control is shown after chronic and acute treatments with GSE. Staining was done after adipocyte
maturation. (B) GSE (selected optimum concentration) does not have any effect on adipocytes maturation (chronic treatment) or mature
adipocytes (acute treatment) in human type II diabetic visceral adipocytes (HDP-AC). B-left panel) Representative photomicrographs of
Oil Red-O (ORO, X 400 magnification) staining of lipids in the absence and presence of GSE treatment are shown. B-right panel) Percent
ORO staining intensity (O.D.500) relative to control is shown after chronic and acute treatments with GSE. Staining was done after
adipocyte maturation.

(Continued )

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10153

Oncotarget

Figure 1: (C) GSE (selected optimum concentration) does not have any effect on adipocytes maturation (chronic treatment)
or mature adipocytes (late-acute treatment) in human adipocytes from adipose tissue derived mesenchymal stem cells
[MSC-AC]. C-left panel) Representative photomicrographs of BODIPY-493/503 (X 600 magnification) staining of lipids
in the absence and presence of GSE (5µg/mL) chronic treatment are shown. C-right panel) Percent ORO staining intensity
(O.D.500) relative to control is shown after chronic and acute treatments with GSE. Staining was done after adipocyte
maturation. Columns, mean values; error bars, SEM.
Overall, based on ORO staining of lipids and
percent ORO staining intensity (Figure 1A-C), the
optimal GSE concentrations, selected for the future
experiments that did not have any effect on adipocytes
maturation or mature adipocytes (based on no changes
in lipid content), were 10–25 µg/mL for mouse 3T3L1 differentiated adipocytes, 10 µg/mL for human
type II diabetic visceral adipocytes, and 5 µg/mL
for human adipocytes from adipose tissue-derived
mesenchymal stem cells. Due to the complex process
of adipogenesis under in vitro experimental conditions,
which necessarily requires the cells to be over confluent
for adipocyte maturation to ‘set in’, it was not possible
to measure lipid content with respect to adipocyte cell
number. Since GSE at the selected optimum doses did
not affect the viability of either the pre-adipocytes or the
mesenchymal stem cells as determined by Trypan blue
exclusion assay (data not shown), it was evident that the
correction for cell number was not a limiting factor in
the adipogenesis experiments carried out in the presence
of GSE. Furthermore, since there was no change in the
lipid content, it indicates that the selected optimum nontoxic GSE doses do not interfere in differentiation of
pre-adipocytes and mesenchymal stem cells to mature
adipocytes and that these GSE doses also do not affect
the lipid content of mature adipocytes.

adipocyte functional signaling. We used mouse/human
adipogenesis RT2 qPCR Array (Qiagen) to analyze the
expression of genes associated with adipogenesis in
the mouse 3T3-L1 differentiated adipocytes and human
adipocytes from adipose tissue-derived mesenchymal
stem cells which were exposed to chronic GSE treatment
(Figure 2). Representative heat maps showing the relative
changes in the genes estimated by RT2 qPCR indicated
that GSE causes an alteration in the expression of various
adipogenesis-related genes in both mouse (Figure 2A) and
human (Figure 2B) adipocytes.
Notably, in mouse 3T3-L1 differentiated adipocytes
(Figure 2A), GSE caused an increase (3 folds) in the
expression of pro-brown adipose tissue (BAT) genes
Ucp-1, Prdm16, Bmp7 and Dio2,while it decreased the
expression of anti-BAT Twist1 and also increased antiBAT Wnt10b and Nr0b2 gene levels. Also, the levels of
pro-WAT genes Fgf10 and Klf4 were decreased strongly
by GSE, but there was also an increase in Bmp2 and Bmp4;
however, no effect on anti-WAT and pro-adipogenesis
gene levels was observed by GSE. In these cells, the gene
levels of adipokines, such as Adipoq, Lep and Retn were
also decreased by GSE treatment. Consistent with its
effect in mouse 3T3-L1 differentiated adipocytes, GSE
also increased the level of pro-BAT UCP-1 gene by ~8
folds in human adipocytes from adipose tissue-derived
mesenchymal stem cells (Figure 2B); other pro-BAT genes
that were significantly increased (~8 -10 folds) by GSE were
PRDM16 and BMP7. However, not all pro-BAT genes were
increased by GSE in these cells; some pro-BAT genes such
as DIO2, CREB1, PPAR-α and PGC1-α were decreased.
The levels of pro-WAT gene KLF4 was decreased by GSE
in these cells, but the levels of BMP2, EGR2, FGF10 and

GSE interferes in adipocyte functional signaling
by inducing ‘browning’ of adipocytes
Next, we examined whether GSE (at the selected
optimum doses defined above) modulates the expression
of mRNAs and/or proteins which are essential for the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10154

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Effect of GSE on mRNA levels of adipogenesis-associated genes in mouse and human adipocytes. Representative

heat map showing relative changes in genes estimated by RT2qPCR Profiler TM PCR Array in, (A) mouse 3T3-L1 differentiated Adipocytes
(3T3 L1-AC), and (B) Human adipocytes from adipose tissue derived mesenchymal stem cells (MSC-AC). Total RNA was isolated from
mouse 3T3-L1-AC after chronic GSE (10 μg/mL, 0–8 days) treatment, and from MSC-AC after chronic GSE (5 μg/mL, 0–14 days)
treatment.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10155

Oncotarget

SREBF1 were increased. Furthermore, while anti-WAT
genes such as GATA2, GATA3 and KLF2 were increased,
the anti WAT KLF3 gene level was decreased by GSE. The
pro-adipogenesis genes that were significantly decreased
by GSE were DKK1, FABP4, FGF1 and FGF2, while the
levels of genes, such as E2F1, FASN, SFRP5 and SLC2A4
were increased. The gene levels of adipokines such as
ADIPOQ and LEP were decreased by GSE treatment but
the levels of ADIG and RETN were significantly increased.
Furthermore, the levels of lipoprotein lipase (LIPE) gene
were also significantly decreased by GSE treatment in
both mouse 3T3-L1 differentiated adipocytes and human
adipocytes from adipose tissue-derived mesenchymal stem
cells. A comprehensive analysis of all these results clearly
suggests that the alterations in most of the genes were in
favor of adipocyte browning. Since the expression of probrowning indicator gene UCP-1 was strongly increased in

both cell lines, its increased mRNA expression was further
confirmed by using specific primers for mouse Ucp-1 by
RT2 qPCR in GSE-treated mouse 3T3-L1 differentiated
adipocytes (Figure 3A).
To further substantiate the changes in the
expression of adipogenesis-related genes by GSE,
we next assessed the expression of effector protein
molecules associated with adipogenesis in mouse 3T3L1 adipocytes (Figure  3B). Our results indicated a
differential modulation of adipogenesis-related proteins
during different stages of adipocyte differentiation by
GSE. While chronic GSE treatment in mouse 3T3L1 adipocytes for 0–3 days increased the protein
expression of C/EBP-α, PPAR-γ and FAS on day 3
of the adipocyte differentiation process, chronic GSE
treatment for 8 days decreased the protein expression
of C/EBP-α, C/EBP-β, SREBP-1/c, PPAR-γ and FAS

Figure 3: Effect of GSE on the browning of adipocytes. GSE increases (A) mRNA levels of Ucp-1 in mouse 3T3-L1differentiated

adipocytes (3T3-L1-AC) as analyzed by RT2qPCR after chronic GSE treatment. (B) Western blot analysis of adipogenesis-related proteins
during different stages of 3T3-L1 adipocyte differentiation by GSE; β-actin was used as loading control after stripping and re-probing
the blots. Relative densitometric values compared to respective controls are shown below each blot (nd, not detectable bands). (C) GSE
increases mitochondriogenesis in human adipocytes from adipose tissue derived mesenchymal stem cells (MSC-AC) after chronic
treatment [GSE dose: 5ug/mL (0-14 days)]. Representative images (X 600 magnification) show MitoTracker Red stained mitochondria and
DAPI-blue stained nuclei, in the absence and presence of GSE. Columns, mean values; error bars, SEM.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10156

Oncotarget

in the matured adipocytes on day 8 (Figure 3B). Taken
together, from these results, it was evident that though
there was no change in the lipid content of adipocytes
after chronic GSE treatment, GSE did modulate both
mRNA and protein expression of the genes which are
implicated in adipogenesis. Since an increase in UCP-1
mRNA levels also indicates towards the ‘browning’ of
adipocytes [41–44] by GSE, we next confirmed this
phenomenon by detecting whether mitochondriogenesis
[an increase in mitochondria number which is an indicator
of browning of adipocytes [41–44], was also increased in
these adipocytes following GSE exposure (Figure 3C).
Using MitoTracker Red staining of mitochondria, it was
observed that GSE treatment indeed results in a significant
increase in mitochondriogenesis in adipocytes (Figure
3C). Since the role of ‘brown adipocytes’ is different from
white adipocytes [45–48], taken together, above results
suggested a functional modification of adipocytes by GSE
exposure towards a more ‘brown’ phenotype.

functional modification in growth promoting signals of
adipocytes on CRC cells and not due to changes in lipid
content of matured adipocytes as evident from perilipin
staining of lipids in the experiment and also based on
our above results showing no changes in percent ORO
staining intensity in adipocytes after GSE treatments
(Figure 1).

GSE decreases the chemotactic properties of
adipocytes towards CRC cell invasion
To determine whether GSE also has the potential
to decrease the chemotactic properties of adipocyte
signaling towards CRC cells, we focused on a CRC cell
line with known invasion and migratory characteristics
(Figure  4C). Since HT29 and SW480 cells are noninvasive under in vitro conditions, HCT116 CRC
cells with established invasive potential under in
vitro conditions [49] were used. Briefly, adipocyteconditioned media (collected at  48 h) after chronic
or late-acute pre-treatment with GSE was used as the
chemo-attractant (supplemented with 0.5% FBS) in
the lower chamber of BD matrigel invasion chamber
for HCT116 CRC cells (4 x 105 cells in DMEM media
containing 0.5% FBS) in the upper chamber. After 48 h,
matrigel invaded CRC cells (Figure 4C) were methanol
fixed, H&E stained and counted as described earlier [50].
Adipocytes used for collection of conditioned media
were mature mouse 3T3-L1 differentiated adipocytes
and human type II diabetic visceral adipocytes. GSE
was used to pre-treat these adipocytes by adding the
selected optimum doses during differentiation events
[chronic treatment] or after adipocyte maturation
[late-acute]. These treated adipocytes were then washed
to clear off GSE, and then incubated with serum and GSE
free media for 48 h so as to collect adipocyte-conditioned
media which was later used as a chemo-attractant for
CRC cells in BD matrigel invasion assay. Important to
note here is that adipocytes were pre-treated with GSE
and then GSE was removed before using these mature
adipocytes as chemo-attractant for invasion of CRC
cells, so that no direct effect of GSE on CRC cells could
interfere in study outcomes. Cell counts of CRC cells
that had invaded matrigel indicated that the invasion
of HCT116 CRC cells was significantly reduced when
conditioned media from both chronic (data not shown)
and late-acute (Figure 4C) GSE-treated adipocytes
was used. These results show that GSE effects were
primarily due to functional modification of migratory /
invasion promoting signals of adipocytes on CRC cells
and not due to interference in differentiation of preadipocytes to mature adipocytes or the lipid content of
mature adipocytes based on our above results showing no
changes in percent ORO staining intensity in adipocytes
after GSE treatments (Figure 1).

GSE inhibits the growth promoting potential of
adipocyte secretions on CRC cells
Since the predominant effect of GSE on adipocytes
was their functional modification, we next focused our
studies on assessing the biological consequences of
this GSE effect on CRC cells. Specifically, to confirm
that indeed GSE affects the growth promoting potential
of adipocyte secretions on CRC cells, a 3D model of
adipocyte-CRC no-contact co-culture was generated
(Figure 4A). In this co-culture 3D system, mature
adipocytes were pre-treated with GSE and then GSE was
removed before co-culture of mature adipocytes with
CRC cells, so that no direct effect of GSE on CRC cells
could interfere in study outcomes. Briefly, pre-adipocytes
(mouse 3T3-L1 fibroblasts) were plated in the bottom
of 8 well-BD-chamber slide (Cat #354108, BD Falcon)
and then allowed to differentiate in matrigel for 8 days.
Mature mouse 3T3-L1 differentiated adipocytes were
then treated with GSE (10 µg/mL) for 2 days (lateacute GSE treatment on day 8 for 48h). GSE was next
washed off, and the top of the matrigel was overlaid
with a single layer of CRC HT29 (Figure 4) or SW480
(data not shown) cells in serum free media for 6 days.
Cells were exposed to BrdU for 24 h before study end
(6 days) and the BrdU +ve CRC cells were counted
(Figure 4B). Our results indicated a significant decrease
in the proliferation of CRC cells (BrdU +ve cells) after
6 days of their no-contact co-culture with GSE-treated
adipocytes compared to control adipocytes (Figure 4B).
A strong perilipin (used for lipid staining) and BrdU
–ve staining was used to identify the differentiated
adipocytes at the bottom of the well in both untreated and
GSE-treated adipocytes (Figure 4A). Importantly, these
results show that the GSE effects were primarily due to

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10157

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Effect of GSE on the growth promoting potential and chemotactic properties of adipocytes towards CRC
cells. (A) 3D model of adipocyte-CRC no-contact co-culture. Pre-adipocytes (3T3-L1 fibroblasts) were plated on the bottom of 8 well-

BD-chamber slide and then allowed to differentiate in matrigel for 8 days. Mature adipocytes (3T3-L1-AC) were then treated with GSE
(10 µg/ mL) for 2 days (late-acute treatment on day 8 for 48h). GSE was next washed off and the top of the matrigel was overlaid with a
single layer of CRC HT29 cells in serum free media for 6 days. Cells were exposed to BrdU for 24 h, before study end; strong perilipin and
BrdU –ve staining identified differentiated adipocytes. (B) Representative photomicrographs (X 200 magnification) indicate the decrease
in the number of BrdU +ve cells-green, after 6 days of co-culture. DAPI-blue was used to stain nuclei. (C) GSE decreases the chemotactic
properties of adipocytes towards HCT116 CRC cell invasion. Adipocyte-conditioned media (CM: collected for 48 h) after late-acute
pre-treatment with GSE was used as the chemo-attractant in BD matrigel invasion chamber. After 48 h, matrigel invaded CRC cells were
methanol fixed, H&E stained and counted. Adipocytes used were 3T3-L1-AC and human type II diabetic visceral adipocytes (HDP-AC).
Representative photomicrographs of H&E stained (X 100 magnification) matrigel invaded HCT116 CRC cells are shown. Columns, mean
values; error bars, SEM.

GSE inhibits adipocyte mediated ­
pro-tumorigenic signals on CSC
enriched colonospheres

signals arising from the GSE-treated adipocytes secretions,
on the self-renewal capacity of CSC population in CRC
cell lines. For the first set of studies, we isolated CSC
enriched CD44+EpCAMhigh cell populations from human
CRC cell lines SW480 and HT29 [53] and then subjected
them to sphere cluster formation assays (Figure 5) [53] in
the absence or direct presence of GSE (50–100µg/mL),
and % of floating colonospheres (≥ 50 cells per sphere)
generated after 10 days were determined (Figure 5A-B).
Whereas a single GSE treatment significantly

Recent studies have identified CD44+EpCAMhigh
cells as the tumor cell populations harboring CSC
properties (self-renewal and aberrant differentiation)
in CRC, which drive tumorigenic events [16, 51, 52].
Accordingly, we performed the studies to assess both the
direct effect of GSE as well as that of pro-tumorigenic
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10158

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Effect of GSE on the formation of CSC enriched colonosphere in SW480 and HT29 CRC cells. (A-B) Effect
of different doses of GSE on number and size (diameter and area) of CSC enriched SW480 and HT29 colonospheres in sphere cluster
formation assays after 10 days. A& B-left panels) Representative phase contrast photomicrographs (X 100 magnification, crop factor: 10)
of CSC enriched colonospheres depicting a decrease in their size by GSE treatment. Area of colonospheres was measured using Zeiss
Axioscope 2 microscope software (Carl Zeiss, Inc., Jena, Germany). $ P<0.05, # P<0.02; * P<0.001. (C-D) Effect of GSE on the viability
of CRC cells in colonospheres. Colonospheres were dispersed as single cells by Accutase treatment, and Trypan blue dye exclusion assay
was used to assess cell viability. Columns, mean values; error bars, SEM.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10159

Oncotarget

decreased the number of SW480 colonospheres in a
dose-dependent manner, the inhibitory effect was
significant only at 100μg/mL GSE dose in HT29
colonospheres (Figure 5A). Furthermore, we calculated
the diameter and area of individual colonospheres and the
results showed a significant decrease in these parameters
after GSE exposure (at all doses in both cell lines)
which indicated that GSE treatment had an inhibitory
effect on the progenitor/ bulk daughter CRC cells in the
colonospheres (Figure 5A-B). The growth inhibitory
effects of GSE in these colonospheres were further
confirmed by measuring cellular viability of dissociated
spheres using Trypan blue dye exclusion assay (Figure
5C-D). The results showed that GSE caused a significant
decrease in live as well as total cell numbers with a strong
increase in the number of dead cells in both SW480 and
HT29 colonospheres (Figure 5C-D).
To examine whether GSE efficacy against colon
CSCs involves an alteration in the gene levels of CSC
associated-signaling molecules, -transcription factors,
and -markers, we next performed semi-quantitative RTPCR analysis on selected colon CSC associated genes
after 48h of GSE exposure in monolayer cell culture of
CRC cells (Figure 6A). Indeed, GSE treatment down
regulated the mRNA levels of: a) CSC regulatory
molecule HES-1 that is the transcriptional target of
NOTCH 1 signaling, and b) CSC-associated transcription
factors and markers, namely NANOG, OCT-4, BMI1, CD133, EpCAM, CD44, MSI-1 and LGR5 in both
SW480 and HT29 cell lines (Figure 6A). Based on the
data showing that GSE modulated the mRNA expression
of CD44, the CSC associated-marker, next we also
assessed the protein expression of CD44 in the CRC
cell lines (Figure 6B). Immunofluorescence staining for
CD44 indicated a dramatic decrease in the expression
of membrane CD44 in both SW480 and HT29 CRC cell
lines after GSE treatment (Figure 6B).
Since CD44 is an essential CSC marker [16, 51,
52, 54], next, we also performed the Z stack analysis
(Figure 7A) of HT29 colonospheres, to determine how
protein expression of this marker and another essential
colon CSC-associated regulatory molecule, β-catenin
[55], was modulated by GSE. Similar to our data in
monolayer culture (Figure 6), we found a drastically
lower expression of both CD44 and β-catenin in GSEtreated colonospheres compared to controls (Figure 7A).
Similarly, the expression of OCT-4 was also effectively
reduced by GSE (Figure 7B). Since CSCs have been
associated with increased migratory and invasive
properties, we next also evaluated the colonospheres for
the expression of a) SNAIL-1, a mesenchymal marker, the
increased expression of which is associated with migratory
characteristics of cells, and b) E-cadherin, the epithelial
localization of which imparts epithelial differentiation
and its increased expression causes the cells to lose

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

their migratory potential [56–58]. The Z scans showing
the staining patterns for these molecules indicated that
while there was an increased expression of SNAIL-1 in
the periphery of control colonospheres with less overall
E-cadherin staining, the SNAIL-1 staining was drastically
decreased while membrane E-cadherin expression was
significantly increased in all the cells of GSE-treated
colonospheres (Figure 7C).
Next, in the second set of the studies, to mimic the
physiological influence of tumorigenic signals arising from
the adipocyte secretions (systemic as well as peritoneal),
colonosphere formation assay was performed in the
presence of mature adipocytes (no-contact co-culture)
(Figure 8A). Briefly, human type II diabetic visceral
pre-adipocytes were grown on cover slips and allowed
to differentiate and mature in to human type II diabetic
visceral adipocytes. GSE (10 µg/mL, optimum dose) was
used to pre-treat these adipocytes by adding it during
differentiation events [chronic treatment: 0–12 days] or
after adipocyte maturation [late-acute: at day 12 for 48 h].
Matured adipocytes with or without GSE pre-treatment
on cover slips were then washed to clear off GSE and
placed at the bottom of low attachment six-well plates.
These adipocytes on cover slips were then incubated for
48 h with serum-free stem cell specific media to be used
in colonosphere assays. After 48 h, colon CSCs were
seeded as single cells (3000 cells/well) in this media for
colonosphere formation. It is important to emphasize here
that it was a no contact co-culture model as adipocytes on
cover slips were placed on the bottom of wells whereas
the colonospheres in the sphere cluster formation assays
are generated as floating spheroids in the media and are
not in contact with the adipocytes but at the same time
are exposed to adipocytes secretions. After 10 days, the
number and size of colonosphere formed was measured
(Figure 8A). Important to note here is that adipocytes were
pre-treated with GSE and then GSE was removed before
co-culture of mature adipocytes with colon CSC, so that
no direct effect of GSE on colon CSC could interfere in
study outcomes.
Our results indicated that compared to control
colon CSC alone, presence of adipocytes caused a
significant increase in HT29 colonospheres formation;
however, chronic or acute GSE pre-treatment of
adipocytes significantly reduced the booster signals of
adipocytes resulting in decreased colonosphere numbers
that were comparable to those without adipocytes
(Figure 8A). The Z stack analysis of the colonospheres
was next performed (Figure 8B), which revealed that
protein expression of CD44 was markedly decreased in
the CSC enriched colonospheres which were co-cultured
in the presence of GSE-exposed adipocytes compared
to untreated adipocytes. Also importantly, these results
showed that GSE effects were primarily due to functional
modification of growth promoting signals of adipocyte

10160

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Effect of GSE on mRNA levels of CSC associated-signaling molecules, transcription factors, markers, and
CD44 protein levels in CRC cells. (A) Effect of GSE on HES-1, NANOG, OCT-4, BMI-1, CD133, EpCAM, CD44, MSI-1 and LGR5
mRNA levels in HT 29 and SW480 CRC cells as determined by semi-quantitative RT-PCR analysis. Columns indicate fold changes relative
to untreated controls and were normalized to GAPDH mRNA levels. (B) Effect of GSE on the protein expression of CD44 in SW480 and
HT29 CRC cells as observed by immunofluorescence staining. Representative photomicrographs of immunofluorescence staining (X 600 x
2 magnification) of CRC cells with CD44-red and DAPI-blue as nuclear stain are shown. GSE dose (50 μg/mL, for 48h).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10161

Oncotarget

Figure 7: Effect of GSE on the protein expression of CD44, β-catenin, Oct-4, SNAIL-1 and E-cadherin in CSC enriched
CRC colonospheres. Effect of GSE on the protein expression of, (A) CD44 and β-catenin; (B) OCT-4; and (C) SNAIL-1 and E-cadherin

levels in CSC enriched HT29 colonospheres. Stained samples were mounted with DAPI containing anti-fade reagent (Invitrogen) for
visualization under confocal microscopy. Z stack analysis was performed and representative scans (X 600 magnification) with individual
scan depth of specific colonospheres representing highest fluorescence intensity/signal are shown.

DISCUSSION

secretions on colon CSC and not due to interference in
differentiation of pre-adipocytes to mature adipocytes
or in the lipid content of mature adipocytes as indicated
by ORO staining based identification (Figure 8C) of
differentiated human type II diabetic visceral adipocytes
(red lipid droplets).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Recent studies have ascribed the major reason for
the failure of most of the treatment strategies against CRC
to the presence of CSC population in the colon tumor
mass, which is essentially resistant to current therapeutic
10162

Oncotarget

Figure 8: Effect of GSE on CSC enriched colonosphere formation, induced by no-contact co-culture with
adipocytes. Human type II diabetic visceral pre-adipocytes were grown on cover slips and allowed to differentiate and mature in to human

type II diabetic visceral adipocytes (HDP-AC). GSE (10 µg/mL) was used to pre-treat these adipocytes by adding it during differentiation
events [chronic treatment: 0-12 days] or after adipocyte maturation [late-acute: day 12 for 48 h]. (A) Matured adipocytes with or without
GSE pre-treatment were then used in no-contact HT29 colonosphere assays. After 10 days, the number and size of colonosphere formed
was measured. (B) Effect of GSE on the protein expression of CD44 in HDP-AC mediated CSC enriched HT29 colonospheres as observed
by immunofluorescence staining. Representative z scan images of immunofluorescence staining (X 400 magnification using confocal
microscopy) of colonospheres with CD44-red and DAPI-blue as nuclear stain are shown. Scan depth of specific colonospheres are also
shown. (C) Representative photomicrographs (X 200 magnification) of Oil-Red-O (ORO) based identification of differentiated HDP-AC
(red lipid droplets), in the absence and presence of GSE exposure are shown. Columns, mean values; error bars, SEM.

strategies, compared to daughter cells in the bulk tumor
cell population [12–18]. As stem cells or their progenitors
are the targets of transformation into CSCs which are

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

responsible for tumorigenesis [13–15, 17, 18], etiological
factors that interfere with the pro-tumorigenic signals
affecting the CSC population needs to be identified.

10163

Oncotarget

Since obesity is associated with increased CRC incidence
and mortality [8], it is imperative that obesity-driven
triggers that cause enhanced colon tumorigenesis, due
to the expansion of CSC pool, be critically defined.
Recently, there is a paradigm shift that adipose tissue
surrounding epithelial tumors are not ‘idle-bystanders’,
but rather they actively participate in signaling that
alters microenvironment in favor of tumor growth and
progression [9–11]. However, not much is known about the
impact of adipose tissue-modified microenvironment on
both CRC and colon CSC; the latter being now recognized
as the real driving force behind CRC initiation, promotion
and progression [12, 14, 16, 59]. Such an effort is now not
only important but rather essential since obese conditions
play an important role in increased CRC growth [3, 7, 8].
In light of these considerations, there is an urgent need to
understand the crucial role of adipocytes secretions (both
in systemic circulation and peritoneal fluids) on colon
CSC that drives CRC under obese conditions. Though the
role of adipocytes, the major players in obesity, on colon
carcinogenesis is just beginning to unfold, nevertheless
in the growing obesity epidemic, it is essential that we
investigate the benefits of those agents which exert both
anti-obesogenic and anti-CRC effects resulting in CRC
prevention and control under obese conditions.
In the present study, employing a panel of mouse
and human (diseased and non-diseased) adipocytes,
we found that GSE pre-treatment of adipocytes (in
co-culture under no contact model using a 3D matrigel
culture system) decreases their growth promoting effects
on CRC cells. In addition, adipocyte-conditioned media,
collected after chronic and acute pre-treatment with
GSE, significantly decreased the chemotactic properties
of adipocytes towards CRC cell invasion. Furthermore,
not only did GSE alone exert inhibitory effect on the
self-renewal capacity of the colon CSC population as
evidenced by a decrease in both the number and size of
colonospheres and altered mRNA/protein levels of various
CSC-associated markers and regulatory molecules, the
growth promoting signals of adipocytes on colon CSC
population were also dramatically reduced by GSE.
Notably, these effects of GSE on adipocytes were not
associated with any changes in the lipid content of
adipocytes after GSE exposure. However, GSE was found
to increase mitochondriogenesis and UCP-1 mRNA levels
together with differential modulation of adipogenesisrelated genes/proteins during different stages of adipocyte
differentiation. Since increased mitochondriogenesis and
UCP-1 expression are associated with brown adipocytes
[41–47], we presumed that somehow GSE treatment
was causing the ‘browning’ of adipocytes and thereby
interfering with the pro-tumorigenic signals of adipocytes
on colon CSCs/CRC cells.
The above observations and interpretations
have strong implications, given the fact that white and
brown adipocytes have functionally different roles.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Briefly, adipose tissue in mammals exists in two distinct
forms, namely WAT and BAT [45–48, 60]. WAT is
composed of white adipocytes which store excess energy in
the form of triglycerides; however, BAT is primarily made
up of brown adipocytes which uniquely express UCP-1;
activation of UCP-1 uncouples the proton gradient in
the mitochondria from ATP generation which results in
dissipation of energy as heat [45–48, 60]. Furthermore,
WAT has relatively few mitochondria and secretes a
variety of hormones and adipokines, but BAT burns lipids
to generate heat and expend energy and is involved in
plasma triglyceride clearance and glucose homeostasis.
This underlies the importance of BAT in obesity and
related metabolic disorders [45, 46]. Unlike rodents, in
humans, the prevalence of BAT decreases in adulthood,
thus its functionality in human adults is limited and is
further diminished in obese individuals [45–47]. However,
in recent years, the existence of adipocytes with an
intermediate phenotype between brown and white, known
as ‘brite’ adipocytes, indicates a possibility of ‘browning’
of WAT to a ‘brown phenotype’ with beneficial effects
[45–48, 60]. The ‘brite’ adipocytes are reminiscent of
a lean adipose tissue, which is neither associated with
increased secretion of pro-inflammatory adipokines and
cytokines from the adipocytes and inflammatory cells,
respectively, nor involved in tumor development and
promotion [4, 11, 45–47]. Thus, strategies to increase
both activity and recruitment of these ‘brite’ adipocytes
are currently being investigated and recognized as a new
therapeutic/preventive target to combat obesity-associated
disorders [41–47].
Taken together above discussion and our findings
that GSE efficacy against CRC under obese conditions
may possibly be mediated via its ability to induce ‘brown
remodeling’ of white adipocytes, GSE stands out as a
strong candidate agent for both pre-clinical and clinical
studies in future for its potential use against CRC growth
and progression under obese conditions. Furthermore,
extensive investigations into the molecular mechanisms
of GSE potential to induce the browning phenomenon in
adipocytes are also required and will be the focus of our
future studies. Successful outcomes from such studies
would have significant clinical impact on rationalized
use of GSE to control obesity-associated human CRC in
particular and other malignancies in general.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Reagents
Standardized preparation of GSE [22–24] was a
gift from Kikkoman Corp. (Nado City, Japan) and was
dissolved in DMSO for cell culture use. Antibodies used
were: CD44 total (Cat # sc-65410), C/EBP-α (Cat # 2295),
C/EBP-β (Cat # 3082), FAS (Cat # 3180) and SREBP1c (Cat # 366), and PPAR-γ (Cat # sc-7273) from
10164

Oncotarget

Santa Cruz Biotechnology; BrdU-FITC (Cat # ab74545)
and OCT-4 (Cat # ab18976) from Abcam; CD44-FITC
(Cat # 555478, BD Pharmingen); EpCAM-PE (Cat #
347211BD Biosciences); β-catenin (Cat # 9582), Snail-1
(Cat # 3895), E-cadherin (Cat # 3195), and Perilipin (Cat
# 9349) from Cell Signaling Technology. Anti-β-actin
(Cat # A2228) antibody was from Sigma. Secondary
antibodies, anti-rabbit IgG-HRP-linked (Cat # 7074)
and anti-mouse IgG-HRP-linked (Cat # 7076) were from
Cell Signaling Technology. Texas Red (Cat # T2767) or
Alexa Flour 488 (Cat # A11008) or Alexa Fluor 594 (Cat
# A110032) conjugated secondary antibodies and BrdU
labeling reagents (Cat # 00-0103) were from Invitrogen.
BODIPY 493/503 (Cat # D-3922) and MitoTracker Red
(Cat# M-7152) were from Molecular Probes. Growth
factor (GF) reduced matrigel was from BD Bioscences
(Cat # 356231). Invasive potential of CRC cells was
determined using matrigel coated trans-well chambers
(8 micron pore size) from BD Biosciences. TrizolR
method was used to isolate total RNA from CRC cells/
adipocytes, first-strand cDNA prepared using RT-PCR first
strand kit (Cat # 330401,Qiagen), and semi-quantitative
RT-PCR analysis was done using specific primers from
Sigma as described earlier [53]. Primer sequences are
detailed in Supplementary Table 1. For RT2qPCR analysis
of adipogenesis related genes, RT2 ProfilerTM PCR
Array (Qiagen) for mouse (Cat # PAMM-049ZA) and
human (Cat # PAHS-049ZA) was employed, while for
RT2qPCR analysis of mouse Ucp-1 gene, Qiagen kit (Cat
# PPM05164B) was used. All RT2 qPCR analysis were
done using ABI 7500 cycler as described earlier [53].

a growth media consisting of high glucose DMEM
(Cat #11995, Gibco) and 1% penicillin-streptomycin,
supplemented with 10% bovine calf serum (Cat #302030, ATCC). The 3T3-L1 adipocyte differentiation was
induced at 2 days post-confluency (designated as day 0)
by exposing confluent fibroblasts (pre-adipocytes) to an
adipogenic induction media, consisting of growth media
[high glucose DMEM, 1% penicillin-streptomycin and
10% FBS (Cat #10437, Gibco)], supplemented with 1 μM
dexamethasone (Cat #API-04, G-Biosciences), 0.5 mM
isobutylmethylxanthine (IBMX, Cat #I5879, Sigma), and
1 μg/mL bovine insulin (Cat #128-100, Cell Applications,
Inc.) for 3 days. On day 3, the adipogenic induction media
was replaced with media consisting of the growth media
supplemented with 1 μg/mL bovine insulin [without
IBMX and dexamethasone] and after another 3 days, on
day 6, the adipocytes were maintained in growth media
only (without bovine insulin, IBMX and dexamethasone).
Human visceral pre-adipocytes associated with
type II diabetes were cultured and differentiated in to
adipocytes according to manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly,
after reaching confluency, human visceral pre-adipocytes
were incubated with adipogenic differentiation media
(Cat #PT-8002, Lonza) for 12 days for differentiation
into mature adipocytes. Human adipose tissue-derived
mesenchymal stem cells were cultured and induced to
differentiate into adipocytes according to differentiation
kit provided by ATCC (Cat #PCS-500-050). Briefly,
adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cells were incubated
with adipogenic differentiation initiation media [15
mL of adipocyte basal medium and 1 mL of adipocyte
differentiation (AD) supplement] for 4 days (media
replenished after 2 days) and then differentiated cells
were maintained in adipocyte differentiation maintenance
medium [85 mL of adipocyte basal medium and 5 mL of
adipocyte differentiation maintenance (ADM) supplement]
for another 10 days (media changed after every 3 days) for
differentiation into mature adipocytes.

Cell lines
SW480, HT29 and HCT116 cells were from ATCC
(Manassas, VA), and maintained under 37°C /5% CO2
conditions in DMEM (HT29, and HCT116,) and RMPI
(SW480) media supplemented with 10% FBS and 1%
penicillin/streptomycin (Cat #15140, Gibco). Mouse
3T3-L1 differentiated adipocytes (3T3- L1-AC) were
generated from mouse 3T3-L1 fibroblasts (ATCC).
Human differentiated adipocytes were generated from
well-defined human adipose tissue derived mesenchymal
stem cells (Cat #PCS-500-011, ATCC) and human visceral
pre-adipocytes associated with type II diabetes (Cat # PT5008, Lonza Group Ltd.); these differentiated adipocytes
are referred in the figures as MSC-AC and HDP-AC,
respectively.

Protocols for GSE treatment
Since adipocyte differentiation time varied between
different cell lines, the specific treatment schedule
(Supplementary Figure 1) for chronic and late-acute GSE
treatments are detailed as: 1a) Chronic treatments in 3T3L1-AC: GSE added at day 0 (induction of adipogenesis in
post-confluent pre-adipocytes) till day 8 (day of adipocytes
maturation); 1b) Late-acute treatments in 3T3 L1-AC:
GSE added at day 8 (day of adipocytes maturation) for 48
h; 2a) Chronic treatments in human type II diabetic visceral
adipocytes: GSE added at day 0 (induction of adipogenesis
in post-confluent pre-adipocytes) till day 12  (day of
adipocytes maturation); 2b) Late-acute treatments in
human type II diabetic visceral adipocytes: GSE added

Adipocyte Culture and Differentiation
Well-defined differentiation protocols were
followed, as shown in supplementary figure 1. Mouse
3T3-L1 fibroblasts were cultured and maintained in

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10165

Oncotarget

at day 12 (day of adipocytes maturation) for 48 h; 3a)
Chronic treatments in human adipocytes from adipose
tissue derived mesenchymal stem cells: GSE added
at day 0 (induction of adipogenesis in post-confluent
pre-adipocytes) till day 14 (day of adipocytes maturation);
and 3b) Late-acute treatments in human adipocytes
from adipose tissue derived mesenchymal stem cells:
GSE added at day 14 (day of adipocytes maturation)
for 48 h. It should be noted that during chronic GSE
treatments, wherever media changes were required during
the adipogenesis process, following removal of spent
media, the fresh media that was added to the cells was
supplemented with the required concentration of GSE.
Adipocyte-conditioned media was obtained by subjecting
specific adipocytes to serum free media for 48 h, and
then using the cell clarified, generated sterile media,
in subsequent in vitro experiments in place of regular
media. Total cellular lysates, determination of protein
concentrations and western blotting followed by ECL
detection were done as described previously [23, 24].

Sphere cluster formation assays

Staining of lipids and mitochondria

Microscopic and statistical analysis

ORO staining was performed to identify intracellular
lipid droplets in matured and differentiated adipocytes.
Briefly, ORO stock solution was prepared by dissolving
300 mg ORO powder in 100 mL of 100% isopropanol. As
working solution, 3 parts of ORO stock was mixed with
2 parts of water and allowed to sit at room temperature
(RT) for 10 min and then filtered. The working solution
was prepared fresh before use. At the end of adipocyte
differentiation events, the adipocytes were washed with
PBS, formalin fixed for 1 h, washed with 60% isopropanol
and then dried in air at RT before exposing them to ORO
solution for 15 min. ORO stained cells were rinsed with
water four times to wash of excess stain and observed
under microscope to identify red stained lipid droplets.
For quantification purposes, ORO stained cells were
eluted with 100% isopropanol for 10 min and absorbance
of the elutes was measured at O.D. 500 nm. Lipids were
also stained in formalin fixed cells by using either directly
green fluorescent BODIPY 493/503 (1µg/mL) dye or
anti-perilipin primary antibody (1:200) followed by texas
red conjugated goat anti-rabbit-secondary antibody. The
slides were mounted with Prolong Gold Antifade reagent
with DAPI and observed under confocal microscope.
For mitochondria detection, live cells were exposed to
MitoTracker Red dye (100 nM) in serum free media for
30 min at 37°C, washed and formalin fixed; following
mounting with DAPI, thread like bright red stained
organelles were identified as mitochondria under confocal
microscope.

In invasion assay, matrigel invaded CRC cells were
manually counted at 400X [50]. For Immunofluorescence
staining of colonospheres, the colonospheres were
harvested and immobilized for staining convenience as
described by us recently [53]. Fluorescent images of cells /
colonospheres were captured using a Nikon D-Eclipse
C1 confocal microscope (Nikon) and analyzed using EZC1 Free viewer software. Z stacking was performed for
colonospheres, as detailed recently [53]; for comparisons,
averaged interval scans that best represent the highest
fluorescence intensity/signal were used. In treatment
assays, difference between treatment and control groups
was determined by one-way ANOVA or un-paired twotailed Student’s t-test using Sigma stat 2.03 software.
Two-sided P values of (0.05 were considered significant.
For western blots, β-actin was used as loading control
after stripping and re-probing the blots, and densitometric
values were calculated by Image J (NIH) software using
correction factor for β-actin blots.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

CRC cell populations were subjected to sphere
cluster formation assays as described earlier [53]. Briefly,
single sorted FACS separated CD44+EpCAMhigh cells
[employing CD44-FITC and EpCAM-PE antibodies] were
cultured (3000 cells/ well) in stem cell specific serum free
media (2mL) in an ultra-low attachment six well plates
(Cat # 3471, Costar) for 10–12 days. The defined stem cell
specific serum free media was DMEM/F-12 (Cat #21041025) supplemented with 1% penicillin-streptomycin, B27
(Cat # 17504-044) and N2 (Cat #17502-048) supplements
(all from Gibco), and growth factors [recombinant human
epidermal growth factor (Cat # 01-107) and fibroblast
growth factor (Cat#PHG0261), both from Invitrogen].
GSE was added after 6 h of seeding. Colonospheres
with ≥ 50 cells were scored as true colonospheres. To
measure cellular viability in colonospheres, spheres
were dissociated with Accutase for 15 min at 37oC and
subjected to Trypan blue dye exclusion assay

GRANT SUPPORT
This work was supported by NIH R01 AT003623
and NCI R01 CA112304.

Conflict of interest
No potential conflicts of interest were identified by
any of the authors.

10166

Oncotarget

ABBREVIATIONS

12.	 Boman BM, Huang E. Human colon cancer stem cells: a
new paradigm in gastrointestinal oncology. J Clin Oncol.
2008; 26:2828–2838.

GSE, grape seed extract; CRC, colorectal cancer;
CSC, cancer stem cells; 3T3-L1-AC, mouse 3T3-L1
differentiated adipocytes; MSC-AC, human adipocytes
from adipose tissue-derived mesenchymal stem cells;
HDP-AC, human type II diabetic visceral adipocytes;
3D, 3 dimensional; ORO, Oil-Red-O.

13.	 Huang EH, Wicha MS. Colon cancer stem cells:
implications for prevention and therapy. Trends Mol Med.
2008; 14:503–509.
14.	 Lobo NA, Shimono Y, Qian D, Clarke MF. The biology
of cancer stem cells. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol. 2007;
23:675–699.
15.	 McDonald SA, Graham TA, Schier S, Wright NA,
Alison MR. Stem cells and solid cancers. Virchows Arch.
2009; 455:1–13.

REFERENCES
1.	 National Cancer Institute: PDQ® Genetics of Colorectal
Cancer. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Date last
modified <02/28/2013>. Available at:http://cancer.gov/­
cancertopics/pdq/genetics/colorectal/HealthProfessional.

16.	 Ricci-Vitiani L, Fabrizi E, Palio E, De Maria R. Colon
cancer stem cells. J Mol Med. 2009; 87:1097–1104.
17.	 Sanchez-Garcia I, Vicente-Duenas C, Cobaleda C. The
theoretical basis of cancer-stem-cell-based therapeutics
of cancer: can it be put into practice?. Bioessays. 2007;
29:1269–1280.

2.	 Center MM, Jemal A, Ward E. International trends in colorectal cancer incidence rates. Cancer epidemiology, biomarkers
& prevention : a publication of the American ­Association
for Cancer Research, cosponsored by the ­American
Society of Preventive Oncology. 2009; 18:1688–1694.

18.	 Ward RJ, Dirks PB. Cancer stem cells: at the
headwaters of tumor development. Annu Rev Pathol. 2007;
2:175–189.

3.	 Donohoe CL, Pidgeon GP, Lysaght J, Reynolds JV. Obesity
and gastrointestinal cancer. The British journal of surgery.
2010; 97:628–642.

19.	 Derry MM, Raina K, Agarwal C, Agarwal R. Identifying
molecular targets of lifestyle modifications in colon cancer
prevention. Frontiers in oncology. 2013; 3:119.

4.	 Gregor MF, Hotamisligil GS. Inflammatory mechanisms in
obesity. Annual review of immunology. 2011; 29:415–445.

20.	 Kaur M, Agarwal C, Agarwal R. Anticancer and cancer
chemopreventive potential of grape seed extract and other
grape-based products. The Journal of nutrition. 2009;
139:1806S–1812S.

5.	 Hotamisligil GS. Inflammation and metabolic disorders.
Nature. 2006; 444:860–867.
6.	 Pais R, Silaghi H, Silaghi AC, Rusu ML, Dumitrascu DL.
Metabolic syndrome and risk of subsequent ­colorectal
cancer. World journal of gastroenterology : WJG. 2009;
15:5141–5148.

21.	 Rajamanickam S, Agarwal R. Natural products and colon
cancer: current status and future prospects. Drug Dev Res.
2008; 69:460–471.

7.	 Reynolds JV, Donohoe CL, Doyle SL. Diet, obesity
and cancer. Irish journal of medical science. 2011; 180:
521–527.

22.	 Yamakoshi J, Saito M, Kataoka S, Kikuchi M. Safety
evaluation of proanthocyanidin-rich extract from grape
seeds. Food and chemical toxicology : an international
journal published for the British Industrial Biological
Research Association. 2002; 40:599–607.

8.	 Gallagher EJ, LeRoith D. Epidemiology and molecular mechanisms tying obesity, diabetes, and the metabolic syndrome with cancer. Diabetes care. 2013; 36:
S233–239.

23.	 Kaur M, Mandair R, Agarwal R, Agarwal C. Grape seed
extract induces cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in human
colon carcinoma cells. Nutrition and cancer. 2008;
60:2–11.

9.	 Matafome P, Santos-Silva D, Sena CM, Seica R. ­Common
mechanisms of dysfunctional adipose tissue and obesityrelated cancers. Diabetes/metabolism research and reviews.
2013; 29:285–295.

24.	 Derry M, Raina K, Agarwal R, Agarwal C. Differential
effects of grape seed extract against human colorectal
cancer cell lines: The intricate role of death receptors and
mitochondria. Cancer letters. 2013; 334:69–78.

10.	 Nieman KM, Romero IL, Van Houten B, Lengyel  E.
Adipose tissue and adipocytes support tumorigenesis
and metastasis. Biochimica et biophysica acta. 2013;
1831:1533–1541.

25.	 Derry MM, Raina K, Agarwal R, Agarwal C. Characterization
of azoxymethane-induced colon tumor metastasis to lung
in a mouse model relevant to human sporadic colorectal
cancer and evaluation of grape seed extract efficacy.
Experimental and toxicologic pathology: official journal
of the Gesellschaft fur Toxikologische Pathologie. 2014;
66:235–242.

11.	 Yehuda-Shnaidman E, Schwartz B. Mechanisms linking
obesity, inflammation and altered metabolism to colon
carcinogenesis. Obesity reviews : an official journal of the
International Association for the Study of Obesity. 2012;
13:1083–1095.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10167

Oncotarget

26.	 Derry MM, Raina K, Balaiya V, Jain AK, Shrotriya S,
Huber KM, Serkova NJ, Agarwal R, Agarwal C. Grape
seed extract efficacy against azoxymethane-induced colon
tumorigenesis in A/J mice: interlinking miRNA with
cytokine signaling and inflammation. Cancer Prev Res
(Phila). 2013; 6:625–633.

37.	 Ardevol A, Motilva MJ, Serra A, Blay M, Pinent M.
Procyanidins target mesenteric adipose tissue in Wistar lean
rats and subcutaneous adipose tissue in Zucker obese rat.
Food chemistry. 2013; 141:160–166.
38.	 Pinent M, Blade C, Salvado MJ, Blay M, Pujadas G,
Fernandez-Larrea J, Arola L, Ardevol A. Procyanidin
effects on adipocyte-related pathologies. Critical reviews
in food science and nutrition. 2006; 46:543–550.

27.	 Derry MM, Somasagara RR, Raina K, Kumar S, Gomez J,
Patel M, Agarwal R, Agarwal C. Target identification of
grape seed extract in colorectal cancer using drug affinity
responsive target stability (DARTS) technique: role of
endoplasmic reticulum stress response proteins. Current
cancer drug targets. 2014; 14:323–336.

39.	 Quesada H, del Bas JM, Pajuelo D, Diaz S, ­Fernandez-Larrea
J, Pinent M, Arola L, Salvado MJ, Blade  C. Grape seed
proanthocyanidins correct dyslipidemia associated with a
high-fat diet in rats and repress genes controlling lipogenesis
and VLDL assembling in liver. Int J  Obes (Lond). 2009;
33:1007–1012.

28.	 Huang S, Yang N, Liu Y, Gao J, Huang T, Hu L, Zhao J,
Li Y, Li C, Zhang X. Grape seed proanthocyanidins inhibit
colon cancer-induced angiogenesis through suppressing
the expression of VEGF and Ang1. International journal of
molecular medicine. 2012; 30:1410–1416.

40.	 Charradi K, Elkahoui S, Karkouch I, Limam F, Hassine FB,
Aouani E. Grape seed and skin extract prevents highfat diet-induced brain lipotoxicity in rat. Neurochemical
research. 2012; 37:2004–2013.

29.	 Kaur M, Singh RP, Gu M, Agarwal R, Agarwal C. Grape
seed extract inhibits in vitro and in vivo growth of human
colorectal carcinoma cells. Clinical cancer research:
an official journal of the American Association for Cancer
Research. 2006; 12:6194–6202.

41.	 Festuccia WT, Blanchard PG, Deshaies Y. Control of
Brown Adipose Tissue Glucose and Lipid Metabolism by
PPARgamma. Frontiers in endocrinology. 2011; 2:84.
42.	 Petrovic N, Walden TB, Shabalina IG, Timmons JA,
Cannon B, Nedergaard J. Chronic peroxisome proliferatoractivated receptor gamma (PPARgamma) activation of
epididymally derived white adipocyte cultures reveals a
population of thermogenically competent, UCP1-containing
adipocytes molecularly distinct from classic brown
adipocytes. The Journal of biological chemistry. 2010;
285:7153–7164.

30.	 Kaur M, Tyagi A, Singh RP, Sclafani RA, Agarwal R,
Agarwal C. Grape seed extract upregulates p21 (Cip1)
through redox-mediated activation of ERK1/2 and
posttranscriptional regulation leading to cell cycle arrest
in colon carcinoma HT29 cells. Molecular carcinogenesis.
2011; 50:553–562.
31.	 Velmurugan B, Singh RP, Agarwal R, Agarwal  C.
Dietary-feeding of grape seed extract prevents azoxymethaneinduced colonic aberrant crypt foci formation in fischer
344 rats. Molecular carcinogenesis. 2010; 49:641–652.

43.	 Pisani DF, Djedaini M, Beranger GE, Elabd C,
Scheideler  M, Ailhaud G, Amri EZ. Differentiation of
Human Adipose-Derived Stem Cells into "Brite" (Brownin-White) Adipocytes. Frontiers in endocrinology.
2011; 2:87.

32.	 Velmurugan B, Singh RP, Kaul N, Agarwal R, Agarwal  C.
Dietary feeding of grape seed extract prevents intestinal
tumorigenesis in APCmin/+ mice. Neoplasia. 2010;
12:95–102.

44.	 Qiang L, Wang L, Kon N, Zhao W, Lee S, Zhang Y,
Rosenbaum M, Zhao Y, Gu W, Farmer SR, Accili   D.
Brown remodeling of white adipose tissue by SirT1dependent deacetylation of Ppargamma. Cell. 2012;
150:620–632.

33.	 Charradi K, Sebai H, Elkahoui S, Ben Hassine F, Limam F,
Aouani E. Grape seed extract alleviates high-fat dietinduced obesity and heart dysfunction by preventing cardiac
siderosis. Cardiovascular toxicology. 2011; 11:28–37.

45.	 Betz MJ, Enerback S. Therapeutic prospects of
metabolically active brown adipose tissue in humans.
Frontiers in endocrinology. 2011; 2:86.

34.	 Decorde K, Teissedre PL, Sutra T, Ventura E, Cristol JP,
Rouanet JM. Chardonnay grape seed procyanidin extract
supplementation prevents high-fat diet-induced obesity in
hamsters by improving adipokine imbalance and oxidative
stress markers. Molecular nutrition & food research. 2009;
53:659–666.

46.	 Ravussin E, Galgani JE. The implication of brown adipose
tissue for humans. Annual review of nutrition. 2011;
31:33–47.
47.	 Vosselman MJ, van Marken Lichtenbelt WD, Schrauwen P.
Energy dissipation in brown adipose tissue: From mice
to men. Molecular and cellular endocrinology. 2013;
379:43–50.

35.	 Ohyama K, Furuta C, Nogusa Y, Nomura K, Miwa T,
Suzuki K. Catechin-rich grape seed extract supplementation
attenuates diet-induced obesity in C57BL/6J mice. Annals
of nutrition & metabolism. 2011; 58:250–258.

48.	 Wu J, Cohen P, Spiegelman BM. Adaptive thermogenesis in
adipocytes: is beige the new brown?. Genes & development.
2013; 27:234–250.

36.	 Park SH, Park TS, Cha YS. Grape seed extract (Vitis
vinifera) partially reverses high fat diet-induced obesity
in C57BL/6J mice. Nutrition research and practice. 2008;
2:227–233.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

49.	 Liu Y, Zhang F, Zhang XF, Qi LS, Yang L, Guo H,
Zhang N. Expression of nucleophosmin/NPM1 correlates
10168

Oncotarget

with migration and invasiveness of colon cancer cells.
Journal of biomedical science. 2012; 19:53.

54.	 Ricci-Vitiani L, Lombardi DG, Pilozzi E, Biffoni M,
Todaro M, Peschle C, De Maria R. Identification and
expansion of human colon-cancer-initiating cells. Nature.
2007; 445:111–115.

50.	 Mateen S, Raina K, Agarwal C, Chan D, Agarwal R.
Silibinin synergizes with histone deacetylase and DNA
methyltransferase inhibitors in upregulating E-cadherin
expression together with inhibition of migration and
invasion of human non-small cell lung cancer cells. The
Journal of pharmacology and experimental therapeutics.
2013; 345:206–214.

55.	 Fodde R, Brabletz T. Wnt/beta-catenin signaling in cancer
stemness and malignant behavior. Curr Opin Cell Biol.
2007; 19:150–158.
56.	 Onder TT, Gupta PB, Mani SA, Yang J, Lander ES,
Weinberg RA. Loss of E-cadherin promotes metastasis
via multiple downstream transcriptional pathways. Cancer
research. 2008; 68:3645–3654.

51.	 Dalerba P, Dylla SJ, Park IK, Liu R, Wang X,
Cho RW, Hoey T, Gurney A, Huang EH, Simeone
DM, Shelton AA, Parmiani G, Castelli C, Clarke MF.
Phenotypic characterization of human colorectal
cancer stem cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007;
104:10158–10163.

57.	 Thiery JP. Epithelial-mesenchymal transitions in tumour
progression. Nature reviews Cancer. 2002; 2:442–454.
58.	 Thompson EW, Newgreen DF, Tarin D. Carcinoma
invasion and metastasis: a role for epithelial-mesenchymal
transition?. Cancer research. 2005; 65:5991–5995
discussion 5995.

52.	 Vermeulen L, Todaro M, de Sousa Mello F, Sprick MR,
Kemper K, Perez Alea M, Richel DJ, Stassi G, Medema JP.
Single-cell cloning of colon cancer stem cells reveals a
multi-lineage differentiation capacity. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A. 2008; 105:13427–13432.

59.	 Ailles LE, Weissman IL. Cancer stem cells in solid tumors.
Curr Opin Biotechnol. 2007; 18:460–466.
60.	 Yao X, Shan S, Zhang Y, Ying H. Recent progress in
the study of brown adipose tissue. Cell & bioscience.
2011; 1:35.

53.	 Kumar S, Raina K, Agarwal C, Agarwal R. Silibinin
strongly inhibits the growth kinetics of colon cancer
stem cell-enriched spheroids by modulating interleukin
4/6-mediated survival signals. Oncotarget. 2014; 5:
4972–4989.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10169

Oncotarget

