Published OnlineFirst January 13, 2012; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-3439

Cancer
Research

Perspective

Repurposing Approved and Abandoned Drugs for the
Treatment and Prevention of Cancer through Public–Private
Partnership
Scott J. Weir1, Louis J. DeGennaro2, and Christopher P. Austin3

The cancer medical community, perhaps more than any
other, understands the dire need for new, innovative therapies
for the estimated 11,714,000 Americans living with cancer (1).
While our understanding of the biology and genetics of cancer
has increased dramatically in recent decades, the pace of
discovery, development, and registration of new drug therapies
for the treatment, prevention, and control of cancer has not.
This is especially true for the many rarer forms of cancer. Indeed,
many cancers meet the Orphan Drug Act deﬁnition of <200,000
prevalence in the United States (2). Understanding cancer in this
light and making meaningful inroads into the development of
targeted therapies for these rare diseases requires new thinking,
new approaches, and new collaborations.
On July 6, 2010, leaders from industry, government, academia,
and nonproﬁt organizations participated in a national Town
Hall co-sponsored by The University of Kansas Cancer Center
(KUCC), the Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation, the Kansas
Bioscience Authority, the Friends of Cancer Research, and the
Council for American Medical Innovation (CAMI). This Town
Hall meeting, entitled "The New Role of Academia in Drug
Discovery and Development," drew attention to academia's
changing role in translational research. Today, academic institutions are poised and challenged unlike ever before to meet
society's expectation that breakthrough technologies and biomedical discoveries—funded by the federal government and
made within these institutions—be moved through the therapeutic product development process to beneﬁt human health.
Several policy leaders participated in the Town Hall
meeting. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
(HHS) Secretary Kathleen Sebelius opened the meeting with
a keynote address describing HHS's support for this new,
powerful challenge. NIH Director Francis Collins and U.S.
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Commissioner Margaret Hamburg joined former U.S. Majority Leader and
CAMI Chairman Richard Gephardt to discuss agency perspectives on how to foster innovation and collaboration. In
December 2010, the Town Hall co-sponsors released a white
paper entitled "The New Role of Academia in Drug Discovery

Authors' Afﬁliations: 1Institute for Advancing Medical Innovation, University of Kansas Cancer Center, Kansas City, Kansas; 2The Leukemia &
Lymphoma Society, White Plains, New York; and 3NIH Center for Translational Therapeutics, Rockville, Maryland
Corresponding Author: Scott J. Weir, Kansas Masonic Cancer Research,
3901 Rainbow Boulevard, Mailstop 1027, Kansas City, KS 66160. Phone:
913-588-4798; Fax: 913-588-4701; E-mail: sweir@kumc.edu
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-3439
2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

and Development: New Thinking, New Competencies, New
Results," which reﬂects key recommendations coming out of
the event (3).
In January 2011, Secretary Sebelius further called for strategic partnerships between industry, government, academia,
and nonproﬁt organizations to build "a stronger foundation for
a new century of treatments and cures" (4). Responding to this
challenge, three organizations with forward-thinking strategies and unique respective drug repurposing experiences
established The Learning Collaborative to advance therapies
for blood cancers more efﬁciently than any of the component
organizations could do alone. This collaboration represents
the future in cancer drug development—a team effort that
brings together unparalleled strengths in the various disciplines needed to advance a treatment from the laboratory to
regulatory approval as rapidly as possible. The Learning Collaborative is a dedicated collaboration between the NIH Chemical Genomics Center (NCGC) and its Therapeutics for Rare
and Neglected Diseases (TRND) program, The Leukemia &
Lymphoma Society (LLS), and KUCC to discover and develop
new drug therapies for rare blood cancers. Speciﬁcally, The
Learning Collaborative combines the disease expertise and
network of the LLS, the cancer drug repurposing and drug
development expertise of the KUCC, and the drug discovery
expertise of the NCGC to create a pipeline of new therapies to
treat blood cancers using less traditional forms of drug discovery and development. The partners have a shared commitment not only to discovering and developing new molecular
entities (NME) for the treatment of rare blood cancers but also
to exploring new uses for approved and abandoned drugs. The
Learning Collaborative is advancing blood cancer–focused
projects from target identiﬁcation and validation through
clinical proof-of-concept.

Repurposing Drugs for the Beneﬁt of Patients
While The Learning Collaborative is focused on both NMEs
and repurposing, this commentary emphasizes drug repurposing strategies for two reasons. First and foremost, repurposing
approved and abandoned drugs for cancer represents an
opportunity to rapidly advance to patients promising drug
therapies by capitalizing on existing data and experience.
The same holds true for abandoned or "shelved" drug candidates, agents whose development was discontinued for any
number of non-safety–related reasons. NIH has taken notice
of the important potential of repurposed and abandoned
drugs (5). In April 2011, Dr. Francis Collins convened a meeting
with research and development leaders from the pharmaceutical industry in Bethesda, MD entitled "NIH-Industry

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

1055

Published OnlineFirst January 13, 2012; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-3439

Weir et al.

Roundtable—Exploring New Uses for Approved and Abandoned Therapeutics." A major objective of this meeting was
to seek industry support in accessing approved and abandoned
drugs for evaluation in patients suffering from rare and
neglected diseases. Second, drug repurposing provides opportunities for The Learning Collaborative to interact with regulatory agencies, in accord with The Learning Collaborative's
objective of creating new and more rapid paths to regulatory
approval of cancer drug therapies. Both provide critical learning opportunities and thus allow this nontraditional collaboration to evolve scientiﬁcally and operationally.

A New Academic Model
Drug discovery and development is universally acknowledged to be costly, time-consuming, and risky. Academia
unfortunately faces additional barriers, deeply rooted in the
conventional dynamics of university faculty, infrastructure,
and process. The typical American academic institution is
composed of research-oriented faculty who, in many cases,
lack experience with the translational/regulatory process.
Furthermore, even preeminent academic institutions are often
deﬁcient in core drug discovery and development functions, as
traditional grant funding patterns and the tenure system
incentivize basic research rather than translation. These circumstances make it difﬁcult for academia to play a broader
role in drug discovery and development. Success now requires
charging forward with new, innovative approaches to the
entire translational process. Indeed, the new National Center
for Advancing Translational Sciences (NCATS) at NIH is envisioned as catalyzing just such technological and paradigmatic
advances in the academic sector (6).

The Learning Collaborative
In June 2010, The Learning Collaborative's three founding
partners combined forces in an effort to bridge the "Valley of
Death," bringing together proven expertise in blood cancer
research, drug discovery, and drug development. At the outset
of this endeavor, founding partners established a Memorandum
of Understanding to clearly deﬁne collective objectives, expectations, and deliverables. The partners designed these objectives
and expectations to meet the new challenges of drug discovery
and development. This partnership soon became a benchmark
for innovation at NIH after becoming one of the ﬁrst nonproﬁt/
academic endeavors to receive a Cooperative Research and
Development Agreement (CRADA) designation. Importantly,
The Learning Collaborative obtained this CRADA designation
because of the demonstrated capacity of the LLS and KUCC to
develop and commercialize drug therapies as nonproﬁt entities.
This model can and should apply to many other rare diseases, for
which the usual commercial incentives are inadequate.
The Learning Collaborative's purpose is to effectively bridge
the gap between basic cancer research and drug discovery/
development/approval by moving high impact projects rapidly
through a series of short-term, commercially focused, go/no go
decision points (Fig. 1). Projects are evaluated for advancement
or termination by applying industry-quality Project Management to all activities.

1056

Cancer Res; 72(5) March 1, 2012

Figure 1. The Learning Collaborative partner contribution across the drug
discovery and development continuum. The logos contained within this
ﬁgure are approved for usage.

The success of this rare public–private partnership is
based on the fact that each participating organization offers
unique, well-established capabilities. As the largest private
disease philanthropy organization focused on blood cancer,
LLS brings access to cutting edge basic research. In addition, the LLS Therapy Acceleration Program, which supports projects focused on development of new therapies for
blood cancer, has established partnerships with pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies that provide an
avenue to license drug therapies developed by The Learning
Collaborative to for-proﬁt partners. NCGC and its TRND
program established the ﬁrst drug discovery and development pipeline within the NIH to produce new therapies
speciﬁcally for rare diseases; The Learning Collaborative
uses this organization's ability to provide high-throughput
screening and medicinal chemistry. KUCC provides cancer
biology, drug discovery, early-stage drug development, and
experimental therapeutics expertise as well as regulatory
know-how to the collaboration. Through informed, structured planning and unprecedented industry collaborations,
KUCC ensures that The Learning Collaborative's core competencies in research are fully leveraged forward to commercial viability.

Auranoﬁn for the Treatment of CLL
The Learning Collaborative's ﬁrst project, which is also a pilot
project of the TRND program, focuses on repurposing an
existing small-molecule drug, auranoﬁn, initially approved to
treat rheumatoid arthritis in the mid-1980s. The Hematology
Branch of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute
(NHLBI) at NIH is collaborating with The Learning Collaborative on this groundbreaking project. Auranoﬁn is being evaluated by The Learning Collaborative as a treatment for relapsed
chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL)—one of the four major
types of leukemia and one that typically affects older people.
Almost 15,000 people in the United States are diagnosed with
CLL each year. Although current treatments for CLL are
effective over the short term, patients frequently relapse and
the disease remains incurable. The development of new, effective therapies is essential. In just 2 years after the identiﬁcation
of auranoﬁn's activity in CLL cells, this project has entered

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst January 13, 2012; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-3439

Cancer Uses for Repurposing Approved and Abandoned Drugs

clinical trials. By conducting the experimental therapeutics
trial at three institutions, KUCC, NHLBI, and The Ohio State
University (Columbus, OH), patient enrollment will be accelerated. Upon clinical proof-of-concept, The Learning Collaborative will engage a for-proﬁt partner to advance auranoﬁn
through late-stage drug development, registration, and
commercialization.
The development of new therapies for blood cancers poses
both scientiﬁc and economic challenges. The Learning Collaborative has the unique ability to "de-risk" promising drug
therapies, such as auranoﬁn, using an innovative approach to
quickly determine proof-of-concept. This partnership represents a standing model for innovative practice and multistakeholder collaboration in drug discovery and development.
The effort provides academia with opportunities to leverage
funding, build organizational strengths, and clearly deﬁne
exclusivity path(s) required to attract interested for-proﬁt
partners. Partnerships, such as The Learning Collaborative, are
the key to addressing unmet medical need in this increasingly
difﬁcult landscape.
The partnership is named The Learning Collaborative
because this model is scalable, applicable across a wide range
of therapeutic areas, and replicable by organizations committed to innovative models of collaboration. Learnings from The
Learning Collaborative will contribute to building a stronger
foundation for translational research in America, leading to the
advancement of new treatments for rare diseases, including
rare cancers. In the past year, The Learning Collaborative
surmounted many potential barriers and experienced important learning moments that positively steered the partnership.
Some early successes that can be replicated include best
practices in leveraging funding from multiple sources, integrating technology transfer into teams, and development of
novel approaches to preclinical and clinical proof-of-concept.
Members of The Learning Collaborative continue to explore
solutions to barriers that include addressing regulatory science
issues (with particular focus on repurposing off patent and
abandoned drugs for rare and neglected diseases) and deﬁning
exclusivity path(s) to interest future for-proﬁt partners.
The Learning Collaborative is currently evaluating and selecting additional blood cancer drug discovery and development
projects. Additional projects will use drug discovery and drug
repurposing strategies. Projects are being identiﬁed on the
basis of research conducted by the 3 collaborating organizations as well as research conducted by other academic
institutions.

Engaging in Repurposing Partnerships
As shown by The Learning Collaborative, a new collaborative model of drug discovery and development can yield
successful results. Each member of the collaboration pos-

sesses individual assets that can be leveraged and integrated
to advance promising drug therapies to patients. The foundation of a strong collaboration centers on a willingness to
coalesce around the shared goal of translating discoveries
from the laboratory to marketplace. In this new model,
traditional practices may not be suitable, and collaborators
may need to develop novel technology transfer, patenting,
licensing, and funding streams.

Advances in Regulatory Science and Public
Policy
To promote collaborative practices and their success,
advancements in regulatory science are necessary. Priority
areas include developing guidance on drug repurposing,
increasing data-sharing and disclosure about drug development failures, modernizing regulatory pathways based on new
science, and designing new exclusivity strategies. While these
advancements would not be a cure all for the challenges of drug
development, they are a strong step toward de-risking the
process and promoting innovation.
A particular development challenge exists in repurposing
off-patent drugs for rare cancers: regulatory approval often
requires expensive and complex clinical trials, but limited
returns on investment make it difﬁcult to attract private sector
ﬁnancing and expertise. New paths to exclusivity and pricing/
reimbursement strategies are needed to promote private sector engagement. In addition, it will be critical to create innovative public policy solutions that incentivize repurposing offpatent drugs for rare cancers—particularly, for small biotechnology companies, which may ﬁnd opportunities in lower
margin and small (but well-deﬁned) markets attractive.

Conclusion
Nontraditional, dynamic partnerships, such as The Learning
Collaborative, allow nonproﬁt organizations to play a high
impact role in advancing the development of new cancer drug
therapies and bringing these therapies rapidly to patients. The
foundations of The Learning Collaborative model are a willingness to rely on partners for expertise, share freely, stay
focused on the shared goal of translating discoveries from the
laboratory to marketplace, and view deliverables as not only
new treatments but also improvements in the processes by
which those treatments are developed. The Learning Collaborative model allows the partner organizations to more effectively advance their missions to bring new therapies to the
millions of patients suffering from rare cancers.
Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest
No potential conﬂicts of interests were disclosed.
Received October 21, 2011; revised January 3, 2012; accepted January 3, 2012;
published OnlineFirst January 13, 2012.

References
1. Cancer prevalence: how many people have cancer? Atlanta,
GA: American Cancer Society. [cited 2011 Oct 6]. Available from:
http://www.cancer.org/cancer/cancerbasics/cancer-prevalence.

www.aacrjournals.org

2. Howlader N, Noone AM, Krapcho M, Neyman N, Aminou R,
Waldron W, et al., editors. SEER Cancer Statistics Review,
1975-2008. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. [cited

Cancer Res; 72(5) March 1, 2012

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

1057

Published OnlineFirst January 13, 2012; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-3439

Weir et al.

2011 Dec 15]. Available from: http://seer.cancer.gov/csr/1975_
2008/.
3. The new role of academia in drug development: new thinking,
new competencies, new results. Kansas City, MO: Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation. [cited 2010 Dec 1]. Available from: http://www.kauffman.org/uploadedﬁles/town_hall_white_paper_12-10.pdf.

1058

Cancer Res; 72(5) March 1, 2012

4. Sebelius K. Building a stronger foundation for a new century of treatments and cures. Health Aff (Millwood) 2011;30:81–3.
5. Collins F. Mining for therapeutic gold. Nat Rev Drug Discov
2011;10:397.
6. Collins F. Reengineering translational science: the time is right. Sci
Transl Med 2011;3:90.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst January 13, 2012; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-3439

Repurposing Approved and Abandoned Drugs for the Treatment
and Prevention of Cancer through Public−Private Partnership
Scott J. Weir, Louis J. DeGennaro and Christopher P. Austin
Cancer Res 2012;72:1055-1058. Published OnlineFirst January 13, 2012.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-3439

This article cites 2 articles, 1 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/72/5/1055.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 7 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/72/5/1055.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

