www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2016, Vol. 7, (No. 52), pp: 87037-87051
Research Paper

CCL2/EGF positive feedback loop between cancer cells and
macrophages promotes cell migration and invasion in head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma
Lu Gao1,3,*, Feng-qin Wang1,4,*, Hui-min Li1, Jie-gang Yang1, Jian-Gang Ren1,2, Ke-fei
He1,2, Bing Liu2, Wei Zhang1,2, Yi-Fang Zhao1,2
1

The State Key Laboratory Breeding Base of Basic Science of Stomatology and Key Laboratory of Oral Biomedicine Ministry
of Education, School and Hospital of Stomatology, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430079, China

2

Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, School and Hospital of Stomatology, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430079, China

3

College of Stomatology, Dalian Medical University, Dalian 116044, China

4

Department of Stomatology, The Central Hospital of Wuhan, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan 430014, China

*

These authors contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Yi-Fang Zhao, email: yifang@whu.edu.cn
Wei Zhang, email: wzhang88@whu.edu.cn
Keywords: HNSCC, tumor associated macrophages, invadopodia, CCL2, EGF
Received: May 07, 2016     Accepted: November 02, 2016     Published: November 23, 2016

ABSTRACT
Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) represents the most frequent
malignancy in the head and neck region, and the survival rate has not been improved
significantly over the past three decades. It has been reported the infiltrated
macrophages contribute to the malignant progression of HNSCC. However, the
crosstalk between macrophages and cancer cells remains poorly understood. In
the present study, we explored interactions between monocytes/macrophages and
HNSCC cells by establishing the direct co-culture system, and found that the crosstalk
promoted the migration and invasion of cancer cells by enhancing the invadopodia
formation through a CCL2/EGF positive feedback loop. Our results demonstrated
HNSCC cells educated monocytes into M2-like macrophages by releasing C-C motif
chemokine ligand 2 (CCL2, or MCP-1). And the M2-like macrophages secreted epithelial
growth factor (EGF), which increased the motility of HNSCC cells by enhancing the
invadopodia formation. These subcellular pseudopodia degraded extracellular matrix
(ECM), facilitating tumor local invasion and distant metastasis. Moreover, EGF upregulated CCL2 expression in HNSCC cells, which recruited monocytes and turned them
into M2-like macrophages, thus forming a positive feedback paracrine loop. Finally,
we reported that curcumin, a powerful natural drug, suppressed the production of
EGF and CCL2 in macrophages and cancer cells, respectively, blocking the feedback
loop and suppressing the migration and invasion of HNSCC cells. These results shed
light on the possibilities and approaches based on targeting the crosstalk between
cancer cells and monocytes/macrophages in HNSCC for potential cancer therapy.

INTRODUCTION

recurrence and distant metastases are considered to be
the major reasons for the poor prognosis [3]. Thus, the
underlying mechanisms for the local invasion and distant
metastases of HNSCC need to be better understood.
Persistent inflammation induced by smoking,
excessive alcohol consumption, repetitive injury and
human papillomavirus (HPV) infection has been
evidenced as the critical factor during the initiation and

Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC)
is one of the most frequent cancers in the world. Despite
the rapid development of diagnostic and therapeutic
approaches in recent years, the 5-year survival rate of
patients suffering HNSCC is still less than 50%, which
remains over the past three decades [1, 2]. The local
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

87037

Oncotarget

development of most HNSCCs [4, 5]. The infiltrated
macrophages in tumors (termed as tumor associated
macrophages, TAMs), as the major inflammatory cellular
population in the tumor microenvironment, promote
the progression of malignancies by supporting tumor
growth, enhancing tumor associated angiogenesis,
suppressing adaptive immunity, and assisting tumor
cells in invading into surrounding normal tissues and
metastasizing to distant organs [6]. Monocytes enter tumor
tissues through blood vessels, and then differentiate into
macrophages under the stimuli from tumor cells or the
tumor associated microenvironment [7]. Accumulating
research has demonstrated the crosstalk between tumor
cells and macrophages (or monocytes) contributed to the
recruitment of macrophages in various cancers, including
breast cancer, lung cancer, hepatocellular carcinoma, etc.
[8–10]. However, the interactions between monocytes/
macrophages and HNSCC cells, as well as the consequent
effects on the progression of HNSCC are largely unknown.
Efficient tumor invasion and metastasis through
tissue barriers or blood/lymphatic vessel walls require
potent ability of extracellular matrix (ECM) degradation
[11]. Recent studies have reported the specialized
subcellular structures, which were named as invadopodia
in malignant cells and podosomes in many normal cell
types, including vascular endothelial cells, macrophages,
osteoclasts, etc., involved in the degradation of ECM
[12, 13]. These membrane protrusions facilitate cancer
cells penetration through the basement membrane of
blood vessels and into surrounding tissues, therefore
promoting local invasion and distant metastasis of the
cancer cells. Our previous study demonstrated that the
infiltration of TAMs in cancer tissues was successively
increased compared with that in the normal tissues. The
number of infiltrated macrophages was strongly associated
with lymph node metastasis [14]. However, whether
the infiltrated macrophages regulate the formation of
invadopodia and then promote the migration and invasion
of HNSCC cells are still unclear.
We here for the first time performed a detailed
analysis of the sequential steps involved in the crosstalk
between monocytes and HNSCC cells, as well as the
consequential effects on the motility of cancer cells. Our
data revealed that HNSCC cells recruited and educated
monocytes into M2- polarized macrophages, which in turn
promoted the migration and invasion of the cancer cells
by enhancing the their invadopodia formation in an EGF
dependent manner. And we found that the EGF/EGFRCCL2/CCR signaling pathways in the co-culture system
constituted a positive feedback paracrine loop. Finally,
we tested and found that curcumin, a natural polyphenolic
compound derived from the root of Curcuma longa,
suppressed the expression of CCL2 in HNSCC cells and
EGF in macrophages, weakened the invadopodia formation

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

and alleviated HNSCC cells migration and invasion,
showing a promising therapeutic potential in HNSCC.

RESULTS
HNSCC cells educate monocytes into M2polarized macrophages
High infiltration of tumor associated macrophages
in HNSCCs was reported in our previous study [14].
And a recent study has also demonstrated that TAMs
could be recruited by the tumor microenvironment of
HNSCC [15]. However, the precise mechanism by which
monocytes are recruited is still unclear. Here, we firstly
established a direct co-culture system between monocytes
and HNSCC cells by culturing THP1 and Cal27 together
for 24 h. THP1 cells were stained with a green fluorescent
dye CFDA-SE for visualization. As shown in Figure 1A,
equal amounts of THP1 cells were seeded in the blank
dishes (Control group) and the dishes pre-cultured with
Cal27 cells or oral keratinocytes (OKC). After co-culture
for 24 h, the unattached cells were washed out, and
the attached cells were observed under a microscope.
The results demonstrated the number of differentiated
macrophages, the adherent THP1 cells, was significantly
increased when co-cultured with Cal27 cells, reaching
approximate 70% of the total population (Figure 1A
and 1B). Less than 10% THP1 cells were adherent on
the blank dishes and approximate 30% THP1 cells were
adherent when co-cultured with OKCs. Moreover, another
HNSCC cell line FaDu also promoted the adherence of
THP1 cells (Supplementary Figure S1). The CFDASE labeled THP1 cells were sorted, and analyzed by
flow cytometry to quantify the membrane expression of
CD163 and CD206. After co-culture with Cal27 cells,
more than 60% THP1 cells displayed double positive
staining of CD163 and CD206, and less than 20% THP1
cells were double positive after co-culture with OKCs
(Figure 1C and 1D). Then the unattached THP1 cells
were washed out, and the polarization of the macrophages
was investigated by quantitatively analyzing the mRNA
expression profile of the specific biomarkers using
qPCR. The results demonstrated the mRNA expression
levels of Arg1, Fizz1, Mgl1 and Mgl2 were significantly
increased in the attached THP1 cells that were co-cultured
with Cal27 cells, but not those co-cultured with OKCs
(Figure 1E). THP1 cells without any treatment and M2polarized macrophages, which were induced from THP1
cells treated with phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA)
and IL-4/IL-13 cytokines, were used as negative and
positive control, respectively. All above data suggested
that HNSCC cells promoted the differentiation of
monocytes into macrophages, and educated them into M2polarized phenotype.

87038

Oncotarget

CCL2 contributes to the differentiation of
monocytes into M2- polarized macrophages

SDF-1α and CCL2 in the co-cultured Cal27 cells were
significantly increased. The mRNA expression of CCL2
was twice as high as that in the control tumor cells.
Moreover, secreted CCL2 in supernatant was analyzed.
The protein level of CCL2 was increased from 200 pg/ml
to over 400 pg/ml in the co-culture system, which was

Cal27 cells in the co-culture system were also sorted
using FACS, and the cytokines expression was analyzed.
As shown in Figure 2A, the mRNA expression levels of

Figure 1: HNSCC cells promote the differentiation and M2- polarization of THP1 cells. CFDA-SE labeled THP1 cells were

added to the dishes in which Cal27 cells were seeded for 6 h. After co-culture for 24 h, unattached THP1 cells were washed out. (A) Cal27
cells promote the differentiation of THP1 cell into macrophages, most of which were attached on the cancer cells. (B) The ratio of attached
cells to the total THP1 population was calculated. Co-culture of THP1 cells and oral keratinocytes (OKC) was established as a control.
Then the CFDA-SE labeled THP1 cells were sorted by FACS. (C) The membrane protein expression of CD163 and CD206 was analyzed
by flow cytometry. (D) The CD163 and CD206 double positive THP1 cells were quantitatively analyzed. After the unattached THP1 cells
were washed out, the CFDA-SE labeled THP1 cells were sorted. (E) The mRNA expression of M2- polarized macrophage’s markers Arg1,
Fizz1, Mgl1 and Mgl2 were analyzed. **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

87039

Oncotarget

much higher than that in the supernatant of Cal27 cells
that were treated with THP1 conditioned medium
(Figure 2B). Moreover, CXCR4 and CCR2, the receptors
of SDF-1α and CCL2, were up-regulated in the cocultured THP1 cells (with Cal27 or FaDu cells) in both
mRNA and protein levels (Figure 2C and 2D), suggesting
that SDF-1α/CXCR4 and CCL2/CCR2 axes might
involve in the differentiation and polarization of THP1
cells under co-culture conditions. RS504393 (10 μM), a
highly selective CCR2 chemokine receptor antagonist,
significantly repressed the differentiation of THP1 cells
as the number of adherent monocytes was dramatically
decreased. AMD3100, a specific CXCR4 antagonist,
only slightly decreased the adherent monocytes number
(Figure 2E and 2F). Thus, in the following experiments,
CCL2/CCR2 signaling pathway was studied. Furthermore,
our data revealed that in the co-culture system containing
RS504393, the ratio of CD163 and CD206 double positive
THP1 cells was significantly decreased, from more than
60% to approximate 30% (Figure 2G and 2H). Moreover,
the mRNA expression profile of the co-cultured THP1
cells in the presence of RS504393 was analyzed. The
results from qPCR showed the remarkably declined
expression of Arg1, Fizz1, Mgl1 and Mgl2 in the THP1
cells after RS504393 treatment (Figure 2I).
In order to avoid the potential influence of the
cancerous property of THP1 cells on the interactions
between HNSCC cells and monocytes, we then isolated
primary monocytes from human peripheral blood
according to the previous study [16]. The direct co-culture
system between peripheral blood monocytes (PBMs) and
Cal27 cells was established according to the approach we
mentioned above. Results from FACS demonstrated that
Cal27 cells promoted the membrane expression of CD163
and CD206 in PBMs (Supplementary Figure S2A). The
mRNA expression of M2 phenotypic markers Arg1,
Fizz1, Mgl1 and Mgl2 was also significantly increased in
these primary macrophages when co-cultured with Cal27
cells (Supplementary Figure S2B). Moreover, RS504393
remarkably reduced the membrane expression of CD163
and CD206, as well as the mRNA expression of these
M2 phenotypic cytokines in the PBMs under co-culture
conditions (Supplementary Figure S2). Taken together,
these results suggested that HNSCC cells promoted the
differentiation and polarization of monocytes into M2polarized macrophages by secreting CCL2.

displayed the highest motility compared with those were
treated with THP1 conditioned medium (THP1-CM)
and M2- polarized macrophages conditioned medium
(M2-CM). In addition, our data revealed that the cocultured Cal27 cells held the highest invasive ability,
even higher than the Cal27 cells treated with M2-CM.
The quantitative data was presented in Figure 3C and 3D.
The similar results were also found in the wound healing
assays and transwell chamber assays using FaDu cells
(Supplementary Figure S3). Intriguingly, we found
that in the wound healing assays, most macrophages
were located in the margins of the scratches, indicating
that macrophages might lead HNSCC cells to migrate.
Moreover, our results evidenced that suppression of
CCL2/CCR2 axis using RS504393 alleviated the enhanced
motility of Cal27 cells (Supplementary Figure S4). All
these data indicated that macrophages in the co-culture
system promoted the migration and invasion of HNSCC
cells, thus contributing to the local invasion and distant
metastasis of HNSCC.

Macrophages enhance the invadopodia
formation in HNSCC cells
Accumulating research revealed invadopodia
played important roles during cell migration and invasion
[11, 17]. Thus invadopodia formation in HNSCC cells
under co-culture conditions were analyzed. Co-localization
of F-actin and cortactin in Cal27 cells proved invadopodia
formation in the gelatin-coated coverslips. The increased
yellow dots in the Cal27 cells co-cultured with THP1
suggested invadopodia were enhanced after interactions
with macrophages (Figure 4A). By counting the area of
the yellow dots per cell, we quantitatively analyzed the
invadopodia formation. And we found that invadopodia
were increased almost three times in the Cal27 cells that
were directly co-cultured with THP1, similar with the
cancer cells treated with M2-CM (Figure 4B). Moreover,
co-localization of F-actin and MMP14 in Cal27 cells
suggested the assembly of functional invadopodia,
which took the responsibility to degrade ECM
(Figure 4C). The quantitative data indicated that the
functional invadopodia in Cal27 cells in the direct coculture system were increased, as twice as that in the Cal27
cells in control group (Figure 4D). Moreover, mRNA and
protein expression of MMP14 in Cal27 cells was analyzed
using qPCR and western blots, respectively. In the cocultured Cal27 cells, MMP14 was significantly increased
in both mRNA and protein levels (Figure 4E and 4F).
The increased invadopodia formation was also found in
FaDu cells when co-cultured with THP1 (Supplementary
Figure S5). ECM degradation ability of Cal27 cells was
then analyzed by seeding cells on the coverslips coated by
Alexa405-labeled gelatin. Under a confocal laser scanning
microscope, the increased area of the matrix degradation
(black holes) could be observed, suggesting that the

Macrophages promote the migration and
invasion of HNSCC cells
We next explored whether the interactions
between cancer cells and macrophages contributed to the
progression of HNSCC, especially to the invasion and
metastasis. Thus, wound healing assays and transwell
chamber assays were performed. As shown in Figure 3A
and 3B, Cal27 cells in the direct co-culture system
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

87040

Oncotarget

Figure 2: CCL2/CCR2 axis involves in the differentiation and M2- polarization of THP1 cells. The sorted HNSCC cells

(including Cal27 and FaDu cells) were analyzed for the expression of chemotactic factors, and meanwhile the corresponding receptors were
measured in the co-cultured THP1 cells. (A) The mRNA expression levels of SDF-1α and CCL2 were increased in the co-cultured Cal27
cells. (B) ELISA assays demonstrated the increased protein level of CCL2 in the supernatant of the co-culture system. The supernatant
harvested from M2- polarized macrophages was used as a control. (C) The mRNA expression of CXCR4 and CCR2 were measured in
THP1 cells that were co-cultured with HNSCC (Cal27 and FaDu) cells. (D) The protein expression of CXCR4 and CCR2 were analyzed in
the co-cultured THP1 cells. (E) CCR2 antagonist RS504393 and CXCR4 antagonist AMD3100 reduced the number of attached THP1 cells
in co-culture. (F) Quantitative analysis of the attached THP1 cells with the treatment of RS504393 or AMD3100. (G) RS504393 reduced
the number of CD163 and CD206 double positive THP1 cells in the co-culture system (with Cal27 cells). (H) The quantitative analysis of
CD163+CD206+ THP1 cells after flow cytometry. (I) RS504393 decreased the mRNA expression of Arg1, Fizz1, Mgl1 and Mgl2 in the
attached THP1 cells. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

87041

Oncotarget

ECM degradation ability of Cal27 cells was significantly
enhanced (Supplementary Figure S6). Of great interest,
the macrophages formed gigantic black holes, even bigger
than that formed by activated Cal27 cells (in co-culture
or treated with M2-CM). More, RS504393 suppressed the
invadopodia formation of Cal27 cells under co-culture
conditions (Supplementary Figure S7). In summary, our
results proved the interactions between macrophages and
HNSCC cells dramatically enhanced the migration and
invasion of the tumor cells by increasing the functional

invadopodia formation. In the co-culture system,
macrophages might also contribute to the invasion through
their remarkable ECM degradation abilities.

CCL2/EGF paracrine loop contributes to the
aggressive behavior of HNSCC cells
Previous studies reported that the invadopodia of
tumor cells were regulated by EGF, a powerful growth
factor that was highly expressed in TAMs [18, 19]. Thus,

Figure 3: Co-culture with THP1 cells promotes the migration and invasion of HNSCC cells. (A) Wound healing assays
indicated the enhanced migration ability of Cal27 cells when co-cultured with THP1 cells. (B) The enhanced migration and invasion
abilities of Cal27 cells in the co-culture system were determined by transwell chamber assays. (C) Quantitative analysis of transwell
chamber assays. (D) Quantitative analysis of transwell chamber assays. The conditioned medium harvested from THP1 (THP1-CM) and
induced M2-polarized macrophages (M2-CM) were used as a control. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

87042

Oncotarget

we measured the mRNA and protein expression of EGF
in THP1 cells. As shown in Figure 5A and 5B, EGF was
highly expressed in the THP1 cells that were co-cultured
with Cal27 cells. Moreover, the protein level of EGF in
the supernatant of the co-culture system was four times
as high as that in the supernatant of pure THP1 cells.

Cetuximab, an epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
monoclonal antibody that was widely used for cancer
therapy, was exerted to block EGF/EGFR pathway.
Our data showed the migration and invasion abilities of
Cal27 cells were significantly impaired after cetuximab
(10 μg/ml) treatment (Figure 5C and 5D, Supplementary

Figure 4: Co-culture with THP1 cells enhances the formation of invadopodia and the ECM degradation ability of
HNSCC cells. Cal27 cells alone or with THP1 cells were seeded on the gelatin coated coverslips. After 24 h, coverslips were harvested

and stained with rhodamine-phalloidin and invadopodia biomarkers. (A) Co-culture with THP1 increased the Cortactin and F-actin positive
invadopodia formation in Cal27 cells. (B) Co-culture with THP1 increased the MMP14 and F-actin positive invadopodia formation in
Cal27 cells. (C) Quantitative analysis of the area of cortactin positive invadopodia per Cal27 cells. (D) Quantitative analysis of the area
of MMP14 positive invadopodia per Cal27 cells. (E) The mRNA expression of MMP14 in the Cal27 cells were measured by qPCR.
(F) The protein expression of MMP14 in the Cal27 cells were analyzed by western blots.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

87043

Oncotarget

Figure S8). More, cetuximab also reduced the invadopodia
formation in the Cal27 cells under the co-culture
conditions (Figure 5E and 5F) or treated with the M2- CM
(Supplementary Figure S9).
As CCL2 and EGF were up-regulated in HNSCC
and THP1 cells in the co-culture system, it was reasonable
to explore whether these two factors were regulated by
each other. The mRNA and protein expression levels
of EGF and CCL2 in the co-culture system were then
analyzed. Results demonstrated RS504393 suppressed

the expression of EGF in THP1 cells in both mRNA
and protein levels under the co-culture conditions
(Figure 6A–6D). On the other hand, cetuximab repressed
the expression of CCL2 in Cal27 and FaDu cells that
were co-cultured with THP1 cells (Figure 6E–6H).
The similar results were also found under the indirect
co-culture conditions. RS504393 significantly suppressed
the increased expression of EGF in THP1 cells treated with
Cal27 or FaDu conditioned medium (Cal27-CM; FaDuCM), and cetuximab decreased the expression of CCL2

Figure 5: EGF derived by THP1 cells enhances the migration and invasion of HNSCC cells by increasing invadopodia
formation. (A) The EGF mRNA expression of THP1 in co-culture was measured. (B) The secretion level of EGF in the supernatant of the

co-culture system was determined. THP1 alone or induced M2- polarized macrophages was used for comparison. (C) EGFR monoantibody
Cetuximab suppressed the migration and invasion of Cal27 cells that were enhanced by the co-culture with THP1. (D) Quantitative analysis
of transwell chamber assays. (E) Cetuximab reduced the invadopodia formation in Cal27 cells, especially that in co-cultured Cal27.
(F) Quantitative analysis of the area of cortactin (left panel) and MMP14 (right panel) positive invadopodia per Cal27 cells. *P < 0.05,
**P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

87044

Oncotarget

in Cal27 and FaDu cells that were treated with M2-CM.
Taken together, these data suggested that monocytes
that were co-cultured with HNSCC cells expressed and
released EGF, which enhanced the migration and invasion
of HNSCC cells by enhancing invadopodia formation.
More importantly, a positive paracrine feedback loop of
CCL2/EGF between macrophages and HNSCC cells was
formed in the co-culture system.

EGF in the co-culture system were firstly analyzed after
curcumin . As shown in Figure 7A and 7B, the expression
of CCL2 was significantly reduced in Cal27 cells under
co-culture conditions after curcumin treatment in both
mRNA and protein levels, however, showed no obvious
change in Cal27 cells cultured alone. On the other hand,
the expression of EGF in THP1 cells co-cultured with
Cal27 cells was also down-regulated in the presence of
curcumin (Figure 7C and 7D). These results informed
that curcumin might endow dual inhibitory effects in the
therapeutics against HNSCC by targeting the CCL2/EGF
positive feedback paracrine loop.
The migration and invasion abilities of Cal27 in
the co-culture system after curcumin treatment were
then analyzed. Curcumin (5 μM) significantly reduced
the cell number on the bottom of transwell membrane in
both migration and invasion assays, suggesting curcumin
dramatically weakened the aggressive behavior of Cal27
cells under co-culture conditions (Figure 7E and 7F).
Similar results were obtained from the wound healing
assays (Supplementary Figure S10). Furthermore, our
data revealed that curcumin only slightly decreased
the invadopodia formation in Cal27 cells without any
treatment, but significantly attenuated the functional
invadopodia formation in the Cal27 cells under co-culture
conditions (Figure 7G and 7H). Moreover, our results

Curcumin blocks CCL2/EGF loop and inhibits
malignant progression of HNSCC
Curcumin is a phenolic compound derived from
Curcuma longa, showing great therapeutic potentials in
both inflammatory diseases and malignancies [20]. We
supposed curcumin might be able to block the crosstalk
between monocytes and malignant cells. To determine
the inhibitory effects on the cell proliferation of cocultured THP1 and Cal27 cells, curcumin with different
concentrations was added to the co-culture system. At a
concentration of 10 μM or above, curcumin suppressed
the proliferation of the cells under co-culture conditions
obviously (data not shown). Thus, to avoid the effects
of proliferation inhibition on the migration and invasion
abilities of HNSCC cells, 5 μM curcumin was used in
the following experiments. The expression of CCL2 and

Figure 6: CCL2/CCR2 and EGF/EGFR axes act as a feedback paracrine loop between THP1 and HNSCC cells.

(A) RS504393 significantly reduced the EGF mRNA expression in THP1 cells that were co-cultured with Cal27. (B) RS504393 decreased
the EGF level in the supernatant of the co-culture system with Cal27. (C) RS504393 significantly reduced the EGF mRNA expression
in THP1 cells that were co-cultured with FaDu. (D) RS504393 decreased the EGF level in the supernatant of the co-culture system with
FaDu. (E) Cetuximab reduced the CCL2 mRNA expression in Cal27 cells in the co-culture system. (F) Cetuximab alleviated the secretion
level of CCL2 in the co-culture supernatant. (G) Cetuximab reduced the CCL2 mRNA expression in Cal27 cells in the co-culture system.
(H) Cetuximab alleviated the secretion level of CCL2 in the co-culture supernatant. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

87045

Oncotarget

evidenced curcumin alleviated the ECM degradation in the
co-culture system (Supplementary Figure S11). All these
results demonstrated that curcumin significantly reduced
the aggressive behaviors of HNSCC cells by targeting the
CCL2/EGF positive feedback paracrine loop.

malignancies has been increasingly appreciated. As one
of the most important stromal cell components, monocyte/
macrophage has been attracting attentions since the early
of this century. HNSCCs were closely related with chronic
inflammation that was induced by smoking, injury or
HPV infection [2]. Thus, we proposed that TAMs, the
most important and abundant carcinoma associated
inflammatory (CAI) cells, played prominent roles in
HNSCCs. Previous studies including our recent work
suggested the infiltration of macrophages was correlated

DISCUSSION
The importance of the interactions between
cancer cells and stromal cells during the progression of

Figure 7: Curcumin inhibits the aggressive behaviors of HNSCC cells by breaking the CCL2/EGF paracrine loop.

Curcumin reduced the mRNA (A) and protein (B) expression levels of CCL2 in co-cultured Cal27, and decreased the expression of
mRNA (C) and protein (D) in co-cultured THP1 cells. (E) Curcumin suppressed the migration and invasion of Cal27 cells in co-culture.
(F) Quantitative analysis of transwell chamber assays. (G) Curcumin reduced the cortactin and MMP14 positive invadopodia formation in
the co-cultured Cal27 cells. (H) Quantitative analysis of the area of cortactin (left panel) and MMP14 (right panel) positive invadopodia per
Cal27 cells. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

87046

Oncotarget

with a poor outcome in HNSCC patients and could be used
as a potentially useful prognostic marker [21, 22]. Despite
numerous studies reported that monocytes/ macrophages
were recruited in HNSCC tissues, the molecule mechanism
by which macrophages or their precursors monocytes were
recruited and activated is far from clear.
We thus established indirect and direct co-culture
system between monocytes and HNSCC cells to study
their interactions. As direct co-culture (but not indirect coculture) between these two cell types might reflect the real
situation in tumor tissues, it was established in our present
study. The attachment of monocytes was considered as the
marker of differentiation, and then the cells were sorted
for the analysis of cytokines and membrane proteins
expression to determine the polarization. Our screening
data suggested that SDF-1α and CCL2 were increased
significantly in HNSCC cells, but not GM-MSF and
M-CSF as previously reported [23]. Blocking either of
them disturbed the differentiation and polarization of
monocytes. However, CCL2/CCR2 axis seemed much
more critical during the process. CCL2, also named as
monocyte chemotactic protein 1 (MCP1), was produced
by stromal components in the tumor microenvironment
and tumor cells. As a potent monocyte/macrophage
chemotactic factor, CCL2 enhanced metastases in
numerous tumors by recruiting macrophages [24, 25].
Recently, the elevated expression of CCL2 was also
reported in HNSCC with a poor outcome in patients [26].
Blockade of CCL2/CCR2 axis in various tumors displayed
remarkable therapeutic effects as the versatile functions
of macrophages in tumor progression [10]. Of interest,
we found that the corresponding receptors of SDF-1α and
CCL2, CXCR4 and CCR2 were up-regulated in the THP1
cells, which might amplify the chemotaxis of monocytes
into the tumor sites. Moreover, our data indicated that
CCL2/CCR2 axis was involved in the M2 polarization of
the attached macrophages.
TAMs, most of which were evidenced as M2polarized macrophages, promoted malignant progression
by secreting cytokines and growth factors [27]. In the
present study, the up-regulation of EGF in the co-culture
system was noticed. Blocking EGF/EGFR signaling
pathway using cetuximab, we proved EGF was the
foremost factor taking responsibility for the enhanced
motility of HNSCC cells. Our above results reminded
us that Cal27-derived CCL2 and THP1-derived EGF
might form a positive feedback loop, thus promoting
the differentiation of macrophages and the invasion of
cancer cells. In breast cancers, it was reported that cancer
cells activated macrophages to a TAM-like phenotype
by producing GM-CSF, and reciprocally, CCL18
released from TAMs induced the epithelial mesenchymal
transition (EMT) of breast cancer cells, thus forming a
positive feedback loop. We then detected the CCL2 and
EGF expression in the co-cultured Cal27 and THP1 cells
after cexitumab and RS504393 treatment, respectively.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

We found blockade of EGF/EGFR axis reduced the
expression of CCL2 in Cal27 cells, while suppression
of CCL2/CCR2 axis decreased the expression of EGF
in THP1 cells, suggesting that in HNSCC, the crosstalk
between cancer cells and macrophages was also mediated
by a positive feedback paracrine loop. Moreover, we
noticed that the direct contact with THP1 was more
powerful in promoting the motility of the cancer cells.
Since most of THP1 cells were located on the surface
of HSNCC cells, we proposed that the signals on the
membrane of these two cells might interact and transmit
additional signals for the enhanced migration and invasion.
A previous research in breast cancers reported that the
direct binding between tumor cells and macrophages
mediated by CD11b/CD90 and Ephrin/EphA4 induced
the EMT of breast cancer cells, thus establishing a cancer
stem cell niche in a juxtacrine dependent manner [28].
It would be interesting and important to further uncover
the physical interaction between HNSCC cells and
macrophages.
Invadopodia were actin-rich cell membrane
projections, by which invasive carcinoma cells penetrated
the basement membrane and degraded ECM, promoting
tumor local invasion. Moreover, recent studies uncovered
that invadopodia were of importance for the intravasation
of tumor cells [29]. Intravasation was a necessary step
in the development of distant metastasis, through which
the tumor cells entered the bloodstream [11]. Since our
data proved that co-culture with THP1 cells enhanced
the invasion ability of HSNCC cells, we further studied
whether the formation of invadopodia in Cal27 cells
was enhanced. The increased invadopodia in Cal27 cells
was determined as the co-localized areas of cortactin
and F-actin, as well as MMP14 and F-actin. The areas
were enlarged dramatically in Cal27 cells in the coculture system. Furthermore, degradation of the matrix
was visualized by seeding cells on the Alexa405-gelatin
coated coverslips. The results showed the enhanced
matrix degradation ability of Cal27 cells under co-culture
conditions. In addition, our data suggested that the Cal27
cells that were contacted macrophages directly showed
more aggressive behaviors rather than those were treated
with conditioned media of M2- polarized macrophages.
These results were consistent with the finding in a recent
study, in which the authors demonstrated the direct
contact between macrophages and tumor cells induced
RhoA activity in tumor cells, triggered the formation of
invadopodia and then enabled tumor cells to break through
the matrix barriers during transendothelial migration
and metastasis [30]. Besides, in the gelatin degradation
assays, we found that in comparison with Cal27 cells,
THP1-derived macrophages presented much higher ECM
degradation abilities as they formed bigger black holes
in the Alexa405- labeled gelatin. Combined with the
finding that macrophages were located on the margins of
the scratches in the wound healing assays, we supposed
87047

Oncotarget

that macrophages might act as the guide cells leading the
migration and invasion of HNSCC cells, which was also
partially proved in the Roh-Johnson et al., study [30].
However, whether the cancerous property of THP1 cells
affects the ECM degradation ability should be further
determined using primary macrophages.
Curcumin was widely studied in both inflammationrelated diseases and malignancies. Therefore, we supposed
it might be able to block the interactions between
macrophages and HNSCC cells. As expected, curcumin
broke the paracrine loop as it not only suppressed the
expression of EGF in the macrophages but also inhibited
the up-regulation of CCL2 in the HNSCC cells. Curcumin
also alleviated the enhanced migration, invasion and
ECM degradation abilities of the co-cultured Cal27 cells
by reducing the invadopodia formation. Taken together,
our present study uncovered a novel paracrine crosstalk
between macrophages and tumor cells in HNSCC, and
further highlighted the importance of macrophages in
HNSCC cells migration and invasion by enhancing
invadopodia formation. And most importantly, we
found that curcumin, a normal and widely used natural
drug, could alleviate the enhanced aggressive behaviors
of HNSCC cells by blocking the CCL2/EGF positive
feedback paracrine loop, shedding light on the great
potentials in HNSCC treatment. Moreover, since the
potent effects of the interaction between tumor cells
and macrophage as we described in the present study,
it was highly recommended to include the stromal cells
when establishing in vivo models. And the paracrine
loop we here reported also should be verified in an
immunocompetent HNSCC mice model.

was purchased from Peprotech. All other chemicals were
classified as analytical grade reagents.

Cell lines and culture conditions
THP1 (Human acute monocytic leukemia cell line)
and Cal27 and FaDu (HNSCC cell lines) were obtained
from the China Center for Type Culture Collection
(CCTCC, Wuhan). THP1 was maintained in RPMI1640, and Cal27 and FaDu were maintained in DMEM,
supplemented with 10% FBS, 100 U/ml penicillin, and
100 mg/ml streptomycin. Cells were incubated in a
humidified atmosphere of 95% air and 5% CO2 at 37°C.
Cell volume was measured by the Vi-CELL cell viability
analyzer (Beckman Coulter, Fullerton, CA, USA).
The medium was changed three times a week and cells
passaged when 70% confluence was reached.

Induction of macrophages polarization and
preparation of conditioned medium
THP1 cells were induced into M2- polarized
macrophages by as previously reported. Briefly, THP1
cells were induced by phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate
(PMA) for 6h into macrophages, and then induced by
IL-4 (20 ng/ml), IL-13 (20 ng/ml) for 18h into M2
macrophages. The culture medium was changed with FBS
free medium and was collected as a conditional medium
after further 24 h culture.

Green fluorescent cells tracer technique
THP1 cells were centrifuged and suspended in the
culture medium with 5% free FBS and green fluorescent
dye CFDA-SE (2 μl/ml), incubating at 37°C for 15 min.
Then the cells were centrifuged and suspended in the
medium with 10% FBS, which incubated at 37°C for 30
min. Finally, the cells were rinsed with PBS twice.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Regents and antibodies
Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM),
Roswell Park Memorial Institute medium (RPMI-1640),
fetal bovine serum (FBS), penicillin, and streptomycin
were obtained from GIBCO (Carlsbad, CA, USA).
Dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO), Hoechst 33258 were
purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA).
Carboxyfluorescein diacetate, succinimidyl ester
(CFDA-SE) was purchased from Beyotime Institute of
Biotechnology. Cetuximab was purchased from Merck
(Darmstadt, Germany). AMD3100 and RS504393 were
purchased from R&D Systems (Minneapolis, MN).
Curcumin was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis,
MO, USA). Rabbit polyclonal anti-cortactin antibodies,
mouse monoclonal anti-MMP14 antibodies were
purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc. (Santa
Cruz, CA). Alexa Fluor 568-conjugated phalloidin and
secondary anti-mouse or anti-rabbit antibodies conjugated
with Alexa Fluor 488 or Alexa Fluor 568 were purchased
from Invitrogen. Recombinant LPS, IL-4, IL13, IFN-γ
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Adhesion assays
THP1 cells were stained by CFDA-SE and counted
by the Vi-CELL cell viability analyzer. First, Cal27 cells
(5 × 105) were seeded in the six-well plate for 6 h. After
Cal27 cells attachment, THP1 cells were seeded at the
ratio of 1:1 in DMEM medium supplemented with or
without RS504393, the group without Cal27 seeded as a
control group. Cells were allowed to attach for 2 hours
where after the wells were washed with PBS and the nonadherent cells of THP1 were collected and counted, then
the adherent cells of THP1 were observed by microscope.

Indirect and direct co-culture
The conditional medium (CM) was collected from
Cal27, THP1 and M2- macrophages as described above.
For indirect co-culture, Cal27-CM was put into six-well
87048

Oncotarget

Chemotactic migration and matrigel invasion
assays

plates which seeded with THP1 or THP1 induced by
PMA, and THP1-CM or M2-CM were put into 6 well
plates which seeded with Cal27. For direct co-culture,
THP1 cells were stained by CFDA-SE and seeded with
Cal27 cells at a ratio of 1:1 in monolayer culture for 24 h.

For detection of tumor cells migration and invasion,
transwell boyden chambers (Corning, NY, USA) with
polycarbonate filter (pore size of 8 μm) were used.
Matrigel was diluted to 200 μg/mL and applied to the
top side of the filter in cell invasion assays, whereas in
cell migration assays, the filter was not coated. Cal27
cells were seeded on the upper chamber at a density of
1 × 105 cells/well in 200μL of serum-deprived medium;
meanwhile, conditioned medium was applied to the
lower chamber as chemoattractant (indirect co-culture).
Cal27 cells and THP1 cells (0.5 × 105 cells each) were
seeded on the upper chamber (direct co-culture). After
24 h incubation, the cells on the upper surface of the
membrane were carefully removed by scrubbing with a
cotton swab. Then, the membranes were fixed with 4%
formaldehyde for 10 min, stained with 1% crystal violet
for 5 min, and finally photographed and quantified under
a phase microscope.

Fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS)
After establishing direct co-culture for 24 h,
RS504393 (CCR2 inhibitor) and Cetuximab (EGFR
inhibitor) were added into the co-culture system. Control
group was performed in the same way and received the
same medium but without medicine. After 24 h, the coculture system was sorting by BD FACS III according to
green fluorescence and size of cells. For flow cytometric
analysis, the sorted THP1 cells were harvested and
suspended in ice-cold PBS containing 3% BSA (Sigma).
5 × 105 cells/tubes in 100 μl were prepared and incubated
for 30 min. Cells were washed and incubated with PE antihuman CD163 and Alexa Fluor® 647 anti-human CD206, as
well as corresponding isotype antibodies for 30 min in dark.
After washed 3 times, cells were analyzed on FACS Calibur
flow cytometer (BD Biosciences) using Cell Quest software.

Would healing assays
Cal27 cells (1 × 106/well) or Cal27 and THP1 cells
(0.5 × 105 cells each) were plated in 6-well plates and were
grown to 80–90% confluence. Then, the monolayer of cells
was scraped with a standard 200 μL sterile micropipette
tip to create a denuded gap of constant width. The cells
were subsequently washed with PBS and then exposed to
conditioned medium or serum-free medium for 24 h. At
the end of the exposure, the cells migrated in the gap were
observed and counted under a phase microscope.

MTT proliferation assays
Cal27 and THP1 were seeded at 5 × 103 cells/well
in a 96-well plate at a ratio of 1:1, which were starved
of growth factors overnight by replacing their growth
medium with DMEM (serum-free). Cells were incubated
by curcumin with different concentrations (0, 5, 10, 20, 40
and 80 μM) as single stimuli. All conditions were tested
in triplicate or quadruplicate. After 24 h, cell samples
were incubated with 5 mg/ml MTT (Sigma) for 4 h. After
removal of the MTT solution, formazan crystals were
dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). The absorbance
was measured at a wavelength of 570 nm according to the
manufacturer’s protocol.

Invadopodia and extracellular matrix (ECM)
degradation assays
Briefly, 0.2% gelatin in PBS was dropped on the
coverslips that were pretreated with 0.5% glutaraldehyde
for 15 min at room temperature. Then cells were seeded
on gelatin matrix coated coverslips in 24-well plates and
grown for 24 h. Alexa Fluor® 408 Protein Labeling Kit was
used to label gelatin for extracellular matrix degradation
assays. The cells were grown on glass coverslips with
indicated treatment. Then, cells were washed with PBS,
fixed in paraformaldehyde (PFA) at 37°C for 30 min,
washed with PBS for three times and blocked with 10%
non-immune goat serum for 1 h at room temperature.
After that, cells were incubated with the primary
antibody including cortactin and MMP14 at a dilution
of 1:200 overnight at 4°C, followed by incubation with
DyLight 488-conjugated secondary antibody (1:400) and
rhodamine-conjugated phalloidin (1:200) for 1 h at room
temperature. The nuclei were stained with DAPI, and
the coverslips were mounted on a microscope slide with
embedding medium (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA).

Quantitative real-time RT-PCR
Quantitative real-time RT-PCR (qPCR) was
performed to evaluate the mRNA expression levels of
macrophages-related genes, growth factors, chemokine and
chemokine receptor in Cal27 and THP1 cells. Total RNA
was isolated with TRIzol Reagent (Invitrogen). Aliquots (1
mg) of RNA were reverse transcribed to cDNA (20 μl) with
oligo(dT) and M-MuLV reverse transcriptase (Fermentas,
Glen Burnie, MD). One-fifth of the cDNA was used as a
template for PCR using SYBR Premix ExTaqTM (Perfect
Real Time) kit (Takara, Kyoto, Japan) in an ABI 7500
Real-Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems, Foster City,
CA). 18s rRNA was selected as an internal control for each
experiment. The primer sequences designed for qPCR were
presented in Supplementary Materials (Supplementary
Table S1).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

87049

Oncotarget

The cells were observed and photographed with a confocal
microscope. Olympus FV1000 confocal laser scanning
microscope and Leica SP8 confocal microscope were
used. Co-localization parameters were measured by
Leica Microsystems software Quantitative analysis of
the number of invadopodia per cell, the area of individual
invadopodia formed by cells was performed using Image
pro plus software. For each condition, only invadopodia
positive for F-actin and cortactin or MMP14 were scored
and 10 cells per each slide were analyzed.

  4.	 Quan J, Johnson NW, Zhou G, Parsons PG, Boyle GM,
Gao J. Potential molecular targets for inhibiting bone
invasion by oral squamous cell carcinoma: a review of
mechanisms. Cancer Metastasis Rev. 2012; 31:209–219.
  5.	 Coussens LM, Werb Z. Inflammation and cancer. Nature.
2002; 420:860–867.
 6.	 Wynn TA, Chawla A, Pollard JW. Macrophage biology
in development, homeostasis and disease. Nature. 2013;
496:445–455.
 7.	 Armaiz-Pena GN, Gonzalez-Villasana V, Nagaraja AS,
Rodriguez-Aguayo C, Sadaoui NC, Stone RL, Matsuo K,
Dalton HJ, Previs RA, Jennings NB, Dorniak P, Hansen JM,
Arevalo JM, et al. Adrenergic regulation of monocyte
chemotactic protein 1 leads to enhanced macrophage
recruitment and ovarian carcinoma growth. Oncotarget.
2015; 6:4266–4273. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.2887

Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)
ELISA kits for EGF and CCL2 were used (R&D
Systems, Minneapolis, MN). Concentrations of human
EGF and CCL2 in the culture supernatant were measured
by ELISA following kit instructions. Briefly,100 μL of the
samples were loaded on the plates and incubated for 2 h at
room temperature. After the plates were washed with wash
buffer (0.05% Tween20 in PBS), samples were incubated
with detection antibody for 2 h at room temperature.
Immunoreactivity was determined by adding substrate
solution and absorbance (450 nm and 570 nm) was
determined by Vmax Kinetic microplate reader (Molecular
Devices, Sunnyvale, CA).

 8.	Hollmen M, Roudnicky F, Karaman S, Detmar M.
Characterization of macrophage--cancer cell crosstalk in
estrogen receptor positive and triple-negative breast cancer.
Sci Rep. 2015; 5:9188.
  9.	 Yoshimura T, Liu M, Chen X, Li L, Wang JM. Crosstalk
between Tumor Cells and Macrophages in Stroma Renders
Tumor Cells as the Primary Source of MCP-1/CCL2 in
Lewis Lung Carcinoma. Front Immunol. 2015; 6:332.
10.	 Li X, Yao W, Yuan Y, Chen P, Li B, Li J, Chu R, Song H,
Xie D, Jiang X, Wang H. Targeting of tumour-infiltrating
macrophages via CCL2/CCR2 signalling as a therapeutic
strategy against hepatocellular carcinoma. Gut. 2015.

Statistical analysis
All data were presented as mean ± SEM of three
independent or more experiments. One/two-way analysis
of variance, Student-Newman-Keuls were performed for
statistical analysis. Mean ± SEM with a difference of
P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

11.	Chiang SP, Cabrera RM, Segall JE. Tumor Cell
Intravasation. A Review in the Theme: Cell and Molecular
Processes in Cancer Metastasis. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol.
2016:ajpcell 00238 02015.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING

12.	 Schachtner H, Calaminus SD, Thomas SG, Machesky LM.
Podosomes in adhesion, migration, mechanosensing and
matrix remodeling. Cytoskeleton. 2013; 70:572–589.

This work is supported by National Natural Science
Foundation of China (30973330, 81371159) to YFZ. ZW is
supported by the supporting program for young excellent
talents by China Association for Science and Technology.

13.	 Nicolson GL. Cell membrane fluid-mosaic structure and
cancer metastasis. Cancer Res. 2015; 75:1169–1176.
14.	 He KF, Zhang L, Huang CF, Ma SR, Wang YF, Wang WM,
Zhao ZL, Liu B, Zhao YF, Zhang WF, Sun ZJ. CD163+
tumor-associated macrophages correlated with poor
prognosis and cancer stem cells in oral squamous cell
carcinoma. Biomed Res Int. 2014; 2014:838632.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no potential conflicts of interest.

REFERENCES

15.	 Essa AA, Yamazaki M, Maruyama S, Abe T, Babkair H,
Raghib AM, Megahed EM, Cheng J, Saku T. Tumourassociated macrophages are recruited and differentiated
in the neoplastic stroma of oral squamous cell carcinoma.
Pathology. 2016; 48:219–227.

  1.	 Neville BW, Day TA. Oral cancer and precancerous lesions.
Cancer J Clin. 2002; 52:195–215.
 2.	Lambert R, Sauvaget C, de Camargo Cancela M,
Sankaranarayanan R. Epidemiology of cancer from the oral
cavity and oropharynx. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2011;
23:633–641.

16.	 Delirezh N, Shojaeefar E, Parvin P, Asadi B. Comparison
the effects of two monocyte isolation methods, plastic
adherence and magnetic activated cell sorting methods, on
phagocytic activity of generated dendritic cells. Cell J. 2013
Fall;15:218–23.

  3.	 Mishra R. Biomarkers of oral premalignant epithelial lesions
for clinical application. Oral Oncol. 2012; 48:578–584.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

87050

Oncotarget

17.	 Paz H, Pathak N, Yang J. Invading one step at a time: the
role of invadopodia in tumor metastasis. Oncogene. 2014;
33:4193–4202.

24.	 Sanford DE, Belt BA, Panni RZ, Mayer A, Deshpande AD,
Carpenter D, Mitchem JB, Plambeck-Suess SM,
Worley LA, Goetz BD, Wang-Gillam A, Eberlein TJ,
Denardo DG, et al. Inflammatory monocyte mobilization
decreases patient survival in pancreatic cancer: a role for
targeting the CCL2/CCR2 axis. Clin Cancer Res. 2013;
19:3404–3415.

18.	 Kedmi M, Ben-Chetrit N, Korner C, Mancini M, BenMoshe NB, Lauriola M, Lavi S, Biagioni F, Carvalho S,
Cohen-Dvashi H, Schmitt F, Wiemann S, Blandino G, et al.
EGF induces microRNAs that target suppressors of cell
migration: miR-15b targets MTSS1 in breast cancer. Sci
Signal. 2015; 8:ra29.

25.	Ksiazkiewicz M, Gottfried E, Kreutz M, Mack M,
Hofstaedter F, Kunz-Schughart LA. Importance of CCL2CCR2A/2B signaling for monocyte migration into spheroids
of breast cancer-derived fibroblasts. Immunobiology. 2010;
215:737–747.

19.	 Liu ZC, Chen XH, Song HX, Wang HS, Zhang G, Wang H,
Chen DY, Fang R, Liu H, Cai SH, Du J. Snail regulated
by PKC/GSK-3beta pathway is crucial for EGF-induced
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) of cancer cells.
Cell Tissue Res. 2014; 358:491–502.

26.	 Ding L, Li B, Zhao Y, Fu YF, Hu EL, Hu QG, Ni YH,
Hou YY, et al. Serum CCL2 and CCL3 as potential
biomarkers for the diagnosis of oral squamous cell
carcinoma. Tumour Biol. 2014; 35:10539–10546.

20.	 Wilken R, Veena MS, Wang MB, Srivatsan ES. Curcumin:
A review of anti-cancer properties and therapeutic activity
in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. Mol Cancer.
2011; 10:12.

27.	 Pollard JW. Macrophages define the invasive
microenvironment in breast cancer. J Leukoc Biol. 2008;
84:623–630.

21.	 Hu Y, He MY, Zhu LF, Yang CC, Zhou ML, Wang Q,
Zhang W, Zheng YY, Wang DM, Xu ZQ, Wu YN,
Liu LK. Tumor-associated macrophages correlate with the
clinicopathological features and poor outcomes via inducing
epithelial to mesenchymal transition in oral squamous cell
carcinoma. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2016; 35:12.

28.	 Lu H, Clauser KR, Tam WL, Frose J, Ye X, Eaton EN,
Reinhardt F, Donnenberg VS, Bhargava R, Carr SA,
Weinberg RA. A breast cancer stem cell niche supported by
juxtacrine signalling from monocytes and macrophages. Nat
Cell Biol. 2014; 16:1105–1117.

22.	 Ji WT, Chen HR, Lin CH, Lee JW, Lee CC. Monocyte
chemotactic protein 1 (MCP-1) modulates pro-survival
signaling to promote progression of head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma. PloS one. 2014; 9:e88952.

29.	Gligorijevic B, Wyckoff J, Yamaguchi H, Wang
Y, Roussos ET, Condeelis J. N-WASP-mediated
invadopodium formation is involved in intravasation and
lung metastasis of mammary tumors. J Cell Sci. 2012;
125:724–734.

23.	 Van Overmeire E, Stijlemans B, Heymann F, Keirsse J,
Morias Y, Elkrim Y, Brys L, Abels C, Lahmar Q, Ergen C,
Vereecke L, Tacke F, De Baetselier P, et al. M-CSF and
GM-CSF Receptor Signaling Differentially Regulate
Monocyte Maturation and Macrophage Polarization
in the Tumor Microenvironment. Cancer Res. 2016;
76:35–42.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30.	 Roh-Johnson M, Bravo-Cordero JJ, Patsialou A, Sharma VP,
Guo P, Liu H, Hodgson L, Condeelis J. Macrophage contact
induces RhoA GTPase signaling to trigger tumor cell
intravasation. Oncogene. 2014; 33:4203–4212.

87051

Oncotarget

