Original Article

Neoadjuvant (Presurgical) Therapy for
Renal Cell Carcinoma: A New
Treatment Paradigm for Locally
Advanced and Metastatic Disease*
Christopher G. Wood, MD1 and Vitaly Margulis, MD

BACKGROUND: Although upfront cytoreductive nephrectomy followed by systemic therapy remains the
standard of care for metastatic renal cell carcinoma, the addition of novel targeted therapy has prompted
a reevaluation of this treatment paradigm. The authors reviewed their experience with neoadjuvant systemic therapy administered before cytoreductive surgery for metastatic, locally recurrent, or regionally
advanced renal cell carcinoma. METHODS: The authors compared patients treated with presurgical targeted therapy (with sunitinib, sorafenib, or bevacizumab) with a contemporary group that underwent upfront cytoreductive surgery. RESULTS: The authors found no difference in any perioperative surgical parameters indicative of morbidity or mortality between the 2 groups. Laboratory models of renal cell carcinoma
treated with systemic targeted therapy demonstrate specific protein expression profiles that correlate with
response to therapy and the development of therapy resistance. CONCLUSIONS: Neoadjuvant (presurgical)
targeted therapy before cytoreductive surgery appears safe in the setting of metastatic renal cell carcinoma. It identifies patients who respond to systemic therapy before surgery, thus avoiding highly morbid
surgery in patients destined for a poor outcome. Further studies are needed to identify the molecular endpoints associated with treatment response and the development of the resistant phenotype, which will in
turn identify novel transduction pathways worthy of therapeutic development. Cancer 2009;115(10
C 2009 American Cancer Society.
suppl):2355–60. V
KEY WORDS: renal cell carcinoma, targeted therapy, nephrectomy, neoadjuvant therapy, transduction
pathways.

Surgery remains an integral part of the treatment of renal cell carcinoma in all stages of the disease.
Resection followed by risk-based surveillance is the standard of care for localized and locally advanced disease. Cytoreductive nephrectomy (CN), followed by the timely administration of systemic therapy, is considered the standard of care for patients who present with metastases.1,2 Randomized trials have
demonstrated a survival advantage for patients who undergo cytoreductive surgery before the
Corresponding author: Christopher G. Wood, MD, Department of Urology, Unit 1373, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, 1515
Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030; Fax: (713) 792-3474; cgwood@mdanderson.org
Department of Urology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas
This educational proceedings publication is based on a symposium held on June 27-28, 2008, in Cambridge, Massachusetts.
*Innovations and Challenges in Renal Cancer: Proceedings of the Third Cambridge Conference, Supplement to Cancer
Received: September 18, 2008; Revised: December 16, 2008; Accepted: December 29, 2008
C 2008 American Cancer Society
Published online: April 30, 2009 V

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.24240, www.interscience.wiley.com

Cancer

May 15, 2009

2355

Original Article

administration of immunotherapy, and the practice has
largely been extended into the era of targeted therapy, in
the absence of evidence-based data that would suggest
control of the primary tumor in the setting of metastatic
disease is no longer paramount.3,4 Furthermore, metastasectomy, either as a primary therapy for a limited metastatic burden or as part of a surgical consolidation strategy
after a partial response to systemic therapy, has also been
associated with an improved prognosis.5
Despite extensive and intensive clinical research, the
proper integration of surgery with systemic therapy
remains elusive and problematic. To our knowledge, in
the year 2008, there remains no effective adjuvant agent
in the setting of locally advanced disease at high risk of recurrence after surgical therapy, despite extensive clinical
studies evaluating the role of such agents as interferon,
interleukin-2, chemotherapy, tumor vaccines, and hormones.6,7 Current adjuvant strategies are focused on the
role of the tyrosine kinase inhibitors sunitinib and sorafenib in ongoing clinical trials. In the setting of metastatic
disease, despite the demonstrated improvement in survival associated with CN before systemic therapy, there
remain a small but significant subset of patients who demonstrate either rapid progression of their metastatic disease in the postoperative period or a therapy-refractory
phenotype; not only do these patients not derive benefit
from control of their primary tumor, but the surgery also
appears to hasten their demise because of excessive
morbidity.8
Neoadjuvant or presurgical therapy is a novel therapeutic strategy that is now being investigated in the treatment of renal cell carcinoma in conjunction with the
development of targeted molecular therapy that affects
specific angiogenic and growth factor pathways important
in renal cell carcinoma biology.9,10 In part predicated on
the success of this paradigm in other malignancies (such as
colorectal, pancreatic, and urothelial cancers), presurgical
therapy has the potential to provide real-time clinical
feedback on the responsiveness of the patient’s overall tumor burden to a given systemic therapy before committing the patient to what could be a highly morbid surgical
procedure. Other potential benefits of this approach
include local tumor down-staging, which may make subsequent surgical extirpation less morbid, and, in the case
of locally advanced renal cell carcinoma, presurgical therapy, which may eliminate micrometastatic disease at its
2356

earliest stage, thus diminishing the risk of metastatic progression postoperatively. Potential detractions from the
presurgical systemic therapy approach include the possibility that treatment-related morbidity may add to the
complexity of the surgical procedure, increase the risk of
perioperative morbidity and/or mortality, and, in the case
of localized or locally advanced disease, unnecessarily
delay potentially curative surgery in a nonresponding
patient.
Herein, we review the published experience with
presurgical targeted therapy before surgical resection of renal cell carcinoma at the University of Texas M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center and elsewhere, with specific
attention to safety, perioperative morbidity and mortality,
local tumor effects, and outcomes. Furthermore, we
report on interim results of ongoing translational experiments that examine the impact of targeted therapy
response and resistance on tumor protein expression, with
an eye toward the identification of novel molecular pathways that might prove important for therapeutic targeting
in the salvage setting.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
By using an approved protocol through our institutional
review board, we reviewed the perioperative clinical experience in patients at our institution undergoing surgery
for renal cell carcinoma (recurrent disease or CN) after
presurgical systemic therapy with targeted molecular
agents (bevacizumab, sunitinib, sorafenib). These patients
were matched to a contemporary cohort of patients
undergoing CN or resection of recurrence, without receiving presurgical therapy. Parameters for the 2 groups that
were examined and compared included length of presurgical systemic therapy, time from cessation of therapy to
surgery, and type of therapy. Perioperative parameters
that were examined included surgical time, blood loss,
transfusion requirements, perioperative morbidity and
mortality, and length of hospital stay. In patients undergoing CN as part of their treatment for metastatic renal
cell carcinoma, survival outcomes between the 2 groups
were also examined. In addition, as part of this review and
presentation, we examined the published literature
regarding the use of presurgical therapies in the treatment
of renal cell carcinoma for localized, locally advanced,
recurrent, and metastatic disease, to identify factors that
Cancer

May 15, 2009

Neoadjuvant Therapy for RCC/Wood and Margulis

Table 1. Potential Applications for Presurgical Targeted
Therapy in the Management of Renal Cell Carcinoma
Locally advanced primary tumor
Tumor thrombus
T4 disease
Large tumor in a solitary renal unit
Extensive bilateral tumors
Renal fossa recurrence

Metastatic renal cell carcinoma
Before cytoreductive nephrectomy
Before metastasectomy (surgical consolidation)

FIGURE 1. A Kaplan-Meier survival curve comparing cancerspecific survival between patients who received up-front
cytoreductive nephrectomy and those who underwent presurgical therapy before cytoreductive nephrectomy. SE indicates standard error.

might predict successful outcomes from the use of this
approach.

RESULTS
The 44 patients treated with presurgical targeted agents
and the 58 patients who underwent initial surgical resection were followed up for 12.1 months and 11.1 months,
respectively, and were identically matched in terms of
their clinical characteristics, burden of metastatic disease,
and number of adverse prognostic factors.11 We found no
significant differences between study groups in the type
and length of surgical procedure, extent of lymph node
dissection, estimated blood loss, incidence of blood transfusions, amount of blood products administered, or the
length of hospital stay. In addition, a similar proportion
of patients in each group received postsurgical systemic
therapy. A total of 39 complications occurred in 33
(32.4%) of the study patients. There was no perioperative
mortality, and we observed no statistically significant differences in the incidence of re-exploration; readmission;
or thromboembolic, cardiovascular, pulmonary, gastrointestinal, infectious, or incision-related complications
among patients treated with presurgical targeted molecular therapy and patients who underwent initial surgery.
Cancer

May 15, 2009

The results of a logistic regression analysis confirmed that
presurgical targeted molecular therapy was not associated
with increased perioperative mortality or morbidity. We
evaluated numerous clinical variables, including patient
age (10-year increments), sex, body mass index (<30 or
>30 kg/m2), Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status, number of Memorial-Sloan Kettering
Cancer Center risk criteria, presurgical targeted therapy
(bevacizumab or sunitinib/sorafenib), duration of presurgical therapy (1-week increments), interval between discontinuation of therapy and CN (1-week increments),
intraoperative blood loss (200-mL increments), use of
blood products, duration of surgery (1-hour increments),
type of surgical procedure, and interval between CN and
postsurgical systemic therapy (1-week increments), and
found that only estimated blood loss of >1200 mL was
associated with the occurrence of a complication after CN.
At the time of last follow–up, 8 (18.2%) of the 44
patients treated with presurgical targeted therapy and 18
(31.0%) of the 58 patients treated with initial surgery had
died of renal cell carcinoma. Kaplan-Meier analysis
revealed similar median cancer-specific survival among
patients treated with presurgical targeted molecular therapies and patients treated with up-front CN (27.7 months
vs 31.0 months; P ¼ .697) (Fig. 1).
Current and potential future indications for presurgical therapy in the setting of locally advanced and metastatic renal cell carcinoma are listed in Table 1. There is
no debate that patients who have unresectable disease are
poor surgical candidates based on disease phenotype or
presence of comorbid conditions or that those who refuse
surgery have absolute indications for this approach.
Patients with locally advanced disease, as well as those
with adjacent organ involvement, tumor thrombi, or clinical evidence of regional lymph node metastases, could
2357

Original Article

also potentially benefit from presurgical therapy in an
attempt to surgically down-stage their disease and eliminate micrometastatic disease before surgery. In the setting
of metastatic renal cell carcinoma, presurgical therapy
offers the opportunity to confirm disease response to systemic therapy before committing the patient to a potentially morbid intervention. Aside from 2 case report series
that describe tumor thrombi reduction in response to presurgical therapy, to our knowledge there are few studies in
the literature regarding the primary tumor response to targeted therapy.12,13 In a small series of 17 patients, van der
Veldt et al14 reported that 4 patients achieved a partial
response, 12 had stable disease, and 1 demonstrated disease progression. Overall, a volume reduction of 31% was
noted in the primary tumor of responding patients.

DISCUSSION
It is clear that both surgery and systemic therapy have a
role in the management of locally advanced and metastatic
renal cell carcinoma, but the proper integration of these 2
treatment modalities remains undefined. In the setting of
locally advanced disease, the development of an effective
systemic therapy that diminishes the risk of disease recurrence in conjunction with extirpative surgery remains elusive. To our knowledge to date, none of the systemic
therapies that have demonstrated activity in the setting of
metastatic disease has proved to be an effective and reliable adjuvant.6,7 In the setting of metastatic disease, upfront CN followed by the administration of systemic therapy has been established as the standard of care, but in
large part this treatment paradigm has developed as a consequence of the real lack of effective systemic therapies
available in the past and the reality that the primary tumor
rarely, if ever, responded to systemic therapy in conjunction with metastatic foci.15 With the development and
implementation of targeted molecular therapy that can
meaningfully affect the biology of both the primary tumor
and metastases, the playing field has changed and, as a
consequence, treatment paradigms must be reexamined.
The concept of neoadjuvant or presurgical therapy is
an attractive treatment paradigm for many reasons. With
the primary tumor left in situ during the administration
of systemic therapy, there is real-time feedback provided
on disease response to the selected treatment, which may
allow adjustments in therapy (change to a different ther2358

apy, combine agents) to ensure maximal response. Locally
advanced primary tumors may be down-staged, resulting
in less morbid surgery and improved local control. In concert, patients not responding to systemic therapy can be
‘‘spared’’ highly morbid surgical interventions that have
no hope of improving outcome. Lastly, tumor tissue, harvested at the time of surgery, can be rigorously interrogated with translational research techniques both to
evaluate the effects of systemic therapy at a molecular level
and to provide clues regarding pathways of resistance and
novel therapeutic targets.
With that said, the presurgical paradigm must be
rigorously tested in the context of clinical trials before
being widely implemented. The potential delay in curative surgery for patients with localized and locally
advanced disease must be measured against the potential
benefits of presurgical therapy. The not insignificant toxic
effects associated with the administration of targeted molecular therapy may result in the ‘‘deconditioning’’ of an
otherwise fit surgical patient. The impact of therapy on
perioperative morbidity and mortality must also be measured, because there is the potential for significant complications that might otherwise not be realized.
The available body of literature, which to our
knowledge is modest at present, would suggest that the
application of presurgical therapy is, at the very least,
safe.11 In our retrospective series of patients undergoing
CN or surgery for recurrent disease, the addition of presurgical targeted molecular therapy did not add to perioperative morbidity or mortality, even when administered
up to the day before surgery, as was the case with some of
the patients who received presurgical sunitinib. In particular, concerns regarding surgical site and wound healing
appear unfounded based on our retrospective study,
although surgical procedures that include an anastomosis
(eg, enteric, vascular) were not evaluated in our study and
need further consideration. Although this presurgical experience awaits prospective validation from ongoing clinical trials, it would appear from our retrospective analysis
that a more important factor that would predict morbidity may be the time to resumption of therapy after surgery
as opposed to the date of termination before surgery.
Although not a focus of our retrospective series,
another purported benefit of presurgical therapy is the
potential for primary tumor down-staging. The literature
contains several, mostly anecdotal, case studies or small
Cancer

May 15, 2009

Neoadjuvant Therapy for RCC/Wood and Margulis

series that demonstrate primary tumor regression in
response to targeted molecular therapy.12-14 These
include reductions in tumor dimension and regression of
tumor thrombi within the vena cava. Clinical response
rates of approximately 31% have been cited in initial
reports, although it remains unclear what impact, if any,
these responses had on perioperative morbidity and ease
of surgical resection. Although it is intriguing to consider
the utilization of targeted molecular therapy as an adjunct
to make the ‘‘unresectable’’ become resectable or to promote the regression of regionally advanced (atrial) tumor
thrombi to the point that would obviate the need for cardiopulmonary bypass support, further study, in the context of clinical trials with informed patient consent, is
necessary to confirm the utility of this approach. Particular attention should be focused on the treatment of tumor
thrombi, because it is equally plausible to consider that
instead of regression, necrosis and embolization of the
pulmonary vasculature could be a possible consequence of
presurgical therapy.
In the setting of metastatic renal cell carcinoma, the
true benefit of presurgical therapy may be realized in
patients who never see the inside of an operating room.
Retrospective series that report on up-front CN all note a
percentage of patients who do not receive systemic therapy because of rapid disease progression postoperatively
or surgical morbidity or mortality. With a presurgical
approach, only those patients who demonstrate response
to therapy and remain good operative candidates would
undergo surgery. Patients with treatment-refractory disease could be spared a highly morbid surgical procedure
that is unlikely to affect their outcome.
Tissue, blood, and urine specimens harvested from
patients treated with presurgical therapy can be used for
translational research to confirm that the targeted therapy
hits its target, examine downstream effects, and also search
for novel molecular pathways that have not yet been
exploited for therapeutic benefit. These and other studies
that are focused on the identification and characterization
of tissue-based, serum-based, and blood-based molecular
markers that may predict response to a given therapy and
patient outcome are the subject of intense investigation at
the University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center
and other institutions. In addition, we have developed
xenograft models of human clear cell renal cell carcinoma
from resected specimens, in which we have further evalCancer

May 15, 2009

uated the molecular changes in tumors that are associated
with a response to targeted molecular therapy and the development of a resistant phenotype. Findings in these in
vivo models, when correlated with findings from specimens harvested in our clinical research studies evaluating
presurgical therapy, may translate into the rapid identification, characterization, and implementation of meaningful biomarkers associated with tumor response and
patient outcome.
Conclusions
Neoadjuvant (presurgical) therapy is a novel treatment
strategy for locally advanced and metastatic renal cell carcinoma that is worthy of further development. Initial
experiences suggest that it is safe, with no increased risk of
surgical morbidity or wound complications. Future presurgical studies in the locally advanced setting should
focus on local tumor down-staging and effects on recurrence-free survival after surgery. In the setting of metastatic renal cell carcinoma, presurgical approaches can
serve as a litmus test to reserve CN for only those who
stand to benefit from the procedure. Finally, translational
correlative studies with tissue harvested from patients
treated with presurgical therapy will provide molecular
readouts on the effectiveness of a given therapy on the tumor and perhaps provide clues toward novel molecular
pathways that may emerge with therapy resistance.

OPEN DISCUSSION
The questions and discussion below follow from the oral presentation given at the Third Cambridge Conference on Innovations and Challenges in Renal Cancer and do not
correspond directly to the written article, which is a more general review.
Dr. Michael Atkins: Do you have other data that
show tissue findings and link those with changes in the tumor size, changes in imaging, or changes in blood?
Dr. Christopher G. Wood: Those studies are
ongoing, but they appear to be able to allow us to predict
who is responding to therapy and who is not.
Dr. W. Marston Linehan: Did you have trouble
with wound healing?
Dr. Wood: No.
Dr. Brian Rini: Do you have a standard for when to
restart therapy after surgery?
2359

Original Article

Dr. Wood: We start sunitinib approximately 1
month after surgery and bevacizumab a month after
surgery.
Dr. Linehan: You do think that has affected your
surgery much ?
Dr. Wood: It really has not. Recently, we have been
operating more on patients who have received mTOR
inhibitors, and there seems to be more of a desmoplastic
reaction with the mTOR inhibitors compared with the
VEGF inhibitors. I don’t know whether that will pan out
with subsequent surgeries.
Dr. David F. McDermott: What do you think
should be the next adjuvant trial?
Dr. Wood: Axitinib.
Dr. Robert Figlin: It is hard to anticipate what the
next trial should be in the absence of some information
about the current 1800-patient trial. One option would
be to join the sunitinib versus nothing trial that is international and finish that while you let things evolve.
Dr. Jeffrey Sosman: I would be concerned about
moving forward quickly with subsequent trials without
some idea of the dangers of giving a year of antiangiogenic
therapy and then stopping. Conversely, it is going to be a
long time from that trial.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures
The program was made possible by educational grants provided
by Genentech, Novartis Pharmaceuticals, Pfizer, Inc., and Wyeth
Pharmaceuticals. Program management and CME sponsorship
were provided by InforMEDical Communications, Inc., Carlisle,
Massachusetts.
Dr. Wood has served as a consultant for Bayer/Onyx; has served
as consultant and received honoraria from Antigenics, BristolMyers Squibb, Ethicon, and Pfizer; and is a member of the
Speaker’s Bureau for Bayer/Onyx and Pfizer.

3.

Mickisch GH, Garin A, van Poppel H, et al. Radical nephrectomy plus interferon-alfa-based immunotherapy
compared with interferon alfa alone in metastatic renalcell carcinoma: a randomised trial. Lancet. 2001;358:966970.

4.

Flanigan RC, Salmon SE, Blumenstein BA, et al. Nephrectomy followed by interferon alfa-2b compared with interferon alfa-2b alone for metastatic renal-cell cancer. N Engl J
Med. 2001;345:1655-1659.

5.

Vogl UM, Zehetgruber H, Dominkus M, et al. Prognostic
factors in metastatic renal cell carcinoma: metastasectomy as
independent prognostic variable. Br J Cancer. 2006;95:691698.

6.

Wood CG. Adjuvant approaches to renal cell carcinoma.
Clin Adv Hematol Oncol. 2008;6:19-21.

7.

Kunkle DA, Haas NB, Uzzo RG. Adjuvant therapy for
high-risk renal cell carcinoma patients. Curr Urol Rep.
2007;8:19-30.

8.

Walther MM, Yang JC, Pass HI, et al. Cytoreductive surgery before high dose interleukin-2 based therapy in
patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma. J Urol. 1997;
158:1675-1678.

9.

Jonasch E. Presurgical therapy in metastatic renal cell carcinoma. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther. 2007;7:73-78.

10. Wood CG. Multimodal approaches in the management of
locally advanced and metastatic renal cell carcinoma: combining surgery and systemic therapies to improve patient
outcome. Clin Cancer Res. 2007;13:697s-702s.
11. Margulis V, Matin SF, Tannir N, et al. Surgical morbidity
associated with administration of targeted molecular therapies before cytoreductive nephrectomy or resection of
locally recurrent renal cell carcinoma. J Urol. 2008;180:9498.
12. Karakiewicz PI, Suardi N, Jeldres C, et al. Neoadjuvant
Sutent induction therapy may effectively down-stage renal
cell carcinoma atrial thrombi. Eur Urol. 2008;53:845-848.
13. Shuch B, Riggs SB, Larochelle JC, et al. Neoadjuvant targeted therapy and advanced kidney cancer: observations
and implications for a new treatment paradigm. BJU Int.
2008;102:692-696.

1.

Leibovich BC, Blute ML. Surgical management of renal
cell carcinoma. Semin Oncol. 2006;33:552-562.

14. van der Veldt AA, Meijerink MR, van den Eertwegh AJ, et
al. Sunitinib for treatment of advanced renal cell cancer:
primary tumor response. Clin Cancer Res. 2008;14:24312436.

2.

Wood CG. The role of cytoreductive nephrectomy in the
management of metastatic renal cell carcinoma. Urol Clin
North Am. 2003;30:581-588.

15. Wagner JR, Walther MM, Linehan WM, et al. Interleukin2 based immunotherapy for metastatic renal cell carcinoma
with the kidney in place. J Urol. 1999;162:43-45.

References

2360

Cancer

May 15, 2009

