Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 1

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Intra-tumor AvidinOX allows efficacy of low dose systemic
biotinylated Cetuximab in a model of head and neck cancer
Loredana Vesci1,*, Ferdinando Maria Milazzo1,*, Anna Maria Anastasi1,
Fiorella Petronzelli1, Caterina Chiapparino1, Valeria Carollo2, Giuseppe Roscilli3,
Emanuele Marra3, Laura Luberto3, Luigi Aurisicchio3, Maria Lucrezia Pacello3,
Luigi Giusto Spagnoli2, Rita De Santis1
1

Biotechnology, Research & Development, Sigma-Tau SpA, 00071 Pomezia, Rome, Italy

2

Tissue Macro Array Lab, University of Tor Vergata, via della Ricerca Scientifica, 00133, Rome, Italy

3

Takis Biotech, Castel Romano, 00128, Rome, Italy

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Rita De Santis, e-mail: rita.desantis@sigma-tau.it
Keywords: HNSCC, AvidinOX, Cetuximab, bCet, targeted therapy
Received: July 07, 2015 	Accepted: October 26, 2015 	Published: November 07, 2015

ABSTRACT
For locally advanced and metastatic head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(HNSCC), the current clinical use of Cetuximab in chemo/radiotherapy protocols is
often associated to severe systemic toxicity. Here we report in vitro data in human
FaDu pharynx SCC cells, showing that inactive concentrations of biotinylated
Cetuximab (bCet) become active upon anchorage to AvidinOX on the surface of
tumor cells. AvidinOX-anchored bCet induces apoptosis and DNA damage as well as
specific inhibition of signaling, degradation and abrogation of nuclear translocation
of EGFR. In the mouse model of FaDu cancer, we show that intra-tumor injection
of AvidinOX allows anti-tumor activity of an otherwise inactive, intraperitoneally
delivered, low dose bCet. Consistently with in vitro data, in vivo tumor inhibition
is associated to induction of apoptosis, DNA damage and reduced angiogenesis.
AvidinOX is under clinical investigation for delivering radioactive biotin to inoperable
tumors (ClinicalTrials.gov NCT02053324) and present data support its use for the local
treatment of HNSCC in combination with systemic administration of low dose bCet.

lung cancer cells, leads to an increase of in vitro anti-tumor
activity that translates into in vivo anti-tumor efficacy of
very low doses of nebulized bCet, when administered
after nebulized AvidinOX [6]. During the last five years,
we reported in several studies that injected AvidinOX
exhibits the distinctive property to form Schiff’s bases
with tissue proteins thus constituting a stable receptor for
biotinylated therapeutics that might be very diverse in
nature like radiolabeled biotin or biotinylated stem cells
[6–9]. Consistently with data obtained with lung cancer
cells, here we show anti-tumor activity of AvidinOXanchored bCet against FaDu pharynx squamous cell
carcinoma cells in vitro. In vivo, we describe that the
injection of AvidinOX into FaDu xenografts enables antitumor activity of a very low dose bCet, administered
intraperitoneally after 24 hours. AvidinOX is currently
under investigation in a phase I clinical trial for targeting
177
Lutetium-biotinDOTA (177Lu-ST2210) [10] to inoperable

INTRODUCTION
Head and neck cancer accounts for more than
550,000 cases annually worldwide [1]. The median
overall survival for recurrent or metastatic head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) remains less than
one year despite a wide armamentarium of therapeutic
approaches including anti-EGFR antibody Cetuximab [2,
3]. The administration of Cetuximab in combination with
radiotherapy and chemotherapy has shown modest survival
improvement in patients with locally advanced and
relapsed/metastatic cancer [3, 4] and such improvement
is at expenses of increased local and systemic toxicities
that deserve consideration and timely management [5].
Therefore, there is a high medical need for improving the
cost/benefit ratio of current HNSCC treatments.
We recently described that anchoring biotinylated
Cetuximab (bCet) on the surface of AvidinOX-conjugated
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

914

Oncotarget

liver metastases (ClinicalTrials.gov NCT02053324).
Present results support intra-tumor injection of AvidinOX
for targeting systemic low dose bCet in head and neck
cancer patients with the expectation to reduce Cetuximabrelated toxicity while possibly increasing local anti-tumor
efficacy.

effect of AvidinOX anchorage of bCet on EGFR trafficking,
FaDu cells were analyzed by High Content Screening
(HCS) fluorescence imaging. The presence of FcR on
FaDu cells was preliminarily ruled out by cytofluorimetry
(data not shown). Biotinylated Panitumumab (human
IgG2 anti-EGFR) (bPan) and Rituximab (chimeric IgG1
anti-CD20 Mab) (bRit) were included in the experiments
representing a second EGFR-specific and a negative control
Mab, respectively. EGF-induced EGFR endocytosis in
FaDu cells was proven not to be affected by AvidinOX
conjugation (Supplementary Figure S3). HCS was then used
to investigate the fate of AvidinOX-anchored biotinylated
antibodies. As expected, after 30 minutes, fluorescent bCet
but not bRit was found within the cytoplasm of FaDu cells
while, in AvidinOX-conjugated cells, both bCet and bRit
appeared in dots on the cell surface indicating that bCet
internalization was prevented by AvidinOX anchorage
(Supplementary Figure S4). Same results were obtained
with bPan (not shown). Consistently with previous data
in lung cancer cells, where AvidinOX-anchored bCet and
bPan induced a dramatic reduction of EGFR consequent
to its massive localization within the lysosomes [6], HCS
imaging showed that, upon 30-minute incubation with
AvidinOX-anchored bCet or bPan but not bRit, EGFR
disappeared in FaDu cells (Figure 2A). The degree of
the effect was substantial and similar after 2 or 24 hours
thus indicating persistence and irreversibility of the effect
upon antibody removal. Co-localization of EGFR with
lysosomes in Supplementary Figure S5. Interestingly, while
EGFR degradation was induced by 1 μg/mL bCet or bPan
in AvidinOX-treated cells, Cetuximab and Panitumumab
did not affect EGFR in FaDu cells at concentrations up
to 200 μg/mL, with or without AvidinOX (Supplementary
Figure S6A–S6C). EGFR degradation proved to be strictly
dependent on the anchorage of biotinylated anti-EGFR
antibodies to AvidinOX. In fact, no degradation occurred
when bCet binding to AvidinOX was competed by an excess
of unrelated biotinylated antibody (bRit) while, it persisted
in the presence of an excess of Cetuximab, despite the
expected competition on EGFR binding (Figure 2B). Same
results were obtained with bPan (not shown).

RESULTS
Biochemical properties of biotinylated cetuximab
Determination of the number of biotin molecules
coupled to Cetuximab was performed by Electrospray
Ionization Mass Spectrometry (ESI MS). The highest peak
of the non-biotinylated Cetuximab exhibited an estimated
mass of 152653 Da while the highest peak of bCet
exhibited an estimated mass of 154607 Da with a mass
difference of 1954 Da. Since biotinylation adds 452.24 Da
for each biotin, bCet was calculated to have, in the most
represented form, an average of 4.3 biotins/Ig molecule
(Figure 1A). Mass spectrometry analysis also identified
preferential biotinylation sites on lysine 49, 126, 145, 188,
190 and 207 and lysine 5, 43, 75, 224, 248, 290, 319, 322,
328, 336, 362 and 416 in light and heavy antibody chains,
respectively. Molecular integrity of bCet was confirmed by
size exclusion chromatography and SDS-PAGE analyses
(Figures 1B and 1C, respectively). Isoelectrofocusing
analysis showed for bCet batches, lower isoelectric points
(8.45–6.85) compared to Cetuximab (9.3–8.65) consequent
to the biotinylation of positively charged lysines (Figure
1D). Cytofluorimetry analyses on EGFR+ and EGFRtumor cells confirmed the binding specificity. In fact, bCet
did not bind to EGFR- cells as Cetuximab, unless prior cell
conjugation with AvidinOX (Supplementary Figure S1).
EGFR-specific ELISA showed similar binding potency
for bCet and Cetuximab (Figure 1E) and surface plasmon
resonance (SPR) indicated similar affinity (Figure 1F), that
is consistent with previously published data [11]. Overall
results indicated substantial biochemical and biological
similarity of bCet with Cetuximab.
An experimental system to test the hypothesis
that AvidinOX-bound bCet (potentially tetrameric)
might exhibit higher avidity for EGFR compared to the
monomeric one, was attempted by SPR. Taking into
account all limitation deriving from comparing two
different experimental conditions, results showed faster
dissociation of EGFR from AvidinOX-bound bCet
compared to bCet (Supplementary Figure S2).

AvidinOX-anchored bCet inhibits
phosphorylation and signaling of EGFR
To ascertain whether AvidinOX-anchored bCet
would have been able to block EGFR signaling in FaDu
cells, cultures were treated with bCet with and without
EGF stimulation. EGFR phosphorylation and downstream
signaling were assessed by Western blotting. As shown in
Figure 3A, treatment with bCet significantly reduced basal
level of phosphorylated EGFR (pEGFR) in AvidinOX
pretreated cells and caused a dramatic reduction of
total EGFR. Both effects were observed after 1 hour
and persisted at least up to 18 hours. In EGF-stimulated
cells, treatment with bCet was effective in reducing

AvidinOX-anchored bCet prevents
internalization and induces
degradation of EGFR
Internalization of EGFR/ligand (EGF or anti-EGFR
antibodies) is a physiological mechanism affecting the tumor
cell response to growth and inhibition stimuli. To test the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

915

Oncotarget

EGFR phosphorylation at both 1068 and 1101 tyrosine
residues with a more pronounced effect in AvidinOX
pretreated cells, where the effect was also accompanied
by a strong reduction of total EGFR and by decreased
level of phosphorylated-Akt and Erk 1/2, which are
known to be downstream effectors of EGFR signaling
(Figure 3B). Western blotting data showing a dramatic
reduction of EGFR are consistent with HCS imaging data
in Figure 2 and Figure S6A–S6C. We previously showed,
in several lung cancer cell lines, that AvidinOX-anchored
bCet induces a dramatic decrease of total and activated
EGFR in both nuclear and non-nuclear cell compartments
[6]. As shown in Figure 3C, a very strong reduction of
phosphorylated non-nuclear (left panel) and nuclear (right

panel) EGFR was observed in EGF-induced FaDu cells
upon AvidinOX anchorage of bCet but not bRit. These
data were further confirmed by ELISA titration of EGFR
on the same cellular extracts (Figure 3D).

AvidinOX-anchored bCet induces apoptosis and
interferes with pro-angiogenic pathways
Several in vitro experiments were performed with
FaDu cells for testing the effect of AvidinOX-anchored
bCet on molecular pathways. As shown in Figure 4A,
AvidinOX-anchored bCet was about 10 times more
effective than bCet at inducing phosphorylation of the
early marker of DNA damage, histone H2A.X (γH2A.X),

Figure 1: Characterization of biotinylated Cetuximab. A. Electrospray Ionization Mass Spectrometry profiles of Cetuximab
(upper panel) and representative batch of bCet with 4.3 biotins/mole (lower panel). B. Size exclusion chromatography of Cetuximab (black
line) and bCet (batch as in A, blue line). C. SDS-PAGE analysis of Cetuximab and bCet (batch as in A), under reducing (lanes 2 and 3,
respectively) and non-reducing (lanes 5 and 6, respectively) conditions. Molecular weight standard in lane 1. D. IEF analysis of three
batches of bCet with an average of 4.3, 4.4 and 5.7 biotins/mole (lane 2, 3 and 4, respectively). Cetuximab and IEF standards in lane 5
and 1, respectively. E. EGFR-specific ELISA of Cetuximab (red line) and bCet (batch as in A, dotted black line). F. Cet and bCet kinetic
constants by SPR.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

916

Oncotarget

after 4-hour incubation. To ascertain whether the
prolonged treatment with AvidinOX-anchored bCet could
also result in induction of apoptosis or other cell deathrelated pathways, FaDu cells, with or without AvidinOX
pretreatment, were cultivated 48 hours in the presence
of bCet and then whole cell lysates were analyzed
for multiple protein expression by using a Proteome
Profiler Array (Figure 4B, upper left panel). Results after
densitometric analysis showed that AvidinOX-anchored
bCet caused an increase of several pro-apoptotic proteins
associated to both extrinsic and intrinsic apoptotic
pathways (i.e. TRAILR1/DR4 and TRAILR1/DR5, Bax,

cleaved caspase-3, clusterin, cytochrome C) (Figure 4B,
lower left panel). Interestingly, the treatment with bCet,
without AvidinOX, was associated to a strong downregulation of anti-apoptotic effectors belonging to the
Bcl-2 protein family (Figure 4B, lower right panel).
Activation of P53 was not observed with any treatment
most likely because this is an event occurring at earlier
time points. Nevertheless, AvidinOX-anchored bCet
caused up-regulation of the cell cycle inhibitor p21Cip1
and stress-associated replication regulator protein Claspin
(Figure 4B, upper right panel). In agreement with array
protein expression data, higher cleavage of caspase-3 and

Figure 2: AvidinOX-anchored bCet and bPan induce degradation of EGFR. A. Fluorescence imaging by High Content

Screening (HCS) Operetta of FaDu cells, with and without AvidinOX conjugation and 30-minute incubation with 1 μg/mL CF488-labeled
biotinylated Mabs (blue). After 2 or 24-hour cultivation, cells were washed, fixed and stained for the detection of EGFR by AF555-labeled
anti-EGFR Mab (red). Draq5 dye staining of nucleus and cytoplasm (grey). Violet is the result of the blue and red dye co-localization.
B. Cells, with and without AvidinOX conjugation were incubated with medium (Control), 15 μg/mL Cetuximab (Cet) or 1 μg/mL bCet
alone or in the presence of 15 μg/mL bRit or Cet. All panels: representative picture of at least 5 fields of triplicate wells. Magnification 60X.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

917

Oncotarget

up-regulation of p21Cip1 in the same FaDu cell cultures,
were observed with AvidinOX-anchored bCet, compared
to bCet, by HCS analysis (Figure 4C and Supplementary
Figure S7, respectively).
In order to assess whether treatment with bCet
could also induce molecular modulation associated with
angiogenesis, tumor growth, invasion and metastasis,
the level of specific proteins secreted in the conditioned
culture medium of FaDu cells was measured by using

a specific Proteome Array kit (Figure 5A). As shown
in Figures 5B and 5C, AvidinOX-anchored bCet was
more effective than bCet decreasing secretion of several
pro-angiogenic factors, as well as many growth factors
and invasion-associated enzymes. Noteworthy, higher
reduction of secreted chemokines having pro-tumorigenic/
invasion effects was observed with anchored-bCet
compared to bCet paralleled by an impressive increase of
secreted Amphiregulin which is known to be a relevant

Figure 3: AvidinOX-anchored bCet blocks EGFR signaling, induces receptor degradation and prevents nuclear
translocation. Cells were serum-starved 24 hours and then cultivated, with or without AvidinOX conjugation in culture medium or in

the presence of indicated antibodies. Whole cell lysates or sub-cellular fractions were prepared at different times following treatment and
then subjected to Western blotting or ELISA analyses for indicated target proteins. A. Whole cell lysates. B. Whole cell lysates from EGFstimulated cells. C. Nuclear (right panel) and non-nuclear (left panel) fractions of EGF-stimulated cells, 18 hours after treatment. D. ELISA
titration of phosphorylated and total EGFR in non-nuclear (left panel) and nuclear (right panel) fractions of EGF-stimulated cells, as in C.
Data are expressed as % residual pEGFR/EGFR (non-nuclear) or nuclear EGFR compared to cells in culture medium. Error bars: mean of
duplicates ± SD. EGF was added 30 minutes before cell lysis, where indicated. All panels: representative data from at least two independent
experiments.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

918

Oncotarget

predictive marker of tumor cell sensitivity to Cetuximab
[12] (Figure 5D).

about 14 and 7 days, respectively [7, 13]. In a preliminary
dose-finding study, 40 μg/mouse bCet, administered i.p.
three times once/week to mice bearing subcutaneous
xenografts of FaDu cells, was found to be a suboptimal
treatment (Supplementary Figure S8). Therefore, mice
with FaDu xenografts were treated with this bCet
dose with and without intra-tumor pre-treatment with
AvidinOX, 24 hours before each bCet administration. As

Intra-tumor injection of AvidinOX enables antitumor efficacy of low dose systemic bCet
The half-life of injected AvidinOX into normal
tissues and tumor masses was previously shown to be

Figure 4: AvidinOX-anchored bCet induces H2A.X phosphorylation and apoptosis. A. FaDu cells, with and without AvidinOX

conjugation, were treated 4 hours with medium or bCet. Histone H2A.X phosphorylation was measured by using a Phosphorylation
Chemiluminescence Detection kit. Each value represents the mean ± SE of two independent experiments. (*p < 0.05 vs cells without
AvidinOX, Mann-Whitney’s test). B. Array membrane representative image of FaDu cells, with and without AvidinOX conjugation, treated
48 hours with medium (Control) or 5 μg/mL bCet. EGF induction the last 30 minutes. Apoptosis-related proteins were measured on whole
cell lysates using the Human Apoptosis Array kit. Spot pixel densities were recorded and analyzed by using image analysis software.
Average background signal was subtracted from each spot and the normalized mean pixel densities were plotted according to target family.
Data (mean of duplicates ± SD) were expressed as percentage with respect to baseline values (100%) of control cells (with and without
AvidinOX). C. HCS analysis of FaDu cells, 48 hours after 1-hour contact with medium (Control) or 5 μg/mL bCet, with and without
AvidinOX conjugation. After treatment, cells were washed, fixed and stained for the detection of cleaved-caspase-3 (green). Draq5 dye
staining of nucleus and cytoplasm (grey). Each panel, representative picture of at least 5 fields of triplicate wells. Magnification 60X. Note:
in all experiments, AvidinOX conjugation did not affect baseline values.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

919

Oncotarget

shown in Figure 6A, significant tumor growth inhibition
was only observed in AvidinOX-treated tumors, with
a tumor volume inhibition of 56%. Analysis of tumor
sections by histology confirmed significant reduction of
neoplastic areas in this group (Figure 6B), paralleled by
higher phosphorylation of histone H2A.X (γH2A.X) and

increased level of cleaved caspase-3, as determined by
immunohistochemistry (Figures 6C, 6D, 6E).
Additional serial sections from the same tumor
xenografts were used to investigate angiogenesis.
Microvessel density (MVD) was evaluated by counting the
number of VEGFR2+ and CD31+ vessels. Results showed

Figure 5: AvidinOX-anchored bCet affects pro-angiogenic and pro-tumorigenic pathways. FaDu cells, with and without

AvidinOX conjugation, treated 72 hours with medium (Control) or 5 μg/mL bCet, with EGF induction the last 30 minutes. Analysis of
secreted angiogenesis- and proliferation-related proteins was carried out using the Proteome Profiler Array kit. Spot pixel densities were
collected and analyzed using image analysis software. Average background signal was subtracted from each spot and the normalized
mean pixel densities were plotted according to target family. Data (mean of duplicates ± SD) were expressed as percentage with respect to
baseline values (100%) of control cells (with and without AvidinOX). A. Array membrane representative image. B. Angiogenesis-related
proteins. C. Proliferation/invasion-related proteins. D. Chemokines and cytokines. Note: in all experiments, AvidinOX conjugation did not
affect baseline values.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

920

Oncotarget

that the anti-angiogenic activity of bCet was significantly
enhanced upon AvidinOX anchorage (Figures 7A, 7B,
7C). No toxicity was observed in all experimental groups
as indicated by lack of body weight loss (data not shown).
Overall, in vivo data proved to be consistent with in vitro
results obtained with FaDu cells.

monotherapy for recurrent and metastatic HNSCC [14–
17]. Unfortunately, modest anti-tumor efficacy, together
with significant side effects and costs remain major
obstacles to its clinical wide spreading [4, 18]. The dose
of intravenous Cetuximab can be as high as 2 g/month and
treatment can go on for several months. The British health
system found the addition of Cetuximab to radiotherapy to
be cost-effective compared to single modality radiotherapy
while Cetuximab with chemotherapy is not recommended.
Whereas, in the US, where economic evaluations are
not incorporated in the drug approval process, addition
to chemotherapy is the preferred regimen [19]. To

DISCUSSION
The anti-EGFR monoclonal antibody Cetuximab is
approved in Europe and US for use in combination with
chemo/radiation in patients with locally advanced and as

Figure 6: Intra-tumor injection of AvidinOX allows anti-tumor efficacy of low dose intraperitoneal bCet. A. Tumor

volume of FaDu s.c. xenotransplants in mice treated i.p. with 40 μg bCet, 8, 15 and 22 days after tumor cell transplantation, with or without
(vehicle) injection of AvidinOX (50 μg), administered intra-tumor (tumor masses 40–50 mg) 24 hours before each bCet dose. Data are mean
± SE of 8 mice per group. B. Average area of tumor masses measured on hematoxylin-eosin stained paraffin-embedded sections of mice in
A. C. Percentage of tumor cells (mean ± SE) immunostained for phosphorylated histone H2A.X (γH2A.X) in tumor sections of mice in A
(5 fields from two serial sections/mouse). D. Percentage of tumor cells (mean ± SE) immunostained for cleaved caspase-3 in tumor sections
of mice in A (5 fields from two serial sections/mouse). E. Representative pictures of data in C and D (Magnification 40X). Panels A–D.
Mann-Whitney U test *p < 0.05 versus bCet. Data from one representative study out of two.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

921

Oncotarget

assess the cost effectiveness of adding Cetuximab to
chemotherapy in patients with recurrent or metastatic
HNSCC, the Canadian public healthcare system adopted
a model to project the lifetime clinical and economic
consequences of the disease in a three year time horizon.
In the base case, addition of Cetuximab to platinum-based
chemotherapy led to an increase in cost of $36,000 per
person, resulting in an incremental cost effectiveness
ratio (ICER) of $386,000 per quality-adjusted life-year
(QALY) gained and concluding that Cetuximab could
only be economically attractive if the cost of Cetuximab
is substantially reduced or if future research can identify
predictive markers to select patients most likely to benefit
from the addition of Cetuximab to chemotherapy [20].
It is known that Cetuximab inhibits oral squamous cell
carcinoma invasion and metastasis directly via degradation
of epidermal growth factor receptor [21] and indirectly

via inhibition of neo-angiogenesis [22]. Cetuximab can
also exert pro-apoptotic activity particularly when used
in combined therapies [23, 24]. With regard to DNA
damage in response to irradiation, Cetuximab has been
reported to inhibit EGFR translocation to the nucleus that
is known to activate major DNA repair pathways [25]. In
contrast with this observation, others indicate that intracellular trafficking of EGFR is enhanced by Cetuximab
[26] and there is a wide literature correlating poor
response to Cetuximab with EGFR nuclear localization
thus making nuclear EGFR an important molecular target
in cancer [27–29]. We recently reported that AvidinOXanchored bCet inhibits dimerization and signalling, blocks
endocytosis, induces massive lysosomal degradation and
abrogates nuclear translocation of EGFR, in lung cancer
cells at doses otherwise not effective. This translates into
utility of nebulizing tiny doses of bCet that, when delivered

Figure 7: Anti-tumor efficacy of low dose intraperitoneal bCet in AvidinOX-treated tumors correlates with inhibition
of angiogenesis. A. VEGFR-2 and B. CD31 positive vessels by immunohistochemistry in human FaDu tumor xenografts from mice
treated i.p. with bCet with or without previous intra-tumor injection of AvidinOX of study in Figure 6. Microvessel density (MVD) is
expressed as mean number of vessels per square millimeter ± SE of tumor samples from each group (12 selected fields from two serial
sections/mouse).°°p < 0.01 vs vehicle and **p < 0.01 vs bCet by Mann-Whitney U test. C. Representative immunohistochemistry pictures
of data in A and B. Magnification 40X.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

922

Oncotarget

after nebulized AvidinOX, exert therapeutic effect in
lung cancer models [6]. Consistently with previous data
in lung cancer, here we show that intra-tumor injection
of AvidinOX turns a low systemic dose of bCet into an
effective anti-tumor treatment in the FaDu model of
head and neck cancer. Growth inhibition of FaDu tumor
xenografts is shown to be associated with the induction
of apoptosis and DNA damage and marked inhibition of
angiogenesis. In vivo results are in agreement with in vitro
data indicating that AvidinOX anchorage turns ineffective
bCet concentrations into a treatment leading to massive
EGFR degradation and to activation of pro-apoptotic
and anti-angiogenesis signals. As with previous lung
cancer data, the second anti-EGFR biotinylated antibody
bPan behaves similarly as bCet in FaDu, suggesting
that engagement of EGFR by any AvidinOX-anchored
anti-EGFR antibody might lead to the same outcome.
Previous data had clearly demonstrated that potency
improvement of biotinylated anti-EGFR antibodies was
dependent on the interaction of biotin with AvidinOX. In
fact, the non-biotinylated controls, at suboptimal doses,
were less or not effective with or without AvidinOX
[6]. Presently, we show in Supplementary Figure 6A–
6C that Cetuximab and Panitumumab fail to induce
EGFR degradation in FaDu cells, at dose as high as
200 μg/mL, with or without AvidinOX. We also prove
that AvidinOX anchorage is essential to bCet and bPan
activity as competition on AvidinOX occupancy by a notrelevant biotinylated antibody prevents their anti-EGFR
activity. Overall data confirm that AvidinOX anchorage
endows anti-EGFR antibodies with peculiar properties,
the most evident of which is the induction of dramatic
degradation of EGFR. Present data support the clinical
use of intra-tumor AvidinOX to enable therapeutic efficacy
of low doses anti-EGFR antibodies in HNSCC patients.
Dose reduction of these antibodies is expected to have
beneficial effects on both overall tolerability and cost of
treatment. Regarding tolerability, AvidinOX has been
proven to be very well tolerated either when injected in
tissues or when inhaled by both rodents and non-human
primates, despite its known immunogenicity [6–9, 13,
30–33]. Very good tolerability and no treatment-related
adverse events have been recorded in eight patients, with
inoperable liver metastasis, who were treated to date with
intra-tumor AvidinOX and intravenous 177Lu-ST2210
(NCT02053324). Regarding cost of the treatment, this is
expected to be substantially lower than current Cetuximab
treatments because of the low amount of the expensive
antibody to be used and low manufacturing costs of
Avidin, which is extracted from egg white and oxidized
by quite simple biochemical processes [13]. Present results
in HNSCC, together with previous results in lung cancer
models, point to AvidinOX as a wide applicable tool for
making low doses of anti-EGFR antibodies effective
against cancer. Ongoing studies in our laboratories show
that the principle is also valid for anti-ErbB2 and ErbB3
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

antibodies (manuscript in preparation). The latter results,
although not obvious, are somehow expected based on
the biological similarities of the targeted receptors, all
belonging to the EGFR family [34]. On the other hand, the
use of AvidinOX for targeting antibodies to receptors of
different families, to other surface molecules or to soluble
factors is still speculative but very exciting if we think
to the possibility to reduce the doses of expensive and
frequently toxic reagents. Particularly, antibodies against
the immune check points inhibitors, that are currently
becoming very popular because of their proven efficacy
[35, 36] might find benefit from an AvidinOX-based
targeted delivery that could allow reduction of doses and
improvement of tolerability.
Interestingly, AvidinOX would easily allow the
targeting of combination therapies to tumors, as well as to
other diseased tissues, with therapeutics that might include
a variety of biotinylated agents spanning from radioactive
biotin, as in the current clinical trial, to biotinylated
antibodies or biotinylated cells for each of which proof of
concepts were previously produced [6–9].
All results collectively taken encourage further use
of AvidinOX in additional clinical protocols.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cells and AvidinOX conjugation
Human squamous cell carcinoma of the pharynx
FaDu, human squamous cell carcinoma of the tongue
OSC-19 and human melanoma SKMel28 cells were
obtained from the American Type Culture Collection
(ATCC) and maintained in a humidified atmosphere with
5% CO2 at 37°C. Working cell banks were established and
all experiments were performed using cells within 6–8
passages after thawing.
AvidinOX® (registered brand of Sigma Tau) was
prepared by Areta International (Varese, Italy) as a
lyophilized form, according to previously described
methods [13]. After reconstitution with water for
injection, the protein was 3.0 mg/mL, in acetate buffer pH
5.2 with mannitol and NaCl. For AvidinOX conjugation,
pellets of 5x105 cells or adherent cells (96- or 24-well
plates) were washed with PBS and incubated 1 hour at
4°C with 100 μL of 100 μg/mL AvidinOX in PBS. Cells
were then washed with DMEM and used for further in
vitro experiments.

Preparation and characterization of biotinylated
antibodies
For biotinylation of Cetuximab (Erbitux®; Merck
Serono), Panitumumab (Vectibix®; Amgen) and Rituximab
(MabThera®; Roche), 100 mg of antibody were subjected
to buffer exchange by ultrafiltration on Amicon Ultra
30K (Millipore) and brought to a concentration of
923

Oncotarget

about 10 mg/mL in PBS. Activated 2X-AHbiotin-NHydroxysuccinimide ester (ST3297, Sigma-Tau) was
added at 1:10 Mab:biotin molar ratio. The reaction mixture
was incubated 2 hours at room temperature under mild
shaking, loaded on SEC disposable PD-10 column (G-25,
Amersham-Pharmacia) and eluted with PBS. Biotinylated
antibody fractions were pooled based on OD280 values and
finally filter sterilized. Endotoxins were tested by LAL test
(Endosafe PTS/MCS Cartridges, Charles River).
The biotinylation level was assessed by HABA test
[37] and/or by Electrospray Ionization Mass Spectrometry
(ESI MS). For ESI MS, the samples were pretreated
with 8M Urea and then sprayed through a capillary at
high voltage into the MS instrument where the mass
over charge ratio (m/z) was measured. The mass of the
molecule was determined using a deconvolution algorithm
(MaxEnt Software). Positions of biotinylated lysines
were analyzed by nano-LC-MS/MS peptide sequencing
(Alphalyse) and protein identification was based on a
probability-scoring algorithm (http://www.matrixscience.
com). Briefly, the protein samples were reduced and
alkylated with iodoacetamide, i.e. carbamidomethylated,
and subsequently digested with trypsin. The resulting
peptides were concentrated by Speed Vac lyophilization
and redissolved for injection on a Dionex nano-LC system
and MS/MS analysis on a Bruker Maxis Impact QTOF
instrument. The MS/MS spectra were used for UniProt and
NCBI database searching by using the Mascot, version
2.4, software.
Purity and integrity were confirmed by SECHPLC. Antibodies (300 μg in 30 μL) were loaded on a
TSKgel G3000 SWXL (7.8 × 300 mm) column (Tosoh
Bioscience). Mobile phase: 100 mM phosphate buffer
solution (pH 7.0), 300 mM NaCl/Acetonitrile (90:10).
Flow rate: 1 mL/min. Detection by 280 nm absorbance.
SDS-PAGE and IEF analyses were performed according
to standard methods [38, 39]. For electrophoresis, samples
were separated on a linear 4–15% acrylamide gradient
gel and stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue R250.
For IEF, the analysis was performed in native conditions
and samples (5 μg/lane) separated on IEF pH 3–9 gel
containing 5% polyacrylamide and stained with Blue
Bandit.
Immunoreactivity of biotinylated Cetuximab (bCet)
and biotinylated Panitumumab (bPan) was tested by
antigen-specific ELISA. Briefly, Immuno MAXISORP 96well plates (Nunc) were coated overnight at 4°C with 50
ng/well of recombinant human EGF-R/Erb1 Fc chimera
(R&D). Plates were washed with PBS 0.1% Tween-20
(PBS-T), blocked 2 hours with PBS-T, 1% BSA, and
incubated with serial dilutions of antibodies 1 hour at room
temperature (RT). After washings, horseradish peroxidase
(HRP)-conjugated anti-human K light chain antibody
(Sigma Aldrich), diluted 1:1000 in blocking solution,
was added 1 hour at RT. After three washings, 200 μL/
well TMB substrate (Sigma Aldrich) were added and after
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30 minutes at RT, the reaction was blocked by H2SO4
solution, and optical density at 450 nm was measured by
ELISA reader (Tecan).
Specificity of biotinylated antibodies was tested by
cytofluorimetry. Pellets of FaDu, OSC-19 or SKMel28
cells, with and without AvidinOX-conjugation, were
incubated 1 hour at 4°C with antibodies and their related
biotinylated derivatives. After washings, cells were
incubated with mouse PE-conjugated anti-human Ig (BD).
Analysis was carried out through FACScalibur (BD).
Affinity analysis by Surface Plasmonic Resonance
(SPR) was carried out by Biacore T200 instrument
(GE). The binding kinetics of Cetuximab and bCet to
recombinant EGFR-Fc chimera (R&D) immobilized
by standard amino coupling procedure to a CM5 sensor
chip were measured by injecting the two antibodies
in the 250–15.6 nM concentration range (duplicates).
Evaluation of kon and koff rate constants was performed by
BIA Evaluation software version 3.2, using the bivalent
analyte fitting model and KD calculated as the ratio of the
two constants.

H2A.X phosphorylation (γH2A.X) assay
Tumor cells were plated onto 96-well clear bottom
black plates (Corning) in culture medium supplemented
with 10% FBS. Twenty-four hours later, cells were washed
with DPBS and were treated with AvidinOX (100 μg/
mL) 30 minutes at 37°C. After removal of AvidinOX
solution, the cells were washed and treated 4 hours with
biotinylated Cetuximab in culture medium containing 2%
FBS. Histone H2A.X phosphorylation at serine 139 was
measured by ELISA using the H2A.X Phosphorylation
Chemiluminescence Detection kit (Upstate), according to
the manufacturer’s instructions.

EGFR signaling by western blotting
FaDu cells were seeded in 10-cm culture plates
(3x106 cells/plate) in EMEM 10% FBS, incubated
overnight at 37°C and then starved 24 hours in serumfree medium. Cells, with and without AvidinOX (100 μg/
mL) conjugation, were then cultivated for different times
with biotinylated antibodies at various concentrations.
In some experiments, antibodies were removed after 1
hour contact and then cells were cultivated 18 hours in
serum-free medium. EGFR activation was performed by
adding 100 ng/mL EGF (R&D) 30 minutes before cell
lysis. At the end of culture, cells were washed twice with
ice-cold PBS and then whole cell lysate was prepared
by incubation, 10 minutes in ice, with lysis buffer (Cell
Signaling) supplemented with protease and phosphatase
inhibitors. Cell lysates were subjected to sonication
prior to centrifugation at 14,000 x g, 10 minutes at 4°C,
to remove cell debris. In some experiments, cytosolic/
membrane fractions and nuclear extracts were prepared
924

Oncotarget

and analyzed as previously described [6]. Protein content
was determined by Bradford method. Equal amounts
of soluble proteins were separated on SDS-PAGE and
then transferred to nitrocellulose membrane (Amersham
Hybond-ECL, GE). Membranes were blocked 3 hours
at room temperature with 5% non-fat dry milk in PBS,
0.05% Tween-20 (PBS-T) before overnight incubation,
at 4°C, with one of the following primary antibodies:
pEGFR (Tyr1068) (#2236), EGFR (#4267), pAKT
(#4058), AKT (#9272) and pERK 1/2 (#9101) from
Cell Signaling; pEGFR (Tyr1101) (#ab76195) from
abcam. Immunoblotting with anti-α-tubulin (#T5168,
Sigma Aldrich) or anti-HDAC2 (#2540, Cell Signaling)
antibodies was done to confirm equal protein loading for
non-nuclear/whole cell lysate and nuclear protein extracts,
respectively. After washings with PBS-T, membranes
were incubated 1 hour with the appropriate secondary
HRP-conjugated anti-rabbit (1:3000) or anti-mouse
(1:2000) IgG antibody (Sigma Aldrich and Amersham
GE, respectively). Immunoreactive bands were visualized
by enhanced chemiluminescence detection (Amersham
ECL plus, GE) and analyzed by phosphoimaging
(STORM, Molecular Dynamics) or by exposure to X-ray
film (Amersham Hyperfilm ECL, GE). Densitometric
analysis was performed using an image analysis software
(ImageQuant TL Image Analysis Software v8.1, GE).

mean pixel densities plotted according to target family.
Data were expressed as percentage with respect to values
measured in control cells.

Measurement of proliferation- and angiogenesisrelated proteins in conditioned media
FaDu cells, with and without AvidinOX (100
μg/mL) conjugation, were cultivated in serum-free
medium with biotinylated antibodies. At each time
point, conditioned culture media (CM) were collected,
centrifuged at 400 x g, divided into aliquots and stored
at -80°C until use. Secretion of angiogenesis- and
proliferation-related proteins in CM was assessed using
the Proteome Profiler Array assay (R&D), according to
manufacturer’s instructions.
Acquisition and analysis of pixel densities were
performed as described before. Data were expressed as
percentage with respect to values measured in CM of
control cells.

High content screening (HCS) fluorescence
imaging
FaDu cells were seeded in 96-well microtiter plates
(3–6 × 103/well) and cultivated 3 days, starved 24 hours in
serum-free medium and then, with or without AvidinOX
conjugation (100 μg/mL), incubated 30 minutes with
medium or CF488-labelled antibodies. Antibodies were
removed by washing with medium and cells analyzed for
fluorescence by High Content Screening (HCS) system
Operetta (Perkin Elmer), after cultivation in serum-free
medium for the indicated time.
EGFR was detected by AF555-conjugated rabbit
anti-EGFR antibody (D38B1) (Cell Signaling), added
after cell fixation with 4% formaldehyde in PBS,
permeabilization with PBS, 0.2%Tween-20 (PBS-T)
and blocking with 2% BSA in PBS-T. Cells were
counterstained with Draq5 dye (Cell Signaling).
For the detection of cleaved-caspase-3 and P21Cip1,
FaDu cells with or without AvidinOX conjugation (100
μg/mL) were incubated 1 hour with the biotinylatedantibodies (5 μg/mL) and then, after washing, cultivated
48 hours in serum-free medium, with EGF induction
(100 ng/mL) the last 30 minutes. Cells were then
washed, fixed and permeabilized. Cleaved-caspase-3 and
P21Cip1 were detected by using specific rabbit polyclonal
antibodies (#9661, Cell Signaling and sc-397, Santa Cruz,
respectively) and PE-conjugated goat anti-rabbit Ig as
secondary antibody (#554020, BD).

EGFR expression assay
FaDu cells were seeded in 10-cm culture plates,
starved 24 hours in serum-free medium and then, with
or without AvidinOX conjugation, incubated 1 hour
with biotinylated antibodies. After washing, cells were
cultivated 18 hours in serum-free medium, with EGF
induction the last 30 minutes (100 ng/mL). Phosphorylated
and total EGFR in nuclear and non-nuclear protein
fractions were assessed by specific PathScan Sandwich
ELISA kits (Cell Signaling), according to manufacturer’s
instructions.

Apoptosis assay
FaDu cells were seeded in 10-cm culture plates,
starved 24 hours in serum-free medium and then, with and
without AvidinOX conjugation, cultivated 48 hours in the
presence or absence of bCet 5 μg/mL, with EGF induction
the last 30 minutes (100 ng/mL). Whole cell lysates were
then prepared and used for assessing the expression of
various proteins involved in apoptosis and DNA repair,
through the Human Apoptosis Array kit (R&D), according
to manufacturer’s instructions.
After exposition of membranes to X-ray film, pixel
densities were collected through the Imager 600RGB (GE)
and analyzed by image analysis software (ImageQuant TL
Image Analysis Software v8.1, GE). Average background
signal was subtracted from each spot and the normalized
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

In vivo studies
Animal studies were performed in accordance
with the “Directive 2010/63/UE” on the protection of
animals used for scientific purposes, made effective in
925

Oncotarget

Italy by the Legislative Decree 4 March 2014, n. 26, and
ARRIVE guidelines [40]. Female athymic nude mice, 5
to 6 weeks old, were purchased from Harlan Laboratories
(Udine, Italy). All procedures performed on the animals
were approved by Animal Welfare Body and authorized
by the Italian Ministry of Health, 46/2014-PR. At the end
of the treatment period and before necropsy, mice were
euthanized by CO2 asphyxia as indicated in the AVMA
(American Veterinary Medical Association) Panel on
Euthanasia and according to the guidelines described in
UKCCR, United Kingdom Co-ordinating Committee on
Cancer Research, 1998.
Mice were maintained in a pathogen-free facility
and were inoculated subcutaneously, in the right flank,
with 100 μL suspension of 5 × 106 FaDu cells in Hanks’
balanced salt solution. Tumor-bearing mice were
randomized into groups of 8 and received 50 μg/16.6 μL of
AvidinOX intratumorally or the same volume of AvidinOX
formulation buffer (vehicle), 24 hours before each
intraperitoneal injection of 40 μg/mouse bCet. Treatment
started 8 days after tumor transplantation (average size
of tumor masses 40–50 mg). Tumor measurements were
performed by digital Vernier caliper twice per week and
tumor volume (TV) calculated by the equation: volume =
length x (width)2/2.
Efficacy of treatment was assessed as: TV inhibition
percentage (TVI%) in treated versus control mice,
calculated as: TVI% = 100 - (mean TV treated/mean
TV control x100). When tumors reached a volume of
about 1000 mm3, mice were euthanized. To examine the
possible toxicity of treatment, body weight was recorded
throughout the study. Percent of body weight loss (BWL)
was calculated as: 100 - (mean BWdayx/mean BWday1x100),
where day 1 is the first day of treatment and day x is any
day after (maximum BWL%).

with specific antibodies against phospho-Histone H2A.X
(Ser139) (#2577) and cleaved caspase-3 (#9664), from
Cell Signaling, or against CD31 (#ab28364), from Abcam,
diluted in blocking buffer (5% Goat serum and 0.4%
Triton X-100, in PBS, for γ-H2A.X and cleaved caspase-3;
10% Goat serum in PBS for CD31) overnight at 4°C in
a humidified chamber. Negative controls were incubated
without primary antibodies. Sections were incubated with
appropriate biotinylated secondary antibody (1:300) and
then with the detection solution containing conjugated
HRP-streptavidin and 3,3′-diaminobenzidine (ABC kit,
Vector). Sections were ultimately counterstained with
hematoxylin. Images were taken by microscope (Eclipse
E800, Nikon) equipped with a JVC KY-F55B color video
digital camera.
For VEGFR-2 evaluation, sections after
deparaffination and rehydration were treated 15 minutes
with 1 mM EDTA and 0.05% Tween 20 (pH 8.0) in a
microwave for antigen retrieval, followed by quenching
of endogenous peroxidase activity for 5 minutes with 3%
H2O2 in PBS. Next, sections were incubated with a specific
antibody anti-VEGFR-2 (#2479, Cell Signaling), diluted
in blocking buffer (5% Goat serum in Tris buffered-saline
with 0.05% Tween 20), overnight at 4°C in a humidified
chamber.
IHC staining for γ-H2A.X and cleaved caspase-3
was quantified as: number of positive cells (brown cells)
x 100/total number of cells, in 5 fields from two serial
sections/mouse.
The mean number of VEGFR-2 and CD31 positive
vessels per mm2 viable tumor was quantified in 24
arbitrary selected fields/tumor.
All tissue sections for immunohistochemical
analysis were scored by two independent pathologists
using light microscope and subsequently data confirmed
by computerized measurements [41].

Histology and immunohistochemistry

Statistical analysis

Tumors were harvested from mice sacrificed 4
hours after the last antibody administration. Tumor
masses were fixed 12 hours at 4°C in 10% phosphatebuffered formalin. Then, they were dehydrated in
ascending concentrations of ethanol, cleared with xylene
and paraffin embedded. Tissue blocks were cut by using
a rotary microtome into 5-μm sections and processed for
histology and immunohistochemistry (IHC). For histology,
hematoxylin/eosin staining was performed according to
standard methods. Area of tumor lesions was calculated
by AlexaSoft X-PRO software and data expressed in cm2
(40X magnification).
For immunohistochemistry, sections after
deparaffination and rehydration were treated 15 minutes
with 10 mM citrate buffer and 0.05% Tween 20 (pH
6.0) in a microwave for antigen retrieval, followed by
quenching of endogenous peroxidase activity 5 minutes
with 3% H2O2 in PBS. Sections were then incubated
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

All data were expressed as a mean of values ±
standard error (SE) or ± standard deviation (SD) and
differences between groups were analyzed using nonparametric Mann-Withney’s U test. Differences were
considered significant at p ≤ 0.05.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Barbara Leoni and Antonio Rosi for
excellent technical support.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
All authors certify that they have no competing
financial interests pertaining to any of the data or
statements given in this article.
926

Oncotarget

REFERENCES

growth factor receptor ligand production and cetuximab
response in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma cell
lines. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2012; 138:491–9.

1.	 Jemal A, Bray F, Center MM, Ferlay J, Ward E, Forman D.
Global cancer statistics. CA: A Cancer J for Clin. 2011;
61:69–90.

13.	 Verdoliva A, Bellofiore P, Rivieccio V, Catello S,
Colombo M, Albertoni C, Rosi A, Leoni B, Anastasi AM,
De Santis R. Biochemical and biological characterization of
a new oxidized avidin with enhanced tissue binding properties. J Biol Chem. 2010; 285:9090–9.

2.	 Pezzuto F, Buonaguro L, Caponigro F, Ionna F, Starita N,
Annunziata C, Buonaguro FM, Tornesello ML. Update
on Head and Neck Cancer: Current Knowledge on
Epidemiology, Risk Factors, Molecular Features and Novel
Therapies. Oncology. 2015; 89:125–136.

14.	 Thomson DJ, Ho KF, Ashcroft L, Denton K, Betts G,
Mais KL, Garcez K, Yap BK, Lee LW, Sykes AJ,
Rowbottom CG, Slevin NJ. Dose intensified hypofractionated intensity-modulated radiotherapy with synchronous
cetuximab for intermediate stage head and neck squamous
cell carcinoma. Acta Oncol. 2015; 54:88–98.

3.	 Wen Y, Grandis JR. Emerging drugs for head and neck
­cancer. Expert Opin Emerg Drugs. 2015; 20:313–329.
4.	 Strom TJ, Trotti AM, Kish J, Russell JS, Rao NG,
McCaffrey J, Padhya TA, Otto KJ, Caudell JJ. Comparison
of every 3 week cisplatin or weekly cetuximab with concurrent radiotherapy for locally advanced head and neck cancer. Oral Oncol. 2015; 51:704–8.

15.	 Shapiro LQ, Sherman EJ, Riaz N, Setton J, Koutcher L,
Zhang Z, Shi W, Fury MG, Wolden SL, Pfister DG,
Morris   L, Lee N. Efficacy of concurrent cetuximab vs.
5-fluorouracil/carboplatin or high-dose cisplatin with
intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) for locallyadvanced head and neck cancer (LAHNSCC). Oral Oncol.
2014; 50:947–55.

5.	 Numico G, Franco P, Cristofano A, Migliaccio F,
Spinazze S, Silvestris N, Cante D, Sciacero P, La Porta MR,
Girelli F, Ricardi U. Is the combination of Cetuximab with
chemo-radiotherapy regimens worthwhile in the treatment
of locally advanced head and neck cancer? A review of current evidence. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2013; 85:112–120.

16.	 Hu MH, Wang LW, Lu HJ, Chu PY, Tai SK, Lee TL,
Chen MH, Yang MH, Chang PM. Cisplatin-based
chemotherapy versus cetuximab in concurrent
­
­chemoradiotherapy for locally advanced head and neck
cancer t­reatment. Biomed Res Int. 2014; 2014:904341.

6.	 De Santis R, Rosi A, Anastasi AM, Chiapparino C,
Albertoni C, Leoni B, Pelliccia A, Santapaola D, Carollo V,
Marra E, Aurisicchio L, Arseni B, Pacello ML et al.
Efficacy of aerosol therapy of lung cancer correlates with
EGFR paralysis induced by AvidinOX-anchored biotinylated Cetuximab. Oncotarget. 2014; 5:9239–55.

17.	 Egloff AM, Lee JW, Langer CJ, Quon H, Vaezi A,
Grandis JR, Seethala RR, Wang L, Shin DM, Argiris A,
Yang D, Mehra R, Ridge JA et al. Phase II study of cetuximab in combination with cisplatin and radiation in unresectable, locally advanced head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma: Eastern cooperative oncology group trial E3303.
Clin Cancer Res. 2014; 20:5041–51.

7.	 Albertoni C, Leoni B, Rosi A, D’Alessio V, Carollo V,
Spagnoli LG, van EC, De Santis R. Radionuclide Therapy
of Unresectable Tumors with AvidinOX and (90)
Y-biotinDOTA: Tongue Cancer Paradigm. Cancer Biother
Radiopharm. 2015; 30:291–8.

18.	 Hannouf MB, Sehgal C, Cao JQ, Mocanu JD, Winquist
E, Zaric GS. Cost-effectiveness of adding cetuximab to
platinum-based chemotherapy for first-line treatment of
­recurrent or metastatic head and neck cancer. PLoS One.
2012; 7:e38557.

8.	 De Santis R, Leoni B, Rosi A, Albertoni C, Forni G,
Cojoca R, Iezzi M, Musiani P, Paganelli G, Chinol
M, Carminati P. AvidinOX for highly efficient tissue-­
pretargeted radionuclide therapy. Cancer Biother
Radiopharm. 2010; 25:143–8.

19.	 de Souza JA, de Lima LG, Cohen EE. Pharmacoeconomic
issues in head and neck oncology. Curr Opin Oncol. 2013;
25:213–7.

9.	 Nucera E, Nicoletti C, Chiapparino C, Pacello ML,
D’Alessio V, Musaro A, De Santis R. AvidinOX for tissue
targeted delivery of biotinylated cells. Int J Immunopathol
Pharmacol. 2012; 25:239–246.

20.	 Hannouf MB, Sehgal C, Cao JQ, Mocanu JD, Winquist
E, Zaric GS. Cost-effectiveness of adding cetuximab to
platinum-based chemotherapy for first-line treatment of
­recurrent or metastatic head and neck cancer. PLoS One.
2012; 7:e38557.

10.	 Urbano N, Papi S, Ginanneschi M, De Santis R, Pace S,
Lindstedt R, Ferrari L, Choi S, Paganelli G, Chinol M.
Evaluation of a new biotin-DOTA conjugate for pretargeted antibody-guided radioimmunotherapy (PAGRIT). Eur
J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2007;34: 68–77.

21.	 Dai W, Li Y, Zhou Q, Xu Z, Sun C, Tan X, Lu L.
Cetuximab inhibits oral squamous cell carcinoma invasion
and metastasis via degradation of epidermal growth factor
receptor. J Oral Pathol Med. 2014; 43:250–7.

11.	 Patel D, Lahiji A, Patel S, Franklin M, Jimenez X,
Hicklin DJ, Kang X. Monoclonal antibody cetuximab binds
to and down-regulates constitutively activated epidermal
growth factor receptor vIII on the cell surface. Anticancer
Res. 2007; 27:3355–66.

22.	 Jouan-Hureaux V, Boura C, Merlin JL, Faivre B.
Modulation of endothelial cell network formation in vitro
by molecular signaling of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) exposed to cetuximab. Microvasc Res.
2012; 83:131–7.

12.	 Oshima G, Wennerberg J, Yamatodani T, Kjellen E,
Mineta H, Johnsson A, Ekblad L. Autocrine epidermal
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

927

Oncotarget

23.	 Maseki S, Ijichi K, Nakanishi H, Hasegawa Y, Ogawa T,
Murakami S. Efficacy of gemcitabine and cetuximab combination treatment in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. Mol Clin Oncol. 2013; 1:918–24.

Therapeutic use of avidin is not hampered by antiavidin
antibodies in humans. Cancer Biother Radiopharm. 2010;
25:563–70.
33.	 Petronzelli F, Anastasi AM, Pelliccia A, Santapaola D,
Albertoni C, Rosi A, Leoni B, Ferrari LE, Paganelli G,
Gramiccioli G, Pesce D, Alfano AM, Stasi MA, De
Santis R. Preclinical pharmacology and safety of a novel
avidin derivative for tissue-targeted delivery of radiolabelled biotin. Basic Clin Pharmacol Toxicol. 2011; 109:
145–55.

24.	 Masui T, Ota I, Kanno M, Yane K, Hosoi H. Low-intensity
ultrasound enhances the anticancer activity of cetuximab in
human head and neck cancer cells. Exp Ther Med. 2013;
5:11–16.
25.	 Dittmann K, Mayer C, Rodemann HP. Inhibition of
radiation-induced EGFR nuclear import by C225
­
(Cetuximab) suppresses DNA-PK activity. Radiother
Oncol. 2005; 76:157–61.

34.	 Roskoski R, Jr. The ErbB/HER family of protein-tyrosine
kinases and cancer. Pharmacol Res. 2014; 79:34–74.

26.	 Liao HJ, Carpenter G. Cetuximab/C225-induced
­intracellular trafficking of epidermal growth factor ­receptor.
Cancer Res. 2009; 69:6179–83.

35.	 Carbognin L, Pilotto S, Milella M, Vaccaro V, Brunelli M,
Calio A, Cuppone F, Sperduti I, Giannarelli D, Chilosi M,
Bronte V, Scarpa A, Bria E, Tortora G. Differential Activity
of Nivolumab, Pembrolizumab and MPDL3280A according
to the Tumor Expression of Programmed Death-Ligand-1
(PD-L1): Sensitivity Analysis of Trials in Melanoma, Lung
and Genitourinary Cancers. PLoS One. 2015; 10:e0130142.

27.	 Brand TM, Iida M, Luthar N, Starr MM, Huppert EJ,
Wheeler DL. Nuclear EGFR as a molecular target in cancer.
Radiother Oncol. 2013; 108:370–7.
28.	 Iida M, Brand TM, Campbell DA, Li C, Wheeler DL. Yes
and Lyn play a role in nuclear translocation of the epidermal
growth factor receptor. Oncogene. 2013; 32:759–67.

36.	 Barbee MS, Ogunniyi A, Horvat TZ, Dang TO. Current
Status and Future Directions of the Immune Checkpoint
Inhibitors Ipilimumab, Pembrolizumab, and Nivolumab in
Oncology. Ann Pharmacother. 2015; 49:907–37.

29.	 Ryu SH, Lee SW, Yang YJ, Song SY, Kim JH, Choi EK,
Ahn SD. Intracytoplasmic epidermal growth factor receptor shows poor response to the cetuximab antitumor effect
in irradiated non-small cell lung cancer cell lines. Lung
Cancer. 2012; 77:482–7.

37.	 Green NM. A spectrophotometric assay for avidin and biotin based on binding of dyes by avidin. Biochem J. 1965;
94:23C–24C.

30.	 De Santis R, Albertoni C, Rosi A, Leoni B, Petronzelli F,
D’Alessio V, Nucera E, Salvatori G, Paganelli G,
Verdoliva A, Carminati P, Nuzzolo CA. OXavidin for tissue
targeting biotinylated therapeutics. J Biomed Biotechnol.
2009; 2009:921434.

38.	 Steinberg TH. Protein gel staining methods: an introduction
and overview. Methods Enzymol. 2009; 463: 541-63.

31.	 De Santis R, Anastasi AM, Pelliccia A, Rosi A,
Albertoni C, Verdoliva A, Petronzelli F, D’Alessio V,
Serani S, Nuzzolo CA. Chemical linkage to injected tissues is a distinctive property of oxidized avidin. PLoS One.
2011; 6:e21075.

40.	 Kilkenny C, Browne WJ, Cuthill IC, Emerson M,
Altman  DG. Improving bioscience research reporting:
the ARRIVE guidelines for reporting animal research.
Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2012; 20:256–60.

39.	 Friedman DB, Hoving S, Westermeier R. Isoelectric focusing and two-dimensional gel electrophoresis. Methods
Enzymol. 2009; 463:515–40.

41.	 Schneider CA, Rasband WS, Eliceiri KW. NIH Image to
Image J: 25 years of image analysis. Nat Methods. 2012;
9:671–5.

32.	 Petronzelli F, Pelliccia A, Anastasi AM, Lindstedt R,
Manganello S, Ferrari LE, Albertoni C, Leoni B, Rosi A,
D’Alessio V, Deiana K, Paganelli G, De Santis R.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

928

Oncotarget

