1641

COMMENTARY

Getting to Personalized Cancer
Medicine
Taking Out the Garbage
Carolyn Compton,

MD, PhD

1,2

1
Office of Biorepositories and Biospecimen Research, National Cancer Institute,
Bethesda, Maryland.
2

Office of Technology and Industrial Relations, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland.

T

Address for reprints: Carolyn Compton, MD, PhD,
Director, Office of Biorepositories and Biospecimen Research, Acting Director, Office of Technology and Industrial Relations, National Cancer
Institute, Room 10A31, 31 Center Dr., Bethesda,
MD 20892-2580; E-mail: comptcar@mail.nih.gov
Received April 2, 2007; accepted April 4, 2007.

ª 2007 American Cancer Society

he vision of personalized medicine is a compelling one for the
future of medical care in general and cancer care in specific.
It foresees the use of molecular data to better classify disease,
facilitate the development and validation of new targeted therapies, treat patients with more specificity and efficacy but fewer
adverse events, and more accurately determine disease predisposition. This vision drives most of the major strategic initiatives of
the National Institutes of Health and the National Cancer Institute
(NCI), and it is the principle behind recently drafted congressional bills such as the ‘‘Genomics and Personalized Medicine Act
of 2007.’’
An issue that is intuitively obvious but rarely emphasized is that
biospecimens of high quality are the sine qua non of personalized
medicine. The molecular data that are the envisioned basis for personalized medicine must be derived from cells and tissues because,
quite simply, that is where the molecules reside. Biospecimens such
as cells, tissue, blood, and plasma are common requirements for
patient management in current, standard-of-care medical practice.
In cancer medicine they are the gold standard of diagnosis, staging,
and prognostic/predictive factor analysis. In a world of personalized
medicine, however, biospecimens will take center stage as the critical link between the clinic and the patient. To realize the vision of
personalized medicine, patient- and disease-specific molecular data
must be derived from biological specimens in an accurate and reproducible manner. This in turn requires that the biospecimens
themselves be annotated, collected, processed, and, if necessary,
stored and/or distributed according to standards that safeguard
their quality. Otherwise, on either an individual patient or a medical
enterprise level, the vision is reduced to the well-known aphorism
of ‘‘garbage in, garbage out.’’
The reality of personalized medicine is on the horizon. The
first steps have been taken in the evolution of tumor classification,
disease prognosis, molecularly targeted treatment, and response to
therapy based on molecular features. These represent some of the
most important advances in cancer medicine over the past decade,
but their development has been utterly dependent on the availabil-

DOI 10.1002/cncr.22966
Published online 30 August 2007 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

1642

CANCER

October 15, 2007 / Volume 110 / Number 8

ity of high-quality biospecimens. High-profile examples are described below.
 Investigators using tumor specimens from the NCI
Cooperative Breast Cancer Tissue Resource
showed that the HER-2/neu receptor is amplified
in 20% to 30% of breast cancer cases. An antibody
developed to this receptor (trastuzumab [Herceptin]) was found to be effective against breast
cancers with HER-2/neu overexpression and is
now standard of care for such tumors.
 Imatinib mesylate (Gleevec) is a drug originally
developed for the treatment of chronic myelogenous leukemia by targeting the BCR-ABL protein.
After conducting molecular profiling studies on
biospecimens collected from different tumor
types, investigators found that a mutant form of
KIT, a protein related to BCR-ABL, is responsible
for the progression of gastrointestinal stromal
tumors (GISTs). This led to the hypothesis that
imatinib could be used to treat GISTs, and subsequent clinical trials confirmed that the drug has
unprecedented effectiveness in this disease.
 Gefitinib (Iressa), an anticancer drug that has
been on the market for several years, was
designed to target the epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) thought to contribute to lung
cancer. Although the drug was approved by the
US Food and Drug Administration, only about
10% of lung cancer patients typically responded
to gefitinib. Using samples of tumor tissue from
strong responders, it was found that these cancers carried specific EGFR mutations and that
this genetic marker could be used to predict gefitinib responsiveness.
Advanced technologies for molecular analysis are
now exquisitely sensitive and specific, and many
have the capacity for high throughput. Thus, the
capacity for performing the type and amount of molecular profiling needed for personalized medicine is
within reach. However, great strides in the development of molecular analysis technology have significantly raised the bar for molecular analyte quality
and standardization. For example, powerful technologies that can detect the difference in the phosphorylation state of a single protein in a biologic sample
demand increased rigor in biospecimen acquisition
and handling to achieve reproducible results. Even if
the analysis method were faultless, false results could
be produced by poor quality samples. The source of
confounding variation would be the analyte itself,
with error introduced upfront during specimen processing.

The usefulness of biospecimens for the types of
translational research needed to move medicine into
the personalized era is limited by variation in the
ways biospecimens are annotated with clinical data
and consented for scientific use. Even biospecimens
of the highest physical quality will be of little or no
use in translational research if they lack high-quality
clinical data or are not properly consented. The
question looms as to whether or not enough biospecimens of sufficient quality currently exist to support
the research needed to drive the development of personalized medicine, and if not, what is being done
to address this problem.
Biospecimen collections have been stored by
individual laboratories, private companies, community hospitals, academic medical centers, and government institutions for various objectives since the
mid-19th century. According to an authoritative analysis
published by RAND Corporation in 1999, there are
over 300 million biospecimens stored in hundreds of
biorepositories across the US.1 That number is likely
far greater today. However, the full potential of these
repositories as scientific resources has never been
realized because the biorepositories employ widely
varying procedures for quality control, storage, annotation, and patient consent. This variation makes
it difficult, or even impossible, for the research community to compare and validate results derived from
the use of these biospecimens.
The variation in biospecimen quality is especially
problematic for genomic and proteomic analysis
technologies given their extraordinary sensitivity.
Thus, despite the large numbers of biospecimens
banked across the country, insufficient numbers of
high-quality samples presently exist to support major
scientific initiatives using these technologies. One
example of this dilemma is The Cancer Genome
Atlas (TCGA) pilot project. TCGA is a recently
launched, large-scale team science initiative jointly
sponsored by the NCI and the National Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI). The pilot aims to
perform broad genomic analysis of 3 cancer types
using a combination of major technology platforms,
including large-scale gene sequencing, in a coordinated fashion. The data from TCGA will be made
publicly available for all researchers to use in developing new diagnostic, therapeutic, and preventative
strategies for cancer. If the pilot phase is successful,
it is envisioned that TCGA will be expanded to
include all major cancer types. Initial preparation for
TCGA included intensive efforts to locate specimen
collections that met the technical demands of the
analysis platforms to be used, but only a small number of qualifying specimen collections ultimately

Biospecimens and Personalized Medicine/Compton

could be identified. Among them, no single repository had sufficient numbers of samples of any given
tumor type to service the entire project. For the NCI
and NHGRI, this experience has underscored the
pressing need for biospecimens that meet the quality
requirements of sophisticated molecular technologies
that, in turn, enable transformative research initiatives like TCGA.
The associated clinical data obtained from medical records must be accurate, complete, and standardized across biospecimen collections to facilitate
studies that link molecular profiles to patterns of disease progression and outcome. The integrity and
quality of biospecimen materials and data are
becoming increasingly important as the research
community sets its sights on answering the bigger
questions in cancer with larger, population-scale
studies.
Both within the US and internationally, there are
a number of ongoing efforts to create large-scale
resources in which biospecimens are collected,
stored and distributed under a new system of standards, quality control, data sharing, and access. These
efforts include:
 The United Kingdom (UK) National Cancer Tissue
Resource, which comprises a large-scale network
of acquisition and processing centers for tumor
biospecimens.
 The UK Biobank, which is recruiting up to half a million participants between the ages of 45 and 69 to
contribute blood samples, lifestyle details, and medical histories to create a large biospecimen resource
for epidemiological studies.
 Biobank Japan, which is creating a large-scale
DNA repository, with blood samples and associated clinical information from over 300,000 individuals.
 Kaiser Permanente, which has launched a largescale campaign among more than 2 million subscribers with the goal of soliciting 500,000 volunteers to provide blood or saliva specimens for
genetic analysis to study how lifestyle, environmental factors, and genes interact to contribute to
diseases such diabetes, asthma, and cancer.
 The US. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), which
has launched a pilot project to gather 100,000

1643

biospecimens with the aim of linking certain diseases to the genetic makeup of the biospecimen
donors. Due to its large size and well-established
electronic health record system, the VA is well
positioned to successfully expand this effort.
Key to increased patient participation in building
these and other large-scale biospecimen collections
will be the implementation of guarantees of medical
record privacy, legislation and enforcement of protections against genetic discrimination, and the creation of very clear informed consent guidelines for the
use of biospecimens and their data.
The NCI has recently led several efforts to establish best practices for biospecimen resources that
will help to ensure that quality standards for the
research needed to further personalized medicine are
recognized and implemented throughout the
research enterprise, thereby furthering personalized
medicine. These include the establishment of the
NCI Office of Biorepositories and Biospecimen
Research; the development of the National Biospecimen Network Blueprint (providing a framework of
recommendations for standardized informed consent, privacy of Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act-protected patient information,
biorepository operating procedures, researcher access
to biospecimens, and quality control for data and
specimens); hosting of the first International Summit
on Harmonization of Biorepositories; and issuance of
the Draft First-Generation Guidelines for NCI-supported Biorepositories, now revised in accordance
with public comment and renamed NCI Best Practices for Biospecimen Resources. While large biorepositories are clearly increasing in number and
incorporating standardized procedures for biospecimen and data handling, much work remains to be
done to achieve the vision of national and/or global
resources that can support the scale and precision of
molecular analyses needed to accelerate progress toward personalized medicine.

REFERENCE
1. Eisenman E, Haga SB. Handbook of Human Tissue Sources.
A National Resource of Human Tissue Samples. Washington,
DC: Rand; 1999.

