HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Author Manuscript

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 May 16.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. ; 476(7360): 346–350. doi:10.1038/nature10350.

Functional genomics reveals serine synthesis is essential in
PHGDH-amplified breast cancer

Author Manuscript

Richard Possemato1,2,3,4, Kevin M. Marks5, Yoav D. Shaul1,2,3,4, Michael E. Pacold1,2,3,4,8,
Dohoon Kim1,2,3,4, Kivanç Birsoy1,2,3,4, Shalini Sethumadhavan5, Hin-Koon Woo5, Hyun G.
Jang5, Abhishek K. Jha5, Walter W. Chen1,2,3,4, Francesca G. Barrett1, Nicolas Stransky3,
Zhi-Yang Tsun1,2,3,4, Glenn S. Cowley3, Jordi Barretina3,7, Nada Y. Kalaany1,2,3,4, Peggy P.
Hsu1,2,3,4, Kathleen Ottina1,2,3,4, Albert M. Chan1,2,3,4, Bingbing Yuan1, Levi A. Garraway3,7,
David E. Root3, Mari Mino-Kenudson6, Elena F. Brachtel6, Edward M. Driggers5, and David
M. Sabatini1,2,3,4
1Whitehead

Institute for Biomedical Research, Nine Cambridge Center, Cambridge, MA 02142,

USA
2Howard

Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA

3Broad

Institute of Harvard and MIT, Seven Cambridge Center, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA

4The

David H. Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research at MIT, 77 Massachusetts Avenue,
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA

Author Manuscript

5Agios

Pharmaceuticals, 38 Sidney Street, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA

6Department

of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, 55 Fruit
Street, Boston, MA 02114

7Department

of Medical Oncology and Center for Cancer Genome Discovery, Dana-Farber
Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical School, 44 Binney Street, Boston, MA 02115, USA

8Harvard

Radiation Oncology Program, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 75 Francis Street,
Boston, MA 02114, USA

Abstract

Author Manuscript

Users may view, print, copy, download and text and data- mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research,
subject always to the full Conditions of use: http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to D.M.S. (sabatini@wi.mit.edu).
Supplementary Information is linked to the online version of the paper at www.nature.com/nature.
Author Contributions R.L.P. and D.M.S. conceived the project and designed the experiments. R.L.P performed the screening,
knockdown, cell proliferation and tumour formation experiments. K.B., Y.D.S., F.G.B., M.E.P., P.P.S., K.O., Z-Y.T., N.Y.K. and
W.W.C assisted with experiments. E.F.B. collected breast cancer patient samples and scored PHGDH IHC. D.K. performed and M.MK. assisted with interpretation of PHGDH IHC. K.M., S.S., H-K.W., A.K.J. and E.D. performed metabolite profiling and flux
experiments. N.S., J.B. and L.A.G. assisted with amplification data. G.S.C and D.E.R. assisted with screening technology. B.Y. and
A.M.C. provided bioinformatic support. R.L.P wrote and D.M.S. edited the manuscript.
Author Information Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints. The authors declare competing
financial interests: details accompany the full-text HTML version of the paper at www.nature.com/nature.

Possemato et al.

Page 2

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Cancer cells adapt their metabolic processes to drive macromolecular biosynthesis for rapid cell
growth and proliferation (1,2). RNAi-based loss of function screening has proven powerful for the
identification of novel and interesting cancer targets, and recent studies have used this technology
in vivo to identify novel tumor suppressor genes (3). Here, we developed a method for identifying
novel cancer targets via negative selection RNAi screening in solid tumours. Using this method,
we screened a set of metabolic genes associated with aggressive breast cancer and stemness to
identify those required for in vivo tumourigenesis. Among the genes identified, phosphoglycerate
dehydrogenase (PHGDH) is in a genomic region of recurrent copy number gain in breast cancer
and PHGDH protein levels are elevated in 70% of ER-negative breast cancers. PHGDH catalyzes
the first step in the serine biosynthesis pathway, and breast cancer cells with high PHGDH
expression have elevations in serine synthesis flux. Suppression of PHGDH in cell lines with
elevated PHGDH expression, but not those without, causes a strong decrease in cell proliferation
and a reduction in serine synthesis. We find that PHGDH suppression does not affect intracellular
serine levels, but causes a drop in the levels of alpha-ketoglutarate, another output of the pathway
and a TCA cycle intermediate. In cells with high PHGDH expression, the serine synthesis
pathway contributes approximately 50% of the total anaplerotic flux of glutamine into the TCA
cycle. These results reveal that certain breast cancers are dependent upon increased serine pathway
flux caused by PHGDH over-expression and demonstrate the utility of in vivo negative selection
RNAi screens for finding potential anticancer targets.

Author Manuscript

As a starting point for identifying metabolic genes required for tumourigenesis, we crossreferenced maps of metabolic pathways with the KEGG database to compile a
comprehensive list of 2,752 genes encoding all known human metabolic enzymes and
transporters (Supplementary Table 1). Public oncogenomic data were analyzed to score
genes based on three properties: (i) higher expression in tumours versus normal tissues, (ii)
high expression in aggressive breast cancer, or (iii) association with the stem cell state (Fig.
1a). Genes scoring in two of these three categories as well as those at the top of each
category were selected to define a high priority set of 133 metabolic enzyme and transporter
genes (Supplementary Table 2). We assembled lentiviral shRNA vectors targeting these
genes (median 5 shRNAs per gene) and used them to generate two libraries of shRNAexpressing lentiviruses, one containing 235 distinct shRNAs (targeting transporters and
control genes) and the other 516 distinct shRNAs (targeting metabolic enzymes and control
genes) (4).

Author Manuscript

To identify genes that may be essential for tumourigenesis, the libraries were screened for
shRNAs that become depleted during breast tumour formation in mice. Human
MCF10DCIS.COM cells (5) were chosen for the screens because, of several breast cancer
lines examined, these were capable of forming tumours upon injection of the fewest number
of cells. 1.5 million MCF10DCIS.COM cells were infected with each library so that each
cell carried one viral integrant, and ~500–1000 cells per shRNA (100,000–1 million cells
total) were injected into mouse mammary fat pads at two sites per animal (Supplementary
Discussion). Twenty-eight days later orthotopic tumours were harvested and massively
parallel DNA sequencing was used to determine the abundance of each shRNA in genomic
DNA from tumours and initially injected cells (Fig. 1b). shRNA abundances correlated well
between replicate tumours (Fig. 1c) and 5 or 12 tumours per library were analyzed to

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 May 16.

Possemato et al.

Page 3

Author Manuscript

identify shRNAs that became significantly depleted during tumour formation. Sixteen genes
were designated hits in the screen, with at least 75% of the shRNAs targeting these genes
scoring (Fig. 1d and Supplementary Table 3).

Author Manuscript

Several genes previously shown to have important roles in cancer emerged as hits, including
the mitochondrial ATP transporter VDAC1; the lactic acid transporter SLC16A3; and the
nucleotide synthesis genes GMPS and CTPS. The hit list also includes genes involved in the
control of oxidative stress (SOD2, GLS2, SEPHS1), the pentose phosphate pathway
(TALDO1) glycolysis (GAPDH, TPI1), and in the proline (PYCR1) and serine (PHGDH)
biosynthetic pathways. An analogous pooled screen carried out in MCF10DCIS.com cells
grown in culture rather than in tumor xenografts revealed that of 20 genes that scored in the
in vitro screen, 10 also scored in the in vivo screen (Supplementary Fig. 2a, Supplementary
Table 3 and Supplementary Discussion). Interestingly, AK2, which encodes an adenylate
kinase that generates ADP from ATP and AMP, was required for in vitro but not in vivo
growth (Supplementary Fig. 2b).

Author Manuscript

For five hit genes (PHGDH, GMPS, SLC16A3, PYCR1, and VDAC1), two scoring shRNAs
were tested for their effects on tumour formation. Each of these shRNAs suppressed
expression of their targets in MCF10DCIS.com cells and reduced tumor forming capacity.
(Fig. 1e, Supplementary Fig. 2c). For reasons discussed below, PHGDH was of particular
interest, and the three shRNAs that scored in the in vivo screen also decreased PHGDH
protein expression and two shRNAs of differing knockdown efficacies inhibited tumour
growth consistent with their capacity to suppress PHGDH expression (Fig. 1e). Moreover,
tumours derived from cells that in culture had confirmed reductions in PHGDH levels had,
in immunohistochemical (Supplementary Fig. 3a) and immunoblotting assays
(Supplementary Fig. 3b), PHGDH staining or levels similar to control tumours, suggesting
that tumourigenesis selected for cells that lost shRNA-mediated PHGDH suppression.
To prioritize genes for follow up studies we consulted a recently available analysis of copy
number alteration across cancer genomes (6). Indeed, PHGDH exists in a region of
chromosome 1p commonly amplified in breast cancer and melanoma (Fig. 2a), as well as in
several other cancer types (not shown). In total, 18% of patient derived breast cancer cell
lines and 6% of primary tumours have amplifications in PHGDH. In the datasets examined,
none of the other hit genes are in genomic regions of focal and recurrent copy number gain.

Author Manuscript

Our meta analysis for genes associated with aggressive breast cancer is corroborated by a
previous study which found elevated PHGDH mRNA levels in breast cancers that are ERnegative, of the basal type, and associated with poor 5-year survival (7). We confirmed these
associations in distinct gene expression datasets (Fig. 2b) and additionally found that
PHGDH is elevated in ER-negative breast cancer relative to normal breast tissue (Fig. 2b).
Of all the genes identified as hits in our screen, PHGDH has the most significantly elevated
expression in ER-negative breast cancer (Supplementary Fig. 4). Moreover, by analyzing 82
human breast tumour samples with an immunohistochemical assay for PHGDH, we found
that PHGDH protein levels correlate significantly with ER-negative status (Fig. 2c). In total,
compared to ER-positive breast tumours, ~68% and ~70% of ER-negative breast tumours
have elevations of PHGDH at the mRNA and protein levels, respectively (Fig. 2b, 2c and

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 May 16.

Possemato et al.

Page 4

Author Manuscript

Supplementary Methods). ER-negative breast cancer comprises approximately 20–25% of
all breast cancer cases, but as many as 50% of all breast cancer deaths within 5 years of
diagnosis (8), underscoring the importance of identifying additional drug targets for this
class of breast cancer.

Author Manuscript

Across a set of breast cancer lines, four lines with PHGDH amplifications had 8–12 fold
higher PHGDH protein expression compared to non-transformed MCF10A and ER-positive
MCF7 cell lines, which do not have PHGDH amplifications (Fig. 2d). Mechanisms other
than gene copy number increases must also exist for boosting PHGDH expression because
PHGDH protein levels were also elevated in two ER-negative cell lines (MT3, Hs578T)
lacking the PHGDH amplification (Fig. 2e). This is consistent with the finding that PHGDH
expression is upregulated at the mRNA and protein level in a higher fraction of ER-negative
breast cancers than the fraction exhibiting amplification at the DNA level. Interestingly,
PHGDH is also expressed 4-fold more in the MCF10DCIS.COM cells used in the in vivo
screen than in two parental lines (MCF-10A; MCF10AT) that exhibit no or lower
tumourigenicity (9) (Fig. 2f).

Author Manuscript

PHGDH encodes 3-phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase, the first enzyme branching from
glycolysis in the three-step serine biosynthetic pathway (10) (Fig. 3a). PHGDH uses NAD as
a cofactor to oxidize the glycolytic intermediate 3-phosphoglycerate into phosphohydroxypyruvate (11, 12), which subsequent enzymes in the pathway convert into serine via
transamination (PSAT1) and phosphate ester hydrolysis (PSPH) reactions (10) (Fig. 3a).
Serine is essential for synthesis of proteins and other biomolecules needed for cell
proliferation, including nucleotides, phosphatidyl-serine, and sphingosine (Supplementary
Fig. 1). Classic studies show elevated serine biosynthetic activity, as determined by enzyme
assays, in rat tumour lysates (10, 13), and suggest that PSPH is the rate-limiting enzyme of
this pathway in the liver (14). Interestingly, we find that numerous genes that are expected to
promote serine biosynthesis or are involved in the subsequent metabolism of serine for
biosynthesis are elevated in ER-negative breast cancer (Supplementary Fig. 5),
demonstrating that PHGDH elevation occurs in the context of upregulation of a broader
pathway.

Author Manuscript

To understand the metabolic consequences of increased PHGDH expression we used
metabolite profiling and serine synthesis pathway flux analysis to examine breast cancer
cells with and without PHGDH amplifications. We found that cells with PHGDH
amplifications (BT-20, MDA-MB-468, HCC70), had elevated flux through the serine
synthesis pathway compared to those without PHGDH amplifications (MDA-MB-231,
MCF7 and MCFC10A) (Fig. 3b and Supplementary Fig 6a). Cells with elevated PHGDH
and high pathway flux were capable of robust proliferation in medium lacking serine, while
in cells with low levels of PHGDH, the deprivation of serine caused a significant blunting or
even cessation of proliferation (Supplementary Fig. 6b).
PHGDH is required for the increased serine pathway flux of cells with elevated PHGDH
because RNAi-mediated PHGDH suppression significantly reduced flux in MDA-MB-468
and BT-20 cells (Fig. 3c). Conversely, in MCF-10A human mammary cells engineered to
overexpress PHGDH, serine pathway flux increased to levels similar to those in MDA-

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 May 16.

Possemato et al.

Page 5

Author Manuscript

MB-468, BT-20, and HCC70 cells (Fig. 3d). Furthermore, MCF-10A cells overexpressing
PHGDH had increased proliferation in the absence of serine, indicating that PHGDH
overexpression is sufficient to drive flux through the pathway (Supplementary Fig. 6c).
Interestingly, overexpression of PSPH, considered the rate-limiting serine biosynthetic
enzyme in the liver, did not increase pathway flux in MCF-10A cells (Fig. 3d). The
observations that PSPH is rate limiting in the liver while PHGDH is rate limiting in
MCF10A cells can be reconciled by the observation that serine levels in the liver (2 mM) are
well above the concentration at which PSPH is feedback inhibited by serine (500 µM), but
low in cell lines in culture (~100 µM), a concentration at which PSPH should be active 14.
These data demonstrate that PHGDH is a key enzyme controlling flux through the serine
biosynthetic pathway in cancer cells.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

We next asked if cells with an increase in PHGDH expression require it for cell proliferation
and survival. In cell lines with elevated PHGDH expression (BT-20, MDA-MB-468,
HCC70, Hs578T and MT3), but not without (MDA-MB-231, MCF-7), RNAi-mediated
suppression of PHGDH caused a dramatic decrease in cell number (Fig. 3e–f,
Supplementary Fig. 6d) and cell death (Fig. 3g and Supplementary Fig. 6e) in the absence of
apoptotic markers (Supplementary Fig. 6f). This sensitivity to PHGDH suppression was
observed both in cells with PHGDH amplifications (BT-20, MDA-MB-468, HCC70) and in
those with high PHGDH expression but lacking the amplifications (MT3, Hs578T).
Consistent with flux through the serine synthesis pathway being important in cells with high
PHGDH expression, suppression of the other two enzymes in the pathway (PSAT1 and
PSPH) inhibited the proliferation of MDA-MB-468 and BT-20, but not MCF7, cells
(Supplementary Fig. 6g). Moreover, inhibition of PSPH inhibited tumour formation by
MCF10DCIS.com cells (Supplementary Fig. 6h). Therefore, elevated PHGDH expression
defines a set of breast cancer cell lines with increased serine pathway flux that are dependent
upon PHGDH, PSAT1, and PSPH for proliferation. This finding suggests that many ERnegative breast cancers that express PHGDH at high levels (~70% of all ER-negative
disease in our dataset, Fig. 2c) may be sensitive to inhibitors of the serine synthesis pathway.

Author Manuscript

To investigate whether PHGDH suppression can affect the growth of established tumours,
we generated an inducible shRNA (15) that, upon doxycycline treatment, reduced PHGDH
protein levels in MDA-MB-468 cells (Fig. 3h). MDA-MB-468 cells transduced with this
shRNA were allowed to form murine mammary fat pad tumors for 25 days before
introduction of doxycycline in a subset of mice (Fig. 3h). Compared to control mice, those
given doxycycline exhibited substantially reduced tumour growth, while tumours made from
cells transduced with a control inducible shRNA grew equally well in the presence or
absence of doxycycline (Fig. 3h). These results indicate that PHGDH suppression can
adversely affect growth in existing tumours (Supplementary Discussion).
Serine is a central metabolite for biosynthetic reactions, and we find that overexpression of
PHGDH contributes significantly to biosynthetic flux to serine. However, PHGDH
suppression inhibited proliferation even in cells growing in media containing normal levels
of extracellular serine (Fig. 3f), and supplementation with additional serine or a cellpermeable methyl-serine-ester did not blunt the effects of the PHGDH knockdown (Fig. 4a,
4b). Intracellular and extracellular serine are in equilibrium (Supplementary Fig. 7a), and

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 May 16.

Possemato et al.

Page 6

Author Manuscript

import of extracellular serine was not defective in the cell lines studied (Supplementary Fig.
7b). These findings suggest that serine production may not be the only important role of
PHGDH in cell lines with high PHGDH expression. We considered three hypotheses to
explain our observations: (1) serine produced via the PHGDH pathway is utilized in a
different manner than exogenous serine, (2) suppression of PHGDH adversely affects
glycolysis, or (3) the PHGDH, PSAT1 and PSPH reactions produce metabolites besides
serine that are also critical for cell proliferation. The first hypothesis was deemed unlikely
because serine synthesized intracellularly is in equilibrium with extracellular serine
(Supplementary Fig. 7a). The second hypothesis was also unlikely because PHGDH
suppression did not affect glucose uptake or lactate production (Supplementary Fig. 7c).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

To pursue the third hypothesis, we considered which additional metabolites the serine
synthesis pathway might produce in significant levels in cells with high PHGDH expression.
The serine pathway produces equimolar amounts of serine and alpha-ketoglutarate (aKG,
Supplementary Fig. 1). Proliferating cells utilize intermediates of the citric acid (TCA)
cycle, such as aKG, as biosynthetic precursors, and upregulate anaplerotic reactions that
drive glutamine derived carbon into the TCA cycle, counterbalancing biosynthetic efflux
(16, Supplementary Discussion). We hypothesized that in cells with high PHGDH
expression, the PSAT1 reaction might contribute a significant fraction of glutamate to aKG
flux. If true, the serine biosynthesis pathway would play an important role in TCA
anaplerosis of glutamine-derived carbon. Consistent with this possibility, suppression of
PHGDH in MDA-MB-468 cells caused a large reduction in the levels of aKG (Fig. 4c,
Supplementary Fig. 7d). In fact, of the major metabolites measured, aKG was the one with
the most significant and largest change upon PHGDH suppression, whereas serine levels
were not significantly changed (Supplementary Fig. 8). PHGDH suppression also caused a
significant reduction in other TCA components (Fig. 4d, Supplementary Fig. 8). Like
suppression of PHGDH, suppression of PSAT1 also caused a significant reduction in serine
pathway flux and aKG levels (Fig. 4c, Supplementary Fig. 7d–e). Furthermore, labeling
studies using U-C13-glutamine revealed that the absolute flux from glutamine to aKG and
other TCA intermediates was significantly reduced in cells with RNAi-mediated suppression
of PHGDH or PSAT1 (Fig. 4e, Supplementary Fig. 9a–b). These data indicate that in cell
lines with high PHGDH expression, the serine synthesis pathway is responsible for
approximately 50% of the net conversion of glutamate to aKG and that suppression of
PHGDH results in a significant loss of TCA intermediate flux and steady state levels of
TCA intermediates (Fig. 4f, Supplementary Fig. 9a–b). Furthermore, labeling studies using
U-13C-glucose in cell lines with PHGDH amplification (MDA-MB-468) and without
(MDA-MB-231) revealed that in cells with high PHGDH expression, flux through the serine
biosynthesis pathway shunts 8–9% of the glycolytic flux towards serine production,
compared to 1–2% in the cell line with low PHGDH expression (Fig. 4f and Supplementary
Fig. 9a). Therefore, increased flux through the serine biosynthesis pathway has a major
impact on aKG production, but a smaller effect on glycolysis or serine availability in these
cells (Supplementary Discussion). In contrast, another prominent aKG-producing
transaminase, alanine aminotransferase, does not contribute significantly to aKG production
in PHGDH-amplified cells (Supplementary Fig. 10).

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 May 16.

Possemato et al.

Page 7

Author Manuscript

We find that PHGDH expression is a critical part of a cellular program promoting serine
pathway flux (Supplementary Fig. 5) and is responsible for a considerable portion of
anaplerosis of glutamate into the TCA cycle as aKG (Supplementary Fig. 1). As ~70% of
ER-negative breast cancers exhibit elevated PHGDH (Fig. 2c), our work suggests that
targeting the serine synthesis pathway may be therapeutically valuable in breast cancers with
elevated PHGDH expression or PHGDH amplifications (Supplementary Discussion). Lastly,
we anticipate that the screening approach described here may be applicable to other cancer
types or gene sets, enabling the identification of novel cancer targets directly in an in vivo
context.

Methods Summary
Author Manuscript

To undertake negative selection RNAi screening in solid tumours, pools of
MCF10DCIS.com cells expressing an shRNA library were injected into the 4th mammary
fat pad of immunocompromised mice and allowed to form tumours. Abundances of shRNAs
in the tumours was determined using massively parallel sequencing and compared to shRNA
abundance in the injected cells. Genes targeted by shRNAs that were significantly depleted
during tumour growth were considered hits and prioritized by analyzing gene copy number
data from human tumours and cancer cell lines. Lentiviral shRNAs were used to suppress
PHGDH expression in breast cancer cell lines with and without PHGDH genomic
amplification. Serine synthesis pathway activity and anaplerosis were measured via flux
analyses utilizing isotopically labeled molecules.

Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.

Author Manuscript

Acknowledgements
We thank members of the Sabatini Lab, Manjae Kwon, Biao Luo, and Ferenc Reinhardt for assistance. This
research is supported by fellowships from Susan G. Komen for the Cure to R.L.P. and the Life Science Research
Foundation to Y.D.S. and grants from the Keck Foundation, the David H. Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer
Research at MIT, The Alexander and Margaret Stewart Trust Fund, and NIH Grant CA103866 to D.M.S. D.M.S. is
an investigator of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute.

References

Author Manuscript

1. Jones RG, Thompson CB. Tumor suppressors and cell metabolism: a recipe for cancer growth.
Genes Dev. 2009; 23(5):537–548. [PubMed: 19270154]
2. Hsu PP, Sabatini DM. Cancer cell metabolism: Warburg and beyond. Cell. 2008; 134(5):703–707.
[PubMed: 18775299]
3. Bric A, et al. Functional identification of tumor-suppressor genes through an in vivo RNA
interference screen in a mouse lymphoma model. Cancer Cell. 2009; 16(4):324–335. [PubMed:
19800577]
4. Moffat J, et al. A lentiviral RNAi library for human and mouse genes applied to an arrayed viral
high-content screen. Cell. 2006; 124(6):1283–1298. [PubMed: 16564017]
5. Miller FR, Santner SJ, Tait L, Dawson PJ. MCF10DCIS.com xenograft model of human comedo
ductal carcinoma in situ. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2000; 92(14):1185–1186. [PubMed: 10904098]
6. Beroukhim R, et al. The landscape of somatic copy-number alteration across human cancers.
Nature. 463(7283):899–905. [PubMed: 20164920]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 May 16.

Possemato et al.

Page 8

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

7. Pollari S, et al. Enhanced serine production by bone metastatic breast cancer cells stimulates
osteoclastogenesis. Breast Cancer Res Treat.
8. van de Vijver MJ, et al. A gene-expression signature as a predictor of survival in breast cancer. N
Engl J Med. 2002; 347(25):1999–2009. [PubMed: 12490681]
9. Miller FR, et al. Xenograft model of progressive human proliferative breast disease. J Natl Cancer
Inst. 1993; 85(21):1725–1732. [PubMed: 8411256]
10. Snell K. Enzymes of serine metabolism in normal, developing and neoplastic rat tissues. Adv
Enzyme Regul. 1984; 22:325–400. [PubMed: 6089514]
11. Achouri Y, Rider MH, Schaftingen EV, Robbi M. Cloning, sequencing and expression of rat liver
3-phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase. Biochem J. 1997; 323(Pt 2):365–370. [PubMed: 9163325]
12. Walsh DA, Sallach HJ. Purification and properties of chicken liver D-3-phosphoglycerate
dehydrogenase. Biochemistry. 1965; 4(6):1076–1085. [PubMed: 4378782]
13. Knox WE, Herzfeld A, Hudson J. Phosphoserine phosphatase distribution in normal and neoplastic
rat tissues. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1969; 132(2):397–403. [PubMed: 4307821]
14. Lund K, Merrill DK, Guynn RW. The reactions of the phosphorylated pathway of L-serine
biosynthesis: thermodynamic relationships in rabbit liver in vivo. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1985;
237(1):186–196. [PubMed: 2982327]
15. Wiederschain D, et al. Single-vector inducible lentiviral RNAi system for oncology target
validation. Cell Cycle. 2009; 8(3):498–504. [PubMed: 19177017]
16. DeBerardinis RJ, et al. Beyond aerobic glycolysis: transformed cells can engage in glutamine
metabolism that exceeds the requirement for protein and nucleotide synthesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A. 2007; 104(49):19345–19350. [PubMed: 18032601]

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 May 16.

Possemato et al.

Page 9

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 1. Outline of in vivo pooled screening strategy identifying PHGDH as essential for
tumourigenesis

a, Venn Diagram outlining meta-analysis. b, Outline of experimental design. c, Log2 fold
change in shRNAs abundance of experimental (blue) or neutral shRNAs (red) for a single
tumour (X-axis) compared to an average of eleven tumours (Y-axis). d, Genes scoring in
vivo. e, Average weight of tumours from MCF10DCIS.com cells expressing shRNAs
targeting PHGDH (PHGDH_1, PHGDH_2 and PHGDH_3) or control (GFP) and protein

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 May 16.

Possemato et al.

Page 10

Author Manuscript

expression of PHGDH or RPS6 (S6). Error bars are SEM (n=4). Asterisks indicate
probability value (p) < 0.05. ND = Not Done.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 May 16.

Possemato et al.

Page 11

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 2. Genomic amplifications of PHGDH in cancer and association of PHGDH expression
with aggressive breast cancer markers

Author Manuscript

a, PHGDH vicinity copy number (CN) data for melanoma (left, n=111) and breast cancer
(BC, right, n=243) samples. Coloured bar indicates degree of CN loss (blue) or gain (red).
Samples sorted by CN at PHGDH locus (dotted lines). Graphs at left of CN data shows
amplification significance (−log10(q-value), ~0.60 is the significance threshold for
amplification). b, Representative PHGDH gene expression data for indicated BC groups.
Whiskers indicate 91st and 9th percentile. c, Table reports numbers of human BC samples
with “weak”, “moderate”, or “strong” PHGDH staining from BC subgroups indicated.
Representative staining intensities shown in images. Asterisk indicates p<0.0001 comparing
ER-positive versus ER-negative classes (Fisher’s exact test). d–f, PHGDH protein levels are
shown for (d) PHGDH amplified versus non-amplified (annotated with “+” or “−“), (e)
PHGDH non-amplified, over-expressing, and (f) MCF10A derived cell lines. Values below
PHGDH immunoblots are normalized immunoflourescent quantification (LI-COR) of
PHGDH levels relative to actin control and MCF10A and MCF7.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 May 16.

Possemato et al.

Page 12

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 3. Cell lines with elevated PHGDH expression have increased serine biosynthetic pathway
activity and are sensitive to PHGDH suppression

Author Manuscript

a, Serine biosynthesis pathway (SBP). b–d, Serine production by SBP in (b) indicated breast
cell lines, (c) after PHGDH suppression by siRNA, and (d) MCF-10A cells expressing
PHGDH or PSPH cDNAs with associated immunoblots. e–f, Immunoblots of indicated
proteins (e) for indicated cell lines expressing control shRNA (GFP) or shRNAs against
PHGDH (PHGDH_1 and PHGDH_2). Relative proliferation (f) of cells transduced with
shRNA constructs after seven days. g, Images showing cellular morphology of MDAMB-468 at day seven of (f). h, Tumour growth of MDA-MB-468 cells expressing
doxycycline inducible control shRNA (GFP) or shRNA against PHGDH (shPHGDH_2) in
mice fed doxycycline (Dox, 2mg/kg, green lines, n=5) or normal (blue lines, n=4) diet after
initial tumour palpation (Day 0). Immunoblots of PHGDH or RPS6 (S6) shown for cells in
vitro. Asterisks indicate p < 0.05 relative to control. Error bars for metabolite measurements
(n=4) and tumour size indicate SEM and for cell number indicate SD (n=3).

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 May 16.

Possemato et al.

Page 13

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 4. Suppression of PHGDH results a deficiency in anaplerosis of glutamine to alphaketoglutarate

a, Relative proliferation of cell lines indicated expressing control shRNA (GFP) or shRNAs
against PHGDH (PHGDH_1 and PHGDH_2) after seven days of growth under conditions
indicated. b, Relative proliferation of MDA-MB-231 cells under conditions indicated. c,
Intracellular alpha-ketoglutarate (aKG) four days after treatment with shRNA against
PHGDH or PSAT1 cell number normalized relative to control shRNA (GFP). d, Citric acid
cycle intermediate levels four days after treatment with shRNA against PHGDH or GFP

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 May 16.

Possemato et al.

Page 14

Author Manuscript

(n=4). Color bar shows Log2 scale. e, aKG isotopic labeling at indicated time points after
treatment with isotopically labeled glutamine four days after treatment with shRNA against
PHGDH, PSAT1 or GFP. f, Model of relative metabolite fluxes for indicated pathways.
Asterisks indicate p < 0.05 relative to control. Error bars indicate SEM (n=4).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 May 16.

