Published OnlineFirst May 17, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-0512

Cancer
Research

Meeting Report

Exploiting Tumor Vulnerabilities: Epigenetics, Cancer
Metabolism and the mTOR Pathway in the Era of
Personalized Medicine
~oz-Pinedo1, Eva Gonza
lez-Sua
rez2, Anna Portela4, Antonio Gentilella3, and Manel Esteller4,5,6
Cristina Mun

Abstract
Patient stratiﬁcation according to drug responses, together with the discovery of novel antitumor targets, is
leading to a new era of personalized cancer treatments. With the aim of identifying emerging pathways and the
challenges faced by clinicians during clinical trials, the IDIBELL Cancer Conference on Personalized Cancer
Medicine took place in Barcelona on December 3–4, 2012. This conference brought together speakers working in
different areas of cancer research (epigenetics, metabolism and the mTOR pathway, cell death and the immune
system, clinical oncology) to discuss the latest developments in personalized cancer medicine. Cancer Res; 73(14);
4185–9. 2013 AACR.

Introduction
Unresponsiveness to therapy remains a signiﬁcant problem
in cancer treatment. As part of a series of IDIBELL Cancer
Conferences, this meeting focused on emerging ﬁelds in cancer
research: epigenetic drugs, the mTOR pathway and cancer
metabolism, the tumor microenvironment, and overcoming
resistance to cancer therapeutics. Moreover, clinical researchers shared with the audience some of the challenges encountered in the implementation of clinical trials to test novel
drugs, the criteria for patient selection, and their perspectives
about how to improve personalized medicine. The conference
was organized by Manel Esteller (IDIBELL, Barcelona, Spain),
George Thomas (IDIBELL and University of Cincinnati,
Cincinnati, OH), Sara Kozma (IDIBELL), and Cristina
Mu~
noz-Pinedo (IDIBELL) and took place in the futuristic Hotel
Hesperia Tower, which served as an appropriate venue
to discuss the future of anticancer therapies.

Tumor Metabolism and the mTOR Pathway
Proliferating cells require synthesis of DNA, RNA, proteins,
and lipids at a higher rate than untransformed cells. Because
oncogenic transformation leads to "metabolic transformation,"
analysis of metabolic preferences of cancer cells may permit
Authors' Afﬁliations: 1Cell Death Regulation Group; 2Transformation and
Metastasis Group, Cancer Epigenetics and Biology Program (PEBC);
3
Metabolism and Cancer Group, IDIBELL (Bellvitge Biomedical Research
Institute), Gran Via de L'Hospitalet 199, 08908 L'Hospitalet; 4Cancer
Epigenetics and Biology Program (PEBC), Bellvitge Biomedical Research
Institute (IDIBELL); 5Department of Physiological Sciences II, School of
 Catalana de Recerca i
Medicine, University of Barcelona; and 6Institucio
Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain
Corresponding Author: Manel Esteller, IDIBELL, Hospital Duran i Reynals
3a planta, Gran Via de L'Hospitalet 199, 08908 L'Hospitalet, Barcelona,
Spain. Phone: 34-932-607-140; Fax: 34-932-607-219; E-mail:
mesteller@idibell.cat
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-0512
2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

the development of novel drugs, targeting metabolic processes
heavily relied upon by tumors, as novel anticancer agents (1).
Lipid synthesis and fatty acid usage through b-oxidation are
upregulated in many tumors, which opens the door to treatment of certain tumors with drugs that target this pathway. But
what mutations will lead to sensitivity to drugs that inhibit
lipid metabolism? Brendan Manning (Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, MA) and Arkaitz Carracedo (bioGUNE) are
trying to understand the role of speciﬁc oncogenes in the
regulation of lipid metabolism. Manning showed how the
phosphoinositide 3-kinase or RAS oncogenes promote de novo
lipid synthesis in an mTOR-dependent manner. Carracedo
discussed the role of the promyelocytic leukemia protein as
a prosurvival protein in breast cancer that promotes fatty acid
catabolism and PPAR signaling (2). Tak Mak (The Campbell
Family Institute for Breast Cancer Research, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada) presented preclinical data about the role of carnitine
palmitoyltransferase 1C, an enzyme involved in fatty acid
oxidation and normally expressed exclusively in the brain, as
a prosurvival molecule in breast cancer cells. This suggests
that drugging this enzyme with molecules that do not cross
the blood–brain barrier could be highly effective (3). Cristina
Mu~
noz-Pinedo has studied the ability of the glycolytic inhibitor
2-deoxyglucose to induce apoptosis in sarcoma. This drug is
effective in vitro against alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma (4), but
not other soft-tissue sarcomas, which are nevertheless dependent on glucose. Nucleotide biosynthesis is another pathway
usually upregulated in tumors. Drugs that inhibit this pathway,
such as methotrexate and 5-ﬂuorouracil, have been used for
decades in the clinic because tumor cells are more sensitive
to inhibition of nucleotide metabolism. Brendan Manning
reported that growth factors regulate de novo pyrimidine
synthesis through mTOR (5). The mTOR downstream effector
S6 kinase, by phosphorylating a key enzyme of the pathway,
stimulates nucleotide synthesis, thereby providing a link
between the nucleotide pool required for increased RNA and
DNA synthesis in growing cells.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

4185

Published OnlineFirst May 17, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-0512

~oz-Pinedo et al.
Mun

The kinase mTOR is a major driver of tumor metabolism and
proliferation of cancer cells, acting downstream of numerous
oncogenic pathways. Several drugs targeting the mTOR pathway are being developed and tested in the clinic. David Sabatini
(Whitehead Institute, Cambridge, MA) is trying to understand
how the mTOR pathway and its activators, the Rag GTPases,
regulate metabolism and survival. Transgenic mice with hyperactive Rag GTPases show accelerated postnatal death related
to their inability to maintain blood glucose and amino acid
levels. This effect of mTOR is related to negative regulation of
autophagy (6).
The mTOR pathway also supervises another fundamental
anabolic cellular process, ribosome biogenesis, which is also
massively elevated in proliferating cells. George Thomas
showed that lesions in ribosome biogenesis activate a cell
checkpoint controlled by p53 through a unique mechanism
involving the ribosomal proteins RPL5, RPL11, and 5S rRNA.
These studies open new avenues in understanding the etiopathology of ribosomopathies (7). Another aspect of cell
physiology that is regulated by the mTOR pathway is the
control of cell size. Jose Aramburu (Pompeu-Fabra University,
Barcelona, Spain) used a model of cellular adaptation to
osmotic stress to show that mTOR can maintain cell size and
activate adaptive genes during stress responses (8). Altogether,
these ﬁndings point out the central role of mTOR as a master
regulator of cell growth and stress responses.

Tumor Microenvironment and the Immune
System
The contribution of the tumor stroma to tumorigenesis has
gained increasing attention over the past decade. Understanding the basic players that make the stroma permissive to tumor
cells is of key importance to target metastasis pharmacologically. In a comprehensive talk, Gregg Semenza (Johns Hopkins,
Baltimore, MD), highlighted the reciprocal paracrine cross-talk
between breast cancer and mesenchymal stem cells in the
process of lymph node and lung metastasis formation (9).
Hypoxia-inducible factors (HIF) are the master regulators of
this reciprocal signaling, and drugs that target HIF, such as
digoxin or acriﬂavin, were shown to block metastatic spread,
shedding light on the importance of HIF-signaling mitigation
during breast cancer treatment.
The immune response undoubtedly affects tumor progression. However, there is increasing evidence that cells of the
immune system can be subverted and reeducated by tumors to
assist rather than destroy the tumor. In this regard, it is now
well established that persistent inﬂammation can generate a
supportive environment within tumors that can assist tumor
maintenance and tumor progression on several levels. The
plenary lecture given by Michael Karin (University of California, San Diego, San Diego, CA) and sponsored by EMBO placed
strong emphasis on the tight link between inﬂammation and
obesity, one of the most common high-risk factors of the
Western world. Hepatocellular carcinoma induced by high-fat
diet and/or by genetic background is dependent on the
production of interleukin (IL)-6/TNF and the establishment
of a feedback loop between chronic inﬂammation and the

4186

Cancer Res; 73(14) July 15, 2013

stimulation of STAT3, which drives cancer progression. In
another paradigm, a peculiar mechanism involving intestinal
microbiota was shown to initiate colorectal carcinoma. Once
penetrated in the tumor lesion, gut microbiota elicit an
inﬂammatory response mediated by IL-23/IL-17, two of the
major promoters of colorectal carcinoma. Intriguingly,
treatment with antibiotics reduces the tumor load in mice,
paving the way for a novel conceptual use of over-the-counter
drugs (10).
Although growing evidence suggests that immune responses to certain tumors can assist cancer progression in some
cases, there is also heartening evidence that immune responses to tumors can assist in tumor eradication. Moreover,
recent evidence also indicates that the immune system may
be involved in the therapeutic response to certain anticancer drugs. In this regard, Guido Kroemer (INSERM, Paris,
France) showed that drug-mediated cell death in vivo may
occur with the externalization of speciﬁc immunogenic signals, such as calreticulin, on tumor cells. The latter event
seems to promote immunogenic cell death, and is followed
by the recruitment of immune cells, which also assist in
tumor eradication. Hyperploidization is one of the triggers
of immunogenicity (11). In the same line, Jean-Ehrland Ricci
(INSERM, Nice, France) analyzed the effects of an antiglycolytic drug, 2-deoxyglucose, on the immunogenicity of cell
death induced by etoposide. Although etoposide on its own
promoted cell death in a mouse model of B-cell lymphoma,
this was greatly enhanced when used in combination with
2-deoxyglucose. Rather surprisingly, Ricci showed that 2deoxyglucose triggered immunogenicity of dying cells, with
the combination effects being more obvious in immunocompetent than in immunodeﬁcient mice (12). A lesson we
learned from these talks is that rational drug design and
screening should consider the involvement of complex
mechanisms that are not only limited to the targeted tumor
but could also harness the help of the immune system.

Novel Antitumor Therapies: Overcoming
Apoptotic Resistance
The aim of most antitumor therapies is to promote cell
death in tumor cells while sparing nontransformed cells.
However, this is a difﬁcult challenge, especially because tumors
frequently overexpress antiapoptotic proteins, such as Bcl-2
family members, or are deﬁcient in proapoptotic proteins, such
as p53. Stig Linder (Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden)
screened for drugs that kill p53-deﬁcient cells and identiﬁed a
small molecule that blocks the deubiquitinase activity of the
proteasome. This molecule, b-AP15, can bypass protection
from apoptosis exerted by Bcl-2 and is effective in a number
of animal tumor models (13). Another way to bypass apoptotic
impairment is to induce nonapoptotic cell death. Doug Green
(St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN) is studying the mechanisms of necroptosis. This form of cell death is
induced by TNF, mediated by the kinases RIPK1 and RIPK3,
and suppressed by the proapoptotic protein caspase-8 (14).
Deciphering the mechanisms by which this form of cell death
proceeds may lead to the identiﬁcation of speciﬁc activators of

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst May 17, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-0512

Meeting Report: IDIBELL—Personalized Cancer Medicine

the pathway to target tumors overexpressing antiapoptotic
proteins.

Epigenetics: A Tool for Personalized Medicine
and a Target for Novel Drugs
Epigenetic regulation of gene expression by histone modiﬁcations or DNA methylation is now well established to make
important contributions to cell differentiation and proliferative states. Disruption of the epigenetic landscape in cancer is
a well-known phenomenon. In recent years, it has been shown
that numerous compounds that inhibit components of the
epigenetic machineries are effective against cancer cells. On
the other hand, candidate gene approaches to identify the
epigenetic alterations present in cancer have recently been
complemented by new whole-genome technologies, which are
bringing forward the idea to use epigenetic marks as biomarkers to personalize cancer treatment (15). Using DNA methylation arrays, Manel Esteller was able to classify different
types of acute lymphoblastic leukemia, non–small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC), and cancers of unknown primary origin (16).
Lynnette Fernandez-Cuesta (University of Cologne, Germany)
presented a uniﬁed pipeline that affords efﬁcient mapping
of paired-end RNA-seq reads and downstream analysis of
transcribed genes in cancer samples. This approach uses a
de novo assembly step to increase the sensitivity and speciﬁcity
in detecting chimeric transcripts. Because translocations
might activate druggable cancer pathways, in-depth study of
RNA-seq data might help to provide new speciﬁc and personalized treatment to patients.
DNA and histone modiﬁcations can be targeted, and several
talks covered the use of drugs targeting histone modiﬁcations.
Nick La Thangue (University of Oxford, Oxford, UK) presented
his work on a sensitivity determinant for histone deacetylase
(HDAC) inhibitor–induced apoptosis: HR23B. HR23B shuttles
ubiquitinated cargo proteins to the proteasome for subsequent
degradation. Reduced HR23B expression in biopsy samples
was highly associated with lack of HDAC inhibitor therapy
response. After conducting the studies with patients treated
with HDAC inhibitors other than SAHA, La Thangue suggested
HR23B as a pan-biomarker for patient stratiﬁcation into
groups that will gain the most clinical beneﬁt (17). Scott A.
Armstrong (Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New
York, NY) showed that DOT1L, a histone H3K79 methyltransferase, is required for leukemia maintenance and thus a
potential therapeutic target in MLL-rearranged leukemias
(18). A selective inhibitor of DOT1L has been developed that
blocks H3K79 methylation, inhibits leukemogenic gene expression, and selectively kills cultured cells bearing MLL translocations. Small-molecule DOT1L inhibitors have entered a phase I
clinical trial. Christopher Vakoc (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, New York, NY) identiﬁed the acetylated histones
reader BET bromodomain protein 4 (BRD4) as being critically
required for maintenance of acute myeloid leukemia (19). Use
of the small-molecule inhibitor JQ1 phenocopies the genetic
suppression of Brd4. The effects of Brd4 suppression are, at
least in part, due to its role in sustaining Myc expression to
promote aberrant self-renewal. Moreover, myc regulation via

www.aacrjournals.org

long-range enhancement through Brd4 seems to be leukemia/
hematopoietic speciﬁc. Esteller presented studies on several
epigenetic drugs: zebularine, a DNA methylation inhibitor;
enoxacin, an enhancer of microRNA production; and CHR6494, an inhibitor of the histone kinase Haspin (20). Importantly, Esteller also discussed mechanisms of resistance, such
as a truncating mutation in HDAC2 conferring resistance to
HDAC inhibitors and ampliﬁcation in DNMT3B conferring
resistance to demethylating agents.

Personalized Cancer Medicine: Impact on
Clinical Translation
This session brought together basic, translational, and clinical scientists to discuss strategies for the selection of patients
who will most likely beneﬁt from a particular therapy. Understanding the mechanisms that contribute to primary or
acquired resistance will yield biomarkers that predict how
individual patients will respond to drugs, and the development
of drugs that can act in synergy with established treatments or
overcome drug resistance. Rene Bernards (The Netherlands
Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, the Netherlands) uses genomewide loss of function genetic screens (short hairpin interference libraries) in cancer cell lines to identify genes related
to drug response. In this way, it was found that blockade of
the EGF receptor (EGFR) shows strong synergism with BRAF
(V600E) inhibition in patients with colon cancer (21). These
results have led to a clinical trial initiated only 8 months after
manuscript publication. This strategy also led to the identiﬁcation of MED12 as responsible for resistance to tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (TKI) in lung cancer. Moreover, MED12 may
constitute a multitarget drug resistance beyond TKI, as suggested by Bernard's data (22).
The laboratories of Manuel Hidalgo, Alberto Bardelli, and
Alberto Villanueva have established patient-derived xenografts
in mice (PDX) as a resource geared toward establishing a
connection between the particular genetic and histopathogenic properties of the tumor and the best therapeutic options.
M. Hidalgo (Spanish National Cancer Research Center, Madrid,
Spain) and colleagues have used pancreatic PDX to study
patient response to gemcitabine, extracting signatures and
identifying biomarkers that can be implemented in clinical
trials contributing to the classiﬁcation of pancreatic tumors
(23). Bardelli (IRCC Candiolo and University of Turin, Turin,
Italy) showed that it is feasible to study primary and secondary
resistance to anti-EGFR antibodies using colorectal PDX
derived from patients. These PDX models prospectively recapitulated biomarker-based case stratiﬁcation and identiﬁed
KRAS, BRAF, NRAS, and HER2 as predictors of resistance to
anti-EGFR blockade. Bardelli also showed how the emergence
of KRAS mutations in the plasma of patients undergoing antiEGFR therapy can be used to detect early relapse and guide
further therapies (24). Villanueva (Catalan Institute of Oncology-IDIBELL, Barcelona, Spain) has generated extensive and
representative OrthoXenoBanks (OXB) of epithelial ovarian
and colorectal tumors generated by orthotopic implantation
(i.e., tumors with the same organ of origin) that mimic immunohistologically and genetically the heterogeneity of both

Cancer Res; 73(14) July 15, 2013

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

4187

Published OnlineFirst May 17, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-0512

~oz-Pinedo et al.
Mun

diseases. OXBs are being used to explore the best patient
treatment (25).
Clinical researchers Rafael Rosell, Josep Tabernero, and
Ram
on Salazar shared with the audience their concerns about
how intertumor heterogeneity may complicate clinical trials
and how the current knowledge on patient stratiﬁcation is
applied in the day-to-day clinical practice. Rosell (Catalan
Institute of Oncology, Badalona, Spain) emphasized that targeting cancer with pairs of synthetic lethal drugs may reduce
the emergence of resistance. Results from the EURTAC clinical
trial (26) support the assessment of two novel markers, BIM
expression and EGFR T790M mutation before initiation of
treatment with EGFR inhibitors in NSCLC. Moreover, combined inhibition of EGFR and AXL can prevent or overcome
resistance to EGFR inhibitors. Salazar (Catalan Institute of
Oncology, Barcelona, Spain) talked about the clinical management of EGFR pathway resistance in colorectal carcinomas
and highlighted the need to improve the sensitivity of mutation detection to increase prediction of response (27). Nanoﬂuidic digital PCR provides a robust, quantitative measure of
the proportion of KRAS-mutant alleles allowing a better classiﬁcation of tumors. Tabernero (Vall d'Hebron Institute of
Oncology, Barcelona, Spain) encouraged a transition from a
clinically directed drug development approach, in which
responses to drugs in speciﬁc tumor types guide the next
steps of experimentation, to a translational guided scenario in
which the predictive biomarkers and drugs are codeveloped
from the beginning of drug development until drug approval.
Phase I trials provide an arena for early hypothesis testing,
examining not only safety and toxicity but also target engagement, biologically effective dosages, and selection of an appropriate patient population.

Conclusions
Cancer metabolism is a promising new area of research
that deserves further attention. In this sense, inhibition of the
mTOR pathway, which controls metabolism and proliferation,

warrants further investigation. Currently many oncology
patients are receiving expensive treatments that can cause
adverse side effects without getting any therapeutic beneﬁt. In
this sense, animal models of xenopatients may be useful before
clinical trials because they recapitulate characteristics of the
original tumor, including drug sensitivity. Since the initiation
of the "-omic" era, enormous amounts of data have been
generated. This information needs to be comprehensively
integrated and made available to clinicians. Jonathan Knowles
(EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland), the Instituto Roche Distinguished Speaker, wrapped up the conference with an overview
of personalized medicine. Knowles urged the scientiﬁc community to deﬁne ways to decide the best combination of
available compounds for efﬁcacy in particular patient cohorts.
Finally, he stressed that major progress toward curing cancer
is now possible through early detection from blood screens
and early intervention through surgery, and a combination of
radiation and chemotherapy followed by new-generation–targeted immunotherapy for all patients. The road toward personalized medicine is a challenging one and represents a major
change in perspective for all involved, but it is becoming a
reality.
Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest
No potential conﬂicts of interest were disclosed.

Acknowledgments
The Instituto Roche is acknowledged for their generous sponsorship. The
authors thank AGAUR, Genoma Espa~
na, Company of Biologists, Illumina, and
Novartis for sponsorship.

Grant Support
This work was supported by grants from ISCIII (PI10/0104 to C. Mu~
nozPinedo, Sara Borrell to A. Portela), SAF2011-22893 to E. Gonzalez-Suarez, EMBO
long-term fellowship to A. Gentilella. Seamus Martin, Raffaella Iurlaro, Dori
Huertas, and Helena Díaz are acknowledged for support.
Received February 18, 2013; revised April 4, 2013; accepted May 13, 2013;
published OnlineFirst May 17, 2013.

References
1.
2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

4188

Munoz-Pinedo C, El Mjiyad N, Ricci JE. Cancer metabolism: current
perspectives and future directions. Cell Death Dis 2012;3:e248.
Carracedo A, Weiss D, Leliaert AK, Bhasin M, de Boer VC, Laurent G,
et al. A metabolic prosurvival role for PML in breast cancer. J Clin Invest
2012;122:3088–100.
Reilly PT, Mak TW. Molecular pathways: tumor cells co-opt the brainspeciﬁc metabolism gene CPT1C to promote survival. Clin Cancer Res
2012;18:5850–5.
Ramirez-Peinado S, Alcazar-Limones F, Lagares-Tena L, El Mjiyad N,
Caro-Maldonado A, Tirado OM, et al. 2-deoxyglucose induces noxadependent apoptosis in alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma. Cancer Res
2011;71:6796–806.
Ben-Sahra I, Howell JJ, Asara JM, Manning BD. Stimulation of de novo
pyrimidine synthesis by growth signaling through mTOR and S6K1.
Science 2013;339:1323–8.
Efeyan A, Zoncu R, Chang S, Gumper I, Snitkin H, Wolfson RL, et al.
Regulation of mTORC1 by the Rag GTPases is necessary for neonatal
autophagy and survival. Nature 2013;493:679–83.
Fumagalli S, Ivanenkov VV, Teng T, Thomas G. Suprainduction of p53
by disruption of 40S and 60S ribosome biogenesis leads to the
activation of a novel G2/M checkpoint. Genes Dev 2012;26:1028–40.

Cancer Res; 73(14) July 15, 2013

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

Ortells MC, Morancho B, Drews-Elger K, Viollet B, Laderoute KR,
Lopez-Rodriguez C, et al. Transcriptional regulation of gene expression during osmotic stress responses by the mammalian target of
rapamycin. Nucleic Acids Res 2012;40:4368–84.
Chaturvedi P, Gilkes DM, Wong CC, Luo W, Zhang H, Wei H, et al.
Hypoxia-inducible factor-dependent breast cancer-mesenchymal
stem cell bidirectional signaling promotes metastasis. J Clin Invest
2013;123:189–205.
Grivennikov SI, Wang K, Mucida D, Stewart CA, Schnabl B, Jauch D,
et al. Adenoma-linked barrier defects and microbial products drive IL23/IL-17-mediated tumour growth. Nature 2012;491:254–8.
Senovilla L, Vitale I, Martins I, Tailler M, Pailleret C, Michaud M, et al. An
immunosurveillance mechanism controls cancer cell ploidy. Science
2012;337:1678–84.
Beneteau M, Zunino B, Jacquin MA, Meynet O, Chiche J, Pradelli LA,
et al. Combination of glycolysis inhibition with chemotherapy results in
an antitumor immune response. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2012;109:
20071–6.
D'Arcy P, Brnjic S, Olofsson MH, Fryknas M, Lindsten K, De Cesare M,
et al. Inhibition of proteasome deubiquitinating activity as a new cancer
therapy. Nat Med 2011;17:1636–40.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst May 17, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-0512

Meeting Report: IDIBELL—Personalized Cancer Medicine

14. Green DR, Oberst A, Dillon CP, Weinlich R, Salvesen GS. RIPKdependent necrosis and its regulation by caspases: a mystery in ﬁve
acts. Mol Cell 2011;44:9–16.
15. Rodriguez-Paredes M, Esteller M. Cancer epigenetics reaches mainstream oncology. Nat Med 2011;17:330–9.
16. Fernandez AF, Assenov Y, Martin-Subero JI, Balint B, Siebert R,
Taniguchi H, et al. A DNA methylation ﬁngerprint of 1628 human
samples. Genome Res 2012;22:407–19.
17. Khan O, Fotheringham S, Wood V, Stimson L, Zhang C, Pezzella F,
et al. HR23B is a biomarker for tumor sensitivity to HDAC inhibitorbased therapy. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2010;107:6532–7.
18. Bernt KM, Zhu N, Sinha AU, Vempati S, Faber J, Krivtsov AV, et al.
MLL-rearranged leukemia is dependent on aberrant H3K79 methylation by DOT1L. Cancer Cell 2011;20:66–78.
19. Zuber J, Shi J, Wang E, Rappaport AR, Herrmann H, Sison EA, et al.
RNAi screen identiﬁes Brd4 as a therapeutic target in acute myeloid
leukaemia. Nature 2011;478:524–8.
20. Huertas D, Soler M, Moreto J, Villanueva A, Martinez A, Vidal A, et al.
Antitumor activity of a small-molecule inhibitor of the histone kinase
Haspin. Oncogene 2012;31:1408–18.
21. Prahallad A, Sun C, Huang S, Di Nicolantonio F, Salazar R, Zecchin D,
et al. Unresponsiveness of colon cancer to BRAF(V600E) inhibition
through feedback activation of EGFR. Nature 2012;483:100–3.

www.aacrjournals.org

22. Huang S, Holzel M, Knijnenburg T, Schlicker A, Roepman P, McDermott
U, et al. MED12 controls the response to multiple cancer drugs through
regulation of TGF-beta receptor signaling. Cell 2012;151:937–50.
23. Garrido-Laguna I, Uson M, Rajeshkumar NV, Tan AC, de Oliveira E,
Karikari C, et al. Tumor engraftment in nude mice and enrichment in
stroma- related gene pathways predict poor survival and resistance to
gemcitabine in patients with pancreatic cancer. Clin Cancer Res
2011;17:5793–800.
24. Misale S, Yaeger R, Hobor S, Scala E, Janakiraman M, Liska D, et al.
Emergence of KRAS mutations and acquired resistance to anti-EGFR
therapy in colorectal cancer. Nature 2012;486:532–6.
25. Vidal A, Munoz C, Guillen MJ, Moreto J, Puertas S, Martinez-Iniesta M,
et al. Lurbinectedin (PM01183), a new DNA minor groove binder,
inhibits growth of orthotopic primary graft of cisplatin-resistant epithelial ovarian cancer. Clin Cancer Res 2012;18:5399–411.
26. Rosell R, Carcereny E, Gervais R, Vergnenegre A, Massuti B, Felip E,
et al. Erlotinib versus standard chemotherapy as ﬁrst-line treatment for
European patients with advanced EGFR mutation-positive non-smallcell lung cancer (EURTAC): a multicentre, open-label, randomised
phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol 2012;13:239–46.
27. Salazar R, Roepman P, Capella G, Moreno V, Simon I, Dreezen C, et al.
Gene expression signature to improve prognosis prediction of stage II
and III colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol 2011;29:17–24.

Cancer Res; 73(14) July 15, 2013

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

4189

Published OnlineFirst May 17, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-0512

Exploiting Tumor Vulnerabilities: Epigenetics, Cancer Metabolism
and the mTOR Pathway in the Era of Personalized Medicine
Cristina Muñoz-Pinedo, Eva González-Suárez, Anna Portela, et al.
Cancer Res 2013;73:4185-4189. Published OnlineFirst May 17, 2013.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-0512
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2013/05/17/0008-5472.CAN-13-0512.DC1

Cited articles

This article cites 27 articles, 11 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/73/14/4185.full#ref-list-1

E-mail alerts

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.

Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

