Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 42

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Ketamine-mediated afferent-specific presynaptic transmission
blocks in low-threshold and sex-specific subpopulation of
myelinated Ah-type baroreceptor neurons of rats
Lu-Qi Wang1,2,*, Sheng-Zhi Liu1,*, Xin Wen1,*, Di Wu2, Lei Yin2, Yao Fan1, Ye Wang3,
Wei-Ran Chen1, Pei Chen2, Yang Liu1, Xiao-Long Lu1, Hong-Li Sun3, Weinian Shou4,
Guo-Fen Qiao1,2 and Bai-Yan Li1
1

Department of Pharmacology, Harbin Medical University, Harbin, China

2

Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Medicine Research of Ministry of Education, Harbin Medical University, Harbin, China

3

Department of Pharmacology, Daqing Campus of Harbin Medical University, Daqing, China

4

Riley Heart Research Center, Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Herman B. Wells Center for Pediatric Research, Department
of Pediatrics, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA
*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Bai-Yan Li, email: liby@ems.hrbmu.edu.cn
Correspondence to: Guo-Fen Qiao, email: qiaogf188@163.com
Keywords: nodose ganglia (NG), nucleus of the solitary tract (NTS), presynaptic neurotransmission, baroreflex afferent pathway,
ketamine (Ket), Pathology Section
Received: July 10, 2015	

Accepted: November 29, 2015	

Published: December 12, 2015

ABSTRACT
Background: Ketamine enhances autonomic activity, and unmyelinated C-type
baroreceptor afferents are more susceptible to be blocked by ketamine than
myelinated A-types. However, the presynaptic transmission block in low-threshold
and sex-specific myelinated Ah-type baroreceptor neurons (BRNs) is not elucidated.
Methods: Action potentials (APs) and excitatory post-synaptic currents (EPSCs)
were investigated in BRNs/barosensitive neurons identified by conduction velocity
(CV), capsaicin-conjugated with Iberiotoxin-sensitivity and fluorescent dye using
intact nodose slice and brainstem slice in adult female rats. The expression of mRNA
and targeted protein for NMDAR1 was also evaluated.
Results: Ketamine time-dependently blocked afferent CV in Ah-types in nodose
slice with significant changes in AP discharge. The concentration-dependent inhibition
of ketamine on AP discharge profiles were also assessed and observed using isolated
Ah-type BRNs with dramatic reduction in neuroexcitability. In brainstem slice, the 2ndorder capsaicin-resistant EPSCs were identified and ~50% of them were blocked by
ketamine concentration-dependently with IC50 estimated at 84.4 µM compared with
the rest (708.2 µM). Interestingly, the peak, decay time constant, and area under
curve of EPSCs were significantly enhanced by 100 nM iberiotoxin in ketamine-more
sensitive myelinated NTS neurons (most likely Ah-types), rather than ketamine-less
sensitive ones (A-types).
Conclusions: These data have demonstrated, for the first time, that low-threshold
and sex-specific myelinated Ah-type BRNs in nodose and Ah-type barosensitive
neurons in NTS are more susceptible to ketamine and may play crucial roles in not only
mean blood pressure regulation but also buffering dynamic changes in pressure, as
well as the ketamine-mediated cardiovascular dysfunction through sexual-dimorphic
baroreflex afferent pathway.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44108

Oncotarget

INTRODUCTION

neurons in NG and the 2nd-order Ah-type barosensitive
neurons perhaps in NTS [28]; (2) the neuroexcitability
of these Ah-type BRNs, not A- and C-types, is tightly
regulated by female hormone and likely responsible for
the sexual-dimorphism in baroreflex afferent functions
[26]; (3) Ketamine differentially blocks presynaptic
sensory afferent neurotransmission [4] in male rats, but no
such information is available in female rats so far.
Therefore, this study is designed to test the effects
of ketamine on presynaptic neurotransmission in the
cell body of the 1st-order BRNs and its central terminals
forming the synapse with the 2nd-order barosensitive
neurons in NTS. By using whole-cell patch techniques
conjugated with intact nodose slice and horizontal
brainstem slice, as well as the fluorescent dye labeling
technique, the effect of ketamine on afferent conduction
(CV) and excitatory post-synaptic currents (EPSCs) were
evaluated. These data will provide a solid evidence to
fully understand a likely cardiac dysfunction mediated by
ketamine in its clinical application.

Ketamine has extensively been used in the clinical
practice as the anesthetic agents. Increasing evidences
have shown that the intravenous anesthetic ketamine
increases the blood pressure, heart rate and cardiac output
[1-3], alters autonomic nerve activity and baroreflex
afferent function [4-7]. Recent study indicates ketaminemediated the pro-arrhythmic effect and problematic rise
in blood pressure [2, 8-10]. Additionally, unusual cases
of death caused by acute or chronic ketamine poisoning
have been reported [11, 12], and long-term administration
of ketamine induces a significant ventricular structural
and electrophysiological remodeling [13]. Recently,
cardiac arrest following ketamine administration for
rapid sequence intubation has been reported in critical ill
patients [14], and a significant cardiac and kidney toxicity
have also been confirmed by ketamine self-administration
in rodents induces cardiotoxicity [15, 16].
Notably, the low-threshold and sex-specific
distribution of myelinated Ah-type baroreceptor neurons
(BRNs) [17-20] have extensively been studied since the
intact nodose slice preparation is developed [21, 22]. As
compared with traditionally classified A- and C-types,
the afferent conduction and neuroexcitability of this Ahtypes are more like A-types, while, the afferent-specific
chemosensitivity to vanilloid receptor agonist capsaicin
[23] or neurotransmitter histamine [24, 25] are more
similar to A-types or C-types, respectively, which may
lead at least partially to the sexual-dimorphism in aortic
baroreflex function [26]. Even though Ah-types are fast
conducted and myelinated afferents, they also share
discharge characteristics with unmyelinated C-types, such
as, repolarization hump [17], expression tetrodotoxinresistant Na+ channels [18, 27], and large conductive
Ca2+-activated K+ channels [8, 19]. Our previous report
have shown that myelinated A-types is less susceptible
to ketamine-mediated presynaptic transmission block
[4] compared with C-types, however, it would be
very interesting to see the distinctive response of this
myelinated Ah-type BRNs in nodose ganglia (NG) and
the 2nd-order Ah-type barosensitive neurons in the nucleus
of the solitary tract (NTS) to ketamine due largely to
the difference in electrophysiological property and
chemosensitivity.
Only one study in published literatures has
demonstrated the sex-difference in ketamine-induced
cardiac output [3], due mainly to the male species used
in the vast majority of previous investigation, so, it stands
to reason for lacking of the evidence to directly support
the gender difference in ketamine-mediated cardiac
physiology and dysfunction. However, several lines of
evidence may point out this potential direction: (1) an
extensive studies have demonstrated that the low-threshold
and sex-specific distribution of myelinated Ah-type BRNs
[17-20, 22, 24, 27, 28] services as a functional 1st-order
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

RESULTS
Time-dependent blocks of ketamine on afferent
conduction of Ah-type BRNs in NG
In NG of adult male rats, both afferent conduction
and discharge profiles of unmyelinated C-type afferents
were significantly altered by ketamine but not myelinated
A-types [4]. However, it remains unclear whether the
neurons from age-matched female rats also respond
the same way to ketamine, especially the sex-specific
subpopulation of myelinated Ah-types. In this regard,
the intact nodose slice [17, 21] was selected and vagal
stimulation-evoked afferent conduction was tested before
and after ketamine (Figure 1). Not surprisingly, in total 86
successful recordings from female nodose slices (n = 11
preparations), A- (n = 11, 12.79%) and C-type afferents
(n = 63, 73.25%) responded the same way as the males to
ketamine (data not shown). In stark contrast to A-types,
even though Ah-types (n = 9, 10.46%) were myelinated
afferents, the CV (11.78 ± 3.46 m/s) was dramatically and
reversely inhibited in a time-dependent fashion by 100
M ketamine (Figure 1A). Averaged conduction blocks
were observed at 10.08 ± 3.24 min after being exposed
to ketamine.
In order to fully understand the detail changes in
AP waveform before and after ketamine, the derivatives
over the membrane potential and the displacement current
phase plots [21, 29] were introduced, by which the
insightful information regarding depolarizing (negative
loop) and repolarizing (positive loop) phases of AP, as
well as the relation of them could be viewed directly.
Interestingly, during the time-dependent inhibition of
44109

Oncotarget

ketamine, the UVMAX and DVMAX revealed by derivatives
(Figure 1C) and the displacement currents phase plots
(Figure 1D) were inhibited as the similar manner over
the time course of AP. Whereas, the repolarization
hump, the one of key feature to distinguish Ah- from
A-types except for CV, remained (Figure 1D, indicated
as red arrow). Clearly, the course of depolarization was
smoothness before ketamine (Black trace), suggesting
that the tetrodotoxin-resistive (TTX-R) Na+ currents kick
in on time, right before the peak activation of tetrodotoxinsensitive (TTX-S) Na+ channels. Whereas, in the presence
of ketamine, the voltage-dependent activation for TTX-R
was delayed, i.e., the TTX-R Na+ currents kick in after the
maximal activation of TTX-S, which causes a separation
of these components during the depolarization (Figure

1C, curved arrow; Figure 1D, indicated by ▼) into two
functional portions. Averaged percentage reduction at
each time points were no difference between these two
portions (Supplemental Table 1), suggesting an equivalent
inhibitory effect of ketamine on TTX-S and TTX-R
components functionally expressed on myelinated Ah-type
baroreceptor afferents and an equal contribution of these
two components to AP depolarization and neuroexcitation.
Obviously, the effects of ketamine on TTX-S and TTX-R
Na+ currents may differ in Ah-types from either TTX-S in
A-types or TTX-R in C-types in our previous investigation
demonstrating that TTX-R is more susceptible to ketamine
compared with TTX-S component in male rats [4].
Apart from the depolarization alternation along
with the time-dependent CV blocks, the peak of AP

Figure 1: Time-dependently inhibition of Ketamine (Ket) on afferent conduction of Ah-type BRNs using intact nodose
slice of female rats. The AP was evoked by vagal stimulation (▼) and 100 µM Ket was applied by the bath perfusion. A. Vagal

stimulation elicited AP before (Ctrl, black trace) and 12 min duration (colored traces) after 100 µM Ket and washout (black dotted trace) as
well, inset: nerve fiber dissertations of Vagus after enzymatic treatment and the calibration to get the actual length for calculating the CV.
The calibration factor for this nerve is 0.685 (shorter / longer) and the actual length for this nerve: 12 mm (distance between the electrodes)
/ 0.685 = 17.518 mm, the latency (the time from stimulus artifact to vagal evoked AP) is 1.67 sec, so the CV for this nerve is 17.518 mm
/ 1.67 = 10.48 M/s, suggesting that this is myelinated afferents; B. Ctrl AP evoked by vagal stimulation and the derivative calculated over
the time course that plotted as the functional membrane voltage. By expended time scale, there is a clear repolarization hump over the time
course of AP and the derivative (▼ and dot line), suggesting that this afferent neuron is the low-threshold and sex-specific subpopulation of
Ah-type afferents; C. Vagal stimulation evoked AP before and 10 min after Ket; D. the displacement currents of phase plot: the derivatives
were plotted as the functional membrane voltages.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44110

Oncotarget

(APPEAK) was also reduced gradually with APD50. By
plotting APPEAK, APD50, and UVMAX as the function of
concentration of ketamine using a Boltzmann Equation,
non-liner relationships were observed (Figure 2A-2C)
between these functional parameters of AP depolarization
and the concentration of ketamine, suggesting that at least
two ion channel components are blocked by ketamine,
which may closely be associated with AP depolarization.
This observation was consistent well with the changes
in derivative alternations over the membrane voltage
showing the reduction in UVMAX in the presence of
ketamine (Figure 1C-1D).

Ah-category and the percentage of distribution for Ahtype BRNs was similar to that being observed in the
intact nodose slice and consistent well with our previous
observation [17]. In the presence of ketamine, the
maximal inhibitory effects were appeared at less than 2
min, which is sooner than those observed in intact nodose
slice (~10 min), and obviously, all discharge parameters
(Supplemental Table 2) were significantly inhibited by
ketamine in a concentration-dependent manner. By looking
insight into the details of AP discharge characters, such
as the reduction in the APPEAK, significant depolarization
in APFT (the take off point of membrane depolarization,
Figure 3A), and dramatic decrease in UVMAX (the negative
peaks of displacement current phase plots, Figure 3B),
ketamine-induced Na+ channel inactivation was highly
suspected, meanwhile, the changes in APD50 and DVMAX
(the positive peaks of displacement current phase plots,
Figure 3B) implied the inhibition of K+ channels (Figure
3A-3B), leading to the significant reduction in the
frequency of repetitive firings (Figure 3C).

Concentration-dependent inhibition of ketamine
on discharge profiles of Ah-type BRNs in NG
In order to accurately evaluate the concentrationdependent profile of ketamine, the neurons were isolated
from NG of adult female rats, which would be the best
model for pharmacological investigation because the
tested neurons could be completely and immediately
exposed to the ketamine and washed out. However, due
to the incapability to measure the CV, the afferent type
of these isolated neurons need to be classified using
electrophysiological validations [22] before ketamine.
With this preparation, 11 neurons (11.34%) out of 97
successful recordings from 4 preparations matched the

Inhibitory effects of ketamine on EPSCs of Capinsensitive Ah-type barosensitive neurons in NTS
Even though the afferent conduction block was
observed in the cell body of Ah-type 1st-order BRNs
housed in the NG, the presynaptic transmission block

Figure 2: Non-liner relationships between the inhibitory effects of Ketamine (Ket) and AP discharge characters such
as the peak of AP (APPEAK), rate of depolarization (UVMAX), and AP duration (APD50).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44111

Oncotarget

may also be detected on their terminals synapsed with
the 2nd-order barosensitive neurons located within the
NTS based upon the never mixed principle of afferent
transmission. To answer this particular question, the
horizontal brainstem slice preparation was employed and

the ST-stimulated EPSCs were recorded with or without
ketamine. With this preparation, Cap-insensitive 2nd-order
barosensitive neurons (n = 17) were identified from 9 NTS
brainstem slices. Interestingly, total 8 (~47%) of them
(Figure 4A) were more sensitive to ketamine compared

Figure 3: Concentration-dependent inhibition of Ketamine (Ket) on discharge profiles of Ah-type BRNs isolated from
adult female rats. Both single and repetitive discharges were elicited by brief pulse and depolarization steps. By measuring the AP

threshold (APFT) and upstroke velocity conjugated with the repolarization hump, the afferent was identified as Ah-type BRNs. A. AP
before and after 30 - 300 µM Ket; B. the derivatives before and after 30 - 300 µM Ket; C. the repetitive discharge before and after 100 µM.

Figure 4: Concentration-dependent inhibition of Ketamine (Ket) on EPSCs of identified 2nd-order capsaicin (Cap)insensitive and Ket-more sensitive Ah-type NTS barosensitive neurons in brainstem slice of adult female rats. In

this experiment, the AP was collected from fluorescent labeled, Cap-insensitive, but Ket-more sensitive 2nd-order NTS barosensitive
neurons right before the EPSC was evoked by the solitary track stimulation using the protocols described in details in method section and
supplemental materials. A. the AP elicited from Cap-insensitive Ah-type NTS neuron; B. the EPSCs in ACSF (black), 100 nM Cap (red),
in the presence of 30 - 300 µM Ket (green, blue, light blue), and 50 nM NBQX (pink) collected from the same neuron shown in A.; C. the
concentration-response relationship of Ket. The Cap-insensitive Ah-and Cap-insensitive A-type types (recordings shown in Figure. 6) were
differentially blocked by Ket and the IC50 for Ah- and A-types were estimated at 84.4 µM and 708.2 µM, respectively.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44112

Oncotarget

with the rest of observations (n = 9, Figure 5A-5B).
The amplitude of EPSCs were reduced concentrationdependently by ketamine and the half maximal inhibitory
concentrations (IC50) were estimated as 84.4 µM and 708.2
µM, respectively, for ketamine-more sensitive (presumable
Ah-types) and ketamine-less sensitive (A-types) groups
(Figure 4B-4C). However, EPSCs recorded from all Capinsensitive barosensitive neurons in NTS were abolished
by 50 µM NBQX (Figure 4B, pink trace) although they
responded differently to ketamine.
Recent observation [28] suggests that myelinated
(Cap-insensitive) Ah-type barosensitive neurons from
NTS respond to selective KCa1.1 blocker, iberiotoxin
(IbTX), differently compared with myelinated A-types
(Cap-insensitive), this may allow us identifying Ah-type
afferents in the 2nd-order NTS neurons. After completely
recording with ketamine, the most of tested Capinsensitive neurons (n = 6 for ketamine-more sensitive, n
= 5 for ketamine-less insensitive) were in a good condition
and could be washed out at least partially with ACSF
within 5 min. Even though these NTS neurons display
a differential sensitivity to ketamine (Figures 4 & 5),
they are all Cap-insensitive myelinated afferents, such as

myelinated A- and Ah-types, as those are observed in NG.
If this is the case, inactivation of KCa1.1 would alter the
dynamics of EPSCs via upregulation of glutamate release
from the presynaptic terminals in ketamine-more sensitive
Ah-types rather than ketamine-less sensitive A-types [28].
As expected, after removing the fast desensitization at
post-synaptic terminals with 50 μM CTZ, the averaged
amplitude, decay time constant, and the area under the
curve of EPSCs were all increased in the presence of
100 nM IbTX in ketamine-more sensitive (Figure 6A &
bottom table), but not in ketamine-less sensitive group
(Figure 6B & bottom table), implying that Cap-insensitive
and ketamine-more sensitive neurons function as the 2ndorder myelinated Ah-type neurons in NTS and share exact
same features as the 1st-order Ah-type in NG for the fast
conduction [18] and functional expression of KCa1.1
[28], whereas, those neurons insensitive to Cap and lesssensitive to ketamine are traditionally classified as A-type
of NTS [4].

Figure 5: Concentration-dependent inhibition of Ketamine (Ket) on EPSCs of identified 2nd-order capsaicin (Cap)insensitive A-type NTS barosensitive neurons in brainstem slice of adult female rats. In this experiment, the AP was collected
from fluorescent labeled, Cap-insensitive, but Ket-less sensitive 2nd-order NTS barosensitive neurons right before the EPSC was evoked
by the solitary track stimulation using the protocols described in details in method section and supplemental materials. A. AP elicited from
Cap-insensitive A-type NTS neuron; B. the EPSCs in ACSF (black), 100 nM Cap (red), and in the presence of 300 - 1000 µM Ket (green
and blue) collected from the same neuron shown in A.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44113

Oncotarget

AMPA receptor expression in NG and NTS

Ah-type barosensitive neurons is highly expected. To
test this hypothesis, the qRT-PCR and western blot were
carried out in both NG and NTS. These data showed that
GluR1 and GluR2 were detected in both NG and NTS,
however, females expressed significant less mRNA and
protein for GluR2 in NTS compared with age-matched
males and the expression profile was upregulated in
ovariectomized (OVX) females (Figure 7A). Intriguingly,
the expression patterns for both mRNA and protein
of GluR2 in NG were in stark contrast to those in NTS
(Figure 7B). Even though the difference of NG and NTS
expressed GluR1 did not established between sexes (data
not shown). These molecular data suggest that the female
hormone-dependent expression of GluR2 receptor in NG

The
α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4isoxazolepropionic acid receptor (AMPA) is a nonN-methyl-D-aspartate (non-NMDA) type ionotropic
transmembrane receptor for glutamate that mediates fast
synaptic transmission in the central nervous system and
assembles from 4 genetically distinct subtypes including
Glu1-4 [30]. NBQX has been reported to selectively
block the excitatory actions of AMPA in rat [31]. Upon
our electrophysiological and pharmacological tests with
NBQX, the involvement of AMPA receptor in ketaminemediated presynaptic transmission blocks of the 2nd-order

Figure 6: Differential effects of Iberiotoxin (IbTX) on the amplitude, decay time constant (DTC), and area under the
curve (AUC) of EPSCs in ketamine (Ket)-more sensitive and Ket-less sensitive 2nd-order barosensitive neurons of NTS.
Even though these NTS neurons displayed a differential sensitivity to Ket, they were all capsaicin (Cap)-insensitive myelinated afferents,
presumably mixed with myelinated A- and Ah-types, as those were observed in nodose ganglia. If this is the case, inactivation of KCa1.1
would change the dynamics of solitary track stimulation-evoked EPSCs of Ket-more sensitive rather that Ket-less sensitive group. A.
and B. The changes in the amplitude, DTC, and AUC of EPSCs in ACSF, with 50 μM cyclothiazide (CTZ), and CTZ plus 100 nM IbTX,
respectively, in Ket-more sensitive and Ket-less sensitive 2nd-order barosensitive neurons of NTS. The averaged dynamic parameters of
EPSCs were summarized in the bottom table.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44114

Oncotarget

Figure 7: Sex-specific difference in expression profiles (fold change) of mRNA and protein for GluR2 receptor, one of
subtypes of AMPA family, in NTS A. and NG B. of adult male, age-matched female, and OVX. Averaged data were expressed as

mean ± SD. NTS: n = 4 rats (repeat for 3 times for both mRNA and western blot), and NG: n = 4 rats for mRNA and n = 9 rats for western
blot (repeat for 4 times for both mRNA and western blot). *P < 0.05 and **P < 0.01 vs male, #P < 0.05 and ##P < 0.01 vs female.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44115

Oncotarget

and NTS plays a critical role in sexual-dimorphisms, at
least partially, in sex- and afferent-specific presynaptic
neurotransmission of baroreflex afferent function and
ketamine-mediated cardiovascular dysfunction.

and myelinated afferents. Simply because of the femalespecific distribution of the Ah-type neurons [17], the
current observation highly suggests that ketaminemediated presynaptic transmission blocks may not only
contribute to the cardiac pathophysiological processes,
including autonomic nerve and baroreflex function [4-7,
32], pro-arrhythmic effect and problematic rise in blood
pressure [2, 8-10, 32], ventricular remodeling [13], cardiac
arrest [14], but also be responsible for the potential gender
difference in cardiac function [3] in clinical management
with ketamine. Therefore, more attention needs to be
emphasized on all aspects in clinical practice with
ketamine in those patients with ischemic heart diseases
[33]. Importantly, more investigation regarding ketamine
needs to be conducted using female species at the bench
and special awareness has to be focused on the female
patients at the bedside during ketamine application
to enhance our understanding in knowledgebase
of ketamine. Moreover, except for the sex-specific
distribution characteristics, Ah-type BRNs in NG or Ahtype barosensitive neurons in NTS share both features of
myelinated afferents, like fast conduction [18, 22] and
Cap-insensitivity [23], and unmyelinated afferents, such
as ion channel expression [18, 28] and chemosensitivity
to histamine [24], so that it may play an important role not
only in regulating the mean blood pressure [34, 35] but
also in buffering the dynamic changes in blood pressure
[36-38], which are the major functions for C- and A-type
baroreceptor afferents, respectively.

DISCUSSION
Myelinated Ah-type barosensitive neurons in NTS
The major finding of this study is the ketaminemediated afferent-specific conduction blocks in lowthreshold and sex-specific subpopulation of myelinated
1st-order Ah-type BRNs identified by conduction velocity
[21, 22] in NG and presynaptic neurotransmission blocks
in ketamine-more sensitive myelinated 2nd-order Ah-type
barosensitive neurons identified by Cap- [4] and IbTXsensitivity [28] in NTS.

Potential role of Ah-type baroreceptor neurons
of NG and barosensitive neurons of NTS in
physiological and disease condition
This is the first direct evidence to demonstrate that
Ah-type neurons in NG or Ah-type barosensitive neurons
in NTS are much more sensitive to ketamine compared
with A-types, even though they are all Cap-insensitive

Figure 8: TTX-S and TTX-R components of Na+ currents are both involved in afferent conduction and action potential
(AP) formation of Ah-type BRNs in intact nodose slice of adult female rats. As shown in the figure 1, vagal stimulation-evoked

APs were collected at 11-12 min after 100 µM Ketamine (Ket). A. AP dissertation was observed at 11 min after Ket due to the delay
activation of TTX-R component, which was completely blocked by Ket at 12 min after application with remaining TTX-S component; B.
the derivatives over the membrane potential plotted as the function of membrane voltage from traces shown in A., and clear separation of
TTX-S and TTX-R components of Na+ currents was observed at 11 min after Ket, and remaining TTX-S component alone at 12 min after
Ket; C. the separation of TTX-S and TTX-R components was also confirmed by the displacement current phase plots.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44116

Oncotarget

Collaborative contribution of TTX-S and TTX-R
Na+ channels in Ah-type baroreceptor afferents

this circumstance, reduced TTX-S still induces membrane
depolarization that barely reaches the threshold for TTX-R
component and leads to the distorted AP, suggesting a key
role of TTX-S in initiated AP formation and propagation.
Further incubation with ketamine, the TTX-S
remains but TTX-R component disappears (Figure 8A-C,
red). These data highly suggest that TTX-S coordinates
closely with TTX-R during AP depolarization, and there is
clear difference in activation threshold for both TTX-S and
TTX-R component and TTX-S is an essential for TTX-R
activation simply because if TTX-S activation could not
make the membrane depolarized to the threshold for
TTX-R in the presence of ketamine, then the conduction
failure would absolutely occurred even though TTX-R
component may still be available for activation. In another
word, the TTX-S component in identified low-threshold
and sex-specific myelinated Ah-type BRNs housed in
NG is critical for setting the firing threshold, while,
TTX-R component is a key player for further depolarized
membrane to form a propagated AP.
From this observation, the conclusion could not be
drawn if TTX-S is less sensitive to ketamine compared
with TTX-R component even though it disappears
later than TTX-R, which may be masked by significant
reduction in TTX-S component by ketamine leading
to less membrane depolarization up to the threshold
for TTX-R, in this case, even if there is enough TTX-R
available it would remain not to be activated, so the
explanation from this observation will not be contradicted
with literature [39]. From the cellular point of view,
Ah-type afferents not only express similar ion channels
compared with the C-type afferents, including TTX-S/
TTX-R [18, 27], KCa1.1 [28, 43], and HCN1 [19, 20,
44], but also show identical chemosensitivity to histamine
[24, 25], so, it is not surprised that Ah-type afferents
display a similar reaction to ketamine within presynaptic
neurotransmission on the cell body and synaptic terminal
of 1st-order neurons as indicated in C-type afferents [4].
Although the effect of ketamine was not evaluated in
the observation, the significant slow repolarization and
broader AP duration suggested that certain K+ channels
must be blocked by ketamine, which is consistent with the
previous documentation [40, 45]. Moreover, conjugated
with our intact nodose slice data and the data collected
from isolated neuron preparation, we also conclude that
afferent conduction definitely failed before somatic AP
generation because AP can still be elicited in isolated Ahtype BRNs with higher concentration of ketamine causing
the presynaptic neurotransmission failure.
Upon the establishment of intact nodose slice
preparation [17, 21, 22], this low-threshold and sexspecific subpopulation of myelinated Ah-type baroreceptor
afferents have extensively been investigated for more
than a decade. Due to their female-dependent distribution,
relatively high neuroexcitability [17, 19, 28, 44, 46] with
female hormone-dependent, the A-type-like fast afferent

The afferent conduction block of ketamine observed
in the cell body of the 1st-order neurons is a time- and
concentration-dependent, which is attributed at least to the
inhibition of voltage-gated Na+ channels [39, 40], whereas,
the presynaptic transmission block-mediated by AMPA
and NMDA receptors is a central mechanism of ketamine
at afferent terminals of the 1st-order neurons [4, 41, 42].
Voltage-gated Na+ channels (Nav1.7 and Nav1.8) are
critical for afferent conduction, and the current observation
showed that both Nav1.7 (TTX-sensitive, TTX-S) and
Nav1.8 (TTX-resistant, TTX-R) are both involved in
conduction in Ah-type afferents, which could be blocked
by ketamine leading to the conduction failure of vagal and
solitary track neurotransmission revealed by the present
(Figure 1A and Figure 4B) and previous observation [4].
However, several questions remain to be answered. Firstly,
whether TTX-S and TTX-R Na+ channels play an equal
role in afferent conduction; secondly, it is not clear what
the relationship is to mediate afferent conduction between
TTX-S and TTX-R Na+ channels; additionally, if TTX-S
or TTX-R Na+ channel alone evokes the conduction.
Interestingly, the intact nodose slice preparation [39]
would be a proper way to answer the above questions.

The equal contribution and cooperation of
TTX-S and TTX-R Na+ channels in AP formation
and afferent conduction of Ah-type neurons in
baroreflex afferent pathway
The derivatives over the membrane potential and
displacement current phase plots are two useful methods
for quantification of TTX-S and TTX-R Na+ channel
contribution and cooperation in AP formation and afferent
conduction [21, 29]. Clearly, in the control condition, the
smooth derivatives of depolarization in vagal stimulationevoked AP (Figure 1B) imply that the TTX-R component
recruits before the TTX-S component reaches the
maximal. In contrast, in the presence of ketamine, the
amplitude and slope in rising phase of derivatives reduces
markedly with significantly lesser smoothness (Figure
1C, as indicated by curved arrow), suggesting that both
TTX-S and TTX-R components are partially inhibited
with equal potency (Supplemental Table 1) and TTX-R
Na+ currents kick in after TTX-S component reaches the
maximal before conduction failure, this phenomenon is
also confirmed by the displacement current phase plots
(Figure 1D, indicated by green arrow heads). Interestingly,
the significant plateau (Figure 8A, black) in AP
depolarization is observed right before conduction failure
with corresponding separation of TTX-S and TTX-R
components revealed in derivatives (Figure 8B) and the
displacement current phase plots as well (Figure 8C). In
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44117

Oncotarget

conduction, and C-type-like electrophysiological and
chemosensitive properties to histamine and IbTX, so, Ahtype afferents may play a great contribution in baroreflex
afferent function to elicit larger blood pressure and heart
rate change like A-types to buffering dynamic changes in
pressure [34, 35] and provide powerful antihypertensive
baroreflex responses like C-types to regulate mean blood
pressure [36-38], which would retain a relative a low
blood pressure in female rats compared with age-matched
males [26]. Together with the data collected from the
present experiments, we have a strong reason to believe
that ketamine-mediated presynaptic neurotransmission
blocks would cause dramatic cardiovascular dysfunction
via baroreflex afferent pathway [32], especially in those
female patients with or without cardiovascular diseases.

desensitization at postsynaptic terminals), 2,3-Dihydroxy6-nitro-7-sulfamoyl-benzo(F) quinoxaline (NBQX,
antagonist for non-NMDA), and Iberiotoxin (IbTX,
a selective blocker for a large conductance of Ca2+activated-K+ channel, KCa1.1) were purchased from
Sigma (St Louis, MO, USA); Stock solutions were stored
at -20°C and diluted using the bath solution right before
experiments. During the experiment, drugs or toxins were
applied through bath perfusion or micro-perfusion right on
the patched neuron at flow rate no more than 1.0 ml/min.

Intact nodose slice
The NG contains the cell body of afferent neurons
(the 1st-order) that send afferent signals via the solitary
track (ST) to form the synapses with the 2nd order neurons
in NTS. Using this nodose slice preparation, the action
potential (AP) was evoked by vagal stimulation and
afferent conduction velocity (CV) was also calculated
to classify the afferent fiber type. The methodology of
surgical procedures and tissue preparations for nodose
slice are described in details in expended methods section
(see online Supplemental Materials) or elsewhere [21, 22].

MATERIALS AND METHODS
An expanded methods section is available in the
online-only data supplement
All animal procedures and protocols were performed
with the pre-approval of the Institutional Animal Care
and Use Committee at Harbin Medical University,
which are in accordance with the recommendations of
the Panel on Euthanasia of the American Veterinary
Medical Association and the National Institutes of Health
publication “Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory
Animals
(http://www.nap.edu/readingroom/books/
labrats/).”

Dil labeling
The lipophilic fluorescent dye (Dil, Molecular
Probe) was used to label the aortic depressive nerve
(ADN) in younger SD rats to confirm the 1st-order
BRNs in NG and 2nd-order barosensitive neurons in
NTS. The procedures of Dil labeling were described in
details previously [47]. Briefly, the rats at 4 weeks of age
(75~100 g) were anaesthetized, the leftside ADN was
dissected carefully near aortic arch, and then Dil crystals
were placed on top of the ADN and sealed completetly
to prevent Dil from contaminating the Vagus. At least
one week after the survival surgery is necessary to allow
the Dil to retrograded transport to NG and NTS. In this
experiment, the adult SD rats were used to ensure the
completely myelination, in this regard, at least 8~10 weeks
after labeling, the nodose slice or horizontal brainstem
slices could be prepared for electrophysiological data
collection

Experimental animals
Adult female Sprague Dawley (SD) and aged-match
male rats (240-280 g) were selected for the molecular
experiments, the preparations of intact nodose slice,
isolated neurons, and horizontal brainstem slice. Rats were
directly purchased from Wei-Tong-Li-Hua Experimental
Animal Technology Co, Ltd, Beijing, China, with SPF
grade and licensed under SCXK (Beijing) 2012–0001. All
rats were maintained at the animal facility of the Second
Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical University with a
12/12 hour light cycle for 3 days before they were used for
experiments. Ovariectomized (OVX) female rats were also
used to evaluate the hormone-dependency of expression
profiles of NMDA type-I receptor in NG and NTS. The
protocol for surgery procedures of OVX was described in
detail elsewhere [44].

Horizontal brainstem slice
The NTS contains the cell body of the 2nd-order
neurons within visceral afferent pathway to integrate
and relay the processes to higher regions of the brain.
Horizontal brainstem slices of the NTS that included a
sufficient length of the solitary tract to electrically evoke
monosynaptic AMPA receptor-mediated currents in NTS
neurons were prepared [4]. Initial synaptic characterization
of NTS neurons was carried out using a burst of five

Chemicals
Capsaicin (Cap, a TRPV1 agonist), cyclothiazide
(CTZ, a modulator of AMPA receptor for removing rapid
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44118

Oncotarget

200 μs current pulses delivered at 50 Hz, with a three
second interval between each trail. Stimulus intensity
was gradually increased until a corresponding train of
excitatory postsynaptic currents (EPSC) was recorded
in the patched NTS neuron. Tract stimulus intensity was
then increased beyond this threshold up to 5 times greater.
Only those EPSCs exhibiting a jitter (standard deviation
of latency) ≤ 200 μs and amplitude saturation in response
to increases in stimulus intensity were considered to
arise from monosynaptic, the 2nd-order NTS neurons and
thus suitable for further study. The ST-evoked EPSCs
were recorded and their dynamic changes, such as the
amplitude, the delay time constant, and the area under
curve of EPSCs were evaluated before and after ketamine
in this brainstem slice preparation [4, 28].

Fiber type identification for NTS neurons

Isolated nodose neurons

The animals were euthanized with an excessive
dose of pentobarbital sodium. Both sides of the nodose
ganglia and NTS were removed immediately and frozen
on liquid nitrogen. Nine pairs of tissues from NG and 4
tissue samples from NTS were collected for Western blots.
The tissues were lysed by using lysis buffer (Beyotime
Biotech, China) containing 1% protease inhibitor solution
(Beyotime). The lysate was centrifuged for 15 min
to collect supernatant. The protein concentration was
determined using BCA Protein Assay Kit (Beyotime).
The samples were boiled for 7 min and then loaded on
10% SDS-PAGE gel (100 mg of protein, 15 ml per well)
for electrophoresis with 110 V for 90 min. The protein on
the gel was transferred onto NC membranes at 300 mA
for 75 min, which was blocked by 5% nonfat dry milk
diluted by PBS at room temperature for 3 hours. The
membrane was probed with primary antibody (GluR2
receptor rabbit polyclonal antibody, Alomone Labs, 1:200)
at 4°C overnight and then the secondary antibody (goat
anti-rabbit, Licor, 1:8000) for 60 min at room temperature.
GAPDH was used as the internal control. Bound bands
were visualized and analyzed using Odyssey Infrared
Imaging System (LI-COR Biosciences) and Odyssey v1.2
software.

The afferent fiber types of the 2nd-order neurons of
NTS were confirmed by sensitivity to Cap applied at the
end of recordings and the feature of delay excitation [23,
48]. Both A- and Ah-type NTS 2nd-order neurons are Capinsensitive without detectable delay excitation, but the
property of EPSCs of Ah-types is altered by Iberiotoxin
(IbTX), whereas, A-types are not [28]. In contrast, C-types
are Cap-sensitive with clear delay excitation and IbTXmediated a significant changes if the dynamics in the
property of EPSCs.

Western blot analysis for GluR2 protein

In order to accurately evaluate the concentrationdependent property of ketamine, isolated nodose neurons
were isolated enzymatically using adult rats according to
the protocols described in detail previously [21, 29]. A
single AP and repetitive discharge were elicited by a brief
pulse and step depolarization current injection before and
after ketamine.

Fiber type identification for nodose neurons
In intact slice and at room temperature (22~23 °C),
the afferent fiber types of nodose neurons were classified
by CV, a fast conducted (CV > 4 m/s) without or with
hump feature during the repolarization was identified as
myelinated A- and Ah-types, whereas, a slow conducted
(CV < 1.0 m/s) was identified as unmyelinated C-types
[21].
For isolated neurons, a set of AP discharge
characters, such as AP firing threshold, upstroke velocity,
AP duration and repolarization hump, were used in
combination for isolated neurons identification [22].
Briefly, A-type was characterized as low-threshold (APFT:
> -40 mV) with the maximal up- (UVMAX: > 250 mV/ms)
and down-stroke velocity (DVMAX: > -100 mV/ms), narrow
AP duration (APD50: < 1.0 ms), a negative presentation
of repolarization hump; Ah-type showed a similar APFT
and UVMAX, and slower DVMAX (-75~100 mV/ms), wider
APD50 (< 2.0 ms) with hump feature compared with
A-type; while, for C-type, the APFT was more depolarized
(-30 mV), both UVMAX (< 200 mV/ms) and DVMAX (< -50
mV/ms) were significant slower with much wider APD50
(> 2.0 ms) and dramatic repolarization hump. In addition,
the chemosensitivity to capsaicin (Cap) was also useful in
identification of the afferent type. Both A- and Ah-types
were insensitive to 100 nM Cap, while the C-types showed
a positive respond to Cap. Due to the difficulty to washout,
Cap must be applied at the end of the recordings.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Real-time quantitative PCR for test GluR2 mRNA
For SYBR Green RT-PCR, 4 SD rats were
used to harvest total mRNAs from NG and NTS
in each group. Total RNAs were extracted using
the TRIzol® Reagent (Invitrogen) according to
the manufacturer’s instructions. The cDNAs were
synthesized using the Reverse Transcription Kit
(Applied Biosystems). Quantitative PCR reactions
were run on an ABI 7500 fast Real-Rime PCR System
(Applied Biosystems). The primers (Invitrogen) were
used as follows: 5’-ATTGTAGACTACGATGATTC-3’
(forward) and 5’-AATAGTCAGCTTGTACTTGA-3’
(reverse) for GluR2. GAPDH was used as an internal
44119

Oncotarget

control. The primer sequences of GAPDH were:
5’-AAGAAGGTGGTGAAGCAGGC -3’ (forward) and
5’-TCCACCACCCAGTTGCTGTA-3’ (reverse). The
2−ΔΔCt method was applied for the data analysis and the
data were normalized and converted into relative mRNA
expression.

98:121-132.
5.	

6.	 Herd DW, Anderson BJ, Keene NA, Holford NH.
Investigating the pharmacodynamics of ketamine in
children. Paediatr Anaesth. 2008; 18:36-42.

Data analysis

7.	 Akine A, Suzuka H, Hayashida Y, Kato Y. Effects of
ketamine and propofol on autonomic cardiovascular
function in chronically instrumented rats. Auto Neurosci.
2001; 87:201-208.

The recordings were acquired by Clampfit and the
data were analyzed by using Excel, Origin and SPSS
software. The figures were prepared with Origin. The
paired t-test was selected for statistical analysis for the
changes in afferent conduction and discharge profiles
before and after ketamine. The EPSC data were averaged
from 10 traces from one recording and compared before
and after ketamine using t-test and ANOVA where
appreciated. The mRNA and protein expression for
NMDA receptor were expressed as the fold changes and
t-test was used for the comparison between groups. An
averaged data were expressed as mean ± SD. The P value
less than 0.05 were considered significantly difference.

8.	 Varkevisser R, Vos MA, Beekman JD, Tieland RG, Van
Der Heyden MA. AV-block and conduction slowing prevail
over TdP arrhythmias in the methoxamine-sensitized proarrhythmic rabbit model. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol.
2015; 26:82-89.
9.	

11.	 Licata M, Pierini G, Popoli G. A fatal ketamine poisoning.
J Forensic Sci. 1994; 39:1314-1320.

This project was supported by grants from the
National Natural Science Foundation of China 81173051
to GFQ, 81202509 to HLS, and 31171122, 81573431 to
BYL.

12.	 Tao Y, Chen XP, Qin ZH. A fatal chronic ketamine
poisoning. J Forensic Sci. 2005; 50:173-176.
13.	 Li Y, Shi J, Yang BF, Liu L, Han CL, Li WM, Dong
DL, Pan ZW, Liu GZ, Geng JQ, Sheng L, Tan XY, Sun
DH, Gong ZH, Gong YT. Ketamine-induced ventricular
structural,
sympathetic
and
electrophysiological
remodelling: pathological consequences and protective
effects of metoprolol. Br J Pharmacol. 2012; 165:17481756.

CONFLICTS OF INTERESTS
These authors declare no conflict of interests.

REFERENCES

14.	 Dewhirst E, Frazier WJ, Leder M, Fraser DD, Tobias JD.
Cardiac arrest following ketamine administration for rapid
sequence intubation. J Int Care Med. 2013; 28:375-379.

1.	 Suleiman Z, Ik K, Bo B. Evaluation of the cardiovascular
stimulation effects after induction of anaesthesia with
ketamine. J West African Coll Surg. 2012; 2:38-52.

15.	 Li X, Li S, Zheng W, Pan J, Huang K, Chen R, Pan T,
Liao G, Chen Z, Zhou D, Shen W, Zhou W, Liu Y.
Environmental enrichment and abstinence attenuate
ketamine-induced cardiac and renal toxicity. Sci Rep. 2015;
5:11611.

2.	 Wutzler A, Huemer M, Boldt LH, Parwani AS, Attanasio
P, Tscholl V, Haverkamp W. Effects of deep sedation
on cardiac electrophysiology in patients undergoing
radiofrequency ablation of supraventricular tachycardia:
impact of propofol and ketamine. Europace. 2013; 15:10191024.

16.	 Chan WM, Liang Y, Wai MS, Hung AS, Yew DT.
Cardiotoxicity induced in mice by long term ketamine
and ketamine plus alcohol treatment. Toxicol Lett. 2011;
207:191-196.

3.	 Sigtermans M, Dahan A, Mooren R, Bauer M, Kest B,
Sarton E, Olofsen E. S(+)-ketamine effect on experimental
pain and cardiac output: a population pharmacokineticpharmacodynamic modeling study in healthy volunteers.
Anesthesiology. 2009; 111:892-903.

17.	 Li BY, Qiao GF, Feng B, Zhao RB, Lu YJ, Schild JH.
Electrophysiological and neuroanatomical evidence
of sexual dimorphism in aortic baroreceptor and vagal
afferents in rat. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol.
2008; 295:R1301-310.

Jin YH, Bailey TW, Doyle MW, Li BY, Chang KS, Schild
JH, Mendelowitz D, Andressen MC. Ketamine differentially
blocks sensory afferent synaptic transmission in medial
nucleus tractus solitarius (mNTS). Anesthesiology. 2003;

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

van Hecke O, Guthrie B. Oral ketamine analgesia in chronic
pain and problematic rise in blood pressure. BMJ Case Rep.
2014; 2014.

10.	 Rollin A, Maury P, Guilbeau-Frugier C, Brugada J.
Transient ST elevation after ketamine intoxication: a new
cause of acquired brugada ECG pattern. J Cardiovasc
Electrophysiol. 2011; 22:91-94.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

4.	

Sun L, Tanida M, Wang M, Kuda Y, Kurata Y, Shibamoto
T. Effects of anesthetics on the renal sympathetic response
to anaphylactic hypotension in rats. PloS One. 2014;
9(11):e113945.

18.	 Yan ZY, He JL, Wen X, Zuo M, Guan J, Wu D, Song
DX, Guo TZ, Yu X, Guo XJ, Zuo CM, Qiao GF, Li BY.
44120

Oncotarget

Variations in afferent conduction and axonal morphometrics
of aortic depressive nerve imply wider baroreflex function
of low-threshold and sex-specific myelinated Ah-type
baroreceptor neurons in rats. Int J Cardiol. 2014; 182:23-26.

JY, Zhang HC, Wang LJ, Pan XD, Fu Y. Remodeling of
hyperpolarization-activated current, Ih, in Ah-type visceral
ganglion neurons following ovariectomy in adult rats. PloS
One. 2013; 8:e71184.

19.	 He JL, Li JN, Zuo CM, Wang LQ, Wen X, Zuo M, Guan
J, Wu D, Song DX, Yu X, Qu MY, Liu Y, qiao GF, Li
BY. Potentiation of 17beta-estradiol on neuroexcitability
by
HCN-mediated
neuromodulation
of
fastafterhyperpolarization and late-afterdepolarization in lowthreshold and sex-specific myelinated Ah-type baroreceptor
neurons via GPR30 in female rats. Int J Cardiol. 2014;
182:174-178.

30.	 Qiao GF, Cheng ZF, Huo R, Sui XH, Lu YJ, Li BY. GM1
ganglioside contributes to retain the neuronal conduction
and neuronal excitability in visceral and baroreceptor
afferents. J Neurochem. 2008; 106:1637-45.
31.	 Li BY, Schild JH. Comparisons of somatic action potentials
from dispersed and intact rat nodose ganglia using patchclamp technique. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2002; 23:481-489.

20.	 Han LM, Ban T, Liu Y, Yuan M, He JL, Wen X, Qian
Z, Qiao GF, Li BY. Hyperpolarization-activated currentmediated slow afterhyperpolarization in myelinated Ahtype of baroreceptor neurons isolated from adult female
rats. Int J Cardiol. 2014; 172:e106-108.

32.	 Bailey TW, Hermes SM, Andresen MC, Aicher SA.
Cranial visceral afferent pathways through the nucleus
of the solitary tract to caudal ventrolateral medulla or
paraventricular hypothalamus: target-specific synaptic
reliability and convergence patterns. J Neurosci. 2006;
26:11893-11902.

21.	 Li BY, Schild JH. Patch clamp electrophysiology in nodose
ganglia of adult rat. J Neurosci Methods. 2002; 115:157167.

33.	 Hollmann M, Heinemann S. Cloned glutamate receptors.
Ann Rev Neurosci. 1994; 17:31-108.
34.	 Sheardown MJ, Nielsen EO, Hansen AJ, Jacobsen P,
Honore T. 2,3-Dihydroxy-6-nitro-7-sulfamoyl-benzo(F)
quinoxaline: a neuroprotectant for cerebral ischemia.
Science. 1990; 247:571-574.

22.	 Li BY, Schild JH. Electrophysiological and
pharmacological validation of vagal afferent fiber type of
neurons enzymatically isolated from rat nodose ganglia. J
Neurosci Methods. 2007; 164:75-85.

35.	 Wang X, Ding X, Tong Y, Zong J, Zhao X, Ren H, Li Q.
Ketamine does not increase intracranial pressure compared
with opioids: meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.
J Anesth. 2014; 28:821-827.

23.	 Jin YH, Bailey TW, Li BY, Schild JH, Andresen MC.
Purinergic and vanilloid receptor activation releases
glutamate from separate cranial afferent terminals in
nucleus tractus solitarius. J Neurosci. 2004; 24:4709-4717.

36.	 Jakobsen CJ, Torp P, Vester AE, Folkersen L, Thougaard
A, Sloth E. Ketamine reduce left ventricular systolic and
diastolic function in patients with ischaemic heart disease.
Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 2010; 54:1137-1144.

24.	 Li JN, Qian Z, Xu WX, Xu B, Lu XL, Yan ZY, Han
LM, Liu Y, Yuan M, Schild J, Qiao GF, Li BY. Gender
differences in histamine-induced depolarization and inward
currents in vagal ganglion neurons in rats. Int J Biol Sci.
2013; 9:1079-88.

37.	 Fan W, Andresen MC. Differential frequency-dependent
reflex integration of myelinated and nonmyelinated rat
aortic baroreceptors. Am J Physiol. 1998; 275:H632-H640.

25.	 Li JN, Li XL, He J, Wang JX, Zhao M, Liang XB, Zhao
SY, Ma MN, Liu Y, Wang YB, Chen H, Qiao GF, Li BY.
Sex- and afferent-specific differences in histamine receptor
expression in vagal afferents of rat: A potential mechanism
for sexual dimorphism in prevalence and severity of asthma.
Neuroscience. 2015; 303:166-177.

38.	 Fan W, Schild JH, Andresen MC. Graded and dynamic
reflex summation of myelinated and unmyelinated rat aortic
baroreceptors. Am J Physiol. 1999; 277:R748-R756.
39.	 Kumada M, Terui N, Kuwaki T. Arterial baroreceptor
reflex: its central and peripheral neural mechanisms. Prog
Neurobiol. 1990; 35:331-361.

26.	 Santa Cruz Chavez GC, Li BY, Glazebrook PA, Kunze DL,
Schild JH. An afferent explanation for sexual dimorphism
in the aortic baroreflex of rat. Am J Physiol Heart Circ
Physiol. 2014; 307:H910-H921.

40.	 Seagard JL, Dean C, Hopp FA. Discharge patterns of
baroreceptor-modulated neurons in the nucleus tractus
solitarius. Neurosci Lett. 1995; 191:13-18.

27.	 Qiao GF, Li BY, Zhou YH, Lu YJ, Schild JH.
Characterization of persistent TTX-R Na+ currents in
physiological concentration of sodium in rat visceral
afferents. Int J Biol Sci. 2009; 5:293-297.

41.	 Seagard JL, Gallenberg LA, Hopp FA, Dean C. Acute
resetting in two functionally different types of carotid
baroreceptors. Circ Res. 1992; 70:559-565.
42.	 Zhou ZS, Zhao ZQ. Ketamine blockage of both tetrodotoxin
(TTX)-sensitive and TTX-resistant sodium channels of rat
dorsal root ganglion neurons. Brain Res Bull. 2000; 52:427433.

28.	 Liu Y, Wen X, Liu SZ, Song DX, Wu D, Guan J, Wang LQ,
Li JN, Lu XL, Guo TZ, Zuo CM, Qiao GF, LI BY. KCa1.1mediated frequency-dependent central and peripheral
neuromodulation via Ah-type baroreceptor neurons located
within nodose ganglia and nucleus of solitary tract of female
rats. Int J Cardiol. 2015; 185:84-87.

43.	 Schnoebel R, Wolff M, Peters SC, Brau ME, Scholz A,
Hempelmann G, et al. Ketamine impairs excitability in
superficial dorsal horn neurones by blocking sodium and
voltage-gated potassium currents. Br J Pharmacol. 2005;

29.	 Qiao GF, Qian Z, Sun HL, Xu WX, Yan ZY, Liu Y, Zhou
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44121

Oncotarget

146:826-833.
44.	 Twele F, Bankstahl M, Klein S, Romermann K, Loscher W.
The AMPA receptor antagonist NBQX exerts anti-seizure
but not antiepileptogenic effects in the intrahippocampal
kainate mouse model of mesial temporal lobe epilepsy.
Neuropharmacology. 2015; 95:234-242.
45.	 Ogawa A, Uemura M, Kataoka Y, Ol K, Inokuchi T.
Effects of ketamine on cardiovascular responses mediated
by N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor in the rat nucleus tractus
solitarius. Anesthesiology. 1993; 78:163-167.
46.	 Li BY, Glazebrook P, Kunze DL, Schild JH. KCa1.1
channel contributes to cell excitability in unmyelinated
but not myelinated rat vagal afferents. Am J Physiol Cell
Physiol. 2011; 300:C1393-C1403.
47.	 Klockgether-Radke AP, Huneck S, Meyberg S, Neumann
P, Hellige G. Ketamine enantiomers differentially relax
isolated coronary artery rings. Eur J Anaesthesiol. 2005
;22:215-221.
48.	 Qiao GF, Li BY, Lu YJ, Fu YL, Schild JH. 17Beta-estradiol
restores excitability of a sexually dimorphic subset of
myelinated vagal afferents in ovariectomized rats. Am J
Physiol Cell Physiol. 2009; 297:C654-C664.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44122

Oncotarget

