Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 19

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Editorial

Rejuvenation by inhibiting TGF-β1/pSmad signaling
Elizabeth H. Corder and Karta Purkh Singh Khalsa
Dan shen root (Salvia miltiorrhiza, “Red sage”), is
a mainstay of Chinese medicine to maintain the health of
the circulatory system, able to reduce blood sugar levels
and prevent the formation of advanced glycation products
associated with an elevated risk of cognitive decline, and
as a modern Chinese treatment for acute pancreatitis,
among other uses. Again, dan shen attenuates TGF-beta/
Smad signaling and reduces fibrosis in model systems [35].
Turmeric rhizome (Curcuma longa) has wide
application in both Ayurvedic and Chinese systems and
is well known to us as a spice and as the agent that gives
mustard its yellow color. The curcumin in turmeric may be
the strongest known inhibitor of TGF-β1/pSmad signaling,
found in one experimental system to reduce levels in
diabetic nephropathy, thereby lessening proteinurea and
improving kidney function in a patient sample [6].
Sarsaparilla root (Smilax glabra) has long been used
to strengthen bones and muscles and to treat infection,
among other uses including as a flavoring agent renowned
for its pleasant taste. Root extracts inhibit TGF-β1/pSmad
signaling, thereby inhibiting the migration of cancer cells
in one experimental system [7].
This is not a complete list of plants each having
characteristically manifold medicinal uses in traditional
medicine able to reverse TGF-β1/pSmad signaling in
experimental systems and patient populations. Their
long usage suggests relative safety and efficacy, and
acceptability at effective doses, in general human
populations. They are readily available. Taking this
information into account, one implication of Yousef et al.
[1] is that these widely available food-like herbs might be
included in the diet of adults to modulate TGF-β1/pSmad
signaling. Moreover, these and other materica medica
from traditional medical systems might be investigated as
modern therapies to improve stem cell function.

Yousef et al. [1] report the rejuvenation of
myogenesis and neurogenesis in old mice ―24 months old,
analogous to 80 year old humans ― by reversing TGF-β1/
pSmad signaling to the lower levels found in young mice.
They suggest that the higher levels inhibit the capacity of
stem cells in old muscle and in the hippocampus of the
aged brain to contribute to differentiated tissue. Reversal
was accomplished pharmacologically by a single small
molecule. These findings may constitute a milestone in
aging research.
At this point in time it may be worth taking a
moment to step back and acknowledge that traditional
medical systems―Westerm, Ayurvedic (Indian) &
Chinese―include materica medica, namely plants, whose
leaves or roots have been found to reverse TGF-β1/pSmad
signaling in experimental systems and patient populations
(URL: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed). Here are
five examples:
Gotu kola leaf (Centella asiatica) used in Ayurvedic
and Chinese medicine to promote the rapid healing of
wounds without scarring, mitigate fibrotic conditions
such as liver cirrhosis and keloids, and to treat neurologic
conditions including senility. Recent biomedical reports
in a number of experimental systems indicate that
Asiatic acid and other constituents block TGF-beta/
Smad signaling: liver fibrosis (rat, CCL(4)) [2], cardiac
myopathy (mice, pressure overload), pulmonary fibrosis
(mice, bleomycin-induced), keloids (cell culture), renal
tubulointerstitial fibrosis (mice, obstruction of one ureter),
burn wound healing (mice), and atrial fibrillation (AF
patients). One plant used almost interchangeably, or in
combination, with gotu kola named brahmi (Bacopa
monnieri, often described as B. monniera) has wide usage
in India presently and since ancient times to maintain
cognition in older persons, as well as to treat other
conditions such as irritable bowel syndrome.
Astralagus root is the premier herb in traditional
Chinese medicine to boost the immune system, for
example, to ward off winter colds and flu. Astragalus
propinquus is the preferred name for Chinese medicinal
Astragalus root (syn. Astragalus membranaceus). Like
gotu kola, recent experimental reports demonstrate
attenuation of TGF-beta/Smad signaling and reduced
fibrosis in model systems that investigate astralagus [3,4].

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Elizabeth H. Corder: Complex Biological Systems Alliance,
North Andover, MA, USA
Correspondence to: Elizabeth H. Corder, email elizabeth.
corder@cbsaimtt.com
Received: May 20, 2015
Published: June 22, 2015

16790

Oncotarget

References
1.	

Yousef H et al. Oncotarget. 2015; 6(14):11959-78.

2.	

Tang L et al. Man K, ed. PLoS ONE. 2012; 7: e31350.

3.	

Liu X et al. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010; 25: 420-426.

4.	

He S et al. Br J Dermatol. 2012; 166: 564-574.

5.	

Zhang M et al. Exp Lung Res. 2014; 40: 172-185.

6.	 Khajehdehi P et al. Scand J Urol Nephrol. 2011; 45: 365370.
7.	

She T et al. PLoS One. 2015; 10: e0118287.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

16791

Oncotarget

