Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 36

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Editorial

Q-ing tumor glutaminase therapy
Zachary E. Stine and Chi V. Dang
Cancer cells reprogram metabolism to provide
the energy, nucleotides, lipids, amino acids and other
building blocks required to proliferate and survive in the
stressful tumor microenvironment [1]. Changes in cancer
metabolism were first noted in the 1920’s with Otto
Warburg’s discovery that tumors show increased aerobic
conversion of glucose to lactate (termed the Warburg
Effect). A recent revival of interest in cancer metabolism
has been fueled by the discovery that hypoxia and the
constitutive activation of MYC, KRAS, PI3K/AKT/mTOR
signaling and other pathways drives the rewiring of tumor
metabolism by controlling the expression and activity of
key metabolic enzymes. The sustained proliferation driven
by oncogene activation and loss of checkpoints leaves
tumors ‘addicted’ to reprogrammed metabolism, opening
a therapeutic window.
Glutamine, the most abundant amino acid in the
blood, can be taken up by transporters (including SLC1A5/
ASCT2) and utilized as a source of carbon and nitrogen
for energy production and biosynthesis [2]. Glutamine
can be converted to glutamate by the enzyme glutaminase,
which, in humans, is encoded by the genes GLS (kidneytype glutaminase) and GLS2 (liver-type glutaminase).
Glutamate can then be converted to the tricarboxylic acid
(TCA) cycle intermediate α-ketoglutarate by glutamate
dehydrogenase or transaminases. While glucose-derived
pyruvate is shunted away from the mitochondria in
tumors, glutamine-derived α-ketoglutarate can fuel the
TCA cycle. Although Warburg’s observations led to the
assumption that the TCA cycle was not critical in tumors,
mitochondrial TCA metabolism provides important
precursors for the synthesis of cellular building blocks [1,
2].
MYC, one of the most frequently deregulated
genes in cancer, is a transcription factor that promotes
cell proliferation, induces the Warburg effect, and drives
ribosome biosynthesis and translation to increase cell mass
[3]. MYC-driven cell transformation induces dependence
on extracellular glutamine and upregulates expression of
SLC1A5 and GLS [1-4].
As GLS is broadly expressed in many cancer types
and catalyzes the first step of glutamine catabolism,
it represents a potential anti-cancer therapy target.
While initial attempts to target glutamine metabolism
with glutamine analogs led to wide spread toxicity, the
development of an allosteric GLS inhibitor (BPTES,
bis-2-(5-phenylacetamido-1,2,4-thiadiazol-2-yl)ethyl
sulfide) showed promise in vitro and in xenografts models
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

[5]. Recently, we published a study testing the ability of
GLS inhibition to treat a genetically engineered mouse
model of MYC-driven hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC),
termed the LAP/MYC model [6]. We found that LAP/
MYC HCC tumors showed increased Gls expression
and decreased Gls2 expression compared to surrounding
tissue, and confirmed that the upregulation of GLS and
downregulation of GLS2 is also found in human HCC. We
showed that treatment with BPTES, specific to the GLS
isoform, prolonged survival of LAP/MYC mice compared
to vehicle treated controls. BPTES-treated mice showed
smaller tumors with decreased staining of the proliferation
marker KI-67. Consistent with GLS inhibition, tumors
treated with BPTES showed increased glutamine levels
and decreased glutamate levels compared to controls.
BPTES treatment was well tolerated in mice. Then, using
a MYC-driven cell line as a model to study the effects of
GLS inhibition, we demonstrated that BPTES treatment
blocked DNA replication, resulting in cell death. Further,
we confirmed the in vivo specificity of BPTES by rescuing
xenograft growth with the expression of a BPTES resistant
GLS mutant.

Figure 1: Glutamine (Gln) is converted to glutamate
(Glu) by glutaminase, encoded for by GLS (upregulated
in tumor) and GLS2 (downregulated in tumor). In

addition to its role in glutathione and amino acid synthesis,
glutamate can then be converted to α-Ketoglutarate (α-KG) by
glutamate dehydrogenase (GLUD) or aminotransferases. The
TCA cycle provides citrate for lipid synthesis and oxaloacetate
(OAA), which can be converted to the nucleotide synthesis
precursor aspartate (Asp). BPTES inhibits GLS to block the
conversion of glutamine to glutamate and prolong survival in
the LAP/MYC model.

38440

Oncotarget

While BPTES shows encouraging preclinical
efficacy, a BPTES related compound (CB-839) with
improved pharmacological properties has entered phase
I clinical trials [7]. Many challenges and opportunities
remain as GLS inhibition enters the clinic, including
the need to identify tumors that may respond to GLS
inhibition. While in vitro studies show that cell lines of
many cancer types depend on glutamine and GLS activity,
some recent studies indicate that tumors may not be as
commonly glutamine dependent as cells grown in a dish
[2]. However, these studies have been limited in scope and
will require further examination.
Prediction of therapeutic response to GLS inhibition
will require the identification of biomarkers, development
of new tools, and a detailed understanding of how
mutational status interacts with the tissue type of origin to
control tumor metabolism. While MYC has been shown
to induce glutamine dependence in vitro and reprogram
glutamine metabolism in various transgenic models in
vivo, the tumor tissue of origin can impact how glutamine
metabolism is affected by MYC expression. For example,
while transgenic MYC expression in the LAP/MYC
model reprograms glutamine metabolism and promotes
glutaminase dependence, a MYC-driven lung tumor model
does not exhibit reprogrammed glutamine metabolism and
shows increased expression of glutamine synthetase [4].
Studies suggest that potential predictors of response to
GLS inhibition include high expression of the GLS splice
isoform GAC, low glutamine to glutamate ratio and low
expression of genes that may circumvent the requirement
for GLS activity, such as Pyruvate Carboxylase and GLS2
[2, 7]. Similar to the use of 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose
Positron Emission Tomography (FDG-PET) to image
tumors through their avid uptake of glucose, fluorinated
glutamine probes have been developed and are in
clinical trials [2]. It remains to be seen if high tumor
18F-glutamine uptake predicts therapeutic response.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Glutamine metabolism plays a diverse role in
metabolism, controlling cellular energetics, redox state,
amino acid production, cell signaling and nucleotide
synthesis. The centrality of GLS in these diverse cellular
functions makes GLS inhibition an ideal candidate for
combination therapies. In addition to reports already in
the literature of GLS showing promise in combination
therapy in preclinical studies, we speculate that GLS
inhibition will show synthetic lethality with drugs that
perturb cellular metabolism, nucleotide synthesis, redox
state or DNA repair among others.
Chi V. Dang: Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute,
Abramson Cancer Center, University of Pennsylvania
Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA
Correspondence to: Chi V. Dang, email dangvchi@upenn.
edu
Keywords: cancer, metabolism, glutaminase
Received: November 02, 2015
Published: November 09, 2015

References
1.	

Ward P. S., et al. Cancer Cell. 2012; 21:297-308.

2.	 Hensley C. T., et al. The Journal of clinical investigation.
2013; 123:3678-3684.
3.	

Dang C. V. Cell. 2012; 149:22-35.

4.	

Yuneva M. O., et al. Cell metabolism. 2012; 15:157-170.

5.	

Le A., et al. Cell metabolism. 2012; 15:110-121.

6.	

Xiang Y., et al. The Journal of clinical investigation. 2015;
125:2293-2306.

7.	 Gross M. I., et al. Molecular cancer therapeutics. 2014;
13:890-901.

38441

Oncotarget

