1173

Association Between Megestrol Acetate Treatment
and Symptomatic Adrenal Insufficiency With
Hypogonadism in Male Patients With Cancer
Rony Dev, DO
Egidio Del Fabbro, MD
Eduardo Bruera, MD
Department of Palliative Care and Rehabilitation
Medicine, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas.

Patients with advanced cancer may develop cachexia, which is often treated with
megestrol acetate (MA). In addition to thromboembolic disease, MA may cause
symptomatic suppression of the hypothalamic pituitary adrenal axis. In male
patients with cancer, treatment with MA may also suppress the gonadal axis,
resulting in symptomatic androgen deficiency. Three cases are presented to highlight the symptomatic burden of adrenal insufficiency and hypogonadism. Clinicians need an increased awareness of the complication of adrenal insufficiency
secondary to MA treatment and a low threshold to test for adrenal and gonadal
dysfunction in symptomatic male patients with advanced cancer. Cancer
2007;110:1173–7.  2007 American Cancer Society.

KEYWORDS: cancer
hypogonadism.

cachexia,

megestrol

acetate,

adrenal

insufficiency,

P

atients with cancer often develop cachexia, which is characterized by a number of physical symptoms such as anorexia,
chronic nausea, early satiety, and fatigue. Currently, megestrol acetate (MA) is frequently used as a palliative agent to treat cancer
cachexia, and 2 recent systematic reviews have concluded that MA
improves appetite and results in weight gain in cancer patients.1,2
However, the authors of a third systematic review expressed doubts
as to whether a small gain in weight translated into a significant
clinical benefit, particularly in view of the risk of severe side effects.3
In addition to thromboembolic disease, treatment with MA can
result in symptomatic adrenal insufficiency.4 After reviewing the
English literature, we identified 1 case report of a patient with cystic
fibrosis receiving MA with suppression of both the adrenal and gonadal axis.5 Our case series identifies 3 symptomatic cancer patients
who were being treated with MA who had abnormalities in both
their adrenal and gonadal axis.
Eduardo Bruera is supported by National Institutes of Health Grant # R01NR010162-01A1 and
#R01CA122292,01.
Address for reprints: Rony Dev, DO, Department
of Palliative Care and Rehabilitation Medicine,
The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd., Unit 008, Houston,
TX 77030-4009; Fax: (713) 792-6092; E-mail:
rdev@mdanderson.org
Received March 12, 2007; revision received April
25, 2007; accepted May 1, 2007.

ª 2007 American Cancer Society

Patient 1
A 20-year-old white male with a history of osteosarcoma originating
in the left femur with metastases to the lungs and liver presented
with fever, intermittent abdominal pain, lower extremity edema,
melena, and feeling ‘‘low.’’ He was previously treated with preoperative chemotherapy followed by limb salvage surgery that was complicated by the development of chronic osteomylitis. After
recovering from surgery, the patient received radiation therapy and
additional chemotherapy, including methotrexate, gemcitabine,

DOI 10.1002/cncr.22924
Published online 23 July 2007 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

1174

CANCER

September 15, 2007 / Volume 110 / Number 6

doxorubicin, and, most recently, ifosfamide 1 week
before presentation. His medical history was significant for venous thrombosis and his medications
included MA (at a dose of 600 mg/daily), fluconazole,
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, and morphine. On
physical examination, his vital signs were notable for
a heart rate of 129 beats per minute. He appeared
thin and pale; his oral examination revealed thrush.
Abdominal examination of the patient was notable
for a large right-sided mass, and the examination of
his extremities revealed 21 pitting edema as well as
a small area of erythema located at his limb salvage
surgical site. At the time of admission, a complete
blood cell count revealed low hemoglobin (7.8 g/dL),
decreased platelets (49 k/uL), and a normal level
of white blood cells. Also notable on initial laboratory testing was hyponatremia (132 mmol/L) and
hypoalbuminemia (2.4 g/dL). The patient was immediately hospitalized, received a transfusion of packed
red blood cells, and was treated for presumed infection with broad-spectrum intravenous antibiotics.
On admission, MA was continued without stress
dose glucocorticoids. During hospitalization, palliative care consultants ordered morning serum cortisol
(2.5 lg/dL [normal, 4.3–22.4 g/dL]) as well as serum
total testosterone (24 ng/dL [normal, 241–827 ng/
dL]). In addition, serum adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) was low at 5 pg/mL (normal, 7–50 pg/
mL) and an adrenocorticotropin stimulation test
revealed inadequate adrenal response consistent with
adrenal insufficiency. MA was replaced with hydrocortisone (at a dose of 300 mg/daily) and his clinical
condition slowly improved. The septic workups
initiated at the time of admission, including cultures
of the blood, throat, and urine, were negative. He
was eventually discharged home on hydrocortisone
taper and broad-spectrum antibiotics. During an outpatient follow-up visit he was doing well, and his
subsequent laboratory testing revealed normal morning testosterone levels.

Patient 2
A 63-year-old white male with a history of nonsmall
cell lung cancer presented to the palliative medicine
clinic reporting decreased appetite, profound fatigue,
and lightheadedness on standing. He was previously
treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy comprised
of carboplatin and paclitaxel, and subsequently
underwent pneumonectomy of his left lung. After
recovering from surgery, he received further chemotherapy with docetaxel plus imexon and pemetrexed.
Despite treatment, his disease metastasized to his
liver and the upper pole of his right kidney, sparing

the adrenal glands. His past medical history was notable for tobacco abuse and renal vein thrombosis,
and his current medications included MA (at a dose
of 400 mg/daily) and enoxaprin. On physical examination, his vital signs were normal and he appeared
well. The initial laboratory evaluation including a
complete blood cell count was within normal limits
with the exception of decreased hemoglobin (10.8 g/
dL). On subsequent laboratory testing, the patient
was noted to have diminished morning serum cortisol (1.9 lg/dL) and decreased total serum testosterone (31 ng/dL). Thyroid-stimulating hormone and
serum albumin levels were normal. Secondary to his
history of thromboembolic disease, low serum cortisol, and diminished testosterone, MA was tapered
while he was supplemented with dexamethasone (at
a dose of 4 mg/daily) and topical testosterone (at a
dose of 5 g/daily). On the follow-up outpatient visit,
he was noted to have profound improvement in
symptoms of fatigue and no further episodes of lightheadedness.

Patient 3
A 71-year-old white male with a history of metastatic
carcinoma of unknown primary involving the left humerus presented to the palliative medicine clinic
reporting diaphoresis, nocturia, fatigue, dyspnea with
exertion, and increased drowsiness. The patient was
previously treated with radiation therapy and chemotherapy with paclitaxel, carboplatin, and, most
recently, capecitabine. His medical history was significant for hypothyroidism, mild renal insufficiency,
depression, and benign prostatic hypertrophy. His
medications included long-acting oxycodone for
pain, MA (at a dose of 800 mg/daily), escitalopram
oxalate, levothyroxine, and fludrocortisone. On physical examination, the patient appeared well, with the
exception of faint skin erythema on his left upper extremity. His initial laboratory testing revealed critically low morning serum cortisol (1.4 lg/dL),
decreased morning total testosterone (31 ng/dL), and
a diminished thyroid-stimulating hormone level at
0.03 mIU (normal, 0.4–4.5 mIU). His levothyroxine
dosage was decreased and MA was discontinued. In
addition, treatment with dexamethasone (at a dose
of 1 mg/daily) and methylphenidate was initiated.
On a follow-up visit in the palliative medicine clinic,
he noted significant improvement of his symptoms
and he was subsequently tapered off dexamethasone.
On repeat laboratory testing, androgen deficiency
was confirmed. After discussing the risks and benefits of therapy, the patient was prescribed a transdermal testosterone patch (5 g/daily).

Megestrol Treatment Complications/Dev et al.

DISCUSSION
MA has been shown to stimulate appetite in patients
with anorexia and cancer cachexia in several placebo-controlled trials.6–9 However, its use has the
potential for undesired side effects including thromboembolism, adrenocortical suppression, hyperglycemia, hypertension, alopecia, gynecomastia, and
impotence. Adrenal insufficiency may be an unrecognized complication because patients can present
with nonspecific symptoms including fatigue, joint
pain, anorexia, and gastrointestinal abnormalities,
and during periods of increased stress they may
manifest additional symptoms including cardiovascular instability and hypoglycemia.10 In addition to
adrenal suppression, MA can result in low testosterone,11,12 which is linked with symptoms of fatigue,
decreased libido, sleep disturbance, and poor concentration. Other effects of long-term androgen deficiency include low bone mineral density, reduced
muscle mass, mild anemia, and increased body fat.
Low testosterone in cancer patients has also been
associated with mood disturbances13 and decreased
appetite.14 Our case series raises questions as to
whether the inherent glucocorticoid activity of MA
provides adequate physiologic supplementation to
prevent the symptoms of adrenal insufficiency and
whether the treatment of anorexia with MA inadvertently results in symptomatic androgen deficiency in
male patients with cancer.
A progesterone analog, MA stimulates appetite
by an unknown mechanism. MA at doses of >160
mg/day can inhibit ACTH, resulting in adrenal insufficiency10 at the hypothalamic-pituitary level.15–17
However, MA does have inherent glucocorticoid
properties and binds to glucocorticoid receptors with
approximately half the binding affinity of dexamethasone and twice the affinity of cortisol.18
A review of the literature reveals case reports of
MA use resulting in symptomatic adrenal insufficiency in patients with cancer.19,20 Children with
cancer may have increased susceptibility for symptomatic adrenal suppression when being treated with
MA for symptoms of cachexia.21 During periods of
acute illness, patients receiving MA are recommended to receive empiric therapy with stress doses
of corticosteroids.16,22 When discontinuing chronic
MA therapy, the manufacturer directs physicians to
consider glucocorticoid supplementation in patients
with symptoms of adrenal insufficiency in the
stressed or nonstressed state. It may be difficult to
determine the degree of stress in a patient with
advanced cancer. Future research may be needed to
address the question of whether glucocorticoid sup-

1175

plementation or MA taper is safer than abrupt discontinuation of chronic therapy in patients with
advanced disease and children with cancer.
MA also has profound effects on testosterone,
reducing levels to near castration levels in elderly
men11 and in patients with advanced prostatic cancer.12 Although to our knowledge the mechanism of
androgen suppression is unknown, MA has been
shown to reduce serum luteinizing hormone levels in
patients with prostate23 and breast cancer.24 In addition, in healthy elderly men, MA was shown to
increase prolactin levels by 150%,17 which can result
in androgen deficiency. In male patients with
advanced cancer, other medications, including glucocorticoids25 and chronic opioids,26 may also contribute to the increased frequency of androgen
deficiency.13
The first patient in the current study presented
with fever and nonspecific symptoms, raising concern for possible underlying infection and sepsis.
During admission, clinicians were unaware of the
risk of endocrine abnormalities associated with MA
use such as adrenal insufficiency and low testosterone. In view of his history of venous thrombosis, MA
was discontinued and adrenal insufficiency was treated with hydrocortisone. Although the patient’s septic
workup was negative, an underlying infectious etiology could not be definitively excluded. However,
because symptoms of adrenal insufficiency can overlap with that of sepsis, clinicians need a low threshold to evaluate the adrenal axis when patients being
treated with MA are hospitalized or exposed to
increased stress. In addition to adrenal insufficiency,
the patient had low testosterone, which may have
contributed to his symptom burden. After discontinuing MA, his total testosterone level returned to
within normal limits.
The second patient in our study presented to the
palliative outpatient clinic with nonspecific symptoms of poor appetite, fatigue, and lightheadedness.
His laboratory tests revealed critically low morning
cortisol and testosterone levels. Because a morning
cortisol level <4 lg is specific for an impaired
hypothalamic pituitary axis,27,28 further testing with
low-dose adrenocorticotropin was not pursued. In
addition to adrenal and gonadal axis suppression,
the patient had a history of thromboembolic disease,
making it difficult to justify continuation of MA. His
symptoms resolved with glucorticoid supplementation. Other possible causes of androgen deficiency in
our second patient include an unrecognized side
effect of past chemotherapy as well as his history of
advanced cancer.

1176

CANCER

September 15, 2007 / Volume 110 / Number 6

The third patient in the current study presented
to our ambulatory palliative clinic with multiple nonspecific symptoms. His evaluation revealed several
abnormalities in the hypothalamic pituitary axis,
including abnormal thyroid function, critically low
morning serum cortisol, and diminished morning
total testosterone. After his levothyroxine dose was
adjusted and MA was replaced with dexamethasone,
his symptoms improved. Several confounding factors
including preexisting thyroid deficiency and concurrent treatment with fludrocortisones make it difficult
to determine the impact of MA on the hypothalamic
pituitary axis, and whether his symptom improvement was secondary to discontinuation of MA versus
treatment with glucocorticoids is unclear. In addition, despite being tapered off glucocorticoids, his
morning total testosterone remained low, and he
was offered transdermal testosterone replacement
therapy.
Physicians need to be conscious of the inherent
glucocorticoid activity of MA and to have a heightened awareness of the complication of adrenal
insufficiency. After treatment of adrenal insufficiency,
follow-up cortisol levels, which we acknowledge are
lacking in our case series, should be checked to confirm the recovery of the adrenal axis. In addition,
patients with cancer receiving MA who present with
symptoms of abnormal mood, anorexia, decreased libido, fatigue, or insomnia need their morning testosterone levels measured. The symptomatic impact of
androgen suppression secondary to MA needs to be
better characterized and research into the utility of
monitoring the hypothalamic pituitary axis before
and during therapy with MA may be needed. It may
be argued that all symptomatic male cancer patients
receiving MA, glucocorticoids, or opioids need to be
screened for hypogonadism, because testosterone
replacement may play an important role in symptom
management. To our knowledge, clinical trials
addressing the benefits of androgen replacement in
hypogonadic men with advanced cancer are currently lacking. However, in a recent open-label study,
hypogonadic noncancer patients receiving chronic
opioid therapy benefited symptomatically from
testosterone supplementation,29 and the Endocrine
Society guidelines suggests considering short-term
testosterone replacement in men with androgen deficiency receiving high-dose glucocorticoids.30
In conclusion, the hypothalamic pituitary adrenal and gonadal axis in conjunction with the pineal
gland regulates our thirst, hunger, libido, mood, and
energy level. The hypothalamic pituitary axis is not
protected by the blood/brain barrier and is exposed
to multiple therapeutic agents that are utilized in

patients with advanced cancer. In the palliative
patient population, medications such as MA, glucocorticoids, and opioids are often used for symptom
control but have the potential to suppress the axis.
Future research on the symptomatic benefits of the
physiologic supplementation of hydrocortisone and
testosterone in patients with advanced cancer with
adrenal insufficiency and hypogonadism is needed.

REFERENCES
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.
11.

12.

13.

14.
15.

Lopez AP, Figuls MR, Cuchi GU, et al. Systematic review of
megestrol acetate in treatment of anorexia-cachexia syndrome. J Pain Symptom Manage. 2004;27:360–369.
Berenstein EG, Ortiz Z. Megestrol acetate for the treatment
of anorexia-cachexia syndrome. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev. 2005;2:CD004310.
Ruiz-Garcia V, Juan O, Perez Hoyos S, et al. Megestrol acetate: a systematic review usefulness about the weight gain
in neoplastic patients with cachexia [in Spanish]. Med Clin
(Barc). 2002;119:166–170.
Mann M, Koller E, Murgo A, Malozowski S, Bacsanyi J, Leinung M. Glucocorticoidlike activity of megestrol. A summary of Food and Drug Administration experience and a
review of the literature. Arch Intern Med. 1997;157:1651–
1656.
McKone EF, Tonelli MR, Aitken ML. Adrenal insufficiency
and testicular failure secondary to megestrol acetate therapy in a patient with cystic fibrosis. Pediatr Pulmonol.
2002;34:381–383.
Bruera E, Ernst S, Hagen N, et al. Effectiveness of megestrol
acetate in patients with advanced cancer: a randomized,
double-blinded crossover study. Cancer Prev Control. 1998;
2:74–78.
Loprinzi CL, Ellison NM, Schaid DJ, et al. Controlled trial
of megestrol acetate for the treatment of cancer anorexia
and cachexia. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1990;82:1127–1132.
Tchekmedyian NS, Hickman M, Siau J, et al. Megestrol acetate in cancer anorexia and weight loss. Cancer. 1992;69:
1268–1274.
Feliu J, Gonzales-Baron M, Berrocal A, et al. Usefulness of
megestrol acetate in cancer cachexia and anorexia. Am J
Clin Oncol. 1992;15:436–440.
Salvatori R. Adrenal insufficiency. JAMA. 2005;294:2481–
2498.
Lambert CP, Sullivan DH, Freeling SA, Lindquist DM, Evans
WJ. Effects of testosterone replacement and/or resistance
exercise on the composition of megestrol acetate stimulated weight gain in elderly men. A randomized controlled
trial. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2002;87:2100–2106.
Geller J, Albert J, Yen SSC. Treatment of advanced cancer
of prostate with megestrol acetate. Urology. 1978;12:537–
541.
Strasser F, Palmer JL, Schover LR, et al. The impact of hypogonadism and autonomic dysfunction on fatigue, emotional function, and sexual desire in male patients with
advanced cancer. Cancer. 2006;107:2949–2957.
Garcia J, Li H, Mann D, et al. Hypogonadism in male
patients with cancer. Cancer. 2006;106:2583–2591.
Meacham LR, Mazewski C, Krawiecki N. Mechanism of
transient adrenal insufficiency with megestrol acetate
treatment of cachexia in children with cancer. J Pediatr
Hematol Oncol. 2003;25:414–417.

Megestrol Treatment Complications/Dev et al.
16. Naing KK, Dewar JA, Leese GP. Megestrol acetate therapy
and secondary adrenal suppression. Cancer. 1999;86:1044–
1049.
17. Bodenner DL, Medhi M, Evans WJ, Sullivan DH, Liu H,
Lambert CP. Effects of megestrol acetate on pituitary function and end-organ hormone secretion: a post hoc analysis
of serum samples from a 12-week study in healthy older
men. Am J Geriatr Pharmacother. 2005;3:160–167.
18. Kontula K, Paavonen T, Luukkainen T, Andersson LC. Binding of progestins to the glucocorticod receptor. Correlation
to their glucocorticoid-like effects on in vitro functions of
human mononuclear leukocytes. Biochem Pharmacol. 1983;
32:1511–1518.
19. Fried G, Stein M, Haim N. A rare event of megestrol acetate (Megace)-induced adrenal suppression in a breast cancer patient. Am J Clin Oncol. 1997;20:628–629.
20. Subramanian S, Goker H, Kanji A, Sweeney H. Clinical adrenal insufficiency in patients receiving megestrol therapy.
Arch Intern Med. 1997;157:1008–1011.
21. Orme L, Bond J, Humphrey M, et al. Megestrol acetate in
pediatric oncology patients may lead to severe, symptomatic adrenal suppression. Cancer. 2003;98:397–405.
22. Loprinzi CL, Fonseca R, Jensen MJ. Induction of adrenal
suppression by megestrol acetate. Ann Intern Med. 1996;
124:613.

1177

23. Geller J, Albert J, Yen SS, Geller S, Loza D. Medical castration of males with megestrol acetate and small doses of
diethylstilbestrol. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1981;52:576–580.
24. Pommier RF, Woltering EA, Flethcher WS. Changes in serum sex steroid levels during megestrol acetate therapy.
Surg Oncol. 1994;3:351–359.
25. MacAdams MR, White RH, Chipps BE. Reduction of serum
testosterone levels during chronic glucocorticoid therapy.
Ann Intern Med. 1986;104:648.
26. Rajagopal A, Vassilopoulou-Sellin R, Palmer JL, Kaur G, Bruera
E. Symptomatic hypogonadism in male survivors of cancer
with chronic exposure to opioids. Cancer. 2004;100:851–858.
27. Erturk E, Jaffe CA, Barkan AL. Evaluation of the integrity of
the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis by insulin hypoglycemia test. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1998;83:2350–2354.
28. Hagg E, Asplund K, Lithner F. Value of basal plasma cortisol assays in the assessment of pituitary-adrenal insufficiency. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 1987;26:221–226.
29. Daniell HW, Lentz R, Mazer NA. Open-label pilot study of
testosterone patch therapy in men with opioid-induced
androgen deficiency. J Pain. 2006;7:200–210.
30. Bhasin S, Cunningham GR, Hayes FJ, et al. Testosterone
therapy in adult men with androgen deficiency syndromes:
an Endocrine Society clinical practice guideline. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab. 2006;91:1995–2010.

