Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 20

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Editorial

Trafficking of lymphocytes into the CNS
Nicholas Schwab, Tilman Schneider-Hohendorf, and Heinz Wiendl

action, it is imperative to functionally elucidate exactly
these interactions. Our work about CD4 cells and their
expression of VLA-4, PSGL-1, and MCAM contributes
one facet to the overall picture (Schneider-Hohendorf
et al., 2014). We could show that if human T cells are
subjected to in vivo VLA-4 blockade (during treatment
with natalizumab), they continuously upregulate PSGL1 and can use it to enhance their rolling capacities over
primary human endothelial cells. As this “upregulation”
takes months and years to reach a plateau, we speculate
that it is not in fact a gene regulation process, but more
a process on a population level, in which the immune
system over time selects for those T cells with higher
PSGL-1 expression, leading to a gradual increase of
this molecule in the overall population. However, these
T cells might be able to roll alongside the endothelium
with a higher frequency (and also on endothelial cells
with lower expression of PSGL-1 ligands than cells
without that upregulation), but without VLA-4 they are
unable to adhere to it. At least this is true for most T cells.
Interestingly, there is an adhesion molecule, which was
originally discovered during oncological studies: MCAM
(melanoma cell adhesion molecule). A subpopulation of T
cells express MCAM (it has been shown that these cells
are mostly Th17 cells) and we could show that they can
use their MCAM expression to adhere to endothelial cells
even without using VLA-4. In vivo this leads to the CSFresident cells of natalizumab-treated patients to express
no VLA-4 and high quantities of MCAM. Whether
these MCAM+ cells use an MCAM-ligand interaction
to mediate adhesion or if they use MCAM to mediate
adhesion by proxy, because they possess a functional
advantage due to their expression of this molecule, is still
unclear. The MCAM+ cells in the CSF and the CNS of
these patients are obviously unable to trigger relapses
on their own, as all Th1 cells depend on VLA-4 to enter
the CNS and this molecule is blocked by natalizumab.
However, even without relapses it is possible that these
cells can mediate some form of damage on their own
and contribute to underlying slow processes of disease
progression. Additionally, this might be the reason why
the cessation of natalizumab usually leads to a strong
rebound of MS activity (Melis et al., 2013): as the relapsetriggering cells (Th17) are already located in the CNS, the
removal of the VLA-4 blockade allows for a swift and
immense recruitment of Th1 cells. Future studies will

Immune cell migration over the blood-brain barrier
into the central nervous system has been a topic of
research for the last century, but it has gained significant
momentum 20 years ago with the possibility of blocking
adhesion molecules with monoclonal antibodies and
use these as a therapeutic avenue for immune-mediated
tissue damage (Yednock et al., 1992). In principle this
concept applies to organ transplantation, as well as to
autoimmunity, disease examples being psoriasis, Crohn’s
disease, and multiple sclerosis (Stüve and Wiendl, 2009).
The general principle is easy: immune cells are equipped
with a set of (surface) molecules, which they use to
interact with the respective ligands on the surface of the
endothelial barriers separating blood circulation from the
central nervous system tissue. Progress in immunology
of the last few years has contributed numerous novel
immune cell subpopulations and deep-resolution
characterization of know subsets, all better characterized
by different sets of e.g. cell surface molecules, cytokine
production or transcription signatures (Ransohoff,
2009). To complicate matters even more, the field now
acknowledges the existence of at least 3-4 “blood-brain
barriers” or trafficking routes into the CNS, each of them
comprising a different set of endo- and epithelial cells with
their own and unique expression of (adhesion) molecules.
Furthermore, homeostatic and pathological conditions can
change those patterns completely, e.g. during inflammation
(Engelhardt and Ransohoff, 2012). Cellular adhesion of
lymphocytes under physiological flow conditions depends
on several steps (activation, rolling, weak- and firmadhesion, crawling, diapedesis) even though these steps
can differ between cellular subsets and the respective
barrier.
Molecular interactions between PSGL-1 and P-/E/L-selectin, LFA-1 and ICAM-1/2, and especially VLA-4
and VCAM-1 have been the main focus of immune cell
adhesion. However, to find out exactly which immune
cells use which molecules to interact with which molecule
on the barrier side is a herculean task. Natalizumab, a
blocking monoclonal antibody against the integrin alpha
chain of VLA-4, works by completely blocking the VLA4-mediated adhesion step of lymphocytes to endothelial
cells and has been proven to be a very effective treatment
in most MS patients. However, if the next generation
of treatments against immune-mediated diseases is
supposed to be more specific in its mechanisms of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17863

Oncotarget

have to explore the possibility of treating MS patients
according to their pathogenic phenotype: Th1-driven MS
pathology might be effectively treated with blockade of
VLA-4, but Th17-driven pathology probably will not. As
Th17 cells migrate (over the choroid plexus) into the CNS
using a different set of adhesion molecules (Rothhammer
et al., 2011), a different treatment might be better suited
to inhibit their pathological potential. Whether that is the
combined blockade of VLA-4 and MCAM remains to be
seen, as these cells might also fulfill important functions in
immune surveillance that we do not yet understand and the
complete blockade of CNS infiltration could lead to even
more severe adverse events such as PML.
In summary, trafficking lymphocytes and
specifically lymphocyte subpopulations have individual
signatures of adhesion molecules that allow for entry into
the CNS. Neutralization of VLA-4 with the monoclonal
antibody natalizumab, a highly effective therapy for MS,
does not completely prevent all leukocyte traffic into the

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

CNS. It does, however, inhibit central memory cells from
entering and overall induces a dramatic, but reversible
shift of the lymphocytes and immune cell milieu in the
CNS and the CSF. This might explain, why in the general
MS population the lack of migration inhibition of Th17
cells is without major clinical consequences, but in some
forms of inflammatory CNS diseases (such as e.g. the
NMO spectrum) this therapy does not work.
Nicholas Schwab: Department of Neurology, University of
Muenster, Muenster, Germany
Correspondence to: Nicholas Schwab, email nicholas.
schwab@ukmuenster.de
Keywords: Pathology Section
Received: July 06, 2015
Published: July 17, 2015

17864

Oncotarget

