Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 27

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Editorial

HIF2a inhibitors for the treatment of VHL disease
Ana Martins Metelo, Haley Noonan and Othon Iliopoulos
orthologs of human HIF2a and ameliorates significantly
the phenotypic abnormalities of the vhl-/- embryos. This
work indicates that pharmacological inhibition of HIF2a
is sufficient to treat VHL-disease related abnormalities. In
addition, it provides strong rational for further preclinical
development of these HIF2a inhibitors.
Zebrafish possess two orthologs of human HIF2a,
called epas1a and epas1b, as well as two orthologs
of human HIF1a, hif1aa and hif1ab. We previously
showed that only human HIF2a contains a 5’-UTR
with a functional IRE, unlike HIF1a, and consequently,
compound 76 is specific for HIF2a and does not suppress
HIF1a translation in mammalian cells [5]. We proved
that the same is true for the 5’-UTR of zebrafish Hif2a
orthologs, epas1a and epas1b.
To test whether compound 76 has the ability to
repress epas1a and epas1b activity in vivo we challenged
wild type zebrafish embryos with a chemical hypoxia
mimetic, DMOG. Treatment of animals with DMOG
results in stabilization of all zebrafish orthologs of
human HIF1a/2a and robust upregulation of their target
genes (phd3, epo, and vegfab). Compound 76 suppressed
the expression of hypoxia-target genes in zebrafish.
Morpholino knockdown experiments strongly suggest that
hypoxic expression of epo and vegf is primarily controlled
by the Hif2a paralogs, epas1a and epas1b. Suppression
of epas1a and epas1b by compound 76 was biologically
impactful; compound 76 significantly suppressed the
epo-driven erythrocytosis and angiogenesis that followed
exposure of embryos to DMOG.
In the process of quantifying the effect of inhibitor
76 we developed, in collaboration with the Carpenter
Laboratory at the Broad Institute, a computerized imagebased assay that allows the quantification of angiogenesis
and erythropoiesis in zebrafish embryos. This novel
method can now be applied to high-throughput screens for
the identification of compounds that regulate angiogenesis
and erythropoiesis in vivo.
Zebrafish embryos, homozygous for vhl loss-offunction mutations (vhl-/- embryos), resemble human
VHL disease and develop epo-driven erythrocytosis,
complex blood vessel networks in the brain and retina
reminiscent of HB, increased proliferation of their liver
and kidney that is reflective of VHL-associated tumor
biology, and cardiomegaly with decreased cardiac
contractility [6]. We used vhl-/- embryos to test the in vivo
effect of the HIF2a inhibitors that we identified. We found
that compound 76 significantly suppresses the expression

Patients with von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease
possess a germline mutation in the VHL tumor suppressor
gene that confers a life-time risk of developing renal
cell carcinomas (RCC), central nervous system
hemangioblastomas
(HB),
pheochromocytomas,
pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors, papillary cystadenomas
and erythrocytosis [1]. The VHL protein targets the
Hypoxia Inducible Factors 1 and 2a (HIF1a and HIF2a)
for proteasomal degradation in cells exposed to a normal
range of oxygen concentration. However, low oxygen
concentration (hypoxia) or loss-of-VHL function lead to
HIF1a/2a stabilization and transactivation of HIF-target
genes. HIF1a/2a are transcription factors targeting genes
such as vascular endothelial factor (VEGF), transforming
growth factor (TGF), erythropoietin (EPO), erythropoietin
receptor (EPOR), transferrin, and angiopoietin 1.
Collectively, the expression of HIF1a/2a target genes
contributes to oncogenic processes such as angiogenesis,
erythropoiesis, reprogramming of metabolism, cell
proliferation, and metastasis [1]. HIF1a and HIF2a are
paralogs expressed in most human epithelial cells and
possess both overlapping and distinct functions [2].
For example, in RCC, it is known that HIF2a acts as an
oncogene, while HIF1a is a tumor suppressor gene [3].
There are currently no drugs available to treat VHL
disease. VHL patients develop multiple tumors over a
lifetime that require repeated surgeries. Not only can such
surgeries for serially appearing lesions result in damaged
renal or brain parenchyma, but oftentimes they are not
feasible due to the location of the HB [4]. Therefore,
pharmacological inhibition of HIF2a would be an ideal
therapeutic strategy in the treatment of VHL disease and
HIF2a-driven tumors. We review here our recent work
and present for the first time evidence that small molecule
HIF2a inhibitors, developed by the Iliopoulos Laboratory
at Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical
School, target HIF2a in vivo, using a vertebrate animal
model of human VHL disease.
We previously identified small molecule HIF2a
inhibitors via a mammalian cell-based reporter screen of
HIF2a activity [5]. These inhibitors operate by enhancing
the binding of iron regulatory protein 1 (IRP1) to an iron
regulatory element (IRE) in the 5’-UTR of HIF2a, but
not HIF1a mRNA, thereby specifically repressing HIF2a
translation. In our recent study, published in Journal of
Clinical Investigation (Metelo AM et al., JCI 2015;125
(5):1987-97), we provide evidence that the HIF2a
inhibitor, lead compound 76, can inhibit the zebrafish
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23036

Oncotarget

of epas1a/1b-target genes (phd3, epo, transferrin, vegfab,
angiopoietin 1, and tgfa) in vhl-/- mutant embryos. The
effect of the inhibitor was not merely biochemical;
compound 76 suppressed the epo-driven erythrocytosis
as well as the abnormal vascular proliferation seen in
the brain and trunk characterizing the vhl-/- embryos. In
addition, compound 76 promoted erythroid differentiation
and decreased the number of early erythroid progenitors
circulating in the peripheral blood. The number of
erythroid progenitors is characteristically increased in
vhl-/- embryos, possibly as a direct effect of epas1a/1b
on erythroid maturation. Finally, we found that the HIF2a
inhibitor compound 76 significantly improved cardiac
contractility among the vhl-/- embryos and enhanced their
viability.
In conclusion, our work presents an example
of pharmacological treatment of VHL disease related
abnormalities in a vertebrate animal model. HIF2a
inhibitor 76, a lead compound, exhibits promising in vivo
activity as it can partially reverse the VHL phenotype
in zebrafish. These observations provide a strong
rationale for optimization of compound 76 via medicinal
chemistry to develop derivatives suitable for preclinical
and clinical testing. The VHL gene is inactivated in
over 90% of sporadic RCC tumors [7], rendering RCC
a model disease for HIF2a inactivation. Specific HIF2ainhibitors can be used not only to treat VHL disease but

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

the majority of these sporadic RCC as well. In addition,
there is compelling preclinical and clinical evidence for
the contribution of HIF2a expression in several human
malignancies (such as glioblastoma, lung, colon, ovarian
and prostate cancer).
Othon Iliopoulos: Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer
Center and Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, MA,
USA
Correspondence to: Othon Iliopoulos, email oiliopoulos@
partners.org
Keywords: hypoxia, VHL, HIF2a inhibitors, renal cancer
Received: June 03, 2015
Published: June 25, 2015

References

23037

1.	

Iliopoulos O. J Clin Oncol. 2006; 24: 5593-5600.

2.	

Hu C et al. Mol Cell Biol. 2003; 23: 9361-9374.

3.	

Shen C et al. Cancer Discov. 2011; 1: 222-235.

4.	

Lonser RR et al. Lancet. 2003; 361: 2059-2067.

5.	

Zimmer M et al. Mol Cell. 2008; 32: 838-848.

6.	

Van Rooijen E et al. Blood. 2009; 113: 6449-6460.

7.	

The Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network. Nature. 2013;
499: 43-9.

Oncotarget

