Priority Report

Cells Deficient in the FANC/BRCA Pathway Are Hypersensitive
to Plasma Levels of Formaldehyde
1

1,3

4

2

John R. Ridpath, Ayumi Nakamura, Keizo Tano, April M. Luke, Eiichiro Sonoda,
6
6
7
8
Hiroshi Arakawa, Jean-Marie Buerstedde, David A.F. Gillespie, Julian E. Sale,
5
9
10
5
Mitsuyoshi Yamazoe, Douglas K. Bishop, Minoru Takata, Shunichi Takeda,
4
1,2
1
Masami Watanabe, James A. Swenberg, and Jun Nakamura

5

1
Department of Environmental Sciences and Engineering, and 2Curriculum in Toxicology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
Chapel Hill, North Carolina; 3College of Arts and Sciences, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia; 4Research Reactor Institute,
Kyoto University, Kumatori, Japan; 5Department of Radiation Genetics Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan; 6GSF-National
Research Center for Environment and Health, Institute for Molecular Radiobiology, Neuherberg-Munich, Germany; 7Beatson
Institute for Cancer Research, Glasgow, United Kingdom; 8Medical Research Council Laboratory of Molecular Biology,
Division of Protein and Nucleic Acid Chemistry, Cambridge, United Kingdom; 9Department of Radiation
and Cellular Oncology, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois; and 10Department of Human Genetics,
Research Institute for Radiation Biology and Medicine, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan

Abstract
Formaldehyde is an aliphatic monoaldehyde and is a highly
reactive environmental human carcinogen. Whereas humans
are continuously exposed to exogenous formaldehyde, this
reactive aldehyde is a naturally occurring biological compound that is present in human plasma at concentrations
ranging from 13 to 97 Mmol/L. It has been well documented
that DNA-protein crosslinks (DPC) likely play an important
role with regard to the genotoxicity and carcinogenicity of
formaldehyde. However, little is known about which DNA
damage response pathways are essential for cells to counteract formaldehyde. In the present study, we first assessed the
DNA damage response to plasma levels of formaldehyde using
chicken DT40 cells with targeted mutations in various DNA
repair genes. Here, we show that the hypersensitivity to formaldehyde is detected in DT40 mutants deficient in the BRCA/
FANC pathway, homologous recombination, or translesion
DNA synthesis. In addition, FANCD2-deficient DT40 cells are
hypersensitive to acetaldehyde, but not to acrolein, crotonaldehyde, glyoxal, and methylglyoxal. Human cells deficient in
FANCC and FANCG are also hypersensitive to plasma levels of
formaldehyde. These results indicate that the BRCA/FANC
pathway is essential to counteract DPCs caused by aliphatic
monoaldehydes. Based on the results obtained in the present
study, we are currently proposing that endogenous formaldehyde might have an effect on highly proliferating cells,
such as bone marrow cells, as well as an etiology of cancer in
Fanconi anemia patients. [Cancer Res 2007;67(23):11117–22]

Introduction
Formaldehyde is an aliphatic monoaldehyde and is a highly
reactive environmental pollutant found in automobile emissions
and tobacco smoke. Recently, formaldehyde has been reevaluated
Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research Online
(http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Current address for M. Takata: Radiation Biology Center, Kyoto University, Kyoto,
Japan, and M. Yamazoe: Wakayama Medical University, School of Medicine,
Wakayama, Japan.
Requests for reprints: Jun Nakamura, Department of Environmental Sciences
and Engineering, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599.
Phone: 919-966-6140; Fax: 919-966-6123; E-mail: ynakamur@email.unc.edu.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-3028

www.aacrjournals.org

by the IARC as a known environmental human carcinogen (group 1)
due to a positive association between the extent of formaldehyde exposure of workers and their death from nasopharyngeal
cancer (1). Whereas humans are continuously exposed to exogenous formaldehyde, this chemical is also a naturally occurring
biological compound that is present in all tissues, cells, and bodily
fluids. Formaldehyde and its oxidation product, formic acid,
function as key intermediates in the ‘‘one-carbon pool’’ (2) used
for the biosynthesis of purines, thymidine, and some amino
acids. It has been found that the concentration of endogenous
formaldehyde in human plasma ranges from 13 to 97 Amol/L
(3, 4), with Heck et al. reporting an average of 82 Amol/L (calculated using 1.060 for the density of human blood). Formaldehyde is usually rapidly metabolized by reduction, oxidation, and
reduced glutathione (GSH)–dependent pathways. However, saturation in formaldehyde metabolism may lead to DNA damage.
It has been well documented that cells exposed to formaldehyde exhibit, as a major form of DNA damage, DNA-protein crosslinks (DPC; ref. 5). DNA-histone crosslinks have been shown to
have a strong correlation with formaldehyde-induced tumor
incidence in animals. As a result, the level of formaldehydeinduced DPCs is considered to be a good molecular dosimeter for
formaldehyde cancer risk assessment (5). Although understanding the importance of DPCs with regard to the genotoxicity of
formaldehyde is paramount, little is known about which DNA
damage response pathways are essential for cells to counteract
formaldehyde.
Fanconi anemia is characterized by developmental abnormalities, susceptibility to certain cancers, and sensitivity to DNA-DNA
crosslinking agents (6). At least 13 FANC complementation groups
(A, B, C, D1, D2, E, F, G, I, J, L, M, N) have been identified (6).
These proteins interact in a common pathway that activates
FANCD2 via monoubiquitination (6). Upon recognition of a stalled
replication fork, for instance, by the nuclear E3 monoubiquitin
ligase core complex, activated FANCD2 is targeted to BRCA1
nuclear foci where it regulates DNA repair by possibly homologous recombination and translesion synthesis (6). DT40 cells and
their isogenic mutants have predominantly been used to investigate the function of various gene products (7). In the present
study, we assessed the DNA damage response to formaldehyde
by the reverse genetic approach using the DT40 cell model
system and isogenic human cancer cells deficient in the FANC
pathway.

11117

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (23). December 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Materials and Methods
Materials. Fetal bovine serum (FBS), 2,3-bis[2-methoxy-4-nitro-5-sulfophenyl]-2H-tetrazolium-5-carboxanilide inner salt (XTT), 1-methoxy-5methylphenazinium methyl sulfate, acetaldehyde, acrolein, glyoxal, and
methylglyoxal were obtained from Sigma. Formaldehyde and crotonaldehyde were purchased from Fisher Scientific and Across Organics,
respectively. The total GSH quantification kit was from Dojindo Molecular
Technologies, Inc. RPMI 1640 culture medium, chicken serum, and
penicillin/streptomycin were obtained from Invitrogen.
Cell lines and cell culture. All DT40 mutants were derived from
isogenic DT40 parent cell lines (Supplementary Table S1). The DT40 cells
and their mutants were cultured as previously reported (8). Parental
colorectal cancer cell lines (RKO) cells and isogenic clones harboring an
engineered disruption of FANCC or FANCG (9) were cultured in a humidified 5% CO2 atmosphere at 37jC. The medium consisted of RPMI 1640 cell
culture medium containing 10% FBS (heat inactivated), 100 mg/mL
penicillin, and 100 mg/mL streptomycin.
Cell survival assay. For DT40 cells and their mutants, suspended cells
(f600 cells per 250 AL per well) were seeded into 24-well plates, exposed to
formaldehyde (and other aldehydes), and allowed to divide for f10 cycles.
The formaldehyde used was 37% aqueous and was serially diluted in sterile
1 PBS (Life Technologies) to obtain the appropriate concentrations in
the plates. All formaldehyde dilutions were made fresh and kept on ice.
(Initially, a colony formation assay was attempted, but discontinued, as it
seemed formaldehyde reacted adversely with the methylcellulose semisolid
medium). After cultivation, cell viability was determined by the XTT assay
(10). For RKO cells and their isogenic cells deficient in FANCC or FANCG,
the adhesive cells (f600 cells per 250 AL per well) were seeded into 24-well
plates and cultivated for 2 days before treatment. After changing to fresh

medium, the cells were exposed to formaldehyde and allowed to divide for
7 days. The medium was replenished at 4 days after treatment. The survival
rates were determined as described above.
Determination of intracellular total GSH. Total GSH levels were
measured according to the manufacturer’s directions using a commercially
available kit.
Statistical analysis. Survival data were log-transformed giving approximate normality. Analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) was used to test for
mean intercept differences and differences in the slopes of the linear doseresponse curves between wild-type and a series of mutant cells.

Results and Discussion
Homologous recombination repair and nonhomologous end
joining repair of DNA damage induced by formaldehyde. We
assessed the contribution of each DNA damage response pathway
to formaldehyde-induced DNA damage. Toward this end, we used
a panel of isogenic DT40 cell mutants (Supplementary Table S1),
each of which was defective in a particular DNA repair or cell cycle
checkpoint response pathway. Here, we show that formaldehyde
causes a reduction in survival of DT40-derived mutants that are
deficient in homologous recombination repair. The homologous
recombination repair pathway mutants showed sensitivity to formaldehyde in the following order: FANCD2 >> BRCA2 > BRCA1 =
XRCC2 = RAD51C = RAD51D = XRCC3 = RAD54 > RAD52 > parent
DT40 cells (Fig. 1A and B; Supplementary Fig. S1A and B). In
contrast, cell survival rates were largely equivalent between nonhomologous end joining (NHEJ)–deficient cells and parent DT40

Figure 1. Relative LC50 values and linear
regression analysis of cell survival results
in DT40 cells and their mutants exposed
to formaldehyde. A, each LC50 value
was calculated from results of cell
survival data shown in Figs. 2, 3, and 4.
Relative LC50 values were normalized
according to the LC50 value of parental
wild-type cells. N.S. , no significance.
B, survival rates were log transformed
for ANCOVA analysis to compare slopes
or interceptions between two lines
generated by linear regression lines
derived from DT40 wild-type cells and
mutants. The value of the slopes was
calculated from survival data and was
plotted for each mutant. All mutants
except ku70 (one of the white columns)
showed statistically significant difference
in slopes or interception (P < 0.05).

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (23). December 1, 2007

11118

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Hypersensitivity of FANC/BRCA Mutants to Formaldehyde

Figure 2. Sensitivity of DT40 cells and
DT40-derived FANCD2-deficient cells to
aldehydic agents. Survival of DT40 cells
and FANCD2-deficient cells after exposure
to acetaldehyde (A ), methylglyoxal (B),
acrolein (C ), and crotonaldehyde (D ).
The concentration of each aldehyde is
displayed on the x axis in a linear scale,
whereas the survival rates are displayed on
the y axis in a logarithmic scale. Points,
mean for three or four wells; bars, SD.
Reproducibility was confirmed at least
thrice.

cells (Fig. 1A and B; Supplementary Fig. S1C). One of the metabolic
pathways used by cells to detoxify formaldehyde is GSH-dependent.
Therefore, we tested whether there is an association between
intracellular GSH levels and hypersensitivity of homologous
recombination–deficient cells to formaldehyde. However, we found
no correlation between GSH concentrations and formaldehydeinduced cell toxicity in series of isogenic DT40 cells (data not
shown). These results revealed a requirement for the homologous
recombination pathway, but not the NHEJ pathway, in processing
DNA damage induced by formaldehyde, strongly suggesting that
the homologous recombination pathway is involved in repair of
DPCs.
Role of excision repair pathways in the repair of DNA
damage induced by formaldehyde. Results of biochemical
experiments have indicated that nucleotide excision repair (NER)
is involved in the elimination of DPCs (11, 12). However, the
relative contribution of the various excision repair pathways to the
removal of DPCs has not been fully characterized. Therefore, we
tested each excision repair pathway [NER and base excision repair
(BER)] as to its effectiveness in removing DPCs caused by formaldehyde. Our results show hypersensitivity in the following

www.aacrjournals.org

order: PARP1 (BER/single-strand and double-strand break repairs)
> XPA (NER) > POLh (BER) > FEN1 (BER; Fig. 1A and B;
Supplementary Fig. S1D). The DT40 mutants for POLh and FEN1
showed slight to marginal hypersensitivity, indicating that BER
is not heavily involved in DPC repair. PARP1 is used in many
pathways, such as BER, single-strand break repair, stabilization of
replication forks, and possibly double-strand break repair (13).
Thus, because POLh and FEN1 sensitivities indicate that BER is
probably not highly implicated in formaldehyde-induced DPC
repair, the higher sensitivity of the PARP1 mutant may be due to its
role in DNA replication and double-strand break repair in cells
exposed to formaldehyde. In addition to PARP1, XPA likely plays
a moderate role for counteracting DNA damage induced by formaldehyde. These results obtained from XPA-deficient DT40 cells
agree with a previous study which showed that human fibroblasts
deficient in NER (XPA and XPF) were slightly hypersensitive to
formaldehyde in cell survival (14).
Role of translesion DNA synthesis and cell cycle checkpoint
pathways in the repair of DNA damage induced by formaldehyde. In the DT40 cell model system, REV1-deficient, REV3deficient, and RAD18-deficient cells have been reported to be

11119

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (23). December 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

hypersensitive to various DNA-DNA intercrosslinking agents,
including cisplatin and mitomycin C (15). To determine the role
of translesion synthesis in the repair of DNA damage induced by
formaldehyde, we exposed DT40 and DT40 cells deficient in REV1,
REV3, and RAD18 along with POLu to formaldehyde. For the REV1,
REV3, and RAD18 mutants, our results show good agreement with
the intercrosslinking study, whereas POLu mutants were only
marginally sensitive to formaldehyde (Fig. 1A and B; Supplementary Fig. S1E). Proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) has been
reported to be partly ubiquitinated in a RAD18-dependent manner,
and this monoubiquitination of PCNA is necessary for carrying out
translesion synthesis by polymerase D in yeasts (16). In addition,
it has been proposed that ATR/CHK1 signaling is required for
RAD18-mediated PCNA monoubiquitination against DNA damage
induced by benzo(a)pyrene dihydrodiol epoxide (17). To further
characterize the DNA damage response to formaldehyde, we
exposed formaldehyde to cells deficient in the S-phase cell cycle
components ATM or CHK1. Formaldehyde sensitivity in these
cells was similar to parental cells (Fig. 1A and B; Supplementary
Fig. S1F). These results suggest that neither the ATM nor CHK1
pathway participate in the DNA damage response to formaldehydeinduced DNA damage.
Role of FANCD2 in the repair of DNA damage induced by
endogenously existing aldehydes other than formaldehyde.
Using DT40 cells deficient in FANCD2, the most sensitive cell line
to formaldehyde, we addressed whether other major endogenously
existing aldehydes cause similar hypersensitivity to FANCD2 cells.
Among the endogenously existing aldehydes potentially capable of
inducing DPCs (18), acetaldehyde caused hypersensitivity in FANCD2
cells at millimolar levels (Fig. 2A). Methylglyoxal (Fig. 2B), glyoxal

Figure 3. Sensitivity of RKO cells and their isogenic cells disrupted in FANCC
or FANCG to formaldehyde. Survival of parental RKO cells and their isogenic
FANCC / / and FANCG / cells after exposure to formaldehyde. The
concentrations of formaldehyde are displayed on the x axis in a linear scale,
whereas the survival rates are displayed on the y axis in a logarithmic scale.
Points, mean for three or four wells; bars, SD. Reproducibility was confirmed at
least thrice.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (23). December 1, 2007

(data not shown), acrolein, and crotonaldehyde (Fig. 2C and D)
showed no hypersensitivity in FANCD2 cells (Fig. 2B–D). These
results suggest that the FANC pathway may be essential to counteract DPCs induced by aliphatic short monoaldehydes, but not DPCs
caused by either aliphatic dicarbonyl compounds or a,h-unsaturated
aldehydes. Another possibility is that either a,h-unsaturated
aldehydes or aliphatic dicarbonyl compounds may more efficiently
introduce other types of deleterious DNA lesions, such as exocyclic
base adducts or oxidative base lesions.
Endogenous DPC-inducing agents and Fanconi anemia.
Fanconi anemia, a rare disease with heterozygosity existing at a
frequency of f0.4% of the population (19), is an inherited disorder
associated with progressive bone marrow failure and predisposition to malignant leukemia and solid tumors (6). It has been well
documented that cells from Fanconi anemia patients are hypersensitive to DNA interstrand crosslinking agents (6), with an
associated increase in chromosomal breakage. We know, however,
of no report that has described a condition whereby endogenous
reactive agents, such as formaldehyde, have induced DPCs with the
further induction of toxicity in cells deficient in the FANC pathway.
It has been reported that endogenous formaldehyde in human
plasma is detectable at concentrations ranging from 13 to 97 Amol/L
(3, 4). The two most sensitive DT40 mutants are FANCD1 (BRCA2)–
deficient and FANCD2-deficient cells, which showed hypersensitivity
to formaldehyde at concentrations between 10 and 15 Amol/L. This
observation raises a question about the relevance of data derived
from the DT40 model system to the human cellular response to
formaldehyde. Therefore, we exposed RKO cells and their isogenic
cells disrupted in FANCC or FANCG. The human cells deficient in
either FANCC or FANCG were hypersensitive to formaldehyde at
concentrations 20 Amol/L or higher (FANCC) or 38 Amol/L or
higher (FANCG; Fig. 3). These results indicate that the FANC/BRCA
pathway plays a critical function in not only DT40 cells, but in
human cells. Therefore, we currently hypothesize that endogenous
formaldehyde induces DPCs and plays a critical role in the
initiation of progressive bone marrow failure or predisposition to
malignant tumors in Fanconi anemia patients.
Possible DNA repair pathways for DPCs induced by
formaldehyde. It is widely accepted that formaldehyde predominantly introduces DPCs in cells. The DPC formation is believed to
be related to formaldehyde-induced cancer in animals and humans;
however, little information is available in terms of the DNA damage
response to formaldehyde. Interestingly, we recognized that the
DNA damage responses to formaldehyde in the DT40 cell model
system were similar to those of cisplatin (15). For example, survival
of isogenic DT40 mutants to cisplatin is in the following order:
REV3 > FANCC > RAD18 > XRCC2 > XRCC3 > PARP1 > RAD54 >
BRCA1 > XPA = ATM > BRCA2 = MSH3 > parental DT40 cells.
Because both DNA-DNA crosslinks and DPCs have the potential to
cause stalled DNA replication forks and may introduce doublestrand breaks, hypersensitivity of homologous recombination–
deficient cells to formaldehyde is likely due to DPCs. Furthermore,
cisplatin induces DPCs in addition to interstrand or intrastrand
crosslinks. The similarity of the DNA damage response in DT40
mutants to cisplatin and formaldehyde also raised the possibility
that DPCs caused by cisplatin may have a role in the
hypersensitivity of DT40 cells deficient in the FANC/BRCA and
homologous recombination pathways. We also found hypersensitivity of PARP1-deficient DT40 cells to formaldehyde. Interestingly,
PARP1 also inhibits homologous recombination from interference
by Ku and ligase IV in DT40 cells (20). This report, combined with

11120

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Hypersensitivity of FANC/BRCA Mutants to Formaldehyde

Figure 4. Hypothesized pathway for the
repair of DPC. DSB, DNA double-strand
break.

our results, suggests that without precise regulation of homologous
recombination in the absence of PARP1, the homologous
recombination repair pathway for the repair of double-strand
breaks induced by DPCs may not efficiently restore the integrity of
genomic DNA. Although XPA mutants are more resistant to formaldehyde compared with homologous recombination–deficient cells
(a characteristic shared with cisplatin; ref. 15), XPA-deficient cells
were moderately hypersensitive to formaldehyde, suggesting a
reasonable role for NER in the elimination of DNA damage caused
by formaldehyde. Figure 4 shows a possible DNA repair pathway to
counteract DPCs induced by formaldehyde. In the error-free DPC
excision process, formaldehyde-induced DPCs could be first
degraded to DNA–amino acid crosslinks (DAC) by a cellular proteasome. The NER pathway may recognize and eliminate the DACs
followed by DNA repair synthesis (11, 12, 14). In contrast, errorprone DPC excision processes could exist to tolerate formaldehydeinduced damage. After degradation of DPCs to DACs but before
initiation of excision repair, DNA replication may start and
translesion synthesis DNA polymerases may by-pass and extend
DNA synthesis past the DACs. After DNA replication, the NER
pathway may recognize and eliminate the DACs followed by DNA
repair synthesis. Because homologous recombination–deficient
cells are hypersensitive to formaldehyde, the requirement for

References
1. Cogliano VJ, Grosse Y, Baan RA, Straif K, Secretan MB,
El Ghissassi F. Meeting report: summary of IARC
monographs on formaldehyde, 2-butoxyethanol, and 1tert-butoxy-2-propanol. Environ Health Perspect 2005;
113:1205–8.
2. Neuberger A. The metabolism of glycine and serine.
Amsterdam: Elsevier; 1981.
3. Szarvas T, Szatloczky E, Volford J, et al. Determination

www.aacrjournals.org

homologous recombination repair for uncoupling of initiation
of DNA replication and excision repair processes can be hypothesized. The NER pathway recognizes and eliminates DACs.
Before the completion of excision repair, DNA replication could
begin and lead to the formation of DNA double-strand breaks with
subsequent repair by a homologous recombination–dependent
pathway. Another possibility is that DPCs formed during DNA
replication cause stalled DNA replication forks, followed by the
formation of DNA double-strand breaks. The homologous recombination–dependent pathway could then repair these DNA doublestrand breaks.

Acknowledgments
Received 8/7/2007; revised 9/24/2007; accepted 10/11/2007.
Grant support: Center for Environmental Health and Susceptibility grant NIEHS
P30-ES10126, Superfund Basic Research Program grant NIEHS P42-ES05948, and
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill Department of Environmental Sciences
and Engineering B.B. Parker Fellows Program, and Public Health Service training grant
(J.R. Ridpath).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank Dr. Tadayoshi Bessho, Dr. Elizabeth Fryar Tita, Dr. Nadia Georgieva,
Dr. Scott Blutman, and Brian F. Pachkowski for critically reading the manuscript and
Dr. Scott E. Kern for providing isogenic RKO cells.

of endogenous formaldehyde level in human blood and
urine by dimedone-14C radiometric method. J Radioanal
Nucl Chem 1986;106:357–67.
4. Heck H, Casanova M. The implausibility of leukemia
induction by formaldehyde: a critical review of the
biological evidence on distant-site toxicity. Regul
Toxicol Pharmacol 2004;40:92–106.
5. Hubal EA, Schlosser PM, Conolly RB, Kimbell JS.
Comparison of inhaled formaldehyde dosimetry predictions with DNA-protein cross-link measurements in

11121

the rat nasal passages. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 1997;143:
47–55.
6. Kennedy RD, D‘Andrea AD. The Fanconi Anemia/
BRCA pathway: new faces in the crowd. Genes Dev 2006;
19:2925–40.
7. Yamazoe M, Sonoda E, Hochegger H, Takeda S.
Reverse genetic studies of the DNA damage response
in the chicken B lymphocyte line DT40. DNA Repair
(Amst) 2004;3:1175–85.
8. Tano K, Nakamura J, Asagoshi K, et al. Interplay

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (23). December 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research
between DNA polymerases h and E in repair of
oxidation DNA damage in chicken DT40 cells. DNA
Repair (Amst) 2007;6:869–75.
9. Gallmeier E, Calhoun ES, Rago C, et al. Targeted
disruption of FANCC and FANCG in human cancer
provides a preclinical model for specific therapeutic
options. Gastroenterology 2006;130:2145–54.
10. Scudiero DA, Shoemaker RH, Paull KD, et al.
Evaluation of a soluble tetrazolium/formazan assay for
cell growth and drug sensitivity in culture using human
and other tumor cell lines. Cancer Res 1988;48:4827–33.
11. Minko IG, Zou Y, Lloyd RS. Incision of DNA-protein
crosslinks by UvrABC nuclease suggests a potential
repair pathway involving nucleotide excision repair.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2002;99:1905–9.
12. Reardon JT, Sancar A. Repair of DNA-polypeptide

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (23). December 1, 2007

crosslinks by human excision nuclease. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 2006;103:4056–61.
13. Schreiber V, Dantzer F, Ame JC, de Murcia G.
Poly(ADP-ribose): novel functions for an old molecule.
Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2006;7:517–28.
14. Quievryn G, Zhitkovich A. Loss of DNA-protein crosslinks from formaldehyde-exposed cells occurs through
spontaneous hydrolysis and an active repair process linked
to proteasome function. Carcinogenesis 2000;21:1573–80.
15. Nojima K, Hochegger H, Saberi A, et al. Multiple
repair pathways mediate tolerance to chemotherapeutic
cross-linking agents in vertebrate cells. Cancer Res 2005;
65:11704–11.
16. Haracska L, Torres-Ramos CA, Johnson RE, Prakash
S, Prakash L. Opposing effects of ubiquitin conjugation
and SUMO modification of PCNA on replicational

11122

bypass of DNA lesions in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
Mol Cell Biol 2004;24:4267–74.
17. Bi X, Barkley LR, Slater DM, et al. Rad18 regulates
DNA polymerase n and is required for recovery from
S-Phase checkpoint-mediated arrest. Mol Cell Biol 2006;
26:3527–40.
18. Kuykendall JR, Bogdanffy MS. Efficiency of DNAhistone crosslinking induced by saturated and unsaturated aldehydes in vitro . Mutat Res 1992;283:131–6.
19. Schroeder TM, Anschutz F, Knopp A. Spontaneous
chromosome aberrations in familial panmyelopathy.
Humangenetik 1964;1:194–6.
20. Hochegger H, Dejsuphong D, Fukushima T, et al.
(2006) Parp-1 protects homologous recombination from
interference by Ku and Ligase IV in vertebrate cells.
EMBO J 2006;25:1305–14.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cells Deficient in the FANC/BRCA Pathway Are
Hypersensitive to Plasma Levels of Formaldehyde
John R. Ridpath, Ayumi Nakamura, Keizo Tano, et al.
Cancer Res 2007;67:11117-11122.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/23/11117
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2007/11/29/67.23.11117.DC1

This article cites 19 articles, 6 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/23/11117.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 13 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/23/11117.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

