Correspondence
8. Fabbri A, Cencini E, Rigacci L, et al. Efficacy and safety of rituximab plus low-dose oral fludarabine and cyclophosphamide as
first-line treatment of elderly patients with indolent non-Hodgkin
lymphomas [published online ahead of print July 22, 2013]. Leuk
Lymphoma.

Alessandro Gozzetti, MD
Marzia Defina, MD
Alberto Fabbri, MD
Division of Hematology
University Medical Center of Siena
Siena, Italy
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.28443, Published online October 22, 2013
in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

FCR among patients with a median age of 55 years
produced a significant reduction in the rate of severe
infections, albeit comparable rates of CR and grade 3 to 4
neutropenia per cycle and per patient.4 Together with the
fact that the addition of rituximab to FCR did not
increase the frequency of infections despite a higher rate
of neutropenia,3 these data raise the question of whether
limiting hematological toxicity will translate into an
actual clinical benefit.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
The authors made no disclosures.

Reply to Myelosuppression After
Frontline Fludarabine,
Cyclophosphamide, and
Rituximab in Patients With
Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia
Analysis of Persistent and New-Onset
Cytopenia
Myelosuppression can persist after the completion of
frontline therapy with fludarabine, cyclophosphamide,
and rituximab (FCR) in patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), mostly among elderly patients with
baseline cytopenia. Its frequency decreases over time, with
no association noted with disease progression, second
myeloid malignancies, or infections (unless persisting up
to 9 months).1 The data shown by Gozzetti et al describe
grade 3 to 4 hematological toxicity (rather than grade 2
to 4) during treatment (rather than after) in elderly
patients with CLL receiving frontline oral FC with rituximab. The observed complete response (CR) rate was 78%
and the rate of grade 3 to 4 cytopenia was 15%. In our initial phase 2 study of FCR among patients with a median
age of 58 years, the reported CR rate was 70% and grade 3
to 4 neutropenia (the most common hematological toxicity) complicated 52% of courses.2 During the CLL8 trial
(among patients with a median age of 61 years), the CR
rate was 44% and grade 3 to 4 neutropenia was observed
in 34% of patients.3 Either calculated per person or cycle,
the toxicity reported by Gozzetti et al is lower. It is not
clear how many patients had baseline cytopenia, another
factor that is significantly associated with myelosuppression in our analysis, and how many received support with
growth factor. It is interesting to note that the addition of
granulocyte-macrophage–colony-stimulating factor to
452

REFERENCES
1. Strati P, Wierda W, Burger J, et al. Myelosuppression after frontline
fludarabine, cyclophosphamide, and rituximab in patients with
chronic lymphocytic leukemia: analysis of persistent and new-onset
cytopenia [published online ahead of print August 13, 2013]. Cancer.
doi: 10.1002/cncr.28318.
2. Keating MJ, O’Brien S, Albitar M, et al. Early results of a chemoimmunotherapy regimen of fludarabine, cyclophosphamide, and rituximab as initial therapy for chronic lymphocytic leukemia. J Clin
Oncol. 2005;23:4079-4088.
3. Hallek M, Fischer K, Fingerle-Rowson G, et al. Addition of rituximab to fludarabine and cyclophosphamide in patients with chronic
lymphocytic leukaemia: a randomised, open-label, phase 3 trial.
Lancet. 2010;376:1164-1174.
4. Strati P, Ferrajoli A, Lerner S, et al. Fludarabine, cyclophosphamide
and rituximab plus granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating
factor as frontline treatment for patients with chronic lymphocytic
leukemia [published online ahead of print July 29, 2013]. Leuk
Lymphoma.

Paolo Strati, MD
Susan O’Brien, MD
Department of Leukemia
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center
Houston, Texas
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.28442, Published online October 22, 2013
in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Margin Assessment in Oral
Squamous Cell Carcinoma
We have read with great interest the study by Ch’ng et al
in which the authors attempt to show that surgical treatment alone achieves an “acceptable” local control among
patients with close margins.1 This study appears to reasonably show that increase in the number of adverse parameters is associated with higher rates of local and
regional failure. However, we are concerned by the
authors’ methods for characterization of margins, heterogeneity of studied cases (in terms of anatomic subsites and
Cancer

February 1, 2014

