HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Author Manuscript

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 14.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2015 September 17; 525(7569): 384–388. doi:10.1038/nature14985.

The spliceosome is a therapeutic vulnerability in MYC-driven
cancer

Author Manuscript

Tiffany Y-T. Hsu1,2,3,4, Lukas M. Simon4, Nicholas Neill1,4, Richard Marcotte10, Azin
Sayad10, Christopher S. Bland1,4, Gloria V. Echeverria6,8,9, Tingting Sun1,4, Sarah J.
Kurley1,4, Siddhartha Tyagi1,4, Kristen L. Karlin1,4, Rocio Dominguez-Vidaña1,2,4, Jessica D.
Hartman12, Alexander Renwick4, Kathleen Scorsone7, Ronald J. Bernardi7, Samuel O.
Skinner1,14, Antrix Jain1, Mayra Orellana1,4, Chandraiah Lagisetti13, Ido Golding11,4, Sung
Y. Jung1, Joel R. Neilson2,6, Xiang H.-F. Zhang5, Thomas A. Cooper6,8,9, Thomas R.
Webb13, Benjamin G. Neel10,11, Chad A. Shaw4, and Thomas F. Westbrook1,2,4,#
1Verna

& Marrs McLean Dept. of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology

2Interdepartmental
3Medical
4Dept.
5The

Program in Molecular and Biomedical Sciences

Scientist Training Program

of Molecular and Human Genetics

Lester and Sue Smith Breast Center

Author Manuscript

6Dept.

of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics

7Dept.

of Pediatrics

8Dept.

of Pathology and Immunology

9Dept.

of Molecular and Cellular Biology Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA

10Princess

Margaret Cancer Centre, University Health Network, Toronto, Canada

11Department
13Center

of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Canada

for Chemical Biology, Bioscience Division, SRI International, Menlo Park, CA 94025,

USA
14Department

of Physics, University of Illinois, Urbana, IL 61801, USA

Abstract
Author Manuscript

Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research,
subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
#
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to T.F.W. (thomasw@bcm.edu).
12present address: Humacyte, Morrisville, NC 27560, USA
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
T.Y.-T.H., N.N., R.M., C.S.B., G.V.E., T.S., S.J.K., S.T., K.L.K., J.D.H., K.S., R.J.B., S.O.S., A.J., C.L., M.O. performed the
experiments. L.M.S., A.S., R.D.V., A.R., C.A.S. performed statistical analyses. I.G., S.Y.J., J.R.N., X.Z., T.A.C., T.R.W., B.G.N.,
C.A.S., T.F.W. devised or supervised experiments. T.Y.-T.H. and T.F.W. wrote the manuscript.
RNAseq data sets have been deposited in NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus under accession number GSE66182.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.

Hsu et al.

Page 2

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

c-MYC (MYC) overexpression or hyperactivation is one of the most common drivers of human
cancer. Despite intensive study, the MYC oncogene remains recalcitrant to therapeutic inhibition.
MYC is a transcription factor, and many of its pro-tumorigenic functions have been attributed to
its ability to regulate gene expression programs1–3. Notably, oncogenic MYC activation has also
been shown to increase total RNA and protein production in many tissue and disease contexts4–7.
While such increases in RNA and protein production may endow cancer cells with pro-tumor
hallmarks, this elevation in synthesis may also generate new or heightened burden on MYC-driven
cancer cells to properly process these macromolecules8. Herein, we discover the spliceosome as a
new target of oncogenic stress in MYC-driven cancers. We identify BUD31 as a MYC-synthetic
lethal gene, and demonstrate that BUD31 is a component of the core spliceosome required for its
assembly and catalytic activity. Core spliceosomal factors (SF3B1, U2AF1, and others) associated
with BUD31 are also required to tolerate oncogenic MYC. Notably, MYC hyperactivation induces
an increase in total pre-mRNA synthesis, suggesting an increased burden on the core spliceosome
to process pre-mRNA. In contrast to normal cells, partial inhibition of the spliceosome in MYChyperactivated cells leads to global intron retention, widespread defects in pre-mRNA maturation,
and deregulation of many essential cell processes. Importantly, genetic or pharmacologic
inhibition of the spliceosome in vivo impairs survival, tumorigenicity, and metastatic proclivity of
MYC-dependent breast cancers. Collectively, these data suggest that oncogenic MYC confers a
collateral stress on splicing and that components of the spliceosome may be therapeutic entry
points for aggressive MYC-driven cancers.

Author Manuscript

To discover genes and cellular processes required to tolerate oncogenic MYC, we previously
performed a genome-wide MYC-synthetic lethal screen in human mammary epithelial cells
engineered with inducible-MYC (MYC-ER HMECs) for candidates affecting cell viability
in a MYC-selective manner9. This screen nominated BUD31 as a candidate MYC-synthetic
lethal gene (Fig. 1a), wherein barcoded BUD31-shRNAs consistently dropped out of the
population in MYC-hyperactivated cells relative to cells without MYC induction (Fig. 1b).
In validation experiments, BUD31 depletion restrained clonogenic growth and activated
apoptosis in MYC-induced cells, as compared to MYC-normal cells (Extended Data Fig.
1a–c). Expression of shRNA-resistant BUD31 rescued the MYC-synthetic lethal phenotype
of BUD31-shRNA (Fig. 1c, Extended Data Fig. 1d), indicating the phenotype is an RNAi
on-target effect.

Author Manuscript

BUD31 has been linked to the spliceosome in yeast10, but its function in mammalian
systems has not been elucidated. To uncover the molecular function(s) of BUD31, we
identified BUD31-interacting proteins via Flag-BUD31 immunoprecipitation from cells with
or without RNase A (which eliminates protein-protein interactions mediated by RNA
tethering), and mass spectrometry. Remarkably, 79 of 134 core spliceosomal components
were associated with BUD31 (Extended Data Fig. 2a), suggesting a strong association
between BUD31 and the spliceosome in human cells.
The spliceosome is a dynamic molecular machine consisting of several nuclear protein
complexes that cycle on and off of pre-mRNA during intronic splicing11.
Coimmuniprecipitation experiments confirmed that BUD31 associates with multiple
subcomplexes of the spliceosome including the Prp19/CDC5L subcomplex (PRPF19), the

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 14.

Hsu et al.

Page 3

Author Manuscript

U2 snRNP (SF3B1, SF3A1), U2-related factors (U2AF1), the U5 snRNP (EFTUD2), and
Sm proteins (SNRPF) (Fig. 1d and Extended Data Fig. 2c), but interaction with nonspliceosomal proteins was not detected (Extended Data Fig. 2d–e). To test more broadly the
association of BUD31 with subcomplexes of the spliceosome, we performed bimolecular
fluorescence complementation (BiFC) between BUD31 and proteins from each major
spliceosomal subcomplex. BiFC analysis indicated that BUD31 associates with components
of the major snRNPs (U1, U2, U4/U6, and U5) as well as Sm proteins (Fig. 1e and Extended
Data Fig. 2b), indicating that BUD31 is present at several stages of spliceosomal assembly.

Author Manuscript

To examine more directly whether BUD31 plays a role in pre-mRNA splicing, we tested in
vitro splicing efficiency using nuclear extracts with or without BUD31 knockdown. BUD31
loss significantly inhibited pre-mRNA splicing (Extended Data Fig. 2f–i). In addition,
knockdown of BUD31 led to defects in early spliceosome assembly, as indicated by
impaired formation of complex A (Extended Data Fig. 2h–i). Collectively, these data
indicate that HMECs require a core spliceosomal protein (BUD31) to tolerate dysregulated
MYC.

Author Manuscript

We hypothesized that cells with oncogenic MYC required BUD31 for cell survival because
of its role in the spliceosome. To test this hypothesis, we generated a BUD31 mutant
deficient in binding core spliceosomal proteins by mutating a highly conserved region
spanning a C2-C2 zinc finger. Mutation of this region abrogated BUD31 interaction with
spliceosomal proteins (Extended Data Fig. 2j). To determine whether this region is also
necessary for cells to tolerate MYC hyperactivation, we performed an in vitro competition
assay. GFP-expressing MYC-driven breast cancer cells encoding inducible shBUD31 were
transduced with shRNA-resistant wild-type or mutant BUD31 cDNA, and these cells were
mixed with non-transduced, GFP-negative cells. BUD31 knockdown significantly inhibited
proliferation of MYC-driven cancer cells. Proliferation was fully rescued by wild-type
BUD31 cDNA but not a BUD31 mutant deficient in spliceosomal binding (Fig. 1f),
suggesting BUD31 association with the spliceosome is required to support survival of MYChyperactivated cells. More broadly, these results indicate that oncogenic MYC may increase
cellular dependency on spliceosome function. In contrast, ectopic expression of oncogenes
HER2 and EGFR did not enhance the effects of BUD31 depletion (Extended Data Fig. 3a–
b), suggesting the stress imposed by MYC on spliceosomal function is not a universal
feature of the oncogenic state.

Author Manuscript

To test whether one or more subcomplexes of the spliceosome are required to tolerate
aberrant MYC activity, we examined additional components of spliceosome assembly and
catalysis including SF3B1 (U2 snRNP), U2AF1 (U2-related splicing factor), EFTUD2 (U5
snRNP), and SNRPF (core Sm protein found in every snRNP complex). Notably, partial
depletion of each spliceosomal component led to loss of cell viability (Fig. 1h–k, Extended
Data Fig. 4a–d) and increased apoptosis (Extended Data Fig. 4e–h) in MYC-hyperactivated
cells. This suggests that (a) multiple subcomplexes of the core spliceosome are required for
cells to tolerate oncogenic MYC, and (b) MYC-hyperactivated cells are sensitive to modest
perturbations in spliceosome function.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 14.

Hsu et al.

Page 4

Author Manuscript

Next we investigated whether pharmacologic inhibition of the spliceosome is also synthetic
lethal with MYC. Several pharmacologic agents (e.g., FR901464, pladienolides, and their
derivatives) have been characterized to bind the core SF3b complex components and inhibit
spliceosome function12. However, most of these inhibitors are not amenable for in vivo
delivery. We developed a new small molecule inhibitor of SF3B1, called SD6, that impairs
spliceosome function and is bioavailable in mammals13. Consistent with our genetic data,
low concentrations of SD6 significantly suppressed colony formation (Fig. 1g) and induced
apoptosis (Extended Data Fig. 4i) in a MYC-selective manner. The synthetic lethal
interaction between MYC hyperactivation and core spliceosome perturbation suggests that
pre-mRNA splicing is necessary to tolerate oncogenic MYC.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

In many different cell lineages and experimental systems, oncogenic activation of MYC has
been shown to amplify the synthesis of cellular mRNA through direct or indirect
mechanisms4,5,14,15. In agreement, MYC hyperactivation in HMECs increased total cellular
mRNA synthesis and mRNA steady-state levels (Fig. 2a) without an increase in cellular
growth rate (Extended Data Fig. 3c). In contrast to a recent report in B-cell compartments16,
MYC hyperactivation did not affect the levels of spliceosome proteins in HMECs (data not
shown), suggesting that increased pre-mRNA dosage is not compensated for by higher
spliceosome levels. Thus, we hypothesized that the MYC-induced increase in global mRNA
synthesis confers increased pressure on the spliceosome to process pre-mRNAs, and partial
perturbation of the spliceosome would lead to widespread defects in splicing of pre-mRNA
introns in the MYC-hyperactive state. To test this hypothesis, we compared intron retention
(IR) after BUD31 knockdown in MYC-normal or MYC-hyperactivated cells. We performed
RNAseq from cells in each state (normal, BUD31 knockdown, MYC-hyperactive, and
MYC-hyperactive with BUD31 knockdown) and determined pre-mRNA splicing efficiency
by calculating IR at junctions across the genome (Fig. 2b). Because analysis of intronic
reads may be influenced by the presence of stable RNAs within introns and/or spliced
lariats, we restricted the analysis to reads directly spanning exon-intron or exon-exon
junction sequences (75,623 junctions in 6,861 genes) (see Supplementary Information).

Author Manuscript

To examine the effects of spliceosome perturbation in the normal and oncogenic MYC
states, we compared the effect of BUD31 knockdown on junction IR coefficients in wildtype and MYC-hyperactivated cells. Notably, BUD31 depletion caused significantly more IR
in the MYC-hyperactive state relative to the MYC-normal state (Fig 2c, P<10−324). Similar
results were observed when junction coefficients were computed on a gene level (Fig. 2d,
P<10−189). The increase in intron retention conferred by aberrant MYC activation and
BUD31 shRNA was validated on individual exon-intron junctions via qRT-PCR (examples
in Fig. 2e–j). IR was not limited to a few discrete genes. Instead, BUD31 knockdown in the
MYC-hyperactive state led to significantly increased IR in 42% of genes analyzed (2,848 of
6,861, P<0.05). These data indicate that the combination of oncogenic MYC activation and
partial spliceosome inhibition leads to a widespread increase in IR. This is consistent with
the hypothesis that MYC-induced increase in pre-mRNA synthesis enhances cellular
dependency on optimal spliceosome function by raising the level of pre-mRNA substrates
for spliceosomal processing.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 14.

Hsu et al.

Page 5

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Intron-retaining pre-mRNAs often fail to complete mRNA maturation and are commonly
degraded via quality control mechanisms17. Because the combination of MYC
hyperactivation and spliceosome inhibition led to a global increase in intron retention (Fig.
2c–d), we hypothesized that these cells may harbor widespread defects in pre-mRNA
maturation and stability (Fig. 3a). To test this hypothesis, we measured levels of cellular
poly(A)+ RNA in each of four states (± MYC-hyperactivation,±BUD31-shRNA) before and
after treatment with the transcriptional inhibitor actinomycin D. After actinomycin D
treatment, cellular poly(A)+ RNA decreased by comparable levels (~16–19%) in control
cells with or without BUD31 knockdown (Fig. 3b). Intriguingly, MYC-hyperactivated cells
exhibited enhanced mRNA stability, perhaps resulting from enhanced polysomal loading of
mRNA during MYC-induced translation18. In contrast, cells harboring MYChyperactivation and BUD31-depletion exhibited a substantially greater loss (38%) of
poly(A)+ RNA after actinomycin D treatment, suggesting a defect in pre-mRNA maturation
and/or stability in the combined MYC-hyperactivated/BUD31-shRNA state. Similarly,
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) measurements of poly(A)+ RNA revealed that the
combination of MYC hyperactivation and BUD31 knockdown led to a substantially greater
decrease (60%) in poly(A)+ RNA after actinomycin D treatment (Extended Data Fig. 5a).
Similar trends were observed in nuclear RNA pools, consistent with defects in nuclear premRNA maturation (Extended Data Fig. 5b). Consistent with this decrease in pre-mRNA
maturation and stability, cells harboring oncogenic MYC and BUD31 knockdown exhibited
significantly lower (54%) steady-state levels of poly(A)+ RNA (Fig. 3c). Collectively, these
results indicate that MYC-hyperactivation increases cellular pre-mRNA synthesis, and
inhibition of the spliceosome reduces the cellular capacity to process this pre-mRNA burden.
The result of this MYC-hyperactivated and spliceosome-hypomorphic state is enhanced
intron retention, decreased mRNA maturation and stability, and a significant loss of steadystate cellular mRNA.

Author Manuscript

GO analysis of genes with the most significant intron retention in the combined MYChyperactive/BUD31-depleted state (2,848 of 6,816 genes analyzed for IR) suggests many
essential processes and subcellular structures were impacted, including gene expression,
DNA replication and repair, the mitotic spindle, unfolded protein response, and RNA
splicing (Fig. 3d). Many genes participating in these essential cell processes exhibited
increased IR in the combined MYC-hyperactive/BUD31-knockdown state (representative
genes in Fig. 3e) and a concomitant decrease in RNA levels, consistent with a defect in
maturation and stability of IR-containing transcripts (Fig. 3f). Consistent with their role in
critical cellular processes, knockdown of these genes reduced cell number by 0.7–4.2 fold
(as quantified by barcode-tag abundance, Extended Data Fig. 6). Together, these data are
consistent with the hypothesis that the combination of oncogenic MYC and spliceosome
inhibition leads to widespread loss of mRNA integrity, resulting in the deregulation of many
essential genes and processes instead of a single pathway.
Because oncogenic MYC significantly increases the sensitivity of HMECs to inhibition of
the spliceosome, we hypothesized that MYC-driven cancers may be hyper-dependent on
core spliceosomal function to support their survival. We queried whether MYC-driven breast
cancer cell lines exhibit increased sensitivity to knockdown of core spliceosomal genes.
Recently, we conducted genome-wide RNAi screens in a panel of 72 breast cancer and
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 14.

Hsu et al.

Page 6

Author Manuscript

immortalized cell lines for genes affecting cell viability (Fig. 4a) (R.M., A.S., B.N., in prep).
From this dataset, we tested for a correlation between MYC-dependency (as indicated by
sensitivity to MYC-shRNAs) and dependency on (a) the spliceosome (as indicated by
sensitivity to shRNAs targeting spliceosome components in the shRNA library) or (b)
100,000 randomly drawn gene sets. Notably, MYC-dependent breast cancer cell lines were
significantly more sensitive to shRNAs targeting the core spliceosome (Fig. 4b, P=0.005).
The correlation between MYC-dependency and spliceosome-dependency was significantly
pronounced in the basal breast cancer lines (Fig. 4c, P<0.00001), an aggressive molecular
subtype of breast cancer frequently driven by MYC.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Triple-negative breast cancers (TNBCs) are commonly driven by MYC, and exhibit an
aggressive, highly metastatic clinical course. To determine whether MYC-driven TNBCs are
dependent on spliceosomal integrity for their tumorigenic and metastatic proclivity, we
tested the effects of genetic and pharmacologic inhibition of the spliceosome on MYCdependent and metastatic TNBC models. Inducible BUD31-shRNA reduced cell viability
and increased apoptosis in MYC-dependent TNBC cells in vitro (Fig. 4d–e, and Extended
Data Fig. 7a–b). Similar to MYC-ER HMECs, MYC protein levels remained unchanged
during BUD31 depletion in these MYC-dependent cancer cell lines (Extended Data Fig. 8a,
and 8b for HMECs), suggesting the apoptotic response was not due to loss of the driver
oncogene (MYC). To assess the impact of spliceosomal perturbation on tumor growth, we
established a pooled competition assay that utilizes shRNA-associated barcodes to detect
changes in tumor cell fitness (Extended Data Fig. 9). In the metastatic TNBC cell line MDAMB-231-LM2 (LM2)19, inducible-MYC-shRNA-expressing cells dropped out of the tumor
population, confirming the MYC dependency of this TNBC model (Fig. 4f). Similarly,
tumor cells harboring BUD31- or SF3B1-shRNA dropped out of the tumor population (Fig.
4f). Tumorigenicity of another MYC-dependent TNBC model (SUM159) was similarly
impaired by BUD31 depletion (Extended Data Fig. 7c–d). These data suggest that loss of
BUD31 or other core spliceosomal factors inhibits MYC-dependent breast cancer growth in
vivo.
Because MYC-driven breast cancers are prone to metastasize to visceral organs including
the lungs20, we tested whether perturbation of spliceosome function affected metastatic
expansion of MYC-dependent LM2 cells. As shown in figure 4g, BUD31 depletion resulted
in substantial drop out of this metastatic cell population (>133.5-fold change), with the
majority of +dox tumors containing shBUD31-barcodes below the level of detection. This
data suggests that BUD31 and the spliceosome are essential for MYC-dependent breast
tumorigenicity and metastatic expansion in vivo.

Author Manuscript

Next, we tested whether pharmacologic inhibition of the spliceosome also impaired
tumorigenic and metastatic potential of MYC-dependent TNBC cells. Compared to MYCnormal cell lines (IC50 ~53 nM), MYC-driven cancer cells were significantly more sensitive
(IC50 ~4 nM) to the spliceosome inhibitor SD6 in vitro (Extended Data Fig. 10a). Similarly,
SD6 suppressed proliferation of a MYC-driven B-cell model4 (Extended Data Fig. 10b),
suggesting oncogenic MYC may confer hyper-dependency on the spliceosome in many
epigenetic backgrounds and cancer types. In primary LM2 tumor xenografts, SD6 potently
restrained tumor growth with no toxicities in any organ system examined, suggesting

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 14.

Hsu et al.

Page 7

Author Manuscript

splicing is essential for the tumorigenicity of these MYC-dependent breast cancer cells (Fig.
4h). Similarly, SD6 impaired lung metastatic expansion in experimental metastasis assays
(Fig. 4i), and extended progression-free survival (Extended Data Fig. 10c). Collectively, this
data suggests MYC-driven breast cancers depend on spliceosomal integrity for their
tumorigenic and metastatic progression.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Altogether, these data suggest MYC-driven breast cancers harbor an enhanced dependency
on the core spliceosome. Recent studies have shown MYC regulates splicing of select genes
via induction of alternative splicing factors or components of the core spliceosome.16,21 This
study suggests MYC may induce a much broader stress on splicing via its ability to elevate
global pre-mRNA synthesis. Recently, there has been considerable investigation into how
MYC elicits a widespread increase in mRNA synthesis across the transcriptome4,5,22,23.
Importantly, either direct or indirect mechanisms of elevated pre-mRNA synthesis elicited
by MYC could lead to an enhanced dependency on the spliceosome, and thus make MYCdriven cancers candidates for spliceosome-based therapies. These observations provoke the
important question of whether MYC-induced amplification of mRNA synthesis may also
generate vulnerabilities in other aspects of RNA processing (such as mRNA capping,
polyadenylation, or mRNA export) and downstream protein biosynthesis24 in MYC-driven
cancers. Intriguingly, the spliceosome may be a target of both oncogene addiction and
oncogenic stress. Components of the U2 snRNP, such as SF3B1 and U2AF1, harbor
frequent and recurrent somatic mutations that cluster in an evolutionarily conserved domain,
suggestive of oncogenic function.25,26 Based on such putative oncogenic functions, the
spliceosome has been proposed as a target for classical oncogene addiction, in which
spliceosome mutant tumors may be addicted to the oncogenic functions of spliceosome
mutants and thus sensitive to spliceosome inhibitors. However, this study and others27,28
have shown that inhibition of spliceosome components is deleterious in cancer cell line
models that lack spliceosome mutations, suggesting that other drivers of cancer (like MYC)
are determinants of sensitivity to splicing inhibitors. Because oncogenic MYC is known to
drive several pro-tumorigenic programs that include rewiring of biosynthetic pathways29,30,
our model provokes the important hypothesis that cellular processes (like splicing) that
enable cancer cells to tolerate such widespread shifts in macromolecular synthesis may
provide entry points for anti-cancer therapies.

METHODS
Vectors and virus production

Author Manuscript

Commercially available pGIPZ shRNAs targeting BUD31 (V2LHS_47771 and
V2LHS_47770), EFTUD2 (V2LHS_28167), SF3B1 (V3LHS_397872), SNRPF
(V2LHS_276933), and U2AF1 (V2LHS_84677) were obtained from Open Biosystems.
shRNAs targeting the 3’UTR region of BUD31 were designed using the BiopredSI and
RNAi Codex algorithms (shRNA sequence
TGCTGTTGACAGTGAGCGCCGCTGTCTATCAGCTGTGATTTAGTGAAGCCACAGAT
GTAAATCACAGCTGATAGACAGCGATGCCTACTGCCTCGGA). For inducible RNAi
experiments, shRNAs were subcloned into the pINDUCER doxycycline-inducible lentiviral
expression system31. Lentiviruses and retroviruses were produced by transiently transfecting

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 14.

Hsu et al.

Page 8

Author Manuscript

shRNA or cDNA constructs using Mirus Bio TransIT transfection protocols into 293T cells
and harvesting viral supernatants 48 hours after transfection.
Cell culture

Author Manuscript

HMECs expressing hTERT and inducible MYC-ER (MYC-ER HMECs), F7s, and HME1s
were cultured in mammary epithelial growth medium (MEGM, Lonza). 293T cells, Hela
cells, and MDA-MB-231 LM2 human breast cancer cells were cultured in DMEM (Gibco)
supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS). SUM159 human breast cancer cells were
cultured in F12 (Gibco) media supplemented with 5% FBS, 10 mM HEPES (Gibco), 5
ug/mL insulin (Invitrogen), and 1 ug/mL hydrocortisone. P493-6 human B-cell lymphoma
cell line was cultured in RPMI-1640 supplemented with 10% FBS (Clonotech) and 1%
GlutaMAX (Invitrogen). All cell lines were incubated at 37°C and 5% CO2. Cell lines were
obtained from ATCC, and all cell lines are tested yearly for mycoplasma contamination.
Stable cell lines expressing shRNAs or cDNAs were generated by lentiviral or retroviral
transduction in the presence of 8 µg/mL polybrene followed by selection with appropriate
antibiotic resistance markers.
Cell proliferation assays

Author Manuscript

MYC-ER HMECs were infected with pINDUCER-shRNA viruses at an M.O.I. of 1.3–1.5,
and transduced cells were seeded at a density of 3,000 onto 96-well black plates (Corning).
MYC-ER HMECs with pINDUCER-shBUD31-3’UTR were treated with 300 nM 4-OHT
(tam) to induce MYC hyperactivation and 32 ng/ml doxycycline (dox, Sigma) to induce
shBUD31 expression. SUM159 and MDA-MB-231-LM2 (LM2) were infected with
pINDUCER-shBUD31 (targeting the 3’UTR and coding region, respectively) virus at an
M.O.I. of 1.5, and seeded at a density of 1,000 and 2,000, respectively. Expression of
shBUD31 in LM2 and SUM159 cells was induced with 1 µg/ml dox. HMECs and breast
cancer cells were re-fed every 3–4 days until cells reached confluence. At confluence, cells
were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde, and nuclei were stained with Hoeschst3321 (1:1000,
Life Technologies). Nuclei were imaged and counted using the Celígo Imaging Cell
Cytometer (Brooks).

Author Manuscript

For clonogenic assays, breast cancer or immortalized epithelial cells were seeded at low
density (between 500–2,000 cells per plate depending on the cell line) into 6cm plates, four
replicates per treatment group. MYC-ER HMECs with pINDUCER-shBUD31-3’UTR were
treated with 8 ng/ml dox and 300 nM tam, and MYC-ER HMECs treated with 10 or 20 nM
SD6 were also cultured with 200 nM tam. Cells were re-fed every 4 days until colonies were
macroscopic. The colonies were stained using Coomassie brilliant blue. Macroscopic
colonies were quantified and normalized to vehicle-treated cells for each cell line.
For P493-6 cell line with pmyc-tet construct32, MYC was reduced by treating cells with 0.1
µg/ml tetracycline (Sigma) for 72 hours. MYC was induced by washing P493-6 cells with
1× PBS twice, then culturing cells in RPMI-1640 medium with 10% Tet System Approved
FBS (Clontech) and 1% GlutaMAX). P493-6 cells were treated with or without 100 nM SD6
and with or without 01. µg/ml tet for 4 days.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 14.

Hsu et al.

Page 9

Immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry

Author Manuscript

Hela cells transduced with lentivirus encoding BUD31 cDNA and non-transduced Hela cells
were harvested, and nuclear extracts as well as whole cell lysates were collected as
described previously33. Lysates were treated with RNase A (500 ug/mL) for 1 hour on ice.
For IPs, nuclear and whole cell extracts were ultracentrifuged at 100,000 rcf, and incubated
with 25 ug M2 Flag antibody (Sigma) for 1 hour, followed by ultracentrifugation and
incubation with Sepharaose-CL4B Protein A beads (GE Healthcare). Beads were washed
with NTN (50 mM Tris-Cl, pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP-40), and immunocomplexes
were resuspended in 1× Laemmli buffer and resolved on pre-cast 4–20% Novex TrisGlycine gels (Life Technologies). Gels were minimally stained with Coomassie brilliant
blue, cut into 8 molecular weight ranges, and digested with trypsin. Immunocomplexes were
identified on a Thermo Fisher LTQ mass spectrometer, and data processing was performed
as previously described33.

Author Manuscript

Enrichment analysis
Human GO annotation file (gene_association.goa_human.gz) was downloaded from
geneontology.org/GO.downloads.annotations.shtml containing a GOC Validation date of
09/02/2013. Enrichment analysis was performed to consider the content of (a) BUD31associated proteins, or (b) genes with enhanced IR. Gene symbols annotated to BUD31associated proteins were cross tabulated against all gene ontology annotations. Genes with
enhanced IR were cross tabulated against the subset of gene ontology annotations for genes
considered in this analysis. We used Fisher’s exact test to determine p-values for the
proportion of genes overlapping each annotation set.
Bimolecular fluorescence complementation (BiFC)

Author Manuscript

BUD31 was cloned into the pQCXIN-N-YFP fusion vector, in which the BUD31 Nterminus was fused to the N-terminal domain (residues 1–155) of Venus YFP. Human
splicing factor cDNAs were individually recombined into retroviral vectors with C-terminal
Venus YFP (residues 156–239) tags at the N-terminal ends. SUM159 breast cancer cells
were transduced with these bait and prey BiFC retroviruses, and cellular fluorescence was
analyzed by flow cytometry in triplicate.
BUD31 mutagenesis

Author Manuscript

Wild-type and mutant BUD31 cDNAs were generated by gene synthesis (IDT DNA) and
recombined into the pQCXIN-N-YFP fusion vector. Mutant BUD31 consisted of
substituting human BUD31 amino acid residues 105–114 with an equivalent number of
glycine residues (codon GGA).
In vitro competition assay
MYC-dependent SUM159 breast cancer cells with pINDUCER-shBUD31-3’UTR were
transduced with viruses containing wild-type or mutant BUD31 or negative control cDNA
recombined into pQCXIN-N-YFP vectors. Infected, GFP+ cells are mixed at an 80:20 ratio
with non-transduced, GFP− parental cells and seeded into 96-well plates and treated either –

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 14.

Hsu et al.

Page 10

Author Manuscript

or + dox (1 µg/ml). At confluence, cells were passaged 1:10 and processed for flow
cytometry. The in vitro competition assay was continued for two passages.
Immunoblotting
Cells were lysed in 1× SDS sample buffer (62.5mM Tris-HCl, pH6.8, 10% glycerol, 2%
SDS, 2.5% β-mercaptoethanol) and heated at 95°C for 12 minutes. The following antibodies
were used for Western blotting: Flag (Sigma, A8592), BUD31 (ProteinTech, 11798-1-AP),
SF3B1 (Bethyl, A300-996A), Prp19 (Bethyl, A300-101A), U2AF1 (Bethyl, A302-079A),
SF3A1 (Bethyl, A301-603A), EFTUD2 (Bethyl, A300-957A), SNRPF (Abcam, 154870),
HER2 (Millipore, 06-562), EGFR (Cell Signaling, 2232), cleaved caspase-3 (Cell Signaling,
9664), RPS8 (Assay Biotechnology, R12-3466), EIF2S1 (Abgent, AP13469s), eIF3I (p36)
(Biolegend, 646701), and c-Myc (D84C12) (Cell Signaling, 5605). Vinculin (Sigma, V9131)
and ran (BD Biosciences, 610340) was used as loading control.

Author Manuscript

In vitro transcription
Uniformly 32P-UTP radiolabeled MINX pre-mRNA was in vitro transcribed from a BamHIdigested plasmid34, DNaseI (Ambion) treated and gel-isolated on a 8 M urea 6%
polyacrylamide gel.
In vitro splicing

Author Manuscript

HeLa nuclear extracts used for in vitro splicing assays were made as described previously35
from HeLa cells transduced with an inducible BUD31-targeting shRNA and grown in the
presence or absence of 1 ug/ml dox. Splicing reactions of 15 µl contained: 8 nM RNA
substrate, 0.8 mM DTT, 1.7 mM MgOAc, 1.7 mM ATP, 17 mM phospho-creatine, 20mM
glycine, 1U/µL RNasin Plus (Promega), 3.7% PVA and 50 ug of HeLa nuclear extracts.
Splicing reactions were incubated for indicated time points at 30°C and stopped by digestion
with proteinase K (Ambion) for 30 minutes at 45°C followed by RNA purification. RNA
purified from splicing reactions was electrophoresed on 8 M urea 8% polyacrylamide gels,
then exposed to a phosphorimager screen (Typhoon Trio phosphorimager, GE Healthcare).
Alternatively, RNA purified from in vitro splicing reactions was added to RT-PCR reactions
as previously described36 with primers in exons 1 and 2 of MINX (forward: 5'CGGAATTCGAGCTCGCCC-3’ and reverse: 5'-GGATCCCCACTGGAAAGA-3’). PCR
products were run on 6% non-denaturing polyacrylamide gels and visualized after staining
with ethidium bromide.
Spliceosome complex formation assay

Author Manuscript

In vitro splicing reactions were carried out as described above, placed on ice, and heparin
was added to a final concentration of 2 µg/µL. Reactions were incubated in the presence of
heparin at 30°C for 5 minutes and immediately loaded onto 0.75 mm non-denaturing 4%
acrylamide – 0.4% agarose composite gels. Gels were run at 250V at room temperature in
1× tris-glycine running buffer for 3 hours, then placed on Whatman paper and exposed to a
phosphorimager cassette.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 14.

Hsu et al.

Page 11

RNA isolation and qRT-PCR

Author Manuscript

RNA isolation was performed with the RNeasy Mini kit (Qiagen). Reverse transcription was
performed using the High Capacity RNA-to-cDNA Master Mix (Applied Biosystems), and
qPCR was performed using SYBR Green Master Mix (Applied Biosystems). The following
primers were used:

BUD31

F: 5’-ACCAACTTCGGGACGAACTG-3’
R: 5’-CGGCCCACTTCCAGCTT-3’

EFTUD2

F: 5’-CCTTCGTGTTGTCAGAGAGTGTCT-3’
R: 5’-TGGGTTGGAGGTTGGTGAGT-3’

SF3B1

F: 5’-GTGGACAAAATGGCGAAGAT-3’

Author Manuscript

R: 5’-GAGCTTCATCAAGAGCTGCC-3’
SNRPF:

F: 5’-GGGAATGGAGTACAAGGGCT-3’
R: 5’-CCCAGATGTCCAGACAAAGC-3’

U2AF1:

F: 5’-ACGTTTAGCCAGACCATTGC-3’
R: 5’-TGTTCCTGCATCTCCACATC-3’

GAPDH:

F: 5’-CCTCCCGCTTCGCTCTCT-3’
R: 5’-TGGCGACGCAAAAGAAGAT-3’

RNA sequencing (RNAseq)

Author Manuscript

pINDUCER11-shBUD31-3’UTR infected MYC-ER HMECs were cultured for 72 hours −/
+ 16 ng/mL dox and 48 hours±300 nM tamoxifen in triplicates. Total RNA was isolated
using the RNeasy kit (Qiagen). RNA samples were rRNA depleted, and NGS libraries were
constructed and sequenced as 75 bp paired-end reads by Illumina HiSeq 2000.
Quality assessment of RNAseq
RNA-seq NGS reads quality was evaluated using FastQC application
(bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/).
Alignment of RNAseq data

Author Manuscript

RNA-seq NGS reads were mapped using STAR RNASeq aligner (version 2.3.1). In order to
improve mapping accuracy, splice junctions’ database file (gencode.v.14.annotation.gtf.sjdb)
was supplied at the genome index generation step with command line option --sjdbOverhang
74 together with hg19_Gencode14.overhang75/hg19_chrOnly.fa and default parameters.
Duplicate reads were marked with the MarkDuplicates function of the Picard-tools software
package (picard.sourceforge.net; version 1.107) using default settings.
Intron-exon junction definition
Rationale—To prevent confounding effects in our analysis of intron retention (IR) within
HMECs, we confined our analyses to exons in non-overlapping genes that are included
within all isoforms of a given gene (75,623 junctions in 6,861 genes).

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 14.

Hsu et al.

Page 12

Author Manuscript

Method—Intron-exon junctions were obtained using the University of California Santa
Cruz Genome Browser “knownGene” table (downloaded 06/04/2014). Constitutive junctions
were defined as junctions that (1) appear in each transcript annotated to a given gene
symbol, (2) did not overlap with any transcript annotated to a different gene symbol, and (3)
fail to mark the start or stop of a transcript.
Junction intron retention calculation

Author Manuscript

Rationale—Because analysis of intronic reads may be influenced by the presence of stable
RNAs within introns and/or spliced lariats, we calculated junction IR as the ratio of exonintron reads to exon-exon reads, restricting the analysis to reads directly spanning exonintron or exon-exon junction sequences. Method: We used R together with the Rsamtools
package to calculate intron retention (IR). Briefly, for each intron-exon junction, we
extracted all non-duplicate reads overlapping this junction. Next, we assigned these reads
into two categories: (1) “intronic” if the read mapped to at least the first base of the intron,
(2) “exonic” if none of the bases of the read mapped to the first base of the intron and at
least one base mapped to a subsequent exon. We counted the total number of reads assigned
into each category for each junction. IR was calculated as:

Author Manuscript

where IRj,i represents the IR score for junction j in sample i and Ij,i and Ej,i refer to the count
of reads classified as “intronic” and “exonic” for junction j in sample i, respectively. To
avoid ratios with 0 in the denominator we added 1 to each of these counts. The scripts used
to conduct this calculation are available upon request. We restricted all following analyses to
intron-exon junctions with an average of at least 25 total (“intronic” and “exonic”) reads in
the control and MYC-hyperactivated samples.
Gene intron retention calculation
For the cumulative distribution analyses, the mean IR score for all junctions in a gene were
averaged.
Gene annotation

Author Manuscript

A custom gene annotation file was generated to correspond to the set of intron-exon
junctions considered in the IR analysis. Briefly, exons were defined as: 1) an exon flanked
by two junctions annotated to the same symbol, 2) an exonic region flanked by one junction
and conserved across all transcripts annotated to the same symbol.
Statistical analysis of RNAseq
Statistical analyses were performed using the open source statistical programming
environment ‘R’. Empirical cumulative distributions of IR scores were compared using twosided Kolmogorov-Smirnov test and Wilcoxon test.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 14.

Hsu et al.

Page 13

Permutation-based test of significance

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

The significance of the difference of empirical cumulative distributions of junction-level IR
scores was evaluated using a permutation-based approach. The null hypothesis was that
splicing perturbations had no effect on intron retention changes in the MYC-normal and
MYC-hyperactivated states. In order to model this null hypothesis, the treatment information
was blinded to the assignments of MYC activity. We generated a third Control sample by
randomly selecting half of the junctions from samples 1-Control and 2-Control. Control and
Myc samples were grouped as 6 “normal” samples, and LowBUD31 and Myc_LowBUD31
samples were grouped as “splicing perturbed” samples. Next, we comprehensively generated
all possible “normal” and “splicing perturbed” contrasts by subtracting the average of each
junction IR score of 3 “normal” samples from that of the “splicing perturbed” group. The
empirical distribution of all possible double differences was generated and used to assign
significance to the original observations. An analogous approach was used to evaluate the
difference of empirical cumulative distributions of gene-level IR scores.
qPCR intron retention validation assay
Amplification reactions were prepared using SYBR Select Master Mix (Applied
Biosystems) according to the manufacturer’s instructions with final primer concentration of
300 nM. Reactions were performed using a StepOnePlus Real Time PCR System (Applied
Biosystems) with an initial incubation at 95°C for 10 minutes followed by 40 cycles of 15
seconds at 95°C and 1 minute at 60°C. Primers were designed using Primer3 (available at
http://bioinfo.ut.ee/primer3/) and assessed for quality using Beacon Designer (http://
www.premierbiosoft.com/qpcr/) and UNAFold (https://www.idtdna.com/UNAFold). Primers
used for each reaction were:

Author Manuscript

HTRA1_IE

F: 5′-GCGTTCATTTTAAGGTGCTACAGG-3′
R: 5′-TGGGCATTTGTCACGATCAGT-3’

HTRA1_EE

F: 5′-GACGTGGTGGAGAAGATCGC-3’
R: 5′-AAACCCAGACCCACTAGCCA-3′

PRPF19_IE

F: 5′-TCCCCTTGTGTGACCTTCTCT-3′
R: 5′-AGAATCTCCGTCCATTGTTTGC-3′

PRPF19_EE

F: 5′-AGAACTTTAAGACTTTGCAGCTGG-3′
R: 5′-TCTCCGTCCATTGTTTGCAGA-3′.

UBALD2_IE

F: 5′-GCTGCGTTTCCTGACTCCG-3′
R: 5′-GTGGTGGCTGTTGGGAATGT-3′

Author Manuscript

UBALD2_EE

F: 5′-CAGTTGCTGCAGGCGGCC-3′
R: 5′-TGGAAGAACGTGCTCAGCGC-3′

Ultramer oligonucleotides (Integrated DNA Technologies) were synthesized to match the
predicted amplicon of each primer pair, and standard curves were generated for each
reaction using 3-fold serial dilutions of these control templates ranging in concentration
from 4.0 × 10−12 M to 1.6 × 10−14 M. The sequence AAGAA was added to both the 5′ and
3′ ends of each template to facilitate primer binding. Control template sequences were as
follows:
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 14.

Hsu et al.

Page 14

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

HTRA1_IE:

5′-AAGAAGCGTTCATTTTAAGGTGCTACAGGCTTAAGTGTGTACTCCTTTGGATTTTAGGCTTCCGTTTTCTAAACGAGAGGTGCCGGTGGCTAGTGGGTCTGGGTTTATTGTGTCGGAAGATGGACTGATCGTGACAAATGCCCAAAGAA-3′

HTRA1_EE:

5′-AAGAAGACGTGGTGGAGAAGATCGCCCCTGCCGTGGTTCATATCGAATTGTTTCGCAAGCTTCCGTTTTCTAAACGAGAGGTGCCGGTGGCTAGTGGGTCTGGGTTTAAGAA-3′

PRPF19_IE:

5′-AAGAATCCCCTTGTGTGACCTTCTCTCTTTCTATTTCTGGCAGGTAAAGTCACTGATCTTTGACCAGAGTGGTACCTACCTGGCTCTTGGGGGCACGGATGTCCAGATCTACATCTGCAAACAATGGACGGAGATTCTAAGAA-3′

PRPF19_EE:

5′-AAGAAAGAACTTTAAGACTTTGCAGCTGGATAACAACTTTGAGGTAAAGTCACTGATCTTTGACCAGAGTGGTACCTACCTGGCTCTTGGGGGCACGGATGTCCAGATCTACATCTGCAAACAATGGACGGAGAAAGAA-3′

UBALD2_IE:

5′-AAGAAGCTGCGTTTCCTGACTCCGCCTGGCCCGCCGTGTCACTGCCCTGTTTGTCCGCAGACCGCGCTGAGCACGTTCTTCCAAGAAACCAACATTCCCAACAGCCACCACAAGAA-3′

UBALD2_EE:

5′-AAGAACAGTTGCTGCAGGCGGCCCACTGGCAGTTCGAGACCGCGCTGAGCACGTTCTTCCAAA-GAA

CT values from each reaction were interpolated on the standard curve generated using the
corresponding control template to approximate the concentration of cDNA template in each
experimental sample. These values were then reported as the ratio of IE to total (IE + EE)
cDNA template in each sample.
Transcription pulse assay

Author Manuscript

MYC-ER HMECs with pINDUCER11-shBUD31-3’UTR were cultured −/+ 16 ng/mL dox
and/or −/+ 300 nM 4-OHT tamoxifen. Cells were pulsed with 500 uM 4-thiouridine (4-SU,
Sigma) for 2 hours, and harvested for total RNA using RNeasy mini kit (Qiagen). 4-SUlabeled RNA was purified from 20 ug total RNA. Isolation of newly transcribed RNA was
performed as described37 using 100 µL streptavidin beads (Miltenyi Biotec).
Poly(A)+ RNA isolation
Dynabeads Oligo(dT)25 (Life Technologies) were equilibrated with 50 µL Lysis/Binding
Buffer, and total RNA was heat denatured (70°C for 2 minutes) prior to binding poly(A)+
RNA to Dynabeads. Isolation of mRNA was performed according to manufacturer’s
instructions. Poly(A)+ RNA concentrations were measured with a fluorescence plate reader
(Molecular Devices) using Quant-iT RiboGreen reagent (Life Technologies).
Poly(A)+ RNA LNA FISH

Author Manuscript

pINDUCER11-shBUD31-3’UTR transduced MYC-ER HMECs were seeded onto collagencoated 8-well glass chamber slides and cultured −/+ 16 ng/mL dox and −/+ 300 nM
tamoxifen. Cells were treated −/+ 2 ug/mL actinomycin D (Gibco) or DMSO for 5 hours
prior to fixation in 4% formaldehyde and 5% acetic acid in PBS for 15 minutes at RT. Fixed
cells were washed with PBS, permeabilized with proteinase K (5 ug/mL, Life Technologies),
and treated −/+ RNase A (100 ug/mL, Sigma) for 30 minutes at 37°C in PBS. Dehydration
of the cells was performed with 70%, 95% and 100% ethanol solutions. FITC-labeled
oligo(dT)25 locked nucleic acid (LNA) probes were heated to 90°C for 4 minutes, then
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 14.

Hsu et al.

Page 15

Author Manuscript

cooled to hybridization temperature (55°C). Dehydrated and dried cells were incubated in 40
nM of LNA probes in hybridization buffer [50% formamide, 2× SSC, 50 mM NaPi (pH 7.0),
10% dextran sulfate] overnight at 55°C. Chamber slides were washed with 5× SSC, 1× SSC,
0.2× SSC, and PBS, and dehydrated prior to counterstaining with DAPI and mounting with
Fluoromount-G (Southern Biotech). Cells were imaged using a Nikon Ti-E inverted
microscope with 40× air objective and Andor Zyla 4.2 sCMOS camera. For each treatment
condition and actinomycin time point, ≥ 150 cells were analyzed for mean FITC intensity.
Cellular FITC values were adjusted for background fluorescence by subtracting the mean
extra-cellular pixel value. Image analysis was performed using Nikon Elements
Luminescent apoptosis assays

Author Manuscript

Caspase-3/7 activity was assessed in MYC-ER HMECs and breast cancer cell lines by
incubating Caspase-Glo 3/7 Reagent with cells in triplicate wells of a 96-well plate and
measuring luminescence with a plate reader (Molecular Devices). Luminescence was
normalized using cell numbers determined by Hoeschst3321 staining of a duplicate plate,
followed by nuclei counting using the Celígo Imaging Cell Cytometer (Brooks).
Tumorigenicity and Metastasis Assays
SUM159 breast cancer cells were transduced with pINDUCER11-shBUD31-3’UTR virus
and analyzed by flow cytometry to confirm >98% transduction. 8 × 106 transduced cells
were injected with matrigel (BD Biosciences) subcutaneously into the flank of four-weekold female athymic nude Foxn1-nu mice (Harlan Labs). Mice were maintained on sucrose
water (−dox) or sucrose water with dox (+dox). Tumor volume was measured using calipers,
and once tumors achieved 150 mm3, mice were randomized onto sucrose water (−dox) or
sucrose water with dox (+dox).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

For mixed population experiments, MDA-MB-231-LM2 breast cancer cells were
individually transduced with pINDUCER11-shRNAs targeting the indicated genes at an
M.O.I. appropriate to transduce all cells (1.3–1.5). The individual populations were mixed in
vitro and expanded prior to injection. For mixing experiments shRNAs, populations were
mixed at equal ratios. 3 × 106 or 2 × 105 mixed population cells were injected
subcutaneously into the right flank or into the lateral tail vein of four-week-old female
athymic nude Foxn1-nu mice (Harlan Labs), respectively. Subcutaneous tumor volume was
measured with calipers over time. Mice were randomized onto sucrose water (−dox) or
sucrose water with dox (+dox) after tumors exceeded 150 mm3. Lung metastatic progression
was monitored and quantified using noninvasive bioluminescence as described previously19.
When tumors reached 1000 mm3 or the total luminescence flux reached 1 × 109, genomic
DNA from dissected tumors or lungs were harvested using the QIAamp DNA mini kit
(Qiagen). qPCR was performed with SYBR Green PCR Master Mix (Life Technologies)
using manufacturer’s recommendations and the following primers. Experimental target CT
values were normalized to the TRE CT values, and NCOR2 was used as a negative control.

BUD31

F: 5’-TGGAAGACATCTGCGTGGTATT-3’

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 14.

Hsu et al.

Page 16

Author Manuscript

R: 5’-CGCGCAAACCTAAAGGCATA-3’
SF3B1

F: 5’-GCCGTATCATTAGTACGCCATA-3’
R: 5’-TCGATCCTAGGACGGGGTAT-3’

MYC

F: 5’-GCCGGCCATATTTTCACTTC-3’
R: 5’-CACACCTACCGAAAAACAAAC-3’

NCOR2

F: 5’-AACTTCCGGTGCTGTCGTTT
R: 5’-CGCGTCCTAGGTAATACGACTCA-3’

TRE:

F: 5’-TGTACGGTGGGAGGCCTATATAA
R: 5’-GCGTCTCCAGGCGATCTG-3’

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

For SD6 drug infusion studies, 3 × 106 or 2 × 105 MDA-MB-231-LM2 breast cancer cells
were injected into the flank or lateral tail vein of four-week-old female athymic nude Foxn1nu mice (Harlan Labs), respectively. For mice with subcutaneous tumors, jugular vein
catheters (SAI Infusion Technologies) were surgically implanted into each mouse 13–16
days after injection, and were randomized to receive vehicle (n=11) or (n=10) infusion. Tail
vein-injected mice were randomized to receive vehicle (n=7) or SD6 (n=6) infusion 1 day
after tail vein injections. Animals received daily infusions of vehicle (10% [(2hydroxypropyl)-β-cyclodextrin] dissolved in 50 mM Na 2 HPO 4 /NaH 2 PO 4, pH 7.4) or
50 mg/kg of SD6 for 20 consecutive days (subcutaneous cohort) or 10 consecutive weekdays
(tail vein cohort). Mice were infused via jugular catheter at a rate of 3.5 µL/minute with a
Fusion 200 Touch Syringe Pump (SAI Infusion Technologies). The total volume infused did
not exceed 500 µL per day. Subcutaneous tumor volumes were monitored with calipers, and
lung metastatic progression was monitored with noninvasive bioluminescence. Mice were
sacrificed once tumors reached 2000 mm3 or the total luminescence flux reached 1 × 109. In
progression-free survival analyses, progression is defined as 5-fold increase in pulmonary
bioluminescence relative to initial values or 4-fold increase in subcutaneous tumor volume
relative to its volume at time of randomization.
Investigators responsible for monitoring and measuring the xenografts of individual tumors
were not blinded. Simple randomization was used to allocate animals to experimental
groups. All animal studies were performed in accordance with institutional and national
animal regulations. Animal protocols were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and
Use Committee at Baylor College of Medicine.

Author Manuscript

Power analysis was used to determine appropriate sample size to detect significant changes
in animal survival, which were based on previous survival analyses in our laboratory. All
animals were included in analyses.
Pooled shRNA screens in breast cancer cell lines
Pooled shRNA screens were performed on 68 breast cancer lines and four non-malignant
immortalized mammary epithelial lines, essentially as described38. Briefly, cells are infected
with a lentiviral shRNA library at a MOI of 0.3, and passaged under standard conditions. At
4 and 8 doublings, respectively, DNA is isolated and hybridized to a customized chip to

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 14.

Hsu et al.

Page 17

Author Manuscript

assess shRNA dropout. A detailed description of the results of these screens will be
published separately (R. M., A. S., and B.G.N., manuscript in preparation).
Correlation between MYC dependency and spliceosome dependency
First, to calculate MYC dependency scores using likely on-target hairpins, we used assay
observations associated with 3 hairpins incorporated into the first ATARIS39 solution for
MYC. MYC dependency scores were generated using a hierarchical linear model, with
pooled shRNA screen observations as the independent variable and two regression
covariates: initial signal intensity (with coefficient β0) and linear time-course dropout trend
(with coefficient β1). The dropout trend is calculated for each cell line separately, resulting in
a per-cell-line MYC dropout score (the value of coefficient β1).

Author Manuscript

Second, the MYC dependency score was used in a hierarchical linear model to search for
associations with the essentiality of other genes (such as spliceosome encoding genes). This
model uses pooled shRNA screen observations as the independent variable and three
regression covariates: initial assay signal intensity (with coefficient β0), linear time-course
dropout trend (with coefficient β1), and an interaction term between dropout trend and MYC
dependency score (with coefficient βM). The p-value associated with the interaction term βM
is used to determine whether a significant association exists. A detailed description of this
approach will be published elsewhere (A. S., R. M., and B.G.N., manuscript in preparation).
A summary statistic using results from the single-gene analyses was used to test the
significance of the association between MYC dependency and the essentiality of a gene set.
For a gene set containing genes g, we calculate the gene set summary statistic as

Author Manuscript

where sign() and pvalue() indicate the values associated with the regression coefficient βM.
The resulting metric, termed a siMEM (mixed-effect model) score, indicates the significance
and correlation between sensitivity to MYC-shRNAs and sensitivity to a group of shRNAs
targeting a gene set (such as those targeting the spliceosome). A gene set (ex. spliceosome
genes) for which a substantial number of genes are significantly associated with MYC
dependency, and all with the same direction (sign) of association, will have a large
positive score.

Author Manuscript

When calculated for the gene set consisting of the core spliceosome, this value summarizes
the direction and strength of the significance observed across genes in the spliceosome. To
determine whether this observation is significant, the same statistic is calculated for 100,000
randomly drawn gene sets of the same size as the core spliceosome, yielding the null
distributions of gene set summary statistics in Figures 4b–c.
Statistical analysis
All experiments were performed on biological replicates unless otherwise specified. Sample
size for each experimental group/condition is reported in the appropriate figure legends and
methods. For cell culture experiments, sample size was not predetermined, and all samples
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 14.

Hsu et al.

Page 18

Author Manuscript

were included in analyses. For significance testing, analyses were chosen if data met the
assumptions of the tests. Data was checked for comparable variance prior to statistical
analysis. Statistically significant differences between control and experimental groups were
determined using two-tailed unpaired Student’s t-test, one-way ANOVA with Tukey-Kramer
minimum significant difference test, Mann-Whitney test, Kolmogorov-Smirnov test,
Wilcoxon test, permutation-based test of significance, and log-rank test as indicated in the
appropriate figure legend and methods text.

Extended Data

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Extended Data Figure 1. Validation of BUD31 as a MYC-synthetic lethal gene in HMECs

Author Manuscript

a, qRT-PCR analysis of BUD31 mRNA level (mean±s.d., n=3 biological replicates). b,
Clonogenicity of MYC-ER HMECs with or without MYC hyperactivation or BUD31
depletion (mean±s.e.m., n=4 biological replicates, **P<0.01, two-tailed Student’s t-test). c,
Caspase-3/7 activation by caspase luminescence assay (mean±s.e.m., n=3, ***P<0.001, oneway ANOVA). d, FLAG-tagged protein levels in MYC-ER HMECs in which vinculin was
used as a loading control.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 14.

Hsu et al.

Page 19

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 2. BUD31 interacts with core spliceosomal factors and is required for
spliceosomal assembly and pre-mRNA splicing

a, 134 core spliceosomal proteins are listed. Proteins in red are shown to interact with
BUD31, as discovered by Flag-BUD31 IP-MS and BUD31 bimolecular fluorescence
complementation (BiFC). b, Heat map of BUD31-interacting spliceosomal proteins,
organized by spliceosome sub-complexes. A black-green color scale depicts normalized
BiFC interaction values between spliceosomal proteins and negative control protein
(technical replicates in 2 left lanes) and BUD31 (technical replicates in 2 right lanes). c,

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 14.

Hsu et al.

Page 20

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Spliceosomal snRNPs (colored circles) interact in a stepwise manner to excise intronic
sequences from pre-mRNA. snRNPs with proteins identified from the BUD31 IP-MS are
noted (blue outline) to be BUD31-associated. d, Co-immunoprecipitation of Flag-BUD31
for non-spliceosomal proteins. Input and IP blots probed by EIF2S1 and EIF3I were taken at
different exposures to minimize background signal. e, Interaction between N-YFP-tagged
BUD31 and C-YFP-tagged spliceosomal (DDX46) or cytoplasmic proteins (TRIM9,
SOCS2, EPHA8) was assessed by cellular fluorescence (mean±s.e.m., n=3 technical
replicates). f, Nuclear extracts with or without BUD31 knockdown were incubated with premRNA substrate, and RT-PCR of unspliced RNA (top) and spliced RNA (bottom) was
performed, using primers at the indicated arrows (left). BUD31 protein levels in the nuclear
extracts were normalized to vinculin expression (middle) and quantified (right). g,
Radioactively labeled pre-mRNA (MINX) was incubated with nuclear extracts with or
without BUD31 depletion. RNA purified from the splicing reaction was run on a denaturing
gel and imaged by autoradiography. The identities of prominent bands are based on size. *
denotes putative intron-lariat band. h, After in vitro splicing was performed as described
previously, products were electrophoresed on native gel, and spliceosome complexes were
visualized by autoradiography. Complex A and non-specific H complexes are labeled. i,
Phosphorimager quantification of the ratio of RNA in complex A compared to that in
complex H. j, Interaction between N-YFP-tagged wild-type (WT) or mutant BUD31 and CYFP-tagged splicing factors was assessed by cellular fluorescence (mean±s.e.m., n=2
technical replicates, ***P<0.001, two-tailed Student’s t-test).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 3. HMECs with oncogenic activation of HER2 and EGFR do not require
BUD31

a, Cell number changes in HMECs with inducible shBUD31 and constitutive HER2 or
EGFR expression (mean±s.e.m.; n=4 technical replicates; *P<0.05; N.S., not statistically
significant; two-tailed Student’s t-test). HER2 and EGFR protein is normalized to vinculin
(right). b, MYC protein levels in HMECs with constitutive HER2 or EGFR expression. c,

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 14.

Hsu et al.

Page 21

Author Manuscript

MYC induction by tamoxifen in MYC-ER HMECs does not increase cell proliferation over
time (mean±s.e.m., n=8 technical replicates).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 4. Partial knockdown of core splicing factors is MYC-synthetic lethal in
HMECs

a–d, mRNA levels for core splicing factors (a) SF3B1, (b) U2AF1, (c) EFTUD2, and (d)
SNRPF were evaluated by qRT-PCR (mean ±s.d., n=3 technical replicates). e–i, Caspase-3/7
luminescence in MYC-ER HMECs with (e–h) partial suppression of core spliceosomal
proteins or (i) spliceosome inhibitor SD6 (mean±s.e.m., n=3 technical replicates,
***P<0.001, one-way ANOVA).

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 14.

Hsu et al.

Page 22

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 5. BUD31 loss in MYC-hyperactivated cells destabilizes mRNA

a–b, MYC-ER HMECs with inducible shBUD31 treated with actinomycin D for 5 hours
were labeled with oligo(dT)25 LNA probes via fluorescence in situ hybridization. Cellular
FITC intensity was assessed within (a) cellular and (b) nuclear regions (DAPI+). Data are
represented as the difference in cellular FITC intensity between 0 hour and 5 hours of
actinomycin D treatment in each cell state (mean±s.e.m., n=150, ***P<0.001, two-tailed
Student’s t-test).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 14.

Hsu et al.

Page 23

Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 6. BUD31 depletion in MYC-hyperactivated cells enhances intron
retention and decreases expression of cell-essential genes

In MYC-hyperactive cells, 17 representative genes display increased intron retention and
decreased steady-state RNA levels after BUD31 knockdown. Depletion of these genes by
shRNA decreased cell viability (mean barcode abundance±s.e.m.). 2-fold decrease in
barcode abundance is noted by the dashed red line. All values are reflective of 3 biological
replicates, and genes are color-coded based on their GO-term annotation.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Extended Data Figure 7. MYC-dependent breast cancer cells require BUD31 for in vitro and in
vivo growth

Author Manuscript

a, Relative cell number of SUM159 cells with doxycycline-inducible shBUD31 in vitro
(mean±s.e.m., n=8 technical replicates, ***P<0.001, two-tailed Student’s t-test). b,
Caspase-3/7 luminescence in BUD31-depleted SUM159 cells (mean±s.e.m., n=3 technical
replicates, ***P<0.001, two-tailed Student’s t-test). c–d, SUM159 cells engineered with
dox-inducible shBUD31 were subcutaneously transplanted into mice and randomized onto
dox treatment (−dox n=10, +dox n=9). Loss of BUD31 SUM159 xenografts (c) inhibits
tumor growth (mean±s.e.m., *** P<0.001 at day 21, two-tailed Student’s t-test) and (d)
prolongs progression-free survival in nude mice (P-value, log-rank test).

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 14.

Hsu et al.

Page 24

Author Manuscript
Extended Data Figure 8. BUD31 depletion does not affect levels of MYC protein

Author Manuscript

a, MYC protein levels in MYC-ER HMECs with inducible shBUD31 expression normalized
to vinculin expression. To confirm specificity of MYC antibody, human mammary epithelial
cells without the MYC-ER construct (HMEC) were engineered to express inducible
shMYC. b, MYC protein levels in SUM159 and LM2 cells with inducible shBUD31
normalized to vinculin expression. To confirm specificity of MYC antibody, SUM159 cells
were engineered to express inducible shMYC.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 14.

Hsu et al.

Page 25

Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 9. Core splicing factors EFTUD2 and SNRPF are required for MYCdependent LM2 breast cancer tumor growth

Schematic for in vivo barcode-based competition assay. LM2 cells transduced with inducible
shRNAs targeting negative control genes or candidate genes were mixed at an equal ratio.
This mixed population was transplanted into mice, and tumors were allowed to form in the
presence or absence of dox. At the experimental endpoint, genomic DNA was isolated for
comparisons of relative barcode (shRNA) abundance in tumor genomic DNA.

Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 10. Spliceosome inhibitor SD6 inhibits MYC-dependent cancer cells in
vitro and in vivo

Author Manuscript

Acknowledgments

Author Manuscript

a, MYC-dependent breast cancer cells (SUM159, LM2) and MYC-normal immortalized
epithelial cells (F7, HME1) were cultured with SD6 at low density and analyzed for
clonogenic growth. b, MYC-repressible human B-cell line P493-6 was treated with or
without 100 nM SD6 in the absence or presence of MYC-hyperactivation for four days, and
cells were counted for relative cell number changes (mean±s.e.m., n=3 biological replicates,
***P<0.001, one-way ANOVA). c, Kaplan-Meier survival analysis of nude mice with
pulmonary seeding of LM2 cells treated with or without SD6 for 10 days (vehicle n=7, SD6
n=6, P-value by log-rank test).

REFERENCES

We would like to thank J. Rosen, S. Butler, K. Neugebauer, and members of T.F.W, C.A.S., and T.A.C. laboratories
for helpful comments, and P. Yu for bioinformatics support. The authors also acknowledge the joint participation by
Adrienne Helis Melvin Medical Research Foundation through its direct engagement in the continuous active
conduct of medical research in conjunction with Baylor College of Medicine for cancer research. The Dan L.
Duncan Cancer Center Shared Resources was supported by the NCI P30CA125123 Center Grant and provided
technical assistance including Cell-Based Assay Screening Service (Dan Liu), Genomic and RNA Profiling
Resource (Lisa White), Biostatistics & Informatics Shared Resource (Susan Hilsenbeck) and Cytometry and Cell
Sorting (Joel Sederstrom; P30 AI036211 and S10 RR024574). T.Y.-T.H. was supported by NIH pre-doctoral
fellowship (NCI 1F30CA180447) and CPRIT training grant (RP101499). M.O. and R.J.B. were supported by The
Gillson Longenbaugh Foundation. R.J.B. was supported by Alex's Lemonade Stand Foundation. Work in the
Golding lab was supported by NIH grant R01 GM082837, NSF grants PHY 1430124 (PFC: Center for the Physics
of Living Cells) and PHY 1147498 (CAREER), and Welch Foundation grant Q-1759. T.F.W. was supported by
CPRIT (RP120583), the Susan G. Komen for the Cure (KG090355), the NIH (1R01CA178039-01 and U54CA149196) and the DOD Breast Cancer Research Program (BC120604).

1. Eilers M, Eisenman RN. Myc's broad reach. Genes & development. 2008; 22:2755–2766. [PubMed:
18923074]
2. Sabo A, Amati B. Genome recognition by MYC. Cold Spring Harbor perspectives in medicine.
2014; 4

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 14.

Hsu et al.

Page 26

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

3. Dang CV. MYC, metabolism, cell growth, and tumorigenesis. Cold Spring Harbor perspectives in
medicine. 2013; 3
4. Lin CY, et al. Transcriptional amplification in tumor cells with elevated c-Myc. Cell. 2012; 151:56–
67. [PubMed: 23021215]
5. Nie Z, et al. c-Myc is a universal amplifier of expressed genes in lymphocytes and embryonic stem
cells. Cell. 2012; 151:68–79. [PubMed: 23021216]
6. Ruggero D. The role of Myc-induced protein synthesis in cancer. Cancer research. 2009; 69:8839–
8843. [PubMed: 19934336]
7. Barna M, et al. Suppression of Myc oncogenic activity by ribosomal protein haploinsufficiency.
Nature. 2008; 456:971–975. [PubMed: 19011615]
8. Luo J, Solimini NL, Elledge SJ. Principles of cancer therapy: oncogene and non-oncogene
addiction. Cell. 2009; 136:823–837. [PubMed: 19269363]
9. Kessler JD, et al. A SUMOylation-dependent transcriptional subprogram is required for Myc-driven
tumorigenesis. Science. 2012; 335:348–353. [PubMed: 22157079]
10. Masciadri B, et al. Characterization of the BUD31 gene of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Biochemical
and biophysical research communications. 2004; 320:1342–1350. [PubMed: 15303280]
11. Wahl MC, Will CL, Luhrmann R. The spliceosome: design principles of a dynamic RNP machine.
Cell. 2009; 136:701–718. [PubMed: 19239890]
12. Bonnal S, Vigevani L, Valcarcel J. The spliceosome as a target of novel antitumour drugs. Nat Rev
Drug Discov. 2012; 11:847–859. [PubMed: 23123942]
13. Lagisetti C, et al. Optimization of antitumor modulators of pre-mRNA splicing. Journal of
medicinal chemistry. 2013; 56:10033–10044. [PubMed: 24325474]
14. Kanazawa S, Soucek L, Evan G, Okamoto T, Peterlin BM. c-Myc recruits P-TEFb for
transcription, cellular proliferation and apoptosis. Oncogene. 2003; 22:5707–5711. [PubMed:
12944920]
15. Rahl PB, et al. c-Myc regulates transcriptional pause release. Cell. 2010; 141:432–445. [PubMed:
20434984]
16. Koh CM, et al. MYC regulates the core pre-mRNA splicing machinery as an essential step in
lymphomagenesis. Nature. 2015
17. Garneau NL, Wilusz J, Wilusz CJ. The highways and byways of mRNA decay. Nature reviews.
Molecular cell biology. 2007; 8:113–126. [PubMed: 17245413]
18. Mezquita P, Parghi SS, Brandvold KA, Ruddell A. Myc regulates VEGF production in B cells by
stimulating initiation of VEGF mRNA translation. Oncogene. 2005; 24:889–901. [PubMed:
15580293]
19. Minn AJ, et al. Distinct organ-specific metastatic potential of individual breast cancer cells and
primary tumors. The Journal of clinical investigation. 2005; 115:44–55. [PubMed: 15630443]
20. Di Cosimo S, Baselga J. Management of breast cancer with targeted agents: importance of
heterogeneity. Nature reviews. Clinical oncology. 2010; 7:139–147. [corrected].
21. David CJ, Chen M, Assanah M, Canoll P, Manley JL. HnRNP proteins controlled by c-Myc
deregulate pyruvate kinase mRNA splicing in cancer. Nature. 2010; 463:364–368. [PubMed:
20010808]
22. Sabo A, et al. Selective transcriptional regulation by Myc in cellular growth control and
lymphomagenesis. Nature. 2014; 511:488–492. [PubMed: 25043028]
23. Walz S, et al. Activation and repression by oncogenic MYC shape tumour-specific gene expression
profiles. Nature. 2014; 511:483–487. [PubMed: 25043018]
24. Lin CJ, et al. Targeting synthetic lethal interactions between Myc and the eIF4F complex impedes
tumorigenesis. Cell reports. 2012; 1:325–333. [PubMed: 22573234]
25. Graubert TA, et al. Recurrent mutations in the U2AF1 splicing factor in myelodysplastic
syndromes. Nature genetics. 2012; 44:53–57. [PubMed: 22158538]
26. Papaemmanuil E, et al. Somatic SF3B1 mutation in myelodysplasia with ring sideroblasts. The
New England journal of medicine. 2011; 365:1384–1395. [PubMed: 21995386]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 14.

Hsu et al.

Page 27

Author Manuscript

27. Hubert CG, et al. Genome-wide RNAi screens in human brain tumor isolates reveal a novel
viability requirement for PHF5A. Genes & development. 2013; 27:1032–1045. [PubMed:
23651857]
28. Adler AS, et al. An integrative analysis of colon cancer identifies an essential function for PRPF6
in tumor growth. Genes & development. 2014; 28:1068–1084. [PubMed: 24788092]
29. Cunningham JT, Moreno MV, Lodi A, Ronen SM, Ruggero D. Protein and nucleotide biosynthesis
are coupled by a single rate-limiting enzyme, PRPS2, to drive cancer. Cell. 2014; 157:1088–1103.
[PubMed: 24855946]
30. Liu YC, et al. Global regulation of nucleotide biosynthetic genes by c-Myc. PloS one. 2008;
3:e2722. [PubMed: 18628958]

References

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

31. Meerbrey KL, et al. The pINDUCER lentiviral toolkit for inducible RNA interference in vitro and
in vivo. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2011;
108:3665–3670. [PubMed: 21307310]
32. Schuhmacher M, et al. Control of cell growth by c-Myc in the absence of cell division. Current
biology : CB. 1999; 9:1255–1258. [PubMed: 10556095]
33. Malovannaya A, et al. Streamlined analysis schema for high-throughput identification of
endogenous protein complexes. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America. 2010; 107:2431–2436. [PubMed: 20133760]
34. Zapp ML, Berget SM. Evidence for nuclear factors involved in recognition of 5' splice sites.
Nucleic acids research. 1989; 17:2655–2674. [PubMed: 2524033]
35. Dignam JD, Lebovitz RM, Roeder RG. Accurate transcription initiation by RNA polymerase II in a
soluble extract from isolated mammalian nuclei. Nucleic acids research. 1983; 11:1475–1489.
[PubMed: 6828386]
36. Echeverria GV, Cooper TA. Muscleblind-like 1 activates insulin receptor exon 11 inclusion by
enhancing U2AF65 binding and splicing of the upstream intron. Nucleic acids research. 2014;
42:1893–1903. [PubMed: 24185704]
37. Dolken L, et al. High-resolution gene expression profiling for simultaneous kinetic parameter
analysis of RNA synthesis and decay. Rna. 2008; 14:1959–1972. [PubMed: 18658122]
38. Marcotte R, et al. Essential gene profiles in breast, pancreatic, and ovarian cancer cells. Cancer
discovery. 2012; 2:172–189. [PubMed: 22585861]
39. Shao DD, et al. ATARiS: computational quantification of gene suppression phenotypes from
multisample RNAi screens. Genome research. 2013; 23:665–678. [PubMed: 23269662]

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 14.

Hsu et al.

Page 28

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 1. The spliceosome is required for cells to tolerate oncogenic MYC hyperactivation

Author Manuscript

a, BUD31 is a MYC-synthetic lethal gene. b, shBUD31 barcode abundances +/−MYC-ER
hyperactivation (mean±s.e.m., n=3 biological replicates). c, Relative number of MYC-ER
HMECs with dox-inducible shBUD31-UTR and constitutive Flag-GFP or -BUD31
expression (mean±s.e.m., n=4 technical replicates). d, Flag-BUD31 co-immunoprecipitation
for core spliceosomal factors. e, Interaction between BUD31 and spliceosomal proteins
assessed by BiFC (mean±s.e.m., n=3 technical replicates). f, GFP+ MYC-dependent cells
with inducible shBUD31-UTR and constitutive WT, mutant BUD31, or negative control
cDNA expression were mixed with GFP− cells and passaged (mean±s.e.m, n=8 technical
replicates, two-tailed Student’s t-test). g, Change in MYC-ER HMEC clonogenicity after
SD6 treatment (mean±s.e.m., n=4 technical replicates, two-tailed Student’s t-test). h–k,
Relative number of MYC-ER HMECs after partial depletion of core spliceosomal proteins
(mean±s.e.m., n=4 technical replicates, one-way ANOVA). **P<0.01, ***P<0.001.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 14.

Hsu et al.

Page 29

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 2. In MYC-hyperactivated cells, perturbation of the spliceosome leads to global intron
retention

Author Manuscript

a, (Left) total poly(A)+ RNA per cell (10−4 ng) and (right) newly synthesized 4-sU-labeled
poly(A)+ RNA per cell (10−5 ng) (mean±s.e.m., n=4 technical replicates for both assays,
two-tailed Student’s t-test). b, Schematic of intron retention (IR) analysis. c–d, Empirical
cumulative distribution of IR coefficients for (c) 75,623 exon-intron junctions or (d) 6,861
genes. Curves represent IR differences after BUD31 depletion in MYC-normal and MYChyperactive states. A rightward shift in the MYC-hyperactive curve indicates increased IR
(Kolmogorov-Smirnov test). e–g, Log2-fold changes in junction IR relative to untreated by
RNAseq of representative genes (mean±s.e.m., n=3 biological replicates, two-tailed
Student’s t-test). h–j, qRT-PCR validation showing fold change in junction IR relative to
untreated (mean±s.d., n=3 biological replicates, two-tailed Student’s t-test). *P<0.05,
**P<0.01, ***P<0.001

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 14.

Hsu et al.

Page 30

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 3. Combined spliceosomal perturbation and MYC-hyperactivation inhibits pre-mRNA
maturation

a, Model of MYC-spliceosome synthetic lethality. b, Difference in cellular poly(A)+ RNA
in HMECs after actinomycin D (A.D.) treatment (mean±s.e.m., n=3 biological replicates,
two-tailed Student’s t-test). c, Steady-state poly(A)+ RNA levels per cell (10−4 ng) (mean
±s.e.m., n=4 biological replicates, two-tailed Student’s t-test). d, Gene ontology (GO)
enrichment of intron-retained genes in the MYC-hyperactive and BUD31-depleted state.
Dashed line indicates P=0.05. e–f, In MYC-hyperactive BUD31-shRNA cells, representative
genes display (e) increased intron retention (mean±s.e.m.) and (f) decreased steady-state
RNA levels (mean±s.e.m.) after BUD31 knockdown in MYC-hyperactivated cells. Bar
colors represent GO terms, see legend in Extended Data Figure 6. **P<0.01, ***P<0.001

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 14.

Hsu et al.

Page 31

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 4. In vivo perturbation of spliceosomal activity impairs MYC-dependent breast tumors
and metastases

Author Manuscript

a, Schematic for identifying genetic co-dependencies in breast cancer lines. b–c, MYCsiMEM score, which represents the correlation between cell line sensitivity to MYCshRNAs and sensitivity to shRNAs targeting random gene sets (n=100,000), is plotted
against frequency of gene sets. Increasing MYC-siMEM values denote higher correlation
with MYC-dependency. Red arrows indicate MYC-siMEM scores for spliceosomedependency in (b) all breast cancer lines (n=72) and (c) the basal breast cancer subset (n=32,
P-value by bootstrap analysis for both). d–e, MDA-MB-231-LM2 cells with shBUD31
display (d, bottom) diminished BUD31 protein levels, (d, top) decreased cell numbers (mean
±s.e.m., n=8 technical replicates, two-tailed Student’s t-test) and (e) increased caspase-3
cleavage (bottom) and caspase-3/7 luminescence (top; mean±s.e.m., n=3 technical
replicates, two-tailed Student’s t-test). f–g, Barcode-shRNA abundance of LM2 cells within
(f) primary tumors or (g) pulmonary metastases. Mean barcode abundance in each tumor or
lung is normalized to the injected cell population (n=3 technical replicates, two-tailed
Student’s t-test). h, Change in LM2 tumor growth after 2 weeks of vehicle (n=13) or SD6
(n=10) infusion. Bars indicate mean values (two-tailed Student’s t-test). i, Pulmonary LM2
bioluminescence after 10-day infusion with vehicle (n=7) or SD6 (n=6). Bars indicate
median values (Mann-Whitney test). *P<0.05, **P<0.01, ***P<0.001.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 14.

