NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 14.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Published in final edited form as:
Cell. 2014 August 14; 158(4): 929–944. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2014.06.049.

Multi-platform analysis of 12 cancer types reveals molecular
classification within and across tissues-of-origin
Katherine A. Hoadley*, Christina Yau*, Denise M. Wolf*, Andrew D. Cherniack*, David
Tamborero, Sam Ng, Max D.M. Leiserson, Beifang Niu, Michael D. McLellan, Vladislav
Uzunangelov, Jiashan Zhang, Cyriac Kandoth, Rehan Akbani, Hui Shen, Larsson Omberg,
Andy Chu, Adam A. Margolin, Laura J. van’t Veer, Nuria Lopez-Bigas, Peter W. Laird,
Benjamin J. Raphael, Li Ding, A. Gordon Robertson, Lauren A. Byers, Gordon B. Mills,
John N. Weinstein, Carter Van Waes, Zhong Chen, Eric A. Collisson, The Cancer Genome
Atlas Research Network, Christopher Benz, Charles M. Perou, and Joshua M. Stuart

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Abstract

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Correspondence to: Christopher Benz; Charles M. Perou; Joshua M. Stuart.
*first authors
SECONDARY AUTHOR LIST:
Rachel Abbott, Scott Abbott, B. Arman Aksoy, Kenneth Aldape, Adrian Ally, Samirkumar Amin, Dimitris Anastassiou, J.Todd
Auman, Keith A Baggerly, Miruna Balasundaram, Saianand Balu, Stephen B. Baylin, Stephen C. Benz, Benjamin P. Berman, Brady
Bernard, Ami S. Bhatt, Inanc Birol, Aaron D. Black, Tom Bodenheimer, Moiz S. Bootwalla, Jay Bowen, Ryan Bressler, Christopher
A. Bristow, Angela N. Brooks, Bradley Broom, Elizabeth Buda, Robert Burton, Yaron S.N. Butterfield, Daniel Carlin, Scott L. Carter,
Tod D. Casasent, Kyle Chang, Stephen Chanock, Lynda Chin, Dong-Yeon Cho, Juok Cho, Eric Chuah, Hye-Jung E. Chun, Kristian
Cibulskis, Giovanni Ciriello, James Cleland, Melisssa Cline, Brian Craft, Chad J. Creighton, Ludmila Danilova, Tanja Davidsen,
Caleb Davis, Nathan D. Dees, Kim Delehaunty, John A. Demchok, Noreen Dhalla, Daniel DiCara, Huyen Dinh, Jason R. Dobson,
Deepti Dodda, HarshaVardhan Doddapaneni, Lawrence Donehower, David J. Dooling, Gideon Dresdner, Jennifer Drummond,
Andrea Eakin, Mary Edgerton, Jim M. Eldred, Greg Eley, Kyle Ellrott, Cheng Fan, Suzanne Fei, Ina Felau, Scott Frazer, Samuel S
Freeman, Jessica Frick, Catrina C. Fronick, Lucinda L. Fulton, Robert Fulton, Stacey B. Gabriel, Jianjiong Gao, Julie M. GastierFoster, Nils Gehlenborg, Myra George, Gad Getz, Richard Gibbs, Mary Goldman, Abel Gonzalez-Perez, Benjamin Gross, Ranabir
Guin, Preethi Gunaratne, Angela Hadjipanayis, Mark P. Hamilton, Stanley R. Hamilton, Leng Han, Yi Han, Hollie A. Harper, Psalm
Haseley, David Haussler, D. Neil Hayes, David I. Heiman, Elena Helman, Carmen Helsel, Shelley M. Herbrich, James G. Herman,
Toshinori Hinoue, Carrie Hirst, Martin Hirst, Robert A. Holt, Alan P. Hoyle, Lisa Iype, Anders Jacobsen, Stuart R. Jeffreys, Mark A.
Jensen, Corbin D. Jones, Steven J.M. Jones, Zhenlin Ju, Joonil Jung, Andre Kahles, Ari Kahn, Joelle Kalicki-Veizer, Divya Kalra,
Krishna-Latha Kanchi, David W. Kane, Hoon Kim, Jaegil Kim, Theo Knijnenburg, Daniel C. Koboldt, Christie Kovar, Roger Kramer,
Richard Kreisberg, Raju Kucherlapati, Marc Ladanyi, Eric S. Lander, David E. Larson, Michael S. Lawrence, Darlene Lee, Eunjung
Lee, Semin Lee, William Lee, Kjong-Van Lehmann, Kalle Leinonen, Kristen M. Leraas, Seth Lerner, Douglas A. Levine, Lora Lewis,
Timothy J. Ley, Haiyan I. Li, Jun Li, Wei Li, Han Liang, Tara M. Lichtenberg, Jake Lin, Ling Lin, Pei Lin, Wenbin Liu, Yingchun
Liu, Yuexin Liu, Philip L. Lorenzi, Charles Lu, Yiling Lu, Lovelace J. Luquette, Singer Ma, Vincent J. Magrini, Harshad S.
Mahadeshwar, Elaine R. Mardis, Adam Margolin, Marco A. Marra, Michael Mayo, Cynthia McAllister, Sean E. McGuire, Joshua F.
McMichael, James Melott, Shaowu Meng, Matthew Meyerson, Piotr A. Mieczkowski, Christopher A. Miller, Martin L. Miller,
Michael Miller, Richard A. Moore, Margaret Morgan, Donna Morton, Lisle E. Mose, Andrew J. Mungall, Donna Muzny, Lam
Nguyen, Michael S. Noble, Houtan Noushmehr, Michelle O’Laughlin, Akinyemi I. Ojesina, Tai-Hsien Ou Yang, Brad Ozenberger,
Angeliki Pantazi, Michael Parfenov, Peter J. Park, Joel S. Parker, Evan Paull, Chandra Sekhar Pedamallu, Todd Pihl, Craig Pohl,
David Pot, Alexei Protopopov, Teresa Przytycka, Amie Radenbaugh, Nilsa C. Ramirez, Ricardo Ramirez, Gunnar Rätsch, Jeffrey
Reid, Xiaojia Ren, Boris Reva, Sheila M. Reynolds, Suhn K. Rhie, Jeffrey Roach, Hector Rovira, Michael Ryan, Gordon Saksena,
Sofie Salama, Chris Sander, Netty Santoso, Jacqueline E. Schein, Heather Schmidt, Nikolaus Schultz, Steven E. Schumacher,
Jonathan Seidman, Yasin Senbabaoglu, Sahil Seth, Samantha Sharpe, Ronglai Shen, Margi Sheth, Yan Shi, Ilya Shmulevich, Grace O.
Silva, Janae V. Simons, Rileen Sinha, Payal Sipahimalani, Scott M. Smith, Heidi J. Sofia, Artem Sokolov, Mathew G. Soloway,
Xingzhi Song, Carrie Sougnez, Paul Spellman, Louis Staudt, Chip Stewart, Petar Stojanov, Xiaoping Su, S. Onur Sumer, Yichao Sun,
Teresa Swatloski, Barbara Tabak, Angela Tam, Donghui Tan, Jiabin Tang, Roy Tarnuzzer, Barry S. Taylor, Nina Thiessen, Vesteinn
Thorsson, Timothy Triche Jr., David J. Van Den Berg, Fabio Vandin, Richard J. Varhol, Charles J. Vaske, Umadevi Veluvolu,
Roeland Verhaak, Doug Voet, Jason Walker, John W. Wallis, Peter Waltman, Yunhu Wan, Min Wang, Wenyi Wang, Zhining Wang,
Scot Waring, Nils Weinhold, Daniel J. Weisenberger, Michael C. Wendl, David Wheeler, Matthew D. Wilkerson, Richard K. Wilson,
Lisa Wise, Andrew Wong, Chang-Jiun Wu, Chia-Chin Wu, Hsin-Ta Wu, Junyuan Wu, Todd Wylie, Liu Xi, Ruibin Xi, Zheng Xia,
Andrew W. Xu, Da Yang, Liming Yang, Lixing Yang, Yang Yang, Jun Yao, Rong Yao, Kai Ye, Kosuke Yoshihara, Yuan Yuan,
Alfred K. Yung, Travis Zack, Dong Zeng, Jean Claude Zenklusen, Hailei Zhang, Jianhua Zhang, Nianxiang Zhang, Qunyuan Zhang,
Wei Zhang, Wei Zhao, Siyuan Zheng, Jing Zhu, Erik Zmuda, Lihua Zou

Hoadley et al.

Page 2

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Recent genomic analyses of pathologically-defined tumor types identify “within-a-tissue” disease
subtypes. However, the extent to which genomic signatures are shared across tissues is still
unclear. We performed an integrative analysis using five genome-wide platforms and one
proteomic platform on 3,527 specimens from 12 cancer types, revealing a unified classification
into 11 major subtypes. Five subtypes were nearly identical to their tissue-of-origin counterparts,
but several distinct cancer types were found to converge into common subtypes. Lung squamous,
head & neck, and a subset of bladder cancers coalesced into one subtype typified by TP53
alterations, TP63 amplifications, and high expression of immune and proliferation pathway genes.
Of note, bladder cancers split into three pan-cancer subtypes. The multi-platform classification,
while correlated with tissue-of-origin, provides independent information for predicting clinical
outcomes. All datasets are available for data-mining from a unified resource to support further
biological discoveries and insights into novel therapeutic strategies.

INTRODUCTION

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Cancers are typically classified using pathologic criteria that rely heavily on the tissue site of
origin. However, large-scale genomics projects are now producing detailed molecular
characterizations of thousands of tumors, making a systematic molecular-based taxonomy of
cancer possible. Indeed, The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) Research Network has reported
integrated genome-wide studies of ten distinct malignancies: glioblastoma multiforme
(GBM) (The_Cancer_Genome_Atlas_Network, 2008), serous ovarian carcinoma (OV)
(The_Cancer_Genome_Atlas_Network, 2011), colon (COAD) and rectal (READ)
adenocarcinomas (The_Cancer_Genome_Atlas_Network, 2012b), lung squamous cell
carcinoma (LUSC) (The_Cancer_Genome_Atlas_Network, 2012a), breast cancer (BRCA)
(The_Cancer_Genome_Atlas_Network, 2012c), acute myelogenous leukemia (AML)
(The_Cancer_Genome_Atlas_Network, 2013b), endometrial cancer (UCEC) (Kandoth et
al., 2013b), and renal cell carcinoma (KIRC) (The_Cancer_Genome_Atlas_Network,
2013a), and bladder urothelial adenocarcinoma (The_Cancer_Genome_Atlas_Network,
2014). Those studies have shown that each single-tissue cancer type can be further divided
into three to four molecular subtypes. The sub-classification is based on recurrent genetic
and epigenetic alterations that converge on common pathways (e.g. p53 and/or Rb
checkpoint loss; RTK/RAS/MEK or RTK/PI3K/AKT activation). Meaningful differences in
clinical behavior are often correlated with the single-tissue tumor types and, in a few cases,
single-tissue subtype identification has led to therapies that target the driving subtypespecific molecular alteration(s). EGFR-mutant lung adenocarcinomas and ERBB2-amplified
breast cancer are two well-established examples.
To move toward a molecular taxonomy, we investigated whether tissue-of-origin categories
split into sub-types based upon multi-platform genomic analyses, and also extend the
analysis in the other direction to look for possible convergence. We looked to see what
molecular alterations are shared across cancers arising from different tissues and if
previously recognized disease subtypes in fact span multiple tissues of origin. With those
questions in mind, we performed a multi-platform integrative analysis of thousands of
cancers from 12 tumor types in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) project. Using data from
multiple assay platforms, we tested the hypothesis that molecular signatures provide a

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 14.

Hoadley et al.

Page 3

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

distinct taxonomy relative to the currently used tissue-of-origin based classification. At the
center of our results is the identification of 11 “integrated subtypes”. Consistent with the
histological classification, tissue-of-origin features provided the dominant signal(s) for
identification of most subtypes, irrespective of genomic analysis platform or combination
thereof. However, approximately 10% of cases were reclassified by the molecular
taxonomy, with the newly defined integrated subtypes providing a significant increase in the
accuracy for the prediction of clinical outcomes.

RESULTS
Samples, Data Types, and Genomic Platforms

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

To identify a multi-tissue, molecular signature-based classification of cancer objectively, we
first characterized each of the individual tumor types using six different “omic” platforms.
The diverse tumor set called “Pan-Cancer-12,” is composed of 12 different malignancies. It
comprises 3,527 cases assayed by at least four of the six possible data types routinely
generated by TCGA: whole-exome DNA sequence (Illumina HiSeq and GAII), DNA copy
number variation (Affymetrix 6.0 microarrays), DNA methylation (Illumina 450,000-feature
microarrays), genome-wide mRNA levels (Illumina mRNA-seq), microRNA levels
(Illumina microRNA-seq), and protein levels for 131 proteins and/or phosphorylated
proteins (Reverse Phase Protein Arrays; RPPA). The 12 tumor types include the ten TCGA
Network published data sets listed above and two additional tumor types for which
manuscripts have been submitted: lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) and head & neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSC). This is the most comprehensive and diverse collection of
tumors analyzed by systematic genomic methods to date.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

We performed sample-wise clustering to derive subtypes based on six different data types
separately: DNA copy number, DNA methylation, mRNA expression, microRNA
expression, protein expression, and somatic point mutation (see Supplemental Extended
Experimental Procedures and Analyses, Section 1). The classification results from each
single-platform analysis produced sets of 8 to 20 groups of samples that each showed high
correlation with tissue of origin (Figures S1A–F) and were highly comparable with each
other (Figure S2A). For example, patterns of copy number change varied across tissue types,
and subtyping of the tumors based on copy number alterations revealed a significant
correlation with tissue (p < 6×10−6, Chi-square test).
Integrated Platform Analysis (Cluster of Cluster Assignments)
To identify disease subtypes on a more comprehensive basis than could be done using any
single type of data, we developed an integrated subtype classification for all of the tumor
samples in the Pan-Cancer-12 collection based on five of the data types, excluding somatic
mutations. To do so, the results of the single platform analyses were provided as input to a
second-level cluster analysis using a method we refer to as Cluster-Of-Cluster-Assignments
(COCA), which was originally developed to define subclasses in the TCGA breast cancer
cohort (The_Cancer_Genome_Atlas_Network, 2012c). The algorithm takes as input the
binary vectors that represent each of the platform-specific cluster-groups and re-clusters the
samples according to those vectors (see Supplemental Text Section 2). One advantage of the

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 14.

Hoadley et al.

Page 4

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

method is that data across platforms are combined without the need for normalization steps
prior to clustering. In addition, each platform influences the final integrated result with
weight proportional to the number of distinct subtypes reproducibly found by Consensus
Clustering. Thus, “large” platforms (e.g. 450,000 DNA methylation probes) with orders of
magnitude more features than “small” platforms (e.g. 131 RPPA antibodies) do not
dominate the solution.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In addition to the COCA classification, we used two additional, independent methods to
derive Pan-Cancer-12 subtypes based on integrated data: (i) an algorithm called
SuperCluster (Kandoth et al., 2013b) (Figure S2B) and (ii) clustering based on inferred
pathway activities from PARADIGM (Vaske et al., 2010), which integrates gene expression
and DNA copy number data with a set of predefined pathways to infer the degree of activity
of 17,365 pathway features such as proteins, complexes, and cellular processes (Figure
S2C). Both SuperCluster and PARADIGM produced classifications that were highly
concordant with the COCA subtypes (Figure S2D). Given recent promising results that use
gene networks (as opposed to the sparsely populated single-mutation space) to cluster
samples based on somatic DNA variants (Hofree et al., 2013), we calculated a mutationbased clustering after first associating genes with pathways and then identifying clusters
based on mutated pathways (Figure S1F; Supplemental Data File S1). Including those
clusters in the identification of COCA subtypes produced highly similar results to COCA
subtypes that did not use the mutation-based clusters (Figure S2D). Thus, we focus here on
the COCA results obtained without the mutations, as those five other platform-based
classifications required no prior biological knowledge.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The COCA algorithm identified thirteen clusters of samples, 11 of which included more
than ten samples (Table S1). The two small clusters (n=3 and 6) are noted (Table 1), but
were excluded from further analyses. We refer to the remaining sample groups by cluster
number and a short descriptive mnemonic (Table 1). Of the 11 COCA-integrated subtypes,
five show simple, near one-to-one relationships with tissue site of origin: C5-KIRC, C6UCEC, C9-OV, C10-GBM and C13-LAML (Figure 1A). A sixth COCA type, C1-LUADenriched, is predominantly composed (258/306) of non-small cell lung (NSCLC)
adenocarcinoma samples (LUAD). The second major constituent of the C1-LUAD-enriched
group is a set of NSCLC squamous samples (28/306). Upon re-review of the frozen or
formalin fixed sections, 11/28 lung squamous samples that cluster with the C1-LUADenriched group did not have squamous features and were reclassified as lung
adenocarcinoma (Travis et al., 2011). NSCLCs are often difficult to classify based on
histology alone (Grilley-Olson et al., 2013). That difficulty poses an important clinical
challenge since histology is used to guide the selection of chemotherapy (Scagliotti et al.,
2008) and to select patients for further mutational analysis (e.g., EGFR mutation and ALK
fusion testing in non-squamous NSCLC). However, the challenge can be addressed by
genomic analysis based on distinct differences in mutation spectrum (Table S2A) and
distinct gene expression patterns (Figure S1A). Two clear subtypes of NSCLC (C1-LUADenriched and C2-Squamous-like, see discussion below) are identified by COCA.
For the other five tissue types, the patterns are more complex. Either a given tissue splits
into multiple COCA groups (divergence) or multiple tissue types coalesce into a single

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 14.

Hoadley et al.

Page 5

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

COCA group (convergence). A simple example of convergence previously described for
TCGA data is the merging of colon (COAD) and rectal (READ) tumors into a single COCA
group (The_Cancer_Genome_Atlas_Network, 2012b). The expression features shared by
colon and rectal samples were noted in the TCGA Network paper on the two cancer types,
but we extend those findings through use of the multi-platform clustering approach (Figure
1, Table 1).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Breast cancers (BRCA) exhibit a pattern of divergence in which two main groups of samples
are distinctly identifiable. One group (C3-BRCA/Luminal) contains essentially all of the
Luminal (estrogen receptor-positive) (594/597) and HER2-positive tumors (66/66), whereas
the other (C4-BRCA/Basal) contains 131/139 of the Breast Basal-like tumors. Although it
has previously been appreciated that Basal-like breast cancers (the majority subset of TripleNegative Breast Cancers) form a distinct subtype (Prat et al., 2013;
The_Cancer_Genome_Atlas_Network, 2012c), the findings here provide a more refined,
quantitative picture of the extent of difference from Luminal and Basal-like breast cancers.
Whereas tissue-of-origin is the dominant signal for combined data on almost all of the other
cancer types in the Pan-Cancer-12 collection, Breast Basal-like cancers are as different from
Luminal/ER+ breast cancers as they are from cancers of the lung (Figure 1). The data from
the present study strongly reinforce the idea that Basal-like breast cancers constitute a
unique disease entity.
The remaining three tissue types (HNSC, LUSC and BLCA) provide examples of both
divergence and convergence in COCA subtyping (Figure 1 and Table 1). The strongest
pattern of convergence is observed for the vast majority of HNSC (301/304), LUSC
(206/238) and some of the BLCA (31/120) tumors; they cluster together in a large COCA
group (C2-Squamous-like), perhaps reflecting similar cell-type-of-origin or smoking as an
etiologic factor. BLCA tumors also exhibit a divergence pattern, distributing predominantly
into three distinct groups: 31 BLCA in the C2-Squamous-like group, 10 in the C1-LUADenriched group, and 74 in the bladder-only group, C8-BLCA. Five other BLCA samples
cluster in four different COCA groups.
Clinical importance of the COCA subtypes

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

To investigate the clinical relevance of the COCA subtypes, we performed Kaplan-Meier
Survival analysis on the Pan-Cancer-12 data set. The results indicate that tissue-of-origin
(Figure S3A) and COCA subtype (Figure 1D) are both prognostic and each provides
independent information (Figure 1E). Additionally, the two most commonly mutated genes
in the overall dataset, TP53 (41%) and PIK3CA (20%), are prognostic, even across different
tumor types, as are previously defined genomic signatures of cell proliferation rate (Nielsen
et al., 2010) and mutated TP53 gene expression-based signature (Troester et al., 2006)
(Figure S3B–F).
We next asked whether prognostic information is provided by the COCA subtypes after
accounting for known clinical and tissue-of-origin features. We performed a Multivariate
Cox proportional hazards analysis to predict outcomes across the dataset. The analysis was
limited to the COCA subtypes that did not have a one-to-one relationship with tissue-oforigin tumor type (COCA1-LUAD enriched, COCA2-Squamous, COCA3-Breast/luminal,
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 14.

Hoadley et al.

Page 6

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

COCA4-Breast/Basal, COCA7-COAD/READ, and COCA8-BLCA). In the model we
included clinical features such as tumor size, node status, metastasis status, and age at
diagnosis, as well as tissue-of-origin. We performed a likelihood ratio test conditioning first
on the clinical variables; when either tissue-of-origin or COCA subtype was added to the
model, a large increase in the predictive fit of the model was observed, beyond what one
would get with the clinical information alone (Figure 1E). That observation supports the
classical model in which tissues-of-origin provides strong predictions of outcome. Next, we
asked whether the COCA subtypes add additional independent information for predicting
survival beyond the combination of tissue-of-origin and clinical features. Indeed, we
observed a significant increase in statistical likelihood when COCA is added to a
multivariate model that already includes the clinical and tissue-based information (P <
0.0002; Chi-square test; Figure 1E). Thus, while the COCA classification differs from
tissue-of-origin based classification in only ~10% of all samples, the difference does provide
important molecular information that reflects tumor biology and is associated with clinical
outcome.
Genomic Determinants of the Integrated COCA Subtypes

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

We next identified the major genomic determinants of the COCA subtypes, including
somatic mutations and DNA copy number changes. For single nucleotide variants, we
analyzed a Pan-Cancer-12 list of 127 Significantly Mutated Genes (SMGs) obtained by
MuSiC analysis (Kandoth et al., 2013a). Only three of the genes are mutated at a frequency
≧10% (TP53, PIK3CA and PTEN), and 11 additional are mutated at ≥5% frequency (Table
S2A). We also include a list of 291 High-Confidence Cancer Drivers (HCDs) from PanCancer-12 analysis (Tamborero et al., 2013), identified by a combination of five
complementary methods to identify signals of positive selection in the mutational pattern of
genes across tumors.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

A large number of correlations between COCA subtypes and somatic mutations were found
(Figure 2A, Figure S4D, Supplemental Data File S2). Somatic mutations clearly distinguish
the C1-LUAD-enriched group from the C2-Squamous-like group. KEAP1 and STK11 are
preferentially mutated in C1-LUAD-enriched tumors, whereas CDKN2A, NOTCH1, MLL2
and NFE2L2, among others, are preferentially mutated in C2-Squamous-like (Figure 2A). A
similarly distinct set of SMGs was seen for the C3-BRCA/Luminal and C4-BRCA/Basal
groups; only two genes are shared (TP53 and PIK3CA), and they show different mutation
frequencies (Table S2A). Since the somatic mutation results were not used in any way to
determine the COCA subtypes, they provide independent evidence that distinctly different
genetic events underlie the subtypes. A protein-protein interaction network analysis of
mutations associated with the COCA subtypes obtained using a new version of the HotNet
algorithm (Vandin et al., 2012) provides an overview of the genomic determinants of the
COCA subtypes (Figure S4E).
The degree of genomic instability was a major determinant of subtype, as revealed in copy
number variation (CNV) data (Figure 2B). The C9-OV, C4-BRCA/Basal and C1-LUADenriched subtypes showed the most marked genomic instability, as assessed by average
number of copy number segments per subtype (Figure 2C), whereas AML and UCEC

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 14.

Hoadley et al.

Page 7

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

showed the least. Numerous COCA subtype-associated alterations implicated specific
regions, arm-level copy number changes (Figure S4A) and/or focal regions of copy number
alteration (Figure S4B). Of note were a number of previously described tissue type-specific
and subtype-specific alterations, including Chr7 gain and Chr10 loss in GBM
(The_Cancer_Genome_Atlas_Network, 2008), 3p loss and 5q gain in kidney
(The_Cancer_Genome_Atlas_Network, 2013a), 4q and 5q loss in Breast Basal-like cancers
(The_Cancer_Genome_Atlas_Network, 2012c) and 3p loss and 3q gain in Lung Squamous
tumors (The_Cancer_Genome_Atlas_Network, 2012a). Of note, the latter were seen in most
C2-Squamous-like tumors, regardless of tissue of origin.
Expression-based Determinants of the Integrated Subtypes

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

We next sought to identify gene expression modules characteristic of each COCA subtype.
First, we started with 6,898 sets of gene signatures documented to be co-expressed, coamplified, or to function together. From these, we identified gene programs as those whose
genes have mRNA-seq signatures of high mutual correlation across the Pan-Cancer-12
dataset. After applying a bimodality filter and Weighted Gene Correlation Network-based
clustering, 22 non-redundant gene programs were identified (Supplemental Table S4A,
Figure S5A, Experimental Procedures and Analyses, Section 5, and Supplemental Data File
S5). Linear classification with the 22 gene programs reconstituted the 11 integrated subtypes
with 90% accuracy (Figure S5A; Table S4B). To view the expression-based determinants of
the integrated subtypes we plotted the average expression level of each gene program within
each COCA cluster (Figure 3). As expected, the gene programs GP6-squamous
differentiation/development, GP13-neural signaling and GP20-TAL-1-leukemia/
erythropoiesis were the most highly expressed in the C2-Squamous-like, C10-GBM and
C13-LAML subtypes, respectively. As well, GP7_Estrogen signaling was highest in the C3BRCA/luminal cases, whereas GP17_basal signaling had its highest levels in the C4BRCA/Basal cases. Activated pathway characteristics found by enrichment and sub-network
analyses based on PARADIGM inferences, many of which were consistent with the gene
program analysis, are summarized in Table S4A (see Supplemental Extended Procedures
and Analyses).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Gene expression programs and PARADIGM pathways carry clinically relevant information
beyond tissue-of-origin as evidenced by a multivariate Cox model of survival with COCA
subtype as a covariate (see Table S4E). Squamous differentiation/development (GP6),
proliferation/cell cycle, and estrogen signaling (GP7) were significant predictors in the
model. Intriguingly, GP7, along with fatty acid oxidation (GP10), tumor suppressing miRNA
targets (GP3) and the PTEN/MTOR signaling program, were found to be significantly
associated with patient outcome in kidney cancer using a Cox proportional hazards survival
analysis (Figure S5D; Table S4F). In common with the C3-BRCA/Luminal subtype cases,
higher levels of estrogen signaling (GP7) were also associated with better prognosis for C5KIRC cancers. Consistent with the higher frequency of elevated HER2 protein levels in
bladder, colorectal and serous endometrial cancers (Akbani et al., 2014), the HER2amplified gene signature appeared elevated in the C8-BLCA, C7-COAD/READ and C6UCEC subtypes, as well as the C3-BRCA/Luminal subtype which contains all HER2positive breast cancers. Predictors independent of disease stage included basal signaling

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 14.

Hoadley et al.

Page 8

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

(GP17), associated with decreased overall survival, and the immune-related PARADIGM
pathways PD1_signaling and CTLA4_pathway, both of which were associated with
increased overall survival. These immune-related signatures may reflect varying amounts of
lymphocyte infiltrate in the tumors as has been estimated by DNA methylation-based
analysis of the Pan-Cancer-12 dataset (Figure S5E). In any case, these immune cellassociated gene programs may be pertinent to emerging treatment strategies based on
immune modulation. Overall, despite uneven clinical information and follow-up across the
many different Pan-Cancer types, expression-based determinants of the integrated subtypes
were sufficiently informative to identify pathway-based features of prognostic value that
transcend tissue-of-origin cancer types.
Multiple-Platform Determinants of the Integrated Subtypes

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

To gain insight into the genetic and epigenetic determinants that characterize each of the
COCA subtypes, we calculated differential gene scores derived from each of the separate six
platforms (see Supplemental Extended Experimental Procedures and Analysis Section 4) as
well as PARADIGM pathway features. All differential activities were mapped to individual
genes so that thematic pathways could be identified (see Supplemental Data File S2). Copy
number data were summarized at the gene level using GISTIC 2.0 and t-tests for every gene
were performed for each COCA subtype. DNA Methylation probes were associated with
any gene that fell in the +/1500bp region surrounding gene transcriptional start sites. Genes
with differential mRNA expression were identified using a SAM analysis on the RSEM
values. Genes with differentially expressed protein products were determined by running a ttest on the 131 protein forms represented on the RPPA data. For mutations, a Fisher’s exact
test on the frequency within a COCA subtype compared to outside the subtype was
performed for all of a set of 291 high-confidence driver genes (Tamborero et al., 2013).
Differentially expressed miRNAs for each COCA subtype were identified using a Wilcoxon
rank-sum test based on the miRNA-Seq data. Genes were then identified as those predicted
to be targeted by a differentially expressed miRNA that was also anti-correlated across the
Pan-Cancer-12 dataset.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Three approaches were used to summarize the unique features of the COCA subtypes. First,
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) was run on the single-platform gene-based results
and then clustered for visual inspection to elucidate distinctive pathways (Figure S6A).
Second, a supervised Elastic Net approach was used to classify the COCA subtypes with
95% accuracy in cross-validation and the predictive features were collected (Figure S6B;
Supplemental Data File S3). Third, ‘regulatory hubs’ from PARADIGM with more than 15
downstream targets and found to be differentially activated within a COCA subtype relative
to other subtypes were collected (Table S5A). All three approaches revealed that each
platform detects different pathways and features with respect to both COCA subtypes and
data platforms. The identified discriminating features of the COCA subtypes confirm several
expectations: 1) C3-BRCA/Luminal was defined by protein and gene signatures for ER and
GATA3 determined by the Elastic Net model as well as by PIK3CA-related signaling
revealed by copy number variation-based and mutation-based GSEA, 2) C5-KIRC was
defined by multiple features of hypoxia found by mutation- and mRNA-Seq-based GSEA as

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 14.

Hoadley et al.

Page 9

well as predictive Elastic Net features, and 3) C7-COAD/READ was in part defined by APC
mutations.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Convergence of the Squamous-like Subtype

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

A striking finding of the integrative subtype analysis was the coalescence of four distinct
tumor types (LUSC, HNSC, some BLCA and a very few LUAD) into the single C2Squamous-like subtype. We investigated the genomic- and pathway-based determinants of
the subtype. The three main tumor types included shared loss of 3p and increased TP63,
PIK3CA and SOX2 gene copies within a characteristic 3q amplicon (Figure 4A). Those
regions are well known in LUSC (The_Cancer_Genome_Atlas_Network, 2012a) and HNSC
(Bhattacharya et al., 2011; Walter et al., 2013), and the results here extend that observation
to include a subgroup of BLCA cases. In addition, the C2-Squamous-like subtype tends to
show amplification of MYC and loss of CDKN2A, RB1 and TP53. TP53 mutation is frequent
(72%), followed by a dramatic drop-off in mutation frequency to MLL2 (20%), PIK3CA
(19%), CDKN2A (18%), NOTCH1 (16%), NFE2L2 (10%) and MALAT1 (6%), the only
other genes mutated at ≥10% frequency (Table S2A). Of potential interest in the C2Squamous-like group, tumors without TP53 mutations show a higher density of PIK3CA
mutations (Figure 1), consistent with recent evidence linking PI3K activation and wild-type
TP53 inactivation in HNSC (Herzog et al., 2013). Putative driver analysis identified several
genes (PIK3CA, MLL3 and KEAP1) frequently mutated in the C2-Squamous-like group but
also in other COCA subtypes (Figure 4B). Of these, FRG1B and CASP8 were found to be
significantly more associated with HNSC by Fisher’s exact test. Putative driver analysis also
revealed a number of genes with higher mutation frequencies in the C2-Squamous-like
subtype than in any other subtype: TP53, SYNE1, MLL2, CDKN2A, NOTCH1, NFE2L2 and
EP300, among others (Figure 4C; Figure S7A).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

An extension of the HotNet algorithm (Vandin et al., 2012) was run on all genes mutated in
≥ 2% of any one subtype in conjunction with the HINT physical protein-protein interaction
network (Supplemental Extended Experimental Procedures and Analyses, Section 4; Table
S3). HotNet identified four sub-networks of mutated genes characteristic of the C2Squamous-like subtype (Table S3B). The largest, most frequently mutated sub-network
(91.7% of C2-Squamous-like samples) includes many well-known cancer genes and tumor
suppressors, including TP53, CDKN2A and PTEN. The second most mutated sub-network
(59.9%) consists of NFE2L2, CUL3, and KEAP1, CCNE1, FBXW7, and NOTCH1. NFE2L2,
CUL3 and KEAP1 are well known regulators of oxidative stress. The third most mutated
sub-network (37.1% of Squamous samples) includes the ASCOM complex (MLL2 and
MLL3) and the putative ASCOM-interacting protein KDM6A. These proteins are involved
in histone modifications that promote transcription. In addition, consistent with previous
reports on collective motility in squamous cell carcinomas (Friedl and Gilmour, 2009), RAC
and RHO signaling are also elevated in the C2-Squamous-like subtype based on
PARADIGM analysis (Table S4A, Figure S7B).
Molecular Features Common to the Squamous, Breast Basal, and Ovarian Subtypes
Past work highlighted transcriptional similarities between the Breast Basal-like subtype and
LUSC (Chung et al., 2002), as well as Breast Basal-like and Serous Ovarian cancers

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 14.

Hoadley et al.

Page 10

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

(The_Cancer_Genome_Atlas_Network, 2012c). We therefore asked if those subtypes share
additional characteristics. The C9-OV (94%), C4-BRCA/Basal (80%) and C2-Squamouslike (72%) subtypes have the highest frequencies of TP53 mutation. All three show a very
high frequency of copy number changes (Figure 2C), and all are significantly enriched with
amplifications of 3q26 and 8q24/cMYC and losses of chromosomes 4q, 5q, 8p, and 18q
(Figure 2B). The COCA subtypes share features common to a pan-cancer cluster identified
by a parallel analysis of the transcriptional profiles of these same tumors (Martinez et al.,
2014), which was found to be associated with genomic loss of CDKN2A (p16ARF),
increased numbers of DNA double strand breaks, high expression of cyclin B1, and
upregulation of proliferation genes.
Consistent with our previous TCGA report noting the similarities between Breast Basal-like
and Serous Ovarian cancers (The_Cancer_Genome_Atlas_Network, 2012c), the copy
number profiles of the integrative subtypes place the C4-BRCA/basal subtype closest to the
C9-OV subtype (Figure S4C); both are also near a cluster tree branch that contains C2Squamous-like and C8-BLCA. All six of those subtypes show TP53 mutation and largescale copy number changes.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Pathway commonalities between the C4-BRCA/basal and C9-OV subtypes (Table S5B)
largely recapitulate previous finding using PARADIGM analysis that both subtypes show
activation of cMYC and FOXM1/proliferation signaling
(The_Cancer_Genome_Atlas_Network, 2012c). However, HIF1A signaling in those
subtypes, despite previously being reported as high, appears less active in this Pan-Cancer
context, probably due to the presence of other cancer types with clearly elevated HIF1A
signaling (e.g. C5-KIRC). In terms of gene programs, C2-Squamous-like tumors show high
expression of the basal signaling gene program (GP17), at levels comparable with those in
the C4-BRCA/Basal tumors (Figure 3). In addition, both subtypes show up-regulation of the
proliferation/DNA synthesis gene program (GP1), as well as signatures of TP53 mutation,
MYC targets/TERT, VEGF signaling and activation of the PD1 and CTLA4 immune costimulatory pathways (Table S4A, Figure 3). Indeed, principal components analysis showed
that C2-Squamous-like and C4-BRCA/Basal tumors are the most similar COCA subtypes
with regard to gene program/drug pathway expression (Figure S5B).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In line with those findings, a systematic search for PARADIGM pathway commonalities
between the C2-Squamous-like and C4-BRCA/Basal tumors through the definition of a
‘basalness score’ (The_Cancer_Genome_Atlas_Network, 2012c) reveals shared activation
of proliferation- and immune-related pathways. TP63 network dysregulation is apparent in
HNSC and LUSC (Figure S7C, Table S5), as found previously
(The_Cancer_Genome_Atlas_Network, 2012a; Walter et al., 2013). It has also been
associated with normal basal stem/progenitor cell function in other organs (e.g. breast,
urogenital tract) (Crum and McKeon, 2010). However, closer scrutiny of the network
neighborhood surrounding the TAp63g and dNp63a complexes reveals that TP63 activation
is more significant in the C2-Squamous-like tumors than it is in the C4-BRCA/Basals, and it
involves a larger number of TP63 network targets (Figure 5A). Indeed, TP63 expression
levels, in particular expression of the oncogenic ΔNp63 isoform, are significantly higher in
the C2-Squamous-like subtype than in the C4-BRCA/Basal tumors (Figure 5B). Notably, we

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 14.

Hoadley et al.

Page 11

did not see TP63 network activity or increased expression in the C9-OV subtype (Table S4A
and Figure 6B).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

High TP53 mutation rates characterize several tumor types including those represented by
the COCA subtypes C4-BRCA/Basal, C9-OV, and C2-Squamous-like (Table S2A).
Surprisingly, our pathway and gene program analysis reveal a pattern of TP53 compensation
in the C2-Squamous-like tumors that distinguishes them from these other subtypes with high
TP53 mutation rates. First, the C2-Squamous-like tumors do not exhibit significant loss of
PARADIGM-inferred TP53 activity (Table S4A) and PARADIGM-SHIFT analysis (Ng et
al., 2012) predicts loss-of-function of TP53-truncating mutations (observed in 43% of C4BRCA/Basal, 38% of C9-OV and 30% of C2-Squamous-like cases) at a significantly higher
degree in the C4-BRCA/Basal and C9-OV subtypes compared to the C2-Squamous-like
subtype (Figure 5C). Second, the copy number data when aligned with TP53 missense and
truncating mutations, reveals more loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in the C9-OV and C4BRCA/Basal than in the C2-Squamous-like samples. The apparent higher TP53-pathway
activity in C2-Squamous-like tumors may be related to the expression of isoforms of related
family members TP63 and/or TP73 (Figure 5B), which may compensate for TP53 mutation
in the C2-Squamous-like tumors as revealed by PARADIGM-Shift analysis (Figure 5C),
and as supported by functional experimental data in HNSC lines and tumors (Lu et al.,
2011). In HNSC, the function of TP63/73 in growth of HNSC is modulated in the presence
of inflammatory factor TNF-α and cREL. Third, the transcriptional targets of TP53 shared
with TP63/73 appear to be more highly expressed in the C2-Squamous-like subtype than in
the C9-OV or C4-BRCA/Basal subtype (Figure S7D). Indeed, hierarchical clustering of 33
TP53-related gene signatures subsets the C2-Squamous-like, C4-BRCA/Basal and C9-OV
tumors predominantly by subtype (left side dendrogram sub-tree: 99% C4-BRCA/basal/C9OV; right-side dendrogram sub-tree: 98% C2-Squamous-like) (Figure 5D). However, with
the exception of the C4-BRCA/Basal-like subtype, the levels of TP53 activity were not
predictive of overall survival when restricted to the analysis within a subtype. For the C4BRCA/Basal case, the PARADIGM-Shift scores do provide a moderate predictive degree
when only the TP53 truncating mutants are considered (P<0.05). Interestingly, TP63/73
compensatory function has been linked to cisplatin chemo-sensitivity and survival in
BRCA1-related triple negative breast cancers (Leong et al., 2007). These studies show the
potential for p63/73 compensatory function for mutated or suppressed p53 in HNSCC and
breast cancer, which has potential implications for targeted and standard therapy across
these malignancies. These data indicate that TP53/63/73 downstream activities are of
potentially broader significance among the C2-Squamous-like, C9-OV and C4-BRCA/Basal
subtypes, with similarly high TP53 mutation rates.
Divergence of Bladder Cancer Subtypes
Despite a relatively small sample size (n=120), bladder cancer was one of the most diverse
of the tumor types, with samples clustering into 7 of the 11 major COCA subtypes (Table
S6). The majority of the samples fell into three main COCA groups: 10 in C1–LUADenriched, 31 in C2–Squamous-like and 74 in C8–BLCA. Correlation with histology showed
that the bladder samples in the C2-Squamous-like group did, indeed, have evidence of
squamous features, although most in that subtype had less than 50% squamous

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 14.

Hoadley et al.

Page 12

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

differentiation upon review by a team of 5 urological pathologists. The genomic
classifications are consistent with evidence for diverse squamous, adenocarcinoma and other
variant histologies in bladder carcinoma (Willis et al., 2013). Because it is one of the most
diverse tissue-of-origin tumor types in the Pan-Cancer-12 set, we looked at survival
differences among the three main COCA groups of bladder cancers. Samples in the C2Squamous-like and C1-LUAD-enriched groups showed significantly worse overall survival
than those in the C8-BLCA group (Figure 6A; Figure S8B). The same distinction held in
proteomics-only analyses (Akbani et al., 2014), consistent with the worse overall survival of
the other tumor types (LUAD, LUSC, and HNSC) that predominate in the C1-LUADenriched and C2-Squamous-like subtypes.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

We focused on the two larger subsets (C2-Squamous-like and C8-BLCA) of bladder
cancers, performing single-platform and integrated-platform comparisons. There are
significant differences in copy number (Figure S4A), protein expression (Figure 6B),
mutations (Figure 6C), gene programs (Figure 6D) and PARADIGM pathway networks
(Figure 6E; Figure S8A). There is also a significant difference in 3p arm-level events; the
C2-Squamous-like subset shows the characteristic squamous-like pattern of 3p loss, whereas
the C8-BLCA subtype does not (Figure 2B). Consistent with findings from the Pan-Cancer
proteomics analysis (Akbani et al., 2014), higher HER2 and Rab25 protein levels are
observed in the majority of the C8-BLCA cases relative to the C2-Squamous-like bladder
cases (Figure 6B). Conversely, markers of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) such
as low E-cadherin, high fibronectin, and high N-cadherin expression are apparent in the C2Squamous-like bladder cancers (Figure 6B). Both gene program and PARADIGM analyses
reveal differences in immune cell signatures; the bladder C2-Squamous-like samples show
higher levels of immune cell-associated signatures (Figure 6D–E). That difference, which
has also been noted for lung squamous (The_Cancer_Genome_Atlas_Network, 2012a) and
breast Basal-like cancers (Prat et al., 2010), could contribute to differences in outcome and
suggest therapeutic targets.

DISCUSSION

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

This integrated multi-platform analysis of 12 cancer types provides independent and
clinically relevant prognostic information above and beyond tumor stage and primary tissueof-origin. Based on this study, one in ten cancer patients would be classified differently by
this new molecular taxonomy versus our current tissue-of-origin tumor classification system.
With respect to its therapeutic relevance, this proportion of potentially misclassified tumors
is comparable to the rate of EGFR mutations in unselected non-small cell lung cancers
(Lynch et al., 2004; Paez et al., 2004) and ERBB2 amplifications among all breast cancers
(The_Cancer_Genome_Atlas_Network, 2012c). If used to guide therapeutic decisions, this
reclassification would affect a significant number of patients to be considered for nonstandard treatment regimens. In addition to identifying several new genomic and pathway
insights between and within tissue-of-origin tumor types, this TCGA study provides a public
resource compendium of individual and integrated datasets from six different “omic”
platforms, comprehensively characterizing >3,500 tumors and enabling researchers to
explore new questions and analytical approaches that will perpetuate this discovery process.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 14.

Hoadley et al.

Page 13

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

It is possible that each COCA subtype reflects tumors arising from distinct cell types. In this
new taxonomy, cancers of non-epithelial origin (e.g. neural, muscle, connective tissue)
appear most different from epithelial tumors based on virtually all molecular platforms. The
next most marked difference is apparent between epithelial cancers arising from basal layerlike cells (C2-Squamous-like and C4-BRCA/Basal) and those with secretory functions (C1LUAD-enriched and C3-BRCA/Luminal). Molecular commonalities within a COCA
subtype suggest common oncogenic pathways. The C2-Squamous-like cancers likely arise
from a cellular subtype shared between environmentally exposed epithelial surfaces (e.g.
oral cavity, lungs, and bladder); and malignancies from this cellular subtype possess a
characteristic set of dysregulated genomic features, including SOX2 and ΔNp63 high
expression (by 3q26-29 amplification) with TP53 mutation. Although some of these
pathway features have previously been reported for normal squamous tissue development
and homeostasis (Crum and McKeon, 2010) and in squamous cell carcinomas of specific
organ sites (Maier et al., 2011; Yang et al., 2011), they have not previously emerged
collectively as a broad subtype-defining phenotype from an integrated genomic analysis of
thousands of different tumors. Cancers in the C2-Squamous-like subtype appear most
similar to those in the C4-BRCA/Basal subtype, which in turn show pathway similarities to
those in the C9-Ovarian. While all three COCA subtypes exhibit comparably high TP53
mutation frequencies and expression of the GP17_Basal signaling gene program, the C2Squamous-like cancers are distinguished from all others by their significantly higher TP63
and TP73 expression, both short (ΔNp63, ΔNp73) and long (TAp63, TAp73) isoforms,
which may partially compensate TP53 mutation in this COCA subtype.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In this integrated analysis, bladder cancers (BLCA) emerged as the most heterogeneous of
all Pan-Cancer-12 malignancies, with multiple samples falling into primarily three different
integrated subtypes (C1-LUAD-enriched-like, C2-Squamous-like and C8-BLCA). The
clinical relevance of Pan-Cancer integrated subtyping is apparent in this divergent cohort of
tumors. Survival is dependent on subtype membership, with the C2-Squamous-like BLCA
cases showing earlier mortality than the more common C8-BLCA cases (Figure 7A). Those
BLCA cases in the C2-Squamous-like subtype display immune features common to the C2Squamous-like subtype, that are pertinent to two areas of current interest among bladder
cancer researchers: i) epidemiologic and experimental evidence that chronic cystitis and
recurrent bladder inflections (or other physical irritants) capable of inducing squamous
metaplasia can predispose to squamous cancer of the bladder; and ii) the observation that
early-stage bladder cancers are often responsive to intravesicular T-cell induction by
Bacillus-Calmette-Guerin (BCG) anti-TB vaccination. These findings strongly support a
COCA subtype specific approach to post resection surveillance, adjuvant therapy and
management of metastatic disease for bladder cancer patients.
Our results suggest that “cell-of-origin” rather than pathway-based features dominate the
molecular taxonomy of diverse tumor types. There are several possible explanations for this
observation. First and foremost, there are hundreds to thousands of features (mRNAs,
proteins, microRNAs) with cell-type specific expression patterns, whereas pathways tend to
regulate a much smaller subset of components – tens to hundreds of genes and their
products. Secondly, pathways are often used in a cell type-specific manner (e.g. APC-

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 14.

Hoadley et al.

Page 14

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

pathway in colon/rectum); therefore, pathway-based features are likely subsumed by a cellof-origin-based classification. Further research is needed to uncover pathway dependencies
within a cell-of-origin context, of which many such relationships already exist (i.e. EGFR in
LUAD, BRAF in Melanoma, etc).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In closing, the refined molecular taxonomy we describe builds on centuries of pathology and
genetic research. The datasets and results have been collected into a unified resource on
Synapse to support integrative bioinformatics analysis. To support navigation through these
findings, the results have been made available through several portals including the UCSC
Genome Browser, Gitools, and MD Anderson’s Next Generation Heatmaps (see the
Supplemental Extended Procedures and Analyses). New methods to mine these data will
enable “subtracting away” the dominant cell-of-origin signals to reveal information about
pathway signaling and tumor microenvironments (e.g. stromal and immune components).
This new taxonomy provides independent prognostic information above and beyond stage
and tissue-of-origin, and further investigations may provide novel pathway-based insights
with clues for personalizing therapy. Follow-up studies are needed to validate the findings
reported here, and additional samples and tumor types will extend the integrated analysis.
However, this initial PanCancer-12 analysis lays the groundwork for a richer classification
of tumors into molecularly defined subtypes unlike all prior cancer classification systems.

EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Data for the complete set of 5,074 TCGA samples were obtained for the December 22, 2012
Pan-Cancer-12 data freeze from the Sage Bionetworks repository, Synapse. All data is made
available through the Synapse website (https://www.synapse.org) and referenced with
Synapse identifiers denoted as synN, where N provides a unique identifier within the
Synapse system. All relevant result files relevant for subtyping and downstream analyses are
available from syn2468297.
Mutation data and predicted driver genes

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Single nucleotide variant calls for all samples in each of the 12 different tumor types were
obtained from the official data freeze for each individual data type. Briefly, mutation calls
were obtained from the separate TCGA working groups and processed to de-duplicate and
re-annotate them using the ENSEMBLE version 69 transcript database. The combined
mutation annotation format (MAF) file is available from the Synapse resource.
127 Significantly mutated genes (SMGs) were identified in the entire sample set as those
mutated more frequently than the background model according to MuSiC analysis as
described in (Kandoth et al., 2013a). The SMG analysis was also performed by running
MuSiC restricted to each COCA subtype. Lastly, genes whose mutations predominantly
occur within a given COCA subtype were identified by using the list of high-confidence
drivers retrieved by the combined analysis of several signals of positive selection, as
described in (Tamborero et al., 2013).

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 14.

Hoadley et al.

Page 15

Cluster of Cluster Assignments (COCA)

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Subtypes derived from each of the six platforms – mRNA-Seq, miRNA-Seq, reverse-phase
protein arrays (RPPA), structural copy number alterations (SCNA), DNA methylation, and
somatic mutations – were calculated as described in the Supplemental Extended Procedures
and Analyses section. Subtype calls for each of the six platforms were used to identify
relationships among the different COCA subtypes and coded into a series of indicator
variables for each subtype. The binary matrix was then used in the ConsensusClusterPlus Rpackage (Wilkerson and Hayes, 2010) to identify patterns of relationship among the
samples. ConsensusClusterPlus was run with 80% sample resampling and 1000 iterations of
hierarchical clustering based on a Pearson correlation distance metric. More information on
integrative subtyping analysis can be found in Supplemental Extended Procedures and
Analyses, Section 2. The integrated COCA subtypes are available on the Synapse resource.
Survival Analysis for Pan-Cancer-12 and Squamous Bladder Samples

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Overall survival was calculated for samples using information from the enrollment and
follow-up forms available at the DCC and downloaded on 6/17/2013. Kaplan-Meier survival
plots were generated with the package Survival in R. A log-rank test was used to assess
significance.

Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.

Acknowledgments
We thank the thousands of patients and their loved ones who contributed materially, emotionally, and intellectually
to this study. We thank DA Wheeler and ML Meyerson for scientific review of the work and MP Schroeder for
help setting up Gitools. We thank KR Shaw, BA Ozenberger, HJ Sofia, CM Hutter, and JC Zenklusen for
administrative support. This work was supported by grants from the Chapman Foundation and Dell Foundation to
JNW, a MD Anderson Physician Scientist Award to LAB, a Burroughs Welcome Career Award at the Scientific
Interface to BJR, and support from the following grants from the United States National Institutes of Health: K08
CA137153, K08 CA176561, P50 CA083639, R01 CA071468, R01 HG005690, R01 HG007069, R01CA180006,
R21 CA155679, U01 CA168394, U24 CA143858, U24 CA143867-05, U24 CA143883, U24 CA143848, U24
CA143858, U24 CA143866, U54 CA112970, U24 CA143799, U24 CA143835, U24 CA143840, U24 CA143843,
U24 CA143845, U24 CA143848, U24 CA143858, U24 CA143866, U24 CA143867, U24 CA143882, U24
CA143883, U24 CA144025, U54 HG003273, U54 HG003067, U54 HG003079, ZIA-DC-000073, ZIADC-000074, and P30 CA016672 for the MD Anderson CCSG Functional Proteomics Core.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

References
Akbani R, Ng PK, Werner HM, Shahmoradgoli M, Zhang F, Ju Z, Liu W, Yang JY, Yoshihara K, Li J,
et al. A pan-cancer proteomic perspective on The Cancer Genome Atlas. Nature communications.
2014; 5:3887.
Bhattacharya A, Roy R, Snijders AM, Hamilton G, Paquette J, Tokuyasu T, Bengtsson H, Jordan RC,
Olshen AB, Pinkel D, et al. Two distinct routes to oral cancer differing in genome instability and
risk for cervical node metastasis. Clinical cancer research: an official journal of the American
Association for Cancer Research. 2011; 17:7024–7034. [PubMed: 22068658]
Chung CH, Bernard PS, Perou CM. Molecular portraits and the family tree of cancer. Nature genetics.
2002; 32(Suppl):533–540. [PubMed: 12454650]
Crum CP, McKeon FD. p63 in epithelial survival, germ cell surveillance, and neoplasia. Annual
review of pathology. 2010; 5:349–371.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 14.

Hoadley et al.

Page 16

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Friedl P, Gilmour D. Collective cell migration in morphogenesis, regeneration and cancer. Nature
reviews Molecular cell biology. 2009; 10:445–457.
Grilley-Olson JE, Hayes DN, Moore DT, Leslie KO, Wilkerson MD, Qaqish BF, Hayward MC,
Cabanski CR, Yin X, Socinski MA, et al. Validation of interobserver agreement in lung cancer
assessment: hematoxylin-eosin diagnostic reproducibility for non-small cell lung cancer: the 2004
World Health Organization classification and therapeutically relevant subsets. Archives of
pathology & laboratory medicine. 2013; 137:32–40. [PubMed: 22583114]
Herzog A, Bian Y, Vander Broek R, Hall B, Coupar J, Cheng H, Sowers AL, Cook JD, Mitchell JB,
Chen Z, et al. PI3K/mTOR inhibitor PF-04691502 antitumor activity is enhanced with induction of
wild-type TP53 in human xenograft and murine knockout models of head and neck cancer. Clinical
cancer research: an official journal of the American Association for Cancer Research. 2013;
19:3808–3819. [PubMed: 23640975]
Hofree M, Shen JP, Carter H, Gross A, Ideker T. Network-based stratification of tumor mutations.
Nature methods. 2013
Kandoth C, McLellan MD, Vandin F, Ye K, Niu B, Lu C, Xie M, Zhang Q, McMichael JF,
Wyczalkowski MA, et al. Mutational landscape and significance across 12 major cancer types.
Nature. 2013a; 502:333–339. [PubMed: 24132290]
Kandoth C, Schultz N, Cherniack AD, Akbani R, Liu Y, Shen H, Robertson AG, Pashtan I, Shen R,
Benz CC, et al. Integrated genomic characterization of endometrial carcinoma. Nature. 2013b;
497:67–73. [PubMed: 23636398]
Leong CO, Vidnovic N, DeYoung MP, Sgroi D, Ellisen LW. The p63/p73 network mediates
chemosensitivity to cisplatin in a biologically defined subset of primary breast cancers. The
Journal of clinical investigation. 2007; 117:1370–1380. [PubMed: 17446929]
Lu H, Yang X, Duggal P, Allen CT, Yan B, Cohen J, Nottingham L, Romano RA, Sinha S, King KE,
et al. TNF-alpha promotes c-REL/DeltaNp63alpha interaction and TAp73 dissociation from key
genes that mediate growth arrest and apoptosis in head and neck cancer. Cancer research. 2011;
71:6867–6877. [PubMed: 21933882]
Lynch TJ, Bell DW, Sordella R, Gurubhagavatula S, Okimoto RA, Brannigan BW, Harris PL, Haserlat
SM, Supko JG, Haluska FG, et al. Activating mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor
underlying responsiveness of non-small-cell lung cancer to gefitinib. The New England journal of
medicine. 2004; 350:2129–2139. [PubMed: 15118073]
Maier S, Wilbertz T, Braun M, Scheble V, Reischl M, Mikut R, Menon R, Nikolov P, Petersen K,
Beschorner C, et al. SOX2 amplification is a common event in squamous cell carcinomas of
different organ sites. Human pathology. 2011; 42:1078–1088. [PubMed: 21334718]
Martinez E, Yoshihara K, Kim H, Mills GB, Trevino V, Verhaak RG. Comparison of gene expression
patterns across twelve tumor types identifies a cancer supercluster characterized by TP53
mutations and cell cycle defects. Oncogene. 2014 To appear.
Ng S, Collisson EA, Sokolov A, Goldstein T, Gonzalez-Perez A, Lopez-Bigas N, Benz C, Haussler D,
Stuart JM. PARADIGM-SHIFT predicts the function of mutations in multiple cancers using
pathway impact analysis. Bioinformatics. 2012; 28:i640–i646. [PubMed: 22962493]
Nielsen TO, Parker JS, Leung S, Voduc D, Ebbert M, Vickery T, Davies SR, Snider J, Stijleman IJ,
Reed J, et al. A comparison of PAM50 intrinsic subtyping with immunohistochemistry and clinical
prognostic factors in tamoxifen-treated estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer. Clinical cancer
research: an official journal of the American Association for Cancer Research. 2010; 16:5222–
5232. [PubMed: 20837693]
Paez JG, Janne PA, Lee JC, Tracy S, Greulich H, Gabriel S, Herman P, Kaye FJ, Lindeman N, Boggon
TJ, et al. EGFR mutations in lung cancer: correlation with clinical response to gefitinib therapy.
Science. 2004; 304:1497–1500. [PubMed: 15118125]
Prat A, Adamo B, Cheang MC, Anders CK, Carey LA, Perou CM. Molecular characterization of
basal-like and non-basal-like triple-negative breast cancer. The oncologist. 2013; 18:123–133.
[PubMed: 23404817]
Prat A, Parker JS, Karginova O, Fan C, Livasy C, Herschkowitz JI, He X, Perou CM. Phenotypic and
molecular characterization of the claudin-low intrinsic subtype of breast cancer. Breast cancer
research: BCR. 2010; 12:R68. [PubMed: 20813035]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 14.

Hoadley et al.

Page 17

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Scagliotti GV, Parikh P, von Pawel J, Biesma B, Vansteenkiste J, Manegold C, Serwatowski P,
Gatzemeier U, Digumarti R, Zukin M, et al. Phase III study comparing cisplatin plus gemcitabine
with cisplatin plus pemetrexed in chemotherapy-naive patients with advanced-stage non-small-cell
lung cancer. Journal of clinical oncology: official journal of the American Society of Clinical
Oncology. 2008; 26:3543–3551. [PubMed: 18506025]
Shannon P, Markiel A, Ozier O, Baliga NS, Wang JT, Ramage D, Amin N, Schwikowski B, Ideker T.
Cytoscape: A Software Environment for Integrated Models of Biomolecular Interaction Networks.
Genome research. 2003; 13:2498–2504. [PubMed: 14597658]
Tamborero D, Gonzalez-Perez A, Perez-Llamas C, Deu-Pons J, Kandoth C, Reimand J, Lawrence MS,
Getz G, Bader GD, Ding L, et al. Comprehensive identification of mutational cancer driver genes
across 12 tumor types. Scientific reports. 2013; 3:2650. [PubMed: 24084849]
The_Cancer_Genome_Atlas_Network. Comprehensive genomic characterization defines human
glioblastoma genes and core pathways. Nature. 2008; 455:1061–1068. [PubMed: 18772890]
The_Cancer_Genome_Atlas_Network. Integrated genomic analyses of ovarian carcinoma. Nature.
2011; 474:609–615. [PubMed: 21720365]
The_Cancer_Genome_Atlas_Network. Comprehensive genomic characterization of squamous cell
lung cancers. Nature. 2012a; 489:519–525. [PubMed: 22960745]
The_Cancer_Genome_Atlas_Network. Comprehensive molecular characterization of human colon and
rectal cancer. Nature. 2012b; 487:330–337. [PubMed: 22810696]
The_Cancer_Genome_Atlas_Network. Comprehensive molecular portraits of human breast tumours.
Nature. 2012c; 490:61–70. [PubMed: 23000897]
The_Cancer_Genome_Atlas_Network. Comprehensive molecular characterization of clear cell renal
cell carcinoma. Nature. 2013a; 499:43–49. [PubMed: 23792563]
The_Cancer_Genome_Atlas_Network. Genomic and epigenomic landscapes of adult de novo acute
myeloid leukemia. The New England journal of medicine. 2013b; 368:2059–2074. [PubMed:
23634996]
The_Cancer_Genome_Atlas_Network. Comprehensive molecular characterization of urothelial
bladder carcinoma. Nature. 2014; 507:315–322. [PubMed: 24476821]
Travis WD, Brambilla E, Noguchi M, Nicholson AG, Geisinger KR, Yatabe Y, Beer DG, Powell CA,
Riely GJ, Van Schil PE, et al. International association for the study of lung cancer/american
thoracic society/european respiratory society international multidisciplinary classification of lung
adenocarcinoma. Journal of thoracic oncology: official publication of the International Association
for the Study of Lung Cancer. 2011; 6:244–285.
Troester MA, Herschkowitz JI, Oh DS, He X, Hoadley KA, Barbier CS, Perou CM. Gene expression
patterns associated with p53 status in breast cancer. BMC cancer. 2006; 6:276. [PubMed:
17150101]
Vandin, F.; Clay, P.; Upfal, E.; Raphael, BJ. Discovery of mutated subnetworks associated with
clinical data in cancer. Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing Pacific Symposium on
Biocomputing; 2012. p. 55-66.
Vaske CJ, Benz SC, Sanborn JZ, Earl D, Szeto C, Zhu J, Haussler D, Stuart JM. Inference of patientspecific pathway activities from multi-dimensional cancer genomics data using PARADIGM.
Bioinformatics. 2010; 26:i237–245. [PubMed: 20529912]
Walter V, Yin X, Wilkerson MD, Cabanski CR, Zhao N, Du Y, Ang MK, Hayward MC, Salazar AH,
Hoadley KA, et al. Molecular subtypes in head and neck cancer exhibit distinct patterns of
chromosomal gain and loss of canonical cancer genes. PloS one. 2013; 8:e56823. [PubMed:
23451093]
Wilkerson MD, Hayes DN. ConsensusClusterPlus: a class discovery tool with confidence assessments
and item tracking. Bioinformatics. 2010; 26:1572–1573. [PubMed: 20427518]
Willis DL, Porten SP, Kamat AM. Should histologic variants alter definitive treatment of bladder
cancer? Current opinion in urology. 2013; 23:435–443. [PubMed: 23880739]
Yang X, Lu H, Yan B, Romano RA, Bian Y, Friedman J, Duggal P, Allen C, Chuang R, Ehsanian R,
et al. DeltaNp63 versatilely regulates a Broad NF-kappaB gene program and promotes squamous
epithelial proliferation, migration, and inflammation. Cancer research. 2011; 71:3688–3700.
[PubMed: 21576089]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 14.

Hoadley et al.

Page 18

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

KAH, CY, DMW, ADC, LVV, NLB, PWL, LD, GBM, CCB, CMP, and JMS conceived and
designed the experiments. KAH, CY, DMW, ADC, DT, MDL, BN, VU, RA, HS, and BJR
developed key methodology. RA, PWL, LAB, and GBM acquired data sets. KAH, CY,
DMW, ADC, DT, AC, SN, MDL, BN, MDM, VU, CK, RA, HS, NLB, PWL, BJR, LD,
AGR, LAB, GBM, JNW, CVW, ZC, EAC, CCB, CMP, and JMS analyzed and interpreted
data. JZ, LO, AAM, NLB, RA, JNW, NLB, and JMS created data resources. KAH, DY,
DMW, ADC, DT, SN, MDL, BN, VU, RA, BJR, LAB, GBM, JNW, CVW, ZC, EAC, CCB,
CMP, JMS drafted the manuscript or provided critical revisions. JZ, CCB, CMP, and JMS
led and coordinated the project.

CONSORTIA

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The members of The Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network are Rachel Abbott, Scott
Abbott, B. Arman Aksoy, Kenneth Aldape, Adrian Ally, Samirkumar Amin, Dimitris
Anastassiou, J.Todd Auman, Keith A Baggerly, Miruna Balasundaram, Saianand Balu,
Stephen B. Baylin, Stephen C. Benz, Benjamin P. Berman, Brady Bernard, Ami S. Bhatt,
Inanc Birol, Aaron D. Black, Tom Bodenheimer, Moiz S. Bootwalla, Jay Bowen, Ryan
Bressler, Christopher A. Bristow, Angela N. Brooks, Bradley Broom, Elizabeth Buda,
Robert Burton, Yaron S.N. Butterfield, Daniel Carlin, Scott L. Carter, Tod D. Casasent,
Kyle Chang, Stephen Chanock, Lynda Chin, Dong-Yeon Cho, Juok Cho, Eric Chuah, HyeJung E. Chun, Kristian Cibulskis, Giovanni Ciriello, James Cleland, Melisssa Cline, Brian
Craft, Chad J. Creighton, Ludmila Danilova, Tanja Davidsen, Caleb Davis, Nathan D. Dees,
Kim Delehaunty, John A. Demchok, Noreen Dhalla, Daniel DiCara, Huyen Dinh, Jason R.
Dobson, Deepti Dodda, HarshaVardhan Doddapaneni, Lawrence Donehower, David J.
Dooling, Gideon Dresdner, Jennifer Drummond, Andrea Eakin, Mary Edgerton, Jim M.
Eldred, Greg Eley, Kyle Ellrott, Cheng Fan, Suzanne Fei, Ina Felau, Scott Frazer, Samuel S
Freeman, Jessica Frick, Catrina C. Fronick, Lucinda L. Fulton, Robert Fulton, Stacey B.
Gabriel, Jianjiong Gao, Julie M. Gastier-Foster, Nils Gehlenborg, Myra George, Gad Getz,
Richard Gibbs, Mary Goldman, Abel Gonzalez-Perez, Benjamin Gross, Ranabir Guin,
Preethi Gunaratne, Angela Hadjipanayis, Mark P. Hamilton, Stanley R. Hamilton, Leng
Han, Yi Han, Hollie A. Harper, Psalm Haseley, David Haussler, D. Neil Hayes, David I.
Heiman, Elena Helman, Carmen Helsel, Shelley M. Herbrich, James G. Herman, Toshinori
Hinoue, Carrie Hirst, Martin Hirst, Robert A. Holt, Alan P. Hoyle, Lisa Iype, Anders
Jacobsen, Stuart R. Jeffreys, Mark A. Jensen, Corbin D. Jones, Steven J.M. Jones, Zhenlin
Ju, Joonil Jung, Andre Kahles, Ari Kahn, Joelle Kalicki-Veizer, Divya Kalra, Krishna-Latha
Kanchi, David W. Kane, Hoon Kim, Jaegil Kim, Theo Knijnenburg, Daniel C. Koboldt,
Christie Kovar, Roger Kramer, Richard Kreisberg, Raju Kucherlapati, Marc Ladanyi, Eric S.
Lander, David E. Larson, Michael S. Lawrence, Darlene Lee, Eunjung Lee, Semin Lee,
William Lee, Kjong-Van Lehmann, Kalle Leinonen, Kristen M. Leraas, Seth Lerner,
Douglas A. Levine, Lora Lewis, Timothy J. Ley, Haiyan I. Li, Jun Li, Wei Li, Han Liang,
Tara M. Lichtenberg, Jake Lin, Ling Lin, Pei Lin, Wenbin Liu, Yingchun Liu, Yuexin Liu,
Philip L. Lorenzi, Charles Lu, Yiling Lu, Lovelace J. Luquette, Singer Ma, Vincent J.
Magrini, Harshad S. Mahadeshwar, Elaine R. Mardis, Adam Margolin, Marco A. Marra,
Michael Mayo, Cynthia McAllister, Sean E. McGuire, Joshua F. McMichael, James Melott,
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 14.

Hoadley et al.

Page 19

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Shaowu Meng, Matthew Meyerson, Piotr A. Mieczkowski, Christopher A. Miller, Martin L.
Miller, Michael Miller, Richard A. Moore, Margaret Morgan, Donna Morton, Lisle E. Mose,
Andrew J. Mungall, Donna Muzny, Lam Nguyen, Michael S. Noble, Houtan Noushmehr,
Michelle O’Laughlin, Akinyemi I. Ojesina, Tai-Hsien Ou Yang, Brad Ozenberger, Angeliki
Pantazi, Michael Parfenov, Peter J. Park, Joel S. Parker, Evan Paull, Chandra Sekhar
Pedamallu, Todd Pihl, Craig Pohl, David Pot, Alexei Protopopov, Teresa Przytycka, Amie
Radenbaugh, Nilsa C. Ramirez, Ricardo Ramirez, Gunnar Rätsch, Jeffrey Reid, Xiaojia Ren,
Boris Reva, Sheila M. Reynolds, Suhn K. Rhie, Jeffrey Roach, Hector Rovira, Michael
Ryan, Gordon Saksena, Sofie Salama, Chris Sander, Netty Santoso, Jacqueline E. Schein,
Heather Schmidt, Nikolaus Schultz, Steven E. Schumacher, Jonathan Seidman, Yasin
Senbabaoglu, Sahil Seth, Samantha Sharpe, Ronglai Shen, Margi Sheth, Yan Shi, Ilya
Shmulevich, Grace O. Silva, Janae V. Simons, Rileen Sinha, Payal Sipahimalani, Scott M.
Smith, Heidi J. Sofia, Artem Sokolov, Mathew G. Soloway, Xingzhi Song, Carrie Sougnez,
Paul Spellman, Louis Staudt, Chip Stewart, Petar Stojanov, Xiaoping Su, S. Onur Sumer,
Yichao Sun, Teresa Swatloski, Barbara Tabak, Angela Tam, Donghui Tan, Jiabin Tang, Roy
Tarnuzzer, Barry S. Taylor, Nina Thiessen, Vesteinn Thorsson, Timothy Triche Jr., David J.
Van Den Berg, Fabio Vandin, Richard J. Varhol, Charles J. Vaske, Umadevi Veluvolu,
Roeland Verhaak, Doug Voet, Jason Walker, John W. Wallis, Peter Waltman, Yunhu Wan,
Min Wang, Wenyi Wang, Zhining Wang, Scot Waring, Nils Weinhold, Daniel J.
Weisenberger, Michael C. Wendl, David Wheeler, Matthew D. Wilkerson, Richard K.
Wilson, Lisa Wise, Andrew Wong, Chang-Jiun Wu, Chia-Chin Wu, Hsin-Ta Wu, Junyuan
Wu, Todd Wylie, Liu Xi, Ruibin Xi, Zheng Xia, Andrew W. Xu, Da Yang, Liming Yang,
Lixing Yang, Yang Yang, Jun Yao, Rong Yao, Kai Ye, Kosuke Yoshihara, Yuan Yuan,
Alfred K. Yung, Travis Zack, Dong Zeng, Jean Claude Zenklusen, Hailei Zhang, Jianhua
Zhang, Nianxiang Zhang, Qunyuan Zhang, Wei Zhang, Wei Zhao, Siyuan Zheng, Jing Zhu,
Erik Zmuda, Lihua Zou

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 14.

Hoadley et al.

Page 20

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 1. Integrated Cluster-Of-Cluster Assignments analysis reveals 11 major subtypes (see also
Supplemental Figures S1-3 and Data Files S1-3)

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

A) Integration of subtype classifications from 5 “omic” platforms resulted in the
identification of 11 major groups/subtypes from 12 pathologically defined cancer types. The
groups are identified by number and color in the second bar, with the tissue of origin
specified in the top bar. The matrix of individual “omic” platform type classification/subtype
schemes was clustered, and each data type is represented by a different color: copy
number=black, DNA methylation=purple, miRNA=blue, mRNA=red and RPPA=green. B)
Mutation status for each of 10 Significantly Mutated Genes coded as: wild-type=white,
mutant=red, missing data=gray. C) Copy number status for each of 9 important genes:
amplified=red, deleted=blue, copy number neutral=white and missing data=gray. The colorcoding schema is shown to the right. D) Overall survival (OS) of COCA subtypes by
Kaplan-Meier plot. COCA subtypes are highly correlated with overall survival outcomes. E)
The log-likelihood ratio (LR) statistic was estimated as we added clinical variables, COCA
subtype, or tissue type information to a cox proportional hazards model. Clinical variables
included age at diagnosis, tumor size, node status and metastasis status. The change in LR
statistic as features were added to the model was assessed for significance by chi-square
analysis. The set of samples was limited to the set of tumor types that did not have a one-toone relationship with a COCA subtype: BLCA, BRCA, COAD, HNSC, LUAD, LUSC, and
READ in COCA clusters COCA1 – LUAD-enriched, COCA2-Squamous, COCA3-BRCA/
Luminal, COCA4-BRCA/Basal-like, COCA7-COAD/READ and COCA8-BLCA. First bar

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 14.

Hoadley et al.

Page 21

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

“A” shows results of adding tissue-of-origin to clinical variables already part of the model,
followed by a variable representing the COCA subtyping; bar “B” shows results when
COCA is first added on to clinical variables, and then tissue-type is added. In each case the
increase in the ability to predict OS was in terms of the LR.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 14.

Hoadley et al.

Page 22

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 2. Genomic determinants of the Integrative COCA Subtypes (see also Supplemental
Figure S4 and Tables S2-3)

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

A. Genes from the high-confidence list of drivers (Tamborero et al., 2013) found to be
mutated at a different rate within one COCA subtype compared outside it based on a twotailed Fisher’s exact test. Mutation frequency enrichment, red to orange; genes with
mutations equaling the background rate, yellow; genes with no observed mutations in a
subtype, white. Displayed are top-ranked genes in terms of significant mutation enrichment
(FDR<1%) in at least one COCA subtype. B. Somatic copy number alterations (SCNAs) in
Integrative Clusters. SCNAs in tumors (horizontal axis) are plotted along chromosomal
locations (vertical axis). The heatmap shows the presence of amplifications (red) and
deletions (blue) throughout the genome. The color strip along the top indicates integrative
COCA cluster membership; the number in parentheses indicates % of samples in a COCA
subtype with TP53 mutation. COCA subtypes are ordered from highest TP53 mutant
percentage to lowest. C. Range of copy number segments in tumors within each Integrative
Cluster. The box and whisker plots show the middle quartiles and the minimum and
maximum number of segments in each cluster group.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 14.

Hoadley et al.

Page 23

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 3. Subtype-specific patterns of gene-program and selected pathway expression
characterizing each Pan-Cancer-12 COCA subtype (see also Supplemental Figures S5-6, Table
S4, and Data File S5)

The heat map shows integrative subtypes in numerical order. Gene programs (top) and
pathway signatures from PARADIGM (bottom) were clustered separately from each other.
Red-blue intensities reflect the means of the scores (red=high, white=average, blue=low).

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 14.

Hoadley et al.

Page 24

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 4. Genomic determinants of the C2-Squamous-like COCA subtype (see also Supplemental
Figure S7 and Table S5)

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

A) SCNAs for the C2-Squamous-like subtype are shown, highlighting the importance of
3q26 gains across the different tissue-of-origin samples. B. Selected genes from 291 highconfidence driver (HCD) genes (Tamborero et al., 2013) mutated in > 5% of C2-Squamouslike samples and comparable in frequency in other subtypes. Samples with protein-affecting
mutations in those genes are shown in green. C. HCD genes (as in panel B) with mutation
frequency significantly higher in C2-Squamous-like tumors relative to others (stated at
p<0.01 according to Fisher’s exact test with FDR correction). The method used corrections
for imbalance in the number of samples from different tissues (see Supplemental Text
Section 8). D. Two sub-networks of mutated pathways identified by an updated HotNet
algorithm analysis using HINT interactions (see Supplemental Text) as mutated in at least
20% of the samples of the C2-Squamous-like subtype (cluster 2). Pie charts indicate
interactions among the proteins in each subnetwork. Each gene (node) is colored by wedges
whose size indicates the relative proportion of the gene’s mutations that are in samples from
each integrated subtype. To the right of the pie charts is a gene-by-sample mutation matrix
representing the mutation status of each gene across all Squamous-like samples. Full ticks
represent SNVs, downticks represent deletions and upticks represent amplifications. The
color of each tick indicates tissue-of-origin type, with gray indicating no mutation in the
corresponding sample.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 14.

Hoadley et al.

Page 25

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 5. Comparison of molecular characteristics of C2-Squamous-like, C4-BRCA/Basal and
C9-OV (ovarian) subtypes reveals differences in TP63 and TP53 signaling (see also
Supplemental Figure S7, Table S5, and Data File S4)

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

A) Relative significance of TP63 network activation within the C2-Squamous-like and C4BRCA/Basal subtypes. The network neighbors surrounding the TAp63γ and ΔNp63α
tetramer complexes that show significant activation (or inactivation) within the C2Squamous-like and/or C4-BRCA/Basal subtypes relative to all other cases were visualized
using Cytoscape (Shannon et al., 2003). Node shape reflects relative significance in the oneversus-all comparison (square: more significant in C2-Squamous-like, triangle: more
significant in C4-BRCA/Basal). Node color indicates relative activity (red: activated in C2
and C4, blue: inactivated in C2 and C4, purple: activated in C2 but inactivated in C4, white:
activated or inactivated in only one subtype). B) Box plot of isoform-specific levels of TP63
and TP73 within three of the TP53-frequently mutated COCA subtypes (C2-Squamous-like,
C4-BRCA/Basal, and C9-OV). C) CircleMap of PARADIGM-Shift differences associated
with TP53 mutations within the C2, C4 and C9 COCA subtypes. Samples were ordered first
by integrative subtype membership (innermost ring), then by TP53 mutation status (second
ring), and finally by P-Shift (outer ring, indicating TP53 activity). The GISTIC score
(indicating CNV), mRNA expression level, PARADIGM upstream and downstream
activities are shown in the third, fourth, fifth and sixth rings, respectively. Red-blue color
intensity reflects magnitude (red: positive, blue: negative). TP53-truncating mutants are
highlighted (black outlined wedge), and the mean P-shift scores of the truncating mutants
are shown. Negative P-Shift scores (outer ring blue) predict loss of function (LOF). D)
Unsupervised clustering of C2-Squamous-like, C4-BRCA/basal, and C9-OV cancers based
on the expression patterns of 33 published TP53-related gene signatures. Sample subtype
assignment (pink: C2-Squamous-like, blue: C4-BRCA/basal, purple: C9-OV) and TP53

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 14.

Hoadley et al.

Page 26

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

mutation status (wild type: white, truncating: black, missense: grey) are indicated in the
column color bar. Heatmap red-blue color intensity reflects magnitude (red: positive, white,
average: blue: negative). See Supplemental Data File S4 (syn2491513) for complete list.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 14.

Hoadley et al.

Page 27

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 6. Divergence of the bladder cancer samples across multiple COCA subtypes (see also
Supplemental Figure S8 and Table S6)

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

A) Kaplan-Meier survival analysis of bladder cancers within the C1-LUAD-enriched, C2Squamous-like, and C8-BLCA subtypes. B) Heatmap of 17 proteins expressed at
significantly different levels within the C2-Squamous-like relative to the C8-BLCA bladder
cancer samples. Samples are arranged along the column by subtype (pink: C2, light blue:
C8); and protein data are ordered along the rows by clustering. Rainbow color scale reflects
magnitude (red: high, green: average, blue: low). C) HCD genes with differential mutation
frequencies among the bladder samples clustered in COCA subtypes C1, C2 and C8.
Differential frequencies reflect frequencies within, relative to frequencies outside of, the
COCA subtype. D) Heatmap of 11 gene programs showing significant differential
expression between the C2 and C8 bladder cancers. Samples are arranged along the column
by subtype (pink: C2, light blue: C8), and gene programs are ordered along the rows by
clustering. Red-blue color scale reflects magnitude (red: high, blue: low). E) PARADIGM
sub-network of immune-related pathway biomarkers activated in C2 bladder cancers relative
to the C8 subtype. Red-blue color scale represents relative activation (red: higher in C2,
blue: higher in C8). Node size reflects relative significance, and node shape denotes feature
type (diamond: multi-protein complex, inverted v: cellular process, circle: genes, square:
gene family). Color of an edge reflects type of interaction within the PARADIGM
SuperPathway (purple arrows: activation, green T: inhibition).

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 14.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Table 1

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

2

BRCA

C2-Squamous-like

0

3

1

1

0

258

28

1

0

2

306

GBM

HNSC

KIRC

LAML

LUAD

LUSC

OV

READ

UCEC

Totals

546

0

0

0

206

6

0

0

302

0

1

31

0

COAD

C1-LUAD-enriched

10

Handle

BLCA

688

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

688

0

C3-BRCA/Luminal

137

0

0

0

1

1

0

0

0

0

0

135

0

C4-BRCA/Basal

479

0

0

1

0

0

0

470

0

2

0

5

1

C5-KIRC

341

340

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

C6-UCEC

256

1

73

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

182

0

0

C7-COAD/READ

79

0

0

0

1

1

0

0

1

0

0

2

74

C8-BLCA

327

0

0

327

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

C9-OV

197

0

0

0

2

1

0

2

1

190

0

0

1

C10-GBM

3

2

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

1

C11-small-various

6

0

0

0

0

2

0

2

0

0

0

0

2

C12-small-various

162

0

0

0

0

0

161

0

0

0

0

1

0

C13-AML

3527

345

73

329

238

270

161

475

305

195

182

834

120

Total

The name of each COCA subtype (top row) includes a cluster number (1 to 13) and a text designation for mnemonic purposes. Two of the subtypes (numbers 11 and 12) were eliminated from further analysis
because they included < 10 samples (3 and 6 samples, respectively). Hence, the text focuses on 11 subtypes, not 13.

The 12 pathological disease types (rows) and their relationship to the thirteen integrated subtypes defined by the Cluster-of-Cluster-Assignments (COCA) method (see also Supplemental Table
S1)

Hoadley et al.
Page 28

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 14.

