www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2017, Vol. 8, (No. 4), pp: 5717-5734
Research Paper

Hormophysa triquerta polyphenol, an elixir that deters CXCR4and COX2-dependent dissemination destiny of treatmentresistant pancreatic cancer cells
Sheeja Aravindan1,2, Satishkumar Ramraj3, Kathiresan Kandasamy1, Somasundaram
S. Thirugnanasambandan1, Dinesh Babu Somasundaram3, Terence S. Herman2,3
and Natarajan Aravindan3
1

Department of Marine Sciences, Center of Advanced Study in Marine Biology, Annamalai University, Parangipettai, TN, India

2

Stephenson Cancer Center, Oklahoma City, OK, USA

3

Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK, USA

Correspondence to: Natarajan Aravindan, email: naravind@ouhsc.edu
Keywords: pancreatic cancer; seaweed polyphenols; tumor invasion and metastasis; residual pancreatic cancer; tumor relapse
and recurrence
Received: October 11, 2016	

Accepted: November 23, 2016	

Published: December 10, 2016

ABSTRACT
Therapy-resistant pancreatic cancer (PC) cells play a crucial role in tumor
relapse, recurrence, and metastasis. Recently, we showed the anti-PC potential of
an array of seaweed polyphenols and identified efficient drug deliverables. Herein,
we investigated the benefit of one such deliverable, Hormophysa triquerta polyphenol
(HT-EA), in regulating the dissemination physiognomy of therapy-resistant PC cells in
vitro, and residual PC in vivo. Human PC cells exposed to ionizing radiation (IR), with/
without HT-EA pre-treatment were examined for the alterations in the tumor invasion/
metastasis (TIM) transcriptome (93 genes, QPCR-profiling). Utilizing a mouse model
of residual PC, we investigated the benefit of HT-EA in the translation regulation of
crucial TIM targets (TMA-IHC). Radiation activated 30, 50, 15, and 38 TIM molecules
in surviving Panc-1, Panc-3.27, BxPC3, and MiaPaCa-2 cells. Of these, 15, 44, 12, and
26 molecules were suppressed with HT-EA pre-treatment. CXCR4 and COX2 exhibited
cell-line-independent increases after IR, and was completely suppressed with HT-EA,
across all PC cells. HT-EA treatment resulted in translational repression of IR-induced
CXCR4, COX2, β-catenin, MMP9, Ki-67, BAPX, PhPT-1, MEGF10, and GRB10 in residual
PC. Muting CXCR4 or COX2 regulated the migration/invasion potential of IR-surviving
cells, while forced expression of CXCR4 or COX2 significantly increased migration/
invasion capabilities of PC cells. Further, treatment with HT-EA significantly inhibited
IR-induced and CXCR4/COX2 forced expression-induced PC cell migration/invasion.
This study (i) documents the TIM blueprint in therapy-resistant PC cells, (ii) defines
the role of CXCR4 and COX2 in induced metastatic potential, and (iii) recognizes the
potential of HT-EA in deterring the CXCR4/COX2-dependent dissemination destiny of
therapy-resistant residual PC cells.

INTRODUCTION

and radiation. The use of radiation therapy (RT) in PC
treatment is multi-fold: (i) RT after surgery prevents
tumor relapse or recurrence, (ii) RT before surgery,
along with chemotherapy, shrinks and makes removing
borderline resectable tumors easier, (iii) RT can be the
main treatment, combined with chemotherapy, for locally
advanced and unresectable cancers; (iv) RT relieves pain
in patients with advanced cancers, and; (iv) RT can be

With an expected 53,070 new cases in 2016,
pancreatic cancer (PC) is one of the major causes of
cancer death in the United States [1]. For four decades,
the 5-year survival rate for PC has hovered around 5%
[2]. In addition to its silent nature and tendency for late
discovery, PC shows unusual resistance to chemotherapy
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5717

Oncotarget

used as the prime modality for people who are not healthy
enough for other treatments [3, 4]. However, clinical trials
that investigated the benefit of RT, either alone or as part
of chemo-RT, have shown equivocal clinical outcomes
in patients with PC [4, 5]. Only 20% of primary PCs
show a determinate response to RT [4, 6]. The lack of
clinical efficacy of RT mandates the investigation of
methods to overcome radiation resistance in PC. To that
end, radio-sensitizing PC cells could significantly benefit
patients diagnosed with resectable disease who suffer
from local and/or distant failure post-resection [7, 8].
The need to defeat PC’s induced radio-resistance and to
potentiate therapeutic radiation highlights the necessity of
elucidating the underlying mechanisms of PC.
Adding to the complexity, metastatic disease
develops after surgery combined with pre/post
radiotherapy (RT). However, the onset and orchestration
of the sequential functional events of metastasis,
including malignant cell release from the primary tumor
site, inhabitation, and clonal expansion at distant sites,
is poorly understood [9]. Initial event of metastasis
originates in the primary tumor microenvironment,
where intercellular molecular signaling cross talk
between the tumor, surrounding stroma, and adjacent
tissues leads to extracellular matrix rearrangement, cell
motility enhancement, and proliferation promotion. The
genetic rearrangements that occur in cancer cells drive
uncontrolled growth, aberrant replication and sustained
angiogenesis, and regulate anti-growth signals and evade
apoptosis; these rearrangements collectively orchestrate
progressive metastatic disease [10]. Based on the concept
of multistage carcinogenesis in PC, continuous acquisition
of these genetic rearrangements in therapy-resistant cancer
cells is instrumental for post-surgical recurrence and/
or metastasis. Since numerous genes are engaged in the
sequential processes of tumor dissemination [11-18],
understanding the comprehensive TIM transcriptome
in therapy-resistant surviving PC cells is crucial.
Accordingly, the objective of this study is to understand
the comprehensive TIM transcriptome in therapy-resistant
surviving PC cells and identify the genetic determinants
that govern radio-resistance and subsequent tumor
recurrence and dissemination. This study identified two
such genetic determinants, CXCR4 and COX2, in a panel
of radio-resistant, genetically diverse PC cells. CXCR4
is the only receptor that is expressed in the normal
pancreas, PC cells, and all pancreatic tumor specimens
[19]. Likewise, researchers have reported > 70% COX2 expression in clinical PC [20-22]. We investigated the
influence of radiation-induced CXCR4 and COX2 in
dictating the metastatic state of surviving PC cells.
The development of drug deliverables targeting
such genetic determinants is imminent and could shift the
current therapeutic approach in progressive PC. The health
care industry heavily relies on natural products [23], as
these derivatives constitute > 50% of drugs in clinical use.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

In parallel to the NCI’s ongoing probable drug screening
of >100,000 extracts against tumor systems [24],
extensive research to identify anticancer deliverables from
various marine floral compounds, including seaweeds, is
underway [25]. The anticancer potential of seaweeds
that contain large amounts of polyphenols (catechin,
epicatechin, EGCG, gallic acid) has been well documented
[26, 27]. Further, studies have demonstrated the antiproliferative [28], tumor-regressing [29], and metastasisinhibiting [30] efficacy of seaweed polyphenols. A
linear and directly proportional relationship between
the anti-carcinogenic activity and antioxidant activity of
polyphenols has been documented in many in vivo models
[29, 31-33]. In assorted tumor models, researchers have
recognized the benefit of seaweed extracts in effectively
suppressing the functional cellular events that drive tumor
progression, including tumor cell growth, cell-cycle
release, proliferation, survival, DNA repair, angiogenesis,
and metastasis [34-39]. Recently, our in vitro studies
screened a panel of polyphenols derived as polarity
gradient extractions from five different seaweed species
for their efficacy against PC [40], and recognized three
deliverables with high impact on impeding autophagy
signaling [41] and PC cancer stem cell status [42].
Hence, these fractions could be clinically translatable
in this setting. We hypothesize that one such fraction,
Hormophysa triquerta polyphenol (HT-EA), will result in
the inhibition of crucial genetic determinants of the TIM
phenotype. Delineating such efficacy in radio-resistant PC
cells will identify a ‘drug deliverable’ that not only radiosensitizes PC cells, but will also potentiate the benefit of
RT in the treatment of this deadly disease.

RESULTS
Radiotherapy prompts tumor invasion and
metastasis transcriptome activation in resistant
PC cells
To define the radio-responsive TIM-related
signaling in PC cells, we investigated the alterations in
mRNA levels for 93 well-characterized TIM molecules
(Table S1) in genetically diverse human PC cells
exposed to clinical RT. QPCR profiling revealed unique
amplification signatures across treatment groups and
cell lines. Profile-to-profile expression distinctions were
normalized with in-house controls (HPRT-1, GAPDH,
and/or β-actin), hierarchically clustered (complete linkage)
with Gene Cluster (http://bonsai.hgc.jp/~mdehoon/
software/cluster/software.htm), and examined using
Maple Tree (v0.2.3.2 Beta, rana.lbl.gov/EisenSoftware.
htm), which provides self-organizing maps of distinctive
gene expression profiles for every condition and cell
line investigated (Figure S1). Overall, RT resulted in
5718

Oncotarget

the activation of 36, 53, 29, and 42 TIM molecules in
surviving Panc-1, Panc-3.27, BX-PC3, and MiaPaCa-2
cells, respectively. Interestingly, cells→genes traverse
analysis identified cell-line-independent activation of 10
genes (across 4 cell lines), 15 genes (in 3 cell lines), and
24 genes (in 2 cell lines).
Applying stringent criteria, RT significantly
increased the expression of 30, 50, 15, and 38 TIM genes
in Panc-1, Panc-3.27, BX-PC3, MiaPaCa-2 cells (Figure
1). Two genes, CXCR4 and PTGS2, showed cell-lineindependent upregulation after FIR exposure. Thirteen

genes, Birc3, CTSD, CTSL1, FGFR4, IL1β, MCAM, Met,
Metap2, MMP10, MMP13, MTA2, Myc, and NF2 showed
cell-line-independent activation in at least three cell lines.
After RT, a set of 26 TIM genes (Adamts1, Aldh3A1, kRas,
Casp8, Kynu, CD44, CD82, CST7, CTSB, CTGF, CTSK,
TP53, HMGB1, CXCL12, IL13Ra2, FLT1, MMP-2, -7,
-14, MGAT5, NEDD9, NME-1, -4, VEGFA, SPP1, SYK)
were upregulated in two cell lines. Distinctively, a small
subset of genes showed cell-line-dependent activation in
Panc-1 (HTATIP2, Serpine 1), Panc-3.27 (FLT4, HGF,
Hras, ID1, IGFBP7, ISG20, ITGA7, MMP-3, -9, NME-2,

Figure 1: Alteration of tumor invasion metastasis transcriptome in PC cells surviving after fractionated RT. Clinical
doses of radiation (2 Gy/Day for 5 days for a total dose of 10 Gy) significantly induced (≥ 2 fold upregulation) tumor invasion and metastasis
transcriptome in surviving Panc-1, Panc-3.27, MiaPaCa-2, and BxPC-3 cells. Two genes, CXCR4 and PTGS2, showed consistent cellline-independent upregulation. Quantitative transcriptional expression of 93 TIM molecules were assayed using custom-archived QPCR
profiling.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5719

Oncotarget

Figure 2: HT-EA alleviates RT-associated activation of tumor invasion and metastasis transcriptome in surviving PC
cells. Histograms of QPCR profiling comparison analysis showing the HT-EA-associated regulation of fractionated radiation-induced
tumor invasion and metastasis transcriptome in surviving Panc-1, Panc-3.27, BxPC-3, and MiaPaCa-2 cells.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5720

Oncotarget

BxPC-3, MiaPaCa-2) cells that were pretreated with HTEA and exposed to radiation. Pre-treating cells with HTEA inhibited 15 (of 30), 44 (of 50), 12 (of 15), and 26
(of 38) FIR-induced TIM molecules in Panc-1, Panc-3.27,
BxPC-3, and MiaPaCa-2 cells, respectively (Figure 2).
Interestingly, treatment with HT-EA repressed radiationinduced CXCR4 across all cell lines investigated. In
addition, PTGS2 (COX2), upregulated across PC cells
after RT, was completely suppressed with HT-EA (Figure
2). Moreover, cell-line-independent inhibition of Birc3,
CTGF, CTSD, FGFR4, IL1β, Metap2, MMP10 (3 cell
lines), ADAMTS1, Aldh3A1, Casp8, CD82, CST7, CTSB,
CTSL1, IL13Ra2, MMP-7, -13, -14, MGAT5, MTA2,
MCAM, MYC, NEDD9, NF2, and NME-1 (2 cell lines)
were observed with HT-EA treatment. Conversely,

-5, Pax5, PDGFA, PLAUR, PTEN, TDD1, TGFβ1, Tmip2, -4), BxPC-3 (HDAC1, MAP2K4), and MiaPaCa-2
(CCNE2, CCR7, CDH-1, -11, Col4A2, Jag1, Kiss1,
MMP1, MTSS1, Runx1) cells. These results highlight the
induction of TIM-related transcripts in radio-resistant PC
cells. Further, these data identify the cell-line-independent
and cell-line-dependent upsurge in TIM transcriptional
responses in PC cells after RT.

HT-EA target therapy-orchestrated onset of TIM
transcription in human PC cells
We investigated the alterations in the transcription
of TIM molecules in human PC (Panc-1, Panc-3.27,

Figure 3: HT-EA mitigates RT-associated translation of tumor invasion and metastasis targets in residual PC. A.

Representative microphotographs from hematoxylin & eosin stained PC tissue microarray (TMA) constructed with xenografts (established
from MiaPaCa-2) exposed to mock-irradiation or fractionated irradiation, with or without HT-EA treatment. Pullout shows the staining
pattern (20x magnification). B. Representative microphotographs from CXCR4-stained PC tissue microarray (TMA) constructed with
xenografts exposed to mock-irradiation or fractionated irradiation, with or without HT-EA treatment. Pullout shows the staining pattern
(20x magnification). C. Aperio TMA quantitation analysis showing protein-specific positivity magnitudes (mean + SD) in mock-irradiated
PC xenografts, and residual PC after clinical RT, with or without HT-EA treatment. Group-wise comparisons were made using Two-way
ANOVA with Bonferroni’s post-hoc correction.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5721

Oncotarget

critical proteins (β-catenin, MMP9, Ki-67, NKX3.2,
PhPT1, GRB10) that are instrumental in PC progression
after therapy, we examined their alterations in PC cells
that were selectively exposed to RT, with or without a
daily dose of HT-EA. IHC staining consistency across
samples was achieved by TMA construction (Figure
3A) utilizing histopathological evaluations of individual
H&E stained tumor tissues, coupled with automated
IHC. C-X-C chemokine receptor type 4 (CXCR4) IHC
staining exhibited baseline positivity in mock-irradiated
controls (Figure 3B & 3C). Selective CXCR4 localization
was observed in the plasma membrane (see pullout
in Figure 3B). We observed no staining when the noprimary negative control for CXCR4 was used. IHC
revealed strong positivity and abundant presence (~80%

HTAIP2, VEGFA (Panc-1), FLT-1, -4, HGF, HMGB1,
HRAS, ID1, IGFBP7, ISG20, ITGA7, MMP-2, -3, NME-2,
-5, PAX5, PDGFA, PLAUR, PTEN, SYC, TIMP-4 (Panc3.27), HDAC1, MAP2K4, TP53 (BxPC-3), CCNE2,
CCR7, MET, MTSS1, and NME4 (MiaPaCa-2) showed
cell-line-dependent inhibition after HT-EA pretreatment.

HT-EA regulates translation of CXCR4, COX2,
and other crucial TIM targets (β-catenin, MMP9,
Ki-67, NKX3.2, PhPT1, MEGF10, GRB10) in
residual PC
To investigate whether HT-EA regulates radiationinduced common targets (CXCR4, COX2) and other

Figure 4: HT-EA mitigates RT-associated translation of COX2, β-catenin, MMP9, and Ki-67 in residual PC.

Representative microphotographs from A. Cox2-, B. β-catenin-, C. MMP9-, and D. Ki-67- stained PC tissue microarray (TMA) constructed
with xenografts (established from MiaPaCa-2) exposed to mock-irradiation or fractionated irradiation, with or without HT-EA treatment.
The pullout in each panel represents the corresponding Ab staining pattern in 20x magnification showing the protein-specific cellular
localization. Please see Figure 3C for Aperio TMA quantitation analysis of COX2-, β-catenin-, MMP9-, and Ki-67-specific positivity
magnitudes (mean + SD) in mock-irradiated PC xenografts, and residual PC after clinical RT, with or without HT-EA treatment.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5722

Oncotarget

of cells) of CXCR4 in residual PC after RT (Figure 3B
& 3C). However, HT-EA treatment completely (P <
0.05) suppressed CXCR4 in residual PC (Figure 3C).
Figure 4A portrays the expression profiles of COX2
(PTGS2) in PC exposed to clinical FIR (compared with
mock-IR controls), with or without HT-EA treatment.
Compared with the stromal cells, we observed strong
COX2 positivity in tumor cells. At the sub-cellular level,
COX2 is abundant in cytoplasm, with weak membranous
localization (see pullout in Figure 4A). Although COX2
was detectable under all conditions, strong (P < 0.01) and
abundant positivity was observed in residual PC (Figure
3C). There was a substantial variance in COX2 expression

between the group that received radiation alone and the
group that received radiation and HT-EA (Figures 3C &
4A). These modifications in CXCR4 and COX2 expression
in response to RT in the presence and absence of HTEA treatment corroborated well with the transcriptional
modifications observed with QPCR profiling.
β-catenin (Cadherin-associated protein and beta 1)
IHC staining revealed predominant plasma membrane
localization (see pullout in Figure 4B). Compared with
the baseline expression in mock-IR controls, we observed
strong and abundant ( > 90% of the cells) β-catenin
expression (P < 0.001) in residual PC after clinical RT
(Figures 3C & 4B). β-catenin immunoreactivity was

Figure 5: HT-EA mitigates RT-associated translation of PhPT-1, BAPX, MEGF-10, and GRB-10, in residual PC.

Representative microphotographs from A. PhPT-1, B. BAPX, C. MEGF-10, and D. GRB-10-stained PC tissue microarray (TMA)
constructed with xenografts (established from MiaPaCa-2) exposed to mock-irradiation or fractionated irradiation, with or without HT-EA
treatment. The pullout in each panel represents the corresponding Ab staining pattern in 20x magnification, showing the protein-specific
cellular localization. Please see Figure 3C for Aperio TMA quantitation analysis of PhPT-1-, BAPX, MEGF-10-, and GRB-10-specific
positivity magnitudes (mean + SD) in mock-irradiated PC xenografts, and residual PC after clinical RT with or without HT-EA treatment.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5723

Oncotarget

Figure 6: RT-associated activation of CXCR4 and COX-2 determined the metastatic state of the surviving PC cells:
A. Representative whole images of cell migration assay (mock-IR and IR) and the representative images of migrated cells in the cell

seed stopped areas (wound) taken after 0 and 24h of human Panc-1 cells exposed to either mock-irradiation or radiation with and without
HT-EA treatment, forced expression of COX2 or CXCR4 with/without HT-EA treatment, after silencing COX2/CXCR4, after HT-EA
treatment alone or, after silencing COX2/CXCR4 and exposed to FIR. B. Panc-1 cells migrated to seed stopped area (wound) and C.
Matrigel-invaded MiaPaCa-2 and Panc-1 cells (mean + SD) showing 1) heightened migratory and invasive potential of cells that survive
RT; 2) complete inhibition of IR-induced migration/invasion potential with HT-EA treatment, by muting IR-induced CXCR4 or COX2; 3)
high migration/invasion capacity in CXCR4 or COX2 expressed cells, and; 4) complete inhibition of CXCR4-/COX2-induced migratory/
invasive capabilities with HT-EA treatment. Expression of CXCR4 or COX-2 (Origene) was carried out using TurboFectin 8.0 and CXCR4
or COX-2 silencing with shRNA (MISSION® shRNA, Sigma-Aldrich) following standard protocols. Invasion assays were performed using
the BD Matrigel invasion assay, following standard protocols. Quantification of invaded cells was performed using Image Quant colony
count analysis software. Group-wise comparisons were examined by ANOVA with Bonferroni’s post-hoc corrections using GraphPad
PRISM software. A P value of < 0.05 was considered significant.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5724

Oncotarget

completely reduced (P < 0.001) to near basal levels
(Figure 3C & 4B) in all PC cores from HT-EA-treated
animals. Figure 4C shows representative IHC results
for Matrix metallopeptidase 9 (MMP-9) in PC cells that
received RT, with or without HT-EA pre-treatment. MMP9 expression was stronger and selective in the cytoplasm,
with some weak positivity in the nucleus (see pullout in
Figure 4C). While mock-IR controls exhibited measurable
levels of MMP-9, we observed strong MMP-9 positivity
(P < 0.001) in residual PC after RT. Weak positive MMP9 expression was observed with HT-EA treatment (Figure
3C & 4C). Likewise, Ki-67 positivity was detected under
all conditions. IHC staining revealed a strong nuclear
localization (see Figure 4D pullout). Ki-67 positivity
ranged from 48.35% in mock-IR control to 98.70% of
residual tumors (Figure 3C). HT-EA treatment produced
fewer Ki-67-positive epithelial cells (48.38%; Figures 3C
and 4D).
The PhPT1 (Phospho-histidine phosphatase 1)
IHC staining profile for PC specimens after RT, with or
without HT-EA treatment, are presented in Figure 5A.
No traceable PhPT1 immunoreactivity was observed
in control (mock-IR) conditions, consistent with the
documented low expression of PhPT1 in PC (www.
proteinatlas.org). Radiation-exposed PC cells revealed
a detectable, yet weak, cytoplasmic localization of PhPT1
(see Figure 5A pullout). However, RT-associated induction
in PhPT1 localization was completely reduced with HTEA treatment (Figures 3C & 5A). IHC analysis of BAPX1
(NK3 homeobox 2, NKX3.2) revealed baseline positivity
in mock-IR controls. Bapx1 was mostly localized in
the nucleus (see Figure 5B pullout). After RT, Bapx1
expression was strongly positive and present in 93.92% of
the PC cells lingering after treatment (Figure 3C & 5B).
Conversely, HT-EA treatment in conjunction with RT
resulted in a significant (P < 0.001) reduction in Bapx1
levels in residual PC (Figure 3C & 5B).
Likewise, cellular localization levels of Multiple
EGF-like-domains 10 (MEGF10) were examined in PC
xenografts exposed to RT, with and without polyphenol
treatment (Figure 5C). MEGF10 immunoreactivity showed
marginal positivity in control (mock-IR) specimens
(Figure 3C), consistent with reported levels in human
PC (www.proteinatlas.org). Conversely, the residual
PC cells exhibited up to 44.71% immunoreactivity for
MEGF10 localization. MEGF10 positivity appeared brown
in color, and was mostly localized in the plasma membrane
in a spotted pattern (see Figure 5C pullout). We observed
a significant (P < 0.001) inhibition of induced MEGF10
expression in residual PC tissues with HT-EA treatment
(Figures 3C & 5C). Further, we examined GRB10 (Growth
factor receptor-bound protein 10), a protein that is highly
expressed in human PC (www.proteinatlas.org), in PC
exposed to RT, with and without HT-EA treatment (Figure
5D). Mock-irradiated PC tumors showed low GRB10
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

immunoreactivity. GRB10 positivity was intense and
present in 98.51% of the PC cells that survived RT (Figure
3C). GRB10 positivity appeared granular and dark brown
in color, and was primarily localized in the cytoplasm (see
Figure 5D pullout). Treatment with HT-EA significantly (P
< 0.001) reduced the radiation-induced GRB10 expression
in PC tissues. These observations demonstrate the efficacy
of HT-EA in mitigating therapy-responsive induction of
β-catenin, MMP9, Ki-67, NKX3.2, PhPT1, GRB10, and
MEGF10 in residual PC.

HT-EA deters the radiotherapy-induced CXCR4/
COX2 facilitated metastatic state of the resistant
PC cells
Delineating
whether
RT-associated
transcriptional→translational increase of CXCR4 and
COX2 mediates the metastatic state of the surviving PC
cells, and whether treatment with HT-EA deters such a
response, we examined the associated modifications in
two hallmarks of metastasis coupled with gene knock-in/
knock-out approaches. For this, human PC (MiaPaCa-2,
Panc-1) cells exposed to either mock-IR or IR, with or
without HT-EA treatment, were examined for modulations
in tumor cell migration and invasion capabilities. To
define the role of COX2 and/or CXCR4 in the IR-induced
metastatic state of the cells, COX2- or CXCR4-silenced
PC cells were then exposed to mock-IR or IR. To identify
whether HT-EA affects PC cell dissemination destiny
by selectively targeting CXCR4/COX2, we assessed the
alterations in tumor cell migration and invasion after
ectopic expression of CXCR4/COX2 in PANC-1 and
MiaPaCa-2 cells treated with HT-EA. Cell migration
analysis under proliferation-controlled conditions revealed
marginal migration in mock-irradiated controls of Panc-1
(Figure 6A & 6B) cells. However, we noticed a profound
surge in the migration of cells that survived IR exposure,
as evidenced by the complete disarray of the cells. It is
pertinent to mention that, since the experiments were
performed under strict proliferation control conditions,
the complete disarray of the wound represents the robust
movement of the cells (Figure 6A & 6B). Interestingly,
treating these cells with HT-EA completely reversed
radiation-induced cell migration (Figure 6A & 6B)
and demonstrates the tumor cell migration inhibition
potential of HT-EA in this setting. Silencing CXCR4 or
COX2 remarkably reversed the induced cell migration in
surviving cells (Figure 6A & 6B), identifying the definitive
role of IR-induced CXCR4 and/or COX2 in tumor cell
migration. Conversely, forced expression of CXCR4 or
COX2 simulated the RT response, with complete disarray
of cells (Figure 6A & 6B), defining their direct role in
induced cell migration. Treating the cells with HT-EA
reverted the forced expression-induced cell migrations
(Figure 6A & 6B), demonstrating that HT-EA deters tumor
5725

Oncotarget

cell migration by selectively targeting radiation-induced
CXCR4 and COX2.
Results from a matrigel invasion assay identified
heightened tumor cell invasion in RT-resistant MiaPaCa-2
and Panc-1 Cells (Figure 6C). However, pretreating these
cells with HT-EA significantly (P < 0.001) inhibited
therapy-induced invasion. Further, muting COX2 or
CXCR4 completely (P < 0.001) deterred the induced
invasion capabilities of surviving PC cells, highlighting
their intrinsic therapy-associated switch in the metastatic
state. Moreover, forced expression of CXCR4 and COX2
resulted in a significant increase in tumor cell invasion
(Figure 6). Treating the cells with HT-EA reversed the
COX2 or CXCR4 expression-associated increase in tumor
cell invasion. Together, these data demonstrate that HT-EA
selectively targets RT-induced CXCR4/COX2-dependent
heightened invasion in surviving PC cells.

GRB10, MEGF10, PhPT-1, and MMP-9 in established PC
residual tumors after RT, (d) the clinical benefits of HT-EA
in reverting the therapy-associated regulation of β-catenin,
KI-67, NKX3.2, GRB10, Megf10, PhPT-1, and MMP-9
in residual tumors, (e) the intrinsic influence of radiationinduced COX2 and CXCR4 in the heightened metastatic
state of the PC cells that survive radiation, and (f) the
efficacy of HT-EA in selectively inhibiting radiationinduced COX2- and/or CXCR4-dependent heightened
tumor cell migration and invasion. The 93 genes that we
examined are functionally characterized as pro-invasion
and -metastasis molecules. Hence, upregulation of these
genes reflects the functional response. To that end, here we
focus the discussion on gene profiles and TIM signature,
with an in-depth assessment of cell-line-independent
candidates and the benefits of HT-EA as an anti-metastatic
drug deliverable.
Metastasis, the process by which tumor spreads or
disseminates to distant organs, is a well-programmed,
tightly regulated, complex, sequential process. Local
invasion, the first step, requires cell release that defies
cellular adhesion and prompts cell motility, which
facilitates tumor cell invasion into the adjacent tissues.
This is followed by the invasion of cancer cells through
the basal membrane, blood, and lymphatic vessel
endothelium (intravasation), thus entering the circulation.
In combination with circulating leukocytes and platelets,
the surviving circulating tumor cells assemble tumor
emboli and are arrested at remote locations. At these
sites, tumor cells invade out of the vessels (extravasation)
and occupy the distant site. The continuous ongoing
acquisition of genetic and epigenetic changes in these
tumor cells, coupled with favorable microenvironment
conditions, prompts cell proliferation and the angiogenic
response that could lead to the development of metastatic
tumor.
Our results document a comprehensive, cell-lineindependent induction of TIM molecules in human PC
cells after RT. Activation profiles of TIM molecules
were fairly high in Panc-3.27 cells compared with other
cell lines, presumably due to the elemental variations
in radiation-response between these genetically diverse
PC cells. Although researchers have recognized the
instrumental role of select TIM molecules in PC, here for
the first time, we report the comprehensive alterations
of TIM molecules in surviving PC cells. Two genes,
CXCR4 and COX-2, stood out after IR. Induction of these
two molecules identified them as the prime mechanisms
that could drive PC metastasis after therapy. A number
of additional molecules that showed elevated activation
after RT in > 2 cell lines are also potential targets for
sensitization.
The critical role of CXCR4 in influencing every
stage of metastasis, including tumor cell migration,
growth, invasion, and angiogenesis, has been recognized
[19, 59-62]. Further, studies have identified that CXCR4

DISCUSSION
In cancer patients, metastasis remains the major
cause of death [43, 44]. Patients with PC present with
progressive metastatic disease at diagnosis, with minimal
response to chemotherapy and RT [45]. However,
the onset of PC metastasis, particularly after first-line
therapy, and the molecular mechanisms that underlie
therapy resistance, tumor progression, and dissemination
are poorly understood. Identifying drug deliverables
that can target tumor progression after therapy will
have a momentous impact on the treatment of PC. The
results presented here demonstrate the initiation of a
robust invasion/metastasis signaling response in the PC
cells that survive RT. Studies have demonstrated the
existence of functional interlinks between the sequential
cellular events, such as signaling response, DNA damage
recognition, and induced repair, in PC cells that survive
therapy. Surviving tumor cells after RT exhibit initiation
of hyperactive (oncogenic) survival and activation of the
invasion/metastasis signal transduction pathways [46-58].
The results present a blueprint of the modulation of
tumor cell invasion/metastasis transcriptome (93 genes) in
human PC cells after clinically relevant, fractionated RT.
The data show the complex pattern of TIM transcriptome
elevation after RT, with a clear indication of a ‘cellline-independent’ response. Further, we demonstrated
significant clinical benefits of a seaweed polyphenol
fraction in mitigating the therapy-associated activation
of TIM transcriptomes in vitro and functional cellular
localization of crucial players in vivo. Our study examined
(a) a comprehensive panel of TIM signaling molecules
after clinical RT in a panel of genetically diverse PC
cells, (b) the potential of a proven anti-PC bioactive
fraction of seaweed polyphenols in targeting the therapyassociated TIM transcriptome, (c) the cellular localization
of key functional tumor invasion and metastasis responses
driving CXCR4, COX2, β-catenin, KI-67, NKX3.2,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5726

Oncotarget

is the only receptor that is expressed in healthy human
pancreas, PC cells, and 100% of PC specimens [19].
CXCR4 positivity and/or its heightened expression have
been shown to significantly correlate with PC progression
and dissemination and with a substantial reduction in OS
[63]. The present study confirms a consistent and cellline-independent transcriptional activation of CXCR4
in PC cells surviving first-line RT. Although CXCR4 is
mutagenic for PC and other tumor cells [60], a recent
study demonstrated that CXCR4 could also amplify the
metastatic state of PC cells [19]. Consistently, silencing
CXCR4 has been shown to inhibit cancer migration
[64], including migration in PC [63]. More importantly,
blocking CXCR4 has been shown to hinder PC
carcinogenesis by impeding the cell cycle and cell colony
formation [63]. Herein, our results demonstrated that
CXCR4 transcription is activated in all genetically diverse
PC cells that survive RT, corresponding with a translational
increase in residual PC tumors, and that radiation-induced
CXCR4 mediates the migration and invasion of surviving
PC cells. New to science, these findings also identify that
HT-EA can not only cause a significant and consistent
inhibition of CXCR4 transactivation and translation in
therapy-resistant PC cells, but also deters the CXCR4dependent alterations in the metastatic state of the cells.
In this regard, HT-EA targeting CXCR4 could be highly
beneficial in the mitigation of metastasis after therapy and/
or the onset of secondary oncogenesis in this setting.
Evidence suggests an important role of COX-2 in
the initiation and evolution of many tumors [21, 65-69],
including PC [20, 21]. COX-2, a catalytic enzyme that
plays a critical role in the synthesis of prostaglandins [70],
has been shown to be upregulated in > 70% of human PC
[20-22]. In many cancers, heightened COX-2 levels have
been shown to correlate with high levels of intratumoral
prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) [71-73]. PGE2 was recently
shown to upregulate invasive potential [74]. Studies
demonstrating the activation of matrix metalloproteinases
and the associated increase in invasive physiognomies
with ectopic expression of COX-2 further revealed the
influence of COX-2 in tumor invasion [75]. Most studies
have examined the role of COX-2 in PC tumorigenesis
and progression. However, to our knowledge, the current
study is the first observation demonstrating the therapytriggered activation of COX-2 in surviving cells. The
results presented here established a consistent increase
in COX-2 activation in all PC cell lines investigated.
Biologically, COX-2 upregulation has been shown to resist
programmed and/or induced cell death [76], to dictate
the metastatic state in cancer cells [75], and to stimulate
angiogenic events [77]. Collectively, these COX-2
upregulation-driven biological events play critical roles
in tumor evolution. Our results demonstrating elevated
COX-2 expression in all PC cell lines after IR and in
residual tumors recognize COX-2 as a definitive target
for radio-sensitization. Moreover, our findings show that
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

induced COX-2 mediates, at least in part, the tumor cell
metastatic potential. Demonstrating the efficacy of HT-EA
in inhibiting the COX-2-dependent heightened metastatic
state of therapy-resistant PC cells defines the benefit of
this fraction in effective prevention and/or treatment of PC
relapse and recurrence.
Although the benefits of seaweed constituents in
cancer treatment are beginning to be discovered, ours is the
first group to show the benefits of sequentially extracted
polyphenol fractions in cancer medicine, particularly as
treatments against PC [40]. Utilizing a comprehensive
approach, we identified three fractions with high levels of
activity: SA-EA, PT-EA, and HT-EA [41, 42]. Our results
further demonstrate the advantage of one such promising
fraction in preventing PC invasion and metastasis when
used in conjunction with RT, by selectively targeting the
therapy-driven molecular switches. Strikingly, HT-EA
attenuated the CXCR4 and COX-2 molecules in therapyresistant cells. Upon close examination of the data, HT-EA
was noted to have a unique inhibitory signature on every
panel of RT-induced cell-line-independent TIM molecules
(see Results). Taken together, the data indicate that
seaweed extract prompts a direct and definite inhibitory
effect on invasion and metastasis in residual PC settings.
This work provides a foundation for more detailed
mechanistic investigations and translation into the clinic
setting.
We utilized a preclinical PC residual tumor model
that incorporates clinically mimicking fractionated RT
selectively delivered to human PC xenografts, to identify
HT-EA’s efficacy in the regulation of TIM functional
response molecules. To our knowledge, this is the first
attempt of such an approach to determine the therapeutic
response in PC. We observed increased expression of
β-catenin, a crucial player in canonical Wnt signaling,
in residual PC tumors. Studies have demonstrated the
critical role of β-catenin in cancer cell proliferation,
dissemination, and other key functional events [78-80].
The activation of β-catenin and subsequent Wnt pathway
signaling reinforces the metastatic state (tumor cell
migration, invasion, adhesion) of the cancer cells [79, 81,
82]. Much evidence has demonstrated the association of
heightened β-catenin expression with tumor evolution and
poor clinical outcomes [83-86]. In PC, aberrant β-Catenin
expression has been observed and has been shown to
have clinical significance with lymph node metastasis.
Consistent with previous estimates, Ki-67-positive nuclei
clustered heavily in the residual tumors [9,10]. Studies
have shown that heightened Ki-67 levels in tumors could
directly correlate to reduced time to disease progression
after primary therapy, and low OS after systemic
(metastatic) recurrence [87]. Furthermore, researchers
have reported that a high Ki-67 level in tumors may serve
as a stand-alone prognostic factor for progressive disease
with metastasis [88], suggesting that metastatic cancers
with low and high Ki-67 expression have different median
5727

Oncotarget

times to progression during therapy.

onset of the TIM transcriptome in surviving PC cells and
residual tumors, but also selectively targets radiationinduced CXCR4-/COX-2-dependent dissemination destiny
of surviving PC cells. Together, the results identified a
potential clinically translatable drug deliverable, HTEA, that could serve as a panacea for PC progression,
relapse, and recurrence. Further studies with appropriate
residual PC models (spontaneous PC animal models
coupled with current clinical treatment modalities), drug
pharmacokinetics, and systemic tumor-targeted delivery
approaches are warranted and are currently in progress in
our laboratory.

In residual PC settings, we also identified novel
targets, including NKX3.2, PhPTP, MEGF10, and GRB10,
that could drive the therapy response in surviving cells.
These proteins have not yet been characterized in PC
metastasis. However, for the first time, we identified
their localization in residual tumors after therapy. These
proteins could play a role in orchestrating invasion and
metastasis. For example, GRB10, an adaptor protein,
has been shown to exhibit Bad-dependent interaction
with Raf-1 kinase [89]. Nevertheless, the influence of
GRB10 in activating or inhibiting signal transduction
and the subsequent functional consequences in vivo
remain uncertain. Current in vitro data from independent
studies equivocally support both causal and regulatory
roles [90-96]. MMP-9 has been extensively investigated
in tumor metastasis, including PC metastasis. Evidence
suggests a directly proportional relationship with elevated
overexpression of MMP9 in invasive tumors and their
clinical impact on tumor relapse. Nonetheless, HT-EA
investigated in this study resulted in the regulation of
therapy-associated increased localization of β-catenin,
KI-67, NKX3.2, GRB10, Megf10, PhPT-1, and MMP-9
in residual PC models. Our results highlight the molecular
blueprint of therapy-induced metastatic signaling and the
clinical efficacy of HT-EA in this setting.
The limitation of this study is the use of the PC
xenograft residual model. The authors are aware that
orthotropic or spontaneous PC models are appropriate
to elucidate the molecular events pertaining to invasion
and metastasis that occur in tumors and the tumor
microenvironment in response to RT. However, the
present study was conducted primarily to recognize
whether any radio-response in surviving tumor cells
activates the metastatic state and to identify any genetic
determinants that govern such a phenotype. The xenograft
residual PC model utilized in the present study, coupled
with the achievability of tumor-specific RT, allowed
us to define such function-focused molecular events in
PC and recognized the critical role of two candidates,
CXCR4 and COX2, in this setting. Armed with this
information, our future studies will focus on elucidating
the appropriate molecular events in TME with clinically
translatable spontaneous PC models that are currently
under development in our laboratory.
In conclusion, for the first time, the present study
reveals the molecular blueprint for tumor invasion and
metastasis in PC cells that survive a course of RT, in in
vitro (utilizing a panel of genetically diverse human PC
cells) and in vivo (mouse model of residual PC) settings.
Further, the results identified two crucial functional
targets, CXCR4 and COX-2, that determine the metastatic
state of the surviving PC cells. New to science, the results
identified that a high-polarity extraction of seaweed
polyphenol, HT-EA, not only mitigates therapy-associated
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell culture
Human Panc-1 (ATCC-CRL1469), MiaPaCa-2
(ATCC-CRL1420), Panc-3.27 (ATCC-CRL2549), and
BxPC-3 (ATCC-CRL1687) cells were obtained from Dr.
Daniel J. Brackett (Department of Surgery, University
of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City,
OK). Low passages of cells were cultured and maintained
as described earlier [40, 97]. For passaging and for
all experiments, the cells were detached using 0.25%
trypsin/1% EDTA, resuspended in complete medium,
counted electronically using a Countess automated cell
counter (Carlsbad, CA, USA), and incubated in a 95%
air/5% CO2 humidified incubator.

Xenotransplantation mouse model
All experiments conformed to American
Physiological Society standards for Animal Care, carried
out in accordance with the guidelines laid down by the
National Research Council, and were approved by our
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Sevenweek-old male athymic NCr-nu/nu nude mice (NCI,
Frederick, MD) weighing 25-30 g were acclimated for at
least 3 days before the study. Human MiaPaCa-2 (5x106)
cells suspended in 30% Matrigel (BD Biosciences) were
administered SC into the right flanks. Tumor growth was
periodically monitored and tumor volume was calculated
using the formula volume = [(π/6) × length × width2].
Tumors were allowed to grow to a volume of at least 100
mm3. Six animals were used in the pretreatment group.
Animals were randomly allocated to each group [98-102].
At the end of each experiment, animals were euthanized
by CO2 asphyxiation, and the xenografts were harvested
and subjected to downstream end-point analysis.

5728

Oncotarget

In vitro and in vivo irradiation procedures

Tissue microarray construction and quantitative
immunohistochemistry

In the radiation experiments, cells were exposed to
either mock-irradiation or fractionated irradiation (FIR) of
2 Gy/day for 5 days of low-LET using a Gamma Cell 40
Exactor (Nordion International, Inc., Ontario, Canada) at
a dose rate of 0.81 Gy/min. In vivo PC xenografts were
selectively exposed to clinically relevant FIR, (2 Gy/day
for 5 days per week for a total of 3 weeks), to a total dose
(TD) of 30 Gy. A specially designed cerrobend shield was
used to encase the bodies of the mice, exposing only the
flank tumors, as described earlier [53, 58, 103]. Mockirradiated animals were treated identically, except they
were not subjected to radiation.

All mouse tissue microarray construction procedures
and automated immunohistochemical (IHC) staining
were performed in the Stephenson Cancer Center Cancer Tissue pathology core, as described earlier [41,
42]. For the present study, slides were immunostained
for COX2 (Abgent), CXCR4 (Spring Bioscience)
GRB10, MEGF10 and MMP9 (Santa Cruz), BAPX1,
KI-67 (Thermo Scientific), β-catenin, and PHPT1 (Cell
Signaling Technology). Appropriate tissue morphologic/
pathologic (H&E) controls and negative controls without
primary antibody were examined in parallel. The slides
were micro-digitally scanned using an Aperio Scanscope
(Aperio Technologies, Inc., Buffalo Grove, IL) slide
scanner. Virtual slides were constructed with digital
histology. This allows assembly of tissue collections in
TMA with variable magnifications. The digital images
were then analyzed using Aperio Integrated Spectrum
software, the web-based database system. Group-wise
comparisons were made using ANOVA with Tukey’s
post-hoc correction. A P value of < 0.05 was considered
statistically significant.

Polarity gradient polyphenol(s) extraction and
cell treatments
Cells were plated in 100-mm tissue culture plates
containing 6 ml of complete growth medium and were
allowed to grow up to 70-80% confluence. Polaritybased extractions of seaweed polyphenol fractions were
performed as described in our earlier studies [40]. We
selectively examined ethyl acetate fraction of Hormophysa
triquerta (HT-EA). In all in vitro investigations, cells
were treated with 100 µg/ml of polyphenol, while a
corroborated daily (i.v.) dose of 10 mg/Kg concentration
was used for in vivo studies.

Plasmid
preparation
transfection

DNA/sHRNA

The plasmid constructs of COX-2 (untaggedHuman prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2, Origene)
and CXCR4 (untagged-Human chemokine [C-X-C
motif] receptor 4, Origene) were amplified and purified
following the manufacturer’s protocol. Plasmid DNA
transfections were carried out using TurboFectin 8.0
reagent (Origene) as described earlier [105]. COX2
silencing of was achieved with MISSION COX-2 shRNA
(CCG GCT ATC ACT TCA AAC TGA AAT TCT CGA
GAA TTT CAG TTT GAA GTG ATA GTT TTT G), while
CXCR4 silencing was achieved using MISSION CXCR4
shRNA (CCG GGC GTG TAG TGA ATC ACG TAA ACT
CGA GTT TAC GTG ATT CAC TAC ACG CTT TTT G;
Sigma-Aldrich). Transfected cells were either mock-IR,
exposed to IR, or treated with HT-EA, and were utilized
for determining tumor cell invasion and migration.

Quantitative TIM transcriptome profiling
Total RNA extraction and real-time QPCR profiling
were performed as described earlier [54], using a custommade TIM transcriptome profiler (Realtimeprimers.com,
Elkins Park, PA). We started with this highly selective
QPCR profiler instead of an all-encompassing gene array
because the selected genes entail a well-characterized
profile governing TIM. This selection facilitates
interpretation of data, simplifying data acquisition and
analysis, and avoids genes that are not functionally
characterized. The ΔΔct values were calculated by
normalizing the gene expression levels to the expression
of the housekeeping genes. The normalized data were then
compared between groups, and the relative expression
level of each gene was expressed as fold change. When
comparing each gene’s signal intensity between groups,
we used a ≥ 2 fold increase or decrease to represent
“stringent” criteria for upregulation or downregulation,
and an increase/decrease of < 2 fold to represent “less
stringent” criteria. Classifying gene regulation criteria in
this way can provide an index of reliability of the gene
expression data [104].

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

and

Real-time wound-healing assay
ORIS™ cell migration assay (Platypus
Technologies, Madison, WI) was used to examine
the alterations in PC cell migration in response to the
mock-irradiation, IR exposure with/without HT-EA
treatment, IR exposure with/without COX-2/CXCR4
silencing, and forced expression of COX-2/CXCR4,
with/without HT-EA treatment following manufacturer’s
5729

Oncotarget

protocol. Induced or associated modification in cellular
proliferation was arrested using Mitomycin C (10 μg/ml,
Sigma). Cells were stained with CellTracker™ CMFDA
(5-chloromethylfluorescein diacetate), Thermo Fisher
Scientific, Waltham. MA), a Green-fluorescent dye,
and were imaged in real-time at 0h and at 24 h using
an Operetta high-content confocal immunofluorescence
imager (Perkin Elmer, Inc., Waltham, MA).

NA and SA drafted the manuscript, and KK, ST, and
TSH helped in revising it critically.
All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Editorial note
This paper has been accepted based in part on peerreview conducted by another journal and the authors’
response and revisions as well as expedited peer-review
in Oncotarget.

Matrigel invasion assay
For invasion assays, 1× 105 cells were plated in the
top chamber with a Matrigel-coated membrane (24-well
insert; pore size, 8 μm; BD Biosciences). Cells were plated
in medium without serum, and medium supplemented
with serum was used as a chemoattractant in the lower
chamber. The cells were incubated for 24 h. Cells that did
not migrate or invade through the pores were removed by
a cotton swab. Cells on the lower surface of the membrane
were fixed with 3:1 methanol: acetic acid and stained
using 0.1% Crystal violet to visualize the invaded cells.

REFERENCES
1.	 Society AC. Cancer Facts & Figures 2015. . Atlanta:
American Cancer Society. 2016; 1 (1):1-56.
2.	 Ries LAG HD, Krapcho M, Mariotto A, Miller BA, Feuer
EJ, Clegg L, Eisner MP, Horner MJ, Howlader N, Hayat M,
Hankey BF, Edwards BK SEER Cancer Statistics Review,
1975-2003, National Cancer Institute. Bethesda, MD, http://
seer.cancer.gov/csr/1975_2003/, based on November 2005
SEER data submission. posted to the SEER web site. 2006;
( ): .
3.	 Callery MP, Chang KJ, Fishman EK, Talamonti MS,
William Traverso L and Linehan DC. Pretreatment
assessment of resectable and borderline resectable
pancreatic cancer: expert consensus statement. Annals of
surgical oncology. 2009; 16(7):1727-1733.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors acknowledge the University of
Oklahoma SCC-Cancer Tissue Pathology Core for all
TMA and IHC services and the SCC-Cancer Functional
Genomics Core for high-content confocal imaging
services. The authors also acknowledge the OUHSC
Office of the Vice President for Research, Staff Editor
(Ms. Kathy Kyler) for help in critically reviewing this
manuscript.

4.	

5.	 Goodman KA and Hajj C. Role of radiation therapy in the
management of pancreatic cancer. J Surg Oncol. 2013;
107(1):86-96.
6.	 Roldan GE, Gunderson LL, Nagorney DM, Martin JK,
Ilstrup DM, Holbrook MA, Kvols LK and McIlrath DC.
External beam versus intraoperative and external beam
irradiation for locally advanced pancreatic cancer. Cancer.
1988; 61(6):1110-1116.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
All authors declare that they do not have any
conflicts of interest.

7.	 Oettle H, Post S, Neuhaus P, Gellert K, Langrehr J,
Ridwelski K, Schramm H, Fahlke J, Zuelke C, Burkart C,
Gutberlet K, Kettner E, Schmalenberg H, Weigang-Koehler
K, Bechstein WO, Niedergethmann M, et al. Adjuvant
chemotherapy with gemcitabine vs observation in patients
undergoing curative-intent resection of pancreatic cancer: a
randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2007; 297(3):267-277.

GRANT SUPPORT
The authors are supported by the research funding
from the OUHSC Department of Radiation Oncology
Research Development Funds and Stephenson Cancer
Center - Experimental Therapeutics Program.

8.	 Asiyanbola B, Gleisner A, Herman JM, Choti MA,
Wolfgang CL, Swartz M, Edil BH, Schulick RD, Cameron
JL and Pawlik TM. Determining pattern of recurrence
following pancreaticoduodenectomy and adjuvant
5-flurouracil-based chemoradiation therapy: effect of
number of metastatic lymph nodes and lymph node ratio. J
Gastrointest Surg. 2009; 13(4):752-759.

Author contributions
NA, KK, ST, and TSH contributed to the conception
and design of the experiments.
SA, SR, DS and NA performed the experiments and
contributed to the acquisition of the data.
NA, SA, and SR contributed to data analysis and
interpretation.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Hazard L. The role of radiation therapy in pancreas cancer.
Gastrointestinal cancer research. 2009; 3(1):20-28.

9.	 Kim J, Yu W, Kovalski K and Ossowski L. Requirement
for specific proteases in cancer cell intravasation as revealed
by a novel semiquantitative PCR-based assay. Cell. 1998;
5730

Oncotarget

94(3):353-362.

Monden M. Overexpression of cyclooxygenase-2 in
carcinoma of the pancreas. Clinical cancer research. 1999;
5(8):2018-2024.

10.	 Hanahan D and Weinberg RA. The hallmarks of cancer.
Cell. 2000; 100(1):57-70.

23.	 Gurib-Fakim A. Medicinal plants: traditions of yesterday
and drugs of tomorrow. Molecular aspects of medicine.
2006; 27(1):1-93.

11.	 Hanahan D, Bergers G and Bergsland E. Less is more,
regularly: metronomic dosing of cytotoxic drugs can
target tumor angiogenesis in mice. The Journal of clinical
investigation. 2000; 105(8):1045-1047.

24.	 M. CG and R. BM. Drug discovery and development at the
National Cancer Institute: the role of natural products of
plant origin. . Medicinal Plant Resources of the Tropical
Forest, M J Balick, E Elisabetsky, and S A Laird, Eds,.
1996:101-136.

12.	 Varner JA and Cheresh DA. Integrins and cancer. Current
opinion in cell biology. 1996; 8(5):724-730.
13.	 Skubitz AP. Adhesion molecules. Cancer treatment and
research. 2002; 107:305-329.

25.	 Mans DR, da Rocha AB and Schwartsmann G. Anti-cancer
drug discovery and development in Brazil: targeted plant
collection as a rational strategy to acquire candidate anticancer compounds. The oncologist. 2000; 5(3):185-198.

14.	 Maurer CA, Friess H, Kretschmann B, Wildi S, Muller C,
Graber H, Schilling M and Buchler MW. Over-expression
of ICAM-1, VCAM-1 and ELAM-1 might influence tumor
progression in colorectal cancer. International journal of
cancer Journal international du cancer. 1998; 79(1):76-81.

26.	 Yoshie Y, W. W, P. H and T. S. Compositional difference
of phenolic compounds between two seaweeds, Halimeda
spp. Journal of Tokyo University Fisheries. 2002; 88( ):2124.

15.	 Fogar P, Basso D, Pasquali C, De Paoli M, Sperti C,
Roveroni G, Pedrazzoli S and Plebani M. Neural cell
adhesion molecule (N-CAM) in gastrointestinal neoplasias.
Anticancer research. 1997; 17(2B):1227-1230.

27.	 Furusawa E and Furusawa S. Anticancer activity of a
natural product, viva-natural, extracted from Undaria
pinnantifida on intraperitoneally implanted Lewis lung
carcinoma. Oncology. 1985; 42(6):364-369.

16.	 Tempia-Caliera AA, Horvath LZ, Zimmermann A,
Tihanyi TT, Korc M, Friess H and Buchler MW. Adhesion
molecules in human pancreatic cancer. Journal of surgical
oncology. 2002; 79(2):93-100.

28.	 Yuan YV, Carrington MF and Walsh NA. Extracts from
dulse (Palmaria palmata) are effective antioxidants and
inhibitors of cell proliferation in vitro. Food and chemical
toxicology. 2005; 43(7):1073-1081.

17.	 Matsuyama Y, Takao S and Aikou T. Comparison of matrix
metalloproteinase expression between primary tumors with
or without liver metastasis in pancreatic and colorectal
carcinomas. Journal of surgical oncology. 2002; 80(2):105110.

29.	 Makita H, Tanaka T, Fujitsuka H, Tatematsu N, Satoh K,
Hara A and Mori H. Chemoprevention of 4-nitroquinoline
1-oxide-induced rat oral carcinogenesis by the dietary
flavonoids chalcone, 2-hydroxychalcone, and quercetin.
Cancer research. 1996; 56(21):4904-4909.

18.	 Gress TM, Muller-Pillasch F, Lerch MM, Friess H,
Buchler M and Adler G. Expression and in-situ localization
of genes coding for extracellular matrix proteins and
extracellular matrix degrading proteases in pancreatic
cancer. International journal of cancer Journal international
du cancer. 1995; 62(4):407-413.

30.	 Coombe DR, Parish CR, Ramshaw IA and Snowden JM.
Analysis of the inhibition of tumour metastasis by sulphated
polysaccharides. International journal of cancer Journal
international du cancer. 1987; 39(1):82-88.

19.	 Billadeau DD, Chatterjee S, Bramati P, Sreekumar R, Shah
V, Hedin K and Urrutia R. Characterization of the CXCR4
signaling in pancreatic cancer cells. International journal of
gastrointestinal cancer. 2006; 37(4):110-119.

31.	 Fujita Y, Yamane T, Tanaka M, Kuwata K, Okuzumi J,
Takahashi T, Fujiki H and Okuda T. Inhibitory effect of
(-)-epigallocatechin gallate on carcinogenesis with N-ethylN’-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine in mouse duodenum. Japanese
journal of cancer research. 1989; 80(6):503-505.

20.	 Merati K, said Siadaty M, Andea A, Sarkar F, Ben-Josef
E, Mohammad R, Philip P, Shields AF, Vaitkevicius V,
Grignon DJ and Adsay NV. Expression of inflammatory
modulator COX-2 in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma
and its relationship to pathologic and clinical parameters.
American journal of clinical oncology. 2001; 24(5):447452.

32.	 Tanaka T, Kojima T, Kawamori T, Wang A, Suzui M,
Okamoto K and Mori H. Inhibition of 4-nitroquinoline-1oxide-induced rat tongue carcinogenesis by the naturally
occurring plant phenolics caffeic, ellagic, chlorogenic and
ferulic acids. Carcinogenesis. 1993; 14(7):1321-1325.
33.	 Tanaka T. Cancer chemoprevention by natural-products
(review). Oncology reports. 1994; 1(6):1139-1155.

21.	 Tucker ON, Dannenberg AJ, Yang EK, Zhang F, Teng L,
Daly JM, Soslow RA, Masferrer JL, Woerner BM, Koki
AT and Fahey TJ, 3rd. Cyclooxygenase-2 expression is
up-regulated in human pancreatic cancer. Cancer research.
1999; 59(5):987-990.

34.	 Zhang RL, Luo WD, Bi TN and Zhou SK. Evaluation
of antioxidant and immunity-enhancing activities of
Sargassum pallidum aqueous extract in gastric cancer rats.
Molecules. 2012; 17(7):8419-8429.

22.	 Okami J, Yamamoto H, Fujiwara Y, Tsujie M, Kondo
M, Noura S, Oshima S, Nagano H, Dono K, Umeshita
K, Ishikawa O, Sakon M, Matsuura N, Nakamori S and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

35.	 Yang JI, Yeh CC, Lee JC, Yi SC, Huang HW, Tseng CN
and Chang HW. Aqueous extracts of the edible Gracilaria
5731

Oncotarget

tenuistipitata are protective against H(2)O(2)-induced DNA
damage, growth inhibition, and cell cycle arrest. Molecules.
2012; 17(6):7241-7254.

in human neuroblastoma cells. Cancer Biol Ther. 2008;
7(4):569-576.
49.	 Aravindan N, Madhusoodhanan R, Natarajan M and
Herman TS. Alteration of apoptotic signaling molecules as
a function of time after radiation in human neuroblastoma
cells. Mol Cell Biochem. 2008; 310(1-2):167-179.

36.	 Liu F, Wang J, Chang AK, Liu B, Yang L, Li Q, Wang
P and Zou X. Fucoidan extract derived from Undaria
pinnatifida inhibits angiogenesis by human umbilical vein
endothelial cells. Phytomedicine. 2012; 19(8-9):797-803.

50.	 Aravindan N, Rakhesh M, Ambarish J and Herman T.
Radio-adaptation mediated by persistent activation of
NFκB through positive feed back (NFκB-TNFα-NFκB)
cycle in neuroblastoma cells. AACR Annual Meeting.
2007:AN3921.

37.	 Zhang Z, Teruya K, Eto H and Shirahata S. Fucoidan
extract induces apoptosis in MCF-7 cells via a mechanism
involving the ROS-dependent JNK activation and
mitochondria-mediated pathways. PloS one. 2011;
6(11):e27441.

51.	 Aravindan N, Thomas CR, Jr., Aravindan S, Mohan AS,
Veeraraghavan J and Natarajan M. Irreversible EGFR
Inhibitor EKB-569 targets low-LET gamma-radiationtriggered rel orchestration and potentiates cell death in
squamous cell carcinoma. PloS one. 2011; 6(12):e29705.

38.	 Kim SK and Karagozlu MZ. Marine algae: natural product
source for gastrointestinal cancer treatment. Advances in
food and nutrition research. 2011; 64:225-233.
39.	 Jayasooriya RG, Choi YH, Moon SK, Kim WJ and
Kim GY. Methanol extract of Hydroclathrus clathratus
suppresses matrix metalloproteinase-9 in T24 bladder
carcinoma cells by suppressing the NF-kappaB and MAPK
pathways. Oncology reports. 2012; 27(2):541-546.

52.	Aravindan N, Veeraraghavan J, Madhusoodhanan R,
Herman TS and Natarajan M. Curcumin regulates lowlinear energy transfer gamma-radiation-induced NFkappaBdependent telomerase activity in human neuroblastoma
cells. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2011; 79(4):1206-1215.

40.	Aravindan S, Delma CR, Thirugnanasambandan SS,
Herman TS and Aravindan N. Anti-pancreatic cancer
deliverables from sea: first-hand evidence on the efficacy,
molecular targets and mode of action for multifarious
polyphenols from five different brown-algae. PLoS One.
2013; 8(4):e61977.

53.	 Aravindan S, Natarajan M, Awasthi V, Herman TS and
Aravindan N. Novel synthetic monoketone transmute
radiation-triggered NFkappaB-dependent TNFalpha crosssignaling feedback maintained NFkappaB and favors
neuroblastoma regression. PLoS One. 2013; 8(8):e72464.

41.	 Aravindan S, Ramraj SK, Somasundaram ST and Aravindan
N. Novel adjuvants from seaweed impede autophagy
signaling in therapy-resistant residual pancreatic cancer. J
Biomed Sci. 2015; 22:28.

54.	 Aravindan S, Natarajan M, Herman TS and Aravindan N.
Radiation-induced TNFalpha cross signaling-dependent
nuclear import of NFkappaB favors metastasis in
neuroblastoma. Clinical & experimental metastasis. 2013;
30(6):807-817.

42.	 Aravindan S, Ramraj SK, Somasundaram ST, Herman
TS and Aravindan N. Polyphenols from marine brown
algae target radiotherapy-coordinated EMT and stemnessmaintenance in residual pancreatic cancer. Stem cell
research & therapy. 2015; 6:182.

55.	 Aravindan S, Natarajan M, Herman TS, Awasthi V and
Aravindan N. Molecular basis of ‘hypoxic’ breast cancer
cell radio-sensitization: phytochemicals converge on
radiation induced Rel signaling. Radiat Oncol. 2013; 8:46.

43.	 Fidler IJ. Critical determinants of metastasis. Semin Cancer
Biol. 2002; 12(2):89-96.

56.	 Madhusoodhanan R, Natarajan M, Singh JV, Jamgade
A, Awasthi V, Anant S, Herman TS and Aravindan N.
Effect of black raspberry extract in inhibiting NFkappa B
dependent radioprotection in human breast cancer cells.
Nutrition and cancer. 2010; 62(1):93-104.

44.	 Nguyen DX, Bos PD and Massague J. Metastasis: from
dissemination to organ-specific colonization. Nat Rev
Cancer. 2009; 9(4):274-284.

57.	Madhusoodhanan R, Natarajan M, Veeraraghavan J,
Herman TS and Aravindan N. NFkappaB activity and
transcriptional responses in human breast adenocarcinoma
cells after single and fractionated irradiation. Cancer
biology & therapy. 2009; 8(9):765-773.

45.	 Stathis A and Moore MJ. Advanced pancreatic carcinoma:
current treatment and future challenges. Nature reviews
Clinical oncology. 2010; 7(3):163-172.
46.	 Aravindan N, Herman TS and . NM. Mechanism of
hyperthermia-induced radiosensitization of human breast
cancer cells. 53rd Annual meeting, Radiation Research
Society, November 4-9, Philadelphia, PA. 2006.

58.	 Veeraraghavan J, Natarajan M, Aravindan S, Herman TS
and Aravindan N. Radiation-triggered tumor necrosis factor
(TNF) alpha-NFkappaB cross-signaling favors survival
advantage in human neuroblastoma cells. The Journal of
biological chemistry. 2011; 286(24):21588-21600.

47.	 Aravindan N, Aravindan S, Herman TS and Natarajan M.
EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor pelitinib regulates radiationinduced p65-dependent telomerase activation in squamous
cell carcinoma. Radiat Res. 2013; 179(3):304-312.

59.	 Zlotnik A. Chemokines in neoplastic progression. Seminars
in cancer biology. 2004; 14(3):181-185.

48.	 Aravindan N, Madhusoodhanan R, Ahmad S, Johnson D
and Herman TS. Curcumin inhibits NFkappaB mediated
radioprotection and modulate apoptosis related genes
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

60.	 Balkwill F. The significance of cancer cell expression of the
chemokine receptor CXCR4. Seminars in cancer biology.
5732

Oncotarget

2004; 14(3):171-179.

Prostaglandin E2 increases growth and motility of colorectal
carcinoma cells. The Journal of biological chemistry. 2001;
276(21):18075-18081.

61.	 Kucia M, Jankowski K, Reca R, Wysoczynski M, Bandura
L, Allendorf DJ, Zhang J, Ratajczak J and Ratajczak MZ.
CXCR4-SDF-1 signalling, locomotion, chemotaxis and
adhesion. Journal of molecular histology. 2004; 35(3):233245.

75.	 Tsujii M, Kawano S and DuBois RN. Cyclooxygenase-2
expression in human colon cancer cells increases metastatic
potential. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America. 1997; 94(7):3336-3340.

62.	 Muller A, Homey B, Soto H, Ge N, Catron D, Buchanan
ME, McClanahan T, Murphy E, Yuan W, Wagner SN,
Barrera JL, Mohar A, Verastegui E and Zlotnik A.
Involvement of chemokine receptors in breast cancer
metastasis. Nature. 2001; 410(6824):50-56.

76.	Tsujii M and DuBois RN. Alterations in cellular
adhesion and apoptosis in epithelial cells overexpressing
prostaglandin endoperoxide synthase 2. Cell. 1995;
83(3):493-501.

63.	 Wang Z, Ma Q, Li P, Sha H, Li X and Xu J. Aberrant
expression of CXCR4 and beta-catenin in pancreatic cancer.
Anticancer research. 2013; 33(9):4103-4110.

77.	 Tsujii M, Kawano S, Tsuji S, Sawaoka H, Hori M and
DuBois RN. Cyclooxygenase regulates angiogenesis
induced by colon cancer cells. Cell. 1998; 93(5):705-716.

64.	 Liang Z, Yoon Y, Votaw J, Goodman MM, Williams L
and Shim H. Silencing of CXCR4 blocks breast cancer
metastasis. Cancer research. 2005; 65(3):967-971.

78.	 Clevers H. Wnt/beta-catenin signaling in development and
disease. Cell. 2006; 127(3):469-480.
79.	 Yang F, Zeng Q, Yu G, Li S and Wang CY. Wnt/betacatenin signaling inhibits death receptor-mediated apoptosis
and promotes invasive growth of HNSCC. Cellular
signalling. 2006; 18(5):679-687.

65.	 Murata H, Kawano S, Tsuji S, Tsuji M, Sawaoka H,
Kimura Y, Shiozaki H and Hori M. Cyclooxygenase-2
overexpression enhances lymphatic invasion and metastasis
in human gastric carcinoma. The American journal of
gastroenterology. 1999; 94(2):451-455.

80.	 White BD, Chien AJ and Dawson DW. Dysregulation of
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling in gastrointestinal cancers.
Gastroenterology. 2012; 142(2):219-232.

66.	 Gupta S, Srivastava M, Ahmad N, Bostwick DG and
Mukhtar H. Over-expression of cyclooxygenase-2 in human
prostate adenocarcinoma. The Prostate. 2000; 42(1):73-78.

81.	 Saadeddin A, Babaei-Jadidi R, Spencer-Dene B and Nateri
AS. The links between transcription, beta-catenin/JNK
signaling, and carcinogenesis. Molecular cancer research.
2009; 7(8):1189-1196.

67.	 Wolff H, Saukkonen K, Anttila S, Karjalainen A, Vainio H
and Ristimaki A. Expression of cyclooxygenase-2 in human
lung carcinoma. Cancer research. 1998; 58(22):4997-5001.

82.	 Pujal J, Capella G and Real FX. The Wnt pathway is active
in a small subset of pancreas cancer cell lines. Biochimica
et biophysica acta. 2006; 1762(1):73-79.

68.	 Mohammed SI, Knapp DW, Bostwick DG, Foster RS, Khan
KN, Masferrer JL, Woerner BM, Snyder PW and Koki
AT. Expression of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) in human
invasive transitional cell carcinoma (TCC) of the urinary
bladder. Cancer research. 1999; 59(22):5647-5650.

83.	 Yu X, Wang Y, DeGraff DJ, Wills ML and Matusik
RJ. Wnt/beta-catenin activation promotes prostate
tumor progression in a mouse model. Oncogene. 2011;
30(16):1868-1879.

69.	 Hwang D, Scollard D, Byrne J and Levine E. Expression of
cyclooxygenase-1 and cyclooxygenase-2 in human breast
cancer. Journal of the National Cancer Institute. 1998;
90(6):455-460.

84.	 Hsu HP, Shan YS, Jin YT, Lai MD and Lin PW. Loss
of E-cadherin and beta-catenin is correlated with poor
prognosis of ampullary neoplasms. Journal of surgical
oncology. 2010; 101(5):356-362.

70.	 Smith WL, DeWitt DL and Garavito RM. Cyclooxygenases:
structural, cellular, and molecular biology. Annual review
of biochemistry. 2000; 69:145-182.

85.	 Lee HS, Park MH, Yang SJ, Park KC, Kim NS, Kim YS,
Kim DI, Yoo HS, Choi EJ and Yeom YI. Novel candidate
targets of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling in hepatoma cells.
Life sciences. 2007; 80(7):690-698.

71.	 Pugh S and Thomas GA. Patients with adenomatous
polyps and carcinomas have increased colonic mucosal
prostaglandin E2. Gut. 1994; 35(5):675-678.

86.	 Wang L, Cheng H, Liu Y, Yu W, Zhang G, Chen B, Yu
Z and Hu S. Prognostic value of nuclear beta-catenin
overexpression at invasive front in colorectal cancer for
synchronous liver metastasis. Annals of surgical oncology.
2011; 18(6):1553-1559.

72.	 Rolland PH, Martin PM, Jacquemier J, Rolland AM and
Toga M. Prostaglandin in human breast cancer: Evidence
suggesting that an elevated prostaglandin production is a
marker of high metastatic potential for neoplastic cells.
Journal of the National Cancer Institute. 1980; 64(5):10611070.

87.	 Nishimura R, Osako T, Nishiyama Y, Tashima R, Nakano
M, Fujisue M, Toyozumi Y and Arima N. Prognostic
significance of Ki-67 index value at the primary breast
tumor in recurrent breast cancer. Molecular and clinical
oncology. 2014; 2(6):1062-1068.

73.	 Uefuji K, Ichikura T and Mochizuki H. Cyclooxygenase-2
expression is related to prostaglandin biosynthesis and
angiogenesis in human gastric cancer. Clinical cancer
research. 2000; 6(1):135-138.

88.	 Gong P, Wang Y, Liu G, Zhang J and Wang Z. New insight
into Ki67 expression at the invasive front in breast cancer.

74.	 Sheng H, Shao J, Washington MK and DuBois RN.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5733

Oncotarget

PLoS One. 2013; 8(1):e54912.

Molecular and cellular biochemistry. 2007; 302(1-2):51-58.

89.	 Kebache S, Ash J, Annis MG, Hagan J, Huber M, Hassard
J, Stewart CL, Whiteway M and Nantel A. Grb10 and
active Raf-1 kinase promote Bad-dependent cell survival.
The Journal of biological chemistry. 2007; 282(30):2187321883.

101.	Aravindan N, Cata JP, Dougherty PM and Shaw AD. Effect
of fenoldopam on ischemia/reperfusion-induced apoptosis.
Renal failure. 2006; 28(4):337-344.
102.	Aravindan N, Cata JP, Hoffman L, Dougherty PM,
Riedel BJ, Price KJ and Shaw AD. Effects of isoflurane,
pentobarbital, and urethane on apoptosis and apoptotic
signal transduction in rat kidney. Acta anaesthesiologica
Scandinavica. 2006; 50(10):1229-1237.

90.	 Liu F and Roth RA. Grb-IR: a SH2-domain-containing
protein that binds to the insulin receptor and inhibits its
function. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America. 1995; 92(22):1028710291.

103.	Aravindan S, Natarajan M, Ramraj SK, Pandian V, Khan
FH, Herman TS and Aravindan N. Abscopal effect of lowLET gamma-radiation mediated through Rel protein signal
transduction in a mouse model of nontargeted radiation
response. Cancer gene therapy. 2014; 21(2):54-59.

91.	 O’Neill TJ, Rose DW, Pillay TS, Hotta K, Olefsky JM and
Gustafson TA. Interaction of a GRB-IR splice variant (a
human GRB10 homolog) with the insulin and insulin-like
growth factor I receptors. Evidence for a role in mitogenic
signaling. The Journal of biological chemistry. 1996;
271(37):22506-22513.

104.	Veeraraghavan J, Natarajan M, Herman TS and Aravindan
N. Low-dose gamma-radiation-induced oxidative stress
response in mouse brain and gut: regulation by NFkappaBMnSOD cross-signaling. Mutat Res. 2011; 718(1-2):44-55.

92.	 Stein EG, Gustafson TA and Hubbard SR. The BPS domain
of Grb10 inhibits the catalytic activity of the insulin and
IGF1 receptors. FEBS letters. 2001; 493(2-3):106-111.

105.	Khan FH, Pandian V, Ramraj SK, Aravindan S, Natarajan
M, Azadi S, Herman TS and Aravindan N. RD3 loss
dictates high-risk aggressive neuroblastoma and poor
clinical outcomes. Oncotarget. 2015; 6:36522-36534. doi:
10.18632/oncotarget.5204.

93.	 Wick KR, Werner ED, Langlais P, Ramos FJ, Dong LQ,
Shoelson SE and Liu F. Grb10 inhibits insulin-stimulated
insulin receptor substrate (IRS)-phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase/Akt signaling pathway by disrupting the
association of IRS-1/IRS-2 with the insulin receptor. The
Journal of biological chemistry. 2003; 278(10):8460-8467.
94.	 Morrione A. Grb10 adapter protein as regulator of insulinlike growth factor receptor signaling. Journal of cellular
physiology. 2003; 197(3):307-311.
95.	 Morrione A, Valentinis B, Resnicoff M, Xu S and Baserga
R. The role of mGrb10alpha in insulin-like growth factor
I-mediated growth. The Journal of biological chemistry.
1997; 272(42):26382-26387.
96.	 Langlais P, Dong LQ, Ramos FJ, Hu D, Li Y, Quon MJ
and Liu F. Negative regulation of insulin-stimulated
mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling by Grb10. Mol
Endocrinol. 2004; 18(2):350-358.
97.	 Veeraraghavan J, Natarajan M, Lagisetty P, Awasthi
V, Herman TS and Aravindan N. Impact of curcumin,
raspberry extract, and neem leaf extract on rel proteinregulated cell death/radiosensitization in pancreatic cancer
cells. Pancreas. 2011; 40(7):1107-1119.
98.	 Aravindan N, Natarajan M and Shaw AD. Fenoldopam
inhibits nuclear translocation of nuclear factor kappa B in
a rat model of surgical ischemic acute renal failure. Journal
of cardiothoracic and vascular anesthesia. 2006; 20(2):179186.
99.	 Aravindan N, Aravindan S, Riedel BJ, Weng HR and Shaw
AD. Furosemide prevents apoptosis and associated gene
expression in a rat model of surgical ischemic acute renal
failure. Renal failure. 2007; 29(4):399-407.
100.	Aravindan N, Aravindan S, Shanmugasundaram K and
Shaw AD. Periods of systemic partial hypoxia induces
apoptosis and inflammation in rat skeletal muscle.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5734

Oncotarget

