Published OnlineFirst December 22, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-3368

Meeting Report

Twenty-First Annual Pezcoller Symposium: Unconventional
Therapeutic Targets in Cancer

Cancer
Research

Enrico Mihich1, Pier Paolo Pandolfi2, and David Livingston1
Introduction
The 21st Pezcoller Symposium, entitled “Unconventional
Therapeutic Targets in Cancer,” was held in Trento, Italy,
on June 11–13, 2009. The focus of the Symposium was on
identifying nontraditional targets for anticancer drug action
and using new concepts for drug development.

Report
Sean Morrison (University of Michigan Center for Stem
Cell Biology, Ann Arbor, MI) indicated that tumorigenic potential is a common characteristic of melanoma cells rather
than a property of a rare population of stem cells. A fundamental question is whether cells with tumorigenic potential
are common as would be expected under a clonal evolution
model or rare as suggested under a stem cell model. Studies
on cancers, including melanoma, have indicated that only
rare human cancer cells (0.1–0.0001%) have tumorigenic potential when transplanted into nonobese diabetic/severe
combined immunodeficient (NOD/SCID) mice. Using more
immunocompromised NOD/SCID IL2Rgnull mice increased
the detection of tumorigenic melanoma cells by several orders of magnitude. In limiting dilution assays, approximately
25% of unselected melanoma cells from 12 different patients
formed tumors. In single-cell transplants, an average of 27%
of unselected melanoma cells from four different patients
formed tumors. High frequencies of tumorigenic cells can
be detected in some cancers even in NOD/SCID or in fully
immunocompetent mice. Morrison has been unable to detect
any evidence for hierarchical organization or intrinsic differences in tumorigenicity among melanoma cells. Despite examining more than 50 cell surface markers (including
markers previously suggested to mark “melanoma stem
cells”), he was unable to distinguish tumorigenic and nontumorigenic subpopulations of melanoma cells; for example,
CD133-positive and CD133-negative cells both readily formed
tumors. In samples from three patients with glioblastoma,
tumorigeneic cells were also common. Overall, the results
suggest that some cancers follow a stem cell model, whereas
many others do not.
Bruce Spiegelman (Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
MA) discussed the mechanisms underlying the defects in oxAuthors' Affiliations: 1 Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and 2 Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
Corresponding Author: Enrico Mihich, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 44
Binney Street, Boston, MA 02115. Phone: 617-582-7316; Fax: 617-5828550; E-mail: Enrico_mihich@dfci.harvard.edu.
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-3368
©2010 American Association for Cancer Research.

14

idative metabolism in tumors. His laboratory has investigated how brown fat is generated. A large zinc-finger
protein, PRDM16, is both necessary and sufficient to induce
brown fat from white fat precursor cells or myoblasts.
PRDM16 was isolated and found to exist in complex with
several transcription factors, including CCAAT/enhancer
binding protein-β (C/EBP-β) and p53. The PRDM16/C/
EBP-β complex is responsible for the muscle/brown fat
switch. They also found that PRDM16 binds to p53 and suppresses its actions. This is particularly interesting given
that PRDM16 seems to be overexpressed via chromosomal
translocation in certain human leukemias.
William Kaelin (Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
MA) identified 2-oxoglutarate-dependent dioxygenases
(EglN1) as potential therapeutic targets in cancer. In the
presence of oxygen, the α subunit of the transcription factor
hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) is hydroxylated on one (or
both) of two prolyl residues by the EglN1. This creates a binding site for VHL, which then targets HIFα for polyubiquitination and proteasomal degradation. When oxygen levels are
low, or the VHL protein is crippled, HIFα accumulates, binds
to HIFβ, and transcriptionally activates genes that promote
survival in a low-oxygen environment. Compounds that
activate EglN1 are being explored as anticancer agents. Inhibition of EglN2 leads to loss of cyclin D1 in a HIF-independent
manner, decreased proliferation, and impaired tumorigenesis
in vivo; impaired proliferation can be rescued by exogenous
cyclin D1 or by loss of pRB. RBP2, a pRB-binding protein, is a
2-oxoglutarate–dependent dioxygenase that serves as a histone demethylase. Inhibition of RBP2 seems to lead to impaired proliferation, promotion of differentiation, and loss
of tumorigenesis.
Vishva Dixit (Genentech, San Francisco, CA) discussed
deubiquitinases as possible targets for cancer chemotherapy.
The ubiquitin ligase COP1, together with its binding partner,
DET1, ubiquitinates proto-oncogene ETV1, resulting in ETV1
proteasomal degradation. Truncation of ETV1 in the
TMPRSS2:ETV1 translocation product, found commonly in
prostate cancer, eliminates its COP1 binding motif and enhances its stability. COP1 deficiency causes prostate intraepithelial neoplasia in vivo. In human prostate cancer, loss of
COP1 expression correlated with elevated ETV1 protein.
Thus, COP1 is potentially a tumor suppressor. In a separate
unscheduled brief presentation, Dr. Dixit discussed IAP inhibitors as cancer therapeutic agents. These molecules operate
by suppressing the antiapoptotic actions of the relevant IAP
and also trigger cell death by triggering tumor necrosis factor
signal transduction and suppressing NF-κB function.
Gregory Verdine (Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
MA) used specifically stapled peptides to affect targets that
would otherwise be difficult or impossible to attack directly.
As many as 80% to 90% of all potential targets are undruggable.

Cancer Res; 70(1) January 1, 2010

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2010 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst December 22, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-3368
Twenty-First Annual Pezcoller Report

The Verdine laboratory is developing “synthetic biologics,”
molecules that, like biologics, possess an ability to target
large, flat surfaces, but, like small molecules, are fully synthetic and can be readily modified. Hydrocarbon-stapled
α-helical peptides and dipeptides have been developed. Proteins involved in cell survival were among the first that were
targeted (e.g., Bcl2 and Bax), and therapeutic effects were observed in animals. Transcription factors can be targeted in
this way.
Nika Danial (Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA)
discussed the role of the apoptosis-regulating protein BAD
in glucose sensing. Glycolysis and mitochondrial oxidative
phosphorylation suppression is associated with metabolic
aberrations in both cancer cells and in diabetes. When phosphorylated, the BAD minimal death domain, BH3, engages
proteins involved in glucose phosphorylation, mitochondrial
respiration, and ATP production. When dephosphorylated,
the BH3 domain inactivates Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL. Hydrocarbonstapled phospho-BAD BH3 helices simulated the metabolic
function of BAD.
Steven Elmore (Abbott Laboratories, Abbott Park, IL) reported on the use of specific compounds to target Bcl-2 as
cancer treatment. Cancer cells gain a survival advantage by
changing the balance between proapoptotic and antiapoptotic factors. Antagonists of antiapoptotic Bcl-2 proteins have
been developed. ABT-263 is a small molecule that disrupts
Bcl-2 or Bcl-xL interactions with proapoptotic proteins (e.g.,
Bim), leading to rapid initiation of Bax mitochondrial membrane translocation, cytochrome c release, and Bax/Bak–
dependent apoptotic cell death. ABT-263 can kill cell lines
dependent on Bcl-2 and/or Bcl-x L for survival but is incompletely potent as a single agent in most solid tumors.
However, by lowering the apoptotic threshold, ABT-263
synergistically enhanced the killing effect of chemotherapeutic agents in several tumors clinically.
Wilhelm Krek (Institute of Cell Biology, Zurich, Switzerland) discussed microtubule-based VHL tumor suppressor
mechanisms. Regulation of microtubule cytoskeletal stability
by VHL binding is critical for its tumor-suppressing activity.
VHL suppresses spindle misorientation and promotes chromosomal stability by positively regulating Mad2 mitotic
checkpoint protein expression. Loss of Mad2 leads to aneuploidy, and aneuploidy arising after VHL inactivation can be
rescued by Mad2 reexpression. This newly identified function
of VHL is rendered defective in VHL mutants, linked, at least
in part, to microtubule-dependent activities. An association
between VHL inactivation, reduced Mad2 levels, and increased aneuploidy was also found in human renal cancer.
Quantitative live-cell imaging of microtubule growth was important when the plus-end marker end-binding protein 3green fluorescent protein was imaged in conjunction with
the spatiotemporal clustering of growth tracks to reveal the
effect of VHL function loss on microtubule dynamics.
Emilio Hirsch (University of Torino, Torino, Italy) studied
the inhibition of phosphoinositide 3-kinases (PI3K) in mice.
PI3Ks consist of heterodimers of a 110-kDa catalytic (p110)
subunit and a regulatory/adapter subunit. p110α, p110β,
p110γ, and p110δ share homology, assume certain nonredun-

www.aacrjournals.org

dant biological roles, and work both as kinases and as scaffolds supporting certain protein-protein interactions. Thus,
p110γ plays a crucial role in mounting inflammatory reactions but is also part of a complex controlling cardiac contractility. Deletion of the p110β gene causes embryonic
lethality, but the expression of catalytically inactive p110β
is compatible with life. Although the absence of p110γ blocks
proliferation of fibroblasts, inhibition of its kinase activity
does not affect their growth. The p110γ protein is required
for epidermal growth factor receptor endocytosis, independently of its kinase activity. Clathrin-coated vesicle production is severely impaired in the absence of p110γ, yet is
normal when p110γ catalytic function is ablated. Despite
its function as a scaffold protein, p110γ catalytic activity is
involved in signal transduction triggered by tyrosine kinase
and G-protein–coupled receptors. p110γ seems to be required for oncogenic Erbb2–mediated mammary cancer development because mice expressing catalytically inactive
p110γ revealed delayed mammary gland cancer development
when crossed with transgenic mice that overexpressed Erbb2
in the mammary gland.
David Sabatini (Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA) discussed the therapeutic potential
of targeting the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR)
pathway. One mTOR complex regulates growth through
S6K, and another regulates cell survival through Akt.
mTORC1 and mTORC2 define both the rapamycin-sensitive
and the rapamycin-insensitive branches of the mTOR pathway. Amino acids promote mTORC1 movement to a part of
the endomembrane system containing its activator Rheb.
Targeting Rheb-mTORC1 interactions may represent a new
therapeutic approach in tumors. Amino acids signal through
the conserved Rag family of small GTPases, which interact
directly with the Raptor component of mTORC1 depending
on the GTP-loaded status of the Rags. mTORC1 inhibition by
the mTOR-interacting protein, Deptor, hyperactivates PI3K
signaling in multiple myeloma. This interaction may represent another potential target of therapeutic intervention.
Tom Roberts (Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA)
discussed targeting of PI3K isoforms in cancer. The only class
of cancer-associated PI3Ks is 1A, consisting of three enzymes
(p110α, p110β, and p110δ) signaling downstream from receptor tyrosine kinases (RTK), G-protein–coupled receptors
(GPCR), and certain oncoproteins. Pathway activation in tumors is usually achieved by activating mutations in p110α
via inactivation or mutations of PTEN. p110α carries the majority of the PI3K signal in RTK signal transduction, while
p110β responds to GPCRs. p110α is essential for the growth of
tumors driven by mutations and/or oncogenic RTKs/Ras, whereas p110β is the major isoform in mediating PTEN-deficient
tumorigenesis. In a prostate tumor model with deletion of
PTEN, BEZ235, which inhibits both PI3Kα and PI3Kβ, blocked
prostate tumor progression. In an ovarian model with lost
PTEN and activated Kras, ablation of p110α, but not of
p110β, markedly inhibited tumor formation. p110 isoform–
specific inhibition holds promise as a therapeutic strategy.
Giulio Superti-Furga (Center for Molecular Medicine, Vienna,
Austria) uses molecular networks to discern future drug

Cancer Res; 70(1) January 1, 2010

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2010 American Association for Cancer
Research.

15

Published OnlineFirst December 22, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-3368
Mihich et al.

targets. Five drugs for chronic myeloid leukemia were investigated. Imatinib resistance necessitated the development
of second-generation (nilotinib and dasatinib) and thirdgeneration (bosutinib and INNO-406) inhibitors. The diseaserelevant protein target profiles of these drugs were identified
in patients' cells by chemical proteomics, which combines
drug-affinity chromatography with mass spectrometry. One
nonenzymatic target identified, NQO2, was inhibited by imatinib at nanomolar concentrations. The interaction profiles of the
five drugs display strong differences, overlapping only at the
ABL kinases, with dasatinib and bosutinib being particularly
promiscuous. In conclusion, (a) “modern” targeted drugs are
quite promiscuous; (b) generally, drug targets are likely part
of larger protein complexes; (c) binding partners may influence drug action on the complex and be affected; (d) the
complex components that become available after drug treatment may redistribute and affect other signaling pathways;
and (e) drugs are system perturbators and not “erasers” of
protein activity, with some gain-of-function effects matching loss-of-function.
Peter Finan (Novartis, Cambridge, MA) discussed target
identification by chemical genetics. Wnt pathway inhibitor
development has been hampered by the paucity of pathway
components amenable to small-molecule inhibition. A chemical genetic screen was used to identify modulators selectively inhibiting β-catenin–activated transcription. By a solidphase chemical and proteomic approach, it was found that
the most potent and specific of these modulators inhibits a
member of the phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate family, tankyrase, which had not been previously associated with the Wnt
pathway. These studies highlighted novel approaches to
identifying new therapeutic targets.
William Hahn (Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA)
described systematic functional approaches to targeting KRas. A strategy for targeting KRAS is to identify gene products
that, when suppressed or inhibited, result in synthetic lethality (i.e., cell death only in the presence of a relevant oncogenic allele). By systematic RNA interference screens, two
kinases, TBK1 and STK33, were identified that synthesize activated mutant KRAS and selectively kill cancer cell lines.
Thus, synthetic lethality screens visualize the existence of
heretofore unpredicted cancer target proteins.
Todd Golub (Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA)
discussed how gene expression signatures reflecting a biological state can be used to identify small molecules modulating
the signature of interest and that biological state. This
process, termed gene expression–based high-throughput
screening, was successfully applied to the identification of
compounds, inducing myeloid differentiation of acute myeloid leukemia cells, inhibiting the activity of Ewing Sarcoma
oncogene EWS/FLI, and abrogating androgen receptor signaling in prostate cancer. To systematically connect signatures
of diseases to signatures of gene product function or signatures of drug action constitutes the Connectivity Map project
in which new drug targets operating in pathways of interest
are discovered. The Connectivity Map approach identified
modulators of glucocorticoid resistance in acute leukemia
and candidate mechanisms of action of small molecules dis-

16

Cancer Res; 70(1) January 1, 2010

covered in cell-based screens such as a natural product
inhibitor of transcription. Thus, gene expression–based
approaches are an important new adjunct to conventional
approaches to drug discovery.
Charles Sawyers (Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center,
New York, NY) discussed novel approaches to prostate cancer therapy. Androgen receptors (AR) can promote prostate
cancer growth in human tumor xenografts growing in animals treated with androgen deprivation therapy. AR can be
overexpressed in this setting. AR antagonists function as
weak agonists in this context. Novel AR antagonists are
sought using a cell-based screen that might retain AR inhibitory function in the context of increased AR expression. Using the high-affinity AR agonist RU59063 as a starting point,
more than 200 derivatives were synthesized and screened.
The novel compound RD162 retained potent antiandrogen
activity in cells expressing increased levels of AR, blocked
AR function in mice with 10-fold greater potency/affinity
than bicalutamide, and impaired the growth of LNCaP and
LAPC-4 xenografts engineered to express high levels of AR.
An RD162 derivative, MDV3100, has shown clinical activity
in a phase I-II clinical trial. MDV3100 impaired the growth
of the TMPRSS2-ERG–positive cell line VCAP in culture
and induced apoptosis. Some results suggested that PI3K
pathway activation may blunt the efficacy of antiandrogen
therapy.
Pier Paolo Pandolfi (Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA)
stressed the need to target cancer-initiating cells (CIC) for
effective therapy. The elucidation of a novel PTEN/PI3K/
mTOR signaling regulatory network for the control of “stem
cell-ness” has allowed for the testing of concepts for CIC
eradication of immediate therapeutic applicability. Excessive
signaling can also trigger fail-safe mechanisms leading to
stem cell pool exhaustion, depending on the genetic milieu.
Thus, therapeutic intervention could aim at transiently enhancing, rather than blocking, PTEN/PI3K/mTOR signaling.
Cancer cell types that benefit from aberrant activation of this
pathway (e.g., prostate cancer) would be particularly sensitive to a transient superactivation of the pathway. Transient
inactivation of the tumor suppressor promyelocytic leukemia
(PML) could be used toward the eradication of the leukemiainitiating cells (LIC) in chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML).
PML represses mTOR signaling, and its inactivation leads to
LIC exhaustion in CML. Arsenites (e.g., A2O3) transiently inhibit PML by triggering its proteasome-dependent degradation and causing the exhaustion of the CML LICs. Initial
treatment with A2O3, followed 3 to 5 days later by Gleevec,
could eradicate CML residual disease, a concept currently
tested clinically. Thus, Pandolfi underscored how transient
pharmacologic inhibition of tumor suppressors could represent a new therapeutic avenue.
Zaver Bhujwalla (Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore,
MD) discussed imaging to guide therapies based on unconventional targets. In prodrug enzyme activation systems,
imaging the enzyme delivery so that the prodrug is administered when enzyme levels are highest in tumor and lowest
in systemic circulation and normal tissues would optimize
this therapeutic strategy. Cytosine deaminase converts

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2010 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst December 22, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-3368
Twenty-First Annual Pezcoller Report

5-fluorocytosine (5-FC) to 5-fluorouracil (5-FU). 5-FC and
5-FU can be detected noninvasively by 19F magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Imaging was used to time prodrug
administration optimally. Image-guided targeting of choline
kinase, the first step in choline phospholipid biosynthesis, is
also done. Target specific pathways, microenvironments,
and cell types within tumors can be targeted under image
guidance.
Robert Kerbel (University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada)
outlined unexpected outcomes of anti–vascular endothelial
growth factor treatments. After an initial antitumor effect,
unexpectedly enhanced tumor cell growth and metastasis occur. Through increases in the hypoxia-induced transcription
factor HIF-1, drug-exacerbated tumor hypoxia likely results
in the adaptive upregulation of angiogenesis, cell invasion,
and metastasis. Circulating growth factors, cytokines, and
chemokines are induced following the administration of
antiangiogenic drugs, such as sunitinib, and can promote
tumor growth and angiogenesis. In preclinical models of
neoadjuvant or adjuvant-like therapy of micrometastatic
breast cancer, evidence of accelerated metastatic growth
was obtained. To improve the effect of antiangiogenic

www.aacrjournals.org

drugs, their combination with metronomic chemotherapy
is being investigated.

Prospects
The novel and unconventional molecular targets and systems discussed at this Symposium should provide the basis
for the development of more effective and specific treatments of cancer.

Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest
No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

Acknowledgments
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in
part by the payment of page charges. This article must
therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
Received 9/10/09; revised 10/27/09; accepted 10/28/09;
published OnlineFirst 12/22/09.

Cancer Res; 70(1) January 1, 2010

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2010 American Association for Cancer
Research.

17

Published OnlineFirst December 22, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-3368

Twenty-First Annual Pezcoller Symposium: Unconventional
Therapeutic Targets in Cancer
Enrico Mihich, Pier Paolo Pandolfi and David Livingston
Cancer Res 2010;70:14-17. Published OnlineFirst December 22, 2009.

Updated version

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-3368

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2010 American Association for Cancer
Research.

