Research Article

Blockade of Hedgehog Signaling Inhibits Pancreatic Cancer
Invasion and Metastases: A New Paradigm for Combination
Therapy in Solid Cancers
1,5

1,5

2

3

1,5

Georg Feldmann, Surajit Dhara, Volker Fendrich, Djahida Bedja, Robert Beaty,
1,5
1,5
1,5
1,5
Michael Mullendore, Collins Karikari, Hector Alvarez, Christine Iacobuzio-Donahue,
4
3
4
1,4,5
Antonio Jimeno, Kathleen L. Gabrielson, William Matsui, and Anirban Maitra
Departments of 1Pathology, 2Surgery, 3Comparative Medicine, and 4Oncology, 5The Sol Goldman Pancreatic Cancer Research Center,
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland

Abstract

Introduction

In the context of pancreatic cancer, metastasis remains the
most critical determinant of resectability, and hence survival.
The objective of this study was to determine whether
Hedgehog (Hh) signaling plays a role in pancreatic cancer
invasion and metastasis because this is likely to have profound
clinical implications. In pancreatic cancer cell lines, Hh
inhibition with cyclopamine resulted in down-regulation of
snail and up-regulation of E-cadherin , consistent with
inhibition of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, and was
mirrored by a striking reduction of in vitro invasive capacity
(P < 0.0001). Conversely, Gli1 overexpression in immortalized
human pancreatic ductal epithelial cells led to a markedly
invasive phenotype (P < 0.0001) and near total downregulation of E-cadherin. In an orthotopic xenograft model,
cyclopamine profoundly inhibited metastatic spread; only one
of seven cyclopamine-treated mice developed pulmonary
micrometastases versus seven of seven mice with multiple
macrometastases in control animals. Combination of gemcitabine and cyclopamine completely abrogated metastases
while also significantly reducing the size of ‘‘primary’’ tumors.
Gli1 levels were up-regulated in tissue samples of metastatic
human pancreatic cancer samples compared with matched
primary tumors. Aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) overexpression is characteristic for both hematopoietic progenitors and
leukemic stem cells; cyclopamine preferentially reduced
‘‘ALDH-high’’ cells by f3-fold (P = 0.048). We confirm
pharmacologic Hh pathway inhibition as a valid therapeutic
strategy for pancreatic cancer and show for the first time its
particular efficacy against metastatic spread. By targeting
specific cellular subpopulations likely involved in tumor
initiation at metastatic sites, Hh inhibitors may provide a
new paradigm for therapy of disseminated malignancies,
particularly when used in combination with conventional
antimetabolites that reduce ‘‘bulk’’ tumor size. [Cancer Res
2007;67(5):2187–96]

Pancreatic cancer is among the most devastating of human
malignancies. Despite improvements in surgical and chemotherapeutic approaches during the past decades, pancreatic cancer
continues to have a dismal prognosis, with an average overall
5-year survival of <5% (1). To date, surgical resection is the only
potentially curative therapeutic option; however, due to the lack of
early symptoms, the vast majority of patients present with
metastatic disease, rendering their malignancy inoperable (2, 3).
Even if the disease is diagnosed early and surgical resection with
curative intention is done, nearly all patients develop local
recurrence and/or distant metastases following surgery and
eventually succumb to the debilitating effects of metastatic growth
(3). Thus, it is likely that even in the setting of apparently localized
disease, micrometastases are present in distant organ sites (4).
Conventional chemotherapy is rarely curative for metastatic
pancreatic cancer. Treatment strategies that specifically target
and prevent metastases might therefore have the potential to
significantly improve the prognosis of this dismal disease.
Recently, aberrant activation of the Hedgehog (Hh) pathway has
been found in the majority of human pancreatic cancers and other
gastrointestinal tract malignancies (5, 6). Moderate growth
inhibition of 50% to 60% in vivo was shown in preestablished s.c.
pancreatic cancer xenografts in response to Hh inhibition with the
small-molecule smoothened antagonist cyclopamine; the effects
were more pronounced when cyclopamine therapy was initiated
simultaneously with s.c. implantation of cancer cells (5). Unfortunately, neither of these scenarios, particularly the latter, is clinically
relevant. In addition to the established criticisms vis-à-vis s.c.
xenograft models and the altered pharmacokinetics in this artificial
milieu (7, 8), pancreatic cancer xenografts rarely metastasize from
the s.c. environment. In the context of a nearly universally
metastatic disease like pancreatic cancer, this is a major pitfall.
Therefore, to more accurately simulate the cognate human disease
scenario, we here tested the effects of Hh blockade using a
spontaneously metastasizing xenograft model of pancreatic cancer.
Our results confirm that the Hh signaling pathway is a valid
therapeutic target in human pancreatic cancer, but, unlike
conventional chemotherapeutics that target ‘‘bulk’’ tumor mass,
our findings suggest that Hh inhibition has preferential effect on
cells responsible for invasion and metastatic seeding.

Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research Online
(http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
G. Feldmann and S. Dhara contributed equally to this work.
Requests for reprints: Georg Feldmann, Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, CRB2, Room 316, 1550 Orleans Street, Baltimore, MD
21231. Phone: 410-955-3511; Fax: 410-614-0671; E-mail: gfeldma4@jhmi.edu.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-06-3281

www.aacrjournals.org

Materials and Methods
Cell culture. Pancreatic cancer cell lines were grown in either RPMI
medium (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS;
Invitrogen) and 1 penicillin-streptomycin (Biofluids, Camarillo, CA) or in

2187

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (5). March 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research
DMEM containing 10% FBS, 1 MEM vitamin solution (Sigma-Aldrich,
St. Louis, MO), 1 nonessential amino acid solution, 1% sodium pyruvate
solution (both from Biofluids), and 1 penicillin-streptomycin. Human
pancreatic ductal epithelial (HPDE) cells were grown in Keratinocyte-SFM,
supplemented with 0.1 ng/mL epidermal growth factor and 25 Ag/mL
bovine pituitary extract (Invitrogen). All cell lines were routinely tested for
Mycoplasma infection using the MycoSensor PCR Assay Kit (Stratagene, La
Jolla, CA).
Cell growth assays. 3-(4,5-Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium
bromide (MTT) assays were done as previously described (9). In brief, 2,000
cells per well were incubated in 100-AL medium containing 0.5% FBS
for 96 h with 6 Amol/L cyclopamine, solvent, or medium only. Finally,
20 AL/well of CellTiter96 solution (Promega, Madison, WI) were added for
1 h and plates were read on a Wallac-1420 plate reader at an absorbance
of 490 nm (Perkin-Elmer, Boston, MA). All experiments were set up in
quadruplicate to determine means and SDs.
RNA extraction and real-time reverse transcription-PCR. Tissue
samples were homogenized with a rotor stator homogenizer (Polytron
PT1200C, Kinematica, Newark, NJ). Cells were lysed in the cell culture dish
and RNA was extracted using RNeasy Mini kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA). RNA
was reverse transcribed with oligo-dT primers at 42jC for 50 min using the
SuperScript First Strand System (Invitrogen). Quantitative PCR for human
or mouse Gli1, Gli2, Ptch, nestin, snail, and E-cadherin was done using either
Assays-on-Demand (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) or Quantitect
SYBR Green PCR kit (Qiagen) on a 7300 Real-time PCR System. Relative fold
levels were determined using the 2( DDCt) method (10), with PGK1 used as
housekeeping control for human transcripts and GUSB for murine assays.
Soft agar assays. Soft agar assays were set up in six-well plates, each well
containing a bottom layer of 1% agarose (Invitrogen), a middle layer of 0.6%
agarose including 10,000 cells, and a top layer of medium only. Mixtures in
each well were supplemented with cyclopamine or solvent where applicable,
and the plates were incubated for 3 weeks. Next, 1.5 mL of 0.5% Wright’s
staining solution were added to each well. After incubation at 4jC
overnight, colonies were visualized by trans-UV illumination and counted
using analysis software QuantityOne (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA).
Apoptosis assay. To determine induction of apoptosis, the Guava
Multicaspase kit (Guava Technologies, Hayward, CA) was used as we have
previously described (9). Briefly, in this assay, the gating of cells occurs
as follows: live and noncommitted apoptotic cells, SR-VAD-FMK( ),
7-AAD( ); ‘‘early’’apoptotic cells: SR-VAD-FMK(+), 7-AAD( ); ‘‘late’’ apoptotic
cells, SR-VAD-FMK(+), 7-AAD(+); ‘‘dead’’ cells, SR-VAD-FMK( or dim),
7-AAD(+).
Cell cycle analysis. After drug treatment, cells were fixed in 70% ethanol,
stained with propidium iodide, and analyzed on a Guava Personal Cell
Analysis system (Guava Technologies) according to the standard protocol
provided by the manufacturer. Percentages of cells in G0-G1, S, or G2-M
phase were determined using ModFitLT software version 3.0 (Guava
Technologies).
Transient overexpression of Gli1 in HPDE cells. HPDE cells (11) were
seeded onto six-well plates at 200,000 per well and transfected the following
day with 1 Ag of pSR-a-GLI per well or empty vector using FuGene6
transfection reagent (Roche, Indianapolis, IN).
Modified Boyden chamber invasion/migration assays. Modified
Boyden chamber assays to assess invasion/migration were done as
previously described (12). Briefly, 20 Ag/well of Matrigel (BD Biosciences,
San Jose, CA) were applied to 24-well transwell plates with 8-Am pore size
(BD Biosciences) and allowed to solidify overnight. Then, medium was
added and 30,000 cells were seeded into each well. Where applicable,
cyclopamine (6 Amol/L) or solvent was added. The assays were done using
Panc-1, a Hh-independent cell line, and L3.6pl, a Hh-dependent cell line. The
E3LZ10.7 line could not be used in this experiment because, despite
multiple attempts, neither control nor treated cells were able to cross the
Matrigel barrier. Therefore, L3.6pl cells were used, which show nearly
equivalent growth inhibition in response to cyclopamine. As a converse, Hh
signaling was aberrantly activated in HPDE cells by transient transfection of
the Hh transcription factor Gli1. The plates were incubated at 37jC for 96 h,
then cells at the bottom were fixed in ethanol and stained. Cells in 10

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (5). March 1, 2007

randomly selected microscopic fields were counted and means and
standard deviations were calculated. Transmigrated cells were normalized
for viable cell masses as described (13).
Generation of orthotopic pancreatic cancer xenografts and drug
treatment. All animal experiments conformed to the guidelines of the
Animal Care and Use Committee of Johns Hopkins University and animals
were maintained in accordance to guidelines of the American Association
of Laboratory Animal Care. E3LZ10.7 cells [5  106 in a total volume of
200 AL of 1/1 (v/v) PBS/Matrigel] were injected s.c. into male CD1 nu/nu
athymic mice (Charles River, Wilmington, MA). After 2 to 4 weeks, the s.c.
tumors were harvested and cut into cubes of f1 mm3. Male CD1 nu/nu
athymic mice, ages 6 to 8 weeks, were anesthesized using volatile gas
anesthesia. The abdomen was opened via a subcostal left incision of f1 cm.
After visualization of the spleen and adherent pancreas, a small pocket was
prepared inside the pancreas using microscissors (Roboz Surgical Instruments, Gaithersburg, MD), into which one piece of the s.c. tumor was
implanted. The incision in the pancreas was closed with a 8-0 nylon
monofilament suture, the abdominal wall was sutured with 6-0 nylon
monofilament string, and the skin adapted using wound clips.
In case of L3.6pl, 106 cells were resuspended in 50 AL of a 1:1 (v/v)
mixture of PBS/Matrigel and directly injected into the murine pancreas. At
21 days postimplantation of the xenograft, the E3LZ10.7 orthotopic tumor
volumes were measured by ultrasound (Vevo660, Visual Sonics, Toronto,
Canada). The animals bearing E3LZ10.7 orthotopic xenografts were
distributed into four groups with similar average tumor volumes, which
were then randomized into four arms: (a) vehicle; (b) cyclopamine, 2 daily
doses of 25 mg/kg p.o. by oral gavage; (c) gemcitabine, 100 mg/kg i.p. every
4 days; and (d) combination therapy with cyclopamine plus gemcitabine at
the above doses. Cyclopamine was dissolved in a sodium citrate/phosphate
buffer (pH 3) containing 10% (w/w) 2-hydroxylpropyl-h-cyclodextrin
(Sigma-Aldrich) at a concentration of 2.5 mg/mL; gemcitabine was
dissolved in 0.9% sodium chloride. The medication was given for a total
of 30 days starting 21 days after implantation of the primary xenograft.
L3.6pl-bearing mice were treated for 15 days with 50 mg/kg/d of
cyclopamine s.c. in a triolein-ethanol vehicle (6).
Necropsy and assessment of primary tumor growth and metastasis.
After 30 days of drug treatment, the mice were euthanized; spleen, liver,
kidneys, intestine, peritoneum, and lungs were inspected for grossly visible
metastases and preserved in 10% formalin solution (Sigma-Aldrich) for
histology. Samples of the primary tumors were snap-frozen on dry ice for
mRNA analysis. In addition to macroscopic inspection, one random
histologic section of liver, spleen, kidneys, lungs, and intestine was
examined microscopically for the presence or absence of micrometastases
in each animal. Regional lymph nodes were harvested and a histologic
section examined if lymph node metastases were suspected from
macroscopic inspection.
The series of orthotopic L3.6pl xenografts was only evaluated for the
presence of liver and peritoneal metastases.
Immunohistochemical analysis of xenografts. Microscopic slides were
prepared from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded samples of orthotopic
tumors, heated to 60jC for 1 h, deparaffinized using xylene, and hydrated
by a graded series of ethanol washes. Antigen retrieval was accomplished
by microwave heating in 10 mmol/L sodium citrate buffer (pH 6.0) for
10 min. Endogenous peroxidase activity was quenched by 10-min
incubation in 3% H2O2 and nonspecific binding was blocked with 10%
serum. Sections were then probed with primary goat anti-human
antibodies [Shh (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN), Ptch, and nestin (Santa
Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA)] in PBS containing 1% FBS overnight
at 4jC. After washing twice with PBS, secondary antibodies (1:250) were
added for 1 h. Slides were again washed twice with PBS, developed with the
Vectastain Elite Kit (Vector Labs, Burlingame, CA) and 3,3¶-diaminobenzidine, and counterstained with H&E.
Primary and metastatic pancreatic cancer specimens. Matched
samples of primary and metastatic pancreatic cancers were obtained from a
pancreatic cancer rapid autopsy program, as previously described (13).
Briefly, the tissues are obtained from individuals with terminal, disseminated pancreatic cancer who have provided informed consent for

2188

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Hh Inhibition in Pancreatic Cancer
postmortem harvesting of tissue. Eight matched pairs were obtained,
including liver, omental, lung, and lymph node metastases with the
corresponding primary tumors. Following histopathologic confirmation of
neoplastic cellularity, RNA was extracted for reverse transcription-PCR
(RT-PCR) analysis.
Evaluation of aldehyde dehydrogenase activity. After incubation with
cyclopamine (6 Amol/L) or solvent in low-serum conditions for 3 days, cells
were stained for aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) using the Aldefluor
reagent (Stem Cell Technologies, Vancouver, Canada) according to the
manufacturer’s instructions and analyzed on a FACSCalibur flow cytometer
(Becton Dickinson). ALDH-positive cells were quantified by calculating the
percentage of total cells that displayed greater fluorescence compared with
a control staining reaction containing the ALDH inhibitor diethylaminobenzaldehyde.
Statistical analysis. Kruskal-Wallis analysis was done using SPSS version
11.0.1 for Microsoft Windows; two-tailed t test and Mann-Whitney U test
were done using GraphPad Prism for Windows version 4.00. P < 0.05 was
regarded as statistically significant.

Results
In vitro studies establish the metastatic pancreatic cancer
cell line E3LZ10.7 as Hh dependent. A wide range of growth
inhibition, from 0% to 100%, was observed in a panel of 21 human
pancreatic cancer cell lines in response to 6 Amol/L cyclopamine
(Fig. 1A); mostly, this data confirmed previous observations from
our and other groups about the variability of in vitro responses to
cyclopamine in pancreatic cancer cell lines (5, 6). For further
analysis in the in vitro and in vivo settings, we selected the lowpassage pancreatic cancer cell line E3LZ10.7, which was established from a liver metastasis in a patient with terminally

disseminated pancreatic cancer (13). This cell line reproducibly
grows in the orthotopic milieu in vivo, accompanied by onset of
spontaneous metastases, thus enabling the preclinical studies
discussed below. Growth inhibition in vitro in response to cyclopamine was mirrored by significant down-regulation of the Hh
target genes Gli1 and Ptch (Fig. 1B and Supplementary Fig. S1A).
Moreover, in the E3LZ10.7 cell line, cyclopamine treatment led to
significant down-regulation of Snail mRNA and concomitant upregulation in E-cadherin transcripts (Fig. 1C), suggesting inhibition
of the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition phenotype as a result
of Hh inhibition. However, cyclopamine treatment resulted only in
minor morphologic changes in vitro, with a higher percentage of
cells undergoing apoptosis (Fig. 1D).
Hh-induced growth inhibition in the E3LZ10.7 line was further
accompanied by an increase in the cellular apoptotic fraction,
demonstrable by a significant increase of cells in early (12.0 F 0.6%
versus 8.4 F 0.4%; P = 0.0009) and late (5.6 F 1.0% versus 1.9 F
0.1%; P = 0.0032) apoptotic states, as well as of dead cells (9.7 F
0.4% versus 4.8 F 0.8%; P = 0.0008; Fig. 2A), and a decrease of the
‘‘live cell’’ fraction (72.7 F 0.4% versus 84.9 F 0.8%; P < 0.0001; not
shown) as determined by the Guava MultiCaspase assay. Cyclopamine treatment in low-serum conditions caused minor albeit
reproducible increases in the fraction of cells in the G0-G1 phase of
the cell cycle (72.3% versus 67.1%) and decreased the amounts of
cells in S phase (16.75% versus 21.37%) or G2-M phase (10.92%
versus 11.53%; Fig. 2B), suggesting that the major contribution of
growth inhibition occurs through increased cell death rather than
reduced proliferation. We then explored the effects of Hh blockade
on in vitro tumorigenicity using colony formation in soft agar as a

Figure 1. A, viable cell masses,
determined using MTT assays, were
reduced by nearly 100% to 0% by Hh
inhibition with 6 Amol/L cyclopamine for
4 d as compared with solvent-treated cells
in vitro. B, on treatment with cyclopamine,
RT-PCR revealed down-regulation of the
Hh target genes Gli1 and Ptch on the
mRNA level in the pancreatic cancer cell
line E3LZ10.7. C, Hh inhibition with
cyclopamine led to down-regulation of
Snail and up-regulation of E-cadherin
mRNA in E3LZ10.7 in vitro. D, microscopic
photographs of E3LZ10.7 cells treated with
cyclopamine (6 Amol/L) or solvent for 4 d.

www.aacrjournals.org

2189

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (5). March 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 2. A, using the Guava
Multicaspase assay, an increase of
cells undergoing apoptosis was
detected on treatment with cyclopamine.
B, cyclopamine treatment slightly but
reproducibly increased the percentage of
cells in G0-G1 phase, whereas the
fractions of cells in S and G2-M phases
were reduced. Representative of three
independent experiments with similar
results using the Guava Cell Cycle
analysis kit. C, anchorage-independent
growth in soft agar was reduced in the
Hh-sensitive cell line E3LZ10.7 on Hh
inhibition with cyclopamine, whereas
treatment with cyclopamine showed no
effect on the Hh-resistant cell line Panc-1.
D, inhibition of invasion/migration of the
Hh-dependent metastatic pancreatic
cancer cell line L3.6pl in vitro by
cyclopamine treatment. Cyclopamine had
no effect on Panc-1 cells.

read-out. Although Hh inhibition with cyclopamine did not
completely abolish anchorage-independent growth in this cell line,
colony formation in soft agar was significantly reduced compared
with vehicle-treated cells (72.7 F 7.1 versus 119.3 F 9.3 colonies,
respectively; P = 0.002). In contrast, cyclopamine did not affect
anchorage-independent growth of Panc-1 cells (Fig. 2C), which was
shown to be Hh independent based on the lack of response in MTT
assays (Fig. 1A) and the absence of target gene down-regulation
(data not shown).
Hh signaling modulates the invasive phenotype of pancreatic epithelium independent of proliferation. Having established the contribution of Hh signaling to in vitro growth, we
wanted to further dissect whether this pathway has an effect on the
invasive phenotype, a critical measure of cancer dissemination. In
modified Boyden chamber assays, Hh-dependent L3.6pl cells
treated with cyclopamine showed a >500-fold reduction in the
number of transmigrating cells (P < 0.0001), and this phenomenon
was independent of inhibition of cell growth (Fig. 2D). In contrast,
no effects on the invasive properties of the Hh-independent cell

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (5). March 1, 2007

line Panc-1 were seen with cyclopamine treatment (Fig. 2D). We
then carried out these assays from the reciprocal perspective (i.e.,
by aberrantly overexpressing the Hh transcription factor Gli1 in an
immortalized, nontransformed HPDE cell line and determining the
effects of such ectopic expression on cell growth and invasion).
We first determined that parental HPDE cells have minimal
endogenous Hh activity as gauged by reporter studies and target
gene expression (data not shown). We then confirmed that ectopic
Hh activation in HPDE cells results in increased cell growth
compared with mock-transfected cells (P = 0.029; Fig. 3A);
therefore, invasion assays were normalized to the viable cell count
to exclude any effects of increased cell number on transmigration.
Independent of cell growth, Gli1 overexpression had profound and
significant effects on the invasive properties of HPDE cells at
96 h compared with mock-transfected cells (P < 0.0001; Fig. 3B)
but did not induce any morphologic changes in vitro (not shown).
Cyclopamine abrogates metastases in an orthotopic xenograft model of pancreatic cancer and synergizes with
gemcitabine. Surgical orthotopic implantation was well tolerated

2190

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Hh Inhibition in Pancreatic Cancer

by athymic mice, and the tumor take rate was 100%. No obvious
side effects or behavioral disturbances of either cyclopamine or
gemcitabine, alone or in combination, at the given doses were
observed during the 30 days of treatment, and there were no
differences in body weight between the four respective treatment
groups caused by the medication (Fig. 4A). However, one of the
seven mice in group D (cyclopamine + gemcitabine) died after
12 days of treatment of unknown reason (necropsy could not be
done) and, therefore, only six mice were analyzed in this group.
Cyclopamine treatment did not significantly inhibit E3LZ10.7
primary tumor growth as gauged by the orthotopic tumor volumes
at the end of treatment, although primary tumors in the
cyclopamine group tended to be smaller than those of the control
group (P = 0.097). In contrast, gemcitabine inhibited growth of the
primary tumors as compared with both mock-treated (P < 0.001)
and cyclopamine-treated animals (P = 0.004). Combination of
cyclopamine with gemcitabine treatment had no additional effect
on inhibition of primary tumor growth as compared with
gemcitabine alone, but significantly reduced tumor growth as
compared with cyclopamine only (P = 0.001; Fig. 4B).
Whereas cyclopamine therapy had no significant effects on
E3LZ10.7 primary tumor growth, the effects on tumor metastases
were profound (Table 1). At the end of 30 days of systemic therapy,
distant metastases were present in all of the seven (100%) vehicletreated control animals as seen macroscopically and in histologic
sections (Fig. 5A and B); specifically, 6 of 7 had spleen, 4 of 7 liver,
3 of 7 regional lymph node, and 2 animals had peritoneal and
kidney metastases, respectively. In contrast, only 1 of 7 (14%) mice
exhibited histologically demonstrable micrometastases to the lung

in treatment group B (cyclopamine only), whereas metastases were
completely absent in animals receiving combination therapy with
cyclopamine and gemcitabine (group D). In mice treated with
gemcitabine only (group C), there were metastases to the spleen in
3 of 7 and to regional lymph nodes in 1 of 7 cases, but no
metastases to other organ sites were found.
Our first experiments using an orthotopic injection technique had
also shown inhibition of metastases in xenografts of another pancreatic cancer cell line, L3.6pl (Supplementary Table S1). Whereas
liver metastases developed in 9 of 9 (100%) control animals and
peritoneal metastases were present in 4 of 9 (44%) control cases, no
metastases were found in cyclopamine-treated mice.
There were no obvious morphologic differences in the primary
E3LZ10.7 tumors between the controls and cyclopamine-treated
xenografts. However, in xenografts that had received gemcitabine,
with or without cyclopamine, histologic sections showed
prominence of single pleomorphic cancer cells as opposed to
confluent sheets of necrotic tumor cells, as well as prominence
of residual stromal cells (Fig. 5C). In concert with the lack of
histologic distinctions between control and cyclopamine-treated
animals, no differences were found in the immunohistochemical
expression of the Hh ligand Shh and the Hh receptor Ptch, with
abundant expression observed in both arms (data not shown).
Nestin immunohistochemistry, which was used to highlight
tumor neovasculature of murine origin (14, 15), also revealed
no significant differences between cyclopamine and control arms
(Fig. 5D).
A variety of pharmacodynamic parameters were then examined in
the primary xenografts from the four treatment arms. Murine nestin

Figure 3. Transient overexpression of Gli1 led to increased proliferation as determined by MTT assays (A ) and invasion/migration (B) in vitro in the immortalized
normal ductal epithelial cell line HPDE. Transient overexpression of the transcription factor Gli1 led to down-regulation of E-Cadherin in a time-dependent manner as
revealed by real-time RT-PCR (C ). *, statistically significant differences as compared with control cells.

www.aacrjournals.org

2191

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (5). March 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 4. A, during the 30 d of treatment, there was no difference in body weights between mice treated with vehicle alone, cyclopamine, gemcitabine, or combination
therapy with gemcitabine plus cyclopamine. B, tumor sizes of primary xenografted tumors at the end of treatment. Tumors in the cyclopamine group were not
significantly smaller than in the control group. Treatment with gemcitabine led to significantly reduced average tumor size as compared with vehicle or cyclopamine.
Combination of cyclopamine with gemcitabine was not superior to treatment with gemcitabine alone in controlling primary tumor growth.

is expressed in the tumor neovasculature of xenografts
(14, 15), whereas the human nestin assay is expected to detect any
nestin expression within the neoplastic cells themselves. Quantitative RT-PCR analysis showed significant down-regulation of murine

Table 1. Numbers of animals with metastases to distant
organ sites in the different treatment groups of E3LZ10.7
xenografts
Group

A

Regimen

B

C

D

Vehicle Cyclopamine Gemcitabine Cyclopamine +
gemcitabine

No.
animals

7

7

7

6

Spleen
Liver
Lymph
nodes
Peritoneum
Kidneys
Lungs
Intestine

6/7 (86%)
4/7 (57%)
3/7 (43%)

0/7 (0%)
0/7 (0%)
0/7 (0%)

3/7 (43%)
0/7 (0%)
1/7 (14%)

0/6 (0%)
0/6 (0%)
0/7 (0%)

2/7
2/7
0/7
0/7

0/7
0/7
1/7
0/7

0/7
0/7
0/7
0/7

0/6
0/6
0/6
0/6

(29%)
(29%)
(0%)
(0%)

(0%)
(0%)
(14%)
(0%)

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (5). March 1, 2007

(0%)
(0%)
(0%)
(0%)

(0%)
(0%)
(0%)
(0%)

nestin mRNA in the treatment groups receiving gemcitabine, with or
without addition of cyclopamine, compared with the control arm,
which is consistent with reduction in tumor neovasculature,
whereas no significant differences were noted between control and
cyclopamine-only groups. Human nestin levels showed a trend
towards decreased expression in both treatment groups that
received cyclopamine; however, due to the small sample number
and considerable variation between the respective samples, these
differences did not reach statistical significance (Fig. 5D). Murine
Ptch levels, reflecting Hh expression in the stromal components,
showed a trend towards decreased expression in the treatment
groups; however, because this decrement was also observed in the
gemcitabine arm, the mechanism-based significance is uncertain.
We saw no significant differences or trends in the expression of
human Ptch (Fig. 5D); similarly, there were no significant differences
or trends in murine or human Gli1 or Gli2 mRNA (data not shown).
No significant differences in snail mRNA levels could be observed,
again possibly because the sample numbers studied were too small
(Fig. 5D).
Gli1 is overexpressed in human pancreatic cancer metastases. In light of our consistent in vitro and in vivo experimental
observations correlating Hh signaling with the invasive and
metastatic capacity of pancreatic cancer cells, we examined eight
matched primary and metastasis samples obtained at rapid
(‘‘warm’’) autopsy from patients with disseminated pancreatic
cancer. We found significant overexpression of Gli1 transcripts in

2192

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Hh Inhibition in Pancreatic Cancer

4 of 8 (50%) matched metastatic foci as compared with the primary
tumors (Fig. 6A); snail transcripts were overexpressed in 3 of 4
studied cases (data not shown).
Cyclopamine treatment preferentially reduces the ALDHexpressing population in pancreatic cancer cells. Expression of
elevated ALDH levels is associated with a stem/progenitor cell
phenotype in the hematopoietic system (16–18); moreover, the
expression of elevated ALDH within leukemic cells segregates with
a subpopulation capable of tumor engraftment on serial
transplantation assays (19). The establishment of distant metastases can be considered analogous to ‘‘tumor initiation’’ at a
distant site. Given the profound effect of cyclopamine therapy on

limiting pancreatic cancer metastases, we wanted to determine
whether Hh blockade would result in selective depletion of ALDHexpressing cells. Treatment with 6 Amol/L cyclopamine reproducibly and preferentially reduced the percentage of ALDHexpressing E3LZ10.7 cells by f3-fold (P = 0.048; Fig. 6B),
suggesting that blockade of Hh signaling might specifically
eliminate the subpopulation of cells with putative tumor-initiating
properties.
Interestingly, significant overexpression of Gli mRNA was found
in ‘‘ALDH-bright’’ E3LZ10.7 versus unsorted cells by quantitative
RT-PCR, whereas Ptch and E-cadherin expression was not
significantly different (Fig. 6C).

Figure 5. A, distant metastases of the
primary xenograft to spleen (i ), kidney (ii ),
and liver (iii ). B, histologic images of
spleen (i ), kidney (ii ), and lymph node
metastases (iii ). In one animal receiving
monotherapy with cyclopamine,
micrometastases to the lung were detected
in a histologic slide (iv ). C, histologies of
xenograft tumors treated with vehicle (i ),
cyclopamine (ii ), gemcitabine (iii ),
or combination of cyclopamine plus
gemcitabine (iv) after 30 d of treatment.
D, Hh target gene expression in
orthotopic pancreatic cancer xenografts.
Immunohistochemistry for nestin in
vehicle-treated (i) and cyclopamine-treated
(ii ) tumor tissues. The diagrams show
relative steady-state mRNA expression of
murine and human nestin and patched, as
well as human snail. Points, mean; bars,
SD. *, statistically significant difference as
compared with the control group.

www.aacrjournals.org

2193

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (5). March 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 6. A, in matched human tissue samples, Gli1 mRNA was found to be up-regulated in metastatic nodules as compared with the primary tumors in four of eight
studied cases. B, flow cytometry revealed an f3-fold reduction in ALDH-high cells on treatment with cyclopamine in vitro (P = 0.048). Representative data of two
experiments with similar results. C, quantitative real-time RT-PCR analysis revealed overexpression of Gli mRNA in flow-sorted ALDH-bright E3LZ10.7 as compared
with unsorted cells. Expression of Ptch and E-cadherin was not markedly changed. *, P < 0.05.

Discussion
Studies conducted by two groups, including ours, were the first
to show that aberrant activation of the Hh pathway occurs in the
majority of pancreatic cancers (6). Moreover, this ectopic activation
seems to be due to Hh ligand overexpression rather than to
activating mutations of genes involved in Hh signaling. This offers
a unique opportunity to study pharmacologic Hh pathway
inhibition by means of the small-molecule smoothened inhibitor
cyclopamine as a new therapeutic strategy for pancreatic cancer.
Whereas blockade of Hh signaling causes growth inhibition of
Hh-dependent pancreatic cancer cell lines in vitro and a modest
growth inhibition of the resulting s.c. pancreatic cancer xenografts
in vivo (5, 6), the effects on pancreatic cancer metastases remain
unexplored. To our knowledge, this is the first report specifically
showing the potential for Hh inhibitors as a therapeutic option for
limiting pancreatic cancer metastases. Thus, only one lung
micrometastasis was observed in one of seven E3LZ10.7-bearing
cyclopamine-treated mice, and complete absence of metastases
was observed in xenografted mice treated with the combination
therapy of cyclopamine and gemcitabine. Most notably, the striking
reduction in pancreatic cancer metastases was present despite the
apparent lack of significant effect of cyclopamine monotherapy on
bulk primary tumor volume.
This abrogation of metastasis was also observed in xenografts
derived from another pancreatic cancer cell line, L3.6pl, pre-

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (5). March 1, 2007

cluding this being only a special feature of one particular cell
line.
For the first time, our study addresses two critical issues pertaining
to the role of Hh pathway as a therapeutic target in pancreatic
cancer. First, we show the significant correlation between extent of
intracellular Hh activation and invasive ability, which is independent
of any effects this signaling pathway may have on proliferation.
Blockade of Hh signaling in pancreatic cancer cells significantly
inhibits invasion, and, conversely, ectopic Hh activation in
immortalized human pancreatic ductal cells renders them profoundly invasive in modified Boyden chamber assays. It has been
previously reported that an active Hh pathway induces epithelial-tomesenchymal transition through Gli1-dependent transcriptional
down-regulation of the cell adhesion molecule E-cadherin (12, 20,
21), which, in turn, confers a greater invasive ability in cancer cells
(20, 21). Our data confirm that similar mechanisms are active in the
pancreatic epithelium, with profound loss of E-cadherin expression
in HPDE-Gli1 cells and the reciprocal up-regulation of E-cadherin in
E3LZ10.7 cells treated with cyclopamine.
The second issue that we address in this study pertains to minor
cellular subpopulations that may be preferentially affected by Hh
blockade in pancreatic cancer. Specifically, we show an f3-fold
reduction in the proportion of ALDH-expressing cells by cyclopamine therapy in E3LZ10.7 cells. Our finding of Gli overexpression
in ALDH-bright cells might suggest that this subpopulation could

2194

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Hh Inhibition in Pancreatic Cancer

be particularly Hh dependent and, therefore, preferentially sensitive
to Hh inhibition with cyclopamine.
Expression of elevated ALDH levels in human hematopoietic
progenitor cells was first reported more than 15 years ago; subsequently, the ‘‘ALDH-high’’ cells were shown to have significantly
higher levels of engraftment when transplanted into nonobese
diabetic/severe combined immunodeficient mice (17, 18, 22). More
recently, lineage-negative, ALDH-high cells isolated from acute
leukemias were shown to have consistent ability to engraft in
nonobese diabetic/severe combined immunodeficient mice, which
is consistent with this subpopulation being enriched in leukemic
stem cells (19). The f3-fold reduction of cells with elevated ALDH
expression in treated E3LZ10.7 cells suggests that cyclopamine
might be preferentially targeting the putative tumor-initiating
subpopulation in pancreatic cancers, rather than the proliferative
fraction comprising the bulk tumor volume.
How do we reconcile these two discrete effects of cyclopamine
therapy, i.e., impairment of invasive capacity within the overall
population of pancreatic cancer cells and a preferential depletion
of a minor subpopulation of ALDH-expressing cells, in the context
of observed in vivo effects on metastasis inhibition? To address this
question, one must consider the process of metastasis as one of
tumor initiation occurring at a distant anatomic site. Given the
numbers of cells released by a primary tumor into circulation per
day (usually in millions) and the relatively few established
metastases one encounters, the vast majority of disseminated
cancer cells reaching potential metastatic sites are incapable of
engraftment, and only a minority of circulating tumor cells retain
the potential capacity to result in tumor initiation at secondary
foci. Arguably then, a reduction in metastases can be observed with
therapies that either limit the overall numbers of disseminated
cells in circulation or with therapies that cause selective depletion
of tumor-initiating cells even in the absence of discernible effects
on cells that comprise the bulk of the tumor. For example,
gemcitabine treatment significantly inhibited primary tumor
growth in our series and concurrently reduced, but did not
completely abrogate, the occurrence of macrometastases in the
orthotopic xenograft model, which is consistent with previous
reports (23). Conventional antimetabolites such as gemcitabine
likely reduce metastasis incidence by a sheer decrement in bulk
tumor volume and proportional reduction in numbers of
circulating tumor cells. In contrast, cyclopamine has a negative
effect on metastatic seeding in pancreatic cancer that dramatically
exceeds the observed efficacy on primary tumor volume, suggesting that cyclopamine either (a) inhibits the functional ability of
cancer cells to invade (e.g., by down-regulation of epithelial-tomesenchymal transition) or (b) preferentially targets the minor
proportion of cells capable of tumor initiation within the bulk
tumor without necessarily reducing overall invasive capacity, or (c)
results in a combination of (a) and (b). In contrast to gemcitabine,
which unequivocally alters xenograft morphology, we find no
significant histologic differences between control and cyclopaminetreated primary tumors, underscoring what we observe at the
macroscopic level. Similarly, we find no differences in stromal
neovasculature (as assessed by murine nestin immunohistochemistry and real-time PCR) between control and cyclopamine-treated
arms, arguing against the possibility that reduced passive ‘‘leakage’’
of tumor cells into the circulation might account for the reduced
frequency of metastases.
It is entirely possible that the lack of tumor growth inhibition
in the orthotopic location is merely a pharmacokinetic issue that

www.aacrjournals.org

can be overcome with higher dosing. A previous report by Thayer
et al. (5), using s.c. xenograft models and delayed administration
of cyclopamine (i.e., onset of cyclopamine treatment after s.c.
xenografts became palpable), had shown a modest growth
inhibition of 50% to 60% in two pancreatic cancer lines. Notably,
even in this study, ‘‘concurrent’’ administration of cyclopamine
(i.e., onset of cyclopamine treatment in conjunction with s.c.
injection of cells) resulted in a more profound effect on xenograft
growth inhibition (f80%), confirming that this class of agents
has a greater effect on preventing tumor initiation than on
established tumor regression. This finding is entirely compatible
with our observed preferential effects on limiting metastases in
the orthotopic model. Given a persistent requirement for Hh
signaling in maintaining tissue homeostasis, one needs to be
cognizant of potential toxicities that might arise from higher
cyclopamine dosages in somatic Hh-dependent cell populations.
Consistent with previous reports (reviewed in ref. 24), we found
no obvious signs of toxicity by Hh inhibition with cyclopamine at
the given dose (25 mg/kg p.o. by oral gavage twice daily) in mice
during the 30-day treatment period. It is possible that somatic
stem cells, much like the bulk tumor cell population, are less Hh
dependent than the circulating cancer cells that are destined to
engraft at metastatic sites; however, this remains a matter of
speculation.
We believe that our results provide a compelling rationale for
exploring Hh inhibitors in human pancreatic cancer, particularly
from the standpoint of therapy of metastatic disease. Despite small
numbers, we show that the Hh transcription factor Gli1 is
overexpressed at the mRNA level in four of eight samples from
pancreatic cancer metastases as compared with matched primary
tumor tissue, underscoring a role for this pathway in mediating
disease progression. From an experimental therapeutics perspective, we also present an improvement in cyclopamine formulation
that will facilitate its clinical translation. In previous preclinical
reports, cyclopamine was usually administered dissolved in a
triolein/ethanol or DMSO base, with adverse reactions (ulcerations)
commonly seen at the injection site. In this study, we have used an
orally bioavailable formulation of cyclopamine dissolved in
cyclodextrin, which was administered by oral gavage at a twicedaily dosing schedule. Other orally bioavailable Hh small-molecule
inhibitors have also been reported (25) and, together with the
current formulation or its analogues, are likely to be the used in
future clinical trials.
In summary, we show for the first time that cyclopamine has a
profound effect in limiting pancreatic cancer metastases in vivo.
Our results potentially serve as the seedbed for a new paradigm in
anticancer therapy, wherein a conventional antimetabolite that
reduces bulk tumor volume (e.g., gemcitabine) is combined with a
class of metastasis inhibitors like cyclopamine to enhance overall
therapeutic efficacy and eventually ameliorate survival.

Acknowledgments
Received 9/5/2006; revised 11/20/2006; accepted 1/2/2007.
Grant support: NIH grants R01CA113669 and R21DK072532, the Sol Goldman
Pancreatic Cancer Research Center, and an AACR-PanCAN award (A. Maitra), and
fellowship grant within the Postdoc-Programme of the German Academic Exchange
Service (DAAD) (G. Feldmann).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank Infinity Pharmaceuticals (Cambridge, MA) for the kind donation of
cyclopamine.

2195

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (5). March 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

References
1. Jemal A, Siegel R, Ward E, et al. Cancer statistics, 2006.
CA Cancer J Clin 2006;56:106–30.
2. Warshaw AL, Fernandez-del Castillo C. Pancreatic
carcinoma. N Engl J Med 1992;326:455–65.
3. Li D, Xie K, Wolff R, Abbruzzese JL. Pancreatic cancer.
Lancet 2004;363:1049–57.
4. Schneider G, Siveke JT, Eckel F, Schmid RM. Pancreatic
cancer: basic and clinical aspects. Gastroenterology
2005;128:1606–25.
5. Thayer SP, di Magliano MP, Heiser PW, et al. Hedgehog
is an early and late mediator of pancreatic cancer
tumorigenesis. Nature 2003;425:851–6.
6. Berman DM, Karhadkar SS, Maitra A, et al.
Widespread requirement for Hedgehog ligand stimulation in growth of digestive tract tumours. Nature 2003;
425:846–51.
7. Kerbel RS. Human tumor xenografts as predictive
preclinical models for anticancer drug activity in
humans: better than commonly perceived-but they can
be improved. Cancer Biol Ther 2003;2:S134–9.
8. Kelland LR. Of mice and men: values and liabilities of
the athymic nude mouse model in anticancer drug
development. Eur J Cancer 2004;40:827–36.
9. Sui G, Bonde P, Dhara S, et al. Epidermal growth factor
receptor and hedgehog signaling pathways are active in
esophageal cancer cells from rat reflux model. J Surg Res
2006;134:1–9.
10. Livak KJ, Schmittgen TD. Analysis of relative
gene expression data using real-time quantitative

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (5). March 1, 2007

PCR and the 2( DDC(T)) method. Methods 2001;
25:402–8.
11. Furukawa T, Duguid WP, Rosenberg L, Viallet J,
Galloway DA, Tsao MS. Long-term culture and immortalization of epithelial cells from normal adult human
pancreatic ducts transfected by the E6E7 gene of human
papilloma virus 16. Am J Pathol 1996;148:1763–70.
12. Karhadkar SS, Bova GS, Abdallah N, et al. Hedgehog
signalling in prostate regeneration, neoplasia and
metastasis. Nature 2004;431:707–12.
13. Embuscado EE, Laheru D, Ricci F, et al. Immortalizing the complexity of cancer metastasis: genetic
features of lethal metastatic pancreatic cancer obtained
from rapid autopsy. Cancer Biol Ther 2005;4:548–54.
14. Amoh Y, Yang M, Li L, et al. Nestin-linked green
fluorescent protein transgenic nude mouse for imaging human tumor angiogenesis. Cancer Res 2005;65:
5352–7.
15. Amoh Y, Li L, Tsuji K, et al. Dual-color imaging of
nascent blood vessels vascularizing pancreatic cancer in
an orthotopic model demonstrates antiangiogenesis
efficacy of gemcitabine. J Surg Res 2006;132:164–9.
16. Storms RW, Trujillo AP, Springer JB, et al. Isolation of
primitive human hematopoietic progenitors on the
basis of aldehyde dehydrogenase activity. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 1999;96:9118–23.
17. Storms RW, Green PD, Safford KM, et al. Distinct
hematopoietic progenitor compartments are delineated
by the expression of aldehyde dehydrogenase and CD34.
Blood 2005;106:95–102.
18. Hess DA, Meyerrose TE, Wirthlin L, et al. Functional

2196

characterization of highly purified human hematopoietic repopulating cells isolated according to aldehyde
dehydrogenase activity. Blood 2004;104:1648–55.
19. Pearce DJ, Taussig D, Simpson C, et al. Characterization of cells with a high aldehyde dehydrogenase activity
from cord blood and acute myeloid leukemia samples.
Stem Cells 2005;23:752–60.
20. Huber MA, Kraut N, Beug H. Molecular requirements
for epithelial-mesenchymal transition during tumor
progression. Curr Opin Cell Biol 2005;17:548–58.
21. Zhou BP, Hung MC. Wnt, hedgehog and snail: sister
pathways that control by GSK-3h and h-Trcp in the
regulation of metastasis. Cell Cycle 2005;4:772–6.
22. Hess DA, Wirthlin L, Craft TP, et al. Selection based
on CD133 and high aldehyde dehydrogenase activity
isolates long-term reconstituting human hematopoietic
stem cells. Blood 2006;107:2162–9.
23. Bauer TW, Liu W, Fan F, et al. Targeting of urokinase
plasminogen activator receptor in human pancreatic
carcinoma cells inhibits c-Met- and insulin-like growth
factor-I receptor-mediated migration and invasion and
orthotopic tumor growth in mice. Cancer Res 2005;65:
7775–81.
24. Lees C, Howie S, Sartor RB, Satsangi J. The hedgehog
signalling pathway in the gastrointestinal tract: implications for development, homeostasis, and disease.
Gastroenterology 2005;129:1696–710.
25. Romer JT, Kimura H, Magdaleno S, et al. Suppression
of the Shh pathway using a small molecule inhibitor
eliminates medulloblastoma in Ptc1(+/ )p53( / )
mice. Cancer Cell 2004;6:229–40.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Blockade of Hedgehog Signaling Inhibits Pancreatic Cancer
Invasion and Metastases: A New Paradigm for Combination
Therapy in Solid Cancers
Georg Feldmann, Surajit Dhara, Volker Fendrich, et al.
Cancer Res 2007;67:2187-2196.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/5/2187
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2007/02/28/67.5.2187.DC1

This article cites 25 articles, 6 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/5/2187.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 66 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/5/2187.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

