Correspondence

Age-Related Differences in
Quality of Life Among Patients
With Diffuse Large B-Cell
Lymphoma
We read with great interest the article by Williams et al1
regarding the treatment of very elderly patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). They concluded
that the R-CHOP regimen (rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone) conferred
the longest survival and should also be considered for
patients aged >80 years. However, they also stated that
studies are needed to characterize the impact of DLBCL
treatment on quality of life and to determine optimal
R-CHOP dosing for very elderly patients. We very much
agree that it is important to include the impact of cancer
and its treatment on quality of life when making (shared)
decisions concerning optimal treatment. We recently
published 2 population-based studies on quality of life
among patients with DLBCL, including the elderly.2,3
We observed that patients aged 18 to 59 years, 60 to
75 years, and 76 to 85 years all reported significantly and
clinically relevantly worse mean scores on physical, role,
cognitive, and social functioning and reported more
symptoms such as fatigue, dyspnea, and sleeping problems compared with their age-matched and sex-matched
counterparts without cancer, regardless of the DLBCL
treatment they received. Patients aged 18 to 59 years
reported better physical functioning, global health status,
and quality of life and reported fewer symptoms than
patients aged 76 to 85 years. Although these differences
between younger and older patients with DLBCL were of
small clinical importance, it appeared that compared with
the normative population, the largest impacts of cancer
and its treatment were observed among the youngest age
group. An obvious explanation might be that older
patients receive less aggressive treatment, but also may
have better coping strategies through more life experience
and are likely to be faced with lower work-related and
social demands and therefore experience less impact.
Furthermore, a direct comparison between patients
with DLBCL who underwent R-CHOP every 2 weeks
(R-CHOP14) or every 3 weeks (R-CHOP21) demonstrated that patients who underwent R-CHOP14
reported more neuropathy concerns, fatigue, and a
slowed-down feeling. Despite the fact that patients who
underwent R-CHOP14 were on average younger (median
Cancer

August 15, 2015

age, 64 years [range, 21-78 years]) and had fewer comorbid conditions at the time of diagnosis, their global health
status and quality of life were worse during follow-up
compared with patients treated with R-CHOP21, who
were on average older (median age, 69 years [range, 28-86
years]). Because 2 recent trials demonstrated no differences
in overall survival among patients with DLBCL who
underwent R-CHOP14 and R-CHOP21, the authors
advised use of the R-CHOP21 schedule as the standard
first-line treatment for DLBCL.4,5 With respect to
quality of life, it again appears that R-CHOP21 is the
preferred schedule.
Our population-based analyses demonstrated that
quality of life is highly affected by cancer therapy and/or
the cancer itself in both younger and elderly patients with
DLBCL. The balance between quality and quantity of life
is of utmost importance because a large number of
patients have to cope with a lower functional status and
symptoms not only directly after treatment but often for
many years after diagnosis. Before treating the very elderly
with aggressive treatment regimens, it is recommended
that physicians discuss the advantages and disadvantages
of treatment options and, most importantly, a patient’s
wish for quality of life at old age.
FUNDING SUPPORT
No specific funding was disclosed.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
The authors made no disclosures.

REFERENCES
1. Williams JN, Rai A, Lipscomb J, Koff JL, Nastoupil LJ, Flowers CR.
Disease characteristics, patterns of care, and survival in very elderly
patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Cancer. 2015;121:18001808.
2. Oerlemans S, Issa DE, van den Broek EC, et al. Health-related quality of life and persistent symptoms in relation to (R-)CHOP14,
(R-)CHOP21, and other therapies among patients with diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma: results of the population-based PHAROS-registry.
Ann Hematol. 2014;93:1705-1715.
3. van der Poel MW, Oerlemans S, Schouten HC, et al. Quality of life
more impaired in younger than in older diffuse large B cell lymphoma survivors compared to a normative population: a study from
the population-based PROFILES registry. Ann Hematol. 2014;93:811819.
4. Cunningham D, Hawkes EA, Jack A, et al. Rituximab plus cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisolone in patients with
newly diagnosed diffuse large B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma: a phase
3 comparison of dose intensification with 14-day versus 21-day cycles.
Lancet. 2013;381:1817-1826.
5. Delarue R, Tilly H, Mounier N, et al. Dose-dense rituximab-CHOP
compared with standard rituximab-CHOP in elderly patients with
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (the LNH03-6B study): a randomised
phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2013;14:525-533.

2857

Correspondence
Simone Oerlemans, PhD
Department of Research
Netherlands Comprehensive Cancer Organisation (IKNL)
Eindhoven, The Netherlands
Center of Research on Psychology in Somatic Diseases (CoRPS)
Tilburg University
Tilburg, The Netherlands

Marten R. Nijziel, MD, PhD
Department of Internal Medicine/Hemato-Oncology
Maxima Medical Center
Eindhoven/Veldhoven, The Netherlands

Lonneke V. van de Poll-Franse, PhD
Department of Research
Netherlands Comprehensive Cancer Organisation (IKNL)
Eindhoven, The Netherlands
Center of Research on Psychology in Somatic Diseases (CoRPS)
Tilburg University
Tilburg, The Netherlands
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29427, Published online April 29, 2015
in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Reply to Age-Related Differences
in Quality of Life Among Patients
With Diffuse Large B-Cell
Lymphoma
We appreciate the thoughtful correspondence from Oerlemans et al in regard to our article.1 Although patients
aged >80 years have the highest incidence of diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), this population is rarely
included in studies. Thus, we sought to characterize current treatment and survival patterns for patients aged >80
years (1156 patients) to determine the most effective management strategies for this population. To our knowledge,
our study is the largest yet to examine DLBCL treatment
and survival outcomes in patients aged >80 years.
We found that in patients with DLBCL who are
aged >80 years, the combination of rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone
(R-CHOP) was associated with the longest survival, even
after controlling for potential confounders such as
performance status and comorbidity. Although our data
suggested that age alone should not be used as a contraindication to effective treatment, there are a multitude of
other factors that influence DLBCL treatment selection
and survival.2 Quality of life (QOL) is one such important
consideration for elderly patients with cancer.
In their letter, Oerlemans et al presented findings
from their recent studies examining QOL in elderly
patients with DLBCL. They found that those who
received R-CHOP every 2 weeks had decreased healthrelated QOL (HRQOL) compared with patients who
received R-CHOP every 3 weeks.3 In another study, they
2858

found that although cancer and its treatment affect
HRQOL in patients with DLBCL, this effect appears to
be less significant for patients aged 76 to 85 years.4 This
finding was believed to be due to less aggressive treatment
and enhanced coping skills in elderly patients. Taken together, these results emphasize that QOL should be incorporated into treatment decision-making for elderly
patients with DLBCL at both the individual level (incorporating patient preferences) and the population level (to
establish strategies for R-CHOP administration in this
population).
In addition, treatment toxicity is a factor that may
affect HRQOL in elderly patients with DLBCL. A recent
study found that approximately one-third of elderly
patients with DLBCL who received anthracycline-based
therapy experienced toxicity requiring treatment
modification.5 These results suggest that elderly patients are
more susceptible to anthracycline toxicity and that optimal
dosing should be investigated further in this population.
In conclusion, we agree with the points raised by
Oerlemans et al and advocate for further studies examining the effect of DLBCL treatment on QOL and toxicity
in elderly patients.
FUNDING SUPPORT
This work was supported by National Institutes of Health grant
R21CA158686.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
Dr. Flowers is supported by National Institutes of Health grant
R21CA158686 for work performed as part of the current study.
He has acted as a paid consultant for Spectrum, Celgene,
OptumRx, and Seattle Genetics and as an unpaid consultant for
Genentech, Biogen Idec, Roche, and Millennium/Takeda. He has
received research funding from AbbVie, Acerta, Celgene, Gilead
Sciences, Infinity Pharmaceuticals, Janssen Pharmaceuticals, Millennium/Takeda, Spectrum, Onyx Pharmaceuticals, and Pharmacyclics as well as payment for the development of educational
presentations from Clinical Care Options, Educational Concepts,
and Research to Practice.

REFERENCES
1. Williams JN, Rai A, Lipscomb J, Koff JL, Nastoupil LJ, Flowers CR.
Disease characteristics, patterns of care, and survival in very elderly
patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Cancer. 2015;121:18001808.
2. Flowers CR, Nastoupil LJ. Socioeconomic disparities in lymphoma.
Blood. 2014;123:3530-3531.
3. Oerlemans S, Issa DE, van den Broek EC, et al. Health-related
quality of life and persistent symptoms in relation to (R-)CHOP14,
(R-)CHOP21, and other therapies among patients with diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma: results of the population-based PHAROS-registry.
Ann Hematol. 2014;93:1705-1715.
4. van der Poel MW, Oerlemans S, Schouten HC, et al. Quality of life
more impaired in younger than in older diffuse large B cell lymphoma

Cancer

August 15, 2015

