Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 34

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

Tumor growth accelerated by chemotherapy-induced senescent
cells is suppressed by treatment with IL-12 producing cellular
vaccines
Jana Simova1, Olena Sapega1, Terezie Imrichova2, Ivan Stepanek1, Lenka
Kyjacova2, Romana Mikyskova1, Marie Indrova1, Jana Bieblova1, Jan Bubenik3,
Jiri Bartek2,4,5, Zdenek Hodny2, Milan Reinis1
1

Immunology Unit, Czech Centre for Phenogenomics, BIOCEV and Department of Transgenic Models of Diseases, Institute
of Molecular Genetics of the ASCR, v.v.i., Prague 14220, Czech Republic

2

Department of Genome Integrity, Institute of Molecular Genetics, v.v.i., Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, Prague
14220, Czech Republic

3

First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague, Prague 12000, Czech Republic

4

Danish Cancer Society Research Center, Copenhagen DK-2100, Denmark

5

Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Science For Life Laboratory, Division of Translational Medicine and
Chemical Biology, Karolinska Institute, 17121 Solna, Sweden

Correspondence to: Zdenek Hodny, email: hodny@img.cas.cz
Milan Reinis, email: reinis@img.cas.cz
Keywords: cellular senescence, cancer chemotherapy, docetaxel, IL-12, cell therapy
Received: April 18, 2016     Accepted: May 29, 2016     Published: July 19, 2016

Abstract
Standard-of-care chemo- or radio-therapy can induce, besides tumor cell death,
also tumor cell senescence. While senescence is considered to be a principal barrier
against tumorigenesis, senescent cells can survive in the organism for protracted
periods of time and they can promote tumor development. Based on this emerging
concept, we hypothesized that elimination of such potentially cancer-promoting
senescent cells could offer a therapeutic benefit. To assess this possibility, here
we first show that tumor growth of proliferating mouse TC-1 HPV-16-associated
cancer cells in syngeneic mice becomes accelerated by co-administration of TC-1
or TRAMP-C2 prostate cancer cells made senescent by pre-treatment with the
anti-cancer drug docetaxel, or lethally irradiated. Phenotypic analyses of tumorexplanted cells indicated that the observed acceleration of tumor growth was
attributable to a protumorigenic environment created by the co-injected senescent
and proliferating cancer cells rather than to escape of the docetaxel-treated cells
from senescence. Notably, accelerated tumor growth was effectively inhibited by cell
immunotherapy using irradiated TC-1 cells engineered to produce interleukin IL-12.
Collectively, our data document that immunotherapy, such as the IL-12 treatment,
can provide an effective strategy for elimination of the detrimental effects caused by
bystander senescent tumor cells in vivo.

Introduction

matrix components and remodeling factors, cytokines and
chemokines including proinflammatory species as well
as other factors mediating intercellular communications
[7]. Besides cell death, senescence can be induced in
tumor cells during chemotherapy or radiotherapy [8, 9].
In such case, the fate and the function of surviving
senescent tumor cells, including the effects of SASP
on tumor microenvironment, are considered to play an
important role in tumor progression with influence on the
effectiveness of antitumor therapy. There is accumulating
evidence that the presence of senescent cells in the tumor

Cellular senescence, an irreversible cell-cycle
arrest, represents a principal barrier against tumorigenesis
[1–3]. Senescent cells do not proliferate, however, they
remain metabolically active and are able to further
influence biological processes within the body [4]. These
‘bystander’ effects are mediated by numerous molecules
produced by the senescent cells, commonly termed
senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP; [5, 6]).
SASP comprises mainly growth factors, extracellular
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

54952

Oncotarget

and their SASP-related effects can be tumor growthpromoting [10]. It can be presumed therefore that not only
the induction of cancer cell senescence itself, but also
subsequent elimination of senescent cells will contribute,
in a tumor-stage-dependent manner, to the overall antitumor barrier capacity. Indeed, it has been shown that
oncogene-induced senescent murine hepatocytes were
cleared by the immune system, through a process termed
‘senescence surveillance’ [11]. Importantly, impaired
senescence surveillance in this model resulted in the
induction of hepatocarcinoma. Furthermore, in MMTVWnt1-driven mammary tumors, persistence of senescent
cells secreting senescence-associated cytokines displayed
protumorigenic potential and contributed to tumor
relapse [12]. The importance of senescence surveillance
in aging has also been demonstrated in a study in which
clearance of senescent cells (p16Ink4a) suppressed and/or
delayed development of ageing-associated symptoms in a
progeroid mouse model [13].
The first example documenting tumor-promoting
effects of senescent cells co-administered with
proliferating tumor cells was reported by Krtolica et al.
[14] who showed that co-injection of senescent fibroblasts
with human mammary tumor cells accelerated tumor
growth in immunocompromised mice. Later on, however,
it was shown that although senescent human prostate
cancer cells increased proliferation of co-cultured tumor
cells in vitro, such accelerating impact on xenograft
tumor cell growth in nude mice was not observed [8]
indicating impact of some still unidentified factors on this
phenomenon.
Interleukin 12 (IL-12), a cytokine connecting innate
and adaptive immunity, represents one of the important
players in induction of anti-tumor immune response [15].
Produced mainly by antigen presenting cells, such as
dendritic cells, macrophages, monocytes or B cells upon
their activation, IL-12 exerts its effects mainly through
induction of IFNγ, as well as NK and T cell activation
[16, 17]. Antitumor immunotherapy with IL-12
administered in different forms, including the usage of
irradiated tumor cells producing IL-12, has been studied
[15, 18, 19]. In several experimental tumor models,
including those used in our laboratory, anti-tumor
immunogenicity could be enhanced by administration of
IL-12 or by gene therapy with tumor cells engineered to
produce IL-12 (for reviews, see [20–22]).
This intriguing accumulating data inspired our
present working hypothesis, namely that IL-12-based
immunotherapy might be able to mitigate or entirely
eliminate the pro-tumorigenic effects of bystander
senescent cells. Indeed, here we document an acceleration
of tumor growth, when proliferating TC-1 tumor cells
were co-administered into syngeneic mice together
with syngeneic tumor cells that had been subjected to
senescence-inducing treatment with docetaxel (DTX).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Furthermore, we also document effective treatment of such
tumors by cell therapy using irradiated IL-12-producing
tumor cells.

Results
DTX induces senescence in mouse tumor cells
TC-1 and TRAMP-C2
First, we evaluated the impact of DTX in terms of
senescence induction, using two C57Bl/6 mice-derived
tumor cell lines TC-1 and TRAMP-C2 of lung and prostate
epithelial origin, respectively. Both TC-1 and TRAMP-C2
cells were susceptible to DTX and underwent senescence
after a four-day incubation with 7.5 µM DTX [23]. After
this treatment, the vast majority of TC-1 and TRAMP-C2
cells were alive but senescent, as characterized by the lack
of cell proliferation, increased senescence-associatedβ-galactosidase activity, characteristic cell morphology
and increased expression of p16INK4a and p21waf1
inhibitors of cyclin-dependent kinases. Most of the
senescent cells showed persistent DNA damage response,
as judged from the presence of DNA damage foci positive
for serine 139-phosphorylated histone H2AX (γH2AX;
Figure 1, Figure 3B). Cessation of DNA replication was
verified by incorporation of EdU. Only limited subsets
of EdU-positive cells were observed in both TC-1 and
TRAMP-C2 cell populations by FACS analysis (Figure
2A). Such residual EdU positivity can most likely be
accounted for by ongoing DNA repair of the observed
DNA damage (γH2AX) and/or aberrant endoreduplication
uncoupled
from
cell
division
(Figure
2B)
as we did not observe any proliferation of cells upon the
DTX-treatment (Figure 3A). Most importantly for our
subsequent experiments, subcutaneous administration
of such senescent cells into animals did not lead to
development of tumors (Figure 3C).
Pro-tumorigenic effects of senescent cells are believed
to be mediated through their secretome [5]. Therefore,
we analyzed any potential expression changes among
84 cytokines/chemokines evaluated during the course of
the DTX-induced senescence in TC-1 and TRAMP-C2
cell lines. Indeed, expression of more than two dozens of
cytokines was altered (either upregulated or downregulated;
fold change > 2) in both TC-1 and TRAMP-C2 tumor cell
lines. Elevated mRNA levels of a number of inflammatory
and immunoregulatory factors, such as CSF2, CXCL1,
CXCL16, TNFSF13b, adiponectin, CCL19, CCLl20,
CCL4, CCL5, CD70, CNTF, CSF3, CXCL10, HC, IL10, IL-13, IL-17f, IL-27, IL-6, LIF, TNF were observed
(Supplementary Table 1). Notably, some of these factors are
endowed with documented pro-tumorigenic properties, such
as CXCL1 or IL-6 [7]. Elevated mRNA levels of the TNF
family (FasL, TNSFS13b, TNF-α) were observed as well.

54953

Oncotarget

Admixture of senescent cells accelerates
tumorigenic potential of proliferating TC-1 cells

cells (Figure 4B). Again, the presence of syngeneic
bystander senescent cells accelerated the tumor growth.
Significantly accelerated tumorigenicity was achieved also
with admixture of proliferating TRAMP-C2 cancer cells
(Figure 4C), as expected, and, interestingly, by adding
lethally irradiated tumor cells (Figure 4D). Flow cytometry
phenotypic analysis of cells explanted from the tumors and
cultured for seven days ex vivo, taking advantage of the
TC-1 and TRAMP-C2 mutual discrimination using the
CD80 cell surface marker (TC-1 cells are CD80-positive
while TRAMP-C2 are CD80-negative), revealed that the
vast majority of tumor cells present in the tumors that
had arisen from co-injection of TC-1 proliferating cells
with senescent TRAMP-C2 cells were TC-1 tumor cells
(Figure 5). This indicates that the senescent cells did not

In order to test whether ‘bystander’ senescent cells
can influence tumor growth, proliferating TC-1 tumor cells
were injected into mice either alone (3 × 104 cells/mouse)
or admixed with docetaxel-induced senescent TC-1
cells (3 × 105 cells/mouse). As shown in Figure 4A, coadministration of the bystander DTX-treated (senescent)
cells and proliferating TC-1 cells into syngeneic animals
resulted in significantly accelerated tumor growth,
as compared to the tumors when the proliferating
TC-1 cells were injected alone. Next, we performed
an analogous experiment in which TC-1 proliferating
cells were co-administered with senescent TRAMP-C2

Figure 1: Docetaxel induces senescence in TC-1 and TRAMP-C2 cells. Senescence-associated β-galactosidase activity in TC-1

and TRAMP-C2 cells treated with DTX (7.5 μM) for 4 days (A). Phase contrast microscopic images of control and DTX-treated (7.5 μM)
TC-1 and TRAMP-C2 cells at day 4 after the treatment (B). Immunoblotting detection of mouse p16INK4A (p16) and p21waf1/cip1 (p21)
in control and DTX-treated (7.5 μM) TC-1 and TRAMP-C2 cells harvested at day 4 and 6 after the treatment. GAPDH was used as a
loading control (C). qRT-PCR quantification of p16 and p21 in control and DTX-treated (7.5 μM) TC-1 and TRAMP-C2 cells harvested at
day 4 and 6 after the treatment. Data represent means ± S.D. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.005 (D).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

54954

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Analysis of TC-1 and TRAMP-C2 cell proliferation by EdU incorporation. The cells were driven to senescence

by 4-day treatment with 7.5 µM docetaxel (DTX) and then incubated with 10 µM EdU for 6 h. Click-iT reaction was performed on fixed
cells and FACS analysis was carried out to determine the fraction of proliferating cells in DTX-treated and control samples (A). Control
and DTX-treated TC-1 and TRAMP-C2 cells were incubated with 10 µM EdU for 6 h. Following fixation, Click-iT reaction was performed
and the coverslips were mounted with Mowiol containing DAPI (B).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

54955

Oncotarget

bypass senescence in vivo in our settings and thus they
did not contribute to the growing cell mass of the tumor.
On the other hand, admixture of proliferating instead of
senescent TRAMP-C2 cells resulted in tumors consisting
of both TC-1 and TRAMP-C2 cells, in spite of the fact that
the TRAMP-C2 cells were injected in a number lower than
the number of cells sufficient to ensure tumor growth in
all injected animals. Collectively, these data demonstrate
that bystander senescent tumor cells can evoke a tumor

growth-promoting microenvironment, a property shared
by bystander lethally irradiated tumor cells.

IL-12-based immunotherapy suppresses
senescence-accelerated tumor growth
We have previously reported induction of IFNγ
upon in vivo administration of an IL-12-producing cellular
vaccine by ELISPOT analysis of spleen cells, as well as

Figure 3: Docetaxel-induced DNA damage and senescence in TC-1 and TRAMP-C2 cell lines in vitro and in vivo. Cells

were seeded onto 6-well plates in triplicates and treated with 7.5 µM docetaxel (DTX) or left untreated (control). Cell proliferation was
determined by counting cell number every 24 h and plotted as log2 ratio of final cell number to number of seeded cells, to compensate
for differential seeding capacity of control versus the DTX-treated cells (A). To detect DNA damage, control and DTX-treated cells were
stained with phosphoSer139 H2AX (γH2AX) antibody and mounted with Mowiol containing DAPI (B). Mice were transplanted s.c. on day
0 with TC-1 cells (3 × 104) or with senescent DTX-treated cells at the doses 3 × 104 [TC-1/DTX(a)] or 5 × 105 [TC-1/DTX(b)] tumor cells,
respectively, and the tumor growth was monitored. The experiment was repeated three times with similar results (C).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

54956

Oncotarget

We conclude from these in vivo experiments that IL-12based immunotherapy strategies analogous to the one we
evaluated in this pre-clinical study may be effective also
against the accelerated tumor growth fueled by the local
microenvironment modified by the presence of bystander
tumor senescent cells.

determination of the IFNγ levels in plasma by ELISA [24].
Given that IL-12-mediated antitumor effects are associated
with induction of IFNγ, we have hypothesized that
immunotherapy with IL-12 could be effective against
both the proliferating and senescent tumor cells by
concomitantly inducing non-specific as well as specific
immune responses and thereby inhibiting growth of
the senescent cell-accelerated tumors. To test this
working hypothesis, here we employed irradiated IL-12producing TC-1-derived cells, injected into the vicinity of
in vivo growing tumors in two scenarios: i) either tumors
growing from proliferating TC-1 cells alone, or ii) tumors
growing in an accelerated fashion upon co-injection of
the proliferating TC-1 cells with TC-1/DTX senescent
cells. Consistent with our hypothesis, compared to rapid
growth of mock-treated tumors, treatment with the IL-12producing TC-1-based cellular vaccine greatly inhibited
tumor growth under both tumorigenic scenarios (Figure 6).

Discussion
From a broader perspective, our present results
contribute to the field of tumor cell senescence and
immunotherapy in several ways.
First, we show that chemotherapy-induced (here
by DTX treatments) tumor cell senescence can indeed
exert a tumor-promoting effect under syngeneic in vivo
conditions. DTX, a chemotherapeutic agent used either
alone or in standard-of-care combination treatments

Figure 4: Co-administration of DTX-treated senescent cells accelerates tumor growth. Mice were transplanted s.c. on day 0

with TC-1 cells (3 × 104 cells per mouse) admixed with senescent, DTX-treated TC-1 cells (TC-1/DTX; 3 × 105) (A); with senescent, DTXtreated TRAMP-C2 cells (TRAMP-C2/DTX; 3 × 105 cells per mouse) (B); with irradiated TC-1 cells (150 Gy; 3 × 105 cells per mouse) (C);
or proliferating TRAMP-C2 cells (3 × 105) (D). Controls were mice transplanted s.c. on day 0 with proliferating TC-1 cells (3 × 104 cells
per mouse) only. In all experiments, significant acceleration of the tumor growth was observed (p < 0.05). The experiments were repeated
three times with similar results.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

54957

Oncotarget

for various types of human malignancies, has been
previously shown to induce massive cellular senescence
in several tumor cell lines [23, 25]. In this study, we
have demonstrated that DTX, when administered to two
tumorigenic cell lines TC-1 and TRAMP-C2 in vitro in
subapoptotic doses, induced persistent DNA damage
response, cell cycle arrest and development of senescencelike phenotype accompanied by complex alteration of
cytokine expression/secretion. This is in agreement
with the current views that DNA damage signaling
and repair networks are closely tied with the immune
response signaling pathways [26]. Dependent on (patho)

physiological context, such links can have either positive
or detrimental impact on organismal health. Although protumorigenic effects of senescent cells, namely fibroblasts,
mediated by their SASP have been studied in the past
[6], there has been paucity of studies documenting protumorigenic effects of tumor cells brought into senescence
by genotoxic chemotherapeutic agents, a gap in our
knowledge partly filled by our present results.
Second, our major objective was to set up an
in vivo model in which the impact of senescent cells on
tumor growth could be investigated in the context of
non-immunocompromised syngeneic animals, to better

Figure 5: Cell surface marker analysis of explanted tumor cells. Explanted tumor cells were cultured for seven days and

analyzed for the proportion of TC-1 (CD80+) and TRAMP-C2 (CD80−) cells by flow cytometry using CD80 as a marker (filled histograms;
empty histograms represent isotype controls). To exclude leukocytes from the analysis, CD45+ cells were gated out. For comparison,
explanted cells were cultured in the culture medium optimized either for TC-1 cells (upper row) or for TRAMP-C2 cells (lower row) (A).
Flow cytometry analysis of the CD80 cell surface expression on cultured TC-1 and TRAMP-C2 cells, as well as their mixed culture (B).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

54958

Oncotarget

mimic the clinical human scenario. We argued that
such model would help elucidate the biological impact
of bystander senescent tumor cells under conditions
permissive for interactions of the growing tumor with
the host immune system, a complex interplay that
can dramatically influence tumor microenvironment
and cancer development in general. This fundamental
biological aspect of tumorigenesis is unfortunately
missing in the widely used xenograft tumor models based
on immunodeficient animals, and it is a major advantage
of the dataset presented here.
Another major advantage of our present study
is the nature of the senescent cells used in our in vivo
experiments. Thus, most previous studies dealt with
the effects of senescent fibroblasts present in the tumor
stroma on the proliferation of human tumor cells. Bavik
et al. have demonstrated that both direct co-culture and
conditioned medium from senescent fibroblasts stimulated
neoplastic epithelial cells proliferation in vitro [27].
Further, senescent fibroblasts have been shown to promote
neoplastic transformation of partially transformed ovarian
epithelial cells in a three dimensional spheroid cell
culture model [28]. Moreover, in vivo experiments were
performed using nude mice in which xenograft tumor
growth was monitored. Accelerated tumor growth was
observed when senescent fibroblasts (1.5 × 106 cells) were
co-injected with the same number of proliferating MDA231 human breast cancer cells into (nu/nu) mice [14].
However, in the study performed by Ewald et al., the
admixture of 0.5 × 106 senescent doxorubicin-treated DU145 human prostate cancer cells with the equal number of
proliferating cells did not result in any growth acceleration
of the xenografted tumor [8]. In contrast, in our present

study using syngeneic immunocompetent C57BL/6 model,
we observed that the presence of senescent syngeneic tumor
cells did augment the growth of tumors in vivo. We propose
that the apparent discrepancy between the negative data of
Ewald et al. [14] on the one hand, and our positive results
documenting tumor growth acceleration on the other, might
be attributable to better fitness and proliferation potential
of tumor cells in the syngeneic system, cell type specific
sensitivity or differences in the SASP of senescent cells
or, importantly, the requirement of interactions between
the senescent cells and the immune system or developing
tumor stroma. Indeed, these important factors that are
present in our syngeneic, immunocompetent model system,
cannot be established in any heterologous system due to
an uneven compatibility of mouse and human signaling
components and compromised immunity. In addition,
we believe that using much fewer senescent cells in
our present experiments (we used the ratio between the
proliferating tumor cells: 3 × 104 cells/mouse, and the
admixed docetaxel-treated senescent TC-1 or TRAMP-C2
cells at 3 × 105 cells/mouse), compared to higher
amounts of senescent cells in the previous studies [14],
is a more realistic scenario that further supports the value
of our model system.
Notably, our analysis of cytokine and chemokine
transcript levels in the DTX-treated senescent tumor
cells demonstrated upregulation of numerous cytokine
species including those implicated in supporting tumor
growth (such as CXCL1, IL-1 or IL-6). This effect of
docetaxel is in accord with previous studies showing that
persistent DNA damage response induced by various
chemotherapeutics results in complex changes in cytokine
expression and secretion (reviewed in [6]). As expected,

Figure 6: IL-12-based immunotherapy suppresses senescence-accelerated tumor growth. Mice were transplanted on day
0 s.c. with TC-1 cells (3 × 104), docetaxel-induced senescent TC-1/DTX (3 × 105) or TC-1 cells (3 × 104) admixed with TC-1/DTX. IL-12
producing TC-1/IL-12 cells were administered on day 3 in the vicinity of transplanted control TC-1 cells and TC-1 cells admixture with
TC-1/DTX senescent cells. The experiment was repeated twice with similar results. p < 0.05 TC-1 as compared to TC-1/DTX; p < 0.05
TC-1 as compared to TC-1 + TC-1/IL-12; p < 0.05 TC-1 + TC-1/DTX vs. TC-1 + TC-1/DTX + TC-1/IL-12.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

54959

Oncotarget

approach. Although senescent cells do not proliferate,
they remain alive in vitro for long periods of time. Using
a mouse liver carcinoma model, it has been demonstrated,
that senescent tumor cells induced innate immune response
due to their inflammatory cytokine secretion, accompanied
by increase of leukocyte attracting molecules like ICAM1
or VCAM1. Consequently, senescent tumor cells were
cleared from the organism [31]. Senescent cells can also
induce specific immunity, as has been illustrated through
their use as experimental cellular vaccines [32]. These
facts suggest that detrimental effects of senescent cells
can be eliminated using effective immunotherapy. IL-12,
as a cytokine bridging innate and adaptive immunity,
capable of activating NK cells, as well as inducing Th1
immune responses, appears to be a suitable candidate for
such treatment. We have previously demonstrated the
potential of IL-12-producing cellular vaccines that can be
conveniently administered in the tumor vicinity, in several
therapeutic chemo-immunotherapeutic settings. Here,
we advance such studies and clearly document that the
IL-12-based therapy can effectively inhibit development
of tumors, including those whose growth was accelerated
by the presence of bystander senescent cells.
Collectively, our work presented here has
established a murine model that is beneficial for research
into pro-tumorigenic effects of senescent cells, as well
as innovative therapeutic strategies. Last but not least,
our present dataset has documented that IL-12-mediated
therapy may represent a feasible way to minimize or
eliminate the adverse tumor-promoting effects of bystander
senescent cells that may accumulate in vivo either due to
endogenous oncogene-induced stimuli or insults caused by
genotoxic chemotherapy and radiotherapy.

when comparing cytokine profiles among different cell
lines, there are some variations in the levels of specific
cytokines. However, some shared, consistently altered
species found in human senescent cells such as IL6 and
CSF2 are also present in the secretome of the DXTinduced mouse senescent cells used here. For given
tumor cells, these variations in secreted signaling ligands
can have specific contributions to their respective tumor
microenvironment and can possibly result in distinct
responses to the same therapeutics.
In control experiments, we have proved that the
growth acceleration could be achieved also by a senescent
tumor cell type distinct from the proliferating one. This
suggests that senescent cells can promote growth of tumor
cells of different tissue origin, thus potentially fueling
secondary malignancies of either the same or different
tissues exposed to chemotherapy. Furthermore, relevant
to radiotherapy and its potential late adverse effects, we
show here in yet another set of experiments that also cells
in which genotoxic stress was induced by irradiation,
rather than chemotherapy, share the capacity to promote
accelerated tumor growth.
There is still debate on ‘stability’ versus reversibility
of the senescence phenotype, and there is mounting
evidence that senescent cells can sometimes bypass their
growth arrest and re-enter the cell cycle [29]. Interestingly,
docetaxel-treated tumor cells can form polyploid senescent
cells and subsequently re-enter the cell cycle and acquire a
chemoresistant phenotype [30]. However, our analyses of
the cell surface markers of the explanted tumor cells that
formed the established tumors after TC-1 inoculation, the
growth of which had been accelerated by the presence of
senescent TRAMP-C2 cells, did not suggest any significant
degree of senescence bypass among the TRAMP-C2 cells,
since the vast majority of the explanted tumor cells were
of TC-1 origin. These data suggest that the tumor growth
was accelerated by paracrine pro-tumorigenic effects of
the bystander senescent tumor cells. Unfortunately, in
the scenario we have used, it is impossible to distinguish
between direct effects on tumor cell proliferation versus
more indirect impact through the tumor microenvironment
or antitumor immunity, as the critical processes probably
occurred shortly upon tumor cell administration when
they are very difficult to follow. In a control experiment,
in which TC-1 tumor cells were co-administered with
proliferating TRAMP-C2 cells (although in suboptimal
dose), analysis of cells from explanted tumors revealed
that both TC-1 and TRAMP-C2 cells were present, as
expected.
The major objective of our study was to develop
a murine model that would enable us to test the
immunotherapy efficacy in elimination of senescent cells
and/or their detrimental tumor promoting effects and to
demonstrate the effectiveness of the immunotherapy

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

materials and Methods
Cell culture
TC-1 cell line was obtained by in vitro cotransfection of murine lung C57BL/6 cells with HPV16
E6/E7 and activated human H-Ras (G12V) oncogenes [33].
IL-12-gene modified TC-1/IL-12 (231/clone 15) cells used
for immunotherapy produced in vitro 40 ng IL-12/1 × 105
cells/ml medium/48 h and were irradiated (150 Gy) before
use [34]. TC-1 cells were cultured in RPMI 1640 medium
supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum, L-glutamine and
antibiotics. TRAMP-C2 prostate carcinoma cells [35] were
obtained from ATCC collection. TRAMP-C2 cells were
maintained in D-MEM medium (Sigma-Aldrich, Saint
Louis, MO, USA) supplemented with 5% FCS, Nu-Serum
IV (5%; BD Biosciences, Bedford, MA, USA), 5 mg/ml
human insulin (Sigma-Aldrich), dehydroisoandrosterone
(DHEA, 10 nM; Sigma-Aldrich) and antibiotics [36].

54960

Oncotarget

Induction of senescence and characterization of
senescent cells

performed in ABI Prism 7300 (Applied Biosystems)
using SYBR Select Master Mix containing SYBR
GreenE dye (Applied Biosystems). The relative quantity
of cDNA was estimated by ΔΔCT method and data were
normalized to β-actin (ACTB). Following primers were
purchased from East Port (Prague, Czech Republic):
ACTB_fw: 5′-CATTGCTGACAGGATGCAGAAGG-3′,
ACTB_rev: 5′-TGCTGGAAGGTGGACAGTGAGG-3′;
p21_fw: 5′-CAGATCCACAGCGATATCCA-3′, p21_
rev: 5′-ACGGGACCGAAGAGACAAC-3′; and p16_
fw: 5′-CGTGAACATGTTGTTGAGGC-3′, p16_rev:
5′-GCAGAAGAGCTGCTACGTGA-3′. Data represent
values from three independent experiments performed in
3 technical replicates.

To induce senescence in tumor cells, cells were
cultured for 4 days in medium containing 7.5 µM
DTX (Actavis, North Brunswick, NJ). Senescence was
evaluated by using Senescence β-galactosidase Staining
Kit (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA)
according to manufacturer’s instructions. Images were
captured by Dino-Lite (Dino-Lite Europe (Naarden,
Netherlands) by using inverted tissue culture microscope
Nicon TMS (Nicon, Tokyo, Japan) and by inverted tissue
culture microscope Nicon Eclipse TE300 (Nicon, Tokyo,
Japan) equipped with Leica DFC490 camera and LAS AF
software (Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany).

EdU incorporation, Click-iT reaction and FACS
analysis

Antibodies
The following antibodies were used for
immunoblotting: anti-mouse p21waf1/cip1 (p21) rabbit
monoclonal antibody (ab109199) and anti-mouse
p16INK4A (p16) rabbit polyclonal antibody (ab189034)
were purchased from Abcam (Cambridge, UK), antimouse GAPDH rabbit monoclonal antibody (14C10) was
purchased from Cell Signaling Technology (Danvers,
MA, USA). IgG-HRP anti-rabbit secondary antibody
produced in goat (170–6515) was purchased from Bio-Rad
Laboratories (Hercules, CA, USA).

TRAMP-C2 and TC-1 cells were driven to
senescence by DTX as described above. On the fourth
day of DTX treatment, cells were incubated with 10 µM
5-ethynyl-2′-deoxyuridine (EdU) for 6  h. For Click-iT
reaction cells were washed by PBS, detached by trypsin,
washed by PBS again and fixed by 4% formaldehyde for
15 min. The fixed cells were washed in PBS, permeabilized
by 0.2% Triton X-100 for 5 min and washed by 1% BSA/
PBS. Click-iT reaction was performed with Click-iT EdU
Alexa Fluor 647 Kit (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA)
according to manufacturer’s instructions. After that, cells
were washed twice in PBS and resuspended in fresh PBS
for FACS analysis. FACS analysis was performed using
an LSR II flow cytometer (BD Biosciences) and data
analyzed by FlowJo 7.6.5 software.

SDS-PAGE and immunoblotting
Cells were washed with PBS, harvested into
Laemmli SDS sample lysis buffer (2% SDS, 50 mM
Tris-Cl, 10% glycerol in double distilled water) and
sufficiently sonicated (3 × 15 seconds at 4 micron
amplitude with 15 seconds cooling intervals) on Soniprep
150 (MSE, London, UK). Concentration of proteins was
estimated by the BCA method (Pierce Biotechnology, IL,
Rockford, USA). 100 mM DTT and 0.01% bromphenol
blue was added to lysates before separation by SDS-PAGE
(14% gel was used). The same protein amount (35 μg) was
loaded into each well. Proteins were electrotransferred
onto a nitrocellulose membrane using wet transfer and
detected by specific antibodies combined with horseradish
peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody. Peroxidase
activity was detected by ECL (Pierce Biotechnology).
GAPDH was used as a marker of equal loading.

FACS analysis of explanted tumor cells
Cell surface expression of CD45 and CD80 on
the tumor cells explanted from tumor bearing mice was
analyzed by flow cytometry. Cell suspensions were washed
and preincubated with anti-CD16/CD32 antibody to
minimize non-specific binding for 15 min at 4°C following
washing step and incubation with labeled primary antibody
for 30 min at 4°C. Relevant isotype controls of irrelevant
specificity were used. FACS buffer (PBS, 1% FBS, 0.1%
NaN3) was used for all washing steps and analysis. The
following antibodies were used: PE anti-CD80 (16-10A1),
PE anti-CD86 (GL1), BV421 anti-CD45 (30-F11) (BD
Biosciences, San Jose, CA); FACS analysis was performed
using an LSR II flow cytometer (BD Biosciences) and data
analyzed by FlowJo 7.6.5 software.

Quantitative real time PCR (qRT-PCR)
Total RNA samples were isolated using RNeasy
Mini Kit (Qiagen Sciences, Germantown, MD, USA).
First strand cDNA was synthesized from 500 ng of
total RNA with random hexamer primers using HighCapacity cDNA Reverse Transcription kit (Applied
Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). qRT-PCR was
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Immunolabeling and fluorescence microscopy
Cells were grown on glass coverslips were driven to
senescence by DTX as described above. On the fourth day
of DTX treatment, cells were fixed by 4% formaldehyde
54961

Oncotarget

Data processing and statistical analyses

for 20 min and permeabilized by 0.2% Triton X-100
for 5 min. Subsequently, cells were washed with PBS,
blocked in 25% FBS/PBS for 30 min and stained with
primary antibodies diluted in 1% BSA/PBS for 1 h. After
double-wash by PBS cells were stained with secondary
antibody diluted in 1% BSA/PBS for 45 min, doublewashed by PBS again and mounted in Mowiol, containing
4′,6-diamidine-2-phenylindole (DAPI; Sigma) counterstain (1 mg/ml). Fluorescence microscopy was performed
using fluorescence microscope Leica CTR6000 (Leica
Microsystems) equipped with monochrome digital camera
DFC350 FX and Leica LAS AF Lite software.
The antibodies used: phospho-Ser139 H2AX, rabbit,
polyclonal, Cell Signaling, 1 : 200; Alexa 488 goat antirabbit, Invitrogen, 1 : 1000.

For evaluation of in vitro experiments, graph
concerning qRT-PCR data was generated using Prism 5
(GraphPad Software, La Jolla, CA USA). qRT-PCR data
represent mean ±  S.D. p-values were calculated using
student t-Test for two samples assuming unequal variances
(Microsoft Excel 2010, Microsoft, Redmond, WA, USA).
p < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
For evaluation of in vivo experiments, Analysis of
Variance (ANOVA) from the NCSS, Number Cruncher
Statistical System (Kaysville, Utah, USA) statistical
package was utilized. Standard deviations are indicated in
the Figures.

Acknowledgments

Cytokine array

The authors are grateful to Mrs. Renata Tureckova
for skillful technical assistance.

Cells were seeded into 75 cm flasks (1 – 3 × 10
cells/flask) and after 6 h, DTX was added to a final
concentration of 7.5 mM and cells were cultivated for 96 h
with/without DTX (7.5 mM). Expression of selected
chemokines/cytokines by tumor cells was analyzed using
Mouse Cytokines & Chemokines PCR Array (PAMM150ZG-4, QIAGEN) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions.
2

6

Conflicts of Interest
All authors declare no competing financial interests.

Grant support
This work was supported by research grant
NT14461 grant from the Grant Agency of the Ministry of
Health of the Czech Republic.

Mice
C57BL/6 male mice, 6 - 8 weeks old, were obtained
from AnLab Co., Prague, Czech Republic. Experimental
protocols were approved by the Institutional Animal Care
Committee of the Institute of Molecular Genetics, Prague.

References
  1.	 Bartkova J, Rezaei N, Liontos M, Karakaidos P, Kletsas D,
Issaeva N, Vassiliou LV, Kolettas E, Niforou K,
Zoumpourlis VC, Takaoka M, Nakagawa H, Tort F, et al.
Oncogene-induced senescence is part of the tumorigenesis
barrier imposed by DNA damage checkpoints. Nature.
2006; 444:633–637.

In vivo experiments
Mice (8 - 10 per group) were transplanted on day
0 s.c. with control TC-1 cells (3 × 104), DTX-induced
senescent TC-1/DTX or TRAMP-C2/DTX cells (3 × 105)
or control TC-1 cells (3 × 104) admixed with TC-1/DTX
or TRAMP-C2/DTX cells. For control, irradiated TC-1
cells (150 Gy), TRAMP-C2 cells injected in admixture
with TC-1 cells were used. To characterize growing
tumors, some tumors were explanted, cultured in vitro for
7 days and the surface expression of CD80 was analyzed
by FACS. IL-12 producing TC-1/IL-12 cells were used in
therapeutic experiments. Cells were administered on day 3
in the vicinity of transplanted control TC-1 cells and TC-1
cells admixture with TC-1/DTX senescent cells. Mice
were observed twice a week and the size of the tumors was
recorded. Two perpendicular diameters of the tumors were
measured with a caliper and the tumor size was expressed
as the tumor area (cm2).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

  2.	 Di Micco R, Fumagalli M, Cicalese A, Piccinin S, Gasparini P,
Luise C, Schurra C, Garre M, Nuciforo PG, Bensimon A,
Maestro R, Pelicci PG, d’Adda di Fagagna F. Oncogeneinduced senescence is a DNA damage response triggered by
DNA hyper-replication. Nature. 2006; 444:638–642.
  3.	 Sager R. Senescence as a mode of tumor suppression.
Environ Health Perspect. 1991; 93:59–62.
  4.	 Campisi J. Senescent cells, tumor suppression, and
organismal aging: good citizens, bad neighbors. Cell. 2005;
120:513–522.
  5.	 Coppe JP, Patil CK, Rodier F, Sun Y, Munoz DP, Goldstein J,
Nelson PS, Desprez PY, Campisi J. Senescence-associated
secretory phenotypes reveal cell-nonautonomous functions
of oncogenic RAS and the p53 tumor suppressor. PLoS
Biol. 2008; 6:2853–2868.

54962

Oncotarget

20.	 Bubenik J. Cytokine gene-modified vaccines in the therapy
of cancer. Pharmacol Ther. 1996; 69:1–14.

  6.	 Davalos AR, Coppe JP, Campisi J, Desprez PY. Senescent
cells as a source of inflammatory factors for tumor
progression. Cancer Metastasis Rev. 2010; 29:273–283.

21.	 Bubenik J. Genetically modified tumour vaccines carrying
inserted genes for immunoregulatory molecules. Folia Biol
(Praha). 1996; 42:295–304.

  7.	 Coppe JP, Desprez PY, Krtolica A, Campisi J. The
senescence-associated secretory phenotype: the dark side
of tumor suppression. Annu Rev Pathol. 2010; 5:99–118.

22.	 Bubenik J. Interleukin 12 in cancer treatment. Folia Biol
(Praha). 2011; 57:1–2.

  8.	 Ewald J, Desotelle J, Almassi N, Jarrard D. Drug-induced
senescence bystander proliferation in prostate cancer cells
in vitro and in vivo. Br J Cancer. 2008; 98:1244–1249.

23.	 Schwarze SR, Fu VX, Desotelle JA, Kenowski ML,
Jarrard DF. The identification of senescence-specific genes
during the induction of senescence in prostate cancer cells.
Neoplasia. 2005; 7:816–823.

  9.	 Gewirtz DA, Holt SE, Elmore LW. Accelerated senescence:
an emerging role in tumor cell response to chemotherapy
and radiation. Biochem Pharmacol. 2008; 76:947–957.

24.	 Simova J, Pollakova V, Indrova M, Mikyskova R, Bieblova J,
Stepanek I, Bubenik J, Reinis M. Immunotherapy augments
the effect of 5-azacytidine on HPV16-associated tumours
with different MHC class I-expression status. Br J Cancer.
2011; 105:1533–1541.

10.	 Hoenicke L, Zender L. Immune surveillance of senescent
cells—biological significance in cancer- and non-cancer
pathologies. Carcinogenesis. 2012; 33:1123–1126.
11.	 Kang TW, Yevsa T, Woller N, Hoenicke L, Wuestefeld T,
Dauch D, Hohmeyer A, Gereke M, Rudalska R, Potapova A,
Iken M, Vucur M, Weiss S, et al. Senescence surveillance of
pre-malignant hepatocytes limits liver cancer development.
Nature. 2011; 479:547–551.

25.	 Di Mitri D, Toso A, Chen JJ, Sarti M, Pinton S, Jost TR,
D’Antuono R, Montani E, Garcia-Escudero R, Guccini I,
Da Silva-Alvarez S, Collado M, Eisenberger M, et al.
Tumour-infiltrating Gr-1+ myeloid cells antagonize
senescence in cancer. Nature. 2014; 515:134–137.

12.	 Jackson James G, Pant V, Li Q, Chang Leslie L, QuintásCardama A, Garza D, Tavana O, Yang P, Manshouri T, Li Y,
El-Naggar Adel K, Lozano G. p53-Mediated Senescence
Impairs the Apoptotic Response to Chemotherapy and
Clinical Outcome in Breast Cancer. Cancer Cell. 2012;
21:793–806.

26.	 Pateras IS, Havaki S, Nikitopoulou X, Vougas K,
Townsend PA, Panayiotidis MI, Georgakilas AG,
Gorgoulis VG. The DNA damage response and immune
signaling alliance: Is it good or bad? Nature decides when
and where. Pharmacology & Therapeutics. 2015; 154:36–56.
27.	 Bavik C, Coleman I, Dean JP, Knudsen B, Plymate S,
Nelson PS. The gene expression program of prostate
fibroblast senescence modulates neoplastic epithelial cell
proliferation through paracrine mechanisms. Cancer Res.
2006; 66:794–802.

13.	 Baker DJ, Wijshake T, Tchkonia T, LeBrasseur NK,
Childs BG, van de Sluis B, Kirkland JL, van Deursen JM.
Clearance of p16Ink4a-positive senescent cells delays
ageing-associated disorders. Nature. 2011; 479:232–236.
14.	 Krtolica A, Parrinello S, Lockett S, Desprez PY, Campisi J.
Senescent fibroblasts promote epithelial cell growth and
tumorigenesis: a link between cancer and aging. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A. 2001; 98:12072–12077.

28.	 Lawrenson K, Grun B, Benjamin E, Jacobs IJ, Dafou D,
Gayther SA. Senescent fibroblasts promote neoplastic
transformation of partially transformed ovarian epithelial
cells in a three-dimensional model of early stage ovarian
cancer. Neoplasia. 2010; 12:317–325.

15.	 Tugues S, Burkhard SH, Ohs I, Vrohlings M, Nussbaum K,
Vom Berg J, Kulig P, Becher B. New insights into
IL-12-mediated tumor suppression. Cell Death Differ. 2015;
22:237–246.

29.	 Beausejour CM, Krtolica A, Galimi F, Narita M, Lowe SW,
Yaswen P, Campisi J. Reversal of human cellular
senescence: roles of the p53 and p16 pathways. Embo J.
2003; 22:4212–4222.

16.	 Grufman P, Karre K. Innate and adaptive immunity to
tumors: IL-12 is required for optimal responses. Eur J
Immunol. 2000; 30:1088–1093.

30.	 Ogden A, Rida PC, Knudsen BS, Kucuk O, Aneja R.
Docetaxel-induced polyploidization may underlie
chemoresistance and disease relapse. Cancer Lett. 2015;
367:89–92.

17.	 Dranoff G. Cytokines in cancer pathogenesis and cancer
therapy. Nat Rev Cancer. 2004; 4:11–22.

31.	 Xue W, Zender L, Miething C, Dickins RA, Hernando E,
Krizhanovsky V, Cordon-Cardo C, Lowe SW. Senescence
and tumour clearance is triggered by p53 restoration in
murine liver carcinomas. Nature. 2007; 445:656–660.

18.	 Indrova M, Bieblova J, Bubenik J, Reinis M. IL-12
immunotherapy of minimal residual disease in murine
models of HPV16-associated tumours: induction of immune
responses, cytokine production and kinetics of immune cell
subsets. Int J Oncol. 2008; 32:499–507.

32.	 Meng Y, Efimova EV, Hamzeh KW, Darga TE, Mauceri HJ,
Fu YX, Kron SJ, Weichselbaum RR. Radiation-inducible
immunotherapy for cancer: senescent tumor cells as a
cancer vaccine. Mol Ther. 2012; 20:1046–1055.

19.	 Indrova M, Bieblova J, Rossowska J, Kuropka P, PajtaszPiasecka E, Bubenik J, Reinis M. HPV 16-associated
tumours: IL-12 can repair the absence of cytotoxic and
proliferative responses of tumour infiltrating cells after
chemotherapy. Int J Oncol. 2009; 34:173–179.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33.	 Lin KY, Guarnieri FG, Staveley-O’Carroll KF, Levitsky HI,
August JT, Pardoll DM, Wu TC. Treatment of established
54963

Oncotarget

tumors with a novel vaccine that enhances major
histocompatibility class II presentation of tumor antigen.
Cancer Res. 1996; 56:21–26.

36.	 Mikyskova R, Stepanek I, Indrova M, Bieblova J, Simova J,
Truxova I, Moserova I, Fucikova J, Bartunkova J, Spisek R,
Reinis M. Dendritic cells pulsed with tumor cells killed by
high hydrostatic pressure induce strong immune responses
and display therapeutic effects both in murine TC-1 and
TRAMP-C2 tumors when combined with docetaxel
chemotherapy. Int J Oncol. 2016; 48:953–964.

34.	 Indrova M, Bieblova J, Jandlova T, Vonka V, PajtaszPiasecka E, Reinis M. Chemotherapy, IL-12 gene therapy
and combined adjuvant therapy of HPV 16-associated MHC
class I-proficient and -deficient tumours. Int J Oncol. 2006;
28:253–259.
35.	 Foster BA, Gingrich JR, Kwon ED, Madias C, Greenberg NM.
Characterization of prostatic epithelial cell lines derived
from transgenic adenocarcinoma of the mouse prostate
(TRAMP) model. Cancer Res. 1997; 57:3325–3330.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

54964

Oncotarget

