Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 17

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Essential role for cyclic-AMP responsive element binding protein
1 (CREB) in the survival of acute lymphoblastic leukemia
Naomi E. van der Sligte1, Kim R. Kampen1, Arja ter Elst1, Frank J.G. Scherpen1,
Tiny G.J. Meeuwsen–de Boer1, Victor Guryev2, Frank N. van Leeuwen3, Steven M.
Kornblau4, Eveline S.J.M. de Bont1
1

 ivision of Pediatric Oncology/Hematology, Department of Pediatrics, Beatrix Children’s Hospital, University Medical Center
D
Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands

2

European Research Institute for The Biology of Ageing, University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen,
Groningen, The Netherlands

3

Laboratory of Pediatric Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud
University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands

4

Department of Leukemia, The University of Texas, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, United States of America

Correspondence to:
Eveline S.J.M. de Bont, e-mail: e.s.j.m.de.bont@umcg.nl
Keywords: acute lymphoblastic leukemia, cyclic-AMP responsive element binding protein, CREB, targeted therapy
Received: January 28, 2015     Accepted: April 24, 2015     Published: May 06, 2015

ABSTRACT
Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) relapse remains a leading cause of cancer
related death in children, therefore, new therapeutic options are needed. Recently, we
showed that a peptide derived from Cyclic-AMP Responsive Element Binding Protein
(CREB) was highly phosphorylated in pediatric leukemias.
In this study, we determined CREB phosphorylation and mRNA levels showing
that CREB expression was significantly higher in ALL compared to normal bone
marrow (phosphorylation: P < 0.0001, mRNA: P = 0.004). High CREB and phosphoCREB expression was correlated with a lower median overall survival in a cohort
of 140 adult ALL patients. ShRNA mediated knockdown of CREB in ALL cell lines
blocked leukemic cell growth by inducing cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. Gene
expression array analysis showed downregulation of CREB target genes regulating
cell proliferation and glucose metabolism and upregulation of apoptosis inducing
genes. Similar to CREB knockdown, the CREB inhibitor KG-501 decreased leukemic
cell viability and induced apoptosis in ALL cell lines, as well as primary T-ALL samples,
with cases showing high phospho-CREB levels being more sensitive than those with
lower phospho-CREB levels.
Together, these in vitro findings support an important role for CREB in the survival
of ALL cells and identify this transcription factor as a potential target for treatment.

to achieve in children [3]. Improvements in outcome
obtained over the past few decades are largely attributed
to optimization of combination chemotherapy. However,
further improvements in outcome appear to be limited by
chemotherapy related toxicity [4]. Therefore, treatment
approaches using the new generation of available kinase
inhibitors targeting leukemia-specific proteins with
reduced toxicity may further improve conventional
therapeutic strategies.
Recently, we determined kinase activity profiles in
primary pediatric ALL, acute myeloid leukemia (AML),
and chronic phase chronic myeloid leukemia (CML-CP)

INTRODUCTION
Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia (ALL) is the most
common pediatric malignancy, comprising almost 25%
of all cancers diagnosed among children [1]. Based on
immunophenotype, ALL can be classified in two major
subtypes; B-cell precursor lineage (BCP-ALL) and
T-cell lineage (T-ALL). The clinical outcome of children
with ALL remains favorable, with an overall five-year
event-free survival rate up to 90% [2]. However, relapse
remains common and cure after relapse is difficult
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14970

Oncotarget

samples using kinase activity profiling [5, 6]. These results
revealed significantly elevated phosphorylation of a peptide
derived from cyclic (c)-AMP responsive element binding
protein, phosphorylated on tyrosine 134 and serine 133
(CREB_Y134/S133) in all leukemic samples compared to
normal bone marrow (NBM). No significant differences in
CREB_Y134/S133 peptide phosphorylation were observed
between leukemia subtypes.
The transcription factor CREB acts downstream of
major signaling pathways, including cAMP-dependent
protein kinase A (PKA), mitogen-activated protein kinases
(MAPK) via ribosomal protein S6 kinase (RPS6KA1), and
phosphatidylinositol 4, 5-bisphosphate 3-kinase (PI3K) /
Akt [7, 8]. After phosphorylation on serine 133, CREB
binds to the CREB binding protein (CBP) to regulate
the transcription of various target genes involved in cell
proliferation, differentiation and survival [8]. In normal
hematopoietic cells, previous studies have detected a
higher CREB expression in progenitor cells (e.g. CD34+
cells) compared to differentiated cells [9]. Numerous
studies have investigated the role of CREB in myeloid
leukemia [9–12]. Since CREB is frequently expressed
in bone marrow cells of patients with both myeloid and
lymphoid acute leukemias and below detectable levels in
remission samples, it was hypothesized that CREB might
regulate essential cell functions in these leukemic cells [9,
10, 13]. Additionally, high CREB expression was found
to be associated with an increased risk of AML relapse
[10]. CREB downregulation in myeloid leukemia cell lines
led to a decrease in cell growth and viability in vitro and
suppression of leukemia progression followed by a prolonged overall survival in a murine imatinib resistant CML
model [9]. In pediatric AML, it was shown that miR-34b
promoter hypermethylation causes CREB overexpression
[11]. Hypermethylation of the miR-34b promoter and
subsequent higher CREB protein levels were found
in 66% of the pediatric AML patients [12]. Despite the
multitude of studies into the role of CREB in myeloid
leukemias, the relationship between CREB expression
levels and outcome and the applicability of CREB as a
potential druggable target in ALL has not been examined.
In this study, we have correlated CREB expression in
primary ALL patients to outcome. Moreover, we have studied
the effects of a loss of CREB function on ALL survival and
gene expression profiles using shRNA mediated knockdown
of CREB or a CREB inhibitor (KG-501).

samples [6, 24]. Moreover, the CREB_S133 peptide was
more highly phosphorylated in T-ALL compared to BCPALL (4995.27 and 3904.16, respectively, P = 0.024) [6].
In order to define a role for CREB expression in
ALL and to compare the expression levels between T-ALL
and BCP-ALL, we first determined CREB mRNA levels.
Relative CREB mRNA levels were consistently higher
in ALL compared to normal bone marrow (P = 0.004,
Figure 1A). CREB expression levels did not differ between
BCP-ALL and T-ALL (P = 0.580, Figure 1A).
Phosphorylation levels of CREB_S133 were analyzed
using phospho-kinase arrays. Overall phosphorylation
intensities of the 46 protein kinases on the array were
higher in the pediatric ALL samples compared to the
normal bone marrow samples (Supplementary Figure 1 and
Supplementary Table 4). Consistent with earlier reports,
a prominent difference in phosphorylation intensities
between normal bone marrow and leukemia samples was
observed for CREB_S133 phosphorylation (Figure 1B)
[13]. Normalized CREB_S133 phosphorylation intensities
showed an 83-fold increase in primary pediatric ALL
compared to normal bone marrow (mean normalized
phosphorylation intensities of 2.32 and 0.028, respectively,
P < 0.0001, Figure 1B). Phosphorylation intensities did
not differ between T-ALL and BCP-ALL (2.84 and 2.19,
respectively, P = 0.069, Figure 1B). As expected, we
observed no correlation between CREB mRNA expression
levels and CREB_S133 phosphorylation intensities
(rs = 0.142, P = 0.529).

High CREB expression and phosphorylation is
associated with reduced overall survival in adult
primary ALL blasts
As a high CREB expression was found to be
associated with poor outcome in AML, we investigated the
relationship between estimated event-free survival rates
and CREB phosphorylation for 42 pediatric ALL patients.
Patients were divided into two groups based on CREB
phosphorylation levels (above and below mean CREB
phosphorylation intensities). In spite of the small number
of patients, we observed that patients with high CREB
phosphorylation levels trended towards a lower eventfree survival relative to patients with low phosphorylation
levels (P = 0.073, Figure 2).
As we observed a trend in our small pediatric
cohort, we interrogated a previously described reverse
phase protein array (RPPA) data set of 140 newly
diagnosed mostly young adult ALL patients (Figure
3, Supplementary Table 5A and 5B) [15]. In this
dataset, normal bone marrow CD34+ cells were used
as comparison since these cells are known to have high
CREB expression levels [9]. CREB expression and
CREB_S133 phosphorylation was found to be above
that of normal CD34+ cells in 17.1% and 5.0% of the
ALL patient samples, respectively, while 25.7% (CREB)

RESULTS
High CREB expression in pediatric ALL
Previously, using our kinome profiling set, we
showed that phosphorylation of a CREB-derived peptide
containing residue serine 133, a key residue in the
regulation of CREB mediated gene expression, was among
the most strongly phosphorylated peptides in the ALL
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14971

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Normalized CREB expression profiles in pediatric ALL and normal bone marrow (NBM) mononuclear
cells. CREB mRNA expression levels for normal bone marrow and ALL patients, ALL patients are displayed as a group and distinguished based

on immunophenotype A. CREB_S133 phosphorylation determined using phospho-kinase arrays for normal bone marrow and ALL patients. ALL
patients are again shown as one group and distinguished based on immunophenotype B. Asterisks (*) indicate significant differences (P < 0.05)
of normal bone marrow vs ALL or BCP-ALL vs T-ALL as determined by the Mann-Whitney U test. Horizontal bars indicate median values.

Figure 2: Relationship between CREB phosphorylation and event-free survival in pediatric ALL. Kaplan-Meier plot of

event-free survival time as function of CREB phosphorylation. The estimated event-free survival time appeared to be lower for patients
with high CREB phosphorylation intensities (P = 0.073).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14972

Oncotarget

and 66.4% (phospho-CREB_S133) of the primary ALL
samples showed expression below that of normal bone
marrow CD34+ cells (Figure 3A and 3B, Supplementary
Table 5A). To investigate the prognostic value of CREB
and phospho-CREB expression levels, we examined the
relationship between overall survival rates and CREB
expression and phosphorylation. Patients were divided
into three groups based on expression levels (below
normal, normal, and above normal protein expression
levels compared to the 90 interpercentile of normal bone
marrow CD34+ protein expression levels). Although
CREB_S133 protein phosphorylation  was  high  in only
7 patients, both high CREB and phospho-CREB_S133
levels were found to be associated with a poor outcome
compared to normal or below normal expression levels
(Figure 3C and 3D). Patients with high CREB expression

or phospho-CREB_S133 levels showed a lower median
overall survival (68 and 33 weeks, respectively)
compared to patients with normal levels (CREB and
phospho-CREB_S133 both 198 weeks, P = 0.002 and
P = 0.001, respectively) or below normal levels (181
and 182 weeks, P = 0.015 and P < 0.001, respectively,
Figure 3C and 3D). We conclude from these results that
high expression or activity of CREB is associated with an
unfavorable prognosis in ALL.

shRNA-mediated downregulation of CREB
reduces cell growth and cell viability
Since CREB expression and activity appears to be
higher in ALL cells compared to normal bone marrow,
CREB may represent an important signaling protein

Figure 3: High CREB expression and phosphorylation is associated with reduced overall survival in adult ALL. Box-

plots of CREB A. and phospho-CREB B. protein levels of 140 Ph-negative adult ALL patients distinguished based on immunophenotype.
Expression levels were normalized using normal CD34+ cells as a comparison because of their known high CREB expression. To determine
the overall survival, patients were divided into three groups based on CREB C. and phospho-CREB D. expression levels. The proportion
of surviving patients was lower for patients with high CREB or phospho-CREB expression levels compared to patients with an expression
at normal CD34+ levels (P = 0.002 and P = 0.001, respectively) or below normal CD34+ levels (P = 0.015 and P < 0.001, respectively)

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14973

Oncotarget

both in pediatric and adult ALL. Hence, we investigated
the role of CREB on leukemic cell survival performing
shRNA mediated knockdown of CREB in four ALL
cell lines using three different shRNAs. CREB protein
expression levels were reduced in all cell lines, albeit
with variable efficiencies. Despite multiple transductions,
shCREB1, while highly effective in the other cell lines,
produced only a minimal reduction in expression (85%
of shControl cells) in the Molt4 cells. In all other cases,
a reduction in protein expression levels ≤ 55% of the
shControl transduced cells was observed (Figure 4, left
panels). Moreover, we observed that CREB knockdown
effectively impaired leukemic cell growth in these four
cell lines ranging from 30% in RS4;11 up to 96% in Jurkat
and Nalm6 (Figure 4, right panels).
To explain the dramatic effect of CREB knockdown
on cell growth, we studied the consequences of CREB
knockdown on cell cycle progression and apoptosis. Cell

cycle analysis for Jurkat, Nalm6, and RS4;11 revealed that
CREB knockdown decreased the percentage of cells in
S and G2/M phases with a concomitant increase of cells in
the apoptotic sub-G0/G1 and / or G0/G1 phases, consistent
with a cell cycle arrest (Figure 5A). No cell cycle analysis
was performed on Molt4 transduced cells since this is an
aneuploid cell line. Complementary to the increase of cells in
the apoptotic sub-G0/G1 phase, Annexin-V staining showed
an increase in apoptotic cell numbers for the shCREB
transduced cells at the 144 hour time point as compared
to the 0 hour time point, which was not observed in cells
transduced with a scrambled shRNA control (Figure 5B).

Gene expression profiling of CREB
knockdown cells
Gene expression profiling was performed to
examine genetic consequences that resulted from shRNA

Figure 4: CREB is essential for leukemic cell growth and viability. CREB is successfully downregulated in 4 ALL cell lines
using three different CREB shRNAs. Downregulation was confirmed by Western blot analysis as shown in de left panels. Growth curve
analysis shows that CREB downregulation results in a decrease in cell growth (right panels). Growth was measured in duplicate by absolute
cell counts every 48 hours using a Coulter Counter. The results are shown as mean ± standard deviation.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14974

Oncotarget

Figure 5: CREB downregulation induces cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. Cell cycle analysis shows a reduction in the percentage
of cells in S and G2/M phases with a concomitant increase of cells in sub-G0 and G0/G1 phases in comparison with shControl A. Annexin-V
staining shows an increase in apoptotic cell numbers for CREB downregulated cells as compared to control transduced cells B. The results
are shown as mean ± standard deviation. Asteriks (*) indicate significant differences (P < 0.05) by Student t-test.
e.g. PHGDH, PSAT1, and SHMT2 were observed in
the list of downregulated genes (Figure 6). Since it has
been previously shown that glucose metabolism plays a
central role in sustaining cancer growth and oncogenic
transformation [26], the downregulation of essential
genes involved in this pathway likely contributes to the
observed phenotypic effects observed in response to
CREB knockdown.

mediate knockdown of CREB in the four ALL cell lines
Jurkat, Nalm6, Molt4, and RS4;11 using shCREB2 and
shCREB3. Since CREB was shown to act either as a
transcriptional activator (when phosphorylated) or as a
repressor, we were interested in genes that were either
up- or downregulated [25]. We identified 1, 022 genes that
were significantly up- or downregulated in both shCREB2
and shCREB3 versus shControl transduced cells (P < 0.05,
Supplementary Table 6). To identify more specific CREB
target genes within the list of differentially expressed
genes we correlated differences in gene expression to the
amount of CREB knockdown. Of the 535 upregulated
genes, 510 genes were inversely correlated with CREB
protein expression, and 463 genes were correlated to the
487 downregulated genes (Pearson’s correlation, P  <
0.05, Supplementary Table 6). The list of downregulated
genes included putative CREB target genes regulating
cell proliferation and cell cycle e.g. CIAO2, CSNK1A1,
MCM10, PAFAH1B1, PSMD5, STAT6, TFDP1, UBE2V1,
and UBE2V2. Of the known CREB target genes we
observed upregulation of BAD, BNIP2, and DEDD2, genes
implicated in the induction of apoptosis.
Interestingly, KEGG pathway analysis identified
the metabolic pathway involved in glucose metabolism
as a key effector of CREB knockdown. Multiple
genes involved in glycolysis e.g. GPI, ALDOC, and
PKM2, tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA cycle) e.g.
DLAT and IDH3A and serine and glycine biosynthesis
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Decreased ALL cell survival in response to the
CREB inhibitor KG-501
The effects of pharmacological inhibition on leukemic
cell survival was evaluated using the CREB inhibitor
KG-501 in 4 ALL cell lines and 8 primary pediatric ALL
patient samples. KG-501 restricts the function of CREB
by inhibiting the CREB/CBP interaction, which requires
phosphorylation of CREB at serine 133. CREB_S133
expression levels in the 4 ALL cell lines and 8 primary ALL
patient samples are shown (Figure 7A). Exposure to KG501 induced a dose-dependent decrease in cell viability in
all cell lines tested, but the LC-50 values for the T-ALL
cell lines Jurkat (4.1 μM) and Molt4 (3.7 μM) were lower
than those for the BCP-ALL cell lines Nalm6 (16.7 μM)
and RS4;11 (>50 μM). This was largely concordant with
the effects seen after CREB knockdown (Figure 7B).
Interestingly, RS4;11 cells, which were least affected by
CREB knockdown and KG-501 treatment, showed the
14975

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Effect of CREB knockdown on glucose metabolism. Schematic overview of metabolic enzymes involved in glucose

metabolism affected by shRNA mediated CREB knockdown. Downregulated genes, as determined by gene expression profiling, and their
role in glucose metabolism are shown in red.

Figure 7: Inhibition of CREB induces cell death in a dose-dependent manner. CREB and phospho-CREB expression was

determined by Western blot analysis for BCP-ALL and T-ALL cell lines and primary samples A. Effects of the CREB inhibitor KG-501
were determined after 24 or 48 hours of incubation for primary samples and cell lines, respectively. CREB inhibition results in a dosedependent decrease in cell viability as determined by WST-1 conversion. Cell viability percentages were plotted against concentration of
KG-501 (μM) using four ALL cell lines B., four primary BCP-ALL samples C., and four primary T-ALL samples D.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14976

Oncotarget

lowest phospho-CREB expression levels (Figure 7A). The
observed decrease in cell viability was inversely correlated
with the percentage of apoptotic cell numbers (rs = −0.67,
P = 0.017, Supplementary Figure 2).
Next, the effects of the KG-501 inhibitor were
evaluated in 8 primary pediatric ALL samples. Whereas
none of the BCP-ALL samples responded to the drug
despite high CREB phosphorylation, all 4 primary
T-ALL samples showed sensitivity to the drug in a dosedependent manner (Figure 7C and 7D, LC-50 values
for T-ALL 1, 2, 3, and 4 were 10.32 μM, 7.16 μM, 9.07
μM, and 45.90 μM, respectively). The differences in
sensitivity were reflected by CREB and phospho-CREB
levels, with primary leukemic T-ALL cells showing high
CREB expression or activity (T-ALL samples no. 1, 2, and
3) being more sensitive than those with low CREB and
phospho-CREB levels (T-ALL sample no. 4) (Figure 7A).

Interestingly however, within the list of downregulated
genes, enzymes involved in glycolysis (GPI, ALDOC, and
PKM2), TCA cycle (DLAT and IDH3A), and serine and
glycine biosynthesis (PHGDH, PSAT1, and SHMT2) were
among the most prominent. Although DLAT and IDH3A
were previously described as putative CREB target genes,
all genes were listed as genes with predicted functional
CREs [28]. The role of CREB in glucose metabolism
has been extensively studied, especially in the context of
diabetes mellitus, showing a central role for transducers of
regulated CREB activity (TORCs, especially TORC2) in
CREB-dependent gene transcription in response to glucose
[29, 30]. In cancer cells, an increase in glycolysis, known
as the Warburg effect, is frequently observed, which allows
the generation of essential precursors for the synthesis
of proteins, nucleic acids, and lipids from glycolytic
intermediates [31, 32]. The observed downregulation
of these genes in response to shRNA mediated CREB
knockdown contributes to the strong phenotypic effects
observed in our cell lines.
In addition to shRNA mediated knockdown,
we also explored the effects of the CREB inhibitor
KG-501. We previously showed that cells from normal
bone marrow are insensitive to the KG-501 inhibitor [14].
In accordance with the CREB phosphorylation levels and
the shRNA results, the cell lines Jurkat, Molt4, Nalm6,
and 3 / 4 primary T-ALL samples were sensitive to
CREB inhibition. Unexpectedly, while shRNA mediated
CREB knockdown and CREB inhibition showed similar
phenotypic effects in T-ALL cell lines and primary
T-ALL samples, we observed different phenotypic effects
between BCP-ALL cell lines and primary samples using
pharmacological CREB inhibition. Although shRNA
mediated CREB knockdown, as well as KG-501 showed
corresponding results in BCP-ALL cell lines, KG-501
had no effect on the survival of primary BCP-ALL
samples, despite high CREB phosphorylation levels.
Although human cancer derived cell lines are the most
widely used models to test therapeutic strategies, the
limitations of cell line models are well known [33,
34]. Additionally, this discrepancy may be explained
by CREB target gene regulation. Transcription of
CREB target genes is partly dependent on CREB
phosphorylation at serine 133 and the subsequent CREB/
CBP interaction. CREB target gene transcription may
also be induced in a phosphorylation independent manner
by a family of CREB coactivators, of which TORC
complexes are the most potent (Supplementary Figure 3)
[35]. The small molecule antagonist KG-501 restricts
the function of CREB by inhibiting the CREB/CBP
interaction in a dose-dependent way (Supplementary
Figure 3) [36]. Therefore, sensitivity to the CREB/
CBP interaction inhibitor KG-501 appears to be only
observed when the transcription of CREB target genes is
predominantly dependent on the CREB/CBP interaction.
We hypothesize that cells unresponsive to KG-501

DISCUSSION
Although the survival of children with ALL is
approaching 90%, ALL relapse remains a leading cause
of cancer-related death in children [1, 2]. To further
improve clinical outcome, new therapeutic strategies are
necessary. To date, the effects of CREB inhibition and
its role in leukemogenesis have been primarily studied
in acute myeloid leukemia. Here, we report a prominent
role for CREB in ALL. Our results show that, relative
to normal bone marrow, CREB is overexpressed both at
the mRNA and protein level, consistent with previous
results of Pigazzi et al, showing high expression of CREB
in 94% pediatric ALL cases [13]. Additionally, CREB
has frequently undergone an activating phosphorylation
on serine 133. No correlation between CREB mRNA
expression levels and CREB phosphorylation could be
observed in our study. Since protein phosphorylation is the
net result of intracellular kinase activity and basal protein
expression levels (influenced by mRNA translation and
protein degradation) and the generally poor correlation
between protein and mRNA concentrations, this may
not be surprising [27]. Our results demonstrate also that
high expression and / or phosphorylation of CREB are
associated with a lower overall survival in an adult ALL
patient cohort. Furthermore, CREB appears to be essential
for leukemic cell growth, since both CREB shRNA
mediated knockdown and pharmacological inhibition
leads to growth inhibition and cell death.
Studying CREB knockdown using shRNAs in ALL
cell lines resulted in decreased cell numbers that appeared
to be net result of changes in cell cycle distribution and
the induction of apoptosis. We performed gene expression
profiling to elucidate the phenotypic effects observed in
response to shRNA mediated CREB knockdown. First of
all we observed effects of CREB knockdown on CREB
target genes implicated in cell proliferation, cell cycle, and
apoptosis, consistent with the observed phenotypic effects.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14977

Oncotarget

leukemia-enriched fraction of 140 mostly young adult
ALL patients (79 Philadelphia-negative commonALL (CALLA), 42 Philadelphia-negative preB-ALL,
and 19 T-ALL) [15]. As cytogenetic abnormalities are
differentially distributed between pediatric and adult
patients, we excluded the BCR-ABL1 positive leukemias
and the B-Cell lymphoma population from the adult
cohort. Patients’ characteristics of adult ALL patients are
summarized (Supplementary Table 3).

treatment are able to maintain mediated transcriptional
regulation by recruiting coactivators that act independent
of this CREB/CBP interaction.
Moreover, it is also possible that primary T-ALL
cells are more dependent on CREB relative to BCP-ALL
cells. The cAMP response element (CRE) has been found
in the promoters of many T cell-specific genes [37, 38].
Furthermore, it has been shown that phosphorylation
of the proto-oncogene VAV1, downstream of the T
cell and pre-T cell receptor, activates CREB and that
in vivo VAV1-deficiencies cause T cell developmental
defects that resemble CREB-deficiency [39]. Moreover,
this CREB dependency might be Notch 1 dependent.
Aberrant activation of the Notch 1 signaling pathway
is seen in >  60% of the T-ALL cases [40]. Notch 1 is
able to activate the serine/threonine kinase Akt, which
acts upstream of CREB, contributing to leukemogenesis
[41]. Although no direct relationship between Notch 1
and CREB has been reported in leukemia to date, Notch
regulates the phosphorylation of CREB involved in longterm memory formation in Drosophila melanogaster [42].
Finally, we cannot rule out that the difference between
primary T-ALL and BCP-ALL samples reflects KG-501
off-target effects. Since the presence of the KIX domain
is required for more transcriptional activities, other
inhibitory effects of KG-501 on factors that associate with
the KIX domains, such as NF-kB, have been observed
[36]. In addition, a recent study describes that KG-501
also interferes with the interaction between c-Myb and the
KIX domain of the coactivator p300 in vitro and inhibits
Myb activity in vivo [43].
In conclusion, we have demonstrated that high
CREB expression and activity is associated with reduced
overall survival in ALL. Moreover, our in vitro findings
suggest an important role for CREB in the survival
of acute lymphoblastic leukemia cells. These results
underscore the need for future investigations aimed at
validating the role of CREB as a potential therapeutic
target for acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Cell lines
The T-ALL cell lines Jurkat and Molt4 and the BCPALL cell lines Nalm6 and RS4;11 were purchased from the
American Type Culture Collection (Manassa, VA, USA)
and cultured in RPMI-1640 or αmem medium (Cambrex
Bio Science, East Rutherford, NJ, USA) supplemented
with 10% fetal calf serum (FCS, Bodinco, Alkmaar, The
Netherlands) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Gibco,
Carlsbad, CA, USA).

RNA isolation and quantitative real-time PCR
(qRT-PCR)
Total RNA was isolated (RNeasy mini kit, Qiagen,
Hilden, Germany) and subsequent complementary DNA
was synthesized from 1 μg RNA (First Strand cDNA
Synthesis kit, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA)
according to manufactures protocol. CREB mRNA
expression was detected in triplicate using SYBR Green
qRT-PCR (Applied Biosystems, Darmstadt, Germany) and
normalized to RPL22 as a reference gene [16]. Relative
mRNA expression levels of the gene of interest were
calculated using the 2–ΔΔCT method relatively to the normal
bone marrow sample with the highest CREB mRNA
expression level [17].

Antibody microarrays
Acute lymphoid leukemia patient samples were
subjected to a human phospho-kinase microarray (Catalog
Number ARY003, R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN,
USA) following manufacturers protocol. Eight of the 42
arrays (4 T-ALL and 4 BCP-ALL) were published before
[6]. The experimental procedures and data analysis were
performed as described earlier [6].

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Patients
Primary blood and bone marrow samples from
ALL patients or patients without hematologic disorders
were collected after getting written informed consent
in accordance with the regulations and protocols of the
Medical Ethical Committee of the University Medical
Center Groningen (UMCG) and the Institutional Review
Board of the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center (MDACC). Samples from UMCG were processed
as previously described [14]. Patients’ characteristics,
as well as an overview of the selected ALL patients is
shown (Supplementary Tables 1 and 2, respectively).
For RPPA analysis we used protein derived from the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Reverse phase protein array (RPPA)
The methodology, validation, and statistical
analysis of the RPPA technique are fully described in
previous publications and are briefly summarized in the
Supplementary Information [18–23]. Expression was
compared to the expression of normal CD34+ cells as a welldefined control with a known high CREB expression. Cases
were divided into three cohorts, below, above or within the
90% confidence interval of normal CD34+ cells, respectively.
14978

Oncotarget

shRNA mediated knockdown

Omnibus (GEO) database and are accessible through GEO
Series accession number GSE68413.

Lentiviral vector (pLKO.1) containing shRNA
sequences targeting CREB were obtained from Open
Biosystems (Waltham, MA, USA) and genetically modified
into a pLKO1-mCherry vector. Sequences are available
upon request. Lentiviral particles were generated by
co-transfection of pLKO1-mCherry-shCREB or scrambled
vector with packaging plasmid psPAX2 and the envelope
plasmid pMD2.G into 293T cells using FuGENE HD
transfection reagent (Roche, Woerden, The Netherlands).
Leukemic cells were incubated with lentiviral supernatants
for one or two consecutive days after which stably
transduced cells were expanded.

Cell viability assay
In vitro drug sensitivity after KG-501 (SigmaAldrich) exposure was determined with a WST-1 based
cell viability assay (Roche) as described previously, and
calculated as percentage of untreated controls [14]. LC50
values represent drug doses inhibiting cell viability within
24 or 48 hours.

Statistical analysis
Estimated event-free and overall survival analyses
were performed using the Kaplan-Meier method in SPSS
(Version 20, IBM, Armonk, NY, United States). Estimates
at specific time points are provided with 95% confident
intervals (CIs). Data was censored at time of an event or
at the last follow-up visit. The logrank test was applied
to compare Kaplan-Meier plots between patient groups.
Experimental data is presented as mean values from in
general three experiments ± standard deviation (SD), unless
described differently. Statistical analyses were perfromed
with The non-parametric Mann-Whitney U test and
the parametic paired and unpaired two-tailed t-test (SPSS).
P-values < 0.05 were considered as statistically significant.

Western blot analysis
Cells from primary blood or bone marrow samples
from newly diagnosed ALL patients, ALL cell lines, and
transduced cells were lysed and denaturized in laemmli
sample buffer (Bio-Rad laboratories, Veenendaal, The
Netherlands). Western blots were performed as previously
described [14]. CREB and phospho-CREB antibodies
were obtained from Cell Signaling (Danvers, MA, USA).
Loading control was visualized using β-actin (Santa Cruz
Biotechnology, Dallas, TX, USA) or Ponceau S (SigmaAldrich, Buchs, Switzerland). Signals were digitally
quantified with subtraction of background (LI-COR
Biosciences, Lincoln, NE, USA) and normalized using
the loading control.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank the Junior Scientific
Masterclass, University of Groningen, Groningen, The
Netherlands for financial support and JJ Schuringa from
the Department of Hematology, University Medical
Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen,
The Netherlands for his generous supply of the mCherrypLKO.1 backbone.

Flow cytometric analysis
Apoptosis analysis was conducted by Annexin
V-FITC/PI or Annexin V-FITC labeling solution
(Annexin-V-FLUOS Staining Kit, Roche). A propidium
iodide/Rnase A DNA labeling was performed for cell cycle
analysis according to standard techniques as described
in the Supplementary Information. All flow cytometry
experiments were performed on a LSR-II flow cytometer
(BD FACS DIVA software, BD bioscience, Breda, The
Netherlands) and analyzed using FlowJo software (Tree
Star Inc., Ashland, OR, USA).

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors have declared no conflicts of interest.

Authorship contribution
NEvdS performed and designed research,
collected data, analyzed data and wrote the paper. KRK
performed research, collected data and wrote the paper.
AtE performed research. FJGS and TGJMdB performed
research and collected data. VG performed quantile
normalization and log2-transformation and supervised
gene expression data analysis. FNvL supervised research
and edited the paper. SMK performed RPPA analysis,
collected and analyzed RPPA data and edited the paper.
ESJMdB designed and supervised research, supervised
data analysis and wrote the paper. The manuscript was
reviewed and approved by all authors.

Gene expression
Total RNA was isolated from CREB or scrambled
transduced cells (RNeasy mini kit). The quality control,
RNA labeling, hybridization, and data extraction was
profiled on Illumina HumanHT-12 v4.0 Expression
BeadChips, all performed at ServiceXS B.V. (Leiden,
The Netherlands). Scans (Illumina iScan), image analysis
and extraction of raw data (Illumina GenomeStudio
v2011.1) was done, after which we performed quantile
normalization and log2-transformation. Gene expression
data have been deposited in NCBI’s Gene Expression

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14979

Oncotarget

References

14.	 Kampen KR, Ter Elst A, Mahmud H, Scherpen FJ,
Diks  SH, Peppelenbosch MP, de Haas V, Guryev V, de
Bont ES. Insights in dynamic kinome reprogramming as a
consequence of MEK inhibition in MLL-rearranged, AML.
Leukemia. 2014; 28:589–599.

1.	 Pui CH, Carroll WL, Meshinchi S, Arceci RJ. Biology, risk
stratification, and therapy of pediatric acute leukemias: an
update. J.Clin.Oncol. 2011; 29:551–565.

15.	 Kornblau SM, Qiu YH, Zhang N, Coombes KR, O’Brien S,
Kantarjian HM, Thomas DA. Proteomic Profiling of 128
Proteins In 194 Acute Lymphocytic Leukemia (ALL)
Patients Using Reverse Phase Proteins Arrays (RPPA)
Reveals Recurrent Proteins Expression Signatures with
Prognostic Implications. ASH Annual Meeting Abstracts.
2010; 116:3230.

2.	 Inaba H, Greaves M, Mullighan CG. Acute lymphoblastic
leukaemia. Lancet. 2013; 381:1943–1955.
3.	 Mullighan CG. The molecular genetic makeup of acute
lymphoblastic leukemia. Hematology Am.Soc.Hematol.
Educ.Program. 2012; 2012:389–396.
4.	 Roberts KG, Mullighan CG. How new advances in genetic
analysis are influencing the understanding and treatment
of childhood acute leukemia. Curr.Opin.Pediatr. 2011;
23:34–40.

16.	 de Jonge HJ, Fehrmann RS, de Bont ES, Hofstra RM,
Gerbens F, Kamps WA, de Vries EG, van der Zee AG, te
Meerman GJ, ter Elst A. Evidence based selection of housekeeping genes. PLoS One. 2007; 2:e898.

5.	 Ter Elst A, Diks SH, Kampen KR, Hoogerbrugge PM,
Ruijtenbeek R, Boender PJ, Sikkema AH, Scherpen FJ,
Kamps WA, Peppelenbosch MP, de Bont ES. Identification
of new possible targets for leukemia treatment by kinase
activity profiling. Leuk.Lymphoma. 2011; 52:122–130.

17.	 Schmittgen TD, Livak KJ. Analyzing real-time PCR
data by the comparative C(T) method. Nat.Protoc. 2008;
3:1101–1108.
18.	 Kornblau SM, Coombes KR. Use of reverse phase protein
microarrays to study protein expression in leukemia: technical and methodological lessons learned. Methods Mol.Biol.
2011; 785:141–155.

6.	 van der Sligte NE, Scherpen FJ, Meeuwsen-de
Boer  TG, Lourens HJ, Ter Elst A, Diks SH, Guryev  V,
Peppelenbosch  MP, van Leeuwen FN, de Bont ES.
Kinase activity profiling reveals active signal transduction pathways in pediatric acute lymphoblastic leukemia:
A new approach for target discovery. Proteomics. 2015;
15:1245–1254.

19.	 Kornblau SM, Tibes R, Qiu YH, Chen W, Kantarjian HM,
Andreeff M, Coombes KR, Mills GB. Functional proteomic
profiling of AML predicts response and survival. Blood.
2009; 113:154–164.

7.	 Johannessen M, Delghandi MP, Moens U. What turns
CREB on? Cell.Signal. 2004; 16:1211–1227.

20.	 Troncale S, Barbet A, Coulibaly L, Henry E, He B,
Barillot E, Dubois T, Hupe P, de Koning L. NormaCurve:
a SuperCurve-based method that simultaneously quantifies
and normalizes reverse phase protein array data. PLoS One.
2012; 7:e38686.

8.	 Sakamoto KM, Frank DA. CREB in the pathophysiology
of cancer: implications for targeting transcription factors
for cancer therapy. Clin.Cancer Res. 2009; 15:2583–2587.
9.	 Cheng JC, Kinjo K, Judelson DR, Chang J, Wu WS,
Schmid I, Shankar DB, Kasahara N, Stripecke R, Bhatia R,
Landaw EM, Sakamoto KM. CREB is a critical regulator
of normal hematopoiesis and leukemogenesis. Blood. 2008;
111:1182–1192.

21.	 Neeley ES, Baggerly KA, Kornblau SM. Surface
Adjustment of Reverse Phase Protein Arrays using Positive
Control Spots. Cancer.Inform. 2012; 11:77–86.
22.	 Neeley ES, Kornblau SM, Coombes KR, Baggerly KA.
Variable slope normalization of reverse phase protein
arrays. Bioinformatics. 2009; 25:1384–1389.

10.	 Shankar DB, Cheng JC, Sakamoto KM. Role of cyclic
AMP response element binding protein in human leukemias. Cancer. 2005; 104:1819–1824.

23.	 Kornblau SM, Qiu YH, Zhang N, Singh N, Faderl S,
Ferrajoli A, York H, Qutub AA, Coombes KR, Watson DK.
Abnormal expression of FLI1 protein is an adverse prognostic factor in acute myeloid leukemia. Blood. 2011;
118:5604–5612.

11.	 Pigazzi M, Manara E, Baron E, Basso G. miR-34b targets
cyclic AMP-responsive element binding protein in acute
myeloid leukemia. Cancer Res. 2009; 69:2471–2478.
12.	 Pigazzi M, Manara E, Bresolin S, Tregnago C, Beghin A,
Baron E, Giarin E, Cho EC, Masetti R, Rao DS, Sakamoto
KM, Basso G. MicroRNA-34b promoter hypermethylation
induces CREB overexpression and contributes to myeloid
transformation. Haematologica. 2013; 98:602–610.

24.	 Brindle PK, Montminy MR. The CREB family of transcription activators. Curr.Opin.Genet.Dev. 1992; 2:199–204.
25.	 Lamph WW, Dwarki VJ, Ofir R, Montminy M, Verma IM.
Negative and positive regulation by transcription factor cAMP response element-binding protein is modulated
by phosphorylation. Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.U.S.A. 1990;
87:4320–4324.

13.	 Pigazzi M, Ricotti E, Germano G, Faggian D, Arico M,
Basso G. cAMP response element binding protein
(CREB) overexpression CREB has been described as
critical for leukemia progression. Haematologica. 2007;
92:1435–1437.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

26.	 Hsu PP, Sabatini DM. Cancer cell metabolism: Warburg
and beyond. Cell. 2008; 134:703–707.

14980

Oncotarget

an activator: coactivator interaction. Proc.Natl.Acad.
Sci.U.S.A. 2004; 101:17622–17627.

27.	 de Sousa Abreu R, Penalva LO, Marcotte EM, Vogel C.
Global signatures of protein and mRNA expression levels.
Mol.Biosyst. 2009; 5:1512–1526.

37.	 Feuerstein N, Firestein R, Aiyar N, He X, Murasko D,
Cristofalo V. Late induction of CREB/ATF binding and a
concomitant increase in cAMP levels in T and B lymphocytes stimulated via the antigen receptor. J.Immunol. 1996;
156:4582–4593.

28.	 Zhang X, Odom DT, Koo SH, Conkright MD, Canettieri G,
Best J, Chen H, Jenner R, Herbolsheimer E, Jacobsen E,
Kadam S, Ecker JR, Emerson B, et al. Genome-wide analysis of cAMP-response element binding protein occupancy,
phosphorylation, and target gene activation in human tissues. Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.U.S.A. 2005; 102:4459–4464.

38.	 Wang H, Zou J, Zhao B, Johannsen E, Ashworth T,
Wong  H, Pear WS, Schug J, Blacklow SC, Arnett KL,
Bernstein BE, Kieff E, Aster JC. Genome-wide analysis
reveals conserved and divergent features of Notch1/RBPJ
binding in human and murine T-lymphoblastic leukemia
cells. Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.U.S.A. 2011; 108:14908–14913.

29.	 Koo SH, Flechner L, Qi L, Zhang X, Screaton RA,
Jeffries  S, Hedrick S, Xu W, Boussouar F, Brindle P,
Takemori H, Montminy M. The CREB coactivator TORC2
is a key regulator of fasting glucose metabolism. Nature.
2005; 437:1109–1111.

39.	 Haubert D, Weckbecker G. Vav1 couples the T cell receptor
to cAMP response element activation via a PKC-dependent
pathway. Cell.Signal. 2010; 22:944–954.

30.	 Jansson D, Ng AC, Fu A, Depatie C, Al Azzabi M,
Screaton RA. Glucose controls CREB activity in islet cells
via regulated phosphorylation of TORC2. Proc.Natl.Acad.
Sci.U.S.A. 2008; 105:10161–10166.

40.	 Weng AP, Ferrando AA, Lee W, Morris JP 4th,
Silverman LB, Sanchez-Irizarry C, Blacklow SC, Look AT,
Aster JC. Activating mutations of NOTCH1 in human T cell
acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Science. 2004; 306:269–271.

31.	 Cairns RA, Harris IS, Mak TW. Regulation of cancer cell
metabolism. Nat.Rev.Cancer. 2011; 11:85–95.
32.	 Amelio I, Cutruzzola F, Antonov A, Agostini M, Melino G.
Serine and glycine metabolism in cancer. Trends Biochem.
Sci. 2014; 39:191–198.

41.	 Palomero T, Sulis ML, Cortina M, Real PJ, Barnes K,
Ciofani M, Caparros E, Buteau J, Brown K, Perkins SL,
Bhagat G, Agarwal AM, Basso G, et al. Mutational loss of
PTEN induces resistance to NOTCH1 inhibition in T-cell
leukemia. Nat.Med. 2007; 13:1203–1210.

33.	 Sharma SV, Haber DA, Settleman J. Cell line-based platforms to evaluate the therapeutic efficacy of candidate anticancer agents. Nat.Rev.Cancer. 2010; 10:241–253.

42.	 Zhang J, Little CJ, Tremmel DM, Yin JC, Wesley CS.
Notch-inducible hyperphosphorylated CREB and its ultradian oscillation in long-term memory formation. J.Neurosci.
2013; 33:12825–12834.

34.	 Gillet JP, Varma S, Gottesman MM. The clinical relevance
of cancer cell lines. J.Natl.Cancer Inst. 2013; 105:452–458.
35.	 Conkright MD, Canettieri G, Screaton R, Guzman E,
Miraglia L, Hogenesch JB, Montminy M. TORCs: transducers of regulated CREB activity. Mol.Cell. 2003; 12:413–423.

43.	 Uttarkar S, Dukare S, Bopp B, Goblirsch M, Jose J,
Klempnauer KH. Naphthol AS-E phosphate inhibits the
activity of the transcription factor Myb by blocking the
interaction with the KIX domain of the coactivator p300.
Mol.Cancer.Ther. 2015.

36.	 Best JL, Amezcua CA, Mayr B, Flechner L, Murawsky CM,
Emerson B, Zor T, Gardner KH, Montminy M.
Identification of small-molecule antagonists that inhibit

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14981

Oncotarget

