NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 17.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Published in final edited form as:
Cancer Cell. 2014 March 17; 25(3): 282–303. doi:10.1016/j.ccr.2014.02.025.

ERBB receptors: From oncogene discovery to basic science to
mechanism-based cancer therapeutics
Carlos L. Arteaga1 and Jeffrey A. Engelman2
1Vanderbilt-Ingram
2Massachusetts

Cancer Center, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN

General Hospital Cancer Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA

Summary

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

ERBB receptors were linked to human cancer pathogenesis approximately three decades ago.
Biomedical investigators have since developed substantial understanding of the biology
underlying the dependence of cancers on aberrant ERBB receptor signaling. An array of cancerassociated genetic alterations in ERBB receptors has also been identified. These findings have led
to the discovery and development of mechanism-based therapies targeting ERBB receptors that
have improved outcome for many cancer patients. In this Perspective, we discuss current
paradigms of targeting ERBB receptors with cancer therapeutics and our understanding of
mechanisms of action and resistance to these drugs. As current strategies still have limitations, we
also discuss challenges and opportunities that lie ahead as basic scientists and clinical investigators
work toward more breakthroughs.

ERBB family: EGFR, HER2, HER3, HER4

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The ERBB family of transmembrane receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) consists of the
epidermal growth factor receptor EGFR (ERBB1), HER2 (ERBB2), HER3 (ERBB3) and
HER4 (ERBB4). Binding of ligands to the extracellular domain of EGFR, HER3, and HER4
induces the formation of kinase active hetero-oligomers (Yarden and Sliwkowski, 2001).
HER2 does not bind any of the ERBB ligands directly but it is in a conformation that
resembles a ligand-activated state and favors dimerization (Cho et al., 2003; Garrett et al.,
2003). Activation of HER2 and EGFR induces trans-phosphorylation of the ERBB dimer
partner and stimulates intracellular pathways such as RAS/RAF/MEK/ERK, PI3K/AKT/
TOR, Src kinases, and STAT transcription factors [reviewed in (Yarden and Pines, 2012)].
Although HER3 can bind ATP and catalyze autophosphorylation, it has a weak kinase
activity compared to that of its ERBB co-receptors (Shi et al., 2010). However, upon transphosphorylation by another ERBB family member, HER3 serves as an efficient
phosphotyrosine scaffold, leading to potent activation of downstream signaling. The
specificity and potency of intracellular signaling cascades are determined by the expression
© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Correspondence: carlos.arteaga@vanderbilt.edu and jengelman@mgh.harvard.edu.
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

Arteaga and Engelman

Page 2

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

of positive and negative regulators, the specific composition of activating ligand(s), receptor
dimer constituents and the array of proteins that associate with the tyrosine phosphorylated
C-terminal domain of the ERBB receptors (Avraham and Yarden, 2011).
Over the past several years, it has become evident the ERBB family members have a
prominent role in the initiation and maintenance of several solid tumors. This has led to the
development and widespread implementation of specific ERBB inhibitors as cancer
therapies. In this Perspective, we will focus on the therapeutic approaches for targeting
ERBB family members in cancer, with a particular emphasis on HER2 amplified breast
cancer and EGFR mutant lung cancer.

LINKS TO CANCER
HER2

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The first evidence for a role of ERBB2 or HER2 (for human EGFR2) in cancer was inferred
from the connection to its rat ortholog, Neu, a mutant cDNA isolated from carcinogeninduced neuroblastomas (Schechter et al., 1984). (Please note that in this Perspective,
ERBB2 and HER2 will be used when discussing mouse and human ERBB2, respectively.)
Although rodent Neu is mutated, human HER2 is typically amplified in human cancers such
as breast, gastric and esophageal (Table 1). Overexpression of either rat or human wild-type
ERBB2 was shown to transform diploid cells. Consistent with its oncogenic activity,
overexpression of wild-type Neu or HER2 under the control of a mammary-specific
promoter leads to metastatic mammary tumors in transgenic mice (Andrechek et al., 2000;
Finkle et al., 2004). In a seminal study, Slamon et al. found that HER2 is amplified in about
20% of breast cancers (Slamon et al., 1987). This was the first report of an oncogenic
alteration associated with poor outcome in cancer patients, suggesting a causal relationship
to cancer virulence. Further evidence linking HER2 with cancer progression is the
improvement in survival of patients with HER2 amplified early-stage breast cancer treated
with the HER2 antibody trastuzumab. More recent studies using next-generation sequencing
have identified less frequent activating mutations in HER2 in several cancer types without
HER2 gene amplification (discussed below).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

A recent study of >500 breast tumors by The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) Network has
shed light into the biological heterogeneity of clinical HER2 overexpressing cancers
(HER2+ as defined by gene amplification) by further parsing into HER2-enriched (HER2E)
and luminal subtypes as defined by gene expression (Koboldt et al., 2012). HER2E-HER2+
tumors had higher frequencies of aneuploidy, somatic mutation, and TP53 mutation, as well
as amplification of FGFRs, EGFR, CDK4, and cyclin D1. Luminal-HER2+ breast cancers
showed higher expression of a luminal gene cluster including GATA3, BCL2, and ESR1
and harbored a higher rate of GATA3 mutations. It is anticipated that because of these
molecular differences, the clinical management of HER2E and luminal subtypes of HER2+
breast cancers will also be different. Finally, not all tumors of the HER2E gene expression
subtype were HER2 amplified. One implication of these data is that some breast cancers
with a single copy of HER2 harbor an expression signature of HER2 dependence and, as
such, may benefit from anti-HER2 therapy. Consistent with this speculation are the results
of the NSABP B-31 adjuvant trastuzumab trial, in which 9.7% of patients that did not meet
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 17.

Arteaga and Engelman

Page 3

criteria for HER2 overexpression by FISH or IHC also benefitted from adjuvant trastuzumab
(Paik et al., 2008).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Somatic mutations in HER2 have been reported in several human cancers (Table 1). Most
are missense mutations in the tyrosine kinase and extracellular domains or duplications/
insertions in a small stretch within exon 20. HER2 mutations are almost exclusively
observed in cancers without HER2 gene amplification. Several of these mutants have
increased signaling activity, and are most commonly associated with lung adenocarcinoma,
lobular breast, bladder, gastric, and endometrial cancers (Koboldt et al., 2012).
EGFR

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The EGF receptor was originally identified as an oncogene because of its homology to vERBB, a retroviral protein that enables the avian erythroblastosis virus to transform chicken
cells (Downward et al., 1984). Subsequently, EGFR overexpression was shown to be
transforming in laboratory models, and EGFR gene amplification was reported in a wide
range of carcinomas. Early studies by Mendelsohn and colleagues demonstrated that
antibodies directed against EGFR block growth of A431 cells, demonstrating that EGFR
signaling could drive cancer cell growth and setting the stage for clinical use of EGFR
inhibitors (Kawamoto et al., 1983).
An oncogenic mutation that deletes exons 2–7 in the receptor ectodomain, denoted
EGFRvIII, is found in about 40% of high-grade gliomas with wild-type EGFR amplification
(Sugawa et al., 1990). EGFRvIII exhibits constitutive dimerization, impaired
downregulation, and aberrant tyrosine kinase activity, all resulting in enhanced
tumorigenicity (Nishikawa et al., 1994). In addition to glioblastoma multiforme (GBM),
EGFRvIII has been found in a fraction of breast, lung, head and neck, ovarian, and prostate
cancers (Moscatello et al., 1995). Because its expression is restricted to tumor tissues,
EGFRvIII has been therapeutically targeted with specific antibodies and vaccines. There is
clinical evidence suggesting that the presence of EGFRvIII can predict clinical responses of
GBMs to the EGFR TKIs gefitinib and erlotinib (Haas-Kogan et al., 2005; Mellinghoff et
al., 2005). The second most common EGFR variant in GBM is EGFRc958, observed in
about 20% of tumors with wild-type EGFR amplification. EGFRc958 lacks amino acids
521–603 and displays increased, ligand-dependent kinase activity (Frederick et al., 2000).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The causal role of EGFR in tumorigenesis was further solidified in 2004 when somatic,
activating mutations in EGFR were discovered in a subset of non-small cell lung cancers
(NSCLC) (Lynch et al., 2004; Paez et al., 2004; Pao et al., 2004) (Table 1). The discovery
was spurred by efforts to understand why occasional NSCLCs were highly sensitive to small
molecule EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). It is now well established that lung
cancers harboring these EGFR mutations are highly responsive to single-agent EGFR
inhibitors with RECIST response rates of ~55%–75% (Mok et al., 2009; Rosell et al., 2012;
Sequist et al., 2013b). EGFR mutations are primarily localized within two hot spots of the
kinase domains, a series of overlapping deletions in exon 19 and a leucine to arginine
substitution at amino acid position 858 (L858R) [reviewed in (Pao and Chmielecki, 2010)].
In addition, mutations are also rarely observed elsewhere in the kinase domain, including
insertions in exon 20 (Yasuda et al., 2013). The prevalence of the mutations differs among
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 17.

Arteaga and Engelman

Page 4

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

distinct human populations. They are found in ~8%–10% of Caucasians, but in a higher
proportion East Asians. Lung cancers with EGFR mutations are most highly associated with
adenocarcinoma histology and in patients with a minimal smoking history. Of note, cancers
with EGFR mutations often have amplification of the mutant EGFR allele as well
(Cappuzzo et al., 2005). Cell culture and transgenic mouse model studies have shown that
mutant EGFR has transforming activity (Greulich et al., 2005; Ji et al., 2006; Politi et al.,
2006).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

EGFR is important for the growth of some colorectal cancers (CRC) and head and neck
cancers. In these cancers, genetic alterations in EGFR have not been consistently identified.
However, the efficacy of the EGFR antibody cetuximab demonstrates the importance of
EGFR signaling in these tumors. Although some reports suggest that EGFR amplification
correlates with response to cetuximab (Moroni et al., 2005), this alteration is not currently
used as a predictive biomarker. Importantly, cetuximab provides clinical benefit primarily in
colorectal cancers that do not harbor KRAS mutations (Cunningham et al., 2004) and in
those with high expression of EGFR ligands amphiregulin and epiregulin (Khambata-Ford et
al., 2007). Presumably, cetuximab is effective in sensitive cancers because it blocks liganddependent activation of EGFR and down-regulates the receptor from the cell surface (Fan et
al., 1994). Thus, in these colorectal cancers, we suspect that ligand-dependent activation of
EGFR drives progression of these cancers. Currently, cetuximab is most often administered
with chemotherapy in KRAS wild-type colorectal cancers. Similarly, in head and neck
cancers, cetuximab is primarily used in conjunction with chemotherapy (Vermorken et al.,
2008) as well as radiotherapy (Bonner et al., 2006). Despite conflicting reports on the utility
of EGFR expression by IHC for patient selection in head and neck cancers (and CRC), there
currently are no validated predictive biomarkers of response to EGFR inhibitors in head and
neck cancers (Burtness et al., 2005; Cunningham et al., 2004; Licitra et al., 2011; Licitra et
al., 2013; Vermorken et al., 2008). It is notable that cetuximab appears to be more effective
than EGFR TKIs in cancers with ligand-dependent activation of EGFR, whereas TKIs are
more effective in cancers with EGFR mutations. We speculate that this is so because mutant
EGFR activation is not ligand-dependent and TKIs have higher affinity for mutant EGFR
than wild-type EGFR, thus leading to a significant therapeutic window. In contrast,
antibodies such as cetuximab are more effective in EGFR wild-type cancers because they
are highly effective at blocking ligand-dependent activation of EGFR and are
pharmacologically stable.
ERBB3 and ERBB4
ERBB3 has been linked to cancer, primarily due to its mechanistic role in promoting
signaling from oncogenic HER2 and EGFR (discussed below). However, somatic mutations
scattered throughout the ERBB3 gene were recently identified in subsets of breast and
gastric cancers (Table 1). Many of the mutations were located in the extracellular domain,
and they appear to have oncogenic potential, function in a ligand-independent manner, and
require heterodimerization with HER2 for transforming activity (Jaiswal et al., 2013). Future
studies are needed to determine if cancers with ERBB3 mutations are particularly sensitive
to ERBB3 and/or HER2-targeted drugs. Similarly, mutations in ERBB4 were identified in
cancer, particularly melanoma (Prickett et al., 2009), lung adenocarcinoma (Ding et al.,

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 17.

Arteaga and Engelman

Page 5

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

2008), and medulloblastoma (Gilbertson et al., 2001). Although laboratory studies
demonstrated that melanoma cell lines harboring ERBB4 mutations were sensitive to
lapatinib, it remains unknown if targeting ERBB4, or any other ERBB family member, will
have therapeutic value in these cancers.
ERBB Ligands
Overproduction of ligands is one mechanism by which cancers aberrantly activate ERBB
receptors. The source of these can be tumor cells or the tumor stroma. There are three
groups of ligands. One group specifically binds EGFR and includes EGF, TGFα,
amphiregulin (AR), and epigen (EPG). A second group binds both EGFR and HER4 and
includes betacellulin (BTC), HB-EGF, and epiregulin (EPR). The third group includes all
the neuregulins (NRG) 1–4, of which NRG1 and NRG2 bind HER3 and HER4, whereas
NRG3 and NRG4 only bind HER4 (Hynes and MacDonald, 2009).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In transgenic mouse studies, mice that co-express TGFα and Neu in mammary epithelium
developed multifocal mammary cancers that arose after a significantly shorter latency than
those expressing either gene alone (Muller et al., 1996). TGFα is also co-overexpressed with
EGFR in lung, colorectal, ovary and head and neck squamous cancers, where it is associated
with poor patient prognosis (Grandis et al., 1998; Yarden and Sliwkowski, 2001) (Table 1).
Recent reports suggest that in addition to overexpression, mistrafficking, and/or ‘extracrine’
(exosomal targeting receptor activation) signaling by ERBB ligands may also contribute to
epithelial cell transformation (Singh and Coffey, 2014). For example, altered trafficking of
EREG to the apical cell surface leads to prolonged EGFR phosphorylation and more
proliferative and invasive tumors (Singh et al., 2013). Further, significantly enhanced levels
of invasiveness are observed when breast cancer cells are incubated with exosomes
containing high levels of AREG compared to incubation of cells with exosomes containing
low levels of AREG or recombinant EGFR ligands (Higginbotham et al., 2011), suggesting
a gain-of-function mode of EGFR signaling that might act in more distant environments.
Other roles of ligand-dependent activation of EGFR were discussed above.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

An autocrine loop has been described in ovarian cancer cells and tumors that overexpress
NRG1 and HER3, where suppression of HER3 with RNAi or with a neutralizing HER3
antibody suppressed ovarian cancer growth in laboratory models (Sheng et al., 2010) (Table
1). A NRG1-mediated autocrine loop inducing HER3 activation was also discovered in head
and neck cancer cells without HER2 amplification. These cells were particularly sensitive to
the EGFR/HER2 TKI lapatinib (Wilson et al., 2011), suggesting NRG1-driven tumors
depend on HER3 activated by HER2 and/or EGFR. Finally, Hegde et al. found high levels
of NRG1 and its receptor HER4 in NSCLC residual tumor cells that remained after
cytotoxic chemotherapy. Inhibition of HER3/4 signaling with a NRG1-blocking antibody
increased the magnitude and duration of response to chemotherapy in these in vivo models
(Hegde et al., 2013). This causal association of ERBB ligand overexpression and drug
resistance is not limited to NRG1 or to chemotherapy. For example HGF has been found to
confer resistance to the BRAF inhibitor vemurafenib in BRAF-mutant melanoma cells
(Wilson et al., 2012).

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 17.

Arteaga and Engelman

Page 6

DOWNSTREAM SIGNALING
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Oncogenic addiction to EGFR and HER2 are intimately linked to regulation of downstream
signaling. In cancers highly sensitive to inhibition of EGFR or HER2 inhibitors, EGFR or
HER2 is the main driver of downstream signaling, particularly via the PI3K/AKT and
MEK/ERK pathways. Thus, in cancers addicted to EGFR or HER2, inhibition of the
respective RTK leads to concomitant loss of flux through these pathways. Loss of these
signaling events leads to growth arrest and converges on the BCL-2 family of proteins to
promote apoptosis [reviewed in (Niederst and Engelman, 2013)].

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In EGFR and HER2 driven cancers, HER3 is an important heterodimer partner because it
potently activates the phosphatidylinositide-3 kinase (PI3K)/AKT survival pathway via its
six docking sites for the p85 regulatory subunit of PI3K. Although HER2 potently activates
ERK signaling, it does not bind p85 nor directly activate PI3K/AKT. Thus, HER2-mediated
activation of HER3 is essential for stimulation of the PI3K/AKT pathway. In transgenic
mice, genetic ablation of ERBB3 in the mammary gland via Cre-mediated recombination
abrogates ERBB2-driven mammary hyperplasias, DCIS, invasive cancers and metastases
(Vaught et al., 2012). Similarly, shRNA-mediated knockdown of HER3 but not EGFR
inhibits viability of HER2-overexpressing breast cancer cells. Further, HER3 but not EGFR
is always phosphorylated in human HER2-amplified breast cancers (Lee-Hoeflich et al.,
2008), suggesting it is an obligatory co-biomarker of aberrant HER2 activity and
dependence. More recently, an inducible HER3 shRNA (Lee-Hoeflich et al., 2008) and a
HER3 neutralizing antibody (Garrett et al., 2013b) were shown to inhibit growth of
established HER2-amplified xenografts, further suggesting HER3 is essential for survival of
HER2-dependent tumors. Analogous to HER2-induced signal transduction, mutant EGFR
often activates PI3K via HER3 (Engelman et al., 2005), and maintenance of HER3 signaling
can promote resistance to EGFR inhibitors (Engelman et al., 2007; Schoeberl et al., 2010).
However, unlike HER2, EGFR is also able to signal to PI3K via GAB1 in a HER3independent manner (Mattoon et al., 2004; Turke et al., 2010), suggesting that EGFR mutant
cancers may be better equipped than HER2 amplified cancers to adapt to the loss of HER3
function.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

HER2 amplified tumors have a strong dependence on PI3K/AKT signaling, as sustained
blockade of this pathway appears to be required for the antitumor effect of HER2
antagonists (Chakrabarty et al., 2013; Yakes et al., 2002). Comprehensive cancer cell line
panels screened for sensitivity to pan-PI3K, p110α-specific, and AKT inhibitors have
consistently shown preferential activity of these drugs against HER2-amplified breast cancer
lines (Heiser et al., 2012; O’Brien et al., 2010). Further, genetic ablation of p110α has been
shown to abrogate ERBB2-induced mammary tumor formation in transgenic mice
(Utermark et al., 2012). Preclinical studies have shown that, compared to HER2 amplified
cancers, EGFR mutant cancers are less sensitive to single-agent PI3K/AKT inhibitors.
Rather, inhibition of the PI3K and MEK pathways is necessary in order to induce apoptosis
and cause tumor regressions (Faber et al., 2010). Importantly, mechanisms of de novo and
acquired resistance to HER2 and EGFR directed therapies involve persistence or
reactivation of PI3K/AKT signaling via alternate amplified RTKs and/or mutations in the
PI3K pathway (Rexer and Arteaga, 2013).
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 17.

Arteaga and Engelman

Page 7

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Other downstream signaling pathways such as Src kinases, JAK/STAT and WNT are also
activated by ERBB receptors (Yarden and Sliwkowski, 2001). Examples below suggest they
are involved and/or mediate resistance to ERBB receptor-targeted therapies. However,
evidence that ERBB receptors depend on Src, JAK/STAT or WNT for their effects on
transformation and cancer progression is less clear and will not be discussed further.
Feedback activation of ERBB signaling promoting resistance to inhibition of alternative
kinases

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

More recently, EGFR and HER3 activation have been observed as important cellular
adaptations to inhibitors of downstream signaling. For example, in BRAF mutant CRC,
BRAF inhibitors fail to inhibit ERK signaling in sustained fashion due to activation of
EGFR which, in turn, re-activates ERK in the presence of the BRAF inhibitor (Corcoran et
al., 2012; Prahallad et al., 2012). However, combined inhibition of EGFR and BRAF blocks
re-activation of ERK and leads to regressions of BRAF mutant CRC in vivo. This
combination is now being actively developed in clinic for this subset of CRCs. Similarly,
inhibition of the MEK pathway in many cancers, including KRAS mutant cancers, activates
ERBB signaling by releasing a negative feedback on ERBB dimerization (Turke et al.,
2012). This further suggests the ERBB activation could mitigate the responsiveness of other
cancers to MEK inhibition.
Analogous to the effects of inhibiting the MEK pathway, inhibition of the PI3K pathway
leads to potent activation of HER3-dependent signaling in HER2-amplified breast cancers
(Chakrabarty et al., 2012; Chandarlapaty et al., 2011). In these cancers, co-inhibition of
HER3 and PI3K provided substantially greater anti-tumor efficacy. In other examples,
EGFR activation has been observed as a resistance mechanism to small molecules targeting
other tyrosine kinases. For example, EGFR activation is a resistance mechanism to ALK and
MET inhibitors in ALK-positive lung and MET-amplified gastric cancers, respectively.
Inhibition of EGFR re-sensitizes the resistant cancers to their respective TKI (Katayama et
al., 2012; McDermott et al., 2010; Qi et al., 2011; Sasaki et al., 2011). Thus, activation of
ERBB family members has emerged as a common mechanism of adaptation upon inhibition
of downstream signaling, and inhibition of ERBB family members may be used to augment
the efficacy of other pathway inhibitors.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

MECHANISMS OF ACTION OF EGFR AND HER2 INHIBITORS
HER2
Trastuzumab is a humanized IgG1 antibody that binds to an epitope in juxtamembrane
region IV of the HER2 receptor. It inhibits cleavage of the HER2 ectodomain, uncouples
ligand-independent HER2-containing dimers leading to partial inhibition of downstream
signaling, and triggers antibody-dependent, cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) (Clynes et
al., 2000; Ghosh et al., 2011; Junttila et al., 2009; Molina et al., 2001; Yakes et al., 2002)
(Table 2). This last mechanism cooperates with the recruitment of a T-cell population
mediating an adaptive immune (memory) response that enhances tumor eradication (Park et
al., 2010; Stagg et al., 2011). The importance of the immune response is underscored by the
finding that the therapeutic effect of trastuzumab was markedly diminished in mice that

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 17.

Arteaga and Engelman

Page 8

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

were engineered to be deficient in NK cells and macrophages capable of binding the Fc
region of trastuzumab (Clynes et al., 2000). Pertuzumab is a monoclonal antibody that
recognizes an epitope in heterodimerization domain II of HER2, thus blocking ligandinduced HER2-HER3 dimerization, resulting in partial inhibition of PI3K/AKT signaling
(Agus et al., 2002). Because pertuzumab and trastuzumab bind to different epitopes in the
HER2 ectodomain (Franklin et al., 2004), hence their complementary abilities to disrupt
HER2-containing dimers, the combination of pertuzumab and trastuzumab has shown
synergy in preclinical studies (Scheuer et al., 2009) and clinical trials (Baselga et al., 2012b;
Gianni et al., 2012) and is now approved for treatment of patients with HER2+ breast
cancer. Trastuzumab-derivative of maytansine 1 (T-DM1 or trastuzumab emtansine) is an
antibody-drug conjugate in which one molecule of trastuzumab is covalently bonded via a
non-cleavable linker to 3.5 molecules of a maytansinoid that inhibits microtubule
polymerization (DM1). After binding to the receptor, the T-DM1/HER2 complex is
internalized followed by degradation in lysosomes, release of DM1 and subsequent cell lysis
(Lewis Phillips et al., 2008). T-DM1 binds to HER2 with similar affinity as trastuzumab,
thus retaining the ability of the naked antibody to inhibit ligand-independent HER2containing dimers and signal transduction as well as to mediate ADCC (Junttila et al., 2011).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Lapatinib is an ATP-competitive, reversible small molecule inhibitor of the HER2 and
EGFR tyrosine kinases (Konecny et al., 2006). In HER2+ breast cancers, lapatinib quickly
disables HER2 signaling, resulting in inhibition of the PI3K/AKT and MAPK pathways, and
it has shown clinical activity in HER2+ breast cancers that have progressed on trastuzumab
(Geyer et al., 2006). Lapatinib also binds the inactive conformation of EGFR (Wood et al.,
2004) but has not been active against cancers for which EGFR antibodies or TKIs are
approved. Afatinib (Minkovsky and Berezov, 2008) and neratinib (Burstein et al., 2010) are
irreversible, covalent HER2/EGFR TKIs with activity against HER2, HER4, EGFR, and
some HER2 insertion mutants (Bose et al., 2013). Of note, the clinical efficacy of all
therapeutic inhibitors of HER2 has been predominantly limited to breast cancers that
overexpress HER2 as measured by intense membrane staining in the majority of tumor cells
with HER2 antibodies [3+ by immunohistochemistry (IHC)] or excess copies of the HER2
gene determined by fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH).
EGFR

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Gefitinib and erlotinib are ATP-competitive EGFR TKIs (Table 2). Biochemical and
crystallography analyses demonstrate that the mutants possess a higher affinity for the firstgeneration EGFR inhibitors gefitinib and erlotinib compared to the wild-type receptor
(Carey et al., 2006; Yun et al., 2007). Thus, the mutant enzymes are inhibited at lower
concentrations of drug, which leads to a favorable therapeutic index. As will be discussed in
greater detail below, EGFR mutant lung cancers often develop a second mutation in the
gatekeeper residue, T790M, as they become resistant to gefitinib or erlotinib. Thus, there
have been intense efforts to develop a drug that can inhibit T790M EGFR to overcome
resistance. One such effort was the development of second-generation EGFR inhibitors,
such as afatinib and dacomitinib. These drugs are irreversible ATP-competitors that form
covalent links with the Cys773 residue of EGFR. Although these second-generation drugs
have the capacity to inhibit the EGFR T790M, they do so at concentrations that also inhibit

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 17.

Arteaga and Engelman

Page 9

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

wild-type EGFR. Thus, there is not a favorable therapeutic index, and dose-limiting
toxicities due to inhibition of wild-type EGFR (such as rash and diarrhea) prevent increasing
doses high enough to fully suppress T790M. Thus, they have been largely ineffective at
overcoming T790M-mediated resistance in the clinic. Pao et al. found that mouse lung
transgenic tumors expressing T790M EGFR are sensitive to the combination of afatinib and
cetuximab (Regales et al., 2009). This combination has progressed to the clinic where it has
demonstrated significant clinical activity against T790M EGFR lung cancers, although it is
also associated with significant toxicity (Janjigian et al., 2011).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

More recently, third-generation EGFR inhibitors have been developed. The first of such
compounds, WZ-4002, was designed to be much more potent against the resistant T790M
mutation than the wild-type receptor, thus restoring a favorable therapeutic index in which
the drugs can be dosed high enough to inhibit T790M without inducing toxicity from
inhibiting wild-type EGFR (Walter et al., 2013; Zhou et al., 2009). Of note, this drug is not a
quinazoline derivative like the first- and second-generation EGFR inhibitors. WZ-4002 has
not been developed clinically, whereas two drugs with similar properties, AZD9291 and
CLO-1686, have been (Walter et al., 2013). Clinical data are emerging for these compounds,
and the high rate of clinical responses, with minimal toxicity, are increasing enthusiasm for
the class of drugs (Ranson et al., 2013; Sequist et al., 2013a; Soria et al., 2013).
In contrast to the EGFR TKIs, the EGFR neutralizing antibody cetuximab blocks ligand
binding to the EGFR. Thus, it is most effective in cancers that harbor ligand-activated, wildtype EGFR. In colorectal cancers with wild-type KRAS, inhibition of EGFR leads mainly to
loss of downstream ERK signaling. However, since mutant KRAS directly activates ERK,
cetuximab fails to suppress ERK in these cancers, likely explaining the lack of clinical
activity (Ebi et al., 2011). As a result, cetuximab is now used primarily in cancers with wildtype KRAS. Panitumumab is another EGFR-targeted antibody that has activity in wild-type
KRAS CRC. Unlike cetuximab, it is an IgG2, and is predicted not to engage immune effector
cells to mediate ADCC. Despite this difference, phase III studies have demonstrated clinical
efficacy similar to that of cetuximab (Douillard et al., 2013; Jonker et al., 2007; Van Cutsem
et al., 2009; Van Cutsem et al., 2007). Thus, it seems plausible that the primary mechanism
of action of cetuximab and panitumumab is due to its inhibition of EGFR signaling and not
engagement of ADCC.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

HER3 inhibitors
Several HER3 neutralizing antibodies are in clinical development. MM-121 and U3-1287
(formerly AMG-888) bind the extracellular domain of HER3, block heregulin-induced
phosphorylation and reduce expression of HER3 at the cell surface (Garrett et al., 2011;
Schoeberl et al., 2010). MM-121 (IgG2) is most effective against tumors with liganddependent activation of HER3 (Sheng et al., 2010). U3-1287 synergizes with trastuzumab
and lapatinib to suppress the growth of HER2-amplified xenografts (Garrett et al., 2013a)
and has single-agent activity against transgenic mouse mammary cancers induced by
Polyomavirus middle T antigen (Muraoka-Cook et al., 2011). RG7116 is an IgG1 that
selectively binds domain 1 of human HER3. It blocks ligand binding and down-regulates
HER3 from the cell surface. Through glycoengineering of its Fc moiety, RG7116 mediates

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 17.

Arteaga and Engelman

Page 10

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

enhanced ADCC that correlates with HER3 receptor density (Mirschberger et al., 2013). At
this time, these antibodies have completed phase I safety and dose-finding trials but their
clinical efficacy remains to be shown.
LJM716 is a novel anti-HER3 antibody that binds an epitope within domains 2 and 4 in the
receptor’s extracellular domain, thus trapping HER3 in an inactive conformation. In contrast
to the other anti-HER3 antibodies, it blocks both ligand-induced and ligand-independent
HER3 dimerization and activation (Garner et al., 2013). This property may be particularly
advantageous in HER2-amplified breast cancers, in which HER2 appears to activate HER3
in a ligand-independent manner. Accordingly, in laboratory studies, LJM716 reduced
growth of established HER2-amplified xenografts when given as a single agent and
synergized with PI3K inhibitors to suppress growth of HER2-amplified/PIK3CA mutant
tumors (Garrett et al., 2013b).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

More recently, bi-specific antibodies targeting HER3 have been introduced. MM-111 is an
antibody that docks onto HER2 and subsequently binds HER3, thus blocking liganddependent activation of HER2/HER3 dimers (McDonagh et al., 2012). Finally,
MEHD7945A is a two-in-one IgG1 generated by phage display engineering that specifically
binds HER3 and EGFR with high affinity, thus blocking TGFα- and HRG-induced
activation of both receptors and downstream PI3K/AKT and ERK signaling. MEHD7945A
mediates ADCC in vivo and demonstrated superior antitumor activity against multiple tumor
models compared to monospecific antibodies (Schaefer et al., 2011). Currently HER3
inhibitors are being developed in combination with trastuzumab, EGFR antibodies and
TKIs, PI3K inhibitors and cytotoxic chemotherapy. In addition to HER2 amplification and
EGFR mutation, high heregulin expression and HER3 mutations are being explored as
predictive biomarkers of response in clinical trials.

MECHANISMS OF RESISTANCE TO ERBB INHIBITORS

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Although ERBB targeted therapies have provided substantial benefit to patients with
advanced cancer, cancers ultimately have developed resistance to the current approaches. In
this Perspective, we will discuss both de novo and acquired resistance. The distinction is
primarily a clinical one: de novo or intrinsic resistance refers to cancers that do not exhibit
an initial response, whereas acquired resistance develops following an initial, often marked
and durable, clinical response. It is important to appreciate that the same molecular
mechanism may cause both types of resistance, underscoring the robustness of the biological
principles underlying how cancers evade these therapies.
Mechanisms of resistance have been discovered by several approaches, including the
maintenance of cell lines and xenografts in the presence of drug until resistance emerges, or
infecting sensitive cell lines with open reading frame (ORF) or shRNA libraries to identify
genes whose expression or loss leads to resistance. These efforts have also been coupled to
biopsy programs, in which cancers are systematically biopsied upon the development of
resistance to interrogate acquired molecular changes upon treatment pressures (Sequist et al.,
2011; Yano et al., 2011; Yu et al., 2013). However, there are significant limitations with
many of the laboratory studies. Although EGFR TKIs are primarily used as single-agents for

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 17.

Arteaga and Engelman

Page 11

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

EGFR mutant lung cancers, HER2-directed therapies and EGFR antibodies are generally
used in combination with chemotherapy in the clinic. However, most laboratory studies have
modeled resistance to these agents as single therapies, thus not recapitulating the selective
pressure of combination therapies applied in the clinic. Other data about potential resistance
mechanisms have been derived from correlative clinical trials where patients have been
treated with anti-HER2 drug(s) in combination with chemotherapy, a variable not always
considered in the interpretation of the studies of drug resistance. Finally, even though
combinations of HER2 antagonists are increasingly used in the clinic, resistance to these
combinations has yet to be modeled widely in the laboratory.
Intrinsic HER2 alterations

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Some resistance mechanisms affect the capacity for HER2 inhibitors to directly engage
HER2. Anido et al. described p95-HER2, a truncated form of HER2, lacking the
trastuzumab binding region, which may arise from alternate transcription initiation sites in
HER2 (Anido et al., 2006) (Figure 1A). Patients with metastatic breast cancer harboring
cytosolic expression of p95-HER2 exhibit a very low response rate to trastuzumab compared
to those patients without p95-HER2 in their tumors (Scaltriti et al., 2007). This form of
HER2 retains kinase activity, and tumors with p95-HER2 may still be susceptible to kinase
inhibition with a TKI, as suggested by the observation that p95-HER2 tumors exhibit a
similar response rate to the combination of capecitabine and lapatinib compared to breast
cancers expressing full-length HER2 (Scaltriti et al., 2010).
A splice variant that eliminates exon 16 in the extracellular domain of the HER2 receptor
has also been identified in HER2+ primary breast cancers and cell lines (Kwong and Hung,
1998) (Figure 1A). This variant does not eliminate the trastuzumab epitope on HER2, but
stabilizes HER2 homodimers and prevents their disruption upon binding by the antibody,
resulting in trastuzumab resistance in cell lines. The Δ16 isoform was found to interact
directly with Src, and treatment with the Src inhibitor dasatinib overcame the resistance to
the antibody conferred by the alternative splicing variant (Mitra et al., 2009). However,
clinical evidence of an association between HER2-Δ16 and resistance to trastuzumab has not
been shown.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

HER2 mutations have been found in a small proportion of lung, gastric, colorectal, breast
and head and neck cancers (Lee et al., 2006; Ross et al., 2013; Stephens et al., 2004;
Willmore-Payne et al., 2006). These mutants of HER2 are resistant to lapatinib and
trastuzumab (Figure 1B) but sensitive to the covalent HER2 TKI neratinib (Bose et al.,
2013; Wang et al., 2006). To the best of our knowledge, HER2 mutations in HER2 geneamplified breast tumors are very rare. As such, they have not been identified as a resistance
mechanism to trastuzumab. One possible reason is that these mutations may comprise only a
portion of the amplified HER2 alleles and, therefore, exist below the limits of sensitivity of
traditional DNA sequencing methods (Zito et al., 2008). It is possible that cancer cells
harboring these mutations will be selected, or acquired, after the selective pressure of antiHER2 treatment. If so, they may only be detected in tumors that are progressing after
primary HER2-targeted therapy. However, comprehensive studies profiling HER2+ tumors
that have progressed on primary anti-HER2 therapies have not been reported.

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 17.

Arteaga and Engelman

Page 12

Intrinsic EGFR alterations

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In EGFR mutant lung cancer, the most common mechanism of acquired resistance to EGFR
inhibitors is the development of a mutation in the gatekeeper residue of EGFR, T790M
(Kobayashi et al., 2005; Pao et al., 2005). T790M abrogates the inhibitor effects of gefitinib
and erlotinib by increasing the affinity of the receptor for ATP (Yun et al., 2008), thereby
lessening the potency of first-generation EGRF inhibitors (Figure 1C). At least 50% of
biopsies from patients with acquired resistance harbor the T790M mutation. Recent studies
suggest that highly sensitive methods can detect the T790M mutation in ~35% of pretreatment biopsies. This suggests, but does not prove, that it pre-exists in a small fraction of
cells, and that those cells are selected for during the course of treatment (Maheswaran et al.,
2008; Rosell et al., 2011). Currently, the third-generation EGFR inhibitors (discussed above)
are in early clinical trials to overcome this resistance.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

An analogous finding has been observed in wild-type KRAS CRCs that develop resistance
to cetuximab. A small study reported the development of a S492R mutation in the
extracellular domain of EGFR that interferes with cetuximab binding, but does not interfere
with ligand-dependent activation nor abrogates receptor engagement by panitumumab
(Montagut et al., 2012) (Figure 1D).

BYPASS TRACK RESISTANCE
Other than the immune effects of ERBB antibodies, it is believed that most of activity of
these drugs is due to suppression of downstream signaling, particularly PI3K/AKT and
MEK/ERK. Thus, many cancers are resistant to single-agent ERBB inhibitors because at
least one of these critical downstream pathways is maintained despite inhibition of the
targeted receptor. This type of resistance, also termed “bypass track” resistance, is often
used to describe resistance resulting from maintenance of these key downstream signaling
pathways despite adequate inhibition of the respective RTK [reviewed in (Niederst and
Engelman, 2013) and Figure 2].
Ligand- and RTK-mediated resistance

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

One of the earliest bona fide observations that RTK bypass signaling induces resistance to
ERBB inhibitors was in EGFR-mutant NSCLCs. Amplification of the MET gene was found
in EGFR mutant cancers with acquired resistance to EGFR TKIs but not in pre-treatment
biopsies (Bean et al., 2007; Engelman et al., 2007). In EGFR-mutant NSCLC cells with
acquired resistance, MET reactivates both PI3K/AKT and MEK/ERK signaling despite the
inhibition of EGFR. The combination of MET and EGFR inhibitors was sufficient to block
downstream signaling and induce marked tumor regressions (Engelman et al., 2007; Turke
et al., 2010). Activation of MET by its ligand hepatic growth factor (HGF) was also
sufficient to promote resistance through activation of downstream signaling (Yano et al.,
2008). MET has also been implicated in trastuzumab resistance. HGF-induced signaling
through MET was shown to abrogate the action of trastuzumab (Shattuck et al., 2008; Turke
et al., 2010). Further, gene amplification of MET and HGF was reported in a cohort of
HER2+ patients who did not respond to trastuzumab and chemotherapy (Minuti et al.,

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 17.

Arteaga and Engelman

Page 13

2012). Thus, MET activation by either gene amplification or ligand stimulation can cause
bypass resistance to EGFR and HER2 inhibitors.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Re-activation of EGFR and HER3 can also serve as a mechanism of resistance to ERBB
inhibitors. In laboratory models of HER2-amplified breast cancer treated with trastuzumab,
increased levels of EGFR and ERBB ligands led to an increase in active EGFR/HER3 and
EGFR/HER2 dimers to promote resistance (Ritter et al., 2007). This is consistent with data
showing that trastuzumab is unable to block ligand-induced HER2-containing heterodimers
(Agus et al., 2002). Similarly, activation of TGFβ receptors can increase ERBB ligand
production and cleavage, particularly TGFα, amphiregulin and heregulin, via activation of
the TACE/ADAM17 sheddase; this results in activation of HER3 and PI3K and promotes
drug resistance (Wang et al., 2008). Further, a gene signature of TGFβ activity was
developed and shown to correlate with resistance to trastuzumab and poor clinical outcome
in patients (Wang et al., 2008).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Similarly, in EGFR mutant cancers, MET amplification leads to resistance to EGFR TKIs
through re-activation of HER3 (Engelman et al., 2007). In a subset of EGFR mutant lung
cancers, amplification of HER2, presumably involving HER3 reactivation, was also
identified as a resistance mechanism to EGFR TKIs (Takezawa et al., 2012). Consistent with
these data, blockade of HER3 with the neutralizing antibody MM-121 increases the efficacy
of cetuximab in a mouse model of EGFR mutant lung cancer (Schoeberl et al., 2010). Along
those lines, a selective ADAM inhibitor, INCB3619, which prevents the processing and
activation of multiple ERBB ligands including heregulin, inhibits HER3 signaling and
enhances gefitinib-mediated inhibition of EGFR in NSCLC (Zhou et al., 2006). Further
supporting a role of amplified HER2-HER3 signaling in resistance to EGFR-targeted
therapies, colorectal cancer patients with de novo or acquired resistance to cetuximab-based
therapy exhibit HER2 amplification in their tumor or high levels of circulating heregulin
(Yonesaka et al., 2011). Finally, using patient-derived colon cancer xenografts, Bertotti et al.
identified HER2 gene amplification as a predictor of resistance to cetuximab among KRAS
wild-type tumors (Bertotti et al., 2011).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

IGF-I receptors have also been implicated in driving resistance to both EGFR and HER2
inhibitors. Overexpression of IGF-1R or an increase in levels of IGF-1R/HER2 heterodimers
can potently activate PI3K/AKT signaling and confer resistance to trastuzumab in laboratory
studies (Huang et al., 2010). Inhibition of IGF-1R with a neutralizing antibody or a small
molecule TKI, or targeting the HER2 kinase with lapatinib was found to overcome IGF-1Rmediated resistance to trastuzumab (Nahta et al., 2007). In a neoadjuvant trial of
chemotherapy plus trastuzumab, a high level of IGF-1R expression measured by IHC
correlated with a poor clinical response (Harris et al., 2007). Similarly, activation of IGFIR,
via loss of expression of IGFBP3 and IGFBP4, which encode insulin-like growth factor
binding proteins 3 and 4, respectively, maintains PI3K/AKT signaling despite blockade of
EGFR and promotes resistance to EGFR inhibitors in multiple cell lines (Guix et al., 2008).
In these cases, inhibition of IGF1R re-sensitized to EGFR inhibition. In addition, inhibition
of IGF-IR also suppressed the development of “persistor cells,” the small population of PC9
EGFR mutant cells that survives the initial inhibition of EGFR, described by Settleman and
colleagues (Sharma et al., 2010).
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 17.

Arteaga and Engelman

Page 14

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In addition to the bypass pathways mentioned above, numerous other RTK-mediated
resistance mechanisms have been observed. The EphA2 receptor has been shown to confer
resistance to trastuzumab in cell lines, and EphA2 expression was shown to predict poor
outcome patients with HER2+ breast cancer. (Zhuang et al.). Most recently, the
erythropoietin (Epo) receptor was found to be co-expressed in cell lines and primary tumors
that overexpress HER2. In these cell lines, concurrent treatment with recombinant
erythropoietin conferred trastuzumab resistance. In patients with HER2+ breast cancer, the
concurrent administration of erythropoietin and trastuzumab correlated with a shorter
progression-free and overall survival compared to patients not receiving erythropoietin
(Liang et al., 2010). Finally, in erlotinib-resistant EGFR mutant lung cancer cells and
lapatinib-resistant HER2-amplified breast cancer cells, levels of the AXL RTK were
markedly increased (Liu et al., 2009; Zhang et al., 2012). Targeting AXL was able to resensitize some of these resistant cancers to the original TKI.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

We should note that most of these RTK-mediated mechanisms do not necessarily involve
genetic activation of the RTK, as mainly protein assays (i.e., IHC for IGF-IR, AXL, EphA2,
etc.) have been employed to measure their levels in tumor tissues. Such correlations do not
prove that the putative bypass RTK is causal to drug resistance in the clinic or in a particular
patient. Ultimately, clinical efficacy using specific drugs that target the bypass RTK will be
needed for true validation.
Intracellular kinases
Molecules in the pathways downstream of RTKs can be aberrantly activated as a result of
genetic alterations, also resulting in drug resistance (Figure 2). Somatic alterations in the
PI3K/AKT pathway are the most frequent in breast cancer, occurring in approximately 30%
of HER2+ tumors. These include mutation and/or amplification of the genes encoding the
PI3K catalytic subunits p110α (PIK3CA) and p110β (PIK3CB), the PI3K regulatory
subunit p85α (PIK3R1), the PI3K effectors AKT1, AKT2, and PDK1, and loss of the lipid
phosphatases PTEN and INPP4B [reviewed in (Engelman, 2009)]. It is generally accepted
that the antitumor activity of HER2 inhibitors depends on inhibition of PI3K-AKT
downstream of HER2. Thus, one would expect that activating mutations in the PI3K
pathway would confer resistance to HER2 inhibitors.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Constitutive activation of PI3K, via overexpression of PIK3CA mutants, conferred
resistance to the antibody in laboratory studies (Chakrabarty et al., 2010; Eichhorn et al.,
2008; Serra et al., 2008). Patients with ‘hot spot’ PIK3CA mutations and undetectable or low
PTEN measured by IHC, exhibited a poorer outcome after treatment with chemotherapy and
trastuzumab compared to patients without those alterations (Berns et al., 2007; Dave et al.,
2011; Esteva et al., 2010). In the EMILIA and Neo-ALTTO randomized trials in HER2+
breast cancer, patients with PIK3CA mutant tumors did not benefit from lapatinib and
capecitabine (Baselga, 2013b) and from lapatinib and trastuzumab (Baselga, 2013a),
respectively. It remains to be determined whether T-DM1, because of its ability to deliver
high levels of cytotoxic chemotherapy to HER2-overexpressing cells, trumps this
mechanism of resistance.

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 17.

Arteaga and Engelman

Page 15

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

One of the first discoveries linking constitutive activation of PI3K signaling and resistance
to HER2 inhibitors was accomplished by Berns et al. Using a large-scale siRNA genetic
screen, they identified PTEN as the only gene whose knockdown conferred trastuzumab
resistance (Berns et al., 2007). However, the association of PTEN loss with drug resistance
in the clinic is less clear. In one early study in patients with metastatic breast cancer, loss or
low levels of PTEN correlated with a lower response to trastuzumab (Nagata et al., 2004).
This correlation was not found in patients with early breast cancer treated with adjuvant
trastuzumab (Perez et al., 2013). We speculate this was because of the concomitant
administration of chemotherapy in an adjuvant setting (Rexer et al., 2013).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Similar findings have been observed in cancers with acquired resistance to EGFR inhibitors.
Introduction of PIK3CA mutations into EGFR mutant lung cancer cell lines is sufficient to
maintain PI3K signaling and promote resistance (Engelman et al., 2006). Accordingly,
PIK3CA mutations have been identified in biopsies of EGFR mutant cancers with acquired
resistance to EGFR inhibitors (Sequist et al., 2011). Similarly, a report found that PTEN loss
may be associated with resistance to EGFR inhibitors (Sos et al., 2009). In addition to
reactivation of PI3K, re-activation of ERK signaling can promote resistance to EGFR
inhibitors as evidenced by the finding of a BRAF mutation in an EGFR mutant lung cancer
with acquired resistance (Ohashi et al., 2012). In a second example, an EGFR mutant cell
line made resistant to third-generation EGFR inhibitors developed amplification of ERK and
was re-sensitized upon inhibition of MEK (Ercan et al., 2012).
A compelling recent discovery underlying this type of resistance mechanism was the study
of KRAS wild-type colorectal cancers that had developed resistance to cetuximab. By
performing repeat biopsies and evaluating circulating tumor DNA, investigators observed
the emergence of KRAS mutations as a resistance mechanism (Diaz et al., 2012; Misale et
al., 2012). From a signaling perspective, one would expect that the KRAS mutant clones fail
to down-regulate the ERK pathway in response to cetuximab, underlying the resistance. As
the presence of KRAS mutations predicts for lack of initial response to cetuximab, these
findings underscore the convergence of intrinsic and acquired resistance mechanisms.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Src family kinase (SFK) signaling has been implicated by several studies in promoting
resistance to HER2 inhibitors. In HER2+ breast cancer cells with acquired resistance to
lapatinib, up-regulation of SFK activity, particularly Yes, was observed in several resistant
cell lines. Resistance was associated with recovery of PI3K/AKT signaling despite
inhibition of HER2. Addition of a Src TKI partially blocked PI3K/AKT and restored
sensitivity to lapatinib (Rexer et al., 2011). In another study, the authors suggest that PTEN
was no longer capable of dephosphorylating and suppressing Src in trastuzumab-resistant
HER2+ cells, and the addition of a Src kinase inhibitor overcame trastuzumab resistance
(Zhang et al., 2011). Src activity is also involved in the resistance conferred by the Δ16
HER2 isoform and the EpoR (Mitra et al., 2009). Src is thought to mediate resistance in part
via phosphorylation and inhibition of PTEN, leading to constitutive PI3K signaling (Liang et
al., 2010).

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 17.

Arteaga and Engelman

Page 16

Defects in apoptosis and cell cycle control

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Inhibition of a driver oncogene such as EGFR and HER2 results in proliferation arrest and
apoptosis. Therefore, alterations in the normal apoptotic machinery can also induce
resistance to EGFR- and HER2-targeted therapies. Indeed, we observed that levels of the
pro-apoptotic BH3-only Bcl2 family member, BIM, are predictive of response to targeted
therapy in EGFR mutant lung cancers, HER2-amplified breast cancers and PIK3CA mutant
cancers (Faber et al., 2011). BIM protein normally is induced following inhibition of EGFR
and HER2 in these cancers. In this study, although erlotinib or lapatinib inhibited EGFR and
HER2 and downstream signaling in EGFR mutant and HER2-amplified cancers,
respectively, only those cell lines with high levels of BIM underwent marked apoptosis. This
suggests that BIM levels are a biomarker predictive of response to a TKI in an oncogeneaddicted cancer. Other groups have reported similar results in EGFR mutant lung cancers
(Ng et al., 2012) and HER2 gene-amplified breast cell lines with and without activating
mutations (Tanizaki et al., 2011). In cancers with concurrent PIK3CA mutant cells, however,
both the growth inhibitory effect and induction of BIM following treatment with lapatinib
were blunted (Tanizaki et al., 2011).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Survivin, a member of the inhibitor of apoptosis (IAP) protein family that inhibits the
activity of caspases, has been shown to be a point of convergence of several pathways that
can lead to resistance to HER2 inhibitors. In HER2+ breast cancer cells, inhibition of HER2PI3K reduces survivin expression resulting in apoptosis. HER2-amplified breast cancer cells
with acquired resistance to lapatinib up-regulate ERα which, in turn, induces FoxO3amediated transcription of survivin (Xia et al., 2006). In turn, high survivin levels allow for
escape from lapatinib. Accordingly, elevated levels of survivin and MCL-1 have been found
in trastuzumab-resistant cells (Chakrabarty et al., 2013).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Altered control of progression through the cell cycle in response to HER2 inhibition also
plays a role in resistance. Cell lines made resistant to trastuzumab by chronic exposure
exhibited focal amplification of cyclin E. CDK2 inhibitors reduced growth of these
trastuzumab-resistant xenografts (Scaltriti et al., 2011). Further, in a cohort of patients with
HER2+ breast cancers treated with trastuzumab, amplification of cyclin E was associated
with a diminished clinical response. Downregulation of the Cdk inhibitor p27KIP1 and a
resulting increase in Cdk activity has also been associated with trastuzumab resistance
(Nahta et al., 2004; Yakes et al., 2002). Indeed, modulation of levels of p27KIP1 appears to
be a common endpoint for several of the resistance pathways noted above, including
signaling from IGF-1R and MET (Nahta et al., 2005; Shattuck et al., 2008).
Tumor host factors
Host factors that affect the immunomodulatory function of trastuzumab can also contribute
to trastuzumab resistance. In mice lacking FcγRIII and, thus, deficient in NK cells and
macrophages capable of binding the Fc region of trastuzumab, the therapeutic effect of
trastuzumab was markedly diminished (Clynes et al., 2000). Polymorphisms in the gene
encoding FcγRIII in humans were associated with resistance to trastuzumab in patients with
metastatic HER2+ breast cancer (Musolino et al., 2008). In the same study, PBMCs from
patients with FCGR3 polymorphisms associated with an improved outcome after

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 17.

Arteaga and Engelman

Page 17

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

trastuzumab induce a stronger trastuzumab-mediated ADCC in vitro. A follow-up study
found that the quantity and lytic efficiency of CD16(+) lymphocytes are the major factors
affecting the level of ADCC induced by trastuzumab. This, in turn, correlates with tumor
response (Gennari et al., 2004). We should note, however, that a large trial of trastuzumabbased adjuvant chemotherapy in patients with early HER2+ breast cancer did not show an
association between FCGR3A and FCGR2A polymorphisms with patient outcome (Hurvitz
et al., 2012)

STRATEGIES TO OVERCOME RESISTANCE: COMBINATION THERAPIES
Clinical experience has validated EGFR and HER2 as effective drug targets. However, in
the metastatic setting, these inhibitors do not lead to cures, and cancers ultimately develop
resistance. Thus, there is a great need to identify therapeutic strategies that will improve
upon the current approaches. We believe that one strategy will include maximal blockade of
the oncogene target itself as well as inhibition of the key bypass tracks that promote
resistance. The growing number of escape routes will likely necessitate combinations of
multiple agents, whose delivery will require innovative dosing and scheduling.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

HER2

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

All currently available HER2 inhibitors target or exploit mechanisms of HER2 function. As
single drugs, however, they do not potently suppress HER2 signaling. This may explain the
generally short-lived responses of metastatic HER2+ breast cancers to single-agent HER2
inhibitors. Trastuzumab and pertuzumab, in particular, are each weak signaling inhibitors,
possibly because they incompletely block HER2-containing dimers (Junttila et al., 2009).
Treatment with lapatinib (and likely other HER2 TKIs) leads to an increase in HER2 and
HER2-containing dimers at the plasma membrane, and fails to completely and persistently
inhibit the HER2 kinase (Garrett et al., 2011; Scaltriti et al., 2009). This may be explained
by both the narrow therapeutic index of current HER2 TKIs and the challenge of complete
and sustained inhibition of an amplified drug target, i.e., HER2, with small molecules.
Moreover, inhibition of the HER2 kinase leads to an initial reduction of PI3K/AKT
signaling, which releases negative feedbacks resulting in up-regulation of HER3 and other
RTKs as wells as survival factors such as BCL2 and ERα, thereby mitigating the efficacy of
HER2 inhibitors(Chakrabarty et al., 2012; Chandarlapaty et al., 2011; Garrett et al., 2011;
Muranen et al., 2012; Xia et al., 2006). We also recognize that HER2-amplified breast
cancers vary with respect to their addiction to HER2 signaling, although they are grouped
together using clinical criteria (FISH, IHC) for HER2 overexpression. Thus, we speculate
many HER2 gene amplified cancers are not truly ‘addicted’ to HER2 signaling and, as such,
are not sensitive to HER2 TKIs. Finally, resistance to T-DM1 may be due to several reasons,
including the sparing of HER2-negative tumor cells within heterogeneous cancers
containing HER2+ and HER-negative tumor cells, a scenario not uncommon in clinical
practice. Finally, T-DM1, trastuzumab and pertuzumab cannot bind p95-HER2 and, thus,
would be inactive against tumor cells with an abundance of cytosolic fragments of HER2.
One strategy to address the limitations of anti-HER2 drugs as single agents has been to
combine multiple HER2 antagonists that have different but complementary mechanisms of
action. Clinical experience had suggested that trastuzumab-refractory tumors remained
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 17.

Arteaga and Engelman

Page 18

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

dependent on HER2 as continuing trastuzumab in new treatment regimens beyond
progression to trastuzumab demonstrated clinical benefit (von Minckwitz et al., 2009).
Currently, dual blockade of HER2 is well-entrenched in the clinic. For example, the
combination of trastuzumab and lapatinib is superior to each agent alone in both the
metastatic (Blackwell et al., 2010) and neoadjuvant settings (Baselga et al., 2012a).
Similarly, the combination of trastuzumab and pertuzumab was shown to be superior to each
antibody alone in both neoadjuvant trials in patients with early disease (Gianni et al., 2012)
and in patients with advanced disease, as assessed by progression-free survival (Baselga et
al., 2012b). The combination of T-DM1 and pertuzumab is also in progress. This novel
approach would incorporate dual receptor blockade with two HER2 antibodies (trastuzumab
and pertuzumab) plus the delivery of a potent cytotoxic (DM1) to HER2 amplified cells
while mostly sparing host tissues (Phillips et al., 2013).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

At the time of writing this Perspective, several novel anti-HER2 combinations are being
tested in clinical trials. Some of these include a third drug targeted to the HER2 network
(Table 3). It is anticipated that for a cohort of HER2+ breast cancers that escape anti-HER2
dual therapy, a third drug targeted against a signaling hub in the receptor network might be
necessary. Supporting this possibility, a recent study showed that transgenic mammary
tumors expressing HER2 and PIK3CAH1047R were completely resistant to the combinations
of trastuzumab plus pertuzumab and trastuzumab plus lapatinib. Addition of the pan-PI3K
inhibitor BKM120 to each combination resulted in inhibition of tumor growth, but only
partially and temporarily (Hanker et al., 2013). Currently, a main clinical focus is the
addition of PI3K inhibitors and/or HER3 neutralizing antibodies (Garrett et al., 2013b) to the
established combinations of anti-HER2 therapies (Table 3). More recent data suggest that
blockade of mTOR downstream HER2 with the TORC1 inhibitor everolimus, while
maintaining trastuzumab therapy, can induce clinical responses in HER2+ cancers that have
progressed on trastuzumab (Hurvitz et al., 2013; Morrow et al., 2011; O’Regan, 2013).
Along the same lines, neratinib in combination with the TORC1 inhibitor temsirolimus
recently demonstrated clinical activity in HER2 mutant lung cancers (Gandhi et al., 2014).
Finally, one proposed novel strategy is the combination of trastuzumab with anti-PD1 and
anti-CD37 monoclonal antibodies. In this case, anti-PD1 would inhibit IFNγ-activated T
cells and anti-CD37 would block CD8+ T cells; both of these T-cell subtypes are required
for the adaptive immune response triggered by trastuzumab (Stagg et al., 2011).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

EGFR
One major mechanism of resistance to EGFR inhibitors in EGFR mutant cancers is the
development of the T790M gatekeeper residue. The newer third generation EGFR TKIs that
suppress T790M are showing remarkable progress in this subset of cancers (Ranson et al.,
2013; Sequist et al., 2013a; Soria et al., 2013). Ultimately, clinical trials will be needed to
determine if third generation EGFR inhibitors become first-line therapy for EGFR mutant
lung cancers. We anticipate that metastatic EGFR mutant lung cancers will likely become
resistant to drugs that target T790M since there are several additional potential resistance
mechanisms. Thus, it will likely be necessary to combine inhibitors of bypass tracks with
T790M-specific inhibitors to provide greater durations of remission and prolongation of
patient survival.

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 17.

Arteaga and Engelman

Page 19

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In general, combinations that overcome resistance to EGFR inhibitors have generally
required continued inhibition of EGFR combined with a drug that blocks the bypass track
[reviewed in (Niederst and Engelman, 2013)]. For example, in EGFR mutant lung cancers
that are resistant via MET amplification, combined EGFR and MET inhibition is required to
suppress downstream PI3K/AKT and MEK/ERK and induce tumor regressions in vivo
(Turke et al., 2010). In similar examples of resistance mediated by IGF-IR and AXL,
inhibition of the bypass RTK in combination with the EGFR is needed to overcome
resistance (Cortot et al., 2013; Guix et al., 2008; Zhang et al., 2012). Thus, one central
strategy involving combinations centers on maintaining potent inhibition mutant EGFR
while adding different inhibitors to these accessory pathways. This has been employed in
early clinical trials that have combined EGFR inhibitors with MET inhibitors, PI3K
inhibitors and IGF-IR inhibitors (Table 3). However, none of these trials utilized third
generation EGFR inhibitors, which are the only drugs that appear capable of overcoming
T790M. The advent of these third generation inhibitors may now unleash the potential of
targeting bypass tracks once T790M is effectively inhibited.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In KRAS wild-type colorectal cancers, the recent finding that resistant cancers develop
EGFR mutations that abrogate cetuximab binding or KRAS mutations suggests approaches
analogous to those discussed above. Again, the development of point mutations in EGFR
suggests that alternative approaches to suppress EGFR may be warranted. Preclinical studies
suggest panitumumab may overcome this type of resistance (Montagut et al., 2012). In
colorectal cancers that develop KRAS mutations upon development of resistance, current
trials are examining the efficacy of EGFR inhibitors in combination with inhibitors to
overcome resistance (Alberto Bardelli, personal communication).

Projections to the future: Novel approaches
Monitoring tumor evolution

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

One of the major challenges will be to determine the optimal combinations for individual
patients. Some examples have clear biomarkers pointing to specific combinations, such as
the use of combined HER2 and PI3K inhibitors for HER2-amplified breast cancers
harboring PIK3CA mutations, as well as EGFR and MET inhibitors for EGFR mutant lung
cancers harboring MET amplifications. However, several of the other combinations do not
have straightforward biomarkers for patient selection. In the cases of IGF-IR and AXL, it is
quite unlikely that expression of the RTK alone will accurately identify those cancers in
which those proteins are driving resistance. Thus, more precise assessments of RTK and
signaling activation via novel proteomic methods would be potentially valuable to identify
the most appropriate combinations.
As the cancers progress through therapies, there will be a need to continually interrogate the
cancer to understand how it has adapted to treatment pressures and become drug resistant.
Many centers have utilized repeat biopsy programs to perform biopsies after the
development of resistance to targeted therapies to determine how the cancer has evolved.
Indeed, with the increasing use of next-generation sequencing approaches, it is likely the
genetic landscape for resistance mechanisms will increase dramatically over the coming
years. Even though this approach has great promise to discover resistance mechanism, it
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 17.

Arteaga and Engelman

Page 20

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

may also have potential limitations when the results are used to determine the next course of
therapy for an individual patient as the (acquired) alterations identified in a single biopsy
may not reflect all of the resistant clones in multiple metastatic sites in an individual patient
(Bean et al., 2007; Engelman et al., 2007; Turke et al., 2010). Thus, non-invasive measures
such as molecular interrogation of circulating tumor cells or plasma DNA may help capture
the heterogeneity of resistance in patients, as was done to identify the development of KRAS
mutations in colorectal cancers that acquire resistance to cetuximab (Diaz et al., 2012;
Misale et al., 2012). As efforts to identify new therapeutic strategies to overcome resistance
are intensified, the development of cell lines and patient-derived xenografts from resistant
biopsies may facilitate the identification of new therapeutic strategies. Recent advances in
technology may help bring these ‘live’ biopsies directly into the laboratory for interrogation
(Liu et al., 2012). Such models could be interrogated by high-throughput shRNA and drug
screens to identify novel therapeutic approaches to overcome resistance (Figure 3).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In addition to profiling of metastatic recurrences, the increasing use of neoadjuvant antiHER2 therapy in patients with newly diagnosed HER2+ breast cancers provides a novel
platform for discovery of mechanisms of resistance and tumor heterogeneity. At least two
studies have shown that some patients with HER2+ tumors convert to HER2-negative
following neoadjuvant trastuzumab and chemotherapy, and these patients exhibit a shorter
relapse-free survival compared to those with residual tumors that remain HER2 amplified
(Hurley et al., 2006; Mittendorf et al., 2009). These results suggest, first, that with
heterogeneity in HER2 overexpression in the primary tumor, the anti-oncogene therapy
eliminates the HER2-dependent compartment and enriches for HER2-negative clones.
Second, patients with HER2+ tumors that change to HER2-negative upon primary antiHER2 therapy are at a high risk of early recurrence. This neoadjuvant approach facilitates
interrogation of the drug-resistant cancer and the identification of targetable mechanisms
potentiallly driving subsequent metastatic recurrences (discussed below).
Innovative trial designs

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

For both HER2- and EGFR-driven cancers, it is becoming apparent that new treatment
paradigms will be necessary to lead to durable remissions or even cures. Ultimately, we
posit that combination therapies will be needed, and that it is more rational to consider a
proactive regimen that employs alternating regimens of combinations that eliminate cancer
cells before they adapt and become resistant rather than treating cancers after the
development of clinically overt resistance. However, the large number of potential resistance
mechanisms will likely necessitate the use of more drugs than will be tolerable if they are all
delivered simultaneously, and each drug is dosed to achieve continual target suppression.
When developing combinations, the use of mutant specific inhibitors will be highly
attractive components because of their greater therapeutic windows. However, even with
such an approach, given the large number of potential resistance mechanisms, it may
become necessary to use even more creative approaches to proactively kill the various
resistant clones as they emerge. In the future, we envision developing regimens that rotate
and intercalate tolerable combinations to prevent or substantially delay the development of
resistance. In particular, regimens that include immunotherapy and other disparate
approaches may be needed.

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 17.

Arteaga and Engelman

Page 21

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In breast cancer, the increasing use of neoadjuvant therapy lends itself to some innovative
possibilities to develop novel therapeutic regimens, accelerate drug approvals and discover
mechanisms of drug resistance. Achievement of a pathological complete response (path CR)
in the breast and axillary lymph nodes after neoadjuvant trastuzumab or chemotherapy has
been associated with improved long-term outcome (Gianni et al., 2010; Liedtke et al., 2008).
Because of this association, the FDA recently proposed that randomized neoadjuvant trials
can be considered for accelerated drug approval using path CR as a surrogate that is
‘reasonably likely to predict longer term benefit,’ at least for some subtypes of breast cancer,
particularly the HER2+ subtype (Prowell and Pazdur, 2012). Recently, the FDA approved
the HER2 antibody pertuzumab as neoadjuvant treatment in patients with HER2+ early
breast cancer (http://www.fda.gov/NewsEvents/Newsroom/PressAnnouncements/
ucm370393.htm). This approval was based on the results of two neoadjuvant studies,
NeoSphere and TRYPHAENA, where the combination of pertuzumab and trastuzumab was
superior to trastuzumab alone. The potential impact of this recommendation is quite
transformative, as it can accelerate the approval of novel and effective combinations.
Further, the early delivery of these anti-HER2 combinations to patients with treatment-naive
HER2+ tumors should at least partially trump acquired drug resistance. The use of the preoperative therapy setting as a clinical research platform where novel combinations and
regimens can be compared and triaged using path CR as a clinical endpoint predictive of
long-term outcome has been discussed recently (Bardia and Baselga, 2013).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Another benefit of a pre-operative approach is that, except for patients who experience a
complete response, tumor tissue is always available at the time of surgery. These ‘drug
resistant’ residual cancers should harbor mechanisms and/or biomarkers of resistance to the
primary therapy and, potentially, a similar molecular profile to that of drug-resistant micrometastases that can be interrogated with massive parallel sequencing of DNA extracted from
the mastectomy specimen (Balko et al., 2012; Balko et al., 2013). Thus, we propose ‘drugresistant’ HER2+ residual cancers in the breast harbor targetable genomic alterations
causally associated with resistance to neoadjuvant anti-HER2 therapy (Figure 4). Molecular
profiling of these residual tumors should identify these alterations. In addition, patientderived xenografts (PDXs) generated with these residual cancers can be used to test novel
combinations with activity against these drug-resistant cancer that can be later applied to
patients on an individual basis. Drugs that target novel mechanisms of resistance identified
in the residual tumors can be examined in subsequent randomized neoadjuvant trials. In the
future, we anticipate that tumor types other than HER2+ breast cancer could also effectively
utilize neoadjuvant trials to accelerate drug development and discover mechanisms of
resistance.

Conclusions
Ultimately, to cure ERBB-dependent cancers, we will likely have to incorporate therapeutics
that are toxic to cancer cells via mechanisms that are not solely based on suppressing ERBB
signaling, the associated bypass tracks, and antibodies targeting ERBB receptors to induce
ADCC. The timing of treatment may also make a difference. For example, deploying ERBB
targeted combinations early in the natural history of these cancers, i.e., in the adjuvant
setting to treat micro-metastatic subclinical disease, may yield better outcomes than treating
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 17.

Arteaga and Engelman

Page 22

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

patients with metastatic disease, where the effect will not be curative. We feel that
optimizing the timing and intensity of this approach will provide substantial clinical benefit
to patients, and will serve as the foundation for incorporating complementary, independent
therapeutic strategies that may ultimately lead to highly durable responses and further cures.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by NCI grant R01 CA80195 (CLA), R01 CA137008 (JAE), R01 CA164273 (JAE), R01
CA140954 (JAE), ACS Clinical Research Professorship Grant CRP-07-234 (CLA), Breast Cancer SPORE grant
P50 CA98131, GI Cancer SPORE grant P50 CA127003, Department of Defense (JAE), and Vanderbilt-Ingram
Cancer Center Support grant P30 CA68485

References

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Agus DB, Akita RW, Fox WD, Lewis GD, Higgins B, Pisacane PI, Lofgren JA, Tindell C, Evans DP,
Maiese K, et al. Targeting ligand-activated ErbB2 signaling inhibits breast and prostate tumor
growth. Cancer cell. 2002; 2:127–137. [PubMed: 12204533]
Andrechek ER, Hardy WR, Siegel PM, Rudnicki MA, Cardiff RD, Muller WJ. Amplification of the
neu/erbB-2 oncogene in a mouse model of mammary tumorigenesis. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2000; 97:3444–3449. [PubMed: 10716706]
Anido J, Scaltriti M, Bech Serra JJ, Santiago Josefat B, Todo FR, Baselga J, Arribas J. Biosynthesis of
tumorigenic HER2 C-terminal fragments by alternative initiation of translation. Embo J. 2006;
25:3234–3244. [PubMed: 16794579]
Avraham R, Yarden Y. Feedback regulation of EGFR signalling: decision making by early and
delayed loops. Nature reviews Molecular cell biology. 2011; 12:104–117.
Balko JM, Cook RS, Vaught DB, Kuba MG, Miller TW, Bhola NE, Sanders ME, Granja-Ingram NM,
Smith JJ, Meszoely IM, et al. Profiling of residual breast cancers after neoadjuvant chemotherapy
identifies DUSP4 deficiency as a mechanism of drug resistance. Nat Med. 2012; 18:1052–1059.
[PubMed: 22683778]
Balko JM, Giltnane J, Wang K, Schwarz LJ, Young CD, Cook RS, Owens P, Sanders ME, Kuba MG,
Sanchez V, et al. Molecular profiling of the residual disease of triple-negative breast cancers after
neoadjuvant chemotherapy identifies actionable therapeutic targets. Cancer Discov. 2013
Bardia A, Baselga J. Neoadjuvant therapy as a platform for drug development and approval in breast
cancer. Clinical cancer research: an official journal of the American Association for Cancer
Research. 2013; 19:6360–6370. [PubMed: 24298066]
Baselga J, Bradbury I, Eidtmann H, Di Cosimo S, de Azambuja E, Aura C, Gomez H, Dinh P, Fauria
K, Van Dooren V, et al. Lapatinib with trastuzumab for HER2-positive early breast cancer
(NeoALTTO): a randomised, open-label, multicentre, phase 3 trial. Lancet. 2012a; 379:633–640.
[PubMed: 22257673]
Baselga J, Cortes J, Kim SB, Im SA, Hegg R, Im YH, Roman L, Pedrini JL, Pienkowski T, Knott A, et
al. Pertuzumab plus trastuzumab plus docetaxel for metastatic breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2012b;
366:109–119. [PubMed: 22149875]
Baselga, J.; Majewski, I.; Nuciforo, P., et al. PIK3CA mutations and correlation with pCR in the
NeoALTTO trial (BIG 01–06). European Cancer Congress; 2013; 2013a.
Baselga J, Verma S, Ro J, et al. Relationship between tumor biomarkers (BM) and efficacy in
EMILIA, a phase III study of trastuzumab emtansine (T-DM1) in HER2-positive metastatic breast
cancer (MBC). Cancer research. 2013b:73.
Bean J, Brennan C, Shih JY, Riely G, Viale A, Wang L, Chitale D, Motoi N, Szoke J, Broderick S, et
al. MET amplification occurs with or without T790M mutations in EGFR mutant lung tumors with
acquired resistance to gefitinib or erlotinib. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America. 2007; 104:20932–20937. [PubMed: 18093943]
Berns K, Horlings HM, Hennessy BT, Madiredjo M, Hijmans EM, Beelen K, Linn SC, GonzalezAngulo AM, Stemke-Hale K, Hauptmann M, et al. A functional genetic approach identifies the

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 17.

Arteaga and Engelman

Page 23

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

PI3K pathway as a major determinant of trastuzumab resistance in breast cancer. Cancer cell.
2007; 12:395–402. [PubMed: 17936563]
Bertotti A, Migliardi G, Galimi F, Sassi F, Torti D, Isella C, Cora D, Di Nicolantonio F, Buscarino M,
Petti C, et al. A molecularly annotated platform of patient-derived xenografts (“xenopatients”)
identifies HER2 as an effective therapeutic target in cetuximab-resistant colorectal cancer. Cancer
Discov. 2011; 1:508–523. [PubMed: 22586653]
Blackwell KL, Burstein HJ, Storniolo AM, Rugo H, Sledge G, Koehler M, Ellis C, Casey M, Vukelja
S, Bischoff J, et al. Randomized study of Lapatinib alone or in combination with trastuzumab in
women with ErbB2-positive, trastuzumab-refractory metastatic breast cancer. Journal of clinical
oncology: official journal of the American Society of Clinical Oncology. 2010; 28:1124–1130.
[PubMed: 20124187]
Bonner JA, Harari PM, Giralt J, Azarnia N, Shin DM, Cohen RB, Jones CU, Sur R, Raben D, Jassem
J, et al. Radiotherapy plus cetuximab for squamous-cell carcinoma of the head and neck. N Engl J
Med. 2006; 354:567–578. [PubMed: 16467544]
Bose R, Kavuri SM, Searleman AC, Shen W, Shen D, Koboldt DC, Monsey J, Goel N, Aronson AB,
Li S, et al. Activating HER2 mutations in HER2 gene amplification negative breast cancer. Cancer
Discov. 2013; 3:224–237. [PubMed: 23220880]
Burstein HJ, Sun Y, Dirix LY, Jiang Z, Paridaens R, Tan AR, Awada A, Ranade A, Jiao S, Schwartz
G, et al. Neratinib, an irreversible ErbB receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor, in patients with
advanced ErbB2-positive breast cancer. Journal of clinical oncology: official journal of the
American Society of Clinical Oncology. 2010; 28:1301–1307. [PubMed: 20142587]
Burtness B, Goldwasser MA, Flood W, Mattar B, Forastiere AA. Eastern Cooperative Oncology G.
Phase III randomized trial of cisplatin plus placebo compared with cisplatin plus cetuximab in
metastatic/recurrent head and neck cancer: an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group study. Journal
of clinical oncology: official journal of the American Society of Clinical Oncology. 2005;
23:8646–8654. [PubMed: 16314626]
Cappuzzo F, Varella-Garcia M, Shigematsu H, Domenichini I, Bartolini S, Ceresoli GL, Rossi E,
Ludovini V, Gregorc V, Toschi L, et al. Increased HER2 gene copy number is associated with
response to gefitinib therapy in epidermal growth factor receptor-positive non-small-cell lung
cancer patients. Journal of clinical oncology: official journal of the American Society of Clinical
Oncology. 2005; 23:5007–5018. [PubMed: 16051952]
Carey KD, Garton AJ, Romero MS, Kahler J, Thomson S, Ross S, Park F, Haley JD, Gibson N,
Sliwkowski MX. Kinetic analysis of epidermal growth factor receptor somatic mutant proteins
shows increased sensitivity to the epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor,
erlotinib. Cancer research. 2006; 66:8163–8171. [PubMed: 16912195]
Chakrabarty A, Bhola NE, Sutton C, Ghosh R, Kuba MG, Dave B, Chang JC, Arteaga CL.
Trastuzumab-resistant cells rely on a HER2-PI3K-FoxO-survivin axis and are sensitive to PI3K
inhibitors. Cancer research. 2013; 73:1190–1200. [PubMed: 23204226]
Chakrabarty A, Rexer BN, Wang SE, Cook RS, Engelman JA, Arteaga CL. H1047R
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase mutant enhances HER2-mediated transformation by heregulin
production and activation of HER3. Oncogene. 2010; 29:5193–5203. [PubMed: 20581867]
Chakrabarty A, Sanchez V, Kuba MG, Rinehart C, Arteaga CL. Feedback upregulation of HER3
(ErbB3) expression and activity attenuates antitumor effect of PI3K inhibitors. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2012; 109:2718–2723. [PubMed:
21368164]
Chandarlapaty S, Sawai A, Scaltriti M, Rodrik-Outmezguine V, Grbovic-Huezo O, Serra V, Majumder
PK, Baselga J, Rosen N. AKT inhibition relieves feedback suppression of receptor tyrosine kinase
expression and activity. Cancer cell. 2011; 19:58–71. [PubMed: 21215704]
Cho HS, Mason K, Ramyar KX, Stanley AM, Gabelli SB, Denney DW Jr, Leahy DJ. Structure of the
extracellular region of HER2 alone and in complex with the Herceptin Fab. Nature. 2003;
421:756–760. [PubMed: 12610629]
Clynes RA, Towers TL, Presta LG, Ravetch JV. Inhibitory Fc receptors modulate in vivo cytoxicity
against tumor targets. Nat Med. 2000; 6:443–446. [PubMed: 10742152]
Corcoran RB, Ebi H, Turke AB, Coffee EM, Nishino M, Cogdill AP, Brown RD, Della Pelle P, DiasSantagata D, Hung KE, et al. EGFR-mediated re-activation of MAPK signaling contributes to
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 17.

Arteaga and Engelman

Page 24

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

insensitivity of BRAF mutant colorectal cancers to RAF inhibition with vemurafenib. Cancer
Discov. 2012; 2:227–235. [PubMed: 22448344]
Cortot AB, Repellin CE, Shimamura T, Capelletti M, Zejnullahu K, Ercan D, Christensen JG, Wong
KK, Gray NS, Janne PA. Resistance to irreversible EGF receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors
through a multistep mechanism involving the IGF1R pathway. Cancer research. 2013; 73:834–
843. [PubMed: 23172312]
Cunningham D, Humblet Y, Siena S, Khayat D, Bleiberg H, Santoro A, Bets D, Mueser M, Harstrick
A, Verslype C, et al. Cetuximab monotherapy and cetuximab plus irinotecan in irinotecanrefractory metastatic colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med. 2004; 351:337–345. [PubMed: 15269313]
Dave B, Migliaccio I, Gutierrez MC, Wu MF, Chamness GC, Wong H, Narasanna A, Chakrabarty A,
Hilsenbeck SG, Huang J, et al. Loss of phosphatase and tensin homolog or phosphoinositol-3
kinase activation and response to trastuzumab or lapatinib in human epidermal growth factor
receptor 2-overexpressing locally advanced breast cancers. Journal of clinical oncology: official
journal of the American Society of Clinical Oncology. 2011; 29:166–173. [PubMed: 21135276]
Diaz LA Jr, Williams RT, Wu J, Kinde I, Hecht JR, Berlin J, Allen B, Bozic I, Reiter JG, Nowak MA,
et al. The molecular evolution of acquired resistance to targeted EGFR blockade in colorectal
cancers. Nature. 2012; 486:537–540. [PubMed: 22722843]
Ding L, Getz G, Wheeler DA, Mardis ER, McLellan MD, Cibulskis K, Sougnez C, Greulich H, Muzny
DM, Morgan MB, et al. Somatic mutations affect key pathways in lung adenocarcinoma. Nature.
2008; 455:1069–1075. [PubMed: 18948947]
Douillard JY, Zemelka T, Fountzilas G, Barone C, Schlichting M, Heighway J, Eggleton SP,
Srimuninnimit V. FOLFOX4 With Cetuximab vs. UFOX With Cetuximab as First-Line Therapy
in Metastatic Colorectal Cancer: The Randomized Phase II FUTURE Study. Clin Colorectal
Cancer. 2013
Downward J, Yarden Y, Mayes E, Scrace G, Totty N, Stockwell P, Ullrich A, Schlessinger J,
Waterfield MD. Close similarity of epidermal growth factor receptor and v-erb-B oncogene
protein sequences. Nature. 1984; 307:521–527. [PubMed: 6320011]
Ebi H, Corcoran RB, Singh A, Chen Z, Song Y, Lifshits E, Ryan DP, Meyerhardt JA, Benes C,
Settleman J, et al. Receptor tyrosine kinases exert dominant control over PI3K signaling in human
KRAS mutant colorectal cancers. J Clin Invest. 2011; 121:4311–4321. [PubMed: 21985784]
Eichhorn PJ, Gili M, Scaltriti M, Serra V, Guzman M, Nijkamp W, Beijersbergen RL, Valero V,
Seoane J, Bernards R, et al. Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase hyperactivation results in lapatinib
resistance that is reversed by the mTOR/phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase inhibitor NVP-BEZ235.
Cancer research. 2008; 68:9221–9230. [PubMed: 19010894]
Engelman JA. Targeting PI3K signalling in cancer: opportunities, challenges and limitations. Nat Rev
Cancer. 2009; 9:550–562. [PubMed: 19629070]
Engelman JA, Janne PA, Mermel C, Pearlberg J, Mukohara T, Fleet C, Cichowski K, Johnson BE,
Cantley LC. ErbB-3 mediates phosphoinositide 3-kinase activity in gefitinib-sensitive non-small
cell lung cancer cell lines. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America. 2005; 102:3788–3793. [PubMed: 15731348]
Engelman JA, Mukohara T, Zejnullahu K, Lifshits E, Borras AM, Gale CM, Naumov GN, Yeap BY,
Jarrell E, Sun J, et al. Allelic dilution obscures detection of a biologically significant resistance
mutation in EGFR-amplified lung cancer. J Clin Invest. 2006; 116:2695–2706. [PubMed:
16906227]
Engelman JA, Zejnullahu K, Mitsudomi T, Song Y, Hyland C, Park JO, Lindeman N, Gale CM, Zhao
X, Christensen J, et al. MET amplification leads to gefitinib resistance in lung cancer by activating
ERBB3 signaling. Science. 2007; 316:1039–1043. [PubMed: 17463250]
Ercan D, Xu C, Yanagita M, Monast CS, Pratilas CA, Montero J, Butaney M, Shimamura T, Sholl L,
Ivanova EV, et al. Reactivation of ERK signaling causes resistance to EGFR kinase inhibitors.
Cancer Discov. 2012; 2:934–947. [PubMed: 22961667]
Esteva FJ, Guo H, Zhang S, Santa-Maria C, Stone S, Lanchbury JS, Sahin AA, Hortobagyi GN, Yu D.
PTEN, PIK3CA, p-AKT, and p-p70S6K status: association with trastuzumab response and
survival in patients with HER2-positive metastatic breast cancer. Am J Pathol. 2010; 177:1647–
1656. [PubMed: 20813970]

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 17.

Arteaga and Engelman

Page 25

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Faber AC, Corcoran RB, Ebi H, Sequist LV, Waltman BA, Chung E, Incio J, Digumarthy SR, Pollack
SF, Song Y, et al. BIM expression in treatment-naive cancers predicts responsiveness to kinase
inhibitors. Cancer Discov. 2011; 1:352–365. [PubMed: 22145099]
Faber AC, Wong KK, Engelman JA. Differences underlying EGFR and HER2 oncogene addiction.
Cell Cycle. 2010; 9:851–852. [PubMed: 20160489]
Fan Z, Lu Y, Wu X, Mendelsohn J. Antibody-induced epidermal growth factor receptor dimerization
mediates inhibition of autocrine proliferation of A431 squamous carcinoma cells. The Journal of
biological chemistry. 1994; 269:27595–27602. [PubMed: 7961676]
Finkle D, Quan ZR, Asghari V, Kloss J, Ghaboosi N, Mai E, Wong WL, Hollingshead P, Schwall R,
Koeppen H, et al. HER2-targeted therapy reduces incidence and progression of midlife mammary
tumors in female murine mammary tumor virus huHER2-transgenic mice. Clinical cancer
research: an official journal of the American Association for Cancer Research. 2004; 10:2499–
2511. [PubMed: 15073130]
Franklin MC, Carey KD, Vajdos FF, Leahy DJ, de Vos AM, Sliwkowski MX. Insights into ErbB
signaling from the structure of the ErbB2-pertuzumab complex. Cancer cell. 2004; 5:317–328.
[PubMed: 15093539]
Frederick L, Wang XY, Eley G, James CD. Diversity and frequency of epidermal growth factor
receptor mutations in human glioblastomas. Cancer research. 2000; 60:1383–1387. [PubMed:
10728703]
Gandhi L, Bahleda R, Tolaney SM, Kwak EL, Cleary JM, Pandya SS, Hollebecque A, Abbas R,
Ananthakrishnan R, Berkenblit A, et al. Phase I study of neratinib in combination with
temsirolimus in patients with human epidermal growth factor receptor 2-dependent and other solid
tumors. Journal of clinical oncology: official journal of the American Society of Clinical
Oncology. 2014; 32:68–75. [PubMed: 24323026]
Garner AP, Bialucha CU, Sprague ER, Garrett JT, Sheng Q, Li S, Sineshchekova O, Saxena P, Sutton
CR, Chen D, et al. An antibody that locks HER3 in the inactive conformation inhibits tumor
growth driven by HER2 or neuregulin. Cancer research. 2013; 73:6024–6035. [PubMed:
23928993]
Garrett JT, Olivares MG, Rinehart C, Granja-Ingram ND, Sanchez V, Chakrabarty A, Dave B, Cook
RS, Pao W, McKinely E, et al. Transcriptional and posttranslational up-regulation of HER3
(ErbB3) compensates for inhibition of the HER2 tyrosine kinase. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2011; 108:5021–5026. [PubMed:
21385943]
Garrett JT, Sutton CR, Kuba MG, Cook RS, Arteaga CL. Dual blockade of HER2 in HER2overexpressing tumor cells does not completely eliminate HER3 function. Clinical cancer
research: an official journal of the American Association for Cancer Research. 2013a; 19:610–619.
[PubMed: 23224399]
Garrett JT, Sutton CR, Kurupi R, Bialucha CU, Ettenberg SA, Collins SD, Sheng Q, Wallweber J,
Defazio-Eli L, Arteaga CL. Combination of antibody that inhibits ligand-independent HER3
dimerization and a p110alpha inhibitor potently blocks PI3K signaling and growth of HER2+
breast cancers. Cancer research. 2013b; 73:6013–6023. [PubMed: 23918797]
Garrett TP, McKern NM, Lou M, Elleman TC, Adams TE, Lovrecz GO, Kofler M, Jorissen RN, Nice
EC, Burgess AW, et al. The crystal structure of a truncated ErbB2 ectodomain reveals an active
conformation, poised to interact with other ErbB receptors. Molecular cell. 2003; 11:495–505.
[PubMed: 12620236]
Gennari R, Menard S, Fagnoni F, Ponchio L, Scelsi M, Tagliabue E, Castiglioni F, Villani L,
Magalotti C, Gibelli N, et al. Pilot study of the mechanism of action of preoperative trastuzumab
in patients with primary operable breast tumors overexpressing HER2. Clinical cancer research: an
official journal of the American Association for Cancer Research. 2004; 10:5650–5655. [PubMed:
15355889]
Geyer CE, Forster J, Lindquist D, Chan S, Romieu CG, Pienkowski T, Jagiello-Gruszfeld A, Crown J,
Chan A, Kaufman B, et al. Lapatinib plus capecitabine for HER2-positive advanced breast cancer.
N Engl J Med. 2006; 355:2733–2743. [PubMed: 17192538]

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 17.

Arteaga and Engelman

Page 26

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Ghosh R, Narasanna A, Wang SE, Liu S, Chakrabarty A, Balko JM, Gonzalez-Angulo AM, Mills GB,
Penuel E, Winslow J, et al. Trastuzumab has preferential activity against breast cancers driven by
HER2 homodimers. Cancer research. 2011; 71:1871–1882. [PubMed: 21324925]
Gianni L, Eiermann W, Semiglazov V, Manikhas A, Lluch A, Tjulandin S, Zambetti M, Vazquez F,
Byakhow M, Lichinitser M, et al. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy with trastuzumab followed by
adjuvant trastuzumab versus neoadjuvant chemotherapy alone, in patients with HER2-positive
locally advanced breast cancer (the NOAH trial): a randomised controlled superiority trial with a
parallel HER2-negative cohort. Lancet. 2010; 375:377–384. [PubMed: 20113825]
Gianni L, Pienkowski T, Im YH, Roman L, Tseng LM, Liu MC, Lluch A, Staroslawska E, de la HabaRodriguez J, Im SA, et al. Efficacy and safety of neoadjuvant pertuzumab and trastuzumab in
women with locally advanced, inflammatory, or early HER2-positive breast cancer (NeoSphere): a
randomised multicentre, open-label, phase 2 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2012; 13:25–32. [PubMed:
22153890]
Gilbertson R, Hernan R, Pietsch T, Pinto L, Scotting P, Allibone R, Ellison D, Perry R, Pearson A,
Lunec J. Novel ERBB4 juxtamembrane splice variants are frequently expressed in childhood
medulloblastoma. Genes, chromosomes & cancer. 2001; 31:288–294. [PubMed: 11391800]
Grandis JR, Melhem MF, Gooding WE, Day R, Holst VA, Wagener MM, Drenning SD, Tweardy DJ.
Levels of TGF-alpha and EGFR protein in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma and patient
survival. Journal of the National Cancer Institute. 1998; 90:824–832. [PubMed: 9625170]
Greulich H, Chen TH, Feng W, Janne PA, Alvarez JV, Zappaterra M, Bulmer SE, Frank DA, Hahn
WC, Sellers WR, et al. Oncogenic transformation by inhibitor-sensitive and -resistant EGFR
mutants. PLoS Med. 2005; 2:e313. [PubMed: 16187797]
Guix M, Faber AC, Wang SE, Olivares MG, Song Y, Qu S, Rinehart C, Seidel B, Yee D, Arteaga CL,
et al. Acquired resistance to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors in cancer cells is mediated by loss of
IGF-binding proteins. J Clin Invest. 2008; 118:2609–2619. [PubMed: 18568074]
Haas-Kogan DA, Prados MD, Tihan T, Eberhard DA, Jelluma N, Arvold ND, Baumber R, Lamborn
KR, Kapadia A, Malec M, et al. Epidermal growth factor receptor, protein kinase B/Akt, and
glioma response to erlotinib. Journal of the National Cancer Institute. 2005; 97:880–887.
[PubMed: 15956649]
Hanker AB, Pfefferle AD, Balko JM, Kuba MG, Young CD, Sanchez V, Sutton CR, Cheng H, Perou
CM, Zhao JJ, et al. Mutant PIK3CA accelerates HER2-driven transgenic mammary tumors and
induces resistance to combinations of anti-HER2 therapies. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America. 2013; 110:14372–14377. [PubMed: 23940356]
Harris LN, You F, Schnitt SJ, Witkiewicz A, Lu X, Sgroi D, Ryan PD, Come SE, Burstein HJ,
Lesnikoski BA, et al. Predictors of resistance to preoperative trastuzumab and vinorelbine for
HER2-positive early breast cancer. Clinical cancer research: an official journal of the American
Association for Cancer Research. 2007; 13:1198–1207. [PubMed: 17317830]
Hegde GV, de la Cruz CC, Chiu C, Alag N, Schaefer G, Crocker L, Ross S, Goldenberg D, Merchant
M, Tien J, et al. Blocking NRG1 and other ligand-mediated Her4 signaling enhances the
magnitude and duration of the chemotherapeutic response of non-small cell lung cancer. Science
translational medicine. 2013; 5:171ra118.
Heiser LM, Sadanandam A, Kuo WL, Benz SC, Goldstein TC, Ng S, Gibb WJ, Wang NJ, Ziyad S,
Tong F, et al. Subtype and pathway specific responses to anticancer compounds in breast cancer.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2012;
109:2724–2729. [PubMed: 22003129]
Higginbotham JN, Demory Beckler M, Gephart JD, Franklin JL, Bogatcheva G, Kremers GJ, Piston
DW, Ayers GD, McConnell RE, Tyska MJ, et al. Amphiregulin exosomes increase cancer cell
invasion. Current biology: CB. 2011; 21:779–786. [PubMed: 21514161]
Huang X, Gao L, Wang S, McManaman JL, Thor AD, Yang X, Esteva FJ, Liu B. Heterotrimerization
of the growth factor receptors erbB2, erbB3, and insulin-like growth factor-i receptor in breast
cancer cells resistant to herceptin. Cancer research. 2010; 70:1204–1214. [PubMed: 20103628]
Hurley J, Doliny P, Reis I, Silva O, Gomez-Fernandez C, Velez P, Pauletti G, Powell JE, Pegram MD,
Slamon DJ. Docetaxel, cisplatin, and trastuzumab as primary systemic therapy for human
epidermal growth factor receptor 2-positive locally advanced breast cancer. Journal of clinical

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 17.

Arteaga and Engelman

Page 27

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

oncology: official journal of the American Society of Clinical Oncology. 2006; 24:1831–1838.
[PubMed: 16549824]
Hurvitz SA, Betting DJ, Stern HM, Quinaux E, Stinson J, Seshagiri S, Zhao Y, Buyse M, Mackey J,
Driga A, et al. Analysis of Fcgamma receptor IIIa and IIa polymorphisms: lack of correlation with
outcome in trastuzumab-treated breast cancer patients. Clinical cancer research: an official journal
of the American Association for Cancer Research. 2012; 18:3478–3486. [PubMed: 22504044]
Hurvitz SA, Dalenc F, Campone M, O’Regan RM, Tjan-Heijnen VC, Gligorov J, Llombart A,
Jhangiani H, Mirshahidi HR, Tan-Chiu E, et al. A phase 2 study of everolimus combined with
trastuzumab and paclitaxel in patients with HER2-overexpressing advanced breast cancer that
progressed during prior trastuzumab and taxane therapy. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2013; 141:437–
446. [PubMed: 24101324]
Hynes NE, MacDonald G. ErbB receptors and signaling pathways in cancer. Curr Opin Cell Biol.
2009; 21:177–184. [PubMed: 19208461]
Jaiswal BS, Kljavin NM, Stawiski EW, Chan E, Parikh C, Durinck S, Chaudhuri S, Pujara K, Guillory
J, Edgar KA, et al. Oncogenic ERBB3 mutations in human cancers. Cancer cell. 2013; 23:603–
617. [PubMed: 23680147]
Janjigian YY, Groen HJ, Horn L, Smit EF, Fu Y, Wang F, Shahidi M, Denis LJ, Pao W, Miller VA.
Activity and tolerability of afatinib (BIBW 2992) and cetuximab in NSCLC patients with acquired
resistance to erlotinib or gefitinib. Journal of clinical oncology: official journal of the American
Society of Clinical Oncology. 2011 suppl; abstr 7525.
Ji H, Li D, Chen L, Shimamura T, Kobayashi S, McNamara K, Mahmood U, Mitchell A, Sun Y, AlHashem R, et al. The impact of human EGFR kinase domain mutations on lung tumorigenesis and
in vivo sensitivity to EGFR-targeted therapies. Cancer cell. 2006; 9:485–495. [PubMed:
16730237]
Jonker DJ, O’Callaghan CJ, Karapetis CS, Zalcberg JR, Tu D, Au HJ, Berry SR, Krahn M, Price T,
Simes RJ, et al. Cetuximab for the treatment of colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med. 2007; 357:2040–
2048. [PubMed: 18003960]
Junttila TT, Akita RW, Parsons K, Fields C, Lewis Phillips GD, Friedman LS, Sampath D,
Sliwkowski MX. Ligand-independent HER2/HER3/PI3K complex is disrupted by trastuzumab
and is effectively inhibited by the PI3K inhibitor GDC-0941. Cancer cell. 2009; 15:429–440.
[PubMed: 19411071]
Junttila TT, Li G, Parsons K, Phillips GL, Sliwkowski MX. Trastuzumab-DM1 (T-DM1) retains all
the mechanisms of action of trastuzumab and efficiently inhibits growth of lapatinib insensitive
breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2011; 128:347–356. [PubMed: 20730488]
Katayama R, Shaw AT, Khan TM, Mino-Kenudson M, Solomon BJ, Halmos B, Jessop NA, Wain JC,
Yeo AT, Benes C, et al. Mechanisms of acquired crizotinib resistance in ALK-rearranged lung
Cancers. Science translational medicine. 2012; 4:120ra117.
Kawamoto T, Sato JD, Le A, Polikoff J, Sato GH, Mendelsohn J. Growth stimulation of A431 cells by
epidermal growth factor: identification of high-affinity receptors for epidermal growth factor by an
anti-receptor monoclonal antibody. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America. 1983; 80:1337–1341. [PubMed: 6298788]
Khambata-Ford S, Garrett CR, Meropol NJ, Basik M, Harbison CT, Wu S, Wong TW, Huang X,
Takimoto CH, Godwin AK, et al. Expression of epiregulin and amphiregulin and K-ras mutation
status predict disease control in metastatic colorectal cancer patients treated with cetuximab.
Journal of clinical oncology: official journal of the American Society of Clinical Oncology. 2007;
25:3230–3237. [PubMed: 17664471]
Kobayashi S, Boggon TJ, Dayaram T, Janne PA, Kocher O, Meyerson M, Johnson BE, Eck MJ, Tenen
DG, Halmos B. EGFR mutation and resistance of non-small-cell lung cancer to gefitinib. N Engl J
Med. 2005; 352:786–792. [PubMed: 15728811]
Koboldt DC, et al. Comprehensive molecular portraits of human breast tumours. Nature. 2012;
490:61–70. [PubMed: 23000897]
Konecny GE, Pegram MD, Venkatesan N, Finn R, Yang G, Rahmeh M, Untch M, Rusnak DW,
Spehar G, Mullin RJ, et al. Activity of the dual kinase inhibitor lapatinib (GW572016) against
HER-2-overexpressing and trastuzumab-treated breast cancer cells. Cancer research. 2006;
66:1630–1639. [PubMed: 16452222]
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 17.

Arteaga and Engelman

Page 28

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Kwong KY, Hung MC. A novel splice variant of HER2 with increased transformation activity. Mol
Carcinog. 1998; 23:62–68. [PubMed: 9808159]
Lee-Hoeflich ST, Crocker L, Yao E, Pham T, Munroe X, Hoeflich KP, Sliwkowski MX, Stern HM. A
central role for HER3 in HER2-amplified breast cancer: implications for targeted therapy. Cancer
research. 2008; 68:5878–5887. [PubMed: 18632642]
Lee JW, Soung YH, Seo SH, Kim SY, Park CH, Wang YP, Park K, Nam SW, Park WS, Kim SH, et
al. Somatic mutations of ERBB2 kinase domain in gastric, colorectal, and breast carcinomas.
Clinical cancer research: an official journal of the American Association for Cancer Research.
2006; 12:57–61. [PubMed: 16397024]
Lewis Phillips GD, Li G, Dugger DL, Crocker LM, Parsons KL, Mai E, Blattler WA, Lambert JM,
Chari RV, Lutz RJ, et al. Targeting HER2-positive breast cancer with trastuzumab-DM1, an
antibody-cytotoxic drug conjugate. Cancer research. 2008; 68:9280–9290. [PubMed: 19010901]
Liang K, Esteva FJ, Albarracin C, Stemke-Hale K, Lu Y, Bianchini G, Yang CY, Li Y, Li X, Chen
CT, et al. Recombinant human erythropoietin antagonizes trastuzumab treatment of breast cancer
cells via Jak2-mediated Src activation and PTEN inactivation. Cancer cell. 2010; 18:423–435.
[PubMed: 21075308]
Licitra L, Mesia R, Rivera F, Remenar E, Hitt R, Erfan J, Rottey S, Kawecki A, Zabolotnyy D,
Benasso M, et al. Evaluation of EGFR gene copy number as a predictive biomarker for the
efficacy of cetuximab in combination with chemotherapy in the first-line treatment of recurrent
and/or metastatic squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck: EXTREME study. Ann Oncol.
2011; 22:1078–1087. [PubMed: 21048039]
Licitra L, Storkel S, Kerr KM, Van Cutsem E, Pirker R, Hirsch FR, Vermorken JB, von Heydebreck
A, Esser R, Celik I, et al. Predictive value of epidermal growth factor receptor expression for firstline chemotherapy plus cetuximab in patients with head and neck and colorectal cancer: analysis
of data from the EXTREME and CRYSTAL studies. Eur J Cancer. 2013; 49:1161–1168.
[PubMed: 23265711]
Liedtke C, Mazouni C, Hess KR, Andre F, Tordai A, Mejia JA, Symmans WF, Gonzalez-Angulo AM,
Hennessy B, Green M, et al. Response to neoadjuvant therapy and long-term survival in patients
with triple-negative breast cancer. Journal of clinical oncology: official journal of the American
Society of Clinical Oncology. 2008; 26:1275–1281. [PubMed: 18250347]
Liu L, Greger J, Shi H, Liu Y, Greshock J, Annan R, Halsey W, Sathe GM, Martin AM, Gilmer TM.
Novel mechanism of lapatinib resistance in HER2-positive breast tumor cells: activation of AXL.
Cancer research. 2009; 69:6871–6878. [PubMed: 19671800]
Liu X, Ory V, Chapman S, Yuan H, Albanese C, Kallakury B, Timofeeva OA, Nealon C, Dakic A,
Simic V, et al. ROCK inhibitor and feeder cells induce the conditional reprogramming of epithelial
cells. Am J Pathol. 2012; 180:599–607. [PubMed: 22189618]
Lynch TJ, Bell DW, Sordella R, Gurubhagavatula S, Okimoto RA, Brannigan BW, Harris PL, Haserlat
SM, Supko JG, Haluska FG, et al. Activating mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor
underlying responsiveness of non-small-cell lung cancer to gefitinib. N Engl J Med. 2004;
350:2129–2139. [PubMed: 15118073]
Maheswaran S, Sequist LV, Nagrath S, Ulkus L, Brannigan B, Collura CV, Inserra E, Diederichs S,
Iafrate AJ, Bell DW, et al. Detection of mutations in EGFR in circulating lung-cancer cells. N
Engl J Med. 2008; 359:366–377. [PubMed: 18596266]
Mattoon DR, Lamothe B, Lax I, Schlessinger J. The docking protein Gab1 is the primary mediator of
EGF-stimulated activation of the PI-3K/Akt cell survival pathway. BMC Biol. 2004; 2:24.
[PubMed: 15550174]
McDermott U, Pusapati RV, Christensen JG, Gray NS, Settleman J. Acquired resistance of non-small
cell lung cancer cells to MET kinase inhibition is mediated by a switch to epidermal growth
factor receptor dependency. Cancer research. 2010; 70:1625–1634. [PubMed: 20124471]
McDonagh CF, Huhalov A, Harms BD, Adams S, Paragas V, Oyama S, Zhang B, Luus L, Overland R,
Nguyen S, et al. Antitumor activity of a novel bispecific antibody that targets the ErbB2/ErbB3
oncogenic unit and inhibits heregulin-induced activation of ErbB3. Mol Cancer Ther. 2012;
11:582–593. [PubMed: 22248472]

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 17.

Arteaga and Engelman

Page 29

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Mellinghoff IK, Wang MY, Vivanco I, Haas-Kogan DA, Zhu S, Dia EQ, Lu KV, Yoshimoto K,
Huang JH, Chute DJ, et al. Molecular determinants of the response of glioblastomas to EGFR
kinase inhibitors. N Engl J Med. 2005; 353:2012–2024. [PubMed: 16282176]
Minkovsky N, Berezov A. BIBW-2992, a dual receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor for the treatment of
solid tumors. Curr Opin Investig Drugs. 2008; 9:1336–1346.
Minuti G, Cappuzzo F, Duchnowska R, Jassem J, Fabi A, O’Brien T, Mendoza AD, Landi L, Biernat
W, Czartoryska-Arlukowicz B, et al. Increased MET and HGF gene copy numbers are associated
with trastuzumab failure in HER2-positive metastatic breast cancer. British journal of cancer.
2012; 107:793–799. [PubMed: 22850551]
Mirschberger C, Schiller CB, Schraml M, Dimoudis N, Friess T, Gerdes CA, Reiff U, Lifke V,
Hoelzlwimmer G, Kolm I, et al. RG7116, a therapeutic antibody that binds the inactive HER3
receptor and is optimized for immune effector activation. Cancer research. 2013; 73:5183–5194.
[PubMed: 23780344]
Misale S, Yaeger R, Hobor S, Scala E, Janakiraman M, Liska D, Valtorta E, Schiavo R, Buscarino M,
Siravegna G, et al. Emergence of KRAS mutations and acquired resistance to anti-EGFR therapy
in colorectal cancer. Nature. 2012; 486:532–536. [PubMed: 22722830]
Mitra D, Brumlik MJ, Okamgba SU, Zhu Y, Duplessis TT, Parvani JG, Lesko SM, Brogi E, Jones FE.
An oncogenic isoform of HER2 associated with locally disseminated breast cancer and
trastuzumab resistance. Mol Cancer Ther. 2009; 8:2152–2162. [PubMed: 19671734]
Mittendorf EA, Wu Y, Scaltriti M, Meric-Bernstam F, Hunt KK, Dawood S, Esteva FJ, Buzdar AU,
Chen H, Eksambi S, et al. Loss of HER2 amplification following trastuzumab-based neoadjuvant
systemic therapy and survival outcomes. Clinical cancer research: an official journal of the
American Association for Cancer Research. 2009; 15:7381–7388. [PubMed: 19920100]
Mok TS, Wu YL, Thongprasert S, Yang CH, Chu DT, Saijo N, Sunpaweravong P, Han B, Margono B,
Ichinose Y, et al. Gefitinib or carboplatin-paclitaxel in pulmonary adenocarcinoma. N Engl J
Med. 2009; 361:947–957. [PubMed: 19692680]
Molina MA, Codony-Servat J, Albanell J, Rojo F, Arribas J, Baselga J. Trastuzumab (herceptin), a
humanized anti-Her2 receptor monoclonal antibody, inhibits basal and activated Her2
ectodomain cleavage in breast cancer cells. Cancer research. 2001; 61:4744–4749. [PubMed:
11406546]
Montagut C, Dalmases A, Bellosillo B, Crespo M, Pairet S, Iglesias M, Salido M, Gallen M, Marsters
S, Tsai SP, et al. Identification of a mutation in the extracellular domain of the Epidermal Growth
Factor Receptor conferring cetuximab resistance in colorectal cancer. Nat Med. 2012; 18:221–
223. [PubMed: 22270724]
Moroni M, Veronese S, Benvenuti S, Marrapese G, Sartore-Bianchi A, Di Nicolantonio F, Gambacorta
M, Siena S, Bardelli A. Gene copy number for epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and
clinical response to antiEGFR treatment in colorectal cancer: a cohort study. Lancet Oncol. 2005;
6:279–286. [PubMed: 15863375]
Morrow PK, Wulf GM, Ensor J, Booser DJ, Moore JA, Flores PR, Xiong Y, Zhang S, Krop IE, Winer
EP, et al. Phase I/II study of trastuzumab in combination with everolimus (RAD001) in patients
with HER2-overexpressing metastatic breast cancer who progressed on trastuzumab-based
therapy. Journal of clinical oncology: official journal of the American Society of Clinical
Oncology. 2011; 29:3126–3132. [PubMed: 21730275]
Moscatello DK, Holgado-Madruga M, Godwin AK, Ramirez G, Gunn G, Zoltick PW, Biegel JA,
Hayes RL, Wong AJ. Frequent expression of a mutant epidermal growth factor receptor in
multiple human tumors. Cancer research. 1995; 55:5536–5539. [PubMed: 7585629]
Muller WJ, Arteaga CL, Muthuswamy SK, Siegel PM, Webster MA, Cardiff RD, Meise KS, Li F,
Halter SA, Coffey RJ. Synergistic interaction of the Neu proto-oncogene product and
transforming growth factor alpha in the mammary epithelium of transgenic mice. Mol Cell Biol.
1996; 16:5726–5736. [PubMed: 8816486]
Muranen T, Selfors LM, Worster DT, Iwanicki MP, Song L, Morales FC, Gao S, Mills GB, Brugge JS.
Inhibition of PI3K/mTOR leads to adaptive resistance in matrix-attached cancer cells. Cancer
cell. 2012; 21:227–239. [PubMed: 22340595]

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 17.

Arteaga and Engelman

Page 30

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Muraoka-Cook RS, Garrett J, Sanchez VK, Stanford JC, Young C, Chakrabarty A, Rinehart C, Zhang
Y, Wu Y, Greenberger LM, et al. ErbB3 ablation impairs phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/
AKT-dependent mammary tumorigenesis. Cancer research. 2011
Musolino A, Naldi N, Bortesi B, Pezzuolo D, Capelletti M, Missale G, Laccabue D, Zerbini A, Camisa
R, Bisagni G, et al. Immunoglobulin G fragment C receptor polymorphisms and clinical efficacy
of trastuzumab-based therapy in patients with HER-2/neu-positive metastatic breast cancer.
Journal of clinical oncology: official journal of the American Society of Clinical Oncology.
2008; 26:1789–1796. [PubMed: 18347005]
Nagata Y, Lan KH, Zhou X, Tan M, Esteva FJ, Sahin AA, Klos KS, Li P, Monia BP, Nguyen NT, et
al. PTEN activation contributes to tumor inhibition by trastuzumab, and loss of PTEN predicts
trastuzumab resistance in patients. Cancer cell. 2004; 6:117–127. [PubMed: 15324695]
Nahta R, Takahashi T, Ueno NT, Hung MC, Esteva FJ. P27(kip1) down-regulation is associated with
trastuzumab resistance in breast cancer cells. Cancer research. 2004; 64:3981–3986. [PubMed:
15173011]
Nahta R, Yuan LX, Du Y, Esteva FJ. Lapatinib induces apoptosis in trastuzumab-resistant breast
cancer cells: effects on insulin-like growth factor I signaling. Mol Cancer Ther. 2007; 6:667–674.
[PubMed: 17308062]
Nahta R, Yuan LX, Zhang B, Kobayashi R, Esteva FJ. Insulin-like growth factor-I receptor/human
epidermal growth factor receptor 2 heterodimerization contributes to trastuzumab resistance of
breast cancer cells. Cancer research. 2005; 65:11118–11128. [PubMed: 16322262]
Ng KP, Hillmer AM, Chuah CT, Juan WC, Ko TK, Teo AS, Ariyaratne PN, Takahashi N, Sawada K,
Fei Y, et al. A common BIM deletion polymorphism mediates intrinsic resistance and inferior
responses to tyrosine kinase inhibitors in cancer. Nat Med. 2012; 18:521–528. [PubMed:
22426421]
Niederst MJ, Engelman JA. Bypass mechanisms of resistance to receptor tyrosine kinase inhibition in
lung cancer. Sci Signal. 2013; 6:re6. [PubMed: 24065147]
Nishikawa R, Ji XD, Harmon RC, Lazar CS, Gill GN, Cavenee WK, Huang HJ. A mutant epidermal
growth factor receptor common in human glioma confers enhanced tumorigenicity. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 1994; 91:7727–7731.
[PubMed: 8052651]
O’Brien C, Wallin JJ, Sampath D, GuhaThakurta D, Savage H, Punnoose EA, Guan J, Berry L, Prior
WW, Amler LC, et al. Predictive biomarkers of sensitivity to the phosphatidylinositol 3′ kinase
inhibitor GDC-0941 in breast cancer preclinical models. Clinical cancer research: an official
journal of the American Association for Cancer Research. 2010; 16:3670–3683. [PubMed:
20453058]
O’Regan R, Ozguroglu M, Andre F, Toi M, Jerusalem G, Wilks S, Isaacs C, Xu B, Masuda N, Arena
FP, Yardley DA, Yap YS, Mukhopadhyay P, Douma S, El-Hashimy M, Taran T, Sahmoud T,
Lebwohl DE, Gianni L. Phase III randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicenter trial
of daily everolimus plus weekly trastuzumab and vinorelbine in trastuzumab-resistant, advanced
breast cancer (BOLERO-3). Journal of clinical oncology: official journal of the American
Society of Clinical Oncology. 2013:31.
Ohashi K, Sequist LV, Arcila ME, Moran T, Chmielecki J, Lin YL, Pan Y, Wang L, de Stanchina E,
Shien K, et al. Lung cancers with acquired resistance to EGFR inhibitors occasionally harbor
BRAF gene mutations but lack mutations in KRAS, NRAS, or MEK1. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2012; 109:E2127–2133.
[PubMed: 22773810]
Paez JG, Janne PA, Lee JC, Tracy S, Greulich H, Gabriel S, Herman P, Kaye FJ, Lindeman N, Boggon
TJ, et al. EGFR mutations in lung cancer: correlation with clinical response to gefitinib therapy.
Science. 2004; 304:1497–1500. [PubMed: 15118125]
Paik S, Kim C, Wolmark N. HER2 status and benefit from adjuvant trastuzumab in breast cancer. N
Engl J Med. 2008; 358:1409–1411. [PubMed: 18367751]
Pao W, Chmielecki J. Rational, biologically based treatment of EGFR-mutant non-small-cell lung
cancer. Nat Rev Cancer. 2010; 10:760–774. [PubMed: 20966921]
Pao W, Miller V, Zakowski M, Doherty J, Politi K, Sarkaria I, Singh B, Heelan R, Rusch V, Fulton L,
et al. EGF receptor gene mutations are common in lung cancers from “never smokers” and are
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 17.

Arteaga and Engelman

Page 31

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

associated with sensitivity of tumors to gefitinib and erlotinib. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2004; 101:13306–13311. [PubMed:
15329413]
Pao W, Miller VA, Politi KA, Riely GJ, Somwar R, Zakowski MF, Kris MG, Varmus H. Acquired
resistance of lung adenocarcinomas to gefitinib or erlotinib is associated with a second mutation
in the EGFR kinase domain. PLoS Med. 2005; 2:e73. [PubMed: 15737014]
Park S, Jiang Z, Mortenson ED, Deng L, Radkevich-Brown O, Yang X, Sattar H, Wang Y, Brown NK,
Greene M, et al. The therapeutic effect of anti-HER2/neu antibody depends on both innate and
adaptive immunity. Cancer cell. 2010; 18:160–170. [PubMed: 20708157]
Perez EA, Dueck AC, McCullough AE, Chen B, Geiger XJ, Jenkins RB, Lingle WL, Davidson NE,
Martino S, Kaufman PA, et al. Impact of PTEN protein expression on benefit from adjuvant
trastuzumab in early-stage human epidermal growth factor receptor 2-positive breast cancer in
the North Central Cancer Treatment Group N9831 trial. Journal of clinical oncology: official
journal of the American Society of Clinical Oncology. 2013; 31:2115–2122. [PubMed:
23650412]
Phillips GD, Fields CT, Li G, Dowbenko D, Schaefer G, Miller K, Andre F, Burris HA 3rd, Albain
KS, Harbeck N, et al. Dual Targeting of HER2-Positive Cancer with Trastuzumab Emtansine and
Pertuzumab: Critical Role for Neuregulin Blockade in Antitumor Response to Combination
Therapy. Clinical cancer research: an official journal of the American Association for Cancer
Research. 2013
Politi K, Zakowski MF, Fan PD, Schonfeld EA, Pao W, Varmus HE. Lung adenocarcinomas induced
in mice by mutant EGF receptors found in human lung cancers respond to a tyrosine kinase
inhibitor or to down-regulation of the receptors. Genes Dev. 2006; 20:1496–1510. [PubMed:
16705038]
Prahallad A, Sun C, Huang S, Di Nicolantonio F, Salazar R, Zecchin D, Beijersbergen RL, Bardelli A,
Bernards R. Unresponsiveness of colon cancer to BRAF(V600E) inhibition through feedback
activation of EGFR. Nature. 2012; 483:100–103. [PubMed: 22281684]
Price-Schiavi SA, Jepson S, Li P, Arango M, Rudland PS, Yee L, Carraway KL. Rat Muc4
(sialomucin complex) reduces binding of anti-ErbB2 antibodies to tumor cell surfaces, a potential
mechanism for herceptin resistance. Int J Cancer. 2002; 99:783–791. [PubMed: 12115478]
Prickett TD, Agrawal NS, Wei X, Yates KE, Lin JC, Wunderlich JR, Cronin JC, Cruz P, Rosenberg
SA, Samuels Y. Analysis of the tyrosine kinome in melanoma reveals recurrent mutations in
ERBB4. Nat Genet. 2009; 41:1127–1132. [PubMed: 19718025]
Prowell TM, Pazdur R. Pathological complete response and accelerated drug approval in early breast
cancer. N Engl J Med. 2012; 366:2438–2441. [PubMed: 22646508]
Qi J, McTigue MA, Rogers A, Lifshits E, Christensen JG, Janne PA, Engelman JA. Multiple mutations
and bypass mechanisms can contribute to development of acquired resistance to MET inhibitors.
Cancer research. 2011; 71:1081–1091. [PubMed: 21266357]
Ranson M, Pao W, Kim DW, Kim SW, Ohe Y, Felip E, Planchard D, Ghiorghiu S, Cantarini M, Cross
D, et al. AZD9291: AN IRREVERSIBLE, POTENT AND SELECTIVE TYROSINE KINASE
INHIBITOR (TKI) OF ACTIVATING (EGFRM+) AND RESISTANCE (T790M)
MUTATIONS IN ADVANCED NSCLC. Journal of thoracic oncology: official publication of
the International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer. 2013; 8:s389.
Regales L, Gong Y, Shen R, de Stanchina E, Vivanco I, Goel A, Koutcher JA, Spassova M, Ouerfelli
O, Mellinghoff IK, et al. Dual targeting of EGFR can overcome a major drug resistance mutation
in mouse models of EGFR mutant lung cancer. J Clin Invest. 2009; 119:3000–3010. [PubMed:
19759520]
Rexer BN, Arteaga CL. Optimal targeting of HER2-PI3K signaling in breast cancer: mechanistic
insights and clinical implications. Cancer research. 2013; 73:3817–3820. [PubMed: 23794708]
Rexer BN, Ham AJ, Rinehart C, Hill S, de Matos Granja-Ingram N, Gonzalez-Angulo AM, Mills GB,
Dave B, Chang JC, Liebler DC, et al. Phosphoproteomic mass spectrometry profiling links Src
family kinases to escape from HER2 tyrosine kinase inhibition. Oncogene. 2011
Rexer BN, Shyr Y, Arteaga CL. Phosphatase and tensin homolog deficiency and resistance to
trastuzumab and chemotherapy. Journal of clinical oncology: official journal of the American
Society of Clinical Oncology. 2013; 31:2073–2075. [PubMed: 23650407]
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 17.

Arteaga and Engelman

Page 32

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Ritter CA, Perez-Torres M, Rinehart C, Guix M, Dugger T, Engelman JA, Arteaga CL. Human breast
cancer cells selected for resistance to trastuzumab in vivo overexpress epidermal growth factor
receptor and ErbB ligands and remain dependent on the ErbB receptor network. Clinical cancer
research: an official journal of the American Association for Cancer Research. 2007; 13:4909–
4919. [PubMed: 17699871]
Rosell R, Carcereny E, Gervais R, Vergnenegre A, Massuti B, Felip E, Palmero R, Garcia-Gomez R,
Pallares C, Sanchez JM, et al. Erlotinib versus standard chemotherapy as first-line treatment for
European patients with advanced EGFR mutation-positive non-small-cell lung cancer
(EURTAC): a multicentre, open-label, randomised phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2012; 13:239–
246. [PubMed: 22285168]
Rosell R, Molina MA, Costa C, Simonetti S, Gimenez-Capitan A, Bertran-Alamillo J, Mayo C, Moran
T, Mendez P, Cardenal F, et al. Pretreatment EGFR T790M mutation and BRCA1 mRNA
expression in erlotinib-treated advanced non-small-cell lung cancer patients with EGFR
mutations. Clinical cancer research: an official journal of the American Association for Cancer
Research. 2011; 17:1160–1168. [PubMed: 21233402]
Ross JS, Wang K, Sheehan CE, Boguniewicz AB, Otto G, Downing SR, Sun J, He J, Curran JA, Ali S,
et al. Relapsed classic E-cadherin (CDH1)-mutated invasive lobular breast cancer shows a high
frequency of HER2 (ERBB2) gene mutations. Clinical cancer research: an official journal of the
American Association for Cancer Research. 2013; 19:2668–2676. [PubMed: 23575477]
Sasaki T, Koivunen J, Ogino A, Yanagita M, Nikiforow S, Zheng W, Lathan C, Marcoux JP, Du J,
Okuda K, et al. A novel ALK secondary mutation and EGFR signaling cause resistance to ALK
kinase inhibitors. Cancer research. 2011; 71:6051–6060. [PubMed: 21791641]
Scaltriti M, Chandarlapaty S, Prudkin L, Aura C, Jimenez J, Angelini PD, Sanchez G, Guzman M,
Parra JL, Ellis C, et al. Clinical benefit of lapatinib-based therapy in patients with human
epidermal growth factor receptor 2-positive breast tumors coexpressing the truncated p95HER2
receptor. Clinical cancer research: an official journal of the American Association for Cancer
Research. 2010; 16:2688–2695. [PubMed: 20406840]
Scaltriti M, Eichhorn PJ, Cortes J, Prudkin L, Aura C, Jimenez J, Chandarlapaty S, Serra V, Prat A,
Ibrahim YH, et al. Cyclin E amplification/overexpression is a mechanism of trastuzumab
resistance in HER2+ breast cancer patients. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America. 2011; 108:3761–3766. [PubMed: 21321214]
Scaltriti M, Rojo F, Ocana A, Anido J, Guzman M, Cortes J, Di Cosimo S, Matias-Guiu X, Ramon y
Cajal S, Arribas J, et al. Expression of p95HER2, a truncated form of the HER2 receptor, and
response to anti-HER2 therapies in breast cancer. Journal of the National Cancer Institute. 2007;
99:628–638. [PubMed: 17440164]
Scaltriti M, Verma C, Guzman M, Jimenez J, Parra JL, Pedersen K, Smith DJ, Landolfi S, Ramon y
Cajal S, Arribas J, et al. Lapatinib, a HER2 tyrosine kinase inhibitor, induces stabilization and
accumulation of HER2 and potentiates trastuzumab-dependent cell cytotoxicity. Oncogene.
2009; 28:803–814. [PubMed: 19060928]
Schaefer G, Haber L, Crocker LM, Shia S, Shao L, Dowbenko D, Totpal K, Wong A, Lee CV,
Stawicki S, et al. A two-in-one antibody against HER3 and EGFR has superior inhibitory activity
compared with monospecific antibodies. Cancer cell. 2011; 20:472–486. [PubMed: 22014573]
Schechter AL, Stern DF, Vaidyanathan L, Decker SJ, Drebin JA, Greene MI, Weinberg RA. The neu
oncogene: an erb-B-related gene encoding a 185,000-Mr tumour antigen. Nature. 1984; 312:513–
516. [PubMed: 6095109]
Scheuer W, Friess T, Burtscher H, Bossenmaier B, Endl J, Hasmann M. Strongly enhanced antitumor
activity of trastuzumab and pertuzumab combination treatment on HER2-positive human
xenograft tumor models. Cancer research. 2009; 69:9330–9336. [PubMed: 19934333]
Schoeberl B, Faber AC, Li D, Liang MC, Crosby K, Onsum M, Burenkova O, Pace E, Walton Z, Nie
L, et al. An ErbB3 antibody, MM-121, is active in cancers with ligand-dependent activation.
Cancer research. 2010; 70:2485–2494. [PubMed: 20215504]
Sequist LV, Soria J-C, Gadgeel SM, Wakelee HA, Camidge DR, Varga A, Fidias P, Wozniak AJ, Neal
JW, Doebele RC, et al. First-in-human evaluation of CO-1686, an irreversible, selective, and
potent tyrosine kinase inhibitor of EGFR T790M. Journal of clinical oncology: official journal of
the American Society of Clinical Oncology. 2013a:31.

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 17.

Arteaga and Engelman

Page 33

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Sequist LV, Waltman BA, Dias-Santagata D, Digumarthy S, Turke AB, Fidias P, Bergethon K, Shaw
AT, Gettinger S, Cosper AK, et al. Genotypic and histological evolution of lung cancers
acquiring resistance to EGFR inhibitors. Science translational medicine. 2011; 3:75ra26.
Sequist LV, Yang JC, Yamamoto N, O’Byrne K, Hirsh V, Mok T, Geater SL, Orlov S, Tsai CM,
Boyer M, et al. Phase III study of afatinib or cisplatin plus pemetrexed in patients with metastatic
lung adenocarcinoma with EGFR mutations. Journal of clinical oncology: official journal of the
American Society of Clinical Oncology. 2013b; 31:3327–3334. [PubMed: 23816960]
Serra V, Markman B, Scaltriti M, Eichhorn PJ, Valero V, Guzman M, Botero ML, Llonch E, Atzori F,
Di Cosimo S, et al. NVP-BEZ235, a dual PI3K/mTOR inhibitor, prevents PI3K signaling and
inhibits the growth of cancer cells with activating PI3K mutations. Cancer research. 2008;
68:8022–8030. [PubMed: 18829560]
Sharma SV, Lee DY, Li B, Quinlan MP, Takahashi F, Maheswaran S, McDermott U, Azizian N, Zou
L, Fischbach MA, et al. A chromatin-mediated reversible drug-tolerant state in cancer cell
subpopulations. Cell. 2010; 141:69–80. [PubMed: 20371346]
Shattuck DL, Miller JK, Carraway KL 3rd, Sweeney C. Met receptor contributes to trastuzumab
resistance of Her2-overexpressing breast cancer cells. Cancer research. 2008; 68:1471–1477.
[PubMed: 18316611]
Sheng Q, Liu X, Fleming E, Yuan K, Piao H, Chen J, Moustafa Z, Thomas RK, Greulich H, Schinzel
A, et al. An activated ErbB3/NRG1 autocrine loop supports in vivo proliferation in ovarian
cancer cells. Cancer cell. 2010; 17:298–310. [PubMed: 20227043]
Shi F, Telesco SE, Liu Y, Radhakrishnan R, Lemmon MA. ErbB3/HER3 intracellular domain is
competent to bind ATP and catalyze autophosphorylation. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America. 2010; 107:7692–7697. [PubMed: 20351256]
Singh B, Bogatcheva G, Washington MK, Coffey RJ. Transformation of polarized epithelial cells by
apical mistrafficking of epiregulin. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America. 2013; 110:8960–8965. [PubMed: 23671122]
Singh B, Coffey RJ. Trafficking of epidermal growth factor receptor ligands in polarized epithelial
cells. Annual review of physiology. 2014; 76:275–300.
Slamon DJ, Clark GM, Wong SG, Levin WJ, Ullrich A, McGuire WL. Human breast cancer:
correlation of relapse and survival with amplification of the HER-2/neu oncogene. Science. 1987;
235:177–182. [PubMed: 3798106]
Soria JC, Sequist LV, Gadgeel S, Goldman J, Wakelee H, Varga A, Fidias P, Wozniak AJ, Neal JW,
Doebele RC, et al. FIRST-IN-HUMAN EVALUATION OF CO-1686, AN IRREVERSIBLE,
HIGHLY, SELECTIVE TYROSINE KINASE INHIBITOR OF MUTATIONS OF EGFR
(ACTIVATING AND T790M). Journal of thoracic oncology: official publication of the
International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer. 2013; 8:s141.
Sos ML, Koker M, Weir BA, Heynck S, Rabinovsky R, Zander T, Seeger JM, Weiss J, Fischer F,
Frommolt P, et al. PTEN loss contributes to erlotinib resistance in EGFR-mutant lung cancer by
activation of Akt and EGFR. Cancer research. 2009; 69:3256–3261. [PubMed: 19351834]
Stagg J, Loi S, Divisekera U, Ngiow SF, Duret H, Yagita H, Teng MW, Smyth MJ. Anti-ErbB-2 mAb
therapy requires type I and II interferons and synergizes with anti-PD-1 or anti-CD137 mAb
therapy. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America.
2011; 108:7142–7147. [PubMed: 21482773]
Stephens P, Hunter C, Bignell G, Edkins S, Davies H, Teague J, Stevens C, O’Meara S, Smith R,
Parker A, et al. Lung cancer: intragenic ERBB2 kinase mutations in tumours. Nature. 2004;
431:525–526. [PubMed: 15457249]
Sugawa N, Ekstrand AJ, James CD, Collins VP. Identical splicing of aberrant epidermal growth factor
receptor transcripts from amplified rearranged genes in human glioblastomas. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 1990; 87:8602–8606. [PubMed:
2236070]
Takezawa K, Pirazzoli V, Arcila ME, Nebhan CA, Song X, de Stanchina E, Ohashi K, Janjigian YY,
Spitzler PJ, Melnick MA, et al. HER2 amplification: a potential mechanism of acquired
resistance to EGFR inhibition in EGFR-mutant lung cancers that lack the second-site
EGFRT790M mutation. Cancer Discov. 2012; 2:922–933. [PubMed: 22956644]

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 17.

Arteaga and Engelman

Page 34

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Tanizaki J, Okamoto I, Fumita S, Okamoto W, Nishio K, Nakagawa K. Roles of BIM induction and
survivin downregulation in lapatinib-induced apoptosis in breast cancer cells with HER2
amplification. Oncogene. 2011; 30:4097–4106. [PubMed: 21499301]
Turke AB, Song Y, Costa C, Cook R, Arteaga CL, Asara JM, Engelman JA. MEK inhibition leads to
PI3K/AKT activation by relieving a negative feedback on ERBB receptors. Cancer research.
2012; 72:3228–3237. [PubMed: 22552284]
Turke AB, Zejnullahu K, Wu YL, Song Y, Dias-Santagata D, Lifshits E, Toschi L, Rogers A, Mok T,
Sequist L, et al. Preexistence and clonal selection of MET amplification in EGFR mutant
NSCLC. Cancer cell. 2010; 17:77–88. [PubMed: 20129249]
Utermark T, Rao T, Cheng H, Wang Q, Lee SH, Wang ZC, Iglehart JD, Roberts TM, Muller WJ, Zhao
JJ. The p110alpha and p110beta isoforms of PI3K play divergent roles in mammary gland
development and tumorigenesis. Genes Dev. 2012; 26:1573–1586. [PubMed: 22802530]
Van Cutsem E, Kohne CH, Hitre E, Zaluski J, Chang Chien CR, Makhson A, D’Haens G, Pinter T,
Lim R, Bodoky G, et al. Cetuximab and chemotherapy as initial treatment for metastatic
colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med. 2009; 360:1408–1417. [PubMed: 19339720]
Van Cutsem E, Peeters M, Siena S, Humblet Y, Hendlisz A, Neyns B, Canon JL, Van Laethem JL,
Maurel J, Richardson G, et al. Open-label phase III trial of panitumumab plus best supportive
care compared with best supportive care alone in patients with chemotherapy-refractory
metastatic colorectal cancer. Journal of clinical oncology: official journal of the American
Society of Clinical Oncology. 2007; 25:1658–1664. [PubMed: 17470858]
Vaught DB, Stanford JC, Young C, Hicks DJ, Wheeler F, Rinehart C, Sanchez V, Koland J, Muller
WJ, Arteaga CL, et al. HER3 is required for HER2-induced preneoplastic changes to the breast
epithelium and tumor formation. Cancer research. 2012; 72:2672–2682. [PubMed: 22461506]
Vermorken JB, Mesia R, Rivera F, Remenar E, Kawecki A, Rottey S, Erfan J, Zabolotnyy D, Kienzer
HR, Cupissol D, et al. Platinum-based chemotherapy plus cetuximab in head and neck cancer. N
Engl J Med. 2008; 359:1116–1127. [PubMed: 18784101]
von Minckwitz G, du Bois A, Schmidt M, Maass N, Cufer T, de Jongh FE, Maartense E, Zielinski C,
Kaufmann M, Bauer W, et al. Trastuzumab beyond progression in human epidermal growth
factor receptor 2-positive advanced breast cancer: a german breast group 26/breast international
group 03–05 study. Journal of clinical oncology: official journal of the American Society of
Clinical Oncology. 2009; 27:1999–2006. [PubMed: 19289619]
Walter AO, Sjin RT, Haringsma HJ, Ohashi K, Sun J, Lee K, Dubrovskiy A, Labenski M, Zhu Z,
Wang Z, et al. Discovery of a Mutant-Selective Covalent Inhibitor of EGFR that Overcomes
T790M-Mediated Resistance in NSCLC. Cancer Discov. 2013; 3:1404–1415. [PubMed:
24065731]
Wang SE, Narasanna A, Perez-Torres M, Xiang B, Wu FY, Yang S, Carpenter G, Gazdar AF,
Muthuswamy SK, Arteaga CL. HER2 kinase domain mutation results in constitutive
phosphorylation and activation of HER2 and EGFR and resistance to EGFR tyrosine kinase
inhibitors. Cancer cell. 2006; 10:25–38. [PubMed: 16843263]
Wang SE, Xiang B, Guix M, Olivares MG, Parker J, Chung CH, Pandiella A, Arteaga CL.
Transforming growth factor beta engages TACE and ErbB3 to activate phosphatidylinositol-3
kinase/Akt in ErbB2-overexpressing breast cancer and desensitizes cells to trastuzumab. Mol
Cell Biol. 2008; 28:5605–5620. [PubMed: 18625725]
Willmore-Payne C, Holden JA, Layfield LJ. Detection of EGFR- and HER2-activating mutations in
squamous cell carcinoma involving the head and neck. Mod Pathol. 2006; 19:634–640.
[PubMed: 16547470]
Wilson TR, Fridlyand J, Yan Y, Penuel E, Burton L, Chan E, Peng J, Lin E, Wang Y, Sosman J, et al.
Widespread potential for growth-factor-driven resistance to anticancer kinase inhibitors. Nature.
2012; 487:505–509. [PubMed: 22763448]
Wilson TR, Lee DY, Berry L, Shames DS, Settleman J. Neuregulin-1-mediated autocrine signaling
underlies sensitivity to HER2 kinase inhibitors in a subset of human cancers. Cancer cell. 2011;
20:158–172. [PubMed: 21840482]
Wood ER, Truesdale AT, McDonald OB, Yuan D, Hassell A, Dickerson SH, Ellis B, Pennisi C, Horne
E, Lackey K, et al. A unique structure for epidermal growth factor receptor bound to GW572016

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 17.

Arteaga and Engelman

Page 35

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

(Lapatinib): relationships among protein conformation, inhibitor off-rate, and receptor activity in
tumor cells. Cancer research. 2004; 64:6652–6659. [PubMed: 15374980]
Xia W, Bacus S, Hegde P, Husain I, Strum J, Liu L, Paulazzo G, Lyass L, Trusk P, Hill J, et al. A
model of acquired autoresistance to a potent ErbB2 tyrosine kinase inhibitor and a therapeutic
strategy to prevent its onset in breast cancer. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America. 2006; 103:7795–7800. [PubMed: 16682622]
Yakes FM, Chinratanalab W, Ritter CA, King W, Seelig S, Arteaga CL. Herceptin-induced inhibition
of phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase and Akt Is required for antibody-mediated effects on p27, cyclin
D1, and antitumor action. Cancer research. 2002; 62:4132–4141. [PubMed: 12124352]
Yano S, Wang W, Li Q, Matsumoto K, Sakurama H, Nakamura T, Ogino H, Kakiuchi S, Hanibuchi
M, Nishioka Y, et al. Hepatocyte growth factor induces gefitinib resistance of lung
adenocarcinoma with epidermal growth factor receptor-activating mutations. Cancer research.
2008; 68:9479–9487. [PubMed: 19010923]
Yano S, Yamada T, Takeuchi S, Tachibana K, Minami Y, Yatabe Y, Mitsudomi T, Tanaka H, Kimura
T, Kudoh S, et al. Hepatocyte growth factor expression in EGFR mutant lung cancer with
intrinsic and acquired resistance to tyrosine kinase inhibitors in a Japanese cohort. Journal of
thoracic oncology: official publication of the International Association for the Study of Lung
Cancer. 2011; 6:2011–2017.
Yarden Y, Pines G. The ERBB network: at last, cancer therapy meets systems biology. Nat Rev
Cancer. 2012; 12:553–563. [PubMed: 22785351]
Yarden Y, Sliwkowski MX. Untangling the ErbB signalling network. Nature reviews Molecular cell
biology. 2001; 2:127–137.
Yasuda H, Park E, Yun CH, Sng NJ, Lucena-Araujo AR, Yeo WL, Huberman MS, Cohen DW,
Nakayama S, Ishioka K, et al. Structural, Biochemical, and Clinical Characterization of
Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) Exon 20 Insertion Mutations in Lung Cancer.
Science translational medicine. 2013; 5:216ra177.
Yonesaka K, Zejnullahu K, Okamoto I, Satoh T, Cappuzzo F, Souglakos J, Ercan D, Rogers A,
Roncalli M, Takeda M, et al. Activation of ERBB2 signaling causes resistance to the EGFRdirected therapeutic antibody cetuximab. Science translational medicine. 2011; 3:99ra86.
Yu HA, Arcila ME, Rekhtman N, Sima CS, Zakowski MF, Pao W, Kris MG, Miller VA, Ladanyi M,
Riely GJ. Analysis of tumor specimens at the time of acquired resistance to EGFR-TKI therapy
in 155 patients with EGFR-mutant lung cancers. Clinical cancer research: an official journal of
the American Association for Cancer Research. 2013; 19:2240–2247. [PubMed: 23470965]
Yun CH, Boggon TJ, Li Y, Woo MS, Greulich H, Meyerson M, Eck MJ. Structures of lung cancerderived EGFR mutants and inhibitor complexes: mechanism of activation and insights into
differential inhibitor sensitivity. Cancer cell. 2007; 11:217–227. [PubMed: 17349580]
Yun CH, Mengwasser KE, Toms AV, Woo MS, Greulich H, Wong KK, Meyerson M, Eck MJ. The
T790M mutation in EGFR kinase causes drug resistance by increasing the affinity for ATP.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2008;
105:2070–2075. [PubMed: 18227510]
Zhang S, Huang WC, Li P, Guo H, Poh SB, Brady SW, Xiong Y, Tseng LM, Li SH, Ding Z, et al.
Combating trastuzumab resistance by targeting SRC, a common node downstream of multiple
resistance pathways. Nat Med. 2011; 17:461–469. [PubMed: 21399647]
Zhang Z, Lee JC, Lin L, Olivas V, Au V, LaFramboise T, Abdel-Rahman M, Wang X, Levine AD,
Rho JK, et al. Activation of the AXL kinase causes resistance to EGFR-targeted therapy in lung
cancer. Nat Genet. 2012; 44:852–860. [PubMed: 22751098]
Zhou BB, Peyton M, He B, Liu C, Girard L, Caudler E, Lo Y, Baribaud F, Mikami I, Reguart N, et al.
Targeting ADAM-mediated ligand cleavage to inhibit HER3 and EGFR pathways in non-small
cell lung cancer. Cancer cell. 2006; 10:39–50. [PubMed: 16843264]
Zhou W, Ercan D, Chen L, Yun CH, Li D, Capelletti M, Cortot AB, Chirieac L, Iacob RE, Padera R,
et al. Novel mutant-selective EGFR kinase inhibitors against EGFR T790M. Nature. 2009;
462:1070–1074. [PubMed: 20033049]

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 17.

Arteaga and Engelman

Page 36

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Zhuang G, Brantley-Sieders DM, Vaught D, Yu J, Xie L, Wells S, Jackson D, Muraoka-Cook R,
Arteaga C, Chen J. Elevation of receptor tyrosine kinase EphA2 mediates resistance to
trastuzumab therapy. Cancer research. 70:299–308. [PubMed: 20028874]
Zito CI, Riches D, Kolmakova J, Simons J, Egholm M, Stern DF. Direct resequencing of the complete
ERBB2 coding sequence reveals an absence of activating mutations in ERBB2 amplified breast
cancer. Genes, chromosomes & cancer. 2008; 47:633–638. [PubMed: 18418848]

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 17.

Arteaga and Engelman

Page 37

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 1. Schema depicting intragenic alterations leading to resistance to HER2 and EGFR
inhibitors

A) HER2 truncations (p95) and splice variants (Δ16) are not inhibited by trastuzumab. In
addition, expression of specific mucin isoforms can prevent trastuzumab from binding
HER2 (Price-Schiavi et al., 2002). Not shown in the figure, pertuzumab and T-DM1 cannot
recognize p95 either. B) HER2 harboring exon 20 insertions are not inhibited by lapatinib,
but may be sensitive to irreversible HER2 inhibitors afatinib and neratinib. They are also
resistant to trastuzumab. C) The EGFR T790M gatekeeper mutation leads to acquired
resistance to first generation EGFR inhibitors, but is effectively inhibited by third generation
EGFR inhibitors. D) An EGFR mutation in the extracellular domain is associated with
acquired resistance to cetuximab, but may still be sensitive to another anti-EGFR antibody,
panitumumab. Dashed lines indicate inhibition via alternative antibodies and inhibitors.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 17.

Arteaga and Engelman

Page 38

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 2. Schematic depicting resistance to EGFR and HER2 inhibitors due to activation of
bypass track signaling

Left) Model of a sensitive EGFR or HER2-addicted cancer treated with an ERBB small
molecule inhibitor or antibody resulting in suppression of downstream signaling. EGFR or
HER2 homodimers and heterodimers are shown. Right) Model of a EGFR mutant or HER2amplified cancer with resistance due to maintenance of downstream signaling in the
presence of the EGFR or HER2 inhibitors. Activation of signaling can be caused by
activation of other RTKs or mutational activation of downstream signaling.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 17.

Arteaga and Engelman

Page 39

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 3. Developing laboratory models to discover mechanisms of resistance

A) Resistance mechanisms can be discovered by culturing sensitive cell lines in the presence
of a specific HER2 or EGFR inhibitor until resistance develops, or by introducing shRNA or
ORF libraries to determine genes whose overexpression or suppression will lead to
resistance. B) Alternatively, when resistance develops in the clinic, a cell line can be
generated from a biopsy of the resistant lesion, and the resulting resistant line can be
screened with drugs and/or shRNA libraries to determine strategies to re-sensitize them.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 17.

Arteaga and Engelman

Page 40

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 4. Targetable alterations in (residual) breast cancers after neoadjuvant anti-HER2
therapy may identify actionable mechanisms of drug resistance

Systemic neoadjuvant anti-HER2 therapy reduces or eliminates the primary HER2+ tumor as
well as micrometastases (top row). We propose that ‘drug-resistant’ residual cancers in the
breast following neoadjuvant therapy harbor targetable genomic alterations causally
associated with resistance to HER2 inhibitors. Molecular profiling of these residual tumors
should identify these genomic alterations. Further, patient-derived xenografts (PDXs)
generated with these residual cancers can be used to test novel combinations with activity
against these drug-resistant cancers that can be later applied to patients on an individual
basis. Drugs that target novel mechanisms of resistance identified in the residual tumors can
be examined in subsequent neoadjuvant trials (bottom row).

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 17.

Arteaga and Engelman

Page 41

Table 1

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Alterations of ERBB receptors and ligands in human cancer
Molecule

Alteration

Cancer types

Notes

References

EGFR

mutation, insertion
(L858R, etc.)

NSCLC (adenocarcinoma)

EGFR

vIII

glioma

EGFR

amplification

NSCLC (squamous), head & neck, glioma,
esophageal, colorectal, anal (?)

(Yarden et al., 2012)

HER2

amplification

breast, gastric, esophageal

(Koboldt et al., 2012)

HER2

mutation

breast (lobular), lung, gastric, bladder,
endometrial

(Lynch et al., 2004; Paez et
al., 2004; Pao et al., 2004)
deletion of exons 2–7
in the ectodomain

unclear if all those
reported are
activating or gain-offunction

(Sugawa et al., 1990)

(Kobodlt et al., 2012)

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

HER3

mutation

breast, gastric

(Jaiswal et al., 2013)

HER4

mutation

melanoma, NSCLC, medulloblastoma

(Gilbertson et al., 2001;
Prickett et al., 2009)

TGFα

overexpression

prostate, lung, pancreas, ovary, colon, head &
neck

androgenindependent prostate
cancer; poor
prognosis when
associated with high
EGFR

(Grandis et al., 1998;
Yarden and Sliwkowski,
2001)

Neuregulin-1

Overexpression

colorectal, head & neck

associated with drug
sensitivity or
resistance

(Wilson et al., 2011;
Yonesaka et al., 2011)

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 17.

Arteaga and Engelman

Page 42

Table 2

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

ERBB receptor inhibitors: Mechanisms of action and key clinical trials

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Drug

Type of molecule

Mechanism of action

FDA approval

Key clinical trial(s)

Trastuzumab

Humanized IgG1, binds
juxtamembrane domain
IV

Inhibits ectodomain cleavage and
ligand-independent HER2containing dimers
ADCC and adaptive immunity to
HER2

1998 (metastatic
breast)
2006 (adjuvant early
breast)
2010 (advanced
gastric)

(Slamon et al.,
2001)
(Piccart-Gebhart et
al., 2005; Robert et
al., 2006; Romond
et al., 2005)
(Bang et al., 2010)

Pertuzumab

Humanized IgG1, binds
heterodimerization
domain II

Inhibits ligand-induced HER2containing dimers

2012 (metastatic
breast)
2013 (neoadjuvant
breast)

(Baselga et al.,
2012b; Gianni et
al., 2012;
Schneeweiss et al.,
2013)

Lapatinib

Small molecule

Reversible, ATP-competitive TKI

2006 (advanced breast)

(Geyer et al., 2006)

Trastuzumab emtansine (T-DM1)

Antibody-drug conjugate

Same as trastuzumab plus
inhibition of microtubules and
cell lysis (DM-1)

2013 (advanced breast)

(Verma et al., 2012)

Erlotinib

Small molecule

Reversible, ATP-competitive TKI

2004 (3rd line
advanced NSCLC)
2005 (pancreas cancer)
2013 (1st line EGFR
mutant NSCLC)

(Mok et al., 2009;
Moore et al., 2007;
Shepherd et al.,
2005)

Afatinib

Small molecule

Irreversible ATP-competitive TKI

2013 (metastatic
EGFR mutant
NSCLC)

(Sequist et al.,
2013b)

Neratinib

Small molecule

Irreversible ATP-competitive TKI

N/A

Trials in patients
with HER2 mutant
tumors in progress

Cetuximab

Human-murine chimeric
IgG2, binds ligandbinding domain

Inhibits ligand-dependent
activation of EGFR

2004 (originally for
late line EGFR+ CRC
but now only used in
earlier line wild-type
KRAS CRC)
2006 (head & neck
with radiotherapy or
chemotherapy)

(Van Cutsem et al.,
2009; Vermorken et
al., 2008)
(Bonner et al.,
2006)

Panitumumab

Human IgG1, binds
ligand-binding domain

Inhibits ligand-dependent
activation of EGFR

2006 (originally for
late line EGFR+ CRC
but now only used in
earlier line wild-type
KRAS CRC)

(Van Cutsem et al.,
2007)

AZD9291

Small molecule

Irreversible ATP-competitive TKI
(3rd generation)

N/A

Trials in EGFR
mutant lung cancer
in progress

CLO-1686

Small molecule

Irreversible ATP-competitive TKI
(3rd generation)

N/A

Trials in EGFR
mutant lung cancer
in progress

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 17.

Arteaga and Engelman

Page 43

Table 3

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Anti-ERBB combinations

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Combination

Mechanism(s) of action

Relevant clinical trials

Trastuzumab + lapatinib (or neratinib,
afatinib)

ADCC, partial disruption of HER2-HER3 dimers,
inhibition of HER2 and EGFR tyrosine kinases

(Baselga et al., 2012a; Blackwell et
al., 2010)

Trastuzumab + pertuzumab (only
approved combination)

More complete inhibition of ligand-induced and ligandindependent HER2-containing heterodimers, ADCC,
downregulation of HER2 from cell surface

(Baselga et al., 2012b; Gianni et al.,
2012; Schneeweiss et al., 2013)

T-DM1 + pertuzumab

Same as above plus inhibition of polymerization of
microtubules with DM1

MARIANNE (NCT01120184)

Trastuzumab + everolimus

ADCC, disruption of ligand-independent HER2-HER3
dimers, inhibition of TORC1

BOLERO-3 (NCT01007942)

Trastuzumab + pertuzumab + PI3K
inhibitor

Inhibition of ligand-induced and ligand-independent
HER2-containing heterodimers, ADCC, ATPcompetitive inhibition of catalytic activity of p110

Pending

Trastuzumab + HER3 neutralizing
antibody

ADCC, partial disruption of HER2-HER3 dimers,
inhibition of heregulin binding, downregulation of
HER3 and/or HER3 dimerization

Pending

Trastuzumab + HER3 antibody + PI3K
inhibitor

Same as above plus direct inhibition of p110

Pending

T-DM1 + PI3K inhibitor

ADCC, partial disruption of HER2-HER3 dimers,
inhibition of polymerization of microtubules, direct
inhibition of p110

Pending

Afatinib + cetuximab

Combined targeting of EGFR T790M to compensate for
complete inhibition of target by either approach alone.
Afatinib may also target resistance due to HER2
activation

Pending

EGFR + PI3K inhibitor

Block resistance due to re-activation of PI3K signaling

Pending

Erlotinib + MET inhibitor

Block MET dependent resistance to EGFR inhibitors

MetLung Trial and others

EGFR inhibitor + IGF-IR antibody

Block IGF-IR dependent resistance to EGFR inhibitors

Pending

Erlotinib + Hydroxychloroquine

Effort to block the survival of “drug tolerant” cells
following treatment with EGFR TKIs (Sharma et al,
Cell, 2010)

(Goldberg et al., 2012)

Irreversible EGFR inhibitor + MET
inhibitor

Overcome both T790M and MET mediated resistance

Pending

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 17.

