Editorial

The Clinical Diversity of
Postchemotherapy Germ
Cell Teratoma
Scott E. Eggener, MD

The notably high durable cure rates associated with germ cell tumors of the testis are unique among all
solid tumors. Over the last 40 years, the 5-year survival rate for men with germ cell tumors has improved
from 63% to 95%,1 largely because of meaningful advances, such as cisplatin-based multiagent chemotherapy, defining the anatomic patterns of extragonadal metastatic spread, risk-appropriate therapy, integrated multidisciplinary care, and randomized trials to optimize treatment efficacy. This unparalleled
success should not lead to complacency but rather serve as motivation to solve other pertinent and unresolved issues, such as chemotherapy-refractory tumors, late recurrences, and treatment toxicity.
Teratoma is a poorly understood, chemoresistant, and biologically unpredictable pathologic entity. It
is associated with late recurrences,2 can lead to an increased treatment burden, and has a wide array of prognostic and treatment implications. Derived from 2 or more germ cell layers (endoderm, ectoderm, or mesoderm), teratoma is capable of striking histologic and phenotypic diversity. Although it is unclear whether
teratoma originates from non-neoplastic germ cells or from germ cell tumor components, such as yolk sac
or embryonal carcinoma, 2 major histologic variants of teratoma exist. Mature teratoma consists of differentiated elements, and immature teratoma has fetal-appearing, undifferentiated characteristics. Although
these variants are distinct visually and embryologically, neither prognosis nor treatment differs.
Teratoma often is referred to as ‘benign’, a misnomer that, unfortunately, may contribute to preventable adverse outcomes. This misconception dates back at least 100 years,3 and has been substantiated both
genetically and clinically. Teratomas can be aneuploid and contain genetic alterations similar to viable
germ cell elements, such as isochrome 12p.4 When they are present as metastases in the retroperitoneum,
teratomas have a clonal origin similar to that of germ cell elements both in the retroperitoneum and within
the primary testicular lesion.4,5
Clinically, teratomas are capable of expansive local growth, can transform into somatic malignancies,
and lead to late recurrences, all of which are associated with poor outcomes. Growing teratoma syndrome
is an entity that refers to rapidly enlarging sites of metastatic teratoma. Surgical excision is the only
Corresponding author: Scott E. Eggener, MD, Section of Urology, University of Chicago, 5841 South Maryland Avenue, MC-6038, Chicago, IL 60637;
Fax: (773) 702-1001; seggener@surgery.bsd.uchicago.edu
Section of Urology, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois
See referenced original article on pages 1310–7, this issue.
Received: September 13, 2008; Accepted: September 15, 2008
C 2009 American Cancer Society
Published online: January 22, 2009, V

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.24146, www.interscience.wiley.com

1138

Cancer

March 15, 2009

Editorial/Eggener

treatment alternative but, even when successful, can result
in significant morbidity. Teratoma has long been known
to transform into somatic malignancies, such as sarcoma,
adenocarcinoma, leukemia, or primitive neuroectodermal
tumors.6 Max Wilms noted in the late 1800s that teratomas of the testicle may develop either carcinomatous or
sarcomatous degeneration and, based on growth potential, always should be resected, regardless of whether they
pose an immediate threat.3 To this day, the mainstay of
treatment for teratoma remains surgery, although, for teratomas that transform into somatic single-cell types,
chemotherapy can result in meaningful long-term
responses.7
Late recurrences in patients with germ cell tumors
occur after a prolonged disease-free interval, typically
defined as either 2 years or 5 years, and can be challenging
to eradicate.8 When it is present at postchemotherapy retroperitoneal lymph node dissection (PC-RPLND), teratoma is an independent predictor of late recurrence and
also is the most frequently identified histologic component of late recurrences.9 Shahidi et al reported on 13
patients who had nonseminomatous germ cell tumor and
very late recurrences (>5 years), all of whom harbored elements of teratoma in the orchiectomy specimen.2 For all
of these reasons, the removal of residual teratoma is considered an essential aspect of preventing late recurrences.
Coupled with the potentially adverse clinical manifestations, the presence of teratoma is common. Among
patients with metastatic nonseminomatous germ cell
tumors, 26% to 42% of postchemotherapy retroperitoneal masses contain teratoma.10-12 In a pooled analysis of
nearly 1000 resected postchemotherapy masses, 36% had
evidence of mature teratoma.11 Although teratoma is
identified more commonly in patients who have large
masses (95% of patients with >10 cm retroperitoneal
masses after chemotherapy),13 it also frequently is identified in smaller masses. It is present in 26% of masses that
measure <2 cm in greatest dimension11 and in 23% of
masses that measure <1 cm on imaging studies.14
Two specific situations exhibit the biologic complexity of teratoma. First, although teratoma in the testicle
predicts for its presence in the retroperitoneum, its absence in the primary tumor does not obviate its presence
in the retroperitoneum. For example, of 644 patients who
underwent postchemotherapy surgery at Indiana University, retroperitoneal teratoma was present in 85% of
Cancer

March 15, 2009

patients who had teratoma in the orchiectomy specimen.13 However, among patients who did not have teratoma identified in the testicle, 48% had it in the
retroperitoneum. Observations such as this highlight our
limitations in understanding the etiology of teratoma.
Whether teratoma is capable of metastasizing or simply
develops directly from pre-existing germ cell tumor elements is unknown. Second, teratoma has a notoriously
bipolar behavior. A proportion of unresected retroperitoneal teratoma likely would remain dormant and stable in
size and would be unlikely to cause local morbidity or systemic recurrence. Alternatively, as outlined above, certain
masses containing teratoma are capable of enormous local
growth and malignant transformation, may contribute to
a late recurrence, and clearly have lethal potential. Therefore, the accurate identification of patients who are likely
to harbor retroperitoneal teratoma and which phenotype
it is likely to manifest would be dually invaluable. Because
the uncertainties regarding growth kinetics and transformative potential remain unsettled, RPLND continues to
be considered the premier staging tool and consolidative
therapy to optimize cancer-specific outcomes after
chemotherapy.
In this issue of Cancer, investigators at The University
of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center characterize 97
patients with postchemotherapy retroperitoneal teratoma
and provide estimates and predictors of long-term outcome.15 Because this is 1 of a few groups in the US that has
the clinical volume and extended patient follow-up
to generate meaningful findings from observational studies,
it is well suited to address this important clinical situation.
The key findings from their study reiterate many
meaningful concepts in the management of patients with
germ cell tumors. First, a significant number of patients
with teratoma at PC-RPLND will experience a cancer recurrence (actuarial 10-year recurrence rate, 24%).
Twenty-five percent of recurrences occurred >6 years
(and as late as 12 years) after surgery. In addition, teratoma in the retroperitoneum does not exclude a recurrence of viable germ cell tumor elsewhere. Similar to
another recent study,16 38% of patients that recurred did
so with nonteratomatous elements. For these reasons,
strict PC-RPLND surveillance should not only be mandatory but lifelong.
Second, full bilateral RPLND provides excellent
and durable local control of the retroperitoneum. Only
1139

Editorial

3% of patients experienced a retroperitoneal recurrence,
which is a credit to the skill and experience of the study
surgeons, particularly in the setting of what often are large
and adherent masses. Suprahiatal recurrences outside of
the surgical template were slightly more common (5%),
and it would be interesting to know what the preoperative
suprahiatal imaging studies revealed in these patients.
Third, risk stratification at diagnosis offers useful information even after the completion of multimodal therapy
with curative intent. In the current study, mediastinal
involvement at diagnosis strongly predicted for recurrence
after postchemotherapy surgery. Given the high coassociation of mediastinal involvement with advanced clinical
stage and International Germ Cell Cancer Consensus Classification,17 this finding corroborates previous studies demonstrating that more advanced features at diagnosis lead to
higher recurrence rates after combination therapy.16,18 Collectively, these findings speak to the importance of earlier
detection through testicular self- examination and the need
for more effective systemic salvage therapies.
Fourth, an elevated a-fetoprotein (AFP) level is associated directly with mortality in patients who have teratoma
identified at the time of postchemotherapy surgery.
Although it is a novel finding, it is not surprising, because
an abnormal AFP level before surgery consistently has been
associated with worse cancer-specific survival in many other
settings.19,20 Serum tumor markers remain a vital component of risk stratification, treatment decisions, and the early
detection of recurrence for patients with testicular cancer.
Of course, in the interpretation of any well done
study there are caveats to consider. Referral and practice
patterns at the University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, as a tertiary academic medical center, differ
compared with other hospitals and, thus, may compromise the generalizability of the findings to other settings.15 For example, 39% of patients received multiple
regimens of chemotherapy before surgery, and the study
occurred over the span of 23 years during which chemotherapy regimens and surgical expertise varied. Furthermore, it appears that all patients who had clinical stage II
disease received induction chemotherapy rather than
undergoing primary RPLND. For urologists who advocate primary RPLND for patients with low-volume clinical stage II disease, the findings may not be applicable.
Because many patients who undergo postchemotherapy
RPLND also require extraretroperitoneal surgery, it
1140

would have been beneficial to know the rates, locations,
pathologic characteristics, and predictive implications of
extraretroperitoneal surgery.21
Nevertheless, the report by Svatek et al from the
University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center is relevant, organized, and timely. All physicians who are interested in the care of patients with metastatic
nonseminomatous germ cell tumors should be cognizant
of these findings. By providing considerable amounts of
observational data, the investigators add to our understanding of postchemotherapy teratoma while also
broadly underscoring the gaps in our knowledge.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures
The author made no disclosures.

References
1.

National Cancer Institute. Surveillance, Epidemiology, and
End Results Program. Available at: www.seer.cancer.gov.
Accessed September 1, 2008.

2.

Shahidi M, Norman AR, Dearnaley DP, Nicholls J, Horwich A, Huddart RA. Late recurrence in 1263 men with
testicular germ cell tumors. Multivariate analysis of risk factors and implications for management. Cancer. 2002;95:
520-530.

3.

Coley WB, Buxton BH. IV. Teratoma of the testis. Ann
Surg. 1901;34:391-397.

4.

Jones TD, Wang M, Sung MT, et al. Clonal origin of metastatic testicular teratomas. Clin Cancer Res. 2006;12:53775383.

5.

Kernek KM, Ulbright TM, Zhang S, et al. Identical allelic
losses in mature teratoma and other histologic components
of malignant mixed germ cell tumors of the testis. Am J
Pathol. 2003;163:2477-2484.

6.

Motzer RJ, Amsterdam A, Prieto V, et al. Teratoma with
malignant transformation: diverse malignant histologies
arising in men with germ cell tumors. J Urol. 1998;159:
133-138.

7.

Donadio AC, Motzer RJ, Bajorin DF, et al. Chemotherapy
for teratoma with malignant transformation. J Clin Oncol.
2003;21:4285-4291.

8.

Oldenburg J, Martin JM, Fossa SD. Late relapses of germ
cell malignancies: incidence, management, and prognosis.
J Clin Oncol. 2006;24:5503-5511.

9.

Michael H, Lucia J, Foster RS, Ulbright TM. The pathology of late recurrence of testicular germ cell tumors. Am J
Surg Pathol. 2000;24:257-273.

10. Kondagunta GV, Bacik J, Bajorin D, et al. Etoposide and
cisplatin chemotherapy for metastatic good-risk germ cell
tumors. J Clin Oncol. 2005;23:9290-9294.

Cancer

March 15, 2009

Editorial/Eggener

11. Oldenburg J, Alfsen GC, Lien HH, Aass N, Waehre H,
Fossa SD. Postchemotherapy retroperitoneal surgery
remains necessary in patients with nonseminomatous testicular cancer and minimal residual tumor masses. J Clin
Oncol. 2003;21:3310-3317.
12. Steyerberg EW, Keizer HJ, Fossa SD, et al. Prediction of
residual retroperitoneal mass histology after chemotherapy
for metastatic nonseminomatous germ cell tumor: multivariate analysis of individual patient data from 6 study groups.
J Clin Oncol. 1995;13:1177-1187.
13. Beck SD, Foster RS, Bihrle R, et al. Teratoma in the orchiectomy specimen and volume of metastasis are predictors of
retroperitoneal teratoma in post-chemotherapy nonseminomatous testis cancer. J Urol. 2002;168:1402-1404.
14. Karellas M, Carver B, Stasi J, Motzer R, Bosl G, Sheinfeld
J. Clinical outcome following post-chemotherapy retroperitoneal lymph node dissection for men with clinical stage II
non-seminomatous germ cell tumors and a radiographically
normal retroperitoneum. Presented at the 2007 Annual
Meeting of the American Urological Association, Anaheim,
California, May 19-24, 2007.
15. Svatek RS, Spiess PE, Sundi D, et al. Long-term outcome
for men with teratoma found at postchemotherapy retroperitoneal lymph node dissection. Cancer. 2009;115:13101317.

Cancer

March 15, 2009

16. Carver BS, Shayegan B, Serio A, Motzer RJ, Bosl GJ,
Sheinfeld J. Long-term clinical outcome after postchemotherapy retroperitoneal lymph node dissection in men with
residual teratoma. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25:1033-1037.
17. [Noauthors listed] International Germ Cell Consensus Classification: a prognostic factor-based staging system for metastatic germ cell cancers. International Germ Cell Cancer
Collaborative Group. J Clin Oncol. 1997;15:594-603.
18. Loehrer PJ Sr, Hui S, Clark S, et al. Teratoma following
cisplatin-based combination chemotherapy for nonseminomatous germ cell tumors: a clinicopathological correlation. J Urol. 1986;135:1183-1189.
19. Beck SD, Foster RS, Bihrle R, Einhorn LH, Donohue JP.
Pathologic findings and therapeutic outcome of desperation
post-chemotherapy retroperitoneal lymph node dissection in
advanced germ cell cancer. Urol Oncol. 2005;23:423-430.
20. Eggener SE, Carver BS, Loeb S, Kondagunta GV, Bosl GJ,
Sheinfeld J. Pathologic findings and clinical outcome of
patients undergoing retroperitoneal lymph node dissection
after multiple chemotherapy regimens for metastatic testicular germ cell tumors. Cancer. 2007;109:528-535.
21. Spiess PE, Tannir NM, Brown GA, et al. Recurrence in
nonseminomatous germ cell testis tumor patients with no
viable tumor at postchemotherapy retroperitoneal lymph
node dissection. Urology. 2007;70:1173-1178.

1141

