Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 28

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

N-n-butyl haloperidol iodide protects cardiomyocytes against
hypoxia/reoxygenation injury by inhibiting autophagy
Bin Wang1, Shuping Zhong2, Fuchun Zheng3, Yanmei Zhang1, Fenfei Gao1,
Yicun Chen1, Binger Lu1, Han Xu1, Ganggang Shi1,4
1

Department of Pharmacology, Shantou University Medical College, Shantou, 515041 Guangdong, China

2

Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA

3

 epartment of Pharmacy, The First Affiliated Hospital, Shantou University Medical College, Shantou, 515041 Guangdong,
D
China

4

 epartment of Cardiovascular Diseases, The First Affiliated Hospital, Shantou University Medical College, Shantou, 515041
D
Guangdong, China

Correspondence to:
Ganggang Shi, e-mail: ggshi@stu.edu.cn
Keywords: Pathology Section, autophagy, N-n-butyl haloperidol iodide, hypoxia/reoxygenation, apoptosis, cardiomyocytes
Received: June 05, 2015	

Accepted: August 20, 2015	Published: September 02, 2015

ABSTRACT
N-n-butyl haloperidol iodide (F2), a novel compound derived from haloperidol,
protects against the damaging effects of ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) injury
in vitro and in vivo. In this study, we hypothesized the myocardial protection of
F2 on cardiomyocyte hypoxia/reoxygenation (H/R) injury is mediated by inhibiting
autophagy in H9c2 cells. The degree of autophagy by treatment with F2 exposed
to H/R in H9c2 cell was characterized by monodansylcadaverine, transmission
electron microscopy, and expression of autophagy marker protein LC3. Our results
indicated that treatment with F2 inhibited autophagy in H9c2 cells exposed to H/R.
3-methyladenine, an inhibitor of autophagy, suppressed H/R-induced autophagy, and
decreased apoptosis, whereas rapamycin, a classical autophagy sensitizer, increased
autophagy and apoptosis. Mechanistically, macrophage migration inhibitory factor
(MIF) was inhibited by F2 treatment after H/R. Accordingly, small interfering RNA
(siRNA)-mediated MIF knockdown decreased H/R-induced autophagy. In summary,
F2 protects cardiomyocytes during H/R injury through suppressing autophagy
activation. Our results provide a new mechanistic insight into a functional role of F2
against H/R-induced cardiomyocyte injury and death.

cell death pathways [2]. Autophagy has been implicated
in myocardial I/R. However, the role of autophagy in
contributing to cell survival and death in the heart remains
controversial [3, 4]. Several lines of evidence suggest that
autophagy may promote cell survival by purging the cell
of damaged proteins to generate the intracellular building
blocks required to maintain vital functions during nutrientlimiting conditions, such as ischemia or hypoxia [5, 6].
However, most lines of evidence suggest that up-regulation
of autophagy during hypoxia/reoxygenation (H/R) or I/R
may be detrimental [7, 8]. Autophagy may promote cell
death through excessive self-digestion and degradation
of essential cellular constituents. Many damaged
cardiomyocytes show features of autophagic/lysosomal
cell death during myocardial I/R injury, including the
appearance of cytoplasmic autophagic vacuoles and the

INTRODUCTION
Exacerbated tissue and organ damage produced by
the restoration of blood flow after ischemia is known as
ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) injury. Myocardial I/R injury
is a pathophysiological phenomenon commonly seen after
ischemia heart disease and heart surgery. I/R injury is
caused by disturbances in ionic homeostasis, local edema,
free radical stress and inflammatory responses. Recently,
many studies report that autophagy also plays a key
role in myocardial I/R injury in both animal models and
cellular models by causing progressive degeneration of the
heart [1]. Autophagy is a dynamic process that turns over
organelles and proteins through a lysosome-associated
degradation process, and serves a critical function in
cellular homoeostasis by regulating cell survival and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24709

Oncotarget

shown that F2 has protective effects on in vivo myocardial
I/R injury and in vitro H/R injury models [13, 14]. Its
cardioprotective mechanism might be associated with the
inhibition of calcium overload by blocking ventricular
myocyte calcium channels and suppressing parameter.
Recently, we found that F2 could ameliorate H/R-induced
apoptosis [15]. In this study, we used a well-established
H/R injury model that causes cardiomyocyte death in
the H9c2 culture line, and tested the hypothesis that the
protective effects of F2 are associated with inhibiting
autophagy to reduce cardiomyocyte apoptosis.

recruitment of LC3 to autophagosomes [9]. Inhibition of
H/R-induced autophagy by 3-methyladenine (3-MA) or
knockdown of Beclin 1 leads to enhanced cardiac myocyte
survival in vitro [10]. In addition, inhibition of autophagy
reduces the size of myocardial infarction and cardiac
myocyte apoptosis in beclin 1+/− mice [4].
Moderate autophagy may promote cell survival
while the excessive autophagy can accelerate cell death.
As such, autophagy as a potential target for the treatment
of ischemic heart diseases has become of increasing
interest. Furthermore, it will provide a new therapeutic
strategy for the prevention of I/R injury. New drugs that
regulate cardiomyocyte autophagy will enhance our
ability to ameliorate myocardial I/R injury and aid in the
investigation of the role of autophagy in the pathogenesis
of I/R injury.
Haloperidol (Hal) (Figure 1A), a classical antipsychotic butyrophenone drug, has been shown to possess
vasodilatory and cardioprotective effects. Hal at a clinical
dose relived symptoms of unstable angina pectoris and
ameliorated ischemic changes seen on electrocardiography
in patients [11], but large-sample studies are hampered
by its extrapyramidal adverse reaction. Therefore, we
used the piperidine group of Hal to modify and screen 1
compound, N-n-butyl haloperidol iodide (F2) (Figure 1B),
which was found to maintain the relaxation of the coronary
artery but have no extrapyramidal side reactions [12]. The
compound has been patented. Our previous studies have

RESULTS
F2 alleviates hypoxia/reoxygenation injury
We assessed cell viability in every group via MTT
assay. F2 (10−5-10−7 mol/L) ameliorated cell viability in
a concentration dependent manner (Figure 1C). Since
lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) leakage is widely used as
a marker of cellular damage, cardiomyocyte cells injury
was assessed by determining LDH activity in culture
medium at the end of reoxygenation. LDH leakage
increased in the H/R group compared with the control
group, but was significantly decreased by F2 treatment
(Figure 1D). These findings indicated that F2 could
promote cell survival and reduce cell damage in H9c2
cells subjected to H/R.

Figure 1: F2 promotes cell survival and reduces cell damage after H/R in myocardial H9c2 cells. A. Chemical structure of

haloperidol (Hal). B. Chemical structure of N-n-butyl haloperidol iodide (F2). C. Cell viability was measured by MTT assay. D. The release
of LDH in culture medium was determined at the end of reoxygenation. The data shown are represented as the means ± SD confirmed in
three separate experiments. *p < 0.05 vs. control, #p < 0.05 vs. H/R. Ctrl: control; H/R: hypoxia/reoxygenation.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24710

Oncotarget

F2-mediated protection involves inhibition of
autophagy in cardiomyocytes following H/R

F2 inhibits autophagy induced by H/R through
the MIF /mTOR pathway

Activation of autophagy occurs in cardiomyocytes
following H/R. To identify the role of F2 in regulating
H/R-mediated autophagy in cardiomyocytes, we examined
whether F2 could inhibit autophagy in cardiomyocytes,
following H/R, by MDC staining and transmission
electron microscopy (TEM). The autofluorescent
substance MDC has been shown to be a specific marker
for autophagic vacuoles (AVs). When cells are viewed
with a fluorescence microscope, AVs stained by MDC
appear as distinct dot-like structures distributed within
the cytoplasm or localized to the perinuclear regions. In
the H/R group, an increase in MDC-labeled vesicles was
observed, as indicated by punctuate MDC fluorescence
(Figure 2A and  2B), suggesting an induction of AV
formation after H/R. In the F2-treated groups, the number
of MDC-labeled vesicles declined in a dose-dependent
manner. Autophagy was further confirmed by TEM.
H9c2 cells after H/R showed typical autophagic vacuoles,
including accumulation of numerous autophagic vesicles
with a distinct double membrane, compared with no or
few autophagic vacuoles in control cells. As above,
F2 treatment reduced autophagic vacuoles in a dosedependent manner (Figure 2C and 2D).
SQSTM1 (p62) is associated with mature
autophagic vesicles and is degraded within
autophagosomes. Western blot analysis revealed
that p62  protein levels were reduced after H/R, and
F2 treatment inhibited the reduction of p62 protein in a
dose-dependent manner (Figure 2E and 2F).

We next investigated the molecular mechanism
underlying of F2 inhibit H/R-induced autophagy. Recent
evidence suggests an effect of MIF/mTOR signaling in
the regulation of autophagy in murine cardiomyocytes.
However, whether this signaling pathway is mediated
by F2 in cardiomyocyte H/R has not been assessed. We
first investigated whether F2 could regulate the MIF/
mTOR signaling pathway in our H/R model. Western
blot analysis demonstrated that the expression of MIF
markedly increased and the phosphorylation of mTOR
significantly decreased in cardiomyocytes following
H/R injury (Figure  4A and 4B), demonstrating that F2
could significantly inhibit H/R-induced MIF. Reduced
phosphorylation levels of mTOR were also observed
to occur in a dose-dependent manner after F2 treatment
compared to the H/R group.
To further investigate the function of MIF, we
then knocked down MIF by using MIF-specific siRNA,
the knockdown efficiency was shown in Figure 4C.
Our results show that MIF knockdown significantly
reduced autophagy after cardiomyocytes (Figure 4D).
In addition, knockdown of MIF significantly increased
the phosphorylation of mTOR after H/R (Figure 4E).
Taken together, these findings indicate that F2 treatmentdependent recovery of cardiomyocytes from H/R may
occur in part through the MIF/mTOR pathway to inhibit
autophagy.

F2 inhibits the expression of autophagy markers
in H9c2 cells subjected to H/R

H/R induced apoptosis is related to autophagy
To further confirm our hypothesis that inhibition
of autophagy is a mechanism for the protective effect
of F2 in H/R recovery, we used a classical autophagy
inhibitor: 3-methyladenine (3-MA), a phosphoinositide
3-kinase inhibitor that exerts its autophagy-inhibiting
effect before the formation of autophagosome, and a
classical autophagy sensitizer: rapamycin, which is
generally used to induce autophagy. The expression
of LC3- II and cleaved caspase-3 were decreased by
pretreatment with 3-MA in the H/R group, compared
to the untreated H/R group (Figure  5A and 5B).
Pretreatment with rapamycin significantly increased
LC3- II and cleaved caspase-3 expression, indicating
that rapamycin could induce apoptosis.

Microtubule-associated protein light chain 3 (LC3)
is a specific marker for autophagy initiation. LC3- II
is an accepted marker for autophagosome formation,
although higher autophagosome accumulation may
result from either increased autophagosome formation
(autophagy initiation) or interrupted autophagosome
degradation (autophagosome clearance). Western blot
analysis revealed that LC3- II was up-regulated in H9c2
cells exposed to H/R (Figure 3A). And F2 could inhibit
the expression of LC3- II in a dose-dependent manner. To
further investigate the effect of F2 on autophagy, we used
qRT-PCR and western blot to determine the expression
levels of the autophagy-related genes, Atg5 and Beclin-1.
Expression of Atg5 or Beclin-1 mRNA and protein were
increased in H9c2 cells subjected to H/R, and F2 reduced
the expression of Atg5 and Beclin-1 in a dose-dependent
manner (Figure  3B and 3C). The above data clearly
indicate that F2 could inhibit autophagy induced by H/R
in H9c2 cells.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

F2 decreases H/R induced apoptosis in H9c2 cells
To determine the effect of F2 on apoptosis induced
by H/R in H9c2 cells, we first examined early apoptosis
by flow cytometry following annexin V-FITC and

24711

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Effect of F2 on H/R-induced autophagy in H9c2 cells. A. Autophagic vacuoles were stained with MDC. B.
Quantification of mean fluorescent intensity in panel A. C. Ultrastructure features were examined by transmission electron microscopy
(TEM), detected with magnification of × 25, 000. D. Quantification of the number of autophagosomes in panel C. E. Protein expression of
p62. F. Quantification of panel E with densitometry. β-actin was used as a loading control. The data shown are represented as the means
± SD confirmed in three separate experiments. *p ˂ 0.05 vs. control, #p ˂ 0.05 vs. H/R. Ctrl: control; H/R: hypoxia/reoxygenation.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24712

Oncotarget

propidium iodide (PI) dual labeling. F2 (10−5-10−7 mol/L)
ameliorated apoptosis induced by H/R in a concentration
dependent manner. These results strongly demonstrate
that F2 attenuates H/R-induced apoptosis in H9c2 cells
(Figure 6A and 6B).
To further investigate the protection against
apoptosis in H9c2 cells, we examined the mitochondrial
cell death pathway and measured the release of
cytochrome c from the inner mitochondrial space by
western blot. F2 could inhibit H/R-induced cytochrome
c release into the cytosolic fraction in a concentration

dependent manner (Figure 6C). The release of cytochrome
c from the mitochondria is a well-known mechanism to
trigger downstream activation of caspase-9, which in turn
cleaves caspase-3, resulting in cell death. An analysis of
caspase-3 activity in the lysates of H9c2 cells revealed
that F2 treatment reduced H/R-induced caspase-3 activity
in a dose-dependent manner following H/R, compared
with H9c2 cells not treated with F2 (Figure 6D). To further
illustrate F2 could ameliorate apoptosis in H9c2 cells
subjected to H/R, we performed western blot analysis for
the apoptotic marker cleaved caspase-3 (Figure 6E). The

Figure 3: F2 inhibits the degree of autophagy in H9c2 cells subjected to H/R. A. Western blot was performed with H9c2
cells for the expression of autophagic marker proteins LC3. B. The expression level of Atg5, Beclin 1 mRNA was analyzed with qRTPCR. C. Western blot was analyzed the expression of Atg5, Beclin 1. β-actin was used as the loading control. Values are means ± SD.
*p ˂ 0.05 vs. control, #p ˂ 0.05 vs. H/R. Ctrl: control; H/R: hypoxia/reoxygenation.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24713

Oncotarget

Figure 4: F2 inhibits autophagy through the MIF-mTOR pathway in H9c2 cells subjected to H/R. A. Effect of F2 on
the MIF expression in H9c2 cells subjected to H/R. B. Effect of F2 on the p-mTOR expression in H9c2 cells subjected to H/R. C. The
knockdown efficiency was analyzed by western blot. D. Effect of knockdown MIF on the LC3 expression in H9c2 cells subjected to H/R.
E. Effect of knockdown MIF on the p-mTOR expression in H9c2 cells subjected to H/R. The data shown are represented as the means ± SD
confirmed in three separate experiments. *p ˂ 0.05 vs. control, #p ˂ 0.05 vs. H/R, ##p ˂ 0.05 vs. H/R+siCtrl. Ctrl: control; H/R: hypoxia/
reoxygenation.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24714

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Inhibition of autophagy decrease apoptotic cell death. A. The expression of LC3 with 3MA or Rapa. B. The expression
of cleaved caspase-3 with 3MA or Rapa. H9c2 cells were treated with 100 ng/ml rapamycin. The data shown are represented as the means
± SD confirmed in three separate experiments. *p ˂ 0.05 vs. control, #p ˂ 0.05 vs. H/R. Ctrl: control; H/R: hypoxia/reoxygenation; Rapa,
rapamycin.

the protective effect of F2 on the autophagy-induced
cell death observed in cardiomyocyte H/R is not yet
fully understood. In our previous study, we showed that
F2- mediated protection is associated with antagonizing
intracellular calcium overload through L-type calcium
channels and suppressing damage. In the present study,
we use a cardiomyocyte H/R model to demonstrate that
F2 exerts a protective effect against H/R-induced injury,
and that the molecular mechanism involves F2-mediated
inhibition of autophagy. This data not only identify a
novel mechanism of F2, but also provides impetus for the
research and development of novel calcium antagonists
for therapeutic use in the treatment of cardiac disease.
The next significant work should focus on exploring
the relevance and mechanism of calcium channels and
autophagy.
Macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF),
a pleiotropic cytokine, facilitates inflammation and
modulates metabolism. MIF is believed to control the
inflammatory “set point” during responses to a variety
of inflammatory stimuli. MIF regulates inflammatory
cell activation and release of other pro-inflammatory
cytokines [19] and its pathological role has been
reported in various inflammatory disorders, such as

results show that the cleaved forms of caspase-3 bands
were dramatically induced when subjected to H/R, and
F2 could inhibit cleaved caspase-3 expression. To further
confirm the protective effects of F2 against H/R-induced
apoptosis, the expression levels of apoptosis-related
proteins such as Bcl-2 and Bax were examined using
western blot analysis. The Bcl-2/Bax ratio decreased in the
H9c2 cells exposed to H/R and this decrease was greatly
attenuated by F2 treatment (Figure 6F).

DISCUSSION
Many patients suffer from ischemic heart disease
secondary to acute myocardial infarction. These are
among the most prevalent health problems worldwide
and are a major cause of morbidity and mortality. After
ischemia, a long period of secondary myocardial injury
occurs following myocardial reperfusion, including
oxidative stress, inflammation, necrosis and apoptosis.
Loss of myocardial cells is the main factor that interferes
with recovery from the secondary damage. A series of
previous studies have shown that F2 has protective effects
on myocardial I/R injury in vivo and in in vitro H/R injury
models [13–18]. However, as a calcium antagonists,

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24715

Oncotarget

Figure 6: F2 protects cardiomyocytes against H/R-induced apoptosis. A. Flow cytometry analysis of the annexin

V-FITC/PI staining. B. Quantification histograms indicated the percentages of early (annexin V-FITC positive and PI negative) and late
(annexin V-FITC positive and PI positive) apoptotic cells. C. Western blot analysis of cytochrome c in cytosolic and membrane fractions
of H9c2 cells treated with F2 and exposed to hypoxia-reoxygenation. VDAC is a mitochondrial marker. D. Caspase-3 activity in lysates
of H9c2 cells exposed to H/R with and without F2 treatment. E. Cleaved caspase-3 protein assayed by western blot at different treatment
concentrations. F. Effects of F2 on apoptosis-related proteins assayed by western blot at different treatment concentrations. β-actin was
probed as the loading control. Values are means ± SD. *p ˂ 0.05 vs. control, #p ˂ 0.05 vs. H/R. Ctrl: control; H/R: hypoxia/reoxygenation.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24716

Oncotarget

depletion and oxidative stress during I/R. Autophagy
has been implicated in myocardial I/R, although the
exact functional role of autophagy in cell survival and
death pathways associated with heart damage remains
unclear. Several lines of evidence suggest that autophagy
may promote cell survival by purging the cell of
damaged proteins to generate the intracellular building
blocks required to maintain vital functions during
nutrient-limiting condition [5, 35]. Autophagy may also
promote cell death through excessive self-digestion
and degradation of essential cellular constituents or
it may interact with the apoptotic cascade in the heart
[36], indicating a double-edged sword for the biological
function of autophagy in myocardial I/R injury. Several
lines of evidence suggest that autophagy may promote cell
apoptosis, and inhibition of the autophagy could decrease
apoptosis [4, 8]. The present study showed increased the
expression of cleaved caspase-3 protein (Figure 5B), and
up-regulation of LC3- II (Figure 3A) and Beclin-1 levels
(Figure 3B and 3C) in the cardiomyocytes H/R model,
which suggest that H/R could induce autophagy and
apoptosis. After F2 treatment, the induction of the LC3-II
protein decreased significantly after cardiomyocyte H/R
(Figure 3A). The effect of F2 was consistent with that
of the classical autophagy inhibitor, 3-MA. Conversely,
rapamycin-induced autophagy in cardiomyocytes could
induce apoptosis (Figure 5A and 5B), which confirms that
autophagy-induced apoptosis is a primary event in the
secondary damage of in myocardial I/R. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first study demonstrating that F2
protects cardiomyocytes from H/R injury via the inhibition
of excessive autophagy.
In conclusion, F2 significantly reduces the extent of
damage following H/R injury, and improves the survival
of cardiomyocytes. This protective role of F2 is related
to inhibition of excessive autophagy. Furthermore,
activation of the downstream signaling pathways MIF/
mTOR is essential for the effect of F2 in myocardial cell
death. Our study demonstrates that therapeutic strategies
using F2 may be suitable for recovery from myocardial
I/R injury.

rheumatoid arthritis, atherosclerosis and cardiovascular
diseases [20,  21]. MIF promotes prolonged I/R injury
by enhancing the inflammatory response [22]. However,
some evidence has suggested cardioprotective roles of
MIF under various pathological conditions, including
type 1 diabetes [23] and ischemia-reperfusion [24–26].
Several scenarios have been depicted for MIF-induced
biological responses, including activation of the AMPK
and JNK signaling cascades. More interestingly, a
recent study revealed that MIF could inhibit autophagy
[27–29]. In our study, knockdown MIF partially
inhibited autophagy in cardiomyocyte H/R (Figure
4D). The mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) is
a serine/threonine protein kinase that regulates cell
growth, cell proliferation, cell motility, cell survival,
protein synthesis, and transcription. mTOR belongs to
the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-related kinase protein
family. As a central protein of the PI3K family, mTOR
is an upstream signal and plays an important role in the
regulation of autophagy. Moreover, downstream signaling
of MIF/mTOR plays an important role in programmed
cell death, and phosphorylated mTOR provides
cardioprotection by reducing autophagy and enhancing
recovery in myocardial I/R [30]. As a macrolide
antibiotic, rapamycin is often used to induce autophagy
via mTOR inhibition [31]. The mTOR-signaling pathway
is considered a master regulator of multiple interrelated
functions and mechanisms relevant to cell growth,
proliferation and death. Cardiac mTOR overexpression is
sufficient to provide substantial cardioprotection against
I/R injury and suppress the inflammatory response [32].
Furthermore, mTOR may directly modulate separate
mechanisms controlling myocardial cell death, such as
mechanisms involving the pro-apoptotic molecules BAD
and Bcl-2 [33]. This dual role of mTOR may be based on
the level of autophagy activation and/or various activated
phases or situations. The mTOR pathway may have
opposing effects on myocardial cell death mechanisms,
which depend on the situation and stress level. These
factors must be considered when designing potential
therapies. In this study, we observed that autophagy is
excessively activated during the early stages of H/R, and
F2 treatment reduces the expression of MIF (Figure 4A)
and further enhances mTOR signaling (Figure 4B),
resulting in autophagy inhibition. Taken together, these
findings suggest that the role of F2 in cardiomyocyte
death and recovery from H/R involves inhibition of
autophagy via the MIF/mTOR signaling pathway
(Supplementary Figure 1).
Autophagy is an important intracellular bulk
degradation process, whereby cytosolic proteins and
organelles are sequestered by double membrane vesicles
termed autophagosomes and delivered to lysosomes
for degradation [34]. Autophagy occurs at basal levels,
thereby participating in homeostatic functions in cells,
but can be further induced by stress, such as nutrient
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

MATERIAL AND METHODS
Materials and antibodies
N-n-butyl haloperidol iodide (F2) was synthesized
in our laboratory. Caspase-3 assay kits, HEPES,
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazo-lium
bromide (MTT) and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) were
purchased from Sigma (St. Louis, MO, USA). F2 was
dissolved in DMSO. The final DMSO concentration
in solution was ≤ 0.1%, and the concentration had no
effect on viability of normal H9c2 cells or H/R-induced
H9c2 cells. Antibodies against cleaved caspase-3, LC3,
24717

Oncotarget

Assay of LDH activity

SQSTM1 (P62), cytochrome C and Bax were purchased
from Cell Signaling Technology (Danvers, MA, USA).
Antibodies against MIF were purchased from Abcam
(Cambridge, UK). Antibodies against phospho-mTOR,
Beclin-1, Bcl-2, and Atg5 were purchased from Santa
Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA, USA). Antibodies
against β-actin, anti-rabbit secondary antibody, and antimouse secondary antibody were purchased from Wuhan
Boster Biotechnology Limited Company (Wuhan,
China). Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM)
and fetal bovine serum (FBS) were purchased from
Gibco Laboratories (Carlsbad, CA, USA). The annexin
V -FITC Apoptosis Detection kit was purchased from
Dojindo Molecular technologies, Inc. (Shanghai, China).
Lipofectamine™ 2000 were obtained from Invitrogen
Biotechnology (Camarillo, USA). SiRNAs were obtained
from Shanghai Genepharma Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China).
All other chemicals and regents were purchased from local
agencies.

To determine the amount of cell injury induced by
H/R protocol, LDH activities in the culture media were
measured using a Lactate Dehydrogenase Activity Assay
kit (Jiancheng Bioengineering Institure, Nanjing, China)
according to the manufacturer’s directions.

Monodansylcadaverine (MDC) staining
MDC is a specific maker for autophagic vacuoles.
H9c2 cells were inoculated in 24-well plates with sterile
cover slips. Control H9c2 cells and those subjected to
H/R in the presence or absence of F2 were incubated with
0.05 mM MDC (Sigma, USA) in fresh medium for 30 min
at 37°C in the dark. After incubation, cells were washed
three times with PBS and immediately analyzed with a
fluorescence microscope.

Transmission electron microscope (TEM)

H9c2 cell culture

Transmission electron microscopy was used to
detect cellular ultrastructure. H9c2 cells were collected
by centrifugation and washed three times with PBS, then
fixed in glutaraldehyde (2.5% w/v) in 0.1 M cacodylate
buffer overnight. After rinsing with buffer, the cells
were then fixed in Karnofsky’s fixative, post-fixed in 1%
osmium tetroxide for 15 min, rinsed in water, and stained
in aqueous uranyl acetate (3% w/v) for 30 min. Cell
monolayers were then scraped, pelleted, and examined
with a transmission electron microscope.

H9c2 cardiomyocytes derived from rat myocardium
were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection
(ATCC, Rockville, MD). H9c2 cells were cultured
in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS, 100 μ/mL
penicillin, and 100 μ/mL streptomycin and maintained
in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2 at 37°C. The
medium was changed every 2 days. All assays contained
appropriate controls, were performed in triplicate, and
repeated on three separately initiated cultures.

Mitochondrial and cytosolic fractionation

Hypoxia/Reoxygenation protocol

To determine the release of pro-apoptotic factors
from mitochondria to cytosol by western blot, we
isolated mitochondria using a Mitochondria Isolation Kit
(Beyotime Institute of Biotechnology, China). Briefly,
cells were incubated in 100 μL ice-cold mitochondrial
lysis buffer on ice for 10 min. Cell suspension was then
taken into a glass homogenizer and homogenized for
30  strokes using a tight pestle on ice. The homogenate
was subjected to centrifugation at 600 g for 10 min at 4°C
to remove nuclei and unbroken cells. Then the supernatant
was collected and centrifuged again at 12000 g for
30  min at 4°C to obtain the cytosolic (supernatant) and
mitochondrial (deposition) fraction. Samples of cytosol
and mitochondria were dissolved in lysis buffer and
proteins were subjected to western blot for the analysis of
cytochrome c (cyto C).

Hypoxia was induced by replacing the initial
culture medium with buffer pH 6.2: 137 mM NaCl,
12 mM KCl, 0.49 mM MgCl2 · 6H2O, 0.9 mM CaCl2,
4 Mm HEPES, and 20 mM Na lactate [37]. H9c2
cardiomyocytes were incubated in an air-tight chamber
gassed with pure N2 at 37°C for 1 h. Following exposure
to hypoxia, the buffer was then replaced with fresh
oxygenated culture medium and H9c2 cells were
reoxygenated for 3 h in a humidified tissue culture
incubator with 5% CO2-95% air.

Assessment of H9c2 cell viability by MTT assay
The viability of H9c2 cardiomyocytes was
measured using an MTT Cell Proliferation Assay Kit
according to the manufacturer’s instructions [38].
After H/R treatment, MTT was added to incubate
for 4 h at 37°C and solubilized with 150 μL DMSO.
The absorbance was measured by a microplate reader
at 490  nm. Cell viability was measured as a percent
calculated as follows: Viability (%) = (OD of Assay OD of Blank) / (OD of control – OD of blank) ×  100%.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

RNA extraction and quantitative real-time
polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR)
The expression level of Atg5 and Beclin 1 genes
were determined by qRT-PCR. Briefly, total RNA was
extracted from H9c2 cells with RNAiso Plus according
24718

Oncotarget

to the protocol of the manufacturer (Takara, Dalian,
China). 500 ng of total RNA was used for generating
cDNA by using a Primescript RT reagent kit from
Takara. Resulting cDNAs were quantified by realtime PCR on an ABI 7500 Real-Time PCR System
(Applied Biosystems) using the following primers:
Atg5: 5′-AGTGGAGGCAACAGAACC-3′ (sense)
and 5′-GACACGAACTGGCACATT-3′ (antisense);
Beclin 1: 5′-GGCAGTGGCTCCTATT-3′ (sense)
and
5′-GGCGTGCTGTGCTCTGAAAA-3′.
Data
was normalized to β-actin transcript levels using
5′- CTGTATGCCTCTGGTCGTAC-3′ (sense) and
5′-TGATGTCACGCACGATTTCC-3′ (antisense) primers.
Expression was calculated using ΔΔCt method.

the Bradford method was used to determine protein
concentration. Supernatants were incubated with 2 mM
caspase-3 substrate (Ac-DEVD-pNA) at 37°C for 1 h,
and then the absorbance at 405 nm was measured with a
spectrophotometer. Caspase-3 enzymatic activity in cell
lysates was directly proportional to the color reaction.

Western blot analysis
H9c2 cells were treated with the conditions as
indicated, cells were harvested, washed three times with icecold PBS and lysed in ice-cold RIPA lysis buffer for 30 min.
For western blot analysis after protein quantification with a
BCA assay kit (PIERCE, Rockford, USA). Equal amounts
of denatured protein samples were subjected to SDS-PAGE
and probed with the corresponding antibodies as indicated
at 4°C overnight, followed by incubation with a 1:5,000
dilution of HRP-conjugated secondary antibody for 1 h at
room temperature. The transferred proteins were visualized
with a SurperSignal West Dura detection kit (Pierce
Biotech, Rockford, USA) and exposed to Medical Blue
X-ray film. Results were analyzed with Gel-pro software
by densitometric analysis (Media Cybernetics, USA).

Transfection of MIF small interfering RNA
(siRNA)
The cells were inoculated in 6-well plates and
transfected with siRNA, using Opti-MEM media (Gibco
by life Technologies). Briefly, 5 μL of MIF siRNA
(20 μM) was mixed with Opti-MEM media. Separately,
Lipofectamine™ 2000 (Invitrogen) was mixed with OptiMEM and then the mixtures were combined for 20 min at
room temperature. The mixture was then added to each
well containing cells and medium and incubated for 6 h.
Medium was then changed into antibiotic-free DMEM
supplemented with 10% FBS for 48 h. MIF siRNA
duplexes (sense, GUCGGGAGAAAUAAAUGGUdTdT;
antisense,
ACCAUUUAUUUCUCCCGACdTdT)
or control nonspecific siRNA duplexes (sense,
CGUUUGUUCGCUUCCUGAGTT;
antisense,
CUCAGGAAGCGAACAAACGTG).

All assays were repeated at least three times
independently. All data were expressed as the mean±
standard deviation (S.D) and analyzed with SPSS 13.0
statistical software (SPSS Inc.). Differences between
groups were determined with a one-way analysis of
variance (ANOVA) followed by a Student-Newman-Keuls
test. P ˂ 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

Flow cytometry

Abbreviations

For assessment of apoptosis, an annexin V-FITC/
PI staining kit (Dojindo Molecular technologies) was
used according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly,
H9c2 cells were washed with phosphate-buffered
saline (PBS), then resuspended in 100 μL of binding
buffer at 1 × 106 cells/mL. Aliquots of 10 μL annexin
V-FITC stock solution and 5 μL propidium iodide (PI)
were added to the cells, and cells were incubated in the
dark for 15 min room temperature. Immediately after
mixing with 400 μL of binding buffer, the samples were
analyzed by flow cytometry with use of a FACSort
Flow Cytometer (Becton-Dickinson, Franklin Lake,
NJ, USA). Approximately 10,000 cells were counted in
each of the samples, and data were analyzed by use of
WinMDI software (v2.9, bio-soft Net).

3-MA, 3-methyladenine ATG, autophagy-related
gene Cyto C, Cytochrome C DMSO, dimethyl sulfoxide F2,
N-n-butyl haloperidol iodide H/R, hypoxia/reoxygenation
I/R, ischemia/reperfusion LC3, microtubule associated
protein light chain 3 MDC, monodansylcadaverine
MIF, Macrophage migration inhibitory factor
mTOR, mammalian target of rapamycin MTT,
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-  yl)-2,5-  diphenyltetrazolium
bromide Rapa, rapamycin siRNA, Small interfering RNA
SQSTM1, sequestosome 1

Statistical analysis

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING
This work was supported by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (NO. 81473215), National
Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) Guangdong
Joint Funds (NO.U0932005), National Natural Science
Foundation of China (NO. 81072633), and The Central
Government Special Funds Supporting the Development
of Local Colleges and Universities.

Caspase-3 activity
Caspase-3 activity was assessed by a commercially
available caspase-3 assay kit from Sigma, according
to the manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, after lysis,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24719

Oncotarget

REFERENCES

haloperidol on coronary artery. Zhong Guo Yao Xue Za
Zhi. 1998; 9:529–31.

1.	 Zhao G, Wang S, Wang Z, Sun A, Yang X, Qiu Z, Wu C,
Zhang W, Li H, Zhang Y, Zhao J, Zou Y, Ge J. CXCR6
deficiency ameliorated myocardial ischemia/reperfusion injury by inhibiting infiltration of monocytes and
IFN-gamma-dependent autophagy. Int J Cardiol. 2013;
168:853–62.

13.	 Huang Z, Li H, Guo F, Jia Q, Zhang Y, Liu X, Shi G.
Egr- 1, the potential target of calcium channel blockers in
cardioprotection with ischemia/reperfusion injury in rats.
Cell Physiol Biochem. 2009; 24:17–24.
14.	 Zhang Y, Shi G, Zheng J, Lv Y, Gao P, Huang Z, Gao F,
Zhou Y. The protective effect of Egr-1 antisense oligodeoxyribonucleotide on myocardial injury induced by ischemia-reperfusion and hypoxia-reoxygenation. Cell Physiol
Biochem. 2008; 22:645–52.

2.	 Sanchez P, De Carcer G, Sandoval IV, Moscat J,
Diaz-Meco MT. Localization of atypical protein
kinase  C  iso  forms into lysosome-targeted endosomes
through interaction with p62. Mol Cell Biol. 1998;
18:3069–80.

15.	 Wang JZ, Cai CY, Zhang YM, Zheng JH, Chen YC,
Li  WQ, Shi GG. N-n-Butyl haloperidol iodide protects
against hypoxia/reoxygenation-induced cardiomyocyte
injury by modulating protein kinase C activity. Biochem
Pharmacol. 2010; 79:1428–36.

3.	 Przyklenk K, Undyala VV, Wider J, Sala-Mercado JA,
Gottlieb RA, Mentzer RM Jr. Acute induction of autophagy
as a novel strategy for cardioprotection: getting to the heart
of the matter. Autophagy. 2011; 7:432–3.

16.	 Huang ZQ, Shi GG, Zheng JH, Liu B. Effects of N-n-butyl
haloperidol iodide on rat myocardial ischemia and reperfusion injury and L-type calcium current. Acta Pharmacol Sin.
2003; 24:757–63.

4.	 Matsui Y, Takagi H, Qu X, Abdellatif M, Sakoda H,
Asano T, Levine B, Sadoshima J. Distinct roles of autophagy in the heart during ischemia and reperfusion: roles of
AMP-activated protein kinase and Beclin 1 in mediating
autophagy. Circ Res. 2007; 100:914–22.

17.	 Zhang Y, Chen G, Zhong S, Zheng F, Gao F, Chen Y,
Huang Z, Cai W, Li W, Liu X, Zheng Y, Xu H, Shi G.
N-n-butyl haloperidol iodide ameliorates cardiomyocytes
hypoxia/reoxygenation injury by extracellular calciumdependent and -independent mechanisms. Oxid Med Cell
Longev. 2013; 2013:912310.

5.	 Hamacher-Brady A, Brady NR, Gottlieb RA. The interplay
between pro-death and pro-survival signaling pathways in
myocardial ischemia/reperfusion injury: apoptosis meets
autophagy. Cardiovasc Drugs Ther. 2006; 20:445–62.
6.	 Dosenko VE, Nagibin VS, Tumanovska LV,
Moibenko  AA. Protective effect of autophagy in anoxiareoxygenation of isolated cardiomyocyte? Autophagy.
2006; 2:305–6.

18.	 Zhang Y, Shi G, Zheng J, Tang Z, Gao P, Lv Y, Guo F,
Jia Q. The protective effects of N-n-butyl haloperidol iodide
on myocardial ischemia-reperfusion injury in rats by inhibiting Egr-1 overexpression. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2007;
20:639–48.

7.	 Cheng BC, Huang HS, Chao CM, Hsu CC, Chen CY,
Chang  CP. Hypothermia may attenuate ischemia/­
reperfusion-induced cardiomyocyte death by reducing
autophagy. Int J Cardiol. 2013; 168:2064–9.

19.	 Calandra T, Bernhagen J, Metz CN, Spiegel LA, Bacher M,
Donnelly T, Cerami A, Bucala R. MIF as a glucocorticoidinduced modulator of cytokine production. Nature. 1995;
377:68–71.

8.	 Wang ZG, Wang Y, Huang Y, Lu Q, Zheng L, Hu D,
Feng  WK, Liu YL, Ji KT, Zhang HY, Fu XB, Li XK,
Chu MP, et al. bFGF regulates autophagy and ubiquitinated
protein accumulation induced by myocardial ischemia/
reperfusion via the activation of the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway. Sci Rep. 2015; 5:9287.

20.	 Chen D, Xia M, Hayford C, Semik V, Tham EL, Hurst S,
Chen Y, Tam HH, Pan J, Wang Y, Tan X, Lan H,
Shen H, et al. Expression of Human Tissue Factor Pathway
Inhibitor on Vascular Smooth Muscle Cells Inhibits
Secretion of Macrophage Migration Inhibitory Factor and
Attenuates Atherosclerosis in ApoE-/- Mice. Circulation.
2015; 131:1350–60.

9.	 Cao DJ, Gillette TG, Hill JA. Cardiomyocyte autophagy:
remodeling, repairing, and reconstructing the heart. Curr
Hypertens Rep. 2009; 11:406–11.

21.	 Zernecke A, Bernhagen J, Weber C. Macrophage migration inhibitory factor in cardiovascular disease. Circulation.
2008; 117:1594–602.

10.	 Valentim L, Laurence KM, Townsend PA, Carroll CJ,
Soond S, Scarabelli TM, Knight RA, Latchman DS,
Stephanou A. Urocortin inhibits Beclin1-mediated autophagic cell death in cardiac myocytes exposed to ischaemia/
reperfusion injury. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2006; 40:846–52.
11.	 Shi G, Zheng J, Chen S. Analysis of 5 case of treating
unstable angina patients with haloperidol. J Shantou Univ
Med coll. 1997; 10:33–34.

22.	 Gao XM, Liu Y, White D, Su Y, Drew BG, Bruce CR,
Kiriazis H, Xu Q, Jennings N, Bobik A, Febbraio MA,
Kingwell BA, Bucala R, et al. Deletion of macrophage
migration inhibitory factor protects the heart from severe
ischemia-reperfusion injury: a predominant role of antiinflammation. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2011; 50:991–9.

12.	 Shi G, Zheng J, Li C, Chen J, Zhuang X, Chen S, Liu X.
The effect of quaternary ammonium salt derivation of

23.	 Tong C, Morrison A, Yan X, Zhao P, Yeung ED, Wang J,
Xie J, Li J. Macrophage migration inhibitory factor

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24720

Oncotarget

deficiency augments cardiac dysfunction in Type 1 diabetic
murine cardiomyocytes. J Diabetes. 2010; 2:267–74.

31.	 Schmelzle T, Hall MN. TOR, a central controller of cell
growth. Cell. 2000; 103:253–62.

24.	 Ma H, Wang J, Thomas DP, Tong C, Leng L, Wang W,
Merk M, Zierow S, Bernhagen J, Ren J, Bucala R, Li J.
Impaired macrophage migration inhibitory factor-AMPactivated protein kinase activation and ischemic recovery
in the senescent heart. Circulation. 2010; 122:282–92.

32.	 Aoyagi T, Kusakari Y, Xiao CY, Inouye BT, Takahashi
M, Scherrer-Crosbie M, Rosenzweig A, Hara K, Matsui  T.
Cardiac mTOR protects the heart against ischemia-­
reperfusion injury. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2012;
303:H75–85.

25.	 Qi D, Hu X, Wu X, Merk M, Leng L, Bucala R, Young LH.
Cardiac macrophage migration inhibitory factor inhibits JNK pathway activation and injury during ischemia/­
reperfusion. J Clin Invest. 2009; 119:3807–16.

33.	 Castedo M, Ferri KF, Kroemer G. Mammalian target of
rapamycin (mTOR): pro- and anti-apoptotic. Cell Death
Differ. 2002; 9:99–100.
34.	 Levine B, Yuan J. Autophagy in cell death: an innocent
convict?. J Clin Invest. 2005; 115:2679–88.

26.	 Miller EJ, Li J, Leng L, McDonald C, Atsumi T, Bucala R,
Young LH. Macrophage migration inhibitory factor stimulates AMP-activated protein kinase in the ischaemic heart.
Nature. 2008; 451:578–82.

35.	 Kuma A, Hatano M, Matsui M, Yamamoto A, Nakaya H,
Yoshimori T, Ohsumi Y, Tokuhisa T, Mizushima N. The
role of autophagy during the early neonatal starvation
period. Nature. 2004; 432:1032–6.

27.	 Xu X, Pacheco BD, Leng L, Bucala R, Ren J. Macrophage
migration inhibitory factor plays a permissive role in the
maintenance of cardiac contractile function under starvation
through regulation of autophagy. Cardiovasc Res. 2013;
99:412–21.

36.	 Hamacher-Brady A, Brady NR, Logue SE, Sayen MR,
Jinno M, Kirshenbaum LA, Gottlieb RA, Gustafsson AB.
Response to myocardial ischemia/reperfusion injury
involves Bnip3 and autophagy. Cell Death Differ. 2007;
14:146–57.

28.	 Chen HR, Chuang YC, Chao CH, Yeh TM. Macrophage
migration inhibitory factor induces vascular leakage via
autophagy. Biol Open. 2015; 4:244–52.

37.	 Jonassen AK, Brar BK, Mjos OD, Sack MN, Latchman DS,
Yellon DM. Insulin administered at reoxygenation exerts
a cardioprotective effect in myocytes by a possible antiapoptotic mechanism. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2000; 32:757–64.

29.	 Chuang YC, Su WH, Lei HY, Lin YS, Liu HS, Chang CP,
Yeh TM. Macrophage migration inhibitory factor induces
autophagy via reactive oxygen species generation. PLoS
One. 2012; 7:e37613.

38.	 Zhang J, Ma K, Qi T, Wei X, Zhang Q, Li G, Chiu JF. P62
regulates resveratrol-mediated Fas/Cav-1 complex formation and transition from autophagy to apoptosis. Oncotarget.
2015; 6:789–801.

30.	 Sciarretta S, Volpe M, Sadoshima J. Mammalian target of
rapamycin signaling in cardiac physiology and disease. Circ
Res. 2014; 114:549–64.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24721

Oncotarget

