1927

CORRESPONDENCE

Identifying Breast Cancer Patients Most Likely
to Benefit From Aromatase Inhibitor Therapy
After Adjuvant Tamoxifen

W

e are responding to the recently published study by Freedman
and colleagues in which it is suggested that the benefits of
adding an aromatase inhibitor after 5 years of adjuvant tamoxifen
in patients with early-stage breast cancer are small.1 First, we wish
to emphasize that decisions regarding adjuvant hormonal therapy
for individual patients must take into account the absolute risk of
future disease recurrence and mortality as well as the proportionate
reduction in risk produced by treatment.
Results from the National Cancer Institute of Canada Clinical
Trials Group MA-17 trial indicate a 42% reduction in the risk of
recurrent breast cancer and contralateral new primary breast cancer
among patients who received letrozole after 5 years of adjuvant tamoxifen.2 In their study of 471 patients who completed 5 years of
adjuvant tamoxifen, Freedman et al. reported an absolute event rate
of 7% in Years 5 through 10. Accordingly, the authors concluded
that the absolute benefit of an aromatase inhibitor after adjuvant
tamoxifen is small. They stated that patients with a higher baseline
risk of recurrence have more substantial absolute benefits.
The absolute risk of recurrence in the study by Freedman and
colleagues was low compared with published figures from other
larger studies. In the placebo arm of MA-17 (n ¼ 2594 women),
10.2% of patients developed recurrent disease at 4 years after they
completed tamoxifen. In a recently published, population-based
study (n ¼ 1086 women) from the British Columbia Cancer Agency
(BCCA), the event rate in Years 5 through 10 after 5 years of adjuvant tamoxifen was 14.6%.3 Furthermore, the most recent Oxford
Overview reported an event rate in Years 5 through 10 of approximately 10%.4
Consistent with their lower event rate is the fact that the cohort
studied by Freedman et al. appeared to have a lower baseline risk
of recurrence compared with the MA-17 and BCCA populations.
The proportion of women who were lymph node-negative was
much higher in the study by Freedman et al. (68%) than in the MA17 study (49%) and the BCCA study (42%).
Thus, although we do not disagree with the methodology or
reasoning employed by Freedman et al., we believe it is critical that
clinicians who decide whether to recommend an aromatase inhibitor after 5 years of tamoxifen use the best available data to assess
the baseline risk of recurrence. Because it appears that the event
rate in the cohort reported by Freedman et al. may be an underestimate, clinicians who are trying to decide whether to advise
extended adjuvant therapy would be better advised to rely on tools
such as Adjuvant Online5 that make use of much more substantial
datasets to estimate baseline risk.
ª 2007 American Cancer Society

1928

CANCER May 1, 2007 / Volume 109 / Number 9

REFERENCES
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

Freedman GM, Anderson P, Li T, Ross E, Swaby R, Goldstein L. Identifying breast cancer patients most likely to
benefit from aromatase inhibitor therapy after adjuvant
radiation and tamoxifen. Cancer. 2006;107:2552–2558.
Goss PE, Ingle JN, Martino S, et al. Randomized trial of
letrozole following tamoxifen as extended adjuvant therapy
in receptor-positive breast cancer: updated findings from
the NCIC CTG MA-17. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2005;97:1262–
1271.
Kennecke HF, Olivotto IA, Speers C, et al. Late risk of
relapse and mortality among postmenopausal women with
estrogen responsive breast cancer after 5 years of tamoxifen. Ann Oncol. 2007;18:45–51.
Early Breast Cancer Trialists’ Collaborative Group. Effects
of chemotherapy and hormonal therapy for early breast
cancer on recurrence and 15-year survival: an overview of
randomized trials. Lancet. 2005;365:1687–1717.
Adjuvant! Online. Available at URL: www.adjuvantonline.
com (Accessed November 10, 2006.)

Christopher M. Booth, MD
Joseph L. Pater, MD, MSc
National Cancer Institute of Canada
Clinical Trials Group, Kingston, Ontario, Canada
Paul E. Goss, MD, PhD
Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center
Boston, Massachusetts
Paul E. Goss receives honoraria and is on the advisory
boards of Novartis, Pfizer, Astra-Zeneca, and Glaxo
Smith Kline pharmaceutical companies
DOI 10.1002/cncr.22613
Published online 12 March 2007 in Wiley InterScience
(www.interscience.wiley.com).

this with data from larger, multiinstitutional studies
that had recurrence risks that ranged from 10% to
15%. However, as they point out in their letter, this
may have been caused by our higher proportions of
older and lymph node-negative patients. In a study
of lymph node-negative patients, the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project B-14 reported
a recurrence-free survival rate of 94% and an overall
survival rate 94% 7 years after the second randomization to placebo after 5 years of tamoxifen.2 In
addition, in contrast with the MA-17 study, our study
contained only patients who were eligible for breast
conservation. Our group may have had smaller tumor sizes or more favorable pathologic features than
studies that included patients who underwent mastectomy. Subgroups of patients in our study (see
Table 21) who were younger, premenopausal at the
time of diagnosis, had T2 tumor classification, or
had positive lymph node status had a lower eventfree survival in the 85% to 90% range, comparable to
that reported for the MA-17 study. Variations in recurrence numbers are common when comparing
data from single institutions with data from randomized multicenter studies or metaanalyses used in
Adjuvant Online.
In conclusion, for myself and on behalf of the
study authors, I believe that we share fairly common
ground with little need for controversy on this issue.
We agree that the decision for extended adjuvant
therapy needs to be individualized. The potential
risk reduction by the additional therapy needs to be
gauged by the baseline risk for recurrence and
weighed against patient age, comorbidities, cost, and
risk of complications.

Author Reply

I

believe that Drs. Booth, Peter, and Goss in their
letter are emphasizing the need to individualize
the decision to extend endocrine therapy for each
patient—a position that is similar to our own.1 Looking at our group as a whole, the potential benefit to
extended therapy, assuming a 40% risk reduction,
would have been small, in the range from 1% to 2%.
However, our conclusions stated that there were subgroups that would have had more chance of benefiting from the extended therapy based on younger age
or initial pathologic stage and less chance of benefiting based on older age, comorbidities, or earlier
stage disease.
We reported an event-free survival rate of 7%
between Years 5 and 10. Booth et al. have contrasted

REFERENCES
1.

2.

Freedman GM, Anderson P, Li T, Ross E, Swaby R, Goldstein L. Identifying breast cancer patients most likely to
benefit from aromatase inhibitor therapy after adjuvant
radiation and tamoxifen. Cancer. 2006;107:2552–2558.
Fisher B, Dignam J, Bryant J, Wolmark N. Five versus more
than five years of tamoxifen for lymph node-negative
breast cancer: updated findings from the National Surgical
Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project B-14 randomized trial.
J Nat Cancer Inst. 2001;93:684–690.

Gary M. Freedman, MD
Department of Radiation Oncology, Fox Chase
Cancer Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
DOI 10.1002/cncr.22614
Published online 12 March 2007 in Wiley InterScience
(www.interscience.wiley.com).

