Research Article

HIV-1 Protease Inhibitors Nelfinavir and Atazanavir Induce Malignant
Glioma Death by Triggering Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress
1

2

4

3

Peter Pyrko, Adel Kardosh, Weijun Wang, Wenyong Xiong, Axel H. Schönthal,
4
and Thomas C. Chen

2

Departments of 1Pathology, 2Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, 3Physiology and Biophysics, and 4Neurosurgery,
University of Southern California Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California

Abstract
HIV type 1 (HIV-1) protease inhibitors (PI) have been shown to
have anticancer activity in non–HIV-associated human cancer
cells. The underlying mechanism of this effect is unclear. Here,
we show that the PIs nelfinavir and atazanavir cause cell death
in various malignant glioma cell lines in vitro. The underlying
mechanism of this antitumor effect involves the potent
stimulation of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress response
(ESR), as indicated by increased expression of two ESR
markers, GRP78 and CHOP, and activation of ESR-associated
caspase-4. Induction of ESR seems to play a central role in PIinduced cell death because small interfering RNA–mediated
knockdown of the protective ER chaperone GRP78 sensitizes
cells; whereas knockdown of proapoptotic caspase-4 protects
cells from PI-induced cell death. Furthermore, the treatment
of cells with PIs leads to aggresome formation and accumulation of polyubiquitinated proteins, implying proteasome
inhibition. Thus, our results support a model whereby PIs
cause tumor cell death via triggering of the ESR, inhibition
of proteasome activity, and subsequent accumulation of
misfolded proteins. Inhibition of glioma growth via ESR takes
place in the in vivo setting as well, as nelfinavir inhibits the
growth of xenografted human malignant glioma, with concomitant induction of the proapoptotic ER stress marker
CHOP. Because ER stress has also been reported as the
mechanism for insulin resistance and diabetes, our ER stress
model of PI function may also explain why these drugs may
induce insulin resistance as one of their most common side
effects. [Cancer Res 2007;67(22):10920–8]

Introduction
HIV type 1 (HIV-1) protease inhibitors (PI) have become
important tools in the treatment of HIV infection and include
nelfinavir (Viracept), sequinavir (Invirase), ritonavir (Norvir),
amprenavir (Agenerase), indinavir (Crixivan), and atazanavir
(Reyataz). The addition of these drugs to highly active antiretroviral
therapy (HAART) has improved patient outcomes and decreased
viral resistance (1). Moreover, the treatment with ritonavir, indinavir, or sequinavir has had an unexpected additional consequence,
the regression of Kaposi’s sarcoma (2), which prompted researchers
to investigate the potential antitumor effects of protease inhibitors
in various other cancer models. Since then, several reports
indicated that PIs might indeed harbor antitumor activity, albeit

Requests for reprints: Thomas C. Chen, Department of Neurosurgery, University
of Southern California Keck School of Medicine, 1200 N State St. #5046, Los Angeles,
CA 90033. Phone: 323-226-7421; Fax: 323-226-7833; E-mail: tcchen@usc.edu.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-0796

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (22). November 15, 2007

to varying degrees. For example, indinavir has been shown to
reduce the invasion of hepatocarcinoma cell lines in vitro and to
delay growth of these tumors in a nude mouse model in vivo (3).
Using prostate carcinoma cell lines, Yang et al. (4) reported
that nelfinavir was able to block interleukin-6–stimulated signal
transduction pathways in vitro and inhibited xenograft tumor
growth in vivo. In an investigation with ritonavir, sequinavir, and
nelfinavir, all three drugs were shown to induce growth arrest and
apoptosis in multiple myeloma cells in vitro (5). Furthermore,
ritonavir was shown to inhibit EL4-T cell thymoma growth in
syngeneic mice (6). However, in a study using an established
glioblastoma cell line, Laurent et al. (7) observed that ritonavir
failed to inhibit tumor growth in vivo, although the drug did display
cytostatic and cytotoxic effects in vitro.
An additional feature of protease inhibitors that might be
beneficial for their potential use as anticancer agents is their ability
to sensitize cancer cells to radio- and chemotherapy. For example,
saquinavir, ritonavir, and indinavir were shown to potentiate the
effects of all–trans-retinoic acid on human myelocytic leukemia
cells (8), and ritonavir was shown to enhance the anticancer
effects of docetaxel on prostate cancer cells in vitro and in vivo (9).
Other investigators showed that the treatment of prostate,
glioblastoma, and leukemia cells with saquinavir caused the
induction of apoptosis, and that sequinavir sensitized prostate
cancer cells to ionizing radiation (10). Nelfinavir and amprenavir
were also shown to decrease vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF)/HIF-1a expression and angiogenesis in glioblastoma cells
(11), whereas nelfinavir induced cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in
melanoma cells (12). In addition, amprenavir and nelfinavir
increased the effectiveness of radiotherapy in an animal xenograft
tumor model (13). Although various mechanisms have been
proposed to explain the antitumor effects of the different protease
inhibitors, such as inhibition of nuclear factor nB (NF-nB; ref. 14),
blockage of Akt signaling (4, 13), or inhibition of cytochrome P450
3A4 enzyme (CYP 3A4; ref. 9), this issue has not been convincingly
clarified.
In this present study, we present evidence that protease
inhibitors might impair tumor cell growth via the stimulation of
a particular stress pathway, called the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress response (ESR) or unfolded protein response (UPR). The
ESR consists of a set of adaptive pathways that can be triggered by
disparate perturbations in normal ER function, such as accumulation of misfolded proteins, lipid or glycolipid imbalances, or
changes in the ionic conditions of the ER lumen (see refs. 15, 16 for
reviews). The primary purpose of the ESR is to alleviate the
stressful disturbance and restore proper ER homeostasis. In the
case of intense or persistent ER stress, however, these pathways will
trigger programmed cell death/apoptosis. One of the central
prosurvival regulators of the ESR is glucose-regulated protein 78
(GRP78/BiP), which has important roles in protein folding and

10920

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Induction of ER Stress by Protease Inhibitors

Figure 1. Protease inhibitors inhibit glioblastoma cell
growth as well as survival and induce ER stress markers
in vitro. A, U251, T98G, and LN229 glioblastoma cell
lines were exposed to increasing concentrations of
nelfinavir and atazanavir. Cells cultured in 96-well plates
were treated with drugs for 48 h, and cell growth and
survival were determined by conventional MTT assay.
MTT assays were done in 96-well plates with the use of
3.0 to 8.0  103 cells per well as described in detail
elsewhere (50). Cell viability of untreated cells was set
at 100%. Columns, mean; bars, SE; n = 8. Because
the MTT assay is based on the measurement of the
metabolic activity of the cell culture, drug effects were
also determined via cell counts over time, as well as
by visual inspection of drug-treated cultures (data not
shown); these additional approaches excluded general
metabolic interference as a major cause for the outcome
shown in this figure, but rather, confirmed that these
drugs effected overall reduced cell growth and survival.
B, 300 cells per well were seeded in six-well plates
and treated with the indicated drug for 48 h. Thereafter,
the medium was replaced with fresh medium, and the
cells were allowed to proliferate for 14 d in the absence
of the drug. The newly formed colonies of adherent
cells were stained with methylene blue and counted.
The number of colonies formed in the absence of drug
treatment was set at 100%. Columns, mean; bars, SE;
n = 6. Because T98G cells are not able to spawn
colonies under these conditions, they were not included
in this part of the experiment. C, U251, T98G, and
LN229 glioblastoma cell lines were cultured in the
presence of increasing concentrations of nelfinavir and
atazanavir for 48 h. Cellular lysates were prepared
and subjected to Western blot analysis with antibodies
to ER stress markers GRP78, CHOP, and caspase-4.
The levels of GRP78 protein were quantified using
ImageJ software. Actin antibody was used as a loading
control to verify equal amounts of lysate in each lane.

assembly, in targeting misfolded proteins for degradation, in ER
Ca2+ binding, and in controlling the activation of transmembrane
ER stress sensors (17). On the other hand, CCAAT/enhancer binding protein homologous transcription factor (CHOP/GADD153)
and caspase-4 are critical executioners of the proapoptotic arm of
the ESR (18, 19).
In this study, we show that nelfinavir and atazanavir are able to
potently induce ESR in malignant glioma cells, as indicated by
elevated levels of GRP78 and CHOP, and activation of caspase-4,
which leads to cell death. Moreover, both drugs cause the
accumulation of polyubiquitinated proteins and subsequent aggresome formation, consistent with our view that ER stress is due to
proteasome inhibition, with resultant accumulation of misfolded
proteins. This notion is further supported by our observation that
inhibition of general protein synthesis (which prevents an increase
in misfolded proteins) abrogates the ESR-stimulatory effects of
both nelfinavir and atazanavir. Taken together, our study suggests
that protease inhibitors might exert their anticancer activity via
the stimulation of ER stress with resultant cell death.

www.aacrjournals.org

Materials and Methods
Materials. Nelfinavir (Viracept, 625 mg) was purchased from Agouron
Pharmaceuticals Inc., whereas atazanavir (Reyataz, 150 mg) was purchased
from Bristol-Myers Squibb Company. The pills were ground and dissolved in
100% ethanol at 25 mmol/L (stock solution). Both drugs were added to the
cell culture medium in a manner that kept the final concentration of solvent
(ethanol) below 0.8%. Appropriate amount of ethanol (based on the highest
concentration of solvent added with the drugs) was always added to the
controls.
Cell lines and culture conditions. The malignant glioma cell lines U251
and LN229 were provided by Frank B. Furnari and Webster K. Cavenee
(Ludwig Institute of Cancer Research, La Jolla, CA). T98G and U87
malignant glioma cell lines were obtained from the American Tissue Culture
Collection. All cell lines were propagated in DMEM (Life Technologies BRL)
supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 100 units/mL penicillin, and
0.1 mg/mL streptomycin in a humidified incubator at 37jC and a 5% CO2
atmosphere.
Immunoblots and antibodies. The cells were lysed in radioimmunoprecipitation assay buffer (RIPA), and equal amounts of total cellular lysates
were processed by Western blot analysis according to established
procedures (20). Antibodies to GRP78 and CHOP and caspase-4 were

10921

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (22). November 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research
obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc. and were used according
to manufacturer’s recommendations. Caspase-4 was also purchased from
StressGen Biotechnology Corporation. The secondary antibodies were
coupled to horseradish peroxidase and were detected by chemiluminescence using the SuperSignal West substrate from Pierce. All immunoblots
were repeated at least once to confirm the results. The GRP78 blots were
quantified using ImageJ software (21).
Immunohistochemistry. Immunohistochemical analysis of protein
expression in tumor tissues was done with the use of the Vectastatin
ABC kit (Vector Laboratories) according to manufacturer’s instructions.
Terminal nucleotidyl transferase–mediated nick end labeling assay.
Apoptosis in tumor sections was assessed with the use of the terminal
nucleotidyl transferase–mediated nick end labeling (TUNEL) assay (22). All
components for this procedure were from the ApopTag In situ Apoptosis
Detection kit (Chemicon), which was used according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. Hematoxylin was used for background staining.
Colony formation assay. Twenty-four hours after transfection with
small interfering RNA (siRNA), the cells were seeded into six-well plates at
200 cells per well. After complete cell adherence, the cells were exposed to
drug treatment for 48 h. Thereafter, the drug was removed, fresh growth
medium was added, and the cells were kept in culture undisturbed for 12 to
14 days, during which time the surviving cells spawned a colony of
proliferating cells. Colonies were visualized by staining for 4 h with 1%
methylene blue (in methanol) and then were counted.
Electron microscopy. Electron microscopy was done by the Doheny Eye
Institute Specialized Microscopy Core Facility at the University of Southern
California. Cells were spun down into a beam capsule with a clinical
centrifuge. Pelleted cells were fixed in 2% paraformaldehyde and 0.1%
glutaraldehyde in 0.1 mol/L phosphate buffer (pH, 7.4) at room temperature
for 1 h. The cell pellets were then postfixed with 1% osmium tetroxide for
2 h on ice and then rinsed thrice with distilled water. The fixed pellets
were dehydrated through an ethanol dilution series up to 100% ethanol and
then immersed in propylene oxide (PO) thrice for 2 min. Pellets were then
infiltrated in a 3:1 PO/Eponate resin mixture overnight. The pellets were

then embedded in 100% Eponate resin (Ted Pell Inc.) in beam capsules and
placed in a 60jC oven overnight. After hardening, tissue blocks were ultrathin sectioned at 75 nm thickness and placed on 300 mesh copper grids.
Grids were next counterstained with saturated uranyl acetate and lead
citrate and then analyzed on a Zeiss EM 10 electron microscope (Zeiss).
Transfections with siRNA. Cells were transfected in six-well plates with
the use of LipofectAMINE 2000 (Invitrogen) according to manufacturer’s
instructions. The different siRNAs were synthesized at the microchemical
core laboratory of the USC/K. Norris Jr. Comprehensive Cancer Center, and
their sequences were as follows; si-GFP (sense): 5¶-CAAGCUGACCCUGAAGUUCTT-3¶; (antisense): 5¶-GAACUUCAGGGUCAGCUUGTT-3¶; si-GRP78
(sense): 5¶-GGAGCGCAUUGAUACUAGATT-3¶; (antisense): 5¶-UCUAGUAUCAAUGCGCUCCTT-3¶; si-Caspase-4 (sense): 5¶-AAGUGGCCUCUUCACAGUCAUTT-3¶; (antisense): 5¶-AAAUGACUGUGAAGAGGCCACTT-3¶.
Cytoplasmic calcium imaging. The cells were loaded by incubating
them with 4 Amol/L Fura-2/AM (Invitrogen) for 30 min at room temperature
in external solution containing 138 mmol/L NaCl, 5.6 mmol/L KCl,
1.2 mmol/L MgCl2, 2.6 mmol/L CaCl2, 10 mmol/L HEPES, and 4 mmol/L
glucose (pH, 7.4). After loading, the cells were rinsed and transferred to the
imaging setup. The cells were treated with individual drugs for 10 s, whereas
fluorescence was elicited with the excitation wavelength alternating between
350 and 380 nm, using a Polychromator V (TILL Photonics GmbH) to
provide illumination via a Zeiss Axiovert 100 microscope with a Zeiss Fluar
40 oil objective (Carl Zeiss). Images were captured using a Cascade
512B CCD camera (Photometrics) controlled with MetaFluor software
(Molecular Devices) at 0.5 Hz acquisition frequency. Ratios of the images
obtained at 350 nm and 380 nm excitation were used to illustrate changes in
the cytoplasmic calcium concentration according to the principles
developed by Tsien (23).
Tumor growth in nude mice. Male athymic nu/nu mice 4 to 6 weeks
old were obtained from Harlan and implanted s.c. with 5  105 U87
glioblastoma cells as described in detail elsewhere (24). For the
determination of tumor growth during continuous drug treatment,
40 mg/kg nelfinavir was given via direct administration into the stomach

Figure 2. Knockdown of GRP78 enhances,
whereas knockdown of caspase-4 reduces,
cell killing by nelfinavir and atazanavir. U251
glioblastoma cells were transiently transfected
with siRNA directed at GRP78 (si-GRP78) or
caspase-4 (si-Casp 4). As a control, siRNA
targeted at green fluorescent protein (si-GFP)
was used. A, 48 h after transfection, parallel
cultures were treated with 15 Amol/L nelfinavir
and 25 Amol/L atazanavir in the case of
si-GRP78/si-GFP or with 30 Amol/L nelfinavir
and 50 Amol/L atazanavir in the case of si-Casp
4/si-GFP. In all instances, control cultures
received no drug treatment or treatment with
solvent (ethanol) alone. After 48 h of drug
treatment in the case of siGRP78 and 36 h in
the case of siCasp4, the drugs were removed,
and the fraction of surviving cells was
determined by colony-forming assays. Shown
is the percentage of surviving cells (where the
number of colonies under non–drug-treated
conditions was set to 100%). The P values
show statistically significant differences in
survival between cells receiving si-GRP78
and control siRNA (si-GFP ) and between
cells receiving si-Casp 4 and control siRNA,
respectively. B, to verify the effectiveness
of the siRNAs, Western blot analysis of
the respective target proteins was done.
Additionally, in the case of the caspase-4
knockdown, the effects on GRP78 and
CHOP protein levels were determined.
This experiment was done in parallel to
colony-forming assays, and the same
concentrations of drugs were used.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (22). November 15, 2007

10922

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Induction of ER Stress by Protease Inhibitors
with a stainless-steel ball-head feeding needle (Popper and Sons Inc.) in 25%
ethanol, and tumor growth was monitored and recorded as described (24).
For the examination of short-term in vivo effects of drugs on CHOP
expression, the animals received a daily dose (120 mg/kg) of the drug in the
same way. Ninety-six hours later, the animals were sacrificed, and the
tumors were harvested for analysis.

Results
To establish the effects of nelfinavir and atazanavir on malignant
glioma cells in vitro, we did conventional 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assays, which measured short-term growth and survival of the treated cell culture,
as well as colony-forming assays, which revealed the ability of
individual cells to survive and develop a new colony. We picked
three glioblastoma cell lines (U251, LN229, T98G) based on their
different genetic background. First, the cell lines were cultured in
96-well plates in the presence of nelfinavir and atazanavir for 48 h,
and cell proliferation was determined using MTT assay. Both drugs
inhibited cell growth in all cell lines in a concentration-dependent
manner (Fig. 1A). Although the sensitivity to these drugs differed
from cell line to cell line, the overall viability was significantly
decreased in all cell lines used. In addition, the inhibitory effects of
nelfinavir seemed to be more potent than those of atazanavir.
Second, colony-forming assays were done with U251 and LN229
cells. As shown in Fig. 1B, both drugs decreased cell survival, and
nelfinavir again was more effective than atazanavir.
Interestingly, we noted that the sensitivity of the various glioma
cells to protease inhibitors correlated with their sensitivity to the
model ER stress inducer thapsigargin.5 This observation prompted
us to investigate the effects of nelfinavir and atazanavir on the
expression of ER stress markers GRP78, CHOP, and caspase-4.
Glioma cell lines were cultured in the presence of nelfinavir and
atazanavir, and total cellular lysates were analyzed by Western blot
with antibodies to GRP78, CHOP, and caspase-4. As shown in
Fig. 1C, the treatment with nelfinavir and atazanavir strikingly
increased GRP78 and CHOP protein levels in a concentrationdependent manner in all cell lines. Additionally, both drugs caused
the activation of caspase-4, as indicated by the appearance of a
cleaved caspase-4 protein with lower molecular weight.
To determine whether the ESR was involved in cell death
induced by nelfinavir and atazanavir, we applied specific siRNAs to
knock down the expression of either GRP78 or caspase-4. Glioma
cells were transfected with siRNA and treated with the drug for
48 h, and the percentage of surviving cells was determined with
the use of the colony formation assay. When GRP78 levels where
reduced by siRNA, the cells became more sensitive, and there was
less cell survival (Fig. 2A). In the case of caspase-4 siRNA, the
opposite was observed: we found that the sensitivity of cells to drug
treatment was significantly reduced (Fig. 2A). In addition, specific
knockdown of the target was confirmed by Western blot analysis.
As shown in Fig. 2B, siRNA to GRP78 reduced GRP78 protein levels;
in the case of caspase-4, the specific siRNA not only reduced the
overall amount of this target protein, but also prevented the
appearance of the cleaved, i.e., activated, form of caspase-4.
Calcium homeostasis is an important function of the ER, and
calcium disturbances result in ER stress. Thapsigargin, a widely
used model inducer of ER stress, acts by inhibiting ER calcium

5

Unpublished data.

www.aacrjournals.org

ATPase activity, thereby causing an immediate spike in cytoplasmic
calcium levels (25). To determine whether protease inhibitors
would affect cytoplasmic calcium levels, we assessed the effect of
acute exposure to nelfinavir and atazanavir. For this purpose, U251
cells were loaded with Fura-2/AM, exposed to 50 Amol/L nelfinavir
or 100 Amol/L atazanavir, and the increase in cytoplasmic calcium
levels was measured. As shown in Fig. 3, cells treated with nelfinavir
and atazanavir did not display a rapid calcium spike, but rather
maintained steady calcium levels after exposure to the drugs. In
contrast, celecoxib, which is known to generate a rapid calcium
spike (26, 27), was used as a positive control and caused an
immediate cytoplasmic calcium spike (Fig. 3).
When tumor cells treated with nelfinavir or atazanavir were
observed under light microscopy, we noticed striking morphologic
changes (Fig. 4A). Following 24 h of treatment with either nelfinavir
or atazanavir (only nelfinavir shown), large cytoplasmic vacuolelike structures could be observed. To investigate this phenomenon
in greater detail, we applied transmission electron microscopy to
nelfinavir-treated cells. Once again, large cytoplasmic vesicles were
observed and were identified as grossly dilated, stressed ER. Similar
effects on the ER were previously described by Dorner et al. (28) in
Chinese hamster ovary cells, in which the synthesis of secreted
proteins was excessively increased. In addition to the enlargement

Figure 3. Nelfinavir and atazanavir do not affect cytoplasmic calcium levels
during short-term treatment. U251 glioblastoma cells were treated with 30 Amol/L
nelfinavir or 50 Amol/L atazanavir, and changes in cytoplasmic calcium levels
were recorded. Short-term treatment (up to 4 min) with protease inhibitors
revealed no increase in intracytoplasmic calcium levels. As a positive control,
cells were exposed to 100 Amol/L of celecoxib, which is known to generate a
rapid and prominent calcium spike (26). Shown are typical response curves
from several repeats. Arrows, beginning of drug treatment.

10923

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (22). November 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 4. Nelfinavir and atazanavir cause inhibition of
the proteasome. A, U251 glioblastoma cells were grown in
the presence of 50 Amol/L nelfinavir for 24 h and visualized
by light microscopy. Arrows, point to dilated ER cisternae.
B, U251 cells in the presence of 50 Amol/L nelfinavir for
24 h were visualized by transition electron microscopy.
Left, majority of the cell. Right, close-up on a part of the
cell that contains an aggresome (arrows and inset ).
C, U251 cells were cultured in the presence or absence of
50 Amol/L nelfinavir and 80 Amol/L atazanavir for 24 h.
Cellular lysates were prepared and subjected to Western
blot analysis with antibodies to ubiquitin. Actin antibody
was used as a loading control to verify equal amounts of
lysate in each lane.

of the ER, we detected that a majority of drug-treated cells
contained a structure consistent in appearance with an aggresome
(Fig. 4B). Aggresomes are presumed to consist of an aggregation
of ubiquitinated proteins due to the inhibition of proteasome
activity (29, 30). Therefore, to investigate if the accumulation of
polyubiquitinated proteins would occur during protease inhibitor
treatment, lysates of cells treated with nelfinavir and atazanavir
were subjected to Western blot analysis with antibody against
ubiquitin. A prominent increase of polyubiquitinated proteins of
various different sizes, represented by a smear on the blot, was
observed in drug-treated cells (Fig. 4C), indicating that proteasome
activity was indeed inhibited by these protease inhibitors.
A prominent feature of the ESR is a general, transient downregulation of overall protein synthesis, in combination with
selectively increased translation of ER stress proteins, such as
GRP78 (31, 32). We therefore investigated whether nelfinavir would
impair cellular translation by determining the incorporation of
35
S-methionine into newly translated proteins. As shown in Fig. 5A,
2 or 8 h of treatment with 30 Amol/L nelfinavir had very little effect
on the rate of translation as compared with thapsigargin or the
potent translational inhibitor cycloheximide, which both reduced
ongoing translation by f90% at 2 h. At 18 h, however, there was a
noticeable decrease in protein translation rate in cells treated with
nelfinavir; at 30 Amol/L, this reduction was 30% (Fig. 5A). Nelfinavir
at 50 Amol/L and atazanavir at 80 Amol/L inhibited protein
synthesis rate by >50% at 24 h (Fig. 5B). Interestingly, after 8, 18,
and 24 h of treatment with nelfinavir and 24-h treatment with
atazanavir, a prominent band with an apparent molecular weight
of 78 kDa became visible. Via immunoprecipitation, we identified
this band as GRP78 (Fig. 5C).
Thus far, our data indicated a model by which nelfinavir
inhibited the proteasome, leading to the gradual accumulation of

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (22). November 15, 2007

misfolded proteins, which caused ER stress and subsequent cell
death. To further confirm this model, we employed the protein
synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide, which would be expected to
prevent the accumulation of newly synthesized, misfolded proteins,
thereby averting the generation of ER stress. Toward this end, U251
glioma cells were treated with nelfinavir or atazanavir in the
absence or presence of cycloheximide. After 24 h, light micrographs
of all groups were taken. As shown in Fig. 5D, cell cultures treated
with nelfinavir or atazanavir alone displayed striking morphologic
changes in that the cells had lost most of their contact to the
substratum, which led to cellular rounding and partial to complete
detachment from the culture plate, consistent with the early phases
of cellular death. In stark contrast, the presence of cycloheximide
entirely prevented these drug-induced morphologic changes, and
the cells maintained the same morphology as untreated control
cells (Fig. 5D). We next investigated whether this obvious
protective effect of cycloheximide could also be observed at the
molecular level and, therefore, analyzed the amount of polyubiquitinated proteins and activation of caspase-4 by Western blot
analysis. Consistent with the results above, cycloheximide prevented the accumulation of polyubiquitinated proteins, as well as
the cleavage/activation of caspase-4, in nelfinavir- and atazanavirtreated cells (Fig. 5D).
Finally, in an effort to establish the antitumor effects of nelfinavir
on malignant cells in vivo and to determine whether ER stress
might be relevant in the in vivo setting as well, a xenograft nude
mouse tumor model was used. U-87 malignant glioma cells were
chosen because of their high in vivo tumorigenicity, and their
genetic profile (p53 wild type, PTEN mutant) is consistent with a
de novo glioblastoma (33–35). As shown in Fig. 6A, the daily
treatment of tumor-bearing animals with nelfinavir significantly
inhibited tumor growth during long-term (6 weeks) therapy. In

10924

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Induction of ER Stress by Protease Inhibitors

Figure 5. The role of protein synthesis in the action of PI. A, U251 cells were treated with 30 Amol/L of nelfinavir or 2.4 Amol/L thapsigargin (Tg ) for the times
indicated. As controls, cells remained untreated (Cntr) or were exposed to the potent protein synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide (CHX ). During the final 30 min of each
treatment condition, the culture medium was replaced with methionine-free growth medium supplemented with 35S-methionine (20 ACi/mL) in the continued presence
of the respective drug. Total cellular lysates were prepared, and equal amounts of each sample (30 AL) were separated by PAGE. Top, autoradiograph of the gel;
bottom, the same gel stained with Coomassie blue. An aliquot from each sample was used to determine protein concentration, as well as the amount of incorporated
35
S-methionine; the resulting magnitude of incorporated radioactivity per milligram of total protein is shown as counts per minute (cpm ), where the value from non–drugtreated cells at 2 h (Cntr ) was set to 100%. Arrowheads, point to a prominently 35S-labeled protein of 78 kDa. B, U251 cells were treated with 50 Amol/L of nelfinavir
and 80 Amol/L atazanavir for 24 h, and 35S-methionine incorporation was done as described in (A). C, the 78-kDa protein (arrowheads in A and B) was identified
as GRP78 by immunoprecipitation analysis. D, U251 glioblastoma cells were exposed to 50 Amol/L nelfinavir and 80 Amol/L atazanavir for 24 h in the absence or
presence of 50 Amol/L cycloheximide (CHX ). Light micrographs of the cells show changes in morphology (left ). Cellular lysates were prepared and subjected to Western
blot analysis with antibodies to ubiquitin and caspase-4 (casp-4 ; basal levels of caspase-4 and its cleaved fragment were scanned at different exposures; right ).
Actin antibody was used as a loading control to verify equal amounts of lysate in each lane.

addition, after short-term treatment (96 h) of tumor-bearing
animals with nelfinavir, highly elevated levels of the ER stress
indicator protein CHOP could be detected in the tumor tissue from
these animals; whereas non–drug-treated animals displayed only
barely detectable amounts of this protein (Fig. 6B). In addition, the
highly elevated amount of CHOP protein after nelfinavir treatment
correlated with significantly increased apoptosis in the tumor
tissue, whereas tumors from vehicle-treated animals did not
display elevated levels of apoptosis (Fig. 6B).

www.aacrjournals.org

Discussion
Despite growing interest in HIV-1 protease inhibitors (PI) as
anti-cancer drugs, the anticancer mechanism of action of this
group of chemical compounds is unknown. In our current study,
we show that the PIs nelfinavir and atazanavir induce glioma cell
death by triggering the ESR. In general, the main purpose of the
ESR is to alleviate specific disturbances, for instance, changes in the
ionic conditions of the ER or accumulation of misfolded proteins,
and restore proper homeostasis. Major components of this

10925

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (22). November 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

protective function are chaperone proteins, such as GRP78 (17).
However, if the insult is too severe and cannot be eliminated, the
ESR will initiate cell death via its proapoptotic components, which
include CHOP and caspase-4 (18, 19).
Recently, Gills et al. (36) have evaluated seven Food and Drug
Administration–approved HIV PIs (amprenavir, atazanavir, indinavir, lopinavir, nelfinavir, ritonavir, and saquinavir) against lung
cancer and found that nelfinavir was the most potent. Therefore,
we used nelfinavir as one of the first-generation and atazanavir as
one of the newer generation PIs, and we found that both of these
drugs potently triggered ESR. At the molecular level, this effect was
revealed by the robust induction of the ESR markers GRP78 and
CHOP and the activation of ESR-associated caspase-4 (Fig. 1). In
addition, both drugs caused dilated ER compartments (Fig. 4),
which is a typical morphologic feature of cells experiencing severe
ER stress (28).
Our siRNA experiments provided evidence that the induction of
ESR indeed plays a critical role in the anticancer activity of these
PIs. Specifically, knockdown of GRP78 (the protective component
of the ESR) enhanced cell death by nelfinavir and atazanavir,
whereas knockdown of caspase-4 (a proapoptotic component of
the ESR) significantly increased cell survival after treatment with

these drugs (Fig. 2). Both outcomes are consistent with the
prosurvival role of GRP78 and the proapoptotic role of caspase-4 in
the ESR and reveal a direct involvement of this process in PI action.
Similar siRNA-type approaches by other investigators have shown a
prominent role of the ESR in cell death induced by other categories
of drugs as well. For example, knockdown of GRP78 resulted in
decreased survival of gastric adenocarcinoma cells after treatment
with celecoxib, a cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor (37), and sensitized
breast cancer cells to etoposide-mediated cell death (38).
Conversely, knockdown of caspase-4 was shown to protect
pancreatic cancer cells from apoptosis induced by bortezomib,
a proteasome inhibitor that is clinically used in the therapy of
multiple myeloma (29).
Our investigation of protein translation rates showed a moderate
inhibition of overall protein synthesis after prolonged incubation of
cells with PIs, concomitant with selectively increased expression of
GRP78 (Fig. 5). Such differential effects are typical indicators of the
ESR, although the severity and timing of inhibition may vary
greatly depending on the insult. For example, shutdown of general
translation by thapsigargin, a potent inhibitor of ER calcium
pumps, is rapid and very efficient due to the immediate increase in
cytosolic calcium concentrations (ref. 39; see also Fig. 5). On the

Figure 6. Nelfinavir inhibits tumor growth and stimulates ESR
and apoptosis in tumor cells in vivo. A, nude mice were implanted
s.c. with U87 glioblastoma cells. Once palpable tumors had
formed, the animals received daily gavage with nelfinavir or the
same volume of solvent (25% ethanol; 40 mg/kg). Tumor size
was determined every 3 to 6 d. Points, mean tumor volume in
each group; bars, SE; n = 5. P values between control and
nelfinavir-treated animals on day 42 and 48 are indicated.
B, Nude mice were implanted s.c. with U87 glioblastoma cells.
Once tumors had reached a volume of 500 mm3, two animals
each received either nelfinavir or vehicle alone (25% ethanol)
for 96 h (120 mg/kg). Thereafter, all four animals were sacrificed,
and their tumors were analyzed by immunohistochemical staining
for CHOP protein as well as TUNEL assay for cell death/
apoptosis. Top, expression of CHOP protein. Small black
rectangles, enlarged areas of the same photograph shown
below in the middle. Bottom, cell death (arrows , examples of
TUNEL-positive, i.e., apoptotic, cells). In all cases, representative
sections are shown.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (22). November 15, 2007

10926

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Induction of ER Stress by Protease Inhibitors

other hand, bortezomib, which triggers ESR via the inhibition of
the proteasome, leads to a gradual buildup of misfolded protein
levels and, therefore, requires longer incubation times and affects
general translation rates only moderately (29). In comparison, we
find that the kinetics of translational inhibition by nelfinavir
resemble those of bortezomib and do not involve rapid changes in
cytoplasmic calcium (Fig. 3). This similarity is noteworthy in light
of our observation that treatment of glioblastoma cells with
nelfinavir and atazanavir results in the accumulation of polyubiquitinated proteins and aggresome formation (Fig. 4), which are
typical indicators of proteasome inhibition. Furthermore, reports
by others have shown that nelfinavir impairs proteasome function
in human hepatoma cells (40), and two further PIs, saquinavir and
ritonavir, were shown to inhibit proteasomal activity in prostate
carcinoma and thymoma cell lines (6, 10). Thus, our results provide
additional support for the emerging view that some, if not all, HIV1 PIs act as inhibitors of the proteasome. Furthermore, they suggest
that this function might participate in triggering ESR, in agreement
with several reports linking the inhibition of proteasomal activity
by bortezomib and other established proteasome inhibitors to
the accumulation of misfolded proteins and subsequent ESR
(29, 41, 42).
The above results are consistent with the following proposed model of PI antitumor action: PIs inhibit the proteasome,
which prevents the degradation of proteins; at the same time,
general protein synthesis continues to proceed, which results in
the accumulation of unfolded/misfolded proteins. This, in turn,
triggers ESR as the cell’s attempt to neutralize impending proteotoxicity. As part of this protective response, the ER chaperone
GRP78 is induced, and the rate of new protein synthesis is slowed.
However, because proteins cannot be degraded due to constant
inhibition of the proteasome in the continued presence of the
drug, the protective arm of the ESR eventually is overwhelmed,
and the balance is shifted toward its proapoptotic components
(CHOP and caspase-4), which initiate cell death. This order of
events is also supported by our finding that cycloheximide
efficiently blocks the induction of ESR by PIs, i.e., PI-induced
morphologic changes, accumulation of polyubiquitinated proteins,
and cleavage of caspase-4 do not take place in the presence of this
nondiscriminatory inhibitor of total protein synthesis (Fig. 5), quite
likely due to the cell’s inability to accumulate newly synthesized
unfolded/misfolded proteins under these conditions.
An important question resulting from our results was whether
the effects observed in vitro would also take place in vivo. Two of
our results indicate that the answer is yes. First, in our xenograft
tumor model, nelfinavir significantly inhibited U87 glioma growth
in vivo. Second, nelfinavir also caused robust induction of the ESR
indicator CHOP and apoptosis in tumors from these animals
(Fig. 6). Taken together, these results reveal that the antitumor and
ESR-inducing effects of nelfinavir are not restricted to in vitro
conditions, but also take place in the in vivo setting. Additionally,
our in vitro results show that the induction of ESR markers, as well
as the noticeable inhibition of glioblastoma cell proliferation, by

References
1. Perrin L, Telenti A. HIV treatment failure: testing for
HIV resistance in clinical practice. Science 1998;280:
1871–3.
2. Sgadari C, Barillari G, Toschi E, et al. HIV protease
inhibitors are potent anti-angiogenic molecules and

www.aacrjournals.org

nelfinavir can take place at concentrations of 6 Amol/L and below
(Fig. 1A and B). Such concentrations are known to be attainable
clinically (43, 44) and, therefore, open the prospect that antitumor
effects of nelfinavir might be achievable in cancer patients as well.
Cancer cells generally display elevated metabolic rates and
increased rates of protein synthesis. Because of this distinction,
the consequences of proteasome inhibition would be expected to
be more deleterious in cancer cells than in normal cells. A few
recent studies indeed seem to support this concept. For example, it
was shown that the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib induced
aggresome formation and apoptosis in pancreatic carcinoma cells,
but did not exert these effects in normal pancreatic epithelial cells
in vitro or in vivo (30). Similarly, the PI ritonavir potently
stimulated apoptosis in various tumor cell lines, whereas nontransformed cell lines and terminally differentiated bone marrow
macrophages were comparatively resistant to this effect (6).
The use of PIs in gliomas has a number of potential advantages
and disadvantages. PIs are small molecules that should cross the
blood-brain barrier (BBB) readily. They have already been shown
(albeit, indirectly) to have activity in the central nervous system
(CNS), as the number of HIV patients with CNS lymphomas has
decreased significantly since the initiation of HAART (2). Laurent
et al. have shown that ritonavir penetrated across the BBB and
achieved adequate concentrations in the CNS in an intracranial
glioma model (7). Yilmaz et al. (45) have measured cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF) levels of both nelfinavir and saquinavir, with better CSF
concentrations of nelfinavir, compared with saquinavir.
One major potential risk for PIs is the development of insulin
resistance with progression to type II diabetes (46, 47). In this
regard, it is interesting to note that several recent papers have
established ER stress as a key link between obesity, insulin
resistance, and type II diabetes (48, 49). In particular, it was shown
that obese mice experienced chronic ESR, which lead to insulin
resistance and type 2 diabetes, and these pathologic metabolic
consequences could be prevented by an orally active chemical
chaperone that alleviated ER stress in cells and whole animals
(48, 49) The development of insulin resistance may be problematic
in brain tumor patients who are often on systemic steroids. Many
of these patients may have their systemic blood sugar level
increased with the combination of Decadron and PIs; how
significant this elevation becomes will need to be determined.

Acknowledgments
Received 2/27/2007; revised 9/7/2007; accepted 9/14/2007.
Grant support: Accelerate Brain Cancer Cure (to T.C. Chen and A.H. Schönthal)
and from the Margaret E. Early Medical Research Trust (to A.H. Schönthal).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We are grateful to Frank B. Furnari and Webster K. Cavenee (Ludwig Institute for
Cancer Research, La Jolla, CA) for the glioblastoma cell lines. We thank Dr. Amy Lee
for the initial aliquots of caspase-4 antibody and siGRP78, as well as discussions about
ESR. We also thank the University of Southern California Glioma Research Group,
in particular Dr. Florence Hofman, for discussions and comments during the work on
this project.

promote regression of Kaposi sarcoma. Nat Med 2002;8:
225–32.
3. Esposito V, Palescandolo E, Spugnini EP, et al.
Evaluation of antitumoral properties of the protease
inhibitor indinavir in a murine model of hepatocarcinoma. Clin Cancer Res 2006;12:2634–9.
4. Yang Y, Ikezoe T, Takeuchi T, et al. HIV-1 protease

10927

inhibitor induces growth arrest and apoptosis of human
prostate cancer LNCaP cells in vitro and in vivo in
conjunction with blockade of androgen receptor STAT3
and AKT signaling. Cancer Sci 2005;96:425–33.
5. Ikezoe T, Saito T, Bandobashi K, Yang Y, Koeffler HP,
Taguchi H. HIV-1 protease inhibitor induces growth
arrest and apoptosis of human multiple myeloma cells

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (22). November 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research
via inactivation of signal transducer and activator of
transcription 3 and extracellular signal-regulated kinase
1/2. Mol Cancer Ther 2004;3:473–9.
6. Gaedicke S, Firat-Geier E, Constantiniu O, et al.
Antitumor effect of the human immunodeficiency virus
protease inhibitor ritonavir: induction of tumor-cell
apoptosis associated with perturbation of proteasomal
proteolysis. Cancer Res 2002;62:6901–8.
7. Laurent N, de Bouard S, Guillamo JS, et al. Effects of
the proteasome inhibitor ritonavir on glioma growth
in vitro and in vivo . Mol Cancer Ther 2004;3:129–36.
8. Ikezoe T, Daar ES, Hisatake J, Taguchi H, Koeffler HP.
HIV-1 protease inhibitors decrease proliferation and
induce differentiation of human myelocytic leukemia
cells. Blood 2000;96:3553–9.
9. Ikezoe T, Hisatake Y, Takeuchi T, et al. HIV-1 protease
inhibitor, ritonavir: a potent inhibitor of CYP3A4,
enhanced the anticancer effects of docetaxel in
androgen-independent prostate cancer cells in vitro
and in vivo . Cancer Res 2004;64:7426–31.
10. Pajonk F, Himmelsbach J, Riess K, Sommer A,
McBride WH. The human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV)-1 protease inhibitor saquinavir inhibits proteasome function and causes apoptosis and radiosensitization in non–HIV-associated human cancer cells. Cancer
Res 2002;62:5230–5.
11. Pore N, Gupta AK, Cerniglia GJ, Maity A. HIV protease
inhibitors decrease VEGF/HIF-1a expression and angiogenesis in glioblastoma cells. Neoplasia 2006;8:889–95.
12. Jiang W, Mikochik PJ, Ra JH, et al. HIV protease
inhibitor nelfinavir inhibits growth of human melanoma
cells by induction of cell cycle arrest. Cancer Res 2007;
67:1221–7.
13. Gupta AK, Cerniglia GJ, Mick R, McKenna WG,
Muschel RJ. HIV protease inhibitors block Akt signaling
and radiosensitize tumor cells both in vitro and in vivo .
Cancer Res 2005;65:8256–65.
14. Pati S, Pelser CB, Dufraine J, Bryant JL, Reitz MS, Jr.,
Weichold FF. Antitumorigenic effects of HIV protease
inhibitor ritonavir: inhibition of Kaposi sarcoma. Blood
2002;99:3771–9.
15. Boyce M, Yuan J. Cellular response to endoplasmic
reticulum stress: a matter of life or death. Cell Death
Differ 2006;13:363–73.
16. Wu J, Kaufman RJ. From acute ER stress to
physiological roles of the unfolded protein response.
Cell Death Differ 2006;13:374–84.
17. Li J, Lee AS. Stress induction of GRP78/BiP and its
role in cancer. Curr Mol Med 2006;6:45–54.
18. Hitomi J, Katayama T, Eguchi Y, et al. Involvement of
caspase-4 in endoplasmic reticulum stress-induced
apoptosis and Abeta-induced cell death. J Cell Biol
2004;165:347–56.
19. Oyadomari S, Mori M. Roles of CHOP/GADD153 in
endoplasmic reticulum stress. Cell Death Differ 2004;11:
381–9.
20. Harlow E, Lane D. Using antibodies: a laboratory
manual. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 1999. p. 267–309.

21. Abramoff MD, Magalhaes PJ, Ram SJ. Image processing with ImageJ. Biophotonics Int 2004;11:36–42.
22. Heatwole VM. TUNEL assay for apoptotic cells.
Methods Mol Biol 1999;115:141–8.
23. Grynkiewicz G, Poenie M, Tsien RY. A new generation of Ca2+ indicators with greatly improved fluorescence properties. J Biol Chem 1985;260:3440–50.
24. Pyrko P, Soriano N, Kardosh A, et al. Downregulation
of survivin expression and concomitant induction of
apoptosis by celecoxib and its non-cyclooxygenase-2inhibitory analog, dimethyl-celecoxib (DMC), in tumor
cells in vitro and in vivo . Mol Cancer 2006;5:19.
25. Gallego-Sandin S, Novalbos J, Rosado A, et al.
Albumin prevents mitochondrial depolarization and
apoptosis elicited by endoplasmic reticulum calcium
depletion of neuroblastoma cells. Eur J Pharmacol 2005;
520:1–11.
26. Johnson AJ, Hsu AL, Lin HP, Song X, Chen CS. The
cyclo-oxygenase-2 inhibitor celecoxib perturbs intracellular calcium by inhibiting endoplasmic reticulum Ca2+ATPases: a plausible link with its anti-tumour effect and
cardiovascular risks. Biochem J 2002;366:831–7.
27. Pyrko P, Kardosh A, Liu Y-T, et al. Calcium-activated
ER stress as a major component of tumor cell death
induced by 2,5-dimethyl-celecoxib (DMC), a non-coxib
analog of celecoxib. Mol Cancer Ther 2007;6:1262–75.
28. Dorner AJ, Wasley LC, Kaufman RJ. Increased
synthesis of secreted proteins induces expression of
glucose-regulated proteins in butyrate-treated Chinese
hamster ovary cells. J Biol Chem 1989;264:20602–7.
29. Nawrocki ST, Carew JS, Dunner K, Jr., et al.
Bortezomib inhibits PKR-like endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) kinase and induces apoptosis via ER stress in
human pancreatic cancer cells. Cancer Res 2005;65:
11510–9.
30. Nawrocki ST, Carew JS, Pino MS, et al. Aggresome
disruption: a novel strategy to enhance bortezomibinduced apoptosis in pancreatic cancer cells. Cancer Res
2006;66:3773–81.
31. Luo S, Baumeister P, Yang S, Abcouwer SF, Lee AS.
Induction of Grp78/BiP by translational block: activation of the Grp78 promoter by ATF4 through and
upstream ATF/CRE site independent of the endoplasmic reticulum stress elements. J Biol Chem 2003;278:
37375–85.
32. Ma Y, Hendershot LM. The role of the unfolded
protein response in tumour development: friend or foe?
Nat Rev Cancer 2004;4:966–77.
33. Van Meir EG, Kikuchi T, Tada M, et al. Analysis of the
p53 gene and its expression in human glioblastoma
cells. Cancer Res 1994;54:649–52.
34. Furnari FB, Lin H, Huang HS, Cavenee WK. Growth
suppression of glioma cells by PTEN requires a
functional phosphatase catalytic domain. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 1997;94:12479–84.
35. Chen TC, Apuzzo MLJ. Malignant progression in
gliomas. Park Ridge: American Association of Neurological Surgeons; 1995. p. 181–9.
36. Gills J, Lopiccolo J, Abu-Asab MS, Shoemaker R,

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (22). November 15, 2007

10928

Borojerdi J, Dennis PA. HIV protease inhibitors as cancer
therapeutics: is off-the-shelf right on target? AACR
Meeting Abstracts 2006.
37. Tsutsumi S, Namba T, Tanaka KI, et al. Celecoxib
upregulates endoplasmic reticulum chaperones that
inhibit celecoxib-induced apoptosis in human gastric
cells. Oncogene 2006;25:1018–29.
38. Dong D, Ko B, Baumeister P, et al. Vascular targeting
and antiangiogenesis agents induce drug resistance
effector GRP78 within the tumor microenvironment.
Cancer Res 2005;65:5785–91.
39. Wong WL, Brostrom MA, Kuznetsov G, GmitterYellen D, Brostrom CO. Inhibition of protein synthesis
and early protein processing by thapsigargin in cultured
cells. Biochem J 1993;289:71–9.
40. Hamel FG, Fawcett J, Tsui BT, Bennett RG, Duckworth
WC. Effect of nelfinavir on insulin metabolism, proteasome activity and protein degradation in HepG2 cells.
Diabetes Obesity and Metabolism 2006;8:661–8.
41. Lee AH, Iwakoshi NN, Anderson KC, Glimcher LH.
Proteasome inhibitors disrupt the unfolded protein
response in myeloma cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
2003;100:9946–51.
42. Fribley A, Wang CY. Proteasome inhibitor induces
apoptosis through induction of endoplasmic reticulum
stress. Cancer Biol Ther 2006;5:745–8.
43. Smith PF, Robbins GK, Shafer RW, et al. Pharmacokinetics of nelfinavir and efavirenz in antiretroviralnaive, human immunodeficiency virus-infected subjects
when administered alone or in combination with
nucleoside analog reverse transcriptase inhibitors.
Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2005;49:3558–61.
44. Regazzi M, Maserati R, Villani P, et al. Clinical
pharmacokinetics of nelfinavir and its metabolite M8 in
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-positive and HIVhepatitis C virus–coinfected subjects. Antimicrob
Agents Chemother 2005;49:643–9.
45. Yilmaz A, Fuchs D, Hagberg L, et al. Cerebrospinal
fluid HIV-1 RNA, intrathecal immunoactivation, and
drug concentrations after treatment with a combination
of saquinavir, nelfinavir, and two nucleoside analogues:
the M61022 study. BMC Infect Dis 2006;6:63.
46. Nolan D. Metabolic complications associated with
HIV protease inhibitor therapy. Drugs 2003;63:2555–74.
47. Rudich A, Ben-Romano R, Etzion S, Bashan N.
Cellular mechanisms of insulin resistance, lipodystrophy
and atherosclerosis induced by HIV protease inhibitors.
Acta Physiol Scand 2005;183:75–88.
48. Ozcan U, Cao Q, Yilmaz E, et al. Endoplasmic
reticulum stress links obesity, insulin action, and type
2 diabetes. Science 2004;306:457–61.
49. Ozcan U, Yilmaz E, Ozcan L, et al. Chemical
chaperones reduce ER stress and restore glucose
homeostasis in a mouse model of type 2 diabetes.
Science 2006;313:1137–40.
50. Kardosh A, Soriano N, Liu YT, et al. Multitarget
inhibition of drug-resistant multiple myeloma cell lines
by dimethyl-celecoxib (DMC), a non–COX-2 inhibitory
analog of celecoxib. Blood 2005;106:4330–8.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

HIV-1 Protease Inhibitors Nelfinavir and Atazanavir Induce
Malignant Glioma Death by Triggering Endoplasmic
Reticulum Stress
Peter Pyrko, Adel Kardosh, Weijun Wang, et al.
Cancer Res 2007;67:10920-10928.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/22/10920

This article cites 47 articles, 28 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/22/10920.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 9 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/22/10920.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

