Original Article

Innovations and Challenges in Renal
Cancer: Summary Statement From
the Third Cambridge Conference*
Michael B. Atkins, MD1, Ronald M. Bukowski, MD2, Bernard J. Escudier, MD3, Robert A. Figlin, MD4,
Gary H. Hudes, MD5, William G. Kaelin, Jr, MD6, W. Marston Linehan, MD7, David F. McDermott, MD1,
James W. Mier, MD1, Ivan Pedrosa, MD1, Brian I. Rini, MD2, Sabina Signoretti, MD8,
Jeffrey A. Sosman, MD9, Bin Tean Teh, MD10, Christopher G. Wood, MD11, Amado J. Zurita, MD11,
and Laura King12

The Third Cambridge Conference on Innovations and Challenges in Renal Cancer, a symposium held in
Cambridge, Massachusetts, June 27-28, 2008, and chaired by Michael B. Atkins, was convened to discuss
the current state of knowledge in the field, critique new data, stimulate communication among those
involved in basic and clinical research, and offer recommendations for further study. Four main topics were
discussed: genetics and molecular biology of renal cell cancer, staging and prognosis, systemic therapy,
and correlative science and biomarkers in stage IV disease. The conference format combined brief presentations with extended periods of discussion. The conclusions and recommendations are summarized in this
paper and presented in more detail in the individual papers that follow. Cancer 2009;115(10 suppl):2247–
C 2009 American Cancer Society.
51. V
KEY WORDS: renal cancer, genetics, vascular endothelial growth factor, immunotherapy, biomarkers.

In 2008, an estimated 54,390 new cases of renal cell cancer (RCC) were diagnosed in the United States,
and 13,010 people died of this disease.1 Patients with organ-confined disease whose cancer is detected and
treated early have 5-year survival rates approaching 85%.2 However, in patients with metastatic disease
and those who experience relapse after curative nephrectomy, the expected 5-year survival rate is only
approximately 10%.2 Renal cancer is made up of several different types of cancer, each of which responds
differently to treatment. However, 3 potentially distinct targets and related therapeutic approaches are currently available: vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) (antiangiogenic therapy), mammalian target of

Corresponding author: Michael B. Atkins, MD, 300 Brookline Avenue, Boston, MA 02215; matkins@bidmc.harvard.edu
1
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts; 2The Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Taussig Cancer Institute, Cleveland, Ohio; 3Institut
Gustave Roussy, Unite Immunotherapie, Villejuif, France; 4City of Hope Comprehensive Cancer Center, Duarte, California; 5Fox Chase Cancer Center,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; 6Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston, Massachusetts; 7National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland; 8Brigham and
Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts; 9Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, Nashville, Tennessee; 10Van Andel Research Institute, Grand Rapids,
Michigan; 11M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas; 12InforMEDical Communications Inc, Carlisle, Massachusetts

This educational proceedings publication is based on a symposium held on June 27-28, 2008, in Cambridge, Massachusetts.
*Innovations and Challenges in Renal Cancer: Proceedings of the Third Cambridge Conference, Supplement to Cancer
Received: October 9, 2008; Accepted: November 12, 2008
C 2009 American Cancer Society
Published online: April 30, 2009 V

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.24229, www.interscience.wiley.com

Cancer

May 15, 2009

2247

Original Article

rapamycin (mTOR) (targeted therapy), and immunotherapy. Additional research is urgently needed into optimal
ways of using these treatment strategies, identification of
new therapeutic targets, and identification of patients
most likely to benefit from each particular treatment.

Genetics and Molecular Biology
Our genetic and clinical experience suggests that there is a
significant opportunity to develop potential therapeutic
agents that target the metabolic defects in renal cell cancers. Identification of the MET, BHD, FH, and VHL
genes in renal cancer has enabled the development of targeted approaches to treat both hereditary and sporadic renal cancer. Early studies of the MET, BHD, and FH genes
have provided a basis for potential therapies for hereditary
papillary RCC, noninherited papillary RCC, BHD-associated kidney cancer, hereditary leiomyomatosis, RCCassociated kidney cancer, and nonfamilial type 2 papillary
kidney cancer.3 Antiangiogenic agents, such as sorafenib,
sunitinib, and bevacizumab, that target the downstream
effects of VHL loss and hypoxia inhibitory factor (HIF)
up-regulation, have shown remarkable, albeit still less
than desired, benefit in the treatment of patients with
clear cell kidney cancer.4-6 We are continuing to identify
HIF-dependent and -independent functions of the VHL
protein that contribute to kidney cancer and genes that
when mutated cooperate with VHL loss to cause kidney
cancer. In addition, we are trying to identify unique
vulnerabilities that are created in cells that lack the VHL
protein that might lend themselves to therapeutic
approaches. Some of these pathways might include the
phosphoinositide-3 kinase (PI3K)/Akt/mTOR pathway,
which is the target of mTOR inhibitors such as temsirolimus and everolimus, and the c-met pathway, which may
either cooperate with VHL loss or be active by itself in
inducing RCC growth.7

Staging and Prognosis
Although many different clinical factors have been studied
as potential prognostic factors in RCC, the ability of these
factors to serve as independent predictors of prognosis is
difficult to assess because of variations in definitions, coding, and populations studied. Gene expression profiling
has revealed both VHL-HIF–related and non–VHL2248

HIF–related prognostic factors and differences in the vasculature between low-grade and high-grade tumors.8 In
addition, it is necessary to refine prognostic models using
updated clinical criteria and biomarkers. Current studies
are attempting to identify RCC-specific biomarkers that
can improve early diagnosis, tumor progression surveillance, and prediction of patient prognosis. Yet, the development of robust tissue-based biomarkers that can be
used in the clinical setting requires a standardization of
various procedures involved in the process. This standardization has to be developed for all 3 major phases of tissue
biomarker studies: 1) the preanalytical phase, which
includes the collection, processing, and storage of the tissue; 2) the analytical phase, during which the tissue is analyzed in the laboratory; and 3) the postanalytical phase,
during which interpretation of results and data analysis
are performed.

Systemic Therapy
Renal cell carcinoma evokes an immune response that can
result in significant disease remission. Various immunotherapeutic strategies have been studied in an attempt to
reproduce or accentuate this response. The most consistent antitumor activity has been reported with interferon a
and interleukin-2. Previous studies have revealed that the
more effective agent, in terms of response rate and
response quality, is high-dose intravenous bolus interleukin-2.9,10 Future studies on the immune system are
needed to help us identify predictors of response (or resistance) and to allow ready identification of patients with
metastatic kidney cancer most likely to have a durable
response to immunotherapy.
Currently, the most active agents for treating RCC
are VEGF pathway-targeting antiangiogenic agents,
which have been shown to significantly delay disease progression and likely extend survival of patients with kidney
cancer. Studies of agents that bind circulating VEGF protein (eg, bevacizumab) and of small molecule inhibitors of
the receptor to which the VEGF ligand binds (eg, sunitinib, sorafenib, axitinib, and pazopanib) have produced
significant clinical effects, including high objective
response rates, prolonged progression-free survival, and
long overall survival.11-15 Future studies need to investigate combination and sequential therapy, mechanisms of
Cancer

May 15, 2009

Summary Statement/Atkins et al

response and resistance, and the effect of these agents in
other disease settings.
Another potential therapy currently being explored
in RCC is PI3K/Akt/mTOR-targeted therapy. Temsirolimus has been shown to improve overall survival in
patients with advanced RCC and poor prognostic features
compared with interferon.16 Everolimus improves progression-free survival in patients in whom sunitinib and/
or sorafenib therapy has ceased to be effective.17 Although
these findings are encouraging, the mechanisms of the
action of PI3K/Akt/mTOR-targeted therapy are incompletely understood. For example, it is unclear to what
extent the therapeutic benefit is mediated by antiangiogenic effects, perhaps via diminished HIF production,
versus direct effects on cell proliferation mediated by
mTOR inhibition. In addition, questions surround the
potential impact of the loss of feedback inhibition of insulin receptor substate/PI3K signaling resulting from the inhibition of mTOR complex 1 by rapamycin analogs and
the activating phosphorylation of Akt by mTOR complex
2. The modest activity of rapamycin analogs in RCC suggests there are additional opportunities for targeting the
PI3K Akt pathway, but further research is necessary.
Because of the promising results seen with the single
agents discussed above, sequential therapy has become the
de facto standard of care in patients with RCC. Although
sequential therapy undoubtedly has contributed to the
apparent improvement in median overall survival now
reported in most RCC studies, little formal testing of specific sequences or strategies has taken place to date. Much
work is needed to help determine the most effective
sequence of drugs in select patient populations. Regarding
patient selection issues, future studies are also needed to
help identify which patients are most likely to respond to
the currently available therapies. Such studies will most
likely include not only investigation of clinical features
and blood- and tissue-based biomarkers, but also sophisticated functional imaging studies.
There has also been a considerable effort placed on
developing combination regimens. To date, combination
studies have produced mixed results. Although combinations of different treatment strategies have been reasonably well tolerated (mTOR þ VEGF pathway inhibition
or VEGF pathway inhibition þ immunotherapy), it
remains to be established whether such combinations are
more effective than the compontent single agents given in
Cancer

May 15, 2009

sequence or even the more effective agent in the combination, administered alone. Furthermore, attempts to block
the VEGF pathway at multiple levels (with bevacizumab
and a VEGF receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor) have produced toxic effects, perhaps indicating that we are nearing
the limit of therapeutic benefit that can be achieved
through inhibiting VEGF-mediated angiogenesis in kidney cancer.

Correlative Science and Biomarkers
Because of the strides made in developing targeted therapies for RCC, several unmet needs must be addressed to
advance the science. Accurate histologic subtyping of
tumors has become even more important as we attempt to
determine how best to administer these therapies. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) provides an opportunity
to accurately characterize the histologic subtype of RCC
noninvasively and to provide surrogate markers associated
with the biologic features of RCC. Two types of MRI
techniques that have been studied for their ability to
determine histologic tumor subtype and to assess tumor
vascularization and perfusion are dynamic contrast–
enhanced (DCE) MRI and arterial spin labeling (ASL)
MRI. DCE MRI allows the identification of distinct patterns of enhancement among the different histologic
subtypes,18 but is limited in clinical trials by its poor
standardization across different vendors and the lack of
direct quantification of tumor perfusion. ASL MRI has
shown promise in its ability to accurately assess the
effects of antiangiogenic therapy on tumor perfusion,
but the clinical significance and general applicability of
these findings needs to be established in larger studies
using current therapies.19
Additional validation is also needed in the area of
blood-based biomarkers for RCC. Biomarkers such as circulating proangiogenic factors and receptors, markers of
hypoxia and endothelial damage, and cellular populations
in peripheral blood, such as circulating endothelial cells,
have achieved some success in identifying which patients
are most likely to respond to treatment or experience toxic
effects, in aiding the selection of optimal doses, and in
determining whether the intended molecular target has
been effectively inhibited. Sophisticated technologies to
fully understand the activity of various treatment
2249

Original Article

approaches and to measure the extent of target inhibition
are being developed.
Along with how and to whom these new targeted
therapies should be administered is the question of when
to administer therapy. Presurgical or neoadjuvant therapy
is a novel approach to the treatment of metastatic and
locally advanced renal cancer. Initial results suggest that it
is safe and not associated with untoward morbidity or
mortality, but future studies are necessary to determine
the utility of this approach.

Future Directions
Although recent progress in the treatment of patients with
advanced RCC is impressive, there is still considerable
need for further advances. Combination and sequential
therapies are attractive treatment approaches, but still
need to be pursued carefully with regard to acute and
chronic toxicity and to determine their relative benefit.
Treatment with the VEGF receptor antagonists appears
to induce a number of alternative factors that influence
growth, tumor invasiveness, and angiogenesis. It may be
possible to improve the efficacy of these therapies by inhibition of these compensatory mechanisms that promote
tumor survival in the setting of VEGF pathway blockade.
Novel agents are also in development for the treatment of
RCC, including second-generation VEGF receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (eg, axitinib, pazopanib), c-met
inhibitors (eg, XL880), Akt inhibitors (eg, perifosine),
angiopoietin/Tie-2 inhibitors (eg, AMG 386), monoclonal antibodies (VEGF-Trap), and immunostimulatory
agents (CTLA4 and TroVax). However, the effective use
of these novel agents requires continued understanding of
the biology of RCC. Novel trial designs of combination,
sequential, and new agents will be required to establish
the impact of these approaches on patient outcome.

Conclusion
This conference provided the opportunity for leading
experts in the fields of cancer research, medical oncology,
urology, immunology, radiology, and immunotherapy to
discuss and prioritize research topics in renal cancer. Table
1 lists the top 5 research priorities identified by the
authors in order of importance. The first priority is to
examine the mechanisms of acquired VEGF receptor re2250

Table 1. Top 5 Research Priorities in Order of Importance

Research Priorities
Mechanisms of acquired vascular endothelial growth factor receptor
resistance
New targets (particularly those within the tumor)
Predictive and surrogate biomarkers
Combination vs sequential therapy
Mechanisms of response

sistance, which will most likely involve the study of key
signaling pathways used by RCC cells to adjust to the loss
of VEGF signaling. The second priority is to identify new
targets (particularly those within the tumor) and then test
inhibitors of those targets in defined patient populations
to ensure a fair assessment. The third priority is to identify
predictive and surrogate biomarkers, which will help
select patients for particular therapies and provide early
information on treatment efficacy. The fourth priority is
to explore combination versus sequential therapy with an
eye toward determining the most beneficial approach for
renal cancer patients. Finally, mechanisms of response
need to be explored, with a particular emphasis on how
that might lead to the development of more effective
agents and more rational treatment sequencing.

Conflict of Interest Disclosures
The program was made possible by educational grants provided
by Genentech, Novartis Pharmaceuticals, Pfizer, Inc., and Wyeth
Pharmaceuticals. Program management and CME sponsorship
were provided by InforMEDical Communications, Inc., Carlisle,
Massachusetts.
This research was supported in part by the Intramural Research
Program of the National Institutes of Health, National Cancer
Institute, Center for Cancer Research.
Michael B. Atkins has served as a consultant for Antigenics,
Aveo, Bayer, Bristol Myers Squibb, Genetech, Novartis, Onyx,
and Wyeth and has received research funding from Bayer and
Novartis.
Ronald M. Bukowski has served as a consultant for Bayer, Genetech, Novartis, Pfizer, and Wyeth, has received research funding
from Bayer and Pfizer, and is a member of the Speakers’ Bureau
for Bayer, Genetech, Pfizer, and Wyeth.
Bernard Escudier has received honoraria from Bayer, Hoffman
LaRoche, Genentech, GlaxoSmithKline, Novartis, and Wyeth.
Robert A. Figlin has served as a consultant for Keryx, Pfizer,
and Wyeth, and has received research funding from Amgen,
GlaxoSmithKline, Pfizer, and Wyeth.

Cancer

May 15, 2009

Summary Statement/Atkins et al

ments in VHL/ cancer cells detected in a pilot synthetic
lethal screen. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008;105:1648416489.

Gary H. Hudes has served as a consultant for Genentech, Pfizer,
and Wyeth and has received honoraria from Pfizer and Wyeth.
William G. Kaelin, Jr is a member of the Advisory Board for
Arqule, has served as a consultant for FibroGen, Genzyme,
Norvartis, and Schering-Plough, and has equity in Arqule and
FibroGen.

8.

Sabo E, Boltenko A, Sova Y, Stein A, Kleinhaus S, Resnick
MB. Microscopic analysis and significance of vascular architectural complexity in renal cell carcinoma. Clin Cancer Res.
2001;7:533-537.

9.

Fisher RI, Rosenberg SA, Fyfe G. Long-term survival update
for high-dose recombinant interleukin-2 in patients with renal cell carcinoma. Cancer J Sci Am. 2000;6:S55-S57.

W. Marston Linehan has nothing to disclose.
David F. McDermott is a member of Advisory Boards for
Bayer/Onyx, Genentech, Novartis, and Wyeth, has received
research funding from Genentech and Novartis, and is a member of the Speakers’ Bureau for Novartis and Wyeth.
James W. Mier has nothing to disclose.
Ivan Pedrosa has nothing to disclose.
Brian I. Rini has served as a consultant and received research
funding from Bayer, Genetech, Pfizer, and Wyeth.
Sabina Signoretti has nothing to disclose.
Jeffrey A. Sosman has served as a consultant for Genetech and
Wyeth, and has received honoraria and research funding from
Bayer/Onyx, Genetech, and Wyeth.
Bin Tean Teh has nothing to disclose.
Christopher G. Wood has served as a consultant for Bayer/
Onyx, has served as a consultant and received honoraria from
Antigenics, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Ethicon, and Pfizer, and is a
member of the Speaker’s Bureau for Bayer/Onyx and Pfizer.
Amado J. Zurita has nothing to disclose.
Laura King has nothing to disclose.

References
1.

National Cancer Institute. Kidney Cancer Home Page.
Available at: http://www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/types/kidney
Accessed August 21, 2008.

2.

Motzer RJ, Bander NH, Nanus DM. Renal cell carcinoma.
N Engl J Med. 1996;335:865-875.

3.

Linehan WM, Pinto PA, Srinivasan R, et al. Identification of
the genes for kidney cancer: opportunity for disease-specific
targeted therapeutics. Clin Cancer Res. 2007;13:671S-679S.

4.

Motzer RJ, Rini BI, Bukowski RM, et al. Sunitinib in
patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma. JAMA.
2006;295:2516-2524.

5.

Escudier B, Eisen T, Stadler WM, et al. Sorafenib in
advanced clear-cell renal-cell carcinoma. N Engl J Med.
2007;356:125-134.

6.

Hudes G, Carducci M, Tomczak P, et al. Temsirolimus,
interferon alfa, or both for advanced renal-cell carcinoma.
N Engl J Med. 2007;356:2271-2281.

7.

Bommi-Reddy A, Almeciga I, Sawyer J, et al. Kinase
requirements in human cells: III. Altered kinase require-

Cancer

May 15, 2009

10. Rosenberg SA, Yang JC, White DE, et al. Durability of
complete responses in patients with metastatic cancer
treated with high-dose interleukin-2: identification of the
antigens mediating response. Ann Surg. 1998;228:307-319.
11. Yang JC, Haworth L, Sherry RM, et al. A randomized trial
of bevacizumab, an anti-vascular endothelial growth factor
antibody, for metastatic renal cancer. N Engl J Med.
2003;349:427-434.
12. Motzer RJ, Rini BI, Bukowski RM, et al. Sunitinib in
patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma. JAMA.
2006;295:2516-2524.
13. Escudier B, Eisen T, Stadler WM, et al. Sorafenib in
advanced clear-cell renal-cell carcinoma. N Engl J Med.
2007;356:125-134.
14. Rini BI, Wilding GT, Hudes GR, et al. Axitinib in patients
with metastatic renal cell cancer refractory to sorafenib.
J Clin Oncol. 2007;25(18 suppl):5032.
15. Hutson TE, Davis ID, Machiels JH, et al. Biomarker analysis and final efficacy and safety results of a phase II renal
cell carcinoma trial with pazopanib (GW786034), a multikinase angiogenesis inhibitor [abstract]. J Clin Oncol.
2008;26(suppl). Abstract 5046.
16. Hudes G, Carducci M, Tomczak P, et al. Temsirolimus,
interferon-a, or both in advanced renal-cell carcinoma.
N Engl J Med. 2007;356:2271-2281.
17. Motzer RJ, Escudier B, Oudard S, et al. RAD001 versus
placebo in patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma
after progression on VEGFr-TKI therapy: results of a
randomized, double blind, multicenter phase III study
[abstract]. J Clin Oncol. 2008;26(pt II,suppl 18):1009S.
Abstract LBA5026.
18. Sun ME, Ngo L, Genega EM, et al. Dynamic contrast
enhancement of renal cell carcinoma using a clinical MR
protocol: correlation with pathology. Radiology. 2009;250:
793-802.
19. de Bazelaire C, Alsop DC, George D, et al. MRI measured
tumor blood flow change following antiangiogenic therapy
with PTK787/ZK 222584 (PTK/ZK) correlates with clinical outcome in metastatic renal cell carcinoma. Clin Cancer
Res. 2008;14:5548-5554.

2251

