Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 27

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Androgen receptor splice variants circumvent AR blockade by
microtubule-targeting agents
Guanyi Zhang1,2,6, Xichun Liu2,6, Jianzhuo Li1,2,6, Elisa Ledet4,5,6, Xavier Alvarez7,
Yanfeng Qi3,6, Xueqi Fu1, Oliver Sartor4,5,6, Yan Dong1,3,6, Haitao Zhang2,6
1

College of Life Sciences, Jilin University, Changchun, P.R. China

2

Department of Pathology, Tulane University School of Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA

3

Department of Structural and Cellular Biology, Tulane University School of Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA

4

Department of Medicine, Tulane University School of Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA

5

Department of Urology, Tulane University School of Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA

6

Tulane Cancer Center, Tulane University School of Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA

7

Division of Comparative Pathology, Tulane National Primate Research Center, Covington, Louisiana, USA

Correspondence to:
Haitao Zhang, e-mail: hzhang@tulane.edu
Keywords: androgen receptor, splice variants, prostate cancer, taxane chemotherapy, microtubule
Received: April 24, 2015 	Accepted: June 09, 2015 	Published: June 22, 2015

ABSTRACT
Docetaxel-based chemotherapy is established as a first-line treatment and
standard of care for patients with metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer.
However, half of the patients do not respond to treatment and those do respond
eventually become refractory. A better understanding of the resistance mechanisms to
taxane chemotherapy is both urgent and clinical significant, as taxanes (docetaxel and
cabazitaxel) are being used in various clinical settings. Sustained signaling through
the androgen receptor (AR) has been established as a hallmark of CRPC. Recently,
splicing variants of AR (AR-Vs) that lack the ligand-binding domain (LBD) have been
identified. These variants are constitutively active and drive prostate cancer growth in
a castration-resistant manner. In taxane-resistant cell lines, we found the expression
of a major variant, AR-V7, was upregulated. Furthermore, ectopic expression of two
clinically relevant AR-Vs (AR-V7 and ARV567es), but not the full-length AR (AR-FL),
reduced the sensitivities to taxanes in LNCaP cells. Treatment with taxanes inhibited
the transcriptional activity of AR-FL, but not those of AR-Vs. This could be explained,
at least in part, due to the inability of taxanes to block the nuclear translocation
of AR-Vs. Through a series of deletion constructs, the microtubule-binding activity
was mapped to the LBD of AR. Finally, taxane-induced cytoplasm sequestration of
AR-FL was alleviated when AR-Vs were present. These findings provide evidence that
constitutively active AR-Vs maintain the AR signaling axis by evading the inhibitory
effects of microtubule-targeting agents, suggesting that these AR-Vs play a role in
resistance to taxane chemotherapy.

androgens for binding to AR [1], is the first-line treatment
for metastatic and locally advanced prostate cancer.
While this regimen is effective initially, progression to the
presently incurable and lethal stage, termed castrationresistant prostate cancer (CRPC), invariably occurs. In
2004, docetaxel-based chemotherapy is established as a
first-line treatment and standard of care for patients with
metastatic CRPC [2]. However, about half of the patients

INTRODUCTION
Prostate cancer is the most common non-skin cancer
and the second leading cause of cancer mortality in men
in the United States. Androgen deprivation therapy, which
disrupts androgen receptor (AR) signaling by reducing
androgen levels through surgical or chemical castration,
or by administration of anti-androgens that compete with
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23358

Oncotarget

RESULTS

do not respond to treatment and those do respond become
refractory within one year. Several new treatments,
including the new taxane cabazitaxel [3], the CYP17A1
inhibitor abiraterone [4], and the potent antiandrogen
enzalutamide [5], have received FDA approval as
second-line treatments for metastatic CRPC in recent
years. However, the survival benefits are relatively small
(< = 5 months) and patients eventually become refractory
to treatments. Therefore, breakthroughs in the treatment
of prostate cancer hinge upon better understandings of the
mechanisms of therapeutic resistance of CRPC.
Paclitaxel, docetaxel, and cabazitaxel belong to
the taxane family of chemotherapeutic agents. Taxanes
bind to the microtubules and prevent their disassembly,
thereby suppressing microtubule dynamics, leading to
mitotic arrest and apoptosis [6]. This was believed to be
the mechanism of action of taxanes in prostate cancer
until recently when it was demonstrated by several groups
that taxanes in fact inhibit the AR signaling pathway in
prostate cancer. Taxanes have been shown to block the
nuclear translocation of AR and inhibit the expression
of AR-regulated genes [7, 8]. Additionally, Gan et al.
showed that taxanes inhibit the transcriptional activity
of AR by inducing FOXO1, a transcriptional repressor
of AR [9]. It is well-established that CRPC cells remain
addicted to AR signaling; therefore, the inhibitory effect
on AR, rather than the antimitotic activity, could possibly
be the predominant mechanism of action for taxanes in
prostate cancer.
Sustained signaling through AR has been
established as a hallmark of CRPC. Recently, alternative
splicing variants of AR (AR-Vs) that lack the ligandbinding domain (LBD) have been identified [10–13].
These splice variants remain transcriptionally active
in the absence of androgens and drive prostate cancer
growth in a castration-resistant manner. In addition,
these variants are reported to be prevalently upregulated
in CRPC compared to hormone-naïve prostate cancer
[10–13]. AR-Vs can regulate the expression of canonical
androgen-responsive genes, as well as a unique set of
target genes [12, 14]. In a significant portion of metastatic
CRPC tissues, the variants proteins are expressed at a
level comparable to that of the canonical, full-length AR
(AR-FL) [15, 16]. Patients with high expression of two
major AR-Vs, AR-V7 (also known as AR3) and ARv567es,
have shorter cancer-specific survival than other CRPC
patients [15]. In addition, recent studies have provided
strong support for a critical role of these AR-Vs in
resistance to hormonal therapies, including enzalutamide
and abiraterone [17–20].
Recently, laboratory and clinical studies have
suggested the existence of a cross-resistance mechanism
between taxane-based chemotherapy and second-line
hormonal therapies [21–25]. In this study, we set out
to test the potential roles of AR-Vs in modulating the
response to taxane-based chemotherapy.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Taxane-resistant prostate cancer cell lines
express higher levels of AR-V7
We first established taxane-resistant 22Rv1 and
LNCaP95 lines by culturing cells in escalating doses of
paclitaxel and docetaxel over a period of 2 months. The
response to taxanes were determined by the MTT assay
(Fig. 1, A–C). Western blotting analyses showed that the
expression of AR-FL was reduced, whereas the expression
of AR-V7 was robustly induced, in the 22Rv1 resistant
lines in comparison with the passage-matched parental line
(Fig. 1D). A similar, albeit less pronounced, induction of
AR-V7 was observed in the LNCaP95 docetaxel-resistant
line (Fig. 1E). These results suggest that the constitutive
active AR-V7 was selectively up-regulated in taxaneresistant prostate cancer cells.

Expression of constitutively active AR-Vs
impairs the cytotoxicity of taxanes
To directly test the roles of constitutively active
AR-Vs in resistance to taxanes, we transfected AR-V7
and ARv567es into the AR-V-null LNCaP cells, and measured
the responses to taxanes. As shown in Fig. 2A, cell
viability after docetaxel treatment was markedly higher
in cells expressing AR-V7 or ARv567es, but not in those
overexpressing AR-FL, than in vector-transfected cells.
Similar observations were made with paclitaxel and
cabazitaxel (Supplementary Figure S1). In LNCaP95
cells, when the expression of AR-V7 was silenced by
a V7-specific shRNA, cells became more sensitive to
docetaxal and cabazitaxel (Fig. 2B). Taken together, these
results suggest the expression of constitutively active
AR-Vs negatively impacts the efficacies of taxanes in
prostate cancer cells.

Transcriptional activities of the constitutively
active AR-Vs are refractory to the taxanes
To understand the difference between AR-V7/ARv567es
and the AR-FL in cytoprotection against the taxanes,
we investigated the influence of taxane treatment on the
transactivation activities of these AR isoforms. COS-7,
which does not express any AR proteins, was chosen in
this experiment to avoid interference from the endogenous
AR. As shown in Fig. 3, treatment with docetaxel or
paclitaxel dose-dependently inhibited the ligand-dependent
transcriptional activity of AR-FL, but neither drug was able
to inhibit the constitutive activities of AR-V7 and ARv567es.
This disparity can’t be attributed to the down-regulation of
AR-FL expression, as all AR proteins were not affected by
the treatments (Supplementary Figure S2). These results
suggest that the transcriptional activities of the AR variants
are refractory to the inhibitory effects of taxanes.
23359

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Upregulation of AR-V7 in taxane-resistant prostate cancer cells. A. and B. 22Rv1 with acquired resistance to taxanes

were established by culturing in escalating doses of docetaxel (DTX) or paclitaxel (PTX). MTT assays were performed in passage-matched
22Rv1 or 22Rv1 resistant cells to determine the responses to taxanes. C. The response of DTX-resistant LNCaP95 to docetaxel treatment.
D. and E. Western blotting using an anti-N terminal antibody or an AR-V7-specific antibody in 22Rv1 (D) or LNCaP95 (E) resistant cells.
Rv1/LN95, passage-matched parental line; DR, docetaxel-resistant; PR, paclitaxel-resistant. The P values were determined by the Student’s
t-tests, ** denotes P < 0.01. The results presented are mean ± SEM from three experiments.

Figure 2: Expression of constitutively active AR-Vs negatively impact the cytotoxicities of taxanes. A. LNCaP cells were

transfected with vector, AR-FL, AR-V7, or ARv567es, and cell viability was determined by the MTT assay after 48 h of treatment with
docetaxel. Western analysis was performed with an antibody recognizes the N-terminus of AR. The P values were determined by the
Student’s t-tests. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01 vs vector. B. LNCaP95 cells were cultured in an androgen-depleted condition, and transfected with
a control or an AR-V7-specific shRNA. **P < 0.01. CTX, cabazitaxel. The results presented are mean ± SEM.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23360

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Transcriptional activities of constitutively active AR-Vs are refractory to taxane treatment. COS-7 cells were
transfected with the ARR3-luc reporter plasmid along with a plasmid encoding AR-FL, AR-V7, or ARv567es. The luciferase reporter assay
was performed after 24 h treatment. The P values were determined by the Student’s t-tests. **P < 0.01 vs untreated. Doses: DTX, 1 and
2.5 nM; PTX, 2.5 and 5 nM. The results presented are mean ± SEM from three experiments.

Nuclear imports of constitutively active AR-Vs
are microtubule-independent

peptidomimetic inhibitor of Src family of kinases, but
also inhibits tubulin polymerization [26], and nocodazole
causes microtubule disassembly [27]. Once again, these
drugs inhibited the nuclear import of AR-FL, but not that
of AR-V7 or ARv567es (Fig. 4B). Collectively, these results
suggest the nuclear translocation of AR-V7 or ARv567es are
not mediated by the microtubules.

Next, we investigated the influence of the taxanes
on nuclear translocation of AR-V7 and ARv567es, as these
agents have been shown to block that of AR-FL [7, 8].
Enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP)-tagged
AR-FL and AR-V7 were expressed in COS-7 cells and
the localization of the fusion proteins was analyzed
by fluorescence microscopy. Unlike EGFP-AR-FL,
which required androgen stimulation for nuclear import,
EGFP-AR-V7 spontaneously translocated to the nucleus
(Supplementary Figure S3). When docetaxel and paclitaxel
were added to the culture medium following androgen
stimulation, accumulation of AR-FL in the cytoplasm
was observed after 24 h of treatment (Supplementary
Figure S3). However, treatment with the taxanes had no
effect on the subcellular distribution of AR-V7.
To validate the results above, we performed
fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP)
assays in COS-7 cells expressing fluorescence-tagged AR
proteins. Following treatment with docetaxel, selected
nuclei were photobleached and the cells were imaged
at regular intervals. Nuclear translocation is indicated
by recovery of the nuclear to cytoplasmic fluorescence
ratio (Fn/c). As indicated by the confocal images (Fig.
4A) and the fractional recovery plots (Fig. 4B), nuclear
import of AR-FL was greatly deterred by docetaxel. In
contrast, the nuclear translocations of AR-V7 and ARv567es
were not affected by docetaxel, evidenced by similar Fn/c
recovery curves in control and treated cells (Fig. 4B). To
substantiate these findings, we performed FRAP assays
with additional microtubule inhibitors. KX-01 is a novel
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

AR associates with the microtubules through
the LBD
Proteins that use the microtubule pathway for
nuclear import are known to bind to the microtubules
[28, 29]. To test whether AR binds to the microtubules, we
conducted in vivo microtubule-binding assays in COS-7
cells ectopically expressing AR. Under the condition in
which the microtubules were stabilized, the majority of
AR-FL co-precipitated with the microtubules and was
found in the pellet (Fig. 5). Importin β was used as a
negative control as previously described [29], and p53,
which is known to be a microtubule-binding protein [30],
was used as the positive control. The microtubule-binding
activity was quantitated by the pellet to supernatant
(P/S) ratio [29]. In contrast, when nocodazole, CaCl2, or
low temperature was employed to disrupt microtubule
integrity, AR-FL shifted from the pellet to the supernatant,
leading to marked decreases of the P/S ratios. These results
suggest the AR-FL is a microtubule-associated protein.
To map the region responsible for microtubulebinding on AR, we generated a series of deletion
constructs encompassing different domains of AR
(Fig. 6, left panel). These constructs were analyzed
by the microtubule binding assay. As shown in
23361

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Nuclear imports of constitutively active AR-Vs are microtubule-independent. FRAP assays were performed in

COS-7 cells expressing different fluorescence-tagged AR proteins. Cells transfected with EGFP-AR-FL were cultured in the presence of
androgen. Cells were treated with 20 nM docetaxel for 2 h before photobleaching. A. Confocal images taken at different intervals after
photobleaching of the nuclei. White and yellow arrows indicate the nucleus and the cytoplasm, respectively. B. Recovery plot of the
nuclear:cytoplamic fluorescence ratio (Fn/c) over time in cells treated with different microtubule inhibitors. Fn/c ratios are expressed as
fractions of the pre-photobleach Fn/c. Nocodazole (NCZ) was used at 5 μg/ml and KX-01 was at 100 nM. FRAP images for NCZ and
KX-01 are in Supplementary Figure S4.

Supplementary Figure S4A and Figure 6 (right panel),
all constructs lacking the LBD have poor microtubulebinding activities. In contrast, those retaining the
LBD have similar binding activities as that of AR-FL
(Supplementary Figure S4B and Figure 6). These results
indicate that microtubule association is mediated by the
LBD. Consistent with this finding, we found that the
LBD-truncated AR-V7 and ARv567es both bind poorly to
the microtubules (Fig. 7).

ARv567es-TurboFP635, the inhibitory effect of docetaxel
was significantly attenuated (Fig. 8A & 8B).
To further understand how AR-Vs circumvent
docetaxel-mediated cytoplasmic sequestration of AR-FL,
we conducted the microtubule-binding assay in COS-7
cells co-transfected with AR-FL and an AR-V. As shown
in Fig. 8C, the binding of AR-FL to the microtubules was
markedly reduced when it was co-expressed with AR-V7
or ARv567es. Taken together, these results suggest that the
constitutively active AR-V7 or ARv567es could divert AR
away from the microtubules, and facilitate its nuclear
translocation in a microtubule-independent manner.

AR-Vs interfere with docetaxel-mediated AR-FL
cytoplasmic retention
It has been previously shown that both AR-V7 and
ARv567es facilitate AR-FL nuclear translocation in the
absence of androgen [13, 19]. To investigate whether
AR-Vs mitigate the inhibitory effect of AR-FL nuclear
translocation by docetaxel, we expressed EGFP-ARFL with or without TurboFP635-tagged AR-V7 or
ARv567es in the AR-null COS-7 cells. When co-expressed
with TurboFP635, EGFP-AR-FL was retained in the
cytoplasm following docetaxel treatment (Fig. 8A).
However, in the presence of AR-V7-TurboFP635 or
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Nuclear import of AR-Vs is blocked by an
importin β inhibitor
As an initial attempt to elucidate the nuclear
translocation mechanisms of AR-V7 and ARv567es,
we investigated the involvement of the importin α/β
machinery. FRAP assay was conducted in COS-7
transfected with EGFP-AR-V7 and treated with
importazole, a specific inhibitor of importin β [31] . As
shown by Fig. 9A & 9B, treatment with importazole
23362

Oncotarget

Figure 5: The full-length AR associates with the microtubules. COS-7 cells were transfected with an expression vector for

AR-FL and in vivo microtubule binding assay was performed with a commercial kit (Cytoskeleton, BK038). Nocodazole (NCZ), CaCl2, and
low temperature (cold) were used to disrupt microtubule integrity. Assembled microtubules were precipitated by ultracentrifugation and the
pellet was resuspended and analyzed by Western blot (Top). Importin β and p53 were used as negative and positive controls, respectively,
and histone H3 was used to detect nuclear contamination. P, pellet; W, wash; S, supernatant. Bottom, the microtubule-binding activities for
AR and p53 were quantitated by the P/S ratios. The results presented are mean ± SEM from three experiments.

Figure 6: Microtubule-binding activity is mapped to the ligand-binding domain of AR. Left panel, a series of deletion

constructs encompassing different domains of AR were generated and expressed in COS-7 cells. Right panel, the microtubule-binding
activities of these constructs were analyzed by the in vivo microtubule binding assay and the Western blots (Supplementary Figure S5) were
quantitated to calculate the P/S ratios. The results presented are mean ± SEM from three experiments. MT, microtubule.

significantly reduced the recovery of AR-V7 in the
nucleus. Consistently, AR-V7 was found to accumu­
late in the cytoplasm following importazole treatment
(Fig. 9C). FRAP assay showed a similar inhibition by

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

importazole on the nuclear recovery of TurboFP635tagged ARv567es (Fig. 9D & 9E), suggesting that both
variants are imported to the nucleus by the importin α/β
machinery.

23363

Oncotarget

Figure 7: Poor microtubule-binding activities of the AR-Vs. COS-7 cells were transfected with an expression vector for AR-FL,

AR-V7, and ARv567es and cultured in an androgen-deprived condition. A. In vivo MT-binding assays. B. quantitation of the results in A. The results
presented are mean ± SEM from three experiments. C. Western blot showing that the proteins were expressed at similar levels after transfection.

Figure 8: Cytoplasmic sequestration of AR-FL by docetaxel is attenuated by AR-V7 and ARv567es. A. Confocal fluorescence

microscopy of EGFP-AR-FL subcellular localization when it was expressed with TurboFP or with a TurboFP-tagged AR-V in COS-7 cells.
B. Based on distribution of the green fluorescence signal, cells were categorized into cytoplasmic (N < C), or nuclear and equally nuclear
and cytoplasmic (N ≥ C).% of cells in each category were quantified. DRAQ5 was used to stain the nuclei. Cells cultured in an androgendeprived condition were pre-treated with 10 nM docetaxel for 6 hr, followed by treatment with 1 nM R1881 for 4 hr. ** and ## P < 0.01.
(continued)

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23364

Oncotarget

Figure 8: C. (Continued) In vivo MT-binding assay in COS-7 cells expressing AR-FL alone, or with AR-V7 or ARv567es.

DISCUSSION

Our study represents a step forward in this
direction. Herein, we present evidence that expression of
constitutively active AR-Vs, but not over-expression of
the canonical full-length receptor, protects prostate cancer
cells from the cytotoxic effects of taxanes. We further
show that taxane treatment selectively inhibits androgeninduced nuclear translocation and transactivation activity
of AR-FL, while exerting no such inhibitory effects on
the AR-Vs. These results reveal a fundamental difference
in the nuclear translocation mechanisms of AR-FL and
AR-Vs. AR-FL, as shown by this and other studies,
utilizes a microtubule-facilitated pathway for nuclear
translocation. This trafficking mechanism is shared by
several nuclear proteins including glucocorticoid receptor
(GR), p53, Rb, and parathyroid hormone-related protein
(PTHrP) [29]. On the other hand, the nuclear import of
AR-V7 and ARv567es is not mediated by the microtubule
pathway. The independence of the microtubule pathway
enables the variants to evade taxane-induced cytoplasmic
retention. Finally, we show that sequestration of AR-FL
in the cytoplasm by taxanes is alleviated when AR-V7 or
ARv567es is present. This is likely caused by AR-V steering
AR-FL away from the microtubules, as shown by reduced
binding to the microtubules when AR-Vs are co-expressed.
As an initial attempt to unveil the nuclear translocation
mechanisms of the AR-Vs, we found that nuclear import
of AR-V7 and ARv567es is possibly mediated by the importin
α/β machinery. Elucidation of the upstream events will
likely lead to opportunities to design novel strategies to
target this variant.
The clinical relevance of AR-Vs has been
demonstrated by a myriad of studies. Higher expression
of AR-V7 in hormone-naïve prostate tumors predicts
increased risk of biochemical recurrence following radical

To date, docetaxel and cabazitaxel are the only
chemotherapeutic agents that have been shown to offer
survival benefits for patients with mCRPC. Even in
today’s rapidly evolving landscape of treatment options for
mCRPC, taxane-based chemotherapy continues to be an
important component of the treatment regimens. Recently,
a randomized phase III trial supports the expansion of
the indications of taxanes to earlier disease stages. The
CHARRTED trial demonstrated that the addition of
docetaxel to ADT in patients with high-volume, metastatic,
hormonal-sensitive disease improves overall survival by
17 months (49.2 vs 32.2, P = 0.0013) than ADT alone [32].
With taxane chemotherapy projected to remain a mainstay
in the treatment of prostate cancer, it is imperative to derive
a better understanding of the mechanisms underlying the
inherent and acquired taxane resistances, both of which are
commonly observed in the clinic.
Resistance to taxanes could be multifactorial,
involving general mechanisms of chemoresistance as
well as mechanisms intrinsic to prostate cancer [33].
Existing literature focuses primarily on mechanisms
common to many cancer types, including unfavorable
tumor microenvironment, expression of drug efflux
proteins, alterations in microtubule structure and/
or function, expression of anti-apoptotic and
cytoprotective proteins [34]. However, mechanisms
that are specific to prostate cancer remain poorly
understood. Recent clinical observations provided
evidence for a cross-resistance of CRPC to hormonal
therapy and taxane-based chemotherapy [21–25],
suggesting a common culprit may underlie such a crossresistance phenotype.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23365

Oncotarget

Figure 9: Nuclear translocation of AR-Vs is importin β-dependent. A. FRAP assays were performed in COS-7 cells expressing

EGFP-tagged AR-V7. Cells were treated with DMSO or 50 μM importazole (IPZ) for 2 h before photobleaching. Confocal images taken
at different intervals after photobleaching of the nuclei. Red and yellow arrows indicate nucleus and cytoplasm, respectively. B. Fn/c
recovery plot for EGFP-AR-V7. C. COS-7 cells transfected with pEGFP-AR-V7 were treated with DMSO or 10 μM importazole for 48 h.
DAPI was used for staining the nuclei. D. & E. confocal images (D) and Fn/c recovery plot (E) of FRAP assays in COS-7 cells expressing
TurboFP635-tagged ARv567es and treated with IPZ.

prostatectomy [11, 12], and patients with high levels of
expression of AR-V7 or detectable expression of ARv567es
have a significantly shorter survival than other CRPC
patients [15], indicating an association between AR-Vs
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

expression and a more lethal form of prostate cancer. Studies
have indicated that AR-Vs play important roles in resistance
to androgen-directed therapies [17–19]. Particularly, a recent
groundbreaking study by Antonarakis et al. showed that
23366

Oncotarget

patients positive for AR-V7 expression in circulating tumor
cells have significantly worse responses to enzalutamide or
abiraterone than AR-V7-negative patients [20].
While the roles of AR-Vs are well recognized in
resistance to hormonal therapies, evidence has just started
to accumulate to support their involvement in resistance
to taxane chemotherapy. Thadani-Mulero and colleagues
are the first to show evidence supporting a role of ARV7 in resistance to taxane chemotherapy [35]. In addition,
the study by Martin et al. [36] showed that in cells
harboring AR-Vs, targeting the AR N-terminal domain of
with a small molecule inhibitor enhances the therapeutic
response to docetaxel [36]. A clinical study by Steinestel
et al. showed expression of AR-V7 in circulating cancer
cells significantly correlates with prior treatment with
docetaxel [37]. Very recently, a clinical study presented at
the American Society of Clinical Oncology Genitourinary
Cancers Symposium investigated the responses to
taxane chemotherapy in mCRPC patients with different
AR-V7 status in circulating tumor cells [38]. Although
all the clinical outcomes are worse in patients in the
AR-V7(+) arm, the differences are not statistically
significant [38]. The insignificant differences could result
from the small sample size or due to a “threshold effect” of
AR-V7. In other words, the influence of AR-V7 on taxane
response may be manifested only when it is expressed
above a certain level. Hence, the association of AR-Vs
and sensitivity to taxane chemotherapy warrants further
investigation in a larger cohort.
The main disparity between our study and that
of Thadani-Mulero et al. [35] is on whether ARv567es is
inhibited by the taxanes. In contrast to the data present
herein, Thadani-Mulero and colleagues showed that
ARv567es associates with the microtubules and that the
nuclear translocation of ARv567es is inhibited by taxanes. In
addition, the microtubule-binding activity is mapped to the
DNA-binding and hinge domains of AR [35]. One possible
explanation for these discrepancies is the use of different
assays. Thadani-Mulero et al. performed in vitro assays in
which cell lysates containing AR proteins tagged by GFP
or hemagglutinin were incubated with purified tubulin in a
cell-free system to allow microtubule polymerization and
association. In contrast, we conducted in vivo microtubulebinding assays in which the microtubules and associated
proteins were extracted from cells expressing untagged
AR isoforms. Another major difference between the two
studies is the dosage of taxanes. Docetaxel was applied
at a concentration of 1 μM in the cell culture studies
by Thadani-Mulero et al., in contrast to the clinically
attainable [39] nanomolar concentrations used in our
studies. We demonstrated that treatment with taxanes,
at the low nanomolar concentrations, fail to inhibit the
transcriptional activity or nuclear import of ARv567es.
The canonical AR nuclear localization signal
(NLS) is located in the hinge domain, encoded by exons
3 and 4. Sequence analysis predicted that this NLS is
truncated in AR-V7. However, the study by Chan et al.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

demonstrated that splicing of exon 3 with cryptic exon
3 in AR-V7 reconstitutes this bipartite NLS, which
mediates the nuclear import of AR-V7 [40]. In addition,
expression of a dominant negative mutant of Ran protein
(RanQ69L) which causes premature dissociation of the
importin/cargo complex, reduced nuclear localization of
AR-V7 and ARv567es. These findings are consistent with
our importazole data, suggesting that the nuclear import of
the AR-Vs is mediated by the importin α/β pathway. They
also found that unlike AR-FL, the nuclear localization
of AR-V7 and ARv567es is not affected by an inhibitor for
heat shock protein 90. Together, this study and our data
present herein suggest a fundamental difference between
AR-FL and AR-Vs in the events upstream of importin α/βmediated nuclear entry.
In summary, our study provides support for the
involvement of AR-V7 and ARv567es in attenuating the
response to taxane-based chemotherapy. Mechanistically,
we demonstrated that both variants translocate to
the nucleus in a microtubule-independent manner.
Additionally, these variants can reduce the microtubulebinding activity of AR-FL, thus circumventing its
cytoplasm sequestration triggered by taxanes. These
findings have important clinical implications. The
expression status of these AR variants could potentially
be used as a biomarker to aid treatment selection and
sequencing. More importantly, targeting AR-Vs could be
a fruitful direction to pursue to enhance the efficacy of
taxane chemotherapy. To this end, several small molecule
inhibitors at various stages of clinical development have
shown promises against AR-Vs [41–43], opening doors
for novel therapeutic strategies.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell lines and reagents
LNCaP, 22Rv1, and COS-7 cells were obtained from
American Type Culture Collection. With the exception of
drug-resistant lines, cells used in this study were within
20 passages (~3 months of non-continuous culturing). All
cell lines were tested and authenticated by the method
of short tandem repeat profiling. Docetaxel, cabazitaxel,
and paclitaxel were purchased from Selleck Chemicals
(Houston, TX). Nocodazole was from Sigma Aldrich,
and KX-01 was provided by Kinex Pharmaceuticals. The
following antibodies were used in Western blot analysis:
anti-GAPDH, anti-AR (N-terminus-directed, PG-21;
Millipore), anti-importin β1, anti-β-actin (Santa Cruz),
anti-p53 (Calbiochem), anti-histone H3 (Cell Signaling),
and anti-AR-V7 (Precision Antibody).

Selection of taxane resistant cell lines
22Rv1 cells were initially treated with 10
nM paclitaxel for 72 hours and the surviving cells
were re-seeded and allowed to recover for 1 week.
23367

Oncotarget

Paclitaxel-resistant cells were developed over a period
of 2 months by stepwise increasing concentrations of
paclitaxel (5–50 nM). Age-matched parental cells which
did not receive treatments were maintained in parallel.
Docetaxel-resistant 22Rv1 and LNCaP95 lines were
generated in a similar manner, but with different doses of
docetaxel (5 nM initially, 2.5–20 nM for selection). The
resistant cells were continuously maintained in the highest
concentration of the taxane in which they selected.

cultured in phenol red-free RPMI-1640 supplemented with
10% cs-FBS. At 40 hr after transfection, cells were pretreated with or without 10 nM docetaxel for 6 hr, followed
by treatment with or without 1 nM R1881 for 4 hr. COS-7
cells were subsequently fixed with 2% paraformaldehyde,
and the nuclei were stained with 2.5 μM DRAQ5 (Cell
Signaling). Confocal images were obtained by using a
Leica TCS SP2 system with a 63X oil-immersion objective
on a Z-stage, and an average of 6 fields with ~10 cells per
field were captured for each group. Data quantitation was
performed as described [44].

Western blotting
Cells were washed with ice-cold phosphate-buffered
saline (PBS) and lysed with 2X Cell Lysis Buffer (Cell
Signaling) containing a phosphatase inhibitor and the
protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma). After incubating
the cells on ice for 30 min, lysates were collected by
centrifugation at 10, 000 rpm for 10 minutes. Protein
concentrations were determined by the BCA Protein Assay
kit (Pierce). The samples were separated on 10% SDSpolyacrylamide gels and transferred onto polyvinylidene
fluoride (PVDF) membranes. After blocking in TBS
buffer (150 mM NaCl, 10 mM Tris, pH 7.4) containing
5% nonfat milk, the blots were incubated with a primary
antibody overnight at 4°C and a fluorescent-labeled
secondary antibody for 1 h at room temperature. The
fluorescent signals were obtained by the Odyssey Infrared
Imaging System (LI-COR Bioscience).

Fluorescence recovery after photobleaching
(FRAP) assay
FRAP assay was performed using a Leica TCS
SP2 microscope equipped with 20X, 40X and 63X oil
immersion lenses (Nikon) in combination with a heated
stage (Delta T Open Dish System, Bioptechs), as described
by Roth et al. [45] with modifications. Briefly, three
images were obtained before photobleaching using 10%
of total laser power with excitation at 488 nm, scanning
at a rate of 8 μs/pixel. Photobleaching was performed
by scanning an area covering the entire nucleus 10 times
at a rate of 12.5 μs/pixel, applying 100% of the laser
power. After bleaching, the recovery of fluorescence was
monitored by scanning the cells at 1 minute intervals for
up to 2 hours, using detector and laser settings identical to
those prior to photobleaching. Image analysis was carried
out by using the NIH Image J Software to quantitate the
nuclear (Fn) and cytoplasmic (Fc) fluorescence signals.
The ratios of Fn to Fc (Fn/c) were calculated and the
extent of recovery was determined by fractional recovery
of Fn/c, which is the Fn/c at each time point divided by
the prebleach Fn/c. The data were fitted exponentially to
generate the fractional recovery plot.

Transient transfection and reporter gene assay
COS-7 cells were seeded in 10-cm dishes at
a density to reach 80–90% confluency at time of
transfection. Transient transfection was performed by
using the Lipofectamine and Plus reagents following
the manufacturer’s instructions (Invitrogen). Cells
were co-transfected with ARR3-luc luciferase reporter
contruct and pRL-TK, along with a plasmid encoding
for AR-FL, AR-V7 or ARv567es. After incubating with
the transfection mixture for 4 h, cells were re-plated
in RPMI 1640 containing 10% charcoal-stripped fetal
bovine serum (cs-FBS). Cells were allowed to recover
overnight before treated with DTX (1 and 2.5 nM) or
PTX (2.5 or 5 nM) in the presence or absence of 10
nM DHT. Dual-luciferase assay was performed at 24 h
post treatment using the Dual-luciferase Reporter Assay
System (Promega). The renilla luciferase activity was
used to normalize that of firefly luciferase.

In vivo microtubule binding assay
The AR deletion constructs were generated by
inserting PCR products of the corresponding cDNA
regions into the pcDNA3.1(-) vector. The resulting
plasmids were sequenced to confirm sequence accuracy
and in-frame reading. COS-7 cells were transfected with
indicated plasmids and cultured in RPMI 1640 medium
supplemented with 10% cs-FBS. Microtubule-binding
assay was performed by using the Microtubule/Tubulin
In Vivo Assay Kit (Cytoskeleton Inc., Cat.# BK038)
following the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, 3 × 106
cells were lysed in 4 mL pre-warmed (37°C) Lysis and
Microtubule Stabilization 2 (LMS2) buffer (100 mM
PIPES, pH 6.9, 5 mM MgCl2, 1mM EGTA, 30% (v/v)
glycerol, 0.1% Nonidet P40, 0.1% Triton X-100, 0.1%
Tween 20, 0.1% β-mercaptoethanol, 0.001% Antifoam,
100 μM GTP, 1 mM ATP, 1 × protease inhibitors cocktail)
in a 10-cm cell culture dish. The lysates were collected

Confocal fluorescence microscopy
Subcellular localization of AR proteins was analyzed
by confocal fluorescence microscopy. The pTurboFP635AR-V7 and pTurboFP635-ARv567es plasmids were
generated by cloning the cDNA fragments for AR-V7 and
ARv567es, respectively, into the pCMV-TurboFP635 vector.
COS-7 cells were transfected with indicated plasmids and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23368

Oncotarget

and spun at 2,000 g for 10 min at 37°C to remove nuclei
and unbroken cells. The supernatants were then subjected
to ultracentrifugation at 100, 000 g for 30 min at 37°C to
separate the microtubules from the soluble, unpolymerized
tubulin. The pellet was washed with pre-warmed LMS2
buffer and centrifuged at 100, 000 g for 30 min at 37°C.
For microtubule destabilization conditions, LMS2 buffer
containing nocodazole (5 μg/ml) or CaCl2 (2 mM), or
ice-cold LMS2 buffer were used in the above procedure.
The pellets were resuspended in ice-cold 2 mM CaCl2 and
incubated in room temperature for 15 min to depolymerize
microtubules. The supernatant (S), wash solution (W), and
resuspended pellet (P) were adjusted to equal volumes and
analyzed by Western blotting.

or mitoxantrone plus prednisone for advanced prostate
­cancer. N Engl J Med. 2004; 351:1502–1512.
3.	 De Bono JS, Oudard S, Ozguroglu M, Hansen S,
Machiels JP, Kocak I, Gravis G, Bodrogi I, Mackenzie MJ,
Shen L, Roessner M, Gupta S, Sartor AO. Prednisone
plus cabazitaxel or mitoxantrone for metastatic castration-­
resistant prostate cancer progressing after docetaxel
treatment: a randomised open-label trial. Lancet. 2010;
376:1147–1154.
4.	 De Bono JS, Logothetis CJ, Molina A, Fizazi K, North S,
Chu L, Chi KN, Jones RJ, Goodman OB, Saad F,
Staffurth JN, Mainwaring P, Harland S, Flaig TW,
Hutson TE, Cheng T, Patterson H, Hainsworth JD,
Ryan CJ, Sternberg CN, Ellard SL, Flechon A, Saleh M,
Scholz M, Efstathiou E, Zivi A, Bianchini D, Loriot Y,
Chieffo N, Kheoh T, Haqq CM, Scher HI. Abiraterone and
increased survival in metastatic prostate cancer. N Engl
J Med. 2011; 364:1995–2005.

Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis was performed using Microsoft
Excel. The Student’s two-tailed t-test was used to
determine the difference in means between two groups.
P < 0.05 is considered significant. Data are presented as
mean ± standard error of men (SEM).

5.	 Scher HI, Fizazi K, Saad F, Taplin M-E, Sternberg CN,
Miller K, de Wit R, Mulders P, Chi KN, Shore ND,
Armstrong AJ, Flaig TW, Fléchon A, Mainwaring P,
Fleming M, Hainsworth JD, Hirmand M, Selby B, Seely L,
de Bono JS. Increased survival with enzalutamide in
prostate cancer after chemotherapy. N Engl J Med. 2012;
367:1187–1197.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are indebted to Dr. Yun Qiu for providing the
AR-FL and AR-V7 cDNA constructs, to Dr. Stephen
R. Plymate for the ARv567es cDNA construct, to Dr. Jun
Luo for the EGFP-AR-FL and EGFP-AR-V7 expression
vectors, and to Dr. Rebecca Heald for providing
importazole.

6.	 Jordan MA, Wilson L. Microtubules as a target for
­anticancer drugs. Nat Rev Cancer. 2004; 4:253–265.
7.	 Zhu ML, Horbinski CM, Garzotto M, Qian DZ, Beer TM,
Kyprianou N. Tubulin-targeting chemotherapy impairs
androgen receptor activity in prostate cancer. Cancer Res.
2010; 70:7992–8002.
8.	 Darshan MS, Loftus MS, Thadani-Mulero M, Levy BP,
Escuin D, Zhou XK, Gjyrezi A, Chanel-Vos C, Shen R,
Tagawa ST, Bander NH, Nanus DM, Giannakakou P.
Taxane-induced blockade to nuclear accumulation of the
androgen receptor predicts clinical responses in metastatic
prostate cancer. Cancer Res. 2011; 71:6019–6029.

GRANT SUPPORT
This work was supported by the following grants:
ACS RSG-07-218-01-TBE, DOD W81XWH-12-1-0275
and W81XWH-14-1-0480, NIH/NCI R01CA188609,
Louisiana Board of Regents LEQSF(2012-15)-RD-A-25,
NIH/NIGMS 5P20GM103518-10, Louisiana Cancer
Research Consortium Fund, Oliver Sartor Prostate Cancer
Research Fund, National Natural Science Foundation of
China Projects 81272851 and 81430087.

9.	 Gan L, Chen S, Wang Y, Watahiki A, Bohrer L, Sun Z,
Wang Y, Huang H. Inhibition of the androgen receptor as a
novel mechanism of taxol chemotherapy in prostate cancer.
Cancer Res. 2009; 69:8386–8394.
10.	 Dehm SM, Schmidt LJ, Heemers HV, Vessella RL,
Tindall DJ. Splicing of a novel androgen receptor exon
­generates a constitutively active androgen receptor that
mediates prostate cancer therapy resistance. Cancer Res.
2008; 68:5469–5477.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
No conflicts of interest to declare.

1.	 Harris WP, Mostaghel EA, Nelson PS, Montgomery B.
Androgen deprivation therapy: progress in understanding
mechanisms of resistance and optimizing androgen depletion. Nat Clin Pract Urol. 2009; 6:76–85.

11.	 Hu R, Dunn TA, Wei S, Isharwal S, Veltri RW,
Humphreys E, Han M, Partin AW, Vessella RL, Isaacs WB,
Bova GS, Luo J. Ligand-independent androgen receptor
variants derived from splicing of cryptic exons signify
hormone-refractory prostate cancer. Cancer Res. 2009;
69:16–22.

2.	 Tannock IF, de WR, Berry WR, Horti J, Pluzanska A,
Chi KN, Oudard S, Theodore C, James ND, Turesson I,
Rosenthal MA, Eisenberger MA. Docetaxel plus prednisone

12.	 Guo Z, Yang X, Sun F, Jiang R, Linn DE, Chen H, Chen H,
Kong X, Melamed J, Tepper CG, Kung HJ, Brodie AM,
Edwards J, Qiu Y. A novel androgen receptor splice variant

REFERENCES

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23369

Oncotarget

is up-regulated during prostate cancer progression and
­promotes androgen depletion-resistant growth. Cancer Res.
2009; 69:2305–2313.

22.	 Schweizer MT, Zhou XC, Wang H, Bassi S, Carducci MA,
Eisenberger MA, Antonarakis ES. The influence of prior
abiraterone treatment on the clinical activity of docetaxel in
men with metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer. Eur
Urol. 2014; 66:646–652.

13.	 Sun S, Sprenger CC, Vessella RL, Haugk K, Soriano K,
Mostaghel EA, Page ST, Coleman IM, Nguyen HM,
Sun H, Nelson PS, Plymate SR. Castration resistance in
human prostate cancer is conferred by a frequently occurring androgen receptor splice variant. J Clin Invest. 2010;
120:2715–2730.

23.	 Van Soest RJ, van Royen ME, de Morrée ES, Moll JM,
Teubel W, Wiemer EAC, Mathijssen RHJ, de Wit R, van
Weerden WM. Cross-resistance between taxanes and new
hormonal agents abiraterone and enzalutamide may affect
drug sequence choices in metastatic castration-resistant
prostate cancer. Eur J Cancer. 2013; 49:3821–3830.

14.	 Hu R, Lu C, Mostaghel EA, Yegnasubramanian S, Gurel M,
Tannahill C, Edwards J, Isaacs WB, Nelson PS, Bluemn E,
Plymate SR, Luo J. Distinct transcriptional programs mediated by the ligand-dependent full-length androgen receptor
and its splice variants in castration-resistant prostate cancer.
Cancer Res. 2012; 72:3457–3462.

24.	 Nadal R, Zhang Z, Rahman H, Schweizer MT,
Denmeade SR, Paller CJ, Carducci MA, Eisenberger MA,
Antonarakis ES. Clinical activity of enzalutamide in
docetaxel-naïve and docetaxel-pretreated patients with
metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer. The Prostate.
2014; 74:1560–1568.

15.	 Hornberg E, Ylitalo EB, Crnalic S, Antti H, Stattin P,
Widmark A, Bergh A, Wikstrom P. Expression of androgen
receptor splice variants in prostate cancer bone metastases
is associated with castration-resistance and short survival.
PLoS One. 2011; 6:e19059.
16.	 Zhang X, Morrissey C, Sun S, Ketchandji M, Nelson PS,
True LD, Vakar-Lopez F, Vessella RL, Plymate SR.
Androgen receptor variants cccur frequently in c­ astration
resistant prostate cancer metastases. PLoS ONE.
2011; 6:e27970.

25.	 Cheng HH, Gulati R, Azad A, Nadal R, Twardowski P,
Vaishampayan UN, Agarwal N, Heath EI, Pal SK,
Rehman HT, Leiter A, Batten JA, Montgomery RB,
Galsky MD, Antonarakis ES, Chi KN, Yu EY. Activity of
enzalutamide in men with metastatic castration-resistant
prostate cancer is affected by prior treatment with abiraterone and/or docetaxel. Prostate Cancer Prostatic Dis.
2015; 18:122–127.

17.	 Mostaghel EA, Marck BT, Plymate SR, Vessella RL,
Balk S, Matsumoto AM, Nelson PS, Montgomery RB.
Resistance to CYPA1 inhibition with abiraterone in
­castration-resistant prostate cancer: induction of steroidogenesis and androgen receptor splice variants. Clin Cancer
Res. 2011; 17:5913–5925.

26.	 Anbalagan M, Ali A, Jones RK, Marsden CG, Sheng M,
Carrier L, Bu Y, Hangauer D, Rowan BG. Peptidomimetic
Src/pretubulin inhibitor KX-01 alone and in combination
with paclitaxel suppresses growth, metastasis in human ER/
PR/HER2-negative tumor xenografts. Mol Cancer Ther.
2012; 11:1936–1947.

18.	 Li Y, Chan SC, Brand LJ, Hwang TH, Silverstein KAT,
Dehm SM. Androgen receptor splice variants mediate
enzalutamide resistance in castration-resistant prostate
­cancer Cell Lines. Cancer Res. 2013; 73:483–489.

27.	 Cassimeris LU, Wadsworth P, Salmon ED. Dynamics of
microtubule depolymerization in monocytes. J Cell Biol.
1986; 102:2023–2032.
28.	 Roth DM, Moseley GW, Glover D, Pouton CW, Jans DA.
A microtubule-facilitated nuclear import pathway for cancer
regulatory proteins. Traffic. 2007; 8:673–686.

19.	 Cao B, Qi Y, Zhang G, Xu D, Zhan Y, Alvarez X, Guo Z,
Fu X, Plymate SR, Sartor O, Zhang H, Dong Y. Androgen
receptor splice variants activating the full-length receptor in mediating resistance to androgen-directed therapy.
Oncotarget. 2014; 5:1646–1656.

29.	 Roth DM, Moseley GW, Pouton CW, Jans DA. Mechanism
of microtubule-facilitated “fast track” nuclear import. J Biol
Chem. 2011; 286:14335–14351.

20.	 Antonarakis ES, Lu C, Wang H, Luber B, Nakazawa M,
Roeser JC, Chen Y, Mohammad TA, Chen Y, Fedor HL,
Lotan TL, Zheng Q, De Marzo AM, Isaacs JT, Isaacs WB,
Nadal R, Paller CJ, Denmeade SR, Carducci MA,
Eisenberger MA, Luo J. AR-V7 and resistance to enzalutamide and abiraterone in prostate cancer. N Engl J Med.
2014; 371:1028–1038.

30.	 Giannakakou P, Sackett DL, Ward Y, Webster KR,
Blagosklonny MV, Fojo T. p53 is associated with cellular
microtubules and is transported to the nucleus by dynein.
Nat Cell Biol. 2000; 2:709–717.
31.	 Soderholm JF, Bird SL, Kalab P, Sampathkumar Y,
Hasegawa K, Uehara-Bingen M, Weis K, Heald R.
Importazole, a small molecule inhibitor of the transport
receptor importin-β. ACS Chem Biol. 2011; 6:700–708.

21.	 Mezynski J, Pezaro C, Bianchini D, Zivi A, Sandhu S,
Thompson E, Hunt J, Sheridan E, Baikady B, Sarvadikar A,
Maier G, Reid AHM, Mulick Cassidy A, Olmos D,
Attard G, de Bono J. Antitumour activity of docetaxel following treatment with the CYP17A1 inhibitor abiraterone:
clinical evidence for cross-resistance? Ann Oncol Off J Eur
Soc Med Oncol ESMO. 2012; 23:2943–2947.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

32.	 Sweeney C, Chen Y-H, Carducci MA, Liu G, Jarrard DF,
Eisenberger MA, Wong Y-N, Hahn NM, Kohli M,
Vogelzang NJ, Cooney MM, Dreicer R, Picus J,
Shevrin DH, Hussain M, Garcia JA, DiPaola RS. Impact
on overall survival (OS) with chemohormonal therapy
versus hormonal therapy for hormone-sensitive newly

23370

Oncotarget

metastatic prostate cancer (mPrCa): An ECOG-led phase
III ­randomized trial. J Clin Oncol. 2014; 32:5s.

40.	 Chan SC, Li Y, Dehm SM. Androgen receptor splice
­variants activate androgen receptor target genes and support
aberrant prostate cancer cell growth independent of canonical androgen receptor nuclear localization signal. J Biol
Chem. 2012; 287:19736–19749.

33.	 Seruga B, Ocana A, Tannock IF. Drug resistance in metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer. Nat Rev Clin
Oncol. 2011; 8:12–23.

41.	 Andersen RJ, Mawji NR, Wang J, Wang G, Haile S,
Myung JK, Watt K, Tam T, Yang YC, Banuelos CA,
Williams DE, McEwan IJ, Wang Y, Sadar MD. Regression
of castrate-recurrent prostate cancer by a small-molecule
inhibitor of the amino-terminus domain of the androgen
receptor. Cancer Cell. 2010; 17:535–546.

34.	 Antonarakis ES, Armstrong AJ. Evolving standards in
the treatment of docetaxel-refractory castration-resistant
prostate cancer. Prostate Cancer Prostatic Dis. 2011;
14:192–205.
35.	 Thadani-Mulero M, Portella L, Sun S, Sung M, Matov A,
Vessella RL, Corey E, Nanus DM, Plymate SR,
Giannakakou P. Androgen receptor splice variants determine taxane sensitivity in prostate cancer. Cancer Res.
2014; 74:2270–2282.

42.	 Liu C, Lou W, Zhu Y, Nadiminty N, Schwartz CT,
Evans CP, Gao AC. Niclosamide inhibits androgen receptor
variants expression and overcomes enzalutamide resistance
in castration-resistant prostate cancer. Clin Cancer Res.
2014; 20:3198–3210.

36.	 Martin SK, Banuelos CA, Sadar MD, Kyprianou N.
N-terminal targeting of androgen receptor variant enhances
response of castration resistant prostate cancer to taxane
chemotherapy. Mol Oncol. 2015; 9:628–639.

43.	 Purushottamachar P, Godbole AM, Gediya LK, Martin MS,
Vasaitis TS, Kwegyir-Afful AK, Ramalingam S, AtesAlagoz Z, Njar VCO. Systematic structure modifications
of multi-target prostate cancer drug candidate galeterone to
produce novel androgen receptor down-regulating agents
as an approach to treatment of advanced prostate cancer.
J Med Chem. 2013; 56:4880–4898.

37.	 Steinestel J, Luedeke M, Arndt A, Schnoeller TJ,
Lennerz JK, Wurm C, Maier C, Cronauer MV, Steinestel K,
Schrader AJ. Detecting predictive androgen receptor modifications in circulating prostate cancer cells. Oncotarget. .
Published online Apr 23, 2015.

44.	 Li J, Cao B, Liu X, Fu X, Xiong Z, Chen L, Sartor O,
Dong Y, Zhang H. Berberine suppresses androgen receptor signaling in prostate cancer. Mol Cancer Ther. 2011;
10:1346–1356.

38.	 Antonarakis ES, Lu C, Chen Y, Luber B, Wang H,
Nakazawa M, Marzo AMD, Isaacs WB, Nadal R, Paller CJ,
Denmeade SR, Carducci MA, Eisenberger MA, Luo J.
AR splice variant 7 (AR-V7) and response to taxanes in
men with metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer
(mCRPC). J Clin Oncol. 2015; 33 .

45.	 Roth DM, Harper I, Pouton CW, Jans DA. Modulation of
nucleocytoplasmic trafficking by retention in cytoplasm or
nucleus. J Cell Biochem. 2009; 107:1160–1167.

39.	 Clarke SJ, Rivory LP. Clinical pharmacokinetics of
docetaxel. Clin Pharmacokinet. 1999; 36:99–114.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23371

Oncotarget

