Targeted Therapy in Lung
Cancer
Survival, quality of life improved for some
patients

S

uresh Ramalingam, MD, has a very diﬀerent conversation
with his patients with lung cancer who are candidates for
targeted therapy than he does with those who are not.
Dr. Ramalingam, the chief of medical oncology at Emory
University in Atlanta, Georgia, can now oﬀer these patients who
are candidates more hope in terms of survival and quality of life.
He and his colleagues hope that, eventually, new mutations and
drugs will be discovered to help even more patients with lung
cancer live longer and better lives.
Since 2011, 4 targeted therapies have been approved by the
US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for lung cancer. They
target speciﬁc genetic mutations in adenocarcinoma, the most
common form of lung cancer, which is diagnosed in 130,000
individuals in the United States and 1 million individuals
worldwide each year. It is also the type of lung cancer with a
greater than 50% estimated frequency of actionable oncogenic

Cancer
CANCER

September 1, 2014
SEPTEMBER 1, 2014

drivers, which are molecular abnormalities that are critical to
cancer development and that potentially could be attacked by
targeted agents, according to the authors of a recent study of
such treatments published in JAMA.1
The most recent such drug to receive FDA approval was
ceritinib, which was approved in May for a small subset of
patients with metastatic non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
who had few treatment options. The drug blocks the actions of
the anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) protein that promotes
the development of cancerous cells. Only approximately 5% of
tumors in patients with NSCLC are ALK positive.
The other 3 targeted therapies approved since 2011 are
crizotinib, which also targets the ALK protein, and erlotinib
and afatinib, which target epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) mutations. Approximately 10% to 15% of tumors in
patients with NSCLC are EGFR positive.
“The approval of these drugs has coincided with a shift in
the treatment of lung cancer,” Dr. Ramalingam says. “Now a
patient with an EGFR mutation or an ALK translocation is
considered a distinct entity and is given distinct drugs.”
The study in JAMA concluded that the median survival for
patients with stage IV metastatic lung cancer with such mutations
who received these therapies was 3.5 years, compared with 2.4
years for patients who did not receive the drug.1 Although the
study demonstrated prolonged survival, the authors note that
randomized clinical trials are needed to conﬁrm their results.
Nevertheless, in an accompanying editorial, Boris Pasche, MD,
PhD, of Wake Forest University in Winston-Salem, North
Carolina, and Stefan Grant, MD, of the University of Alabama
at Birmingham, state, “Although much remains to be done,
the incorporation of genomic medicine into the study and
treatment of lung cancer represents, at the very least, the end
of the beginning for the care of these and other patients with
cancer.”2
Adds Richard Pazdur, MD, director of the FDA’s oﬃce of
hematology and oncology products, “We’re very encouraged
by the data. We feel this is the tip of the iceberg and that the
understanding of the basic science of the disease will lead to
more eﬀective therapy—not only in lung cancer but in other
diseases too.”

Fast-Track Approval
FDA spokespeople say they are attempting to get these
promising drugs to patients sooner. In the case of ceritinib,
for example, the agency granted a “breakthrough therapy”
designation, which accelerated the approval process to fewer
than 4 years, versus the roughly 10 years it used to take from the
time of initial studies to approval.
2625
1

© RICHARDCH | SHUTTERSTOCK.COM

Oncology Issues in Focus | BY CARRIE PRINTZ

Introduced in 2012, with the passage of the Food and Drug
Administration Safety and Innovation Act, the “breakthrough
therapy” designation applies to drugs that treat a serious or lifethreatening condition or disease and demonstrate preliminary
clinical evidence of substantial improvement over existing
therapies. It is one of several FDA expedited development
and review programs, which include fast-track designation,
accelerated approval, and priority review designation.
“The main thing is communication between the FDA
and the company, not only during the review process but the
development process,” Dr. Pazdur says. “There are very clear
expectations about what the FDA will be looking for in the
review application and how many patients will be entered on
the clinical trial.”
In the case of ceritinib, patients in the clinic demonstrated
strong, unprecedented responses to the drug, which had a much
more powerful safety proﬁle than chemotherapy, Dr. Pazdur
notes. For that reason, “We moved the process along quickly
because we had no doubt it was better than chemotherapy,”
he says.
In fact, these approved targeted therapies make chemotherapy
less of a necessity, often leading to its being delayed until much
later, Dr. Ramalingam says. “It’s not uncommon for stage IV
NSCLC patients with EGFR mutations to live 5 to 7 years, and
that wasn’t the case before,” he says. “Previously, the median
survival was 8 to 10 months.”

Mutation a Problem
Although University of Colorado lung cancer specialist Paul
Bunn, Jr, MD, sees signiﬁcant gains made possible by these
treatments, he also points out that they do not cure patients
with lung cancer. “These drugs make people live longer and
better,” he says. “Today, 13.5% of stage IV NSCLC patients are
alive in 5 years. Years ago, that number was 1% to 2%. But it
would be better if it was 100%.”
Most commonly, patients develop resistance to these drugs
through a second gatekeeper mutation, which changes the
shape of the receptors so the drug no longer binds well. As a
result, companies are developing second-generation and thirdgeneration tyrosine kinase inhibitors to target these mutations.
Afatinib is such a drug for EGFR mutations, and the recently
approved ceritinib is a second-generation drug for ALK
translocations.
A problem with targeting the second gatekeeper mutations
is they require a large concentration of the drugs, which can
cause a signiﬁcant amount of skin rashes and diarrhea, Dr.
Bunn says. For that reason, third-generation drugs are being
developed that inhibit the mutation without causing signiﬁcant
side eﬀects.
With more new drugs in the pipeline for these targets,
Dr. Ramalingam says, “I anticipate we’ll improve the survival
curve even more favorably. There is also good data that 60% of
patients will have a targetable mutation.”
The most common driver of mutations in NSCLC is K-RAS,
which accounts for 90% of RAS mutations in patients with
lung adenocarcinomas. RAS is the most frequently mutated
2626

oncogene in NSCLC, occurring in approximately 25% of all
tumors, but scientists have not yet developed an eﬀective drug
for targeting it, Dr. Bunn says. Nevertheless, the number of
patients who can be treated by current targeted therapies is not
insigniﬁcant, Dr. Ramalingam says. He notes that “If you look
at the raw numbers, there are some 20,000 to 30,000 NSCLC
patients with targetable EGFR mutations annually.”
One problem Dr. Bunn sees with the approval of
these therapies is that the FDA also requires a “companion
diagnostic” for the drug. Essentially, although many diﬀerent
types of molecular tests are available, physicians can only
conduct the tests through laboratories that are precertiﬁed by
the government. That requirement slows the process, increases
costs, requires extra biopsies, and takes tissue that could be used
for other purposes, he notes.
However, FDA oﬃcials counter that to successfully test
patients for mutations, the test must be a validated, FDAapproved test. “You need to have conﬁdence that what you’re
seeing in a clinical trial can be extrapolated to the right
population,” Dr. Pazdur says.

We feel this is the tip of the iceberg and that the understanding
of the basic science of the
disease will lead to more
effective therapy—not only in
lung cancer but in other
diseases too. — Richard Pazdur, MD
Both Drs. Bunn and Ramalingam say other potentially
promising lung cancer therapies are on the horizon, including
the immunotherapy checkpoint inhibitors, and antiprogrammed
cell death protein 1 (PD1) and antiprogrammed death-ligand 1
(PD-L1) (which received breakthrough status from the FDA for
the treatment of melanoma and bladder cancer, respectively).
These antibodies attack the proteins made by tumors to protect
themselves. Both are currently in phase 3 clinical trials and
could be approved early next year, Dr. Bunn says. “Many of
these responses last more than 2 years, and there are not many
side eﬀects,” he adds. “The problem is, if you give them to
everyone, only 1 in 5 patients respond.”
Identifying why some patients do and some do not respond
and discovering how to increase response rates is the next step
in researching these drugs, he says.

References
1. Kris MG, Johnson BE, Berry LD, et al. Using multiplexed assays of oncogenic
drivers in lung cancers to select targeted drugs. JAMA. 2014;311:19982006.
2. Pasche B, Grant SC. Non-small cell lung cancer and precision medicine: a
model for the incorporation of genomic features into clinical trial design.
JAMA. 2014;311:1975-1976.

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.28943

Cancer

September 1, 2014

