Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 1

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Dasatinib induces DNA damage and activates DNA repair
pathways leading to senescence in non-small cell lung cancer
cell lines with kinase-inactivating BRAF mutations
Shaohua Peng1, Banibrata Sen1,2,*, Tuhina Mazumdar1, Lauren A. Byers1,3,
Lixia Diao4, Jing Wang3,4, Pan Tong4, Uma Giri1, John V. Heymach1,3, Humam
N. Kadara5, Faye M. Johnson1,3
1

 epartment of Thoracic/Head & Neck Medical Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
D
Texas, USA

2

AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals, London, UK

3

The University of Texas Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Houston, Texas, USA

4

 epartment of Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
D
Texas, USA

5

Department of Translational Molecular Pathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA

*

Dr. Banibrata Sen was employed at The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center at the time this research was
performed.

Correspondence to: Faye M. Johnson, e-mail: fmjohns@mdanderson.org.
Keywords: lung cancer, BRAF, TAZ, DNA damage, kinase inhibition
Received: June 03, 2015 	Accepted: November 14, 2015 	Published: November 23, 2015

ABSTRACT
Improved therapies are greatly needed for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
that does not harbor targetable kinase mutations or translocations. We previously
demonstrated that NSCLC cells that harbor kinase-inactivating BRAF mutations
(KIBRAF) undergo senescence when treated with the multitargeted kinase inhibitor
dasatinib. Similarly, treatment with dasatinib resulted in a profound and durable
response in a patient with KIBRAF NSCLC. However, no canonical pathways explain
dasatinib-induced senescence in KIBRAF NSCLC. To investigate the underlying
mechanism, we used 2 approaches: gene expression and reverse phase protein arrays.
Both approaches showed that DNA repair pathways were differentially modulated
between KIBRAF NSCLC cells and those with wild-type (WT) BRAF. Consistent with
these findings, dasatinib induced DNA damage and activated DNA repair pathways
leading to senescence only in the KIBRAF cells. Moreover, dasatinib-induced senescence
was dependent on Chk1 and p21, proteins known to mediate DNA damage-induced
senescence. Dasatinib also led to a marked decrease in TAZ but not YAP protein levels.
Overexpression of TAZ inhibited dasatinib-induced senescence. To investigate other
vulnerabilities in KIBRAF NSCLC cells, we compared the sensitivity of these cells with
that of WTBRAF NSCLC cells to 79 drugs and identified a pattern of sensitivity to EGFR
and MEK inhibitors in the KIBRAF cells. Clinically approved EGFR and MEK inhibitors,
which are better tolerated than dasatinib, could be used to treat KIBRAF NSCLC. Our
novel finding that dasatinib induced DNA damage and subsequently activated DNA
repair pathways leading to senescence in KIBRAF NSCLC cells represents a unique
vulnerability with potential clinical applications.

patients, specifically those with EGFR mutations, ROS1
rearrangements, or EML4-ALK translocations. However,
only a minority of the remaining 80% of patients likely have
targetable, activating kinase mutations or translocations,
and there is a great need to identify additional effective

INTRODUCTION
Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is a
common and rapidly fatal cancer for which targeted
therapies have been markedly effective in about 20% of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

565

Oncotarget

therapies [1]. We previously identified a patient with stage
IV NSCLC harboring a novel BRAF mutation (Y472C)
that had a near complete radiographic response to the
multitargeted kinase inhibitor dasatinib as the sole therapy;
the patient lived without active cancer for 7 years following
treatment [2]. We discovered that Y472CBRAF is a kinaseinactivating BRAF mutation (KIBRAF) and that NSCLC
cells that harbor KIBRAF undergo senescence when exposed
to dasatinib, whereas NSCLC with wild-type BRAF
(WTBRAF) or kinase-activating mutations is resistant to
dasatinib in vitro and in patients [3].
The RAS/RAF/MEK/ERK pathway plays an
important role in the progression of many human cancers.
Once activated by surface receptors, RAS recruits RAF,
a serine/threonine kinase, to the cell membrane and
activates it. RAF then phosphorylates MEK, which in
turn phosphorylates and activates ERK, leading to cancer
progression or senescence depending on the degree
of ERK activation and crosstalk with other signaling
pathways [4]. The 3 RAF proteins (A, B, and C) can form
homodimers and heterodimers [5]. BRAF is by far the
most frequently mutated isoform [6]. BRAF mutations
can result in increased or decreased BRAF kinase activity,
as well as kinase-neutral mutations, and BRAF mutations
occur in 3–8% of patients with NSCLC [7–11] and
many other tumor types [12]. KIBRAF still paradoxically
activates MEK/ERK to levels higher than those in cells
with WTBRAF via heterodimerization with CRAF (Raf-1)
[13–16]. Similarly, inhibition of WTBRAF or expression of
KI
BRAF increases CRAF-BRAF binding, activates CRAF,
and enhances MEK/ERK activation [3, 14–16].
The underlying mechanism of dasatinib-induced
senescence in KIBRAF NSCLC cells is obscure. Dasatinib
inhibits the activity of Src and Abl, as well as nearly 40
distinct kinase targets [17, 18]. Dasatinib weakly inhibits
BRAF, although only at concentrations higher than
those needed to induce senescence, and it can induce
BRAF-CRAF dimerization and CRAF activation in
cells with activated RAS or KIBRAF mutations [3, 19].
Although RAF dimerization was found to be necessary
for dasatinib sensitivity, nilotinib, a kinase inhibitor with
a similar kinase profile that also produced robust RAF
dimerization, did not induce senescence. Another potent
Src/Abl inhibitor, bosutinib, did not induce senescence [3].
Currently there are no well-defined, canonical pathways
that explain the observed dasatinib-induced senescence in
KI
BRAF NSCLC cells.
We sought to define the underlying mechanism
leading to dasatinib-induced senescence in KIBRAF
NSCLC cells. We used 2 approaches: gene expression
arrays and reverse phase protein array (RPPA), in which
we simultaneously examined the expression of 137
proteins and phosphoproteins in KIBRAF and WTBRAF
NSCLC cell lines at baseline and following dasatinib
treatment. Our approach was limited by the existence of
only 2 NSCLC cell lines with endogenous KIBRAF, but
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

nonetheless we determined that dasatinib induced DNA
damage and subsequently activated DNA repair pathways
and decreased TAZ expression leading to senescence
in KIBRAF NSCLC cells. TAZ is part of the Hippo
pathway that is a complex network of at least 35 proteins
that converge on a core kinase cassette that consists of
MST1/2, LATS1/2, SAV1, and MOB [20]. LATS1/2
phosphorylates the transcriptional co-activators YAP and
TAZ that results in their ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis.
TAZ has recently been defined as a novel oncogene in
NSCLC cells where TAZ knock-down results in decreased
anchorage-independent growth in vitro and tumor growth
in vivo; TAZ overexpression causes transformation of
bronchial epithelial cells [21].

RESULTS
DNA repair pathways are differentially
modulated between KIBRAF and WTBRAF
NSCLC cells treated with dasatinib
We used gene expression arrays as an unbiased
method to investigate mechanisms underlying dasatinibinduced senescence. We performed gene expression
profiling of KIBRAF NSCLC cells (H1666 and Cal12T,
which harbor G466VBRAF) and WTBRAF NSCLC cells
(A549, H661) that were incubated for 72 hours with 150nM
dasatinib or vehicle control. We chose 72 hours because
we previously showed that incubation for 72 hours was
required to induce irreversible senescence [3]. Using the
Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 array platform,
we identified profiles that were modulated by dasatinib in
each of the sensitive (KIBRAF H1666 and Cal12T cells)
and resistant (WTBRAF A549 and H661) groups. These
profiles were then cross compared among the two cell
line groups to determine differential effects of dasatinib in
KI
BRAF relative to WTBRAF cells (Figure 1A). We found
2061 gene features corresponding to 1458 genes that were
differentially modulated by dasatinib between KIBRAF and
WT
BRAF cells (fold change ≥ 1.35, P < 0.05; Figure 1A).
We then performed functional pathways and gene set
enrichment analyses using Ingenuity Pathways Analysis
(IPA) to identify pathways and gene sets that were
significantly differentially modulated by dasatinib between
KI
BRAF and WTBRAF cells (Figure 1B, Supplementary
Table 1). This analysis demonstrated that the ATM and
G2M/DNA damage checkpoint pathways were markedly
differentially modulated between KIBRAF and WTBRAF
cells, suggesting that dasatinib induced DNA damage in
KI
BRAF cells (Figure 1B–1C).
Because E2F target genes mediate senescence, we
specifically examined E2F target genes using gene set
enrichment. This analysis revealed significantly suppressed
(indicated by negative z-scores) function of E2F1, 2,
and 3 in the KIBRAF cell lines (Supplementary Figure 1,
566

Oncotarget

Supplementary Table 3). Moreover, the majority of
the E2F1, 2 and 3 target genes were down-regulated in
dasatinib-treated KIBRAF cell lines relative to similarly
treated WTBRAF cell (Supplementary Table 2). Although
dasatinib affected E2F signaling at early time points in
both KIBRAF and WTBRAF cells, the downregulation

was distinct between the two groups at 72 hours
(Supplementary Figure 2). Of note, we also found, based
on downstream gene expression, significantly suppressed
function of TP53 in the dasatinib-treated KIBRAF cell
lines compared with similarly treated WTBRAF cell lines
(Supplementary Table 2).

Figure 1: Comparison of gene expression changes following treatment with dasatinib in non-small cell lung cancer
cells with and without kinase-inactivating BRAF mutations (KIBRAF). A. Heat map of the 2061 gene features that were
differentially modulated by dasatinib in KIBRAF cells compared to wild-type BRAF (WTBRAF; fold change ≥ 1.35, P < 0.05). Treatment
versus control ratios (rows) for each of the differentially expressed gene features were derived and used for clustering gene features and
cell lines (see Methods). Columns represent the cell lines and rows represent treatment/control ratios of the gene features (red, gene feature
ratio up-regulated in sensitive compared to resistant cells; green, gene feature ratio down-regulated in sensitive cells). B. The five most
significant (indicated by inverse log of P-value) canonical pathways, identified by pathways analysis using IPA, that were differentially
modulated by dasatinib in the KIBRAF compared to the WTBRAF NSCLC cells. C. Differentially modulated gene features in the ATM and
G2/M DNA damage checkpoint pathways were topologically organized using IPA to reveal functional gene-gene interactions; green,
dasatinib modulated gene features down-regulated in KIBRAF compared to WTBRAF cells; red, dasatinib-modulated gene features that were
up-regulated in KIBRAF cells. Trt, treated with 150 nM dasatinib for 72 hours. Crtl, vehicle control.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

567

Oncotarget

DNA repair and TAZ are differentially
modulated between KIBRAF and WTBRAF
NSCLC cells treated with dasatinib

To confirm the results of the RPPA and to examine
expression over time, we incubated NSCLC cells with
dasatinib for various durations up to 72 hours and
performed Western blot analysis of various proteins.
For the longer incubation periods (i.e., 24 hours or
more), we included vehicle-treated samples to control
for signaling changes due to cell density (Figure 3A).
Dasatinib induced a sustained increase in levels of
the phosphorylated H2A histone family, member X
(pH2AX, γH2AX) and decreases in levels of Chk1
and TAZ protein expression in KIBRAF cells but not
in WTBRAF cells. The phosphorylation of γH2AX at
serine 139 is an early response to double-strand DNA
breaks [22].
H2AX
is
phosphorylated
by
several
phosphoinositide-3-kinase related protein kinases
(PIKKs) including ATM, ATR, and DNA-PK [22]. Both
ATM and DNA-PK were phosphorylated in KIBRAF
cells treated with dasatinib but at time points later than
the phosphorylation of γH2AX suggesting an alternative
mechanism or a lack of sensitivity in the phospho-specific
antibodies (Supplementary Figure 4).

To further elucidate the mechanism underlying
dasatinib-induced senescence in KIBRAF NSCLC cells,
we used RPPA as a second approach to simultaneously
evaluate the expression of 137 proteins and
phosphoproteins in KIBRAF and WTBRAF NSCLC cells
incubated for 72 hours with dasatinib.
Six proteins were differentially expressed at
baseline (P < 0.05) between KIBRAF and WTBRAF cells,
including 2 proteins involved with DNA repair: DNAdependent protein kinase, catalytic subunit (DNA-PKcs)
and ERCC3 (Rad25; Figure 2A). We compared the
modulation of all proteins after 72 hours of incubation
with dasatinib between KIBRAF and WTBRAF cells.
Although only 7 proteins were significantly differentially
modulated (P < 0.05; Figure 2B), we considered this
RPPA a discovery set and subsequently examined many
proteins that were differentially regulated between the 2
groups (P > 0.05, Supplementary Figure 3).

Figure 2: Proteins involved in DNA repair and TAZ are differentially expressed and modulated between non-small cell
lung cancer cells with kinase-inactivating BRAF mutations (KIBRAF) and those with wild-type BRAF (WTBRAF). A. Basal

protein expression of 137 proteins and phosphoproteins was compared between KIBRAF and WTBRAF cells. To generate the heat map, we
used Pearson correlation distance between proteins and Euclidean distance between samples. We used the Ward method for both genes’ and
the samples’ linkage rule. A 2-sample t test was applied and 6 markers were identified at a false discovery rate of 0.45. B. The mean protein
expression of all 137 measured proteins before and after 72 hours of incubation with 150 nM dasatinib was compared between KIBRAF and
WT
BRAF cells. Error bars represent standard deviation. P < 0.05 for all 7 proteins shown.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

568

Oncotarget

CCN2 were significantly decreased only in KIBRAF cells
(Figure 3C). Likewise, using the gene expression array
data, we found that the majority of TAZ-regulated genes
were downregulated in the KIBRAF cell lines treated with
dasatinib (Supplementary Figure 5).

To investigate the Hippo pathway further, we
measured TAZ mRNA levels, which did not change
after treatment with dasatinib in KIBRAF cells (Figure
3B), demonstrating post-transcriptional regulation.
Additionally, pLats1/2 was increased in KIBRAF cells
after dasatinib treatment (Supplementary Figure 3).
Lats1/2 phosphorylates TAZ resulting in its ubiquitinmediated proteolysis. Although the increase in pLats1/2
was modest, the TAZ protein has a very short half-life [23]
and may be sensitive to this small change. To confirm the
effect of dasatinib on TAZ, we measured the expression
of 2 TAZ transcription targets using quantitative
polymerase chain reaction following incubation with
150nM dasatinib for 72 hours and found that CCN1 and

Dasatinib induces DNA damage in KIBRAF
NSCLC cells
The differential effects of dasatinib on several DNA
repair proteins led us to examine the effects of dasatinib
on DNA damage. We employed the COMET/singlecell gel electrophoresis assay, which nonspecifically
measures both double-strand and single-strand DNA

Figure 3: Chk1 and TAZ are differentially modulated between non-small cell lung cancer cells with BRAF mutations
(KIBRAF) and those with wild-type BRAF (WTBRAF). A. Western blot analysis showing changes in protein expression for cells
incubated with 150nM dasatinib for the indicated times. Bands were quantitated in the line graphs at the bottom. B. mRNA levels of Chk1
and TAZ were measured using quantitative polymerase chain reaction for the indicated times following incubation with 150nM dasatinib.
C. mRNA levels of TAZ target genes were measured using quantitative polymerase chain reaction for the indicated times following
incubation with 150nM dasatinib. Error bars represent standard deviation. *P < 0.05.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

569

Oncotarget

Knockdown of p21 or overexpression of Chk1
and TAZ protects KIBRAF NSCLC cells from
dasatinib-induced senescence

breaks by separating fragmented DNA from intact DNA
using electrophoresis. Results of this assay demonstrated
significant dasatinib-induced DNA damage in KIBRAF
but not in WTBRAF cells.The average tail length and tail
moment increased only in KIBRAF cells (Figure 4A).
To determine if WTBRAF and KIBRAF cell lines had
different abilities to repair DNA, we treated cells with the
DNA damaging agent etoposide and measured resolution
of phosphorylated H2AX. Both the WTBRAF and KIBRAF
cell lines recovered fully within 6 hours (Figure 4B–4C).

To determine whether the downregulation of Chk1 or
TAZ was functionally significant, we overexpressed Chk1,
TAZ, or both in H1666 cells and measured sensitivity to
dasatinib (Figure 5A). We found that overexpression of either
TAZ or Chk1 increased dasatinib resistance and decreased
dasatinib-induced senescence (Figure 5B), although

Figure 4: Dasatinib induces DNA damage in non-small cell lung cancer cells with kinase-inactivating BRAF mutations
(KIBRAF). A. KIBRAF cells (Cal12T, H1666) and wild-type BRAF cells (H661, A549) were incubated with 150nM dasatinib for 72 hours
and DNA damage was measured using the COMET assay. COMET-Assay IV software was used to estimate the tail length, head length,
and tail moment. Error bars represent standard deviation. *P < 0.05 compared with control. B. NSCLC cells were incubated with 5 μM
etoposide for 1 hour and then medium was changed to remove drug. Resolution of phosphorylated γH2AX was measured using Western
blotting (representative blot shown) with quantitation of γH2AX bands normalized for β-actin expression C.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

570

Oncotarget

of oncogenes, including BRAF, paradoxically leads to
senescence that depends on the modulation of MEK/
ERK signaling [24, 25] led us to examine ERK and MEK
activation following treatment with dasatinib in KIBRAF
NSCLC cells (H1666, Cal12T) and WTBRAF NSCLC
cells (A549, H661) using phosphospecific antibodies
(Figure 6A). We observed no sustained changes caused
by dasatinib in the KIBRAF cells. The transient activation
of ERK in A549 cells that we observed may be due to
dasatinib-induced dimerization, which was previously
described [3, 19].
Owing to feedback inhibition, including activation
of downstream phosphatases, phosphorylated ERK and
MEK may not be the ideal measurement of MEK/ERK
activation. We also measured ERK signaling output using
a subset of ERK-dependent genes that consisted of 5
downstream genes (Figure 6B) [26]. One disadvantage

overexpression of either protein did not affect expression of
the other (Figure 5C). In contrast, Lats2 knockdown, which
was insufficient to affect TAZ expression, did not alter
dasatinib sensitivity (Supplementary Figure 6).
Senescence that is triggered by DNA damage is
characterized by p21 accumulation. To determine whether
dasatinib-induced senescence is mediated by p21, we knocked
down p21 with siRNA. We have previously observed
p21 accumulations in Cal12T and H1666 cells treated
with dasatinib. In the current study, p21 knockdown led to
decreased dasatinib-induced senescence (Figure 5D–5E).

Dasatinib does not lead to oncogene-induced
senescence
The sensitivity of KIBRAF cells NSCLC to
MEK inhibitors (below) and the fact that activation

Figure 5: Dasatinib-induced senescence is mediated by Chk1, TAZ, and p21. A. H1666 cells were transfected with DNA
vectors containing Chk1, TAZ, or both and sensitivity to dasatinib was measured using the MTT assay at the indicated drug concentrations
after 72 hours of incubation. B. Senescence was estimated using β-galactosidase staining in transfected cells treated with 150nM dasatinib
or vehicle control for 72 hours. C. Overexpression (OE) was confirmed by Western blot analysis. D. Non-small cell lung cancer cell lines
with kinase-inactivating BRAF mutations (Cal12T, H1666) were transfected with siRNA targeting p21 or a scrambled control and incubated
with 150nM dasatinib or vehicle control for 72 hours. Senescence was estimated using β-galactosidase staining. E. Knockdown (KD) was
confirmed by Western blot analysis. Error bars represent standard deviation. *P < 0.05 compared with control.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

571

Oncotarget

of this method is that other pathways can also influence
the expression of these 5 genes. However, as in the
Western blot analysis, we observed no consistent changes
caused by dasatinib that were unique in the KIBRAF cells.
Additionally, dasatinib did not lead to the production of
reactive oxygen species (ROS) that mediate oncogeneinduced senescence (Figure 6C).

(Supplementary Figure 7). Full rescue was not expected
as KIBRAF is not an inactive molecule despite a lack of
kinase activity. KIBRAF paradoxically activates MEK/
ERK to levels higher than those in cells with WTBRAF
via heterodimerization with CRAF (Raf-1) [13–16].

BRAF NSCLC cells are sensitive to inhibitors
of EGFR and MEK but not SRC, ABL, or RAF
KI

Overexpression of WTBRAF reduces dasatinibinduced senescence and DNA damage in KIBRAF
NSCLC cells

Another approach we employed to identify pathways
of vulnerability in KIBRAF cells was to examine sensitivity
to drugs with a broad range of targets. To achieve this
goal, we downloaded data from 2 large, publically
available cell line screening databases (GDSC and CCLE
- described below) and tested 13 compounds to identify
drugs that were particularly effective in KIBRAF cells
compared with WTBRAF cells [27, 28]. In the Genomics
of Drug Sensitivity in Cancer (GDSC) database, 57 drugs

In our previous work, we transfected NSCLC cell
lines that have endogenous WTBRAF with two different
KI
BRAF constructs and found increased sensitivity to
dasatinib [3]. Likewise we found that transfection of
wt
BRAF into Cal12T partially rescued the phenotype with
reduced dasatinib induced-apoptosis and DNA damage

Figure 6: Dasatinib does not induce oncogene-induced senescence. Non-small cell lung cancer cell lines with kinase-inactivating

BRAF mutations (Cal12T, H1666) or wild-type BRAF (H661, A549) were incubated with 150nM dasatinib for the indicated times (A,
C) or for 72 hours (B) Activation of the MEK/ERK pathway was measured using Western blot analysis with the indicated antibodies
A. or quantitative polymerase chain reaction for downstream transcriptional targets B. Error bars represent standard deviation. *P < 0.05
compared with control. C. The production of reactive oxygen species was estimated using a fluorogenic probe that exhibits fluorescence
upon oxidation by reactive oxygen species.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

572

Oncotarget

were tested in both Cal12T and H1666 cells, along with
65–70 WTBRAF NSCLC cell lines. In the Cancer Cell Line
Encyclopedia (CCLE) database, 13 drugs were tested in
both Cal12T and H1666 cells, along with 86–89 WTBRAF
NSCLC cell lines. We tested 13 drugs with a broad
spectrum of targets in 45 NSCLC cell lines (Cal12T and
H1666 and various WTBRAF cell lines) using the Cell Titer
Glo assay. All tested drugs are listed in Supplementary

Tables 4 and 5. Among all 79 unique drugs (4 drugs
overlapped), we identified 14 drugs with sensitivities that
were statistically different between KIBRAF and WTBRAF
NSCLC cells (Figure 7). KIBRAF cells were consistently
sensitive to inhibitors of the ErbB family and MEK1/2.
Consistent with our previously published data, Cal12T and
H1666 were not particularly sensitive to inhibition of SRC
or ABL, which are both potently inhibited by dasatinib [3].

Figure 7: Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells with kinase-inactivating (KI) BRAF mutations are more sensitive
to inhibitors of EGFR and MEK than NSCLC cells with wild-type (WT) BRAF. We compared the sensitivity of NSCLC cell
lines with kinase-inactivating BRAF mutations (Cal12T, H1666) to those with wild-type BRAF using 79 drugs (Supplementary Table 5).
A 2-sample t test was used to determine whether the mean half-maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50; after log10 transformation) was
statistically different between the 2 groups. Only drugs with significantly different sensitivities between the groups (P < 0.05) are shown.
Drug sensitivity data were obtained from 2 publically available databases (Genomics of Drug Sensitivity in Cancer [GDSC] and Cancer
Cell Line Encyclopedia [CCLE]) and from 13 drugs tested at MD Anderson (MDA).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

573

Oncotarget

To determine if drugs that were effective in KIBRAF
NSCLC cells functioned similarly to dasatinib, we treated
cells with BIBW2992 and PD0325901 and measured
γH2AX, senescence, and apoptosis. These drugs did
not result in significant senescence (< 10%) or γH2AX
expression but did cause apoptosis demonstrating that
the combination worked through a distinct mechanism
from dasatinib in KIBRAF NSCLC cells (Supplementary
Figure 8).
The selective effects of dasatinib on NSCLC cells
harboring KIBRAF suggests that the combination of BRAF
inhibitors with dasatinib would be effective in WTBRAF
NSCLC which would have a broader clinical application.
In our previous publication, we combined vemurafenib
with dasatinib and demonstrated synergy in NSCLC
cell lines with wtBRAF [3]. To further characterize the
underlying mechanism for this synergy, we incubated
NSCLC cells with WTBRAF and measured apoptosis,
senescence, TAZ and γH2AX. As with the EGFR and
MEK inhibitors, the combination did not function similarly
to dasatinib in KIBRAF NSCLC cells. The combination
led to apoptosis in A549 cells and senescence in H661
cells; none had modulated TAZ, CHK1, or γH2AX levels
(Supplementary Figure 9).

Although dasatinib alone has never been shown to
lead to DNA damage prior to this study, it has been shown
to do so in combination with other agents. Inhibition
of c-ABL by dasatinib delays DNA repair following
radiation-induced DNA damage in leukemia and head and
neck cancer cells [31, 32]. The combination of dasatinb
and Herceptin in HER2 expressing breast cancer cell
lines leads to DNA damage although neither agent alone
did so [33]. One unanswered question is the mechanism
by which dasatinib leads to DNA damage selectively in
KI
BRAF NSCLC cell lines. One potential mechanism is
through CRAF. We previously demonstrated that dasatinib
indirectly inhibits CRAF only in cells with KIBRAF but
not WTBRAF. Additionally, CRAF knock down affected
only those NSCLC with KIBRAF [3]. Although we did
not demonstrate a differential effect on MEK/ERK
signaling based on BRAF mutation, CRAF can signal
independently of MEK/ERK [34]. In support of this idea,
expression of KIBRAF (D594A) in mice, but not kinase
active V600EBRAF, leads to CRAF-dependent aneuploidy
that is not MEK dependent [35]. Additional evidence
for the role of RAF in dasatinib-induced senescence is
that we previously demonstrated that transfection of
KI
BRAF into NSCLC cell lines increased their sentivity
to dasatinib but when an additional mutation was added
that prevented BRAF dimerization, no sensitization
was observed [3]. MEK-independent CRAF signaling
via MST1/2 is also a potential link between dasatinibinduced RAF dimerization, Chk1 and the Hippo pathway.
The Hippo pathway is a complex network of at least 35
proteins, including MST1/2, that converge on a core
kinase cassette leading to phosphorylation of Lats1/2
[20]. CRAF can bind to MST1/2, the mammalian
orthologue of Hippo, and interfere with its dimerization
and activation [36, 37]. CRAF and the RAS-association
domain family 1 isoform A (RASSF1A) compete for
binding to MST1/2. RASSF1A binds to and stabilizes
MST1/2 leading to activation of the HIPPO pathway [38].
ATM, Aurora A and Chk1 can phosphorylate RASSF1A
leading to its activation [39, 40]. Lats1/2 phosphorylates
the transcriptional co-activators YAP and TAZ that
results in their ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis. YAP is a
stable protein but TAZ is very unstable with a half-life
of less than 2 hours [23]. TAZ has recently been defined
as a novel oncogene in NSCLC cells where TAZ knockdown results in decreased anchorage-independent growth
in vitro and tumor growth in vivo; TAZ overexpression
causes transformation of bronchial epithelial cells [21].
In dasatinib-treated KIBRAF NSCLC cell lines, YAP
expression was not affected and phosphorylated Lats1/2
increased slightly whereas levels of TAZ were profoundly
decreased. These findings, along with a lack of concurrent
decreases in TAZ mRNA demonstrate that dasatinib
affects post transcriptional control of TAZ in KIBRAF
NSCLC cells. Additionally, we were not able to detect

DISCUSSION
In the current study, we investigated the mechanism
leading to dasatinib-induced senescence in KIBRAF
NSCLC cells and discovered that dasatinib leads to DNA
damage, changes in DNA repair signaling pathways,
and the downregulation of TAZ expression in these
cells. Dasatinib-induced senescence was dependent
on p21 accumulation and the loss of TAZ and Chk1.
Overexpression of either TAZ or Chk1 did not affect
expression of the other protein, suggesting that these were
independent events.
Senescence can be induced by telomere shortening,
DNA damage, or oncogene activation. The DNA damage
response is initiated when the MRN (MRE11-RAD50NBs1) complex is recruited to areas of double-strand
breaks. This complex recruits ATM, which phosphorylates
H2AX (γH2AX) and Chk1. The DNA damage response
may in fact function in most cases of senescence because
telomere shortening leads to DNA damage that induces
the DNA damage response. Replication stress can also
perturb heterochromatin leading to the formation of
senescence associated heterochromatic foci [29] that we
observed following dasatinib treatment in NSCLC cells
with KIBRAF [3]. Oncogene-induced senescence can lead
to the production of ROS and replication stress leading to
the DDR [30]. Dasatinib did not induce ROS production
in any of the cell lines nor did we observe sustained ERK/
MEK activation, suggesting that the NSCLC cell lines did
not undergo oncogene-induce senescence.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

574

Oncotarget

RASSIF1A expression in our NSCLC cell lines with any
commercially available antibodies (data not shown).
We and others previously found that cells with
KI
BRAF mutations still activate MEK and may be
particularly sensitive to its inhibition [3, 15]. Indeed
we discovered that H1666 and Cal12T cell lines were
more sensitive to MEK as well as upstream receptor
tyrosine kinases – particularly EGFR than NSCLC cell
lines lacking KIBRAF mutations. These increased drug
sensitivities were found independently from 3 different
screens and with 4 distinct EGFR inhibitors and 2 distinct
MEK inhibitors supporting a pathway-specific effect
rather than an off target drug effect.
We used two approaches to determine that dasatinb
led to DNA damage and senescence selectively in NSCLC
cell lines with KIBRAF mutations. This work builds on our
prior studies demonstrating a marked and durable effect
of dasatinb in a NSCLC patient with a KIBRAF mutation
[2] and dasatinib-induced senescence that was dependent
upon RAF heterodimerization in NSCLC cell lines [3].
These results have potential clinical application as there is
a striking need to discover targeted therapies for cancers
that lack driver, activating kinase mutations and because
dasatinib, EGFR inhibitors and MEK inhibitors are all
approved drugs.

and maintained as previously described [41]. Cal12T was
purchased from DSMZ (Braunschweig, Germany).

Western blot analysis
Western blot analysis was performed as previously
described [42]. Briefly, cells were lysed on ice and the
lysates were centrifuged at 20,000g for 5 minutes at
4°C and then boiled with 1× Laemmli sample buffer
for 5 minutes. Equal amounts of protein aliquots were
resolved with SDS–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis,
transferred to nitrocellulose membranes, immunoblotted
with a primary antibody, and detected with a horseradish
peroxidase–conjugated secondary antibody (Bio-Rad
Laboratories, Hercules, CA) and ECL reagent (Pierce
Biotech, Rockford, IL).

Quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
Total RNA was isolated from NSCLC cell lines
treated as indicated in the figure legends using an
RNeasy mini kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA) according
to the manufacturer’s instructions. Total RNA (2 μg)
was converted into cDNA using 1× Moloney murine
leukemia virus buffer, 1 μL RNasin, 10 μmol/L random
hexamer, 500 μmol/L deoxyribonucleotide triphosphates,
100 mg/mL bovine serum albumin, and 1.5 μL Moloney
murine leukemia virus reverse transcriptase enzyme in
a final reaction volume of 20 μL. The reaction mixture
was incubated at 42°C for 2 hours, and the reaction was
terminated by heating the mixture at 99°C for 5 minutes
and then at 5°C for 5 minutes as described previously [43].
The mRNA levels for the indicated genes were
measured with SYBR green–based real-time PCR in
triplicate as described previously [43]. The primers were
designed using Primer-BLAST (National Center for
Biotechnology Information; Supplementary Table 6).
Each cDNA sample was amplified using SYBR Green
PCR Master Mix (Applied Biosystems, Grand Island,
NY) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The PCR
products were detected and their dissociation curves were
calculated using the ABI Prism 7500 fast real-time PCR
system (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). The level
of the housekeeping ribosomal gene L32 (Rpl32) was used
as an internal control. Individual data sets were normalized
with control vehicle-treated cells; DDCT values were
normalized with L32 as an internal control.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials
Dasatinib, BIBW2992, PD0325091 and Etoposide
were purchased from Selleck Chemicals (Houston,
TX) and prepared as 20 mM stock solutions in DMSO.
Antibodies used included anti-YAP-TAZ, pLats, Lats1,
Lats2, pMST1/2, pH2AX, MEK, pMEK(S217/221),
ERK, pERK(T202/Y204), pRb, pS6, LC3A/B, ATM,
pChk1, Chk1, pChk2, Chk2, pCDC25c, pATRIP, p27,
p21, pp38, β-catenin, cyclin D1, survivin, p4EBP1,
pSMAD2(S465–467), p70S6K, pCDC2, CDC6,
γH2AX, ATR, pDNA-PK(S2056) and DNA-PK, (Cell
Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA); BRAF and cyclin
E (Santa Cruz, Dallas, TX) and ATM, Flag M2 and
β-actin (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO); pATM(S1981)
(GeneTex, Irvine, CA). Predesigned siRNAs of the target
genes were purchased from Dharmacon (Pittsburgh, PA)
or Thermo Scientific (Rodckford, IL). pcDNA4-Chk1Flag and pCMV5-TOPO-3Xflag-TAZ plasmids were
purchased from Addgene (Cambridge, MA). WTBRAF
plasmid was provided by Dr. W. Kolch (Systems Biology
Irland and The Conway Institute, University College
Dublin).

COMET assay
The alkaline COMET/single-cell gel electrophoresis
assay was performed according to the manufacturer’s
suggested protocol (OxiSelect COMET assay Kit, Cell
Biolabs Inc., San Diego, CA). In brief, OxiSelect COMET
slides were coated with COMET agarose mixed with
experimental cells (104 cells/mL). After on-slide cell lysis
with lysis buffer, cells were subjected to electrophoresis

Cell culture
Human NSCLC cell lines were obtained from
Dr. John Heymach, confirmed with DNA fingerprinting,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

575

Oncotarget

Senescence-associated β-galactosidase staining
and apoptosis assay

for 30 minutes under 1 volt/cm at 4°C. After
electrophoresis, cells were stained with Vista Green DNA
dye and visualized with epifluorescence microscopy using
a FITC filter [44, 45]. Tail length, head length, and tail
moment were measured using COMET-Assay IV software
V4.3 (Perceptive Instruments, Bury St Edmunds, UK).

Senescence-associated β-galactosidase staining was
performed using the β-galactosidase staining kit (Cell
Signaling Technology) according to the manufacturer’s
suggested protocol and visualized under an Olympus
1X71 phase microscope (Melville, NY). In brief, cells
were fixed with formaldehyde at room temperature for 10
minutes followed by overnight staining with X-galactoside
at 37°C [3]. Fields that contained at least 100 cells were
counted in triplicate. To measure apoptosis, cells were
treated with the drugs as described in the figure legends
and digested by Accutase Cell Detachment Solution
(BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA), stained by using FITC
Annextin V Apoptosis Detection Kit (BD Biosciences,
San Jose, CA). Apoptotic cells was detected by Gallios
Flow Cytometer (Beckman Coulter, Inc., Brea CA) and
analyzed by Kaluza software in MD Anderson Cancer
Center flow cytometry core lab.

Overexpression and knockdown of TAZ, Lats1,
p21, Chk1 and WTBRAF
To knock down expression, we used predesigned
sets of 4 independent siRNA sequences of the target genes
(siGENOME SMARTpool, Dharmacon, and Thermo
Scientific, Pittsburgh, PA). To achieve overexpression of
Chk1 and TAZ, we used pcDNA4-Chk1-Flag for Chk1
and pCMV5-TOPO-3Xflag-TAZ for TAZ (Addgene).
Controls included cells that were mock transfected (no
siRNA or DNA), those transfected with vector alone
(for overexpression experiments), and those transfected
with a nontargeting (scrambled) siRNA (for knockdown
experiments). Cells were harvested, washed, and
suspended (2 × 106/100 μL) in Nucleofector V solution
(Lonza Group, Walkersville, MD). siRNA (200 pmol/100
μL), DNA (3 μg/100 μL), or controls were added and
electroporated using the U031 or U024 Nucleofector
program (Lonza) as described previously [46]. WTBRAF
overexpression was performed by Lipofectamine 3000
Transfection Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific, Grand
Island, NY) according to the manufacturer’s instruction.
Overexpression or knockdown was confirmed using
Western blot analysis as described above.

Gene expression
NSCLC cells were incubated with vehicle control or
150nM dasatinib for 72 hours and total RNA was isolated
using the RNeasy Mini kit (Qiagen). The quality of the
RNA was measured using an Agilent 2100 Bio-analyser
(Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, CA). RNA samples were
processed for microarray profiling using the GeneChip
Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 platform (Affymetrix, Santa
Clara, CA). In vitro transcription, cDNA target preparation,
cDNA fragmentation and labelling, hybridization, and chip
scanning for subsequent generation of raw data files (.CEL
files) were performed by Asuragen, Inc (Austin, TX) as
previously described [48]. Microarray expression data were
analysed using BRB-ArrayTools version 4.3 developed by
Richard Simon and The BRB-ArrayTools development
team [49]. Raw data were quantified using background
correction and normalized using Robust Multichip Analysis
in the R environment [50]. Basic quality control was
assessed using graphical summaries of array intensities and
Bland-Altman (M-versus-A) plots. Minimum information
about microarray experiments–compliant data were
submitted to the Gene Expression Omnibus under series
GSE69395. Two 2-sample t tests with random variance
were performed in sensitive and resistant cells separately
to identify gene features in either cell line group that
were significantly (absolute fold-change ≥ 1.35, P < 0.05)
differentially expressed following treatment with dasatinib
[51]. Ratios of the differentially expressed gene features
(n = 2,061) in treated cells compared with control cells
were then derived, and these ratios were cross-compared
between dasatinib-sensitive and -resistant cells. Pathway
analysis of the differentially expressed gene features was
performed using Ingenuity pathway analysis.

Reverse-phase protein array proteomic analysis
Antibody validation and RPPA analysis were
performed as described previously [47]. Briefly, protein
lysate was collected from NSCLC cell cultures after 72
hours in 150nM dasatinib or vehicle control. Protein
lysates (1 μg/μL) were printed (2470 Arrayer; Aushon
Biosystems, Burlington, MA) on nitrocellulose-coated
slides (Grace Bio-Labs, Bend, OR) and immunostaining
was performed using a DakoCytomation-catalyzed
system and diaminobenzidine colorimetric reaction. Spot
intensities were quantified using MicroVigene software
(VigeneTech Inc., Carlisle, MA).

Cell viability assays
Cell viability was measured using the MTT
assay as previously described [42]. In the indicated cell
lines, viability was assessed using the CellTiter Glo
proliferation assay (Promega, Madison, WI) according
to the manufacturer’s specifications. For both assays, 6
replicates were tested at each concentration, and each test
was completed at least twice on different days.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

576

Oncotarget

REFERENCES

Drug sensitivity
Half-maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) data
from the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia database were
obtained from http://www.broadinstitute.org/ccle/home
[27]. IC50 data from the Genomics of Drug Sensitivity
in Cancer database were downloaded from http://www.
cancerrxgene.org/ [52]. IC50 values from our data were
estimated using the drexplorer package as previously
described [53]. IC50 values were then determined from the
best dose-response model identified by residual standard
error. The concordance correlation coefficient was used
to assess reproducibility from biological replicates.
A 2-sample t test was used to determine whether mean
IC50 values (after log10 transformation) were statistically
different (P < 0.05) between WTBRAF and KIBRAF cells.

1.	 Reungwetwattana T and Dy GK. Targeted therapies in
development for non-small cell lung cancer. J Carcinog.
2013; 12:22.
2.	 Johnson FM, Bekele BN, Feng L, Wistuba I, Tang XM,
Tran HT, Erasmus JJ, Hwang LL, Takebe N, Blumenschein
GR, Lippman SM and Stewart DJ. Phase II study of dasatinib in patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer.
J Clin Oncol. 2010; 28:4609–4615.
3.	 Sen B, Peng S, Tang X, Erickson HS, Galindo H, Mazumdar
T, Stewart DJ, Wistuba I and Johnson FM. Kinase-impaired
BRAF mutations in lung cancer confer sensitivity to dasatinib. Sci Transl Med. 2012; 4:136ra170.
4.	 Deschenes-Simard X, Kottakis F, Meloche S and Ferbeyre
G. ERKs in cancer: friends or foes? Cancer Res. 2014;
74:412–419.

Reactive oxygen species (ROS)

5.	 Roskoski R, Jr. RAF protein-serine/threonine kinases:
Structure and regulation. Biochem Biophys Res Commun.
2010; 399:313–317.

ROS was measured by cellROX oxidative stress
reagent (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA) according to
the manufacturer’s instructions. In brief, cells were treated
with 150nM dasatinib for the indicated times and then
incubated with cellROX green fluorogenic probe, which
exhibits strong fluorogenic signals upon oxidation. Cells
were then washed and analyzed using flow cytometry.
For a positive control, each cell line was treated with
Tert-butyl hydroperoxide to produce ROS. SYTOX red
dead cell stain was used to exclude dead cells during flow
cytometry analysis.

6.	 Emuss V, Garnett M, Mason C and Marais R. Mutations of
C-RAF are rare in human cancer because C-RAF has a low
basal kinase activity compared with B-RAF. Cancer Res.
2005; 65:9719–9726.
7.	 Paik PK, Arcila ME, Fara M, Sima CS, Miller VA, Kris
MG, Ladanyi M and Riely GJ. Clinical Characteristics of
Patients With Lung Adenocarcinomas Harboring BRAF
Mutations. J Clin Oncol. 2011.
8.	 Imielinski M, Berger AH, Hammerman PS, Hernandez B,
Pugh TJ, Hodis E, Cho J, Suh J, Capelletti M, Sivachenko
A, Sougnez C, Auclair D, Lawrence MS, Stojanov P,
Cibulskis K, Choi K, et al. Mapping the hallmarks of lung
adenocarcinoma with massively parallel sequencing. Cell.
2012; 150:1107–1120.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We gratefully acknowledge Erica Goodoff and
the Department of Scientific Publications for editorial
assistance with the manuscript.

9.	 Chen D, Zhang LQ, Huang JF, Liu K, Chuai ZR, Yang Z,
Wang YX, Shi DC, Liu Q, Huang Q and Fu WL. BRAF
mutations in patients with non-small cell lung cancer: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS One. 2014;
9:e101354.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
FMJ has research funding from PIQUR
Pharmaceuticals and has been on the scientific advisory
boards for Novartis and Bristol-Myers Squibb. JVH
has research funding from GalaxoSmithKline and Astra
Zeneca and has been on a scientific advisory board for
Astra Zeneca, GalaxoSmithKline, and Genentech. All
others have no conflicts of interest.

10.	 Ding L, Getz G, Wheeler DA, Mardis ER, McLellan
MD, Cibulskis K, Sougnez C, Greulich H, Muzny DM,
Morgan MB, Fulton L, Fulton RS, Zhang Q, Wendl MC,
Lawrence MS, Larson DE, et al. Somatic mutations affect
key pathways in lung adenocarcinoma. Nature. 2008;
455:1069–1075.

GRANT SUPPORT

11.	 Litvak AM, Paik PK, Woo KM, Sima CS, Hellmann MD,
Arcila ME, Ladanyi M, Rudin CM, Kris MG and Riely
GJ. Clinical characteristics and course of 63 patients
with BRAF mutant lung cancers. J Thorac Oncol. 2014;
9:1669–1674.

This work was supported by the American Lung
Association (FMJ). Flow cytometry and bioinformatics
were supported by the National Cancer Institute Cancer
Center Support Grant P30CA016672 (to MD Anderson).
Drug screens were supported by generous philanthropic
contributions to The University of Texas MD Anderson
Lung Cancer Moonshot (JVH).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

12.	 Halilovic E and Solit DB. Therapeutic strategies for inhibiting oncogenic BRAF signaling. Curr Opin Pharmacol.
2008; 8:419–426.

577

Oncotarget

13.	 Wan PT, Garnett MJ, Roe SM, Lee S, Niculescu-Duvaz D,
Good VM, Jones CM, Marshall CJ, Springer CJ, Barford D
and Marais R. Mechanism of activation of the RAF-ERK
signaling pathway by oncogenic mutations of B-RAF. Cell.
2004; 116:855–867.

Chapman PB, Bollag G, et al. The RAF inhibitor PLX4032
inhibits ERK signaling and tumor cell proliferation in a
V600E BRAF-selective manner. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
2010; 107:14903–14908.
27.	 Barretina J, Caponigro G, Stransky N, Venkatesan K,
Margolin AA, Kim S, Wilson CJ, Lehar J, Kryukov
GV, Sonkin D, Reddy A, Liu M, Murray L, Berger MF,
Monahan JE, Morais P, et al. The Cancer Cell Line
Encyclopedia enables predictive modelling of anticancer
drug sensitivity. Nature. 2012; 483:603–607.

14.	 Poulikakos PI, Zhang C, Bollag G, Shokat KM and
Rosen N. RAF inhibitors transactivate RAF dimers and
ERK signalling in cells with wild-type BRAF. Nature.
2010; 464:427–430.
15.	 Kwong LN and Chin L. The brothers RAF. Cell. 2010;
140:180–182.

28.	 Garnett MJ, Edelman EJ, Heidorn SJ, Greenman CD,
Dastur A, Lau KW, Greninger P, Thompson IR, Luo X,
Soares J, Liu Q, Iorio F, Surdez D, Chen L, Milano RJ,
Bignell GR, et al. Systematic identification of genomic
markers of drug sensitivity in cancer cells. Nature. 2012;
483:570–575.

16.	 Heidorn SJ, Milagre C, Whittaker S, Nourry A, NiculescuDuvas I, Dhomen N, Hussain J, Reis-Filho JS, Springer CJ,
Pritchard C and Marais R. Kinase-dead BRAF and oncogenic RAS cooperate to drive tumor progression through
CRAF. Cell. 2010; 140:209–221.

29.	 Di Micco R, Sulli G, Dobreva M, Liontos M, Botrugno
OA, Gargiulo G, dal Zuffo R, Matti V, dʼArio G, Montani
E, Mercurio C, Hahn WC, Gorgoulis V, et al. Interplay
between oncogene-induced DNA damage response and
heterochromatin in senescence and cancer. Nat Cell Biol.
2011; 13:292–302.

17.	 Li J, Rix U, Fang B, Bai Y, Edwards A, Colinge J, Bennett
KL, Gao J, Song L, Eschrich S, Superti-Furga G, Koomen
J and Haura EB. A chemical and phosphoproteomic characterization of dasatinib action in lung cancer. Nat Chem
Biol. 2010; 6:291–299.
18.	 Bantscheff M, Eberhard D, Abraham Y, Bastuck S,
Boesche M, Hobson S, Mathieson T, Perrin J, Raida M,
Rau C, Reader V, Sweetman G, Bauer A, Bouwmeester T,
Hopf C, Kruse U, et al. Quantitative chemical proteomics
reveals mechanisms of action of clinical ABL kinase inhibitors. Nat Biotechnol. 2007; 25:1035–1044.

30.	 Mallette FA and Ferbeyre G. The DNA damage signaling
pathway connects oncogenic stress to cellular senescence.
Cell Cycle. 2007; 6:1831–1836.
31.	 Fanta S, Sonnenberg M, Skorta I, Duyster J, Miething C,
Aulitzky WE and van der Kuip H. Pharmacological inhibition of c-Abl compromises genetic stability and DNA repair
in Bcr-Abl-negative cells. Oncogene. 2008; 27:4380–4384.

19.	 Packer LM, Rana S, Hayward R, OʼHare T, Eide CA,
Rebocho A, Heidorn S, Zabriskie MS, Niculescu-Duvaz I,
Druker BJ, Springer C and Marais R. Nilotinib and MEK
inhibitors induce synthetic lethality through paradoxical
activation of RAF in drug-resistant chronic myeloid leukemia. Cancer Cell. 2012; 20:715–727.

32.	 Raju U, Johnson FM, Glisson BS, Riesterer O, Milas L
and Ang K. (2008). Mechanisms of enhanced radiosensitivity of human head and neck squamous cell carcinomas
by dasatinib (BMS-354825, an inhibitor of Src kinases)
include induction of apoptosis and inhibition of DNA
repair. Proceedings of the American Association for Cancer
Research. (San Diego, CA, pp. 642.

20.	 Harvey KF, Zhang X and Thomas DM. The Hippo
pathway and human cancer. Nat Rev Cancer. 2013;
13:246–257.

33.	 Seoane S, Montero JC, Ocana A and Pandiella A. Effect
of multikinase inhibitors on caspase-independent cell death
and DNA damage in HER2-overexpressing breast cancer
cells. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2010; 102:1432–1446.

21.	 Zhou Z, Hao Y, Liu N, Raptis L, Tsao MS and Yang X.
TAZ is a novel oncogene in non-small cell lung cancer.
Oncogene. 2011; 30:2181–2186.
22.	 Podhorecka M, Skladanowski A and Bozko P. H2AX
Phosphorylation: Its Role in DNA Damage Response and
Cancer Therapy. Journal of nucleic acids. 2010; 2010.

34.	 Chen J, Fujii K, Zhang L, Roberts T and Fu H. Raf-1
promotes cell survival by antagonizing apoptosis
signal-­
regulating kinase 1 through a MEK-ERK independent mechanism. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001;
98:7783–7788.

23.	 Piccolo S, Dupont S and Cordenonsi M. The biology of
YAP/TAZ: hippo signaling and beyond. Physiological
reviews. 2014; 94:1287–1312.

35.	 Kamata T, Hussain J, Giblett S, Hayward R, Marais R and
Pritchard C. BRAF inactivation drives aneuploidy by deregulating CRAF. Cancer Res. 2011; 70:8475–8486.

24.	 Wajapeyee N, Serra RW, Zhu X, Mahalingam M and
Green MR. Oncogenic BRAF induces senescence and apoptosis through pathways mediated by the secreted protein
IGFBP7. Cell. 2008; 132:363–374.

36.	 OʼNeill E, Rushworth L, Baccarini M and Kolch W. Role of
the kinase MST2 in suppression of apoptosis by the protooncogene product Raf-1. Science. 2004; 306:2267–2270.

25.	 Lin AW, Barradas M, Stone JC, van Aelst L, Serrano M and
Lowe SW. Premature senescence involving p53 and p16
is activated in response to constitutive MEK/MAPK mitogenic signaling. Genes Dev. 1998; 12:3008–3019.

37.	 Romano D, Nguyen LK, Matallanas D, Halasz M, Doherty
C, Kholodenko BN and Kolch W. Protein interaction
switches coordinate Raf-1 and MST2/Hippo signalling. Nat
Cell Biol. 2014; 16:673–684.

26.	 Joseph EW, Pratilas CA, Poulikakos PI, Tadi M, Wang W,
Taylor BS, Halilovic E, Persaud Y, Xing F, Viale A, Tsai J,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

578

Oncotarget

38.	 Guo C, Zhang X and Pfeifer GP. The tumor suppressor
RASSF1A prevents dephosphorylation of the mammalian
STE20-like kinases MST1 and MST2. J Biol Chem. 2011;
286:6253–6261.

activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) activation and ­cancer
cell survival via altered Janus-activated kinase-STAT3
binding. Cancer Res. 2009; 69:1958–1965.
47.	 Mazumdar T, Byers LA, Ng PK, Mills GB, Peng S, Diao L,
Fan YH, Stemke-Hale K, Heymach JV, Myers JN, Glisson
BS and Johnson FM. A Comprehensive Evaluation of
Biomarkers Predictive of Response to PI3K Inhibitors and
of Resistance Mechanisms in Head and Neck Squamous
Cell Carcinoma. Mol Cancer Ther. 2014; 13:2738–2750.

39.	 Jiang L, Rong R, Sheikh MS and Huang Y. Mitotic arrest
by tumor suppressor RASSF1A is regulated via CHK1
phosphorylation. Mol Cancer Res. 2014; 12:119–129.
40.	 Hamilton G, Yee KS, Scrace S and OʼNeill E. ATM regulates a RASSF1A-dependent DNA damage response. Curr
Biol. 2009; 19:2020–2025.

48.	 Chen C, Mendez E, Houck J, Fan W, Lohavanichbutr P,
Doody D, Yueh B, Futran ND, Upton M, Farwell DG,
Schwartz SM and Zhao LP. Gene expression profiling
identifies genes predictive of oral squamous cell carcinoma.
Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2008; 17:2152–2162.

41.	 Johnson FM, Saigal B, Talpaz M and Donato NJ. Dasatinib
(BMS-354825) tyrosine kinase inhibitor suppresses invasion and induces cell cycle arrest and apoptosis of head
and neck squamous cell carcinoma and non-small cell lung
­cancer cells. Clin Cancer Res. 2005; 11(19 Pt 1):6924-6932.

49.	 Simon R, Lam A, Li MC, Ngan M, Menenzes S and
Zhao Y. Analysis of gene expression data using BRBArrayTools. Cancer informatics. 2007; 3:11-17.

42.	 Johnson FM, Saigal B, Tran H and Donato NJ. Abrogation
of signal transducer and activator of transcription 3
­reactivation after Src kinase inhibition results in synergistic
antitumor effects. Clin Cancer Res. 2007; 13:4233–4244.

50.	 Irizarry RA, Bolstad BM, Collin F, Cope LM, Hobbs B and
Speed TP. Summaries of Affymetrix GeneChip probe level
data. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003; 31:e15.

43.	 Sen B, Peng S, Woods DM, Wistuba I, Bell D, El-Naggar
AK, Lai SY and Johnson FM. STAT5A-mediated SOCS2
expression regulates Jak2 and STAT3 activity following
c-Src inhibition in head and neck squamous carcinoma. Clin
Cancer Res. 2012; 18:127–139.

51.	 Wright GW and Simon RM. A random variance model for
detection of differential gene expression in small microarray experiments. Bioinformatics. 2003; 19:2448–2455.
52.	 Yang W, Soares J, Greninger P, Edelman EJ, Lightfoot
H, Forbes S, Bindal N, Beare D, Smith JA, Thompson IR,
Ramaswamy S, Futreal PA, Haber DA, Stratton MR, Benes
C, McDermott U, et al. Genomics of Drug Sensitivity in
Cancer (GDSC): a resource for therapeutic biomarker
discovery in cancer cells. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013;
41(Database issue):D955-961.

44.	 Singh NP, McCoy MT, Tice RR and Schneider EL.
A ­
simple technique for quantitation of low levels of
DNA damage in individual cells. Exp Cell Res. 1988;
175:184–191.
45.	 Olive PL, Banath JP and Durand RE. Heterogeneity in
­radiation-induced DNA damage and repair in tumor and
normal cells measured using the "comet" assay. Radiat Res.
1990; 122:86–94.

53.	 Tong P, Coombes KR, Johnson FM, Byers LA, Diao L, Liu
DD, Lee JJ, Heymach JV and Wang J. drexplorer: A tool to
explore dose-response relationships and drug-drug interactions. Bioinformatics. 2015; 31:1692–1694.

46.	 Sen B, Saigal B, Parikh N, Gallick G and Johnson FM.
Sustained Src inhibition results in signal transducer and

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

579

Oncotarget

