Correspondence

Association Between Tamoxifen
Treatment and Diabetes
A Population-Based Study

We read with great interest the elegant article by Lipscombe et al in a recent issue of Cancer.1 The authors concluded that older women who are taking tamoxifen may
have an increased risk of developing diabetes. However,
we believe that the article has some shortcomings that can
be misleading. Lipscombe et al have proposed that tamoxifen can result in weight gain, which was one of the suggested mechanisms for the increased risk of diabetes in
these patients. However, the article provides no information regarding the weight of the patients in either group
and the results have not been adjusted for weight that was
proposed as a risk factor for diabetes, which is a methodological weak point of the study. In addition, the suggested
mechanism does not appear to be true because several
studies have shown that tamoxifen has no significant effect
on weight gain2 and Lipscombe et al. also demonstrated
that the risk of diabetes increased only during tamoxifen
treatment and not after the cessation of therapy.
The most important mechanism that was suggested
by the authors for the increased risk of diabetes in tamoxifen users was the estrogen inhibitory effects of tamoxifen.
However, it is not clear what it meant exactly by ‘‘estrogen
inhibition.’’ Tamoxifen is a selective estrogen receptor
modulator and acts as an estrogen agonist, partial agonist,
or antagonist in different tissues. For example, although tamoxifen acts against the effects of estrogen in breast tissue,
it acts similar to estrogen in many other tissues such as the
endometrium and liver,3 and there is no evidence in the literature that it works as an estrogen antagonist in pancreatic
cells. There is even some evidence of a positive correlation
between serum concentrations of tamoxifen and estrogen.4
Thus, this suggested mechanism does not appear to be true.
The other mechanisms proposed, such as an
increase in beta-cell apoptosis by tamoxifen, lack evidence to support them. Thus, if further studies support
the finding that tamoxifen therapy can result in diabetes, similar to what is observed in androgen deprivation
therapy for prostate cancer, then we will need to determine proper mechanisms to explain this association. A
recent review article has suggested that tamoxifen has
extensive modulatory effects on immunity and most
6012

likely confers these effects through an estrogen-independent mechanism.5 This could mean that tamoxifen
use could result in the alteration of the cytokine environment and many other immunity cell-related derivatives, which may be related to the etiology of many
diseases such as diabetes.

REFERENCES
1. Lipscombe LL, Fischer HD, Yun L, et al. Association between
tamoxifen treatment and diabetes: a population-based study
[published online ahead of print September 20, 2011]. Cancer. doi: 10.1002/cncr.26559.
2. Kumar NB, Allen K, Cantor A, et al. Weight gain associated
with adjuvant tamoxifen therapy in stage I and II breast cancer:
fact or artifact? Breast Cancer Res Treat. 1997;44: 135-143.
3. MacGregor JI, Jordan VC. Basic guide to the mechanisms of
antiestrogen action. Pharmacol Rev. 1998;50:151-196.
4. Gjerde J, Geisler J, Lundgren S, et al. Associations between
tamoxifen, estrogens, and FSH serum levels during steady
state tamoxifen treatment of postmenopausal women with
breast cancer. BMC Cancer. 2010;10:313.
5. Behjati S, Frank MH. The effects of tamoxifen on immunity.
Curr Med Chem. 2009;16:3076-3080.
Jalal Hejazi, PhD candidate
Reza Rastmanesh, PhD
Department of Clinical Nutrition & Dietetics
Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences
National Nutrition and Food Sciences
Technology Research Institute
Arghavane Gharbi
Tehran, Iran
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.27517, Published online: July 6, 2012 in
Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Reply to Association Between
Tamoxifen Treatment and
Diabetes
A Population-Based Study

We thank Drs. Hejazi and Rastmanesh for their interest in
our article. The purpose of our study was to determine
whether there is an association between tamoxifen therapy
and diabetes, and our findings will need to be confirmed in
other populations. Although our population-based databases
have the advantage of providing a large sample size with which
to address that question, they lack detailed clinical information such as that regarding weight gain and other risk factors.
Cancer

December 1, 2012

