Commentary

Contract Research Organizations in Oncology Clinical
Research: Challenges and Opportunities
Daniel A. Roberts, MD1; Hagop M. Kantarjian, MD2; and David P. Steensma, MD3
Contract research organizations (CROs) represent a multibillion dollar industry that is firmly embedded in the contemporary clinical
trial process. Over the past 30 years, and especially within the last decade, the reach of CROs has extended to service all phases of
drug trials in an increasingly global research environment. The presence of CROs is particularly noticeable in medical oncology
because of the large number of investigational compounds developed to treat cancer that are currently undergoing testing in human
subjects. Although limited data are available with which to objectively define the effects that CROs have had on the clinical trial process, with the expansion of these organizations, several reports have called into question whether ethical and professional standards
in research conduct are at times secondary to economic considerations. CROs can add considerable value to the clinical trial process,
but difficulty communicating with CRO representatives and time spent answering trivial data queries generated by CROs are current
obstacles for study site personnel interacting with CROs. Further study of the effect of the CRO industry on the clinical trial process
is needed to ensure efficient data collection and patient safety while collaboratively developing novel therapies in an expedited fashC 2016 American Cancer Society.
ion. Cancer 2016;122:1476-82. V
KEYWORDS: clinical trial; contract research organizations; drug trial; ethics.

INTRODUCTION
Contract research organizations (CROs) are private corporations that perform a wide variety of clinical research-related duties
and functions on behalf of biotechnology, pharmaceutical, and medical device companies sponsoring studies in human subjects.1 Because of economic and regulatory factors, CROs are playing an increasingly visible role in clinical research and the
management of clinical trials, such that interactions with CRO personnel and CRO-originated queries regarding study participants have become a ubiquitous presence in the professional lives of clinical investigators, especially in fields such as medical oncology, in which there are currently a large number of investigational compounds and ongoing interventional trials.
High-quality CROs have the potential to add substantial benefit to the clinical trial process, including improving the quality of data collection and trial standardization. After more than 30 years of CRO activity, the concept appears to be here to stay.
However, interactions between study site teams and CROs are not always efficient or productive. CROs are widely perceived as
adding bureaucratic burden to trial conduct, increasing costs, and contributing to delays in protocol conduct, without a demonstrable benefit in the quality of data collection or improvements in patient safety.2-4 Investigators also have expressed concern
regarding a creeping process of “research fundamentalism” inhibiting cancer research, to which the micromanagement culture
of some CROs contributes.4,5 In this article, we survey the activities of CROs in the contemporary clinical trial landscape,
describe the benefits that CROs offer and the risks that they can pose to safe and ethical research conduct, highlight the burden
that some CROs currently impose on clinical investigators, and outline potential opportunities for improvement.
Origin and Expansion of CROs

The birth of the CRO can be traced to 1982. In that year, Quintiles was founded by a biostatistician from the University
of North Carolina to provide fee-for-service consultative data support for clinical trials, and a newly formed company,
Theradex Oncology Experts, received the clinical trials monitoring service contract from the National Cancer Institute.6,7
In the 1980s, both the National Cancer Institute and large pharmaceutical companies were searching for ways to address
rising research and development costs, including increasingly detailed requirements for New Drug Application submission to regulatory agencies such as the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the various national precursors of
the European Medicines Agency,8 at a time when available capital for research was perceived as increasingly limited.9
CROs were envisioned as a form of outsourcing, a broader corporate trend of subcontracting that originated during the

Corresponding author: David P. Steensma, MD, Adult Leukemia Program, Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical
School, 450 Brookline Ave, Dana 2037, Boston, MA 02215; Fax: (617) 632-2933; david_steensma@dfci.harvard.edu
1
Department of Medicine, Saint Vincent Hospital, Worcester, Massachusetts; 2Department of Leukemia, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas; 3Division of Hematological Malignancies, Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts.

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29994, Received: February 9, 2016; Revised: February 29, 2016; Accepted: March 7, 2016, Published online March 28, 2016 in Wiley Online
Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

1476

Cancer

May 15, 2016

CROs in Oncology/Roberts et al

same period (the term “outsourcing,” a contraction of
“outside resourcing,” dates to 1981).10 CRO outsourcing
provided “spillover capacity” for data management and
biostatistical analysis during peak activity periods, when
the pharmaceutical companies’ own employees had insufficient capacity to complete all necessary tasks.
By the 1990s, the scope of CRO activities had
expanded to service all aspects of Phase 2 to 4 trials, including interfacing with investigators, collecting samples for
laboratory analysis and conducting analyses, and assisting
with dealer management systems and the preparation of
regulatory submissions. The CRO market has grown from
an estimated $2 billion in 1993 to $10 billion in 2005 and
$25.3 billion in 2013, a substantial percentage of the estimated annual clinical research and development expenditures of $130 billion made by the pharmaceutical industry
in that latter year.11-13 The increasingly prominent role of
CROs in medical research also is evidenced by the shift of
sponsors from using “preferred providers,” longitudinal
relationships with a single CRO, to choosing “strategic
partnerships” with CROs on a rotating basis, with contract
terms of up to 3 to 5 years.11
Recent estimates indicate that by 2020, greater than
70% of clinical trials will be conducted by CROs, with the
largest 4 CROs, Quintiles, Parexel, Pharmaceutical Product Development LLC, and INC Research, currently associated with the lion’s share of trials.14 Other smaller CROs,
including Covance Inc, Medpace Inc, PRA Health Sciences, inVentiv Health, and Chiltern International Ltd, were
responsible for approximately 20% of trials in a 2014 survey.15 A 2015 survey predicted the CRO compound annual growth rate at 9.83% during the next 5 years.
Despite this high market penetrance and continued
growth, details regarding the activities of CROs and their
influence on research conduct have been poorly studied to
date. For example, to our knowledge, there currently are no
mechanisms with which to comparatively evaluate the quality, efficiency, competence and expertise, accuracy of data
collection, and cost-effectiveness of CROs involved in cancer research.16
Several major forces are driving the continued
increased market share of CROs, including the globalization of clinical trials, the growth in narrowly used and
costly specialty drugs, and the increasing challenge and
cost to pharmaceutical companies of hiring skilled
benefits-eligible permanent workers. In 2004, approximately 60% of CRO revenue came from the United
States, whereas approximately 40% was international; in
2013, these numbers were nearly reversed at 43% and
57%, with a growing role of CROs noted in emerging
Cancer

May 15, 2016

clinical trial markets such as India, China, and Central
and Eastern Europe.9,11 “Specialty drugs” requiring expertise in delivery routes, rare diseases, or genomic and
other biomarkers are projected to account for 42% of
drug costs in 2016, up from 23% in 2011, and CROs are
increasingly offering extended services related to approved
specialty drugs. These postapproval commitments represent an important source of ongoing growth for the CRO
industry.17
The explosive growth of CROs in the last 20 years
rests primarily on economic grounds. Conversely, increasing product development safety and improving clinical
trial scientific methodology have not yet been key drivers
of trends in CRO use. The lengthy time to new drug
approval and the high cost of conducting all phases of
clinical trials are major challenges for sponsors; according
to a review by the Tufts Center for the Study of Drug Development, drug development times are faster with “high
CRO usage” sponsors.18 However, despite the growth of
CROs, the cost of drug development still substantially
increased between 2003 to 2014, from a reported median
of $802 million to $2.6 billion per new approval,19
although these figures have been widely challenged.20-22
Potential Risks of CROs With Respect
to Study Conduct

To the best of our knowledge, it remains unclear how the
conduct and integrity of clinical trials might be affected
by the increased use of CROs. CROs could potentially
increase the quality of collected data and rate of trial progress. However, although high-quality data are lacking,
observational reports and investigative journalism have
uncovered several concerns that merit attention from the
clinical research community.
Existing data regarding CROs

Few studies to date have compared traditional academic
organization-pharmaceutical sponsor partnership research
structures with the CRO model. In one analysis of CROs,
semistructured interviews were conducted with employees
at 25 US private-sector trial sites in the Southwest United
States between October 2003 and September 2004.23 The
Southwest was chosen because of a CenterWatch database
indicating a “preponderance” of private-sector clinical trials in the area.23 The interviews were conducted until
“saturation was reached,” meaning that the investigators
found that no new useful insights were emerging from further discussion. The lead investigator, who was trained in
qualitative sociologic methods, assessed interview transcripts and provided all interviewees with the full
1477

Commentary

transcript of their interviews and offered an opportunity
for them to edit their transcripts. The 62 informants
included 12 principal investigators (PIs), 18 study coordinators, 3 patient recruiters, 7 administrators, and 22
research participants and representatives of the pharmaceutical companies. The physicians interviewed were representative of the national demographics of industryfunded investigators. Data analysis was based on
grounded theory, with data analysis involving coding field
notes and interviews for emerging categories and themes.
A chief finding from these interviews was that: “The
physicians perceived their roles in terms of business rather
than science. . .physicians saw their primary ethical
responsibility as providing accurate data to the companies
that hired them and did not explicitly refer to their ethical
responsibility to trial participants.”23 However, the
research model and incentives may differ depending on
the setting of the trial. For example, salaried academic
investigators might view clinical trials as a bridge to career
advancement, whereas financial incentives might be a
more important motivation to private-sector physicians.23
Although to our knowledge there are no data available regarding publication bias as it relates specifically to
CROs, multiple analyses have indicated a strong association between pharmaceutical funding and the preferential
publishing of results that favor the interests of those companies.24-26 Given their principal source of funding, the
priorities of CROs are more likely to be aligned with the
interests of sponsors than with enrolled subjects or enrolling physicians. Contractual agreements reached by CROs
with pharmaceutical companies have raised concerns
regarding the inappropriate control of data by industry
sponsors, prompting the International Committee of
Medical Journal Editors to express concern regarding the
conduct of CROs with regard to trial design, access to raw
data, and publication rights.27
Communication and bureaucratic hurdles

Medical professionals and administrative staff with experience interacting with CROs often report frustrating
logistical and communication issues. To understand these
concerns better, we interviewed a convenience sample of
nonphysician study personnel, including regulatory coordinators, Institutional Review Boards, clinical research
coordinators, research nurses, and data managers at 4
academic institutions (Dana-Farber Cancer Institute/
Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Mayo Clinic,
Massachusetts General Hospital, and The University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center). Although the
interviewees stated that some CROs had been highly
1478

responsive to queries, the most commonly cited concern
was the tedious process of adverse event (AE) reporting,
which requires clinicians to attribute the likelihood of an
AE to an effect of a study drug or a combination of drugs
about which little is known, the distribution of AE
descriptions to all sites and Institutional Review Boards
involved in the trial, and possibly multiple follow-up
filings detailing the subsequent clinical course of the
patient.5 Numerous queries regarding patient medical
history and concomitant medications serve to increase
data points collected without necessarily providing
increased clarity regarding the effectiveness or AE profile
of the drug.
One senior investigator interviewed by Duke University
social scientist Jill Fisher suggested that the query process may
be due to CROs needing to impress pharmaceutical companies: “CROs, it seems, always have to prove to the company
that they’re doing a nice job, and they look at minutia so
much so that in some ways (it) can kill you.”28 In contrast to
CROs, the investigator stated that with regard to pharmaceutical sponsors, moving toward drug approval is the highest
priority and, “petty things are not on their agenda.”28
Trial staff at sites in which research is conducted also
often expressed frustration arising from on-site coordinators’ interaction with monitors, those employees assigned
by the CRO to serve as a liaison with clinical facilities
enrolling research subjects. Monitors occasionally have limited clinical experience, yet are tasked with coordinating
complex trials and collecting data from multiple sites.
Monitors also frequently are under pressure from their
CRO to fulfill an internal set of metrics and generate a certain number of queries to be fully compensated, because
many CROs contract via a unit-based payment model in
which CROs are paid by the sponsor for completing
specific tasks, including the resolution of queries.29
Situations have arisen in which monitors have undermined on-site coordinators by e-mailing on-site physicians
stating that an on-site study coordinator has violated the
contract because clinically irrelevant metrics related to these
queries have not been met.30 At the same time, on-site
coordinators reported a frequent inability to obtain timely
responses from monitors regarding clinically pressing questions related to trial conduct, which has resulted in treatment delays that occasionally have affected patient care.
Site personnel describe instances in which they have had to
contact the sponsor directly to have questions answered,
bypassing an assigned but unresponsive CRO. In several
cases, monitors assigned by CROs to oversee studies conducted in the United States did not speak English
Cancer

May 15, 2016

CROs in Oncology/Roberts et al

proficiently and were unable to communicate effectively
with study staff.
The frequent high turnover rate noted for monitors
(due to their relatively low pay and often-cited desire to be
hired by a pharmaceutical company because such companies usually provide greater upward mobility and employee benefits than CROs) compounds this process for
the on-site study coordinators and clinical investigators.
Fisher described the hiring process and transient nature of
the CRO monitor position.28 The majority of monitors
are hired with little prior experience and usually are pending or recent college graduates. CRO monitors often
aspire to and leave for pharmaceutical positions, whereas
others move within the CRO industry to other monitoring positions with more favorable benefits. Subsequently,
according to Fisher, “Most drug studies with a duration of
more than six months will have at least one change in
monitor over the course of the study, and it is not uncommon to hear about four or more monitors assigned to
studies that last more than a year. . .Roughly 60 percent
of all monitors change companies within three years, and
nearly 80 percent of all monitors are no longer in monitoring positions at all after five years.” Because of the high
turnover rate of monitors and their relative inexperience
with cancer generally or the specific tumor type under
study, some monitors are perceived to hound researchers,
as stated by one oncology PI we interviewed, “with the
zeal of Inspector Javert (from Les Miserables) and the competence of Inspector Clouseau (from The Pink Panther).”
CRO personnel who are responsible for prestudy
site selection visits also often have little, if any, clinical experience, a finding backed by Fisher’s investigations.28
Numerous study staff and PIs describe being asked the
same questions on multiple CRO-led “feasibility visits,”
such as whether their institute has a -70 8C freezer or an
on-site investigational pharmacy, even when the study site
is a major comprehensive cancer center that has other trials concurrently open and accruing patients with the same
CRO. In 2015, several major centers, including Weill
Cornell Medical Center, decided to institute a policy of
no longer conducting in-person preselection feasibility
visits because these visits were believed to be inefficient
(G. Roboz, personal communication, November 17,
2015). Similarly, site initiation visit personnel frequently
read from prepared slides and are reported to be unable to
answer basic questions regarding study conduct.
Ethical concerns

Ethical concerns regarding certain CRO practices have
arisen, although these may be exceptional cases. One
Cancer

May 15, 2016

defunct CRO, SFBC International, converted a 675-bed
Holiday Inn hotel in Miami, Florida, into a clinic in
which undocumented immigrants were paid to receive a
study drug in a trial overseen by an unlicensed physician.
The resulting scandal, reported by Bloomberg Markets in
December 2005 (http://www.journalism.columbia.edu/
system/documents/523/original/2006_Evans_Big_Pharma
_s_Shameful_Secret_MAG.pdf), was investigated by a
committee of the United States Senate and resulted in the
firm changing its name to PharmaNet Inc, which was later
acquired by inVentiv Health Clinical.31 The hotel was
subsequently demolished for fire and safety concerns.32 At
another SFBC International site in Montreal, Quebec,
Canada, a patient with active tuberculosis was allowed to
participate in a trial without respiratory isolation, leading
to 9 other participants testing positive for tuberculosis at a
later date.33 Other newsworthy events include the CRO
Parexel hiring an undertrained physician to administer an
investigational monoclonal antibody without after-hours
clinical coverage; 6 subjects enrolled by the physician
developed organ failure.33
Although these examples are egregious, because
monitors from CROs often lack clinical experience, they
may not notice genuine ethical concerns. For example,
one clinical investigator from the Southern California
Research Institute made up patients, failed to conduct
physical examinations on some patients and falsified
results on others, and substituted employee information
for patient data. In September 1998, this investigator was
found guilty of fraud, sentenced to 15 months in prison,
banned from research for 20 years, and ordered to repay
$800,000 to several pharmaceutical companies. During
this fraudulent activity, dozens of monitors assigned to
the trials were blind to the actions of the Southern California Research Institute’s investigator.28
For monitors, their technical training is usually not
enough to allow them to accurately detect fraud. Instead,
there is a large emphasis on intuition. Several of the monitors interviewed by Fisher described a strong emphasis on
intuition in their work: “You sort of get a feel for-when
you see patients really go in and out of the site-you get a
feel for whether the site is a legit site or not.”28
Outsourcing of clinical trials to the developing
world is a potential risk for CROs.34 Medical ethicists
have cited the limited ability of regulatory bodies and
Institutional Review Boards to monitor the integrity of
trial participants and the methods of data collection in
far-flung sites.35 In 2008, the US Department of Health
and Human Services (DHHS) and the Office of the Inspector General (OIG) released a report on the FDA’s
1479

Commentary

capability of monitoring foreign clinical trials. The
DHHS and the OIG found that although approximately
80% of marketing applications contained data from clinical trials with sites located outside of the United States,
and greater than one-half of all subjects in pivotal trials
leading to US drug approvals come from outside the
United States, the FDA inspected far fewer sites in foreign
countries compared with those with domestic locations.35
The DHHS/OIG report also found that the FDA might
be unaware of some ongoing, early-phase clinical trials
because they are being conducted without an Investigational New Drug application. Other reasons for the oversight limitations of the FDA involving sites outside of the
United States include data submission occurring in nonstandard formats and sponsors failing to provide details
regarding site locations and subject enrollment in clinical
study reports.35
Many CROs have joined international regulatory
bodies and been found to be in compliance with standards
set by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development.9 Nevertheless, concerns remain that poor
economic conditions in foreign markets may lead to
patients being enrolled on CRO-coordinated clinical trials due to a lack of other care options, often without
knowledge that they are entering onto a trial.36
Potential Benefits

CROs provide an additional labor pool that is rapidly
available during times of increased sponsor clinical activity, and certain aspects of CRO activities have the potential to be beneficial for drug development, including faster
development times. Independent monitors who are well
trained can provide benefit with respect to the integrity of
trials by adding a layer of professional oversight to data
collection. The insight of experienced monitors into trial
conduct can be helpful to site coordinators, who also are
often clinically inexperienced. Central laboratory analysis
provided by CROs helps to standardize study results
across multiple study sites. Although irrelevant clinical
data also are routinely collected, CROs do ensure that key
data necessary for regulatory submission are collected.
However, the concerns outlined above do call into
question whether CROs as currently constituted add an
unnecessary layer of complexity to a clinical trial process
already burdened by bureaucracy. In addition, since the
emergence of the CRO industry, there clearly is a potential risk to scientific integrity and ethical standards for
sponsors conducting research through outside entities.
This highlights the importance of ensuring clear and thorough contract negotiations between all parties to provide
1480

a strong framework with which to maintain scientific and
ethical integrity.
It is important to note that the majority of physicians who work for CROs, and the CRO industry itself,
appear to strive to produce high-quality research to benefit society. As one group pointed out in a recent essay,
there are many positive aspects to nonacademic research
efforts, including rigorous rules for data collection, the absence of the high-pressure environment of academia, and
the opportunity to work in a variety of clinical areas.8 The
academic setting contains numerous detrimental bureaucratic hurdles to research as well, including the “passing
on” of projects from grant-obtaining senior investigators
to subordinates, resulting in researchers with less experience performing the studies. A better relationship and
cooperation is needed between academic and nonacademic research spheres: “2 is better than 1.”8
Opportunities for Improvement

To the best of our knowledge, there has been only limited
scientific study of CROs. In the absence of objective data,
the Association of American Medical Colleges has issued
2 reports with suggestions and recommendations to maintain the integrity of clinical trials, including proposed safeguards for registering and reporting trials and guidelines
to ensure that study methodology, data analysis, and
research reporting maintain integrity.37 The FDA and European Medicines Agency have suggested that it is desirable that data monitoring committees for clinical trials
prepare additional statistical reports by independent statisticians, such as an academic institution or government
agency, that are not associated with the commercial sponsor or CRO. However, to address the many challenges
brought about by the privatization of clinical trials with
CROs, it most likely will take more than loose recommendations; stronger government regulatory action mandating these safeguards may be required, as well as clarity
regarding what those regulations do and do not require.
CROs may collect trivial data because of confusion or
uncertainty regarding just what data are strictly necessary
to comply with regulations. Modifying policy will require
serious political effort as well as time.
More data concerning CRO-driven research is
needed regarding publication bias, fraud rates compared
with non-CRO trials, and adherence to regulations before
drawing specific conclusions regarding the objective
effects of this trend in the clinical trials process. In the
meantime, we believe there are a few practical measures
that, if instituted, could address many of the aforementioned concerns.
Cancer

May 15, 2016

CROs in Oncology/Roberts et al

To ensure smooth communication between research
sites and CROs, monitors should be required to undergo
specific training regarding the clinical application of the
study drug. They also should be required to speak the language of the site conducting the trial to a basic level of
competence. Monitors should be held to metrics important for study conduct and patient safety, such as response
time to inquiries from clinical staff, rather than more easily measurable but potentially abused metrics such as the
number of data queries generated and resolved. In the
event that CRO monitors are unresponsive to site coordinators, CROs should always provide a direct path with
which to contact the sponsor. Prestudy site feasibility visits are often unnecessary, especially if the study site is well
established with the specific CRO from prior trials. Personnel coming to sites for study site initiation visits should
be knowledgeable regarding the trial design and the investigational product and be able to answer questions concerning study conduct.
Reports that CRO reimbursement models are beginning to change from unit-based or task-based pricing to a
“desired outputs” model may represent a change toward
rewarding clinically meaningful quality standards, and
away from a list of checkboxes that result in many of the
communication problems mentioned above.29 However,
to our knowledge, these quality standards are as yet illdefined. Should these changes become widely implemented in contracts between CROs and their sponsors,
we strongly encourage representation and input from trial
site leaders in both academic institutions and community
practices to ensure further efficiency for data collection
and patient safety.
Finally, although the value of such indices is uncertain,
a “CRO rating index” could be tested. This index could
include the transparent disclosure of metrics such as efficiency, monitor turnover frequency, the percentage of
CRO-managed studies that resulted in peer-reviewed publication, experience with specific cancer types, and cost. Such
an index could help sponsors to identify those CROs that are
not only the least expensive but deliver the best services.
Contracts between investigators and CROs could include
language imposing a surcharge to CROs for excessive queries
or too many changes in CRO personnel, or other controls.
Conclusions

CROs are playing an increasingly important role in clinical trial conduct in oncology and have the potential to add
benefit to the research enterprise, but the potential effects
of CRO use on study safety, ethical conduct, and efficiency are understudied. Concerns raised by study personCancer

May 15, 2016

nel and occasional reports of misconduct suggest that the
current CRO model is flawed and that new standards for
CRO monitors are needed. Further analysis should aid in
modifying interactions between CROs and clinical sites
and achieve universally valued goals, including the rapid
development of safe and effective novel therapies.
FUNDING SUPPORT
No specific funding was disclosed.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
David P. Steensma has received personal fees from Celgene for
registry consulting and personal fees from Amgen and Takeda for
participation in Data Safety Monitoring Committees, and has acted
as a trial design consultant for Novartis for work performed outside
of the current study.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Daniel A. Roberts: Conceptualization, methodology,
investigation, resources, writing–original draft, writing–
review and editing, visualization, and project administration. Hagop M. Kantarjian: Conceptualization, investigation, writing–original draft, and writing–review and
editing. David P. Steensma: Conceptualization, methodology, writing–original draft, writing–review and editing,
and supervision.
REFERENCES
1. CenterWatch. Search industry provider profiles. https://www.centerwatch.com/news-resources/industry-providers/services. Access date.
2. Kantarjian H, Stewart DJ, Zwelling L. Cancer research in the
United States: dying by a thousand paper cuts. Cancer. 2013;119:
3742-3745.
3. Stewart DJ, Batist G, Kantarjian HM, et al. The urgent need for
clinical research reform to permit faster, less expensive access to new
therapies for lethal diseases. Clin Cancer Res. 2015;21:4561-4568.
4. Stewart DJ, Whitney SN, Kurzrock R. Equipoise lost: ethics, costs,
and the regulation of cancer clinical research. J Clin Oncol. 2010;28:
2925-2935.
5. Steensma DP, Kantarjian HM. Impact of cancer research bureaucracy on innovation, costs, and patient care. J Clin Oncol. 2014;32:
376-378.
6. Quintiles Inc. Our history. http://www.quintiles.com/about-us/ourhistory. Accessed November 15, 2015.
7. Theradex Oncology Experts. History. http://www.theradex.com/
about/?History-2. Accessed November 15, 2015.
8. Heinemann L, Hompesch M. Role of physicians in the pharmaceutical industry and clinical research organizations: take more pride in
your work. J Diabetes Sci Technol. 2008;2:707-709.
9. Masri MD, Ramirez B, Popescu C, Reggie EM. Contract research
organizations: an industry analysis. Int J Pharm Healthcare Market.
2007;6:336-350.
10. Oxford English Dictionary. Outsourcing, n. http://www.oed.com/
view/Entry/257590?redirectedFrom=outsourcing-eid. Accessed November 17, 2015.
11. HarrisWilliams and Co. Contract research organization industry
overview. http://www.harriswilliams.com/sites/default/files/industry_
reports/2014.4.17_contract_research_organizations.pdf. Access date.
12. Brooks K. CRO industry update: growth, expansion and new opportunities. Contract Pharma. May 9, 2006. http://www.contractpharma.

1481

Commentary

13.

14.
15.

16.
17.
18.

19.
20.
21.

22.
23.
24.
25.

com/issues/2006-05/view_features/cro-industry-update/. Accessed September 19, 2015.
International Federation of Pharmaceutical Manufacturers and Associations. The Pharmaceutical Industry and Global Health: Facts and
Figures 2014. Geneva, Switzerland: International Federation of Pharmaceutical Manufacturers and Associations; 2014.
PharmaVOICE. Showcase feature: clinical solutions market poised
for growth. PharmaVOICE. June 2015. http://www.pharmavoice.
com/article/clinical-services-0615/. Accessed December 2015.
Brennan Z. Top CROs dominate competition in trial totals, review
finds. http://www.outsourcing-pharma.com/Clinical-Development/
Top-CROs-dominate-competition-in-trial-totals-review-finds.
Accessed March 10, 2016.
Gad SC, ed. Clinical Trials Handbook. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley
& Sons Inc; 2009.
Brooks K. CRO outlook and market trends. Contract Pharma. June
5, 2013. http://www.contractpharma.com/issues/2013-06/view_features/cro-outlook-market-trends/. Accessed November 1, 2015.
Tufts Center for the Study of Drug Development. CRO contribution
to drug development is substantial and growing globally. Tufts CSDD
Impact Reports. 2006;8. http://scimega.com/downloads/industry-reports/
TuftsJan-Feb06ImpactRpt.pdf. Accessed September 19, 2015.
Avorn J. The $2.6 billion pill-methodologic and policy considerations. N Engl J Med. 2015;372:1877-1879.
Goozner M. The $2.6 billion pill. Modern Healthcare. November 29,
2014. http://www.modernhealthcare.com/article/20141129/MAGAZINE/
311299984. Accessed September 19, 2015.
Light DW, Kantarjian H. Cancer drugs’ rising costs: the $100,000
myth. AARP Bulletin. May 2014. http://www.aarp.org/health/drugssupplements/info-2014/rising-cost-of-cancer-drugs.html.
Accessed
January 2016.
Light DW, Warburton R. Demythologizing the high costs of pharmaceutical research. BioSocieties. 2011;6:34-50.
Fisher JA, Kalbaugh CA. United States private-sector physicians and
pharmaceutical contract research: a qualitative study. PLoS Med.
2012;9:e1001271.
Bekelman JE, Li Y, Gross CP. Scope and impact of financial conflicts of interest in biomedical research: a systematic review. JAMA.
2003;289:454-465.
Lexchin J, Bero LA, Djulbegovic B, Clark O. Pharmaceutical industry sponsorship and research outcome and quality: systematic review.
BMJ. 2003;326:1167-1170.

1482

26. Sismondo S. Pharmaceutical company funding and its consequences: a
qualitative systematic review. Contemp Clin Trials. 2008;29:109-113.
27. Davidoff F, DeAngelis CD, Drazen JM, et al; International Committee of Medical Journal Editors. Sponsorship, authorship and
accountability. CMAJ. 2001;165:786-788.
28. Fisher JA. Medical Research For Hire: The Political Economy of
Pharmaceutical Clinical Trials. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press; 2009.
29. Elvidge S. The evolution of CRO reimbursement: shifting from taskdriven units to desired outputs. Life Science Leader. July 1, 2015. http://
www.lifescienceleader.com/doc/the-evolution-of-cro-reimbursement-shiftingfrom-task-driven-units-to-desired-outputs-0001. Accessed March 10, 2016.
30. Dan Roberts MD. Interview with site coordinators of the Adult Leukemia Program, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute-Harvard Cancer Center. Boston, MA: 2015
31. inVentiv Health Clinical. InVentiv Health completes PharmaNet acquisition: positions inVentiv among top global contract research organizations.
http://www.inventivhealthclinical.com/e08b0310-da2f-4e97-bab7-a200a
9d8ba2e/media-center-press-releases-detail.htm. Accessed December
2015.
32. Elliot C. What Happens When Profit Margins Drive Clinical
Research? Mother Jones. September/October 2010 Issue. http://www.
motherjones.com/environment/2010/09/clinical-trials-contact-researchorganizations. Accessed March 10, 2016.
33. Shuchman M. Commercializing clinical trials-risks and benefits of
the CRO boom. N Engl J Med. 2007;357:1365-1368.
34. van Huijstee M, Schipper I, eds. Putting Contract Research Organisations on the Radar. An Exploratory Study on the Outsourcing of
Clinical Trials by Pharmaceutical Companies to Contract Research
Organisations in Non-Traditional Trial Regions. Amsterdam, the
Netherlands: SOMO Centre for Research on Multinational Corporations; 2011.
35. Levinson D. Challenges to FDA’s Ability to Monitor and Inspect
Foreign Clinical Trials. Washington, DC: Department of Health
and Human Services, Office of the Inspector General; 2010.
36. Singh M. Should clinical trials be outsourced? Time. August 7,
2008. http://www.time.com/time/health/article/0,8599,1830334,00.
html. Accessed November, 2015.
37. Lo B, Field MJ, eds; Institute of Medicine Committee on Conflict
of Interest in Medical Research, Education, and Practice. Conflict of
Interest in Medical Research, Education, and Practice. Washington,
DC: The National Academies Press; 2009.

Cancer

May 15, 2016

