Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 39

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

Differential effects of histone deacetylase inhibitors on cellular
drug transporters and their implications for using epigenetic
modifiers in combination chemotherapy
Benigno C. Valdez1, Yang Li1, David Murray2, Jonathan E. Brammer1, Yan Liu1,
Chitra Hosing1, Yago Nieto1, Richard E. Champlin1, Borje S. Andersson1
1

Department of Stem Cell Transplantation and Cellular Therapy, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
Texas 77030, USA

2

Department of Experimental Oncology, Cross Cancer Institute, Edmonton, Alberta T6G 1Z2, Canada

Correspondence to: Benigno C. Valdez, email: bvaldez@mdanderson.org
Keywords: HDAC inhibitors, drug transporter, combination therapy, lymphoma, pre-transplant regimen
Received: May 05, 2016     Accepted: August 11, 2016     Published: August 24, 2016

ABSTRACT
HDAC inhibitors, DNA alkylators and nucleoside analogs are effective components
of combination chemotherapy. To determine a possible mechanism of their synergism,
we analyzed the effects of HDAC inhibitors on the expression of drug transporters
which export DNA alkylators. Exposure of PEER lymphoma T-cells to 15 nM romidepsin
(Rom) resulted in 40%-50% reduction in mRNA for the drug transporter MRP1
and up to ~500-fold increase in the MDR1 mRNA within 32-48 hrs. MRP1 protein
levels concomitantly decreased while MDR1 increased. Other HDAC inhibitors −
panobinostat, belinostat and suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) − had similar
effects on these transporters. The protein level of MRP1 correlated with cellular
resistance to busulfan and chlorambucil, and Rom exposure sensitized cells to these
DNA alkylators. The decrease in MRP1 correlated with decreased cellular drug export
activity, and increased level of MDR1 correlated with increased export of daunorubicin.
A similar decrease in the level of MRP1 protein, and increase in MDR1, were observed
when mononuclear cells derived from patients with T-cell malignancies were exposed
to Rom. Decreased MRP1 and increased MDR1 expressions were also observed in
blood mononuclear cells from lymphoma patients who received SAHA-containing
chemotherapy in a clinical trial. This inhibitory effect of HDAC inhibitors on the
expression of MRP1 suggests that their synergism with DNA alkylating agents is partly
due to decreased efflux of these alkylators. Our results further imply the possibility
of antagonistic effects when HDAC inhibitors are combined with anthracyclines and
other MDR1 drug ligands in chemotherapy.

(HSCT). DNA alkylating agents, nucleoside analogs,
epigenetic modifiers, and proteasome inhibitors, among
others, have been combined to minimize cancer burden
prior to HSCT [1]. The synergistic effects of some of
these drugs involve alteration of the chromatin structure,
activation of the DNA-damage response, inhibition of
DNA repair, disruption of mitochondrial membrane, and
activation of apoptosis [1, 2]. Pre-clinical and clinical
studies by our group showed the synergistic cytotoxicity
of combined DNA alkylating agents busulfan (Bu) and
melphalan (Mel), nucleoside analog gemcitabine (Gem),
and an HDAC inhibitor in lymphoma cells [3–5]. We
proposed a mechanism of their synergism that includes

INTRODUCTION
Most chemotherapy drugs with different
mechanisms of action are more effective when used in
combination. Their combined cytotoxicity efficiently
kills tumor cells, decreases the possibility of developing
resistant cells, and provides patient safety when given at
optimal doses. However, combined drugs may also have
antagonistic effects, and this possibility underscores the
importance of understanding their interactions.
Combination chemotherapy is a common part
of pre-transplant conditioning regimens for patients
undergoing hematopoietic stem cell transplantation
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

63829

Oncotarget

Gem-mediated inhibition of DNA synthesis resulting in
histone modifications and opening of chromatin structure
which allows the genomic DNA to be more accessible to
the alkylating agents Bu and Mel [1, 2]. These alkylating
drugs exacerbate DNA damage and activate apoptosis.
Addition of an HDAC inhibitor (eg. suberoylanilide
hydroxamic acid, SAHA) facilitates histone modifications
and chromatin remodeling, in addition to possible
increased expression of tumor suppressor genes, and
further enhances Bu and Mel adduct formation.
In an effort to identify additional mechanisms of
their synergism, we hypothesized that HDAC inhibitors
may affect the expression of drug transporters, which are
responsible for the efflux of structurally diverse anti-cancer
drugs including DNA alkylators. The best characterized
are the MRP1/ABCC1, MDR1/P-glycoprotein/ABCB,
and BCRP/ABCG2; their expressions may correlate with
multidrug resistance [6]. Although there is a significant
overlap in their substrate specificity, MRP1 exports
a broader range of therapeutic drugs including their
glutathione (GSH)-conjugates [7–9].
Our present study shows that HDAC inhibitors
down-regulate expression of the MRP1 gene and upregulate the MDR1 gene. Since MRP1 exports GSHconjugated DNA alkylators [7], a decrease in its protein
level may contribute to the synergism of HDAC inhibitors
and DNA alkylating agents. Conversely, HDAC inhibitors
might antagonize the efficacy of anti-cancer drugs that
are substrates for MDR1. These differential effects of
HDAC inhibitors on the expression of drug transporters
underscore the necessity for caution in combining these
drugs with other chemotherapeutic agents.

affects the expression of other drug transporters is
unknown. We, therefore, examined the effects of Rom
and panobinostat (Pano) on the expression of three drug
transporter genes – MRP1, MDR1 and BCRP - at various
time points in the PEER lymphoma cell line. Figure 1a
shows similar effects of these two HDAC inhibitors;
MRP1 protein levels started to decrease after 24-hr drug
exposure and were almost eliminated after 48 hrs, while
MDR1 protein levels started to increase after 32-hr drug
exposure. On the other hand, BCRP protein levels slightly
decreased after 48 hrs. Acetylation of histone 3 at Lys
9 (AcH3K9) started to increase after 24 hrs, suggesting
the efficacy of Rom and Pano in inhibiting histone
deacetylation. To determine if the effects of Rom and Pano
on the expression of MRP1 and MDR1 were manifested
at the transcription level, quantitative real-time PCR was
performed. Figure 1b shows ~40% and ~50% decrease
in the mRNA level of MRP1 after 24- and 32-hr Rom
exposure, respectively; some recovery was apparent after
48 hrs. Maximum effect of Pano on the MRP1 mRNA
was observed after 24 hrs and transcript levels started
to recover after 32 hrs (Figure 1b). The mRNA level of
MDR1 continued to increase from 24 to 48 hrs in the
presence of either drug (Figure 1c).
SAHA, an HDAC inhibitor, is a commonly used
anti-neoplastic agent [11]. We, therefore, sought to
determine if SAHA and belinostat (Bel) would have similar
effects on the expression of MRP1 and MDR1 as Rom
and Pano. We used drug concentrations approximately
equivalent to their IC50 in the MTT assay (Figure 2a). At
these concentrations apoptosis was activated as suggested
by ~60% Annexin V positivity (Figure 2a) and cleavage
of PARP1 and caspase 3 (Figure 2b). Again, MRP1
protein levels decreased in cells exposed to these HDAC
inhibitors; MDR1 increased except in cells exposed to
Bel (Figure 2b). DNA-damage response was activated as
shown by increased phosphorylation of H2AX (Figure
2b). All four drugs inhibited histone deacetylase activity
as suggested by increased levels of AcH3K9 with a
corresponding increase in the methylation of histone 3
(Figure 2b). Additional Western blot analysis suggests

RESULTS
HDAC inhibitors decrease the expression of
MRP1 but increase MDR1 expression
The HDAC inhibitor Romidepsin (Rom) has been
reported to increase the expression of MDR1 in patient
mononuclear cells [10], but whether and how this drug

Figure 1: Kinetics of expression of MRP1, MDR1 and BCRP. PEER cells were exposed to solvent (C, control), 15 nM romidepsin

(R, Rom) or 150 nM panobinostat (P, Pano) and harvested after the indicated time (hrs). Total proteins and RNA were isolated and analyzed
by Western blotting a. and quantitative real time-PCR b and c. respectively.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

63830

Oncotarget

that the observed increase in the level of AcH3K9 might
be due to a decrease in the level of Class I and Class II
histone deacetylases (Figure 2c). The phosphorylation of
HDACs 3, 4, 5 and 7, which decreased in the presence
of Rom, Bel, Pano and SAHA may also regulate the
expression of MRP1 and MDR1 genes. Our data suggest
that these HDAC inhibitors decrease expression of Class
I and II HDAC with a concomitant increase in acetylated
histone 3 and a corresponding down-regulation of MRP1
but up-regulation of MDR1.

The observed down-regulation of HDAC4, -5,
-6 and -7, which all belong to Class II, prompted us to
determine if Class II selective inhibitors would similarly
inhibit the expression of MRP1 and up-regulate the
expression of MDR1. Western blot analysis shows a
decrease in the level of MRP1 protein in cells exposed to
5 μM LMK-235, a selective inhibitor of HDAC4 and -5,
but not in cells exposed to 0.5- 1 μM LMK-235 nor 5-10
μM Nexturastat A (NA), a selective inhibitor of HDAC6;
the level of MDR1 protein was not significantly affected

Figure 2: Effects of various histone deacetylase inhibitors on cell proliferation, apoptosis activation and histone
modifications. PEER cells were exposed to drugs for 48 hrs and analyzed for proliferation using the MTT assay a. Activation of apoptosis

was determined using the Annexin V (Ann V; flow cytometry dot plots showing apoptosis profile for each treatment are on top of the bar
graphs) assay (a) and Western blotting b. Modifications of histone 3 (b) and changes in the level of different histone deacetylases c. were
determined by Western blotting. Quantitative analysis of the bands was done by normalizing the signals to β-ACTIN and calculating the
ratio relative to the control (left side of panel c). d. Cells were exposed to HDAC Class II selective inhibitors LMK-235 or Nexturastat A
(NA) at the indicated concentrations for 48 hrs and analyzed by Western blotting. Rom, romidepsin; Bel, belinostat, Pano, panobinostat;
SAHA, suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

63831

Oncotarget

(Figure 2d). The phosphorylation status of HDAC4, 5 and
7 dramatically decreased in cells exposed to 0.5 – 5 μM
LMK-235 and 5 -10 μM NA but their respective level of
total protein significantly changed only at 5 μM LMK-235
(Figure 2d). The level of HDAC6 was not significantly
affected by either drug. These results suggest that among
the members of Class II group HDAC4, -5 and -7 but not
HDAC6 may be involved in the regulation of the MRP1
gene expression but not MDR1.

Rom (15 nM) and 100 nM Pano decreased CFDA efflux
from ~97% (Control) to ~55% and ~74%, respectively.
Again, the drug-mediated decrease in MRP1 protein level
was confirmed by Western blotting (Figure 3c). It is not
clear why exposing PEER cells to 100 nM Pano almost
eliminated MRP1 protein (Figure 3c) but inhibited CFDA
efflux by only ~23% (Figure 3b). Overall, these results
show strong correlation of decreased MRP1 mRNA/
protein levels and transport activity in cells exposed to
HDAC inhibitors.

HDAC inhibitors decrease MRP1 activity

HDAC inhibitors increase MDR1 activity

At the molecular level, RT-PCR and Western blot
analyses showed decreased levels of MRP1 mRNA and
protein. We next sought to determine if cells exposed
to HDAC inhibitors would have a decreased functional
ability to export specific drugs using flow cytometry.
We initially analyzed the kinetics of efflux of CFDA, a
known substrate for MRP1 [12], in PEER cells previously
exposed to solvent or 15 nM Rom as described in Figure
3. Cells were kept on ice and allowed to take up CFDA
for 20 min, then shifted to 37°C to allow efflux of the
fluorescent substrate for various periods of time. The
control cells exported ~33% – 73% of CFDA after 1525 min, increasing to ~92% efflux after 30 min (Figure
3a). On the other hand, cells previously exposed to Rom
showed only ~47% efflux of CFDA after 30 min (Figure
3a), suggesting almost 50% inhibition of the CFDA
efflux in Rom-treated cells. To confirm if efflux of CFDA
was mediated by MRP1, cells were exposed to MK571,
a known inhibitor of MRP1 [13]; efflux was indeed
inhibited by ~40% compared to control cells (Figure 3b).

We similarly analyzed the effects of HDAC
inhibitors on the drug transport activity of MDR1 in
U937 cells by flow cytometry using DiOC2(3), a known
substrate for MDR1 [14]. Exposure of cells to 7 nM Rom
or 45 nM Pano decreased MRP1 but increased MDR1
protein levels (Figure 4a, inset). Efflux of DiOC2(3) from
cells kept on ice during the efflux assay was not significant
for either control or drug-treated cells; shifting to 37°C
showed almost negligible efflux of DiOC2(3) from the
control cells but efflux increased to ~39% and ~30% for
cells pre-exposed to Rom and Pano, respectively (Figure
4a). The observed efflux activity correlated with the level
of MDR1 protein as shown by Western blotting.
Since MDR1 is known to catalyze export of
anthracyclines such as the anti-neoplastic drugs
daunorubicin and doxorubicin [15], we determined if
daunorubicin efflux would be increased in U937 cells
pre-exposed to Rom or Pano. The decrease in cellular
daunorubicin fluorescence, as measured by flow cytometry,

Figure 3: Functional assay of MRP1 protein. PEER cells were exposed to solvent (Control) or 15 nM romidepsin (Rom) for 48 hrs,

harvested, incubated with the MRP1 substrate CFDA for 20 min, shifted to 37°C, and analyzed for efflux of CFDA at the indicated time
point by flow cytometry a. To determine drug-mediated inhibition of CFDA efflux, cells were exposed to 15 nM Rom or 100 nM Pano
(panobinostat) for 48 hrs or to the MRP1 inhibitor MK571 (50 μM) for 30 min prior to the efflux assay. CFDA efflux was performed for
30 min b. “Count” refers to the number of live (i.e., PI-negative) cells. Western blot analysis confirmed the 48-hr drug-mediated decrease
in MRP1 protein level c.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

63832

Oncotarget

was used as an indicator of drug efflux. Cells were allowed
to take up daunorubicin for 1.5 hrs at 37°C, washed and
incubated in drug-free culture medium. Approximately
30% efflux of daunorubicin from the control cells occurred
after 3 hrs. Daunorubicin efflux increased to ~58% and
~55% in cells pre-exposed to Rom and Pano, respectively
(Figure 4b). Addition of orthovanadate, a known
inhibitor of ATPase-dependent drug transporters [16, 17],
abrogated the Rom- and Pano-mediated increase in efflux
of daunorubicin (Figure 4b). Overall, these results show
that HDAC inhibitors increase the drug transport activity
of MDR1, consistent with increased MDR1 mRNA and
protein levels (Figure 1).

busulfan and chlorambucil, and least resistance of MV411 cells (Figure 5b and 5c). PEER cells became more
sensitive to chlorambucil (Figure 5d) and busulfan (data
not shown) in the presence of Rom. Whereas proliferation
of PEER cells was not significantly affected by 0 - 10 μM
chlorambucil (slope of the dose-response line = -0.05), a
steeper slope of -1.6 was obtained in the presence of 7 nM
Rom, suggesting a Rom-mediated decrease in resistance of
PEER cells to chlorambucil (Figure 5d). Again, exposure
of all three cell lines to Rom or Pano decreased the level
of MRP1 protein (Figure 5e). The observed correlation
between DNA alkylator sensitivity and the level of MRP1
protein is consistent with the previous report that MRP1
exports DNA alkylators from cells [7, 8], and suggests
that the synergism of these drugs with HDAC inhibitors is
partly due to down-regulation of the expression of MRP1.

The level of expression of MRP1 correlates with
cellular sensitivity to DNA alkylating agents
DNA alkylating agents such as Bu and Mel exert
synergistic cytotoxicity when combined with HDAC
inhibitors in pre-clinical and clinical studies [3–5].
Moreover, GSH-conjugated alkylators are known to be
exported from cells via the MRP1 drug transporter [7].
Based on these previous studies and on the observed downregulation of MRP1 at the mRNA, protein and functional
levels, we hypothesized that treatment of cells with HDAC
inhibitors may result in inhibition of the efflux of GSHconjugated alkylators. To test this hypothesis, we first
examined the correlation between the basal level of MRP1
and the cellular sensitivity to DNA alkylating agents of
PEER (T-cell leukemia), Daudi (B-cell lymphoma) and
MV4-11 (AML) cell lines. The level of expression of
MRP1 was highest in PEER and lowest in MV4-11 cells
(Figure 5a). Dose-response analysis showed highest
resistance of PEER cells to two DNA alkylating agents,

HDAC inhibitors down-regulate MRP1 and upregulate MDR1 in patient-derived cell samples
To determine the potential clinical significance
of our cell line studies, we exposed mononuclear cells
isolated from the peripheral blood of patients with T-cell
malignancies (patient characteristics are shown in Table 1,
Supplementary Materials) to Rom and analyzed them by
Western blotting. The MRP1 protein levels decreased in
a Rom concentration-dependent manner while the MDR1
protein levels increased in both patient samples (Figure
6a). While the level of BCRP did not change in sample
L-02, it significantly decreased in sample B-03 in the
presence of Rom (Figure 6a). We extended this study to an
analysis of mononuclear cells from patients enrolled in a
clinical trial evaluating SAHA, azacytidine, Gem, Bu and
Mel as a pre-transplant conditioning regimen [18]. Patients

Figure 4: Functional assay of MDR1 protein. a. U937 cells were exposed to solvent (Control), 7 nM romidepsin (Rom) or 45 nM

panobinostat (Pano) for 48 hrs, harvested, incubated with MDR1 substrate DiOC2(3) for 20 min, shifted to 37°C for 45 min and analyzed
for efflux of DiOC2(3) by flow cytometry as described under Materials and Methods. “Count” refers to the number of live (i.e., DAPInegative) cells. Total protein extracts were analyzed by Western blotting (inset) to determine changes in the level of MDR1 protein. b. A
similar analysis was performed using daunorubicin as a fluorescent substrate for MDR1 in the absence or presence of 2 mM orthovanadate
(Van), an MDR1 inhibitor.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

63833

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Correlation between the level of MRP1 protein and cell sensitivity to DNA alkylating agents. a. The expression

of MRP1 in PEER, Daudi and MV4-11 cells was determined by quantitative real time-PCR (mRNA level) and Western blotting (protein
level, inset). b, c. The three cell lines were exposed to various concentrations of busulfan (Bu) or chlorambucil (Chlor) for 48 hrs and
analyzed for cell proliferation using the MTT assay. d. PEER cells were exposed to Chlor with or without 7 nM Rom for 48 hrs and
analyzed by the MTT assay. e. Cells were exposed to HDAC inhibitors (inset: drug concentrations) for 48 hrs and total protein extracts
were analyzed by Western blotting.

Figure 6: Effects of HDAC inhibitors on patient-derived cell samples. a. Mononuclear cells from blood of patients

with peripheral T-cell lymphoma (L-02) and T-cell prolymphocytic leukemia (B-03) were isolated and exposed to the indicated
concentrations of romidepsin (Rom) for 48 hrs, and total protein extracts were analyzed by Western blotting. b. Mononuclear cells
from patients enrolled in clinical trial NCT01983969 were isolated and analyzed by Western blotting. These patients received a
pretransplant conditioning regimen that included gemcitabine, busulfan, melphalan, azacytidine and SAHA. SAHA (Vorinostat) was
given on days -11 to -3 prior to hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Baseline samples (Pre) were taken before the conditioning
therapy and treated samples at 9, 5, 1 day(s) prior to transplant. Sampling prior to chemotherapy for patient #3 was not performed for
logistical reasons.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

63834

Oncotarget

received SAHA starting at day -11 prior to stem cell
transplantation. Figure 6b shows a decrease in the MRP1
protein level from day -9 to day -1 relative to its baseline
level (pre-chemotherapy) while the MDR1 protein level
increased in all 5 patient samples and the BCRP level was
not greatly affected. These results are consistent with our
in vitro cell line and patient cell sample studies (Figures
1 and 6a), suggesting that HDAC inhibitors differentially
affect the expression of MRP1 and MDR1 both in in vitro
and in vivo settings.

peripheral T-cell lymphoma and T-cell prolymphocytic
leukemia, to Rom decreased the MRP1 protein level
(Figure 6a). Mononuclear cells isolated from patients
treated with a SAHA-containing chemotherapy regimen
also showed decreased MRP1 relative to samples taken
prior to chemotherapy (Figure 6b). These data show that
both in vitro and in vivo exposures of cells to HDAC
inhibitors resulted in down-regulation of the MRP1 gene.
While HDAC inhibitors down-regulate the MRP1
gene, they up-regulate the expression of the MDR1
gene. This effect is also apparent at the transcription
level within 24 hrs of drug exposure (Figure 1c) with a
concomitant increase in protein levels and drug transport
activity of MDR1 (Figure 1a and 4c). Similar results were
obtained in established cell lines and patient-derived cell
samples, suggesting general differential effects of HDAC
inhibitors on the expression of drug transporter genes. The
mechanisms underlying these differential effects remain
unknown, but may be related to differences in the sitespecific acetylation/methylation of histones. For example,
acetylation and monomethylation of histone 3 at Lys 9
activate gene transcription whereas di- and tri-methylation
of the same residue results in repression [23–25]. Changes
in histone modifications may also affect expression of
activators and repressors of gene transcription, as well as
mediating a switch between transcription permissive and
repressive chromatin structures [20].
Our study provides a potentially novel approach to
reverse drug resistance in patients. While few inhibitors
which directly bind to drug transporters such as verapamil,
phenothiazine and cyclosporine D derivatives [26] have
been unsuccessful in overcoming drug resistance in the
clinic albeit their efficacy in laboratory models, the use
of HDAC inhibitors to down-regulate MRP1 expression
occurs at the gene level. In fact, our clinical study shows
SAHA-mediated down-regulation of MRP1 expression
(Figure 6b). Although a well-designed and controlled
clinical trial is needed to unequivocally prove the role of
HDAC inhibitors in the reversal of MRP1-mediated drug
resistance in the clinic, our laboratory and clinical data
suggest its possibility.
In summary, our results present potentially critical
implications for combining HDAC inhibitors with other
chemotherapy agents. Combination of HDAC inhibitors
with DNA alkylators and other MRP1 substrates is
expected to result in synergistic and more efficacious
outcomes. However, the increased MDR1 expression
induced by HDACi may result in reduced anticancer
activity of MDR1 substrates, such as anthracyclines,
vinca alkaloids and steroids. Our data seem timely
and relevant in light of a currently ongoing clinical
trial (NCT01280526), testing the value of combined
romidepsin and CHOP (cyclophosphamide, adriamycin,
vincristine, and prednisone). In particular, efflux of
adriamycin, vincristine and prednisone may increase with
HDAC inhibitor-mediated up-regulation of the MDR1

DISCUSSION
We previously demonstrated the synergistic
cytotoxicity of DNA alkylating agents, nucleoside analogs
and HDAC inhibitors in various experimental models
[3–5]. Here, we present a novel mechanism of their
synergism in established cell lines and patient-derived cell
samples. HDAC inhibitors were seen to down-regulate the
expression of MRP1, resulting in decreased MRP1 protein
levels and drug transport activity (Figures 1, 3). Since
MRP1 is known to pump GSH-conjugated DNA alkylators
out of cells [7], decreased MRP1 activity may cause
cellular accumulation of DNA alkylating agents and thus
enhanced cytotoxicity. This inference is consistent with (1)
a strong inverse correlation between the level of MRP1
protein and sensitivity to alkylating agents; cells with high
levels of MRP1 are more resistant to Bu and chlorambucil,
but this phenotype is reversed when cells are exposed to
Rom (Figure 5), and (2) feedback inhibition of glutathione
S-transferases by the GSH-DNA alkylator conjugates,
leading to increased intracellular concentrations of free
alkylating agents [19].
The inhibitory effect of HDAC inhibitors on MRP1
expression is apparent at the transcription level (Figure
1b). Post-transcriptional regulation(s), however, may
also contribute to these effects, as suggested by a greater
decrease in the MRP1 protein compared with its mRNA
levels (Figure 1). Changes in the acetylation status of
proteins involved in the translation of MRP1 mRNA,
and possibly MRP1 protein itself, may contribute to the
reduction of MRP1 levels. Rom and Pano down-regulate
MRP1 expression within 24 hrs of drug exposure as
indicated by decreased mRNA levels. These changes
coincide with histone modifications (Figure 1a), which
may inhibit or enhance transcription [20, 21]. Acetylation
and methylation of histone 3 are both enhanced in PEER
cells exposed to Rom, Bel, Pano and SAHA (Figure 2b);
acetylation is partly due to decreased protein levels of
HDACs 3, 4 and 6 (Figure 2c), and methylation is most
likely due to the known functional interaction between
histone methyltransferases and deacetylases [22]. It
remains to be determined which histone modifications
contribute to the inhibition of MRP1 expression.
Similar results were observed in patient-derived cell
samples. Exposure of cells, obtained from patients with
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

63835

Oncotarget

kit (ThermoFisher Scientific, Rockford, IL), and
immunostaining by Western blot was done as previously
described [28]. The antibodies used in this study are listed
in Table 2 (Supplementary Materials).

gene [6]. Various drug combinations are used in pretransplant conditioning prior to hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation, and our study highlights the importance
of understanding the mechanism(s) of drug interactions
to achieve a more efficacious cytotoxicity to tumor cells.

Quantitative real-time PCR analysis

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Total RNA was purified using the RNeasy mini
kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA) and complementary DNA
was synthesized using the High Capacity cDNA Reverse
Transcription Kit with RNase Inhibitor (Applied
Biosystems, Foster City, CA). Gene expression was
determined by RT-PCR analysis using the iTAQ Universal
SYBR Green Supermix (Bio-Rad Lab, Hercules, CA) as
described [29]. The primers used are listed in Table 3
(Supplementary Materials).

Cells and drugs
PEER is a cell line originally isolated and established
from a patient with T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia
[27], Daudi (ATCC, Manassas, VA) is a B-lymphoblast
cell line, U937 (ATCC) is a cell line originally established
from a patient with histiocytic lymphoma [28], and MV411 (ATCC) is a biphenotypic B myelomonocytic leukemia
cell line. Cells were grown in RPMI 1640 medium
(Mediatech, Manassas, VA) supplemented with 10% heatinactivated fetal bovine serum (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis,
MO) and 100 U/ml penicillin and 100 μg/ml streptomycin
(Mediatech) at 37°C in a fully humidified atmosphere of
5% CO2 in air. Romidepsin (Rom), panobinostat (Pano),
belinostat (Bel), SAHA, LMK-235 and Nexturastat A
were purchased from Selleck Chemicals (Houston, TX)
and dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) to prepare
stock solutions.

Cell proliferation and cell death assays
Cell proliferation assays were done in triplicate
using 96-well plates. Cells (4 X 104) in 100 μl medium
were incubated with or without the test HDACinhibiting drug at 37°C, 5% CO2 for 48 hrs and analyzed
for proliferation using the 3-(4, 5-dimethylthiazol-2yl)-2, 5-diphenyl tetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay as
previously described [29]. Programmed cell death was
determined using the Annexin V assay which measures the
externalization of phosphatidylserine by flow cytometry as
described [30].

Patient samples
Two lymphocytic leukemia cell samples (L-02
and B-03) were isolated from patient peripheral blood
using lymphocyte separation medium (Mediatech) and
incubated in suspension in the same RPMI 1640 medium
described above. Patient L-02 had leukemic peripheral
T-cell lymphoma, whereas patient B-03 had T-cell
prolymphocytic leukemia in the setting of Li-Fraummeni
syndrome (congenital p53 deficiency). Cells were exposed
to DMSO or DMSO/romidepsin for 48 hrs and analyzed
by Western blotting.
Mononuclear cells from peripheral blood of patients
enrolled in clinical trial NCT01983969 (PI: Dr. Yago
Nieto) were isolated using lymphocyte separation medium
(Mediatech), lysed and analyzed by Western blotting.
All patient samples were collected after obtaining
written informed consent, and all studies using these
patient samples were performed under a protocol approved
by the Institutional Review Board of the University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, in accordance with
the Declaration of Helsinki.

Functional assays for MRP1 and MDR1
5-Carboxyfluorescein diacetate (CFDA from
Sigma-Aldrich) and 3, 3'-diethyloxacarbocyanine iodide
(DiOC2(3) from EMD Millipore, Billerica, MA) were
used as fluorescent substrates to assay the MRP1 and
MDR1 transport activity, respectively, by flow cytometry.
Cells were exposed to solvent or HDAC inhibitor for 48
hrs at 37°C, harvested and resuspended in fresh RPMI
1640 medium containing either 1 μM CFDA or 0.5 μg/
ml DiOC2(3) and kept on ice for 20 min to allow their
uptake/influx. Cells were centrifuged, washed with cold
PBS and resuspended in 1 ml RPMI 1640 medium. Each
cell suspension was divided into two 0.5 ml aliquots;
one set was kept on ice and the other set was shifted to
37°C for up to 30 min (CFDA) or 45 min (DiOC2(3)) to
allow temperature-dependent substrate efflux. Cells were
centrifuged again at 4°C, resuspended in 0.4 ml PBS
containing 0.1 μg/ml propidium iodide (PI), and analyzed
by flow cytometry using excitation/emission wavelength
of 488/525 nm for CFDA and DiOC2(3), and 488/617 nm
for PI. Live and dead cells were differentiated by inclusion
of PI, and only live cells were analyzed.
The above procedure was modified when
daunorubicin (Selleck Chemicals, Houston, TX) was used
as a substrate for the efflux assay. Cells were exposed
to solvent or HDAC inhibitor for 48 hrs. Daunorubicin

Western blot analysis
Cells were exposed continuously to drugs for 48
hrs, harvested, washed with cold phosphate-buffered
saline (PBS), and lysed with lysis buffer (Cell Signaling
Technology, Danvers, MA). Cell extracts were analyzed
for protein concentrations using a BCA Protein Assay
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

63836

Oncotarget

(2 μM) was added to the cell suspension and incubated
for 1.5 hrs at 37°C, 5% CO2 to allow its uptake. Cells
were pelleted, washed with PBS (room temperature) and
resuspended in warm RPMI 1640 medium. Cells were
further incubated at 37°C, 5% CO2 to allow daunorubicin
efflux. Sample aliquots were taken after 0, 1, 2 and 3
hrs. Cells were centrifuged, resuspended in 0.4 ml PBS
containing 2 μg/ml 4', 6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI)
and analyzed by flow cytometry using excitation/emission
wavelength of 488/575 nm for daunorubicin and 405/461
nm for DAPI. Live and dead cells were differentiated by
inclusion of DAPI and only live cells were analyzed.
To inhibit efflux of daunorubicin, 2 mM sodium
orthovanadate (Selleck Chemicals) was added 1 hr after
the addition of daunorubicin and incubated for another 30
min. Efflux assay was performed as described above in the
presence of 2 mM sodium orthovanadate.

5.	 Teo EC, Valdez BC, Ji J, Li Y, Liu Y, Brammer JE, Hosing
C, Nieto Y, Champlin RE, Andersson BS. Synergistic
cytotoxicity of busulfan, melphalan, gemcitabine,
panobinostat, and bortezomib in lymphoma cells. Leuk
Lymphoma. 2016. In press.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

9.	 Munoz M, Henderson M, Haber M, Norris M. Role of the
MRP1/ABCC1 multidrug transporter protein in cancer.
IUBMB Life. 2007; 59:752-7.

6.	 Köck K, Grube M, Jedlitschky G, Oevermann L, Siegmund
W, Ritter CA, Kroemer HK. Expression of adenosine
triphosphate-binding cassette (ABC) drug transporters
in peripheral blood cells: relevance for physiology and
pharmacotherapy. Clin Pharmacokinet. 2007; 46:449-70.
7.	 Cole SP, Deeley RG. Transport of glutathione and
glutathione conjugates by MRP1. Trends Pharmacol Sci.
2006; 27:438-46.
8.	 Deeley RG, Westlake C, Cole SP. Transmembrane transport
of endo- and xenobiotics by mammalian ATP-binding
cassette multidrug resistance proteins. Physiol Rev. 2006;
86:849-99.

Part of this research was performed in the Flow
Cytometry & Cellular Imaging Facility, which is supported
in part by the National Institutes of Health through M.D.
Anderson's Cancer Center Support Grant CA016672. This
work was also supported by the Stephen L. and Lavinia
Boyd Fund for Leukemia Research, and by funds donated
by grateful patients.

10.	 Robey RW, Zhan Z, Piekarz RL, Kayastha GL, Fojo T,
Bates SE. Increased MDR1 expression in normal and
malignant peripheral blood mononuclear cells obtained
from patients receiving depsipeptide (FR901228, FK228,
NSC630176). Clin Cancer Res. 2006; 12:1547-55.
11.	 Batty N, Malouf GG, Issa JP. Histone deacetylase inhibitors
as anti-neoplastic agents. Cancer Lett. 2009; 280:192-200.
12.	 Dogan AL, Legrand O, Faussat AM, Perrot JY, Marie JP.
Evaluation and comparison of MRP1 activity with three
fluorescent dyes and three modulators in leukemic cell lines.
Leuk Res. 2004; 28:619-22.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

13.	 Gekeler V, Ise W, Sanders KH, Ulrich WR, Beck J. The
leukotriene LTD4 receptor antagonist MK571 specifically
modulates MRP associated multidrug resistance. Biochem
Biophys Res Commun. 1995; 208:345-52.

REFERENCES
1.	 Andersson BS, Valdez BC, Jones R. Pharmacologic basis
for high-dose chemotherapy. In: Forman SJ, Negrin RS,
Antin JH, Appelbaum FR (Eds). Thomas’ Hematopoietic
Cell Transplantation, 5th edn. Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford,
UK, 2016. pp 211-222.

14.	 Minderman H, Suvannasankha A, O'Loughlin KL, Scheffer
GL, Scheper RJ, Robey RW, Baer MR. Flow cytometric
analysis of breast cancer resistance protein expression and
function. Cytometry. 2002; 48:59-65.

2.	 Valdez BC, Li Y, Murray D, Champlin RE, Andersson BS.
The synergistic cytotoxicity of clofarabine, fludarabine and
busulfan in AML cells involves ATM pathway activation
and chromatin remodeling. Biochem Pharmacol. 2011;
81:222-32.

15.	 Sharom FJ. ABC multidrug transporters: structure, function
and role in chemoresistance. Pharmacogenomics. 2008;
9:105-27.
16.	 Hobbs AS, Froehlich JP, Albers RW. Inhibition by vanadate
of the reactions catalyzed by the (Na+ + K+)-stimulated
ATPase. A transient state kinetic characterization. J Biol
Chem. 1980; 255:5724-7.

3.	 Valdez BC, Nieto Y, Murray D, Li Y, Wang G, Champlin
RE, Andersson BS. Epigenetic modifiers enhance the
synergistic cytotoxicity of combined nucleoside analogDNA alkylating agents in lymphoma cell lines. Exp
Hematol. 2012; 40:800-10.

17.	 Sarkadi B, Price EM, Boucher RC, Germann UA,
Scarborough GA. Expression of the human multidrug
resistance cDNA in insect cells generates a high activity
drug-stimulated membrane ATPase. J Biol Chem. 1992;
267:4854-8.

4.	 Nieto Y, Valdez BC, Thall PF, Ahmed S, Jones RB, Hosing
C, Popat U, Shpall EJ, Qazilbash M, Gulbis A, Anderlini P,
Alousi A, Shah N et al. Vorinostat combined with high-dose
gemcitabine, busulfan, and melphalan with autologous stem
cell transplantation in patients with refractory lymphomas.
Biol Blood Marrow Transplant. 2015; 21:1914-20.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

18.	 Nieto Y, Valdez BC, Thall PF, Jones RB, Wei A, Myers
A, Hosing C, Ahmed S, Popat U, Shpall EJ, Qazilbash M,
Gulbis A, Anderlini P, et al. Double epigenetic modulation
63837

Oncotarget

of high-dose chemotherapy with azacitidine and vorinostat
for patients with refractory or poor-risk relapsed lymphoma.
Cancer. 2016. In press.

James KD, Lefebvre GC, Bruce AW et al. The landscape
of histone modifications across 1% of the human genome
in five human cell lines. Genome Res. 2007; 17:691-707.

19.	 Paumi CM, Ledford BG, Smitherman PK, Townsend AJ,
Morrow CS. Role of multidrug resistance protein 1 (MRP1)
and glutathione S-transferase A1-1 in alkylating agent
resistance. Kinetics of glutathione conjugate formation and
efflux govern differential cellular sensitivity to chlorambucil
versus melphalan toxicity. J Biol Chem. 2001; 276:7952-6.

25.	 Rosenfeld JA, Wang Z, Schones DE, Zhao K, DeSalle
R, Zhang MQ. Determination of enriched histone
modifications in non-genic portions of the human genome.
BMC Genomics. 2009; 10:143.

20.	 Eberharter A, Becker PB. Histone acetylation: a switch
between repressive and permissive chromatin. Second in
review series on chromatin dynamics. EMBO Rep. 2002;
3:224-9.

27.	 Ravid Z, Goldblum N, Zaizov R, Schlesinger M, Kertes
T, Minowada J, Verbi W, Greaves M. Establishment and
characterization of a new leukaemic T-cell line (Peer) with
an unusual phenotype. Int J Cancer. 1980; 25:705-10.

21.	 Miller JL, Grant PA. The role of DNA methylation and
histone modifications in transcriptional regulation in
humans. Subcell Biochem. 2013; 61:289-317.

28.	 Sundstrom C, Nilsson K. Establishment and characterization
of a human histiocytic lymphoma cell line (U-937). Int J
Cancer. 1976; 17:565-77.

22.	 Vaute O, Nicolas E, Vandel L, Trouche D. Functional and
physical interaction between the histone methyl transferase
Suv39H1 and histone deacetylases. Nucleic Acids Res.
2002; 30:475-81.

29.	 Valdez BC, Li Y, Murray D, Corn P, Champlin RE,
Andersson BS. 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine sensitizes busulfanresistant myeloid leukemia cells by regulating expression of
genes involved in cell cycle checkpoint and apoptosis. Leuk
Res. 2010; 34:364-72.

26.	 Leonard GD, Fojo T, Bates SE. The role of ABC
transporters in clinical practice. Oncologist. 2003; 8:411-24.

23.	 Barski A, Cuddapah S, Cui K, Roh TY, Schones DE, Wang
Z, Wei G, Chepelev I, Zhao K. High-resolution profiling
of histone methylations in the human genome. Cell. 2007;
129:823-37.

30.	 Valdez BC, Li Y, Murray D, Ji J, Liu Y, Popat U, Champlin
RE, Andersson BS. Comparison of the cytotoxicity of
cladribine and clofarabine when combined with fludarabine
and busulfan in AML cells: Enhancement of cytotoxicity
with epigenetic modulators. Exp Hematol. 2015; 43:448-61.

24.	 Koch CM, Andrews RM, Flicek P, Dillon SC, Karaöz U,
Clelland GK, Wilcox S, Beare DM, Fowler JC, Couttet P,

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

63838

Oncotarget

