336

Serum Fucosylation Changes in Oral Cancer and Oral
Precancerous Conditions
a-L-Fucosidase as a Marker

Manisha Shah, PhD1
Shaila Telang, PhD2
Gira Raval, PhD1
Pankaj Shah, MD3
Prabhudas S. Patel,

BACKGROUND. The objective of the current study was to investigate the clinical
usefulness of serum fucose, fucosylated glycoproteins (fucoproteins), fucosyltransferase (FucT), and a-L-fucosidase in oral carcinoma.

METHODS. Blood samples were collected from 130 patients with untreated oral
PhD

1

cancer (OC), from 75 patients with oral precancerous conditions (OPC), and from
100 healthy controls. Cancer patients were followed after the initiation of antic-

1

Biochemistry Research Division, Gujarat Cancer
and Research Institute, Ahmedabad, Gujarat,
India.
2

ancer treatments, and 75 follow-up samples were also collected. Serum levels of
fucose and a-L-fucosidase were measured spectrophotometrically. Fucoproteins
were detected by using lectin-affinity chromatography. FucT activity was analyzed
by using radioassay.

Biochemistry Department, Maharaja Sayajirao
University of Baroda, Vadodara, India.

RESULTS. Serum levels of fucose and fucoprotein were found to be increased sig-

3

nificantly in patients with untreated OC compared with controls, patients with

Medical Oncology, Gujarat Cancer and Research
Institute, Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India.

OPC, and complete responders (CR) to treatment; whereas the levels were comparable between untreated patients with OC and nonresponders (NR). A similar
trend was observed for serum FucT levels, and changes in enzyme activity correlated well with fucose and fucoprotein alterations. The OPC group had significantly increased fucosylation of serum proteins. Furthermore, serum a-Lfucosidase activity was markedly higher in patients with untreated OC and in
patients with OPC compared with controls. Using receiver operating characteristic curves, a cutoff for a-L-fucosidase was determined at >450.6 U/mL, which
showed good sensitivity and specificity in OC and OPC compared with controls.
The enzyme activity was declined in the CR group but remained higher in the
NR group compared with pretreatment levels. Furthermore, various clinicopathologic characteristics were correlated positively with serum fucosylation changes.

CONCLUSIONS. The findings of the current study suggest that serum fucosylation
has clinical usefulness in the detection of early changes and for monitoring treatment response in patients with OC. Among the markers studied, serum a-L-fucosidase was identified as a useful marker for close monitoring of patients during
post–treatment follow-up. Cancer 2008;113:336–46.  2008 American Cancer
Society.

KEYWORDS: fucose, fucosylated glycoproteins, fucosyltransferase, a-L-fucosidase, fucosylation, oral cancer, oral precancerous conditions.

Address for reprints: Prabhudas S. Patel, PhD,
Gujarat Cancer and Research Institute, New Civil
Hospital Campus, Asarwa, Ahmedabad-380016,
India; Fax: (011) 91-79-22685490; E-mail: prabhu
das_p@hotmail.com
Received November 26, 2007; revision received
March 2, 2008; accepted March 10, 2008.

ª 2008 American Cancer Society

C

ellular glycosylation changes are associated with diverse types
of neoplastic transformation. Many properties of mammalian
cells are either expressed at or mediated through the cell surface.
Studies suggest that altered glycosylation of cell surface proteins is
critically important in cancer progression, especially the terminal
epitopes of glycoproteins, which have been proposed to play a significant role in cell-cell interactions, development of cell adhesion,

DOI 10.1002/cncr.23556
Published online 2 June 2008 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

Fucosylation Changes in Oral Cancer/Shah et al

malignant transformation, and metastasis.1,2 Fucosylation of glycoproteins (the addition of L-fucose at
the terminal end of the oligosaccharide chain) is one
of the most important features that mediates several
specific biologic functions.3 It has been documented
that tumor cells modulate their surface by increasing
fucosylation levels to escape recognition, which contribute to several abnormal characteristics of tumor
cells, such as decreased adhesion and uncontrolled
tumor growth.4,5 Several studies have suggested that
monitoring serum/tissue fucose levels could be a
promising approach for the early detection, diagnosis, and prognosis of various cancer types6-10
Fucosyltransferases (FucT) (Enzyme Commission
[EC] number 2.4.1 [65, 68, 69, 152, 214, 221]) are a
group of enzymes that catalyze incorporation of
fucose from activated nucleotide donor guanosine
diphosphate (GDP)-fucose to the reducing end of
complex glycans in a linkage-specific manner. These
enzymes are expressed by many tissues and are
increased in serum and tumors from cancer
patients.8,11-13 It has been reported that increased
fucosylation is associated with elevated FucT activity.11 Cancer cells that are shed or released into circulation from the primary tumor often over express
fucosylated glycans on their surface. The expression
of fucosylated glycoproteins (ie, fucoproteins) has
been detected by means of specific lectins.14 Several
lectin-based studies have indicated that fucoproteins
are increased in various cancers.15-17 Abnormally
fucosylated serum heptoglobin and a-fetoprotein
(AFP) are used widely as tumor markers of hepatocellular carcinoma.15,16,18 Profound fucosylation of
the serum microenvironment may be a factor that
interrupts adhesion and influences the formation of
metastases. For example, several fucose-containing
‘natural ligands’ reportedly are involved in the migration of tumor cells.19 Increased expression of fucosylated cell surface antigens, such as Lewis x/y (Lex/y)
or sialyl Lex/a, and the up-regulation of a1,3/4-FucT
have been associated with malignant transformation
and increased metastatic potential of tumors, which
result in a poor prognosis of patients with cancer.20
a-L-fucosidase (EC number 3.2.1.51) is a lysosomal enzyme that catalyzes the hydrolytic cleavage of
terminal fucose residue that is involved in maintaining the homeostasis of fucose metabolism. It has
been reported that alterations in serum and/or tissue
a-L-fucosidase activity potentially may be useful in
the diagnosis and management of cancer
patients.5,8,21-23 Serum a-L-fucosidase has been proposed as a marker for colorectal and hepatocellular
carcinoma.21,24,25 Thus, earlier reports have encouraged interest in the use of serum fucosidase for the

337

diagnosis of malignant diseases and as an indicator
of tumor burden, metastasis, and response to anticancer treatments.
Oral cancer (OC) is one of the major health
hazards in India, and approximately 80,000 new
cases are diagnosed annually, mainly attributed to
different forms of tobacco consumption.26 OC may
serve as an excellent model in which to study the
molecular changes that occur in a cancer cell,
because OC generally is preceded by early changes
termed as oral precancerous conditions (OPC), such
as hyperplasia, dysplasia, leukoplakia, and oral submucus fibrosis (OSMF). It has been established that
OPC represents an increased risk of developing OC
with malignant transformation rates that vary from
0.6% to 36%.27 Although fucose plays an important
role, the simultaneous evaluation of fucosylation
changes in OC is under studied. Therefore, the objective of the current retrospective study was to determine the clinical significance of altered serum
fucose, fucoproteins, FucT, and fucosidase in oral
carcinogenesis and in treatment monitoring of
patients with cancer. To assess the diagnostic specificity of these markers, patients with OPC were
included in the current study who were at risk of
cancer and were distinguished from the patients with
cancer, because we hoped that the inclusion of
patients with OPC would provide an indication of
early changes during the development of OC.
Healthy individuals (controls) were enrolled in the
study to obtain the baseline levels of markers, and
serum levels in the OC and OPC groups were compared with levels in the control group.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study Groups
The study mainly included 3 groups (Table 1): 1)
controls (100 healthy individuals who had no major
illness in the recent past), 2) pathologic controls (75
patients with OPC that included 50 patients with
OSMF and 25 patients with leukoplakia), and 3) cancer patients (130 patients with histopathologically
proven, untreated cancer of the oral cavity). Consent
was obtained from all individuals who participated
in the study. Table 1 shows that the majority of the
patients with OPC and OC were tobacco users and
that most patients with disease were men. Clinical
TNM staging of malignant disease was determined
according to International Union Against Cancer
norms.28 The distribution of patients with OC with
regard to various clinicopathologic characteristics,
including stage, tumor differentiation, lymph node
status, and tumor grade, is provided in Table 2.

338

CANCER

July 15, 2008 / Volume 113 / Number 2

TABLE 1
Details of the Study Groups

Variable
Age, y
Median
Range
Sex, %
Men
Women
Ratio of men to women
Tobacco habits (frequency), %
Yes
No
Tobacco habits, %
Chewing
Smoking
Chewing and smoking
Snuff

TABLE 2
Clinical Characteristics of the Patients With Oral Cancer
Controls
(N5100)

Patients with
OPC (N575)

Cancer
patients
(N5130)

33
20-71

28.5
14-80

42
18-77

88
12
7.6:1

92
8
11.7:1

94
6
15.7:1

61
39

97.4
2.6

97.7
2.3

62
19
15.5
3.5

67.5
13.5
19
—

40
24
33
3

OPC indicates oral precancerous condition.

All patients with OC underwent surgical resection of
their tumor as primary treatment. These patients
were followed at various intervals after the initiation
of postsurgical anticancer treatment. The study also
included post-treatment follow-up serum samples
(N 5 75) from cancer patients. Patients’ responses to
anticancer treatment were assessed on the basis of
their clinical and radiologic findings during followup. The clinical status of patients during and after
anticancer treatment was evaluated as suggested by
Therasse et al,29 and patients were grouped into
complete responders (CR) (N 5 52) and nonresponders (NR) (N 5 23). Patients who had a partial
response (PR) or stable/progressive disease were
grouped together with the NR group.
Blood samples were collected by venipuncture
from all participants, and sera were separated and
stored at 280 8C until analyzed. Each sample was
analyzed in duplicate.

Methods
Estimating total serum fucose levels
Fucose was estimated using the method described by
Winzler.30 Briefly, serum proteins were precipitated
out by 95% ethanol. The pellet obtained from centrifugation was dissolved in 2 mL of 0.2 N NaOH. From
this, 0.5 mL of aliquots was used for fucose estimation. Bound fucose was released from complex carbohydrates and was converted into furfural
derivatives upon reaction with concentrated H2SO4
followed by boiling for 3 minutes. Free fucose, upon

Clinical characteristic
Disease site
Buccal mucosa
Oral tongue
Alveolus
Retromolar trigon
Lip and others (gum, gingival sulcus, hard palate)
Histopathology
Squamous cell carcinoma
Lymph node involvement
No
Yes
Stage of disease
I
II
Early stage (I and II)
III
IV
Advanced stage (III and IV)
Tumor differentiation
Well
Moderate
Poor
Nuclear grade
1
2
3

Percent of patients (N5130)

45.4
20.8
10.7
7.7
15.4
100
49.4
50.6
10.6
17
27.6
17.9
54.5
72.4
30.8
57.7
11.5
27
61.5
11.5

reaction with cystein-hydrochloride, formed yellow
chromophores, and absorbance was read at 396 nanometers (nm). A reaction mixture also was read at
430 nm simultaneously to correct the interference
caused by chromophores from other sugars. Fucose
levels were normalized with serum total proteins
(TP) and expressed as mg/g protein.

Isolating fucoproteins using lectin-affinity chromatography
Lectin-affinity chromatography was performed to
isolate serum fucoproteins as described by Thompson and Turner.15 The fucose-specific lectin Lotus tetragonolobus (LTA) (Sigma Chemical Company, St.
Louis, Mo) was coupled with cyanogen bromide-activated sepharose-4B beads (Amersham Pharmacia) at
a final concentration of 2 mg lectin mL21 packed
beads according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Before coupling with serum proteins, lectin-sepharose beads were washed with Tris buffer (pH 7.4) that
contained KCl, CaCl2, MgCl2, and Nonidet P40. Serum fucoproteins were isolated by mixing an equal
concentration of serum proteins with an equal volume of packed lectin-sepharose beads for 30 minutes
at room temperature. Then, the beads were washed
with Tris buffer to remove unbound serum proteins.

Fucosylation Changes in Oral Cancer/Shah et al

Bound fucoproteins were released from lectin beads
by solubilizing in 100 lL Tris (pH 6.8) containing sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and ethylenediamine tetracetic acid. Resultant elutes were run on 7.5% SDSpolyacrylamide gel electrophoresis gels under reducing conditions, and the proteins were stained using
silver staining method (Bio-Rad Kit).

339

ysis was performed to determine the correlation of
serum markers with clinicopathologic parameters.
The values were expressed as the mean  standard
error of the mean. P values .05 were considered
statistically significant.

RESULTS
FucT assay
The assay described by Yazawa et al was used to
measure FucT activity.31 Briefly, 0.1 mL assay reaction
mixture consisted 50 mM N-(2-hydroxethyl) piperazine-NA-2-ethanesulfonic acid-NaOH buffer (pH 6.8)
and 10 mM MnCl2. To this, 4 mg of fucose acceptor
ovomucoid and 20 lL enzyme source were added.
After equilibration at 37 8C, the reaction was initiated
by addition of C14-labeled nucleotide sugar GDPfucose. A control assay for each sample was run in
the absence of acceptor substrate. The reaction was
terminated by adding a chilled mixture containing 5%
trichloroacetic acid, 2% phosphotungestic acid, and
0.5 N HCl. The resultant pellet was washed twice with
the same acid mixture followed by 95% ethanol. Protein precipitates were solubilized in 1 mL NCS solubilizer (Amersham) and placed in 10 mL scintillation
cocktail. Enrichment of glycoproteins with fucose was
measured by measuring radioactivity using a b counter. Enzyme activity was expressed as continuous passive motion/mg protein/hour.
a-L-fucosidase assay
The fucosidase activity was determined as described
by Wiederschain et al32 Briefly, the reaction mixture,
which contained 20 lL serum as an enzyme source,
205 lL 0.05 N acetate buffer (pH 5.5) and 25 lL
10 mM p-nitrophenyl (PNP)-a-L-fucopyranoside substrate for enzyme, was incubated at 37 8C for 1 hour.
To this, 2.5% ZnSO4 and 0.15 N NaOH were added to
terminate the reaction. The samples were centrifuged, and 300 lL supernatant were mixed with
300 lL 0.04 M glycine buffer, pH 10.5. The absorbance of liberated PNP was measured at 410 nm
wavelength. One unit of enzyme activity was defined
as the amount of enzyme required to hydrolyze 1
nmole of PNP/mL/hour at 37 8C.
Statistical Analysis
Data were analyzed using SPSS statistical software
(version 10). The levels of significance were determined by using unpaired and paired Student t tests.
Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves were
constructed to evaluate the diagnostic value of serum
a-L-fucosidase in patients by selecting a cutoff level
from multiple points on the graph. Multivariate anal-

Comparison of Serum Fucose Levels Between
Controls and Patients
Figure 1 shows that serum fucose levels were
increased significantly in patients who had OC compared with patients who had OPC (P 5 .003) and
compared with controls (P <.001). In addition,
patients with OPC had significantly higher levels of
serum fucose than controls (P 5 .002).
Comparison of Fucoproteins Between Controls and
Patients and Serum Fucoproteins as Treatment Response
Monitors in Patients With OC
Serum fucoproteins were isolated by using lectin
LTA, which detects fucose linked either at the a1,2/
a1,6 position in the core or at the a1,3 position as
terminal or preterminal residue. The intensity of
fucoproteins was quantified using molecular analysis
software (Gel Documentation; Bio-Rad), and results
expressed as optical density/mm2. Figure 2A shows
that the patients with untreated OC had significantly
increased levels of serum fucoproteins compared
with the control group and compared with the
patients with OPC (P 5 .006 and P <.05, respec-

FIGURE 1. Comparison of serum fucose levels between controls
(N 5 100), patients with an oral precancerous condition (OPC) (N 5 75),
and patients with untreated oral cancer (Cancer Pts.) (N 5 130). Values
(mean  standard error of the mean) are expressed as mg/g proteins.

340

CANCER

July 15, 2008 / Volume 113 / Number 2

FIGURE 2. (A) Serum fucosylated glycoproteins (fucoproteins) in controls (N 5 100), in patients with an oral precancerous condition (OPC) (N 5 75), and in
patients with untreated oral cancer (OC) (Cancer Pts.) (N 5 130). Serum fucoproteins were isolated with the fucose-specific lectin Lotus tetragonolobu by using
lectin-affinity chromatography. The band intensity was quantified and compared between the groups. Values (mean  standard error of the mean) are expressed
as optical density (OD)/mm2. (B) Representative serum fucoprotein electrophoretic pattern and fucose levels in controls, in patients with OPC, and in patients
with OC at the time of diagnosis and during follow-up in patients who achieved a complete response (CR) and in patients who achieved a partial response (PR).
Lanes A and B indicate serum fucoprotein patterns in a control and in a patient with an OPC, respectively; Lane C, molecular weight (MW) marker; Lanes D-H,
serum fucoprotein patterns in a patient who had a CR at pretreatment (PT) (Lane D) and during follow-up (Lanes E-H), serum fucoprotein patterns in a patient
who had a PR at pretreatment (Lane I) and during follow-up (Lanes J-L). (C) Representative serum fucoprotein electrophoretic pattern and fucose levels in a
nonresponder (NR) at the time of diagnosis and during follow-up. Lane 1, molecular weight (Mol Wt.) markers; Lane 2, serum fucoprotein patterns in an NR
before the initiation of anticancer treatment; Lanes 3-6, serum fucoproteins in patients during post–treatment follow-up. (D) Serum fucoprotein levels before and
after anticancer treatment in patients who achieved a CR (solid line), in patients who achieved a PR (dashed line), and in NR (dotted line). F1 through F4 indicate follow-up at 1 month, 3 months, 7 months, and 10 months, respectively.

Fucosylation Changes in Oral Cancer/Shah et al

341

rum fucoproteins in the PR group (Fig. 2D, dashed
line) demonstrated a mix response to the anticancer
treatment during follow-up. Thus, our data suggest a
close correlation between serum fucoprotein levels
and response to anticancer treatment and progressive disease in these patients.
Furthermore, we observed a significant association of serum fucose levels in these patients before
and after anticancer treatment, as indicated at the
bottom of the electrophoretic patterns (Fig. 2B and
2C). It is evident from representative patterns and
aggregate presentations of the data that serum fucoproteins correlated well with disease persistence,
remission, and progression as well as patient outcome (Figs. 2B-D).

FIGURE 3. Comparison of serum fucosyltransferase activity between the
controls (N 5 100), patients with an oral precancerous condition (OPC)
(N 5 75), and patients with untreated oral cancer (Cancer Pts.) (N 5 130) analyzed by radioactivity assay. Values (mean  standard error of the mean) are
expressed as counts per minute/mg protein/hour. NS indicates not significant.

tively). In addition, increased levels of serum fucoproteins were observed in the patients who had OPC
compared with the control group (P 5 .07). Representative electrophoretic patterns of serum fucoproteins in controls, in patients with OPC, and in
3 patients with untreated OC who had all posttreatment follow-up serum levels available are shown
in Figure 2B,C. Increased LTA reactivity was observed
especially in 43-kilodaltons (kD) and 66-kD serum
glycoproteins. In Figure 2B, lanes A and B represent
fucoprotein expression in a control and in a patient
with OPC, respectively. The patterns represent fucoprotein changes in the CR group, the PR group, and
the NR group during follow-up. Furthermore, the aggregate presentation of mean fucoprotein levels in
the CR, PR, and NR groups were plotted the followup of each patient against their pretreatment (PT)
levels, as shown in Figure 2D. The fucoprotein levels
were higher at the time of diagnosis (PT levels) in all
patients with OC (ie, the CR, PR, and NR groups), as
depicted in the graph. The serum levels were
decreased in the CR group (Fig. 2D, solid line) during
follow-up (F1-F4 indicate follow-up at 1 month, 3
months, 7 months, and 10 months, respectively)
compared with their PT levels. Conversely, serum
fucoproteins remained unchanged or increased in
the NR group (Fig. 2D, dotted line) because of postsurgical and/or postradiotherapeutic progression of
disease in this group. It is interesting to note that se-

Alterations in Serum FucT and a-L-Fucosidase Activity
Increased levels of fucose and fucoprotein led us to
examine the activity of FucT. Figure 3 shows that
patients who had untreated OC and patients who
had OPC had significantly higher levels of FucT activity than controls (P <.05 and P<.05, respectively). A
comparison of serum fucosidase activity among the
3 groups is provided in Figure 4A. The mean serum
fucosidase levels were found to be elevated significantly in patients who had untreated OC and in
patients who had OPC compared with controls
(P <.001 and P <.001, respectively), whereas the levels
were comparable between patients with OC and
patients with OPC.
ROC Curve Analysis for Preoperative Serum
a-L-Fucosidase
The ROC curve is a meaningful statistical approach
with which to discriminate the groups under analysis
that simultaneously considers both the sensitivity
and the specificity of the parameters. The ROC
curves for serum a-L-fucosidase activity are shown
in Figure 4B, and the corresponding sensitivity and
specificity values as well as the area under the ROC
curves (AUCs) are provided in Table 3. The AUCs for
the comparisons of the control group versus the OC
group, the control group versus the OPC group, and
the OPC group versus the OC group were 0.795,
0.840, and 0.475, respectively. The efficacy of the serum a-L-fucosidase level for discriminating between
the control group and the untreated OC group or the
OPC group was statistically significant (P <.001 and
P <.001, respectively). The ideal cutoff of >450.6 U/
mL for a-L-fucosidase was determined from multiple
points on the ROC curve that resembled the mean
value in the control group. At the chosen cutoff, a-Lfucosidase had 60% sensitivity and a specificity of
89% to discriminate between patients with OC

342

CANCER

July 15, 2008 / Volume 113 / Number 2
TABLE 3
Comparison of the Discriminatory Efficacy of Serum a-L-Fucosidase
Activity in Patients With Oral Cancer and Oral Precancerous
Conditions
Groups*

Sensitivity, %

Specificity, %

P

AUC

Controls vs cancer patients
Controls vs OPC patients
OPC patients vs cancer patients

60
60

89
94

<.001
<.001
NS

0.795
0.840

OPC indicates oral precancerous condition; AUC, area under the curve; NS, not significant.
* The cut-off for a-L-fucosidase was determined as >450.6 U/mL, which showed good sensitivity
and specificity for oral cancer and OPC.

ous clinicopathologic parameters in cancer patients.
We observed that increased serum fucose levels were
associated significantly with tumor differentiation
(P 5 .019) and stage of the malignant disease
(P 5 .041). Serum fucoproteins also had a positive
correlation with lymph node metastasis (P 5 .065).

FIGURE 4. (A) Comparison of serum fucosidase activity between the controls (N 5 100), patients with an oral precancerous condition (OPC) (N 5 75),
and patients with untreated oral cancer (OC) (N 5 130) analyzed by p-nitrophenol assay. Values (mean  standard error of the mean) are expressed as
U/mL. (B) Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves for preoperative serum a-L-fucosidase. Comparisons were made between 1) patients with
untreated OC versus controls; 2) patients with OPC versus controls; and 3)
patients with OPC versus patients with untreated OC. ROC curves were constructed for the analysis of sensitivity and specificity of serum fucosidase
and its ability to discriminate between the study groups. Fucosidase values
(indicated as line graphs) above the reference line on an ROC curve (middle
lines in graphs) suggest a good discriminatory efficacy of the marker that is
within acceptable limits.

patients and controls. The cutoff also had good discriminatory efficacy for OPC with high sensitivity
(60%) and specificity (94%).

Correlation Between Serum Fucosylation Changes and
Clinicopathologic Parameters
Multivariate analysis was performed to determine the
association of serum fucosylation changes with vari-

Comparison Between PT and Posttreatment Serum Levels
of Fucosylation Markers in Patients With OC
Serum fucosylation levels at diagnosis were compared
with their follow-up levels. The follow-up samples
were categorized into CR and NR. A comparison of
fucosylation changes between patients with untreated
OC (PT group), the CR group, and the NR group is
shown in Figure 5A-D. The CR group had declined serum levels of the markers compared with the PT group
and the NR group. Statistical analysis revealed significantly lower levels of serum fucose, fucoproteins,
FucT, and fucosidase in the CR group compared with
the PT group (P <.001, P 5 .001, P 5 .05, and P 5 .001,
respectively); whereas levels in the NR group were
markedly higher (P 5 .001, P <.001, P 5 .05, and
P 5 .07, respectively) compared with levels in the CR
group. Serum fucose, fucoproteins, FucT, and fucosidase revealed comparable levels in the NR group and
the PT group. To determine the association of altered
serum fucosylation levels with the effectiveness of
anticancer treatment, the marker levels at each followup were paired with the patient’s PT levels and were
analyzed. The statistical significance of the alterations
during favorable or unfavorable treatment response
was confirmed in each patient group using the Student t test for paired data, which revealed a trend
comparable to that described above. Serial estimates
of the changes in serum fucosylation levels were calculated after the initiation of anticancer treatment to
evaluate the efficacy of these markers in treatment
monitoring. The patterns of biomarkers at the time of
diagnosis and during and/or after anticancer treatment in patients who had different treatment out-

Fucosylation Changes in Oral Cancer/Shah et al

343

FIGURE 5. Patients with oral cancer (OC) were followed during and/or after anticancer treatment. The post–treatment follow-ups were categorized into complete responders (CR) and nonresponders (NR) as described in the text. The follow-up serum samples were analyzed for fucosylation changes using a Student t
test for paired data analysis for each patient’s follow-up. Graphs show the comparison of (A) serum L-fucose, (B) fucosylated glycoproteins (fucoproteins), (C)
fucosyltransferase (FucT), and (D) a-L-fucosidase between the untreated/pretreatment (PT) patients with OC (N 5 130) and patients who achieved a CR
(N 5 52) or who had an NR (N 5 23). Values are shown as the mean  standard error of the mean. OD indicates optical density; CPM, counts per minute.

comes were studied. Alterations in fucoproteins in 3
representative individuals are shown in Figure 2B and
2C. Levels of fucose, FucT and fucosidase revealed a
sharp decrease during follow-up and remained below
their PT levels throughout follow-up duration in the
CR group. Conversely, the levels rose progressively during follow-up in the NR group. In addition, serum
fucosylation levels decreased during the clinical remission phase. Remarkably, marker levels rose before the
clinical detection of recurrence. Thus, it is evident
from the results that fucosylation changes reflect the
response to the anticancer treatment in patients before
clinical manifestations of disease.

DISCUSSION
The current study demonstrates the association of
changes in serum fucosylation with OC develop-

ment and with treatment response monitoring in
patients with OC. We observed that the measurement of serum levels of fucose, fucoproteins, FucT,
and fucosidase was useful clinically in patients
with OC and OPC. Furthermore, these levels tend
to change with the anticancer treatments in
patients with OC and may be an important aspect
of treatment monitoring and management for these
patients.
Currently, OC is the major cause of cancerrelated mortality among Indian men because of
intense tobacco consumption. In addition, the incidence of OPC continues to increase among the
young population. Therefore, the inclusion of OPC in
the current study established a link between normal
and malignant conditions. The screening and followup of patients with minimally invasive serum tests
are appealing because of the accessibility to repeated

344

CANCER

July 15, 2008 / Volume 113 / Number 2

sampling. The observations of this study are noteworthy because, to our knowledge, the simultaneous
evaluation of serum fucose, fucoproteins, FucT, and
fucosidase in patients with OC has not been reported
previously.
Fucose is known as an important constituent of
glycoproteins, which may be released into the circulation through increased turnover, secretion, and/or
shedding from malignant cells. In the current study,
we observed a significant increase in serum fucose
levels, fucoprotein levels, and FucT activity in
patients with OC and OPC. Increased levels of serum/tissue fucose in patients with cancer have been
reported by various investigators and are of considerable interest because of their potential clinical applications.6,8-10,33 Rao et al reported higher levels of
serum fucose in OC and OPC in a small number of
patients.7
Lectins have been used as an important tool for
exploring the structure and functions of carbohydrates of glycoproteins, and they contributed tremendously to the advancement of glycobiology.34
Increased fucose levels may lead to altered or unique
glycoconjugates. In the current study, it is interesting
to note that the quantitative analysis of fucosylation
changes in patients with OC and OPC indicated overall increased fucosylation. Among these, the 43-kD
and 66-kD serum glycoproteins produced significant hyperfucosylation in patients who had
untreated OC compared with controls and with
patients who had OPC. Furthermore, the expression
of fucoproteins broadly reflected increased fucose
levels, which may have been caused by hyperfucosylation of the 43-kD and 66-kD serum glycoproteins. Our results are in accordance with previous
observations by Thompson and Turner15,16 and Shirahama et al35 Those authors reported increased fucosylation of serum and tumor glycoproteins as a
prognostic marker in patients with cancer that
reflected tumor burden and treatment response.
Moreover, they reported that the role of linkage-specific fucose in the development of an invasive cancer
phenotype reportedly was associated with the
expression of fucosylated Lewis antigens.
The turnover of fucose residue in glycoconjugates can be implied by measuring the activity of
FucT and fucosidase. Increased FucT leads to hyperfucosylation, which manifests as elevated fucoproteins during neoplastic transformation. We observed
a significant rise in FucT activity along with fucose
and fucoprotein levels in serum from patients with
OC and OPC compared with the activity observed in
controls. Increased total and linkage-specific FucT
activities in serum or tumor samples have been

reported in endometrial, hepatocellular, and ovarian
carcinomas.8,11-13 In a previous study, it was demonstrated shown that a1,6-FucT is responsible for the
fucosylation of AFP, which is a useful serum marker
for hepatoma.16 Enhanced expression of a-(1-3/
4)FucT was associated with increased expression of
fucosylated Lewis antigens Lea/b/x/y on the cell surface.20 These Lewis antigens mediate a critical binding of neoplastic cells to activated endothelium
through E-selectin, which is one of the key steps in
hematogenous metastasis.36 We also observed an
association of fucosylated antigen sialyl Lex and
FucT activity in malignant and precancerous tissues
(data not shown), suggesting that linkage-specific
analysis of FucT may yield vital information regarding molecular and phenotypic changes in OC.
Our multivariate analysis indicated a positive
association of serum fucose and fucose/total proteins
(TP) with tumor differentiation, which suggests that
the levels increased as the degree of differentiation
decreased from well differentiated to poorly differentiated tumors. Recently, Kossowska et al suggested
that the fucosylation status of serum glycoproteins
may serve as a promising predictor of survival for
patients with lung cancer.17 A positive association
has been established between elevated serum fucose
levels and a poor prognosis in patients with breast
cancer.37 Shirahama et al used qualitative immunohistochemical analysis and observed that the degree
of fucosylation of tumor glycoproteins in patients
with urinary bladder cancer reflected metastatic
potential and poor survival.35
Furthermore, in the current results provide evidence that serum fucosylation changes can be used
to monitor treatment in patients with OC. Serum
levels of fucose, fucoproteins, and FucT were
decreased in patients who had a successful therapeutic response (the CR group) and remained elevated
or comparable in the NR group compared with their
PT levels. Response to therapy, no response, and persistent disease correlated well with serum fucosylation changes in patients with OC. The results of the
current study strongly suggest that serum fucosylation changes can be useful clinically during post–
treatment follow-up. The markers may serve as indicators of disease and may help to predict treatment
response, lymph node recurrence, or possible therapy failure. Thus, close monitoring of serum fucosylation changes may be promising as a tool for
patients with OC. It has been reported that serum
FucT activities were reduced in breast and gastric
cancers after the removal of tumors, whereas
recurrence or metastasis tended to increase FucT
activity.38,39

Fucosylation Changes in Oral Cancer/Shah et al

L-fucosidase, an important enzyme for fucose
catabolism, also is responsible for the altered fucosylation status of glycoproteins. We observed that serum fucosidase was elevated significantly in patients
with OC and OPC compared with the controls. In the
current study, we have demonstrated the efficiency
of serum a-L-fucosidase for discriminating the
3 study groups. Considerably higher sensitivity (60%)
and specificity (94% for OPC; 89% for OC) of this
enzyme were observed at a threshold >450.6 U/mL,
which is suggestive of its usefulness for the detection
of early changes during cancer development. Similarly, a-L-fucosidase in serum has been reported as a
promising marker for the early detection and diagnosis of hepatocellular carcinoma.21,24,25,40 Ayude et al
demonstrated the diagnostic and prognostic utility of
decreased serum a-L-fucosidase activity in patients
with colorectal cancer.21,24 We observed a positive
correlation of serum fucosidase activity with the
extent of disease, which may indicate an association
of this enzyme activity with tumor progression. In
addition, our data indicated that a-L-fucosidase activity was altered in response to anticancer treatment
in the CR and NR groups and may be useful for
monitoring the treatment response in patients with
OC after primary tumor resection. It is noteworthy
that fucosidase levels in the CR group were similar to
the threshold value of >450.6 U/mL, whereas the NR
group had levels that were higher than the threshold.
Thus, on the basis of the current data, we propose
using the preoperative serum a-L-fucosidase level as
a marker for the detection of early changes during
OC development and for monitoring postoperative
treatment response in patients with OC. The nonsignificant increase in enzyme activity that we
observed in patients who had cancer compared with
patients who had OPC suggests that fucosidase activity increases during early neoplastic changes to compensate for hyperfucosylation of cell surface glycoproteins. However, the incorporation of fucose during malignant transformation may be several fold
higher than the hydrolytic cleavage of this residue.
In conclusion, the current findings provide clear
evidence of increased fucosylation of serum glycoproteins and its association with OC development
and treatment response. The evaluation of serum aL-fucosidase changes in normal, precancerous, and
malignant conditions suggest its potential use for the
early detection and for monitoring treatment response
in patients with OC.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.
15.

16.

17.

18.

REFERENCES
1.

Alhadeff JA. Malignant cell glycoproteins and glycolipids.
Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 1989;9:37-107.

345

Hakomori S. Aberrant glycosylation in tumors and tumorassociated carbohydrate antigens. Adv Cancer Res. 1989;52:
257-331.
Orczyk-Pawilowicz M. [The role of fucosylation of glycoconjugates in health and disease]. Postepy Hig Med Dosw
[serial online]. 2007;61:240-252.
MacDougall SL, Schwarting GA, Parkinson D, Sullivan AK.
Increased fucosylation of glycolipids in a human leukaemia
cell line (K562-Clone I) with decreased sensitivity to NKmediated lysis. Immunology. 1987;62:75-80.
Youakim A, Herscovics A. Cell surface glycopeptides from
human intestinal epithelial cell lines derived from normal
colon and colon adenocarcinomas. Cancer Res. 1985;45(11
pt 1):5505-5511.
Fernandez-Rodriguez J, Paez de la Cadena M, MartinezZorzano VS, Rodriguez-Berrocal FJ. Fucose levels in sera
and in tumours of colorectal adenocarcinoma patients.
Cancer Lett. 1997;121:147-153.
Rao VR, Krishnamoorthy L, Kumaraswamy SV, Ramaswamy
G. Circulating levels in serum of total sialic acid, lipidassociated sialic acid, and fucose in precancerous lesion
and cancer of the oral cavity. Cancer Detect Prev. 1998;22:
237-240.
Wang JW, Ambros RA, Weber PB, Rosano TG. Fucosyltransferase and alpha-L-fucosidase activities and fucose levels
in normal and malignant endometrial tissue. Cancer Res.
1995;55:3654-3658.
Patel PS, Baxi BR, Adhvaryu SG, Balar DB. Evaluation of serum sialic acid, heat stable alkaline phosphatase and
fucose as markers of breast carcinoma. Anticancer Res.
1990;10:1071-1074.
Patel PS, Adhvaryu SG, Balar DB, Parikh BJ, Shah PM. Clinical application of serum levels of sialic acid, fucose and
seromucoid fraction as tumour markers in human leukemias. Anticancer Res. 1994;14:747-751.
Mita Y, Aoyagi Y, Suda T, Asakura H. Plasma fucosyltransferase activity in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma,
with special reference to correlation with fucosylated species of alpha-fetoprotein. J Hepatol. 2000;32:946-954.
Hutchinson WL, Du MQ, Johnson PJ, Williams R. Fucosyltransferases: differential plasma and tissue alterations in
hepatocellular carcinoma and cirrhosis. Hepatology. 1991;
13:683-688.
Takahashi T, Ikeda Y, Miyoshi E, Yaginuma Y, Ishikawa M,
Taniguchi N. Alpha1,6fucosyltransferase is highly and specifically expressed in human ovarian serous adenocarcinomas. Int J Cancer. 2000;88:914-919.
Rudiger H, Gabius HJ. Plant lectins: occurrence, biochemistry, functions and applications. Glycoconj J. 2001;18:589-613.
Thompson S, Turner GA. Elevated levels of abnormallyfucosylated haptoglobins in cancer sera. Br J Cancer.
1987;56:605-610.
Thompson S, Cantwell BM, Cornell C, Turner GA. Abnormally-fucosylated haptoglobin: a cancer marker for tumour
burden but not gross liver metastasis. Br J Cancer. 1991;64:
386-390.
Kossowska B, Ferens-Sieczkowska M, Gancarz R, Passowicz-Muszynska E, Jankowska R. Fucosylation of serum
glycoproteins in lung cancer patients. Clin Chem Lab Med.
2005;43:361-369.
Noda K, Miyoshi E, Kitada T, et al. The enzymatic basis for
the conversion of nonfucosylated to fucosylated alphafetoprotein by acyclic retinoid treatment in human hepatoma cells: activation of alpha1-6 fucosyltransferase.
Tumour Biol. 2002;23:202-211.

346

CANCER

July 15, 2008 / Volume 113 / Number 2

19. Listinsky JJ, Siegal GP, Listinsky CM. Alpha-L-fucose: a
potentially critical molecule in pathologic processes including neoplasia. Am J Clin Pathol. 1998;110:425440.
20. Togayachi A, Kudo T, Ikehara Y, et al. Up-regulation of
Lewis enzyme (Fuc-TIII) and plasma-type alpha1,3fucosyltransferase (Fuc-TVI) expression determines the augmented expression of sialyl Lewis x antigen in non-small cell
lung cancer. Int J Cancer. 1999;83:70-79.
21. Ayude D, Fernandez-Rodriguez J, Rodriguez-Berrocal FJ,
et al. Value of the serum alpha-L-fucosidase activity in
the diagnosis of colorectal cancer. Oncology. 2000;59:310316.
22. Abdel-Aleem H, Ahmed A, Sabra AM, Zakhari M, Soliman
M, Hamed H. Serum alpha L-fucosidase enzyme activity in
ovarian and other female genital tract tumors. Int J Gynaecol Obstet. 1996;55:273-279.
23. Fernandez-Rodriguez J, Ayude D, de la Cadena MP, et al.
Alpha-L-fucosidase enzyme in the prediction of colorectal
cancer patients at high risk of tumor recurrence. Cancer
Detect Prev. 2000;24:143-149.
24. Ayude D, Paez de la Cadena M, Martinez-Zorzano VS, Fernandez-Briera A, Rodriguez-Berrocal FJ. Preoperative serum alpha-L-fucosidase activity as a prognostic marker in
colorectal cancer. Oncology. 2003;64:36-45.
25. Giardina MG, Matarazzo M, Morante R, et al. Serum alphaL-fucosidase activity and early detection of hepatocellular
carcinoma: a prospective study of patients with cirrhosis.
Cancer. 1998;83:2468-2474.
26. Indian Council of Medical Research. ICMR Bulletin.
National Cancer Registry of the Indian Council for Medical
Research Annual Report, January 2001. New Delhi, India:
ICMR; 2001.
27. Oliver RJ, MacDonald DG, Felix DH. Aspects of cell proliferation in oral epithelial dysplastic lesions. J Oral Pathol
Med. 2000;29:49-55.
28. International Union Against Cancer. Head and neck
tumors. In: Spiessl B, Hermanek E, Scheibe O, et al, eds.
TNM Atlas, Illustrated Guide to the TNM/pTNM Classification of Malignant Tumors. 3rd ed. Heidelberg, Germany:
Springer-Verlag; 1990:3-61.

29. Therasse P, Arbuck SG, Eisenhauer EA, et al. New guidelines
to evaluate the response to treatment in solid tumors. European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer,
National Cancer Institute of the United States, National Cancer Institute of Canada. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2000;92:205-216.
30. Winzler RJ. Determination of serum glycoproteins. Methods
Biochem Anal. 1955;2:279-311.
31. Yazawa S, Madiyalakan R, Izawa H, Asao T, Furukawa K,
Matta KL. Cancer-associated elevation of alpha(1-3)-Lfucosyltransferase activity in human serum. Cancer. 1988;
62:516-520.
32. Wiederschain GY, Rosenfeld EL, Brusilovsky AI, Kolibaba
LG. a-L-fucosidase and other glycosidases in human placenta, foetus liver and amniotic fluid at various stages of
gestation. Clin Chim Acta. 1971;35:99-107.
33. Shashikanth MC, Rao BB. Study of serum fucose and serum sialic acid levels in oral squamous cell carcinoma. Indian J Dent Res. 1994;5:119-124.
34. Montreuil J, Vliegenthart JFG, Schachter H, eds. Glycoproteins II (New Comprehensive Biochemistry). Amsterdam,
the Netherlands: Elsevier; 1997.
35. Shirahama T, Ikoma M, Muramatsu T, et al. The binding
site for fucose-binding proteins of Lotus tetragonolobus is a
prognostic marker for transitional cell carcinoma of the
human urinary bladder. Cancer. 1993;72:1329-1334.
36. Kannagi R. Carbohydrate-mediated cell adhesion involved
in hematogenous metastasis of cancer. Glycoconj J. 1997;
14:577-584.
37. Wallack MK, Brown AS, Rosato EF, Rubin S, Johnson JL,
Rosato FE. Serum fucose as a monitor for recurrent malignancy. J Surg Oncol. 1978;10:39-44.
38. Bauer CH, Reutter WG, Erhart KP, Kottgen E, Gerok W.
Decrease of human serum fucosyltransferase as an indicator
of successful tumor therapy. Science. 1978;201:1232-1233.
39. Yazawa S, Asao T, Nagamachi Y, Abbas SA, Matta KL. Tumor-related elevation of serum (alpha 1–3)-L-fucosyltransferase activity in gastric cancer. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol.
1989;115:451-455.
40. Takahashi H, Saibara T, Iwamura S, et al. Serum alpha-Lfucosidase activity and tumor size in hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatology. 1994;19:1414-1417.

