Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 38

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Silibinin-mediated metabolic reprogramming attenuates
pancreatic cancer-induced cachexia and tumor growth
Surendra K. Shukla1, Aneesha Dasgupta1,2, Kamiya Mehla1, Venugopal Gunda1,
Enza Vernucci1, Joshua Souchek1, Gennifer Goode1, Ryan King1, Anusha Mishra1,
Ibha Rai1, Sangeetha Nagarajan1, Nina V. Chaika1, Fang Yu3, Pankaj K. Singh1,2,4,5
1

 he Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska
T
68198, USA

2

Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska 68198, USA

3

Department of Biostatistics, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska 68198, USA

4

Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska 68198, USA

5

Department of Genetics Cell Biology and Anatomy, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska 68198, USA

Correspondence to:
Pankaj K. Singh, e-mail: pankaj.singh@unmc.edu
Keywords: pancreatic cancer, cancer metabolism, silibinin, cachexia, c-Myc
Received: August 19, 2015 	

Accepted: September 25, 2015

Published: October 16, 2015

ABSTRACT
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is the fourth leading cause of cancerrelated deaths in the US. Cancer-associated cachexia is present in up to 80% of PDAC
patients and is associated with aggressive disease and poor prognosis. In the present
studies we evaluated an anti-cancer natural product silibinin for its effectiveness in
targeting pancreatic cancer aggressiveness and the cachectic properties of pancreatic
cancer cells and tumors. Our results demonstrate that silibinin inhibits pancreatic
cancer cell growth in a dose-dependent manner and reduces glycolytic activity of cancer
cells. Our LC-MS/MS based metabolomics data demonstrates that silibinin treatment
induces global metabolic reprogramming in pancreatic cancer cells. Silibinin treatment
diminishes c-MYC expression, a key regulator of cancer metabolism. Furthermore, we
observed reduced STAT3 signaling in silibinin-treated cancer cells. Overexpression of
constitutively active STAT3 was sufficient to substantially revert the silibinin-induced
downregulation of c-MYC and the metabolic phenotype. Our in vivo investigations
demonstrate that silibinin reduces tumor growth and proliferation in an orthotopic
mouse model of pancreatic cancer and prevents the loss of body weight and muscle.
It also improves physical activity including grip strength and latency to fall in tumorbearing mice. In conclusion, silibinin-induced metabolic reprogramming diminishes
cell growth and cachectic properties of pancreatic cancer cells and animal models.

cancer-related deaths [2]. Cachectic cancer patients
exhibit poorer prognosis in comparison to non-cachectic
patients. They also have poor survival and response to
chemotherapy and radiotherapy as well as significant
increase in surgical risk [3]. The etiology of cancerinduced cachexia is not completely understood, but it is
considered to be result of a complex interplay of tumor
and host factors [4]. The most prominent characteristic of
the cachexia is significant skeletal muscle depletion which
mainly occurs due to enhanced proteolysis and reduced

INTRODUCTION
Cachexia is a multifactorial syndrome characterized
by involuntary weight loss due to skeletal muscle wasting
and fat depletion. More than 50% of cancer patients,
depending on the type of cancer, suffer from cachexia
[1]. Often cancer patients are diagnosed with significant
body weight loss that limits therapeutic options. Cachexia
in cancer patients leads to weakness, immobility and
poor  quality of life, which significantly contributes to

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41146

Oncotarget

protein synthesis in myofibers [5]. Considering the role
of cancer-induced cachexia in mortality and morbidity
of cancer patients, management of cachexia represents a
significant unmet medical requirement. Unfortunately, due
to the complex nature and limited understanding of the
disease, to date there is no established therapeutic regimen
for cancer-induced cachexia.
Pancreatic cancer is currently the fourth leading
cause of cancer-related death in the United States
and is estimated to be second leading cause of cancerrelated death in the US by 2030 [6]. Despite improved
molecular understanding of disease progression, the
five-year survival rate of pancreatic cancer patients is
still at 7% [7]. Several factors contribute to the dismal
survival of pancreatic cancer patients, including the
asymptomatic nature of early stage disease, absence of
an effective screening test, and therapeutic resistance [8].
The incidence of cachexia varies widely among
different types of cancer. In comparison to other types
of cancer, pancreatic cancer has the highest incidence
of cachexia; about 80% of patients exhibit cachectic
phenotype at the time of diagnosis [9]. Pancreatic cancerrelated cachexia significantly affects prognosis of the
disease along with reduced postoperative outcome after
pancreaticoduodenectomy. It has been recently reported
that instead of obesity, cachexia is a key determinant
of poor outcome of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma
patients after surgery [10]. Gemcitabine treatment, the
current gold standard therapeutic agent of pancreatic
cancer also has been shown to induce cachexia in an
experimental model of pancreatic cancer [11], similar to
other anti-cancer agents such as taxanes [12]. Considering
all these facts, there is an instant need of alternative
therapeutic agents that possess anti-cancerous as well as
anti-cachectic properties.
Several natural compounds such as graviola and
flavonoids have been shown to exhibit tumor metabolism
inhibitory [13] and anti-cachectic properties [14]. Silibinin
is the major bioactive component of the seed extract of
the plant Milk thistle (Silybum marianum), which has
shown significant anti-proliferative and pro-apoptotic
properties in in vitro and in vivo models of different
type of cancers including prostate, colon and renal cell
carcinoma [15]. Previous studies have demonstrated that
silibinin also exhibits anti-inflammatory properties by
regulating the expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines
such as IL-6 and IL-8 [16]. Silibinin also suppresses the
accumulation of hypoxia inducible factor 1α (HIF1α)
and inhibits activity of the mTOR pathway, both of
which are important regulators of cancer cell metabolism
[17, 18]. Considering all these properties of silibinin, in
the present study we have evaluated the anti-cancerous
and anti-cachectic role of silibinin in pancreatic cancer
by using in vitro as well as in vivo models. Our results
demonstrate that silibinin significantly inhibits the growth
of pancreatic cancer cells and induces global metabolic
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

reprogramming. It also suppresses the cachectic potential
of pancreatic cancer cells. Our in vivo studies demonstrate
that silibinin inhibits tumor growth, proliferation and
pancreatic cancer-induced cachexia in an orthotopic model
of pancreatic cancer. Altogether, our findings demonstrate
the anti-cachectic and anti-cancerous activity of silibinin
in pancreatic cancer.

RESULTS
Silibinin inhibits growth of pancreatic
cancer cells
We examined the effect of silibinin on growth of
pancreatic cancer cell lines. We evaluated the effect of
different doses of silibinin ranging from 10 μM to 250 μM
on the survival of S2-013, T3M4, AsPC-1, BxPC-3,
MIA PaCa-2 and Panc-1. We observed a dose-dependent
inhibition of cell growth in all the cell lines after 72 h
treatment (Figure 1A and Supplementary Figure 1A–1D).
We further evaluated effect of silibinin on γH2AX levels,
a marker for DNA damage and apoptosis, in S2-013 and
T3M4 cells using immunofluorescence assay. After 48 h of
treatment with 50 μM and 100 μM silibinin, we observed
a dose dependent increase in γH2AX level in both S2-013
and T3M4 cells (Figure 1B). Furthermore, we examined
the effect of silibinin treatment on Caspase 3/7 activity in
S2-013 and T3M4 cells. Our results demonstrate enhanced
Caspase 3/7 activity at 48 h post silibinin treatment of
S2-013 and T3M4 cells (Figure 1C). Overall, our results
demonstrate that silibinin inhibits growth of pancreatic
cancer cells in a dose-dependent manner. It also induces
DNA damage in pancreatic cancer cells and activates
Caspase 3/7-mediated apoptosis.

Silibinin inhibits cellular metabolism and
reduces expression of key metabolic enzymes
To explore the effect of silibinin on pancreatic
cancer cell metabolism, we investigated glucose uptake
and lactate secretion in S2-013 and T3M4 cell lines, 24 h
post treatment with 100 μM and 250 μM silibinin. We
observed significant decrease in glucose uptake and lactate
release in both cell lines in a dose-dependent manner
(Figure 2A and 2B). Reduction in lactate release was not
as prominent as in case of glucose uptake. It may be due
to the contribution of other metabolic pathways such as
glutaminolysis in lactate secretion [19]. To determine
the mechanistic basis of such metabolic changes, we
investigated the effect of silibinin on glycolytic gene
expression by performing qRT-PCR. We observed a
significant reduction in mRNA expression of GLUT1,
HKII and LDHA after silibinin treatment in S2-013 and
T3M4 cells (Figure 2C). We observed no change in
41147

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Silibinin inhibits growth of pancreatic cancer cell lines and induces apoptosis. A. S2-013 and T3M4 cells were
treated with different doses of silibinin for 72 h and cell survival was determined by MTT assays. B. S2-013 and T3M4 cells were treated
with the indicated doses for 48 h and γH2A.X was detected by immunoflourescence assay. C. S2-013 and T3M4 cells were treated with
different doses of silibinin and Caspase 3/7 activity was determined after 48 h of treatment. Values represented are mean  ±  SEM. *P 
≤  0.05, **P  ≤  0.01 and ***P  ≤  0.001.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41148

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Silibinin inhibits metabolism of pancreatic cancer cells and reduces expression of glycolytic enzymes.

A. S2-013 and B. T3M4 cells were treated with different doses of silibinin for 24 h and glucose uptake was determined by performing
[3H]-2DG uptake assay. Bars represent counts normalized to cell number and plotted relative to controls. Lactate release was determined by
colorimetric assay using culture medium of S2-013 and T3M4 cells. Values were normalized to total cell number and represented relative
to controls. C. S2-013 and T3M4 cells were treated with 100 μM silibinin for 12 h and total RNA was isolated. Relative mRNA levels of
GLUT1, HKII, LDHA and ENO1 were determined by performing qRT-PCR. Actin was used as an internal control. D. Protein levels of
GLUT1, HKII and LDHA were determined in S2-013 and T3M4 cell lysates from cells treated with solvent control or 100 μM silibinin
for 24 h by performing immunoblotting. Actin was used as a loading control. Values shown are mean  ±  SEM. *P  ≤  0.05, **P  ≤  0.01 and
***P  ≤  0.001.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41149

Oncotarget

mRNA levels of ENO1 upon silibinin treatment in either
cell lines. We also observed reduced GLUT1 and HKII
protein expression, but no change in LDHA expression,
after silibinin treatment in S2-013 and T3M4 cells
(Figure 2D). Thus, our results demonstrate that silibinin
inhibits glucose uptake and lactate release in pancreatic
cancer cells by down-regulating the expression of key
glycolytic enzymes.

results in reduced pentose phosphate pathway activity
and nucleoside synthesis.

Silibinin inhibits STAT3 signaling and reduces
c-MYC expression
Proto-oncogene c-MYC is considered as a master
regulator of cellular metabolism, growth and proliferation
and is deregulated in multiple solid tumors, including
pancreatic cancer [21]. Based on our observations of global
metabolic alterations in silibinin-treated S2-013 and T3M4
cells, we further evaluated the effect of silibinin on c-MYC
expression. Our real-time PCR analyses demonstrated
reduced expression of c-MYC gene in S2-013 and T3M4
cells (Figure 4A). Furthermore, we observed reduced
protein levels of c-MYC in S2-013 and T3M4 cells upon
silibinin treatment, as determined by western blotting
(Figure 4B). It has been reported that silibinin exhibits
its anti-cancerous effect through modulation of several
pro-inflammatory and growth signaling pathways [22].
In order to understand the molecular basis of silibininmediated c-MYC expression regulation and metabolic
reprogramming of pancreatic cancer cells, we investigated
the effect of silibinin treatment on STAT3 activation,
which enhances c-MYC expression [23]. We observed a
reduction in STAT3 levels and even stronger reduction in
pSTAT3 (pY705) levels in S2–013 and T3M4 cells upon
silibinin treatment (Figure 4B). To investigate the direct
transcriptional regulation of c-MYC expression by STAT3
activation under silibinin treatment, we investigated the
effect of constitutively active STAT3 on c-MYC promoter
activity. Transient transfection of HEK-293T cells with a
plasmid construct expressing constitutively active STAT3,
along with pGL3-c-MYC reporter plasmid indicated over
three-fold increase in c-MYC promoter activity, which
could be significantly diminished by silibinin treatment
(Figure 4C). Next, we evaluated if constitutively active
STAT3 upregulates c-MYC mRNA levels in S2-013
cells, with and without silibinin treatment. We observed
increased c-MYC expression in constitutively active
STAT3 transfected S2–013 cells and the upregulation was
significantly abrogated by silibinin treatment (Figure 4D).
To determine the causal relationship between STAT3
activation and c-MYC expression in human pancreatic
cancer, we investigated the TCGA pancreatic cancer dataset
for a correlation between pSTAT3 levels and c-MYC
protein expression in 106 primary tumor specimens. We
observed a modest but statistically significant correlation
between protein levels of pSTAT3 and c-MYC (Figure 4E).
Furthermore, exogenous expression of constitutively
active STAT3 also increased glucose uptake and lactate
secretion in S2-013 cells that was significantly reduced
upon silibinin treatment (Figure 4F–4G). Thus, our results
demonstrate that silibinin diminishes c-MYC expression by
inhibiting STAT3 activation.

Silibinin induces global metabolic alterations in
pancreatic cancer cells
Based on our results indicating reduced
glycolytic activity in pancreatic cancer cells upon
silibinin treatment, we further investigated the effect
of silibinin on global metabolic changes in pancreatic
cancer cells. We evaluated the polar metabolite profiles
of S2-013 cells after silibinin treatment using LCMS/MS metabolomics. S2-013 cells were treated
for 24 h with 100 μM silibinin or vehicle control and
then metabolites were extracted followed by sample
processing, and data acquisition and analysis. Two
dimensional-partial least squares discriminant analysis
(2D-PLS-DA) plot of global metabolite content
indicated that silibinin-treated S2-013 cells clustered
differently from vehicle treated S2-013 cells (Figure 3A).
Quantitative enrichment analysis (QEA) of the
metabolites demonstrates that glucose-alanine pathway
metabolites are highly affected after silibinin treatment
(Figure 3B). Furthermore, analysis of individual
metabolites revealed that silibinin treatment leads to
significant reduction in the levels of several glycolytic
intermediate metabolites, including D-glucose (~75%),
glucose-6-phosphate, fructose-6-phosphate, fructosebisphosphate and lactate (~50%) (Figure 3C), suggesting
impaired glycolysis in silibinin-treated S2-013 cells.
Upholding our previous observation that silibinin
treatment reduces glucose uptake and lactate release, our
metabolomics data indicated reduced glucose and lactate
levels in silibinin-treated S2-013 cells. We also observed
significant reduction in pentose phosphate pathway
(PPP) metabolites, including 6-phosphogluconate
(~50%), erythrose-4-phosphate (~40%), sedoheptulose7-phosphate and sedoheptulose bis-phosphate (~ 70%)
after treatment with silibinin (Figure 3D). The PPP
(oxidative arm) mainly originates from the first
committed step of glycolysis and is required for the
biosynthesis of ribonuleosides, which are the building
blocks of nucleic acid synthesis [20]. We observed
significant reduction in several nucleotides, including
UMP (~50%), CTP (~50%) and UDP (~30%) and their
precursors in silibinin-treated S2-013 cells (Figure 3E).
Overall, our LC-MS/MS metabolomics-based studies
demonstrate that silibinin treatment significantly inhibits
glycolytic pathway in pancreatic cancer cells and thus
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41150

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Silibinin modulates glycolysis, PPP and pyrimidine metabolism in pancreatic cancer cells. S2-013 cells were

treated with solvent control or 100 μM silibinin for 24 h and polar metabolites were extracted and analyzed by performing selected reaction
monitoring (SRM) method on a LC-MS/MS mass spectrometer. Peak areas integrated using MultiQuant 2.1 (AB/SCIEX) were normalized
to the respective protein concentrations and analyzed by utilizing Metaboanalyst 2.0. Values are represented relative to controls. A. PLS-DA
(partial least squares discriminant analysis) plot generated from LC-MS/MS data of control and silibinin-treated S2–013 cells metabolites
B. Pathway enrichment analysis of metabolites from control and silibinin-treated S2-013 cells. C. Relative levels of glycolysis pathway
metabolites from control and silibinin-treated S2-013 cells. D. Relative levels of pentose phosphate pathway metabolites from control and
silibinin treated S2-013 cells. E. Relative levels of pyrimidine biosynthesis pathway metabolites from control and silibinin-treated S2-013
cells. Values represented are mean  ±  SEM. *P  ≤  0.05, **P  ≤  0.01 and ***P  ≤  0.001.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41151

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Silibinin reduces expression of c-MYC by inhibiting STAT3 activation. A. S2-013 and T3M4 cells were treated
with 100 μM silibinin for 12 h and total RNA was isolated. Relative mRNA level of c-MYC was determined by qRT-PCR. B. S2-013 and
T3M4 cells were treated with 100 μM silibinin for 24 h and c-MYC protein level was determined by immunoblotting. pSTAT3, and total
STAT3 level were determined by immunoblotting using cell lysates of S2–013 and T3M4 cells treated with 100 μM silibinin for 24 h.
Beta-actin was utilized as a loading control. C. HEK-293T cells were transfected with vector control (GFP) or STAT3-c plasmid and
after 36 h of transfection cells were treated with silibinin for 24 h. Relative c-MYC promoter activity was determined by performing dualluciferase assays. The bar charts represent the relative c-Myc activity after normalization to renilla-luciferase activity, as compared to the
control. D. S2-013 cells were transfected with vector control (GFP) or STAT3-c plasmid and after 36 h of transfection, cells were treated
with silibinin for 24 h. Total RNA was isolated and relative mRNA levels of c-MYC were determined by performing qRT-PCR. E. Pearson
correlation analysis of pSTAT3 and c-MYC in 106 human pancreatic cancer patient primary tumor specimen data from TCGA. F. S2-013
cells were transfected with vector control (GFP) or STAT3-c plasmid and after 36 h of transfection, cells were treated with silibinin for
24 h. Glucose uptake was determined by performing [3H]-2DG uptake assay. Bars represent counts normalized to cell number and plotted
relative to controls. G. Lactate release was determined by colorimetric assay using culture medium of transfected and silibinin-treated or
control cells. *P  ≤  0.05, **P  ≤  0.01 and ***P  ≤  0.001.

Silibinin inhibits tumor growth in orthotopic
implantation model of pancreatic cancer

tumor weight, tumor volume and muscle weight were
recorded. We observed a significant reduction in tumor
growth rate and tumor volume upon necropsy in silibinintreated tumor-bearing mice in comparison to the control
group (Figure 5A–5C). We also observed a significant
difference between body weight of the control group
and silibinin-treated mice (Figure 5D), with significantly
reduced weight loss in the silibinin-treated tumor-bearing
mice. Furthermore, we observed reduced tumor cell
proliferation in the silibinin-treated group in comparison
to the control group, as evident by reduced Ki67-positive

To investigate the anti-cancerous effect of silibinin in
in vivo conditions, we utilized an orthotopic implantation
mouse model of pancreatic cancer. We implanted 0.5 × 106
S2-013 cells into the pancreas of 6–8 week old female
athymic nude mice. After seven days of implantation, mice
were randomly divided into two groups for control and
silibinin treatment. After three weeks of daily treatment
with silibinin, mice were sacrificed and carcass weight,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41152

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Silibinin inhibits pancreatic tumor growth in orthotopic implantation model. S2-013 cells were orthotopically
implanted into the pancreas of female athymic nude mice. After seven days of implantation, mice were treated with silibinin or vehicle
control. After three weeks of treatment, mice were sacrificed. A. Tumor volumes are plotted over indicated periods. B. Representative
images of tumor upon necropsy. C. Bar chart represents average tumor weight upon necropsy. D. Body weight of mice during the period of
treatment measured by weighing each third day. E. Expression of c-MYC, Ki-67, GLUT1, and pSTAT3 in tumor tissue as determined by
immunohistochemistry. Values shown are mean  ±  SEM. *P  <  0.05, **P  ≤  0.01, and ***P ≤ 0.001.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41153

Oncotarget

of healthy control, S2-013 tumor-bearing control mice
and silibinin-treated S2-013 tumor-bearing mice. We
observed reduced expression of mRNA levels of MuRF1
and Atrogin in silibinin-treated tumor-bearing mice in
comparison to controls (Figure 6F). We also evaluated the
effect of silibinin on gene expression of pro-inflammatory
cytokines in pancreatic cancer cells as well as controls
and silibinin-treated tumor tissues. We observed reduced
expression of TNF-alpha and IL-6 (Supplementary
Figure  3A–3D). Thus, our results demonstrate that
silibinin treatment attenuates pancreatic cancer-induced
cachexia in orthotopic implantation models of pancreatic
cancer.

cells in the silibinin-treated tumor sections (Figure 5E).
We also observed reduced tumoral c-MYC, GLUT1, and
pSTAT3 expression in silibinin-treated mice in comparison
to the controls (Figure 5E), which corroborates our results
from cell culture-based studies. Furthermore, we evaluated
the blood glucose level and glucose tolerance in healthy
controls, tumor-bearing mice and tumor-bearing mice
treated with silibinin. We observed reduced blood glucose
levels and improved glucose tolerance in silibinin-treated
tumor-bearing mice in comparison to the control tumorbearing mice (Supplementary Figure 2A and 2B). Overall,
we demonstrate that silibinin treatment leads to reduced
tumor growth and proliferation in S2-013 tumor-bearing
mice. Furthermore, silibinin treatment reduces STAT3
activation, c-MYC and GLUT1 expression, and the
number of proliferating cells in pancreatic tumors, while
preventing tumor-induced body-weight loss.

DISCUSSION
The anti-cancerous property of plant-derived
flavanoid silibinin has been shown in several types of
cancer, but its effect on the metabolic phenotype of cancer
cells and cancer-cachexia, a systemic metabolic disorder
induced by the metabolic needs of a growing tumor, has not
been studied. In the current studies, we explored the effect
of silibinin on pancreatic cancer cell growth, metabolic
alterations, and cachectic potential using in vitro as well
as in vivo models. Altered metabolism is considered a
hallmark of cancer cells which contributes to maintain
uncontrolled growth and proliferation by providing
sufficient biomass and energy [25]. Therapeutic approaches
to combat cancer have been focused on targeting the rapid
proliferation of cancer cells. Since altered metabolism
of transformed cells significantly contributes to cellular
proliferation, targeting metabolic pathways of cancer
cells shows promise in the area of cancer therapeutics
[26]. Cancer cells display an altered metabolic phenotype
in order to fulfill their enhanced energy and biomass
synthesis requirements for uncontrolled growth [27].
A key metabolic alteration exhibited by most cancer cells
is enhanced aerobic glycolysis, a phenomenon known as
“the Warburg effect” which provides several metabolic
benefits to proliferating cancer cells [28]. In addition
to enhanced glycolytic activity, cancer cells also exhibit
addiction to glutamine, which plays a very important role
in bioenergetics and biosynthesis processes of cancer cells
[29]. Recently, several studies have demonstrated the
therapeutic efficacy of metabolic inhibitors in different
types of cancer. Glycolytic inhibitors 2-Deoxyglucose,
3-Bromopyruvate have shown anti-cancerous property in
different preclinical models of cancer [30]. Several studies
have reported the altered metabolic phenotype of pancreatic
cancer cells, governed by genetic alterations such as K-RAS
mutations and growth signaling pathways [31].
Our current study demonstrates that silibinin
exhibits its anti-proliferative action through modulation
of pancreatic cancer cell metabolism, and by inducing
apoptosis. We observed reduced glucose and lactate
secretion after treatment of cancer cells with silibinin.

Silibinin attenuates pancreatic cancer-induced
cachexia in vitro as well as in vivo
Previously we have reported that diet-induced
metabolic reprogramming inhibits pancreatic cancerinduced cachexia [24]. Based on our observations of
reduced body weight loss in silibinin-treated tumorbearing mice and metabolic alterations in silibinin-treated
pancreatic cancer cells, we further evaluated the role of
silibinin in preventing cancer-induced cachexia. Increased
muscle atrophy is a key feature of cancer-induced cachexia.
Hence, we evaluated the effect of silibinin treatment on
cancer cell-conditioned medium-induced C2C12 myotube
atrophy. We observed reduced myofiber degradation and
proteolysis upon treatment with cancer cell-conditioned
medium that was derived from silibinin pre-treated
S2-013 cancer cell (Figure 6A–6B). We also observed
similar protection with direct treatment of myotubes with
silibinin (Figure 6A–6B). Furthermore, we evaluated the
expression of muscle atrophy-associated genes MuRF1
and Atrogin in conditioned medium-treated C2C12
myotubes. We observed reduced expression of both
MuRF1 and Atrogin in myotubes treated with silibininpretreated S2-013 cell-derived conditioned medium as
well as in myotubes directly treated with silibinin along
with the S2-013 cell-conditioned medium, in comparison
to the myotubes treated with S2-013 cell-conditioned
medium alone (Figure 6C). Furthermore, we evaluated the
effect of silibinin treatment on the cachectic phenotype
in S2-013 pancreatic cancer cell-implanted mice. We
observed significant increase in carcass weight, muscle
weight, grip strength and latency of fall in silibinin-treated
tumor-bearing mice in comparison to the solvent controltreated tumor-bearing mice (Figure 6D). We also observed
improved muscle fiber morphology and reduced fibrosis
in muscle tissues from silibinin-treated tumor-bearing
mice in comparison to controls (Figure 6E). Further, we
evaluated MuRF1 and Atrogin expression in muscles
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41154

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Silibinin reduces cachectic potential of pancreatic cancer. A. Differentiated myotubes from C2C12 cells were cultured
in control, S2-013-conditioned medium, silibinin-pretreated S2-013-conditioned medium, and S2-013-conditioned medium with silibinin
for 72 h and bright-field images were represented for individual treatments. B. Total protein content from C2C12 myotubes cultured in
different conditions was determined by Bradford assay and relative level of protein is represented in the bar graph. C. Differentiated
myotubes from C2C12 cells were cultured in control, S2-013-conditioned medium, silibinin-pretreated S2-013-conditioned medium,
S2-013-conditioned medium with silibinin for 24 h and total RNA was isolated. Relative gene expression of MuRF1 and Atrogin was
determined by performing qRT-PCR. Beta-actin was used as a loading control. D. Carcass weight upon necropsy, gastrocnemius muscle
weight upon necropsy, grip strength, latency of fall, and cumulative food intake over the course of treatment for healthy controls (nontumor-bearing), control tumor-bearing and silibinin-treated tumor-bearing mice at the time of sacrifice. Grip strength and latency of fall was
determined after 23 days of implantation, using grip strength meter and rotarod test. E. H & E staining of gastrocnemius muscle sections
from healthy controls, control tumor-bearing and silibinin-treated tumor-bearing mice. F. Total RNA was isolated from gastrocnemius
muscle specimens of healthy controls, control tumor-bearing and silibinin-treated tumor-bearing mice. Relative mRNA levels of MuRF1
and Atrogin were determined by performing qRT-PCR. Values shown are mean  ±  SEM. *P  <  0.05, **P  ≤  0.01, and ***P ≤ 0.001.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41155

Oncotarget

Glucose is one of the primary sources of cellular
energy and biomass production [32], so inhibition of
key metabolic drivers that regulate glucose metabolism
by silibinin would inhibit the cellular growth and
proliferation. Aberrantly increased expression of glucose
transporters such as GLUT1 plays a significant role in
aggressiveness of multiple cancers, including pancreatic
cancer [33]. Recently, our lab has demonstrated that
GLUT1 expression is regulated by mucin family protein
MUC1 in a hypoxia-dependent manner and increased
glucose uptake by tumors is correlated to an aggressive
phenotype [34, 35]. We also observed reduced expression
of GLUT1 after silibinin treatment in pancreatic cancer
cells. As expected, the reduced expression of GLUT1 also
resulted in reduced glucose uptake by silibinin-treated
cells. GLUT1 expression was also reduced in silibinintreated tumor tissues in orthotopic model of pancreatic
cancer. Along with GLUT1, we also observed reduced
expression of HKII, a key glycolytic enzyme that is critical
for tumor initiation and maintenance [36]. Thus, inhibition
of GLUT1 and HKII expression by silibinin may be
responsible for the reduced glucose uptake and glycolytic
activity in silibinin-treated pancreatic cancer cells.
Our mass spectrometry-based metabolomics studies
demonstrate that silibinin treatment leads to alterations
in the global metabolite profile of pancreatic cancer
cells. Glucose has several catabolic and biosynthetic
fates in proliferating cancer cells [37], hence, the
altered global metabolite profile of pancreatic cancer
cells revealed altered glucose metabolism after silibinin
treatment. Metabolic alterations in cancer cells by
natural compounds like, flavonoids have been reported
in several studies. Plant-derived bioactive compounds
like quercetin, genistein, naringenin, and catechin have
also been shown to alter glucose uptake in cancer cells
[38]. We observed significant down regulation of several
glycolytic intermediates after silibinin treatment, further
corroborating our findings of silibinin-mediated reduction
in glucose uptake, lactate secretion, and glycolytic
enzymes expression.
Enhanced glycolytic metabolism directly contributes
to proliferation of cancer cells, specifically providing
higher levels of glycolytic intermediates needed for
biomass synthesis and several anabolic reactions [39]. The
glycolytic intermediate, glucose-6-phosphate, serves as
substrate for pentose phosphate pathway, which provides
several metabolic intermediates needed for cellular growth
and proliferation and has been reported to be deregulated
in several types of cancer [20]. We observed reduced levels
of pentose phosphate pathway metabolites in silibinintreated pancreatic cancer cells, which may be due to
reduced glucose uptake by these cells. Every proliferating
cell requires replication of its fundamental components,
including DNA, RNA, proteins, and lipids. The pentose
phosphate pathway is the major source of ribonucleotide
synthesis and NADPH, which are crucial for nucleotide
and lipid biosynthesis, respectively [20]. We also observed
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

reduced pyrimidine biosynthesis pathway metabolites in
silibinin-treated cells, indicating impaired nucleoside
biosynthesis in silibinin-treated cells. Overall, our mass
spectrometry-based metabolomics data support cellbased physiological assays indicating impaired glucose
metabolism leading to global metabolic alterations in
pancreatic cancer cells in response to silibinin treatment.
As we observed reduced levels of key metabolites
important for the bioenergetic and biosynthesis processes
of cancer cells, metabolic reprogramming may be the
fundamental aspect of silibinin-mediated inhibition of
cancer cell growth and proliferation .
Studies from several laboratories have demonstrated
c-MYC as an important regulator of growth, proliferation
and metabolism of cells [21]. c-MYC expression is
essential for several metabolic alterations of cancer cells in
order to fulfill their bioenergetic and biosynthetic demands.
It regulates glycolysis, nucleotide synthesis and protein
synthesis, which are basic requirements of proliferating
cancer cells [40]. We observed reduced expression of
c-MYC in silibinin-treated cells. Transcription factor
STAT3 is a positive regulator of c-MYC expression and
is essential for cellular transformation [23]. It has been
reported that silibinin inhibits STAT3 activation in several
preclinical cancer models [41]. STAT3 also plays a
very critical role in metabolic reprogramming of cancer
cells by driving metabolism towards aerobic glycolysis
by transcriptional modulation [42]. Our results also
demonstrate that treatment of pancreatic cancer cells with
silibinin leads to reduced phosphorylation of STAT3.
We have also demonstrated that STAT3-mediated up
regulation of c-MYC transcription is compromised after
silibinin treatment. Therefore, our study provides strong
support of STAT3 mediated c-MYC regulation and its
inhibition by silibinin. However, the exact role of c-MYC
in cachexia is not fully defined and will be evaluated by
future studies.
Silibinin inhibits growth and proliferation of breast
cancer, prostate cancer and colon cancer cells by different
mechanisms, including reduced DNA synthesis, cell cycle
arrest and modulation of growth signaling pathways [22].
We also observed reduced tumor growth and proliferation
of pancreatic tumors in an orthotopic model of pancreatic
cancer. A reduction in c-MYC and GLUT1 expression in
tumors treated with silibinin further validates cell culturebased assays. Most pancreatic cancer patients (~70%)
suffer from glucose intolerance, which further worsens
over the pathogenesis of the disease [43]. We observed
improved glucose tolerance and reduced blood glucose
levels in tumor-bearing mice treated with silibinin.
About 80% of pancreatic cancer patients suffer
from cachexia, which significantly contributes to
mortality and morbidity of the disease [44]. Cachexia is
a complex disorder that results from tumor-host interplay
and metabolic alterations causing increased energy
expenditure, enhanced catabolism in liver, increased
fat oxidation and proteolysis in muscle [45]. We have
41156

Oncotarget

Glucose uptake and lactate release assay

shown earlier that metabolic reprogramming of cancer
cells by dietary intervention can inhibit the cachectic
phenotype of pancreatic cancer [24]. Along with
metabolic reprogramming of pancreatic cancer cells, we
also observed anti-cachectic properties of silibinin in in
vitro as well as in vivo models. We observed significant
improvement in body weight of tumor-bearing mice treated
with silibinin as well as reduced myotube degradation
induced by cancer cell-conditioned medium pretreated
with silibinin. Previous studies have demonstrated that
silibinin exhibits anti-inflammatory properties by reducing
secretion of several pro-inflammatory cytokines [46].
Silibinin also exhibits its anti-inflammatory properties by
reducing NF-κB activity and inhibiting the expression of
several cytokines, including IL-1β, IL-6, IL-10, IL-12,
and TNF-α [47]. We also observed reduced expression
of TNF-alpha and IL-6 in silibinin-treated cancer cells as
well as in tumor tissues from tumor-bearing mice treated
with silibinin. On the basis of our results, we conclude
that anti-cachectic effect of silibinin might be mediated
through metabolic reprogramming as well as suppression
of pro-inflammatory cytokines.
In conclusion, we have demonstrated that bioactive
compound silibinin exhibits anti-cancerous and anticachectic properties in in vitro as well as in vivo models
of pancreatic cancer. It induces metabolic reprogramming
in pancreatic cancer cells by reducing expression of a key
metabolic regulator, c-MYC, through reduced activation
of STAT3. Furthermore, we observed improved glucose
homeostasis and diminished cachexia in tumor-bearing
mice treated with silibinin.

Glucose uptake assay was performed by using
tritiated 2-deoxy-D-glucose as described previously
[24]. The experiments were performed in triplicate and
results were normalized to total cell number. Lactate
release in medium was determined by Lactate Assay Kit
(Eton Bioscience Inc., San Diego, CA, USA), as per the
manufacturer’s protocol.

RNA isolation and qRT-PCR
Total RNA from cells or tissue lysate was extracted
by using TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, USA)
as per manufacturer’s protocol. Complementary DNA
(cDNA) was synthesized using Verso-cDNA synthesis kit
(Thermo scientific, MA, USA) following manufacturer’s
protocol. Expression level of genes was measured by qRTPCR using SYBR Green master mix (Applied Biosystems,
NY, USA) and an ABI 7500 thermo cycler. Reaction mix
was prepared with 3 μl cDNA, 2 μl primers and 5 μl
SYBR Green master mix as mentioned previously [24].
PCR conditions were used: 95°C for 5 min and 95°C for
10s , 60°C for 60s (40 cycles). Beta-actin was utilized as
an internal control. Relative expression levels of genes
were determined by the ΔΔCt method [24].

Immunoblotting
Protein isolation and western blotting were
performed as described previously [49]. Briefly, cells
were washed twice with PBS and lysed in radioimmuno
precipitation assay (RIPA) lysis buffer by incubating at
4°C on a rotatory shaker for 30 min. To remove the cell
debris, lysates were centrifuged at 13000 rpm for 10
min. Protein concentration was measured by Bradford
assay. Equal amount of protein was used for western
blotting. Primary antibodies against GLUT1 (Abcam,
Cambridge, UK), c-Myc (clone 9E10; Santa Cruz
Biotechnology, Dallas, Texas, USA), HKII, LDHA,
STAT3, pSTAT3, anti-phospho histone H2A. X (Cell
Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA) and actin
(Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank, Iowa City,
IA) were utilized for probing specific proteins.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell culture and reagents
Human pancreatic cancer cell lines S2-013
(pancreatic tumor cell line SUIT-2 derived from a liver
metastasis), T3M4, PANC-1, BxPC-3 AsPC-1 and
MIA PaCa-2 from ATCC were cultured in DMEM
medium supplemented with 5% fetal bovine serum,
100 I.U./ml penicillin, 100 μg/ml streptomycin, and
incubated at 370C in a humidified incubator with 5% CO2,
as described previously [48]. C2C12 mouse myoblasts
were cultured in DMEM with 5% FBS and differentiated
to myotubes as described previously [24]. Silibinin, 3-[4,
5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl]-2, 5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide
(MTT) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis,
MO, USA.

Transfection of plasmids
Plasmids were transfected as described previously
[50]. EF.STAT3C.Ubc.GFP, vector control, c-MYC
promoter-luciferase reporter and renilla-luciferase
constructs (Addgene) were transfected by using X-treme
GENE 9 transfection reagent (Roche Diagnostics,
Indianapolis, Indiana, USA) as per the manufacturer’s
protocol.

Cell viability, growth and Caspase 3/7 assay
Cell viability was determined by MTT assay as
described previously [24]. Caspase 3/7 activity was
determined by Promega Caspase-Glo kit (Madison, WI,
USA) as described previously [24].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41157

Oncotarget

Luciferase assay

and body weight were recorded regularly. After 18 days of
treatment, all the mice were euthanized and tumor weight,
tumor volume, muscle weight, carcass weight, etc. were
measured. Tumor tissue, liver, spleen and muscles were
flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and formalin fixed for
further analysis.

Luciferase assay was performed as described
previously [24]. c-MYC-promoter (del1)-luciferase
reporter construct and STAT3-c.Ubc.GFP plasmid
(constitutively active STAT3; STAT3-c) were purchased
from Addgene (Cambridge, MA, USA). Cells were
transfected with 250 ng reporter and 750 ng activator/
vector plasmid and 36 h post transfection, cells were
treated with silibinin. A synthetic Renilla luciferase
reporter pRL-TK was utilized as a transfection control.
Luciferase activity was determined by utilizing DualLuciferase Reporter Assay System (Promega, WI, USA)
as per manufacturer’s instructions.

Measurement of grip strength and rotarod test
We utilized a grip strength meter (Columbus
Instruments, OH, USA) to assess grip strength. On
the 16th day of treatment, we acclimatized mice to the
procedure room for 15 minutes and measured grip
strength as per manufacturer’s instructions. We recorded
the peak force produced by mouse grip and utilized the
average value of three measurements within 2 minutes for
analysis. We evaluated coordination and body mobility of
mice by rotarod test (Rotamex-5, Columbus Instruments,
OH, USA). After 15 minutes of acclimatization in the
procedure room, we placed mice on rotarod, which was
rotating at a speed of 3 rpm. The speed was increased
regularly by 1 rpm per 10 seconds. Latency to fall on
paper-cushion was recorded. The test was repeated twice
after 10-minute intervals. The average time of all the three
trials was calculated.

Immunofluorescence staining
S2-013 and T3M4 cells were seeded at ~ 40%
density on sterile glass cover slips in 12 well plates.
The next day cells were treated with indicated amount
of silibinin for 48 h. After treatment cells were washed
with PBS to remove the media and immunofluorescence
staining was performed as described earlier [51] using
phosphorylated H2A.X (γH2A.X) antibody (1:500
dilution). Images were captured at 20X magnification
using an inverted microscope (DMI600B from Leica) and
processed by using Leica LAS AF software.

Metabolite extraction and MS sample
preparation

Immunohistochemistry

Metabolite extraction was performed as described
previously [52]. About 70% confluent S2-013 cells were
treated with silibinin for 24 h. After treatment, cells were
washed twice with cold PBS and polar metabolites were
then extracted with cryogenically cold 80% methanol/
water mixture. LC-MS grade water (Sigma, MO, USA)
and LC-MS grade methanol (Fischer Scientific, PA, USA)
were used. Methanol extracted samples were dried by
using a speed vacuum evaporator (Savant Speed Vac®
Plus, Thermo Electron Corporation, USA) to evaporate
the methanol and lyophilized by using a freeze dry system
(Labconco, Kansas City, USA) to remove the water.

Immunohistochemistry was performed as described
previously [35]. Tumor sections prepared from control and
silibinin-treated groups were stained with Ki67 (Thermo
Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and c-Myc (clone
9E10; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Dallas, Texas, USA),
pSTAT3 (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA)
and GLUT1 (Abcam, Cambridge, UK) primary antibodies.
Images were captured at 20X magnification using an
inverted microscope (Leica, DMI600B) and processed by
using Leica LAS AF software.

Animals and orthotopic implantation

LC-MS/MS experiment and analysis

All the animal experiments performed in this study
were approved by University of Nebraska Medical Center
institutional animal care and use committee (IACUC).
Athymic female nude mice (NCr-nu/nu) were inhouse
bred and 6–8 week old mice were used for orthotopic
implantation. 0.5  ×  106 S2-013 cells were injected into
the pancreas of each female athymic nude mouse and
7 days post-implantation mice were divided in groups
of eight animals each. Eight age and sex matched mice,
without any tumor cell injection, were utilized as healthy
controls. Animals were treated with 200 mg/kg silibinin
or solvent control daily. Tumor volume, food consumption
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Lyophilized samples were dissolved in equal
amounts of LC-MS grade water and applied to LCMS/MS analysis, using a multiple reaction monitoring
(MRM) method by utilizing AB SCIEX 5500 QTRAP, as
described previously [53]. Data acquisition was performed
by using AnalystTM1.6 software (AB SCIEX) and peaks
were integrated by using MultiquantTM (AB SCIEX).
Peak areas were normalized by using respective protein
concentrations and the resultant peak areas were subjected
to relative quantification analyses with MetaboAnalyst
2.0 [54].
41158

Oncotarget

REFERENCES

C2C12 differentiation and conditioned
medium preparation

1.	 Suzuki H, Asakawa A, Amitani H, Nakamura N, Inui A.
Cancer cachexia—pathophysiology and management. J
Gastroenterol. 2013; 48:574–594.

C2C12 cells were differentiated to myotubes
as described previously [24]. Briefly, C2C12 mouse
myoblast cells were cultured in DMEM with 5% FBS.
Myoblasts were differentiated by using DMEM with 2%
horse serum and 10 μg/ml insulin for 72 h. Differentiation
medium was changed after every 24 h. For the preparation
of conditioned medium, S2-013 cells were seeded at a
density of 50,000 cells/cm2. After 12 h of seeding, cells
were washed twice with PBS and cultured in serum
free medium for the next 24 h. After 24 h, medium was
collected and centrifuged at 3000 rpm for ten minutes to
remove cell debris. The conditioned media thus collected
was then utilized to treat differentiated myotubes or stored
at −80°C.

2.	 Tisdale MJ. Clinical anticachexia treatments. Nutrition
in clinical practice: official publication of the American
Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. 2006;
21:168–174.
3.	 Deans C, Wigmore SJ. Systemic inflammation, cachexia
and prognosis in patients with cancer. Current opinion in
clinical nutrition and metabolic care. 2005; 8:265–269.
4.	 Argiles JM, Busquets S, Stemmler B, Lopez-Soriano FJ.
Cancer cachexia: understanding the molecular basis. Nature
reviews Cancer. 2014; 14:754–762.
5.	 Dodson S, Baracos VE, Jatoi A, Evans WJ, Cella D,
Dalton JT, Steiner MS. Muscle wasting in cancer cachexia:
clinical implications, diagnosis, and emerging treatment
strategies. Annual review of medicine. 2011; 62:265–279.

Measurement of blood glucose and
intraperitoneal glucose tolerance test (IPGTT)

6.	 Rahib L, Smith BD, Aizenberg R, Rosenzweig AB,
Fleshman JM, Matrisian LM. Projecting cancer incidence
and deaths to 2030: the unexpected burden of thyroid, liver,
and pancreas cancers in the United States. Cancer research.
2014; 74:2913–2921.

Blood glucose level of the mice was measured by
using Nova Max Glucose Test Strips (Nova Diabetes
Care, Inc., MA, USA) post 16 h starvation. To perform
IPGTT, mice were fasted for 16 and then administered
2 g/kg glucose and blood glucose level was measured at
different time intervals (0, 30, 60 and 120 minutes after
glucose administration) by using Nova Max Glucose
Test Strips.

7.	 Siegel RL, Miller KD, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2015.
CA: a cancer journal for clinicians. 2015; 65:5–29.
8.	 Garrido-Laguna I, Hidalgo M. Pancreatic cancer: from
state-of-the-art treatments to promising novel therapies.
Nature reviews Clinical oncology. 2015; 12:319–34.
9.	 Ryan DP, Grossbard ML. Pancreatic Cancer: Local Success
and Distant Failure. Oncologist. 1998; 3:178–188.

Statistical analysis

10.	 Pausch T, Hartwig W, Hinz U, Swolana T, Bundy BD,
Hackert T, Grenacher L, Buchler MW, Werner J. Cachexia
but not obesity worsens the postoperative outcome after
pancreatoduodenectomy in pancreatic cancer. Surgery.
2012; 152:S81–88.

We performed ANOVA (one-way; graph Pad
Prism version 4.03) to analyze the treatment responses.
We performed Tukey’s post-hoc analysis for pair-wise
comparisons. We utilized Student’s t-test for comparisons
between two groups. A p value of less than 0.05 was
considered significant.

11.	 Jiang SM, Wu JH, Jia L. Intervention of mirtazapine on
gemcitabine-induced mild cachexia in nude mice with
­pancreatic carcinoma xenografts. World journal of gastroenterology: WJG. 2012; 18:2867–2871.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

12.	 Tohgo A, Kumazawa E, Akahane K, Asakawa A, Inui A.
Anticancer drugs that induce cancer-associated cachectic
syndromes. Expert review of anticancer therapy. 2002;
2:121–129.

This work was supported in part by funding from
the National Institutes of Health grant (R01 CA163649,
NCI) to PKS; American Association for Cancer Research
(AACR)—Pancreatic Cancer Action Network (PanCAN)
Career Development Award (30-20-25-SING) to PKS; the
Specialized Programs for Research Excellence (SPORE,
2P50 CA127297, NCI) to PKS; and Pancreatic Tumor
Microenvironment Research Network (U54, CA163120,
NCI) to PKS.

13.	 Cerella C, Radogna F, Dicato M, Diederich M. Natural
compounds as regulators of the cancer cell metabolism.
International journal of cell biology. 2013; 2013:639401.
14.	 Wang H, Lai YJ, Chan YL, Li TL, Wu CJ. Epigallocatechin3-gallate effectively attenuates skeletal muscle atrophy
caused by cancer cachexia. Cancer letters. 2011; 305:40–49.
15.	 Ramasamy K, Agarwal R. Multitargeted therapy of cancer
by silymarin. Cancer letters. 2008; 269:352–362.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

16.	 Kim BR, Seo HS, Ku JM, Kim GJ, Jeon CY, Park JH,
Jang BH, Park SJ, Shin YC, Ko SG. Silibinin inhibits

Authors declare no conflicts of interests exist.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41159

Oncotarget

the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines through
­inhibition of NF-kappaB signaling pathway in HMC-1
human mast cells. Inflammation research: official journal
of the European Histamine Research Society [et al]. 2013;
62:941–950.

32.	 Burgess DJ. Metabolism: choose your carbon source.
Nature reviews Cancer. 2011; 11:80.
33.	 Ito H, Duxbury M, Zinner MJ, Ashley SW, Whang EE.
Glucose transporter-1 gene expression is associated with
pancreatic cancer invasiveness and MMP-2 activity.
Surgery. 2004; 136:548–556.

17.	 Garcia-Maceira P, Mateo J. Silibinin inhibits hypoxiainducible factor-1alpha and mTOR/p70S6K/4E-BP1 signalling pathway in human cervical and hepatoma cancer
cells: implications for anticancer therapy. Oncogene. 2009;
28:313–324.

34.	 Chaika NV, Gebregiworgis T, Lewallen ME, Purohit V,
Radhakrishnan P, Liu X, Zhang B, Mehla K, Brown RB,
Caffrey T, Yu F, Johnson KR, Powers R, Hollingsworth MA,
Singh PK. MUC1 mucin stabilizes and activates hypoxiainducible factor 1 alpha to regulate metabolism in pancreatic
cancer. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America. 2012; 109:13787–13792.

18.	 Singh PK, Brand RE, Mehla K. MicroRNAs in pancreatic
cancer metabolism. Nature reviews Gastroenterology &
hepatology. 2012; 9:334–344.
19.	 Doherty JR, Cleveland JL. Targeting lactate metabolism for
cancer therapeutics. The Journal of clinical investigation.
2013; 123:3685–3692.

35.	 Chaika NV, Yu F, Purohit V, Mehla K, Lazenby AJ,
DiMaio D, Anderson JM, Yeh JJ, Johnson KR,
Hollingsworth MA, Singh PK. Differential expression of
metabolic genes in tumor and stromal components of primary and metastatic loci in pancreatic adenocarcinoma.
PLoS One. 2012; 7:e32996.

20.	 Patra KC, Hay N. The pentose phosphate pathway and
­cancer. Trends in biochemical sciences. 2014; 39:347–354.
21.	 Dang CV. MYC, metabolism, cell growth, and tumorigenesis. Cold Spring Harbor perspectives in medicine. 2013; 3.

36.	 Patra KC, Wang Q, Bhaskar PT, Miller L, Wang Z,
Wheaton W, Chandel N, Laakso M, Muller WJ, Allen EL,
Jha AK, Smolen GA, Clasquin MF, Robey RB, Hay N.
Hexokinase 2 is required for tumor initiation and maintenance and its systemic deletion is therapeutic in mouse
models of cancer. Cancer cell. 2013; 24:213–228.

22.	 Ting H, Deep G, Agarwal R. Molecular mechanisms of
silibinin-mediated cancer chemoprevention with major
emphasis on prostate cancer. The AAPS journal. 2013;
15:707–716.
23.	 Bowman T, Broome MA, Sinibaldi D, Wharton
W, Pledger  WJ, Sedivy JM, Irby R, Yeatman T,
Courtneidge  SA, Jove R. Stat3-mediated Myc expression
is required for Src transformation and PDGF-induced mitogenesis. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America. 2001; 98:7319–7324.

37.	 Cantor JR, Sabatini DM. Cancer cell metabolism: one
­hallmark, many faces. Cancer discovery. 2012; 2:881–898.
38.	 Park JB. Flavonoids are potential inhibitors of glucose
uptake in U937 cells. Biochemical and biophysical research
communications. 1999; 260:568–574.
39.	 Lunt SY, Vander Heiden MG. Aerobic glycolysis:
­meeting the metabolic requirements of cell proliferation.
Annual review of cell and developmental biology. 2011;
27:441–464.

24.	 Shukla SK, Gebregiworgis T, Purohit V, Chaika NV,
Gunda V, Radhakrishnan P, Mehla K, Pipinos II, Powers R,
Yu F, Singh PK. Metabolic reprogramming induced by
ketone bodies diminishes pancreatic cancer cachexia.
Cancer & metabolism. 2014; 2:18.

40.	 Miller DM, Thomas SD, Islam A, Muench D, Sedoris K.
c-Myc and cancer metabolism. Clinical cancer research:
an official journal of the American Association for Cancer
Research. 2012; 18:5546–5553.

25.	 Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. Hallmarks of cancer: the next
generation. Cell. 2011; 144:646–674.
26.	 Tennant DA, Duran RV, Gottlieb E. Targeting metabolic
transformation for cancer therapy. Nature reviews Cancer.
2010; 10:267–277.

41.	 Bosch-Barrera J, Menendez JA. Silibinin and STAT3:
A natural way of targeting transcription factors for cancer
therapy. Cancer treatment reviews. 2015; 41:540–546.

27.	 Cairns RA, Harris IS, Mak TW. Regulation of cancer cell
metabolism. Nature reviews Cancer. 2011; 11:85–95.

42.	 Camporeale A, Demaria M, Monteleone E, Giorgi C,
Wieckowski MR, Pinton P, Poli V. STAT3 Activities and
Energy Metabolism: Dangerous Liaisons. Cancers. 2014;
6:1579–1596.

28.	 Vander Heiden MG, Cantley LC, Thompson CB.
Understanding the Warburg effect: the metabolic requirements of cell proliferation. Science. 2009; 324:1029–1033.

43.	 Gullo L, Ancona D, Pezzilli R, Casadei R, Campione O.
Glucose tolerance and insulin secretion in pancreatic cancer.
The Italian journal of gastroenterology. 1993; 25:487–489.

29.	 Wise DR, Thompson CB. Glutamine addiction: a new therapeutic target in cancer. Trends in biochemical sciences.
2010; 35:427–433.

44.	 Muliawati Y, Haroen H, Rotty LW. Cancer anorexia cachexia syndrome. Acta medica Indonesiana. 2012;
44:154–162.

30.	 Pelicano H, Martin DS, Xu RH, Huang P. Glycolysis
inhibition for anticancer treatment. Oncogene. 2006;
25:4633–4646.

45.	 Esper DH, Harb WA. The cancer cachexia syndrome: a
review of metabolic and clinical manifestations. Nutrition

31.	 Blum R, Kloog Y. Metabolism addiction in pancreatic
­cancer. Cell death & disease. 2014; 5:e1065.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41160

Oncotarget

in clinical practice: official publication of the American
Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. 2005;
20:369–376.

with p53 and MMP1 expression. J  Biol Chem. 2008;
283:26985–26995.
50.	 Shukla SK, Kumar V. Hepatitis B virus X protein and
c-Myc cooperate in the upregulation of ribosome biogenesis and in cellular transformation. The FEBS journal. 2012;
279:3859–3871.

46.	 Khan AQ, Khan R, Tahir M, Rehman MU, Lateef A, Ali F,
Hamiza OO, Hasan SK, Sultana S. Silibinin inhibits tumor
promotional triggers and tumorigenesis against chemically
induced two-stage skin carcinogenesis in Swiss albino
mice: possible role of oxidative stress and inflammation.
Nutrition and cancer. 2014; 66:249–258.

51.	 Rajput P, Shukla SK, Kumar V. The HBx oncoprotein of
hepatitis B virus potentiates cell transformation by inducing c-Myc-dependent expression of the RNA polymerase
I transcription factor UBF. Virology journal. 2015; 12:62.

47.	 Cristofalo R, Bannwart-Castro CF, Magalhaes CG,
Borges VT, Peracoli JC, Witkin SS, Peracoli MT. Silibinin
attenuates oxidative metabolism and cytokine production
by monocytes from preeclamptic women. Free radical
research. 2013; 47:268–275.

52.	 Shukla SK, Gunda V, Abrego J, Haridas D, Mishra A,
Souchek J, Chaika NV, Yu F, Sasson AR, Lazenby AJ,
Batra SK, Singh PK. MUC16-mediated activation of mTOR
and c-Myc reprograms pancreatic cancer metabolism.
Oncotarget. 2015; 6:19118–31.

48.	 Singh PK, Wen Y, Swanson BJ, Shanmugam K,
Kazlauskas A, Cerny RL, Gendler SJ, Hollingsworth MA.
Platelet-derived growth factor receptor beta-mediated phosphorylation of MUC1 enhances invasiveness in pancreatic
adenocarcinoma cells. Cancer Res. 2007; 67:5201–5210.

53.	 Bajad S, Shulaev V. LC-MS-based metabolomics. Methods
in molecular biology. 2011; 708:213–228.
54.	 Xia J, Mandal R, Sinelnikov IV, Broadhurst D, Wishart DS.
MetaboAnalyst 2.0—a comprehensive server for metabolomic
data analysis. Nucleic acids research. 2012; 40:W127–133.

49.	 Singh PK, Behrens ME, Eggers JP, Cerny RL, Bailey JM,
Shanmugam K, Gendler SJ, Bennett EP, Hollingsworth MA.
Phosphorylation of MUC1 by Met modulates interaction

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41161

Oncotarget

