1365

Diagnosis and Management of Chronic
Myeloid Leukemia
A Survey of American and European Practice Patterns

Hagop M. Kantarjian, MD1
Jorge Cortes, MD1
François Guilhot, MD, PhD2
Andreas Hochhaus, MD3
Michele Baccarani, MD4
Lee Lokey, MD5

BACKGROUND. The success of imatinib therapy for chronic myeloid leukemia
(CML) has brought new challenges; these include optimizing disease monitoring,
imatinib resistance, and use of novel, more potent tyrosine kinase inhibitors.
Thus, there is a need to establish new best practices for CML management in the
post-imatinib era.

METHODS. An internet-based questionnaire, consisting of 26 multiple choice
questions, was developed to assess hematologists’ and oncologists’ self-reported

1
Department of Leukemia, The University of
Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
Texas.

treatment strategies for CML.

2

Department of Oncology Hematology and Cell
Therapy CHU la Miletrie, Poitiers, France.

dents (60%) practiced in the community setting, whereas European respondents
were primarily academic (44%) and hospital-based (40%). Physicians’ responses

3

were generally in line with current recommendations, although differences were

Medizinische Klinik, Universitaet Heidelberg,
Mannheim, Germany.
4

Institute of Hematology and Medical Oncology,
University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
5

Oncology Network Europe, Atlanta, Georgia.

RESULTS. Between November 2005 and January 2006, 956 eligible physicians
responded to the survey; 727 from the US and 229 from Europe. Most US respon-

identified. Confusion existed among respondents over optimal timing of treatment decisions, with a notable proportion of physicians focusing on a single
timepoint rather than consistent monitoring, as currently advocated. Some
respondents were unaware of new molecular monitoring techniques, when to
monitor for BCR-ABL mutations (and the impact on treatment decisions), and
the benefit of new tyrosine kinase inhibitors.

CONCLUSIONS. Responses to the survey suggest that treatment practices in some
areas of CML management are not in line with current recommendations. IdentiHagop Kantarjian and Jorge Cortes received
research grants from Novartis and Bristol-Myers
Squibb not related to this study. Andreas Hochhaus received research grants from Novartis, Bristol-Myers Squibb, and Wyeth. Michele Baccarani
has received consultancies and honoraria from
several companies, including Bristol-Myers Squibb,
Novartis, Merck SD, Pfizer, Roche, Schering, and
Schering Plough. Lee Lokey is an employee of the
Network for Medical Communication and Research
(NMCR) in Atlanta, Georgia. NMCR provides certain
independent medical education and analytic services to Bristol-Myers Squibb for which fees are
paid to NMCR. Lee Lokey does not directly receive
any funds from Bristol-Myers Squibb.
Address for reprints: Hagop M. Kantarjian, MD,
Department of Leukemia, The University of Texas
M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe
Blvd., Box 428, Houston TX 77030; Fax: (713)
794-4297; E-mail: hkantarj@mdanderson.org
Received December 1, 2006; revision received
December 8, 2006; accepted December 21, 2006.

ª 2007 American Cancer Society

fied areas of need should be targeted in future educational activities for the CML
community. Cancer 2007;109:1365–75.  2007 American Cancer Society.

KEYWORDS: CML, survey, clinical practice, molecular monitoring, BCR-ABL mutation, imatinib, dasatinib.

T

he treatment of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) has changed
dramatically over the last decade. As recently as 1997 the standard therapy for patients with newly diagnosed chronic phase CML
not eligible for allogeneic stem cell transplant (SCT) was interferon
alpha (IFN-a), alone or with low-dose cytosine arabinoside (araC).1
The realization that the initiating event in CML was the creation of
the BCR-ABL fusion protein led to considerable effort directed toward the development of agents that would target this constitutively
activated tyrosine kinase.2 These efforts culminated in the development of imatinib, a selective BCR-ABL inhibitor that altered the
treatment paradigm for CML, shifting the focus away from allogeneic SCT as frontline therapy by 2002.3
This rapid change in clinical practice was driven largely by the
results of the IRIS (International Randomized Study of Interferon

DOI 10.1002/cncr.22523
Published online 26 February 2007 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

1366

CANCER

April 1, 2007 / Volume 109 / Number 7

versus STI571) trial, which compared imatinib with
IFN-a plus low-dose araC in patients with newly
diagnosed CML.4 Follow-up of the IRIS trial is now
in excess of 5 years5 and it has become clear that the
prognostic risk factors that applied to traditional
therapies, such as IFN-a, are not as applicable to
imatinib treatment. Whereas a patient’s Sokal score
(based on age, spleen size, and platelet and peripheral blood blast count) does correlate with their likelihood of achieving a complete cytogenetic response
(CCyR) with imatinib, and the associated survival
benefits,6 the depth of response to imatinib is a better indicator of long-term outcome that overrides
pretherapy variables. In the IRIS study, 97% of
patients with a major molecular response (MMR) to
imatinib at 12 months were progression-free at 54
months follow-up, irrespective of their Sokal risk
group at baseline. The prognosis for those patients
who achieved CCyR without MMR at 12 months was
also good. However, among patients who failed to
achieve a CCyR at 12 months, 28% had progressed at
54 months follow-up.7,8
The prognostic value of MR seen in the IRIS
study has meant that the monitoring of minimal residual disease has become increasingly important.
Rising levels of BCR-ABL transcripts are an early indication of loss of response, and thus the need to
reevaluate treatment. Regular molecular monitoring
of individual patients is clearly warranted but there
is much variation between laboratories in testing
methods and in the levels of access to such tests.
These variations have prompted a recent drive to
standardize molecular and disease monitoring in
CML.9
In addition to changes in disease monitoring, resistance to imatinib has led to the development of
several new treatment options that overcome the various mechanisms of imatinib resistance. The availability of new, more potent kinase inhibitors such as
dasatinib (SPRYCEL, formerly BMS-354825) and others
currently in clinical development (eg, nilotinib, SKI606, INNO-406) add to the pressing need for optimizing treatment decisions, and for these decisions
to be linked to appropriate disease monitoring. Dasatinib was recently approved for the treatment of all
phases of CML and Philadelphia-positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia (Ph-positive ALL) with resistance
or intolerance to prior therapy, including imatinib.
Given the rapid rate of change in CML management at present, a greater understanding of current
practices on matters such as new treatment options,
reimbursement issues surrounding these treatment
options, disease monitoring, and access to proper
monitoring tools is needed. Identifying physicians’

preferences in CML monitoring and response criteria,
and the rationale for treatment choices, may identify
additional areas of need, and so aid in focusing educational activities to the CML community. This article reports the results of a survey conducted to
evaluate general trends of practice in CML treatment
and monitoring among hematologists and oncologists within the US and in Europe. The findings of
the survey are discussed in the context of current
published guidelines and clinical trial outcomes.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
An internet-based questionnaire was developed to
assess physicians’ self-reported management of CML.
The survey was developed in collaboration between
the coauthors (H.K., J.C.), the Network for Medical
Communication and Research (NMCR), and Oncology Network Europe (ONE); the 26 questions used
and the multiple choice responses are shown in Table 1. A physician was considered eligible to participate if he/she had treated 4 patients with CML
outside the context of a clinical trial in the 2 years
preceding the survey. This stipulation ensured that
the survey captured practice patterns outside the
directive of a clinical trial.
Of approximately 15,000 oncologists and hematologists invited to participate in the survey, 956 eligible physicians responded between November 2005
and January 2006 (6.4% response rate), 727 from the
US and 229 from Europe; 267 labeled themselves as
‘academic’ and 689 as ‘nonacademic’ (hospital, community, and combination practice settings). Among
US-based responders the academic label was 23% vs
44% among European responders. Responses were
collated and analyzed by the authors of this article.
The contents of this study represent key conclusions
drawn from these data.

RESULTS
Physician/Practice Characteristics
The first section of the questionnaire focused on the
characteristics of physicians and their practices.
Respondents were grouped according to practice setting (academic, hospital, community, or combination). Most US respondents (60%) practiced in the
community setting. In contrast, European respondents were primarily based in academic (44%) and
hospital (40%) settings, with only 7% in community
practice. These figures may not necessarily be indicative of standard practice patterns in the US and Europe, but rather reflective of the respondents to this
survey. Additionally, the understanding of the terms
‘hospital-based’ and ‘community-based’ may have

In the past 2 years have you treated four or more patients with CML outside the context of a clinical trial?
How would you characterize your medical practice?
How many patients with CML are currently under your direct management?
Which of the following best describes the composition of your practice?
Which of the following is indicative of the number of years of clinical experience you have had since
completing your training?
In a newly diagnosed 40-year old patient with chronic phase CML who has a matched related sibling,
which of the following would you recommend?
In a newly diagnosed 40-year old patient with chronic phase CML who has an unrelated matched donor,
which of the following would you recommend?
When a patient of yours receives a preliminary diagnosis of CML, where do you obtain confirmatory testing
by cytogenetics and/or FISH?
When a new patient of yours receives a preliminary diagnosis of CML, where do you obtain confirmatory
testing by qRT-PCR and or BCR-ABL kinase domain mutation?
When evaluating a patient with a white cell count of 40,000 and a morphologic picture consistent with
CML, which of the following initial diagnostic tests would you perform? Please choose all that apply
At what point do you consider it most critical to evaluate response in order to decide whether to continue
or change therapy?
In addition to peripheral blood counts, which of the following do you use in monitoring response to
imatinib therapy? Please choose all that apply
How frequently do you typically repeat cytogenetic analysis studies for monitoring response to imatinib
therapy?
How frequently do you typically repeat qRT-PCR for BCR-ABL mRNA studies for monitoring response to
imatinib therapy?
How frequently do you typically repeat BCR-ABL kinase domain mutation studies for monitoring response
to imatinib therapy?
In a 70-year old woman with Philadelphia chromosome-positive CML on imatinib 400 mg orally daily,
which of the following strategies would you use for monitoring response to imatinib treatment? Please
choose all that apply
A 50-year old patient with Philadelphia chromosome-positive CML is on imatinib daily and has a matched
related sibling donor. For this patient, which of the following monitoring strategies would you initiate?
Choose all that apply.
A 45-year old patient with CML on imatinib mesylate therapy has a matched related sibling BM donor.
Which of the following would cause you to decide that the patient had experienced a suboptimal
response to imatinib and should proceed with an alternative treatment?

1
2
3
4
5

Which of the following imatinib toxicities have you encountered in your patients with CML? Please choose
all that apply

19

18

Which of the following do you feel best indicate ‘‘effective’’ imatinib therapy when treating newly diagnosed
chronic phase CML patients?
How do you usually assess imatinib-associated toxicity in your patients?

17

16

15

14

13C

13B

13A

12

11

10

9

8

7

6

Question

No.

TABLE 1
Questions and Answers in the Online Physician Survey

(continued )

Blood counts; Cytogenetics; FISH; Quantitative PCR; Other
No CHR at 3 months; Ph þ 100% at 6 months; Phþ >35% at 12 months; Any Phþ at 12 months; Any Phþ
at 18–24 months; QPCR þ in CCyR; QPCRþ 0.4% in CCyR; QPCRþ 1% in CCyR at 24 months; 2-fold rise
in QPCR in CCyR; 1 log rise in QPCR in CCyR; Loss of CHR; Increase in Phþ by 30%; <3 log reduction
in QPCR at 12 months; None of the above
CCyR in 3 months; CCyR in 6 months; CCyR in 12 months; MR in 6 months; MR in 12 months; Both CCyR
and MR in 12 months
Frequent physician visits early in course of therapy; Frequent nurse visits early in course of therapy;
Toxicity questionnaire completed by patients; Telephone query performed by nurse; Other
Nausea and vomiting; Diarrhea; Rash; Neutropenia; Thrombocytopenia; Anemia; Muscle cramps; Liver
dysfunction; Fluid retention; Periorbital edema; Pleural effusion; Pericardial effusion or pericarditis;
Weight gain; Congestive heart failure; Fatigue; Bone aches; Other (please specify)

Blood counts; Cytogenetics; FISH; Quantitative PCR; Other

Every 3 months; Every 6 months; Yearly; Don’t utilize qRT-PCR
Only for patients who fail to show CyR to imatinib; Only for patients who have a 2-fold rise in BCR-ABL;
Never ordered the test; Unavailable; Not familiar with this test

Every 3 months; Every 6 months; Yearly; Not repeated; Other

Cytogenetics; FISH; Quantitative PCR; BCR-ABL kinase domain mutation analysis; Other

1 month; 2 months; 3 months; 6 months; 12 months; 3, 6, 12 then every 3–6 months; Other

Cytogenetics; FISH; Quantitative PCR; Other

Local hospital; Nearest teaching hospital lab; Genzyme; Quest; Lab Corp.; Other commercial lab

Local hospital; Nearest teaching hospital lab; Genzyme; Quest; Lab Corp.; Other commercial lab

Imatinib 400 mg/day; Imatinib 600–800 mg/day; Immediate allogeneic SCT; Other

Imatinib 400 mg/day; Imatinib 600–800 mg/day; Immediate allogeneic SCT; Other

<1 year; 1–5 years; 6–10 years; 11–15 years; 16–20 years; >20 years

Yes; No
Academic; Hospital; Community; Combination
1–5; 6–10; 11–15; 16–20; >20
Hematologic malignancies only; Both solid and hematologic; Mostly solid tumors

Response options

CML Management in the US and Europe/Kantarjian et al.
1367

Which of these toxicities have been severe enough to cause you to interrupt (I), dose reduce (R), or
discontinue (D) imatinib therapy?

Which of the following would cause you to decide that response to imatinib was suboptimal and to
consider a change in therapy? Please choose all that apply
What do you generally recommend for patients with a suboptimal response to 400 mg of imatinib daily?

For patients with suboptimal response to imatinib do you assess for BCR-ABL kinase domain mutations?
How do you manage CML patients who have suboptimal response to dose-escalated imatinib and who do
not have an HLA matched bone marrow donor?

For a 65-year old patient with CML who has failed imatinib (using your standard criteria), and who has a
matched related sibling, which of the following treatment options would you choose next?
For a 65-year old patient with CML who has failed imatinib (using your standard criteria), who has a
matched unrelated donor, which of the following treatment options would you choose next?

20

21

23
24

25

Nausea and vomiting; Diarrhea; Rash; Neutropenia; Thrombocytopenia; Anemia; Muscle cramps; Liver
dysfunction; Fluid retention; Periorbital edema; Pleural effusion; Pericardial effusion or pericarditis;
Weight gain; Congestive heart failure; Fatigue; Bone aches; Other (please specify)
Failure to achieve CHR at 3 months; Failure to achieve any CyR at 6 months; Failure to achieve MCyR at 1
year; Failure to achieve CCyR at 18–24 months; Failure to achieve QPCR negativity at 12–24 months
Increase imatinib to 600 mg/day, evaluate in 3–6 months; Increase imatinib to 800 mg/day, evaluate in 3–6
months; Allogeneic SCT for HLA matched patients; Allogeneic SCT if response suboptimal after 3–6
months of imatinib 600–800 mg/day
Yes; No
Continue imatinib and add investigational agents on a clinical trial (eg, tipifarnib or lornafarnib); Continue
imatinib and add IFN, AraC, or hydroxyurea; Discontinue imatinib and begin IFN  AraC; Discontinue
imatinib and begin dasatinib or nilotinib; Other
Immediate allogeneic SCT; Dasatinib or nilotinib; Low dose IFN, AraC, hydroxyurea, or combination of
these; Other investigational strategy
Immediate allogeneic SCT; Dasatinib or nilotinib; Low dose IFN, AraC, hydroxyurea, or combination of
these; Other investigational strategy

Response options

CML indicates chronic myeloid leukemia; SCT, stem cell transplantation; FISH, fluorescence in situ hybridization; IFN, interferon; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; QPCR, Quantitative PCR; CHR, complete hematologic response; CyR, cytogenetic response; McyR, major CyR;
CcyR, complete CyR; Ph, Philadelphia chromosome.

26

22

Question

No.

CANCER

TABLE 1
(continued)

1368
April 1, 2007 / Volume 109 / Number 7

CML Management in the US and Europe/Kantarjian et al.

differed between US and European physicians and,
indeed, between individual physicians in the same
geographical region. Nevertheless, variations in
response between the US and Europe to the remainder of the questionnaire may be a consequence of
these differing practice settings rather than of the geographic region. Country-specific differences in practice patterns within Europe are known to exist, but
were not examined in this survey.
There were marked differences in practice composition between US and European respondents.
Most US respondents (75%) manage both solid and
hematologic cancers, whereas European physicians
were more specialized, with 54% managing hematologic malignancies only. This result may be a reflection of practice setting: 45% of academic respondents
manage only hematologic malignancies, whereas
73% of nonacademic respondents manage both solid
and hematologic malignancies. Patient numbers
managed by US and European physicians were comparable; however, three times as many European
respondents currently had >20 CML patients under
their care. This is likely due to the predominance of
hematologists among European respondents vs their
US counterparts. Survey participants did vary in
terms of number of years of clinical experience after
completion of training: one-third of US respondents
and 13% of European respondents had <5 years of
experience. More than one-third of European respondents had 6–10 years of practice experience, whereas
approximately 20% of US respondents had >20 years
of experience vs 16% of their European counterparts.
This question did not take into account the number
of patients treated by physicians during the indicated
timeframe; therefore, the duration of clinical experience quoted should not be confused with the extent
of clinical experience.

Practice Patterns by Patient Type
In the next section, respondents were presented with
several hypothetical clinical scenarios and asked to
select their favored treatment option.
Case example
In a newly diagnosed 40-year-old patient with
chronic phase CML and a matched related sibling
donor, most respondents (62%, US; 79%, Europe)
chose standard-dose imatinib (400 mg) over allogeneic SCT (13%, US; 10%, Europe) or high-dose
imatinib. Details of the patient’s Sokal score were not
given, which could have influenced a decision for
transplantation. Higher-dose imatinib (600–800 mg)
was more frequently chosen as an option in the US
vs Europe (24%, US; 9%, Europe), a distinction which

1369

may be driven by differences in indications for imatinib and the fact that in Europe such off-label use of
imatinib would not be reimbursed.

Case example
For an older (65-year-old) patient who had failed
imatinib therapy and had a matched related sibling,
approximately 50% of all respondents chose the new
tyrosine kinase inhibitors dasatinib or nilotinib as
their next option. This was compared with 26% and
19% of US and European respondents, respectively,
who opted for immediate allogeneic SCT. The trend
for dasatinib or nilotinib first rather than SCT may
be appropriate, given this patient’s age. Interestingly,
a substantial proportion of respondents (13% in the
US and 26% in Europe) stated that they would
choose IFN-a, low-dose araC, or hydroxyurea alone
or in combination. However, until recently the use of
novel tyrosine kinase inhibitors was confined to clinical trials and it is not clear which, or how many,
respondents had access to them.
Case example
For the same 65-year-old patient, but with a matched
unrelated donor, the proportion of respondents who
would initiate dasatinib or nilotinib treatment
increased from 49% to 55% in the US and from 49%
to 57% in Europe, as one might expect. There was a
concomitant decrease in the proportion of respondents who would choose immediate SCT. Yet, the
preference of a minority of physicians (18% in the
US and 25% in Europe) for pre-imatinib therapies
such as IFN-a, araC, and hydroxyurea remained.
Disease Monitoring
Molecular monitoring of BCR-ABL transcript levels
by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction
(qRT-PCR) is increasingly used to assess treatment
response in CML patients.9,10 Molecular monitoring
is particularly relevant when residual levels of leukemic cells are reduced to levels below detection by
cytogenetic analysis. It is recommended by some
CML experts that BCR-ABL transcript levels in
patients treated with tyrosine kinase inhibitors are
measured every 3 months from treatment initiation.3,10 To gain an understanding of physicians’ preferences in disease monitoring and response, and the
rationale and triggers for their treatment choices, a
number of questions in this area were included in
the survey.
When questioned about the location of testing
the vast majority (93%) of European respondents
relied on either their local hospital laboratory (50%)
or nearest teaching hospital laboratory (43%) for

1370

CANCER

April 1, 2007 / Volume 109 / Number 7

confirmatory cytogenetic and/or fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) studies, with extremely limited
use of commercial laboratories. In contrast, half of
all US respondents relied on commercial laboratories
for these tests. A similar pattern was observed for
qRT-PCR and BCR-ABL kinase domain mutation testing. This difference in Europe/US practices may be
because commercial laboratories are more common
in the US vs Europe, likely a reflection of the lower
level of private healthcare utilization in Europe
(although private laboratories are beginning to
emerge in Europe). Alternatively, the disparity may
be a reflection of academic vs community practice
preference. When grouped by practice setting, most
academic respondents indicated that they perform
cytogenetics/FISH testing at either their local hospital laboratory (63%) or a nearby teaching hospital
laboratory (26%), whereas nonacademic respondents
tend to utilize more commercial laboratory testing.
Another explanation may be the possible existence of
affiliations between US insurance companies and
specific private laboratories.
The survey respondents were also presented with
several hypothetical patient cases, and questioned
with regard to which diagnostic test(s) they would
perform.

Case example
In a patient with a white cell count of 40,000/lL and
a morphologic picture consistent with CML, 37% of
European respondents stated that they would perform cytogenetics, FISH, and qRT-PCR as initial diagnostic tests (Fig. 1A). Nearly one-third (31%) of US
respondents would perform these 3 tests in combination, but a similar proportion (33%) would utilize cytogenetics and FISH only. Over half of all US
respondents and one-third in Europe would not
implement qRT-PCR at diagnosis, seemingly at odds
with the emphasis on molecular monitoring based
on studies showing the prognostic significance of
qRT-PCR data.10–13 Because both US and European
studies support the use of qRT-PCR, the disparity
between the US and European respondents may be a
reflection of the greater proportion of pure hematologists (vs hematologist/oncologists) in the European
vs US group in this survey. Alternatively, the US physicians may recognize the value of qRT-PCR monitoring at later timepoints, but are not aware of its value
in the initial monitoring phase.
Case example
In the case of a 70-year-old woman with Ph-positive
CML on imatinib 400 mg/day, more European
respondents (16%) would monitor imatinib response

FIGURE 1. Disease monitoring preferences of European and US physicians
as determined by responses to questions (A) 10, (B) 14, and (C) 15 in the
survey. B, blood counts; C, cytogenetics; F, fluorescence in situ hybridization;
N, none of the above; NR, no response; O, other; Q, quantitative polymerase
chain reaction monitoring.

with blood counts, cytogenetics, and qRT-PCR, than
with any other option offered in this survey (Fig. 1B).
This omission of FISH analysis is aligned with the
lower use of the technique in Europe in general, and
the tendency to omit FISH analysis in elderly
patients, as in this hypothetical setting. Among the
US respondents there was no discernable trend with
respect to preference for treatment monitoring. This
may reflect the more frequent reliance on initial
(first year) FISH rather than qRT-PCR monitoring in
the US.

Case example
In a younger (50-year-old) Ph-positive CML patient
with a matched sibling donor and treated with imatinib daily, nearly one-third of US respondents indicated that they would monitor with blood counts,
cytogenetics, FISH, and qRT-PCR. More than half of

CML Management in the US and Europe/Kantarjian et al.

European respondents would either use: blood
counts, cytogenetics, FISH, and qRT-PCR (27%); or
blood counts, cytogenetics, and qRT-PCR (24%) (Fig.
1C). These results indicate that only half of all
respondents would monitor the disease of this hypothetical patient in line with recently published
recommendations.3
Direct comparison between responses for the 50and 70-year-old hypothetical patients discussed
above indicates that, both in the US and Europe,
there is a trend for more frequent monitoring in
younger patients, especially those in whom allogeneic SCT is an option. Given that treatment
options have been more limited for older patients,
there is a tendency to reduce monitoring that may
not drive treatment decisions. It will be interesting to
see how the intensity of disease monitoring in older
patients, and in general, changes as new CML treatment options become available.

Frequency of Disease Monitoring in CML and Influence
on Treatment Decisions
Identification of the Ph chromosome by cytogenetic
analysis remains the ‘gold standard’ for diagnosis of
CML. After treatment initiation, guidelines recommend that cytogenetic analysis be repeated at 6- to
12-month intervals until the level of Ph-positive
metaphases falls below 10%, when qRT-PCR should
be implemented to monitor residual disease.14,15 Disease monitoring by FISH is acceptable in cases
where bone marrow cannot be obtained or examined
successfully with conventional cytogenetics. Questions relating to frequency of disease monitoring
were included in the survey to determine current
practices.
Overall, 31% and 39% of US and European respondents, respectively, thought that patient response
should be evaluated at 3, 6, and 12 months as a basis
for treatment decisions, and then every 3–6 months, in
line with current guidelines. When grouped by practice setting (academic vs nonacademic), the split of
responses was similar. Somewhat surprisingly, onethird of US and one-quarter of European respondents felt that it was most critical to evaluate
response at 3 months. Although the value of achieving treatment milestones at 3 months has been
documented, changes in treatment based on this
timepoint alone might be considered premature.
This may suggest the need to educate physicians on
the importance of continued disease monitoring in
the first year of treatment and beyond, as recommended by the recent publication of the European
LeukemiaNet expert panel.3

1371

Most US respondents stated that they repeat
cytogenetic analysis for monitoring response to imatinib every 3 months (34%) or every 6 months (33%),
and nearly half (46%) of European respondents perform cytogenetic analysis every 6 months, whereas
another 29% assess cytogenetics every 3 months. A
notable proportion of respondents (19% in the US
and 15% in Europe) reported that repeating cytogenetic analysis just once annually was sufficient. This
question did not specify whether this was monitoring
in the first or subsequent years of treatment. That
aside, these data reflect the need to highlight the importance of continued bone marrow evaluation, not
only for monitoring CyR, but also for assessing bone
marrow morphology in the context of dose changes.
When queried on the frequency with which they
would repeat qRT-PCR monitoring, 39% of US respondents stated they would do so every 3 months
and 38% every 6 months. A higher proportion (53%)
of European respondents monitor imatinib response
by qRT-PCR every 3 months, whereas 31% do so every 6 months. When grouped by practice setting,
49% of academic respondents use qRT-PCR every 3
months, compared with 39% of nonacademic respondents. These data likely reflect the strong lead
taken by European academic laboratories in molecular testing and may suggest a need to increase awareness of the importance of molecular monitoring
disease by qRT-PCR among nonacademics. To aid
this, more data may be required to confirm the value
of molecular monitoring in a patient in CCyR.
More than 60% of US respondents were either
not familiar with testing for BCR-ABL kinase domain
mutations or had never ordered the test, with only
29% having done so. In contrast, almost 50% of European respondents had utilized BCR-ABL kinase domain mutation analysis, despite the fact that 26% of
European physicians had no access to the test compared with 10% of US physicians. When grouped by
practice setting, 60% of nonacademic respondents
were either not familiar with BCR-ABL kinase domain mutation testing or had never ordered the test,
compared with only 25% of academic respondents.
Importantly, 43% of academic respondents would
only order mutational analysis under specific circumstances, which were entirely appropriate. These
data are reflective of a greater awareness in Europe
of the importance of BCR-ABL mutations, and suggest there may be a need for greater education
among US physicians on when to monitor for BCRABL mutations and, importantly, how to translate
this information into treatment decisions. Although
not analyzed in this survey, it is unclear whether
most physicians, either in the US or Europe, under-

1372

CANCER

April 1, 2007 / Volume 109 / Number 7

stand how to interpret mutational data; this is likely
because until very recently3 no recommendations
existed on when to intervene or how to change treatment based on BCR-ABL mutational analysis. Excessive mutational testing may result in more patients
being treated with SCT, with the associated significant morbidity and mortality risks, rather than other
treatment modalities. However, the clinical significance of mutational testing and results in imatinibsensitive patients are still unclear, even in the
research setting, and requires further study.

Management of Suboptimal Response to
Standard Dose Imatinib
The LeukemiaNet expert panel recently defined suboptimal response to imatinib for patients in chronic
phase CML as a state where the patient may still
have a substantial benefit from continuing imatinib,
but that the long-term outcome of the treatment
would not likely be as favorable.3 Specifically, these
circumstances would be: less than a complete hematologic response (CHR) at 3 months; less than partial
CyR (PCyR) (Ph-positive metaphases >35%) at 6
months; less than CCyR at 12 months; less than
MMR (reduction of BCR-ABL/control gene ratio to
0.10% of a standard baseline value) at 18 months;
the presence of additional chromosomal abnormalities in Ph-positive cells; a loss of MMR; or BCR-ABL
mutations. Baccarani et al.3 propose that in the event
of suboptimal response the imatinib dose should be
increased to 600–800 mg/day and allogeneic SCT
may be offered to eligible patients.
In line with these recommendations, more than
three-quarters of US respondents would recommend
increasing the imatinib dose to 600 mg/day (49%) or
800 mg/day (27%) for patients with a suboptimal
response to 400 mg/day imatinib. In contrast, only
35% and 18% of European respondents would
increase the imatinib dose to 600 and 800 mg/day,
respectively. Almost twice as many European as US
respondents (38% vs 18%) would increase the imatinib dose with the intention of advancing to SCT if
the response remained suboptimal at 3–6 months.
When asked if they employed testing for BCRABL kinase domain mutations in patients with suboptimal imatinib response, most respondents (73%)
in the US did not, whereas 50% in Europe did. This
difference was outside of the academic vs nonacademic split, and highlights the need for more studies/education regarding the significance of BCRABL mutational analysis in this context.
When questioned on how they would manage
suboptimal response in patients with CML and failure to respond to dose-escalated imatinib without a

matched donor, approximately 50% of US and European respondents would discontinue imatinib therapy and enter patients in a clinical trial with
dasatinib or nilotinib. This demonstrates a high level
of awareness among both European and US physicians of the new kinase inhibitors currently available
or in development for the treatment of CML. There
was a trend for continued imatinib therapy with the
addition of hydroxyurea, araC, or IFN-a (27% in Europe, 18% in US). A further 8% of US and 12% of European respondents stated that they would
discontinue imatinib therapy and, rather than enrolling patients in a clinical trial with either dasatinib or
nilotinib, would initiate IFN-a therapy, alone or with
araC.

Defining Failure to Respond to Standard Dose Imatinib
Failure to respond to imatinib is defined as a clinical
situation where continuing imatinib in any dose is
no longer appropriate, and when alternative therapies should be considered.3 The parameters that
indicate failure include: no hematologic response at
3 months; less than CHR at 6 months; less than a
PCyR at 12 months; less than CCyR at 18 months;
and loss of CHR, CCyR, or detection of a BCR-ABL
kinase domain mutation with a low level of sensitivity to imatinib at any time.
The respondents in this survey were asked to
define what they felt constituted failure to respond
to imatinib in the context of a hypothetical patient.
Case example
When presented with a 45-year-old CML patient with
a matched donor, there was little consensus among
respondents on the definition of a failure of response
to imatinib, and when to initiate alternative treatment. The most frequent responses are shown in
Table 2.
Interestingly, when respondents were asked about
what constitutes failure to respond, dictating a change
in therapy in general, rather than related to a specific
patient, both US and European physicians were
aligned with current recommendations.3 Specifically,
most respondents considered failure to respond as a
lack of either a CyR at 6 months or a major CyR
(MCyR) at 1 year. Among European respondents,
13% stated that they would declare failure to respond
if the patient failed to achieve CHR after 3 months,
CyR after 6 months, MCyR after 1 year, and CCyR after 18–24 months. Another 9% reported the same
along with failure to achieve qRT-PCR negativity after
12–24 months. A total of 27% and 18% of US and
European respondents, respectively, indicated that
failure to achieve any CyR after 6 months (13%, US;

CML Management in the US and Europe/Kantarjian et al.
TABLE 2
Definition of Failure to Respond to Imatinib According
to Survey Respondents

1373

TABLE 3
Percentage of Physicians Who Would Discontinue, Interrupt,
or Dose-Reduce Imatinib if Indicated Adverse Events Were Severe

Definition of failure of response

% US
respondents

% European
respondents

No CHR at 3 mo
No CyR at 6 mo
Loss of CHR
No MCyR at 1 yr
No CCyR at 1 yr
No CCyR at 18–24 mo
30% increase in Ph-positive metaphases

11
12
12
10
10
8
10

12
11
12
10
7
8
11

CHR indicates complete hematologic response; CyR, cytogenetic response; McyR, major CyR; CcyR,
complete CyR; Ph, Philadelphia chromosome.

9%, Europe) or MCyR after 1 year (14%, US; 9%, Europe) should be considered failure to respond, and
warrant consideration of alternative therapy. These
responses are partly reflective of the new recommendations for defining imatinib failure as discussed
above. It will be interesting to observe how these
views evolve with increasing awareness of the new
guidelines.

Defining an Effective Response to Imatinib
When questioned on what constitutes ‘effective’ imatinib therapy in newly diagnosed chronic phase CML,
30% and 38% of US and European respondents,
respectively, defined effective response by both a CCyR
and MR at 1 year; 30% and 25% of US and European
respondents, respectively, stated that MR at 6 months
constituted ‘effective’ imatinib therapy. The former
result is reflective of experience with >5 years followup of the IRIS study, but the latter is puzzling given
the lack of evidence for this milestone. The recent
recommendations from Baccarani et al.3 support the
use of hematologic and cytogenetic response parameters measured within the first year, but suggest that
treatment decisions based on MR alone at 3 or 6
months are premature. The extent to which a physician’s opinion on what constitutes effective imatinib
therapy affects their treatment decisions is unclear.
Imatinib Toxicity
One of the advantages of molecular targeted therapy
with tyrosine kinase inhibitors is the comparatively
low rates of associated toxicity. Data from the IRIS
study has shown that imatinib is generally well tolerated, with rates of intolerance significantly lower
than with IFN-a/araC combination therapy.4 Nevertheless, a minority of imatinib-intolerant patients
(3%–5%) experience toxicity so severe that it warrants
treatment discontinuation.16

Adverse event

%
Discontinue,
US/Europe

%
Interrupt,
US/Europe

% Dose
reduced,
US/Europe

Nausea and vomiting
Diarrhea
Rash
Neutropenia
Thrombocytopenia
Anemia
Muscle cramps
Liver dysfunction
Fluid retention
Periorbital edema
Pleural effusions
Pericardial effusion or pericarditis
Weight gain
Congestive heart failure
Fatigue
Bone aches

4/12
5/5
13/21
6/11
8/10
4/6
6/11
23/22
8/8
7/8
17/20
33/22
4/9
35/30
6/6
3/5

50/36
42/45
46/40
41/38
39/40
34/36
43/36
44/41
37/30
37/20
35/37
32/42
34/24
29/40
38/18
40/26

45/52
53/51
41/39
53/51
54/49
62/58
51/53
34/36
55/61
56/73
47/43
34/36
61/67
36/30
57/76
57/69

Most respondents in this survey (90%, US; 97%,
Europe) assess imatinib-associated toxicity with frequent visits early in therapy. Similar incidences of
imatinib toxicities were reported in both the US and
Europe. When questioned on specific toxicities that
had led to dose interruption, dose reduction, or imatinib discontinuation, responses (summarized in
Table 3) were as one might expect, and comparable
between the US and Europe. With the arrival of
new kinase inhibitors, these responses are likely to
change. For example, a physician who currently prescribes steroids to a patient with imatinib-associated
rash in the future may discontinue imatinib in favor
of dasatinib or nilotinib.

DISCUSSION
In the rapidly shifting landscape of CML therapy, an
understanding of physicians’ treatment preferences is
of key importance in identifying areas for improvement in care and to inform future educational activities. Generally, the practice patterns of respondents
to this survey were aligned with current guidelines
and published clinical trials. However, there were
some notable findings.
From the responses to questions on treatment
choice, it is clear that SCT is becoming increasingly
less common. Respondents consistently chose imatinib as the first-line treatment of newly diagnosed
CML, despite the option of a matched related sibling
donor; a trend in agreement with data showing
improved survival rates and quality of life with imati-

1374

CANCER

April 1, 2007 / Volume 109 / Number 7

nib vs SCT.17 Use of SCT may even be reduced to
third- or fourth-line treatment with the emergence of
high-dose imatinib/new tyrosine kinase inhibitor
strategies. The survey indicated that the high-dose
imatinib regimen was more common in the US vs
Europe. To date, comparison of high-dose imatinib
(800 mg/day) vs standard dose (400 mg/day) demonstrates that the higher dose provides increased rates
of CCyR and earlier MR at the expense of greater
myelosuppression; the long-term clinical significance
of these differences remains to be demonstrated.18
Therefore, until further clinical data are available the
practice patterns in Europe in this respect may be
more appropriate than in the US.
Pre-imatinib treatment strategies such as hydroxyurea, araC, or IFN-a remain in use by some physicians as salvage treatment after imatinib failure and
unsuitability of SCT, despite the emergence of newer
tyrosine kinase inhibitors. Nevertheless, approximately half of all respondents chose dasatinib or
nilotinib as second-line treatment. This figure is
likely to rise as access to these drugs extends beyond
clinical trials. Dasatinib was recently approved by the
FDA for treatment of all phases of CML with resistance or intolerance to prior therapy, including imatinib, after successful Phase II trials conducted in over
900 patients.19–23 Initial Phase II trial results for nilotinib are also promising.24–26
It is clear from this survey that there is some confusion among physicians over optimal timing of treatment decisions: one-third of European and onequarter of US respondents consider the 3-month timepoint to be the most critical for evaluating responses
to therapy and making treatment decisions. Long-term
follow-up of the IRIS trial shows that a CCyR to imatinib is an important response-related prognostic factor.
Failure to achieve any CyR at 3 months does not necessarily signal failure of imatinib therapy, because
patients still have a 50% chance of achieving CCyR at
2 years.27 Hematologic responses at 3 months do correlate with long-term outcome and should be considered when making treatment decisions; patients with
no hematologic response at 3 months can be considered to have failed therapy, and patients who do not
achieve a CHR at 3 months can be considered to have
a suboptimal response. Overall, physicians should be
mindful of the new recommendations for treatment,
which advocate consistent evaluation of a range of
responses 3–18 months postinitiation of treatment,3
rather than focusing on a single response criterion at a
single timepoint.
Cytogenetic analysis is a major component of
effective CML disease monitoring, but the benefit of
molecular monitoring by qRT-PCR has increased

greatly in the era of tyrosine kinase inhibitor therapy,
where patients regularly achieve disease levels lower
than can be detected accurately by cytogenetics.
BCR-ABL transcript levels measured by qRT-PCR
early in therapy can predict subsequent response
and the probability of acquired resistance to imatinib.9,10 Patients who achieve an MMR at 12 months
have a very low probability of disease progression in
the subsequent year.28 Evidence from this survey
suggests that European laboratories use molecular
monitoring with qRT-PCR more often, possibly
because of the high proportion of academics among
European responders and the fact that the test is
well established in European academic laboratories.
Major improvements in assay techniques have
advanced PCR from a purely qualitative test with significant variability to a real-time quantitative assay
with reproducible results. However, many physicians
may not fully appreciate the difference between the
qualitative and quantitative techniques and this may
represent an area of educational need among physicians treating CML. Indeed, this confusion may have
influenced responders when answering questions on
the use of PCR in this survey.
According to the recent recommendations, if
qRT-PCR reveals increasing BCR-ABL levels, patients
should undergo analysis for BCR-ABL kinase domain
mutations. A number of BCR-ABL mutants are known
to be highly refractory to imatinib therapy, and their
emergence should trigger a change in treatment
strategy.3 Patients with any one of a further set of
mutants conferring low levels of resistance to imatinib should be monitored closely. Most US respondents were either not familiar with tests for BCR-ABL
kinase domain mutations or had never ordered the
test, in contrast to their European counterparts.
There is also greater awareness among European
respondents of the specific circumstances in which it
is appropriate to carry out the mutational analysis.3
These findings highlight the need to educate the
CML community on the importance of BCR-ABL
mutational analysis in certain situations, and the
manner in which the data should be interpreted.
In summary, the results of this survey provide an
intriguing snapshot of current treatment practices at
this crucial point in the evolution of CML management. Given the availability of new tyrosine kinase
inhibitors, and the dramatic change in our understanding of the value of disease monitoring based on
clinical experience with imatinib, it will be of interest
to see how the changing treatment paradigm affects
practice patterns. To this end, a repeat of this survey
in the future would be of interest to identify changing trends in treatment patterns.

CML Management in the US and Europe/Kantarjian et al.

REFERENCES
1.

2.
3.

4.

5.

6.
7.

8.
9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.
17.

Guilhot F, Chastang C, Michallet M, et al. Interferon alpha2b combined with cytarabine versus interferon alone in
chronic myelogenous leukemia. French Chronic Myeloid
Leukemia Study Group. N Engl J Med. 1997;337:223–229.
Ren R. Mechanisms of BCR-ABL in the pathogenesis of chronic
myelogenous leukaemia. Nat Rev Cancer. 2005;5:172–183.
Baccarani M, Saglio G, Goldman J, et al. Evolving concepts
in the management of chronic myeloid leukemia: recommendations from an expert panel on behalf of the European LeukemiaNet. Blood. 2006;108:1809–1820.
O’Brien SG, Guilhot F, Larson RA, et al. Imatinib compared
with interferon and low-dose cytarabine for newly diagnosed chronic-phase chronic myeloid leukemia. N Engl J
Med. 2003;348:994–1004.
Guilhot F, Larson R, O’Brien S, Druker B,on behalf of IRIS
Study Group. Long-term benefits of imatinib for patients
newly diagnosed with chronic myeloid leukemia in chronic
phase: the 5-year update from the IRIS study. Haematologica. 2006;91:170. Abstract 466.
Deininger MW. Management of early stage disease. Hematology (Am Soc Hematol Educ Program). 2005;1:174–182.
Druker B, Guilhot F, O’Brien S, Larson R. Long-term benefits
of imatinib (IM) for patients newly diagnosed with chronic
myelogenous leukemia in chronic phase (CML-CP): the 5year update from the IRIS study [abstract]. J Clin Oncol
(ASCO Annual Meeting Proc). 2006;24:338s. Abstract 6506.
Mauro M, Deininger M. Chronic myeloid leukemia in 2006:
a perspective. Hematologica. 2006;91:152–158.
Hughes T, Branford S. Molecular monitoring of BCR-ABL
as a guide to clinical management in chronic myeloid leukaemia. Blood Rev. 2006;20:29–41.
Hughes T, Deininger M, Hochhaus A, et al. Monitoring
CML patients responding to treatment with tyrosine kinase
inhibitors: review and recommendations for harmonizing
current methodology for detecting BCR-ABL transcripts
and kinase domain mutations and for expressing results.
Blood. 2006;108:28–37.
Marin D, Kaeda J, Szydlo R, et al. Monitoring patients in
complete cytogenetic remission after treatment of CML in
chronic phase with imatinib: patterns of residual leukaemia and prognostic factors for cytogenetic relapse. Leukemia. 2005;19:507–512.
Muller MC, Gattermann N, Lahaye T, et al. Dynamics of
BCR-ABL mRNA expression in first-line therapy of chronic
myelogenous leukemia patients with imatinib or interferon
alpha/ara-C. Leukemia. 2003;17:2392–2400.
Paschka P, Muller MC, Merx K, et al. Molecular monitoring of
response to imatinib (Glivec) in CML patients pretreated with
interferon alpha. Low levels of residual disease are associated
with continuous remission. Leukemia. 2003;17: 1687–1694.
Faderl S, Hochhaus A, Hughes T. Monitoring of minimal residual disease in chronic myeloid leukemia. Hematol Oncol
Clin North Am. 2004;18:657–670,ix–x.
NCCN. National Comprehensive Cancer Network. Clinical
Practice Guidelines in Oncology. Chronic myelogenous leukemia version 1. Jenkintown, PA: NCCN;2006.
Novartis. Gleevec (imatinib mesylate) prescribing information. Hanover, NJ: Novartis; 2005.
Grigg A, Hughes T. Role of allogeneic stem cell transplantation for adult chronic myeloid leukemia in the imatinib
era. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant. 2006;12:795–807.

1375

18. Aoki E, Kantarjian H, O’Brien S, et al. High-dose imatinib
mesylate treatment in patients (Pts) with untreated early
chronic phase (CP) chronic myeloid leukemia (CML): 2.5year follow-up [abstract]. J Clin Oncol (ASCO Annual Meeting Proc). 2006;24:345s. Abstract 6535.
19. Coutre S, Martinelli G, Dombret H, et al. Dasatanib (D) in
patients (pts) with chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML)
in lymphoid blast crisis (LB-CML) or Philadelphia-chromosome positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia (PhþALL)
who are imatinib (IM)-resistant (IM-R) or intolerant (IM-I):
the CA180015 ‘START-L’ study. J Clin Oncol (ASCO Annual
Meeting Proc). 2006;24:344s. Abstract 6528.
20. Hochhaus A, Kantarjian H, Baccarani M, et al. Dasatinib in
patients with chronic phase chronic myeloid leukemia
(CP-CML) who are resistant or intolerant to imatinib:
results of the CA180013 ‘START-C’ study. J Clin Oncol
(ASCO Annual Meeting Proc). 2006;24:339s. Abstract 6508.
21. Talpaz M, Apperley J, Kim D, et al. Dasatinib (D) in
patients with accelerated phase chronic myeloid leukemia
(AP-CML) who are resistant or intolerant to imatinib:
results of the CA180005 ‘START-A’ study. J Clin Oncol
(ASCO Annual Meeting Proc). 2006;24:343s. Abstract 6526.
22. Shah N, Rousselot P, Pasquini R, et al. Dasatinib (D) vs
high dose imatinib (IM) in patients (pts) with chronic
phase chronic myeloid leukemia (CP-CML) resistant to
imatinib. Results of CA180017 START-R randomized trial
[abstract]. J Clin Oncol (ASCO Annual Meeting Proc).
2006;24:338s. Abstract 6507.
23. Cortes J, Kim D, Rosti G, et al. Dasatinib (D) in patients
(pts) with chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) in myeloid blast crisis (MBC) who are imatinib-resistant (IM-R) or
IM-intolerant (IM-I): results of the CA180006 ‘START-B’
study [abstract]. J Clin Oncol (ASCO Annual Meeting Proc).
2006;24:344s. Abstract 6529.
24. Giles F, Larson R, Le Coutre P, et al. A phase II study of
AMN107, a novel inhibitor of Bcr-Abl, administered to imatinib-resistant or intolerant patients (pts) with Phþ chronic
myelogenous leukemia (CML) in blast crisis (BC) or relapsed/refractory Phþ acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL).
J Clin Oncol (ASCO Annual Meeting Proc). 2006;24:346s.
Abstract 6536.
25. Le Coutre P, Ottman O, Gattermann N, et al. A phase II
study of AMN107, a novel inhibitor of Bcr-Abl, administered to imatinib-resistant or intolerant patients (pts) with
chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) in accelerated phase
(AP) [abstract]. J Clin Oncol (ASCO Annual Meeting Proc).
2006;24:344s. Abstract 6531.
26. Kantarjian H, Gattermann N, O’Brien S, et al. A phase II
study of AMN107, a novel inhibitor of Bcr-Abl, administered to imatinib resistant and intolerant patients (pts)
with chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) in chronic
phase (CP) [abstract]. J Clin Oncol (ASCO Annual Meeting
Proc). 2006;24:345s. Abstract 6534.
27. Druker B, Gathmann I, Bolton A, Larson R,on behalf of the
IRIS (International Randomized IFN vs. STI571) study group.
Probability and impact of obtaining a cytogenetic response
to Imatinib as initial therapy for chronic myeloid leukemia
in chronic phase. Blood. 2003;102:182a. Abstract 634.
28. Hughes TP, Kaeda J, Branford S, et al. Frequency of major
molecular responses to imatinib or interferon alpha plus
cytarabine in newly diagnosed chronic myeloid leukemia.
N Engl J Med. 2003;349:1423–1432.

