www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2017, Vol. 8, (No. 9), pp: 14549-14569
Research Paper

Tianfoshen oral liquid: a CFDA approved clinical traditional
Chinese medicine, normalizes major cellular pathways
disordered during colorectal carcinogenesis
Siliang Wang1, Hengbin Wang3, Yin Lu1,2
1

Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Pharmacology and Safety Evaluation of Chinese Materia Medica, School of Pharmacy, Nanjing
University of Chinese Medicine, Nanjing, 210023, P. R. China

2

Jiangsu Collaborative Innovation Center of Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM) Prevention and Treatment of Tumor, Nanjing
University of Chinese Medicine, Nanjing, 210023, P. R. China

3

Changshu Leiyunshang Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Changshu, 215500, P. R. China

Correspondence to: Yin Lu, email: profyinlu@163.com
Keywords: Tianfoshen oral liquid, colorectal cancer, cell cycle arrest, apoptosis, angiogenesis
Received: November 02, 2016     Accepted: January 09, 2017     Published: January 16, 2017

ABSTRACT
Colorectal cancer remains the third leading cause of cancer death worldwide,
suggesting exploration of novel therapeutic avenues may be useful. In this study,
therefore, we determined whether Tianfoshen oral liquid, a Chinese traditional
medicine that has been used to treat non-small cell lung cancer, would be
therapeutically beneficial for colorectal cancer patients. Our data show that Tianfoshen
oral liquid effectively inhibits growth of colorectal cancer cells both in vitro and in vivo.
We further employed a comprehensive strategy that included chemoinformatics,
bioinformatics and network biology methods to unravel novel insights into the active
compounds of Tianfoshen oral liquid and to identify the common therapeutic targets
and processes for colorectal cancer treatment. We identified 276 major candidate
targets for Tianfoshen oral liquid that are central to colorectal cancer progression.
Gene enrichment analysis showed that these targets were associated with cell
cycle, apoptosis, cancer-related angiogenesis, and chronic inflammation and related
signaling pathways. We also validated experimentally the inhibitory effects of
Tianfoshen oral liquid on these pathological processes, both in vitro and in vivo. In
addition, we demonstrated that Tianfoshen oral liquid suppressed multiple relevant
key players that sustain and promote colorectal cancer, which is suggests the potential
therapeutic efficacy of Tianfoshen oral liquid in future colorectal cancer treatments.

INTRODUCTION

in China according to the standard of quality control
in the Chinese Pharmacopoeia and used to clinically
treat non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) [74].
The TFS formula induces apoptosis in NSCLC cells,
inhibiting their migration and invasion and thereby
extending life span and improving the quality of life of
cancer patients [74]. The lung and the large intestine are
interior-exteriorly related [73], which is one of the most
important content of the basic theory of TCM, promote
us cannot help to speculating whether this formula can
be used as an effective therapeutic for colorectal cancer.
Our previous studies demonstrated that TFS could
significantly inhibit human CRC growth in vitro and
in vivo. However, mechanisms underlying the ant-cancer
effects of TFS remained largely unknown and had to be
further investigated.

Colorectal cancer (CRC) is a malignant cancer
of the gastrointestinal tract with low overall survival
rates [1, 2]. Inspite of tremendous progress in anticancer research, CRC patients experience high rates of
mortality due to lack of early diagnostic techniques as
well as clinical side effects plaguing current therapy
[1]. The etiology of CRC is complex and influenced
by factors such as smoking, drinking, obesity, high-fat
low-fiber diet, inflammatory bowel disease and family
medical history [3–6]. The traditional Chinese medicine
(TCM) has been extensively used as an alternate
treatment for cancers and Tianfoshen oral liquid (TFS)
that is composed of eight medicinal herbs has been one
such formulation [7, 8]. TFS has been widely produced
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14549

Oncotarget

Generally, the traditional Chinese medicines exert
therapeutic effects on multiple targets and pathways of
human body through their complex active components
which cannot be accurately detected solely by
conventional methods [9, 10]. Therefore, we employed
a comprehensive approach that combined prediction of
active compounds based on a range of pharmacokinetic
parameters and excavate the multiple drug targets by
network analysis based on the existing databases. This
strategy was previously used to clarify the synergistic
effects and mechanisms of multi-component, multi-target
agents including other TCM formulas [11–13]. In addition,
we conducted a wide range of experiments to further
elucidate the mechanisms by which TFS exerted its
therapeutic effects on CRC.

(Figure 1G). Analysis of the therapeutic performance of
TFS with SW480 cell-bearing nude mice demonstrated
similar results (Supplementary Figure 1). Therefore, our
experiments clearly demonstrated that TFS inhibited the
growth of human CRC both in vitro and in vivo in a dosedependent manner.

Potential pharmacological mechanisms of TFS
Candidate compound screening for TFS
TFS is composed of eight medicinal herbs,
including, Radix Panacis Quinquefolii (RPQ), Venenum
Bufonis (VB), Radix Asparagi (RA), Bulbus Iphigenia
Indica (BII), Radix Acanthopanax obouatus (RAO), Radix
Actinidia chinensis Planch. (RACP), Fructus Hippophae
(FH) and Fructus Citri Sarcodactylis (FCS). Therefore,
we combined oral bioavailability (OB) screening with
drug-likeness evaluation to identify the active compounds
in TFS [14]. We harvested 86 potential compounds with
appropriate values for these two parameters from the
herbal constituents of TFS. Further, 50 compounds with
lower OB or drug-likeness index that exhibited extensive
pharmacological activities and were typical components
of herbal drugs were also collected as the candidate active
compounds. The 136 compounds from the eight herbs that
were considered as “candidate compounds” are listed in
Supplementary Table 1. The eight different herbs, RPQ,
VB, RA, BII, RAO, RACP, FH and FCS contributed
25, 23, 9, 16, 7, 14, 52 and 9 candidate compounds,
respectively. Among the 136 candidate compounds, ten
were widely distributed in the multiple herbs of TFS
and had been certified to demonstrate diverse biological
effects. For example, β-sitosterol that was present in seven
of the eight herbs (Fructus Citri Sarcodactylis being the
exception) had demonstrated strong anti-inflammatory,
antioxidant and anti-cancer activities [15–17]. Similar
pharmacological properties of ursolic acid, quercetin,
epicatechin and lauric acid that were present in Radix
Asparagi, Radix Actinidia chinensis Planch, Fructus
Hippophae and Fructus Citri Sarcodactylis, respectively,
had also been demonstrated [18–21].

RESULTS
TFS inhibited CRC cell growth in vitro and in vivo
Since TFS has been successfully used to clinically
treat NSCLC, we investigated the in vitro effects of TFS
on the growth of multiple human CRC cells (SW480,
SW620, HT-29, HCT-116, DLD-1 and LS174T). TFS
inhibited CRC growth in a dose and time dependent
manner (Figure 1A; representative time-lapse movie
in Supplementary Videos 1–10 ). Analysis of the IC50
values from each cancer cell line showed that TFS exerted
50% inhibition under 6 mg/ml after 48 h. On the other
hand, TFS had little effect on the colon epithelial cells,
NCM460 when subjected to a similar treatment analysis
(Figure 1B). These results revealed the specific inhibitory
effects of TFS on cancer cells.
To verify the effect of TFS on the growth of human
CRC in vivo, nude mice bearing subcutaneous HT-29
xenografts that were treated with either 2.86 g/kg or
5.72 g/kg TFS for 5 weeks were compared with control
mice that received either normal saline or oxaliplatin
(5 mg/kg), respectively. The results showed that TFS
effectively inhibited tumor progression (Figure 1C–1G).
We observed that the relative tumor volume at day 32
was 2.63, 0.99, 0.41 and 3.71 for mice treated with TFS
(2.86 g/kg), TFS (5.72 g/kg), oxaliplatin and normal
saline, respectively (Figure 1C); The average tumor
weight at day 32 of for the TFS-treated groups were 0.32 g
and 0.17 g, respectively in comparison to 0.41g for the
normal saline group and 0.12 g for the oxaliplatin group
(Figure 1D). We further photographed the isolated day 32
tumor blocks to demonstrate that TFS treatment inhibited
the growth of the xenografted HT-29 tumor compared
with the normal saline control (Figure 1E). In addition,
TFS did not cause any adverse side effects as visualized
by weight and visceral index of mice (Figure 1F). The
Kaplan–Meier survival analysis showed that all the mice
treated with TFS survived the 55 day experimental period
whereas all the control group mice died within 50 days
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Generating compound-putative target network for
TFS
Generally, the effectiveness of the TCM formulas
to prevent and control complex diseases depends on the
synergistic effects between multiple compounds and
their targets [22]. Therefore, we explored the therapeutic
targets of the predicted active compounds of TFS. Towards
this, we integrated the available chemical, genomic and
pharmacological information to predict putative targets
of the candidate compounds [10, 64]. We obtained 468
putative targets for 113 of the 136 candidate compounds
whereas the 23 others did not have any corresponding targets
(Supplementary Table 2). The numbers of putative targets in
RPQ, VB, RA, BII, RAO, RACP, FH and FCS, were 150, 75,
14550

Oncotarget

Figure 1: In vitro and In vivo effects of TFS on growth of CRC cell lines. (A) Multiple CRC cell lines (SW480, SW620, HT-29,

HCT-116, DLD-1 and LS174T) were treated with indicated concentrations of TFS (0.66, 1.31, 2.63, 5.25, 10.5 mg/ml) or oxaliplatin
(0.02 mg/ml) for 12 h, 24 h and 48 h, respectively. The cell growth parameters were documented and calculated by the IncuCyte ZOOM®
live cell imaging system in comparison to the control group (saline treated). The data are presented as mean ± SD. The concentration of
TFS resulting in 50% inhibition of control growth (IC50) was calculated by the SPSS statistics software using Probit model. (B) Colonic
epithelial cells NCM460 were treated with indicated concentrations of TFS and oxaliplatin for 12 h, 24 h and 48 h, respectively. The cell
growth parameters were analyzed as above. The data are presented as mean ± SD. (C) Tumor volume changes of mice treated with TFS
(2.86 g/kg and 5.72 g/kg), oxaliplatin (5 mg/kg) and normal saline (model), respectively, are shown. Data are presented as mean ± SD
(n = 10). ***P < 0.001 (versus model). (D) Weight of tumors collected from different treatment groups of mice on day 32 is shown. Data
are presented as mean ± SD (n = 10). ***P < 0.001 (versus model). (E) Photographs of representative tumor blocks collected from different
treatment groups of mice on day 32 are shown. (F) Body weight (above) and visceral index (below) changes of mice in different treatment
groups on day 32 are shown. Data are presented as mean ± SD (n = 10). *P < 0.05, ***P < 0.001 (versus model). (G) Survival rates of mice
in different treatment groups at 55 d are shown.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14551

Oncotarget

198, 86, 213, 220, 404 and 69, respectively (Supplementary
Table 3). Although the numbers of targets in each herb
were different, they overlapped dramatically in the 8 herbs
(Supplementary Table 4). In other words, different ingredients
in TFS shared common or similar targets with synergistic
effects . For instance, both Radix Panacis Quinquefolii and
Fructus Citri Sarcodactylis were able to inhibit tumorigenesis
by reducing inflammation and proliferation related genes and
proteins that acted synergistically, including iNOS, COX-2,
Bcl-2, cyclin D1 [23, 24].
To gain insights into the role of the putative targets
involved in various biological processes and molecular
functions, we performed preliminary GO (Gene Ontology)
analysis with Omicsbean, a commercial database based
on DAVID (the Database for Annotation, Visualization
and Integrated Discovery) [25] and found that the putative
targets were enriched in cell cycle, apoptosis, inflammation,
angiogenesis and cellular metabolism, all of which are the
hallmarks of cancer (Supplementary Figure 2).
Further, to understand the complex interactions
between the compounds and their corresponding targets
at a system level, we constructed a network based on the
candidate compounds of TFS and their potential targets
(Figure 2 and Supplementary Table 5). The network
contained 631 nodes and 2985 compound-target interactions
of which sixty-five candidate compounds had a median of
eleven degrees (number of related targets) suggesting that
most compounds influenced multiple targets. Specifically,
we found that quercetin, kaempferol and progesterone acted

on 162, 71 and 112 targets, respectively, and therefore could
be the crucial pleiotropically active compounds for TFS
owing to their crucial positioning in the network. Previously,
several studies demonstrated that quercetin inhibited
inflammation, enhanced immune function and promoted
apoptosis by modulating key pathways regulating cancer,
such as, prostaglandin G/H synthase 2, interleukin (IL)-2,
peroxisome proliferator activated receptor gamma and
caspase-9 [26, 27].
Identification of candidate targets for TFS against
CRC
Since the use of a drug is based on its targets, we
collected 446 CRC-related targets from five existing
resources, namely, the DrugBank database, Online
Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) database,
the Genetic Association Database (GAD), the Kyoto
Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) Pathway
Database and the Therapeutic Target Database (TTD)
(Supplementary Table 6). Our analysis showed that the 8
herbs of TFS shared 78 putative targets with those of known
anti-CRC drugs showing the possible therapeutic targets in
this formula (Figure 3A and Supplementary Table 7).
System biology studies have shown that cancer
genes and proteins are interconnected and the proteinprotein interaction (PPI) networks are relevant to
understand the role of various proteins in complex
diseases like cancer [52, 53]. Therefore, we constructed
a putative target network (8631 nodes and 191590 edges)

Figure 2: Construction of the TFS compound-putative target network. The compound-putative target network was constructed

by linking the candidate compounds and their putative targets of the 8 herbs (Radix Panacis Quinquefolii, Venenum Bufonis, Radix
Asparagi, Bulbus Iphigenia Indica, Radix Acanthopanax obouatus, Radix Actinidia chinensis Planch., Fructus Hippophae and Fructus
Citri Sarcodactylis), which are constituents of TFS. The nodes representing candidate compounds are shown as polychrome triangles and
the targets are indicated by yellow squares.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14552

Oncotarget

and a known CRC-related target network (7339 nodes and
142492 edges) using the PPI data. Further, to unravel the
pharmacological mechanisms of TFS against CRC, we
intersected the two networks consisting of 4550 nodes
and 128542 edges (Figure 3B). Based on a previous study
of Li and others [52], we identified nodes with degrees
that were more than twice the median degree (23) of
all nodes as significant targets. Thus, we constructed a
network of significant targets for TFS against CRC that
had 1179 nodes and 60101 edges (Figure 3C). We further
selected seven topological features to identify candidate
targets, namely, ‘degree centrality (DC)’, ‘betweenness
centrality (BC)’, ‘closeness centrality (CC)’, ‘eigenvector
centrality (EC)’, ‘network centrality (NC)’ and ‘local
average connectivity (LAC)’, that were based on a plugin
named CytoNCA [54]. Based on the median values for
‘DC’, ‘BC’, ‘CC’, ‘EC’, ‘NC’ and ‘LAC’ that were 80,
3389.987, 0.4740185, 0.016892, 20.66752 and 14.94827,
respectively, we identified 276 candidate targets with
‘DC’ > 80, ‘BC’ > 3389.987, ‘CC’ > 0.474, ‘EC’ >
0.0169, ‘NC’ > 20.668 and ‘LAC’ > 14.948 (Figure 3D).
Detailed topological features and the PPI network are
shown in Supplementary Table 8 and Figure 3B–3D,
respectively.

we investigated the effects of TFS on the proliferation of
HT-29 cells in vitro. As shown in Figure 5A, we observed
decreased expression of PCNA (proliferating cell nuclear
antigen) in a dose-dependent manner in the TFS-treated
group. Further, we evaluated the effects of TFS on the
cell cycle by staining the cells with propidium iodide (PI)
after treatment with different doses of TFS (1.31, 2.63
and 5.25 mg/ml) for 24 h along with appropriate controls
and performed FACS analysis. As shown in Figure 5B,
treatment with increasing doses of TFS increased the
average percentages of HT-29 cells in the G0/G1-phase
from 37.54% to 58.61%, suggesting that TFS arrested cell
cycle. To ascertain the cell proliferation impact of TFS
in vivo, we performed immunohistochemical assays for
cell cycle markers, PCNA and Ki67 in the transplanted
HT-29 tumors and found similar results (Figure 5C). Since
TFS induced cell-cycle arrest in the G0/G1 phase, we
analyzed the expressions of cell cycle regulatory proteins
associated with G1/S phase transition (cyclin D1, cyclin
D2, CDK2, CDK4 and CDK6). Based on western blot
(Figure 5D), IHC assay (Figure 5C) and quantitative PCR
(Figure 5E), we found that their expression decreased in a
concentration-dependent manner in the TFS-treated groups
compared with the model group. Hence, we concluded that
TFS inhibited CRC by inducing cell-cycle arrest through
its candidate targets including CDKs and cyclin Ds.

Enrichment analysis of candidate targets for TFS
against CRC

TFS induced apoptosis in CRC cells

To further clarify the possible roles of the 276
candidate targets and investigate the relationship
between the functional groups and their underlying
scientific annotations in the biological networks, we
used a Cytoscape plugin, ClueGO [55]. The results
were classified into two categories, namely, molecular
functions/biological processes and the signaling pathway
(Figure 4 and Supplementary Tables 11, 12). Specifically,
we obtained molecular functions/biological processes
related with activation of CDKs, transmembrane receptor
protein tyrosine kinase and VEGFR, apoptosis, cytokine
secretion, DNA damage checkpoint and cytochrome
C release (Figure 4A). The signaling pathways were
MAPK, EGF/EGFR and cell cycle, apoptosis and
inflammation-related (Figure 4B). Based on these data,
we postulated that TFS inhibited CRC by regulating
the major signaling pathways involved in CRC-related
pathology, namely, cell proliferation, apoptosis, chronic
inflammation and angiogenesis. Therefore, to validate the
effects of TFS, we performed molecular biological assays
in vitro and in vivo.

In tandem with enhanced over-proliferation,
dysregulation of apoptosis is a key feature of CRC due
to aberrant activities and expressions of apoptosis-related
molecules [38, 39]. Many of the candidate targets that
we identified in our analysis were also associated with
regulation of cell apoptosis. Therefore, to determine
if TFS promoted CRC apoptosis, we double-stained
HT-29 cells with AnnexinV/PI and performed FACS
analysis. We observed that higher doses of TFS induced
greater apoptotic rates than the control group (p < 0.05;
Figure 6A). To confirm the effects of TFS on apoptosis
in vivo, tumors from CRC xenograft mice were examined
by using cleaved caspase-3 IHC staining and TUNEL
(terminal
deoxynucleotidyl
transferase-mediated
deoxyUTP-fluorescein nick end labeling) assay. We
found that TFS significantly increased the number of cells
with cleaved caspase-3 and positive TUNEL staining
suggesting enhanced apoptosis (Figure 6B). To further
explain the mechanism by which TFS facilitated apoptosis,
we performed RT-PCR, Western blot and IHC assay to
examine the mRNA and protein expressions of apoptosisrelated proteins, namely, Bcl-2, Bax, Bcl-xL and XIAP, in
transplanted CRC tumors with or without TFS treatment.
We found that TFS treatment significantly reduced the
mRNA expression of anti-apoptotic proteins, Bcl-2,
Bcl-xL and XIAP and elevated pro-apoptotic Bax levels
(Figure 6D). The IHC staining and western blot analysis

Experimental validation
TFS inhibited CRC growth partially by arresting the
cell cycle
Deregulated and excessive proliferation is one of the
hallmarks of all cancers including CRC [33, 34]. Therefore,

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14553

Oncotarget

further confirmed enhanced expression of the pro-apoptotic
protein Bax and reduced expression of the anti-apoptotic
proteins, Bcl-2, Bcl-xL and XIAP (Figure 6B, 6C). In
conclusion, TFS promoted apoptosis in CRC cells by
upregulating pro-apoptotic proteins and downregulating
the anti-apoptotic proteins like Bcl-2 and Bax.

TFS on the angiogenesis pathway, we collected serumstarved conditioned media from HT-29 cells treated
with or without TFS and stimulated endothelial cell tube
formation and migration using HUVECs. We observed
that media from TFS treated cancer cells significantly
reduced CRC cell-induced endothelial branching and
migration (Figure 7A and 7B). In addition, we assessed
the the microvessel density in transplanted CRC tumors by
CD31 immuno-reactivity and hemoglobin concentration
and found that the TFS treatment group decreased
intra-tumoral microvessel density and hemoglobin
concentration in comparison to the PBS control group
(p < 0.05) suggesting the anti-angiogeneic effect of TFS

TFS inhibits aberrant angiogenesis upregulated during
CRC progression
A critical process during CRC progression is
angiogenesis and our previous data showed a large
number of candidates that have inhibitory effect on
angiogenesis [43, 44]. To investigate the effects of

Figure 3: Identification of candidate targets for TFS against CRC (A) TFS shared 78 putative targets with known anti-CRC drugs. The

compound-putative target network was constructed by linking the overlapped targets (between TFS putative and known CRC-related) and
the homologous candidate compounds of TFS. The nodes representing candidate compounds are shown as polychrome rhombus and the
targets are presented as grey circles. (B) The interactive PPI network of TFS putative targets and known CRC-related targets made of 4550
nodes and 128542 edges is shown. (C) PPI network of significant proteins extracted from (B). This network is made of 1179 nodes and 60101
edges. (D) PPI network of candidate TFS targets for CRC treatment extracted from (C). This network is made of 276 nodes and 11531 edges.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14554

Oncotarget

(Figure 7D). Furthermore, we examined proteins involved
in angiogenesis like VEGF, and their receptors. Based
on the IHC staining assay, the levels of VEGF-A in TFS
treated tumor tissues was diminished compared to those
in the model group (Figure 7C). Similarly, mRNA and
protein levels of VEGFR1 and VEGFR2 were lower
in the TFS treated tumors in comparison to the control
as analyzed by RT-PCR, western blot and IHC assays
(Figure 7C, 7E, and 7F). We also observed downregulation
of both HIF1-α and MMP-9 mRNA and proteins in TFS
treated tumors (Figure 7C, 7E, and 7F). Overall, these
data indicated that TFS treatment effectively inhibited the
angiogenic response in CRC and confirmed the outcomes
of the functional enrichment analysis.

role of chronic inflammation in the cancer [49, 50]. As
shown in Figure 8A, the TFS treated xenograft tumors
showed lower expression of IL-1α, IL-1β, IL-2, IL-6, IL10 and TNF-α in comparison to the controls (Figure 8A).
In addition, we observed lower protein and mRNA
levels of pro-inflammatory mediators, COX-2 and iNOS
(Figure 8B–8D). We further analyzed the TLR4/NF-κB
signaling pathway and found that TFS treatment inhibited
mRNA and protein expression of TLR4 and p65 in
comparison to the controls in a dose-dependent manner
(Figure 8B–8D). These data further corroborated our
previous findings that TFS treatment significantly reduces
chronic inflammation associated with CRC progression.
We also investigated hyperactive Wnt/β-catenin and
MAPK signaling pathways that are upregulated in CRC.
As shown in Figure 9A, we observed a dose dependent
suppression of ERK and JNK activities by TFS. Moreover,
the protein expression and nuclear location of β-catenin
(Figure 9B, 9C), as well as the mRNA levels of its

TFS suppressed inflammation in CRC neoplastic tissue
The risk of CRC can be reduced by using antiinflammatory non-steroidals and cyclooxygenase-2
selective inhibitor celecoxib that demonstrate the central

Figure 4: Enrichment analysis of candidate targets for TFS against CRC. The enrichment analysis is represented by the pie

charts (right) as generated by ClueGo and the most vital term in the group is labeled (left). Functionally related groups partially overlap.
Representative enriched pathway (P < 0.05) interactions among main TFS targets. (A) Candidate TFS targets enriched in the representative
molecular function/biological process are shown. (B) Candidate TFS targets enriched in the representative signalling pathway are shown.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14555

Oncotarget

Figure 5: TFS induces cell cycle arrest of CRC cell lines. (A) HT-29 cells were treated with or without TFS (1.31, 2.63 and

5.25 mg/ml) for 24 h. The immunofluorescence staining of PCNA was performed as described in Materials and Methods (200×, blue, DAPI;
red, PCNA; green, F-actin). (B) HT-29 cells were exposed to 1.31, 2.63 and 5.25 mg/ml TFS or culture medium only for 24 h and then
stained with Propidium iodide for detecting the cell cycle by FACS (left). The quantitative data of the cell cycle analysis (G0/G1, S, and
G2/M phases) based on an average of triplicate experiments is shown as mean ± SD (right). *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01 (versus negative control).
(C) IHC analysis of Ki67, PCNA, cyclin D1, cyclin D2, CDK2, CDK4 and CDK6 expression in HT-29 transplanted tumor tissue in
different treatment groups is shown (200×, scale bar represents 500 μm; left). The quantitative analysis of IHC data is shown as mean ± SD
(right). **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001 (versus model) (D) The protein expression of Ki67, PCNA, cyclin D1, cyclin D2, CDK2, CDK4 and CDK6
as determined by western blotting is shown. Quantifcation of protein level was normalized to β-actin using densitometry. (E)The mRNA
levels of CCND1, CCND2, CDK2, CDK4 and CDK6 in HT-29 transplanted tumor tissue in different treatment groups as determined by
real-time qPCR is shown. GAPDH was used as the loading control. The data are presented as mean ± SD. ***P < 0.001 (versus model).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14556

Oncotarget

downstream targets, c-myc and survivin (Figure 9B, 9D),
decreased in the TFS-treated groups compared to the
control group.
Collectively, TFS had significant therapeutic effect
on multiple critical pathological pathways of CRC like
cell proliferation, apoptosis resistance, angiogenesis and
chronic inflammation by regulating key targets involved

in carcinogenesis (Figure 10) and thereby showcased its
efficacy in treating CRC.

DISCUSSION
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is a disease that originates
from the epithelial cells lining the rectum or the colon and

Figure 6: TFS induces apoptosis in CRC cells. (A) The HT-29 cells were exposed to 1.31, 2.63 and 5.25 mg/ml TFS or culture

medium for 48 h and stained with propidium iodide and AnnexinV-FITC for detecting the apoptosis by flow cytometry (left). The percentages
of apoptotic cells (the lower-right quadrant of the fluorescence-activated cell sorting histograms (percentage of early apoptotic cells) and
the upper-right quadrant (percentage of late apoptotic cells)) are shown (right). The data represent mean ± SD. **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001
(versus negative control). (B) The TUNEL and IHC analysis of cleaved-caspase 3 expression that denotes the level of apoptosis in HT-29
transplanted tumor tissue in different treatment groups (left). The protein expression level of apoptosis-related protein (Bcl-2, Bax, Bcl-xL
and XIAP) that were detected by IHC assay (200×, scale bar represents 500 μm) are shown (left). The quantitative analysis of TUNEL
and IHC data is shown as mean ± SD (right). *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001 (versus model). (C) The protein expression of cleavedcaspase 3, Bcl-2, Bax, Bcl-xL and XIAP were measured by western blotting. Quantifcation of protein level was normalized to β-actin using
densitometry. (D) The mRNA levels of these aforesaid genes in HT-29 transplanted tumor tissue in the different treatment groups were
determined by real-time qPCR. GAPDH was used as the loading control. The data are presented as mean ± SD. ***P < 0.001 (versus model).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14557

Oncotarget

Figure 7: TFS normalizes aberrant angiogenesis during CRC progression. (A) HUVEC cells were incubated with CM

(condition medium) from HT-29 for 24 h in the presence or absence of TFS. Then, the capillary-like tubeformation and tubular structures of
HUVEC were determined and photographed (40×). The vascular branch of each groups was quantified. The data are presented as mean ± SD.
***
P < 0.001 (versus CM). (B) Representative images (40×) of wound healing experiments with HUVEC monolayers in were exposed to CM
from HT-29 (treated with or without TFS) for 24 h. The data are presented as mean ± SD. ***P < 0.001 (versus CM). (C) IHC analysis of
CD31, VEGFA, VEGFR1, VEGFR2, HIF1-α and MMP-9 expression in HT-29 transplanted tumor tissue in different treatment groups (200×,
scale bar represents 500 μm) is shown (left). The quantitative analysis of IHC data are shown as mean ± SD (right). **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001
(versus model). (D) The level of intratumoral microvessel density (represented by CD31 immuno-reactivity) and hemoglobin concentration
in HT-29 transplanted tumor tissue. The data are presented as mean ± SD. **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001 (versus model). (E) The protein expression
of VEGFA, VEGFR1, VEGFR2, HIF1-α and MMP-9 were determined by western blotting. Quantifcation of protein level was normalized
to β-actin using densitometry. (F) The mRNA levels of these above genes in HT-29 transplanted tumor tissue were determined by real-time
qPCR. GAPDH was used as the loading control. The data are presented as mean ± SD. **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001 (versus model).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14558

Oncotarget

is frequently associated with genetic alterations in the K-ras
and β-catenin oncogenes as well as APC and Bax tumor
suppressors [28–32]. These mutated genes have a number
of downstream target genes that are involved in crucial
cellular processes like cell cycle, proliferation, metabolism,
inflammation. Eventually, this results in establishment of
CRC and its progression. Given the involvement of multiple
pathological processes in cancer, drugs that interfere with
tumorigenesis are prospective treatments for CRC and the
traditional Chinese medicines (TCM) are one of them.

In this study, we first confirmed that Tianfoshen
oral liquid (TFS), a clinical TCM formula that is used
for NSCLC treatment was effective in inhibiting CRC,
both in vitro and in vivo. However, given the complexity
of active components in TFS and the diversity of
potentialmodulated targets in human body, it was difficult
to characterize the scientific basis and underlying
pharmacological mechanisms of TFS for CRC by
conventional methods. Therefore, we utilized a newly
developed pharmacological approach to analyze the active

Figure 8: TFS inhibits chronic inflammation in CRC neoplastic tissue. (A) ELISA analysis of IL-1α, IL-1β, IL-2, IL-6, IL-10

and TNF-α expression in HT-29 transplanted tumor tissue in different treatment groups is shown. The data are presented as mean ± SD.
*
P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001 (versus model). (B) The expression of pro-inflammatory mediators (COX-2 and iNOS) and vital signalling
proteins (TLR4 and p65) were measured by western blotting. Quantifcation of protein level was normalized to β-actin using densitometry.
(C) The protein level of the above proteins as detected by IHC assay (200×, scale bar represents 500 μm; Left). The quantitative analysis of
the IHC data are shown as mean ± SD (right). ***P < 0.001 (versus model). (D) The mRNA levels of these aforementioned genes in HT-29
transplanted tumor tissue were analyzed by real-time qPCR. GAPDH was used as the loading control. The data are presented as mean ± SD.
*
P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001 (versus model).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14559

Oncotarget

compounds and therapeutic targets of TFS. This involved
construction and analysis of a target network based on the
prediction of candidate compounds and speculation of
multiple drug targets. Having identified candidate targets
based on the network, we further annotated by functionally
analysis using ClueGO. This analysis highlighted that TFS
inhibited CRC by regulating aberrant cell proliferation,
apoptosis resistance, induced angiogenesis-related
signaling and chronic inflammation that were induced by
CRC-related oncogenes and dysregulated suppressor genes.
Aberrant cancer cell proliferation is associated
with mutations in oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes
like β-catenin and APC and their downstream signaling
cascades including the MAPK pathway [33, 34]. Ursolic
acid, an active compound produced by Radix Actinidia
chinensis Planch and Fructus Hippophae, has been
shown to suppress the proliferation of CRC cells by
facilitating N-terminal phosphorylation and subsequent
proteasomal degradation of β-catenin [35]. Moreover, the
extracts of Radix Panacis Quinquefolii, Venenum Bufonis,
Radix Actinidia chinensis Planch, Fructus Hippophae
and Fructus Citri Sarcodactylis induce cell-cycle arrest

and inhibit cell proliferation [36, 37]. As shown in
Supplementary Table 8, TFS targets included cell cyclerelated proteins (CDK, c-Myc), oncogene (β-catenin) and
their downstream signaling pathway proteins (ERK, JNK,
MEK) which indicated that the anti-proliferative activity
of TFS was in good agreement with previous literature
investigations [35–37].
Altered apoptosis is central to CRC progression.
Previously, abnormal expression and activity of antiapoptosis-related proteins and genes including the
inhibitor of apoptosis protein family, the Bax family and
the BH3-only protein family has been associated with
poor prognosis and drug resistance in CRC [38, 39].
Composite compounds and extractive fractions of Radix
Panacis Quinquefolii and Venenum Bufonis can induce
the apoptosis of CRC cells in vitro and in vivo [40, 41].
Additionally, quercetin, as an active compound shared by
Radix Asparagi, Radix Actinidia chinensis Planch. and
Fructus Hippophae, can significantly suppress the activity
of viable CRC cells and then induce programmed deaths
[42]. Consistently, apoptosis-related proteins (Bax, Bcl-2,
Bcl-x, the caspase family, PPAR), related oncogene

Figure 9: TFS restrains hyperactive Wnt/β-catenin and MAPK signaling pathways in CRC. (A) The activity of MAPK

(ERK and JNK) signalling pathway was measured by western blotting. Quantifcation of protein level was normalized to β-actin using
densitometry. (B) The nuclear levels of β-catenin and the protein levels of its downstream targets (c-myc and survivin) as detected by
western blotting are shown (left). The quantitative analysis of WB data is shown as mean ± SD (right). ***P < 0.001 (versus model).
Quantifcation of protein level was normalized to β-actin or Lamin B using densitometry. (C) The IHC analysis showing expression of
β-catenin is shown (200×, scale bar represents 500 μm). (D) The mRNA levels of MYC and BIRC5 in HT-29 transplanted tumor tissue were
analyzed by real-time qPCR. GAPDH was used as the loading control. The data are presented as mean ± SD. ***P < 0.001 (versus model).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14560

Oncotarget

Figure 10: The schematic diagram of the research methodology and the proposed model of Tianfoshen oral liquid
acting on colorectal cancer are shown.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14561

Oncotarget

(β-catenin) and their downstream signaling pathway
(PI3K/Akt), as the candidate targets of 8 herbs in TFS
(Supplementary Table 8), may represent the apoptosispromoting effect of the formula and also be eligible
therapeutic targets for treating CRC.
Another crucial factor in CRC progression is
angiogenesis. Angiogenesis-related proteins and factors
are over-expressed and activated in CRC and are potential
therapeutic targets for CRC [43, 44]. Previously, the
active compounds of Radix Panacis Quinquefolii, Bulbus
Iphigenia Indica and Radix Actinidia chinensis Planch.
(example., ginsenoside Re, tubeimoside and quercetin)
have demonstrated anti-angiogenic effects [45–48]. Our
study documented and verified the inhibitory effect of TFS
on pro-angiogenic proteins (e.g. VEGFs, VEGFRs and
MMPs) involved in CRC, both in vivo and in vitro.
Further, the chronic inflammatory bowel disease
involves interactions between chemokines, cytokines,
immune cells, inflammatory cells and pro-inflammatory
mediators that promote the proliferation, growth and
invasion of tumor cells [49]. Thus, targeting chronic
inflammation is important in cancer therapy [50]. Many
candidate targets of TFS shown in Supplementary Table 8
like cytokines (IL-1, IL-6, IL-10 and TNF-α), chemokines
(CCL3, CCL5), chemokine receptor (CXCR4), proinflammatory mediators (COX-2, LOX-5 and iNOS) and
related signaling pathways (NF-κB, Nrf2) participated in
CRC progression. Especially, Radix Panacis Quinquefolii,
the predominant component of this formula, can inhibit
AOM/DSS-induced CRC by regulating the expressions
and activations of pro-inflammatory cytokines [51].
On this basis, we conduct a wide range of
experiment to further elucidated the mechanisms of
by which TFS exerted therapeutic effects on CRC.
Combining literature investigation, enrichment analysis
and experimental validation, we postulated that TFS may
treat CRC through activating/inhibiting the levels of its
targets which play pivotal roles in cancer proliferation,
apoptosis, angiogenesis and inflammation in a multicomponent, multi-target and multi-link manner.
Despite these important discoveries, this study has
limitations. Firstly, although TFS inhibited colorectal
cancer in a preclinical study with no side effects with
similar efficacy as the first-line drug of colorectal carcinoma
chemotherapy, oxaliplatin, the effects of TFS were unclear
and needed further extensive analysis in clinical trials.
Secondly, the effects of some composite compounds of
the herbs used in TFS may have been neglected due to
incomplete information. Thirdly, it is difficult to directly
teasing out specific targets and key active components
from a chemically complex and cognitively scarce TCM
formula. In the current experimentation, we mainly focused
on the pathological processes mitigated by TFS and the
related key targets for CRC. Therefore, future studies are
necessary to clarify the role of vital individual components
of TFS on the pathological process and the specific
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

targets. In future, there is a need to develop collaborative
therapeutic regimens for the clinic that targets the several
synergistic pathways that maintain the malignant state of
CRC and formula like TFS may be beneficial.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Chemicals
Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium, RPMI
1640 medium, Leibovitz’s L-15 medium, Fetal bovine
serum (FBS), trypsin-EDTA and penicillin/streptomycin
were purchased from Gibco (Thermo Fisher Scientific,
USA). Antibodies against PCNA, CDK2, CDK4, CDK6,
cyclin D1, cyclin D2, cyclin D3, Ki67, CD31, VEGFR1,
VEGFR2, EGFR, MMP3, MMP9, HIF-1-alpha, COX2,
LOX, iNOS, JNK, ERK1/2, JNK, phospho-ERK (T202/
T204), phospho-JNK (T183/Y185), beta-catenin, Bcl-2,
Bax, Bad, Bcl-xL and XIAP were provided by CST (Cell
Signaling Technology). Unless otherwise noted, all other
materials were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich.

Chemical composition of Tianfoshen oral liquid
The chemical composition of all the eight herbs
that constitute Tianfoshen oral liquid (TFS) was obtained
from the Chinese Academy of Sciences Chemistry
Database (http://www.organchem.csdb.cn/, last updated:
November 18, 2015) and the Traditional Chinese Medicine
System Pharmacology Database (http://tcmspnw.com/,
version: 2.0) [14]. The information regarding the 542
chemicals is reported in Supplementary Table 9 and it
includes 153 from Radix Panacis Quinquefolii, 24 from
Venenum Bufonis, 32 from Radix Asparagi , 43 from
Bulbus Iphigenia Indica, 7 from Radix Acanthopanax
obouatus, 26 from Radix Actinidia chinensis Planch.,
226 from Fructus Hippophae and 81 from Fructus Citri
Sarcodactylis , respectively.

Candidate compounds screening parameters
We estimated OB prescreening that indicates
the degree of an oral dose of drug that distributes to
the bloodstream [56] and drug-likeness that evaluates
the structural similarity between compounds and the
clinical drugs in the Drugbank database [57] according to
calculations set-up by Wang and others [58]. We defined OB
of 30% and drug-likeness index of 0.18 to select candidate
compounds [10]. Some chemical compounds like bufalin,
cinobufotalin and resibufogenin did not obtain an accurate
DL index and the set minimum OB as 35%. Others such as
ginsenoside Rb2, gamabufogenin, 19-oxobufalin, gracillin,
cucurbitacin b and sesamin, were initially omitted based
on the screening rules [59–63]. However, we manually
retrieved these candidate compounds for further analysis as
their anti-cancer properties have been previously reported.
14562

Oncotarget

Identifying CRC related targets in TFS

insights into their involvement in three different categories
namely, biological processes (BP), molecular function
(MF) and cell component (CC) [25]. We considered
a P-value (have already been corrected through using
Benjamini-Hochberg method) cut-off ≤ 0.05 and applied
the hypergeometric test to identify the enriched GO
terms. An overview of the gene ontology analysis with
up to 15 significantly enriched terms in each of these
three categories, respectively are shown in the chart
(Supplementary Figure 2). The orders of terms in the same
category were based on the P-values. The percentage of
involved genes in a particular term is shown on the x-axis.
Then, we performed enrichment analysis of the
276 candidate targets of TFS using ClueGO, a Cytoscape
plugin that visualizes non-redundant biological terms for
large clusters of genes in a functionally grouped network
[55].The resultant candidates were divided into two
categories, molecular functions/biological processes and
the signaling pathway. The ClueGO network was created
with kappa statistics and reflected the relationship between
the terms based on the similarity of their associated genes.

For the current study, we chose the systematic
drug targeting approach developed by Wang and others
to identify potential targets for medicinal composition of
TFS [64]. Known CRC-related targets were obtained from
five existing resources: (1) The DrugBank database (http://
www.drugbank.ca/, version: 4.3): We used interactions
between FDA-approved drugs for CRC treatment and
human genes/proteins-derived targets and obtained 17
known CRC-related targets [65]; (2) The OMIM database
(Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man; http://www.omim.
org/): We screened with a keyword ‘‘colorectal cancer’’
and found 16 known CRC-related targets [66]; (3) Genetic
Association Database (GAD; http://geneticassociationdb.
nih.gov/):We searched with the keyword ‘‘colorectal
cancer’’ and obtained 370 known targets that change
during CRC [67]; (4) The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes
and Genomes (KEGG) Pathway Database (http: //www.
genome.jp/kegg/): We obtained 59 known CRC-related
targets in the CRC pathway (KEGG ID: map 05210) [68];
and (5) The TTD database (http://database.idrb.cqu.edu.cn/
TTD/): We searched with the keyword “colorectal cancer”
and obtained 38 known targets related with CRC [69].
Detailed information of these known therapeutic targets
is described in Supplementary Table 6. After redundancy
was deleted, 446 known CRC-related targets were finally
collected. Further, PPI data was obtained using the
Cytoscape plugin Bisogenet and analyzing six existing
PPI databases including InAct, Human Protein Reference
Database, Molecular interaction Database, Database of
Interacting Proteins, Biological General Repository for
Interaction Datasets and Biomolecular Interaction Network
Database as described in Supplementary Table 10 [70].

Cell culture and proliferation assays
Human CRC cells SW480, SW620, HT-29, HCT-116,
DLD-1 and LS174T were purchased from Kunming
Institute of Zoology, China. HCT-116 and DLD-1 cells (in
RPMI 1640 medium), HT-29, SW480 and LS174T cells
(in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium), and SW620 cells
(in Leibovitz’s L-15 medium) were grown at 37°C in 5%
CO2. All media were supplemented with 10% FBS and 1%
penicillin/streptomycin. To determine cell proliferation,
the cells (1 × 104 cells/100 μL per well) were seeded into a
96-well flat-bottom plate. At 60% confluence, the cell plate
was removed from the incubator, and the culture medium
was removed by aspiration. Then, 100μL culture medium
containing 10% FBS and 1% penicillin/streptomycin was
added with or without 0.656~10.5 mg/ml TFS and the
cell plate was placed into an IncuCyte ZOOM® live cell
imaging system set at 37°C for 30 min and scanned [72].
The detection parameters were set (objective: 4×; channel
selection: phase contrast; scan type: standard; scan
interval: 1 hr) and the plate was imaged accordingly until
the end of the experiment at 48 h.

Network construction and its features
We first constructed an interaction network for
the known CRC-related targets and predicted putative
drug targets of TFS based on the data obtained from the
Cytoscape plugin Bisogenet. The network was thereafter
visualized with Cytoscape (Version 3.2.1) [71]. The
topological property of each node in the interaction network
was assessed by calculating six measures with a Cytoscape
plugin CytoNCA, namely, ‘Degree centrality (DC)’,
‘Betweenness centrality (BC)’, ‘Closeness centrality (CC)’,
‘Eigenvector centrality (EC)’, ‘Network centrality (NC)’,
and ‘Local average connec-tivity (LAC)’. The definitions
and computational formulas of these parameters have been
previously defined and represent the topological importance
of a node in the network [54]. Larger the quantitative value,
more important is the node in the network.

The xenograft tumor transplant model
The animal studies were conducted according to the
Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals of the
National Institutes of Health according to the procedures
approved by the Research Ethical Committee of Nanjing
University of Chinese Medicine. The CRC cell lines, HT-29
and SW480 were cultured under normal conditions.
A total of 80 (each xenograft model needed 40 mice)
male BALB/c nude mice aged four- to five-week old
and weighing 18–22 g were purchased from Vital River
Laboratory Animal Technology Co., Ltd. (Beijing,

Gene ontology and pathway enrichment analysis
Further, we performed gene ontology analysis using
Omicsbean on the 468 putative targets of TFS to gain
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14563

Oncotarget

Quantitative RT-PCR

China). The animals were maintained in a pathogenfree facility (23°C ± 2°C, 55% ± 5% humidity, 12 h
light/12 h dark cycle) and injected subcutaneously with
HT-29 and SW480 cells (2 × 106 per mouse) into the
abdomen and allowed 2 weeks to establish the tumors.
Later, the xenografted mice were randomly divided into
four groups of 10 mice each. The mice in the low-dose
group (clinical dose) and high-dose group (2× clinical
dose) were orally administered with 2.86 g/kg and 5.72
g/kg TFS once a day, respectively. Mice in the positive
control group were intraperitoneally injected with 5 mg/kg
oxaliplatin (clinical dose, once a week) and those in the
model group were administered with the same volume of
normal saline. The tumor size was measured by the vernier
caliper twice a week and the tumor volume was calculated
as 0.5 × L×W×H, where L is the tumor dimension at the
longest point, W is the tumor dimension at the widest
point, and H is the tumor dimension at the highest point.
Relative tumor volumes were calculated as Vt/V0 (V0 is
the tumor volume when the treatment was initiated). Mice
were weighed and normalized to their initial weights. Mice
in each cohort were considered to be dead either when
tumor volume increased to 1000 mm3 or when the mice
died during treatment. The tumor weight was measured
using an analytical balance after the mice were sacrificed
through CO2 inhalation. All the tumors were bisected, with
one part fixed in 10% formalin and paraffin-embedded for
immunohistochemical and TUNEL staining and the other
part snap-frozen and stored in liquid nitrogen for Western
blot, ELISA and quantitative PCR analysis.

The mRNA expression levels of genes were tested
by SYBR green-based real-time quantitative PCR. Briefly,
total cellular RNA from the lysates of transplanted tumors
was extracted with chloroform solution after addition
of Trizol reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA),
precipitated with isopropanol solution and the RNA
fraction dissolved in DEPC-H2O. An aliquot of 5 μg RNA
was reverse-transcribed into cDNA with a HiScript II
QRT SuperMix for qPCR (+gDNA wiper) kit (Vazyme,
China). Quantitative RT-PCR was performed using a
SYBR Green Master kit (Bio-Rad, USA) according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. The primer pairs are as shown
in the Table 1. Gene expression levels of the samples were
calculated relative to the control using the comparative CT
method as follows: ∆∆CT = ∆CT sample – ∆CT control,
fold change = 2−∆∆CT. GAPDH expression was used as the
internal control.

ELISA
The levels of inflammation -related factors: IL-1α,
IL-1β, IL-2, IL-6, IL-10 and TNF-α in the whole protein
extracts from the tumor samples were detected with
a commercial ELISA kit (R&D Systems, USA). The
absorbances of all samples were measured by a microplate
reader at 490 nm.

IHC Staining
Serial sections (4 μm) were cut from formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded CRC xenograft tissue samples for
IHC staining. Further, after retrieving the antigen using
citrate buffer (0.01 ml, pH 6.0), the sections were washed
three times with PBS and incubated in 10% normal goat
serum to block non-specific background staining. The
sections were then incubated overnight with rabbit antihuman antibodies (Abcam, USA) at 4°C. Further, after
washing thrice with PBS, the sections were incubated with
horseradish peroxidase-labeled anti-rabbit IgG antibody
(Bioworld, USA) for 30 min at room temperature, washed
with PBS and developed using diaminobenzidine. Three
middle-power microscopic fields (×200) were randomly
selected for each section to determine the positive staining
intensities by IPP software (Image-Pro Plus 6.0, Media,
Cybernetics) and the integrated optical density (IOD) was
calculated. The expression levels of the proteins were
presented as the average IOD of the 3 fields.

Western blotting
Whole protein extracts were obtained by
homogenizing frozen tumor samples in whole lysis buffer
(10 mmol/L Tris-HCl, 250 mmol/L sodium chloride,
30 mmol/L sodium pyrophosphate, 50 mmol/L sodium
fluoride, 0.5% Triton X-100, 10% glycerol, 1× proteinase
inhibitor mixture, 1 mmol/L phenylmethylsulfonyl
fluoride, 2 mmol/L iodoacetic acid, and 5 mmol/L ZnCl2).
Protein concentrations were measured using a Thermo
protein assay according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
For western blotting, 50 µg total protein from each sample
was separated by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis and transferred onto polyvinylidene
fluoride membranes using a wet transfer system (Bio-Rad,
USA). The membranes were then blocked with 5% nonfat
milk in TBST buffer [2.42 g/L Tris-HCl, 8 g/L NaCl, and
1 ml/L Tween 20 (pH 7.6)], incubated overnight at 4°C
with primary antibodies suspended in TBST buffer, and
then incubated with secondary antibody conjugated with
horseradish peroxidase. Finally, the protein bands were
detected by ChemiDoc™ XRS+ system (Bio-Rad, USA).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Cell cycle assay
HT-29 cells were seeded in 6-well plates at
concentrations of 2 × 105 per well for 24 h and then treated
with 1.31, 2.63 or 5.25 mg/ml TFS for another 24 h. The

14564

Oncotarget

Table 1: PCR was performed using the follow primers
Gene name

PCR primers
5′-TGTGGGCATCAATGGATTTGG-3′
5′-ACACCATGTATTCCGGGTCAAT-3′
5′-CCAGGAGTTACTTCTATGCCTGA-3′
5′-TTCATCCAGGG AGGTACAAC-3′
5′-ATGGCTACCTCTCGATATGAGC-3′
5′-CATTGGGGACTCTCACACTCT-3′
5′-GCTGCGAAGTGGAAACCATC-3′
5′-CCTCCTTCTGCACACATTTGAA-3′
5′-CTGTCTCTGATCCGCAAGCAT-3′
5′-GGTGGGTACATGGCAAACTTAAA-3′
5′-TTCTTTGAGTTCGGTGGGGTC-3′
5′-TGCATATTTGTTTGGGGCAGG-3′
5′-TCCACCAAGAAGCTGAGCGAG-3′
5′-GTCCAGCCCATGATGGTTCT-3′
5′-GAGCTGGTGGTTGACTTTCTC-3′
5′-TCCATCTCCGATTCAGTCCCT-3′
5′-AATAGTGCCACGCAGTCTACA-3′
5′-CAGATGGCCTGTCTAAGGCAA-3′
5′-AGGGCAGAATCATCACGAAGT-3′

GAPDH
CDK2
CDK4
CCND1
CCND2
BCL2
BAX
BCL2L1
XIAP
VEGFA

5′-AGGGTCTCGATTGGATGGCA-3′
5′-TCTTCATTCACACCGAGTAGTGC-3′
5′-TGAGGTTAGAGCCATCTGGAAA-3′
5′-TTTGCCTGAAATGGTGAGTAAGG-3′
5′-TGGTTTGCTTGAGCTGTGTTC-3′
5′-GTGATCGGAAATGACACTGGAG-3′

CDK6
FLT1
KDR

5′-CATGTTGGTCACTAACAGAAGCA-3′
5′-AGACCTGGGCAGATTCCAAAC-3′

MMP9

5′-CGGCAAGTCTTCCGAGTAGT-3′
5′-ATCCATGTGACCATGAGGAAATG-3′

HIF1A

5′-TCGGCTAGTTAGGGTACACTTC-3′
5′-TA AGTGCGATTGTACCCGGAC-3′
5′-TTTGTAGCCATAGTCAGCATTGT-3′
5′-TTCAGTATCACAACCTCAGCAAG-3′

PTGS2
NOS2

5′-TGGACCTGCAAGTTAAAATCCC-3′
5′-GTCAAGAGGCGAACAC ACAAC-3′

MYC

5′-TTGGACGGACAGGATGTATGC-3′
5′-AGGACCACCGCATCTCTACAT-3′

BIRC5

5′-AAGTCTGGCTCGTTCTCAGTG-3′
5′-AGACCTGTCCCTGAACCCTAT -3′

TLR4

5′-CGATGGACTTCTA AACCAGCCA -3′
5′-AACAGAGAGGATTTCGTTTCCG -3′

RELA

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5′-TTTGACCTGAGGGTAAGACTTCT -3′

14565

Oncotarget

negative control was culture medium only. The cells were
then collected, centrifuged, and fixed overnight with 70%
ethanol at 4°C. Finally, the cells were stained by propidium
iodide (Keygen Biotech, China) solution (1 mg/ml
PI in100 μl per well) at room temperature for 30 min in
darkness. Cell cycle analysis was performed by FACS
using appropriate controls (BD Accuri C6, USA).

Postdoctoral funding in Jiangsu Province (1401138C),
Jiangsu College graduate research and innovation projects
(KYZZ15_0271), 2013’ Program for Excellent Scientific
and Technological Innovation Team of Jiangsu Higher
Education, A Project Funded by the Flagship Major
Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions
(PPZY2015A070) and a project of the Priority Academic
Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education
Institutions (PAPD).

Apoptosis assays

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

Apoptosis was detected by double staining with
annexinV and PI. HT-29 cells were placed in 6-well
culture plates at concentrations of 2 × 105 per well. After
24 h of incubation, the cells were exposed to 1.31, 2.63
or 5.25 mg/ml TFS and cultured for 24 h. The wells
treated with culture medium without TFS were used as
the negative control. The cells were then harvested by
centrifugation and their cell concentration was adjusted to
109/L. Subsequently, the cells were stained with annexinVFITC/PI apoptosis detection kit (KeyGEN BioTECH,
China) and analyzed by FACS (BD Accuri C6, USA)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
TUNEL assay was performed to determine apoptosis
in the tissue samples. Tissue sections (4 μm) were tested
using an in situ cell death detection kit (Roche, Mannheim,
Germany) according to the procedures described by
the manufacturer. Under a high-power microscope,
3  randomly chosen fields (×200) without any necrotic
areas were observed and the average percentage of positive
cells in the 3 fields for each section was determined.

The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

Authorsʼ contributions
Yin Lu is the submission’s guarantor. The
experiments were conceived and designed by Siliang
Wang and Yin Lu. Siliang Wang analyzed the data.
Hengbin Wang was responsible for the quality control
and supply of TFS. Siliang Wang and Yin Lu wrote the
manuscript. All the authors have read and approved the
final manuscript.

REFERENCES
1.	 Favoriti P, Carbone G, Greco M, Pirozzi F, Pirozzi RE,
Corcione F. Worldwide burden of colorectal cancer: a
review. Updates Surg. 2016.
2.	 Aran V, Victorino AP, Thuler LC, Ferreira CG. Colorectal
Cancer: Epidemiology, Disease Mechanisms and
Interventions to Reduce Onset and Mortality. Clin
Colorectal Cancer. 2016.

Tube formation assay
Conditional medium was collected from HT-29
cells pretreated with/without TFS for 24 h. Matrigel
(Becton Dickinson, Bedford, MA, Cat# 356231 ) was
thawed, mixed with an equal volume of complete
medium containing 2 × 104 of HUVEC and treated with
conditioned media. Tube formation was quantified by
counting the number of branch points that formed from
complete branching per field of view. Five fields of view
were determined for each treatment in replicate.

3.	 Parajuli R, Bjerkaas E, Tverdal A, Selmer R, Le
Marchand L, Weiderpass E, Gram IT. The increased risk
of colon cancer due to cigarette smoking may be greater
in women than men. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev.
2013; 22:862–871.
4.	

Statistical analysis
All data were expressed as percentage and mean
with standard deviations ( ± SD). Statistical analysis was
performed using Student’s t-test and one-way ANOVA
by GraphPad Prism 5 for Windows. A p < 0.05 was
considered as statistically significant.

Flores MB, Rocha GZ, Damas-Souza DM, Osorio-Costa F,
Dias MM, Ropelle ER, Camargo JA, de Carvalho RB,
Carvalho HF, Saad MJ, Carvalheira JB. Obesityinduced increase in tumor necrosis factor-alpha leads to
development of colon cancer in mice. Gastroenterology.
2012; 143:741–753 e741–744.

5.	 Neri E, Faggioni L, Cini L, Bartolozzi C. Colonic polyps:
inheritance, susceptibility, risk evaluation, and diagnostic
management. Cancer Manag Res. 2010; 3:17–24.
6.	

Bae SI, Kim YS. Colon cancer screening and surveillance in
inflammatory bowel disease. Clin Endosc. 2014; 47:509–515.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING

7.	 Hsiao WL, Liu L. The role of traditional Chinese herbal
medicines in cancer therapy--from TCM theory to
mechanistic insights. Planta Med. 2010; 76:1118–1131.

This project was supported by National Natural
Science Foundation of China (81403260, 81573859),
China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2014M551639),

8.	 Cheng JH, Liu WS, Li ZM, Wang ZG. A clinical study on
global TCM therapy in treating senile advanced non-small
cell lung cancer. Chin J Integr Med. 2007; 13:269–274.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14566

Oncotarget

  9.	 Zhang Y, Bai M, Zhang B, Liu C, Guo Q, Sun Y, Wang D,
Wang C, Jiang Y, Lin N, Li S. Uncovering pharmacological
mechanisms of Wu-tou decoction acting on rheumatoid
arthritis through systems approaches: drug-target prediction,
network analysis and experimental validation. Sci Rep.
2015; 5:9463.

21.	 Weng WH, Leung WH, Pang YJ, Hsu HH. Lauric acid
can improve the sensitization of Cetuximab in KRAS/
BRAF mutated colorectal cancer cells by retrievable
microRNA-378 expres-sion. Oncol Rep. 2016; 35:107–116.
22.	 Li S, Zhang B. Traditional Chinese medicine network
pharmacology: theory, methodology and application. Chin
J Nat Med. 2013; 11:110–120.
23.	 Xie G, Wang CZ, Yu C, Qiu Y, Wen XD, Zhang CF,
Yuan CS, Jia W. Metabonomic Pro-filing Reveals Cancer
Chemopreventive Effects of American Ginseng on Colon
Carcinogenesis in Apc(Min/+) Mice. J Proteome Res. 2015;
14:3336–3347.
24.	 Dougherty U, Mustafi R, Wang Y, Musch MW, Wang CZ,
Konda VJ, Kulkarni A, Hart J, Dawson G, Kim KE,
Yuan CS, Chang EB, Bissonnette M. American ginseng
suppresses Western diet-promoted tumorigenesis in model
of inflammation-associated colon cancer: role of EGFR.
BMC Complement Altern Med. 2011; 11:111.
25.	 Liu H, Zheng YF, Li CY, Zheng YY, Wang DQ, Wu Z,
Huang L, Wang YG, Li PB, Peng W, Su WW. Discovery of
Anti-inflammatory Ingredients in Chinese Herbal Formula
Kouyanqing Granule based on Relevance Analysis between
Chemical Characters and Biological Effects. Sci Rep. 2015;
5:18080.
26.	 Bruning A. Inhibition of mTOR signaling by quercetin in
cancer treatment and prevention. Anticancer Agents Med
Chem. 2013; 13:1025–1031.
27.	 Niu G, Yin S, Xie S, Li Y, Nie D, Ma L, Wang X, Wu Y.
Quercetin induces apoptosis by activating caspase-3 and
regulating Bcl-2 and cyclooxygenase-2 pathways in human
HL-60 cells. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2011;
43:30–37.
28.	 Kaiser JC, Meckbach R, Jacob P. Genomic instability and
radiation risk in molecular pathways to colon cancer. PLoS
One. 2014; 9:e111024.
29.	 Grady WM. Genomic instability and colon cancer. Cancer
Metastasis Rev. 2004; 23:11–27.
30.	 Pino MS, Chung DC. The chromosomal instability pathway
in colon cancer. Gastroenter-ology. 2010; 138:2059–2072.
31.	Sinicrope FA. DNA mismatch repair and adjuvant
chemotherapy in sporadic colon cancer. Nat Rev Clin
Oncol. 2010; 7:174–177.
32.	 Tsai CF, Ou BR, Liang YC, Yeh JY. Growth inhibition and
antioxidative status induced by selenium-enriched broccoli
extract and selenocompounds in DNA mismatch repairdeficient human colon cancer cells. Food Chem. 2013;
139:267–273.
33.	 Yang Y, Yang JJ, Tao H, Jin WS. New perspectives on betacatenin control of cell fate and proliferation in colon cancer.
Food Chem Toxicol. 2014; 74:14–19.
34.	 Ren CM, Li Y, Chen QZ, Zeng YH, Shao Y, Wu QX,
Yuan SX, Yang JQ, Yu Y, Wu K, He BC, Sun WJ. Oridonin
inhibits the proliferation of human colon cancer cells by
upregulating BMP7 to activate p38 MAPK. Oncol Rep.
2016; 35:2691–2698.

10.	 Li J, Zhao P, Li Y, Tian Y, Wang Y. Systems pharmacologybased dissection of mechanisms of Chinese medicinal
formula Bufei Yishen as an effective treatment for chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Sci Rep. 2015; 5:15290.
11.	 Liu J, Mu J, Zheng C, Chen X, Guo Z, Huang C, Fu Y,
Tian G, Shang H, Wang Y. Sys-tems-Pharmacology
Dissection of Traditional Chinese Medicine Compound
Saffron Formula Re-veals Multi-scale Treatment Strategy
for Cardiovascular Diseases. Sci Rep. 2016; 6:19809.
12.	 Luo Y, Wang Q, Zhang Y. A systems pharmacology
approach to decipher the mechanism of danggui-shaoyaosan decoction for the treatment of neurodegenerative
diseases. J Ethnopharmacol. 2016; 178:66–81.
13.	 Le DH, Le L. Systems pharmacology: A unified framework
for prediction of drug-target interactions. Curr Pharm
Des. 2016.
14.	 Li Y, Zhang J, Zhang L, Chen X, Pan Y, Chen SS, Zhang S,
Wang Z, Xiao W, Yang L, Wang Y. Systems pharmacology
to decipher the combinational anti-migraine effects of
Tianshu formula. J Ethnopharmacol. 2015; 174:45–56.
15.	 Loizou S, Lekakis I, Chrousos GP, Moutsatsou P. Betasitosterol exhibits an-ti-inflammatory activity in human aortic
endothelial cells. Mol Nutr Food Res. 2010; 54:551–558.
16.	 Nirmal SA, Pal SC, Mandal SC, Patil AN. Analgesic and
anti-inflammatory activity of beta-sitosterol isolated from
Nyctanthes arbortristis leaves. Inflammopharmacology.
2012; 20:219–224.
17.	 Baskar AA, Al Numair KS, Gabriel Paulraj M, Alsaif MA,
Muamar MA, Ignacimuthu S. beta-sitosterol prevents
lipid peroxidation and improves antioxidant status and
histoarchitecture in rats with 1,2-dimethylhydrazineinduced colon cancer. J Med Food. 2012; 15:335–343.
18.	 Prasad S, Yadav VR, Sung B, Gupta SC, Tyagi AK, Aggarwal
BB. Ursolic acid inhibits the growth of human pancreatic
cancer and enhances the antitumor potential of gemcitabine
in an orthotopic mouse model through suppression of
the inflammatory microenvironment. Oncotarget. 2016;
7:13182–96. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7537.
19.	 Kim SH, Ryu HG, Lee J, Shin J, Harikishore A, Jung HY,
Kim YS, Lyu HN, Oh E, Baek NI, Choi KY, Yoon HS,
Kim KT. Ursolic acid exerts anti-cancer activity by
suppressing vaccin-ia-related kinase 1-mediated damage
repair in lung cancer cells. Sci Rep. 2015; 5:14570.
20.	 Srivastava S, Somasagara RR, Hegde M, Nishana M, Tadi SK,
Srivastava M, Choudhary B, Raghavan SC. Quercetin, a
Natural Flavonoid Interacts with DNA, Arrests Cell Cycle
and Causes Tumor Regression by Activating Mitochondrial
Pathway of Apoptosis. Sci Rep. 2016; 6:24049.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14567

Oncotarget

35.	 Kim JH, Kim YH, Song GY, Kim DE, Jeong YJ, Liu KH,
Chung YH, Oh S. Ursolic acid and its natural derivative
corosolic acid suppress the proliferation of APC-mutated
colon cancer cells through promotion of beta-catenin
degradation. Food Chem Toxicol. 2014; 67:87–95.
36.	 He BC, Gao JL, Luo X, Luo J, Shen J, Wang L, Zhou Q,
Wang YT, Luu HH, Haydon RC, Wang CZ, Du W, Yuan CS,
et al. Ginsenoside Rg3 inhibits colorectal tumor growth
through the down-regulation of Wnt/ss-catenin signaling.
Int J Oncol. 2011; 38:437–445.
37.	 McDougall GJ, Ross HA, Ikeji M, Stewart D. Berry extracts
exert different antiproliferative effects against cervical and
colon cancer cells grown in vitro. J Agric Food Chem.
2008; 56:3016–3023.
38.	 Hector S, Rehm M, Schmid J, Kehoe J, McCawley N,
Dicker P, Murray F, McNamara D, Kay EW,
Concannon CG, Huber HJ, Prehn JH. Clinical application
of a systems model of apoptosis execution for the prediction
of colorectal cancer therapy responses and personalisation
of therapy. Gut. 2012; 61:725–733.
39.	 Watson AJ. Apoptosis and colorectal cancer. Gut. 2004;
53:1701–1709.
40.	 Wang J, Chen C, Wang S, Zhang Y, Yin P, Gao Z, Xu J,
Feng D, Zuo Q, Zhao R, Chen T. Bufalin Inhibits HCT116
Colon Cancer Cells and Its Orthotopic Xenograft Tumor in
Mice Model through Genes Related to Apoptotic and PTEN/
AKT Pathways. Gastroenterol Res Pract. 2015; 2015:457193.
41.	 Gum SI, Rahman MK, Won JS, Cho MK. A Distinctive
Pattern of Beauveria bassi-ana-biotransformed Ginsenoside
Products Triggers Mitochondria/FasL-mediated Apoptosis
in Colon Cancer Cells. Phytother Res. 2016; 30:136–143.
42.	 Psahoulia FH, Drosopoulos KG, Doubravska L, Andera L,
Pintzas A. Quercetin enhances TRAIL-mediated apoptosis
in colon cancer cells by inducing the accumulation of death
receptors in lipid rafts. Mol Cancer Ther. 2007; 6:2591–2599.
43.	 Geng L, Chaudhuri A, Talmon G, Wisecarver JL, Wang J.
TGF-Beta suppresses VEG-FA-mediated angiogenesis in
colon cancer metastasis. PLoS One. 2013; 8:e59918.
44.	 Wray CJ, Rilo HL, Ahmad SA. Colon cancer angiogenesis
and antiangiogenic therapy. Expert Opin Investig Drugs.
2004; 13:631–641.
45.	 Bin Sayeed MS, Ameen SS. Beta-Sitosterol: A Promising
but Orphan Nutraceutical to Fight Against Cancer. Nutr
Cancer. 2015; 67:1214–1220.
46.	 Peng L, Sun S, Xie LH, Wicks SM, Xie JT. Ginsenoside
Re: pharmacological effects on cardiovascular system.
Cardiovasc Ther. 2012; 30:e183–188.
47.	 Gu Y, Korbel C, Scheuer C, Nenicu A, Menger MD,
Laschke MW. Tubeimoside-1 sup-presses tumor
angiogenesis by stimulation of proteasomal VEGFR2 and
Tie2 degradation in a non-small cell lung cancer xenograft
model. Oncotarget. 2016; 7:5258–5272. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.6676.

calcineurin in the xenograft model of human breast cancer.
Eur J Pharmacol. 2016.
49.	 Wang K, Karin M. Tumor-Elicited Inflammation and
Colorectal Cancer. Adv Cancer Res. 2015; 128:173–196.
50.	 Maeda K, Shibutani M, Otani H, Nagahara H, Ikeya T,
Iseki Y, Tanaka H, Muguruma K, Hirakawa K. Inflammationbased factors and prognosis in patients with colorectal
cancer. World J Gastrointest Oncol. 2015; 7:111–117.
51.	 Yu C, Wen XD, Zhang Z, Zhang CF, Wu XH, Martin A, Du W,
He TC, Wang CZ, Yuan CS. American ginseng attenuates
azoxymethane/dextran sodium sulfate-induced colon
carcinogenesis in mice. J Ginseng Res. 2015; 39:14–21.
52.	 Zhang Y, Li Z, Yang M, Wang D, Yu L, Guo C, Guo X,
Lin  N. Identification of GRB2 and GAB1 coexpression
as an unfavorable prognostic factor for hepatocellular
carcinoma by a combination of expression profile and
network analysis. PLoS One. 2013; 8:e85170.
53.	 Chuang HY, Lee E, Liu YT, Lee D, Ideker T. Networkbased classification of breast cancer metastasis. Mol Syst
Biol. 2007; 3:140.
54.	 Tang Y, Li M, Wang J, Pan Y, Wu FX. CytoNCA: a
cytoscape plugin for centrality analysis and evaluation of
protein interaction networks. Biosystems. 2015; 127:67–72.
55.	 Bindea G, Mlecnik B, Hackl H, Charoentong P, Tosolini M,
Kirilovsky A, Fridman WH, Pages F, Trajanoski Z, Galon J.
ClueGO: a Cytoscape plug-in to decipher functionally
grouped gene ontology and pathway annotation networks.
Bioinformatics. 2009; 25:1091–1093.
56.	 Xu X, Zhang W, Huang C, Li Y, Yu H, Wang Y, Duan J, Ling Y.
A novel chemometric method for the prediction of human
oral bioavailability. Int J Mol Sci. 2012; 13:6964–6982.
57.	 Ma C, Wang L, Xie XQ. GPU accelerated chemical
similarity calculation for compound library comparison. J
Chem Inf Model. 2011; 51:1521–1527.
58.	 Liu H, Wang J, Zhou W, Wang Y, Yang L. Systems
approaches and polypharmacology for drug discovery
from herbal medicines: an example using licorice. J
Ethnopharmacol. 2013; 146:773–793.
59.	Xu P, Cai F, Liu X, Guo L. Sesamin inhibits
lipopolysaccharide-induced proliferation and invasion
through the p38-MAPK and NF-kappaB signaling pathways
in prostate cancer cells. Oncol Rep. 2015; 33:3117–3123.
60.	 Zhang M, Bian ZG, Zhang Y, Wang JH, Kan L, Wang X,
Niu HY, He P. Cucurbitacin B inhibits proliferation and
induces apoptosis via STAT3 pathway inhibition in A549
lung cancer cells. Mol Med Rep. 2014; 10:2905–2911.
61.	 Fujimoto J, Sakaguchi H, Aoki I, Toyoki H, Khatun S, Tamaya T.
Inhibitory effect of ginsenoside-Rb2 on invasiveness of
uterine endometrial cancer cells to the basement membrane.
Eur J Gynaecol Oncol. 2001; 22:339–341.
62.	 Nogawa T, Kamano Y, Yamashita A, Pettit GR. Isolation
and structure of five new cancer cell growth inhibitory
bufadienolides from the Chinese traditional drug Ch'an Su.
J Nat Prod. 2001; 64:1148–1152.

48.	 Zhao X, Wang Q, Yang S, Chen C, Li X, Liu J, Zhou Z,
Cai D. Quercetin inhibits angio-genesis by targeting
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14568

Oncotarget

63.	 Hu K, Yao X. The cytotoxicity of methyl protoneogracillin
(NSC-698793) and gracillin (NSC-698787), two steroidal
saponins from the rhizomes of Dioscorea collettii var.
hypoglauca, against human cancer cells in vitro. Phytother
Res. 2003; 17:620–626.

70.	Martin A, Ochagavia ME, Rabasa LC, Miranda J,
Fernandez-de-Cossio J, Bringas R. BisoGenet: a new tool
for gene network building, visualization and analysis. BMC
Bioinformatics. 2010; 11:91.
71.	 Shannon P, Markiel A, Ozier O, Baliga NS, Wang JT,
Ramage D, Amin N, Schwikowski B, Ideker T. Cytoscape: a
software environment for integrated models of biomolecular
interaction networks. Genome Res. 2003; 13:2498–2504.

64.	 Yu H, Chen J, Xu X, Li Y, Zhao H, Fang Y, Li X, Zhou W,
Wang W, Wang Y. A systematic prediction of multiple
drug-target interactions from chemical, genomic, and
pharmacological data. PLoS One. 2012; 7:e37608.

72.	 Johnston ST, Shah ET, Chopin LK, Sean McElwain DL,
Simpson MJ. Estimating cell diffusivity and cell
proliferation rate by interpreting IncuCyte ZOOM assay
data using the Fish-er-Kolmogorov model. BMC Syst Biol.
2015; 9:38.

65.	 Wishart DS, Knox C, Guo AC, Cheng D, Shrivastava S,
Tzur D, Gautam B, Hassanali M. DrugBank: a
knowledgebase for drugs, drug actions and drug targets.
Nucleic Acids Res. 2008; 36:D901–906.
66.	Hamosh A, Scott AF, Amberger JS, Bocchini CA,
McKusick VA. Online Mendelian In-heritance in Man
(OMIM), a knowledgebase of human genes and genetic
disorders. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005; 33:D514–517.

73.	 Guo H, Zhu SF, Zhang RR, Zhao XL, Wan MH, Tang WF.
Electroacupuncture Ameliorates Acute Lung Injury through
Promoting Gastrointestinal Motility in Rats with Acute
Pancreatitis. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2014;
2014:943596.

67.	 Becker KG, Barnes KC, Bright TJ, Wang SA. The genetic
association database. Nat Genet. 2004; 36:431–432.

74.	 Kong PX, Chen GW, Wang XS. [Clinical and experimental
study on treatment of moderate and advanced malignant
tumors with tianfoshen oral liquid]. Zhongguo Zhong Xi Yi
Jie He Za Zhi. 2001; 21:427–430.

68.	 Altermann E, Klaenhammer TR. PathwayVoyager: pathway
mapping using the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and
Genomes (KEGG) database. BMC Genomics. 2005; 6:60.
69.	 Liu X, Zhu F, Ma X, Tao L, Zhang J, Yang S, Wei Y,
Chen YZ. The Therapeutic Target Database: an internet
resource for the primary targets of approved, clinical trial
and experimental drugs. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2011;
15:903–912.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14569

Oncotarget

