Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 28

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Zoledronic acid prevents the tumor-promoting effects of
mesenchymal stem cells via MCP-1 dependent recruitment of
macrophages
Xiao-Hua Jia1,*, Yang Du1,*, Duo Mao2, Zhong-Liang Wang3, Zhen-Qiang He4, Jing-Dan
Qiu5, Xi-Bo Ma1, Wen-Ting Shang1, Dan Ding2, Jie Tian1,6
1

 ey Laboratory of Molecular Imaging of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy
K
of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China

2

 tate Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology, Key Laboratory of Bioactive Materials, Ministry of Education, College
S
of Life Sciences, Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, China

3

School of Life Science and Technology, Xidian University, Shaanxi, Xi’an 710071, China

4

 tate Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Department of Neurosurgery, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center,
S
Guangzhou 510060, China

5

Department of General Surgery, the Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing 100039, China

6

Beijing Key Laboratory of Molecular Imaging, Beijing 100190, China

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to:
Jie Tian, e-mail: jie.tian@ia.ac.cn
Keywords: zoledronic acid, mesenchymal stem cells, breast carcinoma, tumor associated macrophages, monocyte chemotactic
protein-1
Received: March 29, 2015      Accepted: July 23, 2015      Published: August 03, 2015

ABSTRACT
Zoledronic acid (ZA) has been tested in clinical trials as an additive therapy
for early-stage breast cancer. However, the mechanism by which ZA exerts its
antitumor activity is still unclear. The aim of this study is to investigate whether
the prevention of tumor growth by ZA is through regulating the mesenchymal stem
cells (MSC)-monocyte chemotactic protein 1 (MCP-1)-macrophages axis in the tumor
microenvironment.
To address this issue, MDA-MB-231-FLUC human breast cancer cells were
cultured and injected either alone, or coupled with MSC into the mammary fat pads
of nude mice. MSC were treated with either ZA or untreated. Tumor growth was
determined by using an in vivo bioluminescence imaging (BLI) and the tumorassociated macrophages (TAMs) in tumor tissues were immunohistochemically
analyzed by using CD206 antibody. The effects of ZA on the cytokine related gene
expression of MSC were assessed by using real-time PCR.
In this study, we found that ZA-treated mice showed a significant delay in
tumor growth. In addition, our data revealed that ZA weakened the ability of MSC to
promote tumor growth by impairing TAMs recruitment and tumor vascularization.
Furthermore, it was found that ZA decreased MCP-1 expression of MSC, and
therefore reduced the recruitment of TAMs to the tumor sites and hence inhibited
the tumor growth.
Altogether, our study demonstrated ZA can prevent the tumor-promoting effects
of MSC. The antitumor effects of ZA were caused by decreasing the MCP-1 expression
of MSC, which further decreased the infiltration of TAMs into tumor sites, and therefore
inhibited the tumor growth.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

26018

Oncotarget

INTRODUCTION

Preclinical data obtained from in vitro and in vivo
studies provide compelling evidences that ZA can inhibit
multiple intracellular processes essential for cancer
cell proliferation and invasion, and induce apoptosis
[15]. Furthermore, clinically relevant doses of ZA exert
profound effects on the host’s anticancer response, such
as inhibition of tumor-associated angiogenesis and
modulation of macrophage phenotype, which may be
important anticancer mechanisms in vivo [16]. However,
the effects of ZA to noncancerous stromal cells such as
MSC in tumor microenvironment remained unknown.
To assess the possible mechanism of ZA on
antitumor activity, we analyzed the effects of ZA on
the interaction between MSC and breast cancer cells.
Firstly, we examined the effect of ZA on tumor growth
in breast tumor bearing mice by using BLI, and found
that the development of tumors was inhibited by ZA
treatment. Then, we tested the effects of ZA treated
MSC on tumor growth, and our results suggested that
ZA treated MSC prevented the development of breast
cancer in situ. Thirdly, we demonstrated that ZA impaired
the tumor promoting capability of MSC by impairing
TAMs recruitment. Furthermore, it was found that the
antitumor effects of ZA-MSC were through decreasing the
expression of MCP-1 of MSC, which further decreased the
infiltration of TAMs. Altogether, this study demonstrated
that ZA has antitumor capability and this biological
activity was resulted from regulating the MSC-MCP-1macrophages axis in the tumor microenvironment.

Breast cancer continues to be the most common
lethal malignancy diagnosed in female. Breast cancer
tissues are composed of carcinoma cells and noncancerous
stromal cells, including endothelial cells, immune cells,
MSC and macrophages [1]. Crosstalk between epithelial
breast cancer cells and stromal cells is important for
progression of breast cancer [1]. Therefore, the anti-cancer
therapy by targeting the stromal is a promising therapeutic
option for the treatment of breast cancer.
MSC are a kind of non-cancerous stromal cells,
which have the potential ability for self-renewal, longterm viability, and capacity for differentiation toward a
variety of cell types [2]. Due to chronic inflammation in
the tumor microenvironment, MSC are known to migrate
to tumors, and differentiate into carcinoma-associated
fibroblasts [3]. According to accumulating evidence, MSC
could also have an adverse effect that favors tumor growth
[4–7]. Moreover, the signaling pathway of interleukin-17B
(IL-17B)/IL-17B receptor may mediate the interaction
between human MSC and breast cancer cells [8]. MSC
may sustain cancer cell growth and survival within the
microenvironment, where they can contribute to the
formation of “niches” for tumor growth [1]. Furthermore,
conditioned medium of human MSC have been reported to
promote proliferation, migration, and invasion of human
breast cancer cells [4]. This suggests that tumorigenesis
of breast cancer is acquired by paracrine signals from
MSC within the tumor microenvironment. However, the
paracrine signaling mechanisms by which MSC stimulates
tumorigenesis are largely unknown.
The macrophages in tumor microenvironment were
called tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs). TAMs could
be induced emigration from bone marrow to the periphery
by monocyte chemotactic protein 1 (MCP-1). MCP-1 is also
indispensable in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis
by MSC in mice, through suppressing the function of B cells
and T cells [9]. Moreover, it has been found that through
stimulating toll-like receptors in bacterial infections, bone
marrow-resident MSC could produce abundant MCP-1
[10]. TAMs are known to possess the tumor promoting
effects, which can be recruited by MCP-1. Previous studies
showed that tumor resident MSC promoted tumor growth
by recruiting monocytes/macrophages through MCP-1
[11]. Thus, the MSC-MCP-1-macrophages axis may be
physiologically important in tumor progression.
ZA is a third-generation bisphosphonate. It has been
used for the treatment of solid tumors, including prostate
cancer, lung cancer, and colorectal cancer [12]. ZA has
recently been tested as an additive therapeutic for earlystage breast cancer [13]. ZA also benefited patients with
newly diagnosed multiple myeloma [14]. These findings
clearly demonstrate the beneficial therapeutic effects
of ZA on cancer patients. However, the mechanism
underlying the antitumor activity of ZA remains unclear.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

RESULTS
ZA treatment inhibited breast tumor growth
We firstly assessed the effect of ZA on tumor
growth. ZA was administered intravenously to MDAMB-231-FLUC breast tumor bearing mice, and the tumor
growth was monitored by using BLI. The tumor growth
rate in the ZA-treated group was less than the control
group. On the fourth day, there were significant differences
between the two groups. The results showed that the ZA
treatment significantly decreased the BLI signal of tumors
compared to the control mice (Figure 1A and 1B).

Characterization of MSC
In this study, CD29-positive MSC and CD45positive hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) at the tumor
sites were identified by using immunofluorescent
staining (Figure 2A). Moreover, we cultured the MSC
generated from mice bone marrow, and characterized
them. Mice MSC showed a homogenous spindle-shaped
morphology. MSC also were capable of differentiating
into chondrogenic, adipogenic, and osteogenic cell lines,
as evidenced by mast cells via toluidine blue staining, and
mineralization of the MSC via Alizarin red S staining,
26019

Oncotarget

Figure 1: The antitumor function of ZA. A. ZA-treated mice displayed a significant delay in the tumor growth rate. B. Quantification
of the bioluminescence signal in tumors after different treatments. (*P < 0.05; **P < 0.01)

respectively (data not shown). FACS was used to identify
MSC surface marker expression. High expression level
of CD29, CD73, CD90, CD105 and the low level of
CD34 and CD45 were observed (Figure 2B), which was
consistent with the previous report [17]. All results were
replicated using at least three different MSC clones.

than MSC alone. These results suggested that compared
to untreated MSC, ZA-treated MSC significantly reduced
CD206+ TAMs expression (Figure 4A). We also investigated
the effect of ZA-MSC on tumor neovascularization by
using CD31 marker, and found that ZA-MSC suppressed
vascularization compared to the MSC (Figure 4B).

ZA-treated MSC possessed less tumor-promoting
capacity than untreated-MSC

ZA decreased the MCP-1 expression of MSC,
and MCP-1 was involved in the tumorpromoting effect of MSC

To determine the effects of ZA-treated MSC on tumor
growth, we co-injected ZA-treated MSC and MDA-MB231-FLUC human breast carcinoma cells into the mammary
fat pads of nude mice. Untreated-MSC from the same wildtype mice were used as controls. Co-transplantation of MSC
together with MDA-MB-231-FLUC cells significantly
increased BLI signal of tumor xenograft compared to control
group (PBS group) at day 8 (Figure 3A and 3B). However,
co-injection of MDA-MB-231-FLUC cells and MSC in
the presence of ZA resulted in slightly but not markedly
increased BLI signal of tumors xenograft compared with the
control group. Especially it was noted that co-transplantation
of MDA-MB-231-FLUC cells, MSC and ZA significantly
decreased tumor growth compared with the co-injection of
MSC only at day 8 (Figure 3A and 3B).

To further determine the effect of ZA on MSC, MSC
were treated with 20 ng/ml ZA for 24 h. ZA significantly
inhibited the MCP-1 gene expression in MSC, relative
to the untreated MSC (Figure 5). To determine whether
MCP-1was involved in affecting tumor growth of MSC,
the expression of MCP-1 in MSC was downregulated by
using MCP-1 siRNA. Real-time PCR was performed to
confirm the downregulation efficacy of MCP-1. Compared
with the control siRNA treated MSC, the expression of
MCP-1 was markedly decreased in MSC treated with
MCP-1 siRNA (Figure 6A). To investigate whether MCP1 was indeed involved in the tumor-promoting effect of
MSC in vivo, we firstly treated MSC with control siRNA
or MCP-1 siRNA, then cotransplanted two kinds of
MSC with MDA-MB-231-FLUC tumor cells into mice.
We found that tumor growth was significantly reduced
by MCP-1 siRNA treated-MSC compared to control
siRNA-treated MSC (Figure 6B). Moreover, we evaluated
macrophage infiltration percentage in recipient mice after
coinjection of MSC and cancer cells by performing flow
cytometry. FACS data showed that MCP-1 deficiency led
to a significant reduction in CD206 positive macrophages
numbers in tumor tissues on day 10 (Figure 6C).

ZA-MSC treatment decreased TAMs migration
and vascularization in the tumor sites
To determine whether ZA-MSC treatment affected
TAMs infiltration, we used CD206 immunostaining to
evaluate TAMs at the tumor site. We found that a less
number CD206 positive macrophages were stained in the
ZA-MSC implantation group and the PBS injection group
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

26020

Oncotarget

Figure 2: The characterization of MSC. A. Frozen sections of breast carcinoma tumor were immunostained with anti-CD29 and

CD45. CD29+ and CD45+ stem cells (arrow) migrated into the tumor site. Nuclei were stained with DAPI (blue). Scale bars = 50 μm (left)
and 5 μm (right) respectively. B. Quantitative analysis of cell marker expression by FACS. MSC express high levels of CD29, CD73, CD90
and CD105, but almost negative for CD34 and CD45.

DISCUSSION

vascularization. Furthermore, ZA decreased MCP-1
expression of MSC, and MCP-1 was involved in the
tumor-suppressing effect of ZA-treated MSC. Altogether,
our study suggested that the antitumor effects of ZA were
through decreasing the expression of MCP-1 of MSC,
and hence decreased the infiltration of TAMs, which are
known to be involved in promoting tumor growth.
ZA is a bisphosphonate routinely used in the
treatment of cancer-associated bone disease [18]. In cancer

ZA is often administered as a combination
treatment of cancer; however, the precise mechanism
and contribution of ZA to the antitumor effect remain
unknown. In this study, ZA-treated mice showed
significantly delayed tumor growth. Moreover, our studies
revealed that ZA diminished the ability of MSC to promote
tumor growth by inhibiting TAMs recruitment and tumor
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

26021

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Less potential to promote tumor growth in ZA-MSC compared to untreated-MSC. A. ZA-treated MSC showed

a decreased ability to promote the breast tumor growth compared to untreated MSC. B. Quantification of the bioluminescence signal in
tumors after different treatments. (*P < 0.05)

cells, ZA has been shown to cause apoptosis in both a
caspase-dependent and caspase-independent manner,
inhibiting the cell cycle, and reducing remodeling of the
extracellular matrix and invasiveness [16]. In our study,
we confirmed that ZA inhibited breast tumor progression
in vivo. Cancer tissues are composed of carcinoma cells,
endothelial cells, immune cells, MSC and macrophages
[1]. Previous study showed that ZA treatment could inhibit
the growth, migration, and vessel formation of endothelial
cells [19]. ZA-treated bone marrow-derived macrophages
also showed dose-dependent inhibition of proliferation and
migration, and inhibited adhesion. Moreover, ZA inhibited
the gene expression and the secretion of numerous growth
factors from macrophages [20, 21]. However, there are
rare studies focusing on investigating the effects of ZA on
MSC in tumor sites.
Normal MSC adhere to matrix components,
and as a result, home to the bone, lungs when injected
intravenously [22]. Nevertheless, a growing number of
studies have shown that MSC home to sites of injury
induced by inflammation without organ specificity [23].
Previous studies also have shown that CD45+GFP+ bone
marrow cells could infiltrate to various tissues [24]. MSC
migration to tumors is due to the tumor microenvironment,
consisting of soluble factors produced by inflammatory
and tumor cells, and chemokine receptors on the MSC
[17]. Carcinoma-associated fibroblasts originate from
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

bone marrow and derive from MSC [25]. In our study,
we found that CD29-positive MSC could present at the
tumor sites. Recent studies revealed that bone marrow
MSC and progenitor cells respond to circulating microbial
molecules and induce monocyte emigration by secreting
MCP-1 in proximity to bone marrow vascular sinuses
[10]. MSC isolated from spontaneous lymphomas in
mouse had tumor-promoting ability [11]. Our studies
also revealed that MSC promoted tumor growth in vivo.
However, ZA-treated MSC did not promote tumor growth
in vivo as untreated-MSC. The results suggested that ZAstimulated MSC possessed less tumorigenic potential
of breast tumor cells in vivo. MSC have been shown to
promote tumor growth and metastasis by regulating
angiogenesis, tumor cell survival, immunosuppressive
microenvironment shape, and cancer stem cell (CSC)
maintenance, and mesenchymal niche construction [4].
In this study, we found that ZA-MSC suppressed the
infiltration of TAMs and vascularization at the tumor site.
These results strongly suggested that ZA impaired the
ability of MSC to promote tumor growth by impairing
TAMs recruitment and tumor vascularization.
Immunosuppression activities induced by TAMs
are recognized as key mediators of tumor progression
[26]. MCP-1, a potent monocyte attractant, binds to CCR2
receptors which mediated recruitment of monocytes/
macrophages. Previous studies showed that MCP-1 was
26022

Oncotarget

Figure 4: The analysis of neovascularization and TAMs migration of ZA-MSC treated tumor. A. Immunohistochemical
staining for CD206 (red) and DAPI (blue) in tumors 8 d after treatment. Scale bars = 50 μm. Less CD206 positive macrophages were
stained in the ZA-MSC implantation group than MSC alone group. (*P < 0.05) B. Immunohistochemical staining for CD31 (red) and
DAPI (blue) in tumors 8 d after treatments. Scale bars = 50 μm. Quantitative analysis revealed ZA-MSC administration could significantly
decrease capillary density compared to MSC group. (*P < 0.05) Abbreviations: HPF, high-power field.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

essential in suppression of B cell function and T cell
function in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis
by MSC in mice [9]. Our findings demonstrated that
ZA inhibited the expression of MCP-1 by MSC in vitro.
However, it remains unknown whether or not these effects
are related to macrophage infiltration. To examine whether
this antitumor effects of ZA-MSC were through decreasing
the expression of MCP-1 of MSC and hence decreased
the infiltration of TAMs, we further examined the TAMs
expression by using CD206 immunostaining at the tumor
sites. Our results showed that ZA treated MSC exhibited
low MCP-1 expression, which indicated that MCP-1 was
indeed involved in the antitumor effects of ZA-MSC.
The tumor microenvironment is complex, and it
contains various cell types, soluble factors, extensive
neovasculature, and excessive extracellular matrix deposition.
The network orchestrated by tumor cells, stromal cells, and
soluble factors contributes to tumorigenesis, progression,
metastases, and reoccurrence [1]. Therefore further
investigation is needed to fully understand the function and
mechanism of ZA. MSC-MCP-1-macrophages axis is likely
to be important in various pathological conditions. A better
understanding of the underlying mechanisms can lead to
better therapeutic application of ZA in clinics.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Reagents
ZA was got from Sigma. Monoclonal rat anti-mouse
antibodies against CD29, CD45, and CD31 were from
BD Biosciences; and rat anti-mouse CD206 monoclonal
antibodies were from Abcam. Alexa Fluor 594 and
Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated donkey anti-rat secondary
antibodies were from Invitrogen.

Cell culture
The human breast carcinoma MDA-MB-231FLUC cells were procured from the Department of
Radiology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, and
were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’ medium
(Gibco) containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS),
10 U/ml penicillin, and 100 μg/ml streptomycin in a 5%
CO2 atmosphere. Cells were passaged approximately
every 3 d by trypsinization. MDA-MB-231-FLUC cells
stably transfected with a lentiviral vector containing a
firefly luciferase reporter gene were selected first in vitro,
and then injected into immunodeficient nude mice.

26023

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Effects of ZA on the gene expression in MSC. A marginal reduction of the level of MCP-1 mRNA was detected in MSC
after treatment with ZA. (*P < 0.05)

MSC were collected from the bone marrow of the
tibia and femur of mice aged 6–10 weeks. Cells were
cultured in α-MEM medium (Invitrogen, Carlsbad,
CA) supplemented with 10% FBS, 2 mM glutamine,
100 U/ml penicillin, and 100 μg/ml streptomycin
(Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). Non-adherent cells were
removed after 24 h, and adherent cells were maintained
with medium replenishment every 3 d. MSC were used
from passage 2 to passage 5 in experiments.

volume of sterile PBS. The effect of ZA on tumor growth
was examined by bioluminescence imaging (BLI).
To detect the effect of MSC on tumor growth,
MDA-MB-231-FLUC human breast carcinoma cells
were injected either alone, or coupled with MSC into the
mammary fat pads of nude mice. MSC were treated with
ZA (20 ng/ml) and cultured for 24 h or untreated. Tumor
cell growth was evaluated by BLI. Mice were divided
into three groups (n = 6 per group): MSC group, in which
mice received co-injection of 1 × 106 MSC and 1 × 106
MDA-MB-231-FLUC cells in 100 μl of PBS; the ZAMSC group, in which mice received the same amount of
ZA-treated MSC and breast cancer cells; and the control
(PBS) group received only PBS and cancer cells. Mice
were matched for age and gender in each experiment.
To further determine the effect of MCP-1 in MSC
tumor-promoting effect, MSC were transfected with
MCP-1 siRNA or control siRNA. Tumor cell growth
was detected by BLI at 10 d after establishing the breast
carcinoma model. Animals were divided into three groups
(n = 6 per group): MSC group, in which mice received
injection of 1 × 106 control siRNA-treated MSC and
2 × 106 MDA-MB-231-FLUC cells in 100 μl of PBS;
the si-MCP-1/MSC group, in which mice received
1 × 106 treated MSC and 1 × 106 MDA-MB-231-FLUC
cells in 100 μl of PBS, the MSC were first treated by

Animal model
Female C57BL/6 nude mice (6–7 weeks old) were
purchased from the Department of Experimental Animals,
Peking University Health Science Center. Animal
experiments were performed according to the guidelines
of the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at
Peking University (Permit Number: 2011–0039). Mice
were housed in a specific pathogen-free colony in the
animal facility, and 100 μl of 2 × 106 MDA-MB-231FLUC cells suspended in saline were injected into the
mammary fat pad to establish the orthotopic breast cancer
model. After the tumor cell injection, the mice were given
ZA (100 μg/kg) in 100 μl sterile phosphate-buffered
saline (PBS) via daily tail vein injections (ZA group,
n = 6). Control group (n = 6) was injected with equal

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

26024

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Regulation of tumor growth by ZA-MSC requires MCP-1. A. RT-PCR showed that the expression of MCP-1 was

decreased in MSC in which transfections of MCP-1 siRNA were performed with a Lipofectamine. Meanwhile, real-time PCR result
showed that the expression of MCP-1 was markedly decreased in MCP-1 siRNA treated MSC. The inhibitory efficiency was more than
86% compared with the control siRNA treated MSC. B. After MSC were treated by MCP-1 siRNA, the tumor promoting effect of MSC
was weakened by MCP-1siRNA. C. Impact of MCP-1 on macrophages infiltration on tumor-bearing mice. Representative flow cytometry
data show the frequency of macrophages from tumor with different treatment.

MCP-1 siRNA; and the PBS control group received
1 × 106 MDA-MB-231-FLUC cells in 100 μl of PBS. Mice
were matched for age and gender in each experiment.

the same procedure was repeated at the specified time.
Regions of interest (ROI) imaging signals were quantified
in units of mean photons per second per square centimeter
per steradian (p/s/cm2/sr).

BLI

Real-time PCR

BLI was performed using the Xenogen IVIS Lumina
II system (Perkin Elmer, Waltham, MA, USA) as detailed
previously [27]. 8 min after intraperitoneal injection of
D-Luciferin (150 mg/kg), the animals were imaged, and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

MSC were seeded onto 12-well plates (Corning,
USA) at a density of 2 × 105 cells/well and incubated
overnight. The medium was replaced with a fresh
26025

Oncotarget

medium containing ZA (20 ng/ml) and cultured for
24 h, after which real-time PCR analysis was performed.
All experiments were performed in triplicate. To
determine the effect of MCP-1 in MSC, MSC were
transfected with MCP-1 siRNA in serum-free medium
using Lipofectamin PLUS (Invitrogen, Carlsbad,
CA). The sequences for MCP-1 siRNA were: Sense:
5′-AAUUGAUUUAGCGUACACGdTdT-3′; Antisense:
5′-CGUGUACGCUAAAUCAAUUdTdT-3′.
Total RNA was extracted from cell pellets using
Trizol Reagent (Invitrogen) and treated with RNase-free
DNase I (Qiagen, USA). First-strand cDNA synthesis
was performed using ABI High-Capacity cDNA RT
kit (Applied Biosystems, USA). Then, the RT-PCR
and Real-time PCR were followed. Primers used in
PCR were listed in Table 1, including interleukin-6
(IL-6), monocyte chemoattractant protein (MCP-1),
macrophage inflammatory protein-1β (MIP-1β), tumor
necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), interleukin-19 (IL-19), matrix
metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2), arginase type 1 (Arg1), flammatory zone 1 (FIZZ-1), interleukin-10 (IL-10),
CD47, and signal regulatory protein alpha (SIRPα). The
total amount of mRNA was normalized to endogenous
GAPDH mRNA. The Real-time PCR was performed
in triplicate with the Fast Start Universal SYBR Green
Master (ROX; Roche, Mannheim, Germany) and the
iCycler iQ52.0 Standard Edition Optical System (Bio-Rad,
Hercules, CA, USA).

to the manufacturer’s protocol. To identify MSC, cells
were stained with rat anti-mouse CD29 (BD Biosciences
Pharmingen, San Diego, CA) and CD45 (BD Biosciences
Pharmingen, San Diego, CA). To quantify TAMs
recruitment, the tumor sections were stained with rat
anti-mouse CD206 (BD Biosciences Pharmingen, San
Diego, CA), the percentage of CD206-positive cells was
determined by counting the number of cells in six random
fields (400 × magnification) in three histology sections.
Counting was performed by two blinded independent
investigators. Alexa Fluor 594-conjugated donkey antirat secondary antibody (BD Biosciences Pharmingen, San
Diego, CA) was applied appropriately. DAPI was used for
nuclear counterstaining. To examine vascular density in
tumor, rat anti-mouse CD31 antibody (BD Biosciences
Pharmingen, San Diego, CA) was used. Capillary vessels
were counted by an unbiased investigator in ten randomly
selected high-power fields (HPF) by using a fluorescence
microscope at 400 × magnification.

Flow cytometry
For bone marrow-derived MSC surface marker
analysis, MSC were suspended in staining buffer (PBS,
2% FBS) at a concentration of 2 × 106 cells/ml, and the
MSC suspension (100 μl) was incubated with fluorescent
labeled rat anti-mouse CD29, CD73, CD90, CD105,
CD34 and CD45 antibodies (BD Biosciences Pharmingen,
San Diego, CA) for 30 min on ice. Cells were washed
twice with staining buffer, and fluorescence intensity
was measured by flow cytometry (FACSCaliber, BD
Immunocytometry).
To measure macrophages infiltration in tumor sites,
10 days after transplantation of MSC and MDA-MB231-FLUC cells, tumor tissue was minced and added to

Immunohistochemistry
Tumors were washed thoroughly in PBS and
embedded in the optimal cutting temperature medium
(OCT) (Sakura Finetek, Torrance, CA, USA). Cryosections
(5–6 μm) were cut and stained with antibodies according

Table 1: Primers used in Real-time PCR
Primers

Forward sequence (5′-3′)

Reverse sequence (5′-3′)

IL-6

TCCCCATCTCTCATGCAGTGT

CTCTCTCCCTTCTGAGCAGCTG

MCP-1

GTTGGCTCAGCCAGATGCA

CCAGCCTACTCATTGGGATCA

MIP-1β

CCCTGGGTCACTGAGTACATGA

CAAGGACGCTTCTCAGTGAGAA

TNF-α

CAGCCGATGGGTTGTACCTT

GTGTGGGTGAGGAGCACGTA

IL-19

GGTCTGGTTGGATCCCAATG

CCCATCCTTGATCAGCTTCCT

MMP-2

GGGGTCCATTTTCTTCTTCA

CCAGCAAGTAGATGCTGCCT

Arg-1

AGACAGCAGAGGAGGTGAAGAG CGAAGCAAGCCAAGGTTAAAGC

FIZZ1

TGCTGGGATGACTGCTACTG

AGCTGGGTTCTCCACCTCTT

IL-10

TGCTAACCGACTCCTTAATGCA

TCATGGCCTTGAGACACCTTG

CD47

CCAAACTTTCCCCAGAACAG

AGGAGGAGAAAGGAGGTTGC

SIRPα

TGCAGTTGAGAATGGTCGAA

TCCGCGTCCTGTTTCTGTA

GAPDH

ACCTGCCAAGTATGATGACATCA

CCCTCAGATGCCTGCTTCAC

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

26026

Oncotarget

10 ml of a 4 mg/ml solution of dispase (sigma-Aldrich) in
DMEM (Invitrogen). The minced tissue and media were
transferred to a 50-ml Erlenmeyer flask and incubated for
1 h at 37°C. Following the incubation, the tissue was
filtered through 40 μm nylon cell strainer (BD Pharmingen)
and washed twice in DMEM for FACS analysis (FACScan
flow cytometer, Becton Dickinson). The tumor cells were
stained with Alexa Fluor 647-conjugated rabbit anti-mouse
CD206 (Abcam, Cambridge, MA) and FITC-labeled antimouse F4/80 (Abcam, Cambridge, MA).

6.	 Wei HJ, Nickoloff JA, Chen WH, Liu HY, Lo WC, Chang
YT, Yang PC, Wu CW, Williams DF, Gelovani JG, Deng
WP. FOXF1 mediates mesenchymal stem cell fusioninduced reprogramming of lung cancer cells. Oncotarget.
2014; 5:9514–9529.
7.	 Hass R, Otte A. Mesenchymal stem cells as all-round supporters in a normal and neoplastic microenvironment. Cell
Commun Signal. 2012; 10:26.
8.	 Goldstein RH, Reagan MR, Anderson K, Kaplan DL,
Rosenblatt M. Human bone marrow-derived MSCs can
home to orthotopic breast cancer tumors and promote bone
metastasis. Cancer Res. 2010; 70:10044–10050.

Statistical analysis

9.	 Rafei M, Campeau PM, Aguilar-Mahecha A, Buchanan M,
Williams P, Birman E, Yuan S, Young YK, Boivin MN,
Forner K, Basik M, Galipeau J. Mesenchymal stromal cells
ameliorate experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis
by inhibiting CD4 Th17 T cells in a CC chemokine ligand
2-dependent manner. J Immunol. 2009; 182:5994–6002.

All data were expressed as the mean ± SEM. Oneway analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to determine
intergroup differences. Least significant difference (equal
variances) and Dunnett’s T3 (non-equal variances) post
hoc tests were used for testing the differences between
groups. All tests were two-tailed, and differences were
considered statistically significant at *P < 0.05.

10.	 Shi C, Jia T, Mendez-Ferrer S, Hohl TM, Serbina NV,
Lipuma L, Leiner I, Li MO, Frenette PS, Pamer EG. Bone
marrow mesenchymal stem and progenitor cells induce
monocyte emigration in response to circulating toll-like
receptor ligands. Immunity. 2011; 34:590–601.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING
This work was supported by the National Basic
Research Program of China (973 Program) under Grant
No. 2011CB707700, 2015CB755500 and 2014CB748600,
the National Natural Science Foundation of China under
Grant No. 81301332, 81227901, 61231004, 81470083.
The authors would also like to thank Dr. Karen M. von
Deneen for her helpful revision of the manuscript.

11.	 Ren G, Zhao X, Wang Y, Zhang X, Chen X, Xu C, Yuan
ZR, Roberts AI, Zhang L, Zheng B, Wen T, Han Y, Rabson
AB, et al. CCR2-dependent recruitment of macrophages by
tumor-educated mesenchymal stromal cells promotes tumor
development and is mimicked by TNFalpha. Cell Stem
Cell. 2012; 11:812–824.
12.	 Barrett-Lee P, Casbard A, Abraham J, Hood K, Coleman R,
Simmonds P, Timmins H, Wheatley D, Grieve R, Griffiths
G, Murray N. Oral ibandronic acid versus intravenous zoledronic acid in treatment of bone metastases from breast cancer: a randomised, open label, non-inferiority phase 3 trial.
Lancet Oncol. 2014; 15:114–122.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflict of interests.

REFERENCES

13.	 Coleman R, Cameron D, Dodwell D, Bell R, Wilson C,
Rathbone E, Keane M, Gil M, Burkinshaw R, Grieve R,
Barrett-Lee P, Ritchie D, Liversedge V, et al. Adjuvant
zoledronic acid in patients with early breast cancer: final
efficacy analysis of the AZURE (BIG 01/04) randomised
open-label phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2014; 15:997–1006.

1.	 Quail DF, Joyce JA. Microenvironmental regulation
of tumor progression and metastasis. Nat Med. 2013;
19:1423–1437.
2.	 Bianco P, Cao X, Frenette PS, Mao JJ, Robey PG, Simmons
PJ, Wang CY. The meaning, the sense and the significance:
translating the science of mesenchymal stem cells into medicine. Nat Med. 2013; 19:35–42.

14.	 Witzig TE, Laumann KM, Lacy MQ, Hayman SR,
Dispenzieri A, Kumar S, Reeder CB, Roy V, Lust JA, Gertz
MA, Greipp PR, Hassoun H, Mandrekar SJ, et al. A phase
III randomized trial of thalidomide plus zoledronic acid
versus zoledronic acid alone in patients with asymptomatic
multiple myeloma. Leukemia. 2013; 27:220–225.

3.	 Mishra PJ, Humeniuk R, Medina DJ, Alexe G, Mesirov JP,
Ganesan S, Glod JW, Banerjee D. Carcinoma-associated
fibroblast-like differentiation of human mesenchymal stem
cells. Cancer Res. 2008; 68:4331–4339.

15.	 Kuroda J, Kimura S, Segawa H, Kobayashi Y, Yoshikawa
T, Urasaki Y, Ueda T, Enjo F, Tokuda H, Ottmann OG,
Maekawa T. The third-generation bisphosphonate zoledronate synergistically augments the anti-Ph+ leukemia activity
of imatinib mesylate. Blood. 2003; 102:2229–2235.

4.	 Torsvik A, Bjerkvig R. Mesenchymal stem cell signaling in
cancer progression. Cancer Treat Rev. 2013; 39:180–188.
5.	 Mandel K, Yang Y, Schambach A, Glage S, Otte A, Hass
R. Mesenchymal stem cells directly interact with breast cancer cells and promote tumor cell growth in vitro and in vivo.
Stem Cells Dev. 2013; 22:3114–3127.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

16.	 Agarwal N, Di Lorenzo G, Sonpavde G, Bellmunt J. New
agents for prostate cancer. Ann Oncol. 2014; 25:1700–1709.

26027

Oncotarget

17.	 Karnoub AE, Dash AB, Vo AP, Sullivan A, Brooks MW,
Bell GW, Richardson AL, Polyak K, Tubo R, Weinberg
RA. Mesenchymal stem cells within tumour stroma promote breast cancer metastasis. Nature. 2007; 449:557–563.

22.	 Lee RH, Pulin AA, Seo MJ, Kota DJ, Ylostalo J, Larson
BL, Semprun-Prieto L, Delafontaine P, Prockop DJ.
Intravenous hMSCs improve myocardial infarction in mice
because cells embolized in lung are activated to secrete the
anti-inflammatory protein TSG-6. Cell Stem Cell. 2009;
5:54–63.

18.	 Terpos E, Christoulas D, Kokkoris P, Anargyrou K,
Gavriatopoulou M, Migkou M, Tsionos K, Dimopoulos
MA. Increased bone mineral density in a subset of patients
with relapsed multiple myeloma who received the combination of bortezomib, dexamethasone and zoledronic acid.
Ann Oncol. 2010; 21:1561–1562.

23.	 Wang Y, Chen X, Cao W, Shi Y. Plasticity of mesenchymal
stem cells in immunomodulation: pathological and therapeutic implications. Nat Immunol. 2014; 15:1009–1016.
24.	 Feng G, Mao D, Che Y, Su W, Wang Y, Xu Y, Fan Y,
Zhao H, Kong D, Li Z. The phenotypic fate of bone
­marrow-derived stem cells in acute kidney injury. Cell
Physiol Biochem. 2013; 32:1517–1527.

19.	 Santini D, Zoccoli A, Gregorj C, Di Cerbo M, Iuliani M,
Pantano F, Zamarchi R, Sergi F, Flammia G, Buscarini M,
Rizzo S, Cicero G, Russo A, et al. Zoledronic acid induces
a significant decrease of circulating endothelial cells and
circulating endothelial precursor cells in the early prostate
cancer neoadjuvant setting. Oncology. 2013; 85:342–347.

25.	 Quante M, Tu SP, Tomita H, Gonda T, Wang SS, Takashi
S, Baik GH, Shibata W, Diprete B, Betz KS, Friedman R,
Varro A, Tycko B, et al. Bone marrow-derived myofibroblasts contribute to the mesenchymal stem cell niche and
promote tumor growth. Cancer Cell. 2011; 19:257–272.

20.	 Coscia M, Quaglino E, Iezzi M, Curcio C, Pantaleoni F,
Riganti C, Holen I, Monkkonen H, Boccadoro M, Forni G,
Musiani P, Bosia A, Cavallo F, et al. Zoledronic acid repolarizes tumour-associated macrophages and inhibits mammary carcinogenesis by targeting the mevalonate pathway.
J Cell Mol Med. 2010; 14:2803–2815.

26.	 Biswas SK, Mantovani A. Macrophage plasticity and interaction with lymphocyte subsets: cancer as a paradigm. Nat
Immunol. 2010; 11:889–896.
27.	 Wang L, Su W, Liu Z, Zhou M, Chen S, Chen Y, Lu D,
Liu Y, Fan Y, Zheng Y, Han Z, Kong D, Wu JC, et al.
CD44 antibody-targeted liposomal nanoparticles for molecular imaging and therapy of hepatocellular carcinoma.
Biomaterials. 2012; 33:5107–5114.

21.	 Rietkotter E, Menck K, Bleckmann A, Farhat K,
Schaffrinski M, Schulz M, Hanisch UK, Binder C, Pukrop
T. Zoledronic acid inhibits macrophage/microglia-assisted
breast cancer cell invasion. Oncotarget. 2013; 4:1449–1460.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

26028

Oncotarget

