Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 30

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Identification of therapeutic targets in ovarian cancer through
active tyrosine kinase profiling
Juan Carlos Montero1,*, Sara García-Alonso1,*, Alberto Ocaña2, Atanasio Pandiella1
1

Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular del Cáncer. CSIC-Universidad de Salamanca, Spain

2

Medical Oncology Unit, University Hospital of Albacete, Spain

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to:
Atanasio Pandiella, e-mail: atanasio@usal.es
Keywords: tyrosine kinases, HER2, ovarian cancer, T-DM1
Received: February 23, 2015 	Accepted: July 31, 2015 	Published: August 13, 2015

ABSTRACT
The activation status of a set of pro-oncogenic tyrosine kinases in ovarian cancer
patient samples was analyzed to define potential therapeutic targets. Frequent
activation of HER family receptor tyrosine kinases, especially HER2, was observed.
Studies in ovarian cancer cell lines confirmed the activation of HER2. Moreover,
knockdown of HER2 caused a strong inhibition of their proliferation. Analyses of
the action of agents that target HER2 indicated that the antibody drug conjugate
trastuzumab-emtansine (T-DM1) caused a substantial antitumoral effect in vivo
and in vitro, and potentiated the action of drugs used in the therapy of ovarian
cancer. T-DM1 provoked cell cycle arrest in mitosis, and caused the appearance of
aberrant mitotic spindles in cells treated with the drug. Biochemical experiments
confirmed accumulation of the mitotic markers phospho-Histone H3 and phosphoBUBR1 in cells treated with the drug. Prolonged treatment of ovarian cancer cells
with T-DM1 provoked the appearance of multinucleated cells which later led to cell
death. Together, these data indicate that HER2 represents an important oncogene
in ovarian cancer, and suggest that targeting this tyrosine kinase with T-DM1 may
be therapeutically effective, especially in ovarian tumors with high content of HER2.

agents targeting vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF) signaling have shown efficacy in preclinical
models when combined to chemotherapy [3, 4]. Moreover,
based on positive results obtained in clinical trials using
bevacizumab-based combinations [5, 6], on November 14,
2014, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved
bevacizumab in combination with chemotherapy for the
treatment of patients with platinum-resistant recurrent
epithelial ovarian cancer. The platelet-derived growth
factor receptors (PDGFR) and their ligands [7], and c-Kit
[8] are overexpressed in ovarian cancers. However, Phase
II trials have reported negative results in patients treated
with imatinib, which targets both PDGFR and c-Kit [1].
Several reports indicate that the ErbB/HER family
of receptor tyrosine kinases may represent alternative
targets in ovarian cancer [1]. In fact, the epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) is expressed in 70% of ovarian
tumors [9] and agents that target this receptor have shown
antitumor activity in preclinical models [10]. However,

INTRODUCTION
Ovarian cancer represents the leading cause of
death from gynecological malignancies in western
countries [1]. The yearly estimated incidence is of
12 new cases for every 100,000 women and a death
rate of 8 women for every 100,000 women. Although
advances in surgical and chemotherapeutic treatments
have resulted in improvements in outcome, metastatic
ovarian cancer is still incurable mainly due to the lack
of effective therapeutic strategies [1, 2]. Because of this,
intense efforts are being carried out to define potential
molecular targets that may augment survival of patients
with ovarian cancer. In this respect, several reports have
identified potential therapeutic targets and the efficacy
of treatments against such targets is being analyzed
in clinical trials in various phases of development [1].
Among such experimental treatments, agents acting on
tyrosine kinases have received special attention. Thus,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30057

Oncotarget

clinical results using EGFR-targeted agents have indicated
that such agents offer limited benefit [1]. Expression of
the related ErbB2/HER2 transmembrane tyrosine kinase
has been reported in ovarian cancer [11]. The success of
therapies against this receptor in other tumoral pathologies,
especially in breast cancer [12], led to the development of
clinical studies aimed at the evaluation of the efficacy of
such therapies in HER2 positive ovarian tumors. A phase
II trial on the efficacy of trastuzumab, an antibody against
HER2, in ovarian cancer patients indicated that 7% of
treated patients responded to this agent, with 39% of
the patients showing stabilization of the disease [13].
Pertuzumab, another anti-HER2 antibody which acts by
preventing dimerization of HER2 with other HER family
receptors, has been reported to augment the antitumoral
properties of gemcitabine [14]. Interestingly, preclinical
studies have shown that combination of trastuzumab and
pertuzumab may be more efficacious than treatment with
single antibodies [15]. In an RNAi-based study, Sheng and
colleagues identified another HER family receptor, HER3,
as a potential target in ovarian cancer [16]. RNAi against
this receptor reduced ovarian cancer cell growth in vitro
and an antibody against HER3 reduced tumor growth in
mice xenografted with human ovarian cancer cells. More
recently, HER3 has been reported to be a relevant player
implicated in the facilitation of hematogenous spread of
ovarian cancer [17].
Because of the relevance of tyrosine kinases in
cancer, a study to evaluate the expression of several of
these kinases in ovarian cancer was carried out. From the
whole tyrosine kinase kinome, and with the purpose of
identifying targets amenable for therapeutic intervention, we
selected 22 tyrosine kinases against which drugs are already
approved for clinical use or in advanced stages of clinical
development. Using patient-derived tumoral samples, we
observed that HER2 was active in most of the samples
analyzed. We show that a trastuzumab-drug conjugate
outweighed the antitumoral efficacy of other drugs currently
used for the targeting of HER2, including trastuzumab or
pertuzumab, or the small molecule HER2 inhibitor lapatinib.

tyrosine kinase. Another prerequisite of the study design
was to analyze tyrosine kinases against which drugs were
already approved or under clinical evaluation, with the aim
of rapidly translating the observed findings to the clinical
setting. This restricted the analyses to 22 tyrosine kinases
including receptor and cytosolic tyrosine kinases. The list
of the kinases selected and drugs that act on them is shown
in Table 1. Another three receptor tyrosine kinases, HER4,
Dtk and EphA2, were also added to the study. The kinase
HER4 was included because of the relevant role of HER
receptors in cancer, even though agents against this kinase
are not under clinical development. Two other kinases,
Dtk and EphA2, were also included in the array. They
were expected to be inactive and act as negative controls.
Sixteen ovarian cancer tumors, whose patient
characteristics are shown in Table 2, were analyzed
by antibody arrays. Because of the lack of available
commercial arrays covering all the desired tyrosine
kinases we prepared the antibody arrays in house, after
carefully testing different antibodies against each antigen
to select the capture antibodies to be used in the blots.
Duplicate spots of each antibody were adsorbed onto a
nitrocellulose membrane, and protein lysates from the
different ovarian tumor samples hybridized to the antibody
arrays. Figure 1A describes a map with the position of the
different capture antibodies in the array and Figure 1B
shows data representative from an array obtained upon
incubation of an ovarian tumor protein lysate. Figure 1C
shows that the most frequently activated tyrosine kinases
in ovarian cancer samples were HER2 (95% of patients),
HER3 (80%), EGFR (37%), FAK (37%) and HER4
(25%). Of note, these analyses also revealed the frequent
coexistence of several activated kinases in a single tumor
(Figure 1D).

HER2 knockdown restricts the proliferation of
ovarian cancer cells
The above studies indicated that HER receptors,
particularly HER2, were constitutively active in a large
proportion of ovarian cancer samples. To investigate the
relevance of these receptors in ovarian cancer proliferation,
we used four ovarian carcinoma cell lines on which
the activation status of HER receptors was analyzed by
immunoblotting. The cell lines SKOV3 and OVCAR8
expressed active forms of EGFR, HER2 and HER3
(Figure 2A), and expression of such activated forms was not
substantially affected by the presence of serum in the media.
IGROV1 cells showed expression and activation of EGFR,
HER2 and HER4 receptors. The cell lines A2780 and
IGROV1 expressed very small amounts of active HER2 as
compared to the other cell lines (Figure 2A). A2780 did not
express detectable levels of active EGFR. Of note, HER2
was the only HER family receptor expressed and activated
in all four ovarian cancer cell lines (Figure 2A and 2B). This
last observation falls in line with the data obtained in patient

RESULTS
Active tyrosine kinase profiling in ovarian cancer
Given the relevance of tyrosine kinases in cancer
initiation/progression, we designed a study to evaluate
the activation status of several tyrosine kinases in ovarian
cancer. We decided to study activation status rather than
expression levels, since a more accurate evaluation of
their potential relevance in cancer initiation/progression
is the analysis of their functionality, which is linked to
their activation status [18]. The latter can be analyzed by
direct activity measurements, but is more often assessed
by evaluation of tyrosine phosphorylation of residues
which are used as readouts of the activation status of the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30058

Oncotarget

Table 1: Tyrosine kinases analyzed and available drugs that act on them
Name

Drugs

EGFR

Gefitinib, Erlotinib Cetuximab, Lapatinib, Afatinib, Neratinib

HER2

Trastuzumab, Lapatinib, Pertuzumab, T-DM1, Afatinib, Neratinib

HER3

Sapitinib, MM-121, Patritumab, Canertinib

c-Kit

Imatinib, Nilotinib

Met

Crizotinib, Cabozantinib, Foretinib

PDGFRα

Imatinib, Ponatinib Sorafenib, Pazopanib

PDGFRβ

Imatinib, Sunitinib, Axitinib Sorafenib, Pazopanib

Flt3

Quizartinib, Sunitinib, Lestaurtinib

CSF-1R

Lucitanib

Ret1

Cabozantinib, Vandetanib, Regorafenib, Ponatinib, Sunitinib

Ret2

Cabozantinib, Vandetanib, Regorafenib, Ponatinib, Sunitinib

IGF1R

Figitumumab, Ganitumab, Cixutumumab, Dalotuzumab, Robatumumab

VGFR1

Pazopanib, Sunitinib, Vatalanib

VGFR2

Ramucirumab, Pazopanib, Sunitinib, Vandetanib, Regorafenib, Lenvatinib

VGFR3

Pazopanib, Lenvatinib, Cediranib

FAK

Defactinib, GSK-2256098, PF-562,27, VS-4718

Src

Dasatinib, Saracatinib, Bosutinib

Abl

Imatinib, Nilotinib, Dasatinib, Ponatinib

FGFR1

Dovitinib, Lucitanib, BGJ398, AZD4547

FGFR2

Dovitinib, Lucitanib, BGJ398, AZD4547

FGFR3

Dovitinib, BGJ398, AZD4547

FGFR4

BGJ398, AZD4547

Table 2: Patient characteristics
Age

Mean: 60.37 (43–77)

%

n = 16

Tumor type

Cystoadenocarcinoma

68.75%

n = 11

Tumor borderline

6.25%

n=1

Serous carcinoma

18.75%

n=3

Undifferentiated

6.25%

n=1

IA

6.25%

n=1

IIIA

12.50%

n=2

IIB

12.50%

n=2

IIC

12.50%

n=2

IIIC

56.25%

n=9

0

7.70%

n=1

1

61.50%

n=8

2

23.10%

n=3

4

7.70%

n=1

Stage

ECOG

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30059

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Expression of activated forms of different tyrosine kinases (TKs) in tumor samples from patients with ovarian
cancer. A. 2D map detailing the positions of the different capture antibodies used. C+: positive controls. Ig or PBS: negative controls.
B. Image from a representative array of an ovarian tumor sample. C. Frequency of activation of the different phospho-TKs analyzed in the
array in the ovarian tumor samples. D. Phospho-TKs activated in each tumor are shown by black squares.

samples using the antibody arrays, which indicated HER2 as
the most frequently activated kinase.
To explore the relevance of HER2 in controlling
the proliferation of ovarian cancer cells, we knocked
down HER2 levels in the four ovarian cancer cell
lines by the use of RNAi. From the five RNAi vectors
analyzed, the two of them which caused a more
important decrease in HER2 were used to carry out the
functional studies. As shown in Figure 2C, knockdown
of HER2 was efficiently obtained in the four cell lines
by either of the two shRNAs used. Knockdown of
HER2 profoundly affected proliferation of SKOV3 and
OVCAR8 (Figure 2D). In contrast, little effect on cell
proliferation was observed by knocking down HER2 in
A2780 or IGROV1 cells.

therefore concentrated in evaluating the effect of highly
specific drugs approved for the targeting of HER2.
The four ovarian cancer cell lines were treated with
trastuzumab, pertuzumab, lapatinib or the antibodydrug conjugate trastuzumab-emtansine (T-DM1) [19].
Control or treated cell cultures were counted after 7 days
of treatment. Addition of trastuzumab or pertuzumab did
not affect the proliferation of the four ovarian cancer
cell lines analyzed (Figure 3A). In contrast, a strong
antiproliferative effect was observed in the case of T-DM1
in all the cell lines explored. The most sensitive cell line to
T-DM1 was the SKOV3, while the less sensitive resulted
to be the A2780. In SKOV3 cells lapatinib slightly
reduced proliferation, while in OVCAR8 and A2780 the
effect of that drug was marginal. Interestingly, lapatinib
substantially inhibited the proliferation of IGROV1
cells, even though this cell line was quite insensitive to
HER2 knockdown. Interestingly, these cells were also
quite sensitive to the action of T-DM1. Dose response
curves performed on the four ovarian cancer cell lines
confirmed the high degree of sensitivity of SKOV3 cells
to T-DM1 with respect to the other cell lines (Figure 3B).
In fact, under these conditions, the IC50 value for the

Pharmacological targeting of HER2 in
ovarian cancer
The antiproliferative effects observed using
the genetic targeting of HER2 in ovarian cancer cells
suggested that pharmacologically acting on this receptor
could exert an antitumoral action in ovarian cancer. We
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30060

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Relevance of HER2 in the proliferation of ovarian cancer cells. Activation A. and total levels B. of EGFR, HER2,

HER3 and HER4 in four ovarian cancer cell lines cultured for 12 hours in the presence or absence of FBS. Activated forms of the HER
receptors were analyzed by immunoprecipitation with anti-receptor antibodies, followed by anti-PY blot (A). The levels of the receptors
were analyzed in total cell lysates with the respective anti-receptor antibodies (B) GAPDH was used as a loading control. C. Knockdown
of HER2 in ovarian cell lines. Cells were infected with control vector (pLKO) and viruses including two different short hairpin sequences
targeting HER2. Cell extracts were obtained and the receptor expression was measured by immunoprecipitation followed by Western blot
with the anti-HER2 antibody. D. HER2 knockdown effect on the proliferation of ovarian cancer cells. Cells were infected with the indicated
shRNAs. After selection, cells were then plated and counted after 5 days. Results are plotted as the mean ± s.d. of triplicates with respect
to the proliferation of untreated cultures.

antiproliferative effect of T-DM1 on SKOV3 cells was
in the low picomolar range (IC50=20 pM), while for
the rest of the ovarian cancer cell lines the IC50 values
were > 10 nM.

high complement of HER2 receptors and their sensitivity
to T-DM1 in vitro. These studies showed that trastuzumab
slowed tumor growth in vivo when compared to the
growth of tumors in untreated mice. However, the tumors
continued to increase in size along time. In fact, no
regressions of the tumors were observed in mice treated
with trastuzumab. In this experimental setting T-DM1 not
only prevented tumor growth but produced regression of
the tumors. In fact, after two doses of T-DM1 the tumors
in some mice were undetectable after 21 days from
the initial injection of the drug. Moreover, no relapses
were observed at the site of injection for up to 72 days
after discontinuation of the treatments (Figure 3D).
Biochemically, trastuzumab and T-DM1 did not affect
the total level of HER2 in the tumors (Supplementary
Figure 1). T-DM1 decreased the amount of pHER3 and
pAKT to a higher extent than trastuzumab. Increased

T-DM1 is effective in vivo and potentiates the
action of standard of care drugs
Part of the antitumoral effect of trastuzumab is due
to antibody-dependent cellular toxicity immunological
mechanisms [20]. Therefore, it is possible that its
antitumoral action on ovarian cancer cells could be
restricted in the in vitro conditions. Because of this,
in vivo experiments comparing the antitumoral action
of trastuzumab and T-DM1 were performed using mice
injected with SKOV3 cells (Figure 3C). SKOV3 cells
were selected for these studies because of its relatively
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30061

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Antitumoral action of T-DM1. A. Effect of different drugs targeting HER2 on the proliferation of four ovarian cancer cell

lines. Cells were treated with 1 μM lapatinib and 50 nM of the rest of the indicated drugs for 7 days. Cells were counted and results plotted
as mean ± s.d. of triplicates with respect to the proliferation of untreated cultures. B. Dose-response studies of the effects of T-DM1 on
the four ovarian cancer cell lines. Cells were counted and results plotted as mean ± s.d. of triplicates with respect to the proliferation of
control untreated cultures. C. Tumor sizes of control mice (n = 5) and those treated with trastuzumab and T-DM1 (n = 5 per group) with
the schedules and doses indicated under ‘Materials and methods’. Data represent the mean ± s.d. Statistical analyses were performed on
the measurements obtained at the end of the experiment (day 28), with the following results: Control vs trastuzumab, P = 0.504; Control
vs T-DM1, P = 0.0001; trastuzumab vs T-DM1, P = 0.004. P values were calculated using Student t test (two-sided). D. Absence of
relapse for large and small tumors after regression caused by T-DM1 treatment. The data plotted correspond to the measurements of two
different tumors from two different animals which were followed for up to 72 days from the start of the treatment (65 days after the last
T-DM1 injection). E. Effect of the combination of T-DM1 with chemotherapeutic agents used in ovarian cancer (carboplatin, cisplatin,
docetaxel and vinorelbine). SKOV3 cells were treated with the indicated doses of the drugs and their MTT metabolization were measured.
Combination indexes for the different drug combinations were obtained using the CalcuSyn program and plotted.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30062

Oncotarget

levels of pHER2 were observed in the tumors of mice
treated with trastuzamab when compated to untreated
or T-DM1-treated mice. Together, these data indicated
that T-DM1 exerted an important antitumoral effect on
ovarian cancer cells which clearly outweighd the effect
of trastuzumab.
Most antitumoral treatments are based on drug
combinations which have clearly demonstrated superior
antitumoral activities as compared to single treatments.
Because of this, whether T-DM1 potentiated the action of
chemotherapeutical drugs used in the ovarian cancer clinic
was investigated. To this end, combinations of T-DM1
with cisplatin, carboplatin, docetaxel or vinorelbine were
tested in the SKOV3 and A2780 cells and the results
analyzed by the Chou-Talalay algorithm [21]. Synergistic
effects of T-DM1 with docetaxel and vinorelbine were
observed (Figure 3E and Supplementary Figure 2).

Immunofluorescence analyses showed that T-DM1 caused
appearance of aberrant mitotic spindles as soon as 6 hours
after addition of the drug (Figure 5C).
Immunofluorescence analyses also demonstrated
the appearance of giant multinucleated cells at longer
incubation times (48 and 72 hours) with T-DM1 (Figure 5B
and 6A). The rise in the appearance of these multinucleated
cells followed an inverse time-course with respect to the
mitotic cells, i.e. the progressive decrease in mitotic cells
after 24 hours was followed by a concomitant progressive
appearance of multinucleated cells (Figure 5B).
The presence of these multinucleated cells, likely
caused by deficient spindle assembly due to the maytansine
derivative, was indicative of mitotic catastrophe, a form
of cell death triggered by deficient mitotic progression
[23, 24]. Annexin V/propidium iodide staining experiments
indicated that T-DM1 was unable to substantially increase
apoptotic cell death at early (<24 hours) incubation times
(Figure 6B and 6C). However, extension of the incubation
with the drug for up to 10 days provoked a progressive
increase in cell death (Figure 6C).
Treatment with T-DM1 caused a progressive
derangement in the mitochondrial membrane potential
(Figure 6D), indicative of increased permeability of
the mitochondrial outer membrane, a process which is
linked to cell death [25]. Increases in mitochondrial outer
membrane permeability allow the release of cell death
mediators from the mitochondrial intermembrane space,
which may cause activation of executioner caspases,
important mediators of cell death processes [25].
Treatment of SKOV3 cells with T-DM1 caused increase in
cleaved caspase 3, which represents the active form of this
caspase (Figure 6E). These increases in cleaved caspase 3
were observed at 48 and 72 hours of treatment with the
drug, times at which loss in mitochondrial membrane
potential was already evident (Figure 6D). Together, these
data indicate that treatment of SKOV3 cells with T-DM1
caused cell cycle arrest which is temporally followed by
progression into cell death.

T-DM1 arrests ovarian cancer cells in mitosis
The decrease in cell number caused by T-DM1
could be due to inhibition of proliferation, stimulation
of cell death or both. To investigate the mechanism of
the antiproliferative effect of T-DM1 on ovarian cancer,
SKOV3 cells were stained with propidium iodide and
analyzed cytometrically at different times after addition
of the drug. Treatment with T-DM1 caused accumulation
of the cells in the G2/M phase of the cell cycle
(Figure 4A and 4B). This effect was clear at 24 hours of
treatment. At later times, although also evident, such effect
was more difficult to appreciate due to the action of the
drug on the cell cycle profiles.
To study whether T-DM1 arrested cells in G2 or M
in SKOV3 cells, biochemical analyses of proteins whose
levels mark different cell cycle phases were performed.
To this end, SKOV3 cells were treated with T-DM1 for
different times and cell lysates prepared to analyze the
status of those marker proteins. Treatment with T-DM1
caused accumulation of the mitotic markers pHistone H3
and phosphorylated BUBR1, reaching a peak at 24 hours
of treatment (Figure 4C). In addition, at 24 hours of
treatment with T-DM1 dephosphorylation of CDK1 and
a decrease in wee1, both events required for entry of cells
in mitosis, were detected [22]. In addition, an increase of
cyclin B, which acts partnering with CDK1 to allow entry
of cells in mitosis and progression along prophase and
metaphase, was also observed. Interestingly, an increase
in the levels of p27 was also observed.

DISCUSSION
The dismal prognosis of ovarian cancer in the
metastatic setting has driven much research with the aim
of developing therapeutic strategies to improve disease
outcome [2]. Given the relevance of tyrosine kinases
in cancer initiation/progression and the benefits of their
targeting in other oncological diseases [26], we evaluated
the activation status of several tyrosine kinases in tumor
samples surgically resected from patients with ovarian
cancer.
Antibody array analyses of the ovarian tumoral
samples indicated that a large proportion of these tumors
expressed activated forms of HER receptors, particularly
HER2. Overexpression of HER2 has been reported in
<10% of ovarian tumors [1], while in our active kinase

T-DM1 causes mitotic catastrophe of
ovarian cancer cells
Morphologically, T-DM1 caused progressive cell
rounding in cultures of SKOV3 cells, consistent with
accumulation of cells in mitosis (Figure 5A and 5B).
This accumulation of cells with a mitotic shape reached
a peak at 24 hours decreasing thereafter (Figure 5B).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30063

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Effect of T-DM1 on the cell cycle of SKOV3 cells. Cells were treated with 50 nM T-DM1 for the indicated times and

cell-cycle phases were quantitatively analyzed by PI staining and FACS. A. Cell cycle profile. B. Histograms representing the percentage
of cells in the different phases of the cell cycle. C. SKOV3 cells were treated with T-DM1 (50 nM) and lysed at the indicated times. The
expression of different proteins was determined by Western blot. GAPDH was used as loading controls. Bar graph quantitative analysis of
the intensity of the bands with respect to GAPDH is shown.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30064

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Mitotic arrest caused by T-DM1 in SKOV3 cells. A. Effect of T-DM1 on the morphology of SKOV3 cells grown as

monolayers. 1.5 × 105 cells were plated in 35-mm dishes, allowed to adhere for 24 hours, then T-DM1 (50 nM) was added. The images were
taken at the indicated points at x10 magnification. Scale bar = 40 μm. B. Percentage of cells with mitotic shape and giant multinucleated
cells (GMC) in SKOV3 monolayers. Cells were treated with 50 nM T-DM1 and stained with DAPI and β-tubulin at the indicated points.
GMC were defined as cells with at least three nuclei. Cells with mitotic shape and GMC were counted on a minimum of 10 randomly
selected fields at x63 magnification. Data represent the average of positive cells (percentage) ± s.d./field. C. Effect of T-DM1 on spindle
assembly and organization. SKOV3 were seeded on coverslips and treated with T-DM1 (50 nM) for 6 hours. Cells were fixed and stained
for β-tubulin (green) and DNA (blue). Scale bar = 7,5 μm.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30065

Oncotarget

Figure 6: T-DM1 provokes multinucleation and mitotic catastrophe in SKOV3 cells. A. Detection of giant multinucleated

cells after T-DM1 treatment. SKOV3 were seeded on coverslips and treated with 50 nM T-DM1 for 72 hours. Cells were fixed and stained
for nucleoporin p62 (red), actin (green) and DNA (blue). Scale bar = 25 μm. B. Effect of T-DM1 on Annexin V/PI staning of cells treated for
24 hours with the drug. SKOV3 were treated with 50 nM for the indicated times, double stained with Annexin V-FITC/PI and analyzed by
flow cytometry. C. Effect of T-DM1 on cell viability. The bar graph represents the percentage of viable (Annexin V-negative/PI-negative)
and non-viable cells. D. Effect of T-DM1 on the mitochondrial membrane potential of SKOV3 cells. Cells were cultured and treated as
above, harvested and stained to assess their membrane potential as described under the Materials and Methods section. E. Action of T-DM1
on caspase 3. SKOV3 were treated with 50 nM T-DM1, lysed at indicated points and immunoblot analysis was done for caspase-3 or
cleaved caspase-3.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30066

Oncotarget

arrays the level of HER2 tyrosine phosphorylation was
much higher (>90%). This observation indicated that
the number of tumors in which HER2 was active may
be higher than expected from the expression studies.
Moreover, if HER2 is important in the pathophysiology
of these tumors, then a substantial proportion of ovarian
cancer patients could benefit from the targeting of HER2.
Because of this, studies aimed at defining the biological
relevance of HER2 in ovarian cancer were performed
using model cell lines bearing different complements
of HER2 receptors. In all the cell lines analyzed, HER2
and its phosphorylated form were detected, although at
different levels. Genetic studies using shRNAs targeting
HER2 showed that in SKOV3 and OVCAR8 cells,
knockdown of HER2 resulted in substantial growth
inhibition. In contrast, in A2780 and IGROV1, HER2
knockdown did not substantially affect their proliferation.
These differences in the sensitivity to HER2 knockdown
suggest that certain cell lines (SKOV3 and OVCAR8) may
depend on HER2 signaling for proliferation. In contrast,
even though A2780 and IGROV1 cell lines expressed
HER2, signaling by this receptor does not appear to
significantly contribute to their proliferation. These results
raise the question of why lapatinib affected proliferation
of IGROV1 while HER2 knockdown did not. This effect
of lapatinib on IGROV1 cells may be explained by an
off-target action of the drug, as has already been reported
in other systems [27].
Several relevant considerations from the therapeutic
point of view have to be made with respect to the HER2
knockdown experiments. SKOV3 could be considered
a model of ovarian tumors overexpressing HER2
which could be suitable for therapeutic intervention by
adequately targeting this receptor. In addition to HER2
overexpression, other factors may contribute to HER2
dependency in ovarian cancer. In this respect, it is
interesting that targeting the neuregulins, a set of ligands
which activate HER receptors [28], impedes proliferation
of ovarian carcinoma cells [16].
The in vitro analyses of the effect of several
approved anti-HER2 agents on ovarian cancer cell lines
showed limited efficacy of trastuzumab or pertuzumab,
in line with a previously published in vivo study [15].
In contrast, the trastuzumab derivative T-DM1 showed
strong antitumoral properties both in vitro and in vivo
on ovarian cancer cells. Because of this, we undertook
a comprehensive study to characterize the molecular
response of ovarian cancer cells to T-DM1. Dose-response
curves indicated that the most sensitive cell line was
SKOV3. This may be explained by the concurrence
of two situations: the high expression level of HER2
and the addiction to HER2 observed in SKOV3 cells.
Mechanistically, T-DM1 provoked cell cycle blockade
in mitosis, as indicated by the accumulation of cells in
this phase of the cell cycle and the increased amounts of
proteins such as pHistone H3 and pBUBR1, which mark
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

this phase of the cell cycle. The accumulation of cells in
mitosis could be caused by the maytansinoid derivative
which was likely responsible for the disruption of normal
spindle assembly observed in cells treated with T-DM1.
This caused augmented numbers of mitotic cells in the
cultures, which then evolved into multinucleated cells.
While the direct effect of the antiproliferative action
of T-DM1 appears to be on the cell cycle dynamics,
prolonged treatment with the drug caused cell death. Such
phenomenon may be secondary to the mitotic arrest of
cells and multinucleation, which characteristically lead
to mitotic catastrophe, which has also been reported in
breast cancer [24]. Interestingly, T-DM1 synergized with
docetaxel and vinorelbine. It is therefore possible that
drugs altering microtubule dynamics may augment the
antitumoral action of T-DM1. In addition, T-DM1 caused
an increase in the levels of p27. This effect may be due to
the trastuzumab part of the compound, as this antibody
has been formerly shown to provoke this biochemical
effect [29]. This increase in p27 has been linked to delayed
transit of the cells from G1 into S. While this effect may
contribute to the composite antitumoral effect of T-DM1
it is clear that the mitotic arrest effect predominates over
other effects of the drug on the cell cycle.
Of note, T-DM1 was effective not only in the cell
lines that were sensitive to in vitro knockdown of HER2,
but also in cell lines resistant to such knockdown. Thus, it
is possible that in cells which are not addicted to HER2,
the low levels of HER2 could act favoring the entry of
T-DM1 into the cell. Alternatively, an effect of T-DM1 in
these cell lines caused by constitutive internalization of
extracellular milieu products could also be responsible for
the antiproliferative action of T-DM1. In fact, we observed
internalization of T-DM1 in all the cell lines analyzed
(Supplementary Figure 3). The fact that tumoral cells are
characterized by a high proliferation rate may then explain
the antitumoral effect of T-DM1 on these HER2 low and
knockdown-resistant cells. Moreover, pharmacokinetic
studies [30] have reported plasma concentrations of
T-DM1 above the maximal doses tested in our study
and sustained for up to 20 days. This is important, as it
is possible that ovarian patients with tumors bearing low
levels of HER2 may also benefit from the antitumoral
properties of T-DM1.
In summary, the work herewith reported describes
the activation status of several druggable tyrosine kinases
in ovarian cancer. The study reports frequent activation
of HER2 in the tumoral samples and shows preclinical
evidence that acting on HER2 exerts an antitumoral action
on cells expressing this protein. Because of the much better
effect of the trastuzumab derivative T-DM1 with respect to
other clinically available drugs and its potentiation of the
effect on classical standard of care drugs, the preclinical
data presented here call for the clinical evaluation of
T-DM1, either alone or in combination, for the therapy of
ovarian cancer.
30067

Oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Medium (DMEM) and A2780 and IGROV1 in RPMI-1640
medium containing a high glucose concentration
(4,500 mg/L) and antibiotics (penicillin at 100 mU/mL,
streptomycin at 100 μg/mL) and supplemented with 10%
FBS.
Knockdown of HER2 in ovarian cells was performed
by infection with lentiviral particles. The lentiviral
vectors containing short hairpin RNA (shRNA) for HER2
were obtained from Thermo Scientific (Waltham, MA,
USA). A minimum of 5 different shRNA sequences were
tested and the two that produced higher knockdown levels
were used for the proliferation experiments. Preparation of
lentiviral vectors was performed as described previously [32].

Reagents and antibodies
Cell culture media, puromycin, MTT and DAPI were
purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St Louis, MO, USA).
Fetal bovine serum (FBS) and penicillin/streptomycin
were from Invitrogen (Gaithersburg, MD, USA). Protein
A-Sepharose was from GE Healthcare Life Sciences
(Piscataway, NJ, USA). Carboplatin and cisplatin were
from Pfizer (Madrid, Spain). Docetaxel was from Hospira
UK Ltd (Warwickshire, United Kingdom). Vinorelbine
was from Pierre Fabre (Barcelona, Spain). Lapatinib was
from LC Laboratories (Woburn, MA, USA). Trastuzumabemtansine (T-DM1) was purchased from a pharmacy
located in Andorra. Trastuzumab was purchased from
a local pharmacy and pertuzumab was obtained from
Genentech (San Francisco, CA). Other generic chemicals
were purchased from Sigma, Roche Biochemicals or
Merck (Darmstadt, Germany).
The antibodies against Abl, CSF-1R, EphA2, FAK,
FGFR1, FGFR2, FGFR3, FGFR4, Flt3, IGF-1R, Met,
PDGFRα, PDGFRβ, Ret1, Ret2, Src, pY99-HRP, cyclin
B, cyclin E, Wee1, p27, CDK2, CDK4 and GAPDH
were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa
Cruz, CA, USA). The anti-pH3, anti-p(Y15) CDK1, antipRpb1, anti-pRb (S780) and anti-pRb (S807/811), pHER2
(Y1221/1222), pHER3 (Y1289), and AKT antibodies were from
Cell Signaling Technologies (Beverly, MA, USA). The
anti-c-Kit, anti-cyclin A, anti-cyclin D3, anti-BUBR1,
anti-caspase 3, anti-cleaved caspase 3 anti-pAKT (S473)
and anti-Nucleoporin p62 antibodies were from BD
Biosciences. The anti-Dtk, anti-VEGFR1, anti-VEGFR2
and VEGFR3 antibodies were from, R&D Systems
(Minneapolis, MN, USA). The anti-β-tubulin antibody was
from Sigma-Aldrich. The rabbit polyclonal anti-calnexin
antibody was from Stressgen Biotechnologies Corporation
(British Columbia, Canada). Horseradish peroxidase
conjugates of anti-rabbit and anti-mouse immunoglobulin
G were from Bio-Rad Laboratories (Hercules, CA, USA).
The 4D5 anti-HER2 antibody was provided by Dr. Mark
X. Sliwkowski (Genentech, San Francisco, CA, USA).
The Ab-3 anti-HER2 antibody used for Western blotting
was from Calbiochem (La Jolla, CA, USA). The antiEGFR, anti-HER3 and anti-HER4 antibodies have been
described previously [31].

Patient samples and antibody arrays
Tyrosine phosphorylation of different tyrosine
kinases was evaluated by antibody arrays in ovarian
cancer samples from patients of the University Hospital of
Salamanca. Fresh tissue samples from the primary tumors
were embedded in OCT (Fisher Scientific) and then in
isopentane, and placed at -80°C. Selection of the tumoral
tissue was performed after excision of part of the tumor
and staining with hematoxylin/eosin. The tumors were
minced, washed with PBS and homogenized (Dispomix,
L&M Biotech, Holly Springs, NC, USA) in ice-cold lysis
buffer (1.5 ml/100 mg of tumour). This homogenate was
centrifuged at 10,000 xg for 20 minutes at 4°C and the
supernatants were transferred to new tubes.
To perform the antibody arrays, each antibody
(0.1 μg) in duplicate was spotted onto a nitrocellulose
membrane. The membrane was dried at room temperature
for 30 minutes and then blocked for 2 hours in
Tris-buffered saline with Tween (TBST) containing 5%
bovine serum albumin (BSA). The membranes were
then incubated with 1 mg of protein lysates overnight
at 4°C. The membranes were washed in TBST three
times during 10 minutes and incubated for 2 hours
with the anti–phosphotyrosine-HRP antibody (1:5,000
dilution). After three washes of 10 minutes each in TBST,
membranes were incubated with the ECL Plus Western
Blotting Detection System (GE Lifesciences). Breast
cancer cell lysates from BT474 cells were used as the
positive control, as they contain high levels of resting
tyrosine phosphorylation of several cellular proteins [33].
Control Ig and PBS were spotted as negative controls.
Quantification of the different spots in the array was
performed using the Image Studio Digits V3.1 Odyssey
program (LI-COR, Lincoln, NE, USA).

Cell culture and infection with lentivirus
All cell lines were cultured at 37°C in a humidified
atmosphere in the presence of 5% CO2 and 95% air. The
cell lines were provided by Dr. Faustino Mollinedo (CSIC
Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain), who obtained them from
the American Type Culture Collection. No authentication
was conducted in the author’s laboratory. OVCAR8 and
SKOV3 cells were grown in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Immunoprecipitation and western blotting
Cultured cells were washed with phosphatebuffered saline (PBS) (NaCl, 137 mM; KCl, 2.7 mM;
Na2HPO4, 8 mM; KH2PO4, 1.5 mM) and lysed in
ice-cold lysis buffer (20 mM Tris–HCl [pH 7.0]; NaCl,
30068

Oncotarget

140 mM, EDTA; 50 mM; 10% glycerol; 1% Nonidet
P-40; 1 μM pepstatin; 1 μg/mL aprotinin; 1 μg/mL
leupeptin; 1 mM phenylmethyl sulfonyl fluoride; 1 mM
sodium orthovanadate). Lysates were centrifuged at
10,000 xg at 4°C for 10 minutes and supernatants
were transferred to new tubes with the corresponding
antibody and protein A-Sepharose. Immunoprecipitations
were performed at 4°C for at least 2 hours. Immune
complexes were recovered by a short centrifugation
at 10,000 xg for 15 seconds, followed by three washes
with 1 mL cold lysis buffer. Samples were then boiled in
electrophoresis sample buffer and placed on SDS-PAGE
gels at varying acrylamide concentrations, depending
on the molecular weight of the proteins to be analyzed.
After electrophoresis, the separated proteins in the gel
were transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride membranes
(PVDF) (Millipore Corporation, Bedford, MA, USA).
Membranes were blocked in TBST (100 mM Tris [pH
7.5]; 150 mM NaCl; 0.05% Tween 20) containing
1% BSA or 5% skimmed milk for 1–3 hours and then
incubated with the corresponding antibody for 2–16 hours.
After washing three times with TBST during 10 minutes,
membranes were incubated with HRP-conjugated antimouse or anti-rabbit secondary antibodies for 30 minutes.
After the secondary antibody, the membranes were washed
three times with TBST and the bands were visualized by
using enhanced chemiluminescence [34].

nonattached and attached cells. After washing with PBS,
cells were fixed and permeabilized by ice-cold 70%
ethanol overnight. Cells were centrifuged, resuspended in
500 μL of PBS containing 250 μg DNase-free RNAase A
(Sigma-Aldrich) and incubated at room temperature for
2 hours. Then, 2.5 μg of propidium iodide (PI; SigmaAldrich) were added. DNA content and cell cycle analyses
were performed by using a BD Accuri C6 flow cytometer
and the C6 software (BD Biosciences).
For apoptotic analysis, cells were treated with
T-DM1 for the indicated times and subsequently collected
by pooling together the nonattached and attached cells.
Then, cells were washed with PBS and resuspended in
100 μL of binding buffer (10 mM HEPES/NaOH [pH 7.4];
140 mM NaCl; 2.5 mM CaCl2) containing 5 μL of Annexin
V-fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC; BD Biosciences) and
5 μL of 50 μg/mL PI. Cells were incubated for 15 minutes
in the dark. After adding another 400 μL of binding buffer,
labeled cells were analyzed in a BD Accuri C6 flow
cytometer. Analyses of mitochondrial membrane potential
in ovarian cancer cell lines has been described [35].

Immunofluorescence microscopy
Cells cultured on glass coverslips were washed
with PBS and fixed in 2% p-formaldehyde for
30 minutes at room temperature, followed by a wash in
PBS. Monolayers were quenched for 10 minutes with
PBS with 50 nM NH4Cl2. Cells were then permeabilized
for 10 minutes with PBS supplemented with 0.1%
(final concentration) Triton X-100 and then blocked
in PBS with 0.2% BSA for 10 minutes. Monolayers
were incubated with the indicated primary antibodies
in blocking solution for 1 hour at room temperature.
After three washes for 10 minutes each in PBS with
0.2% BSA, coverslips were incubated with Cy3- or
Alexa 488-conjugated secondary antibodies or with a
50 mg/ml FITC-labeled phalloidin (Sigma-Aldrich)
solution in PBS with 0.2% BSA for 30 minutes at
room temperature. After three washes for 10 minutes
each in PBS with 0.2% BSA, immunolabeled cells
were counterstained with DAPI to detect cell nuclei
and the slides were mounted. Samples were analyzed
by regular epifluorescence microscopy or by confocal
immunofluorescence microscopy using a Zeiss LSM510
system.

Cell proliferation, cell cycle and apoptosis assays
Cell proliferation was assessed by MTT
metabolization or cell counting. For the MTT assays,
cells were seeded in 24-well plates and allowed to
attach overnight in DMEM or RPMI-1640 + 10% FBS.
The next day medium was replaced with complete
medium containing the different drugs. After treatment,
cell proliferation was analyzed by an MTT-based assay
as previously described [35]. For the cell counting
experiments, cells were seeded in 6-well plates and
cultured as above. Once the treatment finished, cells were
counted using a Z1 Coulter Particle Counter (Beckman
Coulter, Pasadena, CA, USA). Unless otherwise indicated,
the results are presented as the mean ± standard deviation
of triplicates of a representative experiment.
To determine whether the combination of T-DM1
with chemotherapeutic agents (carboplatin, cisplatin,
docetaxel and vinorelbine) was synergistic, additive
or antagonist, we used the CalcuSyn v2.0 software
programme (Biosoft, Ferguson, MO, USA) [35]. This
program allows the calculation of the combination index
based on the algorithm of Chou and Talalay. Combination
index values less than 1 indicate synergism, values equal
to 1 indicate an additive effect, whereas values greater
than 1 indicate antagonism.
For the analysis of the cell cycle profile, cells
were treated with T-DM1 for the indicated period of
time and subsequently collected by pooling together the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Xenograft studies
Mice were manipulated at the animal facility
following legal guidelines. Female BALB/c nu/nu
mice (7 weeks old) were obtained from Charles River
Laboratories (Wilmington, MA, USA). A total of 5x106
SKOV3 cells in 100 μl of DMEM and 100 μl of Matrigel
(BD Biosciences) were injected subcutaneously into
the right and left flank of each mouse. When tumours
reached a mean volume of 200 mm3, animals (n = 15)
30069

Oncotarget

were randomized into three groups (with equal average
tumour volumes) (vehicle (PBS) n = 5, trastuzumab n = 5,
and T-DM1 n = 5). Mice were treated twice (day 0 and
day 7) at the first week with trastuzumab (15 mg/kg) and
T-DM1 (15 mg/kg) intravenously. Tumour diameters
were serially measured with a calliper twice per week and
tumour volumes were calculated by the following formula:
volume = width2 × length/2. Mice treated with vehicle and
trastuzumab were sacrificed on day 28. Mice treated with
T-DM1 were maintained to assess whether their tumors
relapsed.

kinase receptor inhibitor SU6668 with paclitaxel affects
ascites formation and tumor spread in ovarian carcinoma
xenografts growing orthotopically. Clin Cancer Res. 2003;
9:3476–3485.
5.	 Burger RA, Brady MF, Bookman MA, Fleming GF,
Monk BJ, Huang H, Mannel RS, Homesley HD, Fowler J,
Greer BE, Boente M, Birrer MJ, Liang SX, et al.
Incorporation of bevacizumab in the primary treatment of
ovarian cancer. N Engl J Med. 2011; 365:2473–2483.
6.	 Perren TJ, Swart AM, Pfisterer J, Ledermann JA,
Pujade-Lauraine E, Kristensen G, Carey MS, Beale P,
Cervantes A, Kurzeder C, du Bois A, Sehouli J, Kimmig R,
et al. A phase 3 trial of bevacizumab in ovarian cancer.
N Engl J Med. 2011; 365:2484–2496.

Statistical analyses
Comparisons of continuous variables between two
groups were performed using a two-sided Student’s t test.
Differences were considered to be statistically significant
when P values were less than 0.05. Statistical data are
presented as the mean ± s.d. All data were analyzed using
the statistical software SPSS 21.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL).

7.	 Henriksen R, Funa K, Wilander E, Backstrom T,
Ridderheim M, Oberg K. Expression and prognostic
significance of platelet-derived growth factor and its
receptors in epithelial ovarian neoplasms. Cancer Res.
1993; 53:4550–4554.
8.	 Schilder RJ, Sill MW, Lee RB, Shaw TJ, Senterman MK,
Klein-Szanto AJ, Miner Z, Vanderhyden BC. Phase II
evaluation of imatinib mesylate in the treatment of recurrent
or persistent epithelial ovarian or primary peritoneal
carcinoma: a Gynecologic Oncology Group Study. J Clin
Oncol. 2008; 26:3418–3425.

FUNDING
Work supported by the Ministry of Economy and
Competitiveness of Spain (BFU2012–39151), the Instituto
de Salud Carlos III through the Spanish Cancer Centers
Network Program (RD12/0036/0003), the scientific
foundation of the AECC and the CRIS Foundation. JCM is
a recipient of a Miguel Servet fellowship program. S. G-A
is recipient of a doctoral contract from the MINECO. The
Cancer Research Institute and the work carried out at A.P.
laboratory receive support from the European Community
through the regional development funding program
(FEDER).

9.	 Bartlett JM, Langdon SP, Simpson BJ, Stewart M,
Katsaros D, Sismondi P, Love S, Scott WN, Williams AR,
Lessells AM, Macleod KG, Smyth JF, Miller WR. The
prognostic value of epidermal growth factor receptor
mRNA expression in primary ovarian cancer. Br J Cancer.
1996; 73:301–306.
10.	 Ciardiello F, Caputo R, Bianco R, Damiano V, Pomatico G,
De Placido S, Bianco AR, Tortora G. Antitumor effect and
potentiation of cytotoxic drugs activity in human cancer
cells by ZD-1839 (Iressa), an epidermal growth factor
receptor-selective tyrosine kinase inhibitor. Clin Cancer
Res. 2000; 6:2053–2063.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

11.	 Lafky JM, Wilken JA, Baron AT, Maihle NJ. Clinical
implications of the ErbB/epidermal growth factor (EGF)
receptor family and its ligands in ovarian cancer. Biochim
Biophys Acta. 2008; 1785:232–265.

REFERENCES
1.	 Yap TA, Carden CP, Kaye SB. Beyond chemotherapy:
targeted therapies in ovarian cancer. Nat Rev Cancer. 2009;
9:167–181.

12.	 Ocana A, Pandiella A. Targeting HER receptors in cancer.
Curr Pharm Des. 2013; 19:808–817.
13.	 Bookman MA, Darcy KM, Clarke-Pearson D, Boothby RA,
Horowitz IR. Evaluation of monoclonal humanized antiHER2 antibody, trastuzumab, in patients with recurrent or
refractory ovarian or primary peritoneal carcinoma with
overexpression of HER2: a phase II trial of the Gynecologic
Oncology Group. J Clin Oncol. 2003; 21:283–290.

2.	 Banerjee S, Kaye SB. New strategies in the treatment of
ovarian cancer: current clinical perspectives and future
potential. Clin Cancer Res. 2013; 19:961–968.
3.	 Hu L, Hofmann J, Zaloudek C, Ferrara N, Hamilton T,
Jaffe RB. Vascular endothelial growth factor immunoneutralization plus Paclitaxel markedly reduces tumor burden
and ascites in athymic mouse model of ovarian cancer.
Am J Pathol. 2002; 161:1917–1924.

14.	 Makhija S, Amler LC, Glenn D, Ueland FR, Gold MA,
Dizon DS, Paton V, Lin CY, Januario T, Ng K, Strauss A,
Kelsey S, Sliwkowski MX, et al. Clinical activity of
gemcitabine plus pertuzumab in platinum-resistant ovarian
cancer, fallopian tube cancer, or primary peritoneal cancer.
J Clin Oncol. 2010; 28:1215–1223.

4.	 Garofalo A, Naumova E, Manenti L, Ghilardi C, Ghisleni G,
Caniatti M, Colombo T, Cherrington JM, Scanziani E,
Nicoletti MI, Giavazzi R. The combination of the tyrosine
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30070

Oncotarget

15.	 Sims AH, Zweemer AJ, Nagumo Y, Faratian D, Muir M,
Dodds M, Um I, Kay C, Hasmann M, Harrison  DJ,
Langdon  SP. Defining the molecular response to
trastuzumab, pertuzumab and combination therapy in
ovarian cancer. Br J Cancer. 2012; 106:1779–1789.

27.	 Dolloff NG, Mayes PA, Hart LS, Dicker DT, Humphreys R,
El-Deiry WS. Off-target lapatinib activity sensitizes colon
cancer cells through TRAIL death receptor up-regulation.
Sci Transl Med. 2011; 3:86ra50.
28.	 Montero JC, Rodriguez-Barrueco R, Ocana A,
Diaz-Rodriguez E, Esparis-Ogando A, Pandiella A.
Neuregulins and cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2008;
14:3237–3241.

16.	 Sheng Q, Liu X, Fleming E, Yuan K, Piao H, Chen  J,
Moustafa Z, Thomas RK, Greulich H, Schinzel A,
Zaghlul S, Batt D, Ettenberg S, et al. An activated ErbB3/
NRG1 autocrine loop supports in vivo proliferation in
ovarian cancer cells. Cancer Cell. 2010; 17:298–310.

29.	 Lane HA, Beuvink I, Motoyama AB, Daly JM, Neve RM,
Hynes NE. ErbB2 potentiates breast tumor proliferation
through modulation of p27(Kip1)-Cdk2 complex formation:
receptor overexpression does not determine growth
dependency. Mol Cell Biol. 2000; 20:3210–3223.

17.	 Pradeep S, Kim SW, Wu SY, Nishimura M,
Chaluvally-Raghavan P, Miyake T, Pecot CV, Kim SJ,
Choi HJ, Bischoff FZ, Mayer JA, Huang L, Nick AM, et al.
Hematogenous metastasis of ovarian cancer: rethinking
mode of spread. Cancer Cell. 2014; 26:77–91.

30.	 Krop IE, Beeram M, Modi S, Jones SF, Holden SN, Yu W,
Girish S, Tibbitts J, Yi JH, Sliwkowski MX, Jacobson F,
Lutzker SG, Burris HA. Phase I study of trastuzumab-DM1,
an HER2 antibody-drug conjugate, given every 3 weeks to
patients with HER2-positive metastatic breast cancer. J Clin
Oncol. 2010; 28:2698–2704.

18.	 Lemmon MA, Schlessinger J. Cell signaling by receptor
tyrosine kinases. Cell. 2010; 141:1117–1134.
19.	 Lambert JM, Chari RV. Ado-trastuzumab Emtansine
(T-DM1): an antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) for HER2positive breast cancer. J Med Chem. 2014; 57:6949–6964.

31.	 Sanchez-Martin M, Pandiella A. Differential action
of small molecule HER kinase inhibitors on receptor
heterodimerization: therapeutic implications. Int J Cancer.
2012; 131:244–252.

20.	 Clynes RA, Towers TL, Presta LG, Ravetch JV. Inhibitory
Fc receptors modulate in vivo cytotoxicity against tumor
targets. Nat Med. 2000; 6:443–446.

32.	 Borges J, Pandiella A, Esparis-Ogando A. Erk5 nuclear
location is independent on dual phosphorylation, and
favours resistance to TRAIL-induced apoptosis. Cell Signal.
2007; 19:1473–1487.

21.	 Chou TC, Motzer RJ, Tong Y, Bosl GJ. Computerized
quantitation of synergism and antagonism of taxol, topotecan, and cisplatin against human teratocarcinoma cell
growth: a rational approach to clinical protocol design.
J Natl Cancer Inst. 1994; 86:1517–1524.

33.	 Seoane S, Montero JC, Ocana A, Pandiella A. Effect of
multikinase inhibitors on caspase-independent cell death
and DNA damage in HER2-overexpressing breast cancer
cells. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2010; 102:1432–1446.

22.	 Lapenna S, Giordano A. Cell cycle kinases as therapeutic
targets for cancer. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2009; 8:547–566.
23.	 Barok M, Joensuu H, Isola J. Trastuzumab emtansine:
mechanisms of action and drug resistance. Breast Cancer
Res. 2014; 16:209.

34.	 Cabrera N, Diaz-Rodriguez E, Becker E, Martin-Zanca D,
Pandiella A. TrkA receptor ectodomain cleavage generates
a tyrosine-phosphorylated cell-associated fragment. J Cell
Biol. 1996; 132:427–436.

24.	 Barok M, Tanner M, Koninki K, Isola J. Trastuzumab-DM1
causes tumour growth inhibition by mitotic catastrophe in
trastuzumab-resistant breast cancer cells in vivo. Breast
Cancer Res. 2011; 13:R46.

35.	 Montero JC, Chen X, Ocana A, Pandiella A. Predominance
of mTORC1 over mTORC2 in the regulation of proliferation of ovarian cancer cells: therapeutic implications. Mol
Cancer Ther. 2012; 11:1342–1352.

25.	 Danial NN, Korsmeyer SJ. Cell death: critical control
points. Cell. 2004; 116:205–219.
26.	 Ocana A, Amir E, Seruga B, Martin M, Pandiella A. The
evolving landscape of protein kinases in breast cancer:
clinical implications. Cancer Treat Rev. 2013; 39:68–76.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30071

Oncotarget

