Original Article

Critical Analysis of Contemporary Clinical Research in MuscleInvasive and Metastatic Urothelial Cancer
A Report from the Bladder Cancer Advocacy Network Clinical Trials Working Group
Matthew D. Galsky, MD1; Ryan Hendricks, BS1; Robert Svatek, MD2; Rick Bangs, BA3; Jean Hoffman-Censits, MD4; Jessica
Clement, MD5; Robert Dreicer, MD6; Elizabeth Guancial, MD7; Noah Hahn, MD8; Seth P. Lerner, MD9; Peter H. O’Donnell,
MD10; Diane Zipursky Quale, JD3; Arlene Siefker-Radtke, MD11; William Shipley, MD12; Guru Sonpavde, MD13; Daniel Vaena,
MD14; Jacob Vinson, MHA15; and Jonathan Rosenberg, MD15

BACKGROUND: There have been no improvements in the treatment of metastatic urothelial cancer in the past several decades. A
census of contemporary clinical research in this disease was performed to identify potential barriers and opportunities. METHODS:
These authors performed a search for clinical trials exploring interventions in muscle-invasive and metastatic urothelial cancer, using
the ClinicalTrials.gov registry. Data extracted from the registry included title, recruitment status, interventions, sponsor, phase, enrollment, study design, and study sites. RESULTS: Among 120 eligible trials exploring interventions in muscle-invasive and metastatic
urothelial cancer, 73% were phase 2 and 73% were nonrandomized. The majority (63%) involved treatment in the metastatic disease
state. The median planned enrollment size per trial was 45 patients (interquartile range, 47 patients). The majority of trials (55%)
involved  3 study sites. Trials most commonly explored interventions in the first-line metastatic (30%) or second-line metastatic
(37%) settings. Targeted therapeutics were studied in 58% of the trials. Among 56 trials that completed enrollment, the median time
to complete accrual was 50 months (range, 10-109 months), and these trials enrolled a median of 40 patients per trial (interquartile
range, 44 patients). CONCLUSIONS: The majority of contemporary clinical trials in muscle-invasive and metastatic urothelial cancer
are small, nonrandomized, phase 2 trials involving 1 to 3 study sites. Enhanced communication and collaboration among the urothelial
cancer community, and other stakeholders, is needed to facilitate the design and conduct of trials capable of expediting progress in
C 2013 American Cancer Society.
this disease. Cancer 2013;119:1994-8. V
KEYWORDS: bladder cancer, urothelial cancer, metastatic, clinical trials.

INTRODUCTION
Cisplatin-based combination chemotherapy regimens, initially developed in the 1980s, marked a step forward in the treatment of urothelial cancer.1 Randomized trials subsequently demonstrated that when applied in the perioperative or metastatic settings, such treatment regimens prolonged patient survival.2-4 However, despite this therapeutic advance, the vast
majority of patients with metastatic urothelial cancer, and a large proportion of patients with muscle-invasive disease, will
still succumb to their disease. Although treatment has been made more tolerable in the past 30 years, it has not become
more effective.5 Urothelial carcinoma is trailing further and further behind the advances made in the management of most
other solid tumors.
There are multiple potential reasons for the lack of progress in the treatment of urothelial cancer.6 Patients with urothelial cancer are generally elderly and often have smoking-related comorbidities, both of which may impact treatment tolerability and clinical trial eligibility. Enrollment to clinical trials has been particularly challenging in this disease, with
several large important trials closing early due to poor accrual.7 Limited funding opportunities for investigators and limited market potential for industry have also often been cited as reasons for the lack of advances in treatment.
Recognizing the obstacles to clinical drug development in urothelial cancer, it is imperative that precious patient and
financial resources be maximized. Accomplishing such a goal requires communication and collaboration among
Corresponding author: Matthew D. Galsky, MD, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, Tisch Cancer Institute, 1 Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY 10029; Fax: (212)
659-5599; matthew.galsky@mssm.edu
1
Mount Sinai School of Medicine, Tisch Cancer Institute, New York, New York; 2University of Texas Health Science Center San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas; 3Bladder Cancer Advocacy Network, Bethesda, Maryland; 4Jefferson Kimmel Cancer Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; 5University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington, Connecticut; 6Taussig Cancer Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio; 7Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts; 8IU Simon Cancer Center,
Indiana University, Indianapolis, Indiana; 9Baylor College of Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas; 10University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois; 11MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas; 12Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts; 13University of Alabama, Birmingham, Alabama; 14University
of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa; 15Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.27973, Received: September 24, 2012; Revised: November 6, 2012; Accepted: November 19, 2012, Published online March 1, 2013 in Wiley
Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

1994

Cancer

June 1, 2013

Clinical Trials in Advanced Urothelial Cancer/Galsky et al

investigators, patients and advocates, funding agencies,
and other stakeholders in an effort to shape the national,
and perhaps international, research agenda. With this in
mind, we sought to take a ‘‘snapshot view’’ of clinical
research in muscle-invasive and metastatic urothelial cancer over the past several years in an effort to identify
trends, barriers to progress, and opportunities to maximize successful drug development moving forward.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
The Bladder Cancer Advocacy Network (BCAN;
www.BCAN.org), founded in 2005, is a nonprofit organization dedicated to increasing public awareness about
bladder cancer, advancing bladder cancer research, and
providing educational and support services for the bladder
cancer community. The BCAN Clinical Trials Working
Group was formed in 2011 with the goal of addressing
barriers to the successful conduct of clinical trials in this
disease. Among the several high-priority activities initially
identified by the BCAN Clinical Trials Working Group
was a census of contemporary clinical research activities in
this disease.
Data Source

ClinicalTrials.gov is a publicly available clinical trial registry launched in February 2000. The registry, developed
and maintained by the National Library of Medicine, represents the most comprehensive source of data regarding
clinical trials performed within and outside the United
States. Details of the development of ClinicalTrials.gov
have previously been reported.8,9 ClinicalTrials.gov
includes both mandatory and optional data elements. In
September 2004, the International Committee of Medical
Journal Editors (ICMJE) issued guidance requiring prospective registration of clinical trials as a precondition for
publication. In September 2007, the US Food and Drug
Administration Amendment Act was enacted, expanding
the registration requirement and enacting penalties for
noncompliance.
Study Sample

Among the 130,756 studies registered within ClinicalTrials.gov as of July 31, 2012, we limited our study sample to ‘‘interventional studies’’ retrieved using the search
terms ‘‘bladder cancer,’’ ‘‘bladder neoplasm,’’ ‘‘urothelial
carcinoma,’’ and ‘‘transitional cell carcinoma.’’ We further
limited our sample to trials registered on or after September 13, 2005. This is the date after which all active trials,
and newly initiated trials, had to be registered to be considered for publication as per ICMJE policy. Trials
exploring interventions in patients with non–muscleCancer

June 1, 2013

invasive bladder cancer were subsequently manually
excluded by reviewing the details of each trial, and a study
on these trials will be reported separately.
Study Variables

Information on each trial was derived directly from ClinicalTrials.gov. Data elements extracted included: trial
number, title, recruitment status, study results, conditions, interventions, sponsor, phase, enrollment, study
design, outcome measures, and study sites. The probable
funding source for each trial was determined by a previously published algorithm.10 Studies were assigned ‘‘clinical disease state’’ categories of: neoadjuvant, local therapy,
bladder-sparing, adjuvant, first-line metastatic:cisplatineligible, first-line metastatic:cisplatin-ineligible, and second-line/beyond metastatic by reviewing the details of
each study, including the title, description, and eligibility
criteria. Interventions were categorized as: surgical, radiation, chemoradiation, supportive, cytotoxic, targeted, or
cytotoxic plus targeted, by reviewing the details of each
study including the title, description, and eligibility criteria. Targeted therapies were broadly defined as all systemic
agents with nonclassical cytotoxic mechanisms. Each trial
included in the final data set was evaluated by 2 independent reviewers (M.G. and R.H.).
Statistical Analysis

We conducted a descriptive analysis to derive a ‘‘snapshot
view’’ of clinical trials in muscle-invasive and metastatic
urothelial cancer registered between 2005 and 2012. We
sought to define the: trial phases, clinical disease states,
interventions, recruitment status, enrollment objectives,
study designs, funding sources, and study sites. According
to ClinicalTrials.gov, studies that are ‘‘active, not recruiting’’ indicate that the study is ‘‘ongoing (ie, patients are
being treated or examined), but enrollment has completed,’’ while ‘‘completed’’ indicates that the study has
‘‘concluded normally; participants are no longer being
examined or treated (ie, last patient’s last visit has
occurred).’’ Studies that are ‘‘suspended’’ have ‘‘halted
(recruiting and enrolling participants) prematurely but
potentially will resume,’’ while ‘‘terminated’’ studies have
‘‘halted prematurely and will not resume.’’ ‘‘Withdrawn’’
indicates that the ‘‘study halted prematurely, prior to
enrollment of the first participant.’’
RESULTS
Of the 130,756 trials registered on ClinicalTrials.gov,
24,479 were excluded as noninterventional studies. Of
the remaining 106,277 trials, 340 trials were retrieved
using the keywords outlined in the Materials and
1995

Original Article
TABLE 1. Trial Characteristics (n ¼ 120)
Characteristic
Phase
Phase 1
Phase 1/2
Phase 2
Phase 2/3
Phase 3
Unknown
Allocation
Single-arm
Randomized
Sponsor
Industry
National Cancer Institute
Institutional/other
Unknown
Recruitment status
Active, not recruiting
Completed
Not yet recruiting
Recruiting
Suspended
Terminated/withdrawn
Number of study sites
1
2
3
4
5
6
Location of sites
United States
Outside United States
Both

Number of Trials (%)

9 (8)
13 (11)
87 (73)
2 (2)
7 (6)
2 (2)
87 (73)
33 (27)
62 (52)
15 (13)
42 (35)
1 (1)
29 (24)
27 (23)
4 (3)
54 (45)
2 (2)
4 (3)
47 (39)
8 (7)
11 (9)
5 (4)
12 (10)
37 (31)
67 (56)
37 (31)
16 (13)

Methods section. Among these 340 trials, 82 were
excluded for not involving urothelial cancer, 59 were
excluded for involving non–muscle-invasive disease, and
79 were excluded due to registration prior to September
13, 2005, leaving 120 trials for the final analysis.
The characteristics of the 120 trials are detailed in
Table 1. The median size of these trials was 45 patients
(interquartile range, 47 patients). Forty-seven trials (39%)
involved a single center, and the majority of trials (55%)
involved  3 study sites. The vast majority of trials were
phase 2 trials (73%) and of these, 76% were
nonrandomized.
Twenty-seven trials (23%) were listed as having
completed accrual, whereas 29 trials (24%) were active
but no longer recruiting patients. The median time to
complete accrual to these 56 trials was 50 months (range,
10-109 months), and these trials enrolled a median of 40
patients per trial (interquartile range, 44 patients).
The trials categorized by clinical disease state are
highlighted in Figure 1. The majority of trials explored
interventions in the advanced/metastatic setting, with
1996

Figure 1. Trial distribution is shown by clinical disease state.
Distribution of 120 trials was analyzed by clinical disease
state being explored. Asterisk (*) indicates second-line or
beyond).

30% involving first-line therapy and 37% involving second-line therapy (and beyond). Figure 2 details the interventions explored among the 120 trials. Targeted
therapies were explored in 58% of the trials either as single
agents or in combination with cytotoxic drugs. The specific classes of targeted therapies explored are shown in
Table 2. Antiangiogenic therapies were the most common
targeted therapeutic class explored, included in 48% of
trials involving targeted therapies.
DISCUSSION
There have been no new drugs approved by the US Food
and Drug Administration for the treatment of advanced
urothelial cancer in the past several decades. Although
there are multiple reasons for this lack of progress, ultimately, the integration of new therapies into the urothelial
cancer armamentarium requires demonstrating meaningful improvements in clinical outcomes in the setting of
well-designed and executed prospective clinical trials.
The current ‘‘census’’ of clinical research in muscleinvasive and metastatic urothelial cancer reveals findings
that are perhaps not surprising, but nonetheless, concerning. The vast majority of trials being performed in this disease are small, single-arm, phase 2 trials involving 1 to 3
study sites. Accrual is slow, with completed trials enrolling
< 1 patient per month. Further troubling is the identification of several instances in which virtually identical trials
(eg, trials exploring gemcitabine, cisplatin, plus sunitinib)
Cancer

June 1, 2013

Clinical Trials in Advanced Urothelial Cancer/Galsky et al

TABLE 2. Classes of Targeted Therapeutics Being
Explored (n ¼ 69)
Therapeutic Class

Number of Trials (%)

Antiangiogenic
EGFR inhibitor
Immune therapy
mTOR inhibitor
Hormonal therapy
FGFR inhibitor
Other

33 (48)
10 (14)
9 (13)
5 (7)
3 (4)
2 (3)
7 (10)

Abbreviations: EGFR, epidermal growth factor receptor family; FGFR, fibroblast growth factor receptor; mTOR, mammalian target of rapamycin.

Figure 2. Trial distribution is shown by type of intervention.
Distribution of 120 trials was analyzed by therapeutic intervention being explored.

were being performed by separate institutions. Pooling
such efforts could likely have resulted in more robust sample sizes/trial designs potentially incorporating random
assignment.
Barriers such as insufficient funding and accrual
concerns have driven patient resources into small,
nonrandomized, single-center trials that are generally
not designed, nor intended, to immediately advance
current care standards. The results of many such trials
are difficult to interpret in the context of historical
controls, may not adequately inform ‘‘go/no-go’’ decisions, and may have had the unintended consequence
of adding to the perception that advances in urothelial
cancer are insurmountable. The current analysis
should serve as a charge to the urothelial cancer community for enhanced communication and collaboration in the conduct of clinical research in this disease.
Even more common malignancies, such as prostate
cancer, have greatly benefitted from coordination
among investigators and/or sites in the design, execution, and reporting of trials.11 This model has also
been highly successfully in less common malignancies,
as evidenced by organizations such as the Multiple
Myeloma Research Consortium (www.themmrc.org).
Without similar efforts in urothelial cancer, we are in
danger of continuing to develop small and ineffective
trials.
Cancer

June 1, 2013

The practical difficulties in establishing disease-specific networks and consortia are not negligible. Funding,
intellectual property, indemnification, academic credit,
and competition are among just a few notable obstacles
on a long list. Further, some investigators have argued
that a novel drug with unprecedented activity in urothelial
cancer is ultimately required to kick-start such collaborations. However, examples of enhanced collaboration and
communication in this disease are already materializing.
The Bladder Cancer Task Force of the National Cancer
Institute (NCI) Genitourinary Cancer Steering Committee was recently established to harmonize research efforts
in urothelial cancer within the NCI Cooperative Group
setting. In addition, the Society of Urologic Oncology has
formed the Clinical Trials Consortium, a national alliance
of academic and community based urologic oncologists
committed to fostering urologic oncology clinical research
within the United States, primarily focused on clinically
localized disease. Development of a similar effort for the
conduct of trials in patients with metastatic urothelial cancer, to complement NCI Cooperative Group activities, is
being discussed in a preliminary fashion, within the
BCAN Clinical Trials Working Group.
The majority (70%) of contemporary clinical trials
identified in the current analysis are being performed in
the metastatic, rather than muscle-invasive, setting.
Although this is consistent with the historical drug development paradigm of first demonstrating the safety and
activity of novel therapies in more advanced disease, the
application of novel approaches in the muscle-invasive
disease state may arguably have an even greater impact
on patient outcomes. Furthermore, the historical drug
development paradigm has been challenged with neoadjuvant trials being performed in other malignancies as a
platform for novel therapeutic development given the
ready access to pre- and posttreatment tumor tissue.12
Encouragingly, a few early examples of such innovative
1997

Original Article

trial designs were identified in the current analysis,
including ‘‘window of opportunity’’ trials exploring
agents such as dasatinib, erlotinib, and ipilimumab. In
addition, an NCI-sponsored workshop entitled, ‘‘Novel
Neoadjuvant Therapy for Bladder Cancer’’ was held in
September 2011 to discuss the feasibility of larger multisite trials in muscle-invasive disease to foster the development of novel agents and approaches, including in the
context of bladder-sparing protocols. As a result of the
NCI workshop, there are 2 large multicenter trials in the
muscle-invasive disease setting, integrating robust correlative science, currently being planned.
Despite the efforts outlined, increased funding of
bladder cancer research, particularly with respect to multicenter clinical/translational efforts, is needed to ensure
future success. Of the trials evaluated in the current analysis, only 13% were sponsored by NCI whereas 52% were
sponsored by industry. Although each year in the United
States, lung cancer, prostate cancer, and colorectal cancer
result in approximately 8-fold, 3-fold, and 3-fold more
deaths than bladder cancer, respectively, NCI funding in
2010 for each of these diseases was more than 10-fold
greater than for bladder cancer.13
Although individual small phase 2 trials may not
necessarily move the field forward, pooling data from
multiple studies may generate insights regarding prognostic factors, clinical subtypes, comparative effectiveness, and may inform future clinical trial design.
Learning as much as possible from each patient, and
from each trial, is critical and allowing the data from
these trials to be ‘‘locked up’’ and inaccessible should be
deemed unacceptable moving forward. For example, the
first-line trials included in the current analysis are
expected to enroll a total of 3057 patients, whereas the
second-line trials are expected to enroll a total of 2961
patients. Pooling these data for secondary analyses would
provide an unmatched resource.
We cannot afford to let our lack of communication
and collaboration be among the many barriers to the development of more effective therapies in urothelial cancer.
Fortunately, there are many recent examples of enhanced
cooperation in clinical research in this disease. Ultimately,
additional disease-specific research networks, or consortia,
are needed to make progress for our patients as expeditiously as possible.

1998

FUNDING SOURCES
No specific funding was disclosed.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
The authors made no disclosures.

REFERENCES
1. Sternberg CN, Yagoda A, Scher HI, et al. M-VAC (methotrexate,
vinblastine, doxorubicin and cisplatin) for advanced transitional cell
carcinoma of the urothelium. J Urol. 1988;139:461-469.
2. Griffiths G, Hall R, Sylvester R, Raghavan D, Parmar MK;
International Collaboration of Trialists; Medical Research Council
Advanced Bladder Cancer Working Party; European Organization
for Research and Treatment of Cancer Genito-Urinary Tract
Cancer Group; Australian Bladder Cancer Study Group; National
Cancer Institute of Canada Clinical Trials Group; Finnbladder;
Norwegian Bladder Cancer Study Group; Club Urologico Espanol de Tratamiento Oncologico Group. International phase III
trial assessing neoadjuvant cisplatin, methotrexate, and vinblastine
chemotherapy for muscle-invasive bladder cancer: long-term
results of the BA06 30894 trial. J Clin Oncol. 2011;29:
2171-2177.
3. Grossman HB, Natale RB, Tangen CM, et al. Neoadjuvant
chemotherapy plus cystectomy compared with cystectomy alone
for locally advanced bladder cancer. N Engl J Med.
2003;349:859-866.
4. Loehrer PJ Sr, Einhorn LH, Elson PJ, et al. A randomized comparison of cisplatin alone or in combination with methotrexate, vinblastine, and doxorubicin in patients with metastatic urothelial
carcinoma: a cooperative group study. J Clin Oncol. 1992;10:
1066-1073.
5. von der Maase H, Hansen SW, Roberts JT, et al. Gemcitabine and
cisplatin versus methotrexate, vinblastine, doxorubicin, and cisplatin
in advanced or metastatic bladder cancer: results of a large, randomized, multinational, multicenter, phase III study. J Clin Oncol.
2000;18:3068-3077.
6. Dreicer R. The future of drug development in urothelial cancer.
J Clin Oncol. 2012;30:473-475.
7. Richter S, Sridhar SS. New directions for biologic targets in urothelial carcinoma. Mol Cancer Ther. 2012;11:1226-1235.
8. Zarin DA, Tse T, Williams RJ, Califf RM, Ide NC. The ClinicalTrials.gov results database–update and key issues. N Engl J Med.
2011;364:852-860.
9. Zarin DA, Tse T, Ide NC. Trial registration at ClinicalTrials.gov
between May and October 2005. N Engl J Med. 2005;353:
2779-2787.
10. Califf RM, Zarin DA, Kramer JM, Sherman RE, Aberle LH, Tasneem MA. Characteristics of clinical trials registered in ClinicalTrials.gov, 2007-2010. JAMA. 2012;307:1838-1847.
11. Morris MJ, Basch EM, Wilding G, et al. Department of Defense
prostate cancer clinical trials consortium: a new instrument for
prostate cancer clinical research. Clin Genitourin Cancer. 2009;7:
51-57.
12. Barker AD, Sigman CC, Kelloff GJ, Hylton NM, Berry DA,
Esserman LJs. I-SPY 2: an adaptive breast cancer trial design in the
setting of neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Clin Pharmacol Ther.
2009;86:97-100.
13. National Cancer Institute. National Cancer Institute Fact Sheet:
Cancer Research Funding. http://www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/factsheet/NCI/research-funding. Accessed October 6, 2012.

Cancer

June 1, 2013

