Research Article

Mechanistic Influences for Mutation Induction Curves after
Exposure to DNA-Reactive Carcinogens
Shareen H. Doak, Gareth J.S. Jenkins, George E. Johnson, Emma Quick,
Elizabeth M. Parry, and James M. Parry
School of Medicine, University of Wales Swansea, Swansea, Wales, United Kingdom

Abstract
A mechanistic understanding of carcinogenic genotoxicity is
necessary to determine consequences of chemical exposure on
human populations and improve health risk assessments.
Currently, linear dose-responses are assumed for DNA reactive
compounds, ignoring cytoprotective processes that may limit
permanent damage. To investigate the biological significance
of low-dose exposures, human lymphoblastoid cells were
treated with alkylating agents that have different mechanisms
of action and DNA targets: methylmethane sulfonate (MMS),
methylnitrosourea (MNU), ethylmethane sulfonate (EMS), and
ethylnitrosourea (ENU). Chromosomal damage and point
mutations were quantified with the micronucleus and
hypoxanthine phosphoribosyltransferase forward mutation
assays. MNU and ENU showed linear dose-responses, whereas
MMS and EMS had nonlinear curves containing a range of
nonmutagenic low doses. The lowest observed effect level for
induction of chromosomal aberrations was 0.85 Mg/mL MMS
and 1.40 Mg/mL EMS; point mutations required 1.25 Mg/mL
MMS and 1.40 Mg/mL EMS before a mutagenic effect was
detected. This nonlinearity could be due to homeostatic
maintenance by DNA repair, which is efficient at low doses
of compounds that primarily alkylate N7-G and rarely attack O
atoms. A pragmatic threshold for carcinogenicity may therefore exist for such genotoxins. [Cancer Res 2007;67(8):3904–11]

Introduction
Cancer has been closely associated with the variety of
carcinogens that humans come into contact with, not only in
their natural environment but also through occupational and
recreational exposures. Assessing and characterizing the mechanisms of such agents in promoting genetic damage is therefore
important in gaining a more complete understanding of their
carcinogenic potential. It has been assumed that a linear
relationship exists between exposure to DNA reactive genotoxins,
the induction of DNA lesions, and their conversion to mutagenic
alterations (1, 2). However, mammalian cells have a number of
homeostatic mechanisms in vivo that provide protection to a
certain extent (e.g., DNA repair, chemical detoxification, or a
redundant target). These mechanisms initially prevent damage
induced from becoming a permanent defect until they become
saturated, thus resulting in a no observed effect level (NOEL), the
experimental concentration below which no statistically significant

Conflicts of interest: The authors have no conflicts of interest.
Requests for reprints: Shareen H. Doak, School of Medicine, University of Wales
Swansea, Singleton Park, Swansea SA2 8PP, Wales, United Kingdom. Phone: 44-1792295388; Fax: 44-1792-295447; E-mail: s.h.doak@swansea.ac.uk.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-06-4061

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (8). April 15, 2007

increase in mutations is detected. However, the existence of such a
threshold effect for agents with carcinogenic potential has been
long debated and is still controversial. Currently, there is only
limited data with regard to the kinetics of mutation induction in
the low-dose region.
Non–DNA reactive agents have been shown to demonstrate
NOELs (3, 4), primarily due to the redundancy of their cellular
targets. Aneugenic compounds, such as colchicine, nocodazole,
vinblastine, and griseofulvin (5–7), that inhibit tubulin polymerization are prime examples. As the spindle apparatus consists of
many tubulin monomers, its inactivation would require multiple
targets to be damaged before a significant adverse effect occurs;
thus, chromosome segregation is only altered at the concentration
that prevents the formation of sufficient microtubules. In contrast,
DNA reactive chemicals have been assumed to have a nonthreshold mode of action, as they directly induce DNA lesions that
have the potential to be fixed as point mutations or chromosomal
aberrations. However, homeostasis in mammalian cells allows
them to adapt to environmental insults, which may be predicted
to limit genetic damage, therefore introducing a range of low
doses that have biologically insignificant effects (i.e., NOEL).
Determining the existence of threshold dose-responses for
genotoxic compounds has important implications because exposure to low concentrations within the NOEL would carry little
carcinogenic risk as DNA aberrations are not fixed, thus they have
no biological significance or further consequences on the cell.
Conversely, in the case of chemotherapeutic agents, ensuring that
treatment doses fall above any threshold is essential for efficient
tumor killing.
An important class of DNA reactive genotoxins also used as
chemotherapeutics are alkylating agents (8). Their modes of action
and DNA targets have been well characterized, and they include a
wide variety of chemicals, many of which are suspected or proved
carcinogens. Human exposure to alkylating agents is frequent in
daily life through occupational sources, medical treatments, and
several endogenous sources, including nitrosation of compounds in
food and tobacco smoke into agents that alkylate DNA (9–11).
Alkylating agents can be classified as monofunctional or bifunctional (i.e., single or double reactive groups), and they are
electrophilic; thus, they react with electron-rich nucleophilic
centers within DNA and proteins, with their specific targets
depending upon the reactivity of the individual chemicals. The
Swain Scott constant (s value) is used as a standard measure of the
reactivity of alkylating agents (12). Compounds with high s values
target highly nucleophilic centers (e.g., N7-G, N3-A), whereas low–s
value alkylating agents are less sensitive to the level of
nucleophilicity of their target; thus, they do not discriminate
between centers of high and low nucleophilicity and so are able to
alkylate O atoms (e.g., O6-G) much more efficiently than those with
high s values.

3904

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Dose Responses of DNA Adducts and Mutations

To understand the mutagenic potential of DNA reactive
compounds, we need to determine the mechanisms which
influence the relationship between exposure, DNA adduct formation, and consequent genetic damage. Humans are most frequently
exposed to monofunctional alkylating agents; thus for the present
study, we have chosen to use model compounds with similar
adduct spectra to those humans we come into contact with. Four
model monofunctional alkylating agents with differing mechanisms
were therefore used to assess the biological significance of
low-dose exposures: methylmethane sulfonate (MMS) and ethylmethane sulfonate (EMS) that primarily induce N7-G adducts
and methylnitrosourea (MNU) and ethylnitrosourea (ENU) that
potently induce O adducts.
The alkylsulfonates were initially developed as chemosterilants
for insects and mammalian pests (13). MMS has been used as a
solvent, insecticide, and chemotherapeutic agent, but due to the
strong carcinogenic potential of this group of agents, both MMS
and EMS are now primarily used as model alkylating agents. MMS
and EMS have high s values, thus react predominantly with ring N
atoms (Table 1; ref. 14), and consequently both are potent
mutagens due to mispairing during replication or the production
of abasic sites and single-strand DNA breaks (15). The nitrosoureas
have been used in the synthesis of diazo compounds, but again
both MNU and ENU are highly mutagenic (13). Nitrosoureas are
much more potent mutagens than methanesulfonates, and they
also differ in their preferred DNA target sites. Most alkylating
agents target the N7 and, to a lesser extent, the O6 positions of
guanine, but MNU and ENU have high affinity for oxygen atoms
due to their low s values (Table 1; ref. 13). In addition, they are
carbamoylating agents, which involve the transfer of their alkyl
groups to nucleophilic amino groups within nuclear proteins (16).
Generally, methylating agents are f10-fold to 20-fold more
reactive than ethylating agents, as the larger groups are less
efficiently transferred. Ethyl adducts are considered more mutagenic, probably as methyl adducts are repaired with greater
efficiency (13, 17). However, factors, such as alkylating agent
reactivity and the sequences they preferentially target, must also be
taken into account.
Table 1. DNA adduct profiles for MMS, MNU, EMS and
ENU
Adduct
s value
N7-G
N3-G
N7-A
N3-A
N3-T
N3-C
O6-G
O2-T
O4-T
O2-C
Phosphotriesters

MMS

EMS

MNU

ENU

>0.83
81–83
0.6
1.8
10.4–11.3
0.1
<1
0.3
Nd
Nd
Nd
0.8

0.67
58–65
0.3–0.9
1.1–1.9
4.2–4.9
Nd
0.4–0.6
2
Nd
Nd
0.3
12–13

0.42
65–70
0.6–1.9
0.8–2
8–9
0.1–0.3
0.06–0.6
5.9–8.2
0.1–0.3
0.1–0.7
0.1
12–17

0.26
11–11.5
0.6–1.6
0.3–0.6
2.8–5.6
0.8
0.2–0.6
7.8–9.5
7.4–7.8
1–2.5
2.7–2.8
55–57

NOTE: Adapted from Beranek (13). Data are in percentages; all possible
adducts were not included, so columns do not add up to 100%.
Abbreviation: Nd, not detected.

www.aacrjournals.org

We have, therefore, focused on two pairs of model alkylating
agents, MMS/MNU and EMS/ENU, to investigate low–dose-response
relationships after exposure to DNA reactive genotoxins, assessing
the induction of chromosomal damage and gene mutation. These
compounds were chosen due to their differing reactive mechanisms,
DNA targets, and sizes of alkyl groups. In addition, their adducts are
removed, at least in part, by different repair mechanisms. Thus,
comparisons both between and within these groups allow us to
relate the consequent results to their mechanisms and infer if repair
is involved. Hence improving our understanding of the underpinning
factors that contribute to nonlinear dose-responses and, thus,
govern the mutagenic potential of this group of carcinogens.

Materials and Methods
Chemicals. MMS, MNU, EMS, and ENU were all purchased from Sigma
(Dorset, United Kingdom). All chemical dilutions were freshly prepared
from stock solutions with water.
Cell culture. The human lymphoblastoid cell line AHH-1 (18) was
cultured in RPMI 1640 (Life Technologies, Paisley, United Kingdom)
supplemented with 1% L-glutamine (Life Technologies) and 10% donor
horse serum (BDGentest, Oxford, United Kingdom). The cells were
maintained at a concentration of 1 to 2  105/mL.
Cytokinesis blocked micronucleus assay. AHH-1 (10 mL) suspension
with cells at 1  105/mL were seeded for 24 h at 37jC, 5% CO2. Each was
dosed with appropriately diluted test chemical (in duplicate) and 3 Ag/mL
cytocholasin B for one cell cycle. Treated cells were harvested, cytospun onto
polished glass slides, fixed in 90% methanol, stained with acridine orange
(12.5 mg/100 mL phosphate buffer, pH 6.8), and viewed under an Olympus
BX50 fluorescence microscope with a UplanF1 100 per 1.3 oil objective. The
criteria for identifying micronuclei were as previously described (19). Two
thousand binucleated cells were scored per treatment (1000 per duplicate).
However, the number of binucleate cells that were analyzed was increased to
10,000 for several doses surrounding the NOEL.
Kinetochores were stained to classify test chemicals as clastogenic or
aneugenic with CREST antibody (Quadratech, Surrey, United Kingdom).
Nuclei were counterstained with 4¶,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole, and 100
micronuclei per dose were scored as positive or negative for kinetochore(s)
under an Olympus BX50 fluorescence microscope.
Forward mutation assays. To remove background mutants within the
AHH-1 cell population, 5  105 cells/mL were grown for 3 days in the 2 
104 mol/L hypoxanthine–8  107 mol/L aminopterin–3.5  105 mol/L
thymidine (HAT) media, followed by 24 h in HT media (as HAT media but
without the aminopterin) and then transferred to normal growth media for
3 to 4 days. Cell suspension (10 mL) at 5  105/mL were exposed to the test
chemical at the appropriate concentration, for 24 h at 37jC, 5% CO2. The
cells were washed to remove the alkylating agent resuspended in 50-mL
fresh media and incubated for 13 days. Then the 96-well plates were loaded
with 4  104 cells per well in selective media containing 0.6 Ag/mL
6-thioguanine [hypoxanthine phosphoribosyltransferase (HPRT) assay] or
4 Ag/mL trifluorothymidine [thymidine kinase (TK) assay]. In addition,
plates without selection containing 20 cells per well were also required to
determine the plating efficiency. All plates were incubated for 14 days at
37jC, 5% CO2, in a humidified atmosphere. Subsequent colony formation
(>20 cells in diameter) was scored to determine the mutation frequency of
each dose, calculated as described by Furth et al. (20).
For each dose, 20 96-well plates for assessing mutation frequency and
another 20 for plating efficiency were set up. However, this was increased to
100 mutation frequency and 50 plating efficiency of 96-well plates for eight
doses surrounding a potential NOEL.
Statistical analysis. A one-way ANOVA, followed by a Dunnett’s posthoc
test, was used to determine if any of the treatment doses were significantly
different from the zero dose. Statistical modeling was done by root
transformation of the data once the control values had been subtracted
p
[ ({x  x c} + 0.5)] to standardize it, followed by plotting a log graph to
determine the NOEL/lowest observed effect level (LOEL) concentrations.

3905

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (8). April 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 1. Influence of MMS (A ), EMS (B ), MNU (C ), and ENU (D ) dose upon micronucleus frequency in the AHH-1 cell line. Points, mean of treatments done in
duplicate; bars, SD. *, the first statistically significant increases in chromosome damage at 0.85 Ag/mL MMS (A), 1.40 Ag/mL EMS (B ), 0.15 Ag/mL MNU (C ), and
0.50 Ag/mL ENU (D ); %Mn/Bn, percentage of binucleated cells containing one or more micronuclei.

Results
The cytokinesis blocked micronucleus (CBMN) and HPRT
forward mutation assays were used to assess the frequency of
chromosomal damage and point mutations, respectively, after
exposure to low concentrations of MMS, MNU, EMS, and ENU, to
determine whether we can estimate NOEL and LOEL values, and
thus, whether there are nonlinear dose-response relationships for
these model alkylating agents. Initial dose setting assays were done
for each compound, with both assays to identify the low-dose range
of the concentration-response curves (data not shown). Subsequently, doses ranging from 0 to 2.5 Ag/mL and 0 to 2.0 Ag/mL
MMS, EMS, and ENU were focused on for further detailed analysis
in the CBMN and HPRT assays, respectively. For MNU, the
corresponding dose ranges assessed were 0 to 0.08 Ag/mL and 0
to 0.2 Ag/mL.
Chromosomal aberration induction. The dose-response
relationships of MMS, MNU, EMS, and ENU, with respect to the
induction of chromosome damage, are illustrated in Fig. 1. A NOEL
ranging between 0 to 0.80 Ag/mL MMS and 0 to 1.35 Ag/mL EMS
was identified. Very sharp and statistically significant increases in
micronuclei frequency were then observed, resulting in LOEL
concentrations at 0.85 and 1.40 Ag/mL for MMS and EMS,
respectively (P < 0.05). Subsequent increases in concentration
above the LOEL resulted in progressive increases in chromosomal
damage, as detected by increasing frequency of micronuclei
formation.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (8). April 15, 2007

The alkylnitrosoureas, however, exhibited very different doseresponses compared with the alkylmethanesulfonates. No clear
NOEL was observed with either MNU or ENU (Fig. 1), instead
with each increase in dose, there was an incremental increase
in micronucleus induction. The first dose that induced a
statistically significant positive response was 0.15 Ag/mL MNU
and 0.50 Ag/mL ENU (P < 0.05), although increases in the
micronucleus frequency above the control were observed at lower
doses in both cases.
Over the dose ranges assessed, the methylating agents induced
reductions in cell viability. At the top dose of 2.5 Ag/mL MMS,
cell viability was at 76%. MNU was the most potent alkylating
agent, demonstrating only 64% cell viability at 1.5 Ag/mL. In
contrast, the ethylating agents had a more moderate effect on cell
survival over the experimental concentrations. Despite some
fluctuations, EMS had very little effect on lowering cell viability
between 0 and 2.0 Ag/mL, whereas ENU resulted in a slight
reduction to 90% at 2.0 Ag/mL. Thus, overall the order of toxicity is
MNU > MMS > ENU > EMS. However, for all four alkylating agents,
LOEL was at concentrations that did not severely diminish cell
survival at 90% to 100% viability. Thus, the genetic damage induced
at these doses was not a consequence of cytotoxicity-related
mechanisms.
Kinetochore staining was subsequently used to determine
whether the micronuclei induced by the alkylating agents
contained whole chromosomes or fragments. In all cases, as dose

3906

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Dose Responses of DNA Adducts and Mutations

increased the proportion of kinetochore, negative micronuclei
increased, thus confirming that these compounds predominantly
act via clastogenic mechanisms, inducing chromosome breakage
and not aneuploidy.
HPRT mutation frequencies. To obtain sufficient statistical
power, 100 96-well plates per dose with 4  104 cells per well
were scored for each concentration analyzed within the low-dose
ranges to be characterized. Figure 2 illustrates the mutation
frequencies for each dose assessed with all the four test
compounds.
Both MMS and EMS showed a range of low doses that lay within
a NOEL, 0 to 1.0 and 0 to 1.2 Ag/mL, respectively. A sharp increase
in mutation frequency was then observed at 1.25 Ag/mL MMS and
1.4 Ag/mL EMS, which represented their LOEL. A 3-fold and 5-fold
increase in mutation frequency was therefore observed between
the NOEL and LOEL doses for MMS and EMS, respectively.
Statistical modeling was done by root transformation of the data
once the control mutation frequency had been subtracted to
normalize the data before analysis. This method focuses on the
NOEL and LOEL concentrations to determine if they are
significantly different from the control values. Indeed, the
statistical analysis confirmed that NOEL doses did not significantly
differ from the control, whereas LOEL doses represented the first
statistically significant increase in mutation frequency observed for
both MMS and EMS (P < 0.05), thus demonstrating that the alkyl
methanesulfonates have nonlinear dose-responses.

In contrast to the MMS and EMS results, and in agreement with
the CBMN assay data, MNU and ENU show linear dose-responses
even when very low concentrations are used (Fig. 2). The first
significant (P < 0.05) increase in mutation frequency occurred at
0.0075 Ag/mL MNU and 0.4 Ag/mL ENU, with no obvious NOEL and
simply a steady increase in mutation frequency with increasing
dose. Consequently, the order of mutagenicity for the four model
alkylating agents assessed in human lymphoblastoid cells was MNU
> ENU > MMS > EMS. By reviewing Table 1, we can speculate that
this order may be directly associated with the levels of O6-alkyl-G
adduct induction, particularly as EMS and MNU induce very
similar levels of all adducts with exception of the O6-G site, yet the
latter is a far more potent mutagen.
HPRT assay validation. To assess the mutation frequency in a
different gene locus, the experiment with MMS was repeated with
the TK forward mutation assay. The resultant TK dose-response
curve was very similar to the HPRT data (Fig. 3), with a NOEL
observed between 0 and 1.0 Ag/mL MMS and a significant LOEL at
1.25 Ag/mL MMS in the TK assay. The TK locus was generally
found to have a higher background mutation frequency than HPRT
(f10-fold), but this is the standard difference between the two loci
and is due to the high proportion of mutations at the HPRT locus
being lethal. As both the HPRT and TK loci showed the same NOEL
and LOEL concentrations after treatment with MMS, it suggests a
genome-wide increase in mutation frequency after exposure to the
alkylating agents through the same mutagenic mechanism.

Figure 2. Dose-response relationships of MMS (A), EMS (B), MNU (C ), and ENU (D ) with respect to HPRT gene mutation frequency (MF). *, the first statistically
significant increases in mutation frequency at 1.25 Ag/mL MMS (A ), 1.40 Ag/mL EMS (B ), 0.0075 Ag/mL MNU (C), and 0.40 Ag/mL ENU (D ); MF, number of
6-thioguanine resistant clones/106 clone-forming cells. Points, average mutation frequency calculated from 100 96-well plates, each dose done in triplicate; bars, SD.

www.aacrjournals.org

3907

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (8). April 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 3. MMS mutation frequency dose-response relationship according to the
TK forward mutation assay. MF, the number of trifluorothymidine resistant
clones/106 clone-forming cells. Points, average mutation frequency calculated
from 100 96-well plates, with each dose done in triplicate. *, the first statistically
significant increase in mutation frequency at 1.25 Ag/mL MMS.

In addition, it is possible that the observed NOEL/LOEL
response was limited by the sensitivity of the HPRT assay rather
than the NOEL for mutation induction by the alkylating agents. As
the number of cells treated per experiment governs assay
sensitivity, in addition to our standard assay (using 4  105 cells/
mL), the MMS experiment was repeated with cells plated in
selective media at a concentration of 2  105/mL and 6  105/mL.
As Fig. 4 illustrates, an increase in overall mutation frequency was
observed due to the same concentration of selective toxic analogue
with an increased number of cells plated, but the position of the
NOEL and LOEL doses remained the same regardless of the
starting concentration of cells. Consequently, the assay used is
considered sensitive for analysis of mutation frequency in these
low-dose regions, as true dose-responses were evident.

chromosomal damage and 0.0075 Ag/mL MNU or 0.4 Ag/mL ENU
for the induction of point mutations. Although increases in genetic
damage were apparent at lower doses, they lacked significance but
they indicate that the presence of MNU and ENU at any level has
the potential to generate a detectable adverse effect.
However, strikingly, we have showed that some compounds that
interact directly with DNA to form adducts have a nonlinear doseresponse. MMS and EMS both display a range of low doses that
represent a NOEL, with LOELs at 0.85 Ag/mL MMS and 1.4 Ag/mL
EMS for the induction of chromosomal damage, and LOELs at 1.25
Ag/mL MMS and 1.4 Ag/mL EMS for point mutations. The LOELs
were not at concentrations that significantly decreased cell
viability; thus, the sharp increases in chromosomal damage and
mutation frequencies observed were not induced via a cytotoxicityrelated mechanism. This lack of cell death produces viable mutant
cells which correlates with increased concern for tumorigenic
potential in vivo.
With respect to both the induction of chromosomal damage and
point mutations, the order of potency of the test compounds was
MNU > ENU > MMS > EMS, which is in agreement with the
literature (25), and might be associated with the level of O6-alky-G
adduct induction (Table 1). However, the lesions that cause gene
mutations are different from those that cause chromosomal breaks.

Discussion
Characterization of the genotoxic mechanisms of xenobiotic
compounds is important for human health risk assessment and in
understanding their carcinogenic potential. DNA reactive agents
have been shown to induce DNA adducts in a linear manner with
increasing dose (21–23). Consequently, such compounds are
currently assumed to have linear dose-responses and abide by
the ‘‘single hit, single target’’ hypothesis, whereby a mutation (that
has the potential to promote neoplastic transformation) results
from a single interaction, causing a nucleotide base change (24).
However, this does not take into account the cytoprotective
mechanisms that potentially counteract any disturbances induced
after exposure to genotoxic agents, thus limiting the abnormalities
observed. We therefore did a quantitative analysis with four
alkylating agents (demonstrating different modes of action and
DNA targets) as model compounds to investigate the biological
significance of low-dose exposures. Hence, a simple in vitro system
based upon a human cell model was used to assess intrinsic
cellular defense.
Consistent with popular belief, MNU and ENU displayed linear
dose-responses in both assays used for this investigation. The
lowest doses that induced a statistically significant increase in
genetic damage were 0.15 Ag/mL MNU or 0.5 Ag/mL ENU for

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (8). April 15, 2007

Figure 4. HPRT mutation frequency induced by MMS with differing cell plating
concentrations for assay validation. A, 2  105 cells/mL; B, 6  105 cells/mL.
In both cases, a significant LOEL is evident at 1.25 Ag/mL MMS (*), indicating
that nonlinearity is a true dose-response and not a consequence of assay
sensitivity.

3908

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Dose Responses of DNA Adducts and Mutations

Figure 5. Influence of MMS dose upon micronucleus frequency in the MGMT
deficient MT1 cell line. *, the first statistically significant increase in chromosome
damage at 0.85 Ag/mL.

O6-alky-G, O2-alkyl-T, and O4-alkyl-T are directly associated with the
induction of GC to AT, AT to TA, and AT to GC point mutations,
respectively, whereas alkylation at N atoms are thought to be the
dominant precursors for chromosomal damage (26, 27). Consequently, the NOELs observed in the CBMN assay with MMS and
EMS treatments are likely to be due to the repair of N7-alkyl-G,
whereas repair of O6-alky-G could give rise to the NOELs displayed
with these compounds in the HPRT assay. Phosphotriesters are also
a frequent target for alkylation, particularly with ENU (Table 1).
They are believed to interfere with DNA-protein binding but do not
seem to inhibit replication (28). In addition, there is no evidence to
suggest that alkyl-phosphotriesters are premutagenic lesions; thus,
they are unlikely to contribute to the dose-response relationships
observed in the current study.
There are a number of mechanisms, including detoxification,
conjugation, and exclusion, that may be responsible for contributing
to genotoxic thresholds, particularly in the in vivo situation (11).
However, DNA repair is the putative mechanism that is thought to be
responsible for biological pragmatic threshold dose-responses after
exposure to genotoxic compounds, as it is primarily responsible for
fixing DNA adducts as permanent damage and may well be able to
successfully remove such adducts at low levels (29, 30). Thus, at low
doses, the rate of adduct repair is faster than its rate of formation,
resulting in a NOEL. The key repairable adducts induced by
alkylating agents occur at the N7 and O6 positions of guanine, and
they are corrected via different mechanisms. N7-alkyl-G adducts are
substrates for the base excision repair (BER) pathway (9) and are
removed to a lesser extent by mismatch repair (31), whereas the
methylguanine DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) enzyme is primarily responsible for repair of O6-alkyl-G adducts, although nucleotide
excision repair is also thought to be involved occasionally when the
MGMT enzyme is overloaded (9, 27).
When the alkylmethane sulfonates are compared with their
counterpart, the nitrosoureas (Table 1), they generally induce far
more N7-G adducts, considerably less O6-G adducts, and do not
induce thymine adducts at all. At low doses, BER may be
responsible for removing the N7-alkyl-G lesions induced by MMS
and EMS, whereas the MGMT enzyme can probably cope with the
low levels of O6-alkyl-G adducts, thus resulting in their NOEL
concentration ranges for the induction of chromosomal damage

www.aacrjournals.org

and point mutations, respectively. In support of this theory, we
have preliminary data demonstrating that expression of the MGMT
gene is significantly up-regulated when cells are treated with MMS
at doses below the pragmatic threshold (data not shown). The
increased quantity of repair enzyme is likely to be responsible for
removing adducts and therefore preventing mutagenic change.
However, at the LOEL concentrations, these repair pathways are
working at their full capacity; adducts will start to escape repair,
become fixed permanent defects, and subsequent increases in dose
result in a more linear increase in damage. The MMS and EMS
NOELs that we have shown experimentally may therefore be due to
efficient repair by both BER and MGMT.
MNU and ENU also induce N7-alkyl-G adducts that may be
efficiently repaired by BER at low doses, but they also induce a
comparatively larger proportion of O6-alkyl-G lesions that may be
too extensive for the MGMT enzyme to correct even at low doses.
In addition, they induce adducts at O2-T and O4-T, which are both
very poorly repaired; thus, the unrepaired O adducts may result in
their linear concentration-responses. The importance of the
thymine adducts have been shown by Guttenplan (32) when he
reported that, at low ENU doses, mutations at AT sites
predominated (as a result of O2-ethyl-T and O4-ethyl-T), but as
concentrations increased, more mutations were induced at GC
sites due to saturation of the MGMT enzyme, and thus, persistence
of O6-ethyl-G. MNU has a very similar adduct profile to EMS, but it
induces a higher proportion of adducts at O atoms; thus, the
linearity the MNU shows may be due to the excess of O6-methyl-G
that are not completely removed and the unrepaired O2-T and O4-T
adducts. Consequently, the low level of O6-alkyl-G induced by
MMS (0.3%) and EMS (2%) at concentrations below 1 Ag/mL and
1.4 Ag/mL, respectively, could be coped with, whereas higher
proportions of 6% to 9% (induced by MNU) likely saturate the
protective mechanisms, leading to increasing mutation levels.
There is a possibility that adduct profiles may be dose dependent,
and thus, at low doses, adduct proportions may differ from those
detailed in Table 1. However, at present there is no data to support
this theory.
To determine if repair is indeed responsible for the differing
dose-responses and to distinguish which adducts are responsible
for the NOELs, these experiments need to be repeated in repairdeficient cell lines, in which more linear dose-responses or lower
LOEL concentrations would be expected. We now have some
preliminary data indicating that the position of the NOEL/LOEL
values, with respect to chromosomal damage, remained unchanged
when the MGMT deficient cell line MT1 is treated with MMS
(Fig. 5). This provides further evidence to suggest that repair of N7alkyl-G adducts are responsible for the NOEL, in which chromosome damage is concerned. However, we consider that nonlinear
dose-response is likely to be displaced when this experiment is
repeated with the HPRT assay, as the point mutations induced are
mostly due to O6-alkyl-G lesions. In repair proficient cell lines,
repair, particularly by the MGMT enzyme, may be removing
O6-alkyl-G adducts at low doses, giving rise to the nonlinear doseresponses we have shown for MMS. This activity is absent in
the MT1 cell line; thus, we would expect a reduced NOEL range
with the HPRT assay due to the reduced efficiency in the removal of
O6-alkyl-G, leading to an increased level of point mutation
induction.
It is of importance to note that the differences in mutagenicity at
equal exposure levels are not purely due to adduct profiles. The
reactivity of the alkylating agents toward DNA is also important

3909

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (8). April 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

and is governed by the compounds’ physiochemical properties,
including the migratory rate of the chemicals through the cell, rate
of alkylation or hydrolysis and their half-lives, factors which all
control the overall number of adducts formed. For example, Table 1
indicates that a higher proportion of adducts induced by ENU is at
O6-G compared with MNU, but at equimolar doses MNU is the
more potent mutagen. This is probably caused by the higher
reactivity that MNU shows toward DNA compared with ENU
(16, 33). Consequently, MNU has been shown to induce a higher
frequency of DNA adducts than equimolar concentrations of ENU
(34). Furthermore, MNU preferentially targets internucleosomal
regions and transcribed sequences (35, 36), whereas ENU has a
higher affinity for chromosomal proteins (16). Thus, chemical
reactivity governs mutagenicity, whereas O6-alkyl-G levels may be
responsible for the shape of the dose-response curves.
It is recognized that one of the primary issues in defining a
nonlinear dose-response is the sensitivity of the assay. To overcome
this, we increased the typical number of cells scored in both test
systems by a factor of 5; thus, 10,000 binucleated cells were
examined in the CBMN assay and 100 96-well plates containing
4  104 cells per well were used in the forward mutation assays.
Consequently, the techniques used were highly sensitive and
robust, with high statistical power. Furthermore, both HPRT and
TK forward mutation assays resulted in the same NOEL and LOEL
values for MMS (1 and 1.25 Ag/mL, respectively) indicating these
values do not change between assays. In addition, the different
dose-response curves after EMS and ENU treatment with the HPRT
assay has been previously reported in vivo (37). The nonlinearity of
EMS was also attributed to the efficient removal of O6-ethyl-G at
low levels by MGMT, whereas poor repair of thymine adducts
explained the linear dose-response of ENU, as mutations were
primarily located at AT sites.
The existence of a NOEL implies at least a pragmatic threshold
for carcinogenicity of these genotoxic agents. Theoretically, as
genetic changes do not arise at very low doses (within the NOEL),
carcinogenesis may be unlikely to occur after exposure to
concentrations below the LOEL, as no biologically significant
effects are observed experimentally. This outcome also has
important implications in patient responses to chemotherapeutics

References
1. Henderson L, Albertini S, Aardema M. Thresholds in
genotoxicity responses. Mut Res 2000;464:123–8.
2. Knudson AG. Mutation and cancer. A statistical study
of retinoblastoma. PNAS 1971;68:820–3.
3. Elhajouji A, Van Hummelen P, Kirsch-Volders M.
Indications for a threshold of chemically induced
aneuploidy in vitro in human lymphocytes. Environ
Mol Mutat 1995;26:292–304.
4. Lynch A, Harvey J, Aylott M, et al. Investigations
into the concept of a threshold for topoisomerase
inhibitor-induced clastogenicity. Mutagenesis 2003;18:
345–53.
5. Elhajouji A, Tibaldi F, Kirsch-Volders M. Indication
for thresholds of chromosome non-disjunction versus
chromosome lagging induced by spindle inhibitors
in vitro in human lymphocytes. Mutagenesis 1997;12:
133–40.
6. Parry JM, Fielder RJ, McDonald A. Thresholds for
aneuploidy-inducing chemicals. Mutagenesis 1994;9:
503–4.
7. Parry JM, Jenkins GJS, Haddad R, Bourner R,
Parry EM. In vitro and in vivo extrapolations of
genotoxin exposure: consideration of factors which

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (8). April 15, 2007

involving alkylating drugs, particularly as MMS-based drugs are in
use in addition to other methylating agents, such as procarbazine
and dacarbazine, which have similar adduct profiles to MMS (38).
The therapeutic dose would have to be significantly above the
LOEL to maximize the cytostatic effects of the drug on cancer cells.
Alternatively, if repair is responsible for the nonlinear doseresponses, then perhaps drugs that inhibit repair in the treated
cells are also required to enhance the effects of the cytotoxic drugs
at low concentrations.
We have therefore shown a NOEL for genotoxicity induced by
MMS and EMS, which indicates that mammalian cells can
withstand exposure to low concentrations of certain genotoxic
agents and maintain a stable genome possibly due to physiologic
protective mechanisms, such as DNA repair. Current regulatory
opinion holds that all DNA reactive genotoxins abide by the ‘‘single
hit, single target’’ hypothesis, whereby a mutation may result from
a single interaction, causing a nucleotide base change (24). This
applies to MNU and ENU, and their linear dose-responses suggest
that there is no safe level of exposure (in vitro at least) for these and
similar acting genotoxins (i.e., those that predominantly generate
adducts at O atoms). However, this concept should now be
reviewed as compounds that primarily alkylate N7-G, and rarely O
atoms show nonlinear responses, as we have shown human cells
can cope with an insult from MMS and EMS at doses below our
identified LOEL concentrations. Due to the analogous responses
observed for MMS and EMS, these data have the potential to be
extrapolated to other agents with similar reactive mechanisms
and/or DNA targets.

Acknowledgments
Received 11/2/2006; revised 1/3/2007; accepted 2/9/2007.
Grant support: American Chemistry Council Propylene Oxide/Propylene Glycol
Panel and Lower Olefin Sector Groups of the European Chemical Industry Council ( for
methylating agents study), European Chemical Industry Council/Long-Range Research
Initiative ( for ethylating agents study), University of Wales Swansea bursaries (G.E.
Johnson and E. Quick).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
The authors thank Margaret Clatworthy for her excellent technical support during
the course of this project.

influence dose-response thresholds. Mut Res 2000;
464:53–63.
8. Hensley MS, Schuchter LM, Lindley C, et al. American
Society of clinical oncology clinical practice guidelines
for the use of chemotherapy and radiotherapy protectants. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:3333–5.
9. Drablos F, Feyzi E, Aas PA, et al. Alkylation damage in
DNA and RNA—repair mechanisms and medical
significance. DNA Repair 2004;3:1389–407.
10. Farmer PB, Sepai O, Lawrence R, et al. Biomonitoring
human exposure to environmental carcinogenic chemicals. Mutagenesis 1996;11:363–81.
11. Jenkins GJS, Doak SH, Johnson GE, Quick E, Waters
EM, Parry JM. Do dose response thresholds exist for
genotoxic alkylating agents? Mutagenesis 2005;20:389–98.
12. Swain CG, Scott CB. Quantitative Correlation of
Relative Rates. Comparison of Hydroxide Ion with Other
Nucleophilic Reagents toward Alkyl Halides, Esters,
Epoxides and Acyl Halides. J Am Chem Soc 1953;75:
141–7.
13. Beranek DT. Distribution of methyl and ethyl
adducts following alkylation with monofunctional
alkylating agents. Mut Res 1990;231:11–30.
14. Op het Veld CW, Jansen J, Zdzienicka MZ, Vrieling H,
van Zeeland AA. Methyl methanesulphonate-induced

3910

hprt mutation spectra in the Chinese hamster cell line
CHO9 and its xrcc1-deficient derivative EM-C11. Mut
Res 1998;398:83–92.
15. Shelby MD, Tindall KR. Mammalian germ cell
mutagenicity of ENU, IPMS and MMS, chemicals
selected for a transgenic mouse collaborative study.
Mut Res 1997;388:99–109.
16. Shibuya T, Morimoto K. A review of the genotoxicity
of 1-ethyl-1-nitrosourea. Mut Res 1993;297:3–38.
17. Singer B. In vivo formation and persistence of
modified nucleosides resulting from alkylating agents.
Environ Health Perspect 1985;62:41–8.
18. Crespi CL, Thilly G. Assay for gene mutation in a
human lymphoblastoid line, AHH-1, competent for
xenobiotic metabolism. Mut Res 1984;128:221–30.
19. Fenech M. The in vitro micronucleus technique. Mut
Res 2000;455:81–95.
20. Furth EE, Thilly WG, Penman BW, Liber HL, Rand
WM. Quantitative assay for mutation in diploid human
lymphoblasts using microtiter plates. Analyt Biochem
1981;110:1–8.
21. Osterman-Golkar S, Czene K, Lee MS, et al.
Dosimetry by means of DNA and haemoglobin adducts
in propylene oxide-exposed rats. Toxicol App Pharmacol
2003;191:245–54.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Dose Responses of DNA Adducts and Mutations
22. van Sittert NJ, Boogaard P, Natarajan AT, Tates AD,
Ehrenberg LG, Tornqvist MA. Formation of DNA
adducts and induction of mutagenic effects in rats
following 4 weeks inhalation exposure to ethylene oxide
as a basis for cancer risk assessment. Mut Res 2000;447:
27–48.
23. Zito R. Low doses and thresholds in Genotoxicity:
from theories to experiments. J Exp Clin Cancer Res
2001;20:315–25.
24. Kirsch-Volders M, Aardema M, Elhajouji A. Concepts
of thresholds in mutagenesis and carcinogenesis. Mut
Res 2000;464:3–11.
25. Suter W, Brennand J, McMillan S, Fox M. Relative
mutagenicity of antineoplastic drugs and other alkylating agents in V79 Chinese hamster cells, independence
of cytotoxic and mutagenic responses. Mut Res 1980;73:
171–81.
26. Natarajan AT, Simons JWIM, Vogel EW, Vanzeeland
AA. Aberrations, sister chromatid exchanges and
point mutations induced by monofunctional alkylating agents in Chinese-hamster cells—a correlation
with different ethylation products in DNA. Mut Res
1984;128:31–40.
27. Op het Veld CW, van Hees Stuivenberg S, van Zeeland

www.aacrjournals.org

AA, Jansen JG. Effect of nucleotide excision repair on
HPRT mutations in rodent cells exposed to DNA
ethylating agents. Mutagenesis 1997;12:417–24.
28. Tsujikawa L, Weinfield M, Reha-Krantz LJ. Differences in replication of a DNA template containing an
ethyl phosphotriesters by T4 DNA polymerase and
Escherichia coli DNA polymerase I. Nucleic Acid Res
2003;31:4965–72.
29. Lutz WK. Dose response relationship and low dose
extrapolation in chemical carcinogenesis. Carcinogenesis 1990;11:1243–47.
30. Purchase IFH, Auton TR. Thresholds in chemical
carcinogenesis. Regulatory Toxicol Pharmacol 1995;22:
199–205.
31. Glaab WE, Tindall KR, Skopek TR. Specificity of
mutations induced by methyl methanesulphonate in
mismatch repair deficient human cancer cell lines. Mut
Res 1999;427:67–78.
32. Guttenplan JB. Mutagenesis by N -nitroso compounds: relationships to DNA adducts, DNA repair and
mutational efficiencies. Mut Res 1990;233:177–87.
33. Veleminsky J, Osterman-Golkar S, Ehrenberg L.
Reaction rates and biological action of N -methyl- and
N -ethyl-nitrosourea. Mut Res 1970;10:169–74.

3911

34. Jansen JG, De Groot AJL, Vanteijlingen CMM, et al.
Formation and persistence of DNA adducts in pouch
skin fibroblasts and liver tissue of rats exposed in vivo
to the monofunctional alkylating agents N -methylnitrosourea or N-ethyl-nitrosourea. Mut Res 1994;307:
95–105.
35. Sudhakar S, Tew KD, Schein PS, Woolley PV, Smulson
ME. Nitrosourea interaction with chromatin and effect
on poly(adenosine disphostphate ribose) polymerase
activity. Cancer Res 1979;39:1411–7.
36. Berkowitz EML, Silk H. Methylation of chromosomal
DNA by 2 alkylating-agents differing in carcinogenic
potential. Cancer Lett 1981;12:311–21.
37. Jansen JG, Vrieling H, Vanteijlingen CMM, Mohn
GR, Tates AD, vanZeeland AA. Marked differences
in the role of O-6-alkylguanine in HPRT mutagenesis in T-lymphocytes of rats exposed in-vivo to
ethylmethanesulfonate, N -(2-hydroxyethyl)-N -nitrosourea, or N -ethyl-N-nitrosourea. Cancer Res 1995;
55:1875–82.
38. vanDelft JHM, LuitenSchuite A, Souliotis VL, et al.
N7-methylguanine and O-6-methylguanine levels in DNA
of while blood cells from cancer patients treated with
dacarbazine. Biomarkers 1996;2:94–8.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (8). April 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Mechanistic Influences for Mutation Induction Curves after
Exposure to DNA-Reactive Carcinogens
Shareen H. Doak, Gareth J.S. Jenkins, George E. Johnson, et al.
Cancer Res 2007;67:3904-3911.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/8/3904

This article cites 38 articles, 4 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/8/3904.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 3 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/8/3904.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

