Original Article

Targeted Therapy in Inflammatory Breast
Cancer*
Hideko Yamauchi, MD1 and Naoto T. Ueno, MD, PhD2,3

Despite the introduction of multimodality treatment approaches, the prognosis of inflammatory breast cancer (IBC)
is poor. Recent developments in molecular targeted therapy may be effective against IBC. The authors report the
results of a literature review. Trastuzumab and lapatinib, which target human epidermal growth factor receptor 2
(HER-2), have demonstrated benefit in clinical trials for HER-2–positive breast cancers. WNT1-inducible signaling
pathway protein 3, Ras homolog gene family member C guanosine triphosphatase, epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR), and p27kip1 also have been studied as potential targets in IBC. Molecular targets in vasculolymphatic processes (angiogenesis, lymphangiogenesis, and vasculogenesis) have demonstrated greater potential in IBC than in
non-IBC. Although loss of E-cadherin is a hallmark of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and may correlate with
the promotion of metastasis, paradoxically, E-cadherin is overexpressed in IBC through an unknown mechanism.
On the basis of dissecting the molecular mechanism of the aggressiveness of IBC, the authors currently are investiC 2010
gating whether EGFR may aid in developing innovative targeted therapies. Cancer 2010;116(11 suppl):2758–9. V
American Cancer Society.
KEYWORDS: inflammatory breast cancer, vasculolymphatic processes, epidermal growth factor receptor, erlotinib,
extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase.

Inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) is 1 of most aggressive types of breast cancer. Despite multimodality
approaches, the prognosis for patients with this disease remains poor. Although we are making efforts to improve treatment for IBC, IBC research is limited, because it is a very rare disease with undefined biology, and there are few defined
targets for IBC. To improve this situation, we require insights from clinical trials and epidemiologic studies investigating
IBC biology.

RESULTS OF THE LITERATURE REVIEW
Molecular targets in vasculolymphatic processes (angiogenesis, lymphangiogenesis, and vasculogenesis) have exhibited
greater potential in IBC than in non-IBC. High expression of angiogenic factors has been observed in IBC. Antiangiogenesis therapies (bevacizumab and SU5416 [semaxinib]) have demonstrated some clinical effect in clinical trials. Lymphangiogenesis may play an important role in early lymph node spread in patients with IBC. Vasculogenesis may be related to
hematogenous metastasis and has been investigated extensively in a human IBC mouse xenograft model.1
Molecular targets in cell proliferation processes have been investigated the most and have yielded promising clinical
results, leading to improved outcomes for patients with IBC. These cell proliferation targets include human epidermal
growth factor receptor 2 (HER-2) and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). Like what was observed in non-IBC,
the HER-2 antibody trastuzumab dramatically changed the prognosis of patients with HER-2–overexpressing IBC. Lapatinib, which inhibits both HER-2 and EGFR, also produced a benefit in patients with HER-2–positive breast cancer,
including IBC, in clinical trials. Additional cell proliferation targets (WNT1-inducible signaling pathway protein 3

Corresponding author: Naoto T. Ueno, MD, PhD, Department of Breast Medical Oncology, Unit 1354, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center,
1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030; Fax: (713) 794-4385; nueno@mdanderson.org
1
Department of Breast Surgical Oncology, St Luke’s International Hospital, Tokyo, Japan; 2Department of Breast Medical Oncology, The University of Texas M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas; 3Department of Stem Cell Transplantation and Cellular Therapy, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas

The articles in this supplement were presented at the First International Inflammatory Breast Cancer Conference, Houston, Texas, December 5-7, 2008.
*Proceedings of the First International Inflammatory Breast Cancer Conference, Supplement to Cancer.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.25171, Received: December 2, 2009; Accepted: January 14, 2010, Published online May 19, 2010 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.
wiley.com)

2758

Cancer

June 1, 2010

Therapy in Inflammatory Breast Cancer/Yamauchi and Ueno

[WISP3], Ras homolog gene family member C [RhoC],
guanosine triphosphatase [GTPase], and p27kip1) also
have been studied in IBC.
Molecules involved in metastasis processes may have
a unique role in IBC because of the aggressiveness of this
disease. E-cadherin overexpression has been reported
IBC, and loss of E-cadherin is a hallmark of epithelialmesenchymal transition. Although this E-cadherin overexpression may be a transient phenomenon, we may be
able to target this unique feature.

CURRENT RESEARCH ON IBC
Guided by the knowledge gained from our review, currently, we are investigating whether EGFR may represent
a potential therapeutic target in IBC. EGFR is overexpressed in 30% of IBCs. Patients with EGFR-positive
tumors have worse 5-year overall survival than patients
with EGFR-negative tumors, and EGFR expression is
associated with an increased risk of recurrence in patients
with IBC.
By using the EGFR-overexpressing IBC cell lines
SUM149 and KPL-4, we investigated the effectiveness of
EGFR blocking against IBC. Erlotinib, an EGFR tyrosine
kinase inhibitor, inhibited cell proliferation and anchorage-independent growth of these IBC cell lines but had
little effect on EGFR-overexpressing non-IBC cell lines
(MDA-MB-468 and BT-20). We also observed that erlotinib inhibited the activation of protein kinase B (Akt)
and extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase (ERK).
ERK activation is associated with increased resistance to
erlotinib in IBC cells. ERK small-interfering RNA
(siRNA) knockdown enhanced the antiproliferative activity of erlotinib. This suggested that erlotinib activity
depends in part on ERK. The ERK pathway may be an
important pathway in IBC tumorigenesis, and targeting
EGFR through the ERK pathway may prevent metastasis
in EGFR-expressing IBC.
In a 3-dimensional culture system, erlotinib reversed
the mesenchymal phenotype of IBC cells at drug concentrations lower than the level at which a cytotoxic effect

Cancer

June 1, 2010

was observed. In an IBC xenograft model, erlotinib dramatically inhibited not only IBC tumor growth but also
IBC lung metastasis. Higher expression of the epithelial
marker E-cadherin and lower expression of the mesenchymal marker vimentin were observed in erlotinib-treated
tumors compared with untreated tumors. Inhibition of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition by erlotinib may lead
the inhibition of metastasis in IBC.2
A molecular pathway that is unique to IBC needs to
be discovered. One potential candidate is the EGFR pathway. We have been investigating the role of this pathway
and the possibility of EGFR-targeted therapy for IBC.
Further extensive preclinical and clinical work based on
molecular findings is needed to improve outcomes in
patients with IBC. Soon, we will be starting to test panitumumab, a human EGFR antibody, plus chemotherapy
(nanoparticle-bound paclitaxel and carboplatin) as a preoperative regimen in patients with HER-2–negative IBC.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
This supplement was sponsored by the Houston Affiliate of
Susan G. Komen for the Cure, the National Cancer Institute,
and the State of Texas Rare and Aggressive Breast Cancer
Research Program. The First International Inflammatory Breast
Cancer Conference was supported in part by GlaxoSmithKline,
Pfizer, Eli Lilly and Company, and Cardinal Health. This article
received the following grant support: NIH grant R01
CA123318-01A1, Morgan Welch Inflammatory Breast Cancer
Research Program, State of Texas Rare and Aggressive Breast
Cancer Research Program (N.T. Ueno), and Susan G. Komen
Post-doctoral Fellowship grant KG091192 (D. Zhang).

REFERENCES
1. Yamauchi H, Cristofanilli M, Nakamura S, et al. Molecular
targets for treatment of inflammatory breast cancer. Nat Rev
Clin Oncol. 2009;6:387-394.
2. Zhang D, LaFortune TA, Krishnamurthy S, et al. Epidermal
growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor reverses mesenchymal to epithelial phenotype and inhibits metastasis in
inflammatory breast cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2009;15:66396648.

2759

