Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 9

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Lipid tethering of breast tumor cells enables real-time imaging
of free-floating cell dynamics and drug response
Kristi R. Chakrabarti1,2,3,*, James I. Andorko4,*, Rebecca A. Whipple3,5, Peipei
Zhang4, Elisabeth L. Sooklal4, Stuart S. Martin2,3,5, Christopher M. Jewell3,4,6
1

Medical Scientist Training Program, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA

2

Graduate Program in Molecular Medicine, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA

3

Marlene and Stewart Greenebaum Cancer Center, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA

4

Fischell Department of Bioengineering, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA

5

Department of Physiology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA

6

Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Christopher M. Jewell, e-mail: cmjewell@umd.edu, jewell.umd.edu
Keywords: circulating tumor cells, microtentacles, breast cancer, microfluidics, polyelectrolyte multilayers
Received: December 20, 2015     Accepted: January 26, 2016     Published: February 08, 2016

ABSTRACT
Free-floating tumor cells located in the blood of cancer patients, known as
circulating tumor cells (CTCs), have become key targets for studying metastasis.
However, effective strategies to study the free-floating behavior of tumor cells in vitro
have been a major barrier limiting the understanding of the functional properties of
CTCs. Upon extracellular-matrix (ECM) detachment, breast tumor cells form tubulinbased protrusions known as microtentacles (McTNs) that play a role in the aggregation
and re-attachment of tumor cells to increase their metastatic efficiency. In this study,
we have designed a strategy to spatially immobilize ECM-detached tumor cells while
maintaining their free-floating character. We use polyelectrolyte multilayers deposited
on microfluidic substrates to prevent tumor cell adhesion and the addition of lipid
moieties to tether tumor cells to these surfaces through interactions with the cell
membranes. This coating remains optically clear, allowing capture of high-resolution
images and videos of McTNs on viable free-floating cells. In addition, we show that
tethering allows for the real-time analysis of McTN dynamics on individual tumor
cells and in response to tubulin-targeting drugs. The ability to image detached tumor
cells can vastly enhance our understanding of CTCs under conditions that better
recapitulate the microenvironments they encounter during metastasis.

on disease progression and patient prognosis beyond
enumeration alone. Though progress has been made on
technologies to enhance the identification and enumeration
of CTCs [1, 4, 5], major limitations remain in performing
downstream functional studies due to challenges with
accurate detection and the low number of CTCs that
can be retrieved from patient blood (frequency of
approximately 1 in 100 million cells in the bloodstream)
[1]. Some of the techniques currently being employed to
analyze CTCs include fluorescence in situ hybridization,
sequencing, immunostaining, xenograft transplantation,
and RNA or protein-based analysis [1, 4, 6, 7]. However,
these methods do not allow for real-time analysis of CTCs
in an environment that preserves their free-floating nature.

INTRODUCTION
Cancer metastasis occurs when epithelial tumor
cells travel through non-adherent microenvironments,
like the bloodstream or lymphatics, to a distant organ.
The presence of tumor cells in the non-adherent
microenvironment of the bloodstream, known as
circulating tumor cells (CTCs), has been detected in
numerous epithelial cancers including breast, prostate,
colon, and lung [1]. CTCs are an early indicator of
clinical spread of disease and their levels correlate with
decreased patient survival [2, 3]. Based on the increasing
clinical relevance of CTCs, understanding their molecular
profile is emerging as a new opportunity to gain insight
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10486

Oncotarget

Microscopy analysis of CTCs has focused almost
exclusively on cells adhered to surfaces (glass, plastic,
extracellular matrix (ECM)) owing to the ease of imaging
and characterization of cells in these static positions.
However, the functional and molecular characteristics of
adherent and non-adherent tumor cells are dramatically
different [8-11]. Thus a critical knowledge gap exists
in the understanding of epithelial tumor cells in nonadherent microenvironments, such as those found in
blood vessels. Non-adherent breast carcinoma cells, for
example, produce unique tubulin-based microtentacles
(McTNs) that promote tumor cell aggregation [12, 13],
reattachment to endothelial layers [14, 15], and retention
of CTCs in the lungs of mice [16, 17]. New enabling
technologies to image tumor cells, McTNs, and other
features in the absence of ECM attachment could vastly
improve the understanding of dynamic cell behaviors that
occur in the non-adherent microenvironments encountered
by CTCs during metastasis. These tools could also support
opportunities for selective targeting of drugs to McTNs or
other structures presented preferentially by CTCs during
metastatic spread, as well as help address rising concerns
that chemotherapies meant to reduce tumor growth may
actually increase metastatic risk [18]. Here, we exploited
the discovery that McTNs form only when protein-based
adhesions are absent to create an innovative platform for
real-time imaging of the dynamic features of live, nonadherent tumor cells. This approach allows new types
of information to be collected (e.g., McTN behavior on
live cells over time) while reducing variables such as
changes in cell function that occur during adhesion or the
complexities of imaging cells in suspension that drift or
are washed away during microfluidic flow.
Biomaterials offer many attractive features – stability,
biocompatibility, versatile chemistries – for controlling
cell adhesion. Common approaches include chemically
functionalizing surfaces, incorporating cell adhesion
peptides, and micropatterning using polymer-based soft
lithography or electrospinning techniques. Of particular
note, several recent studies have exploited biomaterials
to identify CTCs [19-21] or used microfluidic devices
to isolate and immobilize CTCs by acoustic separation,
topography, controlled flow rates, and antibody traps [2225]. Polyelectrolyte multilayers (PEMs) are nanoscale,
polymeric materials assembled by electrostatic or hydrogen
bonding interactions during a layer-by-layer (LbL)
deposition process. PEMs can be coated on topographicallycomplex surfaces (e.g., colloidal, microfluidic) and offer
programmable surface functionalities depending on the
polymers used to assemble films. PEMs have recently
been employed to capture CTCs through incorporation of
cytophilic polymers or cell-adhesive proteins that promote
CTCs adhesion [26-28]. However, new strategies are
needed to study the dynamics of McTNs and other unique
metastatic features that form only when CTCs are in nonadherent environments.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

To enable this new ability, we identified three design
features that would allow prolonged, real-time imaging
and drug screening of McTNs on live tumor cells in a
free-floating state: 1) optically-clear coatings to support
imaging, 2) ability to control microfluidic flow over
cells and 3) simple, low-energy manufacturing process.
Past studies have demonstrated the utility of PEMs for
tuning cell adhesion by varying polymer composition
or through addition of lipids, RGD sequences, or other
binding moieties [29-34]. Thus we leveraged PEMs to
design a platform to immobilize live, detached tumor
cells on microfluidic devices. We show that assembling
cytophobic PEM films with cytophilic lipid tethers
maintains the free-floating properties of tumor cells while
providing spatial immobilization of cells. When tethered,
McTNs on live cells can be visualized in real time and
the dynamics of these structures can be assessed during
microfluidic flow of drugs that enhance or destabilize
McTNs. This technology could generate fundamental
insight into a critical stage of metastasis that has been
largely understudied due to technical challenges and
support new approaches to exploit McTNs as biomarkers
for the metastatic efficiency of tumor cells in diagnosis,
prognosis, and targeted drug design.

RESULTS
The responses of cancer cells detached from
ECM (i.e., in a circulating or free-floating stage) are
highly important in survival, apoptosis, metastasis,
and even in the expression of stem cell characteristics
[36, 37]. However, tumor cells in this state are greatly
understudied due to the technical and clinical challenges
of continuously imaging cells not adhered to surfaces.
Maintaining free-floating cell behavior of breast cancer
cells is particularly critical in promoting McTN formation
[12]. Thus we used breast tumor cells to first test if
programming the compositions of PEM coatings would
allow minimal tumor cell adhesion to maintain the freefloating characteristics (e.g., McTNs) of these cells (Figure
1A), before adding a lipid tether in subsequent designs.

PEMs inhibit cell attachment allowing for McTN
visualization
We formed PEMs from two common polymers,
poly(methacrylic acid) (PMA) and polyacrylamide (PAAm)
that have previously been shown to limit cell adhesion of
numerous cell types [29, 38]. Substrates coated with PEMs
offered precise control over film thickness and did not limit
optical transmission, a feature important for pre-clinical
and clinical imaging (Figure 1B). Since human breast
tumor cells lines have not yet been tested on PEM-coated
substrates, we first confirmed that PMA/PAAm multilayers
could prevent cell adhesion in two NCI breast cancer cell
lines, MDA-MB-436 and MCF-7. MDA-MB-436 cells
10487

Oncotarget

Modification of PEMs with lipid tethers retains
tumor cells after washing

seeded on slides coated with cytophobic PEMs maintained
McTN display (Figure 1C), demonstrating for the first
time maintenance of free-floating tumor cell behavior by
using PEMs. We next coated multi-well culture plates or
microfluidic slides with PEMs and allowed cells to attach
for 0, 6, and 24 hours. The number of cells remaining after
washing at each time point was then quantified by image
analysis and cell proliferation (CellTiter). Imaging revealed
that PEM-coatings prevented attachment of either cell line
(Figure 1D, 1E, Supplementary Figure S1A, S1B) for at
least 24 hours using 1, 4, and 8 PMA/PAAm bilayers. Cell
proliferation data also indicated that deposition of 4 bilayers
and 8 PMA/PAAm bilayers showed reduced attachment
compared with 1 bilayer for both lines (Supplementary
Figure S2A, S2B). Four bilayer films were prioritized for
future experiments since these films formed cytophobic
surfaces that most efficiently decreased cell attachment
while maintaining McTN activity. Coatings did not impact
the viability of either cell line, regardless of substrate
(Supplementary Figures S2C–S2F, S3, S4).

Although PEM-coated surfaces prevented tumor
cell attachment and supported free floating behavior, these
cells were removed during washing with buffer. Thus we
sought to develop a strategy to maintain McTNs while also
providing spatial localization during microfluidic flow for
real-time imaging and drug screening. We hypothesized
that the addition of a terminal lipid layer that interacts
with cell membranes would loosely tether cells to the
surface during microfluidic flow. We tested 1,2-dioleoyl-3trimethylammonium-propane (DOTAP) and 1,2-dioleoylsn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (DOPC) as cationic and
zwitterionic lipids, respectively, owing to the ability of these
molecules to interact with the PEMs electrostatically (Figure
2A). Following addition of DOTAP or DOPC, total film
thickness increased, though individual bilayers were still
only 20nm and optical clarity remained high (Figure 2B, 2C).
We next tested if the addition of lipid supported tethering of

Figure 1: PEMs form a cytophobic layer allowing McTN visualization on microfluidic devices. A. Schematic depicting

coating of microfluidic slide with PEMs to maintain free-floating behavior of tumor cells. B. PEM coatings increase in thickness (left axis,
black) with the number of bilayers but maintain optical clarity (right axis, gray). Data (mean ± SEM) correspond to samples in triplicate.
C. Maximum intensity z-projection of MDA-MB-436 cells on PMA4/PAAm4 surfaces showing McTNs (arrows). Scale bar = 10μm. Percent
of D. MDA-MB-436 and E. MCF-7 cells (mean ± SEM) remaining on surfaces after washing uncoated slides or slides coated with 1, 4, or
8 PMA/PAAm bilayers. Data represents mean values of three independent experiments.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10488

Oncotarget

Lipid tethers preserve McTNs and cell viability

breast tumor cells without inhibiting free-floating features
such as McTNs. Tumor cells were seeded on microfluidic
slides coated with (PMA/PAAm)4 without lipids (PEMno tether), or with either terminal lipid layer (PEM-DOPC
tether, PEM-DOTAP tether). During successive wash steps,
DOTAP retained tumor cells more efficiently compared
to non-tethered cells seeded on microfluidic slides coated
with PEM only (Figure 3A, 3B). MCF-7 cells exhibited
significantly higher overall cell retention with PEM-DOTAP
compared to PEM only over four washes. MDA-MB-436
cells showed significant retention of cells with PEM-DOTAP
for the first wash and continued to tether around 10% of
cells for subsequent washes. Tethering was dependent on
lipid composition, as after five washes, DOTAP tethered and
retained 30% of MCF-7 cells, while DOPC was ineffective
at tethering cells during successive washing (Figure 3A, 3B
versus Figure 3C, 3D). Representative images of cells from
each line tethered on these surfaces are shown in Figure 3E
and Supplementary Figure S5. Since DOTAP demonstrated
superior tethering for both types of tumor cells, this lipid was
prioritized for functional assays.

We next determined if lipid tethering with DOTAP
maintained free-floating tumor cell characteristics. As a
first indicator, McTN frequency was assessed on PEM and
PEM-DOTAP surfaces. Blinded McTN counts revealed
no differences in McTN frequency on PEM-no tether and
PEM-DOTAP surfaces compared to previously published
counts on low-attach multi-well plates (Figure 4A). These
results indicate lipid tethering does not impact the ability
of MDA-MB-436 cells to assemble McTNs, results
confirmed by epifluorescence imaging of McTNs on cells
incubated with each type of PEM or substrate (Figure 4B,
Supplementary Figure S6A). MCF-7 cells exhibited similar
results (Figure 4A, Supplementary Figure S6B), though
these cells assembled McTN at lower frequencies, as
previously reported [39]. Further, toxicity studies confirmed
tethering does not impact tumor cell viability (Figure 4C–
4E, Supplementary Figure S6C–S6F). Thus for the first time,
our approach allows maintenance of free-floating tumor cell
behavior while spatially fixing the location of tumor cells.

Figure 2: Modification of PEMs with lipid tethers. A. Schematic depicting how lipid-terminated PEMs promote interaction with

tumor cell membranes. B. Film thickness and C. optical clarity (mean ± SEM) after addition of DOTAP (blue) and DOPC [red]. Lipids
promote growth of film while maintaining an optically-clear substrate for imaging. Data correspond to the mean of samples prepared in
triplicate with three measurements per surface.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10489

Oncotarget

Lipid tethers allow for real-time high resolution
McTN imaging in response to drug treatments

(Figure 5Ai, arrows). However, since McTNs occur on freefloating cells, the time required to generate a 3-dimensional
stack of z-slice images for tracing McTN length yields
significant blurring as free-floating cells drift over a surface
to which they cannot attach. This limitation was encountered
when imaging cells exposed to PEM surfaces without lipid
tethers (Figure 5Aii, arrows). The blurring effect of cell drift
is even more apparent across a time projection (Figure 5Aiii).
In contrast, tethered breast tumor cells not only maintained
McTNs (Figure 5Aiv, arrow), but also eliminated blurring of
McTNs in z-stacks. This strategy also allowed microtentacle

One of the greatest challenges in studying free-floating
cells is the difficulty in measuring their functional properties
or behavior in real time. This is especially apparent when
trying to image free-floating cells over time and in three
dimensions. Epifluorescence is unable to capture McTNs in
high resolution (Figure 4B). Confocal microscopy of cells
labeled with a fluorescent membrane dye improves signal
to noise and allows McTNs to be imaged with high contrast

Figure 3: DOTAP tethers breast cancer cells. Percent cell retention of A. MDA-MB-436 and B. MCF-7 cells plated on microfluidic

slides coated with PMA4/PAAm4 bilayers alone or with DOTAP. Percent cell retention of C. MDA-MB-436 and D. MCF-7 cells plated
on microfluidic slides coated with PMA4/PAAm4 bilayers alone or with DOPC. The remaining cells after each wash was quantified
with CellProfiler and normalized to the initial cell number. Data represents mean of triplicate independent experiments (mean ± SEM).
E. Representative images of MDA-MB-436 cells at time 0 and after 3 subsequent washes on PMA4/PAAm4 bilayers with no tether and with
PEM-DOTAP or PEM-DOPC tethers at 4x magnification. Scale bar = 200μm. *P<0.05 **P<0.01.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10490

Oncotarget

length to be traced efficiently across z-stacks (Figure 5Av,
arrow) and limited drift of the cell body during time-lapse
imaging (Figure 5Avi). These phenomena are evident during
time-lapse movies of drifting tumor cells seeded on PEMno tether surfaces, whereas DOTAP tethering caused cells
to remain fixed in one location while preserving McTN
dynamics (Supplementary Figure S7A, S7B). It is interesting
to note that debris is seen moving quickly through the field
throughout the movie while the cell remains immobile and
centered (Supplementary Figure S7B).
The major advantage in imaging McTNs over time is
being able to study their responses to drugs not only by McTN
frequency, but also McTN dynamics. To demonstrate this
potential, we recorded three dimensional z-stacks of untreated
MDA-MB-436 cells, cells treated with the microtubule
destabilizing agent, colchicine, or the microtubule stabilizing
agent, paclitaxel. Addition of colchicine decreased McTNs
while paclitaxel enhanced McTNs (Figure 5B). Over time,
colchicine shrunk McTNs and increased cell blebbing,

whereas paclitaxel hyperstabilized McTNs, dramatically
decreasing their dynamics compared to vehicle control. These
new trends are clearly observable in high resolution movies
(Supplementary Figure S7C–S7E) that would be otherwise
impossible without lipid tethering, since microfluidic flow
would wash these cells away or drift would cause blurring.
This strategy also creates new opportunities to study freefloating cell properties on a per-cell basis. For example, we
measured time-dependent drug response and discovered that
treatment with colchicine decreased the mean number of
McTN per cell from 21.6 ± 7.2 to 1.8 ± 1.5, while paclitaxel
treatment increased the frequency of these structures to 39.6
± 7.5 McTNs/cell (Figure 5C).

DISCUSSION
The majority of cancer-related deaths are due
to the spread of tumor cells through the circulation
from the primary site to a secondary organ [40]. While

Figure 4: Lipid tethering retains free-floating characteristics of breast tumor cells and does not affect cell viability.

A. McTN quantification of MDA-MB-436 and MCF-7 cells suspended on a low-attach plate, microfluidic slides with PEM-no tether,
and microfluidic slides with PEM-DOTAP tether. Data represents blinded quantification of McTN frequency from three independent
experiments with 100 cells counted for each (mean ± SEM). B. Representative images of McTNs (arrows) on MDA-MB-436 cells seeded
on PEM-no tether and PEM-DOTAP tether microfluidic slides at 40x magnification. Scale bar = 10μm. Viability of C. MDA-MB-436 and
D. MCF-7 cells calculated at 0 and 6 hrs after seeding on microfluidic slides with PEM-DOTAP tether. Data represents mean cell viability
from three independent experiments (mean ± SEM). E. Representative images show viability of MDA-MB-436 cells tethered by DOTAP
for 6 hrs. Phase contrast, live (green fluorescence), and dead (red fluorescence) images taken at 4x magnification. Scale bar = 200μm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10491

Oncotarget

in the circulation, tumor cells are in a non-adherent
microenvironment that is unlike the conditions in a
primary tumor or the metastatic site. In these non-adherent
conditions, tumor cells undergo many biochemical and
structural changes that affect their sensitivity to therapies
and their overall metastatic efficiency [15, 41]. Classical
drug studies and microscopy focus on analyzing tumor
cells attached to a substrate due to the practical ease of
analyzing cells under static conditions, but these methods
do not recapitulate the free-floating environment of CTCs.
Therefore, we have developed a microfluidic device
that can anchor tumor cells using a lipid moiety while
preventing their attachment to a substrate.
In this proof-of-concept study we show that
tethering is an effective way to retain the free-floating
behavior of cancer cells and provides new opportunities

to study their functional properties with high-resolution
microscopy through spatial localization. This strategy
offers the ability to coat a variety of surfaces, including
microfluidics. We show that incorporating a lipid moiety
on PEMs can passively immobilize tumor cells in a
manner that preserves McTN formation and does not
affect cell viability. In this method, no cellular adhesive
properties are necessary because the interaction of the cell
membrane with the lipid results in cell tethering. Lipids
have previously been used to immobilize cells [32, 34];
here we have advanced this idea to create a simple system
for studying McTNs on free-floating tumor cells. This
approach eliminates the need for solvents, patterning,
designed topographies, or antibodies used in other recent
studies aimed at promoting adhesion of CTCs. Further,
cells can be tethered in complete media and in a short

Figure 5: Lipid tethering allows for real-time McTN imaging in response to drug treatment and minimizes effects of
drift. A. McTN (arrows) imaging of MDA-MB-436 cells seeded on microfluidic slides with PEM-no tether (i-iii) and PEM-DOTAP tether
(iv-vi). Representative 1μm slice (i and iv), maximum z-projection of 5 slices at one time point (ii and v), and maximum t-projection after
20 frames (iii and vi) are shown at 60x magnification. B. McTN (arrow) imaging of MDA-MB-436 cells seeded on microfluidic slides with
PEM-DOTAP tether after treatment with 5μM colchicine for 15 mins and 1μg/ml paclitaxel for 120 mins. Maximum intensity z-projections
of five 1μm slices at one time point are shown at 60x magnification. Complete time-lapse movies are available in Fig. S7. Scale bar =
10μM. C. Manual quantification of the average number of McTNs per cell (mean ± SEM) in MDA-MB-436 cells treated with colchicine
and paclitaxel. **P<0.01 ***P<0.001.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10492

Oncotarget

time frame, both enabling real-time study of McTNs
on individual CTCs. Therefore, using this technique,
tethering of any cell type can be achieved in a simple and
rapid manner, making this a robust platform to study freefloating behaviors across various cell types.
In our studies, each PEM lipid formulation tethered
cancer cells, but the lipid moiety itself altered cell
retention, with DOTAP – a cationic lipid – driving the
best tethering. DOPC – a zwitterionic lipid – contains
a phosphate group which may cause less favorable
interactions with cell membranes compared to DOTAP.
While cells were immobilized on the substrate, they
remained free-floating owing to the cytophobic nature of
the initial PEM coating. There was some loss of tethered
cells as a function of the number of washes, but it is likely
these interactions can be strengthened by incorporation of
cross-linkable lipids [32, 34, 42, 43]. We also observed
a difference in the tethering efficiency as a function of
cell line, with MCF-7 breast cancer cells exhibiting better
tethering compared to MDA-MB-436 cells. These changes
may be due to the differences in membrane composition or
surface marker expression of each cell line [44].
We demonstrate the utility of tethering for tumor
cell analysis by assessing the response of McTNs
to microtubule-targeting drugs. Unlike our previous
studies, it is now possible to add drugs via microfluidic
exchange without displacing cells, allowing measurements
of colchicine-dependent McTN disruption [12] and
paclitaxel-dependent McTN enhancement [18] to be
measured with time-lapse imaging for the first time. Our
discovery that paclitaxel hyperstabilizes McTNs, for
example, is significant since microtubule stability can
enhance McTN formation and increase the re-attachment
efficiency of tumor cells [18]. Mouse models of metastasis
indicate that this increased McTN formation and tubulin
stability results in greater lung trapping of tumor cells
[12, 16, 18]. Therefore, analyzing McTN dynamics and
their response to drugs has important implications on
the metastatic ability of tumor cells. These technological
advances should allow many additional quantitative McTN
metrics to be accurately measured (length, dynamics, etc.)
and also improve on qualitative observations that have
until now not been possible on a live, individual cell basis.
High numbers of CTCs correlate with increased
metastasis and decreased survival of patients with
metastatic cancer [2, 3, 45, 46]. However, CTC
enumeration alone may not be a good marker for
disease staging and prognosis [45]. Therefore,
improved biologic characterization of CTCs is
necessary to better understand their clinical value.
Numerous new approaches have been designed to
improve CTC detection and enumeration, but the
ability to study the functional properties of CTCs
remains difficult [1]. Ex vivo culture of CTCs in
non-adherent conditions has provided one method
to analyze CTCs from patients [6]. This PEM-lipid
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

tethering technology may be applied to these culturing
methods to keep cells from adhering, but offers the
unique capabilities of rapid single-cell analysis
through staining and imaging in real-time.
Studying the biology of CTCs has suggested
important consequences for both metastatic efficiency
and the sensitivity of these structures to candidate cancer
drugs. Of note, patterns of drug sensitivities have been
linked to the genetic mutations present in individual CTC
samples from breast cancer and lung cancer patients,
indicating that a change in tumor genotypes during the
course of treatment can lead to drug resistance [6, 41,
47]. Our work shows tethering tumor cells allows rapid
analysis of specific drug responses in real-time. Markers
of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) are
also upregulated in CTCs with mesenchymal markers
specifically enriched in CTC clusters. These clusters have
increased metastatic capabilities compared with single
cells alone [7, 48]. Thus our approach can be applied to
these existing techniques for fundamental CTC studies
at the single-cell level. Assessing the effects of drugs on
cell viability, EMT markers, or McTNs could all have
implications on their metastatic phenotype. Tethering
would also allow these studies to be conducted in a
manner that more closely recapitulates the free-floating
environment found in circulation. Though our study
focuses on the analysis of tumor cells, this simple and
rapid tethering technology is translatable to numerous
other cell types that are encountered in the blood
stream (e.g., red blood cells, platelets, lymphocytes,
macrophages) and may function differently in a freefloating environment. With new technologies, CTCs will
play an increasing role in informing therapy and disease
progression of cancer patients. Toward this goal, tethering
CTCs with PEM-lipid films could serve as a new tool
to analyze CTC samples to provide better personalized
treatment decisions for patients.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell lines & materials
MDA-MB-436 and MCF-7 cell lines were
purchased from ATCC and cultured with Dulbecco’s
Modified Eagle Medium supplemented with 10%
fetal bovine serum and 1% penicillin-streptomycin
solution. Poly(methacrylic acid) (MW 100,000) and
polyacrylamide (PAAm) (MW 5,000,000-6,000,000)
were purchased from Polysciences. Poly(allylamine
hydrochloride) (PAH) (MW ~200,000) was purchased
from Alfa Aesar. 1,2-dioleoyl-3-trimethylammoniumpropane (chloride salt) (DOTAP) and 1,2-dioleoylsn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (DOPC) were purchased
from Avanti Polar Lipids. Colchicine was purchased
from Sigma and paclitaxel was purchased from Enzo
Life Sciences.
10493

Oncotarget

PEM film deposition and characterization on
planar substrates

deposition, slides were allowed to air dry for 1 hr at room
temperature then stored at room temperature.

For multilayer film deposition, similar to methods
previously reported [35], PMA and PAAm were prepared
as 0.01M solutions using ultrapure water and adjusted
to pH 3. All polymer solutions were filtered with a 0.45
μm cellulose nitrate filter prior to use in multilayer film
assembly. For planar substrates, quartz (Chemglass Life
Sciences) or silicon (Silicon Inc.) were cut into 5mm x
25mm substrates using a dicing saw (Model 1006, Micro
Automation). Cut substrates were cleaned with sequential
washing with acetone, ethanol, methanol, and deionized
water then charged using an oxygen plasma Jupiter III
system (March). These substrates were first immersed in
the polycationic solution PAH (0.05M) for 15 mins then
rinsed twice using two separate baths of deionized water at
pH 3 to remove any excess polymer. This primer layer was
followed by immersion of the substrates into polyanionic
PMA (0.01M) for 5 mins followed by rinsing as above.
The substrates were then immersed in a polycationic
solution of PAAm (0.01M) for 5 mins and rinsed. For
additional bilayers, the process was repeated without
the addition of the primer layer (PAH) until the desired
number of bilayers was assembled. Lipid formulations
comprised of 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine
(DOPC) or 1,2-dioleoyl-3-trimethylammonium-propane
(DOTAP) were obtained from Avanti Polar Lipids.
These lipids were prepared as 0.01M solutions with pH
3 deionized water and sonicated for 60 mins in a room
temperature water bath. PEMs with a lipid tether were
prepared by immersing PEM coated substrates in each
lipid solution for 5 mins followed by two rinsing steps.
The final, coated substrates were removed from solution,
blown dry with compressed, filtered air, and stored at
room temperature prior to characterization. Film thickness
and optical clarity after deposition onto silicon and quartz
substrates were measured using a LSE stokes ellipsometer
(Gaertner Scientific Corportation) and by measuring light
transmittance at 600nm using an Evolution 60 UV-visible
spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific), respectively.

Attachment image analysis
MDA-MB-436 and MCF-7 breast cancer cells were
seeded on PEM coated microfluidic slides (50,000 cells/
channel) ranging from 0 to 8 bilayers. An Olympus CKX4
microscope was used for all experiments to capture images
at 4x magnification. Three pictures per channel were taken
after cell seeding for each condition to quantify initial cell
number (t0). At 6 and 24 hrs, media was removed from
the channel and the channel was washed once before
addition of new media. Three images per channel were
taken for each condition. The area of the image occupied
with cells (as a percent) was quantified using CellProfiler
(Broad Institute) and the average from three images was
calculated. The average percentage for each condition was
then normalized to the area occupied at t0.

Attachment cell titer
MDA-MB-436 and MCF-7 breast cancer cells were
seeded on PEM coated 96-well plates (20,000 cells/well)
ranging from 0 to 8 bilayers. At each time point (1, 3, 6,
and 24 hrs), media was removed from the well and the
well was washed once before addition of new media. After
the 24hr time point an additional wash was done on all
wells. Cell number was determined using CellTiter reagent
according to manufacturer’s instructions. Each time point
was normalized to initial cell number from a reading done
immediately after cell seeding.

PEM viability
MDA-MB-436 and MCF-7 breast cancer cells were
seeded on PEM coated microfluidic slides with PMA4/
PAAm4 bilayers (50,000 cells/channel). At 0, 6, and 24
hrs Live/Dead (Life Technologies) reagent was added
according to manufacturer’s instructions. Corresponding
phase contrast, live (calcein-AM) green fluorescence, and
dead (ethidium homodimer-1) red fluorescence images
were taken in triplicate at 4x magnification with an
Olympus CKX41 fluorescence microscope. The number
of cells in each image was quantified using CellProfiler.
The percent of live and dead cells were calculated by
quantifying the number of green fluorescence positive and
red fluorescence positive cells, respectively, and dividing
by total number of cells in the phase contrast image. GFP
and Texas Red filters were used to for imaging. MDAMB-436 and MCF-7 breast cancer cells were plated on
96-well black plates with PMA4/PAAm4 bilayers (20,000
cells/well). At time 0, 1, 3, 6, and 24 hours Live/Dead
reagent was added and read on a plate reader according
to manufacturer’s instructions. Relative fluorescence units
(RFU) were normalized to time 0.

PEM film deposition on microfluidic slides and
multi-well plates
Uncoated microfluidic slides (1μ-Slide VI 0.4)
were obtained from Ibidi and tissue culture treated 96well plates were obtained from Corning. To coat the
microfluidic slides, 120μL of each polyelectrolyte solution
was added to the microchannels and 75μl of solution
was added to each well of the multi-well plate. After
incubation, solution was removed via aspiration and rinsed
twice for 1 min using 120μL of pH 3 water. Bilayers of
PMA and PAAm were assembled and terminated with
either DOPC or DOTAP as described above. Following

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10494

Oncotarget

Tethering washing

were taken at 40x magnification with an Olympus CKX41
fluorescence microscope.

MDA-MB-436 and MCF-7 cells were seeded on
PMA4/PAAm4 coated microfluidic slides with DOPC or
DOTAP (50,000 cells/channel). Cells were incubated
for 1 hr to allow for tethering. To quantify initial cell
number, three images per channel were taken for each
condition at time 0. After 1 hr, existing media was gently
removed from the bottom port of each channel and fresh
media was added to the top port. Following a wash, three
images were taken per channel for each condition using
an Olympus CKX41 microscope at 4x magnification.
This process was repeated for each wash. The area of the
image occupied with cells (as a percent) was quantified
using CellProfiler and the average from three images was
calculated. The average percentage for each condition was
then normalized to the area occupied at time 0.

Imaging drift and drug treatments
MDA-MB-436 cells were trypsinized, spun down,
and resuspended in phenol red-free and serum-free
DMEM. Cells were seeded on PMA4/PAAm4 coated
microfluidic slides and PMA4/PAAm4 coated microfluidic
slides with DOTAP (50,000 cells/channel). Cells were
incubated for 1 hr to allow for tethering. After 1 hr, one
wash was done where the existing media was gently
removed from the bottom port of each channel and fresh
media was added to top port on the DOTAP slides. This
wash was to ensure only tethered cells were analyzed.
After this wash, CellMask orange cell membrane dye was
added to each channel to a final concentration of 1:10,000.
Cells were treated with 5μM colchicine for 15 mins and
1μg/ml paclitaxel for 120 mins. McTN imaging was done
on an Olympus FV100 confocal laser scanning microscope
at 60x magnification. Five 1μm slices and 20 frames at a
10 sec frame rate were taken for at least five image sets
for each condition. The number of McTNs on each cell
was manually counted on five cells per condition using the
maximum intensity z-projection at the last frame.

Tethering viability
MDA-MB-436 and MCF-7 cells were seeded on
PMA4/PAAm4 coated microfluidic slides with DOPC or
DOTAP (50,000 cells/channel). Cells were incubated
for 1 hr to allow for tethering. After 1 hr, one wash was
done where the existing media was gently removed
from the bottom port of each channel and fresh media
was added to the top port. This wash was to ensure
only tethered cells were analyzed. At 0 and 6 hrs after
washing, Live/Dead reagent was added according to
manufacturer’s instructions. Corresponding phase
contrast, live (calcein-AM) green fluorescence, and dead
(ethidium homodimer-1) red fluorescence images were
taken in triplicate. The number of cells in each image was
quantified using CellProfiler. The percent of live and dead
cells were calculated by quantifying the number of green
fluorescence positive and red fluorescence positive cells,
respectively, and dividing by total number of cells in the
phase contrast image. GFP and Texas Red filters were used
for imaging.

Statistical analysis
Graphpad Prism (version 6.02) was used to
determine all statistic comparisons. Student’s t-test and
one-way ANOVA tests were performed with a Tukey
multiple comparisons post-test as indicated. A p-value of
0.05 or less was considered statistically significant.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the staff of the UMD Nanocenter.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

McTN counting

The University of Maryland has filed patents on which
J. I. Andorko, K. R. Chakrabarti, C. M. Jewell, S.S. Martin,
E. L. Sooklal, and R.A. Whipple are listed as inventors. The
other authors have no conflicts of interests to disclose.

MDA-MB-436 cells were trypsinized, spun down,
and resuspended in phenol red-free and serum-free
DMEM. Cells were seeded on PMA4/PAAm4 coated
microfluidic slides, PMA4/PAAm4 coated microfluidic
slides with DOTAP, or a low attach 24-well plate (50,000
cells/channel). Cells were incubated for 1 hr to allow
for tethering. After 1 hr, one wash was done where the
existing media was gently removed from the bottom port
of each channel and fresh media was added to the top
port on the DOTAP slides. This wash was to ensure only
tethered cells were analyzed. After this wash, CellMask
Orange (Life Technologies) cell membrane dye was
added to each channel to a final concentration of 1:10,000.
McTNs were scored blindly in a population of 100 cells/
well as previously described [12]. Representative images
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

GRANT SUPPORT
This work was supported in part by R01-CA154624
and R01-CA124704, an Era of Hope Scholar Award
(BC100675) from the Department of Defense, and NSF
CAREER Award # 1351688. K.R.C is supported by F30CA196075 from NCI. J.I.A. is a trainee on NIH Grant
# T32 AI089621 and a Graduate Fellow supported by
the American Association of Pharmaceutical Scientists
Foundation. C.M.J. is a Young Investigator supported
by the Damon Runyon Foundation #DRR3415, Alliance
10495

Oncotarget

for Cancer Gene Therapy #15051543, and Melanoma
Research Alliance #348963.

13.	 Yoon JR, Whipple RA, Balzer EM, Cho EH, Matrone MA,
Peckham M and Martin SS. Local anesthetics inhibit kinesin motility and microtentacle protrusions in human epithelial and breast tumor cells. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2011;
129:691-701.

REFERENCES

14.	 Whipple RA, Matrone MA, Cho EH, Balzer EM, Vitolo
MI, Yoon JR, Ioffe OB, Tuttle KC, Yang J and Martin SS.
Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition promotes tubulin
detyrosination and microtentacles that enhance endothelial
engagement. Cancer Res. 2010; 70:8127-8137.

1.	 Joosse SA, Gorges TM and Pantel K. Biology, detection,
and clinical implications of circulating tumor cells. EMBO
Mol Med. 2015; 7:1-11.
2.	 Cristofanilli M, Budd GT, Ellis MJ, Stopeck A, Matera J,
Miller MC, Reuben JM, Doyle GV, Allard WJ, Terstappen
LW and Hayes DF. Circulating tumor cells, disease progression, and survival in metastatic breast cancer. N Engl J
Med. 2004; 351:781-791.

15.	 Matrone MA, Whipple RA, Balzer EM and Martin SS.
Microtentacles tip the balance of cytoskeletal forces in circulating tumor cells. Cancer Res. 2010; 70:7737-7741.
16.	 Balzer EM, Whipple RA, Thompson K, Boggs AE, Slovic
J, Cho EH, Matrone MA, Yoneda T, Mueller SC and Martin
SS. c-Src differentially regulates the functions of microtentacles and invadopodia. Oncogene. 2010; 29:6402-6408.

3.	 Krebs MG, Sloane R, Priest L, Lancashire L, Hou JM,
Greystoke A, Ward TH, Ferraldeschi R, Hughes A, Clack G,
Ranson M, Dive C and Blackhall FH. Evaluation and prognostic significance of circulating tumor cells in patients with
non-small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2011; 29:1556-1563.

17.	 Matrone MA, Whipple RA, Thompson K, Cho EH, Vitolo
MI, Balzer EM, Yoon JR, Ioffe OB, Tuttle KC, Tan M
and Martin SS. Metastatic breast tumors express increased
tau, which promotes microtentacle formation and the reattachment of detached breast tumor cells. Oncogene. 2010;
29:3217-3227.

4.	 Yu M, Stott S, Toner M, Maheswaran S and Haber DA.
Circulating tumor cells: approaches to isolation and characterization. J Cell Biol. 2011; 192:373-382.
5.	 Stott SL, Hsu CH, Tsukrov DI, Yu M, Miyamoto DT,
Waltman BA, Rothenberg SM, Shah AM, Smas ME,
Korir GK, Floyd FP, Jr., Gilman AJ, Lord JB, Winokur D,
Springer S, Irimia D, et al. Isolation of circulating tumor
cells using a microvortex-generating herringbone-chip. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010; 107:18392-18397.

18.	 Balzer EM, Whipple RA, Cho EH, Matrone MA and Martin
SS. Antimitotic chemotherapeutics promote adhesive
responses in detached and circulating tumor cells. Breast
Cancer Res Treat. 2010; 121:65-78.
19.	 Park G-S, Kwon H, Kwak DW, Park SY, Kim M, Lee J-H,
Han H, Heo S, Li XS, Lee JH, Kim YH, Lee J-G, Yang W,
Cho HY, Kim SK and Kim K. Full Surface Embedding of
Gold Clusters on Silicon Nanowires for Efficient Capture
and Photothermal Therapy of Circulating Tumor Cells.
Nano Letters. 2012; 12:1638-1642.

6.	 Yu M, Bardia A, Aceto N, Bersani F, Madden MW,
Donaldson MC, Desai R, Zhu H, Comaills V, Zheng Z,
Wittner BS, Stojanov P, Brachtel E, Sgroi D, Kapur R,
Shioda T, et al. Cancer therapy. Ex vivo culture of circulating breast tumor cells for individualized testing of drug
susceptibility. Science. 2014; 345:216-220.

20.	 Halo TL, McMahon KM, Angeloni NL, Xu Y, Wang W,
Chinen AB, Malin D, Strekalova E, Cryns VL, Cheng C, Mirkin
CA and Thaxton CS. NanoFlares for the detection, isolation, and
culture of live tumor cells from human blood. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences. 2014; 111:17104-17109.

7.	 Yu M, Bardia A, Wittner BS, Stott SL, Smas ME, Ting DT,
Isakoff SJ, Ciciliano JC, Wells MN, Shah AM, Concannon
KF, Donaldson MC, Sequist LV, Brachtel E, Sgroi D,
Baselga J, et al. Circulating breast tumor cells exhibit
dynamic changes in epithelial and mesenchymal composition. Science. 2013; 339:580-584.

21.	 Mitchell MJ, Castellanos CA and King MR. Surfactant
functionalization induces robust, differential adhesion of
tumor cells and blood cells to charged nanotube-coated
biomaterials under flow. Biomaterials. 2015; 56:179-186.

8.	 Kim YN, Koo KH, Sung JY, Yun UJ and Kim H. Anoikis
resistance: an essential prerequisite for tumor metastasis. Int
J Cell Biol. 2012; 2012:306879.

22.	 Adams AA, Okagbare PI, Feng J, Hupert ML, Patterson
D, Göttert J, McCarley RL, Nikitopoulos D, Murphy MC
and Soper SA. Highly Efficient Circulating Tumor Cell
Isolation from Whole Blood and Label-Free Enumeration
Using Polymer-Based Microfluidics with an Integrated
Conductivity Sensor. Journal of the American Chemical
Society. 2008; 130:8633-8641.

9.	 Grassian AR, Coloff JL and Brugge JS. Extracellular matrix
regulation of metabolism and implications for tumorigenesis. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 2011; 76:313-324.
10.	 Fung C, Lock R, Gao S, Salas E and Debnath J. Induction
of autophagy during extracellular matrix detachment promotes cell survival. Mol Biol Cell. 2008; 19:797-806.
11.	 Charpentier M and Martin S. Interplay of Stem Cell
Characteristics, EMT, and Microtentacles in Circulating
Breast Tumor Cells. Cancers (Basel). 2013; 5:1545-1565.

23.	 Stott SL, Hsu C-H, Tsukrov DI, Yu M, Miyamoto DT,
Waltman BA, Rothenberg SM, Shah AM, Smas ME, Korir
GK, Floyd FP, Gilman AJ, Lord JB, Winokur D, Springer
S, Irimia D, et al. Isolation of circulating tumor cells using
a microvortex-generating herringbone-chip. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences. 2010; 107:18392-18397.

12.	 Whipple RA, Cheung AM and Martin SS. Detyrosinated
microtubule protrusions in suspended mammary epithelial cells
promote reattachment. Exp Cell Res. 2007; 313:1326-1336.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10496

Oncotarget

24.	 Sarioglu AF, Aceto N, Kojic N, Donaldson MC, Zeinali M,
Hamza B, Engstrom A, Zhu H, Sundaresan TK, Miyamoto
DT, Luo X, Bardia A, Wittner BS, Ramaswamy S, Shioda
T, Ting DT, et al. A microfluidic device for label-free, physical capture of circulating tumor cell clusters. Nat Meth.
2015; 12:685-691.

35.	 Yang SY and Seo J-Y. Cellular interactions on nano-structured polyelectrolyte multilayers. Colloids and Surfaces
A: Physicochemical and Engineering Aspects. 2008;
313-314:526-529.
36.	 Frisch SM, Schaller M and Cieply B. Mechanisms that link
the oncogenic epithelial-mesenchymal transition to suppression of anoikis. J Cell Sci. 2013; 126:21-29.

25.	 Li P, Mao Z, Peng Z, Zhou L, Chen Y, Huang P-H,
Truica CI, Drabick JJ, El-Deiry WS, Dao M, Suresh S and
Huang TJ. Acoustic separation of circulating tumor cells.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 2015;
112:4970-4975.

37.	 Weiswald LB, Bellet D and Dangles-Marie V. Spherical
cancer models in tumor biology. Neoplasia. 2015; 17:1-15.
38.	 Yang SY, Mendelsohn JD and Rubner MF. New class
of ultrathin, highly cell-adhesion-resistant polyelectrolyte multilayers with micropatterning capabilities.
Biomacromolecules. 2003; 4:987-994.

26.	 Lee H, Jang Y, Seo J, Nam J-M and Char K. NanoparticleFunctionalized Polymer Platform for Controlling Metastatic
Cancer Cell Adhesion, Shape, and Motility. ACS Nano.
2011; 5:5444-5456.

39.	 Whipple RA, Balzer EM, Cho EH, Matrone MA, Yoon
JR and Martin SS. Vimentin filaments support extension
of tubulin-based microtentacles in detached breast tumor
cells. Cancer Res. 2008; 68:5678-5688.

27.	 Best JP, Javed S, Richardson JJ, Cho KL, Kamphuis
MMJ and Caruso F. Stiffness-mediated adhesion of cervical cancer cells to soft hydrogel films. Soft Matter. 2013;
9:4580-4584.

40.	 Chaffer CL and Weinberg RA. A perspective on cancer cell
metastasis. Science. 2011; 331:1559-1564.

28.	 Reategui E, Aceto N, Lim EJ, Sullivan JP, Jensen AE,
Zeinali M, Martel JM, Aranyosi AJ, Li W, Castleberry
S, Bardia A, Sequist LV, Haber DA, Maheswaran S,
Hammond PT, Toner M, et al. Tunable nanostructured coating for the capture and selective release of viable circulating
tumor cells. Adv Mater. 2015; 27:1593-1599.

41.	 Cristofanilli M and Mendelsohn J. Circulating tumor cells
in breast cancer: Advanced tools for “tailored” therapy?
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006; 103:17073-17074.
42.	 Halter M, Nogata Y, Dannenberger O, Sasaki T and Vogel
V. Engineered lipids that cross-link the inner and outer leaflets of lipid bilayers. Langmuir. 2004; 20:2416-2423.

29.	 Mendelsohn JD, Yang SY, Hiller J, Hochbaum AI and
Rubner MF. Rational design of cytophilic and cytophobic
polyelectrolyte multilayer thin films. Biomacromolecules.
2003; 4:96-106.

43.	 Yang SY and Rubner MF. Micropatterning of polymer
thin films with pH-sensitive and cross-linkable hydrogenbonded polyelectrolyte multilayers. J Am Chem Soc. 2002;
124:2100-2101.

30.	 Richert L, Boulmedais F, Lavalle P, Mutterer J, Ferreux
E, Decher G, Schaaf P, Voegel J-C and Picart C.
Improvement of Stability and Cell Adhesion Properties
of Polyelectrolyte Multilayer Films by Chemical CrossLinking. Biomacromolecules. 2004; 5:284-294.

44.	 Ziegler YS, Moresco JJ, Tu PG, Yates JR, 3rd and Nardulli
AM. Plasma membrane proteomics of human breast cancer
cell lines identifies potential targets for breast cancer diagnosis and treatment. PLoS One. 2014; 9:e102341.
45.	 Plaks V, Koopman CD and Werb Z. Cancer. Circulating
tumor cells. Science. 2013; 341:1186-1188.

31.	 Chen J, Kohler R, Gutberlet T, Mohwald H and Krastev
R. Asymmetric lipid bilayer sandwiched in polyelectrolyte multilayer films through layer-by-layer assembly. Soft
Matter. 2009; 5:228-233.

46.	 Yap TA, Lorente D, Omlin A, Olmos D and de Bono JS.
Circulating tumor cells: a multifunctional biomarker. Clin
Cancer Res. 2014; 20:2553-2568.

32.	 Yamaguchi S, Yamahira S, Kikuchi K, Sumaru K,
Kanamori T and Nagamune T. Photocontrollable dynamic
micropatterning of non-adherent mammalian cells using a
photocleavable poly(ethylene glycol) lipid. Angew Chem
Int Ed Engl. 2012; 51:128-131.

47.	 Maheswaran S, Sequist LV, Nagrath S, Ulkus L, Brannigan
B, Collura CV, Inserra E, Diederichs S, Iafrate AJ, Bell
DW, Digumarthy S, Muzikansky A, Irimia D, Settleman
J, Tompkins RG, Lynch TJ, et al. Detection of mutations
in EGFR in circulating lung-cancer cells. N Engl J Med.
2008; 359:366-377.

33.	 Zhang Y, Wang L, Wang X, Qi G and Han X. Forming lipid
bilayer membrane arrays on micropatterned polyelectrolyte
film surfaces. Chemistry. 2013; 19:9059-9063.

48.	 Aceto N, Bardia A, Miyamoto DT, Donaldson MC, Wittner
BS, Spencer JA, Yu M, Pely A, Engstrom A, Zhu H,
Brannigan BW, Kapur R, Stott SL, Shioda T, Ramaswamy
S, Ting DT, et al. Circulating tumor cell clusters are oligoclonal precursors of breast cancer metastasis. Cell. 2014;
158:1110-1122.

34.	 Yamahira S, Yamaguchi S, Kawahara M and Nagamune T.
Collagen surfaces modified with photo-cleavable polyethylene glycol-lipid support versatile single-cell arrays of both
non-adherent and adherent cells. Macromol Biosci. 2014;
14:1670-1676.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10497

Oncotarget

