Research Article

GM1 and Tumor Necrosis Factor-A, Overexpressed in Renal Cell
Carcinoma, Synergize to Induce T-Cell Apoptosis
1

1

2

2

2

Tanya Das, Gaurisankar Sa, Cynthia Hilston, Daisuke Kudo, Patricia Rayman,
2
2
3
3
2,3
Kaushik Biswas, Luis Molto, Ronald Bukowski, Brian Rini, James H. Finke,
2
and Charles Tannenbaum
1

Molecular Medicine Division, Bose Institute, Kolkata, India; 2Department of Immunology, Lerner Research Institute and
Experimental Therapeutics, Taussig Cancer Center, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio

3

Abstract
The ability to induce T-cell apoptosis is one mechanism by
which tumors evade the immune system, although the
molecules involved remain controversial. We found that renal
cell carcinoma (RCC)–induced T-cell apoptosis was inhibited
by >50% when cocultures were performed with gangliosidedepleted tumor cells, caspase-8–negative lymphocytes, or
anti–tumor necrosis factor-A (TNFA) antibodies, suggesting
that tumor gangliosides synergize with signals delivered
through TNFA death receptors to mediate T-cell killing.
The synergy between tumor-derived TNFA and the RCCoverexpressed ganglioside GM1 for killing resting T cells is
corroborated by studies using purified GM1 and rTNFA, which
indicate that a 48-hour pretreatment with the ganglioside
optimally sensitizes the lymphocytes to a TNFA-induced
apoptotic death. However, activated T cells, which synthesize
TNFA themselves, can be killed by exogenous GM1 alone.
RelA-overexpressing lymphocytes are protected from GM1
plus TNFA-mediated apoptosis, a finding consistent with our
previous studies indicating that gangliosides inhibit nuclear
factor-KB activation. These results are clinically relevant
because, similar to T-cells cocultured with GM1-overexpressing RCC lines, T cells isolated from the peripheral blood of
patients with metastatic RCC are also heavily coated with
that tumor-shed ganglioside. This population of patient
cells, unlike T cells isolated from normal donors, is highly
susceptible to apoptosis induced by rTNFA or by metastatic
patient sera, which contain elevated levels of the cytokine.
This report thus extends our previous studies by demonstrating that tumor-derived TNFA enhances RCC apoptogenicity
not only by inducing ganglioside synthesis but also by
initiating receptor-dependent apoptosis in T cells in which
the nuclear factor-KB activation pathway has been inhibited
by GM1. [Cancer Res 2008;68(6):2014–23]

Introduction
Numerous studies indicate that tumors do elicit immune
responses, with tumor-specific T-lymphocytes clonally expanding
in many individuals harboring malignancies (1, 2). These initial

Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research Online
(http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
T. Das and G. Sa contributed equally to this work.
Requests for reprints: Charles Tannenbaum, Department of Immunology/NE4308, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, OH 44195.
Phone: 216-445-0575; Fax: 216-444-9329; E-mail: tannenc@ccf.org.
I2008 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-6037

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (6). March 15, 2008

responses seem to be either short lived or ineffective, however,
because the majority of tumors progress and metastasize, and most
patients eventually die of their disease (3). Our laboratory studies
tumor-induced T-cell apoptosis as a mechanism by which renal cell
carcinoma eludes immune destruction: when examined by in situ
terminal nucleotidyl transferase (TdT)–mediated nick end labeling
(TUNEL) analysis, 30% to 100% of renal cell carcinoma (RCC)
tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TIL) are Annexin V/amino actinomycin D–positive (4). The systemic reach of tumor-mediated
immunosuppression is suggested by the fact that even patient
peripheral blood T cells are susceptible to activation-induced cell
death upon explantation (4). It is the tumors themselves that
mediate these effects because T lymphocytes undergo the same
physiologic changes associated with apoptosis following in vitro
culture with cancer cell lines (5–7).
A variety of tumors have been reported to express aberrantly
elevated levels of FasL, TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand, or
CD70, ligands that can mediate proapoptotic effects upon binding
their specific cognate receptors (8–10). Our laboratory has also
recently elucidated a role for soluble, tumor-associated products in
mediating T-cell apoptosis (11, 12). Further studies have shown that
shed, overexpressed tumor-associated gangliosides play a significant
part in these events (13–16). Renal cell carcinomas, for example,
display increased levels of GM1, GM2, and GD1a (17). Although there
is precedence for gangliosides suppressing antitumor immunity (18,
19), the mechanism by which they act is unclear.
Our previous studies indicated that gangliosides purified from
RCC supernatants depressed nuclear factor-nB (NFnB) activation
in lymphocytes, and also triggered cytochrome c release and
induced apoptosis if coincubated with T cells for extended periods
(7, 11, 12, 20). All of these effects were also mediated by the tumor
cells themselves, but were abrogated when tumor ganglioside
synthesis was inhibited prior to coculture by pretreatment with the
glycosylceramide synthase inhibitor 1-phenyl-2-hexadecanoylamino-3-pyrrolidino-1-propanol. Our finding that caspase-8–
negative Jurkat cells were also largely resistant to a gangliosideoverproducing RCC line suggested that another tumor-derived
product, likely acting through a death receptor, might also
synergize with glycosphingolipids to mediate T-cell death. Interestingly, loss of function mutations in the von Hippel-Lindau (VHL)
tumor suppressor protein are common in clear cell RCC (21, 22).
Because tumor necrosis factor-a (TNFa) is up-regulated in tumors
harboring the mutation (23), most RCCs synthesize TNFa
constitutively. Reports demonstrating that TNFa stimulates
ganglioside expression in several normal cell types (24) led to our
experiments revealing that TNFa could augment tumor killing of
cocultured T-lymphocytes via a mechanism involving increased
tumor ganglioside synthesis (13). Left unresolved, however, was the

2014

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Renal Cell Carcinoma GM1 and TNFa Synergize for T-Cell Death

Figure 1. RCC tumor cells expressing
elevated levels of TNFa exhibit enhanced
apoptogenicity for T cells. A, RNA
preparations from NKE cells and two
RCC clones were subjected to RT-PCR
using 5¶ and 3¶ primers for TNFa,
demonstrating the isolation of an
SK-RC-45 variant clone (SK-RC-45hi )
expressing f7-fold higher levels of the
cytokine than SK-RC-45low. Primers for
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase (GAPDH ) served as a
control for RNA levels in each sample.
B, NKE, SK-RC-45low, and SK-RC-45hi
cells were subjected to immunostaining
with 2 Ag/mL of anti-TNFa, followed
by Alexa 488–labeled secondary
antibody. Nuclei were revealed by DAPI
staining. C, resting T cells were
cocultured for 72 h with NKE cells,
SK-RC-45hi, SK-RC-45low, TNFatransfected SK-RC-45low (clone 24), or
SK-RC-45hi in the continuous presence of
anti-TNFa antibodies (10 Ag/mL), at
which time, lymphocytes were evaluated by
TUNEL for apoptosis. Columns, mean of
three experiments; bars, SE (*, P < 0.001;
**, P < 0.01 versus medium alone). D,
resting T cells incubated in medium or
cocultured with SK-RC-45hi for 72 h were
analyzed for tumor-induced apoptosis by
TUNEL analysis. Typical data obtained by
flow cytometry which was used to generate
the results in C , and all subsequent
experiments assessing T cell apoptosis
under various experimental conditions.

molecular pathway(s) by which these TNFa- and gangliosideproducing tumor cells mediated their toxic effects. Here, we report
that RCC-derived products GM1 and TNFa, in both their tumorassociated and purified forms, could induce T-cell dysfunction
by synergistically activating the receptor-dependent apoptotic
pathway in lymphocytes. The physiologic relevance of these studies
stems from our findings that, unlike lymphocytes from healthy
donors, peripheral blood T cells isolated from patients
with RCC stain strongly for GM1, and are induced to apoptosis
when treated in vitro with either TNFa or with RCC patient serum,
which we find contains elevated levels of TNFa.

Materials and Methods
Reagents. Anti-TNFa, anti-TNFR1, anti–caspase-8, anti–caspase-9, and
anti-FADD antibodies were rabbit polyclonal antibodies from Santa Cruz
Biotechnology, and murine monoclonal antiactin was purchased from
Abcam. Horseradish peroxidase–conjugated sheep anti-mouse and donkey
anti-rabbit immunoglobulin antibodies were from Amersham. FITC-labeled
cholera toxin was from List Biologicals, and anticholera toxin antibody

www.aacrjournals.org

was from Calbiochem. Protein Sepharose beads were from Pierce.
Phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) and ionomycin were from SigmaAldrich. Monoclonal anti-CD3 (OKT3) and monoclonal anti-CD28 (BD
Immunocytometry Systems) were from Ortho Biotech. Caspase-8 inhibitor I
(IETD-CHO), used at 50 Amol/L, was from Calbiochem. GM1 was from
Matreya. Gangliosides were isolated from RCC tissues, purified and
subjected to high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) as previously
described (25). Human recombinant interleukin-2 [Aldesleukin (Proleukin),
CHIRON Corporation] was used at 20 units/mL to maintain the viability of
activated T cells.
Plasmids and transfection. TNFa was cloned from activated T cells,
and the cDNA was inserted into the HindIII and Xba sites of PcDNA3.
Jurkat cells were transfected and selected with G418 as described previously
(20) and clones generated by limiting dilution were characterized for
cytokine production using a TNFa ELISA kit (R&D Systems). The RelA
cDNA and RelA-transfected Jurkat cells were prepared as described
previously (20).
Cell culture. Peripheral blood was obtained and T cells purified and
activated as described previously (13). The Jurkat leukemic T-cell line was
purchased from American Type Culture Collection. Caspase-8–negative
Jurkat cells were a gift from John Blenis (Department of Cell Biology,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA; ref. 26). The long-term renal cell

2015

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (6). March 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research
carcinoma line (SK-RC-45; ref. 27) was obtained, grown, and used
experimentally in cocultures as described previously (13). A variant clone
of SK-RC-45 with enhanced apoptogenicity for resting T cells was isolated
from the parental stock, expressed elevated levels of TNFa, and hence, was
designated SK-RC-45hi. SK-RCC-45 clone 24 was derived by transfecting the
parental SK-RC-45low cells with a TNFa-encoding plasmid. A normal kidney
epithelial (NKE) cell line was used as a negative control in coculture
experiments.
Immunofluorescence. Tumor lines were immunostained to assess
GM1- and TNFa expression levels. Cells were fixed in paraformaldehyde and
permeabilized with Triton X-100 (Sigma). Cells were blocked with 2% fetal
bovine serum/1% bovine serum albumin, and incubated overnight at 4jC
with either FITC-labeled cholera toxin or anti–TNFa antibodies. Cells were
subsequently incubated with the appropriate, labeled secondary antibodies
(Molecular Probes), washed, and counterstained with 4¶,6-diamidino-2phenylindole (DAPI) to visualize the nuclei.
Analysis of DNA fragmentation by TUNEL analysis. Cells were fixed in
1% paraformaldehyde, and were stained and analyzed for apoptosis using
the APO-BRDU system (Invitrogen), as described previously (20).
Cell lysates and analysis of protein by Western blotting. Cell pellets
were resuspended in lysis buffer and subjected to Western analysis as
described (7).
Analysis of TNFA expression using reverse transcription-PCR and
chemiluminescent ELISAs. Total cellular RNA was extracted and
subjected to semiquantitative reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) analysis according to previously described methods and cycling conditions
(28). The primer and probe sequences for TNFa and glyceraldehyde3-phosphate dehydrogenase were as described (28, 29). Sera isolated from
19 patients with RCC and 6 normal controls were assessed for their
TNFa concentrations using the QuantiGlo Human TNFa chemiluminescent ELISA kit (R&D Systems) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions.

HPLC analysis of tumor gangliosides. Tumor gangliosides isolated
from SK-RC-45low and SK-RC-45hi were subjected to HPLC analysis as
previously described (13).
Statistical analysis. Student’s t test (two paired samples for mean or two
samples using equal variances) was used to determine P using Microsoft
Excel Software (version 2003). SE was calculated from SD using Microsoft
Excel software.

Results
RCC tumor cells kill resting T-lymphocytes by a mechanism
dependent on gangliosides and the TNFA receptor/ligand
pair. Gangliosides are overexpressed by a variety of tumor types
(19), and have been reported to mediate cytotoxic effects by
disrupting the mitochondrial function of target cells (7, 30).
The data presented in Fig. 1 support the notion that tumor
gangliosides also contribute to T-cell apoptosis by a mechanism
exhibiting death receptor dependency. When NKE cells and two
RCC cell lines differing vastly in their TNFa expression levels
(SK-RC-45low and SK-RC-45hi; Fig. 1A and B) were compared for
their relative abilities to kill cocultured resting T cells in vitro,
the NKE cells were found to have a negligible effect whereas
the tumor lines mediated apoptosis in proportion to their
levels of TNFa expression (Fig. 1C). Unlike the NKE cells,
which even if pretreated with TNFa did not overexpress
gangliosides and could not induce T-cell apoptosis, SK-RC-45hi
(13) and the TNFa-transfected SK-RC-45 clone 24 stimulated an
average of 55% to 60% of the lymphocytes to TUNEL positivity
(Fig. 1C and D). This was more than twice the level of T-cell
apoptosis induced by the parental SK-RC-45low line, which also

Figure 2. Caspase-8 negativity protects
T cells from apoptosis induced by SK-RC-45hi.
A, wild-type and caspase-8–negative Jurkat
cells were stained with anti-TNFR1 to assess
TNFR1 receptor expression by flow cytometric
analysis, as described in Materials and
Methods. B, cytoplasmic lysates made from
wild-type and caspase-8–negative Jurkat
cells were subjected to Western blot analysis
using 10 Ag protein/lane and antibodies to
FADD, caspase-8, caspase-9, caspase-3, and
actin. C, wild-type Jurkat cells, caspase-8–
negative Jurkat cells, or wild-type Jurkat cells
pretreated for 90 min with 50 Amol/L of
caspase-8 inhibitor I were incubated with
SK-RC-45hi for 72 h prior to analyzing the
lymphocytes by TUNEL for tumor-induced
apoptosis, as described in Materials and
Methods. Columns, mean of three
experiments; bars, SE (*, P < 0.001).

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (6). March 15, 2008

2016

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Renal Cell Carcinoma GM1 and TNFa Synergize for T-Cell Death

Figure 3. TNFa-producing RCC cells overexpress the ganglioside GM1, which adheres to T-cell membranes and participates in lymphocyte killing. A, NKE cells,
SK-RC-45low, SK-RC-45hi, and primary RCC tumor cells were stained with 2 Ag/mL of FITC-labeled cholera toxin and examined by fluorescent microscopy for
GM1 expression, as described in Materials and Methods. B, HPLC profiles of gangliosides isolated from SK-RC-45low and SK-RC-45hi cell lines were obtained as
described in Materials and Methods, demonstrating the elevated levels of GM1 in SK-RC-45hi. C, normal, peripheral blood resting T-cells were either cocultured
with SK-RC-45hi, or incubated in the presence or absence of 25 Ag/mL of GM1 for 2 h, prior to staining the lymphocytes with FITC-labeled cholera toxin to assess
levels of T-cell membrane–associated GM1. D, conditioned medium from confluent cultures of NKE cells, SK-RC-45low, or SK-RC-45hi were immunodepleted or not of
GM1 with cholera toxin/anti–cholera toxin/protein A-Sepharose beads. Resting T cells from normal donors were then cultured for 72 h in each (diluted 50% with
fresh medium), and then subjected to TUNEL analysis to assess the involvement of GM1 in apoptosis induced by tumor supernatants. Supernatants treated with
control IgG and protein A-Sepharose beads served as negative controls. Columns, mean of three experiments; bars, SE (*, P < 0.005 vs. GM1-depleted NKE
supernatants; **, P < 0.05 vs. NKE-depleted supernatants).

became more apoptogenic if pretreated with TNFa prior to a
coculture experiment (Fig. 1C).
In our earlier published reports, the role of TNFa in mediating the
apoptosis of resting T cells was examined only in the context of the
cytokines’ capacity to stimulate tumor ganglioside synthesis.
However, because in those studies, the TNFa used for pretreating
the SK-RC-45 was not removed from the tumor cell monolayers prior
to initiating the coincubation experiments, the possibility that TNFa
might be mediating an additional, requisite proapoptotic activity
was not addressed. Here, our determination that anti-TNFa

www.aacrjournals.org

antibodies inhibited RCC-mediated killing of T cells even after
TNFa-induced ganglioside synthesis was maximal (ref. 13; Fig. 1C),
suggested that TNFa was likely playing an additional obligatory role
in tumor-induced apoptosis of the lymphocytes. Because numerous
laboratories have implicated death ligands expressed by histologically diverse tumors in the apoptosis of TILs (8–10), we thus
considered the possibility that TNFa might be mediating this
additional proapoptotic effect through the TNFa death receptor.
Caspase-8–deficient Jurkat cells are resistant to the apoptogenic SK-RC-45hi line. Because caspase-8 is a requisite for death

2017

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (6). March 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

receptor–dependent activation of the caspase cascade (31), the use
of caspase-8–negative Jurkat cells provided an opportunity to
assess the role of TNFR1 in SK-RC-45hi–mediated killing (Fig. 2A
and B). Wild-type and caspase-8–negative Jurkat cells were thus
analyzed for DNA breaks by TUNEL following a 72-hour
coincubation with adherent SK-RC-45hi monolayers. Wild-type
Jurkat cells were highly sensitive to SK-RC-45hi, with an average of
55% of the cocultured lymphocytes testing positive for apoptosis
(Fig. 2C), although only minimal TUNEL positivity was evident
when, as controls, the lymphocytes were exposed to NKE cells
(f7.0% apoptosis) or fresh medium alone (3%; data not shown).
The defect in T-cell death receptor signaling conferred by the
caspase-8 mutation, however, dramatically decreased the susceptibility of that Jurkat cell clone to SK-RC-45hi by f55%, suggesting
that the tumor-derived TNFa, beyond inducing ganglioside
synthesis, is additionally acting in a death receptor and caspase8–dependent manner (Fig. 2C). Supporting this conclusion was the
even greater inhibition of tumor-induced apoptosis observed (65%
inhibition) when SK-RC-45hi cells were coincubated with wild-type
Jurkat cells in the presence of caspase-8 inhibitor I (IETD-CHO;
Fig. 2C). The fact that SK-RC-45hi–induced Jurkat cell apoptosis can
be reduced by >50% either by abrogating tumor cell ganglioside
synthesis or by inhibiting death receptor–mediated activation of
the caspase cascade, indicates that the RCC tumor line synthesizes
multiple proapoptotic products (i.e., TNFa and gangliosides) that
synergize to induce the apoptosis of Jurkat cells and normal T cells.

RCC tumor cells overexpress GM1 and induce apoptosis of
resting T-lymphocytes in proportion to their level of TNFA
synthesis. When SK-RC-45low and SK-RC-45hi were compared with
a NKE cell line for GM1 expression by immunostaining with FITClabeled cholera toxin, it was evident that the RCC tumor cells
produced much greater amounts of that ganglioside (Fig. 3A), and
did so in proportion to their TNFa expression levels (13): SK-RC45hi cells stained much brighter than SK-RC-45low. These finding
were confirmed when gangliosides isolated from the two RCC
clones were compared for GM1 content by HPLC (Fig. 3B). The
relevance of the SK-RC-45hi model for studying GM1 participation
in RCC-mediated T-cell killing was supported by studies that
examined GM1 overexpression by primary RCC. When primary
RCC explants from eight different patients were digested into
single cell suspensions and analyzed with FITC-labeled cholera
toxin for GM1 levels, all were determined to express highly
abundant quantities of the ganglioside (representative fluorescent
micrograph; Fig. 3A). The potential physiologic implications of this
overexpression are shown in Fig. 3C. Not only do T-cell membranes
incorporate GM1 when the purified ganglioside is added to the
culture medium (Fig. 3C, middle plate), but T cells also become
coated with the molecule when they are cocultured with a GM1overexpressing RCC line (Fig. 3C, right plate). The deleterious
consequences of T cell contact with exogenous GM1 could be
discerned from the experiment depicted in Fig. 3D. When normal
resting, peripheral blood T-cells were assessed for apoptosis

Figure 4. Gangliosides and TNFa synergistically induce T-cell apoptosis. A, resting peripheral blood T-cells were treated with escalating doses of GM1 for 48 h prior
to stimulating them or not for 24 h with 100 ng/mL of TNFa. Cells were subsequently analyzed for apoptosis by TUNEL. Columns, mean of three experiments;
bars, SE (*, P < 0.001; **, P < 0.01 vs. 0 Ag/mL GM1). B, resting peripheral blood T-cells were treated with 25 Ag/mL of GM1 for 24, 48, 72, and 96 h, the last 24 h
in the presence or absence of 100 ng/mL of TNFa. Cells were subsequently analyzed for apoptosis by TUNEL. Columns, mean of three experiments; bars, SE
(*, P < 0.001; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.05 vs. 0 h GM1 pretreatment). C, resting peripheral blood T-cells were treated or not with 25 Ag/mL of GM1 with or without TNFa
as described in A , prior to being stained with DAPI to quantify apoptotic nuclei by fluorescent microscopy. D, RCC gangliosides were isolated from SK-RC-45hi as
described in Materials and Methods, and were used at different concentrations to treat resting T cells prior to a subsequent stimulation with 100 ng/mL of TNFa.
After 72 h, cells were subjected to TUNEL analysis to quantify apoptosis induced by the different treatments (*, P < 0.001; **, P < 0.01 vs. 0 Ag/mL RCC
gangliosides).

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (6). March 15, 2008

2018

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Renal Cell Carcinoma GM1 and TNFa Synergize for T-Cell Death

Figure 5. GM1 alone can induce the
apoptosis of activated T-cells and
TNFa-transfected Jurkat cells. A,
peripheral blood T-cells preactivated with
anti-CD3/anti-CD28 were treated with
increasing doses of GM1 (10, 25,
50 Ag/mL), in the continuous presence or
absence of control IgG or anti-TNFa
antibodies for 72 h, prior to being assessed
for apoptosis by TUNEL. Columns, mean
of three experiments; bars, SE
(**, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.05 vs. No IgG).
B, resting peripheral blood T-cells were
stimulated or not with either
PMA/ionomycin or anti-CD3/anti-CD28
prior to subjecting whole cell lysates to
Western blot analysis using antibodies to
TNFa and TNFR1. Actin served as a
loading control. C, wild-type Jurkat cells
and a Jurkat cell line permanently
transfected with TNFa-encoding cDNA
were treated for 48 h with 100 ng/mL of
TNFa alone, 25 Ag of GM1 alone, or GM1
for 24 h followed by TNFa for 24 h, at
which point, cells were analyzed by TUNEL
for apoptosis. Columns, mean of three
experiments; bars, SE (*, P < 0.001 vs.
medium alone).

following a 72-hour exposure to NKE, SK-RC-45low, or SK-RC-45hi
culture supernatants, the conditioned medium from the NKE line
was found to have no injurious effect on T-cell viability, whereas
the two tumor cell supernatants induced T-cell killing in direct
proportion to their individual levels of GM1 synthesis (25% and
55% apoptosis, respectively; Fig. 3D and A). The specific
involvement of GM1 in this killing was clearly demonstrated in
Fig. 3D, which shows that depletion of GM1 from the tumor cell–
conditioned medium by sequential treatment with cholera toxin,
anticholera toxin antibody, and protein A-Sepharose beads reduced
the apoptogenicity of the tumor supernatants by f50%, although
control IgG and beads had no effect.
Both purified GM1 and purified RCC gangliosides synergize
with recombinant TNFA to induce apoptosis of resting T cells.
To further evaluate the notion that GM1 and TNFa synergize to
induce T-cell apoptosis, resting peripheral blood T cells were
incubated for 48 hours with escalating doses of purified GM1, prior
to treating them or not for a final 24 hours with 100 ng/mL of
TNFa. Only minimal killing was observed when T cells were
cultured with either TNFa alone, or with 10 or 25 Ag/mL of GM1
alone, although some modest levels of apoptosis were achieved
when cells were incubated with higher concentrations of the
ganglioside (Fig. 4A). Synergy between GM1 and TNFa, however,
was observed throughout the range of GM1 provided. The effect
became optimal at a GM1 concentration of 25 Ag/mL, at which
dose GM1 plus TNFa killed 60% of the cocultured T-cells, five times
more cells than could be killed by either the ganglioside or TNFa
alone (Fig. 4A). A time course study was also performed to
determine the optimal GM1 preexposure time requisite for
maximal synergy (Fig. 4B). This experiment revealed that when
resting T cells were incubated with 25 Ag/mL of GM1 for different
time periods prior to adding TNFa for a final 24 hours of culture, a
48-hour preincubation with GM1 (i.e., the 72-hour final time point)
was found to provide the maximum apoptotic effect. DAPI staining
(32) of resting T cells following exposure to GM1 plus TNFa

www.aacrjournals.org

revealed a significant increase in the percentage of apoptotic nuclei
per visual field compared with untreated control cells, or to cells
treated with either GM1 or TNFa alone (Fig. 4C). Together, these
results support the concept that GM1 and TNFa synergistically
mediate the apoptotic death of T cells.
We next wanted to determine whether purified RCC-derived
gangliosides also synergize with TNFa to mediate T-cell killing.
Resting T cells were incubated for 48 hours with increasing doses
of a ganglioside preparation purified from the RCC tumor cell line
SK-RC-45hi, following which TNFa was added for an additional
24 hours. RCC-derived gangliosides were more potent mediators
of T-cell apoptosis than purified GM1, as alone, 7.5 Ag/mL of the
tumor-derived gangliosides killed 20% of the coincubated T-cells
(above background; Fig. 4D). However, synergy between RCC
gangliosides and TNFa was still very much evident, and was
maximal at 7.5 Ag/mL of RCC gangliosides. At this concentration,
tumor gangliosides synergized with TNFa to kill >80% of the
treated T cells (Fig. 4D).
GM1 can synergize with T cell–derived TNFA to kill activated
T lymphocytes directly. Although 25 Ag/mL of GM1 alone was not
significantly apoptogenic for resting T cells (Fig. 4A), it could induce
the apoptotic death of TNFa-expressing activated T-cells (Fig. 5A).
Although both resting and activated T cells express TNFR1 (Fig. 5B),
only the activated cells express detectable TNFa (Fig. 5B). Thus, it
may be that because activated T cells can provide their own source
of synergizing TNFa, they can be killed by GM1 alone (Fig. 5A). This
contrasts with TNFa-deficient, resting T-cells, which can only be
killed by GM1 plus TNFa (Fig. 4A–C) or by an RCC tumor line that
expresses both gangliosides and TNFa (Figs. 1C, D, and 3D). Indeed,
incubation of activated T cells with GM1 in the presence of
antibodies to TNFa significantly abrogated the gangliosidemediated killing (Fig. 5A), whereas control IgG had essentially no
effect. This line of reasoning was further supported by experiments
showing that Jurkat cells treated with GM1 or TNFa did not
undergo apoptosis unless the two reagents were used in synergy,

2019

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (6). March 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

in which case, >55% of the cells succumbed (Fig. 5C). Jurkat cells
engineered to secrete their own source of TNFa, on the other hand,
remained viable when cultured in medium or if treated with
additional TNFa, but could be induced to apoptosis if treated
with 25 Ag/mL of purified GM1 alone, the latter likely synergizing
with cellular sources of TNFa to mediate the effect (Fig. 5C).
Jurkat cells genetically defective for NFKB activation are
susceptible to TNFA alone, with GM1 providing no additional
effect; conversely, Jurkat cells engineered to overexpress RelA
are resistant to the synergistic, apoptotic effects of GM1 and
TNFA. Previous studies from our laboratory indicated that RCC
tumor gangliosides inhibit PMA/ionomycin–induced NFnB activation (11). To investigate the possibility that inhibition of NFnB
might be the mechanism by which GM1 synergizes with TNFa to
induce T-cell apoptosis, wild-type Jurkat cells and Jurkat cells
transfected with a plasmid encoding the InBa super-repressor
(which inhibits NFnB activation) were compared for their
susceptibilities to TNFa, GM1, or both agents in synergy. Neither
the wild-type nor the NFnB-defective Jurkat populations were killed
by a 72-hour incubation with GM1, and as expected, as many as

51% of the InBa mutant transfectants died in response to TNFa
alone (Supplementary Fig. S1A). Interestingly, unlike the case for
wild-type cells, pretreatment with GM1 did not further enhance the
ability of TNFa to kill the NFnB-inhibited, InBa mutant–expressing
cells (Supplementary Fig. S1A).
To further assess the notion that GM1 might act by inhibiting
NFnB, we tested the possibility that NFnB-overexpressing cells
might be resistant to GM1 plus TNFa–mediated apoptosis. RelAtransfected and wild-type Jurkat cells were treated or not with
GM1, TNFa, or both in synergistic combination. As compared with
GM1 or TNFa, which independently exerted minimal apoptogenicity for either cell line, in synergy, those reagents stimulated
f50% of the wild-type Jurkat cells to undergo apoptosis
(Supplementary Fig. S1B). RelA overexpression bestowed significant protection against GM1 plus TNFa, however, as only 20% of
the transfectants were killed by the treatment.
Circulating RCC patient T-cells are coated with tumorderived GM1, and can be induced to apoptosis in vitro with
patient sera but not with normal sera. Unlike normal T cells
which stain only weakly for GM1, but strongly after coincubation

Figure 6. TILs and peripheral blood T-cells isolated from RCC patients were coated with GM1, and could be induced to apoptosis in vitro with either TNFa or RCC
patient serum. A, peripheral blood T-cells isolated from healthy donors and patients with RCC, as well as TILs, were stained with FITC-labeled cholera toxin
to assess GM1 levels. B, a TNFa chemiluminescent ELISA kit was used to measure the TNFa levels present in the sera obtained from 6 healthy donors,
8 RCC patients with localized disease, and 11 RCC patients with metastatic disease. Columns, mean of 6 to 11 samples; bars, SE; dots, TNFa levels present in
the serum of a single individual (*, P < 0.001; ***, P < 0.05 vs. normal serum). C, an RCC patient serum sample (1:1 dilution in complete medium) previously
determined by ELISA to contain elevated levels of TNFa was incubated for 72 h with T cells from either the corresponding RCC patient or from a healthy donor, at
which time, the cells were assessed for apoptosis by TUNEL. One aliquot of patient serum was first treated with anti-TNFa antibodies to neutralize the cytokine
present in the sample. Cells treated with TNFa alone or with GM1 plus TNFa served as controls. Columns, mean of three experiments; bars, SE (*, P < 0.001;
**, P < 0.01 vs. media alone; ***, P < 0.05 vs. normal serum). D, resting peripheral blood T-cells isolated from three patients with RCC were incubated in vitro with
their own respective sera (1:1 dilution in complete medium) for 72 h prior to being assessed for apoptosis by trypan blue exclusion. T cells from three healthy
donors treated with autologous sera served as negative controls. Columns, mean of patient sera from three experiments done in triplicate; bars, SE (*, P < 0.001
vs. normal serum).

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (6). March 15, 2008

2020

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Renal Cell Carcinoma GM1 and TNFa Synergize for T-Cell Death

with the SK-RC-45hi tumor line (Fig. 3C), TILs and peripheral
blood T cells from RCC patients are already coated with the
ganglioside upon isolation (Fig. 6A). These results suggest
that elevated levels of circulating GM1 exist in these patients,
consistent with our finding that explanted, primary RCC tumors
stain brightly for GM1 with FITC-labeled cholera toxin (Fig. 3A).
Our results, demonstrating the close positive correlation between
TNFa and ganglioside production by RCC lines (Fig. 1A and B),
suggested the notion that patients bearing intensely GM1-positive
RCC tumors would also have elevated serum TNFa. To assess this
possibility, serum samples from 11 RCC patients with metastatic
disease, 8 RCC patients with localized disease, and 6 healthy
controls were measured for TNFa content by ELISA. The results of
this analysis, presented in Fig. 6B, indicated that the molecule was
essentially undetectable in the normal serum (0.2 pg/mL), varied in
concentration from 1 to 10 pg/mL in the sera of patients with
localized disease, and ranged between 4 and 34 pg/mL in the sera
of patients with metastatic disease.
Resting T cells from a healthy donor and from a patient with
metastatic disease were also compared for their susceptibilities to
TNFa, GM1, or both agents in synergistic combination, as well as
to metastatic patient serum previously shown to contain elevated
levels of TNFa. As compared with the T cells from a normal
donor, which exhibited sensitivity only to the positive control
treatment of GM1 plus TNFa, but not to either rTNFa or RCC
patient serum alone, the T cells from the metastatic RCC patient
were highly susceptible to both TNFa and to patient serum,
unless the latter was first treated with anti-TNFa antibodies
(Fig. 6C). These results differ from those obtained with serum
from an individual with localized disease, which had minimal
levels of TNFa, and hence, could not kill the patient T cells (data
not shown). Finally, unlike three normal sera, which exhibited no
apoptogenic effect on coincubated autologous normal T-cells
(averaged, line in Fig. 6D), each of three metastatic patient sera
were able to induce the apoptosis of peripheral blood T-cells from
the corresponding individual, the percentage of T cells killed
correlating directly with the TNFa content of the serum, and
varying from 28% to 42% of the target cell population (Fig. 6D).
Collectively, these data reflect the fact that the patient T cells, but
not healthy T cells, were coated with GM1 derived from the
tumor, and hence, were sensitive to either rTNFa or to the TNFa
present in the RCC patient serum.

Discussion
Here, we show that multiple RCC-derived molecules can act in
synergy to mediate the apoptotic death of T lymphocytes: RCCinduced T-cell apoptosis can be substantially inhibited if the tumor
cell/T-cell coincubations are performed with either gangliosidedepleted tumor cells, or in the presence of neutralizing anti-TNFa
antibodies. The notion that there is a synergistic interaction
between tumor-derived gangliosides and TNFa for inducing T-cell
apoptosis is further corroborated by studies with recombinant
TNFa and a purified form of the overexpressed RCC ganglioside
GM1 (17), which shows similar cooperativity for killing T cells when
used together in vitro.
Previous studies from our laboratory indicated that RCC cell
lines stimulate the apoptosis of Jurkat cells and T lymphocytes by a
mechanism that could be largely inhibited by the glucosylceramide
synthesis inhibitor 1-phenyl-2-hexadecanoylamino-3-pyrrolidino-1propanol (7), an indication that tumor gangliosides were involved.

www.aacrjournals.org

This inhibition was maximal when the tumor cells were pretreated
with the ganglioside synthesis inhibitor for 5 days prior to initiating
the coculture experiment, a time frame consistent with that
required for maximal reduction of tumor ganglioside synthesis, as
assessed by HPTLC (33). In this study, the substantial resistance of
caspase-8–negative Jurkat cells to a ganglioside-shedding RCC
tumor line provided the first suggestion that multiple tumor
products might be synergizing to induce T-cell death. The fact that
the expression of caspase-8, the apical molecule in the receptordependent apoptotic pathway (32), is requisite for maximum
lymphocyte susceptibility to RCC-mediated apoptosis, indicates
that the renal tumor cells mediate at least some components of
their apoptogenicity through a death ligand. In this regard, TNFa
was hypothesized to be an RCC-associated death ligand potentially
involved in tumor-induced T-cell apoptosis. This is because
mutations in the VHL tumor suppressor protein are common in
clear cell RCC (21), and lead to dysregulated synthesis of a number
of proteins, including TNFa (23). Indeed, reporter gene assays
confirm that TNFa mRNA is repressed by the wild-type VHL gene
but is actively translated in the VHL mutants (23). These findings
are consistent with Northern blot analyses, RT-PCR, and immunohistochemical studies, which all indicate that, unlike normal
kidney, human kidney cancer cells themselves constitutively
synthesize TNFa (34). Because in addition to the TNFa generated
by VHL-mutated tumor cells, a significant bolus of RCC-associated
TNFa also likely derives from macrophages that so commonly
infiltrate those tumors in vivo (35), it is probable that the renal
tumor environment typically contains high levels of TNF. Supporting this notion is the fact that sera obtained from RCC patients
assessed in our study had highly elevated levels of TNFa as
compared with undetectable levels present in the sera from healthy
volunteers.
It is interesting to note that whereas RCC lines elaborating both
gangliosides and high levels of TNFa could efficiently mediate the
apoptosis of resting T cells, activated T cells can readily be killed by
an RCC line synthesizing gangliosides alone. This likely relates to
the fact that whereas both resting and stimulated T cells express
TNFR1, only the activated lymphocytes express TNFa. We would
thus postulate that SK-RC-45hi–derived TNFa efficiently kills
resting T cells in conjunction with tumor-derived gangliosides,
although SK-RC-45low (the RCC line synthesizing GM1 but only low
levels of TNFa) kills activated T cells by virtue of a synergistic
interaction between tumor-derived gangliosides and T cell–derived
TNFa. Similar findings hold true for the purified reagents: efficient
apoptosis of resting T cells requires treatment with both GM1 and
TNFa, whereas activated T cells can be killed by a low dose of GM1
alone.
NFnB is a transcription factor whose activity is a requisite for the
de novo synthesis of numerous antiapoptotic proteins (36). Because
previous studies indicated that RCC gangliosides inhibit PMA/
ionomycin–induced NFnB activation (11, 12, 20), we hypothesized
that ganglioside-mediated sensitization of T cells to TNF-induced
activation of the caspase cascade (37) might be a mechanism for
the observed synergy. Consistent with this thought are the results
presented here indicating that RelA overexpression protects T-cell
targets from ganglioside/TNFa-induced apoptosis, and that the
ability of TNFa to kill Jurkat cells that are already NFnB-inhibited
(by a transgene encoding the InBa super repressor) cannot be
further enhanced by pretreatment with GM1.
The importance and in vivo relevance of these studies is
amplified by our finding that peripheral blood T-cells isolated from

2021

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (6). March 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

patients with RCC stain much more strongly for GM1 than do the T
cells isolated from healthy controls. That this enhanced GM1
staining on T cells derives from tumor-shed gangliosides is
suggested by two additional observations: (a) when stained with
FITC-labeled cholera toxin, tumor cells from eight of eight resected
RCC expressed highly elevated GM1 levels as compared with the
negligible levels characterizing NKE cells; and (b) when cultured
in vitro with either GM1-overexpressing RCC tumor cells or their
cell-free, spent culture supernatants, T cells from healthy donors
became coated with the ganglioside. Other experiments reported
here showed that, functionally, the strong GM1 positivity of patient
T cells correlated with their susceptibility to apoptotic death if
treated in vitro with either TNFa or with patient serum, the latter’s
toxicity is based on its elevated TNFa concentration, as indicated
both by ELISA and the ability of anti-TNFa antibodies to inhibit the
effect.
These studies thus elucidate a novel mechanism by which RCC
may be enhancing its own growth and metastatic expansion while
combining previous, seemingly unrelated, anecdotal observations
into a unified hypothesis defining the means by which renal tumors
may be killing T cells. Earlier reports from a variety of laboratories
described a role for death receptor–based apoptotic schemes in
mediating T-cell death, but definitive tumor-associated ligands
have remained elusive and uncertain (38). Other laboratories
characterized gangliosides as overexpressed, tumor-associated
immunosuppressive molecules (39–41), somehow involved in
tumor progression and metastasis (42, 43), yet the mechanism by
which these glycosphingolipids produced their deleterious effects
on the immune system were obscure. Our laboratory did show that
RCC gangliosides could suppress NFnB activation in T cells as well
as their downstream synthesis of NFnB-dependent antiapoptotic
proteins (6, 7, 11, 12, 20), but the subsequent events or ‘‘second

References
1. Tatsumi T, Herrem CJ, Olson WC, et al. Disease stage
variation in CD4+ and CD8+ T-cell reactivity to the
receptor tyrosine kinase EphA2 in patients with renal
cell carcinoma. Cancer Res 2003;63:4481–9.
2. Tatsumi T, Kierstead LS, Ranieri E, et al. MAGE-6
encodes HLA-DRh1*0401-presented epitopes recognized by CD4+ T cells from patients with melanoma
or renal cell carcinoma. Clin Cancer Res 2003;9:
947–54.
3. Finke J, Ferrone S, Frey A, Mufson A, Ochoa A. Where
have all the T cells gone? Mechanisms of immune
evasion by tumors. Immunol Today 1999;20:158–60.
4. Uzzo RG, Rayman P, Kolenko V, et al. Mechanisms of
apoptosis in T cells from patients with renal cell
carcinoma. Clin Cancer Res 1999;5:1219–29.
5. Gastman BR, Yin XM, Johnson DE, et al. Tumorinduced apoptosis of T cells: amplification by a
mitochondrial cascade. Cancer Res 2001;60:6811–7.
6. Molto L, Rayman P, Paszkiewicz-Kozik E, et al. The
Bcl-2 transgene protects T cells from renal cell
carcinoma-mediated apoptosis. Clin Cancer Res 2003;
9:4060–8.
7. Kudo D, Rayman P, Horton C, et al. Gangliosides
expressed by the renal cell carcinoma cell line SK-RC-45
are involved in tumor-induced apoptosis of T cells.
Cancer Res 2003;63:1676–83.
8. Whiteside TL, Rabinowich H. The role of Fas/FasL in
immunosuppression induced by human tumors. Cancer
Immunol Immunother 1998;46:175–84.
9. Koyama S, Koike N, Adachi S. Expression of TNFrelated apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) and its

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (6). March 15, 2008

signal’’ that could render lymphocytes apoptotic was undetermined. In the series of experiments described here, we now show
that tumor-derived gangliosides can sensitize T cells to TNFR1mediated apoptosis, induced by TNFa present in the RCC tumor
microenvironment. The fact that numerous histologically distinct
tumors both overexpress gangliosides and are infiltrated by
macrophages, suggests the possibility that this synergistic mechanism of tumor-induced T-cell apoptosis may extend to many
forms of cancer. Interestingly, a role for RCC-associated TNFa in
tumor-induced T-cell apoptosis is consistent with the reported
efficacy of infliximab in a phase II clinical trial, in which the antiTNFa antibodies slowed or stabilized disease in f32% of RCC
patients with advanced disease (44). In a second, more recent
phase II, trial, 46% of RCC patients entering the study with
progressive disease obtained a clinical benefit from infliximab
therapy, and at higher doses of the anti-TNFa antibody, the clinical
benefit increased to 61% of patients (45). These results collectively
imply that agents which neutralize tumor-associated TNFa or
block ganglioside synthesis might enhance both spontaneous
antitumor immune responses and the efficacy of immunotherapeutic interventions. Current studies are directed at defining the
mechanism by which gangliosides inhibit NFnB activation, and
determining whether TNFa and gangliosides synergize through
additional pathways to mediate T-cell killing.

Acknowledgments
Received 10/29/2007; revised 12/20/2007; accepted 1/11/2008.
Grant support: NIH grants RO1-CA111917, CA056937, and CA116255.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We gratefully acknowledge the Department of Science and Technology and Indian
Council of Medical Research, Government of India.

receptors in gastric carcinoma and tumor-infiltrating
lymphocytes: a possible mechanism of immune
evasion of the tumor. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol 2002;
128:73–9.
10. Wischhusen J, Jung G, Radovanovic I, et al. Identification of CD70-mediated apoptosis of immune effector
cells as a novel immune escape pathway of human
glioblastoma. Cancer Res 2002;62:2592–9.
11. Uzzo RG, Rayman P, Kolenko V, et al. Renal cell
carcinoma-derived gangliosides suppress nuclear
factor-nB activation in T cells. J Clin Invest 1999;
104:769–76.
12. Finke JH, Rayman P, George R, et al. Tumor-induced
sensitivity to apoptosis in T cells from patients with
renal cell carcinoma: role of nuclear factor-nB suppression. Clin Cancer Res 2001;7:940–6s.
13. Raval G, Biswas S, Rayman P, et al. TNF-a induction
of GM2 expression on renal cell carcinomas promotes T
cell dysfunction. J Immunol 2007;178:6642–52.
14. Dall’Olio F, Chiricolo M. Sialyltransferases in cancer.
Glycoconj J 2001;18:841–50.
15. Black PH. Shedding from the cell surface of normal
and cancer cells. Adv Cancer Res 1980;32:75–199.
16. Ladisch S, Gillard B, Wong C, Ulsh L. Shedding and
immunoregulatory activity of YAC-1 lymphoma cell
gangliosides. Cancer Res 1983;43:3808–13.
17. Ritter G, Livingston PO. Ganglioside antigens
expressed by human cancer cells. Semin Cancer Biol
1991;2:401–9.
18. Ladisch S, Kitada S, Hays EF. Gangliosides shed by
tumor cells enhance tumor formation in mice. J Clin
Invest 1987;79:1879–82.
19. Birkle S, Zeng G, Gao L, Yu RK, Aubry J. Role of

2022

tumor-associated gangliosides in cancer progression.
Biochimie 2003;85:455–63.
20. Thornton MV, Kudo D, Rayman P, et al. Degradation
of NF-nB in T cells by gangliosides expressed on renal
cell carcinomas. J Immunol 2004;172:3480–90.
21. Schraml P, Struckmann K, Hatz F, et al. VHL mutations
and their correlation with tumour cell proliferation,
microvessel density, and patient prognosis in clear cell
renal cell carcinoma. J Pathol 2002;196:186–93.
22. Igarashi H, Esumi M, Ishida H, Okada K. Vascular
endothelial growth factor overexpression is correlated
with von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor gene inactivation in patients with sporadic renal cell carcinoma.
Cancer 2002;95:47–53.
23. Galban S, Fan J, Martindale JL, et al. von HippelLindau protein-mediated repression of tumor necrosis
factor a translation revealed through use of cDNA
arrays. Mol Cell Biol 2003;23:2316–28.
24. Markotic A, Lumen R, Marusic A, Jonjic S, Muthing J.
Ganglioside expression in tissues of mice lacking the
tumor necrosis factor receptor. Carbohydr Res 1999;321:
75–87.
25. Biswas K, Richmond A, Rayman P, et al. GM2
expression in renal cell carcinoma: potential role in
tumor-induced T-cell dysfunction. Cancer Res 2006;66:
6816–25.
26. Juo P, Kuo CJ, Yuan J, Blenis J. Essential requirement
for caspase-8/FLICE in the initiation of the Fas-induced
apoptotic cascade. Curr Biol 1998;8:1001–8.
27. Ebert T, Bander NH, Finstad CL, Ramsawak RD, Old
LJ. Establishment and characterization of human renal
cancer and normal kidney cell lines. Cancer Res 1990;50:
5531–56.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Renal Cell Carcinoma GM1 and TNFa Synergize for T-Cell Death

28. Alatrash G, Hutson TE, Molto L, et al. Clinical and
immunologic effects of subcutaneously administered
interleukin-12 and interferon alfa-2b: phase I trial of
patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma or
malignant melanoma. J Clin Oncol 2004;22:2891–900.
29. Boucher D, Gogusev J, Droz D. [Expression of IL6 and
TNF-a in normal and pathological kidney. C R Seances
Soc Biol Fil 1993;187:425–33.
30. Garcia-Ruiz C, Colell A, Paris R, Fernandez-Checa JC.
Direct interaction of GD3 ganglioside with mitochondria generates reactive oxygen species followed by
mitochondrial permeability transition, cytochrome c
release, and caspase activation. FASEB J 2000;14:847–58.
31. Kiechle FL, Zhang X. Apoptosis: biochemical aspects
and clinical implications. Clin Chim Acta 2002;326:27–45.
32. Hengartner MO. The biochemistry of apoptosis.
Nature 2001;407:770–6.
33. Deng W, Li R, Ladisch S. Influence of cellular
ganglioside depletion on tumor formation. J Natl Cancer
Inst 2000;92:912–7.

www.aacrjournals.org

34. Gogusev J, Augusti M, Chretien Y, Droz D. Interleukin-6 and TNFa production in human renal cell
carcinoma. Kidney Int 1993;44:585–92.
35. Waase I, Bergholz M, Iglauer A, et al. Heterogeneity of
tumour necrosis factor production in renal cell carcinoma. Eur J Cancer 1992;28A:1660–4.
36. Sonenshein GE. Rel/NF-nB transcription factors and
the control of apoptosis. Semin Cancer Biol 1997;8:
113–9.
37. Van Antwerp DJ, Martin SJ, Kafri T, Green DR, Verma
IM. Suppression of TNF-a-induced apoptosis by NF-nB.
Science 1996;274:787–9.
38. Restifo NP. Not so Fas: Re-evaluating the mechanisms of immune privilege and tumor escape. Nat Med
2000;6:493–5.
39. Heitger A, Ladisch S. Gangliosides block antigen
presentation by human monocytes. Biochim Biophys
Acta 1996;1303:161–8.
40. Ladisch S, Becker H, Ulsh L. Immunosuppression by
human gangliosides: I. Relationship of carbohydrate

2023

structure to the inhibition of T cell responses. Biochim
Biophys Acta 1992;1125:180–8.
41. Ladisch S, Ulsh L, Gillard B, Wong C. Modulation of
the immune response by gangliosides. Inhibition of
adherent monocyte accessory function in vitro . J Clin
Invest 1984;74:2074–81.
42. McKallip R, Li R, Ladisch S. Tumor gangliosides
inhibit the tumor-specific immune response. J Immunol
1999;163:3718–26.
43. Valentino L, Moss T, Olson E, et al. Shed tumor
gangliosides and progression of human neuroblastoma.
Blood 1990;75:1564–7.
44. Maisey NR, Hall K, Lee C, et al. Infliximab: a phase II
trial of the tumor necrosis factor monoclonal antibody
in patients with advanced renal cell cancer. 2004 ASCO
Annual Meeting Proceedings. J Clin Oncol 2004;22:4514.
45. Harrison ML, Obermueller E, Maisey NR, et al. Tumor
necrosis factor a as a new target for renal cell
carcinoma: two sequential phase II trials of infliximab
at standard and high dose. J Clin Oncol 2007;25:4542–9.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (6). March 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

GM1 and Tumor Necrosis Factor-α, Overexpressed in Renal
Cell Carcinoma, Synergize to Induce T-Cell Apoptosis
Tanya Das, Gaurisankar Sa, Cynthia Hilston, et al.
Cancer Res 2008;68:2014-2023.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/6/2014
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2008/03/12/68.6.2014.DC1

This article cites 44 articles, 18 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/6/2014.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 7 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/6/2014.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

