Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 13

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Sixth BHD Symposium and First International Upstate Kidney
Cancer Symposium: latest scientific and clinical discoveries
Gennady Bratslavsky1,2, Mark R. Woodford1,2,3, Michael Daneshvar1,2 and Mehdi
Mollapour1,2,3
1

Department of Urology, SUNY Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, NY, USA

2

Cancer Research Institute, SUNY Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, NY, USA

3

Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, SUNY Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, NY, USA

Correspondence to: Mehdi Mollapour, email: mollapom@upstate.edu
Correspondence to: Gennady Bratslavsky, email: bratslag@upstate.edu
Keywords: FLCN, Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome, renal cell carcinoma, clear cell renal cell carcinoma
Received: November 25, 2015	

Accepted: January 29, 2016	

Published: February 25, 2016

Abstract
The Sixth BHD Symposium and First International Upstate Kidney Cancer
Symposium concluded in September 2015, in Syracuse, NY, USA. The program
highlighted recent findings in a variety of areas, including drug development,
therapeutics and surgical management of patients with BHD and multi-focal renal
tumors, as well as multidisciplinary approaches for patients with localized, locally
advanced and metastatic renal cell carcinoma.

INTRODUCTION

from chromophobe RCC to benign oncocytoma, and most
commonly present as hybrid tumors containing features of
both chromophobe RCC and oncocytomas [9-11]. FLCN
is an evolutionarily conserved, nuclear and cytoplasmic
phosphoprotein that interacts with Folliculin Interacting
Proteins 1 and 2 (FNIP1 and FNIP2) in a phosphorylationdependent manner, and together they form a complex with
AMPK [12]. The functional outcome of this biochemical
interaction and the mechanistic details of FLCN-FNIP1
and FNIP2 interaction remain unclear. Opposing data have
been reported indicating that FLCN regulates mTORC1
function in vitro and in vivo [13-16]. Despite substantial
progress in BHD research there are two broad and major
gaps in our knowledge: 1) Why do tumors occur in BHD
patients? 2) Development of strategies to treat patients
with BHD syndrome.
The Sixth BHD Symposium and First International
Upstate Kidney Cancer Symposium organized by
Gennady Bratslavsky MD (Chair, Department of Urology)
and Mehdi Mollapour PhD (Head, Renal Cancer Biology
Section) at SUNY Upstate Medical University, USA,
brought together many of the leading researchers and
surgeons from across the globe. Patients with BHD
syndrome and other types of kidney cancer also attended
the meeting (Figure 1).

Worldwide nearly 338,000 people develop kidney
cancer every year, and over 100,000 people die from
the disease [1, 2]. Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is the
most common type of chemotherapy-resistant kidney
cancer and it is distinguishable by histopathological
features as well as underlying gene mutations [3]. Clear
cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) is the most common
type of RCC and it is closely associated with mutations
of the Von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) tumor suppressor gene
that lead to stabilization of hypoxia inducible factors
(HIF-1α and HIF-2α). This is critical for tumor growth
and angiogenesis in both sporadic and familial forms
of this disease [4, 5]. The current standard of treatment
for ccRCC are agents that target the VHL–HIF pathway,
specifically VEGF, PDGF, and mTOR.
In contrast to VHL, Birt-Hogg-Dubé (BHD)
syndrome is a rare inherited cancer syndrome that
predisposes affected individuals to develop kidney tumors
(usually not clear cell type like in VHL), pulmonary cysts,
and benign skin tumors (fibrofolliculomas) [6]. Germline
mutations in the tumor suppressor gene Folliculin (FLCN)
cause BHD syndrome [7, 8].
FLCN behaves as a haploinsufficient tumor
suppressor in skin lesions, whereas a loss of function
of both alleles (usually via different “second hits”) is
reported in kidney tumors. These tumors vary in histology
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15292

Oncotarget

Latest Research Findings on BHD
and RCC

LC3C, but not LC3B, is specifically necessary for the
autophagic destruction of midbodies. The mechanism of
specificity involves the presence of a C-terminal peptide
present in LC3C but not LC3B. The number of midbodies
is augmented in cancer cells and stem cells indicating the
role of midbodies, and therefore programs regulating their
numbers, in cellular reprogramming and tumorigenicity.
Dr. Vera P. Krymskaya (University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, USA) showed that FLCN regulates lung
epithelial cell survival and alveolar size. Her data
suggested that lung cysts in BHD result from an underlying
defect in alveolar epithelial cell survival attributable to
FLCN regulation of the E-cadherin-LKB1-AMPK axis.
Dr. Arnim Pause (McGill University, Montréal, Canada)
presented two recent exciting findings from his lab. He
first presented data on FLCN and AMPK conferring
resistance to hyperosmotic stress via remodeling of
glycogen stores. Second, using an adipose-specific FLCN
knockout (adipo-FLCN KO) mouse model, it was shown
that FLCN repression induces metabolic reprogramming
of white adipose tissue through the AMPK/PGC-1α/
ERRα axis. Dr. Yu Jiang (University of Pittsburgh School
of Medicine, Pittsburgh, USA) showed that FLCN is a
ciliary protein that functions through primary cilia to
regulate mTORC1. In response to flow stress, FLCN

In the opening keynote presentation Dr. W. Marston
Linehan, Chief of the Urologic Oncology Branch at the
National Cancer Institute (NCI), National Institute Health
(NIH), reviewed the genetic basis of kidney cancer and
the importance of understanding the underlying biology
for development of treatments. The rest of the first day
focused on the ongoing BHD and RCC scientific research
(Figure 2). Dr. Elizabeth Henske (Brigham and Women’s
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, USA)
presented data on the pathogenic and therapeutic links
between Tuberous Sclerosis Complex (TSC) and BHD.
TSC is a rare multi-system genetic disease that, like BHD,
causes benign tumors to grow in the kidneys, eyes, lungs,
and skin. Dr. Damir Khabibullin from Henske’s group
presented exciting data on FLCN interacting protein
armadillo-repeat containing protein plakophilin 4 (PKP4,
p0071) and its role in cell adhesion and metabolism in
BHD and chromophobe RCC. Dr. Maria F. CzyzykKrzeska (University of Cincinnati College of Medicine,
Cincinnati, USA) showed that VHL and FLCN induce
expression of LC3C but inhibit expression of LC3B.

Figure 1: Participants of the Sixth BHD Symposium and First International Upstate Kidney Cancer Symposium.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15293

Oncotarget

experimental cancer drugs that reactivate mutant p53 by
restoring proper zinc binding to several zinc-impaired
mutants.
Dr. Diana Dunn and Dr. Mehdi Mollapour
(SUNY Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, USA)
showed that pharmacologic inhibition of c-Abl prevents
Aha1 co-chaperone interaction with Hsp90, thereby
hypersensitizing renal cell carcinoma (RCC) to Hsp90
inhibitors both in vitro and ex vivo [17]. Dr. Mark
Woodford and Dr. Mehdi Mollapour (SUNY Upstate
Medical University, Syracuse, USA) reported the
identification of FNIP1/FNIP2 as new co-chaperones
of Hsp90 that decelerate the chaperone cycle, therefore
facilitating FLCN interaction with Hsp90, consequently
ensuring FLCN stability.

interacts with LKB1 and recruits the kinase to primary
cilia for activation of AMPK, which causes mTORC1
down-regulation. Dr. Masaya Baba’s group at Yokohama
City University, Yokohama, Japan, has generated a Xp11.2
translocation RCC mouse model, in which a floxed
neomycin cassette followed by a PRCC-TFE3 cDNA
are inserted in the Rosa26 locus. By crossing these mice
with cadherin 16-Cre transgenic mice, they were able to
induce kidney specific PRCC-TFE3 expression resulting
in RCC development. This model will be useful to clarify
the molecular mechanisms of both Xp11.2 translocation
RCC and BHD-associated RCC development. Dr.
Sunil Sudarshan (The University of Alabama at
Birmingham, Birmingham, USA) presented data on the
elevation of the putative oncometabolite l enantiomer
of 2-hydroxyglutarate in the most common subtype of
kidney cancer and described a novel mechanism for the
regulation of DNA 5-hydroxymethylcytosine levels. Their
findings provide new insight into the metabolic basis for
the epigenetic landscape of renal cancer. Dr. Haifeng
Yang (Thomas Jefferson University, Pennsylvania,
USA) showed exciting data on the functional analysis of
the tumor suppressor PBRM1 in ccRCC. His group has
identified lysine acetylation on PBRM1 as a critical PBAF
binding signal. Additionally, loss of PBRM1 is associated
with worse prognosis in ccRCC patients while the losses
of BRM or BRG1, the enzymatic subunits of PBAF, were
associated with better prognosis.
Dr. Laura Schmidt (NCI, Bethesda, USA) presented
data on the germline FLCN mutation spectrum and
phenotype analysis of 226 families with BHD syndrome.
Renal manifestations, most frequently hybrid oncocytic
tumors, developed in half of all BHD families. Although
no clear genotype-phenotype correlations were observed,
no renal neoplasia was reported in 3 families harboring
large gene deletions encompassing the putative exon1
promoter region. Related to this topic, Dr. Jorge Toro
(NCI, Bethesda, USA) also discussed current and
emerging techniques for detection of FLCN mutations.
He reported 87 novel FLCN germline mutations, including
40 deletions, 15 insertions, 14 missense, 12 nonsense, 4
splice-site and 2 deletion/insertions.
Dr. Angela Pacitto from Professor Tom L. Blundell’s
group (University of Cambridge; Cambridge, UK)
reported the crystal structure of the N-terminal region
of Lst4 (yeast folliculin interacting partner (FNIP1/2)
ortholog) from Kluyveromyces lactis to 2.14 Å resolution
and showed that it contains a longin domain. Folliculin
and FNIP1/2 have been proposed to be members of the
DENN-family of proteins, and the longin domain is
the first domain of this protein fold. This work expands
our understanding of the structural organization of the
FLCN/FNIP complex and its role in disease. Dr. Adam
Blanden from Professor Stewart Loh’s lab (SUNY Upstate
Medical University, Syracuse, USA) showed that the zinc
metallochaperone ZMC1 could serve as a new class of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Latest Clinical Discoveries
The clinical day of the meeting started with
keynote speaker Dr. Robert Uzzo (Fox Chase Cancer
Center, Philadelphia, USA). He presented updates on
the management of RCC and emphasized the importance
of risk management in RCC, separately addressing both
preclinical and clinical risk. He suggested that RCC
risks could be divided into four different categories:
1) Tumor risk, 2) Patient risk, 3) Physician risk and 4)
Hospital risk. All four risk factors are intimately linked
and intersect in the decision-making process of patient
management, patients’ prognoses, and outcomes of
various interventions. Following the notion of risks, Dr.
Ilene Sussman, Director of the VHL Alliance, (Boston,
USA) reported on the Cancer in Our Genes International
Patient Databank (CGIP), a patient driven online databank
that was created in order to measure the impact of
modifiable lifestyle factors on tumor development of new
VHL lesions and other related rare diseases that have a
kidney cancer component. Dr. Jo Robays (Belgian Health
Care Knowledge Centre, KCE, Belgium) presented on
a Belgian clinical practice guideline that was created
by the collaborative efforts of the Belgian Health Care
Knowledge Centre (KCE) and the Belgian College of
Human Genetics and the College of Oncology based on a
systematic review of BHD evidence.
Dr. Mitsuko Furuya (Yokohama City University,
Yokohama, Japan) discussed the clinicopathological
features of 300 Japanese individuals with BHD who
were investigated from 115 families. In this cohort 28
unique gene mutations were identified in the FLCN gene.
Mutations occurred in all exons except number 8, and
most mutations occurred in the exon 11-13 “hot spots”.
Overall, the incidence of RCC was 19.3% (58/300).
Respiratory symptoms were the most frequent phenotype,
and the possible association of lung neoplasms and liver
cysts within patients with BHD is still under investigation.
Dr. Nishant Gupta (University of Cincinnati,
Cincinnati, USA) discussed the use of a Markov state
15294

Oncotarget

transition model that was constructed in order to
retrospectively evaluate the cost effectiveness of highresolution computed tomography (HRCT) screening
in spontaneous pneumothorax. It is reported that BHD
patients have a 50-fold higher chance of pneumothorax,
with approximately 24% experiencing a pneumothorax
in their lifetime, and a recurrence rate of 75%. They
compared the strategy of HRCT screening in patients
diagnosed with BHD who then had pleurodesis to those
with no HRCT screening. Based on Medicare data and
costs, they reported that it was more cost effective to
perform HRCT of the thorax in patients with primary
spontaneous pneumothorax for screening of BHD.
Dr. Paul Johannesma (VU University Medical Center,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands) described findings that
BHD patients have a significantly higher recurrence rate
of spontaneous pneumothorax (SP) after only conservative
treatment compared to invasive treatment. Given the
high SP recurrence rate in BHD patients, one proposal
is to engage in invasive treatment through laparoscopic

surgery (total pleurectomy and pleurodesis) with the aim
to completely obliterate the pleural cavity. Dr. Irma van
de Beek (Department of Pulmonary Disease, Department
of Clinical Genetics, VU University Medical Center,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands) described a retrospective
study designed to evaluate compliance of the currently
advised frequency of surveillance and outcomes of
surveillance in 164 patients who were diagnosed with
BHD in two Dutch specialized centers. Their data
indicated that compliance with advised screening for RCC
was high and that ultrasound might be a sensitive and
widely available imaging modality for detecting clinically
relevant renal tumors in BHD patients.
Dr. Adam Metwalli (National Cancer Institute,
Bethesda, USA) presented on the surgical and functional
outcomes of patients with multifocal RCC. The impact
of prolonged surgical time and rhabdomyolysis on
multivariable analysis did not have long-term impact on
surgical outcomes or renal function. In regards to patients
who underwent repeat robotic partial nephrectomy (PNx),

Figure 2: Simplified representation of the kidney cancer gene pathways. Kidney cancer is fundamentally a metabolic disease

with each of the kidney cancer genes (in red), VHL, MET, FLCN, FH, SDH, TSC1, TSC2, PTEN and TFE3 disrupts the ability of cells to
sense oxygen, iron, nutrients, and energy. (Figure 2 adapted from these references [23, 24]).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15295

Oncotarget

there was a higher rate of conversion from robotic to open
surgery. In this same cohort, renal function was preserved,
while there was increased blood loss and a higher rate
of complications [18-20]. Ultimately, PNx resulted in
excellent cancer control and preservation of renal function
in multifocal RCC patients. Dr. Brian Shuch (Yale Cancer
Center, New Haven, USA) first discussed the prediction
of the clinical behavior of renal tumors by the presence
or absence of a pseudocapsule and their multifocality
by the presence or absence of nodal metastases. He also
demonstrated data that the percentage of preserved renal
parenchyma determines functional outcomes in postpartial nephrectomy patients.
Dr. Gennady Bratslavsky (SUNY Upstate
Medical University, Syracuse, USA) discussed the role
of cytoreductive nephrectomy in metastatic RCC. He
highlighted two awaited trials (EORTC and CARMENA)
that could hopefully address this question in the era of
TKIs. The EORTC trial for metastatic RCC addresses a
question of the appropriate sequence in RCC treatment:
sunitinib followed by nephrectomy versus nephrectomy
followed by sunitinib. The CARMENA trial for
metastatic RCC will compare sunitinib alone versus both
nephrectomy and sunitinib. Meanwhile, surgeons can
use several available prognostic models to help predict
of outcomes, such as the MSKCC guidelines and the
international consortium on RCC [21, 22]. Future studies
will further explain the sequence of first or second line
therapies and the sequences of these treatment modalities
along with combination therapy, immunotherapy and
vaccine based treatments. Ultimately, the role of a
surgeon in the management of metastatic RCC is to avoid
unnecessary options and to continue supporting clinical
trials until the role of cytoreductive nephrectomy is better
defined.
Dr. Jason Muhitch (Roswell Park Cancer Institute,
Buffalo, USA) presented recent work on immunotherapy
in RCC and the results of a clinical trial that evaluated
tumor-associated antigen (TAA) expression in surgically
resected patient RCC lesions from RCC patients treated
with high dose radiation. He also discussed how dendritic
cell immunotherapy via vaccination could help promote
tumor-specific T cell responses that can be effective in
a subset of RCC patients. For example, the AGS-003
dendritic cell vaccine works by injecting dendritic cells
that presents antigens into patients in order to elicit T cell
responses. In combination with SUTENT, the phase II
trial had encouraging outcomes and the large phase III has
recently completed its accrual. Dr. Namitha Chittoria (VA
Medical Center, Syracuse, USA) discussed the different
treatment options and clinical trials for metastatic nonclear RCC (ncRCC). The Phase II ASPEN trial is the
largest trial in ncRCC with 108 patients who were either
treated with sunitinib or everolimus. Patients who received
sunitinib improved their overall progression free survival
(PFS) while everolimus did better in patients with poorer
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

risk. The ESPN trial and the RECORD-3 trial were also
presented. The optimal treatment for ncRCC remains
uncertain and there is limited evidence due to the rarity
of the tumor, and thus multi-institutional trials need to be
conducted.
Dr. Fang-Ming Deng (NYU School of Medicine,
New York, USA) presented updates on the classification
of RCC. Many new tumor entities have been discovered
since the 2004 WHO classification of RCC and these will
be added to the 2016 WHO classification system. The
newest additions to the 2016 WHO classification can be
subdivided by their distinct clinical features, syndromic
and familial entities, and their therapeutic implications.
The newest additions include hybrid oncocytic
chromophobe tumor, tubulocystic RCC, hereditary
leiomyomatosis RCC syndrome-associated RCC, SDH
deficient RCC and several other types. Therefore, if a renal
tumor is seen with unusual clinical and morphological
features, then one should consider the possibility of
classification using a new RCC subtype.

BHD and RCC Family Program
The last day of the meeting was a patient-focused
open forum session led by genetic counselors Ms Lindsay
Middelton (NCI, Bethesda, USA) and Ms Bonnie
Braddock (Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, USA).
Due to the rarity of BHD and RCC, patients affected by
these conditions often have questions and concerns that
cannot be answered by their local health care providers,
and they do not know anyone else who has their condition.
Patients and their family members had an opportunity to
interact with each other and also ask general questions
from clinicians and researchers who are experts in BHD
and RCC field.
A short presentation by Dr. Elizabeth Henske
provided analogies to help clarify the cellular roles of
FLCN. Dr. Nishant Gupta explained the physiology of
SP and the rationale behind choosing different treatments.
Dr. Gupta and others also helped to allay some fears
for patients with an elevated risk of SP. Ilene Sussman
outlined the CGIP from the patient perspective, and
detailed the benefits of participation from both the patient’s
and researcher’s perspective. Dr. Jorge Toro discussed the
various types of skin conditions associated with hereditary
kidney cancer, available cosmetic treatments, and ongoing
clinical trials. Dr. Gennady Bratslavsky discussed
treatment options available for patients with BHD and
renal tumors as well as importance of timely surveillance
and intervention after the largest tumor reaches 3cm.

Concluding remarks
Considerable advances have been made within the
past two years into understanding the function of FLCN
and its involvement in BHD syndrome.
15296

Oncotarget

We have seen some considerable advances in the
treatment of RCC in the past decade based on research
that found the causes of kidney cancer. There are
approximately 15 genes, including FLCN and VHL,
that can cause kidney cancer and each of those genes is
involved in tumorigenesis. The exchange of information
between the different research areas will substantially
contribute to understanding of RCC tumor initiation and
progression as well as a whole new way for diagnosis and
treatment.

heterozygosity in fibrofolliculomas of Birt-Hogg-Dube
patients. The Journal of investigative dermatology. 2007;
127:588-593.
10.	 Vocke CD, Yang Y, Pavlovich CP, Schmidt LS, Nickerson
ML, Torres-Cabala CA, Merino MJ, Walther MM, Zbar B
and Linehan WM. High frequency of somatic frameshift
BHD gene mutations in Birt-Hogg-Dube-associated renal
tumors. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2005; 97:931-935.
11.	 Pavlovich CP, Grubb RL, 3rd, Hurley K, Glenn GM,
Toro J, Schmidt LS, Torres-Cabala C, Merino MJ, Zbar
B, Choyke P, Walther MM and Linehan WM. Evaluation
and management of renal tumors in the Birt-Hogg-Dube
syndrome. J Urol. 2005; 173:1482-1486.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are grateful to Ms. Leah Caldwell, Ms. Barbara
McConnell and Ms. Susan Schulze for organizing the
symposium. This work was supported with funds from
Myrovlytis Trust, SUNY Upstate Medical University and
Foundation for Upstate Medical University.

12.	 Baba M, Hong SB, Sharma N, Warren MB, Nickerson ML,
Iwamatsu A, Esposito D, Gillette WK, Hopkins RF, 3rd,
Hartley JL, Furihata M, Oishi S, Zhen W, Burke TR, Jr.,
Linehan WM, Schmidt LS, et al. Folliculin encoded by the
BHD gene interacts with a binding protein, FNIP1, and
AMPK, and is involved in AMPK and mTOR signaling.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006; 103:15552-15557.

ConflictS of Interest

13.	 Tsun ZY, Bar-Peled L, Chantranupong L, Zoncu R, Wang
T, Kim C, Spooner E and Sabatini DM. The Folliculin
Tumor Suppressor Is a GAP for the RagC/D GTPases That
Signal Amino Acid Levels to mTORC1. Mol Cell. 2013;
52:495-505.

There is no conflict of interest.

REFERENCES
1.	

Siegel RL, Miller KD and Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2015.
CA: a cancer journal for clinicians. 2015; 65:5-29.

14.	 Petit CS, Roczniak-Ferguson A and Ferguson SM.
Recruitment of folliculin to lysosomes supports the amino
acid-dependent activation of Rag GTPases. J Cell Biol.
2013; 202:1107-1122.

2.	 Torre LA, Bray F, Siegel RL, Ferlay J, Lortet-Tieulent J
and Jemal A. Global cancer statistics, 2012. CA: a cancer
journal for clinicians. 2015.

15.	 Yan M, Gingras MC, Dunlop EA, Nouet Y, Dupuy F,
Jalali Z, Possik E, Coull BJ, Kharitidi D, Dydensborg AB,
Faubert B, Kamps M, Sabourin S, Preston RS, Davies DM,
Roughead T, et al. The tumor suppressor folliculin regulates
AMPK-dependent metabolic transformation. J Clin Invest.
2014; 124:2640-2650.

3.	 Motzer RJ, McCann L and Deen K. Pazopanib versus
sunitinib in renal cancer. The New England journal of
medicine. 2013; 369:1970.
4.	

Shen C and Kaelin WG, Jr. The VHL/HIF axis in clear cell
renal carcinoma. Semin Cancer Biol. 2013; 23:18-25.

16.	 Khabibullin D, Medvetz DA, Pinilla M, Hariharan V, Li
C, Hergrueter A, Laucho Contreras M, Zhang E, Parkhitko
A, Yu JJ, Owen CA, Huang H, Baron RM and Henske
EP. Folliculin regulates cell-cell adhesion, AMPK, and
mTORC1 in a cell-type-specific manner in lung-derived
cells. Physiological reports. 2014; 2.

5.	 Linehan WM and Ricketts CJ. The metabolic basis of
kidney cancer. Semin Cancer Biol. 2013; 23:46-55.
6.	 Birt AR, Hogg GR and Dube WJ. Hereditary multiple
fibrofolliculomas with trichodiscomas and acrochordons.
Archives of dermatology. 1977; 113:1674-1677.
7.	

Nickerson ML, Warren MB, Toro JR, Matrosova V, Glenn
G, Turner ML, Duray P, Merino M, Choyke P, Pavlovich
CP, Sharma N, Walther M, Munroe D, Hill R, Maher E,
Greenberg C, et al. Mutations in a novel gene lead to kidney
tumors, lung wall defects, and benign tumors of the hair
follicle in patients with the Birt-Hogg-Dube syndrome.
Cancer Cell. 2002; 2:157-164.

17.	 Dunn DM, Woodford MR, Truman AW, Jensen SM,
Schulman J, Caza T, Remillard TC, Loiselle D, Wolfgeher
D, Blagg BS, Franco L, Haystead TA, Daturpalli S, Mayer
MP, Trepel JB, Morgan RM, et al. c-Abl Mediated Tyrosine
Phosphorylation of Aha1 Activates Its Co-chaperone
Function in Cancer Cells. Cell reports. 2015; 12:1006-1018.
18.	 Bratslavsky G, Liu JJ, Johnson AD, Sudarshan S,
Choyke PL, Linehan WM and Pinto PA. Salvage partial
nephrectomy for hereditary renal cancer: feasibility and
outcomes. J Urol. 2008; 179:67-70.

8.	 Schmidt LS. Birt-Hogg-Dube syndrome: from gene
discovery to molecularly targeted therapies. Familial
cancer. 2013; 12:357-364.
9.	 van Steensel MA, Verstraeten VL, Frank J, KellenersSmeets NW, Poblete-Gutierrez P, Marcus-Soekarman
D, Bladergroen RS, Steijlen PM and van Geel M. Novel
mutations in the BHD gene and absence of loss of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

19.	 Johnson A, Sudarshan S, Liu J, Linehan WM, Pinto PA and
Bratslavsky G. Feasibility and outcomes of repeat partial
nephrectomy. J Urol. 2008; 180:89-93; discussion 93.

15297

Oncotarget

20.	 Kowalczyk KJ, Hooper HB, Linehan WM, Pinto PA, Wood
BJ and Bratslavsky G. Partial nephrectomy after previous
radio frequency ablation: the National Cancer Institute
experience. J Urol. 2009; 182:2158-2163.
21.	 Ko JJ, Xie W, Kroeger N, Lee JL, Rini BI, Knox JJ,
Bjarnason GA, Srinivas S, Pal SK, Yuasa T, Smoragiewicz
M, Donskov F, Kanesvaran R, Wood L, Ernst DS, Agarwal
N, et al. The International Metastatic Renal Cell Carcinoma
Database Consortium model as a prognostic tool in patients
with metastatic renal cell carcinoma previously treated with
first-line targeted therapy: a population-based study. The
lancet oncology. 2015; 16:293-300.
22.	 Motzer RJ, Bacik J, Schwartz LH, Reuter V, Russo P,
Marion S and Mazumdar M. Prognostic factors for survival
in previously treated patients with metastatic renal cell
carcinoma. Journal of clinical oncology. 2004; 22:454-463.
23.	 Linehan WM. Genetic basis of kidney cancer: role
of genomics for the development of disease-based
therapeutics. Genome research. 2012; 22(11):2089-2100.
24.	 Schmidt LS and Linehan WM. Molecular genetics and
clinical features of Birt-Hogg-Dube syndrome. Nature
reviews Urology. 2015; 12:558-569.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15298

Oncotarget

