Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 40

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

Influence of wound fluid on chemotherapy sensitivity in primary
breast cancer cells
Yingchao Zhang1,*, Dong Yan2,*, Hao Zhang3, Xunyan Ou3, Zuowei Zhao3, Dan Wang3,
Caigang Liu3
1

Department of Breast Surgery, The Second Hospital of JiLin University, Changchun, 130021, China

2

Department of Pediatrics, The Second Hospital of Dalian Medical University, Dalian, 114006, China

3

Breast Disease and Reconstruction Center, Breast Cancer Key Laboratory of Dalian, The Second Hospital of Dalian Medical
University, Dalian, 114006, China

*

Co-first authors

Correspondence to: Caigang Liu, email: angel-s205@163.com
Keywords: breast cancer, wound fluid, chemotherapy, drug resistance
Received: April 10, 2016     Accepted: August 10, 2016     Published: August 17, 2016

ABSTRACT
Objective: To investigate the effect of WF on chemotherapy sensitivities of
primary breast cancer cells from breast cancer patients by using CD-DST.
Results: In general, the WF-treated cells showed remarkable increase in survival
rates as compared to the control cells cultured without WF among different anticancer
drug subgroups. This trend was generally observed in all the tumor cells from the
premenopausal, postmenopausal, T2, N0, N1, luminal B, and TN patients.
Methods: The sensitivities of WF-treated primary breast cancer cells, from
21 patients who underwent a radical resection for breast cancer from September 2014
to July 2015, to anticancer drugs: EPI, CDDP, DOC, VNR, 5-FU+LV, and PAC, were
obtained using CD-DST. The survival rates of the breast cancer cells were recorded
and used to gauge the chemotherapeutic effect.
Conclusions: Surgery-induced WF promotes the drug resistance of primary breast
cancer cells to chemotherapy, suggesting that surgery may have adverse effects on
breast cancer patients. More studies are needed to investigate the key factors in WF
that enhance the susceptibility to chemotherapy drugs.

INTRODUCTION

obtaining useful data for designing individualized
chemotherapy [5]. The collagen gel droplet embedded
culture drug test (CD-DST) is an in vitro anticancer drug
sensitivity test that has been applied for chemotherapy of
breast and non-small cell lung cancer patients [6, 7].
In our previous study, we demonstrated that postsurgery WF promotes the proliferation and migration
of breast cancer cells and that the proliferative effect
is concentration-dependent to a certain extent, which
supports the previous findings that surgery may have
adverse effects on breast cancer patients [8]. We
conducted this study to obtain a preliminary conclusion
for patients who received chemotherapy sensitivity
testing, as well as to observe the susceptibility of the
primary tumor cells from patients with different features to
various chemotherapy drugs. In addition, we co-cultured
the tumor cells of some patients with their respective
postoperative wound fluid (WF) to observe the effects
of WF on drug susceptibility. Our results are consistent

Breast cancer is the most common cause of death
in female malignant tumor disease [1]. Chemotherapy is
the most important systemic adjuvant therapy for breast
cancer that still has an irreplaceable role [2]. However,
the efficacy of chemotherapy is often severely affected by
intrinsic and acquired drug resistance [3]. The tumor cells
of patients with different clinical and pathological features
have different susceptibility to chemotherapy. Further, the
tumor cells of patients with different features also have
different susceptibility to various chemotherapy drugs. In
the process of chemotherapy, it is difficult to implement
clinically a personalized and precise treatment plan for
each patient. Predicting the chemosensitivity of patients
with malignant disease to anticancer drugs may help to
avoid the use of ineffective anticancer drugs [4].
In vitro anticancer drug sensitivity tests using
clinical specimens are representative modalities for
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

65034

Oncotarget

with previous studies and provide interesting insights
into how chemotherapy for breast cancer patients can be
implemented in a personalized and precise manner.

WF-treated cells showed remarkable increase in survival
rates as compared to the control cells cultured without WF
among the different anticancer drug subgroups (Figure 2).

RESULTS

Effects of WF on drug resistance of breast cancer
cells in patients with different menopausal status

Effects of WF on drug resistance of primary
breast cancer cells in the general patient
population

The WF-treated cells showed remarkable increase
in survival rates as compared to the control cells cultured
without WF among the different anticancer drug
subgroups in both pre- and postmenopausal patients
(Figures 3 and 4). It is worth noting that the survival rates
of WF-treated breast cancer cells from premenopausal
patients were significantly higher than those of control
group for all the anticancer drugs.

The primary breast cancer cells from patients were
cultured with or without WF, and after treating with
different anticancer drugs, survival rates were assessed
in vitro by performing CD-DST (Figure 1). Generally, the

Figure 1: The primary breast cancer specimen was cut into small pieces and was digested in a cell dissociation enzyme
solution EZ. Then the cells were pre-cultured in CG flasks. Cancer and fibroblast cells showed specific growth morphologies in the

collagen gel droplets. The anticancer agents were added at physiological concentration, and the cells were stained with neutral red and fixed
with neutral formalin buffer.

Figure 2: Survival rates of untreated and WF-treated tumor cells from overall patients after culture with different
anticancer drugs. (A) Survival rates of untreated and WF-treated tumor cells after culture with EPI (B), CDDP (C), DOC (D), VNR (E),
5-FU+LV (F), and PAC (G).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

65035

Oncotarget

Effects of WF on drug resistance of breast cancer
cells in patients with different tumor stages

Effects of WF on drug resistance of breast
cancer cells in patients with different molecular
subtypes

The WF-treated cells showed increase in survival
rates as compared to the control cells cultured without WF
among the different anticancer drug subgroups in both the
N0 and N1 stage patients (Figures 5 and 6).

Almost all the WF-treated cells showed increase in
survival rates as compared to the control cells cultured
without WF among the different anticancer drug

Figure 3: Survival rates of untreated and WF-treated tumor cells from premenopausal patients after culture with the
anticancer drugs EPI (A), CDDP (B), DOC (C), VNR (D), and 5-FU+LV (E).

Figure 4: Survival rates of untreated and WF-treated tumor cells from postmenopausal patients after culture with
different anticancer drugs EPI (A), CDDP (B), DOC (C), VNR (D), 5-FU+LV (E), and PAC (F).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

65036

Oncotarget

subgroups in both luminal B and tripple negative (TN)
patients (Figures 7 and 8).

proliferation and migration of breast cancer cells. The
significance of co-culture with WF suggested that in line
with the doctrine of tumor microenvironment, cytokines in
the WF provide a better microenvironment for the tumor
cells, thereby enhancing proliferation and drug resistance
of the tumor cells.
The survival rates of the primary tumor cells
changed between the untreated control and WF-treated

DISCUSSION
In this study, we found that WF promotes drug
resistance of primary breast cancer cells to chemotherapy,
which is similar to our previous results that WF increased

Figure 5: Survival rates of untreated and WF-treated tumor cells from N0 patients after culture with different
anticancer drugs EPI (A), CDDP (B), DOC (C), VNR (D), 5-FU+LV (E), and PAC (F).

Figure 6: Survival rates of untreated and WF-treated tumor cells from N1 patients after culture with different
anticancer drugs EPI (A), CDDP (B), VNR (C), 5-FU+LV (D), and PAC (E).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

65037

Oncotarget

groups. Overall, we can see that after the addition of WF,
the tumor cells exhibited enhanced resistance to all the
chemotherapy drugs (Figure 2A). Looking in particular at
the line graphs showing the survival rates of tumor cells
in each anticancer drug subgroup, in which the samples
on the left are the untreated cells and on the right the
WF-treated cells, we can observe an upward trend

from left to right that represents an increase in the drug
resistance of the tumor cells (Figure 2B–2G).
We analyzed the susceptibility of tumor cells from
pre- and postmenopausal women, patients with T2–N1
stage breast cancer, and patients with luminal B and
tripple negative breast cancer to different chemotherapy
drugs.

Figure 7: Survival rates of untreated and WF-treated tumor cells from luminal B patients after culture with different
anticancer drugs EPI (A), CDDP (B), DOC (C), VNR (D), 5-FU+LV (E), and PAC (F).

Figure 8: Survival rates of untreated and WF-treated tumor cells from TN patients after culture with different
anticancer drugs EPI (A), CDDP (B), DOC (C), VNR (D), 5-FU+LV (E), and PAC (F).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

65038

Oncotarget

The drug resistance of the primary tumor cells
derived from premenopausal patients increased
significantly after the addition of WF, which is apparently
very detrimental to a good prognosis. However, it should
also be noted that the tumor cells from these patients were
susceptible to the chemotherapy drugs before the addition
of WF. This phenomenon is consistent with our general
clinical understanding that younger premenopausal
patients are the population that is at high risk [11].
The change in the survival rates of the primary
tumor cells from postmenopausal patients was relatively
insignificant compared to the premenopausal patients,
as evident from the slopes of the lines in the graphs.
The tumor cells from postmenopausal patients were also
correspondingly less susceptible to the chemotherapy
drugs [12]. The drug susceptibility of tumor cells from N0
and N1 patients is similar to those from postmenopausal
patients. In addition, the tumor cells from N0 patients are
more susceptible than those from N1 patients, which may
lead to a difference in prognostic outcome between the N0
and N1 patients [13].
The tumor cells from hormone receptor-positive
patients tend to be less susceptible to chemotherapy,
especially those from patients with luminal A breast cancer.
However, the tumor cells from patients with luminal B
breast cancer showed a slightly better susceptibility [14]
and chemotherapy is still the most commonly used form
of systemic adjuvant therapy for patients with triple
negative breast cancer [15]. The tumor cells from patients
with luminal B breast cancer are susceptible to various
chemotherapy drugs. However, the tumor cells with good
drug susceptibility often have higher drug resistance
upon the addition of WF, which is similar to the situation
observed in the premenopausal patients, and the tumor
cells from patients with triple negative breast cancer are
less susceptible to chemotherapy drugs even before the
addition of WF, suggesting higher drug resistance.
Therefore, we need to increase the sample size,
conduct follow-ups, and carry out a more detailed
stratification research on the patients to screen for patients
that are more like to respond better to chemotherapy, in
order to implement a more precise treatment. Likewise,
we should also study the key factors in WF that enhance
the susceptibility to chemotherapy drugs.
In conclusion, the tumor cells from premenopausal
patients with luminal B breast cancer have a better overall
susceptibility to chemotherapy. Some postmenopausal,
N0, and N1 patients are still relatively susceptible to
certain chemotherapy drugs, but the WF had an adverse
effect on their drug resistance.

were enrolled at the Second Hospital of Dalian Medical
University, China between September 2014 and July 2015
Table 1. All patients had no underlying diseases except
breast neoplasm. Written informed consent was obtained
from individual patients, and the experimental protocol
was approved by the Ethics Committee of Dalian Medical
University.
A total of 50 ml wound drainage fluids were
collected in a sterile container without any additives from
individual patients by placing the perforated end of the
surgical drain in the chest wall and/or axilla wounds on
day 3 post surgery. After being centrifuged at 1,600 RCF
for 10 minutes, the concentrations of total proteins in
the supernatants of WF samples were determined by the
bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay using the Pierce BCA
Protein Assay Kit, according to the manufacturers’
instruction (Fisher Scientific, Canoga Park, USA). The
mean concentrations of total proteins in the WF samples
were 2.61 ± 1.2 mg/ml. Individual WF supernatant samples
were aliquoted and stored at −80°C until use in CD-DST.

CD-DST data acquisition
CD-DST was performed as previously described
by Kobayashi et al. [9, 10]. In brief, each fresh specimen
obtained by surgery was finely minced using a scalpel and
digested in a cell dispersion enzyme solution (EZ, Nitta
Gelatin Inc., Osaka, Japan) for 2 h. The dispersed cancer
cells were washed twice, collected by centrifugation at
250 ×g for 3 min, filtered through an 80 um nylon mesh,
and then incubated in a collagen gel coated flask (CGflask, Nitta Gelatin Inc.) in a CO2 incubator at 37°C for
24 h. Only the viable cells adhering to the collagen gel
were collected and suspended in the reconstructed type I
collagen solution (Cellmatrix Type CD, Nitta Gelatin Inc.)
with the final density being 1 × 105 cells/ml. Three drops
of the collagen-cell mixture (30 μl/drop) were placed in
each well of a 6-well multiplate and in a 60-mm dish,
and allowed to gel at 37°C in a CO2 incubator for 1 h.
The final concentration was about 3 × 103 cells/collagen
gel droplet. The culture medium with or without 1% WF
was overlaid on each well, and the plate was incubated in
a CO2 incubator at 37°C overnight. The anticancer drug
was added, and incubated for 1 h (gemcitabine) or 24 h
(other drugs). After the removal of the medium containing
anticancer drugs, each well was rinsed twice, overlaid
with serum-free culture medium (PCN-1, Nitta Gelatin
Inc.), and incubated for 7 days. On the fourth day of the
incubation, the medium was changed once. At the end of
incubation, neutral red was added to each well at a final
concentration of 50 μg/ml, and the colonies in the collagen
gel droplets were stained for 3 h. Collagen droplets in the
60 mm dish were stained just before exposure (day 1).
Thereafter, each collagen droplet was fixed with 10%
neutral formalin buffer, washed in water, air dried, and
quantified by image analysis. A tumor cell survival rate
less than 50% was regarded as in vitro sensitive.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Patients and WF collection
A total of 21 patients, who had undergone
mastectomy with axillary dissection for breast cancer,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

65039

Oncotarget

Table 1: Clinicopathological features of patients enrolled in CD-DST (n = 21)
N

Variables
Menstrual condition
 Pre-menopause
 post-menopause
NAC

7
14

 Yes
 No
Tumor size

12
9

 T2
N stage

21

 N0

16

 N1

5

ER status
 negative
 positive
PR status

5
16

 negative
 positive
Her-2 status

14
7

 negative
 positive
Ki-67 status

12
9

  > 14%
Molecular subtype

21

  Luminal B
  Tripple negative

16
5

Anticancer drugs

Analyses were performed with the use of SPSS
software (version 19.0; SPSS, Inc., Chicago, IL, USA).
The computer program PRISM (version 5; GraphPad
Inc., San Diego, CA, USA) was used to create graphs and
process images.

The anticancer drugs tested in the CD-DST were
0.78 μg/ml epirubicin (EPI), 0.1 μg/ml cisplatin (CDDP),
0.2 μg/ml docetaxel (DOC), 0.1 μg/ml vinorelbine
(VNR), 0.05 μg/ml fluorouracil + 5.0 μg/ml leucovorin
(5-FU+LV), and 1.0 μg/ml paclitaxel (PAC). The culture
time was 24 h for each drug.

Abbreviations
WF, wound fluid; CD-DST, collagen gel droplet
embedded culture drug test; EPI, epirubicin; CDDP,
cisplatin; DOC, docetaxel; VNR, vinorelbine; 5-FU+LV,
fluorouracil + leucovorin; PAC, paclitaxel.

Statistical analysis
Relationships between the two groups (with or
without WF) and other parameters were studied using the
Pearson’s Chi-square test or Fisher’s exact test. Paired
T-test was used to assess differences between the two
groups.
Two-sided P values were calculated for all tests and
are reported here. P values less than 0.05 were considered
to indicate statistical significance.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING
This study was funded by the China National
Natural Science Foundation (No. 81572609 and
81402384). The study have got the technical assistance
from shenyang harmony health laboratory.

65040

Oncotarget

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

  9.	 Naitoh H, Yamamoto H, Murata S, Kobayashi H, Inoue K,
Tani T. Stratified phase II trial to establish the usefulness of
the collagen gel droplet embedded culture-drug sensitivity
test (CD-DST) for advanced gastric cancer. Gastric Cancer.
2014; 17:630–7.

The authors have no potential conflicts of interest
and nothing to disclose.

REFERENCES
1.	

10.	Higashiyama M, Okami J, Maeda J, Tokunaga T,
Fujiwara A, Kodama K, Imamura F, Kobayashi H.
Differences in chemosensitivity between primary and paired
metastatic lung cancer tissues: In vitro analysis based on the
collagen gel droplet embedded culture drug test (CD-DST).
J Thorac Dis. 2012; 4:40–7.

Anderson WF, Katki HA, Rosenberg PS. Incidence of breast
cancer in the United States: current and future trends. J Natl
Cancer Inst. 2011; 103:1397–4 02.

2.	 Early Breast Cancer Trialists’ Collaborative Group
(EBCTCG). Effects of chemotherapy and hormonal therapy
for early breast cancer on recurrence and 15-year survival:
an overview of the randomised trials. Lancet. 2005;
365:1687–7 17.

11.	 Courneya KS, McKenzie DC, Mackey JR, Gelmon K,
Friedenreich CM, Yasui Y, Reid RD, Vallerand JR,
Adams SC, Proulx C, Dolan LB, Wooding E, Segal RJ.
Subgroup effects in a randomised trial of different types and
doses of exercise during breast cancer chemotherapy. Br J
Cancer. 2014; 111:1718–25.

3.	 Dorman SN, Baranova K, Knoll JH, Urquhart BL,
Mariani G, Carcangiu ML, Rogan PK. Genomic signatures
for paclitaxel and gemcitabine resistance in breast cancer
derived by machine learning. Mol Oncol. 2015; pii: S1574–7
89100146–5.

12.	Fontein DB, Charehbili A, Nortier JW, MeershoekKlein Kranenbarg E, Kroep JR, Putter H, van Riet Y,
Nieuwenhuijzen GA, de Valk B, Terwogt JM, Algie GD,
Liefers GJ, Linn S, et al. Efficacy of six month neoadjuvant
endocrine therapy in postmenopausal, hormone receptorpositive breast cancer patients--a phase II trial. Eur J
Cancer. 2014; 50:2190–200.

4.	 Yu DD, Wu Y, Shen HY, Lv MM, Chen WX, Zhang XH,
Zhong SL, Tang JH, Zhao JH. Exosomes in development,
metastasis and drug resistance of breast cancer. Cancer Sci.
2015; 106:959–64.
5.	

McMillin DW, Negri JM, Mitsiades CS. The role of tumourstromal interactions in modifying drug response: challenges
and opportunities. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2013; 12:217–28.

6.	

Takamura Y, Kobayashi H, Taguchi T, Motomura K, Inaji H,
Noguchi S. Prediction of chemotherapeutic response by
collagen gel droplet embedded culture-drug sensitivity test
in human breast cancers. Int J Cancer. 2002; 98:450–5.

13.	Laitala VS, Saarto T, Einiö EK, Martikainen P,
Silventoinen K. Early-stage breast cancer is not associated
with the risk of marital dissolution in a large prospective
study of women. Br J Cancer. 2015; 113:543–7.
14.	Fontein DB, Charehbili A, Nortier JW, MeershoekKlein Kranenbarg E, Kroep JR, Putter H, van Riet Y,
Nieuwenhuijzen GA, de Valk B, Terwogt JM, Algie GD,
Liefers GJ, Linn S, et al. Efficacy of six month neoadjuvant
endocrine therapy in postmenopausal, hormone receptorpositive breast cancer patients—a phase II trial. Eur J
Cancer. 2014; 50:2190–200.

7.	 Higashiyama M, Oda K, Okami J, Maeda J, Kodama K,
Imamura F, Minamikawa K, Takano T, Kobayashi H.
Prediction of chemotherapeutic effect on postoperative
recurrence by in vitro anticancer drug sensitivity testing
in non-small cell lung cancer patients. Lung Cancer. 2010;
68:472–7.

15.	 Kalimutho M, Parsons K, Mittal D, López JA, Srihari S,
Khanna KK. Targeted Therapies for Triple-Negative Breast
Cancer: Combating a Stubborn Disease. Trends Pharmacol
Sci. 2015; pii: S0165–6 14700170–4.

8.	 Wang D, Hu K, Gao N, Zhang H, Jiang Y, Liu C, Wang S,
Zhao Z. High throughput screening of cytokines, chemokines
and matrix metalloproteinases in wound fluid induced
by mammary surgery. Oncotarget. 2015; 6:29296–310.
doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.4828.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

65041

Oncotarget

